TITLE: Assessing the impact of EU policies on recycling supply chain: a system dynamics perspective on advancing packaging recycling capacity
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06438-y
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06438-y
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Assessing the impact of EU policies on recycling supply chain:
a system dynamics perspective on advancing packaging
recycling capacity
Tiep Nguyen1 · Truong Van Nguyen2 · Li Zhou3
· Quang Huy Duong3 ·
Petros Ieromonachou3
Received: 4 January 2024 / Accepted: 9 December 2024 / Published online: 31 January 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
Recycling stands as a crucial strategy in mitigating climate change and advancing towards
carbon neutrality. Within the European Union (EU), the development of a resilient recycling
supply chain is of paramount importance, particularly in response to global disruptions such
as the widespread ban on solid waste imports by numerous countries like China, Malaysia,
Thailand, and Vietnam. Such disruptions have exposed the vulnerabilities of EU member
states, notably their overreliance on waste export and limited domestic recycling capaci-
ties. This study integrates primary data from diverse public sources into a system dynamics
simulation model to assess the effectiveness of three policy types used to enhance EU domes-
tic recycling capacities: Innovation-focused (IF), Subsidy-focused, and Market-based (MB)
policies. Our ﬁndings show that IF policies exert the most considerable impact in the short
term and continue to play a crucial role in the EU’s recycling capacity expansion over the
medium and long term. Conversely, MB policies are identiﬁed as most effective for immedi-
ate capacity enhancement in response to abrupt disruptions. Finally, the result suggests the
optimal policy mix where 84% government resources should be allocated to IF policies and
16% to MB policies to ensure the EU achieves the deliberate balance between short-term
market stabilisation and long-term transformation of its domestic recycling capacity for eco-
nomic, environmental, and social sustainability. This research represents a pioneering effort
in examining the efﬁcacy of a diverse array of policy types within an optimised mix, thereby
encompassing a broader range of policy considerations.
Keywords Government policies · Recycling supply chain · Waste management capacity ·
Packaging recycling · System dynamics
B Li Zhou
ZL14@gre.ac.uk
1
Westcon-Comstor, Tarrytown, NY 10591, USA
2
Greenovation Solutions LTD, London, UK
3
Greenwich Business School, University of Greenwich, London, UK
123

2018
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
1 Introduction
1.1 Research background and motivation
Climate change, characterised by global warming and extreme weather events, poses a sig-
niﬁcant threat to the environment, economies, and societies worldwide. Mitigating climate
change and advancing towards carbon neutrality have become imperative goals for countries
globally, with the European Union1 (EU) at the forefront of this endeavour. In this con-
text, recycling emerges as a critical component in achieving these goals. Recycling not only
reduces the need for extracting and processing raw materials, which are energy-intensive
processes contributing to greenhouse gas emissions, but also minimises waste generation,
thereby reducing landﬁll use and associated methane emissions.
However, the EU, while being a global leader in recycling and waste management, faces
signiﬁcant challenges due to its reliance on exporting waste to other countries. This depen-
dence has been a practical but vulnerable strategy, especially when nations traditionally
receiving waste start imposing bans on imports. It was reported that the total installed mechan-
ical recycling capacity in the European Union (EU) is around 10.4 million tonnes annually
(McKinsey, 2020), while its total packaging waste generated was about 9 times higher—more
than 89 million tonnes in 2018 (Eurostat, 2021). The severe shortage in recycling capacity
was also echoed in the latest report by (European Court of Auditors, 2020a), which afﬁrmed
that the EU only has enough facilities to recycle half of its total plastic packaging waste.
This issue has been shaped by the EU’s decades-long overreliance on recycling capacity in
developing countries for economic reasons. However, due to low environmental standard of
the recycling industry in these countries, the EU’s waste export practice has been unsustain-
able. The turning point emerged in 2018 when China, the EU’s largest importer of recyclable
waste, started to impose the waste import ban (World Trade Organization, 2017). The EU,
along with several western countries, have been severely hit by the disruption from the China
Waste Ban (CWB).
Responding to the waste recycling crisis in the post-CWB, several alternative solutions
have been proposed in the EU. A commonly used measure is to reallocate the exporting
destination to other third countries in Southeast Asia, India, or the Middle East. In 2020, half
of the plastic waste that the UK claimed as “recycled” was actually sent to other countries
(Greenpeace, 2021). Even so, China’s recycling capacity was simply just too signiﬁcant to
be replaced. The sudden surge of waste import has overwhelmed the recycling system of
many countries such as India, Malaysia, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Turkey and Vietnam, so that
they have to start banning some imported waste to protect themselves (Greenpeace, 2021).
Longer-termsolutionsthattheEUhasimposedorplannedtoimposearetoenhancedomes-
tic recycling facilities, reduction in waste generation and increased reuse obligations, as stated
in the 2018 revised Packaging Waste Directive. In addition, the Extended Producer Respon-
sibility schemes (EPRs) will become mandatory for all packaging companies by the end of
2024 (European Commission, 2020a). To put more pressure on its members, the EU is also
tightening up the rules on what counts as recycling (European Court of Auditors, 2020b). For
that, packaging wastes exported outside the EU are under stricter requirements to be counted
as recycled (European Commission, 2018a), resulting in considerable drops in recycling rate
1 The European Union (EU) is a political and economic union of 27 member states that are located primarily
in Europe.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2019
across the country members. From 2021, under new international rules, unsorted and contam-
inated recyclable plastics will not be allowed to be shipped to non-OECD2 countries, which
means more waste would have to be processed domestically. Therefore, it becomes an urgent
need for European countries to expand its current domestic recycling capacity (Brooks et al.,
2018; European Court of Auditors, 2020a; Wen et al., 2021).
The disruption resulting from the waste bans has revealed the poor functioning of the EU’s
domestic waste recycling industry with various fundamental underlying issues. Suppliers of
recycled packaging materials have insufﬁciently invested in sorting and recycling capacity
due to the limited proﬁtability. Meanwhile, buyers (i.e., manufacturing ﬁrms) have low incen-
tives to use recycled materials due to the concerns on availability and quality uncertainty.
The resiliency and sustainability of the EU’s waste recycling industry could be improved
signiﬁcantly if these issues are addressed (European Commission, 2018b; OECD, 2018).
In response to the disruption, the domestic recycling capacity expansion remains the
most mutually agreed solution (Huang et al., 2020; Morita & Hayashi, 2018; Qu et al.,
2019). Recently, (Wen et al., 2021) reafﬁrmed that developed countries should reinforce local
management and waste treatment system through policy incentives and ﬁnancial supports,
rather than deliberately and recklessly exporting to other countries. As such, for the EU
region, appropriate strategies to enhance the EU’s waste recycling capacity are urgently
required (European Court of Auditors, 2020a; Huang et al., 2020).
Therefore, it motivates us to examine how different governmental policies can help
increase the existing capacity to meet domestic waste management needs in the short,
medium, and long term.
According to the Adam Smith’s Invisible Hand (The Wealth Nations) by Sterman (2000),
proﬁtability is a key driver of supply. For the EU’s recycling industry, ‘supply’ refers to
the domestic recycling capacity. Hence, governments can facilitate the expansion of this
capacity by enhancing the industry’s proﬁtability. This could be achieved by aiding recyclers
in reducing recycling cost and/or increase selling price of recycled products/materials. Cost
reductions can be realised directly through government subsidies or indirectly by innovations
that boost productivity. Meanwhile, selling prices can be elevated through governmental
incentives and programmes designed to stimulate demand for recycled materials. For the
reasons discussed, we chose three types of policies to be studied in this paper:
• Innovation-focused policies (e.g., direct ﬁnancial supports for any R&D activities, tax
incentives/relieves for innovations on recycling process)
• Subsidy-focused policies (e.g., ﬁnancial subsidies for recyclers, public funds on separation
collection systems, tax incentives for recyclers)
• Market-based policies. (e.g., Extended Producer Responsibility which requires packaging
producers to accept and recycle used packaging from consumers, imposing minimum
recycled content in a particular material, public awareness campaign to raise consumer
demand)
Although comparing the relative effectiveness of different individual types of policies
could provide some insights, policy makers cannot merely rely on individual policies but
require appropriate policy combinations (Hao et al., 2019; Palmer & Walls, 1997). Identifying
the most effective policy mix is therefore crucial for the EU to utilise its available resources
productively.
Indeed, there have been several studies on each type of the policies for recycle capacity
building: IFP (Aldieri et al., 2019; Huo et al., 2018a; Li et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2021), SFP
2 The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) is an intergovernmental economic
organisation with 37 member countries.
123

2020
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
(Gradus et al., 2017; Joshi et al., 2021; Qiao & Su, 2021; Wang et al., 2014), and MBP (Chang
et al., 2016; Hong & Guo, 2019; Huo et al., 2018a; Ma et al., 2013; Rahbar & Abdul Wahid,
2011). However, most of these analyses are empirical based on past data with short-term and
static nature and limited to the simplifying assumption of linearity. An alternative approach
that can address these shortcomings is using the long-term oriented SD approach; however,
its adoption in investigating the inﬂuence of different policies in recycle capacity building is
scarce.
1.2 Research objective and contribution
To ﬁll the gap above, the primary aim of this study is to offer policy recommendations on how
the EU can implement three types of policies to expand recycling capacity, ensuring resilience
against disruptions in the global recycling chain. Speciﬁcally, our research objectives are: (1)
to analyse the dynamic behaviour of each individual policy over immediate-, short-, mid- and
long-term period; (2) to optimise the budget allocation across the policy mix for maximising
cumulative capacity; (3) to conduct scenario analyses to evaluate the sensitivity of the result
under varying conditions; and (4) to validate the ﬁndings using real data from three EU
member countries.
The system dynamic (SD) modelling approach is chosen in this study due to its capabil-
ity to capture important dynamic behaviour-through-time phenomena derived between all
important variables in the complex, real-work system, thereby providing a more plausible
model of reality (Duran-Encalada et al., 2017). In addition, the tool enables what-if scenarios
analysis and sensitivity analysis which are suitable for policy evaluation (Mingers & White,
2010). The graphical representations of the system can be easily comprehended by a wider
audience, making it more accessible for policy makers, recyclers, and other stakeholders
(Sterman, 2000).
The contributions of this research are twofold: theoretical and practical. From a theoretical
standpoint, our study presents one of the few models that offer a comprehensive view of
the waste recycling system, illustrated through the packaging waste stream. This model is
versatile, allowing for adaptations to other types of waste streams and applicable to different
nations. Furthermore, while existing literature extensively explores the impact of individual
policies on industry capacity expansion, research on the combined effect of policy mixes,
as undertaken in this paper, remains limited. Additionally, by employing SD modelling, this
work enhances the current theoretical frameworks used for addressing disruptions in reverse
logistics.
In terms of practical contributions, this research offers two key beneﬁts to the ﬁeld. Firstly,
it provides practitioners within the EU’s packaging waste recycling system with a deeper
understanding of how different policies perform dynamically over time. This insight is crucial
for adapting to evolving market and environmental conditions. Secondly, the study furnishes
strategic recommendations for policymakers, guiding them in the optimal allocation of gov-
ernment budgets for capacity building. This is particularly vital for addressing the challenges
posed by disruptions in the global recycling chain, ensuring a more robust and resilient
recycling infrastructure.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows: Section 2 discusses literature review
and identiﬁes research gap. Section 3 describes the methodology—the details of how the sys-
tem dynamics model of EU packaging recycling system is developed. Section 4 discusses the
result of simulation, optimisation of EU policy mix, and further scenario analysis. Section 5
is the conclusion.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2021
2 Literature review
2.1 Studies of waste management systems (WMS)
According to the World Bank report, the world generates 2.01 billion tonnes of municipal
solid waste each year and expects to rise to 3.4 billion tonnes by 2050. Notably, at least
33% of this waste is not treated in an environmentally responsible manner (Kaza et al.,
2018). Therefore, to effectively manage current and future waste streams, a well-designed
waste management system (WMS) is essential for improved waste collection, transportation,
separation, treatments, and disposal processes. However, designing WMS is a complex task
as it inherently involves multifaceted trade-offs among a plethora of local and regional factors
such as socioeconomic, technological, ecological, and political (Sandoval-Reyes et al., 2024).
To deal with these complexities, several techniques in the system analysis have been
adopted to provide interdisciplinary supports for a wide spectrum of technical and non-
technical WMS issues. These can be classiﬁed into two core domains: system engineering
and system assessment (Chang et al., 2011). First, system engineering models focus on
WMS design issues and synergistic interfaces based on cost–beneﬁt analysis (e.g. assessing
environmental and economic impacts), optimisation (e.g. selecting facility location, size,
and technology portfolio), simulation (e.g. analysing dynamic behaviour of continuous or
discrete-event waste ﬂows in complex WMS), forecasting (e.g. time-series forecasting of
waste generations with related variables such as population, income level, demographics),
and integrated modelling systems (e.g. improving synergy among sub-systems/functionalities
such as between waste generation and shipping or optimal capacity expansion for waste-to-
energy and landﬁll facilities).
The second domain includes system assessment tools to evaluate WMS performance and
seek for improvements and adaptations in response to the increasing challenges posed by
regulations and the public. Most WMS assessment tools used in literature are Life Cycle
Analysis (LCA), environmental impact assessment, risk assessment, strategic environmen-
tal assessment, sustainable assessment, socioeconomic assessment, material ﬂow analysis,
scenario development, and management information/expert system/ decision support system
(Allesch & Brunner, 2014; Chang et al., 2011; Sandoval-Reyes et al., 2024).
We refer readers to Pires et al. (2011) for a more in-depth analysis of how these ﬁve
engineering modelling approaches and nine assessment tools are used in the European WMS
literature.
2.2 Studies of packaging WMS in response to the recycling crisis
WMS are inherently complex, intertwining with numerous other systems. To effectively anal-
yse the impact of policies, this paper narrows its focus to packaging WMS. The assessment of
the impact stemming from the escalating waste recycling crisis, provoked by a growing num-
ber of global disruptions, has been addressed in existing literature through both qualitative
discussions and quantitative examinations.
Regarding qualitative discussions, Qu et al. (2019) study the impact of the waste ban on the
global circular economy of solid waste, and suggest that for developed countries, their recy-
cling industries with limited capacity and historic dependence on exporting would encounter
challenges in the short run. In the long run, however, this could provide opportunities for the
global circular economy, given that appropriate policy frameworks (e.g. Extended Producer
Responsibility) are properly designed. Similarly, Morita and Hayashi (2018) recommend the
123

2022
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
policy makers in Japan to have suitable measures for more accurate data collection from
recycling and processing routes of all plastics waste, along with the volume in each route.
This type of data is critical to create strategies aiming to expand the domestic recycling
capacity for plastic scrap within Japan. Reviewing the waste management situation in China
before and after the CWB promulgation, Song et al. (2023) posit that the ban might stimulate
some short-term negative impacts on local environments in both China and overseas such as
increased landﬁlls and ﬂy-tipping behaviours.
Adopting a quantitative approach, Wen et al. (2021) use LCA to quantify the environ-
mental impacts of changes in movements and treatment methods for 6 types of plastic waste
across 18 countries in the aftermath of the CWB. They found that the ban has vastly improved
four of the environmental impact indicators (i.e., ﬁne particulate matter formation, freshwa-
ter ecotoxicity, human carcinogenic toxicity, and water consumption) in the short term. In
the long run, to achieve global environmental sustainability, countries are advised to pri-
oritise the gradual transition from export to domestic waste processing, and from landﬁll
to recycling, which could save them an estimated eco-cost of about 1.5–3.2 billion euros.
Likewise, Bourtsalas et al. (2023) and Bourtsalas (2024) also observe the environmental
and public health beneﬁts to both importing and exporting countries when reducing plastic
waste exports and increasing domestic recycling, despite of higher capital costs required.
Investigating the plastic waste ﬂows from a combined production and consumption-based
perspective, Huang et al. (2020) employ a set of environmental-economic models to analyse
the impact of the ban on China and numerous countries. The research ﬁnd that (1) China
is one of the dominant controllers within the global trade networks of plastic waste, (2) the
ban causes only low economic loss to China, (3) the ban results in a shortage in recycled
materials in China, and (4) waste treatment facilities need to be ramped up in developed
countries. Analysing the city-level local air quality in China after the execution of the import
ban, Li and Takeuchi (2023) stress that the environmental impact of the ban get weaker in the
long run, hence it is vital that policy makers support the transformation of the plastic waste
recycling industry by adopting cutting-edge technologies.
2.3 Policies and recycling capacity
2.3.1 Innovation-focused policies (IFP)
Innovation is the use of new techniques, new methods, and new organisational forms (Kemp
et al., 2000). From an economic perspective, innovation can drive down cost through better
productivity (Thatcher & Oliver, 2001).
a. The current EU’s practice.
In the EU Action Plan for the Circular Economy, innovation is acknowledged as a key
driver for the transition from linear to circular economy, including the transformation of waste
to high value-added products (European Commission, 2020b). Particularly, the EU’s Eco-
innovation Action Plan (EcoAP) has listed out 7 types of actions for sustainable innovations,
which are regulation integration, supporting ideas commercialisation, setting standard and
targets, funding, international cooperation, addressing skills gap, and promoting partnerships
between public and private sector (European Commission, 2011). Since its adoption, the
EcoAP has been targeting innovative SMEs, offering funding opportunities under COSME,
Horizon 2020, and the LIFE programme, along with building the Enterprise Europe Network
(EEN) for business matchmaking (European Commission, 2020b).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2023
Following the EcoAP, the EU members have developed many initiatives and policies to
support the innovation advancement in both direct and indirect ways. In terms of direct
support, Germany, for example, provides more direct support in form of grant, innovation
vouchers, loan and credit (Eco-innovation Observatory, 2019a). In contrast, Belgium is well-
known for embedding eco-innovation and sustainability goals into industrial and economic
policies by offering the provision of tax incentives/relieves for eco-innovation (businesses,
R&D activity), and subsidies to allow companies to use expert services in the eco-conception
of sustainable business models and processes (Eco-Innovation Observatory, 2019b).
b. Academic research.
Government policies targeting innovation advancements within the recycling industry has
attracted many interests in the literature. These can be in the form of government ﬁnancial
subsidies speciﬁcally for research, development and deployment of green technologies (Li
et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2021), a mix of ﬁnancial and strict penalties (Huo et al., 2018b; Yalabik
& Fairchild, 2011), and public campaigns to raise awareness towards green innovations
(Huang et al., 2016; Li et al., 2021). Another approach to improve waste recycling innovation
is through incentives supporting the integration and knowledge transfer between industries
(Aldieri et al., 2019). However, the knowledge exchange initiatives often involve risks related
to intellectual property which would demotivate ﬁrms to innovate. For that reason, policy
makers were recommended to provide strong intellectual property rights such as patents to
inventors (Bloom et al., 2019). To ensure the green innovation progress, it is noteworthy for
policy makers to understand that economic policy uncertainties could signiﬁcantly reduce
the performance of green technology innovation, especially among non-state-owned and
low-tech enterprises (Zhou et al., 2024).
2.3.2 Subsidy-focused policies (SFP)
a. The current EU’s practice.
There are different forms of SFP, for example:
• Subsidy for the industry—forcing waste producers to partly contribute as a form of subsidy.
One of the most popular policies in this regard is the Extended Producer Responsibility,
where producers are obliged to bear some of the environmental costs associated with the
treatment or disposing of a product. It can take out some burdens from recyclers, which has
been recognised as the best practice among some of the most successful waste management
economies, including Western Europe and Japan (D’ambrières, 2019).
• Public funds on separation collection systems—a large portion of recycling cost goes to the
preparation phase, where the costly process of waste sorting and separation are required
(Velzen et al., 2013). Most of these costs have been subsidised by local authorities in EU
since 2008 when the Waste Framework Directive came into effect. Under this Directive,
member states are obliged to invest and set up separation collection systems for household
waste.
• Tax incentives—under the EU’s New Circular Economy Action Plan released in 2020,
MemberStateswouldbesupportedtoprovidesubsidyinformoftaxincentivesforrecyclers
(European Commission, 2020b).
b. Academic research.
123

2024
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
Compared to other waste management methods such as incineration or landﬁll, the cost
of recycling is relatively high. Therefore, there were several attempts to drive down recycling
cost by offering subsidies to the management of household plastic waste (Gradus et al., 2017),
auto parts waste (Wang et al., 2014), lead-acid battery waste (Joshi et al., 2021), and general
waste (Liu et al., 2021; Qiao and Su, 2021; Xu et al., 2019). Among the subsidy approaches,
initial subsidy for new joiners was evidenced to increase the number of remanufacturers,
hence, to be the most suitable to be used at the initial stage of industry development. But
when the industry develops to a certain extent, combining this with other subsidy policies
aiming at waste collection and production activities are proved to be more effective (Wang
et al., 2014). Separation is a costly stage within remanufacturing process for plastic packaging
(Schyns & Shaver, 2021). To minimise this cost, policies to subsidise industrial-scale post-
separation were proposed to replace source-separation by householders (Gradus et al., 2017).
Reducing tax is another form of subsidy which has demonstrated its usefulness in helping
remanufacturers reduce cost (Joshi et al., 2021). Even though it is widely believed that
remanufacturers should be the sole recipient of government subsidy in order to increase
remanufacturing activities, (Mitra & Webster, 2008) found that sharing certain fraction of
that subsidy to the manufacturers would yield the most beneﬁts. In particular, subsidy sharing
encourages manufacturers to come up with more suitable product design for remanufacturing,
as well as be more willing to accept the return of end-of-life products.
2.3.3 Market-based policies (MBP)
a. The current EU’s practice.
The sustainability of remanufacturing industry heavily relies on the market demand. Many
countries have adopted regulatory schemes to stimulate the demand of secondary materials.
For example, one of the longest-serving and most successful one is the EPR regulation,
which requires retailers and packaging producers to accept and recycle used packaging from
consumers (Retail Council of Canada, 2020). Another MBP example is the tradable recycling
credit scheme, which aims to boost the market demand by imposing a minimum share of
recycled content in a particular material (Söderholm & Ekvall, 2020). For instance, under
the EU’s single-use plastics Directive released in 2019, plastic bottles will have to contain
at least 25% of recycled content by 2025 and 30% by 2030 (European Commission, 2019).
Apart from imposing regulations, governments can also initiate public awareness campaigns
to shift consumers demand towards sustainable products, which would in turn pressure the
packaging manufacturers to utilise more recycled materials in production (KfW, 2019).
b. Academic research.
In the literature, MBP has also been explored (Conrad, 2005; Costa et al., 2019; Ling &
Xu, 2021). It is argued that tightening emission regulations could force retailers to undertake
their green marketing efforts, which in turn boost market demand (Hong & Guo, 2019;
Rahbar & Abdul Wahid, 2011). Direct government support for supply chain members is
also recommended to increase their capitals to promote green products (Huo et al., 2018b).
Consumption subsidy is another way which could encourage consumers to purchase recycled
products (Ma et al., 2013). In China, the Remanufacturing Product Pilot Program which
subsidies consumers to purchase remanufactured auto part has proved to be effective (Chang
et al., 2016).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2025
2.4 System dynamic (SD) modelling of WMS
SD modelling has been widely adopted in the ﬁeld of reverse logistics and closed-loop supply
chains (CLSC). For example, Zhou et al. (2017) develop a SD model to investigate the impact
of product return and remanufacturing uncertainty on the dynamic performance of the CLSC
system. Ulli-Beer et al. (2007) and Joh and Adolph (2006) use SD approach to reveal the
dynamic interactions between recycling behaviours to different contextual and human factors.
Besiou et al. (2012) develop a SD model to explore the impact of scavenging activities on
the WEEE (Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment) product recovery system in Greece
under three regulatory scenarios: (1) environmental (natural resource availability, pollution
from illegal scavenging activities), (2) economical (proﬁtability of the whole system), and
(3) social (sum of unemployed scavengers).
SD models of packaging WMS can also be found in the literature. For instance, Dace et al.
(2014) is one of few studies using this approach to investigate the inﬂuence of certain policies
and eco-design advancement on the volume of used packaging materials, and the amount
of waste being generated, recycled and landﬁlled. Adopting the same approach, a more
recent paper, Dhanshyam and Srivastava (2021) evaluate the effectiveness of different policy
mix (among developing kerbside facilities, charging disposal fee, and providing recycling
subsidy) in mitigating the plastic waste issue in India.
2.5 Research gap
In summary, our literature review shows that although previous studies have focused on
investigating the global and local impact of waste import bans and revealing the opportuni-
ties and challenges of expanding domestic recycling capacity to respond to the disruptions,
actionable recommendations to support policy making remain limited. In addition, there is a
lack of studies that investigate the design and implementation of different recycling capacity
building strategies (i.e. IFP, SFP, and MBP) in a holistic dynamic point of view.
Therefore, to ﬁll the gaps, our study uses SD modelling approach to build a dynamic
EU recycling system for packaging waste. Based on this model, different simulations are
conducted to assess the effectiveness of individual policies, and hence suggesting the optimal
policy mix for the domestic recycling expansion.
3 Methodology
3.1 Conceptual model
To better capture the interconnections between different components within recycling system,
and the impacts of the three types of policies on capacity expansion from the discussion above,
a conceptual model (causal loop diagram) is developed (Fig. 1). Causal loop diagram is the
representation of the causal relationships between different variables in the system. The
causality and its direction are shown by the directed arrow starting from the independent
variable to the dependent variable. The polarity ( +) or (−) on the arrow embodies the sign
of the effect. The ( +) sign implies that the variables change in the same direction; otherwise,
they change in the opposite way.
The main components of this causal loop diagram are adapted from the simple represen-
tation of the feedback structure of Adam Smith’s Invisible Hand (The Wealth Nations) by
123

2026
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
Fig. 1 The proposed conceptual model—causal loop diagram (Source: Authors)
Sterman (2000). These include the causal effects between cost/unit, price/unit, proﬁtability,
and supply. Among these, the EU supply of recycled materials/products (or recycle rate) is
only constrained by the recycling capacity of the whole industry. Therefore, “EU Recycle
Capacity” in this diagram, within the context of this paper, is the representation of supply in
Sterman’s diagram. Here is the detailed explanation of the conceptual model in Fig. 1.
• B1–Balancing Loop: EU Recycle Capacity increases →Price/unit decreases →Proﬁtabil-
ity drops →EU Recycle Capacity decreases.
Proﬁtability is the main driver for the supply of the secondary material market. When
proﬁtability increases, new entrants are attracted while existing producers are encouraged to
expand its recycling capacity. With more producers in the market, the competition becomes
tougher, which could eventually drive down the selling price of recycled materials/products.
As the price shrinks, so does the proﬁtability, thus forming a balancing loop (B1) in Fig. 1.
• R1–Reinforcing Loop: EU Recycle Capacity increases →Competition Level increases →
Recycling Productivity increases →Cost/unit drops →Proﬁtability rises →EU Recycle
Capacity increases.
At the same time, when recycle capacity increases as a result of the increased proﬁtability,
the competition level in the market also rises. According to the economic theory of “the
escape-competition effect” (Thatcher & Oliver, 2001), the pressure from rising competitions
forces ﬁrms to invest more in innovation to improve productivity. Cost is driven down when
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2027
productivity increases, which in turn increases proﬁtability. This forms a reinforcing loop
(R1).
• B2–Balancing Loop: EU Recycle Capacity decreases →EU Recycle Percentage decreases
→Recycle Percentage Discrepancy increases →Pressure from EU recycling target on
policies increases →Policies promote Demand for Recycled Materials increases →
Price/unit rises →Proﬁtability improves →EU Recycle Capacity improved.
As the recycling capacity in EU shrinks, given that the annual waste volume generated in
the EU remains constant, the recycle percentage also drops. The lower the recycle percentage,
the further it is from the EU’s desirable recycling target (70% of EU’s packaging waste from
all streams to be recycled by 2030—(Eurostat, 2021)), hence the larger the recycle percentage
discrepancy. When the recycle percentage discrepancy widens, pressure will mount for the
authorities to intervene the market with more aggressive policies to improve proﬁtability,
with the objective to close the gap between the actual recycle percentage and the desirable
target. When these policies are aimed at boosting innovation, leading to a rise in productivity,
the proﬁtability would be improved because of a cost reduction, forming a balancing loop
(B2).
• B3 – Balancing Loop: EU Recycle Capacity reduces →EU Recycle Percentage decreases
→Recycle Percentage Discrepancy increases →Pressure from EU recycling target on
policies increases →Policies provide Subsidy for Recyclers rises →Cost/unit drops →
Proﬁtability improves →EU Recycle Capacity increases.
When the policies aim to provide more subsidies for recyclers, the proﬁtability would also
be improved, thanks to a drop in recycling cost. This forms another balancing loop (B3).
• B4–Balancing Loop: EU Recycle Capacity reduces →EU Recycle Percentage decreases
→Recycle Percentage Discrepancy increases →Pressure from EU recycling target on
policies increases →Policies improve Recycling Productivity via Innovation rises →
Recycling Productivity improves →Cost/unit drops →Proﬁtability improves →EU
Recycle Capacity improves.
Finally, when the policies are aimed at promoting market demand for recycled materials,
the proﬁtability would be increased accordingly through growing selling price. This forms a
ﬁnal balancing loop (B4) of the conceptual model.
3.2 SD model of EU packaging recycle industry in the CWB context
The software used for developing the stock and ﬂow diagram (SFD), simulating the policy
effect, as well as optimising the policy mix is Vensim® DSS (Version 6.1c).
The CWB targets mainly unsorted mixed papers and post-consumer plastics which counts
for a large portion of the packaging recyclable waste export in the EU. Hence, the SD model in
this work will focus on the EU’s domestic recycling industry for packaging waste to showcase
the impact of the CWB on the whole WMS in the EU.
The SD modelling approach is adopted, which enables us to build computer simulations
to represent the complex, real-world EU packaging recycling systems under CWB context.
The what-if scenario-based simulations and optimisation will then be performed to analyse
the dynamic behaviour and determine the optimal implementation of policy instruments for
the capacity expansion plan.
The SD model including the SFD that we developed in this section is based on the con-
ceptual model in Fig. 1 with the input from the data we gathered through secondary sources
123

2028
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
Fig. 2 The proposed EU recycling target sub-system (Source: Authors)
and interviews with stakeholders and key experts in SD, which will be explained in detail in
Sect. 3.3.
While the CLD (Fig. 1) helps us understand the causal relationships between variables in
the system, the SFD can capture their dynamic behaviours derived from the mathematical
properties of the stock accumulation over time (Sterman, 2000). The variables used in the
SFD can be classiﬁed into three categories: stock, ﬂow, and auxiliary. The stock variable,
represented by rectangular box, captures the accumulated level of inventory of a variable
over time. The ﬂow variable, represented by the valve icon, describes the changing rate of
quantities from or to a stock and is the only variable which changes the stock level. Auxiliary
variables are drawn without any icon. Like in the CLD, the arrows in SFD also represent the
causality between variables. Finally, the clouds show a source of ﬂows coming from outside
of the model boundary.
To improve the visualisation, the full simulation model is divided into three SFDs rep-
resenting three sub-systems within the EU recycling industry for packaging waste, namely
“The EU recycling sub-system” (Fig. 2), “Total recycling capacity sub-system” (Fig. 3), and
“EU recycling capacity sub-system” (Fig. 4).
3.2.1 Data collection
The data used as input for the SFD includes:
• Data related to the packaging waste generation and recycling activities across 28 country
members of the EU were obtained from the EU’s ofﬁcial statistics database (Eurostat,
2021).
• Data related to the waste ban (for example: which year the ban took into effect, starting
from, then which year the waste ban extended to other countries, etc.) were accessed via
numerous ofﬁcial government sources such as (World Trade Organization, 2017), and
(European Court of Auditors, 2020a).
• Data related to the EU recycling industry (for instance: recycling cost per unit, price per unit
of recycled materials, effect of EU recycle capacity on price per unit of recycled materials,
etc.) were directly extracted or indirectly estimated from highly reliable sources such as
ofﬁcial government websites, peer-reviewed academic papers, and industry reports.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2029
Fig. 3 The proposed recycling rate by region sub-system (Source: Authors)
For other data used in the model but not publicly available, assumptions are rigorously
made. The detailed explanation of the model and its data used is discussed below.
3.2.2 The EU recycling target sub-system
Figure 2 represents high-level overview of the packaging waste recycling sector in the EU.
The packaging waste inventory is the annual amount of packaging waste that are generated
across the European members. The initial packaging waste inventory is set at 84,850 thousand
tonnes, corresponding to the total volume of packaging waste generated in the EU in 2015
(Eurostat, 2021). The total recycle rate is assumed to be the accumulation of three sources:
the rate comes from domestic recycle facilities in EU (EU recycle rate); the rate of waste
being exported and processed in China (China recycle rate); and the rate of waste being
exported and processed in other countries (Other countries recycle rate). All the recycle
rates across three regions are controlled by their respective fraction of total recycle rate and
the desirable recycle rate, which is governed by the desirable recycle percentage targeted
by the European Commission at 70% (European Commission, 2020a). Please refer to Table
7 for the full list of data explanation for this sub-system. Equation 1–14 are mathematical
expressions associated with variables within this sub-system in Fig. 2.
Actual recycle percentage 
T otal recycle rate
Packaging waste inventory (Units : dimensionless)
(1)
China recycle rate  ACT I V E I N I T I AL (Desirable recycle rate × Fraction of recycle in China, 0)
(Units : thousand tonnes)
(2)
Desirable recycle rate  Desirable recycle percentage × Packaging waste inventory
(Units : thousand tonnes)
(3)
Discrepancy recycle percentage  Desirable recycle percentage −Actual recycle percentage
(Units : dim ensionless)
(4)
EU recycle rate ACT I V E I N I T I AL (Desirable recycle rate × Fraction of recycle in EU, 0)
(Units : thousand tonnes)
(5)
123

2030
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
Fig. 4 The proposed EU recycling capacity sub-system (Source: Authors)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2031
Fraction of recycle in China  Initial China recycle f raction + ∫[Inf low China −Out f low China]dt
(Unit : dim ensionless)
(6)
Fraction of recycle in EU  Initial EU recyclef raction + ∫[Inf low EU −Out f low EU]dt
(Units : dimensionless)
(7)
Fraction of recycle in other countries  Initial other countries recycle f raction
+ ∫[Inf low other countries −Out f low other countries]dt
(Units : dim ensionless)
(8)
Other countries recyle rate  ACT I V E I N I T I AL (Desirable recycle rate × Fraction of recycle in other countries, 0)
(Units : thousand tonne)
(9)
Packaging waste inventory  Waste rate + ∫[Waste rate −Waste exit rate]dt
(Units : thousand tonnes)
(10)
Re cycle discrepancy volume availability  I F T H E N ELSE (Discrepancy recycle percentage > 1e −005, 1, 0)
(Units : dim ensionless)
(11)
T otal recycle rate  China recycle rate + Other countries recyle rate
+ EU recycle rate(Units : thousand tonnes)
(12)
Waste exit rate  Packaging waste inventory(Units : thousand tonnes)
(13)
Waste rate  Initial Packaging waste inventory (Units : thousand tonnes) (14)
3.2.3 Recycling rate by region sub-system
The SD model describing the fraction of recycle rate across three regions (the EU, China,
and other countries) can be seen in Fig. 3. For cohesion and clarity purpose, the full list of
equations of this sub-system is moved to Table 5.
As can be seen in Fig. 3, the fraction of recycle in each region is subject to its proﬁtability
ranking, government restrictions and recycle capacity constraint. Particularly, China, which
is ranked with the highest recycling proﬁtability, has taken the most fraction of recycling,
whereas in contrast, EU and other countries are only responsible for much lower fraction of
recycling due to limited recycle capacity and/or government waste ban.
The initial recycle fraction of each region is set (see Table 1) as the starting point for
dynamic interaction during the simulation period.
3.2.4 EU recycling capacity sub-system
Figure 4 represents the stock and ﬂow diagram of the system of the recycling capacity and
proﬁtability in China, other countries, and EU region. For clarity purpose, the full list of
equations of this sub-system is moved to Table 6. The list of input data for this sub-system
can be found in Table 2.
• EU recycle capacity section
The magnitude of the EU recycle capacity adjustment rate depends on proﬁt of recycling
in EU. As the proﬁt increase, there is more incentive for the existing players within the
industry to expand their capacities, leading to a higher EU recycle capacity adjustment rate.
123

2032
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
Table 1 Values of exogenous variables (constants) in the EU recycling rate by region sub-system (Full data
explanation can be seen in Table 8)
Parameter
Value
Data source
Initial other countries recycle fraction
%1.%2 (dimensionless)
Eurostat (2021)
Initial China recycle fraction
0.85 (dimensionless)
European Commission
(2018b)
Initial EU recycle fraction
0.06 (dimensionless)
EU recycling volume of packaging waste in
2015
55,810 (thousand
tonnes)
Eurostat (2021)
Recycle rate constraint disrupted from
government ban (China)
DELAY FIXED (1, 3, 0)
World Trade Organization
(2017)
Recycle rate constraint disrupted from
government ban (other countries)
DELAY FIXED (1, 6, 0)
European Court of Auditors
(2020a)
At the same time, this makes the market more attractive for new entrants, which subsequently
causing a larger recycle capacity adjustment rate in a longer run.
As the EU recycle capacity increase, so does the overall supply of the market which drags
down the overall Price/unit of recycling in EU (provisional) via a negative effect on the EU
price/unit adjustment rate. This creates a balancing loop (B1) in which the increase in EU
recycle capacity, as a result of the discrepancy between the actual recycle percentage and
the desirable recycle percentage, leads to the deterioration of the Price/unit of recycling in
EU (ﬁnal), and eventually push the EU recycle capacity to drop.
• Proﬁt/unit section
The Proﬁt of recycling in EU is the difference between the Price/unit of recycled materials
in EU (ﬁnal) and the Cost/unit of recycling in EU (ﬁnal).
• Price/unit section
Apart from the EU recycle capacity, the price/unit of recycling in EU is also directly
impacted by the market demand for recycled products via the Effect of increasing market
demand on price/unit. This can be put simply as if the supply of recycled materials increases,
the competition from the market would drive down the price of selling one unit of recycled
packaging materials. Additionally, government can have certain inﬂuence on the increase of
the price/unit through market-based policies aim at improving market demand for recycled
materials.Inﬂationrateperyear isconsideredheretoreﬂecttheannualcurrencydepreciation.
While the price/unit can decrease, there is a minimum price/unit of recycled materials in EU
to prevent it from reaching unrealistic value of 0.
• Competition level section and recycling productivity via innovation level section
There is a direct causal effect between the EU recycle capacity and Competition level
in recycling industry. The changes in the latter are proportional to the changes in the pre-
vious stock. The competition level in recycling industry in turn encourages the investment
in innovation on recycling productivity, hence the actual productivity adjustment rate. As
accumulated over time, this would result in higher recycling productivity. Apart from the
mentioned, this stock also beneﬁts from the innovation-focused policies aiming to improve
recycling productivity through innovation.
• Cost/unit section
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2033
Table 2 List of exogenous variables in the EU recycling capacity sub-system (Full data explanation can be seen in Table 10)
Parameter
Value
Source
Inﬂation rate per year
0.048 (dimensionless)
The World Bank (2019)
Minimum price/unit of recycled materials in EU
0.0001 (USD)
Effect of policies on price/unit of recycled materials
y  x
20 (dimensionless) where policy point as x and price/unit of recycled materials
as y
Initial price/unit of recycled materials in EU
234 (USD)
Da Cruz et al. (2014)
Initial cost/unit of recycling in EU
308 (USD)
Da Cruz et al. (2014)
Proﬁt of recycling abroad
China: 100 (USD);
Others: 70 (USD)
Effect of increasing market demand on price/unit
0.07 (dimensionless)
Exal and BCG (2019)
Effect of EU recycle capacity on price/unit of recycled
materials in EU
0.06 (dimensionless)
Busso and Galiani (2019)
Effect of proﬁt on EU recycle capacity adjustment rate
0.25 (dimensionless)
Mansikkasalo et al., (2014)
Initial competition level in recycling industry
1 (dimensionless)
123

2034
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
Table 2 (continued)
Parameter
Value
Source
Effect of competition level on investment in recycling
innovation
Aghion et al. (2018)
Effect of EU recycle capacity on competition level
adjustment rate
1 (dimensionless)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2035
Table 2 (continued)
Parameter
Value
Source
Effect of pressure from EU recycling target on policies
Minimum cost/unit of recycling in EU
0.0001 (USD)
Effect of policies on recycling productivity via
innovation
y  x
20 (dimensionless) where policy point as x and price/unit of recycled materials
as y
Effect of productivity on cost/unit adjustment rate
0.26 (dimensionless)(a)
Rogers (2006)
Effect of policies on EU recycle cost/unit adjustment
rate
y  x
20 (dimensionless) where policy point as x and price/unit of recycled materials
as y
Initial recycling productivity level
1 (dimensionless)
123

2036
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
Table 2 (continued)
Parameter
Value
Source
Effect of proﬁt on recycle capacity when proﬁt is
negative
−0.01 (dimensionless)
Sterman (2000)
Effect of proﬁt on recycle capacity when proﬁt is
negative last time step
(a)Assumes that the growth rate of productivity is proportional to the reduction in cost/unit of production. According to Rogers (2006), using UK’s ONS data from 1996 to 2003,
for all manufacturing ﬁrms the estimated rate of return on productivity growth to R&D is between 19 and 33%. We take the average of these two numbers to get 26%
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2037
The EU cost level adjustment rate is not only being inﬂuenced by the changes in recycling
productivity but also by the inﬂation rate (which reﬂects the depreciation in currency value),
and by the subsidy-focused policies—which are the policies aiming to reduce the recycling
cost/unit. The value of the EU cost/unit adjustment rate is the aggregation of the effects from
all the listed above.
All of the policies that inﬂuence cost/unit, price/unit and productivity via innovation
development are also ampliﬁed by the pressure that the local authorities face from meeting
the EU recycle target on packaging waste (Effect of pressure from EU recycling target on
policies).
3.3 Model validation
In order to ensure reliability of the model, validation must be carried out before simulation
(Forrester & Senge, 1980). Number of tests were carried out, including (1) Structure assess-
ment—checking the realistic nature of the interconnection between variables, and between
variables and levels; (2) Boundary adequacy—the suitability of the selection of endoge-
nous variables, or the boundary of the system built; (3) Dimensional consistency—checking
whether the units of the models make sense, especially when many equations exist; (4) Param-
eter assessment—checking whether every parameter have real life meaning; and ﬁnally, (5)
Behavioural reproduction—using the 2006–2018 data of recycling rate for packaging waste
across the 28 EU members, obtained from (Eurostat, 2021), to verify the model’s behaviours.
For both structure assessment and boundary adequacy test, feedbacks and opinions have
been obtained in the Circular Economy workshop organised by Bexley council, UK, and
“The Spectrum of Systems Approaches to Problem Solving: from Systems Engineering
to System Dynamics to Systems Thinking” workshop organised by the System Dynamics
Society. Remaining tests are run using built-in functions on Vensim. The result shows that
the developed simulation model is stable and does not have any validation issues.
4 Result analysis
4.1 Simulation
Assuming the government has a limited and ﬁxed budget over the simulation time, ﬁrstly, we
need to understand the impact of each of the policies on capacity building; secondly, how to
allocate this budget across the three policy types to maximise the performance of the model.
Within this simulation, the ﬁxed budget is represented by 10 points. Table 3 explains each
case setting.
Apart from the governmental budgets being set based on Table 3, other parameters for the
simulation are set as in Tables 1 and 2 above. The simulation results can be seen in Fig. 5.
We focus particularly on the simulated periods between 2015 and 2040 as there is not much
change in the trend line patterns across all 4 scenarios after year 2040.
Unlike SFP and MBP, of which their impact can be seen quickly after implementation,
IFP takes much longer time to inﬂuence productivity level (Cooper & Perez, 2003; Gross
et al., 2018; Grübler, 1998). Hence, we assume that there is an additional 3-year delay after
the IFP are adopted. This reﬂects that any creation of innovations usually takes time, not in
days or weeks but years.
123

2038
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
Table 3 Summary of the scenario settings
Scenario
Description
Base
No points are awarded to any policy type, implying that the government does not
have policies in response to the CWB. The performance of the system in this
scenario is used as a benchmark for comparing the effectiveness of other policy
scenarios
Innovation-focused
All 10 points of the governmental budgets are allocated towards IFP, while none is
allocated to the other two policies
Subsidy-focused
All 10 points of the governmental budgets are allocated towards SFP, while none is
allocated to the other two policies
Market-based
All 10 points of the governmental budgets are allocated towards MBP, while none
is allocated to the other two policies
Fig. 5 Simulation results for the EU recycle capacity across all scenarios
4.1.1 The immediate term between 2018 and 2020
As can be seen in Fig. 5, the EU recycle capacity in the base scenario remains unchanged in
the ﬁrst 2 years since the CWB in 2018, which reafﬁrmed the urgency of having the policy
incentives supporting the domestic capacity building to make up for the sudden capacity loss
from China.
Among three types of governmental policies, the MBP provide the fastest response to the
CWB disruption by accelerating the expansion of the EU recycle capacity instantly from
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2039
2018. The capacity building supported by the SFP also quickly take into effect from 2019.
As expected, the IFP have not had any impacts yet due to the 3-year delay in effect.
There is plenty of empirical evidence showing the high performance of SFP and MBP in
the capacity building of WMS over the short term. SFP (eg. Tax incentives under the EU’s
2020 New Circular Economy Action Plan, public funds on separation collection systems
under the EU 2018 Waste Framework Directive, and Belgium’s Green Dot fee scheme)
can provide direct ﬁnancial supports that help drive down the cost and increase the proﬁt
margins of recyclers instantly, thereby encourage them to expand their recycling operation
for higher capacity. Likewise, through MBP, the growing pressure from the compliance of
law enforcement (eg. EPR and tradable recycling credit scheme) and the public awareness
campaign (eg. German’s KfW Dossier campaign—Why we need circular economy) can
also force the company to act responsibly and sustainably by consuming more recycled
materials/products, thus lifting the recycling capacity to meet the increased demand.
4.1.2 The short term between 2020 and 2024
In the next 4 years, the MBP continues to play the pivotal role in the EU recycle capacity
expansion plan, whilst the effectiveness of the SFP is levelled off. In 2022, the capacity
level in SFP is at the same level as in the base scenario whereby there are no speciﬁc policy
incentives in use. From 2022 onwards, the SFP is totally outperformed by the rest of the
scenarios. This further conﬁrms that the recycling industry is a demand-driven business;
therefore, to sustain its viability over the longer run, the government should rely on the MBP
to enhance public green awareness and create real demands in the secondary market, rather
than over rely on the direct monetary subsidy.
As opposed to the slow response in the immediate term, the impact of IFP seems to be
much more noticeable in the short term, as its capacity level quickly exceeds the SFP, the
base scenario and the MBP in 2023. This can be explained by the indirect causal relationship
that innovation level has with the proﬁtability. Unlike the other two policy types, it would
take sometimes (about 2 years) before the beneﬁt the IFP can be well-observed. However,
after that, the innovation advancement would signiﬁcantly increase productivity rate, hence
proﬁtability, which eventually lead to the fast and prolonged growth in capacity level, as can
be seen in Fig. 5 for the period between 2020 and 2024.
4.1.3 The medium term between 2024 and 2031
Not much have changed in the trend lines between 2024 and 2031 apart from the fact that
MBP loses its momentum and is overtaken by the base scenario from 2024. As compared
to the previous term, the pace of capacity growth due to the IFP is much slower over the
mid-term, though it remained the most effective policy type for recycle capacity building,
followed closely by the base scenario. The SFP continues to experience the sluggish growth
in the capacity, as compared to the base scenario and the other two policies.
The slowdown in the IFP-based capacity growth could be explained as follows. When the
productivity grows exponentially, thanks to the innovation advancement, the recycling cost
decreases and gets close to 0 very quickly. When the innovation reaches a certain level of
maturity, its perceived beneﬁt towards cost reduction and proﬁt increase is weaken over time,
thereby ﬂattening the capacity growth driven by the IFP.
123

2040
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
4.1.4 The long term between 2031 and 2040
Following the same trend in the medium term, the IFP-led capacity growth continues to be
the highest over the long term, and then gradually faded away when its capacity level gets
closer to that of the baseline scenario. However, it is noteworthy that the IFP scenario in
this model is simulated based on the perceived beneﬁts of innovation over the increasing
productivity of recyclers. Therefore, it is still possible for the government to encourage the
capacity building in the recycling industry through IFP after 2040 if the focus is shifted to
other valued-added beneﬁts of innovation (e.g., eco-design of new products) rather than just
productivity improvement.
4.2 Optimisation of EU policy mix
After understanding the effectiveness of each policy type in the expansion of the EU recycling
capacity, our next attempt is to ﬁnd the best course of governmental actions in response to
the disruptive event of the CWB. Like other industries, the EU policy makers in the recycling
industry also operate under limited budget and resources, therefore, the budget allocated for
each type of policy incentives is subject to be optimised.
Assumingly, the EU governmental budget and resources available for expanding the
domestic recycling capacity is limited to 10 points, our aim is to ﬁnd the optimal proportion
of the governmental budget allocated to each of the three studied policy types (IFP, MBP,
and SFP) in order to maximise the total EU recycle capacity accumulated over the 25-year
simulated period between 2015 and 2040. The optimisation problem is solved by Powell hill
climbing algorithm integrated in the built-in solver in Vensim® DSS for Windows Version
6.1c. The values of parameter setting for the optimisation is the same as in the simulation as
discussed earlier.
Figure6showsthedynamicbehaviouroftheEUrecyclecapacitygrowthindifferentpolicy
scenarios. The optimal solution was found with the budget mix of 84% government resources
dedicating to IFP, 16% to MBP, and 0% to SFP. As can be easily seen, the EU capacity level
in the scenario using the suggested optimal policy design signiﬁcantly outperforms the other
scenarios across the short, medium and long term.
This ﬁnding afﬁrms that the most effective policy design for the EU packaging recycling
capacity expansion is the one that can support both the supply side and demand side. It further
highlights the paramount importance of innovation as the key enablers in the quest to achieve
the EU’s recycling target in the aftermath of the CWB. This also reﬂects the best practices
across the world’s leading countries with the highest recycling rate such as Japan, Netherland,
and Germany. All of which have been the pioneers in adopting cutting-edge technological
innovations in recycling operations.
4.3 Sensitivity analysis
This section aims to examine how the optimal solution of the policy mix varies according to
changes in the ratio of initial unit price and initial unit cost (initial P/C ratio) which represents
different recycling situations in the EU with regard to the industry’s proﬁtability. This also
validates the reliability of the developed model to see if it responds in a reasonable way to
parameter changes.
Particularly, changes to the initial P/C ratio can be done in two ways. The ﬁrst way is we
incrementally change the initial unit price while keeping the initial unit cost at the EU average
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2041
Fig. 6 Optimisation results compared to other scenarios
value of e308. Likewise, the second way is to incrementally change the initial unit cost while
keeping the initial unit price at the EU average value of e234. For other parameters, we keep
the value as they are in the optimisation setting in Sect. 4.2. The result of the optimal policy
mix and the cumulative capacity achieved from two approaches can be seen in Figs. 7 and 8,
respectively.
From the results, it is worth mentioning that even though the government has a budget of 10
points to allocate into the three policies, the maximum cumulative capacity in each scenario
is not always being achieved by spending all government budget. This can be demonstrated
at the initial P/C ratio level of 0.2, 0.3, 0.5, and 4.5 in Fig. 7, as well as 0.2 in Fig. 8.
Fig. 7 Analysis 1-Changes in optimal policy mix and cumulative capacity when initial unit price varies, and
initial unit cost is ﬁxed at the EU average value (e308)
123

2042
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
Fig. 8 Analysis 2-Changes in optimal policy mix and cumulative capacity when initial unit cost varies, and
initial unit price is ﬁxed at the EU average value (e234)
As can be seen in Fig. 7, for countries with loss-making recycle industries (the initial P/C
ratio lower than 1.0), the optimal solution for the policy mix is relatively sensitive to the
change of initial unit price. Particularly, looking at cases with the ratio level between 0.2 and
0.8, it can be observed that countries with higher initial unit price are suggested to invest more
on IFP and SFP than MBP in order to reduce unit cost that elevates the recycle proﬁtability
and capacity. Nevertheless, the optimal solution becomes insensitive to the initial unit price
changes when the recycle industry starts making proﬁts (see P/C ratio between 0.9 and 2.0).
Interestingly, for countries enjoying highly lucrative recycle industries with high initial unit
price (e.g., the initial P/C ratio at 4.5), the mix of all three policies is recommended and the
huge uplift in the cumulative recycle capacity can be achieved accordingly.
Compared to Fig. 7, we can see from Fig. 8 that the optimised policy mix seems less
sensitive to changes in initial unit cost than changes in initial unit price. In addition, for those
countries suffer from substantial losses due to extremely high recycling unit cost (the initial
P/C ratio between 0.1 and 0.5), the deployment of the optimal policy mix only has minor
impacts on capacity building. On the contrary, for countries with reduced recycle cost but
limited proﬁtability (P/C ratio ranging from 0.6 to 1.1), the beneﬁt of using the optimal policy
mix is much more obvious as the cumulative capacity rises signiﬁcantly. However, when the
P/C ratio is higher than 1.1 implying countries having low-cost and high-proﬁt recycling
industries, the effectiveness of the optimal policy mix in capacity building is levelled off or
even causes an opposed effect.
Altogether, the analyses in Figs. 7 and 8 emphasise the pivotal role of innovation in
recycling capacity building regardless of the proﬁtability situation in each EU countries. The
impact of MBP is also more deﬁnite than that of SFB in many cases.
In general, it is essential to know how the optimial results senstive to the initial value
setting. When re-conducting Analysis 1 (Fig. 7) with different initial EU recycle capacity
levels (Fig. 9), and different volume of generated waste levels (Fig. 10), the optimal policy
mix across different P/C ratios stay relatively similar to that of the original analyses. The
only variations are the policy mixes for P/C ratios ranging from 0.5 to 0.8 out of 21 ratios.
This indicates that optimial policy mixes are robust against the initial values of EU recycle
capacity and the volume of generated waste.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2043
Fig. 9 Changes in optimal policy mix and cumulative capacity with different levels of initial the EU recycle
capacity
Altogether, the optimal policy mixes corresponding to changes in unit price, unit cost,
initial EU recycle capacity, and volume of generated packaging waste as shown in Figs. 7,
8, 9 and 10, respectively, provide a potential guidance for the EU member countries to build
domestic recycling capacity taking into consideration unique conditions of each country.
4.4 Verification of the results
To test the EU’s guideline we proposed above, three EU member countries were chosen based
on the availability of comparable data to run policy mix optimisations—France, Romania and
Portugal. The data for initial cost/unit and initial price/unit for each country were obtained
from Fig. 3 in Da Cruz et al. (2014), while the packaging waste generated volume and initial
capacity were obtained from (Eurostat, 2021) for year 2015 in thousand tonnes.
As shown in Table 4, the optimal policy mix for France perfectly matches the EU’s
guideline for P/C ratio at 1.0. Meanwhile, at P/C ratio of 0.8, the optimal policy mix for
Romania matches the scope of the EU’s guideline when the volume of generated packaging
waste decreases by 50% (Fig. 10b). Finally, for P/C ratio at 0.5 in Portugal case, although
does not perfectly match (i.e. IFP + MBP as proposed by the EU’s guideline), the optimal
123

2044
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
Fig. 10 Changes in optimal policy mix and cumulative capacity with different levels of generated waste
policy mix for this country still reﬂects the EU’s guideline in a sense where IFP accounts
for the majority of government budget. This shows that in reality, the best mix of policy
does not only rely on the P/C ratio, but also could be inﬂuenced by other factors. Therefore,
there would be no one-ﬁt-all solution. Each member country should take into account their
respective unique conditions in deciding the most effective policy mix.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2045
Table 4 Optimal policy mix for France, Romania, and Portugal
Scenario
P/C ratio
Packaging waste
generated volume
Initial capacity
Subsidy
Innovation
Market
Cumulative capacity
In line with proposed
EU guidance
France
1.0
12,469
490
0
7.5
2.5
22,474
Yes
Romania
0.8
1397
47
0
7.5
2.5
1533
Yes
Portugal
0.5
1585
54
1.6
8.4
0
1618
Partly
123

2046
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
5 Discussion of implications
Based on the result analysis above, our ﬁndings suggest the EU to allocate the majority of
their governmental budget (up to 84%) on IFP and a smaller, but still signiﬁcant portion (up
to 16%) to MBP. This budget allocation framework is proposed to ensure the EU achieves
the deliberate balance between the short-term market stabilisation in response to the waste
bans and the long-term transformation of its domestic recycling capacity for environmen-
tal sustainability and economic growth. Our innovation-heavy budget can be economically,
environmentally and socially justiﬁed.
From economic perspective, increasing IFP budgets may be appealing. Studies show that
compared to high-carbon innovations, low-carbon innovations tend to generate higher knowl-
edge spillovers which lead to broader applications across the entire economy (Dechezleprêtre
et al., 2013). Therefore, they have greater economic beneﬁts and higher social values to partly
or even fully offset the cost of policy changes. To the EU, innovation is particularly crucial
for enhancing its global leadership in recycling technologies, driving long-term economic
growth through increased productivity and creating new opportunities for exports. On the
other hand, MBP should not be neglected as policies like subsidies, ERP scheme or carbon
credit help stabilise the sector in the short-term after the CWB shocks by boosting immediate
demand and strengthening market mechanism for recycled materials. However, overreliance
on those market-based instruments alone without sufﬁcient investment on innovation may
limit potentials for long-term economic growth and competitiveness as markets often demand
for innovative, cost-effective solutions to truly thrive. In fact, economists found that MBP pro-
vides greater incentives for innovation than command-and-control policies (e.g., technology
standards or performance requirements) by rewarding ﬁrms for the continuous improvement
in their decarbonisation efforts (Dechezleprêtre et al., 2016).
From the environmental rationale, our proposal reﬂects the urgent need for the EU to
handle its own waste in the new global recycling landscape set by the waste bans. Indeed,
without developing cutting-edge recycling technologies such as automatic sorting system or
chemical recycling, the EU will struggle to meet its recycling and landﬁll target. Additionally,
empirical research has implied that effective implementation of technological innovations is
a driving force in transitioning towards a climate-neutral, circular economy which is the EU
goal by 2050 (Tanveer et al., 2022).
Fostering innovation can also generate signiﬁcant social advantages by creating new job
opportunities in research and development (R&D) and advanced manufacturing in waste
management sector, thus aligning with the EU’s broader goals for promoting technological
leadershipandsocialcohesion.Furthermore,advancementsinrecyclingtechnologiescanalso
help improve public health by reducing waste incineration which is a well-known source of air
pollution and health risks (Kurniawan et al., 2021). On the contrary, the MBP or SFP-heavy
budget framework may carry risks for market failure and job losses, especially in sectors like
waste management where demand for recycled materials is largely ﬂuctuated and heavily
rely on the quality and quantity uncertainties of the collected waste and returned products
(Nguyen et al., 2019).
The practical implications of our policy recommendation to policymakers and economic
agents in the EU recycling industries can be discussion as follow:
• Implications for governments and policymakers
By gearing the majority of the budget toward innovation, governments must prioritise
R&D investments, support public and private partnerships (PPPs), and ensure a regulatory
environment that encourages technological advancement. They will need to work closely with
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2047
research institutes, universities and private sectors to maximise the impact of IFP, including
creating initiatives for knowledge sharing, technology transferring and innovation hubs.
Indeed, the EU’s current regulatory framework is heavily aligned with our recommen-
dations. In terms of IFP, programmes like Horizon Europe running from 2021 to 2027
with a budget of e95.5 billion are the key funding mechanism to support projects with
eco-innovation, advanced material recovery, and automation in recycling (e.g. the CIRCU-
LARISE Plastic project). The EU commitment to a net-zero circular economy, as seen in the
Green Deal and the Circular Economy Action Plan (CEAP), also reﬂects the importance of
driving long-tern sustainability through innovation.
Additionally, the shift towards innovation in recycling could foster job creations in high-
tech sectors, leading to growing demands for new skill sets related to advanced materials,
waste sorting technologies, and digital solutions for recycling ﬂow tracking. Under this cir-
cumstance, governments need strategic investments in education and re-training programmes
to manage the transition of workers from conventional, labour-intensive recycling jobs into
the modern, higher-skilled recycling industry.
• Implications for ﬁrms in recycling industries
Firms that invest and adopt early innovative waste management technologies are better
positioned to gain competitive advantages, capture market share and improve proﬁtability
over time, thereby offsetting the heavy initial costs of investment. In this regard, large recy-
cling ﬁrms will likely align well with our IFP recommendation since they have capabilities
and resource to invest heavily on R&D of new technologies like AI and machine learning
(eg. Veolia’s automated waste sorting system) or chemical recycling (eg. the breakthrough
depolimerisation process of waste plastic developed by CARBIOS), thus enjoying economic
beneﬁts of being early adopters (Zhao et al., 2023). Conversely, small and medium enter-
prises (SMEs) face barriers to innovation due to capital constraints and workforce challenges
caused by the skill mismatch of new recycling technologies. Therefore, they may struggle
to beneﬁt from IFP unless they receive more targeted support and public funding (e.g. EIC’s
Accelerator Programme, Seed fundings) to help them fully align with the IFP. For instance,
the European Innovation Council (EIC) plays an active role in scaling up breakthrough inno-
vations through its Accelerator Programme which is particularly relevant to deep-tech, SME
recycling ﬁrms.
6 Conclusion
Major waste-importing countries like China and Malaysia have imposed waste bans which
cause major disruptions to the waste supply chain and unprecedent challenges to the recycling
industry. In response to these disruptive events, it is imperative for countries that are over-
reliant on waste exporting like the EU to develop and execute expansion strategies for their
domestic recycling capacities. Hence, this study aims to develop a SD-based simulation
optimisation model to evaluate the effectiveness of three distinct policy types—innovation
advancement, subsidies, and market promotion—in supporting the expansion of the EU’s
domestic recycling capacity for packaging wastes. Additionally, it proposes a guideline for
implementing an optimal policy mix, tailored to the unique price-to-cost ratios of each EU
member country.
The result shows that IFP can help accelerate the capacity at the fastest pace in the short
term and become the main driver of capacity building in the medium to long term, although its
effectiveness may not be perceived immediately as compared to SFP and MBP. By contrast,
123

2048
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
the MBP can provide the fastest response to the disruptive event by boosting up the capacity
instantlyintheimmediateterm.However,theireffectivenessisfadedawayduringthemedium
and long term. Finally, the capacity driven by the SFP also shows immediate improvement
compared to the capacity under innovation-focused and no policy (baseline scenario) in the
immediate and the ﬁrst half of short term but was quickly overshadowed by all three other
scenarios afterwards. The optimisation results suggested that the maximum capacity level
can be achieved if policy makers could allocate most of its budget and resources (up to
84%) on IFP, and the rest 16% on MBP. In other words, our ﬁndings afﬁrm that the EU’s
recycling sector is an innovation-led and demand-driven industry. Further scenario analyses
also conducted under various conditions reveal that our optimisation results are robust against
any changes, which was veriﬁed by the cases of Romania, Portugal, and France.
For theoretical contributions, our proposed model is amongst the few models offering the
holistic picture of the waste recycling system. The model is versatile, allowing for adaptations
to other types of waste streams and applicable to different nations. In addition, although the
effectiveness of individual policies on recycling capacity expansions has widely studied,
research on the combined effect of policy mixes, as examined in this paper, remains limited.
Finally, our SD modelling approach enhances the current theoretical frameworks used for
addressing disruptions in reverse logistics.
From the political perspective, our ﬁndings are vital as they give policymakers a steer on
how to strategically allocate the government budgets to ensure the EU not only mitigates
the immediate aftermath of the waste ban shocks but also reinforces its domestic recycling
industry to support economic, environmental and social sustainability.
For practical contributions, this research provides the waste recycling practitioners with
a deeper understanding of how different governmental policies perform dynamically in
the immediate-, short-, middle-, and long-term. Considering the heavy capital investment
required for recycling capacity expansions, our insights are crucial for both large ﬁrms and
SMEs to be aware and adjust their business strategies accordingly.
Our study has some limitations which can be addressed in future research. Firstly, while
this research provides evidences of how each type of policies impacts on EU domestic
packaging recycling capacity development, the model itself inherits the limitation of SD
methodology, for example, some causal relationships are hard to quantify and verify, hence
empirical evidence and expert opinions are used. In future, data-driven policy design would
be a research direction for more informed decision makings. Secondly, although our results
show that the optimal policy mix outperform individual policies in addressing the shortage
of EU’s domestic recycling capacity, its effectiveness needs to be further assessed through
industry feedback, survey, and case studies.
Appendix
See Tables 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2049
Table 5 System dynamics model equations for recycling rate by region sub-system
Recycling rate by region sub-system (Fig. 3)
China’s recycle rate constraint 
IF THEN ELSE (“Recycle rate constraint disrupted from government ban (China)” > 0, MIN (‘Recycle rate constraint
disrupted from government ban (China)’, Recycle Capacity Abroad[China]), Recycle Capacity Abroad[China])
Units: thousand tonnes
Desirable recycle rate 
Desirable recycle percentage * Packaging waste inventory
Units: thousand tonnes
EU recycle capacity 
INTEG(IF THEN ELSE ((EU recycle capacity + EU recycle capacity adjustment rate) < 0, 0, EU recycle capacity
adjustment rate), Initial EU recycle capacity)
Units: thousand tonnes
EU recycling volume of packaging waste in 2015  55,810
Units: thousand tonnes
Fraction of recycle in China 
INTEG(Inﬂow China•Outﬂow China, Initial China recycle fraction)
Units: dimensionless
Fraction of recycle in EU 
INTEG(Inﬂow EU•Outﬂow EU, Initial EU recycle fraction)
Units: dimensionless
Fraction of recycle in other countries 
INTEG(Inﬂow other countries•Outﬂow other countries, Initial other countries recycle fraction)
Units: dimensionless
Inﬂow China 
IF THEN ELSE (Rank Proﬁt[China]  3, Maximum fraction of recycle discrepancy that China can satisfy, IF THEN ELSE
(Rank Proﬁt[China]  2:AND: Rank Proﬁt[EU]  3, MIN (Maximum fraction of recycle discrepancy that China can
satisfy, 1•Fraction of recycle in EU), IF THEN ELSE (Rank Proﬁt[China]  2:AND: Rank Proﬁt[Other]  3, MIN
(Maximum fraction of recycle discrepancy that China can satisfy, 1•Fraction of recycle in other countries), MIN
(Maximum fraction of recycle discrepancy that China can satisfy, 1•Fraction of recycle in other countries•Fraction of
recycle in EU))))
Units: dimensionless
Inﬂow EU 
IF THEN ELSE ( Rank Proﬁt[EU]  3, Maximum fraction of recycle discrepancy that EU can satisfy, IF THEN ELSE
(Rank Proﬁt[EU]  2:AND: Rank Proﬁt[China]  3, MIN (Maximum fraction of recycle discrepancy that EU can satisfy,
1•Fraction of recycle in China), IF THEN ELSE (Rank Proﬁt[EU]  2:AND: Rank Proﬁt[Other]  3, MIN (Maximum
fraction of recycle discrepancy that EU can satisfy, 1•Fraction of recycle in other countries), MIN ( Maximum fraction of
recycle discrepancy that EU can satisfy, 1•Fraction of recycle in China•Fraction of recycle in other countries))))
Units: dimensionless
Inﬂow other countries 
IF THEN ELSE (Rank Proﬁt[Other]  3, Maximum fraction of recycle discrepancy that other countries can satisfy, IF
THEN ELSE ( Rank Proﬁt[Other]  2:AND: Rank Proﬁt[China]  3, MIN (Maximum fraction of recycle discrepancy
that other countries can satisfy, 1•Fraction of recycle in China), IF THEN ELSE (Rank Proﬁt[Other]  2:AND: Rank
Proﬁt[EU]  3, MIN (Maximum fraction of recycle discrepancy that other countries can satisfy, 1•Fraction of recycle in
EU), MIN (Maximum fraction of recycle discrepancy that other countries can satisfy, 1•Fraction of recycle in
China•Fraction of recycle in EU))))
123

2050
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
Table 5 (continued)
Recycling rate by region sub-system (Fig. 3)
Units: dimensionless
Initial China recycle fraction  0.85
Units: dimensionless
Initial EU recycle fraction  0.06
Units: dimensionless
Initial other countries recycle fraction  0.09
Units: dimensionless
Maximum fraction of recycle discrepancy that China can satisfy 
MIN (1, China’s recycle rate constraint/Desirable recycle rate)
Units: dimensionless
Maximum fraction of recycle discrepancy that EU can satisfy 
MIN (1, EU recycle capacity/Desirable recycle rate)
Units: dimensionless
Maximum fraction of recycle discrepancy that other countries can satisfy 
MIN (1, Other countries recycle rate constraint/Desirable recycle rate)
Units: dimensionless
Other countries recycle rate constraint 
IF THEN ELSE (“Recycle rate constraint disrupted from government ban (other countries)" > 0, MIN (“Recycle rate
constraint disrupted from government ban (other countries)”, Recycle Capacity Abroad[Other]), Recycle Capacity
Abroad[Other])
Units: thousand tonnes
Outﬂow China 
Fraction of recycle in China
Units: dimensionless
Outﬂow EU 
Fraction of recycle in EU
Units: dimensionless
Outﬂow other countries 
Fraction of recycle in other countries
Units: dimensionless
Proﬁt[China]  Proﬁt of recycling abroad[China]
Proﬁt[Other]  Proﬁt of recycling abroad[Other]
Proﬁt[EU]  Proﬁt of recycling in EU
Units: USD
Rank Proﬁt[Recycle location] 
VECTOR RANK (Proﬁt[Recycle location], 1)
Units: dimensionless
Recycle Capacity Abroad[China] 
Initial China recycle fraction * EU recycling volume of packaging waste in 2015
Recycle Capacity Abroad[Other] 
Initial other countries recycle fraction * EU recycling volume of packaging waste in 2015
Units: thousand tonnes
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2051
Table 5 (continued)
Recycling rate by region sub-system (Fig. 3)
Recycle rate constraint abroad[China]  China’s recycle rate constraint
Recycle rate constraint abroad[Other]  Other countries recycle rate constraint
Units: thousand tonnes
“Recycle rate constraint disrupted from government ban (China)” 
DELAY FIXED (1,3, 0)
Units: thousand tonnes
“Recycle rate constraint disrupted from government ban (other countries)” 
DELAY FIXED (1,6, 0)
Units: thousand tonnes
123

2052
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
Table 6 System dynamics model equations for EU recycling capacity sub-system
EU recycling capacity sub-system (Fig. 4)
Adjusted effect of EU recycle capacity on competition level adjustment rate 
(EU recycle capacity adjustment rate/EU recycle capacity) * Effect of EU recycle capacity on competition level adjustment
rate
Units: dimensionless
Adjusted effect of EU recycle capacity on Price/unit of recycled materials in EU 
EU recycle capacity adjustment rate/EU recycle capacity * “Effect of EU recycle capacity on Price/unit of recycled
materials in EU”
Units: dimensionless
Adjusted effect of productivity on cost/unit adjustment rate 
(Recycling Productivity via Innovation adjustment rate / Recycling Productivity via Innovation) * “Effect of productivity on
cost/unit adjustment rate”
Units: dimensionless
Adjusted effect of proﬁt on EU recycle capacity adjustment rate 
IF THEN ELSE (Proﬁt of recycling in EU <  0, Effect of proﬁt on recycle capacity when proﬁt is negative, IF THEN
ELSE (Last period proﬁt of recycling in EU <  0, Effect of proﬁt on recycle capacity when proﬁt is negative last time
step (Proﬁt of recycling in EU), (Adjusted proﬁt of recycling in EU•Last period adjusted proﬁt of recycling in EU)/Last
period adjusted proﬁt of recycling in EU * Effect of proﬁt on EU recycle capacity adjustment rate))
Units: dimensionless
Adjusted policies improve Recycling Productivity via Innovation 
DELAY FIXED (Policies improve Recycling Productivity via Innovation,6, 0)
Units: dimensionless
Adjusted policies increase Price via improving market demand 
DELAY FIXED (Policies promote Demand for Recycled Materials,3, 0)
Units: dimensionless
Adjusted policies provide Subsidy for Recyclers 
DELAY FIXED (Policies provide Subsidy for Recyclers,3, 0)
Units: dimensionless
Adjusted proﬁt of recycling in EU 
Proﬁt of recycling in EU•(“Initial price/unit of recycled materials in EU”•“Initial cost/unit of recycling in EU”) + 10
Units: USD
Competition level adjustment rate 
Competition level in recycling industry * Adjusted effect of EU recycle capacity on competition level adjustment rate
Units: dimensionless
Competition level in recycling industry 
INTEG( Competition level adjustment rate, Initial competition level in recycling industry)
Units: dimensionless
“Cost/unit of recycling in EU (ﬁnal)” 
“Cost/unit of recycling in EU (provisional)” + “Minimum cost/unit of recycling in EU”Units: USD
“Cost/unit of recycling in EU (provisional)” 
INTEG(“EU cost/unit adjustment rate”, (“Initial cost/unit of recycling in EU”•”Minimum cost/unit of recycling in EU”))
Units: USD
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2053
Table 6 (continued)
EU recycling capacity sub-system (Fig. 4)
Discrepancy recycle percentage  Desirable recycle percentage•Actual recycle percentage
Units: dimensionless
Effect of competition level on investment in recycling innovation
( [(0,0)-(16,0.11)],(0,0),(7.5,0.04),(14,0.11))
Units: dimensionless
Effect of EU recycle capacity on competition level adjustment rate  1
Units: dimensionless
“Effect of EU recycle capacity on Price/unit of recycled materials in EU”  0.06
Units: dimensionless
Effect of extra investment in innovation on recycling productivity 
Investment as percentage of proﬁt in recycling innovation
Units: dimensionless
"Effect of increasing market demand on price/unit"  0.07
Units: dimensionless
"Effect of policies on EU recycle cost/unit"
( [(0,0)-(10,0.5)],(0,0),(10,0.5))
Units: dimensionless
"Effect of policies on price/unit of recycled materials"
( [(0,0)-(10,0.5)],(0,0),(10,0.5))
Units: dimensionless
Effect of policies on recycling productivity via innovation
( [(0,0)-(10,0.5)],(0,0),(10,0.5))
Units: dimensionless
Effect of pressure from EU recycling target on policies
( [(0,0)-(1,0.3)],(0,0),(1,0.1))
Units: dimensionless
"Effect of productivity on cost/unit adjustment rate"  0.26
Units: dimensionless
Effect of proﬁt on EU recycle capacity adjustment rate  0.25
Units: dimensionless
Effect of proﬁt on recycle capacity when proﬁt is negative  -0.01
Units: dimensionless
Effect of proﬁt on recycle capacity when proﬁt is negative last time step
( [(0,0)-(100,0.1)],(0,0),(100,0.05))
Units: dimensionless
"EU cost/unit adjustment rate" 
IF THEN ELSE( Discrepancy recycle percentage > 0, "Cost/unit of recycling in EU (provisional)"*(-"Adjusted effect of
productivity on cost/unit adjustment rate"-Inﬂation rate per year-"Effect of policies on EU recycle cost/unit adjustment
rate" (Adjusted policies provide Subsidy for Recyclers) • Effect of pressure from EU recycling target on
policies(Discrepancy recycle percentage)), "Cost/unit of recycling in EU (provisional)" * (-"Adjusted effect of
productivity on cost/unit adjustment rate" • Inﬂation rate per year • Effect of pressure from EU recycling target on
policies(Discrepancy recycle percentage)))
123

2054
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
Table 6 (continued)
EU recycling capacity sub-system (Fig. 4)
Units: USD
"EU price/unit adjustment rate" 
"Price/unit of recycled materials in EU (provisional)" * (•"Adjusted effect of EU recycle capacity on Price/unit of recycled
materials in EU" + "Effect of increasing market demand on price/unit"•Inﬂation rate per year)
Units: USD
EU recycle capacity 
INTEG( IF THEN ELSE ( ( EU recycle capacity + EU recycle capacity adjustment rate) < 0, 0, EU recycle capacity
adjustment rate), Initial EU recycle capacity)
Units: thousand tonnes
EU recycle capacity adjustment rate 
EU recycle capacity * Adjusted effect of proﬁt on EU recycle capacity adjustment rate * Recycle discrepancy volume
availability
Units: thousand tonnes
EU recycling volume of packaging waste in 2015  55,810
Units: thousand tonnes
Inﬂation rate per year  0.048
Units: dimensionless
Initial competition level in recycling industry  1
Units: **undeﬁned**
"Initial cost/unit of recycling in EU"  308
Units: USD
Initial EU recycle capacity 
Initial EU recycle fraction * EU recycling volume of packaging waste in 2015
Units: thousand tonnes
Initial EU recycle fraction  0.06
Units: dimensionless
"Initial price/unit of recycled materials in EU"  234
Units: USD
Initial recycling productivity level  1
Units: dimensionless
Investment as percentage of proﬁt in recycling innovation 
Effect of competition level on investment in recycling innovation ( Competition level in recycling industry)
Units: dimensionless
Last period adjusted proﬁt of recycling in EU 
INTEG( Last period proﬁt inﬂow•Last period proﬁt outﬂow, 10)
Units: USD
Last period proﬁt inﬂow 
Adjusted proﬁt of recycling in EU
Units: USD
Last period proﬁt of recycling in EU 
Last period adjusted proﬁt of recycling in EU + ( "Initial price/unit of recycled materials in EU"•"Initial cost/unit of
recycling in EU")•10
Units: USD
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2055
Table 6 (continued)
EU recycling capacity sub-system (Fig. 4)
Last period proﬁt outﬂow 
Last period adjusted proﬁt of recycling in EU
Units: USD
"Minimum cost/unit of recycling in EU"  0.0001
Units: USD
"Minimum price/unit of recycled materials in EU"  0.0001
Units: USD
Policies improve Recycling Productivity via Innovation  0
Units: dimensionless [0,10]
Policies promote Demand for Recycled Materials  0
Units: dimensionless [0,10]
Policies provide Subsidy for Recyclers  0
Units: dimensionless [0,10]
"Price/unit of recycled materials in EU (ﬁnal)" 
IF THEN ELSE ( Discrepancy recycle percentage > 0, ( "Price/unit of recycled materials in EU (provisional)" * ( 1 + "Effect
of policies on price/unit of recycled materials" ( Adjusted policies increase Price via improving market demand) + Effect
of pressure from EU recycling target on policies ( Discrepancy recycle percentage))) + "Minimum price/unit of recycled
materials in EU", "Price/unit of recycled materials in EU (provisional)")
Units: USD
"Price/unit of recycled materials in EU (provisional)" 
INTEG( "EU price/unit adjustment rate", "Initial price/unit of recycled materials in EU"•"Minimum price/unit of recycled
materials in EU")
Units: USD
Proﬁt[China]  Proﬁt of recycling abroad[China]
Proﬁt[Other]  Proﬁt of recycling abroad[Other]
Proﬁt[EU]  Proﬁt of recycling in EU
Units: USD
Proﬁt of recycling abroad[China]  100
Proﬁt of recycling abroad[Other]  70
Units: USD
Proﬁt of recycling in EU 
( "Price/unit of recycled materials in EU (ﬁnal)"•"Cost/unit of recycling in EU (ﬁnal)") * ( 1•Investment as percentage of
proﬁt in recycling innovation)
Units: USD
Rank Proﬁt[Recycle location] 
VECTOR RANK ( Proﬁt[Recycle location], 1)
Units: dimensionless
Recycle discrepancy volume availability 
IF THEN ELSE ( Discrepancy recycle percentage > 1e-005, 1, 0)
Units: dimensionless
Recycle rate constraint abroad[China]  China’s recycle rate constraint
Recycle rate constraint abroad[Other]  Other countries recycle rate constraint
123

2056
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
Table 6 (continued)
EU recycling capacity sub-system (Fig. 4)
Units: thousand tonnes
Recycling Productivity via Innovation 
INTEG( Recycling Productivity via Innovation adjustment rate, Initial recycling productivity level)
Units: dimensionless
Recycling Productivity via Innovation adjustment rate 
Recycling Productivity via Innovation * ( Effect of extra investment in innovation on recycling productivity + IF THEN
ELSE ( Discrepancy recycle percentage > 0, Effect of policies on recycling productivity via innovation ( Adjusted policies
improve Recycling Productivity via Innovation) + Effect of pressure from EU recycling target on policies ( Discrepancy
recycle percentage), 0))
Units: dimensionless
Table 7 Full explanations of values of exogenous variables (constants) in the EU recycling target sub-system
Parameter
Value
Source
The EU recycling target sub-system
Initial Packaging waste
inventory
84,850 (thousand tonnes)
Total volume of packaging waste generated
in EU in 2015
Eurostat (2021)
Desirable recycle percentage
0.7 (dimensionless)
By 31 December 2030, the European
Commission target at least 70% by weight
of all packaging waste must be recycled
European Commission,
(2020a)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2057
Table 8 Full explanations of values of exogenous variables (constants) in recycling rate by region sub-system
Parameter
Value
Source
Recycling rate by region sub-system
Initial other countries recycle
fraction
%1.%2 (dimensionless)
Taking average value of available
data (Eurostat, 2020), the EU
recycling percentage outside the
EU for packaging waste is around
9% in 2018 (Table 9). Since the
CWB had been in effect from 1st
January 2018, this can be
interpreted as the EU recycling
percentage outside the EU except
China
Eurostat (2021)
Initial China recycle fraction
0.85 (dimensionless)
This is the estimation for all
packaging waste based on the
statistics that more than 85% of
the exported plastic waste from
EU was shipped to China in 2018
European Commission,
(2018b)
Initial EU recycle fraction
0.06 (dimensionless)
On a scale from 0 to 1, given that
initial China recycle fraction is
0.85, the “Initial other countries
recycle fraction” is 0.09, then the
“Initial EU recycle fraction” can
be estimated as 1–0.85–0.09 
0.06
EU recycling volume of
packaging waste in 2015
55,810 (thousand tonnes)
Total volume of packaging waste
being recycled across European
Union – 28 countries in 2015
Eurostat (2021)
Recycle rate constraint disrupted
from government ban (China)
DELAY FIXED (1, 3, 0) where 1 is
the input, 3 is the delay time step,
0 is the initial value
The function would return the value
of the input delayed by the delay
time step of 3 (3 years from initial
time step of 2015, in 2018 the
waste ban took into effect). The
initial value is the value of the
variable at the start of the
simulation
World Trade Organization,
(2017)
Recycle rate constraint disrupted
from government ban (other
countries)
DELAY FIXED (1, 6, 0) where 1 is
the input, 6 is the delay time step,
0 is the initial value
The function would return the value
of the input delayed by the delay
time step of 6. This is translated as
6 years from initial time step of
2015, in 2021 the waste ban took
into effect in other countries
following the China ban in 2018
(ECA, 2020). The initial value is
the value of the variable at the
start of the simulation
European Court of Auditors,
(2020a)
123

2058
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
Table 9 The EU recycling percentage outside the EU for packaging waste in 2018
Country
Recycling Percentage
Bulgaria
0
Denmark
0
Estonia
14.4
Ireland
21.5
France
2.5
Croatia
0
Italy
0.2
Cyprus
42.3
Lithuania
0.1
Luxembourg
0
Hungary
1.8
Austria
0
Poland
0
Romania
3.2
Slovakia
1.2
Finland
0
Sweden
0
Liechtenstein
68
Norway
0
United Kingdom
23.2
Average
9
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2059
Table 10 Full explanations of values for exogenous variables in the EU recycling capacity sub-system
Parameter
Value
Source
EU recycling capacity sub-system
Inﬂation rate per year
0.048 (dimensionless)
Equivalent to 4.8% per year. Take inﬂation rate average of each country within
Europe & Central Asia from 1999 to 2019, then again estimate the average of
these (excel calculation available)
The World Bank, (2019)
Minimum price/unit of recycled materials in EU
50 (USD)
Assumed a reasonable lowest price that recycled material should be sold at (around
20% of initial price/unit) to avoid the price reaching unrealistic value of 0
Effect of policies on price/unit of recycled materials
y 
x
20 (dimensionless)|with policy point as x and price/unit of recycled materials
as y (a)
Initial price/unit of recycled materials in EU
234 (USD)
The average of (beneﬁts–Government grants–Financial support) across three
countries Portugal, France, and Romania in Fig. 3. Cost coverage considering
(PPP-adjusted) international dollars per ton (Da Cruz, 2014)
Da Cruz et al. (2014)
Initial cost/unit of recycling in EU
308 (USD)
The average of costs across three countries Portugal, France, and Romania in
Fig. 3. Cost coverage considering (PPP-adjusted) international dollars per ton
(Da Cruz, 2014)
Da Cruz et al. (2014)
Proﬁt of recycling abroad
China–100 (USD)/Others–70 (USD)
Assumed a positive healthy proﬁt of recycling industry outside Europe (China and
other countries). Since China received a majority of packaging waste for
recycling from EU before the 2018’s waste ban, proﬁt in China is higher than
“Others”. The values assigned here have no impact on the overall performance
of the model due to the ban from 2018
123

2060
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
Table 10 (continued)
Parameter
Value
Source
Effect of increasing market demand on price/unit
0.07 (dimensionless) (Table 11)
Exal and BCG (2019)
Effect of EU recycle capacity on price/unit of recycled
materials in EU
0.06 (dimensionless)
Based on Busso (2019)’s estimation that when competition (measured by the
number of participating stores in the district) rose by 1 percent, prices for
eligible goods decreased by 0.06 percent
Busso and Galiani (2019)
Effect of proﬁt on EU recycle capacity adjustment rate
0.25 (dimensionless)
The average of the price elasticity of recycle paper supply of around 0.20–0.30
Mansikkasalo et al. (2014)
Initial competition level in recycling industry
1 (dimensionless)
Assigned value of 1 corresponding to the initial supply of the market or “Initial
EU recycle capacity” (2791 thousand tonnes), which in turn corresponding to
“Initial EU recycle fraction” (0.05)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2061
Table 10 (continued)
Parameter
Value
Source
Effect of competition level on investment in recycling
innovation
See (Table 12)
Aghion et al. (2018)
Effect of EU recycle capacity on competition level
adjustment rate
1 (dimensionless)
Within the context of this paper, it is assumed that any rise in supply/EU recycle
capacity would lead to proportional increase of competition level
123

2062
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
Table 10 (continued)
Parameter
Value
Source
Effect of pressure from EU recycling target on policies
The larger the discrepancy recycle percentage, the more pressure for governments
to be more aggressive in its policies. Within the context of this paper, it is
assumed that when the discrepancy recycle percentage reach 1, the effect of
pressure on policies would be 0.1
Minimum cost/unit of recycling in EU
50 (USD)
Assumed a reasonable lowest cost that recycled material should be produced at to
avoid the cost/unit of reaching unrealistic value of 0
Effect of policies on recycling productivity via innovation
y 
x
20 (dimensionless)|with policy point as x and recycling productivity level as
y(a)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2063
Table 10 (continued)
Parameter
Value
Source
Effect of productivity on cost/unit adjustment rate
0.26 (dimensionless) (b)
Rogers (2006)
Effect of policies on EU recycle cost/unit adjustment rate
y 
x
20 (dimensionless)|with policy point as x and recycling cost/unit as y (a)
Initial recycling productivity level
1 (dimensionless)
Assumed a value of 1 corresponding to the “Initial competition level in recycling
industry” at 1
123

2064
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
Table 10 (continued)
Parameter
Value
Source
Effect of proﬁt on recycle capacity when proﬁt is negative
−0.01 (dimensionless)
When the industry is making a loss, regardless of the amount, there is no
incentives to expand the capacity (Sterman, 2004). Here we assume a 1%
decrease in capacity anytime the industry makes a loss or negative proﬁt
Sterman (2000)
Effect of proﬁt on recycle capacity when proﬁt is negative
last time step
To eliminate the inaccuracy in estimating the percentage change from a negative
proﬁt to a positive proﬁt, we assume the effect of proﬁt on recycle capacity
follows the linear regression line of y  0.0005 × whenever there is negative
proﬁt during the preceding time step and a positive proﬁt during the current time
step
aThe effect of “Market-based policies”, “Subsidy-focused policies”, and “Innovation-focused policies” on cost/unit, price/unit, and recycling productivity respectively are set using
the same equation. This is to ensure no bias and ensure fair comparability of the effectiveness of each policy on the EU recycle capacity. Within the context of this paper, it is
assumed to follow the functiony 
x
20
bAssumes that the growth rate of productivity is proportional to the reduction in cost/unit of production. According to Rogers (2006), using UK’s ONS data from 1996 to 2003, for
all manufacturing ﬁrms the estimated rate of return on productivity growth to R&D is between 19 and 33%. We take the average of these two numbers to get 26%
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2065
Table 11 Effect of increasing market demand on price/unit - using percentage of price increase customers are
willing to pay for beverage and beauty/personal care products
Based on a USD 10 product (Exal and BCG, 2019)
Beverage product
Beauty/personal care product
Pay more
range
Average
Percentage of
responses
Expected pay
more amount
Percentage of
responses
Expected pay
more amount
0
0
26%
0
28%
0
2
2
6%
0.12
7%
0.14
1–2
1.5
14%
0.21
16%
0.24
0.5–1
0.75
35%
0.2625
24%
0.18
025–0.5
0.37
22%
0.0814
25%
0.0925
Sum
0.6739
0.6525
Average
0.6632
As percentage
7%
Table 12 Effect of competition level on investment in recycling innovation
Competition level
(a)
Average R&D
investments (a)
EU recycle
fraction (b)
Competition level in
recycling industry (c)
Effect of
competition
level on
investment in
recycling
innovation (d)
No competition
11.7
5
1
0.00
Intermediate
competition
12.2
37.5
7.5
0.04
Full competition
13.5
70
14
0.15
(a)Adapted from Fig. 4 in Aghion et al. (2018)
(b)Assume no competition at “Initial EU recycle fraction” and full competition at “Desirable recycle percent-
age”
(c)Since the “Effect of EU recycle capacity on competition level adjustment rate” is 1, change in “Competition
level in recycling industry” (starting at 1) is proportionate to the change in “EU recycle fraction”
(d)Change percentage of Average R&D investments from no competition
Funding This study was partly funded by Horizon Europe (Grant Number 101192383), and fully funded by
the Impact Development Fund, University of Greenwich, London, UK (Grant Number R1110).
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest All authors declare no conﬂicts of interest and conﬁrm that the manuscript is original. All
authors have agreed to the authorship order and content of the paper and have read and approved the ﬁnal
manuscript for submission.
Ethical approval This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by
any of the authors.
123

2066
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Aghion, P., Bechtold, S., Cassar, L., & Herz, H. (2018). The causal effects of competition on innovation:
Experimental evidence. Journal of Law Economics and Organization, 34, 162–195. https://doi.org/10.
1093/jleo/ewy004
Aldieri, L., Ioppolo, G., Vinci, C. P., & Yigitcanlar, T. (2019). Waste recycling patents and environmental inno-
vations: An economic analysis of policy instruments in the USA, Japan and Europe. Waste Management,
95, 612–619. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2019.06.045
Allesch, A., & Brunner, P. H. (2014). Assessment methods for solid waste management: A literature review.
Waste Management & Research, 32, 461–473. https://doi.org/10.1177/0734242X14535653
Besiou, M., Georgiadis, P., & Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2012). Ofﬁcial recycling and scavengers: Symbiotic
or conﬂicting? European Journal of Operational Research, 218, 563–576. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.
2011.11.030
Bloom, N., Van Reenen, J., & Williams, H. (2019). A toolkit of policies to promote innovation. Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 33, 163–184. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.33.3.163
Bourtsalas, A. C. (2024). Impacts of China’s import ban on US state-level paper waste exports. Sustain Prod
Consum, 44, 55–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2023.11.017
Bourtsalas, A. C., Yepes, I. M., & Tian, Y. (2023). US plastic waste exports: A state-by-state analysis pre- and
post-China import ban. Journal of Environmental Management, 344, 118604. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jenvman.2023.118604
Brooks, A. L., Wang, S., & Jambeck, J. R. (2018). The Chinese import ban and its impact on global plastic
waste trade. Science Advance. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aat0131
Busso, M., & Galiani, S. (2019). The causal effect of competition on prices and quality: Evidence from a ﬁeld
experiment. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 11, 33–56. https://doi.org/10.1257/app.
20150310
Chang, N.-B., Pires, A., & Martinho, G. (2011). Empowering systems analysis for solid waste manage-
ment: Challenges, trends, and perspectives. Critical Reviews in Environment Science and Technology,
41, 1449–1530. https://doi.org/10.1080/10643381003608326
Chang, X., Fan, J., Zhao, Y., & Wu, J. (2016). Impact of China’s recycling subsidy policy in the product life
cycle. Sustainability, 8, 781. https://doi.org/10.3390/su8080781
Conrad, K. (2005). Price competition and product differentiation when consumers care for the environment.
Environ Resour Econ (Dordr), 31, 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10640-004-6977-8
Cooper, R. N., & Perez, C. (2003). Technological revolutions and ﬁnancial capital: The dynamics of bubbles
and golden ages. Foreign Affairs, 82, 148. https://doi.org/10.2307/20033522
Costa, E., Montemurro, D., & Giuliani, D. (2019). Consumers’ willingness to pay for green cars: A discrete
choice analysis in Italy. Environment, Development and Sustainability, 21, 2425–2442. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10668-018-0141-z
D’ambrières, W. (2019). Plastics recycling worldwide: Current overview and desirable changes. Field Actions
Science Report, 2019, 12–21.
Da Cruz, N. F., Ferreira, S., Cabral, M., Simões, P., & Marques, R. C. (2014). Packaging waste recycling
in Europe: Is the industry paying for it? Waste Management, 34, 298–308. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wa
sman.2013.10.035
Dace, E., Bazbauers, G., Berzina, A., & Davidsen, P. I. (2014). System dynamics model for analyzing effects
of eco-design policy on packaging waste management system. Resources, Conservation and Recycling.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2014.04.004
Dechezleprêtre, A., Martin, R., Mohnen, M. (2013). Knowledge spillovers from clean and dirty technologies:
a patent citation analysis. The Centre for Climate Change Economics and Policy.
Dechezleprêtre, A., Martin, R., Bassi, S. (2016). Climate change policy, innovation and growth. Centre for
Climate Change Economics and Policy.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2067
Dhanshyam, M., & Srivastava, S. K. (2021). Effective policy mix for plastic waste mitigation in India using
system dynamics. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 168, 105455. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resc
onrec.2021.105455
Duran-Encalada, J. A., Paucar-Caceres, A., Bandala, E. R., & Wright, G. H. (2017). The impact of global
climate change on water quantity and quality: A system dynamics approach to the US–Mexican trans-
border region. European Journal of Operational Research, 256, 567–581. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.
2016.06.016
Eco-Innovation Observatory. (2019a). Eco-innovation in Germany [WWW Document].
Eco-Innovation Observatory. (2019b). Eco-innovation in Belgium [WWW Document].
European Commission. (2011). The Eco-innovation Action Plan (Eco-AP) [WWW Document].
European Commission. (2018a). DIRECTIVE (EU) 2018/852 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND
OF THE COUNCIL amending Directive 94/62/EC on packaging and packaging waste. Ofﬁcial Journal
of the European Union.
European Commission. (2018b). A European Strategy for Plastics in a Circular Economy [WWW Document].
European Commission.
European Commission. (2019). DIRECTIVE (EU) 2019/904 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF
THE COUNCIL on the reduction of the impact of certain plastic products on the environment [WWW
Document].
European Court of Auditors. (2020a). Plastic packaging waste: EU needs to boost recycling to achieve ambi-
tions [WWW Document].
European Court of Auditors. (2020b). EU action to tackle the issue of plastic waste. Luxembourg.
European Commission. (2020a). Packaging waste - EU rules on packaging and packaging waste, including
design and waste management [WWW Document].
European Commission. (2020b). The New Circular Economy Action Plan [WWW Document]. FEEM Policy
Brief.
Eurostat. (2021). Packaging waste by waste management operations [WWW Document].
Exal, BCG. (2019). BUYING GREEN Quantifying the impact of sustainability on purchase decisions in
consumer goods.
Forrester, J. W., & Senge, P. M. (1980). Tests for building conﬁdence in system dynamics models. System
Dynamics, TIMS Studies in Management Sciences, 14(14), 209–228.
Gradus, R. H. J. M., Nillesen, P. H. L., Dijkgraaf, E., & van Koppen, R. J. (2017). A cost-effectiveness analysis
for incineration or recycling of dutch household plastic waste. Ecological Economics, 135, 22–28. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2016.12.021
Greenpeace. (2021). How the UK is Still Dumping Plastic Waste on the Rest of the World.
Gross, R., Hanna, R., Gambhir, A., Heptonstall, P., & Speirs, J. (2018). How long does innovation and
commercialisation in the energy sectors take? Historical case studies of the timescale from invention to
widespread commercialisation in energy supply and end use technology. Energy Policy, 123, 682–699.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2018.08.061
Grübler, A. (1998). Technology and global change. Cambridge University Press.
Hao, J., Yuan, H., Liu, J., Chin, C. S., & Lu, W. (2019). A model for assessing the economic performance of
construction waste reduction. Journal of Cleaner Production, 232, 427–440. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jc
lepro.2019.05.348
Hong, Z., & Guo, X. (2019). Green product supply chain contracts considering environmental responsibilities.
Omega (Westport), 83, 155–166. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omega.2018.02.010
Huang, Q., Chen, G., Wang, Y., Chen, S., Xu, L., & Wang, R. (2020). Modelling the global impact of China’s
ban on plastic waste imports. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 154, 104607. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.resconrec.2019.104607
Huang,X.,Hu,Z.,Liu,C.,Yu,D.,&Yu,L.(2016).Therelationshipsbetweenregulatoryandcustomerpressure,
green organizational responses, and green innovation performance. Journal of Cleaner Production, 112,
3423–3433. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.10.106
Huo, Y., He, H., Chen, F., & Tai, H.-M. (2018a). Adaptive single-pixel imaging with aggregated sampling and
continuous differential measurements. Optics Communication, 417, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.op
tcom.2018.02.021
Huo, Y., Wang, X., Deng, Q., & Han, P. (2018b). Novel joint-ﬁnancing model for bilateral capital restricted sup-
ply chains under cap-and-trade regulation. Mathematical Problems in Engineering, 2018, 1–13. https://
doi.org/10.1155/2018/8134679
Joh, A. S., & Adolph, K. E. (2006). Learning from falling. Child Development, 77, 89–102.
Joshi, B. V., Vipin, B., Ramkumar, J., & Amit, R. K. (2021). Impact of policy instruments on lead-acid battery
recycling: A system dynamics approach. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 169, 105528. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2021.105528
123

2068
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
Kaza, S., Yao, L., Bhada-Tata, P., Woerden, F. Van. (2018). WHAT A WASTE 2.0 A Global Snapshot of Solid
Waste Management to 2050 OVERVIEW. Washington, DC.
Kemp, R., Smith, K., Becher, G. (2000). How should we study the relationship between environmental regu-
lation and innovation? pp. 43–66.
KfW. (2019). Dossier Circular economy [WWW Document].
Kurniawan, T. A., Lo, W., Singh, D., Othman, M. H. D., Avtar, R., Hwang, G. H., Albadarin, A. B., Kern,
A. O., & Shirazian, S. (2021). A societal transition of MSW management in Xiamen (China) toward
a circular economy through integrated waste recycling and technological digitization. Environmental
Pollution. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2021.116741
Li, J., & Takeuchi, K. (2023). Import ban and clean air: Estimating the effect of China’s waste import ban on
ozone pollution. Environmental Economics and Policy Studies, 25, 471–492. https://doi.org/10.1007/s1
0018-023-00365-1
Li, Z., Pan, Y., Yang, W., Ma, J., & Zhou, M. (2021). Effects of government subsidies on green technology
investment and green marketing coordination of supply chain under the cap-and-trade mechanism. Energy
Econ, 101, 105426. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2021.105426
Ling, Y., & Xu, J. (2021). Price and greenness competition between duopoly ﬁrms considering consumer
premium payments. Environment, Development and Sustainability, 23, 3853–3880. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10668-020-00747-5
Liu, K., Wang, C., Liu, L., & Xu, L. (2021). Which group should governmental policies target? Effects of
incentive policy for remanufacturing industry. RAIRO - Operations Research, 55, 1579–1602. https://
doi.org/10.1051/ro/2021012
Ma, W., Zhao, Z., & Ke, H. (2013). Dual-channel closed-loop supply chain with government consumption-
subsidy. European Journal of Operational Research, 226, 221–227. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2012.
10.033
Mansikkasalo, A., Lundmark, R., & Söderholm, P. (2014). Market behavior and policy in the recycled paper
industry: A critical survey of price elasticity research. For Policy Econ. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forpol.
2013.08.011
McKinsey. (2020). The European recycling landscape—the quiet before the storm? [WWW Document].
Mingers, J., & White, L. (2010). A review of the recent contribution of systems thinking to operational research
and management science. European Journal of Operational Research, 207, 1147–1161. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ejor.2009.12.019
Mitra, S., & Webster, S. (2008). Competition in remanufacturing and the effects of government subsidies.
International Journal of Production Economics, 111, 287–298. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2007.02
.042
Morita, Y., Hayashi, S. (2018). Proposals to Strengthen Japan’s Domestic Measures and Regional Cooperation
on Stable and Environmentally Sound Plastic Scrap Recycling: Response to China’s Ban on Imports of
Plastic Scrap. IGES Policy Brief 41.
Nguyen, T. V., Zhou, L., Chong, A. Y. L., Li, B., & Pu, X. (2019). Predicting customer demand for remanu-
factured products: A data-mining approach. European Journal of Operational Research. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ejor.2019.08.015
OECD, 2018. Improving Plastics Management: Trends, policy responses, and the role of international co-
operation and trade [WWW Document].
Palmer, K., & Walls, M. (1997). Optimal policies for solid waste disposal Taxes, subsidies, and standards.
Journal of Public Economics, 65, 193–205. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0047-2727(97)00028-5
Pires, A., Martinho, G., & Chang, N. B. (2011). Solid waste management in European countries: A review of
systems analysis techniques. Journal of Environmental Management. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.
2010.11.024
Qiao, H., & Su, Q. (2021). Impact of government subsidy on the remanufacturing industry. Waste Management,
120, 433–447. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2020.10.005
Qu, S., Guo, Y., Ma, Z., Chen, W. Q., Liu, J., Liu, G., Wang, Y., & Xu, M. (2019). Implications of China’s
foreign waste ban on the global circular economy. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 144, 252–255.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.01.004
Rahbar, E., & Abdul Wahid, N. (2011). Investigation of green marketing tools’ effect on consumers’ purchase
behavior. Business Strategy Series, 12, 73–83. https://doi.org/10.1108/17515631111114877
Retail Council of Canada. (2020). Overview of European recycling systems [WWW Document].
Rogers, M. (2006). Estimating the impact of R&D on productivity using the BERD- ARD data, Intellectual
Property. Oxford
Sandoval-Reyes, M., He, R., Semeano, R., & Ferrão, P. (2024). Mathematical optimization of waste manage-
ment systems: Methodological review and perspectives for application. Waste Management. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.wasman.2023.10.006
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2017–2069
2069
Schyns, Z. O. G., & Shaver, M. P. (2021). Mechanical recycling of packaging plastics: A review. Macromolec-
ular Rapid Communications, 42, 2000415. https://doi.org/10.1002/marc.202000415
Söderholm, P., & Ekvall, T. (2020). Metal markets and recycling policies: impacts and challenges. Mineral
Economics, 33, 257–272.
Song, N., McLellan, I., Liu, W., Wang, Z., & Hursthouse, A. (2023). The waste ban in China: What happened
next? Assessing the impact of new policies on the waste management sector in China. Environmental
Geochemistry and Health, 45, 1117–1131. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10653-021-01101-y
Sterman, J. (2000). Business dynamics (1st ed.). McGraw-Hill.
Tanveer, M., Khan, S. A. R., Umar, M., Yu, Z., Sajid, M. J., & Haq, I. U. (2022). Waste management and
green technology: Future trends in circular economy leading towards environmental sustainability. Envi-
ronmental Science and Pollution Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-022-23238-8
Thatcher, M. E., & Oliver, J. R. (2001). The impact of technology investments on a ﬁrm’s production efﬁciency,
product quality, and productivity. Journal of Management Information Systems, 18, 17–45.
The World Bank. (2019). Inﬂation, consumer prices (annual %)—European Union, Portugal [WWW Docu-
ment].
Ulli-Beer, S., Andersen, D. F., & Richardson, G. P. (2007). Financing a competitive recycling initiative in
Switzerland. Ecological Economics. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2006.09.017
Velzen, U. T. V., Groot, J., Hilke, B.-B., Groot, J., Bing, X., Jansen, M., & Luijsterburg, B. (2013). Scenarios
study on post-consumer plastic packaging waste recycling (1st ed.). Wageningen UR Food & Biobased
Research.
Wang, Y., Chang, X., Chen, Z., Zhong, Y., & Fan, T. (2014). Impact of subsidy policies on recycling and
remanufacturing using system dynamics methodology: A case of auto parts in China. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 74, 161–171. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.03.023
Wen, Z., Xie, Y., Chen, M., & Dinga, C. D. (2021). China’s plastic import ban increases prospects of environ-
mental impact mitigation of plastic waste trade ﬂow worldwide. Nature Communication. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41467-020-20741-9
World Trade Organization. (2017). China’s import ban on solid waste queried at import licensing meeting
[WWW Document]. World Trade Organization.
Xu, L., Peng, Q., Chen, J., & Wang, C. (2019). Government subsidies in manufacturing and remanufacturing
with consumer segment and heterogeneous demand. Scientia Iranica. https://doi.org/10.24200/sci.2019.
50493.1724
Yalabik, B., & Fairchild, R. J. (2011). Customer, regulatory, and competitive pressure as drivers of environ-
mental innovation. International Journal of Production Economics, 131, 519–527. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ijpe.2011.01.020
Yu, J., Shi, X., Guo, D., & Yang, L. (2021). Economic policy uncertainty (EPU) and ﬁrm carbon emissions:
Evidence using a China provincial EPU index. Energy Econ, 94, 105071. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.en
eco.2020.105071
Zhao,S.,Ku,S.,&Dilyard,J.(2023).Globalwastecrisisandtheroleofinnovationsbyglobalcorporations.InP.
N. Ghauri, U. Elg, & S. M. Hånell (Eds.), Creating a sustainable competitive position: ethical challenges
for international ﬁrms, international business and management (pp. 59–74). Emerald Publishing Limited.
Zhou, L., Naim, M. M., & Disney, S. M. (2017). The impact of product returns and remanufacturing uncer-
tainties on the dynamic performance of a multi-echelon closed-loop supply chain. International Journal
of Production Economics, 183, 487–502. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2016.07.021
Zhou, X., Dai, M., Ma, X., Charles, V., Shahzad, U., & Zhao, X. (2024). Economic policy uncertainty and
the inhibitory effect of ﬁrms’ green technology innovation. Global Finance Journal. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.gfj.2024.100960
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123