TITLE: Minimizing the expected maximum lateness for a job shop subject to stochastic machine breakdowns
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05592-z
---

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05592-z
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Minimizing the expected maximum lateness for a job shop
subject to stochastic machine breakdowns
Gabriel Mauricio Zambrano-Rey1 · Eliana María González-Neira1
·
Gabriel Fernando Forero-Ortiz1 · María José Ocampo-Monsalve1 ·
Andrea Rivera-Torres1
Received: 28 October 2022 / Accepted: 28 August 2023 / Published online: 2 October 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
This paper addresses a stochastic job shop scheduling problem with sequence-dependent
setup times, aiming to minimize the expected maximum lateness. The stochastic nature is
modeled by considering uncertain times between failures (TBF) and uncertain times to repair
(TTR). To tackle this problem, a simheuristic approach is proposed, which combines a tabu
search (TS) algorithm with Monte Carlo simulation. A total of 320 instances were used to
conduct multiple experiments. Instances were generated with two distributions to study the
behavior of stochastic TTR and TBF under log-normal and exponential distributions. Firstly,
the performance of the simheuristic was evaluated for small instances by comparing it with the
simulation of optimal solutions obtained with a mixed-integer linear programming (MILP)
model. The simheuristic approach demonstrated an average improvement of around 7%
compared to the simulation of MILP model solutions. Secondly, the simheuristic performance
was evaluated for medium and large-size instances by comparing it with the simulation of
the solutions obtained by the earliest due date (EDD) and process time plus work in the next
queue plus negative slack (PT + WINQ + SL) dispatching rules. The results showed an
average improvement of around 11% compared to EDD and 14% compared to PT + WINQ
+ SL. Furthermore, the results highlight that even when the two distributions have the same
expected value and coefﬁcient of variation, they can yield different expected maximum
lateness values. This emphasizes the importance of precise distribution ﬁtting when solving
real cases to achieve effective scheduling performance.
Keywords Stochastic job shop scheduling · Maximum lateness · Machine breakdowns ·
Simheuristics · Tabu search
B Eliana María González-Neira
eliana.gonzalez@javeriana.edu.co
1
Departamento de Ingeniería Industrial, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Javeriana, Carrera 7 # 40-62, Bogotá,
Colombia
123

802
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
1 Introduction
In today’s dynamic and competitive world, the pursuit of excellence is a necessity for sur-
viving in markets. Globalization and the technological revolution of the last century have
compelledcompaniestoimprovealltheirinternalprocesses.Underthispremise,newmethod-
ologies and paradigms have emerged to address challenges such as reducing process times,
waste, labor or production and logistics costs, among others (Hill, 2011). Additionally, new
forms of customer demand and marketing are driving companies towards mass customization
of products and services based on speciﬁc customer needs. As a result, companies are forced
to continuously optimize their production planning and execution to remain competitive.
Production scheduling consists of allocating resources to operations to achieve one or
more objectives (Pinedo, 2016). The study of scheduling in manufacturing environments
began in the early twentieth century with the works of Gantt (1919) and other pioneers
such as Smith (1956), Johnson (1954) and Jackson (1956). One way to classify production
schedulingproblemsisbasedontheconﬁgurationofmachinesintheproductionenvironment.
The generic categories include single machine, parallel machines, ﬂow shop, job shop, and
open shop. Speciﬁcally, the job shop scheduling problem (JSSP) refers to scheduling jobs on
a set of m machines, where each job has a single predetermined path, which is independent
of the paths of other jobs, and each machine can only process one job at a time (Çali¸s &
Bulkan, 2015; Jain & Meeran, 1999). This type of conﬁguration occurs in industries such as
aerospace (Chiang & Torng, 2016), machine tools production systems (Kadipasaoglu et al.,
1999), construction equipment production systems (Jacobs & Lauer, 1994), among others.
The literature review presented by Abdolrazzagh and Adbullah (2017) summarizes the
characteristics studied in the JSSP, as well as the objective functions considered. In partic-
ular, the authors mention that the classic constraints considered are related to precedence,
capacity, and the inclusion of release times and due dates. However, there are other con-
straints that have been studied in fewer works due to the complexity they add to the problem.
These constraints include multi-purpose machines, deteriorating jobs, maintenance activities,
sequence-dependent setup times, availability constraints due to machine breakdowns, over-
lapping operations, controllable processing times, among others (Abdolrazzagh & Adbullah,
2017).
Additionally, Abdolrazzagh and Adbullah (2017) also reported that the most commonly
studied objective functions in the JSSP are the makespan, weighted tardiness, and maximum
tardiness. Based on the review of recent literature conducted for this project, it was found that
more than 80% of the studies on the JSSP focus on minimizing the makespan. The remaining
less than 20% of studies are divided among the minimization of weighted tardiness, process
delays, and events associated with the machines.
On the other hand, most studies conducted in JSSP have considered all parameters as
deterministic (Mohan et al., 2019). However, industrial environments are inherently com-
plex with the occurrence of events with stochastic behavior such as machine breakdowns,
maintenance time, processing times, among others (Meng et al., 2020). Most papers that
address the JSSP, assume that machines are always available, although machine breakdowns
are one of the most common and challenging issues in production environments (Zhang et al.,
2022). If machine failures are not considered during scheduling development, such schedules
can become inapplicable (Shady et al., 2021). Particularly, stochastic times between failures
and repairs happen for various reasons. Whenever a failure occurs, the maintenance crew
takes time to assess the problem, depending also on the crew availability and expertise on
the technology. Then, based on the severity of the problem, repair times can vary, whether
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
803
immediate on-site repairs can be done (e.g. oil change, part replacement, parameter setting,
among others), or the machine need be transferred to the maintenance workshop, or even
replaced (Giacaman et al., 2002). Despite the beneﬁts of including stochastic malfunctions
within the scheduling process, the problem becomes much more complex due to the large
search space (Shady et al., 2021).
One of the booming methods used in the literature to solve stochastic optimization prob-
lems are simheuristics, which involves the hybridization of metaheuristics and simulation
techniques (Juan et al., 2015). The advantage of implementing simheuristics is that they
allow for the veriﬁcation of solutions through a simulation process that takes into account the
previously deﬁned stochastic variables. As a result, the obtained solutions are more suitable
for the problem context since they consider uncertainty. Simheuristics have been success-
fully applied to various problem domains, including routing problems (González-Martín
et al., 2016; Gruler et al., 2018; Quintero-Araujo et al., 2019), facility location problems (de
Armas et al., 2017), production scheduling problems (González-Neira & Montoya-Torres,
2019; Juan et al., 2014), among others.
Considering that simheuristics are a hybridization between metaheuristics and simulation,
it is important to mention that several metaheuristic approaches have been used to solve JSSP
in the literature. These approaches include alternative graph (Meloni et al., 2004), simulated
annealing (SA) (Baykasoglu, 2002; Naderi et al., 2010), tabu search (TS) (Nowicki & Smut-
nicki, 2005; C. Zhang et al., 2007), iterated greedy algorithm (Pranzo & Pacciarelli, 2016),
hybridization of immune artiﬁcial and SA algorithms (Roshan et al., 2013), hybridization
of evolutionary algorithm and TS (Cheng et al., 2016) and, hybridization genetic algorithm
(GA) and SA (Shahsavari-Pour & Ghasemishabankareh, 2013).
In this paper, a TS algorithm is proposed to solve the stochastic job shop scheduling
problem (SJSSP). One of the advantages of TS according to Abido (2002) is the robustness
of the parameters and the initial solution. In addition, TS is characterized by its ability to
avoid entrapment in local optimum solutions and to prevent cycles due to the use of ﬂexible
memory for historical search. In fact, recent works in the ﬁeld of JSSP have demonstrated the
effectiveness of TS, including studies by Aschauer et al. (2020a); Tamssaouet et al. (2018);
and Xie et al. (2023).
Consequently, this paper reports a simheuristic approach to solve SJSSP, hybridizing
a TS with Monte Carlo simulation (MCS), to minimize the expected maximum lateness,
considering stochastic times between failures (TBF) and stochastic times to repair (TTR) with
non-resumable jobs. The maximum lateness is related to the delivery date to customers, which
implies minimizing the worst violation of due dates (Pinedo, 2016) and it is recommended for
make-to-order environments (Botta-Genoulaz, 2000). Furthermore, the stochastic TBF and
TTR are modeled with two probability distributions: log-normal and exponential. The log-
normal distribution is important since it does not take negative values which it is appropriate
for reproducing machine malfunction times. In turn, the exponential distribution is often used
for breakdowns because there is a high degree of uncertainty about failures; thus, the only
information available on them is their mean.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 presents the literature review. In
Sect. 3, a mixed integer linear programming formulation is proposed for the deterministic ver-
sion of the problem. Section 4 explains the simheuristic approach, while Sect. 5 describes the
computational experiments carried out to evaluate the performance of the proposed approach.
Finally, Sect. 6 provides conclusions and future work.
123

804
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
2 Literature review
Firstly, this section reports the most recent studies on the deterministic version of the JSSP.
The second subsection focuses on articles that address SJSSP. Lastly, the third subsection
discuses simheuristic approaches to tackle both the JSSP and the SJSSP.
2.1 Deterministic JSSP
The interest in theoretical models for the resolution of the deterministic JSSP began in the
middle of the last century (Abdolrazzagh & Adbullah, 2017). Two of the ﬁrst studies in JSSP
were performed by Akers and Friedman (1955) who used Boolean Algebra, and Jackson
(1956) that generalizes Johnson’s Flow Shop algorithm to JSSPs to minimize makespan.
From those researches until today, literature in JSSP has grown considerably using innovative
techniques. Methods to solve the JSSP vary from simple dispatching rules to sophisticated
algorithms that hybridize metaheuristics to obtain more accurate results. Figure 1 shows the
different techniques that have been implemented in recent years.
In the ﬁeld of optimization, exact methods have been employed to solve classical JSSPs
(Zhang et al., 2019). These methods rely on input data and a series of predeﬁned rules to
determine the ﬂow of the process and obtain an optimal global solution. However, the runtime
of these methods is unpredictable, and for larger problems, they would require signiﬁcant
computational time (Gmys et al., 2020). One of the most commonly used exact methods in
JSSP is the Branch & Bound algorithm (Gmys et al., 2020). Additionally, there are several
mathematical models that are widely used, including mixed-integer linear programming
(Manne, 1960), Langrangian relaxation (Fisher, 1973), and integer linear programming (Li
et al., 2018).
Job shop 
Scheduling 
Problems 
Opmizaon 
techniques 
Eﬃcient 
methods 
Enumerave 
methods 
Branch & Bound 
Mathemacal 
models 
Approximaon 
techniques 
Generalized 
algorithms 
Arﬁcial 
intelligence 
Local Search 
Construcve 
methods 
Boleneck 
heuriscs 
Dispatching rules 
Inseron 
algorithms 
Fig. 1 Techniques for job-shop scheduling
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
805
Since exact methods require high computational times for medium to large instances,
approximation methods have been developed to ﬁnd solutions proximate to global optimum
in less computational time (Fernandez-Viagas et al., 2017). In addition, optimal solutions
for small instances can be used as a standard reference to develop approximate methods
(Li et al., 2018). Among the approximation methods one can ﬁnd the constructive methods
such as dispatching rules, bottleneck heuristics and insertion algorithms (Jain & Meeran,
1999). There are also iterative methods, which use different phases to approach an optimal
solution, selecting it either from a random list or with a probability function. For instance,
greedy algorithms such as GRASP (Bierwirth & Kuhpfahl, 2017; Feo & Resende, 1995) or
biased-randomization algorithms.
Generally speaking, JSSP approaches mostly focus on minimizing makespan and tardi-
ness. The makespan is deﬁned as the time taken to complete all jobs. On the other hand,
tardiness is related to due dates and measures the delay of jobs in relation to their due date
(Pinedo, 2016). Regarding the constraints considered, in the most recent works reviewed for
this paper, characteristics such as maintenance, breakdowns, and slack time represent only
around 10% of the studies.
2.2 Stochastic JSSPs
Most decision-making problems are combinatorial optimization problems that can be mod-
eled with uncertain conditions (Juan et al., 2015). Therefore, stochastic approximation
methods are used to optimize or control systems where the relationship between variables
and controllable factors of a process and its analytical model are unknown. These problems
are known as stochastic combinatorial optimization problems. Banerjee (1965) and Makino
(1965) were the ﬁrst authors to conduct studies in production scheduling with stochastic pro-
cessing times. Banerjee solved a single-machine problem in which processing times follow
a known probability distribution, with the aim of minimizing the maximum probability of
delay. On the other hand, Makino carried out the study with 2 and 3 machines in a ﬂow
shop environment considering exponential and k-Erlang distributions for processing times,
minimizing the makespan (Juan et al., 2015). Some works assume that the starting times
and duration of disturbances (for instance, machine failures) are known in advance and ﬁxed
(Yahyaoui et al., 2009), but in other works, probability distributions are used to generate such
variables.
A search on Scopus using the following formula TITLE-ABS-KEY(((“Stochastic Job
Shop Scheduling”) OR (“job shop scheduling”)) AND (“Machine Breakdowns”)) gave 134
results, but less than 90 papers were related to the JSSP with stochastic machines breakdowns.
The ﬁrst paper was reported back in 1982 by Muhlemann et al. (1982). The authors included
dynamic job arrivals, uncertainty in job processing times, and the likelihood of machine
breakdowns. Various heuristics in the form of dispatching rules were applied to determine
the impact of variability in the mean ratio of ﬂow time to process time, mean queueing time,
mean lateness and percentage of tardy jobs. Later on, Tunali and Orhun (1990) develop a
knowledge-based system for production scheduling in a job-shop using around 300 dispatch-
ing rules with simulation-based performance evaluation. The authors studied the impact of
unexpected machine breakdowns on the predeﬁned schedule, modeling the time to failure
with a Poisson distribution. Output analysis was focused on machine utilization (under or
over) and job lateness. Likewise, Paredis and Van Rij (1992) used a simulator and an evaluator
to understand the effects of the decisions taken during the scheduling process. The simula-
tor tests the robustness of the schedules, provided by a Genetic Algorithm, with respect to
123

806
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
machine failures. Similarly, Holthaus (1999) also reported a simulation-based analysis of
dispatching rules for scheduling in a dynamic job shop, with respect to ﬂow times and due
dates. The study showed that, in terms of mean ﬂow time, the PT + WINQ (processing time
plus work in the queue of its next operation) outperforms other rules; but when the interest is
focused on minimizing the maximum ﬂow time, the AT-RPT (arrival time minus remaining
processing time) becomes superior. With respect to tardiness-based objectives, scheduling
rules showed high sensitivity to the percentage of machine downtimes and mean time to
repair. Experiments were carried out using an exponential distribution to represent TTR and
TBF for all machines.
As reported by Fang and Xi (1997), a periodic and event-driven rolling-horizon strategy
can help accommodate critical situations in job-shop environments caused by continuous
changes in job arrivals, machine breakdowns, machine repair times and job due dates. In this
work, the authors hybridized a GA with dispatching rules, while also considering sequence-
dependent setup times. All events are simulated at speciﬁc points in time, and the impact
on makespan is analyzed. In the presence of uncertainty, a robust or ﬂexible solution is
more valuable than an optimal solution. For instance, Tjornfelt-Jensen and Hansen (1999)
proposed a robust performance measure to identify robust solutions provided by a GA. The
robustness measure is deﬁned as the weighted average of makespan of schedules within a
neighborhood. To simulate machine failures, an operation is randomly chosen using a uniform
distribution. The starting time of this operation is called the breakdown time. The initial setup
time for the machine in failure is set to the time the broken machine becomes operational
again, which is the breakdown time plus the breakdown duration. Five different rescheduling
methods were investigated. The computational experiments revealed that, in most cases, the
rescheduling performance of schedules with a low robustness measure is signiﬁcantly better
than the performance of ordinary schedules for all tested strategies. The proposed measure
yielded good results for moderate breakdowns when compared to the slack-based measure.
Likewise, based on a rolling-horizon strategy, Upasani and Uzsoy (2008) proposed a problem-
reduction scheme to obtain global schedules with an integrated procedure that provides
priority indices for a dispatching approach in a multi-product environment with stochastic
machine breakdowns and job arrivals. The method was used to schedule operations of a wafer
fabrication facility where the presence of two unreliable stations can cause starvation in the
system. TBF and TTR were generated using gamma distributions.
Zou and Li (2006) used a GA and a hybrid allocation-based method for event-oriented
scheduling in JSSP under rush orders and machine breakdowns. If a rush order arrives,
the schedule is put on hold until the rush order is processed, but in the case of a machine
breakdown, only the affected operations are rescheduled. As pointed out by Suwa and Sandoh
(2007), the timing and frequency of rescheduling are important aspects to study. Therefore,
the authors used a tabu search (TS) to deﬁne a predictive schedule. Based on a control limit
policy, the time to conduct a schedule revision is determined based on the cumulative size
of delays. Sixteen machine breakdown scenarios were analyzed using simulation, and the
right-shift scheduling (RSS) policy was employed when a breakdown occurred. In terms of
minimizing maximum tardiness and scheduling frequency, this approach outperformed other
event-driven rescheduling approaches. Also using GA, Al-Hinai and Elmekkawy (2011)
presented a robust two-stage hybrid genetic algorithm (HGA). In the ﬁrst stage, the algorithm
optimized the makespan using deterministic data. Then, in the second stage, it focused on
a bi-objective function by integrating machine assignments and operation sequencing with
the expected machine breakdown in the decoding space. While in most works, breakdown
variables are assumed to be random, the authors proposed that a machine with a higher load
is more likely to fail, and its breakdown time and duration can be assumed to be proportional
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
807
to its elapsed busy time. The timing of the breakdown can also be set early or late in the
schedule.
Another example of a hybrid GA is reported by Hasan et al. (2011), in which a GA is
hybridized with two simple priority rules, the partial re-ordering (PR) and the gap reduction
rule (GR), as well as the gap reduction and restricted swapping rule (GR-RS). The approach
was ﬁrst tested using 40 benchmarks for the deterministic version. For the stochastic, a
uniform distribution was used to identify the machine with a failure, a Poisson distribution
generated the start time of the breakdown, and an Exponential distribution was used for
recoveryduration.First,thesolutionfortheidealJSSPisgenerated,andthentheGRalgorithm
is applied to re-optimize the affected sub-solution when a breakdown occurs. Similar to other
studies, the authors concluded that the impact of machine unavailability is quite low if the
information is known in advance. However, reactive scheduling becomes quite complex when
the breakdown is sudden. In the study conducted by Lei (2011), the SJSSP is addressed using
a simpliﬁed multi-objective GA, with exponentially distributed processing times, aiming
to minimize both makespan and total tardiness. The author recommended incorporating of
stochastic machine breakdowns into the model. In a subsequent work by Lei (2012), the
same JSSP was examined, but with stochastic normal processing times, resumable jobs, and
stochastic machine breakdowns, with the objective of minimizing makespan. To assess the
effectiveness of the proposed approach, it was compared to particle swarm optimization
(PSO), and the results demonstrated that GA outperforms PSO.
Hybrid metahaheuristic approaches have also been proposed to improve the pedictive-
reactive scheduling strategy. For instance, X. Li and Gao (2020) combined the advantage
of a GA and TS to deal with the SJSSP, coupled with event-driven rescheduling policies.
The approach was set up to minimize mean ﬂow time, mean tardiness, maximum tardiness,
and the number of tardy jobs. The TBF and TTR are assumed to follow an exponential
distribution. To generate unexpected events, a simulator was designed not only to reproduce
machine breakdowns but also uncertain job arrivals.
Chen et al., (1997) proposed a solution methodology that combines Lagrangian relax-
ation, stochastic dynamic programming, and ordinal optimization to address the JSSP
considering uncertain machine failures and job processing times. The machines are catego-
rized into reliable and unreliable sets, where the latter have known conditional failure and
recovery rates based on maintenance records. As a result, the number of available machines
becomes a random variable, and the algorithm’s performance is analyzed using Monte Carlo
simulation (MCS). Similarly employing Lagrangian relaxation, Zhu and Soh (1999) intro-
duced a two-stage procedure for off-line scheduling and an affected operations rescheduling
strategy (AOR) to generate new solutions in the presence of machine breakdowns, changes
in job priority, rush orders, order cancellations, and delays in raw material arrivals. The
objective is to minimize the mean weighted ﬂow time for solving FMS job shop problems.
Events are simulated at speciﬁc moments, and the authors concluded that among the ﬁve
types of interruptions, machine breakdowns are the most challenging because their impact
depends on the timing, duration, and number of available machines. However, this conclu-
sion assumes that the breakdown time is known when it occurs. Subramaniam and Raheja
(2003) proposed a modiﬁed AOR strategy that depends on the type of disruption. The authors
discussed strategies for machine breakdowns, process time variations, arrival of unexpected
jobs, and urgent jobs. For machine failures, an idle time equivalent to the breakdown dura-
tion is inserted into the schedule, and the operation on the machine is put on hold until the
machine is repaired. Then, the schedule is repaired using the AOR heuristic. A simulation
study was conducted to examine the impact of disruptions in terms of size, occurrence time,
and schedule size. For machine breakdowns, the disruption size was analyzed for both small
123

808
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
(1–3% of the makespan) and large magnitudes (6–8% of the makespan). The experimental
results demonstrated that the AOR outperforms the RSS heuristic signiﬁcantly in terms of
efﬁciency and stability.
Within the robust strategy to cope with uncertain machine failures, the buffering approach
can be applied to predictive schedules to reduce performance deterioration and improve pro-
duction system stability. Wu et al. (2020) proposed a multi-objective predictive scheduling
algorithm that considers three objectives: makespan, makespan risk and stability risk simul-
taneously. Two types of operation-block-based buffering strategies were implemented, and
after extensive experiments, the proposed approach was found to provide a better Pareto
solution set in terms of both diversity and convergence.
Fuzzy systems have been applied widely, mostly on control problems. Bilkay et al. (2004)
proposed a two-stage fuzzy logic-based algorithm. In the ﬁrst stage, the algorithm assigns
priorities to part types, and in the second stage, an operation allocation is performed to min-
imize makespan, relative machine loads and cost. The proposed algorithm regenerates the
schedule after a machine breakdown, making it suitable for use as an on-line controller. In
the same vein, proactive scheduling aims to constructs schedules that take into account sta-
tistical knowledge of uncertainty upfront. Bollapragada and Sadeh (2004) reported proactive
technique that determines the release dates of different jobs based on measures of shop load,
statistical data of machine failures, and repairs, with a tradeoff between inventory and tar-
diness costs. Using a backward scheduling procedure, initial release dates are determined.
Then, a forward scheduling procedure is used to make sequencing decisions. Experiments
were carried out assuming normally distributed TTR and TBF. The approach was compared
with 39 other rules, and SA proved to yield better schedules even with an increasing fre-
quency of breakdowns. Petrovic et al. (2008) proposed a fuzzy approach to determine the
size of lots, considering fuzzy processing times and fuzzy due dates, to minimize the multiple
objectives such as weighted tardiness of jobs, total setup times, total tardy jobs, total ﬂow
time, and total machine idle times. To evaluate the efﬁciency of the solution method, data
from a printing company were used.
Neural networks have also been used, where neurons can represent processing restrictions
and resolve constraint conﬂicts. For example, Y. Li and Chen (2009) combined the back-
propagation neural network (BPNN) to model machine breakdowns and new job arrivals by
detecting whether constraints are satisﬁed. Then, based on the BPNN’s feasible solution for
the JSSP, a GA is applied for sequence optimization and makespan minimization. Likewise,
the works of Zandieh and Adibi (2009) and Adibi et al. (2010) also conﬁgured an artiﬁcial
neural network with a backpropagation error learning algorithm, but in this work, the neural
network was employed to update parameters of a variable neighborhood search (VNS) algo-
rithm in response to random job arrivals and machine breakdowns. Similarly, Azadeh et al.
(2012) proposed a hybrid algorithm that evaluates its performance using a discrete-event
simulation model and artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN) to solve the JSSP. The objective of
the proposed algorithm is to select the best dispatching rule to assign to each machine with the
aim of minimizing the makespan. The authors considered random processing times measured
in three probability distributions: normal, exponential, and uniform. The standard deviation
and mean variability were kept consistent for each machine.
Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) are considered decentralized models in which agents repre-
sent entities capable of making decisions in real-time. Liu et al. (2004) explored the use of
multiple agents employing an auction-based mechanism to schedule job shops in a dynamic
environment, utilizing a rolling horizon time procedure. Only available machines can host
auctions; therefore, if a machine breaks down, any job can be allocated to it. Similarly, based
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
809
on decentralization, M. Cheng et al. (2005) proposed a method based on the reaction–diffu-
sion equation on a graph, which treats the operations of JSSP as autonomous decentralized
system elements. When an event-rescheduling is triggered, the machine disturbance is con-
sidered as a constraint and is modeled as local and global potentials. However, message-based
protocols can impose communication burdens, so Renna (2009) included pheromone-based
information exchange strategies for a multi-agent system operating in a dynamic JSSP with
inter-arrival time, machine breakdowns and processing times variability.
Holonic Manufacturing Systems (HMS), as well as MAS, are distributed paradigms
for production planning and control. Similar to agents, holons in HMS are autonomous,
cooperative, and intelligent entities that collaborate with others to complete the tasks. For
instance, Zhao et al. (2010) utilized a fuzzy inference system (FIS) for machine selection and
allocation. The machine reliability is determined by the FIS based on its mean time between
failures (MTBF) values. Higher priority is given to the most reliable machines, and to prevent
unbalanced machine workloads, a hybrid PSO with differential evolution (DE) is applied.
The MTBF values are represented by a triangular membership function, ranging from 0 and
50.
Recently, Deep Learning (DL) techniques have been applied to solve the dynamic JSSP
due to their capability to extract features to solve the problem, while the context changes. S.
Chen et al. (2022) proposed a spatial pyramid pooling-based transformer (SPP-Transformer)
that extracts environment features in order to select the best priority rule. The authors claim
that this approach enables fast rescheduling by leveraging the simplicity of priority rules and
the ability of DL methods to extract context features. They reported an improvement of 11%
in the makespan.
One way to test new solutions in the presence of perturbations is through simulation. For
instance, Feng et al. (2020) designed a capacity adjustment system for a multi-product job
shopbasedonaheuristicdecision-makingmodule.Thesimulationmoduleisutilizedtoassess
the performance of the solutions when machine alterations occur. The objective is to monitor
the system and propose corrective actions to minimize the delay rate, maximize the machine
utilization rate, minimize the number of used machines, and minimize the mean total waiting
time. The machine parameters follow an exponential distribution, and the results showed that
the system can enhance the agility of the production system to cope with the complex and
ever-changing industrial setting. In the following subsection, approaches coupling simulation
with the concept of simheuristics are described.
2.3 Simheuristic approaches to solve SJSSP
Few works using simheuristics have been proposed to deal with uncertain parameters in JSSP.
For instance, the following approaches use MCS to account for stochastic problem parame-
ters. Particularly, Beck and Wilson (2007) proposed four constructive algorithms and two TS
algorithms hybridized with MCS to solve a SJSSP with uncertain processing time, aiming to
obtain the solution with a high probability of a good makespan. The algorithms were tested
for instances up to 20 jobs with 20 machines. The results showed that for smaller instances,
the constructive algorithms performed better, while for larger instances, the TS algorithms
obtained the best results. Similarly, Horng et al. (2012) proposed an evolutionary algorithm
by embedding evolutionary strategy in ordinal optimization to minimize expected sum of
inventory costs and tardiness costs in a SJSSP. The approach was evaluated in comparison to
ﬁve dispatching rules demonstrating an excellent performance. Araki and Yoshitomi (2016)
minimized expected makespan in a SJSSP with stochastic processing times. A pseudo PSO
123

810
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
was combined with MCS to solve the problem. The performance of the algorithm was eval-
uated by comparing it to a GA that was also hybridized with MCS. The results demonstrated
the effectiveness of the proposed simheuristic in achieving good performance. Using the
same strategy, Hao et al. (2017) tackled a multi-objective SJSSP with stochastic processing
times. The objectives were expected makespan and expected tardiness. A multi-objective
estimation of distribution algorithm was hybridized with MCS to solve the problem. The
simheuristic was compared to other simheuristics, namely NSGA-II, strength Pareto evolu-
tionary algorithm and adaptive-weight GA, demonstrating a good trade-off between quality
and computational efﬁciency. Aschauer et al. (2020b) solved a no-wait SJSSP with control-
lable processing times to minimize makespan. Firstly, the authors proposed a decomposition
approach that divided the problem into timetabling and sequencing problems. Then, using
MCS, the approach was evaluated for the stochastic version of the problem in benchmark
instances, resulting in a 40% reduction in the standard deviation of the makespan.
Due to the complexity of population metaheuristics and the requirement for multiple repli-
cations to estimate stochastic parameters, R. Zhang and Wu (2011) employed the K-armed
bandit model as a time-saving strategy. In this study, an artiﬁcial bee colony algorithm was
integrated with the budget allocation method. MCS was applied to approximate the mini-
mum expected maximum lateness, considering stochastic processing times. The algorithm
was compared to a PSO hybridized with SA, demonstrating better results when integrating
optimal computing budget allocation (OCBA). The approach was tested on several instances,
validating the effectiveness of the algorithm. Similarly, by employing the OCBA, Yang et al.
(2014) addressed the minimization of the expected sum of earliness and tardiness in a SJSSP
with stochastic processing times. The authors utilized an Evolutionary Strategy in Ordinal
Optimization (ESOO) hybridized with OCBA to solve the problem. The ESOO technique is
based on MCS. The method was tested by modeling the processing times using truncated nor-
mal, uniform, and exponential distributions. The results were compared with those obtained
by ESOO alone, demonstrating that the usage of OCBA improved the results.
Lastly, other works combined optimization methods with discrete-event simulation. For
instance, Sel and Hamzadayı (2018) considered a dynamic JSSP, in which jobs arrive con-
tinuously, with the objective of minimizing the mean ﬂowtime and mean tardiness. They
proposed a simulation–optimization method that utilizes a SA algorithm and includes the
analysis of machine failures. The metaheuristic calls a simulation model implemented in
Arena to estimate the objective function for a set of solutions. The method was compared
with simulations using three dispatching rules: earliest due date (EDD), shortest process time
(SPT), and ﬁrst in ﬁrst out (FIFO). The results showed that SPT achieved the best perfor-
mance in terms of objectives, while the SA algorithm provided a trade-off between objectives
and computational times.
Based on this literature review, the simheuristic-based approach described in this paper
contributes in the following ways. Firstly, no reports have been found on simheuristic
approaches for addressing the SJSSP with sequence-dependent setup times, to the best of
the authors’ knowledge. Secondly, just-in-time non-linear objective functions, such as min-
imizing the maximum lateness, have also been scarcely addressed in literature. The closest
referenced found was the work of Zhang and Wu (2011), which addressed the minimiza-
tion of expected maximum lateness was addressed but assumed stochastic processing times,
without considering stochastic machine breakdowns or sequence-dependent setup times as
in the proposed approach. Thirdly, since the problem has not been previously tackled, this
paper proposed a set of instances, modiﬁed from the related literature, that can serve as a ref-
erence for future research and method comparisons. Lastly, realistic applications necessitate
comprehensive data collection and pre-processing, highlighting the signiﬁcance of selecting
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
811
appropriate probabilistic distributions for representing the data. To address this, the paper
proposes a sensitivity analysis of problem representation (e.g., machine failures) and method
parameterization.
3 Mathematical model of the deterministic JSSP
This section presents the mathematical model for the deterministic JSSP that minimizes
maximum lateness, taking into account deterministic breakdowns. The model incorporates
subsets of breakdowns, denoted as M Bi for each machine i. The quantity of breakdowns in
subset M Bi is calculated based on three factors:
(i)
The planning horizon that represents the maximum length that can take to process all
the jobs. It is calculated as the sum of processing times of all jobs in all machines plus
the sum of maximum values of setup for each job at each machine.
(ii)
The mean time to repair (MTTR) that represent the expected duration of a breakdown
repair.
(iii) The mean time between failures (MTBF) that represents the expected duration between
two consecutive breakdowns.
These three factors are used to calculate the starting and ﬁnishing times of a breakdown
(SBb,i and FBb,i), which are treated as parameters in the model. The MTTR and MTBF are
further explained in Sect 4.3. First, the notations used in the model are presented, including
sets, parameters, and decision variables. Then, the objective functions and constraint sets are
presented and explained.
Sets:
I: Machines {1, . . . , |I|}
J: Jobs {1, . . . , |J|}
O j: operations of job j ∈J

1, . . . ,
O j

M Bi: machine breakdowns of machine i ∈I {1, . . . , |M Bi|}
Parameters:
• Po, j: processing time of operation o ∈O j of job j ∈J
• D j: due date of job j ∈J
• Ro, j: machine index in which operation o ∈O j of job j ∈J has to be performed
• Sj,k,i: sequence dependent setup time if job j ∈J ∪{0} is processed before job k ∈J at
machine i ∈I. Before means without the insertion of other jobs.
• SBb,i : starting time of breakdown b ∈M Bi at machine i ∈I
• FBb,i : ﬁnishing time of breakdown b ∈M Bi at machine i ∈I
• M: a very large positive number
Variables:
• X j,k,i: binary variable that takes the value of 1 if job j ∈J ∪{0} is processed before job
k ∈J at machine i ∈I, j ̸= k. 0 otherwise. Note: 0 is a dummy job to detect the job to
be processed in the ﬁrst position of sequence at machine i ∈I. Before means without the
insertion of other jobs.
• Ci, j: completion time of job j ∈J at machine i ∈I
• Bi, j: starting time of setup at machine i ∈I before processing of job j ∈J at that machine.
Before means without the insertion of other jobs.
123

812
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
• L j: Lateness of job j ∈J
• Lmax: Maximum lateness
• W j,i,b: binary variable that takes the value of 1 if job j ∈J is processed after the breakdown
b ∈M Bi takes place, 0 if it is processed before the breakdown b ∈M Bi takes place.
Objective function:
MinZ = Lmax
(1)
Subject to:
Lmax ≥L j
∀j ∈J
(2)
L j = Ci, j −D j
∀j ∈J, ∀i ∈I
(3)

j∈J∪{0},k̸= j
X j,k,i = 1 ∀i ∈I,
∀k ∈J
(4)

k∈J,k̸= j
X j,k,i ≤1 ∀i ∈I,
∀j ∈J
(5)

j∈J
X0, j,i = 1 ∀i ∈I
(6)
B(Ro, j), j ≥C(Ro−1, j), j
∀j ∈J,
∀o ∈O j, o > 1
(7)
C(Ro, j), j = B(Ro, j), j + Po, j +

k∈J∪{0}Sk, j,(Ro, j) · Xk, j,(Ro, j)
∀j ∈J,
∀o ∈O j
(8)
Bi,k ≥Ci, j −M ·

1 −X j,k,i

∀i ∈I, ∀j ∈J,
∀k ∈J, j ̸= k
(9)
SBb,i ≤Ci, j + M ·

1 −W j,i,b

∀j ∈J,
∀i ∈I,
∀b ∈M Bi
(10)
SBb,i ≤Bi, j + M ·

1 −W j,i,b

∀j ∈J,
∀i ∈I,
∀b ∈M Bi
(11)
FBb,i ≥Ci, j −M · W j,i,b
∀j ∈J,
∀i ∈I,
∀b ∈M Bi
(12)
FBb,i ≥Bi, j −M · W j,i,b
∀j ∈J,
∀i ∈I,
∀b ∈M Bi
(13)
Ci j ≥0 ∀i ∈I,
∀j ∈J
(14)
Bi j ≥0 ∀i ∈I,
∀j ∈J
(15)
SBb,i ≥0 ∀b ∈Mi,
∀i ∈I
(16)
FBb,i ≥0 ∀b ∈Mi,
∀i ∈I
(17)
X j,k,i ∈{0, 1} ∀i ∈I,
∀k, j ∈J, j ̸= k
(18)
W j,i,b ∈{0, 1} ∀j ∈J,
∀i ∈I,
∀b ∈M Bi
(19)
The objective function (1) is to minimize the maximum lateness. Constraint set (2) allows
for the calculation of the maximum lateness. Equation (3) describes the lateness of job j.
Constraint set (4) ensures that each job is scheduled only once on each machine. Constraint
set (5) guarantees that each job has at most one successor job on each machine. Equation (6)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
813
speciﬁes that each machine must have a job that initiates the sequence. Equation (7) ensures
that the starting time of an operation of a job must be greater than or equal to the completion
time of the previous operation of the same job. Constraint set (8) calculates the completion
time of an operation of a job, considering the setup time of the previous job processed just
before the operation. Constraint set (9) guarantees that the setup times and operations of two
jobs do not overlap on the same machine. Equations (10)–(13) ensure that an operation of
any job is performed either before or after a repair time for a breakdown, i.e., the operation is
not processed while the repair is being done. Constraint sets (14)–(19) indicate the domain
of the decision variables.
4 A simheuristic approach based on tabu search
Inthissectiontheproposedtabusearch(TS)metaheuristicisexplained.Themaincomponents
include the coding scheme, the initial solution, the exploration of the neighborhood, and the
utilization of Monte Carlo simulation (MCS) to achieve a stochastic simheuristic approach.
4.1 Coding scheme and the initial solution
Different coding schemes have been used in JSSP literature, and one of the most popular is
the permutation-based approach. In this paper, the job-order coding is used, which denotes
the order in which the jobs’ ﬁrst operation is arranged. Therefore, the size of the sequence
is equal to the number of jobs. For example, a 6 × 6 JSSP (6 jobs and 6 machines, 36
operations), randomly generates a vector such as [6,2,1,4,5,3]. For those jobs that share the
same machine for the ﬁrst operation, the priority in the machine’s queue is determined by the
position of the job in the vector. For instance, in the given example, job #2 and job #4 share
machine #1. Since job #2 is placed before job #4 in the sequence, machine #1 processes job
#2 ﬁrst and then job #4. As mentioned earlier, one way to initialize the search procedure is by
generating a random permutation sequence. However, priority rules can also be utilized, and
in this case, the earliest due date (EDD) rule was explored to schedule jobs’ ﬁrst operation
(Su et al., 1998; Vinod & Sridharan, 2011).
The job-order coding scheme was chosen for three reasons. Firstly, the vector size remains
as small as possible, unlike the working procedure where the vector´s size is equal to the
number of operations (the coding determines the sequence of each job on each machine).
Secondly, considering that a resource is not kept idle if it can start an activity (i.e., non-
delay scheduling), once a job ﬁnishes its ﬁrst operation it immediately moves to the next
machine in its sequence, and so on, until all its operations are processed. By using the
working procedure, sequences with idle times are analyzed in the exploration process, thus
enlarging the search space and requiring more computational cost. Lastly, since the job-
ordered permutation approach determines the allocation of the ﬁrst operation, it allows for
the integration of priority rules for sequencing the remaining operations. Priority rules such
as SPT, EDD, slack (SL), waiting time in the next queue (WINQ), among others, can be
chosen depending on the objective function. Those priority rules are used once a machine
ﬁnishes an operation, and there are two or more jobs in the machine’s queue, allowing the
machine to select the next job according to the rule. In this paper, given that the objective
function is due-date dependent, the EDD rule was chose as the tiebreaker.
123

814
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
4.2 The exploration of neighbor solutions
When the initial solution is complete, the TS begins constructing neighbor solutions by
exchanging the positions of two jobs in the sequence. Figure 2 illustrates the process of
neighborhood construction. Finding neighbors can be done by the exhaustive procedure,
which involves considering all possible combinations. In this case, n−1
i=2 i neighbors must
be analyzed (where n is the number of jobs). As an alternative to the exhaustive neighborhood
exploration, probabilistic TS assignes a probability to each move (i.e., position exchange). If
this probability is lower than a threshold probability (TP in Fig. 2), the move is executed and
the neighbor is analyzed. Otherwise, the neighbor solution is not considered. The main advan-
tage of probabilistic TS is the computational efﬁciency; however, determining the optimal
value for the threshold probability requires experimentation. If the threshold probability is
set to 1.0, then the neighborhood exploration becomes exhaustive. The best neighbor solution
Fig. 2 Neighborhood exploration
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
815
becomes the current solution, and the neighborhood exploration restarts with this solution
until the search process concludes. In the following, the integration of MCS into the process
of neighborhood construction is explained.
4.3 The simheuristic approach using Monte Carlo simulation (MCS)
As seen Fig. 2, during the neighborhood construction, each neighbor solution undergoes a
short MCS to explore different scenarios. These scenarios involve randomly generated times
between failures (TBF) and times to repair (TTR). The MCS parameters include the number
of simulations, the mean times between failures (MTBF), the mean times to repair (MTTR)
and the distribution that represents breakdown behavior.
To perform the MCS, failure and repair times were tested with exponential and log-
normal distributions across different instances. In order to logically assign those distribution
parameters, namely the expected values (MTTR and MTBF) and their standard deviations
(σT T R and σT BF), the Ag parameter, proposed by Gholami et al. (2009), was utilized. The
Ag parameter, described in Eq. (20), represents the proportion of mean time that a machine
spends “in repair” relative to its average total time between breakdowns.
Ag =
MTTR
MTBF + MTTR
(20)
Based on the studies conducted by Adibi et al. (2010), Gholami et al. (2009) and Shahrabi
et al. (2017), the MTTR value was taken as 5*P, where P represents the average processing
time of each machine. Therefore, the repair time takes ﬁve times the average processing time.
From Eq. (20) the value of MTBF can be calculated as presented in Eq. (21).
MTBF = MTTR(1 −Ag)
Ag
= 5 ∗P(1 −Ag)
Ag
(21)
Particularly for the log-normal distribution, the standard deviations of the times to repair
and times between failures (σT T R and σT BF) are calculated as follows:
σT BF = CV ∗MTBF
(22)
σT T R = CV ∗MTTR
(23)
For this particular case, it is assumed that a machine breakdown triggers a reactive mainte-
nance that starts right after the malfunction arises. Figure 3 depicts three possible scenarios.
In the ﬁrst situation (Scenario A), the machine fails while empty, therefore such failure does
not impact job scheduling. In Scenario B, the machine fails during setup, and consequently,
the setup procedure must be executed when the machine becomes available. Lastly, Scenario
C describes the situation in which a machine breaks down during job processing, causing
a right-time shift for the ongoing operation and for all the remaining operations scheduled
after the machine failure.
During the TS procedure, the best solution with its objective function value are stored in
memory. As seen in Fig. 2, the aspiration criterion is applied if a neighbor solution is listed
as a forbidden move in the Tabu Matrix but has a better objective function value compared
to the best value found so far.
123

816
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
Fig. 3 Impact of machine failures on job scheduling
4.4 Simheuristic with intensive simulation
In addition to incorporating MCS during the neighborhood construction, a number of sim-
ulations are applied to the best solution found by the metaheuristic. The aim of conducting
intensive simulations is to obtain a more accurate prediction of the mean maximum lateness
across various machine failure scenarios. Pseudocode #1 explains the TS procedure, which
terminates after a certain number of iterations without any improvement.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
817
Table 1 Benchmark instances
Instance
Authors
#Jobs
#Machines
ft06
Fisher & Thompson (1963)
6
6
la01
Lawrence (1984)
10
5
abz5
Adams et al. (1988)
10
10
la06
Lawrence (1984)
15
5
la21
Lawrence (1984)
15
10
la36
Lawrence (1984)
15
15
ft20
Fisher & Thompson (1963)
20
5
la26
Lawrence (1984)
20
10
abz7
Adams et al. (1988)
20
15
yn1
Yamada & Nakano (1992)
20
20
5 Computational experiments
This section presents a series of experiments conducted to evaluate the proposed simheuristic
approach. The section is divided into six parts. Sect. 5.1 provides a detailed description of
the instances used. Section 5.2 explains the implementation of two dispatching rules to
compare the results of the tabu search (TS) in small and large instances. Sect. 5.3 discusses
the parameter tuning of the simheuristic. Sect. 5.4 evaluates the performance of the TS
simheuristic against the simulated solutions of the dispatching rules and the proposed Mixed
Integer Linear Programming (MILP) approach for the instance ft06. This speciﬁc instance
was chosen because it is the only one for which the MILP has found an optimal solution.
Finally, Sect. 5.5 compares the results of the TS simheuristic with the simulated solutions of
the dispatching rules.
5.1 Instances
The benchmark instances listed in Table 1 were used.1 Each instance only reports processing
times and machine sequences for each job. On the contrary, sequence-dependent setup times
(Skji) on each machine were uniformly generated in the interval [1, max_times], where
max_times represents the total processing time on each machine. Additionally, job’s due dates
(Dj) were generated with a discrete uniform distribution based on Eq. (25). The parameters
used in Eq. (25) include the average value of due dates μ, which depends on the tightness
factor τ that indicated the percentage of jobs expected to arrive late, and the best reported
makespan (Cmax) for each benchmark instance (see Eq. 24). τ values of 0.3 and 0.6 were
used for all instances, with the former allowing for looser due dates compared to the latter.
The parameter due date range (R) took on values of 0.25 and 0.5 to generate values with
different levels of due-date variation. As a result, a total of four combinations of τ and R
were used, resulting in four different combinations of due dates for each set of processing
times, jobs and machines.
μ = (1 −τ)(Cmax)
(24)
1 https://www.eii.uva.es/elena/Elena%20Perez%20Vazquez_archivos/ﬁles_optimaJSSP/jobshop1.txt
123

818
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
Dj =
 
μ

1 −R
2

, μ

1 + R
2

(25)
For the experimental data regarding the mean times between failures (MTBFs) and mean
times to repair (MTTRs), two values of Ag (as deﬁned in Eq. 20) were used: 0.05 and 0.15.
Additionally, three different values of coefﬁcients of variation (0.0, 0.5 and 1.0) are proposed
for the log-normal distribution, as the exponential distribution always has a coefﬁcient of
variation (CV) of 1.0. The CV 0.0 in log-normal distribution was used for the deterministic
case, as it is equivalent, while 0.5 and 1.0 for stochastic events.
5.2 Dispatching rules
In order to compare the results reported by the proposed simheuristic approach, the earliest
due date ﬁrst (EDD) and the process time plus work in next queue plus negative slack (PT +
WINQ + SL) dispatching rules were implemented using discrete-event simulation software,
i.e. FlexSim version 2022. Figure 4 shows the simulation model composed of: (1) four
sources, each one is in charge of generating a number of jobs according to the instance being
evaluated. If other instances are analyzed, more sources can be easily added. Depending on
the instance, just one source generates jobs. (2) An initial queue that stores all jobs, connected
to all machine queues. (3) One queue per machine to store pending jobs while the machine
is busy; (4) 20 machines (because of the largest instance studied in this paper) which execute
either the EDD or the PT + WINQ + SL rule to select the next job to process; and ﬁnally, (5)
a ﬁnal queue that stores jobs that have ﬁnished their sequence. Jobs are called items in the
model, and each item is represented by a colored box in Fig. 4. Each item has a label that is
dynamically updated as the job progresses in its sequence. This label stores the priority index
value that each machine uses to select the next job. The index value is calculated depending on
the dispatching rule equation, as described by (Mizrak & Bayhan, 2006). Failure behavior is
set for each machine, and depending on the probability distribution and MTBF/MTTR values,
the simulation model generates random failures during the simulation time. For example, in
Fig. 4, Processor 5 is in failure, therefore, the machine becomes unavailable. Two dashboards
Fig. 4 Flexsim model implementing dispatching rules
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
819
are used to visualize production progress: (1) a Gantt chart that helps visualize setup times
and processing times for each job, and (2) one pie chart diagram per machine to visualize the
machines’ states (i.e., idle, setup, processing, or breakdown). Global tables and performance
metrics are used to store all data related to each instance, including ﬁnish times, job lateness,
and the maximum lateness. The Experimenter add-in was used to perform 50 replications
for each instance to obtain the mean maximum lateness, the standard deviation, and the 95%
conﬁdence interval.
5.3 Tabu search parameter tuning
To perform the parameterization of the simheuristic, the number of iterations without
improvement (NIT) and the size of the tabu memory (TM) were considered as the main
factors in the computational experiment. Three independent experiments were conducted
based on the instance sizes. The ﬁrst experiment was executed with ft06 instances, which are
considered small. The second experiment included medium-sized instances, namely la01 to
la36, which range from 10 to 15 jobs. Finally, the third experiment focused on instances with
20 jobs, speciﬁcally ft20 to yn1. For the second experiment, the 32 instances corresponding
to la36 were used, and for the third experiment, the 32 instances corresponding to yn1 were
utilized. In total, 96 instances were used for parameter tuning.
For the NIT factor, values of 5, 10, 15, 30 and 100 iterations were chosen after conducting
some preliminary experiments. Regarding the TM factor, values around the number of jobs
were utilized, speciﬁcally 5, 10, 15, and 20. In each experiment, 12 treatments were analyzed
by pairing the values of both factors. The response variable was deﬁned as the improvement
percentage of mean expected maximum lateness. To ensure proper parameterization, consid-
ering that the assumptions of normality and homoscedasticity were not met, we conducted
a separate ANOVA-Type statistic for small, medium, and large instances. The aim was to
identify the optimal combination of NIT and TL parameters for each instance size.
The ANOVA-Type statistics revealed that neither the NIT factor nor the TM factor showed
statistical signiﬁcance. Based on these results, a descriptive analysis was conducted to select
the combination of NIT and TM that provided the lowest average of expected maximum
lateness while considering computational effort. Figure 5 presents the interaction plots of TS
parameters for each instance size.
For small instances, the combinations that yield lower average values of expected maxi-
mum lateness are as follows: NIT 30 TM 5, NIT 100 TM 5, and NIT 5 TM 10. Among them,
the combination NIT 30 TM 5 requires the least computational effort. Additionally, this com-
bination has a TM value that is closest to the size of the vector codiﬁcation of the tabu for
these instances, which is 6 jobs. As a detailed example of the convergence curves provided
by the simheuristic, Fig. 6 shows the convergence curves for a speciﬁc small instance run
with a log-normal distribution with a CV = 1 and an exponential distribution. The blue lines
represent the expected maximum lateness of the best solution at each value of NIT, and the
red line represents the expected maximum lateness of the best global solution at each value
of NIT. It can be observed that the convergence is achieved after NIT = 25 for the log-normal
distribution, whereas for the exponential distribution, it occurs after NIT = 5. Despite both
graphs shown in Fig. 6 having the same coefﬁcient of variation (CV = 1), and the MTTRs
and MTBFs values being the same for each machine in both executions, the exponential
distribution exhibits higher expected maximum lateness values compared to the log-normal
distribution.
123

820
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
Fig. 5 Results of parameter tunning: a small instances, b medium instances, c large instances
(a)
)
b
(
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
1 4 7 10 1316 19 22 2528 31 3437 40 43 4649 52 55
Convergence curve of expected maximum 
lateness with log-normal distribution CV=1
Best solution at each iteration
Best global solution
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
1
4
7
10
13
16
19
22
25
28
31
34
Convergence curve of expected maximum lateness 
with exponential distribution
Best solution at each iteration
Best global solution
Fig. 6 Convergence curves of simheuristic for one small instance: a executed with log-normal distribution and
CV = 1, b executed with exponential distribution
For medium instances, the lowest average value is 3525.7 (NIT 30 TM 10), followed
by 3550.31 (NIT 100 TM 5). Considering that the combination NIT 100 TM 5 requires
approximately three times more computational effort, the combination NIT 30 TM 10 was
chosen for medium-sized instances. Similarly to small instances, a TM value of 10 is closer
to the size of the codiﬁcation vectors (job instance sizes), which are 10 and 15.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
821
Table 2 Parametrization selected for the simheuristic TS
Type of instances
NIT
TM
Small (6 × 6)
30
5
Medium (10 × 5, 10 × 10, 15 × 5, 15 × 10, 15 × 15)
30
10
Large (20 × 5, 20 × 10, 20 × 15)
30
20
For large instances, the lowest average value is 1997.34 (NIT 30 TM 20), followed by
1999.13 (NIT 100 TM 5). Considering that the combination NIT 100 TM 5 requires around
three times more computational effort, the combination NIT 30 TM 20 was chosen for large-
sized instances. Similar to medium and small instances, a TM value of 20 is closer to the size
of the codiﬁcation vectors (job instance sizes), which is 20. Therefore, the parametrization
used for the computational experiments in the following subsections is presented in Table 2.
5.4 Simheuristic vs. simulated solutions given by EDD, PT + WINQ + SL and MILP
model
The objective of this section is to compare the results obtained with the simheuristic against
the simulated solutions provided by the EDD dispatching rule, PT + WINQ + SL dispatching
rule and the proposed MILP model for the small instances (ft06: 6 × 6). The MILP model was
implemented in AMPL language and run in NEOS server. The optimal solutions obtained
were then simulated with 50 replications of Monte Carlos simulation (MCS) (see Pseudocode
1). Larger instances were also tested in MILP model, but no optimal solution was obtained
after 8 h of running. The performance measure for comparisons is the relative percentage
deviation (RPD), as presented in Eq. (26).
RPDTSvsMethod =

Lmax simheuristic −Lmax method

Lmax method
∗100
(26)
Table 3 shows that the expected maximum lateness values are consistently lower when
using the proposed TS simheuristic, except for the case of MILP with Log-normal_0 (i.e.,
the deterministic case). It improves the EDD dispatching rule by an average of 11.34%,
the PT-WINQ + SL dispatching rule by 14.92%, and the simulated solutions of the pro-
posed MILP model by 7.12. In Log-normal_0, the MILP provides a better solution than the
deterministic TS, with a GAP of approximately 7.54%. Nevertheless, the TS simheuristic
improves the simulated solution of the MILP model by an average of 10.53% for the stochas-
tic cases (Log-normal_0.5, Log-normal_1, and Exponential). This is because the proposed
approach is speciﬁcally designed to solve the SJSSP, where the TS simheuristic consistently
provides better expected maximum lateness than the simulation of the MILP model, as well
as the EDD or PT + WINQ + SL dispatching rules, for all the cases. The fact that the TS
simheuristic provides better solutions than the simulation of deterministic procedures high-
lights the importance of implementing methods that account for uncertain events, rather than
relying solely on deterministic solutions. Even though deterministic solutions are simulated
to account for uncertainty, the optimization method does not anticipate variability, resulting
in inefﬁcient utilization of the system.
Due to fact that the results of expected maximum lateness did not fulﬁlled the assump-
tions of normality and homoscedasticity, a non-parametric rank-based ANOVA-Type Statistic
123

822
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
Table 3 Expected maximum lateness of methods and RPD
Distribution_CV
Ag
Method
RPD
TS
EDD
PT + WINQ + SL
MILP
RP DT SvsE DD
RP DT SvsPT +W I N Q+SL
RP DT SvsM I L P
Log-normal_0
0.05
98.75
112.00
123.73
94.50
−11.83%
−20.19%
4.50%
0.15
104.50
121.50
123.68
94.50
−13.99%
−15.51%
10.58%
Total Log-normal_0
101.63
116.75
123.70
94.50
−12.96%
−17.85%
7.54%
Log-normal_0.5
0.05
98.99
112.66
123.79
114.79
−12.13%
−20.03%
−13.76%
0.15
121.80
143.48
150.05
140.82
−15.11%
−18.83%
−13.51%
Total Log-normal_0.5
110.39
128.07
136.92
127.81
−13.80%
−19.37%
−13.62%
Log-normal_1
0.05
105.24
120.68
132.73
125.53
−12.80%
−20.71%
−16.17%
0.15
158.17
172.95
163.95
165.51
−8.55%
−3.53%
−4.43%
Total Log-normal_1
131.70
146.82
148.34
145.52
−10.29%
−11.22%
−9.50%
Exponential
0.05
121.54
136.84
146.51
135.77
−11.18%
−17.05%
−10.48%
0.15
163.20
176.37
178.15
175.33
−7.47%
−8.40%
−6.92%
Total Exponential
142.37
156.60
162.33
155.55
−9.09%
−12.30%
−8.47%
Total general
121.52
137.06
142.82
130.84
−11.34%
−14.92%
−7.12%
The rows marked in bold represent partial totals for each combination of probability distribution and coefﬁcient of variation, regardless of the Ag values
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
823
(Brunner et al., 1997) was performed to evaluate the signiﬁcance of three factors (method,
combination Distribution_CV, and Ag) in relation to the expected maximum lateness. Using
a signiﬁcance level of 5%, all three factors were found to have a signiﬁcant effect on the
expected maximum lateness, as well as the double interaction between Ag and the combina-
tion Distribution_CV (see Table 4).
To analyze these results in more detail, Table 5 presents the factor information that pro-
vides the conﬁdence intervals of ranks under a conﬁdence level of 95% for each of the
three mentioned factors. The lower the values of rankings, the lower the expected maximum
lateness, and the higher the values of rankings, the higher the expected maximum lateness.
Forthemethodfactor,itcanbeobservedthattheproposedsimheuristicTShasaconﬁdence
interval is lower than the other three solution methods, and it does not overlap with the others.
In constrast, the conﬁdence intervals of EDD, PT + WNQ + SL, and MILP overlap with
Table 4 ANOVA-type statistic for small instances
Source of variation
Statistic
df1
df2
p-Value
Method
7.4866
2.3128
55.156
0.0008
Ag
75.3054
1
55.156
0.0000
Method:Ag
0.781
2.3128
55.156
0.4798
Distribution_CV
40.9829
2.9349
55.156
0.0000
Method:Distribution_CV
1.2094
6.6844
55.156
0.3140
Ag:Distribution_CV
6.4682
2.9349
55.156
0.0009
Method:Ag:Distribution_CV
0.203
6.6844
55.156
0.9811
The values marked in bold are those p-values less than the signiﬁcance level of 0.05, meaning those factors or
interactions that are statistically signiﬁcant
Table 5 Factor information of ANOVA-Type Statistic for small instances
Rel.Effect
Std.error
Lower
Upper
Method
EDD
0.5370
0.0302
0.4776
0.5953
MILP
0.4814
0.0179
0.4466
0.5165
PT + WINQ + SL
0.5894
0.0332
0.5230
0.6526
TS
0.3922
0.0219
0.3501
0.4359
Ag
0.05
0.3663
0.0142
0.3390
0.3945
0.15
0.6337
0.0142
0.6055
0.6610
Distribution_CV
Log-normal_0
0.2534
0.0237
0.2099
0.3026
Log-normal_0.5
0.4393
0.0287
0.3842
0.4960
Log-normal_1
0.6036
0.0258
0.5521
0.6530
Exponential
0.5931
0.0255
0.6513
0.7510
123

824
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
each other, indicating that these methods do not have a statistically signiﬁcant difference.
Indeed, the proposed TS is signiﬁcantly different and superior than the other three methods.
Regarding the Ag, as expected, the objective function is signiﬁcantly lower for an Ag of
0.05 compared to an Ag of 0.15, indicating that as the Ag increases, the expected maximum
lateness also increases. Finally, regarding the combination of Distribution_CV, two analysis
can be performed. For the log-normal distribution, as the coefﬁcient of variation increases,
the expected maximum lateness also increases. Furthermore, when comparing Log-normal_1
with Exponential, the conﬁdence intervals overlap, but only to a very small extent. This gen-
erally indicated that despite having the same coefﬁcient of variation and using the same
values of MTTR and MTBF, exponential distributions tend to yield greater expected max-
imum lateness than Log-normal distributions with CV = 1, because exponential behavior
increases variability.
5.5 Results and analysis for medium and large instances
The aim of this section is to compare the results obtained with the simheuristic against the
simulated solutions provided by the EDD and PT + WINQ + SL dispatching rules for
medium and large-sized instances (la01, abz5, la06, la21, la36, ft20, la26, abz7, and yn1),
which range in size from 10 × 5 to 20 × 20. The experiment in this case consisted of four
factors: solution method (TS, EDD, PT + WINQ + SL), instance size (10 × 5, 10 × 10, 15 ×
5, 15 × 10, 15 × 15, 20 × 5, 20 × 10, 20 × 15, and 20 × 20), Distribution_CV, and Ag. Table
6 presents the averages of expected maximum lateness by instance size, the combination of
Distribution_CV, and the solution method. For all instance sizes and probability distributions,
the TS simheuristic provides better results than the simulated solutions of both dispatching
rules.
Table 7 shows the average results summarized for each combination of Distribution_CV,
Ag, and solution method, and presents the RPD deﬁned in Eq. (26). The results demonstrate
that the expected maximum lateness values are consistently lower when utilizing the proposed
TS simheuristic, resulting in an average improvement of 11.72% over the EDD dispatching
rule and 14.08% over the PT-WINQ + SL dispatching rule.
The non-parametric rank-based ANOVA-Type Statistic was performed to evaluate the
effect of the mentioned four factors and their interactions on the expected maximum lateness.
Using a signiﬁcance level of 5%, all four factors were found to have a signiﬁcant effect on
the expected maximum lateness (see Table 8). All signiﬁcant p-values are indicated in bold.
To analyze these results in more detail, Table 9 presents the factor information that pro-
vides the conﬁdence intervals of ranks under a conﬁdence level of 95% for each of the
three mentioned factors. The lower the values of rankings, the lower the expected maximum
lateness, and the higher the values of rankings, the higher the expected maximum lateness.
Forthemethodfactor,itcanbeobservedthattheproposedsimheuristicTShasaconﬁdence
interval is lower than the other three solution methods, and it does not overlap with the others.
In contrast, the conﬁdence intervals of EDD and PT + WNQ + SL overlap with each other,
indicating that these methods do not have a statistically signiﬁcant difference. Indeed, the
proposed TS is signiﬁcantly different and superior than the other three methods.
As in the results of small instances, as the Ag increases the expected maximum lateness
also increases. In relation to Distribution_CV, the same two analysis than in small instances
were performed. For the log-normal distribution, as the coefﬁcient of variation increases, the
expected maximum lateness also increases and the intervals do not overlap. In the second
analysis, that compares the Log-normal_1 with Exponential, the conﬁdence intervals overlap,
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
825
Table 6 Average expected maximum lateness by instance size, combination Distribution_CV and solution method
Instance
size
Log-normal_0
Log-normal_0.5
Log-normal_1
Exponential
EDD
PT +
WINQ +
SL
TS
EDD
PT +
WINQ +
SL
TS
EDD
PT +
WINQ +
SL
TS
EDD
PT +
WINQ +
SL
TS
10_5
1259.00
1249.10
898.50
1321.56
1344.15
1055.01
1519.04
1545.95
1236.66
1620.63
1672.33
1433.82
10_10
2215.13
2222.25
1985.00
2424.03
2422.41
2236.27
2833.87
2828.74
2724.49
3149.73
3162.84
3020.02
15_5
1830.38
1989.29
1372.75
1939.05
2019.95
1495.12
2129.40
2180.74
1739.87
2223.13
2254.81
1998.73
15_10
2454.25
2487.74
1812.00
2650.85
2694.34
2099.72
2987.69
2998.23
2675.34
3095.18
3130.08
2839.21
15_15
2785.38
2790.32
2336.38
3022.90
3080.40
2799.50
3531.17
3507.79
3437.98
3679.44
3873.91
3669.03
20_5
2623.75
3181.48
2020.00
2794.96
3026.21
2305.52
2973.63
3268.97
2650.76
3094.57
3219.68
2774.20
20_10
2502.50
2585.07
1853.00
2714.09
2764.01
2295.67
3108.39
3194.41
2884.13
3183.42
3281.37
3216.30
20_15
1363.50
1348.64
1076.25
1541.60
1556.52
1355.35
1808.04
1857.74
1656.57
1886.50
1945.19
1846.36
20_20
1894.75
1858.63
1378.63
1988.23
1990.06
1835.55
2323.81
2322.41
2286.37
2452.61
2454.61
2438.71
123

826
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
Table 7 Expected maximum lateness of methods and RPD for medium and large instance sizes
Distribution_CV
Ag
Method
RPDs
TS
EDD
PT + WINQ
+ SL
RPD TS
versus EDD
(%)
RPD TS vs PT
+ WINQ + SL
(%)
Log-normal_0
0.05
1498.00
1884.61
1896.70
−20.51
−21.02
0.15
1775.89
2321.75
2483.86
−23.51
−28.50
Total
Log-normal_0
1636.94
2103.18
2190.28
−22.17
−25.26
Log-normal_0.5
0.05
1586.22
1975.45
1984.89
−19.70
−20.09
0.15
2297.71
2557.28
2659.12
−10.15
−13.59
Total Log-
normal_0.5
1941.97
2266.36
2322.01
−14.31
−16.37
Log-normal_1
0.05
1896.95
2188.86
2216.61
−13.34
−14.42
0.15
2834.64
2970.04
3051.16
−4.56
−7.10
Total
Log-normal_1
2365.80
2579.45
2633.89
−8.28
−10.18
Exponential_1
0.05
2139.33
2305.34
2393.31
−7.20
−10.61
0.15
3024.31
3113.59
3161.09
−2.87
−4.33
Total
Exponential_1
2581.82
2709.47
2777.20
−4.71
−7.04
Total general
2131.63
2414.61
2480.84
−11.72
−14.08
Table 8 ANOVA-Type Statistic for medium and large instances
Source of variation
Test statistic
df1
df2
p-value
Method
39.3677
1.8608
144.5530
0.0000
Instance
149.2012
5.2312
144.5530
0.0000
Method:Instance
1.2038
8.4215
144.5530
0.2992
Ag
409.0242
1.0000
144.5530
0.0000
Method:Ag
0.3258
1.8608
144.5530
0.7068
Instance:Ag
4.0306
5.2312
144.5530
0.0016
Method:Instance:Ag
0.3849
8.4215
144.5530
0.9334
Distribution_CV
90.2349
2.9770
144.5530
0.0000
Method:Distribution_CV
2.1899
5.4790
144.5530
0.0527
Instance:Distribution_CV
1.2937
14.5685
144.5530
0.2152
Method:Instance:Distribution_CV
0.1379
22.5369
144.5530
0.9999
Ag:Distribution_CV
7.8402
2.9770
144.5530
0.0000
Method:Ag:Distribution_CV
0.8033
5.4790
144.5530
0.5590
Instance:Ag:Distribution_CV
0.3135
14.5685
144.5530
0.9927
Method:Instance:Ag:Distribution_CV
0.1328
22.5369
144.5530
0.9999
The values marked in bold are those p-values less than the signiﬁcance level of 0.05, meaning those factors or
interactions that are statistically signiﬁcant
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
827
Table 9 Factor information of ANOVA-Type Statistic for small instances
Rel.Effect
Std.Error
Lower
Upper
Method
EDD
0.5313
0.0120
0.5078
0.5546
PT + WINQ + SL
0.5400
0.0121
0.5162
0.5637
TS
0.4287
0.0116
0.4061
0.4516
Ag
0.05
0.3937
0.0080
0.3781
0.4095
0.15
0.6063
0.0080
0.5905
0.6219
Distribution_CV
Log-normal_0
0.3796
0.0142
0.3522
0.4077
Log-normal_0.5
0.4509
0.0147
0.4223
0.4798
Log-normal_1
0.5588
0.0148
0.5295
0.5877
Exponential
0.6108
0.0143
0.5825
0.6383
but only to a very small extent. This generally indicated that despite having the same coefﬁ-
cient of variation and using the same values of MTTR and MTBF, exponential distributions
tend to yield greater expected maximum lateness than Log-normal distributions with CV =
1, because exponential behavior increases variability.
Execution times of the solution methods are presented in Table 10. The dispatching rules
always provide very fast execution times, taking less than 8 s for the 50 replicates. However,
this comes at the cost of increasing the average maximum lateness by more than 14%, which
is quite high. The TS presents a maximum of 18 min for solving the largest instances,
which is very fast considering that it solves the stochastic problem. In the case of the MILP
model, only the small instances (6 × 6) provided a solution. However, once this solution is
simulated, the average maximum lateness is 12% larger than the one provided by the proposed
Table 10 Execution times of solution methods by instance sizes
Instance size
Average execution times (s)
EDD
PT + WINQ + SL
TS
MILP
6_6
6.43
4.78
56.68
38.11 (33.60 + 4.51)
10_5
6.56
5.14
63.60
> 28,800
10_10
7.10
5.18
106.58
> 28,800
15_5
6.84
5.24
271.97
> 28,800
15_10
6.87
5.37
398.62
> 28,800
15_15
7.35
5.46
511.29
> 28,800
20_5
7.14
5.19
767.23
> 28,800
20_10
7.16
5.55
641.34
> 28,800
20_15
7.93
5.86
932.07
> 28,800
20_20
6.86
6.37
1094.65
> 28,800
123

828
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
TS. Therefore, the proposed simheuristic yields good results for the stochastic problem in
reasonable computational times.
6 Conclusions and future research
This paper focuses on the study of a stochastic job shop scheduling problem (SJSSP) with
the objective of minimizing the expected maximum lateness. The main source of uncertainty
considered in this research is machine breakdowns. To address this problem, we formulate
a mixed-integer linear programming model that incorporates the expected times for repairs
and between failures. However, due to the problem’s complexity, the model is only capable
of providing solutions for very small instances. To overcome this limitation, we propose
a tabu search (TS) simheuristic that combines Monte Carlo simulation. The exponential
and log-normal distributions are employed to model the times between failures and repair
durations, respectively, using different coefﬁcients of variation. During each replica of the
Monte Carlo simulation, we generate realizations of these times while maintaining the same
expected value for each machine and for a speciﬁc combination of probability distribution
and coefﬁcient of variation. The proposed simheuristic is parameterized by deﬁning the size
of the tabu list and the number of iterations without improvement for three instance sizes:
small, medium, and large.
To evaluate the performance of the simheuristic, two computational experiments were
conducted. Firstly, for small instances, we compared the results of the simheuristic with
the simulation of solutions obtained from the MILP model, as well as the EDD and PT +
WINQ + SL dispatching rules. Secondly, for medium and large instances, we compared the
simheuristic results with the simulation of solutions provided by the EDD and PT + WINQ
+ SL dispatching rules. The average percentage improvement in expected maximum lateness
was as follows: for small instances, 7.12% compared to the simulation of the best solution
found by the mathematical model, 11.34% compared to the simulation of EDD, and 14.92%
compared to the simulation of the PT + WINQ + SL dispatching rule. For medium and
large instances, an average improvement of 11.72% and 14.08% was achieved, respectively,
when compared to the simulation of solutions provided by the EDD and PT + WINQ +
SL dispatching rules. These results demonstrate the excellent performance of the proposed
approach. It is important to note that the average execution times of the simheuristic were
56.68 s for small instances, 4.51 min for medium instances, and 14.82 min for large instances.
In contrast, the MILP model took 38.11 s for small instances, but it did not yield an optimal
solution within an 8-h execution time for medium and large instances.
The results also provide further insights into the behavior of the expected maximum
lateness under different probability distributions and coefﬁcients of variation. It was observed
thathigherexpectedmaximumlatenessvalueswereobtainedwiththeexponentialdistribution
compared to the Log-normal distribution with a coefﬁcient of variation of 1. Additionally,
in the case of the log-normal distribution alone, as the coefﬁcient of variation increases,
the expected maximum lateness also increases. These ﬁndings highlight the importance
of appropriately adjusting the probability distributions for the times between damages and
repair times to obtain accurate solutions. Furthermore, it was discovered that solving the
deterministicproblemandimplementingsuchasolutionisnotsuitableasitleadstosigniﬁcant
deviations.
Future work will focus on evaluating the hybridization of TS with other simulation
paradigms, such as agent-based simulation, in order to compare their performances. Another
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
829
important recommendation to consider is the implementation of another metaheuristic com-
bined with Monte Carlo simulation, such as a genetic algorithm, GRASP, or iterated local
search. Additionally, it is suggested to introduce other parameters with random behavior,
such as processing times and ready times. Lastly, exploring the use of alternative probability
distributions to model the random behavior of times to repair and between failures is also
recommended.
Funding Open Access funding provided by Colombia Consortium.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abdolrazzagh, M., & Adbullah, S. (2017). Job Shop scheduling: classiﬁcation, constraints and objective
funtions. World Academy of Science-Engineering and Technology, 11, 4–20.
Abido, M. A. (2002). Optimal power ﬂow using tabu search algorithm. Electric Power Components and
Systems, 30(5), 469–483. https://doi.org/10.1080/15325000252888425
Adams, J., Balas, E., & Zawack, D. (1988). The shifting bottleneck procedure for job shop scheduling.
Management Science, 34(3), 391–401.
Adibi, M. A., Zandieh, M., & Amiri, M. (2010). Multi-objective scheduling of dynamic job shop using
variable neighborhood search. Expert Systems with Applications, 37(1), 282–287. https://doi.org/10.
1016/J.ESWA.2009.05.001
Akers, S. B., & Friedman, J. (1955). A Non-numerical approach to production scheduling problems. Journal
of the Operations Research Society of America, 3(4), 429–442. https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.3.4.429
Al-Hinai, N., & Elmekkawy, T. Y. (2011). Robust and stable ﬂexible job shop scheduling with random machine
breakdowns using a hybrid genetic algorithm. International Journal of Production Economics, 132(2),
279–291. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJPE.2011.04.020
Araki, K., & Yoshitomi, Y. (2016). Stochastic job-shop scheduling: A hybrid approach combining pseudo
particle swarm optimization and the Monte Carlo method. Journal of Advanced Mechanical Design,
Systems and Manufacturing, 10(3), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1299/jamdsm.2016jamdsm0053
Aschauer, A., Roetzer, F., Steinboeck, A., & Kugi, A. (2020a). Efﬁcient scheduling of a stochastic no-wait
job shop with controllable processing times. Expert Systems with Applications, 162, 113879. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.eswa.2020.113879
Azadeh, A., Negahban, A., & Moghaddam, M. (2012). A hybrid computer simulation-artiﬁcial neural network
algorithm for optimisation of dispatching rule selection in stochastic job shop scheduling problems.
International Journal of Production Research, 50(2), 551–566. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2010.
539281
Banerjee, B. P. (1965). Single facility sequencing with random execution times. Operations Research, 13(3),
358–364. https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.13.3.358
Baykasoglu, A. (2002). Linguistic-based meta-heuristic optimization model for ﬂexible job shop schedul-
ing. International Journal of Production Research, 40(17), 4523–4543. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00207540210147043
Beck, J. C., & Wilson, N. (2007). Proactive algorithms for job shop scheduling with probabilistic durations.
Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 28, 183–232. https://doi.org/10.1613/jair.2080
Bierwirth, C., & Kuhpfahl, J. (2017). Extended GRASP for the job shop scheduling problem with total
weighted tardiness objective. European Journal of Operational Research, 261(3), 835–848. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ejor.2017.03.030
Bilkay, O., Anlagan, O., & Kilic, S. E. (2004). Job shop scheduling using fuzzy logic. International Journal
of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 23(7–8), 606–619. https://doi.org/10.1007/S00170-003-1771-
2/FIGURES/11
123

830
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
Bollapragada, R., & Sadeh, N. M. (2004). Proactive release procedures for just-in-time job shop environments,
subject to machine failures. Naval Research Logistics (NRL), 51(7), 1018–1044. https://doi.org/10.1002/
NAV.20036
Botta-Genoulaz, V. (2000). Hybrid ﬂow shop scheduling with precedence constraints and time lags to minimize
maximum lateness. International Journal of Production Economics, 64(1–3), 101–111. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0925-5273(99)00048-1
Brunner, E., Dette, H., & Munk, A. (1997). Box-type approximations in nonparametric factorial designs.
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 92(440), 1494–1502. https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.
1997.10473671
Çali¸s, B., & Bulkan, S. (2015). A research survey: Review of AI solution strategies of job shop scheduling
problem. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, 26(5), 961–973. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10845-013-
0837-8
Chen, D., Liu, F., & Luh, P. B. (1997). Scheduling job shops with uncertainties. Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Decision and Control, 4, 3556–3561. https://doi.org/10.1109/CDC.1997.652402
Chen, S., Huang, Z., & Guo, H. (2022). An end-to-end deep learning method for dynamic job shop scheduling
problem. Machines, 10(7), 573. https://doi.org/10.3390/machines10070573
Cheng, M., Sugi, M., Ota, J., Yamamoto, M., Ito, H., & Inoue, K. (2005). Online job shop rescheduling with
reaction-diffusion equation on a graph. In 2005 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems, IROS, 3219–3224. https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2005.1545459
Cheng, T. C. E., Peng, B., & Lü, Z. (2016). A hybrid evolutionary algorithm to solve the job shop scheduling
problem. Annals of Operations Research, 242(2), 223–237. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-013-1332-5
Chiang, P. H., & Torng, C. C. (2016). A production planning and optimisation of multi-mode job shop schedul-
ing problem for an avionics manufacturing plant. International Journal of Manufacturing Technology
and Management, 30(3/4), 179. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJMTM.2016.077813
de Armas, J., Juan, A. A., Marquès, J. M., & Pedroso, J. P. (2017). Solving the deterministic and stochastic
uncapacitated facility location problem: From a heuristic to a simheuristic. Journal of the Operational
Research Society, 68(10), 1161–1176. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41274-016-0155-6
Fang, J., & Xi, Y. (1997). A rolling horizon job shop rescheduling strategy in the dynamic environment. The
International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 13(3), 227–232. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF01305874
Feng, X., Zhao, Z., & Zhang, C. (2020). Simulation optimization framework for online deployment and
adjustmentofreconﬁgurablemachinesinjobshops.InIEEEInternationalConferenceonIndustrialEngi-
neering and Engineering Management, 2020-Decem, 731–735. https://doi.org/10.1109/IEEM45057.
2020.9309782
Feo, T. A., & Resende, M. G. C. (1995). Greedy randomized adaptive search procedures. Journal of Global
Optimization, 6(2), 109–133. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01096763
Fernandez-Viagas, V., Ruiz, R., & Framinan, J. M. (2017). A new vision of approximate methods for the
permutation ﬂowshop to minimise makespan: State-of-the-art and computational evaluation. European
Journal of Operational Research, 257(3), 707–721. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2016.09.055
Fisher, M. L. (1973). optimal solution of scheduling problems using lagrange multipliers: Part II. In Symposium
on the Theory of Scheduling and its Applications. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-80784-8_20
Fisher, H., & Thompson, G. L. (1963). Probabilistic learning combinations of local job-shop scheduling rules.
In J. F. Muth & G. L. Thompson (Ed.), Industrial Scheduling (pp. 225–251). Prentice-Hall.
Gantt, H. L. (1919). Organizing for work. Harcourt.
Gholami, M., Zandieh, M., & Alem-Tabriz, A. (2009). Scheduling hybrid ﬂow shop with sequence-dependent
setup times and machines with random breakdowns. The International Journal of Advanced Manufac-
turing Technology, 42, 189–201.
Giacaman, G. J., Medel, R. P., & Tabilo, J. A. (2002). Simulation of the material transporting and loading
process in Pedro de Valdivia mine. In Proceedings of the Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 1349–1355.
https://doi.org/10.1109/WSC.2002.1166401
Gmys, J., Mezmaz, M., Melab, N., & Tuyttens, D. (2020). A computationally efﬁcient Branch-and-Bound
algorithm for the permutation ﬂow-shop scheduling problem. European Journal of Operational Research.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2020.01.039
González-Martín, S., Juan, A., Riera, D., Elizondo, M., & Ramos-González, J. (2016). A Simheuristic algo-
rithm for solving the arc routing problem with stochastic demands. Journal of Simulation. https://doi.
org/10.1057/jos.2016.11
González-Neira, E. M., & Montoya-Torres, J. R. (2019). A simheuristic for bi-objective stochastic permutation
ﬂow shop scheduling problem. Journal of Project Management, 4, 57–80. https://doi.org/10.5267/j.jpm.
2019.1.003
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
831
Gruler, A., Panadero, J., de Armas, J., Moreno Pérez, J. A., & Juan, A. A. (2018). Combining variable neighbor-
hood search with simulation for the inventory routing problem with stochastic demands and stock-outs.
Computers & Industrial Engineering, 123, 278–288. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2018.06.036
Hao, X., Gen, M., Lin, L., & Suer, G. A. (2017). Effective multiobjective EDA for bi-criteria stochastic job-
shop scheduling problem. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, 28(3), 833–845. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10845-014-1026-0
Hasan, S. M. K., Sarker, R., Essam, D., & Kacem, I. (2011). A DSS for job scheduling under process interrup-
tions. Flexible Services and Manufacturing Journal, 23(2), 137–155. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10696-
011-9094-3/FIGURES/5
Hill, C. (2011). Negocios Internacionales. In Corporate environmental orientation: Conceptualization and the
case of Andean exporters (Vol. 30). https://doi.org/10.1039/C4NJ00351A
Holthaus, O. (1999). Scheduling in job shops with machine breakdowns: An experimental study. Computers
& Industrial Engineering, 36(1), 137–162. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0360-8352(99)00006-6
Horng, S.-C., Lin, S.-S., & Yang, F.-Y. (2012). Evolutionary algorithm for stochastic job shop scheduling with
random processing time. Expert Systems with Applications, 39(3), 3603–3610. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.eswa.2011.09.050
Jackson, J. R. (1956). An extension of Johnson’s results on job IDT scheduling. Naval Research Logistics
Quarterly, 3(3), 201–203. https://doi.org/10.1002/nav.3800030307
Jacobs, L. W., & Lauer, J. (1994). DSS for job shop machine scheduling. Industrial Management & Data
Systems, 94(4), 15–23. https://doi.org/10.1108/02635579410059455
Jain, A. S., & Meeran, S. (1999). Deterministic job-shop scheduling: Past, present and future. European
Journal of Operational Research, 113(2), 390–434. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-2217(98)00113-1
Johnson, S. M. (1954). Optimal two- and three-stage production schedules with setup times included. Naval
Research Logistics Quarterly, 1(1), 61–68. https://doi.org/10.1002/nav.3800010110
Juan, A. A., Barrios, B. B., Vallada, E., Riera, D., & Jorba, J. (2014). A simheuristic algorithm for solving
the permutation ﬂow shop problem with stochastic processing times. Simulation Modelling Practice and
Theory, 46, 101–117. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.simpat.2014.02.005
Juan, A. A., Faulin, J., Grasman, S. E., Rabe, M., & Figueira, G. (2015). A review of simheuristics: Extend-
ing metaheuristics to deal with stochastic combinatorial optimization problems. Operations Research
Perspectives, 2, 62–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orp.2015.03.001
Kadipasaoglu, S. N., Peixoto, J. L., & Khumawala, B. M. (1999). Global manufacturing practices: An
empirical evaluation. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 99(3), 101–108. https://doi.org/10.1108/
02635579910370652
Lawrence, S. (1984). Resource constrained project scheduling: An experimental investigation of heuristic
scheduling techniques (Supplement). Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA: Graduate School of
Industrial Administration.
Lei, D. (2011). Simpliﬁed multi-objective genetic algorithms for stochastic job shop scheduling. Applied Soft
Computing, 11(8), 4991–4996. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ASOC.2011.06.001
Lei, D. M. (2012). Minimizing makespan for scheduling stochastic job shop with random breakdown. Applied
Mathematics and Computation, 218(24), 11851–11858. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.AMC.2012.04.091
Li, Y., & Chen, Y. (2009). Neural network and genetic algorithm-based hybrid approach to dynamic job shop
scheduling problem. In Conference Proceedings-IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and
Cybernetics, 4836–4841. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSMC.2009.5346060
Li, J. Q., Sang, H. Y., Han, Y. Y., Wang, C. G., & Gao, K. Z. (2018). Efﬁcient multi-objective optimization
algorithm for hybrid ﬂow shop scheduling problems with setup energy consumptions. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 181, 584–598. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.02.004
Li, X., & Gao, L. (2020). A hybrid intelligent algorithm and rescheduling technique for dynamic JSP. Engi-
neering Applications of Computational Methods, 2, 345–375. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-55305-
3_17/TABLES/12
Liu, N., Abdelrahman, M. A., & Ramaswamy, S. (2004). A multi-agent model for reactive job shop scheduling.
Proceedings of the Annual Southeastern Symposium on System Theory, 36, 241–245. https://doi.org/10.
1109/SSST.2004.1295656
Makino, T. (1965). On a scheduling problem. Journal of the Operations Research Society Japan, 8, 32–44.
Manne, A. S. (1960). On the job-shop scheduling problem. Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.
8.2.219
Meloni, C., Pacciarelli, D., & Pranzo, M. (2004). A rollout metaheuristic for job shop scheduling prob-
lems. Annals of Operations Research, 131(1), 215–235. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:ANOR.0000039520.
24932.4b
123

832
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
Meng, L., Zhang, C., Ren, Y., Zhang, B., & Lv, C. (2020). Mixed-integer linear programming and constraint
programming formulations for solving distributed ﬂexible job shop scheduling problem. Computers &
Industrial Engineering, 142, 106347. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2020.106347
Mizrak, P., & Bayhan, G. M. (2006). Comparative study of dispatching rules in a real-life job shop environment.
Applied Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 20(7), 585–607. https://doi.org/10.1080/08839510600779738
Mohan, J., Lanka, K., & Rao, A. N. (2019). A review of dynamic job shop scheduling techniques. Procedia
Manufacturing, 30, 34–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2019.02.006
Muhlemann, A. P., Lockett, A. G., & Farn, C. K. (1982). Job shop scheduling heuristics and frequency
of scheduling. International Journal of Production Research, 20(2), 227–241. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00207548208947763
Naderi, B., Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, R., & Khalili, M. (2010). Electromagnetism-like mechanism and simulated
annealing algorithms for ﬂowshop scheduling problems minimizing the total weighted tardiness and
makespan. Knowledge-Based Systems, 23(2), 77–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2009.06.002
Nowicki, E., & Smutnicki, C. (2005). An advanced tabu search algorithm for the job shop problem. Journal
of Scheduling, 8(2), 145–159. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10951-005-6364-5
Paredis, J., & Van Rij, T. (1992). Simulation and constraint programming as support methodologies for job shop
scheduling. Journal of Decision Systems, 1(1), 59–77. https://doi.org/10.1080/12460125.1992.10511509
Petrovic,S.,Fayad,C.,Petrovic,D.,Burke,E.,& Kendall,G.(2008).Fuzzy job shop scheduling with lot-sizing.
Annals of Operations Research, 159(1), 275–292. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-007-0287-9
Pinedo, M. L. (2016). Scheduling (5th ed.). Springer International Publishing.
Pranzo, M., & Pacciarelli, D. (2016). An iterated greedy metaheuristic for the blocking job shop scheduling
problem. Journal of Heuristics, 22(4), 587–611. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10732-014-9279-5
Quintero-Araujo, C. L., Guimarans, D., & Juan, A. A. (2019). A simheuristic algorithm for the capacitated loca-
tion routing problem with stochastic demands. Journal of Simulation. https://doi.org/10.1080/17477778.
2019.1680262
Renna, P. (2009). A performance comparison between efﬁciency and pheromone approaches in dynamic
manufacturing scheduling. Intelligent Systems for Automated Learning and Adaptation: Emerging Trends
and Applications. https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-60566-798-0.CH012
Roshan, S., Jooibari, M., Teimouri, R., Asgharzadeh-Ahmadi, G., Falahati-Naghibi, M., & Sohrabpoor, H.
(2013). Optimization of friction stir welding process of AA7075 aluminum alloy to achieve desirable
mechanicalpropertiesusingANFISmodelsandsimulatedannealingalgorithm.TheInternationalJournal
of Advanced Manufacturing Technology. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-013-5131-6
Sel, Ç., & Hamzadayı, A. (2018). A simulated annealing approach based simulation-optimisation to the
dynamic job-shop scheduling problem. Pamukkale University Journal of Engineering Sciences, 24(4),
665–674. https://doi.org/10.5505/pajes.2017.47108
Shady, S., Kaihara, T., Fujii, N., & Kokuryo, D. (2021). Evolving dispatching rules using genetic program-
ming for multi-objective dynamic job shop scheduling with machine breakdowns. Procedia CIRP, 104,
411–416. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2021.11.069
Shahrabi,J.,Adibi,M.A.,&Mahootchi,M.(2017).Areinforcementlearningapproachtoparameterestimation
in dynamic job shop scheduling. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 110, 75–82.
Shahsavari-Pour, N., & Ghasemishabankareh, B. (2013). A novel hybrid meta-heuristic algorithm for solving
multi objective ﬂexible job shop scheduling. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 32(4), 771–780. https://
doi.org/10.1016/J.JMSY.2013.04.015
Smith, W. E. (1956). Various optimizers for single-stage production. Naval Research Logistics Quarterly,
3(1–2), 59–66. https://doi.org/10.1002/nav.3800030106
Subramaniam, V., & Raheja, A. S. (2003). mAOR: A heuristic-based reactive repair mechanism for job shop
schedules. International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 22(9–10), 669–680. https://
doi.org/10.1007/S00170-003-1601-6/FIGURES/8
Suwa, H., & Sandoh, H. (2007). Capability of cumulative delay based reactive scheduling for job shops with
machine breakdowns. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 53(1), 63–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CIE.
2007.04.002
Tamssaouet, K., Dauzère-Pérès, S., & Yugma, C. (2018). Metaheuristics for the job-shop scheduling problem
with machine availability constraints. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 125, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.cie.2018.08.008
Tjornfelt-Jensen, M., & Hansen, T. K. (1999). Robust solutions to job shop problems. In Proceedings of the
1999 Congress on Evolutionary Computation, CEC 1999, pp. 1138–1144. https://doi.org/10.1109/CEC.
1999.782551
Tunali, S., & Orhun, E. (1990). A knowledge-based production scheduling system. Proceedings of the IEEE
International Workshop on Intelligent Motion Control, IMC, 1990(2), 577–580. https://doi.org/10.1109/
IMC.1990.687384
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:801–833
833
Upasani, A., & Uzsoy, R. (2008). Integrating a decomposition procedure with problem reduction for factory
scheduling with disruptions: a simulation study. International Journal of Production Research, 46(21),
5883–5905. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207540601156215
Vinod, V., & Sridharan, R. (2011). Simulation modeling and analysis of due-date assignment methods and
scheduling decision rules in a dynamic job shop production system. International Journal of Production
Economics, 129(1), 127–146.
Wu, Z., Sun, S., & Yu, S. (2020). Optimizing makespan and stability risks in job shop scheduling. Computers
& Operations Research, 122, 104963. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COR.2020.104963
Xie, J., Li, X., Gao, L., & Gui, L. (2023). A new neighbourhood structure for job shop scheduling problems.
International Journal of Production Research, 61(7), 2147–2161. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.
2022.2060772
Yahyaoui, A., Fnaiech, N., & Fnaiech, F. (2009). New shifting method for job shop scheduling subject to
invariantconstraintsofresourcesavailability.InIECONProceedings(IndustrialElectronicsConference),
pp. 3387–3392. https://doi.org/10.1109/IECON.2009.5415368
Yamada, T., & Nakano, R. (1992). A genetic algorithm applicable to large-scale job-shop problems. In PPSN
(Vol. 2, pp. 281–290).
Yang, H. A., Lv, Y., Xia, C., Sun, S., & Wang, H. (2014). Optimal computing budget allocation for ordinal
optimization in solving stochastic job shop scheduling problems. Mathematical Problems in Engineering.
https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/619254
Zandieh, M., & Adibi, M. A. (2010). Dynamic job shop scheduling using variable neighbourhood
search. International Journal of Production Research, 48(8), 2449–2458. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00207540802662896
Zhang, C., Li, P., Guan, Z., & Rao, Y. (2007). A tabu search algorithm with a new neighborhood structure for
the job shop scheduling problem. Computers & Operations Research, 34(11), 3229–3242. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cor.2005.12.002
Zhang, G., Lu, X., Liu, X., Zhang, L., Wei, S., & Zhang, W. (2022). An effective two-stage algorithm based
on convolutional neural network for the bi-objective ﬂexible job shop scheduling problem with machine
breakdown. Expert Systems with Applications, 203, 117460. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2022.117460
Zhang, J., Ding, G., Zou, Y., Qin, S., & Fu, J. (2019). Review of job shop scheduling research and its new
perspectives under Industry 4.0. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, 30(4), 1809–1830. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10845-017-1350-2
Zhang, R., & Wu, C. (2011). An artiﬁcial bee colony algorithm for the job shop scheduling problem with
random processing times. Entropy, 13(9), 1708–1729. https://doi.org/10.3390/e13091708
Zhao, F., Hong, Y., Yu, D., Yang, Y., & Zhang, Q. (2010). A hybrid particle swarm optimisation algorithm
and fuzzy logic for process planning and production scheduling integration in holonic manufacturing
systems. International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 23(1), 20–39. https://doi.org/10.
1080/09511920903207472
Zhu, L., & Soh, Y. C. (1999). FMS job-shop scheduling under disruptions with consideration of time and
sequence deviation. In IEEE International Symposium on Intelligent Control-Proceedings, pp. 138–143.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ISIC.1999.796644
Zou,Z.,& Li,C.(2006).Integrated and events-oriented job shop scheduling. International Journal of Advanced
Manufacturing Technology, 29(5), 551–556. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-005-2537-9
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123