TITLE: Low carbon policy: a green agriculture supply chain perspective
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06762-x
---

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Received: 26 July 2024 / Accepted: 10 July 2025 / Published online: 15 September 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
Low carbon policy: a green agriculture supply chain 
perspective
Jiaxiang Zhu1 · Yangyan Shi2,3
 · Yong Wu4 · V. G. Venkatesh5
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06762-x
Abstract
With the growing emphasis on low-carbon agriculture and increased public awareness, 
controlling fertilizer use and methane emissions from farmland through low-carbon 
policies has become essential for promoting sustainable operations in China’s agri­
cultural product (AP) supply chain. This paper constructs a game-theoretic model to 
study the dynamics of low-carbon policies and their impact on supply chain perfor­
mance. The study reveals key findings: (i) Under carbon tax policies, the optimal order 
quantity in a centralized decision-making framework exceeds that of a decentralized 
framework, and carbon emission reductions by agricultural firms are higher in the cen­
tralized setting. (ii) Carbon trading does not always benefit green agricultural product 
planting firms. When the unit carbon trading price falls below a certain threshold, the 
income of both green and conventional agricultural product planting firms is inversely 
related to the unit carbon trading price. (iii) A revenue-sharing contract facilitates the 
coordinated development of the supply chain, enabling both agricultural planting firms 
and sellers to achieve a win–win outcome under mixed carbon policy constraints.This 
study enriches the body of research on low-carbon supply chain operations for agri­
cultural products, providing a theoretical foundation for decision-making by members 
of the green agricultural product supply chain under low-carbon policies. Additionally, 
it offers countermeasures, policy recommendations, and strategies for the development 
and governance of green agricultural product supply chains, serving as a reference for 
governments to craft more effective and targeted policies.
Keywords  Carbon emission reduction policies · Green agri-product supply chain · 
Coordination mechanism · Supply chain operation
1  Introduction
The Chinese government has accumulated extensive experience in coordinating and man­
aging low-carbon policies, including carbon tax and carbon trading mechanisms, through 
years of implementing carbon trading pilot programs and environmental tax policies. This 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
has established a robust foundation for the development of a comprehensive carbon trading 
market and the implementation of a stable environmental tax system in China. In the agri­
cultural product (AP) planting sector, the government enforces carbon tax policies on AP 
planting firms (PFs) to encourage the production of green APs. When agricultural product 
planting firms (APPFs) exceed specified emission limits, they are required to pay a carbon 
tax. With the establishment of a carbon trading market and low-carbon tax policies, carbon 
emission rights have effectively become a critical input resource for APPFs, fundamentally 
altering their profit models. As a result, APPFs must closely monitor their carbon emissions 
and adopt low-carbon operational strategies to align with the production of green APs.
These measures are vital for maintaining competitiveness and facilitating the transition 
toward sustainable agricultural practices. Green agricultural products (APs) are sustainable 
and health-conscious products produced "from land to dining table" following rigorous 
standards. The key distinctions between green APs and conventional APs are: (1) Green 
APs are subject to strict regulations regarding land production transformation, and (2) their 
production quantity must be controlled, requiring fixed plots and output (Meemken & Qaim, 
2018; Xiao et al., 2020). The marginal emission reduction costs for planting firms (PFs) 
vary due to differences in the reserves and capabilities of green and low-carbon technolo­
gies. Consequently, the marginal utility of low-carbon tax policies also differs across PFs. In 
practice, ordinary agricultural product planting firms (APPFs) often outsource their produc­
tion to green APPFs because they lack specialized low-carbon equipment and green tech­
nologies, making it challenging to implement effective carbon emission reduction measures. 
This outsourcing not only helps reduce the carbon emission and production costs for APPFs 
but also alleviates the financial burden associated with production expansion.
With the above in mind, this paper studies the operation and coordination mechanism 
of green AP supply chain (SC) under carbon trading policy. The research presented has 
great practical significance in the following three aspects. First, we construct game-theoretic 
model including centralized decision-making, decentralized decision-making, and analyze 
the impact of different carbon policies on the optimal pricing, demand, and profit of green 
APs and ordinary APs. Second, we further analyze supply-chain coordination mechanism 
under the revenue-sharing contract. Third, we conduct numerical analyses and offer some 
useful conclusions based on the numerical results.
In view of the significant impact of carbon emission reduction policy on low-carbon 
agricultural strategy and AP SC decision, this paper focuses on how carbon tax and carbon 
trading policy affect the pricing decision of green AP SC. This research explores following 
questions: What are the important factors affecting the pricing decision of APs SC? How 
do these factors influence the decision-making behavior of both sides under the centralized 
and decentralized mode? How to construct a game decision model to provide a theoretical 
insights of low-carbon APs SC coordination? How to formulate policies and countermea­
sure systems conducive to green and low-carbon agricultural products?
To address these questions, we propose a game theory model to examine the impact of 
two carbon emission reduction policies on the pricing decisions for low-carbon agricultural 
products (APs). In our model, the carbon tax rate and carbon emission reduction subsidies 
introduced by the government to encourage carbon reduction efforts are treated as exog­
enous variables. We assume strict enforcement of low-carbon policies by the government, 
with severe penalties for non-compliance, ensuring that all AP supply chain (SC) companies 
adhere to the regulations. The model incorporates the operational decisions of the supply 
1 3
288

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
chain under both carbon reduction policies and analyzes how these policies influence SC 
performance. Furthermore, we compare the effects of the two policies and identify their 
respective impacts. The results indicate that combining the two policies to formulate more 
detailed carbon reduction measures can create an incentive and constraint compatibility 
mechanism. Addressing these issues enables a deeper understanding of the characteristics 
of low-carbon agriculture, clarifies the internal logic driving the development of green AP 
supply chains, and strengthens governance. It also helps optimize the structural layout of 
low-carbon agriculture, promotes the transformation and upgrading of traditional agricul­
ture, and uncovers the "key" to developing green AP supply chains. Ultimately, these efforts 
enhance the resilience and support the high-quality development of low-carbon AP supply 
chains.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 is a literature review. Section 3 is the prob­
lem description and Assumptions. Section 4 is modeling under different carbon emission 
reduction policies. Section 5 is AP SC coordination under mixed carbon policy. Section 6 is 
a numerical analysis. Section 7 concludes the paper.
2  Literature review
The research on the issue of green agricultural supply chain mainly follows three main lines 
(see Table 1 for details). We will discuss the related literature in three parts: (1) operation 
mode of green AP SC; (2) coordination mechanism of green AP SC; and (3) the impact of 
low carbon tax policy on AP SC.
2.1  Operation mode of green AP supply chain
Scholars believe that recycling subsidies can affect the coordination policies between plant­
ing firms and the platform in non-cooperative situations (Ren et al., 2020; Wang et al., 
2022). The widespread phenomenon of loss in the long-distance transportation of fresh AP, 
resulting in the business model adopted between upstream and downstream firms has a 
Main line 1:operation 
mode of green AP SC
Main line 2: coordi­
nation mechanism of 
green AP SC
Main line 3: the 
impact of low 
carbon tax policy 
on AP SC
Diabat et al. (2013)
Zhang et al. (2014)
Kristianto and Helo 
(2015)
Sun et al. (2018)
Ren et al. (2020)
Feng et al. (2020)
Wang et al. (2022)
Besik et al. (2023)
Do et al. (2023)
Yang and Yao (2023)
Xu et al. (2023)
Zhou al. (2023)
Li et al. (2024)
Lu et al. (2024)
Xia et al. (2020)
Qin et al. (2021)
Khan and Ponce 
(2021)
Singh et al. (2021)
Zhao et al. (2022)
Zhang et al. (2022)
Yang et al. (2023)
Cao and Nan (2023)
Hezarkhani et al. 
(2023)
Do et al. (2023)
Jiang et al. (2024)
Heeß et al. (2024)
Wang et al. (2019)
Cheng et al. 
(2019)
Guo et al. (2020)
Wang et al. (2021)
Liu et al., (2022)
Ventura et al. 
(2022)
Sharam et al. 
(2023)
Waqas et al. 
(2023)
Li et al. (2024)
Shi et al. (2024)
Li et al. (2024)
Table 1  Summary of the research 
on green agricultural supply 
chain issues
 
1 3
289

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
significant impact on their SC decision and operation (Feng et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2018). 
Some scholars studied on the operation mode of green AP SC (Yang & Yao, 2023; Xu et 
al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024; lu et al., 2024). Some scholars discussed the 
operation mode of the green SC of AP under the e-commerce environment, and presented 
suggestions from three aspects: establishing and improving the relevant system, improving 
the norms and guarantee of the government in providing the legal system, and establishing a 
network information system platform to support the green SC (Zhang, 2014; Do et al.,2023; 
Besik et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2022). Some scholars studied practical operation mode in 
e-waste recycling inverse logistics on the basis of analyzing the relevant concept and con­
notation of inverse logistics and green SC. To sum up, the relevant research mainly focuses 
on the discussion of the SC operation mode, with less research related to the operation mode 
of AP SC, and even less research related to the operation mode of green AP SC.
2.2  Coordination mechanism of green agri-products SC
This study is related to coordination mechanism of green AP SC. Some scholars studied 
fresh AP SC coordination problem and analyzed the impact of sellers’ fair preference on 
the level of bilateral preservation efforts and SC coordination in the fresh AP SC (Qin et 
al., 2021; Singh et al., 2021; Heeß et al.,2024). Some scholars have paid particular attention 
to green SC practices and carbon emissions with sustainability performance (Cao & Nan, 
2023; Jiang et al., 2024; Khan & Ponce, 2021; Zhang et al., 2022). Some scholars discussed 
the green SC management practices under the impact of COVID-19 and geopolitical emer­
gencies (Hezarkhani et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2022). Compare with the 
previous studies, our study introduces the impact of carbon trading policy on green AP SC 
and studies its coordination mechanism. Our study differs from previous studies by: (1) 
Previous studies have less considered operation mode of green AP SC and environmental 
awareness to reduce carbon emissions, and there is a lack of research on which mode to 
achieve the optimal overall performance of AP SC; (2) Previous studies have less consid­
ered the impact of low carbon tax policy on the optimal pricing, demand, unit planting cost 
and profit of green AP SC.
2.3  The impact of low carbon tax policy on AP SC
Thirdly, our study is related to the impact of low carbon tax policy on AP SC. Several fac­
tors affect the low-carbon operation of the green AP SC. The first factor is that low-carbon 
emission subsidy policy has become an important driving force to promote the low-carbon 
operation of green AP (Cheng et al., 2019; Guo et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2022; Waqas et al., 
2023). Due to the constraints of low-carbon emission subsidy policies, all members of the 
green AP SC will carry out their operational decisions to maximize their own profit, and 
may also improve their profits through low carbon emission measures (Wang et al., 2019; 
Ventura et al., 2022; Li et al., 2024). The decisions of AP SC members will also change 
when considering the carbon emission behavior of different SC members (Guo et al., 2020; 
Hezarkhani et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2024). Wang et al. (2021) analyzed the impact of planting 
firms’ behavioral selection on the reference carbon emissions, carbon emissions and pricing 
strategies, and the profits of both parties.
1 3
290

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
2.4  Methodology of low-carbon supply chain coordination
Relevant studies at home and abroad can be divided into three categories as follows: In 
the first set, supply chain operations of carbon emission constraints or carbon emission 
rights trading. Among them, some scholars have studied the site selection of multi-stage and 
multi-product enterprises under the carbon emission trading mechanism, and analyzed the 
impact of carbon trading price on the cost and supply chain structure (Diabat et al., 2013; 
Jabcr et al., 2013; Zou et al., 2024). Some scholars have introduced carbon rights trading 
into supply chain management, believing that compared with other government punitive 
measures, carbon rights trading mechanism is more effective, easier to implement and can 
significantly save public resources (Du et al., 2011; Mahato et al.,2024). The second cat­
egory includes game theory studies to introduce carbon tax into supply chain coordination 
decisions. Among them, some scholars believe that carbon tax policy is more efficient than 
carbon trading policy, more complete in the implementation process, while carbon trading 
policy has flexibility in the price (Metcalf, 2009; Xie et al., 2015; Feng et al., 2022). Some 
scholars have analyzed the impact of carbon tax and consumer environmental awareness on 
unit carbon emission of manufacturers and profits of supply chain members under the two 
channel structures (Xiong et al., 2014; Tang et al., 2023). The last category include works 
focused on planning method adopted to include carbon trading and carbon tax into the sup­
ply chain cost minimization model. Among them, some scholars included carbon tax in the 
cost minimization planning model considering carbon emission quota in the form of fixed 
tax rate, and extended the model to the coordination mechanism of N decision enterprises 
(Benjaafar et al., 2010; Yong et al., 2024). Scholars have studied the impact of low-carbon 
policies on the two-stage supply chain coordination, and considered four scenarios: the basic 
model, carbon emission model, carbon trading model and carbon tax model, and believed 
that carbon trading policies are more effective in encouraging carbon emission reduction in 
the supply chain (Yang et al., 2014; Zhu & Ma,2023). Some researchers explored how to 
choose the supply chain transportation mode under the two carbon regulatory policies of 
carbon tax and carbon trading, and believe that carbon emission fee only account for a small 
part of the total transportation cost, and carbon tax or carbon trading mechanism has little 
impact on the transportation mode (Hoen et al., 2014; Xiao et al., 2022).
Current research on mixed carbon policy is relatively few, most of the literature discusses 
a single carbon policy, and discuss the mixed carbon policy of green AP SC constraints 
more practical, this paper also considers the influence of a single carbon policy and mixed 
carbon policy constraints, the two-dimensional factors to three dimensional factors, through 
constructing a game model to discuss a single policy and mixed policy under the optimal 
policy. In this case, the revenue sharing contract is used to coordinate the SC of green APs, 
so as to achieve win–win profit and environment and the overall optimization of the SC.
3  Model definitions and assumptions
3.1  Model description
This paper considers a green AP SC composed of ordinary APPFs, green APPFs and sell­
ers. In this model, the production of both green APs and ordinary APs is limited by the 
1 3
291

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
government’s carbon emission permits. Ordinary APPFs not only produce ordinary APs, 
but also produce green APs through outsourcing. Therefore, an ordinary APPF’s income 
includes three parts: the profit of selling ordinary APs, the profit of selling green APs, and 
the purchase expenses of carbon trading rights or government subsidy for carbon emission 
reduction. In a decentralized decision-making mode, the SC participants pursue their own 
profit maximization. Since ordinary APPFs lack proprietary equipment and technology, they 
outsource their green AP production to green APPFs. This makes green APPFs the dominant 
player in the game, whose decision-making unit could determine prices of green APs. Both 
green and ordinary APs are sold to the sellers by ordinary APPFs at wholesale prices. There­
fore, the decision variables are the wholesale prices of the two APs and the sellers decide the 
retail prices. The basic logical framework of this paper is shown in Fig. 1.
3.2  Model symbols and definitions
Model symbols and definitions used in this study are shown in Table 2.
3.3  Assumptions
Assumption 1  Members of the AP SC are risk-neutral rational economic people, each seek­
ing to maximize their own interests.
Assumption 2  The R&D cost of carbon emission reduction refers to the cost input of a PF 
to the technology research and development and introduction to reduce the carbon dioxide 
emissions of APs in their life cycle. Assuming that the R&D cost function of carbon emis­
sion reduction for a PF i is ci = σ(∆ei)2
2
, i = G, O. ∆ei is the unit carbon emission reduc­
Fig.1  The basic logical framework
 
1 3
292

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
tion of the PF i (Xia et al., 2020), σ is the carbon emission reduction effort factor, the larger 
σ is, the more R&D cost will be required for the same amount of carbon reduction.
Assumption 3  The government implements two kinds of low carbon policies: carbon tax 
policy and carbon trading policy and punishs firms that do not implement carbon policies or 
emit too much carbon, and the punishment is infinite (Xu et al., 2023). Therefore, there will 
be no SC firms that do not implement low-carbon policies.
Table 2  Model symbols and definitions
Symbols
Definitions
Firms in AP SC, i = G, O
G
Green APPFs
O
Ordinary APPFs
σ
The profit-sharing ratio obtained by the seller under supply chain coordination 
mechanism of APs. The profit share ratio obtained by the PF is (1 −σ)(%)
ei
Initial carbon emissions per unit of APs from a supply chain firm(MMT)
∆ei
Carbon emission reduction per unit of APs from a supply chain firm (MMT)
λi
Government subsidy rate for carbon emission reduction of supply chain firms (%)
ξ
The government’s tax rate on carbon emissions from AP SC firms (%)
ki
The effort of emission reduction coefficient of AP SC firms (kg / sq.m)
ci
The cost of emission reduction in AP SC firms(CNY)
α
Price sensitive coefficient of APs
Pe
The cost of government subsidy emission reduction efforts(CNY)
TX
The decentralized decision-making model under carbon tax policy
TY
The centralized decision-making mode under carbon tax policy
NX
The decentralized decision-making model under carbon trading policy
NY
The centralized decision-making model under carbon trading policy
XY
The decision-making model under hybrid carbon policy
βl
The unit production cost of entrusted planting of green APs under model , where 
l ∈{TX, TY, NX, NY, XY}(CNY)
E
The amount of carbon emission permits granted by the government
s (i)
All the alliance in set I contains member 
γ
The degree of consumer preference for APs, where 0 < γ < 1
s
The alliance composed of some players in the multiplayer game, s ⊆I
I
The collection of all players in green AP SC game, I = {1, 2, .., n}
eG, eo
The unit environment effect of producing green and ordinary APs: eG < eo
wG, wo
Wholesale unit prices for green and ordinary APs (CNY)
qG, qo
Sales volumes of green and ordinary APs (kg)
pG, pO
The unit retail prices of green and ordinary APs (CNY)
πTXG
The profit from PFs of green APs (CNY)
πTXO
The profit from PFs of ordinary APs (CNY)
πTGS
The profit from sellers of green APs(CNY)
πTXS
The profit from sellers of ordinary APs(CNY)
πTY
The total profit of AP SC under the centralized decision-making(CNY)
πTX
The total profit of AP SC under the decentralized decision-making (CNY)
1 3
293

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
Assumption 4  The corresponding carbon tax rate and carbon emission reduction subsidy 
seted by the government according to the social emission reduction target and the emission 
reduction situation of the firms, which is an exogenous variable (Jiang et al., 2024).
Assumption 5  The profit parameters of the green AP SC system are non-negative to ensure 
that the SC members are profitable in the unit products.
Assumption 6  Consumers have a preference for green APs, and the market potential for the 
products decreases with the increase of the price. The inverse function is obtained from the 
demand function, and the price is expressed as a function of the demand quantity, which is 
the inverse demand function. So we let the inverse requirement function:p = D −αq + γ, 
α ≥0, γ ≥0, p ≥0. Where,D represents the total market potential for the APs,q is the 
number of orders,α represents the price-sensitive coefficient of market potential,γ repre­
sents the degree of consumer preference for APs.
4  Modeling under different carbon emission reduction policies
4.1  Decision-making mode under carbon tax policy
4.1.1  Centralized decision-making mode under carbon tax policy
When AP SC firms adopt centralized decision-making (CDM), PFs and sellers can access 
all information across the SC, as if they are two departments of one company. As such, the 
whole AP SC can be viewed as one firm. The government sets the corresponding carbon 
tax rate according to the market environment, the emission reduction target of the SC firms 
and the verification of their emission reduction situation, and makes the decision planning 
on the basis of the carbon tax rate and the determined government emission reduction sub­
sidy. Decision benefit functions of green APs and ordinary APs such as Eq. (1), Eq. (2) and 
Eq. (3).
 
πTYG = [βTY −cG −(eG −∆eG) ξ] qTYG −(1 −λG) cG
(1)
 
πTYO = [pTYO −βTY −(eO −∆eO) ξ] qTYO −(1 −λO) cO
(2)
 
πTYS = (pTYG −wTYG) qTYG + (pTYO −wTYO) qTYO
(3)
Equation (1) represents the profit of green APPFs. Expand Eq. (1), we get Eq. (4):
 
πTYG = (βTY −cG) qTYG −(eG −∆eG) ξqTYG −(1 −λG) cG
(4)
where (βTX −cG) qTXG in Eq. (4) represents the income obtained by the green APPFs 
entrusted by the production of green APs, and (eG −∆eG) ξqTYG represents a carbon tax 
that PFs pay to produce green produce. (1 −λG) cG represents the emission-reduction cost 
of green APs. Equation (2) represents the profit of the PF to produce ordinary APs. Equa­
1 3
294

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
tion (3) represents the profit of the seller from selling the two APs to consumers. The overall 
profit of the APs SC is shown in Eq. (5):
 
πTY = (βTY −cG) qTYG + (pTYO −βTY) qTYO
−[(1 −λG) cG + (1 −λO) cO] −(eG −∆eG + eO −∆eO) ξ
(5)
We obtain Eq. (6) by adding the emission reduction cost function and inverse demand func­
tion into Eq. (5):
 
πTY = (D + γ −αqTYG −cG) qTYG + (D −αqTYO + γ −cO) qTYO
−
[1
2 (1 −λG) kG (∆eG)2 + 1
2 (1 −λO) kO (∆eO)2
]
−(eG −∆eG) ξqTYG −(+eO −∆eO) ξqTYO

(6)
Solving the partial derivative of Eq. (6) about qTYG,qTYO,∆eG,∆eO, the optimal decisions 
(q∗
TYG, q∗
TYO, ∆∗
eG1, ∆∗
eO1) can be obtained as shown in Table 3.
4.1.2  Decentralized decision-making mode under carbon tax policy
When AP SC firms adopt decentralized decision-making (DDM), both PFs and sellers maxi­
mize their own interests when making decisions. The carbon emissions of firms in the SC 
of APs are determined by the carbon tax rate set by the government, and directly affect the 
profits of firms. The PF determines the carbon emission reduction of the unit product, and 
the seller determines its own carbon emission reduction and product order volume accord­
ing to the decision planning of the planting firm. Reverse induction is used to solve the game 
decision model and analyze it. The dispersed decision profit functions of green APs and 
ordinary APs under the carbon trading policy are Eq. (7) and Eq. (8) respectively.
 
πTXG = [βTX −cG −(eG −∆eG) ξ] qTXG −1
2 (1 −λG) kG (∆eG)2
(7)
 πTXO = [D + γ −αqTXG −βTX + τ] qTXO −1
2 (1 −λO) kO (∆eO)2 −(eO −∆eO) ξqTXO
(8)
The profit of the seller from selling the two APs is shown in Eq. (9).
 
πTXS = (pTXG −wTXG) qTXG + (pTXO −wTXO) qTXO
(9)
The overall profit of the APs SC under the carbon tax policy is shown in Eq. (10).
Table 3  The optimal solutions in CDM modes under carbon tax policy
Symbol
TY
q∗
TYG
kG(1−λG)[D+γ−cG−ξeG]
2αkG(1−λG)−ξ2kG(1−λG)
q∗
TYO
kO(1−λO)[D+γ−cO−ξeO]
2αkO(1−λO)−ξ2kO(1−λO)
∆∗
eG1
kO(1−λO)[D+γ−cG−ξ(eG+eO)]ξ
2αkG(1−λG)kO(1−λO)−ξ2kG(1−λG)−ξ2kO(1−λO)
∆∗
eO1
kG(1−λG)[D+γ−cO−ξ(eG+eO)]ξ
2αkG(1−λG)kO(1−λO)−ξ2kG(1−λG)−ξ2kO(1−λO)
1 3
295

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
 
πTX = [D + γ −αqT XG −βTX] qTXO −[βTX −cG −(eG −∆eG) ξ] qTXG
−1
2
[
(1 −λG) kG (∆eG)2 + (1 −λO) kO (∆eO)2]
−(eO −∆eO) ξqTXO
 (10)
Solving the partial derivatives of Eq. (10) about qTXG, qTXO, ∆eG, ∆eO, the optimal deci­
sions (q∗
TXG, q∗
TXO, ∆∗
eG, ∆∗
eO) can be obtained in Table 4.
The results of CDM and DDM model under the carbon tax policy can be concluded as 
follows.
Conclusion 1  The optimal order quantity under CDM is larger than the optimal order quan­
tity under DDM, i.e. q∗
TYG > q∗
TXG,q∗
TYO > q∗
TXO.
The proof of Conclusion 1 is given in the Appendix.
Conclusion 2  If ∆∗
eG1, ∆∗
eG2 represents the carbon emission reduction of green APPFs 
under CDM and DDM, respectively, ∆∗
eO1, ∆∗
eO2 represents the carbon emission reduction 
of ordinary APPFs under CDM and DDM, then the carbon emission reduction of both firms 
is higher than that of the DDM under the DDM i.e.∆∗
eG1 > ∆∗
eG2,∆∗
eO1 > ∆∗
eO2.
The proof of Conclusion 2 is given in the appendix.
4.1.2.1  Management insight  Under the constraint of carbon tax policy, all the information 
of the planting firm and the seller is transparent to both parties under the centralized deci­
sion-making, which can be regarded as two departments of one firm, so the whole AP SC 
can be regarded as one firm, and there is no intermediate price difference in the production 
and sales process of APs. At this point, the planting firm and the seller have their common 
decision goal. However, when the agricultural product SC enterprise makes decentralized 
decisions, both sides of the enterprise only consider their own interests to make decisions 
and planning. The planting firm sells the APs to the seller at a wholesale price that is higher 
than the cost. At this time, the ordering cost of the seller is higher than the cost under 
CDM. As a result, the seller will raise the price of APs to ensure their own profits, which 
in turn will result in consumers choosing to buy less or giving up the product due to the 
price increase. In the meaning time, companies still have to pay carbon taxes, which further 
reduce the profits. Therefore, to achieve good profits, the carbon emission reduction of both 
sides of the enterprise is higher than that of the CDM. Therefore, it can be seen that the 
seller can further increase the order quantity of green APs and ordinary APs by increasing 
Table 4  The optimal solutions in DDM modes under carbon tax policy
Symbol
TX
q∗
TXG
kG(1−λG)[D+γ−cG−ξeG]
4αkG(1−λG)−2ξ2kG(1−λG)
q∗
TXO
kO(1−λO)[D+γ−cO−ξeO]
4αkO(1−λO)−2ξ2kO(1−λO)
∆∗
eG2
kO(1−λO)[D+γ−cG−ξ(eG+eO)]ξ
4αkG(1−λG)kO(1−λO)−ξ2[2kG(1−λG)+kO(1−λO)]
∆∗
eO2
kG(1−λG)[D+γ−cO−ξ(eG+eO)]ξ
4αkG(1−λG)kO(1−λO)−ξ2[2kG(1−λG)+kO(1−λO)]
1 3
296

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
carbon emission reduction in urgent decisions, so as to ensure that their own interests will 
not reduce carbon emission reduction.
4.2  Decision-making mode under carbon trading policy
4.2.1  CDM mode under carbon trading policy
 πTY = (pTYG −cG) qTYG + (pTYO −cO) qTYO −(eGqTYG −E) pe −(eOqTYO −E) pe (11)
In Eq. (11), the objective function of CDM is to maximize the overall profits of the AP SC, 
where (pTYG −cG) qTYG + (pTYO −cO) qTYO represents the profits from the production 
and sale of two APs throughout the SC; −(eGqTYG −E) pe −(eOqTYO −E) pe repre­
sents carbon trading gains across the entire SC.
4.2.2  DDM mode under carbon trading policy
 
πTXG = (βTX −cG) qTXG −(eGqTXG −E) pe
(12)
 
πTXO = (wTXG −βTX) qTXG + (wTXG −cO) qTXO −(eOqTXO −E) pe
(13)
 
πTXS = (pTXG −wTXG) qTXG + (pTXO −wTXO) qTXO
(14)
Equation (12) represents the profit of green APPFs, where (βTX −cG) qTXG in Eq. (l2) 
represents the income obtained by the green APPFs, and (eGqTXG −E) pe represents the 
cost of carbon trading expenses; eGqTXG < E represents carbon emissions from produc­
ing APs are less than the licensing limits set by the government. Equation (13) represents 
the profit of ordinary APPFs, (wTXG −βTX) qTXG + (wTXG −cO) qTXO in Eq.  (13) 
represents the income that ordinary APPFs get from selling both products to the sellers, 
and (eGqTXG −E) pe represents the cost of carbon trading expenses for ordinary APPFs; 
Eq. (14) represents the profit of the seller from selling two APs to consumers.
4.2.3  Model solution and analysis under carbon trading policy
Conclusion 3  The relationship between carbon trading and the optimal value is:
(1) ∂β∗
T
∂pe > 0, ∂w∗
T G
∂pe
> 0, ∂w∗
T O
∂pe
> 0;
(2) ∂p∗
TXG
∂pe
> 0, ∂p∗
TXO
∂pe
< 0, ∂p∗
TYG
∂pe
> 0, ∂p∗
TYO
∂pe
< 0.
The proof of Conclusion 3 is given in the Appendix.
By Conclusion 3, when the government implement carbon trading policy under the two 
decision modes, unit green APs commissioned production price, the two products wholesale 
prices and retail prices are positively correlated with carbon trading price. This is similar to 
Chai et al. (2018), which studied that the PFs to offset carbon emissions costs by raising the 
1 3
297

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
retail price of the two APs. The main reason for this phenomenon is when the government 
implements carbon trading policy, the planting cost of the two PFs increases, green PFs 
make up for the increased production cost; the entrusted planting price of unit green APs 
indirectly increases the wholesale price and retail price, which means that consumers will 
bear a part of the carbon trading costs, consumers reduce the motivation to buy ordinary 
APs, the sales of green APs will increase due to market competition.The Optimal solutions 
in both CDM and DDM modes can be obtained as shown in Table 5.
The profit of the green SC participants reaches a minimum at a certain value under both 
decision modes. When carbon trading price (carbon tax policy) is less than this value, it is 
negatively correlated with the profit, and when carbon tax policy is greater than this value, 
it is positively correlated with the profit. The reason for this is that as the price of carbon 
trading increases, the cost of APPFs increases, but the carbon emission license is also a 
resource under carbon trading, and the two APPFs can make profits in the market by selling 
the remaining carbon emission rights. When carbon tax policy is less than a certain thresh­
old, the carbon trading cost is greater than the profit obtained from selling the remaining 
carbon emission rights, thus reducing the profits of the two APPFs. When carbon tax policy 
is greater than a certain threshold, the green APPFs are encouraged to obtain market com­
petitive advantage, and the investment scale is rising and the marginal cost is decreasing. 
At this time, the carbon trading cost is less than the profit of selling the remaining carbon 
emission right, and the profits of green APPFs increase under green agricultural outsourc­
ing, ordinary APPFs and sellers do not lower prices to attract consumers. When consumers 
realize that the price will not decrease, the profits of ordinary APPFs and sellers increase. 
When carbon trading is too expensive, APPFs often make profits by selling their remaining 
carbon permits.
4.2.3.1  Management insight  The government’s carbon trading policy will have an impact 
on the green APs SC under the two decision-making modes. Only reasonable carbon pricing 
can guide the rational allocation of resources. The government can increase the profits of 
participants in the green APs SC by setting appropriate carbon trading prices, while APPFs 
should focus on improving their emission reduction capacity to adapt to market develop­
ment and gain competitive advantages.
Conclusion 4  The effect of carbon trading on the unit retail price of both products is as 
follows:
(1) If pe < γ−cO
eO , then p∗
TXO > p∗
TYO; otherwise p∗
TXO ≤p∗
TYO;
Table 5  The optimal solutions in both CDM and DDM modes
Symbol
NX
NY
π∗
TXG
(1−cG−eGpe+cO−γ+eOpe)2
16(1−γ)
+ Epe
π∗
TXO
(1−cG−eGpe+cO−γ+eOpe)2
32(1−γ)
+ (γ−cO−eOpe)2
8γ
+ Epe
π∗
TXS
(1−cG−eGpe+cO−γ+eOpe)2
64(1−γ)
+ (γ−cO−eOpe)2
16γ
π∗
TY
(1−cG−eGpe+cO−γ+eOpe)2
4(1−γ)
+ (γ−cO−eOpe)2
4γ
+ 2Epe
1 3
298

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
(2) If pe < eO−γ+ξ(1−cG)
ξeG−eO
, then p∗
TXG > p∗
TYG; otherwise p∗
TXG ≤p∗
TYG.
The proof of Conclusion 4 is provided in the Appendix. Conclusion 4 shows that when the 
carbon emissions of the two APs and carbon tax policy is less than a certain threshold value, 
the retail price of the two APs under DDM is greater than CDM. The main reason is that 
when the government’s tax rate on carbon emissions is small, ordinary APPFs and the sell­
ers tend to transfer the carbon trading cost to consumers by raising the wholesale and retail 
prices of both APs, because the increased cost of carbon trading is greater than the profit of 
carbon emission trading.
The increase of unit retail prices of the two APs is related to the impact ratio of the two 
APs on the environment and the degree of market competition. Compared to CDM model, 
the two APPFs pursue self-benefit maximization, the market is much more competitive, 
retail prices of the two APs rise even more sharply under DDM. When the environmental 
effects of the two APs are relatively small, the utility difference between the two APs to 
consumers is small, consumers tend to buy regular agricultural produce, green APPFs have 
less incentive to reduce, the sellers tend to increase the price of green APs more significantly 
to promote the sales of ordinary APs.
4.2.3.2  Management insight  The environmental impact ratio of ordinary APs and green 
APs is the key to affect the market competition. When the environmental impact of the two 
APs is relatively small, the government should reasonably set carbon trading prices and 
increase the publicity and subsidies for green APs, so as to enhance the emission reduction 
motivation of green APPFs and the enthusiasm of consumers to buy green APs.
Conclusion 5  The impact of carbon trading on the demand of the two APs is as follows:
(1) If pe < λ, then q∗
TXO < q∗
TYO, otherwise q∗
TXO ≥q∗
TYO;
(2) If pe < λ, then q∗
TXG < q∗
TYG, otherwise q∗
TXG ≥q∗
TYG.
The proof of Conclusion 5 is given in the Appendix. Conclusion 5 shows that when carbon 
tax policy is less than a certain threshold, the sales volume of the two APs under DDM is 
less than CDM, that is, the reduced sales volume of ordinary APs due to carbon trading is 
greater than CDM mode, and the increased sales volume of green APs due to carbon trading 
is less than CDM mode. The main reasons for this phenomenon are as follows:
According to Conclusion 5, when carbon tax policy is small, under DDM mode, the unit 
retail price of the two APs is large, which reduces the enthusiasm of consumers to buy the 
two APs, and the sales volume of the two APs is small. When carbon tax policy is large, the 
increased carbon trading cost is less than the profit obtained from selling the carbon emis­
sion right, which encourages the green APPFs to conduct low-carbon emission reduction. 
Under DDM mode, PFs pursues their own profit maximization, the motivation of carbon 
emission reduction is greater than CDM mode, and the sales volume of green APs and ordi­
nary APs is large.
Conclusion 6  The impact of carbon trading on the two decision-making modes is as follows:
1 3
299

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
 
π∗
TXG + π∗
TXO + π∗
TXS < π∗
TY
The proof of Conclusion 6 is given in the Appendix. Conclusion 6 shows that the total profit 
of green APs SC is large under CDM, which is because the goal of the sellers and planting 
firms is to pursue their own profit maximization, leading to the loss of marginal profit of 
green APs SC and reducing the overall profit of green APs SC, which is not conducive to 
the coordination of green APs SC.
4.2.3.3  Management insights  Carbon tax policy and the environmental impact ratio of two 
APs will affect the market competitiveness of different decision modes. If the decentralized 
decision member pursues their profit maximization, it may lead to double marginal effect. 
It will be aggravated when carbon tax policy and the environmental impact ratio of the two 
APs meet certain conditions. Therefore, when the environmental impact ratio and carbon 
trading price of the two APs are small, the green APs SC participants should focus on the 
cooperation between the parties to coordinate the profits of the SC. The ultimate purpose of 
the government’s carbon trading policy is to reduce the adverse impact of chemical fertil­
izers and pesticides on the environment in the planting process. Therefore, it is necessary 
to analyze the impact of the government’s carbon trading policy on the environment. To 
facilitate the discussion, Let ei = eGqi∗
G + eOqi∗
O , i ∈{NX,NY,TX,TY}.
Conclusion 7  Comparative analysis of carbon trading on environmental impact is as follows:
(1) eTX < eNX, eTY < eNY.
(2) If pe < ε, then eTX < eTY; otherwise eTX ≥eTY.
The proof of Conclusion 7 is given in the Appendix. Conclusion 7 shows that carbon trading 
policy will reduce the environmental impact of two APs. Conclusion 7 shows that the sales 
volume of the two APs in DDM mode is less than CDM mode, and therefore, the two APs 
in DDM have less impact on the environment when carbon tax policy is small. Consumer 
surplus refers to the difference between the consumer’s willingness to pay and the actual 
payment, which is the surplus obtained by the consumer from the purchased product. The 
consumer surplus measures the additional income subjectively perceived by the consumer. 
In Liu et al. (2018), the consumer surplus expression is as follows:
 
Si = (q∗
G + γq∗
O) + γ (1 −γ) q∗2
O
2
Conclusion 8  Comparative analysis of the impact of carbon trading on consumer surplus is 
as follows:
(1) If pe > max (η, φ), then SNX < STX, SNY < STY;
(2) if pe < min (λ, γ), then STX < SNY.
The proof of Conclusion 8 is given in the Appendix.
1 3
300

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
Conclusion 8 shows that the carbon trading policy can effectively improve the consumer 
surplus when carbon tax policy is large. The main reason is that consumer surplus is a func­
tion of the sales volume of the two APs. According to the previous conclusion, under the two 
decision-making mode, carbon trading policy increases green APs sales, reduces ordinary 
APs sales. When carbon tax policy is larger, green APPFs’ carbon reduction motivation is 
larger, due to the increase of green APs sales increase in consumer surplus, eventually car­
bon trading policy make consumer surplus increase. When carbon tax policy is less than a 
certain threshold, the sales volume of the two APs in DDM mode is small, and the consumer 
surplus in DDM mode is small.
4.2.3.4  Management insights  Compared to the similar subject study literature (Waqas et al., 
2023), carbon trading is not always favorable to green APPFs. In the two decision mode, when 
carbon trading price is greater than a threshold, the implementation of carbon trading policy 
will effectively reduce carbon emissions in the process of APs planting and increase consumer 
surplus, when carbon trading price is less than a threshold, compared with CDM, decentral­
ized reduce the impact of two kinds of APs planting on the environment and reduce consumer 
surplus. Combined with the previous analysis, DDM mode will reduce the green APs SC over­
all profits, therefore, the planting firms should pay attention to the coordination between green 
APs SC, the government should take appropriate carbon trading price and timely subsidies 
for green APs planting firms, promote green APPFs positive emissions, reduce concentrated 
decision-making mode of two kinds of APs planting impact on the environment.
5  APs SC coordination under mixed carbon policy
5.1  APs SC coordination mechanism
Mixed carbon policy is to introduce two environmental policies of carbon tax and carbon 
emission right trading into the market at the same time, while carbon trading policy is the 
trading of carbon emission licensing rights of SC enterprises under the government’s restric­
tions on environmental resources. As a mixed carbon policy, carbon tax-carbon trading plays 
a coordinated role from both horizontal and vertical directions to restrain SC enterprises and 
regulate the market. The mixed carbon policy relies on the carbon trading market, and the 
carbon tax policy is implemented at the same time. Through the government regulation and 
market trading, the emission reduction target is effectively achieved under the combination 
of incentive and regulation. The optimal decision amount of both firms under decentralized 
decision is less than the centralized decision, so that the overall benefit of APs SC under 
decentralized decision is low. Decentralized decision leads to the overall loss of APs SC, 
so it is necessary to sign a scientific and reasonable contract to make the APs SC overall 
coordination and win–win. The revenue-sharing contract is that the planting firms sells two 
APs to the sellers at the wholesale price in the sales stage, and the wholesale price is lower 
than the cost. At this time, the seller will return its profits to the planting firms in a certain 
proportion to make up for the loss of the planting firms, so that the profit level of both sides 
is always in the best state, and the SC of APs can develop in the best condition. The propor­
tion of the planting firms is (1 −σ), and the proportion of the sellers is σ.
1 3
301

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
5.2  SC coordination decision-making based on revenue-sharing
The reverse induction method is used in two stages, first discussing the optimal decision 
under a given revenue sharing contract (w, σ), and then discussing setting the optimal coor­
dination parameters. For the benefit-sharing contract (wG, σ), the profit function of the 
seller selling green APs is shown in Eq. (15).
 
πXYG = σ [pGqG −(1 −λG) cG −(eG −∆eG) ξqG + peeG] −wGqG
(15)
For the benefit-sharing contract (wG, σ), the profit function of the seller selling green APs 
is shown in Eq. (16).
 
πXYO = σ [pOqO −(1 −λO) cO −(eO −∆eO) ξqO + peeO] −wOqO
(16)
The total profit from selling these two APs is shown in Eq. (17).
 
πXYS = σ [pGqG + pOqO −(1 −λG) cG −(1 −λO) cO −(eG −∆eG) ξqG −(eO −∆eO) ξqO]
+ pe (eG + eo) σ −(wGqG + wOqO)
 (17)
The optimal solutions for the sellers under hybrid carbon policy are shown in Table 6.
Conclusion 9  
π∗
XYS > π∗
TXS > π∗
TYS
The proof of Conclusion 9 is given in the Appendix. Conclusion 9 shows that compared 
with the sales profit of APs under the single carbon tax policy, it is found that the sales profit 
under the mixed carbon policy is the largest, followed by the centralized decision policy 
under the carbon tax policy, and the smallest dispersed decision profit under the carbon tax 
policy, that is π∗
XYS > π∗
TXS > π∗
TYS.
6  Numerical analyses
We conduct numerical analyses to more vividly analyze the impact of the government’s 
carbon emission reduction policy on the APs SC, and to further draw some inferences based 
on the numerical analysis results. China Jiangsu Agricultural Reclamation Rice Group Co. 
Ltd., for example, sells ordinary and green APs at the same time. The Group’s green APs are 
entrusted to China Jiangsu Xin Qiang Green AP Development Co. Ltd., which is respon­
Table 6  The optimal solutions for the sellers under hybrid carbon policy
symbol
XY
q∗
XYG
σ[D+γ−(pe+ξ)(eG−∆eG)]−wG
2σα
q∗
XYO
σ[D+γ−(pe+ξ)(eO−∆eO)]−wO
2σα
∆∗
eG3
σ(pe+ξ)[D+γ−(pe+ξ)eG]−(pe+ξ)wG
σ[2αkG−(1−λG)−(pe+ξ)2]
∆∗
eO3
σ(pe+ξ)[D+γ−(pe+ξ)eO]−(pe+ξ)wO
σ[2αkO−(1−λO)−(pe+ξ)2]
1 3
302

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
sible for planting. According to the statistics over the years, compared with ordinary APs, 
green APs can save about 20% of the unit cost, reduce chemical fertilizer by 60%, save 
pesticide by 70% and reduce the impact of environmental pollution by 80%. Therefore, the 
relevant parameters are valued as:D = 180,α = 0.4,wG = 6,wO = 4,cG = 0.6, cO = 0.3, 
eG = 0.2,eO = 0.5, λG = λO = 0.3, kG = 2.8,kO = 2.3,eG = eO = 8, σ = 0.65, γ = 0.5. 
In addition, the profit change trend of green and ordinary APPFs is the same as the profit 
change trend of centralized decision-making. Therefore, this numerical analysis omits the 
profit numerical analysis of green and ordinary APPFs when making decentralized deci­
sions. We used the MATLAB program to conduct the simulation analysis of the green Aps 
SC decision model under the carbon emission reduction policy, and the analysis results are 
shown in Sects. 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, etc.
6.1  Impact of α and ξ on AP sales volume and carbon emission reduction under 
carbon tax policy
6.1.1  Impact of α and ξ on AP sales volume under CDM
First, the impact of agricultural market potential by the price sensitive coefficient of APs α 
and government carbon tax ξ. Let q1 = q∗
TYG,q2 = q∗
TYO, i.e. the optimal order of green 
APs under CDM of carbon tax policy is q1, and the optimal order of ordinary APs is q2. 
As can be seen from Table 9 in the Attached list after the Appendix and Fig. 2, the optimal 
amount of green APs under CDM of carbon tax policy is greater than the amount of ordinary 
APs within the reasonable value range. In addition, with the improvement of people's living 
standards, people's preference for green APs is increasing, and these two factors lead to a 
large increase in the order volume of green APs. But with the increase of the carbon tax, the 
order of two APs is decreasing. In connection with the reality of life, the more APs produced 
and sold, the more carbon tax they will pay, leading to the production reduction of firms to 
relieve the heavy carbon policy pressure with the increasing carbon tax rate of unit product.
6.1.2  Impact of α and ξ on carbon emission reduction under CDM
Second, the impact of carbon emission reduction by price sensitive coefficient of APs α and 
government carbon tax ξ. Let ∆e1 = ∆∗
eG1,∆e2 = ∆∗
eG2, i.e. the optimal carbon emission 
reduction of green APs under CDM of carbon tax policy is ∆e1, and the optimal carbon 
Fig. 2  Impact of α and ξ on AP sales volume under CDM
 
1 3
303

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
emission reduction of ordinary APs is ∆e2. It can be observed from Table 10 in the Attached 
list after the Appendix and Fig. 3 that the optimal carbon emission reduction of green APs 
is larger than that of ordinary APs, regardless of the carbon tax rate and consumer prefer­
ence within the range of parameters. It shows that the government's carbon tax policy can 
effectively improve the emission reduction problem of PFs, and help achieve the emission 
reduction target.
At this point, when the government continues to raise the carbon tax rate, the carbon emis­
sions of PFs will become higher and higher. According to the actual agricultural economic 
activities, when the carbon tax continues to increase, the PFs will choose to plant green APs 
to increase the carbon emission reduction efforts under the pressure of low-carbon policies. 
However, excessive carbon tax will also increase the burden of planting firms and reduce 
their profits, so it is crucial for the government to introduce reasonable carbon tax policies.
6.1.3  Impact of α and ξ on AP sales volume under DDM
Third, the impact of agricultural market potential by the price sensitive coefficient of APs 
α and government carbon tax ξ. Let q3 = q∗
TXG,q4 = q∗
TXO, i.e. the optimal order of green 
APs under DDM of carbon tax policy is q3, and the optimal order of ordinary APs is q4. As 
can be seen from Table 11 in the Attached list after the Appendix and Fig. 4, the optimal 
amount of green APs under the decentralized decision of carbon tax policy is greater than 
Fig. 4  Impact of α and ξ on AP sales volume under DDM
 
Fig. 3  Impact of α and ξ on carbon emission reduction under CDM
 
1 3
304

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
the amount of ordinary APs within the reasonable value range. However, it is found that 
whether green APs or ordinary APs, the order quantity of APs under CDM is more than that 
of APs under DDM by comparing Figs. 2 and 4. The reason is that the whole APs SC is 
integrated into a firm based on the carbon tax rate and the determined government emission 
reduction subsidy. In CDM, the operation information of the whole agricultural product SC 
is transparent, and the operation efficiency is greatly improved.
6.1.4  Impact of α and ξ on carbon emission reduction under DDM
Fourth, the impact of carbon emission reduction by price sensitive coefficient of APs α 
and government carbon tax ξ under DDM. Let ∆e3 = ∆∗
eG3,∆e4 = ∆∗
eG4, i.e. the optimal 
carbon emission reduction of green APs under DDM of carbon tax policy is ∆e3, and the 
optimal carbon emission reduction of ordinary APs is ∆e4.
It can be observed from Table 12 in the Attached list after the Appendix and Fig. 5 that 
the optimal carbon emission reduction of green APs is larger than that of ordinary APs, 
regardless of the carbon tax rate and consumer preference within the range of parameters. 
By comparing Figs. 3 and 5, it is found that regardless of green or ordinary APs, the carbon 
emission reduction in CDM is higher than that in decentralized decision, i.e., ∆e1 > ∆e3, 
∆e2 > ∆e4. The above comparison shows that CDM can promote carbon emission reduc­
tion more than DDM.
6.2  Impact of pe and γ on sales volume and profits under carbon trading policy
6.2.1  Impact of pe and γ on sales volume under CDM
Let q5 = q∗
NXG + q∗
NXO, q6 = q∗
NYG + q∗
NYO, i.e. the optimal order of the two APs under 
CDM of carbon trading policy is q5, and the optimal order of the two APs under decentral­
ized of carbon trading policy is q6. As can be seen fromTable 13 in the Attached list after the 
Appendix and Fig. 6, the sales volume of the two APs is positively correlated with carbon 
trading policy and negatively correlated with consumer preference. Generally speaking, due 
to DDM and double marginal effect, the sales volume of the two products under DDM mode 
is smaller than CDM mode, but when consumers’ preference is less than a certain threshold, 
the sales volume of the two APs under DDM mode is relatively large. This phenomenon 
shows that when the planting firms produce and sell both APs simultaneously, the govern­
Fig. 5  Impact of α and ξ on carbon emission reduction under DDM
 
1 3
305

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
ment should increase the publicity and subsidies for green APs and increase consumers’ 
low-carbon preference, thus increasing the sales volume of the two APs under CDM model.
6.2.2  Impact of pe and γ on profits under DDM of carbon trading policy
Let π1 = π∗
NXG,π2 = π∗
NYO, i.e. the optimal profit of sales the green APs under CDM of 
carbon trading policy is π1, and the optimal profit of selling the ordinary APs under DDM 
of carbon trading policy is π2.
As seen from Table 14 in the Attached list after the Appendix and Fig. 7, both APs 
profits are positively correlated with the cost of government subsidy emission reduction 
efforts, which differs from Conclusion 2. Profits of both APs planting firms are negatively 
associated with consumer preference γ under the influence of consumer preferences, that 
is, although consumer preference γ increases the sales volume of ordinary APs, it has 
reduced the sales of green APs, because the reduced profit in sales of green APs is greater 
than the increased profit in sales of ordinary APs. Finally, the profits of ordinary APs 
planting firms decrease as consumers’ preference for ordinary APs increases. Although 
the green APPFs can increase the profits by increasing the commissioned planting price 
of each unit of green APs, the reduction of green APs will eventually reduce the profits 
of green APPFs. For the sellers, when consumer preference γ for ordinary APs is close 
to 1, the sellers can make profits by selling ordinary APs. As a result, the sellers’ profits 
decrease first and then increase as consumer preferences increase. But the sellers change 
less often with consumer preferences γ, and the overall SC profits decrease as consumer 
preferences γ increase.
Fig. 6  Effect of pe and γ on sales of both APs
 
1 3
306

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
6.3  Profit comparison among several kinds of carbon policy
6.3.1  Comparison of profits of two APs between mixed carbon policy and carbon tax 
policy
Let π3 = π∗
XYG + π∗
XYO,π4 = π∗
TXG + π∗
TXO, π5 = π∗
TYG + π∗
TYO i.e. the optimal profit 
of sales the two APs of the revenue sharing contract under mixed carbon policy is π3, the 
optimal profit of the two APs of centralized decision-making under carbon tax policy is π4, 
and the optimal profit of the two APs of DDM under carbon tax policy is π5.
Observe Table 15 in the Attached list after the Appendix and Fig. 8, the profit of selling 
the two APs is declining as the carbon tax increases when the cost of government subsidy 
emission reduction efforts is low. When the cost of government subsidy emission reduction 
efforts Pe is at a high level, the profit of selling the two APs is slowly rising as the carbon 
tax increases. In reality, when the government’s tax rate ξ is low, the PFs cannot seek profits 
from the government carbon emission reduction subsidy Pe and carbon trading market to 
make up for the loss caused by the carbon tax, so the sales profit will decline. When the gov­
ernment’s tax rate ξ is high, the PFs reduce the production and sell the carbon quota in the 
market for profit, coupled with the increase of the government carbon emission reduction 
subsidy Pe, so the profit will rise slowly. Figure 6 shows that within a reasonable range of 
the value, no matter how the carbon tax rate and the cost of government subsidy change, the 
profits of selling two APs under the income sharing contract are greater than the profits of 
selling two APs under the simple carbon tax policy, i.e. π3 > π4 > π5. It means that under 
the constraints of the mixed carbon policy, the revenue-sharing contract can enable the 
overall coordinated development of the SC, enabling the agricultural growers and sellers to 
achieve a win–win situation. This simulation is similar to the case study of carbon behavior 
decision making (Hezarkhani et al., 2023).
Fig. 7  Effect of pe and γ on profits under CDM
 
1 3
307

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
6.3.2  Comparison of profits of two APs under mixed carbon policy and carbon trading 
policy
Let π6 = π∗
XYG + π∗
XYO,π7 = π∗
NXG + π∗
NXO, π8 = π∗
NYG + π∗
NYO i.e. the optimal profit 
of sales the two APs of the income sharing contract under mixed carbon policy is π6, the 
optimal profit of the two APs of CDM under carbon tax policy is π7, and the optimal profit 
of the two APs of DDM under carbon tax policy is π8.
Table 16 in the Attached list after the Appendix and Fig. 9 shows that the profit of the rel­
evant parameters sold under the signing of the performance of the income sharing contract 
is greater than the profit of the two APs under the simple carbon trading policy. Compared 
to the literature about low-carbon operation of green AP literature (Liu et al., 2022),the 
optimal order quantity under CDM is larger than the optimal order quantity under DDM, 
and the carbon emission reduction of both firms is higher than that of DDM under the 
CDM, i.e. π6 > π7 > π8. It means that the revenue-sharing contract can enable the overall 
coordinated development of the SC, enabling the agricultural planting firms and the sellers 
to achieve a win–win situation under the constraints of the mixed carbon policy. In general, 
the optimal order volume, profit are significantly affected by the cost of government subsidy 
emission reduction efforts Pe and the degree of consumer preference γ for APs. Therefore, 
the government should consider various factors, in maintaining economic development, the 
APs SC profits rising steadily and ensure the increasing carbon emissions, ladder carbon 
trading policy and set ladder carbon tax rate, supervision and control, stimulate the coor­
dinated development of SC, accelerate the construction of low carbon, green APs market 
trading mechanism.
Fig. 8  Comparison of profits of two APs under mixed carbon policy and carbon tax policy
 
1 3
308

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
6.4  Sensitivity analysis
6.4.1  Analysis of the impact of α under no carbon emission reduction policy
We continue to use the China Jiangsu Agricultural Reclamation Rice Group Co. Ltd for the 
sensitivity analysis, in which the assignment of relevant parameters remained constant. The 
computing result of α influence on πTXO πTXG,πTY,πTX under no carbon emission reduc­
tion policy, the specific simulation results are shown in Table 7.
It is observed in Table 7 that without carbon emission reduction policy, the profit from 
PFs of ordinary APs (πTXO), profit from sellers of green APs (xx), total profit of the AP 
SC under the centralized decision-making (xx) and total profit of the APs SC under the 
decentralized decision-making (xx), all increase with the increase of the price sensitivity 
coefficient α. As shown in Table 7, The total profit of the AP SC is more affected by α under 
decentralized decision, and the total profit of the AP SC is less affected by α under central­
ized decision. Where, the production of ordinary agricultural products is more profitable, 
the PFs do not have the corporate social responsibility to produce low-carbon and green 
APs, and the PFs are more inclined to produce ordinary APs under no carbon emission 
reduction policy. The PFs cannot respond to the call of the government by implementing 
Table 7  α influence on πTXOπTXG,πTY,πTX under no emission reduction policy
α = 0.1
α = 0.3
α = 0.5
α = 0.7
α = 0.9
α = 1
πTXO
1.308
1.534
1.752
1.918
2.177
2.345
πTXG
1.046
1.234
1.453
1.665
1.733
1.884
πTY
0.878
0.953
1.042
1.136
1.258
1.359
πTX
0.935
1.043
1.129
1.235
1.358
1.471
Fig. 9  Comparison of profits of two APs under mixed carbon policy and carbon trading policy
 
1 3
309

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
social responsibility and will not help the government achieve its carbon emission reduction 
targets.
6.4.2  Analysis of the impact of α under emission reduction policy
The computing result of the case of the decentralized carbon subsidies α influence on πTXO 
πTXG,πTY,πTX is shown in Table 8.
It is observed in Table 8 that the profit from PFs of ordinary APs, profit from sellers of 
green APs, total profit of the AP SC under the centralized decision-making and total profit 
of the AP SC under the decentralized decision-making all increase with the increase of the 
price sensitivity coefficient α without emission reduction policy. According to Table 8, The 
total profit of the AP SC is more affected by α under centralized decisions, and the total 
profit of the AP SC is less affected by α under decentralized decisions. Because the produc­
tion of green APs has more profit space, the corporate social responsibility of PFs to produce 
low-carbon and green APs is enhanced, and PFs are more inclined to produce green APs. 
The PFs can respond to the call of the government by implementing social responsibility 
and help the government achieve its carbon emission reduction targets. The supply chain 
as a whole has achieved not only economic benefits but also social benefits. In real life, the 
government can not only improve the effectiveness of PFs, but also reduce carbon emissions 
and achieve low-carbon development by formulating emission reduction subsidy policies.
7  Conclusion
This paper builds game-theoretic model including CDM, DDM, and SC coordination deci­
sion-making under carbon tax, carbon trading and mixed carbon policy to study the govern­
ment adopt carbon emission reduction on the influence of APs SC, has a numerical analysis 
of these carbon emission reduction policy on the decision mode of optimal solution, the 
main research conclusions are as follows: First, when the agri-product SC enterprise makes 
DDM, both sides of the enterprise only consider their own interests to make decisions and 
planning. The planting firm sells the AP to the seller at a wholesale price higher than the 
cost. At this time, the ordering cost of the seller is significantly higher than the cost under 
CDM. Then the seller will raise the price of AP to ensure that their own interests will not 
cause losses, and then the consumers in the market will choose to buy less or give up the 
product due to the price increase, so that the interests of the planting firm and the seller will 
produce losses at the same time. At the same time, companies have to pay a carbon tax, 
further reducing the benefits gained. Second, we found that carbon trading is not always 
favorable to green APPFs. When the unit carbon trading price is less than a certain thresh­
old value, the income of green APPFs and ordinary APPFs is negatively related to the unit 
carbon trading price. However, under DDM, carbon trading will increase the sellers’ profits, 
Table 8  Computing result of α influence on πTXOπTXG,πTY,πTX under emission reduction policy
α = 0.1
α = 0.3
α = 0.5
α = 0.7
α = 0.9
α = 1
πTX
0.682
0.753
0.859
0.933
1.126
1.348
πTY
1.008
1.211
1.442
1.631
1.985
2.279
πTXG
0.875
0.913
1.088
1.146
1.258
1.363
πTXO
0.454
0.459
0.512
0.558
0.675
0.791
1 3
310

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
because, carbon trading will increase unit retail prices of the two AP, increase green AP 
sales, reduce sales of ordinary AP, and green AP due to carbon trading profit increased more 
than ordinary AP because of carbon trading, quantity, eventually make sellers overall profit 
change is increased. Carbon trading can reduce the two AP impact on the environment, 
however, carbon trading to reduce consumer surplus, that is, under this condition, carbon 
trading to reduce two AP impact on the environment, however, will reduce consumer sur­
plus, adverse to consumers. Third, according to the numerical analysis, it can be seen that 
the profit of the relevant parameters sold under the signing of the performance of the income 
sharing contract is greater than the profit of the two AP under the simple carbon trading 
policy. It is clear that the optimal profit for centralized decisions under the carbon trading 
policy is higher than that for DDM. It means that the revenue-sharing contract can enable 
the overall coordinated development of the SC, enabling the agricultural planting firms 
and the sellers to achieve a win–win situation under the constraints of the mixed carbon 
policy. In general, the optimal order volume, profit are significantly affected by the cost of 
government subsidy emission reduction efforts and the degree of consumer preference for 
APs. Therefore, the government should consider various factors, in maintaining economic 
development, the AP SC profits rising steadily and ensure the increasing carbon emissions, 
ladder carbon trading policy and set ladder carbon tax rate, supervision and control, stimu­
late the coordinated development of SC, accelerate the construction of low carbon, green 
AP market trading mechanism. This study hopes to provide some theoretical and practical 
support for the realization of carbon emission reduction targets, improving the operation of 
China's carbon trading market and low carbon policy design, giving full play to the emission 
reduction effect of carbon trading and carbon tax mixed carbon tax (environmental tax), and 
increasing the benefits of green AP SC firms while coordinating emission reduction.
The objective of this paper is to clarify the impact of carbon emission reduction policies 
on the supply chain decisions of green APs, which is important for decision-makers and 
practitioners. The main findings and contributions of this paper are summarized below: 
The research findings are different from those literature assuming constraints on a single 
emissions policy (e.g., Besik et al., 2023; Ventura et al., 2022; Waqas et al., 2023), our work 
identifies the impact of two emission policy constraints on low-carbon AP SC decisions. 
We demonstrate that both carbon reduction policies significantly influence performance and 
optimal decisions in the AP SC, which provides new research ideas for low-carbon policy 
to enable the high-quality development of AP supply chain. Few studies have focused on 
considering the production cost factors of ordinary APs and green APs. Our study comple­
ments the gaps in SC operations, subsidies and carbon taxes under carbon reduction poli­
cies. Importantly, we explore a hybrid carbon reduction mechanism that is compatible based 
on two carbon reduction policies, which strengthens the micro theoretical basis of China's 
agricultural green development and industrial structure adjustment. By comparison, we find 
that the optimal order quantity under CDM is larger than the optimal order quantity under 
DDM, and the carbon emission reduction of both firms is higher than that of DDM under 
the CDM under the constraint of carbon tax policy. Carbon trading is not always favorable 
to the PFs of green AP. When the unit carbon trading price is less than a certain threshold 
value, the income of green APPFs and ordinary APPFs is negatively related to the unit car­
bon trading price. Additionally, the study confirms the positive effects of a mixed carbon tax 
policy, consistent with the conclusions of J. Liu et al. (2022).
1 3
311

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
7.1  Theoretical contributions
This research examines the impact of carbon trading and carbon tax policies on the pricing 
decisions within green agricultural product (AP) supply chains (SC). Specifically, this study 
contributes in key ways. First, it investigates how carbon trading and carbon tax policies 
influence the pricing decisions of China's green AP supply chain. This not only introduces 
novel perspectives for leveraging low-carbon policies to drive high-quality development 
but also strengthens the micro-level theoretical foundation for China's agricultural green 
development and industrial restructuring. Second, it examines the effects of various car­
bon emission reduction policies on green AP supply chains and analyzes their coordination 
mechanisms. These insights deepen the macro-level theoretical understanding of resilience 
and high-quality development in China's agricultural industrial and supply chains. Com­
pared to previous studies, this work makes significant contributions in the following areas. 
First, existing research has paid limited attention to the role of diverse carbon emission 
reduction policies in mitigating the environmental impact of agricultural products. Second, 
prior studies have scarcely explored the design of carbon emission reduction contracts to 
coordinate cost-sharing mechanisms within green AP supply chains under mixed carbon 
policies. This paper addresses these gaps by proposing mechanisms and strategies for the 
sustainable development of green AP supply chains.
7.2  Practical implications
This research has significant practical implications. This paper provides decision-making 
tools for the policy research of the green development of China's APSC. It offers valuable 
insights for governments seeking to enhance the resilience of low-carbon agricultural prod­
uct supply chains and promote their high-quality development. These results offer practical 
guidance for formulating more precise and effective governmental policies. It examines the 
effects of various carbon emission reduction policies on the optimal pricing, demand, and 
profitability of two types of agricultural products. By constructing game theory models, 
including centralized and decentralized decision-making frameworks, the study provides 
decision-making tools to support the green development of China's agricultural product sup­
ply chains. Moreover, it proposes strategies, policies, and recommendations for the gover­
nance and sustainable development of green AP supply chains, offering actionable insights 
for crafting targeted and effective government policies. The study integrates insights from 
recent real-world practices in Chinese green agriculture. These include the ecological 
agriculture base in Guizhou, the "brand + digital" dual-drive model for agricultural green 
transformation exemplified by the Wuhu rice case, and innovative organizational models 
for low-carbon agricultural production and business operations in Chengdu, Sichuan Prov­
ince. These practical examples enrich the study's theoretical contributions and strengthen 
its relevance to policy-making. The research also outlines a specific action plan to promote 
low-carbon agriculture. It advocates optimizing the industrial structure by raising entry 
thresholds for high-carbon industries and actively fostering low-carbon sectors. It recom­
mends significantly reducing the use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides, promoting solar 
energy and biogas technologies, and popularizing solar collectors in rural areas. The study 
emphasizes adopting low-carbon, energy-saving, and emission-reduction technologies to 
reduce agriculture’s reliance on fossil fuels, improve energy efficiency, and limit the pro­
1 3
312

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
duction of high-carbon agricultural products. In this context, it suggests implementing tax 
policies for high-carbon energy and agricultural products while introducing incentives to 
encourage low-carbon agricultural practices. Additionally, the research supports financial 
innovation to advance the low-carbon agricultural economy. This includes establishing a 
carbon trading market mechanism and developing futures and options markets for carbon 
emission reductions. Lastly, the study highlights the importance of carbon sequestration 
through measures such as afforestation, biological carbon sequestration, and expanding car­
bon storage efforts. Together, these recommendations aim to facilitate the sustainable and 
high-quality development of China's agricultural sector.
7.3  Future scope
There are several potential directions for future research in the fields of supply chain man­
agement, operations research, and decision-making. First, this study assumes that the gov­
ernment implements two types of low-carbon policies: carbon tax and carbon trading. Future 
research could expand this framework by considering a third type of policy: carbon labeling. 
Second, this work assumes that the profit parameters of the green agricultural product (AP) 
supply chain system are non-negative, ensuring profitability for supply chain members per 
unit product. Future studies could explore scenarios where supply chain members face the 
risk of losses when producing and selling green APs, investigating how such risks influence 
decision-making within the supply chain. Third, this research could be extended to examine 
more complex supply chain systems, such as closed-loop supply chains, multi-level sup­
ply chains, and other intricate configurations. Additionally, future work could focus on the 
application of artificial intelligence in green agriculture, exploring areas such as precision 
agriculture, intelligent breeding management, agricultural robotics, and other innovative 
applications. These avenues could significantly enhance the understanding and advance­
ment of sustainable agricultural practices and green supply chain management.
Appendix
The proof of Conclusion 1  Since
 
q∗
TYG = kG (1 −λG) [D + β −cG −ξeG]
2αkG (1 −λG) −ξ2kG (1 −λG) , q∗
TYO = kO (1 −λO) [D + β −cO −ξeO]
2αkO (1 −λO) −ξ2kO (1 −λO) ,
q∗
TXG = kG (1 −λG) [D + β −cG −ξeG]
4αkG (1 −λG) −2ξ2kG (1 −λG), q∗
TXO = kO (1 −λO) [D + β −cO −ξeO]
4αkO (1 −λO) −2ξ2kO (1 −λO).
Then, first the denominator of q∗
TYG and q∗
TXG is compared. Obviously, the denominator 
of q∗
TYG less than the denominator of q∗
TXG. Secondly, compare the molecules of q∗
TYG and 
q∗
TXG, obviously q∗
TYG and q∗
TXG are equal molecules, Comprehensive comparison can be 
obtained:q∗
TYG > q∗
TXG. Similarly, q∗
TYO > q∗
TXO.
The proof of Conclusion 2  Since
1 3
313

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
 
∆∗
eG1 =
kO (1 −λO) [D + β −cG −ξ (eG + eO)] ξ
2αkG (1 −λG) kO (1 −λO) −ξ2kG (1 −λG) −ξ2kO (1 −λO),
∆∗
eG2 =
kO (1 −λO) [D + β −cG −ξ (eG + eO)] ξ
4αkG (1 −λG) kO (1 −λO) −ξ2 [2kG (1 −λG) + kO (1 −λO)],
∆∗
eO1 =
kG (1 −λG) [D + β −cO −ξ (eG + eO)] ξ
2αkG (1 −λG) kO (1 −λO) −ξ2kG (1 −λG) −ξ2kO (1 −λO),
∆∗
eO2 =
kG (1 −λG) [D + β −cO −ξ (eG + eO)] ξ
4αkG (1 −λG) kO (1 −λO) −ξ2 [2kG (1 −λG) + kO (1 −λO)].
 
Then, first to compare the denominator of ∆∗
eG1 and ∆∗
eG2, Obviously, the denominator 
of ∆∗
eG1 less than the denominator of ∆∗
eG2.Second comparison the molecules of ∆∗
eG1 and 
∆∗
eG2, clearly the equal molecules of ∆∗
eG1 and ∆∗
eG2, Comprehensive comparison is avail­
able ∆∗
eG1 > ∆∗
eG2. Similarly,∆∗
eO1 > ∆∗
eO2.
The proof of Conclusion 3  It can be seen from Conclusion 1, (i) ∂β∗
T
∂pe = eG+eO
2
> 0, ∂w∗
T G
∂pe
=
eG+eO
4
> 0, ∂w∗
T O
∂pe
= eO
2 > 0,
i.e. (i) is proved. And so on, (ii) is proved.
The proof of conclusion 4  If p∗
TXO −p∗
TYO = γ−cO−eOpe
4
, From pe < γ−cO
eO , easy to 
know:p∗
TXO > p∗
TYO.
Otherwise, p∗
TXO ≤p∗
TYO, i.e. (i) is proved. And so on, (ii) is proved.
The proof of Conclusion 5  The proof of Conclusion 5 is similar to Conclusion 4, and its proof 
process is omitted here.
The 
proof 
of 
conclusion 
6  Owing 
to 
π∗
TY−(π∗
TXG + π∗
TXO 
+π∗
TXS) = 
9(1−cG−eG+cO+eOpe−γ)2
64(1−γ)
+ (γ−cO−eOpe)2
16γ
> 0, i.e. 
(
π∗
TXG + π∗
TXO + π∗
TXS
)
< π∗
TY.
The proof of conclusion 7 and conclusion 8  The certificates of Conclusions 8 and 9 are similar 
to conclusion 5, and the proof process is omitted here.
The proof of conclusion 9  Since,
 
πXYS = σ [pGqG + pOqO −(1 −λG) cG −(1 −λO) cO −(eG −∆eG) ξqG −(eO −∆eO) ξqO]
+pe (eG + eo) σ −(wGqG + wOqO)
Then,
1 3
314

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
 
π∗
XYS = (1 −cG −cGpeσξ −γ + cO + cOpeσξ)
8 (1 −γ)
+ (γ −cO −cOpeξ)2
8γ
+ 2Epe.
π∗
TXS = (1 −cG −cGpe −γ + cO + cOpe)
16 (1 −γ)
+ (γ −cO −cOpe)2
4γ
+ 2Epe.
π∗
TYS = (1 −cG −cGpe −γ + cO + cOpe)2
16 (1 −γ)
+ 2.8γ (1 −cG −cGpe)2 + (γ −cO −cOpe)
16γ
+ 2Epe.
Then we get:
 
π∗
XYS −π∗
TXS = π∗
XYS = 8γ (1 −cG −cGpeσξ −γ + cO + cOpeσξ) + 8 (1 −γ) (γ −cO −cOpeξ)2
64γ (1 −γ)
> 0.
 
i.e. π∗
XYS −π∗
TXS > 0, then, π∗
XYS > π∗
TXS.
Similarly, π∗
TXS −π∗
TYS > 0, then, π∗
TXS > π∗
TYS.
Then, π∗
XYS > π∗
TXS > π∗
TYS.
Attached list
See Tables 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16
Table 9  Impact of α and ξ on AP sales volume under CDM
ξ
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
α
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
q1
− 0.868
− 0.593
− 0.078
0.607
1.254
1.862
2.431
2.959
3.449
3.901
q2
− 1.568
− 0.803
− 0.338
− 0.102
0.115
0.313
0.492
0.650
0.789
0.910
Table 10  Impact of α and ξ on carbon emission reduction under CDM
ξ
0.1
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
α
1
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
∆e1 − 0.704
− 0.281
− 0.032
0.241
0.542
0.864
1.215
1.591
1.992
∆e2 − 0.719
− 0.445
− 0.316
0.189
0.059
0.076
0.223
0.378
0.553
Table 11  Impact of α and ξ on AP sales volume under DDM
ξ
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
α
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
q3
− 0.702
− 0.377
0.056
0.581
1.216
1.955
2.798
3.746
4.797
5.952
q4
− 0.958
− 0.692
− 0.462
− 0.270
0.092
0.078
0.254
0.448
0.663
0.964
1 3
315

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
Funding  Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and its Member Institutions
Declarations
Conflict of interest  There is no conflict of interests. No human participants for this study.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted 
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Table 12  Impact of α and ξ on carbon emission reduction under DDM
ξ
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
α
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
∆e3− 0.715
− 0.543
− 0.325
− 0.033
0.366
0.901
1.598
2.495
3.616
4.996
∆e4− 0.788
− 0.624
− 0.451
− 0.259
− 0.034
0.234
0.559
0.952
1.426
1.894
Table 13  Effect of pe and γ on sales of both APs
γ
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Pe 1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
q5
− 1.547
− 0.815
− 0.079
0.618
1.277
1.881
2.446
2.977
3.462
3.953
q6
− 0.835
− 0.541
− 0.311
− 0.116
0.128
0.326
0.458
0.678
0.733
0.898
Table 14  Effect of pe and γ on profits under CDM
γ
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Pe 1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
π1 − 1.663
− 0.827
− 0.082
0.629
1.285
1.872
2.457
2.968
3.458
3.946
π2 0.912
0.776
0.639
0.500
0.359
0.218
0.078
− 0.063
− 0.204
− 0.345
Table 15  Comparison of profits of two APs under mixed carbon and carbon tax policy
ξ
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Pe 1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
π3 129.18
129.05
128.92
128.79
128.66
128.52
128.39
128.26
128.13
128.02
π4 128.90
128.71
128.50
128.30
128.11
127.93
127.70
127.52
127.30
127.23
π5 128.25
128.16
128.08
127.99
127.91
127.82
127.63
127.45
127.16
127.04
Table 16  Comparison of profits of two APs under mixed carbon policy and carbon trading policy
γ
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Pe 1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
π6 129.29
129.27
129.25
129.23
129.21
129.18
129.16
129.14
129.12
129.10
π7 129.05
129.00
128.95
128.90
128.85
128.80
128.75
128.70
128.65
128.61
π8 129.01
128.92
128.83
128.74
128.65
128.56
128.47
128.38
128.29
128.21
1 3
316

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
References
Benjaafar, S., Li, Y., & Daskin, M. (2010). Carbon footprint and the management of supply chains: Insights 
from simple models. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, 10(1), 99–116.
Besik, D., Nagurney, A., & Dutta, P. (2023). An integrated multitiered supply chain network model of com­
peting agricultural firms and processing firms: The case of fresh produce and quality. European Journal 
of Operational Research, 307(1), 364–381. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2022.07.053
Cao, Y., & Nan, B. (2023). Analysis of the innovation input level of agricultural product suppliers under the 
constraint of green consumption (in Chinese). Journal of Commercial Economics, 2023(16), 155–158.
Chai, Q., Xiao, Z., Lai, K.-H., & Zhou, G. (2018). Can carbon cap and trade mechanism be beneficial for 
remanufacturing? International Journal of Production Economics, 203, 311–321. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​
1​6​/​j​.​i​j​p​e​.​2​0​1​8​.​0​7​.​0​0​4​
Cheng, F., Yuan, M., Sun, L., & Luo, J. (2019). Equilibrium decision research of closed-loop supply chain 
network with compound carbon emission reduction policy (in Chinese). Journal of Systems Engineer­
ing, 34(4), 483–496.
Diabat, A., Abdallah, T., Al-Refaie, A., Svetinovic, D., & Govindan, K. (2012). Strategic closed-loop facility 
location problem with carbon market trading. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 60(2), 
398–408.
Do, M.-H., Huang, Y.-F., & Phan, V.-D.-V. (2023). Analyzing the barriers to green supply chain management 
implementation: A case study of the Vietnamese agriculture sector. Journal of Enterprise Information 
Management, 37(1), 125–147. https://doi.org/10.1108/jeim-10-2021-0459
Du, S., Ma, F., Fu, Z., Zhu, L., & Zhang, J. (2015). Game-theoretic analysis for an emission-dependent sup­
ply chain in a ‘cap-and-trade’system. Annals of Operations Research, 228(1), 135–149.
Feng, Y. T., Geng, Y., Zhao, G., & Li, M. Y. (2022). Carbon emission constraint policy in an OEM and 
outsourcing remanufacturer supply chain with consumer preferences. International Journal of Environ­
mental Research and Public Health, 8, 4653–4653.
Feng, Y., Wang, Y., Zhang, Y., & Yu, Y. (2020). Impact of business model on operation of the fresh agri-
product supply chain under random output (in Chinese). Systems Engineering--Theory & Practice, 
40(10), 2631–2647. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​2​0​1​1​/​1​0​0​0​-​6​7​8​8​-​2​0​1​9​-​1​6​1​4​-​1​7
Guo, J., Zhang, H., & Li, B. (2020). Supply chain pricing and coordination under cap-and-trade system and 
subsidy mechanism (in Chinese). Science and Technology Management Research, 40(1).
Heeß, P., Rockstuhl, J., Körner, M.-F., & Strüker, J. (2024). Enhancing trust in global supply chains: Concep­
tualizing digital product passports for a low-carbon hydrogen market. Electronic Markets. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​
r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​2​5​2​5​-​0​2​4​-​0​0​6​9​0​-​7​
Hezarkhani, B., Demirel, G., Bouchery, Y., & Dora, M. (2023). Can “ugly veg” supply chains reduce food 
loss? European Journal of Operational Research, 309(1), 117–132. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​e​j​o​r​.​2​0​2​
3​.​0​1​.​0​3​3​
Hoen, K. M. R., Tan, T., Fransoo, J. C., & van Houtum, G. J. (2014). Effect of carbon emission regulations 
on transport mode selection under stochastic demand. Flexible Services and Manufacturing Journal, 
26(1), 170–195.
Jaber, M. Y., Glock, C. H., & El Saadany, A. M. (2013). Supply chain coordination with emissions reduction 
incentives. International Journal of Production Research, 51(1), 69–82.
Jiang, J., Jiang, S., Xu, G., & Li, J. (2024). Research on pricing strategy and profit-distribution mechanism 
of green and low-carbon agricultural products’ traceability supply chain. Sustainability, 16(5), 2087. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su16052087
Khan, S. A. R., & Ponce, P. (2021). Investigating the effects of the outbreak of COVID-19 on perishable food 
supply chains: An empirical study using PLS-SEM. The International Journal of Logistics Manage­
ment, 33(3), 773–795. https://doi.org/10.1108/ijlm-12-2020-0496
Kristianto, Y., & Helo, P. (2015). Reprint of “Product architecture modularity implications for operations 
economy of green supply chains”. Transportation Research Part E, 7463–7480.
Li, F., Guo, Y., & Liu, B. (2024). Impact of government subsidies and carbon inclusion mechanism on carbon 
emission reduction and consumption willingness in low-carbon supply chain. Journal of Cleaner Pro­
duction, 449, Article 141783. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​j​c​l​e​p​r​o​.​2​0​2​4​.​1​4​1​7​8​3
Liu, J., Ke, H., & Gao, Y. (2022). Manufacturer’s r&d cooperation contract: Linear fee or revenue-sharing 
payment in a low-carbon supply chain. Annals of Operations Research, 318(1), 323–355. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​
g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​2​2​-​0​4​8​6​9​-​z​
Liu, M., Wan, M., & Fu, H. (2018). Low-carbon technology selection for supply chain under cap and trade 
mechanism with low-carbon preference (in Chinese). Chinese Journal of Management Science, 26(1), 
152–162.
1 3
317

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
Lu, Q., Liao, C., Chen, M., Shi, V., Hu, X., & Hu, W. (2024). Platform financing or bank financing in agri­
cultural supply chains: The impact of platform digital empowerment. European Journal of Operational 
Research, 315(3), 952–964. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2023.12.024
Mahato, F., Choudhury, M., & Mahata, C. G.(2024).Multistage supply chain inventory model for control­
lable deterioration and imperfect production with carbon emissions regulations under Stackelberg game 
approach.Environment, Development and Sustainability,(prepublish):1–31.
Meemken, E.-M., & Qaim, M. (2018). Can private food standards promote gender equality in the small farm 
sector? Journal of Rural Studies, 58, 39–51. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​j​r​u​r​s​t​u​d​.​2​0​1​7​.​1​2​.​0​3​0
Metcalf, G. E., & Economss, E. (2009). Designing a carbon tax to reduce US greenhouse gas emissions. 
Rcvicw of Vironmcntal and Policy, 3(1), 63–83.
Qin, Y., Xiang, L., & Qin, X. (2021). A research on supply chain coordination of fresh agricultural products 
considering bilateral fresh-keeping efforts under fairness concern (in Chinese). Industrial Engineering 
Journal, 24(5), 27–38. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​3​9​6​9​/​j​.​i​s​s​n​.​1​0​0​7​-​7​3​7​5​.​2​0​2​1​.​0​5​.​0​0​4
Ren, X., Herty, M., & Zhao, L. (2020). Optimal price and service decisions for sharing platform and coordi­
nation between manufacturer and platform with recycling. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 147, 
Article 106586. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2020.106586
Sharam, K. C., Singh, K., Nigwal, A., & Singh, D. (2023). Individual and collective pricing strategies for 
a multi-layer, multi-channel supply chain with suggested selling price by manufacturer. International 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(10), 38–56.
Shi, L., Pang, T., Peng, H., & Feng, X. (2024). Green technology outsourcing for agricultural supply chains 
with government subsidies. Journal of Cleaner Production, 436, Article 140674. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​
1​6​/​j​.​j​c​l​e​p​r​o​.​2​0​2​4​.​1​4​0​6​7​4
Singh, D., Jayswal, A., Alharbi, M. G., & Shaikh, A. A. (2021). An investigation of a supply chain model for 
co-ordination of finished products and raw materials in a production system under different situations. 
Sustainability, 13(22), 12601. https://doi.org/10.3390/su132212601
Sun, H., Wang, M., Song, Z., & Yu, H. (2018). Analysis of operating mode of electronic product reverse sup­
ply chain based on FAHP. International Journal of Intelligent Information Systems, 7(5), 42–47. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​
/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​6​4​8​/​j​.​i​j​i​i​s​.​2​0​1​8​0​7​0​5​.​1​1​
Tang, R. H., Yang, L., & Ji, J. N. (2023). Impacts of fairness concerns on financing equilibrium in a low-
carbon supply chain. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​
i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​t​r​e​.​2​0​2​3​.​1​0​3​3​2​8​
Ventura, J. A., Golany, B., Mendoza, A., & Li, C. (2022). A multi-product dynamic supply chain inven­
tory model with supplier selection, joint replenishment, and transportation cost. Annals of Operations 
Research, 316(2), 729–762. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04508-z
Wang, J., Cheng, X., Jiang, Y., & Dong, Z. (2021). Behavior selection of supply chain members considering 
reference carbon emission under carbon tax policy (in Chinese). Chinese Journal of Management Sci­
ence, 29(7), 128–138.
Wang, M., Guo, X., & Wang, S. (2022). Financial hedging in two-stage sustainable commodity supply 
chains. European Journal of Operational Research, 303(2), 803–818. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​e​j​o​r​.​2​
0​2​2​.​0​2​.​0​4​8​
Wang, N., He, Q., & Jiang, B. (2019). Hybrid closed-loop supply chains with competition in recycling and 
product markets. International Journal of Production Economics, 217, 246–258. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​
1​6​/​j​.​i​j​p​e​.​2​0​1​8​.​0​1​.​0​0​2​
Wang, X., Du, Q., Lu, C., & Li, J. (2022). Exploration in carbon emission reduction effect of low-carbon 
practices in prefabricated building supply chain. Journal of Cleaner Production, 368, 133153.
Waqas, U., Abd Rahman, A., Ismail, N. W., Kamal Basha, N., & Umair, S. (2023). Influence of supply chain 
risk management and its mediating role on supply chain performance: Perspectives from an agri-fresh 
produce. Annals of Operations Research, 324(1–2), 1399–1427. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​2​2​-​0​
4​7​0​2​-​7​
Xia, X., Li, C., & Zhu, Q. (2020). Game analysis for the impact of carbon trading on low-carbon supply 
chain. Journal of Cleaner Production, 276, Article 123220. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​j​c​l​e​p​r​o​.​2​0​2​0​.​1​2​
3​2​2​0
Xiao, S., Chen, Y.-J., & Tang, C. S. (2020). Knowledge sharing and learning among smallholders in devel­
oping economies: Implications, incentives, and reward mechanisms. Operations Research, 68(2), 
435–452.
Xie, X. P., Zhao, D. Z., & Liu, Y. J. (2015). Revenue sharing consignment contract of low-carbon supply 
chain with carbonemission sensitive demand. Journal of Systems Management, 24(1), 105–117.
Xiong, Z. K., Zhang, P., & Guo, N. (2014). Impact of carbon tax and consumers’ environmental awareness 
on carbon emissions in supply chains. Systems Engineering-Theory & Practice, 34(9), 2245–2252.
1 3
318

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:287–319
Xu, J., Xiong, S., Cui, T., Zhang, D., & Li, Z. (2023). Incorporating consumers’ low-carbon and freshness 
preferences in dual-channel agri-foods supply chains: An analysis of decision-making behavior. Agri­
culture, 13(9), 1647. https://doi.org/10.3390/agriculture13091647
Yang, D., Yang, P., Li, Y., & Wei, Z. (2023). Jointing quality effort and contract decision in green agri-food 
supply chain based on differential game. Modern Supply Chain Research and Applications, 6(1), 31–51. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/mscra-02-2023-0008
Yang, L., Zheng, C. S., & Xu, M. H. (2014). Comparisons of low carbon policies in supply chain coordina­
tion. Journal of Systems Science and Systems Engineering, 23(3), 342–361.
Yang, Y., & Yao, G. (2023). Fresh-keeping decision and coordination of fresh agricultural product supply 
chain considering carbon cap-and-trade under different dominance. Journal of Systems Science and 
Systems Engineering, 33(1), 30–51. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11518-023-5587-3
Yong, W., Hua, J., Luo, X.Y., Zhang,Y. L., Suo, Y., Qian, L., & Li, H. W.(2024).Research on evolutionary 
game of low-carbon logistics in two-level supply chain under carbon tax policy. Sustainable Futures. 
100387–100387
Zhang, J. (2014). Analysis of green supply chain management operation framework and information integra­
tion mode (in Chinese). Information Science, 32(12), 105–108+114.
Zhang, A., Guan, Z., & He, S. (2022). Optimal pricing and service quality decisions of dual channels in case 
of bidirectional free riding (in Chinese). Journal of Systems Engineering, 37(4), 509–521. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​
r​g​/​1​0​.​1​3​3​8​3​/​j​.​c​n​k​i​.​j​s​e​.​2​0​2​2​.​0​4​.​0​0​6
Zhao, C., Wang, D., Younas, A., & Zhang, B. (2022). Coordination of closed-loop supply chain considering 
loss-aversion and remanufactured products quality control. Annals of Operations Research. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​
o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​2​2​-​0​4​6​1​9​-​1​
Zhou, H., Tan, Y., Guan, X., & Wu, P. (2023). Extended Vidale-Wolfe model on joint emission reduction and 
low-carbon advertising strategy design in a secondary supply chain. Annals of Operations Research, 
1–40. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05288-4
Zhu, C., & Ma, J. (2023). Dynamic strategies of horizontal low-carbon supply chains under double carbon 
policies: A bounded rationality perspective. Computers & Industrial Engineering. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​
0​1​6​/​j​.​c​i​e​.​2​0​2​3​.​1​0​9​3​0​9​
Zou, Q. M., Liu, C., & Cao, Y. (2024).Research on emission reduction and financing strategy of low carbon 
supply chain under the carbon trading mechanism. Management Science in China, 32(09):248–259. ​h​t​t​
p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​6​3​8​1​/​j​.​c​n​k​i​.​i​s​s​n​1​0​0​3​-​2​0​7​x
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Authors and Affiliations
Jiaxiang Zhu1 · Yangyan Shi2,3
 · Yong Wu4 · V. G. Venkatesh5
 
 Yangyan Shi
ys102@hotmail.com
1 
School of Management, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China
2 
College of Business Administration, Capital University of Economics and Business, 
Beijing 100070, China
3 
Macquarie Business School, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
4 
Griffith Business School, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Australia
5 
EM Normandie Business School, Metis Lab, Le Havre, France
1 3
319