TITLE: SGCN: A Robust Subsampling-Based GCN for Large-Scale Network with Out-of-Distribution Nodes
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2026
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07269-9
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07269-9
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
SGCN: A Robust Subsampling-Based GCN for Large-Scale
Network with Out-of-Distribution Nodes
Yingqiu Zhu1 · Jialin Li2 · Lei Qin1,3 · Jing Yang4 · Mingchih Chen5,6
Received: 30 November 2025 / Accepted: 4 May 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
Large-scale systems, including transportation networks, supply-chain structures and energy
dispatch systems, typically exhibit high-dimensional graph structures with dynamic topol-
ogy, heterogeneous connectivity and substantial noise. These characteristics create persistent
challenges for Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) in terms of computational scalabil-
ity and sensitivity to distributional shifts. To address these limitations, this study introduces
Subsampling-based Graph Convolutional Network (SGCN), a uniﬁed framework that com-
bines multi-subgraph parallel training with performance-aware weighting for parameter
aggregation. By decomposing full-graph learning into a sequence of size-controlled sub-
graph training tasks, SGCN removes the dependence on global neighborhood expansion and
naturally supports large-scale parallel execution across GPUs, which signiﬁcantly reduces
memory consumption and training time. Moreover, the performance-aware weighting adap-
tively down-weights subgraphs that contain out-of-distribution(OOD) nodes or structural
noise, enabling the model to obtain stable global representations without relying on explicit
detection procedures. Experiments on the Cora, Pubmed and Amazon Computers datasets
show that SGCN achieves predictive performance comparable to or exceeding that of standard
B Jing Yang
yangjing@bjut.edu.cn
B Mingchih Chen
081438@mail.fju.edu.tw
Yingqiu Zhu
inqzhu@uibe.edu.cn
Jialin Li
jlwith0506@gmail.com
Lei Qin
qinlei@uibe.edu.cn
1
School of Statistics, University of International Business and Economics, Beijing, China
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Data Science, University of International Business and
Economics, Beijing, China
3
Dong Fureng Institute of Economic and Social Development, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
4
School of Mathematics, Statistics and Mechanics, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China
5
Graduate Institute of Business Administration, College of Management, Fu Jen Catholic University,
New Taipei City, Taiwan R.O.C.
6
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Development Center, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City, Taiwan R.O.C.
123

Annals of Operations Research
GCNs and widely used sampling-based methods, while providing substantial computational
efﬁciency gains. Under a variety of OOD node corruption levels and structural perturbation
settings, SGCN demonstrates consistently stronger robustness, particularly in high-noise
environments. Overall, SGCN provides a scalable and robust training framework for deep
graph models in operations research. It can be applied to problems such as trafﬁc prediction,
routing, network ﬂow optimization, supply chain risk analysis, and power grid monitoring.
Future work will focus on better subgraph scheduling, adaptive sampling for dynamic graphs,
and extensions to heterogeneous, multilayer, and temporal graphs, so as to further improve
its use in large-scale industrial systems.
Keywords GCN · Subsampling · Large-scale Networks · Optimization
1 Introduction
In the ﬁeld of operations research and optimization, core problems such as network ﬂow,
scheduling, transportation, supply chain management, and logistics planning are fundamen-
tally formulated as resource allocation and risk control tasks on complex graph structures
(Antony et al., 2025). As real world systems continue to expand in scale and exhibit increas-
ingly dynamic network topologies, traditional optimization approaches based on heuristic
rules or static linear models struggle to capture the high-dimensional correlations and local
dependencies inherent in heterogeneous multi-source data, and are often inadequate for han-
dling the structural perturbations and safety risks that frequently arise during system operation
(Zhang et al., 2022). In recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as power-
ful tools for improving predictive accuracy and mitigating decision risks due to their strong
capability in modeling structured data, showing signiﬁcant potential in the development of
trustworthy operating systems (Li et al., 2025). Among various architectures, graph convo-
lutional networks (GCNs) have been widely adopted in supply chain security monitoring,
network reliability analysis, and risk-sensitive scheduling tasks owing to their simple neigh-
borhood aggregation mechanism and training stability (Liu et al., 2025).
However, applying GCNs directly to large-scale, safety-critical industrial operating sys-
tems still encounters signiﬁcant challenges in terms of stability and scalability. First, large
graphs require substantial computation and memory, which makes full-graph training imprac-
tical in real production environments. Transportation networks, communication networks,
and supply chain networks across regions often contain millions of nodes and tens of mil-
lions of edges. Loading the entire adjacency matrix and node features not only imposes
substantial memory pressure but also introduces system latency, making it difﬁcult to meet
the demands of real-time decision-making and safety monitoring (Lee et al., 2024). Sec-
ond, large systems commonly exhibit noisy nodes, abnormal topological structures, and data
drift. These out-of-distribution (OOD) nodes may arise from faulty sensors, unexpected trafﬁc
events, supply chain disruptions, or even adversarial attacks (Han & Huang, 2025; Zhang et
al., 2025). In addition, OOD nodes have been widely observed in practical network-analysis
scenarios, and their presence can adversely affect learning on graphs in different ways. In
relational graphs for anomaly and fraud detection, rare or manipulated entities may form
atypical connections and feature patterns, which can bias neighborhood statistics and cause
normal nodes to be mistakenly pulled toward anomalous representations during aggregation
(Song & Wang, 2022). In spatio-temporal trafﬁc networks, incidents and sensor malfunc-
tions can introduce abrupt distribution shifts; when such abnormal nodes or measurements
123

Annals of Operations Research
enter neighborhood aggregation, they can distort local spatio-temporal dependencies and
degrade forecasting or detection performance (Hu & Wang, 2024). In large-scale recom-
mendation and e-commerce graphs, cold-start entities and atypical user groups often exhibit
feature and topology shifts, and aggregating messages from these nodes can yield biased
embeddings and unstable ranking signals (Li et al., 2025). More generally, recent studies
on OOD generalization for GNNs emphasize that structural and feature-level shifts can cor-
rupt message passing and reduce robustness, especially for methods relying on homophily
or local smoothness assumptions (Li et al., 2022). In safety-sensitive settings, OOD nodes
can propagate misleading signals across broader topological regions, undermining message
passing and substantially degrading system controllability, stability, and reliability (Hu &
Wang, 2024; Li et al., 2025). Given that the core mechanism of GCNs relies on neighbor-
hood aggregation, once corrupted information is disseminated, its impact is ampliﬁed across
successive layers of the system, potentially causing severe misjudgments in critical tasks and
even leading to decision failures (Li et al., 2026). In safety-sensitive settings, OOD nodes
can propagate misleading signals across broader topological regions, undermining message
passing and substantially degrading system controllability, stability, and reliability (Hu &
Wang, 2024; Li et al., 2025). Given that the core mechanism of GCNs relies on neighbor-
hood aggregation, once corrupted information is disseminated, its impact is ampliﬁed across
successive layers of the system, potentially causing severe misjudgments in critical tasks and
even leading to decision failures (Li et al., 2026). Therefore, ensuring that GCNs remain
robust under structural drift, localized anomalies, and adversarial perturbations, while still
satisfying real-time and efﬁciency constraints, constitutes a central challenge in building
reliable operating systems.
To alleviate the computational burden of GCNs on large-scale graphs, researchers have
proposed various sampling-based training methods. Node-wise or layer-wise sampling strate-
gies (e.g., GraphSAGE, FastGCN) can reduce training costs but often distort graph structure,
introduce gradient variance, and may even include OOD nodes that amplify noise, thereby
weakening model robustness and system-level safety (Baygin et al., 2021; Chen et al.,
2018). Graph partitioning and distributed training approaches (e.g., Cluster-GCN and multi-
GPU/cluster frameworks) improve parallelism by dividing the topology, yet they still rely on
the full network structure to construct computational blocks and therefore cannot fundamen-
tally isolate OOD contamination (Ju et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2023). More recent robust GNN
methods typically depend on explicit anomaly detection, conﬁdence estimation, or addi-
tional regularization to mitigate OOD effects (Xu et al., 2021). Although these techniques
can enhance stability on small- to medium-scale graphs, they often require extra labels,
complex training procedures, or substantial computational overhead, making it difﬁcult to
achieve real-time, scalable, and deployable “safe optimization”; in large-scale settings (Lin et
al., 2025). In summary, existing approaches cannot simultaneously satisfy the requirements
of large-scale scalability, robustness under structural perturbations, and system-level safety.
Designing a new GCN framework that enables efﬁcient training, effective anomaly isola-
tion, and controllable risk is therefore critical for building reliable and deployable modern
management systems.
Building on the above challenges, we propose the Subsampling-based Graph Convolu-
tional Network (SGCN), a uniﬁed training framework designed to simultaneously address the
scalability demands of large-scale graph structures and the robustness requirements of high-
risk real-world environments. SGCN not only substantially improves the efﬁciency of graph
learning, but also constructs a trustworthy model capable of maintaining stable behavior in the
presence of structural perturbations, local anomalies, data drift, and pervasive noise, thereby
supporting safe decision-making and reliable resource allocation in practical scenarios of
123

Annals of Operations Research
operations research. The core idea of SGCN is to decompose the original large graph into
multiple independent, parallelizable subgraphs, and to train lightweight GCN local models
on each of them. Because abnormal structures are conﬁned within local regions, this subgraph
decomposition naturally forms an inherent isolation and fault-tolerance mechanism that sup-
pressesthepropagationofnoiseacrosstheglobaltopology.Leveragingthestructuraldiversity
induced by subsampling, SGCN does not rely on anomaly labels or additional robustness
regularization. Instead, it employs a performance-aware weighting for parameter aggregation
that adaptively downweights subgraphs affected by OOD contamination, ensuring that the
ﬁnal integrated model is dominated by structurally stable and signal-consistent subgraphs.
Compared with existing robust GNN approaches that depend on complex anomaly detec-
tion modules or computationally expensive optimization procedures, SGCN offers higher
deployability and system-level stability. In terms of scalability, SGCN distributes the train-
ing workload across multiple small subgraphs, allowing each to be processed independently
on a single GPU and enabling efﬁcient parallelism in multi-GPU or distributed environ-
ments, thereby signiﬁcantly reducing memory consumption and training time. In terms of
robustness, the combination of subgraph isolation and quality-aware aggregation prevents
structural noise from spreading across regions, avoiding the ampliﬁcation of local errors dur-
ing GCN message passing. By achieving a new balance among efﬁciency, scale, and stability,
SGCN provides a scalable and fault-tolerant training framework for reliably applying GCNs
to real-world, large-graph datasets. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows:
1. A scalable GCN training framework for large-scale networks. SGCN introduces
a general subsampling mechanism that decomposes full-graph training into multiple
independent subgraphs. This design preserves structural diversity, signiﬁcantly reduces
GPU memory usage, and fully enables parallel training, fundamentally enhancing the
scalability of GCNs on large graphs.
2. A Performance-aware weighting for OOD robustness without explicit anomaly
detection. By adaptively weighting local models according to their validation perfor-
mance during aggregation, SGCN automatically suppresses subgraphs contaminated by
noise or OOD nodes, ensuring that the ﬁnal global model is dominated by high-conﬁdence
subgraphs and substantially improving stability under realistic noisy conditions.
3. Extensive experiments demonstrating both efﬁciency and robustness on large and
noisynetworks.ExperimentalresultsshowthatSGCNreducestrainingtimeandmemory
consumption while achieving prediction performance comparable to or better than full-
graph GCNs. Moreover, SGCN exhibits signiﬁcantly superior robustness in OOD nodes
compared with existing methods.
2 Related works
For operations research, many core problems naturally manifest as complex graph-structured
data. Typical scenarios such as transportation networks, supply-chain logistics systems,
energy-dispatching networks, production scheduling, and network-ﬂow optimization are
fundamentally composed of nodes and edges that represent physical connections, resource
ﬂows, and operational constraints (Otala et al., 2021). Unlike traditional tabular or time-
series data, graph structures serve not merely as a data organization format, but as carriers of
essential operational information, including system constraints, risk-propagation pathways,
spatial topologies, and inter-entity dependencies. In transportation and logistics systems,
123

Annals of Operations Research
path feasibility and capacity limitations correspond to shortest-path formulations and ﬂow
constraints on graphs. Supply-chain networks consisting of ﬁrms, warehouses, and trans-
portation routes exhibit multi-tiered topologies, where risk propagation, redundancy design,
and vulnerability characteristics depend on graph connectivity and community structure (Zhu
et al., 2025, 2024). Energy-dispatching and power-allocation tasks must satisfy physical ﬂow
laws while preserving topological stability; large-scale production scheduling, matching, and
facility-location problems are likewise commonly expressed using bipartite graphs or ﬂow
networks to model complex combinatorial constraints (Uzunoglu et al., 2024). Moreover,
real-world systems are characterized by strong dynamics, heterogeneity, and multi-modal
interactions: transportation networks evolve with congestion patterns, construction activities,
and incidents; supply-chain structures undergo continual reconﬁguration driven by seasonal
demand ﬂuctuations, node exits, or re-linking; and energy networks are strictly shaped by
physical power-ﬂow constraints and safety requirements. These properties render graph struc-
tures not only descriptive of system morphology but also determinative of feasible decision
regions, risk-exposure patterns, and safety boundaries. Consequently, graph-based models
have become fundamental mathematical tools for understanding, predicting, and optimizing
operational systems, forming a crucial bridge between data-driven learning approaches and
optimization mechanisms in support of system safety and reliable management.
Against this backdrop, GCNs have gradually become a key tool for graph-based learning
in operations research, owing to their ability to automatically aggregate local-neighborhood
features and capture topological dependencies (Chen et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2020).
Unlike traditional approaches based on manually engineered descriptors, GCNs offer com-
pact parameterization, stable optimization behavior, and the capacity to encode spatial
relationships even with shallow architectures, making them particularly suitable for the
heterogeneous and constraint-intensive topologies common in operating systems (Chen et
al., 2025). In transportation networks, GCNs have been used to represent spatial correla-
tions in road-network graphs for trafﬁc-ﬂow prediction and congestion-propagation analysis,
with temporal gating and spatiotemporal fusion mechanisms further enhancing short- and
mid-term travel-time forecasting (Chen et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024). In supply-chain man-
agement, GCNs provide a structured way to capture input–output dependencies, cross-tier
risk-diffusion pathways, and supplier-relationship topologies, thereby supporting assess-
ments of system resilience and long-run operational efﬁciency (Saen et al., 2024). Within
energy systems, GCNs leverage the physical topology of power-grid networks for state
estimation, power-ﬂow prediction, and anomaly or fault localization, which are central to
ensuring system reliability and operational safety (Lee et al., 2024). In production scheduling
and vehicle-routing problems (VRPs), GCNs effectively learn localized constraint patterns
and characteristic substructures, improving both predictive accuracy and optimization out-
comes (Hosny & Reda, 2024). As more studies in operations research integrate neural models
into scheduling, routing, risk analysis, and efﬁciency-evaluation pipelines, including deep-
learning-based prediction of supply-chain performance, R&D dynamics, and sustainability
trajectories (Ahmed et al., 2025; Benzidia et al., 2021), the role of GCNs within applications
of operations research is shifting from handcrafted modeling paradigms toward structure-
aware, end-to-end learning frameworks capable of capturing the full complexity of real-world
operational networks (Ye et al., 2025; Zhao et al., 2024).
However, GCNs face a pronounced “neighborhood explosion” problem when trained
on large-scale graphs. As the number of layers increases, the size of each node’s receptive
ﬁeld grows exponentially, leading to rapidly escalating computational and memory demands,
which restricts the applicability of GCNs on very large graphs. This limitation has motivated
a series of scalable training strategies, including subgraph sampling, graph partitioning, and
123

Annals of Operations Research
distributed training frameworks. Sampling-based approaches such as GraphSAGE (Hamil-
ton et al., 2017), FastGCN (Chen et al., 2018), and GraphSAINT (Zeng et al., 2020) attempt
to reduce computational cost by selecting local neighborhoods or random-walk-based sub-
graphs. Nevertheless, their sampling rules are typically static, making them ill-suited for the
dynamic evolution characteristic of networks. In highly connected supply chains or trans-
portation backbone networks, where node interaction patterns are complex, sampling easily
leads to loss of structural information. It is worth noting that the operations research com-
munity has already introduced several subsampling-based structure-learning methods. For
example, adaptive subsampling frameworks for multilayer networks have been shown to
improve community-structure representation in sparse graphs (Xiao et al., 2025). These
studies highlight the importance of preserving global topology and second-order neigh-
borhood information, aligning closely with the structural-loss challenges encountered by
GCN subgraph-sampling techniques. A recent line of work also explores memory-efﬁcient
GNN architectures by decomposing large graphs into smaller components, such as the
ME-MS-PGAN framework (R, 2025), which reduces attention memory through multi-scale
progressive aggregation. However, its design still relies on approximated full-graph context
and yields relatively limited accuracy on standard benchmarks (e.g., 0.463 on Cora and 0.431
on PubMed), indicating that fundamental challenges in large-graph training and system-level
reliability remain unresolved. Graph-partitioning approaches such as Cluster-GCN (Chiang
et al., 2019) aim to improve large-graph training efﬁciency by reducing cross-cluster message
passing through partitioning algorithms such as METIS. AliGraph (Zhu et al., 2019) further
integrates asynchronous sampling and structural partitioning in industrial settings to enable
large-scale parallel training. However, pre-deﬁned partitions struggle to track the dynamic
evolution of networks: changes in supply-chain structure or power-grid topology can easily
invalidate partition boundaries, preventing the model from adapting to network updates in
a timely manner. Distributed frameworks such as Emma (Huang et al., 2025), G3 (Wan et
al., 2023), DEPR (Mu et al., 2023), and GIST (Wolfe et al., 2024) further extend the scale
of training and reduce communication overhead through techniques such as owner-compute
execution, pipeline parallelism, and stochastic boundary-node sampling, achieving strong
scalability on billion-scale graphs.
Beyond scalability concerns, real-world systems also exhibit noise, OOD nodes, and
structural irregularities, making OOD behavior a central challenge for deploying GCNs (Li
et al., 2024). Because graph data rarely possess an ideal static structure, they are frequently
affected by factors such as data acquisition errors, temporal dynamics, noise injection, or
adversarial attacks (Jin et al., 2020). Existing studies have shown that real-world graph
data, including transportation networks, energy systems, and visibility graph constructed
from large-scale time series, often contain measurement errors, structural noise, and OOD
nodes simultaneously (Chen et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2025). As a result, graphs encountered
during testing may deviate substantially from the training set in both topology and attribute
distribution. Without explicitly modeling and detecting such out of distribution nodes, GCNs
can suffer from severe prediction bias and robustness degradation in practical deployment.
Consequently, OOD behavior has become a key factor affecting the stability and security of
GCN-based operating systems (Dai et al., 2025).
To mitigate OOD disturbances, a variety of robust GNN approaches have been proposed,
including regularization-based methods such as GNNGuard (Zhang et al., 2020) and Robust-
GCN (Zhu et al., 2019), anomaly-oriented models such as OOGN (Li et al., 2022) and
GraphDE (Li et al., 2022), and research on adversarial structural perturbations, exempli-
ﬁed by Structack (Hussain et al., 2021). Collectively, these studies emphasize that noisy
data, erroneous edges, and structural perturbations undermine the reliability of predictive
123

Annals of Operations Research
models.However, most existing robustness techniques rely on explicit anomaly supervision
or dense structural optimization, making them difﬁcult to scale to million- or billion-node
graphs. A growing body of work also notes that edge anomalies are more subtle and more
damaging than node anomalies, as they distort topology, blur community structures, and
alter propagation pathways in supply-chain or ﬁnancial networks (Jin et al., 2020; Motie &
Raahemi, 2024; Shah et al., 2016).
Consequently, GCNs in applications of operations research face a twofold dilemma: on the
one hand, the challenges of large-scale graph training, such as computational cost, neighbor-
hood explosion, and structural dynamism, remain far from being resolved; on the other hand,
high-frequency noise and OOD disturbances render conventional training procedures highly
unstable in real environments, often inducing systematic biases in critical decision-making
tasks. The deeper contradiction lies in the long-standing separation between scalability meth-
ods (sampling, partitioning, distributed frameworks) and robustness methods: the former
implicitly assume clean data, while the latter are typically unable to scale to large graphs. As
a result, existing approaches struggle to satisfy the dual requirement of handling large-scale
graphs while resisting OOD perturbations.
Motivated by these challenges, we propose the SGCN framework. By performing multiple
independent subsamplings of the large graph, training local GCNs in parallel on each sub-
graph, and then fusing parameters through performance-aware weighting, SGCN naturally
offsets local noise and OOD effects across diverse subgraph structures. At the same time, its
fully parallel training framework effectively alleviates large-scale computational bottlenecks.
Together, these properties offer a uniﬁed and scalable solution to the long-standing tension
between scalability and OOD robustness.
3 Methodology
Let G = (V, E) be a graph with N = |V| nodes. Each node v ∈V is associated with a label
yv and a p-dimensional feature vector xv ∈Rp. Let (·, G; θ) denote a GCN parameterized
by θ, which outputs ˆyv = (xv, G; θ) for node v.
When N is extremely large, full-graph training can be computationally prohibitive due
to memory and latency constraints. We therefore train the GCN via subsampling: in each
global epoch, we construct multiple small subgraphs and perform local training on them,
then aggregate the resulting local parameter estimates into a global update. This yields an
efﬁcient and scalable training scheme, denoted as SGCN.
3.1 Training framework
Suppose the training runs for T global epochs. At global epoch t ∈{1, . . . , T }, we maintain
a global parameter estimate ˜θ(t−1) from the previous epoch and perform the following two
steps.
Step 1 (Local training on subsampled subgraphs). We generate R subgraphs
G(t)
1 , . . . , G(t)
R from G using a network subsampling strategy (e.g., snowball sampling). Let
S(t)
r
be the node set of G(t)
r
and enforce |S(t)
r | ≤m for all r to control subgraph size. For
each subgraph G(t)
r , we initialize the local model with ˜θ(t−1) and obtain a local estimate by
minimizing the empirical loss:
123

Annals of Operations Research
ˆθ(t)
r
= arg min
θ
|S(t)
r |−1 
v∈S(t)
r
l

yv, (xv, G(t)
r ; θ | ˜θ(t−1))

,
(1)
where l(·, ·) is a task-speciﬁc loss function (e.g., cross-entropy). Since the R local trainings
share the same initialization but operate on different subgraphs, they can be executed in
parallel.
Step 2 (Performance-aware Weighting). After obtaining { ˆθ(t)
r }R
r=1, we evaluate each
local model on a held-out validation set and record a score s(t)
r
(e.g., accuracy). We then
update the global estimate via weighted averaging:
˜θ(t) =
R

r=1
w(t)
r
ˆθ(t)
r ,
w(t)
r
=
s(t)
r
R
j=1 s(t)
j
.
(2)
This performance-aware weighting prioritizes subgraphs that yield better validation perfor-
mance and downweights subgraphs that are likely to be noisy or out-of-distribution (OOD),
because such subgraphs typically lead to worse validation scores. The resulting ˜θ(t) is used
as the initialization for epoch t + 1. Algorithm 1 summarizes the full training procedure, and
Figure 1 illustrates the overall framework.
Algorithm 1 Training process of SGCN
Input: Graph G = (V, E), feature matrix X, label vector y,
1:
number of global epoch T , number of subgraphs in each global epoch R, subgraph size m, local training
epochs L
Output: Final global parameter estimate ˜θ(T)
2: Initialize global parameter estimate ˜θ(0) randomly
3: for t = 1 to T do
4:
for r = 1 to R in parallel do
5:
Generate a subsample (subgraph) G(t)
r
with at most m nodes from Vtrain via a chosen subsampling
strategy
6:
Extract subgraph features Xr and labels yr
7:
Initialize the local model with parameters set to the current global estimate ˜θ(t−1)
8:
for ℓ= 1 to L do
9:
Train the GCN on G(t)
r
using (Xr, yr)
10:
end for
11:
Save the updated local parameter estimate as ˆθ(t)
r
12:
Evaluate ˆθ(t)
r
on a held-out validation set to obtain a score s(t)
r
13:
end for
14:
Compute weights: w(t)
r
=
R
j=1 s(t)
j
−1
s(t)
r
for r = 1, . . . , R
15:
Update the global parameter estimate via weighted model averaging of local estimates: ˜θ(t) =
R
r=1 w(t)
r
ˆθ(t)
r
16: end for
return ˜θ(T)
3.2 Weighted truncation aggregation
While performance-aware weighting in (2) reduces the inﬂuence of low-quality subgraphs,
a small number of severely corrupted subgraphs may still introduce bias if their validation
scores are small but non-zero. To further stabilize training, we introduce a weighted truncation
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 The framework of SGCN.
Fig. 2 Subsampling in a network containing OOD nodes.
aggregationmechanism,denotedasTruncWeighted,whichcombinessoftweightingwithhard
selection.
Since OOD nodes are relatively rare in the overall network, a sampled subgraph may
contain no OOD nodes at all, or exhibit a lower OOD proportion than the original graph.
As is shown in Figure 2, subgraph sampling therefore increases the chance of obtaining
subgraphs that are cleaner or less affected by OOD perturbations, which can provide more
reliable neighborhood statistics and more informative local training signals. Building on
this, TruncWeighted aims to remove the worst-performing local models via truncation and to
further attenuate the remaining low-quality local models through performance-aware weight-
ing. As a result, local estimations learned from cleaner or less OOD-inﬂuenced subgraphs
contribute more to the global update, while the inﬂuence of OOD-contaminated subgraphs
is systematically suppressed, leading to smoother optimization and improved robustness on
large-scale noisy graphs. The detailed procedure is described below.
At epoch t, given validation scores {s(t)
r }R
r=1, we rank all local models in descending
order and keep only the top-performing fraction speciﬁed by a truncation ratio ρtop ∈(0, 1].
Speciﬁcally, let {s(t)
(1), s(t)
(2), · · · , s(t)
(R)} denote the ordered scores in descending order. Let K =
⌈Rρtop⌉. Based on K, we can deﬁne the index set of the top-K local models as I(t)
top = {r :
s(t)
r
≥s(t)
(K)}. We then aggregate only over this index set:
123

Annals of Operations Research
˜θ(t) =

r∈I(t)
top s(t)
r
ˆθ(t)
r

r∈I(t)
top s(t)
r
.
(3)
Here ρtop is a hyperparameter controlling the retained fraction (e.g., ρtop = 0.9 keeps the
top 90%). Intuitively, truncation performs hard removal of unreliable subgraphs, prevent-
ing their small yet nonzero weights from accumulating into a biased global update, while
performance-awareweightingprovidessoftreliabilityweightingwithintheretainedset.Their
combination makes the aggregation dominated by consistent, high-quality local estimations
without requiring explicit OOD labels, thereby improving robustness and training stability.
4 Experiments
To rigorously evaluate the performance, scalability, and efﬁciency of the proposed SGCN
training framework, we conduct experiments on three widely-used benchmark datasets1:
Cora Sen et al. (2008), PubMed Sen et al. (2008), and Amazon Computers Shchur et al.
(2018). These datasets vary signiﬁcantly in scale and structural complexity, allowing us to
evaluate the effectiveness of SGCN under diverse graph learning scenarios.
4.1 Datasets and baselines
To evaluate the performance of SGCN and competing methods, we adopt three open-sourced
datasets, each containing graph-structured data with associated node features and class labels.
• Cora is a citation network where each node represents a scientiﬁc publication, and edges
denote citation relationships between papers. The node features are high-dimensional
sparse binary vectors indicating the presence or absence of speciﬁc words in the docu-
ment. Each paper is assigned a label corresponding to one of several research topics.
• Pubmed is a biomedical citation graph in which nodes represent scientiﬁc articles, and
edges indicate citation links. Node features are constructed using TF-IDF representations
of words from the abstracts. Each article is labeled according to the medical subject
category it belongs to.
• AmazonComputersisaproductco-purchasenetworkwherenodesrepresentitemsinthe
Computers category and edges indicate that two products are frequently bought together.
Node features are bag-of-words representations extracted from product descriptions and
metadata, and each node is assigned a label corresponding to the product category (or sub-
category) for node classiﬁcation. Compared to citation networks, Amazon Computers
typically exhibits noisier and more heterogeneous connectivity patterns, providing a
complementary testbed for evaluating the robustness and efﬁciency of subgraph-based
training.
To evaluate the relative performance of SGCN, we compare it with four representative
methods:
• Standard GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017) is a full-batch graph convolutional network that
requires the entire graph to reside in memory during training.
1 The
datasets
used
are
publicly
available.
Cora:
https://github.com/shchur/gnn-benchmark/raw/
master/data/npz/cora.npz;
PubMed:
https://github.com/shchur/gnn-benchmark/raw/master/data/npz/
pubmed.npz;
Amazon
Computers:
https://github.com/shchur/gnn-benchmark/raw/master/data/npz/
amazon_electronics_computers.npz.
123

Annals of Operations Research
• GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017) introduces ﬁxed-size neighbor sampling and aggre-
gation to enable inductive learning.
• GraphSAINT (Zeng et al., 2020) adopts node, edge, or random-walk-based subgraph
sampling strategies, coupled with importance reweighting to ensure unbiased gradient
estimation across training batches.
• Cluster-GCN (Chiang et al., 2019) partitions the graph into densely connected clusters
using METIS and performs mini-batch training on the resulting subgraphs.
To ensure consistency and reproducibility, all baseline methods are implemented using
their ofﬁcial released code. Each method is independently run for 10 trials per dataset, and
the reported results are the mean values across runs. For a fair comparison, all methods
are trained using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.01 and a weight decay of
5 × 10−4. ReLU is used as the activation function, and a dropout rate of 0.5 is applied to
prevent overﬁtting. The hidden dimension is set to 16 for Cora and 32 for Pubmed,reﬂecting
the increasing complexity of the datasets.
For SGCN, the hyperparameters are selected based on performance on the validation sets.
Speciﬁcally, for Cora, we use T = 100 epochs, R = 10 subsamples per epoch, a maximum
subgraph size of m = 100, and L = 10 local training steps. For Pubmed, we set T = 50,
R = 20, m = 300, and L = 5. For Amazon Computers, we use T = 60, R = 20, m = 500,
and L = 15.
During training, we aggregate local model parameters obtained from subsamples in each
epoch. The most basic aggregation method is to assign equal weights to all subsample models.
However, to enhance model quality and training robustness, we adopt a more reﬁned heuristic
weighting strategy: for each epoch, we evaluate the predictive performance of each local
model on a held-out validation set and assign weights proportional to its validation accuracy.
This performance-aware weighting allows more informative local models to contribute more
to the global parameter update. In subsequent experiments, we also adopted this technique,
which leads to consistently better results compared to uniform averaging.
All experiments are performed on NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU and 32GB RAM. The imple-
mentation is built using PyTorch 2.1.0 with support from PyG library. We ensure that all
experiments use consistent data splits, identical hardware, and ﬁxed random seeds for repro-
ducibility. Source code and detailed conﬁgurations will be made publicly available.
4.2 Configurations and setups for robustness evaluation
To comprehensively evaluate the robustness of SGCN under network OOD conditions, we
design controlled perturbation experiments that simulate realistic graph corruption such as
erroneous connections, isolated nodes, and topic drifts. Speciﬁcally, we randomly select
pood% of the training nodes as OOD nodes and rewire their edges according to a Bernoulli
distribution with probability prc. Each selected node reconnects to other nodes with proba-
bility prc, thereby creating structural perturbations of varying intensity.
In our experiments, prc is set to 0.01, 0.05, and 0.1, corresponding to mild, moderate, and
severe edge corruption, respectively. The validation and test graphs remain clean to ensure
that all performance degradation originates solely from the corrupted training structures. For
each (pood, prc) conﬁguration, we compare the Standard(full-graph) GCN baseline with
three variants of the proposed SGCN framework:
• SGCN-Avg: performs uniform averaging of model parameters obtained from all sub-
graphs, i.e., each subgraph contributes equally to the global parameter update regardless
of its validation performance.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 Comparison of test
accuracy and average training
time per epoch of various
methods on the Cora dataset
Method
Test Accuracy
Avg. Training Time (s)
Standard GCN
0.811
1.914
GraphSAGE
0.792
0.037
GraphSAINT
0.795
0.054
Cluster-GCN
0.708
0.368
SGCN (Ours)
0.791
0.035
• SGCN-Weighted: aggregates subgraph parameters through a weighted average, where
each subgraph’s contribution is proportional to its validation accuracy, thus reducing the
inﬂuence of poorly trained subgraphs.
• SGCN-TruncWeighted: further extends the weighted scheme by introducing a trunca-
tion mechanism that retains only the top k subgraphs (determined by a predeﬁned ratio)
for aggregation, effectively ﬁltering out subgraphs potentially contaminated by OOD
nodes and producing more stable global updates.
All variants share identical network architectures and optimization settings to ensure a fair
comparison. The mean test accuracy is reported over multiple random runs. It is also worth
noting that even without manually injected anomalies (pood = 0%), real-world graph datasets
such as Cora naturally contain unlabeled outliers or noisy connections. These inherent irregu-
larities are difﬁcult to identify explicitly yet can still affect model stability and generalization.
The TruncWeighted mechanism, by automatically down-weighting or excluding poorly per-
forming subgraphs during aggregation, implicitly mitigates the effect of such inherent noise
without requiring explicit anomaly labels.
4.3 Performance comparison
In this section, we evaluate the overall performance of SGCN in terms of classiﬁcation
accuracy and training efﬁciency. Experiments are conducted on the three datasets mentioned
above. SGCN is compared with four representative methods: Standard GCN, GraphSAGE,
GraphSAINT, and Cluster-GCN.
We begin by evaluating the performance of SGCN on the Cora dataset, which consists of
relatively small-scale but highly sparse graph-structured data. Each method is executed for
10 independent trials, and we report the average test accuracy and average per-epoch training
time.
As summarized in Table 1, SGCN achieves a test accuracy of 79.11%, closely approaching
that of GraphSAINT (79.53%) and GraphSAGE (79.21%), while being only 2.03% lower
than the full-graph Standard GCN (81.14%). This result demonstrates that our subgraph-
based training framework is capable of preserving the overall predictive performance even
without access to full-graph computation during training.
In terms of training efﬁciency, SGCN signiﬁcantly outperforms all baselines. It achieves
the fastest average training time per epoch at just 0.0346 seconds–more than 55× faster
than Standard GCN, and slightly faster than both GraphSAINT (0.0535s) and GraphSAGE
(0.0369s). Compared to Cluster-GCN, which requires preprocessing of static METIS par-
titions, SGCN is not only approximately 10× faster but also yields a notable 8.36% gain
in accuracy. This validates the advantage of our performance-aware weighting, which allow
efﬁcient training without sacriﬁcing expressiveness.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 Comparison of test
accuracy and average training
time per epoch on Pubmed
Method
Test Accuracy
Avg. Training Time (s)
Standard GCN
0.799
2.549
GraphSAGE
0.777
0.069
GraphSAINT
0.802
0.106
Cluster-GCN
0.755
0.416
SGCN (Ours)
0.814
0.054
To draw a conclusion, these results on Cora validate our hypothesis that full-graph com-
putation is not strictly necessary for effective GCN training. Properly designed subgraph
sampling and performance-aware weighting over local models can lead to efﬁcient, scalable,
and high-performing models, even under limited graph access per iteration.
To further assess the scalability and generalization of SGCN, we evaluate its performance
on the Pubmed dataset, which is considerably larger and structurally more complex than
Cora. This dataset poses greater challenges for representation learning due to its higher node
count, deeper hierarchical structure, and lower average degree.
As shown in Table 2, SGCN achieves the highest test accuracy among all evaluated meth-
ods,reaching81.43%.ItoutperformsGraphSAINT(80.23%)andsigniﬁcantlysurpassesboth
GraphSAGE (77.70%) and Cluster-GCN (75.50%). Notably, it also exceeds the performance
of Standard GCN (79.91%), which has complete access to the global graph. This highlights
the ability of our performance-aware weighting to capture essential structural information
and global semantics, even in the absence of full-graph computation.
From an efﬁciency perspective, SGCN again achieves the lowest average training time
per epoch, at just 0.0541 seconds. Compared to GraphSAINT (0.1063s), Cluster-GCN
(0.4161s), and Standard GCN (2.5494s), SGCN delivers speedups of 49%, 7.7×, and 47×,
respectively. These results conﬁrm that our approach scales favorably with graph size while
maintaining minimal computational overhead. Unlike Cluster-GCN, which relies on ﬁxed
partitions that may not generalize well to heterogeneous topologies, or GraphSAINT, which
involvesrepeatededgesamplingandnormalization,SGCNleveragescompact,subgraphsand
performance-aware weighting to accelerate convergence without sacriﬁcing representation
power.
Beyond raw per-epoch speed, SGCN also delivers favorable performance when consider-
ing accuracy-per-second metrics, achieving the highest ratio among all methods evaluated.
This reﬂects not only its computational efﬁciency but also its ability to extract useful
features quickly. In addition, the modular design of local training on multiple subgraphs
allows for natural parallelism. With R subgraphs in each global epoch, the training pro-
cess can be distributed across multiple GPUs or compute nodes, yielding potential speedups
of up to min(R, K) times when using K devices. Such ﬂexibility is highly beneﬁcial in
production-scale graph learning systems where fast retraining or frequent parameter updates
are required. Furthermore, since SGCN avoids dynamic neighbor sampling and full-graph
memory loading, it imposes signiﬁcantly lower memory demands compared to GCN-based
or neighbor-aggregation-based methods. This makes it especially attractive for deployment
in edge devices, limited-resource settings, or federated learning scenarios.
All in all, these properties make SGCN not only efﬁcient in isolated benchmarks but also
practical for real-world systems that demand high throughput, scalability, and low hardware
overhead.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 3 Comparison of test
accuracy and average training
time per epoch on Amazon
Computers.
Method
Test Accuracy
Avg. Training Time (s)
Standard GCN
0.6239
0.8472
GraphSAGE
0.6630
0.0386
GraphSAINT
0.6627
0.0513
Cluster-GCN
0.6612
0.0258
SGCN (Ours)
0.6630
0.0259
Finally, we evaluate the proposed SGCN on the Amazon Computers dataset, reporting
both test accuracy and the average training time per epoch to assess predictive performance
and efﬁciency.
Table 3 shows that SGCN achieves a test accuracy of 0.6630. This result matches the best-
performing baseline, GraphSAGE, and is slightly higher than GraphSAINT (0.6627) and
Cluster-GCN (0.6612). In addition, SGCN improves substantially over the Standard GCN,
which attains 0.6239. The improvement over Standard GCN demonstrates that subgraph-
based training, combined with performance-aware weighting, can preserve and even enhance
predictive performance on Amazon Computers.
In terms of training efﬁciency, SGCN requires 0.0259 seconds per epoch on average,
which is essentially identical to Cluster-GCN at 0.0258 seconds per epoch. Compared with
GraphSAGE and GraphSAINT, SGCN reduces the per-epoch training time from 0.0386
to 0.0259 seconds and from 0.0513 to 0.0259 seconds, respectively. These correspond to
reductions of approximately 33% relative to GraphSAGE and 49% relative to GraphSAINT,
while maintaining comparable accuracy. Compared with Standard GCN, SGCN reduces the
per-epoch cost from 0.8472 to 0.0259 seconds, which is more than a 32-fold speedup, and
simultaneously improves test accuracy from 0.6239 to 0.6630, yielding an absolute gain of
0.0391.
Overall, the Amazon Computers results indicate that SGCN provides a strong accuracy–
efﬁciency trade-off among the compared methods. It achieves competitive test accuracy while
attaining near-minimal per-epoch training time.
4.4 Subsampling strategies comparison
Having demonstrated in the previous section that SGCN achieves competitive or superior
performance compared to several strong baselines, we next investigate the impact of different
subsampling strategies within our framework. Since SGCN is designed to be method-
agnostic, the choice of subsampling method can vary without altering the overall training
pipeline. To this end, we compare four representative strategies, namely random edge, random
node, random walk, and snowball sampling, under the same parameter aggregation scheme
used in Section 4.3. By analyzing local model accuracy distributions, convergence curves,
and stability on three benchmark datasets, we aim to provide a deeper understanding of how
subsampling choices affect the trade-off between accuracy, efﬁciency, and robustness.
Figure 3 summarizes the performance of different subsampling strategies on the Cora
dataset. All strategies eventually converge, but they differ signiﬁcantly in convergence speed
and ﬁnal accuracy. Random node sampling achieves both the fastest convergence and the
highest peak validation accuracy, reaching close to 0.88 during training before stabilizing
at the highest ﬁnal test accuracy (0.872). Random edge sampling attains a comparable peak
accuracy, trailing random node by only 0.001, and converges to a slightly lower ﬁnal accuracy.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 3 Validation accuracy curves of SGCN on Cora using different subsampling strategies. Random node
sampling converges faster and achieves higher accuracy, while random edge, random walk, and snowball
sampling show slower convergence and similar ﬁnal accuracy.
In contrast, random walk and snowball sampling exhibit much lower peak values (around
0.78) and converge more slowly to similar lower accuracy levels. These ﬁndings indicate that
node-based sampling provides the best trade-off between convergence stability and predictive
performance on Cora.
A plausible explanation is that Cora exhibits relatively pronounced community structure
and strong homophily. Under these conditions, topology-driven samplers can over-emphasize
a small number of densely connected regions in early iterations, so different sampled sub-
graphs expose distinct local label and feature neighborhoods. This increases gradient noise
and leads to slower and less stable improvement. By contrast, random node and random
edge sampling tend to provide broader coverage across communities and reduce inter-batch
overlap, yielding more representative neighborhood statistics and more stable optimization.
These observations are consistent with previous research on sampling bias and dependence
in graph sampling and GNN training Zhang et al. (2021); Espín-Noboa et al. (2021).
To further compare stability, Figure 4 illustrates the local model validation accuracy dis-
tributions evaluated every 10 epochs. Random node and random edge sampling consistently
produce compact accuracy distributions with narrow variance, indicating highly stable local
models. In contrast, random walk and snowball sampling show substantially larger variance,
particularly in early epochs, reﬂecting their less uniform sampling nature.
The wider distributions under random walk and snowball sampling can be attributed to
stronger sample dependence. Consecutively sampled subgraphs often overlap substantially
in nodes and edges, so each local model is trained on a correlated and relatively narrow
view of the graph. This reduces the effective diversity among local models and increases
the variance of the aggregated updates, particularly in early training when coverage remains
limited. Similar redundancy and dependence effects in mini-batch GNN training have been
noted in recent system studies Sheng et al. (2024); Bajaj et al. (2024).
We subsequently performed experiments on the Pubmed dataset, which is signiﬁcantly
larger and structurally more complex than Cora, making stability and scalability more chal-
lenging.Figure5showsthevalidationaccuracycurvesunderdifferentsubsamplingstrategies.
Random node and random edge sampling again demonstrate the best performance, achieving
the highest peak validation accuracies, with values approaching 0.87 during training, and the
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig.4 LocalmodelvalidationaccuracydistributionsontheCoradatasetunderdifferentsubsamplingstrategies,
evaluated every 10 epochs. Random Node and Random Edge sampling yield stable and concentrated accuracy,
whereas Random Walk and Snowball show larger variance.
highest ﬁnal accuracies after convergence (0.859 and 0.856). Random walk converges more
slowly and reaches a lower peak accuracy of about 0.85, while snowball lags behind with
both a lower peak of around 0.82 and more noticeable ﬂuctuations throughout training.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 5 Validation accuracy curves of SGCN on the Pubmed dataset using different subsampling strategies.
Random Node and Random Edge sampling achieve the highest ﬁnal accuracies, while Random Walk converges
more slowly and Snowball performs worst.
On Pubmed, the observed performance gap is likely driven by a coverage effect induced
by the sampling strategy. Topology-driven samplers may spend many steps exploring within
limited regions before reaching diverse areas of the graph, so different sampled subgraphs can
exhibit markedly different neighborhood statistics. This increases the variance of stochastic
gradient updates and can slow convergence. By contrast, random node and random edge
sampling typically provide broader coverage per epoch, leading to more consistent opti-
mization trajectories and higher ﬁnal accuracy. Similar coverage–variance interactions and
sampling-induced estimation errors in mini-batch GNN training have been empirically and
theoretically discussed in recent work Zhou et al. (2025); Balin and Çatalyürek (2022).
Compared with Cora, the stability differences on Pubmed follow a similar pattern: node-
based and edge-based sampling maintain the most concentrated accuracy distributions, while
random walk and especially snowball exhibit larger variance. For brevity, the detailed boxplot
results for Pubmed are presented in the Appendix.
Finally, the Amazon Computers dataset shows a very different pattern from Cora and
Pubmed, as shown in Figure 6. The gap between subsampling strategies is much larger, and
the best and worst choices are clearly separated.
Random node sampling is the best on both speed and ﬁnal validation accuracy. It increases
quickly in the ﬁrst few global epochs and then stays around 0.66–0.68 with small ﬂuctuations.
In contrast, random edge and random walk improve much more slowly and ﬁnally stay around
0.59–0.60. Snowball sampling performs the worst. Its validation accuracy stays near 0.37 for
many epochs, and even near the end it is only around 0.45–0.47, with large ups and downs.
A plausible explanation is related to the semantics of the Amazon Computers graph, which
is constructed from co-purchase relations. An edge reﬂects frequent co-buying rather than
label agreement, so local neighborhoods can be label-mixed and less class-consistent. Under
such heterophilous and noisy neighborhoods, edge-expansion samplers such as random walk
and snowball are more likely to over-focus on speciﬁc local regions, yielding subgraphs
with biased neighborhood composition. This bias can increase training noise and lead to
slower and less stable convergence, as discussed in studies of network sampling bias (Non-
representative sampled networks, 2024). Snowball sampling can further exacerbate the issue
because iterative expansion tends to introduce substantial overlap across epochs, reducing
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 6 Validation accuracy curves of SGCN on Amazon Computers using different subsampling strategies.
Random node converges fastest and reaches the highest accuracy. Random edge and random walk converge
slower and end lower. Snowball converges slowest and has the lowest accuracy with large ﬂuctuations.
effective coverage and local model diversity; recent work on mini-batch GNN training also
notes that redundancy and overlap can increase variance and hurt stability (Sheng et al.,
2024). By contrast, random node sampling tends to distribute samples more broadly over the
graph, improving coverage and mitigating expansion-induced bias, which is beneﬁcial for
stable optimization on such co-purchase graphs (Yousuf et al., 2023). Random edge sampling
typically lies between these extremes, as it remains constrained by edges but is more dispersed
than walk- or expansion-based sampling (Zhou et al., 2025).
Overall, the Amazon results show that when edges do not strongly match labels, random
node sampling is a safer choice. It gives better coverage and more stable training, while
edge-based expansion methods can be much less reliable.
4.5 Robustness analysis of SGCN against OOD nodes
The core advantage of SGCN lies not only in its computational efﬁciency but also in its inher-
ent robustness to OOD nodes. To systematically evaluate this property, we design experiments
that measure performance degradation under increasing proportions of out-of-distribution
nodes. We compare three SGCN variants with different aggregation strategies: uniform
averaging (SGCN-Avg), performance-aware weighting (SGCN-Weighted), and truncated
weighted averaging (SGCN-TruncWeighted). The truncation mechanism explicitly excludes
the lowest-performing local models, which are most likely to be contaminated by OOD nodes.
We ﬁrst investigate the robustness of the proposed SGCN framework on the Cora
dataset under controlled out-of-distribution perturbations. Experiments cover three sub-
graph sampling ratios, prc ∈{0.01, 0.05, 0.10}, and seven OOD node proportions, pood ∈
{0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40}%. To provide a coherent and non-overloaded presentation, we
separate the roles of ﬁgures and tables: the accuracy curves in Figure 7 highlight over-
all performance dynamics, the consolidated accuracy table (Table 4) reports all numerical
results for every conﬁguration, and the robustness heatmap in Figure 8 visualizes the cross-
conﬁguration accuracy gains of SGCN-TruncWeighted over Standard GCN.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 7 Test accuracy versus OOD ratio for all sampling ratios (prc ∈{0.01, 0.05, 0.10}) on the Cora dataset.
Each subplot corresponds to a different sampling ratio, with all four methods plotted within each panel.
Table 4 Test accuracy of Standard GCN and three SGCN variants on the Cora dataset across different prc
and pood values.
pood (%)
Method
0
5
10
15
20
30
40
prc = 0.01
GCN (Full Graph)
0.798
0.785
0.785
0.776
0.760
0.748
0.728
SGCN–Avg
0.735
0.761
0.788
0.807
0.818
0.829
0.846
SGCN–Weighted
0.789
0.798
0.809
0.830
0.836
0.832
0.840
SGCN–TruncWeighted
0.817
0.842
0.839
0.839
0.840
0.845
0.840
prc = 0.05
GCN (Full Graph)
0.798
0.795
0.792
0.791
0.778
0.758
0.760
SGCN–Avg
0.735
0.791
0.785
0.794
0.792
0.779
0.773
SGCN–Weighted
0.789
0.802
0.817
0.810
0.803
0.770
0.756
SGCN–TruncWeighted
0.817
0.821
0.829
0.826
0.817
0.802
0.781
prc = 0.10
GCN (Full Graph)
0.798
0.791
0.782
0.776
0.764
0.741
0.674
SGCN–Avg
0.735
0.797
0.795
0.778
0.762
0.668
0.574
SGCN–Weighted
0.789
0.821
0.807
0.795
0.761
0.704
0.686
SGCN–TruncWeighted
0.817
0.826
0.830
0.793
0.758
0.716
0.696
Across all conﬁgurations in Table 4, Standard GCN exhibits a clear and monotonic degra-
dation as the proportion of OOD nodes increases. When pood grows from 0% to 40%, the test
accuracy of GCN (Full Graph) drops from around 0.80 to the range [0.67, 0.76], depending
on prc. The degradation becomes particularly pronounced once pood ≥20%, indicating that
full-graph message passing increasingly ampliﬁes the effect of corrupted neighborhoods as
OOD nodes permeate the graph. This behavior provides a natural baseline for assessing the
robustness contribution of the SGCN variants.
In contrast, all three SGCN variants display substantially ﬂatter degradation curves in
Figure 7, reﬂecting the stabilizing effect of subgraph-based training and aggregation. When
the sampling ratio is smallest (prc = 0.01), SGCN–TruncWeighted remains almost invariant
under OOD perturbations: its accuracy changes only from 0.817 at pood = 0% to 0.840
at pood = 40%, whereas the corresponding GCN accuracy falls from 0.798 to 0.728. The
weighted aggregation variant (SGCN–Weighted) shows a similar but slightly weaker pattern,
123

Annals of Operations Research
e.g., reaching 0.836 at pood = 20% compared with 0.760 for GCN. Even the simple uniform
averaging variant (SGCN–Avg) becomes consistently better than GCN once pood ≥10%.
These trends indicate that when subgraphs are sufﬁciently ﬁne-grained and diverse, aggregat-
ing local estimators can effectively suppress noise ampliﬁcation and maintain stable decision
boundaries under substantial distributional shifts.
As the sampling ratio increases to prc = 0.05, the relative ordering among the four meth-
ods remains largely unchanged, but the performance margins narrow. SGCN–TruncWeighted
still strictly dominates the baseline across all OOD levels: at pood = 10% and 20%,
it improves upon GCN by 0.037 and 0.039 absolute accuracy, respectively, and even at
pood = 40% it maintains a positive gap of 0.021. However, the differences to SGC-
N–Weighted and SGCN–Avg are smaller than in the prc = 0.01 case, suggesting that larger
subgraphs induce more neighborhood overlap and reduce the diversity of local estimators.
This loss of diversity limits, but does not eliminate, the robustness gains obtainable from
aggregation and truncation.
A more nuanced pattern appears when prc = 0.10. In this regime, SGCN–TruncWeighted
continues to outperform GCN under light OOD perturbations, achieving a gain of 0.048 at
pood = 10% (from 0.782 to 0.830). However, the advantage shrinks and even reverses at
intermediate noise levels: at pood = 20% and 30%, the differences become −0.006 and
−0.025, respectively. Interestingly, the gain re-emerges at the highest noise level, where
SGCN–TruncWeighted again surpasses GCN by 0.022 at pood = 40% (0.696 vs. 0.674).
This non-monotonic behavior is consistent with an overlap-driven reduction in estimator
independence: when subgraphs are large and heavily overlapping, the local models carry
highly correlated errors, which weakens the beneﬁts of aggregation under moderate OOD
intensity. Under extreme noise, however, the truncation rule becomes more effective at iso-
lating severely corrupted subgraphs, allowing robustness gains to reappear.
The cross-conﬁguration landscape of robustness is summarized in Figure 8, which visual-
izes the absolute accuracy gain Acc = AccTruncWeighted −AccGCN over all combinations of
prc and pood. A distinct plateau of high gains emerges in the region with small sampling ratio
and strong OOD perturbation: for prc = 0.01 and pood ≥20%, the improvements range
from +0.080 to +0.112, corresponding to roughly 10–15% relative gains over GCN. As prc
increases to 0.05, this plateau shrinks but remains clearly positive, with average improve-
ments of about +0.035 when pood ≥20%. At prc = 0.10, the average gain in the same
high-noise regime becomes negligible (approximately −0.003), with small positive and neg-
ative values cancelling out, which is consistent with the accuracy curves in Figure 7. Focusing
the heatmap on SGCN–TruncWeighted is therefore natural: it is the variant that exhibits the
strongest and most structured robustness pattern, and its improvements over GCN dominate
those of the other SGCN variants.
Overall, the Cora results indicate that the robustness of SGCN arises from the interplay
between two mechanisms. On the one hand, ﬁne-grained subsampling generates diverse
and complementary subgraph-level estimators; on the other hand, the truncation rule acts as
an implicit regularizer that suppresses contributions from subgraphs most affected by OOD
nodes. When prc is small, these mechanisms jointly produce a pronounced robustness plateau
under heavy OOD corruption. As prc increases and overlap proliferates, diversity is reduced
and the gains diminish, but even in these regimes SGCN–TruncWeighted typically matches
or outperforms Standard GCN, and can recover signiﬁcant advantages under extreme noise.
We next present the results on the substantially larger and denser Pubmed dataset,
which serves as a stringent benchmark for evaluating the scalability and robustness of
our SGCN under distributional shifts. We assess Standard GCN and the three SGCN vari-
ants across subgraph sampling ratios prc ∈{0.01, 0.05, 0.10} and OOD node proportions
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 8 Absolute accuracy gain (Acc) of SGCN-TruncWeighted over Standard GCN across all combinations
of prc and pood on the Cora dataset. Higher gains (yellow regions) appear when subgraphs are small and
OOD intensity is high.
Table 5 Test accuracy of Standard GCN and three SGCN variants on the Pubmed dataset across different prc
and pood values
pood (%)
Method
0
5
10
15
20
30
40
prc = 0.01
Standard GCN
0.800
0.794
0.792
0.782
0.778
0.761
0.754
SGCN–Avg
0.815
0.844
0.851
0.855
0.850
0.835
0.837
SGCN–Weighted
0.826
0.845
0.856
0.847
0.850
0.839
0.847
SGCN–TruncWeighted
0.819
0.845
0.856
0.855
0.843
0.838
0.852
prc = 0.05
Standard GCN
0.800
0.792
0.800
0.786
0.778
0.753
0.742
SGCN–Avg
0.815
0.843
0.834
0.830
0.823
0.827
0.827
SGCN–Weighted
0.826
0.837
0.841
0.846
0.839
0.832
0.831
SGCN–TruncWeighted
0.819
0.840
0.847
0.840
0.836
0.818
0.842
prc = 0.10
Standard GCN
0.800
0.793
0.791
0.778
0.764
0.744
0.724
SGCN–Avg
0.815
0.827
0.818
0.803
0.803
0.805
0.810
SGCN–Weighted
0.826
0.825
0.821
0.805
0.804
0.825
0.817
SGCN–TruncWeighted
0.819
0.824
0.818
0.802
0.807
0.802
0.812
pood ∈{0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40}%. The complete results are provided in Table 5, while Fig-
ure 9 illustrates accuracy trajectories and Figure 10 summarizes robustness gains.
At the smallest sampling ratio (prc = 0.01), Standard GCN shows a gradual and consistent
degradation as pood increases, dropping from 0.800 under clean conditions to 0.754 at pood =
40%. In contrast, all SGCN variants remain highly stable. SGCN–TruncWeighted increases
slightly from 0.819 to 0.852 across the same OOD range, and both SGCN–Avg and SGCN–
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 9 Test accuracy versus out-of-distribution ratio (pood) for all sampling ratios (prc ∈{0.01, 0.05, 0.10})
on the Pubmed dataset. Each panel corresponds to one sampling ratio and shows the four evaluated methods.
Fig. 10 Absolute accuracy gain (Acc) of SGCN–TruncWeighted over Standard GCN across all combina-
tions of prc and pood on the Pubmed dataset. Brighter regions correspond to larger robustness gains, which
concentrate at small prc and large pood values.
Weighted maintain accuracies between roughly 0.83 and 0.86 for all OOD levels. As shown
in Figure 9, the SGCN curves remain nearly ﬂat while Standard GCN decreases steadily.
When the sampling ratio increases to prc = 0.05, the dominance of SGCN persists
with slightly reduced but still substantial margins. Over the full OOD range, Standard GCN
decreases from 0.800 to 0.742, whereas SGCN–TruncWeighted stays within [0.819, 0.847]
and reaches 0.842 at the highest noise level. Averaged across all OOD settings, SGCN–
TruncWeighted achieves approximately 0.835 accuracy compared with 0.779 for Standard
GCN, corresponding to a gain of about 0.056.
A similar qualitative pattern appears at the largest sampling ratio (prc = 0.10). Standard
GCN experiences its steepest decline, falling from 0.800 to 0.724 (a drop of 0.076). In
contrast, SGCN–TruncWeighted remains nearly invariant, ranging only from 0.819 to 0.812
across all OOD levels. SGCN–Weighted also remains stable and reaches a high accuracy of
0.825 at pood = 30%, outperforming GCN by 0.081 at this noise level.
Figure 10 provides a global view of the robustness gains. For every combination of prc and
pood, accuracy improvements are strictly positive. Moreover, the gain magnitude increases
with the OOD ratio: at pood = 40%, the improvement reaches 0.098 for prc = 0.01, 0.100
for prc = 0.05, and 0.088 for prc = 0.10. A distinct high-gain region emerges at small
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 6 Test accuracy of Standard GCN and three SGCN variants on the Amazon Computers dataset across
different prc and pood values.
pood (%)
Method
0
5
10
15
20
30
40
prc = 0.01
Standard GCN
0.626
0.624
0.620
0.606
0.600
0.543
0.463
SGCN–Avg
0.655
0.662
0.667
0.659
0.658
0.659
0.667
SGCN–Weighted
0.671
0.669
0.650
0.662
0.663
0.667
0.662
SGCN–TruncWeighted
0.674
0.677
0.689
0.674
0.685
0.676
0.679
prc = 0.05
Standard GCN
0.626
0.626
0.605
0.563
0.534
0.417
0.375
SGCN–Avg
0.671
0.666
0.655
0.653
0.655
0.652
0.648
SGCN–Weighted
0.671
0.664
0.662
0.651
0.653
0.654
0.653
SGCN–TruncWeighted
0.676
0.666
0.673
0.665
0.655
0.654
0.666
prc = 0.10
Standard GCN
0.626
0.621
0.586
0.526
0.446
0.378
0.374
SGCN–Avg
0.666
0.655
0.651
0.652
0.644
0.650
0.644
SGCN–Weighted
0.674
0.657
0.654
0.649
0.651
0.651
0.651
SGCN–TruncWeighted
0.674
0.661
0.655
0.654
0.664
0.663
0.655
Fig. 11 Test accuracy versus out-of-distribution ratio (pood) for all sampling ratios (prc ∈{0.01, 0.05, 0.10})
on the Amazon Computers dataset. Each panel corresponds to one prc value and shows the four evaluated
methods.
prc and large pood, reﬂecting the complementary effects of ﬁne-grained subsampling and
truncation in suppressing unstable or corrupted neighborhood information.
Taken together, the Pubmed results show that SGCN, and especially the TruncWeighted
variant, achieves consistent and substantial robustness improvements over Standard GCN
across all sampling and OOD conﬁgurations. The method delivers 0.06–0.10 absolute gains,
maintains stable behavior across sampling ratios, and scales effectively to large, noisy graphs
with heterogeneous data quality.
WefurtherevaluaterobustnessontheAmazonComputersdatasetwiththesameprotocolas
in the previous datasets. The accuracy curves are shown in Figure 11, and the robustness gains
of SGCN–TruncWeighted over Standard GCN are summarized in Figure 12. The complete
numerical results are reported in Table 6.
Across all three prc settings, Standard GCN degrades rapidly as the OOD ratio increases,
while all SGCN variants remain largely stable. This pattern is especially clear at prc = 0.10:
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 12 Absolute accuracy gain (Acc) of SGCN–TruncWeighted over Standard GCN across all combinations
of prc and pood on Amazon Computers.
as pood increases to 40%, Standard GCN drops from about 0.63 to around 0.37, whereas
SGCN variants stay near 0.64–0.67 throughout. A similar trend is observed when prc = 0.05.
Once pood exceeds 15%, the performance of Standard GCN degrades sharply, whereas
SGCN–Avg, SGCN–Weighted, and SGCN–TruncWeighted exhibit only minor changes and
remain comparatively stable. Even under the mildest perturbation setting, prc = 0.01, the
SGCN variants continue to maintain robust accuracy with limited sensitivity to increasing
pood. Standard GCN still shows clear degradation at higher OOD levels, while SGCN main-
tains a much higher and more stable accuracy band.
Among the three aggregation strategies, SGCN–TruncWeighted consistently provides the
strongest robustness. It is either the top-performing method or very close to the best across
nearly all OOD ratios and sampling ratios. In contrast, SGCN–Avg and SGCN–Weighted
remain stable but may occasionally fall slightly below TruncWeighted under heavier pertur-
bations. This supports the intuition that truncation helps reduce the inﬂuence of local models
that are most affected by OOD nodes.
The heatmap in Figure 12 shows that the robustness gains are strictly positive across
all conﬁgurations. Moreover, the gains grow quickly as pood increases. For example, when
pood = 40%, the improvement reaches about +0.216 at prc = 0.01, +0.292 at prc = 0.05,
and +0.280 at prc = 0.10. These large gains indicate that full-graph message passing in
Standard GCN is highly sensitive to neighborhood corruption in this co-purchase graph,
while SGCN can effectively isolate and suppress the corrupted signal through subgraph
training and aggregation.
Overall, the Amazon results conﬁrm that SGCN provides strong robustness under severe
distribution shifts, and TruncWeighted offers the most reliable performance among the SGCN
variants.
4.6 Hyperparameter sensitivity analysis
We discuss how hyperparameters inﬂuence the empirical performance of our method by using
the Amazon Computers dataset and the SGCN–TruncWeighted variant as a representative
example. We focus on three key parameters: the truncation ratio ρ ∈(0, 1], which denotes
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 7 Sensitivity to truncation
ratio ρ.
ρ
Mean Test Acc. (mean±std)
Best Test Acc.
0.5
0.6590 ± 0.0063
0.6681
0.7
0.6564 ± 0.0126
0.6736
0.8
0.6590 ± 0.0094
0.6797
0.9
0.6587 ± 0.0220
0.7154
1.0
0.6569 ± 0.0144
0.6888
the retained fraction of local models in aggregation; the maximum subgraph size m; and
the number of subgraphs in each global epoch R. Following common practice in sensitivity
analysis,wevaryonefactoratatimewhilekeepingtheothersﬁxedtothedefaultconﬁguration
used in our Amazon experiments. For each setting, we report the mean test accuracy with
standard deviation over repeated trials, together with the best test accuracy observed.
In regard to the truncation ratio ρ, Table 7 indicates that the mean test accuracy varies only
marginally across ρ ∈[0.5, 1.0] (ranging from 0.6564 to 0.6590), suggesting that SGCN–
TruncWeighted is not strongly sensitive to this parameter in terms of average performance.
The more visible effect of ρ lies in robustness and stability. With stricter truncation (e.g.,
ρ = 0.5), the standard deviation is relatively small (0.0063), consistent with the intuition
that ﬁltering out lower-quality local models reduces the inﬂuence of noisy or OOD-heavy
subsamples. As ρ increases, more local models are retained and the aggregation can occa-
sionally beneﬁt from additional complementary information, which is reﬂected by the highest
best-case accuracy at ρ = 0.9 (0.7154). However, this comes with increased variability (std
0.0220), indicating that keeping near-all local models makes the ﬁnal outcome more depen-
dent on whether a few weak local models are included in a given run. In practice, this suggests
that overly aggressive truncation may be unnecessary for accuracy, while overly permissive
truncation may trade stability for occasional gains; we therefore adopt ρ = 0.9 in our default
setting to preserve the peak performance while keeping the mean accuracy comparable to
other choices.
In regard to the maximum subgraph size m, Table 8 shows the most pronounced effect
among the three hyperparameters. Increasing m leads to a clear monotonic degradation in
mean accuracy from 0.6731 (m = 200) to 0.6480 (m = 1200), while the best accuracy
also drops from 0.7136 to 0.6620. This suggests that simply enlarging the subgraph (even if
memory permits) is not beneﬁcial on Amazon Computers. A plausible explanation is two-
fold. First, in a co-purchase graph, expanding to larger neighborhoods can introduce more
heterogeneous and noisy context, which weakens the locality assumption behind subgraph
training and makes local estimations less reliable. Second, larger subgraphs tend to overlap
more across epochs, so different local models become more correlated and provide less com-
plementary information for aggregation; the beneﬁt of ensembling multiple local estimations
is then reduced. In practice, these results recommend using relatively small subgraphs on this
dataset, and we choose m = 200 as the default since it achieves the best mean performance
as well as the strongest best-case result.
Inregardtothenumberofsubgraphsineachglobalepoch R,Table9indicatesthatthemean
accuracy is similar for R ∈{10, 20, 40} (0.6571–0.6587), which suggests limited sensitivity
in average performance. The primary effect again appears in stability: the variance is notably
larger at R = 10 (std 0.0190) and becomes smaller at R = 20 or R = 40 (std 0.0102).
This pattern is expected because a larger R effectively averages over more independently
sampled subgraphs within each global epoch, reducing the randomness introduced by any
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 8 Sensitivity to subgraph
size m.
m
Mean Test Acc. (mean±std)
Best Test Acc.
200
0.6731 ± 0.0117
0.7136
500
0.6600 ± 0.0064
0.6663
800
0.6509 ± 0.0120
0.6659
1200
0.6480 ± 0.0064
0.6620
Table 9 Sensitivity to global
epoch R.
R
Mean Test Acc. (mean±std)
Best Test Acc.
10
0.6571 ± 0.0190
0.7072
20
0.6587 ± 0.0102
0.6797
40
0.6582 ± 0.0102
0.6714
single atypical subsample. Meanwhile, increasing R also increases computation in each
global epoch, and the best accuracy does not improve monotonically with R (e.g., 0.7072 at
R = 10 versus 0.6797 at R = 20). This suggests diminishing returns beyond a moderate R
and motivates a trade-off between stability and efﬁciency. We therefore use R = 20 as the
default conﬁguration on Amazon Computers, which achieves low variance while maintaining
competitive mean accuracy.
Overall, the results suggest that our method is broadly robust to ρ and R in terms of mean
accuracy, and these two parameters mainly regulate the stability–efﬁciency trade-off: smaller
ρ and larger R generally reduce variance, while larger ρ or smaller R may yield occasional
best-case improvements at the cost of higher variability. In contrast, m has a substantially
larger effect and should not be increased blindly; for Amazon Computers, smaller subgraphs
are consistently preferable. Based on the above sensitivity study, we use ρ = 0.9, m = 200,
and R = 20 as the default hyperparameter setting for Amazon experiments unless otherwise
speciﬁed.
5 Conclusion
This paper proposes the SGCN framework to address the scalability limitations and
distribution-shift sensitivity commonly encountered by GCNs when applied to large-scale
graph-based operating systems. Large systems, such as transportation networks, supply-
chain structures, energy systems, and complex network-ﬂow environments, are typically
characterized by massive graph size, structural non-stationarity, and pervasive noise. To cope
with these challenges, SGCN introduces a multi-subgraph parallel training framework com-
bined with performance-aware weighting for parameter aggregation. This design achieves a
balanced trade-off among structural representation ﬁdelity, multi-source noise suppression,
and computational efﬁciency. From a scalability perspective, SGCN decomposes the full-
graph GCN training procedure into a sequence of size-controlled subgraph learning tasks,
thereby avoiding global neighborhood expansion and providing a practical training route
for ultra-large graphs in transportation, supply-chain, and power-grid systems. The com-
positional subgraph-parallel mechanism signiﬁcantly reduces memory and computational
cost and naturally supports multi-GPU or distributed deployment, enabling engineering-
level applicability of GCNs in industrial scenarios of operations research. From a robustness
123

Annals of Operations Research
perspective, SGCN automatically down-weights subgraphs affected by OOD nodes, pro-
ducing stable global representations without relying on explicit anomaly-detection modules.
Experimental results demonstrate that SGCN maintains substantially more stable perfor-
mance under both mild perturbations and severe OOD corruption, allowing it to adapt to the
structural evolution and localized distortions widely observed in real-world operating sys-
tems. Despite these advantages, SGCN may face limitations in several challenging regimes.
On extremely sparse graphs, subgraph sampling may cover too few informative neighbor-
hoods, making message passing less effective and increasing reliance on node features. On
highly dynamic graphs with frequent topology changes, subgraphs sampled at different times
may follow rapidly shifting distributions, which can reduce training stability if the sampling
schedule and aggregation weights are not adapted accordingly. In addition, the effectiveness
of performance-aware weighting depends on a reliable validation signal; under severe label
scarcity or non-stationary label distributions, weight estimation may become noisy and less
discriminative.
Looking forward, we aim to further investigate subgraph scheduling strategies, adap-
tive sampling mechanisms for dynamic graphs, and extensions of SGCN to heterogeneous,
multilayer, and temporal networks, with the goal of strengthening its applicability to
industrial-scale systems. In particular, future work will explore sparsity-aware sampling that
explicitly targets rare but informative regions, streaming or incremental variants of SGCN
for continuously evolving graphs, and robustness-aware weighting rules that remain stable
under limited or drifting validation feedback.
Acknowledgements This research was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
72301070), the Major Project of National Social Science Foundation of China (NO. 22&ZD072), and “the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, China” in UIBE (CXTD14-05).
Funding Open access funding provided by Fu Jen Catholic University The Major Project of National Social
Science Foundation of China (NO. 22&ZD072).
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest All authors certify that they have no afﬁliations with or involvement in any organization
or entity with any ﬁnancial interest or non-ﬁnancial interest in the subject matter or materials discussed in this
manuscript.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives
4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction
in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed material. You do
not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The
images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence,
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative
Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use,
you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
Appendix
To complementthe analyses presented in Section 4.4, we provide additionalsimulation results
illustrating the stability, variance, and temporal evolution of local model performance under
different subsampling strategies. The goal of this appendix is to offer a more comprehensive
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 13 Validation accuracy distributions of local models at epoch 49 on the Cora dataset. Random Node and
Random Edge sampling yield the most stable local models, while Random Walk and Snowball exhibit greater
variance.
Fig. 14 Validation accuracy distributions of local models at epoch 49 on the Pubmed dataset. Node- and
edge-based sampling achieve the most stable performance, whereas Snowball displays the largest variance.
view of how subgraph construction affects the distribution of validation accuracies throughout
the training process, thereby supporting the conclusions reported in the main text.
Cora: Local model stability Figure 13 displays the distribution of local model validation
accuracies at epoch 49 on the Cora dataset across four subsampling strategies. Consistent
with the observations in Section 4.4.1, Random Node and Random Edge sampling produce
compact and concentrated distributions, indicating highly stable subgraph models. In con-
trast, Random Walk and Snowball strategies exhibit notably wider spreads, reﬂecting higher
variance in local estimators and less uniform subgraph quality. These patterns conﬁrm that
node- and edge-based sampling remain the most reliable options on small, sparse graphs
such as Cora.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 15 Temporal evolution of local model validation accuracy distributions on the Pubmed dataset under
different subsampling strategies, evaluated every 10 epochs. Random Node and Random Edge sampling
maintain the most stable performance, while Random Walk and Snowball show substantially higher variance.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Pubmed: Local model stability Figure 14 reports analogous results on the Pubmed dataset.
Compared with Cora, the larger scale and denser connectivity of Pubmed amplify the dif-
ferences among subsampling methods. Node- and edge-based sampling again lead to the
highest and most concentrated accuracy distributions, while Snowball produces the widest
distribution and the lowest mean accuracy. These ﬁndings reinforce the conclusion that uni-
formly exploring the neighborhood structure–rather than accumulating expansion layers as
in Snowball–is crucial for stable local model performance on large graphs.
Pubmed: Temporal evolution of local model variance. In addition to single-epoch statistics,
Figure 15 visualizes the accuracy distributions evaluated every 10 epochs on Pubmed. This
temporal view reveals two notable phenomena. First, Random Node and Random Edge sam-
pling consistently maintain narrow interquartile ranges throughout training, demonstrating
stable convergence dynamics. Second, Random Walk and especially Snowball exhibit large
variance in the early epochs, with unstable outliers persisting into later training stages. This
suggests that Snowball sampling tends to generate uneven subgraph structures, leading to
ﬂuctuating training trajectories that require more epochs to stabilize.
References
Ahmed, K. R., Ansari, M. E., Ahsan, M. N., Rohan, A., Uddin, M. B., & Rivin, M. A. H. (2025). Deep learning
framework for interpretable supply chain forecasting using som ann and shap. Scientiﬁc Reports, 15(1),
26355.
Antony, A., Alaka, P., & Tulasi, B. (2025). Enhancing supply chain management through graph analytics.
IJSAT-International Journal on Science and Technology 16(2).
Bajaj, S., Son, H., Liu, J., Guan, H., & Seraﬁni, M. (2024). Graph neural network training systems: A perfor-
mance comparison of full-graph and mini-batch. Proc. VLDB Endow., 18(4), 1196–1209.
Balin, M.F., & Çatalyürek, Ü.V. (2022). Layer-neighbor sampling - defusing neighborhood explosion in gnns.
In: Neural Information Processing Systems
Baygin, M., Tuncer, T., Dogan, S., Tan, R.-S., & Acharya, U. R. (2021). Automated arrhythmia detection with
homeomorphically irreducible tree technique using more than 10,000 individual subject ecg records.
Information Sciences, 575, 323–337.
Benzidia, S., Makaoui, N., & Bentahar, O. (2021). The impact of big data analytics and artiﬁcial intelli-
gence on green supply chain process integration and hospital environmental performance. Technological
Forecasting and Social Change, 165, Article 120557.
Chen, J., Ma, T., & Xiao, C. (2018). Fastgcn: Fast learning with graph convolutional networks via importance
sampling. CoRR arXiv:abs/1801.10247
Chen, L., Zhu, H., & Han, S. (2025). Stability-optimized graph convolutional network: A novel propagation
rule with constraints derived from odes. Mathematics 13(5).
Chen, H., Chen, P., Wang, B., Yu, X., Chen, X., Ma, D., & Zheng, Z. (2024). Graph neural network based
robust anomaly detection at service level in sdn driven microservice system. Computer Networks, 239,
Article 110135.
Chen, H., Huang, Z., Xu, Y., Deng, Z., Huang, F., He, P., & Li, Z. (2022). Neighbor enhanced graph convo-
lutional networks for node classiﬁcation and recommendation. Knowledge-Based Systems, 246, Article
108594.
Chen, C. Y. T., Sun, E. W., Chang, M.-F., & Lin, Y.-B. (2024). Enhancing travel time prediction with deep learn-
ing on chronological and retrospective time order information of big trafﬁc data. Annals of Operations
Research, 343(3), 1095–1128.
Chiang, W.-L., Liu, X., Si, S., Li, Y., Bengio, S., & Hsieh, C.-J. (2019). Cluster-gcn: An efﬁcient algorithm
for training deep and large graph convolutional networks. In: Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. KDD ’19, pp. 257–266.
Dai, D., Karlsson, H., Månsson, K., & Choi, I. (2025). Nowcasting carbon emissions in a data-rich environment:
a comparison of dynamic factor models and machine learning algorithms. Annals of Operations Research,
1–28
Espín-Noboa, L., Karimi, F., Ribeiro, B., Lerman, K., & Wagner, C. (2021). Explaining classiﬁcation perfor-
mance and bias via network structure and sampling technique. Applied Network Science, 6(1), 78.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Hamilton, W.L., Ying, R., & Leskovec, J. (2017). Inductive representation learning on large graphs. In:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2017), pp. 1024–1034.
Han, H.-C., & Huang, D.-C. (2025). Graph-theoretic detection of anomalies in supply chains: A por-based
approach using laplacian ﬂow and sheaf theory. Mathematics 13(11).
Hosny, A., & Reda, S. (2024). Automatic milp solver conﬁguration by learning problem similarities. Annals
of Operations Research, 339(1), 909–936.
Huang, W., Zheng, T., Wang, R., Zhu, T., Hu, B., He, S., Song, M., Wang, X., Wu, S., & Chen, C. (2025).
Efﬁcient Distributed Graph Neural Network Training With Source Chunking and Moving Aggregation.
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge & Data Engineering, 37(12), 7090–7104.
Hu, J., Chu, C., Criado, R., Chen, J., Hao, S., & Wang, M. (2025). Visibility graph and graph convolution
networks-based segmentation of carbon emission in china. Annals of Operations Research, 348(1), 609–
630.
Hussain, H., Duricic, T., Lex, E., Helic, D., Strohmaier, M., & Kern, R. (2021). Structack: Structure-based
adversarial attacks on graph neural networks. In: Proceedings of the 32st ACM Conference on Hypertext
and Social Media. HT ’21, pp. 111–120.
Hu, Y., & Wang, W. (2024). Network-adjusted covariates for community detection. Biometrika, 111(4), 1221–
1240.
Hu, Y., & Wang, W. (2024). Network-adjusted covariates for community detection. Biometrika, 111, 1221–
1240.
Jin, W., Ma, Y., Liu, X., Tang, X., Wang, S., & Tang, J. (2020). Graph structure learning for robust graph neural
networks. Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
& Data Mining
Ju, W., Yi, S., Wang, Y., Xiao, Z., Mao, Z., Li, H., Gu, Y., Qin, Y., Yin, N., Wang, S., Liu, X., Luo, X., Yu,
P.S., & Zhang, M. (2024). A survey of graph neural networks in real world: Imbalance, noise, privacy
and ood challenges. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence PP.
Kipf, T.N., & Welling, M. (2017). Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with graph convolutional networks. In:
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)
Lee, C.S., Hewes, V., Cerati, G., Wang, K., Aurisano, A., Agrawal, A., Choudhary, A., & Liao, W.-K. (2024).
Addressing gpu memory limitations for graph neural networks in high-energy physics applications.
Frontiers in High Performance Computing 2.
Lee, S., Choi, J., & Son, Y. (2024). Efﬁcient visibility algorithm for high-frequency time-series: application
to fault diagnosis with graph convolutional network. Annals of Operations Research, 339(1), 813–833.
Li, F., Wang, Y., Du, X., Li, X., & Yu, G. (2024). Out-of-distribution node detection based on graph heat kernel
diffusion. Mathematics 12(18).
Li, H., Wang, X., Zhang, Z., & Zhu, W. (2025). Out-of-distribution generalization on graphs: A survey. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 1–20.
Li, Z., Wu, Q., Nie, F., & Yan, J. (2022). GraphDE: A generative framework for debiased learning and out-of-
distribution detection on graphs. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp.
30277–30290.
Li, Y., Liu, X., Liang, P., Wang, B., Yuan, X., & Zhang, L. (2026). Msa-gcn: A multi-modal spatiotemporal
attention graph convolutional network for robust bearing fault diagnosis in noisy environments. Applied
Soft Computing, 186, Article 114295.
Lin, X., Cao, Y., Sun, N., Zou, L., Zhou, C., Zhang, P., Zhang, S., Zhang, G., & Wu, J. (2025). Conformal
graph-level out-of-distribution detection with adaptive data augmentation. In: Proceedings of the ACM
on Web Conference 2025. WWW ’25, pp. 4755–4765.
Liu, Y., Wu, D., & Liang, Y. (2025). Survey on graph-based reinforcement learning for networked coordination
and control. Automation 6(4).
Li, H., Wang, X., Zhang, Z., & Zhu, W. (2022). Ood-gnn: Out-of-distribution generalized graph neural network.
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 35(7), 7328–7340.
Li, W., Wei, W., Wang, P., Pan, L., Yang, B., & Xu, Y. (2025). Research on gnns with stable learning. Scientiﬁc
Reports, 15(1), 29002.
Motie, S., & Raahemi, B. (2024). Financial fraud detection using graph neural networks: A systematic review.
Expert Systems with Applications, 240, Article 122156.
Mu, Z., Tang, S., Zong, C., Yu, D., & Zhuang, Y. (2023). Graph neural networks meet with distributed graph
partitioners and reconciliations. Neurocomputing, 518, 408–417.
Non-representative sampled networks. (2024). Estimation of network structural properties by weighting. Jour-
nal of Econometrics,240(1), Article 105689.
Otala, J., Minard, A., Madraki, G., & Mousavian, S. (2021). Graph-based modeling in shop scheduling prob-
lems: Review and extensions. Applied Sciences 11(11).
123

Annals of Operations Research
R, R. (2025). Memory-efﬁcient probabilistic graph attention networks for large-scale node classiﬁcation.
International Journal of Applied Mathematics, 38, 125–148.
Saen, R.F., Youseﬁ, F., & Azadi, M. (2024). Artiﬁcial intelligence powered predictions: enhancing supply
chain sustainability. Annals of Operations Research, 1–44.
Sen, P., Namata, G., Bilgic, M., Getoor, L., Galligher, B., & Eliassi-Rad, T. (2008). Collective classiﬁcation
in network data, 29, 93.
Shah, N., Beutel, A., Hooi, B., Akoglu, L., Günnemann, S., Makhija, D., Kumar, M., & Faloutsos, C. (2016).
Edgecentric: Anomaly detection in edge-attributed networks. 2016 IEEE 16th International Conference
on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW), 327–334.
Shchur, O., Mumme, M., Bojchevski, A., & Günnemann, S. (2018). Pitfalls of graph neural network evaluation.
Relational Representation Learning Workshop, NeurIPS 2018.
Sheng, Z., Zhang, W., Tao, Y., & Cui, B. (2024). Outre: An out-of-core de-redundancy gnn training framework
for massive graphs within a single machine. Proc. VLDB Endow., 17(11), 2960–2973.
Song, Y., & Wang, D. (2022). Learning on graphs with out-of-distribution nodes. In: Proceedings of the 28th
ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. KDD ’22, pp. 1635–1645.
Uzunoglu, A., Gahm, C., & Tuma, A. (2024). A machine learning enhanced multi-start heuristic to efﬁciently
solve a serial-batch scheduling problem. Annals of Operations Research, 338(1), 407–428.
Wang, D., Zhu, J., Yin, Y., Ignatius, J., Wei, X., & Kumar, A. (2024). Dynamic travel time prediction with
spatiotemporal features: using a gnn-based deep learning method. Annals of Operations Research, 340(1),
571–591.
Wan, X., Xu, K., Liao, X., Jin, Y., Chen, K., & Jin, X. (2023). Scalable and efﬁcient full-graph gnn training
for large graphs. Proceedings of the ACM on Management of Data, 1(2), 1–23.
Wolfe, C. R., Yang, J., Liao, F., Chowdhury, A., Dun, C., Bayer, A., Segarra, S., & Kyrillidis, A. (2024). Gist:
Distributed training for large-scale graph convolutional networks. Journal of Applied and Computational
Topology, 8(5), 1363–1415.
Xiao, Y., Zhu, Y., & Huang, D. (2025). Adaptive subsampling spectral clustering based on second-order
neighbour relationships for sparse networks. Stat 14(4).
Xu, H., Zhu, T., Zhang, L., Zhou, W., & Yu, P.S. (2023). Machine unlearning: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv.
56(1).
Xu, J., Chen, J., You, S., Xiao, Z., Yang, Y., & Lu, J. (2021). Robustness of deep learning models on graphs:
A survey. AI Open, 2, 69–78.
Ye, X., Liu, D., Li, T., & Li, W. (2025). Heterogeneous business network based interpretable competitive ﬁrm
identiﬁcation: a graph neural network method. Annals of Operations Research, 347(2), 1133–1161.
Yousuf, M. I., Anwer, I., & Anwar, R. (2023). Empirical characterization of graph sampling algorithms. Social
Network Analysis and Mining, 13(1), 66.
Zeng, H., Zhou, H., Srivastava, A., Kannan, R., & Prasanna, V. (2020). Graphsaint: Graph sampling based
inductive learning method. In: International Conference on Learning Representations
Zhang, X., & Zitnik, M. (2020). Gnnguard: Defending graph neural networks against adversarial attacks. In:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 9263–9275.
Zhang, H., An, N., & Zhu, X. (2022). Structural dynamic reliability analysis of super large-scale lattice
domes during earthquakes using the stochastic ﬁnite element method. Soil Dynamics and Earthquake
Engineering, 153, Article 107076.
Zhang, Q., Wipf, D., Gan, Q., & Song, L. (2021). A biased graph neural network sampler with near-optimal
regret. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 8833–8844.
Zhang, H., Zhou, Y., Xu, H., Shi, J., Lin, X., & Gao, Y. (2025). Graph neural network approach with spatial
structure to anomaly detection of network data. Journal of Big Data, 12(1), 105.
Zhao, J., Dong, Z., Yao, X.,& Xi, X. (2024). Optimizing collaboration decisions in technological innova-
tion through machine learning: identify trend and partners in collaboration-knowledge interdependent
networks. Annals of Operations Research, 1–42.
Zhou, J., Cui, G., Hu, S., Zhang, Z., Yang, C., Liu, Z., Wang, L., Li, C., & Sun, M. (2020). Graph neural
networks: A review of methods and applications. AI Open, 1, 57–81.
Zhou, Q., Shen, Y., & Chen, L. (2025). Faster convergence in mini-batch graph neural networks training with
pseudo full neighborhood compensation. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 18, 4309–4322.
Zhu, Y., Bao, Y., Qin, L., Sun, Q., Shia, B.-C., & Chen, M.-C. (2025). Resilience analysis based on multi-layer
network community detection of supply chain network. Annals of Operations Research, 1–25.
Zhu, Y., Wang, R., Feng, M., Qin, L., Shia, B.-C., & Chen, M.-C. (2024). Supply chain analysis based on
community detection of multi-layer weighted networks. Mathematics 12(22).
Zhu, D., Zhang, Z., Cui, P., & Zhu, W. (2019). Robust graph convolutional networks against adversarial attacks.
In: Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
Mining, pp. 1399–1407.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Zhu, R., Zhao, K., Yang, H., Lin, W., Zhou, C., Ai, B., Li, Y., & Zhou, J. (2019). Aligraph: a comprehensive
graph neural network platform. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 12(12), 2094–2105.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123