TITLE: Main path and cluster analysis-based review of scheduling in the supply chain
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2026
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07132-x
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07132-x
ORIGINAL - SURVEY OR EXPOSITION
Main path and cluster analysis-based review of scheduling
in the supply chain
Kuo-Ching Ying1 · Pourya Pourhejazy2
· Yan-Xiang Xiao1,3
Received: 18 October 2025 / Accepted: 25 February 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
The need for establishing supply chain resilience in critical industries, such as semicon-
ductors, automobiles, and consumer electronics, calls for holistic operations planning and
scheduling. Supply chain scheduling (SCS) refers to the coordinated planning of produc-
tion and logistics operations to enhance performance beyond the optimal solution for each
operation. The literature on SCS has garnered growing attention, with a total of 1,288 arti-
cles published between 1993 and 2025. A comprehensive review of this domain, informed
by algorithmic big-data analyses such as Main Path Analysis (MPA) and Cluster Analysis
(CA), helps to delineate a clearer landscape of the ﬁeld’s evolution for a broader academic
and practitioner audience. This study sought to analyze the main development trajectories
and research topics in the literature on SCS, with the objective of providing an objective,
algorithm-based review of the existing body of research. The most inﬂuential articles on
knowledge-dissemination pathways are identiﬁed and reviewed using the MPA algorithm.
The prevalent research topics and computational advancements are analyzed using CA. The
advances in mathematical modeling and optimization algorithms for SCS are discussed.
Drawing on the big picture and the development patterns, the study speculates on emerging
development trends and suggests directions for future research.
Keywords Supply chain coordination · Short-term planning · Scheduling · Routing ·
Optimization · Systematic review
B Pourya Pourhejazy
pourya.pourhejazy@uit.no
Kuo-Ching Ying
kcying@ntut.edu.tw
Yan-Xiang Xiao
t111378037@ntut.org.tw
1
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management, National Taipei University of Technology,
Taipei 10608, Taiwan
2
Department of Industrial Engineering, UiT–The Arctic University of Norway, Lodve Langesgate 2,
8514 Narvik, Norway
3
Kinsus Interconnect Technology Corp., Taoyuan City 327, Taiwan
123

Annals of Operations Research
1 Introduction
Early studies in operations research focused on addressing shop ﬂoor concerns (Ying et al.,
2024), while the shift toward supply chain-level operations management gained prominence
during the 1980s (Petropoulos et al., 2026). The supply chain operations include the pro-
curement of raw materials, the production of parts and components, inventory storage, along
with the transportation of work-in-progress, ﬁnished products, and possible product returns
(Sarkis, 2024). Supply chain management involves managing the ﬂow of information and
capital along the physical ﬂow of materials and products. Porter’s (Porter, 1985) concep-
tualization of the value chain and its impact on establishing competitive advantage, and
Thomas and Grifﬁn (Thomas & Grifﬁn, 1996)’s idea of coordinated supply chain man-
agement established the theoretical basis for a supply chain-wide optimization perspective.
Given resource constraints and inherent interdependencies, a coordinated approach to mate-
rial supply, production, and distribution planning can enhance performance beyond what
isolated optimization approaches can achieve (Ivanov et al., 2016a, 2016b). The prime ben-
eﬁts include mitigating the bullwhip effect, enhancing customer service levels, reducing
delivery delays, balancing loads across supply chain partners, and establishing supply chain
resilience (Ivanov, 2018; Ivanov & Sokolov, 2013a; Ivanov et al., 2014, 2017).
Supply chain activities are often framed within the Plan, Source, Make, Deliver, and
Return (PSMDR) processes (Babai et al., 2023). Supply chain management comprises the
planning and scheduling of various operations, as well as associated control decisions (Ivanov
& Sokolov, 2010). Shop-ﬂoor-level decisions interact with those in the ’source’ and ’deliver’
processes of the supply chain, necessitating joint planning. Supply Chain Scheduling (SCS)
refers to the coordinated sequencing of ’source’, ’make’, and ’deliver’ processes to improve
performance beyond individual optimality. With ongoing economic development and tech-
nological progress, the contemporary landscape of SCS research has shifted from localized
and deterministic shop-ﬂoor scheduling to holistic and dynamic coordination spanning the
entire value chain. In particular, the state-of-the-art increasingly emphasizes the integration
of production and distribution operations to achieve system-wide optimality. Moreover, the
emergence of Industry 4.0 technologies and digital twin frameworks has facilitated real-
time and adaptive scheduling and control, allowing supply chains to respond effectively to
unforeseen disruptions.
Several articles have surveyed supply chain modeling and optimization in speciﬁc con-
texts—for example, hydrogen (Riera et al., 2023), sugarcane supply chains (Teixeira et al.,
2023), and food bank supply chains (Rivera et al., 2023)—or in speciﬁc subﬁelds, such as
green supply chains (Xames et al., 2023), resilient supply chains (Emenike & Falcone, 2020),
and closed-loop supply chains (Oliveira & Machado, 2021). Prior studies have examined sup-
ply chain optimization by focusing on speciﬁc theoretical frameworks and methodologies,
such as optimal control theory (Ivanov et al., 2012), dynamic supply chain scheduling (Ivanov
& Sokolov, 2012), simulation-based approaches (Tordecilla et al., 2021), and big-data analyt-
ics (Alsolbi et al., 2023). Stüve et al. (2022) reviewed the modeling approaches and software
for supply chain tactical planning in the food industry. Maroof et al. (2023) reviewed vehicle
routing problems in humanitarian supply chains. The existing reviews primarily focus on
speciﬁc subﬁelds of the supply chain. Moreover, existing work relies on subjective, manual
reading of articles. A comprehensive review of operations planning and scheduling in pro-
duction and logistics, grounded in objective and algorithm-driven methods, will provide a
broad overview, highlight key relationships, and uncover subtle developmental patterns.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Number of published articles over 28 years in the ﬁeld of supply chain scheduling
Our preliminary investigations indicate a steady increase in the number of articles on SCS
(see Fig. 1). The present study employs an objective, algorithm-based approach to identify
and review the seminal knowledge disseminations in SCS. Given projections of future trends
in the literature, which indicate sustained growth through the late 2030s (see Fig. 2), the study
aims to provide a broad overview of development patterns to inspire new research directions
in SCS.
To the authors’ knowledge, no objective analysis and review of the literature on SCS-
based algorithms have been conducted. The following research questions are investigated to
generate actionable knowledge: (RQ1) Which articles are most inﬂuential in the development
of SCS? (RQ2) How has the research evolved within the most established subﬁelds of SCS
across different periods? The use of a Main Path Analysis (MPA)-based review, comple-
mented by Cluster Analysis (CA), is novel and leverages it to systematically address these
questions. Unlike systematic literature reviews that rely on frameworks such as the Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA), MPA focuses on
mapping the evolution of knowledge through citation linkages rather than on the compre-
hensive collection and screening of studies using inclusion/exclusion criteria. Supported by
MPA and CA ﬁndings, the main process integration and technological advancements are
Fig. 2 Projected trends for the
future of supply chain scheduling
literature
123

Annals of Operations Research
emphasized to illustrate their impact on SCS. We also speculate on future directions in the
SCS literature.
Sections 2-5 structure the rest of this manuscript. Section 2 describes the materials and
methods employed to pursue the study objectives. Section 3 analyzes the primary and sec-
ondary development trajectories to review the seminal articles identiﬁed through MPA.
Section 4 identiﬁes and reviews the prevalent research topics using CA. Section 5 synthesizes
the main ﬁndings, discusses the practical implications and trade-offs of SCS, and provides
recommendations for future research.
2 Materials and methods
2.1 Data collection and validation
The Web of Science database was used to collect data. The preliminary investigation was
conducted by searching "Supply Chain" AND "Scheduling" in the topic ﬁeld, which includes
the article title, keywords, and abstract. This investigation resulted in 2,024 articles published
between 1993 and the end of 2024. The articles are screened manually by checking titles
and abstracts, following the studies of (Liberati, 2009; Liberati et al., 2009). Considering that
retrospective articles may negatively affect the literature analysis using MPA, excluding them
reduced the number to 1,805. Finally, a manual screening was performed to remove unrelated
articles. A total of 1,652 documents were used as input for the MainPath480 software. The
software excluded articles that were neither cited by others nor cited other documents (e.g.,
editorials). The outcomes included 1,288 articles, which are considered for further analysis.
The precision index and DOI percentages are used to verify the validity of the gathered
data. Precision is the proportion of nodes in the dataset relative to the number of articles in
the preliminary investigation; that is, the ratio of the number of nodes before to that after
removing isolated nodes. A value higher than 70% is required to guarantee the accuracy of
the MPA analysis (Liu et al., 2019). The DOI percentage indicates dataset quality; a higher
percentage indicates greater reliability. With a precision index of 81% and a DOI percentage
of 82%, the dataset is of acceptable quality for MPA analysis.
2.2 Main path analysis
The idea of analyzing literature data through MPA was introduced by (Garﬁeld, 1964) to
explore the advancement of genetic factors in DNA-related studies. (Dosi, 1982) extended this
idea to trace technological progress in an extensive citation network. (Hummon & Dereian,
1989) Employed graph theory to formalize the analysis of development trajectories in the
literature.
The primary methods used in MPA are presented in Fig. 3 through a simpliﬁed visual-
ization. In a citation network, source nodes (yellow) initiate knowledge, intermediate nodes
(green) facilitate its dissemination, and sink nodes (blue) represent the latest developments.
The tail and head nodes correspond to the cited and citing articles, respectively. The inter-
actions between the three types of nodes (i.e., citations) reveal the ﬂow of knowledge and
highlight key dissemination pathways that constitute the backbone of scientiﬁc development
in the ﬁeld under consideration. Given that the number of times a link is traversed indicates
its weight (i.e., importance), the overall importance of a path can be determined by summing
the weights of its constituent links. In this context, the path with the highest total weight is
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 3 Methods for calculating the link weights in the citation network
the main path. This concept can be illustrated by analogy to the vehicle routing problem, in
which the optimal path is the one with the lowest weight (e.g., cost).
Liu et al. (2019) argued that SPLC represents the nature of knowledge dissemination in
the academic literature and is, therefore, included in the present study. Once the weights are
calculated, various methods can be used to ﬁnd the optimal path. The Global Main Path and
Key-route Main Path methods are employed to identify the primary and secondary citation
chains, respectively. The Key-route Main Path method initiates the search from the most-
cited link(s) (rather than from the network source) and traces paths forward and backward
(i.e., toward the source and sink nodes) to identify ten major, interrelated research themes.
This method ensures that seminal articles are included in the analysis, even if they are not
part of the main development trajectory.
2.3 Cluster analysis
Clustering has been widely used in market research, the social sciences, and bioinformatics to
analyzenaturalgroupingsindataandidentifypatterns.Inthecontextofliteratureanalysis,CA
is a statistical approach for grouping articles into multiple clusters based on their similarity.
The common types of CA are (1) Hierarchical Clustering (i.e., agglomerative, which starts
with each data point as a separate group and gradually merges into larger and larger groups,
or divisive, which begins with all data points as a whole group and gradually subdivides into
123

Annals of Operations Research
smaller groups). (2) Partitioning Clustering (i.e., divides the data set into several predeﬁned
groups to ensure that members within a group are more similar to one another than to those
in other groups). (3) Density-based Clustering (i.e., identiﬁes clusters based on the local
density of data points and can detect groups of any shape). (4) Edge-betweenness Clustering
(i.e., modularizes the network structure by separating communities through the continuous
removal of edges with the highest edge-betweenness centrality).
This study uses the Group Finder program of MainPath480, which implements
Edge-Betweenness Clustering (Girvan & Newman, 2002). This CA approach helps
identify
meaningful
research
clusters
and
research
trends.
The
software
begins
by establishing the keyword network and determining the shortest path between
nodes. The procedure continues by calculating the edge credit for every node

Edge Credit 

1 +  Incoming Edges

× Score of Destination
Score of Start

; this is based on the number
of steps from the source node to a given node. Finally, the edge(s) with the highest scores
are removed, and the resulting isolated points constitute the clusters.
As a ﬁnal step in the literature analysis, VOSviewer (van Eck & Waltman, 2010) is
utilized to analyze keyword correlations. This includes constructing network maps based
on the statistical and analytical analyses of the literature data to visualize key themes and
interrelationships among the articles.
3 Main path analysis results
3.1 The primary knowledge dissemination trajectory
The main knowledge dissemination path, consisting of a total of 17 articles, comprises four
primary development stages that reﬂect a progressive paradigm shift in the ﬁeld. (1) The
foundational stage focused on the computational boundaries of NP-hard shop-ﬂoor schedul-
ing, thereby establishing the mathematical rigor of the ﬁeld. (2) The second stage marked a
transition from isolated optimization to multi-stage integration, reﬂecting the recognition that
local optima often lead to global supply chain inefﬁciencies. (3) The third stage advanced this
by introducing cross-factory collaborative planning, in which multi-objective optimization
began to account for the trade-offs between cost, time, and sustainability. (4) Most recently,
the path has culminated in a fourth stage: intelligent, data-driven SCS. This current frontier
is characterized by the use of Digital Twins and AI to manage ’Supply Chain Viability’—the
ability of a system not only to recover from disruptions but also to dynamically reconﬁgure
itself in a volatile environment. This trajectory reveals that the focus of SCS has moved from
’static efﬁciency’ toward a concern with ’dynamic survivability’.
Figure 4 presents the seminal articles that underpin knowledge dissemination and illustrate
the shiftin focus over the past30 years. The relative size of the arrows indicates the importance
of the corresponding citation, as measured by the SPLC value. The node tags are made of the
ﬁrst author’s family name, the initial letter of the co-author’s family name, and the publication
year.
Stage 1 (1987–2008): The early studies explored basic models, theoretical frameworks,
and the solution of NP-hard problems. The research during the ﬁrst period focused on pro-
duction planning, scheduling, and resource allocation for a single supply point. As shown in
Fig. 4, the source nodes ChengK2001 (Cheng & Kovalyov, 2001) and ChangL2004a (Chang
and Lee, 2004a) are recognized as the seminal early studies in SCS.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 4 Main trajectory of
knowledge dissemination in the
supply chain scheduling literature
The source node ChengK2001 (Cheng & Kovalyov, 2001) studied the operation planning
problem for a single-part supplier serving multiple manufacturers. Given that the supplier
must switch among different part types, the objective was to minimize total setup cost
while meeting manufacturers’ production requirements and avoiding delivery delays. The
authors proposed a mathematical model, demonstrated that the problem is Non-deterministic
Polynomial-time hard (NP-hard) due to interactions between production and delivery, and
used Dynamic Programming (DP) to solve it. They also investigated the special case involv-
ing only two manufacturers and designed a polynomial-time algorithm with O(n) complexity.
The problem was tested in the context of Surface Mount Technology production lines in the
electronics industry.
The source node ChangL2004a (Chang and Lee, 2004a) explored the integrated plan-
ning of production and delivery operations to minimize the maximum completion time, i.e.,
the makespan. They proposed mathematical models with practical constraints and consid-
ered different operational settings: single-machine scheduling with single-customer regional
delivery,dual-parallelmachineschedulingwithsingle-customerregionaldelivery,andsingle-
machine scheduling with multi-customer regional delivery. After establishing the problem’s
NP-hardness, they developed heuristics to obtain near-optimal solutions.
The intermediate node Qi, 2008 (Qi, 2008) proposed an integrated scheduling scheme
for producing and assembling parts in a two-stage supply chain process to maximize overall
efﬁciency. The authors developed a hierarchical state-transition model to solve the problem
using a DP algorithm. The model incorporated resource constraints and sequence-dependent
setup times and demonstrated that the DP algorithm consistently yields optimal solutions
across various instance sizes.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Stage 2 (2009–2014): The intermediate node ChenL2008 (Chen & Li, 2008) proposed an
integrated planning scheme for a manufacturing environment with parallel machines and mul-
tiple subcontractors, aiming to allocate orders to internal production units or outsource them
to external service providers while minimizing total costs, taking into account the delivery
deadlines. The resulting Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) problem was shown to
be NP-hard; therefore, a heuristic algorithm was developed to solve large instances. Through
simulation experiments, the study validated the performance of the proposed heuristic and
examined the effects of different subcontracting strategies on supply chain costs.
The intermediate node SteinerZ2009 (Steiner & Zhang, 2009) studied the integrated pro-
duction scheduling and delivery planning in a two-tier supply chain, with the objective of
minimizing the weighted sum of delayed jobs and batch delivery costs. The problem was
formalized to mitigate delay penalties and batch-delivery costs. After establishing that the
problem is NP-hard, a DP algorithm was developed to solve the simpliﬁed problem, specif-
ically for the special case of delivering delayed orders separately. A fully polynomial-time
approximation scheme was then developed to solve the problem through a three-step process
for joint planning of delayed jobs and batch delivery.
The intermediate node Ullrich, 2013 (Ullrich, 2013) proposed an MILP model that inte-
grates parallel-machine scheduling and vehicle path planning to minimize total delays in the
supply chain. By incorporating vehicle capacity and delivery time window constraints into
a uniﬁed framework, an NP-hard problem was formulated and solved using an improved
Genetic Algorithm (GA). The experiments conﬁrmed that the proposed integration improves
overall efﬁciency, particularly for time-sensitive, high-frequency distribution scenarios such
as automotive parts distribution.
The intermediate node Hajiaghaei-KeshteliA2014 (Hajiaghaei-Keshteli & Aminnayeri,
2014) proposed a new model that integrates production and rail transportation scheduling,
intending to minimize overall supply chain cost. A single-machine production system and
multi-shift railway transportation were considered, accounting for capacity constraints and
production sequence dependencies. They proposed a new metaheuristic and extended the GA
to solve this NP-hard problem. Simulation results showed that the proposed integration can
effectively balance delivery earliness and tardiness while optimizing costs. The intermediate
node Hajiaghaei-KeshteliAG2014 (Hajiaghaei-Keshteli et al., 2014) extended the integrated
production and rail transport scheduling, including ﬁxed departure times, multi-destination
demand, and transport capacity constraints. They employed the GA and Simulated Annealing
(SA) algorithms to solve the problem.
Stage 3 (2015–2019): Research during this period shifted to multi-objective optimization
for widespread coordination between production and distribution, as well as across factories.
The intermediate node AssarzadeganR2016 (Assarzadegan & Rasti-Barzoki, 2016) proposed
an integrated optimization model that combines delivery date allocation, single-machine
scheduling, and distribution planning, with the multi-objective goal of minimizing both costs
and delays. They proposed a Mixed-Integer Nonlinear Programming (MINLP) model and
simpliﬁed the constraints by linearizing them. An adaptive GA and a parallel SA algorithm
were developed to solve the problem.
The intermediate node FuAT2017 (Fu et al., 2017) explored the integrated production
scheduling and vehicle routing problems for cost minimization in the metal packaging indus-
try. Incorporating features such as job splitting, sequence-dependent setup times, and delivery
time windows, they developed MILP formulations and a two-stage iterative heuristic algo-
rithm to solve the problem. They showed that the supply chain cost for metal packaging can be
reduced by nearly 8% through integrated planning of production and distribution operations.
123

Annals of Operations Research
The intermediate node MarandiG2019A (Marandi & Fatemi Ghomi, 2019) proposed the
Integrated Multi-Factory Production and Distribution Scheduling problem, which combined
the facility allocation decisions with vehicle routing and production scheduling. They pro-
posed a Mixed-Integer Programming (MIP) model and solved small-scale instances using the
commercial software CPLEX. They also developed a hybrid of the Imperialist Competitive
Algorithm and SA, with a local search module, to solve larger instances.
Stage 4 (2020–2024). This stage represents a paradigm shift toward intelligent, data-
driven orchestration, in which modern technologies—speciﬁcally additive manufacturing
and intelligent digital twins—facilitate resource-oriented collaborative optimization in an
environment of deep uncertainty. This era marks the transition from static planning to the
concept of ’Cognitive Supply Chain Scheduling,’ in which systems autonomously learn
from disruptions to maintain their long-term viability. The intermediate node YagmurK2021
(Ya˘gmur & Kesen, 2021) was pivotal in this transition, addressing the integrated optimization
of path planning for multiple heterogeneous vehicles and production scheduling problems.
They proposed an MIP formulation to model the problem and metaheuristics to solve it,
including the Memory Algorithm, which uses a path-based encoding method combined with a
path-planning and vehicle-allocation algorithm, and an improved SA algorithm. They showed
that the Memory Algorithm outperformed Simulated Annealing and that the collaborative
SCS approach reduced total travel and delay times by up to 20 percent in a general supply
chain.
The intermediate node KimK2022 (Kim and Kim, 2022a) investigated the integrated
planning of batch production and direct delivery operations. They proposed an MILP for-
mulation and solved it using three improved metaheuristics: Particle Swarm Optimization
(PSO), Imperialist Competitive Algorithm, and GA, of which the last outperformed the oth-
ers. They showed that the integration reduced the delay time by up to 18 percent and enhanced
resource allocation compared to separate planning in a general supply chain.
The intermediate node HeLK2022 (He et al., 2022) investigated the optimization of spare
parts supply chains by combining 3D printing and just-in-time delivery operations. A set
covering formulation was proposed; the MIP model was solved using exact methods for
small-scale instances; the Dantzig–Wolfe decomposition strategy was employed to divide the
model into a Linear Master Problem and an Elementary Shortest Path Problem with Resource
Constraints; and an enhanced branch-and-price algorithm was developed to solve the problem
for larger instances. The integrated scheduling model achieved a 16 percent reduction in total
costs relative to the baseline in additive manufacturing–based supply chains.
The intermediate node LiHK2023 (Li et al., 2023) considered multiple delivery types in the
integrated production and transportation scheduling problems in the context of 3D printing:
direct transportation for emergency repairs and batch transportation for planned repairs.
They introduced a new MILP formulation and employed the Dantzig–Wolfe decomposition
technique to transform the model into a set covering problem, which was solved using an exact
algorithm based on column generation and two new acceleration strategies. The proposed
method demonstrated how to efﬁciently balance transportation costs and delivery time.
TheintermediatenodeYagmurK2023(Ya˘gmur&Kesen,2023)proposedamulti-objective
optimization approach to the integrated production and transportation scheduling problem,
focusing on sustainability and service quality. Based on an MIP formulation that minimizes
carbon dioxide emissions and the maximum delivery delay, an Augmented ε-Constraint
method was developed to generate Pareto-optimal solutions for small-scale instances. The
Pareto Local Search and Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm (NSGA-II) was further
developed, improving its performance in hypervolume and computational time.
123

Annals of Operations Research
In the most recent development along the main trajectory, the sink node SugiantoK2024
(Sugianto & Kim, 2024) explored the integration of additive manufacturing planning and
direct delivery operations to ﬁnal customers. They proposed a new MILP model with practical
constraints, such as material compatibility, setup time, and vehicle capacity, and developed
a modiﬁed PSO algorithm to solve the optimization problem, with a focus on algorithmic
performance analysis.
3.2 The secondary knowledge dissemination trajectories
The key extensions from the main development trajectory consist of 17 articles. Based on
the main objectives of the studies, the articles are divided into B1–B6 boxes (see Fig. 5).
The key extension main path has two source nodes, i.e., BoseP2000 (Bose & Pekny, 2000)
and ÇetinkayaL2000 (Çetinkaya & Lee, 2000), which later extends to the intermediate
node Perea-LópezYZ2003 to form a new development path focused on dynamic optimiza-
tion approaches in multi-level supply chain planning. This branch intersects with the main
development path at the intermediate node Hajiaghaei-KeshteliAG2014. From the main
development trajectory, Hajiaghaei-KeshteliA2014 inspired the research trend in develop-
ing multi-factory-multi-stage SCS, starting with the intermediate node SunCC2015. The
intermediate node AssarzadeganR2016 inspired research on integrated resource allocation
and multi-objective balancing in supply chain planning, as reﬂected in the intermediate
node HassanzadehRK2016. These works, along with subsequent works in the secondary
knowledge-dissemination trajectory, are reviewed below.
(B1): The source node BoseP2000 (Bose & Pekny, 2000) proposed a novel planning
framework that integrates forecasting, optimization, and simulation to manage dynamic
Fig. 5 Key branches from the main path in the supply chain scheduling literature
123

Annals of Operations Research
demands and uncertainty. They compared centralized, decentralized, and distributed col-
laborative structures and found that the distributed structure performed best in most cases,
striking a balance between demand accuracy and efﬁcient planning. Experimental results
showed that their integrated framework reduced inventory costs and improved customer
service levels in the consumer goods supply chain, thus providing a theoretical foundation
for dynamic SCS and collaborative optimization. The other source node, ÇetinkayaL2000
(Çetinkaya & Lee, 2000), studied the integrated inventory replenishment and transportation
scheduling problems in vendor-managed inventory systems. They proposed a mathematical
model, inspired by renewal theory, to optimize replenishment and transportation frequencies
and minimize total costs. The results showed that the time-based freight integration strate-
gies outperformed the just-in-time delivery strategy, especially when demand frequency and
unit transportation costs are high. The study provided a theoretical basis for coordinated
decision-making in vendor-managed supply chains. The two source nodes BoseP2000 and
ÇetinkayaL2000 extended traditional scheduling approaches from static to dynamic, demon-
strating the potential of supply chain big data analytics for intelligent management.
(B2): The intermediate node Perea-LópezYG2003 (Perea-López et al., 2003) introduced
a new supply chain optimization framework based on a model predictive control strategy for
planning multi-product, multi-level distribution networks and batch production operations.
They contributed an MILP model and a rolling-horizon optimization approach that integrates
supply chain planning across suppliers, manufacturers, distribution centers, and customers.
The results showed that a centralized management strategy outperformed a decentralized
planning scheme, as evidenced by reduced resource waste, lower inventory backlogs, and a
15% increase in proﬁtability in a retail supply chain.
The intermediate node Shah, 2005 (Shah, 2005) explored supply chain optimization in
the process industries using simulation analysis and case studies. Decisions regarding the
location of production facilities and the conﬁguration of logistics paths were integrated to
plan multi-site production operations, taking into account the impact of resource allocation
and demand ﬂuctuations. The study concluded that bottlenecks and inefﬁciencies in process-
industry supply chains, as reﬂected in excessive inventory levels, long supply-chain cycles,
and low resource utilization, could be mitigated through integrated planning.
TheintermediatenodeGuillénBEP2006(Guillénetal.,2006)proposedanewMILPmodel
thatintegratesoperational(i.e.,productionschedulinganddistributionplanning)andﬁnancial
(i.e., cash ﬂow and budget management) decisions to optimize a multi-product SCS in the
chemical industry. With shareholder value maximization as the objective function, the model
enabled planning across multiple plants and multi-level distribution networks. They provided
evidence from the chemical industry, showing that the supply chain’s operational efﬁciency
and ﬁnancial performance were enhanced by the integrated planning method compared to
the traditional step-by-step approach.
The intermediate node DemirliY2008 (Demirli & Yimer, 2008) proposed a mixed-integer
fuzzy programming model for integrated production and distribution planning in build-to-
ordersupplychains.Themodelusestriangularfuzzynumberstorepresentuncertainoperating
costs, thereby capturing cost-related uncertainties. It adopts a multi-objective approach to
minimize the fuzzy total cost and risk costs while maximizing expected beneﬁts. The results
showed that the integrated planning method balances customer demand satisfaction and
resource efﬁciency while reducing total operating costs in furniture supply chains.
The intermediate node YimerD2010 (Yimer & Demirli, 2010) developed a dynamic
scheduling method based on an MILP formulation for the integrated production and dis-
tribution planning in build-to-order supply chains. The method combines rolling planning
123

Annals of Operations Research
techniques with a GA to solve the problem in uncertain environments, minimizing procure-
ment and operating costs, while maintaining the minimum service level. The results showed
that the two-stage integrated method reduced supply chain operating costs across production,
transportation, and inventory, and improved customer service quality.
These studies focused on dynamic and uncertain situations in the integrated planning of
multi-level supply chains; for example, they employed model-predictive control combined
with rolling-horizon planning techniques to update supply chain plans in real time. Other
topics included integrating cash ﬂow decisions into integrated supply chain planning and
balancing operational and cost risks.
(B3): The intermediate node HanZLL2015 (Han et al., 2015) proposed an online opti-
mization framework for integrated production and distribution scheduling problems in
both single-machine and multi-machine production environments. They developed a multi-
objective algorithm for multi-stage SCS that accounts for dynamic demand scenarios to
minimize makespan and distribution costs. They conducted simulation experiments to eval-
uate the model’s performance across various scenarios. HanZLL2015 served as a bridge
between the intermediate nodes Hajiaghaei-KeshteliAG2014 and AssarzadeganR2016,
thereby extending research on dynamic planning to encompass broader optimization objec-
tives.
(B4): The intermediate node Hajiaghaei-KeshteliA2014 from the main development tra-
jectoryservedastheinspirationforthisbranch.TheintermediatenodeSunCC2015(Sunetal.,
2015)proposedamixed-integerprogrammingmethodformulti-factoryproductionanddistri-
bution scheduling to optimize operating costs through job allocation, production sequencing,
and inland and maritime transportation distribution planning. The "due-date-based cut-off
rule" was proposed to narrow the feasible solution space, and the genetic algorithm with a
fuzzy controller was introduced to solve large-scale problems. It was shown, through numer-
ical experiments, that the proposed integration reduces total cost by an average of more than
20 percent compared to the traditional isolated production scheduling model.
The intermediate node SunCGW2018 (Sun et al., 2018) introduced a risk-avoidance
method for the integrated production–distribution scheduling problem with uncertain liner
shipping delivery dates in a multi-factory production setting. They adopted a stochastic pro-
gramming approach that minimizes the maximum risk cost subject to value-at-risk constraints
across various reliability levels. Stochastic variables were introduced into the model to cap-
ture ﬂuctuations in ocean freight delivery, and a deterministic equivalent formulation was
constructed to reduce computational complexity. The results supported the risk-mitigation
capabilities of the new integrated planning approach relative to the baseline.
The intermediate node HanYWCY2019 (Han et al., 2019) developed a dynamic pro-
gramming approach for integrating production, inventory, and distribution optimization in a
three-stage supply chain, enabling collaborative decision-making among suppliers, manufac-
turers, and customers. A pseudo-polynomial-time algorithm and a polynomial-time algorithm
for a speciﬁc scenario were developed to determine the optimal weighted sum of delayed
orders and inventory and distribution costs. The simulation experiments showed that the
proposed integration reduces overall supply chain costs, transportation waste, and inventory
backlogs, while increasing on-time deliveries.
TheintermediatenodeLiuGZ2021(Liuetal.,2021)proposedahybridoptimizationframe-
work to solve the integrated production scheduling and distribution path planning problem
in make-to-order supply chains. Considering ﬂexible vehicle departure times, the problem
was decomposed into three sub-problems: vehicle allocation, parallel-machine scheduling,
and distribution scheduling. Vehicle allocation was performed using a Genetic Algorithm,
with an inner-layer algorithm determining the machine allocation, item processing sequence,
123

Annals of Operations Research
distribution path, and vehicle departure times, based on the First-Fit Decreasing and Longest
Processing Time rule combined with Tabu Search. It has been shown that incorporating ﬂex-
ible vehicle departure times reduces distribution costs, particularly when the delivery time
window is strict.
(B5): The intermediate node HassanzadehRK2016 (Hassanzadeh et al., 2016)’s multi-
objective optimization problem for integrated ﬂowshop and distribution scheduling sought
to minimize the total tardiness, earliness, and distribution cost. The non-dominated sorting
genetic algorithm and a multi-objective solution algorithm based on PSO were developed to
solvetheproblem,andtheirperformancewasevaluatedwithrespecttoconvergence,diversity,
and computational efﬁciency. The experimental results showed that the former algorithm
performed better with respect to solution diversity and stability in high-demand uncertainty
scenarios, whereas the latter demonstrated signiﬁcant advantages in computational efﬁciency.
Theyalsoshowedthatintegratingproductionanddistributionplanningimprovessupplychain
efﬁciency.
The intermediate node HassanzadehR2017 (Hassanzadeh & Rasti-Barzoki, 2017)
explored the integration of production and distribution scheduling problems, focusing on
optimizing energy and resource efﬁciency in the supply chain. They proposed a dual-objective
mathematical formulation and two improved metaheuristics: a modiﬁed multi-objective PSO
algorithm and a heuristic-based non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm. The experiments
showed that incorporating the chaotic mapping mechanism and heuristic mutation improved
the performance of the developed algorithms, and that the modiﬁed multi-objective PSO
outperformed the alternative in terms of solution quality and global exploration capability.
The latter algorithm demonstrated greater robustness in multi-objective optimization.
The intermediate node TamannaeiR2019 (Tamannaei & Rasti-Barzoki, 2019) studied the
multi-objective optimization problem of integrated production scheduling with distribution
path planning. A new MILP production scheduling problem was developed that incorporates
multiple vehicle allocation and path selection to minimize weighted delays and operational
costs. They implemented two solution methods: an exact algorithm based on branch-and-
bound (B&B), incorporating the "Least Due Date First" lower-bound strategy for small-scale
instances, and an improved GA for large-scale problems. The performance of the GA variants
was compared in optimizing the problem.
The intermediate node AminzadeganTR2019 (Aminzadegan et al., 2019) explored the
multi-agent supply chain scheduling problem, considering two agents, one that accepts
delayed deliveries subject to penalties and one that rejects delayed orders. Resource alloca-
tion and transportation planning were integrated to minimize batch delivery costs, resource
allocation, delay penalties, and lost sales. They proposed two mathematical formulations,
mixed-integer nonlinear programming (MINLP) and MILP. An adaptive GA and an Ant
Lion Optimization (ALO) algorithm incorporating a new heuristic module were developed
to solve the problems. The genetic algorithm performed better in terms of solution quality,
whereas the ALO algorithm demonstrated higher computational efﬁciency.
The intermediate node AminzadeganTF2021 (Aminzadegan et al., 2021) proposed a new
MILP formulation for SCS, combining order acceptance, resource allocation, and transporta-
tion path planning while accounting for delay penalties. Two metaheuristics, the adaptive GA
and Tabu Search (TS) algorithms, were employed to solve large-scale instances of the prob-
lem. An exact solver solved 85% of the small-scale instances, whereas the GA performed
slightly better on larger problems.
This group of studies focused on multi-objective optimization, with resource allocation as
a common study objective. The research has gradually expanded from single-level scheduling
problems to multi-stage, multi-agent, and multi-modal optimization to improve supply chain
123

Annals of Operations Research
resource utilization and reduce operating costs. Improving the performance of the solution
algorithms has been a secondary goal of these studies.
(B6): The sink node SugiantoK2024 (Sugianto & Kim, 2024) investigated the integrated
scheduling of additive manufacturing-based production and direct delivery processes. An
MILP model was proposed and solved using an extended PSO algorithm, to minimize the
weighted completion time of all parts from production to delivery. The novelty of their
method lies in its batch-construction approach based on material characteristics. In addition,
new heuristic rules were tested, and lower bounds were obtained by solving two relaxation
problems. Experimental results showed that the rule for maximizing capacity utilization
could compete with the metaheuristic algorithm on large instances. The study concluded
with a sensitivity analysis of the coordination of manufacturing and distribution resources
utilization.
Overall, SA, GA, and PSO have been most frequently employed in seminal papers to solve
large-scale SCS problems. A shift from basic models for testing coordination strategies to
dynamic, multi-objective optimization that integrates a wider range of actors is evident across
the main development branches. Recent developments in real-time planning and scheduling
underscore the impact of digitalization (Ivanov et al., 2025), as well as the gradual shift toward
Industry 4.0, which is often characterized by temporally structured machines, heterogeneous
production rates, and dynamic job arrivals (Ivanov et al., 2016a, 2016b). Synthesizing these
developmentalstagesrevealsacleartrajectory:SCSresearchhasevolvedfromsolvinglargely
static, isolated NP-hard problems to addressing increasingly dynamic, multi-echelon systems.
This shift is not merely methodological but also reﬂects a fundamental change in supply chain
objectives—frompurecostefﬁciencytoastrongeremphasisonresilienceandresponsiveness.
The progression demonstrates that as algorithmic sophistication has increased, the literature
has moved toward explicitly capturing the stochastic nature of real-world supply chains,
thereby necessitating the integration of ’source’, ’make’, and ’deliver’ decisions that were
previously treated separately.
4 Cluster analysis results
A total of 1,288 articles was considered for clustering and keyword analysis. The GroupFinder
module of the MainPath480 software analyzed the keywords using the Edge-Betweenness
Clustering algorithm to identify distinct research themes in these articles. A total of 30 clus-
ters were identiﬁed, with the top ﬁve clusters selected for further analysis: (1) Optimization
problems for integrated production and distribution planning; (2) Cross-dock planning and
SCS; (3) Multi-level decision integration in SCS; (4) Distributed supply and inventory man-
agement for deteriorating products; and (5) Coordinated planning of logistics operations.
Figure 6 shows the historical trend in the cumulative number of publications across these
clusters. Cluster 5 exhibited a growth rate that outpaced the other clusters. This surge can
be attributed to the rising global focus on circular economy principles and green logistics,
within which ’logistics’ increasingly encompasses environmental sustainability and carbon
footprint reduction alongside traditional economic value. The steep growth curve suggests
that optimizing these externalities has become a dominant driver in the development of new
SCS models.
The key extension MPA (KeyRoute10) was then applied to identify the primary
knowledge-dissemination pathways that have driven recent developments across the main
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 6 Historical publication trends across the top ﬁve clusters
research clusters. Additionally, keyword network analysis provides insights into the rela-
tionship patterns among keywords. In the network view, nodes represent keywords; links
represent co-occurrences, with their size indicating importance and the distance between
nodes reﬂecting relevance or correlation; colors categorize keywords into different themes
(see Figs. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11).
4.1 Optimization problems for integrated production and distribution planning
The key knowledge development path in Cluster I consists of 17 papers. Twelve of these
articles are present on the global main path. This demonstrates the importance of this cluster
in the SCS literature. The literature in this cluster has focused on the integrated optimization
of multi-stage supply chain operations, examining how the synergy between production and
distribution mitigates the risk of value loss in time-sensitive industries. A critical evaluation
of recent ﬁndings indicates that, for short-shelf-life products, the integration of real-time tem-
perature sensing and blockchain-enabled traceability into scheduling models is increasingly
regarded as a fundamental requirement for ensuring consumer safety and social sustainabil-
ity in the current industrial landscape. The source nodes GeismarLLS2008 (Geismar et al.,
2008), SteckeZ2007 (Stecke & Zhao, 2007), and ChangL2004 (Chang and Lee, 2004b)
were early seminal works that explored how this integration could reduce operational costs.
GeismarLLS2008 introduced an integrated scheduling problem for the production and trans-
portation of products with a short lifespan. SteckeZ2007 developed a similar problem for
make-to-order production operations. ChangL2004 proposed a mathematical problem for
simultaneous machine scheduling and ﬁnished product delivery planning, focusing on single-
machine production. In the most recent seminal development, the sink node KimK2022 (Kim
and Kim, 2022b) explored the scheduling of batch production integrated with direct shipping
operations. This practical scenario is commonly observed in the automotive industry.
Overall, minimizing tardiness has been the main objective in the integrated planning
of production and distribution operations. Automated material handling and human–robot
collaboration for required packaging and inspection are missing elements in the integration of
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 7 Keyword analysis, trend evolution, and the main trajectory of Cluster I
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 8 Keyword analysis, trend evolution, and the main trajectory of Cluster II
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 9 Keyword analysis, trend evolution, and the main trajectory of Cluster III
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 10 Keyword analysis, trend evolution, and the main trajectory of Cluster IV
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 11 Keyword analysis, trend evolution, and the main trajectory of Cluster V
123

Annals of Operations Research
production and logistics processes; incorporating these decision variables and/or constraints
will facilitate seamless integration.
The ﬁndings in Cluster I suggest that future contributions will likely pivot from purely
mathematical integration toward an emphasis on ’computational feasibility’ in real-time
settings, thereby reinforcing the increasing relevance of decomposition methods identiﬁed in
the network analysis. From an optimization perspective, mathematical integration inevitably
increases computational complexity. The extent of such interactions depends heavily on the
application area (i.e., product characteristics); therefore, integrated scheduling of decision
variables exhibiting strong interdependencies should be prioritized to capture optimization
trade-offs at the lowest computational cost (Pourhejazy, 2024). From a practical point of
view, incorporating additional perspectives, such as stress testing (Prathapage et al., 2025)
and cybersecurity (Sawik & Sawik, 2022), will help embed resilience considerations into
SCS.
4.2 Cross-dock planning and SCS
Cluster II comprises 13 articles that focus on the integrated optimization of cross-docking
and truck delivery scheduling in last-mile delivery. Cross-docking reduces storage costs and
delivery time through rapid transshipment. Truck scheduling involves route optimization
and delivery scheduling. The objective is to coordinate the arrival and dispatch of goods to
improve logistics efﬁciency. The depth of recent analysis in this cluster identiﬁes a clear trend
toward AI-optimized middle-mile linehaul planning. Unlike traditional models that focused
on terminal efﬁciency, current research critically assesses the impact of dynamic route adjust-
ments and load consolidation on reducing the bullwhip effect at the urban distribution level,
reporting handling cost reductions of over 10% in complex metropolitan settings. As the
source of the knowledge dissemination path, the source node LeeJL2006 (Lee et al., 2006)
explored the integration of cross-docking and vehicle routing problems, taking into account
practical constraints such as vehicle transportation routes, arrival time synchronization, and
cargo loading. This knowledge dissemination trajectory resulted in empirical ﬁndings on opti-
mizing material handling costs through cross-docking by MukherjeeSSAA2023 (Mukherjee
et al., 2023a), and the impact of using pallet trucks and automated guided vehicles on machine
utilization on the shop ﬂoor by the sink node MukherjeeSSA2023 (Mukherjee et al., 2023b).
The existing studies in this cluster focus on outbound logistics, whereas the integration of
inbound logistics, material handling, and production operations has been largely neglected.
This consideration is essential in the planning and operation of just-in-time systems (e.g.,
when inventory management costs are high and warehousing capacity is limited), as delays in
providing raw materials can cause major disruptions. In addition to this, emerging consider-
ations—such as crowdshipping, capillary distribution, and automated smart lockers (Sawik,
2024) —as well as emerging contexts, including Q-commerce (Raj et al., 2026), should be
studied within SCS.
4.3 Multi-level decision integration in SCS
Cluster III represents the theoretical vanguard of the ﬁeld, where researchers integrate deci-
sions across different decision-making levels to establish the foundations of supply chain
viability. Our evaluation reveals that the current research priority has shifted from maintain-
ing a ﬁxed optimal state to designing structurally reconﬁgurable networks. This involves
the application of switched system formulations and model predictive control to manage
123

Annals of Operations Research
transitions between different operating conditions during prolonged crises, such as geopo-
litical shocks or global pandemics. The source node BoseP2000 (Bose & Pekny, 2000)
initiated research in this cluster by developing a predictive planning and scheduling approach.
They explored the interactions between information ﬂows and resource allocations by inte-
grating demand forecasting into supply chain optimization, which accounts for inherent
dynamic behavior. The most recent developments from the sink nodes in this cluster include
IsakssonHS2018’s exploration of digital technologies in advanced control and operations
planning for the manufacturing industries (Isaksson et al., 2018); LejarzaB2020 ’s study of
closed-loop scheduling for supply chains, addressing product quality dynamics, especially
in perishables (Lejarza & Baldea, 2020); Andrés-MartínezR2021’s dynamic integration of
scheduling and control in multi-product continuous processes using switching systems that
allow for various operating conditions (Andrés-Martínez & Ricardez-Sandoval, 2021); Bade-
joI2022’s data-driven framework that integrates tactical planning with short-term planning
for a multi-objective supply chain optimization (Badejo & Ierapetritou, 2022); and Allen-
BKADHKP2023’s integration of strategic infrastructure decisions and short-term operations
planning (i.e., scheduling) in the context of energy systems (Allen et al., 2023). Exploring
sequential decision analytics and modeling (Powell, 2022) for multi-level decision integration
in SCS will be an important direction for advancing this research cluster.
The imperative for multi-level decision integration in SCS varies depending on the com-
plexity of the supply chain (e.g., supply base and echelons), the criticality of materials (e.g.,
rare earth elements), operational cost structures, and the strategic importance of the product.
For example, in space mission supply chains, planning should account for highly complex
risk structures, given that the supply chain is inherently complex, capital-intensive, and strate-
gically critical (Sawik, 2023).
4.4 Distributed supply and inventory management for deteriorating products
Five articles have formed the main development trajectory under Cluster IV, with
ÇetinkayaL2000 (Çetinkaya & Lee, 2000) and MantriPN2022 (Mantri et al., 2022) represent-
ing the source and end nodes of the knowledge dissemination path on the topic, respectively.
ÇetinkayaL2000 explored the integrated inventory replenishment and transportation prob-
lem in vendor-managed inventory systems. This study inspired one of the early works on
the joint replenishment and channel coordination by ChenC2005 (Chen & Chen, 2005).
MantriPN2022 proposed a multi-product, multi-period dairy supply chain network opti-
mization problem that considers demand clustering, inventory replenishment cycle time, and
product preservation factors. Inventory-location and routing problems fall under this category
of SCS. Given the large number of variables and the issue of nonlinearity in inventory man-
agement problems, simulation-based optimization methods should be developed for solution
generation, function evaluation, and/or the enhancement of analytical models.
Overall, distributed scheduling problems (see (Pourhejazy et al., 2022)) have seen major
development in the past few years. However, when it comes to mathematical integrations,
incorporating sourcing, distribution, and inventory variables into distributed scheduling prob-
lems remains quite underdeveloped. Existing studies are limited to integrating routing and
production scheduling for shop ﬂoors under simple settings, such as a single factory and a
single machine.
123

Annals of Operations Research
4.5 Coordinated planning of logistics operations
Cluster V focuses on optimizing the externalities of supply chain operations through inte-
grated planning. Andersson, 2011’s (Andersson, 2011) maritime distribution problem, which
integrates the scheduling of port visits with the last-mile delivery from the port to the cus-
tomer location; AcunaMGB2012’s (Acuna et al., 2012) integrated model of truck scheduling
and in-ﬁeld chipping in the forestry context; and OberscheiderZHGH2013’s (Oberscheider
et al., 2013) log-truck scheduling model that optimizes driving and loading/unloading times
and emissions in timber transport is the source node for the seminal knowledge dissemination
path under this research cluster. The most recent development on this topic is the sink node
MelchioriNMC2022’s (Melchiori et al., 2022) integrated routing and scheduling of logging
trucks in the forest supply chain. The majority of studies in this cluster concern forestry and
address upstream supply chain operations. Some suggestions for future research directions
in this theme include incorporating sustainability practices, such as the circular use of waste
wood during chipping and cutting, and integrating seeding operations.
Finally, Logistic Regression is used to predict the future growth trends in the top clusters
based on historical data. Figure 12 shows the results. Notably, cluster 2 shows the greatest
room for future research and growth. Studying underexplored logistics concepts, such as
dock-booking, in the context of SCS will help improve process integration, digitalization,
and supply chain automation, and ultimately enable the full implementation of the supply
chain control tower.
5 Concluding remarks
This study explored the trajectories of knowledge dissemination and the development patterns
of operations scheduling in the supply chain literature. Considering 1,288 articles published
between 1993 and the end of 2024, the main knowledge dissemination trajectory consisted
of four development stages: (1) core research on NP-hard problems; (2) integrated modeling
for multi-stage process integration; (3) advances in cross-factory collaborative planning and
multi-objective optimization; and (4) intelligent and data-driven SCS for smart manufac-
turing and logistics. The analysis showed that SCS for the joint optimization of production
and logistics operations has attracted considerable attention in the secondary literature. The
review further analyzed the principal subﬁelds of SCS, focusing on the top ﬁve clusters: (I)
optimization problems for integrated production and distribution planning; (II) cross-dock
planning and SCS; (III) multi-level decision integration in SCS; (IV) distributed supply and
inventory management for deteriorating products; and (V) coordinated planning of logistics
operations.
5.1 Managerial implications and problem trade-offs
The implementation of coordinated SCS offers signiﬁcant competitive advantages while
simultaneously presenting substantial challenges. To provide practitioners and researchers
with a clearer understanding of these dynamics, Table 1 summarizes the primary pros and
cons associated with the considered problem. Speciﬁcally, the table highlights key trade-offs
across four dimensions: (1) Operational Performance, where the pursuit of global optimal-
ity is balanced against increased computational complexity; (2) Supply Chain Dynamics,
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 12 Historical and projected research trends
indicating that enhanced resilience often comes at the cost of higher sensitivity during real-
time execution; (3) Strategic Management, illustrating the tension between mitigating the
bullwhip effect and overcoming information-sharing barriers; and (4) Costs & Efﬁciency,
where resource synergy must be managed alongside intrinsic model uncertainties. Overall,
coordinated scheduling of value-adding operations can be particularly beneﬁcial during peri-
ods of supply chain transitions. For example, Ivanov and Sokolov (2013b) suggested that
coordinated SCS ensures that interactions on the demand and supply sides are not disrupted
throughout the modernization process.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 Summary of beneﬁts and limitations of coordinated supply chain scheduling
Category
Pros (Beneﬁts)
Cons (Limitations & Challenges)
Operational
Performance
Global Optimality: Improves performance
beyond individual stage optimization
Computational Complexity:
Most SCS problems are
NP-hard, requiring advanced
heuristics for real-scale
instances
Supply Chain
Dynamics
Enhanced Resilience: Improves recovery
capability after major disruptions
Real-time Execution: High
sensitivity to dynamic changes
makes static schedules quickly
obsolete
Strategic Management
Mitigated Bullwhip Effect: Better
synchronization reduces inventory and
delivery delays
Information Sharing Barriers:
Requires high transparency and
trust among partners, often
hindered by privacy concerns
Costs & Efﬁciency
Resource Synergy: Reduces total costs
through integrated production and
logistics
Model Uncertainty: Difﬁculty in
accurately capturing stochastic
variables in a uniﬁed
deterministic framework
Building upon these trade-offs, the theoretical ﬁndings of this review offer a range of
diverse pathways for industrial application. As outlined in Table 2, different sectors can lever-
age distinct SCS clusters to address their unique operational bottlenecks. The same outcomes
can be expected when implementing supply chain recovery actions following major disrup-
tions (Ivanov et al., 2018), particularly in high-stakes industries such as semiconductors and
automobiles, where maintaining supply continuity is paramount. Coordinated planning can
also support risk-averse decision-making, thereby helping to maintain supply chain viability
in the presence of propagated disruptions (Sawik & Sawik, 2024; Sawik, 2025).
5.2 Recommendations for future research
Based on the evolutionary patterns identiﬁed through the MPA and the thematic gaps revealed
by the CA, the following research directions warrant further investigation:
(1) Real-Time Data Integration in the Context of Industry 5.0: Building on the transition
toward intelligent SCS systems identiﬁed in Stage 4 of the MPA, future research should
leverage the digital landscape of Industry 5.0. Speciﬁcally, SCS will beneﬁt from the
deeper and more systematic integration of real-time data analysis and predictive models
to enhance the responsiveness of decision support systems to changes in demand and
unexpected supply chain disruptions. In particular, intelligent monitoring of manufactur-
ing systems for automated decision-making within the Internet of Things (IoT) context
can enable SCS to offer more competitive production scheduling and resource manage-
ment solutions. While our analysis shows that this direction has already begun with the
real-time scheduling of last-mile deliveries, it remains largely nascent in upstream and
midstream supply chain operations.
(2) Adaptive and Learning-Based Optimization Solution Methods: To address the
computational complexity of NP-hard scheduling problems that have been predomi-
nantly addressed by heuristic approaches during Stages 1 and 2, future research may
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 Alignment of SCS research clusters with industrial applications
Research Cluster
Key Theoretical
Focus
Primary Industry
Applications
Implementation
Examples
Cluster I: Integrated
Production–Distribution
Global cost and delay
minimization
Electronics &
Semiconductors
Managing re-entrant
ﬂows and SMT
lines to reduce
setup costs
Cluster II: Cross-dock
Planning
Last-mile delivery
and transshipment
optimization
E-commerce & Retail
Enhancing JIT
delivery and
reducing storage
time in urban
distribution hubs
Cluster III: Multi-level
Integration
Dynamic coordination
and information
ﬂow
Automotive &
Aerospace
Coordinating global
multi-tier suppliers
for synchronized
assembly and space
missions
Cluster IV: Deteriorating
Products
Shelf-life and cold
chain constraints
Food & Pharmaceuticals
Managing inventory
decay for
short-shelf-life
goods and medical
supplies
Cluster V: Coordinated
Logistics
Resilience and
transition
management
Process & Chemical
Industries
Integrating ﬁnancial
cash-ﬂow with
multi-site
production
scheduling
extend the use of adaptive optimization algorithms to solve dynamic SCS problems,
including real-time rescheduling decisions. Moreover, the application of deep learn-
ing and reinforcement learning warrants further exploration to enhance the adaptability
of coordinated planning frameworks involving integrated and large-scale optimization
problems. Although data-driven dynamic scheduling has not yet become part of the
dominant development trajectory, our trend analysis suggests that it is poised to become
a major branch of future inquiry.
(3) Collaborative Resource Sharing Across Intertwined Supply Chains: A critical gap
identiﬁed in the existing clusters is the lack of effective coordination across shared
operational networks. An important development would be the coordination of activities
in shared facilities utilized by multiple supply chains; this implies a need for more
comprehensive studies to effectively share resources, improve collaborative efﬁciency,
and address uncertainty in intertwined supply chains. This direction was highlighted as
a potential extension of Cluster V (Coordinated Planning of Logistics Operations) but
remains largely underexplored in the current literature.
(4) Sustainability-Oriented Integration of Blockchain Technologies: Driven by the rapid
growth of Cluster V and the global pursuit of carbon neutrality, future research on SCS
may take advantage of emerging technologies, such as blockchain, to improve end-to-
end transparency and support supply chain–wide minimization of externalities. This
direction is expected to enrich currently underexplored logistics concepts, such as dock
123

Annals of Operations Research
booking, and to contribute to enhanced supply chain process integration, digitalization,
automation, and the full-scale implementation of the supply chain control tower.
(5) Integration of AI and Digital Twins for Real-Time SCS: Future studies should move
beyond static optimization and develop live scheduling frameworks. By leveraging dig-
ital twins, researchers can construct cyber–physical models that not only anticipate
disruptions but also autonomously reconﬁgure production schedules in real time through
deep reinforcement learning.
(6) From Resilience to Supply Chain Viability: As highlighted by the recent evolution
of Cluster V, there is a critical need to develop risk-averse scheduling models. Future
research should shift its focus toward supply chain viability, deﬁned as the ability of
a scheduling framework to sustain long-term systemic functionality under catastrophic
and cascading disruptions.
Funding Open access funding provided by UiT The Arctic University of Norway (incl University Hospital of
North Norway). The authors declare that no funds, grants, or other support were received for the preparation
of this review article.
Data availability The raw/processed data required to reproduce these ﬁndings can be provided upon reasonable
request.
Declarations
Competing interests The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
Ethical Approval Not applicable.
Consent to Participate Not applicable.
Consent to Publish Not applicable.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives
4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in
any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide
a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed material. You do not have
permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence
and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
References
Acuna, M., Mirowski, L., Ghaffariyan, M. R., & Brown, M. (2012). Optimising transport efﬁciency and costs
in Australian wood chipping operations. Biomass and Bioenergy, 46, 291–300. https://doi.org/10.1016/
J.BIOMBIOE.2012.08.014
Allen, R. C., Baratsas, S. G., Kakodkar, R., Avraamidou, S., Demirhan, C. D., Heuberger-Austin, C. F., et al.
(2023). A multi-period integrated planning and scheduling approach for developing energy systems.
Optimal Control Applications and Methods, 44(2), 355–372. https://doi.org/10.1002/oca.2866
Alsolbi, I., Shavaki, F. H., Agarwal, R., Bharathy, G. K., Prakash, S., & Prasad, M. (2023). Big data optimisation
and management in supply chain management: A systematic literature review. Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Review, 56(S1), 253–284. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-023-10505-4
123

Annals of Operations Research
Aminzadegan, S., Tamannaei, M., & Fazeli, M. (2021). An integrated production and transportation scheduling
problem with order acceptance and resource allocation decisions. Applied Soft Computing, 112, Article
107770. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2021.107770
Aminzadegan, S., Tamannaei, M., & Rasti-Barzoki, M. (2019). Multi-agent supply chain scheduling problem
by considering resource allocation and transportation. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 137, Article
106003. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2019.106003
Andersson, H. (2011). A maritime pulp distribution problem. INFOR: Information Systems and Operational
Research, 49(2), 125–138. https://doi.org/10.3138/infor.49.2.125
Andrés-Martínez, O., & Ricardez-Sandoval, L. A. (2021). A switched system formulation for optimal integra-
tion of scheduling and control in multi-product continuous processes. Journal of Process Control, 106,
94–109. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JPROCONT.2021.08.017
Assarzadegan, P., & Rasti-Barzoki, M. (2016). Minimizing sum of the due date assignment costs, maximum
tardiness and distribution costs in a supply chain scheduling problem. Applied Soft Computing, 47,
343–356. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2016.06.005
Babai, M. Z., Arampatzis, M., Hasni, M., Lolli, F., & Tsadiras, A. (2023). On the use of machine learning
in supply chain management: A systematic review. IMA Journal of Management Mathematics, 36(1),
21–49. https://doi.org/10.1093/imaman/dpae029
Badejo, O., & Ierapetritou, M. (2022). Integrating tactical planning, operational planning and scheduling using
data-driven feasibility analysis. Computers & Chemical Engineering, 161, Article 107759. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.COMPCHEMENG.2022.107759
Bose, S., & Pekny, J. F. (2000). A model predictive framework for planning and scheduling problems: A case
study of consumer goods supply chain. Computers & Chemical Engineering, 24(2–7), 329–335. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0098-1354(00)00469-5
Çetinkaya, S., & Lee, C.-Y. (2000). Stock replenishment and shipment scheduling for Vendor-Managed Inven-
tory systems. Management Science, 46(2), 217–232. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.46.2.217.11923
Chang, Y.-C., & Lee, C.-Y. (2004). Machine scheduling with job delivery coordination. European Journal of
Operational Research, 158(2), 470–487. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-2217(03)00364-3
Chen, T.-H., & Chen, J.-M. (2005). Optimizing supply chain collaboration based on joint replenishment
and channel coordination. Transportation Research Part e: Logistics and Transportation Review, 41(4),
261–285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2004.06.003
Chen, Z.-L., & Li, C.-L. (2008). Scheduling with subcontracting options. IIE Transactions, 40(12), 1171–1184.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07408170801975057
Cheng, T. C. E., & Kovalyov, M. Y. (2001). Single supplier scheduling for multiple deliveries. Annals of
Operations Research, 107(1/4), 51–63. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1014938712999
Demirli, K., & Yimer, A. D. (2008). Fuzzy scheduling of a build-to-order supply chain. International Journal
of Production Research, 46(14), 3931–3958. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207540601113273
Dosi, G. (1982). Technological paradigms and technological trajectories. Research Policy, 11(3), 147–162.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0048-7333(82)90016-6
Emenike, S. N., & Falcone, G. (2020). A review on energy supply chain resilience through optimization.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 134, Article 110088. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2020.11
0088
Fu, L.-L., Aloulou, M. A., & Triki, C. (2017). Integrated production scheduling and vehicle routing problem
with job splitting and delivery time windows. International Journal of Production Research, 55(20),
5942–5957. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1308572
Garﬁeld, E. (1964). “Science Citation Index”—A new dimension in indexing. Science, 144(3619), 649–654.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.144.3619.649
Geismar, H. N., Laporte, G., Lei, L., & Sriskandarajah, C. (2008). The integrated production and transportation
scheduling problem for a product with a short lifespan. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 20(1), 21–33.
https://doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.1060.0208
Girvan, M., & Newman, M. E. J. (2002). Community structure in social and biological networks. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 99(12), 7821–7826. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.122653799
Guillén, G., Badell, M., Espuña, A., & Puigjaner, L. (2006). Simultaneous optimization of process opera-
tions and ﬁnancial decisions to enhance the integrated planning/scheduling of chemical supply chains.
Computers & Chemical Engineering, 30(3), 421–436. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.2005.10
.015
Hajiaghaei-Keshteli, M., & Aminnayeri, M. (2014). Solving the integrated scheduling of production and rail
transportation problem by Keshtel algorithm. Applied Soft Computing, 25, 184–203. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.asoc.2014.09.034
123

Annals of Operations Research
Hajiaghaei-Keshteli, M., Aminnayeri, M., & Fatemi Ghomi, S. M. T. (2014). Integrated scheduling of produc-
tion and rail transportation. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 74, 240–256. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cie.2014.05.026
Han, B., Zhang, W., Lu, X., & Lin, Y. (2015). On-line supply chain scheduling for single-machine and parallel-
machine conﬁgurations with a single customer: Minimizing the makespan and delivery cost. European
Journal of Operational Research, 244(3), 704–714. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2015.02.008
Han, D., Yang, Y., Wang, D., Cheng, T. C. E., & Yin, Y. (2019). Integrated production, inventory, and outbound
distribution operations with ﬁxed departure times in a three-stage supply chain. Transportation Research
Part e: Logistics and Transportation Review, 125, 334–347. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2019.03.014
Hassanzadeh, A., & Rasti-Barzoki, M. (2017). Minimizing total resource consumption and total tardiness
penalty in a resource allocation supply chain scheduling and vehicle routing problem. Applied Soft
Computing, 58, 307–323. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2017.05.010
Hassanzadeh, A., Rasti-Barzoki, M., & Khosroshahi, H. (2016). Two new meta-heuristics for a bi-objective
supply chain scheduling problem in ﬂow-shop environment. Applied Soft Computing, 49, 335–351.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2016.08.019
He, P., Li, K., & Kumar, P. N. R. (2022). An enhanced branch-and-price algorithm for the integrated production
and transportation scheduling problem. International Journal of Production Research, 60(6), 1874–1889.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2021.1876941
Hummon, N. P., & Dereian, P. (1989). Connectivity in a citation network: The development of DNA theory.
Social Networks, 11(1), 39–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-8733(89)90017-8
Isaksson, A. J., Harjunkoski, I., & Sand, G. (2018). The impact of digitalization on the future of control and
operations. Computers & Chemical Engineering, 114, 122–129. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COMPCHEM
ENG.2017.10.037
Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., & Sokolov, B. (2017). A Dynamic Approach to Multi-stage Job Shop Scheduling in
an Industry 4.0-Based Flexible Assembly System (pp. 475–482). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-66
923-6_56
Ivanov, D., Tsipoulanidis, A., & Schönberger, J. (2025). Digital Supply Chain, Smart Operations, Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, and Industry 4.0 (pp. 539–585). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-95859-5_16
Ivanov, D. (2018). Structural Dynamics and Resilience in Supply Chain Risk Management (Vol. 265). Springer
International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-69305-7
Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., & Sokolov, B. (2012). Applicability of optimal control theory to adaptive supply chain
planning and scheduling. Annual Reviews in Control, 36(1), 73–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcontrol.
2012.03.006
Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., & Sokolov, B. (2016a). Robust dynamic schedule coordination control in the supply
chain. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 94, 18–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2016.01.009
Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., & Sokolov, B. (2018). Scheduling of recovery actions in the supply chain with resilience
analysis considerations. International Journal of Production Research, 56(19), 6473–6490. https://doi.
org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1401747
Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., Sokolov, B., Werner, F., & Ivanova, M. (2016b). A dynamic model and an algorithm for
short-term supply chain scheduling in the smart factory Industry 4.0. International Journal of Production
Research, 54(2), 386–402. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2014.999958
Ivanov, D., & Sokolov, B. (2010). Adaptive Supply Chain Management. Springer, London. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-1-84882-952-7
Ivanov, D., & Sokolov, B. (2012). Dynamic supply chain scheduling. Journal of Scheduling, 15(2), 201–216.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10951-010-0189-6
Ivanov, D., & Sokolov, B. (2013a). Control and system-theoretic identiﬁcation of the supply chain dynamics
domain for planning, analysis and adaptation of performance under uncertainty. European Journal of
Operational Research, 224(2), 313–323. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2012.08.021
Ivanov, D., & Sokolov, B. (2013b). Dynamic co-ordinated scheduling in the supply chain under a process
modernisation.InternationalJournalofProduction Research,51(9),2680–2697. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00207543.2012.737950
Ivanov, D., Sokolov, B., & Dolgui, A. (2014). Multi-stage supply chain scheduling with non-preemptive
continuous operations and execution control. International Journal of Production Research, 52(13),
4059–4077. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2013.793429
Kim, Y.-J., & Kim, B.-S. (2022). Population-based meta-heuristic algorithms for integrated batch manufac-
turing and delivery scheduling problem. Mathematics, 10(21), Article 4127. https://doi.org/10.3390/ma
th10214127
Lee, Y. H., Jung, J. W., & Lee, K. M. (2006). Vehicle routing scheduling for cross-docking in the supply chain.
Computers & Industrial Engineering, 51(2), 247–256. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2006.02.006
123

Annals of Operations Research
Lejarza, F., & Baldea, M. (2020). Closed-loop optimal operational planning of supply chains with fast product
quality dynamics. Computers & Chemical Engineering, 132, Article 106594. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
COMPCHEMENG.2019.106594
Li, K., He, P., & Ram Kumar, P. N. (2023). A column generation based approach for an integrated production
and transportation scheduling problem with dual delivery modes. International Journal of Production
Research, 61(16), 5483–5501. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2022.2102451
Liberati, A. (2009). The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that
evaluate health care interventions: Explanation and elaboration. Annals of Internal Medicine, 151(4), W.
https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-151-4-200908180-00136
Liberati, A., Altman, D. G., Tetzlaff, J., Mulrow, C., Gøtzsche, P. C., Ioannidis, J. P. A., et al. (2009). The
PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate health
care interventions: Explanation and elaboration. PLoS Medicine, 6(7), Article e1000100. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pmed.1000100
Liu, H., Guo, Z., & Zhang, Z. (2021). A hybrid multi-level optimisation framework for integrated produc-
tion scheduling and vehicle routing with ﬂexible departure time. International Journal of Production
Research, 59(21), 6615–6632. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2020.1821927
Liu, J. S., Lu, L. Y. Y., & Ho, M.H.-C. (2019). A few notes on main path analysis. Scientometrics, 119(1),
379–391. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-019-03034-x
Mantri, J. K., Pattnaik, M., & Nayak, K. C. (2022). Heuristics for the multi-{product, period, effort} milk
supply chain network design (MSCND): A case analysis. Opsearch. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12597-022-
00592-2
Marandi, F., & Fatemi Ghomi, S. M. T. (2019). Integrated multi-factory production and distribution scheduling
applyingvehicleroutingapproach.InternationalJournalofProductionResearch,57(3),722–748.https://
doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1481301
Maroof, A., Khalid, Q. S., Mahmood, M., Naeem, K., Maqsood, S., Khattak, S. B., & Ayvaz, B. (2023). Vehicle
routing optimization for humanitarian supply chain: A systematic review of approaches and solutions.
IEEE Access, 11, 127157–127175. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3331062
Melchiori, L., Nasini, G., Montagna, J. M., & Corsano, G. (2022). A mathematical modeling for simultaneous
routing and scheduling of logging trucks in the forest supply chain. Forest Policy and Economics, 136,
Article 102693. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.FORPOL.2022.102693
Mukherjee, T., Sangal, I., Sarkar, B., Alkadash, T. M., & Almaamari, Q. (2023). Pallet distribution affecting a
machine’s utilization level and picking time. Mathematics, 11(13), Article 2956. https://doi.org/10.3390/
math11132956
Mukherjee, T., Sangal, I., Sarkar, B., & Almaamari, Q. A. (2022). Logistic models to minimize the material
handling cost within across-dock.MathematicalBiosciencesand Engineering,20(2),3099–3119. https://
doi.org/10.3934/mbe.2023146
Oberscheider, M., Zazgornik, J., Henriksen, C. B., Gronalt, M., & Hirsch, P. (2013). Minimizing driving times
and greenhouse gas emissions in timber transport with a near-exact solution approach. Scandinavian
Journal of Forest Research, 28(5), 493–506. https://doi.org/10.1080/02827581.2012.758309
Oliveira, L. S., & Machado, R. L. (2021). Application of optimization methods in the closed-loop supply
chain: A literature review. Journal of Combinatorial Optimization, 41(2), 357–400. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10878-020-00677-y
Perea-López, E., Ydstie, B. E., & Grossmann, I. E. (2003). A model predictive control strategy for supply
chain optimization. Computers & Chemical Engineering, 27(8–9), 1201–1218. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0098-1354(03)00047-4
Petropoulos, F., Akkermans, H., Aksin, O. Z., Ali, I., Babai, M. Z., Barbosa-Povoa, A., et al. (2026). Operations
& supply chain management: Principles and practice. International Journal of Production Research,
64(1), 330–513. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2025.2555531
Porter, M. E. (1985). Competitive advantage: Creating and sustaining superior performance. Simon and
Schuster.
Pourhejazy, P. (2024). Production management and supply chain integration. The Palgrave handbook of supply
chain management (pp. 315–340). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-
19884-7_86
Pourhejazy, P., Cheng, C.-Y., Ying, K.-C., & Nam, N. H. (2022). Meta-Lamarckian-based iterated greedy for
optimizing distributed two-stage assembly ﬂowshops with mixed setups. Annals of Operations Research.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04537-2
Powell, W. B. (2022). Sequential decision analytics and modeling: Modeling with Python - Part II. Foundations
and Trends® in Technology, Information and Operations Management, 16(1–2), 1–176. https://doi.org/
10.1561/0200000103-II
123

Annals of Operations Research
Prathapage, H., Ivanov, D., & Ivanova, M. (2025). Methodological approaches and managerial insights in
supply chain stress testing. International Journal of Production Research, 63(24), 10791–10830. https://
doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2025.2561779
Qi, X. (2008). Coordinated logistics scheduling for in-house production and outsourcing. IEEE Transactions
on Automation Science and Engineering, 5(1), 188–192. https://doi.org/10.1109/TASE.2006.887159
Raj, A., Das, D., & Sawik, T. (2026). Mitigating disruption impact in Q-commerce through optimization of
dark store resilient portfolio. Transportation Research Part e: Logistics and Transportation Review, 205,
Article 104518. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2025.104518
Riera, J. A., Lima, R. M., & Knio, O. M. (2023). A review of hydrogen production and supply chain modeling
and optimization. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 48(37), 13731–13755. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ijhydene.2022.12.242
Rivera, A. F., Smith, N. R., & Ruiz, A. (2023). A systematic literature review of food banks’ supply chain
operations with a focus on optimization models. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain
Management, 13(1), 10–25. https://doi.org/10.1108/JHLSCM-09-2021-0087
Sarkis, J. (Ed.). (2024). The Palgrave handbook of supply chain management. Springer International Publish-
ing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19884-7
Sawik, B. (2023). Space mission risk, sustainability and supply chain: Review, multi-objective optimiza-
tion model and practical approach. Sustainability, 15(14), Article 11002. https://doi.org/10.3390/su1514
11002
Sawik, B. (2024). Optimizing last-mile delivery: A multi-criteria approach with automated smart lockers,
capillary distribution and crowdshipping. Logistics, 8(2), Article 52. https://doi.org/10.3390/logistics8
020052
Sawik, T., & Sawik, B. (2022). A rough cut cybersecurity investment using portfolio of security controls
with maximum cybersecurity value. International Journal of Production Research, 60(21), 6556–6572.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2021.1994166
Sawik, T., & Sawik, B. (2024). Risk-averse decision-making to maintain supply chain viability under propa-
gated disruptions. International Journal of Production Research, 62(8), 2853–2867. https://doi.org/10.
1080/00207543.2023.2236726
Shah, N. (2005). Process industry supply chains: Advances and challenges. Computers & Chemical Engineer-
ing, 29(6), 1225–1235. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.2005.02.023
Stecke, K. E., & Zhao, X. (2007). Production and transportation integration for a make-to-order manufacturing
company with a commit-to-delivery business mode. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management,
9(2), 206–224. https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.1060.0138
Steiner, G., & Zhang, R. (2009). Approximation algorithms for minimizing the total weighted number of late
jobs with late deliveries in two-level supply chains. Journal of Scheduling, 12(6), 565–574. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10951-009-0109-9
Stüve, D., van der Meer, R., Ali Agha, M. S., & Lütke Entrup, M. (2022). A systematic literature review of
modelling approaches and implementation of enabling software for supply chain planning in the food
industry. Production & Manufacturing Research, 10(1), 470–493. https://doi.org/10.1080/21693277.
2022.2091057
Sugianto, W. C., & Kim, B. S. (2024). Particle swarm optimization for integrated scheduling problem with
batch additive manufacturing and batch direct-shipping delivery. Computers & Operations Research,
161, Article 106430. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2023.106430
Sun, X. T., Chung, S. H., & Chan, F. T. S. (2015). Integrated scheduling of a multi-product multi-factory
manufacturing system with maritime transport limits. Transportation Research Part e: Logistics and
Transportation Review, 79, 110–127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2015.04.002
Sun, X. T., Chung, S. H., Chan, F. T. S., & Wang, Z. (2018). The impact of liner shipping unreliability on the
production–distribution scheduling of a decentralized manufacturing system. Transportation Research
Part e: Logistics and Transportation Review, 114, 242–269. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2018.04.002
Tamannaei, M., & Rasti-Barzoki, M. (2019). Mathematical programming and solution approaches for mini-
mizing tardiness and transportation costs in the supply chain scheduling problem. Computers & Industrial
Engineering, 127, 643–656. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2018.11.003
Teixeira, EdosS., Rangel, S., Florentino, HdeO., & de Araujo, S. A. (2023). A review of mathematical optimiza-
tion models applied to the sugarcane supply chain. International Transactions in Operational Research,
30(4), 1755–1788. https://doi.org/10.1111/itor.13056
Thomas, D. J., & Grifﬁn, P. M. (1996). Coordinated supply chain management. European Journal of Opera-
tional Research, 94(1), 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/0377-2217(96)00098-7
Tordecilla,R.D.,Juan,A.A.,Montoya-Torres,J.R.,Quintero-Araujo,C.L.,&Panadero,J.(2021).Simulation-
optimization methods for designing and assessing resilient supply chain networks under uncertainty
123

Annals of Operations Research
scenarios: A review. Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory, 106, Article 102166. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.simpat.2020.102166
Ullrich, C. A. (2013). Integrated machine scheduling and vehicle routing with time windows. European Journal
of Operational Research, 227(1), 152–165. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2012.11.049
van Eck, N. J., & Waltman, L. (2010). Software survey: VOSviewer, a computer program for bibliometric
mapping. Scientometrics, 84(2), 523–538. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-009-0146-3
Xames, M. D., Shefa, J., Azrin, F. A., Uddin, A. SMd. N., Habiba, U., & Zaman, W. (2023). A systematic
review of modeling approaches in green supply chain optimization. Environmental Science and Pollution
Research, 30(53), 113218–113241. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-023-30396-w
Ya˘gmur, E., & Kesen, S. E. (2021). Multi-trip heterogeneous vehicle routing problem coordinated with pro-
duction scheduling: Memetic algorithm and simulated annealing approaches. Computers & Industrial
Engineering, 161, Article 107649. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2021.107649
Ya˘gmur, E., & Kesen, S. E. (2023). Bi-objective coordinated production and transportation scheduling problem
with sustainability: Formulation and solution approaches. International Journal of Production Research,
61(3), 774–795. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2021.2017054
Yimer, A. D., & Demirli, K. (2010). A genetic approach to two-phase optimization of dynamic supply chain
scheduling. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 58(3), 411–422. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2009.01
.010
Ying, K. C., Pourhejazy, P., & Huang, Tc. (2024). Exploring the development trajectory of single-machine
production scheduling. Ann Oper Res. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06395-6
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123