TITLE: MinCovTarget+: a fast heuristic algorithm for fair allocation
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06913-0
---

ORIGINAL-COMPARATIVE COMPUTATIONAL STUDY
Received: 17 September 2023 / Accepted: 20 October 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
 
 Giovanni Puccetti
giovanni.puccetti@unimi.it
Ludger Rüschendorf
ruschen@stochastik.uni-freiburg.de
Steven Vanduffel
steven.vanduffel@vub.ac.be
1 
Department of Economics, Management and Quantitative Methods, Università degli Studi di 
Milano, Milano, Italy
2 
Department of Mathematical Stochastics, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
3 
Department of Business, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussel, Belgium
MinCovTarget+: a fast heuristic algorithm for fair allocation
Giovanni Puccetti1
 · Ludger Rüschendorf2 · Steven Vanduffel3
Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06913-0
Abstract
We introduce the MinCovTarget+ algorithm for the problem of fair allocation of indivis­
ible items and we study its performance with respect to some popular fairness and effi­
ciency criteria such as minimal envy, proportionality, maximal Nash welfare and maximal 
total welfare. By a detailed numerical analysis we compare our newly proposed algorithm 
with a standard algorithm for this kind of problem: the Spliddit algorithm. Our numerical 
analysis shows that MinCovTarget+ provides allocations with an excellent balance be­
tween fairness and efficiency criteria. In particular, it typically yields minimal (null) envy 
solutions with a very high value of Nash welfare, at a fraction of the computation time 
used by Spliddit. Moreover, MinCovTarget+ can be applied in higher dimensions where 
Spliddit cannot be readily implemented. Our paper is the first in the literature to present 
a numerical study of these algorithms using a random uniform valuation of the goods to 
be allocated, as well as a novel design of the value matrix that incorporates dependent 
valuations. All the numerical estimates in this paper were obtained using a Macbook Air 
(Apple M1, 8 GB RAM). The corresponding MATLAB code is available at: ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​g​i​t​h​u​b​
.​c​o​m​/​g​i​o​v​a​n​n​i​p​u​c​c​e​t​t​i​/​M​i​n​C​o​v​T​a​r​g​e​t. A user-friendly version of the algorithm is available 
at https://www.fair-allocation.com.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
1  Introduction and motivation
The problem of fair allocation of indivisible items is a relevant and challenging economic 
problem which has several applications in everyday life. In fact, our social interactions 
often require a method for allocating a number of indivisible goods or resources among a 
number of agents in a reasonable way. For example, the head of a firm might need to allocate 
a limited number of tablets, computers, and private offices among the firm’s employees. A 
group of designated heirs may need a fair way to divide real estate and jewelry coming from 
an inheritance. A couple might need to divide these goods in a divorce settlement. A group 
of friends may need to calculate the rent shares for the different rooms in an apartment. 
These are all practical situations that call for a fair allocation of goods/resources that are 
indivisible in nature: they lose their value when broken, divided into pieces or shared with 
someone else.
The purpose of fair allocation is to find an allocation that satisfies some desired optimality 
properties. The recent literature (Amanatidis et al. 2023) has focused on finding allocations 
that are fair to the agents, in the sense that they produce a low (null) level of envy among the 
agents and, at the same time, guarantee efficiency in the sense of Pareto optimality.
An allocation is called envy-free (EF) if each agent believes to have received the best 
bundle. Although envy-freeness is not always achievable in practice (a single diamond will 
not make everyone happy), one can always aim to optimize fairness by minimizing the level 
of envy among the agents. In the classic framework of additive utilities, EF allocations are 
also proportional (PROP), that is each of the n agents is guaranteed to obtain at least 1
n (a 
fair share) of the total value (note that the converse does not hold).
An allocation is called Pareto optimal (PO) if no other allocation can be made that gives 
at least the same value to all agents and strictly improves the value of at least one of them. 
A straightforward PO allocation rule maximizes total welfare, or the sum of the values 
received by each agent. This can be easily achieved by assigning each item to the player 
who values it the most. However, attaining Pareto optimality by maximizing total welfare 
can produce a high level of envy, as illustrated in the example given in Sect. 5.
The Spliddit algorithm, introduced in Caragiannis et al. (2019), achieves the goal of 
combining Pareto optimality (efficiency) with a low level of envy (fairness) by maximizing 
a different welfare function: Nash welfare, which is the product of the utilities gained by 
each agent. The allocations found by Spliddit are easily shown to be PO and also satisfy a 
relaxation of the no-envy notion, namely envy-freeness up to one good (EF1). This means 
that it is acceptable for an agent j to envy agent i, provided there exists a single good in i’s 
bundle that, if given to j, would eliminate j’s envy.
Private individuals can find a ready-to-use tool to successfully resolve their disputes at 
the website https://www.spliddit.org; see also Shah (2017). The numerical experiments in 
this paper demonstrate that Spliddit guarantees a very good balance between efficiency and 
fairness, and performs very well with respect to the exact notion of envy-freeness.
Besides some minor implicit assumptions, no major drawbacks of the Spliddit algorithm 
are apparent unless one tackles a high-dimensional allocation problem where, say, 300 
goods must be allocated to 30 agents. For this case, Spliddit was able to provide an alloca­
tion within 10 min only 8 times out of 50 simulations of the goods valuations provided by 
the agents. Spliddit cannot be used in higher-dimensional scenarios.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
The MinCovTarget+ algorithm that we propose addresses the aforementioned scenario, 
always finding a no-envy allocation close (99.8% on average) to the maximum total wel­
fare in about 14 s. Real-life examples in which high-dimensional instances arise include 
cases when a number of medical supplies or vaccines must be distributed among hospitals 
in a given country, a union of nations is willing to distribute resources among its country 
members, or a large firm is going to distribute indivisible goods among its employees. High-
dimensional instances may also include the fair allocation of a mix of indivisible and divis­
ible goods. For example, an inheritance may include cash.
The MinCovTarget+ algorithm is based on the MinCovTarget algorithm introduced in 
Cornilly et al. (2022). The MinCovTarget algorithm aims to find allocations with minimal 
envy. By introducing a target parameter, it can balance minimal envy with other allocation 
criteria, such as maximum Nash welfare. The MinCovTarget+ algorithm is a two-step pro­
cedure. In the first step, allocations with different balances (controlled by a parameter) of 
fairness and efficiency are found. In the second step, the algorithm selects an allocation with 
the highest Nash or total welfare among all allocations with minimal envy found in the first 
step. In our numerical experiments, this two-step procedure yields allocations with a low or 
null level of envy and very high Nash or total welfare value.
This paper aims to compare the performance of Spliddit and MinCovTarget+ against 
various fairness criteria. Our numerical results show an excellent performance of Min­
CovTarget+ with respect to envy (hence proportionality), Nash and total welfare. Nota­
bly, MinCovTarget+ can rapidly obtain envy-free allocations also in the high-dimensional 
scenarios for which Spliddit cannot be implemented. For higher-dimensional frameworks 
(n > 200), our figures suggest that MinCovTarget+ can also be used with a single target 
value set equal to the total value of the goods. This enables one to solve high-dimensional 
problems in seconds, finding allocations with approximate maximum total welfare and envy 
levels close to zero.
For the criteria considered in this paper (maximization of total welfare apart), the prob­
lem of fair allocation of indivisible goods is computationally NP-hard (see Bouveret et al. 
2005, Lipton et al. 2004, Nguyen et al. 2013, and the references therein). Roughly speaking, 
this means that, unless one is able for very small dimensional instances to solve the problem 
exactly by full enumeration of the finitely many possible allocations or by linear program­
ming, finding the global optimum is computationally intractable. Consequently, algorithms 
for fair allocation (including the two studied here) are usually approximate. They either 
approximate the problem, as Spliddit does, or they find a local solution rather than a global 
one, as MinCovTarget+ does.
Additionally, from the perspective of worst-case performance, any allocation algorithm 
may be unsatisfactory, as it is always possible to find an example in which a specific fairness 
criterion does not produce a meaningful allocation. However, in the following applications 
we show that Spliddit and MinCovTarget+ offer an excellent balance between fairness and 
efficiency, with the advantage that MinCovTarget+ can handle higher-dimensional instances.
In Cornilly et al. (2022), a preliminary comparison of these algorithms with respect to 
Nash welfare, social inequality, and envy was carried out. However, it was done using Min­
CovTarget without giving proper consideration to the selection of target values, as we do in 
this paper. Furthermore, the Spliddit algorithm was not used there, whereas in this paper we 
conduct a comprehensive numerical analysis (which we could not find in the literature) of 
the original algorithm.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
To broaden the scope of applications of our study, we introduce a novel approach to 
designing agents’ valuations that considers dependent valuations. Finally, we note that a 
variety of practical methods exist for allocating indivisible goods among two agents (see 
Rubchinsky 2010, Kilgour and Vetschera 2018). These methods are not considered here.
2  Mathematical framework
The goal of fair allocation is to allocate a finite set of d ⩾1 indivisible goods among a finite 
number of n ⩾2 agents in a way that satisfies an a-priori fixed fairness criterion. For a full 
background on the classic economic problem of fair allocation and the many fairness cri­
teria existing in the literature, we refer to Amanatidis et al. (2022, 2023), Caragiannis et al. 
(2019), Cornilly et al. (2022), Lang and Rothe (2016), and the references therein.
The starting point of any fair division problem is the so called value matrix V = (vij), 
which collects the values vij ⩾0 given by agent i to item j, for i ∈N := {1, . . . , n} and 
j ∈D := {1, . . . , d}. Examples of value matrices are shown in Figs.  1, 2, and 3. The 
binary matrix X = (xij) represents an allocation among the players, with xij = 1 if agent i 
receives item j, xij = 0 otherwise. We impose that
 
∑
i∈N
xij = 1, j ∈D,
that is each item is allocated to exactly one agent and nothing is thrown away. Given an 
allocation X, the total value gained by agent i is therefore given by
 
Ui(X) =
∑
j∈D
xijvij.
The maximization of the sum of the utilities gained by each agent is called maximum total 
welfare (MTW), that is
 
MTW = max
X∈A
∑
i∈N
Ui(X),
(1)
where A is the set of all possible allocations of d objects to n agents. Notice that, being A 
finite (there are nd possible allocations), the maximum in (1) is attained (there always exists 
at least one MTW allocation). The MTW can be simply achieved by assigning each item to 
the player who values it the most. This operation that can be completed in O(d n log n), and 
it is easily shown to be PO.
As mentioned in the introduction, one of the most popular fairness criteria is the search 
for minimum envy. An allocation X is said to be envy-free (EF) if no agent prefers the 
bundle of goods received by any other agent to their own bundle. Since an EF allocation 
may not exist (if only one item is to be allocated, someone will be unhappy), it makes sense 
to minimize the maximum envy between any two agents. Following Lipton et al. (2004), we 
define the envy e(X) of an allocation X as the maximum envy among any pair of agents, 
i.e.,
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
 
e(X) = max{eik(X); i, k ∈N}, with eik(X) = max{0, U k
i (X) −U i
i (X)},
and where
 
U k
i (X) =
∑
j∈D
xkjvij
is the utility gained by agent k under agent i’s valuations (note that U i
i (X) = Ui(X)). If 
eik(X) = 0, then agent i does not envy agent k. We say that X is a minimum envy allocation 
if it solves
 
min
X∈A e(X).
(2)
As with total welfare, a minimum envy allocation always exists.
Another popular fairness rule is proportionality, which can be shown to be a relaxation of 
the envy-freeness (e(X) = 0) notion. An allocation X is said to be proportional (PROP) if
 
Ui(X) ⩾
∑
j∈D vij
n
,
that is each agent obtains at least 1
n (called a fair share) of the total value assigned to the 
goods, regardless of what the other agents receive. In our framework with additive values, 
an EF allocation is also PROP, but not vice versa; see Amanatidis et al. (2023).
3  Spliddit algorithm
The Spliddit algorithm pursues maximum Nash welfare (MNW), i.e. it aims to maximize 
the product (rather than the sum) of each agent’s total value. By applying a logarithm, the 
problem can be defined as follows:
 
log(MNW) = max
X∈A
∑
i∈N
log Ui(X),
(3)
i.e. as the maximization the sum of the log-utilities of each agent. Note again that the maxi­
mum in (3) is attained. Spliddit does not solve (3) directly, but rather an approximation given 
by the following mixed integer linear programming (MILP). With M = {1, 3, . . . , M −1}, 
Spliddit solves:
 
max
∑
i∈N
Wi, s.t.





Wi ⩽log(k) + (log(k + 1) −log(k))(∑
j∈D xijvij −k), i ∈N, k ∈M (utility proxi);
∑
j∈D xijvij ⩾1, i ∈N (at least 1-utility to each agent);
∑
j∈N xij = 1, j ∈D (all goods are allocated to exactly one agent);
xij ∈{0, 1}, i ∈N, j ∈D (xij = 1 iﬀagent i receives item j).

(4)
There are a few assumptions under which the above MILP turns out to be a good approxima­
tion of the maximization of Nash welfare (3).
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
First, the logarithm is approximated by the minimum of a finite family of affine functions 
(this is the first constraint), which equals the logarithm at integral points. We notice that this 
can be done if the log function is replaced by any concave utility function f, and in general 
works by replacing the term (f(k + 1) −f(k)) by f ′(k).
The utility approximation described above is possible because Spliddit requires integral 
valuations of the goods. That is, each agent is asked to distribute M points (with M = 1000 
in the original version) among the d items. This means that each row of the value matrix V 
adds up exactly to M, i.e.
 
∑
j∈D
vij = M, i ∈N.
The fact that agents’ utilities are integral and can attain a value of at most M is an essential 
feature of Spliddit, which is necessary to make it work. The value of M gives an implicit 
upper bound on the dimensionality of the problems that Spliddit can handle. Valuations pro­
vided by agents for more than M = 1000 items cease to be fully meaningful, and the value 
of M cannot be increased without heavily affecting the cost of computing the final solution.
The second constraint of the above MILP requires that each agent receive at least 1-util­
ity, i.e. at least one object. This prevents an agent from receiving nothing, which would 
cause the corresponding logarithm to be minus infinity. In the original version, a preprocess­
ing step identifies the largest set of players for which this is feasible. In any case, fulfilling 
this constraint implies that Spliddit can only be run when d ⩾n.
The third and fourth constraints of the MILP represent standard requirements for the 
allocation of indivisible items.
These assumptions appear reasonable and the allocations found by Spliddit are shown 
in Caragiannis et al. (2019) to be both EF1 and Pareto optimal. However, Spliddit has an 
Achilles’ heel: the limited dimensionality of the instances it can handle. On our machine, 
Spliddit can generally handle up to a few dozen agents in under a minute, and is thus able 
to deal with most requests coming from private customers (e.g. for inheritance or divorce 
disputes). However, with d ⩾100 goods to be allocated to n = 30 agents, the above MILP 
becomes intractable. In fact, computing or approximating MNW allocations is a challeng­
ing numerical problem; see the detailed discussion given in Amanatidis et al. (2023) and the 
references therein.
4  MinCovTarget+ algorithm
The MinCovTarget+ algorithm that we propose below is an efficient version of the so-called 
MinCovTarget and MinCov algorithms introduced in Cornilly et al. (2022). The MinCov 
algorithm aims to obtain an allocation with minimum social inequality, i.e. one in which the 
utilities gained by each agent are as similar as possible under each agent’s valuation. When 
all agents derive equal utilities from their assigned bundles, we speak of social equality or 
equitability; see Freeman et al. (2019). The MinCov algorithm aims to minimize the social 
inequality I(X) of the system, which is defined as
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
 
I(X) =
∑
i∈N
∑
k∈N
(
U k
i (X) −M/n)2
n2
.
Ideally, the rule of minimal inequality guarantees envy-freeness, see the Adjusted Winner 
algorithm in Brams and Taylor (1996) in which each agent receives exactly the same utility. 
However, when the goal is only social equality, the result is typically an allocation in which 
everyone receives a more-or-less identical assignment that everyone finds mediocre. In this 
case, no one is envious, and the allocation is fair. Yet, total welfare could be vastly improved 
without introducing envy.
In fact, looking for social equality is a strategy for keeping envy low: the envy asso­
ciated with a minimum inequality allocation is bounded by the value of inequality; see 
Propositions 3.2 and 3.3 in Cornilly et al. (2022). Thus, even though MinCov was originally 
designed to minimize inequality, a very good compromise between fairness and efficiency 
can be achieved by introducing of a parameter called the target value.
The MinCovTarget algorithm accomplishes this by introducing a malus τi > 0 (the tar­
get value) for agent i, in order to prioritize the own utility over that of the others. Thus, the 
MinCovTarget algorithm aims to solve
 
min
X∈A Iτ(X),
(5)
where
 
Iτ(X) =
∑
i∈N
∑
k∈N
(
U k
i (X) −1{k=i}τi −(M −τi)/n)2
n2
.
Since in Spliddit the total value of the goods is the same for each agent, in the following we 
choose an homogeneous target value, i.e. τi = τ, i ∈N.
The target value enables the algorithm to interpolate between searching for minimal 
social inequality (for τ = 0, leading to MinCov) and hence minimal envy, and searching for 
MTW (for τ →∞). Smaller target values correspond to stronger consideration of the fair­
ness criterion, while larger target values correspond to a stronger consideration of efficiency. 
Since the algorithm is so fast, one can run it for an entire set of different target values and 
then, in a second step, choose the preferred balance between fairness and efficiency.
The MinCovTarget algorithm is based on a series of efficient local swaps. Starting from 
a trivial allocation in which the first agent is given all the goods, the algorithm reallocates 
one item at a time to maximize the reduction of Iτ(X) on each swap. MinCovTarget does 
not rely on any particular assumptions besides the fact that at least one agent – agent 1, for 
example – gives positive utilities to all objects. Agents’ utilities are evaluated linearly and 
the initial value matrix does not need to be standardized.
In summary, the MinCovTarget+ algorithm is a two-step procedure. In the first step, an 
entire set T of different target values is used, and an allocation is found for each target value. 
In the second step, the algorithm selects an allocation with maximum Nash or total welfare 
from all the solutions obtained in the first step that have minimal envy.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
MinCovTarget+ algorithm
Let T be a non-empty set of target values.
For all τ ∈T , repeat the following procedure:
1. give all items to the first agent;
2. choose one item at random and, if possible, re-allocate it to another agent so that the inequality Iτ(X) 
of the new allocation is maximally reduced;
3. repeat 2. until the inequality of the allocation found has not been reduced for d iterations of 2., and 
denote by Xτ the final allocation found.
Among all the allocations Xτ, τ ∈T , having minimal envy, output the one(s) with maximal Nash/total 
welfare.
The exact method for selecting the agent to whom to reallocate the item chosen in step 
2. is described in Cornilly et al. (2022) and is based on a matrix reformulation of the prob­
lem. In practice, step 2. prescribes reallocating the chosen item to the poorest agent, where 
wealth is evaluated using a specific weighted average of the remaining goods. This method 
allows one to obtain the maximum reduction in inequality in the economic system at each 
step.
Note that the MinCovTarget+ is a heuristic algorithm that compares local solutions, i.e. 
allocations with an objective function Iτ(X) that cannot be reduced by performing further 
local swaps. The final allocation found is not guaranteed to be a global solution, that is an 
allocation with the maximum Nash/total welfare among those having minimal envy.
5  An illustrative example
We present a pedagogical example that illustrates a typical low-dimensional framework for 
the fair allocation problem. We consider a setting in which d = 10 items are to be allocated 
to n = 4 agents. For these small dimensions, it is possible to solve the fair allocation prob­
lem exactly (for any desired criterion) using a brute force method and full enumeration of all 
the possible allocations, which are roughly one million (nd = 410 = 1048576).
Suppose that a regulator asks each agent to privately disclose their valuation of each item 
to be allocated, and that all such valuations are collected in the matrix V given in Fig. 1.
Table 1 shows a comparison of the allocations found by searching for MTW and assign­
ing each item to the player who values it the most (A), as well as by running the Spliddit 
(B) and MinCovTarget+ (C) algorithms. The table reports the items received by each agent 
Fig. 1  Value matrix for d = 10 items to be allocated to n = 4 players (each row adds up to 1000)
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
under the allocations found by the algorithms, and a matrix representing each agent’s valua­
tions of their own bundle (in bold) and of the bundles received by the others.
This example shows how interesting the problem of allocating indivisible items is as it 
balances efficiency targets (like Pareto optimality guaranteed by maximizing total or Nash 
welfare) against fairness targets (such as minimal envy), and efficiency is not the same as 
fairness.
As Table 1A shows, maximizing total welfare alone is not a good fairness rule in general. 
The only MTW allocation (that is Pareto optimal) gives nothing to agent 1, who therefore 
envies all the other agents. In particular, agent 1 envies the bundle received by agent 2, 
which evaluates at 426. Thus, although this allocation maximizes the sum of utilities for all 
agents (the sum of the diagonal elements in the matrix shown), it produces envy amounting 
to nearly half the total value of the goods.
Spliddit (1B) finds the unique allocation that maximizes Nash welfare. This allocation 
has an envy level of 21 (the fourth player receives 305 and envies the second agent’s bundle, 
valued at 326) and a relatively high total welfare level (94.1% of MTW). If an envy-free (or 
envy-minimal) allocation is considered to be fair, then a MNW allocation may not measure 
up; there are other examples in which envy-free allocations are available, but the MNW 
allocation is not one of them. Two-person examples can be found in Kilgour and Vetschera 
(2024) and Brams et al. (2023). However, as mentioned, Spliddit provides a very good bal­
ance between fairness and efficiency; see Kilgour and Vetschera (2024) for a (2-person) 
graphical explanation.
Table 1  Allocations found by various algorithms for the value matrix V in Fig. 1
1A. Maximum total welfare allocation
Items
Agent
Utilities
Fairness rule
Value
Optimum
1
2
3
4
--
1
0
426
342
232
Envy
426
0
1, 3, 5, 7
2
0
754
207
39
Total welfare
1600
1600
4, 8, 10
3
0
331
446
223
Nash welfare
−∞
10.2890
2, 6, 9
4
0
563
37
400
#agents with fair share
3
4
1B. Spliddit (maximum Nash welfare) allocation
Items
Agent
Utilities
Fairness rule
Value
Optimum
1
2
3
4
2, 3, 4
1
377
184
301
138
Envy
21
0
1, 5
2
329
388
265
18
Total welfare
1506
1600
7, 8, 10
3
225
167
436
172
Nash welfare
10.2890
10.2890
6, 9
4
289
326
80
305
#agents with fair share
4
4
1C. MinCovTarget+ (min envy, then max Nash welfare) allocation
Items
Agent
Utilities
Fairness rule
Value
Optimum
1
2
3
4
2, 3, 4
1
377
164
200
259
Envy
0
0
5, 7
2
329
356
104
211
Total welfare
1498
1600
8, 10
3
225
279
301
195
Nash welfare
10.2729
10.2890
1, 6 , 9
4
289
235
12
464
#agents with fair share
4
4
The table reports the items received by each agent under the allocations found by the algorithms, and a 
matrix representing each agent’s valuations of their own bundle (in bold) and of the bundles received by 
the others. In this table only, we give the logarithm of Nash welfare
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
MinCovTarget+ 
(1C) 
is 
run 
with 
a 
set 
of 
51 
different 
target 
values 
T = {0, 20, . . . , 980, 1000}. The advantage of using MinCovTarget+ is that the algorithm 
selects the target values that attain the minimum (zero) level of envy and, among all the 
no-envy allocations, it outputs (the) one with the highest level of Nash welfare. Ultimately, 
MinCovTarget+ finds a no-envy allocation that achieves 96.4% of MNW (Table 1 shows 
logarithmic values) and 93.6% of MTW.
We remark that the MTW (MNW) is not attained by a no-envy allocation. Equivalently, 
there is no no-envy allocation that maximizes total (Nash) welfare in general. This demon­
strates that the various fairness rules introduced here and in the literature generally conflict 
with each other: prioritizing a no-envy solution may result in a reduction of welfare.
In principle, a brute force search provides the optimal solution for any single fairness 
rule; however, enumerating the possible nd allocations quickly becomes intractable as the 
dimensions increase. For d = 100 goods to be allocated to n = 10 agents, one of the sce­
narios discussed in Sect. 7, there are more possible allocations (10100) than there are atoms 
in our universe.
The example shown in this section is pedagogical in nature, so its results are not repre­
sentative of the algorithms’ general performance. Also, MinCovTarget+ involves random 
selection of items to be subsequently re-allocated. To make a robust comparison, we will 
compare the performance of MinCovTarget+ and Spliddit against several random scenarios.
6  Design of the value matrix
To perform a numerical comparison of algorithms for fair allocation (against different allo­
cation rules), one must be able to simulate random value matrices. This allows one to repli­
cate different real-life situations.
In Caragiannis et al. (2019), random uniform valuations are used. In the case of Spliddit, 
this means that each agent is assumed to randomly and uniformly assign the M available 
points to the d objects. Using this method, the values xij are drawn independently from a 
uniform distribution between 0 and M and are then standardized and rounded so that all 
valuations of a single agent are integral and add up to M. To compare with MinCovTarget+, 
we adjust each generated matrix so that the first agent gives positive utility to all objects. 
Note that this can always be achieved by adding a positive constant in the cases the Spliddit 
constraint on agents’ utilities is not binding. Figure 2 shows an example of a simulated value 
matrix V for n = 4, d = 10.
Fig. 2  An example of simulated value matrix V with randomly generated uniform valuations for n = 4 
and d = 10. According to Spliddit rules, each agent allocates M = 1000 points among the different 
goods (each row adds up to 1000)
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
In this study, we introduce a new, more general design for simulating value matrices. We 
believe that this design is more realistic than random uniform valuations. In practice, valua­
tions of the same object made by different agents should depend on each other, particularly 
showing positive correlation. For example, if we have to allocate a gold watch and a plastic 
watch as part of an inheritance, it is more realistic to assume that all agents will likely give 
higher valuations to the first and lower valuations to the latter.
Thus, we introduce a second method for generating value matrices, where we assume 
that the valuations (uniformly distributed between 0 and M) of the same object are depen­
dent. This dependence is modeled by a Gaussian copula (see for instance Nelsen 2006, 
Durante and Sempi 2016) having an equicorrelation matrix with a correlation parameter 
equal to ρ ∈[0, 1]. This correlation parameter ρ allows us to interpolate between the previ­
ously introduced case of uniform, independent valuations (ρ = 0) and the case of perfect 
correlation (ρ = 1), in which all agents give the same valuation to the same object. For the 
following simulations, we find it suitable to assume ρ = 0.5. Figure 3 shows an example 
of a value matrix V simulated with the novel procedure, for n = 4, d = 10, and ρ = 0.5. 
The code for matrix design and simulations can be downloaded via the link provided in the 
abstract and may be useful for other applications.
7  Numerical results
In this section, we compare the MinCovTarget+ and Spliddit algorithms as the dimensional­
ity of the allocation problem increases. For each choice of n and d (which we refer to as a 
scenario), we simulate a number of 1000 value matrices with uniform and dependent values. 
We then run Spliddit and MinCovTarget+ on each simulated value matrix using a set of 
51 different target values T = {0, 40, . . . , 1960, 2000}. Among all the no-envy allocations 
found, MinCovTarget+ chooses the ones with largest Nash welfare.
Figure 4 shows the envy level, the number of agents with a fair share (when this number 
equals n the allocation is PROP), and the percentage of the MNW achieved by MinCovTar­
get+ in 1000 simulations of the value matrix with uniform goods valuations. Figure 5 shows 
the same analysis for dependent valuations.
In scenario A (n = 4, d = 10) MinCovTarget+ outperforms Spliddit in terms of envy for 
both uniform and dependent valuations. Selecting no-envy allocations slightly reduces Nash 
welfare (on average, MCT+ attains 96.5% of the MNW under uniform valuations and 93.3% 
under dependent valuations). In scenarios B (n = 10, d = 100) and C (n = 20, d = 200) 
Fig. 3  An example of a simulated value V matrix with dependent valuations for n = 4, d = 10, and 
ρ = 0.5 (each row adds up to 1000)
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
both algorithms always find no-envy allocations, and MinCovTarget+ closely approximates 
the MNW.
We found that the MinCovTarget+ algorithm (even including the selection of the optimal 
target value) is much faster than Spliddit, and always finds a solution within seconds. Con­
versely, Spliddit suffers from the curse of dimensionality and cannot be really applied when 
the number n of agents or the number d of goods is relatively large. For n = 20, d = 200, 
Fig. 4  For Spliddit (SPL) and MinCovTarget+ (MCT+), we calculate envy (left), number of agents with 
a fair share (middle) and percentage of the MNW achieved by MCT+ in 1000 simulations of the value 
matrix with uniform valuations. On each box, the central mark indicates the median, the circle indicates 
the mean, and the bottom and top edges of the box indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles, respectively. 
Data points that exceed the interquartile range are plotted individually using the + symbol. Note that, for 
scenario (C), we only considered value matrices for which SPL found a solution in less than 2 min, which 
were only 914
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Spliddit could not find a solution within 2 min for 8.6% (8.0%) of the uniform (depen­
dent) value matrices simulated in the experiment. When d = 300 goods were allocated to 
n = 30 agents, we could compute a Spliddit solution within 10 min in only 8 cases out of 
50 simulations of the value matrix. In contrast, MinCovTarget+ can handle the same case in 
approximately 14 seconds, always finding a solution with no envy and providing 99.8% of 
the MTW on average.
Therefore, to make a meaningful comparison of the different algorithms, we first deal 
with smaller dimensional set-ups, and we only considered instances for which Spliddit 
found a solution in less than 2 min.
Fig. 5  The same as Fig. 4 for dependent agent valuations (ρ = 0.5). Note that, for scenario (C), we only 
considered value matrices for which SPL found a solution in less than 2 min, which were only 920
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
7.1  Performance of MinCovTarget+ in high dimensions
Unlike Spliddit, the MinCovTarget+ algorithm can also handle higher-dimensional scenar­
ios, with envy performance that increases with the number of goods. In high dimensions, 
however, we cannot compare the performance of MinCovTarget+ with that of any com­
petitor, nor we can compute MNW allocations. Therefore, we select the allocations with 
the largest total welfare among all no-envy allocations found and compare the algorithm’s 
performance with respect to this latter criterion.
Figure 6 shows the computation time (left), the level of envy attained (middle) as a per­
centage of M, the total value of the goods, and the level of total welfare attained (right) as a 
percentage of the MTW. MinCovTarget+ performs excellently with respect to envy and the 
allocations it finds provide between 90 and 100% of the MTW. For example, with n = 50 
agents and d = 250 goods, MinCovTarget+ finds a no-envy allocation that provides 98.8% 
of MTW in less than 20 s.
The selection of target values is crucial to the MinCovTarget+ algorithm. Our selection 
of 51 target values (ranging from a null target value to twice the total value of the goods) 
provides a good balance between fairness, efficiency, and computation time.
Although the MinCovTarget+ can handle higher-dimensional scenarios, one might be 
willing to reduce the set of target values used by the algorithm in order to save computa­
tional time, eventually using a single target value for a really huge framework.
As a rule of thumb, we suggest using a target value equal to the total value M of the goods 
to be allocated, that is to set T = {M}. This target value seems to provide the best trade-
off between the fairness and efficiency of the final allocation. In fact, in high-dimensional 
scenarios, the MinCovTarget+ algorithm typically finds no-envy allocations for sufficiently 
large target values. Therefore, the target value should be chosen to maximize either Nash 
or total welfare. This can be seen by comparing the fairness and efficiency of allocations on 
the same scale.
To this aim, we define the following score function S : A →[0, 1], which maps an allo­
cation X ∈A to the score value
 
S(X) = α NW(X) + (1 −α) E(X).
(6)
Fig. 6  Computation time (in seconds), envy (as a percentage of the total value M of goods) and total 
welfare (as a percentage of the MTW) attained by the allocation found by the MinCovTarget+ algorithm. 
These figures are averages over 50 simulations of a uniform value matrix
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
In (6), we measure efficiency by NW(X), which is the ratio of the MNW attained by the 
allocation (NW(X) = 1 means that the allocation attains the MNW). To put envy on the 
same scale as efficiency, we define the modified envy as E(X) = 1 −e(X)/M (E(X) = 1 
means that the allocation is EF). As shown in Figs. 6 and 7, measuring envy relative to M 
seems reasonable because in high-dimensional scenarios it might be necessary to increase 
the value of M to allow for meaningful valuations. Additionally, if M is higher, the upper 
bound on maximum envy is also higher. For example, consider a scenario in which a single 
Fig. 8  Values for the score function (and its components), as defined in (6), for the allocations found by 
MinCovTarget+ under Scenario C, and α = 0.5. The values are averaged over 1000 simulations of the 
value matrix with uniform valuations
 
Fig. 7  Computation time (in seconds), envy (as a percentage of the total value M of goods) and total 
welfare (as a percentage of the MTW) attained by the allocation found by the MinCovTarget+ algorithm 
with a single target value set equal to M. These figures are averages over 20 simulations of a uniform 
value matrix. To allow for meaningful agent valuations in these scenarios, the total value of the goods 
was increased to M = 10000
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
object valued at M by all n > 1 agents is to be allocated. The final allocation will always 
produce envy of M, so E(X) = 1 −e(X)/M = 0, regardless of the value of M.
Figure 8 shows the average values of NW(X), E(X), and S(X) (with α = 0.5) for 
the allocations found by MinCovTarget+ in scenario C. This suggests that the choice of 
T = {1000} strikes a good balance between fairness and efficiency goals. For a general 
scenario, however, the choice of a single target value depends on all the instance parameters 
(n, d, the distribution of the entries of the value matrix V, and the weight α) and setting the 
target value equal to the total value of the goods as done here may not be optimal.
With a single target choice, the MinCovTarget+ algorithm can handle huge scenarios in 
seconds. Figure 7 shows the computation time (left), the level of envy attained (middle), 
and the level of total welfare attained (right) by MinCovTarget+ with one target value for a 
different number of agents and an increasing number of objects. MinCovTarget+ performs 
excellently with respect to envy, and the allocations it finds provide a very good approxima­
tion of the MTW. For example, MinCovTarget+ can handle n = 200 agents and d = 400 
goods in approximately 16 s, keeping the level of envy below 0.4% of the total value of the 
goods and achieving 95.9% of the MTW; see Figure 7. In this case the number of possible 
allocations (200400) is in the order of 10920.
8  Conclusions
In this paper, we introduce the MinCovTarget+ algorithm for the problem of fair allocation 
of indivisible items and we compare it with the Spliddit algorithm.
MinCovTarget+ provides excellent approximate solutions to the allocation problem, 
balancing fairness (no envy) and efficiency (maximum Nash or total welfare). It can also 
handle high-dimensional frameworks.
With respect to envy, MinCovTarget+ is better than or compares to Spliddit in all scenar­
ios. It provides allocations with minimal envy and a high value of Nash welfare at a fraction 
of the computation time spent by Spliddit. Moreover, in higher dimensions where Spliddit 
cannot be readily implemented, MinCovTarget+ rapidly achieves envy-free allocations with 
a high total welfare value.
MinCovTarget+ can handle large-scale problems (hundreds of agents and goods) in sec­
onds by setting a single target equal to the total value of the goods, yielding allocations with 
negligible envy and nearly maximal total welfare.
Interested readers are invited to contribute to this project by downloading our code, rep­
licating our experiments, and suggesting extensions or further analyses.
Acknowledgements  We would like to thank two anonymous reviewers who provided several valuable com­
ments that greatly improved an earlier version of our paper.
Author contributions  All authors contributed equally to the paper.
Funding  Open access funding provided by Università degli Studi di Milano within the CRUI-CARE 
Agreement.
Declarations
Conflict of interest  All authors declare that they have no Conflict of interest.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Ethical approval  This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by 
any of the authors.
 Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted 
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Amanatidis, G., Aziz, H., Birmpas, G., Filos-Ratsikas, A., Li, B., Moulin, H., Voudouris, A. A., & Wu, X. 
(2023). Fair division of indivisible goods: Recent progress and open questions. Artificial Intelligence, 
322, Article 103965.
Amanatidis, G., Birmpas, G., Filos-Ratsikas, A., & Voudouris, A. (2022). Fair division of indivisible goods: 
A survey. In L. Raedt (Ed.), Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence - Survey Track (IJCAI-22), (pp. 5385–5393). International Joint Conferences on Artificial 
Intelligence Organization.
Bouveret, S., Lemaître, M., Fargier, H., & Lang, J. (2005). Allocation of indivisible goods: a general model 
and some complexity results. In Proceedings of the 4th international joint conference on Autonomous 
Agents and Multiagent Systems, (pp. 1309–1310).
Brams, S. J., Kilgour, D. M., Klamler, C., & Wei, F. (2023). Two-person fair division of indivisible items - 
bentham vs. rawls on envy. Journal of Philosophy, 120(8), 441–456.
Brams, S. J., & Taylor, A. D. (1996). Fair division: From cake-cutting to dispute resolution. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Caragiannis, I., Kurokawa, D., Moulin, H., Procaccia, A. D., Shah, N., & Wang, J. (2019). The unreasonable 
fairness of maximum Nash welfare. ACM Transactions on Economics and Computation (TEAC), 7(3), 
1–32.
Cornilly, D., Puccetti, G., Rüschendorf, L., & Vanduffel, S. (2022). Fair allocation of indivisible goods with 
minimum inequality or minimum envy. European Journal of Operational Research, 297, 741–752.
Durante, F., & Sempi, C. (2016). Principles of Copula theory. Boca Raton FL: CRC Press.
Freeman, R., Sikdar, S., Vaish, R., & Xia, L. (2019). Equitable allocations of indivisible goods. In Proceed­
ings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-19), (pp. 
280–286).
Kilgour, D. M., & Vetschera, R. (2018). Two-player fair division of indivisible items: Comparison of algo­
rithms. European Journal of Operational Research, 271(2), 620–631.
Kilgour, D. M., & Vetschera, R. (2024). Two-person fair division with additive valuations. Group Decision 
and Negotiation.
Lang, J., & Rothe, J. (2016). Fair division of indivisible goods. In J. Rothe (Ed.), Economics and Computa­
tion (pp. 493–550). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Lipton, R., Markakis, E., Mossel, E., & Saberi, A. (2004). On approximately fair allocations of indivisible 
goods. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM conference on Electronic Commerce, (pp. 125–131).
Nelsen, R. B. (2006). An introduction to copulas (2nd ed.). Berlin: Springer.
Nguyen, T., Roos, M., & Rothe, J. (2013). A survey of approximability and inapproximability results for 
social welfare optimization in multiagent resource allocation. Annals of Mathematics and Artificial 
Intelligence, 68, 65–90.
Rubchinsky, A. (2010). Brams-Taylor model of fair division for divisible and indivisible items. Mathematical 
Social Sciences, 60(1), 1–14.
Shah, N. (2017). Spliddit: Two years of making the world fairer. XRDS: Crossroads, The ACM Magazine for 
Students, 24(1), 24–28.
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
1 3