TITLE: In a memory of the late Harry Markowitz
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06188-x
---

SHORT NOTE
Received: 15 July 2024 / Accepted: 23 July 2024 / Published online: 19 August 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
 
 Haim Levy
mshlevy@huji.ac.il
1 
Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel
In a memory of the late Harry Markowitz
Haim Levy1
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:63–64
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06188-x
Abstract
I have learned from him a lot how to conduct research, but more important, I hope, how 
to be a better human being.
Harry is not with us anymore. It is a very big loss to the academia and it is a very big loss 
and very sad personally to me and to the many other people who loved him so much. The 
condolence is that Harry had very happy and good life. In all my meetings with him and 
in our many Email correspondences, I found an optimistic person who never complained.
Personally, I owe my academic career to Harry. In 1963 I considered taking my master 
degree in Economics. I went to the library and saw the Journal of Finance on one of the 
shelves. Most papers were non-quantitative and contained only words, stories and some 
tables. It seemed boring and I had no interest in these papers. Then, browsing a few vol­
umes of the journal, I so Harry’s 1952 paper-WOW! I was so lucky to find this paper. I was 
so young and did not fully understand the paper, yet I felt it was a pioneering study. This 
study was the first analytic model in finance, opening a new paradigm. No wonder Harry 
won the Nobel Prize for this and the other studies he has accomplished. On the same day 
I decided to take my master degree in Statistics– not to be a good statistician…. just to be 
a good researcher in finance. The 1952 Journal of Finance paper paved the way to another 
pioneering study of Bill Sharpe (the CAPM) who also won the Nobel Prize in Economics 
on the same year with Harry. In the same year, 1952, Harry also published a paper that laid 
down the foundation for a new research area, nowadays well-known as “behavioral eco­
nomics”, a research field for which Danny Kahneman won the Nobel Prize in Economics. 
And these two 1952 pioneering studies have been published when Harry was only 25 years 
old! I will not say one more word on Harry’s contribution to the academia–it is well known 
to all economists.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:63–64
I met Harry in the first time in Jerusalem in 1973. He was a visiting professor in my 
school for a trimester. Close to the end of his visit he came to my office and we started dis­
cussing some research ideas. I said: “I see that we have a good chemistry, I am sorry we did 
not talk on research topics earlier (I was afraid even to suggest working together earlier with 
such an eminent scholar). Harry, said: “I thought you did not want to work with me”. Just 
to make it clear to you: Harry was already one of the most well-known professors in finan­
cial economics… and I was making my first steps in research and only few people knew 
about me. This was Harry– a very modest, and I would say even a shy person. He treated all 
people equally. Research-wise he treated me equally even though there was a big difference 
between our academic achievements.
We started working together, and it was clear to me that he was Mozart and I was at best 
Salieri. So, it was an honor for me to work with Harry and it was obvious to me that he is 
the first author that should appear on our first joint paper. Before we have started work­
ing together he said: “I have one condition, the names on the paper will be alphabetical… 
meaning that my name will appear first. This was Harry - a kind person who was already an 
academic star but treated a young and unknown researcher as his equal.
Since then, we were very close friends. My wife and I visited him and Barbara when he 
was still working in IBM. We had lunch together and drove to Manhattan to enjoy together 
the Swan Lake ballet of Tchaikovsky. It was a beautiful day that I will never forget. Harry 
and Barbara visited us in Philadelphia, when I was visiting professor in Wharton School of 
Business, spent a few days with us and later on we visited them several times in New York 
and in San Diego. In 2006, in an intimate conference in London, we were both on stage dis­
cussing and compering the pros and cons of the Mean-Variance and Stochastic Dominance 
paradigms. Harry thanked my wife so many times for suggesting the concert that we went 
to and enjoyed so much together in London.
We always had intellectual discussions, pleasant environment and I felt that there is 
affection between us. I have learned from him a lot how to conduct research, but more 
important, I hope, how to be a better human being.
I loved you Harry, and will always remember you. May your memory be blessed.
Haim Levy.
Funding  Open access funding provided by Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted 
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
1 3
64