TITLE: Values of blockchain for risk-averse high-tech manufacturers under government’s carbon target environmental taxation policies
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-05030-6
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-05030-6
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Values of blockchain for risk-averse high-tech manufacturers
under government’s carbon target environmental taxation
policies
Tsan-Ming Choi1
Accepted: 12 October 2022 / Published online: 4 November 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
Today, high-tech industries such as consumer electronics commonly face government rules
on carbon emissions. Among the rules, carbon emission tax as well as extended producer
responsibility (EPR) tax are two important measures. Using blockchain, the policy makers
can better determine the carbon target environmental taxation (CTET) policy with accurate
information. In this paper, based on the mean-variance framework, we study the values of
blockchain for risk-averse high-tech manufacturers who are under the government’s CTET
policy. To be speciﬁc, the government ﬁrst determines the optimal CTET policy. The high-
tech manufacturer then reacts and determines its optimal production quantity. We analytically
prove that the CTET policy simply relies on the setting of the optimal EPR tax. Then, in the
absence of blockchain, we consider the case in which the government does not know the
manufacturer’s degree of risk aversion for sure and then derive the expected value of using
blockchain for the high-tech manufacturers. We study when it is wise for the high-tech
manufacturer and the government to implement blockchain. To check for robustness, we
consider in two extended models respectively the situations in which blockchain incurs non-
trivial costs as well as having an alternative risk measure. We analytically show that most of
the qualitative ﬁndings remain valid.
Keywords Blockchain · Mean-variance analysis · Data · High-tech products · Risk averse ·
Carbon target
1 Introduction
In high-tech manufacturing for products such as consumer electronics, mobile phones, and
computers, in addition to research and development (R&D) investments (Wei et al., 2021)
I sincerely thank the editors and reviewers for their constructive comments and careful checking which led to
important improvement of this paper.
B Tsan-Ming Choi
tsanmingchoi@link.cuhk.edu.hk; t.m.choi@liverpool.ac.uk
1
Centre for Supply Chain Research, University of Liverpool Management School, Chatham Building,
Liverpool L69 7ZH, UK
123

784
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
and industrial agglomeration (Yang et al., 2022), environmental sustainability is deﬁnitely
a crucial matter. Many high-tech manufacturers have already paid full attention to reducing
emissions.1 Forbes.com indicates that ﬁrms such as Apple, HP, Fairphone, Microsoft, and
Samsung are all sustainable high-tech manufacturers.2 For instance, in South Korea, Samsung
is a top manufacturer for smart phones and it works with suppliers which are certiﬁed by Eco
Partner to be environmentally sustainable. In Asia, the high-tech industrial manufacturing
giant TSMC is also known to put strong emphasis on green management.3 TSMC’s manu-
facturing has a careful plan for pollution control and waste management.4 In the US, Apple
is committed to achieve carbon neutral by 2030.5 As a matter of fact, extended producer
responsibility (EPR) is a well-established policy (Cai & Choi, 2021; Choi & Siqin, 2022)
imposed on high-tech industries to govern the end of life products’ future. Mobile phones,
personal computers, printers, etc. are examples in which EPR commonly applies in which
the manufacturers of these high-tech products (we call them the “high-tech manufacturers”
in this paper) need to bear some responsibility regarding the end of life product handling and
the corresponding expenses.
At the same time, governments all around the world are considering implementable mea-
sures to ensure decarbonization or carbon neutralization. For instance, EU (The European
Union) has committed to the carbon neutral scheme which aspires to remove carbon emis-
sions (in the same quantity as it creates) by 2050.6 In the US, the government has set the 2030
“Greenhouse Gas Pollution Reduction Target”, which aims to achieve a 50–52% reduction
of total emissions (compared to 2005) in 2030.7 In order to achieve the carbon targets, gov-
ernments around the world can consider imposing the well-designed environmental taxes on
the manufacturers, especially in the high-tech industries.
In this paper, we consider the case in which the high-tech manufacturer is risk averse (Chen
et al., 2007; Choi & Zhang, 2022; Guo & Liu, 2020; Zhang et al., 2022). This assumption on
risk aversion is well-supported by the prior literature as high-tech industries face a high level
of risk owing to the speciﬁc industrial characteristics (see, e.g., Birge, 2000; Van Mieghem,
2003). Being risk averse is indeed a very natural behavior for high-tech manufacturers. In
this paper, we examine how this risk aversion attitude will affect the setting of government’s
carbon target environmental taxation (CTET) policy under the mean–variance framework
(Choi et al., 2018b; Wei & Choi, 2010; Wen & Siqin, 2020).
In addition, today’s business is operating in the digital era (Liu et al., 2022b). Among
many disruptive technologies in the digital age (Choi et al., 2022), such as big data ana-
lytics (Choi & Lambert, 2017; Choi et al., 2018a) and various other types of information
technologies, the use of blockchain (Chowdhury et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2021; Song et al.,
2022) is critical. Blockchain (Dutta et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2022a), as a distributed ledger
1 https://www.accenture.com/us-en/insights/high-tech/sustainability-strategy.
2 https://www.forbes.com/sites/blakemorgan/2020/11/09/10-most-sustainable-consumer-tech-companies/?
sh=a4a19bd49a82.
3 https://esg.tsmc.com/en/focus/APractitionerofGreenPower.html.
4 https://esg.tsmc.com/download/ﬁle/2018_tsmc_csr_report_published_May_2019/english/pdf/e_6_
greenManufacturing.pdf.
5 https://www.apple.com/environment/.
6 https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/society/20190926STO62270/what-is-carbon-
neutrality-and-how-can-it-be-achieved-by-2050.
7 https://www.whitehouse.gov/brieﬁng-room/statements-releases/2021/04/22/fact-sheet-president-biden-
sets-2030-greenhouse-gas-pollution-reduction-target-aimed-at-creating-good-paying-union-jobs-and-
securing-u-s-leadership-on-clean-energy-technologies/.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
785
technology, can achieve a few important functions for high tech supply chains. According
to Infosys.com, high-tech manufacturers commonly require the availability of good infor-
mation, which cannot be taken for granted; blockchain can step up to help overcome this
challenge by providing high quality and accurate information.8 Blockchain is especially use-
ful for consumer electronics manufacturers because of the high complexity associated with
the corresponding production processes. Using blockchain can provide synchronized high
quality data to support operations.9In this paper, we want to focus on blockchain’s perfor-
mance in providing accurate information for the government to set the CTET policy. While
if it is absent, we explore the corresponding challenges and uncover when it is beneﬁcial for
the high-tech manufacturers to adopt blockchain.
Motivated by the importance of CTET policies and blockchain on high-tech industries,
we construct formal models with a goal to analytically study the research questions listed
below:
1. What is the form of CTET policy on a risk-averse high-tech manufacturer in order to
achieve the carbon target?
2. What is the value of using blockchain for the high-tech manufacturer? When will the use
of blockchain be especially beneﬁcial to the manufacturer?
3. How robust are the ﬁndings when we consider the costing factors of blockchain and using
an alternative risk measure for risk aversion (such as semi-deviation of proﬁt or kurtosis
of proﬁt)?
Toaddressthecriticalresearchquestionsraisedabove,wefollowtheclassicliterature(e.g.,
Erkoc & Wu, 2005; Meijer et al., 2022) and employ the newsvendor problem to help build the
theoretical model for the high-tech manufacturer’s production quantity problem. Exploring
the above questions yields several insights. For instance, we analytically show that the CTET
policy simply relies on the setting of the optimal EPR tax (but not the carbon footprint tax).
This ﬁnding holds true because of the risk averse attitude of the high-tech manufacturer.
Then, in the absence of blockchain, we consider the case in which the government does not
know the manufacturer’s degree of risk aversion and then derive the expected value of using
blockchain for the high-tech manufacturer. We reveal the conditions under which the use
of blockchain is especially useful for the high-tech manufacturer. In our extended models,
we investigate the case with blockchain operating costs, as well as the case when the high-
tech manufacturer’s risk aversion is changed to be measured by the semi-deviation of proﬁt
or kurtosis of proﬁt. We show that most qualitative ﬁndings remain the same and hence
conﬁrm the robustness of our theoretical ﬁndings. The only exception in ﬁndings appears
for the case when the costs of operating blockchain are positive; in such a case, whether it
is wise to implement blockchain does depend on the government’s chance of estimating the
high-tech manufacturer’s degree of risk tolerance accurately in the absence of blockchain,
which is different from the case when the blockchain operating costs are zero. Managerial
implications are discussed (see Sect. 5).
This paper is organized as follows. We concisely introduce the problem and topic in
Sect. 1. We conduct a critical literature review in Sect. 2. We build the analytical basic model
and study the cases with and without blockchain in Sect. 3. We extend the basic model with
considerations of blockchain operating costs as well as different risk measures in Sect. 4. We
conclude in Sect. 5 with a discussion on research insights, implications and future research
directions. A notation table is present in Appendix (A2) and all technical derivations and
proofs are relegated to Appendix (A3).
8 https://www.infosys.com/about/knowledge-institute/insights/documents/unlocking-blockchain.pdf.
9 https://www.sofocle.com/industry/blockchain-in-electronics/.
123

786
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
2 Literature review
The following research areas are closely related to this study. We concisely review them as
follows.
2.1 Related studies in operations
The high-tech industries are important in the operations literature. Prior studies have exam-
ined the procurement problem for parts in the high-tech industry (Zhang et al., 2021),
resources management and strategies (Smirnov et al., 2021), logistics systems planning (Lee
& Dong, 2008) and assessing the efﬁciency and performance of the high-tech industry in
practice (An et al., 2020). Among other topics, sustainability in high-tech industries deserves
our attention and it is also related to this paper. In particular, e-wastes and extended producer
responsibility are two hot topics. Plambeck and Wang (2009) analytically explore the impact
of e-waste policy on operations. The authors focus their attention on studying the challenge
associated with the introduction of new season electronics products. Mazahir et al. (2019)
study whether the e-waste rules in Europe are correctly set. In green supply chain operations,
Li et al. (2020a) conduct an empirical study on sustainable supply chain operations. The
authors uncover the role played by being responsive to changes. Li et al. (2020b) explore
green production practices in the apparel industry and examine the related performance mea-
sures. More recently, Li et al. (2021) investigate how supply chain contracts can be applied for
green products. The authors consider the importance of using marketing means to enhance
the demand for green products.
In environmental sustainability, circular supply chain management is proposed (Farooque
et al., 2022; Luthra et al., 2022) and controlling emissions (especially carbon emissions) is an
important issue, which has also attracted lots of attention over the past decade. For instance,
Ma et al. (2018) theoretically investigate the optimal pricing decisions for supply chains in the
presence of a carbon emission taxation policy. Chan et al. (2020) explore the use of all kinds
of environmental taxations in supply chains with risk-averse retailers. The authors consider
in the supply chain context with consumer returns and different contractual arrangements.
Sun and Li (2021) discuss the optimization problem for reducing emissions with the proper
use of technologies. In this paper, we also consider the presence of carbon emission tax.
But different from prior studies, we show that its signiﬁcance is not as good as the EPR tax
when the high-tech manufacturer is risk-averse. As a remark, other related studies include
the exploration of a novel concept called extended consumer responsibility (Sheu & Choi,
2019), and the impact of proper merchandise design with a goal to enhancing sustainability
(Shi et al., 2016). Note that sustainability also relates to a big area called “closed-loop supply
chain management” and reverse logistics (Li et al., 2019). Since this paper does not focus on
it, we refer interested readers to Souza (2013) for an excellent review.
Next, we review the use of blockchain (Choi et al., 2019; Hastig & Sodhi, 2020; Yang,
2019) in production and operations. In the supply chain management literature, Choi (2019)
analytically investigates the implementation of blockchain for the jewelry supply chain. To
be speciﬁc, the author explores the value of using blockchain for authentication of diamonds.
Choi and Luo (2019) study the use of blockchain to improve quality of information for green
supply chain operations. By assuming the normally distributed demand, the authors study
when the government should provide sponsors to encourage blockchain deployment in the
supply chain. Fan et al. (2020) look into the problem from the consumer perspective on when
it is beneﬁcial to implement blockchain in supply chains. Guo et al. (2020) examine the use of
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
787
blockchain to improve information transparency so that sustainable operations for the apparel
supply chain can be achieved. Zheng et al. (2020) explore the smart contracting scheme using
blockchain for supply chain operations. Choi (2020a) studies blockchain based initial coin
offering for projects with R&D and new product development. Choi (2020b) examines the
use of blockchain for ﬁnancing operations in the newsvendor supply chain. Under the Nash
bargaining framework, the author examines the impact brought by blockchain on supply
chain contracts. Cai et al. (2021) examine the cheating problems in supply chain contracts
and propose the use of blockchain to help.
For service platforms, Choi et al. (2020a) investigate the use of blockchain to support rental
platform operations. The authors consider the function of blockchain in allowing truthful
information sharing. Choi et al. (2020b) consider the case with an on-demand platform.
The authors propose the application of blockchain as a way to estimate the risk attitudes of
consumers and evaluate the impacts.
Under COVID-19, Choi and Shi (2022) explore the use of blockchain to enhance
“on-demand ride-hailing service platform” operations. The authors uncover the value of
blockchain in reducing consumers’ worries of infection.
Recently, the use of blockchain has drawn the attention on a related ﬁeld called cyberse-
curity. For example, Rathore and Park (2020) study the “blockchain-based deep learning”
approach to improve cybersecurity. Luo and Choi (2022) analytically establish stylized mod-
els to study how the use of blockchain based security enhancement scheme can improve
cybersecurity and affect government’s penalty scheme. For more research related to the use
of blockchain in the operations literature to deal with risk, refer to Choi (2022).
Similar to the above reviewed studies on the use of blockchain in business operations, this
paper focuses on revealing how blockchain’s function on obtaining the truthful information of
the high-tech manufacturer may affect the environmental taxation policy of the government
as well as when it is wise to implement blockchain. From this sense, this idea is similar to the
on-demand service platform paper by Choi et al. (2020b). However, the scope and models
are totally different between this paper and Choi et al. (2020b).
2.2 Contribution statement
To the best of my knowledge, this is the ﬁrst paper which highlights the role of blockchain
in high-tech manufacturing when the manufacturer is risk averse. As we will see, many
novel insights and interesting results are obtained. They have good implications to high-
tech manufacturers on their choice of whether or not to proceed with blockchain under
the commonly seen government’s environmental taxation policy. Moreover, all results are
derived in closed-form and robustness checking has been conducted with extended modelling
analyses. Thus, the theoretical ﬁndings are all analytically proven and scientiﬁcally solid.
3 Basic model
3.1 With blockchain
We consider the case in which in a market, the government implements a carbon target
environmental taxation (CTET) policy with two parts, namely the per quantity output carbon
emission tax s and the per unit product sold end of life EPR tax ξ. In the CTET policy, there is a
carbon target, which can be transferred into a quantity target Q for the high-tech manufacturer
123

788
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
(see Appendix A1). Note that (i) The quantity target Q is different from the conventional
carbon emissions target (which is measured in weight units), and (ii) the speciﬁc value of
Q depends on the government’s preference, and the industrial features (e.g., the high-tech
manufacturer’s cost revenue parameters and levels of pollution). It is in fact the social welfare
maximizing quantity. In Appendix (A1), we demonstrate how to analytically determine the
optimal Q for the government in our model setting. Note that the optimal Q is independent of
the high-tech manufacturer’s risk averse preference as the government only focuses on social
welfare which includes the environmental impact and proﬁtability of the business operations.
In the following, we consider the case when Q is pre-determined (e.g., following the
result in Appendix (A1)) for the corresponding high-tech manufacturer. The objective of
the government now is to set the CTET policy so as to ensure the high-tech manufacturer
can achieve the target Q. Note that we do not consider the situation when the government
wants to minimize the target Q because this is not optimal and will hurt the economic beneﬁt
associated with social welfare.
For the high-tech manufacturer, it produces a highly seasonal product and sells it in a short
season (i.e., it is a single period problem). The selling price is r per unit (i.e., the unit revenue),
the production cost is w per unit. For product leftover, it incurs a unit holding cost l and carries
a unit value v. Under the government’s CTET policy, each unit of production quantity has to
bear an additional carbon emission tax of s. Each unit of product sold will be charged with an
EPR tax of ξ. Demand for the high-tech product x is random and follows a density function
f (x) and cumulative distribution function F(x). Here, we do not conﬁne the speciﬁc form
of distribution for F(·) and it can be the uniform distribution, normal distribution, gamma
distribution, beta distribution, etc. We deﬁne F−1(·) as the inverse function of F(·). The
high-tech manufacturer is strictly risk-averse and it needs to make an optimal decision on
the production quantity q. Obviously, this is a standard newsvendor problem in which the
high-tech manufacturer is the “newsvendor”.10
However, owing to the risk-averse attitude of the high-tech manufacturer, the optimization
objective is not solely on expected proﬁt maximization. To be speciﬁc, we employ the mean-
variance theory (Chiu & Choi, 2016; Choi et al., 2008) and establish the optimization problem
for the high-tech manufacturer in the following:
Problem (MV) Max (q)
Subject to V [(q)] ≤λ2,
where (q) is the high-tech manufacturer’s proﬁt function,(q) is the expected high-tech
manufacturer’s proﬁt function, V [(q)] is the variance of high-tech manufacturer’s proﬁt
function, and λ is the high-tech manufacturer’s risk tolerance level which reﬂects its degree
of risk aversion.
Problem (MV) is formulated following the risk averse inventory problems’ literature (see,
e.g., Wei & Choi, 2010; Chiu & Choi, 2016; Chiu et al., 2018; Choi, 2021) under the mean-
variance (MV) framework (to capture risk averse preference of the high-tech manufacturer).
Under the MV framework, which is originally from ﬁnance, we make use of the variance as
an analytical measure for risk. Thus, in Problem (MV), the high-tech manufacturer aims to
maximize it proﬁtability (as quantiﬁed by the expected proﬁt) and put the level of risk (as
quantiﬁed by the variance of proﬁt) under “control” by imposing the analytical constraint.
Note that in the extended model, we will consider other risk measures and demonstrate the
validity of ﬁndings under them.
10 This paper focuses on EPR and environmental policies which are especially prominent in the “high-tech”
industries such as computers and consumer electronics. The use of the newsvendor problem is also traditionally
valid to help model the features of these high-tech products, such as volatile demand, and short selling season
(see, e.g., Choi et al., 2004; Erkoc and Wu 2005; Meijer et al., 2022).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
789
For the sequence of decision making, we consider the situation when the government
ﬁrst determines the production quantity “target” by maximizing social welfare and then sets
the CTET policy. After that, the high-tech manufacturer reacts and determines the optimal
production quantity which maximizes Problem (MV).
We now present the detailed mathematical expressions. First, following the standard
newsvendor problem, we can easily list out the proﬁt function of the high-tech manufac-
turer as follows:
(q)  (r −w −s −ξ)q −(r + l −v −ξ)S(q)
(1)
where S(q)  max(q −x, 0), which represents the amount of product leftover when the
season ends.
Taking expectation of (1), we yield the high-tech manufacturer’s expected proﬁt function
in the following:
(q)  (r −w −s −ξ)q −(r + l −v −ξ)S(q)
(2)
where S(q)  E[max(q −x, 0)] 
 q
0 F(x)dx.
Taking variance of (1), we have the high-tech manufacturer’s variance of proﬁt given in
(3):
V [(q)]  (r + l −v −ξ)2(q)
(3)
where (q)  V [max(q −x, 0)]  2
 q
0 (q −x)F(x)dx −
 q
0 F(x)dx
2.
Note that the form of variance of proﬁt in (3) is well-known in the literature even though
we have added the EPR tax in (3). From the literature (see Chiu & Choi, 2016), we know
the structural properties of (2) and (3). To be speciﬁc, (q) is known to be a strictly concave
function with a unique peak. The expected proﬁt maximizer is given by the standard critical
fractile solution by solving the ﬁrst order condition d(q)/dq  0: q∗
M  arg
q
{d(q)/dq 
0}  F−1[(r −w −s −ξ)/(r + l −v −ξ)]. For the variance of proﬁt (3), it is a monotonic
increasing function in q.
In order to ensure the high-tech manufacturer is risk averse, we consider the case when the
constraint V [(q)] ≤λ is binding, which is translated into the situation when V [(q∗
M)] > λ
(which means the expected proﬁt maximizing quantity (for the case when the high-tech
manufacturer is risk neutral) can never be optimal). The MV efﬁcient region is hence given
by   (0, q∗
M) in which q > 0 (we rule out the trivial case with zero quantity) and q < q∗
M.
In this section, we consider the presence of blockchain so that the high-tech manufacturer’s
degree of risk aversion can be accurately estimated (Cai et al., 2020; Choi et al., 2020b) and
known by the government. Note that blockchain has many different functions, including smart
contracting, cryptocurrency, etc. and can be classiﬁed into different categories (e.g., public
blockchain, permissioned blockchain, etc.) In this paper, to focus on the core information
accuracy issue, we intentionally do not consider these other functions. Of course, one may
argue that to have accurate estimate of the high-tech manufacturer’s degree of risk aversion
does not necessarily require the use of blockchain, which is true. However, the argument
here is that using blockchain can fully support information transparency and it can let the
government know the high-tech manufacturer’s degree of risk aversion which is the feature
we would like to examine. This is in line with prior studies such as Choi et al. (2020b). In
addition, in this section, we intentionally do not include the costs associated with blockchain
because (i) the cost of blockchain can be negligibly small when the technology becomes
more mature, (ii) the most heavy cost of blockchain is on the technology investment which is
123

790
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
a sunk cost, and (iii) we can directly quantify the beneﬁt of having information transparency
and then estimate whether it will justify for the investment in the technology. Nevertheless,
we have considered the case in which different operating costs for blockchain are present in
the extended model and we will see that considering the blockchain cost interestingly does
not make much signiﬁcant difference (except one ﬁnding, see Proposition 6) in our core
insights and implications.
For a notational purpose, we deﬁne: φ(q)  √(q), and φ−1(·) is the inverse function
of φ(·). Note that since (q) is monotonic increasing, φ(q) is also monotonic increasing.
φ−1(·) exists and we assume it has a one to one mapping with its argument. Proposition 1
characterizes the optimal production quantity for Problem (MV).
Proposition 1. Under a given CTET policy of the government, the risk-averse high-tech
manufacturer’s optimal production quantity is given by:
q∗
MV  φ−1[λ/(r −v + l −ξ)]
(4)
Proposition 1 is an important and interesting ﬁnding. It not only gives the analytical
closed-form expression of the optimal production quantity under Problem (MV), but it also
highlights the factors which affect the optimal quantity. To be speciﬁc, we can see that the
risk-averse high-tech manufacturer’s optimal production quantity will increase if (i) the unit
revenue, or the unit holding cost decreases, or (ii) the salvage value increases, or the EPR tax
increases, or (iii) the high-tech manufacturer’s degree of risk tolerance increases (i.e., being
less risk averse). Note that the above ﬁndings are different from the case when the high-tech
manufacturer is risk neutral. For instance, when the high-tech manufacturer is risk neutral,
its optimal production quantity is given by: q∗
M  F−1[(r −w −s −ξ)/(r + l −v −ξ)],
which is larger if the unit revenue increases (rather than decreases under the case with a risk-
averse high-tech manufacturer). Moreover, both the per unit production cost w and carbon
emission tax s, which affect the risk neutral high-tech manufacturer’s optimal production
quantity plays no role for the case when the high-tech manufacturer is risk averse. We have
Proposition 2.
Proposition 2. For the government, facing the risk averse high-tech manufacturer, the CTET
policy to achieve the carbon target is a single EPR taxation policy (i.e., controlling ξ is
sufﬁcient) and the optimal EPR tax is given as follows:
ξ∗
MV  r + l −v −λ/φ(Q)
(5)
Proposition 2 is an important ﬁnding. First, it highlights the fact that for the case with
a risk averse high-tech manufacturer, the CTET policy is simply an EPR taxation policy,
and the carbon emission tax s is unimportant. Second, it analytically gives the relationship
between the optimal EPR taxation rate and the other critical factors, namely the unit revenue,
unit holding cost, unit salvage value, degree of risk tolerance and carbon target. In particular,
we can see that the optimal EPR tax will be higher if (i) The unit revenue or unit holding
is higher, or (ii) the unit salvage value or the degree of risk tolerance is lower, or (iii) the
carbon target is higher. Similar to our explanation for Proposition 1, note that the above
relationships are different when the high-tech manufacturer is risk neutral. To be speciﬁc,
if the high-tech manufacturer is risk neutral, then the CTET policy should include both the
carbon emission tax s and the EPR tax. Moreover, focusing on the case when the government
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
791
only controls the EPR tax (and keeps s as a constant), the optimal EPR tax rate (denoted by
ξ∗
M|s; for the risk neutral high-tech manufacturer’s case) is analytically given in closed-form
by ξ∗
M|s  [(1 −F(Q))r −w −s + (v −l)F(Q)]/[1 −F(Q)]. Thus, ξ∗
M|s is higher if the
unit salvage value is higher or the unit holding cost is lower, which is just the opposite to
the case when the high-tech manufacturer is risk averse. This means that considering the risk
averse attitude makes a big difference in terms of shaping the CTET policy.
3.2 Without blockchain
In Sect. 3.1, we consider the situation when the use of blockchain can let the government
estimate the level of risk aversion of the high-tech manufacturer accurately (i.e., knowing
the real value of λ). In this section, we consider the case when blockchain is absent and the
government only has a probability estimation for λ. Note that for a given EPR tax rate, the
high-tech manufacturer reacts by making the optimal production quantity decision following
the optimization problem in Sect. 3.1 (i.e., Problem (MV)).
To be speciﬁc, we consider the case in which the government only has a probability α of
getting the right estimate for λ, and a probability (1 −α) of getting an inaccurate estimate
for λ which we denote as ˆλ (where ˆλ ̸ λ). With this information in mind, when will it be
wise for the high-tech manufacturer to implement blockchain?
To address this issue, we need to explore the value of blockchain by comparing between
the expected proﬁtability under the case with blockchain and the case without blockchain.
From (2) in Sect. 3, in the presence of blockchain, we can easily ﬁnd that the expected
proﬁt of the high-tech manufacturer at the optimal production quantity is given as follows
(i.e., we set q∗
MV  Q):
B∗ (q∗
MV )  (r −w −s −ξ∗
MV )Q −(r + l −v −ξ∗
MV )S(Q)
(6)
where S(Q)  E[max(Q −x, 0)] 
 Q
0 F(x)dx.
In the absence of blockchain, when the government accurately estimates the degree of
risk tolerance of the high-tech manufacturer, then the expected proﬁt is equal to (q∗
MV ).
Note that this case carries a chance of α. When the government wrongly estimates λ to be ˆλ
(where ˆλ ̸ λ), the chance is (1−α). Combining the two cases, in the absence of blockchain,
the expected proﬁt of the high-tech manufacturer at the optimal production quantity is given
as follows:
N B∗ α(q∗
MV ) + (1 −α)[(r −w −s −ˆξ)ˆq −(r + l −v −ˆξ)S(ˆq)]
(7)
where
ˆξ  r + l −v −ˆλ/φ(Q)
(8)
ˆq  φ−1[ˆλ/(r −v + l −ˆξ)]
(9)
From (7), we can clearly see that the expected proﬁt of the high-tech manufacturer depends
on the government’s setting of the EPR tax. A wrong estimation of the high-tech manufac-
turer’s degree of risk tolerance will yield an expected proﬁt of the high-tech manufacturer
which may be higher or lower than the correctly estimated one. This is a tricky situation.
123

792
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
3.3 Impacts of using blockchain
With (6) and (7), we can deﬁne the expected value of blockchain in (10):
EV B  B∗−N B∗
(10)
After simpliﬁcation, we can express EVB as follows:
(11)
EV B  (1 −α){[(r −w −s −ξ)Q −(r + l −v −ξ)S(Q)]
−[(r −w −s −ˆξ)ˆq −(r + l −v −ˆξ)S(ˆq)]}
With the derived EVB, suppose that it is wise for the high-tech manufacturer to implement
blockchain if and only if EV B > 0. Thus, we have Proposition 3a.
Proposition 3a For the risk-averse high-tech manufacturer, when the costs of operating
blockchain are zero: (i) Implementing blockchain is not always a wise decision. (ii) Whether
it is wise to implement blockchain is independent of the government’s chance of estimating
the high-tech manufacturer’s degree of risk tolerance accurately in the absence of blockchain
(i.e., α). (iii) Implementing blockchain is more likely to be a good idea if the target Q is larger.
Proposition 3a gives several important and interesting ﬁndings. First, Proposition 3a(i)
highlights the fact that for the case with a risk averse high-tech manufacturer, even if there
is no additional cost associated with the use of blockchain, it is not always beneﬁcial to
use the blockchain. In other words, the high-tech manufacturer should not blindly vote for
using blockchain as it may bring more harm than good to itself. Second, from Proposition
3a(ii), we can see that counter-intuitively, the government’s chance of estimating the high-
tech manufacturer’s degree of risk tolerance correctly (without using blockchain) is found to
be unimportant in deciding whether it is wise or not for the high-tech manufacturer to adopt
blockchain. Note that this result does depend on the assumption here that blockchain does
not incur additional costs. As we will see in the extended model, this result will not hold if
there are blockchain operating costs. Third, from Proposition 3a(iii), we learn that whether it
is a good idea to deploy blockchain does relate to the government’s target Q. Facing a larger
Q, the high-tech manufacturer is more likely to vote for using blockchain.
Now, we turn to the government. We employ the social welfare function as established in
Appendix (A1) for the following analysis. In the presence of blockchain, the optimal social
welfare is given as follows:
SW B∗ SW(Q)  (1 −η)E P(Q) −ηE I(Q)
In the absence of blockchain, the social welfare becomes the following:
SW N B∗ α[(1 −η)E P(Q) −ηE I(Q)] + (1 −α)[(1 −η)E P(ˆq) −ηE I(ˆq)]
We can deﬁne the expected value of blockchain for social welfare as follows:
EV BSW  SW B∗−SW N B∗
After simpliﬁcation, we can express EV BSW as follows:
EV BSW  (1 −α){(1 −η)[(r −w)Q −(r + l −v)S(Q)] −η[βQ + γ S(Q)]
−[(1 −η)[(r −w)ˆq −(r + l −v)S(ˆq)] −η[β ˆq + γ S(ˆq)]]}
With the derived EV BSW , suppose that the government will prefer the use of blockchain
if EV BSW > 0. We have Proposition 3b.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
793
Proposition 3b For the government (from the social welfare perspective), when the costs of
operating blockchain are zero: (i) Implementing blockchain is not always a wise decision.
(ii) Whether it is wise to implement blockchain is independent of the government’s chance of
estimating the high-tech manufacturer’s degree of risk tolerance accurately in the absence
of blockchain (i.e., α). (iii) Implementing blockchain is more likely to be a good idea if the
target Q is larger.
Proposition 3b is very similar to Proposition 3a. The interpretation is similar and hence
we skip the full details here.
4 Extended models and analyses
In the basic model (Sect. 3), we have made some modelling assumptions. In order to drill
deeper and test for robustness of the ﬁndings, we consider two extended cases in this section.
The details are presented one by one in the following.
4.1 Model C: considering blockchain operating costs
In Sect. 3, we do not consider the operating costs associated with blockchain. In this sub-
section, we consider the case when operating blockchain incurs non-trivial costs. We call
the model under this case Model C. To be speciﬁc, we consider the scenario in which using
blockchain requires a per transaction operating cost c, as well as a per season ﬁxed cost J.
With these costs, we reformulate the optimization problem under Model C to be the following.
Problem (C-MV) Max C(q)
Subject to V [C(q)] ≤λ2,
where C(q) is the high-tech manufacturer’s proﬁt function,C(q) is the expected high-
tech manufacturer’s proﬁt function, V [C(q)] is the variance of high-tech manufacturer’s
proﬁt function, under Model C. The detailed analytical expressions are given below.
C(q)  (r −c −w −s −ξ)q −(r −c + l −v −ξ)S(q) −J
(12)
C(q)  (r −c −w −s −ξ)q −(r −c + l −v −ξ)S(q) −J
(13)
V [C(q)]  (r −c + l −v −ξ)2(q)
(14)
Similar to the basic model’s case, the expected proﬁt maximizing production quantity
under Model C can be easily found by solving the corresponding ﬁrst order condition:q∗
C,M 
arg
q
{dC(q)/dq  0}  F−1[(r−c−w−s−ξ)/(r−c+l−v−ξ)].Wealsofocusonexploring
the case when the constraint V [(q)] ≤λ is binding, which means V [C(q∗
C,M)] > λ.
Similar to Proposition 1, we ﬁnd that for a given CTET policy of the government, the
risk-averse high-tech manufacturer’s optimal production quantity under Model C is given
by:
q∗
C,MV  φ−1[λ/(r −c −v + l −ξ)]
(15)
For the government, facing the risk averse high-tech manufacturer, the CTET policy to
achieve the carbon target is also a single EPR taxation policy and the optimal EPR tax is
given below:
ξ∗
C,MV  r −c + l −v −λ/φ(Q)
(16)
123

794
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
Note that the results in (15) and (16) are basically the same as the ﬁndings summarized in
Propositions 1 and 2, except now the unit operating cost for blockchain is present. However,
the main qualitative conclusion remains the same.
Similar to (6), under Model C, we can easily ﬁnd that the expected proﬁt of the high-tech
manufacturer at the optimal production quantity:
(17)
B∗
C  C(q∗
C,MV )
 (r −c −w −s −ξ∗
C,MV )Q −(r −c + l −v −ξ∗
C,MV )S(Q) −J  B∗−J
Proposition 4 Under the case when the high-tech manufacturer is risk averse, the expected
proﬁts under the basic model and Model C at the optimal production quantity and CTET
policy are the same if the ﬁxed operating blockchain cost J is zero.
Proposition 4 is a surprising result because conventional wisdom will indicate that in the
presence of a strictly positive per unit operating cost for blockchain, even though the ﬁxed
cost of operating blockchain is zero, the expected proﬁt achieved by the risk averse high-tech
manufacturer should be smaller than the case when the per unit operating cost for blockchain
is zero. The trick behind this result goes to the optimal EPR tax ξ∗
C,MV . As a matter of fact,
the presence of c reduces the unit revenue while it also directly reduces the optimal EPR tax
ξ∗
C,MV (which aims to entice the high-tech manufacturer to achieve the carbon target). In this
situation, the expected proﬁt remains unchanged if the ﬁxed operating cost J is zero.
Since Model C considers the presence of blockchain costs, its analysis is devoted to the
case when blockchain is present. For the case without blockchain, the results in Sect. 3.2 are
valid. Thus, we can now jump to the analysis on the value of using blockchain.
Similar to (11), under Model C, we can derive the expected value of blockchain (EV BC)
for the high-tech manufacturer to be the following:
EV BC  EV B −J
(18)
With (18), we can see that the expected values of blockchain under the basic model and
Model C are basically the same except the presence of the ﬁxed blockchain operating cost J.
As such, we can see that Proposition 3(i) and Proposition 3(iii) are true. However, Proposition
3(ii) is no longer valid because whether it is wise to implement blockchain does depend on
the government’s chance of estimating the high-tech manufacturer’s degree of risk tolerance
accurately in the absence of blockchain (i.e., α). We have Proposition 5.
Proposition 5 For the risk-averse high-tech manufacturer, when the costs of operating
blockchain are positive (i.e., under Model C), whether it is wise to implement blockchain
does depend on the government’s chance of estimating the high-tech manufacturer’s degree
of risk tolerance accurately in the absence of blockchain (i.e., α).
Note that for Proposition 5, the main difference is brought by the presence of the ﬁxed
blockchain operating cost J. The per unit operating cost plays no role as we can see from
Proposition 4’s ﬁndings. For the government (and social welfare), similar analyses can be
conduced and similar ﬁndings as the ones under the case for the manufacturer can be found.
We hence do not repeat here.
4.2 Other risk measures
In Sects. 3 and 4, we focus on the case when the risk averse decision of the high-tech
manufacturer is formulated under the MV framework. This is in line with the literature (see
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
795
Chiu & Choi, 2016; Choi et al., 2019). However, variance of proﬁt is not the only measure
which can be used to capture risk. In fact, variance of proﬁt has been criticized as a far from
perfect measure because variance by deﬁnition includes both upside and downside variations
which arguably does not really capture the inherent property of risk (which should only
cover the downside deviation, i.e., having proﬁt less than the mean). Thus, the downside
risk measure such as semi-deviation of proﬁt has been proposed as a risk measure (Chan
et al., 2020; Choi & Chiu, 2012). In addition, the high-tech manufacturer may have other
risk concern associated with a higher moment such as kurtosis (Zhang et al., 2020). Kurtosis
of proﬁt measures the outlier of proﬁt. Having a small kurtosis of proﬁt avoids facing the
risk of having extreme values of proﬁt. For the deﬁnitions, from Choi and Chiu (2012) and
Zhang et al. (2020) we have the following analytical expressions for the two alternative risk
measures, and then we present Proposition 6.
The semi-deviation of proﬁt (Choi & Chiu, 2012) for the high-tech manufacturer is:
SD[(q)]  (r + l −v −ξ)2Z(q),
where Z(q) 
 q−
 q
0 F(x)dx
0
(q −
 q
0 F(x)dx −x) f (x)dx.
The kurtosis of proﬁt (Zhang et al., 2020) for the high-tech manufacturer is:
K[(q)]  (r + l −v −ξ)4(q),
where
(q)

4
 q
0 (q −x)3F(x)dx
−
3
 q
0 F(x)dx
4
+
12
 q
0 F(x)dx
2  q
0 (q −x)F(x)dx −
 q
0 F(x)dx
 q
0 (q −x)2F(x)dx

Proposition 6. For the risk-averse high-tech manufacturer, if the risk measure is changed
from variance of proﬁt to be semi-deviation of proﬁt or kurtosis of proﬁt, all the qualitative
insights in the basic model remain the same.
Proposition 6 is an interesting result. First, it shows that the ﬁndings derived in Sect. 3 are
in fact valid not just under the MV framework, but will also hold true if we replace variance of
proﬁt by the more perfect measure like semi-deviation of proﬁt (as a downside risk measure)
or an alternative measure of kurtosis of proﬁt. This shows the validity of the ﬁndings beyond
the MV domain.
5 Conclusion, insights and future studies
Blockchain is a timely technology. In this paper, we focus on the information aspect of
blockchain and consider its presence can allow the government to have correct estimate of
the high-tech manufacturer’s risk aversion level. By standard modelling analyses, we have
derived many insights and some practical implications. We discuss them in the following one
by one.
5.1 Impacts of risk attitude
One of the key focal point of this study is the role played by risk averse attitude. First, we
ﬁnd that the optimal CTET policy depends on the high-tech manufacturer’s risk preference.
Being risk-averse is very different from being risk-neutral. To be speciﬁc, from Proposition
1 and the discussion thereafter, we note that for the risk-averse high-tech manufacturer, its
optimal production quantity will decrease if the unit revenue increases. On the contrary, when
123

796
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
the high-tech manufacturer is risk neutral, its optimal production quantity will increase if the
unit revenue increases. Moreover, both the per unit production cost and carbon emission tax
would affect the risk neutral high-tech manufacturer’s optimal production quantity but they
do not affect the risk averse high-tech manufacturer’s optimal production quantity. For the
government, facing the risk averse high-tech manufacturer, the CTET policy to achieve the
carbon target is a single EPR taxation policy. However, if the high-tech manufacturer is risk
neutral, the CTET policy should include both the EPR tax and carbon emission tax. The
ﬁndings demonstrate that considering risk averse decision making preference is very critical
because the results are very different from the case with risk neutral attitude.
5.2 The CTET policy
For the target Q, it can be determined by the government by maximizing social welfare (see
Appendix (A1)). For the case with the risk averse high-tech manufacturer, the CTET policy
is the simple EPR taxation policy. From Proposition 2, we see how the optimal EPR taxation
rate relates to other critical factors such as the unit revenue, unit holding cost, unit salvage
value, degree of risk tolerance and the carbon target. To be speciﬁc, we uncover that the
optimal EPR tax will be higher if (i) The unit revenue or unit holding is higher, or (ii) the
unit salvage value or the degree of risk tolerance is lower, or (iii) the carbon target is higher.
These all give good implications for the government to properly set the EPR policy.
5.3 Implementing blockchain
From Propositions 3a and 3b, we can see that for both the risk-averse high-tech manufacturer
and government (with focus on social welfare), when the costs of operating blockchain
are zero: (i) Implementing blockchain is not always a wise decision. Thus, even “free
lunch” may not be good to both the high-tech manufacturer and the government. (ii) Imple-
menting blockchain is more likely to be a good idea if the target Q is larger. Since Q 
F−1
(1−η)(r−w)−ηβ
(1−η)(r+l−v)+ηγ

, a larger Q appears when the per unit emission penalty from produc-
tion (i.e., β) decreases, or the per unit environmental impact brought by each unit of product
sold (i.e., γ ) decreases, or the environmental impact (EI) importance factor decreases. In
other words, if the government pays less attention to environmental impact (and hence rel-
atively more on economic beneﬁt), implementing blockchain is more likely to be desirable
(when other conditions remain constant). (iii) Whether it is wise to implement blockchain is
independent of the government’s chance of estimating the high-tech manufacturer’s degree
of risk tolerance accurately in the absence of blockchain. However, for this feature, it does
require the condition in which the operating costs of blockchain are zero. If the operating
costs of blockchain are non-trivial, then it is no longer true.
5.4 Robustness
(a) Under the case when operating blockchain incurs both a ﬁxed cost and a per transaction
cost, when the high-tech manufacturer is risk averse, the expected proﬁts for the high-tech
manufacturer under these two cases are the same if the ﬁxed operating blockchain cost is
zero (P.S.: Proposition 4). This case happens because the presence of EPR tax will cancel out
the operating cost effect in the optimal ordering quantity. Then, from Proposition 5, when
the costs of operating blockchain are all positive, whether it is wise to implement blockchain
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
797
does depend on the government’s chance of estimating the high-tech manufacturer’s degree
of risk tolerance accurately in the absence of blockchain. This is an important difference
between the major ﬁndings under the cases with and without blockchain operating costs. (b)
For the risk-averse high-tech manufacturer, if the risk measure is changed from variance of
proﬁt to another measure such as the downside risk measure “semi-deviation of proﬁt”, or
extreme event measure “kurtosis of proﬁt”, all the qualitative insights derived under the MV
model remain the same. This shows the robustness of the ﬁndings under the MV model.
In this paper, we focus on the perspective of the risk-averse high-tech manufacturer’s
inventory decision and model it using the newsvendor problem. This is supported by the
literature. However, we may also extend the problem using other modelling choices. It will
also be interesting to extend the analysis to cover the case when remanufacturers are present
and examine the interactions between the high-tech manufacturer and the remanufacturer.
Contractual arrangements (Chiu et al., 2011) may also be examined. Nowadays, in the sharing
economy (Wang et al., 2022), product exchanges are popular. How this affects the results of
this study deserves further analyses. Last but not least, supply chain ﬁnance is an important
research area. Since blockchain has its functions in ﬁnance, it will be an interesting extension
to include supply chain ﬁnance in the high-tech industry and see how that may affect the
government’s CTET policies.
Acknowledgements I sincerely thank the important comments and helpful advice given by the editors and
reviewers. They help improve the paper a lot.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Appendix A1
Determining Q
From the government’s perspective, the consideration of Q is to maximize social welfare.
Here, we deﬁne social welfare as follows,
SW(q)  (1 −η)E P(q) −ηE I(q)
(A1)
where
E P(q) is the expected proﬁt generated from the high-tech manufacturer,
E I(q) is the environmental impact (negative) generated from the high-tech manufacturer,
and
0 < η < 1 is the coefﬁcient which represents the relative importance of E P(q) and E I(q)
in the mind of the government. We call it the environmental impact (EI) importance factor.
The expression in (A1) is intuitive. The government considers both the economic beneﬁt
and environmental impact as well as their relative importance in establishing the analytical
social welfare function.
123

798
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
For the detailed analytical expressions, we have the following:
E P(q)  (r −w)q −(r + l −v)S(q)
(A2)
E I(q)  βq + γ S(q)
(A3)
where β > 0 is the per unit emission penalty from production, and γ > 0 is the per unit
environmental impact brought by each unit of product leftover (with respect to the end of
life product handling, etc.)
Thus, putting (A2) and (A3) into (A1), we have:
SW(q)  (1 −η)[(r −w)q −(r + l −v)S(q)] −η[βq + γ S(q)
 [(1 −η)(r −w) −ηβ]q −[(1 −η)(r + l −v) + ηγ )S(q)
The government’s objective is to determine the optimal production quantity q to maximize
SW(q).
Checking the structural properties shows that SW(q) is a concave function of the pro-
duction quantity q. We can hence ﬁnd the analytical closed-form expression of the optimal
production quantity by solving the ﬁrst order condition:
q∗
SW  arg
q
{dSW(q)/dq  0}  F−1
 (1 −η)(r −w) −ηβ
(1 −η)(r + l −v) + ηγ

Thus, the value of the target Q is equal to F−1
(1−η)(r−w)−ηβ
(1−η)(r+l−v)+ηγ

.
Appendix A2
Notation table
See Table 1.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
799
Table 1 Notation
Notation
Details
CTET
Carbon target environmental taxation
EPR
Extended producer responsibility
MV
Mean–variance
B
The case with blockchain
C
Model C
ξ
The EPR tax
s
The carbon emission tax
Q
Target
α
The probability of correctly estimating the high-tech manufacturer’s risk tolerance level
1 −α
The probability of incorrectly estimating the high-tech manufacturer’s risk tolerance level
c
The per unit operating cost for the case with blockchain under Model C
r
The unit revenue
w
The unit production cost
l
The unit holding cost for end of season leftover
v
The unit end of season (salvage) value
123

800
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
Table 1 (continued)
Notation
Details
J
The ﬁxed operating cost of using blockchain under Model C
λ
The high-tech manufacturer’s risk tolerance level which reﬂects its degree of risk aversion
β
The per unit emission penalty from production
γ
The per unit environmental impact brought by each unit of product leftover (with respect to the end of life product handling, etc.)
0 < η < 1
The environmental impact (EI) importance factor
V [.]
Taking variance
E[.]
Taking expectation
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
801
Appendix A3
All technical derivations and proofs
Proof of Proposition 1 Under a given CTET policy of the government, the risk-averse high-
tech manufacturer aims to determine the production quantity which solve Problem (MV).
Problem (MV) Max (q)
Subject to V [(q)] ≤λ2
Note that since (q) is concave and V [(q)] is monotonic increasing, the optimal pro-
duction quantity will be bounded between 0 and q∗
M. Since the high-tech manufacturer is
considered to be risk-averse and the binding constraint is active V [(q)] ≤λ2, we have
q < q∗
M.
In the solution region, (q) is increasing. As a result, the optimal production quantity is
exactly the production quantity which lies on the boundary of the constraint, i.e.,
q∗
MV  arg
q
{V [(q)]  λ2}
Since V [(q)]  (r + l −v −ξ)2(q), we have the following:
V [(q)]  λ2
⇒

V [(q)]  λ
⇒(r + l −v −ξ)φ(q)  λ
Rearranging terms yields the optimal production quantity for a given EPR tax:
q∗
MV  φ−1[λ/(r −v + l −ξ)]
□
Proof of Proposition 2 From Proposition 1, for a given ξ, we have: q∗
MV  φ−1[λ/(r −v +
l −ξ)].
Thus, for the government, facing the risk averse high-tech manufacturer, the CTET policy
which can achieve the carbon target is a single EPR taxation policy (i.e., controlling ξ alone
is sufﬁcient) and the optimal EPR tax is given as follows.
To achieve the target, we have:
q∗
MV  Q
Then, we have:
Q  φ−1[λ/(r −v + l −ξ)]
Rearranging terms yields:
ξ∗
MV  r + l −v −λ/φ(Q)
□
Proof of Proposition 3a From the expected value of blockchain for the risk averse high-tech
manufacturer in (11), we have:
EV B  (1 −α){[(r −w −s −ξ)Q −(r + l −v −ξ) ¯S(Q)]
−[(r −w −s −ˆξ)ˆq −(r + l −v −ˆξ) ¯S(ˆq)]}
Examining EV B closely, we can see that:
(i)
EV B need not be positive, and hence implementing blockchain is not always a wise
decision.
123

802
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
(ii)
Since 0 < α < 1, we have:
EV B > 0 ⇔[(r −w −s −ξ)Q −(r + l −v −ξ) ¯S(Q)]
−[(r −w −s −ˆξ)ˆq −(r + l −v −ˆξ) ¯S(ˆq)] > 0
Thus, whether it is wise to implement blockchain is independent of the government’s
chance of estimating the high-tech manufacturer’s degree of risk tolerance accurately
in the absence of blockchain (i.e., α).
(iii)
EV B is increasing in Q. Thus, implementing blockchain is more likely to be a good
idea if the target Q is larger.
□
Proof of Proposition 3b We can check the expected value of blockchain for social welfare:
EV BSW  (1 −α){(1 −η)[(r −w)Q −(r + l −v)S(Q)] −η[βQ + γ S(Q)]
−[(1 −η)[(r −w)ˆq −(r + l −v)S(ˆq)] −η[β ˆq + γ S(ˆq)]]}
(i)
EV BSW need not be positive and hence implementing blockchain is not always a wise
decision.
(ii)
Since 0 < α < 1, we have:
EV BSW > 0
⇒{(1 −η)[(r −w)Q −(r + l −v)S(Q)] −η[βQ + γ S(Q)]
−[(1 −η)[(r −w)ˆq −(r + l −v)S(ˆq)] −η[β ˆq + γ S(ˆq)]]} > 0
Thus. whether it is wise to implement blockchain is independent of the government’s
chance of estimating the high-tech manufacturer’s degree of risk tolerance accurately
in the absence of blockchain (i.e., α).
(iii) Since EV BSW is increasing in Q, implementing blockchain is more likely to be a good
idea if the target Q is larger.
□
Proof of Proposition 4 From (17), we have:
¯B∗
C  ¯C(q∗
C,MV )  (r −c −w −s −ξ∗
C,MV )Q −(r −c + l −v −ξ∗
C,MV ) ¯S(Q) −J
 ¯B∗−J
.
Directly, observing from it, we can see that under the case when the high-tech manufac-
turer is risk averse, the expected proﬁts under the basic model and Model C at the optimal
production quantity and CTET policy are the same if the ﬁxed operating blockchain cost J is
zero.
□
Proof of Proposition 5 Directly from the expected value of blockchain for the risk averse
high-tech manufacturer, we can see that: For the risk-averse high-tech manufacturer, when
the costs of operating blockchain are positive (i.e., under Model C), whether it is wise to
implement blockchain does depend on α.
□
Proof of Proposition 6 Suppose that we replace the variance of proﬁt by another risk measure
R[(q)]. Note that since (q) is concave, if R[(q)] ≤λ is active and R[(q)] is monotonic
increasing, the optimal production quantity will be bounded between 0 and q∗
M, and can be
found be solving.
q∗
R  arg
q
{R[(q)]  λ2}
Since R[(q)] is monotonic increasing, we can ﬁnd a functional form of the optimal
solution similar to q∗
MV .
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
803
For the risk-averse high-tech manufacturer, if the risk measure is changed from variance
of proﬁt to be semi-deviation of proﬁt or kurtosis of proﬁt, since both semi-deviation of proﬁt
(Choi & Chiu, 2012) and kurtosis of proﬁt (Zhang et al., 2020) are monotonic increasing in
q, the qualitative ﬁndings remain the same.
□
References
An, Q., Meng, F., Xiong, B., Wang, Z., & Chen, X. (2020). Assessing the relative efﬁciency of Chinese high-
tech industries: A dynamic network data envelopment analysis approach. Annals of Operations Research,
290, 707–729.
Birge, J. R. (2000). Option methods for incorporating risk into linear capacity planning models. Manufacturing
& Service Operations Management, 2(1), 19–31.
Cai, K., He, Z., Lou, Y., & He, S. (2020). Risk-aversion information in a supply chain with price and warranty
competition. Annals of Operations Research, 287, 61–107.
Cai, Y. J., & Choi, T. M. (2021). Extended producer responsibility: A systematic review and innovative
proposals for improving sustainability. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 68(1), 272–288.
Cai, Y. J., Choi, T. M., & Zhang, J. (2021). Platform supported supply chain operations in the blockchain era:
Supply contracting and moral hazards. Decision Sciences, 52(4), 866–892.
Chan, H. L., Choi, T. M., Cai, Y. J., & Shen, B. (2020). Environmental taxes in newsvendor supply chains:
A mean-downside risk analysis. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics: Systems, 50(12),
4856–4869.
Chen, X., Sim, M., Simchi-Levi, S., & Sun, P. (2007). Risk aversion in inventory management. Operations
Research, 55, 828–842.
Chiu, C. H., & Choi, T. M. (2016). Supply chain risk analysis with mean-variance models: A technical review.
Annals of Operations Research, 240(2), 489–507.
Chiu, C. H., Choi, T. M., Dai, X., Shen, B., & Zheng, J. H. (2018). Optimal advertising budget allocation
in luxury fashion markets with social inﬂuences: A mean-variance analysis. Production and Operations
Management, 27(8), 1611–1629.
Chiu, C. H., Choi, T. M., & Tang, C. S. (2011). Price, rebate, and returns supply contracts for coordinating
supply chains with price-dependent demands. Production and Operations Management, 20(1), 81–91.
Choi, T. M. (2019). Blockchain-technology-supported platforms for diamond authentication and certiﬁcation
in luxury supply chains. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 128,
17–29.
Choi, T. M. (2020a). Financing product development projects in the blockchain era: Initial coin offerings
versus traditional bank loans. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TEM.2020.3032426
Choi, T. M. (2020b). Supply chain ﬁnancing using blockchain: Impacts on supply chains selling fashionable
products. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03615-7
Choi, T. M. (2021). Creating all-win by blockchain technology in supply chains: Impacts of agents’ risk
attitudes towards cryptocurrency. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 72(11), 2580–2595.
Choi, T. M. (2022). Achieving economic sustainability: Operations research for risk analysis and optimization
problems in the blockchain era. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-
04394-5
Choi, T. M., & Chiu, C. H. (2012). Mean-downside-risk and mean-variance newsvendor models: Implications
for sustainable fashion retailers. International Journal of Production Economics, 135, 552–560.
Choi, T. M., Feng, L., & Li, R. (2020a). Information disclosure structure in supply chains with rental service
platforms in the blockchain technology era. International Journal of Production Economics, 221, 107473.
Choi, T. M., Guo, S., Liu, N., & Shi, X. (2020b). Optimal pricing in on-demand-service-platform-operations
with hired agents and risk-sensitive customers in the blockchain era. European Journal of Operational
Research, 284(3), 1031–1042.
Choi, T. M., Kumar, S., Yue, X., & Chan, H. L. (2022). Disruptive technologies and operations management
in the industry 4.0 era and beyond. Production and Operations Management, 31(1), 9–31.
Choi, T. M., & Lambert, J. H. (2017). Advances in risk analysis with big data. Risk Analysis, 37(8), 1435–1442.
Choi, T. M., Li, D., & Yan, H. (2004). Optimal single ordering policy with multiple delivery modes and
Bayesian information updates. Computers and Operations Research, 31, 1965–1984.
Choi, T. M., Li, D., & Yan, H. (2008). Mean–variance analysis of a single supplier and retailer supply chain
under a returns policy. European Journal of Operational Research, 184(1), 356–376.
123

804
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
Choi, T. M., & Luo, S. (2019). Data quality challenges for sustainable fashion supply chain operations in
emerging markets: Roles of blockchain, government sponsors and environment taxes. Transportation
Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 131, 139–152.
Choi, T. M., & Shi, X. (2022). On-demand-ride-hailing-service platforms with hired drivers during coronavirus
(COVID-19) outbreak: Can blockchain help? IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management. https://
doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2021.3131044
Choi, T. M., & Siqin, T. (2022). Can government policies help to achieve the pollutant emissions information
disclosure target in the industry 4.0 era? Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-
022-04712-5)
Choi, T. M., Wallace, S., & Wang, Y. (2018a). Big data analytics in operations management. Production and
Operations Management, 27(10), 1868–1883.
Choi, T. M., Wen, X., Sun, X., & Chung, S. H. (2019). The mean-variance approach for global supply chain risk
analysis with air logistics in the blockchain technology era. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics
and Transportation Review, 127, 178–191.
Choi, T. M., Zhang, J., & Cheng, T. C. E. (2018b). Quick response in supply chains with stochastically risk
sensitive retailers. Decision Sciences, 49(5), 932–957.
Choi, T. M., & Zhang, T. (2022). Will being an angel bring more harm than good? Altruistic newsvendors
with different risk attitudes. European Journal of Operational Research. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.
2022.06.043
Chowdhury, S., Rodriguez-Espindola, O., Dey, P., & Budhwar, P. (2022). Blockchain technology adoption for
managing risks in operations and supply chain management: evidence from the UK. Annals of Operations
Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04487-1
Dutta, P., Choi, T. M., Surbhi, S., & Richa, B. (2020). Blockchain technology in supply chain operations:
Applications, challenges and research opportunities. Transportation Research Part E, 142, 102067.
Erkoc, M., & Wu, S. D. (2005). Managing High-tech capacity expansion via reservation contracts. Production
and Operations Management, 14(2), 232–251.
Fan, Z. P., Wu, X. Y., & Cao, B. B. (2020). Considering the traceability awareness of consumers: Should the
supply chain adopt the blockchain technology? Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-020-03729-y
Farooque, M., Zhang, A., Liu, Y., & Hartley, J. L. (2022). Circular supply chain management: Performance
outcomes and the role of eco-industrial parks in China. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and
Transportation Review, 157, 102596.
Guo, S., Sun, X., & Lam, H.K.S. (2020). Applications of blockchain technology in sustainable fashion supply
chains: Operational transparency and environmental efforts. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Man-
agement. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2020.3034216
Guo, S., & Liu, N. (2020). Inﬂuences of supply chain ﬁnance on the mass customization program: Risk attitudes
and cash ﬂow shortage. International Transactions in Operational Research, 27(5), 2396–2421.
Hastig, G. M., & Sodhi, M. S. (2020). Blockchain for supply chain traceability: Business requirements and
critical success factors. Production and Operations Management, 29(4), 935–954.
Lee, D. H., & Dong, M. (2008). A heuristic approach to logistics network design for end-of-lease computer
productsrecovery.TransportationResearchPartE:LogisticsandTransportationReview,44(3),455–474.
Li, C., Feng, L., & Luo, S. (2019). Strategic introduction of an online recycling channel in the reverse supply
chain with a random demand. Journal of Cleaner Production, 236, 117683.
Li, G., Li, L., Choi, T. M., & Sethi, S. P. (2020a). Green supply chain management in Chinese ﬁrms: Innovative
measures and the moderating role of quick response technology. Journal of Operations Management,
66(7–8), 958–988.
Li, G., Lim, M. K., & Wang, Z. (2020b). Stakeholders, green manufacturing, and practice performance:
Empirical evidence from Chinese fashion businesses. Annals of Operations Research, 290(1), 961–982.
Li, G., Wu, H., Sethi, S. P., & Zhang, X. (2021). Contracting green product supply chains considering marketing
efforts in the circular economy era. International Journal of Production Economics, 234, 108041.
Liu, W., Liu, X., & Choi, T. M. (2022a). Effects of supply chain quality event announcements on stock
market reaction: An empirical study from China. International Journal of Operations and Production
Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJOPM-10-2021-0638
Liu, W., Wang, J., Jia, F., & Choi, T. M. (2022b). Blockchain announcements and stock value: A technol-
ogy management perspective. International Journal of Operations and Production Management, 42(5),
713–742.
Luo, S., & Choi, T. M. (2022). E-commerce supply chains with considerations of cyber-security: Should
governments play a role? Production and Operations Management, 31(5), 2107–2126.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
805
Luthra, S., Sharma, M., Kumar, A., Joshi, S., Collins, E., & Mangla, S. (2022). Overcoming barriers to cross-
sector collaboration in circular supply chain management: A multi-method approach. Transportation
Research Part e: Logistics and Transportation Review, 157, 102582.
Ma, X., Ho, W., Ji, P., & Talluri, S. (2018). Coordinated pricing analysis with the carbon tax scheme in a
supply chain. Decision Sciences, 49(5), 863–900.
Mazahir, S., Verter, V., Boyaci, T., & Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2019). Did Europe move in the right direction
on e-waste legislation? Production and Operations Management, 28(1), 121–139.
Meijer, M. S., van Jaarsveld, W., de Kok, T., & Tang, C. S. (2022). Direct versus indirect penalties for supply
contracts in high-tech industry. European Journal of Operational Research, 301, 203–216.
Plambeck, E., & Wang, Q. (2009). Effects of e-waste regulation on new product introduction. Management
Science, 55(3), 333–347.
Rathore, S., & Park, J. H. (2020). A blockchain-based deep learning approach for cyber security in next
generation industrial cyber-physical systems. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics. https://doi.
org/10.1109/TII.2020.3040968
Sheu,J.B.,&Choi,T.M.(2019).Extendedconsumerresponsibility:Syncreticvalue-orientedpricingstrategies
for trade-in-for-upgrade programs. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review,
122, 350–367.
Shi, T., Gu, W., Chhajed, D., & Petruzzi, N. C. (2016). Effects of remanufacturable product design on market
segmentation and the environment. Decision Sciences, 47(2), 298–332.
Shi, X., Yao, S., & Luo, S. (2021). Innovative platform operations with the use of technologies in the blockchain
era. International Journal of Production Research. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2021.1953182
Smirnov, D., van Jaarsveld, W., Atan, Z., & de Kok, T. (2021). Long-term resource planning in the high-tech
industry: Capacity or inventory? European Journal of Operational Research, 293(3), 926–940.
Song, Y., Liu, J., Zhang, W., & Li, J. (2022). Blockchain’s role in e-commerce sellers’ decision-making
on information disclosure under competition. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-021-04276-w
Souza, G. C. (2013). Closed-loop supply chains: A critical review, and future research. Decision Sciences,
44(1), 7–38.
Sun, J., & Li, G. (2021). Optimizing emission reduction task sharing: Technology and performance perspec-
tives. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04273-z
Van Mieghem, J. A. (2003). Capacity management, investment, and hedging: Review and recent developments.
Manufacturing and Service Operations Management, 5(4), 269–302.
Wang, Y., Fan, D., Fung, Y. N., & Luo, S. (2022). Consumer-to-consumer product exchanges for original
fashion brands in the sharing economy: Good or bad for fashion knockoffs? Transportation Research
Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 158, 102599.
Wei, N., Xie, E., & Gao, J. (2021). R&D investment and debt ﬁnancing of high-tech ﬁrms in emerging
economies: The role of patents and state ownership. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Manage-
ment. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2021.3133330
Wei, Y., & Choi, T. M. (2010). Mean-variance analysis of supply chains under wholesale pricing and proﬁt
sharing scheme. European Journal of Operational Research, 204, 255–262.
Wen, X., & Siqin, T. (2020). How do product quality uncertainties affect the sharing economy platforms with
risk considerations? A mean-variance analysis. International Journal of Production Economics, 224,
107544.
Yang, Y., Liu, Q., & Chen, Y. (2022). Does industrial agglomeration promote regional innovation convergence
in China? Evidence from high-tech industries. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management. https://
doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2021.3084936
Yang, C. S. (2019). Maritime shipping digitalization: Blockchain-based technology applications, future
improvements, and intention to use. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation
Review, 131, 108–117.
Zhang, J., Sethi, S. P., Choi, T. M., & Cheng, T. C. E. (2020). Supply chains involving a mean-variance-
skewness-kurtosis newsvendor: Analysis and coordination. Production and Operations Management,
29(6), 1397–1430.
Zhang, J., Sethi, S. P., Choi, T. M., & Cheng, T. C. E. (2022). Pareto optimality and contract dependence
in supply chain coordination with risk-averse agents. Production and Operations Management, 31(6),
2557–2570.
Zhang, W., Wang, J., Ahmadi, R., & Dasu, S. (2021). Timing the price agreement in high-tech component
procurement. Production and Operations Management, 30(11), 4105–4120.
Zheng, K., Zhang, Z., & Gauthier, J. (2020). Blockchain-based intelligent contract for factoring business in
supply chains. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03601-z
123

806
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:783–806
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123