TITLE: To revise or not to revise? This is the question
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06214-y
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06214-y
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
To revise or not to revise? This is the question
Haim Levy1
Received: 9 April 2024 / Accepted: 1 August 2024 / Published online: 27 August 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Buy and hold and periodical revisions are two competing investment strategies. Revising
to the optimal one-period investment weights seemingly dominates the buy-and-hold strat-
egy with random and uncontrolled investment weights determined by asset price changes.
This intuition is misleading as both investment strategies are theoretically included in the risk
aversion efﬁcient set. Considering only economically relevant preferences, with stocks-bonds
portfolios, both strategies are empirically included in the risk aversion efﬁcient set as long as
the investment horizon is shorter than 20 years. However, for an investment horizon longer
than twenty years, the buy and hold strategy empirically dominates the revision strategy by
Almost First-degree Stochastic Dominance (AFSD) rule, namely by all economically rele-
vant utility functions. When the horizon is indeﬁnitely long, holding only stocks dominates
the stock–bond portfolios of both the B&H(S) and the RV(S). However, this theoretical result
may be practically irrelevant for most investors with a horizon shorter than 20 years.
Keywords Revisions strategy(RV(S) · Buy- and- Hold Strategy B&H(S) · Almost
First-degree Stochastic Dominance (AFSD)
JEL Classiﬁcation G11 · G12
1 Introduction
Most portfolio selection models and the accompanied equilibrium pricing models are one-
period models. These one-period frameworks overlook that in practice investors may have
heterogeneous planned investment horizons, generally longer than one-period, rather than
the scenario where all have the same one-period investment horizon. The implicit assumption
underlying these models is presumably that every period the investor revises her portfolio
to the one-period optimal weights; hence the one-period models are repeated many times.
While most one-period portfolio models do not emphasize this implicit assumption regarding
the investment revision (e.g., see Markowitz (1952), Sharpe (1964, 1987), Lintner (1965),
I thank Moshe Levy and Johnathan Erell for their helpful comments.
B Haim Levy
mshlevy@huji.ac.il
1
Hebrew University, 91905 Jerusalem, Israel
123

158
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
and Mossin (1966)), the multi-period (continuous and discrete) models directly incorporate
these portfolio revisions (e.g., see Merton (1969, 1990) and Merton and Samuelson (1974)).
Notallresearchersrecommendperiodicalportfoliorevisions.1 Thereisacompetingschool
of thought advocating that the buy-and-hold investment strategy is optimal and that revising
the portfolio every period is inferior to the buy-and-hold strategy. Note, however, that the
decision not to revise the portfolio every period may be on purpose as it is considered to
be theoretically the optimal investment strategy by a segment of investors, or merely due
to laziness and ignorance. Warren Buffet, the Oracle of Omaha, is probably the most well-
known investor advocating the buy-and-hold strategy (hereafter B&H(S)). He recommends
investing in a portfolio of assets and holding the selected portfolio for the long run, and he
even advocates the B&H(S) for the very long run.2
Nevertheless, the economic intuition inclines toward the view that in the absence of trans-
action costs the investment revisions strategy (hereafter (RV(S)) dominates the buy and hold
investment strategy as with periodical revisions the investor returns every period to the desired
optimal one-period investment weights, hence the portfolio performance is not exposed to the
random and uncontrolled investment weights that are determined by the past random returns
on the various assets included in the portfolio, as occurred with the B&H(S). A partial the-
oretical support for this view is provided by Merton and Samuelson (1974) who prove that
under the assumption of identical and independent distributions (i.i.d) of rates of returns over
time of each asset under consideration, and with the commonly employed utility function in
academic research, the pure3 myopic utility function of the form U(w) = w1−α/(1 −α),
revising the portfolio every period is optimal as it dominates any other investment strat-
egy, including the B&H(S). The crucial question is whether the myopic utility function ﬁts
investors’ preferences in practice, or is merely a theoretical utility function that is irrelevant
in practice, an issue we address in detail in this paper.
In this study, we distinguish between two cases:
a)
A preference between B&H(S) and RV(S) for all theoretically legitimate utility functions.
b) A preference between B&H(S) and RV(S) for all economically relevant utility functions
that constitute a subset of all legitimate theoretical utility functions.
When all theoretical preferences are considered neither the B&H(S) nor the RV(S) dom-
inates. However, when only the economically relevant utility functions are considered, we
ﬁnd that as the horizon increases indeﬁnitely (n →∞), with a stocks-bonds portfolio, the
B&H(S) dominates the RV(S) for all economically relevant utility functions. The even more
important result is that, in practice, to obtain this dominance of the B&H(S), there is no need
for the horizon to be indeﬁnitely large, and the dominance of the B&H(S) with a stocks-bonds
portfolio is empirically achieved for n>20 years.
As mentioned above, the RV(S) has the advantage that the investor can restore at the
end of each period to the desired one–period investment weights. However, the advantage
of the B&H(S) is that it tends to increase the portfolio weight of high mean return assets,
other things being held constant, a desired property. Moreover, as the horizon increases the
1 Numerous studies analyze various aspects of the periodical portfolio revisions. For example, see Arnott
(1993), Leland (1996) and Cavlet, Campbell and Sodini (2009).
2 “Many legendary investors such as Warren Buffett and Jack Bogle praise the buy-and- hold approaches
ideal for individuals seeking healthy long -term returns” (see Beer (2020)). It is not clear that by this policy
a pure buy and hold policy is employed and it is possible that some, albeit minor, rebalancing take place with
the same stocks held.
3 To distinguish from the general utility function of the form U(w) = (A + w)1−α/(1-α), where A is the
wealth not invested in the market.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
159
portfolio mean return may increase with no substantial additional risk due to diversiﬁcation
across time of the large risk-return assets included in the B&H(S) portfolio (note that the
standard deviation increases with the horizon, but due to the large increase in the mean the
probability of a negative return may decreases with the horizon). Thus, the B&H(S) provides
the beneﬁt of diversiﬁcation across time that is not provided by the RV(S), accompanied by
a larger mean terminal wealth.4
Of course, this argument theoretically implies that with the bonds-stocks portfolio, one
should hold only stocks in the very long run, hence, the B&H(S) and RV(S) issue is redundant.
However, to achieve this result one may need to assume a very long horizon that in practice
is probably irrelevant. In this study, we assume that the investor decides to hold for a period
n=1 a diversiﬁed portfolio of a given set of assets (a portfolio that is not necessarily optimal)
for a reasonably planned horizon and the only question is whether it is optimal to revise
the given portfolio every period or to hold it with no revisions. We do not investigate other
investment strategies, e.g., instead the buy and hold strategy simply to invest initially a larger
proportion in stocks relative to the proportion of stocks under the revision strategy, namely
not starting with the same diversiﬁed portfolio.
Note, however, that with these two investment strategies, the investor faces different dis-
tributions of return which may affect the selected optimal diversiﬁcation. To illustrate the
technical difference between the B&H(S) and the RV(S), suppose that x is the one-period
return on stocks and y is the one-period return on bonds, where the return on stocks is, on
average, larger than the return on bonds and it is also more volatile, hence generally riskier.
With revisions every period, the investor faces the same one-period distributions of x and y
and selects the optimal diversiﬁcation between these two assets according to her preference.
However, with the B&H(S) for n-year holding period, the investor faces the multi-period
distributions of X = x1x2.. . . . xN and Y = y1y2 . . . .yN and therefore selects the optimal
diversiﬁcation between X and Y. The distributions of X and Y are much different from the
distributions of x and y, hence the optimal diversiﬁcation and the distributions of the terminal
wealth with B&H(S) and the RV(S) strategies are generally different.
The beneﬁts of diversiﬁcation across time, namely diversifying between XandY is the
main idea behind the common assertion (particularly among practitioners) “stocks for the
long run” and those claiming that in the very long run, one should simply choose the portfolio
that maximizes the geometric mean (presumably with a large weight in stocks), see Latané
(1959), and with some modiﬁcation of this claim see also Markowitz (1976, 2010).
The advantage of the B&H(S) in the long run (namely increasing the weight of stocks in
the portfolio) also conforms with Siegel’s (2014) empirical ﬁnding showing that if one takes
any segment of ten years or longer (approximately from the last two hundred years) then,
due to this over time stocks return offsetting phenomenon, the obtained total rate of return
on the stock index is positive. Practitioners generally also adopt this approach; Life cycle
mutual funds tend to decrease the stocks weight in the portfolio as the investment horizon
decreases with the investors’ age, hence consider stocks’ attractiveness to increase with the
planned investment horizon.5 Nevertheless, it is worth mentioning that not all researchers
agree with this approach (e.g., see Pástor and Stambaugh (2012)), particularly because even
if one considers two hundred years of stock returns, it is advocated that history does not
reﬂect entirely the future potential risk of stocks, hence, it is claimed that stocks may be
riskier rather than safer in the long run.
4 Note that after losses in the stock market the B&H(S) becomes more defensive as less invested in stocks.
5 For the analysis of this investment strategy, and for a suggestion to improve it, see Levy and Levy (2021).
123

160
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
Putting aside the debate whether stocks become riskier or safer with the investment hori-
zon, in this study we compare the RV(S) and B&H(S) paradigms for various degrees of
risk-averse utility functions and various planned investment horizons, where with these two
investment strategies there is an identical goal: to maximize the expected utility deﬁned over
terminal wealth.
Finally, we do not attempt to predict future returns,6 hence we assume that the past
long history that includes many booms and crashes in the stock market reﬂects well future
distribution of return on the various assets.
In the empirical part of this study, we assume that the investor invests in a portfolio com-
posed of stocks (the S&P 500 index) and 10-year treasury bonds for n periods(years). The
investor under consideration may plan7 to revise her portfolio every year or may plan to hold
the portfolio for n years without revisions, namely adopting the buy-and-hold investment
strategy. We analyze the characteristics of the distributions of terminal wealth correspond-
ing to these two competing investment strategies, and pinpoint the conditions under which
one strategy is superior to the other. If in cases where in the absence of transaction costs
the B&H(S) is superior to the RV(S), incorporating transaction costs only enhances this
preference.
In some parts of this study we assume that for n=1 period, both the B&H(S) and the RV(S)
havesomearbitrarybutidenticaldiversiﬁcation,say0.5instocksand0.5inbonds,andforn>1
these two investments strategies proceed according to their declared diversiﬁcation policy,
hence diverse. In the part of this study where some speciﬁc utility function is assumed we
follow the same procedure, but this time for n=1 we start with the optimal diversiﬁcation that
is, once again, identical for both strategies and then follow, as before, with the investment
strategy of B&H(S) and RV(S) for n>1.
The contributions of this study are as follows,
(a)
We advocate that for an investor with a one-period horizon, it may be optimal to diversify
but for another investor with the same utility function with a very long horizon, it may
be better to specialize in the asset with the largest mean as this asset dominates all other
assets and portfolios for the very long run for all economically relevant preferences.
Thus, if the investor decides to extend the investment horizon substantially she may
need to change also the investment diversiﬁcation strategy. This result is not related to
the portfolio revision policy but to the horizon issue that plays a central role in this study.
(b) We brieﬂy explain the First-degree Stochastic Dominance (FSD) and the Almost
FSD(AFSD) investment rules. Although not new, the explanation of the AFSD rule
is necessary as it is employed in this study to show that for all economically relevant
6 The ability to predict future returns is very important to investors. For studies dealing with estimation errors,
see for example, Fabozzi et al. [2007] and Levy and Roll [2023]. However, in this study we assume that the
ex-post distribution represents well the ex-ante distribution and under this assumption we examine the horizon
effect on optimal investment strategy. The estimation errors can be added to the results reported in this study
on the horizon effect. Nevertheless, no attempt is done in this study to predict future returns as done by other
studies.
7 We distinguish between the planned investment horizon and actual horizon. With a given information at
the investment date only the planned multi-period investment horizon is relevant. The investor decides on the
optimal investment for a given planned investment horizon. However, after the ﬁrst period has elapsed a new
information may ﬂow into the market and the investor may change the planned investment strategy. We refer
in this study only to the planned investment horizon but do not rule out a changes in the investment strategy in
response to new information. For an algorithm for portfolio improvement due to changes in parameters, see
Sharpe, reprinted in Lawrence, Guerard and Reeves (1987).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
161
utility functions, the buy-and-hold investment strategy dominates the periodical revision
strategy in the long run.8
(c)
Using annual rates of return on stocks and bonds for various ﬁnite investment hori-
zons, we compare the performance of the RV(S) versus the performance of the B&H(S).
For such comparison, we employ the FSD, AFSD and the M-V rules, and the gen-
eral myopic preference of the form U(w) = (A + w)1−α/(1 −α), where A is the
amount not invested in the capital market (e.g., human capital), a case where the proof
of Merton and Samuelson(1974) is not intact.9 We also employ the utility function
U(w) = (w −S)1−α/(1 −α), a preference suggested by Samuelson (1989). With this
utility function the investor requires a minimal wealth S to sustain subsistence. With
this function a terminal wealth lower than S implies “ruin” (or a utility of negative
inﬁnity) and must therefore be avoided at all costs. This function is a special case of
the general myopic preference presented before where A = −S. 10With a stocks-bonds
portfolio, we empirically compare the expected utility corresponding to the B&H(S) and
RV(S) with these two utility functions, for various risk aversion parameters and various
horizons.
(d) We prove that as the horizon n increases indeﬁnitely, the asset with the largest arithmetic
mean dominates by AFSD all other individual assets and all other portfolios. However,
considering the same initially held diversiﬁed portfolio and a ﬁnite horizon the B&H(S)
empirically dominates the RV(S) as long as the horizon is longer than 20 years. For
horizons shorter than 20 years both strategies are efﬁcient.
(e)
The result in d) above for an indeﬁnitely long horizon raises the following puzzling
question: why do those who recommend the B&H(S) also suggest holding a diversiﬁed
portfolio and not holding only the asset with the largest mean that dominates all other
investment strategies by the AFSD rule for the very long run? Note that even Warren
Buffett who advocates the B&H(S) and recommends holding this portfolio for the very
long run, invests in a diversiﬁed portfolio, rather than in one asset. For example, on
September 2023 Berkshire Hathaway held numerous different assets in the portfolio,
albeit about 10 different stocks account for about 84% of the portfolio, with Apple stock
accounting for about 48% of the held portfolio. Thus, although Berkshire Hathaway’s
portfolio is far from being perfectly diversiﬁed as the market portfolio (e.g. S&P 500
Stock Index), it is also far from holding only one asset as implied by our theoretical
AFSD results for the long run.
We suggest the following possible explanation for the above seemingly contradiction:
First, the planned investment horizon of most investors may be not very long, say, shorter
than 20 years, a case where the asset with the largest mean may not dominate the diversiﬁed
portfolio by the AFSD rule. Second, even if the planned investment horizon is more than
20 years, a possible currently unforeseen emergency event that requires assets liquidation
before the end of the planned investment horizon is implicitly or explicitly considered, which
in turn, makes the average investment horizon shorter than 20 years, a case where the asset
with the largest mean does not necessarily dominates a diversiﬁed portfolio by AFSD rule.
8 For the AFSD rule, see Leshno and Levy (2002). For extension of this rule and experimental studies with
AFSD see Levy Leshno and Leibovich (2010), Tzeng, Huang and Sih (2013) and Teslin, Winkler and Tyzeng
(2015).
9 The proof of Merton and Samuelson showing the superiority of the RV(S) is intact only for the pure myopic
preference where A=0.
10 Generally, A and S are given as of fraction of the total available assets.
123

162
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
The structure of the rest of this paper is as follows: In section 2 we illustrate with a
simple example the distribution of the portfolios’ returns induced by adopting RV(S) and
alternatively by adopting the B&H(S). Section 3 is devoted to the M-V analysis of these two
alternative investment strategies. In section 4 we present the AFSD rule. Section 5 present
the AFSD empirical stocks -bonds portfolio results. Section 6 provides the B&H(S) and
RV(S) results corresponding to the general myopic preference. Section 7 concludes.
2 RV(S) and B&H(S): the distributions of return
In the example given below, we compare the distributions of return corresponding to the
B&H(S) and the RV(S). We illustrate with this example that no one investment strategy
dominates the other by M-V, by First and Second-degree Stochastic Dominance (FSD and
SSD, respectively). Levy (2023) provides mathematical proof that the RV(S) generally does
not dominate the B&H(S) by SSD, let alone byFSD.11 Regarding the M-V rule, we show
that the B&H(S) induces a larger mean and a larger variance than the RV(S). Moreover, while
with the RV(S), the portfolio’s returns are independent over time with the B&H(S), generally
positive correlation over time is created. Regarding the M-V rule, we ﬁrst illustrate these
results with the example and then mathematically generalize the results.
Example To focus on the difference between the RV(S) and B&H(S), we assume in the
following example that there are two mutual funds, identical in all respects apart from the
fact that one fund revises its portfolio every period and the other does not. Which fund is
preferred? Is there dominance of one fund over the other?
For simplicity, suppose that the funds’ portfolio consists only of two assets, say stock
and the riskless asset (similar results hold for two risky assets with different means and
variances). Furthermore, suppose that the one-period stock return (namely 1 + rate of return)
is either 1 or 5 with an equal probability12 and the riskless asset return is 2 with certainty.
Also, without loss of generality, assume that initially, each fund diversiﬁes equally between
these two assets. To illustrate the difference between RV(S) and B&H(S) it is sufﬁcient to
assume n=2 periods. The joint distribution of the return on the stock and the riskless asset in
the two- periods are given in Table 1. Table 1 also reports the end of period 1 distribution of
wealth needed for the employment of the RV(S).
The portfolio return at the end of the ﬁrst period, w1, is given by 1/2(return on stock) +
1/2(return on bond). We employ the end of ﬁrst-period wealth, w1, to calculate the investment
terminal wealth with revisions(RV(S)) at the end of the second period which is needed for
analyzing the dominant relationships of the two investment strategies under consideration.
The RV(S) distribution of terminal wealth is reported in Table 2.
Using the above ﬁgures, we can calculate the portfolio’s mean rate of return corresponding
to periods 1 and 2, respectively, and the covariance of the rates of return of the two periods.
Having the means,
⇀x1=1.5 and
⇀x2=1.5, we can calculate the covariance of the rates of return
on the portfolio in the two periods with RV(S),
11 As FSD ⇒SSD, the fact that there is no SSD implies that there is also no FSD, see Levy (1992). For
the deﬁnition of these rules, see footnote 13.
12 In this example, we selected unrealistically large returns simply to make the calculations more transparent
and to avoid the need to deal with very small numbers. However, the same results are intact also with relatively
small numbers, namely more realistic rates of return. In the empirical part we present these results with actual
rates of return on stocks and bonds.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
163
Table 1 The two-periods joint distribution of the return on stock and riskless asset
Probability
Period 1
Period 2
End of Period 1 Portfolio Return, w1 with equal
weights
Stocks
Bond
Stocks
Bonds
.25
1
2
1
2
1.5
.25
1
2
5
2
1.5
.25
5
2
1
2
3.5
.25
5
2
5
2
3.5
Table 2 The Portfolio’s Terminal Wealth and Rates of Return with Revisions RV(S)
Probability
Portfolio Terminal Wealth at the end
of period 2
Portfolio Rate of Return
First Period
Second Period
0.25
1.5[(1/2)1 + (1/2)2] = 2.25
(1.5 −1) = 0.5

2.25
1.5

−1 = 0.5
0.25
1.5[(1/2)5 + (1/2)2] = 5.25
(1.5 −1) = 0.5
(5.25/1.5)-1 = 2.5
0.25
3.5[(1/2)1 + (1/2)2] = 5.25
(3.5 −1) = 2.5
(5.25/3.5)-1 = 0.5
0.25
3.5[(1/2)5 + (1/2)2] = 12.25
(3.5 −1) = 2.5

12.25
3.5

−1 = 2.5
Cov (x1, x1) = .25(.5x.5 + .5x2.5 + 2.5x.5 + 2.5x2.5)-1.5 × 1.5 = 0.
This result is not surprising and always holds as long as the return on each asset is i.i.d
and one adheres to the RV(S) with constant weight, hence also the return on the portfolio is
i.i.d.
Note that in calculating the means and covariance corresponding to the RV(S) we employ
the one-period available returns or rates of return. However, to derive the covariance corre-
sponding to the B&H(S) we need ﬁrst to derive the rate of return corresponding to the second
period (see Eq. (1) below)). As the one-period return and the terminal wealth are given, one
can easily solve for the second-period rates of return.
Letusturntothecalculationoftheportfolio’sdistributionofterminalwealthandperiodical
rates of return with the B&H(S). With no revision, we have the distribution of terminal wealth
as reported in Table 3.
Table 3 The Portfolio Terminal
Wealth with B&H(S)
Probability
Terminal Wealth
.25
(1/2)(1)(1) + (1/2)(2)(2) = 2.5
.25
(1/2)(1)(5) + (1/2)(2)(2) = 4.5
.25
(1/2)(5)(1) + (1/2)(2)(2) = 4.5
.25
(1/2)(5)(5) + (1/2)(2)(2) = 14.5
.25
(1/2)(1)(1) + (1/2)(2)(2) = 2.5
123

164
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
Table 4 Solving for the Rate of Return in Period 2 Corresponding to the B&H(S)
Probability
Portfolio Return
Rates of Return
Period 1
(1 + R1)
Terminal Wealth
(1 + RT )
Period 2
(1 + R2)
Period 1
Period 2
.25
1.5
2.5
∼= 1.67
.5
.67
.25
1.5
4.5
3
.5
2
.25
3.5
4.5
∼= 1.29
2.5
.29
.25
3.5
14.5
∼= 4.14
2.5
3.14
The B&H(S) provides the distribution of the terminal wealth and not the rate of return
corresponding to each period. Therefore, to calculate for each period the portfolio’s rate of
return, which is needed to calculate the portfolio’s rates of return dependency over time, we
need to employ the following relationship,
(1 + R1)(1 + R2) = (1 + RT )
(1)
where R1 and R2 are the rates of return in periods 1 and 2, respectively, and (1 + RT ) is the
terminal wealth. Employing Eq. (1), and given R1 and RT that has been calculated above,
the portfolio rate of return in the second period, R2, is given by (1 + R2) = (1 + RT )/ (1 +
R1). In Table 4 we provide this calculation.
(see Eq. (1)).
As the investor’s goal is to maximize the expected utility deﬁned on terminal wealth,
to investigate which strategy (revise or not to revise) is optimal, one needs to compare
the terminal wealth distributions per initial one-dollar investment. However, to measure the
dependency of the portfolio’s returns in the two periods one needs to employ the distribution
of rates of return (or the distribution of return) corresponding to each period. For example,
if the wealth at the end of the ﬁrst period is $1.5, the return per one dollar of investment in
the second period is 2.5/1.5 = 1.67 and the corresponding rate of return is 0.67 (see Table 4).
Similarly, all rates of return given in Table 4 are calculated. Employing these one–period
portfolio’s rates of return, the mean rates of return are 1.5 and 1.275 in the ﬁrst and second
periods, respectively, hence the portfolio’s covariance in the two periods is given by,
Cov = 0.25(0.5 · 0.67 + 0.5 · 2 + 2.5 · 0.29 + 2.5 · 3.14) −1.5 · 1.275 = 0.565
Thus, with revisions, as expected, the covariance is zero, while with no revision the
rates of return in the two periods are dependent, in this speciﬁc case, positively correlated.
The intuitive explanation for the obtained positive correlation between the returns in the two
periods is that by the B&H(S), on average, when all events are taken into account, we increase
the investment weight in stocks that on average have larger returns than the return on bonds.
Thus, the portfolio returns tend to increase over time, hence the positive covariance.
Recalling that the investor’s goal is to maximize the expected utility of the terminal wealth,
in our example the terminal wealth given at the end of the second period, we turn to examine
more closely the difference in the terminal wealth distributions corresponding to the two
investment strategies.
Denote the terminal wealth distribution with revisions (RV(S)) by G. Distribution G is
given by: 2.25 and 12.25 with a probability of 0.25 each and 5.25 with a probability of 0.50
(see Table 2). Denote the distribution of the terminal wealth corresponding to the B&H(S)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
165
Fig. 1 The cumulative distribution of terminal wealth,F and G, n = 2 periods
by F with the following distribution of terminal wealth: 2.5 and 14.5 with a probability of
0.25 each and 4.5 with a probability of 0.50(see Table 3).
Figure 1 provides the two cumulative distributions of terminal wealth. As can be seen
from this Figure, distribution G cannot dominate F by FSD and by SSD as F has a higher
mean than G. However, also F does not dominate G by FSD as the two distributions cross.
Finally, F also does not dominate G by SSD because,
 5.25
2.25
[G(t) −F(t)]dt = (2.50 −2.25)x.25 −(5.25 −4.50).50 = −0.3125
This implies that no one investment strategy dominates the other by FSD and SSD.13
Other interesting results that emerge from the numerical example that are quite general
and will be shown to exist also with the stocks-bonds empirical data are the following:
a)
The minimum return of the B&H(S) (distribution F) is larger than the minimum return of
the RV(S) (distribution G). Thus,G cannot dominate F by FSD and SSD (for rigorous
proof of this claim, see Levy (2023)).
b) In the example, neither F nor G dominates the other either by FSD, by SSD, or by
M-V rules. Levy (2023) proved that in the general case, RV(S) does not dominate the
B&H(S) by SSD, a theoretical result that conforms with our example. However, as for
13 F dominates G by FSD if and only if F(x) ≤G(x) for all values x and there is at least one strict inequality,
where F and G are the cumulative distributions of the return on the two prospects under consideration. F
dominates G by SSD if and only if
 x
a[G(t) −F(t)]dt ≥0 for all value x and there is at leat one strict
inequality. For more details, see Hadar and Russell (1969), Hanoch and Levy (1969) and Levy (1992).
123

166
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
the pure myopic preference the RV(S) provides a larger expected utility than any other
investment strategy (see Merton and Samuelson (1974)), also F does not dominate G by
SSD. Therefore, both F and G, namely the B&H(S) and the RV(S), are included in the
SSD efﬁcient set, let alone the FSD efﬁcient set.
c)
In our example, the two distributions, F and G, intersect twice. Generally, they may
cross even more than twice.
d) Finally, in the above example we assume that both funds invest equally between the two
assets. However, the results are quite general, see M. Levy (2023).
3 The choice between the B&H(S) and RV(S) with the M-V rule:
a generalization
We ﬁnd with the above speciﬁc example that there is no M-V preference. We turn now to show
that the above M-V results are not speciﬁc to the employed numerical example as it always
holds.14 Speciﬁcally, for any selected one-period diversiﬁcation, the multi-period return of
the B&H(S) has a larger mean and larger variance than those of the return of the RV(S).
To see this claim let us turn to the general formulas for calculating the multi-period
portfolio’s mean and variance. We demonstrate the various formulas for the n=2 case but
the generalization to the n-period case is straightforward, hence the results are intact for any
horizon, n.
For the independence case, where the return in every period has the same distribution (as
exists with the RV(S)), Tobin (1965) provides the formula for the multi-period mean and
variance as a function of the one-period parameters. These multi-period parameters are not
intact for the B&H(S), a case where rates of return on the portfolio, as illustrated above,
are no longer independent over time. Let us elaborate on this theoretical argument with n=2
period case.
Denote the rate of return on the portfolio in periods 1 and 2, by R1 and R2, respectively.
The two-period return is given by (1+R1)(1 + R2). With revisions and i.i.d of the rate of
return over time of each asset, the two-period mean and variances of the portfolio’s return
(to distinguish from rates of return) are given by (see Tobin (1965))15
μ(2) = (μ(1))2
(2)
and
σ 2(2) = [σ 2(1) + (μ(1))2]2 −[(μ(1))2]2 = σ 4(1) + 2σ 2(1)(μ(1))2
(3)
where μ(1) stands for the one-period mean return and μ(2) stands for the two −
period mean return. Note that in the one-period portfolio selection, one can employ rates
of return or returns interchangeably, but in the multi-period case only mean and variance of
terminal wealth, namely of returns, are relevant.
14 The M-V rule theoretically cannot be optimal simultaneously both for one -and two periods as if the one
period return is normally distributed the two-period return cannot be normally distributed. However, the M-V
rule can serve as an approximation to expected utility as long as the range of returns is not too large, see Levy
and Markowitz (1984). Nevertheless, as the M-V rule is the most commonly employed investment rule it is
worthwhile analyzing its economic implications.
15 Denoting by (1+Rn) is the n periods terminal wealth of, Tobin (1965) proves that with i.i.d.,the following
hold,
μn = μn
1 and Var(1 + Rn) = [σ 2
1 + μ2
1]n −μ2n
1 ,where μ1 and σ 2
1 are the one –period mean and variance
of the return(1 + rate of return). For n = 2 these formulas reduce to Eq. (2) and (3) given in the text.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
167
Table 5 The arithmetic and geometric means, standard deviations, and skewness corresponding to the B&H
and RV(S) for various horizons
Horizons
(Years)
Arithmetic Mean
Geometric Mean
Std
Skewness
B&H
RV
B&H
RV
B&H
RV
B&H
RV
2
1.1776
1.1764
1.1660
1.1654
0.1636
0.1591
0.0844
0.0092
4
1.3868
1.3795
1.3571
1.3535
0.2895
0.2668
0.5072
0.3040
8
1.9414
1.8979
1.8457
1.8264
0.6409
0.5263
1.1100
0.6357
10
2.3140
2.2296
2.1584
2.1228
0.9156
0.7026
1.4225
0.7757
20
6.0489
5.1436
4.9641
4.6195
4.4905
2.4721
3.0523
1.4124
30
15.8349
11.0299
11.0002
9.3832
17.5478
6.6693
4.5865
1.8589
Let us rewrite μ = E(x),where x is the random one-period return on the selected portfolio.
Obviously, with i.i.d of each asset included in the portfolio, with revisions every period and
sticking to the same investment weights every period, the random variable x that denotes the
one-period return on the selected portfolio, is alsoi.i.d. Therefore, consistent with formula
(2) we have,
μ(2) = E(x1x2) = E(x1)E(x2
(4)
However, as explained above, when no revisions have taken place (the B&H(S)), the
portfolio returns x1andx2 in periods 1 and 2, respectively, are dependent even in the case
where the return on each asset is i.i.d.16 Thus, in the no-revision case, we have the following
relationship,
Cov(x1, x2) = E(x1x2) −E(x1)E(x2).
Hence,
E(x1x2) = E(x1)E(x2) + Cov(x1, x2)
(5)
and in the speciﬁc case where the two returns are independent Eq. (5) is reduced to Eq. (4) as
Cov(x1, x2) = 0. Assuming that stocks return, on average, is larger than bonds returns when
all possible joint outcomes are considered, the average investment weight in stocks with the
B&H(S), on average, increases over time, which in turn, on average, induces a larger return
on the held portfolio, hence the B&H(S) portfolio returns are generally positively correlated
over–time.17 Thus, due to the positive correlation, we obtain that the mean of the B&H(S) is
larger than the RV(S) mean (see Eq. (5)). Indeed, we empirically obtain that the mean return
of the B&H(S) is larger than the mean return of the RV(S), a result that conforms with the
assumed positive correlation of the return with the B&H(S), see Table 5 above. Thus, for
any selected one-period RV(S) diversiﬁcation, there is a B&H(S) portfolio with the same
one-period investment weights with a larger multi-period mean.
Let us turn to the formula of the multi-period (with n=2) variance. Denote as before the
portfolio rates returns in period 1 and period 2 by x1 and by x2. By deﬁnition,
Var(x1x2) = E

x2
1x2
2

−[E(x1x2)]2
(6)
16 Note that we employ the same random variable for the RV(S) and B&H(S). Thus we assume that for n=1
a given portfolio is selected by both investment strategies and the difference between the B&H(S) and RV(S)
occurs for n>1.
17 Of course, with any empirical study with relatively small number of observations a negative correlation
may be obtained.
123

168
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
But as,
E

x2
1x2
2

= Cov(x2
1, x2
2) + E

x2
1)E(x2
2

we obtain,
Var(x1x2) = E

x2
1)E(x2
2

−[E(x1x2)]2 + Cov(x2
1, x2
2)
(7)
This is the formula for the two-period variance corresponding to the B&H(S). Note that
if the portfolio returns in the two-period case are independent, as with the RV(S)), we have
that,
Cov(x1, x2)=0 and therefore also Cov( x2
1, x2
2) = 0
and also,
E(x1x2) = E(x1)E(x2)
and Eq. (7) reduces to,
Var(x1x2) =

Var (x1) + E

x2
1
 
Var(x2) + E

x2
2
 
−[E(x1)E(x2)]2
(7’)
and under the i.i.d assumption (namely, x1 and x2 are also identical and independent random
variables), the mean and variance in each period are respectively, identical, hence, Eq. (7’)
can be rewritten as,
Var(x1x2) = [Var(x1) + E

x2
1

]2 −[E(x1)]4
(7”)
or,
Var(x1x2) = [Var(x1)]2 + 2Var(x1)E

x2
1

which is exactly Tobin’s multi-period variance formula for the case n=2.Namely this is the
two-period variance of the RV(S) portfolio, see Eq. (3).18
Turning back to Eq. (7), note that the ﬁrst two terms on the right-hand side provide the
two- period portfolio’s variance with revisions. Thus, with no revision the variance increases
or decreases by the term Cov( x2
1, x2
2). As the non-negative returns on the portfolio in the two
periods with B&H(S) are positively correlated (see the numerical example and the empirical
evidence given below), also the correlation with a positive monotonic function is positive(
namely the correlation of x2
1 and x2
2) is positive. Thus, the portfolio’s multi-period variance
is larger with no revisions than with revision.
In sum, for any one-period selected diversiﬁcation by the RV(S), there is a B&H(S)
portfolio with the same one–period diversiﬁcation, leading to a multi-period portfolio with a
larger mean and larger variance than those parameters of multi-period RV(S) portfolio. For
the empirical ﬁndings that conform with this result, see Table 5.19
18 Note that Tobin (1965) provides a formula for the multi-period variance of return of a given asset with
i.i.d. This formula applies also for the return on a given portfolio with revisions where each asset included in
the portfolio is i.i.d, as in this case the portfolio’s rate of return (and return) are also i.i.d.
19 In the above argument it is assumed that the asset with the largest mean has also the largest variance, as in
the stocks-bonds portfolio. Otherwise it is not obvious that an increase in the investment weight in the asset
with the larger mean induces an increase the portfolio’s variance.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
169
4 The almost FSD(AFSD) rule: the B&H(S) dominates the RV(S)
in the very long run
To show the dominance of the B&H(S) by AFSD rule we need ﬁrst to introduce the ratio-
nale of this rule and explain why this investment rule is important in practice, as it ﬁts all
economically relevant preferences, albeit not all theoretical preferences.
Consider the following example: suppose that we have a very large sample of subjects
facing two alternative prospects: prospect G yielding $2 with certainty and prospect F yielding
$1 or $x with equal probability of 0.5, where x>$2. Every subject is asked what is the minimal
required value x such that she prefers F to G. If we take the largest x across all subjects,
it is obvious that F is preferred to G by all subjects included in the sample. Suppose that
in our large sample, we obtain that the largest value is x=$100. Figure 2 presents these
two hypothetical distributions, where F is preferred to G by all subjects. As the cumulative
distributions F and G cross, there is no FSD. It is easy to see that also there is no SSD.
Thus, one can always ﬁnd a legitimate theoretical utility function where G has a larger
expected utility than F. Is this utility function economically relevant? If our sample is large
enough and if this result repeats itself in other experiments, we claim that the theoretical utility
function revealing a preference for G is, in practice, irrelevant. All investors are willing to
ignore the relatively small FSD violation area denoted in Fig. 2 by A; it is small relative to the
relatively large x=$100 outcome. In other words, the utility function showing a preference for
G in the above example does not ﬁt the preference of any investor, hence it is economically
irrelevant.
Fig. 2 F Dominated G by AFSD
123

170
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
The ratio,
ε ≡A/(A + B)
(8)
is called the relative FSD violation area, where A and B are measured in absolute terms.
Leshno and Levy (2002) suggest the Almost ﬁrst degree Stochastic Dominance (AFSD)
rule that allows some small FSD violation area as shown in Fig. 2. Thus, the dominance is not
for all theoretical utility functions but for all economically relevant utility functions, where
any theoretical utility function that is not included in the empirically relevant set, simply does
not ﬁt in practice the preference of any investor.
But how this ε is determined? Levy, Leshno, and Liebovitz (2010) (LL&L) conducted
an experiment where the subjects face F and G similar to the ones given in Fig. 2, showing
that if ε < 5.9% there is AFSD even though there is no FSD, as with such FSD violation
area all subjects choose F rather than G. LL&L had a sample of 400 subjects composed from
various groups, business school students, medical students as well as investment consultants.
It is possible that with another sample we would obtain a little different value ε, but the
AFSD principle is intact; there is always a very large x (say, one million dollars) such that
all subjects would prefer F to G. In such case, we have AFSD but not FSD, concluding
that all utility functions revealing a preference for G, are theoretically legitimate but are
economically irrelevant. We will employ this AFSD rule in the rest of the paper.
Proposition 1 Suppose that F is the asset with the largest arithmetic mean and G is another
asset or a portfolio that the investor considers. Then, for the very long run, F dominates G
by the AFSD rule as limn→∞εn = 0, much smaller than the allowed FSD violation area
observed in the experiment. Thus, in the very long run, if the means are known, specialization
is optimal (dominates any other possible diversiﬁcation policy) for all economically relevant
utility functions.
For the speciﬁc comparison of the B&H(S) and RV(S), the B&H(S) dominates in the long
run as it has a larger mean. For proof, see Appendix A.
Note that we need n to approach inﬁnity to prove this result, a drawback for all investments
in practice, as investors invest for a ﬁnite period. However, as the allowed FSD violation
area εn, albeit very small, is found to be experimentally positive, the AFSD is obtained in
practice for a ﬁnite n. Indeed, we will show empirically in the comparison of the B&H(S)
and RV(S) regarding the stocks-bonds portfolios that for ﬁnite n the relative FSD violation
area decreases sharply and monotonically with n, reaching much less than 5.9% for realistic
ﬁnite horizon, n>20 years, revealing a dominance of the B&H(S) over the RV(S) by AFSD
in practice.
Finally, note that by proposition 1 the asset with the largest mean dominates all portfolios
and individual assets in the very long run. However, if the horizon is long but not long enough,
we may have a situation where the asset with the largest mean does not dominate the held
portfolio. However, for a long but ﬁnite horizon, the B&H(S) may dominate the RV(S) if
the FSD violation area is relatively small, say, ε < 5.9%. Nevertheless, as explained above
we assume that the same one-period portfolio is held and we investigate only one issue: is it
better to revise or not to revise the portfolio every period?
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
171
5 The empirical results: B&H(S) and RV(S) with portfolio of stocks
and bonds
5.1 Data and methodology
We employ the annual return of stocks (S&P 500 stock index) and of 10-year Treasury bonds
for the period 1928–2022. For n=1 we simply employ the historical rates of return. For n>1
we employ the bootstrapping approach as explained below.
5.1.1 The B&H terminal wealth
For n=2, we draw two years at random from the historical data and calculate the two-year
horizon return of stocks and bonds by the products R1R2(s) and R1R2(b), respectively, where
R1 and R2 stand for the returns (namely 1 + rate of return) in the ﬁrst and second years that
are drawn randomly from the data, and s and b stand for stocks and bonds. Note that as
we draw years, we obtain the returns on stocks and bonds for the same year, therefore the
correlations between stocks and bonds are considered. We repeat this procedure 100,000
times to obtain the estimate of the two-year distribution of terminal wealth of stocks and
bonds. As we assume an equal investment weight in each asset the buy and hold terminal
wealth for two years horizons is simply w2 =1/2 R1R2(s) + 1/2R1R2(b). We have 100,000
observations of this terminal wealth providing the distribution of return for the two-year
investment horizon corresponding to the B&H(S). By the same procedure, we construct the
B&H(S) distribution of terminal wealth corresponding to longer than two years’ horizons.
5.1.2 The RV(S) terminal wealth
As before we draw one- year obtaining the return on stocks and bonds for this year. Then
we calculate the one-year portfolio return by investing equally between stocks and bonds.
Thus, the ﬁrst-year terminal wealth is given by w1 =1/2 R1(s) + 1/2 R1(b). Then we draw a
second year at random and invest 1/2 w1 in stocks and 1/2 w1 and bonds. Therefore, the end
of the second-year terminal wealth with revisions is given by,
w2 = 1
2w1R2(s) + 1
2w1R2(b)
(9)
We repeat this procedure 100,000 to obtain the two-year terminal wealth distribution with
revisions. Similarly, we calculate the distributions of the RV(S) terminal wealth for various
horizons.
5.2 The empirical results
The ﬁrst three central moments and the geometric mean corresponding to the two investment
strategies, for various horizons are reported in Table 5.
By construction all these parameters for n=1 are identical for both B&H(S) and RV(S),
hence are not reported in Table 5. As we can see from this table, for all horizons n>1, the
means, the standard deviations and the skewness of the distribution of returns corresponding
to the B&H(S) are larger than these parameters corresponding to the RV(S). This phenomenon
is because on average we invest more in stocks than in bonds by the B&H(S) relative to the
123

172
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
Fig. 3 The cumulative distributions of the return on the B&H(S) and RV(S) portfolios, respectively, for various
horizons
RV(S), and stocks are more proﬁtable and riskier than bonds.20 Thus, as theoretically proved,
there is no empirical dominance of one investment strategy over the other by the M-V rule.
Drawing the cumulative distributions of the return corresponding to the B&H(S) and
RV(S), we ﬁnd that there is no FSD as the two distributions cross.21 The next interesting
question is whether there is a dominance by AFSD and for what horizons such dominance
is obtained.
Figure 3 presents the cumulative distributions of the terminal wealth corresponding to
B&H(S) and the RV(S) for various horizons, where initially $1 investment is divided equally
between stocks and bonds. As n increases the investment weight in stocks by the B&H(S)
generally increases, hence it is above 0.5.
First note that the B&H(S) distribution crosses the RV(S) distribution from below and as it
has a larger mean it may dominate the RV(S) by AFSD for relatively large n (see Proposition
20 Arditti and Levy (1975) prove that the larger the mean and the larger the variance, the larger the skewness
which explains why the B&H(S) has a larger skewness than the RV(S).
21 Recall that First degree Stochastic Dominance of F over G holds if and only if F(x) ≤G(x) for all values
x and there is at least one strict inequality, where F and G stand for the cumulative distributions of the returns
on the two prospect under consideration. As we can see from Fig. 3 this condition does not hold, hence there
is no FSD,
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
173
Table 6 The Empirical Obtained Violation Term ε for the Stocks-Bonds Portfolios for Various Horizons
Horizons (Years)
2
4
8
10
20
30
ε
33%
23.8%
20.5%
16.3%
5.6%
2.7%
1). As we have on the horizontal axis log –return rather than return22 the distributions given
in Fig. 3 are relatively close to each other, and the distance between the two distributions
is much larger with returns. The two cumulative distributions cross more than once and the
minimum return of the B&H(S) is larger than the minimum return of the RV(S), but due to
the condensed scale, it is not transparent on the graph. Indeed, M. Levy (2023) proved that
this phenomenon is always true and not limited to the speciﬁc data we employ.
Table 6 reports, the relative FSD violation area ε for various horizons. As expected this
term decreases with the horizon, reaching 5.6% for n-20 years and only 2.7% for n=30 years.
As the allowed FSD violation area as obtained in the experiment is about 5.9% (see LL&L,
2010)23 we obtain that for n>20 years that the B&H(S) dominates the RV(S) by the AFSD
rule24.
Thus, for all economically relevant utility functions and the long run (n>20 years) the
B&H(S) dominates the RV(S). For a horizon smaller than 20 years such dominance does not
exist and both strategies are efﬁcient also by the AFSD rule.
6 The preferences by the general myopic utility as a function of the risk
aversion parameter and the horizon
For the pure myopic preference of the form U(w) = w1−α/(1 −α) with the i.i.d. assump-
tion, it is well known that the RV(S) provides a larger expected utility than any other
investment strategy, see Merton and Samuelson (1974). Indeed, this is what we obtain
with the stocks-bonds data (not reported here). In this section, we compare the expected
utility of the B&H(S) and the RV(S) for the general myopic utility function of the form
U(w + A) = (w + A)1−α/(1 −α), where A>0 and for the utility function suggested by
Samuelson(1989) with S = A=-0.2, for various risk aversion parameters,α, and various
horizons, n.25
The procedure for the comparison of the B&H(S) and RV(S) is as follows: ﬁrst, for
a given α and n=1, we solve for the optimal empirical diversiﬁcation between stocks and
bonds corresponding to the selected utility function. Obviously, for n=1 there is no difference
between the B&H(S) and the RV(S). Having these optimal investment weights, we draw a
sample of years and as before construct the multi-period distributions of terminal wealth for
various n, once by revising the investment weights every year to the same optimal one-period
weights (the RV(S)), and once we do not revise the portfolio, and simply accumulate the
22 We employ log-return because with returns the numbers are very large and the Figures is not transparent.
23 For studies that employ the AFSD, see Bali, Demirtas, Levy and Wolf (2009) and M. Levy (2009)).
24 Note that in the AFSD experiment we deal with reasonable outcomes, normally rates of return on ﬁnancial
assets as presented in Fig. 3. With a lottery with very large numbers (e.g., $106 and $1010) one may establish
a situation where the choice is not according to what expected by the AFSD rule.
25 Generally, A and S are given as a fraction of the wealth w. In the empirical study reported in this section it
is assumed that w = $1.
123

174
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
Table 7 The Investment Strategy with the Largest Expected Utility
Horizon( years)
α = .5
α = 1
α = 1.5
α = 2
α = 5
a) For the utility function U(w) = (1 + w)1−α/(1 −α)(A = 1)
2
RV
B&H
RV
B&H
RV
4
RV
RV
B&H
B&H
RV
8
RV
B&H
B&H
RV
RV
10
RV
B&H
B&H
B&H
RV
20
RV
B&H
B&H
RV
RV
30
B&H
B&H
B&H
RV
RV
b) For the Utility Function U(w) = (w −.2)1−α/(1 −α)(S = -.2)
2
RV
RV
B&H
RV
RV
4
RV
RV
B&H
RV
RV
8
B&H
RV
B&H
RV
RV
10
B&H
RV
B&H
RV
RV
20
B&H
RV
B&H
B&H
RV
30
B&H
RV
B&H
RV
RV
multi-period return as recommended by the B&H(S). For every horizon, n, we repeat this
procedure 100,000, calculate the utility of each of the 100,000 observations and the average
of all these results provides the estimated expected utility. In this way, we calculate the
expected utility of the general myopic preferences corresponding to the B&H(S) and RV(S),
respectively.
Table 7 provides the results for n > 2. The winning investment strategy as a function of
the risk aversion parameter α and the horizon, n, for two general myopic utility functions are
written in the table.
For both S= −0.2 and A=1, there is no clear preference for one investment strategy
over the other. However, for relatively large α =5 (that may be economically irrelevant) the
RV(S) provides a larger expected utility than the B&H(S), even though the B&H(S) provides
a larger mean return. This preference of the RV(S) may be due to the fact that with the
B&H(S), on average, more is invested in stocks, hence relatively large returns characterize
this investment strategy. As the marginal utility is declining with wealth and the larger α the
smaller the marginal utility, the contributions of these large returns to the B&H(S) expected
utility become relatively small for large α. 26
26 Denote the distribution of return corresponding to the B&H(S) by F and the one corresponding to
the RV(S) by G. Then, F provides a larger expected utility than G if the following condition holds,
 b
a[G(x) −F(x)]U′(x)dx > 0. As n increases F has more large outcome exceeding the outcomes ofG.
With risk aversion, the larger α the smaller U′ ,therefore, the chance that for a given n F provides a larger
expected utility than G decreases with α. M.Levy (2023) compares the B&H(S) and the RV(S) with stocks
and the riskless asset, short term three-months Treasury bills with the myopic preference with A = S=-.2. He
reports that for this function, the larger n, the larger the accepted α such that F provides a larger expected
utility than G.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
175
7 Discussion
In Table 7 we compare the B&H(S) with the RV(S) with no clear-cut preference. Therefore,
in cases where the horizon is smaller than 20 years, we have no conﬂicting results between
those presented in Tables 6 and 7, as both strategies are included in the AFSD efﬁcient
set. However, for n>20 years, a conﬂict arises by the results presented above. In Table 6
the B&H(S) dominates the RV(S) and in Table 7 such dominance does not exist. These
conﬂicting results may have two possible interpretations: either that a horizon of 20 years or
longer (including a possible emergency need for asset liquidation) is irrelevant as virtually
all investment horizons are shorter than that, or that the above utility functions simply do
not ﬁt the preference of investors in practice. The second interpretation implies that general
myopic preferences with A = −.2 andA = 1, let alone with A = 0, are economically
irrelevant as they reveal in some cases a preference for the RV(S) in contradiction to the
AFSD rule revealing a preference for the B&H(S) for all economically relevant preferences.
Finally, note that one strategy may dominate the other by the Sharpe ratio but such result is
economically irrelevant as the mean–variance rule does not conform with expected utility
for horizons longer than one year, see Levy and Markowitz (1979).
8 Concluding remarks
In this study, we assume that the investor holds a given diversiﬁed portfolio and analyze
whether it is optimal to revise the portfolio every year (the RV(S)) or simply to hold it for
n-years (the B&H(S)). Other investment strategies that may be even better than these two
investment strategies are not considered. We analyze the pros and cons of these two multi-
period investment strategies as a function of the degree of risk aversion , α, and the planned
investment horizon, n.
By Stochastic Dominance (SD) rules there is no dominance of one investment strategy
over the other, and the optimal choice depends on the individual’s preference and the planned
investment horizon.
For the same one-period diversiﬁcation between stocks and bonds by both investment
strategies, the multi-period mean and variance of the B&H(S) are larger than the correspond-
ing RV(S) parameters. Moreover, this result is intact for any set of assets and is not limited
to the stocks-bonds portfolio. Thus, there is no dominance also by the M-V rule. Yet, recall
that the M-V rule and the Sharpe ratio generally do not conform with the expected utility
paradigm for a horizon longer than one year.
For the general myopic utility function and with the stocks-bonds empirical data there are
also ranges of risk aversion parameter α and horizon, n, where the B&H(S) is preferred and
there are some ranges of these parameters where the RV(S) is preferred. Thus, also with the
general myopic utility functions there is no clear preference of one investment strategy over
the other.
The main results of this study refer to the relatively long horizons and the indeﬁnitely long
horizon, respectively. For the long horizon, we distinguish between all legitimate theoretical
utility functions and all economically relevant utility functions. For all theoretical utility
functions, as before, there is no dominance of one strategy over the other by the First-degree
StochasticDominance(FSD)ruleandtheoptimalchoice,onceagain,dependsontheassumed
utility function and the assumed investment horizon. However, for all economically relevant
utility functions, the B&H(S)(with the larger mean) dominates the RV(S) by the Almost FSD
123

176
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
rule (AFSD) in the case where n is indeﬁnitely large. However, even more important, in
practice, with the stocks-bonds portfolio, the B&H(S) empirically dominates the RV(S) by
the AFSD rule, namely for all economically relevant preferences, even for a ﬁnite horizon
as long as n>20 years.
As by the AFSD rule, for n>20 years, the B&H(S) dominates the RV(S) for all economi-
cally relevant utility functions, and for such long horizons for the general myopic preference,
let alone the pure myopic preference, such dominance does not exist, we have a conﬂict-
ing result. There are two possible interpretations for this contradictory result: either that for
virtually all investors the investment horizon (including a possible emergency need to liq-
uidate the investment relatively early) is shorter than 20 years, or that the general myopic
utility functions, let alone the pure myopic utility functions, simply do not ﬁt the investors’
preference in practice.
Appendix A: Proof of Proposition 1
Proof27 We refer in this proof to the B&H(S) portfolio (denoted by F) and the RV(S) portfolio
(denoted by G), where the B&H(S) has a larger multi-period mean28.
Given two cumulative distributions where the mean of F is larger than the mean of G, we
have,
 ≡EF(x) −EG(x) =
 +∞
−∞
[G(x) −F(x)]dx > 0
(10)
(see Hanoch and Levy (1969)),where F and G are the cumulative distributions of the two
prospects under consideration. Therefore, regarding the n-period difference in the means of
the B&H(S) and the RV(S), we have,
n ≡(E F)n −(EG)n =
 +∞
−∞
[Gn(x) −Fn(x)]dx > 0
(11)
where Gn(x) and Fn(x) are the two cumulative n-period distributions of return on the two
prospects, respectively.
Denote the area enclosed between the two distributions where Gn(x) is located below
Fn(x) by An (the FSD- violation area) and the area enclosed between the two distributions
where it is located above Fn(x) by Bn.By deﬁnition, An must be smaller thanBn, because by
assumption n is positive. The difference in the n-period expected return of the two prospects
is given by,
n ≡(EF)n −(EG)n = Bn −An > 0
(12)
27 This proof suggested to me by M. Levy.
28 Due to the positive correlation of the return corresponding to the B&H(S), the expected B&H(S) portfolio
terminal wealth is larger than the expected RV(S) portfolio terminal wealth for all n>1. Denoting the annual
means of the two investment strategies that by compounding leads to the expected terminal wealth by EF
andEG, respectively, we have that EF > EG for all n>1. For the RV(S), as we have that the return on the
portfolio isi.i.d., therefore the terminal wealth is given by (EG)n where EG is the one-period mean that is
constant, namely it does not change with the assumed horizon. However, with the B&H(S), as the expected
terminal wealth grows also due to the increase in the stocks weight in the portfolio, for each n we have a
different EF, and the larger n, larger the annual mean leading to the corresponding expected terminal wealth.
Nevertheless, what is essential for our proof is that for each n we have EF > EG that exists for all n>1.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
177
Fig. 4 The Cumulative Multi-Period Distributions Fn and Gn
Both (EF)n and (EG)n grow exponentially with n, but as the mean of F is larger than the
mean of G, the mean of F grows faster than the mean of G with n. Therefore,
limitn→∞n = ∞
(13)
Figure 4 illustrates a case where the two multi-period distributions intersect and Fn with
the larger mean dominates Gn in the long run by AFSD, as claimed by Proposition 1) but
not by FSD. Let us prove this claim.
First note that εn ≡An/(Bn + An) ≥0. We prove below that as n →∞that.
εn ≤0, therefore we conclude that εn must be equal to zero in the very long run.
By deﬁnition we have, (EG)n =

xgn(x)dx =

[1 −Gn(x)]dx ≡A∗, see Figure 4.
As An ≤A∗(see Figure 4), we have.
εn ≡An/(Bn + An) ≤A∗/(Bn + An) ≤A∗/(Bn −An) = En
G/(En
F −En
G).
Dividing all terms by En
G we ﬁnally obtained,
limitn→∞= 1/(En
F/En
G −1) →0 as limitn→∞(En
F/En
G) →∞
which completes the proof.
Acknowledgements Harry and I were very close friends. We met with our wives in Israel, the U.S., and
England. We coauthored two papers. I have learned from him a lot about how to conduct research, but more
importantly, I hope, how to be modest and a better human being.
Funding Open access funding provided by Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
123

178
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The author certiﬁes that he has no afﬁliations with or involvement in any organization or
entity with any ﬁnancial interest or non-ﬁnancial interest in the subject matter or materials discussed in this
manuscript.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Arditti, F., & Levy, H. (1975). Portfolio efﬁciency analysis in three moments: The multipored case. The Journal
of Finance, 30, 797–809.
Arnott, R. D., & Lovell, R. D. (1993). Rebalancing: Why? When? How Often? The Journal of Investing, 2(1),
5–10.
Bali, T. G., Demirtas, K. O., Levy, H., & Wolf, A. (2009). Bonds versus stocks: Investors’ age and risk-taking.
Journal of Monetary Economics, 56(6), 817–830.
Beer, B, (2020) “What Is Buy and Hold? How the Investing Strategy Works? Investopedia,
Calvet, L. E., Campbell, J. Y., & Sodini, P. (2009). Fight or ﬂight? Portfolio rebalancing by individual investors.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(1), 301–348.
Fabozzi, F. J., Kolm, P. N., Pachamanova, D. A., & Focardi, S. M. (2007). Robust portfolio optimization.
Journal of Portfolio Management, 33(3), 40–48.
Hadar, J., & Russell, W. R. (1969). Rules for ordering uncertain prospects. The American Economic Review,
59(1), 25–34.
Hanoch, G., & Levy, H. (1969). The Efﬁciency Analysis of Choices Involving Risk. The Review of Economic
Studies, 36(3), 335–346.
Latané, H. A. (1959). Criteria for choice among risky ventures. Journal of Political Economy, 67(2), 144–155.
Leland, H. E. (1996). Optimal asset rebalancing in the presence of transaction costs. University of California,
Berkeley.
Leshno, M., & Levy, H. (2002). Preferred by “all” and preferred by “most” decision makers: Almost stochastic
dominance. Management Science, 48(8), 1074–1085.
Levy, H. (1992). Stochastic dominance and expected utility: Survey and analysis. Management Science, 38(4),
555–593.
Levy, M. (2009). Almost stochastic dominance and stocks for the long run. European Journal of Operational
Research, 194(1), 250–257.
Levy, H. (2016). Stochastic Dominance. Springer.
Levy, M. (2023). Does constant asset allocation dominate buy-and-hold? Forthcoming. Finance Research
Letters., 62, 105207.
Levy, H., & Levy, M. (2021). The cost of diversiﬁcation over time, and a simple way to improve target-date
funds. Journal of Banking & Finance, 122, 105995.
Levy, M., & Roll, R. (2023). The shrinkage adjusted sharpe ratio: An improved method for mutual funds
selection. The Journal of Investing, 32(2), 7–23.
Levy, H., Leshno, M., & Leibovitch, B. (2010). Economically relevant preferences for all observed epsilon.
Annals of Operation Research, 176, 153–178.
Levy. and Markowitz, H.M. (1979). Approximating Expected Utility by a Function of Mean and Variance.
The American Economic Review, 69(3), 308–317.
Lintner, J. (2012). Security prices, risk, and maximal gain from diversiﬁcation. The Journal of Finance, 20(4),
587–615.
Markowitz, H. M. (1952). Portfolio selection. The Journal of Finance, 7(1), 77–91.
Markowitz, H. M. (1976). Investment for the long run: new evidence for an old rule. Journal of Finance, 31(5),
1273–1286.
Markowitz, H. M. (2010). World Scientiﬁc. Selected Works.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:157–179
179
Merton, R. C. (1969). Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: The continuous-time case. The Review
of Economics and Statistics, 51, 247–257.
Merton, R. (1990). Continuous-Time Finance. Blackwell.
Merton., and Samuelson, P.,. (1974). Fallacy of the log-normal approximation of optimal portfolio decision-
making over many periods. Journal of Financial Economics, 1, 69–94.
Mossin, J. (1966). Equilibrium in a Capital Asset Market. Econometrica, 34(4), 768–783.
Pástor, ˇL, & Stambaugh, R. F. (2012). Are stocks really less volatile in the long run? The Journal of Finance,
67(2), 431–478.
Samuelson, P., 1989.A case at last for age–phased reduction in equity. Proc.Natl. Acad.Sci. 86, pp.9048–9051.
Sharpe, W. F. (1964). Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium Under Conditions of Risk. Journal
of Finance, 19(3), 425–442.
Sharpe, W. F. 1987, "An Algorithm for Portfolio Improvement", in K.D. Lawrence, J. B. Guerard, Jr., and Gary
D. Reeves, Editors, Advancesin Mathematical Programming and Financial Planning, JAI Press, Inc.,
pp. 155–170. Reprinted in William F. Sharpe: Selected Works (Singapore: World Scientiﬁc Publishing Co.
Ptc Ltd. 2012).
Siegel, J. J. (2014). Stocks for the long run: The deﬁnitive guide to ﬁnancial market returns and long-term
investment strategies. McGraw-Hill.
Tobin, J,1965. “The Theory of Portfolio Selection”, in F.Y. Hahn and F.P. Brechling, eds. The Theory of Interest
Rates, London
Tsetlin, I., Winkler, R. L., Huang, R. J., & Tzeng, L. Y. (2015). Generalized almost stochastic dominance.
Operations Research, 63(2), 363–377.
Tzeng, L. Y., Huang, R. J., & Shih, P. T. (2013). Revisiting almost second-degree stochastic dominance.
Management Science, 59(5), 1250–1254.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123