TITLE: Active guidance systems in maritime evacuations: optimizing the lifeboat allocation for cruise ships
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06467-1
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06467-1
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Active guidance systems in maritime evacuations: optimizing
the lifeboat allocation for cruise ships
Andres Velez1
· Stein W. Wallace1
Received: 6 July 2023 / Accepted: 30 December 2024
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
We study the evacuation of large cruise vessels under hazardous conditions. Based on a new
sensor mesh technology, allowing wireless two-way communication also when electricity
is lost, we propose an optimization-based procedure that provides real-time guidance to
passengers. As a ﬁrst step, we explore a lifeboat assignment procedure to illustrate some of
the aspects linked to pedestrian evacuations on vessels and open the discussion for future
work using operations research in a context where human behavior is part of the problem.
Keywords Onboard safety · Guidance system · Wireless communication · Lifeboat
assignment · Network ﬂows
1 Introduction
Before the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, the cruise industry was experiencing a
steady rise in the number of passengers, reaching a total of 29 million worldwide in 2019
(CLIA, 2022). Since its start in the 1970s, it has generated over 160 million passenger
movements in world cruise ports (Notteboom & Pallis, 2022). Despite the challenges faced
in 2020, it is predicted that 74 percent of the ﬂeet will be back in operation in the coming
years. By late 2022, it became evident that the decline in cruise ship operations was only
temporary. Cruise companies around the world have resumed their activities and are gradually
returning to pre-pandemic levels. Several cruise operators are also expecting further growth
in hosted activities, reafﬁrming the cruise industry’s role as a signiﬁcant contributor to the
global economy (Pallis et al., 2022).
As the cruise industry grows in size and complexity, so too do the safety challenges faced
by both passengers and crew members, particularly when managing large-scale evacuations
in emergency situations (MIG, 2021). Since 2005, there have been 448 signiﬁcant accidents
involving cruise ships, with ﬁre being one of the primary safety concerns. As ships become
larger and more complex, passengers often struggle to familiarize themselves with the facil-
ities in the short time they are on board. For example, the average cruise length in 2021 was
B Stein W. Wallace
stein.wallace@nhh.no
Andres Velez
andres.correa@nhh.no
1
Department of Business and Management Science, NHH Norwegian School of Economics, Bergen,
Norway
123

Annals of Operations Research
6.6 days, although in certain markets like Asia, this can be as short as 2–3 days (CLIA, 2021).
This limited exposure means that many travelers may not be sufﬁciently acquainted with the
ship’s layout or the evacuation paths in the event of a disaster. Additionally, many corridors
on board look identical, increasing the risk of confusion during an emergency. These factors
highlight the need for a ﬂexible and reliable evacuation guidance system to provide real-time
information to passengers during emergencies, helping them navigate safely.
A critical requirement for such a guidance system is two-way communication on board-
retrieving real-world data and providing valuable feedback to passengers. Traditional wired
communication systems, while reliable under normal conditions, present signiﬁcant chal-
lenges during a disaster. They can be disrupted by ﬁre, depend on the ship’s power supply,
and are expensive to install and maintain. This makes them unsuitable for disaster scenarios
where quick and dynamic responses are necessary. Fortunately, recent advancements in wire-
less communication, particularly sensor mesh technologies, have made it feasible to provide
real-time, robust communication in steel-conﬁned environments like cruise ships. Companies
such as ScanReach in Norway have pioneered these technologies, overcoming the physical
limitations that previously hindered data transmission through metallic surfaces (Luo, 2019).
This opens the door for operations research (OR) tools to play a key role in active evacuation
guidance.
While the technology to support real-time communication on cruise ships is now avail-
able, the literature on real-time optimization for evacuation management remains sparse. We
propose that this gap may be attributed to previous technological limitations that made the
problem less appealing to the research community. With the development of sensor mesh
technology, it is now possible to explore optimization-based systems capable of guiding
passengers during a disaster in real time. From a mathematical programming perspective,
optimization emerges as a powerful tool for generating high-quality solutions quickly during
emergencies.
Under the premise that sensor mesh technology is available, this paper outlines an
optimization-based approach that could support the guidance of passengers to their des-
ignated evacuation points in real time. Given the complexity of the evacuation problem, we
divide our approach into two key components: determining an initial lifeboat assignment
for passengers and providing active guidance throughout the evacuation. It is important to
emphasize that this study does not aim to offer a fully developed evacuation system. Instead,
we address a speciﬁc aspect of the problem-the assignment process-which has received little
attention in the OR literature. By focusing on this element, we hope to raise awareness of
its importance and encourage further research into real-time evacuation strategies. Our work
should be viewed as a potential resource for developing rules or strategies that could be
tested using sophisticated simulation tools. Traditional methods for generating evacuation
routes often rely on predetermined rules, behavioral patterns, or pathﬁnding algorithms such
as Dijkstra or A* (Heppenstall et al., 2011). Pathﬁnding algorithms typically do not account
for real-time factors like congestion during the initial stages of the evacuation process. These
factors are considered later, during the simulation.
This division of the problem aligns with the disaster management phases outlined by
Southworth (1991) and Tuydes (2005), who emphasize the need for (1) determining evacua-
tion zones, (2) deﬁning destinations for evacuees, and (3) allocating evacuation routes. In our
approach, the initial lifeboat assignment directly corresponds to the second phase, ensuring
that every passenger is assigned a safe destination, while the active guidance provided dur-
ing the evacuation addresses the third phase by dynamically allocating and adjusting routes
based on real-time data. The ﬁrst phase, determining the zones to be evacuated, is implic-
itly handled through the installation of a sensor mesh network, which monitors passengers’
123

Annals of Operations Research
locations throughout the ship. By applying OR tools, we aim to provide the ﬂexibility that
current evacuation protocols-such as static guidelines posted on walls-cannot offer.
Various emergencies can occur on board, highlighting the importance of adaptable evacu-
ation systems. For instance, in 2019, the Viking Sky cruise ship suffered an engine shutdown
and had to make an emergency stop at Hustadvika, a treacherous sea region off the coast
of Norway. Strong winds and waves prevented the launch of lifeboats, and the evacuation
had to be carried out by helicopter. In other situations, passengers may not be able to follow
standard evacuation paths due to obstructions, or they may ﬁnd that their assigned lifeboat is
already full. These unpredictable factors demonstrate the need for a system that can dynam-
ically assign passengers to evacuation points based on real-time conditions and passengers’
locations.
In the ﬁeld of evacuation management, sophisticated techniques, such as simulations,
have been developed to recreate crowd behavior during emergencies. These simulations
consider factors like individual interactions, stress responses, visibility, and herd behavior,
among others. Simulations are primarily used to test the performance of predeﬁned rules or
policies-whether driven by pathﬁnding algorithms, behavioral rules, or existing regulations.
Simulation optimization, on the other hand, can iteratively search for optimal solutions by
adjusting strategies based on simulation outputs. Yet, even this approach can face limitations
in real-time scenarios due to the complexity of mimicking dynamic and evolving situations
in a reasonable time. Our model, though still in an early stage, aims to address this by gener-
ating an initial evacuation plan that can be continuously adapted as circumstances evolve. It
accounts for congestion and a heterogeneous population, but more advanced considerations-
such as time dynamics-will be explored in future work. We view this model as an initial
framework that can be tested and reﬁned using sophisticated simulation tools developed by
experts in the ﬁeld, ultimately contributing to more effective evacuation strategies in real-
world scenarios.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Sect.2 discusses the technical sup-
port and ship geometry. Section3 details the active guidance system. Section4 presents the
modeling of the assignment procedure. Section5 presents the modeling of the ﬂow decom-
position. Section6 provides a case study. Section7 presents the results of the study. Finally,
Sect.8 summarizes the ﬁndings offering conclusions and an outlook for future research.
2 Technical support and ship geometry
2.1 Technical support
As already stated, the feasibility of wireless transmission of data is a necessary technical
premise for guiding evacuations on ships. One of these developments is presented by the Nor-
wegian company ScanReach, which commercializes a sensor mesh technology that enables
wireless data transfer in steel-conﬁned environments. This is a technology that provides
instant personnel control during emergencies on ships (ScanReach, 2023). To achieve this, a
special wristband carrying an intelligent chip is worn by each passenger, this chip can detect
various passenger conditions, including body temperature, subtle movements, and falls. The
wristband chip’s movement detection feature can distinguish between a regular fall and a
fall downstairs based on the number of meters the chip has fallen. The movement detection
function can also identify passengers trapped in a room or unable to move by themselves.
123

Annals of Operations Research
In addition to wristbands, several sensors must be installed in each room and corridor
to locate and track individually each passenger in real-time. The sensors use low-frequency
wireless signals to communicate with each other, collect the data, and transfer it to a central
processing unit. They can be plugged into normal power sockets, and in the event of power
outages, there is a battery backup that can last for up to 36h. This technology has so far found
application on small vessels allowing for the precise and immediate involvement of rescue
teams, but it is possible to scale it for larger vessels since this technology is suitable for any
type of vessel or maritime environment.
Thesensorsaredesignedforeasyinstallation,allowingthemeshtobedeployedonexisting
vessels. The mesh network facilitates data transmission collected by various sensors utilizing
established industry protocols like Modbus, NMEA, and Bluetooth (ScanReach, 2023), con-
tinuously monitoring changes in room temperature, smoke levels, passenger location, and
other pertinent information. This data is then transmitted to an API, enabling exportation for
its use in third-party applications, such as optimization software. Also, the mesh node and
infrastructure have been certiﬁed by DNV, and more recently received Quality Assurance
Notiﬁcation (QAN) under ATEX; this certiﬁcation (or ‘Ex-cert’) covers both the product and
its manufacturing process.
One major concern about the applicability of this technology is whether or not it is legal
to track passengers during their trips using wristbands. However, after the health crisis cruise
companies have started to implement contact tracing systems on their ships. Royal Caribbean
International has, in recent years, introduced a wearable called Tracelet. This device is used
to keep a register of the places the passengers were and the people they were in contact with,
such information will be used in the event of an onboard health concern. But this is not the
only use of the wearable, it can be also used as a key to enter the cabin, or as a contactless
payment method. Moreover, the use of this tracking device is not optional for the Royal
Caribbean International guest, since any person who refuses to wear it will not be allowed
to sail. The idea behind our research is to integrate the ScanReach sensor mesh technology
with what is already in use.
2.2 Ship geometry and evacuation simulation
The geometry data used in this study were obtained from different works conducted under
the EU framework 7 project SAFEGUARD (Safeguard, 2012), which carried out a compre-
hensive analysis of ship evacuation procedures. As part of this project, a semi-unannounced
full-scale assembly was conducted on a vessel operated by Royal Caribbean Cruise Lines
International, a ship that operates multiple vacation trips in the Caribbean and Baltic Sea
regions. The vessel consists of thirteen decks, including seven decks for passenger cabins
and additional decks dedicated to entertainment and recreational facilities, such as restau-
rants, bars, swimming pools, a casino, a theater, a cinema, a spa, a business center, a gym, a
climbing wall, a mini-golf course, a card room, and shops (Galea et al., 2013).
To ensure the accuracy and reliability of evacuation models, the SAFEGUARD project
answers the invitation from The International Maritime Organization (IMO) for sharing full-
scale data to be used for validation and calibration. The methodologies utilized to collect
data sets are clearly depicted in the work by Deere et al. (2012), and experiments related to
the response time of the passengers to the evacuation alarm were run by Brown et al. (2021).
The validation data sets, including the ship’s geometries, can be accessed at the Fire
Safety Engineering Group (FSEG) associated with Greenwich University through the fol-
lowing link: https://fseg.gre.ac.uk/validation/ship_evacuation. By utilizing the geometry data
123

Annals of Operations Research
derived from the Royal Caribbean cruise vessel described in the aforementioned references,
our study ensures the incorporation of validated and reliable information. The obtained geom-
etry data will be appropriately transformed into a suitable data structure to be utilized in the
optimization models analyzed in this research.
3 Active guidance system
Although the complete active guidance system will not be addressed in this paper, we propose
a dynamic guidance system that selects paths for passengers based on the assignment of
destinations and the periodical reevaluation of the network state, looking for unexpected
events that may force rerouting the evacuees (for instance, newly unavailable corridors,
passengers ahead or behind schedule, or unexpected bottlenecks). This reactive approach
seems more suitable for this application than other tools such as stochastic optimization.
Even though we recognize that evacuations carry a lot of uncertainties and robust plans are
tempting, the reality is that we face an extremely complex problem that needs a fast response.
Thus, ﬁnding accurate input data is difﬁcult, and the complexity added to the model when
considering uncertainties is an undesirable aftermath. The design of the reactive approach
shouldprioritizecomputationalefﬁciency,selectingmethodsandalgorithmsthatdemonstrate
promising time complexity in both theory and practice.
In Fig.1, we represent an active guidance system reacting to incoming sensor information.
As a way to maintain a quick response and scalability of the approach, it is necessary to
begin with an optimized itinerary based on an initial plan, in such a way that correcting the
deviations captured by the sensors just slightly modiﬁes the given optimized itinerary. This
approach has the advantage that re-optimizing should not be computationally costly, and it
is also possible to limit the changes in the paths given to the passengers, minimizing the risk
of distrust in the system’s recommendations.
Notice that this diagram starts with a static initial plan, thus, it is compulsory to add the
time-dimension to correctly assess not only the cruise clear time but also the congestion
proﬁles, accounting for the number of passengers within a corridor at a given time. During
the optimization phase, these congestion proﬁles are iteratively corrected, because we face
a problem where the solution shapes the network’s topology. In this paper, our focus is
to explore the initial plan that will be used as input for the Active Guidance System, our
Assignment Procedure will provide both the lifeboat assignment and the routes composing
the necessary input.
4 Modeling the assignment procedure
4.1 General definitions
Literature related to the dynamic guidance of passengers on cruise vessels is scarce, nev-
ertheless, Cisek and Kapalka (2014) presented a two-layer approach for an active dynamic
evacuation signage system. This early approach was not considering the jamming effect when
several passengers are using the same corridor at the same time and also ignored the indi-
vidual differences of each evacuee. It can be naive to consider a crowd as a group of people
with homogeneous characteristics, as there are people with different mobility restrictions and
physical capacities. If we consider the development of an emergency, a corridor might be safe
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Diagram of the active guidance system
to cross in the near future but inaccessible after some minutes; thus, suggesting this corridor
to people with fast walking speed might be a desirable option to clear the decks quickly, but
suggesting this to a different group of people would guide them to a dead end. In addition,
some passengers on cruise vessels are wheelchair users or have all kinds of disabilities, for
those cases, the suggestion of routes including staircases or narrow corridors could not be
ideal (if the nature of the disaster allows the use of elevators).
Having this in mind, the multi-commodity ﬂow problem is a natural candidate for mod-
eling the Assignment procedure. The multi-commodity ﬂow problem is a formulation with
several applications in which we wish to send from sources to sinks, either different physical
goods or a single type of good with multiple pairs of origins and destinations that need to
send the good to each other. These goods share the same network, but are reigned by their
own particular features. Hence, we cannot treat one commodity at a time if we want to ﬁnd
an overall optimal ﬂow (Ahuja et al., 1993).
The basic formulation for the multi-commodity ﬂow problem deﬁnes particular cost func-
tions and ﬂow vectors for each commodity, restricting the total ﬂow of all commodities on an
arc by some "bundle" constraints tied to a common maximum arc capacity. This formulation
also allows us to restrict individually the ﬂow of a speciﬁc commodity along an arc, making
it easy to model exclusive arcs for a group of commodities, and the ability or inability of a
commodity to reach the upcoming node.
We deﬁned three commodities — groups of people — in the model, namely, Young adults,
Elders and children, and Wheelchair users. These are merely labels, thus there might be
123

Annals of Operations Research
in the samples elders with good physical conditions, or on the contrary, young people with
mobility restrictions (for instance, obesity, fractures, among others). Correct labeling of the
passengers is important for a more accurate assignment, but this process lies beyond the
scope of this paper. Young adults describe persons with full mobility (the ability to traverse
all possible connections between two nodes) and the highest walking speed. Elders and
children describe persons with reduced walking speed but without any restriction to use the
staircases. Finally, Wheelchair users have their own category due to the mobility restrictions
they face and the large area the wheelchairs occupy in the corridors.
In the classical formulation of the multi-commodity problem, we know the sources and the
sinks. In our model we need to determine the sinks (destinations) for the ﬂow. To achieve this
we connect all lifeboat nodes to a single imaginary node (super-sink) with their respective
directed fake arcs as depicted in Fig.2. The capacity of a fake arc equals the capacity of
the corresponding lifeboat. This means the passengers can be assigned freely to fake arcs
(and therefore to the lifeboats) as long as the lifeboat capacity is not exceeded, allowing
the objective function to effectively drive the assignment of passengers based on walking
distance, and network congestion.
4.2 Equivalent length
Usually, the objective of evacuation planning is to ﬁnd individual suggestions informing about
the shortest available route or ﬁnd a way to allocate evacuation routes in order to minimize
the clearing time of the decks. These objectives in trafﬁc assignment research come from the
early work by Wardrop (1952) and his deﬁnition of the user equilibrium (UE) and system
Fig. 2 Super-sink network transformation: All lifeboats are connected to a single node through arcs with null
length and capacity equal to the number of seats of each individual lifeboat
123

Annals of Operations Research
optimality (SO). In both setups, it is necessary to assess time, either taking it into account
directly or ﬁnding a suitable representation of its effects in static networks.
Originally used in evacuation planning for buildings, the equivalent length is a concept
seeking a representation of how difﬁcult it is to traverse a corridor for individuals. This is
achieved by adding penalties to various factors that contribute to slowing down the walking
speed, and ﬁnally multiplying these penalties by the real length of the corridor. Terms such
as congestion, harmful gas accumulations, obstacles, the inclination of the ship, or danger
coefﬁcients can be considered in this approach (Xuan, 2012). In other words, a corridor
would become "longer" when it is more difﬁcult to walk through it, and any route using this
corridor would be considered more expensive in the optimization model.
In the model that will be presented in this paper, we will make use of this deﬁnition to
represent the different walking speeds of the groups of people and the difﬁculty of traveling
congested corridors and staircases. In practice, this means that the parameter involving the
cost of traversing a given arc is higher for Elders and children and Wheelchair users, and
going either upstairs or downstairs is more physically demanding. The equivalent length also
provides us a way to take into account congestion in our model as a decision variable, by
penalizing the corridors with high crowd density.
4.3 Corridor’s capacity relaxation
In the context of trafﬁc ﬂow applications, imposing hard constraints on arc capacities for
modeling purposes is often deemed insufﬁcient to accurately capture the underlying dynamics
of congestion. The reason is that these constraints fail to account for the interactions between
individual ﬂow units, such as vehicles or evacuees. Moreover, hard constraints are not a
favorable choice for evacuation scenarios in which our main objective is to ensure the safety
and well-being of individuals. Such constraints often result in the impossibility of ﬁnding
feasible path assignments for certain evacuees, potentially leading to the abandonment of
people in the face of life-threatening events. Reaching the capacity of a corridor or highway
will not prevent new units from entering the connection, but will have an effect on the travel
speed. Therefore, in many cases, there is no such thing as a forbidden connection, but rather
the undesirable effect of congestion.
Another potentially negative effect of using hard constraints is that people of the same
age group, starting and ending in the same place, maybe split as the arc capacity is reached.
This is less likely to happen if capacity constraints are soft. In a system affected by human
behavior, any suggested action that can cause confusion will increase the chance that people
do not do as suggested, and hence that the overall evacuation time increases.
A penalty approach replaces the hard bundle constraints with (linear) penalties for exceed-
ing the arcs’ capacities. In practice, this allows evacuees to surpass the bound and traverse
the arc but they are subject to a lower walking speed (or an increase of the equivalent length
of the corridors). This kind of behavior is described in the ﬁeld of pedestrians and evacua-
tion dynamics when exploring the hydrodynamic relation between the density and ﬂow of
pedestrian streams.
The ﬂow of a pedestrian stream gives the number of pedestrians crossing a speciﬁc point
within a facility over a given period of time. In other words, it represents the rate at which
pedestrians are moving through that location. However, deﬁning density is more difﬁcult, an
initial approach would count for the number of pedestrians within a selected area, but it is
also possible to provide more detailed deﬁnitions. Several studies since 1968 have tried to
describe the relationship between ﬂow and density. In the diagrams for the different studies,
123

Annals of Operations Research
shown in Fig.3, a common behavior can be observed; the ﬂow of pedestrians increases when
the density of the corridor also increases, and this happens until the maximum ﬂow is reached
(deﬁning the capacity of the corridor); from this point, increasing density within a corridor
impacts negatively the ﬂow of pedestrians. As it can be observed as well, the velocity is
always decreasing with the increase of pedestrian density within the corridor across all the
models (Schadschneider et al., 2009).
We use this deﬁnition of the capacity of a corridor to determine the threshold from where
the penalty will start to be paid. Thus, we are interested in avoiding the assignment of people
to a corridor when it will have a negative impact on the outﬂow, rather than a negative impact
on the walking speed which was proven monotonically decreasing. This also means the
penalty cannot be seen as an approximation of the walking speed but as a measure of how
much the model formulation is willing to compromise the outﬂow. During our computational
experiment, the density at the corridor’s capacity will be approximated from the data reported
by Helbing et al. (2007), this study is the most recent among all the studies plotted in Fig.3.
4.4 Model formulation
We deﬁne G as the undirected network graph consisting of all the vertices and arcs,
representing the structure of a cruise ship layout. The set V = {1, . . . , V , V + 1} represents
the set of vertices in the ship layout, and the vertices can be different facilities, for example,
a cabin or an intersection. Node V + 1 is a super-sink. The set S = {1, . . . , S} represents the
sink nodes, typically lifeboats to which the demand is allocated. However, in this formulation,
these sink nodes are transformed into transshipment nodes and they are connected to the single
super-sink by a special set of arcs. All demand is assigned to the super-sink. A is the set of arcs
linking the vertices. They can be either corridors, stairways, or elevators; arcs are represented
by the combination of tail and head vertices so that A = {(i, j) with i, j ∈V}. The set Fake
represents all arcs connecting the sink nodes with the super-sink, and the set Elevators
gathers all the arcs that represent elevators on board. In addition, for every arc (i, j) ∈A
Fig. 3 Fundamental diagrams for pedestrian movement in planar facilities for a number of studies. The ﬁgure
is taken from Schadschneider et al. (2009). The parameter ρ shows the average density accounting for the
relation between the number of pedestrians and the available area. The ﬂow J of a pedestrian stream represents
the number of pedestrians crossing a ﬁxed location per unit of time. Finally, the average speed of the pedestrian
stream is represented by v
123

Annals of Operations Research
there is an arc ( j, i) ∈A, a necessary network transformation to allow bi-directional ﬂow in
the mathematical formulation (Table 1).
The mathematical formulation for the collection of evacuees on board, as it was stated
in the previous section, will consider up to three different commodities k ∈K = {1, 2, 3}.
For k = 1 we designate the collection of young adults and teenagers, who have full mobility
at the highest walking speed. For k = 2 we designate the collection of elder passengers,
children, and persons with full mobility but a relatively low walking speed, in comparison
to k = 1. And lastly, k = 3 represent the wheelchair users who have mobility restriction
through stairways and narrow corridors.
We also deﬁned two sets for each node i ∈V, namely Outi and Ini, deﬁned as follow:
Outi represents the set of all arcs going out from node i, and consequently, Ini represents
the set of all arcs going into node i.
A penalty approach for the multi-commodity ﬂow problem is formulated as follows:
min

i j∈A

k∈K
Ck
i j · xk
i j + ψ

i j∈A
fi j + γ

i j∈Fake

k∈K
sk
i j
Subject to:

j∈Outi
xk
i j −

j∈Ini
xk
ji = Bk
i
for all k ∈K and i ∈V.
(1)
fi j ≥
K

k=1
(xk
i j · ρk) −(Ui j · φ(i, j))
for all i, j ∈{i j | i j /∈Fake ∪Elevators}.
(2)
xk
i j ≤μk
i j
for all i, j ∈{i j | μk
i j = 0} and k ∈K.
(3)
K

k
xk
i j ≤Boat Max
for all i, j ∈Fake.
(4)
sk
i j ≥xk
i j −Dk
for all i j ∈Fake and k ∈K.
(5)
Table 1 Sets in the proposed model
Symbol
Description
G
G = (V, A), a graph consisting of the vertices and arcs, representing the
ship’s layout
V
Collection of vertices, representing a logical space (e.g. a cabin, a hall, a
doorway, and an intersection of corridors) and the super-sink node
S
Collection of sink nodes (e.g. lifeboats), S ⊆V
A
Collection of arcs between nodes (e.g. a corridor and a stairway), which
can also be expressed as (i, j), where (i, j) ∈V
K
Collection of the group of evacuees labeled according to their age and
mobility restrictions
Fake
Collection of arcs that connect all the nodes i ∈S to the super-sink node
Elevators
Collection of arcs that represent the elevators on the vessel
Outi
Collections of arcs that go out from node i ∈V.
Ini
Collections of arcs that go in to node i ∈V.
123

Annals of Operations Research
fi j ≥0
for all i j ∈A \ {Fake}.
(6)
sk
i j ≥0
for all i j ∈Fake and k ∈K.
(7)
Constraints (1) are node balance constraints. Constraints (2) penalize the assignment of
ﬂow to the corridors above their individual capacities. Constraints (3) ensure that ﬂow is not
assigned to those corridors that cannot be traversed or are forbidden for a given group of
passengers, such as elevators. Constraints (4) state the maximum capacity of a lifeboat as a
hard constraint. Constraints (5) penalize the excess of evacuees of vulnerable groups within
one lifeboat. Constraints (6) and (7) deﬁne the domain of the variables.
All the fake arcs (i, V + 1) with i ∈S are capacitated, making sure the ﬂow of evacuees
is less than or equal to the lifeboat physical capacity. Additionally, the soft constraint (5), for
the sake of the implementation presented in this paper, will make sure that not more than 80
percent of passengers of the lifeboats are labeled as Elders and children, and no more than 10
percent of the passengers are wheelchair users; if these thresholds are surpassed, a penalty
must be paid. A lifeboat that is completely full of young adults is permitted.
The parameter Dk represents a soft constraint on the maximum number of people from
group k that is allowed to board a lifeboat, determined by a desired distribution of evacuees
on the lifeboats. Let us consider that a secondary disaster might happen after the lifeboats
were launched into the ocean. In this case, it is desirable to have young adults able to help in
the new situation.
The external ﬂow vector Bk
i , represents inﬂow and outﬂow for nodes i ∈V. By convention
origin-nodes are set as positive values, whereas, on sink nodes the values are negative. Note
for the formulation with a super-sink only node V + 1 has a negative value. All other nodes
are called transshipment nodes since inﬂow is equal to outﬂow. Parameter Ck
i j represents the
cost of traversing a corridor and it is deﬁned using a simpliﬁed equivalent length, accounting
only for the groups’ walking speed.
The parameter φ(i, j) is the total area of the corridor or room represented by an arc. It is
an important measurement in order to assess the congestion in the network, along with the
upper bound Ui j and space occupied for every kind of passenger ρk. Note that the term ρk
was added to constraint (2), as wheelchair users occupy a larger area in the corridors. Finally,
the parameter μk
i j is the individual capacity on every arc for people from each age group,
this parameter is useful for the deﬁnition of arcs that can be traversed by people from a given
group but not from another; either because of physical restrictions or evacuation policies
deﬁning dedicated paths not applicable to all evacuees. In such case the μk
i j = 0, however, in
our implementation this variable can also take the value -1 to represent that the given corridor
has no hard capacity restriction.
For this multi-commodity ﬂow formulation, three variables are considered, one main vari-
able and two auxiliary variables. The variables xk
i j answer the formulation’s main question:
the number of persons traversing a corridor from each age group. The variables fi j and sk
i j
and their respective parameters ψ and γ serve for the relaxation of formerly hard constraints
that will be explained shortly (Table 2).
5 Flow decomposition
After solving the multi-commodity ﬂow problem, the next step involves breaking down the
ﬂow into paths to determine individual assignments for evacuees. The transformation of
ﬂows into paths can be done in various ways, with paths and cycles representing nonnegative
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 Variables and parameters
Symbol
Description
Variables
xk
i j
Flow of evacuees from group k traversing the arc (i, j) ∈A
fi j
Total excess of ﬂow in the arc (i, j) ∈A
sk
i j
Total excess of evacuees from group k ∈K in the arc (i, j) ∈Fake
Parameters
Dk
Maximum capacity of one lifeboat for people in group k ∈K
Bk
i
External ﬂow vector on node i ∈V for the group k ∈K.
Ck
i j
Equivalent length of the arc (i, j) ∈A for each age group k ∈K
φ(i, j)
Area of the (i, j) ∈A, except for arcs (i, j) ∈Fake ∪Elevators
Ui j
Inﬂection bound for the ﬂow on the arc (i, j) ∈A, except for arcs
(i, j) ∈Fake ∪Elevators (Measured as density)
μk
i j
Individual capacity constraint on the arc (i, j) ∈A for each age group
k ∈K
ρk
Ratio of occupied area by an evacuee of each group k ∈K
ψ
Penalty for excess ﬂow
γ
Penalty for excess evacuees over the threshold for each group k ∈K
ﬂows traversing arcs. Therefore, while every nonnegative ﬂow can be represented as paths
and cycles, they may not necessarily have a unique representation (Ahuja et al., 1993). This
process, known as the Flow Decomposition Problem, can be modeled using either edge-
based or path-based formulations and is NP-hard for certain formulations (Williams et al.,
2021).
We have chosen a path-based formulation of the ﬂow decomposition problem, mainly for
the reasons that will be outlined in the next paragraph; but in addition, this type of formulation
allows the use of non-exact methods or column generation procedures for ﬁnding a solution,
and this could be particularly relevant for those versions of the problem that are relatively
hard to solve given time restrictions.
When a path formulation is deﬁned for a network problem, it is done under the assumption
that there is a pool of paths to choose from. Such a pool is supposed to be ﬁnite and contain
all the possible ordered node combinations able to represent a solution. This characteristic
often makes the number of variables very large. But in the context of evacuations, most of
these paths are not promising suggestions for the evacuees; an acyclic path suggesting to
go up and down stairs several times before leading the person to a safe place will hardly
be considered optimal, nor followed by a rational person. Thus, the selection of a set of
promising paths sufﬁciently large to provide ﬂexibility on the route assignments is the initial
step for decomposing successfully the ﬂow of evacuees into paths.
While network ﬂow theory guarantees that any solution to the multi-commodity ﬂow
problem can be decomposed, the choice of decomposition procedure is crucial in real-life
scenarios. It is tempting to use the reduced network, including only arcs with positive ﬂow,
to scale down the problem size during the decomposition phase. However, this approach
can make it difﬁcult to assess the solution’s quality in certain penalty values. To address
this, we propose calculating the overall top 100 shortest paths using the original network as
an initial ﬁlter against counter-intuitive path recommendations. For example, if a parameter
123

Annals of Operations Research
conﬁguration leads to assigning ﬂows to arcs that cannot be found in any of the best optional
paths for the entire network, the resulting solution is unlikely to be effective or realistic from
the passenger’s perspective.
In our work, we aim to reduce non-compliance by using a limited search space that
prioritizes solutions considered intuitive by passengers. With this pool selection, it is possible
that the different formulations for the Flow decomposition are not able to encounter feasible
solutions, for certain cases and/or parameter values. This situation can be an indication either
that the pool size is too small and didn’t provide enough ﬂexibility, or that the selected penalty
for congestion is too high and would suggest the passengers use corridors that are not present
within their overall best optional paths.
Until now, researchers have primarily focused on ﬁnding the decomposition with the min-
imum number of paths, a problem that has been proven to be NP-hard in the strong sense
(Pie´nkosz & Kołty´s, 2015; Vatinlen et al. 2008). Nevertheless, alternative objectives can be
considered when formulating this problem. For instance, one may decompose an arc ﬂow
into a path ﬂow that minimizes the length of the longest path (the min-max criterion often
applied in other network problems), or aim to minimize the concept of unfairness, as deﬁned
by Roughgarden and Tardos (2002), which is the ratio between the time required to travel on
the suggested path and the time it would have taken to travel on the shortest possible path. In
this paper, we propose using the difference between those lengths as a measure of unfairness,
rather than the ratio. This approach provides a middle ground between user equilibrium (UE)
and system optimality (SO). While decision-makers typically seek to optimize the system,
such decisions may appear suboptimal from the individuals’ perspective. By incorporating
an unfairness measure, we slightly compromise on system optimality to foster greater com-
pliance and trust among those who receive assignments that are noticeably worse than their
optimal paths. The selection of the objective function impacts the distribution of arrival times
and the average distance traveled, which in turn affects individuals’ willingness to follow the
assigned paths.
An algorithm for ﬁnding the k-shortest routes from any point to a given destination was
developed by Yen (1970). We argue that a pool formed by a sufﬁcient number of ranked
shortest paths is the most promising for solving the ﬂow decomposition problem. The pool
size must be large enough to provide ﬂexibility, but not so large that it includes non-viable
solutions, thereby only increasing the problem size and consequently, increasing the com-
puting time. During our numerical tests, we found that the suggestion of using the top 100
shortest paths was good enough to ﬁnd feasible solutions for the considered cases.
In the Ph.D. thesis by Ohst (2016) we can ﬁnd formal deﬁnitions for path-based formula-
tions of the ﬂow decomposition problem. Also, this work shows the necessary constraint to
ensure the sum of the ﬂows assigned to certain paths must equal the ﬂow traversing the corri-
dors they all have in common. Thus, it is necessary to construct a two-dimensional incidence
matrix Ia,i having all the arcs in the network on the rows and all the considered paths on the
columns, from now on denoted P. A number 1 in this matrix indicates that path i crosses
corridor a, therefore the added ﬂow of all the paths traversing corridor a ∈A corresponds to
the ﬂow calculated for the multi-commodity ﬂow problem described before. Notice that since
we have separated ﬂows for each group of passengers, it is necessary to solve independently
the optimization models for each group. Consequently, the forthcoming formulations do not
explicitly reference this particular set.
123

Annals of Operations Research
The ﬂow decomposition problem minimizing the unfairness in the system is formulated
as follows:
min
|P|

i=0
(li −l∗
i ) · xi
Subject to:
|P|

i=0
xi · Ia,i = Fa
for all a ∈(0, |A|).
(8)
xi ≥0
for all i ∈(0, |P|).
(9)
Constraint (8) is the previously described arc balance constraint with Fa representing the
ﬂow traversing arc a, found by solving the multi-commodity ﬂow problem, the term li −l∗
i
represents unfairness of the assignment, where li is the length of the current path, and l∗
i
represent the length of the shortest path for a passenger located at the origin node of path i.
Lastly, xi is the decision variable accounting for the ﬂow assigned to each individual path.
For the other two formulations that will be developed, it is necessary to deﬁne extra
decision variables. The variable ζ is used to minimize either the number of selected paths
or the longest path used in the solution. Additionally, variable yi is a binary variable acting
as a connection between the objective function and the ﬂow decomposition constraint. With
these deﬁnitions, the min-max formulation is as follows:
min ζ
Subject to:
Li · yi ≤ζ
for all i ∈(0, |P|).
(10)
xi ≤M · yi
for all i ∈(0, |P|).
(11)
|P|

i=0
xi · Ia,i = Fa
for all a ∈(0, |A|).
(12)
xi ≥0
for all i ∈(0, |P|).
(13)
yi ∈{0, 1}
for all i ∈(0, |P|).
(14)
ζ ≥0
(15)
Constraint (10) ensure that ζ takes as value the length of the longest selected path in
the solution. Constraint (11) is the classic big M constraint linking the variables xi and yi.
Constraint (12) is the ﬂow decomposition constraint. Constraints (13–15) are the domain of
the variables.
For the last formulation, if we want to ﬁnd the minimum number of paths necessary for
decomposing the ﬂow just constraint (10) in the previous model should be modiﬁed. Thus,
the ﬂow decomposition problem with minimum number of paths is formulated as follows:
min ζ
123

Annals of Operations Research
Subject to:
|P|

i=0
yi ≤ζ
(16)
xi ≤M · yi
for all i ∈(0, |P|).
(17)
|P|

i=0
xi · Ia,i = Fa
for all a ∈(0, |A|).
(18)
xi ≥0
for all i ∈(0, |P|).
(19)
yi ∈{0, 1}
for all i ∈(0, |P|).
(20)
ζ ≥0
(21)
In this formulation, constraint (16) sums up the number of selected paths, therefore,
minimizing ζ minimizes the number of variables yi that can have a value of 1, this constraint
is what makes this formulation an NP-hard problem.
6 Case study
As mentioned before, we have access to the layout of a cruise vessel belonging to Royal
Caribbean International, with a capacity for 2500 passengers and 842 crew members. Starting
from this layout, a network was constructed following two simple rules: every intersection
must be a node, and a node should be placed every 10ms. These rules were considered due to
the importance of precisely encode the vessel’s geometry, and a distance in which they do not
interfere with each other (but there are several sensors as communication backup, in case of
failure of one sensor). Following this, a network with 557 nodes and 1464 arcs (recall that for
each connection between two points two arcs are needed, one in each direction) is generated.
This vessel has 18 lifeboats with a capacity of 150 passengers each, 9 lifeboats on each side
of the ship with a total of 7 possible entries. To reduce the number of decision variables, we
decided to use the entries as the nodes before the super-sink, instead of using the lifeboats
directly. We argue that having 18 possible destinations will provide no additional information
to the model, but it will almost triple the number of paths (and decision variables) considered
in the ﬂow decomposition stage.
The initial location of the passengers is necessary to initialize the optimization problem,
for the purpose of the numerical test only two groups of people are considered, however, it
can be easily expanded to the three groups described in the paper or consider a completely
different deﬁnition for the groups. Also, three different cases were considered for this initial
location. In the ﬁrst case, all the passengers were assumed to be in their cabins when the alarm
went off; in other words, the 2500 passengers with 50 percent being young adults and 50
percent elders and children (this distribution is close to the average number of passengers by
age group reported by CLIA (2021)), were placed evenly across the decks where the cabins
are located. This is the classic case used during simulation studies because this situation
replicates an emergency in the middle of the night. In the second case, the alarm goes off
during daytime and most of the passengers are assumed to be enjoying the facilities on the
top decks (for instance, the pool, the training center, the sports court, or the bars) and a few
of them are located in their cabins. Finally, in the third case, the alarm goes off around dinner
time, thus the passengers are assumed to be in the restaurants or ready to go to the theater.
It is important to mention that for this ship the largest restaurants and the theater are located
123

Annals of Operations Research
in the vicinity of the lifeboats, and in the study by Brown et al. (2021) these locations were
used as assembly stations.
In addition, the values for the parameters that penalize surpassing the capacity levels must
be determined for the study case. The parameter ψ is important in determining the shortest
routes. On top of that, as was mentioned before, this penalty should be seen as how permissive
the model is to having congestion within a corridor, rather than an exact way to calculate the
extra time spent by people when traversing a congested connection. Thus, different values
for ψ were analyzed when solving the model, but γ remained constant. All the cases were
solved using the Python API of Gurobi.
7 Results
For each of the three cases presented in the previous section, the multi-commodity ﬂow
formulation was solved for different values of ψ, starting from ψ = 1. Once the value of the
parameter was increased, it was clear that the model was almost insensitive to variation of ψ
between 1 and 10 (this can be seen in the tables reported in the Appendix). It can easily be
explained by realizing that relatively small values of ψ will not have a signiﬁcant impact on
the total route length. This is because the penalty should be greater than the cost of taking
an alternative route, in order to ﬁnd more attractive a detour rather than the original path.
Thus, we generally observe that the solutions do not change with respect to the non-penalized
model because the formulation is willing to pay the penalty.
Therefore, it is expected that as ψ goes up, the number of positive variables fi j goes down
since the system is actively avoiding having any kind of congestion in its corridors. The
other extreme case is achieved when the value of ψ is large, and increasing it further will not
change the solutions anymore. This happens because there are some arcs in which it does not
matter how much you penalize the congestion, they are necessary to reach the destination.
For instance, all the staircases will pay for the congestion because it is the only way to go up
and down the vessel. It is unavoidable, no matter how high you set ψ. This is the situation we
observed with values above 50, for Cases 1 and 2. Nevertheless, Case 3 presents a different
behavior that will be explained later in the section. In conclusion, we found that values for ψ
between 20 and 30 would provide the most reasonable solutions for all three cases; however,
this might change when considering different ships with their unique features. In order to
obtain fast solutions, good values for the penalty should be found in advance for each ship,
instead of having a tuning process in the middle of a disaster.
Figure4 presents histograms for the three different formulations. The ﬁrst thing to notice
is that the longest path for the group of elders and children is shorter than the one for the
other group, this result is expected given the beneﬁts within the model for this age group. It is
also clear that there are signiﬁcant differences between the results found within each group,
indicating that the different formulations lead to different approaches to getting the evacuees
to the lifeboats. For example, we can see on the bottom ﬁgure how all the formulations
seemed to suggest shorter evacuation routes than what the fewer paths decomposition does
(orange), but in the end, no major differences in the extreme cases can be observed.
This is not the case for the elders and children group, although something similar can be
observed with the min-max decomposition. After initially suggesting longer routes to many
evacuees it managed to assign the last person to a shorter path than the other formulations.
This is the classic behavior of any kind of min-max optimization, since we are minimizing
the longest path it is not that important what is happening with the people who do not belong
to the extreme cases.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 4 Histograms for different Flow Decomposition Formulations (solved for Case 2 with ψ = 40). Length
traveled by Elders and Children (top). Length Traveled by Young Adults (bottom)
It might easily happen that the suggestions for passengers relatively close to the lifeboats
will be considered sub-optimal by them, and undermine the trust in the system, ultimately
increasing non-compliance. In this regard, it is noticeable how the fair approaches seem to
give the best options to as many people as possible, but leave a small number of people with
longer paths (and potentially more dangerous paths) on the tails of the distribution. Analysis
as the previous ones can be done for all three different cases, and for different ψ; therefore,
the selection of a decomposition approach must take into account that different situations on
the vessel will lead to differences in the performance of these formulations.
The fewer paths decomposition was expected to provide a smaller or simpler pool of
paths going to the lifeboats. Independently of its proven costly computation time, a simpler
way to guide people will always be a desirable feature. However, we found no evidence
of a signiﬁcant improvement in this regard; as was mentioned before the problem is more
difﬁcult to solve, and after a computing time of 5min the optimality gap was 1.3 percent and
the best lower bounds found were between 260 and 278 used paths depending on the case.
On average, the optimal solutions found using the other formulations used no more than 5
extra paths in comparison with the fewer paths decomposition, thus this formulation is not
leading to signiﬁcantly simpler solutions than the others.
Finally, we would like to describe brieﬂy the results for Case 3. For this cruise vessel, the
largest restaurants and the theatre are located on the same deck as the lifeboats. This means
that ﬁnding the solution for the shortest path is trivial from the passengers’ point of view (since
they are able to locate the closest lifeboat with ease) and they are likely to disregard complex
paths in this setup. In particular, for Case 3, when ψ is increased above 30, the model ﬁnds
itself in the situation described in Sect.5 regarding the feasibility of the ﬂow decomposition
formulation (see Table 8 in the Appendix). In those cases with large crowds in few spots,
when the penalty for congestion is too high, it is very easy for the Multi-commodity problem
123

Annals of Operations Research
to assign ﬂow to corridors that are not used for the top quickest possible routes. Perhaps,
this outcome suggests that locating restaurants and theaters on the same deck as the lifeboats
could be a favorable design decision. Nevertheless, this emphasizes the importance of the
selection of appropriate penalties based on the passengers’ initial positions during an onboard
emergency.
8 Conclusions and outlook
Modeling evacuations, or any process highly dependent on human behavior, remains a chal-
lenging task. Although this paper has presented a model that takes several important factors
into account, it is clear that further work is needed to reﬁne and expand this model to better
reﬂect reality. One key limitation of the current formulation is the use of a static network.
Since the overall goal of an evacuation is to clear all decks of passengers as quickly as pos-
sible, time becomes the central factor, not distance. Future research should therefore focus
on expanding the current model into a dynamic network formulation, where time-dependent
variables are considered to more accurately capture congestion and movement patterns.
In order to provide a good example of this, let us go back to the multi-commodity ﬂow
problem; our decision variables are accounting for the number of passengers traversing a
corridor, but we cannot answer the question of when they walked through the corridor. The
passengers engaged in the evacuation start from different locations, therefore it is obvious that
they will arrive at a certain corridor at different times. Moreover, as was shown in the paper
by Brown et al. (2021), passengers do not start the evacuation immediately after the alarm
goes off but the starting time follows a log-normal distribution (with different parameters
depending on the boat and trip type). This fact alone indicates that the model can likely
overestimate the congestion within a corridor; it might seem that a large number of passengers
are in it but in reality, they were evenly distributed in time thus the corridor was never jammed.
The opposite can be true as well, punctual trafﬁc jams could be generated but they cannot
be seen by a static formulation. This means, that quicker (and safer) paths can end up being
neglected when the effects of time on parameters and variables are not being modeled.
Additionally, even though making an analysis of the distance walked by evacuees can
provide interesting insights regarding the performance of different ﬂow decomposition
approaches, it is still more adequate to use time-dependent variables. The next step would be
the expansion of the model into a dynamic network formulation; this will bring the ﬂexibility
to model more precisely some interactions and events happening during an evacuation, but
also comes with its own particular challenges. Solving mixed integer optimization models
to optimality is a highly time-demanding process, even for very simple models. Increasing
the network size would exponentially increase the time required to solve a problem, and
during an emergency, we do not have much time. Fortunately, network problems have nice
properties when it comes to computation times, and more recent non-exact methods can also
be considered.
In an ideal world, all the different parameters in a model are well deﬁned, either because
they are constant in time or because we have complete certainty on how they will develop
over the study horizon. However, often this is not the case, for instance, we do not know for
sure how a ﬁre is going to spread on board. To be sure about this it would be necessary to have
a complete understanding of ﬁre behavior, both current ship status and layout distribution,
awareness of any other possible source that can cause explosions, and an endless list of
factors that may have inﬂuence. And even if we know the development of the disaster for
sure, the evacuees’ behavior is stochastic, no matter if they were provided with the best
possible solution or not. We cannot guarantee that all people are going to follow the provided
123

Annals of Operations Research
indications. There can be many good reasons to not do so, such as helping others, looking
for a family member, or having important belongings inside the cabin. These are important
issues that remain open to exploration by modelers in the operation research community, and
possibly in collaboration with experts in human behavior.
Once the evacuees were given a destination for their evacuation, it is necessary then to
select paths through the corridors that take them safely to their destinations. In the best
scenario, people will use the routes found from the Assignment Problem; however, it would
be naive to expect the state of the network and the evacuation conditions to remain unaltered
during the evacuation. Here the installation of the mesh sensor technology and two-way
communication is crucial since the system can perform frequent updates of the location
of passengers and the availability of the corridors. Under unexpected events, this updated
information allows us to react and calculate new suggestions for the evacuees, take corrective
measures, and provide them with safer routes through wristband devices or dynamic signaling
on walls, all connected to the sensor mesh network.
Once we consider active guidance, it is imperative to recognize that a good solution not
only takes the passengers quickly to their destination, and assesses future risks, but also avoids
confusing instructions that could undermine the trust in the system, this way encouraging
non-compliance, since the choice of evacuation route by the evacuees is inﬂuenced by the
level of conﬁdence they have in the information available to them (Lu et al., 2014). Dealing
with situations such as counter-ﬂows, U-turns, and people’s preferences, among other factors;
can be quite challenging to handle during a dynamic guidance stage.
Proposing evacuation plans that deviate signiﬁcantly from human instinct, such as direct-
ing individuals towards the origin of a disaster or instructing them to make a U-turn when
there is no visible threat ahead, often face signiﬁcant resistance. Such instructions can cre-
ate the impression for the passengers that the guidance system lacks understanding of the
situation. However, there are instances when these seemingly counterintuitive instructions
become necessary or the most viable option due to unexpected events. These unforeseen
events can disrupt the original evacuation plan for all passengers on board.
For instance, if a ﬁre suddenly blocks the suggested evacuation route, it becomes imper-
ative for evacuees to backtrack and, in some cases, ﬁnd an alternative lifeboat as their new
best option. In such scenarios, it is crucial to ensure that the process of rerouting passengers
is conducted in a manner that minimizes psychological distress for those passengers who
were not directly affected by the ﬁre but still need to be redirected due to the unforeseen
circumstances. While passengers directly exposed to the ﬁre will certainly comprehend the
need for a change in plans, those compelled to switch positions may struggle to grasp the
rationality behind this adjustment. As for this one, there are other situations that may arise
in which a multidisciplinary understanding is necessary to design a good solution approach,
bringing a dynamic guidance system closer to the users, and increasing the chances of a
successful implementation. To ensure a truly successful implementation of the evacuation
system, the integration of dynamic signaling is crucial.
In conclusion, while this paper has laid the groundwork for a static evacuation model,
future efforts will need to focus on dynamic formulations, time-based variables, and the
inclusion of human behavior factors. These advancements will be essential in creating a
more accurate, reliable, and implementable evacuation system.
Appendix. A
See Tables 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 3 Case 1 for Elder people and Kids. Percentage of people assigned to paths up to a given length, for different penalties
Function
≤25 (m)
≤40 (m)
≤55 (m)
≤70 (m)
≤75 (m)
≤90 (m)
≤105 (m)
≤120 (m)
≤135 (m)
≤150 (m)
≤165 (m)
≤180 (m)
Penal. 1
Fair
0.0
18.56
41.46
64.02
82.83
89.94
94.19
98.69
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Fewer
0.49
17.58
41.46
62.96
81.28
90.43
95.75
99.67
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
MinMax
0.0
18.56
40.8
63.94
82.26
89.94
94.77
99.67
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Penal. 5
Fair
0.0
18.56
41.46
63.37
81.19
88.23
93.3
98.69
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Fewer
0.98
17.09
39.98
62.06
81.19
89.53
94.77
99.67
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
MinMax
0.0
18.56
40.47
62.88
80.7
88.55
93.79
99.67
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Penal. 10
Fair
0.0
18.56
41.46
63.37
80.87
87.9
93.3
98.69
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Fewer
0.49
18.23
40.8
61.57
79.89
88.88
94.77
99.18
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
MinMax
0.0
18.23
39.49
61.41
79.89
89.21
95.26
99.67
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Penal. 20
Fair
0.49
16.43
39.49
58.87
76.7
84.96
92.48
96.65
98.45
98.69
100.0
100.0
Fewer
0.49
16.27
37.69
57.65
76.12
85.28
93.46
98.36
99.67
100.0
100.0
100.0
MinMax
0.49
17.01
36.96
54.62
73.34
85.61
95.42
99.67
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Penal. 30
Fair
0.98
16.19
39.41
59.44
77.68
85.69
90.52
95.26
98.04
99.02
100.0
100.0
Fewer
0.98
15.94
38.02
57.15
75.14
84.79
92.48
98.86
99.67
99.67
100.0
100.0
MinMax
0.0
15.94
34.59
54.21
73.34
86.26
95.09
99.67
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Penal. 40
Fair
0.98
16.52
38.27
57.73
75.55
84.71
91.17
95.91
97.71
98.69
100.0
100.0
Fewer
0.0
16.76
37.53
56.66
74.65
83.48
91.17
98.04
99.84
99.84
100.0
100.0
MinMax
0.98
15.62
35.24
52.41
72.2
86.26
95.09
99.67
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Penal. 50
Fair
0.98
16.52
38.27
57.73
75.55
84.71
91.17
95.91
97.71
98.69
100.0
100.0
Fewer
0.0
16.76
37.53
56.66
74.65
83.48
91.17
98.04
99.84
99.84
100.0
100.0
MinMax
0.98
15.62
35.24
52.41
72.2
86.26
95.09
99.67
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 4 Case 1 for Young People. Percentage of people assigned to paths up to a given length, for different penalties
Function
≤25 (m)
≤40 (m)
≤55 (m)
≤70 (m)
≤75 (m)
≤90 (m)
≤105 (m)
≤120 (m)
≤135 (m)
≤150 (m)
≤165 (m)
≤180 (m)
Penal. 1
Fair
0.0
8.5
19.13
31.56
54.37
69.42
80.54
87.74
93.13
97.06
100.0
100.0
Fewer
0.0
7.2
18.64
31.73
56.5
69.91
80.87
87.57
93.13
97.06
100.0
100.0
MinMax
0.34
6.07
17.54
30.19
55.14
69.31
81.11
87.77
92.92
96.96
100.0
100.0
Penal. 5
Fair
0.0
10.22
19.71
30.83
53.15
67.54
79.72
86.26
93.13
97.06
100.0
100.0
Fewer
0.0
9.57
19.87
32.95
52.25
69.42
80.05
86.43
92.64
96.57
100.0
100.0
MinMax
0.98
9.24
19.71
30.83
54.7
70.4
80.21
86.43
92.31
96.73
100.0
100.0
Penal. 10
Fair
0.0
10.07
19.23
31.51
52.29
68.9
80.36
84.45
91.98
95.09
100.0
100.0
Fewer
0.0
8.59
20.36
31.97
52.25
68.93
80.7
86.92
91.5
96.08
99.35
100.0
MinMax
0.98
9.57
20.69
32.46
51.92
66.64
79.07
85.94
91.5
96.24
100.0
100.0
Penal. 20
Fair
0.0
8.42
20.52
31.64
47.18
65.17
75.96
83.97
91.17
96.4
99.84
100.0
Fewer
0.0
8.75
19.87
32.3
48.98
62.22
76.61
85.28
91.33
95.58
99.35
100.0
MinMax
0.0
9.24
19.05
31.48
48.65
63.86
74.49
84.46
92.8
96.57
100.0
100.0
Penal. 30
Fair
0.0
8.91
18.4
29.68
47.51
60.83
73.43
80.21
87.74
94.11
98.04
98.69
Fewer
0.49
10.23
20.38
29.87
47.87
61.7
73.98
81.34
86.74
92.96
97.55
98.85
MinMax
0.0
8.91
19.05
29.68
44.24
58.3
69.99
81.28
89.86
94.93
100.0
100.0
Penal. 40
Fair
0.0
9.89
19.54
29.03
45.79
58.79
71.05
80.21
87.65
94.52
97.38
97.38
Fewer
0.49
8.91
18.07
28.86
46.2
61.9
72.04
81.36
84.63
91.01
95.91
96.89
MinMax
0.0
9.73
18.07
28.21
45.87
57.65
69.26
77.6
82.99
92.64
100.0
100.0
Penal. 50
Fair
0.0
9.4
20.2
30.66
44.81
56.83
70.24
78.5
84.96
90.52
95.75
96.73
Fewer
0.0
9.89
19.54
28.37
44.73
56.5
67.21
78.41
84.96
93.46
97.22
98.53
MinMax
0.0
9.89
19.05
29.19
43.74
54.54
66.07
75.8
84.96
94.11
100.0
100.0
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 5 Case 2 for Elder people and Kids. Percentage of people assigned to paths up to a given length, for different penalties
Function
≤25 (m)
≤40 (m)
≤55 (m)
≤70 (m)
≤75 (m)
≤90 (m)
≤105 (m)
≤120 (m)
≤135 (m)
≤150 (m)
≤165 (m)
≤180 (m)
Penal. 1
Fair
0.08
3.52
14.5
24.9
46.52
69.07
74.6
83.65
96.73
99.33
100.0
100.0
Fewer
0.08
3.19
13.41
23.47
45.26
70.08
77.03
85.41
96.31
98.83
99.16
100.0
MinMax
0.17
3.35
14.5
24.73
44.01
67.31
73.93
85.16
97.82
100.0
100.0
100.0
Penal. 5
Fair
0.0
3.52
14.08
23.89
45.68
70.08
75.27
83.49
95.56
99.83
100.0
100.0
Fewer
0.17
3.44
12.24
22.05
45.6
70.24
77.54
86.17
96.14
99.16
99.16
100.0
MinMax
0.17
3.35
12.99
22.72
44.17
68.82
75.94
86.17
96.98
100.0
100.0
100.0
Penal. 10
Fair
0.08
3.35
13.33
22.97
44.01
68.99
76.03
85.25
96.23
99.83
100.0
100.0
Fewer
0.0
3.52
13.58
23.22
44.09
69.07
76.36
85.83
96.81
99.08
99.16
100.0
MinMax
0.17
3.34
13.53
22.97
43.53
67.92
75.36
85.55
96.99
100.0
100.0
100.0
Penal. 20
Fair
0.08
3.44
13.91
23.55
45.26
68.32
75.27
83.82
95.39
99.83
100.0
100.0
Fewer
0.08
3.52
13.83
23.3
45.1
69.57
77.12
85.92
94.3
98.32
100.0
100.0
MinMax
0.17
3.27
14.08
23.47
43.42
67.56
75.1
85.83
96.14
100.0
100.0
100.0
Penal. 30
Fair
0.0
2.35
12.24
21.71
43.76
67.06
73.34
77.79
88.6
98.32
99.83
99.83
Fewer
0.0
2.51
12.41
18.86
39.9
59.93
71.42
82.15
94.97
98.66
99.66
99.83
MinMax
0.17
1.51
11.48
19.03
35.79
59.68
69.99
85.0
96.14
99.83
100.0
100.0
Penal. 40
Fair
0.0
2.35
12.24
21.71
43.17
67.73
74.35
77.37
88.35
97.99
99.5
99.83
Fewer
0.17
2.51
14.5
21.79
42.75
65.8
76.11
79.88
87.34
95.14
95.39
99.33
MinMax
0.17
1.51
12.91
20.45
36.71
58.42
68.73
82.82
96.14
99.83
100.0
100.0
Penal. 50
Fair
0.0
2.35
13.33
22.63
43.67
65.13
71.25
76.61
88.43
95.98
97.65
100.0
Fewer
0.17
2.51
12.49
19.78
43.67
65.13
74.94
82.31
89.44
92.46
94.72
98.91
MinMax
0.17
1.51
12.91
20.45
35.46
56.83
67.14
82.48
95.89
99.58
100.0
100.0
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 6 Case 2 for Young People. Percentage of people assigned to paths up to a given length, for different penalties
Function
≤25 (m)
≤40 (m)
≤55 (m)
≤70 (m)
≤75 (m)
≤90 (m)
≤105 (m)
≤120 (m)
≤135 (m)
≤150 (m)
≤165 (m)
≤180 (m)
Penal. 1
Fair
0.0
1.69
8.68
14.42
30.78
47.81
55.65
67.71
77.32
84.57
91.23
99.41
Fewer
0.08
1.85
8.77
14.59
30.78
47.81
55.65
67.71
77.32
84.57
91.23
99.41
MinMax
0.0
1.52
8.68
14.42
30.78
47.81
55.65
67.71
77.32
84.57
91.23
99.41
Penal. 5
Fair
0.08
1.35
7.67
13.24
26.22
42.66
54.3
66.27
76.05
84.06
86.17
98.9
Fewer
0.08
1.69
8.68
14.0
27.07
41.23
51.77
64.17
76.9
83.73
88.45
99.41
MinMax
0.0
1.52
7.5
13.07
27.32
41.65
52.28
65.35
76.22
84.06
88.45
99.41
Penal. 10
Fair
0.0
1.43
5.82
11.64
25.8
39.63
51.52
66.27
75.55
83.81
86.59
98.23
Fewer
0.0
1.1
4.89
9.95
24.96
41.32
52.95
64.0
76.56
84.06
88.7
98.48
MinMax
0.0
1.52
5.82
11.47
27.32
39.38
49.49
65.77
76.81
83.56
89.29
98.82
Penal. 20
Fair
0.0
1.52
6.24
10.46
24.54
40.22
51.77
63.41
72.93
81.53
86.68
95.87
Fewer
0.0
1.26
6.07
10.12
24.2
40.39
51.85
64.0
72.93
81.62
86.76
96.12
MinMax
0.0
0.42
5.56
11.2
23.0
39.09
53.41
66.55
73.63
80.88
86.35
95.62
Penal. 30
Fair
0.0
1.68
6.66
11.04
24.6
36.48
48.1
61.16
68.41
76.33
80.2
91.49
Fewer
0.0
0.84
7.76
13.24
24.03
36.68
48.57
57.76
65.94
75.55
80.61
92.75
MinMax
0.0
1.01
7.34
12.56
24.79
40.56
46.96
58.85
67.71
73.52
77.66
93.0
Penal. 40
Fair
0.0
1.52
5.48
9.61
24.28
39.71
50.42
56.58
66.02
75.21
76.56
86.0
Fewer
0.0
1.01
7.67
12.98
23.27
39.04
45.95
53.46
64.0
74.79
78.67
88.7
MinMax
0.0
0.93
6.32
11.13
24.7
41.57
50.67
57.84
63.49
70.24
76.98
87.52
Penal. 50
Fair
0.0
0.84
3.29
6.5
20.0
35.19
47.68
50.89
57.13
68.52
75.78
79.41
Fewer
0.0
1.01
5.56
9.19
18.13
30.19
41.48
47.47
55.48
65.43
68.72
81.45
MinMax
0.0
0.0
4.21
6.15
13.06
27.3
42.29
49.54
59.22
63.77
68.83
77.76
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 7 Case 3 for Elder People and Kids. Percentage of people assigned to paths up to a given length, for different penalties
Function
≤25 (m)
≤40 (m)
≤55 (m)
≤70 (m)
≤75 (m)
≤90 (m)
≤105 (m)
≤120 (m)
≤135 (m)
≤150 (m)
≤165 (m)
≤180 (m)
Penal. 1
Fair
1.6
12.0
81.6
83.2
89.6
94.4
96.0
96.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Fewer
1.6
12.0
81.6
83.2
89.6
94.4
96.0
96.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
MinMax
1.6
12.0
81.6
83.2
89.6
94.4
96.0
96.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Penal. 5
Fair
1.6
11.2
76.8
79.2
86.4
94.4
95.2
95.2
98.4
99.2
99.2
100.0
Fewer
1.6
11.2
76.8
79.2
85.6
92.8
94.4
95.2
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
MinMax
1.6
11.2
75.6
78.0
86.4
94.0
95.6
95.6
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Penal. 10
Fair
1.6
11.2
77.2
79.6
85.76
93.2
94.0
94.0
99.2
100.0
100.0
100.0
Fewer
1.6
11.2
78.4
80.8
84.8
92.0
92.8
94.4
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
MinMax
1.6
11.2
78.4
80.16
86.4
91.2
92.8
92.8
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Penal. 20
Fair
1.6
11.2
76.64
78.4
85.84
93.76
94.56
94.56
99.2
100.0
100.0
100.0
Fewer
1.6
11.2
76.0
78.4
85.2
94.4
95.2
95.2
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
MinMax
1.6
11.2
77.84
80.24
85.2
91.76
93.36
93.36
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Penal. 30
Fair
1.6
11.2
77.2
79.6
85.76
93.2
94.0
94.0
99.2
100.0
100.0
100.0
Fewer
1.6
11.2
78.4
80.8
84.8
92.0
92.8
94.4
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
MinMax
1.6
11.2
78.4
80.16
86.4
91.2
92.8
92.8
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Penal. 40
Fair
1.6
11.2
77.2
79.6
85.76
93.2
94.0
94.0
99.2
100.0
100.0
100.0
Fewer
1.6
11.2
78.4
80.8
84.8
92.0
92.8
94.4
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
MinMax
1.6
11.2
78.4
80.16
86.4
91.2
92.8
92.8
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Penal. 50
Fair
1.6
11.2
78.4
80.8
86.4
92.8
92.8
92.8
99.2
99.68
99.68
99.68
Fewer
1.6
11.2
76.0
78.4
84.4
93.6
94.88
95.68
99.68
99.68
100.0
100.0
MinMax
1.6
11.2
78.4
80.16
86.4
91.2
92.48
92.48
99.68
99.68
100.0
100.0
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 8 Case 3 for Young People. Percentage of people assigned to paths up to a given length, for different penalties
Function
≤25 (m)
≤40 (m)
≤55 (m)
≤70 (m)
≤75 (m)
≤90 (m)
≤105 (m)
≤120 (m)
≤135 (m)
≤150 (m)
≤165 (m)
≤180 (m)
Penal. 1
Fair
0.8
7.6
38.4
40.8
75.2
81.2
88.0
89.6
95.2
96.0
96.0
100.0
Fewer
1.6
4.8
38.4
40.8
78.0
84.0
88.0
89.6
95.2
96.0
96.0
100.0
MinMax
1.6
4.8
38.4
40.8
78.0
84.0
88.0
89.6
95.2
96.0
96.0
100.0
Penal. 5
Fair
1.6
11.2
44.8
47.2
78.0
84.0
88.0
89.6
95.2
96.0
96.0
100.0
Fewer
1.6
11.2
44.8
47.2
78.0
84.0
88.0
89.6
95.2
96.0
96.0
100.0
MinMax
1.6
11.2
44.8
47.2
78.0
84.0
88.0
89.6
95.2
96.0
96.0
100.0
Penal. 10
Fair
1.6
11.2
31.68
43.84
71.44
79.68
88.0
89.6
95.2
96.0
96.0
100.0
Fewer
1.6
11.2
31.68
44.64
72.24
78.24
88.0
89.6
94.4
96.0
96.0
100.0
MinMax
1.6
11.2
31.68
44.64
71.44
83.04
88.0
89.6
95.2
96.0
96.0
100.0
Penal. 20
Fair
1.6
11.2
31.2
43.04
70.64
78.88
88.0
89.6
95.2
96.0
96.0
100.0
Fewer
1.6
11.2
31.2
44.64
71.44
77.44
88.0
89.6
94.4
96.0
96.0
100.0
MinMax
1.6
11.2
31.2
43.84
70.64
82.24
88.0
89.6
95.2
96.0
96.0
100.0
Penal. 30
Fair
1.6
11.2
31.2
43.52
70.32
78.24
88.0
89.6
94.32
94.32
94.32
98.08
Fewer
1.6
11.2
31.2
43.84
69.92
81.44
88.0
88.8
94.32
94.32
94.32
98.96
MinMax
1.6
11.2
31.2
43.52
69.52
81.92
88.0
88.8
92.48
94.08
94.08
99.2
Penal. 40
Fair
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Fewer
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
MinMax
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Penal. 50
Fair
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Fewer
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
MinMax
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
123

Annals of Operations Research
Funding Open access funding provided by Norwegian School Of Economics No funds, grants, or other support
was received. The authors certify that they have no afﬁliations with or involvement in any organization or
entity with any ﬁnancial interest or non-ﬁnancial interest in the subject matter or materials discussed in this
manuscript.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors have no Conﬂict of interest to declare that are relevant to the content of this
article.
Ethical approval This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by
any of the authors.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Ahuja, R. K., Magnanti, T. L., & Orlin, J. B. (1993). Network ﬂows: Theory, algorithms, and applications.
Prentice hall.
Brown, R., Galea, E., Deere, S., & Filippidis, L. (2021). Passenger response time data- sets for large passenger
ferries and cruise ships derived from sea trials. International Journal of Maritime Engineering. https://
doi.org/10.5750/ijme.v155iA2.899
Cisek, M., & Kapalka, M. (2014). Evacuation route assessment model for optimization of evacuation in build-
ings with active dynamic signage system. Transportation Research Procedia 2:541–549, URL https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.trpro.2014.09.094, the Conference on Pedestrian and Evacuation Dynamics 2014 (PED
2014), 22-24 October 2014, Delft, The Netherlands.
CLIA. (2021). Overview of the global cruise industry. https://cruising.org/-/media/clia-media/research/2022/
2021-1r-clia-001-overview-global.ashx.
CLIA. (2022). State of the cruise industry 2022. https://cruising.org/-/media/clia-media/research/2022/clia-
state-of-the-cruise-industry-2022_updated.ashx.
Deere, S., Galea, E., Filippidis, L., & Brown, R. (2012). Data collection methodologies used in the safeguard
project to collect human factors data. 13–24, URL https://doi.org/10.3940/rina.safe.2012.02.
Galea, E., Deere, S., Brown, R., & Filippidis, L. (2013). An experimental validation of an evacuation model
using data sets generated from two large passenger ships. Journal of Ship Research, 57, 155–170. https://
doi.org/10.5957/JOSR.57.3.120037
Helbing, D., Johansson, A., & Al-Abideen, H. Z. (2007). Dynamics of crowd disasters: An empirical study.
Physical Review E. https://doi.org/10.1103/physreve.75.046109
Heppenstall, A. J., Crooks, A. T., See, L. M., & Batty, M. (2011). Agent-Based Models of Geographical
Systems (1st ed.). Dordrecht: Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-90-481-8927-4
Lu, X., Luh, P. B., Marsh, K. L., Gifford, T., & Tucker, A. (2014). Guidance optimization of building evacuation
considering psychological features in route choice. Proceeding of the 11th World Congress on Intelligent
Control and Automation, 2669–2674, URL https://doi.org/10.1109/WCICA.2014.7053147.
Luo, M. (2019). How to Guide Emergency Evacuations on Cruise Ships? Modelling with Optimization and
Simulation Methodology. Master’s thesis, Norwegian School of Economics.
MIG. (2021). Cruise ship safety statistics. https://www.maritimeinjuryguide.org/blog/cruise-ship-safety-
statistics/.
Notteboom, T., & Pallis, A. (2022). Port Economics, Management and Policy. Routledge.
Ohst, J. P. (2016). On the construction of optimal paths from ﬂows and the analysis of evacuation scenarios.
Doctoral Thesis, Universität Koblenz, Universitätsbibliothek.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Pallis, A. A., Wilmsmeier, G., & Satta, G. (2022). Preparing cruise lines, ports, and destinations for the next
day of cruising. Research in Transportation Business and Management, 45, 100912. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.rtbm.2022.100912
Pie´nkosz, K., & Kołty´s, K. (2015). Integral ﬂow decomposition with minimum longest path length. European
Journal of Operational Research, 247(2), 414–420. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2015.06.012
Roughgarden, T., & Tardos, É. (2002). How bad is selﬁsh routing? Journal of the ACM (JACM), 49(2), 236–259.
Safeguard (2012). Overview of the global cruise industry. https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/218493.
ScanReach, A. S. (2023). ScanReach AS - Wireless IoT for Maritime. Website, https://www.scanreach.com/.
Schadschneider, A., Klüpfel, H., Kretz, T., Rogsch, C., & Seyfried, A. (2009). Fundamentals of Pedes-
trian and Evacuation Dynamics, 124–154. ISBN 978-1-60566-226-8, URL https://doi.org/10.4018/
9781605662268.ch006.
Southworth, F. (1991). Regional evacuation modeling: a state-of-the-art review. Technical report, Oak Ridge
National Laboratory.
Tuydes, H. (2005). Network trafﬁc management under disaster conditions. .
Vatinlen, B., Chauvet, F., Chrétienne, P., & Mahey, P. (2008). Simple bounds and greedy algorithms for
decomposing a ﬂow into a minimal set of paths. European Journal of Operational Research, 185(3),
1390–1401. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2006.05.043
Wardrop, J., (1952). Wardrop of Some Theoretical Aspects of Road Trafﬁc Research-Road Paper No. 36 (Road
Engineering Division), URL https://books.google.no/books?id=eAzAYgEACAAJ.
Williams, L., Tomescu, A., & Mumey, B. (2021). Flow decomposition with subpath constraints. Carbone, A.,
& El-Kebir, M, (eds.), 21st International Workshop on Algorithms in Bioinformatics (WABI 2021), 16:1–
16:15, Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs) (Germany: Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-
Zentrum für Informatik), URL https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.WABI.2021.16, international Workshop
on Algorithms in Bioinformatics, WABI 2021 ; Conference date: 02-08-2021 Through 04-08-2021.
Xuan, L. (2012). Optimal evacuation routes on cruise ship in ﬁre based on equivalent length. Journal of
Shanghai, Maritime University, 33(1), 32.
Yen, J. Y. (1970). An algorithm for ﬁnding shortest routes from all source nodes to a given destination in
general networks. Quarterly of Applied Mathematics, 27(4), 526–530.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123