TITLE: The performance of priority rules for the dynamic stochastic resource-constrained multi-project scheduling problem: an experimental investigation
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-05841-9
---

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-05841-9
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
The performance of priority rules for the dynamic stochastic
resource-constrained multi-project scheduling problem: an
experimental investigation
Philipp Melchiors1 · Rainer Kolisch1
· John J. Kanet2
Received: 2 December 2022 / Accepted: 13 January 2024 / Published online: 26 February 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
We consider the problem of a project manager of a matrix organization responsible for the
timely completion of projects arriving over time and requiring the usage of a set of resources
under his/her purview. A project is deﬁned by a set of activities, precedence relations between
activities, resource requirements, a customer due date, and a priority (a weight). Arriving
projects are released to a ﬂow control system that monitors the progress of activities and
schedules the set of available activities, i.e., activities that are ready to be processed, as
appropriate. A critical feature of such control systems is the decision process for choosing
the next activity to seize a given resource. This is the focus of this paper. In the past several
decades, various heuristic priority rules have been proposed in the literature to support this
type of decision in differing settings such as the job shop problem and the deterministic
resource-constrained project scheduling problem. A gap exists with respect to testing the
various rules all together in the more realistic dynamic-stochastic multi-project environment
when the objective is to minimize weighted project tardiness. The purpose of this paper is
to ﬁll this gap. Results show that the priority rule “Weighted Critical Ratio and Shortest
Processing Time” (W(CR + SPT)) is the best performing rule with respect to minimizing
weighted project tardiness. W(CR+SPT) is shown to be a variant of the family of “Modiﬁed
Due Date” rules ﬁrst introduced by Baker and Bertrand (J Oper Manage 1(3):37–42, 1982).
Repeated application of Duncan’s Multiple Range test demonstrates the robustness of our
ﬁndings. For the environmental parameters (due date tightness, variation of expected activity
durations, and utilization of resource), the W(CR + SPT) rule is dominant with respect to
weighted project tardiness among the eleven priority rules tested. Only when the number of
resources is very modest (either 1 or 3 resources) or under a purely parallel resource network
B Rainer Kolisch
rainer.kolisch@tum.de
Philipp Melchiors
philipp.melchiors@tum.de
John J. Kanet
kanet@udayton.edu
1
TUM School of Management, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
2
School of Business Administration, University of Dayton, Dayton, USA
123

570
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
is W(CR+SPT) not the dominant rule. In those cases, its variant W(CR+GSPT) is the best
performing rule with respect to weighted project tardiness.
Keywords Multiple project · Scheduling · Constrained resources · Stochastic · Priority rules
1 Introduction
In many project-based organizations such as R&D, a matrix structure is employed with func-
tional departments processing projects. Projects of different types (such as new development
projects, incremental development projects) arrive in a stochastic manner and their activities
have to be processed by the resources available in the functional departments. A relevant
objective is to minimize average weighted project delay in which project delay (tardiness)
is deﬁned as the time the project ﬁnishes after its due date and weights indicate the impor-
tance of projects. The arrival time of projects and the duration of activities are stochastic.
This problem is termed as dynamic stochastic resource-constrained multi-project schedul-
ing problem (DSRCMPSP). Despite its practical relevance, only limited research has been
undertaken so far to address this problem. In the literature, the multi-project scheduling
problem is predominantly stated as static and deterministic with the set of projects given
at the outset and all parameters such as activity durations known in advance. However, in
reality these assumptions are generally not met. First, projects arrive continuously over time.
Second, project parameters such as activity durations are stochastic. Thus, the multi-project
scheduling problem is in many cases both dynamic and stochastic in nature. As we discuss
in Sect. 2.2, under the assumption of Markovian interarrival times and activity processing
times, the problem can be modeled as Markov Decision Processes. However, due the curse
of dimensionality large-scale real-world problems cannot be solved to optimality. Hence, the
prevailing method for approaching these real-life complicated conditions is via implementing
a dynamic scheduling policy to construct a schedule using a priority rule for specifying the
order of processing of activities by a resource. In addition to scalability, priority rules are
prevalent in industry as they are easy to understand and to communicate. Against this back-
ground, this paper aims to provide a comprehensive comparison of well-known priority rules,
which have been proposed for simpler settings, for the total weighted tardiness objective and
to adapt them as needed for application to the more practically relevant DSRCMPSP. From
the literature, in particular from the literature on the deterministic multi-project schedul-
ing problem, we identify a number of priority policies which have performed well in prior
computational studies. Whereas all these rules have shown promise for the total weighted
tardiness objective, they have never been compared together in the same study nor in the
dynamic stochastic resource-constrained setting, which we do here.
In order to introduce the problem formally, we follow the framework of Adler et al. (1995)
and depict an organization as a set R of resources. Resource r ∈R comprises cr identical
units, each capable of processing one activity at a time. Projects arrive dynamically according
to a stochastic arrival process. We consider a stream of projects j = 1, . . . , J where each
arriving project j is of type p j ∈P. Project type p ∈P has a weight wp, an interarrival rate
λp, and is comprised of a set of activities Vp and a set of precedence relations Ap of the type
ﬁnish-to-start with minimum time lag of 0. Each precedence relation between activity i and
i′ is written as a tuple (i, i′) ∈Ap. In order to be processed, activity i ∈Vp seizes one unit
of resource rip ∈R for a stochastic duration with mean dip. Resource r ∈R has a capacity
of cr units. The set Er(t) refers to the set of activities being processed by resource r at time
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
571
t ≥0, where each activity i of project j is referred to by tuple (i, j). On arrival of project
j at time a j, a due date D j is assigned. We deﬁne the variables Si j ≥0 as the start time of
activity i of project j. Furthermore, let variable Tj ≥0 be the tardiness of project j. The
objective is to minimize the long term expected average weighted project tardiness with J
being the total number of projects arriving at the system:
Min Z = limJ→∞E
⎡
⎣1
J
J

j=1
w j · Tj
⎤
⎦
(1)
subject to the following constraints
a j ≤Si j
j = 1, . . . , J; i ∈V j
(2)
Si′, j + di′, j ≤Si, j
j = 1, . . . , J; (i′, i) ∈Ap j
(3)
|Er(t)| ≤cr
r ∈R; t ≥0
(4)
Si j + di j −D j ≤Tj
j = 1, . . . , J; i ∈V j
(5)
Si j, Tj ≥0
j = 1, . . . , J; i ∈V j
(6)
The decisions are on the start time of the activities Si j. These must neither be before the
arrival time a j of their projects (Constraint (2)) nor of the ﬁnish time of each of its predecessor
activities i′ ∈Ap j (Constraint (3)). Furthermore, for each resource r the number of activities
processed at any time t must not exceed its capacity cr (Constraint (4)). Finally, Constraint
(5) sets the tardiness of each project j. The objective function (1) minimizes the long term
expected average weighted project tardiness. Note that project arrival times a j and duration
of activities di j are random and thus the activity start Si j and the project tardiness Tj are
random variables.
This paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 2 we provide a brief survey of past related work.
In Sect. 3 we present the priority rules used in our study. Section4 provides the experimental
design of our computational study. In particular, we deﬁne the problem parameters used.
Section5 reports the results of the computational study. Section6 provides a summary and
conclusion.
2 Relevant literature
We begin in Sect. 2.1 with a general review of the class of approaches to the DSRCMPSP,
namely “scheduling policies” under which our work falls. Then, in Sect. 2.2 we brieﬂy review
the relevant literature to identify priority rules as used by scheduling policies found in various
environments to be effective for minimizing weighted tardiness. Section3 then follows with
formal descriptions of the rules we consider and how (if needed) the rules were adapted for
use in the DSRCMPSP.
2.1 Scheduling policies
The general approach that we take to address the DSRCMPSP is to employ a scheduling
policy ω. Different deﬁnitions of a scheduling policy can be found in the literature (e.g., see
Stork, 2001). Here, we employ a general deﬁnition based on Fernandez et al. (1998).
Deﬁnition 2.1 A scheduling policy ω deﬁnes actions at decision times. A decision time t is
either the time of a new project arrival a j or the completion time of an activity Si j + di j. An
123

572
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
action at decision time t consists for each resource r ∈R with at least one idle unit to select
one activity (i, j) ∈Wr(t) from the set of activities waiting to be processed in the queue in
front of the resource r.
A scheduling policy has to meet the nonanticipativity constraint (see Fernandez et al.,
1996), which states that only information known up to decision time t may be used. We
consider completion times of activities and arrival times of the projects arrived until t. For
stochastic project scheduling problems various classes of policies have been proposed (see
for example Möhring et al. 1984; Stork 2001). Our focus is on the class of resource-based
priority policies (RBP) of Stork (2001) that is deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 2.2 At decision time t, a resource-based priority policy (RBP policy) orders the
activities in Wr(t) based on priorities obtained by a priority rule and selects activities accord-
ing to this order until there are either no more activities in the queue or no more resource
units are available.
Note that resource-based priority policies have the non-delay property, i.e., no activity,
which can be started at time t will be deliberately delayed to a later start time (see Kolisch,
1996). In processor scheduling this is termed as work-conserving policy (see Tassiulas &
Georgiadis, 1996). Resource-based priority policies combine priority rules with the parallel
schedule generation scheme (see Kolisch, 1996) that is compatible with the nonanticipativity
constraint (see Ballestin, 2007). An alternative to RBPs are activity-based priority policies
(ABPs) (see Stork, 2001) where the additional constraint exists that an activity with a lower
priority must not be scheduled at an earlier time than an activity with a higher priority. From
a theoretical point of view, ABPs have the advantage that Graham anomalies (see Graham,
1966) are avoided. However, experiments by Fliedner (2015) show that ABPs lead in many
cases to poor performance or even unstable behavior with an unbounded long term average
number of projects in the system. This is due to the fact that idleness of resources occurs
quite frequently such that the busy periods of the resources are not sufﬁcient to cope with
the workload associated with the arriving projects. Recent computational results for the
deterministic single project problem indicate that resource-based policies lead to solutions
with smaller expected makespan (see Ballestin & Leus 2009, Ashtiani et al. 2011, Chen et
al. 2015).
2.2 Relevant priority rule literature
We classify the existing related literature according to the two dimensions: project arrival
(static vs. dynamic) and project information (deterministic vs. stochastic) resulting in four
ﬁelds, which are discussed below.
Static-deterministic multi-project scheduling In the static-deterministic case of the multi-
project scheduling problem, there are a number of projects which have to be scheduled. Each
project is available at the beginning of the planning horizon and all data is deterministic.
The objective is to minimize total weighted project delay. A recent survey of the literature
in this ﬁeld is given by Gómez Sánchez et al. (2022). Notable works include Kurtulus and
Davis (1982), Kurtulus and Narula (1985), Lawrence and Morton (1993) as well as Tsai
and Chiu (1996). In each case, the authors undertake computational studies where they
test the performance of different priority rules. Browning and Yassine (2010a) extend the
investigationtolargersetsofpriorityrulesandgiveamorein-depthanalysisoftherelationship
between problem parameters and rules performance. Browning and Yassine (2016) extend the
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
573
consideration to portfolios of development projects. Building upon the work of Browning
and Yassine (2010b), Van Eynde and Vanhoucke (2020) evaluate a large set of priority
rules on a new set of instances. They differentiate the priority rules into “single project
rules”, “coupled rules”, and “decoupled rules”. For single and coupled project rules, the
multiple projects are modeled as a single super-project network. This is solved by single
project rules using activity information only, while coupled rules are applying project and
activity information. Decoupled rules are comprised of a pair of rules, and the projects are
modeled separately. Using project information, the ﬁrst rule is applied to select a project while
the second rule, using activity information, is applied to choose an activity of the selected
project. The experimental study shows better results for the decoupled rules. The best pair of
priority rules for the project and the activity selection are Minimum Total Work Remaining
(MINTWR) and Minimum Latest Start Time (MINLST), respectively, when solving the
instances of Browning and Yassine (2010a), while for solving the newly generated instances
of Van Eynde and Vanhoucke (2020), the best pair is Minimum Critical Path (MINCP)
and Minimum Dynamic Slack (MINSLK). In a follow-up study, Van Eynde and Vanhoucke
(2022) propose new summary measures for the static-deterministic multi-project scheduling
problem and test the decoupled priority rules on benchmark instances, generated employing
the new summary measures. Using the instance set of Van Eynde and Vanhoucke (2020),
Bredael and Vanhoucke (2022) undertake an extensive comparison of ten re-implemented
metaheuristics from the literature.
Static-stochastic multi-project scheduling In the static-stochastic multi-project schedul-
ing setting, each project is available at the beginning of the planning horizon, and activity
durations are stochastic. The literature on this problem is rather sparse. Wang et al. (2017)
undertake a computational study to assess the performance of priority rules on quality and
robustness. Quality is related to time-based objectives being the delay per project relative to its
critical path length as well as an aggregated delay measure over all projects. Robustness refers
to the stability of the results obtained for the case with deterministic activity durations in the
presence of stochastic activity durations. The set of rules as well as the problem parameters
to control the generation of problem instances is based on the work of Browning and Yassine
(2010a). Wang et al. (2017) ﬁnd that the Earliest-Due-Date-First (EDDF) rule performs best
overall. Since we focus on the weighted tardiness objective in a dynamic-stochastic setting,
we expect the results will not be applicable to our problem context.
Dynamic-deterministic multi-project scheduling In this setting, projects arrive over time
and the arrival time of the projects is stochastic. At the arrival of a project, all information
on that project is known with certainty. Dynamic deterministic multi-project scheduling is
treated intensively by Dumond and Mabert (1988). In this category we also place relevant
studies of the special case of the dynamic job shop scheduling problem. Notable works
concerned with project (job) tardiness include: Baker and Kanet (1983), Vepsalainen and
Morton (1987), Anderson and Nyirenda (1990) and Kutanoglu and Sabuncuoglu (1999).
Dynamic-stochastic multi-project scheduling In this ﬁeld of the literature, multiple projects
arrive in a stochastic fashion over time. Once a project has arrived, the information about
the duration of its activities is stochastic while all other project information is known with
certainty. The seminal paper that addresses dynamic-stochastic multi-project scheduling is
Adler et al. (1995). There, and later in Levy and Globerson (1997), a multi-project organi-
zation is modeled as a fork-join-queueing network in which projects arrive over time and
each activity of a project has to be processed by one speciﬁc function (resource) of the orga-
123

574
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
nization. Activities of different projects are queued in front of the resources in order to be
processed. Scheduling in this context is addressed by different approaches.
Optimal and near optimal policies are computed based on Markov Decision Processes
(MDP)byChoietal.(2007),Melchiors(2015)andSaticetal.(2022).SinceMDPssufferfrom
the curse of dimensionality, the authors limit the number of projects to make the problem more
tractable. Besides that, Choi et al. (2007) and Satic et al. (2022) restrict their considerations
to projects where activities are processed in a strict linear order.
For problem instances of realistic size, priority rules are investigated by different authors.
Anavi-Isakow and Golany (2003) investigate the performance of a set of simple priority rules
in the context of project control mechanisms where projects are backlogged in front of the
system until a threshold for a speciﬁc state such as the number of projects in the system is met.
They ﬁnd for a single problem instance, with three project types and up to seven activities per
project, that the Shortest Processing Time rule performed best w.r.t. average ﬂow time per
project. Melchiors and Kolisch (2009) undertake a simulation study in which they show that
the MINSLK rule as well as policies based on the bottleneck dynamic approach of Lawrence
and Morton (1993) provide good results. Chen et al. (2019) extend the work by Wang et
al. (2017) by taking into account new project arrivals. These are modeled using a second
set of projects, referred to as insertion portfolio, from which a new project is selected at a
random time as long as the number of projects being in process does not exceed a maximum
number. On each arrival of a new project, the priority rule for scheduling is selected based
on the state of the project portfolio, measured by the fraction of critical activities which have
been scheduled. Since the deﬁnition of the dynamic-stochastic multi-project environment as
well as the evaluation of solutions in Chen et al. (2019) differs fundamentally from ours, the
results are difﬁcult to compare.
Besides empirical works of limited scope, there are some theoretical results for scheduling
fork-join-queueing networks. Baccelli et al. (1993) consider the case with a single project
type and resources with a single unit. For this case, they show the optimality of the First-
Come, First-Serve (FCFS) rule applied on the project level (where all activities of one project
are prioritized over the activities of another project) for minimizing the long term expected
project ﬂow time. Since prioritizing on the project level leaves room for prioritization on the
activity level, the rule deﬁnes the class of so-called FCFS-policies. In our study we assess the
performance of FCFS-policies for minimizing total weighted tardiness for multiple project
types.
2.3 Positioning our work
Major drawbacks of the studies undertaken so far for the dynamic-stochastic multi-project
scheduling problem are the small sets of problem instances and limited time horizon of the
investigation. Adler et al. (1995) and Levy and Globerson (1997) aim at demonstrating the
power of fork-join-queueing network models as a process-oriented approach for the inves-
tigation of uncertainty in the context of dynamic and stochastic multi-project organizations.
The authors draw on single case studies from collaborations with industry partners and con-
sider, amongst other approaches, using priority rules for the scheduling task, where only a
limited number of rules are considered.
Chen et al. (2019) use only a limited set of projects arriving in the future and thus consider
only a limited time horizon. In such settings, long term effects, which may lead to differing
outcomes are neglected. A well-known problem related to scheduling in queueing networks
in a dynamic-stochastic context is the stability of the system. Stability implies that the long-
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
575
term average number of projects in the system is ﬁnite. Kumar and Seidman (1990) show that
instability may occur for some scheduling policies leading to unbounded numbers of projects
in the system over time. This may happen even if the utilization per resource is strictly less
than than one. Our experimental design ensures stability of the systems.
To the best of our knowledge, no large-scale systematic investigations of the effects of
problem parameters on the performance of priority rules have been carried out. An exception
holds for the preliminary works of Melchiors and Kolisch (2009) and Melchiors (2015). In
this paper we undertake an elaborate computational study where we assess the impact of
several problem parameters on the performance of priority rule based scheduling policies.
We thereby extend the works of Melchiors and Kolisch (2009) as well as Melchiors (2015)
in several ways: First, we consider additional priority rules such as switching rules, where
one of them turns out to be clearly the best rule. Second, we assess the idea of embedding
priority rules into project-based FCFS policies as proposed by Baccelli et al. (1993). Third,
we ﬁnd groups of rules with similar performance and distinguish between groups of rules
with statistically different performance by using the Duncan test.
3 Priority rules
The selection of the rules was based on their performance for similar problems with total
tardiness or total weighted tardiness objectives. Several of the priority rules to be discussed
below employ the expected length of the critical path of a project and the expected latest
start time of a project’s activities needed to meet the project’s due date. These parameters
are stochastic and depend on the state of the system and future scheduling decisions. As
described below, we derive these parameters employing a Monte Carlo simulation of the
resource-unconstrained system. The notation employed in presenting the rules is summarized
in Table 15 in Appendix A.
3.1 Basic rule types for minimizing tardiness
In searching the literature of scheduling rules designed for minimizing total weighted tar-
diness, we see that all such rules, in some way or another, combine information about the
input parameters due date, activity processing time, and weight. Looking closely at such
rules, we see two fundamental ways in which this information is considered. At a very basic
level, the ﬁrst approach is to consider some ratio involving due dates and processing times. A
second approach is to consider a time-sensitive binary switch in emphasis from due date to
processing time, which gives rise to two basic families of rules: ratio rules and binary switch
rules.
Probably the ﬁrst evidence of the “ratio” approach is found in the work of Carroll (1965)
and his so-called “c over t” dispatching rule which was inspirational for a series of works
by Lawrence and Morton (1993) and Morton and Pentico (1993). For binary switch rules
the seminal work is provided by Baker and Bertrand (1982) with their “modiﬁed due date”
priority rule and later further developed by Baker and Kanet (1983), Dumond and Mabert
(1988), Anderson and Nyirenda (1990) and Kanet and Li (2004). We provide below pre-
cise descriptions of how we adapted the ideas of these various authors to the DSRCMPSP
environment.
123

576
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
3.2 Ratio rules
The ratio rules which we investigate include the family of bottleneck dynamic (BD) rules
proposed by Lawrence and Morton (1993) as well as Morton and Pentico (1993). The generic
form of the rules deﬁnes the priority of an activity (i, j) ∈Wr(t) at time t to be
w j · Ui j(t)
πi j(t)
.
(7)
The basic idea of bottleneck dynamic rules is to balance the cost w j · Ui j(t) of delaying
activity (i, j) for one period against the marginal opportunity cost πi j(t) associated with
starting (i, j) one period earlier. The term w j ·Ui j(t) for the delay cost has two components.
The weight w j, which reﬂects the maximum cost for increasing the tardiness of project j by
one period and the urgency factor Ui j,0 ≤Ui j(t) ≤1, deﬁned as
Ui j(t) = exp

−max

0, (li j −t)
 
k · dri j (t)

.
(8)
In the numerator of Eq. (8), li j is the latest start time of activity (i, j) and thus li j −t is
the slack of activity (i, j). In the denominator, dri j (t) is the average expected duration of
activities waiting in front of resource ri j at time t where ri j is the resource required by activity
(i, j). The factor k is a scaling factor denoted as the “lookahead parameter”. For nonpositive
slack the urgency factor is 1 and it decreases exponentially to zero for positive slack.
To estimate the opportunity costs πi j(t), Lawrence and Morton (1993) propose “myopic
activity costing” (MC) or “global activity costing” (GC). Myopic activity costing considers
only activity (i, j) to be scheduled on resource ri j, which yields opportunity cost
πi j(t) =
πri j (t) · di j
cri j
.
(9)
The rationale for myopic activity costing is that scheduling activity (i, j) seizes fraction
1
cri j of the capacity from resource ri j for di j periods. Each period is worth πri j (t), which is
the estimated opportunity cost for postponing the activities waiting in front of resource ri j
by one period. As all activities waiting for resource r only seize this resource, the fraction
πri j (t)
cri j
becomes πr(t)
cr
and thus a constant term no longer relevant for the selection. Hence, by
omitting the constant term, Eq. (9) reduces to πri j (t) = di j.
Global activity costing (GC) takes into account the opportunity costs of all unﬁnished
activities of project j including activity (i, j) given in the set U j(t). Morton and Pentico
(1993) assume that to expedite project j all not yet ﬁnished activities (i′, j) with i′ ∈U j(t)
of project j have to be started immediately and consecutively. We thus obtain the opportunity
cost
πi j(t) =

m∈U j(t)
πrmj (t) · dmj
crmj
(10)
with resource prices πr(t) set either by uniform resource pricing according to Eq. (11) given
in Lawrence and Morton (1993) or by dynamic resource pricing according to Eq. (12) given
in Morton and Pentico (1993).
πU
r (t) = 1
(11)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
577
π D
r (t) =

(i, j)∈Wr(t)
w j · Ui j(t)
(12)
Combining the two activity costing methods, myopic and global, with the resource pricing
schemes, uniform and dynamic, we obtain the following bottleneck dynamic (BD) priority
rules.
BD with Myopic Activity Costing (BD-MC)
max
(i, j)∈Wr(t)

w j · Ui j(t)
di j

(13)
BD with Global Activity Costing and Uniform Resource Pricing (BD-GC-U)
max
(i, j)∈Wr(t)
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
w j · Ui j(t) ·
⎛
⎝
m∈U j(t)
dmj · πU
r (t)
crmj
⎞
⎠
−1⎫
⎪⎬
⎪⎭
(14)
BD with Global Activity Costing and Dynamic Resource Pricing (BD-GC-D)
max
(i, j)∈Wr(t)
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
w j · Ui j(t) ·
⎛
⎝
m∈U j(t)
dmj · π D
r (t)
crmj
⎞
⎠
−1⎫
⎪⎬
⎪⎭
(15)
The priority rules (13)–(15) are similar to the well-known weighted shortest processing time
(WSPT) rule. A formal deﬁnition of the WSPT rule is given in Eq. (25). The BD-MC-rule
multiplies for each waiting activity its WSPT-value with its urgency factor Ui j(t). In this
way, the project due date is taken into account. If all activities in the queue of resource r
have nonpositive slack and hence their urgency factor Ui j(t) = 1, the BD-MC rule equals
the WSPT rule. The two global activity costing rules BD-GC-U and BD-GC-D generalize
the WSPT-rule by considering all activities of the entire project not yet processed.
3.3 Binary switch rules
The basic idea behind binary switch rules is to provide a priority value for an activity, in which
emphasis switches (at a critical point in time) from the activity’s due date to its processing
time. The major rules falling into this category include the various forms of the “modiﬁed
due date” approach ﬁrst provided by Baker and Bertrand (1982). We study several variations
of the modiﬁed due date approach applying it to the DSRCMPSP as outlined below.
Weighted Modiﬁed Due Date (WMDD) At decision time t, we select an activity according
to
min
(i, j)∈Wr(t)
 1
w j
· max

D j −t, qi j

.
(16)
In Eq. (16), D j is the due date of project j, qi j is the expected time for the activities along
the critical path from activity (i, j) to the project completion, i.e., the tail of activity (i, j).
Note that WMDD gives an activity a priority at time t based on either its project’s due date
or the expected time of its project’s earliest completion.
Weighted Modiﬁed Activity Due Date (WMOD) This rule selects activity (i, j) following
min
(i, j)∈Wr(t)
 1
w j
· max

di j, Di j + t

.
(17)
123

578
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
The estimate of the activity’s due date Di j is calculated as Di j = 0.5 · (Dmax
i j
−Dmin
i j ) with
the maximum due date
Dmax
i j
= D j −qi j + di j
(18)
and the minimum due date
Dmin
i j
= a j + ri j + di j
(19)
where ri j refers to the expected time for the activities along the critical path from the start
of the project to activity (i, j), i.e., the head of the activity (i, j).
Weighted Critical Ratio and Shortest Processing Time (W(CR+SPT))
FirstdevelopedbyAndersonandNyirenda(1990)andstudiedbyKutanogluandSabuncuoglu
(1999) in the dynamic job shop setting, the CR+SPT rule is an interesting variation to the
WMOD approach. The name CR+SPT is somewhat of a misnomer as it suggests a linear
combinationofCRandSPT,ratherthanthe“either-or”logicconstructionofWMOD.Therule
is applied at the activity level (like WMOD) and like WMOD it sets priority to the greater of
an activity time till due or its processing time. The variation consists of dynamically changing
an activity’s due date (and thus its time till due) by multiplying it by the activity’s critical
ratio. The critical ratio CRi j(t) is the ratio of time till project j is due to the remaining
work content on the critical path to completion of j, i.e., CRi j(t) =

D j −t
 
/qi j such that
activities with larger CRi j(t) are less critical. This idea is used to obtain a modiﬁed (expected)
activity duration D′
i j = CRi j(t) · di j that is inserted into the classical WSPT rule as follows
min
(i, j)∈Wr(t)
 1
w j
· max

D′
i j, di j

.
(20)
For activities with low critical ratio, the activity durations are increased in this rule. If all
activities have a critical ratio less than one, then the rule reduces to WSPT.
Weighted Critical Ratio and Global Shortest Processing Time (W(CR+GSPT)) This
rule extends W(CR+SPT) by considering the sum of the expected durations of all unﬁnished
activities, instead of the expected duration of only the current activity (i, j). With DG′
i j =
CRi j(t)

m∈U j(t)
dmj, we obtain
min
(i, j)∈Wr(t)
⎧
⎨
⎩
1
w j
· max
⎧
⎨
⎩DG′
i j ,

m∈U j(t)
dmj
⎫
⎬
⎭
⎫
⎬
⎭.
(21)
Following the distinction of the bottleneck dynamic rules of Morton and Pentico (1993)
into local and global rules as discussed in Sect. 3.2, we categorize the rule W(CR+SPT) as
local and the rule W(CR+GSPT) as global because the former considers only the expected
duration of activity (i, j) while the latter considers the sum of the expected durations of all
not ﬁnished activities, including activity (i, j).
Weighted Due Date Modiﬁed Shortest Activity from Shortest Project (WSASP-DD)
This rule represents a ﬁnal variation of the binary switch approach. It was originally studied
by Kurtulus and Davis (1982) in the job shop environment and later adapted by Kurtulus
and Narula (1985) for the static deterministic resource-constrained multi-project case, and
by Dumond and Mabert (1988) for the dynamic deterministic multi project case. We adapt
it here for the DSRCMPSP by setting the activity’s priority at time t to be
min
(i, j)∈Wr(t)

w j ·

li j −t
 
for li j −t < 0
1
w j ·

q0 j + di j
 
otherweise

,
(22)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
579
where li j −t is the activity’s slack at time t, and q0 j is the tail of the dummy start activity
(0, j) of project j, i.e., the expected length of the critical path of project j. As described by
Dumond and Mabert (1988), SASP-DD is a reﬁnement of the SASP of Kurtulus and Narula
(1985), which combines the features of shortest activity time with minimum slack with the
switch occurring when slack is depleted.
3.4 Benchmark rules
In addition to the rules outlined above, we investigate the following rules, which are com-
monly used for comparison in many of the studies cited above.
First-Come, First-Serve (FCFS) Here, we select activity(i, j) according to
min
(i, j)∈Wr(t)

ai j

,
(23)
with ai j denoting the arrival time of activity (i, j) at resource ri j.
Weighted Minimum Slack (WMINSLK) Activity selection follows
min
(i, j)∈Wr(t)

wp j ·

li j −t
 
for li j −t < 0
1
wp j ·

li j −t
 
otherwise

.
(24)
Note that we modiﬁed WMINSLK such that for the case of negative slack, i.e., li j −t < 0,
the priority value is still positive.
Weighted Shortest Processing Time (WSPT)
min
(i, j)∈Wr(t)

di j
w j

(25)
Random (RAN) This policy randomly selects activities for scheduling. We employ the RAN
rule to serve as a baseline for rule comparisons.
Finally, we note that for all rules, ties are broken randomly.
4 Experimental design
We begin this section with a discussion of the speciﬁc assumptions for the simulation study.
We then outline the relevant parameters for the generation of problem instances and the
simulation.
4.1 Preliminaries
For each project type p ∈P we assume a Poisson arrival process with rate λp. Arriving
projects are numbered in the order of arrival by assigning an index j irrespective of their type.
Activity durations are assumed to be exponentially distributed with expected value dip. The
assumption of exponentially distributed interarrival times of projects and duration of activities
is quite general and in line with the literature (see, e.g., Satic et al., 2022). An advantage of the
exponential distribution is that only limited information is required and that the distributions
are general and do not depend on a speciﬁc application or industry. Maximum allowed ﬂow
times A j are drawn from the uniformly distributed interval

(1 −β) · Ap, (1 + β) · Ap
 
,
123

580
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
Table 1 Systematically altered
levels of the system parameters
System parameter
Values
|R|
1, 3, 5, 10, 15, 20
ρ
0.7, 0.9
CVdr
[0, 0.4], [0.8, 1]
where Ap denotes the mean maxiumum allowed ﬂow time for project type p. Then, due
dates D j are derived from A j by D j = a j + A j. The number of projects in the system is
restricted to N max; otherwise the system might not reach steady state in the sense that the
system exhibits unstable system behavior if non-optimal scheduling policies are used (see
Kumar & Seidman 1990 as well as 2008). N max and Ap for all p ∈P are determined by
simulation runs in which activities are scheduled with the RAN policy. In the ﬁrst run, we
do not restrict the number of projects |J(t)| at any time t. In the next run, we set N max to the
number of projects which is not exceeded for 99% of the time. As a consequence, the system
is nearly an open system without limitation on the number of projects. In another RAN run,
taking into account N max as determined above, we calculate Ap such that the percentage of
completed projects of type p ∈P with ﬂow time C j −a j ≤Ap equals 1 −αp. Parameter
αp measures the percentage of tardy projects of type p when using the RAN scheduling
policy. We employ αp to take into account that the difﬁculty of meeting due dates depends
on multiple factors, among others the utilization of resources (see Ramasesh, 1990). As αp
is a statistical measure deﬁned on the realizations of project ﬂow times, it allows control of
the due date tightness to be independent of other problem parameters. Furthermore, as RAN
does not use any information, the due date tightness does not depend on speciﬁc scheduling
policies. Finally, we discuss a normalization of the results. Instead of using the weighted
tardiness Z(ω) obtained by (priority) policy ω for a problem instance, we normalize the
results by applying
Zn(ω) =
Z(ω)
Z(ωRAN)
(26)
where Zn(ω) is the average weighted tardiness obtained for a policy ω relative to the average
weighted tardiness obtained using the random policy ωRAN. In the following, we refer to
Zn(ω) as normalized weighted tardiness. The normalization has the advantage that when
averaging over the results from a set of problem instances, the values lie in a similar range
such that they have a similar impact on the mean. Furthermore, the performance can be
entirely explained by the information used by policy ω.
4.2 Generation of problem instances
The generation of problem instances is controlled by two sets of parameters, system param-
eters and project type parameters.
System parameters are the number of resources |R|, the system utilization ρ, and CVd
r ,
the coefﬁcient of variation of the expected durations of activities processed on resource r.
The system parameters are systematically varied according to the parameter levels given in
Table 1.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
581
Table 2 Systematically altered
levels of the project type
parameters
Project type parameter
Values
α
80%, 20%
β
50%
(|V1|, |V2|)
(20, 20)
(w1, w2)
(1, 2)
OS
0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0
For each number of resources |R| we assume cr = 1 ∀r ∈R, i.e., each resource r can
process not more than one activity at a time. We assume identical utilization levels
ρr =
λ 
p∈P

i∈Vpr dip
|P|
(27)
for every resource r ∈R (such that ρr = ρ for all r ∈R) with Vpr = {i ∈Vp|rip = r} being
the set of activity types of project type p that are processed by resource r ∈R. We attain a
given utilization level ρ by controlling the total arrival rate λ = λmax ·ρ with λmax = 0.1333.
Utilization ρ is set to 70% and 90%. For simplicity, the project type related arrival rates
λp have equal shares of λ such that λp = λ/|P| holds. The coefﬁcient of variation of the
expected durations of activities processed on resource r is CVd
r , where CVd
r is deﬁned on dr,
the expected duration of any activity arriving at resource r. For simplifying the computation,
we assume that expected durations are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.). Note
that the i.i.d. assumption is normally not met due to the impact of scheduling policies and
interdependencies between activities of the same project. For example, multiple activities
from the same project may arrive on completion of their common predecessors. The expected
duration of all activities processed on a resource r is given by
dr =

p∈P

i∈Vpr
λp · dip
λr
= ρr
cr
(28)
in which
λr =

p∈P
λp · |Vpr|
(29)
is the total arrival rate at resource r ∈R. Due to ρr = ρ, ρr is controlled via the utilization.
Finally, CVd
r is given by
CVd
r =
!
"
"
"
"
#
⎛
⎜⎝λr

p∈P
λp

i∈Vpr
d2
ip
%
p∈P

i∈Vpr dip
&2
⎞
⎟⎠−1,
(30)
for the derivation see Melchiors (2015). For our experiment, we require that CVd
r
∈
(
CVd,min, CVd,max)
for all r ∈R. The intervals are given in Table 1.
Project type parameters are due date tightness α, the variation of the maximum ﬂow time
β, the number of activity types per project type |Vp|, weights of project types wp, and order
strength OS. Table 2 summarizes how the project type parameters were systematically varied.
We investigate problem instances with two project types (P = {1, 2}) with weights w1 = 1
and w2 = 2. As we want to obtain general insights into the effects of problem parameters,
123

582
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
Table 3 |Vpr| for all p ∈P and
r ∈R
|R|
|Vpr|
1
20
3
7, 7, 6
5
4, 4, 4, 4, 4
10
2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2
15
2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1
20
1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1
Table 4 Sample speciﬁcations
2 Samples of (rip, dip) for all i ∈Vp and p ∈{1, 2}
2 Network samples for each level of OS
we consider similar (but not identical) project types. For the following parameters the two
projects types have identical parameter levels: Two levels of due date tightness α = 20%
and 80%, one level for the variation of the maximum ﬂow time β = 0.5, and one level
for the number of activity types for each project type |Vp| = 20. The network structure is
individually controlled for each project type using the order strength (OS). OS is a [0, 1]
normalized measure for the number of all precedence relationships, including the transitive
ones. A value of 0 indicates a parallelnetwork with no precedence relations between activities,
while a value of 1 indicates a network with all activities in strict sequence. A formal deﬁnition
of OS is given by Schwindt (1998). We set OS = 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1 for both project
types. For each level of OS, except 0 and 1, two pairs of non-identical networks are sampled,
one for each project type. For the extreme values of OS = 0 and OS = 1, only one network
exists for each value. Two sets of tuples (rip, dip) for all i ∈Vp and p ∈P are randomly
sampled. For our design, we have sampled two sets in order to cover the range of possible sets
and to avoid that conclusions are made based on speciﬁc properties of a single set. For each
activity type (i, p) we sample dip taking into account CVd. When determining the resource
rip where activity type (i, p) has to be processed, information on the number of activity
types |Vpr| to be processed at each resource r ∈R is required. In our design, each resource
should roughly process the same number of activity types. Thus, for ﬁxed |Vp| = 20 for all
p ∈P, the values for |Vpr| depend on |R| (see Table 3). Table 4 gives the speciﬁcation of
the samples.
The total number of problem instances results from the product over the number of param-
eter levels (given in parentheses) with respect to |R| (6), ρ (2), CVd (2), α (2), OS (6), as
well as the number of sampled pairs for each level of OS (2) and the number of the sets
of tuples (rip, dip) (2), such that we obtain 1, 152 instances. For each problem instance we
simulate each of the 12 priority policies (11 rules and RAN as well as two runs for N max and
the quantile for αp respectively) in a simulation run which results in 16,128 runs.
4.3 Simulation set up
For the simulation of the problem instances we have programmed a discrete event simulation
tool in Java. When running the simulation, we employed a warm-up period of 10,000 projects
to reach steady state. The length of the warm-up period was determined using Welch’s
procedure (see Law, 2007) for problem instances with |R| = 20 and ρ = 0.9 in which
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
583
a high number of projects is expected to be in the system. In this way, a longer warm up
period than necessary is obtained for most instances. The length of the observation period
was set to 20,000 projects. As a variance reduction technique, we employed common random
numbers (see Law, 2007) such that for each problem instance all priority policies are applied
on the same sample of projects with respect to type, interarrival times, and activity durations.
For each problem instance and priority policy we ran 10 replications such that the width of
the conﬁdence interval of the objective function is at most 10%. For the BD-policies, the
look-ahead parameter was set to k = 1, as for this value good results have been obtained in
preliminary experiments.
5 Experimental results
In the following we provide the results of the simulation study. The performance of a rule is
measured as the normalized weighted tardiness Zn(ω) given in Eq. (26). Duncan tests with
a 5% signiﬁcance level were undertaken to detect groups of rules where rules in different
groups show a signiﬁcant difference in performance while rules in the same group do not.
First, in Sect. 5.1 we provide the results for the base case instances. Afterwards, in Sect. 5.2,
we discuss the results for variations of the base case.
5.1 Results for the base case instances
Table 5 provides the performance of all priority rules as well as the group, which a rule belongs
to, according to the Duncan test. Next to the 11 rules presented in Sect. 3, we consider the
random rule RAN, which by deﬁnition has a normalized performance of Zn(RAN) = 1.
The groups as obtained from the Duncan test inform us for any priority rule if the rule has a
signiﬁcant different performance than RAN. Obviously, priority rules, which are signiﬁcantly
worse than RAN, should not be selected. To facilitate reading the tables, we have highlighted
in this as well as the following tables selected rules with the colors used in Table 5, i.e.,
W(CR+SPT)inyellow,BD-GC-Dingreen,BD-MCingray-blue,BD-GC-Uinturquoise,and
W(CR+GSPT) in orange. W(CR+SPT) is the best rule, being signiﬁcantly superior to all other
rules. This extends the ﬁndings of Kutanoglu and Sabuncuoglu (1999) for the dynamic job
shop problem. BD-GC-D, BD-MC, and WMOD rank second. The global counterparts of the
local rules, namely W(CR+GSPT) and BD-GC-U, show a signiﬁcantly worse performance
than the local versions W(CR+SPT), BD-GC-D, and BD-MC. This conﬁrms observations
made by Kanet and Hayya (1982) and Kutanoglu and Sabuncuoglu (1999) for the job shop
problem. The rule WMDD is signiﬁcantly inferior to the random rule RAN.
In Sects. 5.1.1–5.1.5 we discuss the effects of the problem parameters α, |R|, OS, CVd
r ,
and ρ on the performance of the priority rules for the base case instances. For the analysis
we consider the overall effect obtained from averaging over subsets of problem instances.
5.1.1 Due date tightness
Table 6 shows the impact of due date tightness α deﬁned as the percentage of tardy projects
obtained in the simulation study when using the RAN rule. The two levels are α = 0.2
(low due date tightness) with 20% tardy projects and α = 0.8 (high due date tightness)
with 80% tardy projects. It turns out that overall good rules are good for both levels of due
date tightness. W(CR+SPT) is the best rule for low due date tightness and together with
123

584
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
Table 5 Overall performance of
the priority rules and groups
according to the Duncan test
Rule
Z
n(ω)
Groups
W(CR+SPT)
0.31
g
BD-GC-D
0.44
f
BC-MC
0.46
f
WMOD
0.51
f
WMINSLK
0.62
e
FCFS
0.63
e
WSASP-DD
0.81
d
BD-GC-U
0.95
c
WSPT
0.98
c
RAN
1.00
b, c
W(CR+GSPT)
1.07
a, b
WMDD
1.11
a
Table 6 Performances of the priority rules for different due date tightness
BD-GC-D best for high due date tightness. Note for the three rules WSPT, W(CR+GSPT),
and WSASP-DD, the standardized performance improves with higher due data tightness.
The performance of FCFS deteriorates with increasing due date tightness. This was to be
expected, as giving priority to activities that arrived early is not a meaningful strategy when
the majority of projects are tardy.
5.1.2 Number of resources
Figure 1 as well as Table 7 show the performance of the rules when increasing the number
of resources from 1 to 20. For a clearer presentation, we separate the priority rules into two
ﬁgures according to their performance: The left part of Fig. 1 provides priority rules, which
show deteriorating performance for an increasing number of resources. The right part of
Fig. 1 shows priority rules, which are not signiﬁcantly impacted by the number of resources.
The rules depicted in the left part of Fig. 1, namely W(CR+GSPT), WMDD, WMINSLK,
WSASP-DD, BD-GC-U, and BD-GC-D do all use due date information. Furthermore, all
global rules are included in this set. For these rules we observe for up to 5 resources a small
deterioration of performance and small differences between the rules, but for more than 5
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
585
Fig. 1 Impact of |R| on the performance of priority rules
Table 7 Impact of the number of resources on the performance
resources a high deterioration of performance and large differences between the rules. In
Table 7 we see that for a small number of resources, i.e., 1 and 3 resources, BD-GC-D, BD-
GC-U, and W(CR+GSPT) provide the best performance, showing no signiﬁcant difference
according to the Duncan test. For the case of 5 resources, BD-GC-D is still in the best group,
now joined by W(CR+SPT). W(CR+SPT) stays in the best group for more than 5 resources.
The better performance of W(CR+GSPT) compared to W(CR+SPT) for a small number of
resources and loose due dates can be explained by Theorem B.1 given in Appendix B. In
general we observe that global-oriented rules perform better for a low number of resources
whereas local-oriented rules excel for high number of resources.
123

586
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
Table 8 Performance of the priority rules for different levels of order strength
5.1.3 Order strength
Table 8 provides the performance of the priority rules for order strength (OS) levels between
0 (purely parallel activity networks) and 1 (purely serial activity networks). For OS-levels
between 0 and 0.6, BD-GC-D is in the best group while for OS-levels between 0.2 and
1, W(CR+SPT) is in the best group. For the special case of purely parallel networks with
OS = 0, W(CR+SPT) shows a low performance and thus is not a good choice whereas
its global counterpart W(CR+GSPT) is in the best group. However, the performance of
W(CR+GSPT) deteriorates rapidly for OS-levels larger than 0. The good performance of
W(CR+GSPT) for OS = 0 is due the fact that for instances with OS = 0 there are no
precedence constraints between activities. Hence, the start times of activities and the ﬁnish
time of projects are only constrained by the scarce resources. In this case, giving priority
to activities from projects with low total remaining work load is a meaningful strategy to
minimize total weighted tardiness.
5.1.4 Variation of expected activity durations
Table 9 gives the results for the two ranges of the coefﬁcient of variation of the average
activity durations CVd. Again, W(CR+SPT) excels, being in the best group for both levels
of variation. Table 9 underlines the value of WSPT-information when the variance of activity
durations is high. While being in the group of worst performing rules for a low level of
variation, the performance of WSPT improves signiﬁcantly for a high level of variation. This
improvement can be explained by the fact that minimizing the average weighted ﬂow time
of the activities at each resource becomes more effective when the difference in the duration
of the activities becomes more pronounced.
5.1.5 Utilization per resource
Table 10 presents the effect of the utilization per resource on the performance of the priority
rules. For each level of resource utilization, W(CR+SPT) dominates, while BD-GC-D and
BD-MC belong to the second best group. In going from utilization of 0.7–0.9, the perfor-
mance spread between the best and the worst rule jumps from 50.19 to 110.17. This jump
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
587
Table 9 Performance of the priority for different levels of the coefﬁcient of variation of activity durations
Table 10 Effect of the resource utilization on the performance of priority rules
can be explained by growing queue lengths for increased resource utilization, which amplify
the effect of the priority rules. Our ﬁndings contrast those in the literature. There, the per-
formance of ﬂow time related priority rules such as WSPT (see Kutanoglu & Sabuncuoglu
1999 or Vepsalainen & Morton 1987) improves for high utilizations. The explanation lies in
the different deﬁnition of the problem parameters and the related design of the computational
studies. In the literature, due dates are set without taking into account the resource utiliza-
tion. In contrast, in this study the due date tightness is controlled by the statistical measure
percentage of tardy projects α. In this way, we implicitly take the resource utilization into
account when setting the mean maximum duration Dmax
p
for the projects. As a consequence,
the due date tightness is not impacted by the utilization ρ.
5.2 Variations of the base case
In order to investigate the performance of the rules for settings different to the base case,
we considered three different setups: First, the case of a single project type; second, the case
of two project types differing in their weights and due date tightness; third, the case of two
project types differing in their weights and arrival rates.
123

588
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
Table 11 Overall performance of
the priority rules and group
according to the Duncan test for
the single project type case
5.2.1 Single project type
In this experiment we considered a single project type, in contrast to two project types as in
the base case. Table 11 provides the results.
The following insights can be obtained: First, the range between the normalized perfor-
mance of the best and the worst rule maxω{Zn(ω)} −minω{Zn(ω)} decreases from 0.79 to
0.56, meaning that there is less variance between the performance of the rules. This is intu-
itive as problems with a single project type leave less room for good rules to excel. Second,
W(CR+SPT) is still the best performing rule, signiﬁcantly better than any other rule. Third,
the order of performance of the colored rules is quite stable; only priority rule BD-MC dete-
riorates from the third to the ﬁfth rank. Fourth, the global rules BD-GC-U and W(CR+GSPT)
improve in normalized performance from close to one to close to 0.5. These two rules give
priority to projects with a small amount of remaining work. In a single project type setting
this approach gives rise to better results than in settings with multiple types of projects.
5.2.2 Project type differentiation according to due date tightness
We consider two types of projects. Project type 1 with low due date tightness α1 = 20%
and low weight w1 = 1 and project type 2 with high due date tightness α2 = 80% and high
weight w2 = 2. Table 12 shows the results for this setting.
From the results we can obtain the following insights. First, the performance of all rules
except FCFS improves compared to the random rule. In fact, all rules except WSPT are
now signﬁcantly better than the random rule RAN. Second, W(CR+SPT) is still the best
performing rule at the 5% level of signiﬁcance, according to the Duncan test. Third, the order
in performance of the colored rules is not changed and the order of all rules tested is quite
stable.
5.2.3 Project type differentiation according to arrival rate
We consider two types of projects. Project type 1 with a share of 30% of the total arrival rate,
i.e., λ1 = 0.3 · λ, and low weight w1 = 1 and project type 2 with a share of 70% of the total
arrival rate, i.e., λ1 = 0.7 · λ, and high weight w2 = 2. Table 13 gives the results for this
setting. As for the case of different levels of due date tightness, the performance of all rules
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
589
Table 12 Overall performance of
the priority rules and group
according to the Duncan test for
the case with different due date
tightnesses
Table 13 Overall performance of
the priority rules and group
according to the Duncan test for
different arrival rates
when compared to the random rule improves, with BD-GC-U and W(CR+GSPT) improving
considerably. In fact, all rules are now signiﬁcantly better than the random rule RAN. Again,
W(CR+SPT) is signiﬁcantly the best rule. The order of the colored rules is not changed with
the exception of W(CR+SPT).
6 Results for FCFS-policies
In the following we investigate the potential of First-Come, First-Serve (FCFS) policies ﬁrst
proposed by Baccelli et al. (1993) for the case of multi-project scheduling with a single type
of project and general distributed i.i.d. interarrival times and activity durations. At ﬁrst, we
provide a deﬁnition extended to multiple project types.
Deﬁnition 6.1 Given two activities (i, j1) and (i, j2) of the two projects j1 and j2 of the
same type p, where project j1 has arrived before project j2, then a First-Come, First-Serve
(FCFS) policy always schedules activity (i, j1) before (i, j2).
123

590
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
Table 14 Performance comparison of FCFS-policies and Non-FCFS-policies
(%)
Baccelli et al. (1993) show that the class of FCFS-policies contains an optimal policy for the
multi-project scheduling problem with a single project type when minimizing the expected
project ﬂow time. Thus, when due dates are tight, we can expect the FCFS-policy to pro-
vide good results for the weighted tardiness objective. In our experiment we compare the
performance of the priority rules presented above with and without embedding them into the
FCFS-policy scheme. This is done as follows: Instead of having one queue in front of each
resource r ∈R, we have a dedicated queue for each activity type i ∈Vp of each project
p ∈P, which has to be processed on resource r, i.e., for which ri,p = r holds. Within queue
(i, p) all activities are of type (i, p) but belong to different projects. These activities are
sorted according to increasing arrival times ai of their projects, i.e., the activity (i, j) with
the earliest project arrival time a j is at the head of the queue. When one unit of resource
r becomes available at time t, one of the priority rules presented in Sect. 3 is applied to
determine the activity queue (i, p), from which the activity at the head of the queue is started
at t.
Table 14 provides the performance of FCFS-policies relative to the non-FCFS-policies
where the rules are sorted according to decreasing performance for the non-FCFS-policy.
Differing from the tables above, we added the RAN rule with a performance of 100% in
the non-FCFS-setting. In the last column, we indicate a signiﬁcantly better result for the
FCFS-policy on the 95% level of conﬁdence using the Duncan-test. The results show that
FCFS-policies provide better results than non-FCFS-policies. The relative ranking remains
approximately the same. The improvement when using a rule with FCFS-policy depends on
the rules used. The largest improvement is obtained with the RAN rule followed by WSPT.
For the W(CR+GSPT) rule, using the FCFS-policy leads to a slight deterioration. The best
rule W(CR+SPT) beneﬁts through the FCFS-policy by 3.84%. Obviously, policies not based
on the GSPT idea and those that do not imitate the idea such as WMINSLK beneﬁt most
from the FCFS.
7 Conclusions and future research
The main take-away of this study is that the W(CR+SPT) rule is consistently the best rule or
in the group of the best performing rules for minimizing average weighted project tardiness.
This holds for the base case study undertaken in Sect. 5.1 as well as for the variation of
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
591
the base case in Sect. 5.2. Only for some very special settings in the base case study, i.e.,
few resource types or purely parallel project networks, does this not hold; in these cases
W(CR+GSPT), the global variant of W(CR+SPT), is best. The rule W(CR+SPT) is simple
regarding the required parameters, easy to implement, and straightforward to communicate
to practitioners.
Another important ﬁnding is that our result differ from several of those found in the
literature. There, the performance of ﬂow time related priority rules such as WSPT (see
Kutanoglu & Sabuncuoglu 1999 or Vepsalainen & Morton 1987) improve for high utiliza-
tions. The explanation lies in the different deﬁnition of the problem parameters and the related
design of the computational studies. In the literature due dates are set without taking into
account the resource utilization or other problem parameters. In contrast, in this study the
due date tightness is controlled by the statistical measure percentage of tardy projects α. As
a consequence, the due date tightness is not impacted by the utilization ρ.
Further research can be undertaken in several directions. First, a study could be conducted
with different type of distribution functions for the activity durations. Such studies have
been undertaken for the single static resource-constrained project scheduling problem with
makespan objective (see, e.g., Ballestin, 2007) and the they show that priority rules perform
better for problems with activity duration distributions, which have a smaller coefﬁcient of
variation than the exponential distribution. Second, the study at hand could be extended for
more project types and larger projects. Third, the performance could be assessed for policies,
which do not have the non-delay or work-conserving property. Finally, our analysis shows
that the difference in performance of priority rules increases remarkably with the number of
resources. Since studies for the dynamic job shop problem have not investigated instances
with more than 10 resources, this could be a further fruitful area of research.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL. This research war partially funded
by the August-Wilhelm Scheer Visiting Professorship Program of the Technical University of Munich by
ﬁnancing the research stay of John Kanet at the Technical University of Munich.
Declarations
Ethical approval This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by
any of the authors.
Conﬂict of interest Author Philipp Melchiors declares that he has no conﬂict of interest. Author Rainer Kolisch
declares that he has no conﬂict of interest. Author John J. Kanet declares that he has no conﬂict of interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
A Table of notation
See the Table 15.
123

592
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
Table 15 Table of notation
Symbol
Explanation
i
Activity index
j
Project index
J
Number of projects arrived
p
Project type index
t
Time
a j
Arrival time of project j
α
Percentage of tardy projects as global parameter for due date tightness
αp
Percentage of tardy projects of type p
A j
Maximum allowed ﬂow time for project j
Ap
Mean maximum allowed ﬂow time for project type p
Ap
Arc set for precedence relations of project type p
Er(t)
Set of activities being in process at resource r at time t
P
Set of project types
R
Set of resources
V j
Index set for the activities of project j
Vp
Index set for the activities of project type p
Wr(t)
Set of activities waiting at resource r at time t
β
Variation parameter for the maximum ﬂow times around the mean maximum ﬂow time
cr
Number of capacity units of resource r
Ci j
Completion time of activity i of project j
CRi j(t)
Critical ratio of activity i of project j
CVd
Coefﬁcient of variation of the expected activity durations as global parameter
CVdr
Coefﬁcient of variation of the expected durations of the activities processed by resource r
Dmax
i j
Upper estimate for activity due date in the WMOD rule based on the project due date
Dmin
i j
Lower estimate for activity due date in the WMOD rule based on the project arrival time
Di j
Activity due date of the WMOD rule as the mean of the upper and the lower estimate
dr(t)
Mean of expected duration of the activities waiting at resource r at time t
D j
Due date of project j
D
′
i j
Critical ratio modiﬁed expected activity duration
DG′
i j
Critical ratio modiﬁed expected duration of the unﬁnished project activities
di j
Duration (ex-post) of activity i of project j
di j
Expected duration of activity i of project j
li j
Expected latest start time of activity i of project j without project j being delayed
λmax
Maximum arrival rate
λ
Overall arrival rate of projects at the system
λp
Arrival rate for the projects of type p
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
593
Table 15 continued
Symbol
Explanation
λr
Arrival rate of the activities queued in front of resource r
Nmax
Maximum number of projects in the system
OS
Order strength as global parameter
OSp
Order strength of project type p
πi j(t)
Opportunity cost of scheduling of activity i of project j at time t
πr(t)
Price of resource r at time t
πU
r (t)
Price of resource r at time t calculated using uniform resource pricing
π D
r (t)
Price of resource r at time t calculated using dynamic resource pricing
qi j
Expected time for the activities along the critical path from activity (i, j) to the end of project j
ri j
Resource required for activity i of project j
rip
Resource required for activity i of project type p
ri j
Expected time for the activities along the critical path from the start of project j to activity (i, j)
ρ
Resource utilization as global parameter
ρr
Utilization of resource r
Ui j(t)
Urgency factor of activity i project j at time t
U j(t)
Set of not ﬁnished activities of project j
w j
Weight of project j
Z
Average weighted tardiness
Z(ω)
Average weighted tardiness when using policy ω for scheduling
Zn(ω)
Normalized average weighted tardiness when using policy ω for scheduling
B Results for the single resource case
For the single resource case, each activity within each project has to be processed by the
single resource with capacity 1. As due dates get tighter, the weighted tardiness objective
approaches weighted ﬂow time as given by
limJ→∞
⎡
⎣
J

j=1
w j ·

C j −a j
 
⎤
⎦
(31)
where C j denotes the ﬁnish time of project j.
Theorem B.1 The optimal scheduling policy minimizing the long term expected weighted
project ﬂow time is a priority policy where an activity is selected according to
max
(i, j)∈Wr(t)

w j

m∈U j dmj

(32)
and ties are broken arbitrarily. The policy can be seen as as a global WSPT rule for selecting
activities. Instead of the expected duration of an activity, it takes into account the total
expected workload of all unﬁnished activities of project j from the set U j(t) including activity
(i, j).
For the proof see Melchiors (2015).
123

594
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
Thus, in particular when due dates are tight, global WSPT-based rules (BD-GC-U, BD-GC-D
and W(CR+GSPT)) are near optimal policies, for the single resource case.
References
Adler, P. S., Mandelbaum, A., Nguyen, V., & Schwerer, E. (1995). From project to process management:
An empirically-based framework for analyzing product development time. Management Science, 41(3),
458–484.
Anavi-Isakow, S., & Golany, B. (2003). Managing multi-project environments through constant work-in-
process. International Journal of Project Management, 21(1), 9–18.
Anderson, E. J., & Nyirenda, J. C. (1990). Two new rules to minimize tardiness in a job shop. International
Journal of Production Research, 28(12), 2277–2292.
Ashtiani, B., Leus, R., & Aryanezhad, M.-B. (2011). New competitive results for the Stochastic resource-
constrained project-scheduling problem: Exploring the beneﬁts of pre-processing. Journal of Scheduling,
14(2), 157–171.
Baccelli, F., Liu, Z., & Towsley, D. (1993). Extremal scheduling of parallel processing with and without
real-time constraints. Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery, 40(5), 1209–1237.
Baker, K. R., & Bertrand, J. W. M. (1982). A dynamic priority rule for scheduling against due-dates. Journal
of Operations Management, 1(3), 37–42.
Baker, K. R., & Kanet, J. J. (1983). Job shop scheduling with modiﬁed due dates. Journal of Operations
Management, 4(1), 11–22.
Ballestin, F. (2007). When it is worthwhile to work with the stochastic RCPSP? Journal of Scheduling, 10(3),
153–166.
Ballestin, F., & Leus, R. (2009). Resource-constrained project scheduling for timely project completion with
stochastic activity durations. Production and Operations Management, 18(4), 459–474.
Bredael, D., & Vanhoucke, M. (2022). Multi-project scheduling: a benchmark analysis of metaheuristic algo-
rithms on various optimisation criteria and due dates. European Journal of Operational Research, 308(1),
54–75.
Browning, T. R., & Yassine, A. A. (2010). Resource-constrained multi-project scheduling: Priority rule per-
formance revisited. International Journal of Production Economics, 226(2), 212–228.
Browning, T. R., & Yassine, A. A. (2010). A random generator of resource constrained multi-project network
problems. Journal of Scheduling, 13(2), 143–161.
Browning, T. R., & Yassine, A. A. (2016). Managing a portfolio of product development projects under
resource constraints. Decision Sciences, 47(2), 333–372.
Carroll, D.C. (1965) Heuristic sequencing of single and multiple component jobs. PhD Thesis, Sloan School
of Management, M.I.T., Cambridge, M.A.
Chen, H., Ding, G., Zhang, J., & Qin, S. (2019). Research on priority rules for the stochastic resource con-
strained multi-project scheduling problem with new project arrival. Computers & Industrial Engineering,
137, 106060.
Chen, F., Kolisch, R., Wang, L., & Mu, C. (2015). An estimation of distribution algorithm and new computa-
tional results for the stochastic resource-constrained project scheduling problem. Flexible Services and
Manufacturing Journal, 27(4), 585–605.
Choi, J., Realff, M. J., & Lee, J. H. (2007). A Q-learning-based method applied to stochastic resource con-
strained project scheduling with new project arrivals. International Journal of Robust and Nonlinear
Control, 17, 1214–1231.
Dumond, J., & Mabert, V. A. (1988). Evaluating project scheduling and due date assignment procedures: An
experimental analysis. Management Science, 34(1), 101–118.
Fernandez, A. A., Armacost, R. L., & Pet-Edwards, J. J. A. (1996). The role of the nonanticipativity constraint
in commercial software for stochastic project scheduling. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 31(1),
233–236.
Fernandez, A. A., Armacost, R. L., & Pet-Edwards, J. K. (1998). Understanding simulation solutions to
resource-constrained project scheduling problems with stochastic task durations. Engineering Manage-
ment Journal, 10(4), 5–13.
Fliedner, T. (2015). Considering uncertainty in project management and scheduling. PhD-thesis: Technical
University of Munich.
Gómez Sánchez, M., Lalla-Ruiz, E., Fernández Gil, A., Castro, C., & Voß, S. (2022). Resource-constrained
multi-project scheduling problem: A survey. European Journal of Operational Research, 309(3), 958–
976.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 338:569–595
595
Graham, R. L. (1966). Bounds for certain multiprocessing anomalies. The Bell System Technical Journal,
45(9), 1563–1581.
Kanet, J. J., & Hayya, J. C. (1982). Priority dispatching with operations due date in a job shop. Journal of
Operations Management, 2(3), 167–175.
Kanet, J. J., & Li, X. (2004). A weighted modiﬁed due date rule for sequencing to minimize weighted tardiness.
Journal of Scheduling, 7(4), 261–276.
Kolisch, R. (1996). Efﬁcient priority rules for the resource-constrained project scheduling problem. Journal
of Operations Management, 14(3), 179–102.
Kumar, P. R., & Seidman, T. I. (1990). Dynamic instabilities and stabilization methods in distributed real-time
scheduling of manufacturing systems. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 35(3), 289–298.
Kurtulus, I. S., & Davis, E. W. (1982). Multi-project scheduling: Categorization of heuristic rule performance.
Management Science, 28(2), 161–172.
Kurtulus, I. S., & Narula, S. C. (1985). Multi-project scheduling: Analysis of project performance. IIE Trans-
actions, 17(1), 58–66.
Kutanoglu, E., & Sabuncuoglu, I. (1999). An analysis of heuristics in a dynamic job shop with weighted
tardiness objectives. International Journal of Production Research, 37(1), 165–187.
Law, A. (2007) Simulation modeling and analysis (4 edn). McGraw-Hill.
Lawrence,S.R.,&Morton,T.E.(1993).Resource-constrainedmulti-projectschedulingwithtardycosts:Com-
paring myopic, bottleneck, and resource pricing heuristics. European Journal of Operational Research,
64(2), 168–187.
Levy, N., & Globerson, S. (1997). Improving multiproject management by using a queueing theory approach.
Project Management Journal, 28(4), 40–46.
Melchiors, P. (2015). Dynnamic and stochastic multi-project planning, volume 672 of lecture notes in eco-
nomics and mathematical systems. Springer International Publishing.
Melchiors, P., & Kolisch, R. (2009). Scheduling of multiple R&D-projects in a dynamic and stochastic environ-
ment. In B. Fleischmann, K. H. Borgwardt, R. Klein, & A. Tuma (Eds.), Operations Research Proceedings
2008 (pp. 135–140). Heidelberg: Springer.
Meyn, S. (2008). Control techniques for complex networks. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Möhring, R. H., Radermacher, F. J., & Weiss, G. (1984). Stochastic scheduling problems I. Zeitschrift für
Operations Research, 28(7), 193–196.
Morton, T. E., Pentico, D. W. (1993). Heuristic scheduling systems. In Wiley Series in Engineering & Tech-
nology Management. Wiley, Hoboken.
Ramasesh, R. (1990). Dynamic job shop scheduling: A survey of simulation research. Omega, 18(1), 43–57.
Satic, U., Jacko, P., & Kirkbride, C. (2022). Performance evaluation of scheduling policies for the dynamic and
stochastic resource-constrained multi-project scheduling problem. International Journal of Production
Research, 60(4), 1411–1423.
Schwindt, C. (1998). Generation of resource-constrained project scheduling problems subject to temporal
constraints. Technical Report WIOR-543 University Karlsruhe.
Stork, F. (2001). Stochastic resource-constrained project scheduling. PhD Thesis: Technical University Berlin.
Tassiulas, L., & Georgiadis, L. (1996). Any work-conserving policy stabilizes the ring with spatial re-use.
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 4(2), 205–208.
Tsai, D. M., & Chiu, H. N. (1996). Two heuristics for scheduling multiple projects with resource constraints.
Construction Management and Economics, 14(4), 325–240.
Van Eynde, R., & Vanhoucke, M. (2020). Resource-constrained multi-project scheduling: Benchmark datasets
and decoupled scheduling. Journal of Scheduling, 23(3), 301–325.
Van Eynde, R., & Vanhoucke, M. (2022). New summary measures and datasets for the multi-project scheduling
problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 299(3), 853–868.
Vepsalainen, A. P. J., & Morton, T. E. (1987). Priority rules for job shops with weighted tardiness costs.
Management Science, 33(8), 1035–1047.
Wang, Y., He, Z., Kerkhove, L.-P., & Vanhoucke, M. (2017). On the performance of priority rules for the
stochastic resource constrained multi-project scheduling problem. Computers & Industrial Engineering,
114, 223–234.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123