TITLE: A Bayesian network to analyse basketball players’ performances: a multivariate copula-based approach
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04871-5
---

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04871-5
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
A Bayesian network to analyse basketball players’
performances: a multivariate copula-based approach
Pierpalo D’Urso1 · Livia De Giovanni2 · Vincenzina Vitale1
Accepted: 27 June 2022 / Published online: 9 August 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
Statistics in sports plays a key role in predicting winning strategies and providing objec-
tive performance indicators. Despite the growing interest in recent years in using statistical
methodologies in this ﬁeld, less emphasis has been given to the multivariate approach. This
work aims at using the Bayesian networks to model the joint distribution of a set of indicators
of players’ performances in basketball in order to discover the set of their probabilistic rela-
tionships as well as the main determinants affecting the player’s winning percentage. From a
methodological point of view, the interest is to deﬁne a suitable model for non-Gaussian data,
relaxing the strong assumption on normal distribution in favour of Gaussian copula. Through
the estimated Bayesian network, we discovered many interesting dependence relationships,
providing a scientiﬁc validation of some known results mainly based on experience. At last,
some scenarios of interest have been simulated to understand the main determinants that
contribute to rising in the number of won games by a player.
Keywords Bayesian networks · Gaussian copula · Basketball data · Four factors ·
Multivariate dependence
1 Introduction
Sports analytics has experienced rapid growth both for teams and individual players in recent
years. Statistics tools can be particularly useful to assess performances and deﬁne efﬁcient
gaming strategies. In this paper, we focus on basketball, a sports pioneer in using analytic
tools, and data from the National Basketball Association (NBA).
B Vincenzina Vitale
vincenzina.vitale@uniroma1.it
Pierpalo D’Urso
pierpaolo.durso@uniroma1.it
Livia De Giovanni
ldegiovanni@luiss.it
1
Department of Social Sciences and Economics, Sapienza University of Rome, P.za Aldo Moro 5,
00185 Rome, Italy
2
Department of Political Sciences, Data Lab Luiss University, Viale Romania, 32, 00197 Rome, Italy
123

420
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
As far as the literature on statistics in basketball is concerned, many of the proposed
approaches can be traced back to the Bill James’s Sabermetrics approach in baseball (James,
1984, 1987). The seminal work is, however, considered that of Oliver (2004): he identiﬁes
the so-called “Four Factors” that affect the game outcome with different weights and they are:
the Effective Field Goal percentage, the Turnovers per Possession, the Offensive Rebounding
percentage and the Free Throw Attempt rate, analysed later with more detail.
Kubatko et al. (2007) give a common starting point for research in basketball by providing
a detailed overview and description of the main sources of data for basketball statistics; they
also deﬁne the main basic variables used in what described as the “mainstream of basketball
statistics”, ﬁrstly emerged outside the academy and due to Oliver (2004), Hollinger (2004),
Hollinger and Hollinger (2005). In Nikolaidis (2015) one can ﬁnd some indicative ideas for
the statistical analysis of basketball data; he also shows that any basketball team can improve
signiﬁcantly its decision-making process if it relies on statistical support.
Yang et al. (2014) evaluate the efﬁciency of National Basketball Association (NBA) teams
under a two-stage DEA (Data Envelopment Analysis) framework. Applying the additive efﬁ-
ciency approach, they decompose the overall team efﬁciency into ﬁrst-stage wage efﬁciency
and second-stage on-court efﬁciency, ﬁnding out the individual endogenous weights for each
stage.
Other recent scientiﬁc proposals to model player and team performances make use of
network models (Piette et al., 2011; Fewell et al., 2012; Skinner & Guy, 2015; Xin et al.,
2017). In the class of models accounting for spatial features, Metulini et al. (2018) try to
identify the pattern of surface area in basketball that improves team performance while
Zuccolotto et al. (2019) propose a spatial statistical method based on classiﬁcation trees to
assess the scoring probability of teams and players in different areas of a court map.
Sandholtz et al. (2020) propose a new metric for spatial allocative efﬁciency: they estimate
the player’s ﬁeld goal percentage at every location in the offensive half court using a Bayesian
hierarchical model. Then, comparing the estimated ﬁeld goal percentage with the empirical
ﬁeld goal attempt rate, they identify the areas where the lineup exhibits inefﬁcient shot
allocation.
As far as the individual performances are concerned, Fearnhead and Taylor (2011) deﬁne
a proper statistical methodology to estimating the ability of NBA players by comparing their
team performance when they are on the court with respect to when they are off it. Lopez
and Matthews (2015) propose an NCAA men’s basketball predictive model while is due to
Cervone et al. (2016) a multiresolution stochastic process model for predicting basketball
possession outcomes. Engelmann (2017) analyses the possession-based player performance
too while Wu and Bornn (2018) model the offensive player movement in professional bas-
ketball.
Among the regression-based approach, Deshpande and Jensen (2016) propose a Bayesian
linear regression model to estimate and evaluate the impact NBA players have on their teams’
chances of winning while Sill (2010) shows that the Adjusted Plus-Minus (often abbreviated
APM, a basketball analytic used to predict the impact of an individual player on the scoring
margin of a game after controlling for the strength of every teammate and every opponent
during each minute he’s on the court) can be improved by using ridge regression.
Other alternatives based on Bayesian regression models are in Page et al. (2007) and
Deshpande and Jensen (2016) while in the work of Casals and Martinez (2013), a mixed
model is proposed and applied to model player performances.
In the ﬁeld of neural networks, one can refer to the works of Loeffelholz et al. (2009),
Blaikie et al. (2011), Wang and Zemel (2016), Shen et al. (2020), Babaee Khobdeh et al.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
421
(2021). For an extensive literature on the use of Statistics in basketball, an interesting review
is provided by Terner and Franks (2021).
But, as stated by Baghal (2012), there is a lack of attention to applying multivariate
analyses on basketball metrics even though it is well known that winning a game depends on
a plurality of interrelated variables affecting the game outcome each with a different weight.
To this aim, in the same work, Baghal (2012) uses a structural equation model to determine
whether the Four Factors can be modelled as indicators of individual latent factors for the
offensive and defensive quality. Team salaries are added to the model too in order to estimate
the relationship between the cost and offensive and defensive quality.
With the same aim of enlarging the analysis by considering a multivariate approach, we
propose the use of Bayesian networks (BNs) (Pearl, 1988), i.e. probabilistic expert systems
able to identify complex dependence structures, such as that can exist among the set of
performance indicators, and to carry out what-if analysis, at the same time.
Based on our knowledge, the use of BN in sports is rather limited to very few works
(Razali et al., 2017; Constantinou et al., 2013), the latter using BNs with other scopes.
As deeply discussed later, the attractiveness of a BN mainly stems both from its pictorial
representation of the dependency structure through the graph topology and from its inference
engine; the latter makes a BN a decision support system since the reasoning (inference) is
performed by setting some variables in known states and then updating the probabilities
of the remaining variables conditioned by this evidence. The so-called belief updating can
thus help to identify the most impactful variables and suggest the best strategies in different
contexts.
From a methodological point of view, this proposal copes with the problem of handling
non-Gaussian distributions, avoiding the bad practice of variables’ discretization. Therefore,
a suitable extension to the Gaussian copula is considered to estimate the network structure
under the above assumption, relaxing Guassianity. Speciﬁcally, the Non-Parametric BNs
(NPBNs) proposed by Hanea et al. (2006) and Kurowicka and Cooke (2006) are applied in
this paper.
Based on all these considerations, this work aims at introducing to the use of BNs in sports
analytics; their versatility and their natural vocation to be used for prediction purposes could
represent a valid instrument to predict team and player performance, to suggest strategies as
well as a valid tool for decision-making in sports.
Speciﬁcally, we use BNs to identify the main determinants affecting the player winning
percentage taking into account the most important performance indicators suggested in the
literature. Moreover, we propose a model that combines information from data and experts
which represents an important added value in this context.
Data used in this work have been downloaded from the NBA website and refer to 377
players who played at least 10 games and more than 6 min on the court in the regular season
2019–2020.
The paper is organized as follows. In Sect.2 we provide a theoretical description of BNs
and their structural learning methods followed by a brief discussion about the limits of
the discretization; in Sect.3 we introduce the class of Non-Parametric BNs followed by a
little digression on the Nonparanormal estimator proposed by Liu et al. (2009) being the
Gaussian copula a speciﬁc case of the class of Nonparanormal models. After the description
of variables used in this study in Sect.4, we discuss the estimated model in Sect.5. The last
section includes some comments and conclusions.
123

422
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
2 Basics on Bayesian networks
Bayesian Networks (Cowell et al., 1999; Pearl, 1988) are probabilistic graphical models
used to deal with uncertainty in complex probabilistic domains. They bring together graph
theory and probability theory to model multivariate dependence relationships among a large
collection of random variables. It consists of a qualitative component, in the form of a directed
acyclic graph (DAG), and of a quantitative component, in the form of conditional probabilities
associated to each node of the DAG. Hence, they can be deﬁned as multivariate statistical
models satisfying sets of (conditional) independence statements encoded in a DAG.
More formally, given a random vector X = {X1, . . . , Xk} with distribution P, each node
in the DAG corresponds to a random variable Xi, resulting in a graph with k vertices and a
set of directed edges between pairs of nodes; hence, a DAG G is a pair G = (V , E), where V
is the set of vertices (or nodes) and E the set of directed edges. While each node corresponds
to a random variable, a missing arrow between nodes imply (conditional) independence.
Speciﬁcally, the conditional independence properties of a joint distribution P can be read
directly from the graph by applying the rules deﬁned in the so-called d-separation criterion
introduced by Pearl (1988) or the directed global Markov criterion due to Lauritzen et al.
(1990), that is an equivalent criterion to that of the d-separation.
Based on Pearl’s criterion, given three disjoint subsets of nodes X,Y and Z in a DAG G,
Z is said to d-separate X from Y, if for all paths between X and Y there is a vertex w such
that either:
– the connection is serial or diverging and w ∈Z (it is equivalent to say that w is instanti-
ated);
– the connection is converging, and neither w nor any of its descendants (i.e. the nodes that
can be reached from w) are in Z.
A serial connection is of the type x −→w −→y (or x ←−w ←−y), a diverging
connection is x ←−w −→y while a converging one is x −→w ←−y. Clearly, if X and
Y are not d-separated, they are d-connected.
In the graph in the Fig. 1, for example, X3 d-separates X1 and X2 from X4, implying the
conditional independence among the same corresponding variables in P, i.e. (X1, X2) ⊥
X4|X3.
A directed edge from Xi to X j states that X j is inﬂuenced by Xi: using graph terminology,
X j is said the child of Xi that, in turn, is said the parent of X j. The set of parents of X j in
the graph G is denoted by pa(X j). In the DAG of Fig. 1, for example, pa(X3) = {X1, X2}.
Fig. 1 An example of DAG with
5 vertices
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
423
Moreover, with each variable Xi in the DAG, is associated a conditional probability
Pr(Xi|pa(Xi)); all set of these conditional probabilities constitute the quantitative part of
the network.
Based on the local Markov property1 and applying the chain rule, the joint distribution P
over the random vector X can be factorized as:
P(X1 . . . Xk) =
k
i=1
P(Xi|pa(Xi))
(1)
Besides its ability to decompose a multivariate distribution in a set of local computations,
the power of Bayesian networks stems also from the availability of fast and efﬁcient algo-
rithms that perform probabilistic inference (Lauritzen & Spiegelhalter, 1988; Jensen et al.,
1990). They update the marginal probability distributions of some variables when the infor-
mation on one or more distributions of other variables is observed, thus allowing to carry out
what-if analysis.
The structure of a BN (i.e the DAG), as well as its parameters, can be deﬁned by means of
the expert knowledge or learned directly from data using structural learning techniques (Bun-
tine, 1996; Neapolitan, 2003); in practice, the combination of both approaches is, however,
recommended, introducing the prior information as constraints in the ﬁrst learning phase.
The next paragraph provides a little overview of the main methods proposed in the literature
to learn the DAG structure.
2.1 Structural learning in BNs
The structural learning techniques for BNs fall into one of these two mainstream approaches:
constraint-based (Spirtes et al., 1993; Cooper, 1997) and score-based (Heckerman, 1995;
Cooper & Herskovits, 1992) algorithms.
A DAG learnt by means of a constraint-based algorithm entails all the marginal and
conditional independence relationships inferred from independence tests: the most famous
algorithm in this class is the PC algorithm due to Spirtes et al. (1993).
A DAG learnt by means of a score-based approach is the result of an optimization search
strategy based on a scoring function. The graph structure is that which corresponds to the
optimal score metric (the Penalised Likelihoods, AIC and BIC, are frequently used) among
candidate structures, hence, identifying the better ﬁtting network.
It must be noticed that hybrid methods have also been proposed in the literature, combining
both constraint-based and score-based techniques. The two best-known members of this
family are the Sparse Candidate algorithm (SC) by Friedman et al. (1999b) and the Max-Min
Hill-Climbing algorithm (MMHC) by Tsamardinos et al. (2006).
In this work, we apply a score-based algorithm known as the hill climbing algorithm,
which is a heuristic optimization procedure given that the investigation of the space of all
possible DAGs is infeasible in practice by growing exponentially with the number of nodes.
The hill climbing uses a greedy search strategy: generally starting from a network structure
(more often the empty one), it iteratively performs small changes in the current candidate
network by adding, deleting or reversing one arc at a time, stopping when any of changes
improves the chosen score function.
In this study, speciﬁcally, the hill climbing with bootstrap resampling and model averag-
ing is applied as proposed by Friedman et al. (1999a) and implemented in the R package
1 The local Markov property states that each node Xi is conditionally independent of its non-descendants
(e.g., nodes X j for which there is no path from Xi to X j) given its parents.
123

424
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
bnlearn. More robust to noise in the data, this technique consists of sampling data using
bootstrap n times and applying the chosen learning algorithm to each bootstrap sample. Then,
the resulting averaged network is a graph whose edges are those with a strength greater than
a threshold value (see Scutari and Nagarajan (2011) for details about the computation of
the strength signiﬁcance threshold) where the strength of each arc is deﬁned in terms of the
number of times the arc appears over the n learned networks.2
Despite the broad ﬁelds of applicability, in the parametric setting, most inference and struc-
tural learning methods work under the joint multinomial assumption for discrete data and the
joint normality for continuous data. In the case of mixed variables, the conditional Gaussian
distribution (CLGBNs; Lauritzen and Wermuth (1989)) is assumed with the constraint that
continuous nodes can not have discrete children.
Focusing on the continuous case, which is of interest in this work, in the Gaussian BNs
(GBNs, Geiger and Heckerman (1994)), a multivariate normal distribution is assumed for X
implying that each component Xi follows a univariate Gaussian distribution too. Therefore,
f (Xi|pa(Xi) = x) ∼N(αi + βT x; σ 2
Xi ).
(2)
Hence, the parameters of the local distributions are the β coefﬁcients of the linear regression
model in (2). The inﬂuence of the parents on a child is translated in terms of these partial
regression coefﬁcients, meaning that their conditioning effect is given by the additive linear
term in the mean without affecting the variance.
The main drawback associated with the use of the Gaussian BNs. relates to the joint nor-
mality which may be a very strong assumption, very often unrealistic; in the next paragraph,
we shall examine in detail this issue.
2.2 The joint normality assumption and its limits
When the marginal distributions of the continuous variables of the domain are far from
normal, the common practice consists in their discretization; very often, it results in loss
of information and, in some cases, can destroy the true underlying dependence structure.
To this aim, Nojavan et al. (2017) designed an experiment to evaluate the impact of the
commonly used discretization methods for BNs showing that different methods result in
differing future predictions. They state that “we would caution against decisions based on
models for which the outputs vary by the choice (of discretization method) that does not
have justiﬁable scientiﬁc basis” arguing that, in general, when possible, discretization of
continuous variables should be avoided.
As highlighted by Rohmer (2020), a second drawback is computational since one cannot
ignore that the size of conditional probability tables grows exponentially as the number of
states of the involved nodes increases.
The class of Non-Parametric BNs (NPBNs) proposed in the literature by Kurowicka
and Cooke (2006) and Hanea et al. (2006) and based on a D-vine copula approach can
overcome these limits. Joint density is modelled using joint normal copula without requiring
anyparametricassumptiononthemarginals,asopposedtotheparametriccase,whichjustiﬁes
the use of the adjective “Non-Parametric”.
Other interesting works combining the distributional ﬂexibility of pair-copula construc-
tions (PCCs) with the parsimony of the conditional independence models associated with
2 The algorithm also estimates the strength of each arc’s directions conditional on the arc being present in the
graph.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
425
the DAG, can be found in Bauer et al. (2012), Hobæk Haff et al. (2016), Bauer and Czado
(2016), Pircalabelu et al. (2017).
Is due to Harris and Drton (2013) the proposal of the Rank PC Algorithm for Nonparanor-
mal Graphical Models; properly, they extend the well-known PC structural learning algorithm
for Gaussian BNs (Spirtes et al., 1993) to the case of Gaussian copula.
Elidan (2010) proposes the Copula Bayesian Networks (CBNs): as in BNs, they make use
of a graph to encode independencies but rely on local copula functions and an explicit globally
shared parameterization of the univariate densities. Therefore, joint density is constructed
via a composition of local copulas and marginal densities. A generalization of the CBNs to
hybrid BNs can be found in Karra and Mili (2016).
In the class of the undirected graphical models, Liu et al. (2009) introduce the family
of Nonparanormal distributions to relax the Gaussian assumption proposing two different
methods of estimation for a nonparametric undirected graphical model.
In our work, under the assumption of a Gaussian Copula, we estimate a NPBN to identify
the main determinants affecting the player winning percentage considering several important
performance indicators in basketball. We use the theoretical framework of NPBNs proposed
by Kurowicka and Cooke (2006) except for the structural learning phase, i.e the estimation of
the DAG: to learn the graph, we apply the Hill Climbing algorithm to a suitable transformation
of the original random variables in normal scores as suggested by Liu et al. (2009) and deﬁned
more in detail later.
In the next section, we introduce the theoretical framework of NPBNs.
3 Non-parametric Bayesian networks
The Non-Parametric Bayesian Networks, proposed in the literature by Hanea et al. (2006)
and Kurowicka and Cooke (2006), are BNs whose dependence structure is modelled through
a Gaussian Copula. The term “Non-Parametric” has been referred to the marginals since no
distributional assumption is strictly required, i.e. the empirical distributions could be used.
For further interesting readings we refer to Hanea et al. (2010) and Kurowicka and Cooke
(2010).3
In a general setting, each node corresponds to a quantitative variable with an arbitrary
invertible distribution function while the directed edges are associated with (conditional)
parent–child rank correlations computed under the assumption of a joint normal copula.
These (conditional) copulae, assigned to the arcs of the NPBN, depend on a (non-unique)
ordering of the parent nodes. We highlight that the ordering of parent nodes can be assessed
by the experts considering the decreasing strength of inﬂuence on the child, based on data
availability or other qualitative considerations.
The main result arises from the following theorem (Hanea et al., 2006):
– given k variables X1, . . . , Xk with invertible distribution functions F1, . . . , Fk;
– given the corresponding DAG with k nodes entailing all conditional independence rela-
tionships;
– given a speciﬁcation of the conditional rank correlations on the arcs of the NPBN;
– givenacopularealizingallcorrelations[−1, 1]satisfyingtheso-calledzero-independence
property4;
3 For interesting applications see Dalla Valle and Kenett (2015), Vitale et al. (2018), Marella et al. (2019).
4 If a chosen copula satisﬁes the so-called zero-independence property, a zero correlation implies the inde-
pendent copula as well zero partial correlation implies conditional independence.
123

426
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
the joint density over the k variables is (1) uniquely determined, (2) satisﬁes the BN factor-
ization and (3) the conditional rank correlations are algebraically independent.
Moreover, the zero independence property implies that the conditional independence state-
ments can be translated in the graph, assigning zero rank correlation to the corresponding
arc, i.e. the arc can be removed.
The NPBNs speciﬁcation also implies that they require only the deﬁnition of the
one-dimensional marginal distributions and the arbitrary (conditional) rank correlations asso-
ciated with the arcs of the BN to be quantiﬁed and well speciﬁed.
More important, the Gaussian copula has been chosen not only because it satisﬁes the
zero independence property but also because it allows to perform conditioning analytically.
This allows for extremely fast exact inference, therefore, speeding the probabilistic inference
process in complex domains.
More speciﬁcally, let X1 and X2 be two continuous random variables, with invertible
distribution functions F1 and F2 while Y1 and Y2 are the corresponding transformation to
standard normal variables. The conditional distribution of X1|X2 is obtained directly applying
F−1
1 (Φ(Y1|Y2)).
This inference engine performing conditioning analytically is efﬁciently implemented in
the UniNet software.
For sake of completeness, one needs to make a little digression on the validation procedure
for NPBNs proposed by Hanea et al. (2006), Hanea et al. (2010) and Joe and Kurowicka
(2011) to test the Gaussian Copula assumption.
To validate that the joint normal copula distribution is a valid model for the multivariate
data, they deﬁned a new measure of multivariate dependence equal to the determinant of the
rank correlation matrix. Lying in [0, 1], it is equal to 1 if all variables are independent, to 0
in the case of multivariate linear dependence. All values in such interval take into account
the different degree of dependence.
Two determinants have to be computed: the DER, the determinant of the empirical rank
correlation matrix and the DNR, the determinant of the empirical normal rank correlation
matrixcomputedonthetransformedvariables(thatarestandardnormals)applyingtheinverse
Pearson transformation such that ρs =
6
π arcsin( ρ
2 ) where ρ is the Pearson correlation
coefﬁcient while ρs the Spearman one.
This validation step is carried out by simulating the sampling distribution of DNR and
checkingwhetherDERiswithinthe90%centralconﬁdencebandofDNR;ifyes,theGaussian
Copula assumption cannot be rejected at the 10% signiﬁcance level. This validation procedure
is also used in this work.
The DAG selection in Uninet can be done by removing from the saturated graph those
edges with a small conditional rank correlation5; if the DNR falls within the 90% central
conﬁdence band of the determinant of the rank correlation matrix (computed under the
assumption of joint normal copula) of the selected non-saturated BN, the model adequately
approximates the complete graph and could be retained.
Since in the above model selection the arcs’ directions are assigned based on non-statistical
considerations, such as subject-matter knowledge and time/logical ordering, in this paper, the
structural learning phase is replaced by the following procedure: the hill climbing algorithm
with bootstrap resampling and model averaging is applied to a suitable transformation in
normal scores of the original variables as proposed by Liu et al. (2009) and deﬁned in the
next paragraph.
5 Another model selection procedure starts from a BN with no arcs, adding all the edges whose rank correlation
(in the normal rank correlation matrix) is greater than the given threshold.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
427
We point out that the parameters’ learning phase is based on the procedure described for
the NPBNs, thus based on the conditional rank correlations.
3.1 The nonparanormal estimator proposed by Liu et al. (2009)
Following Liu et al. (2009), the Nonparanormal models extend Gaussian models to semi-
parametric Gaussian copula models, with nonparametric marginals. Formally:
Deﬁnition 1 a random vector X = (X1, . . . , Xk)T has a Nonparanormal distribution
if there exist functions { f j}k
j=1 such that Z ≡
f (X) ∼N(μ, ), where f (X) =
( f1(X1), . . . , fk(Xk)). Then, X ∼N P N ∼N(μ, , f ).
In another equivalent way, let { f j}k
j=1 be a set of monotone univariate functions and
let  be a positive-deﬁnite correlation matrix. Then a k-dimensional random variable X =
(X1, . . . , Xk)T has a Nonparanormal distribution X ∼N P N ∼N(μ, , f ) if f (X) :=
( f1(X1), . . . , fk(Xk)) ∼Nk(0, ).
Therefore, a random vector X belongs to the Nonparanormal family if there exists
a set of monotonically increasing transformations functions { f j}k
j=1 such that f (X) =
( f1(X1), . . . , fk(Xk))T is Gaussian.
Moreover, as a lemma, Liu et al. (2009) proved that the Nonparanormal distribution
N P N(μ, , f ) is a Gaussian copula when the f j’s are monotone and differentiable.
A little digression is needed to remember that, in the classical Gaussian Graphical Models,
one assumes that the observations have a multivariate Gaussian distribution with mean μ,
and covariance matrix . More importantly, the conditional independence can be implied
by the inverse covariance (concentration) matrix  = −1. Indeed, if  jk = 0, then the
i-th variable and j-th variable are conditional independent given all other variables. In other
words, the graph G is encoded by the precision matrix.
The following Lemma (Liu et al., 2009) actually states that it also holds for the Nonpara-
normal graphical models.
Lemma 1 If X ∼N P N(μ, , f ) is Nonparanormal and each f j is differentiable, then
Xi ⊥⊥X j|X\{i, j} ⇔i j = 0,
where  = −1.
The important point to note is that, although the NPN identiﬁes a more ﬂexible and broader
class of distributions than the parametric one, the independence relations among the variables
are still encoded in the precision matrix −1.
For the scopes of Liu et al. (2009), the primary objective of the Nonparanormal model
(NPN) is to estimate the underlying sample covariance matrix for a better recovery of the
underlying undirected graph. Therefore, the random variable X = (X1, . . . , Xk) is replaced
by the transformed random variable f (X) = ( f1(X1), . . . , fk(Xk)) assuming that f (X) is
multivariate Gaussian.
Based on the above theoretical framework, the Nonparanormal estimator proposed by Liu
et al. (2009) is based on a two-step procedure: (1) replace the observations, for each variable,
by their respective normal scores, i.e. they estimate the transformation functions; (2) apply
the graphical lasso to the transformed data to estimate the undirected graph.
In the step (1), as a Non-parametric estimator for the functions { f j}, Liu et al. (2009)
proposed the normal score-based Nonparanormal estimator, i.e. a truncated empirical dis-
tribution (the so called Winsorized estimator) whose computation is done by using the R
package huge.
123

428
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
In detail, let x1, . . . , xn be n observations of the X variable and let u1, . . . , un be the
corresponding rank; denoting with Φ the normal CDF function, the truncated normal score
fi is estimated by:
ˆfi =
⎧
⎨
⎩
Φ−1(δ)
i f
ˆui ≤δ
Φ−1( ˆui)
i f δ < ˆui ≤1 −δ
Φ−1(1 −δ)
i f
ˆui > 1 −δ
where ˆui =
ui
n+1 and δ =
1
4n1/4√πlog(n).
For further mathematical details, see Liu et al. (2009, 2012).
Following Liu et al. (2009), we replace the observations with their respective normal
scores; in this way, we can apply to them the Hill climbing algorithm as for the Normal case.
In the next sections, we describe the variables used in the analysis and, then, apply the
proposed learning strategy to them.
4 Data description
The variables used in this study were downloaded from the NBA website and listed in Table
1. They refer to 377 players, all those who played at least 10 games and at least 6 min per
game in the 2019–2020 regular season.
Thanks to Oliver’s studies (Oliver, 2004), in the Basketball, particular attention has been
given to the so-called “Four Factors”: the effective Field Goal percentage, the Turnovers per
Possession, the Offensive Rebounding percentage and the Free Throw Attempt rate.
These measures are considered good proxies for the overall offensive or defensive perfor-
mance and are, in general, not all equivalent. Indeed, in his studies, Oliver assigned a weight
to each factor so that the effective Field Goal percentage is the most important followed by
the turnovers, the rebounding, and the free throws.
Because of their importance, they have included in our work. In detail, the effective ﬁeld
goal percentage (EFG) is the ﬁeld goal percentage adjusting for made 3-point ﬁeld goals, i.e.
Table 1 Basketball variables
Variable
Label
Age
Age
Assist percentage
AST
Assist ratio
AST_RATIO
Effective ﬁeld goal percentage
EFG
Free throw rate
FTA_RATE
Defensive rating
DEFRTG
Defensive rebound percentage
DREB
Minutes played
MIN
Turnover ratio
TO_RATIO
Offensive rebound percentage
OREB
Offensive rating
OFFRTG
Number of possession per 48 min
PACE
Usage percentage
USG
Wins over played games
WIN
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
429
accounts for made three-pointers and serves to catch a player’s (or team’s) shooting efﬁciency
from the ﬁeld.
The turnovers per possession (To_Ratio) is the number of turnovers a player (or a team)
averages per 100 possessions used.
The Offensive Rebounding percentage (OREB) is the percentage of available offensive
rebounds a player obtains while on the ﬂoor; players, as well as teams, by obtaining an
offensive rebound, can have one more attempt to make a basket that, in turn, can rise the
winning probability.
The Free Throw Attempt rate (FTA_RATE) is the number of free throws made by a player
in comparison to the number of ﬁeld goal attempts; it expresses at the same time the player’s
ability to get to the foul line and to make foul shots.
In addition, the Defensive Rebound percentage (DREB) is also considered, that is the
percentage of available defensive rebounds a player obtains while on the ﬂoor.
Wetakeintoaccounttheoffensiveanddefensiveratings(OFFRTGandDEFRTG)too;they
could be seen as measures of the player’s efﬁciency per possession. In particular, OFFRTG
is the number of points per 100 possessions that the team scores while that individual player
is on the court while DEFRTG is the number of points per 100 possessions that the team
allows while that individual player is on the court.
We also include the Assist percentage (AST), the percentage of a team’s assists that a
player has while on the court and the Assist Ratio (AST_RATIO), i.e. the number of assists
a player averages per 100 possessions used.
Moreover, we take into account the age of the player (AGE), the Minutes played by a
player (MIN) as well the number of possession per 48 min (PACE) and the usage percentage
(USG), i.e. the percentage of team plays used by a player when they are on the ﬂoor. At last,
the variable that refers to the wins over the played games (WIN) is also included.
5 The estimated network
Based on the previously described variables and 1.000 simulations, we cannot reject, at the
10% level, the hypothesis that data were generated from the joint normal copula since the
determinant of the empirical rank correlation matrix (DER), being equal to 0.00179533, falls
within the 90% central conﬁdence interval for the determinant of the normal rank correlation
matrix (DNR) [0.0014418, 0.0029218].
Under this assumption, the Bayesian network is estimated based on the model selection
procedure described in the theoretical Sections, i.e., ﬁrst of all, by transforming the variables
into normal scores with Winsorized truncation and then running the Hill Climbing algorithm
ﬁxing the number of bootstrap samples at 500 and using the AIC criterion.
The threshold value is set to 0.70; in this way, only the arcs appearing at least the 70% of
times are retained. This high value allows to deﬁne a parsimonious model avoiding that in the
parameters’ learning phase too many arcs are associated with a conditional rank correlation
close to 0.6
We argue that the model selection procedure is mainly data-driven even if some arcs’
direction are forbidden based on logical constraints.
Given the DAG structure, the conditional correlations associated with the arcs are then
estimated based on the Gaussian copula assumption through the Uninet software.
6 Moreover, this threshold provides almost the same model as the one based on the BIC criterion (with a lower
threshold).
123

430
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
The estimated NPBN is shown in Fig. 2a. The number associated with each arc is the
conditional normal rank correlation, remembering that the rank correlation between the node
and its ﬁrst parent is unconditional, all the others are conditioned to the previous parents’
nodes. The ordering between parents is meaningful; hence, for each node, it has been set
based on expert knowledge.
In the Fig. 2b, the same network is reported whose nodes are replaced by monitors showing
the associated empirical marginal distributions (with the indication of the mean and the
standard deviation) estimated from data.
The estimated network describes the complexity of the multivariate dependence structure
discovering the conditional independence relationships among the performance indicators.
In particular, the concept of the Markov blanket can be useful to identify the main variables
that inﬂuence, for example, the player’s winning percentage. By deﬁnition, the Markov
blanket of a node X, denoted by M B(X), includes all the parents, children and parents
of children of X. It contains all information needed to infer a target variable X, making
all variables not belonging to it redundant. Regarding the target node “WIN”, its Markov
Blanket is composed of all nodes coloured blue in Fig. 2.
In terms of conditional independence, this implies that the winning percentage and the
green variables are conditionally independent, given the blue ones.
This means that the player winning percentage is completely determined by the player
offensive and defensive ratings (OFFRTG and DEFRTG), with nearly the same rank correla-
Fig. 2 The estimated averaged BN under the assumption of Gaussian Copula, using the Uninet software
representation
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
431
Fig. 2 continued
tion even if with opposite sign,7 by the possession (PACE) and by the minutes staying on the
ﬂoor (MIN). No other information is needed to predict winning percentage if those related
to the above variables are available.
This is in accordance with the SEM model proposed by Baghal (2012), whose two latent
factors affecting winning percentage were the offensive and defensive quality factors inﬂu-
enced, in turn, by the Four Factors. This is also veriﬁed in the BN since the Four Factors
affect the winning percentage by means of indirect paths; indeed, unless FTA_RATE, all the
other three are parent nodes of the OFFRTG. Moreover, from the estimated network, the
important role of the effective ﬁeld percentage is conﬁrmed as the main factor inﬂuencing
the offensive quality.
In general, all the discovered conditional relationships well match with those expected or
deﬁned in the literature.
In the following, in order to use the BN for inference purposes, we simulated the following
scenario focusing on the importance of the individual Offensive and Defensive Rating, i.e.
the player’s offensive production and the player’s defensive production. Taking into account
an average player, who plays 26 min and is 27 years old, the winning percentage is 49.5%
(see Fig. 3a).
7 We argue that the rank correlation between OFFRTG and WIN is marginal, that between DEFRTG and WIN
is conditional to OFFRTG. To this purpose, changing the ordering of these two parents nodes, we observed
that the marginal rank correlation between DEFRTG and WIN is equal to −0.34 while the conditional rank
correlation between OFFRTG and WIN given DEFRTG, rises to 0.57.
123

432
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
Suppose we have an OFFRTG of 10% higher than the mean, thus setting the value of
the OFFRTG node at 121 (see Fig. 3b), the mean value of the WIN node goes from 49.5 to
69.2%. Suppose now that we decrease the mean value of the DEFRTG node by 10%, ﬁxing
the value of the node at 99 (see Fig. 3c), the mean value of the WIN node rises to 61.7%. It
means that a 10% increase in offensive quality implies a 40% relative increase in the winning
percentage while the same variation in terms of defensive quality implies a 25% relative
increase in the winning percentage. Therefore, the quality of the player offensive production
seems to have a stronger impact on the winning percentage.
By looking at the monitors, the effects on the whole distribution can be seen as they allow
the visualization of both the original unconditional distribution (showed in grey) and the new
conditional distribution (showed in black).
In the second scenario, we vary the mean value of the Four Factors by 10%, given the
same average player. This combination leads to a relative increase in the winning percentage
of 7% (see Fig. 4 compared to Fig. 3a), all other factors being equal, the DEFRTG above all.
More interesting could be the third simulated scenario in which we follow a bottom-up
approach. This time, we ﬁx the expected high level of winning percentage at 75% in order
to know what are the minimum levels of the other factors that guarantee to reach the above
percentage (see Fig. 5 compared with Fig. 3a). Amongst them, the main evidence relates
to the marked increase of Net Rating, i.e. the difference between OFFRTG and DEFRTG
Obviously, the other indicators also change accordingly and can be investigated by looking
at the change in their mean values (and in their distributions) compared to the baseline ones
in Fig. 3a.
In the fourth scenario we investigate the role of the PACE variable. Being equal the values
of OFFRTG and DEFRTG (see Fig. 6a), decreasing its value to 98 increases the mean value
Fig. 3 First simulated scenario
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
433
Fig. 3 continued
123

434
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
Fig. 4 Second simulated scenario
Fig. 5 Third simulated scenario
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
435
of the winning percentage from 50.8 to 52.7 (see Fig 6b) while if it grows up to 105, the
mean value of the winning percentage decreases to 48.6 (see Fig 6c).
At last, to investigate the inﬂuence of the player’s age, we simulate a ﬁfth scenario. Being
equal all other factors’ conﬁguration, by increasing the age from 26 (Fig. 7a) to 35 (Fig. 7b),
the mean value of the winning percentage goes from 53.7 to 59.4. This could be explained by
the higher value of the OFFRTG which also corresponds to an increase in the AST_RATIO
for the older player.
By these simulations, we have shown the potential uses of BNs in this context, suggesting
that any other scenario of interest could be investigated and deeply analyzed.
6 Conclusions
The aim of this work is to contribute to sports analytics by introducing a multivariate approach
and, therefore, more complex statistical models, such as BNs, to deal with many performance
indicators at the same time, studying their interrelationships rather than analysing them
individually.
As shown through the what-if analysis, the links among different measures are evident.
By means of the concept of Markov Blanket, we also identiﬁed the key determinants of the
winning percentage. Moreover, the role of the Four Factors has been analysed: they affect the
quality of the offensive and defensive production of a player that, in turn, directly affect the
winning percentage. From a methodological point of view, the use of an approach overcoming
the Gaussian assumption by means of a Gaussian Copula, is of interest in this ﬁeld and, in
general, in Statistics since it is well-known to allow great ﬂexibility in the models. In the
Fig. 6 Fourth simulated scenario
123

436
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
Fig. 6 continued
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
437
Fig. 7 Fifth simulated scenario
123

438
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
future, other statistical models based on BNs could be proposed that take into account the
position of the player and many other features not yet included, such as the different seasons
of the league.
Acknowledgements We thanks Orso Maria Panaccione, semi-professional Basketball player, former cham-
pion of Italy with the youth team of Reyer Venezia, to have borrowed his experience and knowledge in this
ﬁeld.
Funding Open access funding provided by Università degli Studi di Roma La Sapienza within the CRUI-
CARE Agreement.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Babaee Khobdeh, S., Yamaghani, M. R., & Khodaparast Sareshkeh, S. (2021). Clustering of basketball players
using self-organizing map neural networks. Journal of Applied Research on Industrial Engineering, 8(4),
412–428.
Baghal, T. (2012). Are the “four factors” indicators of one factor? an application of structural equation modeling
methodology to nba data in prediction of winning percentage. Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports,
8(1).
Bauer, A., & Czado, C. (2016). Pair-copula Bayesian networks. Journal of Computational and Graphical
Statistics, 25(4), 1248–1271.
Bauer, A., Czado, C., & Klein, T. (2012). Pair-copula constructions for non-Gaussian dag models. Canadian
Journal of Statistics, 40(1), 86–109.
Blaikie, A. D., Abud, G. J., David, J. A., Pasteur, R. D. (2011). “nﬂ& ncaa football prediction using artiﬁcial
neural network”. In Proceedings of the midstates conference for undergraduate research in computer
science and mathematics, Denison University, Granville, OH.
Buntine, W. (1996). A guide to the literature on learning probabilistic networks from data. IEEE Transactions
on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 8(2), 195–210.
Casals, M., & Martinez, A. J. (2013). Modelling player performance in basketball through mixed models.
International Journal of Performance Analysis in Sport, 13(1), 64–82.
Cervone, D., D’Amour, A., Bornn, L., & Goldsberry, K. (2016). A multiresolution stochastic process model for
predicting basketball possession outcomes. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 111(514),
585–599.
Constantinou, A. C., Fenton, N. E., & Neil, M. (2013). Proﬁting from an inefﬁcient association football
gambling market: Prediction, risk and uncertainty using Bayesian networks. Knowledge-Based Systems,
50, 60–86.
Cooper, G. F. (1997). A simple constraint-based algorithm for efﬁciently mining observational databases for
causal relationships. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 1(2), 203–224.
Cooper, G. F., & Herskovits, E. (1992). A Bayesian method for the induction of probabilistic networks from
data. Machine Learning, 9(4), 309–347.
Cowell, R. G., Dawid, P., Lauritzen, S. L., & Spiegelhalter, D. J. (1999). Probabilistic networks and expert
systems. Springer.
Dalla Valle, L., & Kenett, R. S. (2015). Ofﬁcial statistics data integration for enhanced information quality.
Quality and Reliability Engineering International, 31(7), 1281–1300. https://doi.org/10.1002/qre.1859
(in Press).
Deshpande, S. K., & Jensen, S. T. (2016). Estimating an nba player’s impact on his team’s chances of winning.
Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports, 12(2), 51–72.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
439
Elidan, G. (2010). Copula Bayesian networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 23, 559–
567.
Engelmann, J. (2017). Possession-based player performance analysis in basketball (adjusted+/–and related
concepts). In Handbook of statistical methods and analyses in sports. Chapman and Hall (pp. 231–244).
Fearnhead, P., & Taylor, B. M. (2011). On estimating the ability of nba players. Journal of Quantitative analysis
in sports, 7(3)
Fewell, J. H., Armbruster, D., Ingraham, J., Petersen, A., & Waters, J. S. (2012). Basketball teams as strategic
networks. PLoS ONE, 7(11), e47445.
Friedman, N., Goldszmidt, M., & Wyner, A. (1999a). Data analysis with Bayesian networks: A bootstrap
approach. In Proceedings of the 15th annual conference on uncertainty in artiﬁcial intelligence (pp.
196–201).
Friedman, N., Nachman, I., & Pe’er, D. (1999b). Learning Bayesian network structure from massive datasets:
The “sparse candidate” algorithm. In M. Kaufmann (Ed.), Proceedings of 15th conference on uncertainty
in artiﬁcial intelligence (pp. 206–221).
Geiger, D., & Heckerman, D. (1994). Learning gaussian networks. In Proceedings of the tenth international
conference on uncertainty in artiﬁcial intelligence. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco,
CA, USA (pp. 235–243).
Hanea, A. M., Kurowicka, D., & Cooke, R. M. (2006). Hybrid method for quantifying and analyzing Bayesian
belief nets. Quality and Reliability Engineering International, 22(6), 613–729.
Hanea, A., Kurowicka, D., Cooke, R., & Ababei, D. (2010). Mining and visualising ordinal data with non-
parametric continuous bbns. Computational Statistics and Data Analysis, 54(3), 668–687.
Harris, N., & Drton, M. (2013). Pc algorithm for nonparanormal graphical models. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 14(11), 3365–3383.
Heckerman, D. (1995). A tutorial on learning with Bayesian networks. In Technical report.
Hobæk Haff, I., Aas, K., Frigessi, A., & Lacal, V. (2016). Structure learning in Bayesian networks using
regular vines. Computational Statistics and Data Analysis, 101(C), 186–208.
Hollinger, J. (2004). Pro basketball forecast 2004–2005. Brassey’s.
Hollinger, J., & Hollinger, J. (2005). Pro basketball forecast, 2005–2006. Potomac Books.
James, B. (1984). The bill James baseball abstract 1987. Ballantine Books.
James, B. (1987). The bill James baseball abstract 1987. Ballantine Books.
Jensen, F. V., Lauritzen, S. L., & Olesen, K. G. (1990). Bayesian updating in causal probabilistic networks by
local computations. Computational Statistics Quarterly, 4, 269–282.
Joe, H., & Kurowicka, D. (2011). Dependence modeling: Vine copula handbook. World Scientiﬁc.
Karra, K., & Mili, L. (2016). Hybrid copula Bayesian networks. In Conference on probabilistic graphical
models. PMLR (pp. 240–251).
Kubatko, J., Oliver, D., Pelton, K., & Rosenbaum, D. T. (2007). A starting point for analyzing basketball
statistics. Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports, 3(3), 1–24.
Kurowicka, D., & Cooke, R. (2006). Uncertainty analysis with high dimensional dependence modelling. Wiley.
Kurowicka, D., & Cooke, R. (2010). Vines and continuous non-parametric Bayesian belief nets with emphasis
on model learning, vol Re-Thinking Risk Measurement and Reporting. Uncertainty, Bayesian Analysis
and Expert Judgement, Risk Books, London, chap, 24, 295–329.
Lauritzen, S. L., Dawid, A. P., Larsen, B. N., & Leimer, H. G. (1990). Independence properties of directed
Markov ﬁelds. Networks, 20(5), 491–505.
Lauritzen, S. L., & Spiegelhalter, D. J. (1988). Local computations with probabilities on graphical structures
and their application to expert systems. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 50(2), 157–224.
Lauritzen, S. L., & Wermuth, N. (1989). Graphical models for associations between variables, some of which
are qualitative and some quantitative. The annals of Statistics, 17(1), 31–57.
Liu,H.,Han,F.,Yuan,M.,Lafferty,J.,Wasserman,L.,et al.(2012).High-dimensionalsemiparametric gaussian
copula graphical models. The Annals of Statistics, 40(4), 2293–2326.
Liu, H., Lafferty, J., & Wasserman, L. (2009). The nonparanormal: Semiparametric estimation of high dimen-
sional undirected graphs. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 10(10), 2295–2328.
Loeffelholz, B., Bednar, E., & Bauer, K. W. (2009). Predicting nba games using neural networks. Journal of
Quantitative Analysis in Sports, 5(1), 1–17.
Lopez, M. J., & Matthews, G. J. (2015). Building an ncaa men’s basketball predictive model and quantifying
its success. Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports, 11(1), 5–12.
Marella, D., Vicard, P., Vitale, V., & Ababei, D. (2019). Measurement error correction by nonparametric
Bayesian networks: Application and evaluation. In Statistical learning of complex data. CLADAG 2017.
Studies in classiﬁcation, data analysis, and knowledge organization (pp. 155–162). Springer.
Metulini, R., Manisera, M., & Zuccolotto, P. (2018). Modelling the dynamic pattern of surface area in basketball
and its effects on team performance. Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports, 14(3), 117–130.
123

440
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:419–440
Neapolitan, R. E. (2003). Learning Bayesian networks. Prentice-Hall Inc.
Nikolaidis, Y. (2015). Building a basketball game strategy through statistical analysis of data. Annals of
Operations Research, 227(1), 137–159.
Nojavan, F., Qian, S. S., & Stow, C. A. (2017). Comparative analysis of discretization methods in Bayesian
networks. Environmental Modelling & Software, 87, 64–71.
Oliver, D. (2004). Basketball on paper: Rules and tools for performance analysis. Potomac Books, Inc.
Page, G. L., Fellingham, G. W., & Reese, C. S. (2007). Using box-scores to determine a position’s contribution
to winning basketball games. Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports, 3(4), 1–18.
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: Networks of plausible inference. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
Piette, J., Pham, L., & Anand, S. (2011). Evaluating basketball player performance via statistical network
modeling. In The 5th MIT Sloan sports analytics conference.
Pircalabelu, E., Claeskens, G., & Gijbels, I. (2017). Copula directed acyclic graphs. Statistics and Computing,
27(1), 55–78.
Razali, N., Mustapha, A., Yatim, F. A., & Ab Aziz, R. (2017). Predicting football matches results using
Bayesian networks for English premier league (epl). In Iop conference series: Materials science and
engineering (Vol. 226, p. 012099). IOP Publishing.
Rohmer, J. (2020). Uncertainties in conditional probability tables of discrete Bayesian belief networks: A
comprehensive review. Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 88, 103384.
Sandholtz, N., Mortensen, J., & Bornn, L. (2020). Measuring spatial allocative efﬁciency in basketball. Journal
of Quantitative Analysis in Sports, 16(4), 271–289.
Scutari, M., & Nagarajan, R. (2011). On identifying signiﬁcant edges in graphical models. In Proceedings of
workshop on probabilistic problem solving in biomedicine (pp. 15–27). Springer.
Shen, J., Zhao, Y., Liu, J. K., & Wang, Y. (2020). Recognizing scoring in basketball game from AER sequence
by spiking neural networks. In 2020 international joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN) (pp.
1–8). IEEE.
Sill J (2010) Improved nba adjusted+/-using regularization and out-of-sample testing. In Proceedings of the
2010 MIT Sloan sports analytics conference.
Skinner, B., & Guy, S. J. (2015). A method for using player tracking data in basketball to learn player skills
and predict team performance. PLoS ONE, 10(9), e0136393.
Spirtes, P., Glymour, C., & Scheines, R. (1993). Discovery algorithms for causally sufﬁcient structures. In
Causation, prediction, and search (pp. 103–162). Springer.
Terner, Z., & Franks, A. (2021). Modeling player and team performance in basketball. Annual Review of
Statistics and Its Application, 8, 1–23.
Tsamardinos, I., Brown, L. E., & Aliferis, C. F. (2006). The max–min hill-climbing Bayesian network structure
learning algorithm. Machine Learning, 65(1), 31–78.
Vitale, V., Musella, F., Vicard, P., & Guizzi, V. (2018) Modelling an energy market with Bayesian networks
for non-normal data. Computational Management Science, 1–18.
Wang, K. C., & Zemel, R. (2016). Classifying nba offensive plays using neural networks. In: Proceedings of
MIT Sloan sports analytics conference (Vol. 4).
Wu, S., & Bornn, L. (2018). Modeling offensive player movement in professional basketball. The American
Statistician, 72(1), 72–79.
Xin, L., Zhu, M., & Chipman, H. (2017). A continuous-time stochastic block model for basketball networks.
The Annals of Applied Statistics, 11(2), 553–597.
Yang, C. H., Lin, H. Y., & Chen, C. P. (2014). Measuring the efﬁciency of nba teams: Additive efﬁciency
decomposition in two-stage dea. Annals of Operations Research, 217(1), 565–589.
Zuccolotto, P., Sandri, M., & Manisera, M. (2019). Spatial performance indicators and graphs in basketball.
Social Indicators Research, 1–14.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123