TITLE: A learning-based co-planning method with truck and container routing for improved barge departure times
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05706-7
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05706-7
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
A learning-based co-planning method with truck and
container routing for improved barge departure times
Rie B. Larsen1
· Rudy R. Negenborn1
· Bilge Atasoy1
Received: 10 February 2021 / Accepted: 14 September 2023 / Published online: 12 December 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Cooperationbetweencontainertransportserviceproviderscanincreaseefﬁciencyinthelogis-
tics sector signiﬁcantly. However, cooperation between competitors requires co-planning
methods that not only give the cooperating partners an advantage towards external compe-
tition but also protect the partners from losing information, clients and autonomy to one
another. Furthermore, modern freight transport requires real-time methods that react to new
information and situations. We propose a real-time, co-planning method called departure
learning based on model predictive control where a barge operator considers the joint cost of
themselves and a truck operator when deciding barge departures. At regular time-intervals,
the barge operator uses previous information to propose a number of departure schedules
for which the truck operator discloses their corresponding expected operational costs. Co-
planning thus only requires limited exchange of aggregate data. The impact of using departure
learning on the transport system’s performance and the method’s learning quality are thor-
oughly investigated numerically on an illustrative, simulated, realistic hinterland network.
With as little as six schedules being exchanged per timestep, departure learning outperforms
decentralized benchmark methods signiﬁcantly in terms of operational costs. It is found that
using knowledge about the performance of related schedules is important for the exploration
of opportunities, but if this is relied upon too much, the realized solution becomes more
costly. It is also found that departure learning is a reliable and realistic co-planning method
that especially performs well when peaks in the demand make departure times highly corre-
lated to the cost of operating the transport system, such as in hinterland areas of ports which
receive large container ships.
This research is supported by the project “Complexity Methods for Predictive Synchromodality” (project
439.16.120) of the Netherlands Organisation for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO) and by the project “Novel
inland waterway transport concepts for moving freight effectively” of European Union Horizon 2020
Programme under grant agreement n◦858508.
B Rie B. Larsen
R.B.Larsen@tudelft.nl
Rudy R. Negenborn
R.R.Negenborn@tudelft.nl
Bilge Atasoy
B.Atasoy@tudelft.nl
1
Department of Maritime and Transport Technology, Delft University of Technology, Mekelweg 2, 2628
CD Delft, The Netherlands
123

170
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
Keywords Cooperative planning · Co-planning · Vehicle utilization · Synchromodal
transport · Barge scheduling · Model predictive control · Online learning
1 Introduction
Better co-planning between stakeholders in transport systems for planning barge schedules,
truck and container routes in real-time will help utilizing the transport capacity better. A more
efﬁcient transport system will help alleviating the negative impacts on the environment, since
less resources will be used and less pollution will be emitted on each transport. The transport
sector is a large contributor of CO2 emissions and has a low efﬁciency, with, e.g., trucks being
empty 26% of the kilometres they drive in the Netherlands (Eurostat, 2020). CO2 emission is
however not the only negative impact of freight transport. The report van Essen et al. (2019)
estimates the external costs of transport, such as the cost of accidents, climate impact, and
noise nuisance. Here it is concluded that maritime transport induces the lowest external cost,
followed by rail, inland waterway and road transport in this order. It is therefore desirable
not only to improve the vehicle utilization, and hence efﬁciency, of truck transport, but also
the utilization across transport modes.
Synchromodal transport uses a-modal bookings and change acceptance to enable transport
providers to optimize plans in accordance with the realisation of uncertainties (Giusti et al.,
2019; van Riessen et al., 2015). The concept gives transport providers more ﬂexibility than
the previous concepts, intermodal and multimodal transport, since mode decisions in these
concepts were ﬁxed, at latest, before departure. In the traditional transport literature, decisions
are divided into strategic, tactical and operational levels (SteadieSeiﬁet al., 2014). Strategic
decisions have long lasting impact and usually high impact on revenue. Tactical decisions
haveimpactoveratangibletimehorizonsandaretypicallybasedonestimatesoffutureevents.
Plans are often made on the tactical level and corrected at the operational level. Operational
decisions regard what to do right now with the realised events. With synchromodal transport,
decisions from the tactical and the operational levels are intertwined: uncertain long term
plans for operational decisions can be formulated without commitment, and tactical decisions
can be changed during operation. This intertwining requires additional research to utilize the
potential of synchromodality. Model Predictive Control (MPC) provides a framework for
combining predictions of future events with real-time decision making. MPC has previously
been used to route containers in several cases, e.g., Huang et al. (2021), and Li et al. (2015).
Barge schedules are typically decided on at the tactical level based on estimated demand
(Demir et al., 2016). When plans are made in advance, the realised demand is often different
and external factors, like weather, cause unforeseen limitations. Some methods plan in accor-
dance with these uncertainties (van Riessen et al., 2015), others adjust predeﬁned departure
times after the demand realization (Behdani et al., 2016) or cancel unproﬁtable departures
(Xu et al., 2015). Truck routing is typically decided on at the operational level based on
pick up and delivery locations and times of the goods (Psaraftis et al., 2016). In Larsen et al.
(2021c) we demonstrated the negative impact of planning ﬁrst container routes and then truck
routes compared to planning them simultaneously in a synchromodal network. The results
of Qu et al. (2019) show the same on a network with only one origin of the demand.
Barges and trucks are often operated by different stakeholders, so simultaneous planning
requirescooperation.Cooperationcaninvolvebothinformationsharingandlossofautonomy.
Many companies are interested in the beneﬁts of cooperation (Cruijssen et al., 2007), but
participate reluctantly due to these implications. In Karam et al. (2021), it is concluded that
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
171
trust-related issues are the main barriers to horizontal cooperation. Information on speciﬁc
transport requests are often considered sensitive information. In Gansterer et al. (2020), it is
shown that sharing of aggregated information can improve the system-wide performance in
comparison with sharing of more sensitive, speciﬁc information. Many cooperation schemes
in the transport literature are constructed such that missing information or sudden changes in
the willingness to follow the scheme can damage the other participating parties. Traditional
cooperation schemes vary from auctions (Xu et al., 2017) to distributed optimization (Li et
al., 2017; Di Febbraro et al., 2016). Gansterer and Hartl (2018) provides an overview that
classiﬁes the existing research into (1) centralized methods, which requires a neutral party,
(2) decentralized optimization methods, and (3) auction-based methods.
We use the term co-planning to describe the act of cooperating to achieve the vehicle
and container transport plans that are best for the group of cooperating stakeholders without
sharing sensitive information or being vulnerable to deﬁance of the other parties. Very little
research on co-planning methods exist. Boros et al. (2008) proposes a co-planning method
that optimizes the joint proﬁt cycle-time imposes on a port and a shipping liner. In their
method in each round of communication, each operator optimizes its costs for a given cycle-
time. These costs are communicated and the expected joint proﬁt is computed. If the expected
proﬁt has improved, a higher cycle-time is used in the next round of communication. Since
the joint problem under certain conditions is concave, the joint proﬁt and the corresponding
cycle-time can be optimized without exchanging detailed information. For more complex
problems, their method may ﬁnd the lowest cycle-time corresponding to a local maxima,
not the global maximum. The planning method presented in Pérez Rivera and Mes (2019),
which integrates drayage and long-haul parts of container routing, separates the optimization
of each type of operation but ensures a common goal by using a shared objective function and
coordinate demand-expectation information across the models. In the literature on transport
contract negotiation, planning at a tactical level is researched under privacy assumptions
similar to those of co-planning. In Yang et al. (2019) a carrier offers two contracts to a
shipper. Since it is a tactical problem, the carrier only has probabilistic information about the
future demand when deciding what contracts to propose. For operational co-planning, the
decision frequency is higher, and there is thus a potential to learn from the other stakeholders’
previous actions.
In Bayesian optimization, prior knowledge is used to identify function evaluations that are
likely to improve the optimizer’s knowledge of the minimum by means of a value function
that typically combines certainty with expected function values. It is often used to optimize
functions where gradient information is unavailable or computationally expensive and where
function evaluations are associated with a cost. Each new function evaluation adds to the
prior knowledge (Frazier, 2018). Bayesian optimization has earlier been used for container
routing problems in Rivera and Mes (2022), where a value function is used to improve the
trade-off between exploration and exploitation in an Approximate Dynamic Programming
solution method. Ideas from Bayesian optimization is used in the present paper to decrease the
needed communication between the barge and the truck operator. This is a novel application
in the transport ﬁeld. The presented method is inspired by the literature on combinatorial
Bayesian optimization (Oh et al., 2019; Baptista and Poloczek, 2018), parallel Bayesian
optimization (Oˇcenášek and Schwarz, 2000; Kandasamy et al., 2018), and warm-start of
Bayesian optimization (Poloczek et al., 2016).
In this paper, we show the impact of co-planning and describe the details of a co-planning
method, called departure learning, for real-time co-planning between a barge and a truck
operator. The co-planned actions are departures of a barge and the remaining actions consid-
ered are loading and unloading of containers to trucks and barge, and departures of the trucks.
123

172
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
An initial version of departure learning was presented in Larsen et al. (2020) together with
preliminary results and a variation of this method for one barge and multiple truck operators
was presented in Larsen et al. (2021b), again with limited exploration of the method’s features
and limited experimental work. The method is based on Model Predictive Control (MPC)
and uses ideas from Bayesian optimization to learn good departure times through continu-
ous communication. Departure learning requires communication of a number of schedules
and indications of the corresponding performances between the barge operator and the truck
operator. The initial departure learning algorithm is now enhanced with better initial guesses
for the performance of schedules and the impact of the method’s learning parameters is pre-
sented. Furthermore, we show the impact of actively learning what schedules are expected to
perform well by comparing departure learning to a similar method that uses randomly chosen
schedules. It is assumed that no party seeks to exploit the framework, but if one party acts
autonomously the other party is not damaged. The main advantage of departure learning is
the ability to co-plan barge departures, i.e. enable a barge operator to depart when it improves
the operation cost of the transport network, without losing control over own operation, trans-
ferring responsibilities between stakeholders or communicating detailed information.
This paper is organized as follows. Section2 details the problem of co-planning barge
departures. In Sect.2.1, an MPC planning barge, truck and container moved in a network
with a single decision maker is presented. Hereafter, departure learning is introduced in
Sect.3. The overall framework is presented ﬁrst, followed by the barge operator’s learning
strategy and the truck operator’s feedback. In Sect.4, simulation experiments are used to
show the impact of the parameters of departure learning and how departure learning performs
compared to three benchmark methods. Section5 concludes the paper and provides future
research directions.
2 Problem statement
When each transport operator can change planned actions up until the time the action is carried
out, co-planning between transport operators must happen in real time. One planning problem
in a synchromodal transport network is co-planning between truck operators responsible for
routing trucks and delivering containers in time, and a barge operator responsible for barge
departures. Figure1 shows the synchromodal transport network used as example in this paper.
The simple road network is used for illustrative purposes. In reality road networks usually
have more nodes corresponding to locations where decisions can be taken. The method is
describedforarbitraryroadnetworksizewithonetruckoperatorandextendseasilytomultiple
truck operators as described in Larsen et al. (2021b) without a thorough investigation of the
impact of the method’s parameters on the achieved performance.
Changing the departure time of a barge impacts the truck operator in the network signiﬁ-
cantly. If the barge departure ﬁts well with the release and due date of container demand, it
is often attractive for the truck operator to send the containers by barge instead of trucking
them. They can do so as the containers are booked a-modal under synchromodal transport.
Good departure times thus often beneﬁt the truck operator by decreasing transport cost and
the barge operator by increasing the transported volume. The barge and the truck operator
thus both have an interest in co-planning to achieve a better joint operational cost. We assume
the barge and truck operators have an agreement outlining the distribution of the economical
gains and burdens. However, the two operators do not want to share speciﬁc information nor
are they willing to hand over decision power.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
173
Fig. 1 Small Dutch transport
network used as example in this
paper
The barge operator does not know which barge departure times will decrease the joint
cost of the transport the most. In a highly dynamic environment with many small shippers
that do not request transport of containers regularly, optimizing barge departures based on
past transport ﬂows can give very ill-ﬁtting schedules for upcoming periods. In those cases,
assuming the barge operator has no knowledge about demand but what he receives in real-
time from the truck operators is thus reasonable. However, the truck operator wants to keep
all information about a given container’s transport-order (such as release time, due date and
quantity) private until the container is committed to take the barge. Only when a container
is committed to be loaded on the barge, the truck operator is willing to share the necessary
practical information. The truck operator is willing to share the total cost they expect to occur
over a certain time horizon if a given barge schedule is implemented. They do however prefer
to limit the number of schedules to respond to, as computing a plan for each schedule can
become computationally demanding and they worry the barge operator will gain too much
insight into their business economy.
On the other hand, the truck operator do not have authority to decide on the barge schedule
as it is a core business decision for a barge operator. Additionally, in realistic cases, multiple
stakeholders will use the capacity on the barge ensuring no single party has full overview
of what departure times will be most beneﬁcial. For simplicity we assume a single truck
operator. We consider a transport system that consists of a barge operator who decides on the
departure times of one barge between two different terminals and one other operator, namely
the truck operator, who decides on the routing of trucks and the mode and route containers are
transported by. We, furthermore, assume in the numerical experiments that the truck operator
shares the cost truly and that the barge operator indeed sends back the best schedule honestly.
It is, however, worth noticing that each operator can incorporate other expenses into the costs
used in the method and has full authority over actions they are responsible for.
Ifoneentityhadthejointinformationanddecisionpowerfromthebargeandthetruckoper-
ator, full integration would be possible. Full integration, typically, enables the best possible
performance of the system, but is unattainable when multiple stakeholders have reserva-
tions towards sharing information and responsibilities. In short the presented method, called
departure learning, answers the question ‘How can a barge operator learn which barge depar-
tures make the total operation cost of a synchromodal transport network lower under limited
real-time information about the total cost?’. To clarify assumptions, model choice and to
provide an idealized solution method, we introduce ﬁrst a real-time, centralized method. If
one entity has full knowledge and authority in the transport system, this method provides
receding horizon-optimal control of the integrated container, truck and vehicle departures.In
123

174
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
Sect.3, we propose departure learning to let the performance of the decentralized transport
system approach that of the centralized method.
2.1 Real-time centralized decision making
To fully integrate the barge departure scheduling with container and truck routing, a model
predictive control (MPC) based method has been developed. Except the assumed central
decision agent, the assumptions and notation of this centralized method are also applica-
ble to departure learning, e.g., the underlying transport network dynamics are identical. A
comprehensive table of notation can be found in Appendix A.
MPC addresses uncertainties by adjusting future plans based on feedback from the system
(Mayne et al., 2000). Every Δt timeunits there is a new decision moment where actions to
be taken until the next decision moment are ﬁxed based on a predicted plan for the next
TpΔt timeunits. We denote with t the running time and with k the count of decision moments.
We call the latter timesteps and deﬁne t = kΔt.
Using MPC for problems that require frequent updates, i.e. low Δt, and a long prediction
horizon Tp necessitates fast optimization of the model. In synchromodal transport problems,
a long prediction horizon is needed because of the long travel times of barges and the need
to describe at least one departure from each terminal. We therefore assume local controllers
can aggregate the present containers and trucks into commodities based on their destination.
Additionally, each commodity is described using continuous variables. This decreases the
computational complexity sufﬁciently such that no heuristics, such as the ones described
in Juan et al. (2021), are needed. Frequent updates can ensure sufﬁcient precision when
the continuous optimal decisions are rounded to integer variables (Sager et al., 2012). We
separate the containers into commodity ﬂows based on their destinations. If a ﬁner granularity
is needed, due date and container type can also be included in the deﬁnition of a commodity.
This has earlier been considered in, e.g., Nabais et al. (2013), which differentiates between
containers with different destination and due time combinations, and Poo and Yip (2019),
which only distinguishes full and empty containers. A ﬁner granularity will increase the
computational complexity and thus the time period, Δt, between decision moments. It is
assumed local decision makers disaggregate the commodity ﬂow decisions into actions for
separate containers. The barge capacity is much larger than that of trucks and the vessel
movements are thus described by binary variables.
The key assumptions of the synchromodal transport system dynamics are:
– Any node in the network can be the origin and destination of transport demand, if it is
deﬁned as such, hence bidirectional ﬂows are considered.
– Demand is modelled as containers available to the network and needed from the network.
Unsatisﬁed demand is penalized. The demand is fully known over the prediction horizon.
– Containers are modelled as ﬂows segmented by their destination.
– Trucks are modelled as ﬂows.
– The number of trucks is ﬁnite and each truck can transport one container.
– The barge has invariant, ﬁnite capacity.
– Quay capacity, crane capacity, etc., and (un)loading rates are considered sufﬁcient.
– Terminal operating hours, drivers resting hours, etc., are not considered.
Each geographicallocation in the synchromodaltransportnetwork is represented by a node
in a graph with multiple directed arcs connecting the nodes. A location can be a terminal
where trucks and/or the barge can be loaded and unloaded; a way point where trucks can
change their intended route; or a hub where trucks can pick up or deliver containers and
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
175
possibly park. The set of nodes is denoted N and the set of road-arcs is denoted R. There
is one barge in the network that sails between node 1 and node 2. The two directional arcs
describing this waterway comprise the set W. Nodes 1 and 2 can also be connected by road.
The road network can be of any size, but must contain at least two locations that function as
origin and destination of containers. The operators’ decisions can only be changed when the
vehicles and containers are at the nodes. It is, e.g., not possible to make the barge return to its
departure terminal if a delay occurs. Furthermore, it is assumed that only the truck operators
have contact to clients and therefore the barge operator receives the demand only through
truck operators.
2.2 System dynamics
In the following we describe the realized dynamics of the transport system. Departure learn-
ing and the centralized method are both based on predictions of the consequences of future
actions. These predictions are made using the same dynamics. To distinguish between pre-
dicted and realized actions and states, we use a bar over the notation for the realized case.
The method used to describe this simultaneous truck and container planning problem is a
simpliﬁcation of the one presented in Larsen et al. (2021a). The following assumptions allow
the use of a simpliﬁed method: 1) the travel time is deterministic, 2) all trucks are of the same
kind, 3) there is no scheduled services in the transport network, and 4) there is unlimited
capacity for loading and unloading. The full method can be used with departure learning, but
as it adds complexity to the description, the simpliﬁed model is used here.
We deﬁne virtual demand nodes adjacent to the graph nodes where containers can have
origin or destination. They act as a reminder of unfulﬁlled bookings. The set of virtual nodes
is denoted by D. The dynamics of the virtual demand nodes are given as
¯zd
i (k + 1) = ¯zd
i (k) −¯udi(k) −¯uid(k) + ¯di(k) ∀i ∈D, ∀k,
(1)
where ¯di(k) ∈Rnc
≥0 is the newly realized demand of each commodity at time k. Notice
that all values are positive, so whether the demand indicates containers that are ready to
be transported or that are due depends on the commodity, i.e. the element in the vector.
nc is the number of commodities, i.e. the number of virtual demand nodes. The mappings
pr
i ∈{0, 1}1×nc and pd
i ∈{0, 1}1×nc are deﬁned such that pr
i ¯di(k) is the sum of containers
that are ready to be picked up at node i at time k and pd
i ¯di(k) is the sum of containers that
are due at node i at time k. The variable ¯zd
i (k) ∈Rnc
≥0 is the unsatisﬁed demand at node i at
time k and ¯uid(k) ∈Rnc
≥0 is the containers of each commodity from terminal node i that are
used to satisfy due dates at the virtual demand node at time k. ¯udi(k) ∈Rnc
≥0 is the opposite.
To guide the direction of the demand satisfaction, the following must be true:
pr
i ¯uid(k) = 0 ∀i ∈D, ∀k
(2)
pd
i ¯udi(k) = 0 ∀i ∈D, ∀k
(3)
Each node in the network can be connected with three kinds of other nodes: Di, Wi
and Ri. Di contains node i’s adjacent virtual demand nodes and Wi the node to which i
is connected by waterways. These sets are either empty or have one element. The set Ri
contains all nodes that are connected to node i by road. Based on these sets, the dynamics of
the stacks of containers are
¯zc
i (k + 1) = ¯zc
i (k) +

j∈Di
(¯udi(k) −¯uid(k)) +

j∈Wi

¯ub
ji(k −τ b
ji) −¯ub
i j(k)

123

176
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
+

j∈Ri

¯u ji(k −τr
ji) −¯ui j(k)

∀i ∈N, ∀k.
(4)
The variable ¯zc
i (k) ∈Rnc
≥0 is a vector of how many containers of each commodity that are
stacked at node i at time k. ui j(k) ∈Rnc
≥0 has the same structure and is for the containers
transported from i to j by road at time k. The road travel between i and j takes τr
i j timesteps
and the waterway travel takes τ b
i j. ub
i j(k) ∈Rnc
≥0 is a vector with the number of containers of
each commodity that is transported from i to j by barge departing at time k.
Two binary variables y1(k) and y2(k) are used to describe the departures of the barge at
timestep k from node 1 and 2 respectively. The travel time from node 1 to 2, τ b
12, and the
return, τ b
21, include loading, travel time, mooring and unloading. Containers that arrive at
the terminal after loading has started will not be accepted on the barge and containers can
only be picked up after the barge has ﬁnished unloading all containers. The dynamics of the
barges is described as
¯zb
i (k + 1) = ¯zb
i (k) −¯yi(k) + ¯y j(k −τ b
ji) i, j ∈{1, 2}, i ̸= j, ∀k
(5)
where ¯zb
i (k) ∈{0, 1} is the number of barges at the quay of node i at time k.
The barge has a capacity of cb and only carries containers that were ready for loading at
the departure time. Hence
1nc ¯ub
i j(k) ≤cb ¯yi(k) ∀< i, j >∈W, ∀k,
(6)
where 1nc ∈R1×nc is a vector of ones. The variable ¯zv
i (k) ∈R is the number of trucks parked
at node i at time k, and has the dynamics
¯zv
i (k + 1) = ¯zv
i (k) +

j∈Ri
¯v ji(k −τr
ji) −¯vi j(k) ∀i ∈N, ∀k,
(7)
where ¯vi j(k) ∈R is the number of trucks departing from i on the road to j at time k. To ensure
containers only travel by roads if they are loaded on trucks, the sum of containers departing
node i at time k on the road to node j must not exceed the number of trucks departing on the
same road at the same time. Trucks are on the other hand allowed to drive empty. Both are
modelled by
1nc ¯ui j(k) ≤¯vi j(k) ∀j ∈Ri, ∀i ∈N, ∀k.
(8)
2.3 Centralized method
At each discrete timestep, the centralized method optimizes the predicted cost of operating
the synchromodal transport system over the time horizon k to k + Tp. It is assumed that it
is cheaper but slower to use the barge than to only use the road mode if we look isolated at
sending one container between the waterway terminals on a barge with a realistic utilization
and do not consider the cost of driving a truck empty. The actual cost will depend on the
vehicles’ utilization and the container’s origin and destination. We consider four kind of
operation costs:
wb
i ∈R
Total operation cost associated with an empty barge that departs from node i
wl
i j ∈R1×nc
≥0
Cost of transporting one additional container with the barge from i to j. Can
vary based on commodity
wv
i j ∈R
Cost of driving a truck from i to j, regardless of load
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
177
wd ∈R1×nc
≥0
Cost per timestep delay per container. Can vary based on commodity. Demand
satisfaction is formulated as a soft constraint
The base cost of sailing the barge is deﬁned as:
J b(k) = wb
1 y1(k) + wb
2 y2(k) ∀k.
(9)
It is assigned to the timestep where the barge departs, i.e. the total travel-cost is incurred
at departure and not during the travel. This reﬂects the assumption that plans for a speciﬁc
vehicle can only be changed when that vehicle is at a node. Running costs like owning
the equipment and hiring people are disregarded, as they are out of scope of the real-time,
operational problem.
The remaining cost of operating the synchromodal network is, as the barge cost, assigned
to the timestep a truck or a container departs. The soft constraint penalty for late delivery of
containers at their destinations is added per container, per timestep. The remaining cost is
thus:
J t(k) =

<i, j>∈R
wv
i jvi j(k) +

<i, j>∈W
wl
i jub
i j(k) +

i∈D
wdzd
i (k + 1),
(10)
At each timestep, the centralized method gathers the number of containers, trucks and
barge that are located at each node and the quantities due to arrive in the future as a conse-
quence of previous decisions. The information related to the barge location is:
¯xb(k) =

¯zb
1(k), ¯y2(k −1), · · · , ¯y2(k −τ b
12), ¯zb
2(k), ¯y1(k −1), · · · , ¯y1(k −τ b
21)
T ,(11)
and the remaining information is:
¯xt(k) =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣

¯zd
1(k) · · · ¯zd
|D|(k)
T

¯ub
j1(k −τ b
j1), j ∈W1, · · · , ¯ub
j|N |(k −τ b
j|N |), j ∈W|N |
T

¯zc
1(k), ¯u j1(k −τr
j1) ∀j ∈R1, · · · , ¯zc
|N |(k), ¯u j|N |(k −τr
j|N |) ∀j ∈R|N |
T

¯zv
1(k), ¯v j1(k −τr
j1) ∀j ∈R1, · · · , ¯zv
|N |(k), ¯v j|N |(k −τr
j|N |) ∀j ∈R|N |
T
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
.
(12)
This information forms the initial constraints of optimization problem (13)–(24), which is
used to decide what actions to implement at the current timestep k. At the next timestep,
the process is repeated such that at any timestep k the actions and their consequences are
optimized for k to k + Tp, but only the actions corresponding to k are implemented.
min
k+Tp−1

κ=k
J t(κ) + J b(κ)
(13)
s.t. xt(k) = ¯xt(k),
(14)
xb(k) = ¯xb(k),
(15)
zd
i (κ + 1) = zd
i (κ) −udi(κ) −uid(κ) + di(κ) ∀i ∈D, ∀κ ∈{k,. . . ,k+Tp−1}, (16)
zc
i (κ + 1) = zc
i (κ) +

j∈Di
(udi(κ) −uid(κ)) +

j∈Wi

ub
ji(κ −τ b
ji) −ub
i j(κ)

+

j∈Ri

u ji(κ −τr
ji) −ui j(κ)

∀i ∈N, ∀κ ∈{k,. . . ,k+Tp−1}, (17)
123

178
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
zb
i (κ + 1) = zb
i (κ) −yi(κ) + y j(κ −τ b
ji) i, j ∈{1, 2}, i ̸= j,
∀κ ∈{k,. . . ,k+Tp−1},
(18)
zv
i (κ + 1) = zv
i (κ) +

j∈Ri
v ji(κ −τr
ji) −vi j(κ)
∀i ∈N, ∀κ ∈{k,. . . ,k+Tp−1},
(19)
1ncui j(κ) ≤vi j(κ) ∀j ∈Ri, ∀i ∈N, ∀κ ∈{k,. . . ,k+Tp−1},
(20)
pr
i ¯uid(κ) = 0 ∀i ∈D, ∀κ ∈{k,. . . ,k+Tp−1},
(21)
pd
i ¯udi(κ) = 0 ∀i ∈D, ∀κ ∈{k,. . . ,k+Tp−1},
(22)
1ncub
i j(κ) ≤cbyi(κ) ∀< i, j >∈W, ∀κ ∈{k,. . . ,k+Tp−1},
(23)
y1(κ) ∈{0, 1}, y2(κ) ∈{0, 1} ∀κ ∈{k,. . . ,k+Tp−1}.
(24)
3 Departure learning
Centralized planning is only possible when one entity has all information and authority to take
all decisions. Traditional distributed optimization requires several rounds of communications
and introduces artiﬁcial fees to shift the local optima. It is often not realistic to assume
transport operators will commit to such a scheme. We therefore propose the novel co-planning
method departure learning, where the global optimum is the goal of the planning, but only
a pre-speciﬁed number of potential schedules and the truck operator’s expected costs are
communicated at each timestep. The method builds on the same assumptions and system
dynamics as presented in Sect.2.1.
At each timestep, the barge operator sends a set I(k) of barge schedules to the truck oper-
ator. The number of schedules is denoted by n and is referred to as the exchanged schedules.
The truck operator hereafter computes the transport cost over the prediction horizon for each
of the schedules. The costs are send back to the barge operator who adds the costs related
only to the barge. The barge operator compares the total costs with the estimated costs of
all other feasible schedules and communicates the best schedule to the truck operator. The
actions corresponding to the current timestep in the schedule with the best performance are
implemented by the barge operator and truck operator separately, and the process is repeated
at the next timestep.
To estimate which schedules will perform better, the barge operator uses the performances
indicated by the truck operator at previous timesteps to estimate the performance at the current
timestep. It is ensured that the set of potential schedules includes both schedules that will
perform well and schedules that helps identifying good schedules in the future by using
selection strategies that focus on both exploitation and exploration. The overview of the
departure learning is shown in Fig.2. In the following, it is described how the barge operator
learns good schedules, and how the truck operator evaluates the cost of a schedule.
3.1 Learning good departure times
To estimate what the performance of all schedules are, all schedules must be identiﬁed.
However, the ﬁrst departure in a schedule must be from the terminal where the barge currently
is, or to which it is travelling. It is thus possible to describe the performance of all feasible
schedules if only half the schedules are identiﬁed as long as the location of the barge is
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
179
Fig. 2 Departure learning. Truck operator actions shown as purple ﬂow to the left and barge operator actions
as green ﬂow to the right. Blue, dashed arrows indicates the necessary communication
known. This reduces the number of binary options per timestep to one (to depart or not).
Such a reduced schedule is called an event e. Figure3 shows an example of a schedule and
its corresponding event. Events can be decoded into schedules using the known location of
the barge at time k as it determines the ﬁrst departure terminal and all departures hereafter
alternate terminals, mathematically:
yi(k + γ ) ≤zb
i (k) +
τ b
ji

κ=τ b
ji−γ
y j(k −κ) ∀γ ≤τ b
ji, ∀< i, j >∈W.
(25)
Each element of the event is a binary variable denoted by bk. An event is thus e =
[bk, . . . , bk+Tp−1]
where
each
element
is
a
speciﬁc
realizations
of
bk ∈{0, 1}, . . . , bk+Tp−1 ∈{0, 1}. It takes time for the barge to travel between the ter-
minals, and therefore not all events are feasible at all timesteps. The set of events that
are feasible at time k is denoted by E(k). Events at two different timesteps may cor-
respond to the same sequence of events when viewed over an inﬁnite timespan, and
123

180
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
Fig. 3 A schedule consists of two vectors of binary variables describing the departure times from the two end
terminals. The corresponding event combines the two
Fig. 4 Illustration of e∞and Ne∞(k). Note that the set of neighbours varies over time
are as such identical. e∞denotes an event over the inﬁnite timespan and is deﬁned as
e∞=
01:k e 0k+Tp:∞

, where 0a:b = {0}b−a is a zero-vector of suitable size. If two
events are identical except for two subsequent elements, the events are said to be neigh-
bours, i.e. for an event e1 = [b1
k, . . . , b1
k+Tp−2] ∈E(k), the set of neighbouring events is
Ne∞
1 (k) =

e = [b2
k, . . . , b2
k+Tp−2] ∈E(k) | b2
i = b1
i ∀i\{i = { j, j+1} for exactly one j ∈
{k, . . . , k + Tp −2} for which b1
j = 1 and b2
j = b1
j+1, b2
j+1 = b1
j

\

e1

This corresponds
to two barge schedules only differing in one departure time and for that departure only with
one timestep. The set of neighbours are indexed with the event’s e∞and time, since two
events e1 ∈E(k) and e2 ∈E(k + 1) with e∞
1
= e∞
2 will have the same set of neighbours
Ne∞for all k where Ne∞∈E(k) ∩E(k + 1). Both e∞and Ne∞(k) are exempliﬁed in Fig.4.
The barge operator holds an estimate of the total operation cost for the barge and the truck
operator for each event. This estimate of an event’s performance is called the event’s expected
ﬁtness and is denoted by ˜Fe∞(k). If the barge operator has received the operation cost the
truck operator will incur if the barge departs according to an event e, we say event e has been
evaluated. To indicate how certain the expected ﬁtness is, an uncertainty function ˜se∞(k) is
used. ˜se∞(k) decreases when an event corresponding to e∞or its neighbours are evaluated
and increases slowly over k. It is expected that the performance indicator for events that share
e∞evolve slowly over time, and that the performance indicators of neighbouring events are
related. Like in Bayesian optimization, ˜Fe∞(k) and ˜se∞(k) are used to sample a number of
candidate events that are expected to either correspond to good barge schedules or provide
useful information for the future. Unlike most implementations of Bayesian optimization,
the number of feasible events is ﬁnite in departure learning, and thus ˜Fe∞(k) and ˜se∞(k) can
be computed for all events.
The set of candidate events I(k) is sampled using strategies based on ranking of ˜Fe∞(k),
˜se∞(k) and functions of the two, together with random selection as outlined in Algorithm
1 for balanced exploitation and exploration. The cardinality of I(k), denoted by n, is the
number of schedules the truck operator must evaluate. Notice that the cost of each schedule
is independent of the other schedules and the operator therefore can evaluate the schedules
in parallel.
After the barge operator receives the cost of each evaluated event from the truck operator,
the expected ﬁtness of these events are updated and their uncertainty values are set to zero.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
181
Algorithm 1 The strategy used to assemble I(k)
1: input ˜Fe∞(k), ˜se∞(k), E(k)
2: return I(k) with n unique events
3: I(k) = ∅
4: for i ←1 to f loor(n/6) do
5:
I(k) = I(k) ∪arg mine∈E(k)\I(k) ˜Fe∞(k) + ˜se∞(k)
6:
I(k) = I(k) ∪arg mine∈E(k)\I(k) ˜Fe∞(k)
7:
I(k) = I(k) ∪arg maxe∈E(k)\I(k)˜se∞(k)
8:
I(k) = I(k) ∪arg mine∈E(k)\I(k) ˜Fe∞(k) −˜se∞(k)
9:
for j ←1 to 2 do
10:
I(k) = I(k) ∪rand (e ∈E(k) \ I(k))
11:
end for
12: end for
13: for i ←f loor(n/6)6 to n do
14:
I(k) = I(k) ∪rand (e ∈E(k) \ I(k))
15: end for
Some events will be feasible at the next time k + 1 which were not feasible at time k. These
events are initialized with the maximum ﬁtness evaluated at k and the uncertainty value snew.
Hereafter, all the ﬁtness and uncertainty values of all events are updated as follows:
˜Fe∞(k + 1) = α ˜Fe∞(k) +
1 −α
|Ne∞(k) ∪Ne∞(k + 1)|

i∈Ne∞(k)∪Ne∞(k+1)
˜Fi(k)
(26)
˜se∞(k + 1) = (α + β)˜se∞(k) +
1 −α
|Ne∞(k) ∪Ne∞(k + 1)|

i∈Ne∞(k)∪Ne∞(k+1)
˜si(k)
(27)
The learning parameter α balances the emphasis laid on each events’ previous value and
on neighbouring events’ values and the factor β controls the speed at which information from
previous timesteps become uncertain. To initialize departure learning prior knowledge can
be used, otherwise it is recommended that ˜Fe∞(1) = ˜Finit ∀e ∈E(1) where ˜Finit is higher
than the expected maximum ﬁtness and ˜se∞(1) = snew ∀e ∈E(1). snew is the maximum
uncertainty and is also used to update new feasible events in step 10 of the method overview
in Fig.2.
3.2 Evaluating the performance
The truck operator evaluates the performance of the communicated schedules by planning
container and truck routes simultaneously for each e ∈I(k). To do so he solves the following
optimization problem, initiated from the current state for the given schedule:
Je∞(k) = min
k+Tp−1

κ=k
J t(κ)
(28)
s.t. xt(k) = ¯xt(k)
(29)
{< y1(κ), y2(κ) > |κ ∈{k, . . . , k + Tp −1}} = e
(30)
(14), (16), (17), and (19)−(23).
(31)
123

182
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
After receiving the truck operator’s cost for an event, the barge operator adds its private costs
to compute the total predicted cost which serves as the event’s ﬁtness, i.e.
Fe∞(k) = Je∞(k) +
k+Tp−1

κ=k
J b(κ) : {< y1(κ), y2(κ) > |κ ∈{k, . . . , k + Tp −1}} = e.
(32)
4 Simulation experiments
When departure learning is used to co-plan barge departures, the learning rate of the method
and the realised cost are dependent on departure learning’s four tunable parameters: the
prediction horizon, Tp; the learning parameter, α; the forgetfulness parameter, β; and the
number of communicated schedules, n. These dependencies were investigated numerically
in simulated experiments. A well-tuned departure learning was hereafter compared to the
performance of a method without cooperation, the centralized method presented in Sect.2.1,
and a co-planning method without learning. In all experiments it is assumed that decisions are
taken every Δt = 15 min. In this section, the used benchmark methods and the scenarios are
ﬁrst described in detail. Second, the impacts of the tunable parameters are presented. Finally,
the departure learning and the three benchmark methods are compared. All experiments are
performed in Matlab formulated with Yalmip (Löfberg, 2004) and solved by Gurobi.
4.1 Benchmark methods
The performance of departure learning is benchmarked against three methods: (1) the central-
ized method, presented in Sect.2.3, which requires full cooperation and unlimited information
sharing, (2) a ﬁxed method that does not require any cooperation and (3) an uninformed co-
planning method without memory of previous plans.
The ﬁxed method that requires no cooperation mimics the traditional division between
decisions taken at the tactical and the operational level, while still assuming a-modal book-
ings. In this method, a pre-deﬁned barge schedule is used and thus only trucks and containers
can be routed in real-time. The used schedule has as many barge departures as possible, since
the likelihood that a container can be transported by barge and arrive in time is higher if there
are more departures. If a schedule with fewer departures was used, the ﬁxed schedule would
have a known disadvantage in terms of late delivery, which we want to avoid to evaluate
the added value of departure learning. During the simulation, the truck operator solves the
truck and container planning problem (28)–(31) every Δt min in an MPC fashion using this
publicly available schedule.
The uninformed co-planning method follows the steps outlined in Fig.5. The method
deviates from departure learning in steps 3, 6, 7, 10 and 11 from Fig.2. Instead of using
Algorithm 1 to actively choose which schedules to propose to the truck operator, the barge
operator sends n randomly chosen schedules from the set of feasible schedules. Step 10 and
11 are omitted and step 6 and 7 are replaced by one step where the best of the schedules
evaluated at the current timestep k is decided to be implemented.
4.2 Scenarios
The numerical experiments were performed on the Dutch network shown in Fig.1 where
Rotterdam and Apeldoorn are origins and destinations and Nijmegen is a terminal for trans-
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
183
Fig. 5 Actions of the uninformed method
shipments. The network thus accommodates nc = 2 different commodities: import to be
transported from Rotterdam to Apeldoorn, and export to be transported in reverse direction.
Departure learning and the benchmark methods all scale to larger truck networks. The three-
node network was chosen to keep the computation time short, the results easily interpretable,
and in order to be able to clearly focus on the co-planning components. It is assumed that
trucks drive 90km/h and (un)loading a truck in Rotterdam takes 20 min, while it is 10 min in
Nijmegen and Apeldoorn. With these assumptions, the 140km distance between Rotterdam
and Apeldoorn corresponds to 123 min travel time, and the 55km distance between Nijmegen
and Apeldoorn takes 56 min. The barge between Dordrecht and Nijmegen is by Qu et al.
(2019) reported to take 5h including loading, so we assume the total travel time between
Rotterdam and Nijmegen is 6h. The capacity of the barge is assumed to be 100 containers.
The truck operator is assumed to have 36 trucks, each of which can transport one container.
They are all parked in Apeldoorn at the beginning of the simulation. The barge departure
schedule used by the ﬁxed method lets the barge sail between Rotterdam and Nijmegen
as frequently as possible. The ﬁrst barge departs at timestep 1 from Nijmegen and departs
hereafter alternating between the two terminals every 6.5 hr corresponding to τ b
12 + 2 = 26
timesteps.
The transport cost is in most of the literature on synchromodal transport computed pri-
marily from the shippers perspective (Wenhua et al., 2019; Resat & Turkay, 2019; Behdani
et al., 2016). This does not capture the cost of repositioning empty trucks and under-full
barges realistically. One strength of departure learning is the ability to track empty vehicles
and thus the ability to assign cost to them, see Larsen et al. (2020). We therefore use the
vehicle-centred costs shown in Table 1.
The demand used in the experiments contains both import and export. Several different
demand proﬁles were used. A summary can be seen in Table 2 and Fig.6 shows the demand
proﬁle with high peaks. In the hinterland of container ports, the large quantities of containers
123

184
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
Table 1 Parameters and costs of the realistic scenario
Non-zero initial states
Network parameters
Costs
¯zb
2(0) = 1
τb
12 = τb
21 = 24
wb
12 = wb
21 = 210
wd = 1000
¯zv
2(0) = 36
τr
13 = τr
31 = 9
wv
13 = wv
31 = 73.19
τr
23 = τr
32 = 4
wv
23 = wv
32 = 33.93
cb = 100
wl
12 = wl
21 = 13.18 1nc
Table 2 Summary of the used demand proﬁles
Release Rotterdam Release Apeldoorn Peak height (of barge capacity)
High peaks
2027
2324
80–100%
Medium-high peaks
1811
1868
60–80%
Medium-low peaks
1338
1824
40–60%
Low peaks
869
1406
20–40%
Unbalanced base quantity
501
1461
–
Unbalanced medium-high quantity 1441
2425
–
Fig. 6 The ﬁrst 5 days of the demand proﬁle with high peaks used in the experiments
that are to be loaded and unloaded from one ship in a relatively short amount of time make the
demand proﬁles with peaks very realistic and relevant to practitioners. In scenarios without
signiﬁcant peaks in the demand, it is likely that there is a predominant direction of transport
of full containers, making the unbalanced demand proﬁles a realistic type of demand to
contrast the demand with peaks. Both proﬁles are used in order to showcase the strengths
and weaknesses of departure learning. For all demands with peaks, a base-demand of 0 to
2 containers are released in Apeldoorn and 0 to 1 containers in Rotterdam every 15 min.
On top of this, a random number of containers within the indicated interval of the barge
capacity are released at both locations at independent and irregular time intervals between
7 and 22.5 hr. In the unbalanced demand with base quantity, between 0 and 1 containers
are released at Rotterdam and between 0 and 3 are released at Apeldoorn every 15 min. For
unbalanced demand with medium-high quantity, between 0 and 3 containers are released at
Rotterdam and between 1 and 4 are released at Apeldoorn every 15 min. The proﬁles were
constructed such that each container was released at least 10 hr before they were due at the
other location. The number of containers due at a virtual demand node is drawn at each
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
185
timestep from a uniform distribution between zero and the number of containers that can
have due date at this destination at this time. Notice the proﬁles have different total demand
quantity. The demand was sampled once for each proﬁle and used in all experiments with
that proﬁle.
The impact of the tunable parameters are shown with simulations using the demand with
high peaks and the unbalanced demand with a base quantity of containers as these two proﬁles
are the extremes in terms of demand volatility and quantity. Results from all demand proﬁles
are used in the ﬁnal comparison between departure learning and the benchmark methods.
Whenappropriate,theexperimentsareasimulationof5daystransportinthesystemwhere,
initially, no containers are present and all trucks are parked in Apeldoorn. This simulation
setup will be referred to as the long simulation setup. A short simulation setup has also been
used. Experiments with this setup and the demand proﬁles with high peaks start with the state
of the system after the centralized method with Tp = 80 has been used for 31,75 hr (127
timesteps) on the long simulation setup, while those on the unbalanced demand with base
quantity use that of the centralized method after 34,25 hr (137 timesteps). These experiments
stop 101 timesteps after. This time period is chosen since it starts after the demand proﬁle
with peaks is fully established and covers a time period where the realized cost when using
the optimal method is higher than average, which indicates that the problem is more complex
during this period.
4.3 Impact of the tunable parameters
The impact of the tunable parameters has been investigated on a series of experiments,
where conclusions made on earlier experiments impacted tuning decisions on later ones.
The experiments were primarily performed with the demand proﬁle with high peaks as the
demand peaks make the difference between good and bad departure times very visible and
thus provide clearer explanation. Some experiments are repeated with the unbalanced demand
proﬁle with base quantity. In the following sections, the impact of each tunable parameter
will thus be presented after an introduction and a description of the experiments that lead to
the insights. In all sections, time will be indicated as timesteps and to initialize new events
snew = Jnew = 107 was used.
4.3.1 Prediction horizon—Tp
The prediction horizon impacts not only departure learning, but also the benchmark methods
since they are all MPC-based. The longer the prediction horizon is, the more information
each method will have available to optimize the cost. The optimization problem only sees the
advantage of moving a vehicle or container, if the prediction horizon is longer than the travel
time. We therefore have considered only prediction horizons longer than Tp = τ b
12+τr
23 = 28
timesteps. To ensure the random variables in departure learning and the uninformed method
or the choice of schedule for the ﬁxed method do not impact the results, the centralized
method was used to show the impact of the prediction horizon. The long simulation setup
with the high peaks demand proﬁle was used in this experiment.
The results in Fig.7 show that as the prediction horizon increases, the total cost of the
realised actions decreases. It is noteworthy that the realised cost is signiﬁcantly higher when
the prediction horizon is too short to foresee the implications on the containers of a round-
trip of the barge. The results, furthermore, show that longer prediction horizons increase the
computation time signiﬁcantly. Since the method is MPC-based, the optimization problem
123

186
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
Fig. 7 The trade-off between the total cost realised in the simulation and computation time. With increasing
prediction horizon, the realised cost decreases and the time it takes to solve the optimization problem each
timestep increases. Long simulation setup, demand with high peaks, centralized method
is solved at each timestep. In the ﬁgure, the shortest, longest and average computation times
for solving the optimization problem one time are reported. The maximum computation time
determines the speed of the method; ΔT must be higher than the slowest computation to
ensure new decisions are available at all timesteps. This value rises quickly with increasing
prediction horizon. For the remainder of the experiments in this paper the prediction horizon
is Tp = 80, as it is a reasonable trade-off between the achievable realised cost and the
computation time.
4.4 Exchanged schedules—n
The more schedules the barge operator gets feedback on from the truck operator, the more
information is available to decide on departures and future communication. However, for
each schedule communicated, the truck operator will have to optimize the planning problem
(28)–(31). This can be done in parallel to decrease the computation time if the truck operator
has sufﬁcient parallel computation capacity. With each schedule communicated, the barge
operator gets a little more insight into the truck operator’s cost structure and current demand
proﬁle since no natural noise from the shifting demand proﬁles is present. Therefore, it is
desirable for the truck operator, both from a computation and an information perspective,
to provide feedback on the lowest number of schedules that can ensure satisfactory barge
departures.
The statistical information on the realised cost for ﬁve repetitions of using departure
learning and the uninformed method with different numbers of exchanged schedules on the
short simulation setup are in Fig.8 compared to the realized cost obtained by the centralized
method. Especially the uninformed method beneﬁt from exchanging more schedules, but the
performance of departure learning does also improve. This is expected since the probability of
randomlychoosingschedulesthatresultsinagoodrealizedperformanceincreaseswhenmore
schedules are exchanged. The results shows that the uninformed method is more sensitive to
thiseffectthandeparturelearning.Forallconsideredn itisclearthatdeparturelearningdeliver
better and more consistent results than the uninformed method. The remaining experiments
will be performed with n = 6 exchanged schedules.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
187
Fig. 8 The box-plots show the min, max, 25th, 50th and 75th percentile of the realized cost when departure
learning (α = 0.7 and β = 0.1) and the uninformed method is exchanging different numbers of schedules.
Red + indicates outliers. The black line is the realized cost when using the centralized method. Notice the
scale difference. Short simulation setup, 5 repetitions, demand with high peaks, Tp = 80
Fig. 9 The statistics of the realized cost using departure learning with different combinations of α and β.
Each group of box-plots shows the statistics for departure learning using α as indicated on the horizontal axis.
Within a group, the color indicates the used β-value as indicated by the legend. The leftmost box-plot in a
group is β = 0. The black line is the realized cost achieved by the centralized method. Short simulation setup,
5 repetitions, demand with high peaks, Tp = 5, n = 6
4.5 Learning parameters—˛ and ˇ
Departure learning’s ability to learn good schedules is tightly linked to the update of the
believed ﬁtness and the uncertainty, (26) and (27). These updates are highly dependent on
the learning parameters α and β. These parameters have no impact on the communication
between the barge and truck operator, neither on the computation time. To investigate the
impact, experiments using departure learning with different combinations of α and β-values
were performed on the small simulation setup with Tp = 80 and n = 6. Each experiment
was repeated ﬁve times.
The realized cost of each experiment is shown in Fig.9. Departure learning with all
combinations of α and β perform better than the uninformed method, which, as seen in
Fig.8, makes the total transport cost minimum e576,383. In four instances, the smallest
123

188
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
Fig. 10 Departure learning’s active search space over time for four different tunings of α and β. The borders
of the coloured panels are min and max over the repetitions of the experiment. The realized departure times
and corresponding search space is for each repetition indicated by a marker. Notice the gap in the vertical axis.
Short simulation setup, 5 repetitions, demand with high peaks, Tp = 5, n = 6
realized cost obtained using departure learning was smaller than the cost of the centralized
method, and in another four instances using α = 1 even the 25th percentile was smaller. This
happens because the departure learning’s at some timesteps implement actions that at that
timestep seem suboptimal, but over time open up for decisions which improves the realized
cost.
It is clear from the results that departure learning with α = 1 performs differently regard-
less of β. When α = 1 the expected ﬁtness of each event is only updated based on that event’s
earlier evaluations. Figure10 shows the number of events that has an expected ﬁtness differ-
ent from the initialization of the event. In other words, it shows how many events departure
learning has an expectation about, and thus implicit how wide the majority of the search
is. We call this number the active search space. In the ﬁgure, the realized departure times
for each repetition are also marked. All repetitions with all tunings of departure learning
departs the barge at the simulation’s ﬁrst timestep k = 127 because of the implementation
method using Matlab sort function and because this departure also for the centralized method
is optimal. When departure learning implements a barge departure, the active search space
collapses rapidly to a signiﬁcantly smaller size. When the barge departs, all schedules with
departure times within the travel time become infeasible. The large collapses just after a
departure is realized thus indicate that departure learning had investigated several events
with departure at the realized time or soon after. Slow decreases in the active search space
occur when schedules with a departure at that timestep becomes obsolete since the barge did
not depart.
Departure learning with α = 1 has, in addition, rapid collapses in the active search space
τ b
12 = 24 timesteps after each departure, regardless of whether there is a new departure or
not. For departure learning with α ̸= 1 this effect is also visible, but the decrease is less
rapid. This indicates, that departure learning with α = 1 to a higher extend focus on the same
plan without investigating plans that has slightly different departure times, and thus becomes
obsolete at different timesteps. This is furthermore supported by the very small active search
space. It is thus likely that even though α = 1 is a very good tuning for the investigated
scenario, it may perform poorly in other cases or if different plans are found initially.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
189
Fig. 11 The realized cost and search space for departure learning for experiments on the unbalanced demand
proﬁle. a corresponds to Fig.9 and b to Fig.10. Notice the total demand is different. In all experiments β = 0.1.
The yellow area in a is the min, max and average realized cost obtained by the uninformed method. Small
simulation setup, 5 repetitions, unbalanced demand with base quantity, Tp = 5, n = 6
In scenarios where the exact departure time is of less importance, and the centralized
method suggests that very frequent barge departures yield the best performance, the same
tendencies for α = 1 are seen. Figure11a shows that departure learning with this proﬁle
still performs better than the uninformed proﬁle, but not as pronounced as with the demand
proﬁle with peaks. It furthermore shows that departure learning with α = 1 has a very large
variance. This can again be explained by the very narrow search space in combination with
the relative performance of the uninformed method.
When there are peaks in the demand, the difference between choosing random and learned
schedules is higher. This indicates that the time of departure is more important. For the
unbalanced demand proﬁle, the centralized method departs as frequently as possible. The
ﬁrst schedule departure learning learns thus remain a good schedule in the beginning of
the simulation. However, this schedule only has three departures because of the prediction
horizon length. When the simulation approaches the third departure, it is thus likely that one
of the randomly chosen schedules in I(k) will perform better, leading to a large diversity
in the realized departure times. The centralized method only departs three times when used
on the demand proﬁle with peaks. These departures correspond to the departure found by
departure learning with α = 1. For this proﬁle, it is not as important if the schedule that are
planned around the third departure include other departures in the future or not, and it is thus
likely that departure learning with α = 1 can ﬁnd this last “optimal” departure. When the
unbalanced demand is used, the difference between the departure times has less impact and
it is thus likely that departure learning with α = 1 ﬁnds different good departures at each
repetition of the experiment. In conclusion, it is not recommended to use departure learning
with α = 1 since the ﬁrst chosen schedules will have a very large impact on the future
realized cost.
Returning to Fig.9, a clear pattern in the impact of α and β is not visible. There is a
tendency that higher α-values in combination with lower β-values gives better results. For
α ≤0.7 and lower, departure learning with β = 0 performs very poorly. This is likely
because when β = 0, equal conﬁdence is put on evaluations performed in the recent and
distant past. When new information becomes known by departure learning, earlier evaluations
123

190
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
may become obsolete. Very high α likely compensates for this effect with the increased focus
on previously evaluated schedules. For the ﬁnal comparison between departure learning and
the benchmark methods, α = 0.7 and β = 0.1 are chosen.
4.6 Comparison between departure learning and the benchmark methods
The right tuning of departure learning can improve the method’s performance, as seen in
the previous sections. In this section departure learning with α = 0.7 and β = 0.1 is
compared to the three benchmark methods. Key results from the simulations are presented
in Table 3. Values in rows marked with (1000) should be multiplied by 1000 for the correct
representation.
The comparison is done on the results from the long simulation setup with Tp = 80 for all
methods and for all demand proﬁles. Two versions of the uninformed method was used for the
experiments with demand with high peaks and with unbalanced demand with base quantity,
one with n = 6 and one with n = 42. Departure learning uses n = 6. The experiments with
departure learning and the uninformed method are repeated ﬁve to ten times and average
values over the repetitions are reported.
Thecentralizedmethodperforms,asexpected,bestintermsofrealizedcostasonedecision
maker has access to all information and thus can coordinate the barge and trucks optimally.
Realistic methods with limited communication between the truck and barge operators can
only perform as well as a centralized method in carefully curated scenarios. Under the sce-
narios where the demand has peaks, departure learning performs very well compared to the
ﬁxed method. In scenarios with unbalanced demand, the ﬁxed method outperforms departure
learning with a small margin.
Under both proﬁles with unbalanced demand, the centralized method uses many barge
departures (17 and 19). The used ﬁxed schedule has 19 departures, which means the acces-
sibility of barge transport capacity is either higher or the same under the ﬁxed schedule as
under the best possible method. Departure learning does not have good information of all
possible schedules as only few schedules are exchanged (n = 6). As a barge departure only
happens if a schedule with an immediate barge departure is expected to be the most beneﬁcial,
departure learning will depart fewer barges in scenarios where there is a high chance that a
schedule with its ﬁrst departure is in the future will imply a similar expected cost. This causes
departure learning to depart the barge less than the centralized method in the scenarios where
the demand is unbalanced and thus do not have peaks to clearly deﬁne beneﬁcial departure
times. This indicates that departure learning will provide beneﬁts in many port hinterlands
and scenarios where the timing of the consolidation of freight is important. In scenarios
with a very predictable, steady demand, a ﬁxed schedule that is optimized to the upcoming
demand will perform better. In all scenarios the uninformed method shows the poorest per-
formance. Even with n = 42 exchanged schedules per timestep, the performance is worse
than departure learning with only n = 6 exchanged schedules. The relative difference in the
performance of the different methods grows with larger peak height.
In Fig.12 the departures realized by each method for the demand with high peaks are seen.
In the later half of the simulation, the ﬁxed method’s schedule is very misaligned with the
“optimal” schedule provided by the centralized method, while departure learning remains
similar. Departure learning departs at relatively similar times in the different repetitions.
Corresponding plot for the other demand proﬁles clearly shows that the higher the correlation
between departure time and the realized costs is, the more likely departure learning is to
outperform both the ﬁxed and the uninformed method.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
191
Table 3 Performance of departure learning and the three benchmark methods on the long simulation setup,
Tp = 80. Departure learning uses α = 0.7, β = 0.1, n = 6
Departure
Centralized
Fixed
Uninformed
Uninformed
learning
n = 6
n = 42
Demand with high peaks
Realized costs (1.000)
2068
860
7936
8587
3815
Unsatisﬁed demand
1922
720
7787
8439
3668
Barge departures
16.6
17
19
12.8
13.8
Barge utilization
35.1%
42.8%
21.9%
28.1%
35.2%
Truck departures
2285
2281
2195
2174
2217
Truck utilization
83.6%
84.0%
85.8%
87.0%
85.8%
Demand with medium-high peaks
Realized costs (1.000)
162.0
116.8
261.6
525.8
Unsatisﬁed demand
38
0
134
398
Barge departures
14.5
14
19
11.5
Barge utilization
23.1%
43.2%
14.2%
20.0%
Truck departures
1886
1877
1865
1902
Truck utilization
87.2%
87.0%
87.9%
87.7%
Demand with medium-low peaks
Realized costs (1.000)
119.9
112.3
170.9
229.2
Unsatisﬁed demand
1
0
51
107
Barge departures
17.4
15
19
11.2
Barge utilization
17.1%
31.5%
13.0%
15.0%
Truck departures
1803
1792
1787
1809
Truck utilization
83.7%
83.3%
83.8%
84.0%
Demand with low peaks
Realized costs
84,377
81,957
87,523
129,116
Unsatisﬁed demand
0
0
0
38
Barge departures
17.5
15
19
9.1
Barge utilization
20.5%
32.0%
14.8%
20.4%
Truck departures
1360
1379
1349
1420
Truck utilization
80.9%
81.4%
81.5%
81.4%
Unbalanced demand with base quantity
Realized costs
85,132
81,825
84,066
91,919
89,616
Unsatisﬁed demand
0
0
0
0
0
Barge departures
14.8
17
19
9.4
9.2
Barge utilization
23.2%
25.1%
22.0%
24.6%
26.0%
Truck departures
1427
1431
1445
1460
1434
Truck utilization
66.9%
66.8%
66.7%
67.1%
66.9%
123

192
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
Table 3 continued
Departure
Centralized
Fixed
Uninformed
Uninformed
learning
n = 6
n = 42
Unbalanced demand with medium-high quantity
Realized costs (1.000)
488.0
143.0
447.4
6 550.4
Unsatisﬁed demand
331
0
282
6327
Barge departures
17.5
19
19
12.0
Barge utilization
30.2%
35.5%
27.1%
25.7%
Truck departures
2352
2390
2345
2290
Truck utilization
79.0%
78.4%
78.8%
79.9%
Fig. 12 The departures realized by each of the four methods. Circular markers represent departures from
Apeldoorn and squares from Rotterdam. For departure learning and the uninformed method, the results of
the ﬁve repetitions are reported above each other. The departures, the central method considered but did not
implement, are shown as smaller, transparent markers. The intensity of the color of these markers thus indicates
how long the central method considered a departure beneﬁcial. Long simulation setup, 5 repetitions, demand
with high peaks, Tp = 5
Departure learning and the benchmark methods all try to reduce the total realized cost.
When doing so, they achieve different usage of the barge and trucks. When a ﬁxed schedule
is being followed, the barge departs 19 times during the experiment. This number varies
for the other methods. When the demand has high peaks, departure learning uses a similar
number of barge departures as the centralized method, indicating that a large part of the good
performance departure learning reaches in these cases is from correctly chosen departures.
The barge departs less when the uninformed method is used, which is expected as the chance
that a randomly chosen schedule with a departure in the ﬁrst-coming timestep is exchanged
at a suitable time is relatively low.
The utilization of the barge capacity is, as expected, best for the centralized method in
most scenarios. The uninformed methods gain on average better results when n = 42 on
unbalanced demand with base quantity. However, the utilization of the barge varies for the
uninformed method without a clear pattern. This is likely due to the utilization of the barge
being tied to the departure moment of the barge, which as discussed above is less predictable
for the uninformed method. When n = 42, we see a higher barge utilization than when n = 6
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
193
which supports that the more schedules are exchanged, the higher is the chance that a suitable
one with immediate departure is among them. Departure learning does in all cases result in
a higher barge utilization than the ﬁxed schedule. The number of truck departures and the
truck utilization does not vary signiﬁcantly between the different methods.
In all scenarios but one, the centralized method manages to deliver all containers with due
time within the simulation period in time. The reported unsatisﬁed demand is measured in
containers times timesteps. The tendencies between the methods are very similar to those
observed for the realized costs. For demand with peaks, departure learning performs much
better than the ﬁxed method which again outperforms the uninformed methods. When the
demand is low, all methods manages to deliver the containers in time, and as the quantity
increases, the late deliveries also increase. It is interesting to notice that while the unbal-
anced demand proﬁle with medium-high quantity has 5% higher demand quantity than the
proﬁle with medium-high peaks, the unsatisﬁed demand is 110% higher for the ﬁxed method
and 771% higher for the unbalanced demand. At the same time, the number of trucks and
barge departures to transport the demand increases for all methods and the truck utiliza-
tion decreases. For the centralized method, the barge utilization is lower for the unbalanced
demand, while it for departure learning and the ﬁxed method increases. These factors indi-
cate that the main driver of delays and costs in the scenario with unbalanced medium-high
demand quantity is the scarcity of trucks to compensate for sub-optimal barge schedules.
In conclusion, for the demand proﬁle with peaks, departure learning is a very good method
for systems where the barge and truck planning cannot be integrated due to stakeholder inter-
ests. blue For situations with unbalanced demand, where high frequency of barge departures
is more important than integration of plans, departure learning performs slightly worse than
the ﬁxed method if it is constructed with frequent departures. Systems with different charac-
teristic will beneﬁt from different approaches, but departure learning is a promising method
if the system has higher correlation between barge departure times and costs.
5 Conclusions and future research
The efﬁciency in the logistics sector can improve signiﬁcantly if the involved stakehold-
ers cooperate in real-time. However, cooperation between competitors requires co-planning
methods that not only give the cooperating partners an advantage towards external com-
petition but also protect the partners from losing information, clients and autonomy to one
another. In this paper, we present a novel method, called departure learning, which facilitates
real-time co-planning of barge schedules between a barge and a truck operator. We show that
departure learning is a promising method for cooperation in practice and how the tunable
parameters of departure learning affects the performance of the combined transport system.
When the transport system is under pressure and consolidation of demand is only possible
at speciﬁc barge departure times, departure learning outperforms the current practice where
schedules are ﬁxed ahead of time. The more information there is available to each operator
when planning, the cheaper the realization will be. The computation time does, however,
increase signiﬁcantly. Less feedback from the truck operator on the barge operator’s depar-
ture plans decreases the possibilities for inferring information. It was found that even with
feedback on only 6 schedules at each timestep, departure learning’s performance was suf-
ﬁcient to achieve good performance. The expected performance of all schedules is updated
using two learning parameters. The results show that extreme parameters limit departure
learning and that higher α values in combination with lower β values perform well. It was
123

194
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
shown that, regardless of the parameters used, departure learning was superior to receiving
feedback on random schedules without remembering previous information.
There are several important directions for further research. Departure learning is built on
ideas from Bayesian optimization and we have shown the impact of tuning one application
of these ideas. Research into variations of the decisions taken when applying the ideas could
reveal other promising methods. It would especially be interesting to consider what impact the
balance between exploration and exploitation has; if other deﬁnitions of neighbouring events
can provide beneﬁts; and how prior information on expected good departure times can be
incorporated. The latter will improve the performance of departure learning when disruptions
occur, as it can mitigate the assumption that information obtained earlier is still applicable to
a high degree. Other interesting research directions are investigating other learning strategies’
strengths and weaknesses for co-planning.
The strength of departure learning is the clear division of authority and responsibility and
the very minimal information exchange. This makes the method more applicable in practice
than many current, academic, cooperation methods. The presented formulation of departure
learning does, however, build on a number of limiting assumptions. Among these, the limited
number of stakeholders involved, the two-terminal barge route, and the lack of operation time
considerations stand out as immediate targets for further research. It is certain that the method
can work when multiple truck operators cooperate with one barge, but how this impacts the
learning parameters and how fairness is ensured are still open questions. It would furthermore
be interesting to apply departure learning to a case study and focus on a proﬁt sharing scheme
that both encourages participation in departure learning and discourages malicious behaviour.
Departure learning shows that it is possible to co-plan with very limited information
sharing and no loss of autonomy. In contrast to our current, hierarchical, transport planning
system, departure learning can adapt departure times to real-time information. With further
research it can become a practical tool for transport operators to increase the utilization of
their transport capacity and thus help alleviating the negative impacts on the environment.
Funding This research is supported by the project “Complexity Methods for Predictive Synchromodality”
(project 439.16.120) of the Netherlands Organisation for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO) and by the project
“Novel inland waterway transport concepts for moving freight effectively” of European Union Horizon 2020
Programme under grant agreement n◦858508.
Data Availability Details on simulation scenarios are available via the 4TU.ResearchData repository https://
data.4tu.nl/.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
195
Appendix A
Table 4 Notation
t
Time
k
Timestep in predicted plan
Δt
Time interval between discrete decision moments. t = kΔt
T
The transpose of a vector is indicated by superscript T
Sets of nodes
N
Set of all locations in the network, called network nodes
D
Set of virtual demand nodes. A virtual demand node is adjacent to the network node it
shares ID with
W
Set consisting of the two directions of the waterway connection
R
Set of both directions of all roads in the network
Model parameters
nc
Number of different container commodities. All containers of the same commodity
have the same destination
¯di(k) ∈Rnc
≥0
Demand realised at node i at timestep k. Each element in the vector is the number of
containers of that commodity. Commodities with destination in i are to be delivered,
the other commodities are ready for pick up
pr
i ∈{0, 1}1×nc
Mapping that describes which elements in the demand state vector that are containers
released the node, i.e. pr
i ¯di(k) is the sum of containers that are released at node i at
time k
pd
i ∈{0, 1}1×nc
Mapping that describes which elements in the demand state vector that are due in the
node, i.e. pd
i ¯di(k) is the sum of containers that are due at node i at time k
τ b
12, τ b
21
Travel time measured in timesteps by barge including mooring, (un)loading etc. from
node 1 to 2 and reverse
cb
Barge capacity
τr
i j
Traveltimemeasuredintimestepsbytruckfromnodei tonode j.Wedonotdifferentiate
between travelling empty or full and disregard loading and unloading time for trucks
One truck can carry one container
¯zd
i (k) ∈Rnc
≥0
Number of containers available for pickup or to be delivered at timestep k in node i.
Each element in the vector is the number of containers of that commodity. Commodities
with destination in i are to be delivered, the other commodities are ready for pick up
¯zb
i (k) ∈{0, 1}
¯zb
i (k) = 1 if the barge is docked (after unloading, before loading) at the quay in node
i at timestep k
¯zv
i (k) ∈R
Number of trucks parked at node i at time k
¯zc
i (k) ∈Rnc
≥0
Number of containers that are stacked at node i at time k. Each element in the vector
is the number of containers of that commodity
¯xt(k)
State vector for the truck operator, containing the current state measurements and future
arrivals of already departed trucks and containers
¯xb(k)
State vector for the barge operator, containing the current state measurements and future
arrivals of already departed barges
123

196
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
Table 4 continued
Decision variables
¯yi(k) ∈{0, 1}
¯yi(k) = 1 if the barge departs from node i at timestep k
¯ub
i j(k) ∈Rnc
Number of containers to load at timestep k to the barge at location i going to location
j. Each element in the vector is the number of containers of that commodity
¯ui j(k) ∈Rnc
≥0
Number of containers to load to trucks departing timestep k from location i going to
location j. Each element in the vector is the number of containers of that commodity
¯udi(k) ∈Rnc
≥0
Number of new containers entering the network node i at timestep k. Always zero in
elements corresponding to containers commodities with destination at the same node i
¯uid(k) ∈Rnc
≥0
Number of containers being delivered at node i at timestep k. Always zero in elements
corresponding to containers commodities with destination elsewhere
¯vi j(k) ∈R
Number of trucks departing from i on the road to j at time k
Parameters and variables used during real-time planning
Notice: these predictions are updated at every decision moment. The full notation would include
the time the prediction was made, e.g. x(k|t) is the full state of the system at timestep k in a
prediction made at time t, but to simplify the reading of equations we throughout the paper use
x(k) to describe the full state of the system in the current prediction. This table only shows the
simpliﬁed notation
Tp
Prediction horizon. Number of timesteps for which the receding horizon plan is made
di(k) ∈Rnc
≥0
Currently expected demand at node i at timestep k. Each element in the vector is the
number of containers of that commodity. Commodities with destination in i are to be
delivered, the other commodities are ready for pick up
zd
i (k) ∈Rnc
≥0
Predicted number of containers available for pickup or to be delivered at timestep k
in node i. Each element in the vector is the number of containers of that commodity.
Commodities with destination in i are to be delivered, the other commodities are ready
for pick up
zb
i (k) ∈{0, 1}
Predicted availability of barge zb
i (k) = 1 if the barge is ready for (un)loading at node
i at timestep k
zv
i (k) ∈R
Predicted number of trucks parked at node i at time k
zc
i (k) ∈Rnc
≥0
Number of containers that are stacked at node i at time k. Each element in the vector
is the number of containers of that commodity
xt(k)
Predicted state vector for the truck, containing the current state measurements and
future arrivals of already departed trucks and containers
xb(k)
Predicted state vector for the barge operator, containing the current state measurements
and future arrivals of already departed barges
wd
Cost per timestep delay per container
wb
i
Cost of sailing the empty barge when it departs from node i
wv
i j ∈R
Cost of driving a truck (empty or full) from i to j
wl
i j ∈R1×nc
≥0
Cost of loading, unloading and handling one container when it is transported by barge
from node i to j. Each element correspond to the speciﬁc cost for that commodity
J b(k)
Total cost for barge operator related to departures at timestep k
J t(k)
Total cost for truck operator for departures and unsatisﬁed demand at timestep k
yi(k) ∈{0, 1}
Predicted barge departures. yi(k) = 1 if the barge departs from node i at timestep k
ub
i j(k) ∈Rnc
Predictions loading of containers to the barge at timestep k at location i going to location
j. Each element in the vector is the number of containers of that commodity
ui j(k) ∈Rnc
≥0
Predictions loading of containers to trucks departing timestep k from location i going
to location j. Each element in the vector is the number of containers of that commodity
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
197
Table 4 continued
udi(k) ∈Rnc
≥0
Predicted number of new containers entering the network node i at timestep k. Always
zero in elements corresponding to containers commodities with destination at the same
node i
uid(k) ∈Rnc
≥0
Predicted number of containers to be delivered at node i at timestep k. Always zero in
elements corresponding to containers commodities with destination elsewhere
vi j(k) ∈R
Predicted number of trucks departing from i on the road to j at time k
Departure learning sets, parameters and variables
bk ∈{0, 1}
bk = 1 if there is a barge departure (regardless from which terminal)
e
Event:
Plan
of
barge
departures
without
location
information,
i.e.
e
=
[bk, . . . , bk+Tp−1]. Figure3 shows an example
E(k)
Set of events that are feasible (i.e. respect barge travel time and current location of
barge) at time k
e∞
Event expanded to an inﬁnite timespan, i.e. e∞=

01:k e 0k+Tp:∞

. Figure4 shows
an example
Ne∞
1 (k)
Set of neighbouring events. Figure4 shows an example. If two events are identical
except for two subsequent elements, the events are said to be neighbours, i.e. for an
event e1 = [b1
k, . . . , b1
k+Tp−2] ∈E(k), the set of neighbouring events is Ne∞
1 (k) =

e = [b2
k, . . . , b2
k+Tp−2] ∈E(k) | b2
i = b1
i ∀i \ {i = { j, j + 1} for exactly one j ∈
{k, . . . , k + Tp −2} and b2
j = b1
j+1, b2
j+1 = b1
j

\

e1

I(k)
Set of Candidate events
n
Cardinality of I(k), i.e. the number of schedules that is communicated and that the
truck operator must evaluate at each decision moment
˜Fe∞(k) ∈R
Expected ﬁtness of event e given what is known at time k. Describes the expected cost
of implementing the schedule corresponding to the event e
˜se∞(k) ∈R
Uncertainty function of event e given what is known at time k. Indicates how certain
the expected ﬁtness is. Lower value indicates conﬁdence in expected ﬁtness is higher
α ∈[0, 1]
Firstlearningparameter:usedtoupdatetheexpectedﬁtness.Highervalueputsemphasis
previous expectations for the same events. Lower value shifts emphasis to expectations
for neighbouring events
β
Second learning parameter: controls the speed at which information from previous
timesteps become uncertain
Je∞(k)
The optimal predicted cost for the truck operator if the barge follows the schedule
corresponding to the event e from timestep k to k + Tp −1
˜Fe∞(k)
Fitness of event e. The optimal expected cost for both the barge and truck operator for
the time period from timestep k to k + Tp if event e
˜Finit
Initialization of expected ﬁtness, should be higher than the expected maximum ﬁtness
snew
Initialization of the uncertainty function for new events
123

198
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
References
Baptista, R., & Poloczek, M. (2018). Bayesian optimization of combinatorial structures. In International
conference on machine learning (pp. 462–471). PMLR.
Behdani, B., Fan, Y., Wiegmans, B., & Zuidwijk, R. (2016). Multimodal schedule design for synchromodal
freight transport systems. European Journal of Transport and Infrastructure Research, 16(3), 424–444.
Boros, E., Lei, L., Zhao, Y., & Zhong, H. (2008). Scheduling vessels and container-yard operations with
conﬂicting objectives. Annals of Operations Research, 161, 149–170.
Cruijssen, F., Dullaert, W., & Fleuren, H. (2007). Horizontal cooperation in transport and logistics: A literature
review. Transportation Journal, 46(3), 22–39.
Demir, E., Burgholzer, W., Hrušovsk`y, M., Arikan, E., Jammernegg, W., & Van Woensel, T. (2016). A green
intermodal service network design problem with travel time uncertainty. Transportation Research Part
B: Methodological, 93, 789–807.
Di Febbraro, A., Sacco, N., & Saeednia, M. (2016). An agent-based framework for cooperative planning of
intermodal freight transport chains. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 64, 72–85.
Eurostat. (2020). Databse: Annual road freight transport vehicle movements, loaded and empty, by reporting
country. https://data.europa.eu/euodp/en/data/dataset/oXV2zjVuHDQNMsQX8vsw.
Frazier, P. I. (2018). A tutorial on Bayesian optimization.
Gansterer, M., & Hartl, R. F. (2018). Collaborative vehicle routing: A survey. European Journal of Operational
Research, 268(1), 1–12.
Gansterer, M., Hartl, R. F., & Savelsbergh, M. (2020). The value of information in auction-based carrier
collaborations. International Journal of Production Economics, 221, 107485. ISSN 0925-5273.
Giusti, R., Manerba, D., Bruno, G., & Tadei, R. (2019). Synchromodal logistics: An overview of critical success
factors, enabling technologies, and open research issues. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and
Transportation Review, 129, 92–110.
Huang, Y., Zhou, Q., Xiong, X., & Zhao, J. (2021). A cooperative intermodal transportation network ﬂow
control method based on model predictive control. Journal of Advanced Transportation, 6, 66.
Juan, A. A., Keenan, P., Martí, R., McGarraghy, S., Panadero, J., Carroll, P., & Oliva, D. (2021). A review
of the role of heuristics in stochastic optimisation: From metaheuristics to learnheuristics. Annals of
Operations Research, 66, 1–31.
Kandasamy, K., Krishnamurthy, A., Schneider, J., & Póczos, B. (2018). Parallelised Bayesian optimisation via
thompson sampling. In International conference on artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics (pp. 133–142).
PMLR.
Karam, A., Hussein, M., & Reinau, K. H. (2021). Analysis of the barriers to implementing horizontal col-
laborative transport using a hybrid fuzzy delphi-ahp approach. Journal of Cleaner Production, 321,
128943.
Larsen, R. B., Atasoy, B., & Negenborn, R. R. (2020). Learning-based co-planning for improved container,
barge and truck routing. In E. Lalla-Ruiz, M. Mes, & Voß, S. (Eds.), Proceedings of the international
conference on computational logistics (pp. 476–491).
Larsen, R. B., Atasoy, B., & Negenborn, R. R. (2021a). Model predictive control for simultaneous planning
of container and vehicle routes. European Journal of Control,57, 273–283.
Larsen, R. B., Baksteen, R., Atasoy, B., & Negenborn, R. R. (2021b). Secure multi-party co-planning of barge
departures. IFAC-PapersOnLine,54(2), 335–341. IFAC symposium on control in transportation systems.
Larsen, R. B., Sprokkereef, J. M., Atasoy, B., & Negenborn, R. R. (2021c). Integrated mode choice and
vehicle routing for container transport. In Proceedings of the international intelligent transportation
systems conference (pp. 3348–3353).
Li, L., Negenborn, R. R., & De Schutter, B. (2015). Intermodal freight transport planning—A receding horizon
control approach. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 60, 77–95.
Li, L., Negenborn, R. R., & De Schutter, B. (2017). Distributed model predictive control for cooperative
synchromodal freight transport. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review,
105, 240–260.
Löfberg, J. (2004). YALMIP: A toolbox for modeling and optimization in matlab. In Proceedings of interna-
tional symposium on computer aided control system design (pp. 284–289).
Mayne, D. Q., Rawlings, J. B., Rao, C. V., & Scokaert, P. O. M. (2000). Constrained model predictive control:
Stability and optimality. Automatica, 36(6), 789–814.
Nabais, J. L., Negenborn, R. R., & Botto, M. A. (2013). Model predictive control for a sustainable transport
modal split at intermodal container hubs. In Proceedings of the international conference on networking,
sensing and control (pp. 591–596).
Oˇcenášek, J., & Schwarz, J. (2000). The parallel Bayesian optimization algorithm. In The state of the art in
computational intelligence (pp. 61–67). Springer.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:169–199
199
Oh, C., Tomczak, J., Gavves, E., & Welling, M. (2019). Combinatorial Bayesian optimization using the graph
cartesian product. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 66.
Pérez Rivera, A. E., & Mes, M. R. K. (2019). Integrated scheduling of drayage and long-haul operations in
synchromodal transport. Flexible Services and Manufacturing Journal, 31(3), 763–806.
Poloczek, M., Wang, J., & Frazier, P. I. (2016). Warm starting Bayesian optimization. In 2016 Winter simulation
conference (WSC) (pp. 770–781). IEEE.
Poo, M.C.-P., & Yip, T. L. (2019). An optimization model for container inventory management. Annals of
Operations Research, 273(1), 433–453.
Psaraftis, H. N., Wen, M., & Kontovas, C. A. (2016). Dynamic vehicle routing problems: Three decades and
counting. Networks, 67(1), 3–31.
Qu, W., Rezaei, J., Maknoon, Y., & Tavasszy, L. (2019). Hinterland freight transportation replanning model
under the framework of synchromodality. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation
Review, 131, 308–328.
Resat, H. G., & Turkay, M. (2019). A discrete-continuous optimization approach for the design and operation
of synchromodal transportation networks. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 130, 512–525.
Rivera, A. E. P., & Mes, M. R. K. (2022). Anticipatory scheduling of synchromodal transport using approximate
dynamic programming. Annals of Operations Research, 66, 1–35.
Sager, S., Bock, H. G., & Diehl, M. (2012). The integer approximation error in mixed-integer optimal control.
Mathematical Programming, 133(1), 1–23.
SteadieSeiﬁ, M., Dellaert, N. P., Nuijten, W., van Woensel, T., & Raouﬁ, R. (2014). Multimodal freight
transportation planning: A literature review. European Journal of Operational Research, 233(1), 1–15.
van Essen, H., van Wijngaarden, L., Schroten, A., de Bruyn, S., Sutter, D., Bieler, C., Mafﬁi, S., Brambilla,
M., Fiorello, D., Fermi, F., Parolin, R., & El Beyrouty, K. (2019). Handbook on the external costs of
transport. CE Delft. www.cedelft.eu
van Riessen, B., Negenborn, R. R., & Dekker, R. (2015). Synchromodal container transportation: An overview
of current topics and research opportunities. In F. Corman, S. Voß, & R. R. Negenborn (Eds.), Proceedings
of the international conference on computational logistics (pp. 386–397). Springer.
van Riessen, B., Negenborn, R. R., Dekker, R., & Lodewijks, G. (2015). Service network design for an inter-
modal container network with ﬂexible transit times and the possibility of using subcontracted transport.
International Journal of Shipping and Transport Logistics, 7(4), 457–478.
Xu, S. X., Huang, G. Q., & Cheng, M. (2017). Truthful, budget-balanced bundle double auctions for carrier
collaboration. Transportation Science, 51(4), 1365–1386.
Xu, Y., Cao, C., Jia, B., & Zang, G. (2015). Model and algorithm for container allocation problem with random
freight demands in synchromodal transportation. Mathematical Problems in Engineering, Article ID
986152.
Yang, R., Lee, C.-Y., Liu, Q., & Zheng, S. (2019). A carrier-shipper contract under asymmetric information
in the ocean transport industry. Annals of Operations Research, 273(1–2), 377–408.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123