TITLE: Reconceptualizing cybersecurity awareness capability in the data-driven digital economy
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04844-8
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04844-8
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Reconceptualizing cybersecurity awareness capability
in the data-driven digital economy
Shahriar Akter1
· Mohammad Rajib Uddin2 · Shahriar Sajib3 ·
Wai Jin Thomas Lee1 · Katina Michael4
· Mohammad Alamgir Hossain5
Accepted: 16 June 2022 / Published online: 2 August 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
Data breaches have become a formidable challenge for business operations in the twenty-
ﬁrst century. The emergence of big data in the ever-growing digital economy has created
the necessity to secure critical organizational information. The lack of cybersecurity aware-
ness exposes organizations to potential cyber threats. Thus, this research aims to identify
the various dimensions of cybersecurity awareness capabilities. Drawing on the dynamic
capabilities framework, the ﬁndings of the study show personnel (knowledge, attitude and
learning), management (training, culture and strategic orientation) and infrastructure capa-
bilities (technology and data governance) as thematic dimensions to tackle cybersecurity
awareness challenges.
B Shahriar Akter
sakter@uow.edu.au
Mohammad Rajib Uddin
md.rajibuddin58@gmail.com
Shahriar Sajib
shahriar.Sajib@uts.edu.au
Wai Jin Thomas Lee
thlee@uow.edu.au
Mohammad Alamgir Hossain
mohammad.hossain@rmit.edu.au
1
School of Business, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia
2
School of Business, University of Wollongong, NSW 2522 Wollongong, Australia
3
UTS Business School, University of Technology Sydney, 15 Broadway, Ultimo, NSW 2007,
Australia
4
School for the Future of Innovation in Society, School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence,
Arizona State University, Mailcode 85287 Tempe, USA
5
School of Accounting, Information Systems, and Supply Chain, RMIT University, Melbourne,
VIC 3000, Australia
123

674
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
1 Introduction
Threats of cybercrimes have created tremendous challenges for organizations in today’s data-
driven digital economy (Rawat et al., 2019). The seriousness of the issue of cybersecurity has
compelled managers and policymakers to reevaluate cybersecurity measures at the individual,
organizational, sectoral and national levels (Al-Shanfari et al., 2020; Schneider et al., 2020;
Bauer et al., 2017; Zwiling et al., 2020; Granåsen & Andersson, 2016). Research on cyberse-
curity has a multidisciplinary orientation with important research focusing on technological,
infrastructural, sociotechnical, psychological and educational aspects (Alotaibi et al., 2016;
Bavel et al., 2019; Trim & Lee, 2019; Tschakert & Ngamsuriyaroj, 2019). While technology
plays a critical role in tackling cybersecurity issues, more recently human aspects have gained
serious attention (Michael, 2008; David et al., 2020; Maalem Lahcen et al. 2020). Speciﬁ-
cally, the importance of specialized training, education, and knowledge of cybersecurity for
individual employees, coupled with critical management capabilities and infrastructure, has
been emphasized by scholars and practitioners. These aspects are seen as most essential in
building cybersecurity awareness within and across organizational boundaries in the current
data-driven business environment (Zwiling et al., 2020; Alotaibi et al., 2016; Holdworth &
Apeh, 2017; Al-Janabi & Al-Shourbaji, 2016).
Due to the emergence of big data and data-driven business processes and operations in the
present business environment, securing, protecting and defending organizational information
has become more important than ever (Rawat et al., 2019; Granåsen & Andersson, 2016).
In the latest report of the Australian Cybersecurity Centre for the 2020–2021 ﬁscal year, a
total of 67,500 cybercrimes were reported. That is an increase of 13 percent year-over-year
(Brown, 2021). It is estimated that the cost of cyber-crimes will reach 10.5 trillion USD by
the year 2025 (CS Ventures, 2016). In 2020, losses from cyber-related crimes totalled AUD
33 billion in Australia (Brown, 2021). Further, a recent report prepared by the Ofﬁce of the
Australian Information Commissioner (2021) said that 61% of notiﬁable data breaches that
occurred in the ﬁrst half of 2020 were malicious or criminal attacks, an increase of 47% year-
over-year. In fact, the year 2020 has experienced a record number of cyber-attacks on business
enterprises, governments and individuals. Among these, there has been a signiﬁcant increase
in attacks related to interconnected emerging technologies, such as artiﬁcial intelligence,
machine learning and 5G networks (Zhang et al., 2021). Attacks in 2020 are also showing
greater tactical cooperation between hacker groups and state actors (Brooks, 2021).
The alarming increase in the rate of cyber attacks has led government and law enforcement
to prioritize the exploration of effective methods of creating cybersecurity awareness in
organizations to safeguard critical assets and infrastructure from cyber threats. The Australian
Government has committed to investing $1.35 billion in cyber defence funding and has
urged all Australians to strengthen their cyber defences. But experts warn such government
measureswillhavelimitedimpactunlessbusinessesalsotakemoreeffectiveaction,internally,
to educate their employees to improve cybersecurity (Proofpoint, 2021). These circumstances
of increased attacks, government commitment to action, and concerns about the necessity for
businesses necessitate to address cybersecurity issues have led to general increased awareness
and to the issues of cyber threats and cybercrimes becoming a serious agenda for researchers
and practitioners (Karjalainen et al., 2020).
As more and more attackers are now targeting people in organizations with limited knowl-
edge of cybersecurity, updating the technological side of the cybersecurity system will not
beneﬁt an organization if the people working in the system are ignored. Therefore, it is vital
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
675
to improve workforce security awareness by promoting cybersecurity knowledge and teach-
ing practical approaches for responding to threats (Ani et al., 2019). An additional factor
affecting organizations in the current situation is that the COVID-19 pandemic has created
signiﬁcant shifts in the way organizations operate. Many employees are working remotely
with ﬂexible working conditions, away from physically secured ofﬁce buildings and clearly
deﬁned and protected systems perimeters. As a result, an organization’s technology envi-
ronment can be more vulnerable to phishing attacks and other cybersecurity threats, such
as social engineering (Brooks, 2021; Brown, 2021). Moreover, the working population has
increasingly adopted mobile technology through bring your own device (BYOD) incentives,
and in general, lacks fundamental knowledge of cybersecurity procedures for the protection
of organizational assets and data. Employees also fall short in awareness of all the various
threat vectors that are continually changing the corporate security landscape (Zwilling et al.,
2020). In a recent survey, it was revealed that 45% of working adults reuse passwords, only
49% conﬁrm password protection of their home Wi-Fi network, 26% consider a free Wi-Fi
network of a trusted location as safe, and 17% are not sure about the safety of open access
networks (Proofpoint, 2021). The importance of internal operational aspects for cybersecu-
rity is further emphasized by Brooks (2021), who points out that 78% of companies lack
conﬁdence in their cybersecurity regime, and only 5% of companies’ data are fully protected
(Varonics, 2021). It is critical to align security awareness with the real and potential threats
to organizations (Proofpoint, 2021).
The lack of security awareness exposes organizations to potential cyber threats and makes
sensitive assets vulnerable to signiﬁcant risk. Hackers tend to attack vulnerable employ-
ees of ﬁnancial institutions, healthcare and manufacturing services. Remote or semi-remote
working environments have made it more difﬁcult for organizations to capture these attacks
(Brandenburg & Paul, 2020). The health and ﬁnancial industries are primary targets for
malicious or criminal attacks (Tim, 2021). Ongoing cybersecurity awareness activities are
required in organizations to address these dynamic threats. As such, this study aims to answer
the following research question:
RQ What are the dimensions of cybersecurity awareness capabilities for an organization in
a data-driven digital economy?
The core objective of Cybersecurity Awareness is to change individuals’ behavior so that
they act appropriately in their handling of cyber threats (Alotaibi et al., 2016). Although
several approaches, such as education and training programs, have been adopted to increase
cybersecurity awareness, their focus is generally on understanding compliance issues, such
as maintaining data conﬁdentiality and reducing risk. While technical factors play a big role,
human factors are also crucial, as a large number of internal data breaches are connected
with human factors and issues that are either intentional, accidental, or with malicious intent.
As a result, businesses cannot rely only on technological aspects of cybersecurity. Rather,
an effective orchestration of organizational activities and management capabilities, along
with technological infrastructure, is required on a continuing basis to effectively modify
human behavior. While reconceptualizing cybersecurity awareness from a capability building
perspective, it is also urgent to consider the data-driven aspects of the present economy.
As exploring data-driven economic aspects has become an important research priority in
general, explicating the microfoundations of CSA capabilities will beneﬁt both researchers
and practitioners in operations research.
123

676
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
2 Literature review
2.1 Cybersecurity
The key objective of cybersecurity for an organization is to protect that organization’s data
and information systems from cybercrimes through developing and adopting security con-
trols and measures (Alqahtani & Erfani, 2021; Korpela, 2015). Cybercrime is deﬁned as a
purposeful attempt to jeopardize the valuable assets of an organization through a system-
atic effort to penetrate the organizational infrastructure (Maalem Lahcen et al., 2020). The
attackers, either a group or lone individuals, attempt to identify potential vulnerabilities in a
target organization (Bauer et al., 2017). The lack of robust and secured technological infras-
tructure, shortcomings in cybersecurity knowledge and experience of key personnel, the lack
of education on cybersecurity protocols and compliance among employees, individual-level
behavioural issues, or human errors may expose an organization and make them vulnerable
to cybercrimes (Alqahtani & Erfani, 2021; Bauer et al., 2017). Based on a literature review of
cybercrime trends and magnitude, Maalem Lahcen et al. (2020) shed light on the interdisci-
plinary framework related to human factors, behavioural, and decision-making strategies in
cybersecurity. The authors ﬁnd that technology alone cannot solve cybersecurity problems.
We emphasize the importance of better understanding of cybersecurity in the workforce.
Training and research for employees about the effectiveness of different approaches is nec-
essary.
2.2 Big data analytics and cybersecurity awareness
Currently, big data provides signiﬁcant value to business organizations in its capacity to reveal
and produce critical actionable insights of strategic importance about a business enterprise
(Akter et al., 2020; Rawat et al., 2019). Through effectively applying big data and predictive
analytics capabilities, organizations are now able to solve many critical business problems, as
well as optimize business operations; these result in signiﬁcant performance improvements
(Akter et al., 2020). The present data-driven economy is producing an enormous amount of
data, which is termed big data. Volume, velocity, veracity and variety are the four “V” key
properties of big data that are emphasized by scholars (Rawat et al., 2019). Volume refers
to the amount or size of the data being generated, velocity refers to the speed at which the
data has been created, veracity refers to the data’s integrity or reliability, and ﬁnally, variety
refers to the heterogeneity of the data being produced (Rawat et al., 2019).
The importance of data-driven cybersecurity has also recently gained the attention of
scholars and practitioners (Rawat et al., 2019). Adoption of advanced analytics and visual-
ization of data can make ﬁrms more vigilant, which can result in faster decision-making at
the time of active cybersecurity threats (Böhm et al., 2018; Rawat et al., 2019). Hence, we can
argue that relying on advanced technology and understanding the use of analytics and data
visualization could be a dimension of cybersecurity awareness. Further, following human—
computer interaction (HCI) techniques, it is possible to bridge the gap between individuals
and their understanding of cybersecurity issues (Ki-Aries and Faily, 2017). Gaming applica-
tions that are tailored to users’ needs can help users effectively gain cybersecurity awareness.
Even cybersecurity experts sometimes ﬁnd descriptions of cybersecurity incidents complex
and challenging to grasp in terms of their format or structure (Alotaibi et al., 2016). In the
data-driven business era context, cybersecurity awareness requires careful consideration and
implementation, following the unique nature of current challenges.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
677
2.3 Enabling cybersecurity awareness capability
Cybersecurity awareness is a state of consciousness in which users are fully aware of risk
and security policies, supported by necessary knowledge and recognition of security threats.
With CSA, users also understand the importance of being responsible. They act appropriately
in relation to cybersecurity issues, and they abide by rules and regulations that are instituted
by their organization’s security mission, by training programs in which they participate, and
by regulatory bodies (Ahlan et al., 2015; Bauer & Bernroider, 2017; McCormac et al., 2017;
Scholl et al., 2017). Cybersecurity awareness focuses on necessary skills to assist in safe-
guarding users from social engineering attacks. The process of social engineering takes place
when an individual’s psychological properties are exploited with the intent to cause harm
through a cyber-attack (Bitton et al., 2020). Kovaˇcevi´c and Radenkovi´c (2020) recommend
considering security awareness as a continuous process due to the potential for new antici-
pated and unanticipated threats. An employee’s understanding of Cybersecurity Awareness
Capabilities (CSAC) can positively inﬂuence their attitude towards cybersecurity compli-
ance (Lee et al., 2016). Scholl et al. (2017) suggest that knowledge and actions secure and
protect vital information as critical elements of CSAC. Gandhi (2017) deﬁned cybersecurity
awareness as the degree to which an individual is aware of cybersecurity, its conformity with
policies and its commitment to the mission of an entity. Zhou et al. (2020) ﬁnd empirical evi-
dence that highlights the signiﬁcant importance of psychological factors such as self-efﬁcacy,
risk awareness and social support to understand CSA in an individual, along with technical
security embedded in a particular device or asset. Poepjes and Lane (2012) emphasize under-
standing how an individual acquires and manages awareness using individual capability when
confronted with making a decision. Karjalainen et al. (2020) focus on behavioural changes
of employees in dealing with cybersecurity over time and across different situations. Trim
and Lee (2019) investigate the relevance of persuasive communication theory and motivation
theory in facilitating cybersecurity awareness programs to inﬂuence changes in behaviors.
The authors suggest further research in understanding the roles of managers in helping staff
to ﬁght cybersecurity attacks in a more effective manner.
Siponen (2001a, 2001b) explains various dimensions of cybersecurity awareness. The
organizational dimension refers to managerial policies and activities related to cybersecurity
awareness; the general public dimension explains how every citizen who is using IT should be
aware of cyber threats; the socio-political dimension involves increasing knowledge among
people who are working at a socio-political level, such as lawyers and politicians; the com-
puter ethical dimension explains how scholars dealing with technologies should keep updated
on their knowledge of cybersecurity. Finally, the institutional education dimension focuses
on education and training at an institutional level. However, Sipoene (2001) states that due
to the informal nature of cybersecurity awareness, there might not be any clear distinction
between the microfoundations explained above. Granåsen and Andersson (2016) apply dif-
ferent technical performance measurement and behavioral assessment techniques based on
real-life cyber defence scenarios to evaluate team effectiveness in a cybersecurity exercise
among IT security experts. The study ﬁnds that cybersecurity awareness is necessary not only
for cybersecurity personnel but also for operational managers. Employees need to be trained
virtually on how to tackle cybersecurity threats while working remotely. These threats can
originate from many actions and directions, from downloading a ﬁle onto a work computer
to routine procedures to update a device.
Atthesametime,cybersecurityleadersmustalwaysbeawareofnewandevolvingbusiness
environments. They must focus on more and new research and development, such as Wyse
123

678
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
thin-client terminals, which allow all call staff to have secure remote connections (Anant
et al., 2020). Table 1 reveals the scarcity of scholarly attempts to explicate different micro-
foundations of CSAC that are required to build and strengthen cybersecurity measures at
the organizational level. More speciﬁcally, research providing comprehensive insights about
CSAC is limited. To ﬁll this critical gap, in the context of big data implications in business
today, this study identiﬁes CSAC as an organizational level capability and explicates the
microfoundations of this important capability (Table 1).
Table 1 Seminal studies on Cybersecurity Awareness Capabilities (CSAC)
Study
Study type
Key ﬁndings on Cybersecurity Awareness
Capabilities
Zwiling et al. (2020)
Empirical
The study aims to investigate knowledge and
behavior on CSA regarding protection tools
that are conducted in four countries, including
Turkey, Poland, Slovenia and Israel. The
study ﬁnds that cybersecurity knowledge is
related to CSA despite differences in gender
and geographical location. Further, the study
reveals a signiﬁcant difference of CSA
knowledge and behavior across countries.
The authors suggest that protective tools for
cybersecurity management play an important
role in creating awareness
Fabisiak & Hyla (2020)
Empirical
The study ﬁnds that Polish medical
professionals lack mandatory knowledge
about cybersecurity and need more training in
this ﬁeld. The authors reported difﬁculty in
acquiring a large amount of data through
surveys within the context of empirical
enquiry
Bauer et al. (2017)
Empirical
Through analyzing efforts of information
security managers’ in designing effective
information security programs, the authors
investigate how users perceive information
security programs that lead to changes in
behavior in maintaining information security
compliance within the banking sector. The
study ﬁnds that a comprehensive design
strategy seems to be more effective among
the bank’s employees for increasing
cybersecurity awareness. The authors note
that informants may convey biased
information inﬂuenced by social desirability
Janabi & Shourbaji (2016)
Empirical
The empirical study reveals that the study
participants, which include academic staff,
university students and employees of
universities, lack necessary knowledge and
awareness regarding the implications of
cybersecurity in their daily life. The authors
suggest further research applying robust
theoretical models and frameworks
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
679
Table 1 (continued)
Study
Study type
Key ﬁndings on Cybersecurity Awareness
Capabilities
Ahmad et al. (2018)
Empirical
Based on the data collected from mainstream
schools (excluding private schools,
international schools and special education),
the study indicates that the level of
knowledge on cybersecurity awareness
among parents to protect their children from
cybersecurity threats is moderate
Barth et al. (2019)
Empirical
The study tests the privacy paradox and ﬁnds
that users are more concerned about ratings
and the price of a desired application, than
they are about privacy and security, when
downloading and installing an app on their
devices
Kraus et al. (2017)
Empirical
The study is conducted on job seekers and
students and ﬁnds that security and privacy
actions on the devices of smartphone users
are inﬂuenced by intrinsic motivation by
nonessential psychological needs, such as the
need for security along with other needs
Shanfari et al. (2020)
Empirical
The study ﬁnds a signiﬁcant impact of six
independent variables that may affect human
components in adopting CSA, considered in
the empirical context of Oman’s public sector
employees
David et al. (2020)
Empirical
The authors ﬁnd that human beliefs, consisting
of resource belief, usefulness belief, and
reciprocity belief, have a positive correlation
for gaining specialist knowledge in
cybersecurity
Bavel et al. (2019)
Empirical
The study applies protection motivation theory
to investigate changes of user’s online
security behavior through providing
notiﬁcations during online shopping. The
ﬁndings suggest that factors such as
awareness of cybersecurity measures, risk
attitude, age, and country have an impact on
appropriate protective behavioral response
Tschakert and Ngamsuriyaroj (2019)
Empirical
The authors ﬁnd the impact of classroom
training with respect to phishing emails and
reducing vulnerability among the participants
to be insigniﬁcant when compared with users
who do not receive any training whatsoever.
The authors recommend further investigation
on the usefulness of the measures, and
suggest that educating participants about the
study may itself sensitize participants toward
phishing and cybersecurity learnings
123

680
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
Table 1 (continued)
Study
Study type
Key ﬁndings on Cybersecurity Awareness
Capabilities
Schneider et al. (2020)
Empirical
Based on a literature review and in-depth
interviews with cybersecurity experts and
senior managers, this study offers a
managerial information security awareness
guideline that is proven based on outcomes.
To assess a practicable managerial
information security awareness program, the
authors recommend targeting senior
managers in their speciﬁc and desired
environment
Holdworth & Apeh (2017)
Empirical
The study ﬁnds that to be successful, industry
requirements for designing and implementing
structured programs and training for
establishing cybersecurity awareness among
hospitality industry employees, needs to
involve three stages of artefact evaluation.
The authors suggest that a greater number of
interactive elements are necessary for the
programs
Zuopeng & Zhang (2019)
Empirical
Through reviewing online content such as blogs
of corporate websites, the study provides
actionable guidelines for the successful
implementation of cybersecurity training and
awareness programs within an organization
3 Methods
This study explores the dimensions of cybersecurity awareness capabilities using a systematic
literature review (SLR). The nature of systematic literature review is to minimize bias by
means of extensive literature review to explore important scientiﬁc contributions within a
ﬁeld and poses a question (Tranﬁeld et al., 2003). A systematic literature review helps us to
understand if a result is persistent throughout the studies and to ﬁnd out what future research
is needed. Although not all studies might ﬁt under the approach of systematic review, it is
considered the most appropriate and meticulous approach for reviewing articles to cover all
applicable data (Snyder, 2019).
Some papers published in journals have ﬂaws. They may fail to include/exclude proper
articles; their methodologies may not be backed by proper discussion or may lack critical
assessment. On the other hand, a systematic approach tends to extensively track down and
incorporate studies that revolve around speciﬁc questions (Palmatier, 2018). Therefore we
have chosen the systematic literature review to address our research question on the dimen-
sions of cyber security awareness capabilities.
An example of a systematic review in cybersecurity research is a study conducted by
(Gheyas and Abdallah 2016). The study conducted a systematic review of over thirty-seven
studies of peer-reviewed journals, edited books and conference proceedings to address two
questions related to insider threats. Furthermore, studies from the following paper-reviewed
journals(e.g.,Tayloretal.,2020;SpanosandAngelis2016)haveusedthesystematicliterature
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
681
review to address cyber security concerns in different ﬁelds such as education, the stock
market, blockchain, and private and public organizations.
Following the guidelines of established SLR research in operations (e.g., Akter et al.,2020)
and reference disciplines (e.g., Palmatier et al., 2018; Snyder, 2019; Tranﬁeld et al., 2003), the
currentstudyexploredthemostrelevantdatabases,suchasABI/InformCollection(ProQuest),
Business Source Complete (EBSCO), ScienceDirect, Emerald Insight, Wall Street Journal
(ProQuest). We appliedvarious relevant search strings to address our research questions,
namely “cybersecurity”, “cybersecurity awareness”, “cybersecurity awareness capability”,
“management capability”, “technology capability”, “data governance capability”, “cyberse-
curityknowledge”,“cybersecuritytraining,”etc.Afterscreeningthetitle,abstract,manuscript
and keywords, we identiﬁed 57 papers from the initial identiﬁcation of 307 articles. We added
5 more papers from cross-citations, which resulted in a total of 62 articles.
At this stage, we conducted a thematic analysis using the procedures of Braun and Clarke
(2006). The ﬁndings presented us three primary dimensions (i.e., personnel, management,
infrastructure capabilities) and eight subdimensions (i.e., knowledge, attitude, learning, train-
ing, strategic orientation, technology and data). We conﬁrmed the reliability of the themes
through qualitative analysis of the data using QSR NVivo 12. These themes were further
conﬁrmed by a panel of ﬁve judges (3 academics + 2 practitioners) using a Q-sorting pro-
cedure with a nominal scale of 1  personnel capabilities, 2  management capabilities
and 3  infrastructure capabilities). The inter-rater reliability of the themes was checked by
applying IBM SPSS statistics package (version 26) (Akter & Wamba, 2016) with a score of
0.86 Kalpha (De Swert, 2012; Krippendorff, 2004, 2007).
Thematic analysis can be deﬁned as a procedure for pinpointing, analyzing and describing
themes within data. The advantage of using thematic analysis is that it can be used for inter-
preting data and is well suited for qualitative analysis, for example, in policy developmet.
The thematic approach can construct an insightful analysis that helps to answer research
questions (Braun and Clarke 2006). It is considered the most relevant technique for research
that seeks results through interpretation. There are several studies in the domain of cyberse-
curity that uses a thematic analysis approach. For example, a study conducted by (Liu et al.,
2020) interviewed thirty-six professionals and used thematic analyses to ﬁnd factors that
lead to cyber risk in Connected and Autonomous Vehicles. The study identiﬁed six factors,
including awareness, user and vendor education, responsibility, and trust. Similarly, a study
conducted by (Cains et al. 2021) used thematic analysis to address research questions which
led to determining themes.
4 Theory
Dynamic capability view (DCV) offers a theoretical underpinning to transform organi-
zational resources and capabilities according to changes in the external environment. To
effectively address changes in the external environment, DCV scholars recommended trans-
forming the organizational resource base (Eisenhardt & Martin, 2000); sensing, seizing, and
re-conﬁguring organizational resources and capabilities (Teece, 2009; Teece et al., 1997);
reconﬁguring organizational learning patterns (Zollo & Winter, 2002); and ﬁnally, simulta-
neously pursuing exploration and exploitation (Smith & Tushman, 2005). Within the context
of the volatility, uncertainty, complexity and ambiguity of the digital business environment,
DCV offers normative guidelines to managers to formulate appropriate strategic courses of
123

682
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
action to navigate their organizations in an entrepreneurial, innovative and ambidextrous
manner (Raisch et al., 2009; Schoemaker et al., 2018).
At the individual level, CSA is articulated as an individual employee’s psychological
and behavioral capacity for awareness of the importance of cybersecurity for committing to
normative rules, policies, and guidelines to act effectively towards potential security threats
followingthecybersecuritymissionofanentity(Ahlanetal.,2015;Gandhi,2017;McCormac
et al., 2017; Scholl et al., 2017). Security workforce capability is the combined expression
of security proﬁciencies in knowledge and practical skills of an individual for implementing
appropriate actions, reactions or inactions for successful security of the operational system
(Ani et al., 2019). At the organizational level, CSAC can be considered an ongoing process
following systematic methods to enable effective preventive, proactive and reactive measures
againstperceived cybersecurity threats through the fostering of necessary psychologicalcapa-
bilities and human capital among employees (Bada et al., 2019; Bitton et al., 2020; Kovaˇcevi´c
& Radenkovi´c, 2020). Therefore, fostering CSAC across organizational boundaries means
emphasizing diverse managerial skills and capabilities in order to harness beneﬁts for the
current digital infrastructure facing extensive security risks (Bitton et al., 2020).
CSAC is a purposeful accomplishment requiring the orchestration of an individual’s rou-
tines and resources across organizational boundaries to result in an intended outcome in a
predictable and systematic manner (Barney, 1991; Barney & Felin, 2013). Further, CSAC
aims to inform and modify individual and organizational level capabilities as well as the
technical infrastructure, under external changes. External changes may include technological
changes and changes in the capabilities of cybercriminals or threats (Al-Shanfari et al., 2020;
Holdsworth & Apeh, 2017; Granåsen & Andersson, 2016). Due to the external orientation
of cyber threats and the dynamic role of CSAC to sense, seize and reconﬁgure organiza-
tional resources, capabilities, or learning (Teece, 2009; Zollo & Winter, 2002), CSAC can be
considered as a dynamic capability.
The importance of managerial roles in building dynamic capabilities is documented in
extant literature (Adner & Helfat, 2003; Gavetti & Levinthal, 2000; Helfat & Peteraf, 2015;
Martin, 2011; Sirmon & Hitt, 2009). Teece (2009) highlights the vital roles of managers in
facilitating strategic decisions through nurturing supporting culture, articulating goals, fos-
tering trust and facilitating organizations to take rapid actions related to opportunities and
threats arising in the external environment. Managerial skills and capabilities play particularly
vital roles in addressing challenges arising in the external environment related to ongoing
cybersecurity threats that result from rapid technological advancement. CSAC, managerial
awareness, perception, and prompt identiﬁcation of potential cybersecurity threats demand
superior cognitive capacity of individual employees (Gandhi, 2017; Kovacevic et al., 2020).
Further, individual employees’ knowledge and learning about cybersecurity threats in a prac-
tical manner enable them to respond to cyber threats faster (Bohm et al., 2018; Bauer et al.,
2017; Ani et al., 2019). Managers need to facilitate communication and dialogue across all
levels of organizational structure (Salvato & Vassolo, 2017) to build a dynamic community
that also supports weak performers (Eisenhardt & Martin, 2000). This point is echoed by
Li et al. (2016) in the cybersecurity context. The authors recommend fostering a culture of
knowledge sharing among employees to improve knowledge and awareness of cybersecu-
rity. They highlight the signiﬁcance of diverse socio-political backgrounds among employees,
which can lead to a positive inﬂuence with improved perception of potential cybersecurity
threats (Siponen, 2001a, 2001b).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
683
5 Conceptual model
The ﬁndings of our review identify CSAC as an emerging research domain in business
and management research, but one that has very limited research in this particular stream.
Although there is a paucity of research on CSAC, our ﬁndings identify three major dimen-
sions and eight subdimensions of CSAC. Figure 1 presents the necessary microfoundations
to build organizational level CSAC across personnel, management and infrastructure capa-
bilities. To gain organizational business value out of CSAC, ﬁrms ﬁrst need to develop their
personnel with knowledge, attitude and education. Second, ﬁrms need to manage proper
training, organizational culture and strategic orientation. Finally, ﬁrms need to establish the
right infrastructure with data governance and technology to build CSAC.
5.1 Personnel capabilities
Employeeknowledgeandattitudesarecriticaltoreducingcybersecuritythreats(Wahyudiwan
et al., 2017). We argue that the knowledge, attitude and behavior (KAB) model of awareness
can be used to measure the CSA level of an employee (Wahyudiwan et al., 2017).
5.1.1 Employee knowledge of cybersecurity
Employee knowledge of cybersecurity has a signiﬁcant impact on building CSAC in the data-
driven business context. The level of security knowledge is deﬁned as how much knowledge
an individual possesses of theoretical information on cyber threats, vulnerabilities, patterns
of attacks, and the impact these can have on the system (Ani et al., 2019). Empirical ﬁndings
have shown that computer literacy skills and information seeking skills also can affect an
Fig. 1 Microfoundations of data-driven cybersecurity awareness capability
123

684
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
individual’s behavior in handling security (Anwar et al., 2017). Safa and Solms (2016) empha-
size the importance of knowledge sharing to reduce threats as well as costs for information
security.
5.1.2 Employee attitude towards cybersecurity
An employee’s attitude can be described as a negative or a positive feeling towards a behavior.
Attitudinal inﬂuences can arise from factors such as job performance or workgroup norms
(Gaspie et al., 2017). Due to employees’ tendencies to neglect policies, training and edu-
cation on cybersecurity, and lack of initiatives by companies to pay necessary attention to
this issue, users in an organization often fall victim to cybersecurity threats by breaching
policies unintentionally or as a result of inﬂuence by other external factors (Ahlan et al.,
2015). Individual factors (self-attitude, self-behavior and self-cognition), institutional fac-
tors (policy compliance and training programs) and environmental factors (peer performance,
social pressure, perceived threats and religious indicators) provide a deeper understanding
for measuring CSA, especially for a knowledge-based institution (Zwilling et al., 2020).
Based on empirical ﬁndings, Li et al. (2016) suggest that the inﬂuence from peer behavior
and other employees’ actions can play a vital role in improving cybersecurity behavior in an
organization. Therefore, necessary measures should be taken, such as providing rewards to
employees who help create a pro-security atmosphere, to create a positive effect.
Several social, psychological and demographic factors such as age, gender, etc., can impact
an employee’s behavior in handling cyber threats. Previously, protection motivation theory
has been applied to explain why different genders in a working environment tend to behave
differently on handling cyber threats. However, recent studies have shown that security behav-
ior is correlated with variables such as perceived susceptibility, perceived severity, perceived
beneﬁts, and self-efﬁcacy (Anwar et al., 2017). The attitude of employees toward a cyber
threat is often ignored given the difﬁculty of assessing an individual’s awareness levels and
whether or not they possess adequate skills to respond to cyber threats (Hadlington, 2018).
5.1.3 Employee learning capabilities
Employees that exhibit reluctance to comply with cybersecurity measures in an organization
may cause serious threats. Therefore, top management needs to take action to effectively
educate employees about cyber threats by providing instructions that are easy to understand
(Siponen et al., 2014). Horenbeeck (2017) recommends keeping the rules simple for employ-
ees to better understand security threats and policies, as complex security rules often lead
people to take shortcuts. A survey based on behavioral theory showed that an organization
needs to put social pressure on employees from superiors and peers. In this case, managers
play a vital role in instituting effective policies and educating employees about the seriousness
and devastating effects of security threats on the organization (Siponen et al., 2010).
5.2 Management capabilities
5.2.1 Training capabilities
To enhance employees’ capability for recognizing cyber threats, organizations need to invest
in training (He & Zang, 2019). However, due to employees’ lack of interest and past experi-
ences feeling bored in the training program, organizations face difﬁculties in reaching goals
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
685
to educate their employees. Siponen et al. (2010) note that lack of motivation and enthusiasm
is also a strong indicator of failure for training programs. Further, employees also complain
about a lack of speciﬁcity and the generic nature of training materials that lack consider-
ation of varied responsibilities and different levels of security threats faced by individual
employees. The head of IT security of Nominet UK believes that if employers offer more
rounded and holistic training and take into account security incidences involving employees
and reﬂect on actions taken, that such changed approaches will beneﬁt both employees and
the organization (Caldwell, 2016). Finally, security programs must be updated both when
threats change and when there are technological advancements (Siponen et al., 2010).
The goals of programs should not only be to create awareness but also to provide training
about what to do when faced with a threat. Hence, practical methods should be used, such as
when a suspicious email arrives, the email can be forwarded to a security expert rather than
ignoring it. The principal security researcher of Kaspersky Lab concluded that the main goal
of the training should be to develop a security mindset for the employees so that they can
take action when they encounter a threat (Caldwell, 2016).
In terms of training cybersecurity personnel, an exercise training program known as cyber
defence exercise (CDXs), has proven to be useful as the goal of CDXs is to provide interactive
training with real-life scenarios in a controlled environment. The program can also be useful
in other work areas, such as legal and forensic work (Granåsen et al., 2019). Experts believe
that awareness training programs should be available to employees regularly through various
mechanisms, such as SMS, via email, using ofﬁce ﬂoorwalkers, or through hackathon events.
To develop effective training content, it is critical to understand employee behavior related
to online security. Companies often prefer developing strict policies and installing cutting
edge technologies for security. However, inappropriate human behavior alone can expose
the company to danger (Li et al., 2014). A global phishing survey has shown that phish-
ing attacks usually target e-commerce, banks and money transfer industries. Phishing often
involves stealing sensitive consumer information and observing victim’s behavior (Arachchi-
lage et al., 2016). Research ﬁndings demonstrate that users’ behavior can be changed through
phishing education, resulting in increased awareness capabilities of phishing threats. How-
ever, to effectively modify an individual’s behavior towards cybersecurity threats, training
is necessary but may not be sufﬁcient. In addition to training, simulation of attacks with
real-world examples and immersive programs can add value.
To be effective, the trainer conducting the training needs to be very knowledgeable and
should possess a sound capacity to deliver the content. Further, the mode of delivery of the
training is important as recently it has been shown that mixed learning methods consisting of
both online and face to face learning deliver better results for creating awareness. Training
and learning tools such as the Cyber Defense Exercise (CDE) often identify an increasing
gap between training methods and technological progression. One of the key factors for
a successful cybersecurity training program is the incorporation of human factors such as
decision-making skills, negotiating skills and information-sharing capabilities. Further, an
individual should be provided training on cybersecurity from the earliest stage of employ-
ment, with effective training reﬂecting practical scenarios to attain mental readiness during
unexpected incidents (Knox et al., 2019).
On the other hand, insider threats (deliberate or accidental) are a growing concern, and
several security experts believe that general training fails to recognize the issue of internal
threats. Unfortunately, most often, organizations do not take internal breaches seriously until
there is data leakage or brand damage. Therefore, training employees about internal threats
has to be taken seriously before data falls into the wrong hands (Caldwell, 2016), but more
importantly, the right policies need to be in place regarding acceptable company practices.
123

686
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
5.2.2 Security culture
An organizational security culture can be deﬁned as a collection of shared security values,
assumptions and beliefs of cybersecurity in an organization that can shape employee behavior
(Chen et al., 2015). Cybersecurity culture can be viewed as a sub-culture of an entity with
speciﬁc goals of security, including all socio-cultural and technical measures. Security culture
inﬂuences employees to have a security mindset and commensurate behavior. Prior studies
have shown that there is a clear link between establishing security policies and the inﬂuence
of top managers in building a security culture (Chen et al., 2015). Several countries, such as
UK, US, Canada and South Africa, identify cybersecurity culture as a critical element of an
organizational policy framework (Gcaza et al., 2017).
To establish a proper cybersecurity culture, management must have a vision and a strategy
with appropriate policies and procedures to change the security culture in an organization (Da
Veiga, 2016). Alshaikh (2020) provided an analysis of how three Australian organizations
have improved their cybersecurity culture through ﬁve key initiatives: ﬁrst, to identify key
cybersecurity behavior; second, to establish a cybersecurity champion network; third, to
build a cybersecurity hub by creating a learning environment for the employees; fourth, to
develop a brand for the cyber team to make it more visible; ﬁnally, ﬁfth, to align security
awareness activities with internal awareness programs and external cybersecurity campaigns.
An organization’s security culture is impacted by the positive attitude of employees who
follow cybersecurity compliance guidelines (Gaspie et al., 2017).
5.2.3 Strategic orientation
Rapid technological change forces frequent updates of the necessary skillsets for security
managers; therefore, the most important and updated skill sets must be identiﬁed along with a
proper way of delivering them to the professionals. Cybersecurity managers require a certain
set of skills to better understand and manage information security. It is vital for cybersecurity
experts to be aware of the capabilities that are required for understanding and addressing
cyber threats in an organization (Haqaf & Koyuncu, 2018). Despite the availability of infor-
mation about the necessary skillsets for cybersecurity managers, gaps are still present. Haqaf
and Koyuncu (2018) further depict the importance of assessing what skill sets are required in
the changing cybersecurity environment. Nazareth and Choi (2015) state that cybersecurity
managers have several important responsibilities and functions, including security planning,
managing risk, selecting proper technology, assessing threats, formulating policies, monitor-
ing performance, and implementing counter measurements and maintenance.
Managers play a vital role in running organizations; therefore, it is necessary for managers
to understand not only the threats that can arise from a technical perspective but also those
that grow out of human behavior. Understanding bothtechnical and human factors can help to
mitigate threats; hence, a management success factor (MSF) model can help decision-makers
in an organization deal with cybersecurity threats more efﬁciently (Diesch et al., 2020). An
MSF model’s main purpose is to identify possible factors or elements that can be used to make
better decisions (Diesch et al., 2020). Further, Nazareth and Choi (2015) developed a model
that allows cybersecurity managers to make better decisions on an organization’s information
assets,andthemodeladditionallyprovidessecuritymanagerswithclearinstructionsaboutthe
kinds of investments that are needed and the impacts those investments can have. Security
managers often use strategies that include detection, deterrence, vulnerability reduction,
education and training. However, clear strategic steps are required rather than approaching
with a single solution.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
687
Recently, network breaches have become so common that only the most signiﬁcant
breaches make news headlines, such as the breach of the credit reporting company Equifax
Inc, which affected over 143 million consumers (Kolevski et al., 2021; Rothrock et al., 2018).
Boards of directors play a vital role in providing cybersecurity to a company; however, a study
showed that most boards are unprepared to handle cybersecurity threats despite 58% of board
members believing cyber-related risk is the most challenging risk they expect to oversee. The
importance of the top executives and the role of board members is exempliﬁed by the data
breach of Target Corp in 2013, where the personal information of over 60 million customers
was stolen. The shareholders took legal action towards the company, which ultimately caused
the CEO and the CIO of the organization to resign. A study conducted by Rothrock et al.
(2018) shows that senior executives and board members are not asking the right questions
because they do not have meaningful metrics to evaluate cybersecurity issues related to their
businesses. Deloitte (2015) shows that audit committees should increase their interactions
with the IT department in order to better understand cybersecurity threats; technology experts
should also join board meetings in different organizations to raise awareness among the mem-
bers. Overall, an organization’s strategic direction can shape its awareness capability.
5.3 Infrastructure capabilities
5.3.1 Technology
Organizations must keep their operating systems up to date to minimize threats. An example
can be taken from the cyber attack of 12th May, 2017. Ehrenfeld (2017), depicts that the
attack, used WannaCrypt and targeted Microsoft Windows across 150 countries. The attack
infected computer systems of various sectors, including transportation, energy and healthcare.
Britain’s National Health Service stated that their systems and machines all were impacted.
Two days later, Microsoft came up with a solution, but it took over 50 days to apply the
solution properly after many failed attempts. From these examples alone, we can see the
danger of cybersecurity breaches and the importance of staying up-to-date with the latest
technology in order to exhibit equal strength with cyber-attackers.
Due to recent technical advances, the healthcare system uses equipment that is connected
with other networks and devices, leaving the overall systems vulnerable, including medical
devices. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has responsibility for assuring the
safety of medical devices, and they have acknowledged the seriousness of the problem.
However, medical device manufacturers seem to have neglected the importance of providing
security for data transfers and data storage. The exchange of data and the collection of data that
supports clinical decision making is not only vulnerable to a medical device’s characteristics
and connectivity, but technological issues, software risks, and of course, human factors also
seem to play a vital role (William and Woodward, 2015). Kim (2017) states that cyber-attacks
can cost government organizations thousands to millions of dollars. For example, Telnet is
still used in organizations, which is very outdated and leaves an open door for an attack.
More up to date technologies and tools are required. But these issues are often overlooked.
In organizations’ efforts to maintain updated technology in cybersecurity, emerging tech-
nologies such as data analytics, machine learning, artiﬁcial intelligence and blockchain
technologies have proven to be very important to managing cybersecurity. New technolo-
gies such as quantum computing, cloud computing, predictive semantics, behavioral identity,
and dynamic networks will bring new approaches for improving cybersecurity but will also
create new cybersecurity threats (Geluvara et al., 2019). Traditional data-driven technology
123

688
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
solutions have drawbacks, such as inefﬁciencies in storage, retention, access, and processing
of the large volumes of information produced by big data (Rawat et al., 2019). As these
techniques were not designed to handle semi-structured or unstructured data, the challenges
of traditional tools can be addressed by big data technology (Rawat et al., 2019). But these
same technologies, e.g. artiﬁcial intelligence, can be used skillfully by attackers to penetrate
cybersecurity barriers through offensive machine-level ‘learning by doing’ approaches.
Machine learning (ML) offers superiority over traditional rule-based algorithms, and ML
methods are now being used to enhance cyber-security capabilities. Techniques can be applied
for detecting intrusion, malware and spam. We need to assess the solution that is provided
by ML and ﬁnd its limitations as well (Apruzzese et al., 2018). Detecting a new generation
of malware and cyber threats tends to be difﬁcult with traditional cybersecurity procedures,
which include access control, antivirus and cryptographic software, intrusion detection and
prevention systems, sandboxes, etc. Therefore, solutions to the problem rely on ML and
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), which can rely upon data from earlier attacks and respond to
newer ones. AI is used in cybersecurity for faster detection of threats and attacks in a given
situation. A further example has been illustrated by Geluvara et al. (2019) on how AL, ML,
and DL have helped ﬁght real cybersecurity problems, for example, London’s NHS spotted
an attack within a second using their algorithms, and the threat was eliminated without any
damage. Similarly, the MIT Computer Science and AI Lab successfully built a model that
was capable of ﬁltering millions of data points and passing the results to a human analyst;
AI was also utilized by the companies PatterEx and CSAIL, who then found that their attack
detection rate rose by 85%.
Blockchain technology has recently gained signiﬁcant adoption across business ecosys-
tems. Blockchain provides trusted transactions among participants in a network. The
uniqueness of blockchain technology has opened doors for many industries such as logistics,
banking and pharmaceuticals in the context of cybersecurity. Blockchain has the potential to
enable a new breed of decentralized applications that will not require any intermediaries for
building key elements of cybersecurity infrastructure (Taylor et al., 2020). We suggest that
the use of blockchain or related technologies does not provide a silver bullet for cybersecurity
issues, but the technology does provide support to existing systems in IoT, data storage and
sharing, network security, private user data, navigation, and the utility of the World Wide
Web.
Several organizations and businesses are now embracing the service of Security Oper-
ation Centers (SOCs). SOCs can be deﬁned as a centralized location, within or outside of
an entity, consisting of people, technologies and processes with an aim to provide complete
cybersecurity solutions, including awareness, maintaining compliances and threat manage-
ment (Agyepong et al., 2020). Many organizations that cannot afford SOCs have had to rely
on a third-party security provider, which is often referred to as a Managed Security Service
Provider (MSSP) (Agyepong et al., 2020). Mutemwa et al. (2018) describe the tools that
are used by SOCs. First are security information and event management systems (SIEM)
tool that looks at events statistically from various network sources such as hosts, the net-
work endpoint, and servers. The SIEM tool provides a risk analysis procedure by analyzing
log data. Second are threat intelligence tools, which gather threat intelligence from various
sources such as news, social media and the centralized database of an organization. The third
is vulnerability assessment, with an investigative and forensic tool. These are tools that help
assess websites and operating systems. Finally, there is a storage tool. All SOC tools should
be protected and encrypted so that only authorized personnel can access them.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
689
5.3.2 Data governance
Data is precious to organizations, and protecting data has become more important than ever
before. Thus, data governance plays a vital role in helping organizations understand what kind
of data they must protect. Data governance (DG) can be deﬁned as the processes, procedures,
technologies and people that enable an organization to exploit data as a digital asset (Yang
et al., 2019). DG provides a general framework for maintenance and administration of data
security, availability, quality, usability, integrity and relevancy. DG also helps organizations
set business goals, maintain business processes, and make complex decisions. DG practices
involve a guided framework for collecting, managing, storing and utilizing data (Yang et al.,
2019). Organizations may face serious challenges for data governance such as lack of a big
data governance framework, shortage of skilled labor, big data security and privacy, lack of
required tools for generating insight, organizations capability to understand the use of data,
insufﬁcient knowledge of managers, organizational capability for digital transformation, and
the complexity of data collection and storage (Rawat et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019).
It is important to distinguish between governance and management. Whereas governance
refers to those who make the decision for ensuring effective management and use of resources,
management involves the implementation of the decisions made by governance (Alhassan
et al., 2016). Thuraisingham (2019) states that corporate executives and the governing board
must ensure cyber governance in an organization, which includes activities such as data pri-
vacy, carrying out risk analysis, and protection from cybersecurity threats. The board and
executive members must go through a few steps to properly implement cyber governance,
such as having a cybersecurity security expert among the board members, having in-house
cybersecurity experts, or have someone from a reliable and reputable source provide these
services. Eugen and Petru¸t (2018) illustrate management practices for protecting data and
recommend having a risk based approach towards security, creating hierarchical cybersecu-
rity policies, maintaining updates and security patches, testing and accomplishing backups,
handling passwords securely, having physical security measures, educating users, employing
tools for monitoring, analytics and management, implementing a comprehensive endpoint
security solution, and providing network security devices. They further state that if an organi-
zation’s data is compromised, it may reduce an organization’s capability to provide services,
eventually leading to fraud, disclosure of conﬁdential information, or destruction of data.
6 Discussion
The microfoundation perspective (Barney & Felin, 2013; Felin, 2015) provides a reductionist
view of the underlying elements of CSAC, which will pave the way for building a holistic
view on CSAC by providing deeper insights into the effectiveness of cybersecurity measures
and programs. We have seen many organizations with superior CSAC. However, concern still
remains about the sustainability of these programs, and an in-depth study has still not been
conducted to date to deal with the CSA issues in an organization and to provide an effective
solution.
6.1 Theoretical contributions
This study makes several theoretical contributions. The study extends the dynamic capability
view (Eisenhardt & Martin, 2000; Schoemaker et al., 2018; Schoemaker et al., 2018; Smith
123

690
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
& Tushman, 2005; Teece et al., 1997; Zollo & Winter, 2002) through applying this essential
theoretical perspective to the ﬁeld by introducing a new dynamic capability, namely CSAC,
which consider the context of data driven business ecosystems. Previously, scholars have
investigated CSA following criminological theories such as the general deterrence theory
(GDT) or limited versions of GDT such as the theory of reasoned action, protection moti-
vation theory, theory of planned behavior and also psychological theories such as protection
motivation theory or situational theory (Hanus Windsor & Wu, 2018). As such, this study is
the ﬁrst study based on DCV applied to cybersecurity awareness. The identiﬁed microfoun-
dations for CSAC highlight the importance of transforming individual level and management
level capability and organizational infrastructure for the successful development of CSAC,
resulting in superior information and cybersecurity management performance.
Firstly, following DCV, the ﬁndings of this study extend the understanding of manage-
rial roles in building CSAC (Adner & Helfat, 2003; Helfat & Peteraf, 2015). Extant studies
on managerial roles in building dynamic capabilities have recognized the important rela-
tionship between quality of managerial decisions, strategic changes and ﬁrm performance
(Helfat & Martin, 2015; Martin & Bachrach, 2018), and organizational capacity to change
and maintain superior performance (Widianto et al., 2021). The theoretical underpinning of
dynamic capabilities, therefore, will be of importance in cybersecurity issues, which are a
serious concern among managers in the present rapidly changing business context. Extending
dynamic capability theory (Adner & Helfat, 2003; Helfat & Peteraf, 2015) within the context
of cybersecurity will allow researchers to integrate the normative guidelines of the dynamic
capability view into the context of cybersecurity in an effective manner.
Secondly, this paper demonstrates the necessity of transforming and reconﬁguring orga-
nizational resources and capabilities, including individual behaviors, training and learning
methods, and technological infrastructure in accordance with the changes in the external
environment through upgrading and integration of new technologies. As DCV endeavors
to equip managers with appropriate courses of action to tackle the challenges posed by the
rapidly changing external environment (Raisch et al., 2009; Schoemaker et al., 2018; Teece,
2009), Akter et al. (2020) echo that technological advancement fostered by next-generation
technologies creates serious challenges for managers of businesses across different indus-
tries and sectors. Conceptualizing CSAC as a dynamic capability along with its underlying
microfoundations offers a sound theoretical underpinning to comprehensively elaborate the
individual and management capabilities and technological infrastructure necessary to tackle
increasing cyber threats to present-day business organizations. This study extends the the-
oretical movement of microfoundations in DCV (Barney & Felin, 2013; Felin, 2015). The
conceptual model and ﬁndings of this study shed light on the microfoundations of the CSAC,
which will extend the interactions among various organizational factors and functional ele-
ments to carry out effective cybersecurity awareness programs.
6.2 Practical contributions
Increased cyber-attacks have affected business organizations. There is an increased risk of
loss of sensitive strategic information, customer’s information, and valuable assets (Agilient,
2019). The negative consequences of cyber threats to business organizations include but
are not limited to destruction and damage of proprietary and commercially sensitive trans-
actional and personal data, loss of ﬁnancial assets, risk of loss of intellectual properties,
including post-attack damages, include the cost of restoration and recovery procedure as
well as the loss of trust and reputational harm (Morgan, 2020). Further, the global pandemic
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
691
has caused companies both large and small to shift toward a remote working environment.
Therefore, organizations must understand and have the capacity to deal with the risks of work-
ing remotely. The pandemic made the workforce more distracted from cyber threats, and to
make matters worse, security professionals also had issues with working remotely. Hence
companies must prioritize cybersecurity budgets and investments and assess risk accordingly.
Training and exercises are needed to address these changes. Since the pandemic began in
the USA alone, the FBI has received over 4000 complaints daily from different corporations.
As human error still makes up 90% of all data breach cases, measures should be taken to
herald changes in training and exercises. Employees must be reminded about their role on
how to effectively prevent, detect, respond and recover from cyber-attacks. Management
should provide new guidelines and monitor the success of employee training and learning
activities, role-based training programs, and exercises to raise and strengthen awareness.
These programs must be considered for every level of employee (Brandenburg & Paul,
2020).
Our conceptual framework based on an extensive analysis of prior work suggests that
developing CSAC involves the dynamic involvement and intertwined contribution of per-
sonnel, management, and infrastructure. For example, prior research highlights that the
development of organizational capabilities stems from the capacities of individuals (Teece,
2007, Felin et al., 2012; Foss, 2011). Accordingly, the CSA level of employees, as determined
by their cybersecurity knowledge, attitude, and learning behavior, is critical in forming the
basis of CSA management capabilities, such as an organization’s CSA climate, or the shared
perceptions of individuals within the organization around the importance of risk and security
policies, and knowledge and recognition of security threats. In turn, with a concerted focus
and emphasis on CSA (e.g., the organization’s CSA orientation), the organization will be
in a better position to develop the necessary organizational processes and routines for the
continuous renewal and reconﬁguration of data governance and cybersecurity technology
(i.e., infrastructure capabilities). Our illustration here emphasizes the joint importance of the
micro-foundations of personnel, management, and infrastructure in developing CSAC.
Similarly, scholars have suggested that resources at the top management level inﬂuence
how managerial decisions are made, and how they affect organizational operations and out-
comes (Helfat & Martin, 2015; Bendig et al., 2018). Accordingly, the strategic infrastructure
ﬁrms deploy to manage cybersecurity threats (e.g., technology and data governance capabil-
ities) are inﬂuential in shaping the cybersecurity knowledge, attitude, and learning behavior
of individual employees (e.g., personnel capabilities) because the infrastructure reﬂects the
ﬁrms’ organization-wide values and beliefs, as well as operational activities, on embracing
and espousing CSA (e.g., the ﬁrms’ CSA strategic orientation, culture, and training capa-
bilities). Therefore, in developing CSAC, the micro-foundations of personnel, management,
and infrastructure capabilities should not be considered in isolation. Instead, managers are
advised of the important roles jointly played by personnel, management, and infrastructure
capabilities underpinning their continuous organization-wide emphasis on cybersecurity.
7 Future research and conclusions
In developing our CSAC framework, we synthesized diverse literature streams that somewhat
overlap or are partly grounded in diverse assumptions. Although our CSAC framework is
speciﬁcally geared toward speciﬁc organizational settings, it may also apply to dyadic inter-
actions, particularly those characterized by collaborative roles (e.g., within a supply chain).
123

692
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
However, we do not contend that all micro-foundations will always be equally important or
thathighCSACwillalwaysberequiredtorealizedesiredoutcomes.Somemicro-foundational
elements (e.g., infrastructure capabilities) may be more pertinent in some contexts (e.g., when
collaborating with external partners) compared to others (e.g., when interacting with end-
users, where personnel capabilities might be of greater importance).
Appropriately, empirical research is necessary to corroborate our CSAC concept and
model. Grounded in dynamic capability theory, our conceptualization of CSAC emphasizes
the continuous (re)conﬁguration of organizational resources and capabilities to not only sense
but also combat cybersecurity threats in an ongoing manner. Future research may adopt a
longitudinal approach to examine the extent to which the fundamental micro-foundational
elements identiﬁed in our conceptual framework contribute to ﬁrms’ continuous develop-
ment and deployment of CSAC. Future research may also beneﬁt from employing the same
approach to determine the extent to which ﬁrms’ CSAC facilitate different performance
outcomes, such as cybersecurity breaches or operational efﬁciency.
Given our conceptualization of CSAC as spanning across multiple organizational levels
(e.g., individual and ﬁrm), future research may be able to shed further light on the spe-
ciﬁc processes and mechanisms through which ﬁrms develop CSAC. For example, previous
research highlights the importance of individual behaviors as the fundamental building blocks
of organizational capabilities at the ﬁrm level (e.g., Wahyudiwan et al., 2017). Accordingly, a
multi-level approach could be employed to examine the extent to which personnel capabilities
fostered at the individual level contribute to CSAC at the ﬁrm level.
Futureresearchmayalsobeneﬁtfromincorporatingrelevantboundaryconditionstoexam-
ine the speciﬁc contexts under which the role of personnel, management, and/or infrastructure
capabilities are more or less pronounced in facilitating the development and deployment
of CSAC. For example, recent research ﬁnds that the accelerating rate of digital transfor-
mation on economic performance is quicker under low market turbulence, but results in
worse environmental performance when market turbulence is high (Li, 2022). Accordingly,
given dynamic capability theory emphasizes that ﬁrms should develop processes for resource
reconﬁguration and capability enhancement to evolve and ﬁt with changing market condi-
tions (Teece, 2007; Morgan, 2012), it might be insightful to investigate which speciﬁc CSAC
micro-foundation is more or less relevant in what speciﬁc industry condition (e.g., techno-
logical turbulence or market turbulence).
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and its Member Institutions.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Adner, R., & Helfat, C. E. (2003). Corporate effects and dynamic managerial capabilities. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal, 24(10), 1011–1125.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
693
Agilient(2019).CybercrimecostsAustralianbusinesses$29billioneachyear.RetrievedOctober17,2021from
https://www.agilient.com.au/2019/10/23/cybercrime-costs-australian-businesses-29-billion-each-year/
Agyepong, E., Cherdantseva, Y., Reinecke, P., & Burnap, P. (2020). Challenges and performance metrics for
security operations center analysts: A systematic review. Journal of Cyber Security Technology, 4(3),
125–152.
Ahlan, A. R., Lubis, M., & Lubis, A. R. (2015). Information security awareness at the knowledge-based
institution: Its antecedents and measures. Procedia Computer Science, 72, 361–373.
Ahmad, N., Asma’Mokhtar, U., Fauzi, W. F. P., Othman, Z. A., Yeop, Y. H., & Abdullah, S. N. H. S. (2018).
Cyber Security Situational Awareness among Parents. In 2018 cyber resilience conference (CRC), EEE
(pp. 1–3).
Akdemir, N., & Lawless, C. J. (2020). Exploring the human factor in cyber-enabled and cyber-dependent crime
victimization: A lifestyle routine activities approach. Internet Research, 30(6), 1665–1687. https://doi.
org/10.1108/INTR-10-2019-0400
Akter, S., & Wamba, S. F. (2016). Big data analytics in E-commerce: A systematic review and agenda for
future research. Electronic Markets, 26(2), 173–194.
Akter, S., Michael, K., Uddin, M. R., McCarthy, G., & Rahman, M. (2020). Transforming business using
digital innovations: The application of AI, blockchain, cloud and data analytics. Annals of Operations
Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03620-w
Alhassan, I., Sammon, D., & Daly, M. (2016). Data governance activities: An analysis of the literature. Journal
of Decision Systems, 25(1), 64–75.
Alotaibi, F., Furnell, S., Stengel, I., & Papadaki, M. (2016). A review of using gaming technology for cyber-
security awareness. International Journal Information Security Research, 6(2), 660–666.
Alqahtani, M. S. A., & Erfani, E. (2021). Exploring the relationship between technology adoption and cyber
security compliance: A quantitative study of UTAUT2 model. International Journal of Electronic Gov-
ernment Research, 17(4), 40–62.
Al-Janabi, S., & Al-Shourbaji, I. (2016). A study of cyber security awareness in educational environment in
the middle east. Journal of Information & Knowledge Management, 15(1), 1650007.
Al-Shanfari, I., Yassin, W., & Abdullah, R. (2020). Identify of factors affecting information security awareness
and weight analysis process. International Journal of Engineering and Advanced Technology, 9(3),
534–542.
Alshaikh, M. (2020). Developing cybersecurity culture to inﬂuence employee behavior: A practice perspective.
Computers & Security, 98, 102003. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2020.102003
Anant, V., Banerjee, S., Li, K., & Boehm, J. (2020). A dual cybersecurity mindset for the next nor-
mal. Mckinsey Digital, Retrieved October 17, 2021 from https://www.mckinsey.com/business-
functions/risk/our-insights/a-dual-cybersecurity-mindset-for-the-next-normal?cid=other-eml-alt-mip-
mck&hlkid=11567b190b2e4d57a8fe5ec989b8b49c&hctky=10302697&hdpid=257a39db-a247-4b1f-
b50d-84c719d6cbad
Ani, U. D., He, H., & Tiwari, A. (2019). Human factor security: Evaluating the cybersecurity capacity of the
industrial workforce. Journal of Systems and Information Technology, 21(1), 2–35. https://doi.org/10.
1108/JSIT-02-(2018)-0028
Anwar, M., He, W., Ash, I., Yuan, X., Li, L., & Xu, L. (2017). Gender difference and employees’ cybersecurity
behaviors. Computers in Human Behavior, 69, 437–443.
Apruzzese, G., Colajanni, M., Ferretti, L., Guido, A., & Marchetti, M. (2018). On the effectiveness of machine
and deep learning for cyber security. In 2018 10th international conference on cyber conﬂict (CyCon),
IEEE (pp. 371–390).
Arachchilage, N. A. G., Love, S., & Beznosov, K. (2016). Phishing threat avoidance behaviour: An empirical
investigation. Computers in Human Behavior, 60, 185–197.
Bada, M., Sasse, A. M. & Nurse, J. R. C. (2019). Cyber security awareness campaigns: Why do they fail to
change behaviour?. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.02672.
Barney,J.(1991).Firmresourcesandsustainedcompetitiveadvantage.JournalofManagement,17(1),99–120.
Barney, J. A. Y., & Felin, T. (2013). What are microfoundations? Academy of Management Perspectives, 27(2),
138–155.
Barth, S., de Jong, M. D., Junger, M., Hartel, P. H., & Roppelt, J. C. (2019). Putting the privacy paradox to the
test: Online privacy and security behaviors among users with technical knowledge, privacy awareness,
and ﬁnancial resources. Telematics and Informatics, 41, 55–69.
Bauer, S., Bernroider, E. W., & Chudzikowski, K. (2017). Prevention is better than cure! Designing information
security awareness programs to overcome users’ non-compliance with information security policies in
banks. Computers & Security, 68, 145–159.
123

694
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
Bauer, S., & Bernroider, E. W. (2017). From information security awareness to reasoned compliant action: Ana-
lyzing information security policy compliance in a large banking organization. ACM SIGMIS Database:
THe DATABASE for Advances in Information Systems, 48(3), 44–68.
Bendig, D., Strese, S., Flatten, T.C., da Costa, M.E.S. and Brettel, M. (2018). On micro foundations of
dynamic capabilities: A multi-level perspective based on CEO personality and knowledge-based capital.
Long Range Planning, 51(6), pp.797–814.
Bitton, R., Boymgold, K., Puzis, R., & Shabtai, A. (2020). Evaluating the information security awareness of
smartphone users. In Proceedings of the (2020) CHI conference on human factors in computing systems
(pp. 1–13).
Böhm, F., Menges, F., & Pernul, G. (2018). Graph-based visual analytics for cyber threat intelligence. Cyber-
security, 1(1), 1–19.
Brandenburg, R., & Paul, M. (2020). Cybersecurity for a remote workforce, July 23 2020, Retrieved October
17, 2021 from https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/cybersecurity-for-a-remote-workforce/
Brooks, C. (2021). Alarming cybersecurity stats: What you need to know for 2021. Retrieved
October 17, 2021 from https://www.forbes.com/sites/chuckbrooks/2021/03/02/alarming-cybersecurity-
stats-------what-you-need-to-know-for-2021/?sh=67255f5058d3
Brown, A. (2021). Cyber security attacks on the rise: Report. Retrieved October 17, 2021 from https://www.
forbesadvocate.com.au/story/7430824/cyber-security-attacks-on-the-rise-report/
Caldwell, T. (2016). Making security awareness training work. Computer Fraud & Security, 2016(6), 8–14.
Cains, M.G., Flora, L., Taber, D., King, Z. and Henshel, D.S.( 2021). Deﬁning cyber security and cyber
security risk within a multidisciplinary context using expert elicitation. Risk Analysis. https://doi.org/10.
1111/risa.13687
Chen, Y. A. N., Ramamurthy, K. R. A. M., & Wen, K. W. (2015). Impacts of comprehensive information
security programs on information security culture. Journal of Computer Information Systems, 55(3),
11–19.
David, D. P., Keupp, M. M., & Mermoud, A. (2020). Knowledge absorption for cyber-security: The role of
human beliefs. Computers in Human Behavior, 106, 106255.
Da Veiga, A. (2016). Comparing the information security culture of employees who had read the information
security policy and those who had not. Information & Computer Security, 24(2), 139–151. https://doi.
org/10.1108/ICS-12-2015-0048
De Swert, K. (2012). Calculating inter-coder reliability in media content analysis using Krippendorff’s alpha.
Center for Politics and Communication, 15, 1–15.
Diesch, R., Pfaff, M., & Krcmar, H. (2020). A comprehensive model of information security factors for
decision-makers. Computers & Security, 92, 101747.
Ehrenfeld, J. M. (2017). Wannacry, cybersecurity and health information technology: A time to act. Journal
of Medical Systems, 41(7), 104.
Eisenhardt, K. M., & Martin, J. A. (2000). Dynamic capabilities: What are they? Strategic Management
Journal, 21(10–11), 1105–1121.
Eugen, P., & Petru¸t, D. (2018). Exploring the new era of cybersecurity governance. Ovidius University Annals,
Economic Sciences Series, 18(1), 358–363.
Felin, T., Foss, N.J., Heimeriks, K.H. and Madsen, T.L. (2012). Microfoundations of routines and capabilities:
Individuals, processes, and structure. Journal of Management Studies, 49(8), pp. 1351–1374.
Felin, T., Foss, N. J., & Ployhart, R. E. (2015). The microfoundations movement in strategy and organization
theory. Academy of Management Annals, 9(1), 575–632.
Foss, N.J. (2011). Invited editorial: Why micro-foundations for resource-based theory are needed and what
they may look like. Journal of management, 37(5), pp. 1413–1428.
Gandhi, A. (2017). Quantitative assessment of information security awareness on informatics students in a
university. In Proceedings of the (2017) International conference on information technology (346–350).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3176653.3176728
Gavetti, G., & Levinthal, D. (2000). Looking forward and looking backward: Cognitive and experiential search.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 45(1), 113–137.
Gcaza, N., von Solms, R., Grobler, M. M., & van Vuuren, J. J. (2017). A general morphological analysis:
Delineating a cyber-security culture. Information & Computer Security, 25(3), 259–278. https://doi.org/
10.1108/ICS-12-2015-0046
Geluvaraj, B., Satwik, P. M., & Kumar, T. A. (2019). The future of cybersecurity: Major role of artiﬁcial
intelligence, machine learning, and deep learning in cyberspace. International conference on computer
networks and communication technologies (pp. 739–747). Springer.
Glaspie, H. W., & Karwowski, W. (2017). Human factors in information security culture: A literature review.
In International conference on applied human factors and ergonomics Springer, Cham (pp. 269–280).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
695
Granåsen, M., Huskaj, G., & Stefan, V. (2019). Data collection and research in CDXs: Command and con-
trol, cyber situational awareness and intelligence perspectives on cyber defense. In 24th international
command and control research and technology symposium (ICCRTS), 29–31 October. International
Command and Control Institute, Laurel, USA.
Granåsen, M., & Andersson, D. (2016). Measuring team effectiveness in cyber-defense exercises: A cross-
disciplinary case study. Cognition, Technology & Work, 18(1), 121–143.
Hadlington, L. J. (2018). Employees attitudes towards cyber security and risky online behaviours: An empirical
assessment in the United Kingdom. International Journal of Cyber Criminology, 12(1), 262–274.
Hanus, B., Windsor, J. C., & Wu, Y. (2018). Deﬁnition and multidimensionality of security awareness: Close
encounters of the second order. ACM SIGMIS Database: THe DATABASE for Advances in Information
Systems, 49, 103–133.
Haqaf, H., & Koyuncu, M. (2018). Understanding key skills for information security managers. International
Journal of Information Management, 43, 165–172.
He, W., & Zhang, Z. (2019). Enterprise cybersecurity training and awareness programs: Recommendations
for success. Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce, 29(4), 249–257.
Helfat, C. E., & Peteraf, M. A. (2015). Managerial cognitive capabilities and the microfoundations of dynamic
capabilities. Strategic Management Journal, 36(6), 831–850.
Helfat, C. E., & Martin, J. A. (2015). Dynamic managerial capabilities: Review and assessment of managerial
impact on strategic change. Journal of Management, 41(5), 1281–1312.
Holdsworth, J., & Apeh, E. (2017). An effective immersive cyber security awareness learning platform for
businesses in the hospitality sector. In 2017 IEEE 25th international requirements engineering conference
workshops (REW), IEEE (pp. 111–117).
Horenbeeck, V. M. (2017). The key to better cybersecurity: Keep employee rules simple. Retrieved October
17.2021 from https://hbr.org/2017/11/the-key-to-better-cybersecurity-keep-employee-rules-simple
Hyla, T., & Fabisiak, L. (2020). Measuring cyber security awareness within groups of medical professionals
in Poland. In Proceedings of the 53rd Hawaii international conference on system sciences.
Karjalainen, M., Siponen, M., & Sarker, S. (2020). Toward a stage theory of the development of employees’
information security behavior. Computers & Security, 101782.
Ki-Aries, D., & Faily, S. (2017). Persona-centred information security awareness. Computers & Security, 70,
663–674.
Kim, J. (2017). Cyber-security in government: Reducing the risk. Computer Fraud & Security, 2017(7), 8–11.
Khadem, N. (2021). Are Australians at a ’turning point’ on cybersecurity or still unprepared?—ABC News,
retrieved October 17, 2021 from https://www.abc.net.au/news/2021-01-11/australians-turning-point-on-
cyber-security-cyberattacks-crime/13018884
Kolevski, D., Michael, K., Abbas, R. & Freeman, M. (2021). Cloud data breach disclosures: The consumer
and their personally identiﬁable information (PII)?. In 2021 IEEE Conference on norbert wiener in the
21st century (21CW) (pp. 1–9). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/21CW48944.2021.9532579
Kovaˇcevi´c, A., & Radenkovi´c, S. D. (2020). SAWIT—Security awareness improvement tool in the workplace.
Applied Sciences, 10(9), 3065.
Knox, B. J., Lugo, R. G., & Sütterlin, S. (2019). Cognizance as a human factor in military cyber defence
education. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 52(19), 163–168.
Korpela, K. (2015). Improving cyber security awareness and training programs with data analytics. Information
Security Journal: A Global Perspective, 24(1–3), 72–77.
Kraus, L., Wechsung, I., & Möller, S. (2017). Psychological needs as motivators for security and privacy
actions on smartphones. Journal of Information Security and Applications, 34, 34–45.
Krippendorff, K. (2004). Reliability in content analysis. Human Communication Research, 30, 411–433.
Krippendorff, K. (2007). Computing Krippendorff’s alpha reliability. Departmental Papers (ASC), 43. http://
repository.upenn.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1043&context=asc_papers. Accessed March 2, 2021.
Lee, H., Kwon, E., Yoo, K., & Chai, S. (2016). An impact of information security investment on information
security incidents: A case of Korean organizations. In Proceedings of the 18th annual international
conference on electronic commerce: e-commerce in smart connected world (pp. 1–4).
Li, L., He, W., Xu, L., Ivan, A., Anwar, M., & Yuan, X. (2014). Does explicit information security policy affect
employees’ cyber security behavior? A pilot study. In 2014 Enterprise systems conference (pp. 169–173).
IEEE.
Li, L., Xu, L., He, W., Chen, Y., & Chen, H. (2016). Cyber security awareness and its impact on employee’s
behavior. International conference on research and practical issues of enterprise information systems
(pp. 103–111). Springer.
Liu, N., Nikitas, A. and Parkinson, S. (2020). Exploring expert perceptions about the cyber security and privacy
of Connected and Autonomous Vehicles: A thematic analysis approach. Transportation research part F:
trafﬁc psychology and behaviour, 75, pp.66–86.
123

696
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
Maalem Lahcen, R. A., Caulkins, B., Mohapatra, R., & Kumar, M. (2020). Review and insight on the behavioral
aspects of cybersecurity. Cybersecurity, 3, 1–18.
Martin, J. A. (2011). Dynamic managerial capabilities and the multibusiness team: The role of episodic teams
in executive leadership groups. Organization Science, 22(1), 118–140.
Martin, J. A., & Bachrach, D. G. (2018). A relational perspective of the microfoundations of dynamic man-
agerial capabilities and transactive memory systems. Industrial Marketing Management, 74, 27–38.
McCormac, A., Calic, D., Butavicius, M., Parsons, K., Zwaans, T., & Pattinson, M. (2017). A reliable measure
of information security awareness and the identiﬁcation of bias in responses. Australasian Journal of
Information Systems. https://doi.org/10.3127/ajis.v21i0.1697
Michael, K. (2008). Social and organizational aspects of information security management, IADIS e-Society,
9-12 April, Algarve, Portugal (pp. 1–8).
Morgan, N.A. (2012). Marketing and business performance. Journal of the academy of marketing science,
40(1), pp. 102–119.
Morgan, S. (2020). Cybercrime to Cost the World $10.5 Trillion Annually by 2025. Retrieved October 17,
2021 from https://cybersecurityventures.com/hackerpocalypse-cybercrime-report-2016/
Mutemwa, M., Mtsweni, J., & Zimba, L. (2018). Integrating a security operations centre with an organization’s
existing procedures, policies and information technology systems. In 2018 International conference on
intelligent and innovative computing applications (ICONIC) (pp. 1–6). IEEE.
Nam, T. (2019). Understanding the gap between perceived threats to and preparedness for cybersecurity.
Technology in Society, 58, 101122.
Nazareth, D. L., & Choi, J. (2015). A system dynamics model for information security management. Infor-
mation & Management, 52(1), 123–134.
Ofﬁce
of
Australian
Information Commissioner
(2021).
Notiﬁable
Data Breaches
Report:
Jan-
uary–June
2021.
https://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/notiﬁable-data-breaches/notiﬁable-data-breaches-
statistics/notiﬁable-data-breaches-report-january-june-2021
Palmatier, R. W., Houston, M. B., & Hulland, J. (2018). Review articles: Purpose, process, and structure.
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 46, 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-017-0563-4
Pattinson, M., Butavicius, M., Parsons, K., McCormac, A., & Calic, D. (2017). Managing information secu-
rity awareness at an Australian bank: A comparative study. Information and Computer Security, 25(2),
181–189.
Poepjes, R., & Lane, M. (2012). An information security awareness capability model (ISACM).
Poepjes, R. (2015). The development and evaluation of an information security awareness capability model:
linking ISO/IEC 27002 controls with awareness importance, capability and risk. Doctoral dissertation,
University of Southern Queensland.
Proofpoint (2021). Proofpoint’s State of the Phish Report reveals remote workers in Australia are currently
undertrained to deal with cyber threats. Accessed on 4th October 2021. https://www.proofpoint.com/au/
newsroom/press-releases/proofpoints-state-phish-report-reveals-remote-workers-australia-are
Raisch, S., Birkinshaw, J., Probst, G., & Tushman, M. L. (2009). Organizational ambidexterity: Balancing
exploitation and exploration for sustained performance. Organization Science, 20(4), 685–695.
Rawat, D. B., Doku, R. & Garuba, M. (2019). Cybersecurity in big data era: From securing big data to
data-driven security. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing.
Rabii, A., Assoul, S., Ouazzani Touhami, K., & Roudies, O. (2020). Information and cyber security maturity
models: A systematic literature review. Information and Computer Security, 28(4), 627–644. https://doi.
org/10.1108/ICS-03-2019-0039
Rothrock, R. A., Kaplan, J., & Van Der Oord, F. (2018). The board’s role in managing cybersecurity risks.
MIT Sloan Management Review, 59(2), 12–15.
Safa, N. S., & Von Solms, R. (2016). An information security knowledge sharing model in organizations.
Computers in Human Behavior, 57, 442–451.
Salvato, C. & Vassolo, R. (2017). The sources of dynamism in dynamic capabilities. Strategic Management
Journal. Special issue article, 1–25.
Schoemaker, P. J., Heaton, S., & Teece, D. (2018). Innovation, dynamic capabilities, and leadership. California
Management Review, 61(1), 15–42.
Scholl, M., Leiner, K., & Fuhrmann, F. (2017). Blind spot: Do you know the effectiveness of your information
security awareness-raising program?. In Proceedings of the 21st world multi-conference on systemics,
cybernetics and informatics WMSCI (2017) (pp. 361–366).
Schneider, B., Asprion, P. M., Androvicsova, S., & Azan, W. (2020). A Practical Guideline for Developing a
Managerial Information Security Awareness Program, AMCIS 2020 Proceedings, 18. https://aisel.aisnet.
org/amcis2020/info_security_privacy/info_security_privacy/18
Siponen, M. T. (2001a). Five dimensions of information security awareness. SIGCAS Computers & Society,
31(2), 24–29.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
697
Siponen, M. T. (2001b). Five microfoundations of information security awareness. SIGCAS Computers &
Society, 31(2), 24–29.
Siponen, M., Pahnila, S., & Mahmood, M. A. (2010). Compliance with information security policies: An
empirical investigation. Computer, 43(2), 64–71.
Siponen, M., Mahmood, M. A., & Pahnila, S. (2014). Employees’ adherence to information security policies:
An exploratory ﬁeld study. Information & Management, 51(2), 217–224.
Sirmon, D. G., & Hitt, M. A. (2009). Contingencies within dynamic managerial capabilities: Interdependent
effects of resource investment and deployment on ﬁrm performance. Strategic Management Journal,
30(13), 1375–1394.
Smith, W. K., & Tushman, M. L. (2005). Managing strategic contradictions: A top management model for
managing innovation streams. Organization Science, 16(5), 522–536.
Snyder, H. (2019). Literature review as a research methodology: An overview and guidelines. Journal of
Business Research, 104, 333–339.
Sobers, R. (2021). 98 Must-know data breach statistics for 2021, Varonics, Accessed on 5th October 2021,
https://www.varonis.com/blog/data-breach-statistics/
Taylor, P. J., Dargahi, T., Dehghantanha, A., Parizi, R. M., & Choo, K. K. R. (2020). A systematic literature
review of blockchain cyber security. Digital Communications and Networks, 6(2), 147–156.
Teece, D. J., Pisano, G., & Shuen, A. (1997). Dynamic capabilities and strategic management. Strategic
Management Journal, 18(7), 509–533.
Teece, D.J. (2007). Explicating dynamic capabilities: the nature and microfoundations of (sustainable) enter-
prise performance. Strategic management journal, 28(13), pp. 1319–1350. 4–11.
Teece, D. J. (2009). Dynamic capabilities and strategic management: Organizing for innovation and growth:
Organizing for innovation and growth. Oxford University Press.
Tranﬁeld, D., Denyer, D., & Smart, P. (2003). Towards a methodology for developing evidence-informed
management knowledge by means of systematic review. British Journal of Management, 14, 207–222.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8551.00375
Thuraisingham, B. (2019). Cyber security and data governance roles and responsibilities at the C-level
and the board. In 2019 IEEE international conference on intelligence and security informatics (ISI)
(pp. 231–236). IEEE
Trim, P. R., & Lee, Y. I. (2019). The role of B2B marketers in increasing cyber security awareness and
inﬂuencing behavioral change. Industrial Marketing Management, 83, 224–238.
Tschakert, K. F., & Ngamsuriyaroj, S. (2019). Effectiveness of and user preferences for security awareness
training methodologies. Heliyon, 5(6), e02010.
Venter, I. M., Blignaut, R. J., Renaud, K., & Venter, M. A. (2019). Cyber security education is as essential as
“the three R’s.” Heliyon, 5(12), e02855.
van Bavel, R., Rodríguez-Priego, N., Vila, J., & Briggs, P. (2019). Using protection motivation theory in the
design of nudges to improve online security behavior. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies,
123, 29–39.
Wahyudiwan, D. D. H., Sucahyo, Y. G. & Gandhi, A. (2017). Information security awareness level measure-
ment for employee: Case study at ministry of research, technology, and higher education. In 2017 3rd
international conference on science in information technology (ICSITech) (pp. 654–658). IEEE.
Widianto, S., Lestari, Y. D., Adna, B. E., Sukoco, B. M., & Nasih, M. (2021). Dynamic managerial capabilities,
organizational capacity for change and organizational performance: The moderating effect of attitude
towards change in a public service organization. Journal of Organizational Effectiveness: People and
Performance, 8(1), 149–172. https://doi.org/10.1108/JOEPP-02-2020-0028
Williams, P. A., & Woodward, A. J. (2015). Cybersecurity vulnerabilities in medical devices: A complex
environment and multifaceted problem. Medical Devices (auckland, NZ), 8, 305.
Yang, L., Li, J., Elisa, N., Prickett, T., & Chao, F. (2019). Towards big data governance in cybersecurity.
Data-Enabled Discovery and Applications, 3(1), 1–12.
Yew, S., Gan, T., Leong, K., Houw, T. & Lim, D.(2015). Cybersecurity: The changing role of audit committee
and internal audit. Retreived October 17, 2021 from https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/
sg/Documents/risk/sea-risk-cyber-security-changing-role-in-audit-noexp.pdf
You, Y., Oh, J., Kim, S., & Lee, K. (2018). Advanced approach to information security management sys-
tem utilizing maturity models in critical infrastructure. KSII Transactions on Internet and Information
Systems, 12(10), 4995–5014.
Zhang, Z. J., He, W., Li, W., & Abdous, M. H. (2021). Cybersecurity awareness training programs: A cost-
beneﬁt analysis framework. Industrial Management & Data Systems. 2021 Jan 29.
Zhou, G., Gou, M., Gan, Y., & Schwarzer, R. (2020a). Risk awareness, self-efﬁcacy, and social support predict
secure smartphone usage. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 1066.
123

698
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:673–698
Zollo, M., & Winter, S. G. (2002). Deliberate learning and the evolution of dynamic capabilities. Organization
Science, 3(3), 339–351.
Zwilling, M., Klien, G., Lesjak, D., Wiechetek, Ł., Cetin, F., & Basim, H. N. (2020). Cyber security awareness,
knowledge and behavior: A comparative study. Journal of Computer Information Systems, 1–16.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123