TITLE: Debt sustainability analysis with conventional and unconventional monetary policy
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06723-4
---

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Received: 4 January 2025 / Accepted: 13 June 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
This paper is scheduled to appear in a special issue of the Annals of Operations Research in honor of 
Professor John Mulvey of Princeton University for his many and lasting contributions to the field of 
operations research and especially to optimization methods and modeling applications to business and 
government settings. We have learned a lot over the years from his work but also through numerous deeply 
insightful discussions as his students and collaborators. This is an updated and expanded version of a paper 
first posted as a BIS Working Paper, No. 1034, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, Switzerland, July 
2022.
This paper was prepared while E. Alberola and G. Cheng were both affiliated with the Bank for 
International Settlements (BIS). The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect 
those of the BIS.
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
Debt sustainability analysis with conventional and 
unconventional monetary policy
Enrique Alberola1 · Gong Cheng2 · Andrea Consiglio3
 · Stavros A. Zenios4,5,6
Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06723-4
Abstract
We embed a macro-monetary model into stochastic debt sustainability analysis with opti­
mal debt financing maturities and endogenous risk premia responding to central bank asset 
purchases. We model the impact on debt dynamics of unconventional monetary policies 
through asset purchases, of the conventional monetary policy rate response to inflation 
shocks, and their interaction. We apply the model to comprehensively assess the European 
Central Bank’s pandemic emergency purchase program (PEPP). We find that the pro­
gram’s positive effect on debt sustainability persists beyond the end of the program, with 
the program termination putting upward pressure on spreads but debt remaining below 
the pre-pandemic levels; inflation surprises can have an indirect unfavorable impact if the 
inflation shock prompts earlier program termination; the program induces a lengthening of 
maturities, with the optimal debt financing response closely matching the empirically ob­
served lengthening of maturities in the eurozone. These findings uncover a novel channel 
of fiscal-monetary interaction through unconventional monetary policy effects on public 
debt in bad times. A retrospective analysis of the Bank of Japan’s quantitative and qualita­
tive easing demonstrates the model’s generality and obtains results aligned with the PEPP.
Keywords  Debt sustainability analysis · Unconventional monetary policy · Optimal debt 
financing · PEPP · QQE
JEL Classification  E52 · F34 · G15 · H62 · H63 · H68
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
1  Introduction
The sovereign debt-monetary policy nexus has been increasingly important since the Great 
Financial Crisis when central banks in advanced economies implemented large asset pur­
chase programs. The European Central Bank (ECB) holdings of eurozone government debt 
surged from about 2% in 2010 to more than 20% by the end of 2020, the Fed increased 
its federal debt holdings from 8 to 18%, and the Bank of Japan (BoJ) increased its shares 
of Japanese government debt from 9 to 44%.1 The COVID-19 crisis reinforced this nexus 
(BIS, 2020). We uncover a novel channel of fiscal-monetary interaction through unconven­
tional monetary policy effects on public debt in bad times.
We embed a macro-monetary model into stochastic debt sustainability analysis (DSA). 
Following Zenios et al. (2021), we consider optimal debt financing maturities with endog­
enous risk premia and add an innovation of modelling the premia response to central bank 
asset purchases. Thus, we study the debt effects of monetary policies through unconven­
tional asset purchases, through conventional monetary policy responses to inflation shocks, 
and their interactions. We apply the model to comprehensively assess the ECB pandemic 
emergency purchase program. We also use it retrospectively on the BoJ quantitative and 
qualitative easing and find that it tracks remarkably well the ex post realized Japanese sover­
eign debt,2. We also study how optimal debt financing strategies respond to monetary policy 
shocks and find that the model-recommended maturities align with the observed behaviour 
of eurozone public debt management offices during the public securities purchase program 
(Plessen-Mátyás et al., 2021).
Debt sustainability analysis uses projected output growth, fiscal balance, and debt 
financing interest rates as the determinants of debt dynamics. Examples of large-scale high-
realism DSA models are those developed and used by the international institutions, i.e., 
the European Central Bank (Bouabdallah et al., 2017), European Commission (European 
Commission, 2020), International Monetary Fund (IMF, 2022), and the European Stability 
Mechanism (Zenios et al., 2021).3 The new fiscal rules by the European Commission (2024) 
also require DSA for the EU member states to develop sustainable fiscal-structural plans. 
These models view monetary policy and inflation as neutral in the long run. We advance 
DSA by introducing a New Keynesian macro-monetary module with IS and Phillips curves 
determining the output gap and inflation dynamics and a Taylor (1993) rule determining the 
conventional monetary policy rate. This is the first channel. Importantly, we also model a 
channel working through quantitative easing (QE) spread suppression due to the transfer of 
public debt to the central bank balance sheet, reducing risk premia across the yield curve. 
Quantitative tightening (QT) works in the opposite direction, and we use the model to assess 
the impact of both purchases and unwinding of the central bank balance sheet.
Consiglio and Zenios (2017) suggested stochastic debt sustainability analysis using sce­
nario analysis with a tail risk measure of the debt dynamics, and Blanchard (2022) advo­
1 Data from the updated IMF database linked to Arslanalp and Tsuda (2014).
2 The ECB program was launched in March 2020, (European Central Bank, 2025) and the BoJ program in 
April 2013, (Bank of Japan, 2025).
3 These models draw from an extensive academic literature of stylized models, see, among others, Arellano 
and Ramanarayanan (2012), Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012), Hatchondo and Martinez (2009), Bocola and 
Dovis (2019), Cole and Kehoe (2000), Conesa and Kehoe (2017), Barro (2003), Angeletos (2002), Bianchi 
et al. (2018), Niepelt (2014), Missale (2012). For an application to the Chinese economy where local gov­
ernments are debt issuers and debt limits are optimally allocated, see He and Zhang (2025).
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
cates the use of stochastic debt sustainability analysis by the institutions. Following Zenios 
et al. (2021), we model uncertainty in inflation, output gap, economic growth, and fiscal 
balance, using a discrete-time and state-space scenario tree of correlated zero-mean devia­
tions of these variables from the steady-state. The tree is calibrated to match steady-state 
expectations from forecasts and the historically observed volatilities and correlations. The 
Taylor rule policy rate is conditioned on the inflation and output gap states. Debt stock and 
flow variables (Dias et al., 2014; Irwin, 2015) are also state-dependent as ratios to economic 
output.
We use the stock and flow dynamics to model the problem of a public debt management 
office (PDMO) with sustainability constraints. Specifically, we optimize the maturity of 
debt financing instruments to trade off financing cost with refinancing tail risk, measured 
using the Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR) of Artzner et al. (1999).4 We impose sustain­
ability conditions on both debt stock and flow. If flow (gross financing needs) exceeds a 
threshold that markets can finance, the sovereign can face a liquidity crisis. If debt stock 
keeps increasing, the sovereign can hit the budget constraint and face a solvency crisis. We 
consider debt sustainable when the flow threshold is respected and the debt stock is on a 
non-increasing trajectory in the long run with a high probability.5
We allow for granular maturities to study the effect of monetary policies on optimal 
debt financing. The risk measure and granular debt financing optimization make our model 
unique among the high-realism models of international institutions. Among stylized models, 
single-period ones consider binary long-short maturity structures (Conesa & Kehoe, 2017; 
Arellano & Ramanarayanan, 2012), whereas multi-period ones assume analytically trac­
table debt structures, such as consols with decaying coupons (Hatchondo & Martinez, 2009; 
Bocola & Dovis, 2019; Angeletos, 2002). The stochastic debt sustainability analysis model 
with conventional and unconventional monetary policy is our methodological contribution.
We calibrate the model on the ECB pandemic emergency purchase program (PEPP) and 
comprehensively assess this program. We document the PEPP effect on the debt sustain­
ability of high-debt eurozone sovereigns, evaluate its potential persistence past the program 
termination, and study the impact of central bank reaction to an inflation surprise. We show 
how the PEPP affects optimal debt financing and explain the lengthening of debt maturities 
by eurozone PDMOs documented by Plessen-Mátyás et al. (2021). We also apply the model 
retrospectively to the Japanese quantitative and qualitative easing (QQE) to evaluate its 
effect on the country’s debt dynamics over the ten years since its 2013 launch. This applica­
tion illustrates the model’s generality and validates the accuracy of our calibration out-of-
sample. The findings corroborate the main results from the PEPP assessment.
The PEPP was launched in March 2020 to inject liquidity into the financial system, with 
its size reaching €1850 billion by December 2020. At its peak, it financed all of the Neth­
erlands’ borrowing needs, about 1.5 times that of Greece, over half of thirteen countries, 
4 The model aligns with the US Treasury PDMO goal is to finance government borrowing at the lowest cost 
against acceptable risks and similarly-worded objectives for the Dutch and Italian Treasuries. See U.S. 
Department of the Treasury (2025), Dutch State Treasury Agency (2018), Italian Ministry of Economy and 
Finance (2017).
5 For debt stock, we set a high confidence level of 0.75 non-increasing trajectories. For the risk horizon, 
Blanchard (2022) suggests ten years, IMF (2022) goes from five to ten, and the EU’s fiscal rules use four 
to seven (European Commission, 2024) In our tests, we consider a horizon of thirty years, covering all 
maturities of existing debt. The flow threshold is about 15% of GDP for emerging and 20% for developed 
economies (Bouabdallah et al., 2017, p. 29).
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
including Germany (Beckmann et al., 2020; Hondroyiannis & Papaoikonomou, 2021). It 
lowered sovereign financing costs, as shown in eurozone countries’ 10-year bond spreads 
relative to the Bund; see Fig. 1, panel A. Spreads spiked after the pandemic, raising debt 
sustainability concerns in fiscally vulnerable countries but dropped below pre-pandemic 
levels with program implementation and increased with speculation about its termination in 
November 2021. In panel B, we display the changes in average sovereign spreads and the 
increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio for high-debt countries (Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain). 
The cumulative spread changes (light blue) are significantly lower than the counterfactual 
(dark blue) that would have resulted from the rise in debt levels (line).6 The spread compres­
sion is significant, averaging 100 basis points.
We calibrate spread suppression as a function of asset purchases and embed this function 
into the DSA model to assess the effect of PEPP and its potential unwinding on high-debt 
countries, and find as follows: 
1. The PEPP substantially improves debt dynamics, with its effects persisting well beyond 
the end of the program. Without the PEPP, the debt level would be unsustainable. A 
persistent primary balance of 1.3% of GDP per annum (p.a.) over eighteen years would 
be required to stabilize debt dynamics at the end of the simulation horizon. In contrast, 
with the PEPP, public debt is sustainable, returning below pre-pandemic levels by 2030.
2. Unwinding the central bank balance sheet as its debt holdings mature (passive quantita­
tive tightening) puts upward pressure on spreads, which is more intense the earlier the 
QT.
3. The effect of an inflation surprise on debt dynamics is modest, in line with Hilscher et 
al. (2021), depending on the monetary policy reaction. If the central bank views the 
shock as transitory and sees through it, debt dynamics slightly improve. If monetary 
policy tightens following a persistent inflation shock, debt dynamics worsen slightly. 
An indirect unfavorable impact would arise if the inflation shock prompts earlier PEPP 
unwinding.
4. PEPP induces a lengthening of maturities, reducing refinancing risks without increas­
ing financing costs; this explains the findings of Plessen-Mátyás et al. (2021) for the 
eurozone.
6 The counterfactual is estimated from a panel regression of spreads on debt levels; see Sect. 3.3.1.
Launch 20/03
1st extension 04/06
2nd extension 10/12
ECB meeting 27/10
0
100
200
300
400
2020−01
2020−07
2021−01
2021−07
2022−01
Spread (bp)
Finland
France
Greece
Italy
Netherlands
Portugal
Spain
−20
0
20
40
60
80
100
126%
130%
134%
138%
142%
146%
150%
2020q1
2020q2
2020q3
2020q4
2021q1
2021q2
2021q3
2021q4
Cumulative spread change (bp)
Debt−to−GDP (right axis)
Actual
Counterfactual
Fig. 1  The ECB pandemic emergency purchase programme
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
1.1  Related literature
Our study relates to the extensive literature on sustainable sovereign debt (see footnote 3). 
We follow Zenios et al. (2021) where the fiscal agent actively manages debt financing to 
minimize interest payments subject to sustainability constraints. This reference and the pre­
ceding works look for sovereign debt financing in the context of debt crises. Instead, we ask 
the question of sustainable debt financing in the context of active monetary policymaking 
and contribute a model with the two channels of conventional and unconventional monetary 
policies.
The blossoming literature on monetary-fiscal interactions inspires the introduction of 
monetary policymaking in DSA. Zampolli (2012) is among the first to look at the role of 
sovereign debt management as a monetary policy tool in the aftermath of the Great Finan­
cial Crisis. Arslan et al. (2020) analyze empirically the impact of central bank bond pur­
chases on government financing during the pandemic. Debrun et al. (2021) revisit the policy 
mix in the eurozone during the pandemic, focusing on the ramifications for price stability. 
Hofmann et al. (2021) present a macro model to explore the implications on fiscal sustain­
ability of monetary policy at the zero lower bound. These papers look at the monetary-fiscal 
nexus from the monetary perspective, whereas we examine the monetary policy effects to 
debt sustainability. We rely on these works to parametrize our conventional monetary policy 
module. To this literature, we contribute a novel assessment of the PEPP. We also add to the 
work of Kawamoto et al. (2021) on the QQE effects on Japanese government bond yields 
by showing that QQE rendered the country’s debt sustainable, and show that the lengthen­
ing maturities documented by Plessen-Mátyás et al. (2021) following the public securities 
purchase program is a Pareto improvement.
We also contribute to the extensive literature on the inflation effects on debt in response 
to the concerns about increasing inflation following the pandemic. Forward-looking analy­
sis by Hilscher et al. (2021) concludes that the US debt can only marginally be inflated 
away due to its relatively short maturity and because inflation shocks are expected to be 
short-lived. Our model captures the interaction between inflation and conventional mone­
tary response to inflation shocks on debt. Under a short-lived inflation shock, our model cor­
roborates their finding for the eurozone high-debt countries and goes further to incorporate 
unconventional monetary policymaking. Still, our model can also cater to longer maturity 
debt and long-lived inflation shocks.
Our paper complements Spronses and Beetsma (2022), who document that central bank 
purchases reduce sovereign debt servicing costs through effects on the auction cycle. We 
find, consistently with them, a compression of spreads for high-debt countries. In related 
work, Lengyel and Giuliodori (2022) look at the demand shock effects on sovereign debt 
spreads from central bank asset purchases and, like us, find significant differential effects 
between high-debt and low-debt countries. We go beyond these works to assess the effects 
of debt sustainability in the long run and the reverse effect of unwinding asset purchases.
The paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 presents the stochastic DSA model enriched 
with conventional and unconventional monetary policymaking. Section  3 calibrates the 
model to a representative eurozone high-debt country and estimates the impact of PEPP on 
spreads. Section 4 provides the comprehensive assessment of the PEPP and central bank 
responses to an inflation surprise. It also reports on Japan’s QQE retrospective exercise. 
In Sect. 5, we look at the effect of PEPP on debt financing maturities. Section 6 concludes.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
2  A model of debt sustainability analysis with monetary policy
We first describe debt dynamics, introduce the scenario tree of stochastic macroeconomic, 
fiscal, and interest rates that drive debt dynamics, define the risk measure, and develop the 
model for optimal debt financing maturities with sustainability constraints following Zenios 
et al. (2021). We then introduce our novelty of a macroeconomic framework with monetary 
policy uncertainty.
2.1  Debt dynamics and optimal public debt management
2.1.1  Debt dynamics
We consider a sovereign that at period t is endowed with nominal output Yt, owes debt stock 
Dt−1, and runs a primary balance PBt, with the legacy debt D0 as an initial condition. The 
sovereign’s gross financing needs are given by the flow variable GFN t as follows:
 
GFN t = it−1Dt−1 + At −PBt,
(1)
where it−1 is the effective nominal interest rate on debt, and At denotes the part of debt 
stock Dt−1 which comes due. The debt stock is given by
 
Dt = (1 + it−1)Dt−1 −PBt.
(2)
The sovereign finances its needs by issuing debt instruments of different maturities, denoted 
by j = 1, 2, . . . , J, with financing decisions Xt(j) denoting the nominal amount of debt 
issued at t. The debt financing equation satisfies
 
J
∑
j=1
Xt(j) = GFN t.
(3)
The nominal interest rate on the issued debt is determined by the risk-free policy rate (ift) 
plus premia idiosyncratic to the sovereign, which depend especially on the debt level (Pae­
sani et al., 2006; Bassanetti et al., 2018). A significant feedback loop for high-debt countries 
links sovereign debt with the level and slope of the yield curve. We model this feedback 
using risk and term premia as a function of the debt-to-GDP ratio, dt = Dt/Yt, and of the 
maturity of the issued instrument. The interest rate for instrument j issued at t is given by
 
rt(j) = ift + ρ(dt, j),
(4)
where ρ(d, j) captures risk premium and term premia for the jth instrument maturity.
The effective interest rate in (2) is a function of the debt financing decisions
 
it =
it−1(Dt−1 −At) + ∑J
j=1 rt(j)Xt(j)
Dt
.
(5)
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
The financing decisions determine debt dynamics, setting risk and term premia, and ulti­
mately influencing financing decisions. Stock and flow are linked through both quantities 
and prices.
2.1.2  Scenario trees and a risk measure
The debt variables are uncertain. Without a monetary policy module, these variables are 
the nominal economic output growth rate, primary balance, and debt financing rates, and 
are represented by a discrete-time and state-space scenario tree; see Fig. 2, panel A. Time 
is indexed by t = 0, 1, 2, . . . T, where T is our risk horizon, and n ∈Nt denotes the state 
at t. The number of states at t is Nt, with a total number of states N. Not all states at t can 
Time
Debt−to−GDP ratio
Fig. 2  Modeling uncertain debt dynamics on a scenario tree
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
be reached from every state at t −1, and P(n) denotes the set of states on the unique path 
from the root state 0 to n. Each path leading to a terminal state n ∈NT is a scenario, with 
probability Prob(n). For each state n, all information at states m ∈P(n) is known since m 
precedes n. Problem data and model variables are state-dependent, indexed by n.
We build the scenario tree using the moment matching method of Consiglio et al. (2016). 
Specifically, the mean values of the state variables match the expected values of forward-
looking projections, such as growth and fiscal stance projections from the IMF World Eco­
nomic Outlook or the term structure of interest rates for highly-rated government bonds. 
With the monetary module, the forward-looking projections for inflation and the output gap 
are the steady-state solutions of the IS and Phillips curve equations. The policy rate is state-
contingent and obtained using a Taylor rule on inflation and output gap. The volatilities of 
the state variables, including correlations, are matched to estimates obtained from historical 
time series.
On a calibrated tree, the dynamics of the debt flow (1) and stock (2) are conditional on 
the values of the variables at each state. The distributions of flow and stock dynamics inform 
us about debt sustainability. We can assess, with a given probability, if refinancing needs are 
likely to remain low or if the debt ratio is on a non-increasing trajectory. Panel B illustrates 
an example of debt-to-GDP ratio distributions across time. We observe a shift of the debt 
distribution towards lower values, with increasing variability for longer horizons. The 0.75 
quantiles are declining, and we infer with high confidence that debt is sustainable.
Following Zenios et al. (2021) we use the CVaR of the ratio of gross financing needs 
to GDP—defined as the expected value of financing needs above the right α quantile, 
i.e., the expected value of the right tail of the flow distribution—to constrain the tail 
risk of gross financing needs at a confidence level α. Let gfn denote the gross financing 
needs stochastic variable over all periods, and define the CVaR risk function for flow by 
Ψ(gfn) .= E (gfn | gfn ≥gfn⋄) . gfn⋄ is the Value-at-Risk. It is the right α-percentile 
of the gross financing needs, i.e., the lowest value of gfn such that the probability of gross 
financing needs less or equal to gfn⋄ is greater or equal to α. Ψ(gfn) measures refinancing 
risk.
2.1.3  Optimal debt management with sustainability constraints
We determine optimal debt financing decisions to minimize the expected interest payment 
(IP) on the tree subject to acceptable levels of refinancing risk, in line with typical PDMO 
mandates (see footnote 1).
Interest payments on state n of the tree consist of interest on legacy debt In
t plus service 
payments on debt created by the financing decisions. We exploit the tree structure to calcu­
late the service payments on a path leading to n. Let CF n
t (j, m) denote the nominal amount 
of interest payment due at state n of period t, per unit of debt Xm
τ(m)(j) issued at state m of 
an earlier period τ(m) on path P(n). This amount is computed from scenarios of the term 
structure of interest rates, the term of the issued debt, and the premia Eq. (4). The state-
dependent interest payment is given by
 
IPn
t = In
t +
∑
m∈P(n)
J
∑
j=1
Xm
τ(m)(j)CF n
t (j, m).
(6)
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Interest payments are what the PDMO controls through the financing decisions X.
The model minimizes the expected cost of debt subject to a flow risk constraint:
 
Minimize
X
∑
n∈Nt,
t=0,1,2,...T.
Prob(n) IPn
t 
(7)
 
s.t.
Ψ(gfn) ≤ω.
(8)
This parametric model trades off debt financing cost and debt refinancing risk bounded in 
(8) by a parameter ω. If ω is below some threshold that the markets can finance, then we can 
ascertain, with high confidence (e.g., 0.75), that debt financing needs can be met. Varying 
ω, we trace a cost-risk efficient frontier ranging from a minimum-risk/maximum-cost to a 
minimum-cost/maximum-risk strategy and intermediate points in between.
Lower refinancing risk, typically through the issuance of long-maturity debt, increases 
the cost of debt financing, and the dynamics of debt-to-GDP ratio shift upwards. The tension 
between stock and flow is controlled through the constraint
 
∂d
∂t ≤δ.
(9)
If debt stock follows a non-increasing trajectory over a 10-year horizon with a high prob­
ability, then debt is sustainable. Hence, we seek solutions with δ ≤0 with a high probabili­
ty.7 Since d is a random variable with scenario values dn
t , this constraint is also implemented 
using the risk measure (Zenios et al., 2021, Online Appendix A.2).
We define debt sustainability in probabilistic terms, following recent advances in sto­
chastic debt sustainability analysis Blanchard (2022), Zenios et al. (2021). Specifically, we 
adopt a twofold criterion:
First, flow sustainability requires that gross financing needs as a share of GDP remain 
below a critical threshold with high probability. We use the CVaR of the GFN ratio to be 
constrained below a 20% threshold for advanced economies, following (Bouabdallah et al., 
2017, p. 29).
Second, stock sustainability requires that the debt-to-GDP ratio follows a non-increasing 
trajectory over a 10-year horizon with at least 75% probability. This criterion reflects the 
notion that debt should not persistently rise for most of the plausible scenarios. The 75% 
confidence level is realistic for policy relevance, see, e.g. European Commission (2024).
The 10-year risk horizon aligns with EU and IMF practices. Although our simulations 
extend to thirty years to capture the entire maturity structure, we evaluate sustainability 
primarily over the 10-year window relevant to fiscal planning and the target horizon of 
the PEPP program. Our results remain qualitatively robust to alternative definitions (e.g., 
stricter probability thresholds or declining debt paths, or time horizons). These would shift 
the cost-risk frontier but do not alter the policy conclusions.
What would happen if a solution with stable debt is not possible? We need additional 
fiscal effort to stabilize or reduce debt to a desired level. A model extension (Zenios et al., 
7 For low-debt countries, we may allow positive δ for as long the long-run debt stock is non-increasing.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
2021, section 6) optimizes the timing and magnitude of stabilizing fiscal effort that renders 
debt stock dynamics sustainable with high probability. Whether the resulting fiscal effort is 
politically tenable or excessively ambitious is not for the model to say, but Eichengreen and 
Panizza (2016) provide empirical guidance. We use this model feature in our tests to obtain 
a quantifiable measure of the impact of different monetary policies on debt sustainability.
2.2  Macroeconomic framework and monetary policymaking
We now describe the macroeconomic framework to introduce monetary policymaking using 
the three equations of the New Keynesian model (IS, Phillips curve, and Taylor rule).
2.2.1  Macroeconomic framework
Inflation (πt) is driven by the Phillips (1962) curve augmented with inflation expectations
 
πt = βππt−1 + (1 −βπ)Eπt+1 + γˆyt + ϵπ,t,
(10)
where Etπt+1 is the expectation at time t of inflation at t + 1, ˆyt is the output gap, βπ and γ 
are parameters, with βπ denoting persistence, and ϵπ,t is a centred error term.
For the output gap (ˆyt) we use the IS curve
 
ˆyt = δˆyˆyt−1 + (1 −δˆy)Eˆyt+1 −αˆy(ift −r∗) + ϵˆy,t,
(11)
where the gap depends on the expectation Eˆyt+1 and the difference of the policy interest 
rates ift from the natural rate r∗. αˆy and δˆy are parameters, with the latter denoting persis­
tence, and ϵˆy,t is a centred error term.8
Solving (10)–(11), we obtain equilibrium inflation and the output gap. The policy interest 
rate, conditional on inflation and the output gap, follows a Taylor (1993) rule
 
ift = θ ift−1 + (1 −θ)[πt−1 + r∗
t + απ(πt−1 −π∗
t )] + αiˆyt−1 + ϵt,
(12)
where aπ, ay are parameters, θ denotes persistence, and ϵt is a centred error term.
DSA works with nominal economic output since debt is in nominal value, and in intro­
ducing monetary policy, we have Yt = Yt−1(1 + gt) where gt = g∗
t + πt, and g∗
t is the real 
GDP growth.
2.2.2  Risk and term premia
The interest rate for debt financing includes credit risk premia (Eq. 4) on top of the policy 
rate (Eq. 12) that are idiosyncratic to each sovereign. Central bank purchases of sovereign 
securities suppress spreads, and we account for both conventional and unconventional poli­
cies by modeling the spread over the risk-free rate ift without and with PEPP.
8 We 
could 
also 
take 
into 
account 
the 
full 
term 
structure 
including 
risk 
premia 
ˆyt = δy
ˆ
yt−1 + (1 −δy)E ˆ
yt+1 −αy( 1
J
∑
j rt(j) −r∗). To limit the number of state variables in the 
stochastic DSA model, we approximate the average of the term structure by the baseline interest rate in (11).
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
We rewrite the spread of (4) as a function of the debt level of the ith country di,t, the 
net asset purchase pi,t, and the maturity of the issued debt j determining the term premium, 
ρ(di,t, pi,t, j). Spread is the product of a function of the debt in the market ρC(dit −pi,t, j) 
times [1 − spread suppression ρUi(pi,t)]. The spread suppression function ρUi(·) takes the 
value zero before the PEPP is launched and increases as the central bank purchases public 
debt; we assume the spread suppression to be uniform across maturities. We have
 
ρ(di,t, pi,t, j) =ρC(di,t −pi,t, j) × (1 −ρUi(pi,t))
ρUi(pi,t) ∈[0, 1].

(13)
The risk premia ρC(·) are a function of the total debt in the market. In the case of central 
bank asset purchases, the marketable debt is less than the total sovereign debt, and uncon­
ventional monetary policy enters DSA through its impact on credit risk premia ρUi(·) with 
a known timing and amounts of assets purchased, pi,t.
2.2.3  Premia under conventional monetary policy
The debt refinancing rates under the conventional monetary policy are obtained from (4) 
and (13) with ρUi(pi,t) = 0. Following Zenios et al. (2021) we express the spread as
 
ρC(d, j) = aj + (1 + bj)ˆρC(d),
(14)
where aj and bj are term premia, and ˆρC(d) is the effect on interest rates (risk premium) of 
the debt stock in the market
 
ˆρC(d) .= ˆρ
[
dmax −d
1 + exp (dmax −d) −
dmin −d
1 + exp (dmin −d)
]
.
(15)
Equation (15) is a smooth sigmoid approximation of a piece-wise linear function, with 
lower bound zero for debt-to-GDP ratio up to dmin and increasing linearly for higher debt 
until it hits a ceiling at dmax when the sovereign loses market access and is financed from 
multilateral institutions.
2.2.4  Premia under unconventional monetary policy
The spread suppression function ρUi(pi,t) is diminishing with central bank purchases, reach­
ing a maximum value when purchases exceed p. For each country i, we estimate the relation
 
ρUi(pi,t) =
{
β0i + β1ipi,t + β2ip2
i,t
0 ≤pi,t ≤pi
ρ
pt > pi.

(16)
We assume that the spread suppression is symmetric when the ECB purchases assets as 
when it reduces its balance sheet. Reverting from an unconventional to a conventional 
regime requires specifying the timing and speed of unwinding purchases.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
2.3  Model summary and debt interaction with economic activity
The model considers exogenous stochastic inflation, output gap, and real economic output, 
and primary balance is an exogenously given fraction of GDP. This allows us to examine 
the effects of inflation shocks and monetary policy interventions on debt stock and flow 
dynamics obtained endogenously with optimal debt financing maturities that trade-off debt 
financing costs with refinancing risk. There is feedback from debt stock to risk premia that 
increases the cost of debt financing, facilitating the study of PDMO responses to monetary 
policy. Exogenously determined asset purchases by the central bank suppress the risk pre­
mia to document the debt effects of unconventional monetary policies.
The model takes the pure public finance view, which is accurate if monetary policy and 
the fiscal stance maintain output at the potential (Blanchard et al., 2021). Hence, it abstracts 
from a fiscal policy reaction function from the government sector to the macroeconomy 
since, with fiscal feedback, it is intractable to optimize the debt financing decisions endog­
enously. The relation between fiscal spending and the macroeconomy is captured through 
the correlation between primary balance and the macro variables in the scenario trees.9 A 
retrospective application of the model to Japan matches the 2013–2023 debt dynamics (see 
subsection, Fig. 8, Panel B), suggesting the validity of the pure public finance view in our 
context.
The direction of change with a fiscal reaction function points towards higher debt than 
what we estimate. If governments were to implement very large fiscal surpluses—higher 
than the exogenously specified fraction of GDP—to keep debt on a sustainable track, this 
would have had contractionary effects undermining the efforts to stabilize debt. Likewise, 
any direct feedback of high debt levels lowering output, as predicted, e.g., by Arellano 
(2008), also undermines debt stabilizing. Working with best-case debt estimates without 
feedback dampens the positive impact of the asset purchase programs on debt dynamics; see 
Sect. 4.1.2. Our findings would be stronger if direct feedback was included.
3  Calibration for the European Central Bank’s PEPP
We calibrate the model in 2021 for a representative eurozone high-debt country over the 
next thirty years and estimate the spread suppression function for PEPP.
3.1  Data
We construct a representative country by averaging the sovereign debt of Italy, Portugal, and 
Spain; see Appendix A.1. The starting debt ratio is 135% GDP with a risk premium of about 
250bp. For reference, the pre-pandemic debt ratio was about 115%. For primary balance, we 
9 Similar simplification is also found in Ghosh et al. (2013) to avoid “complicat[ing] the theoretical analysis 
(because of the potential linear effect of the feedback between debt, interest rates, and growth in the model’s 
equilibrium)” but, as the authors point out “the empirical evidence on the relationship between debt/sover­
eign borrowing costs and long-run growth is mixed at best".
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
average the 2021 IMF World Economic Outlook projections, starting at − 5% in 2020 and 
converging to 0.05% from 2025 onwards.10
We obtain eurozone equilibrium values for macroeconomic variables using the param­
eters for the Phillips curve, IS curve, and Taylor rule from existing literature (Hofmann et 
al., 2021), with r∗ set to zero; see Appendix A.2. The eurozone output gap starts at − 3.1%. 
It converges to 0% by 2030, with inflation starting at 1.8% and converging to 2% by 2027.11 
The eurozone GDP growth, starts at 5.0% in 2021 and converges to 1.4% by 2026.
We estimate the volatilities and correlations of inflation, output gap, real GDP growth, 
and primary balance from the IMF World Economic Outlook historical yearly data over the 
last twenty years; see Appendix A.3.
3.2  Scenario tree, risk, and term premia
The tree has four state variables: inflation, output gap, real GDP growth, and primary bal­
ance. We calibrate the tree using moment matching (Consiglio et al., 2016). The mean value 
of growth and primary balance match the forward-looking projections from the data sec­
tion. The mean values of inflation and output gap variables match the steady state solution 
of (10)–(11). Volatilities and correlations of all state variables match the values estimated 
in the data section. The policy rate is determined by the Taylor rule (12) conditional on the 
inflation and output gap states. In Appendix A.4 (panels A–D), we display the fan charts 
from the calibrated tree and the corresponding fan chart for the policy rates from the Taylor 
rule.
Risk and term premia are added to this rate according to (13). Under conventional mon­
etary policy, we apply Eqs. (14)–(15) calibrated to panel data. We estimate the effects of 
debt stock on the benchmark 10-year sovereign bond spreads over the German Bund ˆρC(d) 
from a panel regression on twenty-three EU countries over the period 2015Q1–2020Q1 
to obtain the coefficient ˆρ of (15). We start the calibration from 2015Q1 to minimize any 
effects from the euro debt crisis and end before PEPP is launched. We obtain an estimate 
ˆρ = 3.2, i.e., each percentage point of debt to GDP adds 3.2 basis points to the spreads.12 
The term premia are estimated relative to the benchmark rate, with yields increasing rela­
tive to the benchmark for longer maturities and decreasing for shorter ones. Appendix A.5 
reports the calibrated premia.
We estimate next the risk premium suppression under unconventional policies using (16).
3.3  PEPP effects on spreads
We calibrate the unconventional monetary policy effects on spreads in two steps. We com­
pute first the counterfactual against which we estimate the effects of PEPP on spreads by 
calibrating, in a second step, a PEPP-induced spread suppression function of cumulative 
ECB holdings of sovereign debt.
10 We use an equal-weighted average to construct a representative high-debt country without excessive weight 
to the larger economy. Our findings are robust to using other, specific, high-debt countries.
11 We take the eurozone inflation from recent past data, which is much lower than current inflation, and simu­
late an inflationary surprise later.
12 This estimate is within the consensus range estimate of 2–4 basis points cited by Blanchard et al. (2021), 
and very close to the 3.25 eurozone estimate of Zenios et al. (2021) using 1995–2016 data.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
3.3.1  Counterfactual spreads
We use ρ(di,t, pi,t, j) with pi,t = 0 and the calibrated (14)–(15) above to obtain predictions 
of spreads with the increase of debt from 2020Q2 onwards. This is the counterfactual should 
there be no PEPP, shown in Fig. 1 (panel B) averaged over the eurozone high-debt countries. 
The counterfactual for each country in our sample is given in Appendix Fig. B.1.
3.3.2  Spread suppression
We estimate the unconventional policy effect ρUi(pi,t) by examining the relationship 
between the difference of the actual benchmark maturity spreads of the ith country from the 
counterfactual spreads ρi,t, and the net asset purchases pi,t as a proportion of the country’s 
PEPP envelope. We consider a spread suppression rate as the proportional reduction of 
actual spreads relative to the counterfactual
 
ˆρUi(pi,t) =
[
1 −
ρi,t
ˆρC(dt)
]
.
(17)
Comparing the actual and the counterfactual spreads since launching the program we obtain 
the spread suppression shown in Fig. 3 (Panel A) for all countries in our sample. We observe 
that the ECB purchases strongly suppress spreads for the high-debt countries, albeit at a 
decreasing rate.
Given the small number of observations, we fit a mixed-effect model of (16) over the 
whole data set, accounting for the correlation among the data due to grouped observations 
clustered by country. We first fit a second-order polynomial using OLS on the panel data as 
our baseline model M0. We then test the following country-specific mixed-effect models to 
fit Eq. (16): 
M1. 
β0i = γ00 + u0i; intercept varies by country with the random effect u0i.
M2. 
β0i = γ00 + u0i and β1i = γ10 + u1i; intercept and first-order coefficient are coun­
try dependent with random effect terms u0i and u1i.
M3. 
β0i = γ00 + u0i, β1i = γ10 + u1i and β2i = γ20 + u2i; all coefficients are country 
dependent, with u0i, u1i, and u2i capturing the grouping effect.
The models are fitted using the R package lme4, with Akaike and Bayesian information 
criteria displayed in Table 1 (Panel A). The best fitting model M2 has country-specific inter­
cept and linear slope with random effects. Random effects account for unobserved coun­
try-specific factors, such as socio-economic or political, that are not always measurable or 
included in the dataset, assuming that these factors do not correlate with the observed inde­
pendent variable of ECB bond purchases (Wooldridge, 2010, ch. 10); see also (Brogaard et 
al., 2020, p. 1744). From the roots of (16) we estimate the maximum suppression rate ρi and 
the amount pi at which the maximum is reached to complete the calibration, and report the 
estimated parameters of M2 in Table 1 (Panel B).13
13 Online appendix Fig. B.2 displays the residuals versus predictive values of M2 with the Q–Q and index plot 
and the histogram of Pearson residuals with the fitted normal. The residual and index plots show no specific 
pattern around the horizontal dashed line, suggesting that the chosen model is reasonable. The residuals scat­
ter uniformly around the 0-line, implying that the error term is homoscedastic and Gaussian distributed, as 
also observed in the Q–Q plot and the histogram.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Italy
Portugal
Spain
20
30
40
50
20
30
40
20
30
40
20
30
40
50
60
40
50
60
70
20
30
40
50
60
Cumulative ECB net purchase (% of country envelope)
Reduction ratio (%)
OLS Fit
Italy
Portugal
Spain
20
40
60
20
30
40
50
Cumulative ECB net purchase (% of country envelope)
Spread reduction (%)
Fig. 3  Empirical PEPP spread suppression rates and the model
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
In Fig. 3 (Panel B), we display the model M2 fit for each country and the OLS fit over 
all countries in the sample. The spread suppression plateaus as the holdings approach the 
country’s envelope, as is visible for Portugal but not yet for Italy and Spain.
4  Model at work
We put the model to work on asset purchase programs for the eurozone and Japan.14 We 
first report on the comprehensive assessment of the eurozone PEPP using our calibration 
above. We then present results with a retrospective assessment of the Japanese QQE using 
a calibration by BoJ staff (Kawamoto et al., 2021).
4.1  Comprehensive assessment of the PEPP
We perform DSA for the representative country under the counterfactual and under three 
PEPP unwinding alternatives: (i) early quantitative tightening (EarlyQT) with purchases 
rolled over until 2024 and unwinding starting from 2025 lasting for five years, (ii) late 
quantitative tightening (LateQT) with five-year unwinding commencing in 2030, and (iii) 
debt rolled over forever (QEternity). LateQT aligns with the current decisions of the ECB to 
unwind maturing bonds from its portfolio.15 QEternity corresponds to a systematic applica­
tion of debt monetization, and its application in our context has limits. Our analysis assumes 
that the spread suppression will be constant over time under QEternity, but in practice, it can 
lead to higher spreads when monetary policy credibility is lost. Hence, QEternity should be 
viewed as providing a best-case lower bound. We also consider a transient inflation shock 
without and with monetary policy reaction. All tests are performed with an intermediate 
debt financing strategy, halfway between the minimum risk and minimum cost.16
14 We solve the model with high precision α = 0.95, but report results and draw inferences at the more real­
istic for policy analysis confidence level 0.75. For instance, the 0.95 quantile in Fig. 2, panel B, is slightly 
increasing, but the 0.75 quantile is declining. This example represents sustainable debt dynamics for all 
practical purposes.
15 See the decisions regarding PEPP of Dec. 14, 2023, (European Central Bank, 2023).
16 Results on the relative merits of the PEPP and the unwinding strategies are robust to different debt financing 
strategies, see Appendix C. Quantitatively, the fan charts shift towards higher debt levels for the minimum 
risk strategy and lower levels for the minimum cost strategy.
Table 1  Fitting the spread suppression model
(a) Information criteria
Model
Akaike
Bayesian
M0
120.3
123.4
M1
109.8
113.7
M2
104.8
109.4
M3
114.3
122.1
(b) Parameters of the best-fitting model M2
Country
β0
β1
β2
pt (at Jan. 2021)
p
ρ
Italy
− 26.70
3.17
− 0.03
49.90
55.79
61.71
Portugal
− 1.28
2.92
− 0.03
46.48
51.31
73.51
Spain
− 21.12
3.12
− 0.03
47.25
54.97
64.73
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
4.1.1  Counterfactual debt sustainability without PEPP
We run the model without PEPP and show in Fig. 4 the scenarios of risk premia and debt 
stock, with an expected cost of debt financing of 4.4% GDP. Panel A shows large and grow­
ing risk premia, reminiscent of the eurozone crisis. The debt-stock ratio in panel B remains 
above the pre-pandemic level and is increasing with a very high probability at the 10-year 
horizon, thus considered unsustainable according to our criterion. These results are robust 
for the minimum cost and risk points, or debt flow; see Appendix C.
If we impose the debt sustainability constraint (9) with δ = 0 the model becomes infea­
sible, and no debt financing strategy can stabilize the debt. We also compute the stabilizing 
fiscal effort that renders debt stock dynamics sustainable with a high probability by the end 
of the simulation horizon to obtain a stabilizing fiscal effort averaging 1.28% GDP p.a. over 
eighteen years; we use the model extension (Zenios et al., 2021, section 6). Such levels of 
fiscal adjustment are excessively ambitious (Eichengreen & Panizza, 2016) to be considered 
feasible, and if they were to be implemented, they would have had contractionary effects 
undermining the efforts to stabilize the debt.
4.1.2  Debt sustainability with PEPP
We run the model with PEPP under different unwinding strategies. PEPP suppresses the 
spreads, and when the program unwinds, we assume that the effect is exactly reversed.17 We 
report the results in Fig. 5 and observe (panels A–C) significantly reduced risk premia dur­
ing the program implementation. Once PEPP is fully implemented, but before unwinding 
commences, the spreads are stable with a high probability of declining due to GDP growth 
(denominator effect). Upon unwinding, the spreads increase sharply, but even with early 
quantitative tightening, the average spreads return to levels slightly below the counterfac­
tual shown by the dashed blue line. The expected cost of debt financing is reduced from 
4.4% of GDP in the counterfactual to 3.0%, 2.4%, and 1.6% under the three unwinding 
strategies, respectively.
The corresponding average debt ratios (panels D–F) are below the pre-pandemic level, in 
contrast to the counterfactual. The spreads remain much below the counterfactual because 
17 PEPP was launched in the context of spooky markets. If the unwinding occurs under normal market condi­
tions, we expect an asymmetric effect, as the reverse impact on spreads could be muted.
21
23
25
27
29
31
33
35
37
39
41
43
45
47
49
200
300
400
500
Spread (bp)
Year
21
23
25
27
29
31
33
35
37
39
41
43
45
47
49
100
150
200
250
300
Debt/Y (%)
Year
Fig. 4  Debt sustainability analysis without PEPP The dashed line denotes the mean value, the dark-shaded 
area denotes the 0.25 and 0.75 quantiles, and the light-shaded area denotes the 0.90 quantile
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 5  Debt sustainability analysis with PEPP. This figure displays the results of debt sustainability analy­
sis under the unconventional PEPP intervention. The x-axis denotes years, and the y-axis denotes spreads 
in bp (panels A–C) and debt-to-GDP ratios in % (panels D–F). The dashed black line denotes the mean 
value, and the shaded areas denote 0.25, 0.75, and 0.90 quantiles. The panels also show (blue line) the 
mean values with no PEPP and the pre-pandemic values for comparison. Panel G illustrates the mean 
and inter-quartile range of the debt ratio at the end of the horizon, together with the initial and the pre-
pandemic debt ratio
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
of the denominator effect and low refinancing costs during the PEPP, contributing to lower 
debt servicing costs. Under all unwindings, debt is declining at the 10-year horizon with a 
probability of 0.75. In panel G, we show the debt ratio’s mean and interquartile range at the 
end of the simulation horizon. For all PEPP schedules, debt converges to an average ratio 
below the starting point.
Panels D–E show that debt trends upwards at the end of the simulation period. We go a 
step further and calculate the stabilizing fiscal effort to put debt dynamics on a non-increas­
ing trajectory throughout the horizon with probability 0.75 and show the results in Fig. 6. 
The bars (left y-axis) show the fiscal effort as a percentage of GDP p.a. averaged over the 
years during which this effort must be sustained (solid line, right y-axis). The fiscal effort 
is lower should the PEPP be kept longer. Without the PEPP, as noted above, we need fis­
cal effort averaging 1.28% GDP p.a. over eighteen years. With EarlyQT the effort is about 
0.90% p.a. over ten years, and it is further reduced to 0.24% p.a. over five years under 
LateQT. The early unwinding of PEPP implies a larger stabilizing fiscal effort over extended 
periods. The spreads under QEternity are very low, and debt is stable even if the country 
runs a deficit. However, this is predicated on the spread suppression remaining unchanged 
over time under QEternity, but in practice, spreads can increase if monetary policy credibil­
ity is lost. Hence, this projection is a best-case lower bound.
In conclusion, the PEPP substantially lowers debt stock with persistent effects beyond the 
end of the program. Public debt will be restored to the pre-pandemic level by 2030. Unwind­
ing the central bank balance sheet puts upward pressure on spreads, but the expected value 
of debt stock is stabilized or declining at the 10-year horizon. Depending on the unwind­
ing speed, a primary balance of 0.2–0.9% of GDP over five to ten years can stabilize debt 
dynamics throughout the simulation horizon. This finding highlights the significant interac­
tion between fiscal and unconventional monetary policies. Two assumptions of our model 
moderate the impact of PEPP on the debt trajectories. First, only the policy risk-free rate 
enters the IS curve, as including spreads as functions of debt leads to a computational com­
Fig. 6  Stabilising the debt dynamics with fiscal effort. This figure displays the fiscal effort required to put 
debt dynamics on a non-increasing trajectory by the end of the horizon, with a probability of at least 0.75. 
The bars (left y-axis) show the fiscal effort as a % of GDP p.a., averaged over the years during which this 
effort must be sustained, as shown by the line (right y-axis)
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
plex nonlinearly constrained problem, as discussed in Sect. 2.3. If this effect were captured, 
it would lead to increases in spreads that are expected to depress economic output, and the 
favorable impact of introducing PEPP would be bigger. Second, if the unwinding is done in 
tranquil times, as opposed to the turbulent period in which PEPP was launched and used for 
the calibration, we would expect that the upward pressure on spreads from PEPP unwinding 
would be less than the suppression upon program launching. The effect would be asymmet­
ric instead of symmetric, reducing the negative impact of unwinding on debt. Overall, our 
tests underestimate the positive effect of PEPP on debt sustainability.
4.1.3  Low-debt countries
The counterfactual spreads of low-debt countries (Finland, Germany, Netherlands, see 
online appendix Fig. C.3) differ only slightly from the actual spreads, contrary to the sig­
nificant differences for high-debt countries in Fig. 1. The spreads of low-debt countries 
increased marginally with the onset of the pandemic, and the average spread suppression 
was about 15bp compared to about 100bp for high-debt countries. The PEPP has a marginal 
effect on the debt dynamics of low-debt countries; the direction of change is consistent with 
that for high-debt countries but quantitatively very small.18 We also note that the positive 
effect of the significant spread suppression for high-debt countries is amplified due to the 
nonlinearity of the risk premium (Eq. 15), but for low-debt countries, both the spread sup­
pression and the nonlinearities are dampened.
4.1.4  An inflation surprise
We consider an inflation shock of 4% with little persistence and the central bank responding 
with a Taylor rule interest rate hike (Appendix Fig. A.3, panels A and B). Alternatively, we 
consider the case where the central bank views the shock as transitory and does not react to 
it (panel C) as was the stance of the ECB until the end of 2021.19
In Fig. 7, we show the effects of inflation and the monetary response on debt dynam­
ics. The fan charts display the risk premium (panel A) and debt stock (panel B) of the no-
PEPP counterfactual without inflation shock; the dashed black lines show the mean values. 
The blue lines show the mean values with an inflation shock and the central bank raising 
interest rates in response, and the green lines show the means without the central bank’s 
response. The results are intuitive in the direction of change, and the magnitude of the infla­
tion effect is small in line with Hilscher et al. (2021). Debt dynamics worsen if the central 
bank responds to inflation, but the increase in the debt ratio is slight since the increase in 
financing costs is partly offset by the increase in nominal GDP. Without a central bank 
response, debt dynamics improve slightly due to the inflation effect. A short-lived inflation 
shock with a conventional monetary policy response has minor effects on debt, supporting 
the view that monetary policy and inflation are neutral in the long run. In the absence of 
PEPP, debt remains on an increasing trajectory.
Would the PEPP restore debt sustainability? In Fig. 7, panel C, we show the mean debt 
ratio and the inter-quartile range at the end of the horizon, together with the reference start­
18 Results available from the authors.
19 See the speech by the President of the ECB in September 2021, European Central Bank (2021).
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
ing debt ratio. The first set of vertical lines displays the ratios without the PEPP, and with 
or without monetary policy response by the central bank. The other three sets show the 
outcome of PEPP unwinding strategies in the presence of an inflation shock, and we consis­
tently observe a strong positive effect of PEPP.
21
23
25
27
29
31
33
35
37
39
41
43
45
47
49
200
220
240
260
280
300
Spread (bp)
Year
21
23
25
27
29
31
33
35
37
39
41
43
45
47
49
120
130
140
150
160
Debt/Y (%)
Year
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
Debt−to−GDP ratio
at the start of PEPP
100
140
180
NoPEPP
EarlyQT
LateQT
QEternity
PEPP exit strategy
Stock of debt (% GDP)
Fig. 7  Effects of an inflation surprise. The figure displays the fan charts for risk premium (panel A) and 
debt stock (panel B) under different conventional monetary policy responses to an inflation shock. The 
coral-shaded fan chart is the baseline without PEPP or inflation surprise, with the dashed black lines 
showing the mean values. The dashed black line denotes the mean value, and the shaded areas denote 
0.25, 0.75, and 0.90 quantiles. The dashed blue lines are the mean values with an inflation shock and a 
conventional monetary policy response using the Taylor rule, and the dashed green lines are the mean 
values when the central bank does not react to the inflation spike. Panel C illustrates the mean and inter-
quartile range of the debt ratio at the end of the horizon without PEPP and for the three unwinding strate­
gies, with the dashed line indicating the initial debt ratio. Lines marked A are without inflation shock, B 
is with inflation shock and a monetary policy response using the Taylor rule, and C is without monetary 
policy response
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
4.2  Retrospective assessment of Japan’s QQE
We apply the model to retrospectively evaluate the QQE from 2013, when it was launched, 
until 2021 and assess Japan’s debt sustainability with and without the QQE. This test illus­
trates the generality of our model to accommodate unconventional monetary policies by 
considering a different policy than PEPP. It also validates our tree calibration method by 
showing a close match of the ex-ante simulated with the ex-post observed average debt-to-
GDP ratios. The test corroborates the effect of asset purchases on debt sustainability since 
QQE was launched.
We replace (16) by the calibrated response of the 10-year Japanese government bond 
nominal yields (i10,t) to the BoJ holdings (ht), as a share of the government debt stock. The 
calibration was conducted by BoJ staff (Kawamoto et al., 2021) using monthly data from 
January 2005 to October 2020, controlling for expected GDP growth (ge
t ) and US 10-year 
Treasury bond yields (iUS
t
). Their OLS regression renders the following functional relation, 
with adjusted R2 of 0.95:
 
i10,t = 0.26 −2.0
ht
JGBt
+ 0.40ge
t + 0.18iUS
t
.
(18)
This implies that a one percentage increase in the ratio of BoJ 10-year holdings to the 
total 10-year government bond stock would reduce yields by two basis points. We use this 
curve to construct a counterfactual yield curve with no-QQE.20 Figure 8, panel A, displays 
the counterfactual 10-year yields, together with the market observed yield since QQE was 
20 We also add term premia relative to the benchmark 10-year JGB rate, with yields increasing relative to the 
benchmark for longer maturities and decreasing for maturities shorter than ten years. From the Bloomberg 
yield curve of December 2020, we calculate the spreads for maturities 1,3, 5, and 20 years, respectively, as 
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Counterfactual
Factual
Yields (%)
Year
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
200
250
300
350
Debt/Y (%)
Year
Counterfactual
Factual
Fig. 8  Retrospective debt sustainability analysis for Japan with QQE. This figure displays the results of a 
retrospective analysis of Japan’s sovereign debt in the presence of QQE and under the no-QQE counter­
factual. Panel A displays the 10-year Japanese government bond yields. The blue line shows the observed 
(factual) yields of 10-year bonds from 2013 to 2021, and the orange line shows the counterfactual yield 
estimates in the absence of QQE from Kawamoto et al. (2021). Both are projected to stay constant past 
2021. Panel B displays the fan chart of debt stock dynamics under the bond yields from panel A. The 
dashed lines denote the medians, and the solid lines are the 0.10, 0.25, 0.75, and 0.90 quantiles. Red 
triangles indicate the actual values from the IMF World Economic Outlook, and the black dots show the 
model mean value estimates
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
launched in 2013 until 2021 and extrapolated to remain constant until 2023. These are the 
input yield curves to calibrate a scenario tree for our retrospective debt sustainability analy­
sis. The tree was calibrated for January 2013, and the DSA was conducted for a ten-year 
horizon until the end of 2023 to assess debt sustainability and compare with the country’s 
ex-post observed average debt ratio. A complete calibration of the Japanese economy with 
a comprehensive analysis of QQE and its potential unwinding in the future, including the 
effects of global tightening of financial conditions, are given in Alberola et al. (2023).
In Fig. 8, panel B, we show the debt trajectories from 2013 up to 2023 with the QQE and 
the counterfactual. The fan chart in pink shading shows the factual debt projections with the 
QQE, with the red line denoting the mean. The mean value of the debt stock in the factual 
(black circles) tracks closely the realized values of Japan’s debt-to-GDP ratio as given by 
the IMF (red triangles), attesting to the accuracy of our tree calibration.
The green-shaded fan chart displays the counterfactual debt projection, with the green 
line denoting the mean. We observe higher average debt levels than the factual, with the dif­
ference widening over time. The 0.75 quantile of the no-QQE case remains upward-sloping, 
whereas the factual 0.75 quantile slightly declines. Hence, with a high probability, the debt 
stock dynamics of Japan would have exploded without QQE growing to about 375% of 
GDP by 2030 (not shown) and increasing. In contrast, with QQE, they remain below 325% 
and are slightly declining.
4.3  Discussion
Overall, we find a strong and persistent positive impact of the asset purchase programs on 
sovereign debt dynamics. However, such programs should not be viewed as a free lunch. 
Our model focuses on debt dynamics and abstracts from some risks that become relevant 
the larger the size of the central bank balance sheet and when there is a change in monetary 
policy.21
Asset purchases increase short-term bank reserves in the central bank balance sheet, and 
the consolidated public sector debt is not reduced, but its maturity decreases. The maturity 
mismatch in the central bank balance sheet can generate losses in rising interest rates, with 
an accompanying fiscal cost as central bank transfers to the government diminish.
Also, unconventional policies blur the separation between monetary and fiscal policy. 
Governments that benefit from low borrowing costs during periods of loose monetary policy 
may resist a return to tighter conditions, such as higher interest rates or reduced asset pur­
chases, creating tensions with central banks and risk undermining their independence.
Our test with an inflation shock uncovers another channel of unconventional mone­
tary policy effects on sovereign debt that is activated in the presence of inflation shocks. 
An inflation spike may accelerate the PEPP unwinding, with EarlyQT being more likely 
than LateQT, as the ECB had suggested,22 However, more rapid unwinding worsens debt 
dynamics.
− 0.1534, − 0.1524, − 0.123, +0.357, and keep this structure of term premia constant throughout our simula­
tions.
21 See, e.g., “Helicopter money: The illusion of a free lunch", ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​v​o​x​e​u​.​o​r​g​/​a​r​t​i​c​l​e​/​h​e​l​i​c​o​p​t​e​r​-​m​o​n​e​y​-​i​l​l​
u​s​i​o​n​-​f​r​e​e​-​l​u​n​c​h.
22 Financial Times ECB scales back stimulus plan as Ukraine war drives up inflation expectations, March 
10, 2022.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
5  Optimal debt financing with unconventional monetary policy
We use the optimal debt financing feature of the model to explore the cost-risk tradeoff and 
the debt maturity issuance under different PEPP schemes.
5.1  Cost-risk tradeoff
With different unwinding schedules, we vary the risk parameter ω to trace the efficient fron­
tiers of expected interest payments vs gross financing needs. We show the results in Fig. 9 
together with the counterfactual. We note a frontier shift down and to the left, significantly 
reducing financing costs and refinancing risk. For instance, EarlyQT produces cost savings 
up to 1.5% GDP over no PEPP, with a simultaneous significant reduction of tail risk of gross 
financing needs. The improvements are more significant for longer duration PEPP.
We illustrate in this figure possible Pareto moves of a PDMO that stays within its mandate 
to finance government borrowing at the lowest cost with acceptable risks. For instance, from 
the intermediate risk point B without PEPP, a move along the vertical arrow reduces financ­
ing cost at constant risk. This move brings us closer to the minimum cost point, suggesting 
a shortening debt maturities. Alternatively, a move along the diagonal reduces both cost and 
risk, but we are now closer to the minimum risk point, suggesting maturity lengthening.
5.2  Optimal debt maturities
We look at the optimal debt maturities of the financing strategy that simultaneously reduces 
cost and risk (diagonal arrow in Fig. 9) and plot the results in Fig. 10. The bars in panel A are 
the optimal weighted average maturity at issuance (WAMI, left y-axis), and the black line 
shows the refinancing risk (right y-axis). The expected cost of debt financing (not shown) 
is reduced from 4.4% of GDP without PEPP to 3.2%, 2.5%, and 2.0% as PEPP unwinding 
takes longer. We observe a lengthening of maturities with a lowering of risks. For instance, 
Refinancing risk (% of GDP)
Expected cost of debt servicing (% of GDP)
2
3
4
5
20
30
40
50
60
Fig. 9  Pareto improvements of the cost-risk tradeoffs
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
EarlyQT increases WAMI by about 12 months, corresponding to a lengthening of about ten 
months per percentage point of financing cost reduction. We also consider the optimal debt 
maturities for a move down the vertical arrow and show the results in panel B. WAMI is 
reduced from 5.7 to 4.1 years with the expected cost (not shown) reduced from 4.4 to 1.5% 
of GDP. Under PEPP, we can achieve significantly lower costs at the same or lower risk. The 
optimal maturities lengthen or shorten depending on PDMO preferences to lower refinanc­
ing risk or financing cost.
We compare the optimal financing strategies with the findings of Plessen-Mátyás et al. 
(2021). They show that one p.p. decrease in government bond yields led to an average 
lengthening of issuance maturities by seven months. This is in line with the maturity exten­
sion of 10 months per p.p. of yield reduction obtained from our model under a simultaneous 
cost and risk reduction. The model’s recommendations are in the direction of the eurozone 
PDMO behavior; quantitatively, they are remarkably close.
In conclusion, the lengthening of maturities by the eurozone PDMO in response to asset 
purchase programs is a Pareto improvement. The policy implication is that funding maturi­
ties should be treated as endogenous in the impact assessment of central bank purchase 
programs.
6  Conclusion
We uncover a novel channel of fiscal-monetary interaction through unconventional mon­
etary policy effects on public debt in bad times. We embed monetary policy uncertainty in 
stochastic debt sustainability analysis through a macro monetary model that incorporates 
conventional monetary policymaking and the spread suppression effect of unconventional 
monetary policies of central banks’ debt purchases. The model quantifies the monetary pol­
icy effects on debt sustainability on optimal public debt financing.
We estimate the PEPP sovereign spreads suppression to calibrate the extended DSA 
model for a representative high-debt eurozone country and comprehensively assess the 
Fig. 10  Debt financing strategies for Pareto improvements under PEPP. This figure displays the weighted 
average maturity at issuance (WAMI) under different PEPP unwinding paths. Panel A corresponds to 
moves that reduce risk at lower cost, with the bars displaying WAMI (left y-axis) and the solid line dis­
playing refinancing risk (right y-axis). Panel B corresponds to moves that reduce cost at a fixed risk, with 
the bars displaying WAMI (left y-axis) and the solid line displaying the expected cost of debt financing 
(expected IP, right y-axis)
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
program’s impact on debt sustainability. Our analysis highlights the relevance of PEPP in 
the sovereign debt markets. We find that the program has substantial favorable effects on 
debt dynamics that persist after the program is finished and render debt sustainable, while 
without it, considerable fiscal effort would be required to stabilize debt. Unwinding the 
central bank holdings as public debt matures puts upward pressure on spreads, but while 
the spreads increase adversely impacts the debt dynamics, especially with earlier unwind­
ing, debt remains sustainable with a high probability. A transient inflation surprise does 
not strongly impact debt dynamics, but higher inflation could accelerate PEPP unwinding, 
negatively impacting debt dynamics.
Overall, PEPP has a sizeable favorable effect on debt sustainability, which is only 
partially reversed as the program is unwound. Passive quantitative tightening negatively 
impacts debt dynamics but does not jeopardize fiscal sustainability, suggesting that the risk 
of fiscal dominance going forward is limited.
We demonstrate implications for public debt management, with the PEPP inducing a 
Pareto improvement in the tradeoff between financing cost and refinancing risk. We find 
it optimal to lengthen maturities to reduce the risk without increasing cost. The model-
recommended optimal maturities align with the observed behavior of eurozone public debt 
management offices during the public securities purchase program. This has a policy impli­
cation that funding maturities should be treated as endogenous in the impact assessment of 
asset purchase programs.
Applying the model retrospectively to the Japanese QQE illustrates its generality, vali­
dates the accuracy of our calibration, and corroborates the main finding from the PEPP 
assessment.
Future work could refine the model to account for the effect of spreads on growth through 
the IS curve using scenario tree perturbations. It could also allow for asymmetric effects 
of quantitative tightening on the spread suppression function by dampening the impact of 
unwinding under normal market conditions.
Supplementary Information  The online version contains supplementary material available at ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​
/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​2​5​-​0​6​7​2​3​-​4​.​
Acknowledgements  We acknowledge extensive comments and suggestions from Matthias Drehmann, Boris 
Hofmann, Athanasios Orphanides, Ilhyock Shim, Junko Koeda, conference participants at the 5th Sovereign 
Debt Research and Management Conference, the 29th NBER-TCER-CEPR Conference, and the Bruegel 
Senior Economists Meeting, and seminar participants at the BIS. We thank Kohei Matsumura and his co-
authors for sharing their data for the Bank of Japan’s quantitative and qualitative easing tests. We thank 
Jimmy Shek for excellent research assistance.
Funding  This research was supported by the Bank for International Settlements, the Cyprus Academy of 
Sciences, Letters, and Arts, and the European Union’s Next Generation EU initiative through the National 
Recovery and Resilience Plan (NRRP), ’GRINS-Growing Resilient, Inclusive, and Sustainable’ project 
(PE0000018), Spoke 4, Work package 4 (CUP B73C22001260006). GRINS also provides open access 
funding.
Declarations
Conflict of interest  The authors declare that they have no Conflict of interest.
Ethical approval  This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by 
any of the authors.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Disclaimer  The views presented in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those 
of their current or past employers.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and 
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the 
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. 
You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. 
The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, 
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative 
Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, 
you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit ​h​
t​t​p​:​/​/​c​r​e​a​t​i​v​e​c​o​m​m​o​n​s​.​o​r​g​/​l​i​c​e​n​s​e​s​/​b​y​-​n​c​-​n​d​/​4​.​0​/.
References
Alberola, E., Cheng, G., Consiglio, A., & Zenios, S. A. (2023). Unconventional monetary policy and debt 
sustainability in Japan. Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 69, Article 101274.
Angeletos, G.-M. (2002). Fiscal policy with noncontingent debt and the optimal maturity structure. The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 1105–1131.
Arellano, C. (2008). Default risk and income fluctuations in emerging economies. American Economic 
Review, 98, 690–712.
Arellano, C., & Ramanarayanan, A. (2012). Default and the maturity structure in sovereign bonds. Journal 
of Political Economy, 120, 187–232.
Arslan, Y., Drehmann, M., & Hofmann, B. (2020). Central bank bond purchases in emerging market econo­
mies. BIS Bulletins 20, Bank for International Settlements
Arslanalp, S., & Tsuda, T. (2014). Tracking global demand for advanced economy sovereign debt. IMF Eco­
nomic Review, 62, 430–464.
Artzner, P., Delbaen, F., Eber, J. M., & Heath, D. (1999). Coherent measures of risk. Mathematical Finance, 
9, 203–228.
Bank of Japan. (2025). Introduction of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing. Retrieved April 20, 
2025, from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​b​o​j​.​o​r​.​j​p​/​e​n​/​m​o​p​o​/​m​p​m​d​e​c​i​/​m​p​r​_​2​0​1​3​/​k​1​3​0​4​0​4​a​.​p​d​f
Barro, R. (2003). Optimal management of indexed and nominal debt. Annals of Economics and Finance, 4, 
1–15.
Bassanetti, A., Cottarelli, C., & Presbitero, A. (2018). Lost and found: Market access and public debt dynam­
ics. Oxford Economic Papers, 71, 445–471.
Beckmann, J., Fiedler, S., Gern, K.-J., Kooths, S., Quast, J., & Wolters, M. (2020). The ECB’s asset purchase 
programmes: Effectiveness, risks, alternatives. European Parliament, Monetary dialogue papers.
Bianchi, J., Hatchondo, J. C., & Martinez, L. (2018). International reserves and rollover risk. American Eco­
nomic Review, 108, 2629–70.
BIS. (2020). A monetary lifeline: Central banks’ crisis response. Annual economic report, Chapter 2, Bank 
for International Settlements.
Blanchard, O. (2022). Fiscal policy under low interest rates. The MIT Press.
Blanchard, O., Leandro, A., & Zettelmeyer, J. (2021). Redesigning EU fiscal rules: From rules to standards. 
Economic Policy, 36, 195–236.
Bocola, L., & Dovis, A. (2019). Self-fulfilling debt crises: A quantitative analysis. American Economic 
Review, 109, 4343–77.
Bouabdallah, O., Checherita-Westphal, C., Warmedinger, T., Stefani, R., Drudi, F., Setzer, R., & Westphal, A. 
(2017). Debt sustainability analysis for euro area sovereigns: A methodological framework. Occasional 
paper 185, European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, DE.
Brogaard, J., Dai, L., Ngo, P. T. H., & Zhang, B. (2020). Global political uncertainty and asset prices. The 
Review of Financial Studies, 33, 1737–1780.
Chatterjee, S., & Eyigungor, B. (2012). Maturity, indebtedness, and default risk. American Economic Review, 
102, 2674–2699.
Cole, H., & Kehoe, T. (2000). Self-fulfilling debt crises. Review of Economic Studies, 67, 91–116.
Conesa, J., & Kehoe, T. (2017). Gambling for redemption and self-fulfilling debt crises. Economic Theory, 
64, 707–740.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Consiglio, A., & Zenios, S. (2017). Stochastic debt sustainability analysis for sovereigns and the scope for 
optimization modeling. Optimization and Engineering, 18(2), 537–558.
Consiglio, A., Carollo, A., & Zenios, S. (2016). A parsimonious model for generating arbitrage-free scenario 
trees. Quantitative Finance, 16, 201–212.
Debrun, X., Masuch, K., Ferrero, G., Vansteenkiste, I., Ferdinandusse, M., von Thadden, L., Hauptmeier, S., 
Alloza, M., Derouen, C., & Bańkowski, K. (2021). Monetary-fiscal policy interactions in the euro area. 
Occasional paper series 273, European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, DE, Sept.
Dias, D., Richmond, C., & Wright, M. (2014). The stock of external sovereign debt: Can we take the data at 
face value? Journal of International Economics, 94, 1–17.
Dutch State Treasury Agency. (2018). Outlook 2019. Retrieved April 20, 2025, from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​d​s​t​a​.​n​l​/​d​o​
c​u​m​e​n​t​e​n​/​p​u​b​l​i​c​a​t​i​e​s​/​2​0​1​8​/​1​2​/​1​4​/​o​u​t​l​o​o​k​-​2​0​1​9
Eichengreen, B., & Panizza, U. (2016). A surplus of ambition: Can Europe rely on large primary surpluses to 
solve its debt problem? Economic Policy, 31, 5–49.
European Central Bank. (2021). Speech by Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, at the ECB Forum on 
Central Banking, 28 September 2021. Retrieved April 20, 2025, from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​e​c​b​.​e​u​r​o​p​a​.​e​u​/​p​r​e​s​s​
/​k​e​y​/​d​a​t​e​/​2​0​2​1​/​h​t​m​l​/​e​c​b​.​s​p​2​1​0​9​2​8​~​4​c​c​5​7​f​5​5​8​d​.​e​n​.​h​t​m​l
European Central Bank. (2023). Monetary policy decisions, 14 December 2023. Retrieved April 20, 2025, 
from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​e​c​b​.​e​u​r​o​p​a​.​e​u​/​p​r​e​s​s​/​p​r​/​d​a​t​e​/​2​0​2​3​/​h​t​m​l​/​e​c​b​.​m​p​2​3​1​2​1​4​~​9​8​4​6​e​6​2​f​6​2​.​e​n​.​h​t​m​l
European Central Bank. (2025). Pandemic emergency purchase programme (pepp). Retrieved April 20, 
2025, from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​e​c​b​.​e​u​r​o​p​a​.​e​u​/​m​o​p​o​/​i​m​p​l​e​m​e​n​t​/​p​e​p​p​/​h​t​m​l​/​i​n​d​e​x​.​e​n​.​h​t​m​l
European Commission. (2020). Debt sustainability monitor. Institutional Paper 143, European Commission, 
Brussels, BE.
European Commission. (2024). Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the effective 
coordination of economic policies and multilateral budgetary surveillance. 2024/1263, European Com­
mission. Retrieved January, 2025, from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​e​u​r​-​l​e​x​.​e​u​r​o​p​a​.​e​u​/​l​e​g​a​l​-​c​o​n​t​e​n​t​/​E​N​/​T​X​T​/​?​u​r​i​=​C​E​L​E​X​
%​3​A​3​2​0​2​4​R​1​2​6​3​&​q​i​d​=​1​7​3​0​7​9​5​7​9​5​3​9​5
Ghosh, A. R., Kim, J. I., Mendoza, E. G., Ostry, J. D., & Qureshi, M. S. (2013). Fiscal fatigue, fiscal space and 
debt sustainability in advanced economies. The Economic Journal, 123(566), F4–F30.
Hatchondo, J., & Martinez, L. (2009). Long-duration bonds and sovereign defaults. Journal of International 
Economics, 79, 117–125.
He, J., Zhang, J. A model of optimal local government debt limit allocation based on the disposal capability 
of the central government. Ann Oper Res (2025). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06691-9
Hilscher, J., Raviv, A., & Reis, R. (2021). Inflating away the public debt? An empirical assessment. The 
Review of Financial Studies, 35, 1553–1595.
Hofmann, B., Lombardi, M., Mojon, B., & Orphanides, A. (2021). Fiscal and monetary policy interactions in 
a low interest rate world. Discussion papers 16411, CEPR.
Hondroyiannis, G., & Papaoikonomou, D. (2021). The effect of eurosystem asset purchase programmes on 
euro area sovereign bond yields during the COVID-19 pandemic. Working papers 291, Bank of Greece.
IMF. (2022). Staff guidance note on the sovereign risk and debt sustainability framework for market access 
countries. Policy paper 039, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Irwin, T. (2015). Defining the government’s debt and deficit. Journal of Economic Surveys, 29, 711–732.
Italian Ministry of Economy and Finance. (2017). Public debt report 2017. Retrieved April 20, 2025, from ​h​
t​t​p​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​d​t​.​t​e​s​o​r​o​.​i​t​/​e​x​p​o​r​t​/​s​i​t​e​s​/​s​i​t​o​d​t​/​m​o​d​u​l​e​s​/​d​o​c​u​m​e​n​t​i​_​e​n​/​d​e​b​i​t​o​_​p​u​b​b​l​i​c​o​/​p​r​e​s​e​n​t​a​z​i​o​n​i​_​s​t​u​d​i​_​
r​e​l​a​z​i​o​n​i​/​P​u​b​l​i​c​_​D​e​b​t​_​R​e​p​o​r​t​_​2​0​1​7​.​p​d​f
Kawamoto, T., Nakazawa, T., Kishaba, Y., Matsumura, K., & Nakajima, J. (2021). Estimating effects of 
expansionary monetary policy since the introduction of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
(QQE) using the macroeconomic model (Q-JEM). Bank of Japan Working Paper Series 21-E-4, Bank 
of Japan.
Lengyel, A., & Giuliodori, M. (2022). Demand shocks for public debt in the eurozone. Journal of Money, 
Credit and Banking, 54(7), 1997–2028.
Missale, A. (2012). Sovereign debt management and fiscal vulnerabilities. In B. for International Settlements 
(Ed.), Threat of fiscal dominance?, volume 65 of BIS Papers (pp. 157–176). Bank for International 
Settlements.
Niepelt, D. (2014). Debt maturity without commitment. Journal of Monetary Economics, 68, S37–S54.
Paesani, P., Strauch, R., & Kremer, M. (2006). Public debt and long-term interest rates. The case of Germany, 
Italy and the USA. Working paper series 656, European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, DE.
Phillips, A. (1962). Employment, inflation and growth. Economica, 29(113), 1–16.
Plessen-Mátyás, K., Kaufmann, C., & von Landesberger, J. (2021). Funding behaviour of debt management 
offices and the ECB’s public sector purchase programme. Working paper series 2552, European Central 
Bank, Frankfurt am Main, DE.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Spronses, J. V., & Beetsma, R. (2022). Unconventional monetary policy and auction cycles of eurozone 
sovereign debt. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 54(1), 169–202.
Taylor, J. (1993). Discretion versus policy rules in practice. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public 
Policy, 39, 195–214.
U.S. Department of the Treasury. (2025). Quarterly refunding: Overview. Retrieved April 20, 2025, from ​h​t​t​p​
s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​t​r​e​a​s​u​r​y​.​g​o​v​/​r​e​s​o​u​r​c​e​-​c​e​n​t​e​r​/​d​a​t​a​-​c​h​a​r​t​-​c​e​n​t​e​r​/​q​u​a​r​t​e​r​l​y​-​r​e​f​u​n​d​i​n​g​/​P​a​g​e​s​/​o​v​e​r​v​i​e​w​.​a​s​p​x
Wooldridge, J. (2010). Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data (2nd ed.). The MIT Press.
Zampolli, F. (2012). Sovereign debt management as an instrument of monetary policy: An overview. BIS 
Papers, 65, 97–118.
Zenios, S., Consiglio, A., Athanasopoulou, M., Moshammer, E., Gavilan, A., & Erce, A. (2021). Risk man­
agement for sustainable sovereign debt financing. Operations Research, 69, 755–773.
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Authors and Affiliations
Enrique Alberola1 · Gong Cheng2 · Andrea Consiglio3
 · Stavros A. Zenios4,5,6
 
 Andrea Consiglio
andrea.consiglio@unipa.it
Enrique Alberola
alberola@bde.es
Stavros A. Zenios
zenioss@ucy.ac.cy
1 
Banco de España, Madrid, Spain
2 
Luxemburg, Luxemburg
3 
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy
4 
Durham University, Durham, UK
5 
University of Cyprus, Nicosia, CY, Cyprus
6 
Academy of Sciences, Letters, and Arts, and Non-Resident Fellow Bruegel, Brussels, Belgium
1 3