TITLE: Exploring reverse mortgage for Italian population: a life-cycle model approach
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06591-y
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06591-y
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Exploring reverse mortgage for Italian population: a life-cycle
model approach
Emilia Di Lorenzo1 · Gabriella Piscopo1
· Alba Roviello1 · Marilena Sibillo2
Received: 15 July 2024 / Accepted: 28 February 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
Elderly’s ﬁnancial status is affected by stochastic lifespan and states of health. The growth of
life expectancy in industrialized countries, the inadequacy of pension systems and the high
medical costs shed light on the need to provide adequate solutions for retirees, whose wealth
is mostly illiquid and mainly composed by own home. The reverse mortgage (RM) contract
allows elder homeowners to borrow money using their home as asset for the loan, maintain-
ing the right to live in the house. The debt is repaid by the heirs when the borrower dies.
This contract might constitute a valid support for the spending needs that may arise during
retirement. The paper deals with a decision problem of a homeowner who is approaching
old age and has to evaluate contracting a reverse mortgage or not. In order to investigate the
economic effects of RM on elderly’s consumption behavior, we construct a life cycle model
tailored to “house rich and cash poor” individuals, whose primary wealth asset is constituted
by real estate and who has to deal with the uncertainty about lifespan, future health states and
the consequent considerable expenses for medical treatments, as well as house maintenance
costs. Elders’ lifetime utility functions take into account consumption preferences, lifespan
uncertainty and bequest motivations, in order to capture the impact of the attachment to the
property on elder’s ﬁnancial planning. We solve the optimization problem to ﬁnd the optimal
savings allocation, with and without RM. We present three exemplary cases related to differ-
ent occurrences of health status, focusing on Italian retired males. Through our analysis, we
found out that, in presence of long-term care expenses and house maintenance costs, indi-
vidual’s liquid wealth signiﬁcantly increases with reverse mortgage. Moreover, homeowner
with a higher bequest motivation experiences lower utility gains from contracting RM plan.
Our results provide an alternative tool to explain elderly skepticism in buying this kind of
product.
B Gabriella Piscopo
gabriella.piscopo@unina.it
Emilia Di Lorenzo
emilia.dilorenzo@unina.it
Alba Roviello
alba.roviello@unina.it
Marilena Sibillo
msibillo@unisa.it
1
Department of Economic and Statistical Sciences, University of Naples Federico II, Via Cinthia,
Napoli, Italy
2
Department of Economics and Statistics, University of Salerno, Via Giovanni Paolo II, Fisciano, Italy
123

Annals of Operations Research
Keywords Reverse mortgage · Life-cycle model · Backward induction · Ageing · Decision
problem
1 Introduction
The demographic framework of an ageing society: challenges for financial and
insurance systems
The demographics of ageing, with its multiple economic and social facets, pose one of the
most pressing and signiﬁcant political challenge worldwide. Further demographic dynamics
are connected to the debate on this issue, including the processes of reducing birth rates
in Western industrialized countries, migration ﬂows, changes in the workforce and families.
Increasing life expectancy can lead to poverty and inequality, even in advanced economies. A
signiﬁcant change in the socio-demographic scenario calls for a different social awareness,
and therefore, the search for innovative solutions to address the new concerns of elderly
services and care. The focus is on the future equilibrium of pension and social protection
systems, health care quality, labor market changes, and the dissemination of adequate and
informed ﬁnancial literature [cf. Haan and Prowse (2014), Denuit et al. (2019), Alvarez et al.
(2021), Jarner et al. (2024), Atance et al. (2025)]. According to the Eurostat survey (Eurostat,
2024), in the aftermath of the Covid-19 pandemic phase, there was a general rise in the trend
of life expectancy at birth throughout the EU, even by 0.2 years when compared to the pre-
pandemic period. In Italy (IstatData, 2023), life expectancy at birth increased to 83.1 in 2023,
six months more than in 2022, even if there were geographical and gender differences. The
average lifespan after 65 years goes up to 10.6 years, compared to 10 years in both 2022 and
2019. However, the disquieting news concern healthy life expectancy in 2023, which will
drop to 59.2 years, compared to 60.1 years in 2022. With this reduction, the indicator has
nearly reached the level of 2019 (58,6 years).
Finding innovative technical solutions is the primary concern in ﬁnancial and insurance
matters. It is time to reassess the existing architecture of the welfare: as for the insurance
market, the focus is on engineered products that follow a life-cycle based structure, while
meeting the objective of ensuring health and well-being for all age groups (European, 2024).
Complying with the goals established by the United Nations and shared by the European
Commission, the guidelines of sustainable development rely heavily on this intent as one of
its fundamental indicators. In addition, the goal of protecting health is part of a wider and
more systematic plan; this has been conﬁrmed since 2016, when the European Commission
published a review of policies to provide adequate responses to broad-spectrum health needs,
redeﬁning the European Core Health Indicators (ECHI) system with the aim of establish-
ing a sustainable health monitoring system. To ensure an adequate standard of living for
elderly groups without sufﬁcient pension income, ﬁnancial planning platforms should be
implemented. Supporting public actions with synergistic interventions through public and
private resources is essential, and this should be done with a fair differentiation based on
the average net wealth of the population groups concerned. The insurance industry’s focus
on protecting individuals can play a signiﬁcant role in designing innovative strategies for
well aging. Reverse Mortgage (RM hereinafter) contracts offer an interesting opportunity
within the Silver Economy (Di Lorenzo et al., 2024a), as they cater to the needs of elderly
homeowners, where pension levels are not sufﬁcient to ensure adequate living standards.
Recent actuarial literature is increasingly focusing on RMs (or Equity Release, in UK); they
123

Annals of Operations Research
are characterized as asset-based policies (Hoekstra & Dol, 2021; Di Lorenzo et al., 2024b):
to augment retirement income, elderly homeowners can release all or a portion of their home
property and obtain a credit line, that is a lump sum or a stream of installments, reserving the
option for heirs to eventually redeem the home, differently from the bare ownership product,
where all the legal rights on the house are lost after the sale (Morano & Tajani, 2016). To
make the target market more comprehensible, we mention for example the case of Italy:
77% of families, at the end of 2022, lived in a home owned and a third of these also owned
other properties (Banca d’Italia, 2020). However, the number of elderly homeowners with
insufﬁcient pension income, known as the “house rich and cash poor”, is alarming on the
other hand. The survey carried out by Beltrametti (2017) focused on the families of elderly
people with at least sixty-year-old householders, who own the primary residence, based on
the monetary income and market value of their home. As many as 13.3 out of 100 senior
citizens had a monetary income of less than e10,000 per year. Among these, 190,000 house-
holds own a home that is valued at least e200,000, just to mention a few examples. Based on
the data provided by the Italian Ministry of Economy and Finance in 2019, when considering
all taxpayers, approximately two-thirds claim ownership of at least one or a portion of the
property (Pellegrino, 2023). However, the discrepancy between the value of the property and
the annual income is striking; just think that 46.8% of taxpayers are owners of at least one
property of any kind but receive an annual income of up to 10 thousand euros, and 64.1%
have an income between 10 and 26 thousand euros. This evidence, in the context of an age-
ing society, represents, in perspective, Italy as a country of asset rich but cash poor families
(Angelini et al., 2012; Pellegrino, 2023).
In this paper we focus on the decision problem of a homeowner who is approaching old
age, in particular we consider elder who is entering retirement or has already retired, and has
to evaluate contracting a Reverse Mortgage or not. We build elders’ lifetime utility function
on the line of Davidoff (2009), Hanewald et al. (2016), considering consumption, bequest
motivations and uncertainty about lifespan and future health states. We solve the optimiza-
tion problem to ﬁnd the optimal saving streams over the lifetime of the homeowner with
and without RM. The decision-making scheme is set within the Italian context, providing
numerical examples to address policy guidelines. Italy represents an archetype of wealthy
countries where inequalities grow in the aging process, since the number of elderly people
is increasing substantially, with a low birth rate and a worrying public debt, and this makes
actions to support the poor elderly unlikely at least in the near future. The RM contract
could represent a tool to accompany the ageing process, in a context where the private sector
complements public interventions. The choice of the application framework is motivated
by the need to implement innovative measures in a context where fragility and inequalities
just emerge in social classes, that are suddenly deprived of pension levels in line with ade-
quate living standards. The remaining of the paper is structured as follows: Sect.2 contains
some considerations about the relevance of Reverse Mortgages for an ageing society; Sect.3
describes the mathematical model and deepens the risk drivers impacting on the contract
and introduces the scenario hypotheses for the applications; Sect.4 presents the utility-based
model, detailing the probabilistic assumption and the structure of the utility function; Sects.5
and 6 explain the optimization procedure and provide numerical applications and sensitivity
analysis; Sect.7 concludes the paper.
123

Annals of Operations Research
2 The reverse mortgage
A resource for an ageing society: a varied and challenging market
The RMs contracts are framed in the area of ﬁnancial insurance products designed to meet
the needs of an ageing society. The so-called “decade of healthy aging” (Angelini et al., 2014;
WHO, 2021; Apicella et al., 2024) is presently underway: the RMs are tailored to ensure that
the elderly have a good quality of life. In a recent Worldmetrics Report (Lindner, 2024), the
global Reverse Mortgage market was valued $34.5 billion in 2019 and is expected to grow to
$39.2 billion by the end of 2027, with a gradual and steady trend. However, the RM market
has developed unevenly in space and time. Their growth has been rapid in Canada and in the
US, where they are also known as Home Equity Conversion Mortgage, largely managed by
the Federal Housing Administration (Merton & Lai, 2016; D’Amato et al., 2021). Similarly,
in the UK, where they are known as Equity Release, they have expanded and well-established.
At the end of 2023, the equity release market showed growth with quarterly increases in new
customer acquisitions of 10%, as well as an 8% increase in total loans (European, 2024).
RMs are growing in Australia (Alai et al., 2014), as well as in Asian economies. A pilot
program of RM products in several major Chinese cities has met with very little support.
For this reason, a recent study (Hanewald et al., 2020) has explored the results of two online
surveys aimed at homeowners aged 45–65 as potential purchasers, and adult children in the
20–49 age group, as children of potential purchasers. After improving the product design and
forwarded this in a clear and simple scheme, the results of this study demonstrate that 89%
of older Chinese homeowners would be interested in this new reverse mortgage product, and
84% of adult children would recommend such a product to their parents. A survey launched
in Germany (Bartsch et al., 2021) found out that consumers’ attention is slowly shifting to
such contracts. Hitherto, the scarcity of demand was mainly due to lack of awareness and
information. Similar reasons are also given in relation to the Spanish market, where the RMs
are showing a new attraction, even for foreign residents (Atance et al., 2024). On the whole,
potential consumers are hesitant, especially in the countries of Mediterranean Europe, due
to the meaning of “hereditary property” connected to the house; so, the house is viewed as
an illiquid asset that must be transmitted to the heirs at all costs, instead of being a tool for
pension planning (Fornero et al., 2016). In 2012, Angelini et al. (2012) investigated in detail
the reasons that explain the lack of demand for RMs in Italy: this appears to be related to
pension incomes still quite high in the period under consideration, as well as anti-selection
phenomena inherent in products affected by the longevity risk. Indeed, according to Angelini
et al. (2012), an important aspect to be taken into account is the information asymmetry due
to the discrepancy between the survival probabilities adopted by the lender and the subjective
survival probabilities perceived by the borrower. However, the RMs have been proven to be
liquidity producers through empirical veriﬁcations in this study, also allowing the heirs to
make the choice to redeem the property, unlike the sale of the bare ownership.
It is not easy to understand retail market trends. In fact, it’s necessary to untangle the
connections between the value attributed to consumption and that of inheritance (Wang &
Han, 2021); unique behavioral paradigms cannot be identiﬁed because these connections vary
based on ﬁnancial education, social class, and health status. Recent studies have cautioned
against possible misinterpretations of individual choices caused by bequest preferences; the
literature sometimes expresses criticism of the ways to incorporate the preference for bequests
into the life-cycle patterns of consumption and wealth (Kraft et al., 2022). Although there
are some critical aspects, mostly related to the product’s complexity and communication, the
123

Annals of Operations Research
170 ﬁnancial market experts involved in the survey carried out by the Centre for European
Economic Research in Mannheim (ZEW) (Bartsch et al., 2021) predict a growing interest in
these products. Moreover, the recent report by Kemmy and Bigley (2023) highlights that new
lenders are entering the European RM market and gaining attention from potential recipients
of the product. Within this context, the urgency for improving ﬁnancial and demographic
literacy cannot be understated (Apicella et al., 2024).
3 Lender’s point of view
3.1 Contract profile, risk drivers and calculation model
This section describes the mathematical model and deepens the risk drivers impacting on the
contract and introduces the scenario hypotheses for the applications. The following actuarial
valuation is instrumental in performing the analysis, contained in subsequent sections, to
evaluate the utility gained by a potential RM subscriber.
Reverse Mortgage contract lines are based on a ﬁnancial equivalence relationship assessed
at t = 0, issue time of the contract, between the commitments of the two counterparties,
lender/bank or insurer and borrower/homeowner, this last aged x. The borrower can receive
at issue time a lump sum, equivalent to the valuation of the contracted house or a percentage
of its value, net of the Non-Negative Equity Guarantee (NNEG from here on), which ensures
that the debt will not exceed the value of the property. As an alternative to the lump sum,
the borrower can receive constant periodic installments throughout the duration of life. This
summary, that brings together the various facets of a contract such as the RM, is intended to
trace the contractual proﬁle of the RM by highlighting the main components of risk that the
lender must control. These risk drivers can be listed and labeled as follows (Di Lorenzo et
al., 2022):
• longevity risk, related to the uncertainty about the borrower’s lifespan. If the borrower
lives longer than expected, this exposes the lender to more payments in the case of
installment payments and in any case, even in the case of lump sum payments, to an
extension of the contract period that will postpone the sale of the property beyond what
was budgeted. Importantly, this source of uncertainty also ampliﬁes the exposure of the
lender to the other sources of risk, which become less controllable as the vulnerability
range increases;
• house price risk, due to possible losses caused by the fact that the liquidation value of
the house may fall below the borrower’s outstanding debt at the time of his/her death;
• ﬁnancial risk, due to the volatility risk of interest rates.
From a strictly ﬁnancial point of view, the calculation model is based on the deﬁnition and
description of two different interest rates and mortality rates, related to the three different
sources of risk listed above. In details, the longevity risk impacts the duration of the contract
and it will be controlled by adopting prudential mortality rates, properly projected. There
are numerous mathematical models that describe the trend of human survival while also
capturing its systematic improvement. The probability that an individual aged x is alive at
the age x +t is denoted by the symbol t px and the probability of dying between x and x +t is
tqx, such that t px = 1−tqx. The house price risk will be described by the interest rate r HV
s
,
the random rate of house value appreciation at the generic time t, with t ∈(0, T ), where
T denotes the maximum duration of the contract. This is the real estate market appreciation
rate in the speciﬁc market where the contract is signed. The ﬁnancial risk will be assessed
123

Annals of Operations Research
through the rate r RM
t
that the lender applies to the loan. This rate is given by the sum of
the risk-free interest rate rt plus the risk premium π. Based on the previous basis for risk
analysis, the ﬁnancial actuarial equivalence relationship established at the issue time of the
contract can be assessed, based on the following notation:
• LS0 is the lump sum payable by the lender at the issue time;
• H0 is the current market value of the house;
• α denotes a proportion of the current house value H0 (0 < α ≤1): from a theoretical
point of view, if α = 1, then the RM contract is written on the whole value of the
house (when the borrower will die, the heirs will pay the accumulated loan or the entire
proceeds from the sale of the house); in practice α < 1 and the contract is written on a
percentage of the initial value of the house (the borrower consequently receives a lower
initial lump sum, and when the borrower will die the heirs consequently will have to
repay the accumulated debt or a proportion of the proceeds from the sale);
• A0 = αH0 is the value of the loan on which the interests are accumulated;
• R is the constant amount of money that the lender will pay to the borrower annually from
issue time until death;
• ¨αx is the actuarial present value of a life annuity paid to an individual of age x, of annual
unit installment, over lifetime.
The following relation holds:
LS0 = R ¨αx < A0 = αH0.
(1)
The quantity (A0 −LS0) represents the cost of the guarantee to be borne by the borrower.
The role of the NNEG is clariﬁed by the following relationship, in which, denoting with At
and Ht the value of the loan and the value of the property at time t respectively, the amount
payable by the heirs at a generic time t, 0 < t < ω −x, where ω is the extreme age of the
borrower, is the value at maturity of a short position in a put option:
Vt = At −max(0, At −Ht) = min(At, Ht).
(2)
Following Wang et al. (2008), considering the stochastic nature of interest rates, random
quantities will be denoted by the tilde symbol. We can write:
˜At = A0
t−1

j=0
(1 + ˜r j RM) = αH0
t−1

j=0
(1 + ˜r j + π),
(3)
˜Ht = αH0
t−1

j=0
(1 + ˜r j HV ).
(4)
We are now able to establish the ﬁnancial equilibrium at the time of contracting, based on the
relationship between the lump sum (coincident with the actuarial present value of the annual
installments payable in the event of the borrower’s lifetime) and the sum Vt:
˜LS0 =
ω−x

t=1
˜Vt
⎡
⎣
t
j=1
(1 + ˜r j)−1
⎤
⎦t−1/1qx,
(5)
where t−1/1qx is the probability that the borrower aged x dies between the ages (x + t −1)
and (x + t). Formula (5) expresses the lump sum and consequently the installment payable
in the event of the borrower’s lifetime as a function of the random variables introduced
earlier, namely, the interest rates r RM
j
, r HV
j
, r j, and the survival probabilities inferred from
123

Annals of Operations Research
an appropriate dynamic model dependent on the borrower’s age and time, so as to capture
the improvement due to longevity. For this reason, eq. (5) represents the possible values of
the lump sum for each possible evolution of the cash ﬂows. In order to derive the lump sum
that the householder receives in t = 0, following the standard assumption in the actuarial
modeling, we assume substantial independence between Vt and the borrower’s lifespan and
denote by P the model selected to calculate the probabilities of death, so we can write the
value of the calculated lump sum as the conditional expected value under a real probability
measure:
LS0 = E(E[ ˜
LS0]|P).
(6)
3.2 Scenario assumptions
In this section we describe the assumptions on which we worked in order to provide the
descriptive numerical results of the research. From the point of view of the lender, the sources
of riskiness were identiﬁed as the risk due to longevity (longevity risk), the risk related to
ﬁnancial market ﬂuctuations (ﬁnancial risk), and the risk that arises from the dynamics of the
real estate market appreciation rate (house price risk). Following the guidelines by Di Lorenzo
et al. (2022), in what follows we will summarize the scenario assumptions considered to
evaluate the value of the lump sum received by the borrower, which is necessary for the
following numerical applications.
Mortality Description. As in Di Lorenzo et al. (2022), we apply the Lee Carter model to
the Italian mortality data, available on Human Mortality Database from 1874 to 2014. This
choice is motivated by the extensive use of the Lee Carter model by academics, actuaries,
and social security institutions to forecast mortality rates. Following Lee and Carter (1992),
the equation of the logarithm of the observed central mortality rates mx,t at age x and year
t, is:
ln mx,t = ax + bxkt + εx,t.
(7)
In Eq. (7), the parameters ax, bx and kt describe, respectively, the shape of the age proﬁle of
ln mx,t, during the observation period, the mortality response at each age x for each change
in the general level of mortality, and the general level of mortality in year t. The quantity εx,t
is an error term, i.e. it represents the part of the mortality phenomenon that the model fails
to capture as a random variable with expected value 0 and variance σ 2
ε . Having the model no
regressors, it cannot be ﬁtted by ordinary regression methods; the authors ﬁnd a least squares
solution of Eq. (7) by minimizing the sum:

x,t
(ln mx,t −ax −bxkt)2.
(8)
By means of the Singular Value Decomposition method applied to the matrix of the observed
mortality rates, it is possible to ﬁt the model to historical rates. The two constraints

x
bx = 1,

t
kt = 0,
(9)
together with the assumption of homoschedasticity of the errors, ensure a unique solution.We
use Box-Jenkins techniques to estimate and forecast the time-varying parameter kt as an
ARIMA time series model (cfr. (Di Lorenzo et al., 2022)). The probabilities of death in the
year needed for (5) can be obtained accordingly.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Financial interest rate description. To describe the short rate dynamics in (3), capturing
the high volatility of the interest rate series, we choose the jump diffusion model proposed by
Merton (cf. (Chen et al., 2021) and (Di Lorenzo et al., 2022)). It is described by the stochastic
differential equation:
drt = r(t)(ηdt + θdWt + dQ(t)),
(10)
in which η is the annualized expected return on the asset price, θ is the annualized volatility
of the asset price, Wt is a Brownian motion and Q(t) is a compound Poisson process. As in
Di Lorenzo et al. (2022), we consider a constant volatility and Gaussian jumps. We estimated
the parameters of the jump diffusion model on the Italian 10 year government bond daily
yield from 2000 to 2018 using the Deoptim package of R. The optimization algorithm used to
calibrate the models is based on the differential evolution algorithm for global optimization
described in Mullen et al. (2011).
House price interest rate description. Refering to Huang et al. (2011), the house prices
Ht is modeled considering the geometric Brownian motion:
dHt = μH(t)dt + σ H(t)dZ(t),
(11)
in which the parameters μ and σ are respectively the drift and the volatility of the process,
while Z(t) is the standard Wiener process. The parameter estimation have been performed
on the quarterly variations of the Italian Real Estate Index IPAB diffused by ISTAT between
2010 and 2019 (IstatData, 2020).
4 Borrower’s point of view
4.1 General aspects and utility-based models
The decision of whether or not to enter into a RM contract is a complex issue for an elderly
person. Following Chiang and Tsai (2016), we can summarize the advantages and disad-
vantages of undertaking the role of the borrower in a RM contract. The borrower has the
advantage of continuing to live at home as well as of being able to rely on a fund or periodic
installments with which to meet daily or health expenses. The borrower is not required to pay
installments or components of them while living at home; loan repayment is limited to an
amount less or equal to the proceeds from the sale of the property and ﬁnally, the possibility,
should market conditions make it advantageous in terms of the value of the home (i.e. the
real estate market appreciates), to proceed to sell the home by reducing interest expenses and
anticipating gains. Again, and in any case, thanks to the NNEG, neither the borrower nor
relatives will incur ﬁnancial obligations arising from any unexpected drops in house prices
(Merton & Lai, 2016). Despite these objective advantageous aspects, RMs are struggling to
take off. Many studies in the ﬁeld point out that there are basically two critical factors: ﬁrst,
an entrenched culture of inheritance, which sees the house as the main asset to be left behind,
from which house bequest motivation originates, to which is added the uncertainty about
future consumption needs, the latter aspect related to uncertainty about lifespan, healthy
lifespan in particular.
In order to investigate the economic consequences of reverse mortgage on elderly’s con-
sumption behavior, we construct a life cycle model for a retired individual aged x with estreme
age ω, whose primary wealth asset is constituted by own home and who has to deal with
the uncertainty about lifespan, future health states and the consequent considerable expenses
123

Annals of Operations Research
for medical treatments, as well as house maintenance costs. For such homeowners, Davidoff
(2009) considers a life cycle model to evaluate consumption smoothing beneﬁts offered by
annuities, long-term care insurance and reverse mortgages, focusing on the interactions of
demand of these different products in the U.S. market. Similar simulations were provided by
Mitchell et al. (1999) and Brown and Finkelstein (2007), but only in the setting of annuities
and long term care insurance, respectively. Subsequently, Hanewald et al. (2016) analyze the
decision problem of the optimal choice between reverse mortgages and home revision plans
in an augmented life cycle model. Their paper extends previous work by Davidoff (2009) by
allowing for interest rate risk, including home reversion plans in addition to reverse mort-
gages, and modeling the timing decision of when to release home equity. The model, however,
is constructed just on two periods, each of which reﬂects a multiyear horizon. Shao et al.
(2019) jointly consider the role of reverse mortgages and long term care insurance (LTCI) in
retirement planning, applying a multi-period life cycle model. They solve the retiree’s opti-
mal choice for consumption, reverse mortgage loans, private long term care insurance and
risk-free assets, referring to the U.S. market. However, they consider retirees with a relevant
amount of starting liquid wealth so to conclude that, when there is no LTCI market, elders do
not need to borrow against their house since pension income and base level of wealth result
to be sufﬁcient to fund consumption. In the aim to ﬁt the model to the Italian context, our
paper focus on the evaluation of RM contracts from the point of view of a homeowner who
has low liquidity to bear medical expenses and consumption of other goods. For this reason,
we do not consider LTCI or other type of products and shift the focus of the analysis to the
optimal savings allocation rather then optimal consumption path. Additionally, we decide to
focus on savings allocation to empirically shed light on the fact that RM may help senior
citizens to give liquid ﬁnancial support to children or grandchildren during their lifetime, as
already noticed by Fornero et al. (2016). In details, our model considers a general scenario
tailored to the “house rich, cash poor” part of elder Italian population, where time moves,
period by period, from age x up to age ω (i.e. t ∈[0, ω −x]). We suppose that at t = 0 the
aged-x individual is in good health, owns some liquid wealth W0 and a mortgage-free home
with current market value H0. At this time, he/she has the opportunity to stipulate a RM plan,
structured as explained in Sect.3. In the following and without any loss in the generality
of the model, we assume that the borrower receives an initial lump sum LS0 rather that a
stream of payments, assigned by the lender following the lines in Sect.3. At each time t,
the elder decides on consumption and savings. We assume that he/she is surely dead at age
ω +1. As in the aforementioned works, we measure utility not only on consumption but also
on bequest to understand the impact of the attachment to the property on elder’s ﬁnancial
planning. Although welfare advantages obtained by contracting a RM contract have been
proven, a strong bequest motivation may lower individual’s utility gains, conﬁrming it as the
most prominent explanation for the absence of demand for this type of products, coherently
with Fornero et al. (2016).
Differently from Davidoff (2009) we do not consider any psychological and ﬁnancial costs
as a consequence of leaving the house for non-health reasons, with the intention of focusing
on the inﬂuence of medical expenses and bequest on elders’ economic attitude. However, our
construction can be easily generalized to include such type of disutility and conclusions will
not be affected at all. As speciﬁed in Sect.3, we incorporate also the possibility of writing
RM on a proportion α of the current market value of the house, in which case the borrower
will receive a lower initial lump sum A0 < LS0. At the random time of death, the heirs
consequently will have to repay the accumulated debt or a proportion of the proceeds from
the sale of the house, according to Eq. (2); individual’s remaining liquid wealth and housing
wealth, net of RM payments, are bequeathed.
123

Annals of Operations Research
4.2 Health states, transition probabilities and house maintenance costs
During the considered lifespan, we assume that the elderly may be in three different health
states1: healthy (s = 1), severely ill (s = 2) or dead (s = 3). States s = 1 and s = 2 are
considered as strictly transitory, i.e. it is not possible to go back once passed them, while state
s = 3 is totally absorbent, in the sense that once reached, one is no longer able to change this
state (Di Falco & De Angelis, 2016).
Denote with ps,t the probability of being in health state s at time t and with Ms the amount
of medical expenditures in health state s. Such costs are chosen to be zero in case of good
health (s = 1) or in case of death (s = 3); medical expenses for s = 2 are estimated by
ISTAT dataset about household medical expenses in the period 2014–2021 (IstatData, 2022).
We set this value constantly equal to Ms,t =e1,000/year, since we just consider the amount
charged to the elder, i.e. eroded by the sum covered by government provision. Also, we do
not look at any type of long term care insurance, since the target of our model is the “house
rich and cash poor” Italian retirees, that usually cannot afford to purchase health or long term
care insurances.
Transition probabilities were acquired from demographic technical bases made available
by Di Falco and De Angelis (2016) in the form of numerical table collected in ANIA (2019).
We refer to male population considering the central scenario, since is that of maximum
likelihood among all the others produced by the model. Using these data, we were able to
obtain a projected application of our model where the individual enters age 70 in 2013 and
turns 100 in 2043 (see Sect.6).
House maintenance costs, denoted with Zt and extracted from ISTAT dataset (IstatData,
2022), are designed to represent repairing costs in which the borrowers incur to keep the
house as required by RM guidelines; these terms will not look at household expenses, to be
fully compensated by the pension income. We set Zt =e150/year.
4.3 Utility function and constraints
Having in mind the structure of the RM contract described in Sect.3, we are now looking
at the elders decision problem, who has the opportunity to stipulate a RM plan at t = 0.
Firstly, our model is constructed in order to ﬁt with our target market, the Italian one, which
is mostly characterized by “house rich and cash poor” retirees. Secondly, in order to focus
on the impact of the reverse mortgage product on elderly consumption and to not further
complicate the construction, we do not look for optimal time or age for contracting a reverse
mortgage, neither consider the possibility of taking multiple RM loans during retirement, as
done in Hanewald et al. (2016), Campbell and Cocco (2003). We describe consumption and
bequest preferences considering constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) utilities. However,
differently from Davidoff (2009) and Shao et al. (2019), where aggregate CRRA utility
functions for housing and non-housing consumption were considered, we follow Campbell
and Cocco (2003) and Hanewald et al. (2016) and deﬁne utility over consumption only, since
housing consumption is related to rent (Piazzesi et al., 2007; Davidoff, 2010): we suppose
that elderly always prefer to live in their own house and will leave just in case of death.
1 The choice of considering just three health states is linked to the availability of data for the Italian market.
One can note that Davidoff (2009) and Hanewald et al. (2016) work on four different health states, relying
on Ameriks et al. (2011), while Shao et al. (2019) consider ﬁve different health states and refer to HRS data
(HRS, 2010) to estimate the transition probabilities.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Therefore, consumption and bequest utility functions have the following form:
U(Cs,t) = C1−γ
s,t
1 −γ ,
(12)
B(Ws,t) = W 1−γ
s,t
1 −γ ,
(13)
where γ > 1 denotes the coefﬁcient of relative risk aversion, Cs,t is state s-time t consump-
tion, Ws,t denotes state s-time t wealth. An x-aged elder maximizes the following lifetime
utility function:
E p[C, W] =
ω−x

t=0
δt ·
 2

s=1
ps,t · U(Cs,t) + β · p3,t · B(W3,t+1)
 
,
(14)
where δ < 1 denotes the subjective discount factor, which represents impatience of the
individual and β is the parameter indicating the intensity of the bequest motivation.
Denoting with CO Hs,t the liquid cash-on-hand available at state s-time t and Ss,t as the
savings carried out to the next period from state s-time t, constraints are constructed, for
every s ∈{1, 2, 3} and t ∈[0, T ] as follows:
• Case with RM:
(i) Cs,t =

W0 −Ss,t −Ms,t −Zt + LS0
if t=0,
CO Hs,t −Ss,t −Ms,t −Zt
if t > 0;
(ii) Ws,t+1 = Ss,t · (1 + rt) + max(0, Ht+1 −At+1);
(iii) Ws,t ≥0;
(iv) 0 ≤Ss,0 ≤W0 −Ms,t −Zt + LS0;
(v) 0 ≤Ss,t ≤CO Hs,t −Ms,t −Zt;
• Case without RM:
(i′) Cs,t =

W0 −Ss,t −Ms,t −Zt
if t=0,
CO Hs,t −Ss,t −Ms,t −Zt
if t > 0;
(ii′) Ws,t+1 = Ss,t · (1 + rt) + Ht+1;
(iii′) Ws,t ≥0;
(iv′) 0 ≤Ss,0 ≤W0 −Ms,t −Zt;
(v′) 0 ≤Ss,t ≤CO Hs,t −Ms,t −Zt.
Equations (i) −(i′) describe the dynamics of consumption ﬂow with and without RM;
at t = 0, the elder is supposed to be in a healthy state (i.e. s = 1) and receives the amount
LS0, established as in (6), in the event of purchasing the RM product. Recall that the cost
for the guarantee to be borne by the borrower are not visible in the consumption ﬂow since
they are already subtracted from the lump sum, as described in Eq. (1). Equations (ii)−(ii′)
explain the relationship between bequest and liquid wealth; equation (ii) takes into account
the NNEG connected to the RM contract, described in Sect.3, while equation (ii′) considers
the house value at t + 1 as a liquid amount bequeathed by the heirs. Equations (iii) −(iii′)
and (iv) −(iv)′ avoid negative wealth and negative consumption respectively. Note that,
without loss of generality, we do not include pension income in the consumption ﬂow since
we suppose that it is totally eroded by household expenses.
123

Annals of Operations Research
5 Optimization procedure
The elder starts the ﬁrst period in a healthy condition and with liquid wealth W0; at this time,
he has the opportunity to stipulate a RM plan. At each period t, he/she has to decide how
much to consume and then consequently how much to save for the next period. Next period
cash-on-hand for a certain health state ˆs is given by
CO Hˆs,t+1 = Ss,t(1 + rt),
(15)
where rt is the risk-free interest rate. The decision is determined at t = 0 by comparing
the value of the lifetime expected utility function with and without the RM. Therefore, to
understand individual’s optimal choice, we need to solve the maximization of Eq. (14),
subjected to constraints (i)-(v), (i′) −(v′).
This problem cannot be solved analytically, hence we exploit the backward induction
mechanism. This method is widely used when dealing with consumption and optimal port-
folio choices over life cycle models (Campbell & Cocco, 2003; Cocco et al., 2005; Davidoff,
2009; Shao et al., 2019), and in several different settings (Cocco & Lopes, 2011; Andréas-
son et al., 2017; Daminato & Padula, 2024). The procedure for our case was constructed as
follows: knowing that at time T + 1 the elder will be surely dead, we could easily establish,
for every health state, the value function for the last period, which corresponds to the indirect
utility function, solving:
Vs,T (C, W) = max
Cs,T
[U(Cs,T ) + δ · β · B(W3,T +1)].
(16)
Subsequently, we can use this value to compute the value functions for the previous
periods: this value is equal to the current utility plus the discounted expected indirect utility.
In general, for each t ∈[0, T ) and health state s = 1, 2, we need to ﬁnd:
Vs,t(C, W) = max
Cs,t

U(Cs,t) + δ ·
 2

s′=1
ps′,t · Vs′,t+1(C, W) + β · p3,t · B(W3,t+1)
 
.
(17)
In order to implement the optimization procedure, we consider savings as the decision
variable,followingDavidoff(2009),andusethegridsearchmethodtoﬁndtheoptimalsavings
choice. More precisely, starting from T and going backward for each time period t ∈(0, T ],
we discretize the wealth state variable considering ordered grid with equidistant grid points
and solve Eqs. (16)–(17) recursively as indicated above, taking into account constraints (i)-
(v), (i′) −(v′). We set the maximum wealth level in each grid as the maximum attainable
wealth, i.e., for each t, Wt,max = W0 · (1 + rt)t represents the wealth that can be accrued
by investing the initial wealth until time t at the risk-free interest rate. For each grid point
of the wealth state variable, we ﬁnd and store the optimal savings and consequently the
consumption levels elder may bear, as well as the values of the corresponding indirect utility
function. Once concluded this iteration, we are ready to get the optimal savings path. Since
the starting wealth is equal to W0 and the elder is in good health at t = 0, i.e. s = 1, we can
extract the optimal savings level (and consequently consumption and next-period starting
wealth) which corresponds to our wealth grid point W0 at t = 0. For successive time periods
t, once knowing the value of the remaining wealth at t −1, using the relation (15) we are
able to repeat the selection procedure until t = T , and construct the optimal savings path.
123

Annals of Operations Research
6 Numerical application and results
In this section we show some numerical applications of the model in order to compare
optimal savings path when the elder homeowner agrees or not to subscribe the RM. Focusing
on the borrower’s perspective, we will present three possible scenarios of different illness
occurrences: the median case scenario in which the elder homeowner becomes seriously ill at
85 and remains in this state until his death, the worst case scenario, in which he/she becomes
seriously ill at 71 and has to face considerable medical expenses until death, and the best
case scenario in which he/she reaches extreme age in good health. We will compare optimal
savings path with and without RM in all these cases. Secondly, we carry out a sensitivity
analysis respect to the parameters that characterize old person’s attitude to understand their
impactonlifetimeutilityfunction:β asthepropensitytobequest,γ representingriskaversion,
δ describing the impatience of the borrower.
6.1 Parameter settings
We suppose that at t = 0 the elder, with starting liquid wealth of W0 =e20, 000, is x = 70
years old and has to decide if to borrow against a proportion α = 0.7 of his/her house2 with
initial value H0 = e200, 000. We set extreme age at ω = 100. Firstly, we need to quantify
the amount of the lump sum LS0 the pensioner receives in the event of signing the contract.
Setting the global interest applied by the lender to the RM loan at 5, 56%, the evolution of
interest rates and house price interest rate are simulated as displayed in Sect.3; the pricing of
the RM was obtained according to the actuarial evaluation formulas developed by Di Lorenzo
et al. (2022) and Di Lorenzo et al. (2024a), and returns LS0 = e42, 126.
At this point, for the purpose of performing the optimization procedure, we ﬁx3 as bench-
mark values δ = 0.98 as the impatience parameter, β = 2 as the bequest propensity parameter
and γ = 2 as the risk aversion parameter. Transition probabilities, medical expenses and
house maintenance costs are chosen as described in Sect.4. From now on, as a consequence
of the demographic technical bases considered, we will refer to male population.
6.2 Results
Given the parameters setting and once the lump sum has been quantiﬁed, we implement the
optimization procedure searching for the optimal savings path that maximizes the lifetime
utility function. During the optimization procedure, we assume that savings accumulate at
a constant risk-free interest rate equal to r = 1, 6%. The process is repeated in the case
the homeowner agrees or not to subscribe the RM. In order to analyze different occurrences
elderly may deal with during retirement, we perform the optimization for the three different
scenarios, showing the level of liquid wealth which coincides with the optimal choice of
savings for each age in Figs. 1, 2, 3. In all the three exemplary cases, it is noticeable that the
liquid wealth available in the case of RM may help release the tension on elderly savings
behavior, so that the elderly would be able to ﬁnancially help heirs while still alive.
2 In this work, we do not consider the proportion α as a decision variable for the elderly since, in the Italian
context, it is generally preset by the issuer in relation to the age and health status of the borrower.
3 It is worth noting that the setting of the parameters is not homogeneous in the existing literature, since
the choice is linked to the speciﬁc framework one decides to analyze. Moreover, we were not interested in
performing any type of estimation for these values in the present work. Therefore, one should interpret our
choice as illustrative to understand how the model works.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Optimal savings paths in the median case scenario
Fig. 2 Optimal savings paths in the worst case scenario
Median case scenario
In this case, according to the parameters setting mentioned earlier, the homeowner becomes
seriously ill at 85 and remains in this state until his death. As Fig.1 shows, without RM,
the incidence of medical expenses leads to consuming all the liquidity from savings within
15 years and the individual, at 88 years old, must ﬁnancially burden the heirs to face his
remaining old age. Otherwise, if he stipulates the RM, the lump sum investment guarantees
the possibility of covering expenses until the extreme age.
Worst case scenario
As per the aforementioned selection of parameters, in this case the elder becomes seriously
ill at 71. The situation becomes more serious respect to the previous one since, if he has not
subscribed to RM, the liquidity from savings at his disposal will collapse at the age of 77,
while in the case of subscription of the contract, he manages to be ﬁnancially independent
for a further 10 years.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 3 Optimal savings paths in the best case scenario
Best case scenario
In the best case, given the parameters as stated above, the homeowner will reach extreme
age in good health. Although the absence of medical expenses, the advantage deriving from
signing the RM can also be notice: the proceeds of the lump sum investment guarantee him
superior liquid wealth from savings which allows him to lead a more comfortable lifestyle
during his old age and provides him with a sort of supplementary pension, as one can see by
the increasing trend of liquid wealth at disposal.
All the examples above clearly illustrate the welfare gains senior citizens may obtain
contracting a RM contract. However, this product is struggling to develop on the Italian
market. We strongly believe that, despite the bequest motivation may be a predominant
element of rejection, poor ﬁnancial literacy among elderly population is highly preventing
this product to be purchased. As already pointed out in Fornero et al. (2016), RM is perceived
as a last resort in case of poverty. However, as the best scenario case pointed out, the RM lump
sum may be used as an instrument to accomplish consumption smoothing as well as being
invested, allowing to create a liquid share of inheritance to be left to heirs. Consequently,
from a policy point of view, it results to be fundamental to furnish ﬁnancial guidance to
elderly in order to enable them to understand the possibilities this product is able to provide
for their retirement and the future of their relatives.
6.3 Sensitivity analysis
In this last section, we conduct a sensitivity analysis by changing the values of the param-
eters β, γ and δ in order to emphasize that the issuer has to take into account the different
characteristics of the buyer, since they may concretely affect the product personal evaluation.
Figure4a–c show, coherently with the existing literature (Hanewald et al., 2016; Shao et al.,
2019), the trend of elder’s utility function as the parameters β, γ and δ vary. We choose the
following settings:
Considering that the utility obtained after contracting the RM is always dominant, one
can notice a decreasing evolution of the lifetime utility function respect to the parameters
β and δ: the stronger the bequest motivation and the impatience of the borrower, the less
123

Annals of Operations Research
Parameter
Value 1
Value 2
Value 3
β
0
2
5
γ
2
3
5
δ
0.93
0.98
1
Fig. 4 Sensitivity analysis
the utility. This may be explained considering that a stronger bequest motivation prevents
elders from giving up the ownership of the house to receive an amount of money. On the
other hand, looking at the parameter δ, moving consumption beneﬁts to preceding years
makes the product less attractive for more forward-looking individuals. In contrast, when
the risk aversion increases, the utility gains when contracting RM increase. This can be
explained considering all sources of house-related risk as a ﬁnancial asset: more risk-averse
homeowners prefer to receive an immediate amount of money rather than face house price
risk.
Given the clear emotional aspects that come into play in purchasing the RM product, this
type of analysis can be useful to policy makers to create a more ﬂexible offer, which is able
to take into account the different personal features of buyers.
7 Conclusions
Reverse mortgage contracts are framed in the area of ﬁnancial insurance products designed
to meet the needs of an ageing society. In this paper, we focus our attention on the point
of view of “house rich and cash poor” elder Italian homeowners, whose ﬁnancial status
is alarming, due to insufﬁcient pension income, increasing life expectancy and consequent
expensive medical costs to be met. Much work has be done in scientiﬁc literature in order
to investigate the reasons why RM is struggling to develop on Italian market. However,
the novelty of our research is to provide an empirical analysis of the impact of RM on
Italian elder’s ﬁnancial planning. Our choice of the stochastic processes in the numerical
applications was made for illustrative purposes and is functional to the construction of the
123

Annals of Operations Research
life-cycle model, which constitutes the central and innovative part of the paper. However,
the generality of our mathematical construction enables to easily employ different stochastic
processes and to cover various ﬁnancial scenarios, including other key variables as inﬂation.
We adapt the widely used life-cycle model (Davidoff, 2010; Hanewald et al., 2016; Shao et
al., 2019) to our target market and center the analysis on comparing optimal savings path with
and without RM. To pursue the optimization procedure, we exploit the backward induction
mechanism and discuss three exemplary cases considering different occurrences elderly may
deal with during retirement, related to health state. A sensitivity analysis on the parameters
characterizing borrower’s attitude was also provided. What emerges is a larger utility gain
in the case RM is chosen, which may provide a relevant welfare support to release pressure
on elders’ consumption and savings allocation. These results shed light on the need for a
better communication and presentation of the product; despite the fact that strong bequest
motive may be one of the most impacting factors for the lack of demand of RM, we strongly
believe that ﬁnancial education has an important role in this framework. Moreover, given
the clear emotional aspects that is involved in this type of product, due to the attachment to
the property elders may feel, our analysis can provide important policy indication to make
the product more attractive in the market: the evidence obtained by exploring the context
of elderly house rich and cash poor Italians are unmistakable, so the saving gains are clear.
The problem of information ambiguity, due to the product’s complexity, as well as the poor
ﬁnancial literacy, constitutes the main point to be addressed.
Funding Open access funding provided by Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II within the CRUI-
CARE Agreement. Emilia Di Lorenzo,Gabriella Piscopo and Alba Roviello were partially supported by the
Grant Agreement “Progetto Partenariati Estesi - PNRR Project “Age-It - Ageing Well in an ageing society ”–
Codice MUR: PE0000015- CUP E63C22002050006”.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors have no Conﬂict of interest to declare that are relevant to the content of this
article.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
ANIA. (2019). Invalidità e inabilità di tipo previdenziale: evidenze osservate, modelli attuariali e base
demograﬁca. http://www.ania.it/it/servizi/studi--e--rapporti--demograﬁci.html.
Alai, D. H., Chen, H., Cho, D., Hanewald, K., & Sherris, M. (2014). Developing equity release markets: Risk
analysis for reverse mortgages and home reversions. North American Actuarial Journal, 18(1), 217–241.
Alvarez, J. A., Kallestrup-Lamb, M., & Kjærgaard, S. (2021). Linking retirement age to life expectancy does
not lessen the demographic implications of unequal lifespans. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics,
99, 363–375.
Ameriks, J., Caplin, A., Laufer, S., & Van Nieuwerburgh, S. (2011). The joy of giving or assisted living? Using
strategic surveys to separate public care aversion from bequest motives. The Journal of Finance, 66(2),
519–561.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Andréasson, J. G., Shevchenko, P. V., & Novikov, A. (2017). Optimal consumption, investment and housing
with means-tested public pension in retirement. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, 75, 32–47.
Angelini, V., Brugiavini, A., & Weber, G. (2014). The dynamics of homeownership among the 50+ in Europe.
Journal of Population Economics, 27, 797–823.
Angelini, V., Pellizzon, L., & Weber, G. (2012). Le scelte abitative degli anziani e la domanda di reverse
Mortgage. L’alternativa al pubblico? Le forme organizzate di ﬁnanziamento privato nel welfare sociale:
Le forme organizzate di ﬁnanziamento privato nel welfare sociale, a cura di a cura di C. Gori. (pp.
73–104).
Apicella, G., De Giorgi, E., Di Lorenzo, E., & Sibillo, M. (2024). Gender-inclusive ﬁnancial and demographic
literacy: Monetizing the gender mortality gap. Applied Stochastic Models In Business and Industry, 1–23.
Atance, D., Debón, A., & De La Fuente, I. (2024). Valuation of reverse mortgages in the Spanish market for
foreign residents. Technological and Economic Development of Economy, 30(1), 46–73.
Atance, D., Lledó, J., & Navarro, E. (2025). Modelling and forecasting mortality rates for a life insurance
portfolio. Risk Management, 27(1), 3.
Banca d’Italia (2020) Indagine sui bilanci delle famiglie. Fascicolo IBF.
Bartsch, F., Buhlmann, F., Kirschenmann, K., & Schmidt, C. (2021). Is there a need for reverse mortgages in
Germany? Empirical evidence and policy implications.
Beltrametti, L. (2017). House rich, cash poor. Come rendere liquida la ricchezza rappresentata dalla casa di
abitazione. Quaderni dell’Osservatorio, Fondazione Cariplo. 26.
Brown, J. R., & Finkelstein, A. (2007). Why is the market for long-term care insurance so small? Journal of
Public Economics, 91(10), 1967–1991.
Campbell, J. Y., & Cocco, J. F. (2003). Household risk management and optimal mortgage choice. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4), 1449–1494.
Chen, F. Y., Yang, S. S., & Huang, H. C. (2021). Valuation of non-negative equity guarantees, considering
contagion risk for house prices under the HJM interest rate model. Quantitative Finance, 21(9), 1551–
1565.
Chiang,S.L.,& Tsai,M.S.(2016).Analyzing an elder’sdesire for a reverse mortgage using an economic model
that considers house bequest motivation, random death time and stochastic house price. International
Review of Economics & Finance, 42, 202–219.
Cocco, J. F., Gomes, F. J., & Maenhout, P. J. (2005). Consumption and portfolio choice over the life cycle.
The Review of Financial Studies, 18(2), 491–533.
Cocco, J. F., & Lopes, P. (2011). Deﬁned beneﬁt or deﬁned contribution? A study of pension choices. Journal
of Risk and Insurance, 78(4), 931–960.
Daminato, C., & Padula, M. (2024). The life-cycle effects of pension reforms: A structural approach. Journal
of the European Economic Association, 22(1), 355–392.
Davidoff, T. (2009). Housing, health, and annuities. Journal of Risk and Insurance, 76(1), 31–52.
Davidoff, T. (2010). Home equity commitment and long-term care insurance demand. Journal of Public
Economics, 94(1–2), 44–49.
Denuit, M., Lucas, N., & Pitacco, E. (2019). Pricing and reserving in LTC insurance. Actuarial aspects of long
term care. 129–158.
Di Falco L., & De Angelis P. (2016). Assicurazioni sulla salute: caratteristiche, modelli attuariali e basi
tecniche.
Di Lorenzo, E., Piscopo, G., & Sibillo, M. (2024). Addressing the economic and demographic complexity via
a neural network approach: risk measures for reverse mortgages. Computational Management Science,
21(1), 11.
Di Lorenzo, E., Piscopo, G., Sibillo, M., & Tizzano, R. (2022). Reverse mortgage and risk proﬁle awareness:
Proposals for securitization. Applied Stochastic Models in Business and Industry, 38(2), 353–369.
Di Lorenzo, E., Piscopo, G., Sibillo, M., & Trotta, A. (2024). Looking toward the future: well-ageing solutions
from the equity release mortgage. Encyclopedia of Monetary Policy, Financial Markets and Banking.
D’Amato, V., Di Lorenzo, E., Haberman, S., Sibillo, M., & Tizzano, R. (2021). Pension schemes versus real
estate. Annals of Operations Research, 299, 797–809.
European Commission. ECHI: European Core Health Indicators. Directorate-General for Health and Food
Safety. (2024). https://health.ec.europa.eu/indicators--and--data/european--core--health--indicators--
echi/echi--european--core--health--indicators_en?prefLang=it
Eurostat. Population and Demography Database. European Union. (2024). https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/
web/population--demography/demography--population--stock--balance/database?node_code=demo_
r_mlifexp
Fornero, E., Rossi, M., & Brancati, M. C. U. (2016). Explaining why, right or wrong,(Italian) households do
not like reverse mortgages. Journal of Pension Economics & Finance, 15(2), 180–202.
HRS. (2010). Health and Retirement Study. https://hrs.isr.umich.edu
123

Annals of Operations Research
Haan, P., & Prowse, V. (2014). Longevity, life-cycle behavior and pension reform. Journal of Econometrics,
178, 582–601.
Hanewald, K., Bateman, H., Fang, H., & Wu, S. (2020). Is there a demand for reverse mortgages in China?
Evidence from two online surveys. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 169, 19–37.
Hanewald, K., Post, T., & Sherris, M. (2016). Portfolio choice in retirement-what is the optimal home equity
release product? Journal of Risk and Insurance, 83(2), 421–446.
Hoekstra, J., & Dol, K. (2021). Attitudes towards housing equity release strategies among older home owners:
A European comparison. Journal of Housing and the Built Environment, 36(4), 1347–1366.
Huang, H. C., Wang, C. W., & Miao, Y. C. (2011). Securitisation of crossover risk in reverse mortgages. The
Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance-Issues and Practice, 36, 622–647.
IstatData . House prices. Ipab. (2020).
IstatData. (2022). Spese per consumi delle famiglie. Coicop.
IstatData. (2023). Tavole di mortalità. I.Stat.
Jarner, S. F., Jallbjørn, S., Andersen, T. M. (2024). Pension system design: roles and interdependencies of
tax-ﬁnanced and funded pensions. Scandinavian Actuarial Journal, 1–35.
Kemmy,S.,&Bigley,A.(2023).ReverseMortgagesInEurope:ProductGrowthHasYetToSpurSecuritization.
S&P Global.
Kraft, H., Munk, C., & Weiss, F. (2022). Bequest motives in consumption-portfolio decisions with recursive
utility. Journal of Banking & Finance, 138, 106428.
Lee, R. D., & Carter, L. R. (1992). Modeling and forecasting US mortality. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 87(419), 659–671.
Lindner, J. (2024). Reverse Mortgage market size statistics. Worldmetrics Report.
Merton, R.C., & Lai, R.N. (2016). On the efﬁcient design of the reverse mortgage: Structure, marketing, and
funding. https://www.aeaweb.org/conference/2017/.../paper/3hsNdR4f
Mitchell, O. S., Poterba, J. M., Warshawsky, M. J., & Brown, J. R. (1999). New evidence on the money’s
worth of individual annuities. American Economic Review, 89(5), 1299–1318.
Morano, P., & Tajani, F. (2016). Bare ownership of residential properties: Insights on two segments of the
Italian market. International Journal of Housing Markets and Analysis, 9(3), 376–399.
Mullen, K., Ardia, D., Gil, D. L., Windover, D., & Cline, J. (2011). DEoptim: An R package for global
optimization by differential evolution. Journal of Statistical Software, 40(6), 1–26.
Pellegrino, S. (2023). Disuguaglianze di redditi e patrimoni in Italia e nel mondo. Collana “Quaderni Fon-
dazione Cariplo”, 42, 1–103.
Piazzesi, M., Schneider, M., & Tuzel, S. (2007). Housing, consumption and asset pricing. Journal of Financial
Economics, 83(3), 531–569.
Shao, A. W., Chen, H., & Sherris, M. (2019). To borrow or insure? Long term care costs and the impact of
housing. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, 85, 15–34.
WHO World Health Organization. (2021). Decade of healthy ageing: Baseline report.
Wang, L., Valdez, E. A., & Piggott, J. (2008). Securitization of longevity risk in reverse mortgages. North
American Actuarial Journal, 12(4), 345–371.
Wang, P., & Han, W. (2021). Decision analysis of the elderly participating in the housing reverse mortgage:
Based on bequest motivation constraint. Journal of Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems, 40(4), 8569–8586.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123