TITLE: Corporate sustainability, investment, and capital structure
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05699-3
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05699-3
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Corporate sustainability, investment, and capital structure
Michi Nishihara1
Received: 31 October 2022 / Accepted: 2 November 2023
┬® The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
This study develops a real options model in which a ’¼ürm invests in either a sustainable project
or an unsustainable project. The sustainable project requires a high investment cost and yields
cash ’¼éows perpetually, whereas the unsustainable project requires a low investment cost and
yields cash ’¼éows until a random maturity. The random termination of cash ’¼éows re’¼éects
the projectŌĆÖs environmental, social, and governance (ESG) risk. In the model, the optimal
investment choice and timing are analytically derived, and the effects of key parameters on
the choice are also examined. Higher ESG risk, growth rate, and volatility, and lower discount
rate encourage sustainable investing mainly through their impacts on the net present value and
timing option value. The less sustainable ’¼ürm chooses higher leverage because it cares less
about the disadvantages of debt. Therefore, access to debt ’¼ünancing and a higher corporate
tax rate (tax shield) discourage sustainable investing.
Keywords Sustainability ┬Ę ESG ┬Ę Real options ┬Ę Capital structure
JEL Classi’¼ücation: G13 ┬Ę G31 ┬Ę G32
1 Introduction
Over the last decade, ’¼ürms have identi’¼üed the importance of the sustainability of their oper-
ations in capital budgeting decisions. International organizations and governments have
also become more active in resolving sustainability issues [e.g., the 17 sustainable devel-
opment goals in United Nations (2022)]. In these circumstances, an increasing number of
academic researchers have also investigated a variety of aspects of sustainability issues. For
instance, several studies have applied operations research methodologies, such as multi-
This version was written on March 23, 2023. This work was supported by the JSPS KAKENHI (Grant
Numbers JP20K01769, JP21H00730). The author thanks anonymous referees, Stein-Erik Fleten, Norio
Hibiki, Haejun Jeon, and Motoh Tsujimura for helpful comments. The author also thanks the participants at
FMA 2021 in Kyoto (online), EURO 2022 in Espoo, and ORSJ 2022 fall conference in Niigata for helpful
feedback.
B Michi Nishihara
nishihara@econ.osaka-u.ac.jp
1
Graduate School of Economics, Osaka University, 1-7 Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043,
Japan
123

Annals of Operations Research
criteria decision-making methods, to the assessment of sustainability [for a survey, see Thies
et al. (2019)]. In the ’¼ünance area, many papers have investigated ESG investment [e.g., Hong
and Kacperczyk (2009); Bolton and Kacperczyk (2021), and Pedersen et al. (2021)]. Many
presentations at the 32nd European Conference on Operational Research also discussed the
effectiveness of ESG investment [e.g., Grassetti and Stocco (2022); DŌĆÖEcclesia and Ste-
fanelli (2022); Nicolosi et al. (2022), and Castellano (2022)].1 Most of the existing literature
addresses the relationships among ESG performance, ’¼ürm characteristics, ’¼ürm risk, and ’¼ürm
value [for a survey, see Gillan et al. (2021)].
Despite the growing body of research, few papers have attempted to address sustainability
issues in the framework of the capital budgeting decision theory. To this point, no theory has
explained the economic mechanisms of market, ’¼ürm, and institutional characteristicsŌĆÖ effects
on corporate investing in sustainable projects. This paper aims to ’¼üll that research gap and
apply the real options modeling approach to reveal the conditions that stimulate corporate
investing in sustainable projects.2
For this purpose, the present study uses the following model. Consider a ’¼ürm that has an
option to invest in one of two projects (i.e., sustainable and unsustainable projects). There
is a tradeoff between ESG risk and investment cost. The sustainable project requires a high
investment cost and yields cash ’¼éows perpetually, while the unsustainable project requires a
low investment cost and yields cash ’¼éows until a random maturity, which follows a Poisson
arrival process and re’¼éects the projectŌĆÖs ESG risk. After evaluating the tradeoff, the ’¼ürm
optimizes its investment choice and timing to maximize ’¼ünancial value.3 In addition to
investigating an unlevered model, this paper examines a levered model in which the ’¼ürm also
optimizes debt issuance (i.e., capital structure) at the time of investment.
Certain practical examples can validate the model. Imagine a hypothetical mining ’¼ürm
that plans to exploit natural resources (say, gold). Generally, mining activities cause many
environmental problems, but it is possible to mitigate environmental damage at a cost. In
this case, the ’¼ürm chooses one of the two means of exploitation (i.e., traditional exploitation
with environmental damage or costly but eco-friendly exploitation), with the knowledge that
environmentally destructive mining might be prohibited in the future. The ’¼ürm makes its
investment choice and timing decisions by observing the international market price of gold,
which determines the projectŌĆÖs cash ’¼éows. Another example is an apparel ’¼ürm that plans to
invest in a factory in a developing country. The ’¼ürm chooses one of two factory types (i.e.,
a factory with or without suf’¼ücient labor rights), and learns that the labor-exploiting factory
has a risk of disaster and closure as a reaction to public criticism (e.g., the Dhaka garment
factory ’¼üre in Bangladesh). The ’¼ürm makes its investment choice and timing decisions based
on the ESG risk and market demand for its apparel products.
This paper analytically solves the model and derives the explicit condition (hereafter, the
sustainability condition) under which the ’¼ürm chooses the sustainable project. The effects of
keyparametersonthesustainabilityconditionarealsoexaminedanalyticallyandnumerically.
These parameters can impact the ’¼ürmŌĆÖs investment choice through three channels: (i) the
1 More than ’¼üfty presentations at the 32nd European Conference on Operational Research were related to
sustainability issues (not limited to ESG investment) according to the program.
2 The model is based on real options theory [e.g., Dixit and Pindyck (1994)]. The real options method is now
widely accepted as a better method than the NPV method speci’¼ücally in capital budgeting decisions involving
uncertainty and irreversibility [for a review, see Kozlova (2017) and Trigeorgis and Tsekrekos (2018)].
3 This paper focuses on an ESG-aware ’¼ürm that recognizes ESG risk and maximizes ’¼ünancial value. On the
other hand, some papers consider that ’¼ürms or investors take non’¼ünancial bene’¼üts from sustainable projects into
account [e.g., Pedersen et al. (2021) and Oehmke and Opp (2022)]. Such ’¼ürms are regarded as ESG-motivated
’¼ürms. The differences are explained in Section 2.3.
123

Annals of Operations Research
NPV of project cash ’¼éows, (ii) the value of the option to defer investment, and (iii) optimal
capital structure. Higher ESG risk, unsustainable investment cost, and lower sustainable
investment cost lead the ’¼ürm to invest in the sustainable project through the NPV channel.
Lower discount rate and higher cash ’¼éow growth rate increase the value of cash ’¼éows in
the far future and, through the NPV and option channels, encourage sustainable investing.
Higher cash ’¼éow volatility encourages sustainable investing through the option channel. In
fact, higher volatility increases the option value of waiting for a better economic state and
investing in the high-cost and high-pro’¼üt project (i.e., the sustainable project) rather than in
the low-cost and low-pro’¼üt project (i.e., the unsustainable project).
Debt ’¼ünancing dif’¼üculties and a lower corporate tax rate do not have the NPV and option
channels but nonetheless encourage sustainable investing through the capital structure chan-
nel. The higher the ESG risk, the higher the probability of ESG-forced exit, and the lower
the probability of debt-driven bankruptcy will be. Then, the less sustainable ’¼ürm cares less
about the debtŌĆÖ disadvantages (i.e., costs of debt-driven bankruptcy), increases leverage, and
enjoys the higher leverage multiplier effect. Consequently, dif’¼üculty in debt ’¼ünancing and a
lower corporate tax rate suppress debt ’¼ünancing and lead the ’¼ürm to invest in the sustainable
project, although this capital structure channel is relatively weak.
These results have signi’¼ücant implications for sustainability issues. Not only cost struc-
tures (e.g., technological innovations and subsidies) and degree of ESG risk (e.g., regulations
and publicity), but also market conditions (e.g., discount rate, growth rate, and volatility) and
the government policies (e.g., interest rate and tax rate) affect corporate decisions to invest
in sustainable projects. Typically, large and listed ’¼ürms in developed countries are active in
resolving sustainability issues. This trend can be rationally explained by these ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ and
countriesŌĆÖ characteristics of lower discount rate and higher ESG risk (or publicity). That is,
these ’¼ürms have a greater economic rationale to invest sustainably than small and unlisted
’¼ürms in developing countries do.
So far, I have focused on the choice between sustainable and unsustainable projects,
but in terms of investment timing, sustainable project investment timing is later (due to
its high investment cost) than unsustainable project investment timing is. By consequence,
parameter changes (e.g., market and policy changes) that promote sustainable investing do not
necessarily accelerate corporate investment. Although parameter changes could lead ’¼ürms
to invest in more sustainable projects, they delay investment timing. Thus, the effects of
parameters on investment timing become non-monotonic.
Last, I will explain technically related literature. In the real options modeling literature on
sustainability issues, many papers have studied investment timing and valuation of renewable
energy projects [for a review, see Kozlova (2017)]. For instance, Boomsma et al., (2012)
analyze investment timing and capacity decisions on renewable energy projects under two
support schemes and reveal those support schemesŌĆÖ differing impacts on the decisions. As
in this paperŌĆÖs use of a Poisson jump to model ESG risk, Boomsma and Linnerud (2015)
and Adkins and Paxson (2016) model renewable policy uncertainty using Poisson jumps and
show the effects of the policy uncertainty on renewable investment timing and valuation.
However, these previous studies do not examine the process of making a decision between
sustainable and unsustainable projects that accounts for the tradeoff between ESG risk and
investment cost, nor do their models incorporate debt ’¼ünancing. Therefore, unlike this paper,
they do not clarify the conditions that promote sustainable investment and those conditionsŌĆÖ
relation to capital structure.
Apart from sustainability issues, many papers examine real options models of investment
and debt ’¼ünancing. Seminal studies by Mauer and Sarkar (2005), Sundaresan and Wang
(2007) and Sundaresan et al. (2015) show the effects of debt ’¼ünancing on investment timing,
123

Annals of Operations Research
agency cost, and ’¼ürm value by integrating McDonald and Siegel (1986)ŌĆÖs investment timing
model with Leland (1994)ŌĆÖs capital structure model. In this context, Shibata and Nishihara
(2012) and Shibata and Nishihara (2018) show the effects of debt borrowing constraints
on investment timing, capital structure, and ’¼ürm value. However, these previous studies
do not consider the process of selecting one project from among several alternatives. By
incorporating the choice between sustainable and unsustainable projects in their levered
setup, this paper unveils the relationships of between corporate sustainability and capital
structure.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section2 introduces the model setup.
Section3 shows the solutions in the unlevered and levered models. In particular, the sustain-
ability conditions are explicitly derived in both models. Section4 numerically explores the
effects of the key parameters on investment choice, timing, and capital structure. Section5
concludes the paper.
2 Model setup
2.1 Unlevered model
Consider a ’¼ürm that has an option to invest in either an unsustainable project by paying invest-
ment cost I1 or a sustainable project by paying investment cost I2, where 0 < I1 < I2 holds.
Throughout the paper, subscripts 1 and 2 stand for the unsustainable and sustainable projects.
The ’¼ürm must choose only one of the available projects for reasons such as operational and
’¼ünancial constraints. After investing in either project, the ’¼ürm receives continuous streams
of earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) X(t), which follows a geometric Brownian
motion4
dX(t) = ╬╝X(t)dt + Žā X(t)dB(t) (t > 0),
X(0) = x(> 0),
where B(t) denotes the standard Brownian motion de’¼üned in a ’¼ültered probability space
(, F, ┬Č, {Ft}), where ’¼ültration Ft represents the state of information at time t, and ┬Č is
the physical probability measure. Constants ╬╝ and Žā(> 0) stand for the growth rate and
volatility of EBIT, respectively. Apply the corporate tax rate Žä Ōłł(0, 1) to X(t). EBIT X(t)
lasts perpetually for the sustainable project, but for the unsustainable project, X(t) matures
at a random time, which follows an exponential distribution with rate ╬╗(> 0).5 The maturity
means the time of the ’¼ürmŌĆÖ exit from the market. For simplicity, the model assumes the
independence between X(t) and the exponential distribution.
Parameter ╬╗ stands for ESG risk of the unsustainable project. For instance, high-pollution
technologies and products made with exploited labor could be legally banned on the grounds
4 The standard literature [e.g., Goldstein et al. (2001), Morellec (2001), Shibata and Nishihara (2012) and
Sundaresan et al. (2015)] examine capital structure models based on EBIT following a geometric Brownian
motion.
5 An exponential distribution is often used to model an unexpected event [e.g., environmental, political, and
regulatory risk]. For instance, Boomsma and Linnerud (2015) and Adkins and Paxson (2016) model an energy
policy change as an exponential distribution.
123

Annals of Operations Research
of ESG concerns. Even if such projects are not legally banned, ESG concerns could nonethe-
less force them to exit the market by attracting signi’¼ücant attention in the era of social
networks.6
To reduce the risks of such future penalties, ’¼ürms would have to pay higher costs (e.g.,
by implementing low-pollution technologies and making products with expensive labor). To
capture this situation as simply as possible, the model assumes the unsustainable project to
have high ESG risk ╬╗ and low investment cost I1 and the sustainable project to have no ESG
risk and high investment cost I2. By assessing the tradeoff of ESG risk and investment cost,
the ’¼ürm optimizes investment choice and timing.7
The assumption of the unsustainable projectŌĆÖs characteristics is based on empirical evi-
dence that ’¼ürms with poor ESG practices have high credit, legal, and downside risks [see
Table 4 in Gillan et al. (2021)]. For instance, Jagannathan et al. (2018) show that ESG risks are
identi’¼üed as rare, large, and nondiversi’¼üable downside risks, and Seltzer et al. (2022) show
that ’¼ürms with poor environmental performance have high credit risk particularly in states
with stringent environmental regulations. On the other hand, there have been mixed empirical
’¼ündings about the effects of ESG performance on ’¼ürm (project) value [see Table 5 in Gillan
et al. (2021)]. Based on the ambiguous ’¼ündings, the model assumes the same cash ’¼éow pro-
cess for both projects. This simplifying assumption renders the model one-dimensional and
facilitates an analytical solution.8
2.2 Levered model
As in the standard models of dynamic investment and ’¼ünancing based on tradeoff theory
[e.g., Shibata and Nishihara (2012) and Sundaresan et al. (2015)], the ’¼ürm issues consol debt
at investment time. The ’¼ürm optimizes debt level (i.e., the coupon of debt) in addition to
investment choice and timing. With debt, shareholders are better off declaring default than
continuing operation and coupon payments when EBIT X(t) falls to a certain threshold. In
bankruptcy, shareholders receive nothing, and debt holders takes over the unlevered ’¼ürm
6 For simplicity, the model assumes that ESG risk will arise only after the unsustainable project initiation. This
means that the ’¼ürmŌĆÖs poor ESG activity attracts public attention and causes regulatory measures or backlash.
In some situations, unsustainable investment options may also entail ESG risk even before investment. In fact,
the ’¼ürst draft of this paper studied such a model. In this case, the ’¼ürm acts as if it faces alternative investment
opportunities with different discount rates. Then, the choice is dynamically inconsistent, and there is no explicit
sustainability condition like (3) and (24). I computed the ’¼ürmŌĆÖs policy and value under the assumption that the
’¼ürm chooses a higher-valued project at time 0 and found that the results are qualitatively the same as those of
this paper.
7
In practice, the lifetime of sustainable projects may be ’¼ünite, but it is expected to be longer than that
of unsustainable projects. Firms may have options to invest in (i.e., switch to) sustainable projects after
unsustainable projects are forced to terminate. However, the remaining option values will be lower than the
values of ’¼ürms that choose sustainable projects from the beginning, due to switching costs, reputational
damage, and competitorsŌĆÖ preemption, etc. Although the difference between the sustainable and unsustainable
projects (i.e., the impacts of ESG risk ╬╗) is smaller in these detailed setups, this paperŌĆÖs main results will
remain qualitatively unchanged.
8 In a bi-dimensional model with different cash ’¼éow processes for the two projects, the ’¼ürm invests in one of
the projects when its cash ’¼éows become suf’¼üciently higher than the other projectŌĆÖs cash ’¼éows [e.g., see a max-
call option in Chapter 6 of Detemple (2006)]. One cannot solve this problem analytically, and no sustainability
condition exists because the ’¼ürm can invest in the unsustainable project for any parameter values. However, I
believe that the main effects of parameter values on sustainable investment will remain unchanged from those
of the one-dimensional model if I focus on the probability of sustainable investing rather than the sustainability
condition.
123

Annals of Operations Research
value,9 where a fraction ╬▒ Ōłł(0, 1) of the ’¼ürm value is lost to the deadweight costs of
bankruptcy (e.g., ’¼üling and attorney fees). If the ’¼ürm invests in the unsustainable project, the
’¼ürm could potentially exit from the market before default.
2.3 Firm types
In the baseline model, the ’¼ürm is fully aware of ESG risk and optimizes its investment and
’¼ünancing policy to maximize ’¼ünancial value. That is, the ’¼ürm can choose either a sustainable
project or an unsustainable project by taking into account the tradeoff between ESG risk and
investment cost.
For comparison, this paper considers ESG-unaware and ESG-motivated ’¼ürms. The ESG-
unaware ’¼ürm mistakenly assumes no ESG risk, i.e., ╬╗ = 0. The ESG-unaware ’¼ürm optimizes
its investment and ’¼ünancing policy to maximize ’¼ünancial value under the faulty assumption.
Because of the assumption ╬╗ = 0, the ESG-unaware ’¼ürm prefers the unsustainable project
with lower investment costs I1. By contract, the ESG-motivated ’¼ürm gains extra value I =
I2 ŌłÆI1 in addition to ’¼ünancial value gained by investing in the sustainable project. The extra
value can be interpreted as non’¼ünancial bene’¼üts or utility from the improvement of ESG
performance [cf. Pedersen et al. (2021)]. The ESG-motivated ’¼ürm prefers the sustainable
project because the extra value I fully compensates for the projectŌĆÖs high investment cost
I2. For simplicity, this paper assumes that equity and debt holders have the same information
and preferences about ESG risk. It could be an interesting issue for future study to investigate
the agency con’¼éicts on ESG risk by incorporating asymmetric information and preferences
between equity and debt holders.
This paperŌĆÖs classi’¼ücation of ’¼ürms into one of three categories (i.e., the ESG-aware, ESG-
unaware, and ESG-motivated ’¼ürms) is based on those introduced by Pedersen et al. (2021).
In the numerical illustrations, I focus on the ESG-aware ’¼ürm as the baseline case for the
following two reasons. First, the ESG-aware ’¼ürmŌĆÖs problem is the most complicated and
interesting because it addresses the tradeoff between ESG risk and investment cost. In fact,
because the other two types of ’¼ürm face no such tradeoff, their choice of project is clear-cut.
Second, several studies [e.g., Bellon (2020) and Cai et al. (2020)] indicate that ESG-aware
’¼ürms seem prevalent in reality.
3 Model solutions
3.1 Unlevered model solutions
The expected NPV of cash ’¼éows starting from X(0) = x at time 0 is calculated as
E
 Ōł×
0
╬╗eŌłÆ╬╗s
 s
0
eŌłÆrt(1 ŌłÆŽä)X(t)dtds

= aU
1 x
(1)
for the unsustainable project and
E
 Ōł×
0
eŌłÆrt(1 ŌłÆŽä)X(t)dt

= aU
2 x
9 This paper does not distinguish between liquidation and reorganization bankruptcy. The unlevered value
can be interpreted as the liquidation or operating-concern value.
123

Annals of Operations Research
for the sustainable project, where r represents the discount rate, and aU
1 and aU
2 are de’¼üned
by aU
1 = (1 ŌłÆŽä)/(r ŌłÆ╬╝ + ╬╗) and aU
2 = (1 ŌłÆŽä)/(r ŌłÆ╬╝). Throughout the paper, E denotes
the expectation in the probability space (, F, ┬Č), superscript U represents the unlevered
model, and r > ╬╝ is assumed for convergence. Multiplier aU
1 is lower than aU
2 because of
random termination of cash ’¼éows. By the strong Markov property of X(t), the expected NPV
of cash ’¼éows starting from X(t) = t at time t (i.e., the conditional expectation given Ft)
becomes aU
1 X(t) for the unsustainable project and aU
2 X(t) for the sustainable project. The
unlevered ’¼ürm (option) value at time 0 is expressed as
V U(x) = sup
T ŌłłT
E

eŌłÆrT max
i=1,2{aU
i X(T ) ŌłÆIi}

,
(2)
where T denotes the set of Ft-stopping times. That is, the ’¼ürm chooses its investment time
T and a higher-valued project using information available until time T .
Optimal stopping problem (2) is technically the same as the one solved by D├®camps et
al. (2006). By using their results [see also Nishihara and Ohyama (2008)], I can show the
following proposition, where ╬▓ = 0.5 ŌłÆ╬╝/Žā 2 +

╬╝/Žā 2 ŌłÆ0.5
2 + 2r/Žā 2(> 1) is the
positive characteristic root. For the proof, see Appendix A.
Proposition 1 If sustainability condition
r ŌłÆ╬╝ + ╬╗
r ŌłÆ╬╝
 
╬▓
╬▓ŌłÆ1
ŌēźI2
I1
,
(3)
holds, the ’¼ürm chooses the sustainable project. The value function and investment threshold
are given by
V U(x) =
ŌÄ¦
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ©
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ®
(aU
2 xU
2 ŌłÆI2)

x
xU
2
╬▓
(x < xU
2 )
aU
2 x ŌłÆI2
(x ŌēźxU
2 ),
(4)
and
xU
2 =
╬▓I2
(╬▓ ŌłÆ1)aU
2
.
(5)
Otherwise, the ’¼ürm chooses either a sustainable project or an unsustainable project. The
value function and investment threshold are given by
V U(x) =
ŌÄ¦
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ©
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ®
(aU
1 xU
11 ŌłÆI1)

x
xU
11
╬▓
(x < xU
11)
aU
1 x ŌłÆI1
(x Ōłł[xU
11, xU
12])
(aU
1 xU
12 ŌłÆI1)U(x) + (aU
2 xU
21 ŌłÆI2) U(x) (x Ōłł(xU
12, xU
21))
aU
2 x ŌłÆI2
(x ŌēźxU
21),
(6)
where U(x) and U(x) denote the state prices for X(t) ’¼ürst reaching xU
12 from above and
xU
21 from below, respectively (for the details, see (29) and (30) in Appendix A), and
xU
11 =
╬▓I1
(╬▓ ŌłÆ1)aU
1
,
(7)
where xU
12 and xU
21 are determined by the smooth pasting conditions (31) and (32) in Appendix
A.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Remark 1 The ESG-unaware ’¼ürm invests in the unsustainable project at threshold
xU
3 =
╬▓I1
(╬▓ ŌłÆ1)aU
2
,
(8)
whereas the ESG-motivated ’¼ürm invests in the sustainable project at threshold xU
3 . Inequal-
ities xU
3 < xU
2 and xU
3 < xU
11 hold, which means that the ESG-unaware and ESG-motivated
’¼ürms invest earlier than the ESG-aware ’¼ürm does. Because of the suboptimality of xU
3 , the
’¼ünancial values of the ESG-unaware and ESG-motivated ’¼ürms are lower than that of the
ESG-aware ’¼ürm.
Sustainability condition (3) is equivalent to the condition that value function (4) dominates
the payoff of the unsustainable project aU
1 x ŌłÆI1 for all x Ōēź0. That is, under sustainability
condition (3), the ’¼ürm has no reason to invest in the unsustainable project for any X(t).
Value function (4) and investment threshold (5) are equal to those of the case in which only
the sustainable project is available. In other words, under sustainability condition (3), the
unsustainable project does not affect the ’¼ürm at all.
If sustainability condition (3) does not hold, the solution is more complicated. The ’¼ürmŌĆÖs
project choice depends on the initial state variable X(0) = x. For x < xU
11, the ’¼ürm waits
for the unsustainable investment, for x Ōłł[xU
11, xU
12], the ’¼ürm immediately invests in the
unsustainable project, and for x ŌēźxU
21, the ’¼ürm immediately invests in the sustainable
project. A notable region is (xU
12, xU
21), where the ’¼ürm waits to invest. The ’¼ürm will undertake
either an unsustainable project when X(t) falls to xU
11 or a sustainable project when X(t)
increases to xU
12. That is, for x Ōłł(xU
12, xU
21), the ’¼ürm postpones its project choice. Then, the
value function includes the state prices for the unsustainable and sustainable investments. The
’¼ürst term represents the value of the option of investing in the unsustainable project, while
the second term represents the value of the option of investing in the unsustainable project.
An interesting insight from this area is that a decrease in EBIT can trigger the unsustainable
investment, while an increase in EBIT can trigger the sustainable investment.
Although the intermediate region (xU
12, xU
21) is interesting, most of the real options liter-
ature assumes that the initial state variable is low enough to exclude immediate investment.
Following this standard, Sect.4 will assume baseline parameter values satisfying x < xU
11 and
x < xU
2 . In this case, the ’¼ürm chooses the unsustainable project if sustainability condition
(3) is not satis’¼üed. Thus, sustainability condition (3) determines whether the ’¼ürm chooses
the sustainable project. The next proposition shows the comparative statics of sustainability
condition (3) and helps answer the following questions: What institutional and market envi-
ronments encourage sustainable investing? What types of ’¼ürms are more eager to invest in
sustainable projects? For the proof, see Appendix B.
Proposition 2 Sustainability condition (3) is more likely to hold for higher I1, ╬╗, Žā, and ╬╝,
as well as for lower I2 and r.
Obviously, higher I1, ╬╗, and lower I2 increase the advantage of the sustainable NPV
over the unsustainable NPV (i.e., aU
2 /aU
1 ). Higher volatility Žā increases the option value of
postponing investment, and through the option effect, it increases the advantage of the high-
cost and high-pro’¼üt project (i.e., the sustainable project) over the low-cost and low-pro’¼üt
project (i.e., the unsustainable project). The impact of Žā coincides with those of D├®camps et
al. (2006) and Nishihara and Ohyama (2008). Higher growth rate ╬╝ and lower discount rate
r increase the advantage of the sustainable project through the NPV and option effects. With
higher ╬╝ and lower r, EBIT will remain at a signi’¼ücant level for a longer time, and hence,
123

Annals of Operations Research
the advantage of the sustainable NPV over the unsustainable NPV (i.e., aU
2 /aU
1 ) increases.
Thus, the ’¼ürm tends to avoid short-termism (i.e., the unsustainable project). Higher ╬╝ and
lower r, like higher Žā, also increase the option value of postponing investment and hence
increase the advantage of the sustainable project.
Proposition 2 generates many insights. First, ’¼ürm characteristics can affect a ’¼ürmŌĆÖs choice
between the alternative projects. For example, large and listed ’¼ürms are more likely to face the
institutional and social pressures of ESG concerns, which implies higher ╬╗ than that of small
and private ’¼ürms. Large and listed ’¼ürms also tend to be more diversi’¼üed, less ’¼ünancially
constrained, and less operationally constrained; hence they use lower discount rates than
small and private ’¼ürms do [e.g., Harrington (1989), Krugger et al. (2015), Jagannathan et al.
(2016), D├®caire (2020) and Nishihara (2021)]. Because of higher ╬╗ and lower r, large and
listed ’¼ürms are more likely to choose sustainable projects than small and private ’¼ürms are. In
terms of economic rationality, this result explains observed trends that large and listed ’¼ürms
are more engaged in sustainability.
Proposition 2 also entails policy implications. What governmental policies will encourage
sustainable investing? Of course, subsidies for sustainable projects decrease I2, and penalties
for unsustainable projects increase I1. The governmentŌĆÖs proactive stances on regulations and
information disclosures regarding ESG risks cause ’¼ürms to perceive higher ╬╗. These policies
are frequently implemented to promote sustainability in the real world. Notably, Proposition
2 also suggests that monetary policies, such as decreasing interest rates and quantitative
easing, encourage sustainable investments by decreasing r. I believe that one of the reasons
that ’¼ürms have paid great attention to sustainability over the last decade lies in the historically
low interest rates that followed the Great Recession.
From an international perspective, developed countries frequently blame developing coun-
tries for poor ESG practices when there are externalities (e.g., climate change caused by
greenhouse gas emissions). However, interest rates vary among countries and tend to be
higher in developing countries. All else being equal, developing countries with higher inter-
est rates valuate unsustainable projects higher (i.e., short-termism) than developed countries
do. To maintain the levels of ESG practices established by developed countries, developing
countries have to take more proactive ESG policies (i.e., subsidies, penalties, and regula-
tions) than developed countries do. In other words, the promotion of sustainability is more
costly in developing countries than it is in developed countries, which causes con’¼éict between
developed and developing countries over ESG issues.
3.2 Levered model solution
3.2.1 Default decisions
The problem is solved backward. First, consider the unsustainable ’¼ürm that issued debt with
coupon C at time 0. Following the standard literature [e.g., Leland (1994) and Goldstein et
al. (2001)], shareholders do not take into account debt in place and optimize default time T D
for their own interests. The equity value of the ’¼ürm is the solution to the optimal stopping
problem
E1(x; C) = sup
T DŌłłT
E
 Ōł×
0
╬╗eŌłÆ╬╗s
 min{s,T D}
0
eŌłÆrt(1 ŌłÆŽä)(X(t) ŌłÆC)dtds

(9)
= E
 Ōł×
0
╬╗eŌłÆ╬╗s
 s
0
eŌłÆrt(1 ŌłÆŽä)(X(t) ŌłÆC)dtds

123

Annals of Operations Research
+ sup
T DŌłłT
E
 Ōł×
T D ╬╗eŌłÆ╬╗s
 s
T D eŌłÆrt(1 ŌłÆŽä)(C ŌłÆX(t))dtds

= aU
1 x ŌłÆ(1 ŌłÆŽä)C
r + ╬╗
+ sup
T DŌłłT
E

eŌłÆ(r+╬╗)T D (1 ŌłÆŽä)C
r + ╬╗
ŌłÆaU
1 X(T D)
 
(10)
= aU
1 x ŌłÆ(1 ŌłÆŽä)C
r + ╬╗
+

x
x D
1 (C)
╬│1 (1 ŌłÆŽä)C
r + ╬╗
ŌłÆaU
1 x D
1 (C)
 
,
(11)
where the strong Markov property of X(t) is used in (10), ╬│1 denotes the negative character-
istic root
╬│1 = 0.5 ŌłÆ╬╝
Žā 2 ŌłÆ
 ╬╝
Žā 2 ŌłÆ0.5
2
+ 2(r + ╬╗)
Žā 2
(< 0),
(12)
and default threshold x D
1 (C) is derived as
x D
1 (C) =
╬│1
╬│1 ŌłÆ1
(r ŌłÆ╬╝ + ╬╗)C
r + ╬╗
.
(13)
More intuitively, one can also derive equity value (11) and default threshold (13) as the
solution to differential equation
╬╝x ŌłéE1(x; C)
Ōłéx
+ 0.5Žā 2x2 Ōłé2E1(x; C)
Ōłé2x
+ ╬╗(ŌłÆE1(x; C)) + (1 ŌłÆŽä)(x ŌłÆC) = r E1(x; C)
(14)
with the value matching condition E1(x D(C); C) = 0 and smooth pasting condition
ŌłéE1(x D(C); C)/Ōłéx = 0, and boundary condition limxŌåÆŌł×E1(x; C)/x < Ōł×(cf. Chap-
ter 5.5.B of Dixit and Pindyck (1994)).10 Note that in (14), term ╬╗(ŌłÆE1(x; C)) represents
that E1(x; C) becomes 0 at probability ╬╗dt in in’¼ünitesimal time interval dt. The solution to
(14) is exactly the same as (11) and (13). Similarly, the debt and ’¼ürm values are derived as
follows:
D1(x; C) =
C
r + ╬╗ ŌłÆ

x
x D
1 (C)
╬│1 
C
r + ╬╗ ŌłÆ(1 ŌłÆ╬▒)aU
1 x D
1 (C)
 
,
(15)
F1(x; C) = aU
1 x +
ŽäC
r + ╬╗ ŌłÆ

x
x D
1 (C)
╬│1  ŽäC
r + ╬╗ + ╬▒aU
1 x D
1 (C)
 
.
(16)
The equity, debt, and ’¼ürm values (11), (15), and (16) resemble the standard valuations
without random maturity [e.g., Leland (1994), Goldstein et al. (2001), Shibata and Nishihara
(2012), and Sundaresan et al. (2015)]. Indeed, (11), (15), and (16) are equal to the standard
valuations with discount rate r + ╬╗. That is, as in Chapter 6.4.A of Dixit and Pindyck
(1994), one can regard the ’¼ürm as in’¼ünitely lived but augment the discount rate by adding
the termination probability parameter ╬╗. As in the standard literature, equations (11), (15),
and (16) can be interpreted as follows. The ’¼ürst two terms in (11) are the equity value of
operating the ’¼ürm with no default, while the last term represents the value of the default
option. Debt value (15) is equal to the value of receiving coupons with no bankruptcy minus
the loss associated with bankruptcy. Firm value (16) is composed of the unlevered ’¼ürm value,
tax bene’¼üts of debt, and bankruptcy costs.c
10 I present this solution method because this method may be more prevalent in the ’¼ünance area.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Now, consider optimal capital structure. As described in the standard literature [e.g.,
Leland (1994) and Goldstein et al. (2001)], the ’¼ürm chooses coupon C to maximize the
’¼ürm value F1(x; C) (which is equal to the ex-ante equity value). By the ’¼ürst-order condition
ŌłéF1(x; C)/ŌłéC = 0, the optimal coupon is derived as
C1(x) =
r + ╬╗
r ŌłÆ╬╝ + ╬╗
╬│1 ŌłÆ1
╬│1
x
h1
.
(17)
By (13), (16), and (17), the optimal ’¼ürm value is derived as
F1(x; C1(x)) = Žå1aU
1 x,
(18)
where h1 and Žå1 are constants de’¼üned by
h1 =

1 ŌłÆ╬│1

1 ŌłÆ╬▒ + ╬▒
Žä
ŌłÆ1
╬│1 (> 1),
(19)
Žå1 = 1 +
Žä
(1 ŌłÆŽä)h1
(> 1).
(20)
The leverage and credit spreads are also derived explicitly as
LV1 = D1(x; C(x))
F1(x, C(x)) = ╬│1 ŌłÆ1
╬│1
1 ŌłÆ╬Š1
Žå1h1(1 ŌłÆŽä),
(21)
CS1 =
C1(x)
D1(x; C1(x)) ŌłÆr = r╬Š1 + ╬╗
1 ŌłÆ╬Š1
,
(22)
where ╬Š1 is a constant de’¼üned by
╬Š1 = (1 ŌłÆ(1 ŌłÆ╬▒)(1 ŌłÆŽä)╬│1)(h1)╬│1
╬│1 ŌłÆ1
.
These solutions are the same as those of the in’¼ünitely-lived ’¼ürm with augmented discount
rate r + ╬╗ in previous studies [e.g., Nishihara and Shibata (2010), Shibata and Nishihara
(2012), and Sundaresan et al. (2015)]. The difference between the unlevered ’¼ürm value (1)
and levered ’¼ürm value (18) is the multiplier Žå1(> 1), which measures the effect of optimal
leverage on ’¼ürm value. That is, the ’¼ürm obtains higher value by choosing the optimal capital
structure based on the tradeoff between the tax bene’¼üts of debt and bankruptcy costs.
The equity, debt, ’¼ürm values, coupon, leverage, and credit spreads of the sustainable ’¼ürm
are equal to the above values with ╬╗ = 0 and are also derived in existing literature [e.g.,
Nishihara and Shibata (2010); Shibata and Nishihara (2012), and Sundaresan et al. (2015)].
Hence, I will omit the equations and let subscript 2 represent the corresponding value of
the sustainable ’¼ürm. For instance, C2(x) and Žå2 represent optimal coupon (17) and leverage
effect (20) with ╬╗ = 0, respectively, for the sustainable ’¼ürm.
3.2.2 Investment and ’¼ünancing decisions
Now, consider the investment and ’¼ünancing decisions. By the strong Markov property of
X(t), the expected NPV of cash ’¼éows starting from X(t) = t at time t becomes aL
1 X(t)
for the unsustainable project and aL
2 X(t) for the sustainable project, where aL
1 = Žå1aU
1 and
aL
2 = Žå2aU
2 . The ’¼ürm (option) value at time 0 is expressed as
V L(x) = sup
T ŌłłT
E

eŌłÆrT max
i=1,2{aL
i X(T ) ŌłÆIi}

,
(23)
123

Annals of Operations Research
where the ’¼ürm chooses its investment time T and a higher-valued and leveraged project.
The differences between problems (2) and (23) are leverage multipliers Žå1 and Žå2. Optimal
stopping problem (23) is technically the same as the one solved by D├®camps et al. (2006).
The following proposition is shown in the same manner as in Proposition 1. For the proof,
see Appendix C.
Proposition 3 If sustainability condition
(r ŌłÆ╬╝ + ╬╗)Žå2
(r ŌłÆ╬╝)Žå1
 
╬▓
╬▓ŌłÆ1
ŌēźI2
I1
,
(24)
holds, the ’¼ürm chooses the sustainable project. The value function and investment threshold
are given by
V L(x) =
ŌÄ¦
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ©
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ®
(aL
2 x L
2 ŌłÆI2)

x
x L
2
╬▓
(x < x L
2 )
aL
2 x ŌłÆI2
(x Ōēźx L
2 ),
(25)
and
x L
2 =
╬▓I2
(╬▓ ŌłÆ1)aL
2
= xU
2 /Žå2.
(26)
Otherwise, the ’¼ürm chooses either a sustainable project or an unsustainable project. The
value function and investment threshold are given by
V L(x) =
ŌÄ¦
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ©
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ®
(aL
1 x L
11 ŌłÆI1)

x
x L
11
╬▓
(x < x L
11)
aL
1 x ŌłÆI1
(x Ōłł[x L
11, x L
12])
(aL
1 x L
12 ŌłÆI1)L(x) + (aL
2 x L
21 ŌłÆI2) L(x) (x Ōłł(x L
12, x L
21))
aL
2 x ŌłÆI2
(x Ōēźx L
21),
(27)
where L(x) and L(x) denote the state prices for X(t) ’¼ürst reaching x L
12 from above and
x L
21 from below, respectively (for the details, see (33) and (34) in Appendix C), and
x L
11 =
╬▓I1
(╬▓ ŌłÆ1)aL
1
= xU
11/Žå1,
(28)
where x L
12 and x L
21 are determined by the smooth pasting conditions (35) and (36) in Appendix
C.
Remark 2 The ESG-unaware and ESG-motivated ’¼ürms invest in the unsustainable and sus-
tainable projects, respectively at threshold x L
3 = xU
3 /Žå2. Inequalities x L
3 < x L
2 and x L
3 < x L
11
hold, which means that the ESG-unaware and ESG-motivated ’¼ürms invest earlier than the
ESG-aware ’¼ürm does. Because of the suboptimality of xU
3 , the ’¼ünancial values of the ESG-
unaware and ESG-motivated ’¼ürms are lower than that of the ESG-aware ’¼ürm.
Proposition 3 can be interpreted as in Proposition 1. Indeed, sustainability condition (24)
is equivalent to the condition that value function (25) dominates the unsustainable projectŌĆÖs
payoff aL
1 x ŌłÆI1 for all x Ōēź0. Value function (25) and investment threshold (26) are equal to
those of the levered model in which only the sustainable project is available. If sustainability
condition (24) does not hold, the ’¼ürmŌĆÖs project choice depends on the initial state variable
123

Annals of Operations Research
X(0) = x. The regions x < x L
11 and x Ōēźx L
21 are the unsustainable and sustainable investment
regions, respectively, whereas the other two regions are the waiting regions. A notable region
is (x L
12, x L
21), where the ’¼ürm waits to invest until X(t) reaches either low threshold x L
11 or
high threshold x L
12.
As explained after Proposition 1, Sect.4 will assume a suf’¼üciently small initial state
variable X(0) = x satisfying x < x L
11 and x < x L
2 . Then, under sustainability condition (24),
the ’¼ürm will invest in the sustainable project and issue debt with coupon C2(x L
2 ) at threshold
x L
2 and go bankrupt at threshold x D
2 (C2(x L
2 )) = x L
2 /h2. If sustainability condition (24) does
not hold, the ’¼ürm will invest in the unsustainable project and issue debt with coupon C1(x L
11)
at threshold x L
11 and either go bankrupt at threshold x D
1 (C1(x L
11)) = x L
11/h1 or be forced to
exit before bankruptcy.
Obviously, sustainability condition (24) is more likely to hold for higher I1 and lower I2.
I cannot mathematically show the impacts of ╬╗, Žā, ╬╝, and r on condition (24) because their
impacts on the ratio of the leverage effect Žå2/Žå1 are complicated. However, Sect.4 will show
numerically that their impacts remain unchanged from Proposition 2. The main reason is
that the impact through the leverage effect is indirect and weaker than the impacts through
the NPV and option effects. The question remains as to whether access to debt ’¼ünancing
encourages sustainable investing. Notably, the next proposition answers this question in the
negative. For the proof, see Appendix D.
Proposition 4 The leverage effect Žå1 increases in ╬╗, which implies Žå1 > Žå2. Hence, sustain-
ability condition (24) is less likely to hold than sustainability condition (3).
The positive derivative ŌłéŽå1/Ōłé╬╗ > 0 means that the leverage effect is larger for the less
sustainable ’¼ürm.11 The economic mechanism is explained below. The unsustainable ’¼ürm is
forcedtoexitregardlessofitsdebtlevel,onceanegativeESGshockoccurs.Thedisadvantages
of debt (i.e., bankruptcy costs ╬▒) only arise when the ’¼ürm defaults earlier than the forced
exit. In other words, higher ESG risk ╬╗, which increases the probability of ESG-forced exit,
decreases the probability of debt-driven bankruptcy. Thus, with higher ╬╗, the ’¼ürm cares less
about the debtŌĆÖs disadvantages, increases leverage LV1, and enjoys larger leverage multiplier
Žå1.12 For instance, if the ’¼ürm knows that it will be terminated in one year, it only needs care
about default within one year. Accordingly, the unsustainable ’¼ürm chooses higher leverage
compared to the sustainable ’¼ürm, which cares about long-term operation. That is, one could
interpret the unsustainable ’¼ürmŌĆÖs debt policy as short-termism. Thus, access to debt ’¼ünancing
decreases the advantage of the sustainable project over the unsustainable project through the
leverage effect and hence discourages sustainable investing.
This result does not mean that higher ESG risk ╬╗ decreases the cost of debt. In fact, higher ╬╗
decreases debt value (15) and increases credit spreads (22). That is, the cost of debt increases
in ╬╗. Equity value (11) also decreases in ╬╗, which means that the cost of equity increases in
╬╗. In this sense, Proposition 4 can also be interpreted as the cost of equity is more sensitive
to ╬╗ than the cost of debt, and, hence, the ’¼ürm with higher ESG risk increases leverage.
Many empirical papers have shown that ’¼ünancing costs increase for less sustainable ’¼ürms
[see Table 4 in Gillan et al. (2021)]. For instance, Hong and Kacperczyk (2009); Ghoul et
al. (2011), and Chava (2014) show that bad ESG practices increase a cost of equity, whereas
11 The ’¼ürm value decreases as the ’¼ürm becomes less sustainable. Indeed, higher ╬╗ decreases aL
1 = Žå1aU
1
because the negative effect of ╬╗ on the unlevered value aU
1 dominates the positive impact on the leverage
multiplier Žå1.
12
Although I cannot analytically show dLV1/d╬╗ > 0, but Sect.4 veri’¼ües dLV1/d╬╗ > 0 in numerical
examples.
123

Annals of Operations Research
(Goss & Roberts, 2011; Chava, 2014; Ge & Liu, 2015; Hasan et al., 2017), and Eliwa et al.
(2021), show that bad ESG practices increase a cost of debt. However, no papers have shown
which effect is stronger or how leverage is related to ESG practices.
Although Proposition 4 implies that access to debt ’¼ünancing can lead ’¼ürms to invest in
unsustainable projects, how can lenders prevent this negative impact of lending on ESG
issues? In practice, some lenders refuse to ’¼ünance unsustainable projects [e.g., negative
screening for ESG issues; see Chava (2014)] and offer lower interest rates for sustainable
projects [e.g., negative premium in green bonds; see Zerbib (2019)]. Proposition 4 does not
assume such ESG-motivated lenders, who care about non’¼ünancial bene’¼üts and utility regard-
ing ESG issues. The following remark shows that such ESG-motivated lenders encourage
sustainable investments. That is, the prevalence of ESG-motivated lenders is a key determi-
nant of whether lending improves ESG practices.
Remark 3 Suppose that the ’¼ürm is able to use debt ’¼ünancing only for the sustainable project.
In this case, problem (23) is replaced with
V L(x) = sup
T
E

eŌłÆrT max{aU
1 X(T ) ŌłÆI1, aL
2 X(T ) ŌłÆI2}

,
which can be solved in the same way as problem (23). Sustainability condition (24) is replaced
with
(r ŌłÆ╬╝ + ╬╗)Žå2
r ŌłÆ╬╝
 
╬▓
╬▓ŌłÆ1
ŌēźI2
I1
,
which is more likely to hold than condition (3). That is, the ’¼ürm is more likely to choose the
sustainable project in the negative screening model than in the unlevered model.
4 Numerical illustrations
4.1 Impacts of ESG risk
This section conducts numerical analysis, including comparative statics with respect to key
parameters: ESG risk ╬╗, discount rate r, growth rate ╬╝, volatility Žā, and corporate tax rate
Žä. The baseline parameter values are set as in Table 1.13 The values of r, ╬╝, Žā, Žä, and ╬▒
are standard in dynamic corporate ’¼ünance literature and re’¼éect a typical S&P ’¼ürm [e.g.,
Morellec (2001), Arnold (2014), Shibata and Nishihara (2018) and Nishihara and Shibata
(2021)]. Following (Boomsma & Linnerud, 2015) and Adkins and Paxson (2016), who
assume renewable energy policy uncertainty as a Poisson jump process with hazard rate 0.1,
ESG risk is set at ╬╗ = 0.1. This means that the unsustainable projectŌĆÖs lifetime is, on average,
1/╬╗ = 10 years. For instance, regulations for greenhouse gas emissions are greatly affected
by international agreements, such as the Kyoto Protocol in 1997 and the Paris agreement in
2015, and the time span is about 10 to 20 years. Blowing up due to ESG concerns in social
networks might occur more frequently, although it depends on the publicity of the ’¼ürm or
project. This subsection shows the results for ╬╗ = 0 to 0.2. The baseline case also assumes
x = X(0) = 0.5, I1 = 10, and I2 = 100 to make the sustainable and unsustainable project
values comparable. These values are not essential because they can be normalized. Note that
13 I computed the results for a wide range of parameter values and presented the qualitatively robust results
in this section.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 Baseline parameter
values
r
╬╝
Žā
Žä
╬╗
╬▒
I1
I2
x
0.05
0.01
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.4
10
100
0.5
the initial state variable x = X(0) = 0.5 is low enough to exclude immediate investment for
all examples in this section.
For the baseline parameter values, sustainability conditions (3) and (24) are satis’¼üed.
The unlevered ’¼ürmŌĆÖs value and investment threshold are V U(x) = 0.44 and xU
2 = 10.237,
whereas those of the levered ’¼ürm are V L(x) = 0.482 and x L
2 = 9.745, where the leverage
effect Žå2 = 1.051. In the levered case, the coupon, default threshold, leverage, and credit
spreads are equal to C2(x L
2 ) = 6.072, x D
2 (C2(x L
2 )) = x L
2 /h2 = 2.791, LV2 = 0.485, and
CS2 = 0.0075. Note that LV2 and CS2 are evaluated at the time of investment.
Figure1 plots investment thresholds x L, xU, default threshold x D, coupon C, ’¼ürm values
V L(x), V U(x), leverage LV , and credit spreads CS for ESG risk ╬╗ = 0 to 0.2, where the
black solid and blue dashed lines represent the levered and unlevered cases, respectively.
Sustainability conditions (3) and (24) hold for ╬╗ Ōēź0.076 and ╬╗ Ōēź0.078, respectively. The
two conditions are almost equal because the leverage effect on the choice is very weak (i.e.,
Žå2/Žå1 Ōēł1). As shown in Proposition 2, higher ╬╗ decreases the NPV of the unsustainable
project with no debt and thus induces the ’¼ürm to choose the sustainable project. This holds
true in the levered model because the impact of r on the NPV is much stronger the impact
of ╬╗ on Žå2/Žå1.
Figure1 shows the jumps in the graphs other than V L(x) and V U(x) at the switching points
between the unsustainable and sustainable projects. For instance, sustainable investment
thresholds x L
2 and xU
2 are much higher than unsustainable investment thresholds x L
11 and xU
11
even when the two project values are comparable. In fact, the ’¼ürm postpones the sustainable
project until the state process X(t) reaches quite a high threshold because of its high-cost
and high-pro’¼üt structure. That is, sustainable investment timing is later than unsustainable
investment timing when the choice between the two projects is comparable.
On the other hand, as explained in Remarks 1 and 2, ESG-unaware and ESG-motivated
’¼ürms invest in the unsustainable and sustainable projects, respectively, at xU
3 = 1.024 in the
unlevered case and x L
3 = 0.975 in the levered case. These thresholds agree with xU and x L
for ╬╗ = 0 in the top-left panel of Fig.1. Compared to these values, the baseline (ESG-aware)
’¼ürmŌĆÖs investment threshold is much higher especially in the case of sustainable investing.
These results entail the following policy implication. The governmentŌĆÖs proactive stances on
sustainability issues may be able to increase ╬╗ and I2/I1 and cause ESG-aware ’¼ürms to switch
from unsustainable projects to sustainable projects. In terms of investment timing, however,
these sustainable investments will take place much later than unsustainable investments with
comparable project values.
Now, I examine each panel of Fig.1 closely. All values are constant in the sustainable
project region because the sustainable project does not depend on ╬╗. In the unsustainable
project region, x L
11, xU
11, x D
1 , C1, LV1, and CS1 increase in ╬╗, whereas V L
1 (x) and V U
1 (x)
decrease in ╬╗. The delay in investment and decrease in ’¼ürm value are straightforward because
the unsustainable NPV decreases with higher ╬╗. What is more notable is the increase in LV1
in the bottom-left panel of Fig.1. The reason has been already mentioned below Proposition
4. Higher ╬╗, which increases the probability of ESG-forced exit, decreases the probability of
debt-driven bankruptcy. Accordingly, the ’¼ürm adopts a more aggressive capital structure as
╬╗ increases. The increase in CS1 in the bottom-right panel is due partially to the increase in
LV1, but the main driver is the increase of the forced exit probability (i.e., the second term
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Comparative statics with respect to sustainability parameter ╬╗
of the numerator in (22)). The positive correlation between ╬╗ and CS1 is consistent with
empirical observations. In fact, Goss and Roberts (2011); Ge and Liu (2015), and Eliwa et
al. (2021), among others, show that bad ESG practices increase a cost of debt (measured by
credit spreads). However, I could not ’¼ünd any empirical paper on the relationship between
ESG practices and leverage. The baseline model predicts the positive correlation between
╬╗ and LV1, but the prevalence of ESG-motivated lenders can reverse the relationship (cf.
Remark 3). This will be an interesting issue to investigate in future empirical studies.
123

Annals of Operations Research
4.2 Impacts of discount rate
Apart from ESG risk ╬╗, the discount rate r greatly affects the ’¼ürmŌĆÖs choice between the
sustainable and unsustainable projects. Intuitively, with high r, the ’¼ürm focuses on cash
’¼éows in the near future and puts less weight on long-term sustainability of cash ’¼éows (i.e.,
short-termism). The ’¼ürm with short-termism tends to prefer the unsustainable project. More
precisely, Proposition 2 show the impact of r on the project choice thorough the NPV and
option effects in the unlevered model. The impact of r remains unchanged in the levered
model because the impact of r on the leverage effect (i.e., Žå2/Žå1) is relatively weak. Figure2
plots x L, xU, x D, C, V L(x), V U(x), LV , and CS for discount rate r = 0.02 to 0.08, where
the black solid and blue dashed lines represent the levered and unlevered cases, respectively.
Sustainability conditions (3) and (24) hold for r Ōēż0.0576 and r Ōēż0.0567, respectively,
where the graphs other than V L(x) and V U(x) jump at the switching points.
As explained below Proposition 4, low discount rate r is associated with large and listed
’¼ürms, and low interest rate policies. In such situations, ’¼ürms face fewer ’¼ünancial constraints
and can easily use debt ’¼ünancing. Although unrestricted access to debt ’¼ünancing hinders
sustainable investing (see Proposition 4), the impact through the leverage channel is much
weaker than the impacts through the NPV and option channels. Overall, large and listed
’¼ürms are likely to choose sustainable projects, and low interest rate policies help sustainable
investment trends.
In each panel of Fig.2, the impacts of r are greater in the sustainable project region
than in the unsustainable project region. The main reason is that the unsustainable projectŌĆÖs
cash ’¼éows may end in the short term and are less sensitive to the level of r. In the top-left
panel, x L and xU jump downward at the switching points from the sustainable project to
the unsustainable project, although x L
11, x L
2 , xU
11, and xU
2 (i.e., x L and xU within each project
region) increase in r. It is well known in real options theory that higher r reduces the NPV
of long-term cash ’¼éows and delays investment [e.g., see Proposition 2 in Nishihara (2021)
for a formal proof]. This standard result does not hold due to the switch from the sustainable
project to the unsustainable project. For instance, investment occurs earlier for r = 0.06 than
for r = 0.04 because the ’¼ürm invests in different projects for r = 0.04 and 0.06. This implies
that low interest policies do not necessarily accelerate corporate investment.
In the center-right panel of Fig.2, V L(x) and V U(x) greatly decrease in r mainly because
the project values are exponentially discounted by rate r. In the bottom-left panel, LV
increases in r. This result is due to the effect of ╬╗ on the unsustainable ’¼ürmŌĆÖs LV (cf. Figure1
in Section 4.1). Indeed, with higher r, the ’¼ürm puts less weight on bankruptcy costs in the
future and increases leverage to receive the tax bene’¼üts. That is, the ’¼ürm with short-termism
adopts a riskier capital structure. This also increases CS in the bottom-right panel.
4.3 Impacts of cash flow growth rate
This subsection examines the comparative statics with respect to growth rate ╬╝. Figure3
plots x L, xU, x D, C, V L(x), V U(x), LV , and CS for growth rate ╬╝ = 0 to 0.04, where the
black solid and blue dashed lines represent the levered and unlevered cases, respectively.
Sustainability conditions (3) and (24) hold for ╬╝ Ōēź0.0045 and ╬╝ Ōēź0.0051, respectively,
where the graphs other than V L(x) and V U(x) jump at the switching points. All else being
equal, higher ╬╝ encourages sustainable investing. This results primarily from the NPV and
option effects explained below Proposition 2, that is, higher ╬╝, like r, increases the NPV of
long-term cash ’¼éows and the option value of postponing investment. Note that the impact
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 2 Comparative statics with respect to discount rate r
of ╬╝ on the leverage effect (i.e., Žå2/Žå1) is much weaker than the impact of ╬╝ on the NPV
and option value. Empirical studies show mixed evidence of whether good ESG practices
help ’¼ürm performance [e.g., Table 5 in Gillan et al. (2021)]. This paper reminds us of the
importance of endogeneity for the research question. Indeed, the model indicates that ’¼ürms
that have high growth rates are more likely to invest in sustainable projects.
In the top-left panel of Fig.3, x L and xU increase in ╬╝ in the unsustainable project region
but decrease in ╬╝ in the sustainable project region. The non-monotonic result is explained
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 3 Comparative statics with respect to growth rate ╬╝
by the tradeoff between the NPV and option effects as follows. Higher ╬╝ increases the NPV
of cash ’¼éows, which plays a role in accelerating investment. On the other hand, higher ╬╝
also increases the option value of waiting for a better economic state, which plays a role in
delaying investment. The NPV effect (i.e., the investment acceleration effect) dominates the
option effect (i.e., the investment delay effect) for the sustainable project with perpetual cash
’¼éows, and vice versa for the unsustainable project with short-term cash ’¼éows.
The bottom-left panel of Fig.3 also shows a notable result. Although LV1 and LV2 (i.e.,
LV within each project region) increase in ╬╝, LV is not monotonic due to the switch between
123

Annals of Operations Research
the unsustainable and sustainable projects. Most of the structural models [e.g., Leland (1994)]
based on the tradeoff theory generate a positive relation between LV and ╬╝, although empir-
ical studies [e.g., Titman and Wessels (1988) and Frank and Goyal (2015)] show a negative
relation. This paper shows the possibility that a ’¼ürm with higher ╬╝ can invest in the sus-
tainable project with lower LV than a ’¼ürm with lower ╬╝. For instance, the panel shows that
LV for ╬╝ = 0 to 0.0051 is higher than LV for ╬╝ = 0.0051 to 0.04. That is, the model
can generate a negative relation between LV and ╬╝ by incorporating an investment choice
between sustainable and unsustainable projects.
4.4 Impacts of cash flow volatility
In the real option analysis, it is important to study the comparative statics with respect to Žā
because Žā affects the results thorough the option channel rather than the NPV channel. As
shown in Proposition 2, higher Žā increases the value of the option to invest in the high-pro’¼üt
and high-cost project (i.e., the sustainable project) rather than the low-pro’¼üt and low-cost
project (i.e., the unsustainable project) in the unlevered model. This result holds true in
the levered model because the impact of Žā on the leverage effect (i.e., Žå2/Žå1) is relatively
weak. Figure4 plots x L, xU, x D, C, V L(x), V U(x), LV , and CS for volatility Žā = 0.1 to
0.5, where the black solid and blue dashed lines represent the levered and unlevered cases,
respectively. Sustainability conditions (3) and (24) hold for Žā Ōēź0.147 and Žā Ōēź0.152,
respectively, where the graphs other than V L(x) and V U(x) jump at the switching points.
Although the jumps are characteristic of a model with project choice, most of the other
results are straightforward and consistent with the standard results in real options theory. For
instance, x L, xU, V L(x), and V U(x) increase in Žā in the top-left and center-right panels.
This is consistent with the well-known result that higher Žā increases the option value of
waiting for a better economic state [e.g., Dixit and Pindyck (1994)]. In the bottom-left panel,
LV decreases in Žā, which is consistent with the well-known result that higher Žā increases
bankruptcy risk and hence decreases leverage (e.g., Leland (1994)). Although x D is not
monotonic in the upper-right panel, it is not notable. In fact, the gap between x L and x D
increases in Žā, which is consistent with the standard result.
The bottom-right panel is most interesting in Fig.4. In the panel, CS1 and CS2 (i.e., CS
within each project region) increase in Žā. This is because adjustment of capital structure (i.e.,
a decrease in LV with higher Žā) does not fully offset the increase in bankruptcy risk with
higher Žā. Although this result is consistent with the standard result in the capital structure
literature [e.g., Leland (1994)], the switch between the unsustainable and sustainable projects
changes the monotonic result. Note that CS1 is much higher due to the forced exit risk (i.e.,
the second term of the numerator in (22)) than CS2. Lower Žā can cause the ’¼ürm to choose
the unsustainable project and hence increase CS. In fact, in the bottom-right panel, CS is
higher for Žā = 0.1 to 0.152 than for Žā = 0.152 to 0.5. This counter-intuitive result may warn
against the apparent argument that a less volatile economy encourages stable development
and hence improves sustainability. Indeed, the model indicates the opposite possibility, that
is, lower Žā discourages sustainable investments and increases corporate bankruptcies.
4.5 Impacts of corporate tax rate
It is also interesting to study the effects of corporate tax rate Žä on the results in terms of
policy implications. Obviously, tax reductions only for sustainable projects, like subsidies,
reduce investment cost I2 and encourage sustainable investing. The question is as to whether
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 4 Comparative statics with respect to volatility Žā
lower taxation of ’¼ürms encourages sustainable investing. Sustainability condition (3) does
not depend on Žä in the unlevered model, while sustainability condition (24) depends on Žä
through the leverage effect Žå2/Žå1. In other words, Žä affects the choice between the sustain-
able and unsustainable projects only through the capital structure channel. As seen in the
previous subsections, Žå2/Žå1 does not change greatly with parameters. Even though Žä sig-
ni’¼ücantly affects the capital structure in tradeoff theory, Žå2/Žå1changes from 0.993 to 0.935
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 5 Comparative statics with respect to corporate tax rate Žä. I2 = 140
with variation of Žä = 0.05 to 0.55. Because of the small impact of Žä on Žå2/Žå1, sustainability
condition (24) holds for Žä = 0.05 to 0.55. To see the weak impacts of Žä on the sustainability
choice, I reset I2 = 140, where the other parameter values remain as in Table 1. Note that
the sustainable and unsustainable project values are almost equal for I2 = 140.
Figure5 plots x L, xU, x D, C, V L(x), V U(x), LV , and CS for corporate tax rate Žä = 0.05
to 0.55, where the black solid and blue dashed lines represent the levered and unlevered cases,
respectively. Sustainability condition (3) holds true regardless of Žä in the unlevered model,
123

Annals of Operations Research
while sustainability condition (24) hold for Žä Ōēż0.307, where the graphs other than V L(x)
jumpattheswitchingpoints.ThisresultimpliesthatlowerŽä encouragessustainableinvesting.
The reason is explained as follows. According to tradeoff theory, lower Žä reduces the tax
advantages of debt and hence reduce LV (see the bottom-left panel of Fig.5). That is, the
’¼ürm is less leveraged and approximates the unlevered ’¼ürm as Žä decreases. As explained in
Proposition 4, the unleverd ’¼ürm is more likely to choose the sustainable project than the highly
levered ’¼ürm is. Thus, lower Žä encourages sustainable investing by decreasing LV . As a policy
implication, tax reductions could lead to safer capital structure and encourage sustainable
investing, although the effects on sustainability through capital structure are indirect and
weaker than the NPV and option effects. Note that this result is based on permanently lower
levels of corporate tax rates. Tax reductions for a short period can discourage sustainable
investing because the ’¼ürm focuses on short-term cash ’¼éows rather than long-term cash ’¼éows.
The center-right panel of Fig.5 shows that V L(x) and V U(x) decrease in Žä. The results
are straightforward because higher Žä decreases the NPV of cash ’¼éows. More interestingly,
the gap between V L(x) and V U(x) increases in Žä. In fact, V U(x) decreases almost linearly,
but the slope of V L(x) moderates, especially after the switching point Žä = 0.307. That is, the
levered ’¼ürm mitigates the negative impact of higher Žä by choosing the unsustainable project
and higher LV (see the bottom-left panel) with greater tax advantages. In the top-left panel,
x L jumps downward at the switching point from the sustainable project to the unsustainable
project, whereas x L
11, x L
2 (i.e., x L within each project region), and xU = xU
2 increase in Žä.
The monotonic increase within each region is explained by the straightforward effect that
higher Žä decreases the NPV of cash ’¼éows and delays investment. However, in the levered
model, the monotonic result does not hold due to the switch from the sustainable project to
the unsustainable project. In fact, x L is higher for Žä = 0.05 to 0.307 than for Žä = 0.307 to
0.55. This implies that low tax rate policies may improve corporate sustainability but delay
corporate investment.
5 Conclusion
This paper investigates a ’¼ürmŌĆÖs choice of project sustainability, investment timing, and capital
structure in the real options model. In the model, the ’¼ürm chooses between sustainable
and unsustainable projects, where the sustainable project with high investment cost yields
perpetual cash ’¼éows, but the unsustainable project with low investment cost has risk of
cash ’¼éow termination (i.e., ESG risk). This paper analytically derives the unlevered and
levered model solutions including the sustainability conditions and shows the effects of key
parameters on the results. The main results are summarized below.
With higher ESG risk, lower discount rate, and higher growth rate, the ’¼ürm is more likely
to invest in the sustainable project mainly because these factors increase the advantage of
the sustainable NPV over the unsustainable NPV. Higher volatility encourages sustainable
investing mainly through the option effect. The ’¼ürm with a less sustainable project adopts
higherleveragebecausetheincreasedprobabilityofESG-forcedexitdecreasestheprobability
of debt-driven bankruptcy. Consequently, the leverage effect is larger for the less sustainable
’¼ürm despite its higher cost of debt. Through the leverage effect, access to debt ’¼ünancing
decreases the advantage of the sustainable project over the unsustainable project and hence
discourages sustainable investing. A higher corporate tax rate can also discourage sustainable
investingthroughtheleverageeffect,buttheleverageeffectisweakerthantheNPVandoption
effects.
123

Annals of Operations Research
These results clarify the market conditions and ’¼ürm characteristics that promote sustain-
able investing and entail many policy implications. However, it must be noted that parameter
shifts (e.g., market and policy shifts) that encourage sustainable investing do not necessar-
ily accelerate investment because sustainable investment timing is later than unsustainable
investment timing, due to higher investment cost. For instance, contrary to straightforward
expectations, lower discount rate and higher growth rate can delay corporate investment
through switch from the unsustainable investment to the sustainable investment.
Funding Open access funding provided by Osaka University.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
articleŌĆÖs Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the articleŌĆÖs Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
A Proof of Proposition 1
It is easy to show that the value function (4) with investment threshold (5) is the solution to
the problem with only the sustainable project, i.e., supT ŌłłT E

eŌłÆrT (aU
2 X(T ) ŌłÆI2)

.
De’¼üne f (x) = (4)ŌłÆ(aU
1 xŌłÆI1). Below, I will show that f (x) Ōēź0 holds for all x Ōēź0 if and
only if condition (3) holds. The solution to f ŌĆ▓(xŌłŚ) = 0 becomes xŌłŚ= xU
2 (a1/a2)1/(╬▓ŌłÆ1) Ōłł
(0, xU
2 ). Note that f (x) is convex because of ╬▓ > 1. Therefore, by the ’¼ürst-order condition,
I have
min
xŌēź0 f (x) = f (xŌłŚ)
= (aU
2 xU
2 ŌłÆI2)

aU
1
aU
2

╬▓
╬▓ŌłÆ1
ŌłÆaU
1 xU
2

aU
1
aU
2

1
╬▓ŌłÆ1
+ I1
= I1 ŌłÆI2

aU
1
aU
2

╬▓
╬▓ŌłÆ1
,
which is nonnegative if and only if condition (3) holds.
Under condition (3), the value function (4) dominates the payoff of the unsustainable
project, and hence, the ’¼ürm has no possibility of investing in the unsustainable project. Then,
problem is reduced to supT ŌłłT E

eŌłÆrT (aU
2 X(T ) ŌłÆI2)

, and the solution is (4).
Next, assume that condition (3) does not hold. In this case, the ’¼ürm has a possibility of
investing in the unsustainable project because of f (xŌłŚ) < 0. On the other hand, aU
2 x ŌłÆI2 >
aU
1 x ŌłÆI1 holds for x ŌåÆŌł×. Then, I can conjecture the two stopping regions, namely
the unsustainable investment region [xU
11, xU
12] and sustainable investment region [xU
21, Ōł×),
where xU
12 < xU
21. This conjecture is veri’¼üed in D├®camps et al. (2006). By the value matching
conditions at thresholds xU
11, xU
12, and xU
21, the value function is expressed as (6), and the state
123

Annals of Operations Research
prices are de’¼üned by
U(x) =
x╬▓(xU
21)╬│2 ŌłÆ(xU
21)╬▓x╬│2
(xU
12)╬▓(xU
21)╬│2 ŌłÆ(xU
21)╬▓(xU
12)╬│2 ,
(29)
 U(x) =
(xU
12)╬▓x╬│2 ŌłÆx╬▓(xU
12)╬│2
(xU
12)╬▓(xU
21)╬│2 ŌłÆ(xU
21)╬▓(xU
12)╬│2 ,
(30)
where
╬│2
represents
the
negative
characteristic
root
╬│2
=
0.5 ŌłÆ╬╝/Žā 2 ŌłÆ

╬╝/Žā 2 ŌłÆ0.5
2 + 2r/Žā 2. Note that (x) and (x) stand for the present values of $1 con-
tingent on the unsustainable investment and sustainable investment, respectively. Equation
(7) follows from the smooth pasting condition at xU
11. Thresholds xU
12 and xU
21 are determined
by the smooth pasting conditions:
(aU
1 xU
12 ŌłÆI1)(U)ŌĆ▓(xU
12) + (aU
2 xU
21 ŌłÆI2)( U)ŌĆ▓(xU
12) = aU
1 ,
(31)
(aU
1 xU
12 ŌłÆI1)(U)ŌĆ▓(xU
21) + (aU
2 xU
21 ŌłÆI2)( U)ŌĆ▓(xU
21) = aU
2 .
(32)
B Proof of Proposition 2
Clearly, higher I1, ╬╗, and lower I2 expand region (3). Higher Žā increases ╬▓/(╬▓ ŌłÆ1) because
of Ōłé╬▓/ŌłéŽā < 0.14 Then, higher Žā expands the region (3). Higher ╬╝ and lower r increase
(r ŌłÆ╬╝ + ╬╗)/(r ŌłÆ╬╝) as far as r > ╬╝ is satis’¼üed. Higher ╬╝ and lower r also increases
╬▓/(╬▓ ŌłÆ1) because of Ōłé╬▓/Ōłé╬╝ < 0 and Ōłé╬▓/Ōłér > 0. Then, higher ╬╝ and lower r expands the
region (3).
Note that investment thresholds (5) and (7) are ╬▓/(╬▓ ŌłÆ1) times the zero-NPV thresholds,
and higher ╬▓/(╬▓ ŌłÆ1) means the higher value of waiting. Thus, I can state that Žā affects
sustainability condition (3) through the option effect, whereas ╬╝ and r affects (3) through
the NPV and option effects.
C Proof of Proposition 3
I can trace the proof in Appendix A by replacing aU
1 and aU
2 with aL
1 and aL
2 respectively,
and hence the proof is omitted. Sustainability condition (24) follows from aL
2 /aL
1 = (r ŌłÆ
╬╝ + ╬╗)Žå2/((r ŌłÆ╬╝)Žå1). The state prices L(x) and L(x) are de’¼üned by
L(x) =
x╬▓(x L
21)╬│2 ŌłÆ(x L
21)╬▓x╬│2
(x L
12)╬▓(x L
21)╬│2 ŌłÆ(x L
21)╬▓(x L
12)╬│2 ,
(33)
 L(x) =
(x L
12)╬▓x╬│2 ŌłÆx╬▓(x L
12)╬│2
(x L
12)╬▓(x L
21)╬│2 ŌłÆ(x L
21)╬▓(x L
12)╬│2 .
(34)
Thresholds x L
12 and x L
21 are determined by the smooth pasting conditions:
(aL
1 x L
12 ŌłÆI1)(L)ŌĆ▓(x L
12) + (aL
2 x L
21 ŌłÆI2)( L)ŌĆ▓(x L
12) = aL
1 ,
(35)
(aL
1 x L
12 ŌłÆI1)(L)ŌĆ▓(x L
21) + (aL
2 x L
21 ŌłÆI2)( L)ŌĆ▓(x L
21) = aL
2 .
(36)
14 The sensitivities of ╬▓ to Žā, ╬╝, and r are well known [e.g., see (Dixit & Pindyck, 1994)].
123

Annals of Operations Research
D Proof of Proposition 4
Clearly, ŌłéŽå1/Ōłéh1 < 0 holds in (20), and Ōłé╬│1/╬╗ < 0 holds in (12). Then, it is suf’¼ücient to show
that Ōłéh1/Ōłé╬│1 > 0. Simplify the notation by de’¼üning the function h1(╬│1) = (1 ŌłÆA╬│1)1/╬│1
for ╬│1 < 0, where A is a positive constant. By calculating the derivative, I have
hŌĆ▓
1(╬│1) = h1(╬│1)
╬│ 2
1

ln(1 ŌłÆA╬│1) +
A╬│1
1 ŌłÆA╬│1
 
.
(37)
De’¼üne
g(╬│1) = ln(1 ŌłÆA╬│1) +
A╬│1
1 ŌłÆA╬│1
and calculate the derivative
gŌĆ▓(╬│1) =
A2╬│1
(1 ŌłÆA╬│1)2 < 0 (╬│1 < 0).
Then, g(╬│1) > g(0) = 0 holds for all ╬│1 < 0, which implies hŌĆ▓
1(╬│1) > 0 in (37).
References
Adkins, R., & Paxson, D. (2016). Subsidies for renewable energy facilities under uncertainty. Manchester
School, 84, 222ŌĆō250.
Arnold, M. (2014). Managerial cash use, default, and corporate ’¼ünancial policies. Journal of Corporate
Finance, 27, 305ŌĆō325.
Bellon, A. (2020). Does private equity ownership make ’¼ürms cleaner? The role of environmental liability
risks, Working paper. University of Pennsylvania.
Bolton, P., & Kacperczyk, M. (2021). Do investors care about carbon risk? Journal of Financial Economics,
142, 517ŌĆō549.
Boomsma, T., & Linnerud, K. (2015). Market and policy risk under different renewable electricity support
schemes. Energy, 89, 435ŌĆō448.
Boomsma, T., Meade, N., & Fleten, S. (2012). Renewable energy investments under different support schemes:
A real options approach. European Journal of Operational Research, 220, 225ŌĆō237.
Cai, X., Zhu, B., Zhang, H., Li, L., & Xie, M. (2020). Can direct environmental regulation promote green
technology innovation in heavily polluting industries? Evidence from Chinese listed companies. Science
of The Total Environment, 746, 140810.
Castellano, R. (2022). Value creation and sustainable business model. In 32nd European conference on oper-
ational research.
Chava, S. (2014). Environmental externalities and cost of capital. Management Science, 60, 2223ŌĆō2247.
D├®caire, P. (2020). Capital budgeting and idiosyncratic risk. In European Finance Association 47th annual
meeting.
D├®camps, J., Mariotti, T., & Villeneuve, S. (2006). Irreversible investment in alternative projects. Economic
Theory, 28, 425ŌĆō448.
DŌĆÖEcclesia, R., & Stefanelli, K., & Morelli, G. (2022). Is green ETF the winning investment strategy?. In 32nd
European conference on operational research.
Detemple, J. (2006). American-style derivatives valuation and computation. Chapman & Hall/CRC.
Dixit, A., & Pindyck, R. (1994). Investment under uncertainty. Princeton University Press.
Eliwa, Y., Aboud, A., & Saleh, A. (2021). ESG practices and the cost of debt: Evidence from EU countries.
Critical Perspectives on Accounting, 79, 102097.
Frank, M., & Goyal, V. (2015). The pro’¼üts-leverage puzzle revisited. Review of Finance, 19, 1415ŌĆō1453.
Ge,W.,&Liu,M.(2015).Corporatesocialresponsibilityandthecostofcorporatebonds.JournalofAccounting
and Public Policy, 34, 592ŌĆō624.
Ghoul, S., El, O., Guedhami, C. Kwok., & Mishra, D. (2011). Does corporate social responsibility affect the
cost of capital? Journal of Banking and Finance, 35, 2388ŌĆō2406.
Gillan, S., Koch, A., & Starks, L. (2021). Firms and social responsibility: A review of ESG and CSR research
in corporate ’¼ünance. Journal of Corporate Finance, 66, 101889.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Goldstein, R., Ju, N., & Leland, H. (2001). An EBIT-based model of dynamic capital structure. Journal of
Business, 74, 483ŌĆō512.
Goss, A., & Roberts, G. (2011). The impact of corporate social responsibility on the cost of bank loans. Journal
of Banking and Finance, 35, 1794ŌĆō1810.
Grassetti, F., & Stocco, D. (2022). ESG rating and tail risk: The role of sustainability in ’¼ünancial networks. In
32nd European Conference on Operational Research.
Harrington, J. (1989). Collusion among asymmetric ’¼ürms: The case of different discount factors. International
Journal of Industrial Organization, 7, 289ŌĆō307.
Hasan, I., Hoi, C., Wu, Q., & Zhang, H. (2017). Social capital and debt contracting: Evidence from bank loans
and public bonds. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 52, 1017ŌĆō1047.
Hong, H., & Kacperczyk, M. (2009). The price of sin: The effects of social norms on markets. Journal of
Financial Economics, 93, 15ŌĆō36.
Jagannathan, R., Matsa, D., Meier, I., & Tarhan, V. (2016). Why do ’¼ürms use high discount rates? Journal of
Financial Economics, 120, 445ŌĆō463.
Jagannathan, R., Ravikumar, A., & Sammon, M. (2018). Environmental, social, and governance criteria: Why
investors should care. Journal of Investment Management, 16, 18ŌĆō31.
Kozlova, M. (2017). Real option valuation in renewable energy literature: Research focus, trends and design.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 80, 180ŌĆō196.
Krugger, P., Landier, A., & Thesmar, D. (2015). The WACC fallacy: The real effects of using a unique discount
rate. Journal of Finance, 70, 1253ŌĆō1285.
Leland, H. (1994). Corporate debt value, bond covenants, and optimal capital structure. Journal of Finance,
49, 1213ŌĆō1252.
Mauer, D., & Sarkar, S. (2005). Real options, agency con’¼éicts, and optimal capital structure. Journal of
Banking and Finance, 29, 1405ŌĆō1428.
McDonald, R., & Siegel, D. (1986). The value of waiting to invest. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101,
707ŌĆō727.
Morellec, E. (2001). Asset liquidity, capital structure, and secured debt. Journal of Financial Economics, 61,
173ŌĆō206.
Nicolosi, M., Cerqueti, R., Ciciretti, R., & Dalo, A. (2022). ESG investing: A chance to reduce systemic risk.
In 32nd European conference on operational research.
Nishihara, M. (2021). Preemptive competition between two ’¼ürms with different discount rates. Managerial
and Decision Economics, 42, 675ŌĆō687.
Nishihara, M., & Ohyama, A. (2008). R&D competition in alternative technologies: A real options approach.
Journal of the Operations Research Society of Japan, 51, 55ŌĆō80.
Nishihara, M., & Shibata, T. (2010). Interactions between preemptive competition and a ’¼ünancing constraint.
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 19, 1013ŌĆō1042.
Nishihara, M., & Shibata, T. (2021). The effects of asset liquidity on dynamic sell-out and bankruptcy decisions.
European Journal of Operational Research, 288, 1017ŌĆō1035.
Oehmke, M., & Opp, M. (2022). A theory of socially responsible investment. Swedish House of Finance
Research Paper No. 20-2, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3467644.
Pedersen, L., Fitzgibbons, S., & Pomorski, L. (2021). Responsible investing: The ESG-ef’¼ücient frontier.
Journal of Financial Economics, 142, 572ŌĆō597.
Seltzer, L., Starks, L., & Zhu, Q. (2022). Climate regulatory risk and corporate bonds, Working Paper. National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Shibata, T., & Nishihara, M. (2012). Investment timing under debt issuance constraint. Journal of Banking
and Finance, 36, 981ŌĆō991.
Shibata, T., & Nishihara, M. (2018). Investment timing, reversibility, and ’¼ünancing constraints. Journal of
Corporate Finance, 48, 771ŌĆō796.
Sundaresan, S., & Wang, N. (2007). Investment under uncertainty with strategic debt service. American
Economic Review, 97, 256ŌĆō261.
Sundaresan, S., Wang, N., & Yang, J. (2015). Dynamic investment, capital structure, and debt overhang. Review
of Corporate Finance Studies, 4, 1ŌĆō42.
Thies, C., Kieckhafer, K., Spengler, T., & Sodhi, M. (2019). Operations research for sustainability assessment
of products: A review. European Journal of Operational Research, 274, 1ŌĆō21.
Titman, S., & Wessels, R. (1988). The determinants of capital structure choice. Journal of Finance, 43, 1ŌĆō19.
Trigeorgis, L., & Tsekrekos, A. (2018). Real options in operations research: A review. European Journal of
Operational Research, 270, 1ŌĆō24.
United Nations. (2022). The sustainable development goals report, United Nations. https://unstats.un.org/
sdgs/report/2022.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Zerbib, O. (2019). The effect of pro-environmental preferences on bond prices: Evidence from green bonds.
Journal of Banking and Finance, 98, 39ŌĆō60.
PublisherŌĆÖs Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional af’¼üliations.
123