TITLE: Guiding the integration of analytics in business operations through a maturity framework
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05614-w
---

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Received: 1 July 2022 / Accepted: 14 September 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
 
 Azar Shahgholian
a.shahgholian@ljmu.ac.uk
1 
Alliance Manchester Business School, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
2 
Liverpool Business School, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, UK
Guiding the integration of analytics in business operations 
through a maturity framework
Olga Menukhin1 · Catherine Mandungu1 · Azar Shahgholian2
 · Nikolay Mehandjiev1
Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05614-w
Abstract
The analytics function is growing in importance as the digitisation of business opera­
tions and markets leads to the generation of ever-increasing amounts of data. Analysing 
this data in a manner aligned with company priorities and structures can generate value 
through supporting effective decision-making, rapid product innovation, supply chain vis­
ibility and other aspects of intra- and inter-company operations. To guide the growth we 
derive a novel maturity framework focused on driving the Analytics-Business alignment, 
covering a number of diverse organisational facets such as data, leadership support, pro­
cesses, data management, governance, technology and people. It differentiates itself by 
using a firm theoretical foundation and providing guidance for analytics capability devel­
opment instead of simply diagnosing the existing maturity level. To guide development, it 
distinguishes between two aspects of maturity – a “state” aspect, which is used to assess 
the present situation in an organisation, and a “management” aspect, which evaluates man­
agement attitude in order to establish the next stage of analytics growth. The framework 
has been implemented in a web-based tool and its utility has been demonstrated by obtain­
ing feedback from 64 managers from a variety of sectors, who have praised its ability to 
integrate diagnosis of the current situation with guidance on the next steps necessary to 
develop analytics maturity.
Keywords  Maturity models · Analytics-business alignment · Analytics capabilities · 
Decision-making · Business operations
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
1  Introduction
The ongoing digitisation of all aspects of business operations and trade leads to the genera­
tion of ever-increasing amounts of data, and this has led to growing focus on analytics as a 
core tool for extracting value from this data. The concept of analytics is broadly understood 
as using data to build computer models that can be applied to analyse products, services and 
processes for the purpose of achieving a required outcome (Grossman, 2018).
The areas where analytics is expected to add value in the field of operations research 
range from providing better visibility and lowering the cost of operations in supply chain 
context (Raman et al., 2018) to supporting industrial decision-making and business growth 
(Zhang et al., 2021). Often the value of analytics is seen as stimulating growth and devel­
opment, for example a firm’s data-driven culture is seen to impact its product and process 
innovation, which in turn improves its performance and may bring competitive advantage 
(Chatterjee et al., 2021; Chaudhuri et al., 2021). This also holds true across the supply chain, 
where big data analytics capability is seen to positively impact the relationship between sup­
plier development and firms’ performance (Gu et al., 2021; Gunasekaran et al., 2017), and 
in creating a customer-involving environment for new product development (Zhan et al., 
2018). Other expected performance effects of analytics include reduced financial risks and 
improved financial performance, better understanding of customer preferences leading to 
increased sales and new business opportunities, operational efficiency and decision making 
(Ferraris et al., 2019; Holmlund et al., 2020; Siegel, 2016; Wamba et al., 2017).
Overall, data analytics is viewed as impacting many facets of operations research, and 
this diversity of impact possibilities calls for alignment between analytics and business 
strategy. The development of a strategic plan is thus deemed an important pre-requisite for 
successful transition towards a business analytics enabled firm (Hazen et al., 2018). This 
supports the concept of business analytics maturity (Vidgen et al., 2017), which is defined as 
the stages of development of a firm in its pursuit “to integrate, manage, and leverage all rel­
evant internal and external data sources into key decision points” (Halper & Stodder, 2014).
The concept of maturity remains widely researched in many disciplines, including in 
operations research, sales and planning (Danese et al., 2018; Machado et al., 2017; Mishra 
et al., 2015; Tavares Thome et al., 2012). Numerous maturity models have been developed 
to address various aspects of information systems and other application fields (Becker et al., 
2009; Mettler & Rohner, 2009; Wendler, 2012). Some were developed to evaluate matu­
rity of information technology (Cates et al., 2005; Watson et al., 2001), data warehousing 
(Sen et al., 2012), business intelligence (Chuah, 2010; Howson & Duncan, 2015, Russel 
et al., 2010), big data and analytics (Burciaga, 2013; Grossman, 2018; Halper & Stodder, 
2014; Nott, 2014; Vesset et al., 2015), and other domains. Our review of existing analytics 
maturity models in Sect. 2 demonstrates their ad-hoc nature with a nearly universal lack 
of underlying theories except being based on the Capability Maturity Model (Paulk et al., 
1993). The existing research explores the contribution of analytics to the firm’s growth, per­
formance (Rialti et al., 2019; Côrte-Real et al., 2017; Erevelles et al., 2016; Ferraris et al., 
2019; Merendino et al., 2017; Shamim et al., 2019; Wixom et al., 2013), logistics and sup­
ply chain management (Wang et al., 2016), and innovation (Chaudhuri et al., 2021; Mikalef 
et al., 2019a). As we have not come across analytics maturity models with theory-derived 
maturity dimensions, i.e. specific areas of interest that are measured by practices, objects or 
activities at each maturity level (Lahrmann et al., 2011), we suggest that the resource-based 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
view (Barney, 1991) and dynamic capabilities (Teece et al., 1997) theories can be applied in 
the context of analytics maturity to provide an underlying theoretical basis for a new Analyt­
ics Maturity Framework (AMF). Although some studies have applied dynamic capabilities 
to the concept of maturity (Magnusson & Nilsson, 2020), so far, the resource-based view 
(RBV) has not been used to provide a foundation for a holistic model of analytics capabil­
ity maturity, despite its obvious suitability. Therefore, we pose our first research question 
as follows:
RQ1. What resources of a firm compose a holistic, theory-supported maturity model to 
guide analytics capability development in organisations?
Our review demonstrates that the available analytics maturity models do not specifi­
cally offer a mechanism for transitioning between stages of maturity. Those maturity models 
originating in consulting often recommend setting goals and creating a plan for change 
(see Table 1). A similar approach has been suggested by academic research proposing that 
firms need to design an evolutionary path to gradually build their digital capability (Issa et 
al., 2018), and evolutionary changes of maturity states occur within an evolutionary cycle 
(Russel et al., 2010). However, most often, the analytics maturity models do not describe 
how the transition should occur (see Table 1); this implies that the firm’s analytics capability 
should match the characteristics of the model in the next stage of maturity. Although analyt­
ics is becoming a key function for evidence-driven decision-making in support of bring­
ing down costs and increasing profitability, businesses still have difficulties understanding 
their analytics capability and progressing in analytics adoption and digital transformation 
(Viaene & Van den Bunder, 2011); they are under pressure to improve the existing capabili­
ties and to find unique and relevant insights (Kiron et al., 2014). Research has identified 
thirty-one challenges companies face when trying to create value from business analytics, 
of which data quality, using analytics for improved decision-making and creating a big data 
and analytics strategy remain top three (Vidgen et al., 2017). We aim to address the gap in 
the literature and pose our second research question:
RQ2. How can transition to the desired level of maturity be achieved?
This paper focuses on developing the AMF - a theory-derived framework for assessing 
the analytics maturity of firms and facilitating transition to the desired level of maturity. 
The development and validation of the AMF is the core contribution of this paper, and the 
ways in which it is derived from the two underlying theories is described in Sect. 3. Our 
framework is differentiated from existing analytics maturity models by using a solid theo­
retical foundation and providing guidance for future growth instead of simply diagnosing 
an existing maturity level. This guidance is based on the AMF distinguishing between two 
dynamic aspects of maturity – a “state” aspect, which is used to assess the present situation, 
and a “management” aspect, which evaluates the management attitude in order to establish 
the next stage of growth for the company’s analytics.
We describe the use of the Action Design Research method in our research methodology 
in Sect. 4, and focus on the systematic derivation of the framework elements from empirical 
material while building upon the existing knowledge base in Sect. 5.
The AMF’s utility has been tested by implementing it as a web-based assessment and 
advisory tool, and by inviting management practitioners from a variety of sectors to com­
ment on its value and drawbacks. The findings described in Sect. 6 indicate that the ability 
of the framework to integrate diagnosis of the current situation with guidance on the next 
steps is necessary to improve analytics maturity.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
No
Name
Reference
Dimensions
Origin
Theoretical 
Foundation
Transition
1
INFORMS
Burciaga, 
2013
Organisational practices 
and culture; analytics capa­
bility, data & infrastructure
Industry /
Consulting
not 
specified
recommends 
to set goals
2
IDC
Vesset et 
al., 2015
Vision, technology, data, 
people, process.
Industry /
Consulting
CMM
vague narra­
tive that each 
dimension 
contributes to 
the progress 
from one 
stage to the 
next
3
TDWI
Halper and 
Stodder, 
2014
Technologies, data 
management, analytics, 
governance, and organisa­
tional aspects
Industry /
Consulting
not 
specified
not described, 
helps to inter­
pret maturity 
scores
4
PAFMA 
(Predictive 
Analytics 
Maturity 
Framework 
Assessment)
Capgemini, 
2012
People, processes, deploy­
ment, prioritisation and 
governance for analytics 
purposes
Industry /
Consulting
not 
specified
not described
5
Gartner
Howson & 
Duncan, 
2015
Level of development of BI 
and analytics initiatives
Industry /
Consulting
not 
specified
not described, 
recommends 
creating 
a plan for 
change, offers 
support with 
the develop­
ment of a 
future-state 
vision
6
DELTA/
DELTA Plus 
/IIA AMA 
(Analytics 
Maturity 
Assessment)
Davenport, 
2018
Analytics strategy, non-da­
ta driven corporate culture, 
poor processes, organisa­
tional resistance, quality 
and availability of data. 
The updated model DELTA 
Plus (2017) includes 
two new components: 
technology and analytics 
techniques
Industry /
Consulting
not 
specified
not described
Table 1  Analytics Maturity Models Overview
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
No
Name
Reference
Dimensions
Origin
Theoretical 
Foundation
Transition
7
APMM (Ana­
lytics Process 
Maturity 
Model)
Grossman, 
2018
six key process areas: (i) 
building analytics model, 
(ii) deploying analytics 
models, (iii) managing 
and operating analytics 
infrastructure, iv) protect­
ing analytics assets through 
appropriate policies, v) 
operating an analytics 
governance structure, vi) 
identifying analytics oppor­
tunities, making decisions 
and allocating resources 
based on an analytics 
strategy
Academia
CMM
not de­
scribed; goals 
identified 
based on 
common 
practice
8
EBIMM 
(Enterprise 
Business 
Intelligence 
Maturity 
Model)
Chuah, 
2010
Data warehousing, 
information quality, and 
knowledge process
Academia
CMM
not described
9
DWPM (Data 
Warehous­
ing Process 
Maturity)
Sen et al., 
2012
Data warehousing 
process supporting qual­
ity and timely delivery of 
information.
Academia
CMM
not described
10
LOBI (Ladder 
of Business 
Intelligence)
Cates et al., 
2005
Enterprise IT planning 
architecture
Academia
not 
specified
not described
11
IBM Big Data 
& Analyt­
ics Maturity 
Model
Nott, 2014
Business strategy, informa­
tion, analytics, culture, 
architecture, governance
Industry /
Consulting
not 
specified
not described
12
Data Ware­
housing 
Stages of 
Growth model
Watson et 
al., 2001
Data, Architecture, Stabil­
ity of Production environ­
ment, Warehouse staff, 
users, Impact on users’ 
skills and jobs, Use of the 
warehouse, Organisational 
impact, Costs and Benefits
Academia
Matura­
tion of data 
processing 
(Nolan, 
1979)
moving 
through the 
stages is not 
described
13
(BDMM) Big 
Data Maturity 
Model
Comuzzi & 
Patel, 2016
Strategic Alignment, 
Organisation, Gover­
nance, Data, Information 
Technology
Academia
Matu­
rity levels 
(Becker et 
al., 2009); 
Organisa­
tion strategy 
literature
no developed 
mechanism, 
‘To-be’ 
suggestions
14
Organic evo­
lutionary ma­
turity model 
of Business 
Intelligence
Russel et 
al., 2010
 A conceptual model 
proposing that maturity 
happens within each evolu­
tionary phase
Academia
CMM
only suggests 
that the 
object that is 
evolving may 
bridge an 
evolutionary 
chasm
Table 1  (continued)
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
The theoretical and management implications described in Sect.  7 demonstrate the 
potential of this work to strengthen the impact of the RBV and dynamic capability research 
by instantiating their constructs in the area of analytics maturity models, and to change 
management practice by providing direct and customised guidance to companies at differ­
ent stages of analytics capability development through aligning such capabilities with the 
business needs.
2  Literature review
The concept of modelling maturity originates from the works of Crosby (1979) and Nolan 
(1979). It received widespread use from the software process maturity framework known 
as Capability Maturity Model (CMM) developed in 1987 (Paulk et al., 1993). The CMM 
offered a set of recommendations for improving software development and maintenance 
capability of the IT function. Maturity models are known as a tool for assessing the state 
of completeness of certain capabilities (Wendler, 2012) or a set of characteristics. Such 
characteristics found in the existing analytics maturity models appear to be arbitrarily 
defined. Although they cover different aspects, such as data quality, leadership support, data 
management, governance, technology, people and skills, these models focus on pinpoint­
ing problems rather than on guiding the development of analytics capabilities. Although a 
small number of models consider alignment of analytics with business strategy (Comuzzi 
& Patel, 2016; Davenport, 2018), the majority of the models overlook the importance of 
Analytics-Business alignment for achieving holistic analytics capabilities at a maturity level 
required by an organisation for operational or strategic decision-making. This paper reviews 
only maturity models available in the Business Intelligence (BI), big data and analytics 
space. Earlier models developed by academia focused on Data Warehousing (Watson et al., 
2001; Sen et al., 2012) and BI maturity (Cates et al., 2005; Eckerson, 2007; Chuah, 2010). 
Only a handful of such management tools were provided by consulting practice before 
2010. The first assessment tool for measuring analytics was the DELTA model developed 
in 2010 by Davenport (2018). Other BI and analytics maturity models from business and 
IT consultancy firms emerged in subsequent years, e.g. Gartner (2010), Capgemini (2012), 
INFORMS (2013), IBM (2014), TDWI (2014) and IDC (2015). An overview of the identi­
fied analytics maturity models is shown in Table 1. The details of a few selected models 
were analysed during the design of dimensions for our framework.
The existing models provide recommendations for setting maturity development goals 
on either continuous or staged progress. However, they lack a theoretical foundation for 
No
Name
Reference
Dimensions
Origin
Theoretical 
Foundation
Transition
15
HISMM 
(Hospital 
Information 
System Matu­
rity Model)
Carvalho et 
al., 2019
Data analysis, Strategy, 
People, Electronic medi­
cal record, Information 
security, Systems and 
Infrastructure
Academia
not 
specified
determine the 
next achiev­
able stage 
and identify 
attributes that 
must be met 
to achieve a 
new stage.
Table 1  (continued)
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
how the analytics capability development and transition between stages should be achieved. 
Several publications pointed out that the available maturity models had no theoretical fram­
ing, except for being broadly based on the CMM (Becker et al., 2009; Magnusson & Nils­
son, 2020; Muller & Hart, 2016; Russel et al., 2010; Wendler, 2012). Another identified 
issue with the existing models concerns the maturity limit-setting nature of the CMM-based 
models and their questionable relevance to business intelligence, analytics and digital tech­
nologies because they cannot have a final state of maturity, rather they evolve (Magnusson 
& Nilsson, 2020; Russel et al., 2010). To address the issue, alternatives to the conventional 
matrix structure have been proposed (Magnusson & Nilsson, 2020; Russel et al., 2010). 
Also, our review shows that the available models appear to use a mixed maturity concept 
focusing on the three elements described by Lahrmann (2011) - people, process and technol­
ogy; some also incorporate organisational aspects such as vision, strategy and culture. On 
top of the organisation’s ability to build and use analytics models with available data, ana­
lytics maturity involves several organisational capabilities, resources and processes (Gross­
man, 2018). Along with resources such as available data, IT infrastructure and technical 
skills, which alone do not guarantee successful data-informed decision-making, creating a 
data science and analytics culture needs to be supported by management (Provost & Faw­
cett, 2013). Typically, building and nurturing the analytics culture can take years (Halper 
& Stodder, 2014). In addition, the effective use of data can be influenced by several factors 
including data quality, data privacy and governance, perceived organisational benefits, pro­
cess management, people, systems, tools and technologies, as well as various organisational 
aspects (Surbakti et al., 2020). Quality of data has been emphasised as an important prereq­
uisite of analytics maturity (Kiron et al., 2014; Ji-fan Ren et al., 2017); however, it remains 
a major challenge for businesses at all maturity levels (Lismont et al., 2017). This means 
that the availability and convenience of relevant mechanisms for ensuring data health, reli­
ability and governance remain key factors in analytics maturity assessments. For developing 
analytics capabilities, not only do organisations need to have a thorough understanding of 
how analytics are deployed in the organisational context (Mikalef et al., 2019b), they also 
need a structured approach to the understanding of their existing analytics capabilities and 
resources.
Having reviewed available analytics maturity models and after consulting the litera­
ture, we established that although there is a small number of models that have the under­
lying theoretical foundations or consider maturity-influencing factors and alignment with 
business strategy, there is still a lack of well-rounded analytics maturity frameworks with 
theory-supported maturity dimensions. In addition, although the literature discusses analyt­
ics processes, data, governance and other relevant characteristics that contribute to better 
organisational performance, we have not come across academic frameworks that suggested 
a theory-based transition method to enable the development of analytics capability and 
change. In the following section, we argue the suitability of the RBV and dynamic capabili­
ties concepts to underpin a new framework to address this gap.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
3  Theoretical approach
As companies diversify to compete in the market by offering unique products (Penrose, 1959, 
pp.21–22), they create unique capabilities and resources (Mintzberg et al., 2009, p.292). The 
RBV (Barney, 1991; Wernerfelt, 1984) and dynamic capabilities concept (Eisenhardt & 
Martin, 2000; Shamim et al., 2019; Teece et al., 1997), concern the development of internal 
capabilities in firms. The former emphasises the rooting of capabilities in the evolution of a 
firm itself and its organisational culture, whilst the latter stresses their development through 
a process of strategic learning (Mintzberg et al., 2009, p.293).
To underpin a new Analytics Maturity Framework with theoretical foundations we link 
the RBV and dynamic capabilities to the concept of analytics maturity. In this paper, we 
explore the ways the RBV and its VRIN/VRIO framework can guide the development and 
organisation of internal resources and capabilities. We argue that analytics maturity can be 
conceptualised as the state of the organisation of internal resources gradually evolving to 
align with business needs and situations requiring insight for relevant decision-making. 
The proposed analytics maturity framework (1) provides firms with a method to assess and 
understand the state across their analytics resources and management attitudes towards the 
development of those resources; and (2) offers guiding principles on how firms can achieve 
analytics maturity growth.
Research that attempted to explain the structure of maturity models is the work by Lah­
rmann et al. (2011). It gives theoretical definitions of five characteristics of maturity models: 
maturity concepts (“people maturity”, “process maturity” and “object or technology matu­
rity”); dimensions (specific areas of interest measured at each level); levels (representative 
states of maturity of each dimension); maturity principle (continuous or staged) and matu­
rity assessment (qualitative or quantitative). We were guided by the outlined principles and 
characteristics while developing our framework; however, Lahrmann’s theoretical model 
does not define a transition mechanism between the levels, i.e. representative states of matu­
rity. This mechanism was deemed important by our end users and its presence in our frame­
work is one of the main innovations in our framework.
3.1  The resource-based view
The RBV takes a firm-specific perspective on why organisations succeed or fail in the mar­
ketplace (Hunt & Morgan, 2005). This view suggests that having resources that are valu­
able, rare, inimitable, non-substitutional and organised (VRIN/O) in order to capture value 
makes it possible for firms to develop a competitive advantage and achieve superior perfor­
mance (Barney, 1991; Grant, 1991; Wernerfelt, 1984). According to Daft (1983), the firm’s 
resources include assets, capabilities, organisational processes, information, and knowledge. 
Controlled by the firm, these resources enable strategy creation that improves its operational 
efficiency and effectiveness. Furthermore, the firm’s resources are divided into three types: 
(i) physical capital resources consisting of resources such as equipment and technology; (ii) 
human capital resources comprising experience, training, intelligence, and knowledge; and 
(iii) organisational capital resources concerning formal structures, controlling systems and 
reporting and planning systems (Barney, 1991). We argue that the firm’s analytics capability 
is a bundle of resources comprising organisational and managerial culture, skills, gover­
nance, analytics processes, IT/Analytics infrastructure, and data technology and techniques 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
that can be re-organised. A transition mechanism enabling maturity growth in our proposed 
Analytics Maturity Framework is based on dynamic re-organisation of the internal analytics 
resources and capabilities.
The RBV perspective is used in the proposed framework holistically. Viewed as a 
resource in itself, knowledge resulting from using the maturity assessment aids managers in 
understanding and re-organising the firm’s internal analytics resources. The AMF can help 
assess the organisation of resources as advocated by the VRIN/O framework, however, the 
realisation of its utility is reliant on the management attitude and action since the unused 
knowledge in the form of the results of the assessment cannot, by itself, initiate improve­
ments that will advance analytics maturity and contribute to growth, company performance, 
and competitive advantage through analytics.
According to Gupta et al. (2018), the ubiquity and rapid increase in the use of ground-
breaking IT technologies led by technological evolvement may erode the sustainability of 
the firm’s existing analytics resources. Technological resources represent physical capital. 
However, with fast-paced changes in technology, once efficient and appropriate technology 
may lose its relevancy a few years later. Regarded as relatively static, the RBV creates some 
limitations. It neither takes into account the rapidly changing nature of business environ­
ments (Teece et al., 1997) and institutional pressures (Dubey et al., 2019), nor accommo­
dates the changes in the evolution of technological and digital resources to support efficient 
analytics and demanding business goals. Therefore, invoking the concept of dynamic capa­
bilities may help to overcome this fundamental limitation (Barreto, 2010).
3.2  Dynamic capabilities
As indicated in the literature review, some research has attempted to apply the dynamic 
capabilities concept to maturity models before. Dynamic capabilities emphasise organisa­
tional routines and managerial skills as drivers of the firm’s ability to integrate, build and 
reconfigure internal competencies to address or create changes in the business environment 
(Teece et al., 1997). Recent research confirms that big data processes and capabilities need 
to change dynamically to adjust to external and internal influences (Braganza et al., 2017). 
The AMF provides an assessment of maturity levels given a combination of resources in a 
specific time period, thus the guidance to develop further will be based on the firm’s organ­
ised resources. Any resources within the firm can change over time either due to internal 
factors or external forces, resulting in a need to be adjusted to business pressures. Firms can 
produce knowledge by reviewing their analytics resources to ensure enduring operational, 
financial and market performance. Therefore, the dynamic capabilities principles emphasise 
resource development and renewal through reassessment and re-organisation.
Firms perceive the role of analytics as critical in closing the maturity and capability gap 
between digital natives and traditional companies (Alles & Burshek, 2016). However, the 
successful adoption of analytics remains a challenge for many (Viaene & Van den Bunder, 
2011). Indeed, just the possession of analytics capabilities or the application of analytical 
methods without a clear business need to address brings no real value to the companies 
unless data is meaningfully transformed into actionable insights (Holsapple et al., 2014; 
Gandomi & Haider, 2015; Larson & Chang, 2016; Seddon et al., 2017) for decision-making. 
This requires such insights to be accessible and integrated into business processes to enable 
evidence-based decisions and insight-informed actions (Bose, 2009; Lavalle et al., 2011; 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Seddon et al., 2017). If previously hidden knowledge provides value after transforming 
data into actionable insights by using analytics, then, from the resource-based and dynamic 
capability perspectives, establishing and organising processes that enable better utilisation 
of the appropriate internal resources is supported by the VRIN/O framework. The dynamic 
capabilities concept suggests that companies build up knowledge that allows improving the 
process of bundling and re-bundling of resources (Eisenhardt & Martin, 2000); and that 
companies should have an ability to renew and reinvent their strategic, analytics, digital and 
IT capabilities to meet the requirements of changing environments (Mikalef & Pateli, 2017; 
Pavlou & El Sawy, 2006; Shamim et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2012). We explain the composi­
tion of the framework and the transition mechanism in Sect. 5.
4  Methodology
Our research uses multiple case studies, though initially we focused on a single company. It 
started with a request from a digital technology company that was preparing to commence 
a major transformation of their customer relationship management (CRM) system, and the 
management team were looking at ways to build a business-wide automated sales forecast­
ing process. The challenge was to streamline all sales forecasting processes and ensure 
data quality and necessary resources for building analytics and forecasting capabilities. 
Reflecting on this study’s research question that originated from a real business problem, we 
decided to combine several research methods in our approach, i.e. a review of the existing 
knowledge base, an analysis of existing maturity models, and action design research (ADR).
Our exploratory literature review aimed to identify existing maturity models and aca­
demic literature relevant to the concept of analytics maturity. We needed to understand from 
the current literature what dimensions are used in existing maturity models, and to identify 
organisational areas that influence the development of analytics capabilities. In addition to 
exploring maturity dimensions, our literature review has concluded that (1) the existing con­
sulting models did not have a theoretical basis (Menukhin et al., 2019); and (2) only a small 
number of theory-supported maturity models originated from academia, but none provided 
a theory base for transition from one analytics maturity stage to the next.
In order to develop an analytics maturity framework we followed the sequence of activi­
ties for developing a theory-informed artefact as recommended by the ADR guidelines (Sein 
et al., 2011), using a qualitative approach (Creswell, 2009) for problem exploration and 
definition, and a framework validation survey. We were guided by theoretical definitions of 
maturity model elements (Lahrman et al., 2011), definitions of maturity level in the Stra­
tegic Alignment Maturity model (Luftman, 2000), the RBV (Barney, 1991) and dynamic 
capabilities (Teece et al., 1997) theories. As the review of the previous relevant studies was 
an integral part of the iterative artefact-development process, the literature was consulted 
throughout different ADR stages.
4.1  Action design research
We used the ADR method because it supports the simultaneous development of a theory-
informed artefact and deployment of this artefact to help address existing organisational 
challenges in the first case study organisation as explained below. The adopted method is 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
shown in Fig. 1, and this section provides further details for the implementation of each 
of the four ADR stages (Problem definition; Building, Intervention and Evaluation (BIE); 
Reflection and Learning; and Formalisation of Learning).
The initial focus on the first case study allowed an in-depth analysis of needs and context 
that were sufficiently specific yet typical for a business setting. This was triangulated with 
the existing knowledge about the role of analytics as an organisational asset as outlined 
in the literature review to form an integrated and generalised understanding of both the 
organisational context and user needs with regards to analytics maturity. Each version of 
the maturity assessment model was evaluated by drawing on both practical feedback and 
theory. Four ADR stages are described below.
4.1.1  Problem definition
The business problem outlined by practitioners from the first case study company to the 
research team resulted from the company’s internal complexities and disparities between 
departmental and regional approaches to sales forecasting by different business units. These 
were further investigated during interviews. This research proposed to assess the company’s 
analytics maturity of the business unit in question. Since it was a multinational company, 
UK-based and overseas departments provided a sufficient scale for the research.
Key information for this theory-driven and practice-inspired research was gathered on: 
(a) the existing process of forecasting sales and financial performance, and (b) understand­
ing the current practices and challenges related to the use of analytics and forecasting tech­
Fig. 1  ADR method stages, adapted from Sein et al. (2011)
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
niques. During this phase, more precise business requirements were defined by the company 
management; these were incorporated in the design of an interview guide that was used to 
gather input during the next stage.
4.1.2  Building, intervention and evaluation (BIE)
The second stage included the following activities: (1) reviewing available maturity models; 
(2) carrying out interviews with practitioners and users to gather information relevant to the 
existing process and the associated practices and challenges; (3) assessing the company’s 
maturity level; (4) integrating maturity dimensions into a target artefact - a theory-supported 
analytics maturity framework (cf. Sect. 5.1); and (5) evaluating the framework and imple­
menting iterative modifications based on practitioners’ feedback.
An initial version of the analytics maturity framework was presented and tested with 
stakeholders in the first case study company. Subsequent interventions throughout this stage 
focused on developing an online version of the analytics maturity framework to allow other 
practitioners to independently assess their companies. The revised version incorporated a 
validation survey and testing the framework with three additional companies. This work is 
discussed further in Sections <link rid="Sect. 16”>5</link> and 6 below.
4.1.3  Reflection and learning
This stage represents a conceptual move from constructing the framework to applying it to 
different organisations thus testing its generalisability. The research team focused on reflect­
ing on the problem framing, identified research gaps, the theories chosen and the emerging 
output. Validating the framework with several companies confirmed that the problem fram­
ing was generalisable and relevant for any business setting.
4.1.4  Formalisation of learning
The final stage of the process focused on the generalisation of the outcome. It included shar­
ing the emerging versions of the framework with users and practitioners within the original 
case study company first. It followed by making the final version available for free access 
and use by any company as a web-tool. This allowed us to extend the research, validate and 
generalise the results. Thus, the refinement and reassessment of the research aim and objec­
tives as part of and throughout the research process reflected the iterative nature of the ADR 
process and principles.
4.2  Data collection approaches
Data was collected from a range of sources as part of Stage 2 of the ADR process.
4.2.1  Interviews
To better understand the business context within our first case study company and explore 
specific areas of interest to be assessed, the research team conducted unstructured inter­
views. The interviews provided first-hand insights from knowledge holders at two levels 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
of seniority within the company, which gave the researchers different perspectives on the 
current business process. Participants for phone interviews were selected from relevant 
functional units in three identified geographic locations of this multi-national company. The 
main principle in selecting respondents was their experience, knowledge of and involve­
ment in the business process in question. The selected groups included (1) regional decision 
makers (regional sales managers and business partners from Sales Operations who typi­
cally read forecast report, Tableau-dashboards users) and (2) global decision makers (global 
programme managers and directors who did not use information systems and digital tools, 
but used the forecasting results for making organisation-wide decisions; they had a strate­
gic view of the business. Additionally, experts from Finance, Marketing and IT were also 
included in order to determine the level of their involvement with Sales Operations.
In order to gather in-depth information on the business process, responsibilities and ways 
how analytics could improve the business process results, interview questions were divided 
into three research sections: process, maturity and improvements. The main reason for 
selecting unstructured interviews as the primary research approach was their flexibility in 
allowing adjustments to be made within the list of the defined areas of investigation during 
the interviews (Saunders et al., 2015, p.391).
In addition to achieving the understanding of the process and gathering related informa­
tion, the interviews incorporated questions on the quality of the existing data, its adequacy 
to deliver anticipated results and what improvements can be made to make efficient data-
informed decisions. Our questions were designed to examine the analytics maturity of the 
Sales Operations with a particular focus on forecasting sales and predicting performance. 
We also sought to understand data sources, frequency, process, output and target audience.
Our literature review showed that the concept of maturity has been applied to multiple 
areas in Information Systems, and the existing maturity models tend to focus on the fol­
lowing aspects: (a) analytics technology issues; (b) business/organisational perspective; 
(c) analytics capabilities; and (d) the impact of analytics on the decision enablement and 
business performance (Chen & Nath, 2018). To explore the company’s maturity, our ques­
tions were organised to cover four dimensions: process, people, technology (including data, 
IT systems) and management support. Table 2 provides a sample of interview questions. 
During the interview process it became apparent that one additional important dimension, 
governance, was overlooked when designing the questionnaire. It was investigated during 
subsequent discussions.
To achieve a sufficient cross-section of sales managers, business partners and other sup­
port staff who provided their opinions and experiences, between 10 and 15 people in total 
from the key target functional units were interviewed in EMEA, Americas, Asia Pacific and 
Australia. Commentary and analysis of the interview findings were used in developing the 
framework.
4.2.2  Iterative meetings
To gather initial feedback, we presented our framework design and maturity assessment to 
three senior managers within the first case study company. The initial prototype of the AMF 
was also tested with three managers within two external start-up companies. In contrast to 
the first case study company, these start-ups had small-scale global footprint. The frame­
work was presented to the managers over a series of conference calls and face-to-face dis­
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
cussions. Our presentations focused on explaining the AMF, reasons behind its creation, and 
how its use could support management challenges. The research purpose of these interactive 
meetings was to understand the practical value of the AMF to the participating businesses. 
Feedback obtained from a survey questionnaire, which is shown in Table 3, was incorpo­
rated into further improvements of the AMF and led to the creation of a web-based tool that 
consisted of two parts, a self-diagnostic assessment and a feedback gathering validation 
survey.
Questions
1.
Do you find the framework useful?
2.
Do you find the framework clear?
3.
Can you identify where your organisation fits in 
relation to the analytics maturity level?
4.
Does it help to select the right analytics technique 
suitable for the present maturity level?
5.
Does it provide guidance regarding how to prog­
ress to the next maturity level?
6.
Do you think it could be used in your organisation?
Table 3  Initial validation survey 
questions
 
Focus
Questions
1
Process
Does a defined process for analytics exist 
in your business unit?
2
Process
Do you think IT understand the sales 
forecasting process?
3
Process
Are predictive analytics techniques inte­
grated with decision making processes?
4
Process
Is customer data analysed using analytics 
techniques?
5
Process
Are you aware of how predictive analyt­
ics techniques can be leveraged for this 
business process?
6
Technology
Are experts aware of IT potential to help 
with analytics needs?
7
Technology
Are there any standardised tools/tech­
niques used for data analytics?
8
Technology
Is the technology environment able to in­
tegrate predictive models into operational 
processes?
9
People
At what level within the company, analyt­
ics initiatives are governed or sponsored?
10
People
Do you have people with data analytics 
skills in your team?
11
Management
Is there a budget allocated for analytics 
initiatives?
12
Management
Are predictive analytics initiatives en­
couraged in your business unit?
Table 2  Interview guide
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
4.2.3  Framework as a web-based tool and a validation survey
After identifying maturity levels and dimensions for the framework, we constructed ques­
tions for assessing each dimension. The questions related to the maturity dimensions were 
reviewed through several iterations by the research team before the first version of a web-
based tool was designed in Qualtrics. The online assessment provided a brief description of 
the framework and its potential benefits. Users were invited to provide consent for data to 
be collected when they use the tool. The assessment was organised in 6 sections, each dedi­
cated to an AMF dimension, with questions exploring the ‘Present State’ of analytics and the 
‘Management’ aspects for each of the maturity dimensions (‘Organisation’ – 6 questions, 
‘IT and Analytics Infrastructure’ – 7, ‘Analytics Processes’ – 6, Skills – 6, ‘Governance’ -7, 
‘Data and Analytics Technology’ − 6). The analytics maturity assessment included a combi­
nation of multiple-choice and matrix table questions. Participants were asked to reflect their 
understanding of data analytics within their organisation or individual business units when 
answering the questions. The web-based tool we built to operationalise and test the AMF is 
available at bit.ly/Analytics_Growth.
To determine the profiles of participants, they were asked to choose options that would 
indicate their involvement with analytics in their roles. Upon completion of the analytics 
maturity assessment, participants were invited to answer a validation survey consisting of 
eight questions, shown in Table 4, with five focusing on the validation of the AMF useful­
ness and three asking about company industry, company size and the participant’s role in 
their organisation.
Questions
1
Has completing this survey helped you reflect on the 
state of Analytics Maturity in your organisation?
2
By answering the survey questions, have you been able 
to relate the state of analytics use in your organisation 
with any particular level of the framework?
3
Has answering the assessment questions helped you 
identify the areas for improvement to drive the analytics 
maturity growth in your organisations?
4
Can using the Analytics Maturity Growth framework be 
of benefit/value in your organisation?
5
If you answered Yes in the previous question, what 
benefit/value can using the framework make in your 
organisation? Please explain briefly your thoughts:
6
Please select your organisation’s industry. This will help 
us gauge the level of analytics maturity within indus­
tries (drop down menu with a list of industry sectors).
7
Please select the size of your organisation, by number 
of employees
8
What is your current role in the organisation? We only 
ask this to help us understand your perspective on 
the framework and the feedback you are giving. Our 
assumption is that Business Managers and Data Profes­
sionals’ views of the analytics maturity will differ.
Table 4  AMF web-based valida­
tion survey
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
5  The analytics maturity framework
5.1  Design
A summary of the activities performed during designing and creating the AMF is shown in 
Table 5.
The Analytics Maturity Framework uses a common maturity structure. We adapted the 
definitions of five maturity levels from the Strategic Alignment Maturity (SAM) model 
(Luftman & Kempaiah, 2008). These are ‘Initial’, ‘Committed’, ‘Focused’, ‘Managed’ and 
‘Optimised’. Based on the analysis of the existing models that is shown in Table 6, and 
while also keeping in mind the IT-Business alignment criteria from the SAM model, we 
constructed new maturity dimensions by grouping commonly occurred themes.
Based on our interview findings and the above analysis, we selected six dimensions that 
could provide support for the Analytics-Business alignment based on the identified firm’s 
resources. Since the motivation for our study was to ground an analytics maturity frame­
work in the established theoretical base, we explored management literature on the RBV 
and big data analytics to support our proposed framework’s dimensions. The AMF dimen­
sions were developed using the environment and knowledge base perspectives (Hevner 
et al., 2004), as shown in Fig. 2. The environment perspective represents our empirical 
research findings accumulated through interviews within the case study companies, analysis 
of available maturity models and practitioners feedback. The knowledge base perspective 
represents literature and academic resources that we accessed in order to develop our matu­
rity dimensions.
Each of the AMF’s dimensions - organisation, skills, governance, analytics processes, 
IT/Analytics infrastructure, and data technology, tools and techniques - are viewed through 
Table 5  Activities performed in the development of the AMF
Stages
1st iteration
2nd iteration
3rd iteration
Building
1) Review of existing maturity 
models (Table 1)
2) Interviews in CS1 (focusing on 
maturity of process, technology, 
people and management)
3) Analysis of CS1 with three 
selected maturity models
4) Initial prototype based on the 
SAM model (Luftman) for maturity 
levels
1) Define maturity 
dimensions based on the 
SAM model of IT/Busi­
ness alignment
2) Literature on maturity 
dimensions
3) Web-based assessment 
(AMF version 1)
Web-based assess­
ment (AMF version 
2)
Intervention
Presentation to CS1 (multinational 
technology company)
Presentations to CS2/
CS3 (two technology 
start-ups)
Online assessment 
by CS4, Presentation 
to CS4 (large public 
sector company)
Evaluation
Survey questions (Table 3)
Survey questions 
(Table 3)
Web-based valida­
tion survey (Table 4)
Learning
Able to assess maturity, but need 
clarity on guidance on how to get 
next levels
Maturity assessment is 
clear, but need further 
clarity on transition to 
next levels
Adjusting the frame­
work for different 
roles (Business vs. 
Technology)
Reflection
Problem framing, research gaps, 
theory, maturity dimensions
Maturity dimensions
Overall usability 
and utility of the 
framework
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
the lens of the RBV. They differ by their nature: organisational, physical or human capital. 
Three out of the six dimensions, i.e. analytics processes, organisation and governance, are 
characteristic of the organisation element of the RBV’s VRIN/O framework, meaning that 
the physical and human resources represented by IT/analytics infrastructure, data/analytics 
technology and skills respectively are supported by the firm’s analytics governance struc­
ture, processes and culture, all of which are intangible resources and therefore difficult to 
Dimensions
INFORM
IDC
TDWI
Organisation
Attitude towards 
analytics
●
●
●
Leadership support
●
●
●
Measures
●
●
●
Processes- use of 
analytics in business 
process
●
●
Vision
Strategy
●
●
Budget
●
●
Justification for 
investment
●
IT- Business 
alignment
●
Analytics
Governance
●
●
●
Roles, skills, teams
●
●
Analytics Ser­
vices (spectrum, 
techniques)
●
●
●
Analytics processes
●
●
Location (separate or 
within IT)
●
Collaboration
●
●
Training
●
●
Data
Data Quality (data 
health)
●
●
●
Access for users
●
●
Data completeness, 
source
●
●
Traceability, 
reliability, lineage, 
auditability
●
●
●
Timeliness (availabil­
ity, collection)
●
●
Data strategy
●
Data management 
process
●
●
●
Technology
Enterprise IT 
architecture
●
●
●
Deployment
●
●
Adoption
●
●
Performance
●
●
Functionality
●
●
Table 6  Comparison of selected 
analytics maturity models
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
imitate. The AMF can be used as a tool to support the internal organisation of the analytics 
capabilities. A brief description of each dimension is provided below.
5.1.1  Organisation (organisational/intangible)
Defines to what extent the organisational strategy, culture, leadership back business analyt­
ics (Barton & Court, 2012; Chaudhuri et al., 2021; Davenport et al., 2001; Erevelles et al., 
2016; Gupta & George, 2016; Kiron et al., 2014; Lavalle et al., 2011; Mikalef et al., 2018; 
Olszak, 2016; Ross et al., 2013). Support for analytics can be fragmented, business unit-level 
or widespread and the level of such support demonstrates the management attitude towards 
encouraging analytics-informed decisions and business environment. Shows the importance 
of integrating and driving the right behaviours for analytics-supported and insight-driven 
decision-making. Lack of culture that supports the use of analytics is suggested to be one 
of the reasons many firms have failed to realise the potential of data (Lavalle et al., 2011). 
Given the effective use of analytics for decision-making and analytics capability devel­
opment both depend on the organisational culture, assessing the firm’s attitude towards 
creating and cultivating culture and practice that supports alignment of analytics with deci­
sion-making at management levels needs to be part of the analytics maturity assessment.
5.1.2  IT & analytics infrastructure (physical/tangible)
Defines the level of suitability of IT systems and platform development in facilitating 
analytics adoption and use; demonstrates the ability of the infrastructure to support and 
accommodate growing volumes of data, attitude to development and impact on the business 
(Gupta & George, 2016; Wamba et al., 2017).
Fig. 2  Integrating maturity dimensions using the Environment and Knowledge perspectives, adapted 
from Hevner et al. (2004)
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
5.1.3  Analytics processes (organisational/intangible)
Assesses the quality of data (Brinkhues et al., 2014; Ji-fan Ren et al., 2017; Kiron et al., 
2014) used in analytics; defines the existence of analytics processes in the organisation and 
how well these are managed and integrated with business needs. Creating efficient analyt­
ics processes to support transformation of data and knowledge is leading to better resource 
utilisation.
5.1.4  Skills (human)
Demonstrates the existence, organisation and level of data analytics skills needed to work 
with current and future technologies (Mikalef et al., 2018); assesses necessary managerial 
practices (Gupta & George, 2016) and attitude to skills development, such as acquisition, 
retention, and training. Achieving value from actionable insights relies on the know-how of 
using analytical technologies and interpreting data by people.
5.1.5  Governance (organisational/intangible)
Defines the firm’s approach to data governance and the ownership of data (Espinosa & 
Armour, 2016; Mikalef et al., 2018; Tallon et al., 2013; Vidgen et al., 2017); demonstrates 
how coherent and supportive the company’s data governance strategy is. The data gover­
nance status can influence the organisational strategy in ensuring the appropriate culture is 
maintained.
5.1.6  Data & analytics Technologies (physical/tangible)
Demonstrates how advanced the technologies, tools and techniques available in the organ­
isation are (Erevelles et al., 2016; Gupta & George, 2016; Wixom et al., 2011); what and 
how analytics technologies and tools are used for efficient data transformation into action­
able insights; and what the organisation’s attitude towards their strategic development is.
5.2  Transition
To further support the AMF with the VRIN/O framework and dynamic capabilities, this 
research proposes a mechanism for transitioning to advanced maturity levels. It proposes 
that transformation of analytics maturity starts with the existing makeup of the internal 
analytics resources and then continues with a course of action ensuring the relevance of 
these resources to the current and future business needs and environment. Each dimension 
is evaluated by two aspects. The first is ‘Management’. This aspect defines the existing 
processes, internal organisation and considerations the business makes about the use of ana­
lytics within the context of each maturity level, and management attitudes to establishing 
the next stage of the organisation’s analytics growth. The second aspect is ‘Present State’, 
which is a qualitative assessment of what the business currently uses and what capabilities 
it owns, e.g. infrastructure, technology, skills, processes, etc. These two aspects are critical 
for transitioning to the next maturity level. The presence of these two aspects makes our pro­
posed framework unique among the available options and allows us to use it for both analys­
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
ing the existing situation and for guiding the transition towards the higher levels of maturity. 
The two aspects of the proposed framework are detailed for each AMF dimension in Fig. 4.
5.2.1  Moving through stages of analytics maturity using the framework
The AMF is based on the continuous maturity principle and the transition model can be 
applied to all dimensions at any maturity level to guide the organisation’s progress from any 
current level of maturity to a more advanced one. As seen in Fig. 5, the transition begins 
with an assessment of the existing capabilities that are defined by the “Present State” aspect 
(Bt) of a specific maturity dimension. If a higher maturity state Bt+1 is desired, the organisa­
tion should reconsider its current “Management” attitude (At) that characterises this dimen­
sion, and change it to the one associated with the desired higher level of maturity (At+1). 
This transition is illustrated by the arched arrow inside the diagram in Fig. 5. The underlying 
assumption for the change of management attitude is: a present analytics maturity level is 
a result of the practices and attitudes measured by the “Management” aspect. The influ­
ence of the management attitude on the analytics maturity level is illustrated by the vertical 
downward arrow in Fig. 5. A desired change, for example, could involve formulating a data 
strategy, establishing governance policies or developing a framework for introducing new 
technologies, etc. As the infrastructure, technology or any other dimension being measured 
becomes more sophisticated, and the analytics implementation supports decision-making 
and business requirements, the desired situation characterised by the “Management” (At+1) 
and “Future State” (Bt+1) aspects becomes a reality. This is now considered an existing 
maturity level and such status is illustrated by the backward arrow on the outside of the dia­
gram. The previously defined aspirations are achieved and so to progress towards creating a 
new future state of analytics maturity, the current capabilities should be reassessed and the 
“Management” attitude should change again. This is a continuous spiral-like cycle.
Fig. 3  Analytics Maturity Framework (available at bit.ly/Analytics_Growth.)
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
5.3  Validating the AMF and its advisory component
The evaluation and validation of the AMF was carried out in two phases, a questionnaire to 
the managers from the three case study companies, and a web-based survey that participants 
were asked to complete after using the online AMF assessment.
During the first evaluation phase with three case study companies (a large multinational 
technology company and two technology start-ups), when asked whether the framework 
was useful, five interviewees across three companies agreed it was beneficial for several 
reasons. Firstly, it helped them to understand the current state of their business. More impor­
tantly, they were able to understand what the desired state should be; they could use this 
understanding to start building roadmaps, designing initiatives and thinking of the type of 
skills needed. The respondents found AMF clear as they were able to identify what analyt­
ics maturity level their business was at. However, it was indicated that there was a need to 
incorporate other elements, such as the nature of the business and the existing data. Also, 
when asked whether the framework provided guidance on how to move to a certain maturity 
level, some respondents said it only provided them with identifiable maturity characteristics 
at each level, but not with ‘this is what you need to do’ advice to move to the next level. 
Overall, all respondents found it practical and would use the AMF in their business. The 
obtained feedback on the framework’s usefulness and relevancy was incorporated into fur­
ther improvements of the AMF and led to the creation of the web-based self-diagnostic and 
feedback gathering tool.
Fig. 4  Transition model
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
This updated AMF version and the web-based tool were tested in the second evaluation 
and validation phase. Firstly, it was tested with a large public listed company from the utili­
ties sector. Five managers and a decision support analyst assessed the analytics maturity 
of their organisation using the online tool and completed the validation survey. Follow­
ing this independently-performed exercise, the research team presented the AMF to the 
company and conducted a group discussion with seven participants. The gathered feedback 
suggested several further modifications in the design of the AMF dimensions. These were 
mainly related to clarifications of analytics terminology used, so that the analytics maturity 
assessment could be completed by managers with different functional roles and business 
perspectives. All managers participating in validating the AMF during consecutive interven­
tions had senior management responsibilities in Operations, Process, IT, Decision Support, 
Strategy and other; these participants had either sufficient or good understanding of the role 
of analytics in their organisations.
Having implemented the modifications, the web-based self-assessment tool was updated 
to reflect the new AMF version, and the link to the tool was distributed amongst MBA 
cohorts within two UK Universities. Both MBA cohorts comprised professionals and man­
agers from industry and the public sector with a minimum number of years of professional 
experience. Participants from a variety of industry sectors were invited through the profes­
sional social media platform LinkedIn to use the tool and complete the analytics maturity 
assessment of their organisations online. After using the tool, participants were invited but 
not obliged to answer a set of questions evaluating the AMF in terms of usefulness, bench­
marking their organisation against the framework, and value to their organisation. 61 people 
in total completed this evaluation part.
Participants came from different industries, but the Information Technology (21%), 
Healthcare (16%), Banking & Financial Services (14%) and Utilities (10%) sectors were 
the largest; the rest included Manufacturing (8%), Public Administration (8%), Education, 
Retail and Other.
6  Results
The results of the AMF validation survey provide answers to our first research question 
focusing on what dimensions should compose a holistic, theory-supported maturity model 
that will guide analytics capability development in organisations. This question and our 
motivation for the research were also complemented by the need for a holistic maturity 
assessment that became apparent from our interview findings.
The results of the validation show that the AMF is practical and provides value by struc­
turing maturity assessment along the following six dimensions: organisation; skills; gov­
ernance; analytics processes; IT/Analytics infrastructure; and data technology, tools and 
techniques. 86% of our respondents found the AMF helpful when reflecting on the state of 
analytics maturity in their organisations, and 76% of them said they were able to relate the 
state of analytics use in their organisations with particular AMF levels. Furthermore, 75% 
of the participants were able to identify the areas for improvement to drive the analytics 
maturity growth in their organisations. In addition, 67% of the participants saw the value 
offered by the AMF if used in their organisations.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Participants were asked to expand on perceived benefits and value of using the AMF 
for their organisations. Two particular benefits dominated the responses. Firstly, the AMF 
provided a structure for the understanding of the company’s analytics capabilities and 
resources. Secondly, it was a tool for the management to understand the company’s current 
state of analytics capabilities One participant stated: “Defining different levels of analytics 
maturity with clear descriptions will help our manager to think more in a framework and 
perceive the current status of the company in this regard and next possible steps” (IT). 
This was echoed by others“…have found the framework useful in better understanding of 
analytics in my organisation” (Healthcare), and “More structured framework to show the 
management how data processes should be organised” (IT).
In addition some participants commented on improved decision making as a benefit if 
the framework was introduced in their organisations: “Using data to make strategic deci­
sions” (Healthcare), “The organisation to use data in making decisions” (Healthcare), and 
“Strategic decision making and predictive analysis” (IT).
The demographics of our validation survey steered towards larger businesses with 
250 + employees (75%) that already have established organisational structures, though 
micro- (4%), small- (16%) and medium- (4%) size businesses also participated. One par­
ticipant from the manufacturing company said that their small and medium-sized enterprise 
(SME) lagged behind in the adoption of analytics, but they “recently started to look into 
digitisation and Industry 4.0 solutions and have little clue ‘how to’ be future ready. Convert­
ing paper-based processes along manual manufacturing for an SME is a big challenge.” 
Our results show that regardless of the company size, the challenges of developing analytics 
capability are common to all businesses. The SMEs have the same needs as large busi­
nesses; they require a structured approach to organising data and analytics and understand­
ing of how to progress with developing their digital and analytics capabilities.
Our second research question focused on how companies can achieve the desired level of 
maturity, and to address this our paper proposes a transition mechanism. Although the vali­
dation survey focused mainly on the utility of the AMF, the participants provided positive 
feedback on this additional contribution of our framework, which can be considered as the 
third perceived benefit from using the AMF in organisations. It was recognised by 40% of 
the participants who agreed to explain their opinions on the AMF benefits that the proposed 
framework offered guidance for analytics capability development. These participants said 
that having a comprehensive view on the company’s analytics capabilities was beneficial for 
building “…a global picture of where the company is” (Financial Services) and developing 
analytics maturity capability because it “provides us a framework to work against, provides 
us a starting point and a goal to aim for” (IT); it helped to “understand how to move up the 
maturity curve” (IT), and “it will support our current proposals to introduce a robust data 
strategy to support the organisations growth” (Other sector), Similarly, “…this framework 
will help the organisation pay particular focus to certain areas of development required” 
(Public Administration), “It would be able to organise and show to the board where we are, 
and where we have to be to go further” (Financial Services), “To highlight the dimensions 
of analytics maturity and to inform transition planning” (Public Administration), and “To 
show the areas for development” (Public Administration).
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
7  Discussion and conclusions
We have developed an analytics maturity framework that is unique amongst the existing 
frameworks by its grounding in the RBV theory and the principles of dynamic capabilities 
theory. Following RBV, the framework uses different types of resources in the organisation 
to shape its six dimensions of analytics maturity. The dynamic capability perspective then 
informs the transition of an organisation along the states of maturity, indicating the firm’s 
ability to reconfigure the state of embeddedness, use and deployment of analytics in support 
of organisational decision-making. This is dependent on the state of management attitude 
to the adoption and strategic development of such capabilities, and this stipulation is one of 
the significant novel elements of our framework.
The motivation for creating an analytics maturity model is to ensure the focus of analyt­
ics activities on addressing business challenges, supporting decision-making, and keeping 
analytics aligned with business goals through the development of analytics capabilities. 
This paper aims to achieve this by applying the RBV and dynamic capabilities concepts to 
systematically derive a framework for organising and developing analytics capabilities in 
a business context. We argue that doing this will help companies not only understand the 
current state of their analytics but also to create a roadmap for developing those capabilities.
The result of our research is the proposed Analytics Maturity Framework (AMF) and 
its implementation in a web-based diagnostic tool. We have shown that through its six 
dimensions, the AMF provides a structural, multi-perspective approach to understanding 
and building analytics capabilities. Viewed as a resource, each dimension can be described 
from the RBV perspective, while an in-depth understanding of the business needs and the 
analytics capabilities that can support them represents the knowledge that can be gradually 
cultivated.
The key novelty embedded in the structure of the AMF is the ability to distinguish 
between creating an inventory of analytics capabilities and guiding the analytics maturity 
growth. The sequel of this section describes the theoretical and managerial implications 
arising from the results of this research.
7.1  Theoretical implications
In the theoretical domain, this research addresses the absence in the literature of comprehen­
sive theory-driven analytics maturity models. The paper integrates concepts from the SAM 
model, the RBV and dynamic capabilities theories to derive the AMF framework that can 
guide the identification and development of analytics capabilities and their maturity. The 
AMF maturity levels are based on the SAM model (Luftman, 2000, 2008), the analytics 
maturity dimensions are supported by the RBV and its VRIN/VRIO framework (Barney, 
1991), and the transition through the stages of maturity relies on the dynamic capabilities 
theory (Teece et al., 1997).
Whilst the RBV and dynamic capabilities have been linked with Big Data Analytics 
capabilities in the previous research, these theories have been mostly analysed through the 
lens of their impact on different output variables such as organisational performance (Rialti 
et al., 2019; Côrte-Real et al., 2017; Ferraris et al., 2019; Shamim et al., 2019); or, to a lesser 
extent, innovation (Mikalef et al., 2019a). Instead, here we are using these theories to derive 
a benchmark-oriented and holistic framework for analytics capabilities growth and maturity.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
The need for systematic derivation of the analytics maturity model has been recognised 
by the academic community, indeed, Korsten et al. (2022) have conducted a Delphi study 
with 9 experts attempting exactly that. However, their work lacks both the transition guid­
ance element of AMF and the comprehensive evaluation in different areas of business 
offered here.
In addition, our observations of analytics needs, practices and processes during the course 
of developing the framework using the ADR method have revealed a number of interesting 
findings which can be used to underpin further developments in the area:
 
●
Companies of different sizes and in different sectors experience similar challenges in the 
realm of data and analytics, often united by the stifling effect of legacy IT systems and 
corresponding poor data quality.
 
●
Companies can find their different divisions on different levels of analytics maturity. 
Indeed, the middle management attitude towards the present state of the analytics capa­
bility directly affects the potential for developing the analytics maturity of that specific 
unit.
 
●
The lack of well-established analytics strategy and governance processes is frequently 
observed across industries and business functions, and it acts as a barrier to a company-
wide use of analytics.
These findings indicate the need for a holistic analytics maturity framework, in alignment 
with the recommendations of Hazen et al. (2018) who call for alignment between analytics 
and business strategy through the development of a strategic plan towards a business analyt­
ics enabled firm. We deliver the framework which can guide the development of such a plan 
aligned with RBV, and underpin further research in the area.
7.2  Managerial implications
In the managerial domain, the proposed analytic maturity framework is a resource that firms 
can deploy internally to better understand analytics and the way it helps them derive value 
from data in all aspects of their operations as envisioned in the academic literature (Zhang 
et al., 2021; Chatterjee et al., 2021, Holmlund et al., 2020, Gu et al., 2021). Companies 
can also use AMF to plan their analytics maturity growth using the two core aspects: the 
analytics resources found at a specific point of time, and the managerial attitudes acting 
as vehicles for further development of those resources. Consequently, the use of AMF is 
expected to lead to significant improvement in the way analytics adds value to operations 
and identifying business opportunities as well as in organisation’s performance.
As a managerial assessment tool, the framework provides a starting point for re-organ­
isation and improvement of analytics capabilities and allows business leaders to think of the 
next development steps in a structured way, set goals and plan actions. This can reduce the 
uncertainty inherent in highly complex business transformations. For example, short-term 
goals could focus on forming an understanding of the current environment and maturity 
level for building the right analytics processes, planning governance and selecting suitable 
data technologies. Long-term goals could include plans for creating an organisational cul­
ture that embraces analytics support for decision-making, or data unification, etc.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
We believe this framework provides a comprehensive approach to assessing the analytics 
maturity level, indeed AMF’s six dimensions represent bundles of resources aligned with 
business operations. Using the ADR method to develop AMF has ensured its relevance to 
ongoing business needs in diverse business contexts, because ADR created the space for us 
to explore the aspects and dimensions of analytics maturity in several real contexts in con­
secutive iterations of the framework, validated and stimulated by practitioners’ feedback.
Overall, our framework provides a way of positioning the business on a maturity level 
and assessing the Analytics-Business alignment. It further proposes the actions needed for 
the transition to the next desired analytics maturity level. The framework was implemented 
as a web-based tool, and has been validated through a series of interactions with four case 
study companies, discussions of its usefulness, challenging areas, and the practicality of 
correct positioning of a business within the analytics maturity levels.
7.3  Limitations and further work
Formulating our research problem with the first case company at the initial stages was 
instrumental in allowing us to achieve the depth necessary for conceptual clarity of the 
framework. However, the nature of the focal company (UK branch of a blue-chip IT multi-
national) may have influenced the overall direction of the work. Fortunately, our consequent 
findings from other business contexts indicate this has not been the case. Although we col­
lected a variety of respondents to ensure for example that our results apply to small and 
medium-sized companies, the majority of responses were obtained from large organisations 
with 250 + employees.
We also recognise that exploring the transition method and maturity growth over a period 
of time may deliver new insights, for example in terms of the fit of IT infrastructure and 
architecture evolution to the current maturity levels. Many companies run on legacy IT 
infrastructure and systems that might not be suitable for the modern business environment. 
In this respect, the proposed transition mechanism should be validated in the real context, 
ideally, over a period of time.
In our future research, we are planning to address these limitations, including an in-depth 
investigation of currently under-explored challenges such as standardisation. Other research 
opportunities could focus on investigating the influence of the firm size and the available 
resources on the maturity level descriptions. For example, certain companies can maximise 
value creation or achieve sustainable performance at lower levels of the analytics maturity 
scale when compared to high-tech multinationals.
Funding  No funding was received to assist with the preparation of this manuscript. This research did not 
receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate  All procedures performed in studies involving human participants 
were in accordance with the ethical standards of the University of Manchester.
Informed consent  Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study.
Competing interests  Authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted 
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Alles, D., & Burshek, J. (2016). Ranking Analytics maturity by industry. International Institute for Analytics.
Barney, J. (1991). Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal of Management, 17(1), 
99–120.
Barreto, I. (2010). Dynamic capabilities: A review of Past Research and an agenda for the future. Journal of 
Management, 36(1), 256–280. https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206309350776.
Barton, D., & Court, D. (2012). Making advanced Analytics work for you. Harvard Business Review. 
Retrieved Oct 2020 from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​h​b​r​.​o​r​g​/​2​0​1​2​/​1​0​/​m​a​k​i​n​g​-​a​d​v​a​n​c​e​d​-​a​n​a​l​y​t​i​c​s​-​w​o​r​k​-​f​o​r​-​y​o​u.
Becker, J., Knackstedt, R., & Pöppelbuß, J. (2009). Developing Maturity Models for IT Management - A 
Procedure Model and its application. Business and Information Systems Engineering, 1(3), 213–222. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-009-0044-5.
Bose, R. (2009). Advanced Analytics: Opportunities and challenges. Industrial Management & Data Sys­
tems, 109(2), 155–172. https://doi.org/10.1108/02635570910930073.
Braganza, A., Brooks, L., Nepelski, D., Ali, M., & Moro, R. (2017). Resource Management in Big Data 
Initiatives: Processes and dynamic capabilities. Journal of Business Research, 70, 328–337. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​
.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​j​b​u​s​r​e​s​.​2​0​1​6​.​0​8​.​0​0​6.
Brinkhues, R., Macada, A. C., & Casalinho, G. (2014). Information management capabilities: antecedents 
and consequences. In: Proceedings of Americas conference on information systems (AMCIS).
Burciaga, A., & INFORMS Annual Meeting October. (2013). INFORMS Analytics Maturity Model, 2013. 
Retrieved Sep 2018 from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​i​n​f​o​r​m​s​.​o​r​g​/​R​e​s​o​u​r​c​e​-​C​e​n​t​e​r​/​V​i​d​e​o​-​L​i​b​r​a​r​y​/​I​N​F​O​R​M​S​-​M​e​e​t​i​
n​g​s​-​V​i​d​e​o​s​/​I​N​F​O​R​M​S​-​A​n​n​u​a​l​-​M​e​e​t​i​n​g​-​P​r​e​s​e​n​t​a​t​i​o​n​s​/​2​0​1​3​-​I​N​F​O​R​M​S​-​A​n​n​u​a​l​-​M​e​e​t​i​n​g​-​M​i​n​n​e​a​p​o​l​i​
s​/​A​n​a​l​y​t​i​c​s​-​M​a​t​u​r​i​t​y​-​M​o​d​e​l.
Capgemini (2012). Measuring Organizational Maturity in Predictive Analytics: The First Step to Enabling 
the Vision. Retrieved Jul 2018 from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​c​a​p​g​e​m​i​n​i​.​c​o​m​/​w​p​-​c​o​n​t​e​n​t​/​u​p​l​o​a​d​s​/​2​0​1​7​/​0​7​/​M​e​a​s​u​r​
i​n​g​_​O​r​g​a​n​i​z​a​t​i​o​n​a​l​_​M​a​t​u​r​i​t​y​_​i​n​_​P​r​e​d​i​c​t​i​v​e​_​A​n​a​l​y​t​i​c​s​_​_​t​h​e​_​F​i​r​s​t​_​S​t​e​p​_​t​o​_​E​n​a​b​l​i​n​g​_​t​h​e​_​V​i​s​i​o​n​.​p​d​f.
Carvalho, J. V., Rocha, A., van de Wetering, R., & Abreu, A. (2019). A Maturity model for hospital informa­
tion systems. Journal of Business Research, 94, 388–399. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​j​b​u​s​r​e​s​.​2​0​1​7​.​1​2​.​0​1​
2.
Cates, J., Gill, S. & Zeituny, N. (2005). The Ladder of Business Intelligence (LOBI): A framework for enter­
prise IT planning and architecture. International Journal of Business Information Systems, 1(2), 220–
238. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJBIS.2005.007408.
Chatterjee, S., Chaudhuri, R., & Vrontis, D. (2021). Does data-driven culture impact innovation and perfor­
mance of a firm? An empirical examination. Annals of Operations Research. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​
1​0​4​7​9​-​0​2​0​-​0​3​8​8​7​-​z​.​
Chaudhuri, R., Chatterjee, S., Vrontis, D., & Thrassou, A. (2021). Adoption of robust business analytics for 
product innovation and organizational performance: The mediating role of organizational data-driven 
culture. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04407-3.
Chen, L., & Nath, R. (2018). Business analytics maturity of firms: An examination of the relationships 
between managerial perception of IT, business analytics maturity and success. Information Systems 
Management, 35(1), 62–77.
Chuah, M. H. (2010). An enterprise business intelligence maturity model (EBIMM): Conceptual framework, 
In Proceeding of Fifth International Conference on Digital Information Management (ICDIM). Thun­
der Bay, ON, Canada.
Comuzzi, M., & Patel, A. (2016). How organisations leverage Big Data: A maturity model. Industrial Man­
agement & Data Systems, 116(8), 1468–1492.
Côrte-Real, N., Oliveira, T., & Ruivo, P. (2017). Assessing business value of Big Data Analytics in european 
firms. Journal of Business Research, 70, 379–390. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​j​b​u​s​r​e​s​.​2​0​1​6​.​0​8​.​0​1​1.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Creswell, J. W. (2009). Research Design: Qualitative, quantitative and mixed methods approaches (3rd ed.). 
Sage Publications.
Crosby, P. (1979). Quality is free: The art of making quality certain. McGraw-Hill.
Daft, R. (1983). Organizational theory and design. West.
Danese, P., Molinaro, M., & Romano, P. (2018). Managing evolutionary paths in sales and Operations Plan­
ning: Key dimensions and sequences of implementation. International Journal of Production Research, 
56(5), 2036–2053.
Davenport, T. (2018). DELTA Plus Model & Five Stages of Analytics Maturity: A Primer. Retrieved Nov 
2018 from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​i​i​a​n​a​l​y​t​i​c​s​.​c​o​m​/​d​e​l​t​a​-​p​l​u​s​-​p​r​i​m​e​r.
Davenport, T., Harris, J., David, W., & Jacobson, A. (2001). Data to knowledge to results: Building an ana­
lytic capability. California Management Review, 43(2), 117–138.
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S., Blome, C., & Papadopoulos, T. (2019). Big Data and predictive 
analytics and manufacturing performance: Integrating institutional theory, resource-based view and big 
data culture. British Journal of Management, 30, 341–361. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8551.12355.
Eckerson, W. (2007). Beyond the Basics: Accelerating BI Maturity. Retrieved Jul 2018 from ​h​t​t​p​:​/​/​d​o​w​n​l​o​a​
d​.​1​0​1​c​o​m​.​c​o​m​/​p​u​b​/​t​d​w​i​/​F​i​l​e​s​/​S​A​P​_​m​o​n​o​g​r​a​p​h​_​0​4​0​7​.​p​d​f.
Eisenhardt, K., & Martin, J. (2000). Dynamic capabilities: What are they? Strategic Management Journal, 
21(10/11), 1105–1121.
Erevelles, S., Fukawa, N., & Swayne, L. (2016). Big Data consumer analytics and the transformation of 
marketing. Journal of Business Research, 69(2), 897–904.
Espinosa, J. A., & Armour, F. (2016). The big data analytics gold rush: a research framework for coordina­
tion and governance. In: Proceedings of 2016 49th Hawaii international conference on system sciences 
(HICSS), 1112–1121.
Ferraris, A., Mazzoleni, A., Devalle, A., & Couturier, J. (2019). Big data analytics capabilities and knowledge 
management: Impact on firm performance. Management Decision, 57(8), 1923–1936. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​
0​.​1​1​0​8​/​M​D​-​0​7​-​2​0​1​8​-​0​8​2​5​.​
Gandomi, A., & Haider, M. (2015). Beyond the hype: Big data concepts, methods, and Analytics. Interna­
tional Journal of Information Management, 35(2), 137–144. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​i​j​i​n​f​o​m​g​t​.​2​0​1​4​.​
1​0​.​0​0​7.
Grant, R. (1991). A resource-based perspective of competitive advantage. California Management Review, 
33(3), 114–135. https://doi.org/10.2307/41166664.
Grossman, R. (2018). A framework for evaluating the analytic maturity of an organization. International 
Journal of Information Management, 38(1), 45–51. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​i​j​i​n​f​o​m​g​t​.​2​0​1​7​.​0​8​.​0​0​5.
Gu, V. C., Zhou, B., Cao, Q., & Adams, J. (2021). Exploring the relationship between supplier development, 
big data analytics capability, and firm performance. Annals of Operations Research, 302, 151–172. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-03976-7.
Gunasekaran, A., Papadopoulos, T., Dubey, R., Wamba, S. F., Childe, S., Hazen, B., & Akter, S. (2017). Big 
data and predictive analytics for supply chain and organizational performance. Journal of Business 
Research, 70, 308–317.
Gupta, M., & George, J. F. (2016). Toward the development of a big data analytics capability. Information 
and Management, 53(8), 1049–1064.
Gupta, G., Tan, K. T. L., Ee, Y. S., & Phang, C. S. C. (2018). Resource-based view of Information Systems: 
Sustainable and transient competitive advantage perspectives. Australasian Journal of Information Sys­
tems, 22. https://doi.org/10.3127/ajis.v22i0.1657.
Halper, F., & Stodder, D. (2014). TDWI Analytics Maturity Model Guide. Retrieved Jul 2018 from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​t​d​
w​i​.​o​r​g​/​w​h​i​t​e​p​a​p​e​r​s​/​2​0​1​4​/​1​0​/​t​d​w​i​-​a​n​a​l​y​t​i​c​s​-​m​a​t​u​r​i​t​y​-​m​o​d​e​l​-​g​u​i​d​e​.​a​s​p​x.
Hazen, B. T., Skipper, J. B., Boone, C. A., & Hill, R. (2018). Back in business: Operations research in support 
of big data analytics for operations and supply chain management. Annals of Operations Research, 270, 
201–211. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-016-2226-0.
Hevner, A., March, S., Park, J., & Ram, S. (2004). Design Science in Information Systems Research. MIS 
Quarterly, 28(1), 75–105.
Holmlund, Vaerenbergh, Y. V., Ciuchita, R., Ravald, A., Sarantopoulos, P., Ordenes, F. V., & Zaki, M. (2020). 
Customer experience management in the age of big data analytics: A strategic framework. Journal of 
Business Research, 116, 356–365.
Holsapple, C., Lee-Post, A., & Pakath, R. (2014). A unified foundation for business analytics. Decision Sup­
port Systems, 64, 130–141. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2014.05.013.
Howson, C., & Duncan, D. (2015). ITScore Overview for BI and Analytics September 24 2015. Retrieved Jul 
2018 from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​g​a​r​t​n​e​r​.​c​o​m​/​d​o​c​/​3​1​3​6​4​1​8​/​i​t​s​c​o​r​e​-​o​v​e​r​v​i​e​w​-​b​i​-​a​n​a​l​y​t​i​c​s.
Hunt, S. D., & Morgan, R. M. (2005). The Resource-Advantage Theory of Competition. Malhotra, N.K. (Ed.) 
Review of Marketing Research (Review of Marketing Research, 1, 153–206. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​8​/​S​1​
5​4​8​-​6​4​3​5​(​2​0​0​4​)​0​0​0​0​0​0​1​0​0​8.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Issa, A., Hatiboglu, B., Bildstein, A., & Bauernhansl, T. (2018). Industrie 4.0 roadmap: Framework for digi­
tal transformation based on the concepts of capability maturity and alignment. 51st CIRP Conference 
on Manufacturing Systems, 973–978.
Ji-fan Ren, S., Wamba, S., Akter, S., Dubey, R., & Childe, S. (2017). Modelling quality dynamics, business 
value and firm performance in a big data analytics environment. International Journal of Production 
Research, 55(17), 5011–5026.
Kiron, D., Prentice, P. K., & Ferguson, R. B. (2014). The Analytics Mandate. MIT Sloan Management 
Review, 55(4), 1–25.
Korsten, G., Aysolmaz, B., Turetken, O., Edel, D., & Ozkan, B. (2022, January). ADA-CMM: A Capability 
Maturity Model for Advanced Data Analytics. In Proceedings of the 55th Hawaii International Confer­
ence on System Sciences.
Lahrmann, G., Marx, F., Winter, R., & Wortmann, F. (2011). Business Intelligence Maturity: Development 
and Evaluation of a Theoretical Model, In Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences, Kauai, HI, USA
Larson, D., & Chang, V. (2016). A review and future direction of agile, business intelligence, analytics and 
data science. International Journal of Information Management, 36(5), 700–710. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​
1​6​/​j​.​i​j​i​n​f​o​m​g​t​.​2​0​1​6​.​0​4​.​0​1​3.
Lavalle, S., Lesser, E., Shockley, R., Hopkins, M., & Kruschwitz, N. (2011). Big data, Analytics and the path 
from insights to value. MIT Sloan Management Review 52: 21–32. Retrieved Oct 2020 from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​s​l​o​
a​n​r​e​v​i​e​w​.​m​i​t​.​e​d​u​/​a​r​t​i​c​l​e​/​b​i​g​-​d​a​t​a​-​a​n​a​l​y​t​i​c​s​-​a​n​d​-​t​h​e​-​p​a​t​h​-​f​r​o​m​-​i​n​s​i​g​h​t​s​-​t​o​-​v​a​l​u​e​/.
Lismont, J., Vanthienen, J., Baesens, B., & Lemahieua, W. (2017). Defining analytics maturity indicators: A 
survey approach. International Journal of Information Management, 37(3), 114–124.
Luftman, J. (2000). Assessing business-IT alignment maturity. Communications of the Association of Infor­
mation Systems, 4(14), 1–50. https://doi.org/10.17705/1CAIS.00414.
Luftman, J., & Kempaiah, R. (2008). An update on Business-IT alignment: ‘A line’ has been Drawn. MIS 
Quarterly Executive, 6(3), 165–177.
Machado, C., de Lima, E., da Costa, S., Angelis, J., & Mattioda, R. (2017). Framing maturity based on sus­
tainable operations management principles. International Journal of Production Economics, 190, 3–21.
Magnusson, J., & Nilsson, A. (2020). Digital Maturity in the Public Sector: Design and Evaluation of a new 
model, Scandinavian Workshop on E-Government (SWEG2020). Available at: ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​g​u​p​.​u​b​.​g​u​.​s​e​/​f​i​l​
e​/​2​0​8​0​0​9​.​
Menukhin, O., Mandungu, C., Shahgholian, A., & Mehandjiev, N. (2019). ‘Now and Next: A Maturity Model 
to Guide Analytics Growth’. In Proceedings of UKAIS 2019 Conference, 24th UK Academy for Infor­
mation Systems International Conference, 09-10th April 2019, Oxford, UK, ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​a​i​s​e​l​.​a​i​s​n​e​t​.​o​r​g​/​u​k​
a​i​s​2​0​1​9​/​3​9​/​.​
Merendino, A., Dibba, S., Meadows, M., Quinn, L., Wilson, D., Simkina, L., & Canhoto, A. (2017). Big data, 
big decisions: The impact of big data on board level decision making. Journal of Business Research, 93, 
67–78. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​j​b​u​s​r​e​s​.​2​0​1​8​.​0​8​.​0​2​9.
Mettler, T., & Rohner, P. (2009). Situational Maturity Models as Instrumental Artifacts for Organizational 
Design, In DESRIST ‘09 Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Design Science Research 
in Information Systems and Technology. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Mikalef, P., & Pateli, A. (2017). Information technology-enabled dynamic capabilities and their indirect 
effect on competitive performance: Findings from PLS-SEM and fsQCA. Journal of Business Research, 
70, 1–16.
Mikalef, P., Pappas, I. O., Krogstie, J., & Giannakos, M. (2018). Big data analytics capabilities: A system­
atic literature review and research agenda. Information Systems and e-Business Management, 16(3), 
547–578.
Mikalef, P., Boura, M., Lekakos, G., & Krogstie, J. (2019a). Big data analytics capabilities and innovation: 
The mediating role of dynamic capabilities and moderating effect of the environment. British Journal 
of Management, 30(2), 272–298.
Mikalef, P., Boura, M., Lekakos, G., & Krogstie, J. (2019b). Big data analytics and firm performance: Find­
ings from a mixed-method approach. Journal of Business Research, 98, 261–276.
Mintzberg, H., Ahlstrand, B., & Lampel, J. (2009). Strategy safari: The complete guide through the wilds of 
strategic management (2nd ed.). Great Britain: Pearson.
Mishra, A., Das, S. R., & Murray, J. (2015). Risk, process maturity, and Project Performance: An empirical 
analysis of US Federal Government Technology Projects. Production and Operations Management, 
25(2), 210–232.
Muller, L., & Hart, M. (2016). Updating Business Intelligence and Analytics Maturity Models for New 
Developments, Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing, Vol.250, 137–151. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​
0​.​1​0​0​7​/​9​7​8​-​3​-​3​1​9​-​3​2​8​7​7​-​5​_​1​1​.​
Nolan, R. (1979). Managing the crisis in data processing. Harvard Business Review, 57, 115–126.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Nott, C. (2014). Big Data & Analytics Maturity Model. 15 August 2014. Retrieved Sep 2018 from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​
w​w​.​i​b​m​b​i​g​d​a​t​a​h​u​b​.​c​o​m​/​b​l​o​g​/​b​i​g​-​d​a​t​a​-​a​n​a​l​y​t​i​c​s​-​m​a​t​u​r​i​t​y​-​m​o​d​e​l.
Olszak, C. (2016). Toward better understanding and use of Business Intelligence in Organizations. Informa­
tion Systems Management, 33(2), 105–123.
Paulk, M., Curtis, B., Chrissis, M., & Weber, C. (1993). Capability Maturity Model, Version 1.1. IEEE Soft­
ware, 10(4), 18–27. https://doi.org/10.1109/52.219617.
Pavlou, P., & El Sawy, O. (2006). From IT leveraging competence to competitive advantage in turbulent 
environments: The case of New Product Development. Information Systems Research, 17(3), 198–227.
Penrose, E. (1959). The theory of the growth of the firm (4th ed.). Ebook Central Academic Complete [Online].
Provost, F., & Fawcett, T. (2013). Data Science for Business. Kindle version, accessed 18 November 2018 
from Amazon.com.
Raman, S., Patwa, N., Niranjan, I., Ranjan, U., Moorthy, K., & Mehta, A. (2018). Impact of big data on sup­
ply chain management. International Journal of Logistics Research and Applications, 21(6), 579–596.
Rialti, R., Zollo, L., Ferraris, A., & Alon, I. (2019). Big data analytics capabilities and performance: Evidence 
from a moderated multi-mediation model. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 149, 119781.
Ross, J. W., Beath, C., & Quaadgras, A. (2013). You may not need big data after all. Harvard Business 
Review. Retrieved Oct 2020 from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​h​b​r​.​o​r​g​/​2​0​1​3​/​1​2​/​y​o​u​-​m​a​y​-​n​o​t​-​n​e​e​d​-​b​i​g​-​d​a​t​a​-​a​f​t​e​r​-​a​l​l.
Russell, S., Bruni, M., Haddad, M., & Granger, M. (2010). Organic Evolution and the Capability Maturity of 
Business Intelligence, in: AMCIS 2010 Proceedings, 501, https://aisel.aisnet.org/amcis2010/501.
Saunders, M., Lewis, P., & Thornhill, T. (2015). Research Methods for Business Students. 7th edn. Pear­
son [Online]. Available at: ​h​t​t​p​:​/​/​l​i​b​.​m​y​i​l​i​b​r​a​r​y​.​c​o​m​.​m​a​n​c​h​e​s​t​e​r​.​i​d​m​.​o​c​l​c​.​o​r​g​/​O​p​e​n​.​a​s​p​x​?​i​d​=​8​1​9​4​8​7 
(Accessed: 20 July 2018).
Seddon, P., Constantinidis, D., Tamm, T., & Dod, H. (2017). How does business analytics contribute to busi­
ness value? Information Systems Journal, 27(3), 237–269. https://doi.org/10.1111/isj.12101.
Sein, M., Henfridsson, O., Purao, S., Rossi, M., & Lindgren, R. (2011). Action Design Research. MIS Quar­
terly, 35(1), 37–56.
Sen, A., Ramamurthy, K., & Sinha, A. (2012). A model of data warehousing process maturity. IEEE Transac­
tions on Software Engineering, 38(2), 336–353.
Shamim, S., Zenga, J., Shariq, S., & Khana, Z. (2019). Role of big data management in enhancing big data 
decision-making capability and quality among chinese firms: A dynamic capabilities view. Information 
& Management, 56(6), 103–135.
Siegel, E. (2016). Predictive analytics (2nd ed.). Wiley.
Surbakti, F., Wanga, W., Indulska, M., & Sadiq, S. (2020). Factors influencing effective use of big data: A 
research framework. Information & Management, 57, 102–146. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​i​m​.​2​0​1​9​.​0​2​.​
0​0​1​.​
Tallon, P., Ramirez, R., & Short, J. (2013). The Information Artifact in IT Governance: Toward a theory of 
Information Governance. Journal of Management Information Systems, 30(3), 141–178.
Tavares Thome, A. M., Scavarda, L. F., Fernandez, N. S., & Scavarda, A. J. (2012). Sales and operations plan­
ning: A research synthesis. International Journal of Production Economics, 138, 1–13.
Teece, D., Pisano, G., & Shuen, A. (1997). Dynamic capabilities and strategic management. Strategic Man­
agement Journal, 18(7), 509–534.
Vesset, D., Girard, G., Feblowitz, J., Versace, M., Burghard, C., O’Brien, A., Olofson, C., Schubmehl, D., 
McDonough, B., Woodward, A., & Bond, S. (2015). IDC MaturityScape: Big Data and Analytics 2.0 
Retrieved Aug 2018 from: https://www.cacp.ca/index.html?asst_id=1637.
Viaene, S., & Van den Bunder, A. (2011). The secrets to managing business Analytics projects. MIT Sloan 
Management Review. Retrieved Oct 2020 from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​s​l​o​a​n​r​e​v​i​e​w​.​m​i​t​.​e​d​u​/​a​r​t​i​c​l​e​/​t​h​e​-​s​e​c​r​e​t​s​-​t​o​-​m​a​n​a​
g​i​n​g​-​b​u​s​i​n​e​s​s​-​a​n​a​l​y​t​i​c​s​-​p​r​o​j​e​c​t​s​/.
Vidgen, R., Shaw, S., & Grant, D. (2017). Management challenges in creating value from business analytics. 
European Journal of Operational Research, 261, 626–639.
Wamba, S., Gunasekaran, A., Akter, S., Ji-fan Ren, S., Dubey, R., & Childe, S. (2017). Big data analytics and 
firm performance: Effects of dynamic capabilities. Journal of Business Research, 70, 356–365. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​
d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​j​b​u​s​r​e​s​.​2​0​1​6​.​0​8​.​0​0​9.
Wang, N., Liang, H., Zhong, W., Xue, Y., & Xiao, J. (2012). Resource structuring or capability building? An 
empirical study of the business value of information technology. Journal of Management Information 
Systems, 29(2), 325–367.
Wang, G., Gunasekaran, A., Ngai, E., & Papadopoulos, T. (2016). Big data analytics in logistics and supply 
chain management: Certain investigations for research and applications. International Journal of Pro­
duction Economics, 176, 98–110.
Watson, H., Ariyachandra, T., & Matyska, R. (2001). Data Warehousing Stages of Growth. Information Sys­
tems Management, 18(3), 42–50. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​2​0​1​/​1​0​7​8​/​4​3​1​9​6​.​1​8​.​3​.​2​0​0​1​0​6​0​1​/​3​1​2​8​9​.​6.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Wendler, R. (2012). The maturity of maturity model research: A systematic mapping study. Information and 
Software Technology, 54(12), 1317–1339.
Wernerfelt, B. (1984). A resource-based view of the firm. Strategic Management Journal, 5(2), 171–180. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.4250050207.
Wixom, B. H., Watson, H. J., & Werner, T. (2011). Developing an enterprise business intelligence capability: 
The Norfolk southern journey. MIS Quarterly Executive, 10(2), 61–71.
Wixom, B., Yen, B., & Relich, M. (2013). Maximizing Value from Business Analytics. MIS Quarterly Execu­
tive, 12(2), 111–123.
Zhan, Y., Tan, K. H., Li, Y., & Tse, Y. K. (2018). Unlocking the power of big data in new product develop­
ment. Annals of Operations Research, 270, 577–595.
Zhang, H., Zang, Z., Zhu, H., Sharma, S. K., & Sridhar, S. (2021). Boosting industrial decision making and 
business growth using improved data analytics model. Annals of Operations Research. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​
1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​2​1​-​0​4​3​3​6​-​1​.​
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations. 
1 3