TITLE: A local search framework for industrial test laboratory scheduling
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04007-1
---

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04007-1
S.I. : PATAT 2018
A local search framework for industrial test laboratory
scheduling
Florian Mischek1
· Nysret Musliu1
Accepted: 23 February 2021 / Published online: 8 March 2021
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
In this paper we introduce a complex scheduling problem that arises in a real-world industrial
test laboratory, where a large number of activities has to be performed using qualiﬁed person-
nel and specialized equipment, subject to time windows and several other constraints. The
problem is an extension of the well-known Resource-Constrained Project Scheduling Prob-
lem and features multiple heterogeneous resources with very general availability restrictions,
as well as a grouping phase, where the jobs have to be assembled from smaller units. We
describe an instance generator for this problem and publicly available instance sets, both ran-
domly generated and real-world data. Finally, we present and evaluate different metaheuristic
approaches to solve the scheduling subproblem, where the assembled jobs are already pro-
vided. Our results show that Simulated Annealing can be used to achieve very good results,
in particular for large instances, where it is able to consistently ﬁnd better solutions than a
state-of-the-art constraint programming solver within reasonable time.
Keywords RCPSP · Local search · Real-world · Simulated annealing
1 Introduction
Project scheduling problems appear in countless variations wherever multiple activities have
to be scheduled and assigned resources of some kind, subject to various constraints. Examples
include production and manufacturing environments, event management, software develop-
ment, and many more. Since these problems can become quite large and include complex
constraints in practical settings, there is an ever increasing need for automated solution
approaches to produce high-quality solutions in acceptable time.
In this paper, we introduce a new real-world scheduling problem that arises in an industrial
test laboratory of a large company. It is an extension to the well-known Resource-Constrained
Project Scheduling Problem (RCPSP), on which it builds by adding various additional exten-
B Florian Mischek
fmischek@dbai.tuwien.ac.at
Nysret Musliu
musliu@dbai.tuwien.ac.at
1
Christian Doppler Laboratory for Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Optimization for Planning and Scheduling,
DBAI, TU Wien, Favoritenstraße 9-11, 1040 Vienna, Austria
123

534
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
sions, both traditional and new, to capture the speciﬁc requirements of this, and other similar
laboratories.
In the Test Laboratory Scheduling Problem (TLSP) tasks have to be grouped into larger
units called jobs, which derive their properties from the tasks they contain. In general, tasks
within a job are executed sequentially, but without any predeﬁned order, and therefore jobs
have to fulﬁll all requirements of their tasks over their whole duration. A detailed discussion
of the properties of a job and the motivation behind it can be found in Sect. 3.2 of this paper.
Afterwards, the jobs have to be scheduled (i.e. assigned a mode, timeslots and resources),
subject to various constraints. Besides several well-known features of (extensions of) the
RCPSP from the literature, such as multiple execution modes and time windows, the TLSP
also features additional constraints imposed by the real-world problem setting. In particular,
RCPSP and its variants usually assume that units of a resource are identical and homogeneous
and therefore can be used to cover the demand of all tasks. Due to this, an assignment of
individual units to tasks is not necessary. Exceptions exist, e.g. by Dauzère-Pérès et al.
(1998) or Bellenguez and Néron (2005), and sometimes an equivalent effect is achieved by
introducing additional modes for each possible resource assignment (e.g. by Schwindt and
Trautmann (2000) and Bartels and Zimmermann (2009)). However, this is practical only for
a single resource with very few available values per task. In contrast, TLSP features multiple
heterogeneous resources, with very general restrictions on which units can be used to perform
a job, and potentially large demands.
In addition, jobs in TLSP can be linked to each other, indicating that these jobs must be
performed by the same employees1. To the best of our knowledge, a similar concept exists
only by Salewski et al. (1997) and Drexl et al. (2000), where the mode of several jobs is
required to be the same.
In real-life practice, it is commonly the case that the grouping of tasks into jobs is already
known and only a solution for the scheduling part of the problem is required. This gives
rise to a restricted problem variant we denote as TLSP-S, which has a (ﬁxed) list of jobs as
additional input, but otherwise follows the same restrictions as TLSP.
The contributions of this article are as follows:
– We introduce TLSP, a new and complex real-world scheduling problem that is of direct
practical relevance. For this new problem, we provide a formal deﬁnition and describe its
subproblem TLSP-S. In addition, we prove the NP-hardness of both TLSP and TLSP-S
via a reduction from RCPSP.
– We provide an instance generator for TLSP, which is capable of randomly generating
instances based on real-world data with a wide variety of conﬁguration options.
– Two sets of new generated instances for TLSP, plus three real-world instances taken
directly from the laboratory of our industrial partner, are made publicly available for
download.
– We developed a new local search framework for TLSP-S, and evaluate the performance
of different meta-heuristics on the problem. We show that Simulated Annealing can
be used to produce high-quality results that rival those of a state-of-the-art constraint
programming model and consistently outperforms it on larger instances. The proposed
algorithms have been used successfully in the daily scheduling in the laboratory of our
industrial partner.
1 This can be used to model multi-step procedures that require knowledge from previous steps, such as ensuring
that documentation of completed tasks is prepared by the employees who actually performed the tasks.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
535
This article is an extension of work presented at the conference on Practice and Theory
in Automated Timetabling (PATAT) 2018 (see also the technical report Mischek and Musliu
(2018)) where we ﬁrst introduced the problem deﬁnition for TLSP.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 gives a short overview over
related literature and variants of RCPSP that are particularly relevant for TLSP. Section 3
formally introduces the problem deﬁnition, input data and constraints. The last subsection
also provides a reduction outline of RCPSP to TLSP, thereby showing the NP-hardness of
the problem. Section 4 provides information about our instance generator and available data
sets. Section 5 describes the local search framework and the algorithms used, followed by
experimental results in Sect. 6. Finally, concluding remarks and future work are given in
Sect. 7.
2 Related literature
2.1 Problem features
As the standard problem in the area of project scheduling, RCPSP has seen vast amounts
of work over several decades. For surveys on literature regarding this problem and its many
variants, we refer to surveys e.g. by Mika et al. (2015); Hartmann and Briskorn (2010) and
Brucker et al. (1999). In particular, Hartmann and Briskorn (2010) provide a comprehensive
overview regarding work dealing with extensions to RCPSP.
Many of these extensions contain problem features that are also found in the TLSP, or
at least related concepts. Table 1 shows a selection of these features, as well as references
from the literature for RCPSP variants that contain these particular features or at least some
related concepts. While some aspects (e.g. multiple modes, setup times) are already well
known, others have few (e.g. heterogeneous resources) or no (task grouping, linked tasks)
direct correspondence in previously studied problems, to the best of our knowledge.
In the following, we will provide more details about these features and their treatment in
the literature, describing both similarities and differences to TLSP where appropriate.
The ﬁrst of these, and one of the most well-known, is multi-mode RCPSP (MRCPSP),
originally formulated by Elmaghraby (1977). It allows each activity to be performed in one
of several modes which can affect duration and resource requirements. A survey focused
solely on MRCPSP formulations is provided by W¸eglarz et al. (2011).
Multiple separate projects, with project-speciﬁc constraints and objective functions,
appear in the Resource Constrained Multi-Project Scheduling Problem (RCMPSP). Other
works dealing with this problem are e.g. by Gonçalves et al. (2008) and Villafáñez et al.
(2019). Wauters et al. (2016) introduce the Multi-Mode RCMPSP (MMRCMPSP), which
combines both multiple modes and multiple projects and was used for the MISTA 2013
challenge.
RCMPSP also features multiple objectives, including one that is similar to the project
completion time objective in TLSP. The main difference is that in RCMPSP, the completion
times are normalized using the length of the critical path of each project. Also, the remaining
objectives are completely unrelated to those that appear in TLSP. One of the main impacts
of alternative (multi-)objective functions is that permutation schedules (Hartmann (1998)),
which represent a solution as a permutation of activities and are used in many state-of-the-art
works on RCPSP, are no longer guaranteed to yield optimal solutions.
123

536
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
Table 1 Main features of TLSP and their correspondence in other variants of RCPSP. The last column includes
papers that contain similar concepts, which may not be directly applicable for TLSP
Problem feature
RCPSP extension
Related concept
Task grouping
–
Trautmann and Schwindt
(2005); Wilson et al. (2012)
Setup times
Survey: Mika et al. (2006)
Batch scheduling, e.g.
Schwindt and Trautmann
(2000); Potts and Kovalyov
(2000)
Multiple modes
MRCPSP, Survey: W¸eglarz
et al. (2011), e.g. Wauters
et al. (2016)
Multiple projects
RCMPSP, e.g. Villafáñez
et al. (2019), MMRCMPSP
by Wauters et al. (2016)
Heterogeneous
resources
Dauzère-Pérès et al. (1998),
MSPSP by Bellenguez and
Néron (2005)
e.g. Schwindt and Trautmann
(2000); Bartels and
Zimmermann (2009)
Linked tasks
–
Salewski et al. (1997); Drexl
et al. (2000)
Project completion
time objective
Appears in RCMPSP, e.g.
Villafáñez et al. (2019);
Gonçalves et al. (2008)
Setup times have been studied extensively in various forms, here we refer to the survey by
Mika et al. (2006). Of note is that in particular sequence- or schedule-dependent setup times
can be used to model batch processing, treated e.g. by Schwindt and Trautmann (2000) or
Potts and Kovalyov (2000), which is related to the task grouping formalism in TLSP. Both
approaches attempt to remove overheads due to setup times by grouping multiple smaller
activities into larger units. The main difference is that in batch processing approaches, the
batches arise implicitly from the completed schedule and the scheduled activities correspond
to tasks. In contrast, in TLSP jobs are created explicitly from tasks, which are not directly
scheduled at all.
The only paper using a similarly explicit approach to grouping small activities into larger
units is by Trautmann and Schwindt (2005). They decompose a batch-scheduling problem
into two independent subproblems, of which the ﬁrst assembles the batches and the second
produces a schedule for the previously created batches.
As mentioned in the previous section, the default assumption in RCPSP and most of its
variants is that units of a resource are interchangeable, i.e. each unit can be used for each
activity. A notable exception is by Dauzère-Pérès et al. (1998), who employ very general
resource requirements which are even more ﬂexible than those in TLSP. Unfortunately, the
authors make heavy use of (a variant of) permutation schedules, which are unsuitable for
TLSP.
A second example of heterogeneous resources can be found in the Multi-Skill RCPSP
(MSPSP), introduced by Bellenguez and Néron (2005). In MSPSP, each resource unit has a
number of skills, and resource requirements are given as a multi-set of required skills. Despite
this different resource model, a distinct objective function and several other discrepancies,
MSPSP is still quite closely related to TLSP-S. Instances for MSPSP contain up to 90
activities, compared to 300+ jobs for instances of practical size for TLSP-S.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
537
Alternatively, heterogeneous resources like those in TLSP can sometimes be modeled
using additional modes in MRCPSP (Bellenguez and Néron (2005)). Since each potential
subset of assigned resources has to be encoded in a separate mode, this is only feasible for
single resources and small numbers and therefore unsuitable for TLSP.
As far as we are aware, the concept of linked jobs, which need to have the same resource
units assigned, has not been applied to any variant of RCPSP before. Salewski et al. (1997)
and Drexl et al. (2000) deal with a somewhat related concept, where several activities have
to be scheduled using the same mode, as described in Sect. 1. Of course, this is easier to add
on top of RCPSP, since the assumption of homogeneous resources can be retained.
Finally, we would like to mention two problems dealing with scheduling activities in lab-
oratories, due to the similarities in their overall setting with TLSP: Bartels and Zimmermann
(2009) deal with scheduling tests of experimental vehicles. The described problem con-
tains several aspects and constraints similar to TLSP. However, it uses a different resource
model (in particular regarding destructive tests) and uses the number of employed vehicles
as the main optimization criterion. Polo Mejia et al. (2017) developed an integer linear pro-
gram for scheduling research activities for a nuclear laboratory, using a problem formulation
derived from MSPSP, but with (limited) preemption of activities. Despite a similar setting,
the requirements are unfortunately incompatible with those of TLSP.
Overall, to the best of our knowledge there is no variant of RCPSP that can fully model
the requirements of TLSP(-S). Regarding TLSP-S, the closest related problem is probably
MSPSP due to similar restrictions on the availability of resources to each activity. However,
trying to model the very general restrictions of TLSP(-S) for MSPSP would result in a
prohibitively large number of skills, not to speak of other features like linked jobs or objective
criteria, which are not included in MSPSP at all. Therefore, a new approach is required to
model and solve the TLSP(-S).
2.2 Solution approaches
As varied as the different extensions to RCPSP are also the solution approaches used to
solve them. While initially the focus was on problem-speciﬁc heuristics, such as priority or
dispatching rules, the last few decades have seen much work on metaheuristics, both local
search-based and population-based, but also hybrid heuristic approaches combining two or
multiple other techniques (Pellerin et al. (2020); Mika et al. (2015)).
Such a hybrid approach using a combination of memetic and hyperheuristic methods with
Monte-Carlo tree search by Asta et al. (2016) won the 2013 MISTA challenge mentioned
above, which dealt with MMRCMPSP. The same problem is also treated by Ahmeti and
Musliu (2018), who provided several ideas that were useful in our solver implementation for
TLSP-S.
Exact approaches have so far been mostly limited to smaller or more tightly constrained
variants of RCPSP. However, recent years have seen some progress, in particular in the area
of Constraint Programming (CP), e.g. by Szeredi and Schutt (2016), who developed a CP
model for MRCPSP that is able to solve instances of realistic sizes.
Given its similarities to TLSP-S, successful solution approaches for MSPSP may be of
particular interest. To the best of our knowledge, the best results so far for MSPSP have been
achieved by Young et al. (2017), who also used a CP approach to solve the problem.
In general, metaheuristics seem to be the most promising approach to a new variant of
RCPSP, such as TLSP-S, both due to their ease of implementation and their consistently high
123

538
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
performance on existing problem variants in the literature. Where exact solution approaches
are desired, CP should certainly be considered, given its recent successes.
3 Problem description
In TLSP, a list of projects is given, which each contain several tasks. For each project, the
tasks must be partitioned into a set of jobs, with some restrictions on the feasible partitions.
Then, those jobs must each be assigned a mode, time slots and resources. The properties and
feasible assignments for each job are calculated from the tasks contained within.
A solution of TLSP is a schedule consisting of the following parts:
– A list of jobs, composed of one or multiple similar tasks within the same project.
– For each job, an assigned mode, start and end time slots, the employees scheduled to
work on the job, and an assignment to a workbench and equipment.
The quality of a schedule is judged according to an objective function that is the weighted
sum of several soft constraints and should be minimized. Among others, these include the
number of jobs and the total completion time (start of the ﬁrst job until end of the last) of
each project.
3.1 Input parameters
A TLSP instance can be split into three parts: The laboratory environment, including a list
of resources, a list of projects containing the tasks that should be scheduled together with
their properties and the current state of the existing schedule, which might be partially or
completely empty.
3.1.1 Environment
In the laboratory, resources of different kinds are available that are required to perform tasks:
– Employees e ∈E = {1, . . . , |E|} who are qualiﬁed for different types of tasks.
– A number of workbenches b ∈B = {1, . . . , |B|} with different facilities. (These are
comparable to machines in shop scheduling problems.)
– Various auxiliary lab equipment groups Gg = {1, . . . , |Gg|}, where g is the group index.
These each represent a set of similar devices. The set of all equipment groups is called
G∗.
The scheduling period is composed of discrete time slots t ∈T = {0, . . . , |T | −1}. Each
time slot represents half a day of work.
Tasks are performed in one of several modes labeled m ∈M = {1, . . . , |M|}. The chosen
mode inﬂuences the following properties of tasks performed under it:
– The speed factor vm, which will be applied to the task’s original duration.
– The number of required employees em.
3.1.2 Projects and tasks
Given is a set P of projects labeled p ∈{1, . . . , |P|}. Each project contains tasks pa ∈Ap,
with a ∈{1, . . . , |Ap|}. The set of all tasks (over all projects) is A∗= 
p∈P Ap.
Each task pa has several properties:
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
539
– It has a release date αpa and both a due date ¯ωpa and a deadline ωpa. The difference
between the latter is that a due date violation only results in a penalty to the solution
quality, while deadlines must be observed.
– Mpa ⊆M is the set of available modes for the task.
– The task’s duration dpa (in time slots, real-valued). Under any given mode m ∈Mpa,
this duration becomes dpam := dpa ∗vm.
– Most tasks must be performed on a workbench. This is indicated by the boolean parameter
bpa ∈{0, 1}. If required, this workbench must be chosen from the set of available
workbenches Bpa ⊆B.
– Similarly, pa requires qualiﬁed employees chosen from E pa ⊆E. The required number
depends on the mode. A further subset E Pr
pa ⊆E pa is the set of preferred employees.
– Of each equipment group g ∈G∗, the task requires rpag devices, which must be taken
from the set of available devices G pag ⊆Gg.
– A list of direct predecessors Ppa ⊆Ap, which must be completed before the task can
start. Note that precedence constraints can only exist between tasks in the same project.
Each project’s tasks are partitioned into families Fpf ⊆Ap, where f is the family’s index.
For a given task pa, f pa gives the task’s family. Only tasks from the same family can be
grouped into a single job.
Additionally, each family f is associated with a certain setup time spf , which is added to
the duration of each job containing tasks of that family.
Finally, each project p may deﬁne linked tasks, which must be assigned the same
employee(s). Linked tasks are given by the equivalence relation L p ⊆Ap × Ap, where
two tasks pa and pb are linked if and only if (pa, pb) ∈L p.
3.1.3 Initial schedule
All problem instances include an initial (or base) schedule, which may be completely or
partially empty. This schedule can act both as an initial solution and as a baseline, placing
limits on the schedules of employees and tasks, in particular by deﬁning ﬁxed assignments
that must not be changed.
Provided is a set of jobs J 0, where each job j ∈J 0 contains the following assignments:
– The tasks in the job: ˙A j
– A ﬁxed subset of these tasks ˙AF
j ⊆˙A j. All ﬁxed tasks of a job in the base schedule
must also appear together in a single job in the solution.
– The mode assigned to the job: ˙m j
– The start and completion times of the job: ˙ts
j resp. ˙tc
j
– The resources assigned to the job:
– Workbench: ˙b j
– Employees: ˙E j
– Equipment: ˙Ggj for equipment group g
Except for the tasks, each individual assignment may or may not be present in any given
job. Fixed tasks are assumed to be empty, if not given. In all other cases, missing assignments
will be referred to using the value ϵ. Time slots and employees can only be assigned if also
a mode assignment is given.
A subset of these jobs are the started jobs J 0S. A started job js ∈J 0S must fulﬁll the
following conditions:
123

540
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
– It must contain at least one ﬁxed task. It is assumed that the ﬁxed tasks of a started job
are currently being worked on.
– Its start time must be 0.
– It must contain resource assignments fulﬁlling all requirements.
A started job’s duration does not include a setup time. In the solution, the job containing the
ﬁxed tasks of a started job must also start at time 0. Usually, the resources available to the
ﬁxed tasks of a started job are additionally restricted to those assigned to the job, to avoid
interruptions of ongoing work in case of a rescheduling.
3.2 Jobs and grouping
Forvariousoperationalreasons,tasksarenotscheduleddirectly.Instead,theyareﬁrstgrouped
into larger units called jobs.
A single job can only contain tasks from the same project and family.
Jobs have many of the same properties as tasks, which are computed from the tasks that
make up a job. The general principle is that within a job, tasks are not explicitly ordered or
scheduled; therefore the job must fulﬁll all requirements of each associated task during its
whole duration.
The motivation behind this restriction, which deliberately overconstrains the schedule, is
due to a combination of conditions in the laboratory of our industrial partner:
– Tasks of the same family usually have equivalent or very similar requirements in practice.
– Many tasks only cover a small fraction of a timeslot (e.g. half an hour out of a four-
hour timeslot). Scheduling tasks directly to timeslots would therefore incur unacceptable
overheads due to rounding. An alternative solution to this problem would be shorter
timeslots, which would conﬂict with the ﬂexible working times in the lab.
– Related formalisms, e.g. schedule-dependent setup times (Mika et al. 2006), would be
difﬁcult to apply since the actual setup time between two tasks may depend on multiple
resources.
– Tasks frequently need to be reordered or delayed. The chosen formulation guarantees
that this is always possible within a job, adding a measure of ﬂexibility to the schedule.
Results by Wilson et al. (2012) indicate that this ﬂexibility can be useful in the presence
of delays during the execution of a schedule.
Let J = {1, . . . , |J|} be the set of all jobs in a solution and Jp ⊆J be the set of jobs
of a given project p. Then for a job j ∈J, the set of tasks contained in j is ˙A j. j has the
following properties:
˜p j
and
˜f j
are the project and family of j.
˜α j := max
pa∈˙A j
αpa,
˜¯ω j := min
pa∈˙A j
¯ωpa,
˜ω j := min
pa∈˙A j
ωpa
are the release date, due date and deadline of j, respectively.
˜M j :=

pa∈˙A j
Mpa
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
541
is the set of available modes.
˜d jm := ⌈(sp j f j +

pa∈˙A j
dpa) ∗vm⌉
is the (integer) duration of the job under mode m. The additional setup time is added to the
total duration of the contained tasks.
˜b j := max
pa∈˙A j
bpa
is the required number of workbenches (˜b j ∈{0, 1})
˜B j :=

pa∈˙A j
Bpa
are the available workbenches for j.
˜E j :=

pa∈˙A j
E pa
are the employees qualiﬁed for j.
˜E Pr
j
:=

pa∈˙A j
E Pr
pa
are the preferred employees of j.
˜r jg := max
pa∈˙A j
rpag
are the required units of equipment group g.
˜G jg :=

pa∈˙A j
G pag
are the available devices for equipment group g.
˜P j := {k ∈J \ { j} : ∃pa ∈˙A j, pb ∈˙Ak s.t. pb ∈Ppa}
is the set of predecessor jobs of j. Finally,
˜L p := {( j, k) ∈J × J : j ̸= k ∧∃pa ∈˙A j, pb ∈˙Ak s.t. (pa, pb) ∈L p}
deﬁnes the linked jobs in project p.
In addition, a solution contains the following assignments for each job:
– ˙ts
j ∈T the scheduled start time slot
– ˙tc
j ∈T the scheduled completion time
– ˙m j ∈M the mode in which the job should be performed
– ˙b j ∈B the workbench assigned to the job (ϵ if no workbench is required)
–
˙E j ⊆E the set of employees assigned to the job
–
˙G jg ⊆Gg the set of assigned devices from equipment group g
123

542
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
3.3 Constraints
A solution is evaluated in terms of constraints that it should fulﬁll. Hard constraints must
all be satisﬁed in any feasible schedule, while the number and degree of violations of soft
constraints in a solution give a measure for its quality.
For the purpose of modeling, we introduce additional notation: The set of active jobs at
time t is deﬁned as Jt := { j ∈J : ˙ts
j ≤t ∧˙tc
j > t}.
3.3.1 Hard constraints
H1: Job assignment Each task must be assigned to exactly one job.
∀p ∈P, pa ∈Ap :
∃! j ∈J s.t. pa ∈˙A j
H2: Job grouping All tasks contained in a job must be from the same project and family.
∀j ∈J, pa ∈˙A j :
p = ˜p j
f pa = ˜f j
H3: Fixed tasks Each group of tasks assigned to a ﬁxed job in the base schedule must
also be assigned to a single job in the solution.
∀j0 ∈J 0 :
∃j ∈J s.t. ˙AF
j0 ⊆˙A j
H4: Job duration The interval between start and completion of a job must match the job’s
duration.
∀j ∈J :
˙tc
j −˙ts
j = ˜d j ˙m j
H5: Time Window Each job must lie completely within the time window from the release
date to the deadline.
∀j ∈J :
˙ts
j ≥˜α j
˙tc
j ≤˜ω j
H6: Task precedence A job can start only after all prerequisite jobs have been completed.
∀j ∈J, k ∈˜P j :
˙tc
k ≤˙ts
j
H7: Started jobs A job containing ﬁxed tasks of a started job in the base schedule must
start at time 0.
∀j ∈J, js ∈J 0S :
t F
js = 1 ∧˙AF
js ⊆˙A j
⇒
˙ts
j = 0
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
543
H8: Single assignment At any one time, each workbench, employee and device can be
assigned to at most one job.
∀b ∈B, t ∈T :
|{ j ∈Jt : ˙b j = b}| ≤1
∀e ∈E, t ∈T :
|{ j ∈Jt : e ∈˙E j}| ≤1
∀g ∈G∗, d ∈Gg, t ∈T :
|{ j ∈Jt : d ∈˙G jg}| ≤1
H9a: Workbench requirements Each job requiring a workbench must have a workbench
assigned.
∀j ∈J :
˙b j = ϵ ⇐⇒˜b j = 0
H9b: Employee requirements Each job must have enough employees assigned to cover
the demand given by the selected mode.
∀j ∈J :
| ˙E j| = e ˙m j
H9c: Equipment requirements] Each job must have enough devices of each equipment
group assigned to cover the demand for that group.
∀j ∈J, g ∈G∗:
| ˙G jg| = ˜r jg
H10a: Workbench suitability The workbench assigned to a job must be suitable for all
tasks contained in it.
∀j ∈J :
˙b j = ϵ ∨˙b j ∈˜B j
H10b: Employee qualiﬁcation All employees assigned to a job must be qualiﬁed for all
tasks contained in it.
∀j ∈J :
˙E j ⊆˜E j
H10c: Equipment availability The devices assigned to a job must be taken from the set
of available devices for each group.
∀j ∈J, g ∈G∗:
˙G jg ⊆˜G jg
H11: Linked jobs Linked jobs must be assigned exactly the same employees.
∀p ∈P, ( j, k) ∈˜L p :
˙E j = ˙Ek
123

544
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
3.3.2 Soft constraints
The following constraints can be used to evaluate the quality of a feasible solution. They
arise from the business requirements of our industrial partner and have been formulated in
close cooperation with them.
Each soft constraint violation induces a penalty on the solution quality, denoted as Ci,
where i is the soft constraint violated.
S1: Number of jobs The number of jobs should be minimized.
:
C S1 := |J|
S2: Employee project preferences The employees assigned to a job should be taken from
the set of preferred employees.
∀j ∈J :
C S2
j
:= |{e ∈˙E j : e /∈˜E Pr
j }|
S3: Number of employees The number of employees assigned to each project should be
minimized.
∀p ∈P :
C S3
p := |

j∈Jp
˙E j|
S4: Due date The internal due date for each job should be observed.
∀j ∈J :
C S4
j
:= max(˙tc
j −˜¯ω j, 0)
S5: Project completion time The total completion time (start of the ﬁrst test to end of the
last) of each project should be minimized.
∀p ∈P :
C S5
p := max
j∈Jp
˙tc
j −min
j∈Jp
˙ts
j
Constraint S1 favors fewer, longer jobs over more fragmented solutions. This helps reduc-
ing overhead (fewer setup periods necessary, rounding of fractional durations) and increases
the ﬂexibility of the schedule, since tasks within a job can be freely reordered. Also, it reduces
the complexity of the ﬁnal schedule, both for the employees performing the actual tasks and
any human planners in those cases where manual corrections or additions become necessary.
In practice in the lab of our industrial partner, it has proved efﬁcient to have only few
employees cover the tests of a single project, due to the presence of project-speciﬁc conditions
and procedures as well as the need for continual coordination and communication with other
parts of the laboratory as well as external clients. This is captured by constraint S3.
Constraint S4 makes the schedule more robust by encouraging jobs to be completed
earlier than absolutely required, so they can still be ﬁnished on time in case of delays or other
disturbances.
Finally, constraint S5 also helps reduce overheads, as longer timespans between the tests
of a project would require additional effort to become familiar with project-speciﬁc test
procedures, as well as storage space for the devices in between tests.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
545
The overall solution quality will be determined as the weighted sum over all soft constraint
violations.
The relative importance of these constraints (i.e. their weights) still needs to be deﬁned.
In practical applications, we expect them to be chosen interactively according to the current
situation. For our evaluations, we have assumed a uniform weight of 1 for all soft constraints.
3.4 The TLSP-S problem
A practically relevant subproblem of the TLSP deals with the case where a grouping of tasks
into jobs is already provided for each project, which cannot be changed by the solver. Thus,
the goal is to ﬁnd an assignment of a mode, time slot and resources to each (given) job, such
that all constraints are fulﬁlled and the objective function is minimized. Since this variant
focuses on the scheduling part of the problem, we denote it as TLSP-S.
In TLSP-S, the number and properties of jobs (see Sect. 3.2) are ﬁxed and can be precom-
puted from the properties of the tasks they contain.
Without loss of generality, we assume that this ﬁxed initial grouping is provided via the
initial schedule. Thus, an instance for TLSP-S can also be given as input to a solver for TLSP
and vice-versa, as long as the initial schedule contains a valid job grouping for all tasks.
For TLSP-S, constraints H1–H3 will always be trivially satisﬁed and can therefore be
ignored. Similarly, the penalty induced by soft constraint S1 is constant, since the number of
jobs cannot be modiﬁed. We still include this penalty in our results for comparability of the
solutions with instances of TLSP.
3.5 Complexity analysis of TLSP
In this section, we provide a reduction from RCPSP to TLSP, to show that TLSP is indeed
a generalization of RCPSP. Since RCPSP is known to be NP-hard (Blazewicz et al. (1983)),
this also shows the NP-hardness of TLSP.
RCPSP can be deﬁned as follows (summarized from the deﬁnition given by Hartmann and
Briskorn (2010)): Input is a list of activities A = {1, . . . , |A|}. Each activity a has a duration
da, a list of predecessors Pa ⊂A, which must be completed before a can start, and resource
requirements rak for each resource k ∈K = {1, . . . , |K|}. Each resource has a capacity ck,
which denotes the number of available units per timeslot. The goal is to ﬁnd a start time for
each activity, such that precedence constraints are fulﬁlled, the capacity of each resource is
not exceeded in any timeslot and the total makespan (i.e. the end of the last activity in the
schedule) is minimal.
For this reduction, we use the decision variant of RCPSP (which was also proven NP-hard
by Blazewicz et al. (1983)), which takes an integer s as additional input and asks whether a
schedule with makespan ≤s exists.
Given an arbitrary instance of RCPSP I, we can then construct a corresponding instance
of TLSP as follows:
– It contains a single project p1.
– For each activity a in I, we create a corresponding task in p1 with the same duration as
a. Each task has its own family (with a setup time of 0).
– Precedences between activities in I can be directly translated to the tasks of p1.
– Each task has a release date of 0 and both a target date and a deadline of s.
123

546
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
– There is a single mode with speed factor 1 and no required employees. This mode is
available for all tasks.
– For each resource k in I, we create a new equipment group gk, containing ck devices.
– Equipment requirements for each task are determined as follows: A task requires rak
devices of group gk, where a is the activity in I that corresponds to the task. All devices
in each group are available for all tasks.
– There are no workbenches or employees. Tasks do not require workbenches.
– There are no linked tasks.
– The base schedule is empty.
Since each family contains only a single task, the job grouping of each feasible schedule
is uniquely determined: There is a separate job for each task, which has exactly the same
properties (regarding duration, resource requirements, precedences, linked jobs) as the task
it contains. For any activity a in I, there must be exactly one corresponding job ja, which is
the one containing the task corresponding to a in the above construction.
Given a schedule (identiﬁed by the set of jobs J) that is a feasible solution for the TLSP
instance constructed above, it is easy to see that it directly corresponds to a valid schedule S
for the RCPSP instance I, where each activity a starts at the same time as ja ∈J. Precedences
are satisﬁed by construction and the capacity of each resource cannot be exceeded at any
time, since otherwise at least one device would have to be assigned to two overlapping jobs
in J at the same time (pidgeonhole principle). Further, all jobs in J must end before the
deadline s. Since both start and duration of abilities and the corresponding jobs are equal,
this also means that all activities in S must end before s, i.e. the makespan of S is at most s.
In the other direction, for any instance I of RCPSP, with a schedule S of makespan at most
s, we can ﬁnd a feasible schedule J for the corresponding instance of TLSP constructed as
above. As before, each job ja ∈J should start (and end) at the same time as the corresponding
activity a in S. Precedences and time windows are then satisﬁed by construction. Next, we
will show that we can always ﬁnd an equipment assignment for each job that fulﬁlls both the
requirements (constraint H9c) and the single assignment constraint (H8) are satisﬁed: We
look at each job j in order of increasing start time. Let J< j be all jobs considered before
j which overlap the start of j, A< j be the activities in S corresponding to those jobs and
a be the activity corresponding to j. Since S is feasible, the activities in A< j can require a
total of at most ck −rak units of each resource k (the remaining rak units are required for a).
Therefore, there can be at most ck −rak devices assigned to jobs in J< j. It follows that there
are at least rak devices left to be assigned to j, which is enough to cover its requirements
(H9c). Since jobs are considered in order of increasing start time, there can also be no other
jobs not in J< j that overlap j and have those devices assigned. It follows that constraint H8
must be fulﬁlled at every step. All other constraints are trivially satisﬁed.
In conclusion, a schedule for the RCPSP instance with makespan ≤s exists if and only if
the corresponding TLSP instance is feasible. Since the reduction can be done in polynomial
time, this proves that even the problem of ﬁnding any feasible solution for TLSP is already
NP-hard.
If the base schedule is not empty, but instead the (unique) feasible job grouping is provided
as additional input, we immediately arrive at an instance for TLSP-S. As before, each activity
in I corresponds directly to both exactly one task and exactly one job in the constructed
instance. Therefore, the same argument as for TLSP can be used to show the NP-hardness
also of TLSP-S.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
547
4 New instances for TLSP
In this section, we introduce an instance generator, which can be used to randomly generate
instances for both TLSP and TLSP-S based on real-world data. We also propose two sets of
new and publicly available instances for TLSP(-S) assembled using our instance generator.
Finally, we describe three real-world instances taken from our industrial partner, which are
also available online in anonymized form.
4.1 Instance generator
In order to be able to generate instances of speciﬁc size and complexity on demand, we
developed an instance generator for TLSP. It randomly generates instances of various sizes
that are based on the real-world data in the laboratory of our industrial partner and can be
conﬁgured to produce instances of various sizes and properties. The generator was written
in Java.
To generate a new instance, one has to specify the number of expected projects and the
length of the scheduling period, plus optionally various conﬁguration parameters that reﬁne
the desired properties of the instance. From this, an instance is generated as follows: First, the
laboratory environment, including the available resources, is deﬁned according to the desired
number of projects and the length of the scheduling period. Then, the required number of
projects is generated, together with a set of jobs for each project. This is used to populate
the reference solution, which is guaranteed to be a feasible solution for the ﬁnal problem
instance. In the third step, task properties (resource requirements and availabilities, prece-
dence constraints, time windows, ...) are deﬁned in accordance with the reference schedule.
Finally, the reference solution is modiﬁed to become the base schedule, which completes the
instance generation.
4.1.1 Environment generation
From the number of projects given (together with their average total work) and the length of
the scheduling period, a measure for the expected workload per time slot can be extracted.
The number of employees and workbenches required to achieve a certain mean degree of
utilization can be estimated from this measure.
Equipment is generated by a separate component, which can be passed to the instance gen-
erator. This component also handles equipment requirements of tasks in Step 4.1.2. Currently
supported are two different implementations:
Lab equivalent mode generates devices for exactly those equipment groups that are relevant
for planning at our industrial partner. The equipment requirements for tasks
also closely corresponds to the distribution of requirements in the real-world
laboratory.
General mode is more ﬂexible and creates between 3 and 6 equipment groups,
together with corresponding devices. Equipment requirements for each
groups are selected to be either unitary (i.e. tasks require at most device
of this group) or randomly generated for each project.
In both cases, the number of devices in each group depends on the same measure for workload
as for the employees and workbenches, modiﬁed by the expected number of required devices
per task.
In this step, also the task modes shown in Table 2 are generated.
123

548
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
Table 2 Task modes used by the
instance generator
Mode
vm
em
Single
1
1
Shift
0.6
2
External
1
0
4.1.2 Reference solution
Each project is assigned a certain total workload, which is taken from a distribution that
is as close as possible to the real-world data. It is also assigned to a random interval of
the scheduling period, where earlier intervals are slightly favored over later ones. Then a
number of tasks are created, still without a duration. In general, the expected number of tasks
grows with the project’s workload. These tasks are then distributed into families and further
into jobs. The families can either be taken from the real-world data or generated randomly,
depending on the generator conﬁguration.
Each generated job is then randomly assigned a preliminary duration (taken from the
total workload of the project), a mode (with only a small probability for External mode),
and equipment requirements according to the chosen equipment generation mode (see Step
4.1.1). Most jobs will also be set to require a workbench.
Once these parameters are determined, the job is placed into the reference schedule. This
is done by ﬁrst randomly choosing a seed point within the project’s assigned interval. Starting
at this point, the job is grown outward in both directions as long as any feasible resource
assignment for it exists or until the desired duration is reached. If no feasible placement at
the whole duration can be found, the position is still accepted as long as the duration is not
much smaller than expected. Where this is not the case or no resource assignment exists even
for the initial seed, the procedure is repeated for another random seed point, up to a certain
maximum number of iterations. While this process cannot guarantee that a feasible schedule
can be found, experiments so far have shown that this is sufﬁcient in most cases.
Once a job is scheduled, it is assigned a feasible set of resources. Its ﬁnal duration is split
between its tasks, minus the setup time required for its family.
To model started jobs, the scheduling period is extended to the past by one month (about
40 time slots) in the beginning of this step. After all jobs have been scheduled, the scheduling
periodisreducedtoitsoriginalduration.Jobsendingbeforethenewﬁrsttimeslotareremoved
completely, including their contained tasks – it is assumed that those have been completed
before the start of the scheduling period. Those overlapping the ﬁrst time slot have their
duration reduced accordingly (potentially including removing some of the contained tasks)
and are deﬁned as started jobs.
4.1.3 Task properties
After the reference schedule has been completed, the remaining properties of the tasks are
ﬁnalized.
Release dates, deadlines and due dates for tasks of a project are set to the ﬁrst start,
respectively last end, of any job in the project. They are then extended outwards by an
additional number of time slots (minimum of 0), which is usually smaller for the due date
than for the deadline.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
549
The available resources are set for each job (and all contained tasks) such that they include
at least the assigned resources. The number of available resources is taken from the real-world
data for employees (including preferred employees) and workbenches, and handled by the
chosen equipment generation mode for equipment. A small subset of tasks may also have
additional available resources beyond those of the other tasks in the job.
The available task modes are chosen such that tasks of a job with the External mode in the
reference schedule must be performed in this mode, while all other tasks can be performed
in Single mode, plus optionally in Shift mode. The latter is always the case if the task’s job
has Shift mode in the reference schedule.
Started jobs will always have their time window, available resources and modes set to
exactly those values that they are assigned to, to ensure that they cannot be altered by the
solver.
The generation of precedence constraints is again delegated to a separate component,
which can be set in the conﬁguration. Two implementations are currently supported, both
start by building a maximum graph of possible dependencies according to the reference
schedule for each project:
Ranked precedence constraints assign ranks to a subset of tasks such that tasks of higher
rank have all tasks of lower rank as prerequisites.
General precedence constraints randomly choose arcs in the maximum dependency graph
that will result in actual dependencies between tasks.
In both cases, the number of precedence constraints between tasks is rather low and most
tasks don’t have any prerequisite tasks at all. This circumstance is directly taken from the
real-world data, where only few dependencies between tasks appear and contrasts with other
project scheduling problems that include tighter constraints on the order of activities.
Finally, possible candidates for linked tasks are identiﬁed, both within and between jobs,
and a small subset of those is chosen randomly.
4.1.4 Base schedule
The last step in the instance generation process is the derivation of a base schedule from the
reference solution.
Again, there are several supported options for this, which the generator can be conﬁgured
to use. Currently, there are two main implementations supported:
Delete mode Removes some assignments of the jobs in the reference schedule, but leaves
the remaining assignments intact.
Random mode Replaces assignments of the jobs in the reference schedule by random values.
Resource availability constraints and time windows are respected, but other
constraints may be violated by these changes.
Either mode has a parameter that deﬁnes the strength of the perturbation (given as the per-
centage of jobs affected). Further, various ﬂags can modify the behavior, including keeping
certain types of assignments intact (e.g. the grouping of tasks into jobs).
Any perturbations do not affect started jobs as well as a number of jobs selected as ﬁxed,
which have their tasks ﬁxed and either all or some assignments ﬁxed to the current value by
restricting the time window, available resources and/or modes to their assigned values.
123

550
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
Table 3 Instance generator conﬁguration parameters for the two provided datasets
Parameter
LabStructure
General
Equipment
Lab equivalent
General
Task families
Lab equivalent
General
Precedence
Ranked
General
Base schedule mode
Delete
Delete
Base schedule perturbation
1.0
1.0
Base schedule options
Grouping constant
Grouping constant
4.2 Data sets
Currently, there are two sets of test data available, General and LabStructure, both with 60
instances each. These were generated for TLSP, but include a grouping of tasks into jobs in
the (otherwise empty) base schedules that is guaranteed to have at least one feasible solution.
Thus, they are directly usable also for TLSP-S. Feasible solutions for TLSP-S are guaranteed
to also be feasible for TLSP under that grouping and have the same objective values.
Both data sets feature instances of various sizes, starting at 5 projects over a period of 88
time slots, up to 90 projects over 782 time slots. A single project contains an average of close
to 4 jobs. There are no initial assignments except for the started jobs at the beginning of the
scheduling period and a small number (≈5%) of jobs whose assignments are ﬁxed.
The difference between the two data sets is that for the LabStructure set, the instance
generator was conﬁgured to produce instances that are as close as possible to the actual real-
world data. In contrast, the General set uses the same distribution of work across projects and
tasks,butismoreﬂexibleregardingseveralotherstructuralfeatures,suchasequipmentgroups
andjobprecedence.Thisdistinctionwasmadetoobtainadiverserangeofinstances,including
both those very similar to the real-world laboratory and those with different characteristics.
The instance generator conﬁgurations used to create these two datasets are listed in Table 3.
On average, jobs have 5 available workbenches and 6 qualiﬁed employees (the different
modes each require between 0 and 2 employees). The demand and availability of equipment
is more varied and differs a lot between data sets and instances. Three different types of
equipment demands appear: Of any given group, jobs require either a single speciﬁc device
(these are usually project-speciﬁc), one out of a small list of options (< 10) or several (12
on average, but with a large variance) out of a large list (depends on the instance size, up
to several hundred). The distribution of these types is heavily skewed towards the ﬁrst two
options. Further, the huge number of possible assignments for equipment demands of the
third type is offset by the fact that most jobs do not require equipment of these groups and
the number of devices per group is large enough that feasible equipment assignments can
be found quite easily. These resource distributions were adapted from real-world data in our
partner laboratory.
In addition to the two randomly generated data sets, we also provide three real-world
instances taken directly from the laboratory of our industrial partner in anonymized form.
These instances each cover a planning period of approximately one and a half years and
contain between 59 and 74 projects. Table 4 lists some important parameters of these three
instances.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
551
Table 4 The three real-world instances. For each instance, the table lists the number of projects, jobs and the
length of the scheduling period, followed by the number of employees, workbenches and equipment groups.
The last columns contain the mean qualiﬁed employees and available workbenches per job, as well as the mean
available devices per job and equipment group (only over those jobs that actually require at least one device of
the group, about 10% of all jobs). *The generated instances also include tasks with multiple available devices
per group. This discrepancy arises from the fact that several equipment groups were not yet considered for
planning in practice at the time these instances were created
ID
|P|
|J|
h
|E|
|B|
|G∗|
|E j|
|B j|
|Ggj|
2019-04
74
297
606
22
17
1
5.49
3.06
1*
2019-07
59
251
700
24
17
1
5.33
3.17
1*
2019-10
59
223
572
19
17
1
5.70
3.48
1*
All instances (including the real-world instances) are available for download at https://
www.dbai.tuwien.ac.at/staff/fmischek/TLSP. Once additional data sets become available,
they will also be added there.
5 Local search
For easy implementation of and comparison between different solution techniques, we have
developed a solution framework that provides a uniﬁed workﬂow, common data structures
and utility functionality for TLSP solver implementations.
While theoretically also applicable for other solution approaches, this framework is mainly
intended for use with local search. Here, the basic building block is that of a move, which is a
small change to a given solution, such as a replacement of a time slot or a resource assignment
for a single job. Each move contains the necessary information to be applied to a schedule and
to efﬁciently evaluate its effects on the solution quality. A basic set of move implementations
are provided, which can be combined to form more complex changes. Neighborhoods deﬁne
a set of moves available from a current schedule, and provide functionality to access and
iterate over these moves. In addition they also allow for the selection of a random or the best
move among those they contain. These neighborhoods are employed by search heuristics,
which implement the strategies to choose a move that should be applied from among several
neighborhoods in each step of the search.
5.1 Neighborhoods
For this paper, we have developed two different neighborhoods that are suitable to solve
TLSP-S. Both are the combination of several smaller neighborhoods focused on speciﬁc
types of moves, and contain the union of all these moves.
The ﬁrst set, called Simple, contains neighborhoods that each affect a single aspect of a
job’s assignments. It consists of the following neighborhoods:
– Mode change: Switches the assigned mode of the job to a different value. The start time
of the job is kept constant for all moves in this neighborhood, except where the new
duration would conﬂict with time windows or precedence constraints. In these cases, the
start time is adjusted to ensure that those constraints are satisﬁed. Also, the number of
assigned employees is adjusted to match the new requirements.
123

552
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
– Time slot change: Moves the job to a new position in the schedule. As before, time
windows and precedence constraints are respected by all possible moves.
– Resource change: Switches out a single assigned resource unit (workbench, employee or
device) by a different unit of the same type (and group, for equipment).
– Resource swap: Swaps a unit of a resource assigned to this job with a different unit of
the same type assigned to an overlapping job. A resource unit is considered for a swap
only if it is suitable for its new job.
While moves from the ﬁrstthree neighborhoods are theoretically sufﬁcientto reach an opti-
mal solution from any schedule already satisfying time window and precedence constraints,
the addition of resource swaps adds more options in situations where a single change would
result in a prohibitively large number of conﬂicts.
The second variant is a larger neighborhood, with the main idea that a job is completely
removed from the schedule and the neighborhood contains all possible combinations of mode,
time slot and resource assignments for that job (as before, time windows and precedence
constraints are respected by all moves).
However, the enormous number of potential equipment assignments per job in some
instances made some adjustments necessary. For example, instance LabStructure/010 con-
tains 88 devices in equipment group 1, of which 27 are required by job 45, for a total of
27
88

≈3.3 × 1022 different possible equipment assignments for this job alone.
Instead, we employed a reduced version of the neighborhood, which keeps the existing
equipment assignments intact, and combined it with a Resource Change neighborhood lim-
ited to equipment changes. We refer to this combination of neighborhoods as JobOpt. To
further increase the efﬁciency when the best move in the neighborhood is required, we utilize
independencies between assigned resources to precompute and cache the effects of assigning
individual units to the job.
Since the neighborhoods described above do not affect the task grouping, they are not
suitable for solving TLSP, unless the are combined with additional neighborhoods covering
the grouping aspect.
5.2 Search heuristics
The search heuristics make use of the available neighborhoods, which abstract away the
problem speciﬁc details and can be dynamically changed. Thus, the heuristics are problem-
agnostic and can be used for TLSP, TLSP-S and other related variants, as long as the employed
neighborhoods are adjusted to ﬁt. This makes implementing and modifying search heuristics
very easy. For this paper, we have implemented and evaluated two well-known metaheuristics,
Min-Conﬂict and Simulated Annealing, as an example of the kind of search strategies that
are supported by the framework.
5.2.1 Min-conﬂict
The min-conﬂicts heuristic (Minton et al. (1992)) was originally developed to solve constraint
satisfaction problems (including scheduling applications). It works by randomly selecting a
variable appearing in at least one conﬂict (violated constraint) and choosing a value for it
that minimizes the number of conﬂicts remaining.
This strategy can be adapted as follows for TLSP(-S) and our solver framework: Choose
a job at random that violates at least one constraint, and pick a move from the neighborhood
involving the chosen job that minimizes constraint violations (i.e. the best move).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
553
Different selection strategies are possible, due to the distinction between hard and soft
constraints. We have experimented with three different variants of Min-Conﬂict. The ﬁrst
selects jobs from among those violating hard constraints. Once the solution is feasible, also
soft constraint violations are considered. The second variant considers both hard and soft
constraint violations from the start. Finally, the third variant chooses from all jobs, regardless
of their presence in any kind of constraint violation.
For TLSP(-S), the second and third variants are virtually equivalent due to soft constraints
S3 (Number of employees) and S5 (Project completion time), whose presence entails that
most, if not all, jobs are involved in at least one soft constraint violation2. Further, results did
not differ in any meaningful way between the ﬁrst and either of the latter variants.
For simplicity, and to avoid having to keep a running account of the jobs involved in
constraint violations, the experiments in Sect. 6 have been done using variant three.
A weakness of MC is that it contains no mechanism to avoid repeating already visited
solutions and thus might get stuck where several adjacent conﬁgurations for most or all jobs
are locally optimal. A possible countermeasure is to inject additional randomness into the
solution procedure. In our framework, we have also included a random walk (RW) algorithm,
that randomly selects a job and performs a random move for the chosen job. RW is combined
with MC in a hybrid heuristic that at each step calls RW with a low probability pRW , and
MC otherwise.
Also, the search automatically restarts from a new initial solution if no progress has been
achieved within a certain number of moves.
5.2.2 Simulated annealing
Simulated Annealing (Kirkpatrick et al. (1983)) is a well-known metaheuristic that has
been employed successfully to solve many NP-complete problems, including RCPSP (e.g.
Bouleimen and Lecocq (2003); Laurent et al. (2017)).
In SA, the search starts from a randomly generated solution. In each step, a candidate
move is chosen randomly from the available neighborhoods. The difference in objective
value  due to the chosen move is calculated. If  < 0 (for minimization problems), the
move is applied. Otherwise, it is still accepted with probability e−/T . Thus, the acceptance
probability depends on  (smaller values have a larger probability to be accepted) and a
parameter T called temperature (higher values result in a larger acceptance probability). The
temperature starts at an initial value T 0 and is iteratively reduced by a cooling factor α, with
0 < α < 1, after a certain number of steps, until a minimum temperature T min is reached.
At this point, the search stops.
The choice of α is crucial because it determines the number of moves until the algorithm
halts. In order to ensure that the available time is fully used, i.e. T min is reached right at the
timeout, we adjust α according to the number of moves applied per second. At a search speed
of m moves per second, i iterations between successive cooling steps, current temperature
T , T min will be reached after u = i
m logα( T min
T 0 ) seconds. Conversely, for a given timeout of
u seconds, we get the following for α:
α =
T min
T 0
 i
um
(1)
2 This is exacerbated in TLSP, where soft constraint S1 (Number of jobs) trivially involves every single job
in a soft constraint violation
123

554
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
Since search speed (the value of m) can vary between different instances, processors and
also in the course of the search, we initially set α to 1, and periodically update it during the
search, using the average measured search speed so far for m, the current temperature instead
of T 0 and the remaining time for u.
We have also alternatively experimented with ﬁxed cooling rates, where the search restarts
when the minimum temperature is reached, either from a new initial solution or the best
solution found so far (reheating). Neither of these options (at different cooling rates - and
therefore different numbers of restarts or reheatings) improved upon the solution quality,
with short cooling cycles producing infeasible solutions more often and worse penalties in
most other cases.
Finally, a schedule for TLSP(-S) can contain both hard and soft constraint violations. This
has to be taken into account when calculating a value for . In our implementation, we have
weighted each hard constraint violation by a factor wH (chosen by the parameter tuner, see
below).
6 Experimental results
For the experiments, a set of thirty instances of different sizes were chosen (15 each from the
General and LabStructure sets described in Sect. 4.2 - one of each size, plus a second instance
for the three smallest sizes), plus the three real-world instances available. The instances and
some important properties are listed in Table 5.
Since we are solving TLSP-S, we use the task grouping provided in the reference solution
(which is otherwise empty except for the assignments of started jobs).
The algorithms described in Section 5 were implemented in Java 8. All experiments were
performed on a Lenovo ThinkPad University T480s with an Intel Core i7-8550U (1,8 GHz),
using a single thread and a timeout of ten minutes.
6.1 Parameter configuration and tuning
For parameter tuning, we used SMAC3 (Hutter et al. (2011)), version 0.10.0. Tuning was
performed on a set of 30 instances chosen in the same way as, but distinct from, the test data
set. In each case, we allocated a budget of 500 target algorithm runs to SMAC.
6.1.1 Min-conﬂict
For the Min-Conﬂict heuristic, the restriction to a single job at each step means that both
the Simple and the (larger) JobOpt neighborhoods can be explored in reasonable time. Over
various solver runs, both neighborhoods achieved comparable results on the training set over
several different conﬁgurations. For parameter tuning and the ﬁnal evaluations, we decided
to use the JobOpt neighborhood.
There are two construction heuristics that can be used to generate the initial solution. The
ﬁrst (Greedy) iterates over the jobs in order of ascending deadline and greedily assigns to each
job the currently best values. The other (Random) uses random values for all assignments,
respecting time windows, job precedence and resource availability constraints.
While MC itself does not include any parameters, there are still several possibilities for
conﬁguration. The parameters submitted to SMAC for tuning are listed on Table 6a and
include the following: Init is the construction heuristic that should be used to build the
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
555
Table 5 The set of test instances used for the experiments. Shown are the data set the instance is taken from and
the ID within that set. The following columns list the number of projects, jobs and the length of the scheduling
period, followed by the number of employees, workbenches and equipment groups. The last columns contain
the mean qualiﬁed employees and available workbenches per job, as well as the mean available devices per
job and equipment group (only over those jobs that actually require at least one device of the group, about
10% of all jobs)
#
Data Set
ID
|P|
|J|
h
|E|
|B|
|G∗|
|E j|
|B j|
|Ggj|
1
General
000
5
7
88
7
7
3
2.08
3.57
1.5
2
General
001
5
8
88
7
7
3
4.88
3.63
15.67
3
LabStructure
000
5
24
88
7
7
3
1.84
3.38
11.67
4
LabStructure
001
5
14
88
7
7
3
4.36
3.5
0.36
5
General
005
10
29
88
13
13
4
4.04
3.48
5.76
6
General
006
10
18
88
13
13
6
5.56
4.22
13.28
7
LabStructure
005
10
37
88
13
13
3
6.16
4.03
0.65
8
LabStructure
006
10
29
88
13
13
3
6.21
3.76
21.01
9
General
010
20
60
174
16
16
5
7.42
4.42
11.36
10
General
011
20
84
174
16
16
4
7.31
4.3
3.7
11
LabStructure
010
20
65
174
16
16
3
6.28
4.43
26.26
12
LabStructure
011
20
62
174
16
16
3
7.27
4.24
1.21
13
General
020
15
29
174
12
12
5
5.76
3.97
1.12
14
LabStructure
020
15
53
174
12
12
3
6.28
4.47
20.63
15
General
025
30
113
174
23
23
3
8.26
4.41
5.71
16
LabStructure
025
30
105
174
23
23
3
7.52
4.25
39.63
17
General
015
40
126
174
31
31
3
9.26
4.48
29.53
18
LabStructure
015
40
138
174
31
31
3
7.36
3.57
41.93
19
General
030
60
208
174
46
46
6
9.85
4.11
31.45
20
LabStructure
030
60
212
174
46
46
3
9.28
4.17
78.16
21
General
035
20
76
520
6
6
5
4.24
3.62
8.08
22
LabStructure
035
20
71
520
6
6
3
4.3
3.42
11.70
23
General
040
40
196
520
12
12
4
6.95
4.47
4.24
24
LabStructure
040
40
187
520
12
12
3
6.55
4.51
1.38
25
General
045
60
260
520
18
18
6
7.65
4.52
23.95
26
LabStructure
045
60
239
520
18
18
3
7.44
4.42
33.65
27
General
050
60
270
782
13
13
4
6.89
4.39
3.89
28
LabStructure
050
60
247
782
13
13
3
6.97
4.21
23.42
29
General
055
90
384
782
19
19
5
7.27
4.29
26.89
30
LabStructure
055
90
401
782
19
19
3
7.34
4.53
36.76
initial solution . Another parameter is the maximum number of moves without improvement
(MMWI) before the search restarts from a new initial solution. Finally, pRW denotes the
probability at each step that a single move of random walk is performed instead of the
min-conﬂict heuristic.
123

556
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
Table 6 Tuning parameters for Min-Conﬂict with Random Walk (a) and Simulated Annealing (b). The last
column lists the parameter values for the best conﬁguration found
Parameter
Value range
Best conﬁguration
(a) Min-conﬂict + Random walk
Init
{Random, Greedy}
Greedy
MMWI
{100 . . . 10000}
131
pRW
{0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2}
0.1
(b)Simulated annealing
T 0
{10 . . . 100}
69
T min
{0.001, 0.01, 0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10}
0.1
wH
{10, 20, 50, 100, 200}
10
6.1.2 Simulated annealing
The parameters to tune for SA are the initial temperature T 0, the minimum temperature
T min and the weight factor for hard constraint violations wH, since the cooling rate is
automatically determined from the available time and the number of moves applied per
second. The parameters for SMAC and tuning results are listed in Table 6b.
As with the Min-Conﬂict heuristic, we saw comparable results for both the Simple and
JobOpt neighborhoods and opted to continue the experiments with the JobOpt neighborhood
for comparability.
6.2 Evaluation
Table 7 shows a comparison of results for Min-Conﬂict with Random Walk (MC+RW) and
Simulated Annealing (SA), with the conﬁguration described in the previous section. These
results are compared to those of a Constraint Programming model (CP), written in MiniZinc
(Nethercote et al. (2007)) and using the solver Chuffed (Chu (2011). Details for this CP
model can be found in Geibinger et al. (2019).
Due to their non-deterministic behavior, both MC+RW and SA were run 10 times on each
instance, with different seeds for the (pseudo-) random number generator. The table shows
the best solution found over all runs, the number of feasible solutions found, and the average
penalty among all feasible solutions.
From these results, it can be seen that instances can be split into two groups: For small
instances with 20 projects or less (instances 1–14 and 21,22), good solutions could be found
in most cases. This was much more difﬁcult for larger instances with more than 20 projects.
MC+RW was unable to reliably ﬁnd feasible solutions for most large instances within the
given time. Moreover, even where it does ﬁnd solutions without conﬂicts, the resulting penalty
is often only slightly better than what was already achieved with the greedy construction
heuristic.
SA performed much better and found feasible solutions in more than 97% of all runs.
Also the solution quality is consistently better than with MC+RW, except for some small
instances.
The CP model could ﬁnd feasible solutions for all of the instances already within one
minute. Within the full time limit, it could prove optimality for 12 of the 16 small instances.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
557
Table 7 Comparison of results. Min-conﬂict with random walk and Simulated Annealing were both run 10
times each, with different seeds. Columns Best contain the best solution found, #Feas. the number of feasible
solutions found (out of 10) and Avg the average penalty over all feasible solutions. Solutions for CP marked
with “*” are optimal for the instance
#
MC+RW
SA
CP
Best
#Feas.
Avg
Best
#Feas.
Avg
1
98
10
98
98
10
98
98
*
2
73
10
73
73
10
73
73
*
3
149
10
149.3
152
10
156.4
149
*
4
105
10
105.3
105
10
105
105
*
5
285
10
286.9
287
10
300.1
283
*
6
162
10
162.4
177
10
192.2
162
*
7
327
10
331.7
307
10
307.4
307
*
8
314
10
323.5
310
10
312
310
*
9
625
10
648.8
501
10
502.7
501
*
10
725
10
751
564
10
565.3
892
11
993
10
1049.9
874
10
879
856
*
12
749
10
768.9
663
10
668
713
13
340
10
341
352
10
352.1
340
*
14
450
10
457.9
422
10
425.7
420
*
15
1800
4
1841
1087
10
1090.6
1653
16
1357
8
1429.8
1143
10
1155.2
1561
17
1381
10
1410.9
1195
10
1234
1382
18
1688
10
1760.7
1364
10
1375.3
1822
19
2675
6
2735.3
2277
10
2337
2650
20
2853
2
2898.5
2312
10
2360.6
2892
21
908
10
1007.7
683
10
686.6
930
22
1033
10
1079.7
767
10
771.9
839
23
–
0
−−
2393
6
2476.3
3531
24
2484
2
2664
1808
10
1852.5
2454
25
–
0
−−
2908
8
3050.9
3281
26
–
0
−−
2724
10
2805
3899
27
3372
3
3405.7
2176
10
2191.3
3146
28
2585
10
2617.2
2367
10
2375.8
2569
29
5334
2
5406.5
4208
9
4428.4
4548
30
6453
10
6646.8
4828
9
4896.8
5905
Compared to the results for SA, CP slightly outperforms SA on those instances where
it could ﬁnd optimal solutions. However, SA produced better results for every single other
instance, sometimes by more than 30%. In particular, SA decisively outperformed CP on the
large instances, i.e. those with more than 20 projects. These results can also be seen in Fig. 1.
The differences between the results for small and large instances indicates that the number
of projects (and thus jobs) is the main factor in determining the time required to solve an
instance. In contrast, neither the number of time slots in the scheduling period, nor the
number of resources available for each job seem to have a decisive impact on the difﬁculty
of an instance.
123

558
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
Fig. 1 Results for Min-Conﬂict with Random Walk (MC+RW), Simulated Annealing (SA) and Constraint
Programming (CP), with a timeout of 10 minutes per instance. The center and right groups show results only
for small (≤20 projects) and large instances, respectively. Results were scaled by the best solution known for
each instance
6.2.1 Additional runtime
We also repeated our experiments with the same conﬁguration for Simulated Annealing with
a longer timeout of one hour. Table 8 shows the results of these experiments, again compared
with the results for the CP model (also with a timeout of one hour).
With the increased time budget, feasible solutions could be found for all instances. As
with the shorter time limit, the solutions produced by SA for all instances where CP could
not ﬁnd optimal solutions are better than those found by CP, in some cases by more than
30%. In particular, this includes all large instances.
For those small instances, where optimal solutions have been found, SA achieved solutions
with the same or very close penalties.
Compared to the results with a shorter time limit, the penalty for large instances (>20
projects) has improved by nearly 3.8% on average with SA. CP could ﬁnd optimal solutions
for three of the four remaining small instances. However, the results for large instances
improved by less than 1% on average.
Figure 2 shows a comparison of the performance of the two solvers, both overall and
separated into small and large instances. With the increased running time, CP ﬁnds the best
known (indeed optimal) solution for all but one of the small instances, but is still outperformed
by SA both on the larger instances and in overall quality.
Our results are in line with previous ﬁndings for RCPSP (e.g. by Pellerin et al. (2020),
for a recent example) that exact approaches are suitable mostly for instances with fewer
activities and that heuristics are needed to ﬁnd good solutions for instances of larger sizes.
A possible explanation for this may be that exact approaches in general have to examine a
substantial part of the search space, which grows exponentially with the number of activities,
while heuristics can often ﬁnd more efﬁcient paths through that search space, at the cost of
losing any guarantees about the ﬁnal solution reached.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
559
Table 8 Comparison of results
with a timeout of one hour.
Simulated Annealing was run 5
times per instance with different
seeds. Column Best contains the
best solution found, #Feas. the
number of feasible solutions
found (out of 5) and Avg the
average penalty over all feasible
solutions. Solutions for CP
marked with “*” are optimal for
the instance
#
SA
CP
Best
#Feas.
Avg
1
98
5
98
98
*
2
73
5
73
73
*
3
151
5
152.4
149
*
4
105
5
105.4
105
*
5
292
5
300.8
283
*
6
180
5
191
162
*
7
307
5
307
307
*
8
310
5
310.2
310
*
9
501
5
501
501
*
10
564
5
564.6
740
11
872
5
873.4
856
*
12
663
5
664.8
656
*
13
352
5
353.6
340
*
14
422
5
422.2
420
*
15
1086
5
1086.8
1647
16
1141
5
1142.2
1561
17
1195
5
1206
1284
18
1360
5
1361
1820
19
2196
5
2233
2650
20
2261
5
2284.6
2888
21
683
5
683.6
679
*
22
765
5
766.6
765
*
23
2200
5
2276
3487
24
1782
5
1799.4
2452
25
2598
5
2737.8
3278
26
2605
5
2633.4
3894
27
2155
5
2159.8
3130
28
2333
5
2341.2
2569
29
4038
5
4204.8
4539
30
4601
5
4636.6
5904
7 Conclusions
In this article, we have introduced the new problem TLSP, and its subproblem TLSP-S,
which are complex extensions to existing RCPSP variants based on real-world requirements.
A complexity analysis via reduction from RCPSP shows that even ﬁnding a feasible solution
for either of these two problems is already NP-hard. Our ﬁndings and comparison to related
variants of RCPSP indicate that TLSP covers several aspects important in actual practice that
cannot be efﬁciently modeled by existing formulations.
Our publicly available instance sets, ﬁrst described in this paper, contain both instances
randomly generated based on real-world requirements, using our conﬁgurable instance gen-
erator, and real-world instances. Our experimental evaluations indicate that these instances
123

560
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
Fig. 2 Results for Simulated Annealing (SA) and Constraint Programming (CP), with a timeout of one hour per
instance. The center and right groups show results for small (≤20 projects) and large instances, respectively.
Results were scaled by the best solution known for each instance
provide a challenging benchmark data set which can be further used by other researchers to
work on this problem.
In addition, we have introduced a solver framework for solving these problems, which
supports several metaheuristic solvers and provides multiple options for conﬁguration and
extensions. Using this framework, we have shown that Simulated Annealing using a suitable
set of problem-speciﬁc neighborhoods can be used to provide high quality solutions for
TLSP-S, and outperforms a state-of-the-art method based on Constraint Programming for
larger and practical instances both under strict time limits and with longer runtimes. Our
results also further support the general ﬁnding that for most scheduling problems based on
RCPSP, exact methods work well only for smaller instances, and heuristics are necessary to
solve instances of realistic sizes.
The methods proposed in this work are currently in use in the laboratory of our industrial
partner, who successfully generate schedules for their long-term planning.
Regarding future work, we plan to investigate whether these results can also be transferred
to the TLSP, which combines TLSP-S with an additional grouping stage. A promising direc-
tion of research also seems the combination of both local search and CP-based approaches,
in the form of hybrid algorithms or large neighborhood search, to combine the advantages
of both methods and further improve the results for TLSP-S.
Acknowledgements Open access funding provided by TU Wien (TUW). The ﬁnancial support by the Austrian
Federal Ministry for Digital and Economic Affairs and the National Foundation for Research, Technology and
Development is gratefully acknowledged.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
561
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Ahmeti, A., & Musliu, N. (2018). Min-conﬂicts heuristic for multi-mode resource-constrained projects
scheduling. In: Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, ACM, pp 237–244
Asta, S., Karapetyan, D., Kheiri, A., Özcan, E., & Parkes, A. J. (2016). Combining monte-carlo and
hyper-heuristic methods for the multi-mode resource-constrained multi-project scheduling problem.
Information Sciences, 373, 476–498.
Bartels, J. H., & Zimmermann, J. (2009). Scheduling tests in automotive r&d projects. European Journal of
Operational Research, 193(3), 805–819. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2007.11.010.
Bellenguez, O., & Néron, E. (2005). Lower bounds for the multi-skill project scheduling problem with hier-
archical levels of skills. In M. Trick & E. Burke (Eds.), Practice and Theory of Automated Timetabling
V (pp. 229–243). Berlin: Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Blazewicz, J., Lenstra, J. K., & Kan, A. R. (1983). Scheduling subject to resource constraints: Classiﬁcation
and complexity. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 5(1), 11–24.
Bouleimen K, Lecocq H (2003) A new efﬁcient simulated annealing algorithm for the resource-constrained
project scheduling problem and its multiple mode version. European Journal of Operational Research
149(2):268 – 281, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-2217(02)00761-0, http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0377221702007610, sequencing and Scheduling
Brucker, P., Drexl, A., Möhring, R., Neumann, K., & Pesch, E. (1999). Resource-constrained project schedul-
ing: Notation, classiﬁcation, models, and methods. European Journal of Operational Research, 112(1),
3–41.
Chu G (2011) Improving combinatorial optimization. PhD thesis, University of Melbourne, Australia, http://
hdl.handle.net/11343/36679
Dauzère-Pérès, S., Roux, W., & Lasserre, J. (1998). Multi-resource shop scheduling with resource ﬂexibility.
European Journal of Operational Research, 107(2), 289–305.
Drexl, A., Nissen, R., Patterson, J. H., & Salewski, F. (2000). Progen/πx -an instance generator for resource-
constrained project scheduling problems with partially renewable resources and further extensions.
European Journal of Operational Research, 125(1), 59–72.
Elmaghraby, S. E. (1977). Activity networks: Project planning and control by network models. New Jersey:
Wiley.
Geibinger T, Mischek F, Musliu N (2019) Investigating constraint programming for real world industrial test
laboratory scheduling. In: Proceedings of the Sixteenth International Conference on the Integration of
Constraint Programming, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, and Operations Research (CPAIOR 2019)
Gonçalves, J., Mendes, J., & Resende, M. (2008). A genetic algorithm for the resource constrained multi-
project scheduling problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 189(3), 1171–1190.
Hartmann, S. (1998). A competitive genetic algorithm for resource-constrained project scheduling. Naval
Research Logistics (NRL), 45(7), 733–750.
Hartmann, S., & Briskorn, D. (2010). A survey of variants and extensions of the resource-constrained project
scheduling problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 207(1), 1–14.
Hutter F, Hoos HH, Leyton-Brown K (2011) Sequential model-based optimization for general algorithm
conﬁguration. In: International Conference on Learning and Intelligent Optimization, Springer, pp 507–
523
Kirkpatrick,S.,Gelatt,C.D.,&Vecchi,M.P.(1983).Optimizationbysimulatedannealing.Science,220(4598),
671–680.
Laurent, A., Deroussi, L., Grangeon, N., & Norre, S. (2017). A new extension of the rcpsp in a multi-site
context: Mathematical model and metaheuristics. Computers and Industrial Engineering, 112, 634–644.
Mika, M., Waligóra, G., & W¸eglarz, J. (2006). Modelling setup times in project scheduling. Perspectives in
modern project scheduling (pp. 131–163). Boston: Springer.
Mika, M., Waligóra, G., & W¸eglarz, J. (2015). Overview and state of the art. In C. Schwindt & J. Zimmer-
mann (Eds.), Handbook on Project Management and Scheduling (Vol. 1, pp. 445–490). Cham: Springer
International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-05443-8_21.
Minton, S., Johnston, M. D., Philips, A. B., & Laird, P. (1992). Minimizing conﬂicts: A heuristic repair method
for constraint satisfaction and scheduling problems. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 58, 161–205.
123

562
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:533–562
Mischek F, Musliu N (2018) The test laboratory scheduling problem. Technical report, Christian Doppler
Laboratory for Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Optimization for Planning and Scheduling, TU Wien, CD-TR
2018/1
Nethercote N, Stuckey PJ, Becket R, Brand S, Duck GJ, Tack G (2007) Minizinc: Towards a standard CP
modelling language. In: Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming - CP 2007, 13th International
Conference, CP 2007, Providence, RI, USA, September 23-27, 2007, Proceedings, pp 529–543, https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-74970-7_38
Pellerin, R., Perrier, N., & Berthaut, F. (2020). A survey of hybrid metaheuristics for the resource-constrained
project scheduling problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 280(2), 395–416.
Polo Mejia O, Anselmet MC, Artigues C, Lopez P (2017) A new RCPSP variant for scheduling research activ-
ities in a nuclear laboratory. In: 47th International Conference on Computers & Industrial Engineering
(CIE47), Lisbonne, Portugal, p 8p., https://hal.laas.fr/hal-01630977
Potts, C. N., & Kovalyov, M. Y. (2000). Scheduling with batching: A review. European Journal of Operational
Research, 120(2), 228–249.
Salewski,F.,Schirmer,A.,&Drexl,A.(1997).Projectschedulingunderresourceandmodeidentityconstraints:
Model, complexity, methods, and application. European Journal of Operational Research, 102(1), 88–
110.
Schwindt, C., & Trautmann, N. (2000). Batch scheduling in process industries: An application of resource-
constrained project scheduling. OR-Spektrum, 22(4), 501–524.
Szeredi R, Schutt A (2016) Modelling and solving multi-mode resource-constrained project scheduling. In:
Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming - 22nd International Conference, CP 2016, Toulouse,
France, September 5-9, 2016, Proceedings, pp 483–492, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-44953-1_31
Trautmann, N., & Schwindt, C. (2005). A minlp/rcpsp decomposition approach for the short-term planning
of batch production. In: computer aided chemical engineering (Vol. 20, pp. 1309–1314). Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Villafáñez, F., Poza, D., López-Paredes, A., Pajares, J., & del Olmo, R. (2019). A generic heuristic for multi-
project scheduling problems with global and local resource constraints (rcmpsp). Soft Computing, 23(10),
3465–3479.
Wauters, T., Kinable, J., Smet, P., Vancroonenburg, W., Vanden Berghe, G., & Verstichel, J. (2016). The multi-
mode resource-constrained multi-project scheduling problem. Journal of Scheduling, 19(3), 271–283.
W¸eglarz, J., Józefowska, J., Mika, M., & Waligóra, G. (2011). Project scheduling with ﬁnite or inﬁnite number
of activity processing modes - a survey. European Journal of Operational Research, 208(3), 177–205.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2010.03.037.
Wilson M, Witteveen C, Huisman B (2012) Enhancing predictability of schedules by task grouping. In: BNAIC
2012: 24th Benelux Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 25-26 October
2012, Citeseer
Young, K. D., Feydy, T., & Schutt, A. (2017). Constraint programming applied to the multi-skill project
scheduling problem. In J. C. Beck (Ed.), Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming (pp. 308–
317). Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123