TITLE: A joint sustainable order-packing vehicle routing optimisation for the cold chain e-fulfilment
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-05949-y
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-05949-y
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
A joint sustainable order-packing vehicle routing
optimisation for the cold chain e-fulﬁlment
Y. P. Tsang1
· Haoran Ma2
· K. H. Tan3
· C. K. M. Lee1,2
Received: 25 September 2023 / Accepted: 13 March 2024 / Published online: 6 April 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Due to the new normal caused by the pandemic, consumer behaviour has now shifted to
online shopping not only for general commodities but also for food and other perishable
products. Therefore, e-commerce fulﬁlment is now integrated with cold chain capabilities to
satisfy stringent requirements on time-criticality and product quality, leading to the concept
of cold chain e-fulﬁlment. In the cold chain e-fulﬁlment process, perishable orders are packed
in thermal packaging solutions and delivered to consumers before the quality preservation
time window. To secure a sufﬁcient time buffer during last mile delivery, excessive use of
thermal packaging materials is applied, which creates an adverse environmental impact on
our eco-system. Aligning with low-carbon business practices, this study proposes a novel
joint optimization model, namely the Joint Optimization of Sustainable Order Packing and
Multi-Temperature Delivery Problem (JOSOPMDP), for order packing and vehicle routing
decisions, where the sustainable use of thermal packaging materials is promoted without
negatively inﬂuencing product quality and customer satisfaction. To evaluate its viability and
performance, three sets of computational experiments are subsequently conducted. It is found
that the proposed model is feasible to strike a balance between order packing and vehicle
routing decisions. Compared with the traditional strategy, the average total cost and satis-
faction level are improved by 3.26% and 47.88%, respectively. Consequently, this research
fosters sustainable thinking in the cold chain e-fulﬁlment process, minimizing environmental
impact.
Keywords Sustainability · Order packing · Last mile delivery · Cold chain · E-fulﬁlment
B Y. P. Tsang
yungpo.tsang@polyu.edu.hk
1
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung
Hom, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China
2
Laboratory for Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Design, Tai Po, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region,
China
3
Business School, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
123

806
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
1 Introduction
Cold chain research has received continuous practical interest in recent years, with particular
emphasis on pre-cooling, storage, packaging, and distribution stages in handling temperature-
sensitive products, such as food and pharmaceuticals (Andoh et al., 2022; Yan et al., 2022).
The cold supply chain is distinguished from the conventional one, due to their requisite for
consistent thermal control throughout the supply chain journey. In particular, maintaining
low temperatures enhances the longevity of perishables and mitigates microbial alterations,
thus providing consumers with safe and quality cold chain products (James & James, 2010).
Over the past decade, the proliferation of refrigeration usage in both developed and devel-
oping nations has led to a substantial increase for the cold supply chain and e-fulﬁlment
(Loisel et al., 2021). Due to the new normal caused by the pandemic, consumer behaviour
is now shifted to online shopping for not only general commodities but also food and other
perishable products. Taking the Chinese market as an example, based on iiMedia Research’s
report, the total demand for cold chain logistics in China witnessed a 5.35% increase to reach
240 million tons from January to August 2023. Additionally, the total revenue of cold chain
logistics experienced a growth of 3.41%, amounting to $43.3 billion. It is projected that by
2025, the size of the cold chain logistics market will expand signiﬁcantly and reach $121.9
billion. Moreover, fresh e-commerce transactions are expected to soar to $90.8 billion by
2027 (iiMedia Research, 2023). In addition, the Statista’s analysis revealed that the cold
chain market in North America is poised to witness a twofold expansion over a six-year
period from 2018 to 2024, ultimately reaching a staggering value of $142.6 billion (Statista,
2020).
Therefore, e-commerce fulﬁlment is now integrated with cold chain capabilities to satisfy
stringent requirements on time-criticality and product quality, leading to the concept of cold
chain e-fulﬁlment. Different from traditional e-commerce, it has more stringent requirements
in terms of temperature and time, as shown in Table 1. The customers in this process place
orders through various platforms, enabling the delivery of perishable food to its destination
using thermal packaging for long-distance or intra-city transportation, as depicted in Fig. 1.
Focusing on the last-mile delivery in the cold chain e-fulﬁlment, the present modalities are
facilitated by considering (i) cold chain packaging and (ii) multi-temperature characteristics.
The former approach employs the packaging materials, for example foam boxes and eutectic
plates, to form a microenvironment conducive to the short-term temperature preservation.
However, the cold chain packaging materials are not conveniently recycled, which is coun-
terproductive to the goal of green logistics operations (Yingfei et al., 2022). In addition, this
method would carry a certain level of risk of quality deterioration due to the limited cooling
capacity, if the packaging materials were not properly applied. The latter is aimed to incor-
porate multi-temperature characteristics for the last mile delivery in the e-fulﬁlment process.
The theory of multi-temperature joint distribution (MTJD) was proposed for distributing
goods with varying temperature requirements in trucks, thus catering to market demands for
fragmented orders (Kuo & Chen, 2010). But unfortunately, this way necessitates high oper-
ational standards and equipment for handling e-commerce orders, which incurs substantial
operating costs (Ndraha et al., 2018). Especially for the last-meter delivery between truck
parking locations and consumer destinations, merely using multi-temperature refrigerated
trucks cannot effectively preserve the product safety and quality.
However, the extant literature is limited to achieve a balance between the cost, sustain-
ability and quality assurance in applying cold chain packaging for cold chain e-fulﬁlment
(Behdanietal.,2019;Fanetal.,2020;Songetal.,2022).Anevidentparadoxemergesbetween
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
807
Table 1 The difference between cold chain and conventional supply chain in E-Fulﬁllment
Aspect
Cold chain e-fulﬁllment
Conventional e-fulﬁllment
Facilities
Storage
Specialized cold storage
facilities with
temperature-controlled
environments to preserve
product freshness and integrity
Typical pallet racking systems
and storage equipment
Packaging
Specialized insulated packaging
to maintain temperature
integrity and protect cold chain
items from temperature
ﬂuctuations
Standard packaging materials
for ease of handling and
better protection
Transportation
Refrigerated trucks, reefers, or
temperature-controlled
containers used to maintain the
required temperature during
transportation
Non-temperature-controlled
vehicles and delivery
methods
Management
Inventory
management
Advanced inventory systems
with real-time temperature
tracking to ensure product
quality and monitor expiration
dates
Standard inventory
management systems, e.g.
ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out and
last-in-ﬁrst-out
Regulatory
compliance
Compliance with strict
regulations and guidelines
(e.g., GDP, HACCP) to ensure
safety and quality standards for
temperature-sensitive products
Compliance with standard
operating procedures,
focusing on productivity and
customer satisfaction
Reverse logistics
Specialized processes for
handling product returns,
recalls, and disposal of
temperature-sensitive items
Typical logistics process to
return goods back to
upstream entities
Fig. 1 Generic process of the cold chain e-fulﬁlment
123

808
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
the costs associated with cold chain packaging and the freshness of food; it becomes arduous
to achieve maximum satisfaction in terms of quality while keeping packaging expenditures
to a minimum (Mercier et al., 2017). Undoubtedly, when assuring the product quality along
the entire e-fulﬁlment process, it is inevitable to apply cold storage facilities, refrigerated
transportation and cold chain packaging for minimising the ﬂuctuations of environmen-
tal condition (Xu et al., 2018). However, achieving effective quality assurance by using the
aforementioned technologies contradicts to the goals of low-carbon/carbon-neural initiatives,
for example, hydroﬂuorocarbon emission from refrigeration systems and non-biodegradable
styrofoam, as well as the extra electricity for refrigeration. Since the extant literature and
industrial practices merely hint some green operations management and strategies for order
fulﬁlment operations (Defraeye et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2020), the research on incorporating
the low-carbon concept into cold chain e-fulﬁlment is emerging for in-depth investigation.
Thus, an optimal balance between cost, product quality and sustainability should be urgently
struck, without which carbon emissions from the cold chain e-fulﬁlment operations could be
out of control, not to mention the goal of carbon neutrality.
In consideration of the aforementioned motivation, this study presents a joint optimization
model for sustainable order packing and multi-temperature delivery in the context of cold
chain e-fulﬁlment. The proposed model recommends the use of cold chain packaging con-
structed from a variety of refrigeration materials, selected in accordance with the distribution
distance and necessary handling temperature. This approach fosters multi-temperature dis-
tribution and allows for adaptable amendments to the relationship between refrigeration time
and distribution time. It maintains the quality of the transported items, mitigates unnecessary
refrigeration wastage, and enhances the efﬁciency of the entire terminal distribution link. By
doing so, the model thus realises substantial economic value together with sustainable use
of cold chain packaging materials.
This paper is organised as follows. Section 2 reviews the existing order packing and vehicle
routing methods for logistics optimisation. Section 3 describes the proposed model of sus-
tainable order packing and multi-temperature delivery, as well as its solution algorithm. The
computational experiments appear in Sect. 4, where different case scenarios are conducted
to examine the model performance. Finally, Sects. 5 and 6 indicates managerial implications
and draws conclusions, respectively.
2 Literature review
This study primarily concentrates on the last mile delivery for the cold chain e-fulﬁlment. In
the quest to address challenges associated with cost, quality and sustainability, extant models
related to order packing and vehicle routing problems for cold chain operations are reviewed
in the following.
2.1 Order packing in cold chain
In the context of cold chain management, the vital signiﬁcance of fresh packaging cannot
be overstated, given its substantial implications for product quality and shelf life. Packag-
ing typically employs insulative or low thermal conductivity materials, often supplemented
with phase change materials, leading to a degree of ﬂexibility in their shape and size. This
inherent variability consequently results in dynamic packaging costs and a variable poten-
tial for perishability containment. As a result, the reﬁnement of packaging methodologies
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
809
becomes a topic of considerable importance, necessitating scrutiny from both cost-efﬁciency
and product quality maintenance perspectives (Defraeye et al., 2015). A signiﬁcant body of
academic research has delved into the impact of packaging environments on the containment
potential of the package. Factors such as humidity, ventilation, and light have contributed
to the evolution of enhanced packaging methodologies (Defraeye et al., 2014; Han et al.,
2015). Nonetheless, in practical implementations, obstacles emerge due to the complexity of
these boxes’ recycling processes and the high cost of packaging materials, thereby imposing
a substantial ﬁnancial burden on businesses. Furthermore, maintaining an acceptable level
of environmental impact poses a formidable challenge, and the insulation capability of the
boxes is inherently time-constrained. This complexity renders it challenging to assess the
consistency of preservation ability across varying distribution locations (Zhao et al., 2020).
To surmount these constraints and to enhance practical implementation, some scholars have
advocated for the use of multiplicative heuristic algorithms to optimise order packaging
strategies. This approach signiﬁes a shift in focus from merely reducing material consump-
tion to enhancing material use efﬁciency for cost containment (Xia et al., 2018). However,
in the practical realm, the effectiveness of an optimised packaging method for cold chain
logistics depends on the delivery route as well. Therefore, the integration of order-packing
vehicle routing problem can effectively balance the cost, quality assurance and sustainability
in the cold chain e-fulﬁlment.
2.2 Vehicle routing in cold chain
The Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) has maintained a sustained prominence in academic
discussion for several decades. Scholars have primarily concentrated on enhancing eco-
nomic feasibility through the reﬁnement of routing schemes and vehicle scheduling strategies
(Gendreau et al., 2014). In relation to distribution challenges bound by stringent time win-
dows, a non-deterministic polynomial-time (NP)-hard optimisation problem is established
to calibrate issues pertaining to cost, capacity, and time limitations. Further exploration has
illuminated the relative effectiveness of this algorithm in addressing such constraint-bound
issues (Gutierrez et al., 2018). Academics have also proposed economically viable and efﬁ-
cientsolutions in scenarios where customer demand is uncertain and round-trip replenishment
is allowable (Kyriakidis & Dimitrakos, 2019). Notably, the occurrence of demand, in real-
ity, exhibits both randomness and signiﬁcant correlation, necessitating the integration of
comparable heuristics and adaptive demand predictors (Latorre-Biel et al., 2021). Upon
examination of numerous typical VRP instances, it becomes apparent that recent research
has leaned towards exploring methodologies that can be generalised to path planning prob-
lems with minimal practical constraints, rather than solutions uniquely crafted for highly
customised problems (Braekers et al., 2016). Approaches that embody such generalisability
are invariably more harmonious with real-world applications.
Within the sphere of transportation activities, cold chain logistics commands signiﬁcant
attention due to its inherent characteristics. Unlike conventional transportation planning, it
is intrinsically time- and temperature-sensitive, mandating the prompt delivery of perishable
goods to the end consumer under optimal conditions (Theophilus et al., 2021). However,
the observed variability and volatility in the practical execution of this logistics sector are
substantial (Theophilus et al., 2021). As a result, researchers increasingly emphasise the prac-
ticality, efﬁciency, and adaptability of constructing optimal cold chain transportation paths.
Consequently, optimisation algorithms and strategies speciﬁcally designed for cold chain
logistics have emerged. For instance, within the speciﬁc context of ice cream transportation,
123

810
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
the chaotic search algorithm proved to be a feasible solution for urban distribution facing
strict time windows and randomised demand, compared to the forbidden search algorithm
(Dávila et al., 2021). In an effort to transition from the cold chain logistics model with the
ﬁxed-temperature characteristics and achieve a socio-economically balanced interplay of cost
and carbon emission, a multi-temperature combined distribution model has been proposed.
This strategy notably enhances the ﬂexibility of cold chain logistics, whilst simultaneously
strengthening operational efﬁciency across various logistics activities, such as storage, load-
ing and unloading, sorting, and distribution (Wang & Zhao, 2013). Unquestionably, within
the context of cold chain logistics, particularly in light of recent low-carbon initiatives, the
paramount objectives extend beyond mere delivery efﬁciency. They also encapsulate the opti-
misation of customer value, product quality, and process sustainability. The heterogeneity
in the nature of goods necessitating transportation, coupled with their disparate tempera-
ture requirements, posits signiﬁcant hurdles towards the attainment of a sustainable last-mile
delivery mechanism for cold chain e-fulﬁlment.
2.3 Summary and research gap
Through summarising the emergence of this research topic, it is implied that sustainable use
of cold chain packaging materials in the cold chain e-fulﬁlment is regarded as important as the
above three factors, apart from considering cost, productivity and quality. In other words, cost,
productivity, product quality and sustainability become four major pillars in the cold chain e-
fulﬁlment operations. It is emerging to explore a low-carbon and sustainable way to optimize
theorderpackingandvehicleroutingproblemsinanintegratedperspectivesoastoaligntothe
globaltrendandbeneﬁttoournextgeneration(Panetal.,2020;Tsengetal.,2016).Inpractical
terms, the intersection of these two aspects, namely order packing and vehicle routing for
cold chain e-fulﬁlment, constitutes the primary focus of this study, as shown in Fig. 2. This
study distinguishes itself from other cold chain transportation research by providing a more
holistic approach to process optimisation, spanning from packaging to transportation. It is
vital to underscore that within this multi-objective optimisation model, a balance point can
be ascertained between packaging and transportation costs. This facilitates the formation of
an effective interrelationship between these two elements in practical scenarios.
Fig. 2 Research gap of the last mile delivery in the cold chain e-fulﬁlment
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
811
Fig. 3 Order packing and vehicle routing in the JOSOPMDP
3 Research methodology
Based on the aforementioned research gap, the research methodology, comprising the prob-
lem description, mathematical model and solution algorithm, is depicted in this section.
3.1 Problem description
Throughout the comprehensive continuum of cold chain e-fulﬁlment from the initial phase
of order picking, packing until delivery to the ﬁnal destination, there persists an inherent
risk of thermal ﬂuctuations, resulting in the quality deterioration. As shown in Fig. 3, this
study focuses on the e-order fulﬁlment process for cold chain products, in which shipments
are optimally packed and delivered with the minimal use of cold chain packaging materials
and maximal food safety to achieve sustainability. This problem disrupts the conventional
decision-making logic of ﬁrst selecting packaging and then optimising the logistics path.
Instead, the proposed combinatorial optimisation process involves simultaneously choosing
the most material-saving packaging method based on the handling requirements of the goods
to be distributed, and identifying the optimal distribution path to reach the ﬁnal destination
within the packaging’s preservation capacity. In a nutshell, the joint optimization of sustain-
able order packing and multi-temperature delivery problem (JOSOPMDP) is formulated to
provide practical insights in packing and delivery e-orders of cold chain shipments.
3.2 Model description
This study delineates the assumption of various factors pertinent to the multi-temperature
last mile delivery, encompassing packaging conﬁguration, vehicular allocation, and route
planning parameters. In accordance with these premises, an optimization model based on the
JOSOPMDP is meticulously constructed. Subsequently, a comprehensive explication of the
algorithm for resolving the above problem is presented.
123

812
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
In this problem, it is assumed that there are n types of perishable goods, namely S =
{s1, s2, . . . , sn}, and m types of refrigerated packaging boxes, namely B = {b1, b2, . . . , bm}.
Thescenarioaccommodatesrequestsfor N distinctivecustomerlocations,whereeachrequest
from customers comprises at least one type of perishable goods. Theses perishable commodi-
ties need to be individually encased and subsequently consolidated into a truck for delivery to
the customer locations. The customer orders in this model is deﬁned as Oi = [αsi · s|∀s ∈S]
for the customer location i ∈N where the parameter αsi is modelled as in Eq. (1).
αsi =
 1, Goods s sent to the customer i
0,
Otherwise
(1)
Initially, when dealing with a series of orders, it is crucial to consider the maximum
insulation time required for the goods to be dispatched to each respective destination. This
time is reliant on the properties of each individual item, as well as the insulation capabilities
of the packaging container. As such, it is deﬁned that Oi∈N present the order per customers,
qs∈S represent the weight of each item, and wb∈B represent the capacity of each packaging
container. For the use of cold chain packaging, a time–temperature relationship is assumed for
each package, as in Eq. (2), where coefﬁcients θb∈B and θ′
b∈B denote the slope and constant
in the linear relationship, Ts presents the range of upper and lower handling temperature
per perishable goods. According to the selected cold chain packaging type, the material cost
Cb∈B is deﬁned for the evaluation of the total packaging cost.
Asib = θb∈B · max(Ts
_ , Ts) + θ′
b∈B
(2)
For each order, characterized by the inclusion of multiple items, each item can be packaged
separately in distinct boxes. The decision variable of packing the goods s by using the
packaging box b for the customer location i is deﬁned as in Eq. (3).
βsib =
 1, Goods ssent to customer iand packed with b
0,
Otherwise
(3)
This leads to a total number of potential packaging arrangements that can be mathe-
matically represented as |Bn|Oi . The packaging option for each order can be described as
pkn
i and the quality preservation time corresponding to each commodity is Asib. Also, the
above packaging option is constrained by the total capacity of the packaging boxes, namely
βsibqs ≤wb, where qs and wb denotes the weight of goods and capacity of the packaging
boxes. With considering the corresponding packaging costs, the total packaging cost required
C pkn
i is presented as in Eq. (4).
C pkn
i =

b∈B

s∈S
βsibCb
(4)
When the goods within an order are encapsulated utilizing the cold chain packaging
boxes, the packages can be consolidated into a single shipment denoted as fi to transport to
the customer i, where fi = [βsib · s · b|∀s ∈S, ∀i ∈N, ∀b ∈B]. Subsequently, the weight
q fi and shelf life A fi of the shipment fi are expressed as in Eqs. (5) and (6).
q fi =

b∈B

s∈S
βsib · wb
(5)
A fi = min
b∈B(βsib · Asib), whereβsib ̸= 0
(6)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
813
Duringthedeliverystage,thereare N shipmentstodeliverthegoodstocustomers,inwhich
each shipment encompasses with b|Oi| distinct types of packaging. Thus, there are N
i=1 b|Oi|
possible combinations in consolidating the shipments, namely pln = ( f1, f2, . . . fN), and
the total cold chain packaging cost is modelled as in Eq. (7).
Z1 =
N

i=1
C pkn
i
(7)
After completing the cold chain packaging process, the shipments are consolidated and
loaded in trucks for last mile delivery. The formulation of an effective delivery strategy
necessitates a balance between cost minimization and customer satisfaction maximization.
Essential factors, including the geographical distance between delivery locations, the volu-
metric and weight speciﬁcations of the cargo, and the customer time windows, are considered
for the optimisation.
Regarding the last mile delivery, the ﬂeet of k ∈K delivery trucks is considered, where
Qk is the maximum load of each vehicle. To ensure the sufﬁcient number of trucks for
optimisation, the minimal number of trucks for completing all shipments pln is deﬁned as
in Eq. (8).
min|k| =
N
i=1 q fi
Qk

(8)
To oversee the complicated optimisation process, the penalty factor for exceeding vehicle
capacity γ and the total number of load violation Dk are introduced. Moreover, the parameter
v is the average driving speed of each vehicle; di j is the distance between the points i and j
in the distribution;pc is the ﬁxed cost of each vehicle,pr is the fuel cost per kilometer of the
vehicle. Overall, decision variables of the route optimisation are expressed as in Eqs. (9) to
(11).
xi jk =
 1, where vehicle k passess from the location i to j
0, Otherwise
(9)
yik =
 1, Location i is reached by vehicle k
0, Otherwise
(10)
σ fik =
 1, Shipment fi is distributed by vehicle k
0, Otherwise
(11)
When considering the customer satisfaction in the last mile delivery, this model proposes
two pivotal dimensions, namely (i) product quality window, and (ii) customer time window,
as shown in Fig. 4. By combining the above two dimensions, the overall satisfaction CT f
is deﬁned for shipment fi at time t fi when the vehicle arrives at the customer i. Given that
the optimal route J is obtained for visiting all customer locations, the time to visit a speciﬁc
customer location is expressed as in Eq. (12).
t f j =

j∈J∪{0}
σ f jk
d j, j+1
v
(12)
On one hand, for transporting cold chain products with cold chain packaging, the quality
preservation time per package is deﬁned above. When the transportation time exceeds the
quality preservation time, the corresponding quality deterioration is modelled in the product
quality window as shown in Fig. 4a. When the vehicle arrives at the time t fi ∈

0, A fi
 
,
123

814
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
Fig. 4 Illustration of product quality and customer time windows
the quality satisfaction is equal to 1; when vehicle arrives in t fi ∈(A fi , L fi ], quality sat-
isfaction linearly decreases over time; Otherwise, the quality satisfaction is equal to 0 for
customers, when t fi ∈(L fi , ∞). On the other hand, the customer time window to receive
the delivery is modelled as shown in Fig. 4b. The customer satisfaction is rated at 1 when the
delivery time is within the scheduled time periods, namely t fi ∈

ri,r′
i
 
. When the delivery
is reached at t fi ∈[ei , ri) and t fi ∈

r′
i , e′
i
 
which are the tolerance period of customers, the
customer satisfaction linearly decreases over time. If the delivery is made beyond

ei, e′
i
 
,
the customer satisfaction is rated at 0. In this study, the customer satisfaction is set at 0.7 or
above, which is expressed as

Ri, R′
i
 
. Consequently, the overall satisfaction based on the
above considerations is shown as Fig. 4c and modelled in Eqs. (13) and (14).
For t fi ∈

Ri, R′
i
 
: CT f

t fi

=
⎧
⎨
⎩
1, when t fi ∈

0, A fi
 
1 −τ ∗

t fi −A fi

, when t fi ∈

A fi , L fi
 
0, when t fi ∈

L fi , ∞

(13)
For t fi

Ri, R′
i
 
: CT f

t fi

= 0
(14)
During the transportation process, ﬁxed and variable costs are incurred. Fixed costs refer
to costs that do not vary with the last mile delivery process, such as the purchase and lease of
vehicles and equipment, insurance cost, and salaries of administrative staff. Transportation
costs, on the other hand, are variable costs that increase according to the distance transported
including fuel, maintenance, and labor costs. Both types of costs must be considered in the
ﬂeet management to ensure that transportation operations are efﬁcient and cost-effective.
The vehicle type and load in this model are assumed to be the same. Therefore, the change
in ﬁxed cost is related to the number of vehicles actually involved in dispatching the goods.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
815
Its function is deﬁned as Z2 in Eq. (15).
Z2 =

k∈K

j∈I
x0 jk · pc
(15)
Transportation cost is mainly reﬂected in fuel consumption, and there is a proportional
relationship with the mileage of dispatching vehicles. Its function is deﬁned as Z3 in Eq. (16).
Z3 =
kmax

k=kmin
N

i=0
N

j=0
xi jk ·

di j pr + γ (Dk −Q)
 
(16)
The utilization of diverse vehicles for cargo transportation can yield varying degrees of
transportation costs and satisfaction levels in terms of quality and delivery time. Moreover,
the weight of the shipped goods and the time constraints for delivery can also ﬂuctuate based
on the type of goods packaging. Consequently, it is imperative to devise a multi-objective
model that incorporates these variables. This model is integral to deriving a relatively optimal
solution, as elucidated in Eqs. (17) and (18). Constraint (19) limits the maximum load of
dispatching vehicles; Constraint (20) limits the delivery time for the customer satisfaction
evaluation; Constraint (21) ensures that each customer is only served by one truck; Constraint
(22) ensures that the starting point and end point of dispatching vehicles are in the depot;
Constraints (23) and (24) ensure that each point to be distributed is only served once.
Min.G1 = Z1 + Z2 + Z3
(17)
Max.G2 = 1
N
N

i=1
CT f

t fi

(18)
Subject to:
N

i=1
σ fikq f ≤Q, ∀k ∈K
(19)
Ri ≤a + t fi ≤R′
i, ∀i ∈N
(20)

k∈K
yik = 1
(21)
N

j=1
x0 jk −
N

i=1
xi0k = 0, ∀k ∈K
(22)
N

i=0
xi jk = y jk, ∀k ∈K
(23)
N

j=0
xi jk = y jk, ∀k ∈K
(24)
3.3 Solution algorithm
To address the complex and NP-hard problem presented in the above investigation, traditional
approaches typically dissect the problem into two distinct but interrelated components: order
packing optimization and route optimization. These components are subsequently optimized
123

816
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
independently, with signiﬁcant emphasis on the application of heuristic algorithms. Such
algorithms, fundamentally a stochastic search technique, emulates the random selection pro-
cesses inherent in biological evolution (Kim et al., 2017). Such an approach often yields
near-to-optimal solutions for optimization problems when evaluated against a diverse set
of objectives. These objectives may include, but are not limited to, minimization of travel
distance, reduction in transit time, and decrease in carbon emissions. However, this paper
proposes an alternative approach: a joint optimization of both order packing and delivery
route aspects, potentially enhancing the model’s practical applicability.
The innovative optimization algorithm presented in this research ingeniously integrates
a cyclical principle based on the genetic algorithm (Li & Li, 2022). It incorporates the
packaging selection phase within the evolutionary progress of the delivery route optimization,
facilitating a more holistic and multidimensional evolutionary process. As shown in Fig. 5,
the process ﬂow of the solution algorithm is graphically illustrated. At the beginning, the
stock keeping units (SKUs) from e-commerce platforms are deﬁned, while customers can
place the orders which are the combination of different SKUs. Since the cold chain packaging
materials, namely the packages, have the capacity constraint, all feasible packaging plans can
be generated for the order fulﬁlment. In order to deliver customer orders in an optimal manner,
the permutation of cargo plans is thus considered, namely 
i∈N |Bn|Oi . For instance, when
considering Order 1 with four packaging plans, Order 2 with two packaging plans and Order
Fig. 5 Process ﬂow of the solution algorithm for JOSOPMDP
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
817
3 with four packaging plans, the number of cargo plans for optimisation is 32 in total. For
each cargo plan, the route optimisation is initialized with the ﬁtness F0 = −M, where M is
an arbitrary and large positive integer. In addition, the ﬁtness function for the evolutionary
process is deﬁned as F = ω1G1 −ω2G2. Through applying the genetic algorithm (GA),
the optimal route per each cargo plan can be obtained by deploying the genetic operators,
including roulette wheel selection, crossover, mutation and replacement. Consequently, the
optimal solution for optimizing both order packing and vehicle routing can be derived to
minimize the costs and maximize the customer satisfaction.
4 Computational experiments
In order to examine the key concepts posited in this study, this section delineates four case
scenarios. These scenarios present an exhaustive exploration of solutions to the JOSOPMDP
from diverse perspectives, highlighting the potential for real-life deployment.
4.1 Instance generation
For examining the feasibility and performance of the proposed model, the testing instances
are generated by considering the perishable goods and cold chain packaging materials, so as
to achieve the joint optimisation of order packing and vehicle routing problems for the cold
chain e-fulﬁlment.
According to industrial practices, nine stock keeping units (SKUs) of perishable com-
modities are considered, in which they have their own speciﬁc handling temperature ranges
(in °C) and volumetric weight (in kg) as shown in Table 2. The list of above SKUs is applied
to generate customer orders for the computational experiments, while the speciﬁc cold chain
packaging as shown in Table 3 is considered to perform the optimal order packing operations.
In Table 3, there are nine types of cold chain packaging with different volumetric weights (in
kg), temperature preservation capabilities (in terms of θb∈B and θb∈B′) and corresponding
order packing cost (Tsang et al., 2018). Regarding the transportation process, all the trucks
are assumed to be the same with the speciﬁcations: (i) volumetric weight of 300 kg, (ii) ﬁxed
cost of $2,000, (iii) speed of 45km/h, and (v) fuel consumption of $19/km.
Table 2 Commodity data for the instance generation
#
Name
Temperature range (in °C)
Volumetric weight (in kg)
SKU 1
Cabbage
0 to 4
4
SKU 2
Carrot
5–15
3
SKU 3
Banana
13–14
5
SKU 4
Agaric
10–22
1.5
SKU 5
Watermelon
4 to 10
6
SKU 6
Fresh shrimp
≤−15
2.5
SKU 7
Egg
4–7
3
SKU 8
Almond
0–8
0.8
SKU 9
Fresh milk
−2 to 0
1
123

818
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
Table 3 Cold chain packaging types for order packing
Type
Volumetric weight (in kg)
θb∈B
θb∈B′
Material cost (in $)
1
1.5
0.2049
14.058
65
2
1.5
0.3148
6.3269
90
3
1.5
0.5357
−0.3346
125
4
3
0.2220
14.223
90
5
3
0.3000
7.5462
120
6
3
0.2819
8.3115
85
7
6
0.1995
11.412
125
8
6
0.1934
12.192
100
9
6
0.3308
7.7923
130
Although only nine SKUs and another nine cold chain packaging methods are considered
in this study, the number of combinations of the cargo plans is already too large, leading to the
computationally-expensive optimisation process. For instance, when considering the order
fulﬁlment process with ﬁve customer orders and each order contains all nine SKUs, the ways
to package the SKUs is 99 = 387, 420, 489, assuming that all cold chain packaging methods
are suitable for all nine SKUs. Thus, the number of possible cargo plans is 387, 420, 4895 =
8.73×1042. In order to examine the model viability and performance, the SKUs and package
types are grouped in advance to generate the instances for computational experiments. As
shown in Table 4, the SKUs were divided into three groups according to the weight of the
foodstuffs, and the packages were also divided into three groups according to the capacity
of the packages for the instance generation. Therefore, the customer orders are randomly
generated through the uniform pseudorandom number generator for experiments.
In addition to the instance generations, the route optimisation per cargo plan is made
by using the GA to optimize the ﬁtness value in accordance with the proposed solution
algorithm, while all the deﬁned constraints, like quality and customer time window, truckload
capacity and ﬂow constraints, can be satisﬁed. To initialize the GA for the time-efﬁcient
route optimisation, the algorithmic parameters are set as follows: (i) population size of 50;
(ii) number of generations of 30; (iii) crossover rate of 0.75; (iv) mutation rate of 0.03;
(v) generation gap of 0.7. Also, the weights ω1 and ω2 between two objective functions to
evaluate the ﬁtness value are set at 1 and 100, respectively.
Table 4 Experimental Grouping
Groups
SKUs/packaging types
Items (I)
SKU 2 (Carrot), SKU 3 (Banana), SKU 4 (Agaric)
Items (II)
SKU 1 (Cabbage), SKU 7 (Egg), SKU 9 (Fresh milk)
Items (III)
SKU 5 (Watermelon), SKU 6 (Fresh shrimp), SKU 8
(Almond)
Boxes (I)
Packaging boxes 2, 5 and 9
Boxes (II)
Packaging boxes 1, 4 and 7
Boxes (III)
Packaging boxes 3, 6 and 8
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
819
Table 5 Information of the customer orders with locations and time windows
Order
Items (I)
Items (II)
Items (III)
Location
Time window
1
Agaric
Carrot
Banana
Fresh milk
Egg
Cabbage
Almond
Watermelon
Fresh shrimp
(29, 40)
29 to 139
2
Banana
Agaric
Egg
Fresh milk
Fresh shrimp
Almond
(23, 35)
23 to 134
3
Agaric
Carrot
Fresh milk
Cabbage
Almond
Watermelon
(56, 73)
56 to 173
4
Banana
Egg
Fresh shrimp
(72, 44)
72 to 144
5
Carrot
Cabbage
Watermelon
(43, 6)
43 to 106
6
Carrot
Agaric
Cabbage
Fresh milk
Watermelon
Almond
(99, 40)
99 to 140
7
Banana
Agaric
Carrot
Egg
Fresh milk
Cabbage
Fresh shrimp
Almond
Watermelon
(69, 74)
69 to 174
4.2 Case 1: feasibility study in different item-box combinations
For Case 1, it is aimed to investigate the feasibility of the proposed model, where the Boxes
(I), (II) and (III) are applied to package the generated customer orders from Items (I), (II) and
(III). Table 5 shows information of seven randomly generated orders with speciﬁc locations
and time windows. For the route optimisation based on the customer orders, the simulated
environment in a 100*100 coordinate plane with the range of time window [0, 200] is estab-
lished. According to the proposed solution algorithm, the constraint of the packaging capacity
is applied to ﬁlter out those infeasible packaging options for products. In return, the total
number of cargo plans for Items (I), Items (II) and Items (III) are 7776, 3888 and 3888 for the
route optimisation. Through the GA-based optimisation process, it is found that the proposed
model is promising to obtain the optimal routes among different item groups in using Boxes
(I) with the satisfaction level of 1. In other words, all the orders are fulﬁlled and delivered
within the quality and customer time windows, while the optimal routes with the optimal cold
chain packaging plan are illustrated in Fig. 6. The balance between two objective functions
of the JOSOPMDP for the ﬁtness evaluation is appropriately struck. Furthermore, the costs
associated to the optimal solution for order packing and vehicle routing for all the item-box
combinations are summarized in Table 6. Overall, the average total cost and satisfactory level
of the proposed model among different settings are 6453.53 and 0.89, respectively.
4.3 Case 2: comparison with the traditional order fulfilment process
Tohighlightthevalueoftheproposedmodel,theconventionalapproachintheorderfulﬁlment
process is considered, where it is assumed that the perishable products are packed with best
ﬁt packaging option in term of its volumetric weight, referred to the 3-dimensional knapsack
problem. Its primary objective is to maximise the space utilisation of the package boxes, while
phase change materials, like eutectic plates, are put in the available spaces. Therefore, it is
worth investigating the differences between the proposed and the conventional approaches,
and thus the reasonability to adopt the proposed model can be justiﬁed. Table 7 shows the
123

820
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
Fig. 6 Optimal routes with the optimal packaging plan in three item groups
costs and satisfaction levels of using the traditional packaging strategy. In average, the total
cost and satisfaction level to fulﬁl all customer orders are $6621.88 and 0.68. Compared with
Case 1, the average improvements in terms of packaging cost, transportation cost, total cost
and satisfaction level are 4.50%, 2.84%, 3.26% and 47.88%.
4.4 Case 3: robustness study to the random order generations
In addition to the feasibility and benchmarking with the traditional method, the model robust-
ness for the random order generation process is investigated in this case. From the above
computational experiments, the random seed of ‘123’ is applied to control the uniform pseu-
dorandom number generator, and thus it is worth modifying the random seed to examine the
optimality stability. In this case, another ten arbitrary sets of the random seed, namely ‘125’,
‘222’, ‘333’, ‘345’, ‘397’, ‘451’, ‘588’, ‘693’, ‘789’ and ‘891’ are considered, where Items (I)
and Boxes (I) are applied to inspect the total cost and satisfaction level. Figure 7 demonstrates
the corresponding experimental results when using different random seeds. When changing
the randomness seed, the total quantities of the generated seven orders are slightly different
such that the total costs among the settings can be different. However, the satisfaction levels
among different settings are relatively stable, such that all the product quality and service
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
821
Table 6 Optimal solutions for different item-box combination
Item-box combination
Total no. of
cargo plans
Packaging
cost ($)
Delivery cost
($)
Total cost
($)
Satisfaction
level
Items (I)
Boxes (I)
7776
1590.00
4723.45
6313.45
1.00
Items (I)
Boxes
(II)
7776
1300.00
5285.07
6585.07
1.00
Items (I)
Boxes
(III)
7776
1415.00
5013.80
6428.80
0.84
Items
(II)
Boxes (I)
3888
1670.00
4920.25
6590.25
1.00
Items
(II)
Boxes
(II)
3888
1335.00
5116.88
6451.88
0.69
Items
(II)
Boxes
(III)
3888
1375.00
5076.02
6451.02
0.70
Items
(III)
Boxes (I)
3888
1630.00
4683.78
6313.78
1.00
Items
(III)
Boxes
(II)
3888
1335.00
5119.63
6454.63
1.00
Items
(III)
Boxes
(III)
3888
1430.00
5062.86
6492.86
0.76
Table 7 Optimal results with using the traditional packaging strategy
Item-box combination
Total no. of
cargo plans
Packaging
cost ($)
Delivery
cost ($)
Total cost
($)
Satisfaction
level
Items (I)
Boxes (I)
1
1700.00
4919.75
6619.75
0.70
Items (II)
Boxes (I)
1
1710.00
4914.13
6624.13
0.66
Items (III)
Boxes (I)
1
1710.00
4911.75
6621.75
0.67
time windows can be satisﬁed. It shows that the proposed model is robust to strike an optimal
balance between order packing and vehicle routing.
5 Results and discussion
Based on the computational experiments as above, the results are further discussed in this
section so as to elaborate the phenomenon of different experimental cases. Moreover, the
insights to the cold chain e-fulﬁlment are explicitly elaborated to guide the sustainable devel-
opment.
123

822
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
Fig. 7 Experimental results of different random seeds
5.1 Discussion on the experimental cases
The aforementioned three experiments progressively showcase the potential of JOSOPMDP
in the industry. The effectiveness of the proposed model in connecting packaging and trans-
portation schemes is convincingly demonstrated by Case 1 through the manipulation of goods
to be delivered and subsequent order generation. Furthermore, it effectively showcases that
the model can successfully accommodate crucial factors such as location, time, and order
randomness within real-world scenarios. In our observations, the utilization of Boxes (I) has
emerged as a standout solution for meeting consumer demands while effectively controlling
costs within a limited area across three categories of items. The primary rationale behind this
success lies in the superior and average insulation capacity of these boxes, which enable them
to maintain optimal environmental temperature for any weight or temperature-sensitive items
during transportation. This key feature ensures that the quality and integrity of the goods are
preserved throughout the journey, aligning perfectly with industry requirements. In contrast,
Boxes (II) only exhibited an average slope coefﬁcient of 0.2088 for insulation capacity, which
raises concerns about their ability to safeguard temperature-sensitive Items (II) during tran-
sit. Moreover, the slope coefﬁcient falls within the range of 0.1995 to 0.2220 (variance =
0.00009198) indicating that there is minimal variation in the insulation performance among
the three box types. Especially for products kept at low temperatures, this category of pack-
aging faces challenges in ensuring an adequate preservation time during distribution. Indeed,
the minor differences observed among goods with varying temperature requirements within
the same order impose challenges on transportation tasks with diverse destinations. This
limitation poses a notable risk of violating customer expectation time windows and prod-
uct deterioration, ultimately compromising customer satisfaction. Furthermore, Boxes (III)
displayed signiﬁcant variations in insulation capacity across different volumes, making it
challenging to achieve relative equilibrium in preserving goods’ shelf life within the same
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
823
order and thereby increasing distribution complexity. Notably, when employing this particu-
lar packaging boxes, the overall customer satisfaction score among all three groups averaged
merely 0.77.
In addition, Fig. 6a, d, g reveal signiﬁcant disparities in the formulation of transportation
plans for different orders among the same types of packing boxes. Notably, for Items (II), the
most cost-effective and efﬁcient route differs from the other two commodities due to their
lower temperature requirements compared to room temperature, which primarily necessitates
a higher demand for refrigeration capacity in the packaging material. Therefore, In the context
of ﬁxed packaging boxes, it is essential to mitigate the adverse effects on vehicle scheduling
and routing in the distribution process. This diverges from conventional logistics practices
where a single optimal path is applicable across all order situations. This divergence from
the norm highlights the importance of tailored approaches in cold chain transportation. Such
targeted strategies can optimize order efﬁciency while ﬂexibly adapting to the changing and
intricate demands of modern logistics. The implications of this understanding emphasize the
reliability and credibility of the fundamental principles outlined in this paper, facilitating
the swift provision of effective guidance for personalized cold chain logistics planning.
Furthermore, compared to the current packaging and distribution methods employed in the
market, the JOSOPMDP model demonstrates a signiﬁcant optimization effect. Case 2 reveals
that under identical packaging types and goods for delivery, the traditional strategy only
satisﬁes an average of 68% of customer requirements what means it increases the likelihood of
product deterioration during delivery, leading to food waste, damage to enterprise reputation,
and a range of adverse consequences. Additionally, this necessitates an additional investment
of 3–7% in packaging costs, which further strains capital turnover for enterprises over an
extendedperiodandreducestheiroperatingproﬁt.Furthermore,theutilizationanddisposalof
excessive refrigeration materials have resulted in a certain degree of environmental pollution.
For example, the employment of refrigeration packaging materials such as dry ice leads to
the emission of greenhouse gases, while foam boxes and other low-temperature phase change
materials pose challenges for recycling, contradicting the objective of establishing an eco-
friendly supply chain system. By adopting JOSOPMDP instead of conventional selection
strategies, there is a signiﬁcant enhancement in customer satisfaction, thereby minimizing
food wastage caused by spoilage. Simultaneously, it achieves an optimal balance between
packaging and shipping costs while no longer relying on the depletion of non-renewable
environmental resources for distribution purposes. This has signiﬁcant implications for the
sustainability of the cold chain E-fulﬁlment. The general applicability of this model is further
demonstrated in Case 3, wherein various distribution layouts and uncertain order scenarios
can be simulated by altering the random seed. As illustrated in Fig. 7, this model consistently
formulates effective packaging and transportation strategies to meet customers’ demands for
food quality. Consequently, it holds signiﬁcant potential for broad application in cold chain
logistics by offering more efﬁcient and sustainable solutions for the industry.
5.2 Managerial implications
Cold chain logistics imposes stringent requirements on packaging containers and the distri-
bution environment. The temperature during the process, from the distribution centre to the
customer’s hands, is prone to ﬂuctuations. Although refrigerated trucks can provide effective
cooling, they cannot completely eliminate the risk of food personnel. Moreover, operating
refrigerated trucks incurs signiﬁcant costs and requires speciﬁc equipment, placing consider-
able economic pressure on enterprises. Therefore, utilizing passive packaging for delivering
123

824
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
fresh food presents a superior alternative. This approach ensures that products with vary-
ing temperature requirements do not interfere with each other while reducing the impact of
manual handling on temperature stability. On this basis, the JOSOPMDP model is employed
to standardize the order packaging and vehicle route planning processes, effectively miti-
gating the adverse effects of localized optimization on overall operations in logistics. The
packaging scheme obtained through this model saves the use of excessive cooling materials,
and also maximizes the utilization of resources in the distribution scheme. In other words,
this model achieves a harmonious balance between packaging and transportation costs while
ensuring customer satisfaction with product quality. This innovation signiﬁcantly contributes
to insulation material conservation and the reduction of ﬁxed transportation costs, thereby
enhancing resource utilization within the enterprise and optimizing the cost management
strategy. In fact, the logistics industry is consistently confronted with the challenge of miti-
gating environmental pollution. Undoubtedly, this model aligns with the “reduce” principle
of sustainable development. In the long term, economizing on packaging and transportation
resources not only safeguards non-renewable energy sources by alleviating strain on coal and
soil resources but also diminishes carbon dioxide emissions, thereby mitigating the adverse
impact of greenhouse gases on global temperatures. Consequently, within the social devel-
opment requirements, this represents one of the effective approaches for traditional logistics
enterprises to transition towards “Green Logistics”. Moreover, the timely delivery of fresh
food provides a competitive edge for enterprises to establish their reputation. Customer trust
reinforces the business image of the enterprise, and the potential business value should not
be underestimated. In brief, JOSOPMDP generates dual business value at both economic and
social levels. Consequently, it serves as a practical guideline for designing management solu-
tions and making resource allocation decisions that promote mutually beneﬁcial outcomes
for buyers and sellers. Further integration with Warehouse Management System (WMS) and
Transportation Management System (TMS) facilitates the seamless exchange of informa-
tion, establishing a visually dynamic and adaptable supply system for cold chain distribution
centres. This integration facilitates real-time temperature monitoring and control across the
entire supply chain, from warehouse to last mile delivery. While WMS tracks the status of
temperature-sensitive inventory, TMS considers vehicle scheduling; when combined with
the JOSOPMDP model, companies can ensure that cold chain goods reach their destina-
tion in optimal condition while maintaining product quality and regulatory compliance. This
not only provides comprehensive visibility for all stakeholders but also enables proactive
response by triggering timely alerts and notiﬁcations in case of temperature deviations or
emergencies. Moreover, in comparison to existing planning strategies, the model proposed
in this paper can effectively minimize the inefﬁcient utilization of cold chain packaging
materials including eutectic plates, ice packs, dry ice and so on, while also reducing fuel
consumption waste during the distribution process. In addition, the distribution efﬁciency of
the system effectively mitigates food waste caused by spoilage. Consequently, it contributes
to mitigating the environmental impact caused by human commercial activities and promotes
sustainable development of the cold chain supply system. Another noteworthy salient con-
sideration pertains to quality assurance. During food transportation, evaluating management
efﬁciency primarily relies on food quality. JOSOPMDP quantiﬁes customer satisfaction and
employs it as a crucial criterion for formulating enterprise strategies. This approach ensures
the effectiveness of deliveries to a substantial degree, aligning the interests of businesses
with customer expectations and enhancing overall operational performance in the cold chain
logistics sector.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
825
6 Conclusion
This study demonstrates the potential of the JOSOPMDP to optimize cold chain e-fulﬁlment
by connecting packaging and transportation decisions. Across varied delivery items, loca-
tions, and order volumes, the proposed model formulated the sustainable decisions on order
packing and vehicle routing plans tailored to the perishable goods, outperforming conven-
tional strategies. It enabled the selection of optimal thermal packaging to balance insulation
needs and environmental impact, improving customer satisfaction by 47.88% on average.
Unlike ﬁxed logistics plans, the proposed model optimises the delivery routes with the balance
of costs and customer satisfaction in terms of product quality and service time. By optimiz-
ing packaging sustainability and delivery efﬁciency simultaneously, JOSOPMDP unlocks
more agile, economical, and eco-friendly cold chain e-fulﬁlment. This pioneering approach
paves the way for further supply chain advancements through cross-functional integration
and customization. In future, the research foundation in this work can be further extended
with more real-life case studies to better quantify the sustainability value from the proposed
model. Moreover, the distributionally robust optimisation process can also be considered to
enhance the solution practicality in the industry.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank the Hong Kong Polytechnic University for supporting
the project (Project Code: UAMX). This research is also funded by the Laboratory for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
in Design, Hong Kong (Project Code: RP2-2) under the InnoHK Research Clusters, Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region Government.
Funding Open access funding provided by The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. This research is funded
by the Laboratory for Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Design, Hong Kong (Project Code: RP2-2) under the InnoHK
Research Clusters, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Government.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that there is no conﬂict of interest.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Appendix A: List of notations
Symbol
Description (Value range)
S, sn
Types of perishable foods (S = {s1, s2, . . . , sn})
B, bm
Types of packaging boxes (B = {b1, b2, . . . , bm})
i, j, N
Delivery location (i, j ∈N)
Oi∈N
Orders for each customer
123

826
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
Symbol
Description (Value range)
qs∈S
Weight of each item
wb∈B
Capacity of each packaging boxes
θb∈B, θ′
b∈B
Fresh-keeping capacity coefﬁcient of packing box
Ts
Preservation temperature range (s ∈S)
Cb∈B
Total cost of packaging boxes
Asib
Time–temperature relationship of cold chain
packaging(∀i ∈N; ∀s ∈S; b ∈B)
αsi, βsib
Decision variables (∀i ∈N; ∀s ∈S; b ∈B)
|Oi|Bn
Total number of potential packaging arrangements
pkn
i
The packaging option for each Oder
(∀i ∈N; ∀n ∈

1, 2, . . . , |Oi|Bn
)
C pkn
i
Total packaging costs (∀i ∈N; ∀n ∈

1, 2, . . . , |Oi|Bn
)
fi
Delivery single cargo (∀i ∈N)
q fi
Weight of cargos (∀i ∈N)
A fi
Shelf life of cargos (∀i ∈N)
pln
Speciﬁc permutations of the packaging method for the
merchandise (∀n ∈

1, 2, · · · N
i=1 Bn|Oi|
)
k
Number of truckers
Qk
Maximum load of each vehicle
γ
Penalty factor
Dk
Total number of load violation
v
Average driving speed
di j
Distance between two points (i, j ∈N)
pc
ﬁxed cost of each vehicle
pr
Variable cost of each vehicle
xi jk, yik, σ fik
Decision variables (∀i ∈N; ∀j ∈N; ∀k ∈

kmin,...,kmax

)
CT f
Quality satisfaction
t fi
Actual arrival time (∀i ∈N)
J
Optimal route for visiting all customer locations
τ
Freshness penalty factor
ri,r′
i
Customer expectation time window
ei, e′
i
Soft time window
Ri, R′
i
Request time window
Z1
Total packaging cost
Z2
Total ﬁxed transportation cost
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
827
Symbol
Description (Value range)
Z3
Total variable transportation cost
a
Start time
G1
Total cost
G2
Overall satisfaction
References
Andoh, E. A., & Yu, H. (2022). A two-stage decision-support approach for improving sustainable last-mile
cold chain logistics operations of COVID-19 vaccines. Annals of Operations Research, 238, 75–105.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04906-x
Behdani, B., Fan, Y., & Bloemhof, J. M. (2019). Cool chain and temperature-controlled transport: An overview
of concepts, challenges, and technologies. Sustainable food supply chains (pp. 167–183). Elsevier.
Braekers, K., Ramaekers, K., & Van Nieuwenhuyse, I. (2016). The vehicle routing problem: State of the art
classiﬁcation and review. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 99, 300–313.
Dávila, S., Alfaro, M., Fuertes, G., Vargas, M., & Camargo, M. (2021). Vehicle routing problem with deadline
and stochastic service times: Case of the ice cream industry in Santiago city of Chile. Mathematics,
9(21), 2750.
Defraeye, T., Cronjé, P., Berry, T., Opara, U. L., East, A., Hertog, M., Verboven, P., & Nicolai, B. (2015).
Towards integrated performance evaluation of future packaging for fresh produce in the cold chain.
Trends in Food Science & Technology, 44(2), 201–225.
Defraeye, T., Lambrecht, R., Delele, M. A., Tsige, A. A., Opara, U. L., Cronje, P., Verboven, P., & Nicolai, B.
(2014). Forced-convective cooling of citrus fruit: Cooling conditions and energy consumption in relation
to package design. Journal of Food Engineering, 121, 118–127.
Fan, Y., Behdani, B., & Bloemhof-Ruwaard, J. M. (2020). Refer logistics and cold chain transport: A systematic
review and multi-actor system analysis of an un-explored domain. European Journal of Transport and
Infrastructure Research, 20(2), 1–35.
Gendreau, M., Jabali, O., & Rei, W. (2014). Chapter 8: Stochastic vehicle routing problems. Vehicle rout-
ing: Problems, methods, and applications (2nd ed., pp. 213–239). Society for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics.
Gutierrez, A., Dieulle, L., Labadie, N., & Velasco, N. (2018). A multi-population algorithm to solve the VRP
with stochastic service and travel times. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 125, 144–156.
Han, J. W., Zhao, C. J., Yang, X. T., Qian, J. P., & Fan, B. L. (2015). Computational modeling of airﬂow and
heat transfer in a vented box during cooling: Optimal package design. Applied Thermal Engineering, 91,
883–893.
iiMedia Research. (2023). (rep.). Industrial Application and Typical Cases study Report on China Cold Chain
Logistics in 2023–2024. iiMedia Research.
James,S.J.,&James,C.J.F.R.I.(2010).Thecoldfoodchainandclimatechange.FoodResearchInternational,
43(7), 1944–1956.
Kim, H., Kim, S. H., Jeon, M., Kim, J., Song, S., & Paik, K. J. (2017). A study on path optimization method
of an unmanned surface vehicle under environmental loads using genetic algorithm. Ocean Engineering,
142, 616–624.
Kuo, J. C., & Chen, M. C. (2010). Developing an advanced multi-temperature joint distribution system for the
food cold chain. Food Control, 21(4), 559–566.
Kyriakidis,E.G.,&Dimitrakos,T.D.(2019).Stochasticsinglevehicleroutingproblemwithorderedcustomers
and partial fulﬁlment of demands. International Journal of Systems Science: Operations & Logistics,
6(3), 285–299.
Latorre-Biel, J. I., Ferone, D., Juan, A. A., & Faulin, J. (2021). Combining simheuristics with petri nets for solv-
ing the stochastic vehicle routing problem with correlated demands. Expert Systems with Applications,
168, 114240.
Li, N., & Li, G. (2022). Hybrid partheno-genetic algorithm for multi-depot perishable food delivery problem
with mixed time windows. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04747-8
123

828
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:805–828
Loisel, J., Duret, S., Cornuéjols, A., Cagnon, D., Tardet, M., Derens-Bertheau, E., & Laguerre, O. (2021). Cold
chain break detection and analysis: Can machine learning help? Trends in Food Science & Technology,
112, 391–399.
Mercier, S., Villeneuve, S., Mondor, M., & Uysal, I. (2017). Time–temperature management along the food
cold chain: A review of recent developments. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety,
16(4), 647–667.
Ndraha, N., Hsiao, H. I., Vlajic, J., Yang, M. F., & Lin, H. T. V. (2018). Time-temperature abuse in the food
cold chain: Review of issues, challenges, and recommendations. Food Control, 89, 12–21.
Pan, X., Li, M., Wang, M., Zong, T., & Song, M. (2020). The effects of a Smart Logistics policy on carbon
emissions in China: A difference-in-differences analysis. Transportation Research Part e: Logistics and
Transportation Review, 137, 101939.
Song, M., Zheng, C., & Wang, J. (2022). The role of digital economy in China’s sustainable development in
a post-pandemic environment. Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 35(1), 58–77.
Statista. (March 31, 2020). Market size of the cold chain logistics in North America from 2018 to 2024 (in
billion U.S. dollars) [Graph]. In Statista. Retrieved January 05, 2024, from https://www-statista-com.
ezproxy.lb.polyu.edu.hk/statistics/955108/cold-chain-packaging-us-market-size/
Theophilus, O., Dulebenets, M. A., Pasha, J., Lau, Y. Y., Fathollahi-Fard, A. M., & Mazaheri, A. (2021). Truck
scheduling optimization at a cold-chain cross-docking terminal with product perishability considerations.
Computers & Industrial Engineering, 156, 107240.
Tsang, Y. P., Choy, K. L., Wu, C. H., Ho, G. T. S., Lam, H. Y., & Tang, V. (2018). An intelligent model for
assuring food quality in managing a multi-temperature food distribution centre. Food Control, 90, 81–97.
Tseng, M. L., Tan, K. H., Geng, Y., & Govindan, K. (2016). Sustainable consumption and production in
emerging markets. International Journal of Production Economics, 181, 257–261.
Wang, D., Lai, Y., Jia, B., Chen, R., & Hui, X. (2020). The optimal design and energy consumption analysis
of forced air pre-cooling packaging system. Applied Thermal Engineering, 165, 114592.
Wang, S. Y., & Zhao, M. (2013). Impetus of multi-temperature joint distribution based on storage-type cold-
chain logistics. Journal of Highway and Transportation Research and Development (English Edition),
7(2), 94–99.
Xia, Y., Fu, Z., Tsai, S. B., & Wang, J. (2018). A new TS algorithm for solving low-carbon logistics vehicle
routing problem with split deliveries by backpack—From a green operation perspective. International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 15(5), 949.
Xu, X., Zhang, X., & Liu, S. (2018). Experimental study on cold storage box with nanocomposite phase change
material and vacuum insulation panel. International Journal of Energy Research, 42(14), 4429–4438.
Yan, B., Liu, Y., & Fan, J. (2022). Two-echelon fresh product supply chain with different transportation
modes. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-05092-6
Yingfei, Y., Mengze, Z., Zeyu, L., Ki-Hyung, B., Avotra, A. A. R. N., & Nawaz, A. (2022). Green logistics
performance and infrastructure on service trade and environment-measuring ﬁrm’s performance and
service quality. Journal of King Saud University-Science, 34(1), 101683.
Zhao, Y., Zhang, X., & Xu, X. (2020). Application and research progress of cold storage technology in cold
chain transportation and distribution. Journal of Thermal Analysis and Calorimetry, 139, 1419–1434.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123