TITLE: Automatic balance mechanisms for notional defined contribution pension systems guaranteeing social adequacy and financial sustainability: an application to the Italian pension system
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03819-x
---

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03819-x
S.I.: RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN FINANCIAL MODELING AND
RISK MANAGEMENT
Automatic balance mechanisms for notional deﬁned
contribution pension systems guaranteeing social adequacy
and ﬁnancial sustainability: an application to the Italian
pension system
Pierre Devolder1 · Susanna Levantesi2
· Massimiliano Menzietti3
Accepted: 26 September 2020 / Published online: 14 October 2020
© The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
Since the mid 1990s some European countries (including Italy) implemented a Notional
Deﬁned Contribution (NDC) pension system. Such a system is based on pay-as-you-go
funding, while the pension amount is a function of the individual lifelong contribution.
Despite many appealing features, the NDC system presents some drawbacks: ﬁrst, it is
vulnerable to demographic and economic shocks compromising the ﬁnancial sustainability;
second, it could fail to guarantee adequate pension beneﬁts to pensioners. In order to reduce
the ﬁrst limit, automatic balance mechanisms (ABMs) have been proposed in literature and
also implemented in Sweden, while solutions that combine ﬁnancial sustainability and social
adequacy have been applied only in a pay-as-you-go point system. The aim of this paper is to
insert into the Italian NDC architecture ABMs that preserve social adequacy under ﬁnancial
sustainability constraints. Godinez-Olivares et al. (Insur Math Econ 69:117–126, 2016) built
ABMs for a Deﬁned Beneﬁt pension system using nonlinear optimization techniques to
calculate the optimal paths of the control variables representing the main drivers of the
system: contribution rate, retirement age and indexation of pensions. Following this line
of research, we have developed a nonlinear optimization model for the Italian NDC system
based on three control variables: pensions indexation, notional rate and contribution rate. The
objective function considers both social adequacy and contribution rate sustainability, under
liquidity and sustainability constraints. In the numerical application we apply the model to the
Italian pension system and test the sensitivity of the results to different economic scenarios
and objective function parameters.
Keywords Notional Deﬁned Contribution pension systems · Automatic balance
mechanisms · Social adequacy · Financial sustainability · Optimization
B Susanna Levantesi
susanna.levantesi@uniroma1.it
1
Université Catholique de Louvain (UCL), Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium
2
Sapienza University of Rome, Viale Regina Elena 295-G, 00141 Rome, Italy
3
University of Calabria, Rende, Italy
123

766
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
1 Introduction
Traditional pension schemes in social security usually combine a Deﬁned Beneﬁt structure
(DB) with a pay-as-you-go mechanism (PAYG). This classical architecture aims at creating
an intergenerational solidarity while guaranteeing a well-deﬁned level of living standard
for retirees. However, the aging phenomena, caused by a signiﬁcant increase in longevity
and a decrease in fertility, has deeply threatened these schemes. Therefore, many countries
have adapted different reforms in order to restore the ﬁnancial sustainability. Among these
strategies, the NDC mechanism has been proposed as a credible alternative (Gronchi and
Nisticò 2006; Holzmann 2017).
NDC is based on a combination of pay-as-you-go (PAYG) ﬁnancing and a pension formula
mimicking ﬁnancial deﬁned contribution schemes: the contributions are accumulated until
retirement in an account using a rate of return. At retirement age, the account is converted
into a lifelong annuity. The scheme is notional because of the underlying PAYG mechanism:
the accounts are virtual and not invested in the ﬁnancial markets; they are just used for
computation of the beneﬁts. The main parameters of a NDC scheme are: the contribution
rate (ﬁxed due to the DC structure), the normal retirement age, the notional rate (virtual
rate of return given to the account), the indexation parameter (adaptation of the beneﬁts
after retirement), the conversion factor (transformation of the notional account into a lifetime
annuity) and the eventual automatic adjustment mechanism (eventual ex post corrections on
the notional rate and/or the indexation parameter). This philosophy has been successfully
implemented in different European countries (Sweden, Italy, Poland, Latvia. . .) (Chlo´n-
Domi´nczak et al. 2012). The characteristics of these NDC systems can be different from one
country to another (see Table 1 in the “Appendix A” comparing four countries).
Undoubtedly, NDC has many important advantages with respect to classical DB schemes
(Holzmann 2017). From an individual point of view, NDCs can be considered as actuarially
fair because of the direct link between the contributions and the pension paid after retire-
ment (Palmer 2006) and the DC nature should induce ﬁnancial sustainability on a long-term
basis. Despite these appealing characteristics, NDC has serious drawbacks. If theoretically
the system is in equilibrium in a steady state (with constant demographical and economic
conditions), the method cannot automatically guarantee ﬁnancial sustainability in dynamic
realistic conditions (Valdés-Prieto 2000). Therefore, adjustment mechanisms are necessary
to restore equilibrium.
Automatic Balance mechanisms are techniques introduced in a public pension scheme
in order to automatically correct its parameters; the purpose is to avoid waiting for political
interventions (Vidal-Meliá et al. 2009). Different kinds of automatic balance mechanisms
have been proposed in the literature for NDC schemes (see e.g. Knell 2010; Alonso-García
et al. 2018). In Sweden for instance, automatic balance mechanisms have been put in place:
automatic adjustment rules are applied each year to the notional rate and the indexation
rate of pensions, depending on the solvency situation (Settergren 2001). However, all these
mechanisms generally remain in a strict DC environment. The adjustments correct only the
level of present and future beneﬁts and the contribution rate remains unchanged.
This logic seems coherent with the DC characteristics of NDC. Nevertheless, in an aging
world, it could fail to guarantee adequate pension beneﬁts to pensioners. If ﬁnancial sus-
tainability is a key issue for a social security pension scheme, its social adequacy is also
important. In this perspective, pure NDC with mechanisms adjusting only the beneﬁt side
can be seen as an unfair intergenerational solution. From a general point of view, DB and
DC are extreme cases with respect to adaptation to external risks: DB is focused on social
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
767
adequacy while DC is concerned with ﬁnancial sustainability. Intermediate compromises
exist where a risk sharing is applied between all the generations [see for instance Musgrave
(1981)]: retirees accept some adaptation of their beneﬁt level while active people accept
some variability of their contributions. Financial sustainability is then combined with social
adequacy. This philosophy has been successfully applied in the context of a PAYG points
system (Schokkaert et al. 2018; Devolder and de Valeriola 2019).
The purpose of this paper is to introduce such a logic inside the NDC architecture. The
basic mechanism of NDC remains unchanged but the contribution rate can ﬂuctuate over time.
More precisely, we develop an automatic balance mechanism using nonlinear optimization
to guarantee both social adequacy and ﬁnancial sustainability in NDC systems. The proposed
ABMisbasedonthreedecisionvariables:thebeneﬁtindexationrate(effectonpaidpensions),
the notional rate (effect on the level of future pensions) and the contribution rate (effect on
the funding).
The closest contribution in the literature to our paper is from Gannon et al. (2016), that
developed ABMs in a DB system, introducing a nonlinear optimization problem based on
three decision variables: contribution rate, indexation of pensions and retirement age. Fol-
lowing these authors, we consider the contribution rate and the indexation of pensions, but
also the notional rate as decision variables, including lower and upper bounds and smooth
constraints, but in the context of a NDC system. In our analysis, we introduce an optimiza-
tion problem in order to monitor the control variables and generate a mechanism preserving
the adequacy of the system under ﬁnancial sustainability constraints. Otherwise, in Gannon
et al. (2016), the objective function in the optimization problem aims to restore the pension
system’s sustainability through the actuarial balance.
It is worth noting that in our model the inclusion of a control variable operating on
contribution rate can be considered a novelty in the current debate on adjustment mechanisms
in NDC systems. To test the effectiveness of the proposed ABMs, we provide a numerical
illustration based on the Italian pension system, showing how the optimal paths of the control
variables change under different economic scenarios.
The existing literature on the optimization techniques in pension systems rather than
involving PAYG systems, mainly concerns pension funds and their asset allocation (or asset
liability management), such as dynamic decision problems on allocation of the assets, the
contributions and the indexation of future payments. Some interesting contributions involving
optimization techniques in pension systems have been provided by Battocchio et al. (2007)
that analyze the pension funds optimal asset allocation maximizing the expected utility of its
surplus (difference between total wealth and retrospective reserve) and Klein Haneveld et al.
(2010) that study the pension fund strategic asset liability management problem considering
long-term solvency goals and short-term constraints on the ratio of assets over liabilities
(funding ratio) speciﬁed in probabilistic terms. Finally, Kopa et al. (2018) propose a model
for an employee optimal pension allocation from a retirement perspective under stochastic
dominance constraints, applying a multistage stochastic programming approach.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the basics of the NDC system and the
PAYG mechanism. In Sect. 3, we propose a new automatic balance mechanism based on three
control variables (notional rate, indexation rate and contribution rate), while in Sect. 4 we
illustrate the optimization problem for calculating the optimal paths of the control variables.
A numerical illustration is presented in Sects. 5 and 6 lays out this paper’s conclusion.
123

768
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
Fig. 1 Multiple state model for
pension system
2 The model for a notional deﬁned contribution system
This section presents the main demographic and ﬁnancial assumptions applied to a NDC
system. We describe the determinants of the evolution of the active and beneﬁciary population
(Sect. 2.1), the evolution of contribution and beneﬁts (Sect. 2.2), and the features of a PAYG
funding system (Sect. 2.3).
2.1 Active and beneficiary population
We consider a pension system paying only retirement pensions, disregarding invalidity bene-
ﬁts, survivor beneﬁts and withdrawals. Therefore, we can represent the evolution of the active
and beneﬁciary population by a multiple state model, where {X(τ); τ = 0, 1, 2, . . . , T } is
the random state of an individual belonging to the system at time τ. The model has a ﬁnite
state space X = {1 = active, 2 = pensioner, 3 = dead} and a set of transitions according to
Fig. 1.
We assume that all the transition probabilities depend on age and time, while are
independent from the past service duration.1 Hence, the process can be modeled by a time-
inhomogeneous Markov chain in a discrete time, with [0, T ] the ﬁxed ﬁnite time horizon.
The transition probabilities of a life being in state j at age x + τ, given that the life is in
state i at age x, are deﬁned as follows:
τ pi j(x, t) = P

X(t + τ) = j
X(t) = i

i, j ∈X, i ̸= j,
(2.1)
While the probability of a life being in state i at age x to remain in the same state up to age
x + τ is:
τ pii(x, t) = P {X(t + z) = i
for all z ∈[0, τ], X(t) = i}
(2.2)
We assume that each transition is at the beginning of the year. We denote Ni(x, t) and Zi(x, t)
as the number of lives and the new entrants in state i at age x at time t, respectively. Therefore,
the total population in the state i at time t is given by:
Ni(t) =

x
Ni(x, t)
(2.3)
While, the total new entrants in the state i at time t are given by:
Zi(t) =

x
Zi(x, t)
(2.4)
Typically, the future evolution of new entrants in active state can be modeled in three different
ways (Iyer 1999): the ﬁrst one assumes given the age distribution of new entrants; the second
one supposes given the evolution of the total number of actives by age, N 1(x, t) (e.g. based on
1 Therefore, the eligibility for retirement pension does not depend on the years of service.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
769
labour force or general population projections); the third one assumes known the growth rate
of total active population, ρ(t), equally affecting all groups of contributors, and the relative
age distribution of the new entrants in the active state, dz(x, t). In the last two cases, the age
distribution of new actives for each projection year is indirectly deduced.
Regarding the ﬁrst case, it is unusual to assume known the age distribution of new entrants
over the forecasting horizon (Iyer 1999). Following the prevalent literature (e.g. Gronchi and
Nisticò 2006; Alonso-García et al. 2018), we consider the third approach: given the initial
total active population, N 1(0), and its growth rate, ρ(t), the total active population at time t
is:
N 1(t) = N 1(t −1)(1 + ρ(t))
(2.5)
The total new actives are described by the following equation:
Z1(t) = N 1(t) −

x
N 1(x −1, t −1)p11(x −1, t −1)
(2.6)
While, the number of new entrants by age, Z1(x, t), is obtained by:
Z1(x, t) = Z1(t)dz(x, t)
(2.7)
Therefore, the active population aged x at time t is calculated by:
N 1(x, t) = N 1(x −1, t −1)p11(x −1, t −1) + Z1(x, t)
(2.8)
Equation 2.8 can be rewritten as follows:
N 1(x, t) = N 1(x −t, 0)t p11(x −t, 0) +
T ′

h=0
Z1(x −h, t −h)h p11(x −h, t −h) (2.9)
where T ′ = min(t −1, x −α), x −t ≥α and α the minimum age of new entrants.
Note that N 1(x −t, 0)t p11(x −t, 0) is the proportion of the initial active population still
in the active state at time t, while the second term represents the new generations of actives.
The pensioners’ population aged x at time t is calculated by:
N 2(x, t) = N 2(x −1, t −1)p22(x −1, t −1) + Z2(x, t)
(2.10)
where Z2(x, t) = N 1(x −1, t −1)p12(x −1, t −1) are the new pensioners aged x in year t.
Note that the probability p12(x −1, t −1) takes into account both the pension system rules
and the retirement propensity, and then it is zero before the minimum retirement age and one
at the maximum retirement age.
Equation 2.10 can be rewritten as follows:
N 2(x, t) = N 2(x −t, 0)t p22(x −t, 0) +
T ′′

h=0
Z2(x −h, t −h)h p22(x −h, t −h) (2.11)
where T ′′ = min(t −1, x −β), x −t ≥β and β the minimum age of retirements.
Note that N 2(x −t, 0)t p22(x −t, 0) is the proportion of the initial beneﬁciaries still in
the state of pensioner at time t, while the second term represents the new generations of
pensioners.
The new deaths at age x occurring in the year t are calculated by the following equation:
Z3(x, t) = N 1(x −1, t −1)p13(x −1, t −1) + N 2(x −1, t −1)p23(x −1, t −1) (2.12)
123

770
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
2.2 Contribution and benefits
Weassumethatindividualwagedependsonlyonageandtime,andnotonseniority.Therefore,
denoted s(x, t, i) as the wage for an individual i aged x at time t, individuals with same age
x in year t have the same individual wage,2 i.e. s(x, t, i) = s(x, t) ∀i independently from
their past service duration. We denote ξ(t) as the growth rate of individual wage from t −1
to t such that:
s(x, t) = s(x, t −1) [1 + ξ(t)]
(2.13)
Under this framework, the total wage earned by the active population aged x in the year t is
derived by:
S(x, t) = N 1(x, t)s(x, t)
(2.14)
While, the amount of total wage earned by the active population in the year t is:
S(t) =

x
S(x, t)
(2.15)
Furthermore, the average wage in year t is calculated as:
s(t) = S(t)
N 1(t) =

x N 1(x, t)s(x, t)

x N 1(x, t)
(2.16)
Note that s(t) is the weighted average of the individual wage, s(x, t), where the weights
are the proportion of actives aged x to the total active population in year t. Moreover, if the
pension system is in a steady state, Eqs. 2.13 and 2.16 imply that:
s(t) = s(t −1) [1 + ξ(t)]
(2.17)
When the pension system is in a steady state, combining Eqs. 2.5, 2.16 and 2.17, the amount
of total wage evolves as follows:
S(t) = S(t −1) [1 + ξ(t)] [1 + ρ(t)]
(2.18)
The total contribution paid by the active population aged x in the year t is:
C(x, t) = c(t)S(x, t)
(2.19)
Where c(t) is the contribution rate characterizing the pension system in the year t and the
amount of total contribution paid by the active population in the year t is:
C(t) =

x
C(x, t) = c(t)S(t)
(2.20)
By deﬁnition, in a NDC system the contribution rate should be constant, c(t) = c for all t,
and the pension beneﬁt at retirement depends on the total contributions paid by the individ-
ual during his working life. These contributions are virtually accumulated in an individual
notional account and converted in an annuity at retirement. The individual account is remu-
nerated each year t at a notional rate of return, g(t), that can be chosen in different ways (see
e.g. Holzmann 2017):
– equal to the growth rate of the total wage in the year t, that coincides with the growth
rate of contribution. When the system reaches the steady state, the notional rate becomes:
[1 + ξ(t)] [1 + ρ(t)] −1; therefore it is affected by both wage and population evolution.
2 It is the wage relevant to the social security pension scheme for full-time work.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
771
This choice guarantees that the NDC system is sustainable in both a steady state and a
semi steady state (where the growth rate of actives is constant, but the growth rate of wages
could vary). For this reason, such a rate is also known as “natural rate”(Valdés-Prieto
2000) or “canonical rate”(Gronchi and Nisticò 2006).
– equal to the growth of the contribution base per capita that increase at the same rate of the
individual wage. This is the rate applied in Sweden (see e.g. Alonso-García et al. 2018).
– as a function of the growth rate of notional GDP. For example, in Italy it is equal to
the ﬁve-year GDP growth average rate. Note that this notional rate “can be equal to the
wage bill growth rate only if the distributive shares in GDP remain constant”(Gronchi
and Nisticò 2006).
Due to the assumption of the individualwage, the individualnotionalaccountfor an individual
i aged x at the end of year t evolves as follows:
m(x, t, i) = [m(x −1, t −1, i) + c(t)s(x, t)] [1 + g(t)]
(2.21)
The total accumulated notional capital at the end of year t for the actives aged x is equal to:
M(x, t) =

i∈N1(x,t)
m(x, t, i)
(2.22)
and evolves as follows3:
M(x, t) =

M(x −1, t −1)p11(x −1, t −1) + C(x, t)

[1 + g(t)]
(2.23)
At the end of working life, the initial amount of pension is determined by dividing the
accumulated notional capital to an annuity rate speciﬁc for each age x and time t, ä(x, t),
calculated as:
ä(x, t) =

h=0
h p22∗(x, t) ·
t+h
 
k=t

1 + λ∗(k)
1 + g∗(k)

(2.24)
where λ∗(t) is the ex-ante pension indexation,4 g∗(t) is the ex-ante notional rate (or discount)
and h p22∗(x, t) is the ex-ante survival probability of a pensioner aged x at time t for h years.5
Note that the evaluation of ä(x, t) requires assumptions on all the above variables.
Equation 2.24 can be rewritten as a function of a discounting rate, j∗(k) = 1+λ∗(k)
1+g∗(k) −1,
summarizing the pension indexation and the notional rate, as follows:
ä(x, t) =

h=0
h p22∗(x, t) ·
t+h
 
k=t

1 + j∗(k)

(2.25)
3 Note that we consider mortality before retirement in the evolution of the population (2.12), but not in the
formula of the total accumulated notional capital (2.23), automatically creating a survival dividend. Moreover,
we do not take into account inheritance gains: this aspect is not relevant in the numerical illustration because
we assume no mortality before retirement age. Inheritance gains are actually redistributed in Sweden, while
not in Italy.
4 We can observe that the pension indexation differs from one country to another. For example, the pension
beneﬁts are indexed to the inﬂation rate in Italy and in Latvia, while it is given by the difference between the
consumer price index and 1.6% in Sweden and by a combination of the consumer price index and the wage
increase in Poland (see Gronchi and Nisticò (2006) for Chlo´n-Domi´nczak et al. (2012) for the other countries).
5 Note that in the Italian pension system the calculation of ä(x, t) only takes into account for the mortality
improvement up to time t and not its future evolution during the pension payment.
123

772
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
Once deﬁned the individual notional account and the annuity rate, the initial pension beneﬁt
paid in advance to a new pensioner aged x in the year t is calculated as:
bz(x, t, i) = m(x, t, i)
ä(x, t)
(2.26)
While, the total amount of pension paid to the new retirees is given by:
Bz(x, t) =

i∈Z2(x,t)
bz(x, t, i)
(2.27)
The total pensions paid to retirees aged x in the year t are then calculated as:
B(x, t) = B(x −1, t −1)p22(x −1, t −1) [1 + λ(t −1)] + Bz(x, t)
(2.28)
Note that λ is the effective pension indexation experienced by the pensioners that could differ
from the estimated value λ∗.
Finally, the amount of total pensions paid to retirees in the year t is derived by:
B(t) =

x
B(x, t)
(2.29)
2.3 The PAYG system
A PAYG system is said to be perfectly balanced when the income from contributions matches
the expenditure on pensions:
N 1(t) · c(t) · s(t) = N 2(t) · b(t)
(2.30)
where b(t) =
B(t)
N2(t) is the average pension. The ﬁxed contribution rate c(t) not always
guarantees the system’s equilibrium. Therefore, we deﬁne ˆc(t) as the PAYG contribution rate
satisfying the equilibrium equation 2.30:
ˆc(t) = N 2(t)
N 1(t) · b(t)
s(t)
(2.31)
Denoting D(t) = N2(t)
N1(t) as the dependency ratio and r(t) = b(t)
s(t) as the beneﬁt ratio in the
year t, the equilibrium equation can be rewritten as:
ˆc(t) = D(t) · r(t)
(2.32)
By deﬁnition, in a NDC system the contribution rate should be constant, therefore in the
case of a variation of the dependency ratio (beneﬁt ratio), the system should be automatically
adjusted by changing the beneﬁt ratio (dependency ratio).
First of all, it should be noticed that there is no clear deﬁnition of sustainability. As
pointed out by Knell et al. (2006), “ﬁscal policies are sustainable if they can be continued
indeﬁnitely; unsustainable policies will ultimately have to be modiﬁed. . . while there is no
unique theoretical benchmark of sustainability, all deﬁnitions do imply that an ever-increasing
debt ratio is not sustainable.” Applied in the area of a pensions system, sustainability could
be deﬁned as “a position where there is no need to increase the contribution rate in the future”
(see Vidal-Meliá 2010). Such a deﬁnition could be easily applied to NDC systems but not to
DB ones.
With regard to the difference between sustainability and solvency, the concept of solvency
is typical of the private insurance sector and refers to the “ability of a pension scheme’s assets
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
773
tomeetthescheme’sliabilitiesindicator”(Gannonetal.2016).Concerningtheuseofliquidity
and/or solvency indicators, Boado-Penas et al. (2008) observe that often annual cash-ﬂow
deﬁcit/surplus are considered as “solvency indicator, despite the fact that it is only a liquidity
indicator”. A PAYG system could experience periods with cash-ﬂow surpluses along with
decreasing solvency ratio.
We measure the liquidity of the system in the year t by the unfunded liabilities (U L),
deﬁned as the difference between the pension beneﬁts paid to pensioners and the contribution
earned by actives:
U L(t) = B(t) −C(t)
(2.33)
Note that the unfunded liabilities over time imply the accumulation of a reserve fund, if
negative (U L < 0), or a pension liability, if positive (U L > 0). The evolution of the reserve
fund F(t) in t ∈[0, T ], with F(t) ⋛0, is given by:
F(t) = F(t −1) [1 + g(t −1)] + C(t) −B(t)
(2.34)
Where the notional rate g is the rate of return remunerating the reserve fund.
With reference to the ﬁnancial sustainability of the system, we measure it by the total
unfunded liabilities (TU L) over a ﬁxed time horizon (0, T ) that we deﬁne as the difference
between the present value of future beneﬁts and the present value of future contributions
discounted at the notional rate g(t), consistently with the rate of return that remunerate the
notional account:
TU L(0, T ) =
T

t=1
B(t)vg(0, t) −
T

t=1
C(t)vg(0, t)
(2.35)
where vg(0, t) = t−1
h=0 [1 + g(h)]−1. Equation 2.35 can be rewritten as the present value
of all future unfunded liabilities U L(t), t = 1, 2, . . . , T throughout the accumulation phase
before retirement:
TU L(0, T ) =
T

t=1
U L(t)vg(0, t)
(2.36)
Remark The system’s ﬁnancial sustainability can be measured though the difference between
the reserve fund at ﬁnal and initial time. A proof for this statement is given in the following.
From Eq. 2.34, we derive the expression of the reserve fund at ﬁnal time T :
F(T ) =
T

t=1
[C(t) −B(t)] mg(t, T ) + F(0)mg(0, T )
(2.37)
where mg(t, T ) = vg(0,t)
vg(0,T ). Recalling that U L(t) = B(t) −C(t), we obtain that:
F(0) −F(T )vg(0, T ) = TU L(0, T )
(2.38)
Following the sustainability ABM, we assume F(0) = 0 and we do not take into account the
return of the reserve fund.
Note that using TU L as a measure of ﬁnancial sustainability is in line with the ﬁnancial
solvency measure adopted in the U.S. old-age and survivors insurance (OASI) and disability
insurance (DI) social security programs. Actually, the U.S. actuarial balance measures the
differencebetweenthepresentvalueofpensionbeneﬁtsandthepresentvalueofcontributions,
on a 75-year time horizon, taking into account the trust fund assets at initial period and a
minimum level of the trust fund assets at ﬁnal period (Vidal-Meliá 2010).
123

774
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
It is worth noting that if we only refer to sustainability, a pure NDC system could not
guarantee the social adequacy. Therefore, an adequacy measure should be considered in
ABMs modeling. As stated by Schokkaert et al. (2018), “an equitable and credible promise
should relate future pensions to the future average living standard in society”, consequently
an adequacy measure could be deﬁned as the ratio between the average pension paid by the
system and the average wage earned by the active population. Actually, a NDC system can
only achieve the ﬁnancial sustainability in the unrealistic case of a system in steady state
(Valdés-Prieto 2000; Vidal-Meliá 2010), as it is vulnerable to demographic and economic
shocks. For example:
– changes in life expectancy produce immediate effects on D(t) and bz(t) (due to the
changes in ä(x, t)), and delayed effects on r(t) because the beneﬁts to the existing
pensioners are not usually indexed to life expectancy;
– changes in unemployment rate produce immediate effects on D(t) not automatically
adjusted by the system when pension beneﬁts are not directly linked to the unemployment
rate (as e.g. in Italy and Sweden);
– otherwise, the system could experience a variation of the beneﬁt ratio that is not com-
pensated by the dependency ratio when the growth rate of wage, ξ(t), and the pension
indexation rate, λ(t), do not coincide. Also in this case the equilibrium equation is not
satisﬁed.
3 Automatic balance mechanisms and quasi NDC systems
This section presents Automatic Balance Mechanisms (ABMs) for NDC systems based on
three control variables, the notional rate, beneﬁts indexation and the contribution rate. As
previously observed, the NDC system does not always create ﬁnancial sustainability, that can
be achieved through the introduction of ABMs. Vidal-Meliá (2010) deﬁne an ABM as “a set
of predetermined measures established by law to be applied immediately as required accord-
ingly to the solvency or sustainability indicator...to re-establish the ﬁnancial equilibrium of
PAYG pension systems with the aim of making those systems viable without the repeated
intervention of the legislators”. The authors observe that the most relevant features of ABMs
should be automation, short-term, rationality, transparency and gradualness.
Academic research has produced different proposals on this topic, e.g. D’Addio and
Whitehouse (2012) suggested automatic adjustments on beneﬁt levels according to changes
in life expectancy, through the revaluation of past earnings with inﬂation instead of the
average growth rate of earnings and pensions indexation; Gannon et al. (2016)) proposed
ABMs based on three decision variables, the growth rate of contribution rate, retirement age
and indexation of pensions. The mechanisms actually adopted in many developed countries
to enforce the sustainability of PAYG pension schemes (DB, point or NDC systems) mainly
have been the indexation of pension beneﬁts, or the minimum retirement age, or the minimum
years of contributions required for a full beneﬁt to life expectancy (see Vidal-Meliá 2010;
Gannon et al. 2015 for a description of ABMs adopted in Sweden, Canada, Germany, Japan,
Finland and US).6 Among the developed countries with a NDC pension system, Sweden
is the only one that has introduced an ABM (reform in May 2001). The Swedish system
provides that the notional rate applied to notional capital and the indexation rate of pension
6 It should be noticed that some of them are more effective when applied to DB or point systems than to NDC.
For example, in a NDC, indexing the retirement age to life expectancy would improve the social adequacy but
would not change the ﬁnancial stability of the system.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
775
beneﬁts (usually equal to the average wage growth) are reduced when the system’s solvency
indicator falls below one. The solvency indicator is determined as a “balance ratio”between
assets (contribution asset plus buffer fund) and pension liability (Settergren 2001).7
Even if an ABM could allow a NDC system to become ﬁnancially sustainable, it may be
socially undesirable due to sudden adjustments. Therefore, an automatic mechanism should
work gradually so as to prevent jumps in the paths of the ABM reference variables. A
critical aspect of automatic adjustments applied to a NDC system is that it could not guar-
antee adequate pension beneﬁts to pensioners, raising social adequacy issues. Indeed, as
observed by Schokkaert et al. (2018), the ﬁnancial sustainability is not able to keep the
system “socially”sustainable. As experienced in some countries, pension reforms aiming to
reach the ﬁnancial sustainability led to inadequate pensions depressing the living standard
of pensioners and making the pension system less appealing for young generations.
As we will show later in the case of Italy, ABMs operating on notional rate and pension
indexation do not assure adequate pensions. For this reason, we focus on a combination of
ABMs that guarantees ﬁnancial sustainability by minimizing a cost function measuring the
social adequacy of the pension system by the beneﬁt ratio r(t). A possible way of providing
adequate pensions, under ﬁnancial sustainability constraints, is to increase the contribution
rate. Such an increase would introduce an aging risk sharing between beneﬁciaries (pension-
ers) and contributions payers (actives): actually, it enforces the ﬁnancial sustainability, not
reducing the current pensions, and, at the same time, increases the actives’ notional amount,
and therefore produces higher and more adequate pensions in the future. Then, in this paper,
the contribution rate is one of the ABM decision variables, that can be increased/decreased
in order to enforce the adequacy and/or the sustainability of the NDC system. We deﬁne this
system as “Quasi Notional Deﬁned Contribution”(Quasi-NDC) to show that this variable,
typically constant in a NDC system, could change.
The increase of social security contributions could create a negative impact on labour
costs and the market side, therefore on the long-term sustainability of the scheme itself. The
analysis of such eventual economic consequences is beyond the scope of this paper, but we
can observe that some measures can mitigate these potential negative effects:
– In the optimization problem, that deﬁnes ABMs, we simultaneously introduce an absolute
upper bound and a relative maximum yearly increase for the contribution rate, moder-
ating the effects on the labour market; this kind of automatic balance mechanism with
continuous control and progressive effect avoids sudden shocks.
– We can consider the contribution rate obtained by the optimization problem as an implicit
rate, necessary for the global equilibrium of the PAYG scheme. However, this cost could
be partially paid by social contributions on wages and partially by other tax sources (for
instance solidarity contributions on other kinds of incomes).
In light of the above considerations, we propose an ABM8 based on the following adjustments
at time t:
7 See also Boado-Penas and Vidal-Meliá (2013) for a description of the Swedish ABM.
8 Another possible adjustment mechanism could work on the calculation of pension beneﬁts at retirement.
e.g. some countries with DB PAYG systems, such as Portugal or Finland, link the initial pension beneﬁts
to life expectancy improvements. Such an adjustment is implicit in a NDC system where the annuity rate is
periodically updated to new life tables. What we exclude here are adjustments at the moment of retirement not
linked to the life expectancy improvement. Note that the introduction of these adjustments would be politically
unacceptable because of the deﬁnition of NDC: it could suddenly decrease the notional capital at the moment
of retirement, not allowing the pensioner to revise its choices in order to obtain an adequate pension.
123

776
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
– γ (t) in the beneﬁts indexation rate:
B(x, t) = B(x −1, t −1)p22(x −1, t −1) [1 + λ(t −1)] γ (t) + Bz(x, t)
– ζ(t) in the notional rate:
M(x, t) = M(x −1, t −1)p11(x −1, t −1) [1 + g(t −1)] ζ(t) + C(x, t)
– θ(t) in the contribution rate:
C(x, t) = c · S(x, t) · θ(t)
The design of an ABM can be symmetric or asymmetric. The ﬁrst occurs when adjusting for
both positive and negative deviations from the ﬁnancial sustainability indicator and the second
involves only negative adjustments in pension beneﬁts (lower rate indexation of pensions,
lower notional rate) and a higher contribution rate. See Gannon et al. (2016) for a discussion
about the implication on the sustainability of PAYG systems of implementing symmetric or
asymmetric designs. Disregarding positive adjustments in pensions would penalize social
adequacy, while disregarding lower contribution rate would have negative implications in the
labour market. Therefore, although asymmetric ABMs are mainly used in practice, we only
consider the symmetric case.
The adjustments γ (t) and ζ(t) impact on the amount of total pensions paid by the sys-
tem, B(t): the ﬁrst directly, reducing or increasing the pension indexation (that can even
become negative,9) the second indirectly, reducing or increasing the notional amount that
determine the future pensions. Conversely, θ(t) works on the amount of total contribution,
C(t), increasing or decreasing the future values of notional amounts and pensions.
4 Optimization problem formulation
This section lays out the design of an ABM that automatically adjusts NDC systems in order
to guarantee either social adequacy and ﬁnancial sustainability. The following subsections
describe the optimization problem used to calculate the optimal paths of the decision variables
involved, γ (t), ζ(t) and θ, respectively operating on the beneﬁts indexation, notional rate
and contribution rate, as described in Sect. 3. In (4.1) we specify the objective function to
minimize, in (4.2) the constraints on ﬁnancial sustainability and liquidity as well as upper and
lower bounds and smooth constraints for the decision variables, and in (4.3) the optimization
problem.
4.1 Objective function
The objective function is a Total Penalty Function, denoted by T P F(0, T ), that considers
both social adequacy and contribution rate sustainability on the whole period (0, T ). The
annual adequacy of the pension system is measured by the beneﬁt ratio r(t), setting a min-
imum level c1 that we consider desirable. However, to meet adequacy and sustainability, a
pension system must set the contribution rate at an economically acceptable level, to avoid
negative repercussions on the labour market. Therefore, we specify a maximum level c2 for
the contribution rate. Moreover, we introduce in the objective function two penalty factors,
9 As observed by Gannon et al. (2016), Sweden has already applied a negative indexation of pensions to reach
the ﬁnancial sustainability.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
777
ψ1 and ψ2, representing the social weights given to the failure in achieving the desirable
levels for the beneﬁt ratio and the contribution rate, respectively. The ﬁrst penalty factor, ψ1,
is triggered when the beneﬁt ratio is under the ﬁxed level c1, while the second one, ψ2, when
the contribution rate is above the level c2. The TPF is then deﬁned as:
T P F(0, T ) =
T

t=1

ψ1 [c1 −r(t)]+ + ψ2 [c(t) −c2]+
(4.1)
where c(t) is the contribution rate that makes the system ﬁnancially sustainable with the help
of the ABMs.
4.2 Constraints
Financial sustainability constraint We introduce a null constraint at the total unfunded lia-
bilities over the ﬁxed time horizon (0, T ). However, it is well-known that in practice it is
not possible to precisely verify this equality (Gannon et al. 2016), therefore we include two
constraints in the optimization problem, so that the TU L(0, T ) is within a narrow range.
Speciﬁcally, we require that the absolute value of the ratio between the TU L(0, T ) and the
contributions in the ﬁrst year C(1) is not higher than a small level ε.
−ε ≤TU L(0, T )
C(1)
≤ε
TU L(0, T ) is divided by C(1) in order to relate the total unfunded liabilities to the size of
the NDC system. According to Eq. 2.38, this constraint is equivalent to setting F(T ) = 0,
when F(0) = 0.
Liquidity constraint The second constraint refers to the acceptance by the NDC system of an
annual temporary deﬁcit. We assume a possible temporary deﬁcit on year t, but it must not
exceed a maximum level u respect to the total contribution. Therefore, the annual unfunded
liabilities in respect to the total contribution should be less than u:
U L(t)
C(t) ≤u
Lower and upper bounds of the decision variables In order to avoid strong adjustments on
pensions, notional accounts and contributions that would be socio-political unacceptable, we
introduce lower and upper bounds, G1, G2; Z1, Z2 and T1, T2, on the decision variables γ ,
ζ and θ, respectively. Hence, the decision variables must be in the following ranges:
G1 ≤γ (t) ≤G2,
Z1 ≤ζ(t) ≤Z2,
T1 ≤θ(t) ≤T2
Smooth constraints for the decision variables The last set of constraints concerns the changes
of γ , ζ and θ that should be in a reasonable range in order to prevent jumps in the paths of the
pensions, notional accounts and contributions which would be socially undesirable. Smooth
constraints are set as:
g1 ≤
γ (t)
γ (t −1) ≤g2,
z1 ≤
ζ(t)
ζ(t −1) ≤z2,
t1 ≤
θ(t)
θ(t −1) ≤t2
As explained in the introduction, our formulation of the optimization problem shows some
similarities with the problem introduced by Gannon et al. (2016): the use of contribution rate
and indexation of pensions as decision variables, the presence of lower and upper bounds
of the decision variables and smooth constraints. However, our objective function (the TPF)
123

778
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
considers both social adequacy and contribution rate sustainability, differing from the one
proposed in Gannon et al. (2016) involving the pension system’s sustainability via the actu-
arial balance. The objective function proposed by Gannon et al. (2016) can be found, in our
framework, in the Total Unfunded Liabilities that are included in the optimization problem
as a constraint.
4.3 Optimization problem
The optimization problem for a NDC pension scheme is as follows:
min
γ (t),ζ(t),θ(t) T P F(0, T )
subject to
−ε ≤TU L(0, T )
C(1)
≤ε
U L(t)
C(t) ≤u
G1 ≤γ (t) ≤G2
Z1 ≤ζ(t) ≤Z2
T1 ≤θ(t) ≤T2
g1 ≤
γ (t)
γ (t −1) ≤g2
z1 ≤
ζ(t)
ζ(t −1) ≤z2
t1 ≤
θ(t)
θ(t −1) ≤t2
(4.2)
It is a nonlinear problem that can be solved by some efﬁcient algorithms with a moder-
ate computational cost. In the following we provide some details on the algorithm used to
solve the optimization problem, that has been developed in R. The optimal solutions have
been estimated using the Constrained Optimization BY Linear Approximations (COBYLA)
algorithm in the nloptr package (Ypma 2018), which is an R interface to NLopt, a library
for nonlinear optimization (Johnson 2010). COBYLA is an algorithm for derivative-free
optimization belonging to the category of non-gradient based local search methods and sup-
porting non-linear equality and inequality constraints (Powell 1994). It is suitable for solving
our optimization problem where the derivative of the objective function is not known. The
optimal paths we ﬁnd are local and the solution to the problem is not theoretical.
5 Numerical application
In the numerical application we apply to the Italian NDC pension system the ABMs obtained
by solving the optimization problem deﬁned in Sect. 4. The NDC system has been progres-
sively implemented in Italy since 1995 for new entrants in the labour market, both employees
and self-employed. In 2011 the system was extended to the overall population.10
10 A DB system applies only to some residual categories of workers such as freelance professionals.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
779
We created a simpliﬁed population using the demographic and economic structure of
the National Employees’ Pension Fund members. The population’s features are shown in
Sect. 5.1.
The numerical application is divided into three parts: ﬁrst, we veriﬁed the ability of the
proposed ABM to restore the pension system’s ﬁnancial sustainability and social adequacy.
Actually, despite the introduction of the NDC, the system is far from the equilibrium and
could lead to social adequacy problems. In this ﬁrst analysis, we adopted the hypotheses
of demographic and economic evolution that was used by the Ministry of Finance in the
long-term projections of Italian pension expenditure (Ragioneria Generale dello Stato 2018).
In the second, we performed a sensitivity analysis to verify the effects of different demo-
graphic and economic conditions on the ABMs. Speciﬁcally, we developed two alternative
scenarios: the ﬁrst was characterized by lower employment level and labour productivity than
the base scenario, the second with the ﬁnal employment level and labour productivity equal
to the base scenario but with lower initial growth and higher ﬁnal growth.
In the third part, we developed a sensitivity analysis to test how the optimal paths of
decision variables are inﬂuenced by the choice of different penalty factors in the objective
function, T P F, showing the impact of different political choices on the ABMs.
It is well known that actuarial reports to evaluate the ﬁnancial sustainability of a pension
system have to consider very long time horizons: as pointed out by Boado-Penas and Vidal-
Meliá (2013),), “the minimum time horizon should be the system’s turnover duration, the
normal value of which varies between 30 and 35 years, although actuarial reports often
contemplate a minimum horizon of 75 years”. In the US the actuarial balance of the social
securityprogramsadoptsa75yeartimehorizon,thesameinCanadafortheactuarialvaluation
of the Canada Pension Plan realized by the Ofﬁce of the Chief Actuary; in Japan, the Actuarial
Affairs Division of the Ministry of Health compiles a 95 year time actuarial balance (Gannon
et al. 2016); ﬁnally, in Italy, the last long-term projections of Italian pension expenditure that
were made by the Ministry of Finance refer to the period 2018–2070 (Ragioneria Generale
dello Stato 2018).
In the numerical application we use 75 year time horizon, compliant with the minimum
value often considered in actuarial reports. This time horizon implies that at the end of the
projection the cohort of baby-boomers (initially included in the actives’ population) has been
completely exhausted, so that the ﬁnal demographic structure is scarcely inﬂuenced by this
demographic phenomenon.11
5.1 Data and assumptions
The initial population considered in the case study has the following features:
– Initial active population: N 1(0) = 1000, all males. The initial age distribution of actives
is taken from the observed distribution of the Italian National Institute of Social Security
(INPS) pension scheme for employees in 2015. The average age is 42.3.
– The initial wage distribution of the active population by age, s(x, 0), is taken from the
employees’ observed wage distribution in 2015 (source: INPS). The average wage of the
initial active population is s(0) = 29,617 (Euro).
11 More precisely, the effect of a demographic shock is not completely absorbed at the time of death of the
last member of the baby boomers’ cohort but requires the achievement of the steady state to be exhausted.
123

780
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2 Age distribution of actives and pensioners in t = 0 (black bins) and t = T (grey bins)
– The initial dependency ratio is set to be representative of the dependency ratio of the
INPS pension scheme for employees12: D(0) = 43.6% in 2015. Consequently, the
initial pensioners’ population is N 2(0) = 436. The initial age distribution of pensioners
is taken from the observed distribution of INPS pension scheme for pensioners in 2015,
which average age is 73.9.
– The initial distribution of pension beneﬁts by age is taken from the observed distribution
of INPS pension scheme for pensioners in 2015, which average amount is 21,175 (Euro).
The age distribution of actives and pensioners at initial and ﬁnal time is shown in Fig. 2.
We make the following assumptions on the evolution of actives and pensioners:
– The age distribution of new entrants in the active state is built in accordance with the
observed age distribution of the actives with past service duration lower than 2 years in
2015. It is assumed to be constant over time (dz(x, t) = dz(x)) (see Fig. 3).
– Transition probabilities at initial time, p12(x, 0), are built from the experience of the
INPS pension scheme for employees in 2015.13 The use of a time varying probability
distribution allows us to represent the progressive increase of the minimum retirement
age, and the future actives expected propensity to remain longer at work. The retirement
propensity decreases over time and halves in T=75 (see Fig. 4 left panel).
– Transition probabilities, p13(x, t), are assumed to be 0 for all ages and time. This implies
that we disregard mortality among actives.14
– Transition probabilities at initial time, p23(x, 0), are obtained from the data provided by
INPS on the mortality experience of pensioners, where we set the maximum attainable
age at 100. These probabilities decreases over time and halves in T=75 consistent with
the average reduction factor calculated from the ofﬁcial mortality projections 2015–2065
provided by the Italian National Institute of Statistics (ISTAT)(see Fig. 4 right panel).
Consistently with the Italian pension legislation, we set the notional rate, g(t), equal to
the GDP growth rate and pension indexation, λ(t), equal to the inﬂation rate.
12 In determining the dependency ratio, we only consider the old-age pensioners as in the case study we
disregard invalidity and survivors beneﬁt.
13 Instead of adopting the simple assumption that actives retired at the minimum retirement age, we adopt a
probability distribution from observed data in order to work with a more realistic case.
14 As previously described, in Italy the distribution of inheritance gains is not considered, consequently these
probabilities do not affect the evolution of the accumulated notional capital (see Eq. 2.23).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
781
Fig. 3 Age distribution of new
entrants in the active state
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4 Left panel: transition probabilities, p12(x, t) in t = 0 and t = 75. Values for ages from 18 to 56 are
always set equal to 0, while values for ages from 68 to 100 are always set equal to 1. Right panel: transition
probabilities, p23(x, t) in t = 0 and t = 75
In the actuarial valuation we adopt a constant discount rate j(t) equal to the long run trend
of notional GDP growth rate.
The economic assumptions are coherent with the standard ones of the Ministry of Finance
for the projection of the national pension expenditure (Ragioneria Generale dello Stato 2018).
Therefore, we assume that the GDP growth rate is equal to the sum of the growth rate of the
active population, labour productivity and inﬂation rate. The growth rate of the individual
wage, ξ(t) is equal to the labour productivity coherently with the model described in Sect. 2.
In the base case scenario, we make the following assumption on the economic evolution:
– The growth rate of the active population ρ(t) = 0 ∀t.15
– The inﬂation rate is 0 for each year and hence λ(t) = 0 ∀t.16
15 This choice is consistent with the national scenario-based medium to long-term forecasts made by the
Ministry of Finance, which assume a ﬁnal active population substantially equal to initial one.
16 Numerical tests we carried out with non-zero inﬂation assumptions show a negligible impact of inﬂation
on the adjustment factors obtained by the ABMs, therefore we decided to neglect inﬂation in the numerical
application.
123

782
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 5 Pension system evolution under the base scenario without ABMs
– The labour productivity is set at 1.5% and hence ξ(t) = 1.5% ∀t.17
Therefore, g(t) = 1.5% ∀t and j(t) = 1.5% ∀t. Finally, the contribution rate c(t) is set
to 0.3.18 The dynamics of dependency ratio, beneﬁt ratio and UL ratio in the base scenario,
without any automatic adjustment, are reported in Fig. 5. The dependency ratio of the pension
system increases from 43.6% to 79.1% in 75 years (due to the increase of life expectancy),
the beneﬁt ratio decreases from 71.5% to 38.6% (due to the annuity rate increase) and the
total unfunded liabilities, TU L(0, 75), is 14.4 mln, equal to the 162.5% of the ﬁrst-year
contributions. Therefore, the ﬁnancial sustainability is not reached by the pension system.
Moreover, Fig. 5 (panel b) clearly shows a severe decrease of the beneﬁt ratio (r(t) decreases
by 32.9%), illustrating the social adequacy issue in a NDC system without adjustments. In this
situation, any government action aimed at enforcing the ﬁnancial sustainability, maintaining
the system’s adequacy unchanged, would be socially unfair.
In order to calculate the T P F, we have to set the penalty factors, the target levels for the
beneﬁt ratio, c1, and the contribution rate, c2. We set c1 as a proportion of the initial beneﬁt
ratio r(0). Since r(0) is very high (71.5%),19 a 25% reduction can be considered a reasonable
limit that can be socially acceptable. Therefore, c1 = 0.75 · r(0) = 0.536.
The other bound, c2, is set as a proportion of the initial contribution rate. The c(1) value
is currently very high and a 5% increment can be reasonable in order to limit its impact on
the labour market. Therefore, c2 = 1.05 · c(1) = 0.315.
We ﬁx the penalty factors at the same level (ψ1 = ψ2 = 0.5) to give the same importance
to the beneﬁt ratio adequacy and the contribution rate acceptability. The TPF in the base
scenario without automatic adjustments is equal to 3.20.
In the ﬁnancial sustainability constraint, we set ε = 0.1% which means that TU L(0, 75)
cannot exceed 0.1% (or fall short of −0.1%) of the ﬁrst year contributions (C(1)=8.9 mln). We
consider 0.1%·C(1) a negligible value compared to the economic dimension of the problem:
in the base scenario without ABMs TU L(0, 75) is 14.4 mln, while the corresponding value
obtained with ABMs is in the range (−8.885, 8.885).
17 This hypothesis is consistent with the long-term labour productivity value adopted by the Ministry of
Finance in the national scenario-based medium to long-term forecasts.
18 The contribution rate, c(t), is set according to that of the Italian pension system: currently equal to 33%,
including invalidity beneﬁts, survivors’ beneﬁts and withdrawals. These latter beneﬁts are not considered in
our case study.
19 The initial value obtained in our case study is very close to the estimated value provided by the Ministry
of Finance in 2020, 71% (see Ragioneria Generale dello Stato 2018). Note that this value is much higher than
the OECD countries average value, 52.9% (see OECD 2017) therefore we consider reasonable to reduce it.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
783
In the liquidity constraint, we set u = 5% considering that the initial value of the ratio
between the annual unfunded liabilities and the total contribution is already close to 4%
in t = 0 and that, in the absence of ABMs, it would exceed 10% after 40 years. Halving
the maximum value that can be reached by the liquidity ratio, seems to be a desirable and
reasonable result.
In order to avoid strong adjustments on pensions, notional accounts and contributions,
lower and upper bounds on the decision variables were introduced in the optimization prob-
lem. The lower bounds G1, Z1 and T1 on the decision variables γ (t), ζ(t) and θ(t) are given
respectively by 0.95, 0.95 and 0.85. The upper bounds G2, Z2 and T2 are 1.05, 1.05 and
1.15, respectively. To prevent jumps in the optimal paths of the decision variables, smooth
constraints were introduced. We set g1, z1 and t1 respectively to 0.99, 0.99 and 0.95, and g2,
z2 and t2 to 1.01, 1.01 and 1.05.
We believe it is unrealistic to assume that governments change pension policy too fre-
quently, therefore, we propose that each ABM should change every k years. Therefore:
γ (t + 1) = γ (t); ζ(t + 1) = ζ(t); θ(t + 1) = θ(t) for t ̸= k, 2k, . . .
In the following, we set k = 5.20
5.2 Results under the base scenario
In this section the results of the optimization model are reported, ﬁrst working on single
ABMs, second on double and triple ABMs. We show the T P F values in the base scenario
under different combinations of ABMs in the “Appendix B” (Table 2). The evolution of
beneﬁt ratio, UL ratio, beneﬁts indexation, notional rate and contribution rate is reported in
Fig. 6 for single ABMs, in Fig. 7 for double ABMs and in Fig. 8 for a triple ABM.
In the base scenario, in the case of single ABMs, we obtain a low reduction of the penalty
function only when the adjustment factor θ is considered. In the other two cases (γ and
ζ) the penalty function gets worse, as a consequence of the NDC pension scheme initially
being strongly unbalanced. The optimal paths (γ ∗, ζ ∗) aim to set TU L(0, 75) to zero by
respectively reducing pension beneﬁts and notional capital, lowering the beneﬁt ratio and
hence increasing T P F. As can be seen from Fig. 6 (panel b), single ABMs always operate to
achieve ﬁnancial sustainability by producing a surplus in the ﬁrst years and a deﬁcit (within
5% of the liquidity constraint) in the last years. Referring to Fig. 6 (panel a), we observe
that only the θ-based ABM provides a beneﬁt ratio value stably over the non-optimized one.
The optimal path γ ∗reduces the beneﬁts indexation that is almost always lower than the
non-optimized one (Fig. 6, panel c). Similarly, ζ produces an optimized notional rate that
is lower than the initial one (Fig. 6, panel d). The θ-based ABM involves a contribution
rate increase over the desirable level c2 (Fig. 6, panel e), which guarantees both ﬁnancial
sustainability and a slightly higher value of r(t) than without ABMs.
In case of double ABMs (see Table 2 in the “Appendix B”), the results indicate a good
T P F reduction achieved by combining θ with the other decision variables. While, the T P F
with the double (γ ∗, ζ ∗) ABM is very close to those calculated with γ ∗-based ABM. In
other words, when an adjustment on the beneﬁts indexation rate (γ ) is already present in
the system, adding the adjustment on the accumulated notional capital (ζ) is substantially
useless to achieving the objective. The optimal path (γ ∗, ζ ∗) is less effective because both
these decision variables work at reducing the amount of pensions in order to achieve ﬁnancial
sustainability, disregarding social adequacy (see the red line in Fig. 7, panel a).
20 According to the duration of the Italian legislature.
123

784
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
(a)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(b)
Fig. 6 Pension system evolution under the base scenario with single ABMs
ThedoubleABMsincludingθ leadtocontributionratevaluesabovethedesirablethreshold
c2, reaching the upper bound T2 = 0.345 (Fig. 7, panel e). From Fig. 7 (panel c) it can be
noticed that the beneﬁts indexation under the double ABM based on γ and θ is higher than
the indexation obtained with the double ABM based on γ and ζ: the increase in contribution
rate produced by θ allows to balance the system (TU L(0, 75) near to zero) without a strong
reduction in the beneﬁts indexation. Note that both these variables produce a higher beneﬁt
ratio. Similar considerations could apply to the notional rate that is higher for the double
ABM based on ζ and θ than for the double ABM based on γ and ζ (Fig. 7, panel d).
When we jointly consider three decision variables, we obtain slightly better T P F results
than those achieved by the double ABMs based on θ. The same considerations apply to the
evolution of the beneﬁt ratio, unfunded liability ratio, beneﬁts indexations, notional rate and
contribution rate.
5.3 Sensitivity to economic scenario
In this section we show the results of the optimization procedure under different economic
scenarios in order to measure the sensitivity of the optimal ABMs to different assumptions
on economic growth. We consider two alternative scenarios in respect to the base one:
– Scenario 2 is characterized by lower employment level and labour productivity than the
base one. We set the growth rate of the active population, ρ(t), equal to −0.5% ∀t.
The labour productivity, and hence the growth rate of the individual wage, ξ(t), is set at
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
785
(a)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(b)
Fig. 7 Pension system evolution under the base scenario with double ABMs
1% ∀t. Therefore, g(t) = 0.5% ∀t and j(t) = 0.5% ∀t.21 The inﬂation rate is set to 0
for each year (as in the base scenario) and hence λ(t) = 0 ∀t.
– Scenario 3 is characterized by ﬁrst lower and then higher values of the growth rate of
active population and labour productivity. We set ρ(t) equal to −0.5% for the ﬁrst 37
years and then equal to 0.5% for the last 38 years. The labour productivity and hence ξ(t)
is equal to 1% for the ﬁrst 37 years and then equal to 2% for the last 38 years. Therefore,
g(t) is equal to 0.5% for the ﬁrst 37 years and equal to 2.5% for the last 38 years. Finally,
j(t) = 1.5% ∀t. The inﬂation rate is set to 0 for each year (as in the base scenario) and
hence λ(t) = 0 ∀t.
Scenario 2 was built in order to represent a situation of low economic growth with an employ-
ment level reduction. Scenario 3 instead was built to obtain, at the end of the 75-year time
horizon, an economic growth and an employment level similar to the base scenario, but con-
sidering two successive economic cycles: a ﬁrst cycle of low economic growth and a second
cycle of high economic growth.
In order to better appreciate the differences between the economic scenarios, in Fig. 9 we
show the evolution of the dependency ratio, beneﬁt ratio and UL ratio for the three scenarios
without ABMs.
21 The value of j(t) is set equal to the average of the GDP growth rate over time; in the case of the base
scenario, where j(t) = 1.5%, the annuity rate would be lower and the pension beneﬁts higher, therefore the
pension system would experience greater ﬁnancial unsustainability. In other words, using the average of the
GDP growth rate as discount rate works as an automatic adjustment mechanism in times of economic crisis.
123

786
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
(a)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(b)
Fig. 8 Pension system evolution under the base scenario with triple ABM
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 9 Pension system evolution under the three economic scenario without ABMs
In scenario 2, the dependency ratio D(t) increases more than in the base scenario, while
in scenario 3, after an initial growth equal to that of scenario 2 (ﬁrst 37 years), D(t) decreases
falling below the base scenario level. With regard to social adequacy, scenario 2 has lower
r(t) values than the other scenarios, while in scenario 3 the r(t) performance is similar the
base scenario one.
In scenario 2, the unfunded liability U L(t) for each t is greater than the value obtained
from the base scenario and TU L(0, 75) amounts to 26.6 mln (299.3% of the contributions in
the ﬁrst year). In scenario 3, U L(t) is greater than the value in both base scenario and scenario
2 for the ﬁrst 45 years, while it is lower in the remaining years, where the pension system
obtains a surplus. The surplus amount is not sufﬁcient to offset the initial liabilities as detected
by TU L(0, 75) that amounts to 26.1 mln (294.2% of the contributions in the ﬁrst year).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
787
(a)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(b)
Fig. 10 Pension system evolution with triple ABM—Scenario 2
The T P F values are reported in the “Appendix B” (Table 3) for the three scenarios under
different ABMs. The results show that the T P F in scenario 2 and 3 is larger than in the base
case, both in the absence and presence of AMBs. It is also noted that, similarly to the base
scenario:
– a single ABM is not effective when the decision variables γ and ζ are concerned;
– the double ABMs are more effective when θ is combined with γ or ζ;
– a triple ABM does not strongly improve the T P F respect to double ABMs based on γ
and θ;
– the decision variable ζ is the least effective. Adding the decision variable ζ is only useful
in minimizing the objective function, when the economic scenario is not monotone.
The dynamics of beneﬁt ratio, UL ratio and contribution rate when the triple ABM is taken
into account are reported in Fig. 10 for scenario 2 and in Fig. 11 for scenario 3.
From Fig. 10, we observe that the triple ABM allows to improve the social adequacy of
the system, even if the beneﬁt ratio is far from the desirable level (panel a); moreover, the
decision variables optimal paths allow to reduce the TU L(0, 75) almost to zero. From panel
c, we note that the optimal path of γ ∗produces a beneﬁts indexation often higher than the
one without ABM, while from panel d the optimal path of ζ ∗generates a notional rate often
smaller than the one without ABM. Finally the optimal path of θ∗requires an increase in the
contribution rate beyond the desirable level (panel e).
From Fig. 11, we observe that the triple ABM does not improve the social adequacy of
the system for the ﬁrst 40 years but increases the beneﬁt ratio for the last 35 years, reaching
123

788
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
(a)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(b)
Fig. 11 Pension system evolution with triple ABM—Scenario 3
the desirable level at the end of the time horizon (panel a). Note also that, in the absence
of ABMs, the NDC system would experience a liquidity issue with a value of U L(t)
C(t) higher
than 25% (panel b). Also in the third scenario, the ABMs allow to reduce the TU L(0, 75)
approximately to zero. The optimal path of γ ∗produces a reduction on beneﬁts indexation
for the ﬁrst 40 years (panel c) and the optimal path of ζ ∗a reduction on the notional rate in
the last 35 years, when the productivity is rising (panel d). At the same time the optimal path
of θ∗requires an increase in the contribution rate up to the ﬁxed upper bound (panel e).
5.4 Sensitivity to penalty factors
In this section we show the results of the optimization procedure under different levels of
the penalty factors in T P F, assuming the economic evolution of the base scenario. The
ﬁrst penalty factor ψ1 is triggered when the beneﬁt ratio is below the desirable level c1,
representing the penalty for the social adequacy failure, while the second one, ψ2, when the
contribution rate is above the desirable level c2 penalizing an excessive level of contribution
ratewhichcouldhavenegativeeffectsonthelabourmarket.Changingthepenaltyfactorslevel
allows us to consider different social and economic objectives in the optimization problem.
Speciﬁcally, we consider a scenario where T P F only involves the adequacy target (scenario
A, where ψ1 = 1 and ψ2 = 0) and another scenario where T P F considers the contribution
rate sustainability and disregards the adequacy (scenario B, where ψ1 = 0 and ψ2 = 1).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
789
(a)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(b)
Fig. 12 Pension system evolution under the scenario A (ψ1 = 1, ψ2 = 0) with triple ABM
As shown in the following, results for scenario B are trivial, therefore we introduce a third
scenario in which the penalty factor for adequacy is smaller than the one for contribution rate
sustainability, but different from zero (scenario C, where ψ1 = 0.25 and ψ2 = 0.75). Table 4,
reportedinthe“AppendixB”,illustratesthe T P F valuesfor3ABMsaccordingtothebase,A,
B and C scenarios. In scenario A only social adequacy is considered. In case of single ABMs,
θ is more effective in respect to γ and ζ. For the double ABMs, the combinations including θ
are more effective in reducing T P F than the other combinations. In the case of triple ABMs
the T P F improvements is insigniﬁcant with respect to the double ABM based on ζ and θ.
Scenario B only considers the contribution rate sustainability and by deﬁnition T P F is
null in absence of ABMs. When we introduce ABMs to guarantee the ﬁnancial sustainability,
γ and ζ do not change the contribution rate and then T P F, while θ produces an increase on
c(t) over the desirable level for few years and hence T P F is close to zero.
Scenario C highlights the ABMs functioning when social adequacy accounts less than the
contribution rate sustainability. Once again the ABMs including θ are the best ones.
Figures 12, 13 and 14 show the evolution of beneﬁt ratio, UL ratio and contribution rate
for all three ABMs for scenario A, B and C respectively.
In scenario A (see Fig. 12), in order to increase the beneﬁt ratio (panel a) and to guarantee
the long term ﬁnancial sustainability and the short term liquidity of the NDC system (panel
b), the beneﬁts indexation is almost always higher than in the no ABMs case (panel c), while
the notional rate is reduced (panel d) and the value of contribution rate should increase up
to the upper bound (panel e). Conversely, in scenario B (Fig. 13) the beneﬁt ratio remains
substantially unchanged respect to the no ABMs case (panel a). Concerning the UL ratio
123

790
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
(a)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(b)
Fig. 13 Pension system evolution under the scenario B (ψ1 = 0, ψ2 = 1) with triple ABM
(panel b), the ABMs reduce the values but, at the same time, require a reduction on the
notional rate (panel d) and a small rise in the contribution rate (panel e) for respecting
the ﬁnancial sustainability and liquidity constraints. Beneﬁts indexation (panel c) remains
substantially unchanged. Scenario C (Fig. 14) results to be a compromise between the base
scenario (Fig. 8) and scenario B (Fig. 13) as a consequence of the penalty factors’ choice.
Respect to the base scenario, scenario C fails the adequacy target but the ﬁnal beneﬁt ratio is
in this case higher than in scenario B (panel a). The beneﬁts indexation in scenario C is higher
than in scenario B (panel c), while the notional rate is smaller than in the base scenario (panel
d). Otherwise, while in the base scenario the contribution rate exceeds the target level, in
scenario C it lays below the threshold even if with higher values than in scenario B (panel e).
6 Conclusions
NDC systems have been introduced in order to confront the sustainability issues in traditional
DB pension systems. While a NDC system can be ﬁnancially sustainable in constant demo-
graphical and economic conditions, it may not be so in dynamic conditions. In such situation,
adjustment mechanisms become necessary to assure the ﬁnancial equilibrium. However, all
the adjustments for NDC system proposed in the literature work on the level of present
and future beneﬁts (typically changing the notional rate and the indexation rate), without
changing the contribution rate. This situation could lead to an impoverishment of pensioners,
producing social adequacy issues.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
791
(a)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(b)
Fig. 14 Pension system evolution under the scenario C (ψ1 = 0.25, ψ2 = 0.75) with triple ABM
In this paper, we introduce within the NDC architecture ABMs that guarantee the social
adequacy in accordance with the ﬁnancial sustainability, by combining the expenditure reduc-
tion/increment with the variation over time of the contribution rate. The optimal ABM is
obtained as a solution of a classical optimization problem by controlling the social adequacy
of a NDC system under constraints on ﬁnancial sustainability in the long run and short term
liquidity. However, as too high contribution rate could produce negative effects on the labour
market, the objective function also includes the contribution rate sustainability.
We consider different economic scenarios and different parameters for the objective func-
tion in order to monitor the change in the optimal paths of control variables (involving notional
rate, indexation rate and contribution rate). In all the scenarios, every optimal solution sat-
isﬁes the sustainability and liquidity constraints. Moreover, the introduction of a decision
variable on contribution rate allows to obtain the best values for the objective function. This
is more evident in the adverse economic scenarios, characterized by a stronger reduction of
the beneﬁt ratio over time, which poses a bigger adequacy issue. Therefore, we can state
that when social adequacy is relevant, the ABM also including the contribution rate is more
effective than those only involving present and future beneﬁts. However, using the contribu-
tion rate as a control variable in a NDC system, where per deﬁnition the contribution rate is
ﬁxed, could be questionable and have limited applicability in a “canonical” NDC. Otherwise,
operating only on notional rate and pension indexation does not allow to assure adequate pen-
sions. Thus, in order to guarantee social adequacy, we assume that the contribution rate could
change, deﬁning this system as “Quasi-NDC”.
123

792
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
In conclusion, although our model has some limitations, it may serve as a useful tool for
helping policy making. As any modeling, our ﬁnal outcomes depend on the underlying data,
assumptions and model’s framework. In particular, they are strictly related to the deﬁnition
of the target function to minimize as well as the constraints to fulﬁll. Further analyses could
be carried out based on alternative deﬁnitions of social adequacy and ﬁnancial constraints.
Finally, our model has been developed in a deterministic environment, not taking into account
the uncertainty concerning economic and demographic conditions. Future research could be
dedicated to develop an ABMs in a stochastic environment, for example modeling the wage
and the demographic processes as stochastic.
Funding Open access funding provided by UniversitA degli Studi di Roma La Sapienza within the CRUI-
CARE Agreement.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
A Appendix
See Table 1.
Table 1 Main features of a NDC pension scheme. Example of Sweden, Italy, Latvia and Poland
Sweden
Italy
Latvia
Poland
Contribution
rate
16%
33%
14%
12.2%
Retirement
age
65
65
66
65
Notional rate
Rate of increase of
the mean
individual wage
Average increase
on 3 years of the
GDP
Rate of increase of
the total wages
Rate of increase of
the total wages
Indexation of
the beneﬁts
Difference
between the
consumer price
index and 1.6%
Consumer price
index
Consumer price
index
Combination of
the consumer
price index and
the wage
increase
Conversion
factor
Life time annuity
computed with
an ex ante rate of
increase of 1.6%
Life time annuity
computed with
an ex ante rate of
increase of 1.5%
Life expectancy
Life expectancy
Automatic
adjustment
Yes
No
No
No
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
793
B Appendix
See Tables 2, 3 and 4.
Table 2 Values of the total penalty function under different AMBs. Optimization parameters: ψ1 = 0.5,
ψ2 = 0.5, c1 = 0.536, c2 = 0.315, ε = 0.001, u = 0.05, G1 = Z1 = 0.95, T1 = 0.85, G2 = Z2 = 1.05,
T2 = 1.15, g1 = z1 = 0.99, t1 = 0.95, g2 = z2 = 1.01, t2 = 1.05
Factors
No ABMs
One ABM
Two ABMs
Three ABMs
γ ∗(t)
ζ ∗(t)
θ∗(t)
γ ∗(t),
ζ ∗(t)
ζ ∗(t),
θ∗(t)
γ ∗(t),
θ∗(t)
γ ∗(t), ζ ∗(t),
θ∗(t)
TPF
3.20
3.38
3.48
2.72
3.37
2.47
2.34
2.33
Table 3 Values of the total penalty function under different AMBs and different economic scenarios. Opti-
mization parameters: ψ1 = 0.5, ψ2 = 0.5, c1 = 0.536, c2 = 0.315, ε = 0.001, u = 0.05, G1 = Z1 = 0.95,
T1 = 0.85, G2 = Z2 = 1.05, T2 = 1.15, g1 = z1 = 0.99, t1 = 0.95, g2 = z2 = 1.01, t2 = 1.05
Scenarios
No ABMs
One ABM
Two ABMs
Three ABMs
γ ∗(t)
ζ ∗(t)
θ∗(t)
γ ∗(t),
ζ ∗(t)
ζ ∗(t),
θ∗(t)
γ ∗(t),
θ∗(t)
γ ∗(t), ζ ∗(t),
θ∗(t)
Base
3.20
3.38
3.48
2.72
3.37
2.47
2.34
2.33
2
4.67
5.06
5.18
4.42
5.05
4.34
4.23
4.21
3
3.49
3.89
3.93
3.46
3.77
2.94
2.91
2.73
Table 4 Values of the total penalty function under different weights of the penalty factors. Optimization
parameters: c1 = 0.536, c2 = 0.315, ε = 0.001, u = 0.05, G1 = Z1 = 0.95, T1 = 0.85, G2 = Z2 = 1.05,
T2 = 1.15, g1 = z1 = 0.99, t1 = 0.95, g2 = z2 = 1.01, t2 = 1.05. Base scenario: ψ1 = 0.5, ψ2 = 0.5,
scenario A: ψ1 = 1, ψ2 = 0, scenario B: ψ1 = 0, ψ2 = 1, scenario C: ψ1 = 0.25, ψ2 = 0.75
Scenarios
No ABMs
One ABM
Two ABMs
Three ABMs
γ ∗(t)
ζ ∗(t)
θ∗(t)
γ ∗(t),
ζ ∗(t)
ζ ∗(t),
θ∗(t)
γ ∗(t),
θ∗(t)
γ ∗(t), ζ ∗(t),
θ∗(t)
Base
3.20
3.38
3.48
2.72
3.37
2.47
2.34
2.33
A
6.40
6.76
6.97
4.86
6.74
3.05
2.79
2.78
B
0
0
0
0.05
0
0
0
0
C
1.60
1.69
1.74
1.48
1.68
1.46
1.45
1.43
123

794
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
References
Alonso-García, J., Boado-Penas, M. D. C., & Devolder, P. (2018). Automatic balancing mechanisms for
notional deﬁned contribution accounts in the presence of uncertainty. Scandinavian Actuarial Journal,
2, 85–108.
Battocchio, P., Menoncin, F., & Scaillet, O. (2007). Optimal asset allocation for pension funds under mortality
risk during the accumulation and decumulation phases. Annals of Operations Research, 152, 141–165.
Boado-Penas, M. D. C., Valdés-Prieto, S., & Vidal-Meliá, C. (2008). The actuarial balance sheet for pay-as-
you-go ﬁnance: Solvency indicators for Spain and Sweden. Fiscal Studies, 29(1), 89–134.
Boado-Penas, M. D. C., & Vidal-Meliá, C. (2013). The actuarial balance of the PAYG pension system: The
Swedish NDC model versus the DB-type models. In R. Holzmann, E. Palmer, & D. Robalino (Eds.),
NDC pension schemes in a changing pension world. Gender, politics, and ﬁnancial stability (Vol. 2).
Washington, DC: World Bank.
Chlo´n-Domi´nczak, A., Franco, D., & Palmer, E. (2012). The ﬁrst wave of NDC reforms: The experiences
of Italy, Latvia, Poland and Sweden. In R. Holzmann, E. Palmer, & D. Robalino (Eds.), NDC pension
schemes in a changing pension world. Progress, lessons, and implementation (Vol. 1). Washington, DC:
World Bank.
D’Addio, A. C., & Whitehouse, E. (2012). Towards ﬁnancial sustainability of pensions systems: The role
of automatic adjustment mechanisms in OCDE and EU countries (Vol. 8(12)). Bern: Bundesmat fur
Sozialversicherungen.
Devolder, P., & de Valeriola, S. (2019). Between DB and DC: Optimal hybrid PAYG pension schemes.
European Actuarial Journal, 9(2), 463–482.
Gannon, F., Legros, F.,& Touzé, V. (2015). Automatic adjustment mechanisms and budget balancing of pension
schemes. Working paper.
Godinez-Olivares, H., Boado-Penas, M. C., & Haberman, S. (2016). Optimal strategies for pay-as-you-go
ﬁnance: A sustainability framework. Insurance Mathematics and Economics, 69, 117–126.
Gronchi, S., & Nisticò, S. (2006). Implementing the NDC theoretical model: A comparison of Italy and
Sweden. In R. Holzmann & G. Palmer (Eds.), Pension reform: Issues and prospect for non-ﬁnancial
deﬁned contribution (NDC) schemes, chapter 19 (pp. 493–515). Washington, DC: World Bank.
Holzmann, R. (2017). The ABCs of nonﬁnancial deﬁned contribution (NDC) schemes. International Social
Security Review, 70(3), 53–77.
Iyer, S. (1999). Actuarial mathematics of social security pensions. Geneva: International Labour Ofﬁce and
International Social Security Association.
Johnson, S. G. (2010). The NLopt nonlinear-optimization package. http://cran.r-project.org/package=nloptr.
Klein Haneveld, W. K., Streutker, M. H., & van der Vlerk, M. H. (2010). An ALM model for pension funds
using integrated chance constraints. Annals of Operations Research, 177, 47–62.
Knell, M. (2010). How automatic adjustment factors affect the internal rate of return of PAYG pension systems.
Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 9(1), 1–23.
Knell, M., Kohler-Toglhofer, W., & Prammer, D. (2006). The Austrian pension system—How recent reforms
have changed ﬁscal sustainability and pension beneﬁts. Monetary Policy and Economy, Q2(06), 69–93.
Kopa, M., Moriggia, V., & Vitali, S. (2018). Individual optimal pension allocation under stochastic dominance
constraints. Annals of Operations Research, 260, 255–291.
Musgrave, R. (1981). A reappraisal of social security ﬁnance. Social Security ﬁnancing (pp. 89–127). Cam-
bridge: MIT.
OECD. (2017). Pensions at a glance 2017: OECD and G20 indicators. Paris: OECD Publishing. https://doi.
org/10.1787/pension_glance-2017-en.
Palmer, E. (2006). What’s NDC? In R. Holzmann & E. Palmer (Eds.), Pension reform: Issues and prospects for
non-ﬁnancial deﬁned contribution (NDC) schemes, chapter 2 (pp. 17–35). Washington, DC: The World
Bank.
Powell, M. J. D. (1994). A direct search optimization method that models the objective and constraint functions
by linear interpolation. In S. Gomez & J. P. Hennart (Eds.), Advances in optimization and numerical
analysis (pp. 51–67). Dordrecht: Springe. ISBN 978-90-481-4358-0.
Ragioneria Generale dello Stato (RGS). (2018). Le tendenze di medio-lungo periodo del sistema pensionistico
e socio-sanitario - Aggiornamento 2018. Report, 19, Rome.
Schokkaert, E., Devolder, P., Hindriks, J., & Vandenbroucke, F. (2018). Towards an equitable and sustainable
points system. A proposal for pension reform in Belgium. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1474747218000112.
Settergren, O. (2001). The automatic balance mechanism of the Swedish pension system—A non-technical
introduction. Wirtschaftspolitische Blätter, 4, 339–349.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:765–795
795
Valdés-Prieto, S. (2000). The ﬁnancial stability of notional account pensions. Scandinavian Journal of Eco-
nomics, 102(3), 395–417. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9442.03205.
Vidal-Meliá, C., Boado-Penas, M. D. C., & Settergren, O. (2009). Automatic balance mechanisms in pay-as-
you-go pension systems. The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance Issues and Practice, 34(2), 287–317.
Vidal-Meliá, C., Boado-Penas, M. D. C., & Settergren, O. (2010). Instruments for improving the equity,
transparencyandsolvencyofpaygpensionsystems.NDCs,ABsandABMs.InM.Micocci,G.Gregoriou,
& G. B. Masala (Eds.), Pension fund risk management. Financial and actuarial modelling, chapter 18
(pp. 419–473). New York: Chapman and Hall. ISBN 1439817520.
Ypma, J. (2018). nloptr: R interface to NLopt. http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/nloptr/index.html.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123