TITLE: Incorporating topic membership in review rating prediction from unstructured data: a gradient boosting approach
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05336-z
---

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05336-z
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Incorporating topic membership in review rating prediction
from unstructured data: a gradient boosting approach
Nan Yang1 · Nikolaos Korﬁatis1
· Dimitris Zissis1 · Konstantina Spanaki2
Accepted: 14 March 2023 / Published online: 19 June 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Rating prediction is a crucial element of business analytics as it enables decision-makers
to assess service performance based on expressive customer feedback. Enhancing rating
score predictions and demand forecasting through incorporating performance features from
verbatim text ﬁelds, particularly in service quality measurement and customer satisfaction
modelling is a key objective in various areas of analytics. A range of methods has been
identiﬁed in the literature for improving the predictability of customer feedback, including
simple bag-of-words-based approaches and advanced supervised machine learning models,
which are designed to work with response variables such as Likert-based rating scores.
This paper presents a dynamic model that incorporates values from topic membership, an
outcome variable from Latent Dirichlet Allocation, with sentiment analysis in an Extreme
Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) model used for rating prediction. The results show that, by
incorporating features from simple unsupervised machine learning approaches (LDA-based),
an 86% prediction accuracy (AUC based) can be achieved on objective rating values. At
the same time, a combination of polarity and single-topic membership can yield an even
higher accuracy when compared with sentiment text detection tasks both at the document and
sentence levels. This study carries signiﬁcant practical implications since sentiment analysis
tasks often require dictionary coverage and domain-speciﬁc adjustments depending on the
task at hand. To further investigate this result, we used Shapley Additive Values to determine
the additive predictability of topic membership values in combination with sentiment-based
methods using a dataset of customer reviews from food delivery services.
Keywords Latent dirichlet allocation · Sentiment analysis · Machine learning · Online
reviews · XGBoost
B Nikolaos Korﬁatis
n.korﬁatis@uea.ac.uk
1
Norwich Business School, University of East Anglia, Thomas Paine Study Centre, 1.01C, Norwich
Research Park, Norwich NR4 7TJ, UK
2
Audencia Business School, Nantes, France
123

632
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
1 Introduction
Online reviews are a longstanding topic in literature, and their inﬂuence on sales has been
well documented (See-To & Ngai, 2018; Liu et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020). Customers
view reviews as a way to gather information about the quality of products or services (Li
et al., 2019; Z. Zhao et al., 2019a, 2019b) as well as embodiments of experience-speciﬁc
information regarding the quality of products or services. The rating score from customer
feedback represents customer overall satisfaction or dissatisfaction directly thus affecting
customers’ purchase behaviour. As the antecedents of customer rating have been extensively
researched, the problem of rating prediction attracts more attention, especially when trying
to attribute the rating score to particular aspects of the review or service also known as aspect
rating (Korﬁatis et al., 2019). The textual content associated with the rating score is provided
to justify the latter, thus explaining the underlying rationale, which offers consumers opportu-
nities to express themselves freely rather than feel restricted by pre-deﬁned subareas deﬁned
in the user interface (Büschken & Allenby, 2016). Compared with using the characteristics
of reviews (i.e., review length) for rating prediction, research concerning the prediction of
rating scores from the textual content of customer reviews is attracting more attention, as it
tends to carry signiﬁcant implications for particular service domains.
The review rating score prediction problem is considered to originate from the sentiment
classiﬁcation task of classifying reviews as thumbs up (recommended) or thumbs down (not
recommended) (Pang et al., 2002; Qiu et al., 2018). Several studies suggest a high level of
consistency between a review’s rating score and its textual justiﬁcation (Hu et al., 2014;
Qiu et al., 2018). Even the signiﬁcant variation of ratings could be explained by customer
sentiment statistically (Geetha et al., 2017), the numeric rating scores in customer reviews do
not equally represent customer sentiment, as the polarity information appearing in reviews
cannot be fully captured by ratings due to the limitations of the rating scale itself (Ghose &
Ipeirotis, 2011).
Online reviews are widely adopted for companies to understand how customer per-
ceived the quality of products or services. As demonstrated by Tirunillai and Tellis (2014),
multidimensionality exists in quality measurement. Parasuraman et al. (1988) developed
SERVQUAL to measure service quality using multiple dimensions including reliability, tan-
gibles, responsiveness, assurance, and empathy. Similarly, there are also latent dimensions
within the textual content in online reviews (Tirunillai & Tellis, 2014), The predictive power
of these dimensions has been examined by several studies. Korﬁatis et al. (2019) illustrated
that the extracted dimensions in review text could add predictive accuracy to the overall
customer satisfaction. Xu (2020) also revealed the textual factors in review text have an
asymmetric inﬂuence on customer satisfaction.
The latent dimensions can be discovered using topic models, which has been applied in
various business areas to identify different themes from customers’ textual feedback. Using
topic models, the association and connection between a rating score and review text can be
established, which in turn can assist businesses in understanding the reasons driving different
levels of customer satisfaction as well as the multidimensionality of the service’s outcome
(Korﬁatis et al., 2019). In topic models, mixed-membership models indicate that a document
is considered as a mixture of multiple topics, in which each word belongs to one single topic.
Compared with single-membership which allocate each document to only one topic, mixed-
membership models allow each document cover multiple topics. we can extract the latent
topics (dimensions) as well as how much each document is associated with each latent topic,
which is the topic membership. LDA allows us to compute the topic membership and that
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
633
contained in unstructured data could increasing the accuracy when predicting rating scores
(Korﬁatis et al., 2019; Tirunillai & Tellis, 2014).
Therefore, in this study, we aim to evaluate the ability of topic membership to explain
and predict customer overall satisfaction as well as exploring how topic membership could
be coupled with customer sentiment to enhance the prediction accuracy. Speciﬁcally, using
machine learning, we examine how topic models can be used in conjunction with sentiment
analysis to quantify customer feedback in cases where domain speciﬁc sentiment dictionaries
cannot be available. In addition, given the limitations and the issues with domain-speciﬁc
sentiment analysis, we evaluate whether topic modelling can provide a better alternative
than sentiment analysis in review rating prediction. The latter has signiﬁcant implications,
as it removes the necessity for employing domain-speciﬁc dictionaries and other approaches
that need to be adjusted to the vocabulary of the business domain.
To address these objectives, we perform a large-scale machine learning analysis on a
dataset of 1,810,831 customer reviews from 12,153 restaurants on JustEat, a popular online
food delivery platform in the United Kingdom. Our analysis is multi-faceted. We design and
validate two experiments. First, a binary classiﬁcation task is formed (using a rating score
cut-off) to have a robust evaluation of the performance of topic membership as well as its
comparison with customer sentiment (in both document-level and sentence-level). We also
compare the predictive abilities across topic memberships of all topics. Second, the task of
predicting the actual rating score is proposed. We combine each topic membership separately
with the polarity score and compare the additive predictability of each topic in predicting the
rating score. We perform a post-hoc analysis for robustness by incorporating these two fea-
tures as covariates using a gradient boosting model using XGBoost—an established machine
learning technique. Using the corresponding Shapley additive explanation values (SHAP),
we identify the contribution to the prediction of the rating value by each topic/sentiment
combination separately.
Our study contributes to the analytics literature by demonstrating how these two differ-
ent approaches of incorporating features from unstructured data can be used in tandem to
predict and explain customer satisfaction. Our ﬁndings can lead to faster and more accurate
managerial insights for businesses since topic-based rating prediction can uncover multidi-
mensional aspects of service quality that cannot be captured by sentiment analysis. Thus,
it can explain customer rating scores and highlight service aspects within customer textual
comments to facilitate businesses’ understanding of customers’ perceived quality towards
products or services, which affects customers’ purchase decisions (Yeo et al., 2022). Beyond
customer reviews from review websites, there are also various sources of customer feedback
used in business analytics cases, such as online forums and social media, which do not con-
tain rating scores, or the rating score is incomplete for some of these dimensions. Our study
can also extend to these sources.
To this end, the rest of this paper is organised as follows: Sect. 2 reviews the literature on
sentiment analysis and topic modelling on customer reviews and how they are applied for
rating prediction. Section 3 demonstrates our data sample, models, and metrics for model
performance evaluation. Section 4 details the corpus pre-processing procedures and model
parameter selection; then, it displays the results for these experiments. Section 5 summarises
the analysis and discusses the implications of the results for researchers and practitioners.
The study concludes in Sect. 6 with limitations and future research directions.
123

634
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
2 Literature review
2.1 Sentiment analysis
Sentiment analysis is a celebrated computational analysis method in business and manage-
ment used for detecting customer attitudes and feelings expressed within an unstructured part
of customer feedback through natural language processing (NLP) techniques. It is comprised
of two main tasks: (a) polarity detection—the identiﬁcation of whether the text is positive or
negative and (b) affect detection—the feelings and emotions expressed in the written com-
munication. Polarity detection is the most common approach applied in sentiment analysis,
mainly thanks to the ease of labelling the large textual corpus concerning consumer interac-
tion with company touchpoints (e.g., via social media). In that respect, the literature treats
polarity as either an ordered categorical (with the text classiﬁed as positive/neutral/negative)
or a continuous numerical score of an asymmetric continuum ranging from a normalised
negative algebraic value to a positive algebraic value (e.g., −1 to + 1). Depending on the
task at hand, sentiment can be calculated at the document or sentence levels. The latter also
produces a conﬁdence band that can produce more reliable prediction outcomes if sentiment
is operationalised as input.
Apart from document-level and sentence-level sentiment analysis, aspect-level sentiment
analysis is also discussed in the past literature. In many situations, it requires more investiga-
tion at the aspect level to identify entities and the associated aspects and sentiments (Do et al.,
2019). For instance, companies would like to identify what aspects of their products attract or
dissatisfy customers from customer reviews to improve products (Birjali et al., 2021). There
could be two types of aspects: explicit aspects and implicit aspects. The former represents
those aspects that are directly mentioned in the text, the latter illustrates those aspect terms
that don’t appear in the text but are implied by other terms (Hu & Liu, 2004). Several Machine
learning approaches has been employed to extract the implicit aspects (Bagheri et al., 2013;
Quan & Ren, 2014).
Various sentiment analysis techniques are discussed in the literature (Al-Natour &
Turetken, 2020; Liu, 2010, 2012; Yadav & Vishwakarma, 2020). These can be summarised
into two major types: lexicon-based and machine learning approaches. The lexicon-based
sentiment approach uses a bag-of-words model that requires a dictionary consisting of pre-
deﬁned words or phrases assigned by negative or positive values. The other popular approach
considers sentiment analysis as a pattern recognition problem and utilises machine learning
techniques for classiﬁcation tasks or predictions (Ghiassi & Lee, 2018). Farkhod et al. (2021)
proposed a TDS (Topic Document Sentiment) model, which is an unsupervised machine
learning method based on the JST (Joint Sentiment Topic) model and LDA. They used the
proposed model to discover the sentiment at the word, document and topic levels. When com-
pared with sentiment terms (usually adjectives) from the lexicon-based approach; machine
learning techniques can extract broader and more comprehensive features about several
aspects of text, including nouns and verbs expressing descriptions and attitudes towards
these objects (Liu, 2012).
In addition, the hybrid approach which combines lexicon-based approach and machine
learning approach attracts more attention as it can integrate the advantages of machine learn-
ing approach (high accuracy and ﬂexibility) and that from lexicon-based approach (stability)
(Birjali et al., 2021). For instance, Marshan et al. (2020) developed a hybrid model combing
the lexicon-based and machine learning approaches to detect customer sentiment contained
in reviews from an e-commerce platform. Three machine learning approaches are selected
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
635
including the Naïve Bayes, KNN (k-nearest neighbours) and SVM (Support Vector Machine).
Results showed that the Naïve Bayes had the best performance as a classiﬁer. Elshakankery
and Ahmed (2019) proposed a hybrid model HILATSA, representing Hybrid Incremental
Learning approach for Arabic Tweets Sentiment Analysis to detect the sentiment in tweets.
It is a semi-automatic learning system which will update the lexicon to keep it up to date.
Sentiment analysis for detecting customers’ emotions and attitudes, has been widely
applied in user-generated content (e.g., online reviews), and several studies have examined
the importance of customer sentiment in understanding the relationship with customer rat-
ings, predicting sales, and identifying fraudulent reviews (Y. Zhao et al., 2019a, 2019b; Z.
Zhao et al., 2019a, 2019b; Kumar et al., 2022). Innovative applications, combining machine
learning and bag-of-words-based approaches, have been applied in practice. Dey et al. (2018)
proposed a system that could generate Senti-N-Gram, an n-gram sentiment dictionary, and
proposed an algorithm to extract the sentiment scores for n-grams from a random corpus con-
sisting of review text as well as numerical ratings. This approach showed better performance
than an existing unigram-based approach (VADER) and another n-gram-based approach (SO-
CAL). Recent studies have also applied machine learning approaches to expand dictionary
coverage. For instance, Sharma and Dutta (2021) proposed a framework called SentiDraw,
which calculates the sentiment score for each word from customer reviews based on the
rating distribution. Then it was combined with Support Vector Machine (SVM) to achieve
better polarity determination.
2.2 Topic models on user-generated content
Online reviews, functioning as the “voice of the consumer”, are a form of electronic word-of-
mouth (eWOM); these play a critical role in affecting customers’ decision-making process,
behavioural intention, and product sales performance (Li et al., 2019; Verma & Yadav, 2021).
It has been considered an unignorable information source for both customers and sellers,
especially the textual content within customer reviews, which includes the textual description
of the ﬁrst-hand usage experiences of previous customers (Guo et al., 2017). The growing
popularity of online reviews provides customers with the opportunity to express themselves
naturally with unstructured data.
Customers’ opinions in online reviews are multidimensional and may reﬂect different
aspects, such as product-speciﬁc features or service aspect related evaluations (Büschken
& Allenby, 2016; Kim et al., 2020; Mai & Le, 2021). Therefore, to ascertain these latent
dimensions from customer reviews, the topic modelling approach is applied widely, as topic
models could discover patterns reﬂecting latent topics within a document from unstructured
customer reviews. It assumes that documents consist of a set of topics, and each topic covers a
mixture of words (Alghamdi & Alfalqi, 2015). There are a variety of topic models, including
Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) (Landauer et al., 1998), PLSA (Hofmann, 2001), and LDA
(Blei et al., 2003). There are many extensions of LDA, including the Correlated Topic Model
(CTM) (Blei & Lafferty, 2007) and the Structural Topic Model (STM) (Roberts et al., 2014).
Researchers either adopts existing topic models or proposed new variants of topic models
to discover the multidimensionality of customer reviews. The latent dimensions contained
in customer reviews are critical since they serve as the foundation for how customers evalu-
ate service, brands and ﬁrms, thus affecting new product development or brand positioning.
Kwon et al. (2021) employed topic modelling approach and sentiment analysis to online
customer review for airlines in order to identify customers’ needs. They extracted six dimen-
sions using LDA and identiﬁed several words that contained positive and negative emotions
123

636
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
respectively. Tirunillai and Tellis (2014) extended LDA and employed the variant of LDA to
customers reviews from ﬁve markets and 16 brands. They identiﬁed the latent dimensions and
ascertained the valence, dynamics and heterogeneity, etc. for strategy analysis. Büschken and
Allenby (2016) developed a new model (Sentence-constrained LDA model) based on LDA.
They believe that people tend to change their topics across sentences instead of discussing two
topics in one sentence. They applied it to two datasets consisting of customer feedback from
both restaurant and hotel industry, illustrating the helpfulness of topic modelling approach for
unstructured data. Hu et al. (2019) employed STM to customer reviews from hotel industry
in order to understand customer dissatisfaction from their complaints. They identiﬁed top 10
latent dimensions related with customer dissatisfaction and how dimensions change across
hotel grades. Customers of high-grade hotels mainly complained about service issues while
that of low-graded hotels are more dissatisﬁed with facility-related problems.
2.3 Rating prediction
Given the importance of understanding customer satisfaction, rating prediction is a vital task.
Several studies have examined the characteristics of online reviews (e.g., review length) to
understand customer ratings (Ghasemaghaei et al., 2018; Lai et al., 2021). The information
contained in textual comments also plays an important role in understanding customer ratings.
Therefore, how to utilise review texts to predict customer rating scores has been a popular
topic.
Based on whether the review text is provided in the prediction, the rating prediction task is
mainly divided into two categories: (a) personalised rating prediction and (b) review-aware
rating prediction. The ﬁrst focuses on predicting users’ rating scores over unrated items using
theirpreviousratingbehaviours,whichiswidelyexploredintherecommendationsystemﬁeld
(Cheng et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2016). Latent factor models, including matrix factorisation,
are applied widely and successfully for this type of rating prediction. Customers’ textual
comments could be corroborated to model user interests and item features (Tan et al., 2016;
Zhang et al., 2016) and to improve the accuracy of rating prediction models. The second
concentrates on understanding customers’ rating scores by discovering valuable information
from the provided review text. The direct relationship between sentiment and ratings has
been conﬁrmed in previous studies (Geetha et al., 2017; Hu et al., 2014). Table 1 summarises
the two categories of rating prediction tasks, which approaches they adopt to extract features
from the review text, and what prediction models they adopted.
Büschken and Allenby (2016) employed a variant of LDA to extract latent topics and to
predict customer ratings using a dataset of customer reviews from Italian restaurants. It is
examined that topic membership could be a meaning device to explain customers’ ratings
scores. They used a latent cut-point model to examine the relationships between customer
satisfaction and the topic membership of 8 topics. Xu (2020) employed LSI to the content of
customer reviews from hotel industry and identiﬁed 8 positive factors and 17 negative factors.
Text regression was conducted using the vector space of each textual reviews to examine how
they can affect the overall customer satisfaction. The asymmetric effects were found from
the results representing that not all positive textual factors affected customer satisfaction
positively. Korﬁatis et al. (2019) adopted STM to online reviews from airline passengers
and extract latent dimensions of service quality from the textual content. Together with the
predeﬁned subcategories by the online platforms, the latent dimensions could add the ability
to predict customer overall satisfaction. These studies provide us with another way to predict
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
637
Table 1 Overview of existing literature in rating prediction
Type
Task
Approach
Description
Prediction model
Indicative studies
Personalised rating
prediction
Extracting contextual
features and combining
them to rating prediction
Topic model extensions
These studies were based
on topic models, and
combined topic
modelling approaches
with the latent factor
models
Self-proposed model
(Cheng et al., 2018;
McAuley & Leskovec,
2013; Zhang & Wang,
2016)
Extracting complex
features and improving
rating accuracy
Deep learning
These studies built deep
learning architectures
with multiple layers
Self-proposed model
(Seo et al., 2017; Xing
et al., 2019)
Review-aware rating
prediction
Exploratory relationship
with rating
Sentiment analysis
Direct impact of sentiment
on review ratings and
obtained the preliminary
relationship between
sentiment and ratings
Fix effects model/linear
regression
(Geetha et al., 2017; Hu
et al., 2014)
Rating prediction
Sentiment analysis
Applied sentiment
analysis to review text
and adopted the
extracted sentiment
features for rating
prediction
Ridge regression/linear
regression
(Qu et al., 2010; Y. Zhao
et al., 2019a, 2019b)
Rating prediction
Topic models
Applied LSA to discover
positive and negative
attributes from reviews
and used these
attributes as
independent variables in
text regression to predict
overall satisfaction
Text regression
(Xu, 2020)
123

638
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
Table 1 (continued)
Type
Task
Approach
Description
Prediction model
Indicative studies
Rating prediction
Both sentiment analysis
and topic models
Applied LDA to exploit
several dimensions from
review text and
combined them with
sentiment detected by
sentiment analysis to
explain the overall
satisfaction
Linear
regression/multinomial
regression
(Xiang et al., 2017)
Rating prediction
Self-proposed model
Added constraints to the
LDA model and
proposed a
sentence-constrained
LDA model, and
combined it with rating
data
Self-proposed model
(Büschken & Allenby,
2016)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
639
the customer ratings in addition to using the predeﬁned subscales by companies or platforms
and proved the ability of topic membership to predict and explain customer ratings.
3 Data and methods
For this study we follow the Cross-Industry Standard Process for Data Mining (CRISP-DM),
which is proposed by Wirth and Hipp (2000), aiming to converting business problems into
data mining projects which could be carried out and applied regardless of the type of tech-
nologies and industries. We illustrate “Business Understanding” and “Data Understanding”
in Sects. 3.1 and 3.2. We move to “Data Preparation” in this section and “Modelling” in
Sect. 4.
3.1 Dataset
Our data considers textual reviews of UK customers and is collected from JustEat, the most
popular online food delivery service provider in the UK, with more than 68% of the market
share of online orders.1 Besides, JustEat could provide customers with each review including
rating score and review text from previous customers who purchased in the speciﬁc restaurant
while other competitors (e.g., Deliveroo and UberEats) only display the overall rating score
and the number of reviews of the speciﬁc restaurant. After customers order and receive the
delivered food, they are invited to leave customer reviews describing the entire experience
with the food delivery. Potential customers searching for a restaurant can ﬁnd these reviews on
restaurants’ pages, which can be of assistance to them. We collect customer reviews written
in English and published on their website from January 2016 to November 2021. Generally,
there should be a numerical rating score with textual justiﬁcation in each review. JustEat
adopts a 6-point scale rating system in which customers give a rating from 1 to 6 stars for
three service categories: food quality, delivery time, and restaurant service. The ﬁnal rating
score shown to other consumers when reading these reviews is calculated as the (simple)
average of the individual ratings of these three categories.
The textual justiﬁcation provided by the customer considers all three service categories;
therefore, the average rating provides intervals between the minimum and maximum rating
scores. To make our analysis more meaningful, we select reviews with textual comments
from customers and ﬁlter out those that only contain rating scores. Additionally, each review
length is constrained in terms of length between 15 and 200 words.2 In total, our sample
contains 1,810,831 customer reviews from 12,153 restaurants. Using the density distribution
of the ratings as provided in the dataset, we used the median of the rating scale (3.5 stars) as
the boundary (marked with the blue line in Fig. 1) for separating the positive and negative
reviews given its even distribution in both classes.
Figure 1 shows the distribution of the rating scores for our sample. This indicates that
the percentages of extreme ratings are signiﬁcantly higher than others. The average rating
score is M = 3.57 (SD = 1.82), which is slightly positive. As to the actual distribution of
the scores, the highest percentage occurs in 6-stars ratings, amounting to 20.9%, followed
by a 1-star rating, which has the second-highest proportion (15.3%). In total, the proportions
1 Statista Global Consumer Survey – Brand Report, 2021.
2 A winsorization procedure was followed for the maximum values considering that any reviews about 200
words were above the 95% quantile of the distribution of review word length.
123

640
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
Fig. 1 Distribution of rating scores within the reviews in our sample. The blue dashed line outlines the median
rating score
of positive (49.19%) and negative reviews (50.81%) in our sample are similar, which means
that our sample is balanced.
3.2 Sentiment analysis
Sentiment analysis is generally measured through polarity, which measures the posi-
tive/negative intent expressed in the text. It is generally calculated by various techniques
related to the bag-of-words approach; however, other studies in the literature have also
applied more complicated models. For polarity calculation, the standard method is to use
a lexicon-based approach with domain-speciﬁc or general dictionaries (or lexicons). These
lexicons can be compiled manually or acquired automatically. The function we adopt to cal-
culate polarity is based on subjectivity lexicons, which contain a list of terms connected with
particular emotional states. For instance, the word ‘awful’ relates to a negative state, while
the word ‘excellent’ is associated with a positive state.
We employ the subjectivity lexicon from Hu and Liu (2004) to calculate polarity, including
approximately 6,800 prior-labelled words, which have been identiﬁed by benchmarking these
terms on a large dataset of online consumer reviews. For identifying polarity in the text, a
cluster of terms (xT
i ) that contains four words before and two words after the polarised
word has been used to introduce context. Words in the cluster that do not have value are
called neutral words and are tagged as x0
i , which affect word count (n). In addition, there
are words that do not have emotion but have an inﬂuence on the emotional context, such as
valence shifters. Ampliﬁers (xa
i )/De-ampliﬁers (xd
i )/ are words which can increase/decrease
the emotional intent of words, which are given a weight for calculation (Rinker, 2020). The
context is deﬁned as follows:
xT
i =

(1 + c(x A
i −x D
i )

∗w(−1)

x N
i ,
where:
x A
i =

wneg ∗xa
i

, x D
i
= max

x D′
i , −1

,
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
641
x D′
i
=

−wneg ∗xa
i + xd
i

,
wneg =

x N
i

mod 2.
The polarity score is calculated as:
δ = xT
i
√n
We constrain the polarity score at (−1, 1) using a transformation formula as follows:

1 −
1
exp(δ)
 
∗2

−1.
We use consumers’ original review comments before Part-of-Speech tagging and stop
words removal because the absence of words will decrease the accuracy by affecting the
density of keywords.
3.3 Latent dirichlet allocation (LDA)
The LDA model proposed by Blei et al. (2003) is an unsupervised learning model based
on Bayesian inference. Its underlying principle is exchangeability. Compared with latent
semantic indexing (LSI) and probabilistic LSI (pLSI) models, LDA considers the exchange-
ability of both documents and words. LSI applys statistical computations to a large corpus of
text to extract and represent the contextual usage meaning of words (Batra & Bawa, 2010).
LSI adapts Singular value decomposition (SVD) into the term-document matrix to achieve
dimensionality reduction (Zelikovitz & Hirsh, 2001). Deerwester et al. (1990) demonstrated
that several basic linguistic notions (e.g., synonymy and polysemy) could be captured by the
linear combinations of the tf-idf features, which are derived by LSI. However, the biggest
weakness of LSI is the lack of satisfactory statistical foundation. Subsequently, the proba-
bilistic LSI (PLSI), with a solid statistical foundation using a probabilistic method replacing
SVD, is proposed by Hofmann (2001) to address the weakness of LSI. It considers each
word as a sample from one mixture model, in which the mixture components (multinomial
random variables) are considered as “topics”. In pLSI, a list of mixing proportions for these
mixture components is used to represent each document. However, no probabilistic model at
the document-level is not provided, which mean the numbers from each list is not from any
generative probabilistic model, leading to overﬁtting problems seriously (Blei et al., 2003).
LDA is a generative probabilistic model that can deal with sparse vectors of discrete data,
including bag-of-words in text data and image features. For text data, the core assumption
is that each document is considered a random mixture of latent topics, while each topic is
represented by a multinominal distribution over words. LDA is based on the assumption that
the author of each document would have the same probability to use same words when writing
the same “topic”. LDA is a generative probabilistic model, which simulates the process of
an author producing a document. In this process, the probability of writing a word is related
with the topic that are written about. However, if two authors have different words to write for
the same document, the distribution of words might change to an unrelated topic by making
inaccurate inferences.
Every document is created by a list of hypothetical and unobservable ‘topics’. Each doc-
ument is assumed to be presented by a mixture of topics that reﬂect distributions sharing
common Dirichlet priors. In a single document, the probability of each topic is between 0
123

642
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
Fig. 2 LDA model process using plate notation (Adopted by Blei et al., 2003)
and 1, with the sum of them amounting to 1. The extent to which documents are associated
with topics is considered document-topic proportions, also known as topic membership. The
latent topics are considered as the distributions over a ﬁxed vocabulary in which each word
has a possibility belonging to each latent topic.
In this study, each review is a single document. We index each review as r ∈(1, 2 . . . , R).
K presents the number of topics, which is the primary input variable. The generation process
is summarised as follows:
For each topic k ∈(1, 2 . . . , K), draw a Dirichlet distribution over the vocabulary V ,
βk ∼Dir(η).
For each review, r, choose θr ∼Dir(α).
i.
For each word wa, from review r, a topic assignment is drawn from a multinominal
distribution over θr, zr,a ∼Mult(θr), where zr,a represents the word-speciﬁc topic
assignment.
ii. The observed word,wr,a is drawn from Mult(βz,r,a), where wr,a ∈(1, 2 . . . V ).
The joint distribution of all unobserved variables and observed variables is expressed as
follows:
p(βK , θR, zR, wR|α, η) =
K

k=1
p(βK |η)
R

r=1
p(θr|α)
N

a=1
p

zr,a|θr

p

wr,a|zr,a, βr,k

Figure 2 depicts the graphical model of the LDA process in plate notation. The shaded
nodes present the only observed variables wr,a, which represents the a th word in review r.
A is the total number of words in each review. Each review could be represented as a mixture
of topics. θ denotes the review-topic distribution, which indicates how much each review is
related to topics. β denotes the per-review topic–word distributions. The problem of sparsity
caused by the large vocabulary occurs in many document corpora. The smooth method is
usually adopted to avoid assigning zero probability to words that are from new documents
but don’t appear in documents from training corpus (Blei et al., 2003). Instead of the com-
monly used method-Laplace smoothing, LDA places the Dirichlet priors on the multinomial
parameters. Therefore, α and η, as two Dirichlet parameters, denote the smoothing of topics
with reviews and words within topics, respectively (Syed & Spruit, 2017).
The topic-word distributions and the coefﬁcients for documents cannot be observed and
are estimated by a learning algorithm, such as expectation propagation (a higher-order varia-
tional algorithm) and the Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm (Grifﬁths & Steyvers, 2002;
Minka & Lafferty, 2002; Porteous et al., 2008). For model inference and parameter estima-
tion, we adopted Gibb’s sampling to compute the approximations to the posterior distribution
of the hidden variables in the model, which is the core inferential problem in LDA. Compared
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
643
with the convexity-based variational approach introduced by Blei et al. (2003), Gibb’s sam-
pling could achieve higher accuracy by approaching the asymptotically correct distribution
(Porteous et al., 2008).
3.4 Extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost)
To examine the ability of two approaches in predicting rating scores, we conduct a set of two-
stageexperiments:binaryclassiﬁcationandratingprediction.Classiﬁcationisusedtoidentify
which category the new observation belongs to, while prediction involves making future
estimations based on current data behaviour patterns (Brintrup, 2021). Extreme Gradient
Boosting (XGBoost) is a highly effective scalable tree-boosting system. It has achieved state-
of-the-art results on a wide range of machine learning challenges because of its effectiveness,
ﬂexibility, and portability (Chen & Guestrin, 2016).
Giannakasetal.(2021)comparedtheabilityofXGBoostwitha4-hidden-layersDeepNeu-
ral Network (DNN) when making prediction of the team performance. The results revealed
that both the learning accuracy and prediction accuracy of XGBoost are higher than DNN.
Wu et al. (2021) applied ﬁve different datasets to examine the performances of XGBoost
and Multiple-layer Perceptron Neural Network for binary classiﬁcation tasks. The results
demonstrated that XGBoost performed generally better than the neural network and sig-
niﬁcantly better when the overlapped samples increased. Khanam et al. (2021) evaluated
the performance 7 algorithms including Logistic Regression, XGBoost, KNN, Naïve Bayes,
Decision, SVM and Random Forests when performing classiﬁcation task for fake news detec-
tion. It is examined that XGBoost depicted the highest accuracy than other algorithms. Rao
et al. (2021) also compared the performance of several algorithms as classiﬁers including
XGBoost, Logistic Regression, Random Forest, Decision Tree, Multinomial Naïve Bayes and
Bernoulli Naïve Bayes to perform the binary classiﬁcation task of detecting fake news. They
demonstrated that XGBoost could provide excellent mix of prediction and processing speed
simultaneously. After ﬁne-tuning hyperparameters, it could achieve the highest accuracy than
other methods. Apart from classiﬁcation, another study from Yan et al. (2022) examined the
power of XGBoost to make predictions in health ﬁeld. They compared XGBoost with multi-
variate logistic regression model and found that the former performed better in predicting the
risk of death with one speciﬁc disease. Due to the better performance of XGBoost compared
with other algorithms, we believe that XGBoost is an appropriate approach for classiﬁcation
and prediction tasks.
The gradient boosting approach is described as follows: Assume a dataset D = {(xi, yi) :
i = 1, . . . , n, xi ∈Rm, yi ∈Rn}, with n instances and m features.
yi =
K

k=1
fk(xi), fk ∈F
where K represents the total number of trees, fk(xi) is the predicted value of i-th sample
in the k-th tree,F is the function space consisting of all CARTs (regression or classiﬁcation
trees in XGBoost), and yi is the predicted value, for instance, i.
The set of functions f (k) could be learned by minimising the objective function, which
consists of training loss L(θ) and regularisation term (θ).
O(θ) = L(θ) + (θ) =
n

i
l(yi, yi) +
K

k=1
( fk)
123

644
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
where l is the training losing function, measuring the difference between the predicted value
yi and the observed value yi The regularisation term  could control the model complexity
to avoid overﬁtting.
The tree model could be trained using an additive strategy.
yi t = yi t−1 + ft(xi)
Therefore, the objective function at step t is changed as follows:
O(t) =
n

i=1
l

yi, yi t−1 + ft(xi)

+ ( ft) + constant
By using the second-order Taylor expansion, we simplify the equation as below:
O(t) =
n

i=1
[

l

yi, yi t−1
+ gi ft(xi) + 1
2hi f 2
t (xi)

+ ( ft) + constant
where gi and hi are represented as follows:
gi = ∂yi t−1l

yi, yi t−1
hi = ∂2
yi t−1l

yi, yi t−1
In XGBoost, the complexity is deﬁned as:
( fk) = γ T + 1
2λ||w||2
where γ and λ are regularisation parameters, T represents the number of leaves and w
are scores on leaves. By deﬁning G j = 
i∈I j gi and Hj = 
i∈I j hi and expanding the
regularisation term, the objective function is re-formulated as:
O(t) =
T

j=1
[G jw j + 1
2

Hj + λ

w2
j] + γ T
The best w∗
j and the best corresponding value could be computed as
w∗
j = −
G j
Hj + λ
O∗
j = −1
2
T

j=1
G2
j
Hj + λ + λT
Given that enumerating all possible trees is not intractable, the tree is optimised on one
level at a time by splitting leaves and producing a gain score:
Gain = 1
2

G2
L
HL + λ +
G2
R
HR + λ −(GL + G R)2
HL + HR + λ

−γ
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
645
3.5 3.5. Model performance measurement metrics
In our study, we use two types of metrics to compare the performance of the classiﬁcation and
prediction models. For the classiﬁcation, a standard approach utilising a confusion matrix
is used to represent the dispositions of the test dataset in a 2 × 2 setting (true positive, true
negative, false negative, false positive).
The true positive rate, also known as recall or sensitivity, is calculated as:
Sensitivity =
T P
T P + F N
The false negative rate, also known as speciﬁcity, is estimated as:
Speci f icity =
T N
T N + F P
Precision is calculated as:
Precision =
T P
T P + F P
An equal weighted combination of these two metrics can be reﬂected on the F1-score,
which can be calculated as:
F1 score = 2 ∗Precision ∗Recall
Precision + Recall
The false positive rate (F P R) is equivalent to 1 −Speci f icity. The ROC curve is a
two-dimensional plot that shows sensitivity on the y-axis and 1 −Speci f icity (FPR) on the
x-axis. The perfect one is located at point (0, 1). The ROC curve starts from point (0, 0) and
ends at point (1, 1). AUC is a method to compare classiﬁers and is calculated as the area
under the curve, which is between 0 and 1. The model with higher AUC performs better in
classiﬁcation than others, as it is known that “the AUC of a classiﬁer is equivalent to the
probability that the classiﬁer will rank a randomly chosen positive instance higher than a
randomly chosen negative instance” (Fawcett, 2006, p. 868).
In addition to the binary classiﬁcation, we would perform regression using XGBoost.
Thus, to determine the effectiveness of our model, two metrics will be calculated: Mean
Absolute Error (MAE) and Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE). MAE represents the average
of the difference between the predicted value and the original value, which can be calculated
by the formula below. A smaller MAE indicates a better model.
Mean Absolute Error = 1
N
N

i=1
|yi −yi|
RMSE is popularly used in the literature, which represents the square root of mean squared
error, between the actual and predicted rating score (y) as follows:
Root Mean Squared Error =



 1
N
N

i=1
(yi −yi)2
All metrics are estimated and used in evaluating the performance of each model in the
analysis.
123

646
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
3.6 Feature selection
Unlike simple models (e.g., linear regression), more complex predictive models (e.g., deep
learning and tree-based models) are complicated to interpret. Shapley Additive explanations
(SHAP) values, proposed by Lundberg and Lee (2017), could better interpret black-box
models by computing Shapley values from coalitional game theory. The Shapley value is
an explanation method based on solid theory, in which four axioms (efﬁciency, symmetry,
dummy, and additivity) provide a reasonable foundation. It represents how much a feature
contributes to the prediction for each instance compared with the average prediction of the
trained model (Molnar, 2020). Inspired by cooperative game theory, the Shapley value is
a method of fairly distributing pay-outs to players according to their contribution. In this
study’s circumstances, the ‘players’ represent the feature values, and the ‘game’ signiﬁes the
prediction task.
SHAP could explain the Shapley values as a linear model speciﬁed as:
g(z) = ∅0 +
M

j=1
∅jz j
where M is the maximum number of simpliﬁed input features. z ∈{0, 1}M. When calculating
the Shapley value, the value of z represents the status of the presence (used or not used) of
the corresponding feature in prediction. ∅j is the Shapley value (the attribution of feature
j). The Shapley value of feature j can be calculated as follows:
∅( j) =
M

s⊆{1,...,M}\{ j}
|S|!(M −|S| −1)!
M!
(v(S ∪{ j}) −v(S))
where S represents one subset of the simpliﬁed features included in the model. v(S) is the
total value for S. The marginal contribution of feature j is calculated as v(S ∪{ j}) −v(S).
SHAP could be a powerful method to interpret results from tree-based machine learning
models (e.g., random forest and gradient boosted trees). In this study, SHAP demonstrates
the feature importance by examining its marginal contribution to the model output, which
provides local explanation and consistency globally.
4 Results
4.1 Baseline sentiment calculation
For each review, we calculate the sentiment polarity score (document-level and sentence-
level polarity) using the original textual comment at the review level and provide a decimal
between −1 and 1. Figure 3 provides the distribution of document-level polarity scores in
our sample. The biggest peak of the curve is in the middle. The average polarity score is
0.05, and the standard deviation equals 0.28. The most frequently occurring polarity values
are clustered near the middle. The extreme polarity scores (close to 1.0 and −1.0) occur
the least frequently, which is quite different from the distribution of customer rating scores
(Fig. 1), as extreme rating scores show the most frequent occurrence.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
647
Fig. 3 Polarity score distribution for our sample
4.2 Corpus pre-processing for topic modelling
The textual content from customer reviews is pre-processed by following the standard pro-
cedural remedies, including (a) word tokenization (breaking sentences into a set of tokens),
(b) exclusion of numbers and punctuations, (c) elimination of stop words, which includes
both language stop words removal using the SMART stop word list and context-speciﬁc
stop words exclusion, such as food vocabulary and restaurant brand names, and (d) selecting
only adjectives, nouns, and adverbs from remaining words, since these words contain rele-
vant information about products and product quality (Tirunillai & Tellis, 2014). This step is
implemented by utilising part-of-speech (POS) tagging to keep the parts of speech that are
meaningful as well as lemmatization, which derives the base forms of the words. (e) For low-
frequency words (frequency of occurrence is less than 2% of the total number of reviews),
a pruning procedure is followed, which reduces the number of reviews to 1,700,131. The
low-frequency words which convey highly speciﬁc semantic information are considered as
the weak features in the corpus (Leeman, 2007). We followed the procedure of removing
low-frequency words based on the study of Grifﬁths and Steyvers (2004).
4.3 LDA model estimation and hyperparameter tuning
Aftertransformingtextualdataintoadocument-termmatrix,weestimatethetopicmodelsand
use a heuristic approach to evaluate the hyperparameter values that provide an ideal solution
using the current parameter set. As shown in Fig. 2, there are two hyperparameters, α and
η, which are two smoothing parameters controlling the sparseness of Dirichlet distribution.
These two values and the number of topics K are required to be inputted for the LDA
process. To determine the best number of K, many researchers have adopted trial and error
procedures. A set of models was estimated with various values of K and the model producing
the most meaningful topics is selected (Bastani et al., 2019; Blei, 2012). Based on the intrinsic
nature of reviews from the OFD platform, we could infer that reviews are homogeneous and
concentrated on only a few themes (e.g., food quality, delivery speed, driver’s attitude). As
123

648
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
JustEat adopted a 6-star rating system, we estimate 13 LDA models with different values of
K starting from 6 to 18.
Several researchers seek to ﬁnd the best number by calculating the ‘perplexity’ of the
held-out test set, which is one intrinsic evaluation metric for language model evaluation.
Perplexity algebraically equals the inverse of the geometric mean per-word likelihood (Blei
et al., 2003), which means that the lower perplexity indicates that the model predicts better
for new test samples. However, there is a distinct drawback of using perplexity to evaluate
the quality of the LDA model. The perplexity decreases as the number of topics increases
(Koltcov et al., 2014). Chang et al. (2009) illustrated that producing ever ﬁner partitions as the
number of topics grew could make the model less helpful and reduce topic interpretability.
Therefore, to ﬁnd the best number of K, two metrics are calculated, proposed by Cao
et al. (2009) and Deveaud et al. (2014), to compare 13 LDA models. Cao et al. (2009) found
that the best K is not only correlated with the size of the dataset but is also inﬂuenced by the
inherent correlations within the corpus. They considered each topic as a semantic cluster, in
which the similarity of each word is as small as possible, while the similarities among topics
are expected to be large. Similar with the idea of clustering based on density, they aim to
achieve a large similarity within the topic for more explicit semantic meaning while a small
similarity among topics showing a stable topic structure. The procedures are as follows: First,
the initial LDA model is estimated given an arbitrary K value. Second, they calculate the
average cosine distance of the model, the model’s cardinality, and all topics’ density. Third,
based on the cardinality, they re-estimate the LDA model and initialise sufﬁcient statistics.
If the direction of convergence is negative, topics with high densities will be applied as
reference samples. Otherwise, the seeded method will be adopted to initialise it. Then, repeat
the second and third steps until the model’s average cosine distance and cardinality converge.
In addition, Deveaud et al. (2014) proposed a simple heuristic approach to ﬁnd the best
number of topics when the information diverges between all pairs within the LDA model.
Rather than the non-symmetric measure (Kullback–Leibler divergence), the symmetrised
version of Jensen-Shannon divergence is applied. Figure 4 depicts the performance of dif-
ferent LDA models using these types of metrics for the values of K (x-axis). The model
achieves the best performance when the upper metric has the minimum value or the lower
one is maximised. Therefore, we select 15 as the optimal value of K.
4.4 Topic identification
Table 2 provides the K = 15 topic solution for the review corpus, which is the optimised
solution after topic number selection, as previously discussed. The loading words associated
with each topic can be used to understand the main concerns and preferences of customers in
relation to the food delivery service being reviewed. The topic solution covers 15 topics’ top
7 loading words separately produced using the standard topic word probability (β) from the
LDA estimation process. Several topics show positive intention, such as Topics #1, #2, #3, and
#5, while some topics are more negative (i.e., Topics #11, #12, and #13). For instance, Topic
#12 mainly talks about the delivery service from drivers about locating their address. Topic
#13 concentrates on late deliveries and long waiting times. Topic #3 focuses on customers’
praise and subjectively positive descriptions of their takeaways.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
649
Fig. 4 Selection of the number of topics (K) for identifying the topic solution. Optimal K is identiﬁed by the
shaded area
Table 2 The 15 topics and their top 7 loading words in the topic solution
Topic #
Top 7 loading words
Topic 1
Food, cold, stone, longer, late, delivery, driver
Topic 2
Hot, nice, food, lovely, fresh, tasty, again
Topic 3
Best, place, amazing, delicious, guy, takeaway, excellent
Topic 4
Service, back, customer, phone, poor, bad, problem
Topic 5
Food, great, always, early, delivery, fast, home
Topic 6
Good, quality, portion, large, small, price, worth
Topic 7
Meal, only, happy, extra, box, thing, instead
Topic 8
Order, wrong, right, issue, correct, number, store
Topic 9
Not, more, disappointed, taste, lot, ﬂavour, same
Topic 10
Food, again, warm, free, once, hungry, barely
Topic 11
Never, again, money, ever, dry, soggy, hard
Topic 12
Delivery, driver, where, door, address, house, man
Topic 13
Late, hour, minute, min, half, way, later
Topic 14
Time, ﬁrst, last, long, few, second, next
Topic15
Drink, item, missing, bag, refund, order, full
123

650
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
4.5 Incorporating topic membership in sentiment text detection
As shown in the literature review, sentiment and topic membership could be considered as
two devices to explain and predict customer satisfaction. We would like to examine how sen-
timent and topic membership can predict customer satisfaction empirically. As mentioned
in Sect. 3.1, we consider the mid-point of the rating scale (3.5 stars) as the boundary to
separate negative and positive reviews. Based on its rating score, each review in our sam-
ple is classiﬁed into two classes: positive and negative. Therefore, by classifying customer
reviews into positive and negative, the question is transformed to a binary classiﬁcation task.
More specially, we would also examine the different ability of document-level sentiment and
sentence-level sentiment in this classiﬁcation task. Therefore, we constructed three models
(Table 3) with all target variables being rating (positive/negative) for the classiﬁcation task.
Model A and Model B include the calculated polarity score (document-level and sentence-
level separately) of each review as independent variables to predict the class. Model C adopted
the topic membership of 15 topics from the topic solution of the LDA process as the predic-
tors. The in-sample validation split was 80% for training and 20% for testing with additional
folds selected for conﬁdence interval estimation. For both classiﬁcation tasks, the XGBoost
algorithm is followed. For hyperparameter selection, we limit the maximum depth of the tree
to 2 and the maximum rounds of boosting iterations to 100 to obtain the best outcome.
AUC scores are calculated using k-folding, and ROC curves are graphically presented
in Fig. 5. As presented in Fig. 5, the dashed curve represents the ROC curves of Model A
and Model B (using document-level polarity and sentence-level polarity separately), whose
AUC scores are 0.827 (95% CI: 0.825–0.828) and 0.838 (95% CI: 0.837–0.840), respectively
showing relatively good classiﬁcation, as they are both larger than 0.8. The sentence-level
polarity score has better performance than the document-level polarity score in classifying the
two rating classes. The solid line is the ROC curve of Model C using topic membership (15
topics), demonstrating better performance than using polarity; the curve close to the upper
left corner indicates higher accuracy. The AUC score is 0.860 (95% CI: 0.8587–0.8611),
which represents a better ability to separate positive and negative classes. Only comparing
the two models with polarity, solely using topic membership on its own could increase the
predictive accuracy.
As mentioned, topic membership, including all topics, performs better than sentiment
in helping to classify the positive and negative reviews. These 15 latent topics extracted
through the LDA process indicate various dimensions customers pay attention to contained
in customer reviews. Some of them might be emotional and highly related to customers’
ratings, while some might be more realistic. To examine the individual contribution of each
topic to the predictive accuracy of binary classiﬁcation, we construct and perform 15 models
Table 3 Three models’ AUC
Values for the classiﬁcation task
Target
variable
Polarity
(Document)
Polarity
(Sentence)
Topic
membership
(15 topics)
Rating (positive/negative)
Model A
0.827
Model B
0.838
Model C
0.860
Highest scoring model highlighted in bold
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
651
Fig. 5 AUC comparison (left-hand side) between Model A and Model C as well as AUC comparison (right-hand
side) between Model B and Model C
(with the same hyperparameters as models in the previous experiment) to classify positive
and negative classes and include the topic membership for each topic as predictors. Table
4 demonstrates the AUC scores for the 15 models. Several models (Models #4, #7, #9,
#10, #12, and #14) have relatively low AUC scores (close to 0.5) and do not help much in
predicting customer attitudes. The remaining models have higher predictive performance for
classiﬁcation in some way, whose AUC scores are higher than 0.6. Among them, Model 3 has
the highest AUC score (0.706) and presents the best performance in the binary classiﬁcation
task. The dimension that Topic #3 mainly talks about indicates the strongest relationship with
customers’ attitudes (positive or negative).
We already examined the model with topic membership and model with sentiment only
separately and proved that topic membership with all topics included could perform bet-
ter than polarity only in classifying positive and negative classes. However, the combined
predictive power of sentiment and topic membership has not yet been examined. As Topic
#3 contributes most to the predictive accuracy of classiﬁcation, we construct Model D and
Model E with the integration of Topic #3 and polarity (two levels) as predictors for the clas-
siﬁcation as shown in Table 5. The former includes document-level polarity score and topic
membership (only Topic #3) while the latter includes sentence-level polarity score and topic
membership (only Topic #3) as predictors.
Models were performed with the same hyperparameters, and their ROC curves and AUC
scores are displayed and compared with the Model A and Model B, as shown in Fig. 6.
The comparison (the left-hand side) of Model A and Model D showed that Topic #3 added
as a new predictor together with document-level polarity could increase the AUC score to
0.842 (95% CI: 0.841–0.843). The comparison (the right-hand side) of Model B and Model
E revealed that Topic #3, together with the sentence-level polarity, could increase the AUC
score to 0.852 (95% CI: 0.851–0.854). It demonstrates that topic membership possesses the
additional power to help sentiment when predicting customer attitudes.
The parameters that decide the model architecture are hyperparameters. We could ﬁnd the
ideal hyperparameters and improve our predictive accuracy through hyperparameter tuning.
After tuning hyperparameters, we ﬁnd a relatively better list of hyperparameters with a
123

652
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
Table 4 AUC Comparison among 15 topics’ memberships in the classiﬁcation task
Predictor
Topic1
Topic2
Topic3
Topic
4
Topic
5
Topic
6
Topic7
Topic8
Topic9
Topic10
Topic11
Topic12
Topic13
Topic14
Topic15
Model 1
0.621
Model 2
0.677
Model 3
0.706
Model 4
0.571
Model 5
0.637
Model 6
0.612
Model 7
0.546
Model 8
0.605
Model 9
0.548
Model 10
0.539
Model 11
0.618
Model 12
0.542
Model 13
0.649
Model 14
0.551
Model 15
0.626
Highest scoring model highlighted in bold
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
653
Table 5 Two models construction with combination of sentiment and topic (#3) membership
Target variable
Topic membership
(only topic 3)
Polarity (Document
level)
Polarity (Sentence
level)
AUC
Rating (positive/negative)
Model D
•
•
0.842
Model E
•
•
0.852
Fig. 6 AUC comparison (left-hand side) between Model A and Model D as well as AUC comparison (right-hand
side) between Model B and Model E
learning rate of 0.3, gamma of 0.2, maximum depth of a tree as 7, and the minimum sum of
instance weight as 5 in a child, and the subsample ratio as 0.8. Finally, as Fig. 7 shows, we
improve the AUC scores of models with polarity (both document-level and sentence-level)
and Topic #3 as predictors to 0.845 (95% CI: 0.843–0.846) and 0.856 (95% CI: 0.854–0.857),
respectively.
4.6 Rating score prediction
To examine the ability of polarity and topic membership to predict the exact rating score,
we construct the baseline model, which includes the (sentence-level) polarity score of each
review as the only predictor. The sentence-level polarity will be adopted in the rating score
prediction, considering that it is more accurate than document-level performance from the
results in the previous section. By combining each topic membership separately with polarity
score, 15 models are formed and trained using the same training dataset used in the binary
classiﬁcation task and performed using XGBoost. Considering that this task is an actual
prediction task, MAE, and RMSE models are used for evaluation.
We calculate MAEs and RMSEs for 15 models as well as the baseline model. Figure 8
displays the relative difference of MAE and RMSE for 15 models compared with the baseline
model and sorts from the highest change to the lowest change. All topic membership could
123

654
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
Fig. 7 ROC curves for Model D and Model E after tuning the hyperparameters of XGBoost
Fig. 8 Relative difference of MAE and RMSE for 16 models compared with the baseline model
decrease the error compared with the baseline model, which indicates that the inclusion of
even one topic as a covariate could increase the accuracy of the prediction task. There are two
distinct variables (Topics #13 and #3) that can dramatically decrease the MAE and RMSE.
4.7 Shapley additive explanations (SHAP) for each feature
While Topic #13 and Topic #3 perform best in reducing the model error, other topics (i.e.,
Topics #15 and #2) also show improvement compared with the baseline model. To get more
speciﬁc and direct comprehension of how much each topic can contribute to the prediction
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
655
Fig. 9 SHAP summary plot
of customer ratings, we construct a model including polarity score (sentence-level) and
proportions of 15 topics as covariates to predict customer ratings. The accuracy is improved
substantially (MAE = 0.869, RMSE = 1.137) by including all topics. The contribution of
each feature to the target value is represented by Shapley additive explanations for feature
importance, which is calculated as the average of the absolute Shapley values for each feature
across the dataset. SHAP values can be used to understand the relative importance of different
features in a model. These values are calculated by comparing the model’s output with the
expected value of the model’s output over the entire distribution, taking into account the
dependencies between features. By using SHAP values, we can identify the most important
features in a model and understand how they contribute to its predictions.
The summary plot (Fig. 9) displays global feature importance, as well as feature effects.
All variables are sorted by decreasing feature importance along the y-axis, with their corre-
sponding value next to them. The polarity score is the most dominant feature, and Topic #13
is the second most important feature, followed by Topic #3, while Topic #12 contributes the
least to the predicted values. Each dot in this plot shows the Shapley value of an instance
for each feature, whose horizontal location displays its Shapley value, and vertical location
is determined by the speciﬁc feature. The gradient colour demonstrates the original value
for that variable from low to high. Polarity affects the target variable positively, as high
polarity scores could increase the predicted customer ratings. Topic #13’s membership is
negatively associated with the target value as the predicted rating score will decrease while
the proportion of Topic #13 within a review increases.
Figure 10 displays the dependence plot for Topic #13 and its interaction with the polarity
value. Each dot represents an instance with its proportion within a single review on the x-axis
and its corresponding Shapley value on the y-axis. The gradient colour shows its polarity
value. A small number of dots with proportions lower than 0.067, have positive SHAP values,
indicating an increased prediction value. In contrast, a great many instances have a higher
topic proportion between 0.067 and 0.096. Their corresponding SHAP values are lower than
0, meaning that they decrease the predicted value. More explicitly, for these dots whose x-axis
is between 0.067 and 0.096, as the proportion of Topic #3 increases, their negative inﬂuence
on the predicted rating score will be stronger.
123

656
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
Fig. 10 SHAP dependence plot for Topic #13 membership and its interaction visualisation with polarity score
5 Discussion and implications
5.1 Discussion
Through the robust experiment (binary classiﬁcation), the results show that both document
(review)-level polarity score and sentence-level polarity score perform well in classifying a
review positive or negative with AUC scores—with both being higher than 0.8 even they are
included as the only covariate in two models, respectively. Compared with document-level
polarity, sentence-level polarity performs better in the classiﬁcation task, with a higher AUC
score(0.838)thantheotherAUCscore(0.827).Polaritywithincustomertextualcontentcould
excellently predict customer satisfaction, while sentence-level polarity has a better ability for
theprediction,whichidentiﬁestheimpactofdifferentgranularitylevels.Itconﬁrmsthestrong
ability of sentiment to explain customer ratings, consistent with Chatterjee et al. (2021) and
Zhao et al., (2019a, 2019b).
However, the topic memberships of 15 latent topics extracted from review text using a
topic modelling approach (LDA) perform better in the classiﬁcation task, with an AUC score
of 0.860. Topic membership (all topics included) has higher accuracy than the classiﬁcation
task’s polarity score (both document-level and sentence level). It represents the multidimen-
sionality exists in customer reviews in which they discuss their opinions towards the food and
deliver service from various aspects. The multidimensionality is consistent with other studies
which focused on customer reviews from other hospitality industries such as airlines, restau-
rants, and hotels (Büschken & Allenby, 2016; Xu, 2020). In addition, the multidimensionality
not only stands for various entities (e.g., food quality and delivery service), but also demon-
strates customers’ dialectical in textual content. Customers might describe their experiences
dialectically, such as two-sided reviews (Wang et al., 2022). That may explain the stronger
ability of topic membership to predict ratings as both document-level and sentence-level
sentiment could not capture the various dimensions (Birjali et al., 2021).
By examining each topic membership to the classiﬁcation task separately, the one with the
highest AUC score is selected and collaborated with the polarity score (two different levels),
improving the AUC scores to 0.845 and 0.856, respectively, after hyperparameter tuning.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
657
The robust check could prove that the features generated from the textual content could be
combined with the sentiment to achieve higher accuracy. It also reveals the heterogeneity
of the latent dimensions (Büschken & Allenby, 2016; Hu et al., 2019), which don’t equally
contribute to customer’s overall ratings.
Therefore, we included polarity (sentence-level) and each topic membership one by one
as covariates and constructed 15 regression models. Compared with the baseline model (with
only sentence-level polarity score), the results indicate that whichever topic membership
could improve the model performance. Among them, two topics (Topic #13and #3) could
add the most accuracy to polarity in predicting rating scores since the MAE and RMSE of
that model are decreased most compared to the baseline model. The information captured by
the two topics could add more predictive accuracy to sentiment for rating prediction, which
is also proved by the SHAP feature importance when we include all topics’ membership and
polarity (sentence-level) into the prediction.
5.2 Theoretical implications
Many studies have examined the power of sentiment and latent dimensions within review text
to explain and predict customer overall satisfaction (Cheng et al., 2018; Xing et al., 2019;
Zhao et al., 2019a, 2019b). Compared with most previous research, our study reveals the
comparison the two approaches and how they can be combined for rating prediction.
First, our ﬁndings suggest that compared with sentiments, the topic memberships of latent
dimensions generated from the review text have better performance in rating prediction. The
top membership could be considered as a helpful tool to predict customer overall satisfaction.
Furthermore, the heterogeneity of the predictive power exists across different dimensions.
Several dimensions have good performance in rating prediction while several dimensions
don’t show good enough performance. The new features we extracted from review text can
be collaborated with customer sentiment to achieve better performance in rating prediction
both holistically and individually. It extends the literature by combining the topic membership
with customer sentiment instead of only adopting one feature from the review text.
Second, several models have been proposed by researchers to achieve higher accuracy in
rating prediction (Cheng et al., 2018; Xing et al., 2019). Compared with these approaches,
our approach has more ﬂexibility and interpretability, especially when considering points of
intervention in the customer facing areas of the business. The use of topic modelling approach
allows us to extract latent dimensions from the textual data without pre-labelling the data,
which saves human efforts of training and adjusting the model. The adoption of unsupervised
machine learning approach (LDA) saves the human effort to train the model. Besides, the
adoption of Shapley value could clearly show how each dimension extracted from review
text contributes to predicting the overall ratings, which provides more interpretability of how
each latent dimensions and customer sentiment affect the customer overall satisfaction.
5.3 Practical implications
Customer ratings are direct measurements of customer overall satisfaction while the textual
content represents customer perception towards experience showing customer satisfaction
indirectly (predicting overall). Findings from this study could provide several managerial
insights for restaurant owners and managers. First, our ﬁndings provide restaurants with
identiﬁcation of latent dimensions from a large amount of customer reviews, which demon-
strates customers’ various aspects of perception towards food and delivery service. Both
123

658
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
praise and complaint from customers could help restaurant owners to develop operation
strategies.
Customer feedback is a vital information source to understand customers’ opinions, which
has been proved to have signiﬁcant inﬂuence on customer behaviour and sales (Li et al.,
2019; Z. Zhao et al., 2019a, 2019b). The 15 topics extracted from review text shows the
multidimensionality of customers’ evaluation. For instance, Topic #13 and Topic #8 illustrates
customers’ complaint about long delivery time and order issues respectively while Topic #2
represents customers praise towards food quality.
Furthermore, the heterogeneity which exists in the contributions of each topic member-
ship to customer overall satisfaction, may help restaurants to prioritize the most inﬂuencing
factors. By identifying the most important positive and negative dimensions that inﬂuence the
rating scores, restaurant managers could explicit dissatisfaction and enhance their weakness
accordingly or develop marketing strategies by highlighting their strength. For instance, our
ﬁndings show that except for polarity, Topic #13 mainly illustrating the long delivery time
contributes most to predicting rating score. And the long delivery time is the most important
factor negatively affecting the rating score minimizing the reviews lead to higher rating score.
Following an identiﬁcation of the contribution of each service quality factor, an owner may
also identify priorities and monitor improvement by incorporating other covariates such as
service time and other inputs such as quality of raw materials etc.
6 Conclusions, limitations, and future research
Finding the underlying reasons for rating scores using contextual information is critical for
businesses to develop strategies to discover why customers have different levels of satisfac-
tion. To discover the value of unstructured text within customer reviews to explain actual
customer ratings, we evaluate and compare how two approaches (sentiment analysis and
topic models) can be applied to understand customer satisfaction. This study demonstrates
that incorporating document-level covariates, such as topic membership, can greatly con-
tribute to the understanding of the sentiment of customer feedback, such as the ones found in
customer reviews, and predict the review score in a much better way than the actual tone of
the review text, even in cases where access to sentiment vocabulary may be limited. While
a large body of literature has demonstrated that review text is primarily consistent with the
rating—and therefore, the sentiment of the review is reﬂected in the star rating of this par-
ticular review, from a business owner’s point of view—latent dimensions discovered from
these review texts are a useful instrument to be incorporated in the business practice. They
can identify areas of improvement and competency that the business can expand the most.
Nevertheless, there are several limitations to our research. For the robustness check in our
ﬁrst experiment, we only classify reviews into positive and negative classes, not considering
the neutral class, which has been commonly studied in online review literature. Furthermore,
even though we have examined two granularity levels of sentiment, we only employ a single
dictionary. The choice of dictionaries may have a different inﬂuence on prediction accuracy.
Therefore, these aspects could be improved in future work.
Future work should focus on several directions. First, reviews classiﬁed as neutral could
be considered, together with the positive and negative ones, as three distinct classes for
classifying customer rating scores to different satisfaction levels. Second, apart from lexicon-
based methods, other unsupervised machine-learning techniques could be adopted to detect
customers’ polarity scores. Also, the subjectivity and emotions contained in the review text
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
659
could be considered in future work. Third, customer reviews from other platforms could be
included in the future to discover the level of heterogeneity across different platforms and
different service domains.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interests The authors disclose no ﬁnancial or conﬂict of interests.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Alghamdi, R., & Alfalqi, K. (2015). A survey of topic modeling in text mining. International Journal of
Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 6(1). https://doi.org/10.14569/IJACSA.2015.060121
Al-Natour, S., & Turetken, O. (2020). A comparative assessment of sentiment analysis and star ratings for
consumer reviews. International Journal of Information Management, 54, 102132. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ijinfomgt.2020.102132
Bagheri, A., Saraee, M., & De Jong, F. (2013). Care more about customers: Unsupervised domain-independent
aspect detection for sentiment analysis of customer reviews. Knowledge-Based Systems, 52, 201–213.
Bastani, K., Namavari, H., & Shaffer, J. (2019). Latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) for topic modeling of the
CFPB consumer complaints. Expert Systems with Applications, 127, 256–271. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.eswa.2019.03.001
Batra, S., & Bawa, S. (2010). Using lsi and its variants in text classiﬁcation. Advanced techniques in computing
sciences and software engineering (pp. 313–316). Springer.
Birjali, M., Kasri, M., & Beni-Hssane, A. (2021). A comprehensive survey on sentiment analysis: Approaches,
challenges and trends. Knowledge-Based Systems, 226, 107134.
Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 3, 993–1022 https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/944919.944937
Blei, D. M. (2012). Probabilistic topic models. Communications of the ACM, 55(4), 77–84. https://doi.org/10.
1145/2133806.2133826
Blei, D. M., & Lafferty, J. D. (2007). A correlated topic model of science. The Annals of Applied Statistics,
1(1), 17–35.
Brintrup, A. (2021). AI in the supply chain: a classiﬁcation framework and critical analysis of current
state. In Oxford handbook of supply chain management: OUP, USA. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/
9780190066727.013.24
Büschken, J., & Allenby, G. M. (2016). Sentence-based text analysis for customer reviews. Marketing Science,
35(6), 953–975.
Cao, J., Xia, T., Li, J., Zhang, Y., & Tang, S. (2009). A density-based method for adaptive LDA model selection.
Neurocomputing, 72(7–9), 1775–1781. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2008.06.011
Chang, J., Gerrish, S., Wang, C., Boyd-Graber, J. L., & Blei, D. M. (2009). Reading tea leaves: How humans
interpret topic models. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems, (pp. 288–296).
Chatterjee, S., Goyal, D., Prakash, A., & Sharma, J. (2021). Exploring healthcare/health-product ecommerce
satisfaction:Atextminingandmachinelearningapplication.JournalofBusinessResearch,131,815–825.
Chen, T., & Guestrin, C. (2016). Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, (pp. 785–794). https://
doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939785.
Cheng, Z., Ding, Y., Zhu, L., & Kankanhalli, M. (2018). Aspect-aware latent factor model: Rating prediction
with ratings and reviews. In Proceedings of the 2018 world wide web conference, (pp. 639–648).
123

660
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
Deerwester, S., Dumais, S. T., Furnas, G. W., Landauer, T. K., & Harshman, R. (1990). Indexing by latent
semantic analysis. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 41(6), 391–407.
Deveaud, R., SanJuan, E., & Bellot, P. (2014). Accurate and effective latent concept modeling for ad hoc
information retrieval. Document Numérique, 17(1), 61–84. https://doi.org/10.3166/DN.17.1.61-84
Dey, A., Jenamani, M., & Thakkar, J. J. (2018). Senti-N-Gram: An n-gram lexicon for sentiment analysis.
Expert Systems with Applications, 103, 92–105.
Do, H. H., Prasad, P., Maag, A., & Alsadoon, A. (2019). Deep learning for aspect-based sentiment analysis:
A comparative review. Expert Systems with Applications, 118, 272–299.
Elshakankery, K., & Ahmed, M. F. (2019). HILATSA: A hybrid Incremental learning approach for Arabic
tweets sentiment analysis. Egyptian Informatics Journal, 20(3), 163–171.
Farkhod, A., Abdusalomov, A., Makhmudov, F., & Cho, Y. I. (2021). LDA-based topic modeling sentiment
analysis using topic/document/sentence (TDS) model. Applied Sciences, 11(23), 11091.
Fawcett, T. (2006). An introduction to ROC analysis. Pattern Recognition Letters, 27(8), 861–874. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.patrec.2005.10.010
Geetha, M., Singha, P., & Sinha, S. (2017). Relationship between customer sentiment and online customer
ratings for hotels—An empirical analysis. Tourism Management, 61, 43–54.
Ghasemaghaei, M., Eslami, S. P., Deal, K., & Hassanein, K. (2018). Reviews’ length and sentiment as correlates
of online reviews’ ratings. Internet Research, 28(3), 544–563. https://doi.org/10.1108/IntR-12-2016-
0394
Ghiassi, M., & Lee, S. (2018). A domain transferable lexicon set for Twitter sentiment analysis using a
supervised machine learning approach. Expert Systems with Applications, 106, 197–216.
Ghose, A., & Ipeirotis, P. G. (2011). Estimating the helpfulness and economic impact of product reviews:
Mining text and reviewer characteristics. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
23(10), 1498–1512.
Giannakas, F., Troussas, C., Krouska, A., Sgouropoulou, C., & Voyiatzis, I. (2021). XGBoost and deep neural
networkcomparison:Thecaseofteams’performance.InInternationalConferenceonIntelligentTutoring
Systems, (pp. 343–349).
Grifﬁths, T. L., & Steyvers, M. (2002). A probabilistic approach to semantic representation. In Proceedings
of the Twenty-Fourth Annual Conference of Cognitive Science Society, (pp. 381–386).
Guo, Y., Barnes, S. J., & Jia, Q. (2017). Mining meaning from online ratings and reviews: Tourist satisfaction
analysis using latent dirichlet allocation. Tourism Management, 59, 467–483.
Hofmann, T. (2001). Unsupervised learning by probabilistic latent semantic analysis. Machine Learning,
42(1), 177–196.
Hu, M., & Liu, B. (2004). Mining opinion features in customer reviews. In Proceedings of the 19th national
conference on Artiﬁcal intelligence, (pp. 755–760).
Hu, N., Koh, N. S., & Reddy, S. K. (2014). Ratings lead you to the product, reviews help you clinch it? The
mediating role of online review sentiments on product sales. Decision Support Systems, 57, 42–53.
Hu, N., Zhang, T., Gao, B., & Bose, I. (2019). What do hotel customers complain about? Text analysis using
structural topic model. Tourism Management, 72, 417–426.
Khanam, Z., Alwasel, B., Siraﬁ, H., & Rashid, M. (2021). Fake news detection using machine learning
approaches. In IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, (pp. 012040).
Kim, S., Park, H., & Lee, J. (2020). Word2vec-based latent semantic analysis (W2V-LSA) for topic modeling:
A study on blockchain technology trend analysis. Expert Systems with Applications, 152, 113401.
Koltcov, S., Koltsova, O., & Nikolenko, S. (2014). Latent dirichlet allocation: stability and applications to stud-
ies of user-generated content. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM conference on Web science, (pp. 161–165).
https://doi.org/10.1145/2615569.2615680.
Korﬁatis, N., Stamolampros, P., Kourouthanassis, P., & Sagiadinos, V. (2019). Measuring service quality from
unstructured data: A topic modeling application on airline passengers’ online reviews. Expert Systems
with Applications, 116, 472–486.
Kumar, A., Gopal, R. D., Shankar, R., & Tan, K. H. (2022). Fraudulent review detection model focusing on
emotional expressions and explicit aspects: investigating the potential of feature engineering. Decision
Support Systems, 155, 113728.
Kwon, H.-J., Ban, H.-J., Jun, J.-K., & Kim, H.-S. (2021). Topic modeling and sentiment analysis of online
review for airlines. Information, 12(2), 78.
Lai, X., Wang, F., & Wang, X. (2021). Asymmetric relationship between customer sentiment and online
hotel ratings: The moderating effects of review characteristics. International Journal of Contemporary
Hospitality Management, 33(6), 2137–2156. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJCHM-07-2020-0708
Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998). An introduction to latent semantic analysis. Discourse
Processes, 25(2–3), 259–284.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
661
Li, X., Wu, C., & Mai, F. (2019). The effect of online reviews on product sales: A joint sentiment-topic analysis.
Information & Management, 56(2), 172–184.
Liu, B. (2010). Sentiment analysis and subjectivity. In Handbook of natural language processing. Oxfordshire
(Vol. 2, pp. 627–666).
Liu, B. (2012). Sentiment analysis and opinion mining. In Synthesis lectures on human language technologies
(Vol. 5, pp. 1–167). https://doi.org/10.2200/S00416ED1V01Y201204HLT016)
Lundberg, S. M., & Lee, S.-I. (2017). A uniﬁed approach to interpreting model predictions. In Proceedings of
the 31st international conference on neural information processing systems, (pp. 4768–4777).
Mai, L., & Le, B. (2021). Joint sentence and aspect-level sentiment analysis of product comments. Annals of
Operations Research, 300(2), 493–513. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03534-7
Marshan, A., Kansouzidou, G., & Ioannou, A. (2020). Sentiment analysis to support marketing decision
making process: A hybrid model. In Proceedings of the future technologies conference, (pp. 614–626).
McAuley, J., & Leskovec, J. (2013). Hidden factors and hidden topics: understanding rating dimensions with
review text. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM conference on recommender systems, (pp. 165–172).
Minka, T. P., & Lafferty, J. (2002). Expectation-propagation for the generative aspect model. In Proceedings
of the Eighteenth conference on Uncertainty in artiﬁcial intelligence, (pp. 352–359).
Molnar, C. (2020). Interpretable machine learning: A guide for making black box models interpretable. Lulu.
Pang, B., Lee, L., & Vaithyanathan, S. (2002). Thumbs up? Sentiment classiﬁcation using machine learn-
ing techniques. In Proceedings of the ACL-02 conference on Empirical methods in natural language
processing, https://doi.org/10.3115/1118693.1118704.
Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V. A., & Berry, L. (1988). SERVQUAL: A multiple-item scale for measuring
consumer perceptions of service quality. Journal of Retailing, 64(1), 12–40.
Porteous, I., Newman, D., Ihler, A., Asuncion, A., Smyth, P., & Welling, M. (2008). Fast collapsed gibbs sam-
pling for latent dirichlet allocation. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD international conference
on Knowledge discovery and data mining, (pp. 569–577).
Qiu, J., Liu, C., Li, Y., & Lin, Z. (2018). Leveraging sentiment analysis at the aspects level to predict ratings
of reviews. Information Sciences, 451, 295–309. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2018.04.009
Qu, L., Ifrim, G., & Weikum, G. (2010). The bag-of-opinions method for review rating prediction from sparse
text patterns. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling
2010), (pp. 913–921).
Quan,C.,&Ren,F.(2014).Unsupervisedproductfeatureextractionforfeature-orientedopiniondetermination.
Information Sciences, 272, 16–28.
Rao, V. C. S., Radhika, P., Polala, N., & Kiran, S. (2021). Logistic regression versus XGBoost: Machine
learning for counterfeit news detection. In 2021 second international conference on smart technologies
in computing, electrical and electronics (ICSTCEE), (pp. 1–6).
Rinker, T. (2020). qdap: Bridging the gap between qualitative data and quantitative analysis. R Package Version,
2(4), 3.
Roberts, M. E., Stewart, B. M., Tingley, D., Lucas, C., Leder-Luis, J., Gadarian, S. K., Albertson, B., & Rand,
D. G. (2014). Structural topic models for open-ended survey responses. American Journal of Political
Science, 58(4), 1064–1082.
See-To, E. W., & Ngai, E. W. (2018). Customer reviews for demand distribution and sales nowcasting: A big
data approach. Annals of Operations Research, 270(1), 415–431.
Seo, S., Huang, J., Yang, H., & Liu, Y. (2017). Interpretable convolutional neural networks with dual local
and global attention for review rating prediction. In Proceedings of the eleventh ACM conference on
recommender systems, (pp. 297–305).
Sharma, S. S., & Dutta, G. (2021). SentiDraw: Using star ratings of reviews to develop domain speciﬁc
sentiment lexicon for polarity determination. Information Processing & Management, 58(1), 102412.
Syed, S., & Spruit, M. (2017). Full-text or abstract? examining topic coherence scores using latent dirich-
let allocation. In 2017 IEEE international conference on data science and advanced analytics (DSAA),
(pp. 165–174). https://doi.org/10.1109/DSAA.2017.61.
Tan, Y., Zhang, M., Liu, Y., & Ma, S. (2016). Rating-boosted latent topics: Understanding users and items
with ratings and reviews. In Proceedings of the twenty-ﬁfth international joint conference on artiﬁcial
intelligence, (pp. 2640–2646).
Tirunillai, S., & Tellis, G. J. (2014). Mining marketing meaning from online chatter: Strategic brand analysis
of big data using latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Marketing Research, 51(4), 463–479. https://doi.
org/10.1509/jmr.12.0106
Verma, S., & Yadav, N. (2021). Past, present, and future of electronic word of mouth (EWOM). Journal of
Interactive Marketing, 53, 111–128.
Wang, Y., Zhong, K., & Liu, Q. (2022). Let criticism take precedence: Effect of side order on consumer
attitudes toward a two-sided online review. Journal of Business Research, 140, 403–419.
123

662
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:631–662
Wirth, R., & Hipp, J. (2000). CRISP-DM: Towards a standard process model for data mining. In Proceedings
of the 4th international conference on the practical applications of knowledge discovery and data mining,
(pp. 29–39).
Wu, J., Li, Y., & Ma, Y. (2021). Comparison of XGBoost and the neural network model on the class-balanced
datasets. In 2021 IEEE 3rd international conference on frontiers technology of information and computer
(ICFTIC), (pp. 457–461).
Xiang, Z., Du, Q., Ma, Y., & Fan, W. (2017). A comparative analysis of major online review platforms:
Implications for social media analytics in hospitality and tourism. Tourism Management, 58, 51–65.
Xing, S., Wang, Q., Zhao, X., & Li, T. (2019). A hierarchical attention model for rating prediction by leveraging
user and product reviews. Neurocomputing, 332, 417–427.
Xu, X. (2020). Examining an asymmetric effect between online customer reviews emphasis and overall
satisfaction determinants. Journal of Business Research, 106, 196–210.
Yadav, A., & Vishwakarma, D. K. (2020). Sentiment analysis using deep learning architectures: A review.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review, 53(6), 4335–4385.
Yan, Z., Wang, J., Dong, Q., Zhu, L., Lin, W., & Jiang, X. (2022). XGBoost algorithm and logistic regression
to predict the postoperative 5-year outcome in patients with glioma. Annals of Translational Medicine,
10(16), 860–860.
Yeo, S. F., Tan, C. L., Kumar, A., Tan, K. H., & Wong, J. K. (2022). Investigating the impact of AI-powered
technologies on Instagrammers’ purchase decisions in digitalization era—A study of the fashion and
apparel industry. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 177, 121551.
Zelikovitz, S., & Hirsh, H. (2001). Using LSI for text classiﬁcation in the presence of background text.
In Proceedings of the tenth international conference on Information and knowledge management,
(pp. 113–118).
Zhang, H., Shen, F., Liu, W., He, X., Luan, H., & Chua, T.-S. (2016). Discrete collaborative ﬁltering. In
Proceedingsof the 39th internationalACMSIGIRconferenceon research and development in information
retrieval, (pp. 325–334).
Zhang, C., Tian, Y.-X., & Fan, L.-W. (2020). Improving the Bass model’s predictive power through online
reviews, search trafﬁc and macroeconomic data. Annals of Operations Research, 295(2), 881–922.
Zhang, W., & Wang, J. (2016). Integrating topic and latent factors for scalable personalized review-based
rating prediction. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 28(11), 3013–3027.
Zhao, Y., Xu, X., & Wang, M. (2019a). Predicting overall customer satisfaction: Big data evidence from hotel
online textual reviews. International Journal of Hospitality Management, 76, 111–121.
Zhao, Z., Wang, J., Sun, H., Liu, Y., Fan, Z., & Xuan, F. (2019b). What factors inﬂuence online product sales?
Online reviews, review system curation, online promotional marketing and seller guarantees analysis.
IEEE Access, 8, 3920–3931.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123