TITLE: Insights into the computational complexity of the single-source capacitated facility location problem with customer preferences
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2026
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07110-3
---

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07110-3
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Insights into the computational complexity of the
single-source capacitated facility location problem with
customer preferences
Christina Büsing1
· Timo Gersing1
· Sophia Wrede1
Received: 10 April 2025 / Accepted: 6 February 2026 / Published online: 2 March 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
Single-source capacitated facility location problems are well studied in the operations
research literature, yet classic problems often lack practicability by disregarding the cus-
tomers’ perspective: An authority that assigns customers to open facilities deprives customers
from choosing facilities according to their individual preferences. In reality, this can render
solutions infeasible, as customers may deviate to their most preferred open facility, thereby
breaking capacities of facilities serving more customers than originally planned. Preference
constraints aim to prevent this by ensuring that each customer is served at their most preferred
open facility. The corresponding problem is called single-source capacitated facility loca-
tion problem with customer preferences (CFLP-CP) and is known to be strongly NP-hard.
In this paper, we provide a deeper understanding of the transition from polynomially solv-
able cases to strongly NP-hard cases of the CFLP-CP. In particular, we show that the effect
of preference constraints on the theoretical complexity can go both ways: Some problems
become harder, while others become easier. This is because preference constraints simplify
the assignment of customers to facilities, while simultaneously increasing the complexity
of locating facilities. We show that the type of customer preferences, e.g., strict preferences
or geographically closest assignments, has a vital impact on the complexity. Notably, strict
preferences, i.e., customers cannot be indifferent, allow to compute feasible solutions of the
CFLP-CP in polynomial time.
Keywords facility location · capacities · preferences · computational complexity
B Sophia Wrede
wrede@combi.rwth-aachen.de
Christina Büsing
buesing@combi.rwth-aachen.de
Timo Gersing
gersing@combi.rwth-aachen.de
1
Teaching and Research Area Combinatorial Optimization, RWTH Aachen University, Im Süsterfeld 9,
52072 Aachen, Germany
123

2458
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
1 Introduction
Facilitylocationproblems(FLPs)playanessentialroleinoperationsresearchliterature(Celik
Turkoglu and Erol Genevois, 2020; Laporte et al., 2019). In their basic version, facilities
providingsomesortofserviceforcustomersneedtobeopenedatpotentialsitesandcustomers
are assigned to these facilities. The aim is to minimise the total cost consisting of opening
costs for the facilities and costs for assigning the customers to the facilities. We refer to this
problem as the uncapacitated facility location problem (UFLP). Naturally, each customer
is assigned to the open facility with lowest assignment cost. The class of FLPs is widely
applicable to many real-world problems such as locating health care institutions (Ahmadi-
Javid et al., 2017), charging stations for electrical cars (Ahmad et al., 2022), and many
more (Celik Turkoglu and Erol Genevois, 2020).
In UFLPs, there are no limitations on the service a facility can provide. However, such
limitations are essentialfor many real-world problems, for example, when looking athospitals
and the number of patients that can be treated (Mestre et al., 2015). Often, customers incur a
certain demand and facilities have a certain capacity for serving customers’ demands. Such
problems belong to the class of capacitated facility location problems. In that setting, it is
no longer guaranteed that each customer will be assigned to the open facility with lowest
assignment cost. The problem is called single-source capacitated facility location problem
(CFLP) if each customer has to be assigned to exactly one open facility.
Both, the CFLP and the UFLP assume that each customer can be assigned to any facility
and that the customers follow these instructions. When locating health care emergency cen-
ters, however, it can be assumed that customers will seek the service of their closest open
facility in an emergency. In this case, customers have individual preferences over the facilities
and their assignment in the solution to the UFLP or CFLP might be in conﬂict with their
preferences. In reality, customers then deviate to one of their most preferred open facilities.
While this yields a feasible, although possibly worse, solution in the UFLP, it might turn a
feasible solution of the CFLP infeasible.
We refer to the problem in which each customer has to be served at exactly one of their
most preferred open facilities as the (single-source capacitated) facility location problem
with customer preferences (CFLP-CP/UFLP-CP). If preferences are deﬁned by assignment
costs, we call the problem (single-source capacitated) facility location problem with closest
assignments (CFLP-CA/UFLP-CA). Note, any solution for the UFLP-CA coincides with a
solution for the UFLP. In this work, we study the combinatorial structures of both the CFLP-
CP and the CFLP-CA. The main contribution of this paper is the observation that preference
constraints can, on the one hand, ease the complexity of assigning customers to facilities and,
on the other hand, increase the complexity of locating facilities. Our observation is supported
by the following results:
1. Determining feasibility of the CFLP-CP can be done in polynomial time if either each
customer has a strict preference ordering of the facilities or each customer has uniform
demand; cf. Section 4.
2. Computing an optimal solution for the CFLP-CP with strict preferences is NP-hard even
if capacities are neglected and assignment costs are given by an underlying path graph;
cf. Section 5.
3. Computing an optimal solution for the CFLP-CA with strict preferences is exactly weakly
NP-hard if assignment costs are given by an underlying star graph, and the CFLP-CA is
solvable in polynomial time if customer demands are uniform and assignment costs are
given by an an underlying star graph; cf. Section 6.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
2459
4. Determining feasibility of the CFLP-CP with uniform customer demands and lower
bounds on the customer demand to be served at each open facility is strongly NP-complete
even though the corresponding assignment problem can be solved in polynomial time;
cf. Section 7.
Contributions 1. and 3. support our claim that preference constraints can ease the com-
plexity of assigning customers to facilities. Recall that determining feasibility for the CFLP
is already strongly NP-complete independently of any structures in the assignment costs.
Contributions 2. and 4. show that the introduction of customer preferences can increase the
complexity of locating facilities in contrast to the complexity of locating facilities in solutions
for the UFLP and CFLP, respectively: The UFLP can be solved to optimility in polynomial
time if assignment costs correspond to the costs in an underlying tree graph (Mirchandani and
Francis, 1990), and a feasible solution of the CFLP with uniform demands can be determined
in polynomial time by opening all facilities and solving an instance of the matching problem.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of
related literature. A formal problem deﬁnition is given in Section 3, in which we also sum-
marize used notation. In Section 4, we discuss the feasibility of the CFLP-CP with either
strict preferences or uniform demands. This is followed by a discussion on the computational
complexity of determining an optimal solution for the CFLP-CP with strict customer pref-
erences and assignment costs given by an underlying path graph; cf. Section 5. In Section 6,
we study the CFLP-CA with assignment costs which are given by an underlying star graph.
We show that this problem is exactly weakly NP-hard if customer preferences are strict, and
solvable in polynomial time if customer demands are uniform. In Section 7, we consider the
CFLP-CP with uniform demands and additional lower bounds on the customer demand to
be served at each open facility. If the set of open facilities is already given, we show that
determining a feasible assignment of the customers can be done in polynomial time. If the set
of open facilities is unknown, we show that determining feasibility is strongly NP-complete.
Last but not least, we discuss our ﬁndings and future work in Section 8.
2 Related work
Facility location problems are thoroughly studied in the literature, see, e.g., Laporte et al.
(2019), Celik Turkoglu and Erol Genevois (2020). The uncapacitated facility location prob-
lem (UFLP) poses as the fundamental problem which occurs in all facility location problems
as a subproblem. From the complexity-theoretical point of view, it is easy to ﬁnd a feasible
solution for the UFLP but it is NP-hard to ﬁnd an optimal solution (Mirchandani and Fran-
cis, 1990). If the customers and facility locations are deﬁned on an underlying graph with
assignment costs equating distances in the graph, then an optimal solution can be computed
efﬁciently for the UFLP on tree graphs (Mirchandani and Francis, 1990). Conversely to the
UFLP, already ﬁnding a feasible solution for the single-source capacitated facility location
problem (CFLP) is strongly NP-complete; this can be seen via a reduction from 3-partition,
cf. Garey and Johnson (1979) for a deﬁnition of 3-partition. The relevance and complexity
of FLPs has triggered a large number of scientiﬁc articles related to different aspects, such as
exact solution methods (see, e.g., Avella and Boccia (2009), Görtz and Klose (2012), Fischetti
et al. (2016)), the investigation of their polyhedral structure (see, e.g., Leung and Magnanti
(1989), Aardal et al. (1995), Avella and Boccia (2009), and Avella et al. (2021)) and heuristic
solution methods (see, e.g., Mirchandani and Francis (1990), Korte and Vygen (2018)).
123

2460
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
Most articles considering facility location problems with customer preferences focus on
the uncapacitated case. The work of Hanjoul and Peeters (1987) is considered to be the ﬁrst
occurrence of preference constraints in the context of facility location problems. The authors
propose an exact algorithm, which utilises a branch-and-bound procedure, as well as two
heuristics for solving the UFLP-CP. Several articles focus on preprocessing strategies and
valid inequalities, see, e.g., Cánovas et al. (2007), Vasilyev et al. (2009) and Vasilyev et al.
(2013). A semi-Lagrangian relaxation heuristic approach is proposed by Cabezas and García
(2022). To the best of our knowledge, a thorough analysis of the computational complexity
of the UFLP with customer preferences has not yet been conducted.
Rojeski and ReVelle (1970), Wagner and Falkson (1975) and Gerrard and Church (1996)
focus on the special case in which preferences are deﬁned by distances, i.e., each customer
prefers to be served at their closest open facility. Rojeski and ReVelle (1970) additionally
consider capacities, allow to split customer demands and to expand capacities. Wagner and
Falkson (1975) present models for the location of public facilities which maximise social
welfareandproposeasetofclosestassignmentconstraints.GerrardandChurch(1996)review
constraints for integer linear programming formulations to enforce closest assignments and
to identify applications for facility location problems with closest assignment constraints.
Espejo et al. (2012) theoretically compare all closest assignment constraints in the literature
of discrete location theory up until 2011 and contribute a new set of constraints.
When studying CFLPs with customer preferences, there are two main approaches to
dealing with overloaded facilities. In the ﬁrst approach, the overloaded facility may be opened
and some customers will be served at a facility they like less. In the second approach, each
customer has to be served at their most preferred open facility and facilities that are overloaded
can never be opened. Note that whether a facility will be overloaded depends on which other
facilities are opened. Casas-Ramírez et al. (2018), Calvete et al. (2020), and Polino et al.
(2023) study the ﬁrst approach. Here, the authors consider variations of a bilevel setting
where the leader opens facilities with the aim to minimise the total sum of opening and
assignment costs; the follower assigns each customer, for which a ranking of all potential
facilities is known, to the open facilities with the objective to optimise the sum of achieved
preference rankings of the customers. Calvete et al. (2020) compare computational results of
theﬁrstandsecondapproachtodealwithoverloadedfacilities.Thesecondapproachisstudied
by Büsing et al. (2022) and Büsing et al. (2024). Büsing et al. (2024) propose preprocessing
methods and cover-based inequalities. If preferences are deﬁned by assignment costs, and
assignment costs correspond to distances in an underlying path or cycle, Büsing et al. (2022)
show that the CFLP-CA can be solved in polynomial time. In contrast, the CFLP is strongly
NP-hard independently of the structure of assignment costs, as discussed at the beginning of
this section.
The polynomial time algorithms for special cases of the CFLP-CP in which overloaded
facilities cannot be opened suggest further potential arising from combining capacities and
customer preferences. With this work, we aim to contribute (a) to a better understanding of
the combinatorial structures of the CFLP-CP and (b) theoretical foundations which can be
utilised in exact and heuristic solution approaches for the CFLP-CP.
3 Problem deﬁnition and notation
In the single-source capacitated facility location problem with customer preferences (CFLP-
CP), we are given a set of customers I and a set of potential facilities J. Each customer i ∈
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
2461
I has a demand di ∈N0, each potential facility j ∈J has a capacity Q j ∈N0 and
opening cost f j ≥0. Assigning a customer i ∈I to a facility j ∈J causes assignment
costs ci j ≥0. Each customer i ∈I has ranked all potential facilities according to their
own preferences, inducing a complete, weak ordering ≤i on the potential facilities. We
write j <i k if customer i ∈I strictly prefers potential facility j ∈J over potential
facility k ∈J, and j =i k indicates that i is indifferent between j and k. With this notation
at hand, consider the following deﬁnition of the CFLP-CP.
Deﬁnition 1 Let(I, J, (di)i∈I , (Q j) j∈J, ( f j) j∈J, (ci j)i∈I, j∈J, (≤i)i∈I )begivenasdescribed
above. The single-source capacitated facility location problem with customer preferences
(CFLP-CP) consists in ﬁnding a subset F ⊆J of facilities that are open and an assign-
ment  : I →F of customers to these facilities such that
1. the capacity limit of each open facility is met, i.e., 
i∈−1( j) di ≤Q j holds for each j ∈
F,
2. each customer is assigned to a facility they prefer most among all open facilities, i.e.,
there is no i ∈I and j ∈F such that j <i (i),
3. the cost of opening facilities and assigning customers is minimised, i.e., min-
imise 
j∈F f j + 
i∈I ci(i).
In the following, we denote the set of facilities a customer i ∈I prefers most among all
facilities in a set J ′ ⊆J with pi

J ′
=

j ∈J ′∄j′ ∈J ′ : j′ <i j

.
Facility location problems are often introduced by some underlying graph, where nodes
represent facilities and customers, and assignment costs are equal to the distance of a shortest
path between customer and facility.
Deﬁnition 2 Let G = (V , E) be a graph with edge weights w(e) > 0 for e ∈E
and let cuv be the shortest path between u, v ∈V in G with respect to weights w.
Then (V , V , (dv)v∈V , (Qv)v∈V , ( fv)v∈V , (cuv)u∈V ,v∈V , (≤v)v∈V ) deﬁnes an instance of the
CFLP-CP on graph G for given demands (dv)v∈V , capacities (Qv)v∈V , opening costs
( fv)v∈V , and preferences among nodes (≤v)v∈V .
In the remainder of this paper, we will use the formulations CFLP-CP with assignment
costs which are given by an underlying graph and CFLP-CP on a graph interchangeably.
The same holds, of course, for all other problems studied here and for more speciﬁc graph
classes.
We aim in this paper to develop a better understanding of how capacities and preferences
affect the computational complexity in detail. That is, in which special cases do capacities
and preferences cause the problem to be NP-hard instead of polynomially solvable? And
conversely, in which cases does the problem become polynomially solvable instead of being
NP-hard?
4 Feasibility
In this section, we discuss the complexity of ﬁnding a feasible solution for the CFLP-CP.
Recall that simply ﬁnding a feasible solution for the single-source capacitated facility loca-
tion problem (CFLP) is strongly NP-hard. This extends to the CFLP-CP, considering that
the CFLP is a special case where all customers are indifferent between all facilities. The
complexity of ﬁnding a feasible solution for the CFLP arises from the underlying partition
123

2462
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
problem, where customers represent with their demand the elements and each facility is
allowed to serve the same share of the total demand. The partition structure is trivialized
if we consider uniform customer demands, which makes ﬁnding a feasible solution for the
CFLP polynomially solvable in that case. We show that this also holds for the CFLP-CP with
uniform demands. However, before we prove this claim, we also show that strict preferences
destroy the underlying partition structure. That is, strict preferences allow to ﬁnd feasible
solutions in polynomial time - even for non-uniform demands.
We start by considering the special case of the CFLP-CP with strict preferences, i.e.,
either j <i k or k <i j holds for all i ∈I, j, k ∈J.
Theorem 1 A feasible solution for an instance of the CFLP-CP where each customer has a
strict preference ordering of the potential facilities can be found in O(|I| · |J| · log(|J|))
steps. If we are given a list of facilities sorted by preference for each customer, then we only
need O(|J| · |I|) steps.
Proof If not already given, we construct for every customer a sorted list of facilities, requiring
a total of O(|I| · |J| · log(|J|)) steps.
We start by considering a solution in which all facilities are open, i.e., F = J. Since
each customer has a strict preference ordering of the facilities, the assignment of customers
is easy: Assign each customer to their most-preferred open facility. If this corresponds to a
feasible solution, we are done.
Suppose this solution is infeasible. Then there exists an open facility j ∈F which has to
serve more demand than its capacity offers. Since all facilities are open and each customer is
assigned to their most-preferred facility, we cannot open another facility to lower the demand
assigned to j. Moreover, closing other facilities will either keep j’s assigned demand constant
orincreaseit.Hence,thereisnofeasiblesolutioninwhichfacility j isopen.Weclosefacility j
and reassign all customers that were assigned to j. If the solution is still infeasible, then we
repeat the previous step until either the set of open facilities is empty, i.e., there is no feasible
solution, or until we obtain a solution in which the capacity of each open facility is respected.
Note that reassigning a customer can be done in constant time, as we can assign them to
the next facility in the preference list. While doing so, we update the aggregated demand that
is assigned to the new facility and check whether this demand violates the capacity. Since
there are at most |I| customers to be reassigned, the process of reassignment and checking
for violated capacities can be done in O(|I|) steps. In the worst case, |J| facilities are closed
until infeasibility is proven. This amounts to O(|J| · |I|) steps.
⊓⊔
The procedure in the proof above yields a polynomial time algorithm for computing
a feasible solution for the CFLP-CP with strict customer preferences. Note that we close
exactly those facilities that cannot be open in any feasible solution. Hence, any feasible set
of facilities is contained in the set of facilities computed by the above procedure.
Next, we consider the CFLP-CP with uniform demands. We can assume without loss of
generality that all demands are equal to one. Otherwise, we apply scaling and rounding to
demands and capacities. We can determine feasibility of this problem in polynomial time
too.
Proposition 2 We can compute a feasible solution, or determine that no solution exists, for
the CFLP-CP with uniform demands in polynomial time.
Proof We introduce an extended facility set ˜J = ∪j∈J{ j1, . . . , jQ j } to be the set containing
a number of copies of each facility according to its capacity, and we set the capacity of each
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
2463
such facility to one, i.e., Q j = 1 for each j ∈˜J. Then, we modify the preferences of each
customer so that they are indifferent between facilities j1, . . . , jQ j for each j ∈J. It is
evident that the CFLP-CP with uniform demands and this extended problem are equivalent.
Determining feasibility of this extended problem is equivalent to determining feasibility
of the envy-free house allocation problem. In the envy-free house allocation problem, m
houses and n agents with preferences over the houses are given, and the goal is to assign
each agent to exactly one house so that every agent likes their house at least as much as any
other assigned house. If such an assignment is possible, feasibility is shown. Otherwise, some
houses must be removed from the set of potential houses in order to determine feasibility.
Again, the 1-on-1 correspondence between solutions for the extended problem and instances
of the envy-free house allocation problem is evident: The set of customers corresponds to
the set of agents, the set of open facilities corresponds to the set of houses, and there is an
edge between an agent and a house if the corresponding facility is one of the most preferred
facilities of the corresponding customer.
Gan et al. (2019) show that computing a feasible solution for the envy-free house alloca-
tion problem, or determining that no solution exists, can be done in polynomial time. This
concludes the proof.
⊓⊔
This section supports our observation that preference constraints do not increase the com-
plexity of assigning customers to facilities.
5 Optimality for strict preferences
In the previous section, we showed that feasibility for the CFLP-CP can be determined in
polynomial time if either preferences are strict or customer demands are uniform. These
ﬁndings yield hope for special cases of the CFLP-CP in which an optimal solution can be
computed efﬁciently. However, in this section, we show that computing an optimal solution
for the CFLP-CP is already NP-hard if the problem is deﬁned on a path, that is, the graph
in Deﬁnition 2 is a path. We show this by proving the stronger result that the uncapacitated
version, i.e., the uncapacitated facility location problem with strict customer preferences
(UFLP-SCP) is NP-hard on paths. Since this result is independent of the capacities, it further
emphasises the computational impact of customer preferences on decisions regarding facility
locations.
Theorem 3 The uncapacitated facility location problem with strict customer preferences
(UFLP-SCP) is already NP-hard if the instance is deﬁned on a path graph.
Proof We prove the theorem via a reduction from the NP-hard minimum vertex cover prob-
lem (Garey and Johnson, 1979). In the minimum vertex cover problem, we are given a
graph G = (V , E) and a number k ∈N. The goal is to determine a subset of the nodes S ⊆V
with size of at most k so that at least one end node of each edge in graph G is element of
set S.
We transform any vertex cover instance I = (G = (V , E), k) into an instance of the
UFLP-SCP on a path as follows; cf. Figure 1. Introduce one node v′
i for each i ∈{1, . . . , |V |}
in the vertex cover instance, and denote this set of nodes with V ′
V . Furthermore, introduce
one node e′
j for each j ∈{1, . . . , |E|} in graph G, and denote this set of nodes with V ′
E.
Finally, introduce one dummy node ξ. Set V ′ = V ′
V ∪V ′
E ∪{ξ} denotes the nodes in the
underlying graph of the transformed UFLP-SCP-instance. Set the opening costs of facility ξ
to 0 and the opening costs of facilities in set V ′
V ∪V ′
E to |V ′|2 + 1. Connect the nodes in V ′
123

2464
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
Fig. 1 Polynomial transformation of a solution for a given minimum vertex cover instance into a solution for
an instance of the UFLP-SCP on paths.
such that they form a path in the order (e′
1, . . . , e′
|E|, v′
1, . . . , v′
|V |, ξ). Assign to each edge
in the path costs of 1, except for edge {v′
|V |, ξ} to which we assign cost of k · 3 · |V ′|2. The
edge costs are deﬁned so that it is favorable to assign customers in V ′
V ∪V ′
E to facilities
in V ′
V ∪V ′
E as well as the customer at ξ to the facility at ξ. Otherwise, customers need to
cross the expensive edge {v′
|V |, ξ}.
It remains to deﬁne the preferences of each customer. The customer at ξ prefers the facility
at ξ most. The order of their remaining preferences is arbitrary. Consider customers located
in V ′
V . Each customer in V ′
V prefers the facility at their own node, followed by facilities at
nodes of the same type. That is, customers in V ′
V prefer facilities in V ′
V . Apart from that,
the order of preferences is arbitrary. Consider a customer e′ ∈V ′
E who corresponds to an
edge e = {u, w} ∈E in the vertex cover instance. Denote the nodes corresponding to u, w
with u′, w′ in the CFLP-CP-instance. We deﬁne the most preferred facilities of e′ to be those
in {u′, w′}, followed by the facility at ξ. The preference order of the remaining facilities is
also arbitrary. Assuming that the facility at ξ is open, the preferences of e′ ensure that we
have to pay high assignment costs by crossing the expensive edge {v′
|V |, ξ} if we do not open
a facility corresponding to one of the end nodes of edge e.
We will show that this yields a correspondence between open facilities in V ′
V and vertex
covers in V . In particular, we prove that there exists a vertex cover S ⊆V of size |S| ≤k if and
only if there exists a solution to the CFLP-CP-instance with cost of at most (k +1)·|V ′|2 +k.
Assume there exists a vertex cover S ⊆V with |S| ≤k. Let V ′
S ⊆V ′
V be the nodes
in the CFLP-CP-instance corresponding to those in the vertex cover. Then we construct a
solution by opening all facilities at nodes in V ′
S ∪{ξ}. This yields opening costs of 0 for
the facility at ξ and at most k · (|V ′|2 + 1) for those in V ′
S. We can assign the customer
at ξ to their own facility, which yields no assignment costs. Furthermore, we assign all cus-
tomers in V ′
V ∪V ′
E to facilities in V ′
S, which yields assignment cost of at most (|V | + |E|)2
since |V |+|E| customers need to be assigned and every assignment costs at most |V |+|E|.
The assignment is feasible as customers in V ′
V ∪{ξ} prefer facilities at nodes of their own
type, and the most preferred facilities of customers in V ′
E are located in V ′
S since S is a vertex
cover. Overall, we obtain a feasible solution of cost less than k · (|V ′|2 + 1) + (|V | + |E|)2.
Since (|V | + |E|)2 ≤(1 + |V | + |E|)2 = |V ′|2 holds, we obtain total costs of at most
k · (|V ′|2 + 1) + |V ′|2 = (k + 1) · |V ′|2 + k. Hence, the constructed solution to the CFLP-
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
2465
CP-instance has cost of at most (k + 1) · |V ′|2 + k.
Now, assume we are given a solution to the CFLP-CP-instance of cost at most (k +
1) · |V ′|2 + k. Then the facility at ξ is open. Otherwise, the customer at ξ would need
to cross edge {v′
|V |, ξ} to their assigned facility, which amounts to assignment costs of at
least k · 3 · |V ′|2 ≥(k + 2) · |V ′|2 > (k + 1) · |V ′|2 + k.
We can assume without loss of generality that customers in V ′
E are not assigned to the
facility at ξ. Otherwise, any such customer has to cross edge {v′
|V |, ξ}, and the assignment
cost of such a customer to ξ already exceeds bound (k+1)·|V ′|2+k as shown in the previous
observation. Then, for each customer at e′ ∈V ′
E corresponding to edge e = {u, w} ∈E either
a facility at u′ or w′ has to be open in V ′
V . In this case, all customers at nodes in V ′
V are served
at facilities at nodes in V ′
V . In conclusion, each customer in V ′
V ∪V ′
E incurs assignment cost
of at most |V ′|. Hence, the overall assignment cost incurred by all customers is at most |V ′|2.
Recall that opening a facility in V ′
V incurs cost of |V ′|2 + 1, opening a facility at ξ incurs
cost of 0. Then, opening k facilities at nodes in V ′
V and a facility at ξ yields overall cost of
at most k · (|V ′|2 + 1) + |V ′|2 = (k + 1) · |V ′|2 + k. Opening one more facility at a node
in V ′
V leads to overall opening cost of at least
(k + 1) · (|V ′|2 + 1) = (k + 1) · |V ′|2 + k + 1 > (k + 1) · |V ′|2 + k
and violates the bound on the overall cost. Hence, in a solution to the given CFLP-CP-instance
of cost at most (k + 1) · |V ′|2 + k, at most k facilities at nodes in V ′
V are open. Denote this
set of open facilities with S′ ⊆V ′
V .
We construct a solution for the minimum vertex cover instance by deﬁning the vertex
cover as the set of nodes corresponding to nodes in set S′. Denote this set with S ⊆V . Since
each customer located at a node e′ ∈V ′
E is served at a facility v′ ∈S′, this implies that
the corresponding edge e ∈E is covered by the corresponding node in v ∈S. Since all
customers at nodes in V ′
E are served by the facilities in S′ and |S′| ≤k, the corresponding
edges are covered by all nodes in S with |S| ≤k.
Hence, S is a vertex cover of size |S| = |S′| ≤k, which completes the proof.
⊓⊔
It is easy to see that this result also extends to the CFLP-CP. In conclusion, solving
both the UFLP-SCP and the CFLP-CP with strict preferences is already NP-hard on basic
graph classes, regardless of the actual demands and capacities. Theorem 3 supports our
claim that preference constraints increase the complexity of locating facilities: Recall that
the traditional UFLP on trees can be solved in polynomial time (Mirchandani and Francis,
1990). Furthermore, the result emphasizes the importance of an underlying structure of the
customer preferences.
6 Closest assignments as preferences
In the previous section, we used a rather artiﬁcially designed preference pattern to show
NP-hardness of the CFLP-CP. We now focus on more structured preference constraints,
namely closest assignment, where preferences are ordered with respect to the assignment
costs. Büsing et al. (2022) show that the single-source capacitated facility location problem
with closest assignments (CFLP-CA) is solvable in polynomial time on paths and cycles.
This is due to the strongly structured preferences on such graphs: Customers can only choose
between the nearest facility to their “left” or their “right”, and since there are no branches,
123

2466
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
Fig. 2 Instance of the CFLP-CA on a star graph. Facility nodes have a capacity of B ∈N and demands of
0, non-facility nodes have a capacity of 0 and demands in B/4 and B/2. Opening costs are irrelevant and set
to 0. Note that all customers on non-facility nodes are indifferent between all facilities.
all customers on the path to this facility are also assigned to it. Especially the absence of
branches is crucial, as it removes the partition-structure from assigning customers to facilities.
This becomes even more evident when considering the CFLP-CA on star graphs, which are
trees with a center node having degree of at least three, and all other nodes being leaves
(cf. Figure 2). On these fairly simple graphs, it is already strongly NP-complete to compute
a feasible solution. To see this, note that all customers who are not facilities themselves are
assigned to one of the closest facilities to the center. If the center itself is not a facility and
if all leaves are equally far away from the center, then all customers on non-facility nodes
are indifferent between all facilities, leaving us with an NP-complete partitioning problem;
cf. Figure 2.
In order to remove the partition-structure from our problem on stars, we now investigate
the impact of either strict preferences or uniform demands on the computational complexity
of the CFLP-CA. In Section 6.1, we show that the formerly strongly NP-complete problem on
star graphs becomes weakly NP-hard when considering strict preferences. In Section 6.2, we
show that the problem on star graphs can even be solved in polynomial time when considering
uniform demands.
6.1 Strict preferences on star graphs
In the following, we prove that computing an optimal solution for the CFLP-CA with strict
preferences on star graphs is weakly NP-hard. We will refer to strict preferences as distinct
assignment costs since preferences are now deﬁned by assignment costs.
Theorem 4 The CFLP-CA with distinct assignment costs which are given by an underlying
star graph is at least weakly NP-hard.
Proof We prove our claim via a reduction from the weakly NP-hard knapsack problem (Garey
and Johnson, 1979). Consider a knapsack instance consisting of a capacity B ∈N and a set
of items N, where each item i ∈N is assigned a proﬁt pi ∈N and a weight wi ∈N. The
goal is to ﬁnd a subset S ⊆N of items so that the total weight 
i∈S wi is at most B and the
total proﬁt 
i∈S pi is maximal.
We transform a given knapsack instance into an instance of our problem as follows;
cf. Figure 3.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
2467
Fig. 3 Transformation of an optimal solution for a given knapsack instance with total proﬁt of P = 16 to a
solution for the corresponding instance of the CFLP-CA with total cost of 18 = 
v∈V fv −P.
Introduce node z as the center node in the star graph. The demand, capacity, and opening
costs of z are deﬁned as dz = 1, Qz = B + 1, and fz = 0. Introduce for each item in set N
a leaf node on the star graph. Denote the set of leaves with L = {1, 2, . . . , |N|}.
Each node i ∈L has both a demand and a capacity equal to the weight of the corresponding
item in the knapsack instance, i.e., di = Qi = wi. We set the assignment cost of node i ∈L
to the center node to ciz = i.
This choice ensures that each customer has distinct assignment cost to all other nodes.
We deﬁne the cost of opening a facility at i ∈L so that we save cost of pi when assigning i
to z instead of opening a facility at i, i.e., fi = pi + ciz = pi + i. We prove that there exists
a knapsack solution of value at least P if and only if there exists a facility location solution
of cost at most 
i∈N(pi + i) −P.
Suppose that there exists a feasible solution S ⊆N for a given knapsack instance with P ≤

i∈S pi. We construct the corresponding facility location solution by opening a facility
at z as well as all facilities at {i ∈L|i /∈S}. Due to the closest assignment constraints,
we need to assign all customers to their own facility if it is open. This assignment meets
the capacity constraints on the leaves, as we have di = wi = Qi for all i ∈L. The
customers in {i ∈L|i ∈S} need to be assigned to the facility at z. Since S is a feasible
knapsack solution, this assignment meets the capacity constraint of the facility at z as we
have dz +
i∈S di = 1+
i∈S wi ≤1+ B = Qz. The total opening cost of our constructed
solution is fz+
i /∈S fi = 0+
i /∈S(pi +i). The total assignment cost is 
i∈S ciz = 
i∈S i.
Since inequality P ≤
i∈S pi holds for the considered knapsack solution, inequality

i /∈S
(pi + i) +

i∈S
i =

i∈N
(pi + i) −

i∈S
pi ≤

i∈N
(pi + i) −P
123

2468
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
Fig.
4 An instance of the CFLP-CA on a star graph with the closest open facility to the
center at ξ = 3. The nodes are classiﬁed into always-closed, always-open, and undecided facili-
ties C(ξ) = {z, 2, 4}, F(ξ) = {1, 3, 5}, U(ξ) = {6}, respectively.
holds for the overall cost of the constructed CFLP-CA-instance.
Conversely, consider a solution to the constructed CFLP-CA-instance of cost at
most 
i∈N(pi + i) −P, and denote the set of nodes on which facilities are opened
with F ⊆L ∪{z}. First, note that z ∈F holds since no other facility is capable of serv-
ing z in addition to the customer at the respective node. Hence, the customers in L \ F
are assigned to facility z, while all other customers are assigned to their own facility. We
deﬁne S = {i ∈N|i ∈L \ F} as the corresponding solution to the knapsack instance. Due to
the capacity constraint of facility z, we have 
i∈S wi = 
i∈L\F di ≤Qz −1 = B. Hence, S
is a feasible knapsack solution. The cost 
i∈L\F ciz + 
i∈F∩L fi ≤
i∈N(pi + i) −P of
our facility location solution implies

i∈S
pi ≥

i∈S
pi +
⎛
⎝
i∈L\F
ciz +

i∈F∩L
fi
⎞
⎠−

i∈N
(pi + i) −P

=

i∈L\F
( fi −ciz) +

i∈L\F
ciz +

i∈F∩L
fi −

i∈L
fi + P = P,
which completes the proof
⊓⊔
In the following, we present a pseudo-polynomial algorithm solving the CFLP-CA with
distinct assignment costs on star graphs. Combined with the previous result, we derive that
the CFLP-CA with distinct assignment costs on star graphs is exactly weakly NP-hard.
Consider a star graph T = (V , E), and denote the center node with z. We start by
describing the structure of a solution for our problem. Afterwards, we give an algorithm for
solving this problem.
Anatomy of a solution
Denote the set of nodes on which facilities are opened with F ⊆V . In the following, we
discuss the anatomy of any feasible solution; cf. Figure 4 for a visualisation of the introduced
concepts.
Unique closest facility to the center node and always-closed facilities. In any feasible solu-
tion, there is a unique open facility which has lowest assignment cost to the center node.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
2469
Suppose this closest open facility to the center node is located at node ξ ∈V , i.e., cξz < ciz
for any open facility i ∈F \ {ξ}. Note that z might be the closest open facility with czz = 0.
Given ξ, we can restrict the potential open facilities as follows.
Lemma 5 Let the closest open facility to the center node be located at node ξ ∈V . Then, all
facilities located at nodes in set C(ξ) = {p ∈V : cpz < cξz} ∪{p ∈V : dp > Q p} have to
be closed. This results in a demand to be served at ξ of at least D(ξ) = dξ + 
p∈C(ξ) dp.
Proof Set C(ξ) contains all locations which are strictly closer to the center than ξ or are
incapable of serving the demand of the customer sharing the same node. Since ξ is the closest
facility to the center, any facility located at a p ∈V with cpz < cξz is closed. Furthermore,
since each customer prefers the facility at their own node most, each open facility has to be
able to serve the demand of the customer at their location.
⊓⊔
Always-open facilities.
Next, we analyse the set of open facilities. Based on the location
of ξ, we can immediately derive locations on which facilities have to be opened in any optimal
solution.
Lemma 6 Denote the location of the closest facility to the center with ξ. In any optimal
solution, set F(ξ) = {ξ} ∪{i ∈V \ C(ξ) : fi ≤ciξ} describes the nodes on which facilities
have to be opened.
Proof Note that every facility in V \ C(ξ) can be opened.
Since fi ≤ciξ holds for any i ∈F(ξ) \ {ξ}, the objective value does not increase when
opening a facility at i ∈F(ξ) instead of assigning the customer at i to ξ. Moreover, opening a
facility at i frees up capacity at ξ for other customers, while i only serves their own customer.
Hence, opening all facilities in set F(ξ) is advantageous regarding capacity.
⊓⊔
Undecided facilities.
Lastly, we consider the set of facility locations for which it is yet
undecided whether a facility is opened. Denote this set with U(ξ) = V \ (C(ξ) ∪F(ξ)).
In the following, we utilise our knowledge of the anatomy of a solution in order to construct
an optimal solution.
Solution approach
The previous observations show that opening a facility at node ξ ∈V implies the assignment
of all customers in set C(ξ)∪F(ξ). The only decision to be made is regarding the assignment
of customers located at nodes in set U(ξ); that is, are they served at ξ or at a facility located
on their own node? We save cost of fi −ciξ when assigning customer i ∈U(ξ) to facility ξ
instead of opening a facility at i. Hence, an optimal choice U ′(ξ) ⊆U(ξ) of customers that
are assigned to ξ is given by the following knapsack problem
k(ξ) :=
max
U′⊆U(ξ)

i∈U′
fi −ciξ


i∈U′
di ≤Qξ −D(ξ)

,
(1)
which can be solved via dynamic programming in O(|U(ξ)| · (Qξ −D(ξ))) (Korte and
Vygen, 2018). The value of an optimal solution for a given ξ is then 
i∈F(ξ)∪U(ξ) fi +

i∈C(ξ) ciξ −k(ξ). To compute an optimal solution for the original problem, we only need
to compute F(ξ), C(ξ), U(ξ), and U ′(ξ) for all ξ ∈V and choose the one with the best
objective value.
123

2470
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
Proposition 7 The CFLP-CA with distinct assignment costs which are given by an underlying
star graph can be solved in pseudo-polynomial time O(
ξ∈V |V | · Qξ).
Proof It is easy to see that computing sets C(ξ), F(ξ), U(ξ) takes O(|V |) steps. Together
with the dynamic program for computing U ′(ξ), we have O(|V | · Qξ) steps for each ξ ∈V .
⊓⊔
By combining the lower and upper bound on the complexity from Theorem 4 and Propo-
sition 7, we obtain the following result.
Corollary 8 The CFLP-CA with distinct assignment costs which are given by an underlying
star graph is exactly weakly NP-hard.
To the best of our knowledge, an extension to general trees is not straight-forward – if there
is one. An important question to be answered by algorithms for trees is how to efﬁciently
evaluate which of the customers located in subtrees neighbouring nodes i ∈U(ξ) are also
served at ξ.
Finally, note that in case of uniform demands d ≡1, we have Qξ ≤|V |, which yields the
following result.
Corollary 9 The CFLP-CA with distinct assignment costs and uniform customer demands
can be solved in O(|V |3) steps if the underlying graph corresponds to a star graph.
6.2 Uniform demands on star graphs
In the following, we show that the CFLP-CA with uniform customer demands on star graphs
is solvable in polynomial time, even if customers are indifferent between several facilities.
That is, we extend Corollary 9. We assume without loss of generality that all demands are
equal to one. Otherwise, we apply scaling and rounding to the demands and capacities.
Anatomy of a solution
Consider a CFLP-CA-instance deﬁned on a star graph T = (V , E), and denote the center
node with z. Let R = {r1, . . . ,rℓ} be the set of distinct distances with r1 < r2 < · · · < rℓ
with r1 = czz = 0 and rℓ= maxi∈V {ciz}. Since preferences are deﬁned by assignment
costs, each customer has to be served at an open facility with lowest assignment cost. Hence,
a customer is either served at the facility at their node or at an open facility with lowest
assignment cost to the center node.
Suppose the facility with lowest assignment cost to the center node has assignment cost
of r ∈R to the center. Like in the previous section, there are nodes on which facilities have
to stay closed and others on which we have to open facilities.
• Always-closed facilities. Facilities located at nodes p ∈V have to stay closed if either
the assignment cost to the center node is strictly lower than r, i.e., cpz < r, or the
demand of the customer located on this node exceeds the capacity of this node’s facility,
i.e., Q p < 1; cf. Lemma 5. Denote this set of nodes with C(r) = {p ∈V : cpz <
r} ∪{p ∈V : Q p < 1}.
• Always-open facilities. Facilities located at nodes p ∈V \ C(r) are open in a cost-
minimising solution if opening a facility at p is at most as expensive as assigning the
customer at p to another open facility with lowest assignment cost to the center node,
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
2471
i.e., f p ≤cpz +r; cf. Lemma 6. Denote this set of locations with F(r) = {p ∈V \C(r) :
f p ≤cpz + r}.
The set of undecided facilities differs from before. Conversely to the previous section, now
the set of undecided facilities is deﬁned as the set of potential open facilities with assignment
costs to the center node equal to r, i.e., U(r) = {p ∈V \ C(r) : cpz = r}. In order to
understand this claim, let us ﬁrst discuss the assignment of remaining customers located at
nodes W(r) = V \(C(r)∪F(r)∪U(r)). Each customer in W(r) is either served at a facility
in U(r) or at the facility at their location. It is evident that for each customer p ∈W(r)
the former decision is economically better than the latter one. Yet, due to potential capacity
restrictions of open facilities in U(r), such an assignment might not be possible. However,
if we are given a set of open facilities in U(r), then the assignment of customers in W(r) is
immediately clear as the next lemma shows.
Lemma 10 Let U ′(r) ⊆U(r) be a set of open facilities in a solution for the CFLP-
CA with uniform demands. Due to the uniform demands, we can determine the optimal
assignment of customers in W(r) in a polynomial number of steps by assigning cus-
tomers i ∈W(r) with greatest values fi −(ciz + r) to the facilities in U ′(r). That is, we
solve arg maxW ′(r)⊆W(r){
i∈W ′(r) fi −(ciz +r)||W ′(r)| = 
i∈U′(r) Qi −|C(r) ∪U ′(r)|}.
Proof The open facilities in U ′(r) have to serve all customers in C(r) ∪U(r). Denote
with B = 
i∈U′(r) Qi −
i∈C(r)∪U(r) di = 
i∈U′(r) Qi −|C(r) ∪U(r)| ≥0 the leftover
capacity after this assignment. Since f p > cpz + r holds for any p ∈W(r), we can reduce
the overall objective value most by assigning B customers in W(r) with highest value f p −
(cpz +r) to the facilities in U ′(r). The remaining customers in W(r) are served at the facility
at their location. It is evident that this procedure corresponds to solving a knapsack problem
in which each customer has a demand of one, and it can be solved in polynomial time.
⊓⊔
Hence, the assignment of customers located at nodes in set W(r) depends on the choice of
open facilities located at nodes in set U(r). The assignment can be done efﬁciently if the set
of open facilities in U(r) is given. In the following, we utilise our knowledge of the anatomy
of a solution in order to construct an optimal solution.
Solution approach
The previous observations show that the choice of open facilities located at nodes in U(r)
determinestheoptimalobjectivevaluefortheCFLP-CAonstargraphswithuniformdemands
where the closest facility to the center has a distance of r to z. Denote with U ′(r) ⊆U(r) the
set of open facilities and with B = 
i∈U′(r) Qi −|C(r) ∪U(r)| ∈{0, . . . , 
i∈U(r) Qi −
|C(r)∪U(r)|} the leftover capacity after assigning all customers in |C(r)∪U(r)| to the open
facilities in U ′(r). For a given amount B of leftover capacity at open facilities, an optimal
choice U ′(r, B) ⊆U(r) of facilities that are opened is given by the following min-knapsack
problem
k(r, B) :=
min
U′⊆U(r)
⎧
⎨
⎩

i∈U′
( fi −2 · r)


i∈U′
Qi ≥|C(r) ∪U(r)| + B
⎫
⎬
⎭,
(2)
123

2472
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
which can be solved via dynamic programming in O(|U(r)|·(|C(r)∪U(r)|+B)) = O(|V |2).
The value of an optimal solution for given r, B is then

i∈F(r)
fi +

i∈C(r)∪U(r)
(ciz + r) + k(r, B)
+
⎡
⎣
i∈W(r)
fi −
max
W ′(r)⊆W(r)
⎧
⎨
⎩

i∈W ′(r)
fi −(ciz + r)

|W ′(r)| = B
⎫
⎬
⎭
⎤
⎦.
Note that the former half of the formula represents the cost of opening facilities in F(r)
and U(r) so that B customers from W(r) can be served at facilities in U(r). The second half
of the formula, i.e., the part in square brackets, represents the cost of assigning B customers
in W(r) to open facilities in U(r) so that the saved cost is maximised. To compute an
optimal solution for the original problem, we only need to compute F(r), C(r), U(r), W(r),
and U ′(r, B) for all B = 0, . . . , 
i∈U(r) Qi −|C(r)∪U(r)| and r ∈R, and choose the one
with best objective value.
Proposition 11 The CFLP-CA with uniform customer demands on a star graph can be solved
in O(|V |4) steps.
Proof It is easy to see that computing C(r), F(r), U(r) takes O(|V |) steps. Together with
the dynamic program for computing U ′(r, B), we have O(|V |2) steps for each possible B ∈
{1, . . . , |V |} and each r ∈R.
⊓⊔
Note that the consideration of indifferences within customer preferences increases the
number of steps by a factor |V |; cf. Corollary 9. Theorem 11 gives hope that special cases
of the CFLP-CA are polynomial solvable on trees. This is also motivated by the fact that the
UFLP, which coincides with the UFLP-CA due to its objective, is polynomial solvable on
trees (Mirchandani and Francis, 1990).
We conclude that both distinct assignment costs and uniform demands ease the com-
putational complexity of the CFLP-CA on star graphs. While the CFLP-CA with distinct
assignment costs is exactly weakly NP-hard on star graphs, the restriction to uniform demands
allows to solve the CFLP-CA on star graphs in polynomial time.
7 CFLP-CP with revenue constraints
In this section, we consider a generalisation of the CFLP-CP. In order to model economically
operating facilities that require revenue, we introduce lower bounds ℓj ∈N0 on the total
demand to be served at open facilities j ∈J. These revenue constraints are in addition to
capacity constraints. We refer to the considered generalisation as the CFLP-CP with revenue
constraints.
We ﬁrst show that a feasible assignment within the CFLP-CP with revenue constraints can
be computed efﬁciently if each customer has uniform demand and the set of open facilities
is known. Afterwards, we prove that determining feasibility is strongly NP-complete if the
decision on the open facilities is yet to be made.
Theorem 12 Given a set of open facilities, a feasible assignment of the customers to these
facilities can be computed in polynomial time for the CFLP-CP with revenue constraints and
uniform demands.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
2473
Proof We can assume without loss of generality that all demands are equal to one. Otherwise,
we apply scaling and rounding to demands and capacities.
Let F be the set of open facilities. We reduce the problem of assigning customers I
to facilities F to a bipartite matching problem by introducing Q j copies for each open
facility j ∈F. We denote these copies with ˜F = 
j∈F{ j1, . . . , jQ j }. We construct a
bipartite graph G = (I ∪˜F, E) with edges E = {{i, jk}|i ∈I, j ∈pi (F) , k ≤Q j}, i.e.,
i ∈I is connected to the copies of j ∈F if j is contained in the most preferred facilities
pi (F) of i. It is evident that a feasible assignment of customers exists if and only if there is
a matching M ⊆E that matches every customer i ∈I and at least ℓj many copies of j for
all j ∈F. To compute such a matching, we ﬁrst compute a matching that meets the lower
bounds on the number of served customers and then augment it to a matching covering all
customers.
Assume there exists a matching M ⊆E with the desired properties. Then there exists a
subset M′ ⊆M that matches exactly ℓj many copies of j for all j ∈F. We can assume
without loss of generality that M′ matches the ﬁrst ℓj copies of j. Then M′ is also a matching
in the induced subgraph G′ = G

I ∪˜F′
with ˜F′ = 
j∈F{ j1, . . . , jℓj }. Since |M′| = | ˜F′|
holds, every maximum matching in G′ matches all nodes in ˜F′. We can compute a maximum
matching in G′ in polynomial time (Korte and Vygen, 2018). Let M′′ be such a matching.
If M′′ already matches all customers in I, then M′′ corresponds to a feasible solution of the
assignment problem. Otherwise, M′′ is not a maximum matching in G due to |M′′| < |I| =
|M|. According to Berge’s Theorem (Korte and Vygen, 2018), there exists an augmenting
M′′-path P in G, i.e., a path alternating between edges in E \ M′′ and M′′ that starts and ends
in different exposed nodes. Finding an augmenting path P can be done in polynomial time
via breadth-ﬁrst search when starting in exposed nodes and traversing edges in an alternating
fashion. Note that the symmetric difference M′′△P is a matching of size |M′′|+1. Moreover,
every node that is matched by M′′ is also matched by M′′△P. In particular, M′′△P still
matches the ﬁrst ℓj copies of j for every facility j ∈F. We can iteratively augment M′′ until
it is a maximum matching in G. Then we have |M′′| = |M| = |I|, and thus every customer
in I is matched, while matching at least ℓj copies of j for every facility j ∈F.
⊓⊔
Contrary to the results in Section 4, which show that feasible solutions for the CFLP-CP
with distinct assignment costs or uniform demands can be computed in polynomial time, it is
no longer possible to compute feasible solutions for the CFLP-CP with revenue constraints
in polynomial time, unless P = N P, as we show in the next Theorem. In the following, we
prove that this already holds if preferences are deﬁned by assignment costs.
Theorem 13 Determining feasibility for the CFLP-CA with revenue constraints and uniform
demands is strongly NP-complete. This even holds if assignment costs meet the triangle
inequality and exactly two customers have to be served at any open facility.
Proof The problem is in NP, as we can check in polynomial time whether a set of open facil-
ities and an assignment of customers to facilities implies a feasible solution. We prove strong
NP-hardness via a reduction from the strongly NP-complete problem (3, B2)-SAT (Berman
et al., 2003).
We denote the clauses in our (3, B2)-SAT formula with C1, . . . , Ck and the Boolean
variables with x1, . . . , xn. We refer to these variables as positive literals and to their nega-
tions ¯xi as negative literals. In contrast to the 3-SAT problem, (3, B2)-SAT instances have
the additional property that each literal occurs exactly two times in the formula.
123

2474
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
Fig. 5 Transformation of a (3, B2)-SAT instance (x1∨x2∨x3)∧(x1∨x2∨¯x3)∧(¯x1∨¯x1∨x3)∧(¯x2∨¯x2∨¯x3)
with solution x1 = x3 = 0 and x2 = 1 to a solution of the considered instance of the CFLP-CA with revenue
constraints.
We transform an instance X of (3, B2)-SAT into an instance T of the CFLP-CA with
revenue constraints. We will deﬁne T on an underlying undirected graph G = (V , E), where
each node corresponds to both a customer and a facility, i.e., I = J = V . Since assignment
costs are given by the distance of a shortest path between nodes, they immediately fulﬁll the
triangle inequality. Figure 5 depicts an exemplary construction from a (3, B2)-SAT instance
to the corresponding graph G. The graph G consists of two layers, called Layer 1 and Layer 2,
which are constructed as follows.
Layer 1 consists of one subgraph, named Li
1, for each variable xi in X. Subgraph Li
1
contains a cycle (bi, y+
i , y−
i , ei, hi,li) with edge weights (1, 2, 1, 2, 3, 2) as well as nodes
ai, gi, which are connected to the cycle via edges {ai, bi} and {ei, gi} with weight 3, each.
Layer 2 consists of one subgraph, named L j
2, for each clause C j in X. Subgraph L j
2
contains a complete graph with four nodes s0
j , s1
j , s2
j , s3
j in which each edge has weight 2.
There are six further nodes m j, n j, o j, p j, q j,r j with edges {m j, p j}, {n j, q j}, {o j,r j} with
weight 8, each, and edges {p j, s1
j }, {q j, s2
j }, {r j, s3
j } with weight 7, each.
Layers 1 and 2 are connected via nodes y+
i , y−
i
and m j, n j, o j. Nodes y+
i
and y−
i
cor-
respond to the positive and negative literal of variable xi, respectively. Nodes m j, n j, o j
correspond to the three literals in clause C j. Accordingly, we introduce an edge from y+
i
to m j, n j, or o j if xi is the ﬁrst, second, or third literal in clause C j, respectively. Anal-
ogously, we connect y−
i
if ¯xi is a literal in clause C j. Each of these edges has weight 7.
Note, since X is an instance of (3, B2)-SAT, each literal occurs in exactly two clauses and,
therefore, each y+
i and y−
i is connected with exactly two subgraphs in Layer 2.
In summary, this yields a graph with |V | = 8n + 10k nodes and |E| = 8n + 15k
edges. For the customers i ∈I = V on these nodes, we deﬁne uniform demands di = 1.
For the facilities j ∈J = V , we deﬁne opening costs f j = 0 as well as lower and upper
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
2475
boundsℓj = Q j = 2.Thatis,everyopenfacilityservesexactlytwocustomers.Inconclusion,
the constructed instance is of polynomial size.
It remains to prove that there is a feasible solution for the (3, B2)-SAT instance X if
and only if there is a feasible solution for the constructed instance T of the CFLP-CA with
revenue constraints. For this, we use the following claims on the anatomy of solutions, which
we will prove afterwards in Lemmas 14 and 15.
Claim 1
In every feasible solution, we either open a facility at node y+
i
or y−
i
for i =
1, 2, . . . , n. Moreover, each customer is served within their respective subgraph Li
1 or L j
2.
Claim 2
In every feasible solution, at least one facility has to be opened among
nodes p j, q j,r j for j = 1, 2, . . . , k.
Consider a feasible solution of (3, B2)-SAT instance X. We transform this solution into a
solution of T as follows. In Layer 1, we open facilities at nodes ai, y−
i , ei, hi if variable xi is
set to TRUE. If variable xi is set to FALSE, we instead open facilities at nodes gi, y+
i , bi,li.
Given this choice, observe that there exists a unique closest facility for each node in Li
1. In
the corresponding assignment, each facility serves exactly two customers.
In Layer 2, we open facilities at nodes m j, n j, o j if the facility at their respective neigh-
bouring node y+
i
or y−
i
in Layer 1 is opened. This ensures that no customer in m j, n j, o j
has an incentive to deviate to a facility in Layer 1. If the neighbouring node y+
i or y−
i is not
opened, then we open facilities at the corresponding nodes p j, q j,r j. Since we are given a
feasible truth assignment, there is at least one TRUE literal in each clause. Hence, among
nodes m j, n j, o j, at least one node is not neighbouring an open facility in Layer 1. Therefore,
we open a facility at at least one node from p j, q j,r j in each subgraph L j
2. Without loss of
generality, suppose we open a facility at node p j. This allows us to open a facility at its neigh-
bouring node s1
j without giving the customer at p j an incentive to go to facility s1
j . Hence, we
open facilities at nodes s0
j , s1
j , who serve customers at s0
j , . . . , s3
j , while customers at m j, p j
and n j, q j as well as o j,r j are served at their respective facility. Observe that each customer
is assigned to one of their most preferred facility and that each facility serves exactly two
customers. Hence, we constructed a feasible solution for T .
Conversely, consider a feasible solution to instance T . In our (3, B2)-SAT instance X, we
set variable xi to TRUE if facility y−
i is opened and to FALSE if facility y+
i is opened. This
is feasible, since we either open a facility at node y+
j or y−
j , as stated in Claim 1.
Suppose there exists a clause C j in which all literals are FALSE. In this case,
nodes m j, n j, o j are all neighbouring an open facility in Layer 1. In order to prevent cus-
tomers at these nodes from deviating to Layer 1, we have to open facilities at m j, n j, o j.
However, due to Claim 2, at least one facility has to be opened among nodes p j, q j,r j; then,
their neighbouring facility at m j, n j, o j does not meet its lower bound on its demand - a con-
tradiction. Hence, there is at least one TRUE literal in each clause. Therefore the constructed
assignment is a solution to the (3, B2)-SAT instance X, which proves the theorem.
⊓⊔
It remains to prove that Claims 1 and 2 in the previous proof are true. We start by proving
Claim 1.
Lemma 14 Let instance T be as constructed in the proof of Theorem 13. In every feasible
solution to T , we either open a facility at node y+
i or y−
i for i = 1, 2, . . . , n. Moreover, each
customer is served within their respective subgraph Li
1 or L j
2.
123

2476
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
Proof We ﬁrst show that at least one facility is opened in each subgraph Li
1, L j
2.
Suppose there is a feasible solution in which all facilities in subgraph Li
1 are closed. Also
suppose that there exists an open facility in a neighbouring subgraph L j
2. Due to the large
cost of jumping between layers, all eight customers from Li
1 prefer a facility in one of the
neighbouring subgraphs L j
2. Since T is constructed from a (3, B2)-SAT instance in which
each literal occurs exactly twice, there are only four edges leaving Li
1. At least one of these
edges is used by at least 8/4 = 2 customers from Li
1. Without loss of generality, suppose
that at least two customers enter a neighbouring subgraph L j
2 via node m j. Then, the facility
at m j must be closed since otherwise m j would serve at least three customers. Analogously,
facilities at p j and s1
j must be closed. Therefore, we need at least ﬁve potential facilities with
equal distance to s1
j in L j
2 which serve the two customers from Li
1 as well as the customers
at m j, p j, and s j
2. Such facilities do not exist in L j
2. Hence, if no facility in Li
1 exists, then
there cannot be a facility in any neighbouring subgraph L j
2.
Suppose there is a feasible solution in which all facilities in subgraph L j
2 are closed. Also
suppose that there exists an open facility in a neighbouring subgraph Li
1. Analogue to above,
the ten customers from L j
2 are served at a facility in a neighbouring subgraph Li
1. Since only
three edges leave L j
2, there exists a neighbouring subgraph Li
1 in which at least ⌈10/3⌉=
4 customers are served. However, there exist no four nodes with equal distance from the
nodes y+
i , y−
i via which the customers from L j
2 may enter. Hence, if no facility in L j
2 exists,
then there cannot be a facility in any neighbouring subgraph Li
1.
In summary, if there exists a subgraph in which no facility is opened then we can propagate
the arguments above such that there exists no facility at any node that can be reached from the
considered subgraph. Hence, the customers cannot be served, contradicting the feasibility of
the solution.
Since at least one facility is opened in each subgraph Li
1 for i = 1, 2, . . . , n, the distance
from nodes y+
i and y−
i to the nearest facility is less than 7 – the distance between Layer 1
and Layer 2. Hence, customers at nodes y+
i
and y−
i
are served at facilities in their own
subgraph Li
1. Since y+
i or y−
i lie on every path from Li
1 to every other subgraph, it immedi-
ately follows that no customer in Li
1 deviates to another subgraph. Accordingly, we open at
least 8/2 = 4 facilities in Li
1, since any open facility serves at most two customers. We show
next that we open exactly four facilities and that there are only two possible combinations
within Li
1.
Suppose we open a facility at node ai. Then, we have to ensure that ai serves at least
two customers. If we open a facility at bi,li, or y+
i
then all customers except ai prefer
these facilities over ai, and thus ai only serves itself. Hence, the facility at bi,li, y+
i must be
closed. Note that due to the symmetry of Li
1, opening gi implies that we cannot open facilities
at ei, hi, y−
i . Thus, if we open ai and gi simultaneously, then all other facilities in Li
1 must
be closed, contradicting that we open at least four facilities. Hence, we cannot open ai and gi
simultaneously. Thus, if facility ai is open, then we also open facilities y−
i , ei, hi.
Suppose we open no facility at node ai. Then we must open a facility at node bi. Otherwise,
customers ai, bi would both be served at the same facility, thus breaking their capacity, since
the distances from bi to any other facility in Li
1 are distinct. We also need to open facilities at
nodes li, y+
i , since their customers would otherwise prefer facility bi and break their capacity
together with customer ai. Assume that facility gi is closed. Due to symmetry between ai
and gi, we then need to open facility ei. Due to symmetry between bi and ei, this implies
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
2477
that facilities hi and y−
i
need to be open. However, if we open bi,li, hi, ei, y−
i , y+
i , then
facilities li, hi can only serve themselves. Hence, facility gi needs to be open if ai is closed.
In summary, we either open facilities at ai, y−
i , hi, ei or at gi, y+
i ,li, bi. In particular, we
either open a facility in node y+
i or y−
i , which shows the ﬁrst part of the lemma.
We already showed that all customers in Layer 1 are served at their own subgraph. Con-
versely, if a customer would deviate from their subgraph in Layer 2, then they would be served
at a neighbouring subgraph in Layer 1. However, this would break capacities of facilities in
Layer 1, since they can serve exactly the customers in their own subgraph. This shows the
second part of the lemma.
⊓⊔
Last but not least, we prove Claim 2 from the proof of Theorem 13.
Lemma 15 Let instance T be as constructed in the proof of Theorem 13. In any feasible
solution, at least one facility has to be opened among nodes p j, q j,r j for j = 1, 2, . . . , k.
Proof Suppose that all facilities at nodes p j, q j,r j in L j
2 are closed. Then the distance
from m j, n j, o j to a different facility in L j
2 is at least 15. From Lemma 14, we know that we
open a facility either at y+
i or at y−
i in any subgraph in Layer 1. Hence, the distance from
each customer at m j, n j, o j to their closest open facility in Layer 1 is at most 9. In order to
stop customers m j, n j, o j from deviating to Layer 1, we have to open facilities at m j, n j, o j.
In order to meet the capacity and demand constraints of the facilities at m j, n j, and o j,
they have to serve customers at p j, q j, and r j, respectively. In order to serve the whole
demand in L j
2, we have to open two facilities among nodes s0
j , . . . , s3
j in addition to the
facilities at m j, n j, o j. Then, we have to open at least one facility among nodes s1
j , s2
j , s3
j .
Opening a facility at one of these three locations encourages their neighbouring customer
at p j, q j,r j to deviate from their serving facility at m j, n j, o j to their neighbouring facility
at s1
j , s2
j , s3
j . This leaves at least one facility in m j, n j, o j with serving only themselves – a
contradiction to the solution being feasible.
⊓⊔
Theorem 13 also holds true for the CFLP-CA with revenue constraints and distinct assign-
ment costs. To see this, note that we never used indifferences in the preference of customers
in the proofs above. Furthermore, Theorem 13 conﬁrms our observation that preference
constraints increase the computational complexity of the location problem. Recall that the
complexity of determining feasibility of the CFLP (with revenue constraints) arises from the
strong NP-completeness of the corresponding assignment problem, and we can determine
feasibility of the CFLP (with revenue constraints) in polynomial time if customer demands
are uniform. In contrast, while the assignment problem of the CFLP-CA with revenue con-
straints and uniform demands can be solved in polynomial time (Theorem 12), determining
locations for the facilities and, thereby, determining feasibility is strongly NP-complete.
8 Conclusion
In this paper, we investigate the computational complexity of the single-source capacitated
facility location problem with customer preferences (CFLP-CP). While the complexity of
(single-source capacitated) facility location problems (CFLP/UFLP) is already well studied,
less research has been conducted on the CFLP-CP.
Our results indicate that customer preferences can ease the strong NP-completeness of
assigning customers to facilities in the CFLP. More speciﬁcally, we prove that determining
123

2478
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
Table 1 Determining feasibility for the UFLP, CFLP as well as the CFLP-CP and its variations.
Path
Star graph
Tree
General
UFLP
P (Open any facility)
UFLP-CP
CFLP
Strongly NP-complete (Red. via 3-Partition)
CFLP-CP
CFLP-CP with strict customer preferences
P (Sect. 4)
CFLP-CP with uniform demands
CFLP-CA with revenue constraints and uniform demands
P (Büsing et al., 2022)
?
?
Strongly NP-complete (Sect. 7)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
2479
Table 2 Determining optimality for the UFLP, CFLP as well as the CFLP-CP and its variations.
Path
Star graph
Tree
General
UFLP
P (Mirchandani and Francis, 1990)
NP-hard (Mirchandani and Francis, 1990)
UFLP-SCP
NP-hard (Sect. 5)
CFLP
Strongly NP-hard (Red. via 3-Partition)
CFLP-CP
CFLP-CA
P (Büsing et al., 2022)
Strongly NP-hard (Red. via 3-Partition)
CFLP-CA with strict preferences
Exactly weakly NP-hard (Sect. 6.1)
?
NP-hard (Red. via UFLP)
CFLP-CA with uniform demands
P (Sect. 6.2)
123

2480
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
feasibility of the CFLP-CP with strict preferences can be done in polynomial time (Sec-
tion 4), and computing a feasible solution for the CFLP-CP with strict preferences deﬁned by
assignment costs is exactly weakly NP-hard if assignment costs are deﬁned on an underlying
star graph (Section 6.1). Both cases are strongly NP-complete in the CFLP. Furthermore,
we show that the complexity of the assignment problem with uniform customer demands,
which is known to be polynomially solvable for the CFLP, seems to retain its computational
complexity under the consideration of preference constraints; cf. Proposition 2, Section 6.2
and Theorem 12. Additionally, our results indicate that preference constraints can increase
the computational complexity of locating facilities. More speciﬁcally, we prove that solving
the uncapacitated facility location problem with strict customer preferences (UFLP-SCP)
on paths is NP-hard (Section 5), conversely to solving the UFLP on paths. NP-hardness of
determining optimality for the CFLP-CP with strict preferences follows immediately. Fur-
thermore, we prove that determining feasibility of the CFLP-CP with revenue constrains,
uniform demands, and preferences deﬁned by assignment costs is strongly NP-complete,
even if each facility has to serve exactly two customers (Section 7). The main ﬁndings of
this work regarding the computational complexity of determining feasibility and optimality
are summarised in Table 1 and 2, respectively. Furthermore, both tables provide results for
related cases of the UFLP and CFLP.
Future work may focus on various directions. First, the polynomial algorithm that deter-
mines feasibility of the CFLP-CP with strict preferences can be used in heuristics starting
from feasible solutions. This raises the question whether heuristics for the traditional UFLP
or the UFLP-SCP can be adapted to our problem. Second, the result that arbitrary preference
constraints have a strong impact on the computational complexity of the UFLP-SCP raises
the question whether there are further preference patterns besides closest assignments for
which there are polynomially solvable or weakly NP-hard special cases. Third, the weak NP-
hardness on star graphs for the CFLP-CA with strict preferences as well as the polynomial
time algorithm for the CFLP-CA with uniform demands on star graphs raises the question
whether it is possible to extend these results to general trees. The consideration of special
trees, such as spider trees or caterpillar trees, might help in investigating this question.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to warmly thank Mariia Anapolska for carefully reading this
paper, her valuable comments, and her patience while enduring a lot of misplaced commas. This research has
been partially supported by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (grant no. 05M16PAA)
within the project “HealthFaCT - Health: Facility Location, Covering and Transport”, by the Freigeist-
Fellowship of the Volkswagen Stiftung, and by the German research council (DFG) Research Training Group
2236 UnRAVeL.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Declarations
Conﬂicts of interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
2481
References
Aardal, K., Pochet, Y., & Wolsey, L. (1995). Capacitated facility location: Valid inequalities and facets.
Mathematics of Operations Research, 20, 562–82. https://doi.org/10.1287/moor.20.3.562.
Ahmad, F., Iqbal, A., Ashraf, I., Marzband, M., & Khan, I. (2022). Optimal location of electric vehicle charging
station and its impact on distribution network: A review. Energy Reports, 8, 2314–2333. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.egyr.2022.01.180
Ahmadi-Javid, A., Seyedi, P., & Syam, S. (2017). A survey of healthcare facility location. Computers &
Operations Research, 79, 223–263. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2016.05.018
Avella, P., & Boccia, M. (2009). A cutting plane algorithm for the capacitated facility location problem.
Computational Optimization and Applications, 43, 39–65. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10589-007-9125-x
Avella, P., Boccia, M., Mattia, S., & Rossi, F. (2021). Weak ﬂow cover inequalities for the capacitated facility
location problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 289(2), 485–494. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ejor.2020.07.033
Berman, P., Karpinski, M., Scott, A. (2003). Approximation hardness of short symmetric instances of MAX-
3SAT.
Büsing, C., Gersing, T., Wrede, S. (2022). Analysing the complexity of facility location problems with capac-
ities, revenues, and closest assignments. Proceedings of the 10th International Network Optimization
Conference (INOC), Aachen, Germany, June 7–10, 2022, 81–86, https://doi.org/10.48786/inoc.2022.15
Büsing, C., Leitner, M., & Wrede, S. (2025). Cover-based inequalities for the single-source capacitated facility
location problem with customer preferences. Computers & Operations Research, 182, 107082. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2025.107082
Cabezas, X., & García, S. (2022). A semi-lagrangian relaxation heuristic algorithm for the simple plant
location problem with order. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.
1080/01605682.2022.2150573
Calvete, H., Galé, C., Iranzo, J., Camacho-Vallejo, J., & Casas-Ramírez, M. (2020). A matheuristic for solv-
ing the bilevel approach of the facility location problem with cardinality constraints and preferences.
Computers & Operations Research, 124, Article 105066. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2020.105066
Cánovas, L., García, S., Labbé, M., & Marín, A. (2007). A strengthened formulation for the simple plant
location problem with order. Operations Research Letters, 35(2), 141–150. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orl.
2006.01.012
Casas-Ramírez, M., Camacho-Vallejo, J., & Martínez-Salazar, I. (2018). Approximating solutions to a bilevel
capacitated facility location problem with customer’s patronization toward a list of preferences. Applied
Mathematics and Computation, 319, 369–386. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amc.2017.03.051
Celik Turkoglu, D., & Erol Genevois, M. (2020). A comparative survey of service facility location problems.
Annals of Operations Research, 292, 399–468. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-019-03385-x
Espejo, I., Marín, A., & Rodríguez-Chía, A. M. (2012). Closest assignment constraints in discrete location
problems. European Journal of Operational Research, 219(1), 49–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.
2011.12.002
Fischetti, M., Ljubi´c, I., & Sinnl, M. (2016). Benders decomposition without separability: A computational
study for capacitated facility location problems. European Journal of Operational Research, 253(3),
557–569. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2016.03.002
Gan, J., Suksompong, W., & Voudouris, W. (2019). Envy-freeness in house allocation problems. Mathematical
Social Sciences, 101, 104–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mathsocsci.2019.07.005
Garey, M., & Johnson, D. (1979). Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP-completeness.
New York: W. H. Freeman & Co., New York, USA.
Gerrard, R. A., & Church, R. L. (1996). Closest assignment constraints and location models: Properties and
structure. Location Science, 4(4), 251–270. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0966-8349(97)00001-6
Görtz, S., & Klose, A. (2012). A simple but usually fast branch-and-bound algorithm for the capacitated
facility location problem. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 24(4), 597–610. https://doi.org/10.1287/
ijoc.1110.0468
Hanjoul, P., & Peeters, D. (1987). A facility location problem with clients’ preference orderings. Regional
Science and Urban Economics, 17(3), 451–473. https://doi.org/10.1016/0166-0462(87)90011-1
Korte, B. H., & Vygen, J. (2018). Combinatorial optimization: Theory and algorithms. New York: Springer.
Laporte, G., Nickel, S., & Saldanha da Gama, F. (Eds.). (2019). Location science (2nd ed.). Switzerland:
Springer.
Leung, J. M. Y., & Magnanti, T. L. (1989). Valid inequalities and facets of the capacitated plant location
problem. Mathematical Programming, 44, 271–291. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01587093
123

2482
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:2457–2482
Mestre, A., Oliveira, M., & Barbosa-Póvoa, A. (2015). Location–allocation approaches for hospital network
planning under uncertainty. European Journal of Operational Research, 240(3), 791–806. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ejor.2014.07.024
Mirchandani, P., & Francis, R. (Eds.). (1990). Discrete Location Theory. New York: Wiley.
Polino, S., Camacho-Vallejo, J.-F., & Villegas, J. G. (2023). A facility location problem for extracurricu-
lar workshop planning: bi-level model and metaheuristics. International Transactions in Operational
Research, 0, 1–43. https://doi.org/10.1111/itor.13368
Rojeski, P., & ReVelle, C. (1970). Central facilities location under an investment constraint. Geographical
Analysis, 2(4), 343–360. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1538-4632.1970.tb00864.x
Vasilyev, I., Klimentova, X., & Boccia, M. (2013). Polyhedral study of simple plant location problem with
order. Oper. Res. Lett., 41, 153–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orl.2012.12.006
Vasilyev, I., Klimentova, X., & Kochetov, Y. A. (2009). New lower bounds for the facility location problem with
clients’ preferences. Computational Mathematics and Mathematical Physics, 49, 2010–2020. https://doi.
org/10.1134/S0965542509060098
Wagner, J. L., & Falkson, L. M. (1975). The optimal nodal location of public facilities with price-sensitive
demand. Geographical Analysis, 7(1), 69–83. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1538-4632.1975.tb01024.x
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123