TITLE: Accelerator-mediated access to investors among early-stage start-ups
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05583-0
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05583-0
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Accelerator-mediated access to investors among early-stage
start-ups
Jean-Michel Dalle1,2 · Matthijs den Besten3
· Jeremie Morﬁn4
Received: 1 July 2022 / Accepted: 25 August 2023 / Published online: 15 September 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
We study start-up accelerators, a new type of entrepreneurial support organization charac-
terized by its coaching of regular cohorts of startup founders, that developed rapidly after
pioneer accelerator Y-Combinator, founded in 2005, had ‘accelerated’ success stories Drop-
box and AirBnB among others. We suggest that accelerators can be analysed as platforms
whose function is to relate start-ups and investors within entrepreneurial ecosystems. Accord-
ing to our analysis, leading accelerators play a mediating role in enabling entrepreneurs to
attract investors with a higher proﬁle than they would have otherwise. Using propensity score
matching, we compare participants to several accelerator programs in North America with
similar non-participating start-ups. We measure the prominence of their investors using their
centrality in the investor-network. For several top-tier accelerators, we observe that start-
ups who participated in their programs attracted higher proﬁle investors than other similar
start-ups that were not accelerated. Furthermore, among accelerators, pioneer Y-Combinator
appears to beneﬁt from a winner-takes-all effect, which is typical of platform competition:
Not only do investors it connects its participant startups to appear to be of a higher proﬁle,
but it is also the only accelerator in our sample whose participants gain access to an amount
of early-stage funding that is signiﬁcantly higher than those raised by the control group.
Keywords Accelerators · Early-stage startups · Access to funding · Platforms ·
Entrepreneurial ecosystems
B Matthijs den Besten
m.den-besten@montpellier-bs.com
Jean-Michel Dalle
jean-michel.dalle@sorbonne-universite.fr
Jeremie Morﬁn
jeremiepmorﬁn@gmail.com
1
Agoranov, Paris, France
2
Sorbonne Université, Paris, France
3
Montpellier Business School, Avenue des Moulins, 34185 Montpellier, France
4
Standard Cognition, San Francisco, CA, USA
123

1926
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
1 Introduction
Societies are increasingly entrepreneurial in nature (Audretsch & Thurik, 2000):
Entrepreneurial activity is a key driver of economic growth and, accordingly, organizations
that support entrepreneurs act as catalyst for economic growth. In this paper we investigate a
type of entrepreneurial support organization which goes by the label “accelerator”. We want
to ﬁnd out how accelerator programs inﬂuence entrepreneurial ecosystems considering both
entrepreneurs and those who invest in their startups. We consider the role of accelerators in
fostering network effects, inﬂuencing fundraising capacity, and facilitating connections to
ﬁnancial resource providers including lead investors. We also look at differences in perfor-
mance between dominant accelerators, situated at the top of a platform hierarchy, and less
dominant counterparts.
Accelerators are relative newcomers to entrepreneurial ecosystems: Though there are vari-
ations, accelerators are private entities that provide strong coaching programs to sequential
cohorts of selected start-up founders during short periods of time, in exchange for limited
equity in the start-ups they accelerate. Historically, the ﬁrst organization to claim this label
as a descriptor of its activities was Y-Combinator. After early successes with start-ups such
as Dropbox and AirBnB, Y-Combinator quickly gained recognition and efforts to replicate
its success followed.
As a consequence, accelerators have attracted more and more attention from researchers in
economics and management (e.g. Hochberg, 2016; Younger & Fisher, 2020). Several works
have notably investigated the role of accelerators as actors within entrepreneurial ecosystems
(Moritz et al., 2022; Hernández-Chea et al., 2021). With this paper, we intend to contribute
to this stream of research, which Wurth et al. (2022) label the “epistemological” approach,
compared to the “ontological” question of how the ecosystem came into being. Speciﬁcally,
we investigate whether entrepreneurs and founders take advantage of existing ties between
accelerators and venture capitalists to develop their own networks. In this way we address the
call by Bergman and McMullen (2022)’s to study the interaction between entrepreneurial sup-
port organizations and other stakeholders as well as earlier suggestions by Block et al. (2018)
to study the interplay between new and established players in entrepreneurial ﬁnance and by
Clayton et al. (2018) to investigate the function of intermediaries. Theoretically, we lean on
network studies and build upon the idea of an action mechanism developed by van Burg et
al. (2022) to explain how entrepreneurs beneﬁt from social relationships. To put it in another
way, we look for evidence for the existence of a mechanism in which the entrepreneur’s accu-
mulation of resources is mediated by accelerators in a way that is consistent with what David
Graham, the founder of Y-Combinator, had stressed as the main goal of his organization: to
provide access to the right investors and the right network (Maloux, 2018). Altogether, our
investigations suggest that, within entrepreneurial ecosystems, accelerators act as a platform
between entrepreneurs and venture capitalists.
In our analysis, we compare accelerated start-ups with similar non-accelerated start-ups,
and focus on the prominence of investors they attract, as measured by the position of these
investors in the investor network. Analyzing 111 accelerators active between 2005 and 2015
in the USA, which is the environment where the accelerator phenomenon initially appeared
and where more data is therefore available, and 668 accelerated startups, we observe that
several prominent accelerators did have a positive and statistically signiﬁcant impact on the
centrality of the investors who invested in their accelerated start-ups: Investors attracted by
these start-ups tended to occupy a more central position in the investor network than investors
attracted by similar non-accelerated start-ups. Furthermore, we observe that Y-Combinator
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
1927
is the only accelerator in our sample that has had a statistically signiﬁcant and positive
impact on the amount of early-stage funds raised by its accelerated startups and that Y-
Combinator is also the only accelerator in our sample that had a statistically signiﬁcant and
positive impact on the centrality of the investors in the directed investor network, i.e., in the
network that further accounts for leadership roles in investment syndicates. Y-Combinator
alumni, compared to the alumni of other accelerators (even the most renowned), were the
only ones able to attract prominent investors with a leading role in funding rounds with a
higher likelihood than comparable start-ups who did not opt for acceleration.
These results conﬁrm accelerators’ intermediary role as a platform within entrepreneurial
ecosystems: By attracting more central investors, accelerators attract higher quality start-ups
since entrepreneurs tend to value the reputation signal sent by the investors who invest in their
companies, which contributes to attracting other investors. In this context, the dominant role
played by Y-Combinator in the accelerator ﬁeld, as is visible in our study through its impact
on early-stage fundraising and directed centrality, deﬁnitely corresponds to the standard result
of platform competition according to which one winner emerges who “takes all” (Sun & Tse,
2007).
Thus, we highlight the interdependencies that tie actors together within entrepreneurial
ecosystems, and contribute to an improved understanding of how the different actors that
constitute entrepreneurial ecosystems can develop mutualistic interdependence, as is the
case in biological ecosystems (Stam & van de Ven, 2021). However, due to their nature,
ecosystems keep changing and the role of actors can change as well. Among other things,
the strategic nature of the interdependencies between actors, such as competition among
accelerators as they vie to attract the best start-ups and investors, can result in evolution.
Therefore we concur with Acs et al. (2017) that in order to understand entrepreneurial
ecosystems these dynamics should be taken into account.
In order to address the research question of how accelerator programs inﬂuence
entrepreneurial ecosystems, the rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sect.2 reviews
what scholars have already analyzed with regard to accelerators and formulates hypothe-
ses with regard to their functioning as actors in entrepreneurial ecosystems, while including
reﬂections on the ontology of entrepreneurial ecosystems and introducing the theoretical
framework adopted for the study. Sect.3 presents our approach, Sect.4 introduces the results
of our analysis, Sect.5 discusses their implications before Sect.6 concludes.
2 Literature review
We ﬁrst review the main issues related to accelerators that have been addressed in the litera-
ture. From this, we introduce the entrepreneurial ecosystem perspective as a framework for
these observations, and develop our hypotheses.
2.1 Research context
Apart from the appearance of the term investment accelerator in ﬁnance (Acemoglu, 1993),
the use of the term “accelerator” to denote an organizational form only started in 2005, when
Y-Combinator applied this label to itself. As Y-Combinator was the organization behind
successful ventures like Dropbox and AirBnB, other organizations rapidly sought to emulate
its success in venture creation and therefore soon also adopted a similar label (Younger &
Fisher, 2020). Shane and Nicolaou (2018) pose the question why accelerators appeared just
123

1928
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
after the turn of the century and not earlier. The main factor these authors identify is the cost
of bringing software to market, which has shrunk signiﬁcantly since the nineteen-nineties.
Consequently software producing start-ups nowadays need less time and effort move from
prototype to market-ready product. A difﬁculty that remains, and has become more urgent
due to the low barriers to entry, is to ﬁnd clients for the product (Florén et al., 2018, p.
417). Shane and Nicolaou (2018) suggest that accelerators stepped in to address this need in
particular.
Cri¸san et al. (2021) offer a recent, systematic, review of the academic literature on accel-
erators, complementing the handbook that Wright and Drori (2018) edited on the topic. With
respect to accelerators speciﬁcally, Cri¸san et al. (2021) reviewed 98 papers on accelerators and
classiﬁed them according to the process through which the accelerators studied in the papers
were said to deliver beneﬁts to startups. Within their categorization, “access and growth”
came out as most common. This category refers to accelerators that focus on providing
“access to investors, avenues to reach new markets, and support for product development and
launch.” Across the studies surveyed, the authors observed a tendency to confound outputs,
“immediate results from the accelerating process”, with outcomes, “non-immediate results
related to performance”. In a situation where outputs are more readily measurable, while
outcomes are the main interest of policy makers, Cri¸san et al. (2021) stress the importance
of devoting attention to articulating the link between outputs and outcomes.
A substantial amount of research effort has ﬁrst gone into identifying the features that
are essential to the accelerator business model (Drori & Wright, 2018; Cohen et al., 2019)
propose the following:
• An accelerator provides a ﬁxed-term, cohort-based program to start-ups;
• This offer includes educational components such as mentorship;
• It also includes participation to the program culminates in a graduation event.
As Cri¸san et al. (2021) remarked, researchers have also tried to measure the “effects” of
accelerator programs. Early investigations typically took the amount of funds raised by the
accelerated companies as a key criterion (Hallen et al., 2014; den Besten & Dalle, 2015;
Hochberg, 2016; Yu, 2019). Yu (2019) eventually framed the effectiveness of accelerators
as their potential ability to resolve uncertainty about start-up quality. Conversely, Hochberg
(2016) mostly considered their effect on regional development while, on their part, Mayya and
Huang (2019) investigated the effect of the presence of accelerators on investments allotted
by corporate venture capitalists to early-stage start-ups in the regions where the accelerators
were present.
Casting the net wider, Bergman and McMullen (2022) conducted a systematic review
of articles on ﬁve types of entrepreneurial support organizations: incubators, science parks,
accelerators, maker spaces, and co-working spaces. According to their synthesis, this lit-
erature takes a predominantly instrumental view of the activity of entrepreneurial support
organizations, mainly overlooking relational aspects. Rather than treating support as “help
to become self-sufﬁcient”, they propose to treat it as help to establish ties. They shed light on
the similarities and differences among the ﬁve types of support organization they focus on,
identifying several commonalities: each type of organization emerged a “bit haphazardly”;
all create a temporary “holding” environment for entrepreneurs and their ventures, to change
for the better; for all, there is “considerable ambiguity” with regards to the benchmark to
which the organizations should be held accountable. Across the spectrum, then, Bergman
and McMullen (2022) also ﬁnd that the most popular question that researchers have tried to
answer with regard to entrepreneurial support organizations is whether they have an impact,
with mixed results. Although there are different organizational forms, no general discernible
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
1929
pattern could suggest that one is superior over another in this respect, independent of their
context.
Finally, and closer to our approach, several recent contributions focused on regional studies
have taken a perspective more in line with the recent literature on entrepreneurial ecosys-
tems (Mayer et al., 2017). Hernández-Chea et al. (2021), based on a ﬁeld study in Kenya
and Uganda, for instance, point out that organizations like accelerators typically encourage
collaboration, while Moritz et al. (2022) stress the importance of coopetition in their study
of accelerators in Germany. Others have insisted on the role of accelerators to create an
open environment (Del Sarto et al. (2020), in the case of Italy) or a knowledge community
(Caccamo and Beckman (2021), for Silicon Valley). Altogether, these studies reinforce the
observation of Mian et al. (2016) that fostering accelerators is an important means to achieve
innovation and technology-oriented entrepreneurial growth.
2.2 Theoretical foundation
Following Autio et al. (2018), Bliemel et al. (2019), and Hernández-Chea et al. (2021), we
suggest that to appreciate the value of accelerators, they should be analyzed according to the
role they play within entrepreneurial ecosystems, since actors in an entrepreneurial ecosystem
are tied to one another, as members of supply chains, as beneﬁciaries or benefactors in
support relationships, or through knowledge exchange. Beside accelerators, entrepreneurial
ecosystems include investors, most notably venture capitalists and business angels, and start-
up companies where these investors invest in, plus various other actors such as government
agencies or else other entrepreneurial support organizations (Hausberg & Korreck, 2020;
Islam et al., 2018; Deffains-Crapsky & Klein, 2016).
Wurth et al. (2022) point out that, among researchers and policy makers, there are two
distinct approaches to entrepreneurial ecosystems. The ﬁrst one treats the ecosystem as
“something that can be built” (“ontological”), while the second one focuses on “how it
can be known” (“epistemological”). The approach to ecosystems in this paper is part of the
latter tradition. That is, we do not focus on the emergence of the ecosystem itself but rather
on the emergence of value within the system. Which is not to say that we consider the ﬁrst
approach uninteresting: on the very contrary, we feel that the ﬁrst approach is inextricably
linked to the second one, in the sense that the emergence of value within an ecosystem typi-
cally occurs by fostering the emergence of a narrower ecosystem around the actor to whom
the value accrues as a sub-system within the wider ecosystem (see Wang (2021) for a more
detailed discussion of part-whole relationships within ecosystems).
In this context, the choice of theoretical frameworks within ecosystem research is gen-
erally predicated upon the approach toward the ecosystem: at one side, researchers adopt
institutional or evolutionary theories, on the other side they adopt economic or network theo-
ries depending on the way they treat the ecosystem (Wurth et al., 2022). Here, our treatment of
entrepreneurial ecosystems as the conglomeration of entrepreneur’s ecosystems implies that
we need to cross the divide: Namely, while the hypotheses that we will develop with regard
to the process of the emergence of the entrepreneur’s ecosystem are inspired by elements
from institutional theory, we will combine them with elements that adopted from network
theory in order to assess the value of an emerging entrepreneur’s ecosystem.
With respect to the latter, a recent review of applications of network theory in stud-
ies of entrepreneurship (van Burg et al., 2022) found that, while the literature is complex
and diverse, most studies agree that entrepreneurs beneﬁt from their social relationships. In
this context, van Burg et al. (2022) propose a taxonomy of ﬁve network mechanisms, which
123

1930
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
they label “accessing”, “acquiring”, “diversifying”, “embedding”, and “associating.” Among
these mechanisms, the ﬁrst, which is about “adding new network ties, which subsequently
improves quick and ﬂexible access to knowledge and resources”, and the last, “linking to
prominent players which subsequently can increase reputation”, appear specially relevant at
the early stage of start-up development upon which the present study is focused. In network
terms, the “accessing” mechanism is mainly concerned with the number of ties and their
strength, while the “associating” mechanism is rather concerned with the reputation dimen-
sion of content and with the centrality of ties. Along similar lines, and regarding early stage
development, Kaandorp et al. (2020) study initial networking processes and argue that access
is often a prerequisite to any other activities, while Stuart et al. (1999) highlight the value of
endorsements and Armanios et al. (2017) speciﬁcally discuss the effect of associating with
incubators on the reputation of start-ups.
If, then, at the core of early-stage venture founders’ goals is the establishment and devel-
opment of relationships with other actors in the ecosystem and notably with investors,
accelerators can play a role by facilitating introductions of their accelerated start-ups with
other stakeholders; namely, these mediated connections would concern better-connected part-
ners compared to direct interactions. In this perspective, start-ups would ﬁnd it a relevant
strategy to focus their initial attention on one well-connected member of the ecosystem: an
accelerator with links to other actors and notably to investors. Conversely, investors, on their
part, would themselves ﬁnd it relevant to rely on accelerators in order to provide them with
access to startups, provided that these accelerators would have the reputation of screening
and selecting appropriate, high proﬁle startups. This two-sided congruence in the strategies
of different types of actors, here startups and investors, corresponds to a platform strategy:
startups are attracted to an accelerator depending on the investors to which it is itself con-
nected, while investors foster their relationships to an accelerator depending on the startups it
attracts. To put it differently, because of the simple and basic importance for startup founders
of building relationships within their ecosystem, early-on, accelerators can play the role of
platforms, acquiring a mediating role with respect to the access to other actors and notably
to investors.
2.3 Hypothesis development
Since, again, a primary goal for founders of early-stage ventures is to establish and develop
relationships with other actors and notably to investors, and since this is precisely where accel-
erators play a role by introducing the start-ups they accelerate to other actors, we hypothesize
that these introductions would result into fruitful relationships with better-connected actors,
compared to non-mediated, direct interactions. This “effect” of accelerators would rely on
their reputation and the legitimacy that they would confer to the start-up companies they
support. Legitimacy can come in many forms: Bloodgood et al. (2016) notably distinguish
cognitive legitimacy from pragmatic and normative legitimacy and subdivide the latter two in
exchange, inﬂuence, dispositional legitimacy, and consequential, procedural, structural, and
personal legitimacy, respectively. In general, a start-up is seen as legitimate when it shows it
is appropriate for the moment (Suchman, 1995). Cognitive legitimacy can be gained through
the ritual of the pitch, which is standard fare in the accelerators’ graduation events, since
it allows the entrepreneur to show of the level of preparedness of the start-up to potential
investors (Pollack et al., 2012). According to Bitektine (2011), awarding such legitimacy
is mostly based on gut feeling and requires little active thought. In contrast, other types of
legitimacy rely upon information that needs to be assembled and analyzed. This can be with
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
1931
respect to the the expected return on investment, and more speciﬁcally with respect to the
products and services it proposes and their ﬁt to the market (Shankar & Clausen, 2020), and
the activities of accelerators aimed at helping start-ups attain a level of preparedness that can
translate into cognitive legitimacy have been well-documented (Politis et al., 2019; Harri-
son, 2019; Levinsohn, 2015). Although successful applicants to accelerator programs may
have increased their legitimacy already, the mere event of their selection provides them with
legitimacy through association or certiﬁcation (Plummer et al., 2015; Brown et al., 2019).
According to this perspective, investors can partly outsource to accelerators the (signiﬁcant)
work of assembly and analysis that allows them to confer pragmatic or normative legitimacy
to start-ups. And start-ups, on their part, can focus their initial attention on their accelerator
through which the start-up’s legitimacy can be built and diffuse (Bloodgood et al., 2016).
Hypothesis 1 Engagement in accelerator programs engenders a network effect, fostering
connections with inﬂuential stakeholders within the entrepreneurial ecosystem who possess
extensive network ties themselves.
We hypothesize that the desired outcome from participation in an accelerator program
would be, for a start-up, the creation of connections that would be “better” than the connec-
tions it would already have or would be able to create by itself. However, there are different
ways according to which a connection can be considered as “better”, by enabling the start-up
to access to more resources, notably knowledge, clients and resources. These beneﬁts might
even outweight money, i.e. the amount invested by investors in the startup – which is not a
way to diminish its importance (e.g. Smith and Bergman, 2020).
Hypothesis 2 The association between participation in accelerator programs and enhanced
quantitative fundraising capacity for participants may not be unequivocal.
In the latter respect, among the actors that provide access to ﬁnancial resources to start-
ups, venture capitalists (VCs) are especially prominent. Venture capitalists actively scout
their environment for ventures to invest in. Yet, as Gompers et al. (2019) put it, hardly any
entrepreneur “beats the path to the VC’s door without any connection.” Moreover, not all
VCs are the same: More prominent, better-connected, VCs let start-ups access more resources
through their own connections as well, most notably in later and larger rounds of funding.
In this context, the characteristics of VCs that invest in a start-up, and even more so the
characteristics of those who take the lead in a funding round, makes a large difference: High-
proﬁle investors, especially high-proﬁle lead investors, will be better able to attract others
in their syndicates than others (Ko & McKelvie, 2018). In a similar vein, Sørensen (2007)
found that companies funded by more experienced VCs are more likely to go public and,
once public, stocks held by well-recognized investors demand a lower risk premium (Chung
et al., 2018). Moreover, the positive relation between the reputation of a VC investor and
the market response and performance of ﬁrms after going public is signiﬁcantly stronger for
VCs that were involved in early stages of the ﬁrm development (Lee et al., 2011). Finally,
Guler and Guillén (2010) point to research indicating that the social status of a VC increases
the likelihood that other VCs with a high status join in investment syndicates, that ﬁrms
supported by such VCs typically perform better, and that entrepreneurs are often prepared to
accept worse terms from higher status VCs.
Hypothesis 3 Accelerators’ impact on facilitating connections with ﬁnancial resource
providers, particularly lead investors, is expected to exhibit a stronger positive effect.
123

1932
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
This line of reasoning strongly suggests that accelerators, at least the best of them, would
act as platform intermediaries between start-ups and VCs, and present the start-ups they sup-
port with opportunities to match with higher-proﬁle VCs than they would have encountered
without acceleration. Therefore, accelerators would face similar opportunities and constraints
as accelerators in the platform economy (Thomas et al., 2014) and, in particular, a very
limited number of organizations would eventually tend to dominate each sector due to phe-
nomena known as “winner-takes-all-effects” (cf. Huotari et al., 2017), often associated with
“ﬁrst-mover-advantages” and other dimensions of platform strategies.
Hypothesis 4 The interplay of platform competition dynamics will lead to signiﬁcant dis-
parities, wherein accelerators occupying the dominant platform position exhibit superior
performance compared to their counterparts.
To these main hypotheses, we would like to add subsidiary hypotheses with regards to
which start-ups get to participate in accelerator programs. Our main premise being that
founders seek to acquire legitimacy for their start-ups (Delmar & Shane, 2004) and that
accelerators contribute to confer legitimacy (above), the size of the legitimacy gap between
currently awarded legitimacy and potential legitimacy would be a main driver that would
bring founders to accelerators, and convince accelerators to adopt their start-ups.
Organizational legitimacy, in the words of Meyer and Scott (1983), “refers to the degree of
cultural support for an organization”. In order to distinguish legitimacy from related concepts,
such as status and reputation, Deephouse and Suchman (2013) propose to treat legitimacy
as an attribute that is dichotomous, non-rival, homogenizing, and political. They explain that
organizations can be “more (or less) legitimate” in spite of the dichotomous nature of the
concept by virtue of gaining legitimacy with more people and/or increasing the certainty with
which these people award the legitimacy. From this perspective, one can interpret the task
of bridging the legitimacy gap as an effort to make sure an endeavor is ﬁrmly recognized
as legitimate by the right audience. An alternative explanation for the phrase “more (or
less) legitimate” might be that the many scholars who use this phrase associate legitimacy
with status, which is ordinal, or with reputation, which is continuous in nature. In order to
build upon the very valuable contributions of these scholars, one could adopt a deﬁnition of
legitimacy as a favorable social evaluation of any kind. Consequently, the notion of legitimacy
gap could be articulated with notions such as reputation gap and status differential.
As succinctly put by Navis and Glynn (2011), the legitimacy of start-ups is based on “who
they are” and “what they do”. With respect to the former, Castellano and Khelladi (2017)
note that aspects of the founder team affect its legitimacy, such as its size, perhaps, following
Erikson (2003), because individuals who join a founding team are more likely to develop
entrepreneurial competences. In line with this, Mas-Tur and Simón Moya (2015) found
that “Size of the YIC [Young Innovative Company] and the entrepreneur’s sex signiﬁcantly
affect access to subsidies.” More generally, early-stage investors rely heavily on signals of
entrepreneur quality (Bernstein et al., 2017).
Subsidiary hypothesis a The size of the founding team positively inﬂuences the
entrepreneurial quest for legitimacy, indicating a higher propensity to actively seek and
obtain social recognition and acceptance.
In addition, the legitimacy gap that would motivate founders to turn to accelerators might
alsooccurwhenthereisanex-antemismatchbetweentheactualandperceivedentrepreneurial
competences of start-up founders. Newbert and Tornikoski (2013), among others, submit that
serial entrepreneurs possess a social capital that enhances their legitimacy: they have a “track
record”. Hence, since the perception of their competences depends on the availability of
a track record, founders with a weaker track record feel the need to establish legitimacy
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
1933
using alternative ways (Rutherford et al., 2009). Likewise, Zhang (2019) ﬁnd that investors
are more conﬁdent investing in serial entrepreneurs and suggest that novice entrepreneurs
should seek alternative signals to overcome the conﬁdence gap.
Subsidiary hypothesis b In the absence of confounding factors, founders with a proven track
record experience a diminished legitimacy gap, suggesting a greater degree of perceived
legitimacy attributed to their entrepreneurial endeavors.
Finally, and with respect to the “what they do”, how a start-up proposition is received will
also depend on the context: Indeed, the survival chances of ventures are severely impacted
by the quality of the regional entrepreneurial ecosystem in which they operate (Vedula &
Kim, 2019). Regional differences make that in some places the prima facie legitimacy of
entrepreneurial endeavours is higher than in other places (Díez-Martín et al., 2016). Besides,
opinion leaders confer legitimacy to the pursuit of certain activities to the detriment of others
(Kennedy, 2008), and some propositions may resonate more than others because they are
similar to propositions by others for which legitimacy already has been established (Younger
& Fisher, 2020) or for which there appears to be a better “product-market ﬁt” (Shankar &
Clausen, 2020). Sectors matter too because venture capitalist prefer investing in areas where
any uncertainty about the viability of the offering and about market demand can be resolved
quickly (Lerner & Nanda, 2020).
Subsidiary hypothesis c The magnitude of the legitimacy gap is contingent upon contextual
factors, including temporal, spatial, and proposed activity considerations, indicating that the
level of social recognition and acceptance varies based on the speciﬁc entrepreneurial context.
As is clear from the above, the notion of legitimacy, including with respect to its cognitive
and institutional dimensions, contributes to understanding how an entrepreneur is able to
nurture an ecosystem of clients, suppliers and investors around its venture. In this paper,
our focus is on the transfer of legitimacy from accelerators, which can be said to be part
of an established organizational ﬁeld, to startups, which are nascent organizations operating
on a different ﬁeld within the same overarching ecosystem. As a consequence, we mostly
consider the legitimacy of accelerators as a given element, for the present study, and analyze
how accelerators can help with respect to its transfer, in the context of an entrepreneurial
ecosystem.
3 Method
In this paper we assume that accelerators form an “organizational ﬁeld” (DiMaggio & Powell,
1983). That is, we assume that they carry out similar activities and respond to similar pressures
(reputational, regulatory, or otherwise) from the environment. Given that the accelerators
were ﬁrst created in the United States, and because of our speciﬁc interest in the interaction
between accelerators and venture capital, which is also prominent in the US (Nicholas, 2019;
Grilli et al., 2019), we focus on and limit ourselves to this country.
3.1 Data sample
We retrieved information from CrunchBase, a public database of start-up companies widely
used for scientiﬁc studies (Dalle et al., 2017). Our raw dataset, which was retrieved in August
2016 through the application programming interface provided by Crunchbase (API version
3), is composed of all start-ups with headquarters in the United States for which information
on their founders was available, and consisted in approximately 45,000 start-ups and 140,000
123

1934
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
records of funding rounds associated with an identiﬁer of the organization that received the
funding, the amount and date of funding, the type of funding (venture capital, seed, IPO)
and the investors involved. For each organization, CrunchBase includes information on its
founders, the founding date, the location of its headquarters, and the sector or market in which
it is active. We then cleaned up this dataset by excluding start-ups for which information was
incomplete, or for which funding data were inconsistent (notably when the sum of funds listed
per funding round did not match the total amount of funds indicated in the database). We also
excluded companies founded after 2014. We further restricted our study to start-ups that had
raised more than $150,000. The reason for this restriction is that accelerators themselves can
invest up to $150,000 in start-ups enrolled in their programs, with the consequence that an
endogeneity bias would result if we were not to exclude them. Applying this restriction, we
excludestart-upsthatdidnotmanagetoattractatleastoneinvestorotherthantheiraccelerator.
Finally, to ensure consistency, we also excluded the start-ups for which Crunchbase indicated
an “exit”, that is, an end of its activity due to bankruptcy or takeover. Our ﬁnal sample was
composed of 6000 start-ups, with a participation in an accelerator program for 688 among
them that were identiﬁed on the basis of information compiled by the web site SeedDB, an
independently curated inventory of accelerators and their beneﬁciaries commonly used in the
academic literature on accelerators (see e.g. Cohen and Hochberg, 2014; Regmi et al., 2015;
Porat, 2014, among others), including a Crunchbase identiﬁer to allow for direct matching,
and whose accuracy we manually reconﬁrmed.
3.2 Variables and procedure
We consider the characteristics of the start-ups that make them selected (or not) to take part
in accelerator programs as independent variables, while the characteristics of the investments
they receive are identiﬁed as dependent variables.
3.2.1 Dependent variables
The “accessing” network mechanism outlined previously stresses the material dimension of
content whereas the “associating” network mechanism addresses the reputational dimension
of content and the positioning of the related person or entity in the network. As both network
mechanisms are likely to be active at early stage venture development, hypotheses have been
formulated both with respect to the material dimension of content (hypothesis 2) as well as
with respect to position of the investor the entrepreneur connects with as structural aspects
(hypothesis 1 and 3). Correspondingly, the dependent variables address both the material
dimension (funds raised) as well as with a structural feature (centrality) of the relationships
established with the help of accelerators.
Table 1 lists the dependent variables under study. We identify measures of investor notori-
ety and measures of investments received since the objective of the investigations presented
here is to determine whether accelerator programs make a difference for the start-ups that
beneﬁt from them with respect to the investors and investments they attract. In order to control
for the inﬂuence of confounding factors, we limit our attention to investments in the early
stage funding rounds, also known as “Seed” and “Series-A” funding rounds, which occur
early in the life of a start-up, i.e., shortly after graduating from the program, as opposed to
later-stage rounds for which the inﬂuence of factors unrelated to accelerators is likely to be
prominent.
Investor prominence
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
1935
Table 1 Dependent variables under study
Investor prominence
KMN
Mean Non-directed Katz Centrality
Investor importance
KMD
Mean Directed Katz Centrality
Lead investor importance
Investments
FSA
Sum of Seed and Series A funding
Early stage funds raised
log(FSA)
Natural logarithm of FSA
Early stage funds raised
A central interest of network analysis is to understand the factors that affect the trans-
mission of signals in the network: In the case of epidemics it allows us to track and control
the spread of disease; in the case of investor networks, as we mobilize them this paper, it
contributes to identify the most inﬂuential nodes Sharkey (2017) by measuring their central-
ity. Among available measures of centrality, we opt here for Katz centrality which, unlike
degree centrality, but like eigenvector centrality and PageRank, does not just rely on the
number of neighbors to a given node in the network but also accounts for the importance
(or centrality) of these neighbors. Landherr et al. (2010) provide an in-depth comparison of
common centrality measures and argue that among them Katz-centrality is the only one that
is both monotonic with respect to the distance between nodes and with respect to the number
of shortest paths between nodes, as well as being stable with regards to the ordering of nodes.
In addition, in the context of our study, another useful characteristic of Katz centrality is that
it can be applied to both directed and undirected networks (Sharkey, 2017).
We compute two centrality indices for each start-up, by averaging the centrality of all
investors who participated in its Seed and Series A funding rounds for non-directed Katz
and for directed Katz, respectively. As is standard in the literature on venture networks since
(Hochberg et al., 2007), when two investors co-invest in a funding round, a bidirectional link
can be created between them so as to globally create a bidirectional, non-directed network of
investors. On the basis of this network we compute the variable kmn, a centrality index for
each investor in this network, measured here according to Katz centrality, which we take as
proxy for investor prominence and denote here as non-directed Katz. Thanks to the presence
of detailed information on funding rounds in Crunchbase, we are also able to generate an
unidirectional network by taking into account the leadership role that investors take in funding
rounds, which is a further indication of their prominence: Speciﬁcally, when an investor is
identiﬁed as leading a funding round, it is linked to the other participants in this round with
a directed connection from the leader to the followers. Variable kmd then measures the Katz
centrality of investors within this directed network, denoted as directed Katz.
Investments
With respect to the amount of investment granted to start-ups in their early stage funding
rounds, we assign the sum of the Seed and Series A funds as the value of the variable fsa,
used here after logarithmic transformation since the values of this variable are not normally
distributed. We typically do not consider the rounds separately as they can often be confused
or conﬂated in primary data.
While it is the case that most of the capital available for investment is held by a small
number of large venture capital ﬁrms, it is relatively rare for these ﬁrms to invest in the
early stages (Lerner & Nanda, 2020). Sovereign wealth funds, hedge funds, mutual funds
and other public market investors have started to invest in ﬁrms prior to their initial public
offering but their importance remains limited at the earlier stages of startup development, just
123

1936
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
Table 2 Independent variables under study
Treatment
A
Participator in accelerator program
Support
Time
FD
Founding date
Period
Experience
FDR
Company founders
Breadth
CFR
Companies previously founded per founder
Depth
CFB
Companies previously founded that have received
funding
Success
Location
CA
Headquarters in California
West
NY
Headquarters in New York
East
MA
Headquarters in Massachusetts
North
TX
Headquarters in Texas
South
Activity
F1
Activity tagged among {Analytics; Android; B2B; Big
Data; Cloud Computing; Collaboration; CRM;
Enterprise Software; Hardware; Internet of Things;
iOS; Machine Learning; Marketing Automation;
SaaS; Security; Web Development}
F2
Activity tagged among {Fitness; Health Care;
Information Technology; Medical}
F3
Activity tagged among {Advertising; Apps; Curated
Web; Digital Media; E Commerce; Events; Fashion;
Financial Services; Internet; Marketplace; Messaging;
Mobile; Music; Payments; Photography; Real Estate;
Recruiting; Retail; Search Engine; Social Media;
Software; Sports; Travel; Video}
F4
Activity tagged among {Developer Tools; EdTech;
Education; Finance; FinTech}
after participation (or not) in accelerator programs, since they typically select among ﬁrms
that are already backed by venture capital ﬁrms. Conversely, a very large number of smaller
venture capital ﬁrms have appeared over the past decades that have turned their attention to
less mature entrepreneurial projects, resulting in a highly competitive market for early-stage
funding, at least in the USA.
3.2.2 Independent variables
Table 2 lists the independent variables under study. In addition to the founding date of the
start-up, we consider indicators of the experience of the founding team, of the location of
the start-up, and of its area of activity. Informed notably by hypothesis a–c, these variables
typically are used to model the propensity of start-ups to join accelerator programs. Dummy
variable a serves as dependent variable in the propensity model.
Founder Experience
Crunchbase provides a list of founders associated with each start-up. Variable fdr simply
measures the number of distinct founders listed. Variable cfr is computed as the ratio between
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
1937
the number of founders and the number of companies previously founded by these founders,
and is used as a proxy for the experience of the founding team. In addition, variable cfb is
computed as the number of companies among those that have previously been founded by
the founding team that have managed to raise private funds, and is used as a more informed
proxy for the experience of the founding team, not only with respect to founding start-ups
but also to raising funds.
Location
Dummy variables ca, ny, ma, and tx indicate whether the start-ups were located in the main
regions where entrepreneurial ecosystems are located in the United States. The value of these
variables is determined by the location of the headquarters as speciﬁed in Crunchbase.
Activity
Crunchbase also uses tags to qualify the activities of companies, which we adopt as a proxy
for their sector of activity. These tags do not follow a predeﬁned nomenclature (such as
NACE) but instead are relatively unstructured. In an effort to reduce the dimensionality of
these data, we applied Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Phan et al., 2008; Grün & Hornik,
2011) to identify clusters of tags. LDA is a text mining technique widely used in various
disciplines to categorize large quantities of text into topics (cf. Jelodar et al., 2019). Amongst
others, it has been used in systematic reviews (Mo et al., 2015). As is often the case for
clustering techniques, no clear-cut rules exist for the number of clusters or topics into which
the algorithm should split the data. Here, we instructed LDA to split the data into between 2
and 10 topics and then assessed the discriminatory power of each outcome on the basis of the
heuristics proposed by Nikita (2020). Since the best outcome was achieved by splitting the
tags into four topic areas, we selected this number for our variables. Speciﬁcally, the variables
f1- 4 indicate the strength of afﬁliation of the observed company with activity-groupings
(topics) 1 to 4. Table 2 speciﬁes the grouping of tags into the four topics generated by LDA.
To construct variables f1- 4, we count how many tags within a grouping are associated with
the focal company and then normalize these counts following standard practice.
3.2.3 Accelerator differentiation
There were 111 accelerators in total in whose programs one or more of the start-ups in our
sample have participated. For each accelerator, we compute the total amount of funds raised
by start-ups associated with the accelerator and use this information to order the accelerators
and place them in four different groups. We adopt the procedure of Simón-Moya et al. (2014)
to qualify the differences and similarities among these groups. Speciﬁcally, for each variable
deﬁned in section 3.2.1 and 3.2.2, we ﬁrst test for homogeneity of variances across groups
(homoscedasticity) with Levene’s test. In case the test does not reject the hypothesis that
variances are equal, we apply ANOVA and use the F-test to test for differences among the
groups. If Levene’s null-hypothesis is rejected, we resort to the Browne-Forsythe statistic.
Finally, we apply post-hoc tests to determine which groups are different: We use the Tukey
test for homoscedastic variables with a statistically signiﬁcant inter-group difference and
we use the Games-Howell tests on heteroscedastic variables with a statistically signiﬁcant
inter-group difference. Beyond statistical signiﬁcance we also look at the effect size of the
differences between groups. Effect size concerns the magnitude of the difference between
groups Sullivan and Feinn (2012). For two independent groups, effect size can be measured
by dividing the difference of the group means by the standard deviation of either group. A
commonly used indicator of effect size, Cohen’s d, which we employ as well, refers to the
effect size as negligible for standardized differences in means that are smaller than 0.2, small
123

1938
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
in case they are bigger than 0.2 and smaller than 0.5, moderate from 0.5 to 0.8, and large for
anything higher.
3.2.4 Matching procedure
In order to investigate the differences between start-ups who participated in accelerator pro-
grams and those who did not, we use propensity score matching (PSM) (Sekhon, 2011).
PSM is a method used by various studies in the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship research (Vries &
Block, 2011; Lin et al., 2013; Stephan, 2014) and which has recently been used in research
on accelerators (Assenova, 2019). It is based on identifying a control group of individuals
(here, start-ups), that are similar to other individuals (start-ups) who have been treated (here,
accelerated), but who have not. PSM ﬁrst estimates a model of the likelihood that a start-up
has of being accelerated. For each start-up that has been accelerated, the procedure then
identiﬁes start-ups with the same likelihood of having been accelerated, but that have in fact
not been accelerated. Contrary to the method adopted by Gonzalez-Uribe and Leatherbee
(2018), who compare accelerated start-ups with start-ups who applied to accelerators but
were turned down, propensity score matching allows to create a control group with the same
distribution of initial qualities as the treatment group.
In our case, after checking for interdependence between the variables using correlation
tests, we estimate the propensity of a start-up to attend an accelerator program using a
logit model where participation in an accelerator program is the dependent variable, and the
start-up characteristics listed in Table 2 are the independent variables. We compute variance
inﬂation factors to check for multicollinearity among variables and the Hosmer-Lemeshow
test to estimate the quality of the model. On the basis of the estimated model, we then match
each accelerated start-up in the sample with a non-accelerated start-up picked from the pool
of 5398 non-accelerated companies in our sample. Replacements, i.e., the matching of two
different accelerated start-ups with the same control company, were not allowed. A bias can
potentially result from this approach since the matching may depend on the order in which
it is implemented. Nevertheless, since we use a large pool of observations to select from,
together with a random shufﬂing of the order of observations in the database, the severity of
this effect is limited. Match-balance results are incorporated in the results presented in the
next section.
The results we report concern the average treatment effect on the treated (referred to as
ATT or ATET in the literature). ATT is calculated as the average difference in outcomes
between treated start-ups and their match from the control group. In addition we carried out
what some would consider a “double robustness check”, which is to estimate the effect as the
coefﬁcient associated with the treatment dummy within a regression estimate of the outcomes
on the baseline covariates (Stuart, 2010; Zhao et al., 2021). These additional results are not
presented below, but are available upon request.
Table 3 givens an indication of the distribution of the variables in our sample. Considering
the similarity between the mean and median values, it appears that the distribution of values
for many variables is fairly regular. The variable fsa forms a clear exception to this pattern
and in this case the logistic transformation effectively addresses the issue.
Note that start-up that participate in accelerator programs have typically been created
fairly recently. This reﬂects the growth in accelerator activity over the period of observation
from 2005 till 2015. Besides, while it is common to see at least two co-founders, it is rare
to see sequential entrepreneurs. Furthermore, the four regions for which we specify dummy
variables account for over half of the locations where start-ups are based with 35 percent
in California alone. This last observation is not surprising since these four states are among
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
1939
Table 3 Descriptive statistics with regards to the sample of accelerated startups
Mean
Median
Max
Min
Standard deviation
Independent variables
FD
2011-07-05
2012-01-01
2014-10-17
1999-12-01
646 days
FDR
2.37
2.00
8.00
1.00
0.99
CFR
1.19
1.00
3.00
0.25
0.42
CFB
0.09
0.00
3.00
0.00
0.31
CA
0.35
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.48
NY
0.09
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.29
MA
0.05
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.21
TX
0.02
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.14
F1
0.18
−0.59
5.42
−0.59
1.14
F2
−0.07
−0.36
5.90
−0.36
0.92
F3
0.14
0.04
4.17
−0.99
1.01
F4
0.28
−0.31
7.12
−0.31
1.33
Dependent variables
KMN
2.93
2.66
11.22
0.00
2.26
KMD
1.06
0.52
11.68
0.00
1.44
FSA (M$)
4.57
2.50
54.00
0.02
5.42
log(FSA)
14.66
14.70
17.80
9.68
1.31
n = 668
the;ost populous in the USA and cover areas such as Silicon Valley and Route 128, which
are traditionally associated with entrepreneurship activity.
Finally, note the diversity of activities that start-ups focus on.
With respect to investor interest after acceleration, which is measured by the independent
variables, one can note the large range of values and high standard deviations, which point
to a large variation in the beneﬁts start-ups get from participating in accelerator programs.
4 Results
4.1 Differences among accelerators
Figure 1 plots the distribution of funds raised by start-ups associated with accelerators for
the 111 accelerators in our sample, with colors corresponding to 4 different groups (see
previous section). The y-axis indicates the total amount of funds (in billion USD) for each
accelerator and the labels of the x-axis provide the names of the accelerators concerned.
Accelerators are ordered according to the total of funds associated with them and split into
four adjacent groups, as described in the previous section. Funds are extremely unevenly
distributed among accelerators, with the start-ups associated with one single accelerator, Y-
Combinator, having attracted more than half of the funds. A second group of accelerators
is made up by three regional members of the Techstars network, AngelPad and 500start-
ups, with funds per accelerator ranging from 300 to 500 million dollars. A third group is
associated with total funds raised between 70 and 200 million and a fourth group with less
123

1940
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
Fig. 1 Total amount of funds raised by start-ups per supporting accelerator ordered according to volume.
Source: Own compilation based on Crunchbase data
Table 4 Mean values for
variables with signiﬁcant
differences between groups of
accelerators
(0,60]
(60,78]
(78,92]
(92,100]
n
162
196
138
172
Startup characteristics
FDR
2.46
≈
2.51
≈
2.27
≈
2.21
CA
.57
≫
.31
⋖
.41
≫
.16
MA
.01
<
.11
<
.02
≈
.02
TX
0
=
0
=
0
<
.08
F2
−.17
≈
−.24
<
.17
≈
.03
F3
.06
<
.40
≫
−.16
<
.16
F4
−.05
<
.43
≈
.46
≈
.28
Investor interest
KMN
4.64
>
3.67
≫
1.86
>
1.35
KMD
1.88
≫
.97
≈
.88
>
.51
FSA (M$)
6.41
>
4.52
≈
4.74
≫
2.74
log(FSA)
15.15
>
14.61
≈
14.79
≫
14.14
Binary relationship symbols reﬂect outcomes of statistical tests: ≈indi-
cates no signiﬁcant difference at the 95% level of conﬁdence; {⋖; <
; ≪; ≪} indicate the magnitude of the difference (negligible; small;
moderate; large) based on Cohen’s d and its sign (smaller; greater)
than 50 million of funds raised by its start-ups. The number of start-ups associated with each
group of accelerators is indicated in the ﬁrst row of Table 4.
Table 4 presents a selection of results from the statistical tests detailed in the previous
section, including ANOVA tests on each variable listed in Tables 1 and 2, and subsequent
pairwise tests for differences in the means of that variable among the groups. We qualify the
importance of the difference on the basis of Cohen’s d, the most commonly used indicator
of effect size (Fritz et al., 2012). For the sake of brevity Table 4 only provides results for the
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
1941
variables for which a signiﬁcant difference was found with respect to pairwise comparisons
of adjacent groups. Full results are available from the authors.
With regard to the characteristics of start-ups selected, and while no general pattern is
visible, accelerators seem to differentiate amongst themselves with regards to the geograph-
ical location of the start-ups and with respect to the activities carried out by the start-ups
participating in their programs.
With regard to investors, the mean non-directed Katz centrality (kmn), used as a proxy for
investor prominence, decreases clearly step by step from group 1 to group 4, with a larger step
between groups 2 and 3. Directed Katz centrality (kmd), which focuses on the prominence of
lead investors, also decrases from group 1 to group 4, with the main step occurring between
groups 1 and 2 in this case. Funding (log(fsa)) also declines from group 1 to group 4, with
the most important decline occurring between group 3 and 4. These results provide support
to and conﬁrm Hypothesis 4.
4.2 Differences between accelerated and non-accelerated start-ups
Propensity model and balance
For each start-up in our sample, as described in the previous section, we select a counterpart
among the other start-ups in our database using propensity score matching. We estimate
a logistic model of the propensity to participate in an accelerator program given start-up
characteristics as deﬁned by the independent variables listed in Table 2. We checked for the
absence of multicollinearity and interdependence between variables, including by computing
the variance inﬂation factors for the variables in the model after estimating it, and found them
to be sufﬁciently low to dismiss concerns. In order to assess the quality of the model, we
subjected it to the Hosmer-Lemeshow Goodness of Fit (GOF) Test and found the ﬁt to be
statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level with a resolution of 50 bins, which is reassuring with
respect to the appropriateness of the model.
This model and its results corroborate the subsidiary hypotheses developed in Sect.2.3:
considering the propensity to enroll in an accelerator programs as a proxy for the existence
of a legitimacy gap, we observe that the track record (cfr; cfb) has a negative effect on this
propensity (Hypothesis a) and we further observe a positive effect of the size of the founding
team (fdr: Hypothesis b) and signiﬁcant effects for time, location, and activity (Hypothesis
c).
We identify a match for 665 out of 668 accelerated start-ups in our sample, the 3 start-ups
for which we could not ﬁnd a match being identiﬁed as outliers as they exhibit extreme
values for one or more of their characteristics. We further observe a good balance between
the “treated” set of 665 accelerated start-ups in our sample and the “control” set of 665
non-accelerated counterparts, with no signiﬁcant differences with regards to the independent
variables except for founding date, with a low difference of 3 months. Table 5 reports on the
differences between accelerated and non-accelerated start-ups, as well as the differences with
regard to start-ups associated with particular groups of accelerators and their non-accelerated
counterparts.
Consequences on investors and investments
With regard to the outcome variables, participation in accelerator programs is associated with
attracting investors of higher prominence, as measured by non-directed Katz centrality, for
the ﬁrst two groups of accelerators, with a further marked difference between the ﬁrst and
second group. Conversely, start-ups accelerated by accelerators in group 4 tend to raise lower
123

1942
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
Table 5 Mean values for variables with signiﬁcant differences between accelerated and propensity score matched non-accelerated startups
all
(0,60]
(60,78]
(78,92]
(92,100]
Treat
Cntrl
Treat
Cntrl
Treat
Cntrl
Treat
Cntrl
Treat
Cntrl
n
665
162
195
138
170
Matching variables
FD
7-’11 ⋖10-’11
3-’11 < 12-’11
8-’11 ⋖2-’12
9-’11 ≈9-’11
7-’11 ⋗6-’11
CA
.35 ≈.38
.57 >.41
.69 ≈.41
.41 ≈.41
.15 ≈.31
MA
.05 ≈.02
.01 ≈.03
.11 ⋗.04
.02 ≈.04
.02 =.02
Outcome variables
KMN
2.94 > 2.05
4.64 ≫2.29
3.68 > 2.12
1.86 ≈1.83
1.35 < 1.93
KMD
1.06 ≈1.29
1.88 > 1.29
.98 ≈1.30
.88 ≈1.35
.51 ≈1.22
log(FSA)
14.66 ≈14.74
15.15 > 14.17
14.62 ≈14.70
14.79 ≈14.82
14.14 ≈14.71
Groups identiﬁed as “Treat” and “Cntrl” correspond to startups supported by accelerators and their respective matches. Dates expressed in terms of months and years. Binary
relationship symbols reﬂect outcomes of statistical tests: ≈indicates no signiﬁcant difference at the 95% level of conﬁdence; {⋖; <; ≪; ≪} indicate the magnitude and sign of
the difference (negligible; small; moderate; large) based on Cohen’s d and its sign (smaller; greater)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
1943
Table 6 Mean values for variables with signiﬁcant differences between accelerated and propensity score
matched non-accelerated startups associated with Y-Combinator
n
US
in California
outside California
Treat
Cntrl
Treat
Cntrl
Treat
Cntrl
161
93
69
Matching variables
FD
3-’11 ≈8-’11
1-’11 ≈3-’11
5-’11 ≈7-’11
CA
.57 ≈.56
MA
.01 ≈.02
.03 ≈.02
Outcome variables
KMN
4.63 ≫2.30
4.98 ≫2.76
4.18 ≫1.91
KMD
1.88 > 1.27
2.13≈1.84
1.55 ≈1.11
FSA
6.42 ≈5.18
6.24 ≈5.62
6.65 ≈5.73
log(FSA)
15.15 ≫14.70
15.10 > 14.70
15.22 > 14.83
Groups identiﬁed as “Treat” and “Cntrl” correspond to startups supported by accelerators and their respective
matches. Dates expressed in terms of months and years. Binary relationship symbols reﬂect outcomes of
statistical tests: ≈indicates no signiﬁcant difference at the 95% level of conﬁdence; {⋖; <; ≪; ≪} indicate
the magnitude and sign of the difference (negligible; small; moderate; large) based on Cohen’s d and its sign
(smaller; greater)
funds than their counterparts. These results provide support for Hypothesis 4, for Hypothesis
2, and for Hypothesis 1 yet only for accelerators associated with groups 1 and 2.
Y-Combinator
Start-ups of the ﬁrst group, accelerated by Y-Combinator, are associated with a higher
directed-Katz, and raise a larger amount of funding. However, the previous results (Table 5)
show a difference in terms of how accelerated and control start-ups were located for this
particular group, in addition to the difference in terms of founding dates. We therefore apply
propensity score matching a second time to Y-Combinator exclusively. Table 6 presents
additional results for a dual propensity score matching limited to group 1 start-ups where
Californian start-ups were matched with Californian start-ups, and non-Californian start-ups
were matched with non-Californian start-ups, i.e., considering group 1 start-ups as belonging
to 2 sub-groups depending on their location. Previous results with respect to the prominence
of attracted investors hold strongly for group 1 start-ups, and a signiﬁcant difference is also
visible with respect to the amount of funding raised. Conversely, there is no signiﬁcant differ-
ence among the distributions of directed Katz values: That is, Californian start-ups, whether
accelerated by Y-Combinator or not, attract leading Silicon Valley investors that tend to
assume a leadership role in their deals, whereas start-ups outside California do not. These
results offer a strong support to Hypothesis 1 for Y-Combinator and reject Hypothesis 3, or
at least do not provide support for Hypothesis 3 due to a broader “Silicon Valley” effect.
5 Discussion
In an article for the Annals, and with respect to the crucial selection of startups by investors,
Zhong et al. (2018) propose a recommendation system aimed at selecting start-ups at later
stages of their development. The study reported here is complementary to their effort in that
it highlights the role of accelerators in the selection of start-ups at an earlier stage.
123

1944
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
The results of our analysis also support the view that participation in accelerator programs
facilitates start-up integration within an entrepreneurial ecosystem. At the same time, they
clarify the fact that some of the accelerators are better intermediaries than others. Taken
together, this conﬁrms that accelerators could be seen as platforms and that, among them,
dominant platforms would emerge that attract the entrepreneurs with the best ventures and
the investors with the best connections.
Relation to similar studies
As mentioned above, our analysis of accelerators as platforms is consistent with the
view of accelerators as a “key structural element” in entrepreneurial ecosystems (Autio et
al., 2018).It is also in line with the approach advocated for ﬁnancial markets (Sørensen,
2007). Our ﬁndings with regard to the special position of Y-Combinator concur both with
what is known in the platform literature as the “winner-takes-all” or Matthew-effect (Sun &
Tse, 2007) and with observations on the ﬁeld (Younger & Fisher, 2020). It helps solve the
“accelerator-conundrum” by explaining why accelerators, taken globally, might not have an
effect on accelerated start-ups fundraising, or might even have a negative effect Yu (2019):
only a few prominent accelerator-platforms can have a signiﬁcant effect on fundraisingand
more generally, as we originally emphasized here, on the quality of the attracted investors.
We are not the ﬁrst to apply propensity score matching techniques in this context: while
Yu (2019) relied on hand-coding, other scholars have adopted propensity scores as more
easily replicable matching method (Kher et al., 2020; González-Uribe & Reyes, 2021). Yet,
to our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to measure the prominence of investors in accelerated
start-ups on the basis of social network centrality measures. Goswami et al. (2018) also
study accelerators as intermediaries with regard to accelerators in Bangalore, but also limit
themselves to interviews and document analysis. Our results for the US, by quantifying the
ability of accelerators to connect, indeed refer to one of the four areas of accelerator expertise
identiﬁedintheirstudy.Wewouldalsoliketoemphasizethat ouridentiﬁcationofaccelerators
as providers of legitimacy is not unrelated to Wright and Drori (2018)’s early observations.
Bliemel et al. (2019) also saw accelerators as providers of “start-up infrastructure”, which
is also related to cognitive legitimacy (Caccamo & Beckman, 2021). However, our study
suggests that accelerators can provide other types of legitimacy as well, which is relevant for
stakeholders who typically adopt a more complex way of judging an organization’s legitimacy
(Bitektine, 2011).
Alternative explanations
With regards to the conundrum described above, Qin et al. (2019) conjectured that part of
the reason might be heterogeneity among start-ups. They pointed to differences among the
strategies adopted by entrepreneurs to get most out of their participation in an accelerator
program. Through the propensity score matching method adopted in this paper, we are able
to control for at least part of this heterogeneity. The fact that we are still not able to ﬁnd
an effect of acceleration on the amount of funds raised suggests that the importance of
heterogeneity among start-ups as explanation for the lack of direct monetary beneﬁts is
probably not appropriate.
We interpret the high values of investor centrality for some start-ups as the result of
selection by more central investors. Yet, it may also be the case that these start-ups accede
to denser networks with a higher investor centrality on average. Bliemel et al. (2016) posit
that investors in such networks are likely to rely on normative processes to judge legitimacy
of start-ups while investors in sparse networks with lower centrality rely more on pragmatic
processes. This difference should be visible in the start-up selection process that is carried out
by accelerators as they confer pragmatic and normative legitimacy through this process. The
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
1945
only difference we ﬁnd among selected start-ups is in terms of the activities they propose
to carry out. Ex post, one can try to associate the activities of focus 2 and 4 (see above),
which score high among accelerators associated with low centrality values, dispositional,
and hence, pragmatic legitimacy and investigate to what extent they express activities to are
similar to those already proposed in the ecosystem. In contrast, the activities of focus 3 would
be markers of consequential, or perhaps structural, in any case normative legitimacy. To the
extent that labels like “apps” and “payments” are speciﬁc about outcomes than the sectoral
markers present in focus 2 and 4, this might indeed be the case. From the perspective of
start-ups, however, whether our interpretation or the alternative interpretation presented here
is correct does not make an important difference. Under both interpretations accelerators are
a useful intermediary if they allow start-ups to connect to investors of high centrality.
Among scholars who have investigated accelerators, the perspective adopted by Hochberg
(2016), who link accelerators with the dynamism of regional entrepreneurial ecosystems, is
most like ours. In line with this perspective, Mayya and Huang (2019) show that corporate
venture capitalists signiﬁcantly increase their investments in early-stage start-ups in regions
where seed accelerators are present. Indeed, we also found higher levels of funds raised for
start-ups in certain regions, accelerated or not. The presence of accelerators, dominant or not,
or indeed of incubation structures more in general is not included among the criteria used to
rank entrepreneurial ecosystems by Sitaridis and Kitsios (2020). Still, it matters.
In contrast, we do not feel that the resource-based view would be specially helpful to
explain our results. This perspective was proposed by Uhm et al. (2018) to interpret difference
and similarities between start-ups in the US and Korea. Of course, the accelerator’s ability
to connect to investors can be seen as a resource it provides to start-ups, but it tends to
overlook the importance of this ability as a resource for potential investors. The crucial point
here is that our study illustrates that resources are not passive entities that are waiting to be
selected, but rather dynamic elements that need to be managed and developed (Zahra, 2021).
Entrepreneurial ecosystem are all about the creation and transformation of resources (Spigel
& Harrison, 2018) and actions undertaken in view of gaining legitimacy are crucial in this
context. This is typically why Qin et al. (2019) looked at resource acquisition rather than
selection. Nevertheless, we feel that even the focus on resource acquisition by start-ups has
some limitations in the context of accelerators since the resources acquired during the short
duration of an accelerator program are limited: However, these resources can be ampliﬁed
through the legitimacy gained by participating.
Limitations
Our study does not look into the motivations of founders or investors to turn to accelerators.
Our data typically do not allow us to corroborate or invalidate the idea proposed by Yu (2019)
that the role of accelerators is to reduce the start-up founders’ uncertainty with respect to the
quality of their projects. We do, however, look at the experience of founders and the notoriety
of investors, which both could be construed as motivating factors. Besides the study only
covers start-ups participating on accelerator programs in the US in the ﬁrst ten years of
the existence of accelerators as institutional form. Undoubtedly lengthening the period and
broadening the geographic scope would yield a large and more diverse sample to analyze,
potentially also less coherent. Finally, there might be room for improvement in choice of
methods, in particular with regards to the implementation of propensity score matching
where machine learning alternatives to logistic regression have been proposed (Westreich et
al., 2010), although such improvements would probably not fundamentally alter the results
presented here.
123

1946
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
Implications
We see the theoretical contributions of our work as threefold: First, we articulate the notion
of accelerator outcomes, and the discussions around it, with the research on entrepreneurial
ecosystems, in ways that suggest that this articulation is not at all anecdotal, all the more so as,
second, we integrate elements from the platform ecosystem literature with the entrepreneurial
ecosystem literature (cf. Acs et al., 2017); and, third, we try to create connections between
two hitherto separate streams within this body of literature, by bridging notions from network
theory with notions from legitimacy theory.
Lerner (2010) lists three different audiences that could beneﬁt from a better understanding
of how entrepreneurship phenomena unfold: entrepreneurs and generally startup founders,
policy makers, and venture capitalists. By shedding additional light on the relations between
entrepreneurs, accelerators and investors, we hope that our investigations might contribute
to clarify the role that accelerators play for startup founders, and the supplementary role
that a few accelerators in a given ecosystem might play in this respect, and thus orienting
the strategic choices of startup founders: when choosing an accelerator, the outcome of not
choosing the leading one or leading ones might appear considerably more consequential to
them as soon as they consider accelerators as platforms. To put it differently, our results tell
startup founders that in addition to acquiring knowledge from accelerators, they should do
also take into account the social capital they can acquire when choosing among accelerators.
In addition, our study could help policy makers who seek to deepen their understanding
of how entrepreneurial ecosystem are structured: namely, policies aimed at supporting a
large number of entrepreneurial support organization might face difﬁculties that would stem
from the consequences of the existence of platform competition. As soon as startup founders
anticipate this outcome, they would certainly self-select according, which would result in
non-top-tier accelerators failing to attract high proﬁle startups, thus with potential negative
consequences with respect to how public money can be used if too widely distributed. Finally,
our results might also contribute to orient the choices of venture capitalists notably with
respect to the so-called “sourcing” of the startups they might invest in, by encouraging
them to look, ﬁrst and foremost, at the startups accelerated by the leading accelerators, or
conversely, to look for under-valued opportunities in the portfolio of other, less prominent
accelerators.
Suggestions for further research
Krishnan (2013) argues that operations management scholars should seriously consider
themes related to entrepreneurship as avenues for future research due to the centrality
of this activity in contemporary societies. Judging by the frequency with which the term
“entrepreneurship” is mentioned in operations research journals, this call ﬁnds a growing
resonance. Broadly speaking, there are two ways in which operations research can contribute
to the study of entrepreneurship. The ﬁrst is through the application of familiar methods of
techniques to this novel terrain, be it neural networks (Jain & Nag, 1998), data envelopment
analysis (Sorkhi & Paradi, 2020), multi-criteria decision making (Sitaridis & Kitsios, 2020),
or something else altogether; the second is to adapt its theoretical models and leverage their
rigortoexplainentrepreneurialprocesses(Phan&Chambers,2013).Inthecontextofresearch
on accelerators, in terms of methods the above-mentioned incorporation of machine learning
in propensity score matching would be an obvious avenue. In terms of theory, it would be of
particular interest to see to what extent research on crowdfunding (Mahbub et al., 2022; Li
and Cao, 2021, for instance) could be brought to bear to studies of the accelerator-mediated
interactions between start-ups and investors.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
1947
6 Conclusion
This paper studies the effect of accelerators on the early stage of start-up development. The
effect found turned out to be dependent on the identity and reputation of the accelerator
supporting the start-up. In particular, we found that alumni of well-known accelerators can
attract investors with a position that is more central to the entrepreneurial system than the
position associated with investors in similar companies that did not participate in accelerator
programs.
The results of our propensity-matched study comparing accelerated and non-accelerated
start-ups suggest a renewed understanding of the accelerator phenomenon: Namely, acceler-
ators appear as a competitive platform market with a very limited number of winners. Such
an analysis could of course contribute to modify the perceptions and the decisions of start-up
founders and entrepreneurs about which accelerator to select. Furthermore, the fact that most
accelerators do not have a statistical impact on the amount of funds raised by accelerated
start-ups, nor often on the prominence of investors they are able to connect their startups
to, could also be of relevance for policymakers, when assessing their options with respect
to the development of their ecosystems: Notwithstanding the positive effects identiﬁed by
Hochberg (2016) and others, their strategies could be different whether there would already
exist, or not, a leading ’accelerator-platform’ within their ecosystem.
Supplementary information. Detailed results are available on request.
Funding This study was funded by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (Grant ANR-10-Labex-11-01).
Declarations
Ethical approval This article does not contain any studies with human participants performed by any of the
authors.
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂicts of interest. Dalle is the director of an
incubator, not based on the cohort-based model, located in Paris and without any operations in the US or
Northern America.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Acemoglu, D. (1993). Learning about others’ actions and the investment accelerator. The Economic Journal,
103(417), 318–328. https://doi.org/10.2307/2234770
Acs, Z. J., Stam, E., Audretsch, D. B., & O’Connor, A. (2017). The lineages of the entrepreneurial ecosystem
approach. Small Business Economics, 49(1), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-017-9864-8
Armanios, D. E., Eesley, C. E., Li, J., & Eisenhardt, K. M. (2017). How entrepreneurs leverage institutional
intermediaries in emerging economies to acquire public resources. Strategic Management Journal, 38(7),
1373–1390. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.2575
123

1948
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
Assenova, V. (2019). Institutional change and early-stage startup selection: Evidence from applicants to
venture accelerators. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3448893, Social Science Research Network, Rochester,
NY.
Audretsch, D. B., & Thurik, A. R. (2000). Capitalism and democracy in the 21st century: From the managed
to the entrepreneurial economy*. Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 10(1), 17–34. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s001910050003
Autio, E., Nambisan, S., Thomas, L. D. W., & Wright, M. (2018). Digital affordances, spatial affordances, and
the genesis of entrepreneurial ecosystems. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 12(1), 72–95. https://doi.
org/10.1002/sej.1266
Bergman, B. J., & McMullen, J. S. (2022). Helping entrepreneurs help themselves: A review and relational
research agenda on entrepreneurial support organizations. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 46(3),
688–728. https://doi.org/10.1177/10422587211028736
Bernstein, S., Korteweg, A., & Laws, K. (2017). Attracting early-stage investors: Evidence from a randomized
ﬁeld experiment. The Journal of Finance, 72(2), 509–538. https://doi.org/10.1111/joﬁ.12470
Bitektine, A. (2011). Toward a theory of social judgments of organizations: The case of legitimacy, reputation,
and status. Academy of Management Review, 36(1), 151–179. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2009.0382
Bliemel, M., Flores, R., De Klerk, S., & Miles, M. P. (2019). Accelerators as start-up infrastructure for
entrepreneurial clusters. Entrepreneurship & Regional Development, 31(1–2), 133–149. https://doi.org/
10.1080/08985626.2018.1537152
Bliemel, M. J., Flores, R. G., de Klerk, S., Miles, M. P. P., Costa, B., & Monteiro, P. (2016). The role and
performance of accelerators in the Australian startup ecosystem. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2826317,
Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.
Block, J. H., Colombo, M. G., Cumming, D. J., & Vismara, S. (2018). New players in entrepreneurial ﬁnance
and why they are there. Small Business Economics, 50(2), 239–250. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-
016-9826-6
Bloodgood, J. M., Hornsby, J. S., Rutherford, M., & McFarland, R. G. (2016). The role of network density and
betweenness centrality in diffusing new venture legitimacy: An epidemiological approach. International
Entrepreneurship and Management Journal, 2(13), 525–552. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11365-016-0412-
9
Brown, R., Mawson, S., Lee, N., & Peterson, L. (2019). Start-up factories, transnational entrepreneurs and
entrepreneurial ecosystems: Unpacking the lure of start-up accelerator programmes. European Planning
Studies, 27(5), 885–904. https://doi.org/10.1080/09654313.2019.1588858
Caccamo, M., & Beckman, S. (2021). Leveraging accelerator spaces to foster knowledge communities.
Technovation, 113, 102421. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2021.102421
Castellano, S., & Khelladi, I. (2017). Legitimacy: The missing link in investigating the dynamics of
entrepreneurial teams in successful champagne houses. International Journal of Entrepreneurship and
Small Business, 32(1–2), 160–180. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJESB.2017.085992
Chung, S. L., Liu, W., Liu, W. R., & Tseng, K. (2018). Investor network: Implications for information diffusion
and asset prices. Paciﬁc-Basin Finance Journal, 48, 186–209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pacﬁn.2018.02.
004
Clayton, P., Feldman, M., & Lowe, N. (2018). Behind the scenes: Intermediary organizations that facilitate
science commercialization through entrepreneurship. Academy of Management Perspectives, 32(1), 104–
124. https://doi.org/10.5465/amp.2016.0133
Cohen, S., Fehder, D. C., Hochberg, Y. V., & Murray, F. (2019). The design of startup accelerators. Research
Policy, 48(7), 1781–1797. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2019.04.003
Cohen, S., & Hochberg, Y. V. (2014). Accelerating startups: The seed accelerator phenomenon. SSRN
Scholarly Paper ID 2418000, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.
Cri¸san, E. L., Salan¸t˘a, I. I., Beleiu, I. N., Bordean, O. N., & Bunduchi, R. (2021). A systematic literature
review on accelerators. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 46, 62–89. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10961-
019-09754-9
Dalle, J. M., den Besten, M., & Menon, C. (2017). OECD: Using crunchbase for economic and managerial
research. Technical report.
Deephouse, D. L., & Suchman, M. (2013). Legitimacy in organizational institutionalism. The SAGE Handbook
of Organizational Institutionalism, 49–77. SAGE.
Deffains-Crapsky, C., & Klein, P. G. (2016). Business angels, social networks, and radical innovation. In D.
Bögenhold, J. Bonnet, M. Dejardin, & D. Garcia Pérez de Lema (Eds.), Contemporary entrepreneurship:
Multidisciplinary perspectives on innovation and growth (pp. 275–290). Springer. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-28134-6_18
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
1949
Del Sarto, N., Isabelle, D. A., & Di Minin, A. (2020). The role of accelerators in ﬁrm survival: An fsQCA
analysis of Italian startups. Technovation, 90–91, 102102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2019.
102102
Delmar, F., & Shane, S. (2004). Legitimating ﬁrst: Organizing activities and the survival of new ventures.
Journal of Business Venturing, 19(3), 385–410. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0883-9026(03)00037-5
den Besten, M., & Dalle, J. M. (2015). A comparative analysis of funds raised by startups that beneﬁtted from
US accelerators. In Interdisciplinary European conference on entrepreneurship research, Montpellier,
France.
Díez-Martín, F., Blanco-González, A., & Prado-Román, C. (2016). Explaining nation-wide differences in
entrepreneurial activity: A legitimacy perspective. International Entrepreneurship and Management
Journal, 12(4), 1079–1102. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11365-015-0381-4
DiMaggio, P. J., & Powell, W. W. (1983). The iron cage revisited: Institutional isomorphism and collective
rationality in organizational ﬁelds. American Sociological Review, 48(2), 147–160. https://doi.org/10.
2307/2095101
Drori, I., & Wright, M. (2018). Accelerators: Characteristics, trends and the new entrepreneurial ecosystem.
In M. Wright (Ed.), Accelerators: Successful venture creation and growth (pp. 1–20). Edward Elgar
Publishing.
Erikson,T.(2003).Towardsataxonomyofentrepreneuriallearningexperiencesamongpotentialentrepreneurs.
Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development, 10(1), 106–112. https://doi.org/10.1108/
14626000310461240
Florén, H., Frishammar, J., Parida, V., & Wincent, J. (2018). Critical success factors in early new product devel-
opment: A review and a conceptual model. International Entrepreneurship and Management Journal,
14(2), 411–427. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11365-017-0458-3
Fritz, C. O., Morris, P. E., & Richler, J. J. (2012). Effect size estimates: Current use, calculations, and
interpretation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 141(1), 2–18. https://doi.org/10.1037/
a0024338
Gompers, P. A., Gornall, W., Kaplan, S. N., & Strebulaev, I. A. (2019). How do venture capitalists make
decisions? Journal of Financial Economics, 135(1), 169–190. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2019.06.
011
Gonzalez-Uribe, J., & Leatherbee, M. (2018). The effects of business accelerators on venture performance:
Evidence from start-up Chile. The Review of Financial Studies, 31(4), 1566–1603. https://doi.org/10.
1093/rfs/hhx103
González-Uribe, J., & Reyes, S. (2021). Identifying and boosting “Gazelles”: Evidence from business accel-
erators. Journal of Financial Economics, 139(1), 260–287. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2020.07.
012
Goswami, K., Mitchell, J. R., & Bhagavatula, S. (2018). Accelerator expertise: Understanding the interme-
diary role of accelerators in the development of the Bangalore entrepreneurial ecosystem. Strategic
Entrepreneurship Journal, 12(1), 117–150. https://doi.org/10.1002/sej.1281
Grilli, L., Latiﬁ, G., & Mrkajic, B. (2019). Institutional determinants of venture capital activity: An empirically
driven literature review and a research agenda. Journal of Economic Surveys, 33(4), 1094–1122. https://
doi.org/10.1111/joes.12319
Grün, B., & Hornik, K. (2011). Topicmodels: An R package for ﬁtting topic models. Journal of Statistical
Software, 40(13), 1–30. https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v040.i13
Guler, I., & Guillén, M. F. (2010). Home country networks and foreign expansion: Evidence from the venture
capital industry. Academy of Management Journal, 53(2), 390–410. https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2010.
49389027
Hallen, B. L., Bingham, C. B., & Cohen, S. (2014). Do accelerators accelerate? A study of venture accelerators
as a path to success? Academy of Management Proceedings, 2014(1), 12955. https://doi.org/10.5465/
ambpp.2014.185
Harrison, G. (2019). Business accelerators as learning environments: A mixed methods investigation. PhD
Thesis, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand.
Hausberg, J. P., & Korreck, S. (2020). Business incubators and accelerators: A co-citation analysis-based,
systematic literature review. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 45, 151–176. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10961-018-9651-y
Hernández-Chea, R., Mahdad, M., Minh, T. T., & Hjortsø, C. N. (2021). Moving beyond intermediation: How
intermediary organizations shape collaboration dynamics in entrepreneurial ecosystems. Technovation,
108, 102332. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2021.102332
Hochberg, Y. V. (2016). Accelerating entrepreneurs and ecosystems: The seed accelerator model. Innovation
Policy and the Economy, 16(1), 25–51.
123

1950
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
Hochberg, Y. V., Ljungqvist, A., & Lu, Y. (2007). Whom you know matters: Venture capital networks and
investment performance. The Journal of Finance, 62(1), 251–301. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.
2007.01207.x
Huotari, P., Järvi, K., Kortelainen, S., & Huhtamäki, J. (2017). Winner does not take all: Selective attention
and local bias in platform-based markets. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 114, 313–326.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2016.08.028
Islam, M., Fremeth, A., & Marcus, A. (2018). Signaling by early stage startups: US government research
grants and venture capital funding. Journal of Business Venturing, 33(1), 35–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jbusvent.2017.10.001
Jain, B. A., & Nag, B. N. (1998). A neural network model to predict long-run operating performance of new
ventures. Annals of Operations Research, 78, 83–110. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1018910402737
Jelodar, H., Wang, Y., Yuan, C., Feng, X., Jiang, X., Li, Y., & Zhao, L. (2019). Latent Dirichlet allocation
(LDA) and topic modeling: Models, applications, a survey. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 78(11),
15169–15211. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-018-6894-4
Kaandorp, M., van Burg, J., & Karlsson, T. (2020). Initial networking processes of student entrepreneurs: The
role of action and evaluation. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 44(3), 527–556. https://doi.org/
10.1177/1042258719834019
Kennedy, M. T. (2008). Getting counted: Markets, media, and reality. American Sociological Review, 73(2),
270–295. https://doi.org/10.1177/000312240807300205
Kher, R., Yang, S., & Newbert, S. L. (2020). Exploring the treatment effect of startup accelerators on venture
emergence. In Academy of management proceedings (Vol. 2020, p. 12312).
Ko, E. J., & McKelvie, A. (2018). Signaling for more money: The roles of founders’ human capital and
investor prominence in resource acquisition across different stages of ﬁrm development. Journal of
Business Venturing, 33(4), 438–454. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2018.03.001
Krishnan,V.(2013).Operationsmanagementopportunitiesintechnologycommercializationandentrepreneur-
ship. Production and Operations Management, 22(6), 1439–1445. https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.12012
Landherr, A., Friedl, B., & Heidemann, J. (2010). A critical review of centrality measures in social networks.
Business & Information Systems Engineering, 2(6), 371–385.
Lee, P. M., Pollock, T. G., & Jin, K. (2011). The contingent value of venture capitalist reputation. Strategic
Organization, 9(1), 33–69. https://doi.org/10.1177/1476127011400505
Lerner, J. (2010). The future of public efforts to boost entrepreneurship and venture capital. Small Business
Economics, 35(3), 255–264. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-010-9298-z
Lerner, J., & Nanda, R. (2020). Venture capital’s role in ﬁnancing innovation: What we know and how much
we still need to learn. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 34(3), 237–261. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.
34.3.237
Levinsohn, D. (2015). No entrepreneur is an island : An exploration of social entrepreneurial learning in
accelerators. PhD Thesis, Jönköping University, Jönköping, Sweden.
Li, H., & Cao, E. (2021). Competitive crowdfunding under asymmetric quality information. Annals of
Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-03939-y
Lin, F., Huang, C., He, X., & Zhang, C. (2013). Do more highly educated entrepreneurs matter? Asian-Paciﬁc
Economic Literature, 27(2), 104–116. https://doi.org/10.1111/apel.12023
Mahbub, N., Le, A., & Zhuang, J. (2022). Online crowd-funding strategy: A game-theoretical approach to a
Kickstarter case study. Annals of Operations Research, 315, 1019–1036. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-
020-03857-5
Maloux, C. (2018). This will make you think again about accelerators.
Mas-Tur, A., & Simón Moya, V. (2015). Young innovative companies (YICs) and entrepreneurship policy.
Journal of Business Research, 68(7), 1432–1435. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2015.01.028
Mayer, C., Wright, M., & Phan, P. (2017). Management research and the future of the corporation: A new
agenda. Academy of Management Perspectives, 31(3), 179–182. https://doi.org/10.5465/amp.2017.0124
Mayya, R., & Huang, P. (2019). Seed accelerators and information asymmetries: Evidence from corporate
venture capital investments. Academy of Management Proceedings, 2019(1), 15738. https://doi.org/10.
5465/AMBPP.2019.161
Meyer, J. W., & Scott, R. W. (1983). Centralization and the legitimacy problems of local government,
Organizational environments: Ritual and rationality. SAGE Publications.
Mian, S., Lamine, W., & Fayolle, A. (2016). Technology business incubation: An overview of the state of
knowledge. Technovation, 50–51, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2016.02.005
Mo, Y., Kontonatsios, G., & Ananiadou, S. (2015). Supporting systematic reviews using LDA-based document
representations. Systematic Reviews, 4(1), 172. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-015-0117-0
Moritz, A., Naulin, T., & Lutz, E. (2022). Accelerators as drivers of coopetition among early-stage startups.
Technovation, 111, 102378. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2021.102378
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
1951
Navis, C., & Glynn, M. A. (2011). Legitimate distinctiveness and the entrepreneurial identity: Inﬂuence on
investor judgments of new venture plausibility. Academy of Management Review, 36(3), 479–499. https://
doi.org/10.5465/amr.2008.0361
Newbert, S. L., & Tornikoski, E. T. (2013). Resource acquisition in the emergence phase: Considering the
effects of embeddedness and resource dependence. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 37(2), 249–
280. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6520.2011.00461.x
Nicholas, T. (2019). An American history. Harvard University Press.
Nikita, M. (2020). ldatuning: Tuning of the latent Dirichlet allocation models parameters.
Phan, P., & Chambers, C. (2013). Advancing theory in entrepreneurship from the lens of operations man-
agement. Production and Operations Management, 22(6), 1423–1428. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1937-
5956.2011.01306.x
Phan, X. H., Nguyen, L. M., & Horiguchi, S. (2008). Learning to classify short and sparse text & web with
hidden topics from large-scale data collections. In Proceedings of the 17th international conference on
World Wide Web (pp. 91–100).
Plummer, L. A., Allison, T. H., & Connelly, B. L. (2015). Better together? Signaling interactions in new
venture pursuit of initial external capital. Academy of Management Journal, 59(5), 1585–1604. https://
doi.org/10.5465/amj.2013.0100
Politis, D., Gabrielsson, J., Galan, N., & Abebe, S. A. (2019). Entrepreneurial learning in venture acceleration
programs. The Learning Organization, 26(6), 588–603. https://doi.org/10.1108/TLO-04-2018-0082
Pollack, J. M., Rutherford, M. W., & Nagy, B. G. (2012). Preparedness and cognitive legitimacy as antecedents
of new venture funding in televised business pitches. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 36(5),
915–939. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6520.2012.00531.x
Porat, J. (2014). Exploring the policy relevance of startup accelerators. Issue Brief 4, Ofﬁce of Economic
Research of the Ofﬁce of Advocacy, Washington, DC, USA.
Qin, F., Wright, M., & Gao, J. (2019). Accelerators and intra-ecosystem variety: How entrepreneurial
agency inﬂuences venture development in a time-compressed support program. Industrial and Corporate
Change, 28(4), 961–975. https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dtz036
Regmi, K., Ahmed, S. A., & Quinn, M. (2015). Data driven analysis of startup accelerators. Universal Journal
of Industrial and Business Management, 3(2), 54–57.
Rutherford, M. W., Buller, P. F., & Stebbins, J. M. (2009). Ethical considerations of the legitimacy
lie. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 33(4), 949–964. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6520.2009.
00310.x
Sekhon, J. S. (2011). Multivariate and propensity score matching software with automated balance
optimization: The matching package for R. Journal of Statistical Software 42(7).
Shane, S., & Nicolaou, N. (2018). Exploring the changing institutions of early-stage ﬁnance. Journal of
Institutional Economics, 14(6), 1121–1137. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744137417000467
Shankar, R. K., & Clausen, T. H. (2020). Scale quickly or fail fast: An inductive study of acceleration.
Technovation, 98, 102174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2020.102174
Sharkey, K. J. (2017). A control analysis perspective on Katz centrality. Scientiﬁc Reports, 7(1), 17247. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-15426-1
Simón-Moya, V., Revuelto-Taboada, L., & Guerrero, R. F. (2014). Institutional and economic drivers of
entrepreneurship: An international perspective. Journal of Business Research, 67(5), 715–721. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2013.11.033
Sitaridis, I., & Kitsios, F. (2020). Competitiveness analysis and evaluation of entrepreneurial ecosystems:
A multi-criteria approach. Annals of Operations Research, 294(1), 377–399. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-019-03404-x
Smith, B. R., & Bergman, B. J. (2020). The other side of the coin: Investor identity and its role in
resource provision. Journal of Business Venturing Insights, 14, e00175. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbvi.
2020.e00175
Sorkhi, S., & Paradi, J. C. (2020). Measuring short-term risk of initial public offering of equity securities: A
hybrid Bayesian and data-envelopment-analysis-based approach. Annals of Operations Research, 288(2),
733–753. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-019-03439-0
Spigel, B., & Harrison, R. (2018). Toward a process theory of entrepreneurial ecosystems. Strategic
Entrepreneurship Journal, 12(1), 151–168. https://doi.org/10.1002/sej.1268
Sørensen, M. (2007). How smart is smart money? A two-sided matching model of venture capital. The Journal
of Finance, 62(6), 2725–2762. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2007.01291.x
Stam, E., & van de Ven, A. (2021). Entrepreneurial ecosystem elements. Small Business Economics, 56(2),
809–832. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-019-00270-6
Stephan, A. (2014). Are public research spin-offs more innovative? Small Business Economics, 43(2), 353–368.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-013-9539-z
123

1952
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1925–1952
Stuart, E. A. (2010). Matching methods for causal inference: A review and a look forward. Statistical Science:
A Review Journal of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, 25(1), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1214/09-
STS313
Stuart, T. E., Hoang, H., & Hybels, R. C. (1999). Interorganizational endorsements and the performance of
entrepreneurial ventures. Administrative Science Quarterly, 44(2), 315–349.
Suchman,M.C.(1995).Managinglegitimacy:Strategicandinstitutionalapproaches.AcademyofManagement
Review, 20(3), 571–610. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.1995.9508080331
Sullivan, G. M., & Feinn, R. (2012). Using effect size—Or why the P value is not enough. Journal of Graduate
Medical Education, 4(3), 279–282. https://doi.org/10.4300/JGME-D-12-00156.1
Sun, M., & Tse, E. (2007). When does the winner take all in two-sided markets? Review of Network Economics,
6(1), 16–40. https://doi.org/10.2202/1446-9022.1108
Thomas, L. D. W., Autio, E., & Gann, D. M. (2014). Architectural leverage: Putting platforms in context.
Academy of Management Perspectives, 28(2), 198–219. https://doi.org/10.5465/amp.2011.0105
Uhm, C. H., Sung, C. S., & Park, J. Y. (2018). Understanding the accelerator from resources-based perspec-
tive. Asia Paciﬁc Journal of Innovation and Entrepreneurship, 12(3), 258–278. https://doi.org/10.1108/
APJIE-01-2018-0001
van Burg, E., Elfring, T., & Cornelissen, J. P. (2022). Connecting content and structure: A review of mechanisms
in entrepreneurs’ social networks. InternationalJournalofManagement Reviews,24(2),188–209.https://
doi.org/10.1111/ijmr.12272
Vedula, S., & Kim, P. H. (2019). Gimme shelter or fade away: The impact of regional entrepreneurial ecosystem
quality on venture survival. Industrial and Corporate Change, 28(4), 827–854. https://doi.org/10.1093/
icc/dtz032
Vries, G. D., & Block, J. H. (2011). Venture capital syndication in times of economic crisis. Venture Capital,
13(3), 195–213. https://doi.org/10.1080/13691066.2011.600278
Wang, P. (2021). Connecting the parts with the whole: Toward an information ecology theory of digital
innovation ecosystems. MIS Quarterly, 45(1), 397–422. https://doi.org/10.25300/MISQ/2021/15864
Westreich, D., Lessler, J., & Funk, M. J. (2010). Propensity score estimation: Neural networks, support vector
machines, decision trees (CART), and meta-classiﬁers as alternatives to logistic regression. Journal of
Clinical Epidemiology, 63(8), 826–833. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2009.11.020
Wright, M., & Drori, I. (2018). Accelerators: Successful venture creation and growth. Edgar Elgar Publishers.
Wurth, Bernd, Stam, Erik, & Spigel, Ben. (2022). Toward an entrepreneurial ecosystem research program.
Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 46(3), 729–778. https://doi.org/10.1177/1042258721998948
Younger, S., & Fisher, G. (2020). The exemplar enigma: New venture image formation in an emergent orga-
nizational category. Journal of Business Venturing, 35(1), 105897. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.
2018.09.002
Yu,S.(2019).Howdoacceleratorsimpacttheperformanceofhigh-technologyventures?ManagementScience,
66(2), 530–552. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2018.3256
Zahra, S. A. (2021). The resource-based view, resourcefulness, and resource management in startup ﬁrms:
A proposed research agenda. Journal of Management, 47(7), 1841–1860. https://doi.org/10.1177/
01492063211018505
Zhang,L.(2019).Foundersmatter!Serialentrepreneursandventurecapitalsyndicateformation.Entrepreneur-
ship Theory and Practice, 43(5), 974–998.
Zhao, Q. Y., Luo, J. C., Su, Y., Zhang, Y. J., Tu, G. W., & Luo, Z. (2021). Propensity score matching with R:
Conventional methods and new features. Annals of Translational Medicine, 9(9), 812. https://doi.org/10.
21037/atm-20-3998
Zhong, H., Liu, C., Zhong, J., & Xiong, H. (2018). Which startup to invest in: A personalized portfolio strategy.
Annals of Operations Research, 263(1), 339–360. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-016-2316-z
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123