TITLE: Disaster preparedness using risk-assessment methods from earthquake engineering
JOURNAL: EJOR
YEAR: 2018
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2018.02.014
---

Disaster preparedness using risk-assessment methods from
earthquake engineering
Maria Battarra1,∗, Burcu Balcik2 and Huifu Xu3
(1) University of Bath, School of Management, BA2 7AY, Bath, UK, m.battarra@bath.ac.uk
(2) Ozyegin University, Industrial Engineering Department, Nisantepe Mah. Orman Sk.,
Cekmekoy, 34794 Istanbul, Turkey, burcu.balcik@ozyegin.edu.tr
(3) University of Southampton, Mathematical Sciences, SO17 1BJ, Southampton, UK,
h.xu@soton.ac.uk
∗: Corresponding author
Abstract:
Analyzing the uncertainties associated with disaster occurrences is critical to make eﬀective disaster
preparedness plans. In this study, we focus on pre-positioning emergency supplies for earthquake
preparedness.
We present a new method to compute earthquake likelihood and the number of
the aﬀected people.
Our approach utilizes forecasting methods from the earthquake engineering
literature, and avoids using any probabilistic scenarios. We validate the proposed technique by using
historical earthquake data from Turkey, a country under signiﬁcant earthquake risk. We also present
a case study that illustrates the implementation of our method to solve the inventory allocation
problem of the Turkish Red Crescent.
Keywords: OR in disaster relief, disaster preparedness, earthquake forecasting, inventory allocation
1

1. Introduction
The frequency, intensity and impact of disasters have increased over the last decades due to a
variety of factors including population growth and climate change (European Commission, 2016).
The global average annual loss from earthquakes, tsunamis, cyclones, and ﬂooding is 314 billion dol-
lars (United Nations Oﬃce for Disaster Risk Reduction, 2015). Moreover, about 19,000 deaths and
losses of over 29 billion euros occurred in Europe due to earthquakes alone between 1998 and 2009
(European Geosciences Union, 2017). Logistics account for approximately 80% of the disaster relief
eﬀorts operations (Trunick, 2005; Van Wassenhove, 2006). The importance of applying systematic
methods to improve the performance of humanitarian operations has been increasingly highlighted
in the Operations Research/Management Science (OR/MS) literature over the past decade. Con-
sequently, the number of studies that focus on improving logistics in diﬀerent phases of disaster
management (such as preparedness, response and recovery) by using OR models and techniques has
signiﬁcantly increased.
We refer the interested reader to the review papers by Altay and Green
(2006), Van Wassenhove (2006), Caunhye et al. (2012), Leiras et al. (2014), and ¨Ozdamar and Ertem
(2015).
This paper focuses on preparedness eﬀorts of humanitarian organizations for earthquakes, which
occur suddenly and typically create huge demand for emergency supplies. In particular, our study
is motivated by the disaster preparedness eﬀorts of the Turkish Red Crescent (TRC), which is the
main humanitarian organization in Turkey. Turkey is under signiﬁcant risk of experiencing severe
earthquakes in most of its regions. The most populated areas of the country are close to the North
Anatolian Fault, which is one of the most active and longest earthquake faults in the world (Geggel
and Writer, 2014). For instance, the earthquake that occurred in Izmit (an industrial city neighboring
Istanbul) on the 17th of August, 1999, killed over 17,000 people and left hundreds-of-thousands
homeless and in need of aid.
Therefore, it is critical for the TRC to have eﬀective earthquake
preparedness plans.
As of August 2015, the TRC operates 34 warehouses across the country, where a variety of
emergency supplies (such as tents, blankets, kitchen kits) are pre-positioned to improve the local
response capacity of the organization. Our communication with the TRC disaster managers reveals
that the organization is currently not interested in changing the locations of the warehouses; however,
they want to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of the tactical decisions related to the amount of inventory
to keep at each warehouse. In the current network, the TRC stocks supplies that would be suﬃcient
to meet shelter and nutrition needs of 50,000 families. The total inventory is allocated among the
warehouses in the network primarily based on the population residing in macroareas deﬁned by the
2

organization, and considering the capacity of the warehouses. The inventory allocation decisions do
not currently consider the earthquake risk which may vary greatly across diﬀerent regions. In this
paper, we present a method to include earthquake risk in making inventory allocation decisions for
the TRC.
The pre-positioning of emergency supplies has been widely studied in the humanitarian logistics
literature. Previous studies take into account diﬀerent problem settings (e.g., multiple items, diﬀerent
facility types, network and facility failures), performance measures (e.g., response time, coverage,
unsatisﬁed demand, logistics costs) and modelling approaches (see e.g., Leiras et al. (2014) and
Balcik et al. (2016) for survey papers in humanitarian network design and inventory management).
In particular, two-stage stochastic programming models are widely used (Grass and Kathrin, 2016);
in these models, the ﬁrst-stage decisions (e.g., locations of warehouses and the inventory to pre-
position therein) are made prior to the realization of an uncertain event (i.e., the location and size
of a disaster), while considering the implications of second-stage decisions (e.g., supply distribution
from the warehouses to the demand points), which are made once the uncertainty is resolved (i.e.,
after the disaster). Moreover, disaster scenarios and their probabilities are usually generated based
on historical data, which are typically extracted from databases such as EM-DAT (e.g., Balcik and
Beamon (2008); Duran et al. (2011); Rawls and Turnquist (2010)). While this may be a practical
approach, there is no uniﬁed method to generate these scenarios from the historical data and, even
if the same data is used, diﬀerent disaster scenarios and probabilities can be obtained. Furthermore,
the probabilities associated with disaster scenarios are usually very small, and truncating these
probabilities to a diﬀerent degree of accuracy may provide diﬀerent results.
In this paper, we present a new method to quantify the likelihood of earthquake occurrence and
estimate the number of aﬀected people, based on the studies of Campbell (1982) and Samardjieva
and Badal (2002), respectively. The demand estimates obtained from applying our method are then
incorporated into an inventory allocation model. The proposed method is data-driven and grounded
on statistical assessment models from the earthquake engineering literature. While the method is
simple, it allows us to represent earthquake risk eﬀectively. There are several studies in the literature
that propose disaster preparedness models incorporating the unique aspects of the disasters; e.g.,
Taskin and Lodree (2011) and Galindo and Batta (2013) consider the dynamic wind speed and
intensity information for hurricane preparedness and Garrido et al. (2015) use a ﬂood forecasting
method to characterize ﬂood risk. This study will be the ﬁrst one to utilize risk assessment tools
from the earthquake forecasting literature and incorporate them into optimization models to support
disaster preparedness.
3

In summary, this paper contributes to the literature by:
• introducing forecasting models grounded in the earthquake engineering literature into OR/MS
optimization models;
• proposing a data-driven and systematic technique to avoid scenarios and potentially-unstable
probability values for estimating demand for relief supplies;
• demonstrating how protected earthquake intensities can be systematically obtained and how
they compare to available seismic hazard maps (i.e., maps that show diﬀerent seismic zones in
a region);
• illustrating the calculation and use of protected earthquake intensities and estimated number
of aﬀected people within a case study.
Section 2 illustrates our methodology by breaking it down into three steps: Subsection 2.1 presents
the method used to forecast the likelihood of an earthquake. Subsection 2.2 demonstrates how the
demand of emergency supplies for each region is estimated.
Subsection 2.3 introduces the TRC
case study and the mathematical model for the allocation of emergency supplies. Section 3 presents
computational results in a similar structure; that is, each subsection explains the implementation, val-
idation and analysis for the three main steps of our approach. Finally, Section 4 presents concluding
remarks and future research directions.
2. Methodology
This paper adapts the earthquake forecasting methods from the earthquake engineering literature
to estimate the number of aﬀected people in a region hit by an earthquake. We use these demand
estimates in allocating a ﬁxed amount of supplies among the existing warehouses of the TRC. The
main steps of the proposed method, which will be explained in detail in this section, are:
1. Earthquake forecasting. For each region that can be potentially hit by an earthquake, estimate
the intensity of a representative earthquake (reﬂecting the earthquake risk in the region based
on the intensity and frequency of strong earthquakes in the past, as well as the uncertainty
associated with the forecast);
2. Demand estimation. On the basis of the intensity of the representative earthquake and the
population density of a region, estimate the expected number of aﬀected people in that region
when an earthquake strikes;
4

3. Inventory allocation.
Allocate the emergency supplies among the warehouses based on the
estimated number of aﬀected people determined in the previous step.
The guiding ideas behind the choices made in our modelling approach are:
• The method has to be based on easily accessible data and rely on few parameters. We assume
that mathematical models that consider allocating emergency supplies over a large region (such
as a country) may not involve a high level of detail (e.g., geodetic information or street-by-street
building structures) since such detailed data may not be available or lots of assumptions may
need to be made to set essential parameters.
• The method should not be based on geopolitical boundaries. Since the political regions (e.g.,
counties or provinces) may have heterogeneous characteristics (i.e., size, population density,
etc.), basing a risk assessment analysis on these boundaries may be unreliable. For instance, a
warehouse may not cover all parts of a large province if that province has an elongated shape.
Moreover, the impact of a strong earthquake, which aﬀect multiple provinces and is epicentered
in a small province, may not be entirely captured by considering a single region.
• The method adopted from the earthquake engineering literature has to be well-known and
validated by the research community; at the same time, it has to be suﬃciently simple to be
implemented with the available secondary data, and used within an optimization model.
In the subsections below, we provide detailed instructions for each step of our method and justify
the rationale of our modelling choices.
2.1. Likelihood of extreme earthquakes and protected intensity values
In the earthquake engineering literature, diﬀerent techniques are used to model the occurrence of
earthquake events. The classical and mainstream probabilistic approaches are Poisson-based prob-
ability distribution functions, and Markov or Semi-Markov chains. While Poisson models assume
that earthquakes occur randomly in time, space and magnitude, Markov models describe subse-
quent earthquakes as energy release sequences. Markov and Semi-Markov chains capture geophysical
characteristics of the earthquake occurrence mechanism, but large amounts of data are required to
calibrate the model parameters (Anagnos and Kiremidjian, 1988). The Poisson models are frequently
employed since they result in simple mathematical equations that appear to match observations in
most case studies (Baker, 2008). A recent performance comparison between the two techniques for
Turkey can be found in ¨Unal et al. (2014).
5

The most recent literature in earthquake engineering focused on reﬁning forecasting models and
testing their validity; examples include: Kayabali and Akin (2003), Seher and Main (2004), Alvarez
(2005), Greenhough and Main (2008), and Davis (2012). These models incorporate sources of infor-
mation that are either not easily accessible by non-specialists, or are based on more sophisticated
statistical models. Therefore, in this study, we base our earthquake forecasting on a simple, data-
driven Poisson model; speciﬁcally, we use the model by Campbell (1982), who ﬁrst combined the
extreme-value (EV) theory (Gumbel, 1958) with Bayesian probability theory. This model has been
used for probabilistic assessment of seismic hazards since 1960s (Benjamin, 1968) and has proved
a popular method due to its simplicity, small data requirements (Bayrak and T¨urker, 2016), and
ability to recalculate the risk when new information becomes available (Parvez, 2007). In particular,
Campbell (1982)’s method has been used to assess earthquake risk in various seismic zones through-
out the world (e.g., California in Campbell (1983), Greece and the adjacent areas in Stavrakakis
and Drakopoulos (1995) and Papoulia et al. (2001), South America in Galanis et al. (2002), and
the North-East Indian peninsula in Yazdani and Kowsari (2013)).
Stavrakakis and Drakopoulos
(1995), Galanis et al. (2002) and Yazdani and Kowsari (2013) discuss that the results obtained by
using Campbell (1982)’s method are consistent with those obtained by other methods, and Campbell
(1982)’s method is successful with assessing seismic risk based on data alone.
2.1.1. Campbell (1982)’s earthquake forecasting model
The conventional EV distribution (Epstein and Lomnitz, 1966) models the probability that an
earthquake of intensity m (on the Richter scale), greater than ml, might happen during a time horizon
of length t as:
P(Mmax > m|ml, t) = 1 −e−νte−β(m−ml).
(1)
The value Mmax represents the intensity of the strongest earthquake that will happen in the time
horizon t. Let m ≥ml is an earthquake intensity value, where ml is the threshold intensity by which
to judge an earthquake as a disaster. The parameter ν is the mean rate of occurrence of an earthquake;
and β is the scale parameter of the earthquake magnitude distribution. Note that ν = A/ log 10 and
β = log10B, where A and B are the parameters in the well-known Gutenberg-Richter relationship
(Richter, 1958):
log10 N = A −B(m −ml).
In the latter, N is the expected number of earthquakes with magnitude greater than ml per year.
Campbell (1982) improves the EV model by incorporating two sources of uncertainty. Speciﬁcally,
ν and β are assumed to follow gamma probability distribution functions and they are calibrated
6

using Bayesian inference and historical earthquake data. We deﬁne n′′ to be the number of historical
earthquakes, with strength greater than ml, occurred in the time horizon t′′ (the length of time for
which historical earthquake data is available). Let m′′ = Pn′′
i=1(mi−ml), and mi > ml is the strength
of each earthquakes stronger than ml occurred in the time horizon t′′. The density function of the
posterior distributions of ν and β are:
f(ν) = K1νn′′−1e−νt′′,
(2)
f(β) = K2βn′′−1e−βm′′,
(3)
where K1 and K2 are normalizing constants. Incorporating the Bayesian distributions of earthquake
occurrences and magnitudes (2) and (3) into (1) allows for deﬁning a Bayesian distribution of extreme
earthquake occurrences.
2.1.2. Protected intensity values
One of the innovative contributions of this paper is to make use of the model of Campbell (1982)
to obtain a so-called protected intensity value, which incorporates into the model an additional source
of uncertainty; the uncertainty in the estimation of ν and β parameters. We adopt a conservative
approach and consider a set of likely candidate values for the parameters ν and β (instead of a single
numerical value).
Given m and t, the function in (1) increases for increasing values of ν and decreases for increasing
values of β. Therefore, the probability of an earthquake occurring is higher for high values of ν
and low values of β. Conservative values ν and β can be, respectively, set as Eν(1 + %Dev) and
Eβ(1 −%Dev). For sake of simplicity, we do not use an index to specify the region referring to the
parameters ν and β, but ν and β are region-speciﬁc and computed using historical data for the region
in question. By imposing in Equation (1) the conservative estimates ν and β, we obtain:
P(Mmax > m|ml, t) = 1 −e−νte−β(m−ml)
(4)
This conditional probability distribution takes into account the errors in estimating ν and β,
as well as the historical data about the region. This function can be used to design scenarios for
stochastic models as was done by Balcik and Beamon (2008), Duran et al. (2011), and Rawls and
Turnquist (2010). However, the probability values associated to the occurrence of an earthquake in
each scenario would produce very small numbers, which may lead to stability issues within mathe-
matical models. Moreover, the probability values would not be usable in conjunction with demand
7

estimation models from the earthquake engineering literature (see Section 2.2).
In our proposed approach, a magnitude value represented by the (1 −α)-percentile of the conser-
vative distribution (5) is determined by setting:
1 −e−νte−β(m−ml) = 1 −α
(5)
We denote this value as Mα,ν,β. Mα,ν,β is the protected earthquake intensity for a region, which
is the reference intensity value associated with the region for the coming t years, assuming that the
maximum error on the estimate of ν and β is %Dev, and the probability of earthquake occurrence is
1 −α. We can therefore assign a protected intensity value to each region, representing how risky the
region is based on the number and intensity of the past earthquakes.
2.2. Demand estimation
The expected number of injured people and casualties in the aftermath of an earthquake depend
on a variety of factors, including the characteristics of the earthquake (i.e., shaking intensity, depth)
and the characteristics of the area hit by the disaster (i.e., population density, building resilience,
landscape). In the literature, multiple papers examine how these factors aﬀect the number of casual-
ties and injured (e.g., Jaiswal et al. (2009); So and Spence (2013); Erdik et al. (2014)). These papers
take many relevant factors into account; however, detailed information (e.g., the characteristics of
each building in each street) are necessary to use these models. Instead of attempting to apply so-
phisticated techniques, the practical and simpliﬁed model by Samardjieva and Badal (2002) is chosen
to estimate the number of casualties and injured people. This paper provides empirical functions to
compute the number of injured people or casualties as follows:
log(Nc) = a(P) + b(P)m
(6)
log(Ni/Nc) = −0.99 + 0.21m
(7)
where Nc and Ni denote the number of casualties and the number of injured people, respectively.
The coeﬃcients a and b are regression parameters depending on the average population density P
of the aﬀected area, and m denotes the intensity of the earthquake. Samardjieva and Badal (2002)
provide tabular values of a and b for diﬀerent values of P. Note that the model of Samardjieva and
Badal (2002) requires the value m as input. In this study, we use protected intensity values, so that
the estimate of casualties and injured people not only reﬂects population density, but also the risk
associated to a region.
8

The concept of attenuation of earthquake intensities is also important while estimating the aﬀected
population. When an earthquake happens in a region, it is not realistic to assume that areas far
from the earthquake epicenter are aﬀected by the same intensity than those areas very close to the
epicenter. Christoskov et al. (1990) suggest using attenuation coeﬃcients to reﬂect the fact that
the earthquake intensity (and corresponding demand) decreases further away from the earthquake
epicenter. For the Turkish case study, the ad hoc empirical attenuation coeﬃcients in Yarar et al.
(1984), which are speciﬁcally validated for this country, are taken into account. Section 3.1 describes
how the Turkish population residing in a region has been allocated to areas with diﬀerent perceived
intensity values.
2.3. Inventory allocation model
In this section, we illustrate using the demand estimates generated by the proposed methodology
in an earthquake preparedness model, which particularly focuses on inventory allocation decisions of
the TRC.
Figure 1 depicts the location of the TRC warehouses; speciﬁcally, each crescent sign on the map
represents a warehouse. The organization has determined a total (nationwide) stock level for each
item and a target amount of supplies for each macroarea (macroareas are depicted in Figure 1). A
macroarea contains multiple provinces, and the target of supplies in a macroarea is determined based
on its population. There is not a uniﬁed TRC policy for allocating the emergency supplies among
the facilities within a macroarea. In case of an emergency, the objective of the TRC is to be able
to start distributing emergency supplies in the aﬀected region within two hours (we will assume two
hours to be the target time for the transportation of emergency supplies). While this target seems
ambitious, the TRC managers explain that it is used as an internal motivational slogan and it is not
an oﬃcial performance target. The TRC groups emergency supplies in kits. Each kit satisﬁes the
needs of a family of ﬁve people. Hereafter, we assume the allocation of a single type of emergency
supply (i.e., a kit).
In this study, we use a coverage based objective.
More speciﬁcally, we aim for an equitable
allocation of the available supplies among the located warehouses by maximizing the minimum cov-
erage level achieved across potential demand locations, where coverage level is measured in terms
of the fraction of the emergency supply demand that can be satisﬁed within the desired response
time (similar to Balcik and Beamon (2008)). This objective particularly focuses on the most critical
regions with large expected demands and ensures that these regions are covered as much as possible
if a disaster occurs. Similar max-min type objectives are used frequently in designing humanitarian
relief networks to ensure equity among aid recipients; for instance, Gormez et al. (2011) minimizes
9

the maximum distance between the located facilities and potential disaster regions and Mohammadi
et al. (2016) minimizes the maximum diﬀerence in demand satisfaction ratios among demand loca-
tions while pre-positioning supplies. Dividing scarce supplies among recipients proportional to their
demand amounts has also been widely used in humanitarian resource allocation problems (e.g., see
Balcik et al. (2008); McCoy and Lee (2014); Noyan et al. (2015)). More recently, deprivation costs,
which associate an economic value for human suﬀering due to lack of access to relief supplies, have
been used as a criterion in resource allocation (Perez-Rodriguez and Holguin-Veras, 2015). While
there may be diﬀerent alternatives in modeling equity in resource-limited settings, we use a max-min
type objective as it allows us to characterize the eﬀects of using the proposed risk assessment method
in a practical way (i.e., by specifying the least covered regions) and show the TRC the beneﬁts of
including earthquake risk in making allocation decisions.
Figure 1: Location of TRC warehouses (Source: TRC (August 2015)).
The notation used in our model is as follows. The set of warehouses is represented by J . Each
warehouse j ∈J is associated with a capacity. Speciﬁcally, warehouse j ∈J can store at most Cj
emergency kits. The total number of emergency kits to store all over the country is B. To model
the max-min coverage objective function, we estimate how many emergency supplies would reach
each region i ∈I within roughly two hours. We deﬁne a coverage coeﬃcient aij, which measures the
accessibility of region i from warehouse j. We approximate network distances with aerial distances
given that the location of the earthquake and the aﬀected areas are not known exactly. The coverage
of a region aﬀected by an earthquake is computed as the ratio of the overall amount of supply that
can reach the region (weighted by the aij coeﬃcients) and the expected demand of supplies for the
region.
10

In our model, variable xj represents the amount of emergency supplies stocked in warehouse
j ∈J and variable z ≥0 is the coverage level of the least covered region. The model can therefore
be formulated as follows:
max
z
(8)
s.t. xj ≤Cj,
∀j ∈J
(9)
X
j∈J
xj ≤B,
(10)
P
j∈J aijxj
Di
≥z.
∀i ∈I
(11)
The objective function (8) maximizes the minimum coverage level. Constraints (9) ensure that the
capacity of each warehouse is respected. Constraints (10) restrict the overall number of emergency
kits in the country. Constraints (11) deﬁne the minimum coverage level among all regions. Note that
the coverage level of each region i ∈I is computed as the ratio between the quantity of emergency
supplies that can reach region i and the expected demand of emergency supplies Di.
We allow
variables xj to be continuous.
This assumption is due to the fact that the emergency kits are
available in large numbers and rounding their values to the closest integer would not signiﬁcantly
aﬀect solution accuracy. This allows the TRC to use publicly available software (i.e., Excel solver) to
solve the model in negligible time. Note also that the data required by the model is already available
to the organization and no signiﬁcant assumptions are needed to implement it.
The proposed model does not involve additional complexities such as recent pre-positioning mod-
els in the literature (such as the post-disaster conditions of facilities and of the transportation net-
work). We propose a simple model, which allows us to test the behaviour of the protected earthquake
intensity Mα,ν,β, without distortions due to extra constraints and objectives (additional features can
be easily incorporated in this the model once the Di values are estimated).
3. Implementation, results and analysis: TRC case study
In this section, we describe the implementation of the proposed method on the TRC network
and present results. Subsections 3.1 and 3.2 explain how we obtain protected intensity values and
estimated demand for the Turkish case, respectively. Subsection 3.3 discusses the results obtained
by the inventory allocation model.
11

3.1. Calculating and validating protected earthquake intensity
In this subsection, we describe the application of the earthquake forecasting method to Turkey
in detail.
3.1.1. Processing the historical earthquake data.
We ﬁrst divide Turkey into grids, where each rectangle identiﬁed by the grid represents a region
potentially aﬀected by an earthquake. We consider the extreme coordinates of Turkey (WIKI, 2015)
and draw a large rectangle that contains the entire country. This rectangle is divided into smaller
rectangles by splitting the country’s longitude and latitude into six equally long segments (see the
upper left map in Figure 2, where circles denote the current warehouses’ locations). Each of the
36 small rectangles is roughly 270 kilometers (km) in length and 120 km in width. The rectangles
are sized so as to enclose the most disastrous eﬀects of a large earthquake.
This grid size proves
large enough to capture a suﬃcient number of historical earthquakes (so that the statistical analysis
described in Section 2.1 is relevant). As reported later in Figure 3, 97% of the regions had more than
5 earthquakes, and 81% more than 10 earthquakes. Moreover, this grid size allows for capturing the
eﬀects of a typical strong earthquake in Turkey (Table 3).
Considering 36 rectangles may not be suﬃcient to capture the eﬀects of the earthquakes happening
on the borders between rectangles. The city of Istanbul, for example, is situated roughly at the
intersection of four rectangles (see the upper left map in Figure 2). The eﬀects of an earthquake
happening in the city would not be properly captured if we assume earthquakes are conﬁned to a
single rectangle. We therefore include in our analysis a larger number of rectangles, so that each
border is, in turn, the center of a rectangle. More precisely, the rectangles are shifted horizontally
half of their width to obtain the 30 rectangles in the upper right map in Figure 2, they are then
shifted vertically up half of their height to obtain further 30 rectangles (bottom left map in the
ﬁgure), and ﬁnally both shifts are applied to obtain the 25 rectangles in the bottom right map.
The overall number of rectangles falling completely within the extreme coordinates of Turkey is 121.
Each disaster is assumed to aﬀect a single rectangle (region) at a time, and one rectangle encloses the
eﬀects of a disaster. The supplies can be deployed by the warehouses that can cover the rectangle.
We collect data on the past earthquakes that occurred between 1905 and 2015 from the Bogazici
University Kandilli Observatory and Earthquake Research Institute (KOERI), which records all
ground movements in the country (KOERI, 2015). This database is consulted for the earthquakes
with an intensity greater than 5, depth smaller than 60 km, which occurred in the large rectangle
bounding the country. These values are selected as earthquakes of lower intensity and larger depth
12

Figure 2: Regions considered in Turkey.
do not typically require large amounts of emergency supplies, as suggested by the related literature
discussed in Section 2.2. The data set reports 1087 events.
For each of the 121 rectangular regions, we record the earthquakes falling within the borders of
each region (the same earthquake can be associated with multiple rectangles). Then we compute
the protected earthquake intensities for each region. We consider a time horizon t = 5 years for all
regions, and set ml = 5 (as suggested by Samardjieva and Badal (2002)).
3.1.2. Setting the parameter values.
We perform tests to set reasonable values for the α and %Dev parameters. As a rule of thumb,
α should be close to 1, given that the probability of occurrence of an earthquake with magnitude
greater than ml = 5 in the coming ﬁve years is expected to be a small number (in particular for
low risk regions). We therefore test the values of α between 0.95 and 0.99. We set %Dev as 5%
during these tests. The distribution of the resultant protected earthquake intensities is summarized
in Table 1, in which the maximum and average Mα,ν,β values are reported for the 121 regions of
Turkey. Based on our analysis, we set α at 0.98 since the strongest earthquake ever reported by the
KOERI Observatory has an intensity of 7.9, and we choose to maintain the maximum value of the
protected earthquake intensity to be below 8.0.
The value of %Dev is an estimate of the error expected in forecasting the number and intensity
of earthquakes of strength over 5.0 for each region across the country. A planner has to carefully
calibrate this parameter. A large value of %Dev might overprotect regions with few historical earth-
13

Table 1: Protected earthquake intensities with respect to varying values of α
α
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.99
Avg.Mα,ν,β
6.186
6.292
6.429
6.621
6.948
Max. Mα,ν,β
7.368
7.519
7.712
7.984
8.501
Table 2: Protected earthquake intensity levels with respect to varying values of %Dev
%Dev
25%
10%
7.5%
5%
2.5%
Avg. Mα,ν,β
6.983
6.694
6.657
6.621
6.587
Max. Mα,ν,β
8.549
8.057
8.020
7.984
7.948
M Alanya
α,ν,β
7.346
6.579
6.487
6.401
6.320
M Dursunbey
α,ν,β
7.176
7.056
7.039
7.022
7.055
quakes, a small value might return protected intensities even below ml (this happened with other
data sets and will be explained in the Appendix). In Table 2, we summarise how the parameter %Dev
was set for this case study (having ﬁxed α = 0.98).
Table 2 shows the average and maximum protected earthquake intensity levels across all regions of
the country (ﬁrst row) and for speciﬁc regions with low and high earthquake occurrences in the past.
Alanya is a Southern city where only three strong earthquakes have been recorded since 1905, with
average intensity 5.63. Dursunbey is a town on the West coast, located roughly half way between
Istanbul and Izmir, that suﬀered 81 earthquakes of average intensity 5.38 in the same time horizon.
The region North of Dursunbey, which covers Istanbul, the Marmara Sea, and the South coast of
the Marmara Sea, have the highest risk, according to our method. The values of intensity for this
high-risk region are reported in the second row (denoted by Max. Mα,ν,β) in Table 2. This region,
which is closest to the North Anatolian fault, suﬀered 42 earthquakes with an average intensity 5.643
and our model estimates the protected intensity as 7.984 (with %Dev = 5%).
Regions like Alanya should not be overprotected. Note that a large %Dev value (i.e., 25%) brings
the MAlanya
α,ν,β
to an intensity value higher than that of Dursubey. We set %Dev = 5%, since this value
maintains the strength of the maximum protected intensity below 8.0, and, at the same time, Alanya
is not considered riskier than, for example, Dursunbey.
In setting our parameters for Turkey, we also compared protected intensity values with the corre-
sponding expected intensities (the intensities obtained using the expected ν and β from (6) and (7)).
The diﬀerence is at most an increase of 0.23 on the Richter scale with respect to the corresponding
expected intensity (for regions with few strong earthquakes). However, the use of protected intensi-
14

ties becomes very important when datasets are sparse and regions have heterogeneous characteristics
(i.e., some regions are aﬀected by very strong earthquakes, while others have no record of strong
earthquakes in the past). The Appendix illustrates the importance of including the %Dev parameter
when considering historical data for China. More speciﬁcally, the Chinese case shows that one can
obtain protected intensity values within the desired range even for regions with very diﬀerent risk
proﬁles by calibrating the %Dev parameter.
3.1.3. Testing the eﬀect of the grid size.
We used a sensitivity analysis to assess the robustness of our choice of the size of the regions.
We counted the number of earthquakes occurring in each region by dividing the country into 4×4,
5×5, 6×6, and 7×7 rectangles. We also counted the regions where the protected intensity values
represented no risk (equal to 5.0 intensity), very low risk (between 5.0 and 5.5), low risk (between
5.5 and 6.0) and so on by varying the grid size. Our results are depicted in Figure 3. A 4×4 grid
would result in 66% of the territory being high risk (over 6.5 protected intensity), with some areas
having a protected intensity of over 8.0 (which has never occurred according to the historical data).
Conversely, an 8×8 grid would lead to 54% of the territory being low risk (below 6.5 earthquake
intensity) and only 13% of the territory being high risk (over 7.5 intensity). The 6×6 grid solution
presents protected intensities well spread across the range of risk. Additionally, the solutions with
5×5 or 7×7 grids, would still provide suﬃciently well distributed results.
Figure 3: Number of earthquakes and protected intensity values varying with the grid size
3.1.4. Validation of the protected intensity values.
We validate the values of Mα,ν,β by comparing them with publicly available hazard maps, in
particular, the one compiled under the Global Seismic Hazard Assessment Program (GSHAP, 2015).
15

Hazard maps are practical tools showing how earthquake hazards vary across a given region. The col-
ors in the maps typically reﬂect the maximum horizontal ground acceleration expected in each region,
computed using either probabilistic approaches (e.g., Erdik et al. (1985)) or deterministic approaches
(e.g., Kayabali and Akin (2003)), by considering the geological and topographical characteristics of
the ground.
We map the Mα,ν,β values onto linear scales of hazard, and associate a color with each of them,
similarly to the hazard map in analysis; speciﬁcally, regions with protected intensity values between
5.5 and 6.0 are depicted in light cream, between 6.0 and 6.5 in yellow, 6.5 and 7.0 in pink, and over
7.0 in red. The results are summarized in Figure 4. Despite its simpliﬁed nature, our technique is
capable of identifying the areas of Turkey most at risk and provides a good match to the available
hazard map.
Figure 4: Protected intensities and hazard maps, Turkey
3.2. Estimation of the number of aﬀected people
The intensity of an earthquake decreases as the further one gets from the epicenter. Yarar et al.
(1984) depict the perceived strength of an earthquake in Turkey as a function of the distance from
the epicenter. For example, if a region is hit by an earthquake of strength 7.0 ≤Mα,ν,β ≤8.0,
Yarar et al. (1984) provide the radius r of the circular area (rooted in the epicenter) in which the
earthquake is perceived at strength Mp = 7, as well as the radius of the circular area up to which
the strength of the earthquake is perceived at intensity over Mp = 6, and ﬁnally, the radius of the
area with perceived intensity over Mp = 5 (assuming Graben type earthquakes).
Table 3 considers earthquakes of protected intensities Mα,ν,β over 8, 7, 6, and 5 (at the epicenter).
The radii r of the areas in which the earthquake perceived intensity Mp is over 8, 7, 6, and 5, are given.
16

Table 3: Areas aﬀected by an earthquake
Mα,ν,β
Mp
r
AF
AE
≥8
8
50
7,853.98
7,853.98
7
100
31,415.93
23,561.94
6
200
125,663.71
94,247.78
≥7
7
30
2,827.43
2,827.43
6
70
15,393.80
12,566.37
5
150
70,685.83
55,292.03
≥6
6
20
1,256.64
1,256.64
5
45
6,361.73
5,105.09
≥5
5
15
706.86
706.86
AF is the area in km2 of the circle with radius r, and AE = π(r2 −r2
int) is a ring-shaped area deﬁned
by the outer radius r and inner radius rint (the radius of the largest circular area corresponding to
a stronger Mp, if any).
In this study, we extract population density data from SEDAC (2015), which provides estimations
of the population residing in 2.5 arc-minute grid cells for the whole world. We assume that the
population in a 5×5 degree area reside in a region of Turkey (regions are the rectangles deﬁned
in Section 3.1), if the center of the given area falls within the coordinates of the region. We then
adopt a conservative approach to allocate the population in a region to the areas aﬀected by diﬀerent
earthquake intensities. We assume that the most crowded areas are aﬀected by the earthquake at
the strongest intensity.
For example, for an earthquake of an intensity between 7.0 and 8.0, we
assign the most densely populated areas in the region for up to 2827.43 km2 to be the closest to the
epicenter (see Table 3). Then we allocate the remaining most densely populated areas to a perceived
earthquake intensity 6.0 (up to covering 12566.37 km2), and ﬁnally, the remaining population in the
region is assumed to be aﬀected by earthquake intensity 5.0. For each perceived earthquake intensity
area, the average population density P value is computed, and ﬁnally, the number of aﬀected people
is calculated by using Formulas (6) and (7). A graphical representation of the number of aﬀected
for each region is depicted in Figure 5; here diﬀerent colors depict regions with a higher or a lower
number of estimated aﬀected people.
3.3. The inventory allocation model: analysis and results
In this section, we discuss the solutions obtained by our model and present the results of the tests
performed on critical model parameters. The mathematical model was coded in C using the CPLEX
Callable Library, and CPLEX 12.6 was used as the optimization solver. The negligible computing
times (i.e., less than a second) are not reported.
17

Figure 5: Estimated casualties and injured people, Turkey.
We set the model parameters as follows. Given region i and warehouse j, the value of the coverage
parameter aij is set to 1 if the aerial distance from i and j is below 100 km, 0.5 if the aerial distance
is between 100 km and 150 km, 0.25 if the aerial distance is between 150 km and 200 km, and 0.1 if
the aerial distance is between 200 km and 300 km. These values are set by considering the 2-hour
response time target of the TRC. Furthermore, the number of kits available nationwide is B =50,000.
The Cj parameters are set based on the actual warehouse capacity data obtained from the TRC.
We ﬁrst compare the coverage values obtained by our approach and the TRC’s current allocation
policy. In calculating coverage levels for both cases, we set the expected demand (Di) values as
explained in Section 3.2. The TRC currently allocates inventory in its network in proportion to the
population residing in each macroarea, and furthermore does not utilize an optimization model to
determine what inventory to keep within each macroarea. We calculate the minimum coverage levels
based on the stock levels at the TRC warehouses at the time the data was received (August 2015).
We refer to this solution as the current network or current solution. We ﬁnd that the minimum
coverage percentage in the current network is 1.93%. We note that 49,561 supply kits were stocked
in the current network, which is slightly smaller than the overall capacity (i.e., B =50,000).
The TRC has also provided us with the target stocks (i.e., the maximum number of emergency
kits that the TRC aims to store) for each macroarea. The inventory allocation model is executed by
imposing and then not imposing the macroarea constraints. The macroarea constraints are formu-
lated as follows:
X
j∈Mk
xj ≤Tk, ∀k ∈M
(12)
18

Table 4: Minimum coverage levels and number of warehouses used for diﬀerent number of kits
Number of
z
# warehouses used
kits
(%)
(out of 34)
Current solution
49, 561
1.93
32
50, 000 (Constraints (12))
1.72
14
Proposed solution
50, 000
9.52
17
55, 000
10.53
16
60, 000
11.49
16
100, 000
19.04
17
where Mk is the set of warehouses in the k-th macroarea, Tk the maximum number of emergency
kits in macroarea k and M the set of all the macroareas.
The minimum coverage percentage found by this model is 1.72%; that is, the coverage levels
obtained by using our allocation model with macroarea constraints and the current solution are
similar. However, if Constraints (12) are relaxed, the optimal minimum coverage percentage obtained
by our model becomes 9.52%, which is a signiﬁcant increase from the current coverage value (Table 4).
This suggests that the macroareas as currently set by the organization are restrictive. Therefore, we
do not consider these constraints in further computational analysis and refer to the solution without
Constraints (12) as the proposed solution. Additional tests, which assume a larger capacity at each
facility (and the same budget B), do not provide a signiﬁcant improvement to the coverage. Then, we
examine the eﬀects of increasing the number of emergency kits nationwide by increasing the budget
B gradually; in these tests, we set Cj × 2.0 as for the capacity of each warehouse (allowing for some
slack from the current stock levels with a larger budget). The results are summarised in Table 4. By
doubling the number of emergency supplies, the minimum coverage level reaches 19.04%. From the
results, we also observe that the warehouses in Bursa and Tuzla (both in the south of Istanbul) are
typically ﬁlled up to capacity, even in scenarios with large B values. This highlights the strategic
importance of these warehouses for the TRC.
Figure 6 depicts the regions with coverage below 9.52% in the current solution. The proposed
model is therefore providing better coverage for areas in which both the population and the risk are
high. Note, for example, the regions in the North coast of Turkey, which receive few supplies in the
current network, as well as the region in the South of Turkey (near Antalya).
Figure 7 provides a visual of the variations in coverage from the current to the proposed solution.
For ease of representation, we depict the ﬁrst 36 regions only and do not report the coverage variations
for those regions in which there is no population residing (i.e., they fall in the sea) or the coverage is
more than 100% both before and after using optimization. The two numerical values written within
19

Figure 6: Regions with improved coverage in the proposed solution
each region boundaries are the coverage in the current solution (on the left of the arrow) and the
coverage obtained after using optimization (on the right of the arrow). Yellow regions have a smaller
coverage after using optimization, green regions have a better coverage.
Figure 7: Variation of coverage from the current to the proposed solution
Figure 8 represents the distribution of the minimum coverage values for all regions when com-
paring the current solution with the proposed solution. More precisely, we deﬁne ranges of minimum
percentage coverages on the x-axis. The y-axis speciﬁes the number of regions with a minimum
percentage coverage falling within that range.
Orange and grey bars represent this information
for the current network and the proposed solution, respectively. The minimum coverage value is
higher under the proposed solution than the current solution, but also the average coverage value is
higher. Moreover, the values of coverage are more equal between regions, increasing the equity of
20

the allocation across the country.
Figure 8: Distribution of coverage values.
Figure 9: Allocation of supplies by macroarea
Finally, we compare the current and proposed solutions in terms of the quantity of supplies allo-
cated to the warehouses. For ease of representation, we group the supplies stocked in the warehouses
in each macroarea together. The resulting map of allocation of supplies is provided in Figure 9.
There are similarities between diﬀerent allocation solutions; however, our method recommends shift-
ing more supplies to the high risk areas. For example, our approach suggests stocking more supplies
around Istanbul, Bursa and Izmir (West coast of the country), which represent highly populated and
risky areas. Moreover, a lower quantity of supplies are stored in the areas with low risk but high
population (i.e., the central region including the capital Ankara).
21

4. Conclusions
There is a growing body of literature that focuses on developing optimization models to sup-
port disaster preparedness decisions. In these models, it is important to eﬀectively characterize and
represent uncertainties regarding disaster occurrences and impacts. Most of the existing studies use
probabilistic scenarios to represent these uncertainties.
In this paper, we propose an alternative
practical approach to assess earthquake risk and estimate the size of the aﬀected population in any
given region. Our approach adopts an existing earthquake forecasting method from the earthquake
engineering literature; speciﬁcally, we utilize the risk assessment method developed by Campbell
(1982), which relies on statistical analyses of historical earthquake data, and calculate a protected
intensity value for each earthquake-prone region. We validate our approach by comparing the com-
puted protected intensity values with the seismic hazard maps of two earthquake-prone countries,
namely Turkey and China, which show that our method can assess risk eﬀectively. As discussed by
previous studies (e.g., Papoulia et al. (2001)), the eﬀectiveness of Campbell (1982)’s method may be
aﬀected by how much historical data is available and by the calibration of the model’s parameters.
We demonstrate how our method can be successfully attuned to either Turkey or China.
Another advantage of the proposed risk assessment method is that the protected intensity values
can be used to directly estimate the number of aﬀected people by using the method of Samardjieva
and Badal (2002). As a result, based on historical seismic data, the demand for emergency supplies
for any region can be estimated by following a systematic and practical approach, developed based
on the existing earthquake engineering literature. We then use the estimated demands to solve the
inventory allocation problem faced by the TRC.
The TRC currently allocates supplies in its network primarily by considering the population of the
regions, and without using any optimization method. Given a ﬁxed set of warehouses, an inventory
allocation model can be applied to better allocate the available stock among the warehouses. We
compare the results obtained by our proposed approach and the current solution of the TRC and
show that the minimum coverage percentage across all regions signiﬁcantly increases. Moreover, we
show that use of our method produces an allocation of supplies close to highly populated and risky
areas. Another suggestion is to stock supplies in a smaller number of warehouses in the network.
However, the TRC might be spreading the stocks among a larger number of warehouses to account
for the risks associated with losing supplies or diﬃcult accessibility conditions which may appear
after the disaster.
In this study, we use a max-min coverage objective which aims to improve the condition of the
least advantaged group; min-max/max-min type objectives are frequently used within the context
22

of facility location and resource allocation problems to model equity. As discussed in the paper,
there can be other ways to make equitable resource allocation decisions in humanitarian settings.
In particular, the impact of equity on other metrics as eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness has been an
important concern in studies addressing emergency/disaster settings (e.g., Felder and Brinkmann
(2002); Campbell et al. (2008); McCoy and Lee (2014); Ares et al. (2012); Huang et al. (2012)).
Developing models which ensure equity without compromising other important metrics is an active
research topic relevant to both disaster preparedness and response problems. Therefore, it would be
useful to evaluate the implications of alternative objective functions in inventory allocation decisions
before presenting an operational plan to the relief organization.
While we illustrate our approach on an inventory allocation problem motivated by a real set-
ting, the proposed technique can be used in other preparedness decisions that need an assessment of
earthquake risk. Our approach, which avoids scenarios to represent disaster occurrences and demand
for emergency supplies, may also allow for other types of uncertainties in humanitarian operations
to be modelled more eﬀectively.
Uncertainties related to post-disaster funding, procurement op-
tions and transportation/facility disruptions can be isolated from uncertainties regarding earthquake
occurrences.
Finally, this paper takes a ﬁrst step in creating a bridge between the earthquake engineering liter-
ature and the OR techniques, used in the context of disaster management. Future research can focus
on further interdisciplinary work that adopts alternative techniques from earthquake engineering to
improve decision making for disaster preparedness.
5. Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Pinar Ozyurt, Sinan Derindere, Kadir Bulut, and Ozge Dogan Irmak from
the TRC for providing us with valuable information and data about the TRC supply network and
operations. We would like also to thank Prof. Atilla Ansal for his valuable comments and suggestions
on forecasting models from earthquake engineering.
23

Appendix A. Notation table
Protected earthquake intensity estimation:
t
time horizon for forecasting an earthquake
Mmax
intensity of the strongest earthquake that occurred in t
m
earthquake intensity
ml
intensity threshold above which an earthquake is considered a disaster
ν
occurrence rate of earthquake
β
earthquake intensity rate parameter
A, B, N
Gutenberg-Richter relationship terms
n
number of earthquakes expected to occur in t
n′′, m′′, t′′, K1, K2
posterior parameters resulting from Bayesian inference on historical earth-
quake data (t′′ length of time for which historic data is available, n′′
number of earthquakes with intensity greater than ml recorded in t′′, and
m′′ = Pn′′
i=1(mi −ml) where mi is the intensity of each recorded earth-
quake, K1 and K2 are normalising parameters)
Iν, Iβ
intervals in which the nominal ν and β are expected to lie
Eν, Eβ
expected values of ν and β distributions
%DevEν, %DevEβ
maximum expected deviation between the expected value of ν and β and
their nominal values
ν,β
worst case values of ν and β in Iν, Iβ
α
parameter determining the probability of an earthquake occurrence
Mα,ν,β
protected earthquake intensity
Number of injured and casualties estimation:
P
population density
a(P), b(P)
parameters in the model of Samardjieva and Badal (2002)
Nc and Ni
number of casualties and injured people
R
radial distance from epicentre of an earthquake
AF , AE
areas of circular and ring-shaped regions around the epicentre
TRC inventory allocation model:
J
set of TRC facilities
I
set of regions where an earthquake may occur
Cj
capacity of facility j ∈J
B
number of available kits
aij
coeﬃcient of coverage of facility j ∈J to region i ∈I
z
minimum coverage level in the country
xj
kits allocated to facility j ∈J
Di
demand of supplies in region i ∈I
M
set of macroareas
Mk
set of TRC facilities in the macroarea k ∈M
Tk
target of kits for macroarea k ∈M
24

Appendix B. China risk assessment example
The historical data for China is obtained from the National Center for Environmental Information
(2015), using the extreme coordinates for the country (as done for Turkey). The same number of
rectangles was considered (36 rectangles). The data for this country presents a wider variability,
and fewer events were recorded. There are regions with no strong earthquakes in the past 115 years,
as well as areas with up to 42 disastrous occurrences on the same time horizon.
The strongest
earthquake showed an intensity of 8.6 on the Richter scale.
Regions with heterogeneous risk proﬁles are challenging for risk assessment models, and ﬁnding
a unique set of α, t and %Dev values for all regions can be problematic. By setting %Dev = 0
(i.e., using expected intensity values and not protected values), we could not ﬁnd any combination of
the values of α and t that would invariably produce suitable intensities. We obtained either regions
associated with very small protected intensities (even negative intensities when t is small and the
probability of occurrence of an earthquake high) or too large (above 10 Richter scale, with large t
and low probability of occurrence of an earthquake). Such variability would not allow the integration
of expected intensities with the demand estimation model of Samardjieva and Badal (2002).
The %Dev value was kept to 5% in estimating β, but we increased this value to %Dev = 47.5
in estimating ν. α = 0.85 modelled a lower forecasted probability of occurrence of an earthquake,
motivated by the fact that the earthquakes in the data set were roughly one third of those for Turkey.
By increasing the %Dev value associated with the parameter ν and decreasing α, we could obtain a
suitable range of protected intensity values. This allowed to have Mα,ν,β values varying between 5
to 9.3 intensity (with an average intensity of 6.6) across the country. A graphical representation is
provided in Figure B.10, where our risk assessment is compared with the hazard map provided by
the Global Seismic Hazard Assessment Program GSHAP, 2015. Our map shows a good match with
the hazard map.
25

Figure B.10: Protected intensities and hazard maps, China
 
References
N. Altay and W. G. Green. OR/MS research in disaster operations management. European Journal
of Operational Research, 175 (1):475–493, 2006.
E. E. Alvarez. Estimation in stationary Markov renewal processes, with application to earthquake
forecasting in Turkey. Methodology and Computing in Applied Probability, 7:119–130, 2005.
T. Anagnos and A. S. Kiremidjian. A review of earthquake occurrence models for seismic hazard
analysis. Probabilistic Engineering Mechanics, 3:3–11, 1988.
J. N. Ares, H. De Vries, and D. Huisman.
A column generation approach for locating roadside
clinics in africa based on eﬀectiveness and equity. European Journal of Operational Research, 254:
1002–1016, 2012.
J. W. Baker. An introduction to probabilistic seismic hazard analysis (PSHA). Technical report,
2008.
B. Balcik and B. Beamon. Facility location in humanitarian relief. International Journal of Logistics:
Research and Applications, 11:101–121, 2008.
B. Balcik, B. M. Beamon, and S. Smilowitz. Last mile distribution in humanitarian relief. Journal
of Intelligent Transportation System, 12:51–63, 2008.
B. Balcik, C. D. C. Bozkir, and E. Kundakcioglu. A literature review on inventory management in
humanitarian supply chains. Surveys in Operations Research and Management Science, Special
Issue in Humanitarian Operations, 21:101–116, 2016.
26

Y. Bayrak and T. T¨urker.
The determination of earthquake hazard parameters deduced from
Bayesian approach for diﬀerent seismic source regions of Western Anatolia.
Pure and Applied
Geophysics, 173:205–220, 2016.
J. R. Benjamin. Probabilistic models for seismic force design. Journal of the Structural Division, 94:
1175–1196, 1968.
A. M. Campbell, D. Vandenbussche, and W. Hermann. Models, solutions and enabling technologies
in humanitarian logistics. Transportation Science, 42:127–145, 2008.
K. W. Campbell. Bayesian analysis of extreme earthquake occurrences. Bulletin of the Seismological
Society of America, 72:1689–1705, 1982.
K. W. Campbell. Bayesian analysis of extreme earthquake occurrences. Part II. application to the
San Jacinto fault zone of Southern California. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America,
73:1099–1115, 1983.
A. M. Caunhye, X. Nie, and S. Pokharel. Optimization models in emergency logistics: A literature
review. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 46:4–13, 2012. Special Issue: Disaster Planning and
Logistics: Part 1.
L. Christoskov, E. Samardjieva, and D. Solakov. Improvement of the approach in determining the
possible human losses during strong earthquakes. Bulgarian Geophysical Journal, 4:85–92, 1990.
C. A. Davis. Loss functions for temporal and spatial optimizing of earthquake prediction and disaster
preparedness. Pure and Applied Geophysics, 169:1989–2010, 2012.
S. Duran, M. A. Gutierrez, and P. Keskinocak.
Pre-positioning of emergency items for CARE
International. Interfaces, 41:223–237, 2011.
B. Epstein and C. Lomnitz. A model for the occurrence of large earthquakes. Nature, 211:954–956,
1966.
M. Erdik, V. Doyuran, N. Akkas, and P. Gulkan. A probabilistic assessment of the seismic hazard
in Turkey. Tectonophysics, 117:295–344, 1985.
M. Erdik, K. S¸e¸setyan, M. B. Demircioˇglu, C. Z¨ulﬁkar, U. Hancılar, C. T¨uz¨un, and E. Harmandar.
Rapid earthquake loss assessment after damaging earthquakes. In A. Ansal, editor, Perspectives
on European Earthquake Engineering and Seismology, volume 34 of Geotechnical, Geological and
Earthquake Engineering, pages 53–95. Springer International Publishing, 2014.
27

European Commission. Action plan on the Sendai framework for disaster risk reduction 2015-2030.
Brussels, 17.6.2016, 2016).
European
Geosciences
Union.
Natural
hazards.
http://www.egu.eu/policy/science/
natural-hazards/; accessed April 2017, 2017).
S. Felder and H. Brinkmann. Spatial allocation of emergency medical services: minimising the death
rate or providing equal access? Regional Science and Urban Economics, 32:27–45, 2002.
O. C. Galanis, T.M. Tsapanos, G.A. Papadopoulos, and A. A. Kiratzi. Bayesian extreme values
distribution for seismicity parameters assessment in South America. Journal of the Balkan Geo-
physical Society, 5:77–86, 2002.
G. Galindo and R. Batta. Prepositioning of supplies in preparation for a hurricane under potential
destruction of prepositioned supplies. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 47:20–37, 2013.
R. A. Garrido, P. Lamas, and F. J. Pino. A stochastic programming approach for ﬂoods emergency
logistics. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 75:18–31, 2015.
L. Geggel and S. Writer. Calm before the quake? turkey may be due for the big one, 2014. URL
http://www.livescience.com/47827-turkey-seismic-gap.html.
N. Gormez, M. Kksalan, and F. S. Salman. Locating disaster response facilities in istanbul. Journal
of the Operational Research Society, 62 (7):1239–1252, 2011.
E. Grass and F. Kathrin. Two-stage stochastic programming in disaster management: A literature
survey. Surveys in Operations Research and Management Science, page forthcoming, 2016.
J. Greenhough and I. G. Main. A Poisson model for earthquake frequency uncertainties in seismic
hazard analysis. Geophysical Research Letters, 35:1–4, 2008.
GSHAP.
Global seismic hazard assessment program.
http://www.koeri.boun.edu.tr/sismo/
zeqdb/indexeng.asp (accessed July 2015), 2015.
E. J. Gumbel. Statistics of extremes. Columbia Univ. press, New York, 1958.
M. Huang, K. Smilowitz, and B. Balcik. Models for relief routing: Equity, eﬃciency and eﬃcacy.
Transportation research part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 48:2–18, 2012.
K. Jaiswal, D. J. Wald, and M. Hearne. Estimating casualties for large earthquakes worldwide using
an empirical approach. Technical Report 2009–1136, US Geological Survey, 2009.
28

K. Kayabali and M. Akin. Seismic hazard map of Turkey using the deterministic approach. Engi-
neering Geology, 69:127–137, 2003.
KOERI. Bogazici University Kandilli Observatory and Earthquake Research Institute. http://www.
seismo.ethz.ch/static/GSHAP/eu-af-me/ (accessed July 2015), 2015.
A. Leiras, I. de Brito Jr., E. Q. Peres, T. R. Bertazzo, and H. T. Y. Yoshizaki. Literature review
of humanitarian logistics research: trends and challenges. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and
Supply Chain Management, 4:95–130, 2014.
J. H. McCoy and H. L. Lee. Using fairness models to improve equity in health delivery ﬂeet man-
agemen. Production and Operations Management, 23:965–977, 2014.
R. Mohammadi, S. M. T. F. Ghomi, and F. Jolai. Pre-positioning emergency supplies for earthquake
response: A new multi-objective particle swarm optimization algorithm. Applied Mathematical
Modelling, 40:5183–5199, 2016.
National Center for Environmental Information. http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/nndc/struts/form?
t=101650&s=1&d=1 (accessed July 2015), 2015.
N. Noyan, B. Balcik, and S. Atakan. A stochastic optimization model for designing last mile relief
networks. Transportation Science, 50:1092–1113, 2015.
L. ¨Ozdamar and M. A. Ertem. Models, solutions and enabling technologies in humanitarian logistics.
European Journal of Operational Research, 244:55–65, 2015.
J. Papoulia, G. Stavrakakis, and D. Papanikolaou. Bayesian estimation of strong earthquakes in the
inner Messiniakos fault zone, southern Greece, based on seismological and geological data. Journal
of Seismology, 5:233–242, 2001.
I. A. Parvez. On the bayesian analysis of the earthquake hazard in the north-east indian peninsula.
Natural Hazards, 40:397412, 2007.
N. Perez-Rodriguez and J. Holguin-Veras. Inventory-allocation distribution models for postdisaster
humanitarian logistics with explicit consideration of deprivation costs. Transportation Science, 50:
1261–1285, 2015.
C. G. Rawls and M. A. Turnquist.
Pre-positioning of emergency supplies for disaster response.
Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 44:521–534, 2010.
29

C. F. Richter. Elementary Seismology. W. H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco, 1958.
E. Samardjieva and J. Badal. Estimation of the expected number of casualties caused by strong
earthquakes. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 92:2310–2322, 2002.
SEDAC.
Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center.
http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/
data/set/gpw-v3-population-density-future-estimates (accessed June 2015), 2015.
T. Seher and I. G. Main. A statistical evaluation of a stress-forecast earthquake. Geophysical Journal
International, 157:187–193, 2004.
E. So and R. Spence. Estimating shaking-induced casualties and building damage for global earth-
quake events: a proposed modelling approach. Bulletin of Earthquake Engineering, 11:347–363,
2013.
G. N. Stavrakakis and J. Drakopoulos. Bayesian probabilities of earthquake occurrences in Greece
and surrounding areas. Pure and Applied Geophysics, 144:307–319, 1995.
S. Taskin and E. J. Lodree. A Bayesian decision model with hurricane forecast updates for emergency
supplies inventory management. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 62:1098–1108, 2011.
P. A. Trunick. Special report: delivering relief to tsunami victims. Logistics Today, 2005.
S. ¨Unal, S. C¸elebioˇglu, and B. ¨Ozmen. Seismic hazard assessment of Turkey by statistical approaches.
Turkish Journal of Earth Sciences, 23:350–360, 2014.
United Nations Oﬃce for Disaster Risk Reduction. Global assessment report on disaster risk reduction
2015. making development sustainable: The future of disaster risk management. Geneva, 2015).
L. N. Van Wassenhove. Humanitarian aid logistics: supply chain management in high gear. Journal
of the Operational research Society, 57:475–489, 2006.
WIKI. Wikipedia page, Turkey. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turkey (accessed July 2015),
2015.
R. Yarar, O. Ergunay, M. Erdik, and N. Eren. Attenuation of intensities in Turkey. In Proceedings
of the eight world conference on earthquake engineering, volume 2, pages 343–350, San Francisco,
California, 1984. World Conferences on Earthquake Engineering.
A. Yazdani and M. Kowsari. Bayesian estimation of seismic hazards in Iran. Scientia Iranica, 20:
422–430, 2013.
30