TITLE: Third party social sustainability assessment: Is it a multi-tier supply chain solution?
JOURNAL: IJPE
YEAR: 2018
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2018.08.030
---

1 
 
Third party social sustainability assessment: Is it a multi-tier supply chain solution? 
 
Abstract 
The paper examines the different third party approaches used to assess the social sustainability 
of global multi-tier supply chains. Information asymmetries between supply chain actors and 
stakeholders can result in uncertainty about how a good has been produced and traded, resulting 
in sustainability uncertainty. Third party social sustainability assessment is one mechanism 
used to monitor and communicate the credentials of everyday products to stakeholders. We 
frame our study using information processing theory to discuss how third party assessors can 
help to reduce sustainability uncertainty. As social sustainability is of particular importance 
in labor-intensive industries, empirical data is drawn from agriculture, textiles, handicrafts, 
footwear and consumer electronics supply chains. The analysis of semi-structured interviews 
with assessors reveals differering approaches to assessment. We show how these approaches 
utilize differing numbers of supply chain tiers. Some, for example, focus only on the farmer 
or raw material supplier when assessing social sustainability, which raises questions about the 
credentials of actors further downstream. The communities and livelihoods of supply chain 
actors, often located in the global South, can be dependent on the new, niche and potentially 
more profitable markets made available to goods that can demonstrate their social sustainability 
credentials. Robust assessment is therefore integral in accessing these new markets. The study 
offers a comparison between different assessors that will be of interest to scholars and also to 
supply chain actors considering engaging in social sustainability assessment. 
 
Keywords: information processing theory, indicators, social sustainability, uncertainty 
 
Paper type: Research paper 
 
1.0 Introduction 
 
The outsourcing trends of global supply chains have shifted labor-intensive production 
activities to lower labor-cost countries (Perry and Towers, 2013). In consequence, complex 
supply chain configurations are in operation, utilizing numerous suppliers across multiple 
supply chain tiers, and potentially limiting visibility across the entire chain (Awaysheh and 
Klassen, 2010; Huq et al., 2014). Consumers, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and 
governments repeatedly raise concerns about the wages, working hours and working conditions 

2 
 
of supply chain actors (Andorfer and Liebe, 2012), particularly in the lower tiers. High profile 
transgressions concerning the social sustainability of supply chains are widely reported (Busse 
et al., 2017; Foerstl et al., in press). Threats of negative publicity, consumer boycotts and 
increased scrutiny therefore often emerge as the key drivers for measuring and managing social 
sustainability performance (Brønn and Vidaver-Cohen, 2009). There is an increasing focus 
from stakeholders, including consumers, investors, local communities, non-profit 
organizations, legislators and regulators, on the way in which goods are produced and traded 
(Govindan et al., 2013; Koh et al., 2012). The mechanisms used to assure the social 
sustainability credentials of everyday products sourced from global multi-tier supply chains are 
therefore under the spotlight. Scrutiny places increased demands on supply chain actors. A 
pressing sustainability challenge is the lack of information about trading practices in complex 
supply chains, and hence supply chain actors often experience high sustainability-related 
uncertainty (Busse et al., 2017; Foerstl et al., in press). The market for socially sustainable 
products can open up new trading channels for producers and raw material suppliers, often 
based in the global South. Therefore, the importance of ensuring robust systems for quality 
assurance across multi-tier supply chains to reduce sustainability uncertainty is crucial to many 
livelihoods and communities, as well to the economic performance of the buying firms often 
located in the global North (Busse et al., 2017). 
 
Drawing on information processing theory (Galbraith, 1973), we focus on third party 
assessment as a mechanism used by multi-tier global supply chains to measure and 
communicate their social sustainability performance; i.e. to reduce their sustainability-related 
uncertainty. Rather than conceptualizing the focal firm (Varsei et al., 2014) or the first-tier 
supplier (Wilhelm et al., 2016) as driving the development of socially sustainable supply 
chains, third party assessment utilizes actors within and outside of a supply chain to collect, 
analyse and report on performance data (Albersmeier et al., 2009; Hatanaka et al., 2005). It 
requires co-ordination across the supply chain from internal stakeholders including farmers, 
raw material extractors, distributors and retailers, and from external stakeholders such as third 
party assessors and NGOs (Yawar and Seuring, 2017). The performance of the whole chain is 
under scrutiny, and hence the outcome is contingent on a collaborative approach to social 
sustainability (Awaysheh and Klassen, 2010; Hassini et al, 2012). 
 
As Govindan et al., (2014) point out, it is only recently that research has begun to focus on 
sustainability issues in supply chain management (SCM). Historically, economic advantage 

3 
 
has dominated SCM discourse and hence the focus has been on the dyadic relationship between 
buyer and seller. Examining dyadic relationships has permeated into studies of sustainable 
supply chains, yet this perspective ignores the complexities of operating as a network and fails 
to represent a multi-cultural global perspective (Fahimnia et al., 2015). Scholars show how 
even though authors may describe their sustainability research in relation to supply chains, it 
is an internal or dyadic perspective that is analyzed (Miemczyk et al., 2012). In consequence 
there are few empirical studies on sustainable SCM that consider the entire multi-tiered supply 
chain (Huq et al., 2014). 
 
In light of the increasing focus on human rights, labor and working conditions in global supply 
chains that purport to be socially sustainable, we adopt a supply chain perspective to examine 
how complex supply chains capture information that has been described as unquantifiable 
(Burritt and Schaltegger, 2014). We focus on supply chains for which social issues are 
particularly pertinent: agriculture, textiles, handicrafts, footwear and consumer electronics. We 
examine ten third party assessors focused on assuring the social sustainability credentials of 
products. It is important to note from the outset that our study is not concerned with the impact 
of assessment on social sustainability performance. Rather, we are interested in understanding 
and explaining how multi-tiered assessment is designed and implemented to measure and 
assure the social sustainability of the entire supply chain. 
 
Our study makes an important contribution to the examination of social sustainability 
assessment by utilizing information processing theory as a lens to explore how sustainability 
uncertainty can be reduced. By using a third party to collect and process supply chain 
information, stakeholders may gain access to more and better information about the trading 
practices of supply chains that purport to be socially sustainable. Such information may 
contribute to a greater degree of certainty in sourcing, investment and consumer purchasing 
decisions. We show how different approaches to assessment examine varying numbers of 
supply chain tiers, and discuss how the assessor can act as a bridge to support the measurement 
and communication of social sustainability performance to stakeholders. We reflect on the 
implications of our findings for the assurance of socially sustainable goods. Our paper is 
structured as follows: We begin by justifying the theoretical framing of our study prior to 
focusing our attention on the characteristics of third party supply chain assessment. Next, we 
explain our qualitative research design and move on to present our empirical findings. We 

4 
 
discuss the implications of our findings and raise questions about the ability of current 
assessment practices to assure the social sustainability credentials of products. 
 
2.0 Framing and context of the study 
 
2.1 Theoretical frame: Information processing theory 
We use information processing theory to frame our research. Developed by Galbraith (1973) 
to address internal organizational issues related to task uncertainty, the theory has been 
extended to research on inter-organizational interactions and supply chains (see Premkumar et 
al., 2005; Bode et al,. 2011; Kauppi et al,. 2016; Fan et al., 2017). Uncertainty as a key 
organizational driver for collecting and processing relevant information underpins the theory 
(Kreye, 2017). In supply chain studies, the typical focus has been on uncertainties related to 
the market, environment, partnerships and supply, delivery reliability, quality and inventory 
levels, weather and politics (Premkumar et al., 2005; Fan et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2018; 
Srinivasan and Swink, in press). Given our examination of social sustainability in multi-tier 
global supply chains, we focus on sustainability uncertainty as the source of stakeholder 
information processing needs. 
 
Several factors contribute to sustainability uncertainty in global supply chains. There is 
uncertainty related to both the complexity and limited visibility of the chain. This is often due 
to utilizing many small producers upstream from the buyer in (culturally) distant locations 
(Premkumar et al., 2005; Karjalainen and Moxham 2013; Tachizawa and Wong, 2014; Busse 
et al., 2017; Foerstl et al., in press) and the frequently changing supplier relationships 
(Tachizawa and Wong, 2014). Instances of mock compliance to social sustainability codes, and 
work being outsourced to yet more tiers in the chain (Huq et al., 2014), add to visibility 
challenges. Sustainability uncertainty is compounded because socially sustainable goods are 
characterized as ‘credence goods’: they possess attributes that consumers cannot evaluate 
themselves, even after consumption (Giovannucci and Ponte, 2005). It has been noted that 
these attributes do not ‘exist’ unless their presence is communicated (Pullman and Dillard, 
2010). Information asymmetries therefore exist between suppliers and customers, and so 
purchasing decisions and product reputation are contingent on consumer confidence in the 
accuracy of the sustainability related information that is provided (Ballet and Carimentrand, 
2010; Renard, 2005). The measurement of supply chain performance in this context must focus 
on process attributes, such as child free labor, rather than product attributes, such as size or 

5 
 
weight. These types of process attributes are inherently difficult to substantiate, particularly 
across multi-tier supply chains (Yawar and Seuring, 2017), yet very important to address 
stakeholder concerns (Busse et al., 2017; Foerstl et al., in press). 
 
To tackle information processing needs organizations must develop information processing 
capabilities (Kreye, 2017). Bridging and buffering are two strategies that can be used (Bode 
et al., 2011). Buffering is an effort to incorporate slack into operations (Kauppi et al., 2016; 
Liu et al., 2010). Achieved via excess inventory or slack capacity, this strategy is not suitable 
for social sustainability performance wherein the focus is on assuring trading practices rather 
than on product lead times or supply chain agility. Thus, supply chain actors must implement 
structural mechanisms to ensure better flow of information (Liu et al., 2010), i.e. they must 
engage in bridging (Bode et al., 2011). A bridge is used to facilitate access to information and 
to monitor a partner (Bode et al., 2011). In previous research, inter-organizational information 
systems have been suggested as a way to increase information processing capabilities 
(Premkumar et al., 2005). However, with regards to social sustainability in labor intensive 
industries, technology solutions are not available given the infrastructure and resources of 
suppliers in developing countries. The few recent studies on how to reduce sustainability 
related uncertainty have focused on the managerial efforts of the buying firm, such as 
insourcing, product redesign and reshoring, i.e. information processing mechanisms 
implemented by the focal firm (Busse et al., 2017; Foerstl et al., in press). Bridging can take 
different forms including forming relationships with influential parties, risk management 
systems and monitoring (Bode et al., 2011). We therefore recognize the use of third party 
assessment as a bridging approach used by supply chain actors to increase their capability in 
processing information to reduce sustainability uncertainty. 
 
2.2 Third party assessment 
Third party assessors fulfil stakeholder demands for information about how a product has been 
produced and traded; information needs the individual actors are often unable to provide. Thus 
in response to growing stakeholder demand for information on the sustainability credentials of 
multi-tiered supply chains, a plethora of labelling and certification schemes are currently in 
operation, resulting in what has been described as a standards market where different schemes 
compete for adoption by consumers and supply chains (Hatanaka and Busch, 2008; Reinecke 
et al., 2012). There is no standard approach to social sustainability assessment and multiple 
logos and certification schemes are currently in practice, with examples including coffee 

6 
 
(Giovannucci and Ponte, 2005; Reinecke et al., 2012), cocoa (Hartlieb and Jones, 2009) and 
textiles (Perry and Towers, 2013). Whilst it is anticipated that sustainability information would 
be welcomed by stakeholders, the multiplicity of logos and certification has been criticised for 
causing consumer confusion, increasing certification costs and duplicated activity (Fransen, 
2011). There is often a lack of clarity about what is being measured, and by whom, and whether 
assessments are conducted by actors in the supply chain or by external parties. Questions are 
therefore raised about how effectively the different assessments actually solve the problem of 
sustainability uncertainty. The trend for multiple assessment approaches looks set to continue, 
with global retailers increasing their engagement with socially sustainable product lines 
(Hughes, 2015) and proliferation, rather than consolidation, of market signalling mechanisms 
(Reinecke et al., 2012). It is thus important to study how such varied assessments are able to 
respond to sustainability uncertainty in global supply chains and to reflect on whether the 
information processing that is offered meets the needs of stakeholders. 
 
In situating our study in the context of social sustainability assessment, it is important to clarify 
the operations of this governance mechanism. Popular in food supply chains concerned with 
safety standards, the assessment utilizes actors within and outside of the chain to assess 
performance against standards set either by external organizations or by the focal firm 
(Albersmeier et al., 2009). For social sustainability, engagement with this process is usually 
on a voluntary basis rather than as mandated by government. Where standards are set by the 
focal firm, for example Starbucks’ Shared Planet or H&M Conscious, engagement with 
assessment is a requirement (Boughton, 2008; Whitehead, 2015). We focus on voluntary third 
party assessment, whereby the supply chain enters into the assessment voluntarily, and is 
judged against standards set by an external organization. This process generally operates as 
follows: firstly, an application is made to a third party assessor, next a pre-assessment and 
documentation review is conducted, followed by an on-site audit and finally, if conformity is 
verified, successful assessment is communicated (Hatanaka et al., 2005). Hence, this approach 
differs from the more widely held assumption that the focal firm adopts overall responsibility 
for governing sustainable performance activities (Seuring and Müller, 2008). There are limited 
studies that examine third party assessment in multi-tiered supply chains, and hence we 
conceptualize the third party assessor acting as a bridge between all supply chain actors. In 
understanding information flows between actors, we recognise that this information will not 
focus solely on social sustainability. For information flows between supply chain actors and 

7 
 
the third party assessor, we expect this information to be dominated by a focus on social 
sustainability. 
 
Scholars have noted how the use of third party assessment may offer supply chains a 
comparative advantage as it is perceived as more objective and independent than mandated or 
corporate assessment (Bernstein and Cashore, 2007; Hatanaka and Busch, 2008). Historically, 
the ideology of using a third party to demonstrate a socially sustainable supply chain seemed 
to be in line with Gereffi et al.’s (2005) notion of relational value chain governance. Herein 
regulation occurs through reputation, social proximity and ethnic ties. This is certainly how 
third party assessors such as Fairtrade began, whereby strong relationships with producers were 
forged to develop organizational capacity and producer equity (Doherty and Huybrechts, 
2013). Yet third party assessment is not without its critics. Some perceive it as a way of supply 
chains outsourcing their reporting responsibilities and thus avoiding blame if a problem arises 
(Renard, 2005). Others find evidence of mock compliance, limited interest in assessing 
suppliers beyond tier one of the chain and poorly trained assessors (Albersmeier et al., 2009; 
Huq et al., 2014). There is also the risk that a third party will not carry out an objective, 
independent assessment (Huq et al., 2014). Despite reported shortcomings, there has been a 
sharp rise in the use of third parties to assess the social sustainability performance of global 
supply chains (Hatanaka and Busch, 2008). 
 
2.3 Development of research question 
In summary, we are witnessing stakeholder demands for more and better supply chain 
information about how goods are produced and traded, and a rise in voluntary third party 
performance assessment due to the information processing needs of supply chain actors, 
leading to the emergence of a social sustainability standards market. Against this backdrop, 
and particularly in light of the relatively limited research on this topic, an examination of how 
voluntary third party social sustainability assessment is operationalized in multi-tiered supply 
chains appears apposite. We acknowledge an increase in supply chains drawing on their social 
sustainability credentials with the objective of attaining a competitive advantage. This is a 
fairly recent phenomenon and thus an examination of assessment in this context is important 
for two key reasons. Firstly, the pricing of the product and its value proposition are contingent 
on the robustness of the information provided by the assessment. Thus, the ability of supply 
chains to demonstrate their social sustainability credentials is wholly dependent on the quality 
of the information collected and disseminated, and on whether stakeholders have confidence 

8 
 
in this information. At present, little is known about how such assessment activities are carried 
out. Secondly, supply chains trading on their social sustainability performance are increasingly 
engaging in third party voluntary assessment as a means of demonstrating their credentials to 
stakeholders. This mode of performance assessment has created a competitive standards 
market. Such a market is of increasing importance and yet limited research has been conducted 
on the structures and practices of third party assessors from a SCM perspective. We therefore 
wish to understand more about how this new form of supply chain governance is 
operationalized and the implications for the assurance of social sustainability. We therefore 
frame our study by posing the following research question: 
 
How does the third party assessment of social sustainability act as a bridging mechanism in 
multi-tiered supply chains? 
 
3.0 Research Methodology 
 
3.1 Empirical context 
Given the paucity of empirical studies examining the measurement of social sustainability 
across multi-tier supply chains, it was very difficult to replicate or to extend upon previous 
research designs. In consequence, we conducted an exploratory study designed to elicit new 
insights into the operationalization of voluntary third party assessment as a form of bridging in 
global supply chains. To enable the collection of what is often described as ‘process’ data, and 
to capture information that may be surprising to us, we utilized a qualitative research design 
(Langley, 1999). This approach has been adopted by recent studies examining aspects of social 
sustainability that go beyond the buyer-supplier dyad, and hence also seemed appropriate to 
our context (Huq et al., 2016; Reinecke et al., 2012). As the aim of our study was to develop 
an understanding of third party assessment we were interested in collecting rich data from a 
real setting and to focus on capturing contextual detail (Lincoln and Guba, 1985). Our unit of 
analysis was the assessment activities that were conducted to assure the social sustainability 
performance of the supply chain. We were interested in capturing information from a range of 
voluntary third party assessors and opted for a research design based on semi-structured 
interviews. As previously noted, social sustainability is of particular prominence in labor 
intensive industries (Zorzini et al., 2015), and hence we situated our study in this context. 
 
3.2 Data collection 

9 
 
To execute our study it was important to identify voluntary third party assessment initiatives 
with a focus on the social dimension of sustainability. By drawing on Zorzini et al.’s (2015) 
synthesis of the constituents of social sustainability, we conceptualized social issues as 
concerned with: 
 Human rights – labor conditions (forced labor, child labor), working hours, freedom of 
association. 
 Safe working conditions. 
 Community – economic development. 
 Diversity – purchasing from minority/female-owned business enterprises. 
 Ethical behaviour in sourcing decisions. 
 Respect for local democratic institutions. 
 
We conducted a literature and digital search to identify appropriate assessment initiatives and 
identified relatively few organizations that met our multiple criteria of i) having a focus on 
assessing social sustainability, ii) operating in labor-intensive industries, iii) engaging with 
multi-tier supply chains and ii) acting in a third party capacity. Drawing on assessment 
initiatives based across the world, we identified sixteen as meeting our criteria and hence 
offering a compatible sample with literal replication logic (Voss et al., 2002). We identified 
Directors (or equivalent) from each organization. We expected that those operating at Director 
level would have sufficient understanding of assessment to be suitable for our study. The 
Directors from each of the sixteen organizations were contacted to request participation and 
were also sent a link to a short video produced by the authors that outlined the aims and scope 
of the study, and highlighted its proposed outputs and the potential benefits to current practice. 
Due to the competitive nature of the context, as identified in recent studies, anonymity was 
assured. In some instances the Director provided details of a colleague whom they deemed as 
more appropriate for interview (e.g. Head of Commercial Relations, Accreditation Programme 
Manager) who we subsequently contacted. Of the sixteen organizations contacted five did not 
reply to our initial and follow-up requests, one declined and ten agreed to take part. We 
therefore we able to collect data from 63% of voluntary third party assessors with a principal 
focus on social sustainability. In discussing the study with those who had agreed to take part, 
it became clear that many of the assessment initiatives were made up of very few office based 
staff. We were advised that multiple staff engaging in interviews would detract from the 
running of the operation and would preclude assessment initiatives from being included in our 

10 
 
study. As we wished to collect data from as many assessors as possible, we opted for a single 
respondent approach to enable participation by all who initially agreed to take part. Details of 
the voluntary assessment initiatives that took part in the study are detailed in Table 1. 
 
Voluntary 
Third Party 
Assessor 
Role of Interviewee 
Products Assessed 
A 
Director of Standards 
and Pricing 
Bananas, cocoa, coffee, cotton, flowers, fresh fruit, honey, 
gold, fruit juices, rice, spice, herbs, sports balls, sugar, tea, 
wine, 
B 
Assessment Co-
ordinator 
Oil, nuts, seeds, sugar, bananas, cocoa, fresh fruit, dried 
fruit, juices, coffee, honey, wine, quinoa, handicrafts, tea, 
flowers 
C 
Head Commercial 
Relations 
Coffee, flowers, wine, beer, fruit, cotton, tea, cocoa, 
chocolate, sugar, honey, rice, quinoa, cosmetics, spices, 
herbs, oils, walnut, dried fruit, sports balls 
D 
 
Assessment 
Consultant 
Clothing, textiles, leather, footwear 
E 
 
Director of 
Operations 
Bananas, cane sugar, cocoa, coffee, dried fruit, dried 
vegetables, flowers, fruit, fonio, fresh fruit, fruit juices, 
gold, herbs, honey, nuts, oilseeds, quinoa, rice, spices 
F 
Chief Executive 
Handicrafts, clothing 
G 
Senior Research and 
Impact Advisor 
Bananas, chocolate, gold, coffee, cotton, flowers, sugar, tea, 
wine 
H 
Executive Director 
Sugar, handicrafts, bananas, coffee, cocoa, banana/plantain 
chips, fruit juices, jams, herbs, honey, quinoa 
I 
Accreditation 
Programme Manager 
Coffee, cocoa, electronics, apparel, footwear 
J 
Stakeholder 
Relations Manager 
Consumer electronics, textiles, clothing, footwear 
 
Table 1 – Details of voluntary third party assessors that took part in the study 
 
A semi-structured interview protocol was informed by the themes from the literature and was 
shared with the interviewees prior to the interview. Interviews focused on the history of the 
assessor, the aim(s) of the assessor, development of performance metrics, data collection 
methods, information processing and assessment. As the interviewees were based across 
Europe and North and South America the interviews were conducted over the telephone or 
Skype, recorded and transcribed verbatim. Interviews lasted between 45-60 minutes. In 
addition to the interview data internal documentation (i.e. policy and strategy documents) was 
shared by the interviewees. We also gathered publicly available material where possible from 
websites and reports to augment the primary data collected and to guard against any pressure 
felt by interviewees to give answers that were socially acceptable. 
 

11 
 
3.3 Data analysis 
We began our analysis by using the data collected to map the information processing activities 
for each assessor. We wished to understand the timeline, the actors involved and the activities 
carried out. We were able to identify timescales, types of activities, those responsible for 
activities and the types of information that were collected and shared. We then compared the 
different approaches to collecting, analysing and communicating information about social 
sustainability that were used by the ten assessors and formed clusters of similar activities. Next 
we revisited the interview transcripts and used an iterative process that permitted a cycling 
between emergent data, concepts and relevant literature to identify important themes (Gioia et 
al., 2012). In addition to themes based on information processing, emerging themes were 
identified as the competitive nature of assessment in this sphere, approaches to supplier 
development, the multiple roles played by assessors and some scepticism around the efficacy 
of assessment to make a difference to workers. Finally, we looked for commonalities and 
differences across the ten assessors to develop our comparative analysis (Eisenhardt and 
Graebner, 2007). We shared our findings with an overarching international body that provides 
good practice guidance for assessors interested in developing measurement systems for social 
sustainability. This body invited us to present our findings to its membership and we delivered 
a webinar to 30 practitioners and researchers. This further step in our analysis allowed us to 
test our findings with an experienced audience and allowed us to verify the themes we had 
identified. Finally, in light of the feedback received from the expert audience, we revised our 
analysis and developed a more fine-grained information processing map for each assessor, 
which permitted a more comprehensive comparison and clustering. We were thus able to 
examine the role of the assessor as a bridge, as will be discussed in the Findings. 
 
4.0 Findings: Assessing social sustainability in multi-tiered supply chains 
 
In mapping the information processing activities used to assure social sustainability, three 
different approaches emerged. These different approaches are illustrated as Figure 1. For 
Approach 1, performance measures were developed through internal consultation, the 
measurement focus was the whole supply chain, data was collected through audit, and action 
plans for performance improvement were established. For Approach 2, the activities were the 
same as for Approach 1, however an important difference was how the focus of measurement 
was on upstream supply tiers only rather than the entire supply chain. Instead of developing 
internal performance measures, Approach 3 used existing external criteria and, similar to 

12 
 
Approach 2, the measurement focus was on upstream tiers of the chain only. The key activities 
of each approach to collecting, assessing and communicating sustainability performance 
information are now defined and explained. 
 
 

13 
 
 
Figure 1 – Information processing activities 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
i) Designing systems to assess social sustainability 
From the data collected we were able to identify the following themes related to the systems 
designed to process social sustainability information, each of which is discussed in turn: 
 Developing measurement criteria. 
 Performance measures. 
 Focus of measurement. 
 Data collection 
 
Developing measurement criteria: The ten third party assessors had broadly similar aims; to 
assess and assure the credentials of products that claim to be socially sustainable. Some had 
additional specific goals relating to community development, however in comparing the 
information collected from each initiative we found that the assessment of trading relationships, 
human rights and working conditions were made explicit by all. Two approaches were used to 
development measurement criteria. One was the development of measures through internal 
discussion between the third party assessor and supply chain actors. Proponents of this 
approach saw it as more inclusive and in consequence the resulting measures were pertinent to 
supply chain actors. “If you impose criteria which aren’t very prioritized or feasible…all you 
are doing is throwing them [supply chain actors] out of the market and denying them [the 
opportunity] to develop in the direction that they all want” (H). An alternative approach was 
the adoption of existing criteria from external bodies such as international labor standards from 
the International Labor Organization (ILO), United Nations (UN) guidelines, Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) guidelines and the Social Accountability 
Institute’s SA8000 standard. Advocates of the use of external criteria explained how such 
measures were developed to be universally applicable and standardised, thus permitting 
comparison across organizations and chains. Regardless of how measurement criteria were 
developed and selected, for all assessments they were reviewed by the assessor on a 5 year 
cycle. For some, external factors such as a change in global pricing, particularly for coffee or 
tea, would trigger an additional ad hoc review. 
 
Performance measures: Whilst two different approaches to the development of measurement 
criteria emerged, the end result was very similar. All of the third party assessors used measures 
that focused on industrial relations, working conditions, remuneration and labor. This was 
unsurprising due to the similarity of the overarching aim of each assessor. It is important to 

15 
 
note how the way in which a good is produced and traded differs, and so beneath the 
performance measures there were often additional product specific criteria. Examples of these 
criteria were found for tea, coffee and bananas. 
 
It became apparent during the analysis of the primary and secondary data that whilst the 
assessment initiatives had clear performance measures (i.e. use of forced labor, use of child 
labor) the target was, unsurprisingly, zero - i.e. no forced labor in the organization/supply chain. 
In essence, most of the measures operated in a binary fashion as the actor under scrutiny either 
met the target or did not. There was recognition of the potential shortcomings of this approach, 
particularly if longer hours were required over a fixed period to meet the demands of the chain 
and its customers. For example, “working hours is a very hot topic because you cannot have 
the type of supply chain management you have at the moment and expect working hours to be 
reduced” (D). The challenges of measurement appeared to be a longstanding issue. It was 
noted how “even though there are some hot topics that are hot, they’re not necessarily new” 
(I), and how current measures were perceived as overly simplistic by some as “at the moment 
it is as if someone is passing or failing and in real life scenarios it is not always that black and 
white” (E). 
 
Focus of measurement: Differences in the focus of measurement were identified. Six of the 
assessors adopted a supply chain perspective in which it was stated that every organization in 
the chain was included in the assessment. These assessors explained how they took a product 
approach to assessment, and hence were seeking to assure the conditions under which a product 
had been produced and traded. The remaining four assessors focused on individual 
organizations in the chain, usually on the producer or raw material supplier. Such assessors 
explained how it was very difficult to follow supply chains, particularly for products such as 
handicrafts, clothing and footwear, due to the number of suppliers involved and the 
proliferation of products. With coffee, for example, the product lines are limited as compared 
with supply chains producing handicrafts. Third party assessors with an organizational rather 
than complete chain focus stressed the importance of understanding performance at the 
‘source’ or ‘origin’ of the supply chain. 
 
Data collection: In comparing the ten assessors, the data collection process occurred over a 
period of between 2-6 years. All assessors utilized on-site audits as a key data collection tool, 
which was seen as an important differentiator when compared with mandatory or corporate 

16 
 
assessments in which it was not used. “One of the biggest complaints we have is that we are 
extremely rigorous and that we know there is always an aspect as an audit team that people 
feel we are a bit too strict” (E). Some interviewees commented on their perception that 
validation for assessments that do not require an audit are easy to appropriate. “In [names 
different countries] you could call a factory and the manager would say ‘which [assessment] 
do you need, which does your client [in the supply chain] need? Give me two hours and I will 
get it for you.’ The worst part …was that everyone knew that the certificate [of assessment] 
was fake” (D). Yet whilst continuing to utilize audits, assessors were sceptical of their 
contribution to performance improvement. “Years of auditing has not done much to raise the 
bar…there are only so many audits you can do when you don’t see a lot of improvement (I).” 
The frequency of audits was based on an internal risk based system and/or past performance. 
In addition to audits, assessors discussed supplementary mechanisms to gather data. Self-
assessment reports submitted to the assessor prior to the audit were common. Some assessors 
appeared able to trace monetary transactions to ensure that the agreed price for a product had 
been paid along the length of the supply chain. 
 
All of the third party assessors employed auditors that were normally based in the same country 
as the actor being audited. It was stressed how auditors required local knowledge, an 
understanding of the local language “and [an understanding] of the local social behaviour as 
in a lot of countries where we operate we are with producers who do not have access to 
education and development so we need to talk to them in a different way when we want to check 
for compliance” (E). Some of the assessors were explicit that their body of auditors worked 
for them exclusively, whereas others utilized auditors that could have been employed across a 
range of third party assessors. A number of the assessors did not permit one auditor to conduct 
more than 3 or 4 audits on the same organization as a way of guarding against over familiarity 
and maintaining impartiality of assessment. Not all auditors had the same skills and expertise, 
and hence some third party assessors managed their auditors in terms of themes e.g. some were 
grouped under ‘social compliance’ and audited gender equality and labor democracy at an 
organization level. Other auditors had a supply chain focus and audited traceability across an 
entire supply chain. It is important to note that in all cases the cost of the audit (and associated 
measurement activities) was borne by the organization being audited. The fee was normally 
paid directly to the auditor. 
 
ii) Assessing and communicating social sustainability performance 

17 
 
In examining the assessment and communication activities of the third party assessors, three 
themes require consideration: 
 Performance assessment. 
 Supplier development. 
 Configuration of supply chains. 
 
Performance assessment: The processes for assessing the data collected through audit, and 
supplementary activities, was very similar across all ten assessors. It was a formal and 
structured process that required all information to be returned to a central repository to analysts 
based at the main office. Following the analysis, areas in which the actor(s) under scrutiny had 
not met the performance standard were identified. In describing the assessment process, 
Assessor A remarked “inherent in auditing is a trust in the future, and so you verify, then see 
if the trust was deserved.” Across the interviewees, areas for improvement were often termed 
as ‘non-compliance.’ Action plans for improvement and associated timescales were then either 
developed and directed by the assessor, or agreed in consultation with assessor, auditor and the 
actor/supply chain under scrutiny. 
 
From our examples of third party assessment we found no standard timescales for re-
assessment. Some were very clear that it must occur within, for example, two years, whereas 
other had a different view: “We don’t have timeframes for compliance progress as the realities 
are so complex that to say in 6 years you should have provided, I don’t know, full training to 
all producers on these aspects, how do you guarantee [organizations] can do this?” (H). Some 
of the assessors published the action plans, and follow up activity, of actors/supply chains on 
their website. This appeared to be seen as a mechanism for improving the robustness of the 
process, and also acting as a signal to stakeholders of the legitimacy of the assessment. “The 
fact that we report out on every single monitoring report with company response and 
remediation. Even though sometimes that remediation cannot be as robust as we’d like. The 
fact this it is still reported out publicly, I think, sets us apart from what I’ve seen from other 
[assessment] organizations” (I). Not all assessors were as confident. “After Rana Plaza, [the 
site in Bangladesh of clothing factories supplying retailers including Inditex, Mango and 
Primark that collapsed in April 2013] what happened was there were all these fancy 
[measurement] initiatives that were set up…but at the same time it hasn’t done much for the 
workers or the working conditions sadly. There are some companies who are squeezing the 

18 
 
price [along the supply chain] to cover the cost of their court case” (D). For all of the 
assessors, if logos or certification was to be awarded, use would not be permitted until the third 
party assessor was satisfied that the level of performance had met the required standard. 
 
Supplier development: Some third party assessors offered supplier development support as part 
of the assessment process. Optional peer visits in which a mock audit was undertaken and 
feedback provided prior to a formal audit were available. Assessors perceived this as way to 
promote learning through the sharing of good practice. “Having that friendly person come in, 
who is from another organization, they can tell you what they did, so it is more than a friend, 
it is hopefully an expert friend” (F). Peer visits were often used by organizations that were 
new to the process or were working through action plans as an outcome of a previous 
assessment. The cost of the mock audit was paid directly to the auditor. 
 
Configuration of supply chains: In managing performance, it would appear that some assessors 
actively engaged in supply chain configuration through the sourcing of suppliers. If there was 
demand for a socially sustainable good that could not be satisfied, assessors would attempt to 
source a supplier. “We have a [name of department] that constantly seeks new producers that 
the system needs, wants and can build a market for. That is a way we try and get producers 
into the system” (A). The conversations on this theme were in line with previous research on 
the competitive nature of third party social sustainability assessment as interviewees spoke of 
getting more ‘clients’ and working with multi-national manufacturers and retailers to adopt 
their particular assessment. “What I have seen is a proliferation of stakeholder initiatives that 
compete with each other and fight for the right for a place in the sun” (D). 
 
5.0 Discussion: Third party assessors as a bridging mechanism in socially sustainable 
supply chains 
 
From our analysis we were able to identify three different approaches to social sustainability 
assessment in multi-tiered supply chains. In terms of our focus on information processing 
theory, and the role of the assessor as a bridge, there are two interesting and important 
differences between the approaches to assessment. The first is the design of the measurement 
system and how this has a clear focus on monitoring the actors in the supply chain. The second 
is the lack of focus on all supply chain tiers. This is particularly illuminating as it highlights 
how the assessors may act as a bridge between upstream suppliers and consumers, however 

19 
 
there are limited bridging activities carried out by the assessors that include all tiers. The weak 
bridging that has been identified has implications for the assurance of the social sustainability 
credentials of products if only selected tiers of the supply chain are included in assessment; this 
would only serve to reduce sustainability uncertainty in part of the chain. 
 
5.1 The assessor as a monitor 
In considering how performance measures are arrived at, it would appear that for Approaches 
1 and 2 the requirements of different stakeholders have been included, as advised by Bititci et 
al. (1997; 2005). Approach 3 used existing measures; a method with potential shortcomings 
as the measures may be less relevant and focused than those designed specifically for the 
business (Kennerley and Neely, 2002). There may also be a lack of buy-in if stakeholders feel 
that they have not had input into the measurement system. This may compound the perception 
of social sustainability assessment being outsourced (Renard, 2005). Conversely, using 
external measures may overcome challenges identified with supply chain actors agreeing on 
performance metrics (Longoni and Cagliano, 2015). In requiring supply chain actors to adhere 
to measurement criteria, however these have been developed, the assessors are engaging in 
bridging activities as collaborative structures have been developed (Bode et al., 2011). 
 
Yet whilst our focus was on the third party assessor rather than the actors in the supply chain, 
it is nevertheless worthy of note how the two different approaches to developing measures 
resulted in an identical outcome. This may be due to the context, in that the measures of 
performance are so clearly focused on key aspects of social sustainability there is no need for 
them to be tailored to a particular organization or supply chain. It may also be the case that 
those assessments that developed measures through internal consultation were already 
acquainted with ILO, UN and/or OECD guidelines and used the consultation process to 
validate existing measures that are perceived as good practice. The similarity observed in the 
framing of the measures used appears to be at odds with the notion of a lack of a clear definition 
of the concept of social sustainability, and suggests that the operationalization of the concept 
is now far less opaque than has been previously reported. 
 
All assessors engaged in audit, indicating that it is an expectation in this context. This finding 
is consistent with the view that in developed markets, customers expect the enforcement of 
social sustainability norms (Huq et al., 2016). For all Approaches the focus on audit permits 
on-site assessment, however previous work has noted its shortcomings, particularly through 

20 
 
mock compliance (Huq et al., 2014). This theme did not arise in our study; however the 
efficacy of an audit snapshot to be indicative of normative practices was questioned. Thus one 
could consider whether a buffering approach in line with information processing theory might 
also be called for by assessors in which overlapping assessments are used to reduce the 
uncertainty associated with a single audit and monitoring body, albeit with the risk of “audit 
fatigue” (Marshall et al,. 2016). For Approaches 2 and 3 the audit has even greater significance 
as the findings from one or two actors are used to demonstrate the overall performance of the 
supply chain. In these assessments upstream actors are required to pay for audits and associated 
assessment activities. The design of assessment systems thus has implications for the 
appropriation of rents across the chain as there appears to be no clear attribution of risk and 
reward. In our study we find that the cost of assessment can sit squarely with producers/raw 
material suppliers and so the cost of quality assurance, in this case social sustainability, has 
shifted from retailers to upstream suppliers. This practice allows retailers to capitalize on 
socially sustainable supply chain rents and to use the practices of the chain as a retail marketing 
tool (Hatanaka et al., 2005). As the producer/raw material supplier may also be responsible 
for financing re-assessment audits, important questions remain about the appropriation of 
profits across the chain and the rationale for requiring those actors upstream to finance 
activities that potentially benefit all supply chain actors. 
 
5.2 Weak bridging activities across the supply chain 
In terms of the focus of assessment, for Approach 1, the emphasis was on the multi-tiers of the 
global supply chain. It is therefore anticipated that assessment here permits a level of 
transparency that is greater than in Approach 2 or Approach 3 wherein only selected 
organizations in the chain are part of the assessment. For Approaches 2 and 3, the decision not 
to examine the entire supply chain seems contradictory to assuring the production and trading 
credentials of a credence good. If likened to a “bridge” in information processing theory, these 
Approaches to assessment appear unable to completely reduce the uncertainty related to social 
sustainability disruptions (Bode et al., 2011) by offering only limited information processing 
to those using the assessment. Given that most serious social sustainability problems are often 
caused by suppliers in the lower tiers (Tachizawa and Wong, 2014), the capacity of these 
Approaches to provide information processing capabilities in excess of that provided by a 
single supply chain actor is questionable. Tachizawa and Wong (2014) suggest that companies 
should have oversight of the third parties they have delegated monitoring activities to. Given 
the limited visibility and supply chain scope of some of the Approaches to assessment it would 

21 
 
seem advisable for supply chain actors to engage in some level of additional monitoring to 
buffer against unexpected disruptions. 
 
Whilst recognising how Approaches 2 and 3 often focus on the producer/raw material supplier 
in the chain, and hence have an understanding of the credentials of the credence good at its 
‘source’, there seems to be limited focus on the way in which the good is produced and traded 
further down the chain. Importantly, Approaches 2 and 3 may allow the expansion of actors 
that do not have social sustainability credentials into supply chains deemed as socially 
sustainable. This may be particularly prevalent in packaging and distribution activities where 
forced labor and trafficking are reported (Berlan, 2013). As the assessment focus here is on 
only limited tiers of the chain, there is greater opportunity for actors downstream to become 
part of the chain without being subject to the same scrutiny as those further upstream. 
 
Understanding the differences between social sustainability assessment practices has been 
identified as causing consumer confusion (Ruben and Zuniga, 2011). As discussed, because 
consumers cannot assess the purported characteristics of a credence good, these characteristics 
need to be provided. Consumers may be unaware of any differences in assessment practices, 
particularly in terms of which tiers in the supply chain have been assessed, and if not 
communicated explicitly, stakeholder confidence in the credentials of goods traded as socially 
sustainable may erode. As noted, consumer confidence is crucial to the sale of goods that trade 
on their social sustainability characteristics. Based on our empirical findings, we have 
developed Figure 2 to demonstrate how only Approach 1 can provide sufficient bridging for 
multi-tiered supply chains. 
 
 

22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 – Bridging activities of assessment approaches identified
 

23 
 
Approach 1 permits a degree of scrutiny that may act as a barrier to entry, particularly for those 
organizations that cannot afford to make the necessary investment and changes required for a 
positive assessment. Yet as the entire chain is aligned to one particular assessor, supply chains 
in Approach 1 may experience significant switching costs if a decision is taken to move to a 
different assessor. Switching costs are not only pertinent to those in Approach 1 assessment. 
We noted a willingness of assessors of all Approaches to reconfigure supply chains to satisfy 
perceived demand. In such cases it is not the chain or its actors that are approaching the third 
party assessor, as per the relationship discussed by Hatanaka et al. (2005), but the assessor 
actively seeking upstream actors to join their particular form of assessment. The producer/raw 
material supplier thus becomes dependent on the activities of the assessor to promote and sell 
the product. 
 
Due to the time and money invested in achieving a positive assessment, and its significance in 
the global market, actors may view an exit from the third party assessor as unattractive. This 
finding is important as in considering the literature we likened the original fair trade supply 
chain practices to those akin to Gereffi et al.’s (2005) relational value chain; they were reliant 
on the exchange of tacit information, complementary competencies and reputation. From our 
empirical findings, the governance of socially sustainable supply chains appears to have moved 
away from tacit information sharing and complementary competencies towards intervention 
and control from third party assessors. Our findings suggest that the governance practices of 
the assessor are more on a par with Gereffi et al.’s (2005) captive value chains whereby the 
producer is dependent on the activities of the assessor to promote and sell the product. In 
consequence, the role of the third party assessor requires clarification. Our findings show 
assessors acting simultaneously as monitor, collaborative partner and engaging in sourcing 
decisions. This is a very different proposition to inviting a third party to act as an independent 
evaluator to better co-ordinate information processing and reduce sustainability uncertainty 
across multiple supply chain tiers. 
 
6.0 Conclusions, limitations and further work 
 
Sustainability related information processing is of prime importance to current complex supply 
chains, but has received limited empirical examination (Busse et al., 2017). Our study makes 
two important contributions. Firstly, through our empirical investigation, we are able to 
demonstrate how the assessment of social sustainability differs across third party assessors. 

24 
 
Studies on third party assessment often allude to the practices as homogenous and we are able 
to identify how they differ in the context of social sustainability. Secondly, we highlight the 
lack of clarity around the role of the assessor. In line with information processing theory, we 
note how assessments act as a bridge in the supply chain. Their monitoring is used to mitigate 
the uncertainty associated with social sustainability practices, particularly upstream in the 
supply chain. We show how the scope of the assessment can be limited to one tier, and we find 
only one approach to assessment that examined the entire supply chain. Some approaches to 
social sustainability assessment therefore offer limited information processing capabilities, and 
leave the participating companies open to sustainability uncertainty. It is not only the 
participating companies that are left vulnerable, but also the reputation of the assessors. 
Stakeholders may perceive that a (social) sustainability certification or logo on a product 
guarantees visibility across a multi-tiered global supply chain, whereas our exploratory 
findings deem this not to be the case for those assessors adopting Approaches 2 or 3. In not 
assessing the entire supply chain, these assessors are at risk of being accused of 
misrepresentation should an activity in the unassessed parts of the chain come to light that does 
not comply with the product’s perceived sustainability credentials, particularly if stakeholders 
perceive sustainability to encompass the entire supply chain. To mitigate such risk, and 
increase the social sustainability of global supply chains more generally, we would recommend 
assessors to consider moving more towards Approach 1. We recognise, however, that 
Approach 1 may be more costly and time consuming than Approaches 2 or 3. Approaches 2 
or 3 may also provide feedback in a more timely fashion if only one or two tiers of the chain 
are being assessed, which may be important to certain supply chains. We find sustainability 
assessment to be a strategic decision for supply chain actors that requires focus on what is to 
be achieved, how risks can be mitigated and stakeholder expectations met. Such decisions will 
inform which approach to assessment is the best fit. We suggest that dialogue between 
assessors and supply chains is important in ensuring that assessment is a strategic, rather than 
operational, activity that fulfils the information processing needs of supply chain actors. 
 
For the monitoring of multi-tier supply chains, we show how assessors may operate in multiple 
simultaneous capacities. This is an important finding, as in examining research on third party 
assessment, the implication is that the assessor is an independent body that is approached by a 
supply chain actor. We found the converse; in some cases the assessor had an influence on 
sourcing decisions, and actively marketed its own particular ‘brand’ of assessment to 
producers, raw material suppliers, manufacturers and retailers. This finding calls into question 

25 
 
the independence of the assessor in some instances. In examining the governance of multi-
tiered supply chains, our questions about the role of the assessor provide an interesting jumping 
off point for further work. As per previous studies, we acknowledge the proliferation of third 
party assessors focused on demonstrating the social sustainability credentials of everyday 
products. We find differences in the scope of assessment, and how goods are communicated 
as socially sustainable regardless of how many tiers of the supply chain are assessed. Further 
work on stakeholder perceptions of different third party assessors is an important step to 
identifying the importance of multi-tier visibility. 
 
Additional avenues for further work include the inclusion of supply chain actors and 
stakeholders in the research design. As work is emerging that focuses on social sustainability 
enablers between the buyer-supplier dyad, we believe our study makes an important 
contribution in providing a different assessment perspective. To further advance this body of 
work, empirical studies examining stakeholder salience for sustainability assessment are 
important. Similarly, studies examining the cost of third party assessment and how risk and 
reward are appropriated across the chain would also make an important contribution from an 
assessment perspective. As noted at the outset, our study did not focus on the impact of 
assessment on social sustainability performance. Further work is required to unpack the ‘black 
box’ that separates the design of assessment and its intended outcome in this context (Bourne 
et al., 2013). 
 
Our focus here was on how third party assessors can be used to overcome supply chain visibility 
challenges to reduce sustainability uncertainty. We acknowledge that visibility is not the only 
barrier to social sustainability performance. Several other internal and external barriers to social 
sustainability have been identified in past research including, for example, financial and 
resource constraints, lack of awareness, partner reluctance and regulation (see e.g. Faisal, 2010; 
Walker and Jones, 2012). It would therefore be appropriate to investigate whether using 
external assessors assists in overcoming these barriers. 
 
Our study utilizes empirical data collected across voluntary third party assessors operating on 
a global scale. It is one of few studies in this context that focus on the assessor rather than the 
buyer and/or supplier. It is, however, not without its limitations. As an exploratory study we 
focused on ten assessors. From the potential pool of sixteen assessors that we identified, we 
were pleased with this response, however we recognize that our findings are from a single 

26 
 
respondent and include relatively few examples. Further work could compare voluntary, 
mandatory and statutory socially sustainable assessment in order to elicit a wider sample from 
which to draw conclusions. Our findings show that whilst the ten assessors in our sample 
purport to assess supply chains, in practice this did not mean that they assessed every tier in a 
supply chain. In adopting a broader sample, further work could draw comparisons across a 
wider range of assessors which may highlight more approaches to assessment than the three 
identified in this study. It would also have been interesting to augment our primary data by 
interviewing auditors working in the field. As our budget did not permit extensive travel in the 
field, we were limited in this regard. Nevertheless, and despite these limitations, our study 
offers a platform for interesting further research in this area and highlights the importance of 
robust sustainability assessment for a range of stakeholders, particularly suppliers seeking 
access to new and potentially lucrative markets. 
 
References 
 
Albersmeier, F., Schulze, H., Jahn, G. and Spiller, A. (2009), "The reliability of third-party 
certification in the food chain: From checklists to risk-oriented auditing", Food Control, 
Vol. 20 No. 10, pp. 927-935. 
Andorfer, V.A. and Liebe, U. (2012), "Research on Fair Trade consumption - A review", 
Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 106 No. 4, pp. 415-435. 
Awaysheh, A. and Klassen, R. (2010), "The impact of supply chain structure on the use of 
supplier socially responsible practices", International Journal of Operations and 
Production Management, Vol. 30 No. 12, pp. 1246-1268. 
Ballet, J. and Carimentrand, A. (2010), "Fair trade and the depersonalization of ethics", Journal 
of Business Ethics, Vol. 92 No. 2, pp. 317-330. 
Berlan, A. (2013), "Social sustainability in agriculture: An anthropological perspective on child 
labor", Journal of Development Studies, Vol. 49, No. 8, pp. 1088-1100. 
Bernstein, S. and Cashore, B. (2007), "Can non-state global governance be legitimate? An 
analytical framework", Regulation and Governance, Vol. 1 No. 4, pp. 347-371. 
Bititci, U.S., Carrie, A.S. and McDevitt, L. (1997), "Integrated performance measurement 
systems: a development guide", International Journal of Operations and Production 
Management, Vol. 17 No. 5, pp. 522-534. 
Bititci, U.S., Mendibil, K., Martinez, V. and Albores, P. (2005), "Measuring and managing 
performance in extended enterprises", International Journal of Operations and 
Production Management, Vol. 25 No. 4, pp. 333-353. 
Bode, C., Wagner, S., Petersen, K. and Ellram, L. (2011), “Understanding responses to supply 
chain disruptions: Insights from information processing and resource dependence 
perspectives”, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 54, No. 4, pp. 833-856. 
Boughton, I. (2008, September 24th). Starbucks launch of ethical espresso draws criticism. The 
Caterer. Retrieved from https://www.thecaterer.com/articles/323561/starbucks-
launch-of-ethical-espresso-draws-criticism 
Bourne, M., Pavlov, A., Franco-Santos, M., Lorenzo, L. and Mura, M. (2013), "Generating 
organizational performance: The contributing effects of performance measurement on 

27 
 
human resource management systems", International Journal of Operations and 
Production Management, Vol. 33 No. 11/12, pp. 1599-1622. 
Brønn, P. and Vidaver-Cohen, D. (2009), "Corporate motives for social initiative: Legitimacy, 
sustainability, or the bottom line?", Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 87 No. 1, pp. 91-
109. 
Burritt, R. and Schaltegger, S. (2014), "Accounting towards sustainability in production and 
supply chains", The British Accounting Review, Vol. 46 No. 4, pp. 327-343. 
Busse, C., Meinlschmidt, J. and Foerstl, K. (2017), “Managing information processing needs 
in global supply chains: A prerequisite to sustainable supply chain management”, 
Journal of Supply Chain Management, Vol. 53 No. 1, pp. 87-113. 
Doherty, B. and Huybrechts, B. (2013), "Connecting producers and consumers through fair and 
sustainable value chains", Social Enterprise Journal, Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 4-10. 
Eisenhardt, K. M. and Graebner, M. E. (2007), “Theory building from cases; opportunities and 
challenges”, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 31 No. 3, pp. 488-511. 
Fahimnia, B., Sarkis, J. and Davarzani, H. (2015), “Green supply chain management: A review 
and bibliometric analysis”, International Journal of Production Economics, Vol. 162, 
pp. 101-114. 
Faisal, M.(2010), “Analysing the barriers to corporate social responsibility in supply chains: 
an interpretive structural modelling approach”, International Journal of Logistics: 
Research and Applications, Vol. 13 No. 3, pp. 179-195. 
Fan, H., Li, G., Sun, H. and Cheng, T. (2017), “An information processing perspective on 
supply chain risk management: Antecedents, mechanism, and consequences”, 
International Journal of Production Economics, Vol. 185, pp. 63-75. 
Foerstl, K., Meinlschmidt, J. and Busse, C. (in press), “It's a match! Choosing information 
processing mechanisms to address sustainability-related uncertainty in sustainable 
supply management”, Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management. 
Fransen, L.W. (2011), "Why do private governance organizations not converge? A political-
institutional analysis of transnational labor standards regulation", Governance, Vol. 24 
No. 2, pp. 359-387. 
Galbraith, J. R. 1973. Designing complex organizations. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Gereffi, G., Humphrey, J. and Sturgeon, T. (2005), "The governance of global value chains", 
Review of International Political Economy, Vol. 12 No. 1, pp. 78-104. 
Gioia, D., Corley, K. and Hamilton, A. (2012), "Seeking qualitatative rigour in inductive 
research: Notes on the Gioia methodology", Organizational Research Methods, Vol. 
16 No. 1, pp. 15-31. 
Giovannucci, D. and Ponte, S. (2005), "Standards as a new form of social contract? 
Sustainability initiatives in the coffee industry", Food Policy, Vol. 30 No. 3, pp. 284-
301. 
Govindan, K., Azevedo, S., Carvalho, H. and Cruz-Machado. (2014), “Impact of supply chain 
management practices on sustainability”, Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 85, pp. 
212-225. 
Govindan, K., Khodaverdi, R. and Jafarian, A. (2013), “A fuzzy multi critera approach for 
measuring sustainability performance of a suppler based on triple bottom line 
approach”, Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 47, pp 345-354. 
Hartlieb, S. and Jones, B. (2009), "Humanising business through ethical labelling: Progress 
and paradoxes in the UK", Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 88 No. 3, pp. 583-600. 
Hassini, E., Surti, C. and Searcy, C. (2012), "A literature review and a case study of sustainable 
supply chains with a focus on metrics", International Journal of Production Economics, 
Vol. 140 No. 1, pp. 69-82. 

28 
 
Hatanaka, M., Bain, C. and Busch, L. (2005), "Third-party certification in the global agrifood 
system", Food Policy, Vol. 30 No. 3, pp. 354-369. 
Hatanaka, M. and Busch, L. (2008), "Third-party certification in the global agrifood system: 
An objective or socially mediated governance mechanism?", Sociologia Ruralis, Vol. 
48 No. 1, pp. 73-91. 
Hughes, A. (2015), Retailers, corporate ethics and fair trade, in L. Raynolds and E. Bennett 
(Eds), Handbook of Research on Fair Trade, Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd, 
Cheltenham, pp. 298-315. 
Huq, F., Chowdhury, I. and Klassen, R. (2016), "Social management capabilities of 
multinational buying firms and their emerging market suppliers: An exploratory study 
of the clothing industry", Journal of Operations Management, Vol. 46, pp. 19-37. 
Huq, F., Stevenson, M. and Zorzini, M. (2014), "Social sustainability in developing country 
suppliers: An exploratory study in the ready made garments industry of Bangladesh", 
International Journal of Operations and Production Management, Vol. 34 No. 5, pp. 
610-638. 
Karjalainen, K. and Moxham, C. (2013). Focus on Fairtrade: Propositions for integrating 
Fairtrade and SCM research. Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 116 No. 2, pp. 267-282. 
Kauppi, K., Longoni, A., Caniato, F., and Kuula, M. (2016), "Managing country disruption 
risks and improving operational performance: Risk management along integrated 
supply chains", International Journal of Production Economics, Vol. 182, pp. 484-495. 
Kennerley, M. and Neely, A. (2002), "A framework of the factors affecting the evolution of 
performance measurement systems", International Journal of Operations and 
Production Management, Vol. 22 No. 11, pp. 1222-1245. 
Koh, S.C.L.., Gunasekaran, A. and Tseng, C.S. (2012), “Cross-tier ripple and direct effects of 
directives WEEE and RoHS on greening a supply chain”, International Journal of 
Production Economics, Vol. 140, pp. 305-317. 
Kreye, M. (2017), "Relational uncertainty in service dyads", International Journal of 
Operations and Production Management, Vol. 37 No. 3, pp.363-381. 
Langley, A. (1999), "Strategies for theorizing from process data", Academy of Management 
Review, Vol. 24 No. 4, pp. 691-710. 
Lincoln, Y.S. and Guba, E. (1985), Naturalistic Enquiry, Sage, Beverly Hills, CA. 
Liu, G., Shah, R. and Schroeder, R. (2010), "Managing demand and supply uncertainties to 
achieve mass customization ability", Journal of Manufacturing Technology 
Management, Vol. 21 No. 8, pp. 990-1012. 
Longoni, A. and Cagliano, R. (2015), "Cross-functional executive involvement and worker 
involvement in lean manufacturing and sustainability alignment", International Journal 
of Operations and Production Management, Vol. 35 No. 9, pp. 1332-1358. 
Marshall, D., McCarthy, L., McGrath, P. and Harrington, F. (2016), "What's your strategy for 
supply chain disclosure?" MIT Sloan Management Review, Vol. 57, No. 2, pp. 37-45. 
Miemczyk, J., Johnsen, T.E. and Macquet, M. (2012), "Sustainable purchasing and supply 
management: A structured literature review of definitions and measures at the dyad, 
chain and network levels", Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, Vol. 
17 No. 5, pp. 478-496. 
Perry, P. and Towers, N. (2013), "Conceptual framework development: CSR implementation 
in fashion supply chains", International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics 
Management, Vol. 43 No. 5/6, pp. 478-501. 
Premkumar ,G., Ramamurthy, K. and Saunders, C. (2005), “Information processing view of 
organizations: An exploratory examination of fit in the context of interorganizational 
relationships", Journal of Management Information Systems, Vol. 22 No.1, pp. 257-
294. 

29 
 
Pullman, M. and Dillard, J. (2010), "Values based supply chain management and emergent 
organizational structures", International Journal of Operations and Production 
Management, Vol. 30 No. 7, pp. 744-771. 
Reinecke, J., Manning, S. and von Hagen, O. (2012), "The emergence of a standards market: 
Multiplicity of sustainability standards in the global coffee industry", Organization 
Studies, Vol. 33 No. 5-6, pp. 791-814. 
Renard, M.-C. (2005), "Quality certification, regulation and power in fair trade", Journal of 
Rural Studies, Vol. 21 No. 4, pp. 419-431. 
Ruben, R. and Zuniga, G. (2011), "How standards compete: Comparative impact of coffee 
certification schemes in Northern Nigeria", Supply Chain Management: An 
International Journal, Vol. 16 No. 2, pp. 98-109. 
Seuring, S. and Müller, M. (2008), "From a literature review to a conceptual framework for 
sustainable supply chain management", Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 16 No. 15, 
pp. 1699-1710. 
Srinivasan, R. and Swink, M. (in press), “An investigation of visibility and flexibility as 
complements to supply chain analytics: An organizational information processing 
theory perspective”, Production and Operations Management. 
Tachizawa E. M. and Wong C. Y. (2014), "Towards a theory of multi-tier sustainable supply 
chains: a systematic literature review", Supply Chain Management: An International 
Journal, Vol. 19 No. 5/6, pp. 643-663. 
Varsei, M., Soosay, C., Fahimnia, B. and Sarkis, J. (2014), “Framing sustainability 
performance of supply chains with multidimensional indicators”, Supply Chain 
Management: An International Journal, Vol. 19 No. 3, pp. 242-257. 
Voss, C., Tsikriktsis, N. and Frohlich, M. (2002) “Case research in operations management”, 
International Journal of Operations and Production Management, Vol. 22 No. 2, pp. 
195-219. 
Walker, H. and Jones, N. (2012), “Sustainable supply chain management across the UK private 
sector”, Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, Vol. 17 No. 1, pp. 15-
28. 
Whitehead, S. (2015, April 22). H&M's "conscious" collection? Don't buy into the hype. 
Huffington 
Post. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/shannon-
whitehead/hms-conscious-collection-_b_7107964.html 
Wilhelm, M., Blome, C., Bhakoo, V. and Paulraj, A. (2016), “Sustainability in multi-tier supply 
chains: Understanding the double role of the first-tier supplier”, Journal of Operations 
Management, Vol. 41, pp 42-60. 
Yawar, S. and Seuring, S. (2017), “Management of social issues in supply chains: A literature 
review exploring social issues, actions and performance outcomes”, Journal of Business 
Ethics, Vol. 141, No. 3, pp. 621-643. 
Zhu, S., Song, J., Hazen, B., Lee, K. and Cegielski, C. (2018), “How supply chain analytics 
enables operational supply chain transparency: An organizational information 
processing theory perspective”, International Journal of Physical Distribution & 
Logistics Management, Vol. 48 No. 1, pp. 47-68. 
Zorzini, M., Hendry, L., Huq, F. and Stevenson, M. (2015), "Socially responsible sourcing: 
Reviewing the literature and its use of theory", International Journal of Operations and 
Production Management, Vol. 35 No. 1, pp. 60-109.