TITLE: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
JOURNAL: INFORMS_Journal_Computing
YEAR: 2019
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.2018.0884
---

Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
J. G. Benad´e, J. N. Hooker
Carnegie Mellon University, jbenade@andrew.cmu.edu, jh38@andrew.cmu.edu
We present a general method for obtaining strong bounds for discrete optimization problems that is based
on a concept of branching duality. It can be applied when no useful integer programming model is available,
and we illustrate this with the minimum bandwidth problem. The method strengthens a known bound
for a given problem by formulating a dual problem whose feasible solutions are partial branching trees. It
solves the dual problem with a “worst-bound” local search heuristic that explores neighboring partial trees.
After proving some optimality properties of the heuristic, we show that it substantially improves known
combinatorial bounds for the minimum bandwidth problem with a modest amount of computation. It also
obtains signiﬁcantly tighter bounds than depth-ﬁrst and breadth-ﬁrst branching, demonstrating that the
dual perspective can lead to better branching strategies when the object is to ﬁnd valid bounds.
Key words : branching dual, dual bounds, minimum bandwidth
1.
Introduction
Establishing bounds on the optimal value of a problem is an essential tool for combinatorial
optimization. In a heuristic method, a good bound provides an indication of how close the
solution is to optimality. In an exact algorithm, a known bound can allow one to prove
optimality of a feasible solution found early in the search.
We propose a general method for obtaining optimization bounds that is based on the
concept of a branching dual. It can, in particular, be applied to discrete optimization
problems for which no useful integer programming models or cutting planes are available.
It begins with a known bound, perhaps a weak one, and builds a branching tree that
strengthens the bound as much as desired.
To obtain a good bound more quickly, we reconceive the branching process as local search
in a dual space. We regard partial branching trees as dual solutions of the optimization
problem and obtain neighboring solutions by adding branches to the tree. The value of a
dual solution is deﬁned to be the bound on the optimal value that is proved by the tree.
If the objective of the primal problem is to minimize, the dual problem seeks to maximize
this bound.
This results in a diﬀerent kind of branching scheme than ordinarily used in methods
that seek an optimal solution. Such methods typically attempt to solve both a primal and
1
arXiv:1908.07584v1 [cs.DS] 20 Aug 2019

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
2
dual problem simultaneously. They branch in such a way as to ﬁnd good feasible solutions,
while simultaneously seeking to prove a tight bound on the optimal value. It is diﬃcult to
design a branching strategy that is eﬀective at both tasks. We propose instead to focus
on the dual problem by constructing trees that are speciﬁcally designed to discover good
bounds.
The branching dual is clearly a strong dual, because a complete branching tree proves a
bound equal to the optimal value. In practice, however, we seek a suboptimal solution of
the dual that yields a good bound after a reasonable amount of computation. We do so by
designing an eﬀective local search procedure that takes advantage of problem structure.
This aﬀords an alternative perspective that may yield a bound more quickly than standard
branching procedures.
The approach is somewhat similar to a Lagrangian method in which bounds are obtained
by partially solving the Lagrangian dual, perhaps by subgradient optimization. Yet there
are key diﬀerences. Because there is no duality gap, the branching dual can deliver a bound
as tight as desired if we invest suﬃcient computational resources. Furthermore, there is no
need for inequality constraints in the problem formulation (only inequality constraints can
be dualized in a Lagrangian method), and no need to compute a subgradient or adjust the
stepsize.
To solve the branching dual, we propose a worst-bound local search heuristic that
examines neighboring solutions obtained by branching at nodes with the worst relaxation
value. It is based on the principle that one should move to a neighboring solution that has
some possibility of being better than the current solution.
We show that when the variable selected for branching at a node depends only on the
node’s level in the tree (layered branching), the worst-bound heuristic is optimal in two
senses. It obtains any desired bound with a tree of minimum size, and it obtains the tightest
possible bound that can be obtained from a tree of a given size. In fact, these results
hold more generally for ﬁxed variable selection, which means that the choice of branching
variable at a node depends only on the choices along the path from the root to the node.
When variable selection is not ﬁxed, the heuristic examines neighboring solutions
that result from various branching decisions. The search can be designed to exploit the
characteristics of the problem at hand, much as is done with local search methods in

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
3
general. We will see that a relatively simple local search procedure can substantially
improve the bound.
The bound proved by a partial search tree is a function of the relaxation values computed
at nodes of the tree. The relaxation value at a node is a bound on the value of any solution
obtained in a subtree rooted at that node. If the problem has a tractable continuous
relaxation, as in linear integer programming, we can obtain a relaxation value simply by
ﬁxing the variables on which the search has branched so far and solving the continuous
relaxation that results. Relaxation values can often be obtained, however, without a
continuous relaxation. If there is a known combinatorial bound for a given problem, we
need only determine how to alter the bound to reﬂect the fact that certain variables have
been ﬁxed. This deﬁnes the relaxation values at nodes and allows a local search to improve
the original bound, perhaps signiﬁcantly.
We illustrate this strategy with the minimum bandwidth problem, for which no practical
integer programming model is known. Bounds for this problem have been studied at least
since 1970, when Chv´atal introduced his famous density bound for the problem (Chv´atal
1970). Since the density bound is NP-hard to compute, polynomially computable bounds
have been proposed, such as those of Blum et al. (1998) and Caprara and Salazar-Gonz´alez
(2005). We obtain relaxation values by adapting the Caprara–Salazar-Gonz´alez bound to
the case where some variables are ﬁxed.
We ﬁnd in computational testing that the worst-bound heuristic delivers bounds that
are not only better than the three bounds just mentioned, but that improve the Caprara–
Salazar-Gonz´alez bound signiﬁcantly faster than depth-ﬁrst and breadth-ﬁrst branching
trees that use the same relaxation values.
We obtain these results both with a layered
branching order, where all the nodes on the same level branch on the same variable, and
without. In fact, when variable selection does not only depend on the level a node is on, a
straightforward local search heuristic can signiﬁcantly improve the bounds. We conclude
that the dual perspective proposed here can lead to better branching strategies when the
object is to ﬁnd valid bounds.
The paper is organized a follows. After a brief survey of related work, we deﬁne the
branching dual and develop the idea of a relaxation function, which allows dual solutions to
prove bounds on the optimal value. We then describe the worst-bound heuristic and show
that it is optimal for ﬁxed variable selection. The paper concludes with a computational
study of the minimum bandwidth problem and remarks on future research.

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
4
2.
Related work
A number of branching strategies have been proposed over the years, but almost always
with the aim of solving a problem rather than obtaining a good dual bound quickly. Depth-
ﬁrst search immediately probes to the bottom of the tree and may therefore discover
feasible solutions early in the search. It requires little space but tends to make slow progress
toward improving the dual bound. Breadth-ﬁrst search explores all the nodes on one level
before moving to the next. It ﬁnds the best available bound down to the current depth but
requires too much space for practical implementation.
Primal/dual node selection strategies attempt to obtain some of the advantages of both
depth-ﬁrst and breadth-ﬁrst search. Iterative deepening (Korf 1985) conducts complete
depth-ﬁrst searches to successively greater depths, each time re-starting the search. It
inherits the bound-proving capacity of breadth-ﬁrst search while avoiding its exponential
space requirement, but the amount of work still grows exponentially with the depth.
Limited discrepancy search (Harvey and Ginsberg 1995) conducts a depth-ﬁrst search in a
band of nodes of gradually increasing width. Iteration 0 is a probe directly to the bottom
of the tree. Iteration k is a depth-ﬁrst search in which at most k variables are set to values
diﬀerent from those in iteration 0. This provides a bound at least as good as breadth-ﬁrst
search to level k, but the size of the search tree grows exponentially with k.
Cost-based branching uses relaxation values at nodes as a guide to branching. It is
popular in mixed-integer solvers, where the relaxation values are obtained by solving (or
estimating the solution value of) a continuous relaxation of the problem. The two basic
strategies are worst-ﬁrst and best-ﬁrst node selection. Worst-ﬁrst branching explores a node
with the largest relaxation value ﬁrst (if we are minimizing). Strong branching (Applegate
et al. 2007, Bixby et al. 1995) might be viewed as similar to a worst-ﬁrst strategy because
it selects a branching variable that, when ﬁxed, causes a large increase in the relaxation
value. Pseudocosts (Benichou et al. 1971, Gautier and Ribier 1977) are often used instead of
exact relaxation values to save computation time. Worst-ﬁrst branching is slow to improve
the dual bound, because it leaves nodes with small relaxation values open longer. This
is of relatively little concern in branch-and-bound methods, because they use an upper
bound and relaxation values at nodes (rather than the overall dual bound) to prune the
search tree. However, worst-ﬁrst branching is a poor strategy for quickly obtaining a good

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
5
dual bound. Further discussion of these and related branching strategies can be found in
Achterberg et al. (2005), Hooker (2012) and Linderoth and Savelsbergh (1999).
Best-ﬁrst branching, by contrast, tends to improve the overall dual bound more quickly,
because it explores nodes with the smallest relaxation value ﬁrst. It is nondeterministic
because there may be multiple nodes with the same relaxation value. It is shown in
Achterberg (2007) that when variable selection is ﬁxed, there exists a best-ﬁrst node
selection strategy that solves a given problem instance in a minimum number of nodes.
This, of course, leaves open the question of which best-ﬁrst strategy achieves this result.
There is also the larger issue of which variable selection rule is best.
The worst-bound heuristic proposed here is based on the same idea as best-ﬁrst
branching but diﬀers in that it simultaneously explores the children of all nodes with the
smallest relaxation value. We call it “worst-bound” rather than “best-ﬁrst” to reﬂect this
diﬀerence and our emphasis on the dual bound. Because we are interested in bounding the
optimal value rather than ﬁnding an optimal solution, we obtain somewhat stronger results
than Achterberg (2007). Without assuming ﬁxed variable selection, we show that for some
selection of branching variables at nodes, the worst-bound heuristic proves any given valid
bound with the minimum number of nodes. This does not tell us which variable selection
rule is best, but the heuristic can conduct a local search to ﬁnd a promising variable to
branch on at a given node. Furthermore, we show that when the variable selection rule is
ﬁxed in advance, the worst-bound heuristic always proves a given bound with the minimum
number of nodes, and it always proves the best bound that can be obtained by a tree with
a given number of nodes.
We therefore build on Achterberg’s work in four ways: (a) we expand all relevant
nodes with the minimum relaxation value, thus removing the non-determinism of best-ﬁrst
branching; (b) we prove the resulting algorithm is optimal for proving a dual bound; (c) we
strengthen the algorithm with local search inspired by a concept of branching duality; and
(d) we show empirically that the algorithm yields stronger dual bounds than depth-ﬁrst
and breadth-ﬁrst branching.
Failure-directed search, recently proposed by Vil´ım et al. (2015) for scheduling problems,
is similar to worst-bound branching in that it seeks to prove a bound (or infeasibility)
rather than ﬁnd a solution. However, the mechanism is quite diﬀerent, because it makes
branching “choices” that are most likely to lead to infeasibility, based on the structure

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
6
of the scheduling problem. A “choice” is normally a higher-level decision, such as which
currently unscheduled job to perform ﬁrst. Orbital branching (Ostrowski et al. 2011) is
designed for integer programming problems with a great deal of symmetry. Groups of
equivalent variables are used to partition the feasible region, so as to reduce the eﬀects of
symmetry. It is unclear how these methods can be extended to a general branching method
for optimization problems.
The idea of branching duality was introduced for purposes of sensitivity analysis in
Hooker (1996) and Dawande and Hooker (2000). It is further developed in Hooker (2012),
which suggests using a local search heuristic to solve the branching dual so as to obtain
a bound on the optimal value. In the present paper, we carry out this suggestion by
formulating a speciﬁc heuristic, proving its optimality properties, and applying it to the
minimum bandwidth problem.
3.
The Branching Dual
The branching dual is most naturally deﬁned for a problem with ﬁnite-domain variables.
We therefore consider an optimization problem of the form
min {f(x) | x ∈F, x ∈D}
(1)
where x = (x1,...,xn), F is the feasible set, D = Dx1 ×···×Dxn, and each Dxj is the ﬁnite
domain of variable xj.
A (partial or complete) branching tree for (1) can be deﬁned as follows. Let T be a rooted
tree, and for any node u of T, let P[u] be the path from the root to node u. We will say
that u is on level j of T when P[u] contains j −1 arcs. A terminal node is any node on
level n + 1. Then T is a branching tree if
(a) every nonterminal node u is labeled with a variable xj(u) designating the variable being
branched on at u, and the nodes in P[u] have distinct labels;
(b) the arcs from any nonleaf node u to its children are associated with distinct values in
xj(u)’s domain.
The value associated with an arc leaving u is viewed as an assignment to xj(u). The arcs
in P[u] deﬁne a partial assignment x[u] if u is nonterminal and a complete assignment if u
is terminal.

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
7
Each branching tree T establishes a lower bound θ(T) on the optimal value of (1), in a
manner to be discussed in the next section. We will regard the tree T as a dual solution
of (1), and θ(T) as its value. The branching dual of (1) seeks a tree with maximum value:
max {θ(T) | T ∈T }
(2)
where T is the set of branching trees for (1). The branching dual maximizes the bound
that can be obtained from a branching tree.
4.
The Relaxation Function
To relate the structure of a tree T to the bound θ(T), we suppose that each node u of
T has a relaxation value cu. This is a lower bound on the objective function value of any
solution of (1) consistent with the partial assignment x[u]. We assume the following:
(a) The relaxation value is nondecreasing with tree depth, so that ct ≤cu when t is a
parent of u.
(b) The relaxation value is a sharp bound at any terminal node u, meaning that cu is
exactly the value of the corresponding assignment x[u].
(c) The relaxation value is a function solely of the partial assignment x[u], so that we can
write cu = c(x[u]), where c(·) is the relaxation function.
Condition (c) is useful because it implies that the relaxation value of u does not change
when nodes are added to the tree. This will allow us to prove various properties of the
dual and algorithms for solving it.
Let an open node u of T be a nonterminal node at which branching is still possible; that
is, u has fewer than |Dxj(u)| children. A node that is not open is closed. Thus we have the
following.
Lemma 1. A branching tree T for (1) establishes a bound θ(T) equal to the minimum
of cu over all terminal and open nodes u in T.
The relaxation values can be obtained in any number of ways, so long as they satisfy
(a)–(c). They can be values of a linear programming relaxation, perhaps strengthened
with cutting planes, or they can reﬂect combinatorial bounds, as in the discussion of the
minimum bandwidth problem to follow. They can also be strengthened by domain ﬁltering
and constraint propagation, as in constraint programming.

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
8
We will assume that any feasibility checks are encoded in the relaxation value, so that
cu = ∞whenever infeasibility is detected at node u. We will say that u is infeasible when
cu = ∞and feasible when cu < ∞. An infeasible node is more accurately called a provably
infeasible node, but for brevity we will refer to it simply as an infeasible node.
The branching dual is a strong dual because θ(T) is the optimal value of (1) when T is
a complete branching tree. T is complete when every node of T is closed or infeasible.
Theorem 1. If T is a complete branching tree for (1), then θ(T) is the optimal value
of (1).
Proof. Suppose ﬁrst that (1) is feasible, and let x∗be an optimal solution. Let P[u]
be a longest path in T for which x[u] is consistent with x∗. Suppose u is nonterminal.
If u is closed, some arc leaving u assigns x∗
j(u) to xj(u), which is impossible because P[u]
has maximal length. Also u cannot be infeasible, because x∗is feasible. Therefore, u is
terminal, which implies cu = θ(T) = f(x∗). If (1) is infeasible and thus has value ∞, any
terminal node of T must be infeasible. Since any open node is infeasible, Lemma 1 implies
that θ(T) = ∞. □
Corollary 1. The branching dual is a strong dual.
5.
Solving the Dual
The branching dual can be solved by a local search algorithm that moves from the current
solution to a neighboring solution. In general, a neighbor of T could be any tree obtained
by adding children to open nodes and/or removing leaf nodes. We will suppose that
the algorithm only adds nodes and does not remove them, because this prevents cycling
and ensures that the number of iterations is bounded by the number of possible nodes.
In addition, the monotonicity of the relaxation function implies that the resulting dual
values are nondecreasing. Because there is no cycling, uphill search eventually ﬁnds an
optimal solution. This can still be regarded as local search in the sense that it searches a
neighborhood of the current solution in each iteration.
It remains to specify which nodes to add in each iteration. Recall that the value of
the current dual solution is governed by the worst (smallest) relaxation value of an open
or terminal node u. If u is terminal, the heuristic terminates with the optimal bound
cu. Otherwise, we propose adding nodes that can actually improve the current bound.

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
9
Expanding a node with a relaxation value
better than the worst cannot improve the
bound, because it leaves open nodes with relaxation values equal to the current bound.
However, expanding all nodes with the worst relaxation value can improve the bound. We
will refer to this as a worst-bound heuristic.
The heuristic is stated more precisely in Algorithm 1, in which T is the current dual
solution. An eligible node is an open node u with relaxation value cu = θ(T). Note that
every dual solution created by the heuristic is a saturated tree, meaning that all of its
nonleaf nodes are closed.
Algorithm 1: Worst-bound heuristic
Let T initially consist of the root node;
while some open or terminal node in T is feasible do
if some terminal node u in T has relaxation value cu = θ(T) then
stop with the optimal bound θ(T);
else
for each eligible node u in T do
select a label xj(u) for u that does not occur in path P[u];
add to T all children of u to create the next dual solution;
end
end
end
problem (1) is infeasible;
The heuristic must somehow specify how to select a label for each eligible node u. The
labels are predetermined if variable selection is ﬁxed, because in this case, the label at a
node u is a function of the labels on the other nodes along the path P[u]. As an example,
Fig. 1 shows how the worst-bound heuristic may proceed when variable selection is not
only ﬁxed, but branching is layered (i.e., each node on level j receives label xj).
If variable section is not ﬁxed, a local search is conducted to select labels for eligible
nodes. A greedy heuristic is the simplest approach, and we use it here. For each eligible
node u, examine a subset of the variables that are available to label u, and select one

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
10
3
6
4
x1
x2
x3
x4
3
6
4
∞
6
x1
x2
x3
x4
3
6
7
6
8
6
4
∞
6
x1
x2
x3
x4
Figure 1
Three iterations of the worst-bound heuristic for a layered variable ordering. Each node is inscribed
with its relaxation value. All variables are binary: a solid arc indicates assigning the value 1, a dashed
arc 0. The shaded nodes will be examined in the next iteration.
that will maximize the minimum relaxation value of u’s children. The subset of variables
considered depends on the characteristics of the problem at hand. Naturally, if the subset
selected depends only on P[u], the local search simply deﬁnes a ﬁxed variable selection
rule. However, if the subset is random or depends on factors other than P[u], then variable
selection is not ﬁxed. Even if the local search yields a ﬁxed selection rule, a rule obtained
at runtime may be better than one determined a priori. We will ﬁnd that this is in fact
the case. In addition, the worst-bound heuristic is optimal for a branching rule obtained
at runtime when it is a ﬁxed selection rule.
The worst-bound heuristic is polynomial in the number of possible nodes, because the
number of iterations is bounded by the number of nodes, and each iteration requires, at
worst, examining each node of the current tree, and for each node, the children that result
from selecting each possible label.
6.
Properties of the Worst-Bound Heuristic
If variable selection is ﬁxed, the worst-bound heuristic is optimal in two senses: it ﬁnds the
smallest branching tree that yields a given bound, and it ﬁnds the tightest possible bound
that can be obtained from a tree of a given size. We ﬁrst establish a general result that
holds even when there is no ﬁxed variable selection. We will say that branching tree T ′ is
a branching subtree of branching tree T if T ′ is a subtree of T and the node labels in T ′
are the same as in T.
Theorem 2. Given any branching tree T for (1) that establishes a bound λ, the worst-
bound heuristic can be executed in such a way as to create a branching subtree of T that
establishes the same bound λ.

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
11
Proof. We wish to show that the worst-bound heuristic can construct a branching subtree
T ′ of T that establishes the bound λ. We do so by ﬁrst removing nodes from T in a
particular order until only the root node remains, and then constructing T ′ by showing
that the worst-ﬁrst heuristic restores removed nodes in reverse order until λ is proved.
We denote by λ1,...,λk the distinct relaxation values of the nodes of T that are less than
or equal to λ, where λk = λ and λ1 < ··· < λk. We next clean up T by removing all leaf
nodes whose parents have relaxation value of λk or higher, and repeating until no such
leaf nodes remain. This yields a branching subtree Tk of T that still establishes bound λk.
Furthermore, Tk is saturated, because if it contained an open nonleaf node u, then either
cu < λk or cu ≥λk. In the former case, Tk would not prove the bound λ, and in the latter
case, u would be a leaf node because its children would be removed. Now remove from Tk
all leaf nodes whose parents have relaxation value λk−1, and repeat until no such nodes
remain. This yields a saturated tree Tk−1 that establishes the bound λk−1. In similar fashion,
remove nodes to obtain trees Tk−2,...,T1 (T1 will consist of the root node only). Since trees
T1,...,Tk are saturated, they can now be reconstructed by adding nodes according to the
worst-bound heuristic, provided each node is given the label it has in Tk. If we let T ′ = Tk,
T ′ proves bound λ and is a branching subtree of T, and the theorem follows. □
Theorem 2 provides no guidance on how the heuristic should label nodes to obtain a
desired bound. However, if variable selection is ﬁxed, the labels are determined by previous
branches, as noted in the previous section. In this case, we have the following.
Corollary 2. Suppose variable selection is ﬁxed, and the worst-bound heuristic is
terminated at a point where the current tree contains N nodes. This tree establishes the
tightest bound that can be obtained from a tree of N nodes.
Proof. Suppose T is the tree obtained from the worst-bound heuristic, and T ′ is a tree
of size N that establishes a bound θ(T ′) > θ(T). By Theorem 2, the worst-bound heuristic
yields a branching subtree T ′′ of T ′ that establishes the bound θ(T ′), so that θ(T ′′) ≥θ(T ′).
But since variable selection is ﬁxed and the size of T ′′ is at most N, T ′′ is a branching
subtree of T. So we have θ(T) ≥θ(T ′′) ≥θ(T ′) > θ(T), a contradiction. □
Corollary 3. Suppose variable selection is ﬁxed, and the worst-bound heuristic is
terminated as soon as it proves a bound of λ. The resulting tree is the smallest tree that
establishes the bound λ.

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
12
Proof. Suppose T is the tree obtained from the heuristic, and T ′ is a smaller tree with
θ(T ′) = λ. By Theorem 2, the worst-bound heuristic yields a branching subtree T ′′ of
T ′ that establishes the bound λ, for a suitable choice of node labels. But since variable
selection is ﬁxed, T must be a branching subtree of T ′′, because it is the ﬁrst tree obtained
by the worst-bound heuristic that proves λ. Thus if we let size(T) denote the size of T, we
have size(T) > size(T ′) ≥size(T ′′) ≥size(T), a contradiction. □
7.
The Minimum Bandwidth Problem
The minimum bandwidth problem asks for a linear arrangement of the vertices of a graph
that minimizes the length of the longest edge, where the length of an edge is measured by
the distance it spans in the arrangement. That is, given a graph G = (V,E), the problem
is to ﬁnd
φ(G) = min
τ
max
(i,j)∈E |τi −τj|
(3)
where τ is any permutation of 1,...,|V |, and τi is the position of vertex i in the
arrangement. A graph with ﬁve vertices may be seen in Fig. 2, together with two of its
linear arrangements. The ﬁrst linear arrangement has value 3 while the second has value
2 and is optimal.
a
c
b
d
e
a
b
c
d
e
1
1
1
2
2
3
a
c
b
e
d
1
1
1
2
2
2
Figure 2
A graph and two linear arrangements of its vertices with edge lengths indicated.
Several graph theoretic lower bounds have been derived for this problem. Perhaps the
best known is the density bound of Chv´atal (1970). Let d(s,t) denote the distance between
vertices s,t ∈V , deﬁned as the length of a shortest path connecting s and t, where the
length of a path is the number of edges in it. Given vertex sets S,T ⊆V , let the distance
from S to T be d(S,T) = max{d(s,t) : s ∈S,t ∈T}, and let d(S) = d(S,S) be the diameter
of S. The density bound is deﬁned to be
β(G) = max
S⊆V
|S| −1
d(S)

= max
S⊆V min
v∈S
|S| −1
d(v,S)

.
(4)

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
13
It is clear from the reformulation in (4) that calculating β(G) is equivalent to ﬁnding the
largest clique in G and is therefore NP-hard.
Blum et al. (1998) propose a 1/2-approximation of the density bound,
α(G) = max
v∈V max
S⊆V
v∈S
 |S| −1
2d(v,S)

= max
v∈V
d(v,V )
max
k=1
|Nk(v)| −1
2k

,
(5)
where Nk(v) = {u ∈V : d(u,v) ≤k} is the k-neighborhood of v. The reformulation shows
that α(G) is computable in time O(nm) by viewing every vertex as the root of a layered
graph.
Caprara and Salazar-Gonz´alez (2005) similarly propose a bound computable through
layered graphs,
γ(G) = min
v∈V max
S⊆V
v∈S
|S| −1
d(v,S)

= min
v∈V
d(v,V )
max
k=1
|Nk(v)| −1
k

.
(6)
It places v in the ﬁrst position of an arrangement and greedily places all the vertices in
Nk(v) directly after it in the arrangement. This bound can also be computed in polynomial
time. As Caprara and Salazar-Gonz´alez point out, this bound has the advantage that it
can be naturally be adapted to the case when some vertices have ﬁxed positions, as in a
branching tree. We will exploit this advantage in the next section.
8.
Branching Dual for Minimum Bandwidth
To formulate the branching dual of the minimum bandwidth problem, it is convenient to
state the problem using diﬀerent variables than in (3). We let xi be the vertex that is
placed in position i of the arrangement. Then the problem is
min
x
max
i,j
(xi,xj)∈E
|i −j|
(7)
where x = (x1,...,xn) is a permutation of 1,...,n and n = |V |.
We construct branching trees by branching on the variables xi. We use a branching order
that alternates between assigning vertices to the left and right ends of the arrangement,
because this will be convenient for the relaxation function described below. Thus at each
node t in level i, the partial assignment x(t) ﬁxes variables x1,xn,x2,xn−1,x3,xn−2,...,xi.
Let L be the set of vertices that are assigned to the left end of the arrangement by ﬁxing
vertices u1,...,u|L| to positions 1,...,|L|. R is similarly the vertices ﬁxed to the the right

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
14
end of the arrangement with vertices v1,...,v|R| in positions n,...,n−|R|+1. Denote with
F = V \ (L ∪R) the set of unplaced vertices.
The relaxation value is deﬁned as follows. Since the vertices in L ∪R have already been
assigned positions, each arc leaving t that assigns one of these vertices to xi leads to an
infeasible child node u with relaxation value cu = ∞. The remaining arcs lead to feasible
child nodes. To deﬁne the relaxation value cu at such a node, we modify the bound (6) as
in Caprara and Salazar-Gonz´alez (2005) to reﬂect the fact that vertices in L and R have
been assigned positions. The resulting value cu is given by the optimal value of the integer
programming problem (29) stated in their article which we repeat here for completeness.
Let Π be the set of all permutations of {1,...,n}, and Πp the set of all permutations of
subsets of {1,...,n} of cardinality p. The bi-level integer linear programming relaxation
used as relaxation value is
minφ
fv ≤τv ≤ℓv, v ∈F,
τuh = h, h = 1,...,|L|,
τvi = n −i + 1, i = 1,...,|R|,
τ ∈Π
ℓuh = h, h = 1,...,|L|,
φ ≥i −h, (ui,uh) ∈E,
fvi = n −i + 1, i = 1,...,|R|,
φ ≥i −h, (vi,vh) ∈E,
where
ℓv =
max
πv∈Π|NL
1 (v)∪{v}|
n
πv
v
 φ ≥πv
v −πv
u, πv
u ≤ℓu, ∀u ∈N L
1 (v)
o
, v ∈F
fv =
max
ρv∈Π|NR
1 (v)∪{v}|
n
ρv
v
 φ ≥ρv
v −ρv
u, ρv
u ≤fu, ∀u ∈N R
1 (v)
o
, v ∈F
Here N L
1 (v) is the set of nodes adjacent to v for which the shortest distance to any node
in L is exactly one unit shorter than the shortest distance from v to a node in L. N R
1 is
deﬁned analogously.

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
15
The inner-level ILP’s compute the accurate values for fv and ℓv, the ﬁrst and last
positions available to v ∈F without violating the current value of φ. The outer level ILP
optimizes the bandwidth and location of the free vertices subject to these constraints on
their positions while ensuring that the ﬁxed vertices are placed in the correct locations and
ensuring that the bandwidth is at least the length of the longest edge between two vertices
in L or R. Edges incident to a free vertex are implicitly considered when computing ℓv and
fv, but edges between a vertex in L and one in R do not aﬀect the bandwidth, making
this a relaxation.
Propositions 12 and 15 in Caprara and Salazar-Gonz´alez (2005) present a simple
algorithm for solving this problem which performs binary search on the value of φ guided by
the feasibility of the bounds imposed on the unﬁxed vertices by fv and ℓv. The complexity
of the algorithm is O(mlog n + nlog2 n).
Consider, as a simple example, the graph in Figure 2. Suppose that φ ≤2 and vertex c
has been ﬁxed to the ﬁrst position of the arrangement, so τc = 1. This allows us to bound
the domains of its neighbours, ℓb = 3 and ℓe = 3 and similarly ℓd = 5, which of course has
been known all along. Observe that one of vertices b or e must be placed into position 2,
so although ℓc = ℓe = 3, we improve on the bounds by inferring ℓd = 4 followed by τa = 5.
We can also include variable selection in the worst-bound heuristic, using the greedy
algorithm described earlier, rather than relying on a ﬁxed, alternating branching order.
We consider only two candidates for the next variable on which to branch. At each eligible
node u, we let the branching variable be the next variable on the left or the next variable
on the right, rather than strictly alternating as above. Thus if the currently ﬁxed variables
at u are x1,...,xi and xk,...,xn, we choose between xi+1 and xk−1 as the next branching
variable. The greedy choice is the variable that maximizes the smallest relaxation value
among u’s children.
9.
Computational Results
We compare bounds obtained by the worst-bound heuristic (WBH) to known graph-
theoretic bounds for the minimum bandwidth, as well as to bounds obtained from depth-
ﬁrst search (DFS) and breadth-ﬁrst search (BFS). We ﬁnd that the WBH can strengthen
bounds more rapidly than DFS and BFS when a ﬁxed, layered branching order is used.
Furthermore, these bounds can be improved signiﬁcantly when variable selection is included
in the heuristic, rather than using a ﬁxed layered branching order.

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
16
We use two types of randomly generated test instances and a set of benchmark instances
from the literature. The ﬁrst set of randomized instances, denoted Random, consists of
90 random graph instances with 30 vertices. We generated 10 instances for each density
d ∈{0.1,...,0.9} so that every edge independently has probability d of occurring.
The second type of instances, denoted Turner, are generated according to the random
model of Turner (1986), which was also used for experiments in Caprara and Salazar-
Gonz´alez (2005). This model controls the bandwidth to be at most φ while keeping the
density ﬁxed at d ∈{0.3,0.5}. We generated instances with 30 vertices for φ ∈{3,6,...,27},
resulting in 180 instances,
instances with 100 vertices for φ ∈{10,20,30,40,50},
and
instances with 250 and 1000 vertices for φ ∈{20,40,60,80} and φ ∈{50,100,150,200},
respectively, for a total of 440 instances.
Finally, we test on the set of Matrix Market1 benchmark instances. As in Caprara and
Salazar-Gonz´alez (2005), we restrict ourselves to instances with up to 250 vertices, leaving
39 instances with between 24 and 245 vertices (including 26 with at least 100 vertices).
Figures 3, 5, 6,8 and 9 are a representative sample of performance proﬁles that indicate
the fraction of instances (vertical axis) for which a given branching strategy proves a
target bound after branching on a given number of nodes (horizontal axis). The target
bound is typically within 0% or 5% of the optimal bandwidth (for the Random and MM
instances), or φ (for the Turner instances). The branching strategies compared are WBH
with greedy variable selection (WBH-VS) and WBH with layered branching order which
alternates between placing vertices in the left and right of the permutation (WBH-LR),
as well as DFS and BFS with the same alternating branching order. Where relevant the
ﬁgures also show the fraction of instances for which the tighter of the graph theoretic lower
bounds (5) and (6) achieved the target bound. The number of internal nodes are limited
to k ∈{100,1000,10000}; when the horizontal axis terminates before k all of the curves
are ﬂat for a larger number of branches up to k. We omit results for the Turner instances
with 1000 vertices, since the gap between the tightest graph theoretic lower bound and the
upper bound phi was found to be 0.35% on average, leaving little room for improvement.
The ﬁgures indicate that worst-bound branching with ﬁxed variable order is superior
to both breadth-ﬁrst and depth-ﬁrst branching, and far superior to the graph-theoretic
1 Available at http://math.nist.gov/MatrixMarket/.

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
17
Figure 3
A performance proﬁle showing the fraction of Random instances with 30 vertices for which a target
bound is proved. The blue baseline is the fraction of instances where the unstrengthened graph theoretic
bounds achieved the target bound. The partial tree is limited to k = 100 or k = 10,000 internal nodes.
bounds. Moreover, worst-bound branching with variable selection tightens the bound
substantially, for any given time investment. In fact, on the Random, Turner30 and MM
instances it obtains the optimal value for most instances after only modest computational
eﬀort. WBH-VS and WBH-LR retains a clear advantage over BFS and DFS on the larger MM
instances. On the larger instances it is unsurprisingly more diﬃcult for any of the branching
methods to achieve the target bound in a limited number of nodes. On the Turner250
instances the worst-bound heuristic provides a smaller beneﬁt over the alternatives, in part
because the node limits are more restrictive in a large graph with an increased branching
factor, and in part due of the fact that the gap between the graph theoretic lower bounds
and φ is much smaller (see Table 1). Yet the worst-ﬁrst heuristic continues to prove stronger
bounds than BFS and DFS while requiring signiﬁcantly less computation.

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
18
Figure 4
Scatter plot showing the relative performance of BFS and WBH-LR compared to WBH-VS on the 90
Random instances with 30 vertices after branching on 100 nodes.
Figures 4, 7 and 10 are scatter plots comparing the gap between the lower and upper
bound for the respective branching strategies on a per-instance basis after branching on
a speciﬁed number of nodes. The plots for the omitted test sets are similar. We observe
that WBH-VS inproves over WBH-LR and BFS on a signiﬁcant fraction of the instances,
including many which are solved optimally by WBH-VS while the alternative methods
report gaps in excess of 5 or 10%.
Table 1 shows the average gap between the lower and upper bounds after branching
on 100,1000 or 10000 nodes for each of the methods. As benchmark we also report the
average gap between the strongest of the graph theoretic bounds and the best known upper
bound. For all test sets, the gap is signiﬁcantly reduced by WBH-LR and WBH-VS after
branching on only 100 nodes. On all the test sets except Turner100, WBH-VS achieves an
average gap of less than 1% after branching on 10000 vertices. We also observe that the
graph-theoretic bounds are far tighter on the Turner250 instances than any other, with
an average gap of 4.7%. This decreases to 0.35% in our randomly generated Turner1000
instances (not shown). Finally, we remark that it is perhaps somewhat surprising that DFS
on occasion reports smaller gaps than BFS. This suggests that having strong upper bounds
is useful even when solving the branching dual.
Table 2 reports the maximum frontier size encountered while branching on up to
k ∈{100,1000,10000} nodes, averaged over the instances in each of the test sets. The
maximum frontier size is the largest number of open nodes stored at any point during the
computation. As expected, DFS leads to signiﬁcantly smaller frontier sizes than any of

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
19
Figure 5
A performance proﬁle showing the fraction of Turner instances with 30 vertices for which a target
bound is proved. The partial tree is limited to at most 100, or 1000 internal nodes.
the other methods since it quickly probes to a layer deep in the tree where the average
branching factor is likely to be much lower than at the root node, and spends the bulk of
the computation time at that depth. The memory requirements of WBH-VS is comparable
to that of WBH-LR on the smaller instances, and within a factor of 2.5 on Turner250 and
MM. Both variants of the worst-bound heuristic generally have much smaller frontier sizes
than BFS.
Although our theoretical results do not guarantee the strongest bound for a given frontier
size, we observe that the maximum frontier size is strongly correlated with the node limit
k and the size of the instance. A user who has limited memory available may select a node
limit k appropriately and strengthen the bound as much as possible subject to the node
limit k as guaranteed by Corollary 2. This is unlikely to diﬀer much from the best possible
bound subject to an explicit constraint on the frontier size.
10.
Conclusion
We studied the branching dual of an optimization problem for the purpose of strengthening
an existing bound. We showed that for ﬁxed variable selection, a natural worst-bound node
selection heuristic is optimal for proving bounds with a given computational investment.
We evaluated the worst-bound heuristic experimentally on the minimum bandwidth
problem using a relaxation function in Caprara et al. (2011) and found that it is much more
eﬀective at proving bounds that depth-ﬁrst or breadth-ﬁrst search. Finally, we showed how
combining this node selection heuristic with local search strategies for variable selection
can lead to signiﬁcant improvements in the quality of the bounds.

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
20
Table 1: Average gap size (%) between the optimal lower bound and the best lower bound proved after branching on 100,
1000 and 10000 nodes on the respective test instances. Benchmark (BM) is the strongest of the graph theoretic bounds.
Turner30
Turner100
Turner250
Random30
Benchmarks
Nodes branched on
Nodes branched on
Nodes branched on
Nodes branched on
Nodes branched on
Method
100
1000 10000
100
1000 10000
100
1000 10000
100
1000 10000
100
1000 10000
BFS
3.671 1.798
0.781
8.843 8.307
7.507
1.760 1.646
1.432
11.111 6.816
4.459
5.099 4.054
3.503
DFS
2.782 0.819
0.000
8.940 8.190
7.810
1.870 1.469
1.323
14.290 8.786
1.523
5.937 4.630
4.630
WBF-LR 1.497 0.564
0.000
6.871 6.100
5.707
1.214 1.068
1.016
8.098
3.350
0.723
3.368 2.334
2.067
WBF-VS 0.654 0.213
0.000
5.933 5.505
4.457
1.068 0.964
0.880
4.307
1.429
0.076
1.926 1.406
0.283
BM
27.99 27.99
27.99
18.07 18.07
18.07
4.729 4.729
4.729
32.53
32.53
32.53
20.54 20.54
20.54
Table 2: Average maximum frontier size after branching on 100, 1000 and 10000 nodes on the test instances instances.
Turner30
Turner100
Turner250
Random30
Benchmarks
Nodes branched on
Nodes branched on
Nodes branched on
Nodes branched on
Nodes branched on
Method
100 1000
10000
100
1000
10000
100
1000
10000
100 1000
10000
100
1000
10000
BFS
557 2541
7861
2371 22392 184578 4445 37049 310281 975 5800
24699
3794 28530 211566
DFS
82
82
82
753
753
753
2667
2880
2880
93
93
93
1640
1794
1794
WBH-LR 227
984
2968
1058
8461
73035
1306 10009
83734
391 2186
8395
1168
9667
78666
WBH-VS 275
858
2041
1926 15318 122814 2570 18238 140324 573 2107
6788
3321 19643 196432

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
21
Figure 6
A performance proﬁle showing the fraction of Turner instances with 100 vertices for which a target
bound is proved. The partial tree is limited to at most 1000 internal nodes.
Figure 7
Scatter plot comparing WBH-VS with BFS and WBH-LR on the 70 Turner instances with 100 vertices
after branching on 10000 nodes.
The branching dual method is proposed here primarily for combinatorial problems that
have no useful integer programming model. In such cases, one need only determine how to
strengthen a known bound, even a weak one, to reﬂect the fact that some variables have
been ﬁxed. However, the same technique can also be used to obtain bounds for integer
or mixed integer programming models. In this case, modifying the linear programming
bound to reﬂect ﬁxed variables is trivial. The method can also applied at individual nodes
of a conventional branch-and-cut tree to obtain bounds that may be tighter than those
obtained from a linear relaxation with cutting planes. More generally, the method can
be used for problems with a mixture of discrete variables (not necessarily integer) and
continuous variables, so long as a relaxation value can be computed when some of the
discrete variables have been ﬁxed. These remain topics for future research.

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
22
Figure 8
A performance proﬁle showing the fraction of Turner instances with 250 vertices for which a target
bound is proved. The partial tree is limited to at most 1000, or 10000 internal nodes.
Figure 9
A performance proﬁle showing the fraction of MM instances which a target bound is proved. The partial
tree is limited to at most 1000, or 10000 internal nodes.
References
Achterberg T (2007) Constraint Integer Programming. Ph.D. thesis, Technische Universit¨at Berlin.
Achterberg T, Koch T, Martin A (2005) Branching rules revisited. Operations Research Letters 33(1):42–54.
Alvarez AM, Louveaux Q, Wehenkel L (2017) A machine learning-based approximation of strong branching.
INFORMS Journal on Computing 29:185–195.
Applegate DL, Bixby RE, Chv´atal V, Cook WJ (2007) The Traveling Salesman Problem: A Computational
Study (Princeton University Press).
Benichou M, Gautier JM, Girodet P, Hentges G, Ribiere R, Vincent O (1971) Experiments in mixed-integer
linear programming. Mathematical Programming 1:76–94.
Bixby RE, Cook W, Cox A, Lee EK (1995) Parallel mixed integer programming. Technical report CRPC-
TR95554, Center for Research on Parallel Computation.

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
23
Figure 10
Scatter plot comparing WBH-VS with BFS and WBH-LR on the 39 MM instances after branching on
1000 nodes.
Blum A, Konjevodand G, Ravi R, Vempala S (1998) Semi-deﬁnite relaxations for minimum bandwidth
and other vertex-ordering problems. Proceedings of the thirtieth annual ACM symposium on Theory of
computing, 100–105 (ACM).
Caprara A, Letchford AN, Salazar-Gonz´alez JJ (2011) Decorous lower bounds for minimum linear arrange-
ment. INFORMS Journal on Computing 23:26–40.
Caprara A, Salazar-Gonz´alez JJ (2005) Laying out sparse graphs with provably minimum bandwidth.
INFORMS Journal on Computing 17:356–373.
Chv´atal V (1970) A remark on a problem of Harary. Czechoslovak Mathematical Journal 20(1):109–111.
Dawande M, Hooker JN (2000) Inference-based sensitivity analysis for mixed integer/linear programming.
Operations Research 48:623–634.
Gautier JM, Ribier R (1977) Experiments in mixed-integer linear programming using pseudo-costs. Mathe-
matical Programming 12:26–47.
Harvey WD, Ginsberg ML (1995) Limited discrepancy search. IJCAI Proceedings, 607–615.
Hooker JN (1996) Inference duality as a basis for sensitivity analysis. Freuder EC, ed., Principles and Practice
of Constraint Programming (CP 1996), volume 1118 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 224–236
(Springer).
Hooker JN (2012) Integrated Methods for Optimization, 2nd ed. (Springer).
Khalil EB, Bodic PL, Song L, Nemhauser G, Dilkina B (2016) Learning to branch in mixed integer
programming. AAAI Proceedings, 724–731.
Korf RE (1985) Depth-ﬁrst iterative-deepening: An optimal admissible tree search. Artiﬁcial intelligence
27:97–109.
Linderoth JT, Savelsbergh MWP (1999) A computational study of search strategies for mixed integer
programming. INFORMS Journal on Computing 11:173–187.

Benad´e and Hooker: Optimization Bounds from the Branching Dual
24
Ostrowski J, Linderoth J, Rossi F, Smriglio S (2011) Orbital branching. Mathematical Programming 126:147–
178.
Schulte C, Tack G, Lagerkvist MZ (2017) Modeling and programming with gecode. User documentation.
Turner JS (1986) On the probable performance of heuristics for bandwidth minimization. SIAM journal on
computing 15(2):561–580.
Vil´ım P, Laborie P, Shaw P (2015) Failure-directed search for constraint-based scheduling. Michel L, ed.,
CPAIOR Proceedings, volume 9075 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 437–453 (Springer).