TITLE: Online Risk Monitoring Using Offline Simulation
JOURNAL: INFORMS_Journal_Computing
YEAR: 2019
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.2019.0892
---

Submitted to iINFORMS Journal on Computing
manuscript (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Authors are encouraged to submit new papers to INFORMS journals by means of a style ﬁle template,
which includes the journal title. However, use of a template does not certify that the paper has been
accepted for publication in the named journal. INFORMS journal templates are for the exclusive
purpose of submitting to an INFORMS journal and should not be used to distribute the papers in print
or online or to submit the papers to another publication.
Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
Guangxin Jiang
School of Management, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China, gxjiang@shu.edu.cn
L. Jeff Hong
Department of Management Science, School of Management, Fudan University, Shanghai, China, hong liu@fudan.edu.cn
Barry L. Nelson
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, nelsonb@northwestern.edu
Estimating portfolio risk measures and classifying portfolio risk levels in real time are important yet challenging tasks. In
this paper we propose to build a logistic regression model using data generated in past simulation experiments and to use
the model to predict portfolio risk measures and classify risk levels at any time. We further explore regularization tech-
niques, simulation model structure, and additional simulation budget, to enhance the estimators of the logistic regression
model to make its predictions more precise. Our numerical results show that the proposed methods work well. Our work
may be viewed as an example of the recently proposed idea of simulation analytics, which treats a simulation model as a
data generator and proposes to apply data analytics tools to the simulation outputs to uncover conditional statements. Our
work shows that the simulation analytics idea is viable and promising in the ﬁeld of ﬁnancial risk management.
Key words: simulation analytics; logistic regression; lasso; classiﬁcation; Monte Carlo simulation; variance reduction
History: Received
1.
Introduction 1
In portfolio risk management, simulation studies are often used to estimate portfolio risk measures, e.g.,
exceedance probabilities, values-at-risk or conditional values-at-risk. These studies often produce accurate
estimates of risk measures, as long as the stochastic processes of the underlying risk factors may be sim-
ulated. However, they can also be very time consuming, especially when portfolios consist of multiple
derivative products whose prices also need to be determined by additional simulation efforts. This type of
problem is known as nested estimation and it has been studied extensively in the areas of simulation and
ﬁnancial engineering (see, for instance, Gordy and Juneja 2010, Liu and Staum 2010, Broadie et al. 2011,
1 A preliminary version of this work appeared in the Proceedings of the Winter Simulation Conference (Jiang et al. 2016), which
only outlines the basic logistic regression approach without detailed analysis. Parts of Sections 2 and 3 originally appeared in the
conference paper. In this paper, we add the full technical analysis of the basic logistic regression approach. More importantly, we
propose three performance enhancing techniques with full technical analysis, and provide abundant numerical examples to illustrate
all the methods.
1

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
2
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Sun et al. 2011). Nearly all estimation methods proposed in the simulation literature consider the estimation
problem only once, i.e., one is interested only in estimating a risk measure at the current time point given
the current values of all underlying risk factors, and researchers often argue that these methods may be
implemented over night or over the weekend so that the long computational time needed to run them is not a
huge barrier. In practice, however, portfolio risk measures are often needed in real time as the current values
of the underlying risk factors change. For instance, the famous “4:15 report” of J. P. Morgan requires the
company to consolidate the risks of all trading desks based on the closing values of the underlying factors,
available within 15 minutes after the market closes everyday, and the company uses it to decide whether the
risk is under control (Jorion 2006). We call this the online risk monitoring problem. The estimation methods
available in the simulation literature cannot solve this problem directly, because a portfolio may contain
thousands of ﬁnancial instruments based on many risk factors, and the risk factors may change in seconds.
As we need to estimate the risk measures in real time based on these risk factors, we cannot guarantee that
the desirable simulation results can be obtained in time, even though with parallel computing resources.
We take a different view. We ask whether we can use the sample paths and derivative prices from a
database of retained past simulation results to estimate online risk measures based on the current values of
the underlying risk factors, without running additional simulation experiments. From a mathematical point
of view, the traditional approaches estimate an unconditional risk measure, which is a ﬁxed value; while
what we need is an approach that estimates a conditional risk measure, which is a function of the values of
the underlying risk factors at a future time. This motivates us to consider the simulation analytics approach
recently proposed by Nelson (2016).
The main idea of the simulation analytics approach is to treat the simulation model as a generator of
multiple (often a large number of) replications of system dynamics over time and to apply data mining and
data analytics tools to mine the data and to estimate conditional statements. To make an analogy, we consider
a recommendation problem, which is a classical example of data mining/data analytics (see, for instance,
Hastie et al. 2011). In that problem, the available data include the personal attributes and purchasing records
of many individuals, and the goal is to estimate the probability that an incoming individual with certain
attributes will make a purchase of a certain product (known as an estimation problem) and to decide whether
to recommend a certain product to this individual (known as a classiﬁcation problem). In the online risk
monitoring problem, suppose we have many sample paths (i.e., the data) generated from the simulation
model, and in each sample path (i.e., individual), we have the future evolution of risk factors (i.e., attributes)
and its loss at a relevant day (i.e., purchasing record). Our goal is to estimate the risk measure given the
risk factors at a future time and to classify whether the risk is too high. By this analogy, we conclude that
the online risk monitoring problem is indeed analogous to a recommendation problem and the simulation
analytics approach can be used to solve it.
In this article we consider a speciﬁc online risk monitoring problem. Suppose that an ordinary Monte
Carlo simulation study was conducted at an initial time point (time 0) to evaluate the (unconditional)

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
3
exceedance probability (i.e., the probability that the loss is greater than a given threshold) at an important
future date (time T). To estimate the exceedance probability, the simulation study generated many sample
paths from the initial state of the underlying risk factors at time 0 to time T and evaluated the portfolio loss
(including possibly pricing of derivatives) for each sample path at time T. Our goal is to use the same sam-
ple paths to estimate the same exceedance probability at time T conditional on the state of the underlying
risk factors at any time t ∈[0,T] and to classify the portfolio risk at time t into either “safe” or “dangerous”
based on whether the exceedance probability is below or above a certain threshold. The problem was moti-
vated by our conversations with investment practitioners in the insurance industry, who complained that
their company does not set risk limits dynamically based on portfolio status and, instead, uses static limits.
In this paper, we analyze the problem in the context of ﬁnancial simulation, which typically assume that the
simulation model is the true model, and do not consider the model misspeciﬁcation issue.
Regression is commonly used in estimating the conditional relationship. For instance, Longstaff and
Schwartz (2001) proposed to use linear regression to approximate continuation values in the American
option pricing problem. To estimate the conditional probability and to classify the risk category, logistic
regression is used, and the maximum likelihood method is applied to estimate the parameters of the model.
According to generalized linear model theory (Fahrmeir and Kaufmann 1985), we will show that the risk
estimators are strongly consistent and asymptotically normal. In addition, the classiﬁcation error goes to
zero exponentially fast as the sample size n →∞. This result shows that risk classiﬁcations, which are often
the main purpose of online risk monitoring, are signiﬁcantly easier than risk estimations.
The logistic regression approach is treated as a baseline method in this paper. We then propose three per-
formance enhancing techniques, by taking advantage of either existing data analytics tools or the knowledge
of the simulation models, to further improve the baseline method. Firstly, considering that the number of
risk factors is often large in practical situations, we propose to use L1-regularization (often known as lasso)
to conduct variable selection and to improve prediction accuracy. The basic idea of lasso is to tradeoff a
small increase of bias to obtain a large decrease of variance, so that the estimation and classiﬁcation can be
done more precisely. It is a standard tool in data analytics to handle high-dimension data, and we show that
it also works well in the context of online risk monitoring. We also prove that the risk estimators using lasso
are strongly consistent and asymptotical normally, and the classiﬁcation error goes to zero exponentially
fast as the sample size n →∞.
Secondly, noticing that our data are generated from simulation, we may use our knowledge of the simu-
lation model (i.e., the data generating process) to develop more efﬁcient tools. This is a unique feature of
simulation analytics. In typical data analytics problems, data are observed and the data generating processes
are unknown. To improve the baseline method, we utilize gradient estimation in simulation to develop a
method that perturbs all simulated sample paths so that they are more spread out. Through both theoretical
analysis and numerical studies, we show that the perturbation method can signiﬁcantly improve the quality

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
4
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
of both risk estimators and risk classiﬁers, especially when the time is close to the beginning of the planning
horizon where sample paths are more clustered together.
Thirdly, in some practical situations we may have time to conduct a small number of additional simulation
experiments. Therefore, we also consider how to incorporate the additional simulation data into the analysis
to improve the quality of the risk estimators and risk classiﬁers. In particular, we propose two approaches,
one is to combine two estimators that are derived from the original data and the new data, respectively, and
the other is to combine the original data and the new data together to compute a new estimator. Through
both theoretical analysis and numerical studies, we show that using additional simulation data can improve
the performance in both risk estimations and risk classiﬁcations.
Literature Review
Our work is related to three lines of literature. The ﬁrst is on portfolio risk measurement. Glasserman et al.
(2000, 2002) were among the ﬁrst to study how to estimate portfolio values-at-risk. In particular, Glasser-
man et al. (2000) considered the case where the risk factors follow light-tailed distributions and Glasserman
et al. (2002) considered the case of heavy-tailed distributions. Glasserman and Li (2005), Bassamboo et al.
(2008) and Glasserman et al. (2008) studied portfolio credit risks. For large portfolios, large pool approx-
imation can be used to study the risk measures, see Iscoe and Kreinin (2010) and Sirignano and Giesecke
(2018). All of these papers study situations where the loss of the portfolio may be calculated easily through
closed-form expressions or delta-gamma approximations, and consider how to apply variance reduction
techniques so that the risk measures may be estimated more accurately.
Sometimes, estimation of portfolio losses need additional simulation experiments. For instance, a port-
folio may contain derivatives whose values need to be priced through simulation. Nested simulation
approaches are often used in these situations. Lee and Glynn (2003) studied the general formulation of
nested simulation and considered how to balance the simulation effort in the inner and outer levels, while
Gordy and Juneja (2010) applied it to portfolio risk measurement. Liu and Staum (2010) used stochastic
kriging to improve the estimation efﬁciency, and Broadie et al. (2011) designed an adaptive method to allo-
cate the simulation effort in inner and outer levels. To reduce the large amount of simulation effort needed
in the inner level, Broadie et al. (2015) proposed a regression method and Hong et al. (2017) proposed
a kernel method to avoid nested simulations. Interested readers may see Hong et al. (2014) for a recent
comprehensive review on simulation methods in estimating risk measures.
The second related line of literature is regression. Regression is a standard technique used in data analyt-
ics and statistical learning to construct functional relations and to classify instances (see, for instance, Hastie
et al. (2011) for a thorough introduction of regression techniques in statistical learning). In this article our
goal is to estimate conditional probabilities and use them for classiﬁcation. Therefore, it is natural for us
to consider logistic regression. For background on logistic regression and how to use maximum likelihood
to estimate model parameters, readers are referred to the monograph of Hosmer and Lemeshow (2004). In
statistical learning, lasso is often used with regression to select variables and to improve prediction preci-

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
5
sion, especially when the number of variables is large. It was ﬁrst introduced by Tibshirani (1996) and it can
be applied to not only linear regression models but also generalized regression models that include logistic
regression. Regression has also been used at the interface of stochastic simulation and ﬁnancial engineering.
For instance, as we mentioned earlier, Broadie et al. (2015) proposed a regression method to estimate port-
folio risk measures. Sirignano and Giesecke (2018) used logistic regression to approximate the transition
function in loan-level models. Longstaff and Schwartz (2001) used a regression method to price Ameri-
can style options. Generally, pricing American style options is equivalent to solving dynamic programming
problems, where regression is often used to approximate the value functions for backward induction. In our
method, regression is used repeatedly to approximate the functions of conditional exceedance probabilities,
which are used directly for online risk monitoring.
The third related line of literature is on re-use of simulation experiments. Liu et al. (2010) proposed to
run simulation experiments to construct a good “database” and use it for future estimations. They call the
approach “simulation on demand”. Rosenbaum and Staum (2015) further developed this idea into database
Monte Carlo simulation that uses the database to construct control variates to reduce the variances of the
estimators. Similar to our idea of re-using simulation data, Feng and Staum (2017) proposed the concept
of green simulation that uses retained simulation data as a complementary resource to new simulation data
by employing a change of probability measures. Unlike the approaches mentioned above that either pre-run
simulation experiments (as in simulation on demand) or convert the old simulation data to the new data (as
in green simulation), our approach learns (or mines) the simulation data to uncover conditional relationships
available in the data.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We formulate the online risk monitoring problem in Sec-
tion 2 and introduce the logistic regression based methods in Section 3. Three performance enhancing
techniques, lasso, perturbation, and additional simulation, are discussed in detail in Sections 4, 5, and 6,
respectively. Numerical results are presented in Section 7, followed by conclusions and discussions in Sec-
tion 8.
2.
Problem Statement
Suppose that S(t) = (S1(t),S2(t),...,Sm(t))⊤is a vector of the underlying risk factors, which may include
prices of stocks and bonds, stochastic interest rates, etc, and that S(t) follows a Markov process deﬁned on
a probability space (Ω,F,P) with a natural ﬁltration Ft that governs the evolution of the process. Consider
a portfolio with k ﬁnancial products, e.g., stocks, bonds and derivatives, whose values at time t are denoted
by Vi(t),i = 1,...,k, which depend on the realizations of the underlying risk factors S(t). For convenience
of the notation, we let V(t) = (V1(t),...,Vk(t))⊤. Furthermore, suppose that the positions on the ﬁnancial
products are w = (w1,...,wk)⊤. Then, the value of the portfolio at time t is
Φ(t) =
k
X
i=1
wiVi(t) = w⊤V(t).
(1)

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
6
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Let L(t) = Φ(0) −Φ(t). Then, L(t) is the loss of the portfolio at time t.
Suppose that there is a ﬁxed future time T at which portfolio loss L(T) needs to be evaluated and
further actions need to be taken based on L(T). For instance, T may be the end of the ﬁscal year at which
portfolio loss needs to be reported to shareholders or T is the end of the investment cycle at which bonuses
are distributed. Then, the managers of the portfolio may be interested in estimating the loss distribution
and the portfolio risk measures at time T. In this paper, we consider the estimation of the exceedance
probability, i.e., Pr{L(T) > y} for some important threshold value y. Notice that, if Pr{L(T) > y} may
be estimated for any y, we may use it to obtain other risk measures, such as value-at-risk and conditional
value-at-risk (Glasserman et al. 2000). In the simulation literature, much has been done in estimating the
unconditional probability, i.e., Pr{L(T) > y}, but we are interested in estimating the conditional probability
Pr{L(T) > y|Fu}, which denotes the exceedance probability given the information up to time u ∈(0,T).
By the Markov property of the underlying risk factors S(t), we have Pr{L(T) > y|Fu} = Pr{L(T) >
y|S(u)}. The conditional probability is useful because, at any time u ∈(0,T), given the realization of S(u)
observed in the market, we can tell the probability that the portfolio loss exceeds the threshold y at the
important future time T and we may use the probability as a risk monitoring tool to determine whether the
portfolio risk is under control.
2.1.
The Data
When the portfolio is formed at time 0, a thorough simulation study is typically conducted to analyze
the risk proﬁle of the portfolio and report the risk measures to relevant stakeholders. In this article we
suppose that the unconditional exceedance probability Pr{L(T) > y} is estimated through a nested Monte
Carlo simulation study. For this simulation study, one often has more time available to run simulation
experiments, and the risk measures are often estimated accurately. Then, after the simulation study, we have
n simulated sample paths of the underlying risk factors, denoted by S1(t),S2(t),...,Sn(t) for 0 ≤t ≤T.
These sample paths are often simulated under the real probability measure and they are the output of the
outer level simulation in a nested simulation study. Moreover, we also have the values of the ﬁnancial
products at time T evaluated based on each simulated realization of the underlying risk factors. We denote
them as V1(T),V2(T),...,Vn(T). Notice that these ﬁnancial products may include complicated ﬁnancial
derivatives whose values do not have closed-form expressions. Then, an inner level simulation study under
the risk neutral probability measure may need to be used to estimate the Vi(T) values. In this article, we
assume that these values can be estimated so accurately that they are effectively without estimation error.
Then, given the weights w of the portfolio, we can easily calculate the portfolio loss at time T based on the
simulated realizations of the underlyings, and we denote them as L1(T),L2(T),...,Ln(T).
2.2.
Online Risk Monitoring
Once the portfolio is constructed, the portfolio managers need to constantly monitor the risk of the portfolio.
For instance, they may need to estimate the exceedance probability at any real time (instead of the simulated

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
7
time) given the market conditions, i.e., the real realization of the underlyings S(u), and decide whether the
portfolio is safe or not at time u. We call the ﬁrst the “online risk estimation problem” and the second the
“online risk classiﬁcation problem”. For both problems, we want to use the simulated data in Section 2.1 to
avoid simulating more data, so that both problems may be solved quickly to meet the practical requirements.
In the online risk estimation problem, our goal is to estimate pu(S(u)) = Pr{L(T) ≥y|S(u)} for any
u ∈(0,T) in real time. Notice that pu(S(u)) is a function of S(u). Therefore, our goal is to estimate a
function, which is often called a regression problem in the ﬁeld of statistical learning (Hastie et al. 2011),
and the regression is on S(u) for ﬁxed u. If the function is estimated, we may then plug in S(u) observed
at real time u to estimate the exceedance probability pu(S(u)). Notice that this may be done very quickly
if the function has been estimated before hand.
In the online risk classiﬁcation problem, our goal is to classify the portfolio risk into two categories,
“safe” and “dangerous”, based on the exceedance probability pu(S(u)) in real time. For instance, we may set
α ∈(0,1) as a threshold and classify the portfolio risk is dangerous if pu(S(u)) > α and safe otherwise. In
practice, we may set α = 0.05 or 0.1. Risk classiﬁcation allows risk managers to know immediately whether
actions need to be taken to control the portfolio risk. One may further extend the number of categories from
two to a higher number in the risk classiﬁcation problem. This may lead to a risk ratings that resemble
to the credit ratings, e.g., the AAA to D levels, used by credit rating agencies such as Standard & Poor’s
and Moody’s. Notice that, once the function pu(S(u)) is estimated, the classiﬁcation can also be solved
immediately given the values of S(u) at the time u ∈(0,T).
2.3.
From Online Risk Monitoring to Online Risk Control
Notice that online risk monitoring is only the ﬁrst step to online risk control, which is often the goal of risk
management. For instance, if the risk classiﬁcation indicates that the portfolio risk level is dangerous, risk
managers may decide to change some positions and add some additional products. To apply the simulation
analytics approach to estimate the risk of this new portfolio, however, there may be some difﬁculties. The
major difﬁculty is that the new products may depend on new risk factors whose sample paths are not in
our data. Moreover, even when the new products do not involve new risk factors, how their values at time
T depend on existing sample paths of underlying risk factors may still be unknown and require additional
simulation effort to evaluate. In these situations, we have to run additional simulation experiments, because
the information cannot be mined if it is not in the data.
However, if the online risk control involves only adjusting the positions of existing ﬁnancial products, i.e.,
changing the weights w, without adding new products, we can still apply the simulation analytics approach
to estimate the risk of the new portfolio. To do that, suppose the weights at time u are now w(u). Based
on the new weights, we may reconstruct the portfolio value Φ(T) based on Equation (1) and calculate the
portfolio loss L(T) for the new portfolio, assuming the portfolio will be held until time T. Once we update
the data, we are back to the situation that is considered in Section 2.2. Notice that the reconstruction of the

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
8
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
data does not need additional simulation experiments. Therefore, it can be done efﬁciently and it will not
cause much delay in providing the risk estimates and the risk classiﬁcations.
3.
Logistic Regression
As stated in Section 2, our goal is to estimate pu(S(u)) = Pr{L(T) ≥y|S(u)} and use it for classiﬁcation
for any u ∈(0,T). To do that, notice that we have the simulated sample paths {Si(t),0 ≤t ≤T}, i =
1,2,...,n, and the corresponding portfolio loss Li(T) for each sample path i. Let
Y =
(1
if L(T) ≥y,
0
otherwise.
(2)
We have pu(S(u)) = E[Y |S(u)]. Based on the simulated sample paths, we have n observations of Y ,
denoted by Y1,Y2,...,Yn. Then, to estimate the regression function pu(S(u)), we have n observations of the
input-output pair for given u, and denoted by {(S1(u),Y1),(S2(u),Y2),...,(Sn(u),Yn)}, where the inputs
are also called predictors, input variables or features, and the outputs are also called dependent variables or
responses or classes or labels in the areas of statistical learning.
Notice that both the regression problem and the classiﬁcation problem are classical supervised learning
problems. There are parametric and nonparametric approaches that can be used to solve the problems. For
our problems, because the data were collected from a separate simulation study, the number of observations
is typically not very large. Moreover, as the portfolio may include many assets, the dimension of the features,
i.e., the underlying risk factors S(u), may be quite large. Therefore, the observations may be scattered
sparsely in the feature space. These characteristics typically make nonparametric methods, such as k-nearest
neighbors and kernel methods, less effective due to a high level of variance of the predictions (Hastie et al.
2011). Therefore, in this paper, we consider parametric methods that generally trade off variance for bias
but may be effective if the parametric model is chosen appropriately.
3.1.
Logistic Regression Model and Maximum Likelihood Estimation
Because the response Y is a Bernoulli random variable, to model pu(S(u)), a natural choice is a logistic
regression model (Hosmer and Lemeshow 2004). Let X(·) : ℜm →ℜd denote a set of basis functions
computed from S(u), we then propose the following logistic regression model
log

pu(S(u))
1 −pu(S(u))

= β(u)⊤X(S(u)),
(3)
where β(u) = (β1(u),...,βd(u))⊤is the vector of coefﬁcients. It is worthwhile noting that both X(·) and
β(u) depend on the time u. Therefore, for different time points u ∈(0,T), we may use different basis
functions and obtain different coefﬁcients.
To use the logistic regression model in Equation (3) we need to specify the basis functions X(·). One way
is to specify based on the properties of the loss function, and another is to use polynomials of S(u) due to
the well-known Weierstrass approximation theorem (Rudin 1991). In this paper we suggest the second way

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
9
and we propose to use linear and individual quadratic functions, i.e., X(S(u)) = (1,S(u),S2(u))⊤, where
S(u)2 = (S2
1(u),...,S2
m(u))⊤. Notice that this is the simplest form of polynomials of S(u) that one may
use and it should also be the ﬁrst form of polynomials for one to consider. Fortunately, our numerical results
show that this approach works well for both the regression problem and the classiﬁcation problem. Notice
that the ﬁrst component of X is typically 1, so β1 denotes the intercept. More details on the appropriateness
of the logistic regression model are provided in the online supplement.
The parameters of the logistic regression model of Equation (3) are typically estimated by the maximum
likelihood (ML) method. For the convenience of notation, we omit the time index u when it does not cause
confusion. That is, in Equation (3), we let X denote X(S(u)) and β denote β(u), and
g(X,β) = exp(β⊤X)/(1 + exp(β⊤X)).
Then, the log likelihood function is
log ℓ(β|X,Y ) = Y log (g(X,β)) + (1 −Y )log (1 −g(X,β)).
(4)
For any u ∈(0,T), we have the training data {(Xi,Yi),i = 1,...,n}, where Xi = X(Si),
Ln(β) = 1
n
n
X
i=1
{Yi log (g(Xi,β)) + (1 −Yi)log (1 −g(Xi,β))}
= 1
n
n
X
i=1

Yiβ⊤Xi −log
 1 + exp(β⊤Xi)
 
,
(5)
and the ML estimator ˆβn is given by
ˆβn = arg max
β∈ℜd Ln(β),
(6)
and the maximization problem may be solved numerically and efﬁciently by the coordinate descent algo-
rithm (Hastie et al. 2011).
3.2.
Online Risk Estimation
In the risk estimation problem our goal is to estimate pu(Sr(u)) = Pr{L(T) ≥y|Sr(u)} given that we
have observed Sr(u) at time u. We use the notation Sr(u) to denote it is the real-world observation of
S(u), instead of a simulated observation. Nevertheless, we assume that it has the same distribution as the
simulated observations. When using the logistic regression model, we estimate pu(Sr(u)) by
ˆpu(Sr(u)) = g(Xr, ˆβn) =
exp

ˆβ
⊤
n Xr

1 + exp

ˆβ
⊤
n Xr
,
(7)
where Xr = X(Sr(u)) is known at time u and ˆβn is the ML estimator of the unknown parameter β calcu-
lated using the training data, i.e., the simulated observations of {(Xi,Yi),i = 1,2,...,n} at time u. Based

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
10
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
on the generalized linear model theory in Fahrmeir and Kaufmann (1985), we can assess the quality (i.e.,
consisitency and asymptotic normality) of the risk estimator ˆpu(Sr(u)) easily. To do that, we make the
following assumptions.
ASSUMPTION 1. The observations {(Xi,Yi),i = 1,2,...,n} are independent observations of (X,Y )
and, given X, Y is a Bernoulli random variable with Pr(Y = 1|X) = g(X,β0).
Notice that the independence condition is easily satisﬁed because {(Xi,Yi),i = 1,2,...,n} are calcu-
lated based on sample paths that are simulated independently. Therefore, Assumption 1 basically assumes
that the logistic regression model of Equation (3) is the true model and the true parameter is β0. This is a
typical assumption that is made in parametric statistical estimations, and we can only build the properties
of the estimators based on this assumption. Nevertheless, we have to keep in mind that models are just
approximations and they may introduce bias of which we are not aware.
Let L(β) denote the expectation of the log-likelihood function, i.e.,
L(β) = E[log ℓ(β|X,Y )] = E

Y β⊤X −log
 1 + exp(β⊤X)

.
(8)
Assumption 1 also implies that
β0 = arg max
β∈ℜd L(β).
(9)
Let H(β) denote the Hessian matrix of the log-likelihood function, i.e., H(β) = ∇2
β log ℓ(β|X,Y ). One
can easily verify that
H(β) = −
eβ⊤X
 1 + eβ⊤X2 XX⊤.
We make the following assumptions on H(β), where the expectations E(·) are taken with respect to the
distribution of (X,Y ).
ASSUMPTION 2. The Fisher information matrix J = −E[H(β0)] exists and is positive deﬁnite.
ASSUMPTION 3. There
exists
a
neighborhood
of
β0,
denoted
as
N(β0),
such
that
E

supβ∈N(β0) ∥H(β)∥

< ∞.
Assumptions 2 and 3 are typical assumptions used to analyze the asymptotic properties of the ML esti-
mators (see, for instance, Fahrmeir and Kaufmann 1985 and Newey and McFadden 1994), and they can be
satisﬁed easily in our framework, see the online supplement. Then, we can obtain the asymptotic properties
of the online risk estimator ˆpu(Sr(u)) deﬁned in Equation (7). The following theorem can be found in Jiang
et al. (2016) without proof, and we provide the detailed proof in the online supplement. Again, we want to
emphasize that the result is conditional on Sr(u) (and also Xr = X(Sr(u))).
THEOREM 1. Suppose that Assumptions 1, 2 and 3 are satisﬁed. Then, ˆpu(Sr(u)) →pu(Sr(u)) a.s. and
√n[ˆpu(Sr(u)) −pu(Sr(u))]
d→N(0,D),
as n →∞, where D = cXrJ −1X⊤
r , and c = exp(2β0
⊤Xr)/(1 + exp(β0
⊤Xr))4.

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
11
Theorem 1 states that, under the assumption that the logistic regression model is the true model, the
estimated conditional probability is a consistent estimator of the true conditional probability and it has
an asymptotic normal distribution. As it has been demonstrated empirically in online supplement that the
logistic regression model is a good model for the conditional probability, Theorem 1 also shows that our
proposed approach can be used to solve the online risk estimation problem. Furthermore, as the logistic
regression may be done very quickly given the sample paths or can even be done before Sr(u) is observed
for any given u, the proposed approach can be used for risk estimation in real time.
3.3.
Online Risk Classiﬁcation
Sometimes we are concerned about the classiﬁcation problems, i.e., whether the portfolio is safe or not at
a given time. Of course, an accurately estimated logistic regression model may lead to good classiﬁcations.
However, a coarsely estimated logistic regression may also give acceptable classiﬁcations. For example
in Figure 1, the true boundary is the solid line, and classiﬁes the points into two categories. With a less
accurate boundary, the dash line, the classiﬁcation accuracy is almost as good. This motivates us to consider
the accuracy of classiﬁcation instead of the accuracy of prediction as in Section 3.2, especially in high-
dimensional cases.
x1
x2
true boundary
estimated boundary
Figure 1
True and estimated classiﬁcation boundaries in the feature space deﬁned by (x1,x2), where ∗and
◦deﬁne observations of different categories
Suppose that α is the threshold probability of safe/dangerous zone. If the exceedance probability
pu(Sr(u)) is less than or equal to α, we say the portfolio is in the safe zone. Otherwise, the portfolio is in
the dangerous zone. In practice, pu(Sr(u)) is unknown and we estimate it by ˆpu(Sr(u)). Let I and ˆI denote
the safe/dangerous indictors under the true and estimated probabilities, respectively, i.e.,
I =
(1
if pu(Sr(u)) ≤α
0
if pu(Sr(u)) > α
,
ˆI =
(1
if ˆpu(Sr(u)) ≤α
0
if ˆpu(Sr(u)) > α
.
(10)
Then, ˆI ̸= I denotes a misclassiﬁcation, and we are also interested in understanding how the misclassiﬁ-
cation probability, i.e., Pr{ˆI ̸= I}, converges to zero as the sample size n →∞. To analyze Pr{ˆI ̸= I},

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
12
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
we ﬁrst establish a large-deviation result on Pr{∥ˆβn −β0∥> δ} and use it as a bridge. In the rest of this
section, we drop the subscript u for convenience, and we use X to denote X(Sr(u)) and Xj to denote the
jth component of X, j = 1,2,...,d. This is not to be confused with Xi which is the ith observation of X,
and the boldface denotes that it is a vector. We make the following assumption on Xj.
ASSUMPTION 4. For each j = 1,2,...,d, there exists a constant ωj > 0 such that E
 eωj|Xj|
< ∞.
In this paper Xj is typically a polynomial function of the risk factors S(u). Assumption 4 basically
requires that all risk factors are light-tailed. However, if some of risk factor, say Sj(u), is heavy tailed, we
may redeﬁne it so that it is light-tailed. For instance, if Sj(u) follows a lognormal distribution, we may
redeﬁne it by taking its logarithm. Based on Assumption 4, we establish an exponential rate of convergence
of the ML estimator ˆβn to the true parameter β0, as summarized in the following theorem, which is a
standard large deviation result in ML estimator (see Fu et al. 1993), and has also been stated in Jiang et al.
(2016) but without proof. We provide our own proof of this theorem (see the online supplement), because
similar proof techniques are also used in the proof of Theorem 5.
THEOREM 2. Suppose that Assumptions 1, 2, and 4 hold. Then, for any δ > 0, there exists a positive
constant ¯c(δ) such that
lim
n→∞−1
n log Pr
n
∥ˆβn −β0∥> δ
o
≥¯c(δ).
Based on Theorem 2, we have the following theorem showing that both the probability of a large deviation
of the estimated exceedance probability from its true value, i.e., Pr{|ˆpu(Sr(u)) −pu(Sr(u))| > δ} for any
δ > 0, and the probability of misclassiﬁcation, i.e., Pr{ˆI ̸= I}, converge exponentially fast as n →∞. The
proof is included in the online supplement.
THEOREM 3. Suppose that Assumptions 1, 2, and 4 hold. If ∥Xr∦= 0, then for any δ > 0, there exists
˜c(δ) > 0 such that
lim
n→∞−1
n log Pr{|ˆpu(Sr(u)) −pu(Sr(u))| > δ} ≥˜c(δ).
(11)
Furthermore, if ∥Xr∦= 0 and pu(Sr(u)) ̸= α, then there exists a constant c0 > 0 such that
lim
n→∞−1
n log Pr
n
I ̸= ˆI
o
≥c0.
(12)
Theorem 3 indicates that the misclassiﬁcation probability converges to zero with an exponential rate. This
shows that the risk classiﬁcation problem is in general easier than the risk estimation problem considered in
Section 3.2, as we showed intuitively in Figure 1. In online risk monitoring, we are often interested more in
risk classiﬁcation than in risk estimation; Theorem 3 shows that we can often expect the proposed method
to give a good risk classiﬁcation even when the sample size is not large.
The logistic regression model considered in this section serves as a baseline model in this paper. It is
quite straight-forward once the online risk monitoring problems are deﬁned as we do. In Sections 4 to 6,

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
13
we consider various techniques to enhance the performance of the baseline model, based on either more
advanced data analytics tools or the knowledge and the ﬂexibility of the simulation model itself. We show
that these performance enhancing techniques can indeed improve the qualities of risk estimators and risk
classiﬁers, compared to the baseline model, and they may be used together to achieve further improvements.
4.
Regularization Through Lasso
A large ﬁnancial portfolio may include many ﬁnancial products whose prices are affected by multiple under-
lying risk factors. Therefore, in a simulation study, we often simulate the dynamics of a large number of risk
factors. This imposes a challenge to the online risk monitoring problems that we consider in this paper. In
particular, when the number of risk factors is large, the number of predictors (i.e., the basis functions of the
risk factors) used in the logistic regression model is often larger. Then, the ML estimate of the model param-
eters may have a large amount of variability, known as overﬁtting, and thus reduce the precision of risk
estimation and risk classiﬁcation. Furthermore, due to limited positions in relevant ﬁnancial instruments,
hedging or other reasons, the risk exposure to some risk factors may be quite small or even negligible at
some time. This motivates us to consider regularization techniques, commonly used in statistical learning
(e.g., Chapter 6 of James et al. 2013), to reduce the number of predictors in the model or to shrink the
estimated coefﬁcients. The basic idea is to tradeoff a small increase of bias to obtain a large decrease of the
variance, thus improving the overall prediction accuracy of the model. A model with a smaller number of
predictors also brings better model interpretability. In online risk monitoring, this is particularly important
because it shows clearly to managers the risk factors that they need to monitor closely. In this section we
propose to use L1 regularization, also known as lasso, to improve the logistic regression model. Compared
to other regularization techniques, such as L2 regularization, lasso not only improves prediction accuracy,
but also reduces the number of non-zero predictors, thus improving the model interpretability. More expla-
nation on the variable-selection property of lasso is included in the online supplement.
Under the logistic regression model, i.e., Equation (3), the lasso estimator is
ˆβ
λn
n = arg max
β∈ℜd {Ln(β) −λn∥β∥1},
(13)
where ∥β∥1 = Pd
j=1 |βj| is the L1-norm of the vector β. Compared to the ML estimator in Equation (6),
the lasso estimator adds a shrinkage penalty term λn∥β∥1 in the maximization problem, where λn > 0 is
known as the tuning parameter. It is clear that the penalty term shrinks the lasso estimator towards zero
when compared to the ML estimator ˆβn. In particular, ˆβ
λn
n = ˆβn if λn = 0, and ˆβ
λn
n = 0 if λn = +∞.
In the implementation of lasso, the tuning parameter λn is critical to the prediction accuracy of the model.
To select a good λn, we suggest using k-fold cross validation with k = 5 or k = 10 to ﬁnd the λn value
that minimizes the average classiﬁcation errors of the k test sets (see Chapter 5.1 of James et al. (2013) for
an introduction). Once the tuning parameter is chosen, one can use all the training data to reﬁt the lasso
model, i.e., Equation (13), to ﬁnd the lasso estimate ˆβ
λn
n . For a given tuning parameter, we suggest using
the coordinate descent algorithm of Friedman et al. (2010) to ﬁt the lasso model.

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
14
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Similar to Section 3, in this section, we also study the consistency, asymptotic normality and the large
deviation of the lasso estimators of the exceedance probability as well as the misclassiﬁcation probability.
We show that the lasso estimators preserve all the asymptotic properties that the ML estimators have. To
study asymptotic properties of the lasso estimators, we need a stronger assumption on the Hessian matrix
H(β) than Assumption 2, which is commonly used in analyzing lasso estimators (see, for instance, Fan and
Li 2001). In the assumption, we let Hjk(β) and βl denote the (j,k)th element of H(β) and lth element of
β, respectively, for any 1 ≤j,k,l ≤d.
ASSUMPTION 5. There exists a neighborhood of β0, denoted as N(β0), such that for any β ∈N(β0)
and any 1 ≤j,k,l ≤d, ∂βlHjk(β) exists and there exists a function Mjkl such that |∂βlHjk(β)| ≤
Mjkl(X,Y ) and E[Mjkl(X,Y )] < ∞.
We have the following lemma on the consistency and asymptotic normality of the lasso estimator ˆβ
λn
n .
LEMMA 1 (Fan and Li (2001)). Suppose that Assumptions 1, 2 and 5 holds. If λn →0 as n →∞, then
ˆβ
λn
n →β0 in probability as n →∞. Furthermore, if √nλn →0 as n →∞, then
√n

ˆβ
λn
n −β0

d→N
 0,J −1
as n →∞.
REMARK 1. Even though we attribute Lemma 1 to Fan and Li (2001), we want to point out the lemma
is an adaptation of Theorem 1 of Fan and Li (2001) to our context. Therefore, for completeness, we also
provide the proof of the lemma in the online supplement.
REMARK 2. Furthermore, we want to emphasize that these asymptotic results are meaningful, even
though the tuning parameter λn is chosen by cross validation in the actual implementation of lasso. We
do expect λn chosen by cross validation to get smaller as n increases because we have enough data to tell
which predictors matter without regularization.
Let ˆpλn
u (Sr(u)) = g(Xr, ˆβλn
n ) = exp(X⊤
r ˆβλn
n )/(1 + exp(X⊤
r ˆβλn
n )) be the lasso estimator of the
exceedance probability at any time u ∈(0,T) after observing Sr(u) as well as Xr = X(Sr(u)). Similar to
Theorem 1, based on the consistency and asymptotic normality of the lasso estimator (i.e., Lemma 1), by
the continuous mapping theorem and the delta method (Van der Vaart 2000), we can prove the following
Theorem on the consistency and asymptotic normality of ˆpλ
u(Sr(u)). We omit the proof here.
THEOREM 4. Suppose that Assumptions 1, 2, and 5 holds. If λn →0 as n →∞, then ˆpλn
u (Sr(u)) →
pu(Sr(u)) in probability as n →∞. Furthermore, if √nλn →0 as n →∞, then
√n

ˆpλn
u (Sr(u)) −pu(Sr(u))
 d→N(0,D)
as n →∞, where D = cXrJ −1X⊤
r and c = exp(2β0
⊤Xr)/(1 + exp(β0
⊤Xr))4.

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
15
In the following theorem, we establish the large deviation result of the lasso estimator ˆβ
λn
n . Indeed, for
the theorem to hold, we need the Fisher information matrix to be positive deﬁnite. Therefore, Assumptions
2 is used. The proof of the theorem is included in the online supplement.
THEOREM 5. Suppose that Assumptions 1, 2, and 4 hold and λn →0 as n →∞. Then, for any ϵ > 0,
there exists a positive constant ¯cλ(ϵ) such that
lim
n→∞−1
n log Pr
nˆβ
λn
n −β0
 > ϵ
o
≥¯cλ(ϵ).
REMARK 3. Notice that, by Equations (9), (6) and (13), β0 = arg maxβ∈ℜd
L(β),
ˆβn =
arg maxβ∈ℜd Ln(β), and ˆβ
λn
n = arg maxβ∈ℜd Lλn
n (β), where Lλn
n (β) = Ln(β)−λn∥β∥1. Therefore, β0,
ˆβn and Lλn
n (β) are all solutions to corresponding optimization problems. The proofs of both Theorems 2
and 5 depend critically on Proposition 4.32 in Bonnans and Shapiro (2000), which bounds the differences
between the optimal solutions, i.e., ∥ˆβn −β0∥and ∥ˆβ
λn
n −β0∥, by the differences between the objective
functions, i.e., ∥Ln(β)−L(β)∥and ∥Lλn
n (β)−L(β)∥, respectively. For more details, one may refer to the
online supplement.
Similar to the proof of Theorem 3, we can prove the following theorem on the probability of a large devi-
ation of the estimated exceedance probability from its true value, i.e., Pr
ˆpλn
u (Sr(u)) −pu(Sr(u))
 > δ
 
for any δ > 0, and the probability of misclassiﬁcation, i.e., Pr{ˆIλn ̸= I}. We omit the proof here.
THEOREM 6. Suppose that Assumptions 1, 2, and 4 hold. If ∥Xr∦= 0, then for any ϵ > 0, there exists
˜cλ(ϵ) > 0 such that
lim
n→∞−1
n log Pr
ˆpλn
u (Sr(u)) −pu(Sr(u))
 > δ
 
≥˜cλ(δ).
Furthermore, if ∥Xr∦= 0 and pu(Sr(u)) ̸= α, then there exists a constant cλ
0 > 0 such that
lim
n→∞−1
n log Pr
n
I ̸= ˆIλno
≥cλ
0.
(14)
REMARK 4. We prove Theorems 5 and 6 in our context. However, these results are of interest beyond
the context of online risk monitoring, because logistic regression and lasso are widely used in other contexts
as well.
5.
Variance Reduction Through Perturbation
So far in this paper we have taken a data analytics approach to analyzing the simulation output through
logistic regression for risk estimation and risk classiﬁcation. However, there is a fundamental difference
between typical data analytics problems and simulation analytics problems. In simulation analytics prob-
lems, the analysts know the underlying data generating processes (i.e., the simulation model) and therefore
have much more information than their peers in solving other types of analytics problems. In this section we
ask how we might be able to use the information to develop more efﬁcient tools for risk estimation and risk
classiﬁcation. In particular, we propose a method that perturbs the sample paths generated by the simulation

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
16
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
study and then uses a ﬁrst-order Taylor expansion to approximate the portfolio value under the perturbed
sample paths. We show that the ML estimators of the logistic regression parameters using the perturbed
sample paths have smaller variances than those using the original sample paths, at least when the time is
close to 0.
5.1.
Basic Idea of the Perturbation Method
Notice that, for the logistic regression model to work, we only need to ensure that the sample paths deliver
the correct default probabilities when conditioned on S(u) (see Assumption 1). Therefore, we only need to
make sure that S(t) follows the correct dynamics when t ∈(u,T]. This motivates us to perturb the initial
values S(0) of the sample paths so that the correct dynamics are used for all t ∈(0,T] but the sample paths
are more spread out. We can then use the new sample paths to ﬁt the logistic regression model for any
u ∈(0,T).
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
t
30
40
50
60
70
80
St
95% CI
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
t
30
40
50
60
70
St
95% CI
Figure 2
The default paths (darker color) and the non-default paths (lighter color) before and after perturbing
the initial value
Consider a simple example where there is only one risk factor that is modeled as a geometric Brownian
motion. In the left panel of Figure 2, we plot the generated sample paths. We color a path darker if it
leads to default and lighter otherwise, and we also plot the 95% range of the data. From the plot we see
that the paths with different colors are easier to differentiate when the time u is large because they are
more separated, but more difﬁcult to differentiate when u is small because they are more clustered together.
Suppose that, instead of simulating all sample paths of risk factor from the initial value S(0), we perturb it
by a small amount, say S(0)(1 + δU), where δ > 0 is the perturbation size and U ∈(−1,1) can be chosen
deterministically or randomly, and simulate sample paths from the new initial values. We can then evaluate
the portfolio risk at T and color the sample paths, as in the right panel of Figure 2. From the plot we see that
the sample paths with different colors are more separated, especially when u is small. Therefore, intuitively,
we would expect the perturbed sample paths lead to better risk estimation and risk classiﬁcation. In the
left and right panels of Figure 3, we plot the estimated risk boundaries for this one dimensional example
using the original and perturbed sample paths, respectively. From the plots we see clearly that the perturbed
sample paths lead to better risk estimation and risk classiﬁcation.

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
17
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
40
45
50
55
S
← α=0.1
← α=0.3
← α=0.5
← α=0.7
← α=0.9
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
40
45
50
55
S
← α=0.1
← α=0.3
← α=0.5
← α=0.7
← α=0.9
Figure 3
The boundaries for different α values using the original (left) and perturbed (right) sample paths.
The solid lines are the true boundaries, and the dashed lines are the estimated boundaries via
logistic regression
The perturbation method can be extended easily to multi-dimensional risk factors by perturbing Si(0) to
Si(0)(1+δiUi) for any risk factor i = 1,2,...,m, where U1,...,Um ∈(−1,1). In Section 5.2 we show that,
under the assumption that the sample paths are simulated from the perturbed initial values, the perturbation
method works well when u is small. In particular, when u →0, the variance reduction ratio, i.e., the variance
of the original estimator over that of the new estimator, goes to inﬁnity. In Section 5.3 we show how to
implement the perturbation method using the existing sample paths.
5.2.
Analysis of the Perturbation Method
Let S′(u) = (S′
1(u),...,S′
m(u))⊤denote the perturbed sample paths for any u ∈[0,T], where S′
i(u) is
simulated from a randomly perturbed initial value Si(0)(1 + δiUi) with δi > 0 and Ui ∈(−1,1) chosen
determinsitcally or randomly for all i = 1,2,...,m. Let X′(u) = X(S′(u)), let ˆβ
′
n denote the ML esti-
mator of β0 of the logistic regression model (3) using the perturbed sample paths, and J ′(u) denote the
Fisher information matrix when using the perturbed data. By Lemma C.1 in the online supplement, we have
√n[ˆβ
′
n −β0]
d→N(0,J ′−1(u)) as n →∞for any u ∈(0,T).
Notice that, for the original sample paths, all observations have the same S(0) value thus same X(S(0))
value at time 0. Then, intuitively, the logistic regression model cannot be ﬁtted if X has more than one
dimension, i.e., d ≥2. For the perturbed data, however, all observations have different S′(0) values thus dif-
ferent X′(0) values. Therefore, the logistic regression model may be ﬁtted if there are enough observations.
This intuitively explains why the perturbation method works well at least when u is close to 0. In the rest of
this subsection, we prove this intuition in a rigorous way.
To simplify the notation, we let X(u) = X(S(u)) and let X(0) = x to denote it is a deterministic vector.
Furthermore, let J −1
ii (u) and J ′−1
ii (u) denote the ith diagonal elements of J −1(u) and J ′−1(u), respectively,
for any u ∈(0,T). Notice that they are the asymptotic variances of ˆβi and ˆβ′
i, respectively, for all i =
1,2,...,d. Let ri(u) = J −1
ii (u)/J ′−1
ii (u) denote the asymptotic variance reduction ratio of the perturbation
method for estimating β0i for any u ∈(0,T). The following theorem shows that at least d −1 terms of

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
18
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
r1(u),...,rd(u) go to inﬁnity if u goes down to zero. Therefore, when u is close to zero, the perturbation
method leads to a signiﬁcant variance reduction effect compared to using the original sample paths. The
proof is given in the online supplement.
THEOREM 7. Suppose that Assumptions 1 and 2 are satisﬁed for any u ∈(0,T). Furthermore, suppose
that X(u) is right continuous a.s. at u = 0, supu∈(0,T ) E[∥X(u)∥2+ϵ] < ∞for some ϵ > 0, and J ′(0) is of
full rank. Then, ri(u) →∞as u →0+ for at least d −1 values of i ∈{1,2,...,d}, where u →0+ means u
goes to zero from the positive side.
5.3.
Implementation of the Perturbation Method
To implement the perturbation method, we need to construct the sample paths from randomly perturbed
initial values using the original sample paths and also evaluate the portfolio loss for each newly constructed
sample path. In some cases, these tasks can be done exactly. But in general cases, these can only be done
approximately. First, we consider how to construct sample paths. In many models of risk factors, includ-
ing the geometric Brownian motion model, Heston’s stochastic volatility model, Merton’s jump diffusion
model, and others (see Hull 2014), Sj(u)/Sj(0) is not a function of Sj(0). For these models, one can
construct the new sample path of risk factor j exactly by setting
S′
j(u) = Sj(u)
Sj(0)S′
j(0) = Sj(u)[1 + δUj]
(15)
for any u ∈(0,T]. For more general models of risk factors, we assume that the derivative process
dSj(u)/dSj(0) is available along with the sample path Sj(u). Notice that dSj(u)/dSj(0) is known as the
sample path derivative. It is often very easy to simulate and requires very little additional effort, when it
is simulated along with S(u) (Broadie and Glasserman 1996). Then, we may apply Taylor’s ﬁrst-order
approximation and approximate S′(u) by
S′
j(u) ≈Sj(u) + dSj(u)
dSj(0)

S′
j(0) −Sj(0)

= Sj(u) + dSj(u)
dSj(0)Sj(0)δUj
(16)
for any u ∈(0,T].
Second, we consider how to reconstruct the portfolio loss. By Equation (1), the portfolio loss satisﬁes
L(T) = Φ(0)−Φ(T) = Φ(0)−wV(T) = Φ(0)−Pk
i=1 wiVi(T). Then to reconstruct the portfolio loss for
the new sample paths, we need to compute V′(T), which includes the values of the ﬁnancial products at time
T. Notice that V′(T) depends on S′(T). If there exists closed-form expressions, e.g., Black-Scholes formula
for European call and put options, then V′(T) may be computed analytically. Otherwise, we assume that the
price sensitivities of Vi(T) with respect to Sj(T), i.e., ∂Vi(T)/∂Sj(T), are available for all i = 1,2,...,k
and j = 1,2,...,m. Indeed, dVi(T)/dSj(T) are known as the Greeks in ﬁnancial risk management and
they typically calculated when evaluating Vi(T) (see, for instance, Broadie and Glasserman (1996) and

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
19
Liu and Hong (2011) on simulating the Greeks). Then, we may apply Taylor’s ﬁrst-order approximation to
approximate V ′
i (T) by
V ′
i (T) ≈Vi(T) +
m
X
j=1
∂Vi(T)
dSj(T)

S′
j(T) −Sj(T)

,
where S′
j(T) −Sj(T) may be computed using either Equation (15) or (16) by setting u = T.
Lastly, we discuss how to generate the initial values S′(0). Based on our current construction, S′
j(0) =
Sj(0)[1 + δUj], where U = (U1,...,Um)⊤is uniformly distributed in the hyperbox (−1,1)m. However,
the randomness in U also introduces additional variance in the estimation of ˆβ
′
n. This motivates us to use
low dispersion sequences to spread out the observations of U more evenly in the hypercube to reduce the
variance of the ML estimator. In our implementations, we use the Sobol sequence (Niederreiter 1988). In
the online supplement, we compare the uniformness between two-dimensional uniform random vector and
the Sobol sequence.
6.
Additional Simulation
In previous sections, we assumed that all sample paths are generated at time 0. In some practical situations,
one may be able to simulate more sample paths at some time point between 0 and T. For instance, when
there is a weekend, one may decide to add more sample paths simulated from the current values of the risk
factors. In this section, we consider how to incorporate the additional data into the analysis to improve the
quality of the risk estimators and risk classiﬁers. In particular, we consider two methods. In the ﬁrst method,
we use the two sets of data to generate two estimators separately and then combine the two estimators; and
in the second method, we combine the two sets of data together and use logistic regression on the combined
data set to obtain a new estimator. We prove that both methods lead to estimators that have smaller variances
than the one without using the additional data. The numerical experiments conducted in Section 7.2 show
that both methods have comparable performance in both risk estimations and risk classiﬁcations. However,
compared to the ﬁrst method, the second one is easier to extend to the situations where there are multiple
sets of additional data (simulated at different time points) and is easier to implement. Therefore, we prefer
and recommend the second method.
6.1.
Combining Estimators
Let {˜S(t),u′ ≤t ≤T} be the additional sample paths generated from the time point u′ ∈(0,T), and ˜Y be
the corresponding exceendance indicator, deﬁned similarly as in Equation (2). For any u ∈[u′,T], one may
obtain two estimators, denoted as ˆp0
u and ˆp1
u, based on the original data and the additional data, respectively.
Then, we may use the following combined estimator
˜pu = ν0ˆp0
u + ν1ˆp1
u,
where ν0 > 0 and ν1 > 0 are the corresponding weights with ν0 + ν1 = 1.
Notice that the original sample paths and the additional sample paths are independent. Then,
Var[˜pu] = Var

ν0ˆp0
u + ν1ˆp1
u

= ν2
0Var

ˆp0
u

+ ν2
1Var

ˆp1
u

.

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
20
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Therefore, we propose to ﬁnd the optimal weights ν∗
0 and ν∗
1 to minimize the variance of the combined
estimator, i.e., to solve the following optimization problem:
min
ν0,ν1 ν2
0Var

ˆp0
u

+ ν2
1Var

ˆp1
u

,
s.t. ν0 + ν1 = 1,
0 ≤ν0,ν1 ≤1.
It is easy to see that the optimal weights are
w∗
0 =
Var[ˆp1
u]
Var[ˆp0
u] + Var[ˆp1
u] and w∗
1 =
Var[ˆp0
u]
Var[ˆp0
u] + Var[ˆp1
u].
(17)
In addition, it is clear that the combined estimator with the optimal weights has a smaller variance to both
ˆp0
u and ˆp1
u have. Therefore, by adding additional sample paths, one can improve the quality of the original
estimator ˆp0
u. To use the combined estimator in practice, one ﬁrst estimates the variances of ˆp0
u and ˆp1
u using
the corresponding sample paths, and then uses these variance estimates to approximate the optimal weights
and to calculate the combined estimator.
6.2.
Combining Data
Notice that the original sample paths {S(t),0 ≤t ≤T} and the additional sample paths {˜S(t),u′ ≤t ≤T}
follow the same simulation model from u′ to T, conditioned on S(u′) and ˜S(u′) respectively. Then, for any
u ∈[u′,T], given S(u) = s and ˜S(u) = s, the probability mass functions of Y and ˜Y are the same. Based
on the logistic regression model, we have
Pr{Y = 1|S(u) = s} = Pr{ ˜Y = 1|˜S(u) = s} =
eβ⊤
0 X(s)
1 + eβ⊤
0 X(s) .
Therefore, the likelihood functions of these two data sets are the same, and we may conduct logistic regres-
sion on the combined dataset. In the rest of this subsection, we show that, by combing the two datasets
together, we may estimate the exceedance probabilities with smaller asymptotic variances, compared to the
original estimator without adding the additional sample paths.
Recall that X denotes X(S(u)). For the convenience of notation, we also use ˜X to denote X(˜S(u))
when u ∈[u′,T] is ﬁxed. By Theorem 1, we know that the asymptotic variance of the estimator √n ˆp0
u is
D = cX⊤
r J −1Xr, where n is the original sample size, c = exp(2β0
⊤Xr)/(1 + exp(β0
⊤Xr))4 with Xr =
X(Sr), and J = E[exp(β⊤
0 X)/(1 + exp(β⊤
0 X))2XX⊤]. So we can use D/n to approximate the variance
of the estimator ˆp0
u. Similarly, let ˆp1
u denote the estimator derived from the additional simulation data, then
its variance is approximately ˜D/˜n, where ˜n is the sample size of the additional data and ˜D = cX⊤
r ˜J −1Xr
with ˜J = E[exp(β⊤
0 ˜X)/(1 + exp(β⊤
0 ˜X))2 ˜X ˜X⊤]. Let ˜pu denote the estimator derived from the combined
dataset.
Consider the likelihood function on the combined dataset
ln+˜n(β) =
n
Y
i=1
g(Xi,β)Yi (1 −g(Xi,β))
1−Yi
˜n
Y
j=1
g( ˜Xj,β)
˜Yj

1 −g( ˜Xj,β)
1−˜Yj ,

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
21
and recall that g(X,β) = exp(β⊤X)/(1 + exp(β⊤X)), so the averaged log likelihood function is
Ln+˜n(β) =
1
n + ˜n

n
X
i=1

Yiβ⊤Xi −log
 1 + exp(β⊤Xi)

+
˜n
X
j=1
h
˜Yjβ⊤˜Xj −log

1 + exp(β⊤˜Xj)
i
.
Suppose that there is a sampling regime that makes the additional simulation data size ˜n = ˜n(n), which
is related to the original simulation data size n, and limn→∞˜n(n)/n →r. Under this regime, we only need
to focus on the asymptotic analysis with n →∞.
Notice that (Xi,Yi),i = 1,2,...,n are i.i.d., and ( ˜Xj, ˜Yj),j = 1,2,..., ˜n are i.i.d., then according to
Theorems 1 and 2 in Hoadley (1971), the Fisher information matrix is given by
¯J =
1
1 + rJ +
r
1 + r
˜J.
(18)
Then, the variance of ˜pu is approximated by ¯D/(n + ˜n), where ¯D = cX⊤
r ¯J −1Xr.
To compare the the asymptotic variance of ˜pu with those of ˆp0
u and ˆp1
u, we need the following lemma,
whose proof is provided in the online supplement.
LEMMA 2. Suppose that Σ1 and Σ2 are both d × d positive deﬁnite matrices, and Σ = Σ1 + Σ2. For
every non-zero column vector Xr ∈ℜd,
X⊤
r Σ−1Xr < X⊤
r Σ−1
i Xr,i = 1,2.
(19)
Based on Lemma 2, we have the following proposition that shows ¯D/(n + ˜n) is smaller than those of
D/n and ˜D/˜n, where D/n and ˜D/˜n approximate the variances of ˆp0
u and ˆp1
u, respectively. The proof is
given in the online supplement.
PROPOSITION 1. Let r = ˜n/n. If J and ˜J are positive deﬁnite, then ¯D/(n + ˜n) < min{D/n, ˜D/˜n}.
7.
Numerical Examples
In this section we conduct a sequence of numerical experiments to study the behavior of our proposed
methods in online risk estimation and classiﬁcation, and to compare their performance. Notice that, in
this paper, we focus on designing simulation methods. Therefore, we assume that simulation models are
valid models without misspeciﬁcation errors. For calibrating simulation models and discussions on model
misspeciﬁcation, readers are referred to Alexander (2001), Belomestny and Reib (2006), and White (1982).
In Sections 7.1 to 7.3, we use only the linear basis functions in logistic regression, and in Section 7.4,
we use both linear and individual quadratic basis functions. In all these examples, let λn = λ/n, and we
use 5-fold cross validation to determine the tuning parameter λ when implementing lasso, and use the
perturbation size δ = 5% when implementing the perturbation method. Furthermore, for all examples, we
assume that there are 10000 simulated sample paths, and for each sample path, 100 inner-level simulation

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
22
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
replications are used to determine the values and the Greeks of the derivatives in the portfolio. Some of the
results reported in Sections 7.1 and 7.3 are also available in Jiang et al. (2016). We add more results on the
use of the enhancing techniques and the comparisons.
7.1.
A Portfolio with 5 Underlying Assets
Consider a portfolio that longs 3 call options and 2 put options based on 5 different underlying assets, which
are mutually independent and driven by geometric Brownian motions (GBMs). Speciﬁcally, let S(t) =
(S1(t),...,S5(t))⊤, and the portfolio Φ(t) = V c
1 (t) + V c
2 (t) + V c
3 (t) + V p
4 (t) + V p
5 (t). At time T, if the
portfolio Φ(T) ≤Q, i.e., the loss Φ(0) −Φ(T) ≥Φ(0) −Q, we consider the portfolio in default. Let
the initial values of the ﬁve underlying assets S(0) = (50,50,60,60,70)⊤, the drifts of the GBMs µ =
(0.05,0.06,0.07,0.06,0.05)⊤, the volatilities σ = (0.1,0.1,0.1,0.1,0.1)⊤, and the strikes of the options
K = (40,40,45,80,85)⊤. Let the risk-free interest rate rf = 0.02 and the portfolio loss evaluation time
T = 0.3. Notice that there are two probability measures in our problem. The price dynamics of S(t) with
0 ≤t ≤T are simulated under the real probability measure where µ are used as the drifts of the GBMs,
while the options are evaluated under the risk neutral measure where rf is used as the drift of the GBMs.
Suppose that [0,T] is discreted into N = 30 equal-length intervals, we denote them by 0 = t0 ≤t1 ≤··· ≤
tN = T. Let the maturities of all the options be the same τ = 1, and let Q = 65.
Even though the option prices and their deltas (i.e., price sensitivities w.r.t. S(T)) may be calculated easily
by Black-Scholes formula, we still use simulation to price them to mimic the more complicated situations.
In our logistic regression model, we choose the basis function X(S(t)) = (1,S(t))⊤. Furthermore, when
applying the perturbation method, we use Equations (15) and (16) to approximate the perturbed risk factors
and the corresponding options prices, respectively.
Because the distribution of S(T) is directly available given Sr(t) and the portfolio value Φ(T) may
be calculated easily using Black-Scholes formula given S(T), we may evaluate the true value p(Sj(t))
accurately using a large number of scenarios (e.g., 104 in our calculation) conditioning on any Sr(t). We
can then use the true value as the benchmark to evaluate the performance of our proposed methods.
We plot the standard deviations of the all six parameter estimators in the logistic regression model, with
and without the perturbation method, in Figure 4. We see that the perturbation method clearly reduces the
variances. However, variance reduction diminishes as t increases. Furthermore, we see that the variances of
the estimators of both methods may increase as t approaches T. This is because, when t is close to T, the
exceedance probabilities are likely to be close to either 0 or 1, leading the parameters of the logistic regres-
sion models to very large values, thus increasing the variances of the estimators. Indeed, this phenomenon
exists not only in this example, it exists in all three examples that we consider. In Figure 4, we did not give
the standard deviations of the lasso and lasso+perturbation estimators because the number of risk factors in
this example is small and lasso does not provide beneﬁts.
Figure 4 provides useful insight. However, it does not tell us how good our proposed method is for
risk estimation and classiﬁcation. To evaluate the quality of risk estimation (e.g., predicting exceedance

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
23
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
100
101
102
103
Standard deviation of β1
ML Estimator
Perturbation
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
Standard deviation of β2
ML Estimator
Perturbation
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
Standard deviation of β3
ML Estimator
Perturbation
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
Standard deviation of β4
ML Estimator
Perturbation
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
Standard deviation of β5
ML Estimator
Perturbation
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
Standard deviation of β
ML Estimator
Perturbation
Figure 4
Standard deviations of the ML and perturbation estimators in Example 1
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
0.014
0.016
RMSE
ML Estimator
Perturbation
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
PCC
ML Estimator
Perturbation
Figure 5
RMSE (left panel) and PCC (right panel) of the ML and perturbation estimators in Example 1
probabilities), we use the root-mean-square error (RMSE) as the criterion for the estimated probabilities at
different time points. The RMSE is calculated as
RMSE(t) =
v
u
u
t 1
L
L
X
l=1
1
J
J
X
j=1
[ˆpl(Sj(t)) −p(Sj(t))]
2,
where L is the number of training sets and J is the number of testing sets for each training set, i.e., for
each training set l, we get an estimated probability function ˆp(·), and we generate J testing sets with M
sample paths to calculate the RMSE for this estimated probability throughout ti,i = 1,...,N −1, then we
replicate L times to calculate the average. The RMSE basically tells us the average errors of the probability

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
24
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
original
combining-estimators
combining-data
0.007
0.008
0.009
0.01
0.011
0.012
0.013
0.014
0.015
RMSE
original
combining-estimators
combining-data
0.975
0.98
0.985
0.99
0.995
1
PCC
Figure 6
Box plots of RMSEs and PCCs for the estimators of the original data, the combining-estimators
method and the combining-data method based on 40 replications. u = 0.20, u′ = 0.16
estimates. To evaluate the quality of risk classiﬁcation, we use the probability of correct classiﬁcation (PCC)
as the criterion. In the numerical study, we set L = J = 10, and M = 500, and plot the RMSEs and PCCs
in Figure 5. From the ﬁgure, we see that the RMSEs are small (about 0.01) and the PCCs are large (mostly
above 0.95) for all proposed methods, indicating that the risk estimations and classiﬁcations may be done
precisely. Moreover, the perturbation method can improve the quality of risk estimation and classiﬁcation,
especially when t is small.
7.2.
Additional Simulation
We consider the same example in Section 7.1. In addition, we generate some new sample paths ˜S(u),u ∈
[u′,T] from u′ ∈(0,T) based on the observed values of ˜S(u′). We let ˜n = 1000, which is 10% of the
original sample size n.
We ﬁrst consider the case where u′ = 0.16 and u = 0.20, with all other parameters remaining the same
as in Section 7.1. Notice that u > u′, which means the additional data were generated before the prediction
time u. We plot the results in Figure 6. In this ﬁgure, the left, middle and right box plots of both panels are
from the estimators of the original data, the combining-estimators method and the combining-data method,
respectively. This ﬁgure shows that, with only 10% additional sample paths, the qualities of risk estima-
tors are signiﬁcantly improved, while the qualities of risk classiﬁers are slightly improved. Moreover, the
estimators of the two methods with additional data have comparable performances.
Further, we study the improvement at different prediction time u with u′ = u −0.04, and summarize
the results in Table 1. In this table, we see that both of the estimators with additional data have similar
performances, and both outperform the one with only the original data, especially in risk estimations.
Next, we consider the case u = u′. By setting different values of u, we report the results in Table 2.
Similar to the results in Table 1, both of the estimators with additional data have similar performances, and
both signiﬁcantly outperform the one with only the original data.
These numerical results show that both methods with additional data have comparable performances in
risk estimations and classiﬁcations. However, the method of combining data is in general easier to imple-
ment than the method of combining estimators. Moreover, it can be extended easily to situations where

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
25
Table 1
RMSE and PCC for different parameter u with u′ = u −0.04
original
combining estimators combining data
RMSE
PCC
RMSE
PCC
RMSE
PCC
u = 0.05 0.0098 0.962 0.0087
0.965
0.0087
0.965
u = 0.10 0.0119 0.974 0.0093
0.977
0.0090
0.976
u = 0.15 0.0130 0.982 0.0096
0.984
0.0091
0.985
u = 0.20 0.0120 0.988 0.0089
0.990
0.0084
0.990
u = 0.25 0.0112 0.988 0.0083
0.989
0.0074
0.989
Table 2
RMSE and PCC for different u
original
combining estimators combining data
RMSE
PCC
RMSE
PCC
RMSE
PCC
u = 0.05 0.0096 0.964 0.0063
0.971
0.0063
0.969
u = 0.10 0.0105 0.979 0.0062
0.981
0.0063
0.981
u = 0.15 0.0131 0.983 0.0066
0.987
0.0066
0.986
u = 0.20 0.0109 0.987 0.0057
0.988
0.0059
0.987
u = 0.25 0.0107 0.990 0.0066
0.988
0.0068
0.989
multiple batches of data are added at different time points, as we only need to combine all data together and
conduct logistic regression once. Therefore, we prefer and recommend the method of combing data.
7.3.
Adding Perfectly Hedged Positions
In this example, we add another 20 underlying assets to Example 1 in Section 7.1. For each of the new
underlying assets, we long one call option, and short one put option and the corresponding underlying asset.
Then, by put-call parity (Hull 2014), the newly added positions are perfectly hedged and have a deterministic
value. We further add a proper position of cash so that the value of the new portfolio is the same as that of
Example 1. Therefore, the exceedance probability in this example is exactly same as that in Example 1 and
it is not affected by the newly added underlying assets. We apply our proposed methods on all underlying
assets, old and new, and our goal is to test the performance of the lasso and lasso+perturbation estimators.
We model the dynamics of all underlying assets as GBMs. More speciﬁcally, we now call the ﬁve assets
used in Example 1 as S1(t) and the new assets as S2(t), and Φ(t) = Φ1(t) + Φ2(t). The parameters of
S2(t) (the initial values, drifts, volatilities, and correlations) and the strike prices K2,i are given in Table
1 in the online supplement. All other parameters remain the same as that in Example 1. Therefore, the
exceedance probabilities remain the same. In this example we let the basis function X(S(t)) = (1,S(t))⊤=
(1,S1,1,...,S1,5(t),S2,1(t),...,S2,20(t))⊤.
In Figure 7 we plot the standard deviations of the estimators of β1,...,β6, and in Figure 8 we plot the
RMSEs of β7,...,β26, because we know their true values are 0. From these ﬁgures, we see that the pertur-
bation method reduces variances of all estimators. However, lasso reduces the variances of the intercept β1
and βi,i = 7,...,26, without reducing the variances of β2,...,β6.
We also plot the RMSEs and PCCs in Figure 9. When compared to Figure 5, we ﬁnd that the RMSEs
and PCCs of the ML estimators are higher in this example than in Example 1, indicating that the added risk
factors introduce more noise and make the risk estimation and classiﬁcation more difﬁcult. However, lasso,

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
26
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
100
101
102
103
Standard deviation of β1
ML Estimator
Perturbation
Lasso
Lasso+Perturbation
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
Standard deviation of β2
ML Estimator
Perturbation
Lasso
Lasso+Perturbation
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
Standard deviation of β3
ML Estimator
Perturbation
Lasso
Lasso+Perturbation
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
Standard deviation of β4
ML Estimator
Perturbation
Lasso
Lasso+Perturbation
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Standard deviation of β5
ML Estimator
Perturbation
Lasso
Lasso+Perturbation
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
Standard deviation of β6
ML Estimator
Perturbation
Lasso
Lasso+Perturbation
Figure 7
Standard deviations of the ML, lasso, perturbation and lasso+perturbation estimators of β1,...,β6
in Example 2
perturbation and lasso+perturbation estimators can all improve the RMSEs and PCCs. In particular, the
lasso+perturbation estimators perform very well, making the RMSEs and PCCs almost as good as those in
Example 1.
7.4.
A Portfolio with 80 Risk Factors
In this example we consider a portfolio with 60 underlying assets, and some of them are correlated. The
portfolio has two groups of products. The ﬁrst group longs one call option and one put option for each of
the ﬁrst 40 underlying assets, which are modeled by GBMs. The second group longs one share of the asset
for each of the remaining 20 underlying assets, which are modeled by Heston’s stochastic volatility models,
i.e., the asset price S(t) is modeled by
dS(t) = µS(t)dt +
p
v(t)S(t)dW1(t)
dv(t) = κ(θ −v(t))dt + η
p
v(t)dW2(t)
dW1(t)dW2(t) = ρ′dt,
where W1(t) and W2(t) are standard Brownian motions, κ is the rate of mean reversion, θ is the long-term
mean of variance, η is the volatility of the volatility, µ is the drift of the stock, and ρ′ is the correlation
of two Brownian motions. Notice that, to make sure the volatility is always positive, we need the con-
dition 2κθ > η2. Speciﬁcally, let S1(t) = (S1,1(t),...,S1,40(t)) and S2(t) = (S2,1(t),...,S2,20(t)) denote
the underlying assets in the ﬁrst and second group, respectively. Let Φ1(t) = P40
i=1{V c
i (t) + V p
i (t)}, and
Φ2(t) = P20
i=1 S2,i(t). Similar to previous two examples, we let T = 0.3 and the number of discretization
points N = 30. Other parameters are given in Table 2 in the online supplement, and the maturity times of
all the options are τ = 1.

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
27
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
RMSE
β7
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
RMSE
β8
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
RMSE
β9
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
RMSE
β10
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
RMSE
β11
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
RMSE
β12
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
RMSE
β13
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
RMSE
β14
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
RMSE
β15
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
RMSE
β16
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
RMSE
β17
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
RMSE
β18
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
RMSE
β19
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
RMSE
β20
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
RMSE
β21
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
RMSE
β22
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
RMSE
β23
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
RMSE
β24
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
RMSE
β25
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
RMSE
β26
Figure 8
RMSEs of the ML, lasso, perturbation and lasso+perturbation estimators of β7,...,β26 in Example
2 (legends are in Figure 7)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
RMSE
ML Estimator
Perturbation
Lasso
Lasso+Perturbation
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
PCC
ML Estimator
Perturbation
Lasso
Lasso+Perturbation
Figure 9
RMSE (left panel) and PCC (right panel) of the ML, lasso, perturbation and lasso+perturbation
estimators in Example 2

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
28
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
RMSE
ML Estimator
Perturbation
Lasso
Lasso+Perturbation
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
0.86
0.88
0.9
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
PCC
ML Estimator
Perturbation
Lasso
Lasso+Perturbation
Figure 10
RMSE (left panel) and PCC (right panel) of the ML, lasso, perturbation and lasso+perturbation
estimators in Example 3
This is a challenging example because there are 80 risk factors and only 10000 sample paths. We want to
use this example to test the performance of the proposed methods for high-dimensional problems.
We evaluate the true exceedance probabilities by running 10000 observations at each time point, as in the
ﬁrst two examples, and use them as the benchmark to evaluate the RMSEs and PCCs, based on 100 testing
paths with L = J = 10 and M = 100. At any time t, notice that there are two groups of risk factors, denoted
by S(t) and v(t), where v(t) = (v1(t),...,v20(t))⊤are the volatilities in Heston models at time t. We ﬁrst
include all the linear terms in the basis function, i.e., X(S(t)) = (1,S(t),v(t))⊤, and plot the RMSEs and
PCCs in Figure 10. From the left panel, we see that the risk estimation is not as precise as in previous two
examples, especially when the time is close to T. This may be because the number of risk factor is quite
large in this example and the logistic regression model with only linear terms may be insufﬁcient, i.e., having
a high level of bias. However, from the right panel of the ﬁgure, we see that the quality of risk classiﬁcation
is still quite good, which also supports our argument that risk classiﬁcation is typically an easier problem
than risk estimation. In this example, the logistic model with only the linear terms of risk factors appears
inadequate in approximating the real exceedance probability, especially for large t. This is a misspeciﬁcation
problem, which is a common issue for many statistical learning tools. To alleviate the problem, we add
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
RMSE
ML Estimator
Perturbation
Lasso
Lasso+Perturbation
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
t
0.86
0.88
0.9
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
PCC
ML Estimator
Perturbation
Lasso
Lasso+Perturbation
Figure 11
RMSE (left panel) and PCC (right panel) of the ML, lasso, perturbation and lasso+perturbation
estimators in Example 3 with square terms

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
29
the square terms of the individual risk factors, i.e., X(S(t)) = (1,S(t),v(t),S2(t),v2(t))⊤, where S2(t) =
(S2
1,1(t),...,S2
1,40(t),S2
2,1(t),...,S2
2,20(t))⊤and v2(t) = (v2
1(t),...,v2
20(t))⊤, and plot of the RMSEs and
PCCs in Figure 11. The results show that the risk estimators are more precise (i.e., the RMSEs are smaller)
and the risk classiﬁcations remain the same (i.e., the PCCs are similar). In both cases, we see that the
lasso+perturbation works the best. This example demonstrates that the proposed estimators, especially the
lasso+perturbation estimator, work well even for high-dimensional problems (notice that X(S(t)) is of 161
dimensions) with a reasonable sample size (n = 10000).
8.
Conclusions and Future Research
In this paper we consider how to use retained simulation sample paths to estimate the exceedance probabil-
ities and classify risk levels of a ﬁnancial portfolio in real time. We propose various methods to solve the
problem, study their asymptotic properties, and test their performance numerically on realistic examples.
These methods belong to a new class of techniques, known as simulation analytics, which apply data min-
ing and data analytics tools to estimate conditional statements. We also show that knowing the simulation
model gives us advantages and allows us to develop methods, such as the perturbation method, that are more
efﬁcient than typical data analytics tools.
The perspective of simulation analytics creates many opportunities in ﬁnancial risk management. For
instance, we may consider how to simulate from different S(0), instead of perturbing a single initial value,
so that the online risk monitoring problems may be solved more effectively, or how to conduct online risk
monitoring if the sample paths are simulated using importance sampling, a tool often used for variance
reduction in risk measurement. We may also consider how to handle portfolios that have path-dependent
derivatives such as Asian options and barrier options, and investigate how to use nonlinear statistical learn-
ing tools, such as tree-based methods and neural networks, to improve the accuracy of the risk estimators
and classiﬁers.
Acknolwedgement
The research reported in this paper is partially supported by Hong Kong Research Grants Council Grant
Number GRF 16203214 and by National Science Foundation Grant Number CMMI-1537060.
References
Alexander C (2001) Market Models: A Guide to Financial Data Analysis (Chichester: John Wiley & Sons Ltd).
Bassamboo A, Juneja S, Zeevi A (2008) Portfolio credit risk with extremal dependence: Asymptotic analysis and
efﬁcient simulation. Operations Research 56(3):593–606.
Belomestny D, Reib M (2006) Spectral calibration of exponential L´evy models. Finance and Stochastics 10(4):449–
474.
Bonnans JF, Shapiro A (2000) Perturbation Analysis of Optimization Problems (New York: Springer).

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
30
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Broadie M, Du Y, Moallemi CC (2011) Efﬁcient risk estimation via nested sequential simulation. Management Science
57(6):1172–1194.
Broadie M, Du Y, Moallemi CC (2015) Risk estimation via regression. Operations Research 63(5):1077–1097.
Broadie M, Glasserman P (1996) Estimating security price derivatives using simulation. Management Science
42(2):269–285.
Fahrmeir L, Kaufmann H (1985) Consistency and asymptotic normality of the maximum likelihood estimator in
generalized linear models. The Annals of Statistics 13(1):342–368.
Fan J, Li R (2001) Variable selection via nonconcave penalized likelihood and its oracle properties. Journal of the
American Statistical Association 96(456):1348–1360.
Feng M, Staum J (2017) Green simulation: Reusing the output of repeated experiments. ACM Transactions on Mod-
eling and Computer Simulation 37(4):Article 23.
Friedman J, Hastie T, Tibshirani R (2010) Regularization paths for generalized linear models via coordinate descent.
Journal of Statistical Software 33(1):1–22.
Fu JC, Li G, Zhao LC (1993) On large deviation expansion of distribution of maximum likelihood estimator and its
application in large sample estimation. Annals of the Institute of Statistical Mathematics 45:477–498.
Glasserman P, Heidelberger P, Shahabuddin P (2000) Variance reduction techniques for estimating value-at-risk. Man-
agement Science 46(10):1349–1364.
Glasserman P, Heidelberger P, Shahabuddin P (2002) Portfolio value-at-risk with heavy-tailed risk factors. Mathemat-
ical Finance 12(3):239–269.
Glasserman P, Kang W, Shahabuddin P (2008) Fast simulation of multifactor portfolio credit risk. Operations Research
56(5):1200–1217.
Glasserman P, Li J (2005) Importance sampling for portfolio credit risk. Management Science 51(11):1643–1656.
Gordy MB, Juneja S (2010) Nested simulation in portfolio risk measurement. Management Science 56(10):1833–1848.
Hastie T, Tibshirani R, Friedman J (2011) The Elements of Statistical Learning (New York: Springer-Verlag), second
edition.
Hoadley B (1971) Asymptotic properties of maximum likelihood estimators for the independent not identically dis-
tributed case. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 42(6):1977–1991.
Hong LJ, Hu Z, Liu G (2014) Monte carlo methods for value-at-risk and conditional value-at-risk: A review. ACM
Transactions on Modeling and Computer Simulation 24(4):Article 22.
Hong LJ, Juneja S, Liu G (2017) Kernel smoothing for nested estimation with application to portfolio risk measure-
ment. Operations Research 65(3):657–673.
Hosmer DW, Lemeshow S (2004) Applied Logistic Regression (New York: John Wiley & Sons).
Hull JC (2014) Options, Futures, and Other Derivatives (New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall), 9th edition.

Author: Online Risk Monitoring Using Ofﬂine Simulation
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
31
Iscoe I, Kreinin I (2010) Large pool approximations. Cont R, ed., Encyclopedia of Quantitative Finance, volume 3
(Chichester: John Wiley & Sons).
James G, Witten D, Hastie T, Tibshirani R (2013) An Introduction to Statistical Learning (New York: Springer).
Jiang G, Hong LJ, Nelson BL (2016) A simulation analytics approach to dynamic risk monitoring. Roeder TMK,
Frazier PI, Szechtman R, Zhou E, Huschka T, Chick SE, eds., Proceedings of the 2016 Winter Simulation Con-
ference, 437–447.
Jorion P (2006) Value at Risk: The New Benchmark for Managing Financial Risk (New York: McGraw-Hill), third
edition.
Lee SH, Glynn PW (2003) Computing the distribution function of a conditional expectation via monte carlo: Discrete
conditioning spaces. ACM Transactions on Modeling and Computer Simulation 13(3):238–258.
Liu G, Hong LJ (2011) Kernel estimation of the greeks for options with discontinuous payoffs. Operations Research
59(1):96–108.
Liu M, Nelson BL, Staum J (2010) Simulation on demand for pricing many securities. Johansson B, Jain S, Montoya-
Torres J, Hugan J, Yucesan E, eds., Proceedings of the 2010 Winter Simulation Conference, 2782–2789.
Liu M, Staum J (2010) Stochastic kriging for efﬁcient nested simulation of expected shortfall. Journal of Risk 12(3):3–
27.
Longstaff FA, Schwartz ES (2001) Valuing American options by simulation: a simple least-squares approach. Review
of Financial Studies 14(1):113–147.
Nelson BL (2016) ‘Some tactical problems in digital simulation’ for the next ten years. Journal of Simulation 10(1):2–
11.
Newey WK, McFadden D (1994) Large sample estimation and hypothesis testing. Engle R, McFadden D, eds., Hand-
book of Econometrics, volume 4, chapter 36, 2111–2245 (New York: Elsevier).
Niederreiter H (1988) Low-discrepancy and low-dispersion sequences. Journal of Number Theory 30(1):51–70.
Rosenbaum I, Staum J (2015) Database Monte Carlo for simulation on demand. Yilmaz L, Chan WKV, Moon I,
Roeder TMK, Macal C, Rossetti MD, eds., Proceedings of the 2015 Winter Simulation Conference, 679–688.
Rudin W (1991) Functional Analysis (New York: McGraw-Hill), second edition.
Sirignano J, Giesecke K (2018) Risk analysis for large pools of loans. Management Science In Advance.
Sun Y, Apley DW, Staum J (2011) Efﬁcient nested simulation for estimating the variance of a conditional expectation.
Operations Research 59(4):998–1007.
Tibshirani RJ (1996) Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series
B 58(1):267–288.
Van der Vaart AW (2000) Asymptotic Statistics (Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press).
White H (1982) Maximum likelihood estimation of misspeciﬁed models. Econometrica 50(1):1–25.