TITLE: Synergies Between Operations Research and Quantum Information Science
JOURNAL: INFORMS_Journal_Computing
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.2023.1268
---

arXiv:2301.05554v1 [quant-ph] 11 Jan 2023
Synergies Between Operations Research and Quantum Information
Science
Ojas Parekh
Quantum Algorithms and Applications Collaboratory (QuAAC)
Sandia National Laboratories
odparek@sandia.gov
Abstract
This article highlights synergies between quantum information science (QIS) and operations
research for QIS-curious operations researchers (and vice-versa).
1
Introduction
Operations researchers are no strangers to transferring their expertise to new domains to realize
an impact. Such endeavors often entail understanding enough domain speciﬁcs to eﬀectively
build models and solve problems. This can be an iterative and challenging process, as sometimes
idiosyncrasies that have been internalized by domain experts need to be sussed out. However,
overcoming such obstacles may become particular points of pride, in addition to overall success.
Even though quantum information science (QIS) is a broad, vibrant, and intensely growing
ﬁeld, I advocate approaching QIS the same way we might a more specialized domain. Instead of
being daunted by, for example, never having taken a quantum physics course, we might try to
stick to mathematical descriptions or other abstractions, with the understanding of likely being
oblivious to a body of underlying intuition that has been well earned by physicists. Time and
experience may help remedy the latter if desired.
I highlight seminal or recent advances in QIS attained through the lens of optimization. I
also oﬀer suggestions on how engaging with QIS might lead to advances in more traditional
operations research (OR). Finally, I present strategies for operations researchers to engage QIS.
I encourage operations researchers to cultivate new synergies with QIS.
2
Quantum Information Science applications of Opera-
tions Research
Properties of quantum states and channels.
Without worrying about additional de-
tails or quantum-mechanical interpretations, we may think of a quantum state, ρ, on n quantum
bits (qubits) as a 2n ×2n matrix with complex entries. Many basic properties of quantum states
and the quantum channels describing operations on them may be readily cast as semideﬁnite
programs. In fact the deﬁning properties of a state ρ are that it has trace equal to one and is
positive semideﬁnite. For more details, a self-contained account of ﬁve accessible applications
of semideﬁnite programming to properties of quantum states and channels appears in [ST21].
The high-level perspective of the remainder of the article will not expect an understanding
of qubits or quantum states, beyond the fact that quantum states are exponentially large in the
number of qubits. The latter opens the door to potential exponential advantages over classical
computation, as clever physical manipulations of n qubits may enable nature to implicitly process
exponentially large quantum states in meaningful and useful ways. However, the same kind of
1

statement could be made about randomized classical algorithms, where manipulating n random
bits yields an implicit distribution over an exponentially large set of outcomes. Thus we seek to
identify features of quantum physics that are not accessible classically.
2.1
Diﬀerentiating classical and quantum physics
What does a universe endowed with quantum physics oﬀer that is simply impossible under the
laws of classical physics (i.e., conventional non-quantum physics)? Let me highlight such an
example. In a nonlocal game Alice and Bob are to be posed questions x and y and must agree on
a strategy that generates answers a and b. The value of a nonlocal game, V (a, b | x, y) ∈{0, 1}
determines correctness of the answers, and Alice and Bob’s goal is to maximize the expectation
of V over a given distribution on x, y (and potential randomness in selecting a, b). It turns
out that random strategies do not oﬀer any advantage over deterministic strategies; however,
strategies where Alice and Bob each have one of a pair of entangled1 quantum bits (qubits) are
able to outperform classical strategies (see the survey, [BCP+14]).
Advantages oﬀered by quantum strategies to nonlocal games are intimately related to John
Bell’s seminal tests for nonlocality (or “quantumness”) in physical systems. Quantum violations
of Bell inequalities, that classical physical systems must satisfy, have been demonstrated experi-
mentally under a variety of settings ([BCP+14], Section VII). The values of nonlocal games may
in turn be approximated by hierarchies of semideﬁnite programs (SDPs) ([BCP+14], Section
II.C); however, the size of the resulting programs grows exponentially (or worse) in the size of
the game. Imagine the gratiﬁcation in ﬁnally successfully solving or analyzing a thorny SDP
and subsequently receiving a message from your experimental-physicist friend that nature agrees
with your ﬁndings – a nice pat on the back from the universe. Nonlocal games have fundamental
connections to models of (quantum) computation [MNY21], and a nonlocal games perspective
has recently enabled a landmark result resolving two longstanding problems: Tsirelson’s problem
in quantum mechanics and Connes’ embedding problem in operator algebras [JNV+21, PV16].
2.2
Computational quantum advantages
A foremost direction in QIS is leveraging non-classical features of quantum physics to realize
forms of quantum computation that are able to enjoy advantages over conventional classical
computation. Shor’s seminal quantum algorithm for factoring integers runs exponentially faster
than any known classical algorithm (see e.g., [NC10], Section 5.3); however, as far as we currently
know, exponentially faster classical factoring algorithms might well exist. Yet, if we consider
computational resources beyond execution time, exponential quantum advantages over best-
possible classical algorithms are known.
One such setting is query complexity, where we are only concerned with the number of
queries to a problem’s input data rather than overall execution time. Exponential quantum
advantages in query complexity were among the ﬁrst quantum algorithms discovered (see e.g.,
[NC10], Section 1.4). The scope for exponential advantages in query complexity for graph prob-
lems is generally well understood ([BDCG+20]; see the related survey, [MdW16]). Remarkably,
ﬁnding the best quantum algorithm for a problem in the query model can be captured, within
constant factors, as SDPs [Rei11, BSS03], and this perspective has helped design quantum
graph algorithms (e.g., [DKW19]). Recent work has characterized the precise query complexity
in terms of the completely bounded norm of a tensor [ABP19], which in turn is expressible as
an SDP [GL19]. A relaxed notion of query complexity in expectation turns out to be intimately
related to the Sherali-Adams hierarchy in the classical case and the Lasserre/Sum-of-Squares
(SoS) hierarchy in the quantum case [KLW15]. For open problems in quantum query complexity
see [Aar21], and for a broader survey of exponential quantum speedups see [Aar22].
1Rather than oﬀering a concise but potentially misleading description of entanglement here, I suggest the popular
article, [Wil16].
2

2.3
Building better quantum computers
The biggest open question in quantum computing is perhaps whether we can indeed design and
engineer scalable fault-tolerant quantum computers to realize theoretically supported quantum
advantages. The world is a particularly hostile place for a quantum computer, with magnetic
ﬁelds, variations in temperature, and a host of other sources of noise that are disruptive to com-
putation. Noise induces errors that are ampliﬁed the longer a computation executes. Schemes
to correct such errors are known; however, they demand considerable overhead in terms of ex-
tra error-correction qubits. Designing eﬃcient quantum error correction schemes with desirable
resiliency properties may be cast as an optimization problem, and semideﬁnite programming
techniques have been used to design and analyze such schemes [FSW07, KL09, BBFS21].
Quantum processors may be built upon diﬀerent physical substrates, though the selection is
drastically constrained compared to classical processors. Each brings unique design and engi-
neering challenges, as well as associated optimization problems. Quantum processors are gen-
erally put through quantum characterization, validation and veriﬁcation hoops to ensure they
behave as expected (see the tutorial, [KR21] and review, [EHW+20]). Well-behaved quantum
processors sit under software stacks that oﬀer further opportunities for optimization, includ-
ing compiling high-level quantum algorithms into quantum circuits consisting of native gates.
Interdisciplinary teams including operations researchers are increasingly addressing optimiza-
tion problems at many levels of quantum computer system design [NBGJ22, NLC21, TTS+21,
FBL+22, MCL+22, BPLP20].
2.4
Relaxations for problems in quantum physics
The above applications suggest a recurring theme: convex programs naturally model quantum-
mechanical phenomena, but faithful models require exponential-size programs in the number
of qubits. A technique OR may bring to the table is ﬁnding smaller but reasonably strong
relaxations of such exponential-sized convex programs. This could help accelerate approaches for
exactly or approximately computing quantities of physical interest. I will illustrate this concept
by drawing connections between discrete optimization problems and quantum counterparts,
using the well-known classical Max Cut problem as an example.
Max Cut as an eigenvalue problem.
For a graph G = (V, E) on n vertices, Max Cut
seeks to ﬁnd a set S ⊆V that maximizes the number of edges between S and V \ S. We
will encode Max Cut as ﬁnding the largest eigenvalue of a matrix exponentially large in n, for
more direct comparison with problems from quantum physics. Imagine the columns and rows
of a diagonal matrix H ∈R2n×2n are labeled with the 2n possible vertex sets S ⊆V , and set
HS,S to the number of edges in the cut (S, V \ S). Now since H is diagonal, λmax(H) (the
maximum eigenvalue of H) is the maximum cut value, achieved by a set S∗. The corresponding
eigenvector v∗∈R2n corresponds to a basis vector with a one in the position labeled S∗and zeros
elsewhere. Even though v∗lives in an exponentially large space, it has a succinct description
that only depends on S∗. The matrix H itself also has a succinct description that only depends
on the edges in G. In summary, Max Cut (or discrete optimization problems in general2) may
be cast as ﬁnding λmax(H) for a diagonal matrix H that is exponentially large in n with a
description of size polynomial in n.
Sampling-based problem models.
What happens if a symmetric H is not required to
be diagonal? In this case a solution eigenvector v∗may have exponentially many nonzeros,
which is naturally a major obstacle for eﬃcient algorithms or heuristics. We can circumvent
this by asking for statistics about v∗instead. One option is to instead request samples from a
distribution over the labels of the elements of v∗, such that the label l is obtained with probability
proportional to (v∗
l )2 (or |v∗
l |2 if H is Hermitian and v∗is complex). This output model still
2H could be labeled with subsets of any discrete domain, with infeasibility modeled by large-magnitude values.
3

captures Max Cut, since we would obtain some optimal set S∗as a label with probability 1.
Such models are perhaps as not as foreign as they might ﬁrst appear; for example, Markov
Chain Monte Carlo methods are tailored for similar settings.
Polynomial-time quantum algorithms for linear algebra (see the primer, [DHM+18]) and
machine learning (see the survey, [BWP+17]) are known in the above kind of model, where the
implicitly deﬁned matrices involved are exponentially larger than the number qubits necessary to
describe them, and output vectors are only accessible through samples. However, there are some
critical caveats for obtaining exponential quantum advantages in this context [Aar15, Aar22]. In
breakthrough work, quantum-inspired polynomial-time classical algorithms of the same ﬂavor
have been recently discovered (e.g., [Tan19, CGL+20]); however, they rely on a particular kind of
classical data access model that may be impractical [CHM21]. Recent empirical demonstrations
of quantum advantages are also based on sampling problems [AAB+19, MLA+22].
The Local Hamiltonian problem.
Returning to the problem of computing λmax(H)
as described above, replacing “diagonal” with “Hermitian” in the requirements on H takes us
from an NP-complete discrete optimization problem (e.g., Max Cut) to a fundamental quantum
optimization problem: the Local Hamiltonian problem. Here H is called a Hamiltonian, and
“local” refers to a kind of succinct implicit description of H, in the vein of our Max Cut example
above. Physical systems may be described by local Hamiltonians that dictate how they evolve
over time, where the eigenvectors of the Hamiltonian correspond to stable states of the system.
In fact nature is constantly trying to solve optimization problems all around us! Indeed nature
strives to heuristically put physical systems in their ground states, corresponding to minimum-
eigenvalue eigenvectors of the corresponding Hamiltonian. Consequently, studying ground states
of physical systems is a fundamental problem that aids in better understanding and exploiting
exotic properties of materials, for example, [Min09].
From a computational perspective, Local Hamiltonian is a cornerstone in understanding the
power and limitations of diﬀerent models of quantum computing, serving a role akin to that of
the Boolean Satisﬁability problem (SAT) in classical complexity theory. Local Hamiltonian is
complete for the complexity class Quantum Merlin Arthur (QMA), which contains and is the
natural quantum analogue of NP. We do not expect polynomial-time quantum algorithms to
solve QMA-hard problems (quantum advantages are more subtle than solving NP-hard problems
[AC16, Aar22]. Yet, as with NP-hard problems in the classical regime, aspiring to solve QMA-
hard problems may spark new approaches for heuristic solutions, rigorous approximations, or
exact solutions in special cases.
The Quantum Max Cut problem.
A desire to help shape the nascent ﬁeld of quantum
approximation algorithms underlaid my foray into QIS. Sevag Gharibian and I introduced Quan-
tum Max Cut, an instance of Local Hamiltonian that is closely related to both the Heisenberg
model, a physical model of quantum magnetism, as well as classical Max Cut [GP19]. It turns
out that the celebrated Goemans-Williamson SDP-based approximation algorithm for Max Cut
[GW95] can be generalized to give approximation algorithms for Quantum Max Cut [GP19].
The SDP relaxation employed for Max Cut is an instance of the Lasserre/SoS hierarchy, and
relaxations for Quantum Max Cut [PT21a, PT22] may be obtained from a non-commutative3
counterpart of the Lasserre/SoS hierarchy [PNA10].
As as a canonical constraint-satisfaction and discrete-optimization problem, studying Max
Cut has had far-reaching consequences in both computer science [KKMO07] and OR [DL97],
including exponential lower bounds on polyhedral formulations of the Traveling Salesperson
problem (via the related correlation polytope) [FMP+15]. The goal is for Quantum Max Cut
to serve as a testbed for designing approaches to better solve more general Local Hamiltonian
3Max Cut may be cast as maxzi
P
ij∈E(1 −zizj)/2 for commutative variables z2
i = 1, while Quantum Max Cut
is maxxi,yi,zi λmax(P
ij∈E(1 −xixj −yiyj −zizj)/4), for non-commutative variables (i.e., matrices) x2
i = 1, y2
i = 1,
z2
i = 1 with the additional constraints that variables with diﬀerent indices commute, while diﬀerent variables with
the same index anti-commute.
4

problems [PT21b, PT22]. See Section 7 of [HNP+21] for an introduction to Quantum Max Cut
and Section 3 of [PT22] for additional parallels between Max Cut and Quantum Max Cut.
Challenges.
Although analogies between Max Cut and Quantum Max Cut have helped
direct research into the latter, it largely remains enigmatic. The Goemans-Williamson 0.878-
approximation for Max Cut [GW95] is the best possible under the Unique Games Conjecture
[KKMO07]. Although an optimal approximation for Quantum Max Cut is known in a special
setting [PT22], the currently best-known approximations for the general problem seem far from
optimal [HNP+21]. Thus a primary challenge is better approximation algorithms for Quantum
Max Cut, as well as more general local Hamiltonians problems.
Another direction is designing eﬀective and practical heuristics.
I expect OR-inﬂuenced
heuristics will likely be diﬀerent and complementary to those currently employed by physi-
cists.
More sophisticated OR-style relaxations, based on bespoke valid inequalities or new
types of mathematical-programming hierarchies, are unexplored. Better understanding the non-
commutative Lasserre/SoS hierarchy for Local Hamiltonian is a promising direction, since this
may also yield new types of quantum entanglement constraints [PT22]. Finally, Max Cut and
Quantum Max Cut are natural unconstrained optimization problems; models, relaxations, and
approximations for constrained Local Hamiltonian problems are virtually nonexistent.
2.5
Additional applications
I mention a few more applications in passing. QIP is a model of computation based on quan-
tum interactive proofs, while PSPACE is the model in which a classical computer is granted
polynomial space (but no explicit limit on execution time). Proofs of the celebrated result that
QIP = PSPACE rely on the multiplicative weights method for solving SDPs [JJUW10]. A re-
cent demonstration of self-concordant barrier functions for quantum relative entropy programs
implies more eﬃcient interior-point approaches for such problems [FS22]. Non-commutative
SDP hierarchies can be used to better understand mutually unbiased bases, which have many
applications in quantum information and beyond [GP21]. There are a wide variety of further
such applications in QIS, and there are likely many more waiting to be discovered.
2.6
Discerning a quantum advantage
How will we know if we have witnessed a true and signiﬁcant quantum advantage? On the
theoretical side, worst-case and asymptotic analysis suggests provable exponential quantum
advantages are possible on fault-tolerant quantum computers; however, as previously discussed,
problems admitting provable quantum advantages may not have direct classical counterparts,
rendering an apples-to-apples comparison diﬃcult. Even when such comparisons are possible,
the big question is whether nature will allow us to engineer scalable quantum computers beyond
the near-term noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) regime [Pre18].
On the practical side, promising empirical benchmarks of current early stage NISQ computers
may not be indicative of sustainable advantages into the future. In addition, recent work points
to theoretical limitations of NISQ computing [CCHL22, AGL+22, Kal20]. Empirical benchmarks
are typically focused on a relatively small or otherwise limited set of instances, and even when
quantum computers appear superior, better classical algorithms may be right around the corner.
To mitigate such factors, identifying problems appearing to admit empirical quantum advantages
and issuing open challenges in the vein of the DIMACS Implementation Challenges [DIM22] may
be a fruitful practice. While this is not a direct QIS application of OR, it is something the latter
may share of its culture to beneﬁt the former.
3
Quantum-inspired Operations Research Advances
Diversifying instance libraries.
OR should be proud of its well-deﬁned problem models,
curated libraries of problem instances, and systematic benchmarks across ranges of solvers (e.g.,
5

[MS21]). QIS-inspired instances of optimization problems are likely to have a diﬀerent charac-
ter than traditional OR instances and would make nice additions to existing instance libraries.
Moreover, solving such instances eﬀectively may drive improvements or new techniques or fea-
tures in solvers. Systematic benchmarks and instance collections of quantum-inspired problems
may also be of beneﬁt to the QIS community.
3.1
Quantum algorithms for classical optimization problems
Quantum advantages are known for a variety of bread-and-butter optimization problems within
OR. Pursuing polynomial-factor quantum speedups for optimization problems including gra-
dient descent [GAW19, KP20], linear programming [Nan22], second-order cone programming
[KPS21], semideﬁnite programming [HJS+22, ANTZ21], and convex programming [CCLW20,
vAGGdW20] has been a fruitful endeavor. Yet such quantum algorithms do not always improve
upon classical counterparts for all the problem parameters, and lower bounds suggest expo-
nential quantum speedups are not possible [GKNS21, CCLW20, vAGGdW20]. A “natural” or
“practical” optimization problem admitting a rigorous exponential quantum advantage remains
elusive.
In place of a speedup, we may consider how well a quantum algorithm might approximate a
problem relative to classical algorithms. The Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm
(QAOA) [FGG14] is a quantum-algorithmic framework for formulating and solving discrete op-
timization problems (see the thesis, [Had18]). QAOA resembles mathematical programming in
that discrete optimization problems may be relatively easily expressed in the framework, and
the overall eﬃcacy of the algorithm is often highly dependent on the particular formulation em-
ployed. QAOA has garnered considerable QIS community interest, and it is a natural candidate
for implementation on NISQ systems. Moreover, QAOA is a parameterized algorithm that lends
itself to a natural hybrid quantum-classical loop, wherein a classical optimization routine is used
to obtain parameter values by leveraging a quantum computer to execute QAOA. The perfor-
mance of QAOA is assessed on the current parameter values, informing subsequent parameter
updates. It is not currently known if there is a problem where a polynomial-time execution of
QAOA on a quantum computer is able to yield a provably better approximation than possible
classically. Some theoretical limitations of QAOA are known [AM22, CLSS22, MH22, BKKT20].
Even if QAOA is unable to provide an advantage on classical problems, QAOA might be able
to achieve better approximations than possible classically for quantum optimization problems,
such as Quantum Max Cut. Such directions are understudied [AGM20, AGKS21]. Better un-
derstanding the power and limitations of QAOA, applying it to broader problem classes, and
devising QAOA-inspired classical algorithms remain challenges.
3.2
New types of problems inspired by quantum physics
Beyond helping to solve quantum optimization problems, I urge operations researchers to allow
quantum problems to inspire new types of classical ones. Let me supply an example. Opera-
tions researchers are well aware that our models frequently fail to capture the nuances of the
underlying practical problems we endeavor to solve. For this reason and others, a diverse set of
near-optimal solutions may be preferable to a single optimal solution.
Consider the following version of Max Cut that seeks to promote diverse solutions:
max
x
E[c(x)] +
X
x,y∈{0,1}n
p
Pr[x = x]Pr[x = y]h(x, y),
where x ∈{0, 1}n is a random variable, c(x) is the cost of the cut induced by x, and {0, 1} ∋
h(x, y) = 1 if and only if xi ̸= yi for exactly one position i. The above problem then seeks
to ﬁnd a distribution over cuts, represented by x, that is incentivized for both having a large
expected cut value as well as having support on pairs of cuts that diﬀer in exactly one vertex.
Here h(x, y) is meant to measure diversity between x and y, and other options are possible.
6

The notion of diversity above arises naturally as what is known as a transverse-ﬁeld term
in the quantum Ising model studied in statistical mechanics.
We could think of the above
problem as a transverse-ﬁeld Max Cut problem, and it is actually equivalent to the well-studied
transverse-ﬁeld Ising model, which is a Local Hamiltonian problem.
Fresh insights into the
problem may have an impact on the physical side of things, as I already argued for more
general Local Hamiltonian problems. However, here I would like to emphasize a complementary
story.
We may readily adapt x and c(x) above to derive transverse-ﬁeld versions of other
familiar optimization problems, where we likewise seek distributions over diverse solutions. In
this case insights gleaned from a physical perspective might suggest new avenues for these and
related optimization problems. The challenge is then to more broadly frame physical models
and solution techniques in a way that might impact OR.
4
Suggestions for Engaging QIS
QIS is a diverse and multi-disciplinary ﬁeld collecting physicists, chemists, engineers, computer
scientists, mathematicians and increasingly, operations researchers. Here the notion of an “out-
sider” is perhaps diminished relative to more homogeneous ﬁelds. Reach out to your friendly
neighborhood quantum information scientist with questions or for guidance. Seek out OR col-
leagues who have started dabbling in QIS. Members of the INFORMS ICS Working Group on
Quantum Computing and others have been active in organizing workshops bridging OR and
QIS – be on the lookout for such opportunities.
Suggested reading.
I have explicitly called out references to surveys, primers, tutorials,
reviews, and theses above as hints for further reading. As far as textbooks go, Nielsen and
Chuang is the standard introduction to quantum computing and quantum information for good
reason [NC10]. Several quantum information scientists maintain web pages with pointers for
learning QIS topics (e.g., [Har22]).
I want to stress that you do not have to necessarily understand quantum physics to have an
impact. Working in interdisciplinary teams or settling into a comfortable mathematical formal-
ism are some ways to mitigate a proper physics background. If your regular time commitments
are at odds with cover-to-cover reading of new material, of course you should not feel ashamed
to focus on the bits and pieces that interest you most, with the hope that you will eventually
be able to ﬁll in gaps as necessary or time permits. If you would like to roll up your sleeves and
learn interactively, quantum programming tutorials such as [M+21] might be a good place to
start.
Concluding Remarks
Improved capabilities for solving optimization problems arising in quantum physics can help
us better understand how nature works at a fundamental level. Both practical approaches for
solving speciﬁc kinds of problems as well as furthering theoretical foundations are valuable.
Historically, a stronger command of nature has fueled transformative impacts on civilization
and society.
Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Oﬃce of Sci-
ence, Oﬃce of Advanced Scientiﬁc Computing Research, Accelerated Research in Quantum
Computing, Fundamental Algorithmic Research for Quantum Computing (FAR-QC).
This article has been authored by an employee of National Technology & Engineering Solu-
tions of Sandia, LLC under Contract No. DE-NA0003525 with the U.S. Department of Energy
7

(DOE). The employee owns all right, title and interest in and to the article and is solely respon-
sible for its contents. The United States Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the
article for publication, acknowledges that the United States Government retains a non-exclusive,
paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this ar-
ticle or allow others to do so, for United States Government purposes. The DOE will provide
public access to these results of federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public
Access Plan https://www.energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan.
References
[AAB+19]
Frank Arute, Kunal Arya, Ryan Babbush, Dave Bacon, Joseph C Bardin, Rami
Barends, Rupak Biswas, Sergio Boixo, Fernando GSL Brandao, David A Buell,
et al. Quantum supremacy using a programmable superconducting processor.
Nature, 574(7779):505–510, 2019.
[Aar15]
Scott Aaronson. Read the ﬁne print. Nature Physics, 11(4):291–293, 2015.
[Aar21]
Scott Aaronson. Open problems related to quantum query complexity. ACM
Transactions on Quantum Computing, 2(4):1–9, 2021.
[Aar22]
Scott Aaronson. How much structure is needed for huge quantum speedups?
arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.06930, 2022.
[ABP19]
Srinivasan Arunachalam, Jop Bri¨et, and Carlos Palazuelos. Quantum query algo-
rithms are completely bounded forms. SIAM Journal on Computing, 48(3):903–
925, 2019.
[AC16]
Scott Aaronson and Lijie Chen. Complexity-theoretic foundations of quantum
supremacy experiments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.05903, 2016.
[AGKS21]
Anurag Anshu, David Gosset, Karen J Morenz Korol, and Mehdi Soleimani-
far. Improved approximation algorithms for bounded-degree local Hamiltonians.
Physical Review Letters, 127(25):250502, 2021.
[AGL+22]
Dorit Aharonov, Xun Gao, Zeph Landau, Yunchao Liu, and Umesh Vazirani.
A polynomial-time classical algorithm for noisy random circuit sampling. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2211.03999, 2022.
[AGM20]
Anurag Anshu, David Gosset, and Karen Morenz. Beyond product state approxi-
mations for a quantum analogue of max cut. In 15th Conference on the Theory of
Quantum Computation, Communication and Cryptography (TQC 2020). Schloss
Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum f¨ur Informatik, 2020.
[AM22]
Anurag Anshu and Tony Metger.
Concentration bounds for quantum states
and limitations on the qaoa from polynomial approximations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2209.02715, 2022.
[ANTZ21]
Brandon Augustino, Giacomo Nannicini, Tam´as Terlaky, and Luis F Zuluaga.
Quantum interior point methods for semideﬁnite optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.06025, 2021.
[BBFS21]
Mario Berta, Francesco Borderi, Omar Fawzi, and Volkher B Scholz. Semideﬁnite
programming hierarchies for constrained bilinear optimization.
Mathematical
Programming, pages 1–49, 2021.
[BCP+14]
Nicolas Brunner, Daniel Cavalcanti, Stefano Pironio, Valerio Scarani, and
Stephanie Wehner. Bell nonlocality. Reviews of Modern Physics, 86(2):419, 2014.
[BDCG+20]
Shalev Ben-David, Andrew M Childs, Andr´as Gily´en, William Kretschmer, Su-
partha Podder, and Daochen Wang. Symmetries, graph properties, and quantum
speedups. In 2020 IEEE 61st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
Science (FOCS), pages 649–660. IEEE, 2020.
8

[BKKT20]
Sergey Bravyi, Alexander Kliesch, Robert Koenig, and Eugene Tang. Obstacles
to variational quantum optimization from symmetry protection. Physical review
letters, 125(26):260505, 2020.
[BPLP20]
Leonardo Banchi, Jason Pereira, Seth Lloyd, and Stefano Pirandola. Convex
optimization of programmable quantum computers. npj Quantum Information,
6(1):1–10, 2020.
[BSS03]
Howard Barnum, Michael Saks, and Mario Szegedy. Quantum query complexity
and semi-deﬁnite programming. In 18th IEEE Annual Conference on Computa-
tional Complexity, 2003. Proceedings., pages 179–193. IEEE, 2003.
[BWP+17]
Jacob Biamonte, Peter Wittek, Nicola Pancotti, Patrick Rebentrost, Nathan
Wiebe, and Seth Lloyd. Quantum machine learning. Nature, 549(7671):195–202,
2017.
[CCHL22]
Sitan Chen, Jordan Cotler, Hsin-Yuan Huang, and Jerry Li. The complexity of
NISQ. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07234, 2022.
[CCLW20]
Shouvanik Chakrabarti, Andrew M Childs, Tongyang Li, and Xiaodi Wu. Quan-
tum algorithms and lower bounds for convex optimization.
Quantum, 4:221,
2020.
[CGL+20]
Nai-Hui Chia, Andr´as Gily´en, Tongyang Li, Han-Hsuan Lin, Ewin Tang, and
Chunhao Wang. Sampling-based sublinear low-rank matrix arithmetic framework
for dequantizing quantum machine learning. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual
ACM SIGACT symposium on theory of computing, pages 387–400, 2020.
[CHM21]
Jordan Cotler, Hsin-Yuan Huang, and Jarrod R McClean. Revisiting dequantiza-
tion and quantum advantage in learning tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00811,
2021.
[CLSS22]
Chi-Ning Chou, Peter J Love, Juspreet Singh Sandhu, and Jonathan Shi. Limi-
tations of local quantum algorithms on random Max-k-XOR and beyond. In 49th
International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP
2022). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum f¨ur Informatik, 2022.
[DHM+18]
Danial Dervovic, Mark Herbster, Peter Mountney, Simone Severini, Na¨ıri Usher,
and Leonard Wossnig. Quantum linear systems algorithms: a primer. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1802.08227, 2018.
[DIM22]
DIMACS. DIMACS implementation challenges, 2022.
[DKW19]
Kai DeLorenzo, Shelby Kimmel, and R Teal Witter. Applications of the quantum
algorithm for st-connectivity.
In 14th Conference on the Theory of Quantum
Computation, Communication and Cryptography (TQC 2019). Schloss Dagstuhl-
Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2019.
[DL97]
Michel Marie Deza and Monique Laurent.
Geometry of cuts and metrics.
Springer, 1997.
[EHW+20]
Jens Eisert, Dominik Hangleiter, Nathan Walk, Ingo Roth, Damian Markham,
Rhea Parekh, Ulysse Chabaud, and Elham Kasheﬁ. Quantum certiﬁcation and
benchmarking. Nature Reviews Physics, 2(7):382–390, 2020.
[FBL+22]
Xinyu Fei, Lucas T Brady, Jeﬀrey Larson, Sven Leyﬀer, and Siqian Shen.
Binary control pulse optimization for quantum systems.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.05773, 2022.
[FGG14]
Edward Farhi, Jeﬀrey Goldstone, and Sam Gutmann. A quantum approximate
optimization algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.4028, 2014.
[FMP+15]
Samuel Fiorini, Serge Massar, Sebastian Pokutta, Hans Raj Tiwary, and Ronald
De Wolf. Exponential lower bounds for polytopes in combinatorial optimization.
Journal of the ACM (JACM), 62(2):1–23, 2015.
9

[FS22]
Hamza Fawzi and James Saunderson. Optimal self-concordant barriers for quan-
tum relative entropies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.04581, 2022.
[FSW07]
Andrew S Fletcher, Peter W Shor, and Moe Z Win. Optimum quantum error
recovery using semideﬁnite programming. Physical Review A, 75(1):012338, 2007.
[GAW19]
Andr´as Gily´en, Srinivasan Arunachalam, and Nathan Wiebe. Optimizing quan-
tum optimization algorithms via faster quantum gradient computation. In Pro-
ceedings of the Thirtieth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms,
pages 1425–1444. SIAM, 2019.
[GKNS21]
Ankit Garg, Robin Kothari, Praneeth Netrapalli, and Suhail Sherif. Near-optimal
lower bounds for convex optimization for all orders of smoothness. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:29874–29884, 2021.
[GL19]
Sander Gribling and Monique Laurent. Semideﬁnite programming formulations
for the completely bounded norm of a tensor. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.04921,
2019.
[GP19]
Sevag Gharibian and Ojas Parekh. Almost optimal classical approximation al-
gorithms for a quantum generalization of Max-Cut.
In Approximation, Ran-
domization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques (AP-
PROX/RANDOM 2019). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik,
2019.
[GP21]
Sander Gribling and Sven Polak. Mutually unbiased bases: polynomial optimiza-
tion and symmetry. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.05698, 2021.
[GW95]
Michel X Goemans and David P Williamson. Improved approximation algorithms
for Maximum Cut and satisﬁability problems using semideﬁnite programming.
Journal of the ACM (JACM), 42(6):1115–1145, 1995.
[Had18]
Stuart Andrew Hadﬁeld. Quantum algorithms for scientiﬁc computing and ap-
proximate optimization. Columbia University, 2018.
[Har22]
Aram Harrow. Where can I learn about quantum information?, 2022.
[HJS+22]
Baihe Huang, Shunhua Jiang, Zhao Song, Runzhou Tao, and Ruizhe Zhang. A
faster quantum algorithm for semideﬁnite programming via robust IPM frame-
work. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.11154, 2022.
[HNP+21]
Yeongwoo Hwang, Joe Neeman, Ojas Parekh, Kevin Thompson, and John
Wright. Unique games hardness of Quantum Max-Cut, and a conjectured vector-
valued Borell’s inequality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.01254, 2021.
[JJUW10]
Rahul Jain, Zhengfeng Ji, Sarvagya Upadhyay, and John Watrous. Qip= pspace.
Communications of the ACM, 53(12):102–109, 2010.
[JNV+21]
Zhengfeng Ji, Anand Natarajan, Thomas Vidick, John Wright, and Henry Yuen.
MIP*= RE. Communications of the ACM, 64(11):131–138, 2021.
[Kal20]
Gil Kalai. The argument against quantum computers. In Quantum, Probability,
Logic, pages 399–422. Springer, 2020.
[KKMO07]
Subhash Khot, Guy Kindler, Elchanan Mossel, and Ryan O’Donnell. Optimal
inapproximability results for MAX-CUT and other 2-variable CSPs?
SIAM
Journal on Computing, 37(1):319–357, 2007.
[KL09]
Robert L Kosut and Daniel A Lidar. Quantum error correction via convex opti-
mization. Quantum Information Processing, 8(5):443–459, 2009.
[KLW15]
Jedrzej Kaniewski, Troy Lee, and Ronald de Wolf. Query complexity in expecta-
tion. In International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming,
pages 761–772. Springer, 2015.
[KP20]
Iordanis Kerenidis and Anupam Prakash. Quantum gradient descent for linear
systems and least squares. Physical Review A, 101(2):022316, 2020.
10

[KPS21]
Iordanis Kerenidis, Anupam Prakash, and D´aniel Szil´agyi. Quantum algorithms
for second-order cone programming and support vector machines.
Quantum,
5:427, 2021.
[KR21]
Martin Kliesch and Ingo Roth. Theory of quantum system certiﬁcation. PRX
Quantum, 2(1):010201, 2021.
[M+21]
David Matthews et al.
How to get started in quantum computing.
Nature,
591(7848):166–167, 2021.
[MCL+22]
Alexis Morvan, Larry Chen, Jeﬀrey M Larson, David I Santiago, and Irfan Sid-
diqi. Optimizing frequency allocation for ﬁxed-frequency superconducting quan-
tum processors. Physical Review Research, 4(2):023079, 2022.
[MdW16]
Ashley Montanaro and Ronald de Wolf. A survey of quantum property testing.
Theory of Computing, pages 1–81, 2016.
[MH22]
Kunal Marwaha and Stuart Hadﬁeld. Bounds on approximating Max kXOR with
quantum and classical local algorithms. Quantum, 6:757, 2022.
[Min09]
JR Minkel.
Strange but true: Superﬂuid helium can climb walls.
Scientiﬁc
American, 300:2, 2009.
[MLA+22]
Lars S Madsen, Fabian Laudenbach, Mohsen Falamarzi Askarani, Fabien Ror-
tais, Trevor Vincent, Jacob FF Bulmer, Filippo M Miatto, Leonhard Neuhaus,
Lukas G Helt, Matthew J Collins, et al. Quantum computational advantage with
a programmable photonic processor. Nature, 606(7912):75–81, 2022.
[MNY21]
Hamoon
Mousavi,
Seyed Sajjad Nezhadi,
and Henry
Yuen.
Nonlocal
games, compression theorems, and the arithmetical hierarchy. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.04651, 2021.
[MS21]
Hans D Mittelmann and P Spellucci. Decision tree for optimization software,
2021.
[Nan22]
Giacomo Nannicini. Fast quantum subroutines for the simplex method. Opera-
tions Research, 2022.
[NBGJ22]
Giacomo Nannicini, Lev S Bishop, Oktay G¨unl¨uk, and Petar Jurcevic. Optimal
qubit assignment and routing via integer programming. ACM Transactions on
Quantum Computing, 4(1):1–31, 2022.
[NC10]
Michael A Nielsen and Isaac L Chuang. Quantum Computation and Quantum
Information. Cambridge University Press, 2010.
[NLC21]
Harsha Nagarajan, Owen Lockwood, and Carleton Coﬀrin. Quantumcircuitopt:
An open-source framework for provably optimal quantum circuit design. In 2021
IEEE/ACM Second International Workshop on Quantum Computing Software
(QCS), pages 55–63. IEEE, 2021.
[PNA10]
Stefano Pironio, Miguel Navascu´es, and Antonio Acin. Convergent relaxations of
polynomial optimization problems with noncommuting variables. SIAM Journal
on Optimization, 20(5):2157–2180, 2010.
[Pre18]
John Preskill. Quantum computing in the NISQ era and beyond. Quantum, 2:79,
2018.
[PT21a]
Ojas Parekh and Kevin Thompson. Application of the level-2 quantum Lasserre
hierarchy in quantum approximation algorithms.
In 48th International Col-
loquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2021). Schloss
Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum f¨ur Informatik, 2021.
[PT21b]
Ojas Parekh and Kevin Thompson. Beating random assignment for approximat-
ing quantum 2-local Hamiltonian problems. In 29th Annual European Symposium
on Algorithms (ESA 2021). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum f¨ur Informatik,
2021.
11

[PT22]
Ojas Parekh and Kevin Thompson.
An optimal product-state approxima-
tion for 2-local quantum Hamiltonians with positive terms.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.08342, 2022.
[PV16]
Carlos Palazuelos and Thomas Vidick. Survey on nonlocal games and operator
space theory. Journal of Mathematical Physics, 57(1):015220, 2016.
[Rei11]
Ben W Reichardt. Reﬂections for quantum query algorithms. In Proceedings
of the Twenty-Second Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms,
pages 560–569. SIAM, 2011.
[ST21]
Vikesh Siddhu and Sridhar Tayur. Five starter pieces: Quantum information
science via semi-deﬁnite programs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08276, 2021.
[Tan19]
Ewin Tang.
A quantum-inspired classical algorithm for recommendation sys-
tems. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory
of Computing, pages 217–228, 2019.
[TTS+21]
Wei Tang, Teague Tomesh, Martin Suchara, Jeﬀrey Larson, and Margaret
Martonosi. CutQC: using small quantum computers for large quantum circuit
evaluations. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM International conference on architec-
tural support for programming languages and operating systems, pages 473–486,
2021.
[vAGGdW20] Joran van Apeldoorn, Andr´as Gily´en, Sander Gribling, and Ronald de Wolf.
Convex optimization using quantum oracles. Quantum, 4:220, 2020.
[Wil16]
Frank Wilczek. Entanglement made simple. Quanta Magazine, 28, 2016.
12