TITLE: A Criterion Space Method for Biobjective Mixed Integer Programming: The Boxed Line Method
JOURNAL: INFORMS_Journal_Computing
YEAR: 2019
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.2019.0887
---

EUR Research Information Portal
A criterion space method for biobjective mixed integer programming: the boxed line
method
Published in:
INFORMS Journal on Computing
Publication status and date:
Published: 01/01/2020
DOI (link to publisher):
10.1287/ijoc.2019.0887
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Document License/Available under:
Article 25fa Dutch Copyright Act
Citation for the published version (APA):
Perini, T., Boland, N., Galindo Pecin, D., & Savelsbergh, M. (2020). A criterion space method for biobjective mixed integer
programming: the boxed line method. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 32(1), 16-39. https://doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.2019.0887
Link to publication on the EUR Research Information Portal
Terms and Conditions of Use
Except as permitted by the applicable copyright law, you may not reproduce or make this material available to any third party
without the prior written permission from the copyright holder(s). Copyright law allows the following uses of this material
without prior permission:
 • you may download, save and print a copy of this material for your personal use only;
 • you may share the EUR portal link to this material.
In case the material is published with an open access license (e.g. a Creative Commons (CC) license), other uses may be
allowed. Please check the terms and conditions of the specific license.
Take-down policy
If you believe that this material infringes your copyright and/or any other intellectual property rights, you may request its
removal by contacting us at the following email address: openaccess.library@eur.nl. Please provide us with all the relevant
information, including the reasons why you believe any of your rights have been infringed. In case of a legitimate complaint,
we will make the material inaccessible and/or remove it from the website.

This article was downloaded by: [145.5.180.39] On: 11 June 2025, At: 23:37
Publisher: Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS)
INFORMS is located in Maryland, USA
INFORMS Journal on Computing
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://pubsonline.informs.org
A Criterion Space Method for Biobjective Mixed
Integer Programming: The Boxed Line Method
Tyler Perini, Natashia Boland, Diego Pecin, Martin Savelsbergh
To cite this article:
Tyler Perini, Natashia Boland, Diego Pecin, Martin Savelsbergh (2020) A Criterion Space Method for Biobjective
Mixed Integer Programming: The Boxed Line Method. INFORMS Journal on Computing 32(1):16-39. https://
doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.2019.0887
Full terms and conditions of use: https://pubsonline.informs.org/Publications/Librarians-Portal/PubsOnLine-
Terms-and-Conditions
This article may be used only for the purposes of research, teaching, and/or private study. Commercial use or
systematic downloading (by robots or other automatic processes) is prohibited without explicit Publisher approval,
unless otherwise noted. For more information, contact permissions@informs.org.
The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy, completeness, merchantability, fitness
for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Descriptions of, or references to, products or publications, or
inclusion of an advertisement in this article, neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee, endorsement, or support
of claims made of that product, publication, or service.
Copyright © 2019, INFORMS
Please scroll down for article—it is on subsequent pages
With 12,500 members from nearly 90 countries, INFORMS is the largest international association of operations
research (O.R.) and analytics professionals and students. INFORMS provides unique networking and learning
opportunities for individual professionals, and organizations of all types and sizes, to better understand and use
O.R. and analytics tools and methods to transform strategic visions and achieve better outcomes.
For more information on INFORMS, its publications, membership, or meetings visit http://www.informs.org

INFORMS JOURNAL ON COMPUTING
Vol. 32, No. 1, Winter 2020, pp. 16–39
http://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/ijoc
ISSN 1091-9856 (print), ISSN 1526-5528 (online)
A Criterion Space Method for Biobjective Mixed Integer
Programming: The Boxed Line Method
Tyler Perini,a Natashia Boland,a Diego Pecin,a Martin Savelsbergha
a H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30332
Contact: perinita@gatech.edu,
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-8502-8111 (TP); natashia.boland@gmail.com,
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6867-6125 (NB); diego.pecin@gmail.com,
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-7965-7264 (DP);
martin.savelsbergh@isye.gatech.edu,
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-7031-5516 (MS)
Received: December 12, 2017
Revised: October 16, 2018; December 20, 2018
Accepted: December 27, 2018
Published Online in Articles in Advance:
August 7, 2019
https://doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.2019.0887
Copyright: © 2019 INFORMS
Abstract. Despite recent interest in multiobjective integer programming, few algorithms
exist for solving biobjective mixed integer programs. We present such an algorithm: the
boxed line method. For one of its variants, we prove that the number of single-objective
integer programs solved is bounded by a linear function of the number of nondominated
line segments in the nondominated frontier. This is the ﬁrst such complexity result. An
extensive computational study demonstrates that the box line method is also efﬁcient in
practice and that it outperforms existing algorithms on a diverse set of instances.
History: Accepted by David Woodruff, Area Editor for Software Tools.
Funding: Financial support was received from the National Science Foundation Graduate Research
Fellowship [Grant DGE-1650044].
Supplemental Material: The online supplement is available at https://doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.2019.0887.
Keywords:
multiobjective • integer programming • criterion space search
1. Introduction
Biobjective optimization problems with discrete de-
cision variables arise in many ﬁelds, including sched-
uling (Lei 2009), geographic information systems
(Malczewski 2006), facility location (Farahani et al.
2010), healthcare (Rais and Viana 2011), and many
more (White 1990). In contrast to single-objective op-
timization, the goal in biobjective (and, more generally,
multiobjective) optimization is to generate a set of so-
lutions that induces the nondominated frontier (NDF),
also known as the Pareto front. The NDF is the set of
nondominated points (NDPs). An NDP is a vector of
objective values evaluated at a feasible solution with
the property that there exists no other feasible solu-
tion that is at least as good in all objective values and is
better in one or more of them. There has been enor-
mous interest in these problems from the evolutionary
algorithms community; see, for example, the surveys of
Coello (2000), Deb (2001), and Zhou et al. (2011). This
interest largely concerns continuous multiobjective
optimization problems. The number of evolutionary
algorithms dealing with discrete multiobjective op-
timization problems, which will be our focus, is consid-
erably smaller.
We focus on problems with linear objective func-
tions and constraints and on exact algorithms, which
are guaranteed, in theory, to produce the complete
NDF. Biobjective integer linear programming has
been studied for several decades now; see, for example,
the surveys of Ehrgott and Gandibleux (2000, 2002).
However, to date, much more attention has been
paid to the development of computationally effective
algorithms for pure integer linear programming prob-
lems than to problems that mix continuous and discrete
variables. Over the last 30 years, at least a dozen meth-
ods for generating the NDF for pure integer prob-
lems have been developed.
Biobjective mixed integer linear programs (BOMIPs),
by contrast, have only recently received vigorous
interest, in part owing to their additional numerical
challenges. BOMIP frontiers have a complex struc-
ture. The frontier can contain closed, open, and half-
open line segments, as well as isolated points; see, for
example, the NDF illustrated in Figure 1. Numerical
tolerances and how these are used within an algo-
rithm can signiﬁcantly affect the representation of the
NDF it produces.
Algorithms based on branch and bound, working
in the space of the decision variables, are given by
Mavrotas and Diakoulaki (1998, 2005) and Vincent
et al. (2013). Combining branching on the decision
variables with Pareto branches, which work in the
criterion space, Stidsen et al. (2014) develop a method
designed for the special case that only one of the two
objective functions has continuous variables. In this
case, the NDF has a special structure: it consists of
isolated points; no line segments can occur.
Recently, criterion space methods, in which the search
for the NDF operates over the space of the vector of
objective function values, known as the criterion space,
16
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

have emerged. Such methods have the advantage of
being able to exploit advances in single-objective
solver software because these methods repeatedly
solve single-objective problems, both linear programs
(LPs) and mixed integer linear programs (which we
will generically refer to as IPs), treating the single-
objective solver as a black box. Single-objective prob-
lems, either LP or IP, are the main workhorses of these
algorithms, which differ mainly in the structure and
number of such problems that need to be solved before
the NDF is completely identiﬁed.
The ﬁrst of these algorithms to be published is the
triangle splitting algorithm (TSA) (Boland et al. 2015b).
The TSA ﬁrst identiﬁes all extreme supported NDPs,
using dichotomic search (Cohon 1978, Aneja and Nair
1979), which allows the remaining search region to
be divided into right-angled triangles. Each triangle is
then split, either horizontally or vertically, with each
half searched for an NDP so as to reduce the remaining
search region within the triangle to two rectangles.
Within each rectangle, all extreme supported NDPs are
found (these are extreme and supported only in the local
sense within the rectangle), and the process repeats. Line
segments in the NDF are identiﬁed when they form part
of the hypotenuse of a triangle. The TSA may split a line
segment in the NDF. This can occur even if the line
segment is part of the frontier of a unique slice problem,
which is a biobjective linear program (BOLP) deﬁned
by ﬁxing the integer part of the solution. The TSA thus
requires a postprocessing procedure to provide a par-
simonious description of the NDF.
The second algorithm published is the ε tabu-
constraint method (εTCM) of Soylu and Yıldız (2016),
which uses tabu, or no-good, constraints to identify
line segments in the NDF, combined with ε constraints
to progressively generate the frontier from right to
left (or vice versa).
In this paper, we make the following key contri-
butions:
1. We propose a new criterion space search method
for solving the BOMIP: the boxed line method (BLM).
The method is designed to generalize the balanced
box method (BBM; Boland et al. 2015a), which is a
computationally effective method for pure integer
biobjective integer program (BOIP). The BLM defaults
to BBM in the absence of continuous variables. The key
step of the BBM is illustrated in Figure 2(a): the
rectangular search region (box) is split, and each half
is searched for an NDP, which reduces the remaining
search region to two boxes having a total area of less than
half that of the original box. To apply this idea to BOMIP,
we observe that when the split line passes through a line
segment of the frontier, the NDP found when the ﬁrst
half of the box is searched will lie on the split line. In the
BLM, we seek to extend this NDP to the line segment in
the NDF that contains it. Using the endpoints of this line
segment gives a remaining search region consisting of
two boxes, with a combined area of less than half that of
the original box. Figure 2(b) illustrates this idea. As a
consequence of the idea, the resulting algorithm is
amenable to analysis (discussed next) and produces a
parsimonious description of the NDF.
2. The algorithm has two variants that permit analysis
of the number of single-objective IPs that they require to
be solved: a basic iterative version and a recursive ver-
sion. For both variants, we provide upper bounds on the
number of single-objective IPs required to produce the
NDF. These are the ﬁrst analytic results of this type for
mixed integer multiobjective problems.
3. We design an enhancement that takes advantage
of a property of the NDF encountered in many BOMIP
instances, which can provide a signiﬁcant improve-
ment in algorithm runtime.
4. The benchmark instances originally proposed
by Mavrotas and Diakoulaki (1998), which have been
Figure 1. The Nondominated Frontier of a Biobjective
Mixed Integer Linear Programs (BOMIP) Where
Nondominated Line Segments Are Darkened
Figure 2. The Key Step in the Balanced Box Method and the
Boxed Line Method, Respectively
Note. The remaining search regions (boxes) after the step are shaded.
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
17
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

used to test recent methods, have a structure that is
very sensitive to the numerical tolerances used in
algorithms. In these instances, the slice problems
often have many short line segments in their frontiers
and include line segments that are close to horizontal
or close to vertical. The instances also have frontiers
represented by a relatively small number of slice prob-
lems, which can bias comparisons of algorithms if one
of the algorithms is designed to exploit this structure.
Here we propose a new approach to creating instances
in a controlled way. The approach facilitates valida-
tion of BOMIP algorithms by producing instances for
which the frontiers are known precisely, a priori. It also
supplements the existing suite of test instances by pro-
viding instances having different characteristics, such as
having many slice problems contributing to the frontier.
5. We provide computational results that demon-
strate the relative strengths and weaknesses of the
BLM variants on two classes of the new instances
proposed here, as well as on instances from Mavrotas
and Diakoulaki (1998). The results in the latter case are
compared with the results of the TSA (Boland et al.
2015b) and in both cases with the εTCM (Soylu and
Yıldız 2016).
This paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we
introduce notation and key deﬁnitions. The basic variant
of the BLM is described in Section 3. In Section 3.5,
we prove that the method has an upper bound for the
number of IPs. We continue by presenting the re-
cursive extension to the method in Section 4 along
with its better upper bound for the number of IPs in
Section 4.4. The enhancement designed for a structure
common to many BOMIP instances is discussed in
Section 5. In Section 6, we discuss numerical issues in
implementation and how they relate to the structure
of existing benchmark instances. Then, in Section 7,
we present our new instance generator method. Fi-
nally, we give our computational study in Section 8
and summarize our ﬁndings.
2. Deﬁnitions
We deﬁne the BOMIP as
min
x∈- {z(x) : (z1(x), z2(x))},
(1)
where z1(x), z2(x) are linear in x, and the feasible region
is given by - ⊆ZnI × RnC. We assume that - is non-
empty and bounded. Note that a vector x ∈- has nI
integer components and nC continuous components,
and when it is convenient to differentiate between the
components, we use the convention x  (xI, xC), where
xI ∈ZnI and xC ∈RnC. Let the projections of - onto the
set of integer and real vectors be deﬁned as -I :
xI ∈ZnI : (xI, xC) ∈-
{
for some xC ∈RnC} and -C :
xC ∈RnC : (xI, xC) ∈-
{
for some xI ∈ZnI}, respectively.
The feasible region - lies in the decision space ZnI ×
RnC or simply RnI+nC. By contrast, the image of - under
z(x), that is, = : {y ∈R2 : y  z(x) for some x ∈-}, lies
in the criteria space R2.
Let x1, x2 ∈- be two feasible solutions to (1). If
zi(x1) ≤zi(x2) for i  1, 2 and z(x1) ̸ z(x2), then we say
that z(x1) dominates z(x2). If xN ∈- and there does not
exist a feasible solution x ∈- such that z(x) domi-
nates z(xN), then z(xN) is an NDP, and feasible solution
xN is efﬁcient. The union of all NDPs is deﬁned as the
NDF, which we represent with 1.
A single NDP of (1) can be found by solving single-
objective IPs over - either by lexicographic optimi-
zation or by use of a scalarized objective function. We
use IP to refer to any single-objective problem that has
integer variables, including mixed integer LPs. The
lexicographic IP hierarchically minimizes two objec-
tives in turn. In the case of minimizing z1(x) and then
z2(x), we denote it by
η  lexmin{(z1(x), z2(x)) : x ∈-}.
(2)
Solving a lexicographic IP computationally requires
solving two IPs in sequence. In this case,
η1  min{z1(x) : x ∈-} and then
η2  min{z2(x) : z1(x) ≤η1, x ∈-}
are solved. Then η  (η1, η2) is an NDP of (1). We note
that in practice the second IP tends to solve very
quickly. Lexicographic optimization in the order z2(x)
and then z1(x) is similar. For positive vector λ ∈R2
+,
we refer to
min{λTz(x) : x ∈-}
(3)
as the scalarized IP with respect to λ. Let xλ be an
optimal solution to (3). Then z(xλ) is an NDP of (1).
Not every NDP in the NDF can be found by such an IP.
If, for a given NDP z(xN), there exists positive vector
λ ∈R2
+ such that xN is an optimal solution to (3),
then the NDP is supported; otherwise, the NDP is
unsupported.
The NDF can be described by nondominated line
segments (NLSs), vertical gaps, and horizontal gaps. De-
ﬁne L(z1, z2) to be the line segment connecting end-
points z1, z2 ∈R2, that is, L(z1, z2) : {ξz1 + (1 −ξ)z2 :
0 ≤ξ ≤1}, where the endpoints are ordered such that
z1
1 ≤z2
1. As deﬁned, L(z1, z2) is a closed line segment.
When z1 ̸ z2, we can also have an open line segment
(neither z1 nor z2 is part of the line segment), and a
half-open line segment (either z1 or z2 is not part of the
line segment). We refer to z1 and z2 as closed if they
belong to the line segment and as open otherwise.
A line segment L(z1, z2) is a point where z1  z2.
A gap may appear in the NDF between two NDPs in
the vertical or horizontal direction or both. Between
an NDP and an open endpoint of a line segment in the
NDF there must appear either a vertical or a horizontal
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
18
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

gap. We deﬁne a vertical gap as an interval (y−, y+) ⊂R
such that no NDP p exists with p2 ∈(y−, y+) but where
there does exist an NDP p−with p−
2  y−and either an
NDP p+ with p+
2  y+ or a sequence of NDPs {p0, p1, . . .}
with limn→∞pn
2  y+ (or both). A horizontal gap can be
deﬁned similarly.
We deﬁne S to be the index set of all feasible in-
teger solutions in -I. Given xI ∈XI, the BOLP obtained
from ﬁxing the integer variables to xI is called the slice
problem for xI (Belotti et al. 2013). The NDF of a slice
problem consists of a (connected) set of (closed) line
segments; we call this a slice. The NDF of a slice
problem for xI is called the slice for xI.1 For a slice
problem with index s ∈S, we denote its slice by Ns. If
a slice problem with index s ∈S contributes to the
NDF of the BOMIP so that Ns ∩1 is nonempty, then
we write Ns ∩1  {Ls
1, Ls
2, . . . , Ls
n(s)}, where n(s) is the
number of line segments contributed to the NDF by
the slice problem. (If Ns ∩1 is empty, then n(s)  0.)
Each of the line segments Ls
i for some s ∈S and i 
1, . . . , n(s) is an NLS in the NDF. Note that a single
maximal linesegmentinNs may contributeseveral NLSs
to the NDF, consisting of nonoverlapping sections of the
line segment. We make the natural assumption that the
set Ns ∩1 consists of maximal line segments, where
maximal refers to set inclusion, so Ns ∩1 provides the
minimum cardinality set of line segments that describes
the slice’s intersection with the NDF of the BOMIP.
Given a BOMIP in the form of (1), we deﬁne the total
number of NLSs in the NDF as
n* :
∑
s∈S
n(s).
(4)
3. Basic Method
Here we present the fundamental principles of the
BLM. The four main components of the algorithm are
initialization, the outer loop, the inner loop, and the
line segment generation subroutine. For this pre-
sentation, we assume exact arithmetic. For example,
we describe some constraints as strict inequalities.
These are implemented in practice as inequalities
with the right-hand side adjusted using the desired
accuracy ϵ. The pseudocode provided in the online
supplement makes this explicit. In practice, the nu-
merical issues naturally encountered in solving in-
teger programs, which are even more pressing for
mixed integer programs, make it unreasonable to
expect to determine the NDF exactly. In Section 6, we
deﬁne an approximation—an ϵNDF—and discuss the
numerical challenges that arise in ﬁnding it.
3.1. Initialization
The ﬁrst stage, initialization, solves two lexico-
graphic IPs to determine the upper-leftmost NDP
zL  lexmin{(z1(x), z2(x)) : x ∈-} and the lower-
rightmost NDP zR  lexmin{(z2(x), z1(x)):x ∈-}. We
refer to a rectangular region in criterion space as a
box and describe it by its upper-leftmost and lower-
rightmost corner points. The entire NDF must lie in
the box with zL and zR as its two corner points, which
we denote by B(zL, zR). Note that if zL zR, then
B(zL, zR) is a point. We call a box with zL
i zR
i for i  1 or
2 (or both) trivially small. If the box B(zL, zR) is trivially
small, then the method terminates, and the point is
returned as the full NDF. Otherwise, the two points
are added to the current subset of the NDF, which we
call ˜1, and the box B(zL, zR) is added to the queue,
which we call 4, for further processing by the outer
loop. In general, the basic method only adds boxes to
the queue if both corner points are the closed end-
points of an NLS to which they belong (we discuss this
further in Section 3.5).
3.2. Outer Loop
To introduce the outer loop of the basic version of the
BLM, we ﬁrst describe the process for the BBM (Boland
et al. 2015a) because, in the ﬁrst case we consider, the
two algorithms follow the same procedure. The steps
are visually summarized in Figure 3.
The outerloopisdeﬁned asawhileloop thatendsonce
4 is empty. The main roles of the outer loop are to
remove boxes from 4 for processing, split the boxes
to begin processing (if necessary), call the inner loop to
complete processing, and update ˜1 with any found
NDPs and 4 withremaining boxes forfutureprocessing.
Suppose that a (nontrivial) box B(zL, zR) is arbitrarily
chosen from 4, where zL and zR now represent the
corner points of the new box, not necessarily the
NDPs found by initialization. The outer loop begins
processing by choosing an arbitrary horizontal split
line z2  μ, where μ ∈(zR
2 , zL
2). We solve a lexicographic
IP for an NDP on or below the split line, namely
z*  lexmin{(z1(x), z2(x)) : z2(x) ≤μ, x ∈-}.
(5)
We note that the solution xR ∈-, which maps to
zR  z(xR), is feasible for (5), so in practice we provide
xR as an initial feasible solution to the solver. The next
step is to form a second split line, this time vertically at
z∗
1, and solve a second lexicographic minimization2
for the next NDP
ˆz  lexmin{(z2(x), z1(x)) : z1(x) < z∗
1, x ∈-}.
(6)
The solution xL ∈- that maps to zL  z(xL) is feasible
for (6), so in practice xL is provided as an initial
feasible solution to the solver.
Finally, the outer loop updates ˜1 and 4 accord-
ingly. First, z* and ˆz are added to ˜1. Then z* and ˆz are
used, respectively, with zR and zL to deﬁne two new
boxes B(zL, ˆz) and B(z*, zR), each of which is added to
the queue if it is not trivially small. This concludes the
processing of one box by the outer loop when z∗
2 < μ.
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
19
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

The BLM follows this procedure when the ﬁrst
lexicographic minimization (5) returns NDP z* such
that z∗
2 < μ. Note that when there are discrete vari-
ables, it is possible for an arbitrary horizontal split
line z2  μ to not intersect any NDP, which results in
z∗
2 < μ. In this case, we say that the outer loop has
identiﬁed a vertical gap in the NDF. Once a vertical gap
is identiﬁed by the outer loop, the boxes resulting
from processing are such that this vertical gap is not in
either of the boxes added to the queue (we prove this
formally in Section 3.5).
In a mixed IP with continuous variables, it is likely
that the horizontal split line will intersect an NLS of
the NDF. In this case, the ﬁrst lexicographic minimi-
zation (5) returns NDP z* such that z∗
2  μ. The rest of
the procedure is designed to identify the NLS that
contains z*, that is, to ﬁnd L(z1,z2)⊂B(zL,zR) such that
z*∈L(z1,z2). This concept motivates the name for
the BLM.
The outer loop calls the inner loop, which returns
L(z1, z2) (details on how this is done are given in
Section 3.3). The inner loop returns endpoints z1 and
z2, as well as the NDP that dominates each open
endpoint, if any. The outer loop updates the current
approximation of the NDF by adding L(z1, z2) to ˜1 and
updates the queue by adding up to two nontrivial
boxes. Because our method only creates boxes in which
both corner points are nondominated, we initialize the
boxes depending on the openness of the endpoints
as follows: if z1 is closed, then B(zL, z1) is added to 4;
otherwise, the inner loop has returned an NDP, ˆz1,
that dominates z1, and the box B(zL, ˆz1) is added to 4.
Similarly, if z2 is closed, then B(z2, zR) is added to 4.
Otherwise, the inner loop has returned an NDP, ˆz2,
that dominates z2, and the box B(ˆz2, zR) is added to 4.
This concludes the processing of one box by the
outer loop when z∗
2  μ, which is summarized in
Figure 4. The pseudocode is included in the online
supplement as Algorithm 1.
3.3. Inner Loop
The inner loop is called when the outer loop is pro-
cessing box B(zL, zR) and the split line contains an
NDP, z*, that is, when z∗
2  μ. The inner loop ﬁnds
the NLS L(z1, z2) that contains z*. Its steps are visu-
ally summarized in Figure 5, and the pseudocode is
presented in the online supplement as Algorithm 2.
Here we provide a description.
Figure 3. Outer Loop Procedure for the Balanced Box Method and the Boxed Line Method When z∗
2 < μ
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
20
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

Let x*  (x∗
I, x∗
C) ∈- be an optimal solution to (5)
that maps to z*  z(x*). The ﬁrst step in the inner loop
is to provide an overestimation of the NLS by gen-
erating the line segment containing z* in the slice for
x∗
I, restricted to B(zL, zR). We discuss the details of the
line segment generation subroutine in the Section 3.4.
Here we assume that the following is given: the
maximal line segment L(z1, z2) such that z* ∈L(z1, z2),
zL
1 ≤z1
1 ≤z2
1 ≤zR
1 , zL
2 ≥z1
2 ≥z2
2 ≥zR
2 , and z1, z2, and z* are
all in the slice for x∗
I.
Because L(z1, z2) is part of the NDF of the slice
problem (i.e., of the slice) for x∗
I, it must be that ei-
ther (1) z1  z2 or (2) z1
1 < z2
1 and z1
2 > z2
2. If z1  z*  z2,
the slice consists of the isolated NDP z*, so the inner
loop ends and returns z1  z* and z2  z* (both closed).
Otherwise, z1 ̸ z2, and we may deﬁne the gradient
vector of the line segment L(z1, z2), normalized to have
unit length, as
⃗w  (z1
2 −z2
2, z2
1 −z1
1)/∥(z1
2 −z2
2, z2
1 −z1
1)∥.
(7)
In what follows, all scalarized IPs are scalarized with
respect to ⃗w.
Next, the endpoints of L(z1, z2) are restricted, iter-
atively, until only the nondominated portion of it
remains. Either or both ends are trimmed while al-
ways maintaining z* as the central point between z1
and z2, ensuring that the ﬁnal line segment contains z*.
Until the inner loop terminates, each iteration of the
loop updates the endpoints of the line segment, z1 or
z2 (both their coordinates and their open/closed ﬂag)
with any newfound knowledge. For instance, im-
mediately after the line generation subroutine pro-
vides L(z1, z2), both endpoints are ﬂagged as closed
unless the following cases occur: (1) zR
1  z2
1 and
zR
2 < z2
2, illustrated in Figure 5(a), in which case the
endpoint z2 is dominated by zR, so z2 cannot be closed
and is ﬂagged as open, and (2) zL
2  z1
2 and zL
1 < z1
1, in
which case z1 is ﬂagged as open.
The inner loop is a while loop that continues until
the entirety of the current line segment L(z1, z2) is
nondominated. To check this stopping condition, the
scalarized IP
z(y*)  min{⃗wTz(x) : z1(x) ≤z2
1, z2(x) ≤z1
2, x ∈-} (8)
Figure 4. Outer Loop Procedure for the Boxed Line Method When z∗
2  μ
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
21
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

is solved, where the ﬁrst inequality is strict if z2 is
open and the second inequality is strict if z1 is open.
These conditionally strict inequalities are required
to avoid cycling. Now L(z1, z2) is nondominated if
and only if (8) yields an optimal solution y* with
⃗wTz(y*)  ⃗wTz*. Thus ⃗wTz(y*)  ⃗wTz* is an appropriate
stopping criterion for the while loop.
If ⃗wTz(y*) ̸ ⃗wTz*, it must be that ⃗wTz(y*) < ⃗wTz* be-
cause z* in L(z1, z2) ensures that the feasible solu-
tion mapping to z* is feasible for (8). Thus the NDP
z(y*) dominates a portion of the current line segment.
There are two cases: either z(y*) is to the left or it is to
the right of z*. Without loss of generality, assume that
z1(y*) < z∗
1 (the other case follows from a symmetric
argument). Now there may be many other points
from the slice for y∗
I that also dominate part of L(z1, z2).
We update z1 so as to exclude all such points within
the box by ﬁnding the point with integer solution y∗
I
that dominates part of L(z1, z2) and has a minimal
z2-coordinate. Thus we solve the LP
min{z2(x) : ⃗wTz(x) ≤⃗wTz*,
xI  y∗
I,
x ∈-}.
(9)
Let y′ be an optimal solution to (9) and deﬁne v  z(y′).
We make some important observations about the LP
deﬁned in (9).
• Minimizing z2(x) ensures that all points on the
slice for y∗
I that can dominate the current line segment
are excluded when z1
2 is updated. The idea is illus-
trated in Figure 6(a).
• Even though the point v may lie on the line
segment L(z1, z2), it will never be dominated by any
point from L(z1, z2) because of the ﬁrst constraint
⃗wTz(x) ≤⃗wTz*. Consider Figure 6(b).
• While the ﬁrst scalarization returns an NDP z(y*),
the point v may be dominated. Consider Figure 6(c).
This issue will be discussed later.
Figure 5. The Inner Loop Takes as Input Nondominated Points zL, zR and z*
Note. The output is the (maximal) nondominated line segment containing z*, L(z1, z2), and the nondominated point that dominates any open
endpoint.
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
22
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

• Because it is an LP, (9) can be solved efﬁciently.
Furthermore, because the solution y* is feasible for (9),
in implementation, we provide this initial feasible
solution to the solver, which yields even greater
efﬁciency.
Next, v is used to update z1. First, suppose that
v /∈L(z1, z2). Point ρ ∈L(z1, z2) such that ρ2  v2 is com-
puted, and then z1 is updated (z1  ρ) and ﬂagged to
be open (see Figure 6(a)). Otherwise, v ∈L(z1, z2), and
z1 is updated to z1  v. Beforeupdatingtheopen/closed
ﬂagforz1, we need to check for the possibility that v is a
weakly NDPontheslicefory∗
I, as in Figure 7. If so, then
the new z1 will be open; otherwise, it will be closed. To
check this, the algorithm solves a second LP
min{z1(x) : z2(x)  v2,
xI  y∗
I,
x ∈-}.
(10)
Let y′′ be an optimal solution of (10), and update
v  z(y′′). (Note that even this updated v is still not
necessarily an NDP of the BOMIP.) If v1 < z1
1, then the
algorithm ﬂags z1 as open; otherwise, it is ﬂagged as
closed.
After updating z1 as described, then, by convexity,
it is guaranteed that no point from the slice for y∗
I can
again be found. Because - is bounded, which implies
that -I is ﬁnite, the inner loop will terminate in a ﬁnite
number of iterations. The resulting endpoints z1 and
z2 will then deﬁne the NLS containing z*, L(z1, z2).
As a ﬁnal step, the inner loop ﬁnds each NDP that
dominates an endpoint that is open. Let ˆz1 denote the
NDP that dominates z1 when z1 is open, and let ˆz2
denote the NDP that dominates z2 when z2 is open. To
determine ˆzi for i ∈{1, 2}, two special cases are checked
ﬁrst. First, if z1
2  zL
2, then clearly ˆz1  zL (and similarly
for z2 and zR). Second, if z1
2  z2(y*), then ˆz1  z(y*) (see
Figure 5(d), and similarly, if z2
1  z1(y*), then ˆz2  z(y*)).
Otherwise, the inner loop identiﬁes these NDPs by
solving the IP
min{z1(x) : z2(x) ≤z1
2, x ∈-}
(11)
if z1 is open and by solving the IP
min{z2(x) : z1(x) ≤z2
1, x ∈-}
(12)
if z2 is open. If z1 is open, ˆz1  z(ˆx1), where ˆx1 is an
optimal solution to (11), and if z2 is open, ˆz2  z(ˆx2),
where ˆx2 is an optimal solution to (12).
Figure 6. (Color online) Observations About the Construction of Linear Program (9)
Figure 7. (Color online) The Case That v Lies on the Current Line Segment and Is a Weak Nondominated Point of the Slice
Problem for y∗
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
23
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

3.4. Line Segment Generation Subroutine
The purpose of the line segment generation subrou-
tine is to provide the inner loop with a single line
segment that can be reduced to an NLS simply by
updating its endpoints. The subroutine determines an
overestimate of the NLS containing a given NDP z* 
z(x*) within B(zL, zR). Speciﬁcally, it ﬁnds a maximal
line segment L(z1, z2) of the slice problem for given
integer solution x∗
I with z* ∈L(z1, z2). Such a segment
is an NLS of the slice problem min{(z1(x), z2(x)) :
xI  x∗
I, x ∈-}. Figure 8 illustrates the three possible
cases for z*: z*: it may be an isolated point, or it may
belong to one or two line segments of the slice. When
z* belongs to two line segments, the subroutine ﬁnds
the segment to the lower right; that is, it takes z1  z*
(see Figure 8(c)).
The line generation subroutine produces three in-
terrelated forms of output: the two endpoints of the
line segment, z1 and z2, and, as long as z1 ̸ z2, the
gradient vector ⃗w of the line segment L(z1, z2). When
z1  z2, we say that ⃗w does not exist. If the gradient
vector ⃗w exists, it is normalized before it is returned.
Further details about the subroutine, which is a
modiﬁed version of dichotomic search (Cohon 1978,
Aneja and Nair 1979), can be found in the online
supplement.
3.5. Complexity of the Basic Method
In this section, we prove a worst-case upper bound on
the number of IPs solved in order to generate the
entire NDF. We do so by describing the number of
IPs solved as a function of the number of NLSs in
the NDF.
Consider the BOMIP (1) where - is nonempty and
bounded. Recall that -I is the projection of - onto the
set of integer vectors, and S is the index set of -I. Let
S1 be the index set of feasible integer solutions whose
slice has nonempty intersection with the NDF 1, that
is, S1  {s ∈S : Ns ∩1 ̸ ∅}. Recall that for all s ∈S1,
we write Ns ∩1  {Ls
1,Ls
2,..., Ls
n(s)}, where, for each
i  1,...,n(s), Ls
i is a (distinct, maximal) line segment.
We make one technical assumption for ease of ex-
position: for all distinct pairs of feasible integer so-
lutions s,t ∈S1, we assume that Ls
i ̸⊆Lt
j and Lt
j ̸⊆Ls
i for
all i  1,...,n(s) and j  1,...,n(t). We note that in
benchmark problems, (point) intersections between
distinct slices in the NDF are relatively common, but
containment of an NLS from one slice inside that from
another is relatively rare. Such containments do not
prevent the algorithm from functioning correctly and
returning the entire NDF, but the counting of NLSs
becomes much more complicated. This assumption
does not rule out intersections or even overlap be-
tween slices; compare Figure 9, (a) and (b).
In (4), we deﬁned the total number of line segments
by n*  ∑
s∈S1 n(s). For the following proofs, we use
n(Y) to represent the total number of line segments in a
given (nontrivial) box Y : B(zL, zR), where zL and zR
are NDPs. We take n(Y) to be the number of line
segments (including isolated NDPs) in the strict in-
terior of Y, which excludes zL, zR:
n(Y) :
∑
s∈S
|Ns ∩1 ∩Y \ {zL, zR}|.
(13)
See Figure 9 for an example of counting NLSs with
this new deﬁnition. In addition, let g(Y) ≥0 be the
number of vertical gaps in the NDF within Y. Note
that because a vertical gap is deﬁned by its two in-
cident NDPs, it must be that g(Y) ≤n(Y) + 1 for all Y.
For simplicity of exposition, we drop the notation
for dependence on Y; that is, we use n and g instead
of n(Y) and g(Y), respectively. We will compute the
speciﬁc bounds on the number of IPs solved for dif-
ferent cases of Y with given n and g. Let ℓ(n, g) be the
worst-case number of lexicographic optimization
IPs solved by the basic method in completely pro-
cessing an arbitrary box Y  B(zL, zR) with n NLSs in
the strict interior of Y and g vertical gaps in the NDF.
Figure 8. Three Possible Cases for Finding a Line Segment of the Slice Containing z*
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
24
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

By completely processing, we mean processing any
resulting boxes added to the queue after processing Y,
processing any resulting boxes added to the queue
after that, and so on until no more (nontrivial) boxes
remain in the queue. Similarly, let s(n, g) be the worst-
case number of single-objective optimization IPs
(e.g., scalarized IPs) solved to completely process such
a box Y. In general, we assume that no trivial regions
Y would appear from the queue because trivial
boxes are not added to the queue. Therefore, we
deﬁne ℓ(0, 0)  s(0, 0)  0.
Example 1. For n  0 and g  1, ℓ(0,1)  2 and s(0,1)  0.
Proof. See the online supplement.
Example 2. For n  1 and g  0, ℓ(1,0)  1 and s(1,0)  1.
Proof. See the online supplement.
As we described while illustrating the basic method,
every iteration of the outer loop identiﬁes either an
NLS or a vertical gap. The following proposition
proves that the algorithm eliminates that line segment
or gap completely before adding two new boxes to the
queue. This is an important characteristic, which, for
example, does not apply to the TSA because it may
divide a single NLS into several smaller segments over
more than one iteration. Proposition 1 proves this
unique characteristic, which will allow us to provide an
upper bound for the number of iterations of the outer
loop as well as an appropriate equation for ℓ(n, g).
Proposition 1. Suppose that an iteration of the outer loop
begins with a region Y having n ≥0 NLSs in its strict
interior and g ≥0 vertical gaps where n + g ≥1.
1. At the end of the iteration, (up to) two nontrivial
regions Y′, Y′′ are added to the queue, say with n′, n′′
numbers of NLSs in their interior and g′, g′′ vertical gaps,
respectively. Then we have n′ + n′′ ≤n and g′ + g′′ ≤g,
where at least one inequality is strict. That is, after each
iteration of the outer loop, one NLS or one vertical gap is
eliminated completely from the total unexplored region(s).
2. The number of iterations of the outer loop required to
ﬁnish completely processing Y (including all subsequent
boxes) is bounded above by n + g.
3. ℓ(n, g)  n + 2g.
Proof. In one iteration of the outer loop, there are two
cases for the split line z2  μ: either it intersects a
vertical gap or it intersects an NLS of the NDF.
In the ﬁrst case, when the split line intersects a
vertical gap of the NDF, we have by construction
that the two lexicographic minimizations (5) and (6)
identify the two NDPs incident to the vertical gap ˆz
(above) and z* (below). Let the two resulting regions
be Y′  B(zL, ˆz) and Y′′  B(z*, zR). We have, of course,
decreased the total number of vertical gaps in the
NDF(s), so g′ + g′′ < g. However, the total number of
NLSs in the interiors of Y′ and Y′′ is no greater than
n, that is, n′ + n′′ ≤n. Thus part 1 of the proposition
holds in this case.
In the second case, z* belongs to some NLS L(z1, z2).
Thus we initialize regions Y′ and Y′′ based on NDPs—
either the closed endpoints (i.e., z1, z2) or the NDPs that
dominate the open endpoints (i.e., ˆz1, ˆz2)—discovered
by the inner loop in such a way that guarantees that
the single NLS L(z1, z2) is not split. Hence, we must
have one fewer NLS in the remaining regions, that is,
n′ + n′′ < n. We also have g′ + g′′ ≤g. Thus part 2 of the
proposition holds.
Because every iteration of the outer loop eliminates
an NLS or a vertical gap from the unexplored re-
gion(s), then after n + g iterations, there will only be
trivial unexplored regions remaining. Thus part 2 of
the proposition holds.
Figure 9. Examples of Nondominated Frontiers Where We Assume There Is No Containment Between the Nondominated
Line Segment (NLS) of Distinct Slices and How to Count the Number of NLSs n Using (13)
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
25
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

Finally, we observe that only the outer loop solves
lexicographic IPs. In every iteration of the outer loop,
the horizontal split line z2  μ either intersects a ver-
tical gap in the NDF or it intersects an NLS. If the split
line intersects an NLS, one lexicographic IP is solved
for z*, and if the split line intersects a vertical gap,
two lexicographic IPs are solved for z* and ˆz. Then it
takes at most ℓ(n, g)  n + 2g lexicographic IP solves to
process Y (at most, one for each NLS and, at most, two
for each vertical gap). Also note that Examples 1 and 2
satisfy this upper bound. Thus part 3 of the propo-
sition holds.
Lemma 1. For all g ∈{0, 1, 2}, s(1, g)  1.
Proof. See the online supplement.
Because g ≤n + 1, we can deﬁne the worst-case
number of IP solves as a function of only n, the
number of NLSs in the strict interior of Y:
ˆℓ(n) 
max
g1,...,n+1 ℓ(n, g),
(14)
ˆs(n) 
max
g1,...,n+1 s(n, g).
(15)
We so far have ˆs(0)  0, ˆs(1)  1, and ˆℓ(n)  3n + 2 for
all n ≥0 (because g ≤n + 1 gives ℓ(n, g)  n + 2g ≤n +
2(n + 1)  3n + 2).
Lemma 2. For all n ≥2, ˆs(n)  n + 2 + ˆs(n −1).
Proof of Lemma 2. Assume that there are n ≥2 NLSs.
Without loss of generality, we suppose that the
number of vertical gaps in the NDF is arbitrary and
only consider the case that the split line z2  μ in-
tersects an NLS; otherwise, when the split line in-
tersects a vertical gap, the box is processed in the
outer loop without solving any scalarized or single-
objective IPs. Once the lexicographic IP (5)—which is
not counted for ˆs—ﬁnds NDP z* on the split line, the
inner loop is initiated. Because there are n −1 other
NLSs in the box, there are at worst n −1 scalarized
IPs (8) solved in updating the endpoints z1 and z2.
The nth solve of scalarized IP (8) conﬁrms that the
ﬁnal endpoints on the line segment indeed deﬁne an
NLS. The worst case is when both z1 and z2 are open,
z1
2 < zL
2, and z2
1 < zR
1 because two additional single-
objective IP solves are required to ﬁnd the NDPs
that dominate z1 and z2 (a ﬁgure illustrating this is
given in the online supplement). Therefore, we have
for some n′ + n′′  n −1, ˆs(n)  n + 2 + ˆs(n′) + ˆs(n′′).
So it follows that the worst case is ˆs(n)  n + 2 +
maxi0,...,n−1 ˆs(i) + ˆs(n −1 −i)
{
}.
We now use induction to complete the proof. First,
observe that for n  2, as required,
ˆs(n)  n + 2 + max
i0,1 {ˆs(i) + ˆs(2 −1 −i)}
 n + 2 + ˆs(1) + ˆs(0)  n + 2 + ˆs(1)
because ˆs(0)  0. Now make the inductive assump-
tion that for some m ≥2, ˆs(n)  n + 2 + ˆs(n −1) for all
n  2, . . . , m, and consider ˆs(m+1)  m+3+maxi0,...,m
ˆs(i) + ˆs(m−i)
{
}. The case that i  0 (and i  m) in the max
term gives ˆs(0) + ˆs(m)  ˆs(m) because ˆs(0)  0. The case
that i  1 (and i  m−1) in the max term gives ˆs(1) +
ˆs(m−1)  1+ ˆs(m−1) because ˆs(1)  1. But, by the in-
ductive assumption, ˆs(m)  m+2+ ˆs(m−1)>1+ ˆs(m −1)
because m ≥2. So the case i  1 (and i  m−1) cannot
achieve the maximum. Finally, again by the inductive
assumption,
max
i2,...,m−2{ˆs(i) + ˆs(m −i)}

max
i2,...,m−2{i + 2 + ˆs(i −1) + m −i + 2 + ˆs(m −i −1)}
 m + 4 +
max
i1,...,m−3{ˆs(i) + ˆs(m −2 −i)}
≤m + 4 +
max
i0,1,...,m−3,m−2{ˆs(i) + ˆs(m −2 −i)}
 m + 4 + ˆs(m −1) −(m −1 + 2)
 3 + ˆs(m −1).
But ˆs(m)  m+2+ ˆs(m−1)>3+ ˆs(m−1) because m ≥2,
so none of the cases i  2,...,m−2 can achieve the maxi-
mum. We conclude that maxi0,...,m ˆs(i)+
{
ˆs(m−i)} 
ˆs(m), and so ˆs(m+1)  m+3+ ˆs(m), as required.
□
Theorem 1. For all n ≥1, ˆs(n)  n(n + 1)/2 + 2(n −1).
Proof. This follows by induction on n and Lemma 2;
see the online supplement for details.
4. Recursive Method
There is a natural way to make the BLM a recursive
method that has substantially better worst-case com-
plexity. The fundamental concept is to transform the
inner loop into a recursive procedure that either con-
ﬁrms that a line segment is nondominated or iden-
tiﬁes an NDP that dominates a portion of it. Whenever
such an NDP is found, the inner loop is called re-
cursively to ﬁnd an NLS containing it. In addition to
modifying the inner loop, we must introduce a line
segment trimming subroutine and modify the outer
loop to ﬁt the recursive paradigm. The recursive method
is summarized in Figure 10.
The initialization stage remains the same, and the
outer loop follows the same procedure as the basic
method before calling the inner loop; that is, it selects
boxes from the queue, chooses a split line z2  μ, solves
lexicographic minimization (5), and follows the BBM
procedure when the NDP found is below the split line.
When the outer loop has chosen box B(zL, zR) from the
queue and ﬁnds NDP z* on the split line, that is, z∗
2  μ,
the outer loop then calls the recursive inner loop for
the ﬁrst time, which we call depth level 0.
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
26
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

4.1. Recursive Inner Loop
The recursive inner loop takes as input a box bounded
by two NDPs B(zL, zR), the NDP z* whose NLS it seeks
to generate and the set of all line segments inherited
from its parent calls, which we call +. On the ﬁrst call
of the inner loop (depth level 0), the set + is empty;
for greater depth levels, this set will be nonempty
and will be used for the line segment trimming sub-
routine. The output from the recursive function is a set
of NLSs }, including the one that contains z*.
We now describe the steps of the recursive function.
It ﬁrst calls the line segment generation subroutine, as
in the basic method. If z* is an isolated NDP, then the
recursive function terminates and returns the isolated
NDP. Otherwise, the subroutine provides the line
segment L(z1, z2) and its gradient vector ⃗w.
The second step is to call the line segment trimming
subroutine, which trims the current line segment so
that its endpoints do not exceed any of the previously
found line segments. This step prevents cycling. We
postpone further discussion of this feature to Section 4.2.
For now, we note that there is no trimming to be done
at depth level 0 because L(z1, z2) is the ﬁrst line seg-
ment that has been generated in the box B(zL, zR). Once
trimming is complete, the same checks as in the basic
method’s inner loop are made, that is, to see if either
endpoint is dominated by zL or zR (and, if so, to update
the endpoint as open, accordingly). The resulting line
segment is then added to the set of line segments + for
future line trimming.
The next step in the recursive inner loop is to
solve the same scalarized IP with respect to ⃗w as in
the basic method, that is, (8), including the condi-
tionally strict inequalities. Say the optimal solution is
y*. There are two cases. In the ﬁrst case, if L(z1, z2) is
nondominated, then z(y*) lies on the line segment; that
is, ⃗wTz(y*)  ⃗wTz*. This is the stopping criterion for the
while loop. When it is satisﬁed, the recursive function
Figure 10. The Recursive Inner Loop Applied to a Nondominated Point (NDP) ¯z* Returns Nondominated Line Segments
L(z1, z2) and L(¯z*, ¯z2) and the Isolated NDP ¯¯z*
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
27
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

terminates and returns the NLS, together with all
others it found, stored in }. In the second, more in-
teresting case, ⃗wTz(y*) < ⃗wTz*, that is, when a point
from L(z1, z2) is dominated by z(y*). In this case, the
function recurses and calls itself at the next depth
level. Assume that z(y*) is to the left of z*; the case of
z(y*) to the right can be handled similarly. Then the
following is the input to the recursive call:
• B(χ, z*), the new box, where χ is the NDP from
} ∪{zL} closest to z(y*) on the left (note that z* is the
closest known NDP to the right of z(y*));
• z(y*), the new NDP (it is the NLS containing it
that the function seeks); and
• +, the set of line segments, used for line segment
trimming.
The choice of B(χ, z*) as the new box prevents
rediscovery of line segments already found and en-
sures that only the portion of the line segment con-
taining z(y*) currently not known to be dominated is
explored in the recursive call. Note that when } is
empty, χ  zL.
After all deeper levels of recursive processing are
complete, a set of NLSs } is returned to the current
depth level call of the recursive inner loop. Then the
recursive function updates the line segment L(z1, z2).
In doing so, it follows the same rules as in the basic
method’s inner loop. However, instead of v found
from the LP (9), it chooses the NDP from } that is the
nearest to and strictly to the left of z*. That is, it
chooses
σ  argmin{z2 : z ∈}, z1 < z∗
1}.
(16)
The coordinate σ2 gives the updated z1
2, and the
updated z1
1 value is calculated to ensure that z1 re-
mains on its original line segment. Whether it is closed
or open is determined by whether σ lies on the line
segment. Because σ is guaranteed to be an NDP, there
is no need to solve a separate LP to discover the NDP
that dominates z1 when it is open.
Once the endpoint z1 (or z2, if exploring to the
right of z*) is updated, the while loop again solves
the scalarized IP (8). If the updated line segment is
nondominated, then the stopping criterion is met, and
the line segment L(z1, z2) is returned, along with any
others collected in }. Otherwise, the while loop
continues.
The recursive inner loop accumulates all NLSs
identiﬁed throughout all depths of recursion. This
accumulated set } is returned to the outer loop,
which updates ˜1 and 4 accordingly (details are in
Section 4.3).
4.2. Line Segment Trimming Subroutine
To motivate this subroutine, we give an example of
how—without it—cycling can occur. Consider two
intersecting slices from distinct integer solutions, as in
Figure 11(a). Suppose that z0 was ﬁrst found by the
split line and lexicographic minimization. Then line
generation would generate its full line segment L0,
and scalarization by its gradient ⃗w0 would result in
ﬁnding z1 (recall that the scalarized IP (8) is con-
strained by its endpoints). For the next level of re-
cursion, line generation would generate the full line
segment containing z1, L1, and its gradient ⃗w1. Note,
however, that L1 intersects L0, and in fact, the lower-
right endpoint of L1 is dominated by z0. Thus, scala-
rization by ⃗w1 would yield z0 again, and the algorithm
would cycle.
In general, there is a risk of cycling whenever a call
to the recursive inner loop generates a line segment
that intersects the line segment of a parent call. We
developed a simple routine to detect such intersec-
tions and update the child’s line segment so as to
prevent cycling. This is done by solving a linear system
and updating one endpoint of the child’s line segment,
as necessary; see the online supplement for details.
The line trimming process must be repeated for all
line segments in + that have been inherited by the
current call. For instance, observe that in Figure 11(b),
if all subsequent line segments were not trimmed
by the line segment containing z0, then a cycle would
occur.
4.3. Outer Loop Modiﬁcation
The only major modiﬁcation in the outer loop is the
handling of the output from the recursive inner loop,
which may return more than one continuous por-
tion of the NDF (see Figure 12). Therefore, we must
allow the outer loop to add more than one NLS to the
NDF and more than two boxes to the queue, as
necessary.
The latter requires a simple check of neighboring
NLSs. Consider checking L1 : (z1, z2), which is im-
mediately to the left of L2 : (z3, z4). When z2
1 < z3
1 and
z2
2 > z3
2, the outer loop should add the box B(z2, z3) to
the queue. Note that we must also consider the
boundary NDPs zL and zR while doing this check. In
Figure 12, four boxes are added to the queue because
four pairs of adjacent NLSs satisfy the criteria. One
pair of NLSs does not satisfy the criteria: the isolated
NDP z3 and the NLS containing z*.
4.4. Complexity of the Recursive Method
Let ˆℓR(n) be the worst-case number of lexicographic
IPs solved by the recursive method in completely
processing an arbitrary box B(zL, zR) with n NLSs (and
an arbitrary number of vertical gaps), and let ˆsR(n) be
the same but for scalarized IPs. Recall that the outer
loop only solves lexicographic IPs, and the recursive
inner loop only solves scalarized IPs.
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
28
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

The initialization stage and most of the function-
ality of the outer loop are unchanged; that is, in every
iteration, the outer loop solves one lexicographic IP to
identify an NLS, or it solves two lexicographic IPs to
identify a vertical gap. What has changed is the updating
procedure for the NDF and queue after the recursive
inner loop has terminated. Regardless, the upper bound
for the basic method’s number of lexicographic IP
solves is valid for the recursive method; that is, ˆℓR(n) 
ˆℓ(n)  3n + 2. However, we must reconsider an upper
bound for the number of scalarized IP solves.
Proposition 2. For all n ≥1, ˆsR(n)  2n −1.
Proof of Proposition 2. Let zL, zR be the corner points
for a box with n ≥1 NLSs. Assume that the NDF in the
box contains no vertical gaps. This assumption can be
made without loss of generality because vertical gaps
in the NDF are only discovered in the outer loop (by a
lexicographic IP solve that yields an NDP not on the
split line). They do not change the number of scalarized
IPs that need to be solved.
Because there are no vertical gaps, any split line
intersects an NLS containing the NDP z* found by
the lexicographic IP. Then the line segment in a slice
containing z* is determined (using LPs), and the re-
cursive inner loop is initiated.
In the recursive inner loop, there are two roles for
scalarized IPs. Type I conﬁrms that the current line
segment is nondominated, and every nontrivial line
segment requires exactly one of these IPs to be solved.
Isolated NDPs require none, so in the worst case, all
NLSs have dimension 1, and one type I scalarized IP is
solved per NLS in the NDF. Type II identiﬁes an NLS
for the ﬁrst time. It shows that a portion of the current
line segment is dominated (by returning a new NDP),
and the recursive call returns the NLS containing the
new NDP. Within the recursive call, it is impossible to
rediscover the same NLS. Therefore, no more than n −1
type II scalarized IPs will be required to discover all the
NLSs (the ﬁrst NLS must be found by a lexicographic
IP). Because all n NLSs require solving a type I sca-
larized IP to conﬁrm nondominance, a total of ˆsR(n) 
n + (n −1)  2n −1 scalarized IPs will be solved in the
worst case.
□
5. Same Integer Solution Enhancement
We propose an enhancement to the basic method
(given in Section 3) that has the potential to improve
its computational performance. The enhancement
exploits the observation that when both corner points
of a box have the same integer part of their solution
(they belong to the same slice), there is a good chance
Figure 11. The Line Segment Trimming Subroutine Prevents the Recursive Method from Cycling
Figure 12. The Recursive Variant May Return More Than
One Continuous Portion of the Nondominated Frontier
(e.g., the Nondominated Line Segment Containing z* and
Three Isolated Nondominated Points in the Example
Above), in Which Case the Algorithm Adds More Than Two
Boxes to the Queue (in White)
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
29
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

that the NDF within the box is precisely the part of the
slice within the box. We call this the same integer so-
lution (SIS) variant.
This enhancement was motivated by a common
structure encountered in the NDFs of benchmark
instances used in previous work on BOMIP algo-
rithms (Boland et al. 2015b, Soylu and Yıldız 2016).
These instances have NDFs consisting of a relatively
small number of continuous sections, generated by
relatively few slices, each having many small NLSs.
Figure 13 gives plots of two such instances. In one,
only ﬁve slices contribute to the NDF, which consists
of only four continuous sections. In the other, 15 slices
yield the NDF, consisting of 10 continuous sections.
Each continuous section has several NLSs from the
same slice. These two instances are typical of the
benchmark instances used in prior work.
During the BLM’s processing of these instances,
when both corner points of a box have the SIS, that is,
when zL  z(xL) and zR  z(xR), where xL
I  xR
I : x∗
I, it
is very likely that the NDF between zL and zR is a
subset of the slice for x∗
I. The SIS variant exploits this
observation. In the case that the slice problem does
yield the NDF in the current box, the SIS variant may
need to solve only one scalarized IP, having one no-
good (sometimes called tabu) constraint instead of one
scalarized IP for each NLS. Once it is determined that
the slice problem yields the NDF, LPs, rather than IPs,
may be used to ﬁnd all NLSs.
When the corner points of a box are generated by
a single integer solution x∗
I, the slice must be en-
tirely on or below the line segment L(zL, zR). This fol-
lows from convexity of the image of the LP feasible
set (integer part of the solution is ﬁxed) in crite-
rion space.
Let ⃗w denote the gradient vector of L(zL, zR). The
following scalarized IP with respect to ⃗w includes a
no-good constraint xI ̸ x∗
I, which makes all points
from the slice for x∗
I infeasible:
min{⃗wTz(x) : z1(x) ≤zR
1 , z2(x) ≤zL
2, xI ̸ x∗
I, x ∈-}.
(17)
We assume that the no-good constraint is imple-
mented linearly in the usual way. Let y* be an
optimal solution to (17). Because of the no-good
constraint, z(y∗) is not necessarily nondominated.
However, we make a simple observation: if the point
z(y∗) is on or above the line segment L(zL, zR), that is,
⃗wTzL ≤⃗wTz(y∗), then z(y∗) must be dominated by a
point from the slice for x∗
I, as shown in Figure 14(a).
Furthermore, the entire NDF within B(zL, zR) is given
by the slice for x∗
I. In this case, we solve the slice
problem for x∗
I using dichotomic search (Cohon 1978,
Aneja and Nair 1979), which solves a series of LPs.3
Therefore, if z(y∗) is on or above the line segment
L(zL, zR), the SIS variant will generate the entire NDF
within B(zL, zR) by solving just one scalarized IP (with
one no-good constraint) and a sequence of LPs. Con-
trast this with the basic BLM. In the same scenario with
n such NLSs in the NDF (all from the same slice), it
would solve n lexicographic IPs and n scalarized IPs.
Thus the SIS variant has the potential to provide
signiﬁcant savings in the number of IPs solved.
Now consider the other case, that z(y*) is below the
line segment L(zL, zR), that is, that ⃗wTz(y*) < ⃗wTzL.
There are two subcases: either z(y∗) is an NDP, or
z(y∗) is dominated by some point on the (so far un-
known) slice for x∗
I. These subcases are illustrated in
Figure 14, (b) and (c), respectively.
Figure 13. (Color online) The Nondominated Frontiers for Two Benchmark Instances
Notes. The keys indicate the integer vector associated with each nondominated point. Notice the similar structure in both: each integer vector
contributes several small and continuous nondominated line segments to the nondominated frontier.
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
30
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

When z(y∗) is below L(zL, zR), the SIS variant solves
the LP
min ⃗wTz(x) : z1(x) ≤z1(y∗), z2(x) ≤z2(y∗), xI  x∗
I,
{
x ∈-}.
(18)
If LP (18) is infeasible, then z(y∗) is an NDP. This
follows because zi(x) ≤zi(y∗) for i  1, 2 and x ∈-
implies, by the deﬁnition of y∗, that either z(x)  z(y∗)
or xI  x∗
I. The latter would imply that xI is feasible for
LP (18), which is impossible. Hence, z(x)  z(y∗); z(y∗)
must be an NDP. Otherwise, for similar reasons, any
feasible solution of LP (18), ˆx say, generates an NDP
z(ˆx). In either case, a new NDP has been found, and
then the inner loop is called with the box B(zL, zR) and
this new NDP as z*.
In this case, the SIS variant solves one scalarized IP
with a no-good constraint and one LP before calling
the inner loop, where the output will be a single NLS
(and some number of boxes added to the queue). By
contrast, the basic BLM would solve one lexico-
graphic IP before calling the inner loop, with similar
output. Therefore, the computational effort (and return)
is comparable, so there is not much beneﬁt from the
SIS variant in this case.
Computational experiments with the SIS variant
show enough improvement to indicate that the ﬁrst
case is much more likely than the second case, and so,
on balance, the enhancement is useful.
6. Implementation Issues
Because computers use ﬁnite-precision arithmetic, it
is necessary to introduce numerical tolerances. We
use a value ϵ > 0 to indicate the accuracy at which we
expect the BLM to provide output (deﬁned more
precisely in Section 6.1). Note that because the choice
of ϵ impacts (the accuracy of) the NDF generated by an
algorithm, it also impacts the time required by the
algorithm to ﬁnd the NDF. In Section 6.2, we show
that the NDFs generated for the same instance for
different values of ϵ can vary drastically.
Single-objective IP solvers use tolerances as well,
for example, feasibility and optimality tolerances,
and their choice also impacts the performance. In fact,
certain choices of IP solver tolerances may lead to
unexpected behavior in the algorithm. An illustration
is provided in Figure 15. This is just one example
of the numerical issues that we encountered during
the implementation of our proposed algorithms. We
found that it is critical that the IP solver tolerances are
set to values strictly smaller than ϵ.
The black box nature of (commercial) IP solvers also
makes it difﬁcult to intuit how redundant criterion
space constraints impact its performance. For in-
stance, each box B(z1, z2) can be represented by four
constraints, that is, z1
1 ≤z1(x) ≤z2
1 and z2
2 ≤z2(x) ≤z1
2,
or by just two constraints, that is, z1(x) ≤z2
1 and
z2(x) ≤z1
2 (the fact that z1 and z2 are nondominated
implies the remaining constraints). Our computa-
tional experiments with CPLEX indicated that the
former performs better. However, this behavior may
be different with other solvers.
6.1. Epsilon Frontier
Recognizing that computers use ﬁnite-precision arith-
metic, we deﬁne an ϵ-approximation of the NDF 1 or
simply an ϵ-frontier 1ϵ to be a set of points in criteria
space such that, for ﬁxed ϵ > 0, (1) for all z ∈1, there
exists ¯z ∈1ϵ with ∥z −¯z∥2 ≤ϵ, and (2) for all ¯z ∈1ϵ,
there exists z ∈1 with ∥z −¯z∥2 ≤ϵ.4 Note that there
Figure 14. The Same Integer Solution Variant Applied When zL and zR Are Both Generated by Integer Solution x∗
I
Note. The scalarization (17) with no-good constraint xI ̸ x∗
I will ﬁnd a point z(y∗) either above or below the line segment L(zL, zR), proceeding
with one of the three cases illustrated in (a), (b), and (c).
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
31
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

may be many distinct sets that satisfy the conditions
for being an ϵ-frontier. The BLM (when run to com-
pletion) produces an ϵ-frontier for any given BOMIP
having a nonempty and bounded feasible set. To see
how ϵ is used in the method to produce the ϵ-frontier,
see the algorithms in the online supplement.
This deﬁnition of an ϵ-frontier motivated speciﬁc
design choices in our implementation. For example,
when the inner loop solves scalarization IPs, for ex-
ample, scalarized IP (8), to ﬁnd NDPs that dominate a
line segment, our deﬁnition implies that we are only
interested in NDPs whose distances from the line seg-
ment are greater than ϵ. Therefore, we designed the
criterion for entering the inner loop’s while loop to be
⃗wTz(y*) < ⃗wTz* −ϵ∥⃗wT∥2, where y* is the optimal so-
lution to the scalarized IP. By normalizing the gradient
vector ⃗w with respect to the 2-norm at the end of the
line generation subroutine, that is, by requiring ∥⃗wT∥2 
1, we can simplify the criterion to ⃗wTz(y*) < ⃗wTz* −ϵ.
6.2. Epsilon Sensitivity of Historical Instances
The benchmark instances used in previous computa-
tional studies on algorithms for BOMIPs (Boland et al.
2015b, Soylu and Yıldız 2016) are based on the scheme
proposed by Mavrotas and Diakoulaki (1998). The
NDFs for the 20 instances, ranging in size from 20 to
320 decision variables, have a structure that was de-
scribed in Section 5. Much of the NDF consists of
continuous line segments from the same slice (see
Figure 13). This structure not only poses numerical
challenges when the line segments are extremely
small, that is, when their lengths are smaller than ϵ, it
also means that changes in the value of ϵ result in
drastically different NDFs being generated by our
algorithms, as shown in Table 1.
The fact that the NDF output by an algorithm for
solving BOMIPs can be considerably different when
a different tolerance value is used makes it very
difﬁcult to compare the performance of such algo-
rithms. The issue is compounded by the fact that an
algorithm, such as the TSA, may output several small
line segments whose union is equivalent to a single line
segment output by another algorithm, such as the
εTCM. This has motivated us to generate new in-
stances for which the exact NDF is known and the line
segments in the frontier all have length greater than a
prespeciﬁed value, for example, 10−4.
7. Instance Generation
We now provide a method for generating a BOMIP
having an NDF controlled by parameters and known
a priori. In doing so, we provide an approach to re-
verse engineer a BOMIP from the slices.5
Each instance’s NDF includes some sections of
the line segment Lk  {(x1, x2) ∈R2 : x1 + x2  0, −k ≤
xi ≤k for i  1, 2}, where k ∈(0, ∞) is a parameter.
This line segment will be one slice in the instance. The
instance has π other slices, where π is a parameter, all
of which have their image in criterion space given by a
pointed cone. The vertices of each cone lie on a line
segment parallel to Lk but shifted vertically down. The
width of the cone is randomly chosen in a controlled
manner. Figure 16 illustrates this structure, showing
the image of the feasible set in criterion space for four
Figure 15. If Mixed Integer Linear Program (IP) Solver Tolerances Are Not Set Appropriately, i.e., Strictly Less Than the
Algorithm’s ϵ, Then IPs (Especially Lexicographic IPs) May Return Points That Are Not Nondominated
Table 1. Number of Nondominated Line Segments Found
for Different Values ϵ
Instance
10−3
10−4
10−5
10−6
1
2,570
2,752
2,783
2,786
2
2,643
2,916
2,958
2,970
3
2,578
2,723
2,750
2,753
4
5,608
6,121
6,164
6,174
5
2,824
3,054
3,096
3,096
Note. All ﬁve instances are from the C160 class of instances and are
solved by the basic method.
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
32
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

slices: Lk and three pointed cones. All instances are
constructed to have the property that no two cones
overlap on or below Lk. This means that Lk alternates
between a section that is part of the NDF and a section
dominated by one cone.
Details of a method to generate two different classes
of instances having the structure described earlier
are provided in the online supplement. One class, the
ﬁxed-cone-width instances, is preferred for assess-
ment of the accuracy of BOMIP algorithms because
the NDF is known exactly a priori. The other class,
the randomized-cone-width instances, does not have
known NDFs, and this class of instances is more dif-
ﬁcult to solve in practice because of the high fre-
quency of intersecting slices in the NDF. All instances
are carefully designed to ensure that each NLS has
length of at least ϵ. We also force a proportion of the
cones in a randomized-cone-width instance to be
orthogonal;6 this induces open endpoints.
Given π, the resulting BOMIP has a number of
variables and a number of constraints that are linear in
π. The NDFs associated with the BOMIP will have no
more than 3π + 1 line segments (π + 1 from Lk and at
most two per cone), including open endpoints in-
duced by any orthogonal cones and closed endpoints
induced by intersecting slices.
These structured sets of instances provide a useful
way to study the accuracy and robustness of a BOMIP
algorithm.
8. Computational Study
This section provides computational results obtained
by the BLM on the following sets of instances:
• The 10 largest instances from the benchmark
instances for BOMIPs proposed by Mavrotas and
Diakoulaki (1998), which we refer to as the historical
instances, and
• Ten new randomized-cone-width instances, ﬁve
obtained by setting π  5,000 and ﬁve obtained by
setting π  7,500, which we refer to as the new instances.
All variations of BLM are coded in C++ and solve
the linear and integer programs using IBM CPLEX
Optimizer 12.6. All experiments were conducted in a
single thread of a dedicated Intel Xeon ES-2630 2.3-
GHz with 50 GB of random-access memory running
Red Hat Enterprise Linux Server 7.4.
All variations of BLM use tolerances ϵ  10−5 and
CPLEX tolerances 10−7 for historical instances and
tolerances ϵ  10−4 and CPLEX tolerances 10−6 for the
new instances. The reason for using greater accuracy
for the historical instances is that many of the NDFs
have very small line segments as well as nearly
horizontal or vertical line segments, which makes the
accurate calculation of the gradients critical.
We structure the discussion of the computational
experiments as follows. In Section 8.1, we present a
comparison of the variants of BLM, that is, basic, SIS,
and recursive, and in Section 8.2, we compare (vari-
ants of) BLM with the TSA and the εTCM.
8.1. Comparison of BLM Variants
Table 2 shows the results for the largest historical
instances, that is, the class C320 instances (results for
the next-largest instances, i.e., the class C160 instances,
can be found in the online supplement). Table 3 sum-
marizes the results for the new instances by presenting
the mean of the performance metrics (individual
results can be found in the online supplement). For
each combination of algorithm variant and instance,
we provide the following statistics: number of points
output by the algorithm (nNDP; described in more
detail later), number of different integer part solu-
tions (nIPF; i.e., the number of different slices ap-
pearing in the NDF), total time in seconds to discover
the NDF (TT), total time in seconds spent in IP solves
(IPT), total time in seconds spent in LP solves (LPT),
total number of IPs solved (nIP), total number of
lexicographic IPs (nLex), total number of single-
objective IPs solved to ﬁnd the NDP that dominates
an open endpoint, that is, (11) and (12) (nMin), total
number of scalarized IPs, for example, (8) (nScal),
total number of IPs with the no-good constraint
(nGood), total number of LPs solved (nLP), total
number of boxes processed (nRec), total number of
boxes processed where the corner points are gener-
ated by the SIS (nSIS), and ﬁnally, number of boxes
with z* on the horizontal split line (nZL). When not
applicable, an entry in the tables is marked with
“N/A.”
Figure 16. An Example of a Generated Randomized-Cone-
Width Instance with Four Slices, Including Lk and the
Boundary of Three Cones
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
33
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

Table 2. Comparison of the Different Algorithms for Historical Instances, Class C320
Algorithm
Instance
nNDP
nIPF
TT
IPT
LPT
nIP
nLex
nMin
nScal
nGood
nLP
nBox
nSIS
nZL
Basic
21
16,850
294
37,665.5
33,307.6
4,339.7
53,514
17,790
40
17,894
N/A
171,370
17,803
15,926
17,766
22
19,778
410
42,045.3
36,927.4
5,095.7
61,766
20,540
23
20,663
N/A
191,611
20,510
18,074
20,476
23
17,319
343
38,995.1
34,570.3
4,409.4
53,859
17,895
26
18,043
N/A
171,514
17,884
15,776
17,871
24
19,898
460
46,967.1
41,632.8
5,312.7
62,338
20,706
34
20,892
N/A
200,619
20,696
17,867
20,682
25
13,682
337
24,450.1
21,268.9
3,171.0
42,196
14,024
27
14,121
N/A
130,934
13,994
12,130
13,964
Average
17,505.4
368.8
38,024.6
33,541.4
4,465.7
54,734.6
18,191
30
18,322.6
N/A
173,209.6
18,177.4
15,954.6
18,151.8
Same integer
solution
21
15,699
294
6,106.2
4,890.5
1,211.5
6,598
1,741
40
1,849
1,227
43,443
2,956
1,227
1,722
22
18,840
410
7,788.7
6,297.5
1,485.3
8,613
2,287
23
2,421
1,595
52,662
3,850
1,595
2,233
23
16,449
343
6,977.4
5,607.1
1,366.8
7,459
1,982
26
2,131
1,338
46,627
3,309
1,338
1,961
24
18,546
460
9,535.6
7,899.2
1,630.3
10,070
2,672
34
2,884
1,808
56,219
4,468
1,808
2,679
25
13,239
337
5,329.1
4,296.6
1,029.2
6,578
1,753
26
1,853
1,193
37,911
2,916
1,193
1,700
Average
16,554.6
368.8
7,147.4
5,798.2
1,344.6
7,863.6
2,087
29.8
2,227.6
1,432.2
47,372.4
3,499.8
1,432.2
2,059
Recursive
21
16,831
294
37,201.4
32,767.3
4,417.0
52,297
16,979
N/A
18,339
N/A
170,040
16,971
15,611
16,955
22
19,763
410
41,650
36,417.7
5,210.1
60,312
19,600
N/A
21,112
N/A
189,879
19,568
17,830
19,536
23
17,315
343
38,684.6
34,149.4
4,521.7
52,585
17,042
N/A
18,501
N/A
170,082
17,030
15,546
17,018
24
19,890
460
46,196.8
40,725.8
5,449.5
60,571
19,576
N/A
21,419
N/A
198,351
19,566
17,509
19,552
25
13,667
337
24,635
21,314.5
3,310.4
40,899
13,143
N/A
14,613
N/A
129,295
13,113
11,834
13,083
Average
17,493.2
368.8
37,673.6
33,074.9
4,581.7
53,332.8
17,268
N/A
18,796.8
N/A
171,529.4
17,249.6
15,666
17,228.8
Notes. Statistics reported: nNDP, number of points output by the algorithm; nIPF, number of different integer part solutions; TT, total time to discover the NDF; IPT, total time spent in IP solves;
LPT, total time spent in liner program (LP) solves; nIP, total number of mixed integer linear programs (IPs) solved; nLex, total number of lexicographic IPs; nMin, total number of single-objective
IPs solved to ﬁnd the nondominated point (NDP) that dominates an open endpoint; nScal, total number of scalarized IPs; nGood, total number of IPs with the no-good constraint; nLP, total
number of LPs solved; nRec, total number of boxes processed; nSIS, total number of boxes processed where the corner points are generated by the same integer solution; nZL, number of boxes
with z* on the horizontal split line. Times are reported in seconds. N/A, not applicable.
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
34
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

Note that when we report the number of NDPs
(nNDP), we report the number of distinct endpoints
of line segments in the NDF. (Note that each non-
degenerate line segment in the NDF, regardless of
whether it is closed, half open, or open, results in two
points being output by the algorithm and that each
isolated NDP results in one point being output by the
algorithm.) We use nNDP to denote the number of
points output by the algorithm, and in the remainder
of this section, we refer to these points as NDPs, even
though in some cases, for example, the open end-
points of line segments, they are not.
The value reported in the “nNDP” column for a
given instance ideally should be the same regardless
of the algorithm used. However, because of the dif-
ferent numerical issues that a particular algorithm
may encounter, they rarely produce exactly the same
number, at least for the historical instances.
Note too that the total number of IPs solved (nIP)
satisﬁes nIP  2 × nLex + nMin + nScal + nGood.
First, we discuss the results from Table 2, starting
with the basic variant. As shown in Figure 13, the NDF
of a historical instance is characterized by continuous
portions of many small NLSs from the same slice. In
fact, the basic variant of the BLM reports an average
ratio of 47.5 NDPs per integer solution (i.e., nNDP/
nIPF). The total time to solve a historical instance
reported for the basic variant is approximately the
sum of the time for solving IPs and LPs (i.e., TT ≈IPT +
LPT). The average percentage of the total time spent
solving IPs is 88.2%. We note that the number of
lexicographic IPs is quite close to the number of NDPs.
This is to be expected because in the basic variant of the
BLM, each line segment of the NDF is discovered by
ﬁrst solving a lexicographic IP to obtain an NDP on this
line segment. The number of scalarized IPs does not
differ much from the number of NDPs because the
majority of line segments produced by the line gen-
eration subroutine can usually be proven to be part of
the NDF by solving a single scalarized IP; the line
segments produced by the line generation subroutine
are proven to be nondominated 98.1% of the time (on
average). The number of boxes processed is also quite
close to the number of NDPs because each line segment
of the NDF is discovered by processing exactly one
box. The number of boxes with corner points with the
same integer solution (nSIS) is large: 87.8% of the boxes
(on average). Finally, note that the vast majority of the
NDPs found by solving a lexicographic IP in the outer
loop fall on the horizontal split line: 99.9% of the NDPs
(on average). The high likelihood that the split line
intersects some line segment of the NDF is a result of
the fact that these instances have NDFs that contain
few vertical gaps.
The SIS variant, as expected, greatly improves on
the basic variant. Given a box with corner points
Table 3. Comparison of the Different Algorithms for Generated Instances with n  5,000 and n  75,000
Algorithm
N
nNDP
nIPF
TT
IPT
LPT
nIP
nLex
nMin
nScal
nGood
nLP
nBox
nSIS
nZL
Basic
5,000
15,002.0
5,001
3,924.3
1,761.6
1,846.8
51,786.4
14,586.6
466.4
22,146.8
N/A
104,131
14,546.4
3,175.0
14,502.6
Same integer solution
5,000
15,002.0
5,001
4,522.0
2,245.0
1,954.0
53,575.4
16,191.2
379.6
20,732.6
80.8
112,810.4
16,251.4
80.8
16,073.2
Recursive
5,000
15,002.4
5,001
2,823.6
1,341.8
1,187.8
29,628.2
3,633.6
N/A
22,361
N/A
72,896.4
3,612.0
1.0
3,590.4
Basic
7,500
22,502.0
7,501
8,881.4
4,109.9
3,914.8
81,398.0
21,846.8
706.4
36,998
N/A
157,289.4
21,795.4
8,148
21,740.0
Same integer solution
7,500
22,502.0
7,501
12,060.1
7,146.5
4,017.5
79,738.8
24,021.0
606.0
30,979.8
111.0
168,228.0
24,098.8
111.0
23,888.8
Recursive
7,500
22,502.6
7,501
6,346.7
3,002.0
2,538.4
44,452.4
5,272.8
N/A
33,906.8
N/A
109,628.6
5,240.4
1.2
5,208.0
Notes. Statistics reported: nNDP, number of points output by the algorithm; nIPF, number of different integer part solutions; TT, total time to discover the NDF; IPT, total time spent in IP solves;
LPT, total time spent in liner program (LP) solves; nIP, total number of mixed integer linear programs (IPs) solved; nLex, total number of lexicographic IPs; nMin, total number of single-objective
IPs solved to ﬁnd the nondominated point (NDP) that dominates an open endpoint; nScal, total number of scalarized IPs; nGood, total number of IPs with the no-good constraint; nLP, total
number of LPs solved; nRec, total number of boxes processed; nSIS, total number of boxes processed where the corner points are generated by the same integer solution; nZL, number of boxes
with z* on the horizontal split line. All metrics are averaged over ﬁve instances. Times are reported in seconds. N/A, not applicable.
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
35
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

having the SIS, the SIS variant is able to prove that the
slice for the integer solution inside the box is part of
the NDF by solving a single IP with a no-good con-
straint most of the time. In that case, the NDF inside
the box is generated by solving LPs only. The im-
provement of the SIS variant over the basic variant is
81.2% for total time (on average) and 85.6% for
number of IP solved (on average). This is the best
variant of the BLM for the historical instances.
We want to draw attention to the fact that the SIS
variant produces fewer NDPs for the historical in-
stances than the other variants. We have observed
that this is due to inaccuracies that can occur in the
calculation of the gradients of a line segment in the
line generation subroutine. If the calculated gradient
for a line segment is not very accurate, then the LPs
solved to ﬁnd the endpoints z1 and z2 of the line
segment can ﬁnd incorrect endpoints. As a conse-
quence, rather than ﬁnding the entire line segment,
only a portion may be found, effectively splitting the
line segment into smaller line segments. The SIS vari-
ant relies less on the line generation subroutine. When
the SIS variant establishes that the NDF inside the
box belongs to a single slice, the NDPs of that slice
problem are found by solving LPs without the need to
calculate the individual gradient of each line segment.
The recursive variant does not improve on the basic
variant because it does not recurse very often (the
maximum recorded depth was three for all instances),
because most of the time the full line segment ob-
tained from the line generation subroutine is part of
the NDF. Since the recursive variant rarely recurses, it
proceeds similarly to the basic variant for these his-
torical instances.
Next, we focus on the results for the new instances.
The basic variant reports an average ratio of three
NDPs per integer solution for both sets (n  5,000 and
n  7,500). This is expected due to their structure. The
percentage of time spent solving IPs is 44.9% for set
n  5,000 and 46.3% for set n  7,500. This is com-
parable to the time spent solving LPs. As expected, for
the basic variant, the number of lexicographic IPs is
close to the number of NDPs because there is a one-to-
one correspondence between a lexicographic IP and
an NLS. The number of scalarized IPs is approxi-
mately three per two NDPs. This shows that more
scalarized IPs per NDP are solved in the new in-
stances compared with the historical instances. This is
due to the characterization of the NDF, where the
while loop within the inner loop must usually iterate
more than once in a signiﬁcant portion of the calls.
Indeed, the inner loop solves a single scalarized IP
50.3% of the time (on average) for set n  5,000 and
59.3% of the time (on average) for set n  7,500. A
reasonable number of the boxes processed have cor-
ner points with the SIS, an average of 21.8% for set
n  5,000 and 37.4% for set n  7,500. This is not
surprising given the way the new instances are con-
structed, that is, with line segment Lk extending across
the NDF and contributing many distinct NLSs. How-
ever, unlike the historical instances, the NDF within
these boxes is less likely to be generated entirely by
that single integer solution.
As expected, the SIS variant does not improve on
the basic variant for the new instances; in fact, it is a bit
slower. First, in the new instances, by design, the
solution of the slice problem is not as helpful (in terms
of ﬁnding multiple NDPs of the NDF associated with
the integer solution of the corner points) because (1)
the corner points of the box have the SIS of the line
segment Lk, which is partially dominated by the
pointed cones, or (2) the corner points of the box have
the integer solution associated to some cone (and each
cone produces at most three NDPs). Second, we found
that solving scalarized IPs in which the objective
function has the same gradient as the line segment Lk
can require excessive amounts of time, most likely
because there are multiple optimal solutions to the
scalarized IP (given the way the corner points of the
cones are generated). The very ﬁrst scalarized IP
solved can take up to 35% of the total time to ﬁnd the
entire NDF for an instance!
Finally, the recursive variant is very efﬁcient for the
new instances. Compared with the basic variant, the
recursive variant takes, on average, only 71.9% of
the total time and solves, on average, 57.2% of the
number of IPs for the set n  5,000 and 71.5% of the
total time and 55.6% of the number of IPs for the set
n  7,500. It is more efﬁcient because it recurses fre-
quently with the new instances; the maximum depth
level ranges from 13 to 17 for instances in the set n 
5,000 and from 15 to 20 for instances in the set n 
7,500. As the algorithm recurses, the number of lex-
icographic IPs drops signiﬁcantly because many of
the line segments of the NDF can be discovered and
proved optimal by solving only two scalarized IPs
throughout the recursion. Furthermore, because the re-
cursive inner loop does not solve as many LPs (e.g., it does
not solve (9) to ﬁnd v), the total number of LPs drops
noticeably compared with the basic variant.
8.2. Comparison with Existing Algorithms
Comparing the performance of different algorithms
is always challenging, but it is especially difﬁcult
for algorithms solving multiobjective mixed integer
programs, given that it is nontrivial, in practice, to
characterize an optimal solution, that is, the NDF. An
NDF can contain isolated points as well as open, half-
open, and closed segments, and because computers
employ ﬁnite-precision arithmetic, algorithms have
to use tolerances to decide whether two values are
equal or different. Changing the tolerance(s) used in
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
36
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

an algorithm for ﬁnding the NDF of a multiobjective
integer program, as we have seen in Section 6, can
have a noticeable effect on the resulting NDF.
Unfortunately, the use of tolerances in algorithms
for ﬁnding the NDF of a multiobjective integer pro-
gram also makes it more likely that the execution of an
algorithm on a different hardware platform exhibits a
different behavior, even to the point where it ﬁnds
the NDF for an instance on one hardware platform
but fails to do so for the same instance on another
hardware platform.
In addition, to compare the performance of algo-
rithms, it is preferable to run the algorithms on the
same hardware platform and, if at all possible, for an
algorithm to be the only computationally intensive
process running on the platform when computing
times are recorded.
We were fortunate in that the developers of the TSA
and the εTCM both made the source code of the
implementation of their algorithms available to us.
Thus, a comparison of the performance of our pro-
posed algorithms with the performance of these two
algorithms could be conducted on the same hardware
platform and therefore be fair.
This worked well (mostly) for the instances used
in previous computational studies on algorithms for
biobjective mixed integer programming, that is, the his-
torical instances generated according to the scheme
proposed by Mavrotas and Diakoulaki (1998), but
not so well for the new instances we created. The imple-
mentation of the TSA uses an instance reader that was
customized to the historical instances, and it was not ob-
vious how to adapt it to the new instances. The imple-
mentationoftheεTCM reads the instances correctly but
terminates after the ﬁrst integer program is solved.
Furthermore, the implementation of the TSA that
we had access to uses a relative tolerance and, as a
result, only ﬁnds an approximation of the NDF. More
speciﬁcally, averaged over the instances in the sets
C160 and C320, the TSA ﬁnds 1,519 and 3,140 NDPs,
respectively, whereas the SIS variant of our proposed
algorithms ﬁnds, averaged over the instances in the
sets C160 and C320, 3,548 and 16,555 NDPs, re-
spectively. Therefore, the TSA ﬁnds 42.8% of the
NDPs found by the SIS variant of our proposed al-
gorithm for the instances in the set C160 and only
19.0% for the instances in set C320. As a result, it is not
meaningful to compare solution times.7
The implementation of the εTCM that we had ac-
cess to produced almost identical NDFs, differing by
only a few NDPs, but for a few historical instances, it
failed to produce an NDF (it cycled). We expect that
this is due to the use of a different version of CPLEX
and the use of a different hardware platform. How-
ever, because we felt it was important to perform a
thorough and fair comparison on all instances, new as
well as historical, we implemented our own version of
the εTCM, using, whenever possible, data structures
and subroutines common to the BLM. We validated
our implementation of the εTCM by conﬁrming that it
produced a nearly identical NDF to that produced
by the original implementation, in very similar com-
puting time, on all instances for which this was pos-
sible, that is, for which the original implementation ran
on our platform.
Our overall comparison of algorithms can be found
in Table 4, which reports on the performance of the
SIS variant of the BLM and the εTCM on the historical
instances and the recursive variant of the BLM and the
εTCM on the new instances.
We observe that the SIS variant of the BLM solves
fewer IPs than the εTCM on the historical instances,
which results in faster solution times, 297.9 seconds versus
345.6 seconds, respectively, averaged over the C160
instances, and 7,147.4 seconds versus 10,354.8 sec-
onds, respectively, averaged over the C320 instances.
Even though the recursive variant of the BLM solves
more IPs than the εTCM and far more LPs than the
εTCM, on the new instances, it still ends up having sig-
niﬁcantly faster solution times, 2,823.6 seconds versus
12,156.3 seconds, respectively, averaged over the n 
5,000 instances, and 6,346.7 seconds versus 37,922.2
seconds, respectively, averaged over the n  7,500
instances.
In summary, variants of the BLM not only have
desirable theoretical properties (in terms of the num-
ber of IPs that need to be solved to generate the NDF)
but also are fast in practice and outperform existing
algorithms for solving BOMIPs.
8.2.1. Comments on Recently Published Algorithms for
Solving BOMIPs. The growing interest in solving
BOMIPs is illustrated by two very recent papers (both
published while this paper was under review): Fattahi
and Turkay (2018) introduce an algorithm, called one-
direction search (ODS), based on ideas similar to the
εTCM, and Soylu (2018) introduces an algorithm,
called search-and-remove (SaR), that cleverly combines
dichotomic search, solving slice problems, and no-
good constraints. For the sake of completeness, we
provide some comments on the computational results
reported in these papers.
Fattahi and Turkay (2018) and Soylu (2018) provide
a comparison with published results for the TSA on
historical instances, classes C160 and C320, acknowl-
edging the challenges associated with such a compari-
son because their results were obtained on different hard-
ware platforms and using different versions of CPLEX.
The results for the ODS with relative error ξ  10e−5
(Fattahi and Turkay 2018) show that the ODS takes
more time to produce the NDF for class C160 in-
stances and about the same time or slightly less time
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
37
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

for class C320 instances. The main contribution, how-
ever (and the authors’ primary objective), was dem-
onstrating that more accurate NDF approximations
can be achieved (compared with the TSA).
The results for SaR with 10 subregions (Soylu 2018)
show substantial improvement over the TSA. On
average, SaR produced the NDF 32% faster than the
TSA for C160 instances and 7% faster than the TSA for
C320 instances, where SaR was faster in 9 of 10 in-
stances, by 37% on average, but struggled with one
problematic instance. We note that SaR is especially
well suited for the historical instances because the
NDFs consist of a relatively small number of con-
tinuous sections generated by relatively few slices,
each having many (small) line segments.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Banu Soylu for her generosity in sharing
her εTCM code with them and for her insightful responses to
their questions.
Endnotes
1 Note that our deﬁnition of a slice differs from the original deﬁnition
by Belotti et al. (2013), where it is deﬁned as the feasible set for the slice
problem as opposed to the resulting NDF.
2 The strict inequality used is a convenient shorthand. It is meant to be
interpreted and implemented as z1(x) ≤z∗
1 −ϵ for some ϵ > 0.
3 An alternative method for solving the slice problem is parametric
simplex (Ehrgott 2005).
4 The concept of an ϵ-frontier is not new; however, as opposed to the
deﬁnitions in papers such as Papadimitriou and Yannakakis (2000)
and Vassilvitskii and Yannakakis (2005), which rely on the notion of
relative error, our deﬁnition uses the notion of absolute error.
5 The generated instances are publicly available at https://github
.com/t-perini/BOMIPresearch.
6 A cone is chosen to be orthogonal with probability φ, a parameter. In
all our instances, we used φ  0.05.
7 For the C160 instances, the total runtime of the BLM was 7% longer,
on average, than the published results for the TSA, and for the C320
instances, the BLM’s runtime is 85% longer.
References
Aneja YP, Nair KP (1979) Bicriteria transportation problem. Man-
agement Sci. 25(1):73–78.
Belotti P, Soylu B, Wiecek MM (2013) A branch-and-bound algorithm
for biobjective mixed-integer programs. Optimization Online.
Accessed April 17, 2019, http://www.optimization-online.org/
DB_FILE/2013/01/3719.pdf.
Boland N, Charkhgard H, Savelsbergh M (2015a) A criterion space
search algorithm for biobjective integer programming: The
balanced box method. INFORMS J. Comput. 27(4):735–754.
Boland N, Charkhgard H, Savelsbergh M (2015b) A criterion space
search algorithm for biobjective mixed integer programming:
Table 4. Comparison of the εTCM and the BLM (SIS Variant for Historical and Recursive Variant for New Instances)
Instance
εTCM
BLM
nNDP
nIPF
TT
IPT
LPT
nIP
nLP
nNDP
nIPF
TT
IPT
LPT
nIP
nLP
16
2,762
115
216.6
145.8
70.3
2,870
10,520
2,764
115
206.0
148.6
57.1
1,934
8,287
17
2,949
110
324.9
194.1
130.2
3,054
16,205
2,952
110
257.7
185.6
71.7
1,960
8,915
18
2,739
101
239.3
156.4
82.4
2,834
11,257
2,738
101
232.8
170.5
61.9
1,909
8,172
19
6,151
181
674.1
494.9
177.1
6,319
23,086
6,166
181
577.1
433.1
143.1
3,805
18,212
20
3,125
100
273.0
202.4
69.9
3,216
9,080
3,122
100
216.1
148.8
66.9
1,748
8,698
Average
3,545.2
121.4
345.6
238.7
106.0
3,658.6
14,029.6
3,548.4
121.4
297.9
217.3
80.2
2,271.2
10,456.8
21
15,636
295
8,836.8
6,659.8
2,165.8
15,923
86,957
15,699
294
6,106.2
4,890.5
1,211.5
6,598
43,443
22
18,825
410
11,671.6
9,055.6
2,598.7
19,205
98,134
18,840
410
7,788.7
6,297.5
1,485.3
8,613
52,662
23
16,420
343
10,437.3
7,743.2
2,682.4
16,752
102,411
16,449
343
6,977.4
5,607.1
1,366.8
7,459
46,627
24
18,471
457
13,028.6
10,187.5
2,825.8
18,968
101,218
18,546
460
9,535.6
7,899.2
1,630.3
10,070
56,219
25
13,216
337
7,799.5
5,698.3
2,092.7
13,518
79,133
13,239
337
5,329.1
4,296.6
1,029.2
6,578
37,911
Average
16,513.6
368.4
10,354.8
7,868.9
2,473.1
16,873.2
93,570.6
16,554.6
368.8
7,147.4
5,798.2
1,344.6
7,863.6
47,372.4
5,000.A
15,002
5,001
12,152.0
11,513.9
337.8
25,229
24,345
15,002
5,001
2,861.8
1,383.9
1,184.6
29,711
72,937
5,000.B
15,002
5,001
12,185.2
11,565.4
337.3
25,281
24,201
15,002
5,001
2,788.4
1,301.3
1,192.8
29,587
72,826
5,000.C
15,002
5,001
12,218.9
11,586.8
338.4
25,292
24,156
15,004
5,001
2,827.3
1,350.4
1,184.6
29,538
72,824
5,000.D
15,002
5,001
12,196.0
11,563.4
338.2
25,256
24,272
15,002
5,001
2,788.5
1,306.2
1,187.8
29,664
72,986
5,000.E
15,002
5,001
12,029.3
11,415.1
334.1
25,263
24,243
15,002
5,001
2,851.8
1,367.3
1,189.4
29,641
72,909
Average
15,002
5,001
12,156.3
11,528.9
337.2
25,264.2
24,243.4
15,002.4
5,001
2,823.6
1,341.8
1,187.8
29,628.2
72,896.4
7,500.A
22,502
7,501
38,542.3
37,022.1
701.1
37,875
36,407
22,502
7,501
6,544.4
3,209.7
2,535.2
44,466
109,695
7,500.B
22,502
7,501
38,528.6
37,024.5
700.7
37,889
36,369
22,502
7,501
6,329.9
3,016.2
2,517.2
44,485
109,677
7,500.C
22,502
7,501
38,532.5
37,004.0
701.5
37,890
36,374
22,502
7,501
6,341.6
2,964.6
2,562.0
44,445
109,532
7,500.D
22,502
7,501
36,466.7
34,998.8
671.7
37,907
36,311
22,502
7,501
6,172.0
2,822.3
2,538.8
44,415
109,698
7,500.E
22,502
7,501
37,540.8
36,076.9
671.3
37,893
36,369
22,505
7,501
6,345.6
2,997.1
2,538.9
44,451
109,541
Average
22,502
7,501
37,922.2
36,425.3
689.3
37,890.8
36,366.0
22,502.6
7,501
6,346.7
3,002.0
2,538.4
44,452.4
109,628.6
Notes. Statistics reported: nNDP, number of points output by the algorithm; nIPF, number of different integer part solutions; TT, total time to
discover the NDF; IPT, total time spent in IP solves; LPT, total time spent in liner program (LP) solves; nIP, total number of mixed integer linear
programs (IPs) solved; nLex, total number of lexicographic IPs; nMin, total number of single-objective IPs solved to ﬁnd the nondominated point
(NDP) that dominates an open endpoint; nScal, total number of scalarized IPs; nGood: total number of IPs with the no-good constraint; nLP, total
number of LPs solved; nRec, total number of boxes processed; nSIS, total number of boxes processed where the corner points are generated by the
same integer solution; nZL, number of boxes with z* on the horizontal split line. Times are reported in seconds.
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
38
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

The triangle splitting method. INFORMS J. Comput. 27(4):
597–618.
Coello CA (2000) An updated survey of GA-based multiobjective
optimization techniques. ACM Comput. Surveys 32(2):109–143.
Cohon JL (1978) Multiobjective Programming and Planning (Academic
Press, New York).
Deb
K
(2001)
Multi-Objective
Optimization
Using
Evolutionary
Algorithms, vol. 16 (John Wiley & Sons, New York).
Ehrgott M (2005) Multicriteria Optimization, 2nd ed. (Springer
Verlag, Berlin).
Ehrgott M, Gandibleux X (2000) A survey and annotated bibliog-
raphy of multiobjective combinatorial optimization. OR Spec-
trum 22(4):425–460.
Ehrgott M, Gandibleux X, eds. (2002) Multiple Criteria Optimization:
State of the Art Annotated Bibliographic Surveys, International
Series in Operations Research and Management Science, vol. 52
(Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston).
Farahani RZ, SteadieSeiﬁM, Asgari N (2010) Multiple criteria facility
location problems: A survey. Appl. Math. Model. 34(7):1689–1709.
Fattahi A, Turkay M (2018) A one direction search method to ﬁnd the
exact nondominated frontier of biobjective mixed-binary linear
programming problems. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 266(2):415–425.
Lei D (2009) Multi-objective production scheduling: A survey.
Internat. J. Adv. Manufacturing Tech. 43(9–10):926–938.
Malczewski J (2006) GIS-based multicriteria decision analysis:
A survey of the literature. Internat. J. Geographical Inform. Sci. 20(7):
703–726.
Mavrotas G, Diakoulaki D (1998) A branch and bound algorithm for
mixed zero-one multiple objective linear programming. Eur. J.
Oper. Res. 107(3):530–541.
Mavrotas G, Diakoulaki D (2005) Multi-criteria branch and bound:
A vector maximization algorithm for mixed 0-1 multiple ob-
jective linear programming. Appl. Math. Comput. 171(1):53–71.
Papadimitriou CH, Yannakakis M (2000) The complexity of tradeoffs,
and optimal access of web sources. Proc. 41st Annual Sympos.
Foundations Comput. Sci. (IEEE Computer Society, Piscataway,
NJ), 86–92.
Rais A, Viana A (2011) Operations research in healthcare: A survey.
Internat. Trans. Oper. Res. 18(1):1–31.
Soylu B (2018) The search-and-remove algorithm for biobjective
mixed-integer linear programming problems. Eur. J. Oper. Res.
268(1):281–299.
Soylu B, Yıldız GB (2016) An exact algorithm for biobjective mixed in-
teger linear programming problems. Comput. Oper. Res. 72(Suppl C):
204–213.
Stidsen T, Andersen KA, Dammann B (2014) A branch and bound
algorithm for a class of biobjective mixed integer programs.
Management Sci. 60(4):1009–1032.
Vassilvitskii S, Yannakakis M (2005) Efﬁciently computing succinct
trade-off curves. Theoret. Comput. Sci. 348(2–3):334–356.
Vincent T, Seipp F, Ruzika S, Przybylski A, Gandibleux X (2013)
Multiple objective branch and bound for mixed 0-1 linear pro-
gramming: Corrections and improvements for biobjective case.
Comput. Oper. Res. 40(1):498–509.
White D (1990) A bibliography on the applications of mathemati-
cal programming multiple-objective methods. J. Oper. Res. Soc.
41(8):669–691.
Zhou A, Qu BY, Li H, Zhao SZ, Suganthan PN, Zhang Q (2011)
Multiobjective evolutionary algorithms: A survey of the state of
the art. Swarm Evolutionary Comput. 1(1):32–49.
Perini et al.: Boxed Line Method
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 2020, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 16–39, © 2019 INFORMS
39
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.180.39] on 11 June 2025, at 23:37 . For personal use only, all rights reserved.