TITLE: The impact of chief risk officer appointments on firm risk and operational efficiency
JOURNAL: JOM
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/joom.1175
---

The impact of chief risk officer appointments on firm risk and operational efficiency
Li, H., Lam, H., Ho, W., & Yeung, A. (2022). The impact of chief risk officer appointments on firm risk and
operational efficiency. Journal of Operations Management, 68(3), 241-269. https://doi.org/10.1002/joom.1175
Link to publication record in Ulster University Research Portal
Published in:
Journal of Operations Management
Publication Status:
Published (in print/issue): 11/04/2022
DOI:
10.1002/joom.1175
Document Version
Author Accepted version
For Author Accepted Manuscripts (AAM) published under Ulster University's Rights Retention Policy for Scholarly Works
(RRPSW)
When citing an AAM published under Ulster University's RRPSW please use the following citation structure:
Author, A. A. (Year). Title of article. Journal Name, [Accepted Author Manuscript]. PURE Portal URL. Licensed under CC BY 4.0.
General rights
The copyright and moral rights to the output are retained by the output author(s), unless otherwise stated by the document licence.
Unless otherwise stated, users are permitted to download a copy of the output for personal study or non-commercial research and are
permitted to freely distribute the URL of the output. They are not permitted to alter, reproduce, distribute or make any commercial use of the
output without obtaining the permission of the author(s).
If the document is licenced under Creative Commons, the rights of users of the documents can be found at
https://creativecommons.org/share-your-work/cclicenses/.
Take down policy
The Research Portal is Ulster University's institutional repository that provides access to Ulster's research outputs. Every effort has been
made to ensure that content in the Research Portal does not infringe any person's rights, or applicable UK laws. If you discover content in
the Research Portal that you believe breaches copyright or violates any law, please contact pure-support@ulster.ac.uk
Download date: 13/06/2026

 
1 
The Impact of Chief Risk Officer Appointments on Firm Risk and 
Operational Efficiency 
 
Abstract 
To exercise risk control at the corporate level, firms often appoint Chief Risk Officers (CROs) 
to their top management team. By establishing CRO positions, firms can reduce firm risk and 
potential financial losses caused by operational disruptions. Yet, by inducing stringent control 
measures on risks, security, and compliance, CRO appointments might create unwieldy 
bureaucracies with operational hurdles and incur burdensome costs that offset efficiency. Using 
longitudinal secondary data collected from multiple sources, we analyze the impact of CRO 
appointments on firm risk and operational efficiency of 435 publicly listed firms in the U.S. from 
2006 to 2016. Our results indicate that CRO appointments not only reduce risks, but also improve 
efficiency in operations. We delve into the power of CROs and find that more powerful CROs 
are more effective in enhancing the operational efficiency of firms. We further examine the 
contextual factors and reveal that firms operating under high industry litigation threats and 
industry dynamism improve operational efficiency to a greater extent after CRO appointments. 
Overall, CROs’ appointments are more beneficial to firms when they have stronger power in the 
top management team and when the operating environments are uncertain and volatile. 
 
Highlights 
• CRO appointments help reduce firm risk and improve operational efficiency. 
• The performance impact of CRO appointments is more pronounced when the appointed 
CROs have stronger power. 
• Firms operating in litigious and dynamic environments benefit more from CRO 
appointments. 
 
Keywords: Chief risk officers, firm risk, operational efficiency, power, industry litigation threat, 
industry dynamism 
 

 
2 
1. Introduction 
Firms nowadays operate in a more uncertain environment and have to deal with a variety of 
macro and micro risks (Ho et al., 2015). Risk is defined as “a phenomenon that has the potential 
to deliver substantial harm, whether or not the probability of this harm eventuating is estimable” 
(Lupton, 2013, p. 10). To minimize negative impacts caused by risk factors, executives and 
operations managers emphasize the importance of proactive risk management (Knemeyer et al., 
2009; Neiger et al., 2009). Many companies appoint CROs to the top management team (TMT) 
to develop risk management initiatives (Beasley et al., 2008). Since the appointment of the first 
CRO (i.e., James Lam) by General Electric, CRO positions have been created for 20 years. The 
position has gained more attention after the release of Sections 302 and 404 of the Sarbanes–
Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX) and the occurrence of the global financial crisis in 2008. The bill 
legally requires firms to ensure the accuracy of financial disclosure and tighten risk controls to 
protect investors’ interests (Leuz, 2007). 
Appointing a CRO to the TMT facilitates managerial attention allocated to risk-related 
issues and motivates firms to adopt a strategic view to implement a comprehensive approach to 
risk management, which enables firms to proactively identify, assess, mitigate, and monitor 
potential risks that disrupt their operations. It enhances firms’ ability to deal with unexpected 
circumstances and reduces firm risks and potential financial losses caused by operational 
disruptions (Ambulkar et al., 2015; Tomlin, 2006). Based on this perspective, previous studies 
indicate that firms with a higher level of risk control are associated with higher firm value (Florio 
& Leoni, 2017; Hoyt & Liebenberg, 2011), lower stock volatility (Eckles et al., 2014), lower tail 
risks, and higher stock return performances (Ellul & Yerramilli, 2013). However, risk controls 
may also give rise to bureaucracy, operational constraints, and administrative costs that offset 
operational efficiency (Pagell et al., 2015). For example, creating CRO positions in the TMT 
might make frontline managers think that risk management is someone else’s job and ignore 
risks in operations (Pernell et al., 2017). Also, initiatives that aim to reduce workplace risks 
might incur burdensome costs that decrease the odds of organizational survival (Pagell et al., 
2020). On average, manufacturing firms spend 7% of their total operating costs on risk and 
compliance-related processes (Crain & Crain, 2014). Similarly, financial firms spend 6-10% of 

 
3 
their revenue on risk and compliance (American-Banker, 2018). These costs indicate that there 
is a potential tension between risk control and operational efficiency. As a reflection of this 
tension, empirical results regarding the operating outcomes associated with CRO appointments 
remain inconclusive (as summarized in Table 1 and further discussed in Section 2). 
In this article, we explore this tension by examining how CRO appointments affect firm risk 
and operational efficiency. We further investigate how the power of CROs affects the 
effectiveness of CRO appointments and how environmental factors, including industry litigation 
threat and industry dynamism, moderate the effectiveness of CRO appointments. We focus on 
the following research questions: What are the impacts of CRO appointments on firm risk and 
operational efficiency? How does the power of CROs affect the performance outcomes and under 
what circumstances do CRO appointments become more beneficial to firms? By studying 435 
publicly listed firms in the U.S. from 2006 to 2016, we find that CRO appointments lower firm 
risk and enhance operational efficiency simultaneously, indicating risk control and operational 
efficiency are mutually supportive. Our results also indicate that powerful CROs enhance 
operational efficiency to a greater extent. We further reveal that firms operating under high levels 
of industry litigation threat and industry dynamism benefit more from CRO appointments. 
This study contributes to operations management (OM) and risk management research in a 
few ways. First, our study suggests that appointing a CRO to the TMT is an effective way of 
reducing firm risk and improving operational efficiency simultaneously. This enhances our 
understanding of the paradoxical relationship between risk control and operational efficiency 
(Pagell et al., 2015). More importantly, we delve into the characteristics of CROs and seek to 
understand how CROs’ power affects the effectiveness of such positions. We further explore the 
environmental and contextual factors, showing that CRO appointments are more beneficial to 
firms operating under high litigation threats and dynamic environments. Our research not only 
provides more evidence of the impact of CROs on firm risk and operational efficiency, but also 
extends the literature by examining factors and circumstances in which CROs are more effective 
in gaining efficiency improvements. 
2. Chief Risk Officer and Risk Management 
C-suite appointments signal a firm’s commitment to improving management effectiveness at the 

 
4 
corporate level. For example, creating new positions of supply chain and operations management 
executives (SCOME) reflects a firm’s commitment to improving efficiencies in supply chains 
and operations (Roh et al., 2016; Hendricks et al., 2015). Like other C-suite positions, creating 
a CRO position in the TMT signals a firm’s strategic emphasis on risk control and commitment 
to more comprehensive risk management initiatives (Beasley et al., 2008). For example, the CRO 
appointment announcement of U.S. Steel reported that “United States Steel Corp. is creating a 
new post called Senior Vice President and Chief Risk Officer meant to offer a more integrated 
company-wide system to look at business risks and opportunities…” (Spencer, 2011). Such an 
appointment indicated the firm’s intention to enhance risk control at the corporate level. 
CRO positions are created to tighten risk control and oversee risk management initiatives at 
the corporate level and can be regarded as a strategic emphasis on risk management (Karanja & 
Rosso, 2017). A CRO’s responsibilities include leading the risk management team, 
communicating risk management initiatives, and making decisions related to risk management 
(Karanja & Rosso, 2017). Within the organization, CROs might be responsible for financial 
stability and loss, threats due to market dynamism, disruptions due to unreliable operations and 
supply chains, and potential harms to the firms due to human errors and process negligence. To 
enhance risk management, CRO appointments motivate firms to adopt a more holistic approach 
to identify, assess, mitigate, and monitor risks, rather than relying on traditional ad-hoc risk 
management approaches (Bromiley et al., 2015). 
A summary of previous studies about CRO appointments is presented in Table 1. Previous 
studies regarding the outcomes of CRO appointments highlight the potential tension between 
risk control and operational efficiency. On one hand, CRO appointments can facilitate the 
adoption of enterprise risk management (ERM) tools and enhance risk control, which enables 
firms to reduce risk exposure, safeguard business stability, and reduce financial losses due to 
operational disruptions (Berry-Stölzle & Xu, 2018; Ellul & Yerramilli, 2013). As a result, CRO 
appointments are positively related to firm performance (Florio & Leoni, 2017; Grace et al., 
2015), negatively related to capital costs (Berry-Stölzle & Xu, 2018), and positively related to 
shareholder value (Hoyt & Liebenberg, 2011). 
On the other hand, CRO appointments might bring excessive risk control that hinders 

 
5 
operational efficiency. For example, risk control initiatives might give rise to bureaucracy, a 
cumbersome process of approvals, operational constraints, and opportunity costs that offset 
operational efficiency (Lin et al., 2012). Similarly, creating CRO positions in the TMT might 
make frontline managers believe that risk management is someone else’s responsibility and 
reduce their awareness of operational risks (Pernell et al., 2017). As a result, some research 
suggests that the impact of CRO appointments is marginal (Beasley et al., 2008; Gupta et al., 
2012) or even negative (Lin et al., 2012; da Silva et al., 2019). 
---- Table 1 about here ---- 
Furthermore, the actual benefits of CRO appointments across different industries are highly 
inconclusive. For example, Pernell et al. (2017) found that the appointment of CROs is positively 
related to the adoption of new derivatives that might lead to more risks. This is because the 
appointment might create an “organizational licensing” that makes lower-tier managers reduce 
self-monitoring of risky behaviors. Beasley et al. (2008) also suggested that the effect of CRO 
appointments on firm value (measured by cumulative abnormal return) is insignificant and 
determined by firm characteristics. Previous studies show that the effectiveness of CRO 
appointments is affected by contextual factors, such as firm leverage and firm size (Beasley et 
al., 2008), reporting structure (Aebi et al., 2012), CRO expertise (Bailey, 2019), and CRO 
compensation (da Silva et al., 2019). In view of the complexity of the relationships, more 
research is needed to examine the outcomes of CRO appointments and the contingencies that 
determine the effectiveness of such appointments. Furthermore, previous empirical studies have 
mainly been conducted in the insurance and bank industries, indicating the need to explore the 
impact of CRO appointments across industries. 
3. Theory and Hypotheses 
Executive appointments signal a firm’s strategic intent to improve the management in a specific 
aspect and attract organizational members’ attention to a strategic issue (Hendricks et al., 2015; 
Nath & Mahajan, 2008). Accordingly, we build our hypotheses on the attention-based view 
(ABV) (Ocasio, 1997) and suggest that CRO appointments bring a firm’s focus of attention to 
risk issues and affect the way firms operate. Specifically, we consider new CRO appointments 
as a firm’s initiative to develop comprehensive risk management (Berry-Stölzle & Xu, 2018; 

 
6 
Eckles et al., 2014; Hoyt & Liebenberg, 2011). Accordingly, we focus only on the appointment 
of the first CRO in a firm (i.e., from having no CRO position to the first CRO appointment). 
The premise of the ABV is that firm actions are determined by how the attention of decision-
makers is channeled and distributed (Ocasio, 1997; Stevens et al., 2015). The ABV offers three 
principles to explain firm behaviors. First, the way decision-makers act depends on their focus 
of attention (attention focus). Due to the limited organizational attention and resources, firms 
tend to selectively attend to strategic issues (Dutton & Ashford, 1993). Second, the allocation of 
organizational attention is determined by a firm’s rules, resources, power dynamics, and social 
relationships that structurally regulate and distribute the allocation of strategic issues (structural 
distribution of attention). Accordingly, organizational structure and power dynamics within the 
organization would determine firms’ focus of attention, which in turn affects organizational 
procedures and cultural beliefs (Ocasio, 1997, 2011). From this perspective, having CROs in the 
TMT motivates firms to allocate attention to risk issues. Third, attention is situational (situated 
attention), i.e., decision-makers’ attention focus depends on the characteristics of the situation 
(Nadkarni & Barr, 2008), and internal and external stimuli that they face. Based on the ABV, 
powerful top managers tend to have a stronger voice in the TMT to implement their proposals. 
Also, issues that are salient to the achievement of organizational objectives tend to attract more 
attention from top managers and are more likely to reach a consensus within the TMT (Dutton 
et al., 2001). Consistent with this rationale, we examine how CROs’ power and industry-specific 
factors, i.e., industry litigation threat and dynamism, moderate the relationship between CRO 
appointments and performance outcomes. For brevity, we focus on operational efficiency as the 
dependent variable in our hypothesis development and testing. As robustness checks, we also 
tested how CROs’ power and industry factors moderate the impact of CRO appointments on firm 
risk. The research model is shown in Figure 1. 
---- Figure 1 about here ---- 
3.1 CROs and Performance Outcomes 
From the ABV, firm actions are determined by the attention focus of decision-makers (Ocasio, 
1997). With a new CRO appointed, an organization, particularly its TMT, pays more attention to 
risk issues. This, in turn, motivates the firm to increase its risk management capability and 

 
7 
reduces risk exposure. With a CRO in the TMT, firms increase risk awareness and create a 
consensus of tightening risk control within the organization. CROs motivate managers to confine 
their attention to potential risks in decision-making, leading to the restriction of excessive risk-
taking and less risk exposure (Ellul & Yerramilli, 2013). For example, Giambona et al. (2017) 
found that firms with executives that are more concerned about risks are less likely to invest in 
politically risky countries, thus reducing political risk exposure. In summary, firms with strong 
risk management emphasis tend to be more proactive in identifying risk factors and are better 
prepared for risk events, leading to our first hypothesis: 
H1: CRO appointments reduce firm risk. 
The impact of CROs on operational efficiency is paradoxical. On the negative side, CROs 
might bring tight risk control to organizations, which gives rise to bureaucracy and inefficiency. 
For example, firms might have to change processes and create monitoring positions to oversee 
risks, which give rise to employee costs and delay the processes (Beasley et al., 2008; da Silva 
et al., 2019). To reduce the risks of medical devices, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) introduces a wide range of standards and requires multiple rounds of market approval 
before products can be introduced to the market. However, the standards and market approvals 
possibly slow down the pace of innovation in the medical device industry (Marucheck et al., 
2011). To tighten risk control, firms often adopt a hierarchical organizational structure with more 
formalized procedures. The organizational structure requires different layers of approvals and 
monitoring, leading to delays in decision making and the implementation of new strategic 
initiatives. Formalized procedures also reduce employees’ autonomy and empowerment, making 
them more restrictive and less creative in problem-solving (Hirst et al., 2011). 
However, the operational expenses on strengthening risk control can be restored in the way 
of well-established systems that reduce costs associated with mistakes and disruptions. 
According to the quality management literature (Powell, 2006; Sousa & Voss, 2002), the costs 
associated with quality management can be redeemed in the form of reductions in internal and 
external failures as well as improvements in productivity and product reputation (Kaynak, 2003). 
This idea was summarized into Crosby’s famous claim that “Quality is not a gift, but it is free” 
(Crosby, 1979). A fundamental premise of quality management is that the cost associated with 

 
8 
poor performance, such as rework, loss of customers, and remedy, is larger than the cost of 
developing a reliable process that produces high-quality products (Crosby, 1979). By adopting 
tight quality management systems, firms actively improve operational procedures, monitor 
facility conditions, and adopt preventive measures, leading to fewer quality failures and lower 
correction costs that offset the quality control costs (Hackman & Wageman, 1995). 
The same rationale can be applied to the risk management context. Indeed, the lack of risk 
management could have a significant hidden cost as losses increase exponentially when mistakes 
or damages happen. For example, more innovative firms tend to be risk-taking in product 
development. As a result, they are more vulnerable to unexpected product failures that incur 
remedy costs and reduce firm profits (Mackelprang et al., 2015). 
Operational disruptions caused by product-harm crises and service failures might induce 
regulatory scrutiny on operational procedures and are regarded as deterrents to operational 
efficiency (Cleeren et al., 2017). For example, after the second Boeing 737 Max accident in 2019, 
regulators forced Boeing to scrutinize every aspect of the jet for potential design flaws that 
caused the accidents (Kitroeff & Gelles, 2020). The jet was banned in multiple countries for two 
years, and the delivery of new aircraft had been delayed. Boeing was charged over 2.5 billion 
US dollars to settle the matter (Shepardson et al., 2021). Similarly, other operational failures or 
accidents may entail a comprehensive review of current processes, incurring additional costs, 
and hindering efficiency and firm performance (Khamitov et al., 2020). CRO appointments 
facilitate firms to adopt a comprehensive approach to evaluate the potential hazards in products 
and services. Firms with a strong risk focus continuously evaluate risks involved in their internal 
procedures and implement processes to improve the reliability of products and services 
(Bromiley et al., 2015). Frequent risk scanning of operational procedures enables firms to 
identify process flaws and quality problems. For example, in the product development stage, a 
firm can conduct more comprehensive evaluations and risk assessments before introducing new 
products to the market, leading to the improvement of product quality performance and reduction 
of potential product failures that threat the long-term viability of the firm. 
Enhancing risk management entails the development of contingency plans that potentially 
mitigate the impact of operational disruptions. In the process of product and service deliveries, 

 
9 
firms are vulnerable to external uncertainties and disruptions, such as supply shortages, extreme 
weather, and cyber-attacks (Ho et al., 2015). A key element of risk management is to develop 
contingency plans to mitigate the negative consequences of risk factors (Tomlin, 2006). With 
risk factors that potentially disrupt product and service deliveries being monitored and 
contingency plans being formulated, firms enhance process reliability, reduce interruptions in 
product and service deliveries, leading to the increase of customer satisfaction. 
Furthermore, risk management can help firms identify new opportunities to improve 
operational efficiency. To manage firm risk at the strategic level, CROs might have to restructure 
their operational processes, manage process uncertainties, operational risks, and environmental 
hazards, and integrate them into an overall corporate risk management strategy. The restructuring 
of operational processes helps firms identify opportunities to improve operational efficiency. For 
example, ERM involves constant scanning of the environment for both upside and downside 
risks (Bromiley et al., 2015). Such scanning allows firms to get access to rich external 
information, such as new customer needs and technology changes (Peteraf & Bergen, 2003). The 
scanning procedure, at the same time, helps firms understand technology trends and motivates 
them to renew business models and technology portfolios to cope with the uncertainty that might 
undermine their long-term competitiveness (Fleming, 2001; Voss et al., 2008). This not only 
helps firms mitigate operational disruptions, but also enables them to restructure their operational 
procedures and identify opportunities for efficiency enhancements. Overall, we suggest that: 
H2: CRO appointments lead to enhanced operational efficiency. 
3.2 The Role of CROs’ Power 
Like other C-suite officers, the power of CROs can vary significantly across organizations (Chen 
et al., 2020; Ellul & Yerramilli, 2013). In some firms, CROs can be one of the very few most 
senior executives at the top of an organization’s hierarchy, e.g., senior vice president, having 
general responsibilities and overseeing multiple organizational functions (Ellul and Yerramilli, 
2013). However, CROs can also be just one of the many senior officers in a firm, managing 
narrowly defined risk responsibilities (e.g., legal and compliance). 
From the ABV, the power dynamics within the TMT would significantly affect the allocation 
of organizational attention (Tuggle et al., 2010a, 2010b). Executives with a strong power tend to 

 
10 
have a stronger influence on other TMT members, making their requirements more likely to be 
accepted in the organization (Tuggle et al., 2010b). Also, powerful executive members can raise 
the importance of a strategic issue to a higher level and allocate more resources to such strategic 
initiatives. Consistent with this rationale, we suggest that the power of CROs helps address the 
tension between operational bureaucracy and risk reduction associated with CRO appointments. 
Powerful CROs are more likely to resolve the paradox between risk control and efficiency. 
Implementing an integrated risk management framework can be regarded as an organizational 
change that may create ambiguity and incur goal conflicts among different organizational 
functions (Bromiley et al., 2015). The conflicting objectives for risk control and efficiency can 
be resolved by a powerful CRO because powerful executives can raise the importance of a 
strategic issue to the top of an organization, which reduces ambiguity and conflicting goals 
between organizational units. Also, CROs in a higher position are more likely to drive an 
organization-wide risk management initiative, which further reduces possible goal conflicts 
between organizational functions (Lines, 2007). For example, a CRO of a lower rank may focus 
on risk and compliance narrowly, and tend to tightly restrict new development initiatives, leading 
to conflict, delay, and bureaucracy. However, CROs at the top of the hierarchy overseeing both 
organizational development and risk management are more likely to develop high-level 
strategies to mitigate such a conflict (e.g., by integrating and standardizing risk assessments in 
the early stage of product development). This is consistent with the idea that quality (or risk 
management) is a top management’s responsibility, not a departmental function (Powell, 2006). 
Moreover, powerful CROs are more capable of reducing operational disruptions by creating 
a consensus on risk control. Powerful CROs tend to have a stronger voice in the TMT and are 
more likely to direct organizational attention to risk management. The consensus on risk control 
increases the mindfulness of risk issues in the entire organization. Firms with CROs at the top of 
the organizational hierarchy are more likely to deploy risk management initiatives across 
organizational units and reduce risk factors at different stages, leading to more reliable and 
efficient product and service deliveries without inducing too much bureaucracy (Speier et al., 
2011). As a result, the appointment of more powerful CROs can lead to more reduction in 
operational disruptions that cause inefficiency to a greater extent. Stated formally: 

 
11 
H3: The positive impact of CRO appointments on operational efficiency is greater for CROs 
with stronger power. 
3.3 The Role of Operating Environments 
The ABV posits that the focus of managerial attention is shaped by environmental factors that 
affect the salience of strategic issues (Ocasio, 1997). From this perspective, we suggest that CRO 
appointments can benefit firms to a higher degree under more uncertain and volatile 
environments that make risk issues more salient. We consider litigation threats and dynamism 
as two important indicators of a vulnerable, uncertain, and unpredictable environment. 
Litigation threats refer to possible legal actions taken allegedly against companies because 
of their negligence or other inappropriate organizational actions (Koh et al., 2014). For firms 
operating in industries with high litigation threats, CRO appointments cause fewer conflicts 
within the firms as risk management initiatives proposed by CROs will be more likely to be 
supported by other TMT members. For example, in the pharmaceuticals and biotech industries, 
where firms are constantly threatened by litigation risks, such as patent disputes and product 
liabilities, firms place more importance on regulatory compliance and precaution measures 
(Grabowski et al., 2017). As a result, organizational members are more likely to act consistently 
to support risk control changes proposed by the CRO in a high litigation environment. This 
consensus from the top on the importance of risk management enables CROs to implement risk 
management frameworks more effectively. By contrast, for firms operating in industries with 
low litigation threats, TMT members may pay more attention to other pressing issues faced by 
the firms (e.g., cost efficiencies) than risk management and provide less agreed support for CROs, 
which reduces the effectiveness of CRO appointments. 
Risk control and operational efficiency are more likely to be complementary in litigious 
industries. In such industries, firms’ misconducts are more likely to be accused by stakeholders 
and lead to more severe consequences than those in less litigious industries (Arena & Julio, 2015; 
Huang et al., 2019). This, in turn, raises the difficulty of making effective decisions and increases 
ambiguity in operations. Given the high litigation threats, firms tend to act rigidly to avoid the 
losses associated with potential lawsuits (Staw et al., 1981; Shi et al., 2018). Therefore, in 
litigious industries, a proactive and comprehensive risk management framework, e.g., appointing 

 
12 
CROs and redesigning processes to minimize exposure to litigation risks, can help reduce the 
ambiguity in operations and ensure a stable operational flow within the firm (Bromiley et al., 
2015). This suggests a lower conflict between risk control and operational efficiency in more 
litigious industries. By contrast, in industries with low litigation threats, firms’ potential 
misbehaviors tend to incur less severe consequences and induce a less negative impact on the 
firms’ operations (Hanley & Hoberg, 2012). In such situations, stringent risk control measures 
might lead to more constraints in operations and hinder operational efficiency. This indicates a 
lower synergy between risk control and operational efficiency in less litigious industries. Taken 
together, we expect industry litigation threats strengthen the relationship between CRO 
appointments and operational efficiency. We thus propose that: 
H4: The positive impact of CRO appointments on operational efficiency is greater for firms 
operating in industries with higher litigation threats. 
Industry dynamism refers to the rate and unpredictability of changes in the task environment 
of an industrial sector (Dess & Beard, 1984; Eroglu & Hofer, 2014). We expect that CROs can 
achieve a better synergy between risk control and operational efficiency in a dynamic 
environment considering the uncertainties and opportunities arising from such an environment. 
First, in a dynamic environment, the market conditions are more complex and less predictable 
(Eroglu & Hofer, 2014; Azadegan et al., 2013). The uncertainty of the task environment entails 
information processing challenges and makes managers more vulnerable to judgment biases, 
resulting in a higher inconsistency in strategic decision making (Mitchell et al., 2011). In such 
environments, tightening organizational controls enables the formalization and centralization of 
operational procedures that increase information processing efficiency (Cardinal, 2001; Patel, 
2011). The improved information flows within the organization reduce ambiguity in operations 
and enhance operational efficiency (Rogers et al., 1999; Tushman & Nadler, 1978). By contrast, 
in a stable environment, the market conditions are more predictable and less uncertain, presenting 
a lower need for firms to enhance information processing capabilities (Schilke, 2014). This also 
implies that the process redesign and improved approval hierarchies associated with risk controls 
contribute less to information flows and efficiency improvements. As a result, risk control and 
operational efficiency are less complementary in a stable environment. 

 
13 
Moreover, in a dynamic environment with frequent changes, it is more difficult for firms to 
rely on an invariant, stable set of routines to maintain their operational efficiency (Schilke, 2014). 
In this case, CROs can motivate firms to regularly comprehend external threats to identify risks 
that might jeopardize the viability of the firms (Joseph & Gaba, 2020). Such proactiveness and 
the efforts to comprehend potential risk factors help firms gain more information and insights 
about evolving customer needs and changing market conditions, which enable them to capture 
market opportunities and improve operational efficiency (Peterson & Wu, 2021). By contrast, in 
a stable environment, where environmental changes are uncommon and predictable, CROs are 
less motivated to scan the environment frequently, resulting in fewer opportunities for firms to 
improve operational efficiency. Taken together, we expect industry dynamism strengthens the 
relationship between CRO appointments and operational efficiency. We thus propose that: 
H5: The positive impact of CRO appointments on operational efficiency is greater for firms 
operating in more dynamic industries. 
4. Research Methods 
4.1 Hypothesis Testing Strategies 
There are a few challenges and potential endogeneity concerns for hypothesis testing. First, CRO 
appointments are not a random choice, suggesting that firms with CROs may be quite different 
from other firms without CROs (Pagach & Warr, 2011). Such a difference per se, rather than 
CRO appointments, may explain firms’ performance changes over time. Similarly, as firms are 
paying increasing attention to risk and operations management in today’s competitive 
environments (Knemeyer et al., 2009), there may be a general trend in risk reduction and 
efficiency improvement, independent of CRO appointments. This suggests that the impact of 
CRO appointments on firm risk and operational efficiency could be over-estimated if this 
possible trend is not considered. Finally, although we hypothesize that industry environments 
(i.e., industry litigation threat and dynamism) moderate the impact of CRO appointments, 
industry environments may also determine firms’ decision to appoint CROs. Specifically, it may 
be more likely for firms operating in more litigious and dynamic industries to appoint CROs, 
possibly biasing the estimation of the moderating role of industry litigation threat and dynamism. 
We adopted the following estimation strategies to address these concerns. First, we 

 
14 
employed propensity score matching (PSM) (Hendricks et al., 2015) to simulate a random 
assignment process and address the possible self-selection bias. Specifically, we matched each 
sample firm with CRO appointment to a control firm that has a similar propensity as the sample 
firm to appoint CRO but eventually did not make such an appointment. We took account of firm 
characteristics, industry environments (e.g., industry litigation threat and dynamism), and time-
specific effects when estimating firms’ propensities to appoint CROs. This matching process 
helps ensure that the sample and matched control firms are similar and comparable. 
After performing PSM, we tested H1 and H2 by quantifying the impact of CRO 
appointments in terms of “abnormal” change in firm risk (H1) and operational efficiency (H2). 
Abnormal performance change due to an event, such as CRO appointment, is the difference 
between actual performance change with the occurrence of the event and expected performance 
change without such an event (Barber & Lyon, 1996). In our research context, actual 
performance change is the change in firm risk and operational efficiency of sample firms with 
CRO appointments, and expected performance change is the change in firm risk and operational 
efficiency of matched control firms without CRO appointments. This quantification approach 
helps address possible firm performance trends and enables us to estimate the impact of CROs 
over different periods (e.g., one or two years) after the appointments. 
We then tested H3 to H5 by estimating a cross-sectional regression model (Arora et al., 
2020). The dependent variable is the abnormal change in operational efficiency, while the 
independent variables include CRO power (H3) and industry environments (H4 and H5), as well 
as other control variables. An important advantage of this regression model is its simplicity and 
clarity for result interpretation. Specifically, as the dependent variable is the abnormal change in 
operational efficiency rather than operational efficiency per se, the coefficient of an independent 
variable directly indicates how the independent variable moderates or affects the impact of CRO 
appointments on operational efficiency. We provide more detailed explanations of these steps in 
the following sections. 
4.2 Data Collection 
We measured research variables based on longitudinal secondary data collected from multiple 
sources. First, we identified firms’ announcements of CRO appointments by searching Factiva 

 
15 
that covers news and information articles from various sources, such as The Wall Street Journal, 
The New York Times, PR Newswire, and Business Wire. The keywords used in our search 
included CRO, Chief Risk Officer, and other similar terms, such as Vice President of Risk 
Management, Chief Risk Manager, Enterprise Risk Officer, Enterprise Risk Manager, and 
Director of Risk Management. This data collection approach is in line with prior CRO studies 
(Liebenberg & Hoyt, 2003; Beasley et al., 2008), enabling us to identify CROs at different 
seniority levels. By contrast, some other databases such as Execucomp and BoardEx focus on 
individual appointments at the more senior levels such as executive officers and board directors, 
which may exclude the appointments of less-senior CROs and reduce the variation of our CRO 
power measure. Nevertheless, we also performed a robustness check based on CRO appointment 
data collected from BoardEx and obtained consistent results. 
Our search in Factiva focused on publicly listed firms as the financial and accounting 
information of these firms were available to measure other research variables, such as firm risk 
and operational efficiency. Another advantage of focusing on publicly listed firms is that these 
firms are subject to more stringent reporting requirements and are more visible to the public and 
media, making it more likely for them to make announcements of their CRO appointments. As 
a result, we included NYSE and NASDAQ as the keywords in our search. For firms with multiple 
CRO appointments from 2006 to 2016, we focused on their first CRO appointments because 
these first appointments, compared with other later appointments of the same firms, are more in 
line with the ABV and more likely to capture the firms’ attention paid to risk management. Our 
search via Factiva identified 764 CRO appointments made by publicly listed firms between 2006 
and 2016. After removing 329 CRO succession announcements, we had 435 publicly listed firms 
that made their first CRO appointments between 2006 and 2016. Table 2 shows the distribution 
of the 435 firms’ first CRO appointments across years, while Table 3 indicates that these firms 
are operating in various industries ranging from financial and business services to manufacturing 
and transportation. 
--- Tables 2 and 3 about here --- 
We then obtained longitudinal data from other sources, including Compustat, the Center for 
Research in Security Prices (CRSP), the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 

 
16 
BoardEx, Thomson Reuters, RavenPack, and Audit Analytics, for variable measurements. 
Specifically, we measured firm risk based on daily stock data from CRSP and calculated 
operational efficiency using accounting data from Compustat. We obtained compensation data 
from SEC to measure CRO power. For industry environments, we collected lawsuit data from 
Audit Analytics to measure industry litigation threat and industry sales data from Compustat to 
measure industry dynamism. The data sources and measurements of these variables and other 
control variables are summarized in Table 4 and further discussed below. Due to missing data 
across different databases, our sample size was reduced from 435 to 361 for performing PSM, 
which was further reduced to 225 for running cross-sectional regression. Nevertheless, our one-
way ANOVA test results indicate no significant difference (p > 0.1; not tabulated) in terms of 
some common firm-level variables including sales, total assets, and market value across these 
samples in different estimation steps, providing no evidence of sampling bias. 
--- Table 4 about here --- 
4.3 Propensity Score Matching (PSM) 
To perform PSM, we first formulated a probit regression model in which the dependent variable 
indicates whether a firm makes a CRO appointment in a particular year t. After reviewing prior 
research on the appointments of CROs (Pagach & Warr, 2011; Liebenberg & Hoyt, 2003) and 
other chief executives such as OM executives and chief sustainability officers (Arora et al., 2020; 
Hendricks et al., 2015), we identified a list of variables that may determine CRO appointments 
and included them as the independent variables in the probit regression model, as shown in 
Equation (1). The data sources and measurements of these independent variables can be found 
in Table 4. Consistent with prior studies (Hendricks et al., 2015; Pagach & Warr, 2011), we 
measured the independent variables in year t-1, one year before CRO appointments. We also 
included year dummies to control for unobserved time-specific effects. 
𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦(𝐶𝑅𝑂 𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡= 1) 
= 𝐹{𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖(𝑡−1) + 𝛽2𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖(𝑡−1) + 𝛽3𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑖(𝑡−1) 
+ 𝛽4𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡­𝑡𝑜­𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑖(𝑡−1) + 𝛽5𝐸𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖(𝑡−1) + 𝛽6𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑂𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑝𝑖(𝑡−1) 
+ 𝛽7𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 𝐿𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑇ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖(𝑡−1) + 𝛽8𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 𝐷𝑦𝑛𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑚𝑖(𝑡−1) + 𝛽9𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖(𝑡−1) 
+ 𝛽10𝑃𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠𝑖(𝑡−1) + 𝛽11𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠𝑖(𝑡−1) + 𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟 𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑖𝑒𝑠}, (1) 

 
17 
where i and t are firm and year indexes, respectively. F denotes the cumulative normal 
distribution function. There are 13,430 firms with no missing data across all the independent 
variables, which include 361 sample firms with CRO appointments and 13,069 control firms 
without CRO appointments. After running Equation (1), we obtained the predicted probability 
(or propensity score) of each of these 13,430 firms to make CRO appointments. We then matched 
each sample firm to a control firm with the closest propensity score (i.e., one-to-one nearest-
neighbor matching). 
We further checked the quality of our matching approach. First, we re-ran Equation (1) for 
the sample firms and their matched control firms. Table 5 presents the regression results. Model 
1 in Table 5 indicates that before matching, six of the 11 independent variables significantly 
determine firms’ CRO appointments. Nevertheless, Model 2 shows that after matching, none of 
these 11 variables are statistically significant, suggesting that sample and matched control firms 
have similar propensities to appoint CROs. We also checked the differences between sample and 
control firms across the 11 independent variables. As shown in Table 6, before matching (Panel 
A), sample firms are significantly different from control firms across 10 of the 11 independent 
variables. By contrast, Panel B suggests that after matching, the differences are not significant 
across all the 11 independent variables. Taken together, these test results demonstrate sample 
firms’ similarity and comparability with matched control firms, confirming our matching quality. 
--- Tables 5 and 6 about here --- 
Finally, we checked whether our matched control firms appointed CROs during the sample 
period of 2006-2016. Specifically, we searched the names of these matched control firms and 
CRO-related keywords across different databases, including Factiva, Execucomp, and BoardEx, 
but could not identify the CRO appointments of these matched control firms during 2006-2016. 
This addresses the endogeneity concern that some of our matched control firms in fact also 
appointed CROs during 2006-2016, which may bias our test results. 
4.4 Abnormal Change in Firm Performance 
To test H1 and H2, we quantified the abnormal change in firm performance including firm risk 
(H1) and operational efficiency (H2) as sample firms’ performance change compared with that 
of their matched control firms over the same period (Arora et al., 2020; Barber & Lyon, 1996). 

 
18 
As we performed PSM in year t-1 (one year before CRO appointments), we viewed year t-1 as 
the base year and calculated the performance change from year t-1 to other years following firms’ 
CRO appointments. We analyzed our results up to three years after a CRO appointment (i.e., 
year t+3). In the following, we discuss how the two firm performance variables (i.e., firm risk 
and operational efficiency) were measured in this research. 
Firm Risk. The overall or total risk a firm is facing in a specific period (e.g., one year) is 
represented by the fluctuation of the firm’s stock returns over this period (Lam, 2018). Total risk 
consists of firm-specific idiosyncratic risk and market-specific systematic risk (Luo et al., 2014). 
Mathematically, we calculated the annualized standard deviation of a firm’s daily stock returns 
over a year to indicate its total risk in this year, while its idiosyncratic and systematic risks were 
obtained using the following Market model. 
𝑅𝑖𝑡= 𝛼𝑖+ 𝛽𝑖𝑅𝑀𝑡+ 𝜀𝑖𝑡 , (2) 
where i and t refer to firm i and day t, respectively. Specifically, we first regressed firm i’s daily 
stock returns (Rit) on daily market returns (RMt; measured based on the CRSP index) in each 
year. We then computed firm i’s idiosyncratic risk in a specific year as the annualized standard 
deviation of the residuals (εit) in that year and relied on the coefficient of daily market returns 
(𝛽𝑖) to indicate firm i’s systematic risk in the same year (Lam, 2018; Luo et al., 2014). As our 
hypothesis development suggests that CROs help reduce both internal and external risks firms 
are facing, we used total risk in the main analysis but also checked the robustness of our findings 
to idiosyncratic and systematic risks. 
Operational Efficiency. Following previous studies (e.g., Lam et al., 2016; Li et al., 2010), 
we measured operational efficiency based on stochastic frontier estimation that focuses on a 
firm’s relative efficiency (compared with its industry peers) in converting various operational 
inputs into operational output. Mathematically, we constructed a stochastic function as shown in 
Equation (3) to model the relationship of a firm’s operational inputs [i.e., number of employees 
(EMP), cost of goods sold (CGS), and capital expenditure (CEX)] with its operational output 
[i.e., operating income (OI)]. In line with Li et al. (2010), our model takes account of not only 
the direct effects of different operational inputs but also the possible interactions among them, 
thus better capturing the complex relationships between operational inputs and output. 

 
19 
ln(𝑂𝐼)𝑖𝑗𝑡= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ln(𝐸𝑀𝑃)𝑖𝑗𝑡+ 𝛽2 ln(𝐶𝐺𝑆)𝑖𝑗𝑡+ 𝛽3 𝑙𝑛(𝐶𝐸𝑋)𝑖𝑗𝑡+ 𝛽4 ln(𝐸𝑀𝑃)𝑖𝑗𝑡
2 + 𝛽5 ln(𝐶𝐺𝑆)𝑖𝑗𝑡
2 
 + 𝛽6 ln(𝐶𝐸𝑋)𝑖𝑗𝑡
2 + 𝛽7 ln(𝐸𝑀𝑃)𝑖𝑗𝑡× ln(𝐶𝐺𝑆)𝑖𝑗𝑡+ 𝛽8 ln(𝐶𝐺𝑆)𝑖𝑗𝑡× 𝑙𝑛(𝐶𝐸𝑋)𝑖𝑗𝑡 
 + 𝛽9𝑙𝑛(𝐸𝑀𝑃)𝑖𝑗𝑡× 𝑙𝑛(𝐶𝐸𝑋)𝑖𝑗𝑡+ 𝜀𝑖𝑗𝑡−𝜂𝑖𝑗𝑡 , (3) 
where i, j, and t, are firm, industry (four-digit SIC code), and year indexes, respectively. The 
stochastic random error is indicated by 𝜀𝑖𝑗𝑡 . 𝜂𝑖𝑗𝑡 captures a firm’s technical inefficiency 
compared with the most efficient firm (i.e., the frontier) in the same industry and year. 𝜂𝑖𝑗𝑡 
ranges from 0 to 1, with 𝜂𝑖𝑗𝑡= 0 representing a firm without technical inefficiency. To ease the 
interpretation of the test results, we applied reverse coding and used 1 −𝜂𝑖𝑗𝑡
̂ to provide a direct 
indication of a firm’s operational efficiency. 
4.5 Cross-Sectional Regression Model 
We constructed a regression model as shown in Equation (4) to estimate how the impact of CRO 
appointments on operational efficiency varies across CRO power (H3) and industry 
environments (H4 and H5), after controlling various variables at the firm, industry, economy, 
and year levels. 
𝐴𝑏𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒 𝑖𝑛 𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦𝑖 
= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝐶𝑅𝑂 𝑃𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟𝑖+ 𝛽2𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 𝐿𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑇ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖+ 𝛽3𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 𝐷𝑦𝑛𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑚𝑖 
+ 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙 𝑉𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒𝑠+ 𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟 𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑖𝑒𝑠+ 𝜀𝑖 . (4) 
The dependent variable is the abnormal change in operational efficiency, quantifying the 
impact of CRO appointments on operational efficiency. We chose the abnormal change in one 
year after CRO appointments (i.e., t+1) as the dependent variable because CRO appointments 
do not have a significant impact on operational efficiency in year t (i.e., the appointment year) 
but have the most significant impact in year t+1, as shown in Table 7. β1 to β3 indicate how the 
impact varies across different levels of CRO power (H3), industry litigation threat (H4), and 
industry dynamism (H5), respectively. As the measure of CRO power was available only when 
CRO appointments had been made, we measured all the hypothesized and control variables in 
the year of CRO appointments to ensure consistency. In the following, we discuss how these 
hypothesized and control variables were measured in this research. 
CRO Power. Following previous research on executive power (Ellul & Yerramilli, 2013; 
Feng et al., 2015; Florackis & Sainani, 2018), we measured a CRO’s power based on principal 

 
20 
component analysis (PCA). An important advantage of the PCA approach is its ability to 
transform several power-related variables or proxies into a single principal component, providing 
a composite measure of a CRO’s overall power. This approach thus addresses the 
multicollinearity concern that these power proxies may be highly correlated with each other if 
they are included in the same regression model and also avoids the subjective judgments about 
the relative importance of these power proxies (Ellul & Yerramilli, 2013). 
We performed the PCA of three power proxies, including CRO Executive, CRO Top5, and 
CRO Centrality, that have been widely used in the risk management literature (Chen et al., 2020; 
Ellul & Yerramilli, 2013). CRO Executive indicates whether a firm’s CRO is an executive officer 
within the firm. Although the CRO appointment data collected for this research focus on the 
most senior individuals responsible for risk management in a firm, their seniority relative to that 
of other TMT members varies across firms. While some CROs are appointed at the executive 
officer level, others are assigned some less-senior titles, such as enterprise risk managers and 
enterprise risk officers. Such a variation across firms provides important information for us to 
capture a CRO’s power within a company. Specifically, we searched our sample firms’ filings 
(e.g., Forms DEF 14A, 10-K, etc.) submitted to SEC via the EDGAR database to identify 
whether the firms have stated explicitly in these official documents that their CROs are executive 
officers. We then coded those CROs at the executive officer level as 1 and others as 0. 
Both CRO Top5 and CRO Centrality are concerned with a CRO’s compensation. As an 
employee who occupies a higher position in an organization’s hierarchical structure should get 
higher pay than other employees with lower ranks, employee compensation has been widely used 
as a proxy for individual power within an organization (Finkelstein, 1992). CRO Top5 indicates 
whether a CRO is among the five highest-paid employees in a firm, while CRO Centrality 
quantifies a CRO’s compensation relative to that of the CEO in the same firm. Empirically, we 
searched SEC’s EDGAR database to identify a sample firm’s five highest-paid employees and 
coded the CRO Top5 variable as 1 if the firm’s CRO is one of these employees (and 0 otherwise). 
We also obtained the compensation data of our sample firms from the EDGAR database and 
measured the CRO Centrality variable as the ratio of a CRO’s total compensation to that of the 
CEO in the same firm. If a CRO’s compensation data was not available in the EDGAR database, 

 
21 
we followed prior studies (e.g., Ellul & Yerramilli, 2013; Chen et al., 2020) by measuring CRO 
Centrality based on the total compensation of the fifth highest-paid employee recorded in the 
EDGAR database and subtracted a percentage point from the resultant ratio. This measurement 
approach assumes that a CRO’s compensation should be lower than that of the fifth highest-paid 
employee if the CRO’s compensation is unavailable in the EDGAR database. 
We then checked and confirmed that the three power proxies (i.e., CRO Executive, CRO 
Top5, and CRO Centrality) are highly correlated with each other (p < 0.01), providing initial 
support for performing PCA based on these power proxies. We also found that the PCA of these 
three power proxies yields only one principal component whose eigenvalue is higher than one, 
a lower limit that has been commonly used in previous studies to determine whether a principal 
component should be retained (Florackis & Sainani, 2018). This principal component extracted 
from the PCA accounts for 61% of the total variance and represents an appropriate composite 
measure of a CRO’s overall power. We also conducted robustness checks based on the three 
power proxies individually and obtained consistent test results. 
Industry Litigation Threat. In line with recent studies (Arena, 2018; Kim & Skinner, 2012), 
we relied on lawsuit filing data to measure the litigation threat of an industry. This is because 
lawsuit filings, compared with lawsuit settlements or outcomes, better capture the uncertainties 
or risks firms are facing. Although some prior studies (Kim & Skinner, 2012) have relied on class 
action lawsuits, a specific type of lawsuits obtained from the Securities Class Action 
Clearinghouse (SCAC), to represent litigation threats, this approach ignores other types of 
lawsuits filed against firms and thus is less likely to capture the overall litigation threats firms 
are facing. Our research, instead, considered all the lawsuit filings (e.g., class action, product 
liability, copyright, patent, fraud, antitrust, personal injury, and labor law) disclosed to SEC by 
public firms (Arena, 2018). Obtaining these lawsuit filings from Audit Analytics, we measured 
the litigation threat of firms in a specific industry (four-digit SIC code) and year as the number 
of lawsuits filed against firms in this industry and year divided by the number of firms in the 
same industry and year. We obtained similar test results when measuring industry litigation threat 
alternatively with a focus on class action lawsuits (Kim & Skinner, 2012). 
Industry Dynamism. The fluctuation of industry sales over time has been widely used to 

 
22 
indicate the dynamism of the environment in which a firm is operating (Chang & Cho, 2017; 
Fang et al., 2011). This is because firms should face more uncertainties if the sales of their 
industries change frequently rather than remaining stable over time. In line with the measures of 
other independent variables, we measured industry dynamism in a particular year based on the 
industry data in the same year. As a result, the dynamism of an industry (four-digit SIC code) in 
a particular year was calculated as the standard deviation of quarterly industry sales in this year 
divided by the average quarterly industry sales in the same year. We also measured industry 
dynamism alternatively based on annual industry sales data and obtained consistent test results. 
Control Variables. As the extent to which CRO appointments affect firm performance may 
be explained by other factors beyond the three hypothesized variables discussed above, we 
included 18 control variables in the cross-sectional regression model to account for these 
explanations. The data sources and measurements of the 18 variables are shown in Panel C of 
Table 4. The selection of these control variables was informed by the literature and intended for 
a comprehensive coverage of factors across different levels. Specifically, these variables are 
concerned with CRO characteristics [whether the CRO is female and promoted internally as 
different genders may have different risk preferences (Gupta et al., 2020), while internally 
promoted CROs may be more knowledgeable about firms’ operations and risk environments 
(Bailey, 2019)], board characteristics [we included a board’s size, gender diversity and 
experience diversity as these board characteristics may explain the firm’s risk profile and 
performance outcomes (Aebi et al., 2012; Harjoto et al., 2015; Wowak et al., 2021)], firm 
characteristics [we included a firm’s size, profitability, leverage, market-to-book ratio, and 
earnings volatility as they may be related to the firm’s operational efficiency (Lam et al., 2016; 
Li et al., 2010)], organizational structure and ownership [we focused on CEO duality and 
institutional ownership as they may affect the role and effectiveness of CRO (Ellul & Yerramilli, 
2013; Pagach & Warr, 2011)], industry characteristics [besides the two hypothesized industry-
level variables, we were interested in whether CRO appointments benefit firms more in 
competitive, financial, and polluting industries (Berrone et al., 2013; Black & Neururer, 2020; 
Chang & Cho, 2017)], and economic characteristics [we used the economic policy uncertainty 
index developed by Baker et al. (2016) to account for the economic or macro-level uncertainty]. 

 
23 
We also added two dummy variables to indicate whether a firm has adopted ERM-related tools 
and appointed compliance and supply chain-related executives, respectively, before the CRO 
appointment. This is because firms adopting ERM tools and having compliance and supply 
chain-related executives may have lower risk and/or higher efficiency (Berry-Stölzle & Xu, 
2018; Roh et al., 2016), providing an environment for CROs to better accomplish their duties. 
Finally, we included year dummies to control for unobserved time-specific effects. 
5. Results 
5.1 Hypothesis Testing Results 
Table 7 presents the hypothesis testing results for H1 (firm risk) and H2 (operational efficiency). 
Although there are 361 matched sample firms based on PSM performed in year t-1, the sample 
size decreases gradually as the investigation period increases from years t to t+3. The sample 
size is generally smaller for operational efficiency compared with firm risk because some sample 
firms did not report relevant firm data (e.g., number of employees) required for computing 
operational efficiency. The test results suggest that the abnormal changes in both firm risk and 
operational efficiency are not significant (p > 0.1) in year t in which CROs are appointed. 
However, the abnormal changes in firm risk and operational efficiency become significant (p < 
0.01) in year t+1 and remain significant (p < 0.1) up to year t+3. Specifically, for all three years 
after the CRO appointments, the abnormal change in firm risk is significantly negative (p < 0.1), 
whereas there is a significant and positive abnormal change in operational efficiency (p < 0.05). 
This suggests that CRO appointments have a negative impact on firm risk but a positive impact 
on operational efficiency, supporting H1 and H2, respectively. 
--- Table 7 about here --- 
As the magnitude and significance of the abnormal change in operational efficiency are the 
highest in year t+1, it is used as the dependent variable in the cross-sectional regression model 
shown in Equation (4). The descriptive statistics and correlation matrix of all dependent and 
independent variables included in Equation (4) are shown in Table 8, while the cross-sectional 
regression results are presented in Table 9. Table 9 contains four models. All control variables 
and year dummies are included in Model 1. The three hypothesized variables (i.e., CRO power, 
industry litigation threat, and industry dynamism) are added sequentially in Models 2 to 4. The 

 
24 
adjusted R-squared values of the four models range from 0.086 to 0.141, which are statistically 
significant (p < 0.05). The sample size is reduced from 248 in Table 7 to 225 in Table 9 because 
some control variables (e.g., board gender diversity) have missing data. 
Five control variables, including internal promotion, board gender diversity, board size, 
ERM tool, and financial industries, are significant (p < 0.1) in Model 4 (i.e., the full model). This 
suggests that firms gain higher operational efficiency improvements from CRO appointments if 
they promote CROs internally, appoint more female board directors, maintain a smaller board, 
have adopted ERM tools, and operate in the financial industries. For the hypothesized variables, 
CRO power remains significantly positive (p < 0.05) across Models 2 to 4, indicating that the 
impact of CRO appointments on operational efficiency is more pronounced if the CROs have 
stronger power. H3 is supported. Regarding the industry environments, industry litigation threat 
is significantly positive (p < 0.05) in Models 3 and 4, while Model 4 also shows a significant and 
positive coefficient for industry dynamism (p < 0.05). Therefore, firms operating in more 
litigious and dynamic industries gain higher operational efficiency improvements from CRO 
appointments. Both H4 and H5 are supported. 
--- Tables 8 and 9 about here --- 
5.2 Additional Tests 
We conducted some additional tests to verify the sensitivity of our findings and to rule out 
alternative explanations. Table 10 documents the results of these tests, with the detailed testing 
procedures being discussed below. 
--- Table 10 about here --- 
First, we computed abnormal changes in firm performance based on alternative measures of 
firm risk and operational efficiency. Our alternative measures of firm risk are idiosyncratic risk 
and systematic risk, respectively. As shown in Models 1 and 2 of Panel A, although the abnormal 
changes in idiosyncratic risk and systematic risk are both negative, the risk reduction is more 
significant for idiosyncratic risk than systematic risk. This difference indicates that CRO 
appointments are more likely to reduce firm-specific rather than market-specific risks. We then 
measured operational efficiency alternatively based on a simpler, linear stochastic function (Lam 
et al., 2016; Yiu et al., 2020). Specifically, we dropped the squared and interaction terms in 

 
25 
Equation (3) when modeling the relationship between the operational inputs and output, 
obtaining consistent test results in Model 3 of Panel A. 
As t-test is more sensitive to outliners, we tested the abnormal changes in firm risk and 
operational efficiency alternatively based on Wilcoxon signed-rank test, a non-parametric test 
that does not require the normal distribution assumption (Arora et al., 2020; Hendricks et al., 
2015). The corresponding test results are consistent, as shown in Models 4 and 5 of Panel A. 
We also checked the sensitivity of our test results when a different period of data was used 
to perform PSM. Specifically, instead of based on data in t-1 (one year before CRO 
appointments), we used the three-year average of data from t-3 to t-1 to perform PSM 
(Liebenberg & Hoyt, 2003) and obtained qualitatively similar test results, as documented in 
Models 6 and 7 of Panel A. 
We also recalculated abnormal performance changes based on CRO appointment data 
collected from BoardEx rather than from Factiva. Specifically, we identified all firms that 
appointed their first CROs from 2006 to 2016 via the BoardEx database. We applied the same 
PSM approach to match each of these firms to a control firm without appointing a CRO between 
2006 and 2016. We then calculated the abnormal changes in firm risk and operational efficiency 
based on these matched firms and obtained consistent test results, as shown in Models 8 and 9 
of Panel A. Overall, the first nine models in Panel A consistently show that CRO appointments 
help reduce firm risk and improve operational efficiency with alternative variable measurement, 
test specification, matching period, and data source, supporting H1 and H2. 
To address the concern that our findings regarding the performance impact of CRO 
appointments are due to the significant performance difference between sample and matched 
control firms before the CRO appointments, we conducted several additional tests. First, we 
conducted paired sample t-tests to compare sample firms’ firm risk and operational efficiency 
with that of matched control firms in two years before the CRO appointments (i.e., years t-1 and 
t-2) but could not find any significant difference (p > 0.1; not tabulated). We also calculated the 
abnormal changes in firm risk and operational efficiency from t-2 to t-1. As presented in Models 
10 and 11 of Panel A, the abnormal performance changes before CRO appointments are not 
significant (p > 0.1). Thus, sample firms are similar to matched control firms in terms of both 

 
26 
the levels of and the changes in firm risk and operational efficiency before CRO appointments. 
Regarding the cross-sectional regression model, we first employed alternative measures of 
the three hypothesized variables. Specifically, instead of combining the three power proxies, i.e., 
CRO Executive, CRO Top5, and CRO Centrality, into a composite measure of CRO power, we 
measured CRO power alternatively based on each of these three power proxies and obtained 
consistent test results, as presented in Panel B (Models 1 to 3). Our regression results are also 
qualitatively similar as shown in Model 4 if we measured CRO power in the year after CRO 
appointments (i.e., year t+1) rather than in the appointment year (i.e., year t). 
For industry litigation threat, instead of considering all kinds of corporate lawsuits, our 
alternative measure focused on the class action lawsuits obtained from the SCAC directly (Kim 
& Skinner, 2012). We used annual, rather than quarterly, industry sales data (i.e., annual industry 
sales over the past five years up to the year of CRO appointments) to obtain an alternative 
measure of industry dynamism (Chang & Cho, 2017). Models 5 and 6 in Panel B document 
consistent test results based on these alternative industry-level measures. 
We also included some additional controls in the cross-sectional regression model. 
Specifically, we created two dummy variables, with one indicating whether firms had subsequent 
CRO successions during our investigation period (2006-2016) and the other representing the 
Great Recession occurring in 2008-2009. The first dummy helps account for any difference 
between firms’ first CRO appointments and subsequent CRO successions, while the second 
dummy controls for possible uncertainties arising from the Great Recession. After adding the 
two controls, the regression results are qualitatively similar, as presented in Model 7 of Panel B. 
We also found that the impact of CRO appointments is independent of subsequent successions 
but becomes more pronounced during the Great Recession (p < 0.1; not tabulated). 
We followed the Heckman two-step procedure to check whether self-selection bias plays a 
role in our analysis based on matched sample and control firms (Arora et al., 2020; Hendricks et 
al., 2015). Specifically, we first ran the probit regression model shown in Equation (1) for the 
matched sample and control firms to obtain the inverse Mills ratio (IMR). We then added the 
IMR as an independent variable in our cross-sectional regression model shown in Equation (4). 
If the IMR is significant in this model, our analysis is subject to the self-selection concern. We 

 
27 
obtained consistent test results for the hypothesized variables, as shown in Model 8 of Panel B. 
Moreover, the IMR is insignificant (p > 0.1; not tabulated) in the cross-sectional regression 
model, suggesting that self-selection bias is not a major concern when matched sample and 
control firms are used in our analysis (Arora et al., 2020). 
As our arguments used for developing H3 to H5 can be applied to firm risk as well, we 
replaced the dependent variable in the cross-sectional regression model with the abnormal 
change in firm risk from t-1 to t+1. As presented in Model 9 of Panel B, the regression results 
indicate that the reduction in firm risk due to CRO appointments is more pronounced for firms 
with stronger CRO power and operating in more litigious and dynamic industries, consistent 
with our finding based on operational efficiency. Overall, our regression results are robust to 
alternative measures of hypothesized variables, the inclusion of additional control variables and 
the IMR, and the use of alternative dependent variables. 
As our cross-sectional regression results suggest that firms operating in the financial 
industries benefit more from CRO appointments, a valid concern is whether CRO appointments 
are not beneficial to firms in the non-financial industries. To address this concern, we split the 
full sample into two sub-samples based on whether firms are in the financial industries or not, 
and calculated the abnormal change in operational efficiency for each sub-sample separately. 
The sub-sample test results shown in Models 1 to 2 of Panel C suggest that CRO appointments 
also improve the operational efficiency of firms operating in the non-financial industries, 
although the magnitude of the improvement is smaller than that in the financial industries. 
Another reasonable concern is whether the significant moderating role of financial industries 
found in the regression analysis is driven by depository institutions that account for almost 40% 
of our sample firms. To address this concern, we further divided firms in the financial industries 
into two sub-samples, with one including depository institutions and the other including other 
financial firms. We then compared the difference between these two sub-samples in terms of 
abnormal change in operational efficiency but could not find a significant difference (p > 0.1; 
not tabulated). This indicates that our results are not driven by depository institutions. 
We also checked whether CRO appointments are beneficial to firms without adopting ERM 
tools because our regression results show that firms with ERM tools benefit more from CRO 

 
28 
appointments. The sub-sample test results based on firms with and without adopting ERM tools 
are shown in Models 3 and 4, respectively, in Panel C. It suggests that CRO appointments benefit 
firms without adopting ERM tools, not only firms with ERM tools. 
Finally, we explored the mechanisms underlying the impact of CRO appointments on 
operational efficiency. Based on our hypothesis development and considering data availability, 
we tested three ways in which CROs improve operational efficiency: cost reduction, internal 
control quality improvement, and disruption prevention. Specifically, we expected that CROs 
help firms reduce costs, improve the quality of internal controls, and prevent disruptions to 
products and services, ultimately leading to better operational efficiency. Empirically, we 
measured costs as a firm’s annual cost of goods sold obtained from Compustat. We assessed a 
firm’s quality of internal controls based on data obtained from Audit Analytics. According to 
SOX Section 404, public firms are required to assess and disclose any weaknesses in internal 
controls, such as financial reporting deficiencies, lack of risk assessments, and failures to comply 
with established standards (Beneish et al., 2008; Chalmers et al., 2019). Audit Analytics collects 
these weaknesses data and records the annual number of weaknesses reported by each firm, 
providing a direct indication of a firm’s annual quality of internal controls, with a higher number 
of weaknesses indicating a lower quality. We identified a firm’s product/service-related 
disruptions via RavenPack, a database recording the occurrence of firm-specific events based on 
data from over 22,000 news sources (Hill et al., 2019; Shi et al., 2016). RavenPack classifies 
these events into different categories. We read the description of each category carefully and 
identified those related to the disruptions of firms’ products or services including product/service 
delays, outages, recalls, and suspensions. We then counted the annual number of these disruption 
events for each firm. We applied logarithm transformation to these three measures to account for 
possible data skewness. We then calculated the abnormal changes in the three variables from t-1 
to t+1 and documented the test results in Panel D. It shows that CRO appointments have a 
negative impact on firms’ cost of goods sold and numbers of internal control weaknesses and 
product/service-related disruptions, consistent with our expectation. Moreover, the impact is 
more significant for internal control weakness (p < 0.01) than cost of goods sold (p < 0.1) and 
product/service-related disruptions (p < 0.1). 

 
29 
6. Discussion 
While there has been an abundance of research studying various C-suite appointments, the 
impact of CRO appointments on firm risk and operational efficiency is still under-researched. 
The costly regulation hypothesis posits that organizations make tradeoffs between being safe 
(i.e., risk-free) and being efficient (Pagell et al., 2015). Previous studies have shown that firms 
with a lower level of workplace safety tend to be more productive and have a higher level of 
survival rate (Pagell et al., 2020). Nevertheless, we find that CRO appointments can reduce firm 
risk and improve operational efficiency simultaneously. Our results show that the strategic 
appointment of CRO to the TMT indeed reduces the tension between risk control and efficiency. 
We further delve into the characteristics of CROs and find that CRO’s power enhances efficiency 
to a greater extent. Also, we show that in an uncertain environment characterized by higher levels 
of industry litigation threats and industry dynamism, CRO appointments can achieve efficiency 
improvement to a greater extent. This provides useful insights in understanding the rationale in 
which risk management leads to efficiency enhancements. 
6.1 Theoretical Implications 
Our study supplements previous studies on chief officer appointments (Arora et al., 2020; Roh 
et al., 2016). Consistent with the crisis management studies that suggest crisis-prepared firms 
are less vulnerable to crisis events (Bundy et al., 2017), firms with a proactive risk management 
framework tend to be more active in identifying risks and designing mitigation approaches to 
prevent the occurrence of risk events. Also, we find that attention allocated to risk management 
at the corporate level leads to a “side effect” of improving efficiency. Since risk is an inherent 
problem that represents the potential for the realization of undesired outcomes (Maguire & Hardy, 
2013), strategic and proactive management of risk is the most economical way to reduce its costs. 
This is in line with classical quality management principles that planning for quality from the 
top is significantly more effective than the correction of quality problems (Sousa & Voss, 2002). 
Extending previous studies that focus on the outcomes of CRO appointments (Grace et al., 
2015; Lin et al., 2012; Pernell et al., 2017), this study covers a wider range of industries. We 
compared the results based on financial vs. non-financial firms. The results indicate that the 
effectiveness of CRO appointments is greater in the financial industries. This is probably because 

 
30 
the financial industries are under high regulatory surveillance, particularly after the global 
financial crisis in 2008 (Philippon, 2015), and the conflict between regulatory compliance, cost 
and efficiency are likely to be more salient in the financial sectors (American-Banker, 2018). 
6.1.1 Conflict between Risk Management and Efficiency 
We suggest that strategic risk management is an effective way to address the tension between 
risk control and operational efficiency. Previous studies on the impact of risk control on 
operational efficiency remain inconclusive (Pagach & Warr, 2011). Tightening risk control might 
incur burdensome costs, bureaucracy, and the rigidity of operational routines. Yet, enhancing risk 
management can ensure a stable flow of operations and reduce operational disruptions that offset 
efficiency (Farjoun, 2010). Consistent with the latter view, we find that strategic risk 
management, as represented by CRO appointments, can reduce firm risk and improve 
operational efficiency simultaneously. We suggest that CROs can raise the importance of risk 
management to a strategic level and facilitate a comprehensive approach to risk management. 
CRO appointments motivate firms to implement ERM to adopt a comprehensive evaluating 
protocol to balance risks and rewards (Eckles et al., 2014), help resolve the conflicts associated 
with the implementation of risk management initiatives, and overcome the paradoxical 
relationship between risk controls and operational efficiency. 
This study brings a new perspective, i.e., the ABV, to understand operational practices. The 
ABV explains how the strategic intent of the TMT can be transformed into operational practice 
through directing organizational attention (Ocasio, 1997). Based on the ABV (Ocasio, 1997), we 
suggest that with CROs in the TMT, firms can direct organizational attention to risk management 
and motivate firms to implement comprehensive risk management initiatives. Our study thus 
echoes previous studies that creating TMT positions can deliver strategic intent to internal and 
external stakeholders (Fu et al., 2020), which improves operations strategically. 
6.1.2 Power and Context for CRO Effectiveness 
We delve into the nuance of CROs and highlight the importance of CROs’ power that determines 
the effectiveness of CRO appointments. The results indicate that the impact of CRO 
appointments on operational efficiency is greater when the CRO has stronger power in the 
organization. From the ABV, the power dynamic within the organization is an important 

 
31 
determinant of the distribution of organizational attention (Tuggle et al., 2010a). CROs lacking 
the power to influence other TMT members might fail to channel organizational attention to risk 
issues and dilute the effectiveness of CRO appointments. The variation in CROs’ power also 
explains the inconclusive empirical results regarding the outcomes of CRO appointments. 
Our findings suggest that CROs who occupy a higher position in the organizational 
hierarchy may better coordinate the risk management initiatives and resolve the conflicts 
between different functional areas; this may create a cross-functional integration effect that 
facilitates the implementation of integrated approaches to risk management. In particular, CROs 
who are among the top few executives are more likely to reduce the goal conflicts between risk 
control and efficiency and have a wider range of influence and authority to develop strategic, 
organization-wide risk initiatives, leading to more significant benefits. 
Our results indicate that the litigation threat of the industry is a critical boundary condition 
for risk management initiatives. Litigation threat represents the level of uncertainty in the 
external legal and regulatory environment that gives rise to the vulnerability perception of 
managers (Koh et al., 2014; Wu et al., 2020). From the ABV (Ocasio, 1997), we suggest that 
litigation threat is an important environmental factor that affects the attention allocation within 
the organization. For firms operating in high litigation risk industries, TMT members are more 
likely to be convinced of the importance of risk management. As a result, firms should be more 
proactive in creating insurance mechanisms, such as corporate social responsibility (Koh et al., 
2014) and internal governances (Wu et al., 2020), to mitigate the potential operational 
disruptions. Consistent with these studies, we suggest that the litigation threat provides a 
legitimate environment for CROs to drive TMT attention toward risk control. The results indicate 
that firms under high industry litigation threats improve operational efficiency to a higher degree 
after CRO appointments. This supports our argument that a vague, vulnerable environment is the 
driver behind the complementary effect of risk and efficiency. 
Finally, our findings also offer new insights for dealing with dynamic environments. 
Industry dynamism has been regarded as a major source of firm risk and deterrent to operational 
efficiency. Unlike previous studies that emphasize the importance of innovation and flexibility 
in coping with dynamic environments (Ahuja et al., 2013), we suggest that strengthening risk 

 
32 
control can bring discipline in operations, which in turn, improves firms’ adaptability to dynamic 
markets. Our results indicate that firms can achieve higher operational efficiency through CRO 
appointments in a more volatile environment. Strategic risk management motivates firms to 
frequently scan their external environment to identify opportunities and threats (Clarke & Varma, 
1999). With CROs in the TMT and their duties to understand external risks, firms are more likely 
to proactively assess the changing market environment, identify risk factors, and look for new 
possibilities. Firms thus are in a better position to discover and seize market opportunities and 
improve efficiency. 
6.2 Managerial Implications 
Organizations have been hesitating to invest in risk management initiatives not only because of 
limited empirical evidence showing the benefits of these initiatives, such as CRO appointments, 
but also due to the ambiguous nature of both firm risk and operational efficiency. Our study 
provides important implications to managers as we demonstrate that both risk reduction and 
efficiency enhancement can co-exist with strategic risk management. Hopefully, this will 
motivate more organizations to design, develop, and implement a proactive, holistic risk 
management framework to well prepare for any kind of operational disruptions. We provide a 
self-assessed guideline for those organizations that are planning to appoint CROs in their TMT. 
In particular, it is important that CROs be appointed at a high hierarchical level in the 
organization and given more general, high-level responsibilities to ensure organization-wide risk 
management initiatives. Firms operating in an industry with high legal and regulatory threats 
and/or dynamism should consider appointing CRO more favorably because it can help further 
improve both firm risk and operational efficiency to a great extent. By contrast, for firms 
operating under a stable environment with low litigation threat, relatively fewer opportunities 
can be identified through CRO appointments, and process controls through risk management 
may lead to fewer benefits but more bureaucracies. 
7. Conclusions and Limitations 
CRO positions have been created for more than 20 years. However, the outcomes of CRO 
appointments remain inconclusive. This paper examines how CRO appointments affect firm risk 
and operational efficiency as well as the moderating effect of CROs’ power and environmental 

 
33 
factors, including industry litigation threat and industry dynamism. We find that firms can 
achieve reduction in firm risk and improvement in operational efficiency simultaneously through 
CRO appointments. Besides, the benefits of CRO appointments are more prominent for more 
powerful CROs and in more litigious and dynamic industries. 
This study has several limitations that offer opportunities for further investigation. First, due 
to limited data availability in private companies, we focused only on public firms. As the risk 
and efficiency implications of CRO appointments could be different between public and private 
firms, our results cannot be generalized to both types. Specifically, public firms are more heavily 
regulated and widely scrutinized by different stakeholders, probably making CRO appointments 
more important. Second, firms operating in other countries, especially in developing countries, 
might face quite different litigation threats and regulatory environments, making it interesting to 
explore the impact of CRO appointments on firms in these countries. 
Finally, the occurrence of large-scale disruptions (e.g., the COVID-19 pandemic) would 
probably attract organizational members’ attention to strategic risk management and motivate 
them to appoint CROs in their TMT. We could extend this research by benchmarking the benefits 
of CRO appointments before and after the COVID-19 pandemic. Moreover, we could compare 
the performance outcomes of those firms with and without CRO positions. 
 
Acknowledgements 
Ho would like to acknowledge The University of Melbourne for The Faculty of Business and 
Economics’ Eminent Research Scholars awards in 2018 and 2019. Yeung was partially supported 
by PolyU’s research fund no. 99QP. 
 
References 
Aebi, V., Sabato, G., & Schmid, M. (2012). Risk management, corporate governance, and bank 
performance in the financial crisis. Journal of Banking & Finance, 36(12): 3213-3226. 
Ahuja, G., Lampert, C. M., & Tandon, V. (2013). Paradigm-changing vs. Paradigm-deepening 
innovation: How firm scope influences firm technological response to shocks. Organization 
Science, 25(3): 653-669. 
Ambulkar, S., Blackhurst, J., & Grawe, S. (2015). Firm's resilience to supply chain disruptions: 
Scale development and empirical examination. Journal of Operations Management, 33: 
111-122. 
American-Banker. (2018). Rising compliance costs are hurting customers, banks say. 
Retrieved from https://www.bloomberg.com/professional/blog/rising-compliance-costs-

 
34 
hurting-customers-banks-say/ 
Arena, M., & Julio, B. (2015). The effects of securities class action litigation on corporate 
liquidity and investment policy. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 50(1/2): 
251-275. 
Arena, M. P. (2018). Corporate litigation and debt. Journal of Banking & Finance, 87: 202-215. 
Arora, P., Hora, M., Singhal, V., & Subramanian, R. (2020). When do appointments of corporate 
sustainability executives affect shareholder value? Journal of Operations Management, 
66(4): 464-487. 
Azadegan, A., Patel, P. C., & Parida, V. (2013). Operational slack and venture survival. 
Production and Operations Management, 22(1): 1-18. 
Bailey, C. (2019). The relationship between chief risk officer expertise, erm quality, and firm 
performance. Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance, in press: 1-25. 
Baker, S. R., Bloom, N., & Davis, S. J. (2016). Measuring economic policy uncertainty. The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4): 1593-1636. 
Barber, B. M., & Lyon, J. D. (1996). Detecting abnormal operating performance: The empirical 
power and specification of test statistics. Journal of Financial Economics, 41(3): 359-399. 
Beasley, M., Pagach, D., & Warr, R. (2008). Information conveyed in hiring announcements of 
senior executives overseeing enterprise-wide risk management processes. Journal of 
Accounting, Auditing & Finance, 23(3): 311-332. 
Beneish, M. D., Billings, M. B., & Hodder, L. D. (2008). Internal control weaknesses and 
information uncertainty. The Accounting Review, 83(3): 665-703. 
Berrone, P., Fosfuri, A., Gelabert, L., & Gomez‐Mejia, L. R. (2013). Necessity as the mother of 
‘green’inventions: Institutional pressures and environmental innovations. Strategic 
Management Journal, 34(8): 891-909. 
Berry-Stölzle, T. R., & Xu, J. (2018). Enterprise risk management and the cost of capital. Journal 
of Risk and Insurance, 85(1): 159-201. 
Black, D. E., & Neururer, T. (2020). Do Equity Analysts Provide Information about Dirty Surplus 
Income for Financial Firms? Tuck School of Business Working Paper(2815913). 
Bromiley, P., McShane, M., Nair, A., & Rustambekov, E. (2015). Enterprise risk management: 
Review, critique, and research directions. Long Range Planning, 48(4): 265-276. 
Bundy, J., Pfarrer, M. D., Short, C. E., & Coombs, W. T. (2017). Crises and crisis management: 
Integration, interpretation, and research development. Journal of Management, 43(6): 1661-
1692. 
Cardinal, L. B. (2001). Technological innovation in the pharmaceutical industry: The use of 
organizational control in managing research and development. Organization Science, 12(1): 
19-36. 
Chalmers, K., Hay, D., & Khlif, H. (2019). Internal control in accounting research: A review. 
Journal of Accounting Literature, 42: 80-103. 
Chang, Y. B., & Cho, W. (2017). The risk implications of mergers and acquisitions with 
information technology firms. Journal of Management Information Systems, 34(1): 232-267. 
Chen, X., Higgins, E., Xia, H., & Zou, H. (2020). Do financial regulations shape the functioning 
of financial institutions’ risk management in asset-backed securities investment? The Review 
of Financial Studies, 33(6): 2506-2553. 
Clarke, C. J., & Varma, S. (1999). Strategic risk management: The new competitive edge. Long 
Range Planning, 32(4): 414-424. 
Cleeren, K., Dekimpe, M. G., & van Heerde, H. J. (2017). Marketing research on product-harm 

 
35 
crises: a review, managerial implications, and an agenda for future research. Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science, 45(5): 593-615. 
Crain, W. M., & Crain, N. V. (2014). The cost of federal regulation to the US economy, 
manufacturing and small business: National Association of Manufacturers. 
Crosby, P. (1979). Quality is Free. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
da Silva, A. F., Brunassi Silva, V. A., Sampaio, J. O., & Silva, J. R. (2019). Chief risk officers 
and firm value: Empirical evidence from the insurance industry. Working paper available at 
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3355854 
Dess, G. G., & Beard, D. W. (1984). Dimensions of organizational task environments. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 29(1): 52-73. 
Dutton, J. E., & Ashford, S. J. (1993). Selling issues to top management. Academy of 
Management Review, 18(3): 397-428. 
Dutton, J. E., Ashford, S. J., O'Neill, R. M., & Lawrence, K. A. (2001). Moves that matter: Issue 
selling and organizational change. Academy of Management Journal, 44(4): 716-736. 
Eckles, D. L., Hoyt, R. E., & Miller, S. M. (2014). The impact of enterprise risk management on 
the marginal cost of reducing risk: Evidence from the insurance industry. Journal of Banking 
& Finance, 49: 409-423. 
Ellul, A., & Yerramilli, V. (2013). Stronger risk controls, lower risk: Evidence from US bank 
holding companies. Journal of Finance, 68(5): 1757-1803. 
Eroglu, C., & Hofer, C. (2014). The effect of environmental dynamism on returns to inventory 
leanness. Journal of Operations Management, 32(6): 347-356. 
Fang, E., Palmatier, R. W., & Grewal, R. (2011). Effects of customer and innovation asset 
configuration strategies on firm performance. Journal of Marketing Research, 48(3): 587-
602. 
Farjoun, M. (2010). Beyond dualism: Stability and change as a duality. Academy of Management 
Review, 35(2): 202-225. 
Feng, H., Morgan, N. A., & Rego, L. L. (2015). Marketing department power and firm 
performance. Journal of Marketing, 79(5): 1-20. 
Finkelstein, S. (1992). Power in top management teams: Dimensions, measurement, and 
validation. Academy of Management Journal, 35(3): 505-538. 
Fleming, L. (2001). Recombinant uncertainty in technological search. Management Science, 
47(1): 117-132. 
Florackis, C., & Sainani, S. (2018). How do chief financial officers influence corporate cash 
policies? Journal of Corporate Finance, 52: 168-191. 
Florio, C., & Leoni, G. (2017). Enterprise risk management and firm performance: The Italian 
case. The British Accounting Review, 49(1): 56-74. 
Fu, R., Tang, Y., & Chen, G. (2020). Chief sustainability officers and corporate social (ir) 
responsibility. Strategic Management Journal, 41(4): 656–680. 
Giambona, E., Graham, J. R., & Harvey, C. R. (2017). The management of political risk. Journal 
of International Business Studies, 48(4): 523-533. 
Grabowski, H., Brain, C., Taub, A., & Guha, R. (2017). Pharmaceutical patent challenges: 
company strategies and litigation outcomes. American Journal of Health Economics, 3(1): 
33-59. 
Grace, M. F., Leverty, J. T., Phillips, R. D., & Shimpi, P. (2015). The value of investing in 
enterprise risk management. Journal of Risk and Insurance, 82(2): 289-316. 
Gupta, M., Prakash, P., & Rangan, N. (2012). Governance and shareholder response to chief risk 

 
36 
officer appointments. The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance-Issues and Practice, 37(1): 
108-124. 
Gupta, V. K., Mortal, S., Chakrabarty, B., Guo, X., & Turban, D. B. (2020). CFO Gender and 
Financial Statement Irregularities. Academy of Management Journal, 63(3): 802-831. 
Hackman, J. R., & Wageman, R. (1995). Total quality management: empirical, conceptual, and 
practical issues. Administrative Science Quarterly, 40(2): 309-342. 
Hanley, K. W., & Hoberg, G. (2012). Litigation risk, strategic disclosure and the underpricing of 
initial public offerings. Journal of Financial Economics, 103(2): 235-254. 
Harjoto, M., Laksmana, I., & Lee, R. (2015). Board diversity and corporate social responsibility. 
Journal of Business Ethics, 132(4): 641-660. 
Hendricks, K. B., Hora, M., & Singhal, V. R. (2015). An empirical investigation on the 
appointments of supply chain and operations management executives. Management Science, 
61(7): 1562-1583. 
Hill, A. D., Recendes, T., & Ridge, J. W. (2019). Second‐order effects of CEO characteristics: 
How rivals' perceptions of CEOs as submissive and provocative precipitate competitive 
attacks. Strategic Management Journal, 40(5): 809-835. 
Hirst, G., Van Knippenberg, D., Chen, C.-h., & Sacramento, C. A. (2011). How does bureaucracy 
impact individual creativity? A cross-level investigation of team contextual influences on 
goal orientation–creativity relationships. Academy of Management Journal, 54(3): 624-641. 
Ho, W., Zheng, T., Yildiz, H., & Talluri, S. (2015). Supply chain risk management: a literature 
review. International Journal of Production Research, 53(16): 5031-5069. 
Hoyt, R. E., & Liebenberg, A. P. (2011). The value of enterprise risk management. Journal of 
Risk and Insurance, 78(4): 795-822. 
Huang, A., Hui, K. W., & Li, R. Z. (2019). Federal judge ideology: A new measure of ex ante 
litigation risk. Journal of Accounting Research, 57(2): 431-489. 
Joseph, J., & Gaba, V. (2020). Organizational structure, information processing, and decision-
making: a retrospective and road map for research. Academy of Management Annals, 14(1): 
267-302. 
Karanja, E., & Rosso, M. A. (2017). The Chief Risk Officer: A study of roles and responsibilities. 
Risk Management, 19(2): 103-130. 
Kaynak, H. (2003). The relationship between total quality management practices and their effects 
on firm performance. Journal of Operations Management, 21(4): 405-435. 
Khamitov, M., Grégoire, Y., & Suri, A. (2020). A systematic review of brand transgression, 
service failure recovery and product-harm crisis: integration and guiding insights. Journal 
of the Academy of Marketing Science, 48(3): 519-542. 
Kim, I., & Skinner, D. J. (2012). Measuring securities litigation risk. Journal of Accounting and 
Economics, 53(1-2): 290-310. 
Kitroeff, N., & Gelles, D. (2020). It’s Not Just Software: New Safety Risks Under Scrutiny on 
Boeing’s 737 Max. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/05/business/boeing-
737-max.html 
Knemeyer, A. M., Zinn, W., & Eroglu, C. (2009). Proactive planning for catastrophic events in 
supply chains. Journal of Operations Management, 27(2): 141-153. 
Koh, P. S., Qian, C., & Wang, H. (2014). Firm litigation risk and the insurance value of corporate 
social performance. Strategic Management Journal, 35(10): 1464-1482. 
Lam, H. K. (2018). Doing good across organizational boundaries. International Journal of 
Operations & Production Management, 38(12): 2389-2412. 

 
37 
Lam, H. K., Yeung, A. C., & Cheng, T. E. (2016). The impact of firms’ social media initiatives 
on operational efficiency and innovativeness. Journal of Operations Management, 47: 28-
43. 
Leuz, C. (2007). Was the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 really this costly? A discussion of 
evidence from event returns and going-private decisions. Journal of Accounting and 
Economics, 44(1-2): 146-165. 
Li, S., Shang, J., & Slaughter, S. A. (2010). Why do software firms fail? Capabilities, competitive 
actions, and firm survival in the software industry from 1995 to 2007. Information Systems 
Research, 21(3): 631-654. 
Liebenberg, A. P., & Hoyt, R. E. (2003). The determinants of enterprise risk management: 
Evidence from the appointment of chief risk officers. Risk Management and Insurance 
Review, 6(1): 37-52. 
Lin, Y., Wen, M.-M., & Yu, J. (2012). Enterprise risk management: Strategic antecedents, risk 
integration, and performance. North American Actuarial Journal, 16(1): 1-28. 
Lines, R. (2007). Using power to install strategy: The relationships between expert power, 
position power, influence tactics and implementation success. Journal of Change 
Management, 7(2): 143-170. 
Luo, X., Zhang, R., Zhang, W., & Aspara, J. (2014). Do institutional investors pay attention to 
customer satisfaction and why? Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 42(2): 119-
136. 
Lupton, D. (2013). Risk. London: Routledge. 
Mackelprang, A. W., Habermann, M., & Swink, M. (2015). How firm innovativeness and 
unexpected product reliability failures affect profitability. Journal of Operations 
Management, 38: 71-86. 
Maguire, S., & Hardy, C. (2013). Organizing processes and the construction of risk: A discursive 
approach. Academy of Management Journal, 56(1): 231-255. 
Marucheck, A., Greis, N., Mena, C., & Cai, L. (2011). Product safety and security in the global 
supply chain: Issues, challenges and research opportunities. Journal of Operations 
Management, 29(7-8): 707-720. 
Mitchell, J. R., Shepherd, D. A., & Sharfman, M. P. (2011). Erratic strategic decisions: When 
and why managers are inconsistent in strategic decision making. Strategic Management 
Journal, 32(7): 683-704. 
Nadkarni, S., & Barr, P. S. (2008). Environmental context, managerial cognition, and strategic 
action: An integrated view. Strategic Management Journal, 29(13): 1395-1427. 
Naiker, V., & Sharma, D. S. (2009). Former audit partners on the audit committee and internal 
control deficiencies. The Accounting Review, 84(2): 559-587. 
Nath, P., & Mahajan, V. (2008). Chief marketing officers: A study of their presence in firms' top 
management teams. Journal of Marketing, 72(1): 65-81. 
Neiger, D., Rotaru, K., & Churilov, L. (2009). Supply chain risk identification with value-
focused process engineering. Journal of Operations Management, 27(2): 154-168. 
Ocasio, W. (1997). Towards an attention-based view of the firm. Strategic Management Journal, 
18(S1): 187-206. 
Ocasio, W. (2011). Attention to attention. Organization Science, 22(5): 1286-1296. 
Pagach, D., & Warr, R. (2011). The characteristics of firms that hire chief risk officers. Journal 
of Risk and Insurance, 78(1): 185-211. 
Pagell, M., Klassen, R., Johnston, D., Shevchenko, A., & Sharma, S. (2015). Are safety and 

 
38 
operational effectiveness contradictory requirements: The roles of routines and relational 
coordination. Journal of Operations Management, 36: 1-14. 
Pagell, M., Parkinson, M., Veltri, A., Gray, J., Wiengarten, F., Louis, M., & Fynes, B. (2020). 
The tension between worker safety and organization survival. Management Science, 66(10): 
4863–4878. 
Patel, P. C. (2011). Role of manufacturing flexibility in managing duality of formalization and 
environmental uncertainty in emerging firms. Journal of Operations Management, 29(1-2): 
143-162. 
Pernell, K., Jung, J., & Dobbin, F. (2017). The hazards of expert control: Chief risk officers and 
risky derivatives. American Sociological Review, 82(3): 511-541. 
Peteraf, M. A., & Bergen, M. E. (2003). Scanning dynamic competitive landscapes: a market‐
based and resource‐based framework. Strategic Management Journal, 24(10): 1027-1041. 
Peterson, A., & Wu, A. (2021). Entrepreneurial learning and strategic foresight. Strategic 
Management Journal, in press. 
Philippon, T. (2015). Has the US finance industry become less efficient? On the theory and 
measurement of financial intermediation. American Economic Review, 105(4): 1408-1438. 
Powell, T. C. (2006). Total quality management as competitive advantage: a review and empirical 
study. Strategic Management Journal, 16(1): 15-37. 
Rogers, P. R., Miller, A., & Judge, W. Q. (1999). Using information‐processing theory to 
understand planning/performance relationships in the context of strategy. Strategic 
Management Journal, 20(6): 567-577. 
Roh, J., Krause, R., & Swink, M. (2016). The appointment of chief supply chain officers to top 
management teams: A contingency model of firm-level antecedents and consequences. 
Journal of Operations Management, 44: 48-61. 
Schilke, O. (2014). On the contingent value of dynamic capabilities for competitive advantage: 
The nonlinear moderating effect of environmental dynamism. Strategic Management 
Journal, 35(2): 179-203. 
Shepardson, D., Johnson, E. M., & Rucinski, T. (2021). Boeing to pay $2.5 billion to settle U.S. 
criminal 
probe 
into 
737 
MAX 
crashes. 
 
 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.reuters.com/article/boeing-737max-justice-int-idUSKBN29D07Q 
Shi, W., Connelly, B. L., & Cirik, K. (2018). Short seller influence on firm growth: A threat 
rigidity perspective. Academy of Management Journal, 61(5): 1892-1919. 
Shi, Y., Liu, W.-M., & Ho, K.-Y. (2016). Public news arrival and the idiosyncratic volatility 
puzzle. Journal of Empirical Finance, 37: 159-172. 
Sousa, R., & Voss, C. A. (2002). Quality management re-visited: A reflective review and agenda 
for future research. Journal of Operations Management, 20(1): 91-109. 
Speier, C., Whipple, J. M., Closs, D. J., & Voss, M. D. (2011). Global supply chain design 
considerations: Mitigating product safety and security risks. Journal of Operations 
Management, 29(7-8): 721-736. 
Spencer, M. (2011). U.S. Steel creates chief risk officer post. Retrieved from 
https://www.bizjournals.com/pittsburgh/news/2011/08/01/us-steel-creates-chief-risk-
officer.html 
Staw, B. M., Sandelands, L. E., & Dutton, J. E. (1981). Threat rigidity effects in organizational 
behavior: A multilevel analysis. Administrative Science Quarterly, 26: 501-524. 
Stevens, R., Moray, N., Bruneel, J., & Clarysse, B. (2015). Attention allocation to multiple goals: 
The case of for-profit social enterprises. Strategic Management Journal, 36(7): 1006-1016. 

 
39 
Tomlin, B. (2006). On the value of mitigation and contingency strategies for managing supply 
chain disruption risks. Management Science, 52(5): 639-657. 
Tuggle, C. S., Schnatterly, K., & Johnson, R. A. (2010a). Attention patterns in the boardroom: 
How board composition and processes affect discussion of entrepreneurial issues. Academy 
of Management Journal, 53(3): 550-571. 
Tuggle, C. S., Sirmon, D. G., Reutzel, C. R., & Bierman, L. (2010b). Commanding board of 
director attention: Investigating how organizational performance and CEO duality affect 
board members' attention to monitoring. Strategic Management Journal, 31(9): 946-968. 
Tushman, M. L., & Nadler, D. A. (1978). Information processing as an integrating concept in 
organizational design. Academy of Management Review, 3(3): 613-624. 
Voss, G. B., Sirdeshmukh, D., & Voss, Z. G. (2008). The effects of slack resources and 
environmental threat on product exploration and exploitation. Academy of Management 
Journal, 51(1): 147-164. 
Wowak, K. D., Ball, G. P., Post, C., & Ketchen, D. J. J. (2021). The influence of female directors 
on product recall decisions. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 23(4): 895-
913. 
Wu, W., Peng, F., Shan, Y. G., & Zhang, L. (2020). Litigation risk and firm performance: The 
effect of internal and external corporate governance. Corporate Governance: An 
International Review, 28(4): 210-239. 
Yiu, L. D., Lam, H. K., Yeung, A. C., & Cheng, T. (2020). Enhancing the Financial Returns of 
R&D Investments through Operations Management. Production and Operations 
Management, 29(7): 1658–1678. 
 
 
Figures and Tables 
 
Figure 1. Conceptual model 

 
40 
Table 1. A summary of chief risk officer research 
Articles 
Aspects of CRO 
Sample 
Findings 
Antecedents of CRO appointments 
Liebenberg and Hoyt 
(2003) – RMIR (Vol. 6, 
No. 1) 
CRO as an indicator of 
ERM adoption. 
26 publicly traded firms in the 
U.S. from 1997-2001. 
• Firms with a higher level of financial leverage are more 
likely to appoint CROs to reduce information asymmetry 
within the organization regarding their risk profile. 
Pagach and Warr (2011) 
– JRI (Vol. 78, No. 1) 
CRO as an indicator of 
ERM adoption. 
138 publicly traded firms from 
1992-2005. 
• Larger firms, firms with volatile stock prices, and firms with 
greater institutional ownership have a higher propensity to 
appoint CROs. 
Lin et al. (2012) – NAAJ 
(Vol. 16, No. 1) 
CRO as an indicator of 
ERM adoption. 
85 publicly traded PC insurance 
companies in the U.S. from 
2000–2007 
• Insurance companies that purchase more reinsurance and are 
geographically dispersed are more likely to adopt ERM for 
risk control. 
Outcomes of CRO appointments 
Supportive results 
Hoyt and Liebenberg 
(2011) – JRI (Vol. 78, 
No. 4) 
CRO as an indicator of 
ERM adoption. 
117 U.S. listed insurance firms 
from 1995-2005. 
• The use of ERM has a positive impact on firm value 
(measured by Tobin’s Q). 
Ellul and Yerramilli 
(2013) – JF (Vol. 68, No. 
5) 
CRO power as a part of 
risk management index 
(RMI) 
72 U.S. listed bank holding 
companies from 1995 to 2010. 
• Before the financial crisis years, banks with a higher RMI 
tend to have lower tail risk and nonperforming loans. 
• During the financial crisis years, banks with a higher RMI 
tend to have a higher stock return performance. 
Eckles et al. (2014) – 
JBF (Vol. 49) 
CRO as an indicator of 
ERM adoption. 
69 U.S. listed insurance firms 
from 1990-2008. 
• The adoption of ERM reduces stock return volatility. 
• The adoption of ERM is positively related to the operating 
profits per unit of risk. 
Florio and Leoni (2017) 
– BAR (Vol. 49, No. 1) 
CRO as a part of ERM 
components. 
32 non-finance listed firms with 
CROs and many others in Italy 
from 2011-2013. 
• Firms with more sophisticated ERM systems have higher 
financial performance and market evaluation. 
• The appointment of internal control and risk officer and 
committee has a positive impact on firm value (measured by 
Tobin’s Q). 
Berry-Stölzle and Xu 
(2018) – JRI (Vol. 85, 
No. 1) 
CRO as an indicator of 
ERM adoption. 
250 U.S. listed insurance firms 
from 1996-2012. 
• The adoption of ERM could reduce the firm’s capital costs. 
Bailey (2019) – JAAF (in 
press) 
CRO expertise 
196 firm-year observations of 
U.S. listed insurance firms from 
2006 to 2012. 
• CROs with supervisory and industry expertise and CROs 
with MBA degrees are associated with higher ERM quality. 
• CRO expertise is positively associated with the ROA of the 
firm. 
 
 

 
41 
Table 1 (Continued). A summary of chief risk officer research 
Articles 
Aspects of CRO 
Sample 
Findings 
Non-supportive results 
Beasley et al. 
(2008) – JAAF 
(Vol. 23, No. 3) 
CRO as an indicator of 
ERM adoption. 
120 listed firms across all 
industries in the U.S. from 
1992 to 2003. 
• The effect of CRO appointments on firm value (measured by cumulative 
abnormal return) is insignificant and is determined by firm characteristics. 
• For non-financial firms, the cumulative abnormal return caused by CRO 
appointments is positively related to stock price volatility and firm size but 
negatively related to financial leverage. 
Gupta et al. 
(2012) – GPRI 
(Vol. 37, No. 1) 
Shareholder response 
to CRO appointments 
73 listed firms across all 
industries from 1999 to 
2009. 
• The effect of CRO appointments on firm value (measured by cumulative 
abnormal return) is insignificant. 
• Firms with a weak governance structure are more likely to receive a positive 
evaluation from shareholders. 
Lin et al. (2012) 
– NAAJ (Vol. 16, 
No. 1) 
CRO as an indicator of 
ERM adoption. 
85 listed insurance 
companies in the U.S. 
from 2000–2007. 
• The adoption of ERM is negatively related to Tobin’s Q and ROA. This is 
mainly because ERM programs may give rise to opportunity costs and 
bureaucracy that reduces operational efficiency. 
Pernell et al. 
(2017) – ASR 
(Vol. 82, No. 3) 
CRO appointments as 
antecedents of new 
derivatives 
157 commercial banks 
included in the S&P 1500 
index from 1995 to 2010. 
• The appointment of CRO is positively related to the adoption of new 
derivatives that might lead to more risks. This is because the appointment of 
CROs might create an “organizational licensing” that makes trading-desk 
managers reduce self-monitoring of risky behaviors. 
Aebi et al. (2012) 
– JBF (Vol. 36, 
No. 12) 
The presence of CRO 
in TMT 
49 listed banks with CROs 
and others. 
• Simply having CRO and risk committee does not affect banks’ performance 
during the global financial crisis. This is because the actual risk governance 
structure is more important than the symbolic setting of risk management 
positions. 
• Banks perform better when their CROs report directly to the board of directors 
rather than to CEOs. 
da Silva et al. 
(2019) – 
Working paper 
The presence of CRO 
in TMT 
91 public insurance firms 
(with CROs) in the U.S. 
from 2009 to 2017. 
• The presence of CRO in the TMT is negatively related to a firm’s Tobin’s Q. 
• The effect of CRO on Tobin’s Q depends on CRO incentives. When CROs are 
included in the compensation committee and provided with equity-based 
compensation, their presence in the TMT is positively related to Tobin’s Q. 
Notes: RMIR – Risk Management and Insurance Review; JRI – Journal of Risk and Insurance; NAAJ – North American Actuarial Journal; JF – Journal of 
Finance; JBF – Journal of Banking & Finance; BAR – The British Accounting Review; JAAF – Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance; GPRI – The Geneva 
Papers on Risk and Insurance-Issues and Practice; ASR – American Sociological Review. 

 
42 
Table 2. Distribution of sample firms’ first CRO appointments across years 
Year 
Frequency 
Percentage 
2006 
35 
8.0 
2007 
28 
6.4 
2008 
48 
11.0 
2009 
41 
9.4 
2010 
41 
9.4 
2011 
34 
7.8 
2012 
54 
12.4 
2013 
40 
9.2 
2014 
37 
8.5 
2015 
35 
8.0 
2016 
42 
9.7 
All years 
435 
100 
 
 
 
 
Table 3. Distribution of sample firms across industries 
SIC Code 
Industry 
Frequency 
Percentage 
60 
Depository Institutions 
172 
39.5 
63 
Insurance Carriers 
57 
13.1 
61 
Non-depository Institutions 
26 
6.0 
73 
Business Services 
25 
5.7 
49 
Electric, Gas, & Sanitary Services 
22 
5.1 
62 
Security & Commodity Brokers 
22 
5.1 
67 
Holding & Other Investment Offices 
16 
3.7 
28 
Chemical & Allied Products 
7 
1.6 
87 
Engineering & Management Services 
7 
1.6 
64 
Insurance Agents, Brokers, & Services 
6 
1.4 
20 
Food & Kindred Products 
5 
1.1 
37 
Transportation Equipment 
5 
1.1 
29 
Petroleum & Coal Products 
4 
0.9 
33 
Primary Metal Industries 
4 
0.9 
65 
Real Estate 
4 
0.9 
Other 
Other industries 
53 
12.2 
Total 
All industries 
435 
100 
 
 
 
 

 
43 
Table 4. Variable measurements 
Variables 
Measurements 
Data Sources 
References 
Panel A: Performance Variables 
Firm Risk 
The annualized standard deviation of a firm’s daily stock 
returns. 
CRSP 
Lam (2018) 
Operational 
Efficiency 
A firm’s efficiency (relative to its industry peers with the 
same four-digit SIC code) in transforming operational inputs 
(i.e., EMP, CGS, and CEX) into operational output (i.e., OI) 
based on stochastic frontier estimation 
Compustat 
Li et al. (2010) 
 
Panel B: Hypothesized Variables 
CRO Power 
The first principal component extracted from the PCA of 
three power variables including CRO Executive (whether the 
CRO is an executive officer), CRO Top5 (whether the CRO 
is among the five highest-paid employees), and CRO 
Centrality (CRO’s total compensation divided by CEO’s total 
compensation) 
SEC EDGAR Ellul and 
Yerramilli 
(2013) 
Industry 
Litigation Threat 
The number of lawsuits filed each year against firms in an 
industry (four-digit SIC code) divided by the number of firms 
in the same industry 
Audit 
Analytics 
Arena (2018) 
Industry 
Dynamism 
The standard deviation of quarterly industry sales (based on 
four-digit SIC code) in a year, divided by the average 
quarterly industry sales in the same year 
Compustat 
Chang and Cho 
(2017) 
Panel C: Control Variables 
CRO Gender 
Code 1 for female CROs and 0 otherwise 
Factiva 
Wowak et al. 
(2021) 
Internal 
Promotion 
Code 1 for CROs promoted internally and 0 otherwise 
Factiva 
Bailey (2019) 
Board Size 
The number of board members 
BoardEx 
Aebi et al. 
(2012) 
Board Gender 
Diversity 
The percentage of female board members 
BoardEx 
Wowak et al. 
(2021) 
Board Experience 
Diversity 
The standard deviation of board members’ numbers of years 
served on the board 
BoardEx 
Harjoto et al. 
(2015) 
Firm Size 
A firm’s total assets based on a logarithmic transformation 
Compustat 
Li et al. (2010) 
Firm Profitability A firm’s returns on assets 
Compustat 
Lam et al. 
(2016) 
Firm Leverage 
A firm’s total debt divided by total assets 
Compustat 
Yiu et al. 
(2020) 
Market-to-Book 
Ratio 
A firm’s market value of equity divided by book value of 
equity 
Compustat 
Hendricks et al. 
(2015) 
Earnings 
Volatility 
The standard deviation of a firm’s quarterly earnings in a year 
divided by its average quarterly earnings in the same year 
Compustat 
Liebenberg and 
Hoyt (2003) 
CEO Duality 
Code 1 if a firm’s CEO is also the president or chair of the 
board and 0 otherwise 
BoardEx 
Naiker and 
Sharma (2009) 
Institutional 
Ownership 
The percentage of a firm’s stock held by institutional 
investors 
Thomson 
Reuters 
Pagach and 
Warr (2011) 
Industry 
Competition 
One minus the sum of the squares of each firm’s market share 
in the same industry (four-digit SIC code) 
Compustat 
Chang and Cho 
(2017) 
 
 

 
44 
Table 4 (continued). Variable measurements 
Variables 
Measurements 
Data Sources 
References 
Financial 
Industries 
Code 1 for financial industries (two-digit SIC codes = 60, 61, 
62, 63, 64, 65, and 67) and 0 for other industries 
Compustat 
Black and 
Neururer (2020) 
Polluting 
Industries 
Code 1 for the 20 most polluting industries in the U.S. (two-
digit SIC codes = 10, 50, 33, 49, 28, 36, 12, 13, 20, 32, 30, 
51, 26, 34, 29, 31, 35, 37, 24, and 27) and 0 for other 
industries 
Compustat 
Berrone et al. 
(2013) 
Economic Policy 
Uncertainty 
Average of the monthly economic policy uncertainty index 
developed by Baker et al. (2016) in each year 
policyuncertai
nty.com 
Chang and Cho 
(2017) 
ERM Tool 
Code 1 if a firm has adopted ERM-related tools or systems 
before its CRO appointment and 0 otherwise 
Factiva 
Berry-Stölzle 
and Xu (2018) 
CXO 
Appointments 
Code 1 if a firm has appointed chief compliance officer or 
chief supply chain officer before its CRO appointment and 0 
otherwise 
Factiva 
Roh et al. 
(2016) 
 
 
 
Table 5. Probit regression for propensity score matching 
Variables 
Model 1 (Pre-Matching) 
Model 2 (Post-Matching) 
Firm Size 
0.160*** (0.010) 
-0.005 (0.021) 
Firm Profitability 
-0.299* (0.162) 
0.642 (0.409) 
Firm Leverage 
-0.347*** (0.098) 
0.153 (0.226) 
Market-to-Book Ratio 
0.001 (0.003) 
-0.003 (0.006) 
Earnings Volatility 
0.001 (0.009) 
0.027 (0.022) 
Institutional Ownership 
0.280*** (0.057) 
-0.168 (0.135) 
Industry Litigation Threat 
0.007 (0.016) 
0.020 (0.037) 
Industry Dynamism 
0.235 (0.237) 
-0.332 (0.638) 
Industry Competition 
0.043 (0.124) 
0.132 (0.330) 
Polluting Industries 
-0.133** (0.062) 
0.088 (0.169) 
Financial Industries 
0.611*** (0.055) 
0.056 (0.142) 
Intercept 
-4.192*** (0.193) 
0.040 (0.477) 
Year dummies 
Included 
Included 
Number of sample firms 
361 
361 
Number of control firms 
13069 
361 
Total number of firms 
13430 
722 
Pseudo R-squared 
0.187 
0.009 
LR chi squared 
869.62*** 
9.42 
Notes: *, **, and *** indicate significance at 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively (two-tailed tests). Standard 
errors are in parentheses. 
 
 
 

 
45 
Table 6. Differences between sample and control firms 
Panel A: Pre-Matching 
Variables 
Mean difference between sample and control firms 
t-statistic 
p-value 
Firm Size 
3.147 
22.34 
0.000*** 
Firm Profitability 
0.116 
6.78 
0.000*** 
Firm Leverage 
-0.158 
-2.77 
0.006*** 
Market-to-Book Ratio 
-0.325 
-0.44 
0.660 
Earnings Volatility 
0.246 
1.91 
0.056* 
Institutional Ownership 
0.182 
9.94 
0.000*** 
Industry Litigation Threat 
0.395 
6.40 
0.000*** 
Industry Dynamism 
0.019 
3.51 
0.000*** 
Industry Competition 
0.070 
7.07 
0.000*** 
Polluting Industries 
-0.325 
-12.35 
0.000*** 
Financial Industries 
0.507 
24.97 
0.000*** 
Panel B: Post-Matching 
Variables 
Mean difference between sample and control firms 
t-statistic 
p-value 
Firm Size 
0.047 
0.26 
0.796 
Firm Profitability 
0.012 
1.27 
0.203 
Firm Leverage 
0.007 
0.43 
0.669 
Market-to-Book Ratio 
-0.257 
-0.44 
0.660 
Earnings Volatility 
0.172 
1.08 
0.280 
Institutional Ownership 
-0.026 
-0.94 
0.350 
Industry Litigation Threat 
0.075 
0.70 
0.482 
Industry Dynamism 
-0.003 
-0.47 
0.640 
Industry Competition 
0.001 
0.10 
0.923 
Polluting Industries 
0.008 
0.31 
0.756 
Financial Industries 
0.011 
0.32 
0.750 
Notes: *, **, and *** indicate significance at 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively (two-tailed tests). 
 
Table 7. Abnormal change in firm performance 
Variables 
Years 
N 
Abnormal Change 
t-statistic 
p-value 
Firm Risk 
t-1 to t 
359 
-0.100 
-0.861 
0.390 
Firm Risk 
t-1 to t+1 
339 
-0.326 
-3.018 
0.003*** 
Firm Risk 
t-1 to t+2 
328 
-0.213 
-1.691 
0.092* 
Firm Risk 
t-1 to t+3 
313 
-0.216 
-2.405 
0.017** 
Operational Efficiency 
t-1 to t 
273 
0.014 
1.252 
0.212 
Operational Efficiency 
t-1 to t+1 
248 
0.036 
3.165 
0.002*** 
Operational Efficiency 
t-1 to t+2 
245 
0.035 
2.628 
0.010** 
Operational Efficiency 
t-1 to t+3 
238 
0.029 
1.991 
0.048** 
Notes: *, **, and *** indicate significance at 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively (two-tailed tests); CRO 
appointments are made in year t and propensity score matching is performed in year t-1. 

 
46 
Table 8. Correlations and descriptive statistics 
Variables 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
1. Abnormal Change in 
Operational Efficiency 
1.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. CRO Power 
0.17 
1.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Industry Litigation Threat 
0.06 -0.13 1.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Industry Dynamism 
0.11 
0.04 -0.15 1.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. CRO Gender 
0.04 
0.01 -0.02 0.02 
1.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. Internal Promotion 
0.14 -0.03 0.03 -0.07 0.11 
1.00 
 
 
 
 
 
7. CEO Duality 
0.00 
0.07 
0.08 -0.07 0.02 -0.04 1.00 
 
 
 
 
8. Board Gender Diversity 
0.15 -0.01 0.08 
0.07 
0.05 
0.05 
0.07 
1.00 
 
 
 
9. Board Experience 
Diversity 
-0.10 -0.09 -0.02 0.10 
0.08 
0.02 
0.06 -0.06 1.00 
 
 
10. Board Size 
-0.05 -0.08 0.15 
0.29 -0.07 0.04 
0.03 
0.24 
0.08 
1.00 
 
11. Institutional Ownership 
-0.03 0.07 -0.01 0.01 
0.02 
0.07 
0.04 
0.08 
0.09 -0.12 
1.00 
12. ERM Tool 
0.15 -0.09 0.02 -0.10 -0.01 -0.01 -0.08 0.05 -0.08 0.10 
-0.03 
13. CXO Appointments 
0.06 -0.06 0.10 -0.15 -0.02 0.14 
0.07 
0.16 
0.09 
0.05 
0.15 
14. Firm Size 
0.02 -0.14 0.28 
0.03 -0.04 0.02 
0.10 
0.27 -0.01 0.63 
0.01 
15. Firm Profitability 
-0.13 -0.02 0.21 -0.37 -0.02 -0.01 0.14 
0.00 
0.01 -0.24 
0.15 
16. Firm Leverage 
-0.02 -0.05 0.20 -0.37 -0.02 0.11 
0.10 
0.02 -0.08 -0.07 
0.00 
17. Market-to-Book Ratio 
0.00 
0.08 -0.08 -0.04 0.11 -0.08 0.05 
0.06 -0.04 -0.01 
-0.09 
18. Earnings Volatility 
0.10 
0.12 -0.09 0.06 -0.06 0.08 -0.01 0.12 -0.04 0.04 
0.06 
19. Industry Competition 
0.04 
0.09 -0.09 0.52 -0.02 -0.11 -0.10 0.05 -0.02 0.33 
-0.12 
20. Financial Industries 
0.08 
0.03 -0.10 0.42 
0.05 -0.12 -0.14 -0.04 -0.06 0.18 
-0.17 
21. Polluting Industries 
-0.01 -0.03 -0.07 -0.30 -0.08 0.19 
0.19 
0.09 
0.02 -0.03 
0.09 
22. Economic Policy 
Uncertainty 
-0.07 0.00 -0.09 -0.03 0.03 -0.03 -0.13 -0.10 -0.10 -0.07 
0.11 
Mean 
0.03 -0.03 0.48 
0.58 
0.26 
0.62 
0.44 
0.13 
5.34 10.97 
0.50 
Standard Deviation 
0.16 
1.00 
0.97 
0.08 
0.44 
0.49 
0.50 
0.08 
3.05 
2.99 
0.34 
Variables 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
12. ERM Tool 
1.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13. CXO Appointments 
0.06 
1.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14. Firm Size 
0.18 
0.13 
1.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15. Firm Profitability 
-0.08 0.18 -0.25 1.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16. Firm Leverage 
-0.09 0.15 
0.18 
0.16 
1.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17. Market-to-Book Ratio 
-0.04 0.09 -0.04 0.09 -0.06 1.00 
 
 
 
 
 
18. Earnings Volatility 
0.01 
0.07 -0.02 0.10 -0.09 0.04 
1.00 
 
 
 
 
19. Industry Competition 
0.06 -0.33 0.17 -0.43 -0.44 -0.14 0.01 
1.00 
 
 
 
20. Financial Industries 
0.05 -0.38 0.06 -0.37 -0.38 -0.14 0.07 
0.73 
1.00 
 
 
21. Polluting Industries 
-0.13 0.42 
0.07 
0.14 
0.29 
0.03 
0.02 -0.36 -0.61 1.00 
 
22. Economic Policy 
Uncertainty 
0.18 
0.04 -0.04 -0.02 0.00 -0.17 -0.02 0.06 
0.09 -0.02 
1.00 
Mean 
0.17 
0.20 
8.80 
0.06 
0.20 
1.99 
0.28 
0.62 
0.62 
0.19 123.61 
Standard Deviation 
0.38 
0.40 
1.97 
0.07 
0.18 
5.53 
1.89 
0.36 
0.49 
0.39 
31.41 
Notes: Correlations with absolute values equal to 0.11 or above are significant at the 0.1 level. 
 
 
 

 
47 
Table 9. Cross-sectional regression results 
Variables 
Model 1 
Model 2 
Model 3 
Model 4 
CRO Power 
 
0.028** 
(0.011) 
0.030*** 
(0.011) 
0.031*** 
(0.011) 
Industry Litigation Threat 
 
 
0.025** 
(0.012) 
0.026** 
(0.012) 
Industry Dynamism 
 
 
 
0.374** 
(0.171) 
Internal Promotion 
0.055** 
(0.025) 
0.055** 
(0.024) 
0.051** 
(0.024) 
0.054** 
(0.024) 
ERM Tool 
0.072** 
(0.030) 
0.077** 
(0.030) 
0.078*** 
(0.030) 
0.091*** 
(0.030) 
Financial Industries 
0.054 
(0.041) 
0.063 
(0.040) 
0.071* 
(0.040) 
0.074* 
(0.040) 
Polluting Industries 
0.023 
(0.039) 
0.027 
(0.039) 
0.044 
(0.039) 
0.061 
(0.040) 
CRO Gender 
0.008 
(0.025) 
0.006 
(0.025) 
0.005 
(0.025) 
0.004 
(0.024) 
CEO Duality 
0.017 
(0.022) 
0.011 
(0.022) 
0.010 
(0.022) 
0.008 
(0.022) 
Board Gender Diversity 
0.301** 
(0.145) 
0.297** 
(0.143) 
0.295** 
(0.142) 
0.268* 
(0.141) 
Board Experience Diversity 
-0.004 
(0.004) 
-0.003 
(0.004) 
-0.002 
(0.004) 
-0.003 
(0.004) 
Board Size 
-0.007 
(0.005) 
-0.006 
(0.005) 
-0.006 
(0.005) 
-0.009* 
(0.005) 
Institutional Ownership 
-0.003 
(0.034) 
-0.009 
(0.034) 
-0.004 
(0.033) 
-0.013 
(0.033) 
CXO Appointments 
0.042 
(0.031) 
0.042 
(0.031) 
0.038 
(0.031) 
0.032 
(0.031) 
Firm Size 
-0.002 
(0.008) 
0.000 
(0.008) 
-0.003 
(0.008) 
-0.001 
(0.008) 
Firm Profitability 
-0.207 
(0.173) 
-0.180 
(0.171) 
-0.269 
(0.176) 
-0.177 
(0.179) 
Firm Leverage 
0.032 
(0.076) 
0.025 
(0.075) 
0.014 
(0.075) 
0.029 
(0.074) 
Market-to-Book Ratio 
0.000 
(0.002) 
0.000 
(0.002) 
0.000 
(0.002) 
0.000 
(0.002) 
Earnings Volatility 
0.005 
(0.006) 
0.003 
(0.006) 
0.004 
(0.006) 
0.003 
(0.006) 
Industry Competition 
0.017 
(0.052) 
-0.002 
(0.051) 
-0.004 
(0.051) 
-0.035 
(0.053) 
Economic Policy Uncertainty 
 
0.001 
(0.001) 
0.000 
(0.001) 
0.000 
(0.001) 
0.001 
(0.001) 
Intercept 
-0.133 
(0.128) 
-0.135 
(0.126) 
-0.107 
(0.126) 
-0.336** 
(0.163) 
Year dummies 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
N 
225 
225 
225 
225 
F-test 
1.75** 
1.96*** 
2.06*** 
2.19*** 
R-squared 
0.200 
0.226 
0.242 
0.260 
Adjusted R-squared 
0.086 
0.111 
0.125 
0.141 
Notes: *, **, and *** indicate significance at 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively (two-tailed tests). Standard 
errors are in parentheses. 

 
48 
Table 10. Additional test results 
Panel A: Abnormal Performance Change 
Model 
Years 
N Abnormal Change t-statistic p-value 
1. Measure firm risk based on idiosyncratic risk 
t-1 to t+1 339 
-0.201 
-2.341 
0.020** 
2. Measure firm risk based on systematic risk 
t-1 to t+1 339 
-0.117 
-1.414 
0.158 
3. Measure operational efficiency based on linear 
model 
t-1 to t+1 248 
0.032 
3.031 
0.003*** 
4. Wilcoxon signed-rank test (firm risk) 
t-1 to t+1 339 
-0.326 
-1.810 
0.070* 
5. Wilcoxon signed-rank test (operational efficiency) 
t-1 to t+1 248 
0.036 
2.428 
0.015** 
6. PSM based on three-year average (firm risk) 
t-1 to t+1 336 
-0.198 
-2.060 
0.040** 
7. PSM based on three-year average (operational 
efficiency) 
t-1 to t+1 247 
0.022 
1.838 
0.067* 
8. CRO appointment data from BoardEx (firm risk) 
t-1 to t+1 406 
-0.199 
-2.252 
0.024** 
9. CRO appointment data from BoardEx (operational 
efficiency) 
t-1 to t+1 319 
0.028 
2.411 
0.016** 
10. Change in firm risk before CRO appointments 
t-2 to t-1 349 
-0.018 
-0.128 
0.898 
11. Change in operational efficiency before CRO 
appointments 
t-2 to t-1 273 
-0.008 
-0.705 
0.481 
Panel B: Cross-Sectional Regression Model 
Model 
CRO 
Power 
Industry 
Litigation Threat 
Industry 
Dynamism 
N 
Adjusted 
R-squared 
F-value 
1. Measure CRO power based on CRO 
Executive 
0.058** 
(0.022) 
0.026** 
(0.012) 
0.376** 
(0.172) 
225 
0.136 
2.13*** 
2. Measure CRO power based on CRO 
Top5 
0.053* 
(0.031) 
0.023* 
(0.012) 
0.340* 
(0.174) 
225 
0.119 
1.97*** 
3. Measure CRO power based on CRO 
Centrality 
0.109* 
(0.062) 
0.020* 
(0.012) 
0.414** 
(0.176) 
225 
0.120 
1.98*** 
4. Measure CRO power in year t+1 
0.028** 
(0.011) 
0.026** 
(0.012) 
0.352** 
(0.172) 
225 
0.136 
2.14*** 
5. Measure industry litigation threat 
based on class action lawsuits 
0.027** 
(0.011) 
1.050** 
(0.422) 
0.380** 
(0.171) 
225 
0.148 
2.26*** 
6. Measure industry dynamism based on 
annual industry data 
0.032*** 
(0.011) 
0.026** 
(0.012) 
0.065* 
(0.037) 
225 
0.134 
2.11*** 
7. Include additional control variables 
0.032*** 
(0.011) 
0.027** 
(0.012) 
0.381** 
(0.171) 
225 
0.142 
2.16*** 
8. Include IMR 
0.031*** 
(0.011) 
0.027** 
(0.012) 
0.351* 
(0.186) 
225 
0.137 
2.11*** 
9. Use firm risk as dependent variable 
-0.172** 
(0.084) 
-0.187** 
(0.093) 
-2.815** 
(1.214) 
292 
0.085 
1.88*** 
Panel C: Sub-Sample Analysis 
Model 
Year 
N 
Abnormal Change t-statistic p-value 
1. Financial industries (operational efficiency) 
t-1 to t+1 155 
0.038 
2.496 
0.014** 
2. Non-financial industries (operational efficiency) 
t-1 to t+1 
93 
0.033 
1.951 
0.054* 
3. Firms with ERM (operational efficiency) 
t-1 to t+1 
44 
0.080 
2.566 
0.014*** 
4. Firms without ERM (operational efficiency) 
t-1 to t+1 204 
0.027 
2.211 
0.028** 
Panel D: Mechanism Exploration 
Model 
Year 
N 
Abnormal Change t-statistic p-value 
1. Cost of goods sold 
t-1 to t+1 338 
-0.079 
-1.773 
0.077* 
2. Internal control weakness 
t-1 to t+1 286 
-0.069 
-2.946 
0.003*** 
3. Product/service-related disruptions 
t-1 to t+1 310 
-0.030 
-1.766 
0.078* 
Notes: *, **, and *** indicate significance at 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively (two-tailed tests). Control 
variables and year dummies are included in all regression models in Panel B. Standard errors are in parentheses.