TITLE: Impact of the U.S.–China trade war on the operating performance of U.S. firms: The role of outsourcing and supply base complexity
JOURNAL: JOM
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/joom.1225
---

Impact of the U.S.-China Trade War on the Operating Performance of U.S. Firms: The
Role of Outsourcing and Supply Base Complexity
Fan, D., Zhou, Y., Yeung, A., Lo, C. K. Y., & Tang, C. S. (2022). Impact of the U.S.-China Trade War on the
Operating Performance of U.S. Firms: The Role of Outsourcing and Supply Base Complexity. Journal of
Operations Management, 68(8), 928-962. https://doi.org/10.1002/joom.1225
Link to publication record in Ulster University Research Portal
Published in:
Journal of Operations Management
Publication Status:
Published (in print/issue): 28/12/2022
DOI:
10.1002/joom.1225
Document Version
Author Accepted version
For Author Accepted Manuscripts (AAM) published under Ulster University's Rights Retention Policy for Scholarly Works
(RRPSW)
When citing an AAM published under Ulster University's RRPSW please use the following citation structure:
Author, A. A. (Year). Title of article. Journal Name, [Accepted Author Manuscript]. PURE Portal URL. Licensed under CC BY 4.0.
General rights
The copyright and moral rights to the output are retained by the output author(s), unless otherwise stated by the document licence.
Unless otherwise stated, users are permitted to download a copy of the output for personal study or non-commercial research and are
permitted to freely distribute the URL of the output. They are not permitted to alter, reproduce, distribute or make any commercial use of the
output without obtaining the permission of the author(s).
If the document is licenced under Creative Commons, the rights of users of the documents can be found at
https://creativecommons.org/share-your-work/cclicenses/.
Take down policy
The Research Portal is Ulster University's institutional repository that provides access to Ulster's research outputs. Every effort has been
made to ensure that content in the Research Portal does not infringe any person's rights, or applicable UK laws. If you discover content in
the Research Portal that you believe breaches copyright or violates any law, please contact pure-support@ulster.ac.uk
Download date: 13/06/2026

 
1 
 
 
Impact of the U.S.–China Trade War on the Operating Performance of U.S. Firms: The 
Role of Outsourcing and Supply Base Complexity 
 
Abstract 
 
Multinational corporations have benefited tremendously from free trade in the past few 
decades in the form of cost reductions, resource advantages, and market expansion. However, the 
dynamism of international relations, paired with the global recession, has rekindled the debate over 
frictionless trade. In this study, we examine how trade friction, created by tariff trade barriers, 
affects the operational performance of domestic firms. We also investigate how various supply 
chain characteristics and strategies can moderate the impact of such trade friction. 
Motivated by the 2018 U.S.-China trade war, we conducted a difference-in-difference 
analysis to examine the impact of trade tariffs on various performance indicators of U.S. firms. 
We found that U.S. firms with direct supply partners (i.e., first-tier suppliers) in China had a worse 
performance in terms of inventory (i.e., days of supply) and profitability (return-on-assets). We 
further found that the negative impact on firms’ profitability was more severe for firms with a 
higher degree of outsourcing, and horizontal and spatial supply base complexity. We discuss the 
implications for international operations management, supply chain networks, and supply risk 
management, and provide suggestions to supply chain practitioners and trade policymakers. 
 
Keywords: Geopolitical risk, trade war, outsourcing, supply base complexity, difference-in-
difference 

 
2 
 
 
1. Background 
In the context of stable, open trade and a low trade barrier global environment, many 
multinational corporations (MNCs) have offshored production to Asia, creating complex global 
supply chains for industrial and consumer products. Through cross-border transactions, firms can 
reduce cost and develop knowledge (Pitelis & Teece, 2010), improve the efficiency of physical 
resources, and increase business opportunities (Teece, 1986). However, the flip side of global 
sourcing, as suggested by transaction costs economics (TCE), is that it increases the transaction 
and coordination costs that MNCs are forced to bear (Lampel & Giachetti, 2013). Additionally, 
complex global supply chains can make a firm vulnerable to dynamic changes in trade policies. 
Nowadays, increased transaction risks and coordination are major sources of operational costs 
(Grover & Malhotra, 2003; Yuan et al., 2020). 
The recently emerging nationalism has forced governments to impose new trade restrictions 
for de-globalization (Witt, 2019), creating massive uncertainty in the global supply chain 
(Kouvelis et al., 2011) and forcing firms to rethink their global operational strategies (Charpin et 
al., 2020; Darby et al., 2020). These changes are challenging the presumption in most supply chain 
management studies of a stable, open global environment with low trade barriers (Dong & 
Kouvelis, 2020), motivating us to investigate how global trade environment changes may affect 
firms’ supply chain management. 
Although researchers have examined various aspects of supply chain risks (e.g., Kleindorfer 
& Saad, 2005; Tang & Tomlin, 2008), the understanding of the impacts of geopolitical tensions 
and trade conflicts on firms’ operating performance remains limited (Charpin et al., 2020). Firms 
facing significant geopolitical risk must reconsider their operational strategy and resources and 

 
3 
 
adapt accordingly (Charpin et al., 2020; Darby et al., 2020). In this study, we aim to provide an 
increased understanding of and implications for these decisions. 
In this paper, we examine the impact of trade tariffs on firms’ performance using the recent 
U.S.-China trade war declared by former President Trump as the backdrop. In 2018, over 1,300 
categories and $50 billion worth of products imported from China were affected in the first wave 
of the 25% tariff increases (Office of the United States Trade Representative, 2018). Later, the 
scope was increased to $300 billion over 3,805 categories. In retaliation, China imposed tariff 
increases on $75 billion worth of U.S. products. 
The intent of the import tariff increases was to reduce the trade deficit between the United 
States and China—but U.S. firms have major concerns. The American Chamber of Commerce 
found that 42% of its members experienced higher production costs, and over 50% believed that 
their product sales would decline (Bray, 2019). Huang et al. (2019) found a negative stock market 
reaction toward higher import tariffs for firms importing from China. These observations prompted 
our first research question (RQ1): How would the U.S.-China trade war affect the operating 
performance of U.S. firms sourcing from China? We examined the performance metrics of 
inventory days (Wiengarten et al., 2017) and profitability (Swift et al., 2019) by considering trade 
wars as supply chain disruptors (Roscoe et al., 2020) and cost burdens (Dong & Kouvelis, 2019). 
Previous literature provides limited implications for global supply network design induced 
by geopolitical risk and tension. Diversifying supply was widely suggested for firms to cope with 
trade war because of the increased flexibility. Alternative supply sources are available when 
failures happen at a supply source (Hendricks et al., 2009; Tang & Tomblin, 2008). However, the 
use of supply diversification as a risk mitigation strategy is controversial. Grover and Malhotra 
(2003) conceptualized transaction cost as the sum of transaction risk and coordination cost. 

 
4 
 
Supply diversification is a major source of coordination costs in supply chain management. The 
increased need for coordination can reduce responsiveness to cope with uncertainty (Choi & 
Krause, 2006). This view is in line with Japanese firms’ significant reduction in their supply 
network complexity after the disruption caused by the 2011 earthquake in eastern Japan (Son et 
al., 2021). We therefore propose our second research question (RQ2): How would a U.S. firm’s 
supply diversification affect its capability to respond to the trade war? Specifically, we used the 
extent of outsourcing (Hendricks et al., 2009; Steven et al., 2014) and supply base complexity 
(Dong et al., 2020; Lu & Shang, 2017) as the indicators of supply diversification. We examined 
whether these factors would moderate or accentuate the impact of the increased trade tariffs on a 
firm’s performance. 
To examine our research questions, we conducted a natural experiment to understand the 
effect of the U.S.-China trade war on the operating performance of U.S. firms. By focusing on the 
listed U.S. firms affected by the tariffs imposed in 2018, we compared the performance changes 
in treatment firms, which had direct suppliers in China, and those of control firms, which had no 
direct suppliers in China. We used secondary data collected from Compustat (financial data), 
Bloomberg’s SPLC, and the FactSet Reverse (supply chain relationship data) databases, and 
adopted the propensity score matching (PSM) technique to develop the matched pairs. The 
matching procedures ensured the treatment and control firms were highly similar in terms of firm 
properties and supply network characteristics (e.g., second-tier suppliers). 
Our difference-in-difference (DID) regression analysis revealed that the treatment firms 
suffered a more serious loss in inventory efficiency (inventory days of supply) and profitability 
(return-on-assets, ROA) than did the control firms. We further found that the negative impact on 
firms’ profitability is more severe for firms with a higher degree of outsourcing and horizontal and 

 
5 
 
spatial supply base complexity. Overall, we found that supply diversification exacerbated the 
negative impact of the trade war. 
The results contribute to the literature on supply chain risk management by constructing a 
link between geopolitical uncertainty and operating performance. In addition, we contribute to the 
supply management literature by examining the role of supply diversification amidst uncertainty 
caused by geopolitical tensions and trade barriers. This provides important implications for firms 
to develop resilient global supply networks under such an environment of uncertainty. We also 
discuss the implications of our results in the context of international operations management, 
supply chain networks, and supply risk management, and provide practical references to supply 
chain practitioners and policymakers. 
 
2. Literature Review 
2.1 TCE and Global Sourcing 
TCE conceptualizes a firm’s “make or buy” decisions; low transaction cost is a key driver 
for a firm’s outsourcing (or “buy”) decision (Coase, 1937). Relative to the previous century, 
international transaction costs in the first decade of the 21st century were much lower owing to 
technological advancement (Müller & Seuring, 2007) and stable trade (Oh et al., 2011). Aside 
from transaction costs, the pursuit of competitive advantage was another reason for global sourcing 
(Kotabe & Murray, 2004). Global sourcing helps firms to differentiate products by exploiting 
unique resources (Teece, 1986), increasing firms’ bargaining power with their suppliers (Lampel 
& Giachetti, 2013), and reducing costs (Jiang et al., 2007; Lampel & Giachetti, 2013). 
TCE also highlights the challenges of global sourcing from transaction risk and 
coordination costs perspectives (Clemons et al., 1993; Grover & Malhotra, 2003). Transaction risk 

 
6 
 
causes disturbances to the global supply chain (Williamson, 2008) and affects operational 
continuity and efficiency (Grover & Malhotra, 2003), while coordination costs are associated with 
efforts to facilitate information exchanges, production rationalization, and process standardization 
(Clemons et al., 1993; Lampel & Giachetti, 2013). Using the TCE framework, operations 
management (OM) scholars have developed two streams of literature—supply chain risk 
management and supply diversification—which we describe next. 
 
2.2 Geopolitical Tension and Supply Chain Risk 
Supply chain risk is “the likelihood and impact of unexpected macro or micro level events 
or conditions that adversely influence any part of a supply chain leading to operational, tactical, or 
strategic level failures or irregularities” (Ho et al., 2015, p.5035). This adverse influence includes 
increased operational costs and reduced competitive advantages (Kwak et al., 2018; Tang, 2006). 
Global supply chains are riskier than domestic ones because the former involves more cross-
regional links that are prone to disruptions by macroeconomic and political changes (Manuj & 
Mentzer, 2008). Thus, the management of global supply chain risks requires cross-country 
coordination and collaboration to ensure operational continuity and firm efficiency (Tang, 2006). 
The current supply chain risk literature focused on risk identification, assessment, 
mitigation, and control at both macro- and micro-level types is vast (Ho et al., 2015). Most OM 
researchers examine the impact of natural disasters: Hendricks et al. (2020) examined market 
reactions to the supply chain disruptions caused by the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake, and 
Shen et al. (2020) investigated the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on firm performance. 
Compared with investigations of natural disasters, the research on the impact of man-made crises 
(e.g., trade wars) on firms’ performance is nascent (Darby et al., 2020). Charpin et al. (2020) found 

 
7 
 
that the foreign subunits of MNCs must earn legitimacy to mitigate political uncertainty and risk. 
In the context of Brexit, Hendry et al. (2019), Roscoe et al. (2020), and Moradlou et al. (2021) 
found that geopolitical tensions cause significant supply chain disruptions, requiring resilient and 
robust supply chain designs. These qualitative studies provide valuable information, yet empirical 
investigations are scarce (Charpin et al., 2020). Thus, our study fills a research gap by examining 
the impact of the U.S.-China trade war. 
 
2.3 Supply Diversification: Outsourcing and Supply Base Complexity 
Although firms have little control over geopolitical tension and trade wars, the literature 
suggests that they can mitigate these risks through supply diversification (Robinson, 2020; Schmitt 
et al., 2015; Shih, 2020; Tomlin & Wang, 2011). The merits of supply diversification are illustrated 
by Nokia’s multiple-sourcing strategy: by increasing its supply flexibility, supply diversification 
alleviated the disruption caused by the fire in its Philips semiconductor factory in 2000 (Tang, 
2006). However, diversifying supply can induce complexity and create coordination difficulties 
for a firm’s supply chain management. In this study, we used outsourcing (Steven et al., 2014) and 
supply base complexity (Choi & Krause, 2006) as two indicators of a firm’s supply diversification. 
Firms that depend more on outsourcing are generally less vertically integrated (Broedner 
et al., 2009). They are more heavily involved in activities of buying from other firms, thus more 
parties are involved, and operations are diversified (Steven et al., 2014). Firms can utilize external 
expertise and capacity for production through outsourcing, but their transaction costs may increase 
(Grover & Malhotra, 2003). Furthermore, they may encounter complexity in supplier searches, 
negotiation, monitoring, and coordination, all of which require extra resources, human capital, and 
time. 

 
8 
 
Aside from whether firms outsource, how firms outsource can also affect the need for 
coordination. Choi and Krause (2006) argued that diversifying the supply base can lead to “supply 
base complexity” in two dimensions that are visible to and can be directly controlled by the buyer 
(Lu & Shang, 2017): (1) multiplicity (the number of first-tier suppliers) and (2) diversity (the 
differentiations among the first-tier suppliers). This complexity can increase transactional 
uncertainty in the supply chain, requiring extra coordination efforts (Bode & Wagner, 2015). 
Research shows that such supply base complexity can hinder a firm’s use of its supply base’s 
research & development (R&D) development (Dong et al., 2020). It can also cause delivery delays 
(Milgate, 2001; Vachon & Klassen, 2002), production disruptions (Bozarth et al., 2009), and 
quality problems (Steven et al., 2014). Supply base complexity creates major difficulties for a firm 
in managing its materials and information flow (Brandon-Jones et al., 2015) and coordinating 
among suppliers (Giri & Sarker, 2017; Qi et al., 2004; Tang, 2006; Xiao et al., 2007). 
In some contexts, a firm with increased supply diversification may be less resilient (Choi 
& Krause, 2006). For example, Hendricks et al. (2009) found that firms with higher geographical 
diversification suffer higher market value loss from supply disruptions than those with lower 
geographical diversification. These findings inspired us to hypothesize that firms with a greater 
extent of outsourcing and supply base complexity are likely to suffer more because of increased 
trade tariffs. 
 
2.4 Trade War 
The U.S.-China trade war has prompted economists to examine its impact. Li et al. (2018) 
estimated that the world’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and manufacturing employment will be 
negatively affected; Itakura (2020) estimated that the GDP of China and the United States will be 

 
9 
 
reduced by 1.41% and 1.35%, respectively; and Mao and Görg (2020) estimated that the EU, 
Canada, and Mexico will face a burden of up to $1 billion. In the finance research literature, 
Burggraf et al. (2020) found that tweets related to the U.S.-China trade war reduced the S&P 500’s 
returns and increased market volatility. Huang et al. (2019) found that U.S. firms with more supply 
and market connections with China suffered from a stronger negative market reaction to the trade 
war. 
Little is known about the impact of increased trade tariffs (e.g., the ones associated with 
the U.S.-China trade war) on firms’ operational performance (Plehn et al., 2010). Most OM 
analytical models examine how trade barriers affect a firm’s global procurement strategy (Wang 
et al., 2011) and supply chain design (Hsu & Zhu, 2011). Lu and Van Mieghem (2009) and Dong 
and Kouvelis (2020) found that import tariffs can cause a firm to reconfigure its global supply 
chain network. Grossman and Helpman (2020) found that import tariffs can lead to the 
renegotiation of buyer–supplier dyads or a buyer’s search for new suppliers. Nagurney et al. (2019) 
revealed that while some firms may benefit from trade barriers, consumer welfare may be 
compromised. Using data from the Korean automobile industry, Choi et al. (2012) found that 
import tariffs can affect a firm’s postponement strategy, and He et al. (2019) found that trade 
barriers can increase the global and local environmental costs of agricultural production. By 
conducting in-depth interviews, Roscoe et al. (2020) explored how firms implemented different 
strategies in response to supply chain disruptions caused by Brexit. The aforementioned OM 
literature provide grounds for us to develop our hypotheses to explore how the increased trade 
tariffs affect firms’ performance. 
Because the import tariffs directly affect trade operations between the two countries (the 
United States and China), our modeling framework is based on the general equilibrium models of 

 
10 
 
Tintelnot et al. (2018) and Huang et al. (2019) that involve one domestic country and one foreign 
country. In our study, our treatment firms are U.S. firms with direct first-tier suppliers in China—
the trade tariffs will affect these firms directly (Huang et al., 2019)—while our control firms are 
U.S. firms with no direct suppliers in China. 
 
3. Hypothesis Development 
3.1 Trade Tariffs and the Performance of U.S. Firms Sourcing From China 
Trade tariffs are supply chain disruptors (Grossman & Helpman, 2020; Handfield et al., 
2020; Roscoe et al., 2020) that can negatively affect a firm’s inventory performance (i.e., days of 
supply). Two main reasons underlie these impacts. First, geopolitical events are a significant risk 
factor and often disrupt firms’ supply chains (Roscoe et al., 2020). Tariff levies destabilize the 
supply of goods and raw materials from China to the United States, increasing the cost associated 
with transacting with Chinese suppliers, thus forcing U.S. firms to renegotiate with their Chinese 
suppliers on prices and delivery schedules because of the new trade barrier. A recent survey echoes 
these difficulties: 66% of respondents with global manufacturing networks experienced significant 
disruptions in their business because of the U.S.–China trade war, which intensified operational 
challenges (Burnson, 2019). 
Second, Darby et al. (2020) found that firms tend to increase their inventory level in 
response to policy uncertainty, providing a buffer for possible supply disruptions. Therefore, 
supply chain disruptions caused by the tariff levies may lead firms to make advance purchases to 
remedy policy uncertainty and increase their overall inventory level. Reports show that the tariff 
drove U.S. firms to pile up inventory (Wu, 2018), causing record-high levels of warehouse stock 
throughout the States in 2018 (Naidu & Baertlein, 2018). In contrast, tariffs for Chinese products 

 
11 
 
are less likely to affect inventory days for U.S. firms with no direct Chinese supply chain 
connections. We thus postulated the following: 
H1: The tariff increases associated with the U.S.–China trade war will increase the 
inventory (i.e., days of supply) for U.S. firms with direct suppliers from China. 
 
OM researchers have examined the role of tariffs from the cost perspective (Choi et al., 
2012; Wang et al., 2011) and the sales performance perspective (Dong & Kouvelis, 2020). From 
a cost perspective, our treatment firms incurred higher purchasing costs than our control firms. A 
report from Moody’s revealed that U.S. importers absorbed 90% of the additional costs resulting 
from the tariff levies (Lee, 2021). If the treatment firms hold more inventory (owing to advance 
purchases), they will bear additional inventory holding, goods-in-transit, and transportation costs, 
which negatively affects their overall cost efficiency. Our argument is echoed by a survey of over 
200,000 firms wherein 40% of U.S. firms reported that the trade war increased their operating 
costs (Sim, 2020). 
Some treatment firms may choose to transfer these increased costs to their downstream 
customers by increasing product prices, but such a strategy would reduce sales. For example, data 
show that a 20% tariff imposed by the U.S. government on foreign washing machines drove U.S. 
washing machine prices up by 13% and reduced demand by 3% (Tankersley, 2019). By contrast, 
our control firms with no direct connection to Chinese firms were much less affected by the tariffs. 
Therefore, our treatment firms with direct suppliers from China are likely to bear additional costs, 
leading to lower profitability (ROA). We thus postulate the following: 
H2: The tariff increases associated with the U.S.–China trade war will decrease the 
ROA for U.S. firms with direct suppliers from China. 

 
12 
 
3.2 The Role of Outsourcing and Supply Base Complexity 
In addition to the direct impact of trade tariff increases on firm performance, we 
investigated the extent to which this impact is affected by a firm’s supply diversification. 
Specifically, we first examined the role of a firm’s “make or buy” structure (Steven et al., 2014) 
and then the two dimensions of supply base complexity—horizontal and spatial complexity (Choi 
& Krause, 2006; Lu & Shang, 2017). We discussed their moderating effects on the trade war’s 
impact on firms’ overall profitability (i.e., ROA). 
This exploration is based on Tang’s (2006) argument that supply chain risk management 
requires extraordinary coordination efforts among the supply chain partners, and Choi and 
Krause’s (2006) suggestion that complexity in the supply chain reduces firms’ responsiveness in 
coping with supply disruption. This exploration is also in line with Hendrick et al.’s (2009) finding 
that a geographically diversified firm would suffer more from supply chain disruption. More 
broadly, our exploration is in line with the two components of transaction costs—transaction risk 
(i.e., the operational uncertainty resulting from the trade war) and coordination costs from supply 
diversification. 
Firms that outsource their operational tasks have less flexibility and ability to control their 
supplies (Hendricks et al., 2009). Outsourcing may also cause agency problems that suppliers may 
act upon opportunistically, increasing the buyer’s governance efforts (Williamson, 2008). These 
disadvantages increase the complexity for supply chain management, resulting in higher 
coordination costs for the buyer firm (Steven et al., 2014). 
Scholars have argued that outsourcing can make supply chains vulnerable in uncertain 
environments (Kleindorfer & Saad, 2005). Empirical evidence also shows that firms that depend 
heavily on outsourcing suffer significantly from losses because of supply chain disruptions 

 
13 
 
(Hendricks et al., 2009). Interest alignment and information asymmetry are major issues in 
outsourcing (Steven et al., 2014). Suppliers may take advantage of a buyer’s urgent need to 
increase product prices aggressively. In addition, coordination between firms, particularly in a 
cross-regional setting, is often more difficult than that within a firm. 
Outsourcing is “the extent to which the vertical range of manufacturing is reduced” 
(Broedner et al., 2009, p.127). Thus, firms can conduct vertical integration to reduce their 
dependency on outsourcing. Vertical integration may be a favorable strategy in the case of trade 
wars. In fact, empirical evidence shows that, under tariff uncertainty, an industry tends to be more 
vertically integrated (Alfaro et al., 2016) and thus bear lower transaction costs (Mahoney, 1992) 
associated with coordination efforts in the global supply chain context resulting from reduced 
agency problems and lower information asymmetry across organizational boundaries (Hendricks 
et al., 2009). We thus postulate the following: 
H3: The negative impact of tariff increases on U.S. firms’ profitability is more severe 
for firms with a higher degree of outsourcing (lower degree of vertical integration). 
 
Firms with the same level of outsourcing may have supply bases comprising different 
structures, resulting in variations in supply base complexity. We first examined the extent to which 
the trade war’s impact is affected by a firm’s horizontal (i.e., supply base) complexity, measured 
in terms of the number of suppliers (Choi & Krause, 2006). The literature suggests that a large 
supply base can reduce supplier responsiveness, hindering a firm’s ability to coordinate supply 
resources during supply chain disruptions (Choi & Krause, 2006). A lower number of suppliers 
facilitates the development of long-term buyer–supplier relationships, which enhances information 
sharing, trust, collaborative planning, forecasting, and replenishment (Hollman et al., 2015; Hsu 

 
14 
 
et al., 2008). A few key suppliers with close relationships can ensure close coordination and fast 
recovery during supply chain disruption. Thus, it is easier for the supply base to reconfigure its 
capacity and stabilize materials and supplies amidst the trade war. These arguments are in line 
with Treleven and Schweikhart’s (1988) finding that single sourcing (or a few key suppliers) can 
enhance supplier responsiveness. 
In addition, firms with a few major suppliers are likely to develop long-term trust and close 
mutual relationships. By focusing on a few major suppliers, firms can consolidate their purchases 
and take advantage of the economies of scale. The large order also forces these suppliers to more 
heavily depend on the buyer firms (Heese, 2015) and thus decrease opportunistic behaviors. We 
thus postulate the following: 
H4: The negative impact of tariff increases on U.S. firms’ profitability is more severe 
for firms with a higher degree of horizontal (i.e., supply base) complexity. 
 
In addition to horizontal complexity, firms maintain varying degrees of spatial (i.e., supply 
base) diversity. The increased number of sourcing locations is associated with increased spatial 
complexity of the supply base, which can weaken a firm’s capability to coordinate production 
(Dong et al., 2020). The difficulties result from the varying management styles, cultures, languages, 
operational practices, and institutional environments of suppliers in different locations (Sousa & 
Bradley, 2008). Choi and Krause (2006) stated that the more differentiation among suppliers, the 
more difficulty exists for firms to maintain a close relationship with them, which in turn reduces 
suppliers’ responsiveness. In the context of the U.S.-China trade war, spatially diversified firms 
may switch orders from key Chinese suppliers to many smaller suppliers in other places. However, 
these firms must renegotiate contract terms and reevaluate production processes to determine 

 
15 
 
whether these alternative suppliers have the capability and capacity for the transferred orders. 
These tasks may require tremendous effort on the part of the firms because of the informational, 
cultural, and operational variations in practice caused by cross-regional suppliers. We thus 
postulate the following: 
 
H5: The impact of tariff increases on U.S. firms’ profitability is more negative when 
the firms have a higher spatial (i.e., supply base) complexity. 
 
Figure 1 shows the theoretical framework of this study. 
 

 
16 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Theoretical Framework 

 
17 
 
4. Method 
4.1 Databases 
We compiled secondary data from the Compustat, Bloomberg SPLC, FactSet Revere, and 
Fresard-Hoberg-Philips databases to test the hypotheses. We collected financial data at firm and 
segment levels from the Compustat database. We collected longitudinal supply chain data from 
Bloomberg’s SPLC database, which is widely adopted in recent research into supply chains, 
including product recall (Steven et al., 2014), inventory strategy (Elking et al., 2017), firm 
innovation (Sharma et al., 2020), and supply base innovation (Dong et al., 2020). Although 
Bloomberg SPLC is a comprehensive database widely used by researchers, we cannot guarantee 
that its supplier and customer data are exhaustive. Using a single database (i.e., Bloomberg SPLC) 
to identify a firm’s supply chain partners may omit some suppliers and customers owing to the 
oversight of some less visible connections. Therefore, we used an extra database, FactSet Revere, 
to supplement and validate the Bloomberg SPLC data. FactSet Revere collects panel supply chain 
data from various sources such as SEC 10-K annual filings, investor presentations, press releases, 
and corporate actions (FactSet, 2014) to cover a wide range of supply chain information. This 
database has also been used in recent supply chain research (see Chae et al., 2020; Modi & Cantor, 
2020). Finally, we collected vertical integration data from the Fresard-Hoberg-Philips database. 
 
4.2. Data Collection Process 
Table 1 summarizes the data collection process, which is based on the U.S.–China trade 
war that started in 2018. A major objective of the tariff actions in the trade war was to protect the 
U.S. economy. Therefore, we focused on publicly listed U.S. firms that have business activities in 
the United States (Huang et al., 2019). Our data collection started with 5,667 U.S.-listed firms 

 
18 
 
from 2017 to 2019 obtained from Compustat. This is because we need at least 1 year of data prior 
to (i.e., 2017) and 1 year of data after (i.e., 2019) the trade war to examine the effect. 
Given our focus is on industrial supply chain management, we removed firms in service 
industries with little or no physical products, including finance, insurance, and real estate (Standard 
Industrial Classification, SIC 6000-6799; 1,273 firms); transportation, communications, power, 
gas, and sanitary services (SIC 4000-4999; 563 firms); services (SIC 7000-8999; 846 firms); and 
public administration and the non-classifiable industry (SIC 9100-9999; 49 firms). In total, we 
removed 2,731 firms, leaving 2,936 firms. We further removed firms with no inventory data (903 
firms) and employee data (90 firms), leaving 1,943 firms. 
We focused on the impact of the trade war on U.S. firms, thus removing 411 firms that are 
not headquartered in the United States (i.e., U.S.-listed foreign firms), leaving 1,532 firms. In 
addition, even U.S.-headquartered firms could have little substantial operations in the States 
(particularly in the manufacturing sectors). To confirm that the U.S.-headquartered firms have 
substantial operations in the States, we set the criterion that the firm must have U.S. operational 
assets (i.e., property, plant, and equipment [PP&E]) or sales activities. Specifically, we discarded 
10 firms with no U.S. PP&E, segment sales, or customers in 2017, leaving 1,522 firms. 
We then collected the supply chain data for these 1,522 firms. We first used each firm’s 
name and CUSIP code (obtained from Compustat) to search in the Bloomberg SPLC database to 
locate its customers and suppliers. The firms’ customer and supplier identifiers (e.g., name and 
ticker) and locations were then obtained. We collected 157,121 longitudinal supply chain data 
(80,206 suppliers and 76,915 customers) for 1,198 (out of 1,522) firms from Bloomberg SPLC. 
We then searched the firm names in the FactSet Revere database. We were able to collect 83,996 

 
19 
 
longitudinal supply chain data (25,737 suppliers and 58,259 customers) for 1,181 firms (out of 
1,522). 
The aforementioned figures show that Bloomberg SPLC has stronger coverage in terms of 
the numbers of customers and suppliers (157,121 in Bloomberg SPLC vs. 83,996 in FactSet Revere) 
reported per firm. Nevertheless, the two databases are quite consistent at 93.6% (1,121 overlapped 
firms over 1,198) in terms of firm coverage. Out of the 1,522 firms, we only removed 261 firms 
(17.1%) with no supply chain data in neither Bloomberg SPLC nor FactSet Revere, leaving 1,261 
firms. The 17.1% sample loss owing to missing supply chain data is comparable with the 20.9% 
indicated in previous studies (e.g., Adhikary et al., 2020). 
Because we hypothesized that the firms with direct Chinese suppliers would be most 
affected by tariff increases, we focused on first-tier suppliers of these U.S. firms. However, firms 
that have no first-tier Chinese supplier may still have second-tier Chinese suppliers, and ignoring 
these may cause bias in the later matching process. Therefore, we collected information on the 
focal firms’ second-tier Chinese suppliers by searching for the first-tier suppliers’ suppliers in the 
database. 
Last, we collected the vertical integration data for the 1,261 firms from the Fresard-Hoberg-
Philips database. We removed 204 firms with no vertical integration data from the database, 
leaving 1,057 firms as the final dataset. 
Appendix Table A1 presents the industry distribution of these firms. We found no 
significant difference (p > 0.1) between the initial sample pool of 2,936 firms and the final dataset 
of 1,057 firms by industries. We also found no significant difference (p > 0.1) by industry ratios 
between the initial pool of 2,936 firms and the 376 firms we obtained after the matching procedures 

 
20 
 
for hypothesis testing (discussed in Section 4.3), indicating no serious sample selection bias. We 
provided detailed descriptions of each data collection step in Appendix A2. 
 
[Table 1 about here] 
4.3 Data Analysis 
4.3.1 Natural experiment research design 
Attempting a direct comparison between the firms’ performances before and after the tariff 
increases in 2018 can be problematic because the counterfactual outcomes are unobservable and 
cannot be calculated (Caliendo & Kopeinig, 2008). Therefore, we adopted a treatment-control 
matching approach to design a natural experiment that accounts for unobservable outcomes 
(Heckman et al., 1998). The treatment firms are U.S.-listed firms that have direct first-tier suppliers 
in mainland China identified in the Bloomberg SPLC or FactSet Revere databases. The control 
firms are U.S.-listed firms that have no direct suppliers from China. 
From the 1,057 sample firms, we found 298 treatment firms and 759 potential control firms 
for our analysis. We further used Compustat’s segment data on cost of goods sold (COGS) from 
different regions to verify the accuracy of the Bloomberg SPLC and FactSet Revere databases in 
identifying Chinese suppliers. Specifically, we found that all treatment firms reported COGS from 
China, while all control firms reported no COGS from China, confirming our assumption that the 
control firms did not source directly from China. 
 
4.3.2 Propensity score matching 
Heterogeneity between treatment and control firms may also confound the impact of the 
trade war. For example, if a treatment firm has significantly fewer operating assets than the control 

 
21 
 
firm, any additional negative impact captured in a treatment firm could be owing to its lack of 
resources to cope with the change in the trade environment, rather than direct sourcing from China. 
Therefore, we applied a widely used matching approach, propensity score matching (PSM), to 
ensure that the treatment and control firms are highly similar (Fan et al., 2021; Levine & Toffel, 
2010). The PSM approach aims to calculate the probability (i.e., propensity score) of having direct 
Chinese suppliers for our treatment and control firms. We then used the nearest neighborhood 
approach to match each treatment firm to a control firm with the closest propensity in the same 
industry (two-digit SIC code). We used the following estimation model to generate the equation 
for the propensity score calculation: 
 
 
 
𝐶𝑁𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑖,𝑡= 𝐹(𝑋𝑖,𝑡−1&−2&−3, 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦𝑗). 
 
 
(1) 
Here, 𝐹(. ) is the probit function, and 𝐶𝑁𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 indicates whether a firm i has suppliers 
in China or not in year t where t is 2018, the announcement year of the trade war. Additionally, 
𝑋𝑖,𝑡−1&−2&−3 is a vector of the average of 1-, 2-, and 3-year lagged levels (i.e., years 2015, 2016, 
and 2017) of a series of matching covariates. Three-year average independent variables help 
mitigate the impacts of outliers in the estimation (Pagell et al., 2019). Following Levine and Toffel 
(2010), if only 2 of the 3 years’ data were available (i.e., 2015 and 2017 or 2016 and 2017), we 
used those two values and took the average. If a firm’s data were not available for both 2015 and 
2016, we used 2017 data only. Most of the firms (94.89%) have 3-year data. Finally, 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦𝑗 
is a set of 39 industry dummies. 
 
4.3.3 Selection of matching covariates 
We summarized the measurements and references of the matching covariates in Appendix 
A3. Specifically, we controlled for firm size and industry because previous scholars identified 

 
22 
 
them as two major sources of heterogeneity that would confound the experimental results (Barber 
& Lyon, 1996; Corbett et al., 2005; Swift et al., 2019). Firm size is measured by the total assets 
(Total Assets t-1&-2&-3). Industry dummies (Industryj) can also control outsourcing status to China 
because some industries rely more heavily on Chinese suppliers than others. We also included a 
variable (2nd-tier CN supplier t-1&-2&-3) to indicate a firm’s percentage of its second-tier Chinese 
suppliers to the total number of second-tier suppliers. One may argue that if a trade war has an 
impact on first-tier Chinese suppliers, part of the impact could come from second-tier Chinese 
suppliers. Thus, as we focused on the impacts through first-tier Chinese suppliers, we attempted 
to ensure that the treatment and control firms have no statistical difference in terms of impact from 
second-tier Chinese suppliers. 
In addition, we included a series of potential determinants of having Chinese suppliers, 
including inventory efficiency, fixed assets turnover, capital expenditure, and R&D expenditure. 
Inventory efficiency (Inventory efficiency t-1&-2&-3) is the ratio of sales to average inventory, and 
fixed assets turnover (Fixed assets turnover t-1&-2&-3) is the ratio of sales to PP&E. These ratios 
indicate a firm’s overall operating efficiency. A firm with a higher operating efficiency may have 
reduced slack in production resources and thus is more likely to have Chinese suppliers to help it 
to mitigate the effects of supply chain disruptions (Modi & Mishra, 2011; Wiengarten et al., 2017). 
Capital expenditure (Capital expenditure t-1&-2&-3) is calculated by a firm’s capital expenditure 
normalized by sales and represents the capital expenditure in various operating activities; a firm 
may outsource activities to Chinese suppliers to reduce or defer this capital expenditure (Raddats 
et al., 2016). R&D expenditure (R&D expenditure t-1&-2&-3) is the annual value of R&D expenditure. 
A firm with higher R&D expenditure may concentrate more heavily on innovating its core 
products or processes and outsource its non-core activities to Chinese firms (Jiang et al., 2006). 

 
23 
 
We followed Levine and Toffel (2010) and performed natural logarithm transformation to the 
continuous independent variables, which aims at mitigating the skewness of variables and 
increasing the predicting power of the selection model. 
Table 2 demonstrates that larger firms tend to have direct Chinese suppliers. We also find 
that firms with more second-tier Chinese suppliers, lower inventory efficiency, higher fixed assets 
turnover, and higher R&D expenditure tend to have direct Chinese suppliers. We calculated the 
propensity score for each treatment and control firm based on the estimation coefficients in Table 
2. The Pseudo-R-squared equals 24.69%, suggesting a very good fit for our model (Levine & 
Toffel, 2010; McFadden, 2021). The range of variance inflation factor is between 1.00 and 1.28, 
indicating that multicollinearity is not a serious concern. 
[Table 2 about here] 
 
After calculating the propensity score, we matched each treatment firm with a control firm 
with (1) the closest propensity score, and (2) from the same industry (two-digit SIC code). We 
avoided the scenario in which one control firm is matched to multiple treatment firms, which may 
cause a double-counting issue. We had more treatment firms than control firms in two industries. 
Thus, we removed the treatment firms that could not be matched with any control firms. From the 
298 treatment firms, we discarded seven in this step, leaving 291 treatment-control pairs. 
We further improved our matching quality by setting a matching caliper of 0.1 (Levine & 
Toffel, 2010). We removed 103 treatment-control pairs with a difference in propensity score 
outside the caliper, leaving 188 pairs. We conducted paired t-tests on all the independent variables 
(except industry dummies) used in the probit model. The test results indicated no significant 
difference between treatment and control firms on these variables (p > 0.1) after PSM. Thus, we 

 
24 
 
concluded that the statistics of treatment and control firms are highly similar. We present the 
descriptive statistics of the treatment and control firms in Table 3. We also added the covariates as 
the control variables in the second-stage hypothesis-testing analyses to further control for the 
variations in these variables. 
[Table 3 about here] 
 
4.3.4 DID regression analysis for trade war impacts 
We created a 5-year panel dataset with the 188 pairs (376 firms) from 2015–2019. This 
research time window was constructed based on the year the tariff was significantly increased (i.e., 
2018). We used 3 years (i.e., 2015, 2016, and 2017) before the trade war as the benchmark and 
then subsequently examined the impacts of the trade war in 2018 and 2019. Our event window 
cutoff was 2019 for two reasons: (1) the U.S. and Chinese governments signed the Phase One trade 
deal on January 15, 2020, suggesting a cease-fire, and (2) the 2020 COVID-19 global pandemic 
seriously affected the global supply chain. 
Ideally, we would have 1,880 (376 x 5) firm-year observations. However, we deleted 32 
observations owing to missing data in 2015 or 2016. We also followed previous literature (e.g., 
Corbett et al., 2005; Lo et al., 2014; Swift et al., 2019) with the DID approach to trim by 0.5% of 
extreme values of dependent variables (i.e., inventory days and ROA) at each end, further removing 
38 observations. Finally, the DID analysis dataset included 1,810 observations (i.e., 1,880 - [32 + 
38]). 
We performed a DID estimation to compare the differences in inventory days (H1) and 
ROA (H2) between the treatment and control observations before and after the trade war using the 
following model: 
𝐹𝑃𝑖𝑡= 𝛽∙𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡∙𝐶𝑁𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑖+ 𝛾𝑋𝑖𝑡+ 𝛼𝑖+ 𝛿𝑡+ 𝜀𝑖𝑡, 
 
 
(2) 

 
25 
 
where the dependent variable 𝐹𝑃𝑖𝑡 refers to the firm performance (i.e., inventory days or ROA) of 
firm i in the year t. 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 equals 1 if the year t corresponds to the year on or after the 2018 
announcement of tariff increases (i.e., 2018 and 2019); otherwise, it equals 0. 𝐶𝑁𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑖 equals 
1 if firm i has first-tier Chinese suppliers and equals 0 otherwise. Thus, the interaction term 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡∙
𝐶𝑁𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑖 equals 1 for the observations on or after 2018 of firm i, who had first-tier Chinese 
suppliers before the trade war, and 𝛽 should capture the change in the treatment firm’s 
performance after tariff increases compared with the control firm’s performance. 
We included the vector 𝑋𝑖𝑡 to control for the firm-level characteristics controlled in the 
selection model—total assets, capital expenditure, inventory efficiency, fixed assets turnover, and 
R&D expenditure—to increase the validity of our results. The measurements of these control 
variables were the same as those used in PSM (see Appendix A3). Larger firms (i.e., firms with 
more total assets) may be more affected by the trade war because they seem to be more often 
involved in complex global supply chains (Revilla & Saenz, 2017). Capital expenditure includes 
a firm’s capital investment in production and information technology, which may improve a firm’s 
financial and inventory performance (Steven et al., 2014). Inventory efficiency and fixed assets 
turnover were included to control for firms’ operating efficiency; efficient firms may have fewer 
slacks available to respond to supply chain disruptions (Wiengarten et al., 2017). R&D expenditure 
indicates a firm’s focus on R&D, which may affect its profitability (Cho & Pucik, 2005). We also 
included the supply complexity metrics in 𝑋𝑖𝑡, including outsourcing, horizontal complexity, and 
spatial complexity. The measurements of these variables will be described in the next section. In 
addition, we controlled for the firm fixed effect: 𝛼𝑖, and the year fixed effect: 𝛿𝑡. 𝜀𝑖𝑡 is the error 
term. 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 and 𝐶𝑁𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑖 were omitted in the model because we have controlled for the firm 
and year fixed effects (Levine & Toffel, 2010). In the previously specified model, we expected to 

 
26 
 
capture a positive coefficient 𝛽 in the inventory days model and a negative coefficient 𝛽 in the 
ROA model; these can capture the abnormal negative impacts experienced by the treatment firms 
amidst the trade war and examine H1 and H2. 
 
4.3.5 Difference-in-difference-in-difference (DDD) analysis for moderating effects 
For H3 to H5, we implemented triple-difference designs (Powell & Seabury, 2018) to 
examine whether firms with higher supply diversification suffered more from the tariff increases 
caused by the trade war. Specifically, we used outsourcing, horizontal complexity, and spatial 
complexity to generate the additional differences. We then created interaction terms 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡∙
𝐶𝑁𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑖∙(𝑂𝑢𝑡𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖),𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡∙𝐶𝑁𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑖∙ (𝐻𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑙𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖), and 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡∙
𝐶𝑁𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑖∙(𝑆𝑝𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖) and examined the significance in the coefficients. We used 
ROA as the dependent variable for these analyses because this indicator is widely used as the 
bottom-line firm performance metric (e.g., Lo et al., 2014; Swift et al., 2019). 
Outsourcing was indicated by the (low) level of vertical integration and measured 
according to the method developed by Frésard et al. (2020).1 Because a vertically integrated firm 
is generally less dependent on external firms for supply. For example, since the 2000s, Tiffany & 
Co. has conducted vertical integration by purchasing diamond mines (Butler, 2004). Thus, Tiffany 
was able to reduce the outsourcing of raw diamonds and increase supply control through 
insourcing. 
Hendricks et al. (2009) applied an industry-level measure—vertical relatedness—based on 
the “Use Table” of the input-output (IO) table provided by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, but 
 
1 The variable can be obtained from http://faculty.marshall.usc.edu/Gerard-
Hoberg/FresardHobergPhillipsDataSite/index.html. 

 
27 
 
the authors stated that “it would be ideal to use firm-specific data to compute the vertical 
relatedness at the firm level” (p. 239). Recently, Frésard et al. (2020) developed a firm-level 
vertical integration measure built on the IO table and calculated it using a textual analysis of an 
individual firm’s business description from its 10-K disclosure. The measurement assumes that a 
firm’s product vocabularies are vertically related to its other product vocabularies. The vertical 
integration score is higher when the product vocabulary in the description spans vertically related 
markets (Frésard et al., 2020). The validity of the variable was verified by its significant statistical 
correlation with firms mentioned using the words “vertical integration” and “vertically integrated” 
in their 10-K reports (Frésard et al., 2020). A lower value of vertical integration indicated that the 
firm offered products that were less vertically related (i.e., more outsourcing). We thus reversed 
the scale of vertical integration to indicate a firm’s level of outsourcing (i.e., higher value indicates 
more outsourcing). 
Horizontal complexity was measured by the firm’s number of first-tier suppliers (Bode & 
Wagner, 2015; Dong et al., 2020). This measurement reflects the multiplicity of the firm’s supply 
base (Choi & Krause, 2006; Sharma et al., 2020). 
Spatial complexity is the geographical spread of a firm’s suppliers (Bode & Wagner, 2015). 
We followed Lu and Shang (2017) to measure spatial complexity as the number of countries or 
regions where a firm’s suppliers were located. This measurement reflects the diversity of the 
supply base (Sharma et al., 2020). We excluded U.S. and Chinese suppliers to capture the firm’s 
international supply network. Firms with widespread supply bases across countries should increase 
the difficulty of coordinating production, creating higher uncertainty and complexity (Lu & Shang, 
2017; Vachon & Klassen, 2002). 
 

 
28 
 
4.4 Analysis of Results 
Table 4 presents the descriptive statistics and correlation of the indicators, while Table 5 
presents the results for examining H1 and H2 by considering the coefficients of interaction term 
𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡∙𝐶𝑁𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑖. The inventory days model shows that the interaction term 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡∙
𝐶𝑁𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑖 is significantly positive (b = 8.2062, p < 0.01), indicating that the average treatment 
firms’ inventory days are 8.21 days longer than the control firms during the trade war compared 
with the pre-trade-war period. Thus, H1 is supported. The increased number of inventory days is 
echoed by the increase in the United States’ trade deficit with China, which reached a 10-year high 
of $621 billion in 2018 (Dmitrieva, 2019), indicating that U.S. firms with Chinese suppliers were 
in a buying binge triggered by uncertainty about future tariff increases (Naidu & Baertlein, 2018). 
The ROA model of Table 5 shows that the interaction term 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡∙𝐶𝑁𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑖 is 
significantly negative (b = -0.0129, p < 0.05), indicating that the average treatment firms’ ROA is 
1.29% lower than that of the control firms during the trade war compared with the pre-trade-war 
time. Thus, H2 is supported. 
Table 6 presents the results of our triple difference analysis for the moderating effects of 
outsourcing, horizontal complexity, and spatial complexity, respectively. In Model 1, the 
coefficient of interaction term 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡∙𝐶𝑁𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑖∙𝑂𝑢𝑡𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 is significantly negative (b = 
-0.0078, p < 0.05). We defined a high outsourcing level as when the firm has the outsourcing value 
at one standard deviation above the mean (2.71=1.27+1.44). Therefore, the results indicate that, 
among the treatment firms in the trade war, firms with a high outsourcing level had an average 
ROA that was 1.00% lower than that of firms with a mean outsourcing level. H3 is supported. 
Model 2 presents the results of horizontal complexity. The interaction term 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡∙
𝐶𝑁𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑖∙𝐻𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑙𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖 is significantly negative (b = -0.0006, p < 0.05). We 

 
29 
 
defined a high horizontal complexity level as when the firm has horizontal complexity value at 
one standard deviation above the mean (85.00=60.68+24.32). Therefore, the results indicate that, 
among the treatment firms in the trade war, firms with a high horizontal complexity level had an 
average ROA that was 3.64% lower than that of firms with a mean horizontal complexity level. 
H4 is supported. 
Model 3 presents the results of the spatial complexity. The interaction term 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡∙
𝐶𝑁𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑖∙𝑆𝑝𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖 is significantly negative (b = -0.0037, p < 0.05). We defined 
a high spatial complexity level as when a firm has the spatial complexity value at one standard 
deviation above the mean (9.41=5.14+4.27). The results indicate that, among the treatment firms 
in the trade war, firms with a high horizontal complexity level had an average ROA that was 1.90% 
lower than that of firms with a mean horizontal complexity level. H5 is supported. 
 
[Table 4, 5 and 6 about here] 
 
4.5 Parallel Assumption Check for DID Analysis 
The assumption for DID analysis to capture any treatment effect is parallel performance 
trends, which requires the presence of common trends in dependent variables (i.e., inventory days 
and ROA) between the treatment and control groups before the announcement year of the tariff 
list. We first performed a common trend analysis using the following relative time model (Angrist 
and Pischke, 2008; Song et al., 2020): 
𝐹𝑃𝑖𝑡= ∑
𝜅𝑡∙𝐶𝑁𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑖
2019
𝑡=2015
∙𝐷𝑡+ 𝛾𝑋𝑖𝑡+ 𝛼𝑖+ 𝛿𝑡+ 𝜀𝑖𝑡, 
(3) 
where 𝐷𝑡 are dummy variables that indicate the years from 2015–2019, the study period in our 
main analysis. We excluded the interaction between the treatment indicator and the dummy 

 
30 
 
variable for 2018 (i.e., 𝐶𝑁𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑖∙𝐷2018) because it is the reference group (Dhanorkar, 2019; 
Zou et al., 2020). The other variables are the same as in our main analysis in equation 2. We 
presented the analysis results in Table 7 and plotted the estimated coefficients and confidence 
intervals of 𝜅𝑡in Figure 2. 
Table 7 shows that the coefficients for the years 2015–2017 are nonsignificant in both 
inventory days and ROA models (p > 0.1), which suggests that the differences between the 
treatment and control groups in the 3-year pretreatment period are not significant. This result is 
illustrated in panel (a) and (b) of Figure 2, which shows that the limits of the 95% confidence 
interval for 2015, 2016, and 2017 have included zero. The results support the parallel-trends 
assumption of our analysis. 
Table 7 also shows the coefficient for the year 2019 is significantly positive in inventory 
days model (9.8236, p < 0.01) and negative in ROA model (-0.0190, p < 0.05). Figure (a) and (b) 
also illustrate that the differences appear 1 year after the tariff lists were announced (i.e., 2019). 
This conclusion is consistent with the one we obtained from the primary analysis (Table 5). 
 

 
31 
 
 
 
Note. The values of estimated coefficients and standard errors [in parenthesis] are shown under the year label, 
∗p<0.10. 
Figure 2. The Effects Across Periods of Trade War 
4.6 Placebo Test 
We further conducted a placebo test to test the robustness of our results, as follows. We 
randomly faked the 298 treatment firms with “false” Chinese suppliers in 2018 and repeated the 
whole PSM-DID analysis. If the firms with “true” Chinese suppliers in our study can increase 
inventory days and decrease ROA, we expected the 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡∙𝐶𝑁𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑖 in equation 2 for the 
faked firms to be nonsignificant. We repeated this process 1,000 times and plotted the t-values in 

 
32 
 
Figure 3a and 3b for the inventory days and ROA model, respectively. The result showed that 
98.7% and 96.9% of the “false” p-values are not significant (with t-values between –1.65 and 1.65) 
for inventory days and ROA model, respectively. They also showed that most of the coefficients 
of false 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡∙𝐶𝑁𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑖 in our placebo test were not statistically significant. Thus, the results 
did not refute our conclusions, and our analysis results were not captured by chance. 
 
Figure 3a. Distribution of t-value for Inventory Days Model for Placebo Tests 

 
33 
 
 
Figure 3b. Distribution of t-value for ROA Model for Placebo Tests 
4.7 Other Robustness Checks and Further Analyses 
To further ensure the robustness and increase the empirical value of our findings, we 
conducted several additional tests (Appendix B). First, some U.S. firms may use overseas 
facilities to process Chinese supply to bypass the tariff, which may confound our results. We 
thus selected U.S. firms that had only domestic operations (i.e., PP&E only in the U.S. but not 
overseas) and reran the analysis. The results (Table B1) show that the effects remained 
significant in both inventory days (p < 0.01) and ROA (p < 0.1) models, resulting in similar 
findings to those in Table 5. 
Second, the current design considers only relations between U.S. buyers (treatments) and 
Chinese suppliers. However, these U.S. treatment firms may also have more customers in China 
and may suffer more because of retaliation tariff measures imposed by the Chinese government. 
We first examined whether this factor would confound the treatment effects (H1 and H2). We 

 
34 
 
included and controlled the ratio of number of Chinese customers to total customers in the PSM, 
then reran the analysis. The results (Table B2) show that the trade war’s impacts on inventory 
days and ROA remained significant (p < 0.05). Thus, the Chinese customer factor did not falsify 
conclusions we drew from our primary analysis (Table 5). 
In addition, we examined whether the variation of Chinese customers among the 
treatment firms could cause a different result. We used the number of Chinese customers over 
total number of customers of the firms and conducted a DDD analysis. The results (Table B3) 
show that the treatment firms with more Chinese customers did not have a difference in terms of 
inventory and ROA compared with the treatment firms with less Chinese customers. Therefore, 
Chinese customer connections did not have a significant impact on our H1 and H2 results. 
Our current identification of treatment firm was based on whether firms have direct 
Chinese suppliers. However, those treatment firms may have variation in the extent of relying on 
Chinese suppliers. We added control variables of the numbers of suppliers in China in our DID 
model and reran the analysis. The results (Table B4) show that the trade war’s impacts on 
inventory days and ROA remained significant (p < 0.01). Thus, this additional control factor did 
not falsify our conclusions. 
Some treatment firms may also source from other countries in trade wars with the United 
States. To examine whether this factor amplifies the negative impacts from the U.S.-China trade 
war, we implemented a DDD design to further examine whether firms involved in other trade 
war locations performed differently during the U.S.-China trade war. Specifically, we used 
whether a treatment firm has other trade war locations, defined as whether they have direct 
suppliers from other countries with a trade war with the United States, to generate the additional 
difference (1 = having direct suppliers in other trade-war countries, 0 = otherwise). We then 

 
35 
 
created the interaction term 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡∙𝐶𝑁𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑖∙1(OtherTradeWar𝑖) and examined the 
significance of the coefficient in Appendix Table B5. Our results show that firms with suppliers 
in another trade-war country have longer inventory days (p < 0.05) and lower ROA (p < 0.1) 
compared to firms without other trade war locations. 
High-tech sectors might rely more on a more dynamic, responsive, and reliable supply 
chain and thus suffer more from the trade war (SCMP, 2021). We thus examined the trade war’s 
impacts on the high-tech industries. We followed Modi and Mishra (2011) to define the firms 
with SIC codes of 3511–3599, 3612–3699, and 3812–3873 as high-tech sectors. The analysis 
results (Table B6) show that high-tech firms suffer more in inventory days (6.93 days longer) 
than other firms. The high-tech firms also have a 1.74% lower ROA than other firms as a result 
of the trade war. In addition, our current sample construction is based on all listed U.S. firms 
(except the industries with little or no physical products). However, the Office of the United 
States Trade Representative announced three trade action industry lists in 2018. We examined 
whether there is a difference between firms within and outside the trade-action lists. The analysis 
results (Table B7) show that there is no significant difference between the firms in these two 
groups, indicating that the negative impact of the trade war is not limited to the trade-action 
industries. 
Our primary analysis used the continuous form of moderators to examine H3 to H5. 
However, previous researchers (e.g., Levine & Toggel, 2010) also used the dichotomized 
moderators for the moderation analysis. We followed the literature to compare the additional 
differences between “high outsourcing” and “low outsourcing” groups for H3, “high horizontal 
complexity” and “low horizontal complexity” groups for H4, and “high spatial complexity” and 
“low spatial complexity” groups for H5. We assigned each treatment firm to one of those two 

 
36 
 
groups based on the yearly industry median of the moderators (Levine & Toffel, 2010) and then 
created binary variables coded as “1” for the high-level groups and “0” for the low-level groups. 
We reran the analysis and presented the results in Table B8. The coefficients of all three 
interaction terms were significantly negative (p<0.01), which is consistent with the conclusions 
we obtained from the primary analysis (Table 6). In addition, we further conducted the analyses 
by assigning the high or low groups based on the yearly industry mean. We also followed Su et 
al. (2015) and dropped the treatments between the 45th and 55th percentile to achieve great 
separation. The results are similar to those in Table B8. 
 
5. Conclusion and Discussion 
We have examined the impact of import tariff increases caused by the U.S.-China trade 
war on U.S. firms’ performance and explored the extent to which supply diversification affected a 
firm’s performance. We tested our hypotheses using operational performance data obtained 
between 2015 and 2019 to capture the effect before and after the new tariffs were instituted in the 
recent trade war. Our analysis, in which we adopted a PSM natural experimental design with DID 
regression analysis, revealed that the trade war led to higher inventory (days of supply) and lower 
profitability (ROA) for U.S. firms with direct suppliers in China. In addition, we found that firms 
with a higher degree of outsourcing or a more horizontally and spatially complex supply base 
would suffer more than those with a lower degree of the same. 
 
5.1 Theoretical Contributions 
This study was motivated by the transaction cost framework where transaction cost = 
transaction risk + coordination costs (Grover & Malhotra, 2003). However, arguing that the 

 
37 
 
transaction risk and coordination costs interact in global trade, we proposed that transaction cost 
= transaction risk * coordination costs. Through this interaction, our findings contribute to the 
supply chain risk management literature. 
Most empirical and analytical OM researchers have implicitly assumed the stability of the 
policy environment (Dong & Kouvelis, 2020). In line with Dong and Kouvelis (2020), Tokar and 
Swink (2019), and Fugate et al. (2019), we examine the interfaces between public policy and 
supply chain management. We also echo Charpin et al. (2020) and Darby et al. (2020) to explore 
the impact of political risks on a firm’s global operations. Using trade war as a proxy of uncertainty 
and risk, this study reveals how tariff increases could negatively affect firms both overseas and in 
the home country. Our findings confirm that imposing trade tariffs affects domestic industries 
negatively in terms of inventory and ROA, especially when firms have relied heavily on sourcing 
from overseas. Thus, a trade war, as an adverse international event, increases transaction costs for 
firms, disrupting operations and undermining profitability. 
Recent OM researchers have examined the relationship between a firm’s supply base 
complexity and its financial performance (Lu & Shang, 2017), firm innovation (Sharma et al., 
2020), and the impact of supply-base innovation on financial performance (Dong et al., 2020). We 
entered this discourse by studying how a diversified supply chain can be a burden for MNCs when 
the international trade environment destabilizes. Conventional wisdom suggests that diversifying 
a firm’s sourcing base can mitigate the impact of bilateral trade relations deterioration. However, 
our findings challenge this view and suggest that firms with diversified supply bases suffer more 
from the tariff increases because of the U.S.-China trade war. 
In addition, the results in Table 6 show that the direct effects of horizontal and spatial 
complexity on two firm performance indicators are not significant. This is in line with the debates 

 
38 
 
over the relationship between supply base complexity and firm performance. On the one hand, 
increasing supply base complexity can increase sourcing flexibility (e.g., Hendricks et al., 2009; 
Tang & Tomblin, 2008). This is because firms can have alternative suppliers in different areas 
when a supplier fails. From the risk-diversification view, supply base divergence should increase 
firm performance. On the other hand, if the suppliers in a firm’s supply base are inter-connected 
with each other (e.g., a supplier is buying from another supplier), the substitution advantages from 
having more suppliers can be undermined (Choi & Krause, 2006). In addition, the increased supply 
base complexity requires additional managerial resources for coordination, which increases 
transaction costs (e.g., Choi & Krause, 2006). From a transaction-cost perspective, supply base 
complexity could hinder firm performance. Thus, the nonsignificant direct effect results of the two 
supply base complexity variables might indicate that the flexibility advantage is offset by the 
transaction-cost problem. 
This study also contributes to the literature on manufacturing diversification. Previous 
researchers showed that international diversification results in an inverted U-shaped performance 
outcome (e.g., Hitt et al., 1997; Lampel & Giachetti, 2013; Narasimhan & Kim, 2002; Palich et 
al., 2000) and increase its flexibility to cope with supply disruption (e.g., Hendricks et al., 2009). 
However, our empirical evidence shows that sourcing diversification can become a burden for 
firms in responding to geopolitical risk events. This finding is in line with the view that firms 
should maintain a simple supply chain configuration to better maintain continuity and profitability 
in case of uncertainty (Tang, 2006). A diversified supply structure reduces responsiveness because 
of the difficulty of coordination (Choi & Krause, 2006). Our empirical result is consistent with 
Henricks et al.’s (2009) finding that geographically diverse firms suffer more from supply chain 
disruption. These arguments are also consistent with TCE’s explanation on the constraints of 

 
39 
 
international expansion and diversification. The TCE suggests that diversification increases 
transaction costs in terms of organizational complexity and the need for coordination (Lampel & 
Giachetti, 2013). Thus, in our study we advance the understanding of TCE by proposing that 
vulnerability to policy risks can plausibly explain the disadvantages of international diversification. 
Vertical integration (“make” decision) has been considered a strategy to improve 
administrative efficiency (D’Aveni & Ravenscraft, 1994) and to facilitate coordination and real-
time adaptation (Forbes & Lederman, 2010). Our study adds nuances to the literature by 
highlighting the merits of vertical integration for firms (i.e., increasing a firm’s resilience). When 
the trade war led to substantially increased transaction costs in the international environment, we 
found that vertically integrated firms are likely to suffer less from the increased transaction costs. 
 
5.2 Practical Implications 
This study revealed practical implications for supply chain managers by quantifying the 
impact of the U.S.–China trade war on firms’ operational performance. In line with the survey 
conducted by the trade organizations (e.g., the American Chamber of Commerce in China), our 
results confirm the firms’ concerns over the U.S.–China trade war. Consistent with the prediction 
stated by Dong and Kouvelis (2020), we show that U.S. firms’ performances were negatively 
affected by the trade war. 
Policy makers should understand that protectionism may not necessarily protect domestic 
industries. Our evidence illustrates that these tariffs negatively affect the competitiveness of U.S. 
firms. This finding echoes how the United States’ tariff on foreign imports backfired on Whirlpool, 
which had lobbied for the tariff. In 2013 and 2018, Whirlpool filed complaints about the dumping 
of Samsung and LG washing machines and the U.S. government-imposed tariffs on the imported 

 
40 
 
washers and related materials such as steel and aluminium, resulting in an increase in the price of 
raw materials and a declining demand for domestic washers (Rampell, 2018). Whirlpool’s share 
price tumbled by 15% in the 6 months after the tariff became effective in 2018 (Tangel & Zumbrun, 
2018). In the era of the global supply chain, lobbying for tariff protection may not generate the 
benefits one would hope for. 
The abnormal increase in inventory reflects U.S. firms’ advance purchase behaviors due to 
trade policy uncertainty induced by the trade war. The U.S. trade deficit increase with China that 
expanded in 2018 echoes our findings. In 2019, despite a reduction in the U.S. trade deficit with 
China, the deficit with other countries increased. This suggests that, rather than moving production 
back to the United States, U.S. firms preferred to shift production to other countries with lower 
labor costs, such as Vietnam and Mexico (Zumbrun & Davis, 2020). Thus, in a globalized supply 
market, applying tariffs to a single country cannot stimulate reshoring to domestic manufacturing 
sectors. Rather, it can undermine the operations and profit for these firms. The U.S. government 
may find it more effective to focus on facilitating firms’ relocation rather than imposing tariffs. 
This study also provides an empirical evaluation as to the effectiveness of trade barrier 
policy in the global supply chain era. Recently, we have observed a re-emergence of mercantilism, 
with governments emphasizing the trade gap and protectionism. Mercantilism considers 
international interactions as zero-sum games. According to this approach, a country should work 
to achieve as large a trade surplus as possible to benefit its economy. However, our study suggests 
that protectionism has lost its power to protect the domestic economy in the global supply chain 
era. Because the supply chain of influential MNCs relies significantly on global trade, any 
disruption would have a serious impact on these firms’ operations and, in turn, on the domestic 
economy. Our views are bolstered by the case that major carmakers, such as Tesla, have filed 

 
41 
 
lawsuits against the U.S. government over its tax imposed on Chinese products. As Volvo Cars 
indicated in its filed legal documents, “Volvo Cars strongly believes the way to reach economic 
growth is to reduce tariffs and harmonize international trade” (BBC, 2020). 
 
5.3 Limitations 
This study has several limitations that future researchers should address. First, though the 
Bloomberg SPLC, FactSet Revere, and Compustat Segment databases have been widely used in 
previous OM studies, the exhaustive identification of supply chain relationships was not 
guaranteed; it is possible that the three databases failed to identify some minor and invisible 
relationships, which this study omitted. Therefore, our findings focused more on U.S. firms’ key 
supply chain relationships with China. Second, the post-treatment window of 2 years in this study 
(i.e., 2018 & 2019) is relatively short. Third, this study was focused only on the U.S.–China trade 
war that occurred between the two most prominent and dependent economic entities, and thus the 
results may not apply to trade wars between two economic entities that depend less on each other. 
Fourth, this study was focused on two operating performance facets, including inventory and 
profitability; however, other metrics such as responsiveness, resilience, and adaptability can be 
essential and are worth exploring in future research. 
Additionally, this study was focused on the first-tier suppliers who were directly connected 
with our treatment firms. Our PSM approach controlled the confounding effects of second-tier 
suppliers. As a result of controlling these measures, however, we lost the opportunity to investigate 
the indirect effects of the less visible second-tier suppliers on the firms. Further, we used the 
number of connections and number of countries to measure the firms’ supply base complexity 
based on the data available. The use of relational values reduced our sample size because of the 

 
42 
 
missing variable data in the Bloomberg SPLC and FactSet Reverse databases. Future researchers 
may apply multiple methods (e.g., case studies and longitudinal surveys) and use data collected 
from multiple sources, triangulate this study’s findings, and explore the boundary conditions. 
 
References 
Adhikary, A., Sharma, A., Diatha, K. S., & Jayaram, J. (2020). Impact of buyer–supplier 
network complexity on firms’ greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions: An empirical 
investigation. International Journal of Production Economics, 230, 107864. 
Alfaro, L., Conconi, P., Fadinger, H., & Newman, A. F. (2016). Do prices determine vertical 
integration? The Review of Economic Studies, 83, 855–888. 
Barber, B. M., & Lyon, J. D. (1996). Detecting abnormal operating performance: The 
empirical power and specification of test statistics. Journal of financial Economics, 41(3), 
359-399. 
BBC. (2020, September 24). Trump: Major carmakers sue US government over China tax. 
https://www.bbc.com/news/business-54260917 
Bode, C., & Wagner, S. M. (2015). Structural drivers of upstream supply chain complexity and 
the frequency of supply chain disruptions. Journal of Operations Management, 36, 215-
228. 
Bozarth, C. C., Warsing, D. P., Flynn, B. B., & Flynn, E. J. (2009). The impact of supply chain 
complexity on manufacturing plant performance. Journal of Operations Management, 27, 
78–93. 
Brandon-Jones, E., Squire, B., & Van Rossenberg, Y. G. (2015). The impact of supply base 
complexity on disruptions and performance: the moderating effects of slack and 
visibility. International Journal of Production Research, 53(22), 6903-6918. 
Bray, C. (2019, May 22). US–China trade war “hurting American companies in China” as 
tariffs cut into demand. South China Morning Post. 
https://www.scmp.com/business/companies/article/3011259/us-china-trade-war-hurting-
american-companies-china-tariffs-cut 
Broedner, P., Kinkel, S., & Lay, G. (2009). Productivity effects of outsourcing: New evidence 
on the strategic importance of vertical integration decisions. International Journal of 
Operations & Production Management, 29(2), 127–150. 
Burggraf, T., Fendel, R., & Huynh, T. L. D. (2020). Political news and stock prices: evidence 
from Trump’s trade war. Applied Economics Letters, 27(18), 1485-1488. 
Burnson, P. (2019, December 16). Global supply chain managers still concerned about trade 
conflicts. Supply Chain Management Review. 
https://www.scmr.com/article/global_supply_chain_managers_still_concerned_about_trad
e_conflicts_says_new 
Butler, S. (2004, April 3). Tiffany & Co seeks stakes in diamond mines. The Times. 
https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/tiffany-and-co-seeks-stakes-in-diamond-mines-
k8mpctfrsmx 
Caliendo, M., & Kopeinig, S. (2008). Some practical guidance for the implementation of 
propensity score matching. Journal of economic surveys, 22(1), 31-72. 

 
43 
 
Chae, S., Yan, T., & Yang, Y. (2020). Supplier innovation value from a buyer–supplier 
structural equivalence view: Evidence from the PACE awards in the automotive 
industry. Journal of Operations Management, 66, 7–8. 
Charpin, R., Powell, E. E., & Roth, A. V. (2020). The influence of perceived host country 
political risk on foreign subunits’ supplier development strategies. Journal of Operations 
Management. In press. 
Cho, H. J., & Pucik, V. (2005). Relationship between innovativeness, quality, growth, 
profitability, and market value. Strategic Management Journal, 26(6), 555-575. 
Choi, K., Narasimhan, R., & Kim, S. W. (2012). Postponement strategy for international 
transfer of products in a global supply chain: A system dynamics examination. Journal of 
operations Management, 30(3), 167-179. 
Choi, T. Y., & Krause, D. R. (2006). The supply base and its complexity: Implications for 
transaction costs, risks, responsiveness, and innovation. Journal of operations 
management, 24(5), 637-652. 
Clemons, E. K., Reddi, S. P., & Row, M. C. (1993). The impact of information technology on 
the organization of economic activity: The “move to the middle” hypothesis. Journal of 
management information systems, 10(2), 9-35. 
Coase, R. H. (1937). The nature of the firm. Economica, 4(16), 386-405. 
Corbett, C. J., Montes-Sancho, M. J., & Kirsch, D. A. (2005). The financial impact of ISO 
9000 certification in the United States: An empirical analysis. Management science, 51(7), 
1046-1059. 
Darby, J. L., Ketchen, D. J., Jr., Williams, B. D., & Tokar, T. (2020). The implications of firm‐
specific policy risk, policy uncertainty, and industry factors for inventory: A resource 
dependence perspective. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 56, 3–24. 
D'aveni, R. A., & Ravenscraft, D. J. (1994). Economies of integration versus bureaucracy 
costs: does vertical integration improve performance?. Academy of management 
Journal, 37(5), 1167-1206. 
Dhanorkar, S. (2019). Environmental benefits of internet-enabled C2C closed-loop supply 
chains: A quasi-experimental study of Craigslist. Management Science, 65(2), 660-680. 
Dmitrieva, K. (2019, March 6). U.S. trade gap surged to $621 billion in 2018, 10-year high. 
Bloomberg. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-03-06/u-s-trade-gap-surged-
to-621-billion-in-2018-highest-in-decade 
Dong, L., & Kouvelis, P. (2020). Impact of tariffs on global supply chain network 
configuration: models, predictions, and future research. Manufacturing & Service 
Operations Management, 22(1), 25-35. 
Dong, Y., Skowronski, K., Song, S., Venkataraman, S., & Zou, F. (2020). Supply base 
innovation and firm financial performance. Journal of Operations Management, 66, 768–
796. 
Elking, I., Paraskevas, J. P., Grimm, C., Corsi, T., & Steven, A. (2017). Financial dependence, 
lean inventory strategy, and firm performance. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 53, 
22–38. 
FactSet. (2014). Data and methodology guide. FactSet Data. 
Fan, D., Lo, C. K., & Zhou, Y. (2021). Sustainability risk in supply bases: The role of 
complexity and coupling. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation 
Review, 145, 102175. 

 
44 
 
Forbes, S. J., & Lederman, M. (2010). Does vertical integration affect firm performance? 
Evidence from the airline industry. The RAND Journal of Economics, 41(4), 765-790. 
Frésard, L., Hoberg, G., & Phillips, G. M. (2020). Innovation activities and integration through 
vertical acquisitions. The Review of Financial Studies, 33(7), 2937-2976. 
Fugate, B., Pagell, M., & Flynn, B. (2019). From the editors: introduction to the emerging 
discourse incubator on the topic of research at the intersection of supply chain 
management and public policy and government regulation. Journal of Supply Chain 
Management, 55(2), 3-5. 
Giri, B. C., & Sarker, B. R. (2017). Improving performance by coordinating a supply chain 
with third party logistics outsourcing under production disruption. Computers & 
Industrial Engineering, 103, 168-177. 
Grossman, G. M., & Helpman, E. (2020). When tariffs disturb global supply chains (No. 
w27722). National Bureau of Economic Research. 
Grover, V., & Malhotra, M. K. (2003). Transaction cost framework in operations and supply 
chain management research: theory and measurement. Journal of Operations 
management, 21(4), 457-473. 
Handfield, R. B., Graham, G., & Burns, L. (2020). Corona virus, tariffs, trade wars and supply 
chain evolutionary design. International Journal of Operations & Production 
Management, 40(10), 1649-1660. 
He, R., Zhu, D., Chen, X., Cao, Y., Chen, Y., & Wang, X. (2019). How the trade barrier 
changes environmental costs of agricultural production: An implication derived from 
China’s demand for soybean caused by the U.S.–China trade war. Journal of Cleaner 
Production, 227, 578–588. 
Heckman, J. J., Ichimura, H., & Todd, P. (1998). Matching as an econometric evaluation 
estimator. The review of economic studies, 65(2), 261-294. 
Heese, H. S. (2015). Single versus multiple sourcing and the evolution of bargaining 
positions. Omega, 54, 125-133. 
Hendricks, K. B., Jacobs, B. W., & Singhal, V. R. (2020). Stock market reaction to supply 
chain disruptions from the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake. Manufacturing & Service 
Operations Management, 22(4), 683-699. 
Hendricks, K. B., Singhal, V. R., & Zhang, R. (2009). The effect of operational slack, 
diversification, and vertical relatedness on the stock market reaction to supply chain 
disruptions. Journal of operations management, 27(3), 233-246. 
Hitt, M. A., Hoskisson, R. E., & Kim, H. (1997). International diversification: Effects on 
innovation and firm performance in product-diversified firms. Academy of Management 
journal, 40(4), 767-798. 
Ho, W., Zheng, T., Yildiz, H., & Talluri, S. (2015). Supply chain risk management: a literature 
review. International Journal of Production Research, 53(16), 5031-5069. 
Hollmann, R. L., Scavarda, L. F., & Thomé, A. M. T. (2015). Collaborative planning, 
forecasting and replenishment: A literature review. International Journal of Productivity 
and Performance Management, 64(7), 971-993. 
Hsu, C. C., Kannan, V. R., Tan, K. C., & Leong, G. K. (2008). Information sharing, buyer‐
supplier relationships, and firm performance. International Journal of Physical 
Distribution & Logistics Management, 38, 296–310. 
Hsu, V. N., & Zhu, K. (2011). Tax-effective supply chain decisions under China's export-
oriented tax policies. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 13(2), 163-179. 

 
45 
 
Huang, Y., Lin, C., Liu, S., & Tang, H. (2019, December 17). Trade networks and firm value: 
Evidence from the U.S.–China trade war. 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3504602 
Itakura, K. (2020). Evaluating the impact of the US–China trade war. Asian Economic Policy 
Review, 15(1), 77-93. 
Jiang, B., Belohlav, J. A., & Young, S. T. (2007). Outsourcing impact on manufacturing firms’ 
value: Evidence from Japan. Journal of operations management, 25(4), 885-900. 
Jiang, B., Frazier, G. V., & Prater, E. L. (2006). Outsourcing effects on firms’ operational 
performance. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 26, 12. 
Kleindorfer, P. R., & Saad, G. H. (2005). Managing disruption risks in supply 
chains. Production and operations management, 14(1), 53-68. 
Kotabe, M., & Murray, J. Y. (2004). Global sourcing strategy and sustainable competitive 
advantage. Industrial marketing management, 33(1), 7-14. 
Kouvelis, P., Dong, L., Boyabatli, O., & Li, R. (2011). Handbook of integrated risk 
management in global supply chains (Vol. 1). John Wiley & Sons. 
Kwak, D. W., Seo, Y. J., & Mason, R. (2018). Investigating the relationship between supply 
chain innovation, risk management capabilities and competitive advantage in global 
supply chains. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 38(1), 2-
21. 
Lampel, J., & Giachetti, C. (2013). International diversification of manufacturing operations: 
Performance implications and moderating forces. Journal of Operations 
Management, 31(4), 213-227. 
Lee, Y. N. (2021, May 18). U.S. companies are bearing the brunt of Trump’s China tariffs, 
says Moody’s. CNBC. https://www.cnbc.com/2021/05/18/us-companies-bearing-the-
brunt-of-trumps-china-tariffs-says-moodys.html 
Levine, D. I., & Toffel, M. W. (2010). Quality management and job quality: How the ISO 
9001 standard for quality management systems affects employees and 
employers. Management Science, 56(6), 978-996. 
Li, C., He, C., & Lin, C. (2018). Economic impacts of the possible China–US trade 
war. Emerging Markets Finance and Trade, 54(7), 1557-1577. 
Lo, C. K., Pagell, M., Fan, D., Wiengarten, F., & Yeung, A. C. (2014). OHSAS 18001 
certification and operating performance: The role of complexity and coupling⋆. Journal of 
Operations Management, 32(5), 268-280. 
Lu, G., & Shang, G. (2017). Impact of supply base structural complexity on financial 
performance: Roles of visible and not-so-visible characteristics. Journal of Operations 
Management, 53, 23-44. 
Mahoney, J. T. (1992). The choice of organizational form: vertical financial ownership versus 
other methods of vertical integration. Strategic Management Journal, 13(8), 559-584. 
Manuj, I., & Mentzer, J. T. (2008). Global supply chain risk management 
strategies. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 38(3), 
192-223. 
Mao, H., & Görg, H. (2020). Friends like this: The impact of the US–China trade war on 
global value chains. The World Economy, 43(7), 1776-1791. 
Marino, M., Lhuillery, S., Parrotta, P., & Sala, D. (2016). Additionality or crowding-out? An 
overall evaluation of public R&D subsidy on private R&D expenditure. Research Policy, 
45(9), 1715–1730. 

 
46 
 
McFadden, D. (2021). Quantitative methods for analysing travel behaviour of individuals: 
Some recent developments. Routledge. 
Milgate, M. (2001). Supply chain complexity and delivery performance: An international 
exploratory study. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 6(3), 106-118. 
Modi, S. B., & Cantor, D. E. (2020). How competition influences environmental performance: 
Role of financial slack, leverage, and leanness. Production and Operations Management. 
In press. 
Modi, S. B., & Mishra, S. (2011). What drives financial performance–resource efficiency or 
resource slack?: Evidence from US based manufacturing firms from 1991 to 
2006. Journal of Operations Management, 29(3), 254-273. 
Moradlou, H., Reefke, H., Skipworth, H., & Roscoe, S. (2021). Geopolitical disruptions and 
the manufacturing location decision in multinational company supply chains: A Delphi 
study on Brexit. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 41, 
102–130. 
Müller, M., & Seuring, S. (2007). Reducing information technology‐based transaction costs in 
supply chains. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 107(4), 484-500. 
Nagurney, A., Besik, D., & Li, D. (2019). Strict quotas or tariffs? Implications for product 
quality and consumer welfare in differentiated product supply chains. Transportation 
Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 129, 136-161. 
Naidu, R., & Baertlein, L. (2018, December 20). Trump tariff war with China sends U.S. 
retailers on buying binge. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-retailers-trade-
insight-idUSKCN1OJ0HT 
Narasimhan, R., & Kim, S. W. (2002). Effect of supply chain integration on the relationship 
between diversification and performance: evidence from Japanese and Korean 
firms. Journal of operations management, 20(3), 303-323. 
Oh, C. H., Selmier, W. T., & Lien, D. (2011). International trade, foreign direct investment, 
and transaction costs in languages. The Journal of Socio-Economics, 40(6), 732-735. 
Pagell, M., Wiengarten, F., Fan, D., Humphreys, P., & Lo, C. K. (2019). Managerial time 
horizons and the decision to put operational workers at risk: The role of debt. Decision 
Sciences, 50, 582–611. 
Palich, L. E., Cardinal, L. B., & Miller, C. C. (2000). Curvilinearity in the diversification–
performance linkage: an examination of over three decades of research. Strategic 
management journal, 21(2), 155-174. 
Pitelis, C. N., & Teece, D. J. (2010). Cross-border market co-creation, 
dynamic capabilities and the entrepreneurial theory of the multinational 
enterprise. Industrial and Corporate Change, 19, 4. 
Plehn, J. F., Finke, G. R., & Sproedt, A. (2010, May). Tariff oriented supply chain 
management: Implications of trade agreements on strategic decisions. In Proceedings of 
Production and Operations Management Society (POMS) 21st Annual Conference. 
POMS. 
Powell, D., & Seabury, S. (2018). Medical care spending and labor market outcomes: 
Evidence from workers' compensation reforms. American Economic Review, 108(10), 
2995-3027. 
Qi, X., Bard, J. F., & Yu, G. (2004). Supply chain coordination with demand 
disruptions. Omega, 32(4), 301-312. 

 
47 
 
Raddats, C., Baines, T., Burton, J., Story, V. M., & Zolkiewski, J. (2016). Motivations 
for servitization: The impact of product complexity. International Journal of Operations 
& Production Management, 36, 572–591. 
Rampell, C. (2018, June 14). Trump’s tariffs are already backfiring. Washington Post. 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/trumps-tariffs-are-already-
backfiring/2018/06/14/896b6c5a-700d-11e8-afd5-778aca903bbe_story.html 
Reuters. (2018, July 6). China customs delays clearing U.S. goods as duties loom—Sources. 
https://www.reuters.com/article/usa-trade-china-customs-idAFL1N1U2045 
Revilla, E., & Saenz, M. J. (2017). The impact of risk management on the frequency of supply 
chain disruptions. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 37(5), 
557-576. 
Robinson, M. (2020, July 14). How to overcome trade war, COVID-19, and supply risk? 
Gibson Consulting Group. https://gibsonconsulting.com/how-to-overcome-trade-war-
covid-19-and-supply-risk/ 
Roscoe, S., Skipworth, H., Aktas, E., & Habib, F. (2020). Managing supply chain uncertainty 
arising from geopolitical disruptions: Evidence from the pharmaceutical industry and 
Brexit. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 40, 1499–1529. 
Schmitt, A. J., Sun, S. A., Snyder, L. V., & Shen, Z. J. M. (2015). Centralization versus 
decentralization: Risk pooling, risk diversification, and supply chain disruptions. Omega, 
52, 201–212. 
SCMP. (2021, April 23). U.S.–China tech war: Everything you need to know about the U.S.–
China tech war and its impact. https://www.scmp.com/tech/tech-war/article/3130587/us-
china-tech-war-everything-you-need-know-about-us-china-tech-war 
Sharma, A., Pathak, S., Borah, S. B., & Adhikary, A. (2020). Is it too complex? The curious 
case of supply network complexity and focal firm innovation. Journal of Operations 
Management, 66, 839–865. 
Shen, H., Fu, M., Pan, H., Yu, Z., & Chen, Y. (2020). The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic 
on firm performance. Emerging Markets Finance and Trade, 56, 2213–2230. 
Shih, W. C. (2020, September–October). Global supply chains in a post-pandemic world. 
Harvard Business Review. https://hbr.org/2020/09/global-supply-chains-in-a-post-
pandemic-world 
Sim, B. (2020, August 18). U.S.–China trade war ‘costs UK and US firms $750bn’, says 
report. Financial News. https://www.fnlondon.com/articles/us-china-trade-war-costs-uk-
firms-170bn-says-report-20200818 
Son, B. G., Chae, S., & Kocabasoglu-Hillmer, C. (2021). Catastrophic supply chain 
disruptions and supply network changes: A study of the 2011 Japanese 
earthquake. International Journal of Operations & Production Management. In press. 
Sousa, C. M., & Bradley, F. (2008). Cultural distance and psychic distance: Refinements in 
conceptualisation and measurement. Journal of Marketing Management, 24, 5–6. 
Soysal, G., Zentner, A., & Zheng, Z. (2019). Physical stores in the digital age: How store 
closures affect consumer churn. Production and Operations Management, 28(11), 2778-
2791. 
Steven, A. B., Dong, Y., & Corsi, T. (2014). Global sourcing and quality recalls: An empirical 
study of outsourcing-supplier concentration-product recalls linkages. Journal of 
Operations Management, 32(5), 241-253. 

 
48 
 
Su, H. C., Dhanorkar, S., & Linderman, K. (2015). A competitive advantage from the 
implementation timing of ISO management standards. Journal of Operations 
Management, 37, 31-44. 
Swift, C., Guide Jr, V. D. R., & Muthulingam, S. (2019). Does supply chain visibility affect 
operating performance? Evidence from conflict minerals disclosures. Journal of 
Operations Management, 65(5), 406-429. 
Tang, C. S. (2006). Perspectives in supply chain risk management. International journal of 
production economics, 103(2), 451-488. 
Tang, C., & Tomlin, B. (2008). The power of flexibility for mitigating supply chain 
risks. International journal of production economics, 116(1), 12-27. 
Tangel, A., & Zumbrun, J. (2018, July 16). Whirlpool wanted washer tariffs. It wasn’t ready 
for a trade showdown. The Wall Street Journal. https://www.wsj.com/articles/whirlpool-
wanted-washing-machine-tariffs-it-didnt-plan-for-a-trade-war-1531757621 
Tankersley, J. (2019, April 21). Trump’s washing machine tariffs stung consumers while 
lifting corporate profits. The New York Times. 
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/21/business/trump-tariffs-washing-machines.html 
Teece, D. J. (1986). Profiting from technological innovation: Implications for integration, 
collaboration, licensing and public policy. Research policy, 15(6), 285-305. 
Tintelnot, F., Kikkawa, A. K., Mogstad, M., & Dhyne, E. (2018). Trade and domestic 
production networks (No. w25120). National Bureau of Economic Research. 
Tokar, T., & Swink, M. (2019). Public policy and supply chain management: Using shared 
foundational principles to improve formulation, implementation, and evaluation. Journal 
of Supply Chain Management, 55(2), 68-79. 
Tomlin, B., & Wang, Y. (2011). Operational strategies for managing supply chain disruption 
risk. In P. Kouvelis, L. Dong, O. Boyabatli, & R. Li. (Eds.), Handbook of integrated risk 
management in global supply chains (pp. 79–101). Wiley. 
Treleven, M., & Bergman Schweikhart, S. (1988). A risk/benefit analysis of sourcing 
strategies: Single vs. multiple sourcing. Journal of Operations Management, 7, 3–4. 
Vachon, S., & Klassen, R. D. (2002). An exploratory investigation of the effects of supply 
chain complexity on delivery performance. IEEE Transactions on engineering 
management, 49(3), 218-230. 
Wang, Y., Gilland, W., & Tomlin, B. (2011). Regulatory trade risk and supply chain 
strategy. Production and Operations Management, 20(4), 522-540. 
Wiengarten, F., Fan, D., Lo, C. K., & Pagell, M. (2017). The differing impacts of operational 
and financial slack on occupational safety in varying market conditions. Journal of 
operations management, 52, 30-45. 
Williamson, O. E. (2008). Outsourcing: Transaction cost economics and supply chain 
management. Journal of supply chain management, 44(2), 5-16. 
Witt, M. A. (2019). De-globalization: Theories, predictions, and opportunities for international 
business research. Journal of International Business Studies, 50(7), 1053-1077. 
Wu, W. (2018, October 17). Companies stock up, delay payments as they brace for more 
U.S.–China trade war pain. Southern China Morning Post. 
https://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy/article/2168989/companies-stock-delay-
payments-they-brace-more-us-china-trade 
Xiao, T., Qi, X., & Yu, G. (2007). Coordination of supply chain after demand disruptions 
when retailers compete. International Journal of Production Economics, 109, 1–2. 

 
49 
 
Ye, Y., Yeung, A. C., & Huo, B. (2020). Maintaining stability while boosting growth? The 
long-term impact of environmental accreditations on firms’ financial risk and sales 
growth. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 40(12), 1829-
1856. 
Yuan, Y., Chu, Z., Lai, F., & Wu, H. (2020). The impact of transaction attributes on logistics 
outsourcing success: A moderated mediation model. International Journal of Production 
Economics, 219, 54–65. 
Zou, F., Dong, Y., Hu, K., & Venkataraman, S. (2020). Delegation with technology migration: 
An empirical analysis of mobile virtual network operators. SSRN. 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3560728 
Zumbrun, J., & Davis, B. (2020, October 25). China trade war didn’t boost U.S. manufacturing 
might. The Wall Street Journal. https://www.wsj.com/articles/china-trade-war-didnt-
boost-u-s-manufacturing-might-11603618203 
 

Table 1: Data collection steps 
Panel A: Data development for selection model 
Data screening steps 
Number of firms 
reduction 
Number of firms 
Database used 
1 
Started with firms with available data at least one year before (i.e., 2017) 
and one year after (i.e., 2019) the trade war in 2018 (i.e., 2017-19) 
 
5,667 
Compustat 
2 
Remove firms in service industries with little or no physical products 
2,731 
2,936 
Compustat 
3 
Remove firms without inventory and employee data 
993 
1,943 
Compustat 
4 
Remove firms not headquartered in the U.S. 
411 
1,532 
Compustat 
5 
Remove US-headquartered firms with no substantial operations in the U.S. 
10 
1,522 
Compustat, 
Bloomberg SPLC, 
FactSet Revere 
6 
Remove firms with no data sources in Bloomberg SPLC or FactSet Revere 
databases 
261 
1,261 
Bloomberg SPLC, 
FactSet Revere 
7 
Remove firms with no vertical integration data in the Fresard-Hoberg-
Philips database. 
204 
1,057 (including 298 
treatment and 759 
control firms) 
Fresard-Hoberg-
Philips database 
 
Panel B: Matching procedures 
Data Screening Steps 
Number of 
treatment-control 
pairs removed 
Number of 
treatment firms 
remained 
Number of control 
firms remained 
8 
Started with 298 matched pairs in step 7 in Panel A 
 
298 
759 
9 
Remove firms that cannot be matched with any control firms 
7 
291 
291 
10 
Remove pairs with a caliper of higher than 0.1 
103 
188 
188 
Panel C: Data development for DID analysis 
Data Screening Steps 
Number of 
observations 
removed 
Number of 
observations 
remained 
Number of firms 
remained 
 
 
 
1880 
376 
11 
Remove observations with missing data in 2015 or 2016, and their 
corresponding treatment or control firms. 
16 x 2 
1848 
376 
12 
Remove extreme values for dependent variables (i.e., inventory days or 
ROA) and their corresponding treatment or control firms. 
19 x 2 
1810 
376 
 

Table 2: Estimated coefficients of probit model for PSM 
Independent variables 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
VIF 
Intercept 
-6.7493 [0.6077]*** 
Log Total assets t-1&-2&-3 
0.2584 [0.0265]*** 1.12 
Log Second-tier CN supplier t-1&-2&-3 
9.6455 [1.0862]*** 1.04 
Log Inventory efficiency t-1&-2&-3 
-0.1188 [0.0647]* 
1.11 
Log Fixed assets turnover t-1&-2&-3 
0.1610 [0.0580]*** 1.28 
Log capital expenditure t-1&-2&-3 
-0.0135 [0.3770] 
1.23 
Log R&D expenditure t-1&-2&-3 
0.0193 [0.0055]*** 1.08 
n 
 1,057 
 
Chi-squared 
310.46 *** 
 
Pseudo-R-squared (McFadden) 
24.69% 
 
Note. ∗p < 0.10; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗∗∗p < 0.01. Dependent variable: 
having first-tier CN supplier. Additional controls include 39 
industry dummies. Variables subscripted t-1&-2&-3 are averages of 
one-, two- and three- year lags. 
 
 
 
Table 3: Statistics of treatment and control firms after PSM 
 
 
Total assets 
(millions) 
Second-tier 
CN 
supplier % 
Inventory 
efficiency 
Fixed assets 
turnover 
capital 
intensity 
R&D 
expenditure 
(millions) 
Treatment 
firms 
Mean 
11,624.10 
3.67% 
16.50 
19.87 
0.06 
367.83 
SD 
19,633.72 
11.07% 
40.83 
109.95 
0.16 
1,314.91 
Max 
111,820.00 
100.00% 
411.45 
1,497.00 
1.79 
14,236.00 
Min 
7.46 
0.00% 
2.20 
0.15 
<0.01 
<0.01 
Control 
firms 
Mean 
4,913.17 
3.05% 
12.17 
15.76 
0.06 
113.52 
SD 
6,962.63 
6.74% 
15.39 
69.90 
0.12 
310.45 
Max 
44,876.00 
50.00% 
102.88 
948.65 
1.07 
2,899.00 
Min 
6.29 
0.00% 
1.30 
0.13 
<0.01 
<0.01 
Difference 
p 
0.11 
0.46 
0.16 
0.91 
0.91 
0.86 
 
 

Table 4. Correlation of variables in DID analysis 
 
Mean 
SD 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
1. Post*CN supplier 
0.20 
0.40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Log total assets 
21.76 
1.66 
0.11*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Log second-tier CN supplier 
0.05 
0.08 
-0.11*** -0.12*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Log inventory efficiency 
2.28 
0.69 
0.03 
0.13*** 
-0.06** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Log fixed assets turnover 
2.06 
0.95 
-0.04 
-0.32*** 
0.05* 
0.08*** 
 
 
 
 
 
6. Log capital expenditure 
0.05 
0.13 
-0.02 
0.08*** 
0.02 
0.10*** 
-0.38*** 
 
 
 
 
7. Log R&D expenditure 
12.55 
8.47 
<0.01 
0.09*** 
0.01 
-0.06** 
-0.16*** 
-0.03 
 
 
 
8. Outsourcing 
1.44 
1.27 
-0.01 
0.05** 
0.04* 
-0.17*** -0.14*** -0.07*** 
0.11*** 
 
 
9. Horizontal complexity 
24.32 60.68 
0.03 
0.27*** 
0.002 
0.12*** 
0.14*** 
-0.03 
-0.11*** -0.08*** 
 
10. Spatial complexity 
4.27 
5.14 
0.01 
0.45*** 
0.01 
0.11*** 
0.04 
-0.01 
-0.07*** 
-0.05** 
0.79*** 
Note. ∗p<0.10; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01 . n=1,810 
 
Table 5: Results of DID analysis 
 
 
 
 
 
Inventory days 
 
ROA 
Independent variables 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
Post*CN supplier 
8.2062 [2.6570]*** 
 
-0.0129 [0.0063]** 
Log total assets 
1.2446 [0.5993]** 
 
0.0247 [0.0015]*** 
Log second-tier CN supplier 
-12.7929 [11.3151] 
 
0.0235 [0.0270] 
Log inventory efficiency 
-51.5488 [1.2425]*** 
 
0.0078 [0.0030]*** 
Log fixed assets turnover 
-0.6898 [1.0267] 
 
-0.0016 [0.0025] 
Log capital expenditure 
-8.0828 [6.7456] 
 
-0.1465 [0.0163]*** 
Log R&D expenditure 
0.5413 [0.1014]*** 
 
-0.0007 [0.0002]*** 
Outsourcing 
-7.6220 [0.6811]*** 
 
0.0028 [0.0016]* 
Horizontal complexity 
-0.0334 [0.0232] 
 
-0.00003 [0.0001] 
Spatial complexity 
-0.4799 [0.2980] 
 
-0.0017 [0.0007]** 
n 
 1,810 
 
 
 1,810 
 
R-squared 
52.05% 
 
19.59% 
 
Adj. R-squared 
51.68% 
 
18.96% 
 
F-statistic 
194.86 *** 
 
43.73 *** 
Note. ∗p < 0.10; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗∗∗p < 0.01. Firm and year fixed effects were controlled. 
 
 

Table 6: The results of triple difference analysis on moderators 
 
 
 
Model 1 
 
Model 2 
 
Model 3 
Independent variables 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
Post*CN supplier*Outsourcing 
-0.0078 [0.0039]** 
 
 
Post*CN supplier*Horizontal complexity 
-0.0006 [0.0002]** 
 
 
Post*CN supplier*Spatial complexity 
-0.0037 [0.0016]** 
Log total assets 
0.0252 [0.0019]*** 
0.0328 [0.0022]*** 
0.0326 [0.0022]*** 
Log second-tier CN supplier 
0.0430 [0.0338] 
 
0.0637 [0.0396] 
 
0.0630 [0.0396] 
Log inventory efficiency 
0.0159 [0.0037]*** 
0.0205 [0.0044]*** 
0.0204 [0.0044]*** 
Log fixed assets turnover 
0.0027 [0.0032] 
 
0.0138 [0.0037]*** 
0.0135 [0.0037]*** 
Log capital expenditure 
-0.1714 [0.0201]*** 
-0.1492 [0.0236]*** 
-0.1495 [0.0236]*** 
Log R&D expenditure 
-0.0009 [0.0003]*** 
-0.0003 [0.0004] 
 
-0.0003 [0.0004] 
Outsourcing 
0.0049 [0.0022]** 
 
0.0033 [0.0024] 
 
0.0035 [0.0024] 
Horizontal complexity 
-0.0001 [0.0001] 
 
-0.0001 [0.0001] 
 
-0.0001 [0.0001] 
Spatial complexity 
-0.0013 [0.0009] 
 
-0.0017 [0.0011] 
 
-0.0014 [0.0012] 
n 
 1,810 
 
 1,810 
 
 1,810 
 
R-squared 
15.59% 
 
16.28% 
 
 
16.24% 
 
Adj. R-squared 
14.93% 
 
15.62% 
 
 
15.59% 
 
F-statistic 
33.15 *** 
 
34.89 *** 
 
34.80 *** 
Note. ∗p < 0.10; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗∗∗p < 0.01. Firm and year fixed effects were controlled. 
 
 
 
 

 
Table 7: Results of DID analysis on years 
 
 
 
 
 
Inventory days 
 
ROA 
Independent variables 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
Year2015*CN supplier 
1.7396 [3.8362] 
 
0.0004 [0.0092] 
Year2016*CN supplier 
1.2931 [3.7448] 
 
-0.0035 [0.0090] 
Year2017*CN supplier 
5.2557 [3.7534] 
 
-0.0050 [0.0089] 
Year2019*CN supplier 
9.8236 [3.7659]*** 
 
-0.0190 [0.0088]** 
Log total assets 
1.2198 [0.6008]** 
 
0.0247 [0.0015]*** 
Log second-tier CN supplier 
-13.0125 [11.3365] 
 
0.0237 [0.0270] 
Log inventory efficiency 
-51.5692 [1.2451]*** 
 
0.0078 [0.0030]*** 
Log fixed assets turnover 
-0.7138 [1.0284] 
 
-0.0016 [0.0025] 
Log capital expenditure 
-8.2701 [6.7614] 
 
-0.1463 [0.0163]*** 
Log R&D expenditure 
0.5423 [0.1016]*** 
 
-0.0007 [0.0002]*** 
Outsourcing 
-7.6046 [0.6818]*** 
 
0.0028 [0.0016]* 
Horizontal complexity 
-0.0311 [0.0233] 
 
-0.00003 [0.0001] 
Spatial complexity 
-0.4900 [0.3034] 
 
-0.0017 [0.0007]** 
n 
 1,810 
 
 1,810 
 
R-squared 
52.04% 
 
19.63% 
 
Adj. R-squared 
51.58% 
 
18.87% 
 
F-statistic 
149.56 *** 
 
33.67 *** 
Note. ∗p < 0.10; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗∗∗p < 0.01. Firm and year fixed effects were controlled. 
 
 

Appendix Table A1: Industry distribution (two digit SIC) 
SIC code 
Initial set of firms 
Final dataset for PSM 
After matching 
 
Firms 
% 
Treatments 
Controls 
Total 
% 
Firms 
% 
01 
8 
0.3% 
1 
1 
2 
0.2% 
2 
0.5% 
02 
3 
0.1% 
0 
1 
1 
0.1% 
0 
0.0% 
07 
4 
0.1% 
0 
0 
0 
0.0% 
0 
0.0% 
08 
1 
0.0% 
0 
0 
0 
0.0% 
0 
0.0% 
10 
114 
3.9% 
0 
6 
6 
0.6% 
0 
0.0% 
12 
15 
0.5% 
1 
8 
9 
0.9% 
2 
0.5% 
13 
178 
6.1% 
6 
42 
48 
4.5% 
8 
2.1% 
14 
19 
0.6% 
1 
6 
7 
0.7% 
2 
0.5% 
15 
23 
0.8% 
0 
1 
1 
0.1% 
0 
0.0% 
16 
20 
0.7% 
1 
3 
4 
0.4% 
0 
0.0% 
17 
8 
0.3% 
0 
4 
4 
0.4% 
0 
0.0% 
20 
104 
3.5% 
9 
37 
46 
4.4% 
12 
3.2% 
21 
5 
0.2% 
0 
1 
1 
0.1% 
0 
0.0% 
22 
8 
0.3% 
0 
4 
4 
0.4% 
0 
0.0% 
23 
28 
1.0% 
10 
5 
15 
1.4% 
4 
1.1% 
24 
17 
0.6% 
0 
8 
8 
0.8% 
0 
0.0% 
25 
22 
0.7% 
2 
14 
16 
1.5% 
4 
1.1% 
26 
27 
0.9% 
5 
10 
15 
1.4% 
4 
1.1% 
27 
25 
0.9% 
2 
10 
12 
1.1% 
2 
0.5% 
28 
845 
28.8% 
36 
118 
154 
14.6% 
40 
10.6% 
29 
34 
1.2% 
4 
9 
13 
1.2% 
2 
0.5% 
30 
29 
1.0% 
5 
8 
13 
1.2% 
0 
0.0% 
31 
10 
0.3% 
4 
5 
9 
0.9% 
4 
1.1% 
32 
24 
0.8% 
3 
3 
6 
0.6% 
4 
1.1% 
33 
50 
1.7% 
6 
16 
22 
2.1% 
8 
2.1% 
34 
55 
1.9% 
5 
21 
26 
2.5% 
10 
2.7% 
35 
183 
6.2% 
30 
61 
91 
8.6% 
50 
13.3% 
36 
295 
10.0% 
65 
79 
144 
13.6% 
74 
19.7% 
37 
111 
3.8% 
23 
31 
54 
5.1% 
28 
7.4% 
38 
279 
9.5% 
21 
86 
107 
10.1% 
38 
10.1% 
39 
27 
0.9% 
6 
6 
12 
1.1% 
4 
1.1% 
50 
76 
2.6% 
16 
31 
47 
4.4% 
28 
7.4% 
51 
61 
2.1% 
4 
22 
26 
2.5% 
6 
1.6% 
52 
8 
0.3% 
3 
1 
4 
0.4% 
0 
0.0% 
53 
17 
0.6% 
5 
8 
13 
1.2% 
6 
1.6% 
54 
15 
0.5% 
1 
8 
9 
0.9% 
2 
0.5% 
55 
22 
0.7% 
3 
14 
17 
1.6% 
6 
1.6% 
56 
31 
1.1% 
6 
20 
26 
2.5% 
10 
2.7% 
57 
12 
0.4% 
2 
6 
8 
0.8% 
2 
0.5% 
58 
54 
1.8% 
4 
24 
28 
2.6% 
6 
1.6% 
59 
69 
2.4% 
8 
21 
29 
2.7% 
8 
2.1% 
Total 
2936 
100% 
298 
759 
1057 
100.0% 
376 
100.0% 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A2: Description of data collection steps: 
1. Our data collection started with 5,667 U.S. listed firms that were active from 2017 to 2019 collected from 
Compustat. This is because we needed at least one year of data prior to (i.e., 2017) and one year of data after 
(i.e., 2019) the 2018 trade war for analysis. Our research window cut off at 2019 because the impacts of 
COVID-19 were severe in 2020. 
2. Given our focus on supply chain management, we removed firms in service industries with little or no physical 
products, including Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate (SIC 6000–6799; 1,273 firms), Transportation, 
Communications, Electric, Gas, and Sanitary Services (SIC 4000–4999; 563 firms), Services (SIC 7000–8999; 
846 firms), and Public Administration and Non-classifiable industry (SIC 9100–9999; 49 firms). In total, we 
removed 2,731 firms, leaving 2,936 firms. 
3. We removed firms with no inventory data (903 firms) or employee data (90 firms), leaving 1,943 firms. 
4. We removed 411 firms not headquartered in the U.S., leaving 1,532 firms. 
5. We removed 10 firms with no substantial operations in the U.S., leaving 1,522 firms. (Among the 1,532 firms, 
542 firms specifically reported Property, Plant & Equipment (PP&E) data within the U.S., 1,518 firms reported 
segment sales in the U.S., and 1,233 firms reported US customers; 10 firms with none of these data were 
removed as they appear to have no substantial operations in the U.S.) 
6. We removed 261 firms with no data in the Bloomberg SPLC or FactSet Revere databases, leaving 1,261 firms. 
To prepare the supply chain database for this study, we first searched the names of the 1,522 U.S. firms (from 
Step 5 in Table 1) in the Bloomberg SPLC database. We collected 157,121 supply chain data (80,206 suppliers 
and 76,915 customers) from 1,198 firms. We then searched the firm names in FactSet Revere database. We 
collected 83,996 supply chain data (25,737 suppliers and 58,259 customers) from 1,181 firms. We then 
compared the supplier and customer names for each of the 1,198 firms in Bloomberg SPLC with the 1,181 
firms in FactSet Revere. We found 1,121 firms that appear in both databases. The figures show that Bloomberg 
SPLC has much stronger coverage in terms of the numbers of customers and suppliers (157,121 in Bloomberg 
SPLC vs. 83,996 in FactSet Revere) reported per firm. That’s why we used Bloomberg SPLC as the primary 
source and FactSet Revere as a supplementary source. Nevertheless, the two databases are quite consistent in 
terms of firm coverage at 93.6% (1,121 overlaps out of 1,198 firms). We added 1,378 suppliers and 1,299 
customers in 60 firms (i.e., 1,181-1,121) from FactSet Revere that were not included in the Bloomberg SPLC 
database at all. In addition, in another 80 firms we added additional suppliers and customers data (29 suppliers 
and 1,031 customers) from the FactSet Revere database (the 80 firms also appear in Bloomberg SPLC but 
there are some additional suppliers and customers data in FactSet Revere). Therefore, the use of FactSet data 
enabled us to increase the supply chain data for 140 firms (i.e., 60 + 80), or 11.7% (140/1198) of the data 
collected from Bloomberg. For these 140 firms, 10.05 suppliers and 17.83 customers per firm were added. 
7. We removed 204 firms with no vertical integration data in the Fresard-Hoberg-Philips database, leaving 1,057 
firms 
8. The 1,057 firms, including 298 treatment firms and 759 control firms, were matched. 
9. Among the 298 treatment firms, 7 firms that could not be matched with any control firms were removed, 
leaving 291 matched pairs. In two industries, there were more treatment firms than control firms. Specifically, 
in SIC 23 there were 10 treatment firms while there were only 5 control firms (removing 5); in SIC 52, there 
were 3 treatment firms while there was only 1 control firm (removing 2). 
10. We removed 103 pairs with a propensity score difference outside the matching caliper of 0.1 (Levine & Toffel, 
2010), leaving us with 188 matched pairs (376 firms) for analysis. 
11. We then used these 376 firms to create a panel dataset from 2015 to 2019. Ideally, we would have 1,880 firm-
year observations (i.e., 376 firms x 5 years). However, although we ensured that all firms have available data 
one year before (i.e., 2017) and one year after (i.e., 2019) the trade war in 2018 (i.e., 2017–2019 as explained 
in Step 1), firms could still have missing data in 2015 or 2016. We have 16 missing observations in 2015 or 
2016. In addition, since we need treatment–control matched pairs for analysis, we need to delete the 

corresponding control observation if the treatment observation is missing, and vice versa. Accordingly, we 
deleted 32 observations (instead of 16), leaving 1,848 firm-year observations (i.e., 1,880 – 16 x 2 = 1,848). 
12. We then followed the previous literature (e.g., Corbett et al., 2005; Lo et al., 2014; Swift et al., 2019) with the 
difference-in-difference approach to trim by 0.5% extreme values of dependent variables (i.e., inventory days 
and ROA) at each end. We further remove 19 observations and their corresponding control or treatment firms 
(a total of 38), leaving 1,810 observations (i.e., 1,848 – 19 x 2 = 1,810 observations). 
 
 
Appendix Table A3: The measurements and references of the matching covariates. 
Variable 
Measurement 
in PSM 
process 
in DID 
regression 
Reference 
ROA 
Ratio of operating income to total 
assets 
Yes 
DV 
Corbett et al., 2005 
Inventory days 
(Average inventory/cost of goods 
sold)*365 
— 
DV 
Wiengarten et al., 
2017 
First-tier CN 
supplier 
Dummy coded 1 if the ﬁrm has first-
tier Chinese suppliers 
DV 
— 
— 
Second-tier CN 
supplier 
Ratio of second-tier Chinese 
suppliers to total second-tier 
suppliers 
Yes 
— 
— 
Total assets 
Annual value of total assets 
Yes 
Yes 
Wiengarten et al., 
2020 
capital expenditure 
Capital expenditure normalized by 
sales 
Yes 
Yes 
Steven et al., 2014 
Inventory efficiency 
Ratio of sales to average inventory 
Yes 
Yes 
Modi & Mishra, 
2011 
Fixed assets 
turnover 
Ratio of sales to property, plant, and 
equipment 
Yes 
Yes 
Modi & Mishra, 
2011 
R&D expenditure 
Annual value of research and 
development expense 
Yes 
Yes 
Marino et al., 2016 
Outsourcing 
Reversed vertical integration level: 
text analysis of product vocabulary in 
firm’s business description spans 
vertically related markets 
— 
Yes 
Frésard et al., 2020 
Horizontal 
complexity 
Number of first-tier suppliers 
— 
Yes 
Bode & Wagner, 
2015; Dong et al., 
2020 
Spatial complexity 
Number of countries or regions 
where firm’s suppliers were located 
— 
Yes 
Lu & Shang, 2017 
 
 
 

Table B1: Results of DID analysis (firms with only U.S. operations) 
 
Inventory days 
 
ROA 
Independent variables 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
Post*CN supplier 
30.1997 [9.3572]*** 
 
-0.0709 [0.0370]* 
Log total assets 
8.2169 [1.7437]*** 
 
0.0683 [0.0069]*** 
Log second-tier CN supplier 
-24.4554 [38.7367] 
 
0.3561 [0.1533]** 
Log inventory efficiency 
-59.8757 [3.4102]*** 
 
0.0602 [0.0135]*** 
Log fixed assets turnover 
1.1058 [3.6514] 
 
0.0931 [0.0145]*** 
Log capital expenditure 
-1.5165 [16.4388] 
 
-0.0517 [0.0651] 
Log R&D expenditure 
0.6535 [0.3857]* 
 
-0.0026 [0.0015]* 
Outsourcing 
-6.7497 [3.5367]* 
 
-0.0365 [0.0140]*** 
Horizontal complexity 
-0.0650 [0.0922] 
 
-0.0002 [0.0004] 
Spatial complexity 
-1.1384 [1.2196] 
 
-0.0048 [0.0048] 
n 
 312 
 
 312 
 
R-squared 
54.13% 
 
41.56% 
 
Adj. R-squared 
51.96% 
 
38.80% 
 
F-statistic 
35.04 *** 
 
21.12 *** 
Note. ∗p < 0.10; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗∗∗p < 0.01. Firm and year fixed effects were controlled. 
 
Table B2: Results of DID analysis (Chinese customers controlled in PSM) 
 
Inventory days 
 
ROA 
Independent variables 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
Post*CN supplier 
6.2502 [3.0325]** 
 
-0.0181 [0.0091]** 
Log total assets 
0.3050 [0.6840] 
 
0.0334 [0.0020]*** 
Log second-tier CN supplier 
-27.5463 [13.1145]** 
 
0.0252 [0.0392] 
Log CN customer percent 
-8.7679 [12.9052] 
 
-0.0137 [0.0385] 
Log inventory efficiency 
-54.7153 [1.4286]*** 
 
0.0157 [0.0043]*** 
Log fixed assets turnover 
-1.6241 [1.2759] 
 
0.0115 [0.0038]*** 
Log capital expenditure 
-11.1468 [8.6858] 
 
-0.1610 [0.0259]*** 
Log R&D expenditure 
0.6782 [0.1171]*** 
 
-0.0006 [0.0003]* 
Outsourcing 
-7.5790 [0.7789]*** 
 
0.0053 [0.0023]** 
Horizontal complexity 
-0.0019 [0.0277] 
 
0.00001 [0.0001] 
Spatial complexity 
-0.7726 [0.3375]** 
 
-0.0030 [0.0010]*** 
n 
 1,840 
 
 1,840 
 
R-squared 
47.76% 
 
17.72% 
 
Adj. R-squared 
47.33% 
 
17.05% 
 
F-statistic 
151.60 *** 
 
35.72 *** 
Note. ∗p < 0.10; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗∗∗p < 0.01. Firm and year fixed effects were controlled. 
 
 
 

Table B3: Results of triple difference analysis on firms with Chinese customers 
 
Inventory days 
 
ROA 
Independent variables 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
Post*CN supplier*CN customer percent 
0.1199 [24.6116] 
 
-0.1037 [0.0735] 
Log total assets 
0.4001 [0.6832] 
 
0.0331 [0.0020]*** 
Log second-tier CN supplier 
-27.0858 [13.1435]** 
 
0.0211 [0.0392] 
Log CN customer percent 
-8.3346 [14.1379] 
 
0.0092 [0.0422] 
Log inventory efficiency 
-54.6961 [1.4307]*** 
 
0.0158 [0.0043]*** 
Log fixed assets turnover 
-1.5599 [1.2780] 
 
0.0115 [0.0038]*** 
Log capital expenditure 
-11.1574 [8.6965] 
 
-0.1606 [0.0260]*** 
Log R&D expenditure 
0.6783 [0.1172]*** 
 
-0.0006 [0.0003]* 
Outsourcing 
-7.5460 [0.7802]*** 
 
0.0054 [0.0023]** 
Horizontal complexity 
-0.0020 [0.0278] 
 
0.000004 [0.0001] 
Spatial complexity 
-0.7348 [0.3376]** 
 
-0.0031 [0.0010]*** 
n 
 1,840 
 
 1,840 
 
R-squared 
47.64% 
 
17.63% 
 
Adj. R-squared 
47.21% 
 
16.95% 
 
F-statistic 
150.86 *** 
 
35.49 *** 
Note. ∗p < 0.10; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗∗∗p < 0.01. Firm and year fixed effects were controlled. 
 
Table B4: Results of DID analysis (controlled the number of suppliers in other trade 
war locations and Chinese suppliers) 
 
Inventory days 
 
 
ROA 
 
Coefficients 
Estimate 
Std.error 
 
Estimate 
Std.error 
Post*CN supplier 
9.3650 [2.6939]*** 
 
-0.0140 [0.0064]** 
Log total assets 
2.4346 [0.7039]*** 
 
0.0243 [0.0017]*** 
Log second-tier CN supplier 
-13.4552 [11.3389] 
 
0.0279 [0.0271] 
Log inventory efficiency 
-51.7576 [1.2464]*** 
 
0.0072 [0.0030]** 
Log fixed assets turnover 
-0.0856 [1.0505] 
 
-0.0021 [0.0026] 
Log capital expenditure 
-8.9603 [6.7535] 
 
-0.1445 [0.0163]*** 
Log R&D expense 
0.4558 [0.1035]*** 
 
-0.0007 [0.0002]*** 
Log Number of suppliers in other 
countries had trade war with the U.S. 
-3.9779 [1.4476]*** 
 
-0.0054 [0.0035] 
Log Number of CN supplier 
-0.4066 [1.3991] 
 
0.0051 [0.0033] 
Outsourcing 
-7.8904 [0.6852]*** 
 
0.0030 [0.0016]* 
Horizontal complexity 
-0.0430 [0.0233]* 
 
-0.00003 [0.0001] 
Spatial complexity 
0.1544 [0.3398] 
 
-0.0015 [0.0008]* 
n 
 1,810 
 
 1,810 
 
R-squared 
52.45% 
 
19.72% 
 
Ajd. R-squared 
52.03% 
 
19.00% 
 
F-statistic 
164.84 *** 
 
36.70 *** 
Note. ∗p < 0.10; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗∗∗p < 0.01. Firm and year fixed effects were controlled. 
 
 

 
 
Table B5: Results of triple difference analysis on other trade war locations 
 
Inventory days 
 
ROA 
 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
Post*CN supplier*Other Trade War 
6.2407 [2.7535]** 
 
-0.0112 [0.0065]* 
Log total assets 
1.1746 [0.6044]* 
 
0.0248 [0.0015]*** 
Log second-tier CN supplier 
-11.3530 [11.3282] 
 
0.0210 [0.0270] 
Log inventory efficiency 
-51.5882 [1.2441]*** 
 
0.0078 [0.0030]*** 
Log fixed assets turnover 
-0.6766 [1.0280] 
 
-0.0016 [0.0025] 
Log capital expenditure 
-7.7415 [6.7535] 
 
-0.1466 [0.0163]*** 
Log R&D expense 
0.5512 [0.1016]*** 
 
-0.0007 [0.0002]*** 
Outsourcing 
-7.5969 [0.6818]*** 
 
0.0028 [0.0016]* 
Horizontal complexity 
-0.0327 [0.0232] 
 
-0.00003 [0.0001] 
Spatial complexity 
-0.4774 [0.2987] 
 
-0.0017 [0.0007]** 
n 
 1,810 
 
 1,810 
 
R-squared 
51.93% 
 
19.54% 
 
Adj. R-squared 
51.56% 
 
18.91% 
 
F-statistic 
193.95 *** 
 
43.58 *** 
Note. ∗p < 0.10; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗∗∗p < 0.01. Firm and year fixed effects were controlled. 
 
 
 
Table B6: Results of triple difference analysis for high-tech firms 
 
Inventory days 
 
ROA 
 Independent variables 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
Post*CN supplier*High-Tech industries 
6.9262 [3.2828]** 
 
-0.0174 [0.0078]** 
Log total assets 
1.3481 [0.5991]** 
 
0.0245 [0.0015]*** 
Log second-tier CN supplier 
-12.6620 [11.3329] 
 
0.0238 [0.0270] 
Log inventory efficiency 
-51.4146 [1.2460]*** 
0.0074 [0.0030]** 
Log fixed assets turnover 
-0.7328 [1.0295] 
 
-0.0014 [0.0025] 
Log capital expenditure 
-8.1211 [6.7561] 
 
-0.1458 [0.0163]*** 
Log R&D expenditure 
0.4987 [0.1037]*** 
-0.0006 [0.0002]** 
Outsourcing 
-7.5464 [0.6822]*** 
0.0026 [0.0016] 
Horizontal complexity 
-0.0330 [0.0232] 
 
-0.00003 [0.0001] 
Spatial complexity 
-0.4407 [0.2981] 
 
-0.0017 [0.0007]** 
n 
 1,810 
 
 1,810 
 
R-squared 
51.92% 
 
19.63% 
 
Adj. R-squared 
51.54% 
 
19.00% 
 
F-statistic 
193.81 *** 
 
43.83 *** 
Note. ∗p < 0.10; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗∗∗p < 0.01. Firm and year fixed effects were controlled. 
 

 
 
Table B7: Results of triple difference analysis on firms in trade war list industries 
 
Inventory days 
 
ROA 
Independent variables 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
Post*CN supplier*On trade war list 
3.4749 [2.7881] 
 
0.0011 [0.0066] 
Log total assets 
1.3269 [0.6001]** 
 
0.0244 [0.0015]*** 
Log second-tier CN supplier 
-12.3627 [11.3422] 
 
0.0215 [0.0270] 
Log inventory efficiency 
-51.4766 [1.2468]*** 
 
0.0077 [0.0030]*** 
Log fixed assets turnover 
-0.6251 [1.0287] 
 
-0.0018 [0.0025] 
Log capital expenditure 
-8.0089 [6.7616] 
 
-0.1464 [0.0163]*** 
Log R&D expenditure 
0.5204 [0.1032]*** 
 
-0.0007 [0.0002]*** 
Outsourcing 
-7.6164 [0.6830]*** 
 
0.0028 [0.0016]* 
Horizontal complexity 
-0.0323 [0.0233] 
 
-0.00003 [0.0001] 
Spatial complexity 
-0.4494 [0.2986] 
 
-0.0017 [0.0007]** 
n 
 1,810 
 
 1,810 
 
R-squared 
51.84% 
 
19.40% 
 
Adj. R-squared 
51.46% 
 
18.78% 
 
F-statistic 
193.20 *** 
 
43.21 *** 
Note. ∗p < 0.10; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗∗∗p < 0.01. Firm and year fixed effects were controlled. 
 
 

 
Table B8: The results of triple difference analysis on moderators 
 
Model 1 
 
Model 2 
 
Model 3 
Independent variables 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
 
Estimate 
Std. Error 
Post*CN supplier*High outsourcing 
-0.0289 [0.0098]*** 
 
 
Post*CN supplier*High horizontal complexity 
-0.0314 [0.0117]*** 
 
 
Post*CN supplier*High spatial complexity 
-0.0277 [0.0103]*** 
Log total assets 
0.0251 [0.0018]*** 
 
0.0334 [0.0022]*** 
 
0.0333 [0.0022]*** 
Log second-tier CN supplier 
0.0395 [0.0336] 
 
0.0586 [0.0394] 
 
0.0575 [0.0394] 
Log inventory efficiency 
0.0171 [0.0037]*** 
 
0.0213 [0.0043]*** 
 
0.0213 [0.0043]*** 
Log fixed assets turnover 
0.0030 [0.0031] 
 
0.0135 [0.0036]*** 
 
0.0134 [0.0036]*** 
Log capital expenditure 
-0.1739 [0.0200]*** 
 
-0.1527 [0.0234]*** 
 
-0.1526 [0.0234]*** 
Log R&D expenditure 
-0.0008 [0.0003]*** 
 
-0.0003 [0.0004] 
 
-0.0003 [0.0004] 
Outsourcing 
0.0019 [0.0021] 
 
0.0033 [0.0024] 
 
0.0034 [0.0024] 
Horizontal complexity 
-0.0001 [0.0001] 
 
-0.0001 [0.0001] 
 
-0.0001 [0.0001] 
Spatial complexity 
-0.0014 [0.0009] 
 
-0.0020 [0.0011]* 
 
-0.0020 [0.0011]* 
n 
 1,810 
 
 1,810 
 
 
 1,810 
 
R-squared 
16.22% 
 
16.58% 
 
 
16.58% 
 
Adj. R-squared 
15.57% 
 
15.93% 
 
 
15.93% 
 
F-statistic 
35.06 *** 
 
35.98 *** 
 
35.99 *** 
Note. ∗p < 0.10; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗∗∗p < 0.01. Firm and year fixed effects were controlled.