TITLE: Corporate Purpose in Public and Private Firms
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2022.4618
---

Corporate Purpose in Public and
Private Firms
Citation
Gartenberg, Claudine, and George Serafeim. "Corporate Purpose in Public and Private
Firms." Management Science 69, no. 9 (September 2023): 5087–5111.
Published version
https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2022.4618
Link
https://nrs.harvard.edu/URN-3:HUL.INSTREPOS:37378646
Terms of use
This article was downloaded from Harvard University’s DASH repository, and is made
available under the terms and conditions applicable to Open Access Policy Articles (OAP),
as set forth at
https://harvardwiki.atlassian.net/wiki/external/NGY5NDE4ZjgzNTc5NDQzMGIzZWZhMGFlOWI2M2EwYTg
Accessibility
https://accessibility.huit.harvard.edu/digital-accessibility-policy
Share Your Story
The Harvard community has made this article openly available.
Please share how this access benefits you. Submit a story

 
1 
Corporate Purpose in Public and Private Firms 
 
 
 
 
Claudine Gartenberg1 
University of Pennsylvania 
 
 
George Serafeim 
Harvard Business School 
 
May 4th, 2022 
 
Management Science, forthcoming 
 
Abstract 
Analyzing data from approximately 1.5 million employees across 1,108 established public 
and private US companies, we find that the strength of employee beliefs related to purpose 
is weaker in public companies. Among public companies, those beliefs are stronger for 
firms with more committed owners. These patterns are most pronounced within the 
salaried middle and hourly ranks, rather than senior executives. Differences across firms 
can be attributed, in part, to differences in leadership and incentive characteristics. Our 
findings are consistent with higher owner commitment, and the corresponding policies 
that arise alongside this higher commitment, enabling a stronger sense of purpose inside 
organizations. 
 
 
 
Keywords: Corporate Purpose, Corporate Ownership, Long Term Investment 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Corresponding author: Claudine Gartenberg is the Govil Family Assistant Professor of Management at the Wharton School, University of 
Pennsylvania, 3620 Locust Walk, SHDH 2035, Wharton School, Philadelphia PA 19104; email: cgart@wharton.upenn.edu. George Serafeim is 
the Charles M. Williams Professor of Business Administration at Harvard Business School; 381 Morgan Hall, Harvard Business School, Boston, 
MA 02163; email: gserafeim@hbs.edu. We would like to thank David Frieberg for excellent research assistance, and the Great Place to Work 
Institute, and particularly Amy Lyman, Ed Frauenheim and Marcus Erb for their support. This paper has benefitted from comments by participants 
at the Wharton Org Theory workshop, Strategy Research Forum, Strategy Science Conference, Academy of Management Strategy Division 
Executive Committee annual meeting, Oxford University, University of Rome, University of Miami, Boston University, HKU, INSEAD, Ackerman 
Corporate Governance Conference, IESE-ECGI, Purdue, University of Maryland, SIOE Annual Conference, and Harvard Business School. 
Claudine Gartenberg acknowledges financial support from the Govil Family and the Wharton School. George Serafeim acknowledges financial 
support from the Division of Faculty and Research Development at Harvard Business School. We are solely responsible for any errors. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
2 
Introduction 
 
In 1928, Mary Parker Follett, one of the earliest modern management theorists, spoke of purpose 
as the “invisible leader” of organizations. Using English confectioner Rowntree to illustrate this 
idea, she recounted how every factory worker understood what she meant to the company, and 
what the company in turn meant to the local community and to industrial England overall. It was 
“that common purpose rather than Mr. Rowntree himself [that] is their leader” (Follett, 1940:288). 
This idea presaged what her successors Chester Barnard and Phillip Selznick developed into their 
theories of organizations (Barnard, 1938; Selznick, 1948): organizations, as “adaptive social 
structure[s]” (Selznick, 1948), overcome their collective action problems by instilling a common 
purpose, “the spirit shapes the ends of men” (Barnard, 1938). 
Nearly a century after the Rowntree study, however, measurement and data challenges 
have limited empirical research on corporate purpose across organizations. These constraints 
persist despite purpose drawing increasing attention from policy makers, practitioners, and 
academics as an important foundation of strategy, governance, sustainability, and corporate 
performance (George et al., 2021; Chapman et al., 2017; Younger et al, 2020; Hollensbe et al., 
2014). This work has argued that a credibly implemented purpose can increase governance quality 
(Mayer, 2021; Fisch and Solomon, 2020); innovativeness (Henderson, 2021), financial 
performance (Gartenberg et al, 2019); and social performance (Porter et al., 2019). Yet, we know 
little about what drives differences across firms, and why some firms are more effective than others 
at establishing a strong sense of purpose. 
In this study, we explore ownership structure as one potential source of this difference. We 
focus on owners for several reasons. First, a firm’s owners influence the choice of who is placed 
in management positions and where they focus their attention (Zhang and Gimeno, 2016). Owners 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
3 
have been shown to influence a firm’s investment, financing, and governance choices (Trostel and 
Nichols 1982; Capron and Shen 2007; Asker, Farre-Mensa and Ljungqvist 2014; Gilje and Taillard 
2016), as well as innovative direction (Feldman et al., 2018; Bernstein 2015; Hoskisson et al., 
2002; David et al., 2001) and competitive strategy (Connelly et al., 2010; Chen and Feldman, 
2018). As such, owners have broad power to affect core aspects of the organization. 
Moreover, the relationship between owners and management is shifting. Among public 
companies, institutional investors have become increasingly active (Fisch et al., 2020), and hedge 
funds routinely exert influence over corporations (Kahan and Rock, 2007). The largest institutional 
investors, such as index managers, are also becoming more engaged, increasing their informal 
communications with their portfolio firms and influencing board decisions (Fisch et al., 2020). 
Ownership structures are also changing within the economy. In recent years, much attention has 
been placed on the “eclipse” of the public corporation, as the number of public companies has 
declined, and companies remain private for longer (Kahle and Stulz 2017; Doidge, Kahle, Karolyi, 
and Stulz, 2018), as well as on common ownership, the growing concentration of larger 
institutional investors (e.g., Backus et al, 2021). Given that management is ultimately accountable 
to firm owners, a natural question arises about the implications of these shifts for purpose, Follett’s 
“invisible leader” of organizations. 
In this paper, we consider one aspect of this question: the relationship between the strength 
of an organization’s purpose and whether it is publicly held and, more generally, the commitment 
level of its owners. Public listing enables a firm to raise capital from many investors, whose shares 
are traded on public exchanges. The liquidity of these shares in turn creates an ownership structure 
that is more fluid over time. Indeed, the average holding period for stocks traded on the New York 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
4 
Stock Exchange was nine months in 2019, shorter than any period since the 1920s.2 In contrast, 
the limited liquidity in private markets translates into substantially longer ownership horizons. We 
explore whether this limited liquidity and, as a result, the higher resulting commitment of private 
market owners, translates into a stronger sense of purpose within the firm. 
Corporate purpose is an intrinsically imprecise concept that is challenging both to define 
and measure. We conceive of corporate purpose broadly as a company’s “reason for being.”3 We 
measure the strength of this purpose by aggregating actual employee beliefs in the meaning and 
impact of their work, using the approach established by Gartenberg et al. (2019). This approach 
circumvents corporate announcements that have been shown to be inconsequential “cheap talk” 
(Guiso et al., 2015; Michaelson et al., 2020), and instead relies on the collective set of employee 
beliefs to construct a credible, scalable, and comparable signal of purpose at an organization level. 
The rationale for this approach is that, when implemented effectively, corporate purpose results in 
employees on aggregate holding stronger beliefs that their work has meaning and impact. The 
overall strength of these beliefs can therefore serve as a proxy for the strength of the organization’s 
purpose.4 
Our data comes from a proprietary survey from the Great Place To Work Institute (GPTW). 
This survey, to our knowledge, represents one of the largest data sources on employee workplace 
perceptions available to researchers. We obtain measures of purpose for 1,108 firms based on the 
beliefs of 1,509,797 employees. These employees span the organizational hierarchy from hourly 
 
2 https://www.mfs.com/content/dam/mfs-enterprise/mfscom/insights/2019/November/mfse_time_wp/mfse_time_wp.pdf, accessed Aug 5, 2020 
3 Purposeful Company Report, 2016. 
4 We use the term “purpose” throughout this study. “Purpose” generally refers to the content of beliefs. In this study, however, we are interested in 
the strength of the beliefs, or “purposefulness,” and not the specific beliefs themselves. Similarly, when we refer to “meaning” within the workplace, 
we generally are interested in “meaningfulness,” or the strength, rather than the content, of meaning. For readability, we often shorten 
“purposefulness” and “meaningfulness” to “purpose” and “meaning”, respectively. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
5 
workers up to executives. Critically, the data includes both publicly listed and privately held firms, 
enabling us to conduct our analysis. 
Following Gartenberg et al. (2019), we derive our proxy measure for purpose by 
performing a factor analysis on the full set of survey items. Of the four factors derived by the 
analysis, we identify the factor that includes beliefs regarding the meaning and impact of work 
(e.g., “My work has special meaning: this is not just a job”; “I feel good about the ways we 
contribute to the community”). This factor also includes beliefs about the clarity provided by 
management (e.g., “Management has a clear view of where the organization is going and how to 
get there”; “Management makes its expectations clear.”). This combination of meaning and 
clarity represent a single bundle of beliefs that covary across survey responses; respondents tend 
to record strong or weak beliefs in meaning and clarity in conjunction with each other. This 
combination of meaning and clarity, while emergent from our factor analysis, is consistent with 
research on the role of clarity in sustaining informal commitments within organizations (Gibbons 
and Henderson, 2012a, b). Moreover, it is important to note that these beliefs are orthogonal to a 
separate factor that captures perceptions of overall management quality as well as to overall 
satisfaction. 
We begin by reporting how purpose differs across public and private firms. This first 
analysis yields several notable findings. First, purpose is weaker in public firms, relative to their 
private counterparts. This difference is substantial, translating to approximately 20 percent of a 
standard deviation difference in purpose within the sample. Next, we provide evidence that these 
patterns can be explained, at least in part, by differences in owner commitment levels. To do this, 
we construct three proxies for commitment, two related to public firms and one to private firms. 
Within the set of public firms, first, we measure the percentage of voting shares held by dedicated 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
6 
minus transient institutional investors, with a larger percentage corresponding to greater 
commitment to the firm (Bushee 1998; 2001, Eccles et al. 2014; Brochet et al. 2015; Zhang and 
Gimeno 2016). Second, we measure the percentage of shares held by hedge funds. Because hedge 
funds have higher cost of capital, targeting 15-20% investment returns, they typically have a high 
discount rate and are likelier to seek investments with large and relatively fast payoffs (DesJardine, 
Marti and Durand 2020). We use this second measure as a proxy of less commitment. Among 
private firms, we identify the set with private equity (PE) owners. Because of the contractually 
determined and limited fund lifetime, PE owners typically have a 5 to 6 years horizon when 
investing in the firm. Therefore, we expect PE owners to exhibit less commitment relative to other 
private market owners (e.g., owner-managed, family firms) that have been found to be financially, 
emotionally, and socially committed for decades or even generations (Villalonga and Amit, 2020; 
Gomez-Mejia et al. 2011; Carney et al. 2015). All three proxies show that greater owner 
commitment is associated with higher corporate purpose, although the results for PE do not obtain 
statistical significance in several specifications. 
Given that we lack a natural experiment, we are cautious about making causal claims 
regarding the effect of ownership on corporate purpose. Specifically, we cannot definitively 
separate the interpretation that these empirical patterns reflect the match between owners and firms 
from the interpretation that owners directly influence the strength of purpose. Our view is that both 
mechanisms are likely at play. To separate the treatment from the matching interpretations, we 
perform several lead-lag analyses. We find that hedge fund ownership both leads and lags purpose 
while purpose leads more dedicated relative to transient investor ownership. As such, hedge funds 
appear to have both a treatment and matching effect on purpose, while dedicated institutional 
owners appear to select firms with stronger purpose. This dichotomy is plausible given that hedge 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
7 
funds are more likely than other institutional funds to be active owners. Moreover, dedicated 
investors, by construction, are slow to adjust their portfolios (i.e., lower portfolio turnover) and 
therefore their effect would be harder to detect in our data. 
To provide further insights into the mechanisms through which purpose might be related 
to ownership, we augment our models with organizational features, including measures of leader 
commitment and the rewards structure inside an organization. We find that several of these 
measures—such as whether the CEO joined in lower ranks and was internally promoted, the pay 
gap between the CEO and employees, and the degree to which CEO incentives are based on 
nonmonetary factors—are related both to owner commitment and to purpose. 
This study makes several contributions. First, we add to a growing body of work on the 
role of corporate purpose within firms (George et al., 2021; Mayer, 2021; Chapman et al., 2017; 
Thakor and Quinn, 2013, Henderson, 2021; Gartenberg et al., 2019). In doing so, we respond to a 
call from Hollensbe et al., (2014) for empirical work on the topic. Both this call and our study 
directly relate to a recent resurgence of interest in the role of firms in society (Mayer, 2020; 
Edmans, 2020; Hart and Zingales, 2017), with our study providing evidence that ownership 
structure and purpose are related. Second, our effort also contributes to recent work in strategy that 
has adopted a comparative governance lens through which to assess firm behavior (e.g., Luo and 
Kaul, 2019; Klein et al., 2019; Connelly et al., 2010; Bloom et al., 2012). These studies address 
the impact of different institutional ownership arrangements on both strategic and social outcomes. 
Our study shows that ownership affects not only outside stakeholders, but also employees and their 
perceptions about the meaning and impact of their work. Last, we contribute to research on 
corporate ownership that assesses differences between public and private firms (Capron and Shen 
2007; Asker et al., 2014; Gilje and Taillard 2016; Bernstein 2015; Fitza and Tihanyi 2017). Our 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
8 
work suggests that the likely impact of public ownership extends beyond financial decisions and 
calls for further research focused on the implications of ownership for the management and 
governance of corporations. 
 
Corporate Purpose 
In this section, we first define corporate purpose. We then consider how it is shaped by a firm’s 
leadership, and how these leaders in turn are shaped by a firm’s owners. Based on this logic, we 
then present two hypotheses regarding the nature of a firm’s owners and corporate purpose. 
 
What is Corporate Purpose? 
Corporate purpose is the “why” behind an organization’s existence. It is often defined with a social 
orientation, as in Bartlett and Ghoshal (1994): “the statement of a company’s moral response to its 
broadly defined responsibilities, not an amoral plan for exploiting commercial opportunity.” 
Thakor and Quinn (2013) similarly consider purpose as “something that is perceived as producing 
a social benefit over and above the tangible pecuniary payoff that is shared by the principal and 
the agent.” Purpose need not be explicitly prosocial, however. The Purposeful Company Report 
(2016) defines purpose more broadly as a company’s “reason for being,”5 a definition that includes 
companies driven by creative, technological or other deeply-held, but not necessarily prosocial, 
motivations. Gartenberg et al. (2019)’s definition is similar, as “a set of beliefs about the meaning 
of a firm’s work beyond quantitative measures of financial performance.” We view purpose as 
encompassing this broader perspective. 
 
5 The Purposeful Company Interim Report, May 2016. 
http://www.biginnovationcentre.com/media/uploads/pdf/The%20Purposeful%20Company%20Interim%20Report.pdf, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
9 
While interest among practitioners has surged over the past decade, the importance of 
corporate purpose has long been recognized, initially by Mary Parker Follett, Chester Barnard, 
Philip Selznick, and the other early institutionalists from the mid-20th century who studied 
organizations and their role in society.6 For these scholars, firms distinguished themselves from 
markets in their capacity to act as “cooperative systems,” (Barnard, 1968), what Chandler referred 
to as the “visible hand” of formal organization (Chandler, 1977). In their view, purpose was as 
central to guiding organizations as prices were to markets (Ghoshal and Moran, 1996). It also 
represented more than organizational goals, providing an outlet for the deeply held aspirations of 
the members (Barnard, 1968: 282): “Organizations endure… in proportion to the breadth of the 
morality by which they are governed…Foresight, long purposes, high ideals, are the basis for the 
persistence of cooperation.” Selznick had a similar conception: purpose enabled companies to 
evolve from “expendable organizations” to “enduring institutions…infused with value” (Selznick, 
1957: 18). 
In this view of firms as adaptive social systems, purpose guides the organization, providing 
the foundation of cooperation. Purpose is therefore realized not when it is formalized as a “purpose 
statement,” but when it forms the basis of collective beliefs within the organization. José Viñals, 
the Group Chairman of Standard Chartered, the large UK financial services company with 100,000 
employees worldwide, articulated this view from his practitioner vantage: 
Purpose can never simply be a nice statement written on the walls of the company; 
there must be a deep understanding of the purpose and its connection to decision 
making to make it a reality. We experienced this during Covid19: we didn’t have 
a map to navigate the crisis, but we did have a strong compass of values and 
purpose to guide us.7 
 
 
6 For example see here for a legal perspective from Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz: https://corpgov.law.harvard.edu/2020/08/05/on-the-purpose-
and-objective-of-the-corporation/ 
7 IESE-ECGI Conference, Oct 30, 2020 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
10 
In other words, purpose is intrinsically an intangible idea, existing as the collective set of beliefs 
about the meaning of the work that guides the organization. This view is sufficiently broad to 
encompass the myriad aims that underpin organizations, but not so sweeping as to encompass all 
intangible aspects of the organization, such as culture, identity, and values.8 Moreover, the 
existence of these beliefs is not a foregone conclusion: there may be firms in which employees 
view the organization as devoid of purpose, and others for which the opposite is the case. 
 
How Does Purpose Impact Employees? 
From the early institutionalists onward, purpose was considered central to organizations precisely 
because of its impact on members. In this sense, it falls into a class of level-spanning constructs, 
situated at the level of the organization, but substantiated through the convictions of its members 
(Felin, Foss, and Ployhart, 2015).9 This impact takes several forms. 
First, purpose endows daily work with meaning (Besharov and Khurana, 2015; Bass and 
Riggio, 2006). Meaning has long been understood as one of the primary motivators of individuals, 
(Frankl, 1946). As Barnard (pg 93: 1938) argued, “it appears utterly contrary to the nature of men 
to be sufficiently induced by material or monetary considerations to contribute enough effort to a 
cooperative system to enable it to be productively efficient to the degree necessary for persistence 
over an extended period.” Recent research has supported this view, showing that meaningful work 
is often valued above income and career advancement (Cascio, 2003) and increases employee 
effort and quality (Grant, 2008; Ariely et al., 2008; Cassar and Meier, 2018). When employees can 
 
8 We consider the links with these other aspects in the discussion section. One construct that is difficult to separate from purpose is “mission” in 
that practitioners tend to use these two terms interchangeably. We use the word purpose to encompass both ideas. 
9 This class of constructs raises two questions: first, how can we justify this aggregation into an organizational construct, versus a simple umbrella 
label for individual beliefs? Second, how do these constructs relate to each other? We defer the first question to the data section and the second 
question to the discussion section, where we specifically consider four constructs that could closely relate to purpose: culture, identity, values, 
and stakeholder orientation. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
11 
connect their own work to a larger purpose, they can derive meaning even from the most pedestrian 
activities (Carton, 2018; Wrzesiewski, 2003). 
Second, purpose reinforces identification with the organization (Bouchikhi and Kimberley, 
2007; Henderson and van den Steen, 2015; Akerlof and Kranton, 2005). Identification, in turn, 
alters the relevant frame from the individual to the group, such that members consider the overall 
interests of the group, in addition to their own, when choosing their actions. 
Finally, purpose enables alignment of discretionary effort (Rotemberg and Saloner, 2000) 
by providing a shared vision of where the organization is going. This alignment, in conjunction 
with traditional authority-based tools can become particularly important as firms grow in size and 
complexity (Ghoshal, Moran, and Almeida-Costa, 1995). 
In performing these functions, purpose can exert a powerful influence on the members of 
an organization, beyond the extrinsic incentive effects considered in standard theories of the firm 
(Gibbons, 2005; Zenger et al., 2011; Gartenberg and Zenger, 2022). Meaning, identification, and 
shared vision all contribute to positive outcomes at the individual-level within the firm 
(Henderson, 2021), including increased motivation (Deci and Flaste, 1995; Grant, 2008), trust 
(Henrich et al., 2001; Tyler, 2001), and cooperation (Kreps, 1996; Rotemberg and Saloner, 2000). 
These outcomes in turn have been shown to aggregate to positive performance outcomes at the 
firm level, which also corresponds to the finding by Gartenberg et al (2019) that stronger purpose 
is associated with stronger financial performance. These relationships are depicted in Figure 1, 
which builds on a similar conceptualization of corporate purpose by Henderson (2021). 
<<Insert Figure 1 here >> 
 
Leaders as Architects of Purpose 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
12 
The responsibility for establishing shared purpose resides with the organizations’ leaders. 
In Barnard’s view, this responsibility practically defined the idea of leadership: “leadership…is 
the indispensable social essence that gives common meaning to common purpose.” (1938:283). 
Barnard further emphasized that purpose does not mechanically arise in the presence of authority 
but must be deliberately shaped by leaders: “The inculcation of belief in the real existence of a 
common purpose is an essential executive function.” (Barnard, 1938:87). Leaders accomplish this 
by endowing the organization’s collective work with meaning and connect the work of individual 
members to that meaning (Besharov and Khurana, 2015; Carton et al, 2014; Carton 2018). 
 
While a sense of meaning can arise from multiple sources, leaders have powerful levers to 
shape purpose at the organizational level. Of Selznick’s four core responsibilities of leaders 
(1957:62), two concerned purpose: 1) “definition of institutional mission and role”, 2) 
“institutional embodiment of purpose.”10 Recent studies have developed these ideas further, 
clarifying the actions by leaders that influence purpose. For Podolny et al. (2004), leaders create 
the conditions for meaningful action by employees via “agentic attributes, actions, or behaviors” 
that are directly ascribable to the leaders. This includes both communication – speeches, 
conversations, etc. – but also reward policies, formal structure, strategic actions (Beer et al, 2021). 
These studies emphasize the role of leaders not simply in communicating purpose, but also 
in connecting it to the daily work of the employees. For this implementation of purpose to be 
effective, therefore, it must overcome the challenge common to all informal commitments by 
leaders: it must possess sufficient clarity and credibility to be believed by members (Gibbons and 
Henderson, 2012a, b). In this sense, purpose is rendered clear and credible through concrete actions 
by leaders and a connection to employees’ daily work, and not through “purpose statements” or 
 
10 The other two roles are “defense of institutional integrity,” and “ordering of internal conflict,” also implicitly related to establishing and 
maintaining purpose. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
13 
“mission statements” that may only loosely be connected to reality. To highlight the need for this 
connection, Carton (2018) described one of the fundamental tensions inside organizations: that the 
greater the purpose of an organization, the more distant and less connected it appears to employees. 
Resolving this tension required leaders to act, not as “overseers” [monitors] or as “visionaries” (pg 
355), but as “architects”: “focus[ing] less on the inspirational power of reaching the top of a 
completed structure than on depicting the entirety of the structure all at once, from the foundation 
to the top level.” In other words, leaders articulate a common purpose and then create a structure 
that allows employees to connect that purpose to their own work. 
 
How is Purpose Related to Ownership? 
While leaders are central to establishing purpose, they are also constrained by their accountability 
to the firm owners: whatever actions that might influence purpose within the organization must 
also concord with the preferences of owners. In this section, we consider how differences in owner 
commitment might affect differences in purpose across firms. 
 
Greater owner commitment could lead to stronger purpose for several reasons. First and by 
construction, commitment entails a longer ownership duration, which in turn promotes greater 
engagement, a term used by corporate governance experts to represent a collaborative approach 
between owners and leadership (board and managers, in the case of public firms). As Mallow and 
Sethi (2015) state: 
“the engagement approach is one in which shareholders, primarily long-term ones, 
engage with management to understand firm objectives and strategies and 
potentially influence firm outcomes. Under this approach, voting is not the only 
means of being active and bringing about change. Engaging with board and firm 
executives on a continuous, long-term basis can bring about change through 
incremental, non-confrontational means.” 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
14 
To the extent that this greater collaboration translates to an ability to think about the long-
term and avoid short-term pressures, this would enable leadership to focus on its purpose rather 
than on optimizing short-term performance metrics. Conversely, a substantial focus on short-term 
performance metrics would plausibly reduce the credibility of management’s commitment to the 
organization’s purpose, particularly in settings with large intertemporal tradeoffs. This difference 
in focus, in turn, will be observable to employees and therefore influence their perceptions. 
Second, the greater engagement of committed owners may yield more soft information 
about firms, which in turn allows managers to invest in productive but hard to verify projects that 
otherwise would not be approved by less committed owners (e.g., Grossman and Hart, 1986). For 
example, owners might be better able to identify when risky projects fail due to exogenous factors, 
thereby reducing managers’ reluctance, due to career concerns, to make risky investments in 
pursuit of the organization’s purpose (Bertrand and Mullainathan 2003). Once again, these projects 
should be observable to employees and therefore influence their perceptions. 
Third, committed owners might mitigate free rider problems inside the firm, allowing 
employees to make firm-specific investments with greater confidence that they will not be held up 
by firm owners (Alchian and Demsetz 1972; Williamson 1985), which in turn could enhance the 
sense of purpose inside the organization.11 Employees would not be invested in the same way in 
their work and would avoid making firm-specific investments if they perceive a high probability 
that owners would extract all the value from those investments (Blair and Stout 1990). 
In sum, in the presence of more committed owners, leaders are more likely to behave in a 
way that will be interpreted by employees as consistent with the organization’s purpose. In the 
presence of owners that possess more soft information about the firm and have longer temporal 
 
11 A similar argument could hold for customers, suppliers, and other stakeholders, who could see a strong sense of corporate purpose from owner 
commitment as a credible signal that enables the development of trust or ‘relational contracts’ (Gibbons and Henderson 2012a, b). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
15 
horizons, managers have greater discretion to select actions that have less easily verifiable 
outcomes and will be realized over a long time period. This discretion translates to a greater ability 
to engage in the “agentic behaviors” (Podolny et al., 2004) that support purpose, since these actions 
are by construction connected to creating a meaningful context for the firm employees and less 
connected to immediate payoffs and verifiable returns. 
To explore this relationship between owner commitment and purpose, the first major 
difference that we consider is whether firms are privately held or publicly listed. A defining 
characteristic of public owners is the relative ease with which they may buy and sell their holdings, 
given the liquidity of public equity markets.12 Private markets, on the other hand, are substantially 
less liquid: ownership is privately negotiated and relatively costly to transfer, and owners of private 
firms generally must support their firms when performance declines (Fitza and Tihanyi, 2017). As 
a result, private owners commit to a firm for years, or even decades, in contrast to public market 
investors. Our logic, therefore, is as follows: this fundamental asymmetry in liquidity between 
public and private firms leads to differences in owner commitment to a firm. These differences in 
commitment lead to differential levels of engagement with managers in public and private firms, 
which in turn provides managers of private companies the discretion to engage in activities that 
foster a greater sense of purpose within their organizations: 
H1: Publicly listed firms exhibit a lower sense of purpose compared to privately held firms, all else 
equal. 
To explore this commitment mechanism further, we hypothesize that the type of 
institutional owner might yield significant differences in purpose across firms, with stronger 
 
12 Of course, there are limits to liquidity and a significant percentage of ownership might take days or even weeks or months to sell, especially for 
illiquid stocks. However, in relative terms, even large percentage of ownership for illiquid stocks is more liquid than similar ownership in a private 
firm. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
16 
purpose likelier within firms with long-term institutional owners. These owners have a greater 
incentive to engage with corporate leaders than transient investors, since any threat of exit is by 
definition less credible. In fact, in their survey of institutional investors, McCahery et al. (2016) 
report a substantially higher degree of informal engagement between long-term investors and 
corporate leaders. Over their respondents, nearly 63% reported discussions with top management, 
45% discussions with the board outside of management, and 35% proposed specific actions to 
management, trends that were driven by investors with longer investment horizons and less liquid 
holdings. This level of engagement is consistent with the principles for institutional investors 
advocated by Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen and Katz (WLRK), an established law firm known for 
advocating for a long-term orientation for directors and investors. This engagement, WLRK has 
advocated, enables the effective implementation of purpose: 
Any effective purpose initiative will require not just director engagement, but also 
management leadership and the committed participation of investors. So conceived as 
a partnership of key corporate constituencies—necessarily including institutional 
investors – corporate purpose initiatives have the potential to facilitate long-term 
corporate sustainability and to help protect companies and boards from the rising tide 
of shareholder litigation and short-term activist pressure.13 
 
As with the logic preceding H1, greater engagement enables management to act in support 
of the organization’s purpose thereby reinforcing employee beliefs on the meaning of their work. 
Given this connection between long term ownership, engagement, and purpose, we would expect 
a positive association between commitment and purpose within the organization. 
H2: Purpose is higher in firms with more committed owners than in firms with less committed 
owners. 
We consider three sources of variation of owner commitment. First, within public firms, 
we expect lower commitment from investors that have higher cost of capital and therefore higher 
 
13 Wachtell newsletter, August 19, 2020 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
17 
discount rates. In the presence of high discount rates, an investor is likely to search for and attempt 
to influence management to make decisions that will yield significant profits within a short period 
of time, such as divestments, share repurchases, or strategic acquisitions, that will generate large 
price reactions (DesJardine, Marti and Durand 2020). A typical example of such an investor type 
in public markets is hedge funds, which generally target 15-20% absolute returns. Second, we 
expect that more dedicated relative to transient institutional investors to be associated with a 
stronger sense of purpose. Dedicated (transient) investors exhibit more (less) concentrated 
holdings and longer (shorter) holdings periods thereby, by definition, exhibiting a stronger 
(weaker) commitment to the firm (Bushee, 1998; 2001). Past research has found that more 
dedicated relative to transient investors translates into differences in a firm’s adoption of 
sustainability strategies (Eccles, Ioannou and Serafeim 2014), CEO communication of long vs 
short-term oriented information in conference calls (Brochet, Loumioti and Serafeim 2015), 
competitive behavior (Zhang and Gimero 2016), and strategic vs tactical actions (Connelly et al. 
2010). 
H2a: Within publicly listed firms, purpose will be lower (higher) in firms with more of the 
outstanding shares held by hedge funds (dedicated relative to transient investors). 
Among private firms, we expect lower commitment from private equity funds due to the 
contractually preset and limited nature of the ownership horizon, relative to other private owners. 
For example, research on private family firms documents the commitment that these owners 
exhibit to their firms extending across generations (Carney et al. 2015) and the associated 
emotional and social ties (Gomez-Mejia at al. 2011). In contrast, most private equity funds have 
an expiration date of about eight years from their inception. Therefore, they typically target 
ownership horizons of five to six years and internal rates of return (IRR) of 15-20% (Phalippou 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
18 
2020). The shorter the ownership period and the faster they return the money to their investors, for 
a given amount of absolute money earned, the higher the IRR (Phalippou, 2020). 
H2b: Within privately held firms, purpose will be lower for firms owned by private equity funds. 
 
 
Data and Research Design 
Research Design 
We divide our analysis into three parts. In the first part, we test Hypothesis 1 by relating our 
measure of purpose to public and private ownership. In the second part, we test Hypothesis 2 by 
introducing our three proxies of owner commitment and explore how these proxies relate to 
corporate purpose. In the third part, we explore the role of various leader and reward structure 
characteristics in mediating the commitment-purpose relationship. 
Note that our research design is correlational: our setting does not provide a clean 
instrument to isolate the causal impact of firm ownership on corporate purpose. We do perform a 
lead-lag analysis that provides partial evidence on the consistency of the reported correlations with 
a sorting or a treatment effect. 
 
Measure of Corporate Purpose14 
Our research question requires a scalable and reliable measure of purpose. Our approach is 
to use individual-level survey data to infer the strength of purpose at the organization level by 
aggregating the strength of employee beliefs. The measure is constructed from a survey of a 
 
14 This measurement approach is adapted from Gartenberg et al. (2019). While their sample stops at 2011 and includes only public firms, our 
sample extends to 2016 and includes both public and private firms. Using this expanded sample, the factor analysis yields substantively the same 
four factors that explain most of the variation. We refer the reader to their study for detailed descriptions of the four factors. We later consider 
“Purpose-camaraderie,” as well as a composite index of the four meaning questions on their own, in the discussion section as alternative 
measures of corporate purpose. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
19 
randomized, stratified sample of employees across a large number of firms over time, an approach 
that permits the construction of a standardized measure that can be compared across firms. 
This approach has two substantial advantages over alternatives. First, it circumvents the 
“cheap talk” challenge of purpose statements or CEO proclamations (Guiso, Sapienza, and 
Zingales, 2015; Michaelson, Lepisto, and Pratt, 2020), while retaining the ability to conduct a 
large-sample analysis across firms and over time. Second, it avoids the limitations of text analyses 
based on public employee evaluation databases (e.g, Glassdoor). These analyses have been shown 
to be effective in empirical studies of culture (Srivastava and Goldberg, 2017; Corritore et al., 
2020; Marchetti, 2020), but their free text format does not yield sufficient information on which 
to base a measure of purpose. Moreover, the self-selection into these evaluations introduces 
interpretation challenges that would be particularly acute in our case. 
That said, our approach involves several choices that are important to highlight. First, we 
do not capture the content of purpose, per se, but instead the strength of beliefs associated with 
purpose, or “purposefulness.” As such, we do not have insight into the content of the purposes that 
drive organizations. Second, we do not capture the actions that led to the formation of those beliefs, 
which can arise from a multitude of unobservable sources not directly related to an intentional 
“corporate purpose.” 
These two choices together highlight a general challenge for studies of level-spanning 
constructs such as purpose: beliefs exist within individuals from which the organizational construct 
must be inferred. This inferential process leads to both a “strong form” and a “weak form” 
interpretation of our purpose measure. In the “strong form” interpretation, the aggregated beliefs 
effectively constitute purpose, given Selznick’s and Barnard’s contention that purpose only exists 
as collective beliefs held by members of the organization. In the “weak form” interpretation, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
20 
employee beliefs arise in organizations with purpose but are not purpose itself. Instead, these 
beliefs comprise an informative signal of that purpose: when the underlying purpose varies, 
individual beliefs should also systematically vary. In this latter interpretation, systematic variation 
in employee beliefs indicates variation in the strength of purpose. We interpret our results using 
this more conservative weak form approach: our measure should be viewed as a signal of 
underlying purpose, rather than as a direct measure of purpose itself. 
Our measure has one additional challenge that is specific to our data source: it is based on 
a proprietary survey that is not explicitly designed to measure purpose, but instead the full range 
of employee beliefs about the workplace. As such, we construct our signal from the bundle of 
beliefs that are conceptually most closely related to the beliefs we would theoretically expect to 
arise in settings with strong purpose. We discuss the beliefs that we include in our measure later 
in this section, and the tradeoffs of this approach in the discussion section. 
 
Data Description 
The primary data for this study is compiled from applications to Fortune Magazine’s annual “100 
Best Companies to Work For” list, administered by The Great Place to Work® Institute. The 
applications comprise all submissions to the annual list, regardless of whether the companies were 
selected. These data have been previously used by Gartenberg et al. (2019), where it is described 
in further depth, as well as Guiso et al. (2015), and Garrett, Hoitash and Prawitt (2014). 
All applicants are required to employ more than 1,000 workers in the US and to have 
existed for at least seven years. Since the submission process is costly for applicant companies, 
our dataset comprises a self-selected sample whose management believes that they have a credible 
chance of being included on the list and who place relatively greater value on human capital. One 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
21 
potential concern is that sample selection may limit the generalizability of our results if public and 
private firms differ in their levels of participation in a way that is also related to the strength of 
their purpose. On the other hand, this sample may also be a conservative setting for our analysis 
since these companies are more likely to aim for a sense of purpose among their employees, or at 
least the appearance of such, relative to the universe of firms. We consider potential sample bias 
in Appendix C. 
The application package to the list contains two sections: The Culture Audit Survey© 
(CAS) and the Trust Index© employee survey (TI). The CAS includes structure and policy 
information about the applying company, including industry and location of headquarters, 
employee composition (e.g., numbers, age, and tenures at different hierarchical levels), and pay 
and benefit information. The TI, the main data of interest for our study, is a randomized employee 
survey that captures employees’ beliefs about the workplace climate, including management 
quality, coworker relationships, and the nature of their work. The survey is stratified by job level, 
where the job levels include hourly employees, sales (commission-based) workers, middle 
managers and supervisors, salaried professional and technical workers, and executives and senior 
managers. The survey consists of 57 questions with responses ranging from 1 to 5 on a Likert-like 
scale, where 1 corresponds to “almost always untrue” and 5 corresponds to “almost always true.”15 
Our data agreement with the Institute provides access to all applications – both successful 
and unsuccessful – from 2006 to 2016. We combine summary information from the CAS with TI 
survey data, which we aggregate up to the firm-year level. We merge this dataset with the 
following additional data sources: Compustat to identify the publicly-traded companies in our 
 
15 While our data agreement precludes us from releasing the full set of questions from the survey, a public description of the survey instrument can 
be found here: http://www.greatplacetowork.net/our-approach/what-is-a-great-workplace, accessed 6/25/16. Our four questions on purpose fall 
under the designated “Employee Pride” category. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
22 
sample, Capital IQ to identify private equity owners, and Factset and Thomson Reuters for investor 
identity information on the public firms. 
The sample includes 2,860 firm-year observations, aggregated from 1,509,797 survey 
responses from full time employees, with a median level of 563 responses per firm. Our sample 
includes 1,848 observations from public firms and 1,012 from private firms. The firms in our 
sample are large, with on average $10.8 billion in revenues and 11,300 full time employees. 
Appendix Table A1 shows the number of firms in our sample across years and industries. 
 
Measure Construction 
Our purpose measure is based on an exploratory factor analysis of the TI survey of employee 
workplace perceptions. 16 The factor analysis has two benefits over a simple index of the survey 
questions that most closely relate to purpose. First, it does not impose a structure on the data but 
instead reveals latent constructs driving response patterns. Second, the factors are based on a 
rotated loading matrix that orthogonalizes the measures. Given that the correlation between survey 
items ranges from 0.3 to 0.8, this rotation removes common variance, which in our case likely 
reflects overall job satisfaction. Conceptually speaking, the factors that emerge from the analysis 
can be considered bundles of beliefs that covary together: sets of questions that the survey 
respondents tend to answer similarly, independent of their overall job satisfaction. 
The factor analysis reveals four underlying factors that explain the bulk of the variance in 
the survey. Of these four factors, one factor comprises beliefs most closely related to our 
conceptual representation of purpose as depicted in Figure 1, and we therefore use this factor to 
aggregate into our measure of purpose at the organizational level. Following the convention of 
 
16 We include 53 of the 57 questions, excluding four questions that are outcome measures of overall job satisfaction. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
23 
Gartenberg et al., (2019), we label this factor “Purpose-Clarity” and use the aggregated measure 
as our dependent variable.17 The beliefs captured in “purpose” component are as follows: “My 
work has special meaning: this is ‘not just a job’”, “I feel good about the ways we contribute to 
the community”, “When I look at what we accomplish, I feel a sense of pride”, and “I’m proud to 
tell others I work here.”18 The items within the “clarity” component are: “Management has a clear 
view of where the organization is going and how to get there”, “Management makes its 
expectations clear.” While clarity may seem distinct from purpose, these ideas are conceptually 
related. The clarity items reflect the role of clarity in upholding informal commitments within 
organizations (Gibbons and Henderson, 2012a, b), as well as research on meaningful work 
requiring a clear structure for individuals to contribute to the overall purpose (Beer et al., 2021; 
Carton and Lucas, 2018; Pratt and Ashforth, 2003; Podolny et al., 2004). 
It is also important to note what this factor does not capture. Since it is based on a rotated 
loading matrix, it does not capture overall employee satisfaction, nor does it measure perceptions 
of overall management quality, which is included in a separate factor, labelled Management.19 
Appendix B includes the primary questions included in each factor that results from the factor 
analysis. 
To construct a firm-year level measure of purpose, we take the average of the Purpose-
Clarity factor across all survey respondents within a firm-year. Later in the paper, we substitute 
 
17 The three other factors are: Management, which captures beliefs in the quality of firm’s managers; Non-discrimination, which captures the 
sense that the firm does not discriminate on the basis of age, gender, race or ethnicity; and Purpose-Camaraderie, a second purpose-related factor 
in which the purpose questions covary with questions regarding the degree of collegiality within an organization. We examine Purpose-
Camaraderie as an alterative purpose measure in the discussion section; however, choose Purpose-Clarity as our primary measure. 
18 The four items that constitute the “purpose” component relate to the meaning of and pride in an individual’s work. While meaning and pride 
represent different constructs, it is unsurprising that these items covary, as “authentic pride” (in contrast to “hubristic pride”) is often linked to the 
meaningful achievement and prosociality (Tracy and Robins, 2007) and member identification, also discussed in Henderson (2021) and depicted 
in Figure 1. 
19 Nor does it capture inclusion and non-discrimination, also reflected in a separate factor labelled Non-discrimination. A fourth separate factor 
includes purpose beliefs together with collegiality, which we consider as an alternative measure in the Appendix C. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
24 
this variable with other measures of purpose to assess how the results vary with the choice of 
purpose measure.20 
 
 
Public/Private Ownership, Proxies for Owner Commitment, and Corporate Policies 
To test H1, we sort firms into two top-level categories: public and private. We identify public firms 
by whether they have a corresponding record in Compustat North America, cross-checked with an 
indicator within the GPTW survey of the public or private status of the firm. To test H2, we 
construct three proxies of owner commitment. The first two proxies are based on the identities of 
the public market investors, which we identify by merging our sample with Factset and Thomson 
Reuters. We measure hedge fund ownership as the percentage of outstanding shares held by hedge 
funds. We define a variable for firms with high percentage of dedicated relative to transient 
investors following prior literature (Eccles et al. 2014; Brochet et al. 2015). We use the 
classification of institutional investors used by Bushee (1998; 2001), calculating for each firm-
year the difference between percentage of shares held by voting dedicated and transient investors. 
Our third proxy, obtained via Capital IQ, identifies whether the firm is private equity-owned. We 
code a firm as PE-owned if a private equity firm is identified as an owner in Capital IQ. 
 
Control Variables 
We include the following control variables in our specifications: the natural logarithm of firm sales 
and number of employees, as the sense of purpose may be related to the size of the firm and the 
corresponding degree of bureaucracy required. We also include controls for firm age, and fixed 
 
20 In a supplementary analysis, we also constructed three alternative measures of purpose: 1) an index of only the four purpose-related questions, 
2) an index of only the clarity related questions, 3) the second purpose factor from the factor analysis, Purpose-Camaraderie. None of these 
measures are related to acquisitions or the acquisition characteristics that we identify in this study. Results obtained using these alternative 
measures of purpose are provided in the appendix. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
25 
effects for year, industry, and the state in which the firm is headquartered, as all of these factors 
may influence the degree of purpose within firms.21 In line with prior work (Guiso et al., 2015) we 
include their “halo control,” a variable measuring workplace physical safety, to absorb overall 
satisfaction with the workplace. The rationale for including this variable as a control is that while 
physical safety is also likely be inflated in an environment with overall job satisfaction, it is 
conceptually distinct from other aspects of the workplace environment. Finally, we include 
controls for the proportion of employees at different job levels to account for the fact that 
employees lower in the organization tend to have a lower sense of purpose. 
 
Empirical Specification 
We estimate the relation between Purpose-Clarity and ownership characteristics using an OLS 
model, clustering standard errors at the firm level to account for serial correlation within a firm 
over time. The models we estimate are: 
PurposeClarityit = a + b1 x Publicit + b2 x Industryit + b3 x Yeart + b4 x Statet + ∑Firm controlsit + 
∑Employee controlsit + ϵ!" (1) 
and 
PurposeClarityit = a + b1 x Publicit + b2 x Public x Hedge Fundit + b3 x Public x Long-term Investorsit + b4 
x PEit + b5 x Industryit + b6 x Yeart + b7 x Statet + ∑Firm controlsit + ∑Employee controlsit + ϵ!" (2) 
where PurposeClarity is the Purpose-Clarity factor for firm i in year t. Public is an indicator 
variable that takes the value of one if the firm is publicly listed. The omitted group in equation (1) 
is private firms. State, Industry and Year represent the state of corporate headquarters, industry, 
and year fixed effects. Firm controls include the natural logarithm of total sales, number of 
 
21 Controlling for firm fixed effects is difficult in our setting because we observe few changes in ownership for the period and the firms in our 
sample, and we do not have a good understanding of how fast changes in ownership might translate into changes in purpose. We leave this important 
question for future research. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
26 
employees, firm age, and the halo control. Employee controls include employee age and tenure. 
Coefficient b1 in equation (1) is our main estimate of interest. It represents the incremental increase 
or decrease in purpose associated with public ownership structure relative to a firm that is privately 
owned. The omitted group in equation (2) is private firms non-PE owned. Coefficients b1 - b4 in 
equation (2) are our main estimates of interest. 
Table 1 provides summary statistics by public or private ownership. Public firms are larger 
both in terms of sales and employees and have a different industry distribution. The top three 
industries for public firms in our sample are manufacturing, financial services, and information 
technology. In contrast, the top three industries for private firms in our sample are professional 
services, financial services, and retail. As such, we include controls for both industry and size 
across our analyses. Public and private firms also have different hierarchical structures, with 
private firms comprised of a greater proportion of hourly workers than public firms. Since hourly 
workers tend to possess a lower sense of purpose than salaried and executive level employees 
(Gartenberg et al. 2019), this hierarchical skew toward hourly workers would imply that, all else 
equal, purpose should be lower in private firms. 
<<< Insert Table 1 here >>> 
 
Purpose and Firm Ownership 
Hypothesis 1: Purpose and Public Ownership 
Figure 2 shows the distribution of corporate purpose by ownership type. The distribution is left 
skewed, indicating that purpose is lower in public firms. 
<<< Insert Figure 2 here >>> 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
27 
Table 2 presents the results of estimating equation (1). Columns 1-3 introduce 
progressively more control variables. In column 1, we control only for year fixed effects. In column 
2, we add industry and state fixed effects. In column 3, we also add organizational controls. Across 
these columns, the explanatory power of the column increases from 17.2 to 37.4% suggesting that 
industry membership and firm size are both important explanatory factors. Adding organizational 
controls increases the explanatory power from 37.2 to 37.4%, and the coefficient on the Public 
variable changes very little. The coefficient on public firms is significant at the 5% level. The 
coefficient estimate of -0.0269 in column 3 represents 20% of a standard deviation of Purpose-
Clarity, roughly the same magnitude as the impact of a one standard deviation increase in firm age 
or size. 
<<< Insert Table 2 here >>> 
Public and private firms differ systematically both in terms of size and sector membership. 
Although we control for both industry fixed effects as well as firm size in columns 1-3, a concern 
is that our controls might not adequately mitigate these differences. To understand the robustness 
of our results to a more balanced sample, we run a matching procedure where we implement 
nearest neighbor matching (Panel A) and coarsened exact matching (Panel B) with the same 
matched controls and sets of fixed effects as in Table 2. The results of this match are provided in 
Table 3 and are substantively unchanged. The stability of these measures in this matching process 
suggests that the effect on any omitted variables is either uncorrelated with that of observable 
controls or not substantial (Oster, 2019). Overall, we find strong support for Hypothesis 1. Purpose 
is lower in public firms, a result not driven by observable differences in firm size, age, or industry. 
<< Insert Table 3 >> 
Hypothesis 2: Purpose and Owner Commitment 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
28 
We next test Hypothesis 2 by examining our three proxies for owner commitment. Figure 3 
presents the binned scatterplot of Purpose-Clarity as a function of hedge fund ownership, revealing 
a clear negative association. Similarly, Figure 4 presents the binned scatterplot of Purpose-Clarity 
as a function of long-term investor ownership, revealing a clear positive association. Both 
associations are consistent with Hypothesis 2. 
<<< Insert Figures 3 and 4 here >>> 
Our multivariate analysis, shown in Table 4 is consistent with these patterns. In columns 
1-3, the publicly listed effect is significantly exacerbated for firms with high hedge fund ownership 
and is mitigated for firms with long-term investors. Moreover, PE-owned firms also exhibit weaker 
sense of purpose than private firms, although the estimate is not statistically significant. This could 
reflect that different PE firms have different organizational development strategies, with a minority 
of them strengthening corporate purpose. Thereby the estimated coefficient is negative and close 
to the estimate for public firms and the standard error is high. Using the estimates in column 3, a 
one standard deviation increase in hedge fund ownership is associated with 6% of a standard 
deviation decrease in corporate purpose, while a one standard deviation increase in long-term 
investors is associated with 8% of a standard deviation increase in corporate purpose. The 
coefficient on the PE variable is of the same magnitude, although not statistically significant. 
These effects are the same magnitude as the effect of firm age on Purpose-Clarity, and roughly 
half the magnitude of the effect of firm size. Overall, the evidence provides support for Hypothesis 
2. 
<<< Insert Table 4 here >>> 
We also replicated the analysis at the individual employee level, instead of the aggregated 
firm level observations. Table A2 presents the results of this replication, which confirm our firm-
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
29 
level analysis in both magnitude and significance. Public firms exhibit a weaker sense of purpose 
and that is exacerbated (mitigated) for firms with high percentage of shares held by hedge funds 
(long-term investors). 
 
Alternative Ownership Variables 
The boundaries between public and private firms are sometimes blurry. This is because some 
private firms are owned by public firms raising the issue of whether public firm ownership is 
transmissible. On the other hand, some public firms are family-owned companies, where the 
family has been owning the company for decades, in which case although publicly listed, part of 
the ownership structure would still be characterized by high commitment. We analyze both those 
cases separately to gain deeper insights. 
Many public firms own other private firms that they choose to keep as separate private 
firms with their own leadership structure. Whether keeping a subsidiary as a separate legal entity 
is effective at insulating the firm from the pressures of the parent company is unclear. If indeed 
this is effective, then we expect the private firm to exhibit corporate purpose that is closer to other 
private firms. If it is not effective, we expect those firms to exhibit a corporate purpose that is 
closer to the one exhibited by public firms. Consistent with this latter perspective, Appendix Table 
A11 Panel A shows that these firms have significantly lower purpose. This result suggests that 
there are ownership spillover effects from public markets ownership structures to private firms 
when they are owned by a publicly listed firm. 
An interesting subsample of publicly listed firms is firms where a significant percentage of 
the shares are held by the founding families. These firms might exhibit a stronger sense of purpose 
as families are likely to be much more committed owners and in fact hold the shares for decades 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
30 
if not more. We construct an indicator variable taking the value of one for all public firms where 
a family holds at least one percent of the shares tracing ownership structures in Capital IQ. For 
these firms, we find that corporate purpose is comparable to private firms, albeit with a noisy 
estimate (Panel B). This result provides additional support of the positive association between 
owner commitment and corporate purpose, this time using family owners as a type of committed 
owner. 
 
Lead-Lag Analyses 
 
Our findings are consistent with two distinct, although related, interpretations. The first 
interpretation is that different types of owners choose different types of companies, and hence we 
are reporting a sorting effect in the market for corporate control. The second interpretation is that 
owners have a direct impact on the employees of their companies, and so our patterns capture the 
treatment effect of companies under different types of corporate owners. We consider each of these 
interpretations now. 
 
Under the first interpretation, the patterns that we report reflect companies with higher 
purpose choosing to remain private. Our findings would also suggest that, among public firms, 
hedge funds choose to invest in lower purpose companies while long-term investors invest in 
companies with strong purpose. This assortment may arise either because these companies have 
other attributes that attract certain investors or that investors – for whatever inexplicable reason – 
find lower purpose an attractive attribute on its own. Under this interpretation, investors have no 
direct influence on purpose of the company, and the differences strictly reflect a selection effect. 
Under the second interpretation, owners have a direct impact on purpose. This effect could 
manifest as the impact of these investors engaging with management in ways that directly 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
31 
influence the strength of purpose felt by the employees. For example, if investors influence the 
identity or rewards for the management team, these changes could meaningfully affect the 
employees. 
 
Absent a convincing exogenous change to company ownership, it is impossible to 
definitively separate these two effects. Moreover, from a theoretical perspective, it is implausible 
to us that only one is present in our setting: it is much more likely that owners match to different 
types of companies, and then influence the sense of purpose within those companies in different 
ways. While we cannot separate these two interpretations, Table 4 column 4 shows our best attempt 
to isolate these two effects in our setting. In this table, we replace the ownership categories with 
lagged ownership and forward ownership throughout all specifications.22 The PE ownership 
variable exhibits negligible time variation in our sample and as a result we focus here on the hedge 
fund and long-term investor variables. If a sorting effect is present, we expect purpose to lead 
ownership. If a treatment effect is present, we expect ownership to lead purpose. 
We find a statistically significant association between lag and lead hedge fund ownership 
and purpose. In contrast, for long-term investors we find that purpose exhibits a significant 
association with lead ownership. Overall, the results are more consistent with a treatment and 
sorting effect for hedge funds and a sorting effect for long-term investors in our setting. This 
intuitively makes sense as hedge funds tend to be some of the most active owners in public markets. 
 
Small Sample Switching Analysis 
We also identified four firms that went public in our panel for which we have observations 
both during their private and public periods. We conduct an analysis at the individual level using 
 
22 We impute any missing values at the sample mean to retain a common sample without affecting the point estimates. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
32 
firm fixed effects for these four firms to observe how the change of status from private to public 
is associated with change in Purpose-Clarity. Appendix Table A3 provides the results of this 
analysis. Using the estimated coefficient on Public in column 4, a change in status from private to 
public is associated with a 9 percent within standard deviation drop in Purpose-Clarity, roughly 
half the magnitude the estimate from our main analysis as represented in Table 2. Given the very 
small number of firms we cautiously interpret these results as evidence consistent with our primary 
findings. Overall, these findings support H2, that stronger owner commitment is related to stronger 
sense of purpose within firms. 
 
Organizational Mechanism: Leader Commitment and Rewards 
So far, our analysis provides evidence of the link between owner commitment and purpose. There 
is, however, a considerable distance between investors and employees within the organization. 
How, therefore, do committed investors enable the conditions for a stronger sense of purpose 
among these employees? 
 
While this partnership is unobservable in a large-sample setting as ours, we can look for 
evidence in certain leadership and reward structure characteristics that reflect owner commitment. 
Podolny et al., (2004), in their study of leaders as meaning-makers, emphasized the importance of 
organizational design for the credibility of leaders’ proclamations of purpose: “the medium is very 
much part of the message, and the organization is the medium (pg 27).” To illustrate this point, 
they discuss how articulations by leadership of shared purpose lack credibility within firms with 
vast compensation differentials senior leaders and employees. Compensation structure, rewards, 
and the choice of leaders are examples of characteristics that influence purpose that are in turn 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
33 
influenced by investors. As such, we predict that these factors can help explain the link between 
owner commitment and corporate purpose. 
We examine four categories of these factors. The first category is background of the CEO, 
and specifically overall tenure at the company and whether he or she was promoted from the lower 
ranks of the organization or brought from the outside. The second category is the structure of CEO 
compensation, and specifically the relative pay of the CEO versus the median salaried worker. The 
third category is the incentive structure of the CEO, and specifically whether his or her incentives 
are based on cost and profit margin measures or on growth and non-monetary measures, such as 
employee satisfaction and customer retention and other longer time horizon activities. The fourth 
category covers the compensation structure and benefits offered to employees. Our prior is that 
measures within these four categories should broadly vary with owner engagement, per the 
discussion above. That is, more committed owners will enable the choice of CEO and an incentive 
structure to enable them to focus more on purpose-building activities, which is also complementary 
to greater rent-sharing with employees7. 
We create our measures using GPTW data for CEO background (ISS data for CEO 
compensation, Incentive Lab for incentive metrics), and GPTW data for employee compensation 
and benefits. For CEO background, we include CEO joined in lower ranks, an indicator variable 
whether the CEO has been internally promoted from the lower ranks of the organization, and CEO 
tenure at company, the natural logarithm of tenure in the organization. For CEO compensation, 
we include Pay gap relative to salaried ranks, the ratio of CEO compensation to that of the median 
salaried worker in the firm, and CEO total compensation. For CEO incentive structure, we measure 
Number of margin incentives, and Number of non-margin incentives, the number of incentive 
provisions explicitly tied to margin and non-margin metrics as reported to Incentive Lab. Finally, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
34 
for employee compensation, we calculate a Benefits Index, a composite index of employee benefits 
provided to the company, ESOP, an indicator variable whether the company offers an employee 
stock ownership plan, and Bonus as % comp (salaried), the percentage of total compensation that 
is variable for salaried employees. Note that we do not include mean employee salary here, as it is 
collinear with the CEO-employee pay gap measure in the CEO compensation category. 
Table 5 Column 1 is the baseline reproducing the existing results and are presented for 
comparison purposes. Column 2 includes the CEO background measures and shows that CEO 
joined in lower ranks loads with a positive and significant coefficient, while CEO tenure is not 
significant. The coefficient on Public declines in magnitude somewhat from -0.031 to -0.025, in 
column 2 relative to column 1, as do interaction terms Public*Hedge fund and Public*Long term 
investors, although the decline is smaller in magnitude. However, all three variables remain 
significant, suggesting that CEO background might be an important driver of corporate purpose, 
but it mostly operates independently than ownership commitment. 
Column 3 includes the CEO compensation variables, including Pay gap relative to salaried 
ranks, the ratio of CEO compensation to that of the median salaried worker in the firm, and CEO 
total compensation. These variables load significantly in the columns and further decrease the 
magnitude of the Public coefficient. Firms with higher CEO to average employee pay gap have 
lower sense of purpose after controlling for average CEO pay level, which is significantly and 
positively correlated with purpose. These results provide support to the idea that in organizations 
where the CEO is higher paid, purpose is weaker when employees are not similarly rewarded with 
proportionally higher pay. Column 4 also includes CEO incentive structure variables, and 
specifically Number of margin incentives, and Number of non-margin incentives, the number of 
incentive provisions explicitly tied to margin and non-margin metrics as reported to Incentive Lab. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
35 
Column 5 adds employee compensation measures. The results in this table suggest that firms with 
a reward structure that reflects a commitment to its workforce have higher purpose. 
<<< Insert Table 5 here >>> 
Appendix Table A4 show the results of a supplemental endogenous two-stage analysis, in 
which we predict the corporate policies as a function of firm owners in the first stage and then 
correlate these predicted policies with purpose in the second stage. We specifically consider the 
variables that were significantly related to purpose as reported in Table 5 and instrument these 
variables in a two-stage endogenous least squares regression with our two owner commitment 
measures.23 This result in Table A4 is consistent with the role of fit between owner commitment, 
reward structure, and resulting corporate purpose. It is important to note, however, that the 
inclusion of these measures explains approximately 35% of the difference in Purpose-Clarity 
between public and private firms, still leaving unexplained a significant proportion of the 
association between ownership and purpose. 
 
Overall, the results from these analyses are consistent with the following mechanism: that 
firms with more committed owners exhibit leadership and reward structure characteristics and 
those correlate with stronger beliefs in the meaning of work and in turn corporate purpose. 
 
Results by Job Level 
To this point, all our results document the variation in Purpose-Clarity as measured using 
responses from employees across all levels inside an organization. An interesting question is how 
our results differ considering different hierarchies. One might expect that executives might have 
 
23 We also include two periods of lagged commitment measures as instruments for these policies. Given the likely relationship between owners 
and purpose, this analysis should be interpreted as evidence of fit between ownership, policies and purpose, rather than as evidence that these 
policies impact purpose directly. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
36 
higher sense of purpose unconditionally of ownership. For example, very high levels of 
compensation or a large span of control over the future of the organization might lead executives 
to possess stronger beliefs in the meaning and clarity of their work. The same would be the case if 
owners match with executives that share similar objectives, thereby making purpose again 
independent of ownership type. There are additional reasons why we are motivated to disaggregate 
our Purpose-Clarity measure across job levels. First, there is a distinction in the literature between 
how leaders feel about their actions versus how those actions are perceived by the rest of the 
workforce. A purposeful organization is one where a strong sense of purpose is diffused inside 
the organization. Therefore, understanding how ownership type might affect the sense of purpose 
at different levels of the organization can be instructive in understanding the ability of leaders to 
instill a sense of meaning across the organization. 
Several findings emerge from this analysis, shown in Table 6. First, public firms have lower 
Purpose-Clarity across all job levels except for senior executives. Second, the magnitude of the 
coefficient increases monotonically as one goes down the organizational hierarchy. Executives in 
public firms hold the same beliefs about corporate purpose as their peers in private firms but this 
changes for middle management, even more so for professional staff and then even more for hourly 
workers. We can also think of these results in terms of “purpose inequality”: senior executives of 
public firms experience a greater sense of purpose than their employees, and that inequality of 
purpose is exacerbated the deeper one goes within the organization. This is not the case for private 
companies. This is true even when adjusting for standard deviations by job level: the point 
estimates for executives (Column 1) represent 0.5% of a standard deviation and are statistically 
insignificant, while the point estimates for middle managers, professional and hourly workers 
represent 15%, 19% and 29% of a standard deviation for purpose within each of these job levels, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
37 
respectively, and are all statistically significant at conventional levels. This decline in relative 
purpose is presented graphically in Figure 5, with the difference in corporate purpose plotted at 
each job level, and the relative decline in purpose down the hierarchy clearly visible. 
<<< Insert Table 6 and Figure 5 here >>> 
Table 6 reveals that the negative link between hedge fund ownership and purpose is 
particularly strong at the hourly level, while the positive link between long-term investors and 
purpose is driven by the salaried levels. Interestingly, the lower purpose within private equity firms 
is driven by the executive and middle manager levels, rather than the lower ranks of the 
organization. A potential explanation for the significant effect on PE ownership on executives is 
that executives lose a sense of purpose when they relinquish control to PE owners, or that the 
executives recruited by PE firms find low meaning in their work. Importantly, this result suggests 
that, given the high-powered incentives provided by PE funds, high levels of compensation are 
unlikely to be the culprit for the insignificant result between executive levels and public ownership. 
Moreover, we find that CEO joining in lower ranks, CEO-worker pay gap, and non-margin 
incentives are strongly correlated with purpose in lower levels. These patterns are indeed 
consistent with owners enabling leaders to make structural choices that impact workers down the 
hierarchy. 
Overall, our results are consistent with our prediction that ownership commitment – and 
the structural factors that vary by commitment – have a particular impact among workers at lower 
levels in the organization. 
 
Discussion 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
38 
In this paper we find that our measure of purpose is substantially stronger in private firms relative 
to their public counterparts. We provide evidence that these patterns are explained in part by 
differences in owner commitment that are in turn related to structural choices within the firm such 
as compensation, reward structure, and the background of the CEO. 
In this section, we consider several important questions that our analysis raises, with a 
particular focus on how corporate purpose relates to other aspects of organizations, our 
measurement approach, proposed mechanism, and potential alternative interpretations of our 
findings. Appendix C includes a supplemental discussion of additional considerations, including 
alternative measures of our dependent and explanatory variables, sample selection, and several 
additional tests for omitted variable bias. 
 
Purpose and Other Intangible Organizational Concepts 
One question that arises from our research question is whether corporate purpose is a construct 
that is theoretically distinguishable from other intangible aspects of organizations. We therefore 
begin our discussion by considering how purpose conceptually relates to constructs most related 
to it. specifically consider four constructs in turn: culture, identity, values, and stakeholder 
orientation. 
Purpose and Culture While purpose and organizational culture are often considered 
interchangeably, these constructs are distinct in nature. As with purpose, culture is intrinsically 
imprecise, although its conceptualization has been sharpened over time. In 1989, political scientist 
James Q. Wilson reflected a broad view of organizational culture when he stated “culture is to an 
organization what personality is to an individual” (Wilson, 1989: 91). Research in tradition has 
characterized strong culture organizations as those with employees holding similar values, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
39 
assumptions, and norms (Schein, 1990; Harrison and Carroll, 2006). More recent work has refined 
culture into “a common set of expectations about appropriate or inappropriate attitudes and 
behaviors” (Chatman and O’Reilly, 2016, p. 2016). This definition has engendered two empirical 
approaches, both of which reveal the substantive differences between culture and purpose. One 
approach studies the culture by the relative strengths across specific values such as “adaptability,” 
“results orientation,” or “detail orientation” (O’Reilly et al., 2014), “innovation,” “quality,” 
“integrity,” “teamwork,” (Li, Mai, Shen, and Yan, 2021) or similar categorizations in Marchetti 
(2020) and Weber and Tarba (2012), among others. The second approach studies culture by the 
degree of linguistic convergence among employees (Corritore et al., 2020; Srivastava, Goldberg, 
Manian, and Potts, 2016; Srivastava and Goldberg, 2017). Neither of these two approaches 
considers the degree or strength of shared meaning—central to the construct of purpose—as 
aspects of culture. As such, while purpose and culture cover two important intangible aspects of 
organizations, they are not equivalent. Nor are they necessarily related: as Podolny et al (2004) 
point out in their article about meaning-making inside organizations, nothing about strong 
acculturation within organizations necessarily promotes the emergence of shared meaning and may 
at times impede it. 
Purpose and Identity Purpose and organizational identity are arguably more related than purpose 
and culture, although they are definitionally distinct. Whereas purpose is concerned with “why we 
exist,” identity is concerned with “who we are” (Albert and Whetten, 1985; Pratt and Foreman, 
2000). These distinctions, however, are often obscured in application. For example, leading 
identity scholar Michael Pratt writes in his overview of identity research (Pratt, 2016: 107): “When 
Selznick (1957) refers to organization as ‘infused with meaning,’ and when leaders’ propose a 
higher organizational ‘purpose,’ they are referring to an organization’s normative identity.” 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
40 
Our view is that this interchanging of terms obscures important differences in their 
underlying roles. Rivalry – say between Pepsi and Coke, or Yankees and Red Sox, or Boeing and 
Airbus – can form a strong basis for identity and identification while having little to say about 
purpose. In contrast, when Satya Nadella initiated a profound turnaround at Microsoft, his primary 
focus was on reinvigorating the company’s purpose, a focus that he explicitly contrasted to 
Microsoft’s prior focus on “envy” of its rivals as the basis for action (Nadella, 2017). His re-
articulation of Microsoft’s purpose, “to empower every person and every organization on the 
planet to achieve more,” was clearly a response to “why” the company exists, rather than “who” it 
is. 
That said, purpose and identity are highly related: companies with effective purposes are 
likely to foster strong identities and member identification, while companies devoid of purpose are 
likelier to foster the opposite. This conceptual link is also shown in Figure 1 and discussed in 
Henderson (2021) and Gartenberg and Zenger (2021). However, the fundamental focuses of the 
two ideas remain different: purpose on the “why” and identity on the “who” underpinning an 
organization. 
Purpose and Values Organizational values also relate to purpose. Values can be broadly 
understood as deeply-held beliefs about the moral worth of actions (Benabou and Tirole, 2011). 
Statements such as “inspiring minds,” “bridging cultures,” or “looking out for all” that are featured 
on Apple’s website under “Shared values” reflect this idea.24 Based on this definition, it is clear 
that values and purpose are conceptually related but distinct: effective purposes should enable 
shared values to be realized, but are not equivalent to those values. 
 
24 https://www.apple.com/careers/us/shared-values.html, accessed December 14, 2021. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
41 
Purpose and Stakeholder Orientation. While purpose and stakeholder orientation are related, they 
are also distinct. Specifically, higher stakeholder orientation refers to the idea that a company 
explicitly accounts for and seeks to balance the interests of multiple stakeholders (e.g. customers, 
employees, suppliers, local community) (Freeman 2010). To manage this balance, a company must 
develop governance and management control systems, such as board committee responsibilities, 
incentive plans, metrics, and stakeholder engagement mechanisms, to implement a strategy that 
balances tradeoffs across stakeholders (Eccles, Ioannou, and Serafeim 2014). An outcome of such 
stakeholder orientation could be that company is perceived as more socially responsible and a 
better corporate citizen. 
Given that corporate purpose involves motivations beyond quantitative measures of financial 
performance, many firms with a strong purpose likely also have a strong stakeholder orientation. 
However, the two constructs are not restatements of each other. First, purpose is a common 
understanding of “why” a firm exists, a question that stakeholder orientation does not explicitly 
address. Moreover, a strong purpose does not mechanically imply a strong stakeholder approach. 
While stakeholder orientation assumes that a firm’s objective function should be to achieve better 
outcomes for a diverse set of stakeholders through better stakeholder management, a compelling 
purpose may involve a single-dimensional focus, while imposing negative outcomes on some 
stakeholders. 
An illustrative example of this difference between purpose and stakeholder orientation is Tesla. 
The company’s purpose revolves around the acceleration of the transition towards sustainable 
energy and decarbonization of the economy. However, at the same time, the company has been 
accused of mistreatment of its employees through extremely long working hours, a physically 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
42 
unsafe workplace, and an unwelcoming environment for women. As a result, Tesla is often 
excluded from lists and rankings of companies that are viewed as stakeholder oriented. 
 
That said, we conceptualize a complementary relation between corporate purpose and the 
ability of a company to implement an intentional strategy that considers stakeholder interests in 
the creation of financial value (Grewal and Serafeim 2020). A strong corporate purpose can enable 
intentionality by defining the meaning of actions that need to be taken and increasing alignment 
of all levels of the organization behind those actions. In turn, the measurement of societal impact 
can hold managers accountable, enhance credibility and signal authenticity, in turn reinforcing 
employee beliefs around that purpose inside the organization. 
In sum, purpose – as the “why” behind an organization’s existence – is not equivalent to 
culture, identity, values, or stakeholder orientation. Simplifying the above discussion, purpose 
beliefs address “why we exist,” culture beliefs address “what are appropriate attitudes and 
behaviors,” identity beliefs address “who we are,” values address “where we assign moral worth,” 
and stakeholder orientation addresses “how we allocate scarce resources across different 
stakeholders.” These ideas, however, are interrelated. Effectively implemented, purpose should be 
consistent with the culture and values of the organization, lead to greater member identification, 
and facilitate stakeholder-oriented actions. Our view, however, is that when we measure the 
aggregated strength in meaning within the enterprise, we are measuring a signal of purpose and 
not of these other ideas. We next turn, therefore, to our measurement strategy. 
 
Strengths and Limitations of Purpose Measure 
We construct our measure of corporate purpose based on an employee workplace survey. This 
measurement approach reflects both the core opportunity and challenge for our study. It has the 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
43 
benefit of being based directly on large sample of employee beliefs, circumventing the cheap talk 
challenge of formal purpose statements. On the other hand, since the survey was not explicitly 
designed for our study, we must infer purpose-related beliefs from the questions available. 
Moreover, as with any study using survey data of this nature, we must also address the high degree 
of covariance between responses that is driven by overall satisfaction. In other words, simple 
indices of purpose-related questions will be collinear with satisfaction. 
To address these two challenges, we construct our measure using an exploratory factor 
analysis that permits us to isolate discrete bundles of beliefs that reflect latent underlying factors 
that are both independent of each other and also not proxies for general satisfaction. From the four 
identified factors, we identified the factor that most closely reflects beliefs we would theoretically 
expect in settings with a strong purpose. This factor, which we use as a signal of purpose, 
encompasses a bundle of beliefs in meaningfulness, authentic pride, and clarity that have been 
linked in prior work on purpose as a credible informal commitment (Podolny et al, 2004; Gibbons 
and Henderson, 2012a,b; Henderson, 2021; Gartenberg et al, 2019). 
 
That said, a question arises whether these employee survey items can, in fact, be used to 
represent corporate purpose or whether the construct-to-measure gap is too wide. While the 
resolution to this question is ultimately a matter of judgement, there are two compelling reasons 
to consider that this factor is an informative measure. First, the four factors identified in the factor 
analysis are derived from the full set of questions of the employee survey, a survey designed to 
capture the most important employee perceptions of the workplace. Given that, it is reasonable 
that beliefs in purpose should be included in one of four factors, and it is clear from Appendix B 
that Purpose-Clarity is the most closely aligned with the theoretical construct and its impact on 
employee beliefs. Earlier research has highlighted the connection between purpose to 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
44 
meaningfulness in daily work, a shared vision, and identification (Henderson, 2021, see Appendix 
B), each of which is included in Purpose-Clarity. Of the three remaining factors, only one other, 
labelled Purpose-Camaraderie, could reasonably be considered as an alternative. While we 
consider this possibility in Appendix C, it is important to note that this alternative factor does not 
include beliefs related to clarity, which are linked to effectively-implemented informal 
commitments in organizations (Gibbons and Henderson 2012,ab). Neither of the other two factors, 
Management and Nondiscrimination, reasonably capture beliefs related to purpose. 
Second, it is important to note that we are not aiming to explain all aspects of purpose, but 
instead systematic variation. In this sense, our results can be explained by the conservative “weak 
form” interpretation of our measure. In this weak form interpretation, variation of our signal 
Purpose-Clarity beliefs at the firm level is indicative of variation in the underlying purpose, even 
if Purpose-Clarity captures related beliefs, rather than purpose itself. 
 
That said, a fundamental limitation of our approach that we cannot definitively rule out the 
possibility that systematic variation in meaning, authentic pride, and clarity together does not 
reflecting variation in corporate purpose, but instead variation in another organizational attribute. 
Given our discussion above, it is unlikely that we are capturing culture, trust, or satisfaction. The 
likeliest attribute in our view is identification, as it is empirically and conceptually challenging to 
separate from purpose. As such, our results should be interpreted with this limitation in mind. We 
do not, however, view this overlap as a fundamental challenge to our interpretation: it is 
implausible that these beliefs would reflect a variation in underlying identification that is 
independent of variation in purpose. In other words, our measure may reflect changes in both 
underlying purpose and identification, but it is highly unlikely to reflect variation in identification 
on its own. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
45 
 
In summary, the corporate purpose measure reflects several desirable features. It is 
orthogonal to other empirically derived organizational constructs, scalable and comparable across 
a large number of firms, and it derives from a randomly drawn set of employees inside 
organizations. However, we can observe its manifestation through employee beliefs, which raises 
the possibility of overlap primarily with identification. 
 
Alternative Interpretations 
We next consider other interpretations of our reported results. Differential commitment between 
private and public market investors is not the only difference in characteristics among public and 
private firms. These firms also differ in their management practices, access to finance and 
investment opportunities, access to talent, and agency costs (Renneboog, Simons, and Wright 
2007). We must consider, therefore, whether any of these alternatives might explain our results. 
One alternative explanation is that better management practices are associated with stronger 
purpose, and specifically, a stronger sense of purpose-clarity within firms. However, this 
explanation is inconsistent with prior research on management practices that documents stronger 
management practices within public, rather than private, firms (Bloom et al. 2012). Given we find 
the exact opposite for purpose, either worse management practices result in stronger purpose, an 
implausible explanation, or better management practices are unlikely to explain the presence of 
stronger purpose in private firms. 
Another alternative explanation is differential access to finance and therefore investment 
opportunities. Given that public firms have better access to finance and therefore can be more 
responsive to investment opportunities, if being able to undertake those investment opportunities 
enables fulfilment of corporate, public firms should have a stronger sense of purpose. Therefore, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
46 
differential access to finance and investment opportunities is also unlikely to provide an 
explanation for public firms having lower purpose. 
A third alternative explanation is that public firms are more attractive workplaces and therefore 
attracting better talent. This in turn could create a stronger purpose inside public firms. Again, this 
is inconsistent with the empirical finding that public firms exhibit lower purpose, suggesting access 
to talent is also an unlikely explanation for our results. 
A fourth alternative explanation is that public firms are subject to higher agency costs due to 
their separation of ownership from control. To the extent that agency problems between owners 
and managers weaken the sense of purpose, private firms might have a stronger sense of purpose. 
To more formally test this alternative channel that agency problems drive lower purpose, we 
estimate the relationship between purpose and ownership concentration inside public firms. 
Ownership concentration is measured as the percentage of shares held by the largest five investors. 
A significant body of research suggests that the presence of blockholders and higher ownership 
concentration is associated with lower agency problems (Edmans and Holderness 2019). 
In untabulated results, we find no evidence that firms with high ownership concentration is 
related to higher purpose, and in fact, we find the opposite relationship. Moreover, this agency 
channel is not consistent with lower purpose for PE-owned firms and for firms with hedge fund 
ownership. Both asset managers are thought to implement governance practices that mitigate 
agency costs (Bebchuk, Cohen and Hirst 2017). Although, the hedge fund ownership results might 
also be reconciled with the agency problems driving lower purpose, this would require that lag low 
purpose correlates with higher future hedge fund ownership. We find instead that lag hedge fund 
ownership correlates with lead purpose. Overall, the mosaic of evidence is hard to reconcile with 
differential agency costs driving differences in purpose. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
47 
 
Ownership, Purpose, and Profit 
An important question arises regarding the performance implications of our results. If 
purpose can be value accretive over time, as shown by Gartenberg et al. (2019) and Gartenberg 
and Yiu (2021), why would public firms pursue actions that could be associated with lower 
purpose? This question relates to findings in the literature, such as the declining rate of internal 
innovation and departure of inventors, that suggests costs of public ownership (Bernstein 2015). 
There are several plausible reasons in our view why this phenomenon could arise. Public 
firms are thought as suffering from higher agency costs, due to the separation of ownership and 
control, and lower investor monitoring, due to the dispersed ownership structure that gives rise to 
free rider concerns and declining marginal benefits from monitoring (Berle and Means 1932; 
Holmstrom 1982; Bertrand and Mullainathan 2003). This could lead managers to make decisions 
that lead to lower employee beliefs about purpose, even if doing so might be detrimental to the 
performance of the organization. A prediction of the monitoring and agency explanation, would 
be that firms with investors more likely to reap the benefits of monitoring would exhibit higher 
purpose. These would include firms with more long-term owners, as our results suggest. However, 
as we discussed above, the fact that we find a lower level of purpose associated with hedge fund 
ownership, a type of investor thought to play a significant monitoring role in markets, and that PE 
ownership is associated with lower or insignificantly different purpose, suggests that, at best, this 
explanation lacks convincing empirical evidence. 
A second explanation, relates to the fact that public ownership shifts the set of opportunities 
and priorities for management. If those opportunities and priorities are thought to be value 
enhancing but negatively correlate with purpose then the result would be a lower sense of purpose. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
48 
For example, a significant benefit of public ownership is more access to capital, allowing them to 
attract new leaders and human capital that often needs to be compensated significantly more and 
pursue risky and difficult to implement strategies, such as merger and acquisitions (Celikyurt, 
Sevilir, and Shivdasani 2010). Our results, regarding CEO internal promotions and lower pay gap 
between CEOs and employees, as well as results in Gartenberg and Yiu (2021) that show 
deteriorating purpose following many acquisitions, suggests that this explanation is likely to be 
true in our setting. 
Finally, a third explanation relates to differences in time horizon. If lower sense of purpose 
will affect the performance of an organization beyond the time horizon that managers making the 
decisions that lower purpose, then the costs are outsourced to the next management team and the 
long-term investors of the organization. A similar argument can be made for investors if they 
choose leaders and take actions that will have negative consequences after they are not invested 
anymore in the company. Because purpose is hard to observe, particularly among employees below 
the executive ranks, it is not clear that the costly effects of such actions will be priced by new 
investors and thereby will not be borne by existing investors. 
 
In sum, shifting priorities and opportunities from a public listing leading to choices that are 
detrimental to corporate purpose, alongside the inherent difficulty for investors to observe 
employees’ beliefs of corporate purpose and differences in time horizon could explain why public 
firms might exhibit systematically lower purpose, even if such purpose might be value accretive. 
 
Conclusion 
This study shows that purpose is lower in firms with less committed owners. Publicly listed firms 
exhibit systematically lower purpose than private firms. This is particularly the case for companies 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
49 
with a high percentage of shares owned by institutional investors with high discount rates (i.e., 
hedge funds), while public companies with more dedicated investors have a stronger sense of 
purpose. These patterns are explained, at least in part, by governance differences: higher-purpose 
firms are ones with internally promoted CEOs, CEO incentives structured on growth and non-
monetary incentives, and with a lower CEO-salaried employee pay gap. 
Our measure corporate purpose is constrained by the data available to us and our ability to 
delineate purpose from other organizational constructs. This is a challenging task, given that 
corporate purpose is related to, although conceptually distinct from, organizational culture, 
identity, values, and stakeholder orientation. Even with these obstacles, the measurement of 
corporate purpose represents a significant opportunity for scholars. 
In this paper, we have relied on a large survey of approximately 1.5 million employee-
years covering a wide range of beliefs about the workplace. This is one of the few, if not the only, 
datasets that provides scalable, comparable, and relevant data for the measurement of purpose 
across both public and private firms. Using exploratory factor analysis, we constructed a measure 
representing a set of survey questions that provide a measure, albeit imperfect, of corporate 
purpose. We believe that the measurement of corporate purpose through employee beliefs rather 
than corporate statements presents many advantages, as employees are the stakeholders that have 
the most knowledge about why an organization does what it does and they are less likely to 
represent ‘cheap talk’ statements made by management. 
However, the survey that we use in this study is not explicitly designed to measure 
corporate purpose. This is a shortcoming that future research should address through the 
development and administration of purpose-specific survey instruments. Moreover, advances in 
technology, including availability of large, unstructured datasets and increasing applications of 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
50 
machine learning techniques could be helpful in extracting useful information from text responses 
to surveys, social media, management presentations at conferences and investor days, and 
information intermediaries, such as media, NGOs, and financial analysts. While these approaches 
will entail tradeoffs of their own, a range of empirical strategies will only deepen our understanding 
of this important topic. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
51 
References 
Abadie, A. and Imbens, G.W., 2011. Bias-corrected matching estimators for average treatment 
effects. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 29(1), pp.1-11. 
 
Akerlof, G.A. and Kranton, R.E., 2005. Identity and the Economics of Organizations. Journal of 
Economic perspectives, 19(1), pp.9-32. 
 
Albert, S. and Whetten, D.A., 1985. Organizational identity. Research in organizational 
behavior. 
 
Alchian, A.A. and Demsetz, H., 1972. Production, information costs, and economic organization. 
The American economic review, 62(5), pp.777-795. 
 
Ariely, D., Kamenica, E. and Prelec, D., 2008. Man's search for meaning: The case of Legos. 
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 67(3-4), pp.671-677. 
 
Asker, J., Farre-Mensa, J. and Ljungqvist, A. “Corporate investment and stock market listing: A 
puzzle?” The Review of Financial Studies, 28, no. 2 (2014): 342-390. 
 
Backus, M., Conlon, C. and Sinkinson, M., 2021. Common ownership in America: 1980–
2017. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 13(3), pp.273-308. 
 
Bartlett, CA., and Ghoshal S. "Changing the role of top management: Beyond strategy to 
purpose." Harvard Business Review 72, no. 6 (1994): 79-88. 
 
Barnard, C.I., 1938. The functions of the executive (Vol. 11). Harvard university press. 
 
Bass, B.M. and Riggio, R.E., 2006. Transformational leadership. 
 
Bebchuk, L.A., Cohen, A. and Hirst, S., 2017. The agency problems of institutional investors. 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31(3), pp.89-102. 
 
Beer, H.A., Micheli, P. and Besharov, M.L., 2021. Meaning, Mission, and Measurement: How 
Organizational Performance Measurement Shapes Perceptions of Work as Worthy. Academy of 
Management Journal, (ja). 
 
Bénabou, R. and Tirole, J., 2011. Identity, morals, and taboos: Beliefs as assets. The Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, 126(2), pp.805-855. 
 
Berle, A. and Means, G. “Private property and the modern corporation.” New York: Mac-millan. 
(1932). 
 
Bernstein, S., 2015. “Does going public affect innovation?.” The Journal of Finance, 70, no. 4 
(2015): 1365-1403. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
52 
Bertrand, M. and Mullainathan, S., 2003. Enjoying the quiet life? Corporate governance and 
managerial preferences. Journal of political Economy, 111(5), pp.1043-1075. 
 
Besharov, M.L. and Khurana, R., 2015. Leading amidst competing technical and institutional 
demands: Revisiting Selznick’s conception of leadership. Emerald Group Publishing Limited. 
 
Bloom, N., Genakos, C., Sadun, R. and Van Reenen, J. “Management practices across firms and 
countries.” Academy of Management Perspectives, 26, no. 1 (2012): 12-33. 
Bouchikhi, H., Kimberley J.R., 2008. The soul of the corporation, Wharton School Publishing. 
 
Brochet, F., Loumioti, M. and Serafeim, G., 2015. Speaking of the short-term: Disclosure 
horizon and managerial myopia. Review of Accounting Studies, 20(3), pp.1122-1163. 
 
Bushee, B.J., 1998. The influence of institutional investors on myopic R&D investment 
behavior. Accounting review, pp.305-333. 
 
Bushee, B.J., 2001. Do institutional investors prefer near‐term earnings over long‐run value?. 
Contemporary Accounting Research, 18(2), pp.207-246. 
 
Capron, L. and Shen, J.C., 2007. “Acquisitions of private vs. public firms: Private information, 
target selection, and acquirer returns.” Strategic management journal, 28, no. 9 (2007): 891-911. 
 
Carney, M., Van Essen, M., Gedajlovic, E.R. and Heugens, P.P., 2015. What do we know about 
private family firms? A meta–analytical review. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 39(3), 
pp.513-544. 
 
Carton, A. M., 2018. “I’m Not Mopping the Floors, I’m Putting a Man on the Moon”: How 
NASA Leaders Enhanced the Meaningfulness of Work by Changing the Meaning of 
Work. Administrative Science Quarterly, 63(2), 323–369. 
 
Carton, A.M. and Lucas, B.J., 2018. How can leaders overcome the blurry vision bias? 
Identifying an antidote to the paradox of vision communication. Academy of Management 
Journal, 61(6), pp.2106-2129. 
 
Carton, A.M., Murphy, C. and Clark, J.R., 2014. A (blurry) vision of the future: How leader 
rhetoric about ultimate goals influences performance. Academy of Management Journal, 57(6), 
pp.1544-1570. 
 
Cascio, W.F., 2003. Changes in workers, work, and organizations. Handbook of psychology, 
pp.399-422. 
 
Cassar, L. and Meier, S., 2018. Nonmonetary Incentives and the Implications of Work as a 
Source of Meaning. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32(3), pp.215-38. 
 
Celikyurt, U., Sevilir, M. and Shivdasani, A., 2010. Going public to acquire? The acquisition 
motive in IPOs. Journal of Financial Economics, 96(3), pp.345-363. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
53 
 
Chandler Jr, A.D., 1977. The Visible Hand. Harvard University Press. 
 
Chapman, C., Edmans, A., Gosling, T., Hutton, W., and Mayer, C. The Purposeful Company 
Executive Remuneration Report. (2017). 
Chatman, J.A. and O’Reilly, C.A., 2016. Paradigm lost: Reinvigorating the study of 
organizational culture. Research in Organizational Behavior, 36, pp.199-224. 
Chen, S. and Feldman, E.R., 2018. Activist‐impelled divestitures and shareholder value. 
Strategic Management Journal, 39(10), pp.2726-2744. 
 
Connelly, B.L., Tihanyi, L., Certo, S.T. and Hitt, M.A., 2010. Marching to the beat of different 
drummers: The influence of institutional owners on competitive actions. Academy of 
Management Journal, 53(4), pp.723-742. 
 
Corritore, M., Goldberg, A. and Srivastava, S.B., 2020. Duality in diversity: How intrapersonal 
and interpersonal cultural heterogeneity relate to firm performance. Administrative Science 
Quarterly, 65(2), pp.359-394. 
 
David, P., Hitt, M. & Gimeno, J. (2001). The Influence of Activism by Institutional Investors on 
R&D. Academy of Management Journal. 44. 
 
Deci, E.L. and Flaste, R., 1995. Why we do what we do: The dynamics of personal autonomy. GP 
Putnam's Sons. 
 
DesJardine, M.R., Marti, E. and Durand, R., 2020. Why Activist Hedge Funds Target Socially 
Responsible Firms: The Reaction Costs of Signaling Corporate Social Responsibility. Academy 
of Management Journal, forthcoming 
 
Doidge, C., Kahle, K.M., Karolyi, G.A. and Stulz, R.M., 2018. “Eclipse of the public corporation 
or eclipse of the public markets?.” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 30, no. 1 (2018): 8-16. 
 
Eccles, R.G., Ioannou, I. and Serafeim, G., 2014. The impact of corporate sustainability on 
organizational processes and performance. Management Science, 60(11), pp.2835-2857. 
 
Edmans, A., 2020. Grow the pie: how great companies deliver both purpose and profit. 
Cambridge University Press. 
 
Edmans, A. and Holderness, C.G. “Blockholders: A survey of theory and evidence.” (2019). 
 
Feldman, N.E., Kawano, L., Patel, E., Rao, N., Stevens, M. and Edgerton, J. “The Long and the 
Short of It: Do Public and Private Firms Invest Differently?” Working Paper (2018). 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
54 
Felin, T., Foss, N.J. and Ployhart, R.E., 2015. The microfoundations movement in strategy and 
organization theory. Academy of Management Annals, 9(1), pp.575-632. 
 
Fisch, J.E. and Davidoff Solomon, S., 2020. Should corporations have a purpose?. U of Penn, 
Inst for Law & Econ Research Paper, (20-22). 
 
Fisch, J. E., Hamdani, A. and Davidoff Solomon, S, “The New Titans of Wall Street: A 
Theoretical Framework for Passive Investors.” University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 168, 
(2020): 17 
 
Fitza, M. and Tihanyi, L., 2017. How much does ownership form matter?. Strategic Management 
Journal, 38(13), pp.2726-2743. 
 
Follett, M. P., 1940. Dynamic administration: The collected papers of Mary Parker Follett. 
Harper and Brothers, New York and London 
 
Frankl, V.E., 1946. Man’s search for meaning. 
 
Freeman, R.E., 2010. Strategic management: A stakeholder approach. Cambridge university 
press. 
 
Garrett, J, Hoitash R, and Prawitt DF. “Trust and financial reporting quality.” Journal of 
Accounting Research. 52, no. 5 (2014): 1087-1125. 
 
Gartenberg, C.M., Prat, A. and Serafeim, G. “Corporate purpose and financial 
performance.” Organization Science, 30 no. 1 (2019): 1-18. 
 
Gartenberg, C.M. and Yiu, S., 2022. Corporate Purpose and Acquisitions. Available at SSRN 
3811690. 
 
Gartenberg, C.M. and Zenger, T., 2022. The firm as a subsociety. Available at SSRN. 
 
George, G., Haas, M.R., McGahan, A.M., Schillebeeckx, S.J. and Tracey, P., 2021. Purpose in 
the for-profit firm: A review and framework for management research. Journal of Management, 
p.01492063211006450. 
 
Ghoshal, S., Moran, P. and Almeida-Costa, L., 1995. The essence of the megacorporation: 
shared context, not structural hierarchy. Journal of Institutional and Theoretical 
Economics, 151(4), pp.748-759. 
 
Ghoshal, S. and Moran, P., 1996. Bad for practice: A critique of the transaction cost theory. 
Academy of management Review, 21(1), pp.13-47. 
 
Gibbons, R., 2005. Four formal (izable) theories of the firm?. Journal of Economic Behavior & 
Organization, 58(2), pp.200-245. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
55 
Gibbons, R. and Henderson, R., 2012a. Relational contracts and organizational capabilities. 
Organization science, 23(5), pp.1350-1364. 
 
Gibbons, R. and Henderson, R., 2012b. 17. What Do Managers Do? (pp. 680-731). Princeton 
University Press. 
 
Gilje, E.P. and Taillard, J.P. “Do private firms invest differently than public firms? Taking cues 
from the natural gas industry.” The Journal of Finance, 71, no. 4 (2016): 1733-1778. 
 
Gomez-Mejia, L.R., Cruz, C., Berrone, P. and De Castro, J., 2011. The bind that ties: 
Socioemotional wealth preservation in family firms. Academy of Management Annals, 5(1), 
pp.653-707. 
 
Grant, A.M., 2008. Does intrinsic motivation fuel the prosocial fire? Motivational synergy in 
predicting persistence, performance, and productivity. Journal of applied psychology, 93(1), 
p.48. 
 
Grewal, J. and Serafeim, G., 2020. Research on corporate sustainability: Review and directions 
for future research. Foundations and Trends in Accounting, 14(2), pp.73-127. 
 
Grossman, S.J. and Hart, O.D. “The costs and benefits of ownership: A theory of vertical and 
lateral integration.” Journal of political economy, 94, no. 4 (1986): 691-719. 
Guiso, L, Sapienza P, and Zingales L. "The value of corporate culture." Journal of Financial 
Economics 117, no. 1 (2015): 60-76. 
Hart, O. and Zingales, L. “Companies should maximize shareholder welfare not market value.” 
(2017). 
 
Henderson, R., 2021. Innovation in the 21st century: architectural change, purpose, and the 
challenges of our time. Management Science, 67(9), pp.5479-5488. 
 
Henderson, R. and Van den Steen, E., 2015. Why do firms have" purpose"? The firm's role as a 
carrier of identity and reputation. American Economic Review, 105(5), pp.326-30. 
 
Henrich, J., Boyd, R., Bowles, S., Camerer, C., Fehr, E., Gintis, H. and McElreath, R., 2001. 
Cooperation, reciprocity and punishment in fifteen small-scale societies. American Economic 
Review, 91(2), pp.73-78. 
Hollensbe, E, Wookey C, Hickey L, George G, and Nichols CV. "Organizations with purpose." 
Academy of Management Journal 57, no. 5 (2014): 1227-1234. 
Holmstrom, B., 1982. Moral hazard in teams. The Bell Journal of Economics, pp.324-340. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
56 
Hoskisson, R., Hitt, M., Johnson, R., and Grossman, W. (2002). Conflicting Voices: The Effects 
of Institutional Ownership Heterogeneity and Internal Governance on Corporate Innovation 
Strategies. The Academy of Management Journal. 45. 697-716. 
Kahan, M. and Rock, E.B., Hedge Funds in Corporate Governance and Corporate Control. 
University of Pennsylvania Law Review, Vol. 155, (2007): 1021. 
Kahle, K.M. and Stulz, R.M. “Is the US public corporation in trouble?” Journal of Economic 
Perspectives, 31, no. 3 (2017): 67-88. 
Klein, P.G., Mahoney, J.T., McGahan, A.M. and Pitelis, C.N., 2019. Organizational governance 
adaptation: Who is in, who is out, and who gets what. Academy of Management Review, 44(1), 
pp.6-27. 
 
Kreps DM (1996) Corporate culture and economic theory. Buckley P, Michie J, eds. Firms, 
Organizations and Contracts (Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK), 221–275. 
 
Li, K., Mai, F., Shen, R. and Yan, X., 2021. Measuring corporate culture using machine 
learning. The Review of Financial Studies, 34(7), pp.3265-3315. 
 
Luo, J. and Kaul, A., 2019. Private action in public interest: The comparative governance of 
social issues. Strategic Management Journal, 40(4), pp.476-502. 
Mallow, M.J. and Sethi, J., 2015. Engagement: The Missing Middle Approach in the Bebchuck-
Strine Debate. NYUJL & Bus., 12, p.385. 
 
Marchetti, A., 2020 Firms of a Feather Merge Together: The Coordination Benefits of 
Compatible Cultures. Available at SSRN 3712838. 
Mayer, C., 2021. The Future of the Corporation and the Economics of Purpose. Journal of 
Management Studies, 58(3), pp.887-901 
McCahery, J.A., Sautner, Z. and Starks, L.T., 2016. Behind the scenes: The corporate 
governance preferences of institutional investors. The Journal of Finance, 71(6), pp.2905-2932. 
Mayer, C., 2020. The Future of the Corporation and the Economics of Purpose. Journal of 
Management Studies. 
 
Nadella, S., 2017, Hit Refresh: The Quest to Rediscover Microsoft's Soul and Imagine a Better 
Future for Everyone, Harper Business. 
 
O’Reilly III, C.A., Caldwell, D.F., Chatman, J.A. and Doerr, B., 2014. The promise and 
problems of organizational culture: CEO personality, culture, and firm performance. Group & 
Organization Management, 39(6), pp.595-625. 
 
Oster, E., 2019. Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence. Journal 
of Business & Economic Statistics, 37(2), pp.187-204. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
57 
Phalippou, L., 2020. An Inconvenient Fact: Private Equity Returns & The Billionaire Factory. 
University of Oxford, Said Business School, Working Paper. 
 
Podolny, J.M., Khurana, R. and Hill-Popper, M., 2004. Revisiting the meaning of 
leadership. Research in organizational behavior, 26, pp.1-36. 
 
Porter, M., Serafeim, G. and Kramer, M., 2019. Where ESG fails. Institutional Investor, 16. 
Pratt, MG., and Ashforth BE. "Fostering meaningfulness in working and at work." Positive 
organizational scholarship: Foundations of a new discipline. (2003): 309-327. 
Pratt, M.G. and Foreman, P.O., 2000. The beauty of and barriers to organizational theories of 
identity. Academy of Management Review, 25(1), pp.141-143. 
 
Pratt, M.G., 2016. Hybrid and multiple organizational identities. The Oxford handbook of 
organizational identity, pp.106-120. 
 
Renneboog, L., Simons, T. and Wright, M., 2007. Why do public firms go private in the UK? 
The impact of private equity investors, incentive realignment and undervaluation. Journal of 
corporate finance, 13(4), pp.591-628. 
 
Rotemberg, J.J. and Saloner, G., 2000. Visionaries, managers, and strategic direction. RAND 
Journal of Economics, pp.693-716. 
 
Schein, E.H., 1990. Organizational culture (Vol. 45, No. 2, p. 109). American Psychological 
Association. 
 
Selznick, P., 1948. Foundations of the theory of organization. American sociological 
review, 13(1), pp.25-35. 
 
Selznick, P., 1957. Leadership in administration: A sociological interpretation. Quid Pro Books. 
 
Srivastava, S.B. and Goldberg, A., 2017. Language as a window into culture. California 
Management Review, 60(1), pp.56-69. 
 
Goldberg, A., Srivastava, S.B., Manian, V.G., Monroe, W. and Potts, C., 2016. Fitting in or 
standing out? The tradeoffs of structural and cultural embeddedness. American Sociological 
Review, 81(6), pp.1190-1222. 
 
Thakor, AV., and Quinn RE. "The economics of higher purpose." ECGI-Finance Working Paper 
395 (2013). 
 
Tracy, J.L. and Robins, R.W., 2007. Emerging insights into the nature and function of pride. 
Current directions in psychological science, 16(3), pp.147-150. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
58 
Trostel, A.O. and Nichols, M.L. “Privately-held and publicly-held companies: A comparison of 
strategic choices and management processes.” Academy of Management Journal, 25 no. 1 
(1982): 47-62. 
 
Tyler TR (2001) Why do people rely on others? Social identity and social aspects of trust. Cook 
KS, ed. Trust in Society, vol. 2, Russell Sage Foundation Series on Trust (Russell Sage 
Foundation, New York), 285–306. 
 
Villalonga, B. and Amit, R., 2020. Family ownership. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 36(2), 
pp.241-257. 
 
Weber, Y. and Tarba, S.Y., 2012. Mergers and acquisitions process: The use of corporate culture 
analysis. Cross Cultural Management: An International Journal. 
 
Williamson, O., 1985. E., 1985, The Economic Institutions of Capitalism: firms, markets, 
relational contracting. New York. 
 
Wilson, J.Q., 1989. Bureaucracy: What Government Agencies Do and Why They Do It, New 
York: Basic Books. 
 
Wrzesniewski, A., 2003. Finding positive meaning in work. Positive organizational scholarship: 
Foundations of a new discipline, pp.296-308. 
 
Younger, R., Mayer, C. and Eccles, R.G., 2020, September. Enacting Purpose Within the 
Modern Corporation. In Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate Governance. 
 
Zenger, T.R., Felin, T. and Bigelow, L., 2011. Theories of the firm–market boundary. Academy 
of Management Annals, 5(1), pp.89-133. 
 
Zhang, Y. and Gimeno, J., 2016. Earnings pressure and long-term corporate governance: Can 
long-term-oriented investors and managers reduce the quarterly earnings obsession?. 
Organization Science, 27(2), pp.354-372. 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
59 
Figure 1: Ownership, purpose, and meaning within the organization 
 
Adapted from Henderson (2021); solid line denotes focus areas in this study 
 
 
Figure 2: Corporate purpose by ownership type 
 
 
 
 
 
0
1
2
3
Distribution
-.6
-.4
-.2
0
.2
.4
Purpose-clarity
 Public
 Private
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
60 
Figure 2: Corporate purpose by hedge fund ownership 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Corporate purpose by investor commitment
 
 
Figure 5: Corporate purpose by job level 
 
 
 
-.15
-.1
-.05
0
.05
Purpose-Clarity
0
.1
.2
.3
.4
Hedge fund ownership
-.1
-.05
0
.05
.1
Purpose-Clarity
-.6
-.4
-.2
0
.2
Owner Commitment (Dedicated-Transient)
-.1
-.05
0
.05
Purpose-Clarity
Execs
Salaried - Mid Mgr
Salaried - Prof/Tech
Hourly
rank
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
61 
Table 1: Differences across Public and Private Firms 
 
Sample: 
Public 
Private 
Difference 
 
Variable 
Mean 
Mean 
P(Public-Private) 
Explanatory variables 
 
 
 
 
Hedge fund 
0.089 
 
 
 
Long term investors 
-0.154 
 
 
 
CEO joined in lower ranks 
0.327 
0.579 
** 
 
CEO tenure at company (log years) 
9.495 
11.414 
** 
 
CEO pay gap relative to salaried ranks 
12.093 
 
NA 
 
CEO total compensation ($000) 
8,501 
 
NA 
 
Number of margin incentives 
2.208 
 
NA 
 
Number of non-margin incentives 
7.952 
 
NA 
 
Benefits index 
2.502 
2.313 
** 
 
ESOP 
0.131 
0.133 
 
 
Bonus as % comp (salaried) 
0.148 
0.162 
* 
Controls 
 
 
 
 
% workforce - hourly 
0.455 
0.514 
** 
 
% workforce - commissioned 
0.081 
0.067 
** 
 
% workforce - salaried prof/tech 
0.284 
0.253 
** 
 
% workforce - salaried mid manager 
0.143 
0.122 
** 
 
% workforce - executive 
0.037 
0.044 
** 
 
Sales 
13,150 
6,613 
** 
 
Full-time employees 
14,516 
5,143 
** 
 
Firm age (years) 
57 
65 
** 
 
Halo control 
 
 
 
Industry 
 
 
 
 
Adv and Marketing 
0.009 
0.009 
 
 
Aerospace 
0.010 
0.003 
* 
 
Agriculture 
0.008 
0.004 
 
 
Biotech and Pharma 
0.046 
0.001 
** 
 
Confidential 
0.001 
0.001 
 
 
Construction and Real Estate 
0.045 
0.112 
** 
 
Education and Training 
0.009 
0.003 
† 
 
Electronics 
0.010 
0.001 
** 
 
Engineering 
0.000 
0.002 
† 
 
Financial Services and Insurance 
0.143 
0.144 
 
 
Health Care 
0.029 
0.076 
** 
 
Hospitality 
0.061 
0.072 
 
 
Industrial Services 
0.013 
0.009 
 
 
IT 
0.129 
0.042 
** 
 
Manufacturing and Production 
0.202 
0.127 
** 
 
Media 
0.035 
0.004 
** 
 
Mining 
0.003 
0.000 
† 
 
Missing 
0.011 
0.005 
† 
 
Other 
0.007 
0.003 
 
 
Professional Services 
0.049 
0.240 
** 
 
Retail 
0.123 
0.123 
 
 
Telecommunications 
0.026 
0.005 
** 
 
Transportation 
0.031 
0.007 
** 
 
Utilities 
0.001 
0.000 
 
**, *, † signify statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level respectively 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
62 
Table 2: Purpose and Public Ownership 
 
 
Dependent variable: 
Purpose-clarity 
Model: 
OLS 
OLS 
OLS 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
Public 
-0.0223† 
-0.0274* 
-0.0269* 
 
(0.0122) 
(0.0108) 
(0.0105) 
Revenue (log) 
0.0197** 
0.0124** 
0.0124** 
 
(0.0033) 
(0.0025) 
(0.00260) 
FT employees (log) 
0.0031 
0.0160** 
0.0155** 
 
(0.0044) 
(0.0037) 
(0.00366) 
Firm age (log) 
0.0312** 
0.0178** 
0.0182** 
 
(0.0058) 
(0.0057) 
(0.00576) 
Halo control 
0.1970** 
0.261** 
0.273** 
 
(0.0259) 
(0.0278) 
(0.0287) 
Constant 
-1.190** 
-1.594** 
-1.657** 
 
(0.1270) 
(0.146) 
(0.155) 
Observations 
2,860 
2,860 
2,860 
R-squared 
0.172 
0.372 
0.374 
Org Controls 
N 
N 
Y 
Industry and State FE 
N 
Y 
Y 
Year FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
OLS regressions in Models 1-3. Revenue is total worldwide revenue in latest fiscal year and FT employees is the 
full-time employees. Firm age is the number of years that the firm has been incorporated. Halo control is a variable 
measuring how physically safe is the workplace according to survey responses by employees. Org Controls refers to 
percent of workforce at each hierarchical level. See text for full description. Standard errors clustered at firm-level. 
**, *, † signify statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level respectively 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
63 
Table 3: Purpose and Public Ownership, matched analysis 
 
Panel A: Nearest neighbor match 
Dependent variable: 
Purpose-clarity 
Model: 
Nearest neighbor match 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
Public 
-0.0241** 
-0.0296** 
-0.0191** 
 
(0.0071) 
(0.0070) 
(0.0070) 
Observations 
2,860 
2,791 
2,791 
Match criteria 
Table 2(1) 
Table 2(2) 
Table 2(3) 
 
 
Panel B: Coarsened exact match 
Dependent variable: 
Purpose-clarity 
Model: 
Coarsened exact match 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
Public 
-0.0298* 
-0.0334* 
-0.0530* 
 
(0.0137) 
(0.0130) 
(0.0262) 
Revenue (log) 
0.0260** 
0.0010** 
0.0247 
 
(0.0045) 
(0.0035) 
(0.0153) 
FT employees (log) 
-0.0003 
0.0205** 
-0.0119 
 
(0.0063) 
(0.0055) 
(0.0147) 
Firm age (log) 
0.0292** 
0.0169† 
0.0321 
 
(0.0076) 
(0.0087) 
(0.0257) 
Halo control 
0.158** 
0.278** 
0.340** 
 
(0.0425) 
(0.0476) 
(0.0933) 
Constant 
-1.039** 
-1.858** 
-2.160** 
 
(0.202) 
(0.230) 
(0.517) 
Observations 
1,674 
1,016 
259 
R-squared 
0.173 
0.441 
0.581 
Match criteria 
Table 2(1) 
Table 2(2) 
Table 2(3) 
 
Nearest neighbor matching Model 4, with average treatment effect presented. Match based on exact match without 
replacement on year and industry, and nearest neighbor on firm size and geography. Private firms are omitted 
category. Revenue is total worldwide revenue in latest fiscal year and FT employees is the full-time employees. Org 
Controls refers to percent of workforce at each hierarchical level. See text for full description. Standard errors 
include Abadie-Imbens (2011) bas adjustment for nearest neighbor match (Panel A), and clustered at firm-level for 
CEM (Panel B). **, *, † signify statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level respectively 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
64 
 
 
Table 4: Purpose by owner composition 
 
Dependent variable: 
Purpose-
clarity 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
Public 
-0.0316** 
-0.0306** 
-0.0305** 
-0.0265* 
 
 
(0.0115) 
(0.0114) 
(0.0114) 
(0.0117) 
 
Public*Hedge fund 
-0.122* 
 
-0.109* 
 
 
 
(0.0505) 
 
(0.0504) 
 
 
Public*Long term investors 
 
0.0998* 
0.0922* 
 
 
 
 
(0.0428) 
(0.0421) 
 
 
Private Equity 
-0.0288 
-0.0280 
-0.0289 
-0.0300 
 
 
(0.0206) 
(0.0208) 
(0.0208) 
(0.0209) 
Lagged measures 
 
 
 
 
 
Public*Hedge fund 
 
 
 
-0.0868† 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.0459) 
 
Public*Long term investors 
 
 
 
-0.0352 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.0408) 
Leading measures 
 
 
 
 
 
Public*Hedge fund 
 
 
 
-0.0721† 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.0376) 
 
Public*Long term investors 
 
 
 
0.154** 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.0404) 
Controls 
 
 
 
 
 
Revenue (log) 
0.0121** 
0.0121** 
0.0119** 
0.0117** 
 
 
(0.00258) 
(0.00255) 
(0.00255) 
(0.00255) 
 
FT employees (log) 
0.0156** 
0.0149** 
0.0150** 
0.0148* 
 
 
(0.00363) 
(0.00360) 
(0.00359) 
(0.00360) 
 
Firm age (log) 
0.0162** 
0.0164** 
0.0156** 
0.0159** 
 
 
(0.00577) 
(0.00576) 
(0.00575) 
(0.00573) 
 
Halo control 
0.269** 
0.268** 
0.266** 
0.268** 
 
 
(0.0285) 
(0.0284) 
(0.0284) 
(0.0284) 
 
Constant 
-1.603** 
-1.589** 
-1.568** 
-1.564** 
 
 
(0.153) 
(0.155) 
(0.154) 
(0.155) 
 
Observations 
2,860 
2,860 
2,860 
2,860 
 
R-squared 
0.377 
0.378 
0.379 
0.384 
 
Org Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Industry and State FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Year FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
OLS regressions. Private firms are omitted category. Hedge fund ownership is percent of outstanding equity owned 
by hedge funds. Long-term investors is measured as voting shares of dedicated minus transient investors for firms. 
Private Equity is indicator equal to one for firms with private equity owners. See footer of Table 2 and text for variable 
descriptions. Standard errors clustered at firm-level. **, *, † signify statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level 
respectively 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
65 
Table 5: Purpose, CEO background and incentives 
 
 
Dependent variable: 
Purpose-Clarity 
 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
 
Public 
-0.0306** 
-0.0253* 
-0.0234* 
-0.0235* 
-0.0219† 
 
 
(0.0114) 
(0.0119) 
(0.0118) 
(0.0118) 
(0.0119) 
 
Public*Hedge fund 
-0.107* 
-0.0966† 
-0.0897† 
-0.0875† 
-0.0890† 
 
 
(0.0506) 
(0.0502) 
(0.0504) 
(0.0503) 
(0.0505) 
 
Public*Long term investors 
0.0912* 
0.0824† 
0.0828* 
0.0799† 
0.0640 
 
 
(0.0421) 
(0.0422) 
(0.0414) 
(0.0411) 
(0.0401) 
 
Private Equity 
-0.0286 
-0.0248 
-0.0265 
-0.0267 
-0.0267 
 
 
(0.0208) 
(0.0212) 
(0.0213) 
(0.0212) 
(0.0204) 
CEO background 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CEO joined in lower ranks 
 
0.0260** 
0.0260** 
0.0270** 
0.0251* 
 
 
 
(0.0010) 
(0.0100) 
(0.0099) 
(0.0100) 
 
CEO tenure at company (log years) 
 
-0.0024 
-0.0021 
-0.0020 
-0.0009 
 
 
 
(0.0066) 
(0.0064) 
(0.0064) 
(0.0063) 
CEO compensation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pay gap relative to salaried ranks 
 
 
-0.0030** 
-0.0029* 
-0.0031** 
 
 
 
 
(0.0012) 
(0.0011) 
(0.0011) 
 
CEO total compensation 
 
 
0.0406** 
0.0393** 
0.0389** 
 
 
 
 
(0.0087) 
(0.0087) 
(0.0083) 
CEO incentive structure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of margin incentives 
 
 
 
-0.0015 
-0.0014 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.0027) 
(0.0027) 
 
Number of non-margin incentives 
 
 
 
0.0017* 
0.0016* 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.0007) 
(0.0007) 
Employee compensation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Benefits index 
 
 
 
 
0.0067* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.0032) 
 
ESOP 
 
 
 
 
0.0079 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.0111) 
 
Bonus as % comp (salaried) 
 
 
 
 
0.0780** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.0272) 
 
Constant 
-1.565** 
-1.521** 
-1.778** 
-1.771** 
-1.749** 
 
 
(0.154) 
(0.154) 
(0.150) 
(0.150) 
(0.151) 
 
Observations 
2,860 
2,860 
2,860 
2,860 
2,860 
 
R-squared 
0.379 
0.384 
0.397 
0.399 
0.406 
 
Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Org Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Industry and State FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Year FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
OLS regressions. Private firms are omitted category. See footer of Tables 2 and 4 and text for variable descriptions. CEO joined in 
lower ranks is an indicator variable for CEOs that have been promoted internally from a lower rank. CEO tenure at company is the 
number of years that the CEO has been the CEO. Pay gap relative to salaried ranks is the ratio between CEO to median worker 
pay. CEO total compensation is the total compensation reported for the CEO. Number of margin (non-margin) incentives is the 
sum of provisions in the CEO compensation contract based on cost or margin (sales, growth, or nonfinancial) metrics. Benefits 
index is a composite index of indicator variables for the number of childcare and flexible workplace benefits offered to employees. 
ESOP is an indicator variable if the firm offers an ESOP to all employees. Bonus as % comp is a variable that measures the 
percentage of total compensation for salaried employees that is based on bonus. Standard errors clustered at firm-level. **, *, † 
signify statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level respectively 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
66 
Table 6: Purpose, CEO background and incentives by job level 
 
Dependent variable: 
Purpose-Clarity 
 
 
 
 
Execs 
Salaried mid 
mgr 
Salaried 
prof/tech 
Hourly 
 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
Public 
0.0006 
-0.0182 
-0.0281† 
-0.0371** 
 
 
(0.0157) 
(0.0136) 
(0.0152) 
(0.0131) 
 
Public*Hedge fund 
0.0209 
-0.0568 
-0.0289 
-0.117† 
 
 
(0.0807) 
(0.0623) 
(0.0816) 
(0.0692) 
 
Public*Long term investors 
0.0407 
0.0692 
0.183** 
0.0206 
 
 
(0.0661) 
(0.0487) 
(0.0522) 
(0.0459) 
 
Private Equity 
-0.0631* 
-0.0410* 
-0.0280 
-0.0218 
 
 
(0.0260) 
(0.0182) 
(0.0267) 
(0.0239) 
CEO background 
 
 
 
 
 
CEO joined in lower ranks 
0.0146 
0.0271* 
0.0232* 
0.0262* 
 
 
(0.0135) 
(0.0107) 
(0.0115) 
(0.0110) 
 
CEO tenure at company (log years) 
-0.0096 
-0.0040 
-0.0118 
0.0009 
 
 
(0.0076) 
(0.0070) 
(0.0075) 
(0.0065) 
CEO compensation 
 
 
 
 
 
Pay gap relative to salaried ranks 
-0.0025 
-0.0026* 
-0.0029* 
-0.0031* 
 
 
(0.0015) 
(0.0013) 
(0.0014) 
(0.0014) 
 
CEO total compensation 
0.0523** 
0.0447** 
0.0497** 
0.0313** 
 
 
(0.0114) 
(0.0105) 
(0.0112) 
(0.0085) 
CEO incentive structure 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of margin incentives 
-0.0111* 
-0.0012 
-0.0009 
-0.0033 
 
 
(0.0044) 
(0.0033) 
(0.0032) 
(0.0034) 
 
Number of non-margin incentives 
0.0015 
0.0023* 
0.0022* 
0.0015 
 
 
(0.0015) 
(0.0009) 
(0.0010) 
(0.0009) 
Employee compensation 
 
 
 
 
 
Benefits index 
0.0097* 
0.0073† 
0.0089† 
0.0073* 
 
 
(0.0046) 
(0.0038) 
(0.0048) 
(0.0037) 
 
ESOP 
-0.0087 
0.0133 
-0.0051 
0.0011 
 
 
(0.0165) 
(0.0130) 
(0.0140) 
(0.0136) 
 
Bonus as % comp 
0.0449 
0.106** 
0.0312 
0.0174 
 
 
(0.0400) 
(0.0310) 
(0.0472) 
(0.0290) 
 
Constant 
-1.603** 
-1.458** 
-1.686** 
-1.961** 
 
 
(0.277) 
(0.171) 
(0.237) 
(0.175) 
 
Observations 
2,805 
2,835 
2,803 
2,838 
 
R-squared 
0.187 
0.296 
0.193 
0.346 
 
Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Org Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Industry and State FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Year FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
OLS regressions. Private firms are omitted category. See footer of Tables 2, 4, 5 and text for variable descriptions. 
Standard errors clustered at firm-level. **, *, † signify statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level respectively 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
67 
Appendix Tables and Figures 
 
Table A1: Summary Statistics 
Panel A: Frequency by Year 
 
Year 
No. Obs. 
2006 
365 
2007 
349 
2008 
321 
2009 
275 
2010 
255 
2011 
242 
2012 
218 
2013 
213 
2014 
213 
2015 
209 
2016 
200 
 
Panel B: Frequency by Industry 
Industry 
No. Obs. 
Advertising & Marketing 
26 
Aerospace 
22 
Agriculture 
18 
Biotechnology & Pharmaceuticals 
86 
Confidential 
3 
Construction & Real Estate 
197 
Education & Training 
19 
Electronics 
19 
Engineering 
2 
Financial Services & Insurance 
410 
Health Care 
131 
Hospitality 
186 
Industrial Services 
34 
Information Technology 
280 
Manufacturing & Production 
502 
Media 
69 
Mining and Quarrying 
5 
Missing 
26 
Other 
16 
Professional Services 
322 
Retail 
359 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
68 
Telecommunications 
53 
Transportation 
64 
Utilities 
1 
 
Panel C: Frequency by Ownership Type 
Ownership type 
No. Obs. 
Private-only 
863 
Private, Private-equity owned 
149 
Private, Public owner 
187 
Public 
1661 
 
Panel A presents number of observations in our sample by year. Panel B presents number of observations in our 
sample by industry. Panel C presents number of observations in our sample by ownership type. Private only firms are 
not publicly listed, do not have institutional investors and are not owned by a public company. Private w/ public owner 
firms’ ultimate owners are publicly listed firms. Private equity owner firms’ ultimate owners are private equity firms. 
 
 
 
Table A2: Individual analysis: Owner commitment 
 
 
Dependent variable: 
Purpose-
clarity 
 
 
Model: 
OLS 
OLS 
 
 
(1) 
(2) 
 
Public 
-0.0243** 
-0.0249** 
 
 
(0.0110) 
(0.0109) 
 
Public * Hedge fund 
-0.0482* 
 
 
 
(0.0273) 
 
 
Public * Long term 
investors 
0.0814** 
 
 
 
(0.0316) 
 
 
Private equity 
-0.0303 
-0.0315 
 
 
(0.0217) 
(0.0218) 
Lagged measures 
 
 
 
Public * Hedge fund 
 
-0.0526* 
 
 
 
(0.0306) 
 
Public * Long term investors 
-0.0217 
 
 
 
(0.0293) 
Leading measures 
 
 
 
Public * Hedge fund 
 
-0.0441* 
 
 
 
(0.0251) 
 
Public * Long term investors 
0.116*** 
 
 
 
(0.0368) 
Controls 
 
 
 
Revenue (log) 
0.0109*** 
0.0106*** 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
69 
 
 
(0.0026) 
(0.0026) 
 
FT employees (log) 
0.0133*** 
0.0134*** 
 
 
(0.0039) 
(0.0038) 
 
Firm age (log) 
0.0150** 
0.0148** 
 
 
(0.0060) 
(0.0059) 
 
Halo control 
0.255*** 
0.255*** 
 
 
(0.00275) 
(0.0027) 
 
Constant 
-1.581*** 
-1.576*** 
 
 
(0.0666) 
(0.0672) 
 
Observations 
1,608,830 
1,608,830 
 
R-squared 
0.098 
0.098 
 
Org Controls 
Y 
Y 
 
Industry and State FE 
Y 
Y 
 
Year FE 
Y 
Y 
**, *, † signify statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level respectively 
 
 
Table A3: Fixed Effects Analysis with Firms that Went Public 
 
Dependent variable: 
Purpose-Clarity 
Model: 
OLS 
OLS 
Firm FE 
Firm FE 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Public 
-0.0823** 
-0.0716* 
-0.0713* 
-0.0633* 
 
(0.00792) 
(0.0160) 
(0.0136) 
(0.0136) 
Constant 
0.0949* 
-1.259** 
0.0930** 
-0.694* 
 
(0.0223) 
(0.121) 
(0.00242) 
(0.132) 
Observations 
15,235 
15,235 
15,235 
15,235 
R-squared 
0.003 
0.080 
0.007 
0.083 
Controls 
N 
Y 
N 
Y 
Firm FE 
N 
N 
Y 
Y 
**, *, † signify statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level respectively 
Table A4: 2SLS analysis 
 
 
 
Dependent variable: 
Purpose-Clarity 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
CEO background 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CEO joined in lower ranks 
0.374* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.166) 
 
 
 
 
CEO compensation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pay gap relative to salaried ranks 
 
0.00814 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.0266) 
 
 
 
CEO incentive structure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of non-margin incentives 
 
 
0.0369* 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
70 
 
 
 
 
(0.0148) 
 
 
Employee compensation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Benefits index 
 
 
 
0.0738* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.0333) 
 
 
Bonus as % comp (salaried) 
 
 
 
 
0.615† 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.366) 
 
Observations 
1,848 
1,848 
1,848 
1,848 
1,848 
 
Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Org Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Industry and State FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Year FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
**, *, † signify statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level respectively 
 
Table A5: Alternative purpose measures 
Dependent variable: 
Purpose-
camaraderie 
Purpose 
Index 
Clarity 
Model: 
OLS 
OLS 
OLS 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
Public 
-0.0658** 
-0.0607** 
-0.0812** 
 
(0.0146) 
(0.0111) 
(0.0131) 
Revenue (log) 
0.0028 
0.0027 
-0.0030 
 
(0.0027) 
(0.0024) 
(0.0033) 
FT employees (log) 
-0.0276** 
-0.0084* 
0.0004 
 
(0.0053) 
(0.0038) 
(0.0046) 
Firm age (log) 
-0.0088 
-0.0031 
-0.0111† 
 
(0.0073) 
(0.0057) 
(0.0064) 
Halo control 
0.711** 
0.773** 
0.863** 
 
(0.0555) 
(0.0534) 
(0.0330) 
Constant 
-3.014** 
0.843** 
0.498** 
 
(0.276) 
(0.259) 
(0.181) 
Observations 
2,860 
2,860 
2,860 
R-squared 
0.471 
0.551 
0.554 
Org Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Industry and State FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Year FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
**, *, † signify statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level respectively 
 
Table A6: Alternative purpose measures: nearest neighbor match 
Dependent variable: 
Purpose-
camaraderie 
Purpose 
Index 
Clarity 
Model: 
Nearest neighbor match 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
Public 
-0.0801** 
-0.0784** 
-0.1120** 
 
(0.0100) 
(0.0080) 
(0.0095) 
Observations 
2,792 
2,792 
2,792 
Match criteria 
Table 2(3) 
Table 2(3) 
Table 2(3) 
**, *, † signify statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level respectively 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
71 
 
Table A7: Alternative purpose measures: coarsened exact match 
 
Dependent variable: 
Purpose-
camaraderie 
Purpose 
Index 
Clarity 
Model: 
Coarsened exact match 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
Public 
-0.0148 
-0.0520* 
-0.0722* 
 
(0.0309) 
(0.0258) 
(0.0302) 
Revenue (log) 
-0.0262† 
-0.0095 
-0.0218 
 
(0.0134) 
(0.0111) 
(0.0137) 
FT employees (log) 
0.0067 
-0.0043 
0.0052 
 
(0.0158) 
(0.0128) 
(0.0150) 
Firm age (log) 
0.0038 
0.0101 
-0.0076 
 
(0.0249) 
(0.0217) 
(0.0258) 
Halo control 
0.889** 
0.913** 
0.898** 
 
(0.134) 
(0.117) 
(0.136) 
Constant 
-4.122** 
-0.140 
-0.220 
 
(0.680) 
(0.591) 
(0.683) 
Observations 
259 
259 
259 
R-squared 
0.654 
0.657 
0.686 
Match criteria 
Table 2(3) 
Table 2(3) 
Table 2(3) 
**, *, † signify statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level respectively 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
72 
Table A8: Alternative purpose measures and ownership commitment 
 
 
Dependent variable: 
Purpose-
camaraderie 
Purpose 
Index 
Clarity 
Index 
 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
 
Public 
-0.0686** 
-0.0623** 
-0.0837** 
 
 
(0.0152) 
(0.0112) 
(0.0133) 
 
Public*Hedge fund 
-0.0752 
-0.0650 
-0.0140 
 
 
(0.0698) 
(0.0523) 
(0.0611) 
 
Public*Long term investors 
-0.0311 
-0.0115 
-0.0120 
 
 
(0.0579) 
(0.0469) 
(0.0539) 
 
Private Equity 
-0.0150 
-0.0010 
-0.0131 
 
 
(0.0301) 
(0.0258) 
(0.0305) 
Controls 
 
 
 
 
Revenue (log) 
0.0027 
0.0026 
-0.0030 
 
 
(0.0027) 
(0.0024) 
(0.0033) 
 
FT employees (log) 
-0.0273** 
-0.0083* 
0.0006 
 
 
(0.0053) 
(0.0038) 
(0.0047) 
 
Firm age (log) 
-0.0096 
-0.0039 
-0.0116† 
 
 
(0.0073) 
(0.0057) 
(0.0065) 
 
Halo control 
0.709** 
0.772** 
0.862** 
 
 
(0.0555) 
(0.0536) 
(0.0332) 
 
Constant 
-2.996** 
0.862** 
0.509** 
 
 
(0.279) 
(0.263) 
(0.186) 
 
Observations 
2,860 
2,860 
2,860 
 
R-squared 
0.472 
0.552 
0.554 
 
Org Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Industry and State FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Year FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
**, *, † signify statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level respectively 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
73 
Table A9: Alternative purpose measures and CEO background and incentives 
 
 
Dependent variable: 
Purpose-
Camaraderie 
Purpose 
Index 
Clarity 
Index 
 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
 
Public 
-0.0591** 
-0.0520** 
-0.0707** 
 
 
(0.0148) 
(0.0109) 
(0.0131) 
 
Public*Hedge fund 
-0.0630 
-0.0471 
0.0139 
 
 
(0.0707) 
(0.0527) 
(0.0607) 
 
Public*Long term investors 
-0.0766 
-0.0499 
-0.0454 
 
 
(0.0567) 
(0.0448) 
(0.0536) 
 
Private Equity 
-0.0064 
-0.0035 
-0.0072 
 
 
(0.0289) 
(0.0242) 
(0.0283) 
CEO background 
 
 
 
 
CEO joined in lower ranks 
0.0336** 
0.0343** 
0.0490** 
 
 
(0.0114) 
(0.0090) 
(0.0104) 
 
CEO tenure at company (log years) 
0.0185** 
0.0171** 
0.0254** 
 
 
(0.00695) 
(0.0056) 
(0.0068) 
CEO compensation 
 
 
 
 
Pay gap relative to salaried ranks 
0.0006 
-0.0006 
0.0011 
 
 
(0.0015) 
(0.0011) 
(0.0014) 
 
CEO total compensation 
-0.0256* 
-0.0025 
-0.0058 
 
 
(0.0110) 
(0.0089) 
(0.0092) 
CEO incentive structure 
 
 
 
 
Number of margin incentives 
-0.0022 
-0.0018 
-0.0004 
 
 
(0.0045) 
(0.0033) 
(0.0041) 
 
Number of non-margin incentives 
-0.0010 
-1.11e-06 
0.0001 
 
 
(0.0012) 
(0.0008) 
(0.0010) 
Employee compensation 
 
 
 
 
Benefits index 
0.0261** 
0.0167** 
0.00371 
 
 
(0.0045) 
(0.0034) 
(0.0039) 
 
ESOP 
0.0139 
0.0106 
0.0160 
 
 
(0.0151) 
(0.0112) 
(0.0141) 
 
Bonus as % comp (salaried) 
-0.0139 
0.0309 
0.0728* 
 
 
(0.0333) 
(0.0296) 
(0.0307) 
 
Constant 
-2.626** 
1.002** 
0.553** 
 
 
(0.284) 
(0.265) 
(0.200) 
 
Observations 
2,860 
2,860 
2,860 
 
R-squared 
0.497 
0.568 
0.568 
 
Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Org Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Industry and State FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Year FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
**, *, † signify statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level respectively 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
74 
Table A10: Controlling for Integrity 
 
Dependent variable: 
Integrity 
Purpose-
clarity 
Ethics 
Purpose-
clarity 
 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
 
Integrity 
 
 
 
0.0619** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.0227) 
 
 
 
 
 
Ethics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.0506† 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.0288) 
 
Public 
-0.0940** 
-0.0741** 
-0.0745** 
-0.0260* 
-0.0731** 
-0.0551** 
-0.0556** 
-0.0278* 
 
 
(0.0158) 
(0.0145) 
(0.0144) 
(0.0116) 
(0.0113) 
(0.0108) 
(0.0108) 
(0.0116) 
 
Public*Hedge fund 
 
 
-0.0311 
-0.105* 
 
 
-0.0178 
-0.106* 
 
 
 
 
(0.0657) 
(0.0507) 
 
 
(0.0547) 
(0.0508) 
 
Public*Long term investors 
 
 
-0.0361 
0.0935* 
 
 
-0.0416 
0.0933* 
 
 
 
 
(0.0564) 
(0.0419) 
 
 
(0.0411) 
(0.0419) 
 
Private Equity 
0.0479 
0.0104 
0.0102 
-0.0292 
0.0017 
-0.0084 
-0.0085 
-0.0282 
 
 
(0.0342) 
(0.0310) 
(0.0311) 
(0.0206) 
(0.0249) 
(0.0242) 
(0.0243) 
(0.0207) 
Controls 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Revenue (log) 
 
-0.0053 
-0.0052 
0.0122** 
 
-0.0015 
-0.0014 
0.0120** 
 
 
 
(0.0037) 
(0.0037) 
(0.0026) 
 
(0.0022) 
(0.0022) 
(0.0026) 
 
FT employees (log) 
 
-0.0127* 
-0.0125* 
0.0159** 
 
-0.0093* 
-0.0091* 
0.0156** 
 
 
 
(0.0053) 
(0.0054) 
(0.0037) 
 
(0.0037) 
(0.0037) 
(0.0037) 
 
Firm age (log) 
 
-0.0210** 
-0.0210** 
0.0173** 
 
-0.0012 
-0.0011 
0.0161** 
 
 
 
(0.0069) 
(0.0070) 
(0.0059) 
 
(0.0053) 
(0.0053) 
(0.0058) 
 
Halo control 
0.983** 
1.036** 
1.037** 
0.201** 
0.988** 
1.021** 
1.022** 
0.213** 
 
 
(0.0377) 
(0.0376) 
(0.0377) 
(0.0375) 
(0.0278) 
(0.0279) 
(0.0279) 
(0.0410) 
 
Constant 
-0.565** 
-0.382† 
-0.390† 
-1.541** 
-0.258† 
-0.244 
-0.257† 
-1.552** 
 
 
(0.187) 
(0.204) 
(0.206) 
(0.154) 
(0.137) 
(0.154) 
(0.156) 
(0.154) 
 
Observations 
2,860 
2,860 
2,860 
2,860 
2,860 
2,860 
2,860 
2,860 
 
R-squared 
0.552 
0.621 
0.621 
0.383 
0.649 
0.687 
0.687 
0.380 
 
Org Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Industry and State FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Year FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
**, *, † signify statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level respectively
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
75 
Table A11: Other ownership classifications 
 
Panel A: Private firms with public parents 
Dependent variable: 
Corporate purpose 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
Public 
-0.0105 
-0.0409*** 
-0.0463*** 
 
(0.0143) 
(0.0130) 
(0.0127) 
Private w/ public owner 
-0.0182 
-0.0378** 
-0.0416** 
 
(0.0179) 
(0.0168) 
(0.0167) 
Private equity owner 
-0.0444* 
-0.0450* 
-0.0345 
 
(0.0253) 
(0.0244) 
(0.0229) 
Revenue (log) 
 
0.0171*** 
0.0151*** 
 
 
(0.00304) 
(0.00293) 
FT employees (log) 
 
0.0125** 
0.0168*** 
 
 
(0.00495) 
(0.00484) 
Constant 
0.00650 
-0.301*** 
-0.269** 
 
(0.0132) 
(0.0739) 
(0.119) 
R-squared 
0.198 
0.319 
0.330 
Controls 
Industry, year 
Firm, year 
Full 
 
 
 
 
 
Panel B: Public family firms 
 
Dependent variable: 
Purpose-
clarity 
 
 
Model: 
OLS 
OLS 
 
 
(1) 
(2) 
 
Public 
-0.0280** 
-0.0314** 
 
 
(0.0105) 
(0.0114) 
 
Public*Hedge fund 
 
-0.108* 
 
 
 
(0.0504) 
 
Public*Long term investors 
 
0.0906* 
 
 
 
(0.0420) 
 
Public*Family firm 
0.0196 
0.0172 
 
 
(0.0200) 
(0.0200) 
 
Private Equity 
 
-0.0288 
 
 
 
(0.0208) 
Controls 
 
 
 
Revenue (log) 
0.0123** 
0.0118** 
 
 
(0.0026) 
(0.0026) 
 
FT employees (log) 
0.0153** 
0.0148** 
 
 
(0.0037) 
(0.0036) 
 
Firm age (log) 
0.0183** 
0.0157** 
 
 
(0.0058) 
(0.0058) 
 
Halo control 
0.272** 
0.266** 
 
 
(0.0287) 
(0.0283) 
 
Constant 
-1.653** 
-1.566** 
 
 
(0.154) 
(0.154) 
 
Observations 
2,860 
2,860 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
76 
 
R-squared 
0.374 
0.380 
 
Org Controls 
Y 
Y 
 
Industry and State FE 
Y 
Y 
 
Year FE 
Y 
Y 
**, *, † signify statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level respectively 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
77 
Appendix B: Factors resulting from the factor analysis 
 
This table shows the four factors resulting from the exploratory factor analysis identifying the survey questions that receive the highest 
loadings for each factor 
 
Factor 
Questions 
Purpose-Clarity 
“My work has special meaning: this is not just a job” 
“I feel good about the ways we contribute to the community” 
“When I look at what we accomplish, I feel a sense of pride” 
“I’m proud to tell others I work here” 
“Management has a clear view of where the organization is going and how to get there” 
“Management makes its expectations clear.” 
“I am given the resources and equipment to do my job,” 
Purpose-
Camaraderie 
“This is a fun place to work” 
“We are all in this together” 
“There is a family or team feeling here” 
“My work has special meaning: this is not just a job” 
“I feel good about the ways we contribute to the community” 
“When I look at what we accomplish, I feel a sense of pride” 
“I’m proud to tell others I work here” 
Non-discrimination 
“People here are treated fairly regardless of their sexual orientation” 
“People here are treated fairly regardless of their ethnicity” 
“People here are treated fairly regardless of their gender” 
“People here are treated fairly regardless of their age.” 
Management 
“Management’s actions match its words.” 
“I can ask management any reasonable question and get a straight answer.” 
[further questions masked by data agreement, but reflect other questions regarding management quality] 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
78 
Appendix C: Supplemental discussion on robustness 
 
In this appendix section we discuss supplemental analyses and discussion of various aspects of our 
analysis. We first consider alternative measures for our dependent and explanatory variables, then 
turn to potential sources of omitted variable bias. 
 
Alternative Dependent Variables 
 
We focused our analysis using a purpose metric that measures employee beliefs both about the 
meaning of the work and about the clarity provided by management towards that purpose. We 
focused on this measure because it reflects the idea of meaningfulness in the workplace and aligns 
with work that emphasizes the role of leaders in communicating and creating the conditions, as 
architects, for employees to find meaning in their work. For robustness, however, we look here at 
two alternative approaches to capturing purpose. 
 
One alternative measure of purpose is what Gartenberg et al. (2019) call Purpose-
Camaraderie, the second of two factors that concerns purpose. This measure includes the four 
meaning-related questions, listed in the introduction section, together with questions on the degree 
of camaraderie between employees in the workplace. The two items with the highest loadings on 
this question are i) whether employees have fun at work and ii) whether they believe that there is 
a familial atmosphere among employees at work. The other questions included in this factor 
similarly focus on workplace collegiality. Appendix Table A5 presents this alternative measure. 
As is the case with our primary measure of corporate purpose, public firms and private firms owned 
by public companies have lower purpose-camaraderie in column 1. Columns 2 and 3 decompose 
the Purpose-Clarity measure to the questions that relate to meaning in column 2 and the questions 
that relate to clarity in column 3. 
 
Results suggest that both components are lower in public firms. Table A6 shows results 
using propensity score matching and Table A7 using coarsened exact matching. Table A8 shows 
the results in the augmented models that incorporate the ownership commitment variables. We 
find that although the indicator variable is negative and significant the ownership interaction terms 
do not achieve significance. 
 
Our interpretation is that those alternative measures miss an important aspect of purposeful 
organizations, which is the role of leaders as architects in creating clarity about the path towards 
that purpose (Podolny et al. 2004; Carton 2018). Table A9 shows the results using the augmented 
models with variables on CEO characteristics and incentives. We find similar results for the 
estimated coefficients on CEO joined in lower ranks, and Benefits Index. 
 
Sample Selection Bias 
 
We must also consider whether sample selection bias may affect our results. If, for some 
reason, public firms with lower purpose choose to participate in the GPTW survey but private 
firms with lower purpose do not, then our results could reflect this sample bias. Although it is 
difficult to construct a scenario wherein this occurs, it is possible. Even if this bias exists, however, 
it could explain only part of the differences in purpose across firms with different forms of 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281

 
79 
ownership. Even within private firms, there is systematic variation across PE and non-PE owned 
firms and within public firms, the commitment level of the public market investors is associated 
with purpose; therefore, any sample bias would also have to explain that result. 
 
 
Correlated Omitted Variables 
 
Relation of Purpose to Integrity 
Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2015) document that public firms score lower on a measure of 
integrity that is derived from the same survey that we use in our paper. Therefore, it could be that 
integrity is a correlated omitted variable in the relation between purpose and ownership. Table A10 
tests this possibility. Columns 1 and 2 replicate the analysis and the result as reported in Guiso et 
al. (2015), wherein public firms exhibit lower integrity. Column 3 shows that integrity is not related 
to hedge fund and long-term investor ownership. Column 4 replicates our analysis while also 
including their control for integrity. Our results remain robust to the inclusion of integrity as a 
control variable. Integrity loads with a positive and significant coefficient. Columns 5-8 show the 
same analyses but now instead of the integrity variable we use the ethics variable from Guiso et 
al. (2015). All the results are similar. 
 
Differences in Financial Performance 
A potential alternative explanation is that the results we document are driven by differences in 
financial performance in those companies. We fail to find evidence consistent with this alternative 
explanation in our data, which would suggest that private firms in our sample have better financial 
performance than public firms. The inclusion of sales growth, the only financial performance 
variable included in the GPTW data, as a control variable in the models or as a matching covariate, 
does not change our key results. However, the financial performance explanation could also affect 
our results within public firms if for example, hedge funds might choose to invest in worse-
performing companies and long-term investors in better performing companies. To address this 
concern, we include three periods of lagged return on assets and three periods of lagged revenue 
growth. We still find differences in the purpose measure. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440281