TITLE: Learning from Their Daughters: Family Exposure to Gender Disparity and Female Representation in Male-Led Ventures
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2023.4727
---

EUR Research Information Portal
Learning from Their Daughters: Family Exposure to Gender Disparity and Female
Representation in Male-Led Ventures
Published in:
Management Science
Publication status and date:
Published: 21/02/2024
DOI (link to publisher):
10.1287/mnsc.2023.4727
Document Version
Version created as part of publication process; publisher's layout; not normally made publicly available
Document License/Available under:
Article 25fa Dutch Copyright Act
Citation for the published version (APA):
Wu, Z., Naldi, L., Wennberg, K., & Uman, T. (2024). Learning from Their Daughters: Family Exposure to Gender Disparity
and Female Representation in Male-Led Ventures. Management Science, 70(2), 671-693.
https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2023.4727
Link to publication on the EUR Research Information Portal
Terms and Conditions of Use
Except as permitted by the applicable copyright law, you may not reproduce or make this material available to any third party
without the prior written permission from the copyright holder(s). Copyright law allows the following uses of this material
without prior permission:
 • you may download, save and print a copy of this material for your personal use only;
 • you may share the EUR portal link to this material.
In case the material is published with an open access license (e.g. a Creative Commons (CC) license), other uses may be
allowed. Please check the terms and conditions of the specific license.
Take-down policy
If you believe that this material infringes your copyright and/or any other intellectual property rights, you may request its
removal by contacting us at the following email address: openaccess.library@eur.nl. Please provide us with all the relevant
information, including the reasons why you believe any of your rights have been infringed. In case of a legitimate complaint,
we will make the material inaccessible and/or remove it from the website.

1 
Learning from Their Daughters: 
Family Exposure to Gender Disparity and Female Representation in Male-Led Ventures 
 
 
Zhiyan Wu (corresponding author) 
Rotterdam School of Management 
Erasmus University 
z.wu@rsm.nl 
 
Lucia Naldi 
Jönköping International Business School 
Jönköping University 
lucia.naldi@ju.se 
 
Karl Wennberg 
House of Innovation 
Stockholm School of Economics 
& 
Institute for Analytical Sociology (IAS) 
Linköping University 
karl.wennberg@hhs.se 
 
Timur Uman 
Jönköping International Business School 
Jönköping University 
timur.uman@ju.se 
 
 
Abstract. We build on recent studies on daughter-to-father influence to explore how male founders’ 
fatherhood of daughters impacts female representation in their ventures. We find that, conditional on the 
total number of children, fathering an additional daughter vs. a son is associated with a 4% (11%) 
increase in female director (employee) representation. This daughter-to-father effect gradually matures as 
daughters grow up and socialize in schools and workplaces, and increases as daughters age, suggesting 
that male founders vicariously learn from their daughters about the constraints women face throughout the 
daughters’ lifecycles. Heterogeneity analyses (regarding founder cohort, divorce status, and social class), 
combined with qualitative evidence, further substantiate the plausibility of vicarious learning as a 
potential yet understudied mechanism underlying daughter effects. In addition, daughter effects on 
employee recruitment are concentrated in microbusinesses (number of employees  10) where the 
founder is close in decision authority to all employees. These findings add important nuances to our 
understanding of daughter effects in organizational contexts, and extend theory of gender homophily in 
organizations. 
 
Page 1 of 46
Management Science

2 
1. Introduction 
Female joiners – women employed by the founders of new firms (Rocha and van Praag 2020) – remain 
underrepresented in entrepreneurial settings (International Labour Office 2016). An often-suggested cause 
of this disparity is gender homophily in recruitment: most ventures are male-led, and male founders 
associate more with male joiners when growing their ventures (Ruef et al. 2003).1 Since homophily is 
routinely assumed as a “gravity-like force” among individuals (Leszczensky and Pink 2019: 395), 
scholars and policymakers often advocate gender-neutrality interventions, such as gender quotas or 
diversity policies, to break the gender homophily cycle in business. 
Nevertheless, recent research has revisited the assumption that gender homophily tendencies are 
impossible to change by individuals themselves. This research stream, known as ‘daughter effects’ studies 
(Washington 2008), shows that fathering daughters often nudges male decision-makers’ gender-
egalitarianism to hire more women in the firm’s upper echelons (Calder-Wang and Gompers 2021; 
Dasgupta et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2021), pay female employees better relative to male colleagues (Dahl et 
al. 2012), or launch more women-friendly CSR initiatives (Cronqvist and Yu 2017). This literature 
indicates that homophily tendencies are not as uncontrollable as previously assumed, but can be regulated 
by individuals themselves, and that such regulation is conditioned by decision-makers’ situational 
characteristics, such as fatherhood of daughters. 
Despite the growing prominence of the daughter effects perspective, an important question remains 
regarding the mechanisms underpinning such effects, and how they might affect gender homophilous 
recruitment in organizations at large. Extant work centers on the average effects of fathering daughters on 
gender-related decisions in organizations (Calder-Wang and Gompers 2021; Cronqvist and Yu 2017; 
Dasgupta et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2021), leaving when these daughter effects manifest largely 
 
1 Homophily includes both induced homophily (people associate with similar others due to the structural unavailability of 
dissimilar others in their context) and choice homophily (the tendency to associate with similar others even if dissimilar others 
are available) (Lawrence and Shah 2020). As it is unlikely that all male-led ventures suffer from induced gender homophily, we 
focus on male founders’ choice homophily tendencies. For simplicity, we use homophily and not choice homophily throughout. 
Page 2 of 46
Management Science

3 
understudied (an exception is Ronchi and Smith 2021).2 The timing of daughter effects is important to 
help distinguish between distinct theoretical mechanisms explaining the effects. The primary theoretical 
mechanism adopted in the literature is the female socialization hypothesis: a male decision-maker’s 
homophily regulation is triggered by the critical event of fathering a daughter, bringing him closer to and 
socially identifying with women, adjusting his preferences and values. In this perspective, the change in 
gender-related behaviors in hiring should occur almost upon the birth of a child (Dahl et al. 2012). Yet 
another possibility is that the regulation of homophily tendencies is mainly triggered by rearing a 
daughter, exposing men to the challenges and disadvantages that women face. In this perspective, self-
regulation of homophily tendencies in hiring would require certain exposure occurring when daughters 
reach a certain age (Glynn and Sen 2015). Thus, beyond examining the effects of fathering daughters on 
men’s decision-making in organizations, identifying when such effects manifest is important to probe the 
theoretical mechanisms that can explain why men change their behavior after fathering a daughter. 
Our study aims to address this gap. Since the existence of daughter effects on male decision-makers’ 
behavior is well documented, we do not develop new hypotheses. We instead explore detailed Swedish 
registry data on families and firms to add richness to the cumulative knowledge at the intersection of 
gender homophily and daughter effects research. In our exploratory analysis, we focus on male-led 
ventures (as opposed to established firms) for two reasons. First, given our focus on homophilous 
recruitment, the decision-maker’s probable involvement in personnel decisions represents an important 
scope condition. In new ventures, founders typically serve as key decision-makers who frequently get 
involved in nearly all types of personnel decisions (Shepherd et al. 2020), be it board members or 
employees. Yet, in established firms, personnel decisions may be spread across a variety of decision-
makers, depending on the level of recruitment (Breaugh 2013). Thus, a focus on new ventures is more 
appropriate for our exploratory analysis. Second, much of the debate on gender disparity has focused on 
established firms, but such disparity is likely to have roots in the early days of a firm, given key decision-
 
2 See Section “5. The Timing of Daughter Effects: An Event Study Analysis” for differences between our event study analysis 
and Ronchi and Smith’s (2021). 
Page 3 of 46
Management Science

4 
makers’ strong homophily preferences that drive personal decisions (Gorman 2005). If certain events can 
shape the recruitment patterns in young firms, these events may place firms on a different trajectory in 
terms of diversity and inclusion. Thus, studying how male decision-makers’ family situations shape their 
personal decisions in the workplace could help us understand the variation in organizational demographic 
compositions and shed light on why some firms reproduce inequalities (via hiring) more than others 
(Amis et al. 2020). 
In our exploratory analysis, we first build on the daughter effects literature to leverage the naturally 
exogenous assignment of the sex of a male founder’s child (Washington 2008) to explore daughter effects 
on female joiner representation in male-led ventures. The analysis of the full population of Swedish 
ventures founded by solo male founders between 2004–2017 suggests that, conditional on the total 
number of children fathered, one additional daughter is associated with a 4% (11%) increase in female 
director (employee) representation, given the average level of female joiner representation. The effects 
remain robust when focusing on female representation in meaningful positions that require substantial 
expertise and that are highly paid. A further contingency analysis suggests that daughter effects on female 
employee representation only manifest in microbusinesses (number of employees  10), but disappear in 
larger ventures where male founders may be less involved in lower-level employee recruitment, whereas 
daughter effects on female director representation hold in both microbusinesses and larger ventures. This 
suggests male decision-makers’ probable involvement in personnel decisions is an important scope 
condition of daughter effects on homophilous recruitment. 
Second, we exploit the longitudinal nature of our data to explore when daughter effects manifest 
through an event study analysis with a difference-in-differences regression specification. The event in 
focus is the birth of the first child, whereby male founders who father a daughter are randomly assigned to 
the treatment group, and those fathering a son constitute the control group.3 Although we observe parallel 
trends in the pre-birth period between the treatment and control groups in recruiting men or women to the 
 
3 For a detailed justification of why we focus on the birth of the first child, see Section “5. The Timing of Daughter Effects: An 
Event Study Analysis”. 
Page 4 of 46
Management Science

5 
board or as employees, we find null results of daughter effects in the post-birth period, namely the [-5, 4] 
time window in the event study. This might reflect that daughter effects do not appear immediately after 
childbirth, an implicit assumption in much of the literature. Given the limited time window in this 
sampling period, we explore the dynamics of daughter effects over a longer period in a cross-sectional 
analysis focusing on founders with only one child, using the child’s age as proxy of the post-birth period 
to investigate when daughter effects emerge. This analysis suggests that daughter effects manifest after 
school-entry age, becoming stronger as the daughter grows up. This timing challenges the logic that the 
regulation of male founders’ homophily tendencies is triggered by the critical event of fathering a 
daughter, instead suggesting it is mainly triggered by rearing a daughter. We derive two theoretical 
implications from these analyses. First, daughter effects take years to mature and develop gradually. 
Second, the discontinuous but progressively increasing effect suggests a vicarious learning mechanism 
whereby a male founder may gradually learn from his daughter about the constraints that women face. 
Third, we explore the heterogeneous effects of the daughter-to-father influences to further probe the 
existence of a vicarious learning mechanism. If vicarious learning acts as an operating mechanism, we 
would expect a larger effect among male founders who tend to hold gender-traditional views and thus 
have more to learn from daughters about the constraints that women face. We find supportive evidence 
when exploring the heterogeneous effects across (1) early-cohort founders that grew up in less gender-
egalitarian times, (2) divorced founders with shared custody (compared to married founders), and (3) 
founders who originate from lower-class families. These heterogeneous effects further suggest that 
vicarious learning is potentially an understudied mechanism in daughter effects research. 
Fourth, we conduct interviews with 13 male founders to illustrate our empirical findings. This 
qualitative evidence further speaks to the plausibility of vicarious learning as a mechanism explaining 
daughter effects. In particular, founders with daughters differ from their peers with only sons in their 
views of the opportunities afforded to their children in life. Founders with daughters informed us that they 
observed and worried about the constraints their daughters have or will face, but founders with only sons 
Page 5 of 46
Management Science

6 
emphasized the equal opportunities in Sweden for women and men. Such different views are also 
reflected in how the two types of founders make gender-related decisions in their ventures. 
In sum, our exploratory research suggests that while men by themselves may be ‘invulnerable’ to 
gendered norms in society, they can be vicariously exposed (and thus vulnerable) to such norms via the 
presence of a daughter in the family. This exposure prompts male founders to gradually learn about the 
constraints that women face, ultimately nudging their gender egalitarianism, despite prevalent homophily 
tendencies. Given the abductive nature of our inferences, we acknowledge that this vicarious-learning 
mechanism is just one interpretation of our empirical findings. We thus outline avenues for future 
research to further test the plausibility of this theoretical mechanism. 
Our study offers insights into the growing body of research on daughter effects in the context of 
organizations. The findings challenge two existing beliefs about daughter effects. First, much effort has 
gone into exploring daughter effects on a variety of organizational decisions, including recruitment 
(Calder-Wang and Gompers 2021), promotion (Ronchi and Smith 2021), compensation (Dahl et al. 
2012), and CSR policy (Cronqvist and Yu 2017). Despite the great strides made, this line of work 
implicitly assumes that fathering a daughter will have an immediate effect on men’s decision-making. 
Our findings challenge this assumption by providing new evidence that daughter effects take time to 
mature, emerging discontinuously as daughters socialize into schools and workplaces. Second, extant 
research tends to view daughter effects as a ubiquitous phenomenon, implicitly assuming daughter effects 
manifest across a wide range of organizational decisions. Our findings of firm size as an important scope 
condition stand in stark contrast to the ubiquitous view of daughter effects, suggesting that daughter 
effects on employee recruitment may be concentrated among male decision-makers in small ventures who 
are close in decision authority to all employees. By challenging these two beliefs of daughter effects, our 
work suggests that daughter effects might be more limited than previously thought because they not only 
take time to develop but also appear concentrated in certain organizational processes. 
Our work also makes an integrative contribution by synthesizing gender homophily and daughter 
effects research. Despite their common goal to understand gender-related behaviors, these research 
Page 6 of 46
Management Science

7 
streams have evolved largely in parallel (for a rare exception, see Calder-Wang and Gompers 2021). This 
integrative approach provides theoretical leverage by accommodating individual agency into homophily 
conceptualization, illuminating when such agency is likely to manifest, in which situations, and with what 
implications. Our analysis of the change in male founders’ recruitment behaviors following the birth, 
rearing, and early adulthood of their daughters suggests gender homophily tendencies are conditional on 
decision-makers’ situational characteristics and can be overruled when men are vicariously exposed to 
gender disparity via their daughters. We also probe the implications of cross-context interfaces on 
homophilous associations (Lawrence and Shah 2020), providing an account of how individuals’ social 
interactions in one context (family) may influence their sense of homophilous behaviors in another (work). 
This highlights the salience of considering the cross-context interdependency in studying homophily 
tendencies, suggesting that a stimulus in one context may trigger changes in homophilous behaviors in 
another. 
Our study also has implications for management policies. Female venture joiners represent a 
significant proportion of the active labor market, and understanding a causal antecedent of shifting men 
toward actively promoting gender equality is a crucial step in fostering a more equal society. In contrast 
to gender quotas and other externally focused approaches, our study suggests that men’s family exposure 
(via daughters) to gender disparity can innately engage them in gender egalitarianism. Policymakers 
seeking to exogenously nudge male decision-makers’ gender egalitarianism in recruitment may benefit 
from reminding men to consider the society facing their female offspring, and that as decision-makers, 
they can influence society via their own decisions. 
 
2. Theory Background 
2.1. Gender Homophily and Gender-Neutrality Interventions 
Homophily – the tendency to associate with similar others based on shared characteristics such as gender 
– is a central force in the formation of human relationships (Lawrence and Shah 2020). While commonly 
observed in the corporate domain, gender homophily is especially noticeable in small groups, such as new 
Page 7 of 46
Management Science

8 
venture teams, where key decision-makers tend to be attracted to, and thus hire, similar others (Ruef et al. 
2003). In contrast to intentional forms of gender bias, gender homophily tendencies are unconscious. As 
Elliott and Smith (2004: 369) explain, “people tend to make sense of their social world by categorizing 
others into in-groups and out-groups; and… this normal information processing occurs largely outside 
conscious control”. While bottom-up gender movements, combined with top-down gender quotas, have 
nudged gender egalitarianism in society at large, individual decision-makers may still exhibit unconscious 
behavioral tendencies driven by gender homophily when employing talent in their firms (Gorman 2005). 
Homophily on the organizational level has substantial implications on the societal level (Amis et al. 
2020). Since many firms are male-led, gender homophily has been identified as a root cause of hiring 
patterns that result in persistently low female representation in new organizations (Ruef et al. 2003), 
either as board members or employees. Scholars refer to these societal implications of gender homophily 
as the “homosocial reproduction” of organizations driving gender disparities in society (Rivera 2013). 
To address these homophily-driven gender disparities, policymakers have introduced various gender-
neutrality interventions in the hope of breaking the cycle of gender homophily in male-led firms, 
including government-mandated gender quotas and union-led workplace diversity policies. Despite the 
debatable effectiveness of these initiatives (Kalev et al. 2006), gender-neutrality interventions almost 
exclusively focus on established firms, leaving new ventures unconstrained in terms of coercive 
pressures. Unsurprisingly, new ventures remain a heavily male-dominated field in which female joiner 
representation is persistently low (Rocha and van Praag 2020). 
Despite the powerful theoretical narratives of homophilous recruitment processes, and the absence of 
gender-neutrality interventions that target new ventures, there is wide heterogeneity in female joiner 
representation in male-led ventures (Rocha and van Praag 2020). The scarce but growing daughter effects 
literature shows the relevance of daughter-to-father influence on gendered decisions in the workplace 
(Cronqvist and Yu 2017; Dahl et al. 2012; Dasgupta et al. 2018; Ronchi and Smith 2021; Wang et al. 
2021), suggesting that human tendency toward gender homophily might not be as uncontrollable as 
previously assumed (Calder-Wang and Gompers 2021). 
Page 8 of 46
Management Science

9 
2.2. Daughter Effects on Gender-Related Decisions in Organizations 
In her study on daughter-to-father influence on gendered decisions in politics, arguing for a female 
socialization process, Washington (2008) demonstrates that fatherhood of daughters increases a 
congressperson’s feminist sympathies. Adopting a between-subject design using the naturally random 
assignment of a child’s sex to a fathering congressman, she found that, conditional on the total number of 
children, each daughter increases a congressman’s propensity to vote liberally on bills regarding women’s 
issues. This pioneering work was subsequently extended to the juridical and political decisions among 
federal judges and US Constitutional Convention delegates (Glynn and Sen 2015; Pope and Schmidt 
2021), and the voting and criminal decisions of private individuals (Dustmann and Landersø 2021; 
Oswald and Powdthavee 2010). 
More recently, management research has extended Washington’s (2008) findings to gender-related 
decisions in organizations. Dahl et al. (2012) were among the first scholars to systematically explore the 
impact of a male CEO’s fatherhood on his management style, investigating how a CEO’s transition to 
fatherhood influences his employees’ wages. Drawing on the broader daughter effects literature, they 
found that male CEOs pay employees less generously after fathering a child, and that the birth of a 
daughter has a less negative impact on salaries than the birth of a son. Cronqvist and Yu (2017) 
subsequently generalized daughter effects in the context of socially responsible investment decisions of 
CEOs at Standard and Poor’s (S&P) companies. They found that CEOs with daughters are more likely to 
commit resources to corporate social responsibility practices. In sum, these studies show daughter effects 
on the generic economic decisions of male decision-makers in organizations. 
Several studies also explore whether daughter effects are especially pronounced in gender-related 
hiring decisions in organizations. Using a sample of S&P companies, Dasgupta et al. (2018) found that 
CEOs with daughters are more likely to have women join the board than CEOs with sons, while in a 
sample of Chinese publicly traded firms, Wang et al. (2021) found that CEOs with daughters tend to hire 
more female executives than CEOs with sons. Similar patterns are found in the studies of Calder-Wang 
and Gompers (2021) in the context of recruiting female partners in U.S. venture capital firms, and Ronchi 
Page 9 of 46
Management Science

10 
and Smith (2021) with regard to female employees in male-managed establishments. Although these 
studies provide a more direct understanding of the contexts in which daughter-to-father effects influence 
gender-related hiring decisions in organizations, much work remains to be done. 
For instance, few studies attend to the critical question of when daughter effects emerge, which is 
particularly pertinent to identify the underlying mechanisms that can explain these effects. Extant work 
primarily relies on Washington’s (2008) female socialization hypothesis to explain why daughter effects 
occur (e.g., Cronqvist and Yu 2017; Dahl et al. 2012; Dasgupta et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2021). According 
to this hypothesis, decision-makers in organizations adapt their values and preferences, acquiring more 
feminine values (i.e., other-regarding) when they father a daughter. The female socialization hypothesis 
suggests an immediate change in men’s gender-related views (i.e., an effect due to fathering a daughter). 
Dahl et al. (2012: 671) explain this rapid response as, “having a child … affect[s] a CEO’s values because 
it is one of the most momentous events that can occur in a man’s life”. 
Another plausible hypothesis that has received less research attention concerns men’s exposure to 
gender differences in the opportunities and challenges their daughters face (Glynn and Sen 2015). In this 
perspective, the birth of a daughter would not lead decision-makers to alter gender-related behaviors in 
their organizations, instead requiring exposure to their daughter’s life experiences when she gets older 
(i.e., an effect due to rearing a daughter). The timing of daughter effects and the exposure-based 
mechanism have thus far received limited attention, a gap our study aims to fill. 
 
3. Research Design 
3.1. Data 
We analyze the full population of newly incorporated ventures established by solo male founders in 
Sweden from 2004 to 2017.4 Sweden is an ideal context for our study, as it is one of the most gender-
equal countries (The Economist 2020), and was first in the world to introduce gender-neutral paid 
 
4 In co-founded ventures, it is impossible to discern whether female presentation is driven by the fathering founder’s fatherhood, 
non-fathering founders’ behavioral changes triggered by their co-founder’s fatherhood, or a combination of the two. We thus 
focus on new ventures with single founders. 
Page 10 of 46
Management Science

11 
parental-leave in the 1970s. Today, roughly 90% of Swedish fathers take paternity leave (The Economist 
2014). These early experiences of fatherhood may be the first to stimulate daughter effects nudging a 
father’s gender egalitarianism. Further, while the public sector in Sweden has achieved gender equality, 
the private sector remains male-dominated.5 The low representation of women in the private sector stems 
from factors such as gender homophily in recruitment, since deliberate gender discrimination in the 
workplace has been illegal since 1980. Yet, female representation is heterogeneous among private 
businesses, providing sufficient variation to explore the drivers of female representation in male-led 
ventures. 
Our data derive from three matched longitudinal datasets of the labor market, board of directors, and 
family members in Sweden. The first is the Longitudinal Integration Database for Health Insurance and 
Labor Market Studies (Swedish acronym: LISA) maintained by Statistics Sweden. LISA includes records 
on all individuals over age 16 residing in Sweden on December 31st of each year, starting from 1990. 
Statistics Sweden assigns each individual, family, business entity, and workplace a unique identifier. 
LISA also contains demographic and financial information on all individuals and firms in the country. 
The second data source is the Swedish Companies Registration Office (SCRO) with information on all 
boards of directors from 2004. The third data source is the Population Register (Swedish acronym: RTB), 
with information on all nuclear family members or co-habitants with children. These data sources have 
been widely used in organizational research (e.g., Balachandran et al. 2019; Ertug et al. 2020). 
Using LISA to identify new ventures and their founders, board members, and employees, we define a 
legal entity as a new venture if it is an independent, privately owned, non-financial corporation that did 
not exist in prior years. The unique identifier of a legal entity ensures that ventures are independent and 
not subsidiaries, allowing us to avoid misidentification problems due to changes in venture name or legal 
form over time. We follow all ventures with at least one employee. We excluded five new ventures with 
more than 500 employees at founding because they are likely spinoffs. 
 
5 https://sweden.se/society/gender-equality-in-sweden/ 
Page 11 of 46
Management Science

12 
Among new ventures, we identify male founders as those with the employment status “entrepreneurs 
in own business”. New venture employees are identified with the status “employees” when hired in the 
venture. We use SCRO data on all boards of directors to define individuals as directors (excluding 
employee representatives) if serving on the venture board on November 30th when SCRO publishes its 
yearly register (Balachandran et al. 2019). We identify founders’ children, their age, and sex using RTB. 
Our final sample includes 200,154 venture-year observations, corresponding to 51,223 unique new 
ventures. About 32% (39%) of all observations have no female board members (employees), echoing that 
the Swedish private business sector is male-dominated. Female-dominated ventures also exist even when 
sampling ventures with male founders: 0.1% (17%) of our observations have no male board members 
(employees). 48% of all founders exited during the observation window. The exit rate is similar for 
founders with more/fewer daughters and sons (two-sided T-test: p = 0.90), suggesting that fathering more 
daughters is not related to continuing in entrepreneurship or not. Since our sample can recover the natural 
ratio of sex at birth, founders fathering daughters do not appear to self-select into entrepreneurship. Thus, 
our sample is unlikely to be biased with regard to self-selection into or out of entrepreneurship. 
 
3.2. Variables 
3.2.1. Dependent Variables. We focus on two key types of female joiner representation in male-led 
ventures: board members and employees.6,7 According to SCRO, a limited company must have a board of 
directors,8 and every new venture will hire employees at some point following its establishment. Thus, 
these two types of joiners will grant us sufficient variation in female representation. We measure female 
board (employee) representation as the number of female directors (employees) each year divided by the 
total number of directors (employees). Since it is common in Europe for firms to have employee 
 
6 Following Roach and Sauermann (2015), we distinguish between joiners and leaders in new ventures based on whether the 
individuals are employed by the founder-owner and are not co-owners themselves. 
7 We also considered including managers, but managerial positions are rare in new ventures. Founders typically function as 
owner-managers in their ventures (Wasserman 2017), and in our data, less than 6% of all observations have a managerial position. 
Given the limited variation in managerial positions, we restrict our focus to board members and employees. 
8 https://bolagsverket.se/en/bus/business/limited/2.1147/board-of-directors-1.8631 
Page 12 of 46
Management Science

13 
representatives on their boards, we focus exclusively on non-employee directors when measuring female 
director representation. 
3.2.2. Independent Variable. Founder’s number of daughters is measured as each founder’s number 
of female children each year. As the assignment of a child’s sex to a father is naturally random, 
conditional on the total number of children, a father’s number of daughters is exogenous (Washington 
2008). We offer a detailed justification of this naturally random variable in the “3.3. Identification 
Strategy” section below. The average founder age in our sample is around 48 years, similar to prior 
research (e.g., Azoulay et al. 2020). Thus, most founders in our sample started their businesses after 
fatherhood. Although with a significantly smaller sample, in the ‘Event Study Analysis’ section, we 
leverage the observations of founders experiencing the birth of their first child in our sampling period to 
explore the timing of daughter effects, which helps shine additional light on the potential mechanisms that 
drive daughter effects. 
3.2.3. Control Variables. At the founder level, we control for marriage (1 if married, 0 otherwise), and 
education (1 = pre-upper secondary education under nine years; 2 = pre-upper secondary education nine 
years; 3 = upper secondary education; 4 = post-secondary education under two years; 5 = post-secondary 
education two years or more; 6 = postgraduate education). At the venture level, we control for venture 
performance (net sales in thousand euros) and venture size (number of employees). We follow prior 
research by lagging each venture-level control by one year to account for their effects on venturing 
decisions (e.g., Dahl et al. 2012).9 We include industry-year dummies in all analyses to account for time-
varying industry-specific trends in female-friendly recruitment, retention, and turnover. 
 
3.3. Identification Strategy 
Adopting Washington’s (2008) research design, we use the natural experiment of a child’s sex to explore 
the causal effect of parenting daughters on female joiner representation in male-led ventures. The natural 
 
9 Since childbirth happens throughout the year, and female representation is a statistic measured on the last day of the year, it is 
not necessary to lag our independent variable to prevent reserve causality. Nonetheless, our results remain similar if we lag all 
independent and control variables. 
Page 13 of 46
Management Science

14 
experiment we exploit here essentially constitutes a between-subject design: a male founder has a child, 
and the sex of the child is naturally random. The causal effect identification is between two male founders, 
each with one additional child, the first a girl, the second a boy. The difference in female joiner 
representation between the two founders’ ventures yields an estimate of the relative effect of having an 
additional daughter compared to an additional son. 
This natural experiment setup has several advantages. First, since a between-subject design compares 
female joiner representation in new ventures whose founders have the same number of children, a causal 
effect revealed via our identification strategy captures the effect of the additional child’s sex rather than 
the effect of having an additional child. Second, the natural randomization of variance in a child’s sex 
helps balance out potential confounders between the treatment (additional child = girl) and the control 
group (additional child = boy), including heterogeneity in the supply-side availability of potential female 
employees (Barbulescu and Bidwell 2013) as well as heterogeneity in male founders’ exposure to female 
role models prior to their entrepreneurship (Rocha and van Praag 2020). Even if such heterogeneity is 
unobserved, it does not pose inferential threats. The natural experiment in our data is estimated as: 
Female joiner representationi,k,t = α+β×daughtersi,t+γ×controlsi,t-1+ηi,t+δk,t+εi,k,t (1) 
where i is an index for ventures, k for industries, t for years, female joiner representation is the 
outcome variable, daughters is the number of daughters a male founder parents, controls is a set of control 
variables, η is a set of fixed effects for the total number of children, δ is a set of industry-year fixed effects, 
and ε is the error term. We cluster standard errors at the founder level and use OLS regressions. 
Our identification strategy assumes that conditional on the total number of children, the number of 
daughters is exogenously given (Washington 2008). This presupposes parents are not practicing gender 
selection or following any fertility-stopping rules; we probe this identification assumption below. If our 
identification assumption holds, β will identify the causal effect of interest. Since we condition on the 
total number of children, the number of daughters and number of sons are linearly dependent, and we 
cannot distinguish whether a male founder’s gender-egalitarian behaviors are driven by parenting an 
Page 14 of 46
Management Science

15 
additional daughter, not parenting an additional son, or a combination of the two. Thus, β is interpreted as 
the relative impact of parenting an additional daughter compared to parenting an additional son. 
 
3.4. The Validity of the Identification Strategy 
Our identification strategy assumes that conditional on the total number of children, the number of 
daughters is randomly assigned by nature (Washington 2008). This assumption would be violated if 
individuals practiced any type of sex selection or sex-based fertility stopping rules. Sex selection is 
possible under the condition of abortion or in vitro fertilization (IVF) (Cronqvist and Yu 2017). Our 
empirical setting helps ensure neither case is likely. First, sex-related abortion is illegal and extremely 
rare in Sweden. Midwives, nurses, and doctors have no obligation to reveal the sex to pregnant couples 
and follow strict rules not to do so if they suspect abortion is being considered in relation to the sex of the 
fetus. Second, since the average age of founders in our data is 48, the vast majority did not have access to 
IVF at the time they had children. Even if junior founders had access to IVF, they would use it to 
overcome infertility rather than for sex selection (Hjelmstedt et al. 2003), as the same legal conditions 
apply here, in addition to IVF being costly, time-consuming, and medically cumbersome. To rule out the 
possibility of sex selection, we compare the daughter ratio to what is naturally expected. The natural 
male-to-female birth ratio is about 105–106 men to 100 women (Lazarus 2002), and according to the 
United Nations Population Division,10 106/100 in Sweden. The T-test suggests that the mean daughter 
ratio in our data is not statistically different from the natural sex birth ratio (girl ratio = 48.5%) in the 
Swedish population (Δp = 0.12); this is also true when conditioned on the total number of children (see 
Table A1-1 in Appendix 1). Reflecting the natural sex birth ratio suggests that sex selection is unlikely in 
our data. 
Next, we need to rule out the possibility that founders in our data follow sex-based fertility stopping 
heuristics documented in studies on, for example, wealthy couples (Yavorsky et al. 2020). If parents 
employ heuristics to keep having children until parenting at least one son, those having a first-born 
 
10 https://data-worldbank-org.eur.idm.oclc.org/indicator/SP.POP.BRTH.MF?view=map 
Page 15 of 46
Management Science

16 
daughter (vs. a first-born son) would be more likely to have more children. To assess this possibility, we 
follow Washington (2008) to regress the log-transformed total number of children on a first-born daughter, 
restricting our sample to ventures whose founders have at least one child. We find no significant 
relationship between a first-born daughter and total number of children (see Table A1-2 in Appendix 1), 
suggesting that founders in our data do not appear to follow sex-based fertility stopping heuristics. 
 
4. Daughter Effects in Male-Led Ventures 
4.1. Descriptive Statistics 
Table 1 shows the summary statistics for founder and venture characteristics, with Panel A showing the 
distribution of founders’ number of children: most founders (98.3% of our founder-year observations) 
have fewer than four children (including four). The most common number of children is two (42.6%), 
followed by three (20.5%), one (15.5%), zero (14.0%), and four (5.6%). Panel B in Table 1 shows the 
summary statistics for founders’ number of daughters. The most common number of daughters is one 
(39.0%), followed by zero (36.5%), two (19.7%), three (4.0%), and four (0.7%). Panel C in Table 1 
shows the summary statistics for founder characteristics: 57% of founder-year observations concern 
married founders. On average, founders have an education level between upper secondary school and 
university, 1.94 children and 0.94 daughters (48.5% of founders’ children). Panel D shows the summary 
statistics for venture characteristics. Average sales are 7.21K euros, but with significant variations. The 
average venture has 6.16 employees, with 86% of all observations having fewer than 10 employees; only 
four out of 51,223 ventures managed to scale up to more than 250 employees, a threshold to distinguish 
small-and-medium-sized (SMEs) and larger firms. Panel E shows the summary statistics related to female 
joiner representation; women are underrepresented relative to male peers, resonating with prior research 
on homophily-driven outcomes (Lawrence and Shah 2020; Rocha and van Praag 2020). We refer to these 
numbers when we discuss the estimated effect sizes of founders parenting an additional daughter (vs. an 
additional son). 
(Table 1 about here) 
 
Page 16 of 46
Management Science

17 
Table 2 reports the variable correlations, while Figure 1 shows the binned scatterplots of the raw data 
for the relationship between female joiner representation and founders’ number of daughters, conditional 
on total number of children. The figure indicates the founders’ number of daughters is positively 
associated with female joiner presentation, providing initial evidence that fatherhood of daughters appears 
to nudge a male founder’s gender egalitarianism. 
(Table 2 and Figure 1 about here) 
 
4.2. Daughter Effects on Recruitment 
Table 3a reports the OLS regressions predicting female director representation. Model 1 shows the results 
with only two variables of interest: number of daughters and child number fixed effects. Parenting one 
additional daughter (vs. one additional son) is positively associated with female director representation (β 
= 0.013, p < 0.001). This effect of 1.3 percentage points corresponds to a 4% increase given the sample 
mean. Results remain robust when adding industry-year fixed effects (Model 2), additional controls 
(Model 3), examining founders with children (Model 4), founders with 1–4 children (most common range 
in our data; Model 5), founders with only 1 child (sex-based fertility stopping heuristics impossible; 
Model 6), and limiting our sample to non-family ventures (Model 7).11 We find similar results when 
modeling female employee representation (Table 3b). Practically speaking, fathering one additional 
daughter leads to a 3.6 percentage point increase in female employee representation, corresponding to an 
11% increase given the sample mean. The results remain qualitatively unchanged over several robustness 
checks with alternative measures of key variables, models, and sample (see Table A1-3 in Appendix 1). 
(Tables 3a and 3b about here) 
 
4.3. Recruitment into Meaningful Positions 
While an increase in female director representation suggests that male founders are more likely to assign 
women to meaningful positions after fathering a daughter, we next probe at the employee level whether 
female employees are also more likely to be assigned to meaningful positions. First, we narrow our focus 
 
11 Family ventures are those where any board members share family ID with the founder. 
Page 17 of 46
Management Science

18 
to positions that require (1) management work, (2) work that requires specialization with an in-depth 
university qualification, and (3) work that requires a university education. We then recalculate the ratio of 
women holding these positions. Fatherhood of daughters consistently predicts female employee 
representation in these positions (Models 1 and 2 of Table 3c). Second, we narrow our focus to positions 
with above-median pay, and calculate the female ratio among these positions. Since ventures in our 
sample have 6 employees on average, this analysis focused on above-median pay helps us understand the 
average gender composition among the three top-paid employees. We find empirical support for hiring 
female employees into positions with above-median pay (Models 3–4 of Table 3c). We then replicate the 
same analysis by focusing on the most highly paid positions in the top tertile to help us understand female 
representation among the two top-paid employees, and find similar results (Models 5–6 of Table 3c). The 
result remains robust when focusing on whether the most highly paid employee is a woman or not 
(Models 7-8 of Table 3c). This evidence of female representation in meaningful positions suggests that 
daughter effects result in gender egalitarianism rather than a male founder’s benevolent sexism.12 
(Table 3c about here) 
 
4.4. Boundary Condition of Daughter Effects on Recruitment 
Despite the empirical support for daughter effects in our sample, we make an implicit assumption that 
founders will get involved in both director and employee recruitment. This assumption likely holds 
because ventures in our sample have only 6.16 employees on average, so founders will likely get involved 
in personnel decisions at all levels. However, as ventures scale up, founders may still get involved in 
personnel decisions at a higher level (director recruitment), but may not get involved in personnel 
decisions at a lower level (employee recruitment) (Duchesneau and Gartner 1990). Thus, venture size 
may be a crucial boundary condition for daughter effects on recruitment in new ventures. 
To explore this boundary condition, we follow the European Commission’s (2003) recommendation to 
define a venture as a microbusiness if it employs fewer than 10 people, otherwise defined as larger 
 
12 Benevolent sexists often hold attitudes toward women that seem positive in tone but nonetheless view “women stereotypically 
and in restricted roles” (Glick and Fiske 1996: 491). 
Page 18 of 46
Management Science

19 
ventures. As Table 4 shows, daughter effects on director recruitment differ statistically, but the economic 
significance of this difference is marginal, whereas daughter effects on employee recruitment only 
manifest in microbusinesses and disappear in larger ventures. As such, daughter effects appear to be 
concentrated only among male founders’ close employees, namely directors who advise founders 
regardless of venture size or employees when the ventures are still small. 
(Table 4 about here) 
 
This nuanced finding has crucial implications. First, despite this gender egalitarianism nudged by 
daughter effects, male founders in larger ventures do not appear to enact their gender egalitarianism in 
recruitment policies, consistent with prior research finding that as firms scale up, founders do not appear 
to influence the organizational formalization of hiring practices (Baron et al. 1996). This makes sense 
because in scaled-up ventures founders may not be the only decision-makers in setting up firm policies 
over which investors may have significant influence. 
Second and relatedly, it also speaks to Gorman’s (2005) distinction of interactional vs. structural 
mechanisms in overcoming gender homophily tendencies, wherein interactional mechanisms refer to 
decision-makers using their insights from social encounters to inform their gender-related recruitment 
decisions, whereas structural mechanisms refer to decision-makers formalizing organizational policies 
and practices that may generate gender differences in the workplace. The fact that daughter effects on 
employee recruitment seem to be solely concentrated among male founders in microbusinesses where 
close day-to-day contact is more common suggests that daughter effects might work via interactional 
rather than structural channels. In other words, male founders with daughters may not (be able to) change 
the policies of their firms, but might be less likely to hew to gender stereotypes when interacting with 
female employees. This would suggest that daughter effects on recruitment may not “scale” across larger 
organizations. 
 
5. The Timing of Daughter Effects: An Event Study Analysis 
Page 19 of 46
Management Science

20 
We next exploit the longitudinal nature of our data to investigate within-founder changes in female 
representation among their ventures in an event study analysis.13 The event we focus on is the birth of the 
first child where the child’s sex among fathering founders is exogenously given. Thus, founders that 
experienced fatherhood of daughters are randomly assigned to the treatment group, and those that 
experienced fatherhood of sons are assigned to the control group.14 This event study design lends itself to 
a difference-in-differences analysis where we observe whether female representation in male-led ventures 
exhibits parallel trends in the pre-birth period, and probe when daughter effects appear in the post-birth 
period. As founders in our sample are on average 48 years old, the first-childbirth events we observe are 
rather infrequent. Our final sample for the event study analysis comprises 773 unique birth events, 
corresponding to 773 unique founders (375 fathering a daughter and 398 fathering a son) and 4,525 
venture-year observations.15 The average (median) age of founders in this event study analysis is 36 (35). 
We estimate the following regression to explore the timing of daughter effects: 
 
Female joiner representationi,t = α+∑(βj×treatmenti×post-childbirthi,j)+γ×controlsi,t-1+φt+θi+εi,k,t (2) 
where i indexes ventures, j indexes event time (i.e., years relative to childbirth),16 t indexes year, 
female joiner representation is the outcome of interest, treatment indicates founders who experienced 
fatherhood of a daughter (binary: 1 if yes), post-childbirth indicates the post-occurrence of fatherhood 
(binary: 1 if yes in a given year), controls is a set of control variables,17 φ is a set of year fixed effects, θ is 
a set of venture fixed effects, and ε is the error term. We again cluster standard errors at the founder level 
and use OLS models to specify our regressions. 
 
13 We are indebted to the Management Science review team for pointing this out. 
14 We do not focus on childbirths after the first, since categorizing these into the treatment and control groups is ambiguous. A 
founder would be considered already-treated if he had a daughter before having a son. In this case, the event of a newborn son 
would not assign this founder to the control group given his already-treated status, potentially biasing the event study analysis. 
15 This is an unbalanced sample where we observe 1+ years prior to the event (birth) and 1+ years after the event. 
16 We denote the year in which a founder experiences childbirth as event time j = 0. 
17 We employ all the control variables used in the exploration of the between-founder effect. 
Page 20 of 46
Management Science

21 
Event time j runs from 5 years before childbirth to 4 years after childbirth, omitted when j = -5.18 
Coefficient βj, for each event time, is the estimate of daughter effects for within-founder change (post 
minus pre) in female representation in the treatment group (founders who experienced fathering a 
daughter) net of the within-founder change (post minus pre) in female representation in the control group 
(founders who experienced fathering a son), and is the main coefficient of interest in our event study 
analysis. 
As a balance check, at event time j = -1 (one year prior to childbirth), founders in the treatment (child 
= daughter) and control (child = son) groups do not differ in terms of founder marital status (Δp = 0.12), 
founder education (Δp = 0.34), venture size (Δp = 0.63), venture performance (Δp = 0.42), industry 
distribution (see Table A2-1, Appendix 2), female director representation (Δp = 0.66), or female 
employee representation (Δp = 0.79). Table A2-1 in Appendix 2 provides more details of these statistics. 
Figure 2 plots the coefficients βj for event time window [-5, 4], with two implications. First, we find 
evidence of parallel trends in the years preceding the birth event, as the coefficients βj do not differ 
significantly from zero in these years. This reinforces the exogeneity of a child’s sex and the 
identification assumption. Second, Figure 2 also suggests that daughter effects do not appear within the 
event window in our analysis.19 This finding hints at two possibilities: (1) null results are found when 
using a within-subject design (event study analysis) that differs from the conventional approach in the 
daughter effects literature, or (2) daughter effects may need a relatively long time to mature rather than 
manifesting immediately after the birth event.20 
 
18 We choose the event time window [-5, 4] because it allows us to observe at least 100 distinct founders/ventures at each point in 
time. Figure A2-1 in Appendix 2 provides an overview of the distribution of observations at the level of event time. Our results 
remain similar when we use a narrower event time window. 
19 For the difference-in-differences regression results, see Table A2-2 in Appendix 2. 
20 To our best knowledge, only Ronchi and Smith (2021) use an event study analysis to explore the dynamics of daughter effects 
in organizations. Examining Danish single-manager establishments, they find that a positive effect on female employment 
appears after the birth of a manager’s daughter, but the effect vanishes in two years. In a cross-sectional analysis, they find 
daughter effects on female employment when the daughter is 0–5 years old, an effect largely driven by managers with 1-year old 
daughters (combining the insights from Figures 4 and 5 in their working paper versioned October 27th, 2021). Despite the effects 
vanishing when daughters are 2–5 years of age, they seem to re-emerge when daughters are older than 5 years (Figure 5 in their 
working paper). The authors do not offer an explanation for why the effects appear, disappear, and reappear, but simply claim 
that the effects persist over time. In Note A2-1 of Appendix 2, we discuss why the differences in our results and those of Ronchi 
and Smith (2021) may be due to “incidental truncation” (Greene 2002) in their sampling of daughters. 
Page 21 of 46
Management Science

22 
(Figure 2 about here) 
 
The relatively short post-birth event window may not be sufficient for daughter effects to manifest. 
We therefore explore the dynamics of daughter effects over a longer period in a cross-sectional analysis 
where we focus on founders with only one child, using the child’s age as proxy of the post-birth period. 
We use the age threshold for education in Sweden to categorize daughters into five groups:21 preschool 
age (0–6 years old), elementary school age (7–15 years old), high school age (16–18 years old), university 
age (19–21 years old), working age (older than 22). As shown in Table 5, daughter effects gradually 
emerge when daughters start entering school and workplaces, becoming stronger as daughters grow up. 
 
(Table 5 about here) 
 
 
The event-study and cross-sectional analyses together shed some light on the potential mechanisms at 
play: daughter effects emerge sometime after childbirth and develop gradually, suggesting some type of 
vicarious learning mechanism in that a male founder may progressively learn from his daughter about the 
constraints women face. In addition, the more daughters are socialized into the world outside family 
boundaries (proxied by entering school, college, workplaces, etc.), the greater the daughter effects. This 
provides additional evidence of the plausibility of a vicarious learning mechanism, as the intense 
socialization of a daughter into society mirrors the intensity of gendered information that a male founder 
can learn from his daughter. The discontinuous and gradually increasing daughter effects that we find in 
the event-study and cross-sectional analyses, combined with an interpretation of a vicarious learning 
mechanism, is a novel finding given that extant research has routinely assumed daughter effects as an 
immediate change in men’s preferences, ignoring when daughter effects emerge. 
 
6. Heterogeneous Effects across Cohort, Divorce Status, and Social Class 
Our analysis thus far suggests a potential vicarious learning mechanism underlying daughter effects. In 
this section, we probe the plausibility of this under-recognized mechanism by exploring the 
 
21 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Education_in_Sweden 
Page 22 of 46
Management Science

23 
heterogeneous effects among male founders. A key premise of vicarious learning is that not every male 
founder equally understands the constraints that women face, suggesting a larger effect among those who 
have more to learn. We identified three such contingencies: cohort, divorce status, and social class. 
 
6.1. Founder Cohort 
To differentiate cohorts, we exploit the chronological progression of the Swedish gender-equality 
movement. While gender equality is today a strong social norm in Sweden (The Economist 2020), it has 
not always been so. Workplace gender discrimination was prevalent before being banned in 1980 and still 
exists, although reportedly decreasing over time.22 Thus, male founders in our sample were exposed to 
different societal gender norms depending on when they grew up. Early-cohort founders growing up in a 
more gendered environment may often take gendered practices for granted, despite the recent progress in 
gender equality (West and Zimmerman 1987). If vicarious learning is a plausible explanation, we expect 
to see larger daughter effects in early-cohort founders who have more to learn from their daughters to 
update their gendered views about the constraints that women face. 
Since early-life exposure to societal norms is known to impact what is deemed appropriate in adult life 
(Marquis and Qiao 2020), we differentiate cohorts based on their early-life exposure to weaker vs. 
stronger gender-egalitarian norms in Sweden. We follow prior research using age 15 as the upper 
threshold to define early-life exposure to gender-egalitarian norms in Sweden (Bernile et al. 2017).23 
Hence, those exposed to gender discrimination must have been born before 1965, since it was outlawed in 
1980. We create a dummy variable, gender-egalitarian cohort (1 if birth year ≥ 1965, 0 otherwise), and 
repeat our analysis in a split sample separating the two cohorts. 
We find daughter effects to be significantly larger among early-cohort founders (Models 1–4 of Table 
6a, Chow test p < 0.001). To check whether this heterogeneous effect is due to daughters among early-
cohort-founders being much older than among late-cohort-founders, we limit both subsamples to founders 
 
22 https://sweden.se/society/gender-equality-in-sweden/ 
23 This result remains robust to alternative thresholds for early-life exposure, such as ages 16–18. 
Page 23 of 46
Management Science

24 
whose eldest daughters are already of working age (older than 22). In this restricted sample, founders in 
different cohorts should have similar information channels to learn about the constraints that women face. 
Results remain qualitatively unchanged (Models 5–8). Thus, the heterogeneous effects across cohorts lend 
additional support for vicarious learning as a plausible mechanism. 
 
(Table 6a about here) 
 
6.2. Divorce Status 
A male founder’s divorce status provides another contingency, allowing us to probe the relevance of 
vicarious learning as an explanation of daughter effects. Misunderstanding is a top cause of divorce (Baer 
2017), and recent research shows that unequal housework arrangements are associated with gender-
traditional relationships, lower quality of marital relationships, and higher divorce rates (Ruppanner et al. 
2018). Men with gender-traditional views often place the burden of household work on their partners 
(Sorenson and Dahl 2016), and in gender-traditional couples, the risk of divorce is higher when the wife 
experiences a job promotion (Folke and Rickne 2020). Thus, men holding a gender-traditional view are 
more likely to experience divorce than men holding a gender-equal view. 24 
If a vicarious learning mechanism is salient, we would expect stronger daughter effects among 
divorced founders who have more to learn from their daughters to update their gender-traditional views 
about the constraints facing women. In Sweden, divorced couples share custody of children since 1998,25 
i.e., joint physical custody where the child shares his/her time equally between the two custodial parents’ 
homes. Thus, most divorced male founders will care for their children equally alongside their mothers, 
resulting in more one-to-one time with their children. A nationwide study on Swedish children shows that 
“compared with children living with two parents in the same household, children with shared residence 
reported more often that their father had time for them” (Fransson et al. 2018: 869). In an interview study, 
 
24 This claim, seemingly counter to the notion that traditional views are more conducive to stable marriages (Becker 1991), is 
supported by modern research on gender differences in marital dissolutions. While studies of wives often find a negative 
relationship between egalitarian gender role views and marital stability, studies of husbands find that traditional rather than 
egalitarian views are more predictive of marital dissolution (for a review, see Kaufman 2000). The recent study of Ruppanner et 
al. (2018) using data related to our own confirms this pattern. 
25 Sweden adopted a policy promoting shared legal and residential custody in 1998 (Proposition 1997/98:7). 
Page 24 of 46
Management Science

25 
Swedish children in joint custody explained that they often get more attention and time from each parent 
when seeing one at a time (Berman 2015). 
By taking sole care of their children half of the time, divorced male founders are more likely to be 
reintroduced to the constraints their daughters face when they grow up. In contrast, male founders in 
intact marriages with a more gender-equal view are perhaps already sympathetic to women’s constraints 
in society. Vicarious learning through fathering a daughter should thus be more intense for those who are 
divorced than married. Indeed, results show that our daughter effect is significantly larger among 
divorced founders (Models 1–4 of Table 6b, Chow test p < 0.001). 
 
(Table 6b about here) 
 
6.3. Social Class 
A third contingency factor that we think might be relevant is male founders’ social class. Since lower-
class families may have more gender-traditional views than upper-class families, male founders growing 
up in lower-class families may have more to learn about the constraints women face than those growing 
up in upper-class families. We use parents’ education level as proxy of male founders’ social class (Rubin 
2012), defining a male founder’s original family as upper-class when both his parents have a university or 
higher degrees, and a male founder’s original family as lower-class when neither of his parents have a 
university or higher degree.26 
We find empirical evidence that male founders growing up in lower-class families encounter daughter 
effects, whereas those growing up in upper-class families do not (see Table 6c), providing additional 
support for the plausibility of a vicarious learning mechanism. 
 
(Table 6c about here) 
 
 
 
26 We excluded two cases -- (1) father had university degree but mother did not; (2) father did not have university degree but 
mother had one -- because either case can be interpreted ambiguously. For example, Case 1 may indicate father could be gender-
egalitarian, but it could also be interpreted that this father is more gender traditional since he married a woman with lower 
education than his own. Case 2 could signal the father is gender-traditional given his lower-level education, but this family could 
also be gender egalitarian because of the educated mom. 
Page 25 of 46
Management Science

26 
7. Alternative Mechanisms 
Our analyses so far indicate the plausibility of vicarious learning as a potential mechanism. However, the 
link between the fatherhood of daughters and female joiner representation in male-led ventures might be 
theoretically complex and involve several mechanisms operating in tandem. We here explore other 
potential mechanisms in addition to vicarious learning. Table 7 provides an overview of several 
alternative mechanisms that might explain our findings, and the empirical tests conducted to examine the 
plausibility of these alternative interpretations. 
(Table 7 about here) 
 
There are undoubtedly many other potential mechanisms that we have not probed. For example, the 
employment of joiners is a two-sided matching process, though our paper assumes changes on the 
demand/founder side. Nevertheless, a supply-side mechanism could also explain our findings, at least 
theoretically. For example, women may be more willing to work for a founder with daughters, to the 
extent that he might be seen as more gender-egalitarian. Despite its theoretical plausibility, such a supply-
side mechanism might not work in reality, since it is unlikely that male founders systematically disclose 
their fatherhood information in the job advertising and interview process. If founders do so, it is likely to 
be considered by female job candidates as fishing for their motherhood status, which is illegal. Hence, 
while we formally cannot assess a potential supply-side mechanism of daughter effects in organizational 
contexts, it might be practically difficult for such a mechanism to operate without violating the law. 
Another reason why male founders might prefer not to have women in their ventures is that they 
perceive greater uncertainty in women’s potential contributions to the firm, i.e., a type of statistical 
discrimination. Since new ventures have resource constraints and can rarely afford systematic mistakes in 
employing joiners, male founders may simply employ male joiners to avoid risking their limited positions 
to female job candidates. While fatherhood of daughters may help alleviate this uncertainty, we were 
unable to test it with the archival data. Future research may find it fruitful to explore this, for instance, 
developing surveys or vignette studies concerning this uncertainty mechanism. 
 
Page 26 of 46
Management Science

27 
8. Complementary Qualitative Evidence 
To corroborate our empirical findings and illustrate the plausibility of a vicarious learning mechanism 
explaining daughter effects, we conducted post hoc interviews with 13 male founders in Sweden, seven of 
whom have fathered daughters,27 the remainder only sons. For convenience when presenting the interview 
quotes, we refer to fathers with daughters as the ‘treatment group’ and fathers with only sons as the 
‘control group’. We sampled the founders from business-school contacts purposefully selected from 
ventures in a range of industries, such as services, technology, and retail. The 13 founders (anonymized) 
employ 3–10 individuals, roughly corresponding to the median and mean size of ventures in our 
quantitative data. See Table A4-1 in Appendix 4 for further details of the interview data. 
To avoid misleading the interviewees, we adopted a sequential interview design chosen to partially 
alleviate desirability biases that could have arisen when respondents were asked to reflect on (1) their 
children’s birth and upbringing, and (2) gendered recruitment practices. We conducted two-stage semi-
structured interviews with each founder (see Table A4-2 in Appendix 4 for the interview protocol). The 
first-stage interview centered on general questions related to the family-work interface with an emphasis 
on how the founders envisioned their children’s future, and whether and how fatherhood might be 
reflected in their attitude toward life and work. The second-stage interview focused on recruitment and 
reward behaviors in the venture. We deliberately set a one-week interval between the two interviews to 
avoid a priming effect of the first-stage interviews on the second-stage interviews.28 
In the separately recorded interviews on the family-work interface, all founders reported that 
becoming a father had made a long-lasting impact. For example, one founder with two daughters and no 
sons provided us with a specific and detailed example of how having daughters affected him, how this 
was recognized by others, and the extent to which this experience affected how he ran his venture: 
 
27 Treatment founders in our quantitative exploration are those with daughters, regardless of how many sons they have. Thus, in 
our qualitative corroboration, we follow the same spirit and assume founders with daughters are the focus of our treatment group, 
regardless of whether they have sons or not. 
28 Originally we only interviewed founders with daughters using the two-stage interview design, but an anonymous reviewer 
encouraged us to also interview founders with only sons as contrast. In these interviews, we followed the reviewer’s suggestions 
to use the interview protocol in reverse order (first-stage on gendered practices in the venture, and second-stage on family-work 
interface), so as to avoid a priming effect of family-oriented questions on gender-and-work-oriented questions. 
Page 27 of 46
Management Science

28 
You mature a lot [after having children], since you don’t just have yourself to take care of anymore. 
[Fatherhood] creates maturity in the eyes of different stakeholders; when they see that you are not 
alone anymore [but have a family], they look at you differently. And you behave consciously or 
unconsciously like a father, like a parent, and it projects some security, and it has actually influenced 
my company in a positive way. (Jon; treatment group) 
Another founder, who has two sons and no daughters, also reflected on how his life outlook had 
changed after becoming a father, and how it influenced how he viewed his business: 
You think more about the future. You get a different focus. You get a more future focus. Before having 
a child, you thought about ‘what happens today? How can I improve my day today?’; once having a 
child, you start thinking about ‘how can I improve the conditions and relationships at home in the 
future?’ And it's fair to say this shift in focus is also noticeable at work. Before becoming a father, I 
focused more on the company itself, such as how to make the company grow for the sake of the 
company. Nowadays, my focus is more on ‘how can I make the company work and grow for me (rather 
than for the sake of the company)?’ So there's been a bit of a shift in focus. From the present to the 
future. (Erik; control group) 
Although the transition to fatherhood influenced the male founders’ general views of their own lives 
and their children’s future, the conversations seem to indicate that the child’s sex may trigger different 
changes in views. For example, a founder with roots in southern Europe who came to Sweden at the age 
of two shared the following personal view and what he vicariously learned from his friends: 
My relatives in the south of Europe asked me [when they called me to congratulate me on the birth of 
my daughter] whether I got myself a son [these are my cultural roots, which value sons more than 
daughters]. But I have a friend who has four daughters, and he said that one has a completely 
different type of love for a daughter, and so it is, and so do I think. (Ulf; treatment group) 
We further tracked this gender-related difference by asking founders to reflect on the opportunities 
offered or denied to their children, and what insights they learned from such observations. A founder with 
one daughter and one son reflected that while in the Swedish context opportunities may be equal when it 
comes to getting a job, opportunities for career advancement differ: 
I think they [men and women] have the same opportunities, but they will experience different obstacles 
in their way. Opportunities to get a job—those are there. However, when you get a job, and your name 
is Anna, you may be very good at the job compared to Per who is 50, but Per will always look down 
Page 28 of 46
Management Science

29 
on you. So, opportunities are there, but if you take them, then there is a glass ceiling. That is what the 
problem is. So there are opportunities, but I want to teach my daughter that when Per who is 50 and 
has been in the industry for 20 years starts patronizing her, my girl should push herself forward and 
resist. (Dan; treatment group) 
Another founder with two sons and no daughters appeared to have a fundamentally different view 
regarding equal opportunities for women and men: 
Well, I think, in some ways, it [the gender equality movement] is way too over the top. It tilts in the 
wrong direction which makes the debate uninteresting… I think it goes wrong when, instead of talking 
about competence and so on, you talk about there being equal numbers. If you look at the formation of 
the government, there should be one more woman than men. But you don't look at competence. Then 
you lose focus. I can feel that in my eyes, women would be looked down on even more, because you 
select them based on such merits [equal numbers] instead of competence merits. And that's where the 
focus goes wrong. (Erik; control group) 
Other founders with sons raised similar points. For example, two founders with only sons also 
expressed concerns over hiring women for the sake of gender equality: 
You are forced to hire a woman even if she doesn't have the right skills. You take her just because you 
have to. That is not right. It’s the same thing with gender quotas on boards in some countries. (Fredrik; 
control group) 
Well, to be quite honest, I think competence is more important than gender. I think it's gone a bit too 
far with "it has to be 50/50". I mean, if it's the case that there's higher competence among women, fine, 
then maybe it's 70% women and 30% men. Or if it's the other way around... When I was recruiting, I 
didn't think about it [gender] at all. (Nils; control group) 
These anecdotes illustrate that male founders with daughters seem deeply aware of the career 
constraints that women face, but founders with only sons less so. The founder who mentioned the career 
constraints women face also mentioned that he had recently learned more about gender inequalities in 
society, for example, when taking his children to sports practice. He also reflected that this was not 
something he would have noticed in his social surroundings previously, even if it had existed. This 
increased awareness of gender inequalities from rearing a daughter nudges male founders to emphasize 
gender equality in business decisions: 
Page 29 of 46
Management Science

30 
We have a sports club for girls [in town] and their A-team [elite team] was in the top tier in Sweden, 
but nobody knows about it … If you go and ask which is the best team in town, people will think of the 
other [male] team. And this female A-team dropped out of the top tier, since they didn’t have enough 
resources … My firm will now be sponsoring them. In our firm, we only sponsor female [adult] teams 
and female youth sports teams, we don’t sponsor male teams. (Dan; treatment group) 
Gender-egalitarianism in business decisions was also mentioned by another founder with one daughter 
and one son. This founder perceived the homogeneity of his board of directors, in terms of gender and age, 
to be particularly problematic, and explained how this perception informed his subsequent search for a 
female director. 
I felt that the board was very male-dominated, fairly late middle-age, and very IT-oriented. Then I felt 
that I wanted someone both young and capable—preferably a woman… We contacted a recruitment 
company … and we also gave a clear message that at least one of the two final candidates would be a 
woman. That’s what we said. At least one. (Lars; treatment group) 
We also asked founders with only sons about their recruitment policies. None of them explicitly 
mentioned gender as a decision criterion. For example, a founder with only sons informed us that while 
there is relatively high female representation in his venture, it was not planned but simply stemmed from 
the fact that there are more women than men working in his (architecture) industry: 
We're very much a female company [6 women to 4 men]. But it's just gone that way. It wasn't planned 
to go that way… There has been no discussion about it [gender as a recruitment criterion]. We don't 
want one or the other. We basically want to find a person who fits into the company so that we can do 
the job we want to do. Last time when we did the recruitment, female candidates were the absolute 
majority that applied for the jobs. And that is the reason why it looks like this at the moment. (Mikael; 
control group) 
The above quote also made us wonder whether founders with daughters deliberately want to hire 
women even if there are fewer women than men in their industries. A founder with one daughter and one 
son confirmed this possibility. This founder, whose venture operates in the sports equipment industry, 
reflected that his venture would benefit from having women on site, even though labor market friction 
(e.g., lack of female mechanics) makes this difficult: 
Page 30 of 46
Management Science

31 
I see advantages with women in the company, especially in the industry I am in. We are in a male-
dominant industry, so it is hard to find a woman who wants to work here… But I would really like to 
see more women [working in my company]. (Per; treatment group) 
These and other anecdotal observations from our informants illustrate that rearing daughters makes 
male founders learn more about the constraints women face, and that such vicarious learning predisposes 
them to become more gender-egalitarian in venture decisions.29 
 
9. Discussion 
9.1. Interpretation 
Our exploratory analyses aimed to answer an open question in the literature on daughter effects and 
gender homophily in organizations (i.e., when daughter effects emerge), with the hope of shedding new 
light on the mechanism(s) underlying daughter effects. Exploring Swedish registry data, we found that 
fatherhood of daughters leads to higher female joiner representation in male-led ventures, despite the 
pervasive homophily tendency. Yet, daughter effects do not emerge until daughters shift away from the 
family toward school and workplaces; the more advanced the stage of socialization, the larger daughter 
effects become. These discontinuous and progressively increasing effects suggest that male founders may 
gradually learn from daughters about the constraints that women face, a mechanism we label ‘vicarious 
learning’. Furthermore, daughter effects appear stronger among early-cohort, divorced, and lower-class 
founders, all of whom may have a more gender-traditional than gender-equal view, and thus have more to 
learn from their daughters about the constraints that women face. These heterogeneous effects across 
cohort, divorced status, and social class, combined with the qualitative evidence, further substantiate the 
plausibility of vicarious learning as a potential yet understudied mechanism underlying daughter effects. 
 
9.2. Contributions to the Daughter Effects Literature 
This study makes two contributions to the daughter effects literature. Prior research on daughter effects 
relies on Washington’s (2008) between-subject design (vs. within-subject design) by leveraging the 
 
29 Table A4-3 in Appendix 4 contains an extensive list of quotes from both the treatment and control groups. 
Page 31 of 46
Management Science

32 
naturally random assignment of a child’s sex to a father, implicitly assuming that fatherhood of daughters 
will nudge an immediate change in men’s gender-related preferences. We challenge this assumption by 
exploring the timing of daughter effects through an event study analysis that captures the within-subject 
change before and after fatherhood. In so doing, we provide novel evidence on daughter effects: 
differently from what prior research assumes, daughter effects do not immediately appear following 
childbirth, but emerge only when daughters start socializing in school, college, and workplaces, and these 
effects become larger when daughters become older. The findings of such discontinuous and gradually 
increasing effects suggest a progressive, vicarious learning process throughout the lifecycle of daughters, 
a mechanism underlying daughter effects that has so far received limited attention. 
Second, while much effort has gone into investigating the manifestation of daughter effects across a 
wide range of organizational decisions (e.g., Calder-Wang and Gompers 2021; Cronqvist and Yu 2017; 
Dahl et al. 2012), the boundary conditions of daughter effects have so far escaped scholarly attention. Our 
study uncovers that daughter effects on recruitment appear concentrated only among male decision-
makers’ close (as opposed to all) employees, suggesting an important yet understudied boundary 
condition. This indicates that daughter effects tend to manifest via interactional rather than structural 
channels, as male founders may have decision constraints in formalizing their daughter-nudged 
preferences in recruitment policies when the firm scales up. As such, daughter effects on recruitment 
might not “scale” across larger organizations. 
Overall, daughter effects might be more limited than previously thought, as they take time to develop, 
and appear concentrated only among male decision-makers’ close employees. 
 
9.3. Contributions to the Homophily Literature 
This study also provides two contributions to the homophily literature. First, extant research suggests it is 
very difficult for individuals to counteract homophily tendencies, given these are depicted as operating as 
a “gravity-like force” (Leszczensky and Pink 2019: 395) that decision-makers can hardly overcome on 
their own. Yet, our work suggests that a male founder’s fatherhood of daughters can increase female 
Page 32 of 46
Management Science

33 
representation in his ventures, despite the prevalent homophily force. This finding is encouraging, as it 
indicates that the homophily tendency is indeed conditional on individual characteristics, rather than 
“ubiquitous across a wide range of contexts” (DiMaggio and Garip 2012: 98), as prior research routinely 
suggests. This highlights that different conclusions might be drawn about the possibility of homophily 
regulation, depending on the theoretical space homophily research grants to accommodating inwardly 
oriented agency in the homophilous association. This represents the core contribution of our work to the 
homophily literature, as research in this area traditionally assigns limited agency to individuals. We hope 
our findings help substantiate the value of accommodating individual agency in homophily 
conceptualizations, spurring scholarly interest in behavioral conceptualizations of homophily, i.e., how 
inwardly oriented agency helps break the cycle of homophilous associations and yields more positive 
outcomes for demographic minorities who would otherwise be subject to its adverse consequences. 
Second, our study provides an account of how men’s social interactions with others in one context 
influence their sense of homophilous associations in another. This has implications for the homophily 
literature that tends to view homophily as “ubiquitous”, implicitly assuming the independence of social 
interactions across contexts. Our findings challenge this assumption by substantiating that social 
interaction in a primary social context (family) can affect men’s gender-homophilous behaviors in another 
context (work). This thus highlights the theoretical salience of the interdependence of social interactions 
between different contexts in understanding homophily tendencies (Lawrence and Shah 2020). Since 
people are involved in multiple social contexts, the interdependence of social interactions across multiple 
social contexts might hold the key to explaining the wide heterogeneity in homophilous associations that 
cannot be justified with the existing homophily framework. 
 
9.4. Limitations and Future Research 
Our analyses are not without limitations, some of which will hopefully motivate future research. First, we 
undertake a detailed analysis in a relatively gender-egalitarian context. Despite the benefits of high 
granularity and internal validity, our focus on Swedish ventures also alerts us to the generalizability of our 
Page 33 of 46
Management Science

34 
findings to other contexts. The economic significance of daughter effects identified in a gender-egalitarian 
context such as Sweden should be conservative, and effects may be stronger in countries with gender-
inequal norms. Therefore, future work might benefit from exploring the generalizability of our findings in 
other contexts. 
Another limitation points to the potential distal nature of our variables and the working mechanisms 
we have purported. This is a common limitation among studies of founder characteristics, but substantive 
nonetheless. When interpreting the discontinuous and gradually increased daughter effects, we make a 
strong assumption that fatherhood of daughters nudges a male founder to vicariously learn from his 
(socialized) daughters about the constraints that women face. Although we find support for this 
assumption with our heterogeneous-effects exploration and post-hoc qualitative evidence, it remains a 
strong assumption. Future research could explore its validity using psychometric, attitude-based, or 
experimental decision data. 
Building on our study, future research could also extend the boundaries of daughter effects and assess 
whether and how exposure to the gender disparity of other family members (e.g., sisters, mothers, wives), 
and individuals in one’s social or relational surroundings (e.g., friends, local support network), might 
nudge a male founder’s gender egalitarianism. Interesting questions that scholars could address include 
what type of exposure (besides exposure to daughters) could nudge male decision-makers’ gender 
egalitarianism? When in their private or professional life, and how long should such exposure last? 
 
9.5. Implications for Practice 
Despite much of society today advocating gender equality, gender disparity is still instinctively invisible 
to men who benefit from it, as “privilege is invisible to those who have it” (Coston and Kimmel 2012: 97). 
If men do not see homophily-driven gender disparity as a problem, they cannot be actively engaged in 
solving it. Our work indicates that men are more likely to start learning vicariously from their family 
exposure to gender disparity about the constraints women face. Like earlier studies, we cannot directly 
substantiate this vicarious learning mechanism in terms of perceptions or social cognition. However, we 
Page 34 of 46
Management Science

35 
find tentative support for a larger learning effect among men who tend to hold gender-traditional views on 
women, such as early-cohort, divorced, and lower-class men. If substantiated, exposure-based vicarious 
learning might thus hold significant potential in promoting gender egalitarianism among economic 
decision-makers in more gender-traditional contexts. 
While our findings center on rearing daughters, we by no means suggest using family interventions as 
a practical recommendation for engaging men in building a gender-equal workplace and society. The 
broader idea that our work wants to convey is the following: when proximate others – daughters and 
potentially other loved ones – are vulnerable to gender disparity, men are physically and socio-
emotionally embedded in the social collectivity of those who are vulnerable, which primes them for 
recruitment to the gender equality cause. Those seeking to cultivate a more gender-egalitarian economy 
may benefit from highlighting the personal stakes and responsibilities of male leaders in helping build a 
gender-equal society for their loved ones and not only for women in general. 
 
Acknowledgements 
We thank the department editor Olav Sorenson, the anonymous associate editor, and three reviewers for 
their developmental and constructive feedback that significantly improved this paper. We also are grateful 
for the insightful comments from Helene Ahl, Rene Bakker, Anders Broström, Julia DiBenigno, Olle 
Folke, Mariassunta Giannetti, Denis Grégoire, Charlotte Holgersson, Olenka Kacperczyk, Reddi Kotha, 
Ali Mohammadi, Johanna Rickne, Stoyan Sgourev, Pengfei Wang, seminar participants at BI Norwegian 
Business School, Erasmus University, Fuzhou University, Linköping University, Northeastern University 
(China), Politecnico di Milano, Research Institute of Industrial Economics, Shanghai University of 
Finance and Economics, Stockholm School of Economics, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang University of 
Technology, the Discrimination and Disparities Seminar (2020), the Entrepreneurship and Strategy 
Research Seminar at Strategic Management Society (2021), the Linked Employer-Employee Data (LEED) 
Workshop (2022), and the Wharton People and Organizations Conference (2020). All errors remain our 
own. Karl Wennberg acknowledges generous funding from the Swedish Royal Academy of Letter. 
Page 35 of 46
Management Science

36 
 
References 
Amis JM, Mair J, Munir KA (2020) The organizational reproduction of inequality. Acad. Management 
Ann. 14(1): 195-230. 
Azoulay P, Jones BF, Kim JD, Miranda J (2020) Age and high-growth entrepreneurship. American 
Economic Review: Insights 2(1): 65-82. 
Baer M (2017) Misunderstandings – a top cause of divorce. Accessed on October 27, 2021, 
https://coparenter.com/blog/misunderstandings-a-top-cause-of-divorce/. 
Balachandran C, Wennberg K, Uman T (2019) National culture diversity in new venture boards: The role 
of founders' relational demography. Strategic Entrepreneurship J. 13(3): 410-434. 
Barbulescu R, Bidwell M (2013) Do women choose different jobs from men? Mechanisms of application 
segregation in the market for managerial workers. Organ. Sci. 24(3): 737-756. 
Baron JN, Burton MD, Hannan MT (1996) The road taken: Origins and evolution of employment systems 
in emerging companies. Indust. and Corporate Change 5(2): 239-275. 
Becker G (1991) A treatise on the family (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA). 
Berman R (2015) (Re) doing parent-child relationships in dual residence arrangements: Swedish 
children's narratives about changing relations post-separation. Journal of Family Research 27 123–
140. 
Bernile G, Bhagwat V, Rau PR (2017) What doesn't kill you will only make you more risk‐loving: Early‐
life disasters and CEO behavior. J. Finance 72(1): 167-206. 
Breaugh JA (2013) Employee recruitment. Annu Rev Psychol 64 389-416. 
Calder-Wang S, Gompers PA (2021) And the children shall lead: Gender diversity and performance in 
venture capital. J. Financial Econom. 142(1): 1-22. 
Coston BM, Kimmel M (2012) Seeing privilege where it isn’t: Marginalized masculinities and the 
intersectionality of privilege. Journal of Social Issues 68(1): 97-111. 
Cronqvist H, Yu F (2017) Shaped by their daughters: Executives, female socialization, and corporate 
social responsibility. J. Financial Econom. 126(3): 543-562. 
Dahl MS, Dezső CL, Ross DG (2012) Fatherhood and managerial style: How a male CEO’s children 
affect the wages of his employees. Admin. Sci. Quart. 57(4): 669-693. 
Dasgupta A, Ha L, Jonnalagadda S, Schmeiser S, Youngerman H (2018) The daughter effect: Do CEOs 
with daughters hire more women to their board? Applied Economics Letters 25(13): 891-894. 
DiMaggio P, Garip F (2012) Network effects and social inequality. Annual Rev. Sociol. 38 93-118. 
Duchesneau DA, Gartner WB (1990) A profile of new venture success and failure in an emerging 
industry. Journal of Business Venturing 5(5): 297-312. 
Dustmann C, Landersø R (2021) Child’s gender, young fathers’ crime, and spillover effects in criminal 
behavior. J. Political Econom. 129(12): 3261-3301. 
Elliott JR, Smith RA (2004) Race, gender, and workplace power. Amer. Socio. Rev. 69(3): 365-386. 
Ertug G, Kotha R, Hedstrom P (2020) Kin ties and the performance of new firms: A structural approach. 
Acad. Management J. 63(6): 1893-1922. 
European Commission (2003) Commission recommendation of 6 May 2003 concerning the definition of 
micro, small and medium-sized enterprises. Accessed on July 23, 2022, https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32003H0361. 
Folke O, Rickne J (2020) All the single ladies: Job promotions and the durability of marriage. American 
Economic Journal: Applied Economics 12(1): 260-287. 
Fransson E, Laftman SB, Ostberg V, Hjern A, Bergstrom M (2018) The living conditions of children with 
shared residence – the Swedish example. Child Indicators Research 11(3): 861-883. 
Glynn AN, Sen M (2015) Identifying judicial empathy: Does having daughters cause judges to rule for 
women's issues? Amer. J. Polit. Sci. 59(1): 37-54. 
Gorman EH (2005) Gender stereotypes, same-gender preferences, and organizational variation in the 
hiring of women: Evidence from law firms. Amer. Socio. Rev. 70(4): 702-728. 
Page 36 of 46
Management Science

37 
Greene WH (2002) Econometric analysis, 5th ed. (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ). 
Greene WH (2005) Censored data and truncated distributions The handbook of econometrics (Patterson, 
Palgrave, London), 695-736. 
Hjelmstedt A, Widström A, Wramsby H, Collins A (2003) Patterns of emotional responses to pregnancy, 
experience of pregnancy and attitudes to parenthood among IVF couples: A longitudinal study. 
Journal of Psychosomatic Obstetrics & Gynecology 24(3): 153-162. 
International Labour Office (2016) Women at work: Trends 2016. International Labour Office at Geneva. 
Kalev A, Dobbin F, Kelly E (2006) Best practices or best guesses? Assessing the efficacy of corporate 
affirmative action and diversity policies. Amer. Socio. Rev. 71(4): 589-617. 
Kaufman G (2000) Do gender role attitudes matter? Family formation and dissolution among traditional 
and egalitarian men and women. Journal of Family Issues 21(1): 128-144. 
Lawrence BS, Shah NP (2020) Homophily: Measures and meaning. Acad. Management Ann. 14(2): 513-
597. 
Lazarus J (2002) Human sex ratios: Adaptations and mechanisms, problems and prospects. Hardy I, ed. 
Sex ratios: Concepts and research methods (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK), 287-311. 
Leszczensky L, Pink S (2019) What drives ethnic homophily? A relational approach on how ethnic 
identification moderates preferences for same-ethnic friends. Amer. Socio. Rev. 84(3): 394-419. 
Marquis C, Qiao K (2020) Waking from Mao’s dream: Communist ideological imprinting and the 
internationalization of entrepreneurial ventures in china. Admin. Sci. Quart. 65(3): 795-830. 
Oswald AJ, Powdthavee N (2010) Daughters and left-wing voting. Rev. Econom. and Statist. 92(2): 213-
227. 
Pope JC, Schmidt SJ (2021) Father founders: Did child gender affect voting at the constitutional 
convention? Amer. J. Polit. Sci. 65(3): 566-581. 
Rivera LA (2013) Homosocial reproduction. Smith VV, ed. Sociology of work: An encyclopedia (Sage 
Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA), 377-379. 
Roach M, Sauermann H (2015) Founder or joiner? The role of preferences and context in shaping 
different entrepreneurial interests. Management Sci. 61(9): 2160-2184. 
Rocha V, van Praag M (2020) Mind the gap: The role of gender in entrepreneurial career choice and 
social influence by founders. Strategic Management J. 41(5): 841-866. 
Ronchi M, Smith N (2021) Daddy’s girl: Daughters, managerial decisions, and gender inequality (version: 
October 27, 2021). Working paper. 
Rubin M (2012) Social class differences in social integration among students in higher education: A 
meta-analysis and recommendations for future research. Journal of Diversity in Higher Education 
5(1): 22-38. 
Ruef M, Aldrich HE, Carter NM (2003) The structure of founding teams: Homophily, strong ties, and 
isolation among U.S. Entrepreneurs. Amer. Socio. Rev. 68(2): 195-222. 
Ruppanner L, Brandén M, Turunen J (2018) Does unequal housework lead to divorce? Evidence from 
Sweden. Sociology 52(1): 75-94. 
Shepherd DA, Souitaris V, Gruber M (2020) Creating new ventures: A review and research agenda. J. 
Management 47(1): 11-42. 
Sorenson O, Dahl MS (2016) Geography, joint choices, and the reproduction of gender inequality. Amer. 
Socio. Rev. 81(5): 900-920. 
The Economist (2014) Why Swedish men take so much paternity leave. Accessed on May 15, 2020, 
https://www.economist.com/the-economist-explains/2014/07/22/why-swedish-men-take-so-much-
paternity-leave. 
The Economist (2020) Iceland leads the way to women’s equality in the workplace. Accessed on May 15, 
2020, https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail/2020/03/04/iceland-leads-the-way-to-womens-
equality-in-the-workplace. 
Wang X, Gao C, Feng M (2021) CEOs raising daughters and female executives. Asia-Pacific Journal of 
Accounting & Economics 28(2): 206-224. 
Page 37 of 46
Management Science

38 
Washington EL (2008) Female socialization: How daughters affect their legislator fathers. Amer. Econom. 
Rev. 98(1): 311-332. 
Wasserman N (2017) The throne vs. the kingdom: Founder control and value creation in startups. 
Strategic Management J. 38(2): 255-277. 
West C, Zimmerman DH (1987) Doing gender. Gender & Society 1(2): 125-151. 
Wooldridge JM (2002) Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data (MIT press, Cambridge, 
MA). 
Yavorsky JE, Keister LA, Qian Y (2020) Gender in the one percent. Contexts 19(1): 12-17. 
 
Page 38 of 46
Management Science

39 
Table 1. Summary Statistics 
Panel A. Founder’s number of children 
 
Panel B. Founder’s number of daughters 
 
Frequency 
Percentage (%) 
 
 
Frequency 
Percentage (%) 
0 
 28,054 
 14.02 
 
0 
 73,104 
 36.52 
1 
 31,112 
 15.54 
 
1 
 77,953 
 38.95 
2 
 85,256 
 42.60 
 
2 
 39,443 
 19.71 
3 
 41,083 
 20.53 
 
3 
 8,059 
 4.03 
4 
 11,216 
 5.60 
 
4 
 1,359 
 0.68 
5 or more 
3,433 
1.71 
 
5 or more 
236 
0.11 
Total: 
200,154 
100 
 
Total: 
200,154 
100 
Panel C. Founder characteristics 
 
Count 
Mean 
S.D. 
Min 
Max 
Founder married 
200,154 
0.57 
0.49 
0 
1 
Founder educated 
200,154 
3.24 
1.01 
1 
6 
Founder's number of children 
200,154 
1.94 
1.16 
0 
14 
Founder's number of daughters 
200,154 
0.94 
0.90 
0 
8 
Panel D. Venture characteristics 
 
Count 
Mean 
S.D. 
Min 
Max 
Venture performance (lagged) 
200,154 
7.21 
15.28 
-0.14 
797.60 
Venture size (lagged) 
200,154 
6.16 
14.38 
1.00 
2039 
Panel E. Female representations 
 
Count 
Mean 
S.D. 
Min 
Max 
Female director representation 
200,154 
0.33 
0.23 
0.00 
1.00 
Female employee representation 
200,154 
0.34 
0.38 
0.00 
1.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2. Correlations 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
1. 
Female director representation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. 
Female employee representation 
0.07 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. 
Founder married 
0.24 
0.11 
 
 
 
 
 
4. 
Founder educated 
-0.02 
0.27 
0.07 
 
 
 
 
5. 
Venture performance (lagged) 
-0.04 
0.01 
0.02 
-0.04 
 
 
 
6. 
Venture size (lagged) 
-0.03 
0.01 
0.00 
-0.04 
0.50 
 
 
7. 
Founder's number of children 
0.13 
0.00 
0.27 
-0.03 
0.02 
0.02 
 
8. 
Founder's number of daughters 
0.11 
0.05 
0.17 
0.00 
0.02 
0.01 
0.63 
N = 200,154. Correlations > |0.01| significant at p < 0.01 
 
Page 39 of 46
Management Science

40 
Table 3a. OLS Models Predicting Female Director Representation 
 
M1 
Full sample 
M2 
Full sample 
M3 
Full sample 
M4 
All founders 
with children 
M5 
Founders with 
1-4 children 
M6 
Founders with 
1 child 
M7 
Non-family 
ventures 
Founder's number of daughters 
0.013*** 
0.013*** 
0.013*** 
0.013*** 
0.014*** 
0.032*** 
0.022*** 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.01) 
(0.00) 
Founder married 
 
 
0.103*** 
0.100*** 
0.100*** 
0.112*** 
-0.057*** 
 
 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.01) 
(0.00) 
Founder educated 
 
 
-0.008*** 
-0.007*** 
-0.007*** 
-0.009** 
-0.009*** 
 
 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Venture performance (lagged) 
 
 
-0.001*** 
-0.001*** 
-0.001*** 
-0.001* 
-0.000*** 
 
 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Venture size (lagged) 
 
 
-0.000 
-0.000 
-0.000 
-0.000* 
-0.000 
 
 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Constant 
0.247*** 
0.401*** 
0.380*** 
0.410*** 
0.409*** 
0.222*** 
0.195*** 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
(0.04) 
(0.02) 
Industry-year FE 
Excl. 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Child number FE 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Incl. 
R squared 
0.03 
0.03 
0.08 
0.06 
0.06 
0.07 
0.03 
Observations 
200,154 
200,154 
200,154 
172,100 
168,667 
31,112 
80,652 
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by founder; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 
 
Table 3b. OLS Models Predicting Female Employee Representation 
 
M1 
Full sample 
M2 
Full sample 
M3 
Full sample 
M4 
All founders 
with children 
M5 
Founders with 
1-4 children 
M6 
Founders with 
1 child 
M7 
Non-family 
ventures 
Founder's number of daughters 
0.036*** 
0.033*** 
0.032*** 
0.032*** 
0.032*** 
0.049*** 
0.028*** 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.01) 
(0.00) 
Founder married 
 
 
0.057*** 
0.051*** 
0.051*** 
0.073*** 
0.040*** 
 
 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
Founder educated 
 
 
0.039*** 
0.040*** 
0.040*** 
0.036*** 
0.041*** 
 
 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Venture performance (lagged) 
 
 
0.000*** 
0.001*** 
0.001*** 
0.001 
0.000** 
 
 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Venture size (lagged) 
 
 
-0.000*** 
-0.000*** 
-0.000*** 
-0.001* 
-0.000 
 
 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Constant 
0.343*** 
0.667*** 
0.511*** 
0.505*** 
0.505*** 
0.024 
0.062* 
 
(0.00) 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
(0.05) 
(0.03) 
Industry-year FE 
Excl. 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Child number FE 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Incl. 
R squared 
0.00 
0.23 
0.25 
0.26 
0.26 
0.26 
0.23 
Observations 
200,154 
200,154 
200,154 
172,100 
168,667 
31,112 
80,652 
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by founder; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001
Page 40 of 46
Management Science

41 
Table 3c. Models Predicting Female Employee Representation in Meaningful Positions 
 
Substantial positions 
 
Highly-paid positions: 
above mediana 
 
Highly-paid positions: 
top tertileb 
 
The most highly paid 
M1 
M2 
M3 
M4 
M5 
M6 
M7 
M8 
Founder's number of daughters 
0.004*** 
0.004*** 
 
0.014*** 
0.013*** 
 
0.007* 
0.006* 
 
0.017*** 
0.016*** 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Founder married 
 
0.019*** 
 
 
0.029*** 
 
 
0.021*** 
 
 
0.058*** 
 
 
(0.00) 
 
 
(0.00) 
 
 
(0.00) 
 
 
(0.00) 
Founder educated 
 
0.024*** 
 
 
0.035*** 
 
 
0.028*** 
 
 
0.034*** 
 
 
(0.00) 
 
 
(0.00) 
 
 
(0.00) 
 
 
(0.00) 
Venture performance (lagged) 
 
0.000* 
 
 
0.000*** 
 
 
0.000** 
 
 
-0.001*** 
 
 
(0.00) 
 
 
(0.00) 
 
 
(0.00) 
 
 
(0.00) 
Venture size (lagged) 
 
-0.001*** 
 
 
0.000* 
 
 
0.000** 
 
 
-0.003*** 
 
 
(0.00) 
 
 
(0.00) 
 
 
(0.00) 
 
 
(0.00) 
Constant 
-0.010*** 
-0.092*** 
 
-0.009 
-0.140*** 
 
-0.008 
-0.114*** 
 
-0.003 
-0.104*** 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
Industry-year FE 
Incl. 
Incl. 
 
Incl. 
Incl. 
 
Incl. 
Incl. 
 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Child number FE 
Incl. 
Incl. 
 
Incl. 
Incl. 
 
Incl. 
Incl. 
 
Incl. 
Incl. 
R squared 
0.14 
0.15 
 
0.22 
0.22 
 
0.20 
0.21 
 
0.10 
0.13 
Observations 
200,154 
200,154 
 
149,112 
149,112 
 
116,527 
116,527 
 
200,154 
200,154 
a This OLS analysis only includes ventures with at least two employees. 
b This OLS analysis only includes ventures with at least three employees. 
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by founder; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 
 
Page 41 of 46
Management Science

42 
Table 4. Boundary Condition of Daughter Effects on Recruitment: Venture Size 
 
Female director representation 
 
Female employee representation 
M1 
Microbusinesses 
M2 
Larger ventures 
M3 
Microbusinesses 
M4 
Larger ventures 
Founder's number of daughters 
0.013*** 
0.015*** 
 
0.036*** 
0.007 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Chow test 
p <0.001 
 
p <0.001 
Founder married 
0.104*** 
0.094*** 
 
0.062*** 
0.010 
 
(0.00) 
(0.01) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.01) 
Founder educated 
-0.008*** 
-0.006 
 
0.040*** 
0.014*** 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Venture performance (lagged) 
-0.001*** 
-0.001*** 
 
0.000 
0.000 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Venture size (lagged) 
-0.002*** 
0.000 
 
-0.011*** 
0.000* 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Constant 
0.395*** 
0.302*** 
 
0.607*** 
0.211*** 
 
(0.01) 
(0.04) 
 
(0.01) 
(0.04) 
Industry-by-year FE 
Incl. 
Incl. 
 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Child number FE 
Incl. 
Incl. 
 
Incl. 
Incl. 
R squared 
0.08 
0.06 
 
0.25 
0.47 
Observations 
173022 
27132 
 
173022 
27132 
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by founder; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 
 
 
 
 
Table 5. OLS Models Predicting Female Representation: Founders with Only One Child 
 
M1 Director 
M2 Employee 
Founder with a daughter of pre-school age: [0,6] 
-0.013 
-0.003 
 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
Founder with a daughter of grade-school age: [7,15] 
0.021* 
0.011 
 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
Founder with a daughter of high-school age: [16,18] 
0.039*** 
0.089*** 
 
(0.01) 
(0.02) 
Founder with a daughter of college age: [19,21] 
0.054*** 
0.086*** 
 
(0.01) 
(0.02) 
Founder with a daughter of working age: [22,+) 
0.083*** 
0.114*** 
 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
Founder married 
0.106*** 
0.066*** 
 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
Founder educated 
-0.006 
0.040*** 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Venture performance (lagged) 
-0.001* 
0.001* 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Venture size (lagged) 
-0.000 
-0.001* 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Constant 
0.216*** 
0.015 
 
(0.03) 
(0.05) 
Industry-year FE 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Child number FE 
Incl. 
Incl. 
R squared 
0.08 
0.27 
Observations 
31,112 
31,112 
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by founder; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 
Page 42 of 46
Management Science

43 
Table 6a. Heterogeneous Effects: Cohort as a Contingency 
All founders 
 
Founders with at least one working-age daughter 
Female director 
representation 
 
Female employee 
representation 
Female director 
representation 
 
Female employee 
representation 
M1 
Early cohort 
M2 
Late cohort 
M3 
Early cohort 
M4 
Late cohort 
M5 
Early cohort 
M6 
Late cohort 
M7 
Early cohort 
M8 
Late cohort 
Founder's number of 
daughters 
0.021*** 
0.004 
 
0.047*** 
0.014*** 
 
0.031*** 
0.013 
 
0.049*** 
0.015 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.01) 
 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
Chow test 
p < 0.001 
 
p < 0.001 
 
p = 0.119 
 
p < 0.001 
Founder married 
0.114*** 
0.086*** 
 
0.056*** 
0.046*** 
 
0.097*** 
0.103*** 
 
0.061*** 
0.022 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
 
(0.01) 
(0.02) 
Founder educated 
-0.008*** 
-0.006** 
 
0.039*** 
0.040*** 
 
-0.008** 
-0.005 
 
0.042*** 
0.035** 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.01) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.01) 
Venture performance 
(lagged) 
-0.001*** 
-0.000** 
 
0.001*** 
0.001*** 
 
-0.001*** 
-0.000 
 
0.000 
0.001 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Venture size (lagged) 
-0.000 
-0.000 
 
-0.001*** 
0.000 
 
-0.000 
-0.000 
 
-0.001*** 
-0.002* 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Constant 
0.411*** 
0.209*** 
 
0.565*** 
0.090** 
 
0.466*** 
0.534*** 
 
0.562*** 
0.424*** 
(0.01) 
(0.02) 
 
(0.01) 
(0.03) 
 
(0.01) 
(0.04) 
 
(0.02) 
(0.05) 
Industry-year FE 
Incl. 
Incl. 
 
Incl. 
Incl. 
 
Incl. 
Incl. 
 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Child number FE 
Incl. 
Incl. 
 
Incl. 
Incl. 
 
Incl. 
Incl. 
 
Incl. 
Incl. 
R squared 
0.08 
0.08 
 
0.26 
0.23 
 
0.07 
0.11 
 
0.28 
0.26 
Observations 
100,458 
99,696 
 
100,458 
99,696 
 
26443 
2567 
 
26443 
2567 
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by founder; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001
Page 43 of 46
Management Science

44 
Table 6b. Heterogeneous Effects: Divorce as a Contingency 
 
Female director representation 
 
Female employee representation 
M1 
Founders 
divorced 
M2 
Founders 
married 
M3 
Founders 
divorced 
M4 
Founders 
married 
Founder's number of daughters 
0.043*** 
0.008*** 
 
0.047*** 
0.033*** 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.01) 
(0.00) 
Chow test 
p < 0.001 
 
p < 0.001 
Founder educated 
-0.002 
-0.009*** 
 
0.037*** 
0.039*** 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Venture performance (lagged) 
-0.001** 
-0.001*** 
 
0.001*** 
0.001*** 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Venture size (lagged) 
-0.000 
-0.000 
 
-0.000 
-0.001*** 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Constant 
0.229*** 
0.500*** 
 
0.095 
0.609*** 
 
(0.05) 
(0.01) 
 
(0.06) 
(0.01) 
Industry-year FE 
Incl. 
Incl. 
 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Child number FE 
Incl. 
Incl. 
 
Incl. 
Incl. 
R squared 
0.03 
0.02 
 
0.26 
0.26 
Observations 
22,389 
114,833 
 
22,389 
114,833 
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by founder; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 
 
 
 
Table 6c. Heterogeneous Effects: Social Class as a Contingency 
 
Female director representation 
 
Female employee representation 
M1 
Founders from 
upper-class families 
M2 
Founders from 
lower-class families 
M3 
Founders from 
upper-class families 
M4 
Founders from 
lower-class families 
Founder's number of daughters 
0.012 
0.015*** 
 
0.022 
0.031*** 
 
(0.01) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.01) 
(0.00) 
Chow test 
p < 0.001 
 
p = 0.044 
Founder married 
0.073*** 
0.106*** 
 
0.038* 
0.055*** 
 
(0.01) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.02) 
(0.00) 
Founder educated 
0.004 
-0.007*** 
 
0.049*** 
0.039*** 
 
(0.01) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.01) 
(0.00) 
Venture performance (lagged) 
-0.000 
-0.001*** 
 
0.001 
0.000*** 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Venture size (lagged) 
-0.001* 
-0.000* 
 
-0.001 
-0.000*** 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Constant 
0.117 
0.382*** 
 
0.049 
0.527*** 
 
(0.11) 
(0.01) 
 
(0.20) 
(0.01) 
Industry-by-year FE 
Incl. 
Incl. 
 
Incl. 
Incl. 
Child number FE 
Incl. 
Incl. 
 
Incl. 
Incl. 
R squared 
0.12 
0.08 
 
0.23 
0.25 
Observations 
7526 
166580 
 
7526 
166580 
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by founder; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001
Page 44 of 46
Management Science

45 
Table 7. Alternative Mechanisms Underpinning Daughter Effects 
Mechanisms 
Explanations 
Empirical tests 
1. Female 
socialization 
Exposure to female family members 
can induce an attitudinal shift that 
increases men’s feminist sympathies 
and other-regarding preferences. 
 
Vicarious learning and female socialization can overlap and are thus difficult to disentangle. For 
example, if female socialization occurs, vicarious learning is also likely to occur, and both can 
explain why we see greater daughter effects among founders with older daughters. A fundamental 
premise of female socialization is the immediate change in feminist sympathies and other-regarding 
preferences upon fathering a daughter (Cronqvist and Yu 2017; Dahl et al. 2012), while a 
fundamental premise of a vicarious learning mechanism is gradual changes in a man’s gender 
attitudes as he rears a daughter. The fact that daughter effects only emerge after school-entry age 
indicates that female socialization alone is unlikely to explain our results. 
2. Mission 
change 
Parenting a daughter could also change 
the founder’s worldview and induce 
broader strategic changes in the firm 
toward greater responsibility or a 
better balance of social vs. economic 
goals; becoming more gender-
egalitarian could be just one of the 
aspects through which founders 
engage in this broader transition. 
We constructed two new dependent variables, minority director representation (percentage of 
directors underrepresented with respect to the country of origin) and minority employee 
representation (percentages of employees underrepresented with respect to the country of origin). We 
define a director (employee) as a minority if s/he originally comes from a country (1) other than 
Sweden, (2) other than European, (3) Asian or African. We then replicated our between-founder 
analysis and found that fatherhood of daughters is not associated with minority representation in the 
venture (see Table A3-1 in Appendix 3), suggesting that daughter effects do not seem to engender a 
broader change in missions but a specific change in gender egalitarianism. 
3. Social 
networks 
Founders with daughters may simply 
know more women, to the extent that 
children will probably be involved in 
gender-typed activities and women 
will more likely manage activities 
geared toward girls. 
We focus on female employee representation and categorize it into mom-employee representation 
(number of female employees that have at least 1 child, divided by total number of employees) and 
non-mom-employee representation (number of female employees that have no children, divided by 
total number of employees). The empirical analysis suggests that fatherhood of daughters is positively 
and similarly associated with both types of female representation (see Table A3-2 in Appendix 3). 
This social-networks explanation does not seem to drive our main findings. 
4. Self-
selection 
into female-
typed 
business 
Founders may opt into female-typed 
industries because the fatherhood of 
daughters makes them more aware of 
business opportunities related to 
women, thus getting involved in 
industries where women are the 
dominant workforce. 
 
We use the full population of Swedish firms (i.e., the overall economy) to calculate the female 
representation in each industry each year, i.e., occupational sex segregation in the economy. We 
define an industry as female-dominated if female representation in the industry is 50% or more, using 
the split sample approach to explore whether daughter effects only manifest in female-dominated 
industries. Result suggests that daughter effects are almost identical in female- and male-dominated 
industries (Models 1–4 in Table A3-3, Appendix 3). Our results remain robust when we limit our 
sample to atypical industries with often low female representation (female representation < 10%; see 
Models 5–6 in Table A3-3 in Appendix 3). We also limit the sample to industries that provide gender-
neutral products or services, including (1) agriculture, forestry, and fishing, (2) energy supply, and (3) 
construction activities. Our results remain unchanged (see Table A3-4 in Appendix 3). Overall, self-
selection into female-dominated industries thus does not seem to be a mechanism explaining our main 
findings. 
Page 45 of 46
Management Science

46 
Figure 1. Binned Scatterplots of Female Representation and Founder's Number of Daughters
 
 
Figure 2. The Dynamics of Daughter Effects 
 
 
 
Page 46 of 46
Management Science