TITLE: Backtesting Marginal Expected Shortfall and Related Systemic Risk Measures
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2020.3751
---

Archive ouverte UNIGE
https://archive-ouverte.unige.ch
Working paper
2020
 
Public access
This version of the publication is provided by the author(s) and made available in accordance with the 
copyright holder(s).
Backtesting marginal expected shortfalland related systemic risk measures
Banulescu-Radu, Denisa; Hurlin, Christophe; Leymarie, Jeremy; Scaillet, Olivier
How to cite
BANULESCU-RADU, Denisa et al. Backtesting marginal expected shortfalland related systemic risk 
measures. 2020
This publication URL:
https://archive-ouverte.unige.ch/unige:134136
© This document is protected by copyright. Please refer to copyright holder(s) for terms of use.
Last deposit update in Archive ouverte UNIGE on 15.03.2023 22:28

Backtesting Marginal Expected Shortfall
and Related Systemic Risk Measures
Denisa Banulescu-Radu, Christophe Hurlin, Jérémy Leymarie, Olivier Scaillet ∗
April 3, 2020
Abstract
This paper proposes an original approach for backtesting systemic risk measures.
This
backtesting approach makes it possible to assess the systemic risk measure forecasts used to
identify the ﬁnancial institutions that contribute the most to the overall risk in the ﬁnancial
system.
Our procedure is based on simple tests similar to those generally used to backtest
the standard market risk measures such as value-at-risk or expected shortfall. We introduce
a concept of violation associated with the marginal expected shortfall (MES), and we deﬁne
unconditional coverage and independence tests for these violations. We can generalize these
tests to any MES-based systemic risk measures such as SES, SRISK, or ∆CoVaR. We study
their asymptotic properties in the presence of estimation risk and investigate their ﬁnite sample
performance via Monte Carlo simulations. An empirical application to a panel of U.S. ﬁnancial
institutions is conducted to assess the validity of MES, SRISK, and ∆CoVaR forecasts issued
from a GARCH-DCC model. Our results show that this model provides valid forecasts for MES
and SRISK when considering a medium-term horizon. Finally, we propose an early warning
system indicator for future systemic crises deduced from these backtests. Our indicator quantiﬁes
how much is the measurement error issued by a systemic risk forecast at a given point in time
which can serve for the early detection of global market reversals.
Keywords: Backtesting; Banking regulation; Hypothesis testing; Risk management; Systemic risk.
JEL classiﬁcation: C12, C52, C58, G21, G28.
∗Banulescu-Radu and Hurlin are at the University of Orléans (LEO, FRE CNRS 2014), Leymarie is at the Uni-
versity of Vienna, and Scaillet is at the University of Geneva and Swiss Finance Institute. We would like to thank the
Finance department editor and the two referees for constructive criticism and suggestions for an improved version. We
would also like to thank for their valuable comments Charles-Olivier Amédée-Manesme, Katarzyna Bień-Barkowska,
Daniel Brunner, Ophélie Couperier, Jessica Fouilloux, Christian Gouriéroux, Alain Hecq, Rachidi Kotchoni, Sébastien
Laurent, Nour Meddahi, Phu Nguyen-Van, Andrew Patton, Christophe Pérignon, Joey Soudant, and Jean-Michel Za-
koïan. We also thank the seminar participants at Audencia Business School, CREST, Maastricht University, Toulouse
Business School, University of Rennes, University of Orléans as well as the participants of the 2016 ACPR Chair
"Regulation and Systemic Risk" - Dauphine House of Finance Day Conference, 2016 French Finance Association Con-
ference, 2016 International Conference of the Financial Engineering and Banking Society, 2016 Annual Meeting of the
French Economic Association, 2016 European Meeting of the Econometric Society, 2016 Econometric Research in Fi-
nance Workshop, 2016 MIFN Conference, 15th Conference "Développements Récents de l’Econométrie Appliquée à la
Finance" (Université Paris Nanterre), 2016 French Econometrics Conference, 10th Conference on Computational and
Financial Econometrics, 2017 Vienna-Copenhagen Conference on Financial Econometrics, 22nd Spring Meeting of
Young Economists, 25th Annual Symposium of the Society for Nonlinear Dynamics and Econometrics, 14th Augustin
Cournot Doctoral Days, 2017 INFER Conference, 2017 Annual Conference of the Multinational Finance Society, 7th
PhD Student Conference in International Macroeconomics and Financial Econometrics, 2018 RiskLab-BoF-ESRB
Conference on Systemic Risk Analytics, 2018 Annual Conference of the International Association for Applied Econo-
metrics, and 2019 conference Europlace Institute of Finance and Banque de France Foundation. Finally, we thank the
Chair ACPR/Risk Foundation: Regulation and Systemic Risk, ANR programs MultiRisk (ANR-16-CE26-0015-01)
and CaliBank (ANR-19-CE26-0002-02), and the Banque de France Foundation for supporting our research. All data
and Matlab codes are available at https://zenodo.org/record/3732345.
1

1
Introduction
On October 26, 2014, the European Banking Authority (EBA) published the results of the 2014
EU-wide stress test, which involved 123 banks from 22 countries, covering broadly 70% of total
assets in the EU banking sector (EBA, 2014). The main conclusion of this exercise is that only
24 participating banks fall below the deﬁned capital threshold, leading to a maximum aggregate
capital shortfall of e24.6bn. None of these banks is French, and Christian Noyer, governor of the
Banque de France at that time, immediately saluted the success of the "French banks which are in
the best positions in the Eurozone" (Noyer, October 26, 2014). Interviewed by the Financial Times
a day after these announcements, Viral Acharya (Financial Times, 2014) stated that "French banks
are the weakest in Europe". He declared that in event of a crisis, French ﬁnancial institutions would
face an aggregate capital shortfall of almost $400bn, i.e., approximately 15 times greater than the
shortfall identiﬁed by the EBA for the weakest European banks.1
This debate illustrates the diﬃculty of measuring systemic risk and the need for validation tools
of such measures.2 Our aim in this paper is to address this gap by introducing a general framework
for assessing the validity of systemic risk measures.
This framework is speciﬁcally designed for
systemic risk measures that are expressed as functions of the expected equity loss conditional on a
ﬁnancial crisis.
The ultimate goal of a systemic risk measure is to better identify the vulnerabilities of the ﬁnan-
cial system (see De Bandt and Hartmann, 2002; Benoit et al., 2017, for a survey). We can identify
two main families of systemic risk measures. The ﬁrst set aggregates low-frequency regulatory data.
A typical example is the systemic risk score currently implemented by the Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision (BCBS) and the Financial Stability Board (FSB) to identify so-called systemi-
cally important ﬁnancial institutions (SIFIs), i.e., ﬁrms whose failure might trigger a crisis aﬀecting
the entire ﬁnancial system.3 Another example is the bank capital shortfall computed from the reg-
ulatory banking stress tests previously mentioned. Until 2014, the performance of these measures
could not be assessed empirically because the necessary data were not in the public domain. Re-
cently, Philippon et al. (2017) proposed the ﬁrst evaluation of the quality of the EU banking stress
1Considering only the subset of French banks tested in the ECB stress tests, he estimates a capital shortfall of
$189bn which represents approximately 9% of the French GDP.
2For similar discussions see also Acharya et al. (2014), Tavolaro and Visnovsky (2014), Acharya et al. (2016a,b),
and more recently Pierret and Steﬀen (2018).
3The systemic risk score aggregates information on ﬁve broad categories of systemic importance: size, intercon-
nectedness, substitutability, complexity, and cross-jurisdictional activity. To avoid favoring any particular facet of
systemic risk, the BCBS computes an equally weighted average score of these categories. For further details, see
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2014).
2

tests, and Benoit et al. (2019) identiﬁed some pitfalls in the systemic risk scoring. The second set of
systemic risk measures relies on high-frequency market data such as stocks or asset returns, option
prices, or CDS spreads. These measures have the advantage of being easily implemented with pub-
lic data and standard econometric models. Many global risk measures have been proposed in the
academic literature.4 The most prominent examples are the marginal expected shortfall (MES) and
the systemic expected shortfall (SES) of Acharya et al. (2017), the systemic risk measure (SRISK)
of Acharya et al. (2012) and Brownlees and Engle (2017), and the delta conditional value-at-risk
(∆CoVaR) of Adrian and Brunnermeier (2016).5
The MES of a ﬁnancial ﬁrm is deﬁned as its
short-run expected equity loss conditional on the market taking a loss greater than its value-at-risk
(VaR). It is the key determinant, together with leverage and ﬁrm market value, of the SRISK and
the SES. These two systemic risk measures correspond to the expected amount by which a bank is
undercapitalized in a future systemic event in which the overall ﬁnancial system is undercapitalized.
These global measures are designed to summarize the systemic risk contribution of a given ﬁnancial
institution into a single ﬁgure and can be used to rank ﬁnancial institutions according to their
systemic importance. However, to the best of our knowledge, no backtesting procedures have been
proposed to evaluate their ex post validity. This issue is of crucial importance because validation is
a key requirement for any systemic risk measure to become an industry standard.
We propose here a general framework for backtesting the MES and by extension the SES and
SRISK. As deﬁned by Jorion (2007), backtesting is a formal statistical framework that consists
of verifying whether actual losses are in line with projected losses.
This involves a systematic
comparison of the historical model-generated risk measure forecasts with actual losses. Since the
true value of the risk measure is unobservable, this comparison generally relies on violations. For
instance, in the case of VaR, a violation is said to occur when the ex post portfolio return is lower
than the VaR forecast. The goal here consists of deﬁning an appropriate concept of violation for
the MES and then adapting the backtesting tests currently used by regulators and industry for the
market risk measures such as VaR or expected shortfall (ES). We proceed as follows. First, we
introduce a concept of conditional VaR, inspired by the systemic risk measure proposed by Adrian
and Brunnermeier (2016). A (β, α)-CoVaR is deﬁned as the β-quantile of the truncated distribution
4Bisias et al. (2012) surveyed 31 quantitative measures, whereas Giglio et al. (2016) proposed systemic risk indexes
computed from 19 alternative systemic risk measures.
5These articles are among the most inﬂuential in the academic literature on systemic risk. For instance, the two
articles by Acharya et al. (2012) and Brownlees and Engle (2017) that deﬁned the MES and the SRISK have been
cited 1,000 times since their publication (source: Google Scholar). For online computation of some of these systemic
risk measures, see the Stern-NYU V-Lab initiative website.
3

of the ﬁrm returns given that the ﬁnancial system takes a loss greater than its α-VaR. We express
the MES as an integral of the CoVaRs for all coverage rates β between 0 and 1. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time that a relationship is established between the CoVaR and the MES
and extended to the SES and SRISK. Second, we deﬁne a concept of joint violation of the (β, α)-
CoVaR of the ﬁrm returns and α-VaR of the market returns. This extends the concept of cumulative
violation recently proposed by Du and Escanciano (2017) for ES backtests to a bivariate case. We
deﬁne a cumulative joint violation process deﬁned as the integral of the joint violation processes
for all coverage rates β between 0 and 1. We show that if the risk model used to forecast the
MES is well speciﬁed, this cumulative violation process is a martingale diﬀerence sequence (mds).
Exploiting this mds property, we propose two backtests for the MES: an unconditional coverage
(UC, hereafter) test and an independence (IND, hereafter) test as those generally considered for
the VaR (Christoﬀersen, 1998). The UC test refers to the fact that the violation frequency should
be in line with the theoretical probability of observing a violation. Failure of UC means that the
MES forecasts underestimate or overestimate the ex post systemic risk. In addition to UC, the
violations should satisfy the independence property, which implies that past violations should not
be informative about current or future violations if the dynamics of the risk model to forecast MES
is well-speciﬁed.
Our backtesting procedure has many advantages. It allows backtesting either conditional (with
respect to the past information set) MES or unconditional MES. Furthermore, we derive the asymp-
totic distribution of our test statistics while taking into account the estimation risk (Escanciano and
Olmo, 2010). Indeed, the MES forecasts are generally issued from a parametric risk model where
parameters have to be estimated. Then, the use of standard backtesting procedures to assess the
MES forecasts in an out-of-sample framework can be misleading because these procedures do not
consider the impact of estimation risk. For this reason, we propose a robust version of our test statis-
tics. Monte Carlo simulations show that these robust statistics have good ﬁnite sample properties
for realistic sample sizes.
Another advantage of our backtesting procedure is that it can be applied to any MES-based
systemic risk measure, the typical examples being SES and SRISK. As we can express these measures
as a linear deterministic function of the (long-run) MES, we show that testing their validity is
equivalent to testing the validity of the MES forecast itself.6 We can further extend our framework
6This result is due to the assumptions made on the other constituents of SES and SRISK, i.e., a constant level of
liabilities and a constant initial market value of the ﬁrm (see Brownlees and Engle, 2017; Acharya et al., 2017).
4

to test the validity of ∆CoVaR forecasts. To do so, we propose a simple approach based on a vector
of two joint violations associated with two conditional VaRs of an institution: one for the situation
in which the ﬁnancial system is in distress and a second with respect to the median state of the
ﬁnancial system. The intuition is similar here to the backtests proposed for a multi-level VaR, i.e.,
VaR deﬁned for a ﬁnite set of coverage rates (see Pérignon and Smith, 2008; Colletaz et al., 2013;
Leccadito et al., 2014; Wied et al., 2016, among others). These multi-level VaR backtests have been
recently adapted by Kratz et al. (2018) and Couperier and Leymarie (2018) to assess ES forecasts.
We apply our backtesting tests to assess the empirical validity of the MES, SRISK, and ∆CoVaR
issued from a GARCH-DCC model for a panel of large U.S. ﬁnancial institutions over the period
from January 3, 2000, to December 30, 2016. First, we observe that the one-day-ahead forecasts
of these systemic risk measures are generally misspeciﬁed in periods of ﬁnancial instability. The
UC tests reject the validity of the risk forecasts for most of the ﬁnancial institutions in our panel
during the 2008-2009 global ﬁnancial crisis. Second, when considering a longer forecasting horizon,
say one month, the UC hypothesis is no longer rejected for MES or SRISK. The results suggest that
for longer horizons, the GARCH-DCC model may provide more reliable forecasts of systemic risk.
Finally, we apply the UC test to the ∆CoVAR daily forecasts. Our ﬁndings are fully in line with
those observed for the short-term MES forecasts. The UC hypothesis is rejected for most of the
ﬁnancial institutions during the global 2008-2009 ﬁnancial crisis and to a lesser extent during the
2011-2012 European debt crisis. In addition, our tests show that the stressed CoVaR is generally
more aﬀected by model misspeciﬁcation than the median CoVaR.
Some attempts of validation procedures for systemic risk measures have been proposed in the
literature. Following the coherent risk approach of Artzner et al. (1999), Chen et al. (2013) deﬁne
an axiomatic framework for systemic risk measures.7 However, most of the validation techniques are
empirical. They generally consist of testing whether ﬁrms with high systemic risk scores are more
likely to become insolvent (Wu, 2018) or to suﬀer the highest ﬁnancial losses (Idier et al., 2014)
in a ﬁnancial crisis, for example. The latter conclude that some standard balance-sheet ratios are
better able to predict large equity losses conditional on a true crisis than is the MES. Brownlees and
Engle (2017) show that banks with higher SRISK before the ﬁnancial crisis were more likely to be
bailed out by the government and to receive capital injections from the Federal Reserve. Engle et al.
7A systemic risk measure must satisfy the main conditions that deﬁne any coherent risk measure, namely, the
monotonicity, positive homogeneity, and outcome convexity axioms.
However, it must also satisfy an additional
preference consistency axiom. This axiom states that the risk measure has to reﬂect the preference of the regulator
on the cross-sectional proﬁle of losses across ﬁrms and the distribution of the aggregate outcomes across states.
5

(2015) compare the ranking of European ﬁnancial institutions obtained with the SRISK to the list of
SIFIs produced by the FSB. Recently, Jokivuolle et al. (2018) use statistical tests and ﬁnd that the
systemic risk categories deﬁned by the FSB are diﬀerent from those computed by ∆CoV aR, MES,
and SRISK. Brownlees et al. (2020) propose an historical assessment of SRISK and ∆CoVaR based
on two dimensions. The ﬁrst one, called SIFI ranking challenge, consists of investigating whether
ranking ﬁnancial institutions by SRISK and ∆CoVaR permits the identiﬁcation of institutions with
notable deposit declines around panic events. The second one, called the ﬁnancial crisis prediction
challenge, investigates whether these systemic risk measures are signiﬁcant predictors of system-
wide deposit declines during panic events. Based on an original historical dataset for the New York
banking system between 1866 and 1933, their results show that both measures well identify SIFIs,
especially in periods of distress. However, SRISK and ∆CoVaR exhibit poor performance as early
warning signals of distress in the ﬁnancial system as a whole.
Our validation approach is diﬀerent because it relies on backtesting tests in the same spirit as
those used for market or credit risk measures (Jorion, 2007). We propose test statistics that are
similar to those generally used by regulators or risk managers to backtest the VaR (Kupiec, 1995;
Christoﬀersen, 1998) or the ES (Du and Escanciano, 2017; Kratz et al., 2018). Even if the validation
approaches are diﬀerent, they show similarities in the main. As in Brownlees et al. (2020), albeit
with a diﬀerent empirical approach, we propose an early warning system (EWS) indicator intended
to identify the periods of forecast breakdown that depict signiﬁcant changes in market conditions.
Our indicator is deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the original MES forecast issued from the risk
model and an adjusted MES forecast.
The latter represents the forecast that satisﬁes the null
hypothesis of unconditional coverage. The adjustment of risk forecasts issued from a misspeciﬁed
or mis-estimated risk model has already been considered in the risk management literature. For
instance, Gouriéroux and Zakoïan (2013) propose a method to adjust VaR forecasts aﬀected by
estimation risk. Boucher et al. (2014) adjust imperfect VaR forecasts by outcomes from backtesting
frameworks, considering desirable qualities of VaR models such as the frequency, independence and
magnitude of violations. In recent contributions, Couperier and Leymarie (2018) and Lazar and
Zhang (2019) apply a similar approach to adjust imperfect ES forecasts. Similarly, we propose to
adjust imperfect MES-based forecasts exploiting the statistical properties of the cumulative joint
violation process. Formally, it consists of determining an adjusted coverage level for the MES such
that the null hypothesis of the UC test is not rejected. Our empirical results show that the adjusted
MES diverges from the unadjusted MES at the beginning of the 2007-2009 ﬁnancial crisis and to
6

a lesser extent during the European debt crisis. Such a divergence should alert regulators to the
severity of the ﬁnancial crisis because the risk models applied by banks before the crisis are no
longer compatible with current market conditions.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we deﬁne the MES and introduce
the cumulative joint violation process. We present the backtesting tests for MES in Section 3 and
illustrate their ﬁnite sample properties via Monte Carlo simulations. Section 4 extends our backtests
to any MES-based systemic risk measure, especially to SES, SRISK and ∆CoVaR. An empirical
application is proposed in Section 5. Section 6 illustrates how to use these backtests as early warning
systems to detect ﬁnancial crisis episodes. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section 7.
2
MES and cumulative joint violation process
In this section, we deﬁne the MES and introduce a concept of cumulative joint violation dedicated
to its assessment. We consider the following notations. Let Yt = (Y1t, Y2t)′ denote the vector of
stock returns of two assets at time t. In the speciﬁc context of systemic risk, Y1t corresponds to
the stock return of a ﬁnancial institution, whereas Y2t corresponds to the market return. Denote
by Ωt−1 the information set available at time t −1, with (Yt−1, Yt−2, ...) ⊆Ωt−1 and F (.; Ωt−1)
being the joint cumulative distribution function (cdf) of Yt given Ωt−1, such that F (yt; Ωt−1) ≡
Pr (Y1t < y1, Y2t < y2| Ωt−1) for any y = (y1, y2)′ ∈R2. Assume that F (.; Ωt−1) is continuous.
2.1
Marginal expected shortfall
Following Acharya et al. (2012) and Brownlees and Engle (2017), we deﬁne the MES of a ﬁnancial
ﬁrm as its short-run expected equity loss conditional on the market taking a loss greater than its
VaR. Formally, the α-level MES of the ﬁnancial institution at time t given Ωt−1 is deﬁned as
MES1t (α) = E(Y1t|Y2t ≤V aR2t(α); Ωt−1),
(1)
where V aR2t (α) is the α-level VaR of the marginal distribution of Y2t, denoted FY2 (.; Ωt−1), with
V aR2t (α) = F −1
Y2 (α; Ωt−1), and α ∈[0, 1].8
If we deﬁne the market return Y2t as the value-
weighted average of ﬁrm returns (for all the ﬁrms that belong to the ﬁnancial system), then the
MES corresponds to the derivative of the market ES with respect to the ﬁrm market share (Scaillet,
2004; Acharya et al., 2017), hence the term "marginal". Thus, MES measures how the ﬁnancial
institution contributes to the overall risk of the ﬁnancial system.
8For ease of notation, we do not use the usual convention that deﬁnes the VaR as the opposite of the α-quantile
of the return distribution.
7

The MES is a conditional expectation, and as such, it can be expressed as a function of the
quantiles of the conditional distribution of Y1t given Y2t ≤V aR2t(α). For that purpose, we introduce
the concept of Conditional-VaR (CoVaR) inspired by the systemic risk measure proposed by Adrian
and Brunnermeier (2016). For any coverage level β ∈[0, 1], the CoVaR for ﬁrm 1 at time t is the
quantity CoV aR1t(β, α) such that
Pr (Y1t ≤CoV aR1t(β, α)|Y2t ≤V aR2t(α); Ωt−1) = β.
(2)
There are two main diﬀerences between CoV aR1t(β, α) and the CoVaR introduced by Adrian and
Brunnermeier (2016). First, the conditioning event is based on an inequality, i.e., Y2t ≤V aR2t(α)
as in Girardi and Ergün (2013), rather than on the equality Y2t = V aR2t(α).
Second, we in-
troduce a distinction between the coverage level β of the CoVaR and the coverage level α of the
VaR, which is used to deﬁne the conditioning event. The (β, α)-level CoVaR can also be deﬁned
as CoV aR1t(β, α) = F −1
Y1|Y2≤V aR2t(α)(β; Ωt−1) where FY1|Y2≤V aR2t(α)(.; Ωt−1) is the cdf of the condi-
tional distribution of Y1t given Y2t ≤V aR2t(α) and Ωt−1. Deﬁnition of a conditional probability
and a change of variables yield a useful representation of MES in terms of CoVaR.
MES1t(α) =
Z 1
0
CoV aR1t(β, α)dβ.
(3)
Equation (3) is essential for our backtesting approach. It provides a simple relationship between two
risk measures, i.e., the MES and the CoVaR. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst attempt
to establish a link between these systemic measures that are both broadly used in the systemic risk
literature (see Acharya et al., 2017, for a comparison). Notice that this deﬁnition of the MES is
valid for any bivariate distribution.
For some particular distributions, the conditional cdf FY1|Y2≤V aR2t(α)(.; Ωt−1) that deﬁnes the
CoVaR has a closed-form expression. For instance, Arnold et al. (1993) calculate the marginal of a
bivariate normal distribution with double truncation over one variable. Horrace (2005) formalizes
analytical results on the truncated multivariate normal distribution, where the truncation is one-
sided and at an arbitrary point. Ho et al. (2012) focus on the truncated multivariate t-distribution.
Regardless of the distribution, it is also possible to express the cdf of the truncated distribution
of Y1t given Y2t ≤V aR2t(α) as a simple function of the cdf of the joint distribution of Yt, with
FY1|Y2≤V aR2t(α)(y1; Ωt−1) = α−1F (ey; Ωt−1), with ey = (y1, V aR2t(α))′.
In general, the MES forecasts are issued from a parametric model speciﬁed by the researcher, the
risk manager, or the regulatory authority. For instance, Brownlees and Engle (2017) and Acharya
8

et al. (2012) consider a bivariate dynamic conditional correlation (DCC) model to compute the
MES and the SRISK. In practice, the cdf F (.; Ωt−1, θ0) of the joint distribution of Yt, the cdf
FY2 (.; Ωt−1, θ0) of the marginal distribution of Y2t and the cdf FY1|Y2≤V aR2t(α;θ0)(.; Ωt−1, θ0) of the
truncated distribution of Y1t given Y2t ≤V aR2t(α, θ0) depend on θ0 ∈Θ ⊆Rp, a vector of unknown
parameters. Therefore, we need to estimate these parameters to compute the MES forecasts. In
the sequel, we name this parametric model the "risk model" in reference to the internal risk model
used by banks to produce their VaR or ES forecasts.
2.2
Cumulative joint violation process
To backtest the CoVaR and the MES, we deﬁne a joint violation of the (β, α)-CoVaR of Y1t and
the α-VaR of Y2t at time t. We represent this violation process by the following binary variable
ht(α, β, θ0) = 1 ((Y1t ≤CoV aR1t (β, α, θ0)) ∩(Y2t ≤V aR2t (α, θ0))) ,
(4)
where 1 (.) denotes an indicator function. The violation (4) takes value one if the loss of the ﬁrm
exceeds its CoVaR and the loss of the market exceeds its VaR, zero otherwise.
The VaR backtesting tests (Kupiec, 1995; Christoﬀersen, 1998; Berkowitz et al., 2011, among
others) generally exploit the mds property of the violation process (see Christoﬀersen, 2010, for a
survey).
Here, we adopt a similar approach to backtest the CoVaR and the MES. Notice that
Bayes theorem implies that Pr (ht(α, β, θ0) = 1| Ωt−1) = αβ.
Then, it follows from Equation
(2) that the violations are Bernoulli distributed with mean αβ and that the centered violation
{ht(α, β, θ0) −αβ}∞
t=1 is a mds for risk levels (α, β) ∈[0, 1]2. Formally, if the (β, α)-CoVaR of Y1t
and the α-VaR of Y2t are correctly speciﬁed, we have E (ht(α, β, θ0) −αβ| Ωt−1) = 0.
To test the validity of the MES, we consider a cumulative joint violation process that we can
view as a violation "counterpart" of the MES deﬁnition in Equation (3). We deﬁne this cumulative
joint violation process as the integral of the violations ht(α, β, θ0) for all the risk levels β between
0 and 1, with
Ht (α, θ0) =
Z 1
0
ht(α, β, θ0)dβ.
We can regard this cumulative joint violation process as an extension to the bivariate case of the
cumulative violation process recently introduced by Du and Escanciano (2017) to backtest the
ES. The random variable Ht (α, θ0) has an Ωt−1-conditional distribution deﬁned as the product of a
Bernoulli(α) random variable times a continuous uniform distribution over [0, 1]. The mean and vari-
ance of Ht(α, θ0) are equal to α/2 and α (1/3 −α/4), respectively (see Appendix B for details). Fur-
9

thermore, the Fubini theorem implies that the mds property of the sequence {ht(α, β, θ0) −αβ}∞
t=1 ,
∀(α, β) ∈[0, 1]2 is preserved by integration. As a consequence, the sequence {Ht(α, θ0) −α/2}∞
t=1
is also a mds for any α ∈[0, 1], such that we have E (Ht (α, θ0) −α/2| Ωt−1) = 0.
3
Backtesting MES
Exploiting the mds property of the cumulative joint violation process enables the implementation
of various types of backtests for the MES (see Nieto and Ruiz, 2016, for a survey). Here, we propose
two tests based on the so-called unconditional coverage hypothesis and independence hypothesis
(Christoﬀersen, 1998). The unconditional coverage test relies on the following null hypothesis:
H0,UC : E (Ht (α, θ0)) = α/2.
Since we have E (Ht (α, θ0)) =
R 1
0 E (ht(α; β, θ0)) dβ, the null H0,UC is equivalent to H0,UC :
Pr (ht(α, β, θ0) = 1) = αβ for any β ∈[0, 1].
The null hypothesis UC means that for any risk
level β, the joint probability of observing an ex post return Y1t exceeding its (β, α)-CoVaR and an
ex post return Y2t exceeding its α-VaR must be equal to αβ. Note that if H0,UC is violated, there
are two scenarios. The ﬁrst corresponds to E (Ht (α, θ0)) > α/2, and indicates that the number
of joint exceedances is higher than expected. This scenario is associated with an underestimation
of the MES. In the opposite case, E (Ht (α, θ0)) < α/2 indicates that not enough exceedances are
experienced on average and reveals an overestimation of the MES.
The second backtest is based on the independence property of the centered cumulative violation
process {Ht (α, θ0) −α/2}∞
t=1: the cumulative violations observed at two diﬀerent dates for the
same coverage rate α must be independently distributed. As in Christoﬀersen (1998), we propose a
simple Box-Pierce test (Box and Pierce, 1970) to test for the nullity of the ﬁrst K autocorrelations
of Ht (α, θ0), denoted ρk. We deﬁne the null hypothesis of the IND test as
H0,IND : ρ1 = .... = ρK = 0,
with ρk = corr (Ht (α, θ0) , Ht−k (α, θ0)). A rejection of H0,IND highlights a misspeciﬁcation in the
MES dynamics, and reveals the use of an incorrect risk model.
Implementing the tests requires estimating the parameters θ0 ∈Θ of the model used by the risk
manager to forecast the MES. For simplicity, we adopt a ﬁxed forecasting estimation scheme. We
use an in-sample period from t = 1 to t = T to estimate θ0. Denote by ΩT the information set
10

available at the end of the in-sample period, with {Y1, ..., YT } ⊆ΩT and bθT a consistent estimator of
θ0. Based on the ex post returns observed from t = T + 1 to t = T + n, we compute the backtesting
test statistics from the out-of-sample forecasts of the cumulative violation process given by
Ht(α, bθT ) =

1 −u12t(bθT )

1

u2t(bθT ) ≤α

,
∀t = T + 1, ..., T + n,
with u2t(bθT ) ≡FY2(Y2t; Ωt−1, bθT ) and u12t(bθT ) ≡FY1|Y2≤V aR2t(α,bθT )(Y1t; Ωt−1, bθT ). See Appendix B
for further details.
3.1
Unconditional coverage test
By analogy with the backtest proposed by Du and Escanciano (2017) for ES and the well-known
VaR backtest proposed by Kupiec (1995), we consider a standard t-test for the null hypothesis of
unconditional coverage H0,UC for the MES. We deﬁne the test statistic, denoted UCMES, as
UCMES =
√n

¯H(α, bθT ) −α/2

p
α (1/3 −α/4)
,
(5)
with ¯H(α, bθT ) the out-of-sample mean of Ht(α, bθT ), namely ¯H(α, bθT ) = 1
n
PT+n
t=T+1 Ht(α, bθT ). To
provide intuition for the asymptotic properties of the statistic UCMES, let us deﬁne a similar statistic
UCMES (α, θ0) based on the true value of the parameters θ0 instead of its estimator bθT . Under the
null hypothesis, the sequence {Ht (α, θ0) −α/2}T+n
t=T+1 is a mds with variance equal to α (1/3 −α/4).
As a consequence, the Lindeberg-Levy central limit theorem implies that UCMES (α, θ0) has an
asymptotic standard normal distribution. A similar result holds for the feasible statistic UCMES ≡
UCMES(α, bθT ) when T →∞and n →∞, whereas λ = n/T →0, i.e., when there is no estimation
risk.
However, in the general case T →∞, n →∞and n/T →λ < ∞, there is an estimation risk as
soon as λ ̸= 0. Escanciano and Olmo (2010) show that the use of standard backtesting procedures
can be misleading if one does not account for the uncertainty associated with parameter estimation.
Similarly, Bontemps and Meddahi (2005) develops a test for normality that is robust to parameter
uncertainty and show that standard tests are misleading due to parameter uncertainty.
In the
presence of estimation error, the asymptotic distribution of UCMES is not standard and depends
on the ratio of the in-sample size T to the out-of-sample size n. Theorem 1 gives the corresponding
asymptotic distribution of UCMES when T →∞, n →∞and n/T →λ with 0 < λ < ∞.
11

Theorem 1 Under Assumptions A1-A4 in the Appendix, we have:
UCMES
d→N
 0, σ2
λ

,
where
d→denotes the convergence in distribution and where the asymptotic variance σ2
λ is
σ2
λ = 1 + λR′
MESΣ0RMES
α (1/3 −α/4) ,
with RMES = E0 (∂Ht (α, θ0) /∂θ) and Vas(bθT ) = Σ0/T.
The proof of Theorem 1 is reported in Appendix C. The vector RMES quantiﬁes the parameter
estimation eﬀect on the test statistic UCMES due to the diﬀerence between the estimate bθT and
the true value of the parameter θ0. We can characterize the impact of the estimation risk on the
UCMES test statistic as follows
UCMES
=
1
σH
√n
T+n
X
t=T+1
(Ht (α, θ0) −α/2)
|
{z
}
UCMES(α,θ0)
+
√
λ
σH
1
n
T+n
X
t=T+1
E



∂Ht

α, eθ
′
∂θ

Ωt−1



√
T(bθT −θ0)
|
{z
}
Estimation risk
+ op (1) .
This formula is similar to that obtained by Du and Escanciano (2017) to backtest ES, but its con-
stituents are diﬀerent because the testing procedure now relies on a bivariate distribution. Whatever
the dynamic model considered for the returns, we can deduce the vector RMES from the cdf of the
joint distribution Yt given Ωt−1 with
RMES = −1
αE0
∂F(eyt; Ωt−1, θ0)
∂θ
1(u2t (θ0) ≤α)

+ E0

(1 −u12t (θ0))∂1(u2t (θ0) ≤α)
∂θ

,
where eyt = (y1t, V aR2t(α, θ0))′ and
∂F(eyt; Ωt−1, θ0)
∂θ
=
Z y1t
−∞
f (u, V aR2t (α, θ0) ; Ωt−1, θ0) du × ∂V aR2t (α, θ0)
∂θ
|
{z
}
Impact on the truncation
+
Z y1t
−∞
Z V aR2t(α,θ0)
−∞
∂f (u, v; Ωt−1, θ0)
∂θ
dudv
|
{z
}
.
impact on the pdf of the joint distribution
In the bivariate case, the estimation error aﬀects the cdf of the truncated distribution of Y1t given
Y2t ≤V aR2t (α, θ0) not only through its eﬀect on the joint distribution but also through the
12

truncation parameter, i.e., the VaR of the market return. There is no analytical expression for
the derivative ∂F(eyt; Ωt−1, θ0)/∂θ except for some particular bivariate distributions (see Appendix
D for the case of a bivariate normal distribution). In the general case, we have to evaluate that
expression via numerical diﬀerentiation.
Corollary 2 When there is no estimation risk, i.e., when λ = 0, under Assumptions A1-A4 in the
Appendix, we have UCMES
d→N (0, 1).
When the estimation period T is much larger than the evaluation period n, the unconditional
coverage test is simpliﬁed because it does not require evaluations of RMES and Σ0. Given these
results, it is possible to deﬁne a test statistic UCC
MES that explicitly takes into account the estimation
risk while having a standard limit distribution for any λ with 0 ≤λ < ∞when T and n tend to
inﬁnity. The feasible robust UC backtest statistic is
UCC
MES =
√n

¯H(α, bθT ) −α/2

q
α (1/3 −α/4) + n bR′
MES bVas(bθT ) bRMES
,
where bVas(bθT ) = bΣ0/T is a consistent estimator of the asymptotic variance-covariance matrix of
bθT and bRMES is a consistent estimator of RMES. In Appendix E, we propose an estimator for the
vector RMES that we can easily implement.
3.2
Independence test
To test the independence hypothesis H0,IND : ρ1 = .... = ρm = 0, we use a Portmanteau Box-Pierce
test applied to the sequence of cumulative joint violation forecasts. We deﬁne the Box-Pierce test
statistic as follows
INDMES = n
m
X
j=1
bρ2
nj,
with bρnj the sample autocorrelation of order j of the estimated cumulative joint violation Ht(α, bθT )
given by
bρnj = bγnj
bγn0
and
bγnj =
1
n −j
T+n
X
t=T+1+j

Ht(α, bθT ) −α/2
 
Ht−j(α, bθT ) −α/2

,
where bγnj denotes a consistent estimator of the j-lag autocovariance of Ht(α, bθT ). Theorem 3 gives
the asymptotic distribution of the statistic INDMES when T →∞, n →∞and n/T →λ < ∞.
13

Theorem 3 Under Assumptions A1-A4 in the Appendix, we have:
INDMES
d→
m
X
j=1
πjZ2
j ,
where {πj}m
j=1 are the eigenvalues of the matrix ∆with the ij-th element given by
∆ij = δij + λR′
iΣ0Rj,
Rj =
1
α (1/3 −α/4)E0

(Ht−j(α, θ0) −α/2) ∂Ht(α, θ0)
∂θ

,
where δij is a dummy variable that takes value 1 if i = j and 0 otherwise, {Zj}m
j=1 are independent
standard normal variables, and Vas(bθT ) = Σ0/T.
The proof of Theorem 3 is reported in Appendix F. The test statistic INDMES has an asymptotic
distribution, which is a weighted sum of chi-squared variables. The weights depend on the asymp-
totic variance-covariance matrix of the estimator bθT , on the cumulative joint violation process and
on its derivative with respect to the model parameter θ, as for the UC test. However, this limit
distribution becomes standard when λ = 0, i.e., when there is no estimation risk.
Corollary 4 When there is no estimation risk, i.e., when λ = 0, under Assumptions A1-A4 in the
Appendix, we have INDMES
d→χ2 (m).
From the previous results, we can deduce a robust test statistic for the independence hypothesis,
which has a standard distribution for any λ with 0 ≤λ < ∞, when T and n tend to inﬁnity. Denote
by bρ(m)
n
the vector (bρn1, ..., bρnm)′. The feasible robust IND backtest statistic is deﬁned as
INDC
MES = nbρ(m)′
n
b∆−1bρ(m)
n
,
where b∆is a consistent estimator of ∆, such that b∆ij = δij + n bR′
ibVas(bθT ) bRj, where bVas(bθT ) is
a consistent estimator of the asymptotic variance-covariance matrix of bθT and bRj is a consistent
estimator of Rj. In Appendix E, we provide a simple method to estimate Rj. When T and n tend
to inﬁnity, the robust statistic INDC
MES converges to a chi-squared distribution with m degrees of
freedom regardless of the relative value of n and T.
3.3
Monte Carlo simulations
This section assesses the ﬁnite sample properties of our two backtest statistics computed with and
without taking into account the estimation risk. We consider two deﬁnitions of the MES to study
14

the properties of our tests in various settings. First, we consider the particular case of a marginal
(time-invariant) MES, as in Acharya et al. (2017). This conﬁguration allows us to easily control
for the degree of misspeciﬁcation of ﬁrm risk and ﬁnancial interdependencies and thus to assess the
power of our tests in relevant cases. Second, we consider a conditional (time-varying) MES based
on a multivariate GARCH-DCC model, as in Brownlees and Engle (2017). In the sequel, we brieﬂy
present the two data generating processes (DGP) and the results of our Monte Carlo simulations.
Backtesting marginal MES. To evaluate the empirical size and power of our tests in the case
of a marginal MES, we consider a bivariate normal distribution for the daily demeaned returns
Yt = (Y1t, Y2t)′, such that Yt = Σ1/2zt, with Y1t being the ﬁrm return and Y2t being the market
return and where zt denotes an i.i.d. Gaussian vector error process with E (zt) = 0 and E (ztz′
t) = I2.
Under the null, the variance-covariance matrix Σ is deﬁned as
Σ =

σ2
1
ρσ1σ2
ρσ1σ2
σ2
2

,
where σ1 and σ2 denote the volatility of ﬁrm and market returns, respectively, and ρ is the correlation
between the two returns. We calibrate the parameters θ0 =
 σ2
1, σ2
2, ρ
′ using the daily log-returns
of Bank of America and the CRSP market value-weighted index over the period from January 1,
2012, to December 30, 2016.9 Notice that, under the normality assumption, the MES of the bank
does not depend on the market volatility.10
For each Monte Carlo replication b, we simulate the series {y(b)
1t , y(b)
2t }T+n
t=1 , and we estimate the
variance-covariance parameters θ0 using the ﬁrst T simulated observations {y(b)
1t , y(b)
2t }T
t=1. Then,
using the estimated parameters bθ(b)
T , we compute the cumulative violation process Ht(α, bθ(b)
T ) for
the out-of-sample periods t = T +1, . . . , T +n. For a ﬁnite sample size T, the violations are aﬀected
by the estimation risk due to the diﬀerence between the estimate bθ(b)
T
and the true parameter
value θ0. Finally, using the series {Ht(α, bθ(b)
T )}T+n
t=T+1, we compute the test statistics UCMES and
INDMES, without estimation risk correction, and the corresponding robust test statistics UCC
MES
and INDC
MES. The simulation study is based on 10, 000 replications. In addition, we consider
various in-sample sizes (T = 250, 500, and 2, 500) and out-of-sample sizes (n = 250 and 500) to
illustrate the impact of T and n on the estimation error and the small-sample properties of the
9The estimated values of unconditional variances and correlation, σ2
1, σ2
2, and ρ, are equal to 3.506, 0.722, 0.663,
respectively.
10Under these assumptions, the MES for the bank return has a closed-form expression (Brownlees and Engle, 2017)
given by MES1(α) = −ρσ1φ
 Φ−1 (α)

/α, where φ (.) and Φ (.) denote the pdf and the cdf of a standard normal
distribution. We can also express the MES as the product of the beta of the ﬁrm by the ES of the market return
(Benoit et al., 2017), such as MES1(α) = β1ES2 (α), with β1 = ρσ1/σ2, and ES2 (α) = E(Y2t|Y2t ≤V aR2(α)).
15

backtests. Finally, we set the coverage rate α for the MES to 5%, and we compute the empirical
size as the rejection frequency at a nominal level of 5%.
Because the MES depends on risk levels (volatilities) and dependencies (correlation), we propose
various experiments designed to assess the capabilities of our tests to detect misspeciﬁcation on these
two quantities. We consider three misspeciﬁed models given by Yt = eΣ1/2zt under the alternative
hypothesis:
eΣ =

eσ2
1
eρeσ1eσ2
eρeσ1eσ2
eσ2
2

,
• H1(A1): Undervalued variance of ﬁrm returns, eσ2
1 = (1 −τ)σ2
1, with 0 < τ < 1.
• H1(A2): Undervalued variance of market returns, eσ2
2 = (1 −τ)σ2
2, with 0 < τ < 1.
• H1(A3): Undervalued correlation between ﬁrm and market returns, eρ = (1 −τ)ρ, with 0 <
τ < 1.
Under these alternatives, the variance-covariance matrix is misspeciﬁed and underestimates the
variance of return (A1 and A2) or the correlation (A3) by a rate τ, equal to either 25%, 50%, or
75%.
Such undervaluations of risk or dependence induce an underestimated MES and, in ﬁne,
an undervaluation of the systemic risk. In the case of alternatives, we use the ﬁrst T simulated
observations to estimate the variance-covariance parameters θ0 under the constraint H1.11 Denote
the vector of estimated and constrained parameters obtained in the bth replication by bθ(b)
T . We
compute the test statistics from the misspeciﬁed cumulative violation process Ht(α, bθ(b)
T ) for t =
T + 1, ..., T + n, and we compute the empirical power as the rejection frequency at a 5% nominal
level. To take into account the potential size distortions for small T, our reported powers are all
size-corrected.
Table 1 displays the empirical sizes and powers for the UCMES, UCC
MES, INDMES, and
INDC
MES tests. Four main results are noteworthy. First, the empirical sizes of the UC and IND
tests, with or without correction for estimation risk, converge to the nominal level when both T and
n increase. However, for small in-sample sizes T, the UCMES test exhibits severe size distortions
11For each alternative, the reduction rate τ is applied to the true value of the parameter instead of its estimated
counterpart to avoid variations of the constrained parameters across replications. To ensure positive semi-deﬁniteness
of the estimate of eΣ for any τ, the other parameters are estimated by using the constrained maximum likelihood.
This framework makes it possible to illustrate the power of our tests while taking into account the estimation risk.
Notice that the data generating process considered under H1 (A2) leads to a misspeciﬁed MES: even if MES does not
depend on the market volatility σ2, the other estimated parameters (ﬁrm return volatility and correlation) do not
converge to their true value.
16

due to estimation errors. For instance, for T = 250 and n = 500, the UCMES test is substantially
oversized as its empirical size (11.99%) is twice the nominal size. These size distortions increase
with the out-of-sample size n, as the test statistic UCMES diverges when T is ﬁxed and small, and
n tends to inﬁnity. Second, for small T samples, we recommend the use of robust test statistics that
properly control for estimation risk. Empirical sizes of the robust test statistic UCC
MES are close to
the nominal size of 5% for all reported samples. For instance, for T = 250 and n = 500, its empirical
size is 5.53%. However, the robust INDC
MES backtest exhibits a slower rate of convergence and
displays slight size distortions in small samples.12 Third, our tests demonstrate good capacity for
detecting various misspeciﬁcations in the variance-covariance matrix used to compute the MES.
The empirical power of UC increases with the misspeciﬁcation rate τ and the out-of-sample size n.
The simulations for very large n (not reported) conﬁrm that our UC tests are consistent, as the
rejection frequencies tend to 1. Interestingly, we obtain the highest empirical powers for the mar-
ket volatility misspeciﬁcation (A2), indicating that a poor assessment of market distress may have
severe consequences on the MES. Finally, for all alternatives, the empirical power of the IND test
is still very low whatever n and T. This result is consistent with the theory, as the underestimation
of volatilities and correlation of returns does not have any consequences on the autocorrelations of
the cumulative violation process Ht. As a consequence, the IND backtest is non-sensitive to the
alternatives A1, A2, and A3.
Backtesting conditional MES. For the conditional case, we consider a dynamic conditional
correlation (DCC) model as in Brownlees and Engle (2017).
This model is widely used in the
context of systemic risk since it is able to well reproduce most of the stylized facts on ﬁnancial
data and to capture the interdependencies observed between ﬁrm and market returns. Formally, we
assume that the vector process of demeaned returns is now deﬁned as Yt = Σ1/2
t
zt, where Σt denotes
the conditional variance-covariance matrix and zt is as deﬁned previously. Under the null, we deﬁne
the conditional variance-covariance matrix Σt as Σt = DtRtDt, where Dt = diag{σ1t; σ2t} is a
diagonal matrix that contains conditional volatilities and Rt is the conditional correlation matrix of
Yt. We consider a GJR-GARCH speciﬁcation for the conditional variances of the ﬁrm and market
returns (Glosten et al., 1993; Rabemananjara and Zakoian, 1993),
σ2
it = αi0 + αi1Y 2
i,t−1 + αi2Y 2
it−11 (Yi,t−1 < 0) + αi3σ2
it−1
∀i = 1, 2.
The DCC speciﬁcation imposes a time-varying correlation structure on the standardized returns
12Using an independence test for backtesting expected shortfall, Du and Escanciano (2017) obtain similar size
distortions for small sample sizes.
17

ϵ1t = Y1t/σ1,t and ϵ2t = Y2t/σ2,t through the pseudo-correlation matrix Qt,
Qt = (1 −a −b)Q + aϵt−1ϵ′
t−1 + bQt−1,
where Q is the unconditional correlation matrix and a and b are two non-negative parameters
such that a + b < 1.
The conditional correlation matrix is obtained by rescaling Qt, such as
Rt = (diag Qt)−1/2Qt(diag Qt)−1/2. In the sequel, we refer to this conditional speciﬁcation as
the GARCH-DCC model.13 The Monte Carlo study design is similar to that previously described,
except that we now consider 1, 000 replications. We consider four misspeciﬁed models given by
Yt = eΣ1/2
t
zt under the alternative hypothesis:
• H1(B1): Undervalued conditional variance of ﬁrm returns, eσ2
1t = (1 −τ)σ2
1t, with 0 < τ < 1.
• H1(B2): Undervalued conditional variance of market returns, eσ2
2t = (1−τ)σ2
2t, with 0 < τ < 1.
• H1(B3): Undervalued conditional correlation, eρt = (1 −τ)ρt, with 0 < τ < 1.
• H1(B4): Misspeciﬁcation of the dynamics of ﬁrm and market returns, with Yt = Σ1/2zt.
Under the alternatives B1-B3, the GARCH-DCC model is misspeciﬁed because the conditional
variances or the conditional correlation are misleading by a rate τ, set to either 25%, 50%, or 75%.
In contrast, the alternative B4 induces a misspeciﬁcation of the dynamics of returns: the cumulative
violation process is computed with a variance-covariance matrix that is assumed to be constant over
time, whereas the true matrix is time-varying and exhibits a leverage eﬀect. We expect that this
setting creates autocorrelated violations, which should be detected by our independence test.
Table 2 provides the empirical size and size-corrected power at a 5% nominal level of the con-
ditional MES backtests. Our results are similar to those obtained for the unconditional setting,
and the key takeaways are the following. First, we observe size distortions for the UC backtests
when there is no correction for the estimation risk and the estimation sample size T is small. For
a ﬁxed size T, these distortions increase with the out-of-sample size n. We also observe that the
impact of estimation risk is ampliﬁed compared to the unconditional case due to the increase in
the number of estimated parameters (11 in the case of the GARCH-DCC model). As expected,
the estimated parameters converge to the true parameter values and the impact of estimation error
vanishes asymptotically. Second, our correction for estimation risk is eﬃcient because it leads to
13We set the parameters (α10, α11, α12, α13, α20, α21, α22, α23, a, b) at their maximum likelihood parameter es-
timates, obtained using the same dataset as for the marginal MES. The corresponding estimated values are
(0.149, 0.065, 0.075, 0.855, 0.057, 0.001, 0.268, 0.786, 0.041, 0.754). The unconditional correlation is still set to 0.663.
18

precise inference, even for small T and n. The robust UC test statistic has an empirical size that is
generally close to the nominal size, typically about 4% for T = 250 and n = 500. The robust IND
test statistic is slightly over-sized for ﬁnite sample sizes. Third, our backtests display good power
performance. The UC tests generally detect well the misspeciﬁed alternatives B1, B2, and B3, and
we verify that there is a general improvement in power as the sample size n increases, suggesting
that these tests are consistent for these alternatives. Fourth, the results on the empirical power
suggest complementarity between UC and IND tests. As in the unconditional case, the UC test
displays good power performance against alternatives B1, B2, and B3, while the empirical power of
the IND test is still very low, except for large risk undervaluations. By deﬁnition, the IND backtest
demonstrates better abilities to detect misspeciﬁcation errors in model dynamics. Under alternative
B4, the IND test has an empirical power that is almost twice that of the UC test. As observed in
the VaR backtesting literature (Christoﬀersen, 1998), the combination of UC and IND tests permits
the detection of a larger spectrum of potential misspeciﬁcations in the dynamic models.
TABLES 1-2 ABOUT HERE
4
Backtesting other systemic risk measures
A great advantage of our backtesting approach lies in its simple extension to any systemic risk
measures deﬁned as a function of the MES or the CoVaR. In the sequel, we focus our analysis on
the SES of Acharya et al. (2017), the SRISK of Acharya et al. (2012) and Brownlees and Engle
(2017), and the ∆CoVaR of Adrian and Brunnermeier (2016), as they are the most prominent in
the literature.14
4.1
Backtesting SES and SRISK
Brownlees and Engle (2017) deﬁne the SRISK as the expected capital shortfall of a ﬁnancial insti-
tution, conditional on a crisis aﬀecting the entire ﬁnancial system. The capital shortfall, denoted
CS1t, is deﬁned as the capital reserves that the ﬁrm needs to hold to conform with regulation
and/or prudential management minus ﬁrm equity. Formally, we deﬁne the capital shortfall of the
ﬁrm indexed by 1 on day t as CS1t = k (L1t + W1t) −W1t, where L1t is the book value of debt,
W1t is the market value of ﬁrm equity, and k is a prudential ratio. We deﬁne a systemic event as a
14Our backtests apply to many other measures, such as the ∆CoVaR proposed by Girardi and Ergün (2013), the
component expected shortfall (CES) of Banulescu and Dumitrescu (2015), or the delta conditional expected shortfall
(∆CoES) of Ferreiro (2018), among others. However, they cannot be applied to the class of network systemic risk
measures, such as those proposed by Billio et al. (2012) or Hué et al. (2019).
19

market decline below a given threshold over a time horizon h. Denote by eYt+h = (eY1t+h, eY2t+h)′, or
equally by Yt+1:t+h = (Y1t+1:t+h, Y2t+1:t+h)′, the vector of multi-period arithmetic ﬁrm and market
returns between t + 1 and t + h and by eV aR2t+h ≡V aR2t+1:t+h (α) the corresponding α-VaR of
eY2t+h used as the market threshold. We deﬁne the SRISK of the ﬁrm on day t for an horizon h as
SRISK1t (h)
=
Et(CS1t+h| eY2t+h < eV aR2t+h (α))
=
kEt(L1t+h| eY2t+h < eV aR2t+h (α)) −(1 −k) Et(W1t+h| eY2t+h < eV aR2t+h (α)),
where Et(.) denotes the conditional expectation with respect to Ωt. To compute this expectation,
Brownlees and Engle assume that the debt is constant during a systemic event, i.e., Et(L1t+h| eY2t+h <
eV aR2t+h (α)) = L1t. Furthermore, they introduce the concept of long-run marginal expected short-
fall (LRMES) to compute the expected market value of the ﬁrm. The LRMES is simply a MES
deﬁned in terms of cumulative returns after h periods:15
MES1t (α; h) = Et(eY1t+h|eY2t+h < eV aR2t+h (α)).
Thus, we get Et(W1t+h| eY2t+h < eV aR2t+h (α)) = Wit(1 + Et(eY1t+h|eY2t+h < eV aR2t+h (α))), and
ﬁnally, the SRISK is deﬁned as16
SRISK1t (h) = k L1t −(1 −k) W1t(1 + MES1t (α; h)).
(6)
A similar systemic risk measure, the SES, is proposed by Acharya et al. (2017). The SES represents
the amount that a bank equity drops below its target level (deﬁned as a fraction k of assets) in
the event of a systemic crisis when the aggregate capital is less than k times the aggregate assets.
Acharya et al. (2017) provide theoretical justiﬁcation for how SES relates to MES and show that:
SES1t (h) = (k LV1t −1 −Π MES1t (α; h) + ∆) W1t,
where Π and ∆are two constant terms with Π > 0 and LV1t = (L1t + W1t)/W1t denotes the
quasi-leverage ratio.
These two formulas show how the SRISK and the SES extend the LRMES to take into account
both the liabilities and the size of the ﬁnancial institution. Assuming that the level of debt cannot
be negotiated in the case of a systemic event implies that the level of debt is known at time t. Thus,
15For h = 1, the LRMES boils down to the MES given by Equation (1).
16Equation (6) is similar to the deﬁnition reported by Brownlees and Engle (2017) in Equation (1) (page 52) of
their paper, except that we do not adopt the same sign convention for the MES. Here, we have deﬁned the MES as
a negative quantity according to our Equation (1).
20

the need for inference for these risk measures comes only from the expected value of the ﬁrm at
horizon h, which can break down into an initial value known at time t and the long-run MES. More
generally, we deﬁne a MES-based systemic risk measure as a risk measure for which the need for
inference comes only from its MES component.
Deﬁnition 5 A MES-based systemic risk measure RM1t (h) for ﬁrm 1 at time t and for an horizon
h ≥1 is deﬁned as a deterministic function of the (long-run) MES with
RM1t (h) = gt(MES1t (α; h) , Xt),
where gt (.) is a monotonic (in MES) function and Xt is a set of variables that belong to Ωt.
By deﬁnition, testing the validity of any MES-based systemic risk measure is equivalent to
testing the validity of the LRMES itself. The intuition is as follows. We can rewrite any MES-based
risk measure as a function of the CoVaR (deﬁned in terms of cumulative returns), with
RM1t (h) =
Z 1
0
gt(CoeV aR1t+h (β, α, θ0) , Xt)dβ.
This expression is similar to that obtained for the MES in Equation (3). Furthermore, the violation
process ht(α, β, θ0, Xt) associated with the quantity gt(CoeV aR1t+h (β, α, θ0) , Xt) is equivalent to
the violation process ht(α, β, θ0) associated with the CoVaR, CoeV aR1t+h (β, α, θ0): both binary
processes will take value 1 on the same dates. Thus, the cumulative joint violation process used
to backtest the SRISK, the SES, or any MES-based measure is equivalent to the cumulative joint
violation process used to backtest the MES itself (see Appendix G). As a consequence, the UC and
IND tests are identical to those reported in Section 3.
To implement the aforementioned test statistics, we need to compute the cumulative violation
process Ht (α, θ0) associated with the joint distribution of the multi-period returns (eY1t+h, eY2t+h)
after h periods. For h > 1, it is generally not available in closed form for the class of standard
dynamic models (e.g., GARCH-type models) typically used for daily returns. The problem here is
similar for the estimation of the LRMES itself (see Brownlees and Engle, 2017, for more details).
However, it is straightforward to implement a simulation-based procedure to obtain an estimate of
the cdf of the joint distribution for any horizon h. In the empirical application, we simulate a large
number of paths of returns for the periods t + 1 to t + h, conditional on the information available at
time t, and we compute the corresponding cumulative returns. Then, we apply a kernel estimator
to the simulated cumulative returns to estimate the cdf of their joint distribution.
21

4.2
Backtesting ∆CoVaR
Our testing procedure can be extended to assess the validity of the ∆CoVaR (Adrian and Brun-
nermeier, 2016). In the sequel, we deﬁne this indicator as the diﬀerence between the conditional
VaR (CoVaR) of an institution conditional on the ﬁnancial system being in distress and the CoVaR
conditional on the ﬁnancial system being in its median state.17 Adrian and Brunnermeier deﬁne the
stress for the ﬁnancial system as a situation in which the market return Y2t is equal to its V aR2t (α)
and consider a quantile regression model for the estimation of the CoVaR. A more general approach
consists of deﬁning the ﬁnancial stress as a situation in which Y2t ≤V aR2t(α), as in Girardi and
Ergün (2013). In both cases, we can estimate the CoVaR with M-GARCH-type models and some
usual results about truncated distributions. Similarly, we can represent the normal or median state
of the system by a situation in which V aR2t(βinf) ≤Y2t ≤V aR2t(βsup), with α < βinf < βsup, for
instance βinf = 25% and βsup = 75%. Formally, if we denote by Y2t the return of a portfolio of
ﬁnancial institutions (ﬁnancial system), then the ∆CoVaR of the ﬁnancial ﬁrm is given by18
∆CoVaRt (α) = CoV aR1t(α, α, θ0) −CoV aR1t(α, βinf, βsup, θ0),
(7)
where CoV aR1t(α, α, θ0) (hereafter, stressed CoVaR) veriﬁes Pr(Y1t ≤CoV aR1t(α, α, θ0)|Y2t ≤
V aR2t(α, θ0); Ωt−1) = α and CoV aR1t(α, βinf, βsup, θ0) (hereafter, median CoVaR) veriﬁes Pr(Y1t ≤
CoV aR1t(α, βinf, βsup, θ0)|V aR2t(βinf, θ0) ≤Y2t ≤V aR2t(βsup, θ0); Ωt−1) = α.
To backtest the
stressed CoVaR and the median CoVaR, we deﬁne two violations through the following binary pro-
cesses: ht(α, α, θ0) = 1((Y1t ≤CoV aR1t(α, α, θ0))∩(Y2t ≤V aR2t(α, θ0))), and ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0) =
1((Y1t ≤CoV aR1t(α, βinf, βsup, θ0)) ∩(V aR2t(βinf, θ0) ≤Y2t ≤V aR2t(βsup, θ0))). The logic of the
test is then similar to that used for backtesting the MES. If the risk model is correctly speci-
ﬁed, the two violation processes satisfy the mds property with E
 ht(α, α, θ0) −α2 Ωt−1

= 0 and
E( ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0) −α(βsup −βinf)| Ωt−1) = 0. By exploiting the mds property, we can propose
various types of backtests for the ∆CoVaR or for each of its constituents. As for the MES, we
consider an unconditional coverage test with the following joint null hypothesis:
H0,UC : E (ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0)) = µ,
17Adrian and Brunnermeier provide various deﬁnitions of CoVaR depending on the direction of the conditioning.
To maintain consistency with the conditioning event used in the MES deﬁnition, we consider hereinafter the indicator
referred to as Exposure-∆CoVaR, which is a measure of an individual institution’s exposure to system-wide distress.
18Adrian and Brunnermeier deal with the special case in which βinf
=
βsup
=
0.5, implying that the
CoV aR1t (α, βinf, βsup, θ0) is null. For ease of presentation, we only present the ∆CoVaR at horizon h = 1.
22

where ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0) = (ht(α, α, θ0), ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0))′ denotes the vector of violations, and
where µ =
 α2, α (βsup −βinf)
′. Here, the intuition is similar to the backtests proposed for the
multi-level VaR, i.e., the VaR deﬁned for a ﬁnite set of coverage rates (see Francq and Zakoïan,
2016, for estimation issues). We can cite the tests proposed by Hurlin and Tokpavi (2006), Pérignon
and Smith (2008), Colletaz et al. (2013), Leccadito et al. (2014), and Wied et al. (2016), among
others. These multi-level VaR backtesting procedures have been recently adapted to test the validity
of ES forecasts by Kratz et al. (2018) and Couperier and Leymarie (2018). Given this joint null
hypothesis, we consider a Wald test statistic with
UC∆CoVaR = n

h(α, βinf, βsup, bθT ) −µ
′
γ−1 
h(α, βinf, βsup, bθT ) −µ

,
where h(α, βinf, βsup, bθT ) denotes the out-of-sample mean of ht(α, βinf, βsup, bθT ) and γ is the condi-
tional variance-covariance matrix of ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0) such that
γ =

α2(1 −α2)
−α3(βsup −βinf)
−α3(βsup −βinf)
α(βsup −βinf)(1 −α(βsup −βinf))

.
Under the null hypothesis, the sequence {ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0) −µ}T+n
t=T+1 is a mds with variance
equal to γ. Thus, the Lindeberg-Levy central limit theorem implies that UC∆CoVaR converges to
a chi-squared distribution with two degrees of freedom when we evaluate the test statistic in θ0
instead of bθT . The asymptotic distribution remains valid for the feasible statistic UC∆CoVaR ≡
UC∆CoVaR(bθT ) as soon as T →∞and n →∞, with λ = n/T →0, i.e., without estimation
risk. The proof is reported in Appendix H. In the general case n/T →λ < ∞, the test statistic
UC∆CoVaR is no longer chi-squared distributed. However, by considering the same reasoning as
in Section 3, we can derive a robust test statistic UCC
∆CoVaR that has an asymptotic chi-squared
distribution regardless of the values n and T. Monte Carlo simulations show that the robust test
statistic provides satisfactory size performance regardless of the sample size (see Table 3).
Finally, if the ∆CoVaR risk model fails the UC test, it is worth examining whether this rejection
is due to the the CoVaR of the distress state of the ﬁnancial system (stressed CoVaR) and/or of the
median state of the ﬁnancial system (median CoVaR). To identify the origin of the error, we propose
two UC sub-tests deﬁned as Hdistress
0,UC
: E (ht(α, α, θ0)) = α2 and Hmedian
0,UC
: E (ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0)) =
α (βsup −βinf). The testing procedure is then similar to that previously described.
23

5
Empirical application
In the section, we apply our UC and IND backtests to a panel of U.S. ﬁnancial institutions to assess
the validity of MES, SRISK, and ∆CoVaR. In the ﬁrst part, we describe the data and the empirical
setup, with a special focus on the multiple testing problem. In the second part, we apply our UC
and IND backtests and present our empirical results for short-term (one day) and medium-term
(one month) systemic risk forecasts.
5.1
Data description and empirical setup
Our study focuses on the same panel of large U.S. ﬁnancial institutions as that considered by Brown-
lees and Engle (2017). The dataset contains all U.S. ﬁnancial ﬁrms with a market capitalization
greater than 5 billion dollars as of the end of June 2007 and covers the period from January 3, 2000,
to December 30, 2016. The panel is unbalanced because some companies were not traded continu-
ously during the sample period (for instance, Lehman Brothers after its bankruptcy on September
15, 2008). The corresponding list of tickers and company names is reported in Appendix I. For each
ﬁrm in the panel, we compute the daily logarithmic returns and market capitalization from CRSP
data, and we consider the daily CRSP market value-weighted index return as the market return.
For the SRISK, we collect the quarterly book value of total liabilities from Compustat.
To model the systemic indicators, we use a GARCH-DCC model as in Brownlees and Engle
(2017), Engle et al. (2015), Idier et al. (2014), and Acharya et al. (2012), among others. We estimate
the parameters by maximum likelihood over the T in-sample daily observations assuming a normal
joint distribution. We consider two types of estimation schemes: (i) a rolling-window scheme and
(ii) a recursive scheme.19 In the rolling-window scheme, we estimate the parameters using the most
recent T daily observations up to the end of each month. Here, we consider a 2-year rolling window
with T = 500. In the recursive scheme, we estimate the parameters using all available information
from January 3, 2000, up to the end of each month. As a result, we observe a gradual increase in T
as we move forward in the exercise. For each company, we compute MES, SRISK, and ∆CoVaR at
the end of each month from January 2005 to December 2016. As in Brownlees and Engle (2017),
we only consider positive estimates for the SRISK because it represents a capital shortfall, and the
negative values are set to zero. Finally, we compute the systemic risk forecasts at coverage level α
equal to 5%, and the prudential capital ratio k is set to 8%.
19The Stern-NYU V-Lab website uses the recursive estimation scheme to compute the SRISK for a large set of
U.S. and European ﬁnancial ﬁrms.
24

Our empirical assessment requires testing several hypotheses simultaneously. Each month, we
apply (a maximum of) 95 backtests representing the maximum number of ﬁrms in our panel. This
framework causes a multiple testing problem.20 To that end, we use a controlling method based on
the Family Wise Error rate (FWE). It allows control for the probability of erroneously rejecting at
least one of the null hypotheses (UC or IND) among the institutions. In the sequel, we consider
the Bonferroni procedure, which provides a strong control of the FWE (Romano et al., 2008). The
method is applied as follows. Denote by γ the signiﬁcance level used for a single backtest and by
M the number of backtests to be applied simultaneously, with typically M ≤95 in our case. For
each individual backtest, i.e., each ﬁrm s = 1, . . . , M, we compute an individual p-value ps, and we
reject the null hypothesis at level γ if ps < γ/M for all backtests.
5.2
Empirical results for short-term MES and SRISK forecasts
In this section, we apply our backtests to assess the validity of MES and SRISK by considering a
forecasting time horizon of one day, i.e., h = 1. We evaluate the empirical validity of these indicators
for Bank of America (BAC), JP Morgan (JPM), American International Group (AIG), and Lehman
Brothers (LEH). Figure 1 displays the case of the UC hypothesis and Figure 2 presents the case of
the IND hypothesis. The rejection of the null hypothesis at a 5% signiﬁcance level is represented
by shaded areas. Finally, the backtests are computed with n = 250 out-of-sample observations.21
For each of these ﬁrms, Figures 1 and 2 display the one-day-ahead forecasts of the MES (blue
line) and SRISK (red line) issued from a recursive estimation window. The ﬁgures reveal that both
MES and SRISK increase during periods of ﬁnancial instability, particularly during the subprimes
crisis (2008-2009) and the European debt crisis (2011-2012). At ﬁrst glance, these measures capture
well the impact of the ﬁnancial crisis on the capital shortfalls of these four institutions. However,
this statement is less clear when one considers the empirical validity of these indicators. Figure 1
highlights a signiﬁcant number of rejections of the UC hypothesis during the 2008-2009 ﬁnancial
crisis, and as a result, one can question the validity of the unconditional coverage property during
this period. The GARCH-DCC model produces short-term MES forecasts that are associated with
cumulative violations that are not observed with the right out-of-sample frequency. Furthermore,
20We only control for the multiple testing problem in the cross-sectional dimension. We have decided to not control
for the multiple testing problem in the time series dimension, as we do not aim to provide a "global test" over the
whole period.
21For ease of presentation, we only report the backtests that are robust to estimation risk. Overall, the unadjusted
backtests display more rejections, especially for the rolling estimation scheme, as the ratio λ = n/T increases. The
corresponding results are available upon request.
25

we note for Lehman Brothers severe rejections of the unconditional coverage hypothesis just before
its bankruptcy, indicating a sharp change in its market conditions. For the rest of the sample, the
unconditional coverage hypothesis is generally not rejected, and we can conclude that MES and
SRISK forecasts disclose the true level of systemic risk.
Figure 2 looks at the empirical validity of the IND hypothesis. The Box-Pierce test statistic is
computed for a lag order m = 5. Strikingly, the cluster of rejections of the UC hypothesis observed
during the global ﬁnancial crisis is no longer experienced for the IND hypothesis. Instead, we observe
for AIG and BAC a cluster of rejections of the independence hypothesis during the European debt
crisis. The two statistics take alternative approaches to identify measurement errors that allow for
the separate detection of the two recent episodes of ﬁnancial market instability. Furthermore, we also
identify for JPM (and to a lesser extent for BAC and AIG) several rejections of the IND hypothesis
in 2016-2017, which should warn regulators of the diﬃculties encountered by MES and SRISK in
capturing the correct dynamics of the ﬁrms and market returns in recent years. In Appendix J, we
provide various robustness check exercises by considering (i) a rolling window estimation scheme
and (2) a larger out-of-sample size, with n = 500. We observe the same overall ﬁndings.
FIGURES 1-2 ABOUT HERE
To complete this study, we compute the UC and IND backtests for the full list of tickers and
report the rejection frequencies of the tests. As discussed above, we apply both tests for up to
95 ﬁrms simultaneously, and we implement a controlling method to address the multiple testing
problem. Figure 3 displays the rejection rates of the UC test (top panel) and of the IND test (bottom
panel) adjusted via the Bonferroni controlling method. We still consider a recursive estimation
scheme and n = 250 out-of-sample observations. The UC hypothesis is rejected for 20% to 40%
of the ﬁrms in the panel during the 2008-2009 subprime crisis. The GARCH-DCC model fails to
capture the average level of systemic risk in times of crisis for a large set of ﬁrms. Our results are
consistent with Danielsson et al. (2016), who show that daily risk forecasts are subject to signiﬁcant
model risk during periods of ﬁnancial distress, which are unfortunately when they are most needed.
We observe less pronounced rejections of the IND hypothesis, and the 2008-2009 ﬁnancial crisis is
no longer identiﬁed. Thus, the non-autocorrelation property of the violations is more easily satisﬁed
than the unconditional coverage in global market distress situations. However, we observe up to
20% of rejections during the European debt crisis. Finally, we also highlight a cluster of rejections
of the independence assumption at the end of the sample period, i.e., 2015-2017.
26

Finally, we display in Figure 4 the results obtained for n = 500, i.e., twice the previous out-of-
sample size. The UC and IND backtests identify the same periods of invalid risk forecasts, but the
rejections are more frequent and more important due to the large size n that increases the power
of the tests. In this situation, we observe up to 80% of rejections of the UC hypothesis during
the global ﬁnancial crisis, providing evidence of the failure of the GARCH-DCC model to deliver
valid systemic indicators for most of the ﬁnancial institutions during this period. We obtain similar
results when considering a rolling estimation scheme (see Appendix J).
FIGURES 3-4 ABOUT HERE
5.3
Empirical results for medium-term forecasts
Due to the diﬃculty for banks of immediately adjusting their capital structure, it is generally
preferable to forecast systemic risk at a longer horizon than a single day. Here, we follow Brownlees
and Engle (2017) and consider a forecasting horizon of one month, i.e., h = 22 days, for LRMES and
SRISK. Appendix K provides a detailed description of the method used to compute both measures
over a time horizon h > 1. However, the use of a longer forecasting horizon implies drastically
increasing the size of the out-of-sample dataset used to assess the unconditional coverage property.
Indeed, as we consider cumulative ﬁrm and market returns eYt+h ≡Yt+1:t+h, the computation of
only one observation of the cumulative violation process Ht(α, bθT ) requires h observations of daily
returns. Because the UC test statistic deﬁned in Equation (5) depends on the out-of-sample mean
of the violations Ht(α, bθT ), its computation requires n×h daily observations. For instance, one year
of out-of-sample observations (250 daily observations) and a forecasting horizon of 22 days allows
us to compute only 11 observations of Ht(α, bθT ). To obtain 100 observations of Ht(α, bθT ), we need
about 9 years of daily returns. As the UC test statistic converges with n, this is clearly problematic.
To address this issue, we propose a backtesting framework with overlapping blocks of data.
Figure 5 summarizes the procedure for the case of h = 22. Instead of considering the sequence of
cumulative returns {Y1:22, Y23:44, . . . } (in blue) to compute the violations, we consider the sequence
{Y1:22, Y12:33, Y23:44, . . . } for which two subsequent cumulative returns share a common component
of 11 daily returns (in blue and red). We can view this method as a rolling window procedure
applied to the out-of-sample observations that increases the number of observations available for
the out-of-sample assessment and the power of our test. Obviously, it also creates dependence across
27

the violations Ht(α, bθT ).22 Therefore, the property of independence of the cumulative joint violation
process is no longer satisﬁed, and thus we cannot apply the IND backtest in this case.
Figure 6 reports the rejection frequencies of the UC backtest for SRISK (and LRMES) calculated
for the full panel of ﬁrms.
We estimate the GARCH-DCC parameters either with a recursive
estimation (top panel) or with a rolling-window scheme (bottom panel). For each case, we assess the
empirical validity of SRISK over a time horizon h = 22 with n = 100 out-of-sample observations,
requiring 1111 daily log returns given the 11-day overlap window.23
As mentioned above, the
signiﬁcance level is adjusted via the Bonferroni controlling method. We ﬁnd that the one-month-
ahead SRISK forecasts issued by the GARCH-DCC model are generally valid. For both estimation
schemes, there are very few rejections of the UC hypothesis. Our ﬁndings diﬀer drastically from
those associated with daily forecasts, where we found large rejection frequencies.
Such a diﬀerence should be interpreted with cautious. One the one hand, it could be the sign
that the risk model performs well at longer horizons, while it is less eﬀective in capturing systemic
risk over short-term horizons. This interpretation is in line with that of Brownlees and Engle (2017)
who show that the predictive ability of SRISK is superior over longer horizons. On the other hand,
it may be indicative of the limits in the rejection capabilities of the test for longer horizons. Indeed,
the dependence induced by the overlapping scheme may decrease the power of the backtesting tests
when considering longer horizons.
Finally, we note that the rolling estimation setup is characterized by more rejections than the
recursive estimation setup. This highlights the fact that a widened sample period is more suitable
to capture the long-run dynamics.
FIGURES 5-6 ABOUT HERE
5.4
Empirical results for ∆CoVaR forecasts
This section is devoted to the empirical evaluation of the ∆CoVaR daily forecasts. We compute
the ∆CoVaR with probability levels α = 0.05, βinf = 0.25, and βsup = 0.75. As emphasized by
22If the overlapping is limited and generates only weak dependence across violations, the central limit theorem still
applies, and thus the UC test statistic remains normally distributed under the null. To correct the long-run variance
estimate, we consider an HAC estimator (Newey and West, 1987) for estimating the variance of the violation process.
Monte Carlo experiments (not reported) show that this adjusted test is well sized as soon as the overlap does not
exceed 11 trading days for h = 22.
23The joint distribution of the cumulative returns eYt+h ≡(Y1t+1:t+h, Y2t+1:t+h)′ is not available in closed form,
and thus the derivative of their cdf is more diﬃcult to compute numerically. For this reason, we do not compute the
robust statistics, and alternatively, we set T to 500 to limit the impact of estimation risk.
28

Equation (7), if the ∆CoVaR does not successfully pass the test, it is interesting to know whether
this rejection stems from the CoVaR associated with the distress state (stressed CoVaR) or with the
median state (median CoVaR). Thus, we also report the two UC sub-tests associated with each type
of CoVaR to complete the analysis and identify which component of the ∆CoVaR is misspeciﬁed.
Figure 7 reports the forecasts of ∆CoVaR for AIG, BAC, JPM, and LEH and the rejection
regions of the UC backtest in shaded areas. For each ﬁrm, we observe that the ∆CoVaR predictions
increase in 2008-2009 and in 2012, suggesting that this indicator is sensitive to systemic events and
helpful for systemic risk monitoring. However, at the same time, we observe several rejections of
the unconditional coverage hypothesis for the ∆CoVaR forecasts. In this respect, our empirical
results associated with the ∆CoVaR and with the MES coincide fairly well. Such similarities are
not surprising given the relationship between MES and CoVaR described by Equation (3).24
To characterize which component of the ∆CoVaR is misspeciﬁed, Figures 8 and 9 report the
results for separate backtests of the stressed CoVaR and the median CoVaR, respectively. We ﬁnd
that the CoVaR calculated in distress conditions generally increases more markedly during ﬁnancial
crisis than the CoVaR evaluated in median conditions. Furthermore, we observe that the rejection
periods of the ∆CoVaR identiﬁed in Figure 7 coincide with those of the stressed CoVaR, while the
median CoVaR is overall not aﬀected by misspeciﬁcation (except for AIG). Thus, the GARCH-DCC
model has noticeable problems in properly estimating the CoVaR in case of the ﬁnancial crisis, as
the corresponding frequency of out-of-sample violations is not correct.
Finally, the empirical assessment is extended to the full list of tickers. Figure 10 reports the
rejection rates of the 95 U.S. ﬁrms for the ∆CoVaR (top panel), the stressed CoVaR (middle
panel), and the median CoVaR (bottom panel). We implement the Bonferroni controlling method
and the corresponding results are based on a recursive estimation scheme and n = 250 out-of-sample
observations. Our results conﬁrm that the rejections of the risk model are generally observed for
the ∆CoVaR and for the stressed CoVaR, while the validity of the median CoVaR is generally not
rejected. Furthermore, these rejections mainly occur during the 2008-2009 ﬁnancial crisis, indicating
that the ∆CoVaR and the stressed CoVaR may be severely aﬀected by forecasting errors during
crisis periods. We obtain similar results for n = 500 with more pronounced rejections (not reported).
FIGURES 7-10 ABOUT HERE
24In the same spirit, Benoit et al. (2013) theoretically show that the higher the correlation between the returns of
the SIFIs and the market are, the more likely it is that MES and CoVaR will lead to a convergent diagnostic.
29

6
Early warning system
A by-product of our backtesting procedure is to provide an early warning system (EWS) indicator
that allows us to depict signiﬁcant changes in the stability of the ﬁnancial system. The idea is the
following: a given risk model, say a GARCH-DCC, is used to produce a systemic risk measure,
say MES or SRISK. If the model is correctly speciﬁed, we will observe the cumulative violations
with the right frequency, and we will not reject the null hypothesis of unconditional coverage. On
the contrary, if the model is misspeciﬁed and/or if the market conditions are likely to change, the
model produces invalid systemic risk measures. Let us deﬁne an adjusted systemic risk measure
produced by a potentially misspeciﬁed model but for which we do not reject the null hypothesis
of unconditional coverage. We can use the diﬀerence observed between adjusted and unadjusted
risk measures as a predictor of ﬁnancial distress. This provides useful insights for monitoring the
ﬁnancial system on a real-time basis.
In the same spirit as done for VaR or ES by Gouriéroux and Zakoïan (2013), Boucher et al. (2014)
or Lazar and Zhang (2019), we propose to adjust imperfect MES-based forecasts by considering the
mean property of the cumulative joint violation process. Formally, we deﬁne an adjusted coverage
level eα for the MES-based forecast such that the null hypothesis of unconditional coverage is valid,
i.e., E(Ht(eα, θ0)) = α/2. If the risk model is correctly speciﬁed then eα = α. We can obtain a
feasible adjusted coverage level eα as the solution of the program
eα = arg min
α∈]0,1[

¯H(α, bθT ) −α/2
2
,
where ¯H(α, bθT ) = (1/n) PT+n
t=T+1 Ht(α, bθT ) denotes the mean of the cumulative joint violation pro-
cess and α/2 represents the expected value of the cumulative joint violation process under the
null hypothesis of correct unconditional coverage. Given the deﬁnition of eα, the adjusted forecast
MES1t(eα, bθT ) is valid as we observe the corresponding cumulative joint violations with the right
frequency.
MES is appealing as an EWS because it reacts very quickly to changes in ﬁnancial
market conditions through its short-run information content. Thereafter, we devise an adjustment
for MES, but we can easily generalize this adjustment to any MES-based systemic risk measure.
Considering the diﬀerence between the adjusted and unadjusted MES, we can build an indicator
that depicts the unexpected changes in market conditions and provides early warning signals of
distress in the ﬁnancial system. Formally, this indicator, denoted EWSt (α, eα), is deﬁned as
EWSt (α, eα) = MES1t(eα, bθT ) −MES1t(α, bθT ).
30

This quantity depicts the magnitude of model misspeciﬁcation at time t expressed in terms of
systemic risk and represents the unexplained systemic risk component not anticipated by market
practitioners. In line with our notations, a positive value of EWSt (α, eα) induces an unexpected
growth in systemic risk, while a negative value indicates an unexpected decline in systemic risk.
Figure 11 reports the indicator EWSt (α, eα) for AIG, BAC, JPM, and LEH. The results are
reported using a recursive window estimation scheme and n = 250 out-of-sample observations. In
line with our previous results, we observe a large increase in EWSt (α, eα) during the 2007-2009
ﬁnancial crisis and to a lesser extent during the European debt crisis. During these periods, the
GARCH-DCC model is unable to provide valid systemic risk forecasts, and an adjustment of the
coverage rate is required to get acceptable measures. Interestingly, we also observe a sharp increase
in this indicator for Lehman Brothers at the beginning of 2007, substantially before its bankruptcy.
Finally, we perform the same exercise at an aggregated level, that is, summing our indicator over
the 95 U.S. ﬁrms in our panel. Our aim is to evaluate the ability of the EWS for the ﬁnancial system
as a whole. Figure 12 displays the aggregated EWSt (α, eα). Our results are consistent to those
observed at the ﬁrm level. There is a large increase of the indicator during the global ﬁnancial crisis.
This increase starts in mid-2007 conﬁrming the ability of our indicator to detect reversals early. The
highest value of our aggregated early warning indicator, 3.23, is observed in September 2008 and
coincides with the collapse of Lehman Brothers. Similar results are obtained when considering a
rolling window estimation scheme, and using n = 500 for the out-of-sample period.
In their recent work, Brownlees et al. (2020) evaluate the ability of CoVaR and SRISK to provide
early warning signals of distress in the ﬁnancial system. They conclude that even if CoVaR and
SRISK may be helpful for identifying systemic institutions in periods of distress, neither indicator
would be eﬃcient for predicting when the next crisis is likely to occur.
Our approach here is
complementary: by examining the number of violations experienced by a systemic risk indicator,
our aim is to detect systemic risk measurement errors caused by changes in global market conditions.
FIGURES 11-12 ABOUT HERE
7
Conclusion
This article develops a statistical procedure to backtest systemic risk measures.
The tests are
built-up in analogy with the recent backtests for ES proposed by Du and Escanciano (2017). Our
procedure is consistent with the testing strategies applied by risk managers to assess the validity of
31

market risk measures such as VaR and ES. Its implementation is easy since it only implies evaluating
a cdf of a bivariate distribution. Furthermore, it allows performing a separate test for unconditional
coverage and independence hypothesis (Christoﬀersen, 1998). Monte Carlo simulations show that
for realistic sample sizes, the tests have good ﬁnite sample properties.
Also, we pay particular
attention to the consequences of estimation risk and derive a robust version of the test statistics.
We apply our backtests to large U.S. ﬁnancial institutions considering a GARCH-DCC model
for modeling systemic risk. We ﬁnd that the short-term forecasts of systemic risk (one-day-ahead
forecasts) do not satisfy the unconditional coverage hypothesis during the 2007-2009 ﬁnancial crisis.
The risk model does not capture the true level of systemic risk on a short-term basis, and it is
not possible to accurately conclude which institution is (systemically) riskier than another, or to
determine the right level of regulatory capital for the SIFIs. In contrast, we observe for longer
forecasting horizons (one-month-ahead forecasts) that the unconditional coverage hypothesis is no
longer rejected. Our overall recommendation for users of these tools, ﬁrst and foremost academics
and regulators, is assessing ex ante the validity of the risk forecasts before providing any interpre-
tation of bank exposure to systemic risk.
As a by-product of our backtesting methodology, we develop a procedure that adjusts misleading
systemic risk predictions. The technique consists of modifying the coverage level of a MES-based risk
measure through the severity of the market distress event, such that the adjusted indicator satisﬁes
the unconditional coverage assumption. This technique has been used for market risk measures such
as ES and VaR (Boucher et al., 2014; Lazar and Zhang, 2019, etc.), but to date, it has not been
available for systemic risk measures. To illustrate the merit of our method, we introduce an EWS
indicator deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the misleading forecast and its adjusted counterpart.
Our EWS exhibits a sharp increase before the early signs of the crisis and takes its highest value
during the historic collapse of Lehman Brothers. As a forward-looking measure, it may complete
the toolbox used by academics and regulators to capture the accumulation of systemic risk and
improve the allocation eﬃciency of regulatory capital among banks.
32

TABLES
Table 1: Empirical rejection rates for backtesting MES(5%) at 5% nominal level (marginal case)
T = 250, n = 250
T = 250, n = 500
UCMES
UCC
MES
INDMES
INDC
MES
UCMES
UCC
MES
INDMES
INDC
MES
H0
0.0809
0.0499
0.0895
0.0728
0.1199
0.0553
0.0795
0.0626
H1(A1)
τ = 25%
0.0909
0.0906
0.0479
0.0467
0.1037
0.1042
0.0446
0.0484
τ = 50%
0.2010
0.1886
0.0413
0.0408
0.2460
0.2250
0.0482
0.0462
τ = 75%
0.3824
0.3516
0.0386
0.0344
0.5021
0.4436
0.0460
0.0418
H1(A2)
τ = 25%
0.2129
0.2359
0.0364
0.0353
0.2794
0.3333
0.0417
0.0384
τ = 50%
0.7161
0.7174
0.0437
0.0220
0.8862
0.8912
0.0808
0.0346
τ = 75%
0.9877
0.9830
0.1848
0.0165
0.9993
0.9984
0.4400
0.0296
H1(A3)
τ = 25%
0.1351
0.1291
0.0407
0.0391
0.1533
0.1487
0.0455
0.0440
τ = 50%
0.2676
0.2462
0.0365
0.0337
0.3497
0.3095
0.0460
0.0424
τ = 75%
0.4032
0.3590
0.0368
0.0340
0.5218
0.4409
0.0456
0.0388
T = 500, n = 250
T = 500, n = 500
UCMES
UCC
MES
INDMES
INDC
MES
UCMES
UCC
MES
INDMES
INDC
MES
H0
0.0648
0.0473
0.0891
0.0774
0.0898
0.0509
0.0755
0.0652
H1(A1)
τ = 25%
0.1014
0.1006
0.0437
0.0450
0.1111
0.1113
0.0437
0.0441
τ = 50%
0.2161
0.2079
0.0391
0.0389
0.2751
0.2617
0.0446
0.0397
τ = 75%
0.4115
0.3904
0.0394
0.0358
0.5572
0.5146
0.0452
0.0393
H1(A2)
τ = 25%
0.2372
0.2526
0.0327
0.0352
0.3481
0.3846
0.0460
0.0464
τ = 50%
0.7524
0.7556
0.0438
0.0319
0.9365
0.9411
0.0826
0.0550
τ = 75%
0.9942
0.9932
0.1774
0.0497
0.9998
0.9998
0.4554
0.1408
H1(A3)
τ = 25%
0.1379
0.1355
0.0375
0.0383
0.1814
0.1740
0.0393
0.0393
τ = 50%
0.2813
0.2648
0.0347
0.0311
0.3905
0.3637
0.0420
0.0373
τ = 75%
0.4231
0.3963
0.0367
0.0314
0.5765
0.5310
0.0447
0.0399
T = 2500, n = 250
T = 2500, n = 500
UCMES
UCC
MES
INDMES
INDC
MES
UCMES
UCC
MES
INDMES
INDC
MES
H0
0.0540
0.0503
0.0883
0.0851
0.0581
0.0498
0.0773
0.0724
H1(A1)
τ = 25%
0.0971
0.0971
0.0420
0.0402
0.1204
0.1189
0.0446
0.0447
τ = 50%
0.2169
0.2144
0.0422
0.0389
0.3122
0.3079
0.0417
0.0406
τ = 75%
0.4287
0.4239
0.0373
0.0325
0.6130
0.6018
0.0432
0.0402
H1(A2)
τ = 25%
0.2515
0.2544
0.0344
0.0346
0.4008
0.4125
0.0411
0.0443
τ = 50%
0.7961
0.7968
0.0444
0.0414
0.9656
0.9669
0.0796
0.0775
τ = 75%
0.9974
0.9973
0.1666
0.1336
1.0000
1.0000
0.4319
0.3710
H1(A3)
τ = 25%
0.1421
0.1409
0.0416
0.0402
0.1893
0.1875
0.0417
0.0427
τ = 50%
0.2874
0.2824
0.0354
0.0324
0.4357
0.4251
0.0439
0.0430
τ = 75%
0.4331
0.4281
0.0329
0.0301
0.6487
0.6367
0.0423
0.0401
Note: This table displays the Monte Carlo results associated to the marginal MES setting. UCMES and
INDMES denote the unconditional coverage test and independence test, respectively. The test statistics
robust to estimation risk are superscripted by C. For the independence test, we consider a maximum lag
order m = 5. Reported powers are sized-corrected.
33

Table 2: Empirical rejection rates for backtesting MES(5%) at 5% nominal level (conditional case)
T = 250, n = 250
T = 250, n = 500
UCMES
UCC
MES
INDMES
INDC
MES
UCMES
UCC
MES
INDMES
INDC
MES
H0
0.1080
0.0460
0.1000
0.0590
0.1500
0.0400
0.1100
0.0530
H1(B1)
τ = 25%
0.0780
0.0670
0.0400
0.0470
0.0820
0.0800
0.0400
0.0550
τ = 50%
0.1550
0.1540
0.0540
0.0480
0.1970
0.1980
0.0610
0.0630
τ = 75%
0.3090
0.2750
0.0430
0.0440
0.4470
0.3630
0.0480
0.0600
H1(B2)
τ = 25%
0.1520
0.1850
0.0320
0.0250
0.2210
0.2730
0.0270
0.0310
τ = 50%
0.6490
0.6290
0.0310
0.0110
0.8500
0.7920
0.0530
0.0120
τ = 75%
0.9750
0.9100
0.1710
0.0020
0.9970
0.9540
0.3610
0.0040
H1(B3)
τ = 25%
0.0970
0.1050
0.0410
0.0420
0.1180
0.1320
0.0390
0.0470
τ = 50%
0.2240
0.2060
0.0450
0.0490
0.3050
0.2820
0.0600
0.0620
τ = 75%
0.3190
0.2890
0.0450
0.0420
0.4600
0.3800
0.0490
0.0430
H1(B4)
0.2140
0.3170
0.4470
0.4690
0.2490
0.3710
0.5920
0.6460
T = 500, n = 250
T = 500, n = 500
UCMES
UCC
MES
INDMES
INDC
MES
UCMES
UCC
MES
INDMES
INDC
MES
H0
0.0760
0.0430
0.0940
0.0600
0.0920
0.0360
0.0900
0.0610
H1(B1)
τ = 25%
0.0810
0.0760
0.0470
0.0550
0.1050
0.1140
0.0470
0.0490
τ = 50%
0.1800
0.1680
0.0420
0.0450
0.2760
0.2790
0.0430
0.0420
τ = 75%
0.3810
0.3600
0.0530
0.0610
0.5360
0.5050
0.0570
0.0580
H1(B2)
τ = 25%
0.2250
0.2460
0.0260
0.0330
0.3260
0.3940
0.0430
0.0380
τ = 50%
0.7340
0.7160
0.0420
0.0290
0.9310
0.9290
0.0680
0.0290
τ = 75%
0.9900
0.9770
0.1750
0.0140
1.0000
0.9960
0.3640
0.0140
H1(B3)
τ = 25%
0.1090
0.1100
0.0450
0.0540
0.1630
0.1960
0.0420
0.0430
τ = 50%
0.2790
0.2670
0.0450
0.0540
0.3960
0.3880
0.0470
0.0400
τ = 75%
0.3830
0.3460
0.0320
0.0380
0.5790
0.5400
0.0500
0.0520
H1(B4)
0.2200
0.2880
0.4640
0.5030
0.2860
0.3850
0.5970
0.6390
T = 2500, n = 250
T = 2500, n = 500
UCMES
UCC
MES
INDMES
INDC
MES
UCMES
UCC
MES
INDMES
INDC
MES
H0
0.0500
0.0410
0.0890
0.0810
0.0650
0.0380
0.0680
0.0590
H1(B1)
τ = 25%
0.0980
0.1010
0.0540
0.0540
0.1000
0.0980
0.0480
0.0370
τ = 50%
0.2080
0.2080
0.0450
0.0440
0.3050
0.2990
0.0560
0.0510
τ = 75%
0.4120
0.4100
0.0330
0.0330
0.6190
0.6070
0.0590
0.0540
H1(B2)
τ = 25%
0.2700
0.2810
0.0300
0.0280
0.4020
0.4220
0.0570
0.0580
τ = 50%
0.8200
0.8220
0.0420
0.0290
0.9680
0.9690
0.0870
0.0600
τ = 75%
0.9990
0.9980
0.1620
0.0640
1.0000
0.9990
0.4380
0.2270
H1(B3)
τ = 25%
0.1380
0.1350
0.0280
0.0330
0.1940
0.2030
0.0560
0.0560
τ = 50%
0.2940
0.2910
0.0360
0.0340
0.4470
0.4460
0.0500
0.0430
τ = 75%
0.4630
0.4570
0.0380
0.0340
0.6160
0.6020
0.0520
0.0400
H1(B4)
0.2770
0.2960
0.4040
0.4200
0.2860
0.3210
0.6580
0.6660
Note: This table displays the Monte Carlo results associated to the conditional MES setting. UCMES and
INDMES denote the unconditional coverage test and independence test, respectively. The test statistics
robust to estimation risk are superscripted by C. For the independence test, we consider a maximum lag
order m = 5. Reported powers are sized-corrected.
34

Table 3: Empirical rejection rates for backtesting ∆CoVaR at 5% nominal level (marginal case)
T = 250, n = 250
T = 250, n = 500
UC∆CoV aR
UCC
∆CoV aR
UC∆CoV aR
UCC
∆CoV aR
H0
0.0766
0.0458
0.1051
0.0572
H1(A1)
τ = 25%
0.3100
0.3637
0.4881
0.4966
τ = 50%
0.9002
0.9300
0.9941
0.9928
τ = 75%
1.0000
0.9999
1.0000
1.0000
H1(A2)
τ = 25%
0.0585
0.0599
0.0555
0.0686
τ = 50%
0.0681
0.0748
0.1001
0.1292
τ = 75%
0.0938
0.1492
0.2513
0.3323
H1(A3)
τ = 25%
0.1027
0.1141
0.1449
0.1799
τ = 50%
0.2669
0.3026
0.4957
0.5299
τ = 75%
0.5644
0.5917
0.8471
0.8253
T = 500, n = 250
T = 500, n = 500
UC∆CoV aR
UCC
∆CoV aR
UC∆CoV aR
UCC
∆CoV aR
H0
0.0601
0.0396
0.0806
0.0525
H1(A1)
τ = 25%
0.3534
0.3922
0.5325
0.5341
τ = 50%
0.9336
0.9467
0.9974
0.9969
τ = 75%
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
H1(A2)
τ = 25%
0.0493
0.0501
0.0541
0.0634
τ = 50%
0.0735
0.0798
0.1180
0.1278
τ = 75%
0.1313
0.1635
0.3234
0.3444
H1(A3)
τ = 25%
0.1109
0.1210
0.1732
0.1886
τ = 50%
0.3085
0.3453
0.5299
0.5525
τ = 75%
0.5945
0.6273
0.8629
0.8613
T = 2500, n = 250
T = 2500, n = 500
UC∆CoV aR
UCC
∆CoV aR
UC∆CoV aR
UCC
∆CoV aR
H0
0.0547
0.0468
0.0642
0.0522
H1(A1)
τ = 25%
0.3769
0.3870
0.5723
0.5760
τ = 50%
0.9414
0.9421
0.9974
0.9973
τ = 75%
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
H1(A2)
τ = 25%
0.0493
0.0529
0.0612
0.0677
τ = 50%
0.0715
0.0799
0.1234
0.1319
τ = 75%
0.1336
0.1512
0.3164
0.3457
H1(A3)
τ = 25%
0.1100
0.1196
0.1864
0.1977
τ = 50%
0.3074
0.3349
0.5794
0.5933
τ = 75%
0.6112
0.6361
0.8943
0.9001
Note: This table displays the Monte Carlo results for the ∆CoVaR associated to a time-invariant setting as
deﬁned in Subsection "Backtesting marginal MES". UC∆CoV aR denotes the unconditional coverage test for
∆CoVaR. The probability levels are set to α = 0.05, βinf = 0.25, and βsup = 0.75. The test statistic robust
to estimation risk is superscripted by C. Reported powers are sized-corrected.
35

FIGURES
Figure 1: UC backtests for one-day risk forecast horizon (recursive estimation, n = 250)
Note: This ﬁgure displays the daily MES (blue line), the daily SRISK (red line) and the rejection dates
(shaded area) of the UC backtest at 5% signiﬁcance level for AIG, BAC, JPM, and LEH. We use n = 250
out-of-sample observations and a recursive scheme for parameter estimation. Reported results are robust to
estimation risk.
Figure 2: IND backtests for one-day risk forecast horizon (recursive estimation, n = 250, m = 5)
Note: This ﬁgure displays the daily MES (blue line), the daily SRISK (red line) and the rejection dates
(shaded area) of the IND backtest at 5% signiﬁcance level for AIG, BAC, JPM, and LEH. We use n = 250
out-of-sample observations and a recursive scheme for parameter estimation. We consider a maximum lag
order m = 5. Reported results are robust to estimation risk.
36

Figure 3: Rejection rates of UC and IND backtests (recursive estimation, n = 250, m = 5)
Note: This ﬁgure displays the rejection rates of the UC backtest (top panel) and IND backtest (bottom
panel) at 5% signiﬁcance level for the full list of tickers. We use n = 250 out-of-sample observations, a
recursive scheme for parameter estimation, and a Bonferroni correction for multiple testing. We consider a
maximum lag order m = 5. Reported results are robust to estimation risk.
Figure 4: Rejection rates of UC and IND backtests (recursive estimation, n = 500, m = 5)
Note: This ﬁgure displays the rejection rates of the UC backtest (top panel) and IND backtest (bottom
panel) at 5% signiﬁcance level for the full list of tickers. We use n = 500 out-of-sample observations, a
recursive scheme for parameter estimation, and a Bonferroni correction for multiple testing. We consider a
maximum lag order m = 5. Reported results are robust to estimation risk.
37

Figure 5: Overlapping procedure
Note: This ﬁgure provides an illustration of the overlapping procedure. The variables {Y1:22, Y12:33, . . .}
represent the successive out-of-sample returns considered in the test to backtesting h-day-ahead systemic
risk forecasts with h = 22.
Figure 6: Rejection rates of UC backtests (n = 100, h = 22, overlap of 11 days)
Note: This ﬁgure displays the rejection rates of the UC backtest at 5% signiﬁcance level for the full list of
tickers. We use a recursive scheme (top panel) and a rolling scheme with T = 500 observations (bottom
panel) for parameter estimation. We consider a forecasting horizon h = 22, an overlap of 11 trading days,
n = 100 out-of-sample observations, and a Bonferroni correction for multiple testing.
Figure 7: UC backtests for ∆CoVaR (recursive estimation, n = 250)
Note: This ﬁgure displays the daily ∆CoVaR (blue line) and the rejection dates (shaded area) of the UC
backtest at 5% signiﬁcance level for AIG, BAC, JPM, and LEH. We use n = 250 out-of-sample observations
and a recursive scheme for parameter estimation. Reported results are robust to estimation risk.
38

Figure 8: UC backtests for stressed CoVaR (recursive estimation, n = 250)
Note: This ﬁgure displays the daily stressed CoVaR (blue line) and the rejection dates (shaded area) of the
UC sub-test for stressed CoVaR at 5% signiﬁcance level for AIG, BAC, JPM, and LEH. We use n = 250
out-of-sample observations and a recursive scheme for parameter estimation. Reported results are robust to
estimation risk.
Figure 9: UC backtests for median CoVaR (recursive estimation, n = 250)
Note: This ﬁgure displays the daily median CoVaR (blue line) and the rejection dates (shaded area) of the
UC sub-test for median CoVaR at 5% signiﬁcance level for AIG, BAC, JPM, and LEH. We use n = 250
out-of-sample observations and a recursive scheme for parameter estimation. Reported results are robust to
estimation risk.
39

Figure 10: Rejection rates for ∆CoVaR, stressed, and median CoVaRs (recursive estimation, n =
250)
Note: This ﬁgure displays the rejection rates of the UC backtest for ∆CoVaR (top panel), the UC sub-test
for stressed CoVaR (middle panel), and the UC sub-test for median CoVaR (bottom panel) at 5%
signiﬁcance level for the full list of tickers. We use n = 250 out-of-sample observations, a recursive scheme
for parameter estimation, and a Bonferroni correction for multiple testing. Reported results are robust to
estimation risk.
Figure 11: EWSt (α, eα) for a panel of four ﬁrms (recursive estimation, n = 250)
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
AIG
EW St(α, ˜α)
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
BAC
EW St(α, ˜α)
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
JPM
EW St(α, ˜α)
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
LEH
EW St(α, ˜α)
Note: This ﬁgure displays the EWS (blue line) issued by the UC backtest at 5% signiﬁcance level for AIG,
BAC, JPM, and LEH. We use n = 250 out-of-sample observations and a recursive scheme for parameter
estimation.
40

Figure 12: Aggregated EWSt (α, eα) (recursive estimation, n = 250)
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Aggregated EW St(α, ˜α)
Note: This ﬁgure displays the aggregated EWS (blue line) issued by the UC backtest at 5% signiﬁcance
level for the full list of tickers. We use n = 250 out-of-sample observations and a recursive scheme for
parameter estimation.
41

8
Appendix
Appendix A: Assumptions
To derive the asymptotic properties of the test statistics and the robust test statistics, we introduce
the following assumptions.
A1: The vectorial process Yt = (Y1t, Y2t)′ is strictly stationary and ergodic.
A2: The marginal distribution of Y2t is given by FY2(Y2t; Ωt−1, θ0) and the truncated distribution
of Y1t given Y2t ≤V aR2t(α, θ0) is given by FY1|Y2≤V aR2t(α,θ0)(Y1t; Ωt−1, θ0).
A3: θ0 ∈Θ, with Θ a compact subspace of Rp.
A4: The estimator bθT is consistent for θ0 and is asymptotically normally distributed such that:
√
T

bθT −θ0
 d→N (0, Σ0) ,
with Σ0 a positive deﬁnite p × p matrix. Denote Vas(bθT ) = Σ0/T.
Appendix B: Cumulative joint violation process
Proof. First, let us rewrite Ht (α, θ0) in a more convenient way, through the Probability Integral
Transformation (PIT). Notice that the cumulative joint violation process Ht (α, θ0) depends on the
distribution of Yt as follows:
Ht (α, θ0)
=
1 (Y2t ≤V aR2t (α, θ0)) ×
Z 1
0
1 (Y1t ≤CoV aR1t (β, α, θ0)) dβ
=
1 (FY2 (Y2t; Ωt−1, θ0) ≤α) ×
Z 1
0
1
 FY1|Y2≤V aR2t(α;θ0) (Y1t; Ωt−1, θ0) ≤β

dβ.
Let us introduce two terms that we can interpret as "generalized" errors, namely u2t (θ0) ≡u2t =
FY2(Y2t; Ωt−1, θ0) and u12t (θ0) ≡u12t = FY1|Y2≤V aR2t(α,θ0)(Y1t; Ωt−1, θ0). Then, the cumulative joint
violation process becomes
Ht (α, θ0) = 1 (u2t ≤α)
Z 1
0
1 (u12t ≤β) dβ = 1 (u2t ≤α)
Z 1
u12t
1dβ.
Thus, we can express the process Ht (α, θ0) as a simple function of the transformed i.i.d. variables
u2t and u12t deﬁned over [0, 1], such as
Ht (α, θ0) = (1 −u12t (θ0)) × 1(u2t (θ0) ≤α).
The PIT implies that the variable u2t has a uniform U[0,1] distribution.
The binary variable
1(u2t (θ0) ≤α) has a Bernouilli distribution with a success probability equal to α. The variable
42

u12t has also a U[0,1] distribution as soon as the PIT transformation FY1|Y2≤V aR2t(α,θ0)(.; Ωt−1, θ0) is
applied to observations Y1t for which Y2t ≤V aR2t (α, θ0).25
1(u2t (θ0) ≤α)| Ωt−1 ∼Bernouilli (α) ,
(1 −u12t (θ0))| {Ωt−1, u2t (θ0) ≤α} ∼U[0,1].
The two ﬁrst conditional moments of the cumulative joint process Ht (α, θ0) are then given by
E (Ht (α, θ0)| Ωt−1)
=
Pr (u2t (θ0) ≤α| Ωt−1) × E (Ht (α, θ0)| u2t (θ0) ≤α, Ωt−1)
=
α −α E (u12t (θ0)| u2t (θ0) ≤α, Ωt−1) ,
E
 H2
t (α, θ0)
 Ωt−1

= α E
 1 −2u12t (θ0) + u2
12t (θ0)
 u2t (θ0) ≤α, Ωt−1

.
Since the conditional distribution of u12t (θ0) given Ωt−1 is U[0,1] with E (u12t (θ0)| u2t (θ0) ≤α, Ωt−1) =
1/2 and E
 u2
12t (θ0)
 u2t (θ0) ≤α, Ωt−1

= 1/3, then we get
E (Ht (α, θ0)| Ωt−1) = α
2 ,
V (Ht (α, θ0)| Ωt−1) = α
1
3 −α
4

.
Appendix C: Proof of Theorem 1
Proof.
Denote Ht (α, θ) = (1 −u12t (θ)) 1 (u2t (θ) ≤α) the cumulative violation process, with
u2t (θ) = FY2(Y2t; Ωt−1, θ) and u12t (θ) = FY1|Y2≤V aR2t(α,θ)(Y1t; Ωt−1, θ), ∀t = T + 1, ..., T + n and
∀θ ∈Θ. Under the null hypothesis H0,UC, the sequence {Ht (α, θ0) −α/2}T+n
t=T+1 is a mds with
σ2
H = V (Ht (α, θ0)) = α (1/3 −α/4). For simplicity, we assume that Ωt−1 only includes a ﬁnite
number of lagged values of Yt, i.e., there is no information truncation. We can rewrite the test
statistic UCMES as
UCMES =
1
σH
√n
T+n
X
t=T+1

Ht(α, bθT ) −α/2

.
Under Assumptions A1-A4, the continuous mapping theorem implies that
1
√n
T+n
X
t=T+1

Ht(α, bθT ) −E

Ht(α, bθT )
 Ωt−1

=
1
√n
T+n
X
t=T+1
(Ht (α, θ0) −E (Ht (α, θ0)| Ωt−1))+op (1) .
25We thank Andrew Patton for this suggestion.
43

Rearranging these terms gives
1
√n
T+n
X
t=T+1

Ht(α, bθT ) −E (Ht (α, θ0)| Ωt−1)

=
1
√n
T+n
X
t=T+1
(Ht (α, θ0) −E (Ht (α, θ0)| Ωt−1))
(8)
+ 1
√n
T+n
X
t=T+1
E

Ht(α, bθT ) −Ht (α, θ0)
 Ωt−1

+ op (1) .
The mean value theorem implies that
Ht(α, bθT ) = Ht (α, θ0) +

bθT −θ0
′ ∂Ht(α, eθ)
∂θ
,
where eθ is an intermediate point between θ0 and bθT . Equation (8) becomes
1
σH
√n
T+n
X
t=T+1

Ht(α, bθT ) −α/2

=
1
σH
√n
T+n
X
t=T+1
(Ht (α, θ0) −α/2)
+
√
λ
σH
√
T(bθT −θ0)′ 1
n
T+n
X
t=T+1
E
 
∂Ht(α, eθ)
∂θ
 Ωt−1
!
+ op (1) .
Assume that T →∞, n →∞and n/T →λ with 0 ≤λ < ∞. Under the null hypothesis H0,UC,
the ﬁrst term on the right hand converges in distribution to a standard normal distribution. The
covariance between the ﬁrst term and
√
T(bθT −θ0) is 0 as bθT depends on the in-sample observations
and the summand in the ﬁrst term is for out-of-sample observations. Under Assumption A4, eθ
p→θ0
and since ∂Ht (α, θ0) /∂θ is also a mds, we have
1
n
T+n
X
t=T+1
E
 
∂Ht(α, eθ)
∂θ
 Ωt−1
!
p→RMES = E0
∂Ht (α, θ0)
∂θ

,
where E0 (.) denotes the expectation with respect to the true distribution of Ht (α, θ0). So, we get
√
λ
σH
1
n
T+n
X
t=T+1
E
 
∂Ht(α, eθ)
∂θ
 Ωt−1
!′ √
T(bθT −θ0) d→N

0, λ
σ2
H
R′
MESΣ0RMES

,
and ﬁnally
UCMES
d→N

0, 1 + λR′
MESΣ0RMES
α (1/3 −α/4)

.
Appendix D: Bivariate normal case
Proof. Let us assume that Yt = (Y1t, Y2t)′ such that
Yt = Σ1/2
t
εt
44

where εt = (ε1t, ε2t)′ are i.i.d. N (0, I2), where I2 denotes the 2 × 2 identity matrix and Σt = Σt (θ0)
is the conditional variance-covariance matrix of Yt given Ωt−1. Denote by f (y, Σt) ≡f (y1, y2, Σt)
the pdf and by F (y, Σt) ≡F (y1, y2, Σt) the cdf of the joint distribution of Yt such that
f (y, Σt) = 1
2π |Σt|−1
2 exp

−y′Σty
2

,
F (y, Σt) = Pr ((Y1 ≤y1) ∩(Y2 ≤y2)) =
Z y1
−∞
Z y2
−∞
f (a, b, Σt) dadb.
Using the Dwyer formula (1967), we know that
∂f (y, Σt)
∂Σt
= ∂ln f (y, Σt)
∂Σt
× f (y, Σt) = −f (y, Σt)
2
 Σ−1
t
−Σ−1
t yy′Σ−1
t

,
and we get
∂F (y, Σt)
∂Σt
=
Z y1
−∞
Z y2
−∞
∂f (a, b, Σt)
∂Σt
dadb
(9)
=
−Σ−1
t
2 F (y, Σt) + 1
2
Z y1
−∞
Z y2
−∞
f (a, b, Σt) Σ−1
t ∆(a, b) Σ−1
t dadb,
with ∆(a, b) a 2 × 2 matrix equal to (a, b)′ × (a, b). If we deﬁne the conditional variance-covariance
matrix as
Σt =
 
σ2
1t
σ12t
σ12t
σ2
2t
!
,
we can decompose the matrix expression given in Equation (9) as follows
∂F (y, Σt)
∂σ2
1t
= −σ2
2t
2∆t
F (y, Σt) +
1
2∆2
t
Z y1
−∞
Z y2
−∞
 σ2
2ta2 −2σ12tσ2
2tab + σ2
12tb2
f (a, b, Σt) dadb,
∂F (y, Σt)
∂σ2
2t
= −σ2
1
2∆t
F (y, Σt) +
1
2∆2
t
Z y1
−∞
Z y2
−∞
 σ2
12ta2 −2σ12tσ2
1ab + σ2
1tb2
f (a, b, Σt) dadb,
∂F (y, Σt)
∂σ12t
=
−σ12t
2∆t
F (y, Σt)
+ 1
2∆2
t
Z y1
−∞
Z y2
−∞
 −σ2
2tσ12ta2 +
 σ2
12t + σ2
1tσ2
2t

ab −σ2
1tσ12tb2
f (a, b, Σt) dadb,
with ∆t = σ2
1tσ2
2t −σ2
12t. If θ denotes the parameters vector of the conditional variance-covariance
model (CCC, DCC, etc.), then for any θ ∈Θ, we have
∂F (y, Σt)
∂θ
=

vec
∂F (y, Σt)
∂Σt
′
vec
∂Σt
∂θ

,
where vec(.) denotes the vectorization operator of a matrix.
45

Appendix E: Consistent estimates of RMES, Rj, and γλ
We provide consistent estimates of RMES, Rj, and γλ involved in the computation of the robust
test statistics (see Theorem 1 and 3, and Appendix H).
Estimation of RMES.
As a starting point, we consider the approach that consists in evaluating
the convergence of
1
n
T+n
X
t=T+1
E


∂Ht

α, eθ

∂θ

Ωt−1

.
Deriving the cumulative joint violation process with respect to θ yields
∂Ht

α, eθ

∂θ
= −∂u12t(eθ)
∂θ
1

u2t

eθ

≤α

+

1 −u12t

eθ
 ∂1

u2t

eθ

≤α

∂θ
.
Since FY2 (V aR2t (α, θ) ; Ωt−1, θ) = α for any θ ∈Θ, we have
−∂u12t (θ)
∂θ
= −1
α
∂F(eyt (θ) ; Ωt−1, θ)
∂θ
,
with the vector eyt (θ) deﬁned as eyt (θ) = (y1t, V aR2t (α, θ))′. Taking sums and conditional expecta-
tions yield
1
n
T+n
X
t=T+1
E


∂Ht

α, eθ

∂θ

Ωt−1

= −1
αn
T+n
X
t=T+1
E
 
∂F(eyt(eθ); Ωt−1, eθ)
∂θ
1

u2t

eθ

≤α
 Ωt−1
!
+ 1
n
T+n
X
t=T+1
E



1 −u12t(eθ)
 ∂1

u2t

eθ

≤α

∂θ

Ωt−1

.
Now assume that T →∞, under assumption A4, this quantity converges to
1
n
T+n
X
t=T+1
E
 ∂Ht (α, θ0)
∂θ
 Ωt−1

= −1
αn
T+n
X
t=T+1
E
 ∂F(eyt(θ0); Ωt−1, θ0)
∂θ
1 (u2t(θ0) ≤α)
 Ωt−1

+ 1
n
T+n
X
t=T+1
E

(1 −u12t(θ0))∂1 (u2t(θ0) ≤α)
∂θ
 Ωt−1

.
(10)
Assume that n →∞, this quantity converges to
1
n
T+n
X
t=T+1
E
 ∂Ht (α, θ0)
∂θ
 Ωt−1

p→RMES = E0
∂Ht (α, θ0)
∂θ

.
(11)
We deduce from Equations (10) and (11) that
RMES = −1
αE0
∂F(eyt(θ0); Ωt−1, θ0)
∂θ
1 (u2t(θ0) ≤α)

+ E0

(1 −u12t(θ0))∂1 (u2t(θ0) ≤α)
∂θ

,
(12)
46

Note that explicit formulas for ∂F(eyt (θ0) ; Ωt−1, θ0)/∂θ in the left hand side of Equation (12) are
available for some particular bivariate distributions (see Appendix D for the normal distribution).
In any case, we can evaluate the derivative numerically. The right hand side of Equation (12) is
trickier to implement due to the presence of the indicator function 1 (u2t (θ0) ≤α) that cannot be
continuously diﬀerentiated (see Engle and Manganelli, 2004; Lambert et al., 2012, for similar issues).
We ﬁrst approximate the indicator function with a continuously diﬀerentiable function. Denote by
1⊕(u ≤τ) a continuous approximation function of 1 (u ≤τ), where u is a random variable, and τ
is a probability level,
1⊕(u ≤τ) =
Z τ
0
1
hφ
u −v
h

dv = Φ
u
h

−Φ
u −τ
h

.
with φ (.) a Gaussian kernel function, and h > 0 a bandwidth parameter. Under a suitable form
of the law of large number, we can replace the expectation operator by the sample mean, and a
consistent estimator of RMES of Equation (12) is given by
bRMES = −1
αn
T+n
X
t=T+1
∂F(eyt(bθT ); Ωt−1, bθT )
∂θ
1(u2t(bθT ) ≤α)+ 1
n
T+n
X
t=T+1
(1−u12t(bθT ))∂1⊕(u2t(bθT ) ≤α)
∂θ
,
with
∂F(eyt(bθT ); Ωt−1, bθT )
∂θ
=
Z y1t
−∞
f(u, V aR2t(α, bθT ); Ωt−1, bθT )du × ∂V aR2t(α, bθT )
∂θ
+
Z y1t
−∞
Z V aR2t(α,bθT )
−∞
∂f(u, v; Ωt−1, bθT )
∂θ
dudv,
∂1⊕(u2t(bθT ) ≤α)
∂θ
= 1
h
 
φ
 
u2t(bθT )
h
!
−φ
 
u2t(bθT ) −α
h
!!
× ∂FY2t(y2t, bθT )
∂θ
.
This approach requires to choose an appropriate value for the bandwidth parameter h for the kernel
smoothing which must ensure lim
n→∞h ≡h(n) = 0. Throughout the paper, we select a bandwidth
parameter h = n−1 which veriﬁes the above properties.
Estimation of Rj.
The sketch of the proof is similar to that of the quantity RMES. We use a
continuously diﬀerentiable function in place of the indicator function, and we compute a consistent
estimator of Rj by the law of large number. The quantity Rj is given by
Rj =
1
α (1/3 −α/4)E0

(Ht−j(α, θ0) −α/2) ∂Ht(α, θ0)
∂θ

.
Given the above equation, we need a consistent estimator of ∂Ht(α, θ0)/∂θ to estimate Rj. As it
has been done for RMES, we substitute the indicator function by the kernel approximation, and
47

estimate ∂Ht(α, θ0)/∂θ as follows
∂H⊕
t (α, bθT )
∂θ
= −1
α
∂F(eyt(bθT ); Ωt−1, bθT )
∂θ
1(u2t(bθT ) ≤α) + (1 −u12t(bθT ))∂1⊕(u2t(bθT ) ≤α)
∂θ
.
Finally, by the law of large number, we get
bRj =
1
α (1/3 −α/4)
1
n −j
T+n
X
t=T+1+j
 
(Ht−j(α, θ0) −α/2) ∂H⊕
t (α, bθT )
∂θ
!
.
Estimation of γλ. Let us rewrite ht(α, α, bθT ) and ht(α, βinf, βsup, bθT ) in terms of their generalized
errors,
ht(α, α, bθT ) = 1(u12t(α, bθT ) ≤α) × 1(u2t(bθT ) ≤α),
ht(α, βinf, βsup, bθT ) = 1(u12t(β, bθT ) ≤α) × (1(u2t(bθT ) ≤βsup) −1(u2t(bθT ) ≤βinf)),
with
u12t(α, bθT ) = FY1|Y2≤V aR2t(α,bθT )(Y1t; Ωt−1, bθT ),
u12t(β, bθT ) = FY1|V aR2t(βinf,bθT )≤Y2≤V aR2t(βsup,bθT )(Y1t; Ωt−1, bθT ).
As a key point, we need estimates of Rα
C and Rβ
C (see Appendix H for a deﬁnition). As for RMES
and Rj, the quantities Rα
C and Rβ
C depend on indicator functions, and we propose to approximate
them with kernel smoother. A consistent estimator of Rα
C is given by
bRα
C = 1
n
T+n
X
t=T+1
 ∂
∂θ1⊕(u12t(α, bθT ) ≤α) × 1(u2t(bθT ) ≤α) + ∂
∂θ1⊕(u2t(bθT ) ≤α) × 1(u12t(α, bθT ) ≤α)

,
with ∂
∂θ1⊕(u12t(α, bθT ) ≤α) = 1
h

φ

u12t(α,bθT )
h

−φ

u12t(α,bθT )−α
h

∂
∂θu12t(α, bθT ), and ∂
∂θ1⊕(u2t(bθT ) ≤
α) = 1
h

φ

u2t(bθT )
h

−φ

u2t(bθT )−α
h

∂
∂θu2t(bθT ). Similarly, a consistent estimator of Rβ
C is given by
bRβ
C = 1
n
T+n
X
t=T+1
"
∂
∂θ1⊕(u12t(β, bθT ) ≤α) ×

1(u2t(bθT ) ≤βsup) −1(u2t(bθT ) ≤βinf)

+ 1(u12t(β, bθT ) ≤α) ×
 ∂
∂θ1⊕(u2t(bθT ) ≤βsup) −∂
∂θ1⊕(u2t(bθT ) ≤βinf)
 #
,
with ∂
∂θ1⊕(u12t(β, bθT ) ≤α) = 1
h

φ

u12t(β,bθT )
h

−φ

u12t(β,bθT )−α
h

∂
∂θu12t(β, bθT ), and ∂
∂θ1⊕(u2t(bθT ) ≤
βsup) −∂
∂θ1⊕(u2t(bθT ) ≤βinf) = 1
h

φ

u2t(bθT )−βinf
h

−φ

u2t(bθT )−βsup
h

∂
∂θu2t(bθT ). Given the results
in Appendix H, we get
bγλ =

λ c
Rα
C
′bΣ0 c
Rα
C
λ c
Rα
C
′bΣ0 c
Rβ
C
λ c
Rα
C
′bΣ0 c
Rβ
C
λ c
Rβ
C
′bΣ0 c
Rβ
C

.
48

Appendix F: Proof of Theorem 3
Proof.
Deﬁne the lag-j autocovariance and autocorrelation of the cumulative joint violation
Ht(α, θ0) for j ≥0 by
ρj = γj
γ0
and
γj = Cov (Ht(α, θ0), Ht−j(α, θ0)) .
For ease of notations, we drop the dependence of γj and ρj on α and θ0. The sample counterparts
of γj and ρj based on the sample {Ht(α, θ0)}T+n
t=T+1 are
ρnj = γnj
γn0
and
γnj =
1
n −j
T+n
X
t=T+1+j
(Ht(α, θ0) −α/2) (Ht−j(α, θ0) −α/2) ,
respectively. Similarly, deﬁne bρnj and bγnj, the sample counterparts of γj and ρj based on the sample
{Ht(α, bθT )}T+n
t=T+1 with
bρnj = bγnj
bγn0
and
bγnj =
1
n −j
T+n
X
t=T+1+j

Ht(α, bθT ) −α/2
 
Ht−j(α, bθT ) −α/2

.
The sketch of the proof is similar to that used for Theorem 1. Under Assumptions A1-A4, the
continuous mapping theorem implies that
p
n −j (bρnj −E ( bρnj| Ωt−1)) =
p
n −j (ρnj −E (ρnj| Ωt−1)) + op (1) .
Rearranging these terms gives
p
n −j (bρnj −ρnj) =
p
n −jE ( bρnj −ρnj| Ωt−1) + op (1) .
(13)
The mean value theorem implies that
bρnj = ρnj +

bθT −θ0
′ ∂eρnj
∂θ ,
with eρnj the lag-j autocorrelation of the process Ht(α, eθ), where eθ is an intermediate point between
θ0 and bθT . Deﬁne λ = (n −j)/T, Equation (13) becomes
p
n −j (bρnj −ρj) =
p
n −j (ρnj −ρj) +
√
λ
√
T(bθT −θ0)′E
 ∂eρnj
∂θ
 Ωt−1

+ op (1) .
Under Assumption A4, when T →∞we have eθ
p→θ0. Then, we get for j ̸= 0
E
 ∂eρnj
∂θ
 Ωt−1

p→E
 1
γn0
∂γnj
∂θ
 Ωt−1

−E
ρnj
γn0
∂γn0
∂θ
 Ωt−1

.
49

When n →∞, γn0
p→γ0 and ρnj
p→ρj.
Since E((Ht (α, θ0) −α/2)∂Ht−j(α, θ0)/∂θ| Ωt−1) =
∂Ht−j(α, θ0)/∂θ E( (Ht (α, θ0) −α/2)| Ωt−1) = 0 for j > 0, we get
E
 ∂eρnj
∂θ
 Ωt−1

p→Rj −2ρjR0,
with
Rj = 1
γ0
E0
∂γnj
∂θ

= 1
γ0
E0

(Ht−j(α, θ0) −α/2) ∂Ht(α, θ0)
∂θ

,
and γ0 = α (1/3 −α/4). Under the null ρj = 0 for j = 1, ..., m. Therefore
√nbρnj = √nρnj +
√
λ
√
TR′
j(bθT −θ0) + op (1) .
Notice that √n (ρn1, ..., ρnm)′
d→N (0, Im) and the covariance between the ﬁrst term and
√
T(bθT −
θ0) is 0 as bθT depends on the in-sample observations and the correlation ρnj depends on the out-of-
sample observations. Denote bρ(m)
n
the vector (bρn1, ..., bρnm)′. Under Assumptions A1-A4, we have
√nbρ(m)
n
d→N (0, ∆) ,
with the ij-th element of ∆given by
∆ij = δij + λR′
iΣ0Rj,
Rj =
1
α (1/3 −α/4)E0

(Ht−j(α, θ0) −α/2) ∂Ht(α, θ0)
∂θ

,
∀(i, j) ∈{1, ..., m}2, where δij is a dummy variable that takes a value 1 if i = j and 0 otherwise. We
can write ∆= QΛQ′, where Q is an orthogonal matrix, and Λ is a diagonal matrix with elements
{πj}m
j=1. So, we have
Q′√nbρ(m)
d→N (0, Λ) .
Finally
INDMES = n
m
X
j=1
bρ2
nj
d→
m
X
j=1
πjZ2
j ,
where {πj}m
j=1 are the eigenvalues of the matrix ∆and {Zj}m
j=1 are independent standard normal
variables.
Appendix G: Backtesting MES-based risk measure
Proof. Consider a MES-based risk measure expressed as
RM1t (h) =
Z 1
0
gt(CoeV aR1t+h (β, α, θ0) , Xt)dβ,
50

with
Pr

eY1t+h ≤CoeV aR1t+h(β, α, θ0)|eY2t+h ≤eV aR2t+h(α, θ0); Ωt

= β.
In order to backtest the CoVaR and the MES, we deﬁne a joint violation of the (β, α)-CoVaR of
eY1t+h and the α-VaR of eY2t+h. This violation process is represented by the following binary variable
ht(α, β, θ0) = 1(eY1t+h ≤CoeV aR1t (β, α, θ0)) × 1(eY2t+h ≤eV aR2t+h (α, θ0)).
Denote by ht(α, β, θ0, Xt) the violation process associated to gt(CoeV aR1t+h (β, α, θ0) , Xt) and used
to backtest the MES-based risk measure, for instance the SRISK. If the function gt (.) is monotonic
decreasing with the MES (as it is the case for the SRISK given our sign convention for the MES),
we have
ht(α, β, θ0, Xt) = 1(gt(eY1t+h, Xt) ≥gt(CoeV aR1t+h (β, α, θ0) , Xt)) × 1(eY2t+h ≤eV aR2t+h (α, θ0)).
The violation processes ht(α, β, θ0) and ht(α, β, θ0, Xt) are identical, in the sense that they take
a value 1 at the same date. As a consequence, the cumulative joint violation processes used for
backtesting the MES and a MES-based risk measure are identical.
Ht (α, θ0, Xt) =
Z 1
0
ht(α, β, θ0, Xt)dβ =
Z 1
0
ht(α, β, θ0)dβ = Ht (α, θ0) .
The unconditional coverage test for a MES-based risk measure, say SRISK, corresponds to the null
hypothesis
HSRISK
0,UC
: E (Ht (α, θ0, Xt)) = α/2.
The corresponding test statistic UCSRISK is given by
UCSRISK =
√n

¯H(α, bθT , X) −α/2

p
α (1/3 −α/4)
,
with ¯H(α, bθT , X) the out-of-sample mean of Ht(α, bθT , Xt). As Ht(α, bθT , Xt) = Ht(α, bθT ), ∀t, this
statistic is equivalent to that used for backtesting the MES
UCMES =
√n

¯H(α, bθT ) −α/2

p
α (1/3 −α/4)
.
Appendix H: Backtesting ∆CoVaR
Proof.
The ﬁrst step of the proof consists in evaluating the two ﬁrst conditional moments of
ht (α, βinf, βsup, θ0). The Bayes theorem implies that
E (ht (α, α, θ0) |Ωt−1) = α2,
51

E (ht (α, βinf, βsup, θ0) |Ωt−1) = α(βsup −βinf),
leading to
E (ht (α, βinf, βsup, θ0) |Ωt−1) ≡µ =
 
α2
α(βsup −βinf)
!
.
(14)
According to Equation (14), ht (α, α, θ0) and ht (α, βinf, βsup, θ0) are Bernouilli distributed with
conditional success probabilities α2 and α(βsup −βinf), and conditional variances given by
V (ht (α, α, θ0) |Ωt−1) = α2  1 −α2
,
V (ht (α, βinf, βsup, θ0) |Ωt−1) = α ((βsup −βinf) (1 −α (βsup −βinf)) .
In order to compute the statistic UC∆CoV aR, we have to determine the general expression of the con-
ditional variance-covariance matrix of ht (α, βinf, βsup, θ0), and in particular, we need the conditional
covariance between the two violations,
Cov (ht(α, α, θ0), ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0)|Ωt−1) = E (ht (α, α, θ0) ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0)|Ωt−1)
−E (ht(α, α, θ0)|Ωt−1) E (ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0)|Ωt−1) .
(15)
Since α < βinf, Y2t ≤V aR2t (α, θ0) and V aR2t (βinf, θ0) ≤Y2t ≤V aR2t (βsup, θ0) are incompatible
events, we get ht(α, α, θ0) × ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0) = 0 implying that the ﬁrst expectation in Equation
(15) is 0. We thus have
Cov (ht(α, α, θ0), ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0)|Ωt−1) = −α3(βsup −βinf),
and the conditional variance-covariance matrix of ht (α, βinf, βsup, θ0) is given by
V (ht (α, βinf, βsup, θ0) |Ωt−1) ≡γ =
 
α2(1 −α2)
−α3(βsup −βinf)
−α3(βsup −βinf)
α(βsup −βinf)(1 −α(βsup −βinf))
!
.
With the two ﬁrst conditional moments of ht (α, βinf, βsup, θ0) in hand, we now turn to the identiﬁ-
cation of its asymptotic distribution. Equation (14) implies that the sequence {ht (α, βinf, βsup, θ0)−
µ}∞
t=1 is a mds for any (α, βinf, βsup) ∈[0, 1]3 with
E (ht (α, βinf, βsup, θ0) −µ|Ωt−1) = 0.
As a consequence, the Lindeberg-Levy central limit theorem implies that
√n
 ¯h (α, βinf, βsup, θ0) −µ
 d→N (0, γ) ,
(16)
52

with ¯h (α, βinf, βsup, θ0) = 1/n PT+n
t=T+1 ht (α, βinf, βsup, θ0). From Equation (16), we get immediately
that
UC∆CoV aR = n
 ¯h (α, βinf, βsup, θ0) −µ
′ γ−1(¯h (α, βinf, βsup, θ0) −µ) d→χ(2).
We now turn to the case of the feasible test statistic UC∆CoV aR ≡UC∆CoV aR(bθT ) and its asymptotic
distribution. The sketch of the proof is similar to that of Theorem 1. First, rewrite
√n(¯h(α, βinf, βsup, bθT ) −µ) =
1
√n
T+n
X
t=T+1
(ht(α, βinf, βsup, bθT ) −E(ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0)|Ωt−1)).
The continuous mapping theorem implies that
1
√n
T+n
X
t=T+1
(ht(α, βinf, βsup, bθT ) −E(ht(α, βinf, βsup, bθT ))|Ωt−1) =
1
√n
T+n
X
t=T+1
(ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0) −E(ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0)|Ωt−1)) + op(1).
Rearranging these terms gives
1
√n
T+n
X
t=T+1
(ht(α, βinf, βsup, bθT ) −E(ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0)|Ωt−1)) =
1
√n
T+n
X
t=T+1
(ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0) −E(ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0)|Ωt−1))
+ 1
√n
T+n
X
t=T+1
E(ht(α, βinf, βsup, bθT ) −ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0)|Ωt−1) + op(1).
(17)
The mean value theorem implies that
ht(α, βinf, βsup, bθT ) ≡
 
ht(α, α, bθT )
ht(α, βinf, βsup, bθT )
!
=
 
ht(α, α, θ0)
ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0)
!
+



bθT −θ0
′ ∂ht(α,α,˜θ)
∂θ

bθT −θ0
′ ∂ht(α,βinf,βsup,˜θ)
∂θ

,
where ˜θ is an intermediate point between θ0 and bθT . Equation (17) becomes
1
√n
T+n
X
t=T+1
(ht(α, βinf, βsup, bθT )−E(ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0)|Ωt−1)) =
1
√n
T+n
X
t=T+1
(ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0) −µ)
+


√
λ
√
T

bθT −θ0
′ 1
n
PT+n
t=T+1 E

∂ht(α,α,˜θ)
∂θ
|Ωt−1

√
λ
√
T

bθT −θ0
′ 1
n
PT+n
t=T+1 E

∂ht(α,βinf,βsup,˜θ)
∂θ
|Ωt−1


+ op(1).
(18)
53

Assume that T →∞, n →∞and n/T →λ with 0 ≤λ < ∞. Under the null hypothesis H0,UC, the
ﬁrst term of Equation (18) converges in distribution to a bivariate normal distribution with mean 0
and variance γ. The covariance between the ﬁrst term and
√
T

bθT −θ0

is 0 as bθT depends on the
in-sample observations and the summand in the ﬁrst term is for out-of-sample observations. Under
Assumption A4, ˜θ →θ0, and since the two derivatives ∂ht(α, α, θ0)/∂θ and ∂ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0)/∂θ
are also mds, we have
1
n
T+n
X
t=T+1
E
 
∂ht(α, α, ˜θ)
∂θ
|Ωt−1
!
p→Rα
C = E0
∂ht(α, α, θ0)
∂θ

,
1
n
T+n
X
t=T+1
E
 
∂ht(α, βinf, βsup, ˜θ)
∂θ
|Ωt−1
!
p→Rβ
C = E0
∂ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0)
∂θ

.
where E0(.) denotes the expectation with respect to the true distribution of ht(α, α, θ0) and ht(α, βinf, βsup, θ0).
As a consequence, we have


√
λ
√
T

bθT −θ0
′ 1
n
PT+n
t=T+1 E

∂ht(α,α,˜θ)
∂θ
|Ωt−1

√
λ
√
T

bθT −θ0
′ 1
n
PT+n
t=T+1 E

∂ht(α,βinf,βsup,˜θ)
∂θ
|Ωt−1


d→N (0, γλ) ,
where γλ =
 
λRα
C
′Σ0Rα
C
λRα
C
′Σ0Rβ
C
λRα
C
′Σ0Rβ
C
λRβ
C
′Σ0Rβ
C
!
, and we can deduce that
√n

¯h

α, βinf, βsup, bθT

−µ
 d→N (0, γ + γλ) .
The feasible test statistic UCC
∆CoV aR that takes into account the presence of estimation risk is then
given by
UCC
∆CoV aR = n

¯h

α, βinf, βsup, bθT

−µ
′
(γ + bγλ)−1 (¯h

α, βinf, βsup, bθT

−µ),
where bγλ denotes a consistent estimator of γλ (see Appendix E). The robust statistic UCC
∆CoV aR
converges to a chi-square distribution with two degrees of freedom whatever the value of λ, and is
thus free of estimation risk.
54

Appendix I: List of tickers
Tickers and company names
AET
Aetna
HBAN
Huntington Bancshares
AFL
Aﬂac
ICE
Intercontinental Exchange
ALL
Allstate Corp
JNS
Janus Capital
ABK
Ambac Financial Group
JPM
JP Morgan Chase
ACAS
American Capital
KEY
Keycorp
AXP
American Express
LM
Legg Mason
AIG
American International Group
LEH
Lehman Brothers
AMP
Ameriprise ﬁnancial
LNC
Lincoln National
AMTD
TD Ameritrade
L
Loews
ANTM
Anthem
MI
Marshall & Ilsley
AON
Aon Corp
MMC
Marsh & McLennan
AIZ
Assurant
MA
Mastercard
MTB
M & T Bank Corp
MBI
MBIA
BAC
Bank of America
MER
Merrill Lynch
BK
Bank of New York Mellon
MET
Metlife
BBT
BB&T
MS
Morgan Stanley
BSC
Bear Stearns
NCC
National City Corp
WRB
W.R. Berkley Corp
NYCB
New York Community Bancorp
BRK
Berkshire Hathaway
NTRS
Northern Trust
BLK
Blackrock
NMX
Nymex Holdings
COF
Capital One Financial
NYX
NYSE Euronext
BOT
CBOT Holdings
PBCT
Peoples United Financial
CBG
CBRE Group
PNC
PNC Financial Services
CB
Chubb Corp
PFG
Principal Financial Group
CI
CIGNA Corp
PGR
Progressive
CINF
Cincinnati Financial Corp
PRU
Prudential Financial
CIT
CIT Group
RF
Regions Financial
C
Citigroup
SAF
Safeco
CME
CME Group
SCHW
Schwab Charles
CNA
CNA Financial Corp
SEIC
SEI Investments Company
CMA
Comerica
SLM
SLM Corp
CBH
Commerce Bancorp
SOV
Sovereign Bancorp
CBSS
Compass Bancshares
STT
State Street
CFC
Countrywide Financial
STI
Suntrust Banks
CVH
Coventry Health Care
SNV
Synovus Financial
AGE
A.G. Edwards
TMK
Torchmark
ETFC
E-Trade Financial
TRV
Travelers
FNM
Fannie Mae
TROW
T. Rowe Price
FNF
Fidelity National Financial
UB
Unionbancal Corp
FITB
Fifth Third Bancorp
UNH
Unitedhealth Group
BEN
Franklin Resources
UNM
Unum Group
FRE
Freddie Mac
USB
US Bancorp
GNW
Genworth Financial
WB
Wachovia
GS
Goldman Sachs
WM
Washington Mutual
HIG
Hartford Financial Group
WFC
Wells Fargo & Co
HNT
Health Net
WU
Western Union
HCBK
Hudson City Bancorp
ZION
Zion
HUM
Humana
55

Appendix J: Robustness checks for backtesting short-term risk measures
Figure 13: UC backtests for one-day risk forecast horizon (recursive estimation, n = 500)
Note: This ﬁgure displays the daily MES (blue line), the daily SRISK (red line) and the rejection dates
(shaded area) of the UC backtest at 5% signiﬁcance level for AIG, BAC, JPM, and LEH. We use n = 500
out-of-sample observations and a recursive scheme for parameter estimation. Reported results are robust to
estimation risk.
Figure 14: UC backtests for one-day risk forecast horizon (rolling estimation, T = 500, n = 250)
Note: This ﬁgure displays the daily MES (blue line), the daily SRISK (red line) and the rejection dates
(shaded area) of the UC backtest at 5% signiﬁcance level for AIG, BAC, JPM, and LEH. We use n = 250
out-of-sample observations and a rolling scheme with T = 500 observations for parameter estimation.
Reported results are robust to estimation risk.
56

Figure 15: UC backtests for one-day risk forecast horizon (rolling estimation, T = 500, n = 500)
Note: This ﬁgure displays the daily MES (blue line), the daily SRISK (red line) and the rejection dates
(shaded area) of the UC backtest at 5% signiﬁcance level for AIG, BAC, JPM, and LEH. We use n = 500
out-of-sample observations and a rolling scheme with T = 500 observations for parameter estimation.
Reported results are robust to estimation risk.
Figure 16: IND backtests for one-day risk forecast horizon (recursive estimation, n = 500, m = 5)
Note: This ﬁgure displays the daily MES (blue line), the daily SRISK (red line) and the rejection dates
(shaded area) of the IND backtest at 5% signiﬁcance level for AIG, BAC, JPM, and LEH. We use n = 500
out-of-sample observations and a recursive scheme for parameter estimation. We consider a maximum lag
order m = 5. Reported results are robust to estimation risk.
57

Figure 17: IND backtests for one-day risk forecast horizon (rolling estimation, T = 500, n = 250,
m = 5)
Note: This ﬁgure displays the daily MES (blue line), the daily SRISK (red line) and the rejection dates
(shaded area) of the IND backtest at 5% signiﬁcance level for AIG, BAC, JPM, and LEH. We use n = 250
out-of-sample observations and a rolling scheme with T = 500 observations for parameter estimation. We
consider a maximum lag order m = 5. Reported results are robust to estimation risk.
Figure 18: IND backtests for one-day risk forecast horizon (rolling estimation, T = 500, n = 500,
m = 5)
Note: This ﬁgure displays the daily MES (blue line), the daily SRISK (red line) and the rejection dates
(shaded area) of the IND backtest at 5% signiﬁcance level for AIG, BAC, JPM, and LEH. We use n = 500
out-of-sample observations and a rolling scheme with T = 500 observations for parameter estimation. We
consider a maximum lag order m = 5. Reported results are robust to estimation risk.
58

Figure 19: Rejection rates of UC and IND backtests (rolling estimation, T = 500, n = 250, m = 5)
Note: This ﬁgure displays the rejection rates of the UC backtest (top panel) and IND backtest (bottom
panel) at 5% signiﬁcance level for the full list of tickers. We use n = 250 out-of-sample observations, a
rolling scheme with T = 500 observations for parameter estimation, and a Bonferroni correction for
multiple testing. We consider a maximum lag order m = 5. Reported results are robust to estimation risk.
Figure 20: Rejection rates of UC and IND backtests (rolling estimation, T = 500, n = 500, m = 5)
Note: This ﬁgure displays the rejection rates of the UC backtest (top panel) and IND backtest (bottom
panel) at 5% signiﬁcance level for the full list of tickers. We use n = 500 out-of-sample observations, a
rolling scheme with T = 500 observations for parameter estimation, and a Bonferroni correction for
multiple testing. We consider a maximum lag order m = 5. Reported results are robust to estimation risk.
Appendix K: Computation of LRMES
In this section, we describe the methodology used to compute the MES, hereafter Long-Run MES
(LRMES), and SRISK over an horizon h > 1. The computation approach diﬀer from that used for
the daily predictions, since the capital shortfall is calculated from the multi-period arithmetic returns
59

instead of the arithmetic daily returns. The technique is thus closely related to that proposed by
Brownlees and Engle (2017). Because we do not have closed form distribution for the multi-period
arithmetic returns, we simulate daily log returns for which the distribution is known, and then
aggregate these pseudo daily realizations to obtain its multi-period counterpart. The algorithm is
as follows.
1. Randomly draw S × h pairs {zs
1T+t, zs
2T+t}T+h
t=T+1 for s = 1, . . . , S of daily ﬁrm and market
returns standardized innovations from the normal distribution. The number of pair is set to
S = 500000 in the empirical application.
2. Build S paths of the couple {Y s
1T+t, Y s
2T+t}T+h
t=T+1 given the information known at time T using
the simulated standardized innovations.
3. Apply the formula exp
PT+h
t=T+1 Y s
1T+t

−1, and exp
PT+h
t=T+1 Y s
2T+t

−1, for s = 1, . . . , S
to obtain the pseudo multi-period arithmetic returns {Rs
1T+1:T+h, Rs
2T+1:T+h}S
s=1.
4. Compute the LRMES as the Monte Carlo average of the multi-period arithmetic returns as
follows
LRMES1T+1:T+h(α, c
θT ) = −
PS
s=1 Rs
1T+1:T+h1

Rs
2T+1:T+h ≤V aRR2T +1:T +h

α, c
θT )

PS
s=1 1

Rs
2T+1:T+h ≤V aRR2T +1:T +h

α, c
θT )

,
where V aRR2T +1:T +h

α, c
θT

is the multi-period market decline, and is deﬁned as
V aRR2T +1:T +h

α, c
θT

= percentile
 {Rs
2T+1:T+h}S
s=1, 100α

.
5. Build the h step ahead SRISK forecasts as follows
SRISK1T+1:T+h(α, c
θT ) = kL1T −(1 −k)W1T

1 + LRMES1T+1:T+h(α, c
θT )

,
where k is the value of the prudential capital ratio, L1T is the book value of debt of the ﬁrm
at time T, and W1T is the market value of the ﬁrm at time T. As for the daily case, we set α
to 5%.
Overall, our simulated SRISK forecasts (not reported) are similar to those reported by Brownlees
and Engle (2017) even if we consider a conditional multivariate normal distribution, and not a
semi-parametric GARH-DCC model estimated by QML.
60

References
Acharya, V., Engle, R., and Pierret, D. (2014). Testing macroprudential stress tests: The risk of
regulatory risk weights. Journal of Monetary Economics, 65:36–53.
Acharya, V., Engle, R., and Richardson, M. (2012). Capital shortfall: A new approach to ranking
and regulating systemic risks. American Economic Review, 102(3):59–64.
Acharya, V., Pedersen, L., Philippon, T., and Richardson, M. (2017). Measuring systemic risk.
Review of Financial Studies, 30(1):2–47.
Acharya, V., Pierret, D., and Steﬀen, S. (2016a). Capital shortfalls of european banks since the
start of the banking union. New York: Stern School of Business, New York University.
Acharya, V., Pierret, D., and Steﬀen, S. (2016b). High time to tell european banks: No dividends.
New York: Stern School of Business, New York University.
Adrian, T. and Brunnermeier, M. (2016). Covar. American Economic Review, 106(7):1705–1741.
Arnold, B., Beaver, R., Groeneveld, R., and Meeker, W. (1993). The nontruncated marginal of a
truncated bivariate normal distribution. Psychometrika, 58(3):471–488.
Artzner, P., Delbaen, F., Eber, J.-M., and Heath, D. (1999). Coherent measures of risk. Mathemat-
ical Finance, 9(3):203–228.
Banulescu, G.-D. and Dumitrescu, E.-I. (2015). Which are the siﬁs? a component expected shortfall
approach to systemic risk. Journal of Banking & Finance, 50:575–588.
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2014). The g-sib assessment methodology – score calcu-
lation. Report, November 6.
Benoit, S., Colletaz, G., Hurlin, C., and Pérignon, C. (2013). A theoretical and empirical comparison
of systemic risk measures. SSRN working paper.
Benoit, S., Colliard, J.-E., Hurlin, C., and Pérignon, C. (2017). Where the risks lie: A survey on
systemic risk. Review of Finance, 21(1):109–152.
Benoit, S., Hurlin, C., and Pérignon, C. (2019). Pitfalls in systemic-risk scoring. Forthcoming in
Journal of Financial Intermediation.
61

Berkowitz, J., Christoﬀersen, P., and Pelletier, D. (2011). Evaluating value-at-risk models with
desk-level data. Management Science, 57(12):2213–2227.
Billio, M., Getmansky, M., Lo, A., and Pelizzon, L. (2012). Econometric measures of connected-
ness and systemic risk in the ﬁnance and insurance sectors. Journal of Financial Economics,
104(3):535–559.
Bisias, D., Flood, M., Lo, A., and Valavanis, S. (2012). A survey of systemic risk analytics. Annual
Review of Financial Economics, 4(1):255–296.
Bontemps, C. and Meddahi, N. (2005).
Measuring systemic risk.
Journal of Econometrics,
124(1):149–186.
Boucher, C., Daníelsson, J., Kouontchou, P., and Maillet, B. (2014). Risk models-at-risk. Journal
of Banking & Finance, 44:72–92.
Box, G. and Pierce, D. (1970). Distribution of residual autocorrelations in autoregressive-integrated
moving average time series models. Journal of the American statistical Association, 65(332):1509–
1526.
Brownlees, C., Chabot, B., Ghysels, E., and Kurz, C. (2020). Back to the future: backtesting
systemic risk measures during historical bank runs and the great depression. Journal of Banking
& Finance, 113.
Brownlees, C. and Engle, R. (2017). Srisk: A conditional capital shortfall measure of systemic risk.
Review of Financial Studies, 30(1):48–79.
Chen, C., Iyengar, G., and Moallemi, C. (2013). An axiomatic approach to systemic risk. Manage-
ment Science, 59(6):1373–1388.
Christoﬀersen, P. (1998). Evaluating interval forecasts. International Economic Review, 39(4):841–
862.
Christoﬀersen, P. (2010). Backtesting. Encyclopedia of Quantitative Finance, R. Cont (ed). John
Wiley and Sons.
Colletaz, G., Hurlin, C., and Pérignon, C. (2013). The risk map: A new tool for validating risk
models. Journal of Banking & Finance, 37(10):3843–3854.
62

Couperier, O. and Leymarie, J. (2018). Backtesting expected shortfall via multi-quantile regression.
Working paper.
Danielsson, J., James, K. R., Valenzuela, M., and Zer, I. (2016). Model risk of risk models. Journal
of Financial Stability, 23:79 – 91.
De Bandt, O. and Hartmann, P. (2002). Systemic risk: A survey, in ﬁnancial crisis, contagion and
the lender of last resort: A book of readings. ed. by C. Goodhart, and G. Illing. Oxford University
Press.
Du, Z. and Escanciano, J. C. (2017).
Backtesting expected shortfall: accounting for tail risk.
Management Science, 63(4):901–1269.
Dwyer, P. (1967). Some applications of matrix derivatives in multivariate analysis. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 62(318):607–625.
Engle, R., Jondeau, E., and Rockinger, M. (2015). Systemic risk in europe. Review of Finance,
19(1):145–190.
Engle, R. and Manganelli, S. (2004). Caviar: Conditional autoregressive value at risk by regression
quantiles. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 22(4):367–381.
Escanciano, J. C. and Olmo, J. (2010). Backtesting parametric value-at-risk with estimation risk.
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 28(1):36–51.
European Banking Authority (2014). Results of 2014 eu-wide stress test. Report, October 26.
Ferreiro, J. (2018).
A component delta conditional expected shortfall measure in the ﬁnancial
systemic risk framework. Working paper.
Financial Times (2014). Alternative stress tests ﬁnd french banks are weakest in europe. October
27.
Francq, C. and Zakoïan, J.-M. (2016). Looking for eﬃcient qml estimation of conditional vars at
multiple risk levels. Annals of Economics and Statistics, (123-124):9–28.
Giglio, S., Kelly, B., and Pruitt, S. (2016). Systemic risk and the macroeconomy: An empirical
evaluation. Journal of Financial Economics, 119(3):457–471.
63

Girardi, G. and Ergün, T. (2013). Systemic risk measurement: Multivariate garch estimation of
covar. Journal of Banking & Finance, 37(8):3169–3180.
Glosten, L., Jagannathan, R., and Runkle, D. (1993). On the relation between the expected value
and the volatility of the nominal excess return on stocks. Journal of Finance, 48(5):1779–1801.
Gouriéroux, C. and Zakoïan, J.-M. (2013).
Estimation-adjusted var.
Econometric Theory,
29(4):735–770.
Ho, H., Lin, T.-I., Chen, H.-Y., and Wang, W.-L. (2012). Some results on the truncated multivariate
t distribution. Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 142(1):25–40.
Horrace, W. (2005). Some results on the multivariate truncated normal distribution. Journal of
Multivariate Analysis, 94(1):209–221.
Hué, S., Lucotte, Y., and Tokpavi, S. (2019). Measuring network systemic risk contributions: A
leave-one-out approach. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 100:86–114.
Hurlin, C. and Tokpavi, S. (2006). Backesting value-at-risk accuracy: A simple new test. Journal
of Risk, 9(2):19–37.
Idier, J., Lamé, G., and Mésonnier, J.-S. (2014). How useful is the marginal expected shortfall for
the measurement of systemic exposure? a practical assessment. Journal of Banking & Finance,
47:134–146.
Jokivuolle, E., Tunaru, R., and Vioto, D. (2018). Testing the systemic risk diﬀerences in banks.
Bank of Finland Discussion Paper.
Jorion, P. (2007). Value-at-risk. McGraw-Hill, Third edition.
Kratz, M., Lok, Y., and McNeil, A. (2018). Multinomial var backtests: A simple implicit approach
to backtesting expected shortfall. Journal of Banking & Finance, 88:393–407.
Kupiec, P. (1995). Techniques for verifying the accuracy of risk measurement models. Journal of
Derivatives, 3(2):73–84.
Lambert, P., Laurent, S., and Veredas, D. (2012). Testing conditional asymmetry: A residual-based
approach. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 36(8):1229–1247.
64

Lazar, E. and Zhang, N. (2019). Model risk of expected shortfall. Journal of Banking & Finance,
105:74–93.
Leccadito, A., Boﬀelli, S., and Urga, G. (2014). Evaluating the accuracy of value-at-risk forecasts:
New multilevel tests. International Journal of Forecasting, 30(2):206–216.
Newey, W. and West, K. (1987). A simple, positive semi-deﬁnite, heteroskedasticity and autocor-
relation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica, 55(3):703–708.
Nieto, M. and Ruiz, E. (2016). Frontiers in var forecasting and backtesting. International Journal
of Forecasting, 32(2):475–501.
Noyer, C. (2014). Présentation des résultats de l’evaluation complète des bilans bancaires. ACPR
Banque de France, October 26.
Pérignon, C. and Smith, D. (2008). A new approach to comparing var estimation methods. Journal
of Derivatives, 16(2):54–66.
Philippon, T., Pessarossi, P., and Camara, B. (2017). Backtesting european stress tests. NBER
working paper.
Pierret, D. and Steﬀen, S. (2018). Capital shortfalls at european banks after the 2018 stress test.
AllNews, November 7.
Rabemananjara, R. and Zakoian, J.-M. (1993). Threshold arch models and asymmetries in volatility.
Journal of Applied Econometrics, 8(1):31–49.
Romano, J., Shaikh, A., and Wolf, M. (2008). Formalized data snooping based on generalized error
rates. Econometric Theory, 24(2):404–447.
Scaillet, O. (2004). Nonparametric estimation and sensitivity analysis of expected shortfall. Math-
ematical Finance, 14(1):115–129.
Tavolaro, S. and Visnovsky, F. (2014). What is the information content of the srisk measure as a
supervisory tool? ACPR Banque de France, Economics and Financial Debates.
Wied, D., Weiß, G., and Ziggel, D. (2016). Evaluating value-at-risk forecasts: A new set of multi-
variate backtests. Journal of Banking & Finance, 72:121–132.
65

Wu,
D.
(2018).
Systemic
risk
and
bank
failure.
SSRN
working
paper,
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2492883.
66