TITLE: Demand Pooling in Omnichannel Operations
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2021.3964
---

TSpace Research Repository 
tspace.library.utoronto.ca 
Demand Pooling in Omnichannel Operations 
Ming Hu, Xiaolin Xu, Weili Xue & Yi Yang 
Version Post-print or accepted manuscript. 
Citation 
(published version) 
Hu, M., Xu, X., Xue, W., & Yang, Y. (2022). Demand pooling in 
omnichannel operations. Management Science, 68(2), 883-894. 
Copyright / License Copyright © 2021, INFORMS 
DOI https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2021.3964 
Publisher’s Statement This is an accepted manuscript of an article published by INFORMS in 
Management Science. 
How to cite TSpace items 
Always cite the published version, so the author(s) will receive recognition through services that track 
citation counts, e.g. Scopus. If you need to cite the page number of the author manuscript from TSpace 
because you cannot access the published version, then cite the TSpace version in addition to the published 
version using the permanent URI (handle) found on the record page. 
This article was made openly accessible by U of T Faculty. 
Please tell us how this access benefits you. Your story matters. 

Demand Pooling in Omnichannel Operations
Ming Hu
Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S3E6, Canada, ming.hu@rotman.utoronto.ca
Xiaolin Xu
School of Business, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China, xuxl@nju.edu.cn
Weili Xue
School of Economics and Management, Southeast University, Nanjing 210093, China, wlxue1981@gmail.com
Yi Yang
School of Management, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China, yangyizju@zju.edu.cn
Forthcoming at Management Science
Both traditional retailers and e-tailers have been implementing omnichannel strategies such as buy-online
pickup-at-store (BOPS). We build a stylized model to investigate the impact of the BOPS initiative on
store operations from an inventory perspective. We consider two segments of customers, namely, store-only
customers who only make a purchase oﬄine, and omni-customers who strategically choose between oﬄine
and online channels. We show that BOPS may either beneﬁt or hurt the retailer depending on two
fundamental system primitives, the store visiting cost and the online waiting cost. If the online waiting cost
is relatively low and the store visiting cost is even lower, BOPS can induce omni-customers to migrate from
online buying to BOPS, leading to demand pooling at the bricks and mortar store. Such demand pooling
provides two beneﬁts for the retailer: it reduces the overstocking cost, and after inventory re-optimization,
it results in a higher ﬁll rate at the B&M store, which beneﬁts existing customers and potentially attracts
more customers to the store. In contrast, if both the store visiting cost and the online waiting cost are
relatively high, with the latter even higher, introducing BOPS can result in demand depooling due to the
migration of the omni-customers from oﬄine purchasing to BOPS. This leads to a lower ﬁll rate after
inventory re-optimization, likely due to a lower proﬁt margin under BOPS, which turns away store-only
customers and hurts the retailer.
Funding: M. Hu was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada
[Grant RGPIN-2015-06757]. X. Xu thanks the ﬁnancial support by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China [Grant 71871114]. W. Xue is grateful for the ﬁnancial support by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China [Grant 71822103]. Y. Yang thanks the ﬁnancial support by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China [Grants 71871198, 71931009 and 71821002].
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

2
1.
Introduction
Heated debates emerged a decade ago about where the future of retailing lay–online or oﬄine
channels? The answer seems more apparent now as the lines between digital and physical stores
become blurrier. The future of retailing looks like a hybrid of physical stores and online-ordering
channels, with each company striving to achieve the same goal from diﬀerent starting points.
Amazon and Walmart, for example, are each trying to become more like the other—Walmart by
investing heavily in its technology and acquiring online retailers like Jet and Bonobos, and Amazon
by opening physical bookstores and buying the physical supermarket Whole Foods.
The omnichannel environment presents equal opportunities for both “traditional” retailers (e.g.,
Walmart), which began business with physical stores, and “new” retailers (e.g., Warby Parker),
which started out by selling online (Bell et al. 2014). However, ﬁnding ways to manage the inventory
at the local store, which may serve multiple streams of customers in a given omnichannel strategy,
becomes a key challenge to retailers. On the one hand, inventory plays a vital role under diﬀerent
omnichannel strategies because of its eﬀect on the service levels experienced by customers. To
cater to both online and in-store shoppers at the same time, Target improved its B&M in-stock
performance by 20% in the fourth quarter of 2015 (Chao 2016). On the other hand, inventory is
often the most signiﬁcant cost component for retailers (as a percentage of sales). As mentioned, one
solution for traditional retailers is to use the merchandise in their stores, ideally after inventory re-
optimization, to fulﬁll online orders; however, that strategy may not be as eﬃcient as the centralized
distribution centers that e-tailers use (Kapner 2015). With more inventory at stores to meet the
in-store pickup demand, retailers also face a risk of being stuck with excess inventory (Bose 2014).
In this paper, we study a representative omnichannel strategy, i.e., buy-online pickup-at-store
(BOPS). In fulﬁlling customer demand under BOPS, the B&M store plays the critical role of a
mini-warehouse and pickup location. We build a stylized model for a retailer with two segments of
customers: store-only customers who only consider purchasing the product at the B&M store and
omni-customers who consider buying the product through all channels provided by the retailer. As
a benchmark, we ﬁrst analyze a BASE model in which no omnichannel strategy is implemented,
and online and oﬄine channels are operated independently. Without considering the implication
of inventory, it is intuitive that the introduction of a new omnichannel strategy will expand the
market while simultaneously cannibalizing the existing online and oﬄine channels. However, the
story can be very diﬀerent if we consider the strategic interaction between the retailer’s inventory
decision and customers’ purchasing behavior. Hence inventory is critical to determining whether
BOPS might be a good strategy for a retailer.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

3
Assuming that customers’ online base surplus (i.e., valuation minus price) is higher than their
oﬄine base surplus1 and that the proﬁt margin of online sales is lower than that of oﬄine sales2,
we ﬁnd that BOPS may either beneﬁt or hurt the retailer depending on two fundamental system
primitives, the store visiting cost and the online waiting cost. If the store visiting cost and the
online waiting cost are both low, with the former even lower,3 after inventory re-optimization, the
introduction of BOPS can incentivize omni-customers to migrate from the online channel to BOPS,
which not only gives local inventory information but also provides a new purchase channel for
omni-customers. Thus BOPS can lead to demand pooling at the B&M store, i.e., the local inventory
can be used to fulﬁll orders from two customer segments. Demand pooling has two beneﬁts for
the retailer. First, it allows higher utilization of the local inventory and saves overstocking cost
(referred to as the “utilization enhancement eﬀect”). Second, after inventory re-optimization, it
results in a higher ﬁll rate at the B&M store (referred to as the “availability improvement eﬀect”),
which beneﬁts the existing customers and potentially attracts more customers to visit. However,
the opposite of demand pooling can also happen. If the store visiting cost and the online waiting
cost are both high with the latter even higher,4 BOPS can hurt the retailer as well as the customers.
The damage is due to a demand depooling eﬀect: those omni-customers who would shop oﬄine
in the BASE model, now migrate to BOPS, where the proﬁt margin is lower than in the oﬄine
channel. After inventory re-optimization, the ﬁll rate will be reduced at the B&M store, which
then deters the store-only and omni-customers from visiting the store. That is, although omni-
customers who adopt BOPS are still satisﬁed by the B&M store, demand depooling occurs after
inventory re-optimization because the proﬁt margin of BOPS sales is lower than that of online
sales. Therefore, BOPS may hurt both the retailer and those two segments of customers.
2.
Literature Review
We study the joint management of online and oﬄine channels under an omnichannel strategy
and explore its pros and cons by considering the interactions of multiple channels through the
endogenized inventory decisions. There are two closely related streams of literature: omnichannel
management and multichannel management. The more closely related is omnichannel management,
which has recently gained traction. One part of this stream investigates the impact of omnichannel
1 Our main insights qualitatively carry over when this assumption is relaxed. The analysis is available upon request.
2 A weaker condition is adopted later (see Assumption (M)). Even if this weaker assumption is relaxed, the same
insights hold for at least one of the equilibria.
3 See, e.g., Areas I-2 and I-3 in Figure 3 below for an illustration.
4 See, e.g., Area II-1 in Figure 3 below for an illustration.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

4
on customers’ choice behavior among channels. For example, Knous et al. (2008) and De Keyser et
al. (2015) use survey data to identify various segments of multichannel shoppers. Chintagunta et
al. (2012) empirically quantify the relative transaction costs when households choose between the
online and oﬄine channels of grocery stores. These empirical papers provide a better understanding
of customers’ channel choice behavior and market segmentation. Another part of this stream of
literature investigates the practical implications of implementing an omnichannel strategy. Gallino
and Moreno (2014) empirically examine the impact of BOPS on a retailer’s sales volume in both
online and oﬄine channels and ﬁnd that the implementation of BOPS results in a reduction in
online sales and an increase in store sales and traﬃc. Gallino et al. (2017) analyze the data from a
leading US retailer that introduced the ship-to-store option (BOSS) to customers, and demonstrate
that BOSS can increase sales dispersion among various products in the B&M stores. Bell et al.
(2018) empirically show that oﬄine showrooms not only increase the online and overall sales but
also improve operational eﬃciency.
Existing analytical models of omnichannel management focus on investigating how omnichannel
strategies aﬀect a retailer’s operational decisions and proﬁtability. Cao et al. (2016) show that
BOPS provides customers with a new purchasing option and thus can attract more customers,
which may beneﬁt the retailer. However, BOPS may be detrimental due to the proﬁt margin loss
from operating BOPS (when customers migrate from the oﬄine channel, the purchase price could
be lower; and there is an extra handling cost when customers migrate from either the oﬄine or
online channel). We identify a positive pooling eﬀect and a negative depooling eﬀect of BOPS, in
addition to its market expansion eﬀect and possible proﬁt margin loss.
In this stream of analytical models, a trilogy by Gao and Su is closely related to our work. Gao
and Su (2017a) study how retailers can eﬀectively deliver online and oﬄine information to omni-
customers by comparing three information mechanisms: physical showrooms, virtual showrooms,
and availability information disclosure. Diﬀerent mechanisms result in diﬀerent customer valuation
revelation, leading to diﬀerent channel choice behavior. In particular, they show that physical
showrooms may prompt a retailer to lower the store inventory level because a segment of customers
decide not to buy after learning via showrooming that their valuation turns out to be low. The
reduced inventory level pushes the other segment of customers who have a high realized valuation
to migrate to the online channel. As a result, in equilibrium, both segments migrate to the online
channel as they are homogeneous ex ante. Such an interaction, via the B&M inventory, between
the two ex-post diﬀerent segments of customers who are ex-ante homogeneous is analogous to that
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

5
between the two ex-ante diﬀerent segments of customers—omnichannel and store-only customers—
in our paper.
Moreover, as we do, Gao and Su (2017b) also study an omnichannel strategy with the BOPS
option and examine the impact of the BOPS initiative on store operations. One of their main
ﬁndings is that BOPS may beneﬁt or hurt the retailer, depending on the product characteristics.
The beneﬁts of BOPS are two-fold. First, BOPS as an additional option enables the retailer to
reach new customers (i.e., a market expansion eﬀect) by inventory information disclosure. Second,
BOPS can generate extra cross-selling revenue for the B&M store by inducing omni-customers to
visit the store. On the other hand, Gao and Su (2017b) also reveal an adverse eﬀect of BOPS,
which may reduce the cross-selling revenue in the B&M store. That is, customers can learn the
real-time inventory information via BOPS and will not visit the B&M store once the desired item
is out of stock. Furthermore, they extend their results to the case when there are two segments
of customers who proportionally share a random demand size. Our model has some similarity
buttwo essential diﬀerences: (1) store-only customers in our model are strategic in the sense that
they will anticipate the in-store ﬁll rate before heading out to the store; and (2) we separately
model the sizes of the two segments using two random variables. These two diﬀerences enable us
to identify another beneﬁt of BOPS from the inventory perspective (even without the cross-selling
eﬀect), i.e., the demand pooling eﬀect, which leads to an increase in the ﬁll rate of the B&M store
after inventory re-optimization and then attracts more store-only customers to purchase. They also
enable us to identify another drawback of BOPS, i.e., the demand depooling eﬀect, operating in
the reverse direction of the pooling eﬀect.
Lastly, in the context of a service system, Gao and Su (2018) examine the eﬀects of both online
and oﬄine self-ordering technologies on customer demand, employment levels, and the ﬁrm’s proﬁt.
The authors investigate the interaction, through the staﬃng level, between employee-served (oﬄine
channel) and self-serving customers (online self-ordering channel). In a drastically diﬀerent context,
we consider the interaction, through the local inventory, between store-only and omni-customers
who can strategically choose the purchase channel, as well as how their orders will be fulﬁlled, and
obtain a diﬀerent set of managerial insights.
3.
Model Description
We consider a retailer who sells a product to customers through two channels: online and oﬄine.
As in Cao et al. (2016), we assume there are two types of customers: one intending to shop
only oﬄine, referred to as store-only customers, and the other contemplating both the online and
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

6
oﬄine channels, referred to as omni-customers.5 This classiﬁcation is also consistent with several
empirical studies. For example, De Keyser et al. (2015) demonstrate that the proportion of store-
only customers is around 18% by survey data from a Dutch telecom retailer, whereas that of
multichannel customers is about 52%. Such a segmentation can be predicted by both demographics
and psychographics (see Knous et al. 2008): store-only customers are those who are not tech-savvy
and prefer traditional shopping or those who enjoy shopping in the physical stores, whereas omni-
customers are those who prefer to try new and diﬀerent products, seek new experiences, and are
typically young and well-educated.6 We assume that the market sizes of omnichannel and store-
only customers, denoted by Dm and Ds, respectively, follow the Normal distributions with mean
and variance, (µm,σ2
m) and (µs,σ2
s), respectively. To simplify the analysis, we also assume they
have the same coeﬃcient of variation, i.e., σm/µm = σs/µs. Moreover, the market sizes of the two
segments are assumed to be correlated with a general coeﬃcient of ρ to show that our results are
robust to any demand correlation between the two streams of customers.
The customer segmentation mentioned above is based on the channel choices a customer faces
when making a purchase decision. We refer to those customers who eventually choose to purchase
oﬄine (resp., online) as the oﬄine (resp., online) demand. The online demand, if any, consists of
omni-customers only, who would otherwise choose to purchase oﬄine or exit the market, whereas
the oﬄine demand, if any, consists of either store-only customers or omni-customers or both.
The retailer can hold inventory in the local B&M store or the distribution center (DC). The oﬄine
demand can be satisﬁed only by the B&M inventory. In contrast, the online demand can be fulﬁlled
by both sources, depending on the omnichannel strategy employed by the retailer and the resulting
choices made by customers. In particular, we consider the following two strategies observed from
the practice, with the former as a benchmark and the latter being a typical omnichannel strategy
that is widely adopted in the retailing industry.
Independent Online and Oﬄine Channels (BASE). In the BASE model, the retailer uses
the DC inventory to fulﬁll the online demand, and online and oﬄine channels operate independently.
Buy-Online Pickup-at-Store (BOPS). In the BOPS model, the retailer uses the B&M store
inventory to satisfy those online customers who choose the local pickup option.
5 Gao and Su (2017b) only consider omni-customers. The introduction of store-only customers allows us to better
study the interaction of multiple customer segments from the inventory perspective. Without store-only customers,
our model is reduced to theirs.
6 Though our model does not consider web-only customers, the modeling of such a segment would not change our
insights. This is because our model focuses on the potential conﬂict of the oﬄine inventory being shared by both
store-only customers and omni-customers. This inventory would not be shared with web-only customers.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

7
We assume that omni-customers who eventually choose BOPS ﬁrst check online for the store
inventory; if the store is out of stock, they then switch to the online channel with DC fulﬁllment if
the utility of doing so is positive (see Gao and Su 2017b). For ease of exposition, we assume that
the DC has unlimited inventory capacity. (Our main results also hold when the inventory level in
the DC is endogenized.) This assumption is reasonable when the retailer can make an emergency
replenishment from another DC, or the supplier, in a relatively short lead time compared with that
from the DC to customers. As a result, the online purchases, regardless of how they are fulﬁlled,
can be fully satisﬁed in time. Therefore, the retailer focuses on deciding how much inventory to
stock in the B&M store before random demands are realized. In addition, customers will be lost if
they choose to visit the local store only to discover that their desired product is out of stock. The
latter is consistent with the observation in Haddon (2018) that “[w]hen [walk-in] customers do not
immediately ﬁnd the items they want, 70% switch to another brand or store, or stop their order.”
In the BASE model, we assume that store-only customers and omni-customers who purchase
oﬄine have equal chances of being satisﬁed by the local inventory, as the retailer has no way of
diﬀerentiating the two segments of customers when they visit the B&M store. In contrast, BOPS
enables the retailer to tell omni-customers from store-only customers and to implement diﬀerent
fulﬁllment priorities. Alishah et al. (2016) show that the optimal inventory allocation policy aims
to satisfy the store-only customers ﬁrst. Based on this, we assume that store-only customers have
a higher fulﬁllment priority than omni-customers who purchase from BOPS and are also satisﬁed
from the local inventory. That is, the retailer satisﬁes store-only customers ﬁrst and then satisﬁes
the BOPS demand as much as possible by using the remaining inventory in the B&M store. This
assumption, adopted by Govindarajan et al. (2018) as well, is consistent with the notion that store-
only customers tend to represent a higher proﬁt margin or a greater loss of goodwill in the event of a
stockout than omni-customers, who tend to have more purchase options. In reality, customers from
diﬀerent segments may come in sequentially, and the retailer could use a sophisticated inventory
rationing policy. Nevertheless, our model serves as a good approximation of the practical situation,
in which the retailer reserves inventory for store-only customers.
We denote by co and cb the unit fulﬁllment costs of the DC and B&M store, respectively. The
fulﬁllment cost includes the procurement cost, the logistics cost incurred in shipping from the DC
to the customer’s doorstep, and the inventory holding and handling costs at the DC or B&M store.
We assume that co ≤cb, which is consistent with the observation that the inventory holding and
handling costs at the B&M store are much higher than those at the DC (Kapner 2015).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

8
Given the retailer’s channel strategy, customers choose the purchase option that maximizes their
expected utility, which consists of at most three elements: the expected base surplus of consuming
the product, the store visiting cost, and the online waiting cost, and is expressed as:
E[utility] = E[base surplus] −store visiting cost (if any) −online waiting cost (if any).
Expected Base Surplus. Customers’ expected base surplus = ﬁll rate × (base valuation −
selling price), where the ﬁll rate is based on customers’ belief or actual information about the
in-stock probability. The selling prices for online and oﬄine channels, denoted by po and pb, are
assumed to be exogenous. For simplicity, we assume that customers are homogeneous in their
valuation of the product in the online and oﬄine channels, denoted by vo and vb, respectively.
The comparison of vo and vb can go either way. On the one hand, customers can accurately value
the oﬄine product after inspection, while online customers without ﬁrsthand experience may risk
of having only partial knowledge on which to base their valuation. Thus, customers may view
the online product as being inferior to its oﬄine counterpart, i.e., vo < vb (Chiang et al. 2003).
On the other hand, customers may ﬁnd online purchases more appealing due to abundant review
information and easy comparison shopping available online, which can lead to vo ≥vb. Moreover,
the ﬁll rate for the online channel is equal to 1, because we assume that its demand can always be
fulﬁlled, whereas the oﬄine demand may face a stockout risk, depending on the inventory level in
the B&M store.
Store Visiting Cost. Customers who visit the B&M store will incur a positive visiting cost k,
which might depend on the average driving distance. From the retailer’s perspective, k can be a
measure of the density of its B&M stores. Here, a lower value of k means a higher density of B&M
stores. For simplicity, we assume that this cost is identical for all customers.
Online Waiting Cost. The online waiting cost, denoted by t, is the (perceived) waiting cost
associated with processing and delivery of online orders, as opposed to no waiting if the customers
can buy the product oﬄine. From the retailer’s perspective, the higher the value of t, the less
delivery eﬃciency the retailer has. From the customers’ perspective, t can also be interpreted as a
measure of their patience level depending on the type of product. For instance, people may be less
patient with the delivery of perishable products than with that of durable ones.
The sequence of the game between the retailer and customers is as follows. Under a speciﬁc
channel strategy, the retailer ﬁrst forms a belief in the proportion of customers who will purchase
oﬄine and then decides the inventory level in the B&M store. Customers who cannot observe the
inventory level in the B&M store form a belief about the ﬁll rate, while, when the BOPS option is
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

9
available, omni-customers can determine whether their online purchase is available for local pickup.
Based on the belief/information, customers choose the option that yields the highest, nonnegative,
expected utility among all available purchase options, or choose to exit the market generating zero
surpluses. Throughout the paper, we adopt the notion of rational expectations (RE) equilibrium
(see, e.g., Su and Zhang 2008 and Cachon and Swinney 2009). The RE equilibrium (REE) requires
that beliefs must be consistent with actual outcomes. Here, the retailer’s belief must be identical to
the actual proportion of omni-customers who purchase oﬄine, whereas customers’ beliefs about the
ﬁll rate of the oﬄine channel must agree with the actual expected in-stock probability. We denote
the base surpluses from online and oﬄine channels by uo and ub, respectively, without considering
the ﬁll rate of the oﬄine channel. Hence, uo = vo −po and ub = vb −pb. For ease of exposition, we
make the following two assumptions, with one on the demand side about customer utilities and
the other on the supply side about the proﬁt margins.
Assumption (U). uo ≥max(t,ub).
Assumption (U) requires that customers’ base surplus from the online channel (i.e., uo −t) is
nonnegative, ensuring that the online channel is always a potential choice. It holds when the online
waiting time is relatively low. Assumption (U) also requires the online base surplus to be higher
than the oﬄine base surplus. This assumption is merely for ease of exploration; with it relaxed,
our main insights on demand (de)pooling still hold (see Online Appendices B and C).
Let Φ(·) be the cumulative distribution function of a standard normal distribution and Φ−1(·)
its inverse function. Then, we deﬁne
ϵ∗≡Φ−1(1 −cb/pb)
and
∆≡(
p
σ2
s + σ2
m + 2ρσsσm −σs)
Z ϵ∗
−∞
ϵdΦ(ϵ)/µm,
where ϵ∗corresponds to the critical fractile for a newsvendor, and ∆measures a scaled risk asso-
ciated with going to the B&M store due to its limited inventory.
Assumption (M). po −co ≤pb −cb + ∆.
Assumption (M) rules out the existence of multiple non-Pareto-dominant equilibria. We note that
this assumption can be less restrictive than po −co ≤pb −cb, adopted by Gao and Su (2017b), when
∆≥0. The condition ∆≥0 can hold when the two streams of demand are suﬃciently negatively
correlated (noting that
R ϵ∗
−∞ϵdΦ(ϵ) < 0). If ∆< 0, e.g., when ρ ≥0, Assumption (M) implies that
the proﬁt margin of online sales is suﬃciently lower than that of oﬄine sales. Moreover, when
Assumption (M) is relaxed, the same insights hold for at least one of the equilibria.
Next, we use U Z
X,Y to denote customers’ expected utility, where X represents the type of cus-
tomers, Y speciﬁes the fulﬁllment channel, and Z reﬂects the model setting. Speciﬁcally, X ∈{m,s},
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

10
where m denotes omni-customers and s represents store-only customers; Y ∈{b,o,ob}, where b
and o represent the traditional oﬄine and online channels, respectively, while ob means the BOPS
channel; and Z ∈{B,P}, where B and P correspond to the BASE and BOPS settings, respectively.
4.
Model Analysis
In this section, we analyze two diﬀerent types of omnichannel strategies, namely, BASE and BOPS,
and characterize the Pareto-dominant RE equilibrium (the RE equilibrium for short hereafter)
under each strategy.
4.1.
Separate Online and Oﬄine Channels (BASE)
As mentioned, customers who purchase via the oﬄine channel may face a stockout. Without know-
ing the exact inventory in the B&M store, customers will ﬁrst form a belief ˆζ on the in-stock
probability before making their purchase decision. Based on this belief, customers’ utilities from
oﬄine and online channels, respectively, can be expressed as
U B
s,b = U B
m,b = ˆζub −k,
U B
m,o = uo −t.
(1)
Store-only customers purchase the product if U B
s,b ≥0; otherwise, they exit the market. Assump-
tion (U) ensures that U B
m,o is always nonnegative. Hence, omni-customers will never choose to exit
the market. In particular, omni-customers purchase the product from the oﬄine channel if and
only if U B
m,b ≥U B
m,o, and from the online channel if and only if U B
m,o > U B
m,b.
Next, we consider the retailer’s decision problem. First, the retailer anticipates that a fraction
ˆφm of omni-customers and a fraction ˆφs of store-only customers will purchase through the oﬄine
channel, and thus, the aggregated oﬄine demand is ˆφmDm + ˆφsDs. Given that customers do not
have inventory information for the B&M store, as mentioned, we assume that in BASE, those
omni-customers who visit the store and experience a stockout will not switch back to the online
purchase and hence will be lost. This is in contrast to the BOPS case in which omni-customers can
check the local inventory before heading to the store, and, in the event of a stockout, can easily
switch to online purchase with DC fulﬁllment. The remaining fraction (1−ˆφm) of omni-customers
will choose to purchase through the online channel as its utility is always nonnegative. That is, the
online demand can be expressed as (1 −ˆφm)Dm. Therefore, the retailer’s expected proﬁt function
can be expressed as
πB(q) = pbE[min(ˆφmDm + ˆφsDs,q)] −cbq
|
{z
}
Proﬁt from Oﬄine Channel
+ (po −co)E[(1 −ˆφm)Dm].
|
{z
}
Proﬁt from Online Channel
(2)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

11
The ﬁrst two terms and the last term in (2) represent the expected proﬁts from the oﬄine and
online channels, respectively. Without loss of generality, we normalize the unit salvage value to zero.
Given the beliefs ˆφm and ˆφs, the retailer chooses the order quantity q to maximize the expected
total proﬁt. Unlike the classic newsvendor problem, here in equilibrium, the demand also depends
on the ﬁll rate, which in turn depends on the order quantity. To derive the RE equilibrium, we must
characterize how the retailer’s order quantity and the market size aﬀect the in-stock probability
of the B&M store and then the customer belief. According to Deneckere and Peck (1995), this
in-stock probability is given by E[min{D,q}]/E[D], where D and q represent the random demand
and the inventory level in the B&M store, respectively.
We ﬁrst explore how demand aggregation aﬀects the ﬁll rate by comparing two scenarios that
could possibly sustain in a RE equilibrium. In scenario I, only store-only customers choose the oﬄine
channel, i.e., (ˆφm, ˆφs) = (0,1), and in scenario II, both store-only customers and omni-customers
purchase oﬄine, i.e., (ˆφm, ˆφs) = (1,1). Let qs and qsm be the optimal order quantity maximizing (2)
under scenarios I and II, respectively. Consequently, the corresponding ﬁll rates can be calculated
as ζs = E[min(Ds,qs)]/E[Ds] and ζsm = E[min(Dm + Ds,qsm)]/E[Dm + Ds].
Lemma 1. ζsm ≥ζs.
Lemma 1 shows that demand aggregation from diﬀerent customer streams (scenario II) leads to
a higher ﬁll rate of the B&M store than just a single stream of store-only customers (scenario I).
This result indicates the potential beneﬁt of demand pooling which we will explore later for BOPS.
With Lemma 1, the following proposition characterizes the RE equilibrium for the BASE model.
Proposition 1 (REE in BASE). At the RE equilibrium, the inventory level in the B&M store
and customers’ channel choices in the oﬄine channel are as follows:
(i) if k ≤ζsmub −(uo −t), qB = qsm and (φB
s ,φB
m) = (1,1);
(ii) if ζsmub −(uo −t) < k ≤ζsub, qB = qs and (φB
s ,φB
m) = (1,0);
(iii) if k > max(ζsub,ζsmub −(uo −t)), qB = 0 and (φB
s ,φB
m) = (0,0).
A fraction (1 −φB
m) of omni-customers will purchase through the online channel.
Proposition 1 shows that, if the store visiting cost is low enough, both store-only customers and
omni-customers will choose to purchase through the oﬄine channel. If the store visiting cost is
in an intermediate range, omni-customers will switch to the online channel because the utility of
purchasing online is higher than oﬄine, whereas store-only customers stick to the oﬄine channel
as the associated utility is still positive. If the store visiting cost is high enough, no customers will
visit the B&M store. Moreover, those omni-customers who do not choose the oﬄine channel will
purchase online due to Assumption (U).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

12
4.2.
Buy-Online, Pick-up-in-Store (BOPS)
Now we analyze the BOPS model, in which the retailer can use the B&M store inventory to fulﬁll
orders from both store-only customers and omni-customers who choose BOPS. As in the BASE
model, store-only customers can either purchase through the oﬄine channel or exit the market,
depending on the utility U P
s,b = ˆζub −k, where ˆζ is the belief about the ﬁll rate in the B&M store.
However, when BOPS is a viable option, omni-customers face a choice of one of four alternatives:
purchase online with DC fulﬁllment, purchase oﬄine, choose BOPS, or exit the market. Moreover,
like Gao and Su (2017b), we assume that omni-customers can always check the inventory via BOPS
before going to the store. This means that BOPS plays the role of disclosing inventory information.
Hence, given that the oﬄine inventory information will be taken into account, omni-customers’
utilities of purchasing from diﬀerent channels are given by
U P
m,b = ub −k,
U P
m,o = uo −t,
U P
m,ob = uo −k.
(3)
Figure 1
The decision tree of omni-customers under the BOPS
𝑈௠,௢௕
௉
Check 
Inventory
Stock 
Out?
Maximal 
Utility?
Online 
Channel
Offline 
Channel
BOPS 
Channel
Yes
No
𝑈௠,௢
௉
𝑈௠,௕
௉
Given that uo ≥t (see Assumption (U)), omni-customers always earn a nonnegative utility
from the online channel, and thus they will never choose to exit the market. Figure 1 illustrates
omni-customers’ decision tree. Speciﬁcally, an incoming omni-customer always checks the inventory
availability at the B&M store ﬁrst via BOPS. If the B&M store is out of stock, this omni-customer
purchases from an online channel or leaves the market, depending on his or her utility U P
m,o. If the
inventory is available, the customer will compare utilities from each option, given in (3), to choose
the one that maximizes his or her utility and generates a nonnegative surplus.
As uo ≥ub (see also Assumption (U)), an omni-customer always prefers the BOPS channel over
purchasing oﬄine. Therefore, the omni-customer chooses either the online channel or the BOPS
channel. In particular, he or she will choose the BOPS channel if U P
m,ob ≥U P
m,o (i.e., k ≤t) and
otherwise, the online channel. Overall, 1{k≤t}Dm and 1{k>t}Dm represent the numbers of omni-
customers who prefer BOPS and those who prefer the online channel, respectively, where 1{·} is
an indicator function.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

13
Next, we derive the sales volumes from diﬀerent channels. Notably, omni-customers’ channel
choices only depend on parameters which are assumed to be common knowledge. Therefore, unlike
in the BASE model, the retailer can predict omni-customers’ decisions with only a belief ˆφs about
the proportion of store-only customers who would purchase through the oﬄine channel. Recall that
we assume the store-only customers to have fulﬁllment priority. After fulﬁlling orders from the
store-only customers, the B&M store has the remaining inventory at the level of (q−ˆφsDs)+. Given
that the number of omni-customers who prefer the BOPS channel is 1{k≤t}Dm, the sales volume of
BOPS is min(1{k≤t}Dm,(q −ˆφsDs)+). The sales volume in the online channel includes the online
demand 1{k>t}Dm and the unsatisﬁed BOPS demand (1{k≤t}Dm −(q −ˆφsDs)+)+. Therefore, given
the belief ˆφs, the retailer’s expected proﬁt can be expressed as
πP(q) =
pbE[min(ˆφsDs,q)]
|
{z
}
Revenue from Store-Only Customers
+
poE[min(1{k≤t}Dm,(q −ˆφsDs)+)]
|
{z
}
Revenue from BOPS Channel
−cbq
+(po −co)E[1{k>t}Dm + (1{k≤t}Dm −(q −ˆφsDs)+)+]
|
{z
}
Proﬁt from Online Channel
.
(4)
In (4), the ﬁrst term represents the expected revenue from store-only customers, the second term
is the revenue from omni-customers who purchase through the BOPS channel, the third term
is the inventory procurement cost of the B&M store, and the last term is the proﬁt from those
omni-customers who purchase through the online channel with DC fulﬁllment.
To better understand the eﬀect of BOPS on the ﬁll rate of the B&M store, we ﬁrst consider a
special case of k ≤t, in which omni-customers will always choose to purchase via BOPS if available.
We denote by qp the optimal order quantity that maximizes (4) with ˆφs = 1. The corresponding ﬁll
rate for store-only customers is given by ζp = E[min(Ds,qp)]/E[Ds]. The following lemma illustrates
how the BOPS strategy might aﬀect the ﬁll rate of the oﬄine channel.
Lemma 2. qsm ≥qp ≥qs and ζp ≥ζs. Moreover, ζsm can be greater or less than ζp.
Recall that qs and ζs (see Lemma 1) are the retailer’s optimal order quantity and the correspond-
ing ﬁll rate of the oﬄine channel in the BASE model when just the store-only customers purchase
oﬄine. With the BOPS strategy, the B&M store inventory can be used to fulﬁll orders from both
store-only and BOPS customers. Therefore, BOPS decreases the overstocking risk for the local
store inventory. This incentivizes the local retailer to order more inventory, which in turn leads to
a higher ﬁll rate, i.e., qp ≥qs and ζp ≥ζs, thereby beneﬁting store-only customers, in the parameter
subspace where the B&M store sells only to store-only customers. However, in the parameter sub-
space where omni-customers who used to shop oﬄine have now switched to BOPS, the resulting
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

14
ﬁll rate for store-only customers could decrease or increase after inventory re-optimization. This
is because, compared to BASE, BOPS leads to a lower understocking cost, because unsatisﬁed
omni-customers who choose BOPS will be recaptured by the online channel. This incentivizes the
retailer to order less and reduce the overall ﬁll rate at the B&M store under BOPS. However, as
store-only customers have higher fulﬁllment priority under BOPS than under BASE, in which they
share the inventory with omni-customers, even if the inventory level may be lower under BOPS, it
is still possible for ﬁll rate for store-only customers under BOPS to be higher.
Next, we formally characterize the RE equilibrium for the case of uo ≥ub.
Proposition 2 (REE under BOPS). At the RE equilibrium, the retailer’s optimal inventory
level in the B&M store and customers’ optimal channel choices are as follows:
(i) if k ≤min(t,ζpub), qP = qp, φP
s = 1, and omni-customers choose BOPS (and spill over to the
online channel in the event of stockout);
(ii) if t < k ≤ζsub, qP = qs, φP
s = 1, and omni-customers purchase through the online channel;
(iii) if k > max(min(t,ζpub),ζsub), qP = 0, φP
s = 0, and omni-customers purchase through the
online channel.
Figure 2
Customer choice behavior under BOPS
𝒌
𝒕
0
(II)
(Exit, Online)
Store Visiting Cost
Online Waiting Cost
(I)
(Offline, BOPS)
(III)
(Offline, Online)
Note. (·,·) represents the equilibrium, where the former and latter arguments denote the equilibrium channel choices
of store-only customers and omni-customers, respectively.
Figure 2 illustrates the RE equilibrium in diﬀerent parameter regions depending on the store
visiting cost k and the online waiting cost t. We discuss the equilibrium by considering two cases:
k ≥t and k < t, which correspond to two separate regions divided by the 45◦line in Figure 2.
In the former case (k ≥t), wherein the store visiting cost is higher than the online waiting cost,
omni-customers will always choose the online channel. As the store visiting cost increases, store-
only customers will switch from originally choosing the oﬄine channel (Area III) to exiting the
market (see the part of Area II above the 45◦line). In the latter case (k < t), omni-customers
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

15
may prefer BOPS over the online channel. When the store visiting cost k is below a threshold
(Area I), store-only customers will prefer to shop oﬄine (as opposed to exiting the market). In
this case, it is beneﬁcial for the retailer to serve both demand streams through the B&M store.
However, when the store visiting cost exceeds the threshold (see the part of Area II below the
45◦line), store-only customers will exit the market. This also aﬀects the incentive of the retailer
to serve omni-customers. With only omni-customers, it is more proﬁtable for the retailer to serve
them through the online channel instead of BOPS since the same price is charged but co ≤cb.
Therefore, even though omni-customers may prefer BOPS, the retailer will shut down this channel
to force these customers to buy online. This highlights how the interaction of the store-only and
omni-customers could inﬂuence the optimal omnichannel design; see further discussion in Section
5.
5.
Strategy Comparison: BOPS vs. BASE
The introduction of the BOPS strategy may yield the following eﬀects, which are essentially the
two sides of the same coin:
Demand pooling eﬀect. Compared with the BASE model, the introduction of BOPS may motivate
omni-customers who purchase online under BASE to switch from the online channel to BOPS, as
the latter option provides a higher surplus. As a result, demand pooling occurs in the sense that
the retailer will use the local inventory to serve both BOPS and store-only customers. Lemma 2
shows that demand pooling can lead to a higher ﬁll rate (i.e., ζp ≥ζs), which in turn attracts more
store-only customers ex ante and satisﬁes more of them ex post, and thus can beneﬁt the retailer.
Demand depooling eﬀect. Demand depooling eﬀect is the opposite of the demand pooling eﬀect.
Consider that under BASE, omni-customers may prefer purchasing oﬄine as it provides a higher
surplus than that from the online channel, e.g., when the store visiting cost is low. When BOPS
becomes a viable option, omni-customers have a strong incentive to switch from oﬄine to BOPS
because the store visiting cost applies to both the oﬄine purchase option and BOPS, but BOPS
generates more surplus under Assumption (U). Though the store inventory serves both BOPS
and store-only customers, the proﬁt margin under BOPS can be suﬃciently lower than that of
the oﬄine channel under Assumption (M).7 Hence the introduction of BOPS can incentivize the
retailer to reduce the in-store inventory level, leading to a lower ﬁll rate which turns away store-only
customers ex ante or ex post, and thus can hurt the retailer.
7 If the proﬁt margin of online sales is higher than that of oﬄine sales, Assumption (M) requires that the two demand
segments have a suﬃciently high negative correlation, which leads to a suﬃciently high ﬁll rate under BASE and a
relatively lower ﬁll rate under BOPS as the omni-customers can be recaptured by the online channel in the event of
a stockout.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

16
Figure 3
BOPS over BASE
𝒌
𝒕
0
(II‐2)
Online Waiting Cost
(I‐1)
(III)
(II‐3)
(I‐2)
(I‐3)
(II‐1)
=
Pooling
Depooling
Pooling
Depooling
+
-
+-
Store Visiting Cost
With the REE under BASE and BOPS characterized in Propositions 1 and 2, we now formally
compare the two strategies for the retailer; see Figure 3 for an illustration. For Areas III, II-2,
and II-3, the two strategies have the same proﬁtability. We explain this in two separate cases: (i)
Areas III and II-2 (in which k ≥t) and (ii) Area II-3 (in which k < t). Although the outcomes are
identical, the reasons behind those results are diﬀerent. In the former regions, i.e., where the store
visiting cost is higher than the online waiting cost (k ≥t), the omni-customers do not choose the
BOPS channel. That is, BOPS does not aﬀect customers’ channel choices and makes no diﬀerence
to the retailer’s optimal decision. We turn our attention to Area II-3. In the BASE model, store-
only customers choose to exit the market, whereas omni-customers choose the online channel. With
BOPS, omni-customers prefer BOPS over the online channel because the store visiting cost is lower
than the online waiting cost (k < t). In comparison, store-only customers would still prefer to exit
the market. As the fulﬁllment cost of the online channel is lower than that of BOPS, serving only
the BOPS demand by using the B&M store inventory is not proﬁtable for the retailer, hence, the
retailer will shut down the BOPS channel, e.g., by disclosing no local inventory. As a result, the
market equilibrium will be the same as in the BASE model.
Next, we compare the two strategies for the remaining parameter space that is below the 45◦
line (i.e., k < t). We ﬁrst characterize the area where BOPS beneﬁts the retailer as follows.
Proposition 3 (Demand Pooling Effect). If the online waiting cost is relatively low and
the store visiting cost is even lower as shown in Areas I-2 and I-3 of Figure 3, i.e., ζsmub −uo +t <
k ≤min(t,ζpub), BOPS beneﬁts the retailer.
In this scenario, with BOPS introduced, omni-customers will switch from the online channel to
BOPS, as the latter provides a higher surplus. As a result, demand pooling occurs in the sense that
the retailer will use the local inventory to serve both BOPS and store-only customers. Two beneﬁts
are associated with demand pooling. First, for the original inventory level, it allows higher utiliza-
tion of the perishable inventory and saves overstocking cost when the visiting cost is low enough
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

17
(Area I-2). This phenomenon is called the utilization enhancement eﬀect. Second, in anticipation
of the pooled demand, the retailer re-optimizes the local inventory and sets a higher ﬁll rate at the
local store (Areas I-2 and I-3). This is called the availability improvement eﬀect, which creates a
win-win-win situation that beneﬁts the retailer, store-only, and omni-customers. In particular, the
improved product availability locally under BOPS not only reduces the loss of sales to store-only
customers ex post but also can attract more of them (attract customers who would otherwise shop
elsewhere) ex ante to visit the store and lead to a market expansion for the retailer (Area I-3).
Thus, we provide here an alternative rationale for the application of BOPS—demand pooling.
This is in contrast to Cao et al. (2016), who show that the BOPS channel could cannibalize the
existing oﬄine channel. Our ﬁnding is consistent with the empirical observation by Gallino and
Moreno (2014), who argue that the implementation of BOPS is associated with an increase in store
sales and traﬃc. We explain this observation from the perspective of demand pooling, in addition
to the beneﬁt of information release by BOPS that was introduced in Gao and Su (2017b). In
practice, on the one hand, in order to capture the beneﬁts of the pooling eﬀect, traditional oﬄine
retailers, like Walmart, Best Buy, Target and IKEA, which have already built a strong B&M store
network, now also use their oﬄine stores as e-commerce warehouses (see, e.g., Nash 2016, Gottfried
2016, Ziobro 2016 and Chaudhuri 2016). On the other hand, dominant e-tailers like Amazon and
TMall Alibaba in China are now opening more B&M stores, hoping to capture store-only customers
in addition to their existing customers, who might adopt the BOPS option. For example, Amazon
has started opening a convenience-style Go store and is slated to open large multifunction stores
with curbside pickup capability (Stevens and Safdar 2016).
However, introducing BOPS may backﬁre and turn away existing store-only customers, thus
having a detrimental impact on both the retailer and customers. This demand depooling eﬀect is
illustrated by the following extreme scenario in which the whole segment of store-only customers
are “forced” out ex ante.
Proposition 4 (Demand Depooling Effect). If both the store visiting cost and the online
waiting cost are relatively high with the latter even higher as in Area II-1 of Figure 3, i.e., ζpub <
k ≤ζsmub −uo + t, store-only customers exit the market after BOPS is implemented, and BOPS
hurts the retailer.
In this scenario, both store-only and omni-customers in the BASE model choose the oﬄine
channel (which implies that omni-customers prefer the oﬄine channel to the online). If BOPS
becomes a viable option, omni-customers have a strong incentive to switch from the oﬄine channel
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

18
to BOPS, because the store visiting cost applies to both the oﬄine purchase option and BOPS, but
BOPS generates more customer surplus due to uo ≥ub (see Assumption (U)). Under Assumption
(M), which holds for example when online sales have a lower margin than oﬄine sales, the B&M
store has an incentive to reduce the ﬁll rate after BOPS is implemented. The lower ﬁll rate makes
the oﬄine option no longer attractive to store-only customers and, as such, they would prefer to exit
the market. In turn, such demand depooling would hurt the retailer. Proposition 4 is an extreme
case in which all store-only customers are turned away ex ante. Proposition 5 below presents a
middle ground in which store-only customers could be turned away unsatisﬁed ex post due to a
lower ﬁll rate.
The demand depooling eﬀect is consistent with practical observations. For example, to combat
the potential decrease in the ﬁll rate at the B&M store after introducing BOPS, Target does not
oﬀer some of its most heavily advertised items through BOPS (Ziobro 2015), whereas Toys “R”Us
scaled back some online marketing and eliminated other online deals entirely during the Christmas
of 2016 in fear of shorting store-only customers on popular products (Ziobro 2016).
The eﬀects of demand pooling and depooling of BOPS are two sides of the same coin, and may
be in play simultaneously, as the following result implies.
Proposition 5 (Both Effects in Play). If the store visiting cost is low and the online wait-
ing cost is high as in Area I-1 of Figure 3, i.e., k ≤min(ζpub,ζsmub −uo + t), both demand pooling
and depooling eﬀects apply. In that area, there exists δS(co) such that
(i) if the online price is low, i.e., po < δS(co), the demand depooling eﬀect dominates and BOPS
hurts the retailer;
(ii) if the online price is high, i.e., po ≥δS(co), the demand pooling eﬀect dominates and BOPS
beneﬁts the retailer.
Proposition 5 shows that when the store visiting cost is low and the online waiting cost is
high as in Area I-1 of Figure 3, the eﬀects of demand pooling and depooling of BOPS are in
play simultaneously. For such a case, in equilibrium under the BASE, both store-only and omni-
customers choose to visit the B&M store to make a purchase, and the retailer sets up a relatively
high ﬁll rate at ζsm. Now we dissect the migration process of omni-customers after the introduction
of BOPS into two parts to illustrate how the two eﬀects of demand pooling and depooling apply
simultaneously:
Omni-customers migrate to BOPS. Under Assumption (M), the retailer has an incentive to store
less inventory at the B&M store, which may deter store-only customers from visiting the store ex
ante or leave more store-only customers unsatisﬁed ex post. This is the depooling eﬀect.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

19
Omni-customers pick up at store. After checking the inventory via BOPS, a fraction of omni-
customers come to pick up their purchases, which are taken from the local inventory. With the
same pool of local inventory serving store-only customers and some omni-customers, the retailer
may have an incentive to increase the ﬁll rate of the oﬄine channel. This is the pooling eﬀect.
With cost parameters in Area I-1, in equilibrium, both depooling and pooling eﬀects apply, and
the ﬁll rate at the local store may be lower or higher than that in BASE (see Lemma 2). The
pooling eﬀect beneﬁts the retailer, who reduces the understocking risk by using the inventory of
both channels, i.e., BOPS strategy can serve all of those omni-customers who are partially served
in the BASE model. This is because in BASE, unsatisﬁed omni-customers who visit the local store
and experience stockout will be lost, whereas under BOPS they will be served either by the local
inventory (if available) or by the DC inventory. However, the depooling eﬀect that turns away store-
only customers ex ante or ex post could oﬀset the pooling eﬀect. The overall impact of demand
depooling and pooling depends on the online price. In particular, if the online price is above a
certain threshold, the downside of demand depooling is limited and the beneﬁt of demand pooling
is more signiﬁcant; then the combined eﬀect of BOPS is positive for the retailer, and vice versa.
6.
Discussion and Conclusion
Owing to the complexity of the problem, we adopt a simpliﬁed model to ﬂush out the fundamental
insights. Hence, examining whether these insights are robust is critical. We fully investigate a set
of extensions of the model in Online Appendices D and E, and discuss two of them here.
Cross-Selling Eﬀect. Customers who visit the B&M store (whether they experience a stockout
or not) are likely to purchase other products, which is the so-called cross-selling eﬀect. Denote by
r the expected cross-selling revenue brought by each customer who visits the store for the initially
desired product. A positive cross-selling eﬀect, i.e., r > 0, could inﬂuence the retailer’s inventory
decision, which then, in turn, aﬀects the customers’ channel choice behavior. We discover the
following:
First, the retailer can be more willing to adopt BOPS with cross-selling than without. For
example, when the online waiting cost is relatively high but lower than the store visiting cost,
without cross-selling (r = 0), store-only customers choose to exit the market while omni-customers
turn to the online channel. As a result, the retailer has no incentive to stock any inventory at the
local store. However, if the cross-selling eﬀect is strong enough (r ≥cb −co), it would be beneﬁcial
for the retailer to stock some local inventory to entice omni-customers to make store visits via
BOPS.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

20
Second, the pooling eﬀect is more likely to occur. Consider the situation in which under BOPS
without cross-selling, omni-customers switch from the online channel to BOPS, resulting in the
pooling eﬀect from the combined streams of store-only and omni-customers. With cross-selling,
the stockout cost increases from pb −cb to pb −cb +r. Thus, the retailer has an incentive to further
increase the inventory level and the ﬁll rate at the B&M store, which enhances the pooling eﬀect.
Third, the negative eﬀect of depooling could be strengthened. When the store visiting cost is
high but lower than the online waiting cost, omni-customers who under BASE would prefer visiting
the B&M store migrate to BOPS (for both cases of r = 0 and r > 0), resulting in a lower ﬁll rate
in the B&M store under BOPS due to po ≤pb. Consequently, store-only customers will be deterred
from visiting the store, and in turn, the retailer suﬀers due to this depooling eﬀect, not to mention
the additional loss of cross-selling revenue from store-only customers.
Recourse Behavior of Omni-Customers. In the BASE model, when store-visiting omni-
customers experience a stockout, they are assumed to be lost. Now we relax this assumption.
Suppose that those omni-customers who experience a stockout in store switch to the online chan-
nel. Compared with the lost-sales case (see Theorem 3), the pooling/depooling eﬀect could be
strengthened or weakened. As the explanations for the impact of the recourse behavior on pooling
and depooling eﬀects are similar, here we only discuss its impact on the pooling eﬀect.
Consider the situation under BASE in which without the recourse behavior, omni-customers
choose the online channel, while store-only customers exit the market. Here, without the recourse
behavior, BOPS may trigger a pooling eﬀect (i.e., the retailer uses the local inventory to serve both
BOPS and store-only customers, resulting in a higher ﬁll rate). However, the higher utility from the
recourse behavior may incentivize omni-customers to switch from the online channel to the oﬄine
under BASE. That is, with the recourse behavior of omni-customers, both omni-customers and
store-only customers can choose the oﬄine channel under BASE. Then BOPS does not necessarily
lead to a pooling eﬀect, i.e., the recourse behavior may lessen the pooling eﬀect.
On the other hand, consider the situation in which without the recourse behavior of omni-
customers, both store-only and omni-customers choose the oﬄine channel under BASE; here BOPS
may not trigger a pooling eﬀect. The recourse behavior of omni-customers reduces the lost-sales
cost at the B&M store. As a result, under BASE, the retailer will order less inventory for the
B&M store, resulting in a lower ﬁll rate, which forces omni-customers to choose the online channel.
Consequently, the introduction of BOPS under the recourse behavior may bring omni-customers
to visit the store, resulting in a pooling eﬀect, i.e., the recourse behavior could amplify the pooling
eﬀect.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

21
Concluding Remarks. BOPS, as an omnichannel strategy, has been widely adopted by tradi-
tional B&M retailers (e.g., Walmart) and e-tailers (e.g., Amazon). From the inventory perspective,
we develop a stylized model to investigate the impact of BOPS on store operations. We ﬁnd that
BOPS can be a double-edged sword for the retailer: it may either beneﬁt or hurt the retailer
depending on two fundamental system primitives, the store visiting and online waiting costs.
Many directions are worthy of further exploration. For example, our analysis suggests that
omnichannel strategies tend to beneﬁt the retailer when the online waiting cost is relatively low and
the store visiting cost is even lower. However, it is diﬃcult for retailers to push both capabilities
to the desired level in a short time. Then the cooperation between traditional oﬄine retailers and
e-tailers may be another eﬀective way to enjoy the beneﬁt of deploying omnichannel strategies
quickly. Therefore, how to design an eﬀective cooperation mechanism that beneﬁts both sides may
prove a vital problem for those online and oﬄine ﬁrms who are also competitors.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank the Department Editor Charles Corbett, the Associate Editor, and three
anonymous reviewers for their guidance and constructive comments. All authors have an equal
contribution to the study. Both Yi Yang and Weili Xue serve as the corresponding authors.
References
Acinovic J, Graves SC. 2015. Making better fulﬁllment decisions on the ﬂy in an online retail environment.
Manufacturing Service Oper. Management. 17(1):34-51.
Alishah EJ, Moinzadeh K, Zhou YP. 2016. Store fulﬁllment strategy for an omni-channel retailer. Working
paper, University of Washington, Seattle.
Bell D, Gallino S, Moreno A. 2014. How to win in an omnichannel world? MIT Sloan Management Rev.
56(1),45-53.
Bell D, Gallino S, Moreno A. 2018. Oﬄine showrooms in omnichannel retail: Demand and operational
beneﬁts. Management Sci. 64(4):1629-1651.
Bensinger G. 2016. Amazon plans hundreds of brick-and-mortar bookstores, mall CEO says. WSJ (Feb 2).
Bose N. 2014. Will in-store pick-up of online sales pay oﬀfor retailers? Reuters (Nov 28).
Cachon GP, Swinney R. 2009. Purchasing, pricing, and quick response in the presence of strategic customers.
Management Sci. 55(3):497-511.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

22
Cao J, So KC, Yin S. 2016. Impact of an “online-to-store” channel on demand allocation, pricing and
proﬁtability. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 248(1):234-245.
Chao L. 2016. Target says online sales surge tied to store inventories. WSJ (Feb 24).
Chaudhuri S. 2016. IKEA adapts to growing urban populations. WSJ (Dec 7).
Chiang, WK, Chhajed D, Hess JD. 2003. Direct marketing, indirect proﬁts: A strategic analysis of dual-
channel supply-chain design. Management Sci. 49(1):1-20.
Chintagunta PK, Chu J, Cebollada J. 2012. Quantifying transaction costs in online/oﬄine grocery channel
choice. Marketing Sci. 31(1):96-114.
De Keyser A, Schepers J, Konus U. 2015. Multichannel customer segmentation: Does the after-sales channel
matter? A replication and extension. Int. J. Res. in Marketing. 32(2015):453-456.
Deneckere R, Peck J. 1995. Competition over price and service rate when demand is stochastic: A strategic
analysis. RAND J. Econom. 26(1):148-162.
Gallino S, Moreno A, Stamatopoulos I. 2017. Channel integration, sales dispersion, and inventory manage-
ment. Management Sci. 63(9):2813-2831.
Gallino S, Moreno A. 2014. Integration of online and oﬄine channels in retail: The impact of sharing reliable
inventory availability information. Management Sci. 60(6):1434-1451.
Gao F, Su X. 2017(a). Online and oﬄine information for omnichannel retailing. Manufacturing Service Oper.
Management. 19(1):84-98.
Gao F, Su X. 2017(b). Omnichannel retail operations with buy-online-and-pickup-in-store. Management Sci.
63(8):2478-2492.
Gao F, Su X. 2018. Omnichannel service operations with online and oﬄine self-order technologies. Manage-
ment Sci. 64(8):3469-3970.
Gottfried M. 2016. How to ﬁght Amazon.com, Best Buy-style. WSJ (Nov 20).
Govindarajan A, Sinha A, Uichanco J. 2018. Joint Inventory and Fulﬁllment Decisions for Omnichannel
Retail Networks. Working paper, Ross School of Business, University of Michigan.
Haddon H. 2018. Online orders force supermarkets to rethink their stores. WSJ (Oct 2).
Kapner S. 2015. Web retailers, now with stores, teach new tricks. WSJ (Aug 11).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

23
Konus U, Verhoef PC, Neslin SA. 2008. Multichannel shopper segments and their covariates. J. Retailing.
94(4):398-413.
Nash KS. 2016. Walmart, reporting slower e-commerce growth, makes plans to expand number of products
available online. WSJ (Feb 16).
Nassauer S. 2017. Now featured on Wal-Mart’s website: Higher prices than stores. WSJ (Nov 12).
¨Ozer ¨O. 2003. Replenishment strategies for distribution systems under advance demand information. Man-
agement Sci. 49(3):255-272.
Stevens L, Safdar K. 2016. Amazon working on several grocery store formats, could open more than 2,000
locations. WSJ (Dec 5).
Su X, Zhang F. 2008. Strategic customer behavior, commitment, and supply chain performance. Management
Sci. 54(10):1759-1773.
Ziobro P. 2015. Black Friday showdown: Target takes on Amazon with new in-store strategy. WSJ (Nov 26).
Ziobro P. 2016. As web sales spike, retailers scramble to ship from stores. WSJ (Dec 1).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

1
Online Appendix to
“Demand Pooling in Omnichannel Operations”
Ming Hu, Xiaolin Xu, Weili Xue and Yi Yang
A.
Proofs for the Main Results
Proof of Lemma 1. As both Ds and Dm follow the normal distributions, the optimal solu-
tions of (2) under the two scenarios can be expressed as qs = µs + σsz∗and qsm = µs + µm +
p
σ2
s + σ2
m + 2ρσsσmz∗, where z∗= Φ−1(1 −cb
pb ). Consequently, the corresponding ﬁll rates can be
written as
ζs = E[min(Ds,qs)]
E[Ds]
= 1 + σs
µs
E[min{z∗,ϵ}],
ζsm = E[min(Ds + Dm,qsm)]
E[Ds + Dm]
= 1 +
p
σ2
s + σ2
m + 2ρσsσm
µs + µm
E[min{z∗,ϵ}],
where ϵ follows the standard normal distribution.
As σm/µm = σs/µs, we can obtain
p
σ2
s + σ2
m + 2ρσsσm
µs + µm
= σs
µs
√1 + x2 + 2ρx
1 + x
≤σs
µs
,
where x = µs/µm = σs/σm, and the inequality holds because the correlation coeﬃcient ρ ≤1.
As E[min{z∗,ϵ}] ≤E[ϵ] = 0, the above inequality implies that ζsm ≥ζs.
□
Proof of Proposition 1. Let ˆζ be the customers’ belief on the ﬁll rate and (ˆφs, ˆφm) be the
retailer’s belief on the proportions of store-only customers and omni-customers who purchase oﬄine.
We ﬁrst characterize customers’ channel choices and retailer’s optimal decision in terms of these
beliefs.
Customer Choice. Given customers’ belief on the ﬁll rate, let (¯φs, ¯φm) be the resulting propor-
tions of omni-customers and store-only customers who purchase oﬄine. Customers’ utilities from
purchasing online and oﬄine channels are given by (1). Then, customers’ channel choices are as
follows: 1) store-only customers purchase the product if U B
s,b ≥0; otherwise, exit the market, or 2)
omni-customers purchase the product from the oﬄine channel if and only if U B
m,b ≥max(0,U B
m,o)
and from the online channel if and only if U B
m,o ≥max(0,U B
m,b). In particular, we can further char-
acterize customers’ choices, (¯φs, ¯φm), in diﬀerent parameter regions as follows.
(i) If ˆζub −k ≥(uo −t), then both store-only customers and omni-customers will choose the
oﬄine channel, i.e., (¯φs, ¯φm) = (1,1).
(ii) If uo −t ≥ˆζub −k ≥0, then store-only customers will go to the B&M store, whereas omni-
customers will choose the online channel. That is, (¯φs, ¯φm) = (1,0).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

2
(iii) If uo −t ≥0 > ˆζub −k, then store-only customers will exit the market, and omni-customers
will choose the online channel. That is, neither will go to the B&M store, i.e., (¯φs, ¯φm) = (0,0).
(iv) If ˆζub −k < 0 and uo −t < 0, then both types of customers will exit the market, i.e., (¯φs, ¯φm) =
(0,0).
Therefore, given customers’ belief on the ﬁll rate ˆζ, the resulting market segmentation (¯φs, ¯φm) can
be expressed as
(¯φs, ¯φm) =





(1,1) if ˆζ ≥uo−t+k
ub
,
(1,0) if
k
ub ≤ˆζ < uo−t+k
ub
,
(0,0) if ˆζ < k
ub .
(A1)
Retailer’s Optimal Decision. Given retailer’s beliefs (ˆφs, ˆφm) on customers’ choices, let ¯q
and ¯ζ be the optimal order quantity for the B&M store and the corresponding resulting ﬁll rate,
respectively. As customers are homogeneous, there are only three possible values of (ˆφs, ˆφm): (0,0),
(1,0), and (1,1). We now analyze the retailer’s optimal decision for the three cases.
(i) If (ˆφs, ˆφm) = (1,1), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = pbE[min(Dm + Ds,q)] −cbq. Then,
the optimal order quantity is ¯q = qsm, and the corresponding ﬁll rate is ¯ζ = ζsm.
(ii) If (ˆφs, ˆφm) = (1,0), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (po −
co)E[Dm1{t≤uo}]. Consequently, the optimal order quantity is ¯q = qs, and the corresponding
ﬁll rate is ¯ζ = ζs.
(iii) If (ˆφs, ˆφm) = (0,0), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = (po −co)E[Dm1{t≤uo}]. Therefore,
the retailer will order nothing from the B&M store and the resulting ﬁll rate is zero, i.e., ¯q = 0
and ¯ζ = 0.
In summary, given the belief (ˆφs, ˆφm), the retailer’s optimal decision of ¯q and the corresponding
ﬁll rate ¯ζ can be characterized as
(¯q, ¯ζ) =



(qsm,ζsm) if (ˆφs, ˆφm) = (1,1),
(qs,ζs)
if (ˆφs, ˆφm) = (1,0),
(0,0)
if (ˆφs, ˆφm) = (0,0).
(A2)
RE Equilibrium. Next, we analyze the RE equilibrium, denoted by (qB,φB
m,φB
s ), by connecting
customers’ choices with the retailer’s optimal decision. The concept of RE equilibrium states 1)
customers’ belief on the ﬁll rate is exactly the realized ﬁll rate, and 2) retailer’s belief on customers’
choices is consistent with the realized one. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne the RE equilibrium as follows.
Definition A1 (RE Equilibrium Under BASE). A RE equilibrium (¯ζ, ˆζ, ¯φm, ¯φs, ˆφm, ˆφs, ¯q)
should satisfy the following conditions:
(i) Given ˆζ, (¯φs, ¯φm) satisﬁes Equation (A1);
(ii) Given (ˆφs, ˆφm), (¯q, ¯ζ) satisﬁes Equation (A2);
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

3
(iii) ¯ζ = ˆζ and (¯φs, ¯φm) = (ˆφs, ˆφm).
By Deﬁnition A3, we know that there exist only three potential RE equilibria, i.e., (qB,φB
s ,φB
m) =
(qsm,1,1), (qs,1,0), and (0,0,0). In the following cases, we ﬁrst verify whether these potential
equilibria satisfy the conditions of RE equilibrium. When there exist multiple RE equilibria, we
choose the one which is Pareto-dominant.
Case 1: k ≤ζsmub −(uo −t). In this case, we ﬁrst show that (qsm,1,1) and (0,0,0) are RE
equilibria, whereas the existence of (qs,1,0) depends on whether ζsub ≥k > ζsub −(uo −t) or not.
We take the equilibrium (qsm,1,1) as an example to illustrate how to justify a RE equilibrium.
Speciﬁcally, if the retailer expects that both store-only and omni-customers purchase oﬄine, he will
stock qsm in the B&M store by Equation (A2). Meanwhile, if both store-only and omni-customers
believe that the retailer allocates qsm in the B&M store, then they anticipate that the ﬁll rate
is ζsm. As ζsmub −k ≥(uo −t) ≥0, they will purchase from the B&M store (see Equation (A1)).
In other words, all beliefs are consistent with the actual outcomes and thus (qsm,1,1) is a RE
equilibrium. A similar argument can be applied to the equilibrium (0,0,0).
We now discuss the possibility of equilibrium (qs,1,0). If the retailer expects that only store-
only customers purchase oﬄine, he will stock qs in the B&M store by Equation (A2). If customers
believe that the retailer allocates qs in the B&M store, then their expected ﬁll rate is ζs. If 0 ≤
ζsub −k < (uo −t), store-only customers purchase oﬄine, while it is not the case for omni-customers
by Equation (A1), i.e., the beliefs are indeed consistent with actual outcomes. However, if ζsub−k ≥
(uo −t) (or ζsub −k < 0), both store-only and omni-customers will (or not) go to the B&M store
and customers’ choice would be diﬀerent from the retailer’s expectation.
We next show that the equilibrium (qsm,1,1) always Pareto-dominates others. Clearly, the equi-
librium (0,0,0) is dominated, as it generates zero payoﬀfor both retailer and customers. Now, we
compare the equilibria (qsm,1,1) and (qs,1,0). On the retailer side, we have
πB(qs|(1,0)) −πB(qsm|(1,1))
= (pb −cb)µs + pbσs
Z ϵ∗
−∞
ϵdΦ(ϵ) + (po −co)µm
−
"
(pb −cb)(µs + µm) + pb
p
σ2
s + σ2
m + 2ρσsσm
Z ϵ∗
−∞
ϵdΦ(ϵ)
#
= (po −co)µm −(pb −cb)µm −pb(
p
σ2
s + σ2
m + 2ρσsσm −σs)
Z ϵ∗
−∞
ϵdΦ(ϵ)
= µm((po −co) −(pb −cb) −∆) ≤0,
where the last inequality holds by Assumption (M).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

4
Thus, retailer’s proﬁt under equilibrium (qsm,1,1) is larger than that under (qs,1,0). Meanwhile,
by the condition k ≤ζsmub −(uo −t), omni-customers’ utility under equilibrium (qsm,1,1), i.e.,
ζsmub −k, dominates that under (qs,1,0), i.e., (uo −t), whereas store-only customers’ utility under
equilibrium (qsm,1,1) also dominates as the ﬁll rate is higher, i.e., ζsm ≥ζs. Therefore, the Pareto-
dominant equilibrium is qB = qsm, and (φB
s ,φB
m) = (1,1).
Case 2: ζsub ≥k > ζsmub −(uo −t). In this case, omni-customers will never choose the oﬄine
channel as (uo −t) > ζsmub −k. This implies that (qsm,1,1) is not a RE equilibrium. Similar to Case
1, one can show that both (qs,1,0) and (0,0,0) are equilibria and that (qs,1,0) is Pareto-dominant.
Thus, qB = qs and (φB
s ,φB
m) = (1,0).
Case 3: k > ζsub and k > ζsmub −(uo −t). In this case, one can verify that there exists just one
equilibrium, (qB,φB
s ,φB
m) = (0,0,0).
By combining the above cases, we can obtain the desired results.
□
Proof of Lemma 2. We ﬁrst show that qsm ≥qp. By (4), we have
∂πP(q)
∂q
−∂πB(q)
∂q

( ˆφs, ˆφm)=(1,1)
= (co −pb)∂E[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)]
∂q
≤0,
(A3)
where the inequality holds as pb ≥co and the term E[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)] is increasing in q.
As πP(q) is convex, Equation (A3) implies qsm ≥qp. We now prove that qp ≥qs. Referring to (2),
qs is the minimizer of πB(q) with ˆφm = 0 and ˆφs = 1. Then, we can show that
∂πB(q)
∂q

( ˆφs, ˆφm)=(0,1)
−∂πP(q)
∂q
= −co
∂E[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)]
∂q
≤0,
which implies that qp ≥qs.
Combining
the
above
results,
we
can
prove
that
qsm ≥qp ≥qs.
Recall
that
ζs =
E[min(Ds,qs)]/E[Ds], ζp = E[min(Ds,qp)]/E[Ds] and ζsm = E[min(Dm + Ds,qsm)]/E[Dm + Ds].
As the ﬁll rates ζs and ζp are increasing in the order quantity, one can easily show that ζp ≥ζs.
We next show that ζsm could be higher or less than ζp. Actually, if co approaches 0, ζp converges
to ζs, which is no higher than ζsm (see Lemma 1). Moreover, we can see that ζp is increasing in co.
We just need to use a counter example to show that it is possible that ζsm < ζp. Let co approach
pb and Ds = Dm (i.e., ρ = 1, µs = µm), then, qp converges to qsm and
ζp →E[min(qsm,Ds)]
E[Ds]
= E[min(2qsm,2Ds)]
E[2Ds]
> E[min(qsm,Ds + Dm)]
E[Ds + Dm]
= ζsm.
This completes the proof.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

5
Proof of Proposition 2. Similar to the proof logic of Proposition 1, we characterize the
equilibria as follows.
Customer Choice. We ﬁrst investigate customers’ choices among diﬀerent channels in the
presence of BOPS.
• Omni-customers. With the BOPS channel, omni-customers have four alternative choices:
exiting the market, purchasing oﬄine, online, or through BOPS. By Assumption (U) (i.e., t ≤uo),
omni-customers will always gain a positive utility from purchasing online, and thus, will never
choose to exit the market. Moreover, as uo ≥ub, omni-customers always prefer the BOPS channel
to the option of purchasing oﬄine. Therefore, omni-customers will choose between the online
and BOPS channels. Speciﬁcally, omni-customers purchase from the BOPS channel if and only if
U P
m,ob ≥U P
m,o and the online channel if and only if U P
m,o ≥U P
m,ob.
• Store-only customers. Store-only customers’ utilities from purchasing oﬄine are given by
U P
s,b = ˆζub −k. Then, store-only customers purchase the product if U P
s,b ≥0; otherwise, exit the
market.
Based on the analysis on customers’ choice, we can derive the resulting market segmentation as
follows.
(i) If k ≤t and k ≤ˆζub, store-only customers will go to the B&M store, and omni-customers will
choose the BOPS channel. This means that the total demand for the BOPS channel is Dm,
and that for the B&M store is Ds.
(ii) If k ≤t and k > ˆζub, store-only customers will choose to exit the market, whereas omni-
customers choose the BOPS channel. Then, the total demand for the BOPS channel is Dm
and that for the B&M store is 0.
(iii) If k > t and k ≤ˆζub, store-only customers will go to the B&M store, whereas omni-customers
will go to the online channel. Thus, the total demand for the online channel is Dm, and that
for the B&M store is Ds.
(iv) If k > t and k > ˆζub, store-only customers will exit the market, and omni-customers will
choose the online channel. This means that the total demand for the online channel is Dm
and that for the B&M store is 0.
We denote by φm the proportion of omni-customers who choose to purchase from BOPS and
by ¯φs the proportion of store-only customers who purchase from the B&M store. Therefore, given
customers’ belief on the ﬁll rate ˆζ, the resulting market segmentation (¯φs,φm) is given by
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

6
(¯φs,φm) =









(1,1) if ˆζ ≥k
ub and k ≤t,
(0,1) if ˆζ < k
ub and k ≤t,
(1,0) if ˆζ ≥k
ub and k > t,
(0,0) if ˆζ < k
ub and k > t.
(A4)
Retailer’s Optimal Decision. We now analyze the retailer’s optimal decision given his beliefs
on the market segmentation (ˆφs,φm). Let ¯q and ¯ζ be retailer’s optimal order quantity and the
corresponding resulting ﬁll rate given his belief, respectively. From the above analysis on the market
segmentation, we restrict retailer’s belief (ˆφs,φm) within the set of (1,1), (1,0), (0,1), and (0,0).
Notice that those omni-customers who choose the BOPS channel, but if not satisﬁed, will switch
to the online channel. We analyze the retailer’s optimal decision in the following four cases.
(i) If (ˆφs,φm) = (1,1), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq +
coE[min(Dm,(q−Ds)+)]+(po −co)E[Dm]. Then, the retailer’s optimal order quantity is ¯q = qp
and the corresponding ﬁll rate is ¯ζ = ζp.
(ii) If (ˆφs,φm) = (0,1), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = coE[min(Dm,q)] −cbq + (po −
co)E[Dm] . The optimal order quantity is ¯q = 0, as
∂π(q)
∂q
= co(1 −Φ(q −µm
σm
)) −cb ≤0,
where the inequality holds by co ≤cb. Thus, the corresponding ﬁll rate is ¯ζ = 0.
(iii) If (ˆφs,φm) = (1,0), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (po −
co)E[Dm] . The optimal order quantity is ¯q = qs and the corresponding ﬁll rate is ¯ζ = ζs.
(iv) If (ˆφs,φm) = (0,0), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = (po −co)E[Dm] . The resulting order
quantity and ﬁll rate are ¯q = 0 and ¯ζ = 0, respectively.
Therefore, given retailer’s belief (ˆφs,φm), the optimal order quantity ¯q and the corresponding ﬁll
rate ¯ζ are given by
(¯q, ¯ζ) =



(qp,ζp) if (ˆφs,φm) = (1,1),
(qs,ζs) if (ˆφs,φm) = (1,0),
(0,0) if ˆφs = 0.
(A5)
RE Equilibrium. We now turn to analyze the RE equilibrium, which is denoted by (qP,φP
s ).
Definition A2 (RE Equilibrium Under BOPS).
A RE equilibrium (¯ζ, ˆζ, ¯φs, ˆφs, ¯q) should satisfy the following conditions:
(i) Given ˆζ and φm, ¯φs satisﬁes Equation (A4);
(ii) Given ˆφs and φm, (¯q, ¯ζ) satisﬁes Equation (A5);
(iii) ¯ζ = ˆζ and ¯φs = ˆφs.
According to the above deﬁnition, we consider the following four cases.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

7
Case 1: k ≤t and k ≤ζpub. By (A4), we have φm = 1, and thus by (A5), we have two potential
equilibria, i.e., (qp,1) and (0,0). Similar to Proposition 1, one can verify that both are RE equilibria
and that (qp,1) Pareto-dominates (0,0). Thus, qP = qp and φP
s = 1.
Case 2: k ≤t and k > ζpub. Again, we have two potential equilibria, i.e., (qp,1) and (0,0).
However, in this case, (qp,1) is not a RE equilibrium. Thus, there exists only a single equilibrium,
i.e., qP = 0 and φP
s = 0. As the retailer does not store any inventory in the B&M store, omni-
customers will choose the online channel.
Case 3: k > t and k ≤ζsub. In this case, φm = 0 and there are two equilibria, i.e., (qP,φP
s ) =
(qs,1) or (0,0). The former is Pareto-dominant and thus qP = qs and φP
s = 1.
Case 4: k > t and k > ζsub. In this case, φm = 0, and the only equilibrium is (qP,φP
s ) = (0,0).
As ζp > ζs (see Lemma 2), summarizing the above four cases leads us to the proposition.
□
The proofs for Propositions 3, 4 and 5 can be derived by comparing retailer’s expected proﬁts
in various areas, as illustrated in Figure 3. We now illustrate the proofs as follows.
Proof of Propositions 3. We analyze this case by considering the following two cases.
• ζsmub −uo + t < k ≤min(t,ζsub) (i.e., Area (I-2)). By Proposition 1(ii) and Proposition 2(i),
the retailer’s expected proﬁts in the BASE and BOPS models are respectively given by
ΠB = max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (po −co)E[Dm]};
ΠP = max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + coE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)] + (po −co)E[Dm]}.
Clearly, ΠB ≤ΠP.
• max(ζsmub −uo +t,ζsub) < k ≤min(t,ζpub) (i.e., Area (I-3)). By Proposition 1(iii) and Propo-
sition 2(i), the retailer’s expected proﬁts in the BASE and BOPS models are given by
ΠB = max
q {(po −co)E[Dm]};
ΠP = max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + coE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)] + (po −co)E[Dm]}.
Then, it directly follows that ΠB ≤ΠP.
Combining the above two cases will lead to the result. This is due to the fact that,
[max(ζsmub−uo+t,min(t,ζpub)] = [ζsmub−uo+t,min(t,ζsub)]
[
[max(ζsmub−uo+t,ζsub),min(t,ζpub)],
as ζs ≤ζp.
□
Proof of Proposition 4. When ζpub < k ≤ζsmub −uo + t (i.e., Area (II-1)), we have that
ζsmub −uo + t > ζpub if the region is not empty. As ζsmub ≤uo, we have t > ζpub, and the condition
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

8
of Proposition 2(iii) becomes k > max{ζpub,ζsub} = ζpub. This means that the case corresponds to
Proposition 2(iii) under the BOPS setting.
By Proposition 1(i) and Proposition 2(iii), we have
ΠB = max
q {pbE[min(Ds + Dm,q)] −cbq}
= (pb −cb)(µs + µm) + pb
p
σ2
s + σ2
m + 2ρσsσm
Z ϵ∗
−∞
ϵdΦ(ϵ)
= (pb −cb)(µs + µm) + µm∆+ pbσs
Z ϵ∗
∞
ϵdΦ(ϵ)
= (pb −cb)µs + pbσs
Z ϵ∗
∞
ϵdΦ(ϵ) + (pb −cb + ∆)µm,
≥(pb −cb)µs + pbσs
Z ϵ∗
∞
ϵdΦ(ϵ) + (po −co)µm,
= max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq} + (po −co)µm,
≥(po −co)E[Dm] = ΠP,
where the ﬁrst inequality holds by Assumption (M). Therefore, BOPS hurts the retailer.
□
Proof of Proposition 5. When k ≤min(ζpub,ζsmub −uo + t) (i.e., Area (I-1)), as uo ≥ub,
we have k ≤min(ζpub,ζsmub −uo + t) ≤min(ζpub,t). By Proposition 2(i) and Equation (4), the
retailer’s expected proﬁt in the BOPS model is given by
ΠP = max
q

pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + coE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)] + (po −co)E[Dm]
 
.
Meanwhile, by Proposition 1(i) and Equation (2), the retailer’s expected proﬁt in the BASE
model can be written as
ΠB = max
q {pbE[min(Dm + Ds,q)] −cbq}
= max
q

pbE[min(Ds,q)] + pbE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)] −cbq
 
.
Then, when po →co, we have πB ≥πP as
ΠP = max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + coE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)]}
≤max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + pbE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)]} = ΠB,
in which the inequality holds by co ≤cb ≤pb.
Note that
max
q {pbE[min(Dm + Ds,q)] −cbq} −max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq}
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

9
= pbE[min(Dm + Ds,µm + µs +
p
σ2
s + σ2
m + 2ρσsσmϵ∗)] −cb(µm + µs +
p
σ2
s + σ2
m + 2ρσsσmϵ∗)
−pbE[min(Ds,µs + σsϵ∗)] −cb(µs + σsϵ∗)
= (pb −cb)µm + pb(
p
σ2
s + σ2
m + 2ρσsσm −σs)
Z ϵ∗
−∞
ϵdΦ(ϵ)
= (pb −cb + ∆)µm.
(A6)
If po →pb −cb + co + ∆, we have πB < πP as
ΠP = max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + coE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)] + (pb −cb + ∆)µm}
= max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + coE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)]}
+max
q {pbE[min(Dm + Ds,q)] −cbq} −max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq}
≥max
q {pbE[min(Dm + Ds,q)] −cbq} = ΠB,
where the second equality follows from Equation (A6).
Thus, as ΠP is increasing in po, there exists a threshold δS(co) ∈[co,pb −cb + co + ∆] such that
when po < δS(co), ΠB ≥ΠP, and when po ≥δS(co), ΠB < ΠP.
□
B.
High Online Waiting Time (t > uo)
The results in the main body of the paper rely on the assumption that t ≤uo. This assumption
ensures that omni-customers can always gain a positive utility from the online channel and thus,
will not exit the market. In this section, we consider the opposite case, i.e., t > uo, to show that
our main insights are robust. Our analysis only focuses on the case with high online base surpluse
(i.e., uo ≥ub); the main results also carry over to the case with uo < ub.
The analysis on customers’ choice and retailer’s decision is almost the same as that of the case
with t ≤uo. The only diﬀerence is that under the assumption of t > uo, omni-customers will never
choose the online channel, but will choose BOPS, the oﬄine channel or exit the market. See the
proof of Proposition A1 for a detailed description of customers’ choice and retailer’s decision, as
well as the equilibrium analysis. We ﬁrst characterize the RE equilibrium for the BASE model.
Proposition A1 (REE under BASE with High Online Waiting Cost). At
the
RE
equilibrium, the inventory level in the B&M store and customers’ channel choices in the oﬄine
channel are as follows:
(i) if k ≤ζsmub, then qB = qsm and (φB
s ,φB
m) = (1,1);
(ii) if ζsmub < k ≤ζsub, then qB = qs and (φB
s ,φB
m) = (1,0);
(iii) if k > max(ζsub,ζsmub), then qB = 0 and (φB
s ,φB
m) = (0,0).
No omni-customers will purchase through the online channel.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

10
Consider a scenario where omni-customers deﬁnitely choose the oﬄine channel. Then, the
retailer’s objective function can be rewritten as
πP(q) = pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + poE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)].
(A7)
We denote by q(1)
P
the optimal order quantity of (A7). Then, the corresponding ﬁll rate is given
by ζ(1)
p
= E[min(q(1)
P ,Ds)]/E[Ds]. Let qm be the optimal order quantity of the newsvendor problem
π(q) = poE[min(Dm,q)] −cbq, where the retail price is the online price, but the supply cost is the
oﬄine cost. The following proposition characterizes the equilibrium.
Proposition A2 (REE under BOPS with High Online Waiting Cost). At
the
RE
equilibrium, the retailer’s optimal inventory level in the B&M store and customers’ optimal
channel choices are as follows:
(i) if k ≤ζ(1)
p ub, then qP = q(1)
P , φP
s = 1, and omni-customers choose BOPS;
(ii) if ζ(1)
p ub < k ≤uo, then qP = qm, φP
s = 0, and omni-customers choose BOPS.
Moreover, those unsatisﬁed omni-customers by BOPS will be lost.
When the store visiting cost is low, in equilibrium, store-only customers choose to visit the B&M
store, whereas omni-customers choose to purchase the product via the BOPS channel. In contrast,
when the store visiting cost is high but not higher than uo, in equilibrium, store-only customers
exit the market, whereas omni-customers choose BOPS. In this situation, the local inventory is
only held for omni-customers. Recall that with low online waiting cost (t ≤uo), omni-customers
unsatisﬁed by BOPS will switch to the online channel. However, in the case of a high online waiting
cost (t > uo), those omni-customers will be lost as the utility of purchasing online becomes negative.
We now compare BOPS and BASE strategies for t > uo which is also illustrated by Figure A1.
Theorem A1 (BOPS vs. BASE with High Online Waiting Cost).
(i) If ζsmub ≤k ≤
uo, BOPS beneﬁts the retailer.
(ii) If k < ζsmub, BOPS hurts the retailer.
When the store visiting cost is relatively high (ζsmub ≤k ≤uo), no customer would purchase the
product in the BASE model. As BOPS oﬀers an attractive online price and replaces the high online
waiting cost by the intermediate store visiting cost, it incentivizes omni-customers to purchase the
product via the BOPS channel. Such a market expansion eﬀect beneﬁts the retailer (see a similar
eﬀect in Gao and Su 2017b attributing to the so-called “convenience” oﬀered by BOPS). As there
is no demand coming from the oﬄine channel due to the high store visiting cost, the B&M store
now only serves as a pickup location for the omni-customers.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

11
Figure A1
BOPS over BASE when t > uo
𝒌
𝒕
0
(II‐2)
Online Waiting Cost
(II‐1)
(I‐1)
+ Expansion
Depooling
-
Store Visiting Cost
As the store visiting cost decreases to an intermediate level (ζ(1)
p ub ≤k < ζsmub), both types
of customers choose the oﬄine channel in the BASE model. With BOPS, omni-customers will
migrate from the oﬄine channel to the BOPS channel (i.e., demand depooling). The migration of
omni-customers will lead to a lower ﬁll rate that, in turn, leaves no incentive for the store-only
customers to visit the B&M store. Hence, this demand depooling eﬀect hurts the retailer. When
the store visiting cost further drops to a low level (k < ζ(1)
p ub), store-only customers remain in the
oﬄine channel, and omni-customers switch from the oﬄine channel to the BOPS channel. However,
omni-customers’ migration still results in a proﬁt decrease as they now pay a lower online price and
are lost in the event of stockout at the B&M store (due to t ≤uo). In summary, if t > uo and the
store visiting cost is suﬃciently low (k < ζsmub), BOPS hurts the retailer. Therefore, although Nash
(2016) recommended Walmart to sell its groceries online, the ﬁrm should be careful in this initiative
because, in the case of groceries (as time-sensitive products), when the store visiting cost is low
(e.g., due to the high density of Walmart stores), introducing BOPS may migrate some existing
customers from the high-margin store purchase to a potentially lower-margin BOPS purchase. Due
to the depooling eﬀect, the store may no longer ﬁnd it proﬁtable to maintain a high service level,
which, in turn, can hurt both the store-only customers and the retailer.
C.
Low Online Base Surplus (uo < ub)
As the utility from the oﬄine channel is always higher than that from BOPS, omni-customers never
choose the BOPS channel and instead choose either the online or oﬄine channels. Speciﬁcally, when
U P
m,o ≥U P
m,b (i.e., uo−t ≥ub−k), omni-customers will choose the online channel. If U P
m,o < U P
m,b (i.e.,
uo −t < ub −k), they prefer the oﬄine channel and choose BOPS merely for inventory information
disclosure: they ﬁrst check the inventory availability in store via BOPS; if the local inventory
is available, they will purchase from the B&M store, and otherwise, choose the online channel.
The retailer cannot diﬀerentiate store-only customers and omni-customers, when both choose to
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

12
purchase oﬄine. Hence, the inventory is allocated to those oﬄine customers (possibly from two
streams) proportionally.
Deﬁne φm as the proportion of omni-customers who prefer the oﬄine channel. As discussed
above, it can be expressed as
φm =
 1
if uo −t < ub −k;
0
if uo −t ≥ub −k.
Notice that the retailer can anticipate omni-customers’ decisions φm, because it only depends
on parameters which are assumed to be common knowledge. With a belief ˆφs on the proportion
of store-only customers who purchase through the oﬄine channel, the retailer anticipates there
are a total of ˆφsDs + φmDm oﬄine customers. As the inventory is allocated to those customers
proportionally, the unsatisﬁed BOPS demand is φmDm(1 −
q
ˆφsDs+φmDm )+ and will switch to the
online channel. Therefore, the retailer’s expected proﬁt can be expressed as
πP(q) = pbE[min(ˆφsDs + φmDm,q)] −cbq
|
{z
}
Proﬁt from Oﬄine Channel
+(po −co)E[(1 −φm)Dm + φmDm(1 −
q
ˆφsDs + φmDm
)+]
|
{z
}
Proﬁt from Online Channel
,
(A8)
where the ﬁrst term is the expected proﬁt obtained from the oﬄine channel, and the second term
is the expected proﬁt obtained from the online channel.
Deﬁne qe and qo as the optimal solution of (A8) when (ˆφs,φm) = (1,1) and (0,1), respectively.
The former scenario represents both store-only customers and omni-customers choose the oﬄine
channel, while the latter represents only omni-customers purchase oﬄine. Accordingly, we deﬁne
the corresponding ﬁll rate of the former scenario as ζe = E[min{qe,Ds+Dm}]
E[Ds+Dm]
.
Proposition A3 (REE under BOPS When uo < ub). At the RE equilibrium, the retailer’s
optimal inventory level in the B&M store and customers’ optimal channel choices are as follows:
(i) if k ≤min(ub −uo + t,ζeub), then qP = qe and (φP
s ,φm) = (1,1);
(ii) if ub −uo + t ≥k > ζeub,
(ii-1) when pb −cb > po −co, qP = qo and (φP
s ,φm) = (0,1);
(ii-2) when pb −cb ≤po −co, qP = 0 and (φP
s ,φm) = (0,0);
(iii) if ub −uo + t < k ≤ζsub, then, qP = qs and (φP
s ,φm) = (1,0);
(iv) if k > max(ub −uo + t,ζsub), then qP = 0 and (φP
s ,φm) = (0,0).
A fraction (1 −φm) of omni-customers will purchase through the online channel.
Figure A2 illustrates the RE equilibrium for the case with low online base surplus (i.e., uo < ub).
We discuss the equilibrium by considering two cases: k −t ≥ub −uo and k −t < ub −uo, which
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

13
Figure A2
Customer choice behavior under BOPS when uo < ub
𝒌
𝒕
0
(II)
(Exit, Online)
Online Waiting Cost
(I)
(Offline, Offline)
(III)
(Offline, 
Online)
(IV)
(Exit, Online/Offline*)
Store Visiting Cost
Note. ∗In Area IV, the equilibrium is online if pb −cb ≤po −co and otherwise, oﬄine.
correspond to two separate regions divided by the 45◦line in Figure A2. The explanation for the
former case (k −t ≥ub −uo) including Areas II and III is similar to the counterpart of uo ≥ub. In
the latter case (k −t < ub −uo), omni-customers always prefer the oﬄine channel over the online
channel. When the store visiting cost k is below a threshold (Area I), store-only customers will
choose to shop oﬄine. However, when the store visiting cost exceeds the threshold (Area IV),
store-only customers will exit the market. Although omni-customers prefer the oﬄine channel, the
retailer can order nothing for the B&M store so as to force omni-customers to be fulﬁlled by DC.
In particular, when pb −cb > po −co, it is more proﬁtable for the retailer to serve omni-customers
through the oﬄine channel, and thus, order a positive quantity; otherwise, the retailer has the
incentive to shut down the oﬄine channel. This observation is slightly diﬀerent from that under
uo ≥ub. In the corresponding area under uo ≥ub (see the part of Area II below the 45◦line),
store-only customers will also exit the market. If po −co < pb −cb, it is always more proﬁtable for
the retailer to close BOPS to force omni-customers to purchase online and be fulﬁlled by DC.
The following theorem presents the comparison between BOPS and BASE.
Theorem A2. (BOPS vs. BASE When uo < ub)
(i) If ζsmub −uo + t < k ≤t + ub −uo (Areas I-2, I-3, and II-3), BOPS beneﬁts the retailer.
(ii) If ζeub < k ≤ζsmub −uo + t (Area II-1), there exists δE(co) such that
(ii-1) if po ≥δE(co), BOPS beneﬁts the retailer;
(ii-2) if po < δE(co), BOPS hurts the retailer.
(iii) If k ≤min(ζeub,ζsmub −uo + t) (Area I-1), BOPS beneﬁts the retailer.
D.
Cross-Selling
In this section, we assume that there is a per unit cross-selling r for those customers visiting the
B&M store. Note that customers who go to the store and experience a stockout still buy other
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

14
stuﬀand add value by cross-buying. We incorporate this cross-selling revenue into the BASE and
BOPS models and derive the corresponding equilibria as follows.
D.1.
BASE Model with Cross-Selling
As the cross-selling does not directly aﬀect customers’ behavior, the corresponding analysis is
identical to that in Section 4.1. Given the belief on the proportion of customers who choose to
purchase oﬄine, the retailer’s expected proﬁt function can be written as
π(q) = pbE[min(ˆφmDm + ˆφsDs,q)] −cbq + (po −co)E[(1 −ˆφm)Dm]
+rE[ˆφmDm + ˆφsDs],
(A9)
where the last term represents the revenue from cross-selling in the B&M store.
Proposition A4 (REE for BASE With Cross-Selling). At
the
RE
equilibrium,
retailer’s inventory level assigned to the B&M store and customers’ choices on the oﬄine channel
are as follows:
(i) if k < ζsmub −(uo −t), then qB = qsm and (φB
s ,φB
m) = (1,1);
(ii) if ζsmub −(uo −t) < k < ζsub, then qB = qs and (φB
s ,φB
m) = (1,0);
(iii) if k > max(ζsub,ζsmub −(uo −t)), then qB = 0 and (φB
s ,φB
m) = (0,0);
and (1 −φB
m) proportion of omni-customers will choose the online channel.
D.2.
BOPS Model with Cross-Selling
Under BOPS, the retailer’s expected proﬁt function can be expressed as
π(q) = pbE[min(ˆφsDs,q)] −cbq + (po + r)E[min(ˆφmDm,(q −ˆφsDs)+)]
+(po −co)E[(1 −ˆφm)Dm + (ˆφmDm −(q −ˆφsDs)+)+] + rE[ˆφsDs]
= pbE[min(ˆφsDs,q)] −cbq + (r + co)E[min(ˆφmDm,(q −ˆφsDs)+)]
+(po −co)E[Dm] + rE[ˆφsDs].
(A10)
One can readily verify that π(q) is concave in q for any given (ˆφs, ˆφm). Let qC(ˆφs, ˆφm) be the
corresponding optimal solution of (A10). Moreover, we deﬁne ζC(ˆφs, ˆφm) = E[qC( ˆφs, ˆφm),Ds]
E[Ds]
.
Lemma A1.
(i) qC(1,1) ≥qs and ζC(1,1) ≥ζs.
(ii) qC(0,1) ≥0 if and only if r + co ≥cb.
(iii) ζC(1,1) ≥ζC(0,1) and ζC(1,1) ≥ζp.
Given this lemma, we have the following proposition.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

15
Proposition A5 (REE for BOPS With Cross-Selling). At
the
RE
equilibrium,
the
retailer’s inventory level assigned to the B&M store and customers’ choices on the oﬄine channel
are as follows:
(i) if k ≤min(t,ζC(1,1)ub), then qP = qC(1,1) and (φP
s ,φP
m) = (1,1);
(ii) if t < k ≤ζsub, then, qP = qs and (φP
s ,φP
m) = (1,0);
(iii) if ζC(1,1)ub < k ≤t, then,
(iii −1) when co + r > cb, qP = qC(0,1) and (φP
s ,φP
m) = (0,1);
(iii −2) when co + r ≤cb, qP = 0 and (φP
s ,φP
m) = (0,0);
(iv) if k > max(t,ζsub), then qP = 0 and (φP
s ,φP
m) = (0,0).
Moreover, all other unsatisﬁed omni-customers will buy from the online channel.
D.3.
Comparison Between BASE and BOPS Models with Cross-Selling
The comparison result between BOPS and BASE is as follows.
Theorem A3. (Comparison between BOPS and BASE With Cross-Selling)
(i) If ζsmub −uo + t < k ≤t (Areas I-2, I-3 and II-2), then BOPS beneﬁts the retailer.
(ii) If ζC(1,1)ub < k ≤ζsmub −uo + t (Area II-1), then BOPS hurts the retailer.
(iii) If k ≤min(ζpub,ζsmub −uo + t) (Area I-1), there exists a threshold δC(co,r) ∈[co,co + pb −
cb + r + ∆] such that
(iii-1) if po < δC(co,r), BOPS hurts the retailer;
(iii-2) if po ≥δC(co,r), BOPS beneﬁts the retailer.
Moreover, δC(co,r) is increasing in r and δC(co,r) ≥δS(co).
E.
Recourse Behavior of Omni-Customers
In the base model, when omni-customers who visit the store experience a stock-out, they are
assumed to be lost, instead of switching to the online channel. In this section, we attempt to relax
this assumption by assuming that those omni-customers who experience a stock-out in store will
switch to the online channel. This relaxation only inﬂuences the BASE model, but not the BOPS
model. This is because under BOPS, as a feature of our model, omni-customers can always check
inventory availability of the B&M store via BOPS before visiting the store and naturally switch
to the online channel when facing a stock-out. We ﬁrst characterize the RE equilibrium under the
BASE model and then compare it with that under BOPS. Again, our analysis only focuses on the
case with high online base surplus (i.e., uo ≥ub); the main results also carry over to the case with
uo < ub.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

16
BASE Model. Recall that customers who purchase via the oﬄine channel may face a stockout
risk. Without knowing the exact inventory in the B&M store, customers will ﬁrst form a belief ˆζ
on the in-stock probability before making their purchase decisions. Based on this belief, customers’
utilities from diﬀerent channels can be expressed as:
U B
s,b = ˆζub −k,
U B
m,b = ˆζub −k + (1 −ˆζ)(uo −t),
U B
m,o = uo −t.
(A11)
Diﬀerent from the lost-sales case, omni-customers’ utility from purchasing oﬄine has an additional
utility uo −t from the switch back to the online channel when the stock-out happens with the
probability (1 −ˆζ).
Customer Choice. Store-only customers purchase the product if U B
s,b ≥0; otherwise, they exit
the market. For an omni-customer, she purchases the product from the oﬄine channel if and only
if U B
m,b ≥max{0,U B
m,o} and the online channel if and only if U B
m,o ≥max{0,U B
m,b}.
Retailer’s
Decision. The retailer cannot diﬀerentiate store-only customers and omni-
customers, when both choose to purchase oﬄine. We assume that the inventory is allocated to
those oﬄine customers proportionally. Given the belief (ˆφs, ˆφm) on the proportion of customers
who choose the oﬄine channel, the retailer’s expected proﬁt is given by
¯πB(q) = pbE[min(ˆφmDm + ˆφsDs,q)] −cbq
|
{z
}
Proﬁt from Oﬄine Channel
+ (po −co)E[(1 −ˆφm)Dm]
|
{z
}
Proﬁt from Online Channel
+(po −co)E[(ˆφmDm −
ˆφmDm
ˆφmDm + ˆφsDs
q)+]
|
{z
}
Proﬁt from Online Channel
,
(A12)
where the last term represents the proﬁt from those omni-customers who switch back to the online
channel when experiencing a stock-out at store.
The optimal solution of
¯πB(q)|( ˆφs, ˆφm)=(1,1) = pbE[min(Dm + Ds,q)] −cbq + (po −co)E[(Dm −
Dm
Dm + Ds
q)+],
is just qe (a solution of (A8)), and the corresponding ﬁll rate, i.e., E[min(Dm + Ds,qe)]/E[Dm + Ds],
is given by ζe, which represents the ﬁll rate when both store-only customers and omni-customers
visit the local store. Note that ζe ≤ζsm. However, ζe coulde be larger or smaller than ζs depending
on the demand correlation.
For ease of exploration, we assume that ζe ≥ζs (or equivalently, the demand correlation ρ is
nonpositive); namely, we assume that the ﬁll rate becomes weakly larger when the two streams of
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

17
customers visit the oﬄine store, compared to the case in which only store-only customers visit the
oﬄine store.
Proposition A6 (REE under BASE with Recourse Behavior of Omni-customers).
At the RE equilibrium, the inventory level in the B&M store and customers’ channel choices in
the oﬄine channel are as follows:
(i) if k ≤ζe(ub −uo + t), then qB = qe and (φB
s ,φB
m) = (1,1);
(ii) if ζe(ub −uo + t) < k ≤ζsub, then qB = qs and (φB
s ,φB
m) = (1,0);
(iii) if k > max(ζsub,ζe(ub −uo + t)), then qB = 0 and (φB
s ,φB
m) = (0,0).
A fraction (1 −φB
m) of omni-customers will purchase through the online channel.
When the store visiting cost is low, then both store-only customers and omni-customers will
choose to purchase through the oﬄine channel. As the store visiting cost increases to a moderate
level, omni-customers will switch to the online channel because the utility of purchasing is higher
online than oﬄine, whereas store-only customers stick to the oﬄine channel as the associated
utility is still positive. When the store visiting cost is high, no customers will visit the B&M store.
Moreover, those omni-customers who do not choose the oﬄine channel will purchase online.
The following theorem demonstrates the comparison between BASE and BOPS when omni-
customers who visit the store and face a stock-out will switch back to the online channel.
Theorem A4 (BOPS vs. BASE with Recourse Behavior by Omni-Customers).
(i) If ζe(ub −uo + t) < k ≤min(t,ζpub), BOPS beneﬁts the retailer.
(ii) If ζpub < k ≤ζe(ub −uo + t), BOPS hurts the retailer.
(iii) If k ≤min(ζpub,ζe(ub −uo + t)), there exists δR(co) ≥δS(co) such that
(iii-1) if po < δR(co), BOPS hurts the retailer;
(iii-2) if po ≥δR(co), BOPS beneﬁts the retailer.
First, it can be seen from Theorem A4 that our main insights still hold. 1) BOPS may beneﬁt or
hurt the retailer depending on the store visiting cost and the online waiting cost. 2) The demand
pooling eﬀect still exists when the online waiting cost is relatively low and the store visiting cost
is even lower. 3) In contrast, the demand depooling eﬀect also exists when both the store visiting
cost and the online waiting cost are relatively high, with the latter even higher.
Second, compared with the lost-sales case, the pooling/depooling eﬀect could be strengthened or
weakened. As the recourse behavior does not aﬀect the BOPS model, it suﬃces to directly compare
the BASE models with and without recourse (see Propositions 1 and A6). As the explanations
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

18
for the impact of the recourse behavior on pooling and depooling eﬀects are similar, we here only
discuss how the recourse behavior inﬂuences the pooling eﬀect.
Impact on Pooling Eﬀect. Consider the area in which without the recourse behavior, omni-
customers choose the online channel, while store-only customers exit the market in the BASE
model. In this situation, without the recourse behavior, BOPS may trigger a pooling eﬀect (the
retailer would use the local inventory to serve both BOPS and store-only customers, resulting in
a higher ﬁll rate). However, the higher utility from the recourse behavior may incentivize omni-
customers to switch from the online channel to the oﬄine. That is, with the recourse behavior,
both omni-customers and store-only customers can choose the oﬄine channel in the BASE model.
Then BOPS does not necessarily lead to a pooling eﬀect. Therefore, the recourse behavior may
lessen the pooling eﬀect.
On the other hand, consider the area in which without the recourse behavior, both store-only
customers and omni-customers choose the oﬄine channel in the BASE model. In this situation,
without the recourse behavior, BOPS may not trigger a pooling eﬀect. The recourse behavior of
omni-customers reduces the lost-sales cost in the B&M store. As a result, the retailer will order less
inventory for the B&M store. It leads to a lower ﬁll rate which forces omni-customers to choose the
online channel in the BASE model. Consequently, the introduction of BOPS under the recourse
behavior may incentivize omni-customers to visit the store, resulting in a pooling eﬀect. That is,
the recourse behavior could amplify the pooling eﬀect.
F.
Proofs of the Results in Online Appendix
Proof of Proposition A1. Let ˆζ be the customers’ belief on the ﬁll rate and (ˆφm, ˆφs) be
the retailer’s belief on the proportions of omni-customers and store-only customers who purchase
oﬄine. We ﬁrst characterize customers’ channel choices and retailer’s optimal decision in terms of
these private beliefs.
Customer Choice. Given customers’ belief on the ﬁll rate, let (¯φm, ¯φs) be the resulting propor-
tions of omni-customers and store-only customers who purchase oﬄine. Customers’ utilities from
purchasing online and oﬄine channels are given by (2). Then, customers’ channel choices are as
follows: 1) store-only customers purchase the product if U B
s,b ≥0; otherwise, exit the market, or 2)
omni-customers purchase the product from the oﬄine channel if and only if U B
m,b ≥max(0,U B
m,o)
and from the online channel if and only if U B
m,o ≥max(0,U B
m,b). In particular, we can further char-
acterize customers’ choices, (¯φs, ¯φm), in diﬀerent parameter regions as follows:
(i) If ˆζub −k ≥0, then both store-only customers and omni-customers will choose the oﬄine
channel, i.e., (¯φs, ¯φm) = (1,1).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

19
(ii) If ˆζub −k < 0, then both types of customers will exit the market, i.e., (¯φs, ¯φm) = (0,0).
Therefore, given customers’ belief on the ﬁll rate ˆζ, the resulting market segmentation (¯φs, ¯φm) is
expressed as
(¯φs, ¯φm) =
(
(1,1) if ˆζ ≥k
ub ,
(0,0) if ˆζ < k
ub .
(A13)
Retailer’s Optimal Decision. Given retailer’s beliefs (ˆφm, ˆφs) on customers’ choices, let ¯q
and ¯ζ be the optimal order quantity for the B&M store and the corresponding resulting ﬁll rate,
respectively. As customers are homogeneous, there are three possible values of (ˆφs, ˆφm): (1,1),
(1,0), and (0,0). We now analyze the retailer’s optimal decision for these three cases.
(i) If (ˆφs, ˆφm) = (1,1), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = pbE[min(Dm + Ds,q)] −cbq. Then,
the optimal order quantity is ¯q = qsm, and the corresponding ﬁll rate is ¯ζ = ζsm.
(ii) If (ˆφs, ˆφm) = (1,0), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = pbE[min(Ds,q)]−cbq. Consequently,
the optimal order quantity is ¯q = qs, and the corresponding ﬁll rate is ¯ζ = ζs.
(iii) If (ˆφs, ˆφm) = (0,0), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = 0. Therefore, the retailer will order
nothing from the B&M store and the resulting ﬁll rate is zero, i.e., ¯q = 0 and ¯ζ = 0.
In summary, given the belief (ˆφs, ˆφm), the retailer’s optimal decision of ¯q and the corresponding
ﬁll rate ¯ζ can be characterized as
(¯q, ¯ζ) =



(qsm,ζsm) if (ˆφs, ˆφm) = (1,1),
(qs,ζs)
if (ˆφs, ˆφm) = (1,0),
(0,0)
if (ˆφs, ˆφm) = (0,0).
(A14)
RE Equilibrium. Next, we analyze the RE equilibrium, denoted by (qB,φB
m,φB
s ), by connecting
customers’ choices with the retailer’s optimal decision. The concept of RE equilibrium states 1)
customers’ belief on the ﬁll rate is exactly the realized ﬁll rate, and 2) retailer’s belief on customers’
choices is just consistent with the realized one. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne the RE equilibrium as follows.
Definition A3 (RE Equilibrium Under BASE). A RE equilibrium
(¯ζ, ˆζ, ¯φm, ¯φs, ˆφm, ˆφs, ¯q)
should satisfy the following conditions:
(i) Given ˆζ, (¯φs, ¯φm) satisﬁes Equation (A13);
(ii) Given (ˆφs, ˆφm), (¯q, ¯ζ) satisﬁes Equation (A14);
(iii) ¯ζ = ˆζ and (¯φs, ¯φm) = (ˆφs, ˆφm).
Similar to the proof of Proposition 1, one can obtain the desired result by checking Deﬁnition
A3.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

20
Proof of Proposition A2. As t > uo, omni-customers will never choose the online channel. We
use the same notation as in Proposition 2.
Customer Choice. Given the belief on the ﬁll rate ˆζ, customers’ channel choices are as follows:
1) store-only customers purchase the product if U P
s,b ≥0; otherwise, they exit the market; 2) omni-
customers purchase the product from the BOPS channel if and only if U P
m,ob ≥0; otherwise, they
exit the market. The market segmentation is characterized as follows.
(i) If k > uo ≥ub, both omni-customers and store-only customers will exit the market. That is,
the demand for all channels is zero.
(ii) If uo ≥k > ˆζub, omni-customers will choose the BOPS channel, whereas store-only customers
will exit the market. This means that the total demand for BOPS is Dm and that for the B&M
store is zero.
(iii) If ˆζub ≥k, omni-customers again choose the BOPS channel, whereas store-only customers
will buy from the oﬄine channel. Then, the total demand for BOPS is Dm and that for the B&M
store is Ds.
In summary, given customers’ belief on the ﬁll rate ˆζ, the resulting market segmentation is given
by
(¯φs,φm) =





(1,1) if ˆζ ≥k
ub ,
(0,1) if ˆζ < k
ub and k ≤uo,
(0,0) if k > uo.
(A15)
Retailer’s Optimal Decision. Depending on the above analysis, we can restrict the retailer’s
belief on market segmentation (ˆφs,φm) within (0,0), (0,1), and (1,1).
(i) If (ˆφs,φm) = (1,1), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq +
poE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)] . The optimal order quantity is ¯q = q(1)
P , and the corresponding ﬁll
rate is ¯ζ = ζ(1)
p .
(ii) If (ˆφs,φm) = (0,1), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = poE[min(Dm,q)]−cbq . The optimal
order quantity is ¯q = qm, and the corresponding ﬁll rate is ˆζ = ζm = E[min(Dm,qm)]
µm
. However,
the ﬁll rate for store-only customers is zero.
(iii) If (ˆφs,φm) = (0,0), the retailer does not stock any inventory in the B&M store as there is no
oﬄine demand.
In summary, given the retailer’s belief, the optimal quantity ¯q and the corresponding ﬁll rate ¯ζ are
(¯q, ¯ζ) =



(q(1)
P ,ζ(1)
p ) if (ˆφs,φm) = (1,1),
(qm,ζm) if (ˆφs,φm) = (0,1),
(0,0)
if (ˆφs,φm) = (0,0).
(A16)
RE Equilibrium.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

21
Definition A4 (RE Equilibrium Under BOPS with t > uo).
A RE equilibrium (¯ζ, ˆζ, ¯φs, ˆφs, ¯q) should satisfy the following conditions:
(i) Given ˆζ and φm, ¯φs satisﬁes Equation (A15);
(ii) Given ˆφs and φm, (¯q, ¯ζ) satisﬁes Equation (A16);
(iii) ¯ζ = ˆζ and ¯φs = ˆφs.
We characterize the RE equilibria by considering two cases.
Case 1: k ≤ζ(1)
p ub. In this case, we have φm = 1 and two potential equilibria with (qP,φP
s ) =
(q(1)
P ,1) or (qm,0). The equilibrium (q(1)
P ,1) always exists, whereas (qm,0) exists only when k > ζmub.
Otherwise, when both customers believe that the retailer holds the inventory level at qm, store-only
customers will purchase as k ≤ζmub. Meanwhile, when the retailer expects store-only customers’
purchasing, she will order q(1)
P . Thus, the self-fulﬁlling prophecy fails. Nevertheless, we next show
that (q(1)
P ,1) Pareto-dominates (qm,0) regardless of whether (qm,0) is an equilibrium or not.
Under (q(1)
P ,1), the market segmentation is (ˆφs,φm) = (1,1), whereas under (qm,0), it is (ˆφs,φm) =
(1,0). Clearly, the retailer’s expected proﬁt under the former is larger than that under the latter.
Because pb > po, we have qm < µm + σmΦ−1(1 −cb
pb ) = qs and the corresponding ﬁll rate is ζm < ζs.
Thus, by Lemma 2, ζm < ζ(1)
p , which implies that customers will gain a higher utility from the
equilibrium (q(1)
P ,1).
Case 2: uo ≥k > ζ(1)
p ub. In this case, we can verify that φm = 1 and there is only one equilibrium
(qP,φP
s ) = (qm,0).
Combining the above cases will yield the desired results.
□
Proof of Theorem A1. We prove the results by comparing retailer’s expected proﬁts in various
areas as illustrated in Figure A1.
• k ≤min{ζ(1)
p ,ζsm}ub (i.e., Area (I)). By Proposition 1(i) and Proposition 2(i), the retailer’s
expected proﬁts in the BASE and BOPS models are respectively given by
ΠB = max
q {pbE[min(Dm + Ds,q)] −cbq};
ΠP = max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + poE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)]}.
Because pb ≥po, we have
ΠP = max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + poE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)]}
≤max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + pbE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)]}
= ΠB.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

22
• ζ(1)
p ub < k ≤ζsmub (i.e., Area (II-1)). By Proposition 1(i) and Proposition 2(ii), the retailer’s
expected proﬁts in the BASE and BOPS models are respectively given by
ΠB = max
q {pbE[min(Ds + Dm,q)] −cbq};
ΠP = max
q {poE[min(Dm,q)] −cbq}.
Then, ΠB ≥ΠP as po ≤pb.
• ζsmub < k (i.e., Area (II-2)). Because ζsm ≥ζs, this case in the BASE model corresponds to
Proposition 1(iii). Thus, ΠB = 0. Because ΠP is always nonnegative, ΠB ≤ΠP.
Therefore, we can obtain the desired results by combing the above cases.
□
Proof of Proposition A3. Similar to the proof logic of Propositions 1 and 2, we can characterize
the customers’ choice as follows.
Customer Choice. Given customers’ belief on the ﬁll rate ˆζ, we can analyze the resulting
market segmentation as follows.
(i) If k ≤ub −uo + t and k ≤ˆζub, both store-only customers and omni-customers will go to the
oﬄine channel. Then, the total demand for the B&M store is Ds + Dm, and those omni-
customers who ﬁnd a stockout will switch to the online channel.
(ii) If k ≤ub −uo + t and k > ˆζub, store-only customers will exit the market, and omni-customers
will go to the oﬄine channel. Then, the total demand for the oﬄine channel is Dm.
(iii) If k > ub −uo + t and k ≤ˆζub, store-only customers will go to the B&M store, whereas omni-
customers will go to the online channel. Then, the total demand for the online channel is Dm
and that for the oﬄine channel is Ds.
(iv) If k > ub −uo + t and k > ˆζub, store-only customers will exit the market, and omni-customers
will go to the online channel. Then, the total demand for the online channel is Dm and that
for the oﬄine channel is 0.
In summary, given customers’ belief on the ﬁll rate ˆζ, the resulting market segmentation is given
by
(¯φs,φm) =









(1,1) if ˆζ ≥k
ub and k ≤ub −uo + t,
(0,1) if ˆζ < k
ub and k ≤ub −uo + t,
(1,0) if ˆζ ≥k
ub and k > ub −uo + t,
(0,0) if ˆζ < k
ub and k > ub −uo + t.
(A17)
Retailer’s Optimal Decision. We now analyze the retailer’s optimal decision given his beliefs
on the market segmentation (ˆφs,φm). By the above analysis on the market segmentation, we can
see that the feasible market segmentation (ˆφs,φm) will be (1,1), (1,0), (0,1), and (0,0). Thus, we
discuss the following four cases.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

23
(i) If (ˆφs,φm) = (1,1), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = pbE[min(Ds + Dm,q)] −cbq + (po −
co)E[(Dm −
Dm
Ds+Dm q)+] . The resulting optimal order quantity is ¯q = qe, and the corresponding
ﬁll rate is ¯ζ = ζe.
(ii) If (ˆφs,φm) = (0,1), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = pbE[min(Dm,q)] −cbq + (po −
co)E[(Dm −q)+] . The resulting optimal order quantity is ¯q = qo. Deﬁne the corresponding ﬁll
rate of the local store by ζo = E{Dm,qo}
E[Dm] .
(iii) If (ˆφs,φm) = (1,0), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (po −
co)E[Dm] . The resulting optimal order quantity is ¯q = qs, and the corresponding ﬁll rate is
ζs.
(iv) If (ˆφs,φm) = (0,0), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = (po −co)E[Dm] . The optimal order
quantity is ¯q = 0 and the ﬁll rate is 0.
Therefore, given retailer’s belief (ˆφs,φm), the optimal order quantity ¯q and the corresponding ﬁll
rate ¯ζ are given by
(¯q, ¯ζ) =









(qe,ζe) if (ˆφs,φm) = (1,1),
(qo,ζo) if (ˆφs,φm) = (0,1),
(qs,ζs) if (ˆφs,φm) = (1,0),
(0,0) if (ˆφs,φm) = (0,0).
(A18)
RE Equilibrium. We now turn to analyze the RE equilibrium, which is denoted by (qP,φP
s ).
Definition A5 (RE Equilibrium Under BOPS When uo < ub).
A RE equilibrium (¯ζ, ˆζ, ¯φs, ˆφs, ¯q) should satisfy the following conditions:
(i) Given ˆζ and φm, ¯φs satisﬁes Equation (A17);
(ii) Given ˆφs and φm, (¯q, ¯ζ) satisﬁes Equation (A18);
(iii) ¯ζ = ˆζ and ¯φs = ˆφs.
According to Deﬁnition A5, we consider the following four cases.
Case 1: k ≤ub −uo + t and k ≤ζeub. By (A17), we have φm = 1, and thus by (A18), we have
three potential equilibria, i.e., (qe,ζe), (qo,ζo) and (0,0). Similar to Proposition 1, one can verify
that all are RE equilibria and that (qe,ζe) is Pareto-dominant. Thus, qP = qe and φP
s = 1.
Case 2: k ≤ub −uo + t and k > ζeub. Again, we have three potential equilibria, i.e., (qe,ζe),
(qo,ζo) and (0,0). However, as k > ζeub, the store-only customers will exit the market and thus,
(qe,ζe) is not a RE equilibrium. Notice that the equilibrium (0,0) means that the retailer does not
store any inventory in the B&M store so that omni-customers have to choose the online channel.
If pb −cb > po −co, it is more proﬁtable for the retailer to serve omni-customers through the oﬄine
channel and thus, (qo,ζo) dominates (0,0). Thus, there exists only a unique equilibrium, i.e., qP = qo
and φP
s = 0. On the other hand, when pb −cb ≤po −co, it is more proﬁtable for the retailer to serve
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

24
omni-customers through the online channel and thus, (0,0) dominates (qo,ζo), i.e., the only unique
equilibrium is qP = 0 and φP
s = 0.
Case 3: k > ub −uo +t and k ≤ζsub. In this case, φm = 0 and there are two potential equilibria,
i.e., (qs,ζs) and (0,0). Both are RE equilibria. The former is Pareto-dominant and thus qP = qs
and φP
s = 1.
Case 4: k > ub −uo +t and k > ζsub. In this case, φm = 0 and there are two potential equilibria,
i.e., (qs,ζs) and (0,0). However, as k > ζsub, the store-only customers will exit the market and thus,
(qs,ζs) is not a RE equilibrium. The only equilibrium is (qP,φP
s ) = (0,0).
Summarizing the above four cases leads us to the proposition.
□
Proof of Theorem A2. The results can be derived by comparing retailer’s expected proﬁts in
various areas. We consider the following ﬁve cases.
Case 1: k ≤min(ζeub,ζsmub −uo + t) (i.e., Area I-1). On the one hand, by the equilibrium
analysis in Online Supplement A, the retailer’s expected proﬁt in the BOPS model is given by
ΠP = max
q

pbE[min(Ds + Dm,q)] −cbq + (po −co)E[(Dm −
Dm
Ds + Dm
q)+]

.
On the other hand, the retailer’s expected proﬁt in the BASE model is
ΠB = max
q {pbE[min(Dm + Ds,q)] −cbq}.
Clearly, ΠB ≤ΠP.
Case 2: ζsmub −uo + t < k ≤min(t,ζsub) (i.e., Area I-2). By Proposition 1(ii) and Proposition
A3, the retailer’s expected proﬁts in the BASE and BOPS models are respectively given by
ΠB = max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (po −co)E[Dm]};
ΠP = max
q {pbE[min(Ds + Dm,q)] −cbq + (po −co)E[(Dm −
Dm
Ds + Dm
q)+]}.
Clearly, ΠB ≤ΠP, as Assumption (M) implies that
max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (po −co)E[Dm]} ≤max
q {pbE[min(Ds + Dm,q)] −cbq}.
Case 3: max(ζsmub −uo + t,ζsub) < k ≤min(t,ζeub) (i.e., Area I-3). By Proposition 1(iii) and
Proposition A3(i), the retailer’s expected proﬁts in the BASE and BOPS models are given by
ΠB = max
q {(po −co)E[Dm]};
ΠP = max
q {pbE[min(Ds + Dm,q)] −cbq + (po −co)E[(Dm −
Dm
Ds + Dm
q)+]}.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

25
Then, it directly follows that πB ≤πP as
ΠP = max
q {pbE[min(Ds + Dm,q)] −cbq + (po −co)E[(Dm −
Dm
Ds + Dm
q)+]}
≥max
q {pbE[min(Dm,q)] −cbq + (po −co)E[(Dm −q)+]} ≥(po −co)E[Dm].
Case 4: max(ζsmub −uo + t,ζeub) < k ≤t + ub −uo (i.e., Area II-2). By Proposition 1(iii) and
Proposition A3(ii), the retailer’s expected proﬁts in the BASE and BOPS models (when pb −cb >
po −co) are given by ΠB = maxq{(po −co)E[Dm]} and ΠP = maxq{pbE[min(Dm,q)] −cbq + (po −
co)E[(Dm −q)+]}, Then, it directly follows that ΠB ≤ΠP. On the other hand, when pb −cb ≤po −co,
we have that ΠB ≤ΠP.
Case 5: ζeub < k ≤ζsmub −uo + t (i.e., Area II-1). By Proposition 1(i) and Proposition A3(iii),
we have ΠB = maxq{pbE[min(Ds + Dm,q)] −cbq} and ΠP = maxq{pbE[min(Dm,q)] −cbq + (po −
co)E[(Dm −q)+]}, respectively.
We can easily verify that when po →co, we have ΠP ≤ΠB; whereas when po →∞, ΠP > ΠB.
Moreover, ΠP is increasing in po and ΠB is independent of po. Therefore, there exists a unique
δE(co) such that
max
q {pbE[min(Ds + Dm,q)] −cbq} = max
q {pbE[min(Dm,q)] −cbq + (δE(co) −co)E[(Dm −q)+]}.
If such δE(co) violates Assumption (M), we just let δE(co) = pb −cb + ∆+ co. Consequently, BOPS
beneﬁts the retailer if and only if po ≥δE(co).
□
Proof of Proposition A4. Customers’ choices are the same as those in Proposition 1, and
thus, we obtain
(¯φs, ¯φm) =





(1,1) if ˆζ ≥uo−t+k
ub
,
(1,0) if
k
ub ≤ˆζ < uo−t+k
ub
,
(0,0) if ˆζ < k
ub .
(A19)
We start the analysis with retailer’s decisions as follows.
Retailer’s Optimal Decisions. We have the following three cases.
(i) If (ˆφs, ˆφm) = (1,1), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = pbE[min(Dm + Ds,q)] −cbq +
rE[Dm + Ds] , and the resulting optimal order quantity is ¯q = qsm. Then, the corresponding
ﬁll rate is ¯ζ = ζsm.
(ii) If (ˆφs, ˆφm) = (1,0), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (po −
co)E[Dm]+rE[Ds] . Then, the resulting optimal order quantity is ¯q = qs, and the correspond-
ing ﬁll rate is ¯ζ = ζs.
(iii) If (ˆφs, ˆφm) = (0,0), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = (po −co)E[Dm] , and the resulting
ﬁll rate is 0.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

26
RE Equilibrium. The equilibrium analysis is similar to Proposition 1. Under the condition po −
co ≤pb −cb + ∆, we can obtain the desired equilibria by checking the deﬁnition of RE equilibrium.
□
Proof of Lemma A1. Part (i) is similar to Lemma 2 as r ≥0. We now prove parts (ii) and
(iii) as follows.
(ii) From Equation (A10), qC(0,1) satisﬁes the ﬁrst order condition as
∂π(q)
∂q
= ∂[(r + co)E[min(Dm,q)] −cbq
∂q
= 0.
Clearly, qC(0,1) ≥0 if and only if r + co ≥cb.
(iii) By the optimality condition, qC(1,1) satisﬁes the ﬁrst order condition
∂π(q)
∂q
= ∂[pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (r + co)E[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)]
∂q
≥∂[(r + co)E[min(Dm,q)] −cbq
∂q
,
which implies that qC(1,1) ≥qC(0,1). As the ﬁll rate increases in the order quantity, it follows that
ζC(1,1) ≥ζC(0,1).
Finally, we prove ζC(1,1) ≥ζp. Notice that qC(1,1) satisﬁes the ﬁrst order condition
∂π(q)
∂q
= ∂[E[pb min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (r + co)E[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)]
∂q
= 0,
and qp satisﬁes
∂π(q)
∂q
= ∂[E[pb min(Ds,q)] −cbq + coE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)]
∂q
= 0.
Because r ≥0, it is obvious that qC(1,1) ≥qp, and thus, ζC(1,1) ≥ζp.
□
Proof of Proposition A5. Customers’ choices are the same as those under BOPS in Section
4 of ?. We next analyze the retailer’s optimal decisions.
Retailer’s Optimal Decision. The feasible market segmentation (ˆφs,φm) will be (1,1), (1,0),
(0,1), and (0,0). Omni-customers who experience a stock-out case in the B&M store will go to
the online store and unsatisﬁed store-only customers will be lost. Thus, we have the following four
cases.
(i) If (ˆφs,φm) = (1,1), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (co +
r)E[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)] + (po −co)E[Dm] + rE[Ds]. The resulting optimal order quantity
¯q = qC(1,1), and the corresponding ﬁll rate is ζC(1,1).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

27
(ii) If (ˆφs,φm) = (0,1), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = (co + r)E[min(Dm,q)] −cbq + (po −
co)E[Dm] . Then, when r + co > cb, the resulting optimal order quantity ¯q = qC(0,1), and the
corresponding ﬁll rate is ζC(0,1); when r + co ≤cb, ¯q = 0 and the ﬁll rate is zero.
(iii) If (ˆφs,φm) = (1,0), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (po −
co)E[Dm] + rE[Ds]. The resulting optimal order quantity is ¯q = qs, and the corresponding ﬁll
rate is ζs.
(iv) If (ˆφs,φm) = (0,0), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = (po −co)E[Dm] , and the resulting
ﬁll rate is 0.
RE Equilibrium. Given customers’ purchasing behavior and retailer’s ordering policy, by check-
ing the deﬁnition of RE equilibrium as that for Proposition 2, we can obtain the desired result.
□
Proof of Theorem A3. The results can be derived by comparing retailer’s expected proﬁts in
various areas.
• k ≤min(ζC(1,1)ub,ζsmub −uo + t)
(i.e.,
Area
(I-1)).
Because
uo ≥ub,
k ≤
min(ζC(1,1)ub,ζsmub −uo + t) ≤min(ζC(1,1)ub,t). By Proposition A5(i), the retailer’s expected
proﬁt under BOPS is given by
ΠP = max
q

pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (co + r)E[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)] + (po −co)E[Dm] + rE[Ds]
 
.
By Proposition A4(i), the retailer’s expected proﬁt in the BASE model is
ΠB = max
q {pbE[min(Dm + Ds,q)] −cbq + rE[Ds + Dm]}
= max
q

pbE[min(Ds,q)] + pbE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)] −cbq + rE[Ds + Dm]
 
.
Then, when po −co →0, i.e., po →co, we have ΠB ≥ΠP as
ΠP = max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (co + r)E[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)] + rE[Ds]}
≤max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + pbE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)] + rE[Ds + Dm]} = ΠB,
where the inequality holds by co ≤cb ≤pb and E[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)] ≤E[Dm].
If po −co →pb −cb + r + ∆, we have ΠB < ΠP as
ΠP = max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (co + r)E[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)] + (pb −cb + r + ∆)µm + rµs}
= max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (co + r)E[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)]}
+max
q {pbE[min(Dm + Ds,q)] −cbq} −max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq} + r(µm + µs)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

28
≥max
q {pbE[min(Dm + Ds,q)] −cbq} + r(µm + µs) = ΠB.
Therefore, as ΠP is increasing in po, there exists a threshold δC ∈[co,co + pb −cb + r + ∆] such
that when po < δC, ΠB ≥ΠP, and when po ≥δC, ΠB < ΠP. Moreover, as Πp −Πc is decreasing in
r, we have that:
• ζsmub −uo +t < k ≤min(t,ζsub) (i.e., Area (I-2)). By Proposition A4(ii) and Proposition A5(i),
the retailer’s expected proﬁts in the BASE and BOPS models are respectively given by
ΠB = max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (po −co)E[Dm]} + rµs;
ΠP = max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (co + r)E[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)] + (po −co)E[Dm] + rµs}.
Clearly, ΠB ≤ΠP.
• max(ζsmub −uo + t,ζsub) < k ≤min(t,ζC(1,1)ub) (i.e., Area (I-3)). By Proposition A4(iii) and
Proposition A5(i), the retailer’s expected proﬁts in the BASE and BOPS models are given by
ΠB = max
q {(po −co)E[Dm]};
ΠP = max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (co + r)E[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)] + (po −co)E[Dm] + µs}.
Then, it directly follows that ΠB ≤ΠP.
• max(ζsmub −uo + t,ζC(1,1)ub) < k ≤t (i.e., Area (II-2)). By Proposition A4(iii) and Proposi-
tion A5(iii), the retailer’s expected proﬁts in the BASE and BOPS models are respectively given
by
ΠB = max
q {(po −co)E[Dm]};
ΠP = max
q {(co + r)E[min(Dm,q)] −cbq + (po −co)E[Dm]}.
Clearly, ΠB ≤ΠP.
• ζC(1,1)ub < k ≤ζsmub −uo + t (i.e., Area (II-1)). By Propositions A4(i) and A5(iv), we have
ΠB = max
q {pbE[min(Ds + Dm,q)] −cbq} + r(µs + µm)
≥max
q {pbE[min(Ds + Dm,q)] −cbq} ≥(po −co)E[Dm] = ΠP.
Combing all above cases leads to the desired result.
□
Proof of Proposition A6. Let ˆζ be the customers’ belief on the ﬁll rate and (ˆφm, ˆφs) be
the retailer’s belief on the proportions of omni-customers and store-only customers who purchase
oﬄine. We ﬁrst characterize customers’ channel choices and retailer’s optimal decision in terms of
these private beliefs.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

29
Customer Choice. Given customers’ belief on the ﬁll rate, let (¯φm, ¯φs) be the resulting propor-
tions of omni-customers and store-only customers who purchase oﬄine. Customers’ utilities from
purchasing online and oﬄine channels are given by (A11). Then, customers’ channel choices are as
follows: 1) store-only customers purchase the product if U B
s,b ≥0; otherwise, exit the market, or 2)
omni-customers purchase the product from the oﬄine channel if and only if U B
m,b ≥max(0,U B
m,o)
and from the online channel if and only if U B
m,o ≥max(0,U B
m,b). In particular, we can further char-
acterize customers’ choices, (¯φs, ¯φm), in diﬀerent parameter regions as follows.
(i) If ˆζub −k +(1−ˆζ)(uo −t) ≥(uo −t), then both store-only customers and omni-customers will
choose the oﬄine channel, i.e., (¯φs, ¯φm) = (1,1). The omni-customers will switch to the online
channel when experiencing a stockout.
(ii) If uo −t ≥ˆζub −k+(1−ˆζ)(uo −t) ≥0 and ˆζub −k ≥0, then store-only customers will go to the
B&M store, whereas omni-customers will choose the online channel. That is, (¯φs, ¯φm) = (1,0).
(iii) If ˆζub −k < 0, then store-only customers will exit the market, and omni-customers will choose
the online channel. That is, neither type will go to the B&M store, i.e., (¯φs, ¯φm) = (0,0).
Therefore, given customers’ belief on the ﬁll rate ˆζ, the resulting market segmentation (¯φs, ¯φm) is
expressed as
(¯φs, ¯φm) =





(1,1) if ˆζ ≥
k
ub−(uo−t),
(1,0) if
k
ub ≤ˆζ <
k
ub−(uo−t),
(0,0) if ˆζ < k
ub .
(A20)
Retailer’s Optimal Decision. Given retailer’s beliefs (ˆφm, ˆφs) on customers’ choices, let ¯q
and ¯ζ be the optimal order quantity for the B&M store and the corresponding resulting ﬁll rate,
respectively. As customers are homogeneous, there are only three possible values of (ˆφs, ˆφm): (1,1),
(1,0), and (0,0). We now analyze the retailer’s optimal decision for the three cases.
(i) If (ˆφs, ˆφm) = (1,1), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = pbE[min(Dm + Ds,q)] −cbq + (po −
co)E[(Dm −
Dm
Dm+Ds q)+]. Then, the optimal order quantity is ¯q = qe, and the corresponding ﬁll
rate is ¯ζ = ζe.
(ii) If (ˆφs, ˆφm) = (1,0), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (po −
co)E[Dm]. Consequently, the optimal order quantity is ¯q = qs, and the corresponding ﬁll rate
is ¯ζ = ζs.
(iii) If (ˆφs, ˆφm) = (0,0), the retailer’s expected proﬁt is π(q) = (po −co)E[Dm]. Therefore, the
retailer will order nothing for the B&M store and the resulting ﬁll rate is zero, i.e., ¯q = 0 and
¯ζ = 0.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

30
In summary, given the belief (ˆφs, ˆφm), the retailer’s optimal decision of ¯q and the corresponding
ﬁll rate ¯ζ can be characterized as
(¯q, ¯ζ) =



(qe,ζe) if (ˆφs, ˆφm) = (1,1),
(qs,ζs) if (ˆφs, ˆφm) = (1,0),
(0,0) if (ˆφs, ˆφm) = (0,0).
(A21)
RE Equilibrium. Next, we analyze the RE equilibrium, denoted by (qB,φB
m,φB
s ), by connecting
customers’ choices with the retailer’s optimal decision. The concept of RE equilibrium states 1)
customers’ belief on the ﬁll rate is exactly the realized ﬁll rate, and 2) retailer’s belief on customers’
choices is just consistent with the realized one. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne the RE equilibrium as follows.
Definition A6 (RE Equilibrium Under BASE). A RE equilibrium
(¯ζ, ˆζ, ¯φm, ¯φs, ˆφm, ˆφs, ¯q)
should satisfy the following conditions:
(i) Given ˆζ, (¯φs, ¯φm) satisﬁes Equation (A20);
(ii) Given (ˆφs, ˆφm), (¯q, ¯ζ) satisﬁes Equation (A21);
(iii) ¯ζ = ˆζ and (¯φs, ¯φm) = (ˆφs, ˆφm).
By Deﬁnition A6, we know that there exist only three potential RE equilibria, i.e., (qB,φB
s ,φB
m) =
(qe,1,1), (qs,1,0), and (0,0,0). In the following cases, we ﬁrst verify whether these potential equi-
libria satisfy the conditions of RE equilibrium. When there exist multiple RE equilibria, we choose
the one which is Pareto-dominant.
Case 1: k ≤ζe(ub −(uo −t)). In this case, we ﬁrst show that (qe,1,1) and (0,0,0) are RE
equilibria, whereas the existence of (qs,1,0) as an equilibrium depends on whether ζsub ≥k >
ζsub −(uo −t) or not. The justiﬁcation of a RE equilibrium for those cases is similar to Proposition
1.
We next show that the equilibrium (qe,1,1) always Pareto-dominates others. Clearly, the equi-
librium (0,0,0) is dominated, as it generates zero payoﬀfor both the retailer and customers. Now,
we compare the equilibria (qe,1,1) and (qs,1,0). From Proposition 1, we know that ¯πB(qs|(1,0)) =
πB(qs|(1,0)) ≤πB(qsm|(1,1)) < ¯πB(qsm|(1,1)), in which the last inequality holds due to the addi-
tional proﬁts from omni-customers’ switching behavior.
The domination of omni-customers’ utility and store-only customers’ utility follows the argument
of Proposition 1. Therefore, the Pareto-dominant equilibrium is qB = qe, and (φB
s ,φB
m) = (1,1).
Case 2: ζsub ≥k > ζe(ub −(uo −t)). Similar to Case 1, one can show that both (qs,1,0) and
(0,0,0) are equilibria and that (qs,1,0) is Pareto-dominant. Thus, qB = qs and (φB
s ,φB
m) = (1,0).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

31
Case 3: k > ζsub and k > ζe(ub −(uo −t)). In this case, one can verify that there exists just one
equilibrium, (qB,φB
s ,φB
m) = (0,0,0).
By combining the above cases, we can obtain the desired results.
□
Proof of Theorem A4. The ﬁrst case is similar to the one in Theorem 1, and we omit its
proof.
• ζpub < k ≤ζe(ub −uo + t). In this case, the retailer’s expected proﬁt in the BASE model can
be written as
¯ΠB = max
q {pbE[min(Dm + Ds,q)] −cbq + (po −co)E[(Dm −
Dm
Dm + Ds
q)+]}
= max
q

pbE[min(Ds,q)] + pbE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)] −cbq + (po −co)(E[Dm] −E[min(Dm,
Dm
Dm + Ds
q)]

.
Then, we have
¯ΠB ≤(po −co)E[Dm] = ΠP.
• k ≤min(ζpub,ζe(ub −uo +t)). Because uo ≥ub, k ≤min(ζpub,ζe(ub −uo +t)) ≤min(ζpub,t). By
Proposition 2(i), the retailer’s expected proﬁt in the BOPS model is given by
ΠP = max
q

pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + coE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)] + (po −co)E[Dm]
 
.
When po →co, we have ¯πB ≥πP as
ΠP = max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + coE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)]}
≤max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + pbE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)]} = ¯ΠB,
in which the inequality holds by co ≤cb ≤pb.
Note that for any given q, Dm and Ds, we can prove the following inequality:
Dm
Ds + Dm
min{Ds + Dm,q} ≥min(Dm,(q −Ds)+),
by considering the following three cases:
(a) if q ≥Ds + Dm, we have that
Dm
Ds+Dm min{Ds + Dm,q} = Dm = min(Dm,(q −Ds)+);
(b) if Ds ≤q < Ds +Dm, we have that
Dm
Ds+Dm min{Ds +Dm,q} =
Dm
Ds+Dm q > q −Ds = min(Dm,(q −
Ds)+);
(c) if q < Ds, we have that
Dm
Ds+Dm min{Ds + Dm,q} =
Dm
Ds+Dm q > 0 = min(Dm,(q −Ds)+).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047

32
Therefore, we have E[min(Dm,
Dm
Dm+Ds q)] ≥E[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)]. It follows that when po →pb.
This is because
¯ΠB ≤max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (pb −po + co)E[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)]} + (po −co)EDm
= max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + coE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)]} + (po −co)EDm = ΠP.
Because ΠP −¯ΠB is increasing in po, it ensures that there is a threshold in [co,pb], lower than
which we have ΠP < ¯ΠB. Moreover, we can verify that when po →pb −cb + co + ∆and cb −∆≤co,
¯ΠB < ΠP. This is because
¯ΠB ≤max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (pb −po + co)E[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)]} + (po −co)EDm
= max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + (cb −∆)E[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)]} + (po −co)EDm
= max
q {pbE[min(Ds,q)] −cbq + coE[min(Dm,(q −Ds)+)]} + (po −co)EDm = ΠP.
Thus, there exists a threshold δR(co) ∈[co,pb −cb + co + ∆] such that when po < δR(co), ¯ΠB ≥ΠP,
and when po ≥δR(co), ¯ΠB < ΠP.
Thus, this completes the proof.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214047