TITLE: Trade Credit Insurance: Operational Value and Contract Choice
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2019.3571
---

LBS Research Online
S A Yang, N Bakshi and C J Chen
Trade Credit Insurance: Operational Value and Contract Choice
Article
This version is available in the LBS Research Online repository: https://lbsresearch.london.edu/
id/eprint/1343/
Yang, S A, Bakshi, N and Chen, C J
(2021)
Trade Credit Insurance: Operational Value and Contract Choice.
Management Science, 67 (2). pp. 875-891. ISSN 0025-1909
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2019.3571
INFORMS (Institute for Operations Research and Management Sciences)
https://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/10.1287/mnsc.20...
Users may download and/or print one copy of any article(s) in LBS Research Online for purposes of
research and/or private study. Further distribution of the material, or use for any commercial gain, is
not permitted.

Trade Credit Insurance: Operational Value and
Contract Choice
S. Alex Yang
London Business School, sayang@london.edu
Faculty of Business and Economics, University of Hong Kong
Nitin Bakshi
David Eccles School of Business, The University of Utah, nitin.bakshi@eccles.utah.edu
Christopher J. Chen
Kelley School of Business, Indiana University Bloomington, cch3@iu.edu
Trade credit insurance (TCI) is a risk management tool commonly used by suppliers to guarantee against
payment default by credit buyers. TCI contracts can be either cancelable (the insurer has the discretion
to cancel this guarantee during the insured period) or non-cancelable (the terms cannot be renegotiated
within the insured period). This paper identiﬁes two roles of TCI: The (cash ﬂow) smoothing role (smoothing
the supplier’s cash ﬂows), and the monitoring role (tracking the buyer’s continued creditworthiness after
contracting, which enables the supplier to make eﬃcient operational decisions regarding whether to ship
goods to the credit buyer). We further explore which contracts better facilitate these two roles of TCI
by modeling the strategic interaction between the insurer and the supplier. Non-cancelable contracts rely
on the deductible to implement both roles, which may result in a conﬂict: A high deductible inhibits the
smoothing role, while a low deductible weakens the monitoring role. Under cancelable contracts, the insurer’s
cancelation action ensures that the information acquired is reﬂected in the supplier’s shipping decision. Thus,
the insurer has adequate incentives to perform his monitoring function without resorting to a high deductible.
Despite this advantage, we ﬁnd that the insurer may exercise the cancelation option too aggressively; this
thereby restores a preference for non-cancelable contracts, especially when the supplier’s outside option
is unattractive and the insurer’s monitoring cost is low. Non-cancelable contracts are also relatively more
attractive when the acquired information is veriﬁable than when it is unveriﬁable.
Key words : insurance, risk management, trade credit, moral hazard, operations–ﬁnance interface
History : First draft: February 2016; current version: December 2019
1.
Introduction
Trade credit arises when a supplier allows a buyer to delay payment for goods or services already
delivered. There is a large body of work that suggests that trade credit greatly facilitates trade
(Giannetti et al. 2011). However, a supplier that grants credit also runs the risk of payment default
– that is, the buyer may substantially delay payment or fail to pay altogether. Such defaults
can create severe ﬁnancial diﬃculties for the suppliers, especially among small and medium-sized
1

2
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
enterprises (SMEs). In fact, an estimated one in four SME insolvencies in the European Union is
due to payment defaults (Milne 2010).
To protect themselves against such negative events, suppliers often purchase trade credit insur-
ance (TCI), which allows the insured party to recover losses arising from the buyer defaulting. In
deciding whether to ship goods to a credit buyer, a supplier balances the beneﬁt from the trading
transaction against the downside associated with payment default. TCI helps tip the balance in
favor of shipping, and thereby enhances trade. TCI can be used to insure a single supplier-buyer
transaction, which this paper focuses on for simplicity, or the entire trade between a supplier and
a predetermined set of buyers for a ﬁxed duration (typically a year). TCI ﬁrst became popular
in Europe; however, it now has a substantial global footprint. TCI is oﬀered by specialized trade
credit insurers such as Euler Hermes and Atradius, general insurers such as Swiss Re and AIG,
and national export-import banks (Jones 2010). As of 2016, TCI covered more than e2.3 trillion
of exposure globally (International Credit Insurance and Surety Association 2017).
TCI resembles traditional insurance in certain respects and is distinct in others. Speciﬁcally, it
resembles other forms of insurance in that it is meant to guarantee payment to the insured party
(the supplier) under certain conditions. However, distinct from contracts used in other insurance
settings, the TCI contract often allows the insurer to cancel coverage – in whole or in part – at
any time prior to the shipment of goods. This is achieved by ﬁrst determining the credit limit
(coverage) for a speciﬁed time period, but then within this very time period, allowing the insurer to
withdraw or amend these limits if the insurer determines that there has been a signiﬁcant change
in the credit risk (Jones 2010, Association of British Insurers 2016).1
It is fairly common for insurers to exercise the ﬂexibility to cancel coverage when they believe
that the risk of payment default has deteriorated. In just the ﬁrst few months of 2009, canceled
TCI credit lines amounted to e75 billion (International Financial Consulting 2012). Once TCI
is withdrawn for their buyers, suppliers tend to stop shipping on credit. This dynamic naturally
undermines both parties’ abilities to trade (Kollewe 2009). It is estimated that 5% to 9% of the
total drop in world exports during the recent ﬁnancial crisis can be attributed to the withdrawal
of trade credit insurance (van der Veer 2015). An unwarranted cancelation adversely aﬀects the
eﬃciency of the shipping decision and leads to economic losses.2 Thus, exercise of the cancelation
1 The credit limit is the amount that the insurer will reimburse the insured in case of payment default, minus any
deductible (Association of British Insurers 2016). Note that the credit limits in cancelable TCI may be revised at a
discretionary time; this is distinct from the periodic decision of whether or not to renew a policy and/or revise its
terms, or coverage cancelation based on a set of pre-determined conditions (e.g., the claimholders mis-representing
themselves on their applications), which are commonplace in insurance settings.
2 We refer to a shipping decision as being eﬃcient if it is consistent with the decision when the supplier and the
insurer acts as a single decision-maker.

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
3
option is often contentious owing to its signiﬁcant operational and ﬁnancial implications. In the
words of Bill Grimsey, chief executive of Focus DIY, the UK homeware retailer, credit insurers are
“fair-weather friends who don’t go into enough detail, make unilateral decisions at short notice
and jeopardize the futures of businesses” (Stacey 2009).
An alternate approach to contracting for credit insurance, and a response to the concerns about
cancelation, is embodied in non-cancelable coverage. As the name suggests, the credit limits in
non-cancelable coverage cannot be altered within a speciﬁed time period (AIG 2013, Association of
British Insurers 2016). Given the high stakes, the relative merits of the two contracting approaches
are being hotly debated in the practitioner community (Aitken 2013).
Motivated by the above discussion, we investigate the following questions in this paper: 1) What
roles does TCI play in a supply chain? 2) What are the relative merits of cancelable versus non-
cancelable contracts, and what principles should guide the choice of contract form?
To answer these questions, we develop a game-theoretic model that captures the strategic inter-
actions between the supplier and the insurer for a single transaction. A risky buyer places a credit
order with the supplier, who incurs ﬁnancing costs when facing a cash shortfall. The supplier buys
TCI from the insurer to protect itself against the risk of the payment default. Thereafter, the
insurer can exert costly yet unveriﬁable monitoring eﬀort to obtain updated information about the
buyer’s default risk. This salient feature of the model captures the fact that TCI covers the buyer’s
default risk, which is not internal to the insured ﬁrm (supplier) and is evolving. In practice, the
insurer often has a superior capability to gather and analyze information about the buyer’s default
risk from a variety of channels, such as closely monitoring publicly available information sources
(e.g., ﬁnancial statements), and non-public sources such as site visits, and tracking the buying
ﬁrm’s payment history (Jones 2010, Amiti and Weinstein 2011, Association of British Insurers
2016, Euler Hermes 2018). The obtained market intelligence, which may reﬂect worsening political
or geographical risk (Freely 2012), or the buyer’s deteriorating ﬁnancial situation (Birchall 2008),
has been proven to be powerful in predicting payment default (Kallberg and Udell 2003, Cascino
et al. 2014). Based on the updated assessment of the buyer’s risk provided by the insurer, the
supplier may revisit her decision to ship the order.
By comparing the centralized benchmark with the scenario in which insurance is not available,
we quantify the two roles that TCI fulﬁlls. First, on the ﬁnancial side, TCI smoothes the sup-
plier’s cash ﬂow across diﬀerent possible realizations of buyer’s risk, and thereby mitigates the
adverse ﬁnancial eﬀect of payment default. We refer to this as the (cash ﬂow) smoothing role of
TCI. Second, and diﬀerent from other insurance settings, TCI is also an information service that
facilitates operational decisions. Speciﬁcally, by gaining access to the information that the insurer
may have gathered regarding the buyer’s evolving creditworthiness, the supplier can make more

4
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
eﬃcient operational (shipping) decisions. By steering the shipping decision towards eﬃciency, this
monitoring role of TCI creates operational value that goes beyond pure ﬁnancial considerations.
Fulﬁlling the monitoring role of TCI requires that the insurer has the incentive to obtain updated
information, and that the supplier makes eﬃcient shipping decisions based on the update. These
two incentive issues are crucial determinants of the optimal form of TCI contracts.
We mainly focus on two forms of TCI contracts: non-cancelable and cancelable contracts. Under
the non-cancelable contract, which is similar to a standard contract in other insurance settings, the
credit payment from the buyer, minus a deductible, is guaranteed by the insurer in exchange for a
premium. A cancelable contract, however, gives the insurer an option to cancel coverage before the
order is shipped. We ﬁnd that a non-cancelable contract with a deductible is limited in its ability
to fulﬁll both the smoothing and monitoring roles of TCI. On the one hand, a low deductible does
not deter the supplier from shipping even when the buyer’s creditworthiness deteriorates. Such an
ineﬃcient reaction to the updated information reduces the insurer’s incentive to monitor, thereby
weakening the monitoring role of TCI. On the other hand, a high deductible has two possible
drawbacks: ﬁrst, it may expose the supplier to higher ﬁnancing costs, compromising the smoothing
role; second, it may also discourage monitoring by reducing the insurer’s exposure to the credit
loss. As such, non-cancelable contracts are able to recover the full value of TCI only when the
supplier is ﬁnancially well-oﬀand the insurer’s monitoring cost is low.
By contrast, with cancelable contracts, the insurer’s option to cancel coverage makes it possible to
incorporate his acquired information about the buyer’s risk to appropriately inﬂuence the supplier’s
shipping decision. In particular, compared to non-cancelable contracts, the insurer is now more
motivated to invest in costly monitoring because upon learning that the buyer is overly risky, he
can deter the supplier from shipping by exercising the option to cancel, without resorting to a high
deductible. These dynamics explain why cancelable insurance contracts have long prevailed in the
TCI industry.
Despite this advantage, we ﬁnd that because the insurer does not beneﬁt directly from the
trade after the insurance contract is signed, the insurer may over-cancel, i.e., cancel the supplier’s
coverage even when it is eﬃcient to ship. This incentive hurts the performance of the cancelable
contract when the supplier’s outside option is unattractive (e.g., during an economic downturn),
and the insurer’s monitoring costs are low (which may result from superior information systems
and/or analytical capabilities). Under these circumstances, the supplier may prefer non-cancelable
contracts, which serve as a commitment by the insurer to provide coverage. This preference for
non-cancelable contracts oﬀers a possible explanation for the greater enthusiasm for non-cancelable
coverage following the Great Recession of 2008. We also ﬁnd that contracts that combine the
advantages of cancelable and non-cancelable features can further enhance the value of TCI.

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
5
Finally, compared to the case when information is veriﬁable, when the information collected by
the insurer is unveriﬁable and is subject to strategic manipulation, cancelable contracts in general
become more attractive relative to non-cancelable contracts. This is because the insurer’s cance-
lation action serves as a credible signal of the (unveriﬁable) information. The result also suggests
that non-cancelable contracts will become relatively more attractive as the acquired information
can be credibly communicated by other channels (e.g., IT integration).
The contribution of the paper is twofold. First, we model and quantify the value of TCI, and
highlight its operational role as linked to the monitoring and shipping decisions. Analyzing this
value enables us to oﬀer a theoretical underpinning for the prevalence of diﬀerent TCI contracts,
as well as characterize their relative merits. Second, the ﬁndings shed light on how insurers can
better design and deploy the most appropriate types of contracts to customers. Our analysis also
provides supply chain professionals with insights on how to select the most suitable trade credit
insurance policy.
2.
Related literature
In application, our work is related to two major streams of literature: insurance; and the interface
of operations management, ﬁnance, and risk management.
In the insurance literature, the main focus has been on the implications of asymmetric informa-
tion of the insured party, which manifests in the form of adverse selection (e.g., Rothschild and
Stiglitz 1976), or moral hazard (e.g., Shavell 1979). Our paper is related to both streams. First, in
the literature on moral hazard in the insurance setting, the insured and insurer are equally informed
at the time of contracting, yet the insured party may take hidden actions after entering into the
contract, and the optimal insurance contract is designed to induce more eﬃcient actions, with
deductibles as a commonly used mechanism. Winter (2013) provides an excellent overview of the
literature on insurance with moral hazard. Our work contributes to this literature in three respects.
First, to the best of our knowledge, all extant work models only the moral hazard associated
with the insured party’s actions. In our paper, however, as the trade credit insurer plays an active
risk monitoring role, the optimal contract needs to mitigate not only the supplier’s moral hazard
(shipping decision), but also the moral hazard associated with the insurer’s monitoring eﬀort. As
such, we ﬁnd that a traditional contract (a non-cancelable contract with only a deductible) may
be ineﬃcient to mitigate these moral hazards, and granting the insurer a cancelation option often
improves the contract performance.
Second and relatedly, depending on whether the moral hazard takes place before or after the
focal uncertainty is realized, the extant literature examines either only ex-ante moral hazard, such
as underinvesting in precautionary measures (H¨olmstrom 1979); or only ex-post moral hazard, such

6
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
as overspending on medical care when health conditions cannot be contracted upon (Zeckhauser
1970, Ma and Riordan 2002). Diﬀerently, our model considers both ex-ante moral hazard (the
insurer’s monitoring eﬀort) and ex-post ones (the supplier’s shipping decision, and the insurer’s
cancelation decision under cancelable contracts). Further, the insurer’s eﬀort results in information
revelation, the value of which depends directly on the supplier’s shipping decision. As such, the two
moral hazards need to be mitigated jointly, and the resulting dynamics are qualitatively diﬀerent
to those studied in the literature and warrant the diﬀerent contract forms in TCI.
Third, unlike the literature in which the existence of moral hazard is independent of the contract
used, we study a setting in which moral hazard is endogenous to the contract form. In particular, the
cancelable contract results in the new moral hazard that allows the insurer to cancel the insurance
coverage when it is eﬃcient to ship. This moral hazard, which is absent in a non-cancelable contract,
helps explain why and when the non-cancelable contract can be the preferred contract form.
By examining the case where the information that the insurer acquires is unveriﬁable (§7), our
paper is also related to the adverse selection problem in insurance. In the literature, the adverse
selection problem arises due to the insured party’s private information before contracting, and the
main issue is how the insurer can use contracts to screen such information. Diﬀerently, our model
features the insurer acquiring private information after contracting. As such, the insurer needs to
use a credible message to convey his private information, which is modeled as a signaling game
embedded in the aforementioned moral hazard setting. Our result here also sheds light on the
choice between diﬀerent contract forms.
Highlighting the operational value of TCI, our work is also related to the fast-growing ﬁeld of the
interface of operations management, ﬁnance, and risk management (e.g., Babich and Sobel 2004,
Dada and Hu 2008, Boyabatlı and Toktay 2011). Within this stream, our work is most related to the
papers on the interaction between insurance and operations. Dong and Tomlin (2012) characterize
a ﬁrm’s optimal inventory policy in the presence of business interruption (BI) insurance. Serpa
and Krishnan (2017) also examine BI insurance, focusing on its strategic role in mitigating free
riding. Similar to Serpa and Krishnan (2017), our paper is also built on a game-theoretic model.
Diﬀerently, we study trade credit insurance, another sector of insurance closely related to supply
chain management. Because of this setting, we focus on the strategic interaction between the
supplier and the insurer, who serves the dual-role of monitoring and cash smoothing, and study
its implications for contract forms. Our paper is also related to recent papers on the interaction
between agency conﬂict, operational decisions, and ﬁnancial contracting (Alan and Gaur 2018, Tang
et al. 2018, Babich et al. 2017), especially those that focus on risk shifting as the main source of
ﬁnancial friction. Risk shifting under ﬁnancial contract has been well recognized in ﬁnance (Jensen
and Meckling 1976, Myers 1977), and it has been recently studied in the OM in the context of

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
7
inventory (Chod 2016, Iancu et al. 2016), pricing (Besbes et al. 2017), and R&D investment (Ning
and Babich 2018) under external ﬁnancing. In our paper, once the insurance contract is in place,
the two contracting parties’ behavior may deviate from the ﬁrst-best, similar to the risk shifting
behavior studied in the above papers. However, our paper diﬀers from the above ones not only in
the context (TCI), but also in the underlying economic mechanism: ﬁrst, since cancelable contracts
involve recourse to updated information, the risk-shifting behavior may arise from both parties in
the game; second, in our paper, the risk shifting behavior originates from the updated information
generated endogenously by the insurer’s moral hazard. Thus, in our model, risk shifting interacts
with moral hazard. In addition, this work is related to papers on trade credit (Babich and Tang
2012, Kouvelis and Zhao 2012, Peura et al. 2017, Yang and Birge 2018, Chod et al. 2019, Devalkar
and Krishnan 2019), and those on operational and ﬁnancial means of mitigating supply chain risk
(Gaur and Seshadri 2005, Swinney and Netessine 2009, Yang et al. 2009, Turcic et al. 2015).
Conceptually, since the paper captures the moral hazard on both the insurer and the supplier
side, our paper is related to the literature on double moral hazard, which has been studied in
economics (Bhattacharyya and Lafontaine 1995), and in operations (Corbett et al. 2005, Roels
et al. 2010, Jain et al. 2013). In general, this literature studies moral hazards that are eﬀectively
simultaneous, and thus focuses on performance-based contracts and sharing contracts, which are
static in nature and do not require or possess the ability to incorporate any information updates.
In contrast, in our problem, the moral hazards play out sequentially. In particular, the monitoring
eﬀort of the insurer results in informational gains, which could cause the supplier’s and insurer’s
subsequent moral hazards; consequently, we examine a form of contract with recourse (the option
to cancel) by incorporating the monitoring-generated update. This reactive role is exactly the
purpose served by the cancelability feature in TCI contracts.
3.
Model
The model focuses on the strategic interaction between a supplier (she) who oﬀers trade credit to
her buyer and an insurer (he) who oﬀers a TCI product to the supplier which protects her in the
event the buyer defaults on the payment. The buyer does not make any decisions in our model.
3.1.
The supplier and the buyer
The supplier receives an order from a buyer who agrees to purchase one unit of a good from the
supplier at credit price r, but is prone to payment default. That is, the buyer is obliged to pay the
supplier an amount r at a speciﬁed point in time after the good is delivered; however, there is a
risk that the buyer may default on the payment. Let the buyer’s default risk when the contract is
signed be ¯β. Upon default, the supplier receives no money from the buyer.

8
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
To protect herself against payment default, the supplier may purchase insurance. After signing
the insurance contract, if the supplier learns that the buyer’s default risk has deteriorated, she may
then choose not to ship the good on credit, and instead dispose of the good through an alternative
channel (the supplier’s outside option) at price r0, which is assumed to be lower than (1 −¯β)r.
That is, the buyer is a priori creditworthy. Thus, oﬀering trade credit to the buyer at price r is ex
ante more proﬁtable than the outside option if the supplier is not ﬁnancially constrained.
The supplier’s objective is to maximize her (expected) payoﬀ, which includes the incoming
revenue and insurance claim payments, and the outgoing insurance premium and ﬁnancing-related
costs. Without loss of generality, the risk-free interest rate is normalized to zero. We leave the details
of the insurance premium and claim payment to §3.3, but characterize the supplier’s ﬁnancing
costs as follows. As documented in the ﬁnance literature (Kaplan and Zingales 1997, Hennessy and
Whited 2007, Shleifer and Vishny 2011), when ﬁrms face a cash shortfall, for example, due to the
buyer defaulting, they incur external ﬁnancing costs due to various ﬁnancial market imperfections
such as transaction costs (e.g., in asset ﬁre sales). The existence of such costs demands that ﬁrms
manage cash ﬂow uncertainty using various risk management tools such as hedging and insurance
(Froot et al. 1993, Dong and Tomlin 2012). Speciﬁcally, we assume that the supplier’s ﬁnancing
cost is L(x) = l(T −x)+, where x represents the supplier’s (end of period) net cash ﬂow, which is
equal to her revenue minus the insurance premium and insurance deductible (if applicable), and l
is the marginal ﬁnancing cost that the supplier incurs if x falls short of an exogenously speciﬁed
threshold T, which captures the severity of the supplier’s ﬁnancial constraint. This ﬁnancing cost
model is an abstraction of several commonly observed frictions that ﬁrms face in reality (e.g., ﬁre
sale discount). Despite the end-of-period ﬁnancial constraint T, the ﬁrm has suﬃcient short-term
liquidity to cover the insurance premium in the midst of the period.
On the buyer side, we assume that the buyer’s credit risk is evolving between the time when
the supplier and the buyer enter the credit sale contract and that when the supplier ships the
order. Speciﬁcally, by the time that the supplier needs to decide whether to ship the order or not,
the buyer’s default risk could be one of three levels: low, medium, or high,3 with corresponding
default probabilities β′
1, β′
2, and β′
3, where 0 ≤β′
1 ≤β′
2 ≤β′
3. The probability that the buyer’s default
probability is β′
i is θ′
i, where P
i θ′
i = 1 and ¯β = P
i θ′
iβ′
i. As modeled later, TCI plays an important
role in obtaining information (“signals”) regarding this evolving default risk.
3 Our analysis shows that in order to capture the potential shortcomings of the cancelable contracts, we need at least
three risk levels. Furthermore, additional analytical and numerical results conﬁrm that the main insights of the paper
continue to hold if we consider a model with N > 3 risk levels.

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
9
3.2.
The trade credit insurer and risk monitoring
To capture the market structure of the TCI industry and to focus on the operational implications
of TCI, we assume that the insurer is risk-neutral, faces no liquidity constraint, and operates in
a competitive insurance market (Winter 2013). Therefore, the insurer is willing to oﬀer insurance
contracts as long as the premium covers his expected cost.
A salient feature of our model is that we capture the insurer’s risk monitoring action. Speciﬁ-
cally, we assume that after entering the insurance contract, the insurer decides whether to exert
unveriﬁable monitoring eﬀort at a cost c ≥0. By exerting eﬀort, with probability λ ∈(0,1), the
insurer can obtain updated information (“signals”) that about the buyer’s evolving default risk in
a timely manner before the supplier’s shipping decision. Speciﬁcally, the signals that the insurer
obtains can be classiﬁed into three categories, corresponding to the three levels of the buyer’s
default risk (low, medium, and high) as characterized above: a signal in the low risk group (i = 1)
reﬂects that the buyer is operating as usual with its default risk under control, including the case
when no risk-aggravating events are discovered. A signal embodying medium risk (i = 2) captures
the scenario in which there are some worrying signs about the buyer’s creditworthiness. Finally,
a signal within the high risk group (i = 3) shows strong evidence suggesting that a credit sale is
overly risky (e.g., ﬁling for bankruptcy). However, with probability (1 −λ), the insurer fails to
obtain any signal, which cannot be distinguished from the scenario when no negative information
is observed (i = 1).4 Thus, based on the Bayes’ Rule, when obtaining a signal belonging to group
i = 1 or no signal at all, which are not distinguishable from each other, the posterior buyer default
probability is β1 = (1 −λ)¯β + λβ′
1. The probability of this scenario happening is θ1 = (1 −λ) + λθ′
1.
When obtaining a signal of medium or high level, the buyer’s posterior default probability βi = β′
i
for i = 2,3. The probability of these scenarios happening is θi = λθ′
i for i = 2,3 respectively. On
the other hand, if the insurer decides not to exert eﬀort, no updated information is observed, and
the posterior buyer default probability remains the same as the prior, ¯β. We note that the above
information generation model is similar to that in Stein (2002), and is consistent with the classic
moral hazard literature in that one cannot use the outcome to determine whether the insurer has
exerted eﬀort, and thus, eﬀort cannot be directly contracted upon.
Finally, depending on whether the information obtained is veriﬁable or not, we consider two
scenarios regarding how the insurer shares the information with the supplier. In §5 – 6, we focus
on the case when information is veriﬁable and cannot be strategically manipulated by the insurer.
This is largely consistent with our understanding of practice (e.g., the insurer’s and supplier’s IT
systems are partially connected), and it allows us to focus on the moral hazard associated with
the insurer fulﬁlling his monitoring role. In §7, we examine the scenario where the information
obtained is unveriﬁable and the insurer may strategically manipulate information.
4 We note that this ineﬃciency exists irrespective of whether the information (signal) is veriﬁable or not.

10
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
3.3.
TCI contracts
Motivated by industry practice (Association of British Insurers 2016, AIG 2013, Jones 2010,
Thomas 2013), we mainly focus on the following two types of TCI contracts, with the corresponding
sequence of events as depicted in Figure 1.
Figure 1
Sequence of events under non-cancelable and cancelable policies.
Supplier's Action
Insurer's Action
Non-Cancelable/Cancelable
Cancelable Only
Settles the
claim upon
default
The buyer's
default risk
is realized
Accepts
or rejects
the
contract
Exerts
monitoring
eﬀort at
cost c?
Proposes
contract
parameters
With eﬀort, signal with
default risk βi is received and
shared with the supplier
Receives
order at
credit price
r
Ship on
credit or
receive r0?
Cancels
coverage
and
refunds f?
Supplier's
ﬁnancing
cost
L(x) =
l(T −x)+
• Non-cancelable TCI: Under a non-cancelable contract, the supplier proposes the deductible
δ and premium p, and the insurer decides to accept or reject the contract. After the contract is
signed, the supplier pays p to the insurer, and the insurer may choose to exert monitoring eﬀort
at a cost c > 0 and share his ﬁndings with the supplier. However, regardless of the insurer’s eﬀort
decision and the signal that he receives, as long as the supplier ships the order, the insurer must
pay the supplier’s claim r −δ in the event of the buyer defaulting, and pay zero otherwise.
• Cancelable TCI: Cancelable contracts diﬀer from non-cancelable ones in two respects. First,
the contract includes not only p and δ, but also a refund of the premium f ∈[0,p]. Second, the
insurer has the option to cancel the insurance at any time before the good is shipped. If he cancels
the coverage, the insurer refunds the supplier f and removes his exposure to the buyer’s credit
risk. If he does not cancel, the insurer pays the supplier r −δ if the buyer defaults. We refer the
readers to TATA-AIG (2017) for the policy wordings used in a typical cancelable contract.5
As insurance market is assumed to be competitive, the equilibrium insurance contract is the one
that leads to the highest payoﬀto the supplier, which we deﬁne as the optimal contract. Relatedly,
we say the shipping decision is eﬃcient if and only if the supplier ships under all signals i with
(1 −βi)r ≥r0, the shipping policy under the centralized benchmark as shown later.
5 While allowing diﬀerent forms of TCI contracts to have diﬀerent degrees of ﬂexibility, we assume that the two
parties cannot explicitly contract on the realization of the signals. This captures the fact that as the insurer draws
information from multiple sources, it is impractical to write a complete contract that is contingent on all possible
realizations of the signals. We refer the reader to the seminal work of Grossman and Hart (1986) on the diﬃculties
of contracting on complex events.

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
11
Finally, to focus on the connection between the operational and ﬁnancial aspects of the model.
We make two technical assumptions. The ﬁrst one is:
Assumption 1. r0 > (1 −β3)r.
This assumption asserts that the outside option is more proﬁtable than shipping to the riskist buyer,
as otherwise the outside option is valueless and obtaining updating information does not have any
operational implications. Further, we note that as β1 < ¯β, the earlier condition that r0 < (1 −¯β)r
also implies that upon receiving updated information, it is always eﬃcient to ship at signal i = 1.
Combined, these assumptions guarantee that obtaining updated information has operational value.
Moreover, we note that the eﬃcient decision at i = 2 depends on the attractiveness of r0 relative to
β2. In the rest of the paper, we refer to the case r0 > (1−β2)r as the attractive outside option case,
or equivalently, it is not eﬃcient to ship at i = 2, and the case r0 ≤(1 −β2)r as the unattractive
outside option case, i.e., shipping at i = 2 is ineﬃcient.
Second, we assume that the supplier incurs ﬁnancing costs only if she ships to a buyer who later
defaults. A suﬃcient condition to assure this is characterized as follows.
Assumption 2. T ∈[0, r0 −(r −r0)).
As the insurance premium never exceeds (r −r0), Assumption 2 guarantees that the supplier does
not incur ﬁnancing costs when purchasing insurance and then selling to the outside option.
4.
The dual roles of TCI and its potential value
Before analyzing the performance of diﬀerent TCI contracts, we ﬁrst establish the potential eco-
nomic value of TCI by comparing two benchmarks: The centralized benchmark, where the supplier’s
and insurer’s actions are both controlled by a central decision-maker who is ﬁnancially uncon-
strained (as the insurer) and maximizes the sum of the two parties’ payoﬀs; and the no-insurance
benchmark, where the supplier does not have access to any TCI product. In our setting, the central-
ized outcome is equivalent to the ﬁrst-best outcome, i.e., when the players maximize self-interest
but all actions are contractible (no moral hazard). The diﬀerence in the system surplus between the
two benchmark scenarios represents the potential value of TCI, which is formalized in the result
below.
Proposition 1. The potential value of TCI is min{¯βL(0), (1 −¯β)r −r0} + (φ −c)+, where
φ = P3
i=1 θi[r0 −(1 −βi)r]+ is the option value of shipment cancelation.
Proposition 1 reveals that the potential value of TCI has two components: the cash ﬂow-smoothing
value min[¯βL(0),(1−¯β)r−r0] and the monitoring value (φ−c)+. First, like other forms of insurance,
TCI smoothes the insured ﬁrm’s cash ﬂow and lowers the cost associated with the supplier’s

12
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
ﬁnancial constraint. Speciﬁcally, without insurance, two possible outcomes arise due to the ﬁnancing
constraint: The supplier either ships to the risky buyer under all circumstances, and incurs an
(expected) ﬁnancing cost ¯βL(0), or the supplier always ships to its outside option and incurs an
opportunity cost (1 −¯β)r −r0. TCI eliminates such costs by smoothing the supplier’s cash ﬂow.
Intuitively, such a value is greater when the supplier is more ﬁnancially constrained (larger l or T,
and thus greater L(0)) or faces a less attractive outside option (lower r0).
Second, and more importantly for our purposes, TCI also plays a monitoring role, which is
unique in the TCI setting due to the insurer’s superior capability (relative to the supplier) in
acquiring and analyzing information. Speciﬁcally, by exerting costly eﬀort, the insurer obtains
updated information about the buyer’s default risk. This enables the supplier to cancel shipping
upon receiving a signal i such that shipping to the outside option generates a higher payoﬀthan to
the original risky buyer, i.e., r0 > (1 −βi)r. This option to cancel shipping creates an operational
value of φ = P3
i=1 θi[r0 −(1 −βi)r]+. Whenever this value is greater than the cost of monitoring c,
exerting monitoring eﬀort is eﬃcient. To avoid the uninteresting case where it is not eﬃcient for
the insurer to exert monitoring eﬀort even in the absence of agency issues (c > φ), the rest of the
paper focus on the regions where c ≤φ.
While the potential value of both roles of TCI is fully realized under a centralized setting, under
a decentralized setting where both the insurer and supplier act to maximize their own interest
respectively, it is expected that the realized value of TCI would depend on whether the insurance
contract can successfully fulﬁll the two roles of TCI. In particular, note that fulﬁlling the monitoring
value of TCI depends on the insurer’s incentive to invest in monitoring, as well as the supplier’s
willingness to ship eﬃciently based on the updated information. These two incentive issues are
intertwined, and together they act as the main driving force behind the eﬃciency of diﬀerent TCI
contracts, which is the focus of the following sections. There, we say the supplier receives the full
value of the TCI if the supplier’s payoﬀunder a TCI contract equals that under the centralized
benchmark. Otherwise, the supplier only receives partial value of the TCI.
5.
Non-cancelable contracts
We start our analysis by examining the performance of non-cancelable contracts, which are the
norm in other insurance sectors. In this section, we ﬁrst identify the conditions that incentivize the
insurer to exert eﬀort (§5.1), and then characterize the optimal non-cancelable contracts (§5.2).
5.1.
Inducing the insurer’s eﬀort
After entering into a contract with premium p and deductible δ, and having obtained an updated
estimate of the buyer’s default risk, βi, the supplier makes her shipping decision. Under βi, if the
supplier ships the order, her expected payoﬀis (1−βi)r+βi [r −δ −L(r −δ −p)], where L(r−δ−p)

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
13
is the ﬁnancing cost in the event of the buyer defaulting. If she does not ship, her payoﬀis simply
her outside option r0. By comparing the two options, the supplier ships the order if and only if the
payoﬀfrom shipping exceeds her outside option, i.e., r −βi [δ + L(r −δ −p)] ≥r0, or equivalently,
βi ≤B(p,δ) :=
r −r0
δ + L(r −δ −p),
(1)
where function B(p,δ) represents the threshold default risk at which the supplier is indiﬀerent
between shipping or not under contract (p,δ). For brevity, we suppress the dependence on (p,δ).
This condition reﬂects the intuition that the supplier is more willing to ship when facing a lower
deductible. In anticipation of the supplier’s shipping decision under contract (p,δ), the insurer’s
decision to exert monitoring eﬀort is governed by the conditions in Lemma 1.
Lemma 1. Under (p,δ), the insurer exerts monitoring eﬀort if and only if all of the following
three conditions are satisﬁed:
B ≥¯β;
(2)
¯β(r −δ) ≥c + (r −δ)
X
i
θiβi1βi≤B;
(3)
p ≥c + (r −δ)
X
i
θiβi1βi≤B.
(4)
The conditions reveal that the insurer’s monitoring incentive is closely connected to the supplier’s
shipping decision under coverage. Speciﬁcally, the indicator function 1βi≤B(p,δ) governs whether the
supplier ships when receiving signal βi. Equations (2) and (3) are the insurer’s incentive compati-
bility constraints. Speciﬁcally, for the insurer to exert eﬀort, his cost of doing so must be lower than
his cost without eﬀort, in which case the supplier makes her shipping decision based on the prior
belief expectation ¯β. Clearly, if the supplier does not ship without receiving any updated signal
when she is under coverage, i.e., ¯β > B, then the insurer’s cost without eﬀort is zero, which is lower
than his cost with eﬀort. Thus, the contract must satisfy (2) for the insurer to exert eﬀort. Under
this condition, the supplier always ships without updated information, which leads to the insurer’s
total cost without eﬀort being ¯β(r −δ), and (3) guarantees that this cost must be greater than his
total cost with eﬀort, which is equal to the sum of the eﬀort cost c and the expected claim payment
when the supplier ships under any βi that is no greater than B. Lastly, the insurer’s participation
constraint (4) states that the premium p must cover his total expected cost under monitoring.
5.2.
The optimal non-cancelable contract and its limitations
After characterizing the condition under which the insurer exerts eﬀort, we identify the optimal
contract by comparing the contracts that could not induce monitoring and those that do.

14
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
Lemma 2. Among all non-cancelable contracts that do not induce the insurer’s eﬀort, the optimal
one satisﬁes p = ¯β(r −δ), where the deductible δ is suﬃciently small. Under this contract, the
supplier always ships to the credit buyer and her expected payoﬀis Π0 = (1 −¯β)r.
Intuitively, without insurer’s monitoring eﬀort, the TCI contract focuses on fulﬁlling its smoothing
role. To achieve that, the deductible has to be suﬃciently low such that the supplier avoids ﬁnancing
costs. Further, the low deductible also induces the supplier to ship regardless of the market signal,
which in turn discourages the insurer to exert eﬀort.
Next, we characterize the optimal contract among the ones that induce the insurer’s eﬀort. After
incorporating her optimal shipping decision under this contract, the supplier’s objective is:
max
p, δ∈[0,r] −p + r0
X
i
θi1βi>B +
X
i
θi{(1 −βi)r + βi[r −δ −L(r −δ −p)]}1βi≤B.
(5)
As shown, the supplier’s expected payoﬀconsists of three parts: The insurance premium p; her
revenue when she does not ship (βi > B); and her expected revenue when she ships (βi ≤B). The
last part further comprises of two components: The supplier’s expected revenue when the buyer
does not default (1 −βi)r and her expected payment from the insurer βi(r −δ), as well as her
expected ﬁnancing cost βiL(r −δ −p) if the buyer defaults. Solving (5) subject to (2) – (4) leads
to the optimal contract that induces the insurer’s eﬀort.
By comparing the optimal contract with the insurer’s eﬀort in the previous section and the one
without (Lemma 2), we can obtain the optimal non-cancelable contract. For brevity, we focus on
the optimal contract when the supplier’s outside option is attractive. Speciﬁcally, Proposition 2
presents the case when the outside option is attractive (r0 > (1−β2)r). The case where the supplier
faces an unattractive outside option (r0 ≤(1 −β2)r), as summarized in Proposition B.1 in the
Appendix, is qualitatively similar.
Proposition 2. When the supplier’s outside option is attractive (r0 > (1 −β2)r),
i) for c ≤φN
F V (T) = φ −

β3
β2 −1

(r −r0) −
h
T −(1 −¯β)

r −r−r0
β2
i+
, the supplier receives the
full value of TCI under the optimal contract, and ships only at i = 1;
ii) for c > φN
F V (T), the supplier fails to receive the full value of TCI under any non-cancelable
contracts. Speciﬁcally, there exist threshold functions φN
1 (T), φN
2 (T), φN
3 (T), and φN
4 (T) where
φN
4 (T) ≥...φN
1 (T) ≥φN
F V (T) such that the supplier’s and insurer’s actions under the optimal non-
cancelable contract are summarized in the following table. Columns 5 and 6 in the table indicate
the existence of two potential sources of ineﬃciency that the supplier may experience.

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
15
Region
Range of c
Insurer
Supplier
Supplier incurs
Insurer
name
monitors
ships if
ﬁnancing cost? extracts rent?
Financing Cost (FC) (φN
F V , φN
1 ] ∪(φN
3 ,φN
4 ]
Yes
i = 1
Yes
No
Rent to Insurer (RI)
(φN
1 , φN
2 ]
Yes
i = 1
Yes
Yes
Over-Shipping (OS)
(φN
2 , φN
3 ]
Yes
i = 1,2
Sometimes
No
No Monitoring (NM)
(φN
4 , φ]
No
i = 1,2,3
No
No
Figure 2
Illustration of diﬀerent regions under the optimal non-cancelable contract when r0 > (1 −β2)r.
T
c
FV
FC
NM
RI
φ
OS
φN
FV (T)
φN
3 (T)
φN
2 (T)
φN
1 (T)
Notes. Diﬀerent regions correspond to Column 1 in Proposition 2. In this illustrative example, φN
3 (T) = φN
4 (T). See
the proof of Proposition 2 for the deﬁnition of φN
1 (T), φN
2 (T), φN
3 (T), and φN
4 (T).
The diﬀerent regions in Proposition 2 is illustrated in Figure 2. The speciﬁc contract terms and
the supplier’s and insurer’s payoﬀs are cumbersome and are left in the proof for brevity. We note
from φN
F V (T) that under the optimal contract, the supplier receives the full value of TCI when both
c and T are small, while facing various types of operational and ﬁnancial ineﬃciencies as either c
or T becomes larger. To see why, recall that the role of TCI consists of two components: smoothing
and monitoring. Fulﬁlling both imposes divergent forces on the deductible δ. On the one hand,
to unlock the smoothing value of TCI, the deductible needs to be suﬃciently low, as otherwise,
the supplier incurs ﬁnancing costs even under coverage. On the other hand, the monitoring role
requires the supplier to ship eﬃciently based on the updated information. To deter the supplier
from taking excessive risks, the deductible should be reasonably high. This tension intensiﬁes as
the supplier’s ﬁnancial constraint becomes more stringent (large T), deeming it impossible for
the supplier to recover the full value of TCI. Instead, the optimal contract may require a high
deductible in order to enforce the eﬃcient shipping policy, which results in ﬁnancing costs (Region
FC). Alternatively, if the deductible is kept low in order to reduce ﬁnancing costs, the optimal
contract then has to allow the supplier to adopt a more aggressive shipping policy (Region OS).

16
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
Eventually, when T is extremely large, it becomes too costly to fulﬁll the monitoring role of TCI,
resulting in the no-monitoring contract as captured Lemma 2 to be the optimal one (Region NM).
More interestingly, setting aside the smoothing role, the monitoring role also imposes two con-
ﬂicting forces on deductible. As mentioned above, the deductible needs to be suﬃciently high to
induce eﬃcient shipping. However, as the monitoring role also requires the insurer to exert eﬀort,
the deductible cannot be too high. This is captured in (3): When the deductible is very high, the
negative impact of the buyer’s default on the insurer is minimal, and thus dulls the insurer’s incen-
tive to monitor. Such tension is more pronounced when the insurer’s cost of eﬀort is high (large
c). Speciﬁcally, as c increases, (3) calls for a lower deductible. As the cost of eﬀort is suﬃciently
close to the potential beneﬁt of monitoring φ, it is impossible to fully recover the monitoring role.
Thus, the optimal contract adopts one of three alternatives. First, to induce both monitoring eﬀort
and eﬃcient shipping, the contract needs to set the deductible at a level such that the insurer’s
participation constraint (4) is not binding. In other words, the supplier surrenders some rent to
the insurer (Region RI). Alternatively, similar to the case with large T, the optimal contract may
also lead to over-shipping (Region OS), or abandoning monitoring (Region NM).
At a high level, the ineﬃciency in the optimal non-cancelable contracts is related to the mismatch
between the sequential nature of the incentive conﬂict under TCI and the static nature of the
contract. Speciﬁcally, the monitoring role of TCI relates to the sequential actions of the insurer
and the supplier: The supplier’s decision to ship or not is contingent on the speciﬁc information
that the insurer acquires. However, as the the single lever in the contract to mitigate both moral
hazards, deductible is speciﬁed before the information update. As such, it is often inadequate for
mitigating the conﬂicts of interest between the two parties.
6.
Cancelable contracts
In this section, we examine cancelable contracts and investigate whether they may mitigate some of
limitations of non-cancelable contracts. Clearly, the insurer’s option to cancel the coverage is only
valuable when he acquires updated information and when he actually exercises this option under
certain circumstances. Thus, in this section, we limit ourselves to those contracts under which the
insurer exerts monitoring eﬀort, and actually cancels coverage upon receiving certain signals.
6.1.
The interplay between supplier’s shipping and insurer’s cancelation decisions
To identify the optimal cancelable contract, we ﬁrst characterize the supplier’s shipping policy and
then the insurer’s cancelation policy under a given insurance contract (p,δ,f), where f ∈[0,p] is
the refund that the insurer pays to the supplier upon cancelation of the insurance policy.
Depending on whether her coverage is canceled, the supplier’s shipping policy can be discussed
in two scenarios. First, when insurance coverage is not canceled, the supplier’s payoﬀunder signal

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
17
i is r −p −βi[δ + L(r −δ −p)] if she ships, and r0 if she does not ship. Hence, the supplier ships
the order if and only if βi ≤B(p,δ) where B() was introduced in Eq. (1).
In the case that the insurance is canceled, under the signal i, the supplier’s payoﬀis r −p + f −
βi[r +L(f −p)] if she ships, and r0 −p+f if she does not. Comparing the two payoﬀs, the supplier
ships if and only if:
βi ≤BC(p,f) :=
r −r0
r + L(f −p),
(6)
where the subscript C represents that the coverage is canceled. Note that as L(·) ≥0, BC ≤(r −
r0)/r; this captures the intuition for how the cancelation of coverage could deter the supplier from
over-shipping.
In anticipation of the supplier’s shipping decision described above, the insurer decides whether
or not to cancel coverage. Since the insurer must refund f to the supplier upon cancelation, he
never cancels when βi > B, for which the supplier would never ship the order even under coverage.
However, if the supplier does ship the order when coverage is not canceled (βi ≤B), the expected
claims cost to the insurer is βi(r −δ). Balancing this cost and the refund f, the insurer cancels
coverage if and only if βi ∈[BP,B], where
BP(δ,f) :=
f
r −δ,
(7)
and the subscript P represents the insurer’s cancelation policy. Thus, the insurer only cancels the
coverage when the buyer’s default risk is in the middle range. At the low end, the risk is low
relative to the refund, while at the high end, the supplier herself stops shipping. That said, the
upper threshold B may be higher than β3 when the deductible is suﬃciently small, at which point
the insurer’s cancelation policy degenerates to a simple threshold policy.
Lemma 3. Under any cancelable contract in which the insurer exerts eﬀort and actually cancels
coverage at certain signals, B > max(BC,BP), and the supplier ships if and only if βi < max(BC,BP).
The above result suggests that the supplier’s shipping policy may be completely aligned with the
insurer’s cancelation policy (when BC ≤BP), yet she may also ship when the coverage is canceled
(BC > BP). Under either case, B > max(BC,BP) conﬁrms the intuition that a cancelable contract
induces the supplier to ship to the credit buyer more conservatively than without the cancelation
option. As a cancelable contract under which the insurer never cancels the coverage is equivalent
to a non-cancelable contract, we focus on cancelable contracts which satisfy Lemma 3.

18
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
6.2.
The power of cancelable insurance
Combining the insurer’s cancelation and the supplier’s shipping decisions, we can characterize the
conditions under which a cancelable contract induces the insurer to exert monitoring eﬀort (see
Lemma B.1 in the Appendix). These conditions (Eq. (12) – (14)) follow a similar structure as under
the non-cancelable case (Lemma 1), but diﬀer in that they incorporate the insurer’s cancelation
policy. Among the contracts (p,δ,f) that satisfy these conditions, it is in the interest of the supplier
to choose the one that maximizes her own payoﬀ, that is,
max
p, δ∈[0,r]
f≤p
−p +
X
i
θi[r −βi(δ + L(r −p −δ))]1βi<BP +
X
i
θi[(1 −βi)r −βiL(f −p)]1βi∈[BP ,BC)
+ r0
X
i
θi1βi>max(BP ,BC) + f
X
i
θi1βi∈[BP ,B).
(8)
Eq. (8) shows that under cancelable contracts, the supplier’s expected payoﬀconsists of ﬁve
parts: The insurance premium; her net revenue when shipping under coverage (βi < BP); that
when shipping without coverage (βi ∈[BP,BC)); her outside option when she does not ship (βi >
max(BP,BC)); and ﬁnally, the refund when the coverage is canceled (βi ∈[BP,B)).
By solving this optimization program, we characterize the optimal contract and the parties’
corresponding actions based on whether the supplier’s outside option is attractive (r0 ≥(1 −β2)r,
Proposition 3) and unattractive (r0 < (1 −β2)r, Proposition 4 in §6.3).
Proposition 3. When r0 ≥(1 −β2)r, the following cancelable contract is optimal:
δ = 0;
p = f = c
θ1
+ β1r.
(9)
Under this contract, the supplier receives the full value of TCI by only shipping at i = 1. Corre-
spondingly, the insurer cancels the coverage upon receiving signal i = 2,3.
In comparison with the performance of the optimal non-cancelable contract as depicted in Propo-
sition 2, we notice that under the same parameter region (r0 ≥(1 −β2)r), the optimal cancelable
contract always enables the supplier to enjoy the full beneﬁt of TCI. The reason is as follows.
Recall that the ineﬃciency of non-cancelable contracts is mostly due to two sets of conﬂicts that
pull the deductible in diﬀerent directions: The conﬂict within the monitoring role (large c), and
the conﬂict between the smoothing role and monitoring one (large T). The cancelable contract,
on the other hand, has its advantages in resolving both conﬂicts. To see how cancelable contracts
can fully recover the monitoring role, recall from Lemma 3, the supplier ships more aggressively
under coverage than without. Thus, by canceling her coverage, the insurer can eﬀectively nudge
the supplier to adopt a more conservative shipping policy. Put diﬀerently, a cancelable contract
(partly) transfers control over the shipping decision from the supplier to the insurer. Furthermore,

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
19
since the insurer does not directly beneﬁt from the upside potential of the trade, the insurer indeed
tends to behave more conservatively, which is consistent with the eﬃcient shipping policy when
the supplier faces an attractive outside option. Consequently, granting more control to the insurer
eﬃciently deters over-shipping.
Second, by allowing the insurer to cancel coverage, the cancelable contract partially decouples
the two roles of TCI by eﬀectively creating two levels of deductible: When the signal deems shipping
as eﬃcient (i = 1), the supplier is covered by insurance. Under such circumstances, the smoothing
role of TCI is fulﬁlled as the nominal deductible δ is kept low. This result is also consistent with
the fact that in practice, a majority of cancelable contracts includes zero deductible, while non-
cancelable contracts tend to have large deductibles (Euler Hermes 2018). On the other hand, when
shipping is ineﬃcient (i ≥2), the full monitoring value of TCI is realized via the cancelation of
coverage, which results in an eﬀective deductible equal to r.
In summary, the value of cancelable contracts lays in its inherently sequential nature. Speciﬁcally,
the insurer’s recourse to cancel is exercised after observing the updated information. Such an ex post
action is contingent on the realization of the signal, and thus enhances the monitoring value of TCI.
In addition, note that the cancelation option can only be exercised before the supplier’s shipping
decision, as cancelation afterwards does not correspond to any recourse that creates economic
value. This is also consistent with the practice that the insurer cannot cancel coverage after the
order is shipped.
6.3.
The peril of cancelable contracts: over-cancelation
While Proposition 3 reveals some merits of the cancelable contracts, such contracts are not without
limitation. As shown in the following result, fully recovering the value of TCI is not always feasible
under cancelable contracts when the supplier’s outside option is unattractive.
Proposition 4. When the supplier’s outside option is unattractive (r0 < (1 −β2)r),
i) If β2 ≤¯β, there exist threshold functions φC
1 (T) ≤φC
F V (T) = θ1(β2 −β1)max

r −r−r0
β3 ,
T
1−β2

such that the performance of the optimal cancelable contract is summarized in the following table.
Region
Range of (c,T)
Insurer
Supplier
Financing
Rent to
name
cancels if
ships if
cost
insurer
Full-Value (FV)
c ≥φC
F V
i = 3
i = 1,2
No
No
RI/FC
c ∈[φC
1 ,φC
F V )
i = 3
i = 1,2
Sometimes Sometimes
Under-Insured (UI)
c < φC
1 and T ≤(1−β2)r−r0
lβ2
i = 2,3
i = 1,2
Yes
No
Under-Shipping (US) c < φC
1 and T > (1−β2)r−r0
lβ2
i = 2,3
i = 1
No
No
ii) If β2 > ¯β, there exist threshold functions φC
2 (T) ≤φC
3 (T), such that the performance of the
optimal cancelable contract is summarized in the following table.

20
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
Region Range of (c,T)
Insurer
Supplier
Financing
Rent to
name
cancels if
ships if
cost
insurer
RI/FC c ∈[φC
2 ,φC
3 )
i = 3
i = 1,2
Sometimes
Yes
UI
c ∈(0,φC
2 ) ∪(φC
3 ,φ) and T ≤(1−β2)r−r0
lβ2
i = 2,3
i = 1,2
Yes
No
US
c ∈(0,φC
2 ) ∪(φC
3 ,φ) and T > (1−β2)r−r0
lβ2
i = 2,3
i = 1
No
No
Figure 3
Illustration of diﬀerent regions under optimal cancelable contract when r0 < (1 −β2)r.
T
c
FV
RI/FC
UI
φ
φC
FV (T)
US
φC
1 (T)
(1−β2)r−r0
lβ2
Notes. The illustration is generated under parameters β2 ≤¯β.
Proposition 4 is illustrated in Figure 3. The ﬁrst notable result is that the supplier fails to recover
the full value of TCI when the insurer’s monitoring cost is suﬃciently low or when the medium
signal (β2) is deteriorating relative the prior belief.
The reason why a low monitoring cost hurts the performance of cancelable contract, interestingly,
also originates from the insurer’s cancelation option. While such an option increases the ﬂexibility
of the contract, the ﬂexibility is granted to the insurer, and hence may not always beneﬁt the
supplier. Indeed, this ﬂexibility creates an additional moral hazard on the insurer’s side. Similar
to the supplier’s tendency to over-ship, once the contract is in place, the insurer exercises his
cancelation option according to his own best interest, which may not be fully aligned with the
supplier’s. Speciﬁcally, as previously shown, for the insurer to not cancel at signal i, his cost of
cancelation (refund f) exceeds the expected claim costs βi(r −δ), i.e.,
f ≥βi(r −δ).
(10)
This constraint alludes to the two scenarios in which the insurer tends to over-cancel, i.e., cancel
at signal i when (1 −βi)r > r0. First, when the supplier’s outside option is unattractive (small
r0), it remains eﬃcient to ship at some i when βi is relatively large. Thus, it is more diﬃcult to
satisfy (10) for such i. Second, when the insurer’s monitoring cost is low, the insurance premium

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
21
p also tends to be low. As the refund f is capped by p in practice, (10) becomes more stringent
as c decreases, which also reduces the insurer’s expected cost, holding everything else constant.
When both conditions are met, in order to satisfy (10) for any signal i with (1 −βi)r ≤r0, the
optimal contracts exhibit one of two possible features: They either have a higher deductible, thereby
increasing ﬁnancing costs; or they have a higher premium to allow a higher refund, which leaves
rent to the insurer. These contracts are captured in the Region RI/FC in Figure 3. As c further
decreases, it becomes too costly to incentivize the insurer to adopt an eﬃcient cancelation policy.
Instead, he cancels coverage at i = 2,3, although shipping at i = 2 is eﬃcient. In response, the
supplier chooses between two alternatives depending on her ﬁnancial constraints. When she is less
concerned about the ﬁnancing cost (small T), the supplier follows the eﬃcient shipping policy,
which means that she ships at i = 2 uninsured (Region UI). However, for large T, the supplier
cannot aﬀord shipping without insurance. Thus, she does not ship at i = 2 even if it is eﬃcient
(Region US). Such a dilemma is often faced by suppliers. For example, in 2009, Total Security
Systems, a small supplier to UK security companies, had to decide whether to ship an order worth
£100,000 after their TCI was canceled. Even though they believed that the buyer’s default risk
was low, they canceled the order as they were unwilling to ship uninsured (Stacey 2009).
Finally, we note that the ineﬃciency of cancelable contracts is more pronounced when the credit
risk under the medium signal is high (β2 ≥¯β). In this case, the insurer has a greater tendency
to cancel at i = 2, and the supplier is forced to surrender more rent to the insurer in order to
prevent over-cancelation. As such, the parties are more likely to adopt either ineﬃcient cancelation
or ineﬃcient shipping policies.
6.4.
Contracts choice and improvements
By directly comparing the optimal non-cancelable and cancelable contracts, we note that when
the supplier’s outside option is attractive, i.e., r0 ≥(1 −β2)r, the supplier always (weakly) prefers
the cancelable contract, which recovers the full value of TCI, over the non-cancelable one. The
performance of the cancelable contract strictly dominates when the monitoring cost is high, i.e.,
c > φN
F V (T) (in Proposition 2). On the other hand, the supplier’s preference in the presence of an
unattractive outside option is summarized in the following.
Proposition 5. When the outside option is unattractive (r0 < (1 −β2)r):
1. For β2 ≤¯β, there exists threshold function φL(T) such that the supplier prefers the non-
cancelable contract with monitoring when c ≤φL(T), and the cancelable one when c > φL(T).
2. For β2 > ¯β, there exist threshold functions φH,1(T) ≤φH,2(T) such that the supplier prefers the
non-cancelable contract with monitoring when c ≤φH,1(T), and the non-cancelable contract
without monitoring when c ≥φH,2(T).

22
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
The above Proposition conﬁrms that when the outside option is unattractive, the supplier in gen-
eral prefers the non-cancelable contract when the monitoring cost is suﬃciently low.6 This result
echoes the recent emergence of non-cancelable contracts. Due to the adoption of superior informa-
tion systems and other technological advances, the insurer’s monitoring costs are now markedly
lower than that in the past. This potentially drives down insurance premiums, and as previously
mentioned, a low premium generally leads to over-cancelation by the insurer, which is also con-
sistent with the fact that TCI insurers have been accused of canceling coverage unreasonably. In
addition, during the ﬁnancial crisis, suppliers faced challenging market conditions and were often
deprived of attractive outside options. Such situations made suppliers particularly vulnerable to
insurers’ tendency to over-cancel, making non-cancelable contracts a more desirable choice.
As revealed in the previous results, when choosing TCI contracts, the supplier needs to measure
and compare the value of ﬂexibility oﬀered by cancelation, with that of the commitment embod-
ied in non-cancelable coverage. Intuitively, a cancelable contract with part of the coverage being
non-cancelable that blends these two beneﬁts may further improve the performance of TCI. This
type of contract corresponds to an emerging industry practice of adding non-cancelable coverage
onto a cancelable contract, which is sometimes referred to as top-up cover on cancelable coverage
(Insurance Journal 2012). Such a partially cancelable contract is similar to a cancelable contract
with only one diﬀerence: upon cancelation, the insurer can only cancel part of the coverage, while
the remaining part, is non-cancelable. By modeling this innovative contract form, we ﬁnd that
such contracts further expand the region where the supplier receives the full value of TCI (See
Proposition B.2 in the Appendix for details). Our analysis shows that this innovation adds value
through two channels: ﬁrst, it protects the supplier from ﬁnancing costs through non-cancelable
coverage; second, it deters the insurer from over-canceling.
7.
The implication of unveriﬁable information
In order to focus on the moral hazard associated with the insurer fulﬁlling his monitoring role,
we assume in the previous sections that once the insurer obtains the updated information through
monitoring eﬀort, he shares the information with the supplier without distortion. This assumption
is largely consistent with our understanding of practice (e.g., the insurer’s and supplier’s IT sys-
tems are partially connected, thereby making it diﬃcult to distort information). However, there
is a possibility that the insurer may strategically manipulate the acquired information, and it is
probably more likely when the information is acquired from non-public sources and is thus diﬃ-
cult to verify. This section examines the implication of such unveriﬁable information. The model,
6 When β2 > ¯β and c ∈(φH,1(T), φH,2(T)), the dominant contract form depends on speciﬁc parameter choices.

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
23
including the TCI contracts, is identical to that in §3, except that upon monitoring, the insurer
can misrepresent the information that he gathers.
In this setting, we ﬁrst note that the potential value of TCI is the same as depicted in Proposition
1 since the information is directly available to the insurer. Regarding the performance of TCI
contracts when the insurer maximizes his self-interest, it is intuitive that the insurer always has the
incentive to misrepresent the information in order to deter the supplier from shipping the order,
which would rid him of any claim liability. Anticipating this, the supplier deems valueless any
information that the insurer conveys. This in turn discourages the insurer from exerting monitoring
eﬀort, and thus unravels the monitoring role of TCI. Thus, under the non-cancelable contract,
where the insurer has no other credible means to convey the gathered information to the supplier,
the insurer has no incentive to exert eﬀort, and thus fails to fulﬁll the monitoring role. The resulting
optimal non-cancelable contract is the one depicted in Lemma 2 and it is clear that unveriﬁable
information hurts the performance of non-cancelable contracts.
The impact of unveriﬁable information on cancelable contracts, however, is more intricate. We
ﬁrst note that cancelable contracts equip the insurer with a tool that could potentially convey the
gathered information to the supplier, namely, his cancelation action. The intuition is that the cost
incurred by the insurer to cancel depends on the information he receives: when the information is
positive (low default risk), the cost of cancelation is high, and when negative (high default risk),
cancelation is less costly. Thus, when the supplier observes that her coverage is canceled, she is
more likely to be convinced that the information that the insurer gathers is negative.
To formalize the above argument, we model the interaction between the insurer and the sup-
plier, after contracting and the insurer having exerted monitoring eﬀort, as a signaling game. The
insurer (the sender) conveys his private information to the supplier (the receiver) with the action
of cancelation as the message. We refer the readers to Riley (2001) for a review of signaling games
in the economics literature, and to Lai et al. (2011), Bakshi et al. (2015), and Tang et al. (2018)
for the application in the OM literature. The relevant equilibrium concept is the Perfect Bayesian
equilibrium (PBE). In equilibrium, upon observing the insurer’s cancelation action (the message),
the supplier forms her posterior belief based on the information the insurer gathers, using Bayes’
Rule. Thereafter, the supplier makes her shipment decision accordingly. Speciﬁc to the TCI set-
ting, we focus on semi-separating equilibria as the number of possible messages (cancel or not
cancel) is less than the number of information classes (i = 1,2,3), and thus it is impossible to
completely separate each class of information through diﬀerent action. The other possible type of
equilibria is the pooling equilibria. However, as the insurer has no incentive to exert monitoring
under such equilibria, the resulting cancelable contract will be (weakly) dominated by the optimal
non-cancelable one.

24
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
By studying this signaling game (we refer the readers to Lemma B.2 in the Appendix for details),
we ﬁnd that under the optimal cancelable contract, the insurer adopts an intuitive threshold
cancelation policy: He cancels the contract upon receiving negative information, and does not
cancel on receiving positive information. In response, the supplier ships if and only if her coverage
is not canceled. For the equilibrium outcome in the signaling game, the analysis regarding the
insurer’s decision to exert monitoring eﬀort and the supplier’s choice of contract terms is similar
to that in §6. We present the performance of the resulting optimal contract as follows.
Proposition 6. When the information gathered by the insurer is unveriﬁable,
1. For an attractive outside option (r0 ≥(1 −β2)r), the supplier receives the full value of TCI
under the optimal cancelable contract;
2. For an unattractive outside option (r0 < (1 −β2)r):
i) If β2 ≤¯β, there exists threshold functions φU
1 (T) ≥φU
F V (T) = θ1(β2−β1)T
1−β2
such that the
performance of the optimal cancelable contract is summarized in the following table.
Region
Range of c
Insurer
Supplier
Financing
Rent to
name
cancels if
ships if
cost
insurer
Full Value (FV)
[φU
F V ,φ]
i = 3
i = 1,2
No
No
RI/FC
[φU
1 ,φU
F V )
i = 3
i = 1,2
Sometimes Sometimes
Under-shipping (US) [0,φU
1 )
i = 2,3
i = 1
No
No
ii) If β2 > ¯β, there exist threshold functions φU
2 (T) ≤φU
3 (T), such that the performance of the
optimal cancelable contract is summarized in the following table.
Region Range of c
Insurer
Supplier
Financing
Rent to
name
cancels if
ships if
cost
insurer
RI/FC [φU
2 ,φU
3 )
i = 3
i = 1,2
Sometimes
Yes
US
[0,φU
2 ) ∪(φU
3 ,φ)
i = 2,3
i = 1
No
No
By comparing the optimal cancelable contract under unveriﬁable information with the counter-
parts under veriﬁable information (Propositions 3 and 4), we notice that the cancelable contract
remains eﬃcient in the presence of unveriﬁable information when the supplier faces an attrac-
tive outside option (r0 ≥(1 −β2)r). However, in the presence of an unattractive outside option
(r0 < (1−β2)r), while the performance of the optimal cancelable contract follows a structure simi-
lar to the veriﬁable information case, two diﬀerences are notable. First, the optimal contract under
unveriﬁable information allows the supplier to receive the full beneﬁt of TCI over a larger range
of monitoring costs. This is because when the updated information is unveriﬁable, the supplier is
forced to react to the insurer’s action, instead of the information itself. In this way, the insurer
gains more direct control, and thus, can partially mitigate the supplier’s agency problem. Second,
unveriﬁable information may also hurt the supplier by, interestingly, the same force. Speciﬁcally,

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
25
when the insurer cancels at both i = 2 and 3, the supplier is unable to distinguish these two cases,
and thus loses the potentially valuable option to ship un-insured (Region UI in Proposition 4).
Finally, Proposition 7 compares the above cancelable contract with the non-cancelable one.
Proposition 7. When the information acquired by the insurer is unveriﬁable,
1. for β2 ≥¯β, the supplier prefers the cancelable contract;
2. for β2 < ¯β, there exists a threshold function φU
H(T) such that the supplier prefers the cancelable
contract if and only if c ≤φU
H(T).
Relative to the results under veriﬁable information (Proposition 5), cancelable contracts are more
likely to be the dominant contracting form when the gathered information is unveriﬁable, especially
when the monitoring cost is low. This is because that in addition to its role in mitigating moral
hazard, the cancelation option, which is only present in cancelable contracts, serves as a credible
signal for the insurer to communicate private information. Put diﬀerently, if the insurer has other
channels through which he can credibly communicate the gathered information to the supplier
(e.g., through IT integration, or blockchain), the attractiveness of non-cancelable contracts will be
improved, especially under low monitoring cost. This possibly lends another explanation for the
growing popularity of non-cancelable contracts.
8.
Conclusion
TCI is a commonly adopted risk management tool for suppliers who extend trade credit to their
buyers. Despite its wide usage in practice, TCI has been largely overlooked in the academic litera-
ture. In this paper, we highlight the operational value of TCI, as linked to the monitoring role that
the insurer plays in the TCI setting. We also highlight the supplier’s and insurer’s moral hazards
associated with this role. Centered around cancelability, a distinctive feature of TCI contracts,
we identify the respective advantages and limitations of the two forms of commonly seen TCI
contracts: cancelable and non-cancelable contracts.
Our paper can be extended along diﬀerent dimensions. For example, in focusing on the insurer-
supplier interaction, we assumed that the employment of TCI does not inﬂuence the buyer’s default
probability. However, in some cases, if the supplier were to withdraw the buyer’s trade credit upon
having her insurance canceled, the buyer may face more severe liquidity constraints and thus be
more likely to fail. Similar dynamics (without TCI) were studied recently in Babich (2010) and
Yang et al. (2015). Yet, the choice of TCI contract in the presence of endogenous default risk
remains an open question. Relatedly, the paper takes the trade credit terms between the supplier
and the buyer as exogenously given. However, the availability of TCI could have an impact on the
terms between the two trading parties, as well as other ﬁnancing options. Extending the current

26
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
model in this dimension could be a promising direction for future research. Finally, while the paper
focuses on TCI, the principles that we uncovered may apply more generally. Speciﬁcally, insurer’s
cancelation option can enhance the value of other types of insurance where the insurer is better
equipped to monitor the insured risk. For example, as an emergent insurance product, contingent
business interruption (CBI) insurance reimburses lost proﬁts and extra expenses resulting from an
interruption of business at the premises of a customer or supplier, and hence also insures a risk
that is not internal to the insured party. Therefore, it is possible that the insurer is more eﬃcient
at monitoring this risk as well. Thus, our results have the potential to inform risk management
practice beyond TCI.
Acknowledgments
The authors sincerely thank Vishal Gaur, the Associate Editor, three anonymous referees, Vlad Babich,
John Birge, Guoming Lai, Rong Li, Nicos Savva, Richard Talboys, Juan Serpa, the seminar participants at
Chicago Booth, UCLA Anderson, and University of Toronto Rotman School of Business, the participants
of the 2016 POMS Annual Conference, the 2nd Supply Chain Finance and Risk Management Workshop
at Washington University in St Louis, the 2016 M&SOM Annual Conference, the 2016 INFORMS Annual
Conference, for their valuable inputs and suggestions. The authors are also grateful to London Business
School for the generous ﬁnancial support.
References
AIG. 2013. Special Report: Trade Credit Risks. Strategic Risk URL http://www.aig.de/content/dam/
aig/emea/germany/documents/brochure/specialreport-tradecredit.pdf.
Aitken,
P.
2013.
Understanding
Cancelable
vs.
Non-Cancelable
Limits
under
Trade
Credit
Insurance
Policies.
URL
http://insurancenewsnet.com/oarticle/2013/10/30/
Understanding-Cancelable-vs-Non-Cancelable-Limits-under-Trade-Credit-Insurance-a-412795.
html.
Alan, Y., V. Gaur. 2018. Operational investment and capital structure under asset based lending. Manufac-
turing & Service Operations Management 20(4) 637–654.
Amiti, M., D. E Weinstein. 2011. Exports and ﬁnancial shocks. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4)
1841–1877.
Association of British Insurers. 2016.
Trade Credit Insurance Guide.
URL https://www.abi.
org.uk/globalassets/sitecore/files/documents/publications/public/2016/guidance/
abi-trade-credit-insurance-guide.pdf.
Babich, V. 2010. Independence of capacity ordering and ﬁnancial subsidies to risky suppliers. Manufacturing
& Service Operations Management 12(4) 583–607.
Babich, V., M.J. Sobel. 2004.
Pre-IPO operational and ﬁnancial decisions.
Management Science 50(7)
935–948.

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
27
Babich, V., C. S Tang. 2012. Managing opportunistic supplier product adulteration: Deferred payments,
inspection, and combined mechanisms. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 14(2) 301–
314.
Babich, V., G. Tsoukalas, S. Marinesi. 2017. Does crowdfunding beneﬁt entrepreneurs and venture capital
isnvestors? Georgetown McDonough School of Business Working Paper .
Bakshi, N., S.-H. Kim, N. Savva. 2015. Signaling new product reliability with after-sales service contracts.
Management Science 61(8) 1812–1829.
Besbes, O., D. A Iancu, N. Trichakis. 2017. Dynamic pricing under debt: Spiraling distortions and eﬃciency
losses. Management Science 64(10) 4572–4589.
Bhattacharyya, S., F. Lafontaine. 1995. Double-sided moral hazard and the nature of share contracts. The
RAND Journal of Economics 761–781.
Birchall, J. 2008.
Circuit City prepares to pull the plug on 155 stores.
Financial Times URL http:
//www.ft.com/cms/s/0/44cf9800-aa10-11dd-958b-000077b07658.html#axzz3z7LqYBjg.
Boyabatlı, O., L.B. Toktay. 2011. Stochastic capacity investment and ﬂexible vs. dedicated technology choice
in imperfect capital markets. Management Science 57(12) 2163–2179.
Cascino, S., M. Clatworthy, B. Garcia Osma, J. Gassen, S. Imam, T. Jeanjean. 2014. Who uses ﬁnancial
reports and for what purpose? evidence from capital providers. Accounting in Europe 11(2) 185–209.
Chod, J. 2016. Inventory, risk shifting, and trade credit. Management Science 63(10) 3207–3225.
Chod, J., E. Lyandres, S. A. Yang. 2019.
Trade credit and supplier competition.
Journal of Financial
Economics 131(2) 484–505.
Corbett, C. J, G. A DeCroix, A. Y Ha. 2005. Optimal shared-savings contracts in supply chains: Linear
contracts and double moral hazard. European Journal of Operational Research 163(3) 653–667.
Dada, M., Q. Hu. 2008. Financing newsvendor inventory. Operations Research Letters 36(5) 569–573.
Devalkar, S. K, H. Krishnan. 2019. The impact of working capital ﬁnancing costs on the eﬃciency of trade
credit. Production and Operations Management 28(4) 878–889.
Dong, L., B. Tomlin. 2012.
Managing disruption risk: The interplay between operations and insurance.
Management Science 58(10) 1898–1915.
Euler Hermes. 2018. A Guide to Credit Insurance URL https://www.gccrisk.com/wp-content/uploads/
2016/11/EH-CreditInsurance-WhitePaper_GCC.pdf.
Freely, E. 2012. Risk spolight: European debt crisis rattles trade credit insurance market. URL https:
//usa.marsh.com/Portals/9/Documents/RiskSpotlightJuly2012.pdf.
Froot, K. A, D. S Scharfstein, J. C Stein. 1993. Risk management: Coordinating corporate investment and
ﬁnancing policies. The Journal of Finance 48(5) 1629–1658.

28
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
Gaur, V., S. Seshadri. 2005. Hedging inventory risk through market instruments. Manufacturing & Service
Operations Management 7(2) 103–120.
Giannetti, M., M. Burkart, T. Ellingsen. 2011. What you sell is what you lend? explaining trade credit
contracts. Review of Financial Studies 24(4) 1261–1298.
Grossman, S. J, O. D Hart. 1986. The costs and beneﬁts of ownership: A theory of vertical and lateral
integration. Journal of political economy 94(4) 691–719.
Hennessy, C. A, T. M Whited. 2007. How costly is external ﬁnancing? Evidence from a structural estimation.
The Journal of Finance 62(4) 1705–1745.
H¨olmstrom, B. 1979. Moral hazard and observability. The Bell journal of economics 74–91.
Iancu, D. A, N. Trichakis, G. Tsoukalas. 2016. Is operating ﬂexibility harmful under debt? Management
Science 63(6) 1730–1761.
Insurance Journal. 2012.
Coface Introduces New Trade Credit Top-Up Cover.
URL http://www.
insurancejournal.com/news/national/2012/12/05/272840.htm.
International Credit Insurance and Surety Association. 2017.
Yearbook 2017/2018.
URL http://www.
icisa.org/yearbook/files_content/ICISA_Yearbook\%202017-2018\_Digital.pdf.
International Financial Consulting. 2012. Study on short-term trade ﬁnance and credit insurance in the
European Union. Prepared for the European Union, Contract number: COMP/2011/002.
Jain, N., S. Hasija, D. G Popescu. 2013. Optimal contracts for outsourcing of repair and restoration services.
Operations Research 61(6) 1295–1311.
Jensen, M.C., W.H. Meckling. 1976. Theory of the ﬁrm: Managerial behavior, agency costs and ownership
structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3(4) 305–360.
Jones, P. M. 2010. Trade credit insurance. Primer Series on Insurance 15.
Kallberg, J., G. Udell. 2003. The value of private sector business credit information sharing: The US case.
Journal of Banking & Finance 27(3) 449–469.
Kaplan, S. N, L. Zingales. 1997. Do investment-cash ﬂow sensitivities provide useful measures of ﬁnancing
constraints? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 169–215.
Kollewe,
J.
2009.
Budget
credit
insurance
top-up
scheme
aims
at
helping
ﬁrms
sur-
vive
recession.
The
Guardian
URL
http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2009/apr/22/
budget-top-up-credit-insurance.
Kouvelis, P., W. Zhao. 2012. Financing the newsvendor: supplier vs. bank, and the structure of optimal
trade credit contracts. Operations Research 60(3) 566–580.
Lai, G., L. Debo, L. Nan. 2011. Channel stuﬃng with short-term interest in market value. Management
Science 57(2) 332–346.

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
29
Ma, A. C-T., M. H Riordan. 2002. Health insurance, moral hazard, and managed care. Journal of Economics
& Management Strategy 11(1) 81–107.
Milne, R. 2010. Late payments push smaller companies into bankruptcy. Financial Times URL http:
//www.ft.com/cms/s/0/2bb66d42-37b0-11df-88c6-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3wvh0uR5u.
Myers, S.C. 1977. Determinants of corporate borrowing. Journal of Financial Economics 5(2) 147–175.
Ning, J., V. Babich. 2018. R&d investments in the presence of knowledge spillover and debt ﬁnancing: Can
risk shifting cure free riding? Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 20(1) 97–112.
Peura, H., S. A. Yang, G. Lai. 2017. Trade credit in competition: a horizontal beneﬁt. Manufacturing &
Service Operations Management 19(2) 263–289.
Riley, J. G. 2001. Silver signals: Twenty-ﬁve years of screening and signaling. Journal of Economic Literature
39(2) 432–478.
Roels, G., U. S Karmarkar, S. Carr. 2010. Contracting for collaborative services. Management Science 56(5)
849–863.
Rothschild, M., J. Stiglitz. 1976. Equilibrium in competitive insurance markets: An essay on the economics
of imperfect information. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 629–649.
Serpa, J. C., H. Krishnan. 2017.
The strategic role of business insurance.
Management Science 63(2)
384–404.
Shavell, S. 1979. On moral hazard and insurance. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 541–562.
Shleifer, A., R.W. Vishny. 2011. Fire sales in ﬁnance and macroeconomics. Journal of Economic Perspectives
25(1) 29–48.
Stacey, K. 2009. Total Security Systems: What to do when oxygen supply is cut. Financial Times URL
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/438b1210-2af5-11de-8415-00144feabdc0.html.
Stein, J. C. 2002. Information production and capital allocation: Decentralized versus hierarchical ﬁrms.
The Journal of Finance 57(5) 1891–1921.
Swinney, R., S. Netessine. 2009. Long-term contracts under the threat of supplier default. Manufacturing &
Service Operations Management 11(1) 109–127.
Tang, C. S, S. A. Yang, J. Wu. 2018. Sourcing from suppliers with ﬁnancial constraints and performance
risk. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 20(1) 70–84.
TATA-AIG. 2017.
Trade credit insurance policy – Policy wordings.
URL https://www.irda.gov.in/
ADMINCMS/cms/Uploadedfiles/79_Trade%20Credit%20Insurance%20Policy-Policy%20Wordings.
pdf. Accessed at May 20, 2017.
Thomas, J. 2013. Companies turning to Trade Credit Insurance in an unpredictable and debt-laden world.
White Paper, Zurich American Insurance Company.

30
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
Turcic, D., P. Kouvelis, E. Bolandifar. 2015. Hedging commodity procurement in a bilateral supply chain.
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 17(2) 221–235.
van der Veer, K. J. M. 2015. The private export credit insurance eﬀect on trade. Journal of Risk and
Insurance 82(3) 601–624.
Winter, R. A. 2013. Optimal insurance contracts under moral hazard. Handbook of insurance. Springer,
205–230.
Yang, S. A., J. R. Birge. 2018. Trade credit, risk sharing, and inventory ﬁnancing portfolios. Management
Science 64(8) 3667–3689.
Yang, S. A., J.R. Birge, R.P. Parker. 2015. The supply chain eﬀects of bankruptcy. Management Science
61(10) 2320–2338.
Yang, Z., G. Aydın, V. Babich, D. Beil. 2009. Supply disruptions, asymmetric information, and a backup
production option. Management science 55(2) 192–209.
Zeckhauser, R. 1970. Medical insurance: A case study of the tradeoﬀbetween risk spreading and appropriate
incentives. Journal of Economic theory 2(1) 10–26.
Appendix A:
List of Notation
Table 1 summarizes the notation used in the paper.
Table 1
Notation
r
the credit price that the supplier charges to the credit buyer
r0 the supplier’s outside option, r0 < r
T
the supplier’s net cash ﬂow threshold (she incurs a ﬁnancing cost when her net cash
ﬂow is below T)
l
the proportional ﬁnancing cost incurred by the supplier
c
the insurer’s cost of exerting monitoring eﬀort
βi the buyer’s default probability when the updated information is of type i = 1,2,3.
0 ≤β1 < β2 < β3 ≤1
θi
the probability that the insurer observes information of group i = 1,2,3, P3
i=1 θi = 1
¯β
the prior expectation of the buyer’s default probability, P3
i=1 θiβi = ¯β; (1 −¯β) > r0
p
insurance premium p ≥0
δ
deductible, δ ∈[0,r]
f
the refund that the insurer pays to the supplier when the insurance is canceled,
f ∈[0,p]
φ
the maximum cost of eﬀort for monitoring to be eﬃcient. φ = P3
i=1 θi[r0−(1−βi)r]+

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
31
Appendix B:
Supplemental Results
Proposition B.1 When the supplier’s outside option is unattractive (r0 < (1 −β2)r), there exist threshold
functions φNL
F V (T), φN
1 (T), φN
2 (T) and φN
3 (T), where
φNL
3
(T) ≥φNL
2
(T) ≥φNL
1
(T) ≥φNL
F V (T) = φ −

T −(1 −¯β)

r −r −r0
β3
+
,
(11)
such that the performance of the optimal contract is summarized in the following table.
Region
Range of c
Insurer
Supplier
Supplier incurs
Insurer
name
monitors
ships if
ﬁnancing cost?
extracts rent?
Full Value (FV)
[0,φNL
F V ]
Yes
i = 1,2
No
No
Financing Cost (FC)
(φNL
F V ,φNL
1
] ∪(φNL
2
,φNL
3
]
Yes
i = 1,2
Yes
No
Under-Shipping (US)
(φNL
1
,φNL
2
]
Yes
i = 1
Sometimes
Sometimes
No Monitoring (NM) (φNL
3
,φ]
No
i = 1,2,3
No
No
Lemma B.1 Under a cancelable contract (p,δ,f), the insurer exerts monitoring eﬀort if and only if all of
the following conditions are satisﬁed:
B ≥¯β;
(12)
¯β(r −δ) ≥c + (r −δ)
X
i
θiβi1βi<BP + f
X
i
θi1βi∈[BP ,B];
(13)
f ≥c + (r −δ)
X
i
θiβi1βi<BP + f
X
i
θi1βi∈[BP ,B].
(14)
Proposition B.2 Under the optimal partially cancelable contract, if the outside option is unattractive (r0 <
(1 −β2)r), the supplier receives the full value of TCI if and only if:
c ≥min
 
θ3(β3 −¯β)
1 −¯β
T, θ1(β2 −β1)
1 −β2
(T −γ∗) −
2
X
i=1
θiβiγ∗
!
.
(15)
where γ∗= r −r−r0
β3 −
l
1+l
h
T −

r −r−r0
β3
i+
.
Lemma B.2 Under unveriﬁable information, under any cancelable contract that induces the insurer’s mon-
itoring eﬀort, in the resulting PBE,
1. the supplier ships if and only if the insurer does not cancel the contract;
2. if the insurer cancels at information class i, he also cancels at all information classes k > i; and
3. the insurer cancels when the received signal i ≥j and the supplier ships at i < j for j = 2,3 if and only
if the contract terms (p,δ,f) satisfy the following three conditions jointly:
BP ∈[βj−1, βj];
(16)
B ≥
P
i≤j θiβi
P
i≤j θi
;
(17)
BC ≤
P
i>j θiβi
P
i>j θi
;
(18)
where B(), BC() and BP() are deﬁned in Sections 5 and 6.

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
i
Online Appendix
Trade Credit Insurance:
Operational Value and Contract Choice
S. Alex Yang, Nitin Bakshi, Christopher J. Chen
Appendix C:
List of Notation
Table 2 summarizes a list of notation used in this Online Appendix.
Table 2
Notation
Π0
Π0 = (1 −¯β)r.
Ci
Ci = P
j≥i θj[r0 −(1 −βj)r], for i ≥1.
Πi
Πi = (1 −¯β)r + Ci −c, for i ≥1.
CU
i
CU
i = P
j≥i θjβj

r −r−r0
βi

.
τi
τi = (1 −P
j<i θjβj)

r −r−r0
βi

.
lh
lh =
θ1(β2−β1)
(1−β2) P2
i=1 θiβi .
ΠN
i
the payoﬀunder the optimal non-cancelable contract that induces the supplier to
ship only at signal j < i.
ΠC
i
the payoﬀunder the optimal cancelable contract under which the insurer cancels
at signal j ≥i.
ΠU
i
the payoﬀunder the optimal cancelable contract with unveriﬁable information
under which the insurer cancels at signal j ≥i.
γ
the amount of coverage that is non-cancelable in a cancelable contract with non-
cancelable coverage, γ ∈[0,r −δ].
Appendix D:
Proofs
D.1.
Proofs in Section 4
Proof of Proposition 1.
To characterize the potential value of trade credit insurance, we ﬁrst identify
the payoﬀs under two benchmarks: the ﬁrst-best benchmark and the no-insurance one. Under the ﬁrst-best
benchmark, we consider the following two scenarios depending on whether the insurer exerts monitoring
eﬀort.
1. When the insurer does not exert eﬀort, the supplier makes her shipping decision based on the prior
expectation of the buyer’s default probability ¯β. Thus, she ships the order if and only if (1 −¯β)r ≥r0.
As this condition always holds under Assumption 1, the supplier always ship and the corresponding
payoﬀis (1 −¯β)r.
2. When the insurer exerts eﬀort and hence obtains updated information corresponding to default prob-
ability βi, the supplier ships the order if and only if (1 −βi)r ≥r0 for i = 1,...,N. The supplier’s
corresponding payoﬀis (1 −¯β)r + P
i θi[r0 −(1 −βi)r]+ −c.

ii
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
By comparing the above two scenarios, we can conclude that exerting eﬀort is beneﬁcial if and only if
c ≤
X
i
θi[r0 −(1 −βi)r]+ = φ,
(19)
and the ﬁrst-best payoﬀis therefore:
ΠF B = (1 −¯β)r + (φ −c)+ .
(20)
Next, we consider the no-insurance benchmark. Without insurance, the supplier makes her shipping deci-
sion based on the prior expected default risk ¯β. If she ships, her expected payoﬀis (1 −¯β)r −¯βL(0). If
she does not ship, her payoﬀis r0. Therefore, she ships if and only if ΠNI ≥r0, or equivalently, ¯β ≤r−r0
r+lT .
Therefore, the no-insurance payoﬀis:
ΠNI = max((1 −¯β)r −¯βL(0),r0) = (1 −¯β)r −min
¯βL(0),(1 −¯β)r −r0)

.
(21)
Taking the diﬀerence between ΠF B and ΠNI leads to the potential value of TCI as in the Proposition. □
D.2.
Proofs in Section 5
Proof of Lemma 1.
To facilitate the proof, Figure 4 illustrates the extensive form representation of the
game between the insurer and the supplier after the two parties have entered the (non-cancelable) contract.
Figure 4
Extensive form representation of the game between the insurer and the supplier under a non-cancelable
contract
Exert
Eﬀort
(c)
No
Eﬀort
(r0; 0)
¯β
1 −¯β
(r −δ −L(r −δ −p); r −δ)
(r; 0)
signal
i
w. p. θi
(r0; c)
βi
(r −δ −L(r −δ −p); r −δ + c)
(r; c)
1 −βi
...
...
...
Ship
on
Credit
Not
Ship
Ship
on
Credit
Not
Ship
(Suppliers Payoﬀ; Insurers Cost)
Insurers Decision
Suppliers Decision
For the proof, we ﬁrst show that all three conditions are necessary for the insurer to exert eﬀort.
1. For (2), we prove it by contradiction. Assume this condition is not satisﬁed under contract (p,δ), i.e.,
B < ¯β. Now we compare the insurer’s total costs (eﬀort cost plus claim payout) when he exerts eﬀort
(the upper branch in Figure 4) that his cost when he does not exert eﬀort (the lower branch in Figure
4). If the insurer does not exert eﬀort, the supplier’s belief on the buyer’s default risk remains to
be the prior expectation, ¯β. By the assumption that B < ¯β, the supplier never ships, and hence the
insurer’s total cost is zero. On the other hand, if the insurer exerts eﬀort, his total costs is at least c. By
comparing these two costs, we can conclude that under B < ¯β, the insurer does not have the incentive
to exert eﬀort. Thus, B ≥¯β is a necessary condition for the insurer to exert eﬀort.

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
iii
2. Regarding (3), when (2) is satisﬁed, i.e., the supplier always ships when she receives no updated infor-
mation, the insurer’s total cost when he does not exert eﬀort is ¯β(r −δ), the expected claim payout.
On the other hand, his total cost with eﬀort is the sum of the eﬀort cost c and (r −δ)P
i θiβi1βi≤B, the
expected payout under the supplier’s optimal shipping decision in response to updated information βis,
i.e., she ships if and only if βi ≤B. By comparing the insurer’s total costs between these two scenarios,
we can see that the insurer only exerts eﬀort when (3) holds.
3. (4) is the insurer’s participation constraint, where the left hand side is the premium charged by the
insurer, and the right hand side the total cost with eﬀort, as detailed in the previous discussion on (3).
Without this constraint, the premium is not suﬃcient to compensate the insurer for his total cost, and
hence the insurer will not be willing to oﬀer insurance coverage to the supplier at all.
For the suﬃcient side, similar to the above steps, when all three conditions are satisﬁed, anticipating the sup-
plier’s shipping policy (both with and without updated information), the insurer’s total cost under exerting
eﬀort is (weakly) lower than his cost without exerting eﬀort, as well as the insurance premium. Therefore,
the insurer has the incentive to exert eﬀort. □
Proof of Lemma 2.
If a contract does not induce the insurer’s monitoring eﬀort, no updated information
will be obtained, and hence the supplier makes her shipping decision based on the prior expectation ¯β.
Following the assumption that (1−¯β)r > r0, the highest payoﬀthe supplier can achieve under such contract
is (1 −¯β)r, which can be obtained if and only if no ﬁnancing cost is incurred and the insurer breaks even.
Next, we will show that contracts that satisfy the following two conditions allows the supplier to achieve
this payoﬀwhile does not induce insurer’s eﬀort.
δ ≤min
(1 −¯β)r −T
1 + ¯β
, r −r0
β3

(22)
p = ¯β(r −δ)
(23)
Note that under (22), we have: T ≤r −δ −p, which leads to L(r −δ −p) = 0. Thus, the supplier does not
incur any ﬁnancing cost when she ships the order. Note that δ ≤(1−¯
β)r−T
1+¯
β
is also a necessary condition as for
δ greater than this threshold, the supplier will incur ﬁnancing cost when she ships, which lowers her payoﬀ
under this contract.
Further, (22) also leads to β3 ≤r−r0
δ
, that is, B = β3, suggesting that the supplier always ships. Substituting
B = β3 into Eq. (3), we can see that for any c > 0 (when c = 0, the insurer always exerts eﬀort, so it is
excluded from this case), Eq. (3) does not hold. Thus, according to Lemma 1, such a contract does not
induce insurer eﬀort.
Finally, we note that Eq. (23) ensures that the insurer breaks even. Thus, under the above contract, the
supplier’s payoﬀis (1 −¯β)r, as desired, and Eq. (22) also imposes an upper bound on δ, as stated. □
Proof of Proposition 2.
The proof follows three steps.
1. Step 1. Deﬁne the threshold functions in the proposition that separate the ﬁve regions in the proof
(full value, ﬁnancing cost, rent to insurer, over-shipping, and no monitoring).

iv
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
2. Step 2. Summarize the ﬁve candidate solutions (contracts) that can be optimal (We show in Lemma
E.1 that only these solutions can be optimal).
3. Step 3. Compare the ﬁve candidate solutions to determine the optimal one.
Step 1: Deﬁne the threshold functions that separate the ﬁve regions. The threshold functions
φN
1 (T), φN
2 (T), φN
3 (T), and φN
4 (T) that deﬁne the boundary of diﬀerent regions in the Proposition (illustrated
in Figure 5) depend on the relative magnitude of r0 and the following thresholds:
Ra
0 =

1 −
β2
1 +
θ1β1l
θ2(1+l)(1 −θ1β1 −θ2β2)

1
β2 −1
β3


r;
(24)
Rc
0 =

1 −
β2
1 +
h
1−θ1β1−θ2β2
θ2
−1+(1−θ1β1)l
l¯
β
θ3β3
θ2
i
1
β2 −1
β3


r;
(25)
Rd
0 =

1 −
β2
1 +
h
θ3β3
θ2 +
l P
j≥2 θjβj
(1+l)θ2
(1 −θ1β1 −θ2β2)
i
1
β2 −1
β3


r.
(26)
1. For r0 ≥Ra
0,
φN
1 (T) = min(f1(T), f2(T))
(27)
φN
2 (T) =
(
min(f2(T), f3(T), f7(T))
if r0 /∈(Rc
0,Rd
0)
min(f2(T), f3(T), max(f7(T), f8(T)))
if r0 ∈(Rc
0,Rd
0)
(28)
φN
3 (T) = φN
4 (T) = max(min(f2(T), f3(T)), f4(T)).
(29)
2. For r0 < Ra
0,
φN
1 (T) = min(f1(T), f2(T), f5(T));
(30)
φN
2 (T) = min(f2(T), f3(T), f7(T), f5(T));
(31)
φN
3 (T) = min(max(min(f2(T), f3(T)), f4(T)), f6(T));
(32)
φN
4 (T) = max(min(f2(T), f3(T)), f4(T)).
(33)
where f1(T) – f8(T) are:
f1(T) = CU
2 +
l P
j≥2 θjβj
1 + (1 −¯β)l[T −(τ2 −CU
2 )]+;
(34)
f2(T) = C2 −
l P
j<2 θjβj
1 + l
[T −(τ2 −C2)];
(35)
f3(T) = CU
2 +
l P
j≥2 θjβj
1 + l
[T −(τ2 −C2)]+ ;
(36)
f4(T) = C3 −
l P
j<3 θjβj
1 + l
[T −(τ3 −C3)]+ ;
(37)
f5(T) =

1 −θ1β1 −θ2β2 + θ2β2(1 + l)
θ1β1l

r −r −r0
β2

−T;
(38)
f6(T) =
l(θ1β1+θ2β2)
1+l(1−θ1β1−θ2β2)τ3 −
lθ1β1
1+l(1−θ1β1)τ2 −θ2β2

r −r−r0
β2

l(θ1β1+θ2β2)
1+l(1−θ1β1−θ2β2) −
lθ1β1
1+l(1−θ1β1)
−T;
(39)

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
v
f7(T) = CU
2 +
l P
j≥2 θiβj
1 + θ1β1 + (1 −¯β)l

T −(1 −θ1β1 −θ3β3)

r −r −r0
β2
+
;
(40)
f8(T) = CU
2 +
T −(1 −θ1β1 −θ3β3)

r −r−r0
β2

+
l P
j<3 θjβj
1+l(1−P
j<3 θjβj)(T −τ3 + CU
2 )
1+θ1β1+(1−¯
β)l
l P
j≥2 θjβj
−
l P
j<3 θjβj
1+l(1−P
j<3 θjβj)
.
(41)
According to the deﬁnitions of φN
i () and fi(), it is easy to verify that φN
F V (T) ≤φN
1 (T) ≤φN
2 (T) ≤φN
3 (T) ≤
φN
4 (T). For example, φN
1 (T) ≤φN
2 (T) because min(f3(T),f7(T)) > f1(T).
Figure 5
Threshold functions in Proposition 2.
(a) φN
F V (T)
T
c
FV
FC
NM
RI
φ
OS
φN
FV (T)
(b) φN
1 (T)
T
c
FV
FC
NM
RI
φ
OS
φN
1 (T)
(c) φN
2 (T)
T
c
FV
FC
NM
RI
φ
OS
φN
2 (T)
(d) φN
3 (T)
T
c
FV
FC
NM
RI
φ
OS
φN
3 (T)
Notes. The above threshold functions are drawn for the case r0 ≥Ra
0, where φN
3 (T) = φN
4 (T).
Step 2: Summarize the ﬁve candidate solutions. In Lemma E.1, we characterize the optimal one among
all non-cancelable contracts that induce a given shipping policy (e.g., the supplier ships at i = 1, but not
at i = 2,3). By enumerating these solutions across all possible shipping policies, we identify ﬁve candidate
non-cancelable contracts: Full Value (FV), Financing Cost (FC), Rent to Insurer (RI), Over-shipping (OS),
and No Monitoring (NM).7 By Lemma E.1 and Lemma 2, the optimal non-cancelable contract can only be
7 Note that the ﬁve candidate solutions to the optimal non-cancelable contracts bearing the same name with the ﬁve
regions in the Proposition. As shown later, the solution will be the optimal one in the region that bears the same
name. For example, Region FV is deﬁned by the range of c where Solution FV deﬁned below is optimal.

vi
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
chosen from these ﬁve candidates. In the following, we summarize the contract term and basic properties of
these ﬁve candidates.
1. Solution FV : This represents the solution that the supplier receives the full value of TCI, i.e., her
payoﬀunder the contract is ΠF B = θ1(1 −β1)r + (θ2 + θ3)r0 −c. To achieve this payoﬀ, the contract
must satisfy three conditions: 1) the shipping policy is eﬃciency (ships at i = 1, but not at i = 2,3), the
supplier By examining the candidate solutions in Lemma E.1 and Lemma 2, we note that this payoﬀ
can be achieved under the following contract:
δ = r −r0
β2
−l(T + c −τ2)+
1 + l(1 −θ1β1),
p = c + θ1β1(r −δ).
(42)
This contract corresponds to Statement 1 in Lemma E.1 (Eq. (123)) with i = 2. Under this contract,
the supplier’s payoﬀfollows ΠNB
2
from Eq. (124), which equals to ΠF B if and only if c ≤φN
F V (T), where
φN
F V (T) is deﬁned in the Proposition.
2. Solution FC: This represents the solution that the supplier ships eﬃciently, i.e., only ships at i = 1, and
she incurs ﬁnancing cost, but does not surrender rent to the insurer. This corresponds to Statement 1
in Lemma E.1 with i = 2 when c > φN
F V (T), that is
δ = r −r0
β2
−l(T + c −τ2)+
1 + l(1 −θ1β1),
p = c + θ1β1(r −δ).
(43)
In this case, the insurer’s participation constraint is binding, and the supplier’s payoﬀis
ΠNB
2
= Π2 −
l P
j<2 θjβj
1 + l(1 −P
j<2 θjβj) (T + c −τ2)+ .
(44)
When c > φN
F V (T), ΠNB
2
< Π2, and the diﬀerence is due to the ﬁnancing cost incurred. In addition,
according to Lemma E.1, this solution is optimal only if c < min(f1(T),f2(T)) (when it is feasible and
dominates the contract without eﬀort Π0).
3. Solution RI: This represents the solution that the supplier ships at i = 1, and she surrenders rent to
the insurer. This corresponds to Statement 2 in Lemma E.1 with i = 2, that is,
δ = r −
c
P
j≥2 θjβj
,
p = 1
l
r −r0
β2
−r

+

1 + 1
l

c
P
j≥2 θjβj
−T.
(45)
as shown in Lemma E.1, the insurer’s participation constraint is not binding, and and the supplier’s
payoﬀfollows:
ΠNN
2
= Π2 −
"
(1 −¯β)lc + (1 + P
j<2 θjβjl)(c −CU
2 )
l P
j≥2 θjβj
−T
#
.
(46)
as given by Eq. (126) in Lemma E.1. By Lemma E.1, this solution can be optimal only if c ∈
(f1(T),f3(T)] (when it is feasible and dominates Π0).
4. Solution OS: This represents the solution that the supplier ships at i = 1,2, i.e., she over-ships. This
corresponds to Statement 1 in Lemma E.1 with i = 3, that is,
δ = r −r0
β3
−
l(T + c −τ3)+
1 + l(1 −θ1β1 −θ2β2),
p = c + (θ1β1 + θ2β2)(r −δ).
(47)

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
vii
Under this contract, the insurer’s participation constraint is binding, and the supplier’s payoﬀis
ΠNB
3
= Π3 −
l P
j<3 θjβj
1 + l(1 −P
j<3 θjβj) (T + c −τ3)+ .
(48)
as given by Eq. (124) in Lemma E.1. We can show that follows ΠNB
3
≤Π3 < Π2. This solution can be
optimal only if c ≤f4(T) (when it is feasible and dominates Π0).
5. Solution NM: This represents the solution that the insurer does not exert eﬀort, and the supplier ships
at i = 1,2,3. The supplier’s payoﬀΠ0 as given by Lemma 2, and the insurer’s participation constraint
is binding. Also according to the second part of Lemma E.1, this solution is optimal if and only if
c ≥φN
4 (T) = max(min(f2(T),f3(T)),f4(T)), when it dominates ΠNB
2
, ΠNN
2
and ΠNB
3
.
Step 3: Compare the candidate solutions and determine the optimal one. From the above summary
of the candidate solutions, we have identiﬁed the boundary of Region FV and that of Region NM. In the
following, we prove the boundaries of Region FC, RI, and OS are φN
1 () (between FC and RI), φN
2 () (between
RI and OS), and φN
3 () (between OS and FC), as deﬁned above. To do so, we note that the regions that
Solution FC and Solution RI can be optimal are mutually exclusive, and thus it is not necessary to compare
these two solutions. Therefore, we only need to compare the following two pairs.
1. The comparison between Solution FC (ΠNB
2
) and Solution OS (ΠNB
3
) over the region that both can
be optimal, i.e., c ∈(φN
F V (T), min(f1(T),f2(T),f4(T))].
2. The comparison between Solution RI (ΠNN
2
) and Solution OS (ΠNB
3
) over the region that both can be
optimal, c ∈(f1(T), min(f3(T),f4(T)].
We make these comparisons according to the relative magnitude between r0 and Ra
0.
1. When
r0 ≥Ra
0,
between
Solution
FC
and
Solution
OS,
we
can
verify
that
when
c ∈
(φN
F V (T), min(f1(T),f2(T),f4(T))], ΠNB
2
≥ΠNB
3
. Thus, the FC region, where Solution FC is optimal,
is deﬁned as c ∈(φN
F V (T), φN
1 (T)], where φN
1 (T) = min(f1(T),f2(T)), and φN
3 (T) = φN
4 (T). To further
determine φN
2 (T), we compare Solution RI and Solution OS by the following scenarios:
(a) When r0 ≥

1 −
β2
1+ θ3β3
θ2

1
β2 −1
β3


r := Rb
0, we can verify that the region where Solution OS can be
optimal, i.e., c ≤f4(T) and the region that Solution RI can be optimal, i.e., c ∈(f1(T),f3(T)), do
not overlap. Thus, φN
2 (T) = min(f2(T),f3(T)) as f7(T) > f3(T) over the relevant range.
(b) When r0 < Rb
0, and r0 /∈(Rc
0, Rd
0), in the region where both Solution OS and Solution RI could
be optimal, i.e., c ≤(f1(T),min(f3(T),f4(T)), as ΠNB
3
= Π3, we have that ΠNB
3
> ΠNN
2
if and only
if c > f7(T). Thus, φN
2 (T) = min(f2(T),f3(T),f7(T)).
(c) When r0 < Rb
0 and r0 ∈(Rc
0, Rd
0), in the region where both Solution OS and Solution RI can be
optimal, i.e., c ≤(f1(T),min(f3(T),f4(T)), we can verify that in the region when ΠNB
3
= Π3, we
have ΠNB
3
> ΠNN
2
if and only if c > f7(T); and in the region when ΠNB
3
< Π3, ΠNB
3
> ΠNN
2
if and
only if c > f8(T). Thus, φN
2 (T) = min(f2(T),f3(T),max(f7(T),f8(T))).
2. When
r0 < Ra
0,
between
Solution
FC
and
Solution
OS,
we
can
verify
that
when
c ∈
(φN
F V (T), min(f1(T), f2(T), f4(T))], ΠNB
3
> ΠNB
2
if and only if c ∈(f5(T), min(f2(T), f6(T)). Thus,
Solution FC is optimal when c ∈(φN
F V (T), φN
1 (T)) or c ∈(φN
3 (T), φN
4 (T)) where φN
1 (T), φN
3 (T), and

viii
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
φN
4 (T) are deﬁned as above. Next, between Solution RI and Solution OS, the result is similar to
the case with r0 ≥Ra
0. Taking into consideration of the deﬁnition of φN
1 (T), we have that φN
2 (T) =
min(f2(T), f3(T), f7(T), f5(T)). □
Proof of Proposition B.1.
Analogous to the proof of Proposition 2, this proof consists of the following
three steps.
1. Step 1. Deﬁne the threshold functions in the proposition that separate the four regions (full value,
ﬁnancing cost, under-shipping, and no monitoring).
2. Step 2. Summarize the four candidate solutions (contracts) that can be optimal (We show in Lemma
E.1 that only these solutions can be optimal).
3. Step 3. Compare the candidate solutions to determine the optimal one.
Step 1. Deﬁne the threshold functions that separate the four regions. The deﬁnition of the thresh-
old functions φNL
1
(T), φNL
2
(T), and φNL
3
(T) depending on the relative magnitude of r0 and the following
thresholds:
Re
0 :=

1 −
¯β
1 −θ1

1 −β1
β2

+
l P
j<3 θiβi
1+l
(1 −P
j<3 θiβi) θ1β1
θ2β2

1
β2 −1
β3


r;
(49)
Rf
0 :=

1 −
β2
1 −θ3(β3−β2)
¯
β
+
l P
j<3 θjβj
(1+l)θ2
(1 −θ1β1 −θ2β2)

1
β2 −1
β3


r.
(50)
With these deﬁnitions, as well as f1() – f8() deﬁned in the proof of Proposition 2, we deﬁne φNL
1
, φNL
2
(T),
and φNL
3
(T) as follows.
1. For β2 ≤¯β or r0 ≤Re
0,
φNL
1
(T) = φNL
2
(T) = φNL
3
(T) = f4(T).
(51)
2. For β2 > ¯β and r0 ∈(Re
0,Rf
0],
φNL
1
(T) = min(f4(T), f6(T));
(52)
φNL
2
(T) = φNL
3
(T) = max(f2(T), f4(T)).
(53)
3. For β2 > ¯β and r0 > Rf
0,
φNL
1
(T) = φNL
F V (T);
(54)
φNL
2
(T) = max(φNL
F V (T), min(f2(T), f3(T), f8(T)));
(55)
φNL
3
(T) = max(f4(T), min(f2(T), f3(T)).
(56)
According to the deﬁnition of φNL
F V (T), φNL
1
(T), φNL
2
(T), and φNL
3
(T), we can verify that φNL
F V (T) ≤φNL
1
(T) ≤
φNL
2
(T) ≤φNL
3
(T).
Step 2. Summarize the four candidate solutions. We deﬁne the four candidate solutions of the optimal
non-cancelable contracts that corresponds to the region with the same name in the Proposition. The candidate
solutions are characterized in Lemma E.1 and Lemma 2.

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
ix
1. Solution FV : This represents the solution that the supplier receives the full value of TCI, i.e., her payoﬀ
is Π3. By examining the candidate solutions in Lemma E.1 and Lemma 2, we note that this payoﬀis
achieved if and only if Statement 1 in Lemma E.1 with i = 3 is the relevant solution, that is,
δ = r −r0
β3
−
l(T + c −τ3)+
1 + l(1 −θ1β1 −θ2β2),
p = c + (θ1β1 + θ2β2)(r −δ).
(57)
In this case, the supplier’s payoﬀfollows ΠNB
3
as in Eq. (124), and it equals to ΠF B if and only if
c ≤φNL
F V (T) where φNL
F V (T) is deﬁned in the Proposition.
2. Solution FC: This represents the solution that the supplier ships eﬃciently, i.e., ships at i = 1, 2, and
she incurs ﬁnancing cost, but does not surrender rent to the insurer. This corresponds to Statement 1
in Lemma E.1 with i = 3 (as in the FV scenario) when c > φNL
F V (T). In this case, the supplier’s payoﬀ
ΠNB
3
< Π3. In addition, according to Lemma E.1, this solution is optimal only if c ∈(φNL
F V (T),f4(T)]
(when it is feasible and dominates the contract without eﬀort Π0).
3. Solution US: This represents the solution that the supplier ships only at i = 1, i.e., she under-ships.
This corresponds to Statements 1 or 2 in Lemma E.1 with i = 2, and ΠNB
2
or ΠNN
2
, both of which
are smaller than Π3. This solution can be optimal only if β2 > ¯β and c < min(f2(T), f3(T)) (when it
dominates Π0).
4. Solution NM: This represents the solution that the insurer does not exert eﬀort, and the supplier
ships at i = 1,2,3. The supplier’s payoﬀΠ0 as given by Lemma 2. Also according to Lemma 2 (the
second part), this solution is optimal if and only if c ≥φNL
3
(T) = max(min(f2(T),f3(T)),f4(T)), when
it dominates FV , FC, and US.
Step 3. Compare the candidate solutions and determine the optimal one. Based on the above
deﬁnition of the solution regions, we have identiﬁed the boundary of Region FV and that of Region NM. In
the following, we prove the boundaries of Regions FC and US as in the Proposition. First, we note Solution
US is not relevant when β2 ≤¯β. Thus, in this region, we have φNL
1
(T) = φNL
2
(T) = φNL
3
(T) = f4(T).
For the case with β2 > ¯β, and further consider the following three scenarios:
1. When r0 ≤Re
0, we can verify that ΠNB
3
≥max(ΠNN
2
, ΠNB
2
) over the region that Solution FC and US
co-exist. Thus, Solution US is never optimal, and we have φNL
1
(T) = φNL
2
(T) = φNL
3
(T) = f4(T).
2. When r0 ∈(Re
0,Rf
0), we can show that over the region that ΠNB
3
and ΠNN
2
co-exist, ΠNB
3
≥ΠNN
2
.
However, over the region that ΠNB
3
and ΠNB
2
co-exist, ΠNB
3
≥ΠNB
2
if and only if c ≤f6(T), thus,
φNL
1
(T) = min(f4(T),f6(T)), and φNL
2
(T) = φNL
3
(T) = max(f2(T),f4(T)).
3. When r0 > Rf
0, we can show that over the region that ΠNB
3
and ΠNB
2
co-exist, ΠNB
3
≤ΠNB
2
.
However, over the region that ΠNB
3
and ΠNN
2
co-exist, ΠNB
3
≥ΠNB
2
if and only if c ≥f8(T).
Thus, we have φNL
1
(T) = φNL
F V (T), φNL
2
(T) = max(φNL
F V (T), min(f2(T), f3(T), f8(T))), and φNL
3
(T) =
max(f4(T), min(f2(T), f3(T)). □

x
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
D.3.
Proofs in Section 6
Proof of Lemma 3.
We prove B > BC by contradiction. Suppose B ≤BC. By the deﬁnition of B and BC,
this condition is equivalent to:
r + L(f −p) ≤δ + L(r −p −δ)
(58)
By the deﬁnition of deductible, we must have δ ≤r. Therefore, for (58) to hold, we must have L(r −p−δ) ≥
L(f −p), or equivalently,
r −δ ≤f,
(59)
for L(x) weakly decreases in x. By the deﬁnition of BP in (7), (59) is equivalent to BP ≥1, which suggests
that the insurer never cancels at any signal, contradicts with the condition that the insurer cancels coverage
at certain signals, as stated in the Lemma. Therefore, we must have B > BC.
Similarly, we can prove that B > BP. To see this, note that the insurer only cancels when βi ∈[BP,B).
If B ≤BP, the insurer never cancels, which again contradicts with the condition that the insurer cancels
coverage at certain signals.
Combining the above two results, we have that B > max(BC,BP). Given this result, we next prove the
supplier’s shipping policy by considering the following four ranges for βi.
1. for βi < BP, as BP < B, the insurer knows that if he does not cancel the coverage, the supplier ships
the order. Even though, in this region, his cost of canceling the contract (the refund f) is greater than
the expected claim payout, βi(r −δ) for βi < BP =
f
r−δ. Therefore, in this region, the insurer does not
cancel, and hence the supplier ships.
2. for βi ∈[BP,max(BC,BP)), we further consider two cases,
(a) if BC < BP, max(BC,BP) = BP, and hence [BP,max(BC,BP)) = ∅, and the two parties’ policies are
thereby irrelevant.
(b) if BC ≥BP, the above region becomes βi ∈[BP,BC). Similar to Case 1 (βi < BP), as B >
max(BP,BC), the insurer knows that if he does not cancel, the supplier ships the order. However,
diﬀerent from Case 1, the insurer’s cost of cancelation (refund f) is smaller than the expected
payout, βi(r −δC) in this region, and hence the insurer cancels. For the supplier, knowing that the
insurer will cancel, her payoﬀunder not shipping, r0, is smaller than her expected payoﬀunder
shipping, (1 −βi)r −L(f −p) for βi < BC =
r−r0
r+L(f−p). Therefore, the supplier still ships even when
the insurer cancels her coverage.
3. for βi ∈[max(BC,BP),B], similar as Case 2(b), the insurer knows that if he does not cancel the coverage,
the supplier ships. As such, he cancels the coverage as his cost of doing so (f) is less than the alternative
βi(r −δ). For the supplier, however, observing that her coverage is canceled, the supplier’s payoﬀunder
not shipping, r0, dominates that under shipping, r −L(f −p), because βi ≥BC. Therefore, she does
not ship the order.

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
xi
4. for βi > B, by the deﬁnition of B, the insurer knows that even if he does not cancel the insurer’s coverage,
the supplier still does not ship. As such, the insurer’s cost under not canceling is zero, lowering than his
cost by canceling the coverage (f). Therefore, he does not cancel the coverage. For the supplier, even
if the insurer does not cancel, she still not ship because her payoﬀunder shipping is lower than r0.
Summarizing the supplier’s shipping policy over these four regions, the supplier ships if and only if βi ≤
max(BC,BP), as stated in the Lemma. □
Proof of Lemma B.1.
Similar to the proof of Lemma 1, we ﬁrst show that (12) – (14) are necessary for
the insurer to exert eﬀort.
First, note that (12) is analogous to (2), and it states that under the contract, if the insurer does not exert
eﬀort, the supplier ships under on the prior expectation ¯β.
Next, note that the right hand sides of (13) – (14) are identical, which equal to the insurer’s total cost if
he exerts eﬀort. The cost consists of three parts: the eﬀort cost c, the insurer’s expected payout when the
insurer does not cancel and the supplier ships, (r −δ)P
i θiβi1βi<BP , and the refund the insurer has to pay
when he cancels the coverage, f P
i θi1βi∈[BP ,B]. For the insurer to exert eﬀort, his total cost of doing so must
be (weakly) lower than his other two options, corresponding the left hand side of (13) – (14), respectively:
1. (13) states that it is better oﬀfor the insurer to exert eﬀort than participating the contract, but does not
exert eﬀort and never cancels, under which his cost is the expected payout under the prior expectation
¯β as the supplier always ships, according to (12).
2. (14) states that it is better oﬀfor the insurer to exert eﬀort than participating the contract, but does
not exert eﬀort and always cancels, under which his cost is the refund f.
In addition, note that as f ≤p, (14) also guarantees it is better oﬀfor the insurer to exert eﬀort than not
participating the contract, in which case he does not receive the premium p.
For the suﬃcient side, similar to the proof in Lemma 1, we can see that when all four conditions are
satisﬁed, anticipating the supplier’s shipping decision and his own cancelation decision, the insurer’s total
cost under exerting eﬀort is (weakly) lower than all of his other options. Therefore, the four conditions are
suﬃcient to ensure him to exert monitoring eﬀort. □
Proof of Proposition 3.
To show that the proposed contract (δ = 0, and p = f =
c
θ1 + β1r) is optimal
and allows the supplier to receive the full value of TCI for r0 ≥(1 −β2)r, it is necessary and suﬃcient to
show that the supplier’s payoﬀunder such contract is Π2 = θ1(1 −β1)r + P3
i=2 θir0 −c, which is the highest
possible supplier payoﬀunder r0 ≥(1 −β2)r. To show that, we following the following three steps.
First, we note that this payoﬀcan only be achieved when both the insurer’s cancelation policy and the
supplier’s shipping policy are eﬃcient, that is, the insurer cancels at i = 2,3 and the supplier only ships at
i = 1. By Lemma E.2, the optimal contract under such policies are the solution of the following optimization
problem:
max
p,δ∈[0,r],f≤p−p + θ1[r −β1(δ + L(r −p −δ))] + (r0 + f)
3
X
i=2
θi;
(60)
r0 ≤r −¯β[r + L(r −δ −p)];
(61)

xii
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
¯β(r −δ) ≥c + θ1β1(r −δ) + (θ2 + θ3)f;
(62)
f ≥c + θ1β1(r −δ) + (θ2 + θ3)f;
(63)
f ≥β1(r −δ);
(64)
f < β2(r −δ);
(65)
r0 ≥r −β2[r + L(f −p)];
(66)
r0 < r −β3L(r −δ −p).
(67)
Speciﬁcally, Eq. (60) is the supplier’s payoﬀ(without eﬀort cost) under the speciﬁed policy. Following Lemma
B.1, (61) – (63) jointly ensure the insurer to exert eﬀort under such policies. (64) – (65) states that the
insurer cancels at i = 2, but not i = 1. (66) ensures that the supplier does not ship when the insurer cancels
at i = 2, and ﬁnally, (67) says that if insurer does not cancel at i = 3, the supplier would have shipped at
that scenario. Thus, jointly, (64) – (67) guarantees that with updated information, the insurer cancels at
i = 2,3 and and the supplier ships only at i = 1.
Second, we verify that the contract stated in the proposition (δ = 0, and p = f =
c
θ1 + β1r) is a feasible
solution to the above optimization problem. To show that, ﬁrst note that at δ = 0, according to Assumption
2, we have L(r −δ −p) = 0. Next, under the assumption that r0 ≤(1 −¯β)r, (61) holds. In addition, we
substitute f and δ into (61), which becomes c ≤θ1 [θ2β2 + θ3β3 −(θ2 + θ3)β1]r, or equivalently, c ≤[θ2(β2 −
¯β) + θ3(β3 −¯β)]r. As r0 < (1 −¯β)r, the above equation always holds for c ≤φ = P3
i=2 θi[r0 −(1 −βi)r], the
region that we are interested in. Similarly, it is easy to show that (63) – (65) and (67) are all satisﬁed when
substituting δ = 0 and f =
c
θ1 + β1r. Finally, as r0 ≥(1 −β2)r and L(f −p) = L(0) ≥0, (66) is also satisﬁed.
Combined, the proposed contract is a feasible solution to the optimization problem.
At last, by substituting the contract into (60), we note that the above contract leads to the highest possible
supplier payoﬀΠ2. Thus, the above contract is optimal. □
Proof of Proposition 4.
When r0 < (1 −β2)r, to identify the optimal contract, we ﬁrst specify all
possible scenarios in terms of the insurer’s cancelation policy; for each scenario, we either identify the optimal
cancelable contract, or show that any cancelable contract under that scenario will be (weakly) dominated
by contracts in other scenarios. By enumerating all possible combinations of the insurer’s cancelation policy,
we ﬁnd it is suﬃcient to consider only the following two cases.
1. The insurer cancels at i = 2,3. The optimal contract in this scenario is summarized in Lemma E.3, that
is,
δ = 0;
p = f = c
θ1
+ β1r.
(68)
We refer to the solution in this scenario Solution C.2 (cancels at i = 2 and above). Under this solution,
the insurance premium equals to the insurer’s expected cost, thus, the insurer does not extract any rent.
However, the supplier faces the problem of over-cancelation, i.e., the insurer cancels at i = 2 even if it
is eﬃcient to ship at i = 2. Further, depending on the supplier’s ﬁnancial constraint T, the supplier’s
payoﬀand shipping decision under the optimal contract can be discussed in two cases.

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
xiii
(a) When T ≤(1−β2)r−r0
lβ2
, the supplier ships at i = 1,2. That is, the shipping policy is eﬃcient. However,
the supplier is not insured when she ships at i = 2. Therefore, the supplier incurs ﬁnancing cost.
(b) When T > (1−β2)r−r0
lβ2
, the supplier ships at i = 1. That is, she under-ships. In this case, the supplier
sacriﬁces operational proﬁt to avoid ﬁnancing cost.
We refer to the supplier’s payoﬀunder this solution as ΠC
2 , which follows:
ΠC
2 =
(
Π3 −lθ2β2T,
for T ≤(1−β2)r−r0
lβ2
;
Π2,
for T > (1−β2)r−r0
lβ2
.
(69)
2. The insurer cancels only at i = 3. The optimal contract in this scenario is summarized in Lemma E.4
(cancels at i = 3). We refer to the solution in this case Solution C.3. Under this solution, the supplier
ships at i = 1,2. Thus, both the cancelation and the shipping policies are eﬃcient. However, depending
on the values of the parameters, the supplier may incur ﬁnancing cost (due to a high deductible) and/or
surrender rent to the insurer (when the premium is greater than the insurer’s expected cost). We refer
to the supplier’s payoﬀunder this solution as ΠC
3 , which is detailed in Lemma E.4.
For contracts that induce other cancelation policies (e.g., the insurer only cancels at i = 2), as shown in
Lemma E.5, they are all (weakly) dominated by Solution C.2 or Solution C.3 as discussed above. Thus, it is
suﬃcient to compare ΠC
2 (Solution C.2 in Lemma E.3) and ΠC
3 (Solution C.3 in Lemma E.4) when identifying
the optimal cancelable contract.
To compare the two solutions, we deﬁne the eﬃciency loss of a solution as the diﬀerence between the ﬁrst-
best payoﬀin this case, Π3 = r P2
i=1 θi(1 −βi) + θ3r0 −c and the supplier’s payoﬀs, ΠC
3 or ΠC
2 . Speciﬁcally,
we denote ∆C
3 = Π3 −ΠC
3 and ∆C
2 = Π3 −ΠC
2 . According to Lemma E.3 and Lemma E.4, we have:
∆C
2 =
(
lθ2β2T,
for T ≤(1−β2)r−r0
lβ2
;
θ2[(1 −β2)r −r0],
for T > (1−β2)r−r0
lβ2
.
(70)
As for ∆C
3 , we have that for β2 ≤¯β (corresponding Solution C.3.L in Lemma E.4),
∆C
3 =





















0,
for c ≥θ1(β2 −β1)max

r −r−r0
β3 ,
T
1−β2

;
θ1(β2 −β1)

r −r−r0
β3

−c,
for c < θ1(β2 −β1)max

r −r−r0
β3 ,
r−r−r0
β3
+lT
1+(1−β2)l

;

l
lh
h
θ1(β2−β1)T
1−β2
−c
i
,
for c ∈

θ1(β2−β1)

r−r−r0
β3
+lT

1+(1−β2)l
, θ1(β2−β1)
(1−β2) T

and l ≤lh;
θ1(β2−β1)T
1−β2
−c,
for c ∈

θ1(β2−β1)

r−r−r0
β3
+lT

1+(1−β2)l
, θ1(β2−β1)
(1−β2) T

and l > lh;
(71)
where lh is deﬁned in Lemma E.4. Similarly, ∆C
3 for β2 > ¯β corresponds Solution C.3.H in Lemma E.4.
With this notation, we discuss two cases: when β2 ≤¯β and β2 > ¯β.
First, when β2 ≤¯β, based on Lemma E.3, we observe that for any T, ∆C
2 is independent in c. By considering
Lemma E.4, and in particular, Solution 3.L, we note that for any given T, ∆C
3 is continuous and decreasing
in c when considering each region independently, and ∆C
3 is continuous on c at the boundaries between
diﬀerent regions. Combining the monotonicity of ∆C
2 and ∆C
3 , it is clear that for any T, there exists a function
φC
1 (T) ∈[0,φ] in the Proposition such that Solution C.2 is optimal if and only if c ≤φC
1 (T). In this case,
according to Lemma E.3, the supplier ships at i = 1,2 when T ≤(lβ2)−1[(1−β2)r −r0], corresponding to the

xiv
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
under-insured (UI) region in the Proposition. When T > (lβ2)−1[(1 −β2)r −r0], the supplier only ships at
i = 1, corresponding to the under-ship (US) region in the Proposition.
When c > φC
1 (T), we note that Solution C.3.L is optimal. In addition, by Lemma E.4, we have that ΠC
3 = Π3
when c ≥φC
F V (T) as deﬁned, and by Lemma E.3, ΠC
2 < Π3 when c = φC
F V (T). Thus, by the monotonicity
and continuity of ΠC
3 as proved above, we can show that φC
F V (T) ≥φC
1 (T). Thus, we have that when c ≥
φC
F V (T), the supplier receives the full value of TCI under Solution C.3, corresponding the FV region in
the Proposition, and when c ∈[φC
1 (T), φC
F V (T)), the supplier incurs ﬁnancing cost or surrenders rent to the
insurer, corresponding to the RI/FC region in the ﬁrst table in the Proposition.
Next, we consider the case with β2 < ¯β. The diﬀerence between this case and the previous one (β2 ≥¯β) is
in Solution C.3. In this case, the corresponding solution is Solution C.3.H. The ﬁrst observation of Solution
C.3.H is that ΠC
3 < Π3 (due to the rent surrounded to the insurer and possibly ﬁnancing cost). Combining
this with ΠC
2 < Π3 (Solution C.2), it is clear that the cancelable contract cannot recover the full value of
TCI in this region. Next, we note that in Solution C.3.H, for any T, ∆C
3 ﬁrst strictly decreases in c and
then strictly increases in c. On the other hand, ∆C
2 is independent of c. Thus, there exists φC
2 (T) and φC
3 (T)
where 0 ≤φC
2 (T) ≤φC
3 (T) ≤φ such that ΠC
3 ≥ΠC
2 if and only if c ∈[φC
2 (T), φC
3 (T)]. This corresponds to the
RI/FC region in the second table. When c < φC
2 (T) and c > φC
3 (T), ΠC
2 > ΠC
3 , and the structure of UI and
US regions is the same as in the ﬁrst table. □
Proof of Proposition 5.
We ﬁrst consider the case with β2 ≤¯β and compare the optimal cancelable
contract (Proposition 4) and the optimal non-cancelable one (Proposition B.1). Let the supplier’s payoﬀunder
the optimal cancelable contract be ΠC,∗, which equals max(ΠC
2 , ΠC
3 ) as deﬁned in the proof of Proposition 4,
and in Lemmas E.3 and E.4. Similarly, let the supplier’s payoﬀthat under the optimal non-cancelable contract
be ΠN,∗, which equals to max(Π0, ΠNB
3
, ΠNB
2
, ΠNN
2
) as deﬁned in the proof of Proposition B.1, and in Lemma
E.1. Similar to the proof in Proposition 4, we deﬁne the ineﬃciency gap as ∆C,∗= Π3 −ΠC,∗= min(∆C
2 , ∆C
3 ),
and ∆N,∗= max(∆0, ∆NB
3
, ∆NB
2
, ∆NN
2
). Under this notation, the supplier prefers the cancelable contract if
and only if ∆C,∗≤∆N,∗.
By the proof of Proposition 4, for a given T, we note that for c ≥φC
F V (T), the optimal cancelable contract
leads to ∆C,∗= 0 ≤∆N,∗. For c < φC
F C(T), we have d∆C,∗
dc
∈[−1,0]. As for ∆N,∗, by considering Proposition
B.1 and the proof, for any given T, we have the following two cases:
1. If φNL
3
(T) ≤φC
F V (T), we have that for c ∈[φNL
3
(T), φC
F V (T)],
d∆N,∗
dc
= −1, thus ∆N,∗> ∆C,∗in this
region. As for c < φNL
3
(T), ∆N,∗(weakly) increases in c. Thus, ∆N,∗and ∆C,∗can cross at most once
in this region.
2. If φNL
3
(T) > φC
F V (T), by the same argument, for c < φC
F V (T), ∆N,∗(weakly) increases in c. Thus, ∆N,∗
and ∆C,∗can cross at most once in this region.
Combining the above two scenarios, we can show that there exists a threshold function φL(T) such that
the supplier prefers the cancelable contract when c > φL(T) and the non-cancelable one when c ≤φL(T), as
desired.
In the case with β2 > ¯β, using the same notation as in the previous case, we have for c ≤φNL
F V (T), ∆N,∗= 0.
And we also have ∆N,∗≤Π3 −Π0 = 0 at c = φ. As for the cancelable contract, we have ∆C,∗> 0 for all c.

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
xv
Thus, there exist threshold functions φH,1(T) ≤φH,2(T) such that the supplier prefers the non-cancelable
contract (with monitoring) when c ≤φH,1(T), and the non-cancelable contract (without monitoring) when
c > φH,2(T), as desired. □
Proof of Proposition B.2.
When r0 < (1−β2)r, in order for the supplier to receive the full value of TCI
under a partially cancelable contract, the necessary and suﬃcient conditions are:
1. The insurer exerts eﬀort;
2. The supplier ships at i = 1,2;
3. The supplier does not incur ﬁnancing cost; and
4. The insurance premium equals to the insurer’s expected costs.
In order for the four conditions to hold jointly, the insurer’s cancelation policy can only be one of the following
two scenarios:
1. The insurer only cancels at i = 3;
2. The insurer cancels at i = 2,3.
Next, we identify the feasible sets that satisfy the four conditions above by considering these two scenarios.
Scenario I: The insurer only cancels at i = 3. Under this cancelation policy, the four necessary and
suﬃcient conditions to be satisﬁed jointly is equivalent to that the following inequalities should hold simul-
taneously.
p ≥f;
(72)
p = c +
X
i≤2
θiβi(r −δ) + θ3f;
(73)
r0 ≤r −¯β[δ + L(r −δ −p)];
(74)
f + ¯βγ ≥c +
X
i≤2
θiβi(r −δ) + θ3f;
(75)
¯β(r −δ) ≥c +
X
i≤2
θiβi(r −δ) + θ3f;
(76)
f + β2γ ≥β2(r −δ);
(77)
f < β3(r −δ);
(78)
r0 < r −β2 [r −γ + L(γ + f −p)];
(79)
r0 ≥r −β3 [r −γ + L(γ + f −p)];
(80)
r0 ≤r −β3 [δ + L(r −δ −p)];
(81)
r −δ −p ≥T.
(82)
Among these conditions, (72) follows from the constraint that the refund is no greater than the premium.
(73) makes sure that the premium equals to the insurer’s expected cost (claim and refund, whichever is
applicable). Following the proof in Lemma B.1, (74) – (76) jointly guarantee that the insurer has the incentive
to exert eﬀort under the supplier’s anticipated action. (79) – (80) jointly guarantee that without coverage,
the supplier ships only at i ≤2. This is because if the supplier does not ship at i = 2 without coverage, the

xvi
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
optimization problem degenerates to corresponds to a pure cancelable contract. (81) says that the supplier
ships at i ≤3 if her coverage is not canceled. (77) and (78) conﬁrm that the insurer cancels only at i = 3.
The asymmetry between the two conditions is because that without coverage, the supplier ships at i = 2,
but not i = 3. Thus, the insurer’s total cost under cancelation is f + β2γ at i = 2, but only f at i = 3. Thus,
the insurer’s total cost under cancelation is f + β2γ at i = 2, but only f at i = 3. (82) makes sure that when
the supplier ships under coverage, she does not incur ﬁnancing cost. Finally, note that γ does not enter the
objective function directly as it is only used to discipline the insurer, and the supplier actually never ships
when the contract is canceled.
The above set of constraints can be simpliﬁed as follows: ﬁrst, given (76), (78) is redundant. Second, when
(82) holds, (81) can be simpliﬁed to
δ ≤r −r0
β3
.
(83)
Third, notice that everything else being equal, increasing γ loosens all the constraints except for (80).
Therefore, we can set γ so that (80) is binding, i.e.,
γ = r −r −r0
β3
+
l
1 + l
"
T + c −τ3 −(1 −θ3)f +
2
X
i=1
θiβi
r −r0
β3
−δ
#+
,
(84)
where τi =

1 −P
j<i θjβj

r −r−r0
βi

, which is also deﬁned in Lemma E.1. Note that the above equation
also guarantees that (79) is satisﬁed. Fourth, (84) implies that γ ≥r −r−r0
β3 . Therefore, for the region of c
that we are interested in, i.e., c ≤φ = θ3[r0 −(1 −β3)r], we have that θ3β3γ ≥c. Under this condition, when
(77) holds, (75) becomes redundant.
After applying these four simpliﬁcations, the set of inequalities (75) – (82) can be simpliﬁed to the following
set.
γ = r −r −r0
β3
+
l
1 + l
"
T + c −τ3 −(1 −θ3)f +
2
X
i=1
θiβi
r −r0
β3
−δ
#+
;
(85)
δ ≤r −r0
β3
;
(86)
f ≥β2(r −γ −δ);
(87)
f ≤

1 −P2
i=1 θiβi

(r −δ) −(T + c)
θ3
;
(88)
f ≤c + P2
i=1 θiβi(r −δ)
1 −θ3
;
(89)
f ≤β3(r −δ) −c
θ3
.
(90)
Among these constraints, note that (88) – (90) all set an upper bound for f and have the following inter-
pretation: (88) ensures that the supplier does not incur any ﬁnancing cost when shipping under coverage
(i = 1,2); (89) says that refund cannot be greater than premium; and (90) ensures that it is better for the
insurer to exert eﬀort than to not exert eﬀort and never cancel. By comparing these three constraints, we
can discuss the conditions under which the set of inequalities has a feasible solution based on the following
two scenarios regarding the magnitude of δ.

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
xvii
Scenario I.A. For δ ≤min

r −
c+(1−θ3)T
1−θ3−P2
i=1 θiβi , r −
c
θ3(β3−¯
β)

, (88) is binding, and hence,
γ = r −r −r0
β3
+
l
1 + l

T −

r −r −r0
β3
+
.
(91)
As such, (85) – (90) can be simpliﬁed to:
δ ≤r −
c + (1 −θ3)T
1 −θ3 −P2
i=1 θiβi
;
(92)
δ ≤r −
c
θ3(β3 −¯β);
(93)
δ ≤r −r0
β3
;
(94)
δ ≥r −r0
β3
−
c + P2
i=1 θiβi

r −r−r0
β3

+ (1−θ3)β2l
1+l
h
T −

r −r−r0
β3
i+
θ1(β2 −β1)
.
(95)
Note that (95) ensures that if binding, δ ≤r−r0
β3 . Thus, (94) will not be the one that determines the feasibility
of the above set of inequalities. By comparing (92) and (93), we have the following two scenarios.
Scenario I.A.a. For c ≥θ3(β3−¯
β)
1−¯
β
T, (93) is tighter than (92). Therefore, there exists a feasible δ if and only
if
(¯β −β2)c
θ3(β3 −¯β) + β2
 
r −r −r0
β3
+
l
1 + l

T −

r −r −r0
β3
+!
≥0.
(96)
It is easy to check that this inequality also holds for c ≤φ. Thus, (92) – (95) has a feasible solution for all c
such that
c ≥θ3(β3 −¯β)
1 −¯β
T.
(97)
Scenario I.A.b. For c < θ3(β3−¯
β)
1−¯
β
T, (92) is tighter than (93), and hence there exists a feasible δ for (92) –
(95) if and only if:
c ≥
θ1(β2 −β1)T −(1 −θ3 −P2
i=1 θiβi)β2

r −r−r0
β3 +
l
1+l
h
T −

r −r−r0
β3
i+
1 −β2
,
(98)
Combining (98) and (97) leads to the condition (15) in the proposition.
Scenario I.B. For δ > min

r −
c+(1−θ3)T
1−θ3−P2
i=1 θiβi , r −
c
θ3(β3−¯
β)

, either (89) or (90) is binding. With some
algebra, we can show that the ﬁrst-best payoﬀcannot be achieved outside the region as deﬁned in (15) in
the Proposition. The details are omitted for expositional brevity. □
D.4.
Proof in Section 7
Proof of Lemma B.2.
For the ﬁrst part of the lemma, we note that as the information is unveriﬁable, the
supplier can only update her prior belief and act correspondingly based on the insurer’s cancelation decision
(the message). In addition, as the insurer and supplier act sequentially, there is no beneﬁt for the supplier
to adopt a mixed strategy regarding her shipping decision. Therefore, we have in total four possibilities of
how the supplier reacts to the insurer’s cancelation action.
1. The supplier ships whether the insurer cancels or not.

xviii
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
2. The supplier does not ship whether the insurer cancels or not.
3. The supplier ships when the insurer cancels, and does not ship when he does not cancel.
4. The supplier ships when the coverage is not canceled, and does not ship when the insurer cancels.
Clearly, for the ﬁrst and third scenarios, the insurer should never cancel as the supplier does not ship any
way. Thus, he does not exert eﬀort either, which contradicts with the assumption in the Lemma that the
contract induces the insurer’s eﬀort. For the second scenario, as the supplier always ships, the only beneﬁt
of the insurer’s cancelation is to limit his own cost. However, as the insurance market is competitive, such
beneﬁt will be reﬂected in the premium. Thus, the insurer should not exert eﬀort either. This leaves us only
to the last scenario, and hence proves the ﬁrst part of the lemma.
For the second part, we prove it by contradiction. Assume that the insurer cancels at signal i, but does
not cancel at signal i+1. Then by the lemma above, the supplier does not ship at signal i and ships at signal
i + 1. Anticipating the supplier’s shipping policy, this cancelation policy is optimal to the insurer only if:
f ≤βi(r −δ);
(99)
f ≥βi+1(r −δ).
(100)
However, as βi < βi+1, these two inequalities cannot hold simultaneously, which contradicts with our assump-
tion. This concludes the proof of the second part of the Lemma.
Finally, for the third part of the Lemma, we note that a PBE consists of a sequentially rational strategy
proﬁle, which includes the insurer’s cancelation strategy and the supplier’s shipping strategy in our case,
and the supplier’s posterior belief. For the speciﬁed cancelation strategy and shipping strategy to be in the
PBE, we must have the following two conditions hold jointly:
1. The insurer has no incentive to deviate from the speciﬁc cancelation strategy. This condition further
requires two conditions: 1) the insurer has the incentive to cancel coverage at i ≥j, which holds if and
only if f ≤βj(r −δ). 2) The insurer has no incentive to cancel at i ≤j −1, which holds if and only if
f ≥βj−1(r −δ). Combining these conditions leads to BP ∈[βj−1,βj], which is the ﬁrst condition in the
lemma.
2. The supplier ships if and only if i < j. This condition consists of two parts:
(a) the supplier ships at all i < j, which leads to
r −
P
i≤j θiβi
P
i≤j θi
[δ −L(r −δ −p)] ≥r0,
(101)
where
P
i≤j θiβi
P
i≤j θi
is the supplier’s posterior belief of the buyer’s default risk after observing that the
coverage is not canceled. The above condition can be re-written as
P
i≤j θiβi
P
i≤j θi ≤B(p,δ), corresponding
to the second condition in the Lemma;
(b) the supplier does not ship at all i ≥j, which leads to
r −
P
i>j θiβi
P
i>j θi
[r + L(f −p)] ≤r0,
(102)
where
P
i>j θiβi
P
i>j θi
is the supplier’s posterior belief of the buyer’s default risk upon receiving the
cancelation message. The above condition can be re-written as
P
i>j θiβi
P
i>j θi ≥BC(p,f), corresponding
to the third condition in the Lemma. □

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
xix
Proof of Proposition 6.
In order to identify the optimal contract, we need to ﬁrst identify conditions
under which the insurer has the incentive to exert eﬀort in anticipation of the outcome of the signaling
subgame, in which the insure decides whether to cancel and the supplier decides when to ship. The analysis
is similar to that in Lemma B.1 and the proof. By that, we can identify that under contract (p,δ,f), the
insurer exerts eﬀort if and only if the following three conditions hold jointly:
B ≤¯β;
(103)
¯β(r −δ) ≥c + (r −δ)
X
i
θiβi1βi≤BP + f
X
θi1βi>BP
(104)
f ≥c + (r −δ)
X
i
θiβi1βi≤BP + f
X
θi1βi>BP .
(105)
The three conditions are analogous to (12) – (14) in Lemma B.1. The proof is also similar to that in Lemma
B.1, and the only diﬀerence is the right hand side of (104) – (105), which equals to the insurer’s expected
cost under the cancelation policy depicted in Lemma B.2.
With the above conditions, we can determine the optimal cancelable contract by identifying the optimal
contract that induces diﬀerent cancelation policies. According to Lemma B.2, it is suﬃcient to consider the
following two scenarios:
1. The insurer cancels at i = 2,3 (Scenario 1, Solution U.2).
2. The insurer cancels at i = 3 (Scenario 2, Solution U.3).
In the following, we ﬁrst solve these two scenarios separately, and then compare the performance of the two
when necessary.
Step 1: optimal contracts that induce the insurer to cancel at i = 2,3 (Solution U.2). For this
case, the corresponding optimization problem is as follows:
max
p,δ,f≤p −p + θ1 {r −β1[δ + L(r −δ −p)]} + (θ2 + θ3)(r0 + f);
(106)
s.t. r0 ≤r −¯β[δ + L(r −δ −p)];
(107)
¯β(r −δ) ≥c + θ1β1(r −δ) + (θ2 + θ3)f;
(108)
f ≥c + θ1β1(r −δ) + (θ2 + θ3)f;
(109)
f ≥β1(r −δ);
(110)
f ≤β2(r −δ);
(111)
r0 ≥r −θ2β2 + θ3β3
θ2 + θ3
[r + L(f −p)];
(112)
r0 ≤r −β1[δ + L(r −δ −p)].
(113)
In the optimization problem, (106) is the supplier’s payoﬀ. (107) - (109) follow directly from (103) – (105) with
the insurer’s speciﬁc cancelation policy, and (110) – (113) follow directly from (16) – (18) with the insurer’s
speciﬁc cancelation policy and the supplier’s shipping policy. Note that compared to their counterparts under
veriﬁable information, i.e., Eq. (66) – (67), Eq. (112) –(113) are less restrictive. Thus, it is straightforward
that the optimal solution under the unveriﬁable information case should lead to a (weakly) higher value in
the objective than that under the veriﬁable information case.

xx
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
Next, we note that for Eq. (112) to hold, as f ≤p, the parameter must satisfy:
T ≥l−1
(θ2 + θ3)(r −r0)
θ2β2 + θ3β3
−r

.
(114)
Otherwise, the above optimization problem has no feasible solution.
Under (114), we verify that the contract p = f =
c
θ1 + β1r, and δ = 0 is a feasible solution to Eq. (106)
–(113): Based on the proof in Proposition 3, it is clear that Eq. (107) – (111) are all satisﬁed under the above
contract. (113) is automatically satisﬁed under (107). In addition, we note that under p = f =
c
θ1 + β1r, and
δ = 0, the supplier’s payoﬀis ΠU
2 = Π2, the highest payoﬀthe supplier can achieve under such policies.
Next, we apply the above optimal contract to the following diﬀerent scenarios depending on the supplier’s
outside option.
1. When r0 ≥(1−β2)r, (114) is satisﬁed. Thus, the above contract allows the supplier to fully recover the
value of TCI. Thus, we do not need to consider the other contracting option. This corresponds to the
ﬁrst statement in Proposition 6.
2. When r0 < (1 −β2)r,
(a) When T ≥−
C2
l P
i≥2 θiβi , (114) is satisﬁed. Thus, under this scenario, the insurer over-cancels, i.e.,
he cancels at i = 2 even though it is eﬃcient to ship at i = 2.
(b) When T < −
C2
l P
i≥2 θiβi , this solution is infeasible.
Step 2: Optimal contracts that induce the insurer to cancel at i = 3 (Solution U.3). For this case,
the optimization problem is as follows.
max
p,δ∈[0,r],f≤p −p +
2
X
i=1
θi {r −βi[δ + L(r −p −δ)]} + θ3(r0 + f);
(115)
s.t. r0 ≤r −¯β[δ + L(r −δ −p)];
(116)
¯β(r −δ) ≥c +
2
X
i=1
θiβi(r −δ) + θ3f;
(117)
f ≥c +
2
X
i=1
θiβi(r −δ) + θ3f;
(118)
f ≥β2(r −δ);
(119)
f < β3(r −δ);
(120)
r0 ≥r −β3[r + L(f −p)];
(121)
r0 ≤r −
θ1β1 + θ2β2
θ1 + θ2

[δ + L(r −δ −p)].
(122)
Solving this optimization problem leads to the following results regarding the optimal contracts and the
supplier’s payoﬀΠU
3 . We refer the readers to Lemma E.6 for the details in the detailed solution. In summary,
the shipping and cancelation decision in this Solution is eﬃcient when r0 > (1 −β2)r. However, depending
on the value of parameters, the supplier may incur ﬁnancing cost and/or surrender rent to the insurer.
Step 3: Compare Solutions U.2 and U.3. Next, we compare Solution U.2 (ΠU
2 ) and Solution U.3 (ΠU
3 )
according to the following scenarios.

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
xxi
1. For r0 ≥(1 −β2)r, the full value of TCI is Π2. Based on Solution U.2., ΠU
2 = Π2, i.e., the supplier
receives the full value of TCI. This corresponds to the ﬁrst statement in the Proposition.
2. For r0 < (1 −β2)r, the full value of TCI is Π3. We have two further cases.
(a) If β2 ≤¯β, for c ≥φU
F V (T) as deﬁned in the Proposition, ΠU
3 = Π3, i.e., the supplier receives the full
value of TCI. For c < φU
F V (T), at a given T, by Lemma E.6, the ineﬃciency gap ∆U
3 := Π3 −ΠU
3
decreases in c, which ∆U
2 := Π3 −ΠU
2 is independent of c. Thus, there exists a threshold function
φU
1 (T) such that ∆U
3 ≤∆U
2 if and only if c ≥φU
1 (T). This corresponds to Statement 2.i) in the
Proposition.
(b) If β2 ≤¯β, we note ∆U
3 > 0. In addition, according to Lemma E.6, ∆U
3 ﬁrst decreases and then
increases in c, and ∆U
2 is still independent of c. Therefore, there exists two threshold functions
φU
2 (T) ≤φU
3 (T) such that ∆U
3 ≤∆U
2 if and only if c ∈[φU
2 (T) ≤φU
3 (T)]. This corresponds to State-
ment 2.ii) in the Proposition. □
Proof of Proposition 7.
The proof is analogous to that of Proposition 5. We consider the following two
scenarios.
1. When β2 ≤¯β, we further consider two cases.
(a) for r0 ≤(1−β2)r, we have the supplier’s payoﬀunder the optimal cancelable contract ΠU,∗= ΠU
2 =
Π2, the ﬁrst-best benchmark. Thus, the supplier always prefers the cancelable contract.
(b) for r0 > (1 −β2)r, we have that when c > φU
F V (T), ΠU,∗= ΠU
2 = Π3, the ﬁrst-best benchmark.
Further, ΠU,∗(weakly) decreases in c, while the supplier’s payoﬀunder the non-cancelable contract,
Π0, is independent of c. Thus, ΠU,∗> Π0 for all c.
Combining the above two cases, we prove that cancelable contract is preferred when β2 ≤¯β (Statement
1 in the Corollary).
2. When β2 > ¯β, as ΠU,∗= max(ΠU
2 ,ΠU
3 ). According to the proof in Proposition 6, ΠU,∗< Π3. On the
other hand, the payoﬀunder the non-cancelable contract, Π0 = Π3 at c = φ. Thus, at c = φ, ΠU,∗< Π0.
Further, we note that Π0 is independent of c, while ΠU,∗(weakly) decreases in c. Thus, there exists
φU
H(T) such that ΠU,∗≥Π0 if and only if c ≤φU
H(T). This corresponds to the second statement. □
Appendix E:
Technical Lemmas
Lemma E.1 A non-cancelable contract under which the supplier ships if and only if at β1,...,βi−1, for
i ≥2, exists if and only if βi ≥¯β. and c ≤r P
j≥i θjβj.
Under these two conditions, the optimal non-cancelable contract terms (δ,p) and the supplier’s correspond-
ing payoﬀare:
1. for c ≤CU
i +
l P
j≥i θjβj
1+(1−¯
β)l [T −(τi −CU
i )]+, the contract terms are:
δ = r −r0
βi
−
l(T + c −τi)+
1 + l(1 −P
j<i θiβi),
p = c +
X
j≤i−1
θjβj(r −δ).
(123)
The supplier’s corresponding payoﬀis:
ΠN
i = Πi −
l P
j<i θjβj
1 + l(1 −P
j<i θjβj) (T + c −τi)+ := ΠNB
i
.
(124)
Under this contract, the insurer’s IR constraint is binding.

xxii
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
2. for c > CU
i +
l P
j≥i θjβj
1+(1−¯
β)l [T −(τi −CU
i )]+, the contract terms are:
δ = r −
c
P
j≥i θjβj
,
p = 1
l
r −r0
βi
−r

+

1 + 1
l

c
P
j≥i θjβj
−T.
(125)
The supplier corresponding payoﬀis:
ΠN
i = Πi −
"
(1 −¯β)lc + (1 + P
j<i θjβjl)(c −CU
i )
l P
j≥i θjβj
−T
#
:= ΠNN
i
.
(126)
Under this contract, the insurer’s IR constraint is not binding.
By comparing ΠN
i (ΠNB
i
and ΠNN
i
) with the optimal payoﬀwithout eﬀort Π0 (Lemma 2), we have:
1. ΠNB
i
≥Π0 if and only if
c ≤min

Ci −
l P
j<i θjβj
1 + l
[T −(τi −Ci)], CU
i +
l P
j≥i θjβj
1 + (1 −¯β)l[T −(τi −CU
i )]+

.
(127)
2. ΠNN
i
≥Π0 if and only if
c ∈

CU
i +
l P
j≥i θjβj
1 + (1 −¯β)l[T −(τi −CU
i )]+, CU
i +
l P
j≥i θjβj
1 + l
[T −(τi −Ci)]

.
(128)
Lemma E.2 For any j, k, m ∈{1,2,3}, among all cancelable contracts that induces the insurer to cancel
at signal i ∈[j,m] and the supplier ships if and only if the signal i ≤max(j −1,k), the optimal contract is
the solution to the following optimization problem:
max
p, δ∈[0,r]
f≤p
r0 −p +
X
i<j
θi[(r −r0) −βi(δ + L(r −p −δ))] +
k
X
i=j
θi[(r −r0) −βi(r + L(f −p))] +
m
X
i=j
θif;
(129)
B ≥¯β;
(130)
¯β(r −δ) ≥c +
X
i<j
θiβi(r −δ) +
X
i∈[j,m]
θif;
(131)
f ≥c +
X
i<j
θiβi(r −δ) +
X
i∈[j,m]
θif;
(132)
B ∈(βm,βm+1];
(133)
BP ∈[βj−1,βj);
(134)
BC ∈(βk,βk+1].
(135)
Lemma E.3 (Solution C.2) For r0 < (1−β2)r, a cancelable contract in which the insurer cancels coverage
at i = 2,3 is feasible if and only if:
c ≤θ1[min(¯β,β2) −β1]r.
(136)
Within this region, the optimal contract is :
δ = 0;
p = f = c
θ1
+ β1r.
(137)
Under this contract, the insurer’s payoﬀis zero.
1. for T ≤(1−β2)r−r0
lβ2
, the supplier ships at i = 1,2, and her payoﬀΠC
2 = Π3 −lθ2β2T;

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
xxiii
2. for T > (1−β2)r−r0
lβ2
, the supplier ships at i = 1, and her payoﬀΠC
2 = Π2.
Lemma E.4 (Solution C.3) Let lh =
θ1(β2−β1)
P2
i=1 θiβi(1−β2). For r0 < (1 −β2)r, the optimal cancelable contract
under which the insurer cancels only at i = 3, and the supplier’s corresponding payoﬀΠC
3 , is summarized as
follows.
For β2 ≤¯β (Solution C.3.L), p = f =
c+P2
i=1(r−δ)
P2
i=1 θi
,
1. for c ≥θ1(β2 −β1)max

r −r−r0
β3 ,
T
1−β2

, δ =

r −
c
θ1(β2−β1)
+
, and ΠC
3 = Π3;
2. for c < θ1(β2 −β1)max

r −r−r0
β3 ,
r−r−r0
β3
+lT
1+(1−β2)l

, δ = r−r0
β3 , and ΠC
3 = Π3 −
h
θ1(β2 −β1)

r −r−r0
β3

−c
i
;
3. for c ∈

θ1(β2−β1)

r−r−r0
β3
+lT

1+(1−β2)l
, θ1(β2−β1)
(1−β2) T

;
(a) if l ≤lh, δ = r −
c
θ1(β2−β1); ΠC
3 = Π3 −

l
lh
h
θ1(β2−β1)T
1−β2
−c
i
;
(b) if l > lh, δ = r −
T
1−β2 , and ΠC
3 = Π3 −
h
θ1(β2−β1)T
1−β2
−c
i
;
For β2 > ¯β (Solution C.3.H), p = f = β2(r −δ) and
1. for c ≥θ3(β3 −β2)max

r −r−r0
β3 ,
T
1−β2

, δ = r −
c
θ3(β3−β2), and ΠC
3 = Π3 −
(β2−¯
β)c
θ3(β3−β2);
2. for
c < θ3(β3 −β2)

r −r−r0
β3

and
T ≤(1 −β2)

r −r−r0
β3

,
δ =
r−r0
β3 ,
and
ΠC
3 = Π3 −
h
θ1(β2 −β1)

r −r−r0
β3

−c
i
;
3. for c < θ3(β3−β2)T
(1−β2)
and T > (1 −β2)

r −r−r0
β3

,
(a) if l ≤lh and c <
θ3(β3−β2)
h
r−r−r0
β3
+lT
i
1+(1−β2)l
, δ = r −
r−r−r0
β3
+lT
1+(1−β2)l , and
ΠC
3 = Π3 −


θ1(β2 −β1)

r −r−r0
β3 + lT

1 + (1 −β2)l
−c

−
2
X
i=1
θiβil


T −(1 −β2)

r −r−r0
β3

1 + (1 −β2)l

;
(138)
(b) if l ≤lh and c ∈

θ3(β3−β2)
h
r−r−r0
β3
+lT
i
1+(1−β2)l
, θ3(β3−β2)T
1−β2

, δ = r −
c
θ3(β3−β2), ΠC
3 = Π3 −
(β2−¯
β)c
θ3(β3−β2) −
P2
i=1 θiβil
h
T −
(1−β2)c
θ3(β3−β2)
i
;
(c) if l > lh, δ = r −
T
1−β2 , and ΠC
3 = Π3 −

θ1(β2−β1)T
1−β2
−c

.
Lemma E.5 For r0 < (1−β2)r, the supplier’s payoﬀunder any cancelable contract that induces the insurer
to exert eﬀort and cancel coverage at at least one group of signals is (weakly) dominated by either ΠC
2
(Solution C.2, Lemma E.3) or ΠC
3 (Solution C.3, Lemma E.4).
Lemma E.6 (Solution U.3) The solution to Eq. (115) – (122) in the proof of Proposition 6, and the
supplier’s corresponding payoﬀΠU
3 , is summarized as follows.
When β2 ≤¯β (Solution U.3.L), p = f =
c+P2
i=1(r−δ)
P2
i=1 θi
, and
1. for c ≥θ1(β2−β1)T
1−β2
, δ =

r −
c
θ1(β2−β1)
+
, and ΠU
3 = Π3;
2. for c ∈

θ1(β2−β1)

r−r−r0
¯
β
+lT

1+(1−β2)l
, θ1(β2−β1)
(1−β2) T

,
(a) for l ≤lh, δ = r −
c
θ1(β2−β1), and ΠU
3 = Π3 −l P2
i=1 θiβi
h
T −
(1−β2)c
θ1(β2−β1)
i
;
(b) for l > lh, δ = r −
T
1−β2 , and ΠU
3 = Π3 −
h
θ1(β2−β1)T
1−β2
−c
i
;

xxiv
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
3. for c <
θ1(β2−β1)

r−r−r0
¯
β
+lT

1+(1−β2)l
, δ = r−r0
¯
β
−
l
h
T −(1−β2)

r−r−r0
¯
β
i
1+l(1−β2)
, and
ΠU
3 = Π3 −


θ1(β2 −β1)

r −r−r0
¯
β
+ lT

1 + (1 −β2)l
−c

−l
2
X
i=1
θiβi


T −(1 −β2)

r −r−r0
¯
β

1 + (1 −β2)l

.
(139)
When β2 > ¯β (Solution U.3.H), p = f = β2(r −δ) and
1. for c ≥θ3(β3−β2)T
1−β2
, δ = r −
c
θ3(β3−β2), and ΠU
3 = Π3 −
(β2−¯
β)c
θ3(β3−β2);
2. for c < θ3(β3−β2)T
1−β2
,
(a) for l ≤lh and c ∈

θ3(β3−β2)
h
r−r−r0
¯
β
+lT
i
1+(1−β2)l
, θ3(β3−β2)T
1−β2

, δ = r −
c
θ3(β3−β2), and
ΠU
3 = Π3 −(β2 −¯β)c
θ3(β3 −β2) −l
2
X
i=1
θiβi

T −(1 −β2)c
θ3(β3 −β2)

;
(140)
(b) for l ≤lh and c <
θ3(β3−β2)
h
r−r−r0
¯
β
+lT
i
1+(1−β2)l
, δ = r −
r−r−r0
¯
β
+lT
1+(1−β2)l , and
ΠU
3 = Π3 −


θ1(β2 −β1)

r −r−r0
¯
β
+ lT

1 + (1 −β2)l
−c

−l
2
X
i=1
θiβi


T −(1 −β2)

r −r−r0
¯
β

1 + (1 −β2)l

;
(141)
(c) for l ≥lh, δ = r −
T
1−β2 , and ΠU
3 = Π3 −
h
θ1(β2−β1)T
1−β2
−c
i
.
Appendix F:
Proofs of Technical Lemmas
Proof of Lemma E.1.
Following the analysis in Section 5, for the supplier to only ship at j = 1,...,i−1,
the contract must induce the insurer’s monitoring eﬀort. Therefore, the optimization problem that determines
this optimal non-cancelable contract must have (5) as the objective, and (2) – (4), as well as B(p,δ) ∈(βi−1, βi]
as constraints. For ease of reference, we re-write the optimization problem as follows.
max
p,δ∈[0,r]
r0 −p +
X
j≤i−1
θj {(1 −βj)r + βj[r −δ −L(r −δ −p)] −r0};
(142)
B ≥¯β;
(143)
δ ≤r −
c
P
j≥i θjβj
;
(144)
p ≥c + (r −δ)
X
j≤i−1
θjβj;
(145)
B ∈(βi−1, βi].
(146)
By comparing (143) and (146), we note that the math program has no feasible solution when βi < ¯β. In
addition, we note that for δ ≥0 to satisfy (144), we need c ≤r P
j≥i θjβj.
Under the condition βi ≥¯β, note that, according to (1), B decreases in both δ and p. Thus, (143) and
B > βi−1, i.e., the left half in (146), are both relaxed as δ or p decreases. Further, note that as L(x) is weakly
decreasing in x, the objective decreases in both δ and p. Therefore, (143) and B > βi−1 will not be the binding
constraint for the optimization problem. In other words, the optimal solution is determined by (142), (144)
– (145) and B ≤βi, the last of which can be re-written as:
δ + L(r −δ −p) ≥r −r0
βi
.
(147)

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
xxv
Jointly considering (144), (145), and (147), we note that (144) does not involve p. Therefore, at the optimal
solution (p,δ), at least one of (145) and (147) must be binding, otherwise, (p −ϵ,δ) increases the objective
while not violating any constraints.
Next, we show that any (p,δ) under which (147) is not binding must be (weakly) dominated by another
solution. To see that, let (p,δ) be jointly determined by (144) and (145), that is,
δa = r −
c
P
j≥i θjβj
;
(148)
pa = c + (r −δ)
X
j≤i−1
θjβj.
(149)
If (147) is not binding under the above contract, we can conﬁrm that the contract δa1 = δa −ϵ and pa1 =
pa +ϵP
j≤i−1 θjβj for suﬃciently small ϵ > 0 is also a feasible solution that it satisﬁes (144), (145), and (147).
In addition, substituting the above contract into the objective function, which then becomes:
πa1 :=r0 −pa1 +
X
j≤i−1
θj {(1 −βj)r + βj[r −δa1 −L(r −δa1 −pa1)] −r0}
(150)
=r0 −pa +
X
j≤i−1
θj
(
(1 −βj)r + βj[r −δa −L(r −δa −pa + ϵ
X
j≥i
θiβi)] −r0
)
.
(151)
Next, consider two scenarios:
1. if L(r −δa −pa) > 0, then πa1 is greater than the payoﬀunder contract (pa,δa) as L(x) decreases in x.
Therefore, (pa1,δa1) strictly dominates (pa,δa).
2. if L(r −δa −pa) = 0, then let ϵ = r−r0
βi
−δa. By construction, (147) is binding at (pa1,δa1), which also
satisfy (144) and (145), and πa1 equals to that under (pa,δa) .
Combining the above two scenarios, we can see that any solution (p,δ) that is not binding at (147) is (weakly)
dominated. Therefore, it is suﬃcient for us to consider contract (p,δ) such that (147) is binding. Under this
condition, we analyze the optimal solution depending on whether the other binding constraint is (144) or
(145). Consider the following two scenarios.
1. If both (144) and (147) are binding, the contract deductible δ is determined by:
δ = r −
c
P
j≥i θjβj
=: δNN
i
.
(152)
and the premium p is implicitly determined by:
δ = r −r0
βi
−L(r −δ −p);
(153)
As L(·) ≥0, we have δ ≤r−r0
βi , thus c must satisfy:
c ≥
X
j≥i
θjβj

r −r −r0
βi

= CU
i .
(154)
Under this condition, a feasible premium p exists if and only if it satisﬁes the following two equations.
L
 
c
P
j≥i θiβi
−p
!
=
c −CU
i
P
j≥i θjβj
.
(155)
p ≥
¯β
P
j≥i θjβj
c.
(156)
Further consider two scenarios,

xxvi
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
(a) if c = CU
i , then a feasible p exists if and only if T −
(1−¯
β)c
P
j≥i θjβj ≤0, or equivalently,
c ≥
P
j≥i θjβj
1 −¯β
T.
(157)
(b) if c > CU
i , then according to (155), p follows l(T −r + δNC
IC,i + p) =
c−CU
i
P
j≥i θjβj , or equivalently,
p =

1 + 1
l

c
P
j≥i θjβj
−1
l

r −r −r0
βi

−T =: pNN
i
,
(158)
which satisﬁes (156) if and only if:

1 + 1
l

c
P
j≥i θjβj
−1
l

r −r −r0
βi

−T ≥
¯βc
P
j≥i θjβj
.
(159)
or equivalently,
c ≥
CU
i + lT P
j≥i θjβj
1 + l(1 −¯β)
=: ΦU
i (T).
(160)
which covers the region as deﬁned in (157).
Combining the above two scenarios, we have that when c ≥max(CU
i ,ΦU
i (T)), the optimal contract
terms is (pNN
i
, δNN
i
) as deﬁned above. Correspondingly, the supplier’s payoﬀis:
ΠN
i = r0 −pNN
i
+
X
j<i
θj

(1 −βj)r + βj[r −δNN
i
−L(r −δNN
i
−pNN
i
)] −r0
 
(161)
= Πi −
"
(1 −¯β)lc + (1 + l P
j<i θjβj)(c −CU
i )
l P
j≥i θjβj
−T
#
=: ΠNN
i
.
(162)
2. If both (145) and (147) are binding, according to (145), (p,δ) satisfy:
p = c +
X
j≤i−1
θjβj(r −δ).
(163)
Substituting this into (147) leads to:
δ + L
 "
1 −
X
j≤i−1
θjβj
#
(r −δ) −c
!
= r −r0
βi
,
(164)
To determine whether δ as determined by the above equation can also satisfy (144), we further consider
two scenarios.
(a) If δ results in L
h
1 −P
j≤i−1 θjβj
i
(r −δ) −c

= 0, it must follows δ = r−r0
βi . Such δ satisﬁes both
(144) and L
h
1 −P
j≤i−1 θjβj
i
(r −δ) −c

= 0 if and only if both of the following conditions are
satisﬁed:
r −r0
βi
≤r −
c
P
j≥i θjβj
;
(165)
 
1 −
X
j≤i−1
θjβj
!r −r0
βi

−c ≥T.
(166)
or equivalently,
c ≤min
 CU
i , τi −T

.
(167)

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
xxvii
(b) If δ results in L
h
1 −P
j≤i−1 θjβj
i
(r −δ) −c

> 0, using the functional form of L(), δ follows
δ + l

T −
h
1 −P
j≤i−1 θjβj
i
(r −δ) + c

= r−r0
βi , or equivalently,
δ = r −r0
βi
−
l(T + c −τi)
1 + l(1 −P
j≤i−1 θjβj).
(168)
Such a δ satisﬁes (144) and L
h
1 −P
j≤i−1 θjβj
i
(r −δ) −c

> 0 if and only if:
r −r0
βi
−
l(T + c −τi)
1 + l(1 −P
j≤i−1 θjβj) ≤r −
c
P
j≥i θjβj
,
and
(169)
"
1 −
X
j≤i−1
θjβj
# 
r −r −r0
βi
+
l(T + cE −τi)
1 + l(1 −P
j≤i−1 θjβj)
!
−cE < T.
(170)
Or equivalently,
c ∈(τi −T, ΦU
i (T)],
(171)
which is non-empty if and only if
T > τi −CU
i .
(172)
Combining the above two scenarios, we have that when c ≤max(CU
i ,ΦU
i (T)), the binding constraints
are (145) and (147), and the optimal deductible is:
δ = r −r0
βi
−
l(T + c −τi)+
1 + l(1 −P
j≤i−1 θjβj) =: δNB
i
(173)
and the premium p follows directly from (145), i.e.,
p = c +
X
j≤i−1
θjβj(r −δNB
i
) =: pNB
i
.
(174)
The supplier’s corresponding payoﬀis:
ΠN
i = r0 +
X
j<i
θj

(1 −βj)r −βjL(r −δNC
IR,i −pNC
IR,i)] −r0
 
−c
(175)
= Πi −
P
j<i θiβil(T + c −τi)+
1 + l(1 −P
j<i θjβj)
=: ΠNB
i
.
(176)
Finally, note that CU
i < ΦU
i (T) if and only if
T > (1 −¯β)

r −r −r0
βi

= τi −CU
i .
(177)
Under this condition, note that
ΦU
i (T) = CU
i +
l P
j≥i θjβj
1 + (1 −¯β)l[T −(τi −CU
i )].
(178)
Therefore,
max(CU
i ,ΦU
i (T)) = CU
i +
l P
j≥i θjβj
1 + (1 −¯β)l[T −(τi −CU
i )]+,
(179)
corresponding the boundary that separates the two cases in the lemma.
Next, we compare ΠN
i (ΠNN
i
and ΠNB
i
) with the no eﬀort solution Π0 to prove the ﬁnal part of the lemma.
In parallel to the above two scenarios, we have:

xxviii
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
1. By comparing ΠNB
i
and Π0 (the ﬁrst scenario in the lemma), we have:
ΠNB
i
−Π0 = Πi −Π0 −
P
j<i θjβjl(T + c −τi)+
1 + l(1 −P
j<i θjβj)
.
(180)
As Πi −Π0 = Ci −c, ΠNB
i
−Π0 ≥0 if and only if
c ≤Ci −
l P
j<i θjβj
1 + l
[T −(τi −Ci)].
(181)
In addition, note that according to the above result, ΠNB
i
is only feasible when c ≤CU
i +
l P
j≥i θjβj
1+(1−¯
β)l [T −
(τi −CU
i )]+. Combining these two conditions, we have that ΠNB
i
dominates Π0 if and only if (127) (in
the Lemma) holds.
2. By comparing ΠNN
i
(the second scenario in the lemma) and Π0, we have:
ΠNN
i
−Π0 = Ci −c −
"
(1 −¯β)lc + (1 + l P
j<i θjβj)(c −CU
i )
l P
j≥i θjβj
−T
#
.
(182)
Therefore, ΠNN
i
≥Π0 if and only if:
c ≤CU
i +
l P
j≥i θjβj
1 + l
[T −(τi −Ci)].
(183)
Combining with the condition that deﬁnes the feasibility of optimality of ΠNN
i
, i.e., c > CU
i +
l P
j>i θjβj
1+(1−¯
β)l [T −(τi −CU
i )]+, we obtain that ΠNN
i
dominates Π0 if and only if (128) holds. □
Proof of Lemma E.2.
As the insurer cancels at i ∈[j,m], we have B ∈(βm,βm+1), i.e., Eq. (133), and BP ∈
[βj−1,βj), i.e., Eq. (134). Similarly, as the supplier ships when signal i ≤max(j −1,k), and BP ∈[βj−1,βj),
we have BC ∈(βk,βk+1], i.e., Eq. (135).
With the above mapping, we note that for any expression x, we have P
i<j x = P
i x1βi<BP , P
i∈[j,k] x =
P
i x1βi∈[BP ,BC) and P
i∈[j,m] x = P
i x1βi∈[BP ,B). With the above substitution, the supplier’s payoﬀ(129)
follows from (8), and (130)–(132) follow directly from (12) – (14) in Lemma B.1. □
Proof of Lemma E.3.
We ﬁrst show that Eq. (136) is necessary for such a cancelable contract to be
feasible. Based on Lemma E.2 and using its notation, a cancelable contract with j = 2 and k = 3 is feasible
if and only if the set of following inequalities has a solution.
B ≥¯β;
(184)
¯β(r −δ) ≥c + θ1β1(r −δ) + (θ2 + θ3)f;
(185)
f ≥c + θ1β1(r −δ) + (θ2 + θ3)f;
(186)
p ≥c + θ1β1(r −δ) + (θ2 + θ3)f;
(187)
f < β2(r −δ);
(188)
f ≥β1(r −δ);
(189)
B > β3.
(190)

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
xxix
As p ≥f, given (186), (187) is redundant. When (190) holds, (184) becomes redundant. Further, when (186)
holds, (189) is redundant. Therefore, the above set of inequalities can be simpliﬁed as:
f ≤(θ2β2 + θ3β3)(r −δ) −c
θ2 + θ3
;
(191)
f ≥c
θ1
+ β1(r −δ);
(192)
f < β(r −δ);
(193)
B > β3.
(194)
Note that (191) and (192) can hold jointly if and only if
(θ2β2 + θ3β3)(r −δ) −c
θ2 + θ3
≥c
θ1
+ β1(r −δ),
(195)
or equivalently,
c ≤θ1(¯β −β1)(r −δ).
(196)
Similarly, (192) and (193) can hold jointly if and only if:
c ≤θ1(β2 −β1)(r −δ).
(197)
Combining (196) and (197), and setting δ = 0, which makes both constraints the least stringent, leads to
(136) as desired.
Second, we combine the suﬃcient side with identifying the optimal solution. Note that under the above
cancelation policy, the supplier can have two possible shipping policies: ﬁrst, she ships at i = 1; second, she
ships at i = 1,2 (and hence the shipment is uninsured at i = 2). In the following, we ﬁrst establish the best
possible payoﬀthe supplier can achieve under each shipping policy, and then show that the contract in the
lemma, i.e., (137), allows the supplier to achieve this payoﬀas long as (136) is satisﬁed.
1. If the supplier ships at i = 1, the best possible payoﬀshe can receive is Π2. Next, note that under the
contract (137), the supplier has no incentive to ship at i = 2 when T > (1−β2)r−r0
lβ2
. And in this region,
under the contract (137), her payoﬀis indeed Π2. Therefore, (137) is optimal.
2. If the supplier ships at i = 1,2, as the shipment is uninsured at i = 2, the best possible payoﬀshe can
receive is Π3 −θ2β2lT. Symmetrical to the previous case, the supplier has the incentive to ship at i = 2
when T ≤(1−β2)r−r0
lβ2
. And in this region, under the contract (137), her payoﬀis indeed Π3 −θ2β2lT.
Therefore, (137) is optimal.
Finally, note that the contract (137) has δ = 0, thus, it satisﬁes (184) – (190) under (136). Thus, this contract
always induces the speciﬁc cancelation and shipping decisions as speciﬁed in the lemma as long as (136) is
satisﬁed. □

xxx
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
Proof of Lemma E.4.
Based on Lemma E.2 and using its notation, when the insurer only cancels at
i = 3, and the supplier ships at i = 1,2, we must have j = 3 (if not, i.e., j < 3, then the insurer does not
have the incentive to cancel at i = 3.) and k < 3 (because if k = 3, then the supplier ships under all signals,
and hence the insurer has no incentive to exert eﬀort). By imposing the above j, k and m, we re-write the
optimization problem in Lemma E.2 as follows:
max
p,δ∈[0,r],f≤p−p +
X
i≤2
θi {r −βi[δ + L(r −f −δ)]} + θ3(r0 + f);
(198)
r0 ≤r −¯β [δ + L(r −δ −p)];
(199)
¯β(r −δ) ≥c +
X
i≤2
θiβi(r −δ) + θ3f;
(200)
f ≥c +
X
i≤2
θiβi(r −δ) + θ3f;
(201)
f < β3(r −δ);
(202)
f ≥β2(r −δ);
(203)
r0 ≤r −β3 [δ + L(r −δ −p)];
(204)
r0 ≥r −β3 [r + L(f −p)].
(205)
We simplify this math program as follows. First, as ¯β < β3, given (204), (199) is redundant. Second, note
that (200) can be simpliﬁed as θ3β3(r −δ) ≥c+θ3f. Under this condition, (202) becomes redundant. Thrid,
as L(f −p) ≥0 and (1 −β3)r < r0, (205) is redundant. Fourth, we note that p only appears in (198), (204),
and in the constraint f ≤p. As a smaller p improves the objective function and loosens (204), under the
optimal solution, the constraint f ≤p must be binding, i.e. p = f. Consolidating all the above steps, we can
simplify (198) – (205) as follows.
max
δ∈[0,r],f
X
i≤2
θi[r −βi(δ + L(r −f −δ)) −f] + θ3r0;
(206)
s.t.
f ≤β3(r −δ) −c
θ3
;
(207)
f ≥
c + P
i≤2 θiβi(r −δ)
θ1 + θ2
;
(208)
f ≥β2(r −δ);
(209)
r0 ≤r −β3 [δ + L(r −δ −f)].
(210)
We observe that for any given δ, decreasing f improves the objective function. In addition, note that as f
decreases, both (207) and (210) are relaxed. Therefore, at the optimal f, at least one of (208) and (209) is
binding. By comparing the two conditions, we can see that the binding one depends on the magnitude of δ.
Speciﬁcally, by comparing the right hand side of (208) and (209), we note that
c + P
i≤2 θiβi(r −δ)
θ1 + θ2
≥β2(r −δ)
(211)
is equivalent to
δ ≥r −
c
θ1(β2 −β1).
(212)

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
xxxi
When this condition is satisﬁed, (208) is the binding constraint, i.e., the insurer does not extract rent.
However, the supplier may incur ﬁnancing cost. Otherwise, (209) is the binding constraint, and the insurer
extracts information rent. In the following, we characterize the optimal contract depending on which of the
two constraints are binding.
Scenario I (δ ≥r −
c
θ1(β2−β1)): (208) is the binding constraint, and it can be re-written
f = c + P2
i=1 θiβi(r −δ)
P2
i=1 θi
,
(213)
and (206) – (210) can be re-written as follows:
max
δ∈[0,r]
Π3 −
2
X
i=1
θiβiL
 "
1 −
P2
i=1 θiβi
P2
i=1 θi
#
(r −δ) −
c
P2
i=1 θi
!
(214)
s.t.
δ ≤r −
c
θ3(β3 −¯β)
(215)
δ ≥r −
c
θ1(β2 −β1)
(216)
δ + L
 "
1 −
P2
i=1 θiβi
P2
i=1 θi
#
(r −δ) −
c
P2
i=1 θi
!
≤r −r0
β3
(217)
where Π3 is the supplier’s payoﬀunder the ﬁrst-best benchmark, and the second term in the objective
function captures the potential ﬁnancing cost the supplier needs to incur. By comparing (215) and (216), we
note that the two constraints can jointly hold if and only if
θ3(β3 −¯β) ≥θ1(β2 −β1),
(218)
or equivalently,
β2 ≤¯β.
(219)
In other words, if β2 ≤¯β, there exists no cancelable contract under which the insurer does not extract rent
with the speciﬁed cancelation and shipping policies. In the original optimization problem, the reason lies in
the fact that when (201) is binding, (200) and (203) cannot hold jointly if β2 > ¯β.
Therefore, in the following analysis of Scenario I, we should work under the condition that β2 ≤¯β. In this
case, we note that the objective function decreases in δ. Therefore, the optimal solution corresponds to the
smallest δ that satisﬁes (215) – (217). Further note that both (215) and (217) are loosened as δ decreases,
hence, the optimal solution should satisfy:
δ =

r −
c
θ1(β2 −β1)
+
.
(220)
We can verify that under this deductible and β2 ≤¯β, (215) always holds. To check whether (217) holds under
this contract, we further consider two scenarios, depending on whether δ = 0, i.e., r −
c
θ1(β2−β1) ≤0.
Scenario I.A: For c ≥θ1(β2 −β1)r, δ = 0. We can also verify that (217) holds under all T that satisﬁes
Assumption 2. Thus, the corresponding optimal contract is:
δ = 0;
p = f = c + P2
i=1 θiβir
P2
i=1 θi
,
(221)

xxxii
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
and the supplier’s payoﬀis Πu, the ﬁrst-best benchmark. In other words, the supplier receives the full value
of TCI.
Scenario I.B: For c < θ1(β2 −β1)r, the possible optimal solution, if feasible, is:
δ = r −
c
θ1(β2 −β1);
p = f =
β2c
θ1(β2 −β1).
(222)
This solution is feasible if and only if it satisﬁes (217), or equivalently,
r −r0 ≥β3

r −
c
θ1(β2 −β1) + L
 (1 −β2)c
θ1(β2 −β1)

.
(223)
Note that if this inequality does not hold, then the optimization problem (214) – (217) is infeasible. In other
words, there exists no solution in Scenario I under which (208) is binding. Thus, depending on whether the
supplier can avoid ﬁnancing cost, i.e., T ≤
(1−β2)c
θ1(β2−β1), we further consider two cases.
Scenario I.B.a: for T ≤
(1−β2)c
θ1(β2−β1), or equivalently,
c ≥θ1(β2 −β1)
(1 −β2)
T,
(224)
the supplier can avoid ﬁnancing cost. Under this condition, (217) holds if and only if:
c ≥θ1(β2 −β1)

r −r −r0
β3

.
(225)
Therefore, we have the following two cases.
1. The contract in (222) achieves ﬁrst-best Πu when
c ≥θ1(β2 −β1)max

r −r −r0
β3
,
T
1 −β2

.
(226)
2. No contract under Scenario I is infeasible when
c ∈
θ1(β2 −β1)
1 −β2
T, θ1(β2 −β1)

r −r −r0
β3

.
(227)
Scenario I.B.b: for T ≥
(1−β2)c
θ1(β2−β1), or equivalently,
c ≤θ1(β2 −β1)
(1 −β2)
T,
(228)
(223) can be re-written as:
c ≥
θ1(β2 −β1)

r −r−r0
β3 + lT

1 + (1 −β2)l
.
(229)
Therefore, we have two cases:
1. Contract (222) is feasible when
c ∈


θ1(β2 −β1)

r −r−r0
β3 + lT

1 + (1 −β2)l
, θ1(β2 −β1)
(1 −β2)
T

.
(230)
and the supplier’s payoﬀis Π3 −P2
i=1 θiβil
h
T −
(1−β2)c
θ1(β2−β1)
i
.
2. No contract under Scenario I is feasible when
c ≤min

θ1(β2 −β1)
(1 −β2)
T,
θ1(β2 −β1)

r −r−r0
β3 + lT

1 + (1 −β2)l

.
(231)

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
xxxiii
Consolidating Scenario I.A, Scenario I.B.a (two sub-cases) and Scenario I.B.b (two sub-cases), the optimal
contract in Scenario I (for β2 ≤¯β) can be summarized as follows.
1. The supplier receives the full value of TCI (ΠC
3 = ΠE
3 ) under contract (221) or (222) when
c ≥θ1(β2 −β1)max

r −r −r0
β3
,
T
1 −β2

.
(232)
2. The contract (222) is feasible, but the supplier incurs ﬁnancing cost when:
c ∈


θ1(β2 −β1)

r −r−r0
β3 + lT

1 + (1 −β2)l
, θ1(β2 −β1)
(1 −β2)
T

.
(233)
and the supplier’s payoﬀis:
ΠC
3 = Π3 −
2
X
i=1
θiβil

T −(1 −β2)c
θ1(β2 −β1)

,
(234)
3. The contract is infeasible when:
c < θ1(β2 −β1)max
 
r −r −r0
β3
,
r −r−r0
β3 + lT
1 + (1 −β2)l
!
.
(235)
Scenario II (δ ≤r −
c
θ1(β2−β1)): (209) is binding. Thus, we have:
p = f = β2(r −δ).
(236)
Under this contract, the insurer will not cancel coverage at i = 2. To achieve this, the insurer may extract
rent. Substituting the above expression of p and f into (206) – (210) leads to:
max
δ∈[0,r]
Π3 −[θ1(β2 −β1)(r −δ) −c] −
2
X
i=1
θiβil[T −(1 −β2)(r −δ)]+
(237)
s.t.
δ ≤r −
c
θ3(β3 −β2)
(238)
δ ≤r −
c
θ1(β2 −β1)
(239)
δ ≤r −r0
β3
−
l
h
T −(1 −β2)

r −r−r0
β3
i+
1 + l(1 −β2)
(240)
As shown, the three components of the objective function are: the ﬁrst-best benchmark Π3, the information
rent surrendered to the insurer, and the expected ﬁnancing cost. Note that the information rent, θ1(β2 −
β1)(r −δ) −c, decreases in δ, while the ﬁnancing cost is constant in δ for δ ≤r −
T
1−β2 , and increasing in δ
for δ > r −
T
1−β2 . Combining these two forces, as δ increases from zero, the ﬁnancing cost initially remains
at zero, and hence the objective function increases until δ = r −
T
1−β2 .8 For a greater δ, the supplier incurs
ﬁnancing cost, and
dΠC
3
dδ = θ1(β2 −β1) −l
2
X
i=1
θiβi(1 −β2),
(241)
which is positive if and only if
l < lh :=
θ1(β2 −β1)
P2
i=1 θiβi(1 −β2)
.
(242)
Therefore, the optimal δ follows two cases depending whether l is greater than lh.
8 We can verify that δ = 0 is a feasible solution to the range of c that we are interested, i.e., c ≤φ = θ3[r0 −(1 −β3)r]
for β2 > ¯β, and c ≤θ1(β2 −β1)r for β2 ≤¯β. The second set of conditions comes from the fact that when β2 ≤¯β, the
optimal solution in Scenario I.A above can achieve ﬁrst-best, hence it is unnecessary to consider other solutions.

xxxiv
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
1. For l ≤lh, as δ increases, the corresponding increase in ﬁnancing cost is not as great as the decrease
in information rent. Therefore, the optimal contract sets the deductible as high as possible, i.e. at the
level that at least one of (238) – (240) is binding. Equivalently,
δ = min


r −
c
θ3(β3 −β2), r −
c
θ1(β2 −β1), r −r0
β3
−
l
h
T −(1 −β2)

r −r−r0
β3
i+
1 + l(1 −β2)


.
(243)
2. For l > lh, for δ > r −
T
1−β2 , as δ increases, the corresponding increase in ﬁnancing cost dominates the
decrease in information rent. Therefore, the optimal deductible should be:
δ = min


r −
T
1 −β2
, r −
c
θ3(β3 −β2), r −
c
θ1(β2 −β1), r −r0
β3
−
l
h
T −(1 −β2)

r −r−r0
β3
i+
1 + l(1 −β2)


.
(244)
Combining the above two cases in Scenario II with the three cases in Scenario I that we summarize above,
we can fully characterize the optimal contract and the corresponding payoﬀin the format in Lemma E.4.
First, β2 ≤¯β (Solution C.3.L in Lemma E.4): under this condition, given (239), (238) will not be the
binding constraint. Depending on the range of c, T, and l, we further consider the following cases.
1. When c ≥θ1(β2 −β1)max

r −r−r0
β3 ,
T
1−β2

, according to Scenario I, the supplier can receive the full
value of TCI. This corresponds to the ﬁrst statement in Solution C.3.L.
2. When c < θ1(β2 −β1)max

r −r−r0
β3 ,
r−r−r0
β3
+lT
1+(1−β2)l

, Scenario I is infeasible. Therefore, we only need to
consider the optimal solution in Scenario II. By considering (243) and (244), we have that δ = r−r0
β3 ,
and her payoﬀis:
ΠC
3 = Π3 −

θ1(β2 −β1)

r −r −r0
β3

−c

.
(245)
This corresponds to the second statement in Solution C.3.
3. When c ∈

θ1(β2−β1)

r−r−r0
β3
+lT

1+(1−β2)l
, θ1(β2−β1)
(1−β2) T

, Scenario I is feasible. Next, consider the following two
cases.
(a) when l > lh, the solution in Scenario II follows (244). By comparing the four scenarios, we can see
that the binding one is δ = r −
T
1−β2 . In this case, the supplier can avoid ﬁnancing cost, and her
payoﬀ:
ΠC
3 = Π3 −
θ1(β2 −β1)T
1 −β2
−c

.
(246)
Comparing this with the supplier’s payoﬀunder the optimal contract in Scenario I (234), we have:
Π3 −
θ1(β2 −β1)T
1 −β2
−c

−
"
Π3 −l
2
X
i=1
θiβi

T −(1 −β2)c
θ1(β2 −β1)
#
(247)
=(l −lh)
2
X
i=1
θiβi

T −(1 −β2)c
θ1(β2 −β1)

≥0.
(248)
Thus, the solution in Scenario II, i.e., δ = r −
T
1−β2 , is optimal. This corresponds to Solution
III.L.3(b) in the lemma.

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
xxxv
(b) when l ≤lh, the optimal contract under Scenario II, i.e., (243), can be simpliﬁed into:
δ = min
 
r −
c
θ1(β2 −β1), r −
r −r−r0
β3 + lT
1 + (1 −β2)l
!
.
(249)
Consider the following two cases.
i. When c ∈

θ1(β2−β1)
h
r−r−r0
β3
+lT
i
1+(1−β2)l
, θ1(β2−β1)T
1−β2

, we can show that the optimal contract under
Scenario II, i.e., δ = r −
c
θ1(β2−β1), is the same as in Scenario I. Therefore, the supplier’s payoﬀ
is the same as in (234). This corresponds to Solution III.L.3(a) in the lemma.
ii. When c <
θ1(β2−β1)
h
r−r−r0
β3
+lT
i
1+(1−β2)l
, the optimal solution under Scenario II is δ = r −
r−r−r0
β3
+lT
1+(1−β2)l ,
and the corresponding payoﬀ, following (237), is:
ΠC
3 = Π3 + c −
θ1(β2 −β1)

r −r−r0
β3 + lT

1 + (1 −β2)l
−
2
X
i=1
θiβil


T −(1 −β2)

r −r−r0
β3

1 + (1 −β2)l

.
(250)
With some algebra, we can show that this payoﬀis always lower than the supplier’s payoﬀ
under Scenario I, i.e., (234).
Combining these two cases, we can show that for l ≤lh, the optimal contract is δ = r −
c
θ1(β2−β1),
and the supplier’s payoﬀfollows (234).
Second, β2 > ¯β (Solution IIl.H in Lemma E.4): in this case, Scenario I is infeasible. Therefore, we only
need to consider the solution in Scenario II, as governed by (243) and (244). Further, (238) is tighter than
(239). Depending on the range of c, T, and l, we further consider the following cases.
1. When c ≥θ3(β3 −β2)max

r −r−r0
β3 ,
T
1−β2

, regardless of l, we have: δ = r−
c
θ3(β3−β2), and the supplier’s
payoﬀ, following (237), is:
ΠC
3 = Π3 −(β2 −¯β)c
θ3(β3 −β2).
(251)
This corresponds to Solution III.H.1.
2. When c < θ3(β3 −β2)

r −r−r0
β3

and T ≤(1 −β2)

r −r−r0
β3

, by considering (243) and (244), we have
that δ = r−r0
β3 , and
ΠC
3 = Π3 −

θ1(β2 −β1)

r −r −r0
β3

−c

.
(252)
This corresponds to Solution III.H.2.
3. When c < θ3(β3−β2)T
1−β2
and T > (1 −β2)

r −r−r0
β3

, we further consider the following cases, which corre-
spond to diﬀerent scenarios in Solution III.H.3.
(a) when l ≤lh, the optimal contract under Scenario II, i.e., (243), can be simpliﬁed into:
δ = min
 
r −
c
θ3(β3 −β2), r −
r −r−r0
β3 + lT
1 + (1 −β2)l
!
.
(253)
Therefore, consider the following two cases.
i. when c <
θ3(β3−β2)
h
r−r−r0
β3
+lT
i
1+(1−β2)l
, the optimal solution under Scenario II is δ = r −
r−r−r0
β3
+lT
1+(1−β2)l ,
and the corresponding payoﬀis
ΠC
3 = Π3 −


θ1(β2 −β1)

r −r−r0
β3 + lT

1 + (1 −β2)l
−c

−
2
X
i=1
θiβil


T −(1 −β2)

r −r−r0
β3

1 + (1 −β2)l

, (254)
corresponding to Solution C.3.H.3(a).

xxxvi
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
ii. when c ∈

θ3(β3−β2)
h
r−r−r0
β3
+lT
i
1+(1−β2)l
, θ1(β2−β1)T
1−β2

, δ = r −
c
θ3(β3−β2), and hence the supplier’s payoﬀ
is:
ΠC
3 = Π3 −(β2 −¯β)c
θ3(β3 −β2) −
2
X
i=1
θiβil

T −(1 −β2)c
θ3(β3 −β2)

.
(255)
This corresponds to Solution C.3.H.3(b).
(b) when l > lh, the solution in Scenario II follows (244). By comparing the four scenarios, we can see
that the binding one is δ = r −
T
1−β2 . In this case, the supplier avoids ﬁnancing cost, and her payoﬀ
is:
ΠC
3 = Π3 −
θ3(β3 −β2)T
1 −β2
−c

.
(256)
This corresponds to Solution C.3.H.3(c). □
Proof of Lemma E.5.
In addition to the cancelation policies covered in Lemmas E.3 and E.4, cancelable
contracts under which the insurer exerts eﬀort, as summarized in Lemma B.1 and Lemma E.2, may induce
the following three types of cancelation policies.
1. If the insurer cancels only at i = 2, which leads to j = 2 and m = 2 using the notation in Lemma E.2. In
terms of the supplier’s shipping decision, by applying Lemma 3, we can show that other the following
scenarios are possible.
(a) The supplier ships only at i = 1, which leads to k = 1.
(b) The supplier ships at i = 1,2, which leads to k = 2.
To see why other shipping policies are not possible, note that according to Lemma 3, the supplier’s
shipping policy is always a one threshold policy. Therefore, for the supplier to ship at any state, which is
a necessary condition for the insurer to exert eﬀort, the supplier must ship at i = 1. Depending whether
she ships at i = 2, we have the above two scenarios. Now, it is clearly that the supplier will not ship at
i = 3, because if she does, she will ship at all signals, which again violates the necessary condition for
the insurer to exert eﬀort. As such, only the above two scenarios are feasible. For the following scenarios
of cancelation policy, the logic is similar and we omit the detail there.
2. If the insurer cancels only at i = 1,2, which leads to j = 1 and m = 2. In terms of the supplier’s shipping
decision, there are two possible scenarios.
(a) The supplier ships only at i = 1, which leads to k = 1.
(b) The supplier ships at i = 1,2, which leads to k = 2.
3. If the insurer cancels at only i = 1, which leads to j = 1 and m = 1, which also leads to k = 1. This
means that the supplier ships at only i = 1.
Rearranging these scenarios based on the supplier’s shipping policy, we arrive at the following two cases.
1. The supplier ships at i = 1 (possibly uninsured). Under this shipping policy, the upper bound of the
supplier’s payoﬀis Π2. By comparing this with the optimal contract in Lemmas E.3 and E.4, we note
that:

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
xxxvii
(a) when β2 < ¯β, we further consider two cases.
i. when c ≥θ1(β2 −β1)max

r −r−r0
β3 ,
T
1−β2

, according to Lemma E.4 (Solution III.L.1), there
exists a contract that can achieve the ﬁrst-best payoﬀΠ3, which is greater than Π2.
ii. when c < θ1(β2 −β1)max

r −r−r0
β3 ,
T
1−β2

, we can verify that the solution in Lemma E.3 is
feasible, and it leads to the payoﬀΠC
2 greater than or equal to the upper bound Π2.
(b) when β2 ≥¯β, we can verify that the solution in Lemma E.3 is feasible, and the corresponding
payoﬀis greater than or equal to the upper bound Π2.
2. The supplier ships at i = 1,2, and always uninsured at i = 2. Under this shipping policy, the upper
bound of the supplier’s payoﬀis Π3 −θ2β2lT. Similar to the previous case, we can show that such
contract is (weakly) dominated by ΠC
2 (in Lemma E.3) or ΠC
3 (in Lemma E.4).
Combining the above two cases, we conclude that we do not need to consider cancelable contracts other than
those studied in Lemmas E.3 and E.4. □
Proof of Lemma E.6.
We ﬁrst simplify this set of inequalities. First, we notice that as
θ1β1+θ2β2
θ1+θ2
< ¯β,
given (116), (122) is redundant. Second, similar to the proof in Lemma E.4, (120) and (121) are redundant,
and without loss of generality, we can set f = p. After consolidating all these simpliﬁcations, (115)– (122)
become:
max
δ∈[0,r],f
Π3 −
2
X
i=1
θiL(r −f −δ) −
(
2
X
i=1
θi[f −βi(r −δ)] −c
)
;
(257)
s.t.
r0 ≤r −¯β[δ + L(r −δ −f)];
(258)
f ≤β3(r −δ) −c
θ3
;
(259)
f ≥c + P2
i=1 θiβi(r −δ)
θ1 + θ2
;
(260)
f ≥β2(r −δ);
(261)
The second and third component corresponding represents the potential ﬁnancing cost and rent surrounded
to the insurer. We observe that for any given δ, decreasing f improves the objective function. In addition,
note that as f decreases, both (258) and (259) become less stringent. Therefore, at the optimal f, at least
one of (260) and (261) is binding. By comparing the two conditions, we can see that the binding one depends
on the magnitude of δ. Speciﬁcally, by comparing the right hand side of (260) and (261), we note that
c + P
i≤2 θiβi(r −δ)
θ1 + θ2
≥β2(r −δ)
(262)
is equivalent to
δ ≥r −
c
θ1(β2 −β1).
(263)
When this condition is satisﬁed, (260) is the binding constraint, i.e., the insurer does not extract rent.
Otherwise, (261) is the binding constraint, and the insurer extracts rent. In the following, we analyze the
optimal contract depending on which of the two constraints are binding.
Scenario I (δ ≥r −
c
θ1(β2−β1)): (260) is the binding constraint, and it can be re-written:
f = c + P2
i=1 θiβi(r −δ)
P2
i=1 θi
,
(264)

xxxviii
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
and (257) – (261) can be further simpliﬁed to:
max
δ∈[0,r]
Π3 −
2
X
i=1
θiβiL
 "
1 −
P2
i=1 θiβi
P2
i=1 θi
#
(r −δ) −
c
P2
i=1 θi
!
(265)
s.t.
δ ≤r −
c
θ3(β3 −¯β)
(266)
δ ≥r −
c
θ1(β2 −β1)
(267)
δ + L
 "
1 −
P2
i=1 θiβi
P2
i=1 θi
#
(r −δ) −
c
P2
i=1 θi
!
≤r −r0
¯β
(268)
By comparing (266) and (267), we note that the two constraints can jointly hold if and only if θ3(β3 −¯β) ≥
θ1(β2 −β1), or equivalently, β2 ≤¯β. In other words, if β2 > ¯β, there exists no cancelable contract under
which the insurer does not extract rent with the speciﬁed cancelation and shipping policies. Therefore, in
the following analysis of Scenario I, we should work under the condition that β2 ≤¯β.
Under this condition, we note that the objective function decreases in δ. Therefore, the optimal solution
corresponds to the smallest feasible δ. Further note that both (266) and (268) are loosened as δ decreases,
hence, the optimal solution should satisfy:
δ =

r −
c
θ1(β2 −β1)
+
.
(269)
We can verify that under this deductible and β2 ≤¯β, (266) always holds. To check whether (268) holds under
this contract, we further consider two scenarios, depending on whether δ = 0, i.e., r −
c
θ1(β2−β1) ≤0.
Scenario I.A: For c ≥θ1(β2 −β1)r, δ = 0. We can also verify that (268) holds under all T that satisﬁes
Assumption 2. Thus, the corresponding optimal contract is:
δ = 0;
p = f = c + P2
i=1 θiβir
P2
i=1 θi
.
(270)
And the supplier’s payoﬀis Π3. In other words, the supplier receives the full value of TCI.
Scenario I.B: For c < θ1(β2 −β1)r, the possible optimal solution, if feasible, is:
δ = r −
c
θ1(β2 −β1);
p = f =
β2c
θ1(β2 −β1).
(271)
This solution is feasible if and only if it satisﬁes (268), or equivalently,
r −r0 ≥¯β

r −
c
θ1(β2 −β1) + L
 (1 −β2)c
θ1(β2 −β1)

.
(272)
Note that if this inequality does not hold, then the optimization problem (265) – (268) is infeasible. In other
words, there exists no solution in Scenario I under which (267) is binding. Thus, depending on whether the
supplier can avoid ﬁnancing cost, i.e., T ≤
(1−β2)c
θ1(β2−β1), we further consider two cases.
Scenario I.B.a: for T ≤
(1−β2)c
θ1(β2−β1), or equivalently,
c ≥θ1(β2 −β1)
(1 −β2)
T,
(273)
the supplier can avoid ﬁnancing cost. Under this condition, (272) holds if and only if:
c ≥θ1(β2 −β1)

r −r −r0
¯β

,
(274)

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
xxxix
which always holds as r0 ≤(1 −¯β)r (Assumption 1). Thus, the contract in (271) leads to Π3 in this region.
Scenario I.B.b: for T ≥
(1−β2)c
θ1(β2−β1), or equivalently,
c ≤θ1(β2 −β1)
(1 −β2)
T,
(275)
(272) can be re-written as:
c ≥
θ1(β2 −β1)

r −r−r0
¯
β
+ lT

1 + (1 −β2)l
.
(276)
Note that (275) and (276) jointly hold if T ≥0. Therefore, we have two cases:
1. When (276) holds, contract (271) is feasible, and the supplier’s payoﬀis Πu −P2
i=1 θiβil
h
T −
(1−β2)c
θ1(β2−β1)
i
.
2. When c <
θ1(β2−β1)

r−r−r0
¯
β
+lT

1+(1−β2)l
, no contract under Scenario I is feasible.
Combining Scenario I.A, Scenario I.B.a and Scenario I.B.b (two sub-cases), we summarize the optimal
contract in Scenario I (for β2 ≤¯β) as follows.
1. When c ≥θ1(β2−β1)T
1−β2
, ΠU
3 = Π3 under contract (270) or (271) .
2. When c ∈

θ1(β2−β1)

r−r−r0
¯
β
+lT

1+(1−β2)l
, θ1(β2−β1)T
1−β2

,, the contract (271) is feasible, and
ΠU
3 = Π3 −
2
X
i=1
θiβil

T −(1 −β2)c
θ1(β2 −β1)

.
(277)
3. When c <
θ1(β2−β1)

r−r−r0
¯
β
+lT

1+(1−β2)l
, no contract that satisfy δ ≥r −
c
θ1(β2−β1) is feasible.
Scenario II (δ ≤r −
c
θ1(β2−β1)): (261) is binding. Thus, we have p = f = β2(r −δ). Substituting the above
expression of p and f into (257) – (261) leads to:
max
δ∈[0,r]
Π3 −
2
X
i=1
θiβil[T −(1 −β2)(r −δ)]+ −[θ1(β2 −β1)(r −δ) −c]
(278)
s.t.
δ ≤r −
c
θ3(β3 −β2);
(279)
δ ≤r −
c
θ1(β2 −β1);
(280)
δ ≤r −r0
¯β
−
l
h
T −(1 −β2)

r −r−r0
¯
β
i
1 + l(1 −β2)
.
(281)
As above, the three components of the objective function are: the ﬁrst-best benchmark Π3, the expected
ﬁnancing cost, and the rent surrendered to the insurer. Note that the information rent, θ1(β2 −β1)(r −δ)−c,
decreases in δ, while the ﬁnancing cost is constant in δ for δ ≤r −
T
1−β2 , and increasing in δ for δ > r −
T
1−β2 .
Combining these two forces, as δ increases from zero, the ﬁnancing cost initially remains at zero, and hence
the objective function increases until δ = r −
T
1−β2 . For a greater δ, the supplier incurs ﬁnancing cost, and
dΠ
dδ > 0 if and only if l < lh as deﬁned in Lemma E.4. Therefore, the optimal δ follows two cases depending
whether l is greater than lh.
1. For l ≤lh, as δ increases, the corresponding increase in ﬁnancing cost is not as great as the decrease
in information rent. Therefore, the optimal contract sets the deductible as high as possible, i.e. at the
level that at least one of (279) – (281) is binding. Equivalently,
δ = min
 
r −
c
θ3(β3 −β2), r −
c
θ1(β2 −β1), r −
r −r−r0
¯
β
+ lT
1 + l(1 −β2)
!
.
(282)

xl
Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
2. For l > lh, for δ > r −
T
1−β2 , as δ increases, the corresponding increase in ﬁnancing cost dominates the
decrease in information rent. Therefore, the optimal deductible should be:
δ = min
 
r −
T
1 −β2
, r −
c
θ3(β3 −β2), r −
c
θ1(β2 −β1), r −
r −r−r0
¯
β
+ lT
1 + l(1 −β2)
!
.
(283)
Combining the above two cases in Scenario II with the three cases in Scenario I that we summarize
above, we can fully characterize the optimal contract and the corresponding payoﬀ.
First, when β2 ≤¯β (Solution U.3.L): under this condition, (280) is tighter than (279). Depending on the
range of c, T, and l, we further consider the following cases.
1. When c ≥θ1(β2−β1)T
1−β2
, according to Scenario I, the supplier can receive the full value of TCI. This
corresponds to Solution U.3.L.1.
2. When c ∈

θ1(β2−β1)

r−r−r0
β3
+lT

1+(1−β2)l
, θ1(β2−β1)
(1−β2) T

, Scenario I is feasible. Next, consider the following two
cases, which correspond to the two cases in Solution U.3.L.2.
(a) when l ≤lh, the optimal contract under Scenario II, i.e., (282), can be simpliﬁed into:
δ = min
 
r −
c
θ1(β2 −β1), r −
r −r−r0
¯
β
+ lT
1 + (1 −β2)l
!
.
(284)
Consider the following two cases.
i. When c ∈

θ1(β2−β1)
h
r−r−r0
¯
β
+lT
i
1+(1−β2)l
, θ1(β2−β1)T
1−β2

, we can show that the optimal contract under
Scenario II, i.e., δ = r −
c
θ1(β2−β1), is the same as in Scenario I. Therefore, the supplier’s payoﬀ
is the same as in (277).
ii. When c <
θ1(β2−β1)
h
r−r−r0
¯
β
+lT
i
1+(1−β2)l
, the optimal solution under Scenario II is δ = r −
r−r−r0
β3
+lT
1+(1−β2)l ,
and the corresponding payoﬀ, following (237), is:
ΠU
3 = Π3 + c −
θ1(β2 −β1)

r −r−r0
¯
β
+ lT

1 + (1 −β2)l
−
2
X
i=1
θiβil


T −(1 −β2)

r −r−r0
¯
β

1 + (1 −β2)l

.
(285)
With some algebra, we can show that this payoﬀis always lower than the supplier’s payoﬀ
under Scenario I, i.e., (277).
Combining these two cases, we can show that for l ≤lh, the optimal contract is δ = r −
c
θ1(β2−β1),
and the supplier’s payoﬀfollows (277). This corresponds to Solution U.3.L.2(a) in the lemma.
(b) when l > lh, the solution in Scenario II follows (283). By comparing the four scenarios, we can see
that the binding one is δ = r −
T
1−β2 , and
ΠU
3 = Π3 −
θ1(β2 −β1)T
1 −β2
−c

,
(286)
which is greater than the the supplier’s payoﬀunder Scenario I as given by (277). Thus, the solution
in Scenario II is optimal. This corresponds to Solution U.3.L.2(b).
3. When c <
θ1(β2−β1)

r−r−r0
¯
β
+lT

1+(1−β2)l
, Scenario I is infeasible. Therefore, we only need to consider the optimal
solution in Scenario II. By considering (282) and (283), we have that δ = r−r0
¯
β
−
l
h
T −(1−β2)

r−r−r0
¯
β
i
1+l(1−β2)
,
and the supplier’s payoﬀis:
ΠU
3 = Π3 −


θ1(β2 −β1)

r −r−r0
¯
β
+ lT

1 + (1 −β2)l
−c

−
l(θ1β1 + θ2β2)
h
T −(1 −β2)

r −r−r0
¯
β
i
1 + (1 −β2)l
.
(287)
This corresponds to Solution U.3.L.3.

Yang, Bakshi, and Chen: Trade Credit Insurance
xli
Second, in the case with β2 > ¯β (Solution U.3.H in the Lemma), the solution in Scenario I is infeasible.
Therefore, we only need to consider the solution in Scenario II, as governed by (282) and (283). Further,
(279) is tighter than (280). Depending on the range of c, T, and l, we further consider the following cases.
1. When c ≥θ3(β3−β2)T
1−β2
, regardless of l, we have: δ = r −
c
θ3(β3−β2), and the supplier’s payoﬀ, following
(278), is ΠU
3 = Π3 −
(β2−¯
β)c
θ3(β3−β2). This corresponds to Solution U.3.H.1.
2. When c < θ3(β3−β2)T
1−β2
, depending on l, we consider the following two scenarios.
(a) When l < lh, the optimal contract under Scenario II, i.e., (282), can be simpliﬁed into:
δ = min
 
r −
c
θ3(β3 −β2), r −
r −r−r0
¯
β
+ lT
1 + (1 −β2)l
!
.
(288)
Therefore, consider the following two cases.
i. when c ∈

θ3(β3−β2)
h
r−r−r0
¯
β
+lT
i
1+(1−β2)l
, θ1(β2−β1)T
1−β2

, δ = r −
c
θ3(β3−β2), and hence the supplier’s payoﬀ
is:
ΠU
3 = Π3 −(β2 −¯β)c
θ3(β3 −β2) −
2
X
i=1
θiβil

T −(1 −β2)c
θ3(β3 −β2)

.
(289)
This corresponds to Solution U.3.H.2(a).
ii. When c <
θ3(β3−β2)
h
r−r−r0
¯
β
+lT
i
1+(1−β2)l
, the optimal solution under Scenario II is δ = r −
r−r−r0
¯
β
+lT
1+(1−β2)l ,
and the corresponding payoﬀis
ΠU
3 = Π3 −


θ1(β2 −β1)

r −r−r0
¯
β
+ lT

1 + (1 −β2)l
−c

−
2
X
i=1
θiβil


T −(1 −β2)

r −r−r0
¯
β

1 + (1 −β2)l

, (290)
corresponding to Solution U.3.H.2(b).
(b) When l ≥lh, we should have δ = r −
T
1−β2 , and ΠU
3 = Π3 −

θ3(β3−β2)T
1−β2
−c

. This corresponds to
Solution U.3.H.2(c). □