TITLE: On the External Validity of Social Preference Games: A Systematic Lab-Field Study
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2018
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2017.2908
---

Matteo M. Galizzi, Daniel Navarro-Martinez 
On the external validity of social preference 
games: a systematic lab-field study 
 
Article (Accepted version) 
(Refereed) 
Original citation: 
Galizzi, Matteo M. and Navarro-Martínez, Daniel (2017) On the external validity of social 
preference games: a systematic lab-field study. Management Science. ISSN 0025-1909 
 
© 2017 INFORMS 
 
This version available at: http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/84088/ 
 
Available in LSE Research Online: August 2017 
 
LSE has developed LSE Research Online so that users may access research output of the 
School. Copyright © and Moral Rights for the papers on this site are retained by the individual 
authors and/or other copyright owners. Users may download and/or print one copy of any 
article(s) in LSE Research Online to facilitate their private study or for non-commercial research. 
You may not engage in further distribution of the material or use it for any profit-making activities 
or any commercial gain. You may freely distribute the URL (http://eprints.lse.ac.uk) of the LSE 
Research Online website. 
 
This document is the author’s final accepted version of the journal article. There may be 
differences between this version and the published version. You are advised to consult the 
publisher’s version if you wish to cite from it. 
 
 
 

1 
 
On the External Validity of Social Preference Games: 
A Systematic Lab-Field Study 
 
(Accepted for publication in Management Science). 
 
 
Matteo M. Galizzi 
Department of Psychological and Behavioural Science, London School of Economics and Political 
Science, London, UK. 
E-mail address: m.m.galizzi@lse.ac.uk. 
 
Daniel Navarro-Martinez 
Department of Economics and Business, Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona, Spain; 
Barcelona Graduate School of Economics, Barcelona, Spain; 
Barcelona School of Management, Barcelona, Spain. 
E-mail address: daniel.navarro@upf.edu. 
 
 
Abstract 
We present a lab-field experiment designed to systematically assess the external validity of social 
preferences elicited in a variety of experimental games. We do this by comparing behavior in the 
different games with several behaviors elicited in the field and with self-reported behaviors exhibited 
in the past, using the same sample of participants. Our results show that the experimental social 
preference games do a poor job explaining both social behaviors in the field and social behaviors from 
the past. We also include a systematic review and meta-analysis of previous literature on the external 
validity of social preference games. 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
1. Introduction 
The last few decades have seen a strong surge of interest in what is now widely known in economics 
as ‘social preferences’. While the study of social behaviors has a long tradition in disciplines like 
economics (e.g., Smith 1759), psychology (e.g., Triplett 1898; Lewin 1939) and sociology (e.g., 
Durkheim 1893), in recent times, the term ‘social preferences’ has come to be associated with a more 
specific program of research originating mainly in experimental and behavioral economics (see, e.g., 
Guth, Schmittberger, and Schwarze 1982; Andreoni 1988; Forsythe et al. 1994; Camerer and Thaler 
1995; Fehr and Gachter 2000, 2002; Charness and Rabin 2002; Fischbacher and Gachter 2010). 
A key feature of this research program is that it has focused largely on the study of 
experimental games designed to target different aspects of social behavior, such as altruism (e.g., 
Forsythe et al. 1994; Andreoni and Miller 2002), reciprocity (e.g., Berg et al. 1995; Cox 2004) and 
trust (e.g., Berg et al. 1995; Ortmann et al. 2000). In a typical study, participants play these games in 
laboratory settings, where special care is taken to strip the games from contextual features that depart 
from the underlying game-theoretic structures on which they are based, and to provide real monetary 
incentives that are aligned with the payoffs of the games. This stylized approach has arguably become 
one of the building blocks of experimental and behavioral economics, with literally thousands of 
studies published on the topic, some of which are among the most widely cited papers in leading 
journals (e.g., Fehr and Schmidt 1999; Bolton and Ockenfels 2000; Fehr and Gachter 2000, 2002; 
Henrich et al. 2001, 2005; Charness and Rabin 2002; Herrmann, Thoni, and Gachter 2008).1 
Given such a major interest in the topic, it is surprising how little work has been done to 
investigate systematically the external validity of this experimental games approach to social 
preferences. This seems to us to be one of the most fundamental questions yet to be answered about 
the social preference paradigm. Specifically, to what extent do experimental social preference games 
tap into the principles governing social behavior when it is put in context or taken outside the lab? Not 
addressing this question in a systematic way could put social preference research at risk of becoming 
research on how people play certain games in the lab, instead of research on how people behave in 
social situations of broader interest to economics and other social and behavioral sciences. 
A few researchers have previously warned about potential issues of external validity in research 
on social preferences (see Levitt and List 2007a, b, 2008; List 2009). In a particularly prominent 
paper, Levitt and List (2007a) discuss six potential complications that may arise when the findings of 
social preference experiments are extrapolated outside the lab: (i) participants in the lab act under the 
scrutiny of the experimenters; (ii) their decisions and actions are unlikely to remain anonymous; (iii) 
the context matters and cannot be completely controlled by the experimenters; (iv) the stakes are 
 
1 See Camerer (2003) for a comprehensive review of experimental social preference games; see Zelmer (2003), 
Oosterbeek et al. (2004), Engel (2011), and Johnson and Mislin (2011) for more specific reviews on the Public 
Good, Ultimatum, Dictator, and Trust game, respectively. 

3 
 
different from the ones in real life; (v) the participants in experiments differ from the groups of people 
engaged in most real-world behaviors; and (vi) there are artificial restrictions on choice sets and time 
horizons. 
Some of the points raised by Levitt and List can be interpreted as general limitations of 
laboratory experimentation compared to field settings, and they have in fact initiated a broad-ranging 
methodological debate on the scope and limitations of laboratory experiments in economics (see also 
Falk and Heckman 2009; Camerer 2011; Kessler and Vesterlund, 2015). In that sense, it is important 
to clarify that our focus here is not on the external validity of laboratory experimentation as a whole, 
which is in our view not only useful but also necessary in the social and behavioral sciences. We 
center exclusively on the more specific issue of the external validity of experimental social preference 
games. 
There has indeed been extensive research on some of the complications identified by Levitt and 
List in the realm of social preferences, including studies on the effects of anonymity and scrutiny 
(Hoffman et al. 1994, Hoffman, McCabe, and Smith 1996; Eckel and Grossman 1996; Dana, Cain, 
and Dawes 2006; Dana, Weber, and Kuang 2007; List 2007; Bardsley 2008; Franzen and Pointer 
2012; Winking and Mizer 2013); the context and framing (Cherry, Frykblom, and Shogren 2002; List 
2006; Branas-Garza 2007; Stoop, Noussair, and van Soest 2012; Stoop 2013); the size of the stakes 
(Slonim and Roth 1998; Cameron 1999; Munier and Zaharia 2003; Carpenter, Verhoogen, and Burks 
2005; List and Cherry 2008); the subject pool (Gachter, Herrmann, and Thoni, 2004; List 2004, 2006; 
Carpenter and Seki 2005; Bellemare and Kroger 2007; Bellemare, Kroger, and van Soest, 2008; 2011; 
Carpenter, Connolly, and Myers 2008; Garbarino and Slonim 2009; Stoop et al. 2012; Cleave, 
Nikiforakis, and Slonim 2013; Exadaktylos, Espin, and Branas-Garza 2013; Kessler, 2013; Stoop 
2013); and the self-selection into lab experiments (Krawczyk 2011; Falk, Meier, and Zehnder 2013; 
Slonim et al. 2013; Abeler and Nosenzo 2015). 
All these factors have been shown to matter, at least in some cases, which calls into question 
the idea that behavior in experimental social preference games can be immediately representative of 
social behavior outside the lab. The role of the context is perhaps especially problematic, given that 
typical social preference games are meant to be as context-free as possible, while much research in 
experimental economics and psychology has shown that preferences seem to be significantly shaped 
by the context in which they are elicited (see, e.g., Slovic 1995; Loewenstein 1999; Ariely, 
Loewenstein, and Prelec 2006; Lichtenstein and Slovic 2006; Stewart, Reimers, and Harris 2015). 
More closely related to the research presented here are a relatively small number of empirical 
studies that have examined the external validity of experimental social preference games by directly 
linking evidence from the lab and the field for the same pool of subjects. We have conducted a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of this literature, focusing on the games that we used in our lab-
field experiment (i.e., the dictator game, the ultimatum game, the trust game, and the public good 
game, as explained further down). Appendix A contains the details of the systematic review and meta-

4 
 
analysis. Table A1 provides a synoptic summary of all the lab-field studies retrieved by our 
systematic review, ordered chronologically.2 
As Table A1 shows, the currently accumulated evidence is clearly mixed. Some studies have 
found significant correlations between behavior in particular experimental games and specific field 
behaviors, others have found no correlation, and some others have obtained mixed findings. More 
specifically, our meta-analysis reveals that 39.7% of the reported lab-field correlations and 37.5% of 
the reported lab-field regressions find a statistically significant association between games and field 
behaviors. The overall average lab-field correlation reported is 0.14, and the overall correlation in the 
papers that report significant correlations is 0.27. So, analyzing all the papers together, there is 
currently only weak evidence of correlation between these social preference games and behavior in 
the field. 
In addition, it is unclear how we should interpret the significant results obtained in this 
literature. There is a well-known bias to produce, submit, and publish significant results over 
insignificant ones, which leads to false positives and to an overrepresentation of spurious correlations 
(see, e.g., Rosenthal 1979; Ioannidis 2005; Simmons, Nelson, and Simonsohn 2011; Maniadis, 
Tufano, and List 2014; Miguel et al. 2014; Simonsohn, Nelson, and Simmons 2014). This has recently 
produced a wide-ranging replication crisis that represents a serious threat to the social and behavioral 
sciences (and to other sciences as well), with some analyses estimating the replicability of published 
research at less than 50% (see, e.g., Ioannidis 2005; Simmons et al. 2011; Open Science Collaboration 
2015; Baker 2016). 
This issue becomes much more problematic if the studies published in a specific field are not 
systematic, which we believe is currently the case with many studies in this lab-field research on the 
external validity of social preference games. As our systematic review shows (see Table A1), the 
typical study in this area reports the results of comparing one social preference game with one 
specific, or several related, field measures. It is also apparent that there is a very wide diversity in the 
variables, methodologies, and samples used in the different papers. A particularly worrying aspect is 
that the abstract and context-free nature of these games makes it very difficult to establish clear 
theoretical correspondences between the games and real social behaviors outside the lab, which can 
lead to an ex post rationalization of almost any social behavior as related to the games. We believe 
that this is clearly reflected in the wide variety of behaviors that have been associated to the same 
games, including things as diverse as: earning or spending money, fishing shrimps, drinking beer, 
participating in elections for parent representatives in schools, or registering books in a library. This 
lack of a strict theoretical mapping may also exacerbate publication bias by making it difficult for the 
 
2 See also Camerer (2011) for an interesting review of this and other literature related to external validity, and 
Dolan and Galizzi (2014) for a general discussion of lab-field experiments on pro-social behavior and in other 
areas. 

5 
 
researcher to justify specific null results as meaningfully related to the games. For all these reasons, 
we think it is crucial to conduct more systematic research on the external validity of social preference 
games. 
In this paper, we present a systematic investigation of the external validity of social preference 
games, conducted by comparing behavior in a variety of games with a variety of situations created in 
the field, and also with self-reported social behaviors performed in the past, all using the same sample 
of participants. The different social preference games included (dictator game, ultimatum game, trust 
game, and public good game) cover a large proportion of experimental research on social preferences; 
the five different field situations tap into different types of pro-social behaviors related to giving 
money and helping others; and the self-report measures include various pro-social tendencies shown 
in the past. 
Rather than trying to establish a one-to-one correspondence between particular experimental 
games and specific field situations, which is (as indicated above) necessarily imprecise given the 
abstract and context-free nature of the games, we adopt the strategy of covering a variety of prominent 
social preference games and several relevant field behaviors to explore more broadly the extent to 
which the games are predictive of social behaviors shown in the field. The relationship between the 
games and the field situations we studied is further discussed in the next sections. The self-report 
measures of past social behaviors provide an additional layer to evaluate the explanatory ability of the 
games. To the best of our knowledge, this constitutes the most systematic and comprehensive lab-
field study of the external validity of experimental social preference games available to date. 
Our results show that the social preference games do a poor job in explaining both the field 
behaviors and the self-reports. In a nutshell, none of the behaviors elicited in the field or reported 
from the past were explained to a significant extent by behavior in the experimental games. We do not 
claim that this single study can establish any firm or final conclusions about the complex issue of the 
external validity of social preferences games. We do believe, however, that our results (together with 
our systematic review and meta-analysis) seriously question the external validity of social preference 
games and they call for more, and more systematic, research on this important issue. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the methods used; Section 3 
presents the results obtained; Section 4 discusses the results and concludes. 
 
2. Methods 
Our general approach to investigate the external validity of social preference games involved 
presenting the same sample of participants with the following three elements: (i) a set of questions 
about social behaviors exhibited in the past; (ii) a variety of social preference games played in the 
laboratory; and (iii) several naturalistic situations related to social preferences that we created in the 

6 
 
field. The main aim of this design was to evaluate the social preference games against actual social 
behaviors in the field and self-reported social behaviors from the past, all using the same individuals. 
This lab-field set-up was organized so that each individual participated in three separate 
sessions on three different days of the same week. On the first day, the participants came into the lab 
to do different tasks (some of them unrelated to social preferences), which included the self-report 
measures of past social behaviors. On the second day, the same participants played various social 
preference games in the lab. On the third day, they came again to the lab to complete a task that was 
unrelated to social preferences, and after exiting they were faced with an opportunity to behave pro-
socially in one of five field situations. 
This three-day lab-field structure allowed us to obtain all the information that we were 
interested in, while minimizing the possibility of cross-contamination between the different tasks. We 
now explain each one of these three main components in turn. 
 
2.1. Session 1: The self-report measures of past social behaviors 
In the first experimental session of the week, upon their arrival to the lab, the participants were 
assigned anonymous ID codes. They were then asked to read an informed consent form and sign it if 
they agreed to carry on with the experiment. The form reiterated important information that they had 
already seen on the invitation email. Specifically, it said that: the experiment would require coming to 
the lab for three separate sessions on three different days of the week; each session would last about 
one hour; they would receive a fixed amount of £30 for their participation in all three sessions (to be 
paid at the end of the last session); and they would have the opportunity to get an extra payment 
depending on their performance in the tasks. The participants were then randomly assigned to 
different cubicles in the lab. Throughout the session, they were given more specific instructions for 
the different tasks.3 
In Session 1, the participants reported on their past pro-social behaviors using the Self-Report 
Altruism (SRA) Scale (Rushton, Chrisjohn, and Fekken 1981). This scale consists of 20 items, in 
which people are asked to state how frequently in the past they have done different actions related to 
pro-social behaviors. Three examples are: “I have given money to a charity”, “I have helped carry a 
stranger’s belongings (books, parcels, etc.)”, and “I have given money to a stranger who needed it (or 
asked me for it)”. A full list of the 20 SRA items is contained in Appendix B. Participants rated each 
statement on a scale from 1 (“never”) to 5 (“very often”). This constitutes our primary measure of past 
pro-social behaviors. 
In addition to the SRA scale, in Session 1, the participants responded to other questionnaires 
(not part of the present study) and they completed another unrelated task, which consisted of watching 
and rating several videos. 
 
3 All the instructions given to participants are available from the authors upon request. 

7 
 
 
2.2. Session 2: The social preference games 
In Session 2, the subjects returned to the lab, were again assigned individual ID codes and randomly 
allocated to cubicles, and then received more specific and detailed instructions for the tasks they 
would complete throughout the session. Because of the structure of some of the games played in the 
session, we needed the number of participants to be a multiple of four. To this end, we allocated the 
remaining people to a separate task (conducted in a different room and unrelated to this study) for the 
rest of the session. 
In this session, the subjects participated in seven different games (explained in detail below) 
that are widely used in economics and other social and behavioral sciences to study social 
preferences. All the games were one-shot (i.e., the subjects only played them once) and independent 
from each other. In each of the seven games, the participants were randomly matched (anonymously) 
with other participants in the session, under the constraint that they never interacted with the same 
person more than once. At the end, one of the seven games was randomly selected and the participants 
were actually paid the amount they earned in that particular game. All the games were computerized, 
and they were programmed and implemented using Z-Tree (Fischbacher 2007). 
Participants first received general instructions on the seven-game structure and the general 
payment mechanism, followed by specific instructions before each game. All the instructions given to 
the subjects included examples to illustrate the games and the consequences of playing different 
strategies, and there was always explicit room for questions. 
One aspect of this design that may be worth stressing is that we used only one-shot games. 
While we acknowledge that repeating some experimental games can show interesting patterns of 
behavior, we deliberately avoided repetition because one-shot situations better fit our purposes of 
eliciting social preferences using a variety of games. In particular, this minimizes unwanted cross-
contamination effects produced by learning, feedback, income, and reputation building (see, e.g., 
Goeree and Holt 2001, 2004). This set-up also makes the games more similar to the one-shot field 
situations they would face at the end of Session 3. Furthermore, one-shot games have been the focus 
of most of the previous lab-field studies on the external validity of social preference games. 
Our participants were not given information or feedback about the results of the different games 
until the end, with the exception of the information they inevitably obtained from simply playing the 
games (i.e., in the case of player 1 in the dictator games and player 2 in the ultimatum and trust games 
explained below). All the games were played in the order specified below: 
 
1) Dictator Game 1 (DG1): Two-player game in which Player 1 decides how to divide £10 between 
the self and Player 2. Player 2 simply receives the allocation established by Player 1. Half of the 
participants were Player 1 and the other half Player 2. 

8 
 
2) Dictator Game 2 (DG2): Like Dictator Game 1, but switching the roles (and matching people with 
different partners). 
3) Ultimatum Game 1 (UG1): Two-player game in which Player 1 decides how to divide £10 
between him/her and Player 2. Player 2 decides whether to accept the allocation or not. If the 
allocation is rejected, both players get nothing. Half of the participants were Player 1 and the other 
half Player 2. 
4) Ultimatum Game 2 (UG2): Like Ultimatum Game 1, but all the participants were Player 2 and all 
of them had to respond to the same allocation of £5 for Player 2, which was determined by a 
participant who was Player 1 in a preliminary pilot session.4 
5) Trust Game 1 (TG1): Two-player game in which Player 1 has an endowment of £10 and decides 
how much of it to send over to Player 2. The amount sent over is multiplied by three and given to 
Player 2, who has to decide how much of it to send back to Player 1. Half of the participants were 
Player 1 and the other half Player 2. 
6) Trust Game 2 (TG2): Like Trust Game 1, but all the participants were Player 2 and all of them had 
to respond to the same amount of £5 sent over by Player 1, which was determined by a participant 
who was Player 1 in a preliminary pilot session. 
7) Public Good Game (PGG): Four-player game in which all the players have an endowment of £10 
and have to decide simultaneously how much of it to contribute to a common group fund. The 
overall money in the group fund is then multiplied by two and split between the four players. 
 
Note that these seven games involve six different decisions per participant, and eight different 
decisions overall, as follows: (i) Player 1 in DG1 (half of the subjects) or in DG2 (half of the 
subjects); (ii) Player 1 in UG1 (half of the subjects); (iii) Player 2 in UG1 (half of the subjects); (iv) 
Player 2 in UG2; (v) Player 1 in TG1 (half of the subjects); (vi) Player 2 in TG1 (half of the subjects); 
(vii) Player 2 in TG2; and (viii) one of the players in PG. The allocation of participants was arranged 
so that those who acted as Player 1 in UG1 acted as Player 1 again in TG1, and those who were Player 
2 in UG1 were Player 2 again in TG1. Thus, every participant was Player 1 in a dictator game; Player 
2 in an ultimatum and in a trust game with a fixed amount of £5; and one of the players in a public 
good game. In addition, half the participants were Player 1 in an ultimatum game and in a trust game, 
and the other half were Player 2 in those games. 
 
4 One randomly selected participant in Session 2 was then actually matched with that previous participant to 
determine his/her payoff in the game. This method is a simple way of eliciting Player 2 behaviors in the 
ultimatum game presenting all the participants with the same situation (instead of having varying offers by 
Player 1), and it avoids the additional complications of techniques like the strategy method, which would have 
made the experimental session excessively complex. We used the same method in Trust Game 2 (see below). 

9 
 
These experimental games cover a substantial proportion of research on social preferences and 
they address many of the main behavioral constructs invoked in the literature to explain social 
behaviors. Those constructs include: altruism (Player 1 in DG1 and DG2); positive reciprocity (Player 
2 in TG1 and TG2); negative reciprocity (Player 2 in UG1 and UG2); anticipation of positive 
reciprocity (Player 1 in TG1); anticipation of negative reciprocity (Player 1 in UG1); trust (Player 1 
in TG1); cooperation (PGG); and inequality aversion (which could be used to explain the behavior of 
all the players in all the games). This variety of games and behavioral constructs associated with 
social preferences constitutes our benchmark to compare behavior in social preference games to the 
self-reported social behaviors from the past and to the social behaviors exhibited in the field 
situations. 
 
2.3. Session 3: The field situations 
In Session 3, the participants again returned to the lab, were assigned individual ID codes and 
randomly allocated to their cubicles, and then received more specific and detailed instructions for the 
task they would complete during the session. 
In this session, the participants worked on a single task that was unrelated to the present study. 
The task consisted in making choices between different consumer products. At the end of the task, the 
subjects were paid individually the £30 they were entitled to for having participated in the three 
sessions. The £30 were always paid using exactly the same bill and coin denominations, namely: two 
£10 bills, one £5 bill, three £1 coins, two 50 pence coins, and five 20 pence coins. This was done to 
make sure that all the participants had available cash in various denominations before encountering 
the field situations outside of the lab. We made sure that one participant left the lab approximately 
every three minutes to allow time for the previous participant to complete the field situation. 
When the participants left the laboratory, they encountered one of five naturalistic field 
situations that provided an opportunity to behave pro-socially. Two involved helping and the other 
three involved donating money. The five situations were run consecutively, in the order specified 
below: 
 
1) Boxes: A research assistant stood in an area outside the lab and told the participants that he needed 
help carrying two voluminous (but light) boxes to the basement of the university building where 
the lab was located. He explicitly asked the participants one by one after they exited the lab if they 
could help. If the participants said yes, they actually helped him carry the boxes downstairs. 
2) Phone: A research assistant stood outside the lab and said to the participants that he needed to 
make a quick phone call but his phone was out of battery. He explicitly asked the participants if 
they could lend him their phone for a minute to make the call. If the participants lent him the 
phone, he simply made a call, hung up, and said that there was no answer. 

10 
 
3) Children's Charity: A research assistant stood outside the lab collecting money for a leading 
charity dedicated to helping children in developing countries. He explicitly asked the participants 
if they wanted to contribute money to the charity. The research assistant was wearing an official 
university T-shirt and a professional (sealed) charity bucket of the type commonly used to collect 
donations, with a large sticker with the logo of the charity. He also had color-printed leaflets with a 
brief description of the charity and its activities. The money given by people was then actually sent 
to the charity. 
4) Environmental Charity: This situation was exactly like the previous one, but with a different 
charity. This organization was a leading charity dedicated to protecting the environment. The 
money donated was actually sent to the charity. 
5) Lab Donation: This situation was analogous to situations 3 and 4, but this time the research 
assistant was asking for money to support research projects conducted in our lab. The money given 
by people was actually added to the research funds of the lab. 
 
The participants always encountered the field situations in the same location, which was out of 
the lab premises, and one floor above the lab, in a place they had to cross on the ground floor of the 
building (the lab is located in the basement of one of the core teaching buildings of the university). 
The area selected is often used by the students' union and its associated charities to advertise events 
and conduct different reach-out initiatives, including signing petitions or raising funds. The location 
was therefore a very natural place for students to go through, and there was no apparent reason to 
think that the participants related the situations they encountered with the lab experiment. 
The different field situations cover a variety of naturalistic environments, in which the 
participants were able to express their social inclinations. Helping others and giving money to others 
are representative of a large number of real-world circumstances related to social preferences. In 
addition, donations have been extensively used in behavioral and social science research (see Bekkers 
and Wiepking 2011; List 2011; Oppenheimer and Olivola 2011), and a number of authors have 
explicitly assumed that donations should be related to behavior in social preference games (see 
DellaVigna 2009). Helping behaviors have also been widely studied in the behavioral and social 
sciences (see, e.g., Darley and Batson 1973; Eagly and Crowley 1986; Levine, Norenzayan, and 
Philbrick 2001), and helping has been explored in the field as well, often using methodologies that are 
very much in line with ours (see, e.g., MacRae and Johnston 1998; Levine et al. 2001). 
As explained in the introduction, we deliberately do not want to establish a strict one-to-one 
correspondence between our field situations and the behavior of specific players in specific games. 
The abstract and context-free nature of the games makes such correspondences necessarily imprecise. 
Our strategy here is rather to cover a variety of relevant social preference games and several relevant 
field situations and explore the extent to which the games are predictive of social behaviors in the 
field. 

11 
 
Nevertheless, the different field situations could be related to some of the behavioral constructs 
presumably captured by the games, as follows: (i) altruism (in different forms) is likely to be related 
to decisions in the Box, Phone, and Children’s Charity situations, where there is no element of 
strategic interaction or reciprocity involved; (ii) positive reciprocity is likely to be part of behavior in 
the Lab Donation situation, because participants have just received money from the lab; (iii) 
cooperation is likely to be a relevant motive in the Environmental Charity situation, which focuses 
essentially on a contribution to a public good; and (iv) inequality aversion may be, to some extent, 
relevant in all the situations, but possibly especially so in Children's Charity, where inequality 
between the children in need and the participants is an important feature of the situation. 
 
2.4. Participants and sessions 
All experimental sessions were conducted between June and September 2012. A total of 363 people 
participated in the experiment in a total of 35 experimental sessions. The participants were volunteers 
recruited from a university-wide subject pool, which comprises about 5,000 people, mostly current 
and former students of the university. We used no other eligibility or exclusion criteria to select 
participants. All the experimental procedures were approved by the research ethics committee of the 
institution. 
 
3. Results 
The results are presented in four separate sections. We start by describing briefly the results obtained 
in the three main elements that we elicited (self-report measures of past social behaviors, social 
preference games, and field situations). Then (in Section 3.4) we focus on the main research question 
of the paper, which is the extent to which the games explain the self-report measures and the field 
behaviors. 
 
3.1. Self-report measures of past social behaviors 
Figure 1 shows the distribution of total scores obtained by the participants on the SRA Scale. SRA 
responses are normally combined in one single SRA score, with no multi-factor structure. The means 
and standard deviations obtained for the different items are shown in Table C1 in Appendix C. 
 
[Insert Figure 1 here] 
 
As Figure 1 shows, there was a wide variety in the total SRA scores obtained, with more scores 
concentrated around the center of the distribution and a slight positive skew. 
 
3.2. Social preference games 

12 
 
Figures 2a and 2b consist of 4 panels each (Panels A, B, C, and D in Figure 2a, and Panels E, F, G, 
and H in Figure 2b), which together show the distribution of responses in the 8 different decisions 
obtained from the games. 
 
[Insert Figure 2a here] 
[Insert Figure 2b here] 
 
The results are broadly in line with the patterns usually reported in the literature.5 Panel A 
shows that 37% of the people acting as Player 1 in DG1 and DG2 gave £0 to Player 2. The rest made 
contributions greater than £0, with most people giving amounts between £1 and £5, and showing a 
high 25% spike at £5. Contributions above zero in this type of game are typically interpreted as 
altruism.6 Panel B shows a different picture for Player 1 in UG1. In that case, only 3% of the people 
allocated £0 to Player 2, with most people contributing amounts between £1 and £5, and a high 37% 
spike at £5. This difference between Panels A and B is typically interpreted as an anticipation of 
negative reciprocity in Player 2 that could lead him/her to reject small contributions. In Panel C, we 
can see that 14% of the people acting as Player 2 in UG1 rejected the allocations established by Player 
1; the rest of the participants accepted them. This rejection behavior is usually interpreted as negative 
reciprocity on the side of Player 2. Panel D shows approximately the same percentages as Panel C for 
the case of Player 2 in UG2. 
In Panel E, we find contributions scattered all across the range from £0 to £10 for Player 1 in 
TG1. The highest bar is at £2 (22%), with other bars above 10% at £0, £3, £5, and £10. Contributions 
above zero by Player 1 in this type of game are typically interpreted as an anticipation of positive 
reciprocity in Player 2 (or trust). In Panel F, we see the amounts sent back by Player 2 in TG1. They 
show a high spike of 47% at £0. The rest of the participants contributed varying amounts across the 
range from £1 to £15, most of them between £1 and £5. Contributions greater than zero here are 
typically interpreted as positive reciprocity by Player 2. Panel G shows a very similar pattern for 
Player 2 in TG2, with slightly fewer people at £0, more people between £1 and £5, and no one at £15. 
Finally, Panel H shows a tri-modal distribution of contributions in PGG, with two high bars at £0 
(21%) and £10 (21%), and a lower spike at £5 (13%). The remaining contributions are scattered 
across the whole range, with more contributions between £1 and £4 than between £6 and £9. Amounts 
greater than zero can be interpreted here as cooperative behavior. 
 
5 The variety of specific estimates found in the literature makes it difficult to discuss particular numerical 
results, but it is clearly possible to identify more general patterns typically observed in these games, which are 
very much in line with our results (see Camerer et al., 2003, for a review). 
6 Note, however, that this and the other behaviors observed may also be interpreted as inequality aversion. 

13 
 
Table 1 shows all the pairwise correlations (Spearman’s ρ) between the different game 
decisions. The majority of the correlations are statistically significant at the 5% level (32 out of 48, 
removing the correlations between the same variables) and positive (26 out of 32). All the negative 
correlations involve the behavior of Player 2 in the ultimatum games, reflecting that people who 
accept allocations in the ultimatum games are more likely to make lower contributions in the other 
game decisions. Some of the correlations are also relatively high, with 6 of them above 0.4. This 
shows that there was a relatively high degree of internal consistency in the decisions that the 
participants made in the games. 
 
[Insert Table 1 here] 
 
3.3. Field situations 
Figure 3 shows the distribution of behaviors in the five different field situations, organized in five 
different panels. It also shows an additional Panel F, which displays the three monetary situations 
together (Children's Charity, Environmental Charity and Lab Donation). The number of participants 
in each situation, after removing the missing data, was 50 in Boxes, 44 in Phone, 59 in Children's 
Charity, 73 in Environmental Charity, and 48 in Lab Donation.7 
 
[Insert Figure 3 here] 
 
As Panel A shows, 88% of the participants that faced the Boxes situation helped the research 
assistant to carry the boxes to the basement, and only 12% chose not to help. In Panel B, we see that 
people were more divided in the Phone situation: 70% of the people lent their phones to the research 
assistant and 30% did not. Panel C shows the distribution of contributions in the Children’s Charity 
situation. 42% of the participants did not give any money to the charity, and the other 58% gave 
varying amounts between £0.15 and £5, with higher bars at £1 and £2. Panel D shows that 67% of the 
people did not give anything to the Environmental Charity. The other 33% gave amounts between 
£0.05 and £2.10, with a higher spike at £1. Finally, in Panel E, we have the contributions made by the 
participants in the Lab Donation situation. 50% of the people did not give money to the lab, and the 
other 50% contributed amounts between £0.20 and £2.00, with higher bars at £1 and £2. 
 
 
3.4. Do the games explain the past and the field behaviors? 
 
7 The main reasons for missing data in the field situations were attrition (i.e., people not completing the three 
experimental sessions) and incidental factors of the situation that made it impossible for the research assistants 
to approach particular participants. 

14 
 
We now turn to the main question of whether the game decisions explain the self-report measures and 
the field behaviors. To being with, Table 2 contains pairwise correlations (Spearman’s ρ) between the 
eight game variables and the SRA scores. SRA responses are typically aggregated into one total score 
(SRAtotal), but to extend the analysis we calculated a second score (SRAmoney), including only the 
three items related to money (Items 4, 5 and 13). The game variables were then correlated with both 
scores. 
 
[Insert Table 2 here] 
 
Table 2 shows that three of the eight game variables are significantly correlated with total SRA 
scores at the 5% level, and only one of the eight variables is significantly correlated with the monetary 
SRA score. The significant correlations are relatively low, with no correlation greater than 0.2. The 
game decisions that correlate significantly with SRA scores are those of Player 1 in DG1 and DG2 
(labeled as DG1&2 P.1), Player 2 in TG2 (TG2 P.2), and the players in PGG. This suggests that these 
correlations with SRA scores may relate to motivations that have to do with altruism, positive 
reciprocity, or cooperative tendencies, which seems consistent with the types of items included in the 
SRA Scale. Overall, we interpret this as evidence that there is only a weak relationship between social 
preference games and SRA responses. 
Table 3 contains pairwise correlations (Spearman’s ρ) between the eight game variables and the 
five different field behaviors. We have also included three additional field variables that group 
together different field conditions: one joining the two situations related to helping (Box and Phone, 
with n = 94); one joining the three situations that had to do with donating money (Children's Charity, 
Environmental Charity and Lab Donation, with n = 180); and one putting all field situations together 
(n = 274). This increases considerably the power of our analyses, which is more limited in the 
individual conditions. Table 3 contains as well the average of each column (labeled as Average 1), 
representing the average correlation obtained in each field condition (individually or grouped); and it 
also contains the average of each column but excluding the two variables related to the behavior of 
player 2 in the ultimatum game, which are the only ones for which a negative correlation was found in 
Table1 (labeled as Average 2). 
 
[Insert Table 3 here] 
 
As Table 3 shows, only one out of the 64 correlations is statistically significant at the 5% level. 
It is a correlation of 0.54 between TG1 P.1 and behavior in the Children's Charity situation. This is 
likely to be a spurious correlation produced by randomness, given that it is only one out of 64 and that 
there is no theoretical reason to expect that this game variable would be correlated with this field 

15 
 
situation to a larger extent than some of the other game variables (e.g., DG1&2 P.1).8 None of the 
correlations obtained grouping the field variables to gain statistical power are significant. In addition, 
the correlations within the same variables change from positive to negative throughout the table with 
no apparent meaningful pattern, which suggests randomness and a lack of consistent relationships. 
Overall, we interpret this as evidence that there is no systematic relationship between the game 
decisions and the behavior in the field situations that we analyzed. It is also interesting to note that the 
overall average correlation obtained in our systematic lab-field experiment (0.03) is clearly lower than 
the overall correlation resulting from the papers that report significant correlations in our systematic 
review and meta-analysis of the previous literature (0.27).9 
To extend these initial correlations, we next present a regression analysis that puts together 
different game variables in the same models to show how much of the variance in the self-report 
measures and the field behaviors is explained by the games. 
Table 4 contains a summary of the regression results obtained for the SRA scores. The table 
consists of two columns, one of them for the results using the total SRA scores (SRAtotal) as the 
dependent variable and the other for the results using only the three items that have to do with money 
(SRAmoney). The results in each column are obtained from three separate linear (Ordinary Least 
Squares) regressions with the following entered as explanatory variables: (i) the game decisions in 
which we have responses from the full sample of participants (DG1&2 P.1, UG2 P.2, TG2 P.2, and 
PGG); (ii) the decisions made by only one half of the sample (UG1 P.1 and TG1 P.1); and (iii) the 
decisions made by the other half of the sample (UG1 P.2 and TG1 P.2). The coefficient shown in the 
table for each variable corresponds to the coefficient obtained for that variable in the corresponding 
regression. In addition to the coefficients, each column also shows the proportion of variance 
explained by the explanatory variables in each of the regression models, in the form of R2.10 
 
8 We also calculated p-values correcting for the multiple comparisons performed in Table 3 using six established 
methods: Bonferroni (1935), Holm (1979), Hochberg (1988), Hommel (1988), Benjamini and Hochberg (1995), 
and Benjamini and Yekutieli (2001). The last of these methods (Benjamini and Yekutieli 2001) takes explicitly 
into account dependence between the variables (which makes it similar to other possible approaches, such as the 
ones discussed in Romano and Wolf 2005, 2010; Romano Shaikh, and Wolf 2008; or List, Shaikh, and Xu 
2016). All six correction methods used further reduce the significance of the results to the extent of having no 
correlation that is statistically significant at the 5% level. Specifically, the p-value for the only significant 
correlation obtained in Table 3 (which is 0.0018 without correction) becomes 0. 0720 with all methods except 
Benjamini and Yekutieli (2001), where it becomes 0.3081. 
9 The 95% confidence interval of the overall average correlation obtained is [-0.12, 0.18], which shows that the 
average correlation of 0.27 obtained from the previous papers that report significant correlations is clearly 
rejected by our experiment. 
10 Note that the variables used in the second and third regressions in each column could never be included in the 
same model, because there is no overlap in observations between them. In addition, putting the variables of 

16 
 
 
[Insert Table 4 here] 
 
As Table 4 shows, only one variable in the first column and one in the second column appear as 
statistically significant at the 5% level (UG1 P.1 in the first column and TG2 P.2 in the second). In 
addition, two other variables in the first column of Table 4 (DG1&2 P.1 and TG2 P.2) are significant 
at the 10% level. These results are broadly in line with the correlations reported in Table 2. 
More importantly, the proportions of variance explained by the models in Table 4 are very low. 
All of them are below 0.07 and most of them are actually very close to zero. We interpret this as 
evidence that the game variables have a very limited power to explain the SRA scores. 
Table 5 contains a summary of the regression results obtained for the field behaviors. The table 
has seven columns, corresponding to the five different field situations plus two additional variables, 
one putting together the two situations related to helping (Boxes and Phone) and another joining the 
three situations that have to do with donating money (Children's Charity, Environmental Charity and 
Lab Donation). Each of the columns is constructed following the same three-regression structure 
explained for Table 5 with behavior in the field situation as the dependent variable. In the case of the 
situations with binary dependent variables (Boxes and Phone), the models are standard logistic 
regressions, and the measures of variance explained correspond to McFadden’s Pseudo-R2. 
 
[Insert Table 5 here] 
 
The results in Table 5 show that only two out of the 56 coefficients are statistically significant 
at the 5% level. One corresponds to the only correlation that was significant at 5% in Table 3 (TG1 
P.1 in the Children's Charity column), and the other corresponds to a correlation that was significant 
at 10% in Table 3 (TG2 P.2 in the Lab Donation column). As mentioned in reference to Table 3, this 
statistical significance is likely to be the result of spurious correlations. None of the coefficients 
obtained grouping the field variables to gain statistical power are significant. Overall, the results in 
Table 5 are broadly consistent with the correlations reported in Table 3. 
More substantially, the proportions of variance explained by the regression models are again 
very low. Most of them are below 0.07 (13 out of 21 overall, and 5 out of 6 in the regressions 
combining field situations to gain power) and many of them are close to zero. The variation in these 
proportions does not seem to follow any meaningful pattern and may also be the result of randomness. 
 
either of those two regressions together with the variables in the first model would sacrifice half of the 
observations contained in the sample. 

17 
 
We interpret these results as evidence that the game decisions have a very limited power to explain 
the field behaviors that have been investigated here.11 
Finally, it is also interesting to look at the correlations between the SRA scores and the field 
variables, which are all non-significant at the 5% level, generally small, and they change signs within 
the same variables with no apparent meaningful pattern. The average correlation with the total SRA 
scores is 0.02; with the items that are related to money it is 0.09. This does not affect the analyses 
presented above, but it is an interesting element to take into account when interpreting them and 
drawing conclusions. We elaborate further on this aspect in the next section. 
 
4. Discussion and conclusions 
We have presented the results of a large lab-field experiment that constitutes arguably the most 
systematic assessment of the external validity of experimental social preference games available to 
date. In particular, we elicited self-reported social behaviors performed in the past, decisions in seven 
experimental social preference games, and behaviors in five naturalistic field situations that we 
created. In this context, we investigated the extent to which the games can explain the self-report 
measures and the field behaviors. 
The overarching conclusion is that the games do a poor job explaining both the self-report 
measures and the field behaviors. It is particularly striking that they do not seem to explain to any 
significant extent any of the behaviors observed in the field. Our results seem to support the 
conclusions by Voors et al. (2012) that, in social preference games, “play in lab experiments has no 
predictive power for behavior in naturally occurring settings” (p. 310); or by Laury and Taylor (2008) 
that “one should be cautious when using the results from laboratory […] experiments to make 
inferences about altruism outside the laboratory” (p. 29). 
Evaluating the external validity of social preference games is, of course, a vast and difficult 
task, which requires a full research program and can potentially be tackled in a number of different 
ways. We do not claim to have established any firm or final conclusions about it with this single 
paper, but we do believe that our results are worrying and call for more, and more systematic, 
research on this issue. 
Our results are particularly troubling in light of our systematic review and meta-analysis of the 
previous lab-field literature related to the games that we used in the experiment (see Appendix A). 
 
11 The regressions discussed in this section have been further investigated employing a broad range of statistical 
methods, including: regressions with one game variable at a time, ‘stepwise’ regressions with game variables 
added in sequentially, robust standard errors, log-transforming the dependent variables, Tobit models, non-
parametric techniques, and two-stage approaches. The main results remain essentially the same across all these 
methods, and we have therefore opted to present the results in the simplest and clearest way possible. The 
outcomes of additional analyses are available from the authors upon request. 

18 
 
That review and meta-analysis shows that the typical study in this line of research reports the results 
of comparing one lab game to one specific, or several related, field variables. There is also a very 
wide diversity in the type of variables, methods, and samples used. And more importantly, the lack of 
a clear theoretical mapping of the context-free games into real-world situations, allows for very 
different variables to be rationalized as potentially related to the games (fishing shrimps, drinking 
beer, voting in school elections, etc.). This raises concerns about the possibility that some of the 
previous findings may be the result of spurious correlations. As explained in the introduction, there is 
a well-known bias to produce, submit, and publish significant results over insignificant ones, which 
can be particularly problematic if the studies are not sufficiently systematic. Even without taking this 
into account, our systematic review and meta-analysis show that only 39.5% of the lab-field 
correlations and 37.5% of the lab-field regressions reported show significant associations. 
For these reasons, we believe that more systematic studies investigating the external validity of 
social preference games are needed. Systematization can be achieved in different ways. The present 
study compared a variety of games with a variety of naturalistic field situations using the same sample 
of participants. Given that we focused on one-shot games and that we did not cover all existing social 
preference games, or all relevant field situations, our strategy could be extended in subsequent studies, 
for instance by exploring repeated games, looking into other game structures, or creating other field 
situations, but there are also other possibilities. One could, for example, compare the patterns 
observed in reciprocal (or altruistic, or trusting, or cooperative) behavior in the lab with patterns of 
reciprocal behavior occurring in different field environments (see List 2006; Stoop et al. 2012; 
Kessler 2013; Stoop 2013). 
One potential limitation of our approach is that there is (deliberately) no clear theoretical 
mapping from one specific game to one specific field situation. While we acknowledge this limitation, 
we also believe that such a mapping is virtually impossible to achieve with standard social preference 
games because of their artificiality and lack of context, unless field situations are stylized to be mere 
replications of the games. Under those circumstances, however, one could not answer the question of 
whether the games predict social behaviors that are relevant outside the lab. As discussed above, this 
lack of a clear theoretical mapping from games into field situations is a problem that plagues the 
previous literature. 
Another potential response to our results is that the issue of the external validity of social 
preference games does not really matter. For instance, Camerer (2011) argues that there is “consensus 
among most experimental economists that realism, generalizability, or external validity are not 
especially important” (p. 7). While we agree with many of the arguments in Camerer (2011), we 
respectfully disagree with this specific claim. In our experience, few experimental economists would 
feel comfortable with the idea that they are merely studying how people play games that have no 
relevance to the world outside the lab. That is also clearly not the spirit in which experimental results 
are presented and discussed in academic journals and conferences. We would even venture to say that 

19 
 
the interest that most experimental economists (let alone other types of economists) have in economic 
experiments comes mainly from external validity, in the sense of being able to learn something about 
human behavior beyond the specific games played in the lab (see arguments along these lines in Roth 
1988, 1995, 2008; Davis and Holt 1993; Loewenstein 1999; Starmer 1999a, b; Hertwig and Ortmann 
2001; Smith 2002, 2003; Harrison and List 2004; Bardsley 2005; Guala 2005; Schram 2005; Bardsley 
et al. 2009; Croson and Gachter 2010; Kessler and Vesterlund, 2015). 
We will finish by stressing two important points. First, we do not see our research as addressing 
any dispute about lab versus field experimentation. As noted by authors like Harrison and List (2004), 
List and Levitt (2007b), List and Reiley (2008), Roth (2008, 2015), Falk and Heckman (2009), 
Hennig-Schmidt et al. (2010), Camerer (2011), Harrison (2013), Al-Ubaydli and List (2015), Kagel 
(2015), or Kessler and Vesterlund (2015), among others, the relationship between lab and field 
experiments is a symbiotic one, with the two approaches complementing each other. Both lab and 
field experiments have their own strengths and weaknesses. Lab experiments, for instance, are 
important because of their ability to tightly control the environment and isolate causal relationships, to 
closely reproduce conditions of theoretical models, and to replicate past findings. Furthermore, they 
can provide insights into important behavioral patterns prior to moving into the field (Levitt and List 
2007b). There are indeed countless types of laboratory experiments in the social and behavioral 
sciences, and many of them have proved to be invaluable in uncovering behavioral principles of 
relevance for real-world phenomena outside the lab. Thus, our conclusions here are not at all on the 
adequacy of laboratory experimentation as a whole, but on the external validity of experimental social 
preference games, which constitute the bedrock of modern research on social preferences in 
economics and other related disciplines. 
Second, we do not see our study as dismissing the important contributions of the literature on 
social preferences. It is undeniable that the social preference paradigm has provided groundbreaking 
insights into phenomena like cooperation and punishment (e.g., Henrich et al. 2001; Andreoni and 
Miller 2002; Charness and Rabin, 2002; Fehr and Gachter 2000, 2002; Herrmann, Thoni, and Gachter 
2008). There is, however, a more specific issue of whether the particular type of lab experimentation 
being conducted in this paradigm is capturing the actual underpinnings of real-life social behavior, 
which may have to lead to a revision of some of the experimental methods used in the paradigm. 
It may still be too early to say how such a revision should be done, but part of the answer may 
involve bringing more context into the lab, and constructing experimental environments that more 
closely resemble naturalistic situations of interest. After all, experimental economics and psychology 
have widely documented that subtle differences in the context can have profound effects on how 
people behave (e.g., Ross and Ward 1996; Cherry et al. 2002; Ariely et al. 2006; List 2007; Bardsley 
2008; Stewart et al. 2015). This conclusion seems further reinforced by the fact that we did not find a 
significant correlation between our self-report measure of past social behaviors (the SRA scale) and 
behavior in our field situations. This is reminiscent of the person versus situation debate in personality 

20 
 
and social psychology, and of the conclusion that personality measures are a poor predictor of 
behavior in specific situations. On the other hand, personality measures do a much better job 
predicting the average of various behaviors over time (see Fleeson 2004). This suggest another 
potentially interesting avenue for future research on the external validity of social preference games, 
namely looking into the prediction of average social behaviors over longer time periods. In any case, 
it is important to keep in mind that, as pointed out by Harrison and List (2008), “it is not the case that 
abstract, context-free experiments provide more general findings if the context itself is relevant to the 
performance of the subjects” (p. 840). 
 
Acknowledgments 
Both authors contributed equally to this paper and are listed in alphabetical order. 
The authors are very grateful to Paul Dolan for his encouragement and support when they 
embarked on this project at the LSE. They thank Abigail Barr, Pablo Branas-Garza, Antonio Cabrales, 
Monica Capra, Juan Camilo Cardenas, Gary Charness, Yan Chen, Robin Cubitt, Susann Fiedler, 
Antonio Filippin, Urs Fischbacher, Toke Fosgaard, Simon Gachter, Andreas Glockner, Daniela 
Grieco, Benedikt Herrmann, Heather Kappes, Menusch Khadjavi, Andreas Lange, John List, Sara 
Machado, Robert Metcalfe, Rosemarie Nagel, Chris Olivola, Giovanni Ponti, Wojtek Przepiorka, 
Holger Rau, Paul Smeets, Jan Stoop, Fabio Tufano, Roberto Weber, and the participants at the SPI 
Hub Conference in Chicago, the ESA conference in Prague, the SPUDM conference at IESE Business 
School, the BDRM Conference at London Business School, the FUR Conference at Erasmus 
University Rotterdam, the London Experimental Workshop at Middesex University, and the NIBS 
conference at the University of Nottingham for helpful comments and suggestions. Matteo M. Galizzi 
gratefully acknowledges funding from the ESRC (Future Research Leader Fellowship 
ES/K001965/1); Daniel Navarro-Martinez acknowledges support from the Spanish Ministry of 
Economy and Competitiveness (MINECO-PSI2013-41909-P). 
 
References 
Abeler, J., and Nosenzo, D. (2015). Self-selection into laboratory experiments: Pro-social motives versus 
monetary incentives. Experimental Economics, 18, 195-214. 
Al-Ubaydli, O., and List, J.A. (2015). On the generalizability of experimental results in economics. In G. 
Frechette and A. Schotter (Eds.), Handbook of Experimental Economic Methodology. Oxford University 
Press: Oxford. 
Andreoni, J. (1988). Privately provided public goods in a large economy: The limits of altruism. Journal of 
Public Economics, 35, 57-73. 
Andreoni, J., and Miller, J.H. (2002). Giving according to GARP: An experimental test of the consistency of 
preferences for altruism. Econometrica, 70, 737-753. 

21 
 
Ariely, D., Loewenstein, G., and Prelec, D. (2006). Tom Sawyer and the construction of value. Journal of 
Economic Behavior & Organization, 60(1), 1-10. 
Ashraf, N., Bohnet, I., and Piankov, N. (2006). Decomposing trust and trustworthiness. Experimental 
Economics, 9, 193-208. 
Bandiera, O., Barankay, I., and Rasul, I. (2005). Social preferences and the response to incentives: Evidence 
from personnel data. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 917-962. 
Baker, M. (2016). 1,500 scientists lift the lid on reproducibility. Nature, 533(7604), 452-454. 
Baran, N.M., Sapienza, P., and Zingales, L. (2010). Can we infer social preferences from the lab? Evidence 
from the trust game. NBER Working Paper 15654. 
Bardsley, N. (2005). Experimental economics and the artificiality of alteration. Journal of Economic 
Methodology, 12, 239-251. 
Bardsley, N. (2008). Dictator Game giving: Altruism or artefact? Experimental Economics, 11(2), 122-133. 
Bardsley, N., Cubitt, R., Loomes, G., Moffatt, P., Starmer, C., and Sugden, R. (2009). Experimental economics: 
Rethinking the rules. Princeton University Press: Princeton, 
Barr, A., Packard, T., and Serra, D. (2014). Participatory accountability and collective action: experimental 
evidence from Albania. European Economic Review, 68, 250-269. 
Barr, A., and Serneels, P. (2009). Reciprocity in the workplace. Experimental Economics, 12(1), 99-112. 
Barr, A., and Zeitlin, A. (2010). Dictator games in the lab and in nature: External validity tested and investigated 
in Ugandan primary schools. CSAE Working Paper 2010-11. 
Benjamini, Y, and Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful approach 
to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B (Methodological), 57(1), 289-300. 
Benjanini, Y, and Yekutieli, D. (2001). The control of the false discovery rate in multiple testing under 
dependency. Annals of Statistics, 29(4), 1165-1188. 
Bekkers, R., and Wiepking, P. (2011). A literature review of empirical studies of philanthropy: Eight 
mechanisms that drive charitable giving. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 40(5), 924-973 
Bellemare, C., and Kroger, S. (2007). On representative social capital. European Economic Review, 51, 183-
202. 
Bellemare, C., Kroger, S., and van Soest, A. (2008). Measuring inequity aversion in a heterogeneous population 
using experimental decisions and subjective probabilities. Econometrica, 76(4), 815-839. 
Bellemare, C., Kroger, S, and van Soest, A. (2011). Preferences, intentions, and expectation violations: a large-
scale experiment with a representative subject pool. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 
78, 349-365. 
Benz, M. and Meier, S. (2008). Do people behave in experiments as in the field? Evidence from donations. 
Experimental Economics, 11, 268-281. 
Berg, J., Dickhaut, J.W., and McCabe, K.A. (1995). Trust, reciprocity, and social history. Games and Economic 
Behavior, 90, 166-93. 
Bernold, E., Gsottbauer, E., Ackermann, K., and Murphy, R. (2014). Social framing and cooperation: The roles 
and interaction of preferences and beliefs. ETH Zurich. 

22 
 
Bluffstone R., Dannenberg, A., Martinsson, P., Jha, P., and Bista, R. (2015). Cooperative behavior and common 
pool resources: experimental evidence from community forest user groups in Nepal. World Bank Group 
Policy Research Working Paper 7323. 
Bolton, G.E. and Ockenfels, A. (2000). ERC - A theory of equity, reciprocity, and competition. American 
Economic Review, 10, 122-42. 
Bonferroni, C.E. (1935). Il calcolo delle assicurazioni su gruppi di teste. Tipografia del Senato. 
Bouma, J., Bulte, E., and van Soest, D. (2008). Trust and cooperation: Social capital and community resource 
management. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 56, 155-166. 
Branas-Garza, P. (2007). Promoting helping behavior with framing in dictator games. Journal of Economic 
Psychology, 28(4), 477-486. 
Camerer, C. (2003). Behavioral game theory: Experiments in strategic interaction. Princeton University Press. 
Camerer, C. (2011). The promise and success of lab-field generalizability in experimental economics: A critical 
reply to Levitt and List. SSRN working paper. 
Camerer, C., and Thaler, R. (1995). Anomalies: Ultimatums, dictators and manners. Journal of Economic 
Perspectives, 9, 209-219. 
Cameron, L. (1999). Raising the stakes in the ultimatum game: Experimental evidence from Indonesia. 
Economic Inquiry, 37, 47-59. 
Cardenas, J.C. (2003). Real wealth and experimental cooperation: Experiments in the field lab. Journal of 
Development Economics, 104, 16-33. 
Cardenas, J.C., and Carpenter, J. (2005). Three themes on field experiments and economic development. In J. 
Carpenter, J. List and G. Harrison (Eds.), Field Experiments in Economics. JAI Press: Greenwich. 
Cardenas, J.C., Chong, A., and Nopo, H. (2013). Stated social behaviour and revealed actions: Evidence from 
six Latin American countries. Journal of Development Economics, 104, 16-33. 
Carpenter, J.P., Connolly, C., and Myers, C.K. (2008). Altruistic behavior in a representative dictator 
experiment. Experimental Economics, 11, 282-298. 
Carpenter, J.P., and Myers, C.K. (2010). Why volunteer? Evidence on the role of altruism, reputation, and 
incentives. Journal of Public Economics, 94, 911-920. 
Carpenter, J.P. and Seki, E. (2005). Competitive work environments and social preferences: Field experimental 
evidence from a Japanese fishing community. The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 5, 1-25. 
Carpenter, J.P., and Seki, E. (2011). Do social preferences increase productivity? Field experimental evidence 
from fishermen in Toyama Bay. Economic Inquiry, 49(2), 612-630. 
Carpenter, J.P., Verhoogen, E., and Burks, S. (2005). The effect of stakes in distribution experiments. 
Economics Letters, 86, 393-398. 
Castillo, M., and Carter, M.R. (2002). The economic impacts of altruism, trust and reciprocity: An experimental 
approach to social capital. AAE Staff Papers, University of Wisconsin-Madison. 
Charness, G. and Rabin, M. (2002). Understanding social preferences with simple tests. Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, 117, 817-69. 
Cherry, T.L., Frykblom, P., and Shogren, J.F. (2002). Hardnose the dictator. American Economic Review, 92(4), 
1218-1221. 

23 
 
Cleave, B., Nikiforakis, N., and Slonim, R. (2013). Is there selection bias in laboratory experiments? The case of 
social and risk preferences. Experimental Economics, 16, 372-382. 
Cox, J.C. (2004). How to identify trust and reciprocity. Games and Economic Behavior, 46, 260-281. 
Croson, R., and Gachter, S. (2010). The science of experimental economics. Journal of economic Behaviour and 
Organization, 73(1), 122-131. 
Dana, J.R., Cain, D., and Dawes, R. (2006). What you don’t know won’t hurt me: Costly (but quiet) exit in 
dictator game. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 100, 193-201. 
Dana, J.R., Weber, R., and Kuang, J. (2007). Exploiting moral wiggle room: Experiments demonstrating an 
illusory preference for fairness. Economic Theory, 33, 67-80. 
Darley, J.M., and Batson, C.D. (1973). “From Jerusalem to Jericho”: A study of situational and dispositional 
variables in helping behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 27(1), 100-108. 
Davis, D.D., and Holt, C.A. (1993). Experimental Economics. Princeton University Press: Princeton. 
de Oliveira, A.C.M, Croson, R.T.A., and Eckel, C.C. (2011). The giving type: Identifying donors. Journal of 
Public Economics, 95, 428-435. 
DellaVigna, S. (2009). Psychology and economics: Evidence from the field. Journal of Economic literature, 
47(2), 315-372. 
Dolan, P., and Galizzi, M.M. (2014). Getting policy-makers to listen to field experiments. Oxford Review of 
Economic Policy, 30(4). 725-752. 
Durkheim, E. (1893). The division of labor in society. Paris: Alcan. 
Eagly, A.H., and Crowley, M. (1986). Gender and helping behavior: A meta-analytic review of the social 
psychological literature. Psychological bulletin, 100(3), 283-308. 
Eckel, C.C., and Grossman, P.J. (1996). Altruism in anonymous dictator games. Games and Economic 
Behavior, 16, 181-191. 
Englmaier, F., and Gebhardt, G. (2016). Social dilemmas in the laboratory and in the field. Journal of Economic 
Behavior & Organization, 128, 85-96. 
Ermisch, J., Gambetta, D., Laurie, H., Siedler, T., and Uhrig, S.C.N. (2009). Measuring people’s trust. Journal 
of Royal Statistical Society A, 172(4), 749-769. 
Exadaktylos, F., Espin, A.M., and Branas-Garza, P. (2013). Experimental subjects are not different. Scientific 
reports, 3. 
Falk, A., Meier, S., and Zehnder, C. (2013). Do lab experiments misrepresent social preferences? The case of 
self-selected student samples. Journal of the European Economic Association, 11(4), 839-852. 
Falk, A. and Heckman, J. (2009). Lab experiments are a major source of knowledge in the social sciences. 
Science, 326, 535-538. 
Fehr, E. and Gachter, S. (2000). Cooperation and punishment in public goods experiments. American Economic 
Review, 90, 980-994. 
Fehr, E., and Gachter, S. (2002). Altruistic punishment in humans. Nature, 415, 137-140. 
Fehr, E., Fischbacher, U., Von Rosenbladt, B., Schupp, J., and Wagner, G.G. (2003). A nation-wide laboratory: 
Examining trust and trustworthiness by integrating behavioral experiments into representative surveys. 
CESIfo Working Paper No 866. 

24 
 
Fehr, E., and Leibbrandt, A. (2011). A field study on cooperativeness and impatience in the Tragedy of the 
Commons. Journal of Public Economics, 95, 1144-1155. 
Fehr, E., and Schmidt, K. (1999). A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation. Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, 114, 173-68. 
Fehrler, S., and Przepiorka, W. (2013). Charitable giving as a signal of trustworthiness: disentangling the 
signaling benefits of altruistic acts. Evolution and Human Behavior, 34, 139-145. 
Fischbacher, U. (2007). Z-Tree: Zurich Toolbox for Readymade Economic Experiments. Experimenter’s 
manual. Experimental Economics, 10, 171-178. 
Fischbacher, U., and Gachter, S. (2010). Social preferences, beliefs, and the dynamics of free riding in public 
good experiments. American Economic Review, 100, 541-556. 
Fleeson, W. (2004). Moving personality beyond the person-situation debate the challenge and the opportunity of 
within-person variability. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 13(2), 83-87. 
Forsythe, R., Horowitz, J.L., Savin, N.E., and Sefton, M. (1994). Fairness in Simple Bargaining Experiments. 
Games and Economic Behavior, 6, 347-369. 
Franzen, A., and Pointner, S. (2012). Anonymity in the dictator game revisited. Journal of Economic Behavior 
and Organization, 81(1), 74-81. 
Franzen, A., and Pointner, S. (2013). The external validity of giving in the dictator game: A field experiment 
using the misdirected letter technique. Experimental Economics, 16, 155-169. 
Gachter, S., Herrmann, B., and Thoni, C. (2004). Trust, voluntary cooperation and socio-economic background: 
Survey and experimental evidence. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 55, 505-531. 
Garbarino, E., and Slonim, R. (2009). The robustness of trust and reciprocity across a heterogeneous population. 
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 69(3), 226-240. 
Glaeser, E.L., Laibson, D.I., Scheinkman, J.A., and Soutter, C.L. (2000). Measuring trust. Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, 115, 811-846. 
Goeschl, T., Kettner, S.E., Lohse, J., and Schwieren, C. (2015). What do we learn from public good games 
about voluntary climate action? Evidence from an artefactual field experiment. University of Heidelberg, 
Department of Economics Discussion Paper 595. 
Guala, F. (2005). The Methodology of Experimental Economics. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge. 
Gurven, M., Winking, J. (2008). Collective action in action: prosocial behavior in and out of the laboratory. 
American Anthropologist, 110(2), 179-190. 
Guth, W., Schmittberger, R., and Schwarze, B. (1982). An experimental analysis of ultimatum bargaining. 
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 3, 367-88. 
Harrison, G.W., List, J.A., and Towe, C. (2007). Naturally occurring markets and exogenous laboratory 
experiments: A case study of risk aversion. Econometrica, 75(2), 433-458. 
Harrison, G.W., and List, J.A. (2004). Field experiments. Journal of Economic Literature, 42, 1009-1055. 
Harrison, G.W., and List, J.A. (2008). Naturally occurring markets and exogenous laboratory experiments: A 
case study of the winner’s curse. The Economic Journal, 118, 822-843. 
Hennig-Schmidt, H., Rockenbach, B., and Sadrieh, A. (2010). In search of workers’ real effort reciprocity: A 
field and laboratory experiment. Journal of the European Economic Association, 8(4), 817-837. 

25 
 
Henrich, J., Boyd, R., Bowles, S., Camerer, C., Fehr, E., Gintis, H., and McElreath, R. (2001). In search of 
homo economicus: Behavioral experiments in 15 small-scale societies. American Economic Review, 91, 
73-78. 
Henrich, J., Boyd, R., Bowles, S., Camerer, C.F., Fehr, E., Gintis, H., McElreath, R., Alvard, M., Barr, A., 
Ensminger, J., Henrich, N.S., Hill, K., Gil-White, F., Gurven, M., Marlowe, F.W., Patton, J.Q., and 
Tracer, D. (2005). “Economic main” in cross-cultural perspective: behavioral experiments in 15 small-
scale societies. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28(6), 795-815. 
Herrmann, B., Thoni, C. and Gachter, S. (2008). Anti-social punishment across societies. Science, 319, 1362-
1367. 
Hertwig, R., and Ortmann, A. (2001). Experimental practices in economics: A challenge for psychologists? 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24, 383-451. 
Hill, K., and Gurven, M. (2004). Economic experiments to examine fairness and cooperation among the Ache 
Indians of Paraguay. In J. Henrich, R. Boyd, S. Bowles, C. Camerer, E. Fehr, and H. Gintis (Eds.), 
Foundations of Human Sociality: Economic Experiments and Ethnographic Evidence from Fifteen 
Small-Scale Societies. Oxford University Press. 
Hochberg, Y. (1988). A sharper Bonferroni procedure for multiple tests of significance. Biometrika, 75(4), 800-
802. 
Hoffman, E., McCabe, K., Schachat, J., and Smith, V. (1994). Preferences, property rights, and anonymity in 
bargaining games. Games and Economic Behavior, 7, 346-380. 
Hoffman, E., McCabe, K., and Smith, V. (1996). Social distance and other regarding behavior in dictator games. 
American Economic Review, 86(3), 653-660. 
Holm, H.J., and Danielson, A. (2005). Tropic trust versus Nordic trust: Experimental evidence from Tanzania 
and Sweden. The Economic Journal, 115(503), 505-532. 
Holm, S. (1979). A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, 
6(2), 65-70. 
Hommel, G. (1988). A stagewise rejective multiple test procedure based on a modified Bonferroni test. 
Biometrika, 75(2), 383-386. 
Hopfensitz, A., Miguel-Florensa, J. (2015). Mill ownership and farmer’s cooperative behavior: the case of Costa 
Rica coffee farmers. Toulouse School of Economics. 
Ioannidis, J.P. (2005). Why most published research findings are false. PLoS Med, 2, e124. 
Kagel, J.H. (2015). Laboratory experiments: The lab in relationship to field experiments, field data, and 
economic theory. In G. Frechette and A. Schotter (Eds.), Handbook of Experimental Economic 
Methodology. Oxford University Press: Oxford. 
Karlan, D.S. (2005). Using experimental economics to measure social capital and predict financial decisions. 
American Economic Review, 95, 1688-1699. 
Kessler, J.B. (2013). When will there be gift exchange? Addressing the lab-field debate with a laboratory gift 
exchange experiment. Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania. 
Kessler, J.B., and Vesterlund, L. (2015). The external validity of laboratory experiments: The misleading 
emphasis on quantitative effects. In G. Frechette and A. Schotter (Eds.), Handbook of Experimental 
Economic Methodology. Oxford University Press: Oxford. 

26 
 
Kolstad, J.R., and Lindkvist, I. (2012). Pro-social preferences and self-selection into the public health sector: 
evidence from an economic experiment. Health Policy and Planning, 1-8. 
Krawczyk, M. (2011). What brings subjects to the lab? Experimental Economics, 14(4), 482-489. 
Lagarde, M., and Blaauw, D. (2014). Pro-social preferences and self-selection into jobs: evidence from South 
Africa nurses. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 107, 136-152. 
Lamba, S. and Mace, R. (2011). Demography and ecology drive variation in cooperation across human 
populations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 108, 14426-14430. 
Laury, S.K., and Taylor, L.O. (2008). Altruism spillovers: Are behaviors in context-free experiments predictive 
of altruism toward a naturally occurring public good? Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 
65, 9-29. 
Leibbrandt, A. (2012). Are social preferences related to market performance? Experimental Economics, 15, 589-
603. 
Levine, R.V., Norenzayan, A., and Philbrick, K. (2001). Cross-cultural differences in helping strangers. Journal 
of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 32(5), 543-560. 
Levitt, S., and List, J.A. (2007a). What do laboratory experiments measuring social preferences reveal about the 
real world. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21, 153-174. 
Levitt, S., and List, J.A. (2007b). Viewpoint: On the generalizability of lab behaviour to the field. Canadian 
Journal of Economics, 40(2), 347-370. 
Levitt, S. and List, J.A. (2008). Homo economicus evolves. Science, 319, 909-910. 
Levitt, S., List, J.A., and Reiley, D.H. (2010). What happens in the field stays in the field: Exploring whether 
professionals play minimax in laboratory experiments. Econometrica, 78(4), 1413-1434. 
Lewin, K., Lippitt, R., and White, R.K. (1939). Patterns of aggressive behavior in experimentally created “social 
climates”. Journal of Social Psychology, 10, 171-299. 
Lichtenstein, S., and Slovic, P. (Eds.). (2006). The construction of preference. Cambridge University Press. 
List, J.A. (2004). Young, selfish, and male: field evidence on social preferences. Economic Journal, 114, 121-
149. 
List, J.A. (2006). The behavioralist meets the market: Measuring social preferences and reputation effects in 
actual transactions. Journal of Political Economy. 114(1), 1-37. 
List, J.A. (2007). On the interpretation of giving in Dictator Games. Journal of Political Economy, 115(3), 482-
493. 
List, J.A. (2008). Introduction to field experiments in economics with applications to the economics of charity. 
Experimental Economics, 11, 203-212. 
List, J.A. (2009). Social preferences: Some thoughts from the field. Annual Review of Economics, 1, 563-579. 
List, J.A. (2011). The market for charitable giving. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(2), 157-180. 
List, J.A., and Cherry T.L. (2008). Examining the role of fairness in high stakes allocation decisions. Journal of 
Economic Behavior & Organization 65(1), 1-8. 
List, J.A., and Reiley, D. (2008). Field experiments in economics. In S.N. Durlauf and L.E. Blume (Eds.), The 
New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Palgrave Macmillan Publishing. 
List, J.A., Shaikh, A.M., and Yang, X. (2016). Multiple hypothesis testing in experimental economics. NBER 
Working Paper 21875. 

27 
 
Loewenstein, G. (1999). Experimental economics from the vantage-point of behavioural economics. The 
Economic Journal, 109, 25-34. 
Macrae, C.N., and Johnston, L. (1998). Help, I need somebody: Automatic action and inaction. Social 
Cognition, 16(4), 400-417. 
Maniadis, Z., Tufano, F., and List, J.A. (2014). One swallow doesn't make a summer: New evidence on 
anchoring effects. The American Economic Review, 104, 277-290. 
Markus, A.A.M., and Potgieter, J.L. (2015). Will you give him some money? External validity of social 
preferences in dictator games. University of Utrecht Bachelor’s Thesis. 
Miguel, E., Camerer, C.F., Casey, K., Cohen, J., Esterling, K.M., Gerber, A., Glennerster, R., Green, D.P., 
Humphreys, M., Imbens, G., Laitin, D., Madon, T., Nelson, L., Nosek, B.A., Petersen, M., Sedlmayr, R., 
Simmons, J.P., Simonsohn, U., and Van der Laan, M. (2014). Promoting transparency in social science 
research. Science, 343(6166), 30-31. 
Moher, D., Liberati, A., Teztlaff, J., Altmann, D.G., The PRISMA Group (2009). Preferred Reporting Items for 
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses: the PRISMA Statement. PLoS Medicine 6(7): e1000097. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed1000097. 
Munier, B., and Zaharia, C. (2003). High stakes and acceptance behavior in ultimatum bargaining: A 
contribution from an international experiment. Theory and Decision, 53, 187-207. 
Ortmann, A., Fitzgerald, J., and Boeing, C. (2000). Trust, reciprocity, and social history: A re-examination. 
Experimental Economics, 3, 81-100. 
Oosterbeek, H., Sloof, R., and van de Kuilen, G. (2004). Cultural differences in ultimatum game experiments: 
Evidence from a meta-analysis. Experimental Economics, 7, 171-188. 
Open Science Collaboration. (2015). Estimating the reproducibility of psychological science. Science, 
349(6251), aac4716. 
Oppenheimer, D.M., and Olivola, C.Y. (Eds.). (2011). The science of giving: Experimental approaches to the 
study of charity. Psychology Press. 
Palacios-Huerta, I., and Volij, O. (2008). Experientia docet: Professionals play minimax in laboratory 
experiments. Econometrica, 76(1), 71-115. 
Riedl, A., and Smeets, P. (2015). Why do investors hold socially responsible mutual funds? University of 
Maastricht. 
Roe, B.E., and Just, D.R. (2009). Internal and external validity in economics research: Trade-offs between 
experiments, field experiments, natural experiments, and field data. American Journal of Agricultural 
Economics, 91(5), 1266-1271. 
Romano, J., Shaikh, A.M., and Wolf, M. (2008). Control of the false discovery rate under dependence using the 
bootstrap and subsampling. Test, 17(3), 417-442. 
Romano, J., and Wolf, M. (2005). Exact and approximate stepdown methods for multiple hypothesis testing. 
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 100(469), 94-108. 
Romano, J., and Wolf, M. (2010). Balanced control of generalized error rates. The Annals of Statistics, 38(1), 
598-633. 
Rosenthal, R. (1979). The file drawer problem and tolerance for null results. Psychological Bulletin, 86, 638-
641. 

28 
 
Ross, L., and Ward, A. (1996). Naive realism in everyday life: Implications for social conflict and 
misunderstanding. In T. Brown, E.S. Reed and E. Turiel (Eds.), Values and knowledge (pp. 103-135). 
Erlbaum: Hillsdale, NJ. 
Roth, A.E. (1988). Laboratory experimentation in economics: A methodological overview. Economic Journal, 
98, 974-1031. 
Roth, A.E. (1995). Introduction to experimental economics. In J. Kagel and A.E. Roth (Eds.), The Handbook of 
Experimental Economics (pp. 3-110). Princeton University Press: Princeton. 
Roth, A.E. (2008). What have we learned from market design? Economic Journal, 118, 285-310. 
Roth, A.E. (2015). Is experimental economics living up to its promise? In G. Frechette and A. Schotter (Eds.), 
Handbook of Experimental Economic Methodology. Oxford University Press: Oxford. 
Ruffle, B.J., and Sosis, R. (2007). Does it pay to pray? Costly ritual and cooperation. The B.E. Journal of 
Economic Analysis and Policy, 7(1) (Contributions), Article 18. 
Rushton, J.P., Chrisjohn, R.D., and Fekken G.C. (1981). The altruistic personality and the self-report altruism 
scale. Personality and Individual Differences, 2, 293-302. 
Rustagi, D., Engel, S., and Kosfeld, M. (2010). Conditional cooperation and costly monitoring explain success 
in forest commons management. Science, 330, 961-965. 
Schram, A. (2005). Artificiality: The tension between external and internal validity in economic experiments. 
Journal of Economic Methodology, 12, 225-237. 
Serra, D., Serneels, P., and Barr, A. (2010). Intrinsic motivations and the non-profit health sector: Evidence 
from Ethiopia. CSAE Working Paper 2010-04. 
Simmons, J.P., Nelson, L.D., and Simonsohn, U. (2011). False-positive psychology: Undisclosed flexibility in 
data collection and analysis allows presenting anything as significant. Psychological Science, 22, 1359-
1366. 
Simonsohn, U., Nelson, L.D., and Simmons, J.P. (2014). P-curve and effect size: Correcting for publication bias 
using only significant results. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 9, 666-681. 
Slonim, R., and Roth, A. (1998). Learning in high stakes ultimatum games: An experiment in the Slovak 
Republic. Econometrica. 66, 569-596. 
Slonim, R., Wang, C., Garbarino, E., and Merrett, D. (2013). Opting-in: Participation bias in economic 
experiments. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 90, 43-70. 
Slovic, P. (1995). The construction of preference. American psychologist, 50(5), 364-371. 
Smith, A. (1759). The theory of moral sentiments. A. Millar: London. 
Smith, V.L. (2002). Method in experiment: Rhetoric and reality. Experimental Economics, 5, 91-110. 
Smith, V.L. (2003). Constructivist and ecological rationality. American Economic Review, 93(2), 465-508. 
Starmer, C. (1999a). Experimental economics: Hard science or wasteful tinkering? Economic Journal, 109, 5-
15. 
Starmer, C. (1999b). Experiments in economics: Should we trust the dismal scientists in white coats? Journal of 
Economic Methodology, 6, 1-30. 
Stewart, N., Reimers, S., and Harris, A. J. (2015). On the origin of utility, weighting, and discounting functions: 
How they get their shapes and how to change their shapes. Management Science, 61, 687-705. 

29 
 
Stoop, J., Noussair, C.N., and van Soest, D. (2012). From the lab to the field: Cooperation among fishermen. 
Journal of Political Economy, 120(6), 1027-1056. 
Stoop, J. (2013). From the lab to the field: Envelopes, dictators and manners. Experimental Economics. 
Torres-Guevara, L.E., Schluter, A. (2016). External validity of artefactual field experiments: a study on 
cooperation, impatience, and sustainability in an artisanal fishery in Colombia. Ecological Economics, 
128, 187-201. 
Triplett, N. (1898). The dynamogenic factors in pacemaking and competition. American Journal of Psychology, 
9, 507-533. 
Voors, M., Bulte, E., Kontoleon, A., List, J.A., and Turley, T. (2011). Using artefactual field experiments to 
learn about the incentives for sustainable forest use in developing economies. American Economic 
Review, 101(3), 329-333. 
Voors, M., Turley, T., Kontoleon, A., Bulte, E., and List, J.A. (2012). Exploring whether behavior in context-
free experiments is predictive of behavior in the field: Evidence from lab and field experiments in rural 
Sierra Leone. Economics Letters, 114, 308-311 
Zelmer, J. (2003). Linear public goods experiments: A meta-analysis. Experimental Economics, 6, 299-310. 

30 
 
Appendix A: Systematic review and meta-analysis methodology 
 
In conducting and reporting our systematic review and meta-analysis, we followed as closely as 
possible the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) 
checklist and guidelines (Moher et al., 2009), as explained below. 
 
A.1. Search strategy and key terms 
Google Scholar was searched in July-November 2016 using the following combinations of key terms: 
 
1) 
“social preference” AND “game” AND “external validity” (field TX all text) OR 
2) 
“dictator game” AND “external validity” (field TX all text) OR 
3) 
“ultimatum game” AND “external validity” (field TX all text) OR 
4) 
“trust game” AND “external validity” (field TX all text) OR 
5) 
“public good game” AND “external validity” (field TX all text) OR 
6) 
“social preference” AND “game” AND “field behavior” (field TX all text) OR 
7) 
“dictator game” AND “field behavior” (field TX all text) OR 
8) 
“ultimatum game” AND “field behavior” (field TX all text) OR 
9) 
“trust game” AND “field behavior” (field TX all text) OR 
10) “public good game” AND “field behavior” (field TX all text). 
 
A.2. Selection and exclusion criteria 
The authors reviewed and assessed all the references systematically, following a two-stage strategy. In 
the first stage, the inclusion criteria were applied to the title, the keywords, and the abstract; in the 
second stage, the criteria were applied to the abstract and the full text. All the papers were 
independently assessed for inclusion by each of the authors. Differences in opinions between the 
authors were solved through discussion. 
The two stages worked as follows. In the first stage, a study was included only if it satisfied the 
following three criteria: 
 
1) 
The study was available (no broken link). 
2) 
The study was written in English. 
3) 
The study presented original empirical evidence. This criterion excluded theoretical or 
conceptual papers, reviews, commentaries, editorials, letters, or similar items. 
 
Each article was sequentially evaluated against the three criteria, starting with criterion one and 
ending on criterion three. Whenever a criterion was not met, the article was excluded. 

31 
 
In the second stage, the abstract and the full text of the studies shortlisted in the first stage were 
screened and evaluated according to a further set of two criteria, so that a study was included only if it 
satisfied both of the following criteria: 
 
1) 
The study looked into external validity using a within-subject design, i.e. considering both 
lab games and field behaviors for the same pool of subjects. 
2) 
The study considered a dictator game, an ultimatum game, a trust game, or a public good 
game (or combinations of those games). This criterion focused the systematic review and 
meta-analysis on the games used in our experiment. 
 
Each article was sequentially evaluated against the two criteria. Whenever either criterion was 
not met, the article was excluded. All articles meeting both inclusion criteria were retrieved and 
included in our meta-analysis. 
We included both published and unpublished studies, for example studies in working paper or 
in dissertation form. If both published and unpublished versions of the study were available, we 
considered the published version. If different dates of the unpublished versions were available, we 
considered the most recent one. 
To ensure that the set of studies retrieved was exhaustive and comprehensive, for each included 
study we also back-tracked and screened all the references cited in the article, applying the same 
inclusion criteria explained above. 
 
A.3. Search results 
The initial Google Scholar search resulted in a total number of n = 5,723 entries. After duplicates 
were removed, the resulting number of studies was n = 972. We then excluded the papers that were 
not accessible (n = 39), were not written in English (n = 1), or did not present any original evidence (n 
= 380). A total of 552 articles met all three criteria in this first stage of our selection strategy. 
The abstract and the full text of the 552 studies shortlisted were then screened and evaluated. 
We first excluded the studies which did not use a within-subject design (i.e. combining lab games and 
field behaviors for the same pool of subjects) (n = 488). Then we excluded the studies that did not 
consider the dictator game, the ultimatum game, the trust game, or the public good game (n = 29). A 
total of n = 35 studies matched all the inclusion criteria in this second stage. 
Back-tracking, screening, and evaluating the references cited in these 35 articles against the 
same inclusion criteria retrieved further n = 4 studies. So, at the end of the whole process, the 
systematic review resulted in a total of n = 39 selected studies. 
Table A1 reports a complete list of these papers. Of the n = 39 papers, n = 29 are published: n = 
27 in scientific journals (mainly economics journals, n = 23), and n = 2 in books. One study is a 
Bachelor’s thesis, and n = 9 are in working paper form. 

32 
 
The selection process and the number of papers excluded and included in each stage are 
summarised in the PRISMA flow chart in Figure A1. 
 
[Insert Table A1 here] 
[Insert Figure A1 here] 
 
A.4. Meta-analysis 
We then performed a meta-analysis of the n = 39 papers resulting from our systematic review, based 
on the information reported in the papers. First, each study was closely inspected and a number of 
pieces of information were extracted and collated into Table A1. In particular, Table A1 includes 
information on: the type and number of subjects, the setting, the lab games and field variables used, 
and whether or not a significant association between the lab and the field was found (categorized as 
“Yes”, “No”, “Marginally significant”, or “Mixed evidence”). 
Second, we systematically extracted a number of statistical figures and collated them into an 
Excel file, included as a supplementary material. The Excel file consists of three different 
spreadsheets, as detailed below. 
The first spreadsheet reports all the lab-field correlations reported in each study. In particular, it 
specifies whether or not each study reports the relevant correlation information and, if so, it reports 
the lab games used and the measures derived from them, the field variables analysed, the number of 
subjects, the correlations reported, the type of correlation (e.g., “Pearson”, “Spearman”), the p-value, 
and also additional descriptive notes about the studies. 
The second spreadsheet reports all the lab-field regressions reported in each study. In particular, 
it specifies the source of the information (i.e. the relevant table and page within the paper), the lab 
games used and the measures derived from them, the field variables analysed, the type of regression 
(e.g., “OLS”, “Probit”), whether or not the regression has controls and how many, the estimated 
coefficients, the standard errors, the corresponding values of the statistics, the reported level of 
significance, the p-values (whenever reported in the paper), the number of subjects, the associated 
degrees of freedom, and also descriptive notes about the studies. The information that was missing in 
the papers but was possible to reconstruct from the available information is highlighted in red. 
The third spreadsheet reports several summary statistics based on the lab-field correlation and 
regression figures collated in the other two spreadsheets. Specifically, we calculated, for each paper, 
the proportion of correlation and regression results reported that are significant at the standard 5% 
level, and also the average correlation reported. We also calculated the overall proportion of papers 
reporting correlation information (46.3%), the overall proportions of reported lab-field correlations 
and lab-field regressions that are statistically significant at the standard 5% level (39.7% and 37.5% 
respectively), and the overall average lab-field correlation obtained in all the papers (0.14) and in the 
papers that report significant correlations (0.27). 
 

33 
 
Appendix B: The Self-Report Altruism (SRA) Scale 
 
INSTRUCTIONS: Tick the category on the right that conforms to the frequency with which you have 
carried out the following acts. 
 
 
Never 
Once 
More 
than 
once 
Often 
Very 
often 
1. I have helped push a stranger’s car out of the 
snow. 
 
 
 
 
 
2. I have given directions to a stranger. 
 
 
 
 
 
3. I have made change for a stranger. 
 
 
 
 
 
4. I have given money to a charity. 
 
 
 
 
 
5. I have given money to a stranger who needed it 
(or asked me for it). 
 
 
 
 
 
6. I have donated goods or clothes to a charity. 
 
 
 
 
 
7. I have done volunteer work for a charity. 
 
 
 
 
 
8. I have donated blood. 
 
 
 
 
 
9. I have helped carry a stranger’s belongings 
(books, parcels, etc.). 
 
 
 
 
 
10. I have delayed an elevator and held the door 
open for a stranger. 
 
 
 
 
 
11. I have allowed someone to go ahead of me in a 
lineup (at Xerox machine, in the supermarket). 
 
 
 
 
 
12. I have given a stranger a lift in my car. 
 
 
 
 
 
13. I have pointed out a clerk’s error (in a bank, at 
the supermarket) in undercharging me for an item. 
 
 
 
 
 
14. I have let a neighbour whom I didn’t know too 
well borrow an item of some value to me (e.g., a 
dish, tools, etc.). 
 
 
 
 
 
15. I have bought ‘charity’ Christmas cards 
deliberately because I knew it was a good cause. 
 
 
 
 
 
16. I have helped a classmate who I did not know 
that well with a homework assignment when my 
knowledge was greater than his or hers. 
 
 
 
 
 
17. I have, before being asked, voluntarily looked 
after a neighbour’s pets or children without being 
paid for it. 
 
 
 
 
 
18. I have offered to help a handicapped or elderly 
stranger across a street. 
 
 
 
 
 
19. I have offered my seat on a bus or train to a 
stranger who was standing. 
 
 
 
 
 
20. I have helped an acquaintance to move 
households. 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 
Appendix C: Additional tables 
 
 
Table C1: Means and standard deviations (SD) SRA Scale 
Item 
Mean 
SD 
1 
1.65 
1.01 
2 
3.86 
1.06 
3 
3.28 
0.97 
4 
1.35 
0.82 
5 
2.40 
1.13 
6 
2.42 
1.14 
7 
2.07 
1.22 
8 
3.65 
0.94 
9 
2.03 
1.24 
10 
2.66 
1.25 
11 
3.79 
0.97 
12 
4.09 
0.80 
13 
2.52 
1.25 
14 
2.69 
1.17 
15 
3.35 
0.90 
16 
2.65 
1.09 
17 
3.40 
1.05 
18 
3.29 
1.21 
19 
1.77 
1.20 
20 
2.91 
1.14 
Total 
55.83 
10.98 
 
 

35 
 
Tables and figures 
 
 
Table 1: Pairwise correlations between game decisions (Spearman’s ρ) 
 
DG1&2 
P.1 
UG1 
P.1 
UG1 
P.2 
UG2 
P.2 
TG1 
P.1 
TG1 
P.2 
TG2 
P.2 
PGG 
DG1&2 
P.1 
1.00*** 
0.48*** 
-0.09 
-0.18*** 
0.26*** 
0.32*** 
0.50*** 
0.36*** 
UG1 
P.1 
0.48*** 
1.00*** 
- 
-0.20** 
0.26*** 
- 
0.35*** 
0.25*** 
UG1 
P.2 
-0.09 
- 
1.00*** 
0.09 
- 
0.00 
0.05 
0.00 
UG2 
P.2 
-0.18*** 
-0.20** 
0.09 
1.00*** 
-0.02 
-0.11 
-0.15** 
-0.09 
TG1 
P.1 
0.26*** 
0.26*** 
- 
-0.02 
1.00*** 
- 
0.43*** 
0.25*** 
TG1 
P.2 
0.32*** 
- 
0.00 
-0.11 
- 
1.00*** 
0.38*** 
0.30*** 
TG2 
P.2 
0.50*** 
0.35*** 
0.05 
-0.15** 
0.43*** 
0.38*** 
1.00*** 
0.34*** 
PGG 
0.36*** 
0.25*** 
0.00 
-0.09 
0.25*** 
0.30*** 
0.34*** 
1.00*** 
Notes: 
“*”, “**” and “***” stand for statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively. 
“-” indicates that the correlation cannot be computed because there is no overlap between participants in the pair 
of variables. 
DG1&2 P.1 stands for Player 1 in Dictator Games 1 and 2; UG1 P.1 for Player 1 in Ultimatum Game 1; UG1 P.2 
and UG2 P.2 for Player 2 in Ultimatum Games 1 and 2 respectively; TG1 P.1 for Player 1 in Trust Game 1; TG1 
P.2 and TG2 P.2 for Player 2 in Trust Games 1 and 2 respectively; and PGG for the Public Good Game. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
 
Table 2: Correlations between game decisions and SRA scores (Spearman’s ρ) 
SRAtotal 
SRAmoney 
DG1&2 P.1 
0.20*** 
0.04 
UG1 P.1 
0.16* 
0.06 
UG1 P.2 
-0.05 
0.07 
UG2 P.2 
-0.05 
0.02 
TG1 P.1 
0.03 
0.03 
TG1 P.2 
0.06 
-0.01 
TG2 P.2 
0.20*** 
0.15** 
PGG 
0.14** 
0.00 
Notes: 
“*”, “**” and “***” stand for statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively. 
SRAtotal stands for the total Self-Report Altruism (SRA) score; SRAmoney for a score including only the SRA 
items related to money. 
DG1&2 P.1 stands for Player 1 in Dictator Games 1 and 2; UG1 P.1 for Player 1 in Ultimatum Game 1; UG1 P.2 
and UG2 P.2 for Player 2 in Ultimatum Games 1 and 2 respectively; TG1 P.1 for Player 1 in Trust Game 1; TG1 
P.2 and TG2 P.2 for Player 2 in Trust Games 1 and 2 respectively; and PGG for the Public Good Game. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

37 
 
 
Table 3: Correlations between game decisions and field behaviors (Spearman’s ρ) 
 
Boxes 
Phone 
Children's 
Charity 
Environ. 
Charity 
Lab 
Donation 
All 
Helping 
All 
Donations 
All 
Conditions 
DG1&2 P.1 
0.04 
0.06 
-0.25* 
0.20* 
-0.05 
0.05 
-0.06 
-0.06 
UG1 P.1 
0.18 
0.27 
0.18 
0.04 
0.15 
0.21 
0.15 
0.12 
UG1 P.2 
-0.09 
0.14 
0.22 
-0.05 
-0.06 
0.08 
0.04 
0.07 
UG2 P.2 
-0.13 
0.11 
0.02 
-0.13 
0.06 
0.05 
-0.04 
-0.01 
TG1 P.1 
0.15 
0.28 
0.54*** 
0.00 
-0.12 
0.22 
0.15 
0.13 
TG1 P.2 
0.35 
-0.08 
0.05 
-0.12 
-0.24 
0.1 
-0.11 
-0.07 
TG2 P.2 
0.18 
0.27* 
-0.18 
0.13 
0.29* 
0.21* 
0.03 
0.03 
PGG 
0.14 
-0.04 
-0.03 
0.02 
-0.08 
0.04 
-0.02 
0 
Average 1 
0.10 
0.13 
0.07 
0.01 
-0.01 
0.12 
0.02 
0.03 
Average 2 
0.19 
0.15 
0.05 
0.05 
-0.01 
0.14 
0.02 
0.03 
Notes: 
“*”, “**” and “***” stand for statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively. 
DG1&2 P.1 stands for Player 1 in Dictator Games 1 and 2; UG1 P.1 for Player 1 in Ultimatum Game 1; UG1 P.2 
and UG2 P.2 for Player 2 in Ultimatum Games 1 and 2 respectively; TG1 P.1 for Player 1 in Trust Game 1; TG1 
P.2 and TG2 P.2 for Player 2 in Trust Games 1 and 2 respectively; and PGG for the Public Good Game. 
All Helping, All Donations, and All Conditions group together, respectively, the two conditions related to 
helping, the three conditions related to giving money, and all conditions. 
Average 1 is the overall average of the column; Average 2 is the average excluding the variables related to 
player 2 in the ultimatum games. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

38 
 
 
Table 4: Regression analysis SRA scores 
SRAtotal SRAmoney 
DG1&2 
0.61* 
-0.01 
UG1 P.1 
1.25** 
0.12 
UG1 P.2 
-0.78 
0.41 
UG2 P.2 
-1.16 
0.01 
TG1 P.1 
-0.16 
-0.00 
TG1 P.2 
0.02 
-0.03 
TG2 P.2 
0.65* 
0.18** 
PGG 
0.18 
-0.01 
Var. Explained 1 
0.06 
0.02 
Var. Explained 2 
0.04 
0.01 
Var. Explained 3 
0.00 
0.01 
Notes: 
The numbers reported in the first eight rows are regression coefficients from standard OLS regressions. 
“*”, “**” and “***” stand for statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively. 
SRAtotal and SRAmoney are the dependent variables, and they stands for the total Self-Report Altruism (SRA) 
score and a score including only the SRA items related to money. 
DG1&2 P.1 stands for Player 1 in Dictator Games 1 and 2; UG1 P.1 for Player 1 in Ultimatum Game 1; UG1 
P.2 and UG2 P.2 for Player 2 in Ultimatum Games 1 and 2 respectively; TG1 P.1 for Player 1 in Trust Game 1; 
TG1 P.2 and TG2 P.2 for Player 2 in Trust Games 1 and 2 respectively; and PGG for the Public Good Game. 
Var. Explained 1, 2 and 3 stand for the proportions of variance explained (R2) in the three different regressions 
conducted for each dependent variable: one using as explanatory variables the game decisions for which we 
have observations for the full sample of participants (DG1&2 P.1, UG2 P.2, TG2 P.2, PGG); a second one with 
the variables with observations for half of the participants (UG1 P.1 and TG1 P.1); and a third one with the 
variables with observations for the other half of the participants (UG1 P.2 and TG1 P.2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

39 
 
 
Table 5: Regression analysis field behaviors 
 
Boxes 
Phone 
Children's 
Charity 
Environ. 
Charity 
Lab 
Donation 
All 
Helping 
All 
Donations 
DG1&2 P.1 
-0.07 
-0.08 
-0.11 
0.03 
-0.06 
-0.09 
-0.04 
UG1 P.1 
0.24 
0.11 
0.07 
0.01 
0.14 
0.19 
0.03 
UG1 P.2 
142.81 
0.59 
0.76 
-0.08 
-0.08 
0.79 
0.08 
UG2 P.2 
-15.37 
0.60 
0.11 
-0.19 
-0.00 
0.54 
-0.05 
TG1 P.1 
0.05 
0.27 
0.20*** 
-0.01 
-0.06 
0.14 
0.05 
TG1 P.2 
16.43 
-0.05 
-0.00 
-0.02 
-0.05 
0.03 
-0.03* 
TG2 P.2 
0.34 
0.53* 
0.01 
0.01 
0.22*** 
0.44* 
0.01 
PGG 
0.09 
-0.04 
0.00 
-0.01 
-0.03 
0.00 
-0.00 
Var. Explained 1 
0.19 
0.12 
0.06 
0.04 
0.16 
0.14 
0.01 
Var. Explained 2 
0.04 
0.10 
0.32 
0.00 
0.11 
0.06 
0.04 
Var. Explained 3 
0.27 
0.02 
0.04 
0.03 
0.08 
0.01 
0.04 
Notes: 
The numbers reported in the first eight rows are regression coefficients, from standard logistic regressions in the 
case of the binary variables (not helping = 0, helping = 1), and from standard OLS regressions in the case of the 
continuous variables. 
“*”, “**” and “***” stand for statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively. 
DG1&2 P.1 stands for Player 1 in Dictator Games 1 and 2; UG1 P.1 for Player 1 in Ultimatum Game 1; UG1 
P.2 and UG2 P.2 for Player 2 in Ultimatum Games 1 and 2 respectively; TG1 P.1 for Player 1 in Trust Game 1; 
TG1 P.2 and TG2 P.2 for Player 2 in Trust Games 1 and 2 respectively; and PGG for the Public Good Game. 
All Helping and All Donations group together, respectively, the two conditions related to helping and the three 
conditions related to giving money. 
Var. Explained 1, 2 and 3 stand for the proportions of variance explained (R2 for the OLS regressions, 
McFadden’s Pseudo-R2 for the logistic regressions) in the three different regressions conducted for each 
dependent variable: one using as explanatory variables the game decisions for which we have observations for 
the full sample of participants (DG1&2 P.1, UG2 P.2, TG2 P.2, PGG); a second one with the variables with 
observations for half of the participants (UG1 P.1 and TG1 P.1); and a third one with the variables with 
observations for the other half of the participants (UG1 P.2 and TG1 P.2).

40 
 
 
Table A1: Summary of lab-field studies on external validity of social preference games 
 
Subjects 
N 
Setting 
Lab game 
Field variable 
Lab-field significant 
association? 
Glaeser et al. 
(2000) 
Undergraduate 
students 
97 
Harvard 
University 
 TG 
i) Reservation value for an 
Envelope Drop game; ii) 
GSS survey question about 
trust; iii) index based on 
GSS survey question about 
trust; iv) survey question on 
trusting strangers; v) 
behavioral index; vi) self-
reported trustworthiness; 
vii) honesty index; viii) 
hours volunteering 
i): No for TG P.1; not reported 
for TG P.2. ii): No for TG P.1; 
yes for TG P.2. iii): No for TG 
P.1; yes for TG P.2. iv): Yes 
for TG P.1; not reported for TG 
P.2; v): Marginally significant 
for TG P.1; no for TG P.2; vi): 
Not reported for TG P.1; no for 
TG P.2; vii): Not reported for 
TG P.1; no for TG P.2. viii): 
No for TG P.1; yes for TG P.2. 
Castillo & Carter 
(2002) 
Urban and rural 
community 
members 
283 
KwaZulu-Natal, 
South Africa 
DG, TG 
Per capita household 
expenditure 
Yes for DG and TG P.2 in 
urban areas; marginally 
significant for TG P.1 in urban 
areas; yes but negative for TG 
P.1 in rural areas; no for DG 
and TG P.2 in rural areas. 
Fehr et al. (2003) 
Representative 
sample of adults 
147 
Germany 
TG 
i) Survey question about 
belief that people are fair; 
ii) survey question about 
trustworthiness of others; 
iii) survey question about 
trust in others and in 
institutions; iv) survey 
question about benefit from 
generosity of strangers in 
the past; v) frequency of 
past trustful behavior. 
 i): No for TG P.1; no for TG 
P.2. ii): Mixed evidence for TG 
P.1; no for TG P.2. iii): No or 
marginally significant for TG 
P.1; no for TG P.2. iv) No for 
TG P.1; no for TG P.2. v) Yes 
for TG P.1; no for TG P.2. 
Gachter et al. 
(2004) 
University 
students and 
277 
Samara, Kursk, 
Zheleznogorsk, 
PGG 
i) GSS survey question 
about trust; ii) index based 
i): No. ii): Yes. iii): Yes. iv): 
Marginally significant. v): Yes. 

41 
 
non-students 
Russia; Minsk, 
Grodno, Belarus 
on GSS survey question 
about trust; iii) GSS survey 
question about fairness; iv) 
GSS survey question about 
helpfulness; v) survey 
question about trusting 
strangers; vi) index of 3 
self-reported trusting 
behaviors: leaving door 
unlocked, lending money to 
friends, lending possessions 
to friends; vii) survey 
question about 
trustworthiness 
vi): No. vii) No. 
Hill & Gurven 
(2004) 
Ache Indians 
(hunter-
gatherers) 
30 
Arroyo Bandera, 
Paraguay. 
UG, PGG 
i) Individual total food 
production in kilograms; ii) 
household total food 
production in kilograms; iii) 
percentage of individual 
total food production shared 
outside nuclear family; iv) 
percentage of household 
total food production shared 
outside nuclear family. 
i)-iv): No. 
Cardenas & 
Carpenter (2005) 
Urban slum 
dwellers 
186 
Bangkok, 
Thailand and Ho 
Chi Minh City, 
Vietnam 
VCM (PGG) 
Natural log of household 
expenditure 
Yes for Bangkok; no for Ho 
Chi Minh City. 
Holm & Danielson 
(2005) 
Undergraduate 
economics 
students 
86 + 51 
Dar Es Salaam 
University, 
Tanzania; Lund 
University, 
Sweden 
TG 
i) GSS survey question 
about trust; ii) index based 
on GSS survey question 
about trust; iii) survey 
questions about trusting 
strangers; iv) survey 
question about past lending 
i): No for TG P.1; no for TG 
P.2 in Tanzania; yes for TG P.2 
in Sweden. ii): No for TG P.1 
in Tanzania; no for TG P.2 in 
Tanzania; yes for TG P.1 in 
Sweden; yes for TG P.2 in 
Sweden. iii) No for TG P.1; not 

42 
 
money; v) self-reported 
trustworthiness. 
reported for TG P.2. iv): No for 
TG P.1; marginally significant 
for TG P.2 in Tanzania; no for 
TG P.2 in Sweden. v): Not 
reported for TG P.1; yes for 
TG P.2 in Tanzania; no for TG 
P.2 in Sweden. 
Karlan (2005) 
Female members 
of non-profit 
village banking 
organization 
(FINCA) 
864 
Ayacucho, Peru 
TG, PGG 
i) Default on the loan; ii) 
drop-out from the loan due 
to default or discipline; iii) 
total voluntary savings. 
i): No for TG P.1; yes for TG 
P.2; no for PGG. ii): 
Marginally significant for TG 
P.1; yes for TG P.2; no for 
PGG. iii): Yes for TG P.1; yes 
for TG P.2; no for PGG. 
Ashraf et al. (2006) 
University 
students 
177 
Moscow, Russia; 
Capetown, South 
Africa; Boston, 
US. 
TG 
(also DG 
and triple 
DG, but not 
reported) 
Survey question about trust 
others not to cheat. 
No for TG P.1; yes for TG P.2. 
Bellemare & 
Kroger (2007) 
Representative 
sample of adults 
276+223 
CentERpanel, the 
Netherlands 
TG 
Past life experiences when 
trusting others. 
No for TG P.1; no for TG P.2. 
Benz & Meier 
(2008) 
University 
students 
i)-ii): 99. iii)-
iv): 83. 
University of 
Zurich 
DG 
i) Past donations to social 
fund supporting students in 
financial difficulties or 
foreigners; ii) future 
donations to social fund 
supporting students in 
financial difficulties or 
foreigners; iii) past 
donations to charities; iv) 
future donations to 
charities. 
i): Yes. ii): Yes. iii): Mixed 
evidence. iv): Yes. 
Bouma et al. (2008) 
Rural villagers 
in watersheds 
92 
Five villages in 
India 
TG 
i) Household investment in 
soil and water conservation; 
ii) household contribution 
to soil and water 
i): No for TG P.1; not reported 
for TG P.2. ii): No for TG P.1; 
not reported for TG P.2. 

43 
 
maintenance. 
Gurven & Winking 
(2008) 
Tsimane 
forager-
horticulturalist 
villagers 
71 (DG) + 67 
(UG) 
Cosincho, 
Amazonian 
forest, Bolivia 
DG, UG 
i) Recorded number of days 
participating in construction 
of community well; ii) 
observed food sharing as 
percentage of production 
given to others outside 
nuclear family; iii) observed 
average number of 
interacting partners outside 
nuclear family; iv) recorded 
time spent in social 
visitation outside residential 
cluster; v) observed average 
beer provisioning to extra-
household individuals; vi) 
observed average number of 
others’ beer drinking parties 
outside nuclear family. 
i): No for DG; no for UG. ii): 
No for DG; yes for UG. iii)-v) 
No for DG; no for UG. vi): 
Marginally significant for DG; 
no for UG. 
Laury & Taylor 
(2008) 
University 
students 
125 + 68 
Georgia State 
University 
PGG 
Price for contributing to 
local non-profit 
organization elicited 
through discrete choice 
experiment. 
Yes. 
Barr & Serneels 
(2009) 
Manufacturing 
workers 
164 
Ghana 
TG 
i) Outcome per worker; ii) 
logarithm of earnings. 
i): Yes. 
ii): Mixed evidence. 
Ermisch et al. 
(2009) 
Former 
respondents to 
the British 
Household Panel 
Study 
173 ( TG P.1) 
+ 85 (TG P.2) 
UK 
Binary TG 
 i) Being active in an 
organization on a regular 
basis; ii) willingness to take 
risks in trusting strangers. 
i): No for TG P.1; no for TG 
P.2. ii) Marginally significant 
for TG P.1, not reported for TG 
P.2. 
Baran et al. (2010) 
MBA students 
463 
Chicago Booth 
Business School 
TG 
i) Original gift amount to 
Chicago Booth Business 
School; ii) Original gift 
amount to Chicago Booth 
i): Yes, sometimes marginally 
significant. ii): Yes. iii): No. 
iv): Mixed evidence. 

44 
 
Business School if paid out 
outright; iii) Original gift 
amount to Chicago Booth 
Business School if 
defaulted on pledge; iv) 
Final gift amount to 
Chicago Booth Business 
School. 
Barr & Zeitlin 
(2010) 
Primary school 
teachers 
487 
Uganda 
DG 
Proportion of contracted 
time allocated to teaching in 
previous month. 
Yes 
Carpenter & Myers 
(2010) 
Volunteer 
firefighters, non-
volunteer 
community 
members 
205 + 189 
Vermont, US 
DG 
i) Self-reported training 
hours; ii) self-reported call 
hours; iii) recorded 
response to calls; iv) odds 
of being a volunteer 
firefighter relative to a non-
volunteer community 
member. 
i): No. ii): Yes. iii): No. iv): No 
or marginally significant. 
Rustagi et al. 
(2010) 
Commons user 
groups 
49 
Bale region, 
Ethiopia 
PGG 
i) Forest management 
activities; ii) time spent on 
monitoring forest. 
i): Yes. ii): Yes. 
Carpenter & Seki 
(2011) 
Fishermen 
catching shrimp 
in ‘pooling’ and 
‘non-pooling’ 
boats 
115 
Toyama Bay, 
Japan 
VCM (PGG) 
Productivity of the fishing 
boats in terms of kilograms 
of fish caught per trip. 
No. 
Fehr & Leibbrandt 
(2011) 
Fishermen 
selling shrimp in 
open-air markets 
114 
Villages near a 
lake in North 
Eastern Brazil 
PGG 
i) Hole size in shrimp traps; 
ii) survey measure of mesh 
size of fishnet; iii) real 
measure of mesh size of 
fishnet. 
i): Yes. ii): Yes. iii): 
Marginally significant. 
Lamba & Mace 
(2011) 
Villagers in 
small-scale 
forager-
160 
16 villages in 
Central India 
PGG 
Salt taken from a common 
pool. 
Mixed evidence. 

45 
 
horticulturist 
Pahari Korwa 
society 
Voors et al. (2011) 
Poor rural 
villagers 
99 
South Eastern 
Sierra Leone 
PGG 
Survey attitudinal measures 
of i) illegal commercial 
mining, logging, and 
hunting; ii) illegal hunting 
of endangered species; iii) 
support to forest 
conservation. 
i): Marginally significant. ii): 
No. iii): No or marginally 
significant. 
Kolstad & Lindkvist 
(2012) 
Medical and 
nursing students 
40 + 40 
Muhimbili 
University for 
Health and 
Allied Sciences, 
Dar Es Salaam, 
Tanzania. 
DG (also a 
TG, but not 
reported) 
Survey question on self-
reported annual donations 
to the poor. 
Yes. 
Leibbrandt (2012) 
Fishermen 
selling shrimp in 
open-air markets 
148 
Villages near a 
lake in North 
Eastern Brazil 
PGG 
i) Achieved price (for 
shrimp of similar quality); 
ii) stability of trade 
relations; iii) duration of 
trade relations; iv) 
trustworthiness signaling 
ability; v) quality 
misrepresentation. 
i): Marginally significant. ii): 
Yes. iii): Marginally 
significant. iv): Yes. v): No. 
Voors et al. (2012) 
Poor rural 
villagers 
453 
South Eastern 
Sierra Leone 
PGG 
i) Contribution to 
community project fund for 
the village; ii) survey 
attitudinal measure of 
community labor; iii) 
survey attitudinal measure 
of village farm labor. 
i): No. iii): No. iii): No. 
Franzen & Pointner 
(2013) 
University 
students 
27 + 75 
Universities of 
Cologne and 
Bern 
DG 
Returning a misdirected 
letter with money. 
Yes. 

46 
 
Cardenas et al. 
(2013) 
General 
population 
respondents in 
six capital cities 
567 + 498 + 
488 + 541 + 
580 + 435 
Bogota, Buenos 
Aires, Caracas, 
Lima, 
Montevideo, San 
Jose 
TG, VCM 
(PGG) 
Survey attitudinal measures 
of i) participation in any 
social organization; ii) 
meeting attendance; iii) 
participation in their 
decision planning; iv) hours 
in a month spent in them. 
i)-iv): Yes for TG P.1; no for 
TG P.2.; no for VCM (PGG). 
Barr et al. (2014) 
Parents in 
primary schools 
1,800 
Albania 
Binary PGG 
(also a DG 
and a third-
party 
punishment 
game, but 
not reported) 
i) Membership in voluntary 
organizations; ii) 
participation in community 
activities in past year; iii) 
participation in elections for 
parent representatives at 
individual level; iv) 
participation in national 
elections at individual level; 
v) participation in elections 
for parent representatives at 
district level; vi) 
participation in national 
elections at district level. 
i): No. ii): No. iii): Yes, 
sometimes marginally 
significant. iv): Yes. v): 
Marginally significant. vi): 
Mixed evidence. 
 
Lagarde & Blaauw 
(2014) 
Final-year 
nursing students 
343 
South Africa 
DG (also a 
modified 
DG with a 
patient 
receiver, and 
a modified 
DG with a 
poor 
receiver) 
i) Self-reported job in rural 
area (i.e., a deep rural 
village, a rural village, or a 
small town in a rural area); 
ii) self-reported job in a 
rural health center. 
i): No. ii). No. 
Bernold et al. 
(2015) 
University 
students 
41 + 48 + 45 
+ 44 
University of 
Zurich, ETH 
Zurich 
PGG 
i) Donation to an 
environmental charity 
within a neutral frame; ii) 
within a community frame; 
iii) within a Wall Street 
i)-iv): No. 

47 
 
frame; iv) within an 
environmental frame. 
Bluffstone et al. 
(2015) 
Forest user 
group members 
327 
20 villages in 
Nepal 
PGG 
i) Likelihood of planting 
any trees in community 
forest in previous month; ii) 
likelihood of attending 
community forest user 
group meeting in previous 
month; iii) likelihood of 
adopting biogas; iv) number 
of hours spent monitoring 
and guarding community 
forest in previous month; v) 
number of trees planted by 
subject or their families in 
their private land in last five 
years; vi) number of trees 
planted by the subject in 
community forest in 
previous month. 
i): Marginally significant. ii): 
No. iii): No. iv): No. v): 
Marginally significant. vi): 
Marginally significant. 
Goeschl et al. 
(2015) 
University 
students and 
subjects from the 
general 
population. 
43 + 92 
University of 
Heidelberg 
PGG 
Contribution to a project to 
reduce global CO2 
emissions. 
No. 
Hopfensitz & 
Miquel-Florensa 
(2015) 
Coffee farmers 
members of a 
cooperative 
46 
Tarrazu and 
Turrialba 
regions, Costa 
Rica 
PGG 
Self-reported side-selling 
coffee in free market. 
Mixed evidence. 
Markus & Potgieter 
(2015) 
University 
students 
146 
University of 
Utrecht 
DG 
i) Self-reported likelihood 
of being a blood donor; ii) 
an organ donor; iii) a 
volunteer; iv) a member of 
an association. 
i)-iv): No. 

48 
 
Englmaier & 
Gebhardt (2016) 
University 
students 
20 + 16 + 13 
University of 
Munich 
PGG (also a 
‘reverse’ 
PGG) 
i) Average skill-adjusted 
speed in registering books 
in institute library in first 30 
minutes of group task; ii) of 
individual task; iii) of task 
with no incentives. 
i): Yes. ii): No. iii): No. 
Riedl & Smeets 
(2016) 
Individual 
investors 
625 
Mutual fund 
provider, the 
Netherlands 
TG P.2 
i) Likelihood of holding a 
Socially Responsible 
Investment (SRI) fund; ii) 
share invested in SRI fund. 
i): Yes. ii): No. 
Torres-Guevara & 
Schluter (2016) 
Fishermen 
152 
Tasajera, 
Caribbean Coast, 
Colombia 
PGG 
i) Fishing impact index 
based on administrative 
data on fishing activities in 
past five years, estimated 
with experienced 
fishermen’s opinions; ii) 
estimated with scientists’ 
opinions. 
i): No. ii): No. 
Notes: 
DG stands for Dictator Game; TG for Trust Game; TG P.1 for Trust Game Player 1; TG P.2 for Trust Game Player 2; GTG for Generalized Trust Game; PGG for Public 
Good Game; VCM for Voluntary Contribution Mechanism (normally a synonym for PGG). 
The ‘+’ sign in the N column separates the sample sizes of different experimental treatments/pools/locations in the same study.

49 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Total SRA scores 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total Scores
Percent
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
2
4
6
8

50 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2a: Distribution of responses in first four game decisions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A) DG1&2 Player1
Contribution
Percent
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
10
20
30
40
B) UG1 Player1
Contribution
Percent
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
10
20
30
40
C) UG1 Player2
Acceptance
Percent
0
1
0
20
40
60
80
D) UG2 Player2
Acceptance
Percent
0
1
0
20
40
60
80

51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2b: Distribution of responses in last four game decisions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E) TG1 Player1
Contribution
Percent
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
5
10
15
20
25
F) TG1 Player2
Contribution
Percent
0
5
10
15
0
10
20
30
40
50
G) TG2 Player2
Contribution
Percent
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
10
20
30
40
H) PG
Contribution
Percent
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
5
10
15
20
25

52 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Distribution of behaviors in the field situations 
A) Boxes
Helping
Percent
0
1
0
20
40
60
80
B) Phone
Helping
Percent
0
1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
C) Children's Charity
Contribution
Percent
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
10
20
30
40
D) Environmental Charity
Contribution
Percent
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
E) Lab Donation
Contribution
Percent
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0
10
20
30
40
50
F) C, D and E together
Contribution
Percent
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
10
20
30
40
50
60

53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure A1: PRISMA flow diagram of systematic review 
 
Records identified through Google 
Scholar searching 
(n = 5,723) 
Screening 
Included 
Eligibility 
Identification 
Records after duplicates removed 
(n = 972) 
Titles, keywords, and 
abstracts screened 
(n = 972) 
Records excluded, with reasons: 
 
- Studies not accessible (n = 39) 
- Studies not in English (n = 1) 
- Studies not presenting original 
evidence (n = 380) 
Abstracts and full-texts 
assessed for eligibility 
(n = 552) 
Studies excluded, with reasons: 
 
- Not a within-subject lab-field 
design (n = 488) 
- Lab game is not a dictator game, 
ultimatum game, trust game, or 
public good game (n = 29) 
Assessed studies meeting 
inclusion criteria 
(n = 35) 
Studies included in meta-
analysis 
(n = 39) 
Back-tracked references 
meeting inclusion criteria 
(n = 4)