TITLE: Platform Competition with Multihoming on Both Sides: Subsidize or Not?
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2020.3636
---

NET Institute* 
 
 
www.NETinst.org 
 
 
 
 
 
Working Paper #19-12 
 
September 2019 
 
Platform Competition with Multihoming on Both Sides: 
Subsidize or Not? 
 
Yannis Bakos 
Hanna Halaburda 
Stern School of Business, New York University. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* The Networks, Electronic Commerce, and Telecommunications (“NET”) Institute, 
http://www.NETinst.org​,​ is a non-profit institution devoted to research on network 
industries, electronic commerce, telecommunications, the Internet, “virtual networks” 
comprised of computers that share the same technical standard or operating system, and 
on network issues in general. 

Platform Competition with Multihoming on
Both Sides: Subsidize or Not?∗
Yannis Bakos†
Hanna Halaburda‡
This version: September 2019
Abstract
As the costs of joining platforms decrease, we often see participants in both sides
of two-sided platforms to multihome, a case mostly ignored in the literature on com-
petition between two-sided platforms. We help to ﬁll this gap by developing a model
for platform competition in a diﬀerentiated setting (a Hoteling line), which is similar
to other models in the literature but focuses on the case where at least some agents
on each side multihome. We show that in that case the strategic interdependence be-
tween the two sides of the same platform may be of lesser importance, or even not be
present at all, compared to models that assume single-homing on at least one side of
the market.
The implication is that when multihoming may be present on both sides of the
market, the beneﬁt of subsidizing one side (typically the one with higher price elastic-
ity) is diminished or may not be present at all. This outcome diﬀers from most of the
two-sided platform literature, where interdependence between the two sides served by
the same platform is a major result leading to the policy implication that a platform
will often maximize its total proﬁts by subsidizing one side, typically the one with more
elastic demand. Our analysis shows that the common strategic advice to subsidize one
side in order to maximize total proﬁts may be limited or even incorrect when both sides
multihome, which can be signiﬁcant given the increasing prevalence of multihoming.˙
Keywords: multihoming, platforms, two-sided platforms, network eﬀects, platform subsidies
∗We thank the attendees at the 2017 Asia-Paciﬁc Industrial Organisation Society conference, the 2018
Toulouse Digital Economics Conference, the 2019 Platforms Symposium at Boston University, and seminars
at NYU and MIT. We gratefully acknowledge ﬁnancial support for this work by a grant from the NET
Institute, www.NETinst.org.
†Stern School of Business, New York University.
‡Stern School of Business, New York University.

1
Introduction
The literature on competition between two-sided platforms, going back to Armstrong (2006)
and Rochet and Tirole (2006), mostly ignores the case of multihoming agents on both sides.
Most analyses either consider single homing by participants on both sides of a platform,
or allow multihoming by participants on one side of the platform while they impose single
homing on the other side. These models also typically assume full coverage on both sides,
i.e. that all agents participate on at least one platform.
The argument in favor of not considering multihoming on both sides of the market is
that if one side of the market fully multihomes, there is no beneﬁt to allowing the other side
of the market to also multihome; as all possible pairs of agents could already connect with
each other. This assumption is limiting, however, if each side of the market only partially
multihomes, in which case multihoming on the other side does generate new potential inter-
actions between agents on the two sides of the market. It is also limiting if the platforms
are diﬀerentiated, in which case two agents meeting on one platform would create diﬀerent
surplus than the same agents meeting on a diﬀerent platform.
A major result in the two-sided platform literature is that there is interdependence be-
tween the two sides served by the same platform; meaning that lowering the price on one side
can make the platform more competitive on the other side (without lowering its price there).
The policy implication is that a platform may maximize its total proﬁts by subsidizing one
side, a typical example being that it may be optimal for a content distribution platform like
Adobe to oﬀer Acrobat Reader to consumers at a zero, or even a negative, price, in order to
maximize its proﬁts from the sale to content creators of the corresponding authoring tools.
In this paper we develop a model for platform competition in a diﬀerentiated setting (a
Hoteling line), which is similar to other models in the literature. However we focus on the
case where at least some agents on each side multihome, and we show that in that case
2

the strategic interdependence between the two sides of the same platform may be of lesser
importance, or even not be present at all, compared to models that assume single-homing on
at least one side of the market. The implication is that when multihoming may be present
on both sides of the market, the beneﬁt of subsidizing one side (typically the one with higher
price elasticity) is diminished or may not be present at all.
Our results suggest that we need to be wary of overstating the importance of the inter-
dependence even when it does exist, or we risk missing the important drivers of the market
equilibrium, and give wrong strategic advice. This is a signiﬁcant departure from the two-
sided platform literature, which identiﬁes interdependence between the two sides served by
the same platform, and has policy implications about a platform’s ability to maximize total
proﬁts by subsidizing one side.
2
Related Literature
While most of the literature on competition between two-sided platforms assumes single
homing on at least one side, some papers allow for multi-homing on both sides, typically
in specialized settings. An early example is Caillaud and Jullien (2003) who consider mul-
tihoming in a matching setting, where multihoming agents get additional chances at being
matched, increasing the probability of successful matching.
Choi (2010) and Choi, Jullien and LeFouili (2017) focus on the proﬁtability and optimality
of tying (i.e., bundling) the content provided to consumers, modeling competition between
two platforms that provide content to spatially diﬀerentiated consumers; while the focus of
their analysis is on tying, under certain parameters of their setting the resulting equilibria
involve multi-homing on both sides of the market. Ambrus, Calvano and Reisinger (2016)
and Anderson, Foros and Kind (2016) also analyze platforms in media markets and study the
eﬀect of multihoming by advertisers and consumers on the provision of advertiser-supported
3

content. Neither of these papers looks into the feasibility of subsidies by the platforms in
terms of the conditions necessary to make such subsidies proﬁtable.
Belleﬂamme and Peitz (2017) study how competition between two-sided platforms is
shaped by the possibility of multihoming and contrast single homing on both sides of a
market with multihoming on one side. Previous analysis (e.g., Armstrong 2006) suggests
that if users on one side can multihome, platforms exert monopoly power on that side
and compete on the singlehoming side.
Bellaﬂamme and Peltz ﬁnd that the result can
go either way, possibly beneﬁting rather than hurting the multihoming side. They do not
address multihoming on both sides, but they recognize the importance of studying platform
competition when both sides multi home.
Jeitschko and Tremblay (2017) study entry and competition in a two-sided market where
the two sides of the market (ﬁrms and consumers) are heterogeneous and the homing decision
is endogenized. They consider a monopolist platform as well as a competitive setting with
two platforms. They ﬁnd a variety of equilibria, ranging from tipping where one platform
dominates to competing platforms with a mix of multi-homing and single-homing on both
sides of the market. Cross-subsidization only takes place in the monopoly case, and thus
they do not address the proﬁtability of subsidies in a setting with competing platforms.
Liuy et al (2019) oﬀer an analysis of competition between two-sided platforms, in which
buyers and sellers can multihome, and platforms compete on transaction fees charged on
both sides. They study outcomes with multihoming on both sides, but they assume such
multihoming will take place rather than derive it endogenously.
This emerging literature provides an increasing solid theoretical foundation for the impor-
tance of equilibria in platform competition that are characterized by multi-homing on both
sides. Given the centrality of the cross-subsidization result in the literature on platform
competition, it is thus important to note our results that such cross-subsidization strategies
are not proﬁtable when both sides multihome,
4

3
Model
We consider a setting with two types of potential participants (sides), X and Y , which
are specially diﬀerentiated along segments [0, 1] and [0, Y ] respectively. There is two-sided
Hoteling competition between the two platforms, A and B that are located at the ends of
these segments, with A at 0 in both sides and B respectively at 1 and Y . Speciﬁcally, the
setting is characterized by:
– two-sided Hoteling competition
– side X, x ∼U[0, 1]
– side Y , y ∼U[0, Y ], Y ⪌1
– two platforms, A and B, located at 0 and 1 (Y )
– platforms charge pi, i = A, B on side X and ri on side Y
– user located at x on side X (resp.
y on Y ) receives following utility from joining
platform i = A, B
u(x; A) =Ax + αyA −pA −zx
(1)
u(x; B) =Bx + α(Y −yB) −pB −z(1 −x)
u(y; A) =Ay + βxA −rA −qy
u(y; B) =By + β(1 −xB) −rBq(Y −y)
where yA etc is the number of agents on side Y that participate in platform A.
– Ax, Ay — stand-alone values of platform A for X and Y users
5

– α, β — “network eﬀect” of the other side on side X and Y
– z, q — “transportation cost”: loss of utility due to preference mis-match, or set-up
costs
The setup of this model is shown in Figure 1. An application of this model to gaming
platforms (e.g., Xbox vs Playstation) would involve spatially diﬀerentiated preferences of
consumers (e.g., based on user interface or previous experience with each platform) and
game developers (e.g., based on each platform’s development toolkits and prior experience
of application developers), with multihoming consumers purchasing both platforms, and
multihoming developers making their games available on both platforms.
Similarly, an application to ride sharing could have the two platforms adopt diﬀerent
levels of idleness for their drivers, which would aﬀect the expected waiting time for consumers,
with both drivers and consumers spatially diﬀerentiated based on their opportunity cost for
idleness and waiting time respectively, along the lines of Bryan and Gans (2018). In this case,
single homing agents would only consider one ride sharing platform as drivers or consumers,
while multihoming agents would consider both platforms and endogenously select to join one
or both.
4
Single-homing benchmark
We begin by analyzing as a benchmark the case with full coverage and single-homing, as is
typical in most of the literature on platform competition.
– imposing single-homing and full coverage: xA = xB = ˜x s.t. u(˜x; A) = u(˜x; B) and
yA = yB = ˜y
˜x = z + Ax −Bx + 2α˜y −αY −pA + pB
2z
6

Figure 1: Setup
˜y = qY + Ay −By + 2β˜x −β −rA + rB
2q
– ˜x depends on pA, pB and rA, rB
– interdependence for each platform between its prices on the two sides
5
Allowing for multihoming on both sides
We now allow for multihoming on both sides of a platform.
Utility when multihoming.
We ﬁrst characterize the utilities agents get when multi-
homing, u(x; A&B) and u(y; A&B).
The market coverage of platform A is given by xA, and 1 −xB is the market coverage
of platform B. Multihoming on side X occurs when xA > xB. Multihoming on both sides
occurs when xA > xB and yA > yB. In such a case, an x agent who is multihoming may
meet the same y agents on both platforms, as y agents are multihoming as well; and vice
7

versa.
There are many possibilities for the functional form of u(x; A&B) and u(y; A&B). When
two agents meet on two diﬀerent platforms, they could receive the network beneﬁt twice
(once on each platform). We call that case “double-counting” of the network eﬀects from
the overlapping agents. At the other extreme, the agents may get the beneﬁt only from
meeting once, and no additional beneﬁt from meeting again — “no double counting.” In
the intermediate case, meeting for the second time may yield partial additional network
advantage — “partial double counting.”
Similarly we need to consider the beneﬁt from
intrinsic values of the two platforms when an agent is multihoming.
For the base case of our analysis, we assume double counting of intrinsic values, but no
double counting of the network eﬀect from overlapping agents. Even though X side users
may meet some Y side users on both platforms, they only get the network beneﬁt once.
Therefore, joining both platforms when yA ≥yB yields
u(x; A&B) = Ax + Bx + αY −pA −pB −z
Utility of an agent joining A only, without having joined the other platform, is given by
u(x; A). Note that
u(x; A&B) < u(x; A) + u(x; B) if yA > yB
Similarly for u(y; A&B).
Decision to participate in both platforms.
An agent will multihome when multihom-
ing yields higher utility than joining only platform A, only platform B, or not joining either
of the platforms.
Utility of an agent joining A without having joined the other platform is given by u(x; A)
as in (1). Therefore, the agent indiﬀerent between joining platform A only and not joining
8

any platform at all, ¯xA, is characterized by u(¯xA; A) = 0, i.e.,
¯xA = Ax + α yA −pA
z
(2)
Users x < ¯xA would prefer to join A while users x > ¯xA would prefer not to join at all (see
Figure 2a). I.e., ¯xA would be the market captured by platform A if it was the only platform.
Similarly, given only the choice of platform B or no platform, all users x > ¯xB would
prefer to join B, while x < ¯xB would not join (see Figure 2b), where
¯xB = 1 −Bx + α (Y −yB) −pB
z
(a)
(b)
Figure 2
With multihoming, agents will consider joining A while they already participate in B.
In such a case, user x’s utility from joining A in addition to B is given by
u(x; A|B) = u(x; A&B) −u(x; B) .
(3)
Note that if there is multihoming on side Y , this incremental utility u(x; A|B) must be
9

less than u(x; A).1
That means that some agents who might have joined A if no other
platform was available, would not have joined A as the second platform. I.e., for some x,
u(x; A|B) < 0 < u(x; A). Thus, the actual market captured by platform A in the case of
multihoming on both sides is smaller than ¯xA.
To characterize the size of the market captured by platform A in the case of multihoming
on both sides, we need to identify the agent who is indiﬀerent between joining A in addition to
B, and just staying with B only. This agent, denoted by ˆxA, is characterized by u(ˆxA; A|B) =
0 ⇐⇒u(ˆxA; A&B) = u(ˆxA; B).
ˆxA = Ax + α yB −pA
z
(4)
In the case of multihoming on both sides, platform A captures market of size ˆxA on side X.
It is straightforward to note that since yA > yB, then ˆxA < ¯xA.
Notice the diﬀerence between formulas (2) and (4). The threshold ¯xA depends on the
number of opposite-side agents available on the same platform, yA. That is, it depends on
pricing decision of the same platform A. But ˆxA depends on yB, which depends on the
pricing decision of the other platform.
Interestingly, platform A cannot make itself more appealing to agents on side X by
increasing the number of Y agents it attracts. In fact, the attractiveness of platform A to
agents on side X depends on side Y agents attracted by the other platform; this is because
yB represents the number of side Y agents that are exclusive to platform A. As platform B
becomes more attractive to side Y agents, the number of such agents joining A exclusively
decreases—even if A can increase its overall coverage of side Y . This lowers the attractiveness
of joining A for the marginal side X agent, because the marginal side X agent is deciding
whether to join A in addition to B, not whether to join either A or no platform at all; and
1Another thing to note is that (3) is valid no matter what we take for u(x; A&B), i.e., whether we double
count intrinsic values and the network eﬀect from overlapping platform members.
10

Figure 3: Market coverage of platform A when multihoming on both sides occurs, ˆxA
the marginal side X agent already has access to these side Y agents on platform B.
More formally, the proﬁt maximizing ¯x∗
A depends on pA and rA, the two prices set by
platform A. The proﬁt maximizing ˆx∗
A, however, depends on pA and rB, but not on rA. Thus
ˆx∗
A, which is the relevant proﬁt maximizing price on side X, does not depend on the price
set by platform A on the Y side.
6
Equilibria with multihoming on both sides
The focus of our analysis in this section is to characterize equilibria where agents on both
sides multihome, and especially equilibria where only some agents on both sides multihome,
while others singlehome. We call it partial multi-homing.
Partial multihoming on both sides occurs in equilibrium when ˆxA > ˆxB and ˆyA > ˆyB.
11

(a)
(b)
Figure 4: Participation decision with multihoming on both sides
Note also that in such a case: xA = ˆxA, xB = ˆxB, yA = ˆyA and yB = ˆyB. Using the derivation
of the previous section, we obtain
ˆxA = Ax + αˆyB −pA
z
ˆxB = 1 −Bx + α(Y −ˆyA) −pB
z
ˆyA = Ay + βˆxB −rA
q
ˆyB = Y −By + β(1 −ˆxA) −rB
q
(5)
Note the interaction between ˆxA and ˆyB (and therefore between pA and rB), but NOT
between ˆxA and ˆyA. That is, there is no strategic interaction between pricing on the two
sides of the same platform.
Proposition 1 If both sides multihome and there is no double counting of the network ben-
eﬁts from meeting the same other side agent on both platforms, there is no interdependence
of prices on the two sides of the sane platform when maximizing proﬁt.
I.e., the proﬁt
12

maximizing p∗
i does not depend on r∗
i .
Proof.
This follows directly from FOC for proﬁt maximization. Technically, ri does not
enter the FOC for maximizing proﬁt with respect to pi.
Corollary 1 In the environment described in Proposition 1, it is never proﬁtable for a plat-
form to subsidize one side of the market, i.e., charge a negative price.
The strategic interaction between ˆxA and ˆyB is fueled by the strength of the network
eﬀects). When network eﬀects are strong, i.e., αβ > q z, then no pure strategy equilibrium
with partial multihoming exists. However, there may exist equilibria with multihoming on
both sides where thresholds are outside of the interval, even for strong network eﬀects.
In the rest of the proposal we focus on the case where network eﬀects are weaker than
transportation costs, i.e., αβ < q z.
For αβ < q z, equilibrium with partial multihoming on both sides is characterized by
ˆx∗
A = q(Ax(2qz −αβ) −α(Byz −2qY z + zβ + Y αβ))
(qz −αβ)(4qz −αβ)
ˆy∗
A = z(Ay(2qz −αβ) −β(Bxq −2qz + qY α + αβ))
(qz −αβ)(4qz −αβ)
ˆx∗
B = 2q2z(2z −Y α) + α2β2 + Bxq(−2qz + αβ) + qα(Ayz −4zβ + Y αβ)
(qz −αβ)(4qz −αβ)
ˆy∗
B = 4q2Y z2 + qz(Ax −2z −4Y α)β + α(z + Y α)β2 + Byz(−2qz + αβ)
(qz −αβ)(4qz −αβ)
13

And
p∗
A = −Ax(−2qz + αβ) + α(Byz −2qY z + zβ + Y αβ
4qz −αβ
r∗
A = −Ay(−2qz + αβ) + β(Bxq −2qz + qY α + αβ)
4qz −αβ
p∗
B = (Bx(2qz −αβ) −α(Ayz −2qY z + zβ + Y αβ)
4qz −αβ
r∗
B = By(2qz −αβ) −β(Axq −2qz + qY α + αβ)
4qz −αβ
Proposition 2 For an appropriate range of parameters, there exists a pure strategy equilib-
rium with multihoming on both sides .
Proof.
For now, we prove the existence by providing a set of parameters for which such
an equilibrium exists. We plan to derive soon an analytical formulation for the applicable
range of parameters.
Consider the following parameter values: α = β = 0.1; q = z = 0.2; Ax = Ay =
Bx = By = 0.26; Y = 1. These values result in the following pure strategy equilibrium:
pA = rA = pB = rB = 0.12; xA = yA = 0.8; xB = yB = 0.2 and proﬁts πA = πB = 0.192.
■
Note that for other parameter values, diﬀerent pure strategy equilibria are possible. For
instance, equilibria may arise where the market on one or both sides is not fully covered, or
where singlehoming arises endogenously.
14

7
Meeting the same agent on additional platforms yields
incremental network beneﬁt
So far, we have assumed that participants that overlap on multiple networks do not derive
additional beneﬁt from being able to meet on more than one platform; in other words
there is no double counting of overlapping network members and no double counting of
the corresponding network eﬀects. Under this assumption, we have arrived at equilibrium
conditions (5), which indicate that there is no interdependence between pricing decisions on
the two sides by the same platform. It is a striking result, especially when compared with
the single homing benchmark.
As we have noted in Section 5, there are many possibilities for how utility of multihomers
is speciﬁed. Diﬀerent speciﬁcations may be more suitable for diﬀerent markets.
In this section, we generalize the analysis, by allowing partial double counting of the
network eﬀects in the utility of multihomers. That is, meeting the same agent on the second
platform yields some incremental network beneﬁt above the network beneﬁt from meeting
him on the ﬁrst platform. As we will see, when the partial double counting is allowed, the
interdependence in pricing of two sides by the same platform is present again. However, the
strength of this interaction directly depends on the size of the double-counting. With very
little double-counting, the interdependence is negligibly small.
Our aim in this analysis is to point out that while the interdependence plays primary role
in environments with assumed single-homing, the interdependence is of lesser importance,
and may disappear completely, when the platforms are competing in an environment where
multihoming on both sides is possible.
15

Set up of the generalized problem.
The measure of the multihoming agents on side Y
is yA −yB. The utility of a multihoming agent x is
u(x; A&B, ω) = Ax + Bx + α[Y + ω(yA −yB)] −pA −pB −z ,
where ω ∈[0, 1] is the size of the double-counting. For ω = 0, there is no double counting.
In the special case of ω = 1, u(x; A&B, ω = 1) = u(x, A) + u(x, B). That is, the agent gets
full double beneﬁt from meeting a Y agent twice on the two platforms. In a way, it means
that the two platforms provide diﬀerent beneﬁts, and there isn’t much competition between
them.
Now, even with ω, formula (3) is still valid
u(x; A|B, ω) = u(x; A&B, ω) −u(x; B) = Ax + α[ωyA + (1 −ω)yB] −pA −z x .
And thus
ˆxA(ω) = Ax + α[ωyA + (1 −ω)yB] −pA
z
Based on the discussion at the end of Section 5, ω measures the interdependence between
the price platform A sets on side Y , and how attractive it is to agents on side X. This
interdependence ranges with the value of ω, and for small ω is close to negligible. With
small ω, the price set by the other platform on side Y is much more important to determining
ˆxA.
Note also that for ω = 1, ˆxA(ω = 1) = ¯xA, while for ω < 1, ˆxA(ω) < ¯xA.
Proposition 3 If there is some incremental network beneﬁt of meeting the same other-side
agent on both networks (”double counting” of common agents), the strength of the interde-
pendence between the prices charged on the two sides by the same platform is determined by
the strength of the above double counting.
16

8
Conclusion
In this paper we analyze platform competition when agents multihome on both sides. This
is an increasingly important case, as the cost of joining platforms is often low, and as a
result participants in both sides of two-sided platforms increasingly multi home. This case
of multihoming on both sides has been mostly ignored in the literature, including the work
establishing the central result in platform competition for the pricing interdependence be-
tween the two sides of the market, which implies that often it is optimal for a platform to
subsidize one side.
We develop a model for platform competition in a diﬀerentiated setting (a Hoteling line),
which is similar to other models in the literature but focuses on the case where at least some
agents on each side multihome. Once we allow for multihoming on both sides, it is important
to specify what is the utility of the multihoming users who meet multihoming users on the
other side — that is, they meet each other twice on the two platforms. Do they obtain the
beneﬁt of interaction twice, or only once?
In the base model, we analyze the case where participants meeting in both platforms
obtain the beneﬁt only once (no-double counting). It is reasonable to assume, for instance,
that in online retailing there is little incremental value having a potential buyer see a seller’s
product listing on eBay, once that same listing has already been seen by that buyer on
Amazon marketplace. For this speciﬁcation, we show that:
– under certain conditions, equilibria exist with multihoming on both sides
– when we have multihoming on both sides, the interdependence between the two sides
plays out diﬀerently than under single-homing; speciﬁcally, there is no interdependence
between the two sides of the same platform
– optimal pricing for a platform on one side depends on the prices of the other platform
17

only and thus it is never optimal to subsidize the other side (no divide-and-conquer
strategy).
These results diﬀer from most of the two-sided platform literature, where interdependence
between the two sides served by the same platform is a major result leading to the policy
implication that a platform will often maximize its total proﬁts by subsidizing one side,
typically the one with more elastic demand. Thus the common strategic advice to subsidize
one side in order to maximize total proﬁts may be limited or even incorrect when both sides
multihome, which can be signiﬁcant given the increasing prevalence of multihoming.
While we start with the assumption that meeting the same agent on both platforms brings
no incremental beneﬁt compared to meeting on one platform, we also extend our analysis to a
more general formulation, where the agents can gain partial beneﬁt from meeting each other
the second time. In this case, the interdependence is present again. However, the degree
of interdependence strongly depends on the size of the beneﬁt from the second meeting. If
the partial beneﬁt is very small, the interdependence is also negligible and pricing of the
other platform is a much more important factor in determining a platform’s optimal price.
If, on the other hand, meeting again on the second platform conveys signiﬁcant additional
beneﬁt, the interdependence between the two sides of the same platform reappears, and the
conventional pricing strategy advice applies once again.
In conclusion, we need to be wary of overstating the importance of the interdependence
even when it does exist, or we risk missing the important drivers of the market equilibrium,
and give wrong strategic advice.
References
Ambrus, A., Calvano, E. And Reisinger, M. Either or Both Competition: A ?Two-Sided?
Theory of Advertising with Overlapping Viewerships. American Economic Journal: Microe-
conomics 2016, 8(3): 189-222
18

Anderson, S.P., Foros, O. and Kind, H. J. Competition (2016). For Advertisers And For
Viewers In Media Markets. The Economic Journal 2016.
Armstrong (2006). Competition in two?sided markets. The Rand Journal of Economics,
Vol. 32, Issue 3, September 2006.
Belleﬂamme, P. and Peitz, M. (2017) Platform Competition: Who beneﬁts from multihom-
ing. Working Paper 2017.
Bryan, K.A. and Gans, J.S. (2018) A Theory Of Multihoming In Rideshare Competition.
NBER Working Paper 24806, July 2018.
Caillaud, B. and B. Jullien (2003), Chicken & Egg: Competition Among Intermediation
Service Providers, RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 34, pp. 309–328.
Choi, J-P. (2010) Tying in Two-Sided Markets with Multi-Homing, Journal of Industrial
Economics, 58, pp. 606-627.
Choi, J-P., Jullien, B. and LeFouili, Y. (2017). Tying in Two-Sided Markets With Multi-
Homing: Corrigendum and Comment.
The Journal of Industrial Economics, 65, 4, pp.
872-886.
Jeitschko, T.D. and Tremblay, M.J. (2017) Platform Competition with Endogenous Homing.
Working Paper.
Liuy, C., Tehz, T-H., Wright, J. and Zhou, J. (2019) Multihoming And Oligopolistic Platform
Competition. Working Paper August 16, 2019
Rochet, J.-C. and Tirole, J. (2006). Two-sided markets: A progress report. RAND Journal
of Economics, 37(3):645-667.
19