TITLE: Social Learning in the COVID-19 Pandemic: Community Establishments’ Closure Decisions Follow Those of Nearby Chain Establishments
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2021.4033
---

UC Berkeley
UC Berkeley Previously Published Works
Title
Social Learning in the COVID-19 Pandemic: Community Establishments’ Closure Decisions 
Follow Those of Nearby Chain Establishments
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5s58v319
Journal
Management Science, 67(7)
ISSN
0025-1909
Authors
de Vaan, Mathijs
Mumtaz, Saqib
Nagaraj, Abhishek
et al.
Publication Date
2021-07-01
DOI
10.1287/mnsc.2021.4033
 
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org
Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Social Learning in the COVID-19 Pandemic:
Community Establishments’ Closure Decisions
Follow Those of Nearby Chain Establishments
Mathijs de Vaan, Saqib Mumtaz, Abhishek Nagaraj, and Sameer B. Srivastava
Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley ∗
Abstract
As conveners that bring various stakeholders into the same physical space, ﬁrms can powerfully
inﬂuence the course of pandemics such as COVID-19. Even when operating under government
orders and health guidelines, ﬁrms have considerable discretion to keep their establishments
open or closed during a pandemic. We examine the role of social learning in the exercise of
this discretion at the establishment level. In particular, we evaluate how the closure decisions
of chain establishments, which are associated with national brands, a↵ect those of proximate,
same-industry community establishments, which are independently owned or managed. We con-
duct these analyses using cellphone location tracking data on daily visits to 230,403 U.S.-based
community establishments that are co-located with chain establishments aﬃliated with 319 na-
tional brands. We disentangle the e↵ects of social learning from confounding factors by using
an instrumental variables strategy that relies on local variation in community establishments’
exposure to closure decisions made by brands at the national level. Our results suggest that
closing decisions of community establishments are a↵ected by the decisions made by chain es-
tablishments: a community establishment is 3.5% more likely to be open on a given day if the
proportion of nearby open chain establishments increases by one standard deviation.
∗Corresponding Author: Mathijs de Vaan (mdevaan@haas.berkeley.edu). Other authors: saqib@berkeley.edu,
nagaraj@berkeley.edu, and sameersriv@berkeley.edu. We thank Adit Jain for excellent research assistance. We thank
three anonymous reviewers, the associate editor and department editor of Management Science for their valuable
feedback and suggestions. We also thank Paul Gouvard and Andr´as Tilcsik for feedback on prior drafts of the paper.
The usual disclaimer applies.
1

Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the role of ﬁrms as conveners: despite the proliferation of
online communication, many business models still rely on bringing employees, customers, and other
stakeholders into the same physical space. Research on infectious disease in general and COVID-19
in particular has shown that physical co-location can fuel disease transmission (Anderson et al.,
2020). As a result, local and state governments have implemented a wide range of policies and
directives to inﬂuence whether and how ﬁrms remain open or closed during di↵erent phases of the
COVID-19 pandemic (Benzell et al., 2020; Goolsbee et al., 2020).
For some ﬁrms, government closure directives have left their managers or owners with no choice
but to shutter their doors; however, many other ﬁrms have been able to exercise discretion in
their closure decisions.
This discretion arises in part because many counties and some states
never explicitly ordered ﬁrms to shut down, e↵ectively passing responsibility for responding to
the COVID-19 pandemic to business owners. Moreover, even when directives are in place, many
local and state governments lack adequate resources to monitor and ensure full compliance of all
establishments in their jurisdiction. Finally, directives issued by local and state governments are
often ambiguous, leaving business owners with latitude to interpret the guidance as they see ﬁt.
Given that ﬁrms have considerable leeway in making closure decisions and that these choices can
determine the shape of a pandemic’s trajectory (Akbarpour et al., 2020; Chang et al., 2020), we
examine the social dynamics that underpin these decisions.
In particular, we consider the role of interorganizational social learning in ﬁrms’ closure decisions
during the COVID-19 pandemic. In similar fashion to the introduction of disruptive and ambiguous
regulations (Kelly, 2003; Baker et al., 2016), the COVID-19 pandemic and the health directives
it has spawned have created a context in which ﬁrms have been forced to make closure decisions
under high levels of uncertainty—for example, about how their customers will react, how their
decision will a↵ect their ﬁnancial position, whether their employees will resist, and so on. During
such times of extreme uncertainty, ﬁrms may look to one another for guidance on what behaviors to
adopt (DiMaggio and Powell, 1983; Coleman, 1990; Rogers, 2010). One reason for ﬁrms to emulate
the behavior of other ﬁrms is that they believe that these ﬁrms have superior information about
the appropriate response to uncertainty (Pfe↵er et al., 1976; Tushman and Romanelli, 1983). But
2

even if the information held by other ﬁrms is not obviously superior, the mere act of adopting the
behavior of others can reduce perceived uncertainty (Turner, 2010; Balla-Elliott et al., 2020).
We use the term social learning to describe the process by which the behavior of one organization
prompts other organizations to adopt the same behavior (Young, 2009; DiMaggio and Garip, 2012).
Such adoption may be the result of direct social inﬂuence of the manager of one ﬁrm on the
manager of another ﬁrm. Yet ﬁrms can also learn from the actions of other ﬁrms in indirect ways—
for example, a change in customer behavior in response to the closings of other establishments
may represent a signal to the focal ﬁrm that the appropriate decision is to shutter its doors too.
Given the nature of the data available to us, we are not able to pin down the speciﬁc channels,
such as interorganizational managerial inﬂuence, through which this social learning occurs. We
do, however, develop an empirical strategy to demonstrate that closure decisions are not made in
isolation: when given the discretion, closure decisions of ﬁrms tend to rely on the closure decisions
of geographically proximate competitors.
We consider two classes of establishments: (1) chain establishments, which are either owned by or
aﬃliated with national brands and subject to more centrally deﬁned organizational policies and
practices; and (2) community establishments, which are independently owned and managed. We
examine the extent to which community establishments’ closure decisions follow those of nearby
chain establishments in the same industry. While prior work on interorganizational learning has
mostly focused on the transmission of information through formal and mostly cooperative net-
work connections, we examine how ﬁrms change their behavior in response to decisions made by
competitors. Although we acknowledge that community establishments can also inﬂuence chain
establishments’ closure decisions, our analytical focus is on the e↵ect of chain establishments on
community establishments because community establishments have considerably more discretion
in their closure decisions and our empirical strategy (described in greater detail below) can only
identify the latter e↵ect.
We conducted this investigation using anonymized cellphone location tracking data on daily visits
to 230,403 U.S.-based community establishments that are co-located with chain establishments
aﬃliated with 319 national brands. Rigorously testing our proposition about social learning poses
3

a key identiﬁcation challenge: ﬁrms that are physically proximate do not only respond to each
other’s behavior but may also be susceptible to shared contextual forces that a↵ect all ﬁrms in the
vicinity. For example, a community and chain establishment in the same neighborhood might close
not because one ﬁrm learns from the closure of another but simply because both ﬁrms are faced
with the same county directives and the same local COVID-19 infection rate. To begin to address
these empirical challenges, we estimate the impact of chain closures on community establishments
while controlling for ﬁne-grained ﬁxed e↵ects at the level of the county-date, industry-date and zip
code. These ﬁxed e↵ects account for many potentially confounding factors such as daily changes in
government policy, local infection rates, changes in local demand, and time trends in closure across
di↵erent industries.
Although these ﬁxed e↵ects address many threats to causal identiﬁcation, they fall short of the
ideal experiment that would examine the impact of randomly-assigned chain establishment closures
on proximate, same-industry community establishments.
To approximate this ideal design, we
leverage the fact that ﬁrms with national scale (such as chains) often make centralized closure
decisions that apply to all or a majority of their establishments without placing much weight on
any particular local conditions. We can therefore evaluate our research question by comparing
the responses of otherwise similar establishments that di↵er only in their local exposure to chain
establishments with di↵erent national policies. Building on this intuition and the literature on
“shift-share” instruments (Derenoncourt, 2019; Goldsmith-Pinkham et al., 2018), we instrument for
the closure decisions of a community establishment’s rival chain establishments in the same industry
and zip by using the average number of closures of other establishments of the same chains in all
states except for the community establishment’s focal state. Our results suggest that a community
establishment is 3.5% more likely to be open on any given day if the proportion of nearby open
chain establishments increases by one standard deviation. Taken at face value, this e↵ect is modest
as a chain establishment closure a↵ects a single community establishment’s closure decision on a
given day by only a small amount. That said, when aggregated over a large number of community
establishments over several weeks, the cumulative e↵ect we document becomes meaningful and
consequential. Finally, while our data do not allow us to isolate the precise mechanism by which
chain establishments a↵ect the behavior of community establishments, our results provide robust
4

evidence consistent with ﬁrms paying attention to competitors and imitating their behavior. In the
following sections, we introduce our data, discuss our empirical strategy and present our ﬁndings.
Data
We conduct our analyses using a data set released by the SafeGraph COVID-19 Data Consortium.1.
SafeGraph aggregates anonymized location data from numerous applications on about 45 million
mobile devices to provide foot traﬃc patterns at physical places.2 We focus on service-oriented
points-of-interest (POI) such as retail shops, restaurants, movie theaters, and ﬁtness centers. For
each POI, in addition to its daily foot traﬃc, we observe its geographic location, its North American
Industry Classiﬁcation System (NAICS) industry code, and the branded chain it belongs to (if any).
Appendix A1 describes further details about the data.
Sample Construction
Our primary panel spans the period from March 1, 2020 to April 15, 2020—that is, just before the
COVID-19 pandemic led state and local governments to begin issuing shelter-in-place directives
and for six weeks thereafter. Given that our focus is on establishments that had discretion in their
closure decisions, we eliminate ones that were likely deemed “essential,” which we deﬁne as NAICS
categories in which more than 70% of establishments were open during our observation period.
This method identiﬁes establishments in industries such as gas stations and grocery stores which
were widely considered essential and provides a principled basis to exclude them from our analyses.
The SafeGraph data indicate whether a given establishment is part of a branded chain as well as
the name of the brand, if applicable. We label establishments associated with a national brand as
chain establishments and those with no such association as community establishments. We limit
our focus to national brands that contained more than 50 establishments and operated in at least 25
states. This strategy minimizes the risk that closure decisions by chain establishments were driven
by local COVID-19 conditions, a critical condition for our instrumental variables strategy. In total,
319 brands (represented by 198,176 unique establishments) qualify as a national brand. Our baseline
sample is composed of community establishments that had at least one chain establishment in their
3-digit NAICS industry code and zip code. In total, our sample includes 10,368,135 establishment-
1https://www.safegraph.com/covid-19-data-consortium.
2Information from establishment-census block group observations with less than ﬁve devices are excluded for
privacy reasons.
5

day observations for 230,403 establishments over 45 days, distributed across approximately 12,000
zip codes across the U.S. Appendix A2 contains validation checks for the sample construction.
Variables
Table 1 summarizes our key variables. Our dependent variable Open is an indicator for whether
an establishment was open or closed on a given day. Since the SafeGraph data do not include
such an indicator, we developed an algorithm for this purpose. This algorithm relies on past traﬃc
in February 2020 (before people began sheltering in place), the rate of change of visitors on a
daily basis and makes adjustments for very small and large places whose closures can be harder to
track. Appendix A3 describes this algorithm and includes various validation checks, and reports
the robustness of our results to alternative deﬁnitions of the Open variable.
[TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE]
Our key independent variable, Prop. Chain Est. Open, measures the proportion of chain establish-
ments that are open in the same zip code and industry as the focal community establishment. If a
community establishment has multiple rival chain establishments, we take the weighted average of
these establishments’ closing status. To account for the fact that there is likely to be a lag in social
learning, we consider the previous day’s proportion for the focal day’s closure decision. On average,
about 59% of an establishment’s chain counterparts in the same industry and zip code were open,
although there is signiﬁcant dispersion around the mean, and also reﬂects data from the ﬁrst two
weeks of March when shelter-in-place orders were yet to be issued across the U.S.
Our instrumental variable strategy depends on a reliable instrument for Prop. Chain Est. Open,
which we label National Chain Opening Exposure. For a given brand-date-state combination, we
computed the proportion of stores that were closed across the country, while excluding estab-
lishments in the focal state. Then we calculated the weighted average of this statistic for every
community establishment based on the brands in the zip code and industry of the community estab-
lishment. This metric provides a measure of the extent to which rival chains of the focal community
establishment enacted company wide corporate directives to shutter their doors or remain open.
We explain this instrument in further detail after we describe other data and summary statistics.
6

Our models include various control variables. We approximate establishment size by calculating
the average number of visitors in February, Avg. February Traﬃc. The median establishment has
about 13 visitors on a given day in February. Note that this number is an order of magnitude lower
than the true number of visitors because SafeGraph’s coverage is limited to only about one sixth
the number of devices of the U.S. population. Prop. Devices At Home measures the number of
devices that, according to Safegraph, do not move out of their home location on a given date. This
is a useful proxy for the extent to which individuals in a given area decided to limit their mobility
and helps control for demand factors that might a↵ect closure decisions (Boxell et al., 2020; Chiou
and Tucker, 2020). Finally, we deﬁne an indicator variable, Shelter in Place, that accounts for
whether “shelter-in-place” orders were in e↵ect at the county level for a given zip code on a given
day (based on data from the National Association of Counties).3
Empirical Strategy and Results
Motivating Example
To provide greater intuition for our empirical strategy, we begin with a motivating example. Figure
1 shows the closing status of chain and community establishments in the ﬁtness center industry in
two neighboring zip codes in Collin County, Texas, on March 25, 2020. As indicated by the star
icons, the zip code on the left, 75150, had a closed chain establishment (Orange Theory), while
the zip code on the right, 75409, had a chain establishment (Anytime Fitness) that was still open.
These closing behaviors were consistent with the broad closure pattern of other establishments in
these two chains: as of March 25, 78% of Orange Theory establishments had closed, while 66%
of Anytime Fitness establishments had closed according to our data. As depicted in the ﬁgure
and consistent with our theory and empirical strategy, all six community establishments in the
vicinity of the closed Orange Theory (Brand A) establishment were closed, while three out of the
ﬁve community establishments near the open Anytime Fitness were also open.
Moreover, any
corporate directives issued by Orange Theory or Anytime Fitness at this time were unlikely to be
inﬂuenced by the speciﬁc local conditions in Collin County, which is the main assumption for our
exclusion restriction. We turn next to examining whether the pattern observed in this example
generalizes across industries and locations.
3See https://tinyurl.com/y6sdlgfd.
7

[FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]
Identifying a Social Learning E↵ect
Prior literature on statistically identifying social learning e↵ects demonstrates that mere similar-
ity in behavior between connected actors does not necessarily imply a causal transmission process
(Azoulay et al., 2017; Shalizi and Thomas, 2011). In the example above, we proposed that com-
munity establishments in zip code 75150 might be more likely to be closed than those in zip code
75409 because of di↵erential decisions made by their nearby rival chain establishments. Yet other
factors such as di↵erences in local neighborhood guidelines, local COVID-19 cases, the demographic
composition of residents, and local media coverage could produce a similar pattern.
More formally, consider a model in which a community establishment i, in industry n, and zip
code z makes a decision to stay open at time, t, represented by the indicator Openinzt (where 0
indicates closed and 1 indicates open). We are interested in the relationship between this variable
and Prop. Chain Est. Opennz(t−1), the proportion of chain establishments in industry, n, and zip
code, z, that are open at time, (t −1). In our example above, this variable equals 0 in zip code
75150 and 1 in zip code 75409.
Inspecting the simple correlation between Openinzt and Prop. Chain Est. Opennz(t−1) would be
misleading because of the various confounds noted before. To partially address this issue, in our
most stringent speciﬁcation, we include non-parametric time trends in the form of county-by-date
ﬁxed e↵ects ⌘zt. The county-by-date ﬁxed e↵ects account for a range of confounding factors includ-
ing daily changes in infections, any county-level social distancing guidelines as well as awareness
of the importance of social distancing across time. Further, since national patterns of response to
the pandemic likely varied by industry and over time, our most stringent speciﬁcation also includes
industry-date ﬁxed e↵ects γnt. Finally, to control for time-invariant di↵erences across zip codes
within a county—for example, di↵erences in local income, race, and political orientation (Boxell
et al., 2020)—we include zip code ﬁxed e↵ects ✓z.
Beyond the sources of variation accounted for by our ﬁxed e↵ects, we anticipate that formal shelter-
in-place orders at the local level also a↵ect local establishments’ closure decisions. In models without
temporal ﬁxed e↵ects, we therefore include an indicator variable, Shelter In Placezt, which is set
8

to 1 if there is a shelter in place policy at time, t, in the county to which a zip code, z, belongs.
In models with time ﬁxed e↵ects, this variable is subsumed by the ﬁxed e↵ect. Similarly, given
that establishment size might be associated with di↵ering incentives to remain open or closed, we
include a proxy for size: Avg. February Foot Traffici. Finally, to account for local, time-varying
di↵erences in customer mobility, we include the control, Prop. Devices At Homezt, which indicates
the proportion of customers in zip, z, who are following guidelines to limit their mobility by not
leaving their residence on date, t. Thus, our most stringent OLS speciﬁcation can be summarized
as follows:
Openinzt = β0 + β1 ⇤Prop. Chain Est. Opennz(t−1) + Avg. Feb Foot Traffici+
Prop. Devices at Homezt + γnt + ⌘zt + ✓z + ✏
(1)
Instrumental Variables Speciﬁcation
Despite the inclusion of control variables and various ﬁxed e↵ects, it is still possible that our OLS es-
timates of the coeﬃcient of interest, β1, are biased since there are likely to be other omitted variables
that we cannot explicitly control for. For example, health-conscious customers in a particular area
might mobilize to urge both chain and community establishments in a particular industry to close.
To account for such possibilities, we developed an instrumental variables (IV) identiﬁcation strategy.
Any potential instrument, Z, for our endogenous variable, Prop. Chain Est. Opennz(t−1), must sat-
isfy two conditions. First, it must be suﬃciently correlated with Prop. Chain Est. Opennz(t−1)—
i.e., it should signiﬁcantly a↵ect the probability that a chain establishment temporarily closes.
Second, the IV must satisfy the exclusion restriction: it must a↵ect a community establishment’s
decision to close exclusively via its inﬂuence on closing the local branch of the national chain.
Formally, the instrument requires that cov(Openinzt, Z) 6= 0 and cov(Z, ✏) = 0.
Our instrument for Prop. Chain Est. Opennz(t−1) is National Chain Opening Exposurenz(t−1),
which we denote by Znz(t−1) for brevity. To understand how Znz(t−1) is calculated, consider the
example in Figure 1. For each industry-zip pair, we calculate the proportion of chain establishments
outside of the state of Texas that are open on date, (t −1). Orange Theory (left panel) has 825
establishments outside Texas, of which 181 are open. Meanwhile, Anytime Fitness (right panel) has
1565 establishments outside Texas, of which 526 are open. Since only one chain brand is active in
9

both cases, the instrument, Znz(t−1), is simply calculated as the proportion of establishments open
outside Texas. In Figure 1, this statistic is 0.22 for the zip code 75150 and 0.34 for zip code 75409.
In the case of multiple chains, the instrument, Znz(t−1), is calculated as the weighted average of
this statistic across di↵erent chains.
While we cannot fully rule out violations of the exclusion restriction, we can evaluate whether
corporate closure decisions were orthogonal to observable local market conditions. Doing so allows
us to determine whether the common exposure of chain and community establishments to local
business or disease conditions interfere with the instrument and act as a confounder in our models.
If that is the case, it is possible that we are detecting a “canary in the coal mine” e↵ect, where
chain establishments are responding more rapidly to changing local business and disease conditions,
perhaps because they have better resources and are more sensitive to legal risk. Note that in this
scenario, chain and community establishments exhibit similar closing behavior that is not driven
by social learning but by common exposure to local business or disease conditions. We design a
series of analyses aimed at determining whether the most plausible common exposure e↵ects drive
our results. We include these results in appendix B. Overall, the results of these robustness checks
further corroborate our main ﬁnding.
Summary Statistics
Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for our main variables of interest. The table shows that
the unconditional probability of a community establishment being open in our sample period (i.e.,
March 2nd through April 15th) is 0.431. Note that this mean includes establishment days before
shut downs began around March 15. The table also shows that our main independent variable:
Prop. Branch Est. Open, ranges between 0 and 1, with a mean of 0.59. The mean of our instrument,
National Chain Opening Exposure, is slightly higher at 0.61. Finally, the descriptive statistics for
our three control variables, Prop. Devices At Home and Shelter In Place are included.
Empirical Estimates
In Panel A of Table 2, we report results of OLS regressions. As stated before, we lag the key
independent variable by one day (results are robust to longer lags): the probability of a community
establishment being open at day t is a function of Prop. Branch Est. Open at day t −1. And since
the variation we observe might be clustered within spatial units, we adjust the standard errors for
10

clustering at the county-level.
Model 1 presents the association between the probability of a community establishment being open
and the proportion of chain establishments that are open in the presence of key controls (but
without ﬁxed e↵ects). Model 2 adds industry and zip code ﬁxed e↵ects, and Model 3 includes
almost 12,000 zip ﬁxed e↵ects as well. Model 4, our most stringent speciﬁcation, includes zip ﬁxed
e↵ects, but now also includes industry and county-level time trend (NAICS-by-date and county-
by-date) ﬁxed-e↵ects rather than a common time trend. The inclusion of ﬁxed e↵ects reduces the
coeﬃcient estimate as compared to Model 1 that includes only the controls, demonstrating their
importance in this setting. The range of e↵ect sizes reported in Models 2-4 suggests that a one
standard deviation increase in the proportion of chain establishments (0.356) that are open leads
to between a 1.3%-6.4% increase in the probability of a community establishment being open on a
given day. To put this number into perspective it is important to note that the e↵ect is estimated
at the establishment-day level: even though the e↵ect is modest, it has the potential to accumulate
across establishments and over time.4
[TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE]
Next we move to our IV estimates, which are reported in Panel B. The ﬁrst stage is positive
and signiﬁcant, suggesting that our instrument is predictive of a chain establishment temporarily
closing. Also, the ﬁrst-stage F-statistic is about 1,250, indicating that our instrument is suﬃciently
powered (Lee et al., 2020). The IV estimates are broadly consistent with our OLS estimates in the
sense that they show a positive and signiﬁcant e↵ect of chain establishments’ closure decisions on
those of community establishments. If anything, the IV estimates suggest a slightly greater e↵ect
size than revealed by the OLS speciﬁcations. The IV estimate in Model 6 suggests that a community
establishment is 3.5% more likely to be open if the proportion of open chain establishments increases
by one standard deviation.
4Another way to interpret the e↵ect size is to consider the coeﬃcient of the Shelter in Place variable. A change
to a Shelter in Place order is associated with a 3.8% reduction in the likelihood of a community establishment being
open on a given day.
11

Discussion
The goal of this article has been to identify the role of social learning in the closure decisions of
community establishments during the COVID-19 pandemic. We argued that these establishments
will learn about whether to remain open or to instead close from their proximate chain establishment
competitors. Using granular, time-varying data on individuals’ visits to a national population of
establishments in the U.S. and a novel instrumental variables strategy, we found support for this
proposition.
Findings from this study contribute to our understanding of interorganizational social learning.
Prior work on interorganizational social learning has focused on the transmission of information
through formal and mostly cooperative network connections–for example, in the form of joint ven-
tures, alliances, and interlocking boards (Davis, 1991; Powell et al., 1996). In contrast, we highlight
a setting in which ﬁrms learn from and adopt the behaviors of geographically proximate competi-
tors. In other words, economically relevant information can be transmitted between organizations
in the absence of a formal network connection and even when the two organizations are ﬁerce
competitors.
This paper also makes noteworthy methodological contributions. Our paper is one of the ﬁrst to
apply a shift-share instrument to the study of interorganizational social learning. Many previously
used estimation strategies cannot account for unobserved, time-varying contextual factors that
might a↵ect organizational behavior and that might otherwise masquerade as social learning. The
instrument we introduce can be readily extended to study other ways in which centralized decisions
of chain establishments might shape the behavior of proximate community establishments. Second,
we develop and validate a methodology for determining, based on location tracking data, when a
given establishment is open or closed. Given the ubiquity of location tracking data, an approach
such as ours can be readily extended to studying other forms of interorganizational social learning—
for example, how choices about hours of operation might cascade from one organization to others.
Our ﬁndings also have implications for the design of government policies to inﬂuence ﬁrm behavior
in the management of pandemics such as COVID-19. Perhaps most importantly, this paper shows
that when government directives and health guidelines are ambiguous, ﬁrms will look for other
12

information to guide their decision making. Obviously, such ambiguity may have been intentional
if local governments believe that ﬁrms are well positioned to make these important decisions. But
if one assumes that this is not the case, policy makers and local governments should consider the
consequences of a lack of clarity and precision in their directives.
These contributions notwithstanding, the study also has certain limitations. First, our empirical
strategy focuses on social learning from chain establishments to community establishments. We
recognize, however, that community establishments’ closure decisions might also have a reciprocal
impact on the closure decisions of chain establishments. At the moment, we do not have a com-
parable instrumental variable strategy to help pin down this e↵ect. Second, as rich as the location
tracking data from SafeGraph are, they are ill-suited to pinning down the mechanisms that un-
derlie the patterns we observe (e.g., the exact nature of social information that ﬁrms acquire from
competitors).
In sum, this study documents that community establishments are prone to following suit in re-
sponding to the closure decisions of chain establishments. Understanding organizational decision
making during tumultuous times such as a global pandemic can help local governments design more
e↵ective policies to positively inﬂuence the behavior of local establishments.
References
Akbarpour, Mohammad, Cody Cook, Aude Marzuoli, Simon Mongey, Abhishek Nagaraj, Matteo
Saccarola, Pietro Tebaldi, Shoshana Vasserman, and Hanbin Yang. 2020. “Socioeconomic Net-
work Heterogeneity and Pandemic Policy Response.” University of Chicago, Becker Friedman
Institute for Economics Working Paper .
Anderson, Roy M, Hans Heesterbeek, Don Klinkenberg, and T D´eirdre Hollingsworth. 2020. “How
Will Country-Based Mitigation Measures Inﬂuence the Course of the COVID-19 Epidemic?” The
Lancet 395:931–934.
Azoulay, Pierre, Christopher Liu, and Toby E. Stuart. 2017. “Social Inﬂuence Given (Partially)
Deliberate Matching: Career Imprints in the Creation of Academic Entrepreneurs.” American
Journal of Sociology 122:1223–1271.
Baker, Scott R, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J Davis. 2016. “Measuring Economic Policy Uncer-
tainty.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131:1593–1636.
Balla-Elliott, Dylan, Zo¨e B Cullen, Edward L Glaeser, Michael Luca, and Christopher T Stanton.
2020. “Business Reopening Decisions and Demand Forecasts During the COVID-19 Pandemic.”
Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Benzell, Seth G, Avinash Collis, and Christos Nicolaides. 2020. “Rationing Social Contact During
the COVID-19 Pandemic: Transmission Risk and Social Beneﬁts of US Locations.” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences .
13

Boxell, Levi, Jacob Conway, Matthew Gentzkow, Michael Thaler, and David Yang. 2020. “Po-
larization and Public Health: Partisan Di↵erences in Social Distancing during the Coronavirus
Pandemic.” Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Chang, Serina, Emma Pierson, Pang Wei Koh, Jaline Gerardin, Beth Redbird, David Grusky,
and Jure Leskovec. 2020. “Mobility network models of COVID-19 explain inequities and inform
reopening.” Nature pp. 1–8.
Chiou, Lesley and Catherine Tucker. 2020.
“Social distancing, internet access and inequality.”
Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Coleman, James Samuel. 1990. Foundations of Social Theory. Belknap Press of Harvard University
Press.
Davis, Gerald F. 1991. “Agents without principles? The spread of the poison pill through the
intercorporate network.” Administrative science quarterly pp. 583–613.
Derenoncourt, Ellora. 2019. “Can you move to opportunity? Evidence from the Great Migration.”
Working Paper .
DiMaggio, Paul and Filiz Garip. 2012. “Network e↵ects and social inequality.” Annual review of
sociology 38:93–118.
DiMaggio, Paul J. and Walter W. Powell. 1983.
“The Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional Iso-
morphism and Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields.” American Sociological Review
48:147–160.
Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul, Isaac Sorkin, and Henry Swift. 2018. “Bartik instruments: What, when,
why, and how.” Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Goolsbee, Austan, Nicole Bei Luo, Roxanne Nesbitt, and Chad Syverson. 2020. “COVID-19 Lock-
down Policies at the State and Local Level.” University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute
for Economics Working Paper .
Kelly, Erin L. 2003.
“The strange history of employer-sponsored child care: Interested actors,
uncertainty, and the transformation of law in organizational ﬁelds.” American journal of Sociology
109:606–649.
Lee, David L, Justin McCrary, Marcelo J Moreira, and Jack Porter. 2020. “Valid t-ratio Inference
for IV.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.05058 .
Pfe↵er, Je↵rey, Gerald R Salancik, and Huseyin Leblebici. 1976. “The E↵ect of Uncertainty on the
Use of Social Inﬂuence in Organizational Decision Making.” Administrative Science Quarterly
21:227–245.
Powell, Walter W, Kenneth W Koput, and Laurel Smith-Doerr. 1996. “Interorganizational col-
laboration and the locus of innovation: Networks of learning in biotechnology.” Administrative
science quarterly pp. 116–145.
Rogers, Everett M. 2010. Di↵usion of innovations. Simon and Schuster.
Shalizi, Cosma Rohilla and Andrew C. Thomas. 2011. “Homophily and Contagion are Generically
Confounded in Observational Social Network Studies.” Sociological Methods & Research 40:211–
239.
Turner, John C. 2010. “Social Categorization and the Self-concept: A Social Cognitive Theory of
Group Behavior.” In Key readings in social psychology. Rediscovering social identity, edited by
T. Postmes and N.R. Branscombe, pp. 243–272. Psychology Press.
Tushman, Michael L and Elaine Romanelli. 1983. “Uncertainty, Social Location and Inﬂuence in
Decision Making: A Sociometric Analysis.” Management Science 29:12–23.
Young, H Peyton. 2009. “Innovation di↵usion in heterogeneous populations: Contagion, social
inﬂuence, and social learning.” American economic review 99:1899–1924.
14

Figures and Tables
Figure 1: Illustration of our research design
F = Open Chain establishment
• = Open Community establishment
F = Closed Chain establishment • = Closed Community establishment
Note: This ﬁgure provides an illustration of our research design using two neighboring zip codes in Collin County, TX –
75150 on the left and 75409 on the right. This ﬁgure plots all establishments belonging to the NAICS code 713940 (Fitness
and Recreational Sports Centers) in these two zip codes in our data. Chain establishments are represented by stars, while
community establishments are indicated by circles. Establishments colored in red are closed, while establishments in blue are
open on March 25, 2020 according to our algorithm. As is clear from this ﬁgure, the chain establishment in the left panel (which
is Brand A) has closed while the chain establishment in the right panel (Brand B) has not. In this example, 78% of community
establishments in the left panel are closed while only 66% of community establishments in the right panel are closed on this
given day.
Table 1: Summary Statistics
N
Median
Mean
St. Dev.
Min
Max
Open
10,368,135
0
0.431
0.495
0
1
Prop. Branch Est. Opent−1
10,368,135
0.7
0.593
0.356
0
1
National Chain Opening Exposuret−1
10,368,135
0.609
0.611
0.253
0.000
1.000
Avg. February Traﬃc
230,403
12.562
17.185
25.032
7.032
7,014.948
Prop. Devices At Home
9,688,964
0.343
0.342
0.110
0.003
0.778
Shelter in Place
10,368,135
0
0.156
0.362
0
1
Note: Open is a binary variable indicating whether the community establishment is open or not on a given day.
Prop.
Branch Est.
Open is the ratio of chain establishments that remains open to the total number of chain
establishments in the same industry and zip code. National Chain Opening Exposure is a weighted average of
national opening rates of di↵erent chains that have establishments in the zip area and are in the same industry
as the community establishment. We include three control variables. Avg. February Traﬃc captures the average
number of visitors of an establishment in the month prior to the outbreak of COVID-19. Prop. Devices At Home
measures the ratio of the total number of devices at home and the total number of devices in a census tract area.
Shelter In Place is a binary variable indicating whether a Shelter-in-Place order is in e↵ect in the community
establishment’s county. The Local Customers, Loyal Customers, and Avg. February Traﬃc are all cross-sectional
measures measured in February. The other variables change over time, with Prop. Devices At Home missing some
observations. If our models include this variable, we drop the missing cases.
15

Table 2: OLS and IV Regressions of Community Est. Open
Panel A: OLS Estimates
Open
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
Prop. Branch Est. Opent−1
0.293⇤⇤⇤
0.180⇤⇤⇤
0.060⇤⇤⇤
0.037⇤⇤⇤
(0.011)
(0.006)
(0.003)
(0.002)
Avg. February Traﬃc
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001⇤
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Prop. Devices At Home
−1.275⇤⇤⇤
−1.993⇤⇤⇤
−0.351⇤⇤⇤
−0.168⇤⇤⇤
(0.068)
(0.040)
(0.027)
(0.026)
Shelter In Place
−0.042⇤⇤⇤
−0.038⇤⇤⇤
(0.011)
(0.007)
(Intercept)
0.678⇤⇤⇤
(0.030)
Fixed E↵ect NAICS
No
Yes (25)
Yes (25)
No
Fixed E↵ect Zip
No
Yes (11,879)
Yes (11,879)
Yes (11,879)
Fixed E↵ect Date
No
No
Yes (45)
No
Fixed E↵ect NAICS ⇥Date
No
No
No
Yes (1,125)
Fixed E↵ect County ⇥Date
No
No
No
Yes (70,738)
Observations
9, 688, 964
9, 688, 964
9, 688, 964
9, 688, 964
R2
0.195
0.263
0.302
0.300
Panel B: IV Estimates
Model 5
Model 6
First Stage
IV
First Stage
IV
Prop. Branch Est. Opent−1
0.113⇤⇤⇤
0.099⇤⇤⇤
(0.006)
(0.008)
National Chain Opening Exposuret−1
0.961⇤⇤⇤
0.972⇤⇤⇤
(0.013)
(0.015)
Avg. February Traﬃc
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
(0.000)
(0.001)
(0.000)
(0.001)
Prop. Devices At Home
−0.232⇤⇤⇤
−0.332⇤⇤⇤
−0.004
−0.165⇤⇤⇤
(0.032)
(0.026)
(0.024)
(0.024)
Fixed E↵ect NAICS
Yes (25)
Yes (25)
No
No
Fixed E↵ect Zip
Yes (11, 879)
Yes (11, 879)
Yes (11, 879)
Yes (11, 879)
Fixed E↵ect Date
Yes (45)
Yes (45)
No
No
Fixed E↵ect NAICS ⇥Date
No
No
Yes (1,125)
Yes (1,125)
Fixed E↵ect County ⇥Date
No
No
Yes (70, 738 )
Yes (70, 738)
Observations
9, 688, 964
9, 688, 964
9, 688, 964
9, 688, 964
⇤⇤⇤p < 0.001; ⇤⇤p < 0.01; ⇤p < 0.05
Note: Establishment-date level observations.
The sample includes all establishment-dates from March
2 2020 to April 15 2020 for 230,403 community establishments who have at least one national brand
competitor in their zipcode. The main dependent variable Open:0/1=1 if a place is deemed open according
to our measure derived from SafeGraph cellphone visit data. Prop. Chain Est. Open is the percent of
same-industry zip chain establishments that are open on the same date. Avg. February Foot Traﬃc denotes
average visitors in February 2020. Prop. Devices at Home indicates number of devices that sheltered-in-
place in a given zip code by not leaving their residence even once. Shelter In Place: 0/1=1 if a zip has
a formal Shelter In Place regulation asking establishments to shut down. In the IV regression (Panel B),
National Chain Opening Exposure indicates the predicted likelihood of competitor chain establishments
being open as measured by national closing patterns. The number of ﬁxed e↵ects estimated are included
in parentheses following the ﬁxed e↵ects indicators.
16