TITLE: “Just Words? Just Speeches?” On the Economic Value of Charismatic Leadership
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2021.4219
---

0 
 
“Just Words? Just Speeches?” 
On the Economic Value of Charismatic Leadership 
 
John Antonakis (University of Lausanne) 
Giovanna d’Adda (Università degli Studi di Milano) 
Roberto A. Weber (University of Zurich) 
Christian Zehnder (University of Lausanne) 
 
June 2021 
 
Abstract 
Leadership theories in sociology and psychology argue that effective leaders influence follower 
behavior not only through the design of incentives and institutions, but also through personal 
abilities to persuade and motivate. Although charismatic leadership has received considerable 
attention in the management literature, existing research has not yet established causal evidence 
for an effect of leader charisma on follower performance in incentivized and economically 
relevant situations. We report evidence from field and laboratory experiments that investigate 
whether a leader’s charisma—in the form of a stylistically different motivational speech—can 
induce individuals to undertake personally costly but socially beneficial actions. In the field 
experiment, we find that workers who are given a charismatic speech increase their output by 
about 17% relative to workers who listen to a standard speech. This effect is statistically 
significant and comparable in size to the positive effect of high-powered financial incentives. 
We then investigate the effect of charisma in a series of laboratory experiments in which 
subjects are exposed to motivational speeches before playing a repeated public goods game. 
Our results reveal that a higher number of charismatic elements in the speech can increase 
public-good contributions by up to 19%. However, we also find that the effectiveness of 
charisma varies and appears to depend on the social context in which the speech is delivered. 
 
Key words: Field experiment, charisma, work performance, incentives, leadership 
JEL-Codes: C93, C92, D01, D23, M12, M52 
 
 
 
 

 
1 
1 Introduction 
“Just words, just speeches” was a refrain used in a speech by former U.S. President Barack 
Obama, and earlier by former governor Deval Patrick. They used it to highlight the importance 
of leader rhetoric in giving hope, direction, and meaning to followers. Such soft means of leader 
influence have long held allure as a potentially powerful influence on human behavior and 
featured prominently in sociological and social psychological theories of organizations and 
bureaucracies (Barnard, 1940; Katz & Kahn, 1978; Weber, 1947). Leadership research often 
parallels these perceptions, noting that leaders can influence follower behavior not only through 
the design of incentives and institutions, but also through personal abilities to persuade and 
motivate (House, 1977). Hence, a leader’s “charisma”—the ability to transmit information in a 
symbolic, value-based, and emotional manner (Antonakis et al., 2016)—is a potentially 
important channel through which leaders exert influence. 
However, the question of whether more charismatic “words” can truly motivate and inspire 
followers remains in need of greater scrutiny. Although the fields of psychology and 
management have contributed much to understanding leadership, there are still many 
limitations that bound what conclusions we can draw from the existing empirical work in these 
fields. For example, field studies predicting outcomes from measured leadership styles typically 
ignore that the measures are endogenous and that their correlations with outcomes are very 
plausibly due to omitted variables (see Antonakis et al., 2010, for a detailed discussion). The 
“identification revolution” from economics (cf. Angrist & Pischke, 2010) has not yet made its 
mark in the management and leadership literatures, despite a growing group of scholars 
increasingly noting that causal identification is often ignored and that policy implications from 
endogeneity-plagued findings are few (Gottfredson et al, 2020; Güntner et al., 2020; Sajons, 
2020; Sieweke & Santoni, 2020). 
Moreover, whereas psychologists have studied manipulations of charisma in the laboratory 
(e.g., Howell & Frost, 1989; Shea & Howell, 1999; Towler, 2003), the tasks on which 
participants have worked tend to be trivial, with hypothetical or low stakes, and are never 
compared to incentivized counterfactual conditions. In addition, there is a paucity of robust 
evidence on the effects of charismatic leadership from field experiments (Eden, 2020). Thus, 
despite thousands of published articles in the leadership field, causal evidence for an effect of 
leadership in general—and leader charisma in particular—on follower performance in 
incentivized and economically relevant situations has yet to be convincingly demonstrated. 

 
2 
In parallel to research in leadership and management, economists have primarily 
emphasized incentives and contract design as the primary mechanism through which principals 
influence agents (Lazear & Rosen, 1981; Holmström, 1982; Holmström & Milgrom, 1991; 
Lazear, 2000); this mode of influence is usually referred to as “transactional leadership” in the 
political science, management and psychology literatures (Bass, 1985; Burns, 1978). Economic 
research has, for the most part, largely ignored the “softer” channels, including charismatic 
communication, through which other social scientists assume an important part of leader 
influence occurs. The limited study of leadership mechanisms in economics primarily focuses 
on situations where a party with private information takes costly actions to convey information 
and thereby influence behavior (Hermalin, 1998; Potters et al., 2007). Within the standard 
economic framework, it is difficult to model how words alone—without conveying costly 
signals—can motivate people to change their behavior. Indeed, a recent theoretical model of 
how “charismatic” leaders influence followers (Hermalin, 2017) assumes that at least part of 
this influence is due to the possibility of irrational responses to charisma. 
A few experimental studies in economics provide causal evidence on the extent to which 
“just words” directly influence followers’ actions.1 Most relevant, for our purposes, is work by 
Kvaløy et al. (2015), who use a field experiment to test whether the inclusion of written 
motivational sentences increases performance in a data entry job, finding that such statements 
have a positive effect only when combined with financial incentives. Related work on 
persuasion shows experimentally how interacting with political leaders affects citizens’ 
political preferences and behaviors (Minozzi et al. 2015). Similarly, “moral suasion”—
messages espousing moral arguments for contributing to a public good—can increase voluntary 
contributions, although with effects that diminish over time (Bott et al. 2020; Dal Bo and Dal 
Bo 2014). Finally, d’Adda, et al (2017) find that letting leaders communicate with followers 
often leads to more cheating and dishonesty. Hence, there is some evidence that words alone 
can have an impact on economic behavior, but this evidence is limited and mixed.2 
 
1 A recent paper by Bénabou et al. (2018) investigates theoretically how statements—in the form of “narratives” 
or “imperatives”—can influence moral behavior. Indeed, as in the psychological literature on leadership, they 
allow the possibility that the style and rhetoric through which a message is delivered can lead people to adopt 
different beliefs about the degree to which a costly act is moral. 
2 Fest et al. (in press) use a similar design to that in Kvaløy et al. (2015) to explore the effects of written messages 
that either convey positive expectations or set specific goals. Neither type of message has a positive effect on 
performance in their study. A handful of laboratory studies provide correlational evidence that certain types of 
messages from leaders, making substantively different kinds of arguments, can be more effective for inducing 
change to more efficient equilibria in coordination games (Brandts & Cooper, 2007; Brandts et al., 2015). 
However, the investigation of message content in this research is post hoc and provides no evidence on variation 
in style or charisma of leaders’ messages. 

 
3 
Our paper attempts to bridge the gap between economics and sociological and 
psychological research on charismatic leadership. Our research therefore has a different focus 
than the previous literature: all above-mentioned studies in economics either compared the 
effect of having a motivating message to not having such a message or contrasted motivating 
messages with varying substantive content. Our studies, in contrast, explore how the delivery 
and style of leaders’ communication—and particularly varying the charisma of such 
communication—shapes the effect of a particular motivating message on performance. In other 
words, we are interested in testing whether a leader who delivers a message “better”—that is, 
in a more charismatic way—has a more powerful influence on followers’ efforts. 
We first present a field experiment intended to test, whether “charismatic” leadership, in 
the form of a stylistically different speech given by a leader, can induce workers to exert higher 
effort. In a second step, we further explore the generalizability and limitations of the motivating 
effect of charisma in a series of laboratory experiments in which participants are exposed to 
varying speeches before participating in a repeated public goods game.3 For a clean 
identification of the charisma effect, we always let the same individual (a trained actor) deliver 
the two speeches and we ensured that the number of words and the content—that is, the de facto 
topics, information, structure and themes presented—of the paired speeches were qualitatively 
very similar. Our objective was to vary only the message delivery, in the form of the leader’s 
use of charismatic communication techniques identified in previous psychological leadership 
research. To ensure that the speeches were perceived as intended, we performed manipulation 
checks in which independent samples of participants evaluated each speech along several 
dimensions. 
In our field experiment, temporary workers have to prepare envelopes for a fundraising 
campaign conducted on behalf of a hospital. Workers are exposed to short motivational 
speeches that differ in the number of charismatic elements. To quantify the impact of charisma 
on worker performance, we also compare its effectiveness with the effect of high-powered 
performance pay. As expected, we find that performance pay significantly increases workers’ 
performance, by about 20%, compared to a baseline condition, an increase that is similar in size 
to those found in other field studies (e.g., Lazear, 2000; Shearer, 2004). More interestingly, our 
charismatic motivational speech increases performance by about 17% relative to the baseline 
low-charisma condition, a statistically significant effect that is indistinguishable from that of 
financial incentives. Moreover, whereas the piece rate condition engenders a small and 
 
3 Our work builds on a large body of interdisciplinary studies that introduce insights from diverse areas of social 
science to understand the factors that influence human cooperation (e.g., Deutsch, et al., 1967; Dawes, et al. 1977). 

 
4 
insignificant increase in the cost per letter, the charisma condition significantly decreases the 
cost per letter by about 15%. This calculation of the reduced cost per letter does not take into 
account that the provision of a charismatic speech might be costly as well, but our data allow 
us to determine the maximal amount that could be spent so that charisma remains cost effective. 
Quality checks suggest that the positive effects of charisma and financial incentives do not 
come at the cost of lower quality. 
The field experiment provides clear evidence that varying charisma can influence the 
extent to which leader communication induces desirable follower actions. However, to develop 
a robust understanding of the effects of charisma it is important to test its influence in other 
settings and to develop paradigms that allow researchers to more easily study its effectiveness 
in contexts with varying features. We thus complement our field experiment with a series of 
laboratory studies. The laboratory experiments establish an easily replicable and flexible 
workhorse setting that we and others can use for future research on charisma. 
In all our laboratory experiments, participants play the same four-person public goods 
game for 10 periods. There are many important differences between this laboratory setting and 
the context we use to study the effects of leader charisma in the field. Our objective was not to 
try to identify a laboratory setting as similar as possible to the field context. Rather, we aimed 
to study the effects of charisma on a behavior—voluntary cooperation—that is of fundamental 
importance in the social and organizational sciences using a laboratory paradigm that has been 
previously studied extensively. Our philosophy was thus to start with a very stark environment 
that mimics the way public goods experiments are typically conducted and that omits many 
features of our field experiment. Doing so allows us to identify boundary conditions, beyond 
which charisma is unlikely to have an effect—and where the observation of an effect would be 
surprising. We then add features that are present in the field experiment to shed light on factors 
that might play a role in determining whether charisma has a motivating influence. 
In all laboratory experiments, we compare a high charisma condition, where participants 
watch a charismatic speech before making the first contribution decision, to a low charisma 
condition, where participants see a similar speech, but presented in a less charismatic manner. 
In the first laboratory experiment, we add a baseline condition in which participants do not 
observe a speech. In the second laboratory experiment, we increase the moral dimension of the 
contribution decision—thereby bringing it closer to the context in our field experiment—by 
modifying the game so that each contribution to the public good also creates a donation to a 
children’s hospital. In the third laboratory experiment, participants watch the video as a group 
rather than individually, reproducing the social context from our field experiment. 

 
5 
We find that the high charisma condition yields at least slightly higher contributions 
than the low charisma condition in all laboratory experiments. However, the effect size and its 
statistical strength vary considerably across studies. The biggest difference arises when 
followers are exposed to a charismatic leader in each other’s presence, a feature that is also 
present in our field experiment.4 Contributions to the public good in the third laboratory 
experiment are about 19% higher in the charisma condition compared to no charisma—an effect 
very similar to that in our field experiment—and this difference is statistically significant. We 
use the observation that the effects of charisma appear strongest in our study when individuals 
observe one another receiving the leader’s speech, along with other aspects of our data, to 
cautiously speculate about the mechanisms that may influence the effects of charisma on 
follower behavior. For example, we use measures of beliefs of others’ contributions from our 
laboratory experiment to rule out a direct influence of charisma on beliefs as the main channel. 
Instead, dynamic aspects of the data suggest that groups exposed jointly to charismatic 
communication exhibit greater resilience in not decreasing contributions over time. 
To the best of our knowledge, our experiment is the first to document a causal effect of 
leader charisma on follower behavior in economically relevant environments. Previous studies 
have established that non-monetary motivational instruments, such as symbolic awards 
(Kosfeld & Neckermann, 2011; Bradler et al., 2016) or messages about the meaning of work 
(Grant, 2008; Kosfeld et al., 2014) can increase workers’ output. There is also evidence that 
nudging leadership in non-routine team-tasks substantively increases performance (Englmaier 
et al., 2019). As we note earlier, other studies find some positive impact of brief motivational 
statements (Kvaløy et al., 2015; Dal Bó & Dal Bó, 2014). However, we show that it may not 
only be important to provide followers with such statements, but that how the message is 
delivered can also have significant impacts. If leaders use charismatic leadership tactics, the 
same substantive message can have a much larger positive impact on followers’ behavior. 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: In the following section, we discuss 
the concept of charisma in more detail. In this section we also present an ad hoc model of how 
a leader’s charisma might influence follower behavior, which we return to in developing 
concrete hypotheses for each experiment. Section 3 presents the design and results for our field 
experiment, while Section 4 presents the laboratory experiments. In Section 5, we discuss the 
combined evidence from our studies and provide a broad conclusion. 
 
4 This finding is partly consistent with the model of Hermalin (2017), where part of the effectiveness of charisma 
comes from a rational individual’s belief that other irrational followers will be influenced by charisma. 

 
6 
2 Charisma and Leadership 
2.1 
Background 
Because the concept of charisma is rarely used in economic research, we find it useful to provide 
some background (see Antonakis et al., 2016 for a detailed historical overview). The term 
“charisma” (from the Greek “χάρισμα,” meaning gift) was first used by Max Weber (1947) to 
describe leaders who appeared to have “supernatural, superhuman, or at least specifically 
exceptional powers or qualities” (p. 358). Most of the early scholarship on charisma, descriptive 
in nature, was focused in the political science literature (Burns 1978; Downton 1973; Willner 
1984). House (1977) first proposed a detailed psychological account of how charismatic leaders 
impact followers, rejecting the notion that charisma was somehow a mysterious quality. For 
House, it was important to understand the basis of the psychological interaction that charismatic 
leaders have with their followers, resulting from the characteristics of the leader (e.g., 
confidence and moral conviction), what the leader says, and the situation in which the 
influencing process occurs. 
 
The first systematic empirical research program on charisma began in the field of 
applied psychology, led by Bernard M. Bass (e.g., Bass, 1985; Bass et al., 1987; Waldman et 
al., 1990); other research groups followed suit (e.g., Alimo-Metcalfe & Alban-Metcalfe, 2001; 
Conger et al., 1997; De Hoogh et al., 2004; Podsakoff et al., 1990). The psychological approach 
has generally used questionnaires to gauge perceptions of charisma (see Antonakis et al., 2016 
for details), with the best known one referred to as the Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire 
(MLQ) (Bass & Avolio, 1995). This research strand follows from the idea that charisma is in 
the eye of the beholder and thus measuring perceptions of charisma in observers captures true 
variation in the behaviors signaled by the leader. 
This approach to studying charisma has been strongly challenged, initially by Yukl 
(1999), and later by Antonakis et al, (2011, 2016) and van Knippenberg and Sitkin (2013). 
These critiques identified limitations in the study of charisma including that: 1) charisma was 
confounded with a broader leadership typology called transformational leadership, which 
includes other fundamentally different leadership approaches (e.g., being individually 
considerate) that have nothing to do with charisma per se, 2) charisma was defined and 
measured in terms of its outcomes and was thus conceptually and empirically confounded and 
3) questionnaire measures of charisma are endogenous—they are biased by omitted variables; 
these variables include a host of causes at various levels of analysis (e.g., leader, observer, 
context, microeconomic environment) that may also affect the measure outcome. While it may 

 
7 
seem clear that such measures cannot be modeled as causes of other variables, the ease with 
which questionnaire data can be gathered makes it an appealing approach in much 
organizational research. However, the obvious limitations in modeling these measures as 
ostensive causes of consequential outcomes has been noted in the management literature 
(Fischer et al., 2020). 
The effects of charisma have been isolated and exogenously manipulated in the 
laboratory, producing valuable contributions on the effects of charismatic leadership (e.g., 
Howell & Frost, 1989; Shea & Howell, 1999; Antonakis et al., 2011; Frese et al., 2003; Towler, 
2003). Yet, as mentioned earlier, these experiments lacked consequential outcomes and the 
treatment effects have never been compared to strong counterfactual conditions (e.g., against 
economic incentives). Still, this literature as well as other work (e.g., Den Hartog & Verburg, 
1997; Shamir et al., 1994) provides a useful starting point for identifying communication 
techniques of charismatic leaders. 
Turning to the precise characteristics that make a leader charismatic, Antonakis and 
colleagues (Antonakis et al., 2011; Jacquart & Antonakis, 2015; Tur et al., 2021) identify nine 
verbal and three non-verbal “charismatic leadership tactics” (CLTs). The CLTs are thought to 
help make a leader’s message more salient by making it easier to picture and remember, and by 
arousing follower emotions. From an experimentalist’s point of view, the CLTs are interesting 
because they can be manipulated. The tactics include: (i) metaphors, to simplify the message 
and trigger easy recall; (ii) rhetorical questions, to create intrigue and suspense and direct 
attention to seeking the answer; (iii) stories and anecdotes, to trigger imagery and recall, and 
identify a relevant moral; (iv) contrasts, to define what should be done versus what should not 
be done and (v) three-part lists, to provide sufficient proof or completeness; (vi) expressing 
moral conviction, to focus attention on moral justification and on doing what is right; (vii) 
expressing the sentiments of the collective, essentially using cognitive empathy to engender 
identification (via similarity) with the leader; (viii) setting high and ambitious goals, to make 
followers feel competent and focus their effort on a target and (ix) creating confidence that 
goals can be achieved. Charismatic leaders also affect followers via non-verbal means that 
reinforce the message and convey the leaders’ emotional states, including (x) body gestures, 
(xi) facial expressions, and (xii) an animated voice tone (for more details on the CLTs and 
examples see Antonakis et al. 2012). In naturally-occurring data the presence of verbal and non-
verbal CLTs in leaders’ communication tend to correlate quite strongly (r = .48, Antonakis et 
al. 2011). We will build on this research stream to robustly test the impacts of charisma. 

 
8 
2.2 
Effects of Leader Charisma on Follower Behavior: An Ad-Hoc Model 
In standard economic theory, stylistic communication—the way in which the content is 
delivered—plays no role, because only informational content matters. We present a simple 
model that illustrates the potential impact of leader charisma on follower performance. The 
model does not capture the details of the complex psychological mechanisms underlying leader-
follower interactions, but rather relies on an ad hoc framework. The model is useful because it 
formalizes our intuitions and delivers testable predictions. 
We model an environment in which N followers choose an action in response to a 
motivational message of a leader. Follower i’s utility function has the following form: 
Ui = m(a) + n(a,c) – k(ai), 
where ai is follower i’s productive action, a is a vector containing all followers’ actions (a = 
{a1, a2, …, aN}), c is a measure of the leader’s charisma as perceived by the followers, m is the 
follower’s material benefit, n is the intrinsic (or non-material) utility that the worker derives 
from performing action ai, and k is the follower’s effort cost. 
We assume that the follower’s material benefit m weakly increases in the follower’s 
own action (∂m/∂ai ≥ 0), and in other followers’ actions (∂m/∂aj ≥ 0). The follower’s intrinsic 
utility n can either be a positive term (the follower may enjoy contributing to a useful cause) or 
a negative term (the follower may feel guilty about not contributing to a good cause).5 This type 
of utility may not only be driven by the follower’s own action ai, but may also depend on the 
contribution of others a-i and the perceived leader charisma c. We assume that the worker’s 
productive action has a strictly positive impact on intrinsic utility (∂n/∂ai > 0 and ∂2n/∂ai2 ≤ 0), 
either because contributing makes the worker feel better (if n > 0) or because contributing 
reduces the feeling of guilt (if n < 0). Being exposed to a more charismatic leader is assumed 
to intensify the psychological impact (∂n/∂c > 0 if n > 0 or ∂n/∂c < 0 if n < 0) and to increase 
the intrinsic motivation to perform the task (∂2n/∂ai∂c > 0).6 Moreover, depending on the 
situation, we allow followers’ actions to be strategic complements (∂2n/∂ai∂aj ≥ 0) or strategic 
substitutes (∂2n/∂ai∂aj ≤ 0).7 The cost function k increases in the follower’s action (∂k/∂ai > 0). 
 
5 For our predictions it makes no difference whether the intrinsic utility is positive or negative. The impact of 
charisma on motivation may either be driven by an increase in the utility of contributing or by an increase in the 
disutility of not contributing. The sign may be important in contexts where participation constraints are relevant, 
but in all our experiments participants commit to participation before being exposed to the treatment. 
6 See Kvaløy & Schöttner (2015) for a related assumption. In their model the principal’s “motivational effort” 
reduces the worker’s marginal effort cost. 
7 Strategic complementarity is a plausible assumption in social dilemma settings where conditional cooperation 
has been shown to play a crucial role (see, e.g., Fischbacher et al. 2001). However, other settings may be 
 

 
9 
Our assumption imply that charisma may not only have a direct impact on intrinsic 
motivation (∂2n/∂ai∂c > 0), but may also operate through other channels. If the material or 
intrinsic benefits also depend on others’ actions, charisma may also have indirect effects, 
because each follower anticipates the impact of charisma on her fellow followers (e.g. if 
∂2m/∂ai∂aj ≠ 0 and/or ∂2n/∂ai∂aj ≠ 0). We will discuss the relevance of these different channels 
when we present each of our experiments. 
3 Field Experiment 
3.1 
Recruitment and Procedures 
We conducted our field experiment in collaboration with the Birmingham Children’s Hospital 
(BCH). In November 2013 the BCH launched their “Super Santa” fundraising campaign to 
collect money to help children remaining in the hospital during the Christmas period. Donations 
would fund the purchase of gifts, the refurbishment of rooms and parents’ travel expenses, so 
that the children could spend Christmas with their families. 
To launch the campaign the BCH required about 30,000 stuffed donation letters. To 
prepare these letters we contracted a large temporary employment agency to hire 120 temporary 
workers.8 Following their standard procedure, the agency sent the job advertisement to the usual 
pool of job searchers and posted it at local job centers. The advertisement mentioned that the 
job would consist of stuffing envelopes for 3 hours at home, that the material would have to be 
picked up at the agency’s office and that each worker would be compensated for 3 hours of 
work plus 1.5 hours of traveling and instruction time (see Figure 1 for the original job 
advertisement). The agency handled the sign-up procedure and assigned time slots so that not 
more than eight workers at a time would show up to collect their materials. This assignment 
was mostly followed: only one session had more than 8 participants, while the remaining ones 
had 8 or fewer participants, depending on how many workers failed to show up to the session. 
Workers were not aware that the job was also part of a scientific study.9 
 
characterized by strategic substitutability, as when a fixed overall contribution is needed or when thresholds matter. 
In such contexts, charisma may have diminished impact. 
8 The size of the sample was limited by logistical and implementation constraints. First, we could only have a 
limited number of workers at a time to receive instructions in a conference room. Second, to have the same actor 
deliver the speech to all groups, it was infeasible to have multiple simultaneous groups. Third, because workers 
returned their boxes the following day, we wanted all workers to complete their first session by the time workers 
from earlier sessions started returning their materials. Fourth, to prevent interactions of workers between sessions, 
sessions started once per hour. These constraints limited us to 15 sessions consisting of at most 8 workers and also 
informed our choice to divide the sample into 3 treatments, rather than the 4 of a 2x2 factorial design. 
9 All information about the job was correct and the work was real (all stuffed letters were sent out to potential 
donors). In line with the requirements of the IRB of the University of Birmingham, we debriefed our participants 
after the data collection had been completed. The debriefing letter is displayed in Appendix C. 

 
10 
[Figure 1 about here] 
Each worker was required to show up twice at the agency’s office in Birmingham. On 
the first day workers participated (in groups of eight) in an instruction session of 25 minutes. 
An instructor explained the task in detail and each worker assembled a sample letter. At the end 
each worker signed up for a time slot to return the stuffed letters on the following day10 and 
picked up materials to stuff up to 350 letters.11 The materials were packed in two cardboard 
boxes (with a weight of about 3.5 kilograms each) that were placed in plastic bags so that the 
workers could easily carry them. Before the workers left, they were informed that an organizer 
would provide them with more information about the importance of their job. They were then 
given a five-minute motivational speech by a professional actor. 
Once the instruction session was over, workers took the material home to complete their 
work there. On the next day each worker returned the completed envelopes during the agreed 
upon time slot. A researcher then counted the completed envelopes returned by each worker. 
3.2 
Work Task 
The workers’ task consisted of stuffing envelopes, placing them neatly into boxes in bundles of 
ten envelopes and keeping records of printing mistakes. Stuffing an envelope included the 
following steps. First, the worker had to examine a letter for printing faults. Faulty letters 
required removal and recording the type of printing fault on a list. Faultless letters had to be 
neatly folded and placed in a donation envelope. Next, the worker had to handwrite a code from 
a list on a donation form that was then placed behind the letter in the donation envelope. Finally, 
the worker had to insert a smaller return envelope and seal the donation envelope. Once ten 
envelopes had been completed, the worker had to label and bundle them using a rubber band. 
The bundles had to be packed back into the boxes, so that the worker could return the completed 
work in good order. See Appendix A for photos of materials and completed bundles. 
The advantage of letting workers complete the task at home is that they were separated 
from each other so that direct interaction and spillover effects can be excluded. Logistically, it 
would have been challenging to create such an isolated work environment in a natural manner 
on site. Obviously, we could not observe how workers completed their work at home. This lack 
 
10 A maximum of four people in total, and not more than one person per session, could sign up for each slot. Once 
a slot was full, it was taken off the list of available time slots. 
11 We determined the quantity of campaign material to be given to each worker with two main objectives. First, 
we wanted to ensure that the average worker would not be able to complete all the material in the boxes within the 
time set for the work; pre-test data, which we used to finalize the quantity of material to give each worker, 
suggested an average productivity of 217 envelopes in three hours. Second, we did not give more material than 
what was possible for a person of normal build to easily carry to and from their home. 

 
11 
of control is not a problem for the treatment comparison in which we are interested, because it 
is non-differential by condition. Our main variable of interest is the number of completed 
envelopes that the workers returned to the agency’s office—irrespective of how much time they 
spent doing their task or whether they coopted others to help them. However, we also separately 
measured the quality of the work. In addition, we used the waiting time when workers returned 
their envelopes for a short questionnaire in which we elicited information on workers’ age and 
gender and asked them how long they worked and whether they had received help. However, 
as these data are self-reported and cannot be verified, we interpret them with caution. 
3.3 
Treatments 
We now describe the three treatment conditions that we implemented in our experiment: 
Baseline. Workers received a fixed wage (GBP 28.40) corresponding to the British 
minimum hourly wage of GBP 6.31 for 4.5 hours (3 hours of work plus 1.5 hours of instructions 
and travel time). Workers were given the standard motivational speech, which informed in 
detail about the purpose of the donation campaign and described the importance of the work.12 
Charisma. The charisma condition was identical to the baseline, except that we replaced 
the motivational speech with a substantively similar speech delivered more charismatically. The 
two speeches have the same number of words, their content is very similar and they have been 
designed to convey the same amount of information and moral conviction. However, the 
charisma speech relies heavily on the charismatic leadership tactics (CLTs) that we discussed 
previously, such as metaphors, stories and anecdotes, contrasts, rhetorical questions. 
Piece Rate. The piece rate condition was identical to the baseline, except for the payment 
scheme. The workers in the piece rate condition also received the fixed amount of GBP 28.40. 
However, workers who completed more than the threshold of 220 envelopes received—in 
addition to the fixed wage—a piece rate of GBP 0.12 for each additional envelope completed. 
The workers were informed about the payment scheme during the instruction session. 
We designed the incentive scheme based on data that we collected in a pre-test one 
month before the actual experiment with a sample of 16 workers. In the pretest, workers in the 
baseline condition completed 217 envelopes, on average. The British minimum wage 
legislation made a pure performance pay scheme impossible. We therefore adopted a piece rate 
with a minimum guarantee (see, e.g., Lazear, 2000, for a very similar incentive scheme). 
Workers whose performance was below the threshold level of 220 envelopes earned the fixed 
 
12 See http://www.hec.unil.ch/jantonakis/charisma.htm for studio versions of all speeches. Full-text transcripts of 
the speeches and additional information are provided in Appendix B. 

 
12 
wage, whereas workers who stuffed more than 220 envelopes earned the fixed wage plus a 
piece rate for each additional envelope beyond the threshold. We pushed the piece rate up to 
the point at which we expected a further increase to be unprofitable (i.e., just below the 
estimated average cost of a letter in the pre-tested baseline: GBP 28.40 / 217 = GBP 0.13). 
3.4 
Procedural Details 
We ran the experiment on three consecutive days (November 5-7, 2013). We conducted twelve 
instruction sessions on the first day and another three in the morning of the second day (five 
sessions for each treatment). The sessions were organized in five blocks of three. Within each 
block, treatments were randomly assigned to sessions. This procedure guaranteed that the 
different treatments were equally distributed over the time of day. In total we invited 120 
workers and randomly assigned them to sessions. On the first day 88 of the 96 recruited workers 
showed up and attended the session in full, while on the second day 18 of the 24 recruited 
workers did. In total we have 106 observations (35 in the baseline condition, 30 in the piece 
rate condition, and 41 in the charisma condition).13 Among workers who showed up, some did 
not attend the session in full or decided not to perform the task: namely, four subjects (two in 
the baseline and two in the piece-rate condition) left either during or after the session without 
picking up the material, and one subject in the baseline returned the material untouched one 
hour after the session. Inability to return the boxes or other work opportunities were mainly 
cited as reasons for these refusals. In our preferred specifications, we treat these observations 
as missing, but our results are robust to treating these workers as completing 0 envelopes.14 
The average age of participating workers was 32.5 years and 55 percent were female. 
Table 1 presents summary statistics of workers’ characteristics and parametric balance tests: 
the treatment sub-samples are balanced across all characteristics for which we have data.15 
Workers who received instructions on day 1 brought back their envelopes in the 
afternoon of day 2; those who were instructed in the morning of day 2 returned in the morning 
of day 3. On arrival, a collaborator counted the number of completed envelopes and filled out 
a payment slip. The material was then counted again and quality-checked; namely, the 
 
13 Our sample size is in line or larger than that of similar studies, such as Kube et al. (2012) and Gneezy and List 
(2006). When discussing the empirical results, we report Minimum Detectable Effects (MDEs) to discuss ex-post 
power. 
14 We targeted 40 subjects per condition, to be achieved by running 5 sessions with 8 subjects per session in each 
condition. In order to be able to run sessions even if not all workers turned up, we over-recruited workers for each 
session. The number of workers attending a session ranges between a minimum of 5 and a maximum of 11. These 
variations in attendance by session explain the deviations from the target number of subjects by condition. 
15 Balance is confirmed also if we use non-parametric k-sample tests on the equality of medians. None of the 
Fisher’s exact test statistics reveal statistically significant differences across treatment samples. 

 
13 
experimenter examined whether bundles and boxes were neatly packed, and drew three sample 
envelopes to check whether they were correctly stuffed. We use these checks to construct an 
index of quality. The payment of the workers was entirely handled by the employment agency. 
3.5 
Manipulation checks 
We conducted two types of manipulation checks using external evaluators so as to not make 
the workers aware of the experiment (see Lonati et al., 2018): an objective (counting the 
presence of CLTs) and two subjective ones (measuring perceived charisma). 
For the objective manipulation check, two research assistants (trained in recognizing the 
verbal and non-verbal CLTs) independently coded each speech for the absolute presence of 
each tactic (see Appendix D). The presence of the nine verbal CLTs was coded at the sentence 
level (using the transcripts of the speeches).16 The number of CLTs used as a proportion of total 
sentences in the low-charisma speech was 39.02% (i.e., 16 tactics over 41 sentences); in the 
charismatic speech it was 91.67% (i.e., 44 tactics over 48 sentences). This difference is 
statistically significant (z = 5.28, p < 0.001, Koopman, 1984). Although our focus was mostly 
on verbal tactics, which tend to have stronger correlations with outcomes (see Antonakis et al., 
2011), the actor demonstrated appropriate nonverbal behavior to go with the relevant speech. 
The difference in the total instances of appropriate facial expressions and body language 
(evaluated on the basis of the studio videos) between the two conditions (i.e., 25 vs. 150) was 
highly significant (χ2(1) = 89.29, p < 0.001).17 
The non-charismatic speech was a relatively solid speech with good use of rhetorical 
techniques and appropriate use of facial gestures and voice, though with a more subdued 
delivery in the use of body language. This approach was necessary to make the speech realistic 
and consistent with the underlying motivational content and so as to have a fair treatment 
comparison (Cooper & Richardson, 1986). Moreover, given the charitable context in which the 
work was conducted, we held the strength of moral conviction constant across the two speeches. 
 
16 We checked for inter-coder reliability. For the non-charismatic speech (n = 41 sentences), the coders agreed on 
97.02% of the 369 coding events (i.e., 41 sentences * 9 categories). This level of agreement can be tested against 
chance agreement: κ = .63, z = 12.28, p < 0.001 (Landis & Koch, 1977). We found similar results for the 
charismatic speech (n = 48 sentences) with 95.60% agreement over 432 coding events: κ = .74, z = 15.44, p < 
0.001. After having coded the speeches individually, the coders reconciled their codings on both speeches until 
reaching agreement. Appendix D reports the coded results for the two speeches. 
17 Specifically, the first coder coded 16 and 13 respective instances of use of appropriate facial expressions and 
body language in the non-charismatic speech; the second coder coded 10 and 11 instances (thus the means are 13 
and 12 respectively). For the charismatic speech, the codings were 75 and 81 (first coder), and 71 and 74 (second 
coder), for means of 73 and 77 (rounded down). 

 
14 
For our initial subjective manipulation check we recruited 57 students from the 
University of Birmingham (situated in the same city in which we held the field experiment), 
whom we randomly assigned to watch a studio filmed video of the baseline (n = 27) or the 
charismatic (n = 30) speech. We used the idealized influence and inspirational motivation scales 
of the Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire (MLQ) to measure perceived charisma (Banks et 
al., 2017). In addition, we also included the General Leadership Impression (GLI) 
questionnaire, which taps into how prototypical the leader seemed to the participants (Cronshaw 
& Lord, 1987).18 Following the advice of an anonymous reviewer, we performed a second 
subjective manipulation check using non-student participants who were more similar to the 
workers in our field experiment. For this purpose, we recruited 301 UK-based participants from 
the online platform Prolific Academic (n = 152 and n = 140, for the standard and the charismatic 
speech, respectively). In addition to the MLQ and GLI questionnaires, we also asked 
participants to directly rate the level of charisma of the speech, and included questions on 
perceptions of the work task and emotions associated with each speech.19 
We perform OLS estimations (with robust standard errors) in which we regress indices 
for MLQ and GLI (created by taking the average of the questionnaires’ items) on an indicator 
variable for the charismatic speech. The results for MLQ confirm that both samples of 
participants evaluate the speaker as more charismatic when delivering the charismatic speech, 
by 0.386 (2.667 vs. 3.053), p = 0.021) and 0.311 (3.828 vs. 4.139, p < 0.001) for student and 
online participants, respectively (where the scale ranged from 0 to 4). This result is further 
reinforced by the fact that—when asked directly—our online participants evaluated the level of 
charisma as significantly higher, by 0.842 (4.578 vs. 5.420, p < 0.001) on a scale from 1 to 7, 
in the charismatic speech than in the standard speech. The speaker was also seen as somewhat 
more prototypical for a leader (GLI) when giving the charismatic speech, but this effect is 
neither significant for the student sample (2.437 vs. 2.773, p = 0.164) nor for the online sample 
(3.722 vs. 3.870, p = 0.221). Finally, regarding task perceptions and emotions our online test 
reveals that the charismatic speech seems to neither make the work task appear more 
meaningful, nor to induce different emotions. Appendix Tables F1 and F2 report the full results 
for the student and online manipulation checks, respectively. 
 
18 Appendix F reports the instructions, survey instrument and implementation details for the subjective 
manipulation checks. 
19 The questions on task meaningfulness were taken from the RAND Corporation American Working Conditions 
survey and the Pew Research Center State of American Jobs survey. 

 
15 
3.6 
Predictions: Effects of Incentives and Charisma on Worker Effort 
We apply the framework from Section 2.2 to analyze our field experiment. In essence, in this 
situation, a leader aims at motivating workers to produce a simple, one-dimensional output.20 
For notational simplicity, we assume that the worker’s action a directly corresponds to produced 
output and drop the worker specific subscript i. The material benefit m corresponds to the salary. 
Workers are either hired under a fixed wage contract in which they receive the wage w 
irrespective of their performance (m = w), or they are hired under a performance pay contract 
in which they get—in addition to the fixed wage w—a piece rate p for each output unit that they 
produce beyond a certain threshold output t (m = w + p⋅max[0, a – t]). The worker’s intrinsic 
utility n > 0 depends on the worker’s output a (∂n/∂a > 0, ∂2n/∂a2 ≤ 0, lim(a→0) ∂k/∂a = ∞, and 
lim (a →∞) ∂i/∂ai = 0)) and the leader’s charisma c (∂n/∂c > 0 and ∂2n/∂a∂c > 0).21 We use a 
standard, convex effort cost function k (∂k/∂ai > 0, ∂2k/∂ ai2 > 0, lim (ai →0) ∂k/∂ai = 0, and lim 
(ai →∞) ∂i/∂ai = ∞). 
The slope of an indifference curve in the money-output space is given as follows: 
∂m/∂a = ∂k/∂a – ∂n/∂a. 
Our assumptions on n and k imply that this slope is negative for low levels of output (because 
initially the increase in intrinsic satisfaction from additional output dominates the cost increase) 
and positive for high levels of output (because the cost increase becomes dominant). 
[Figure 2 about here] 
Figure 2 shows examples of indifference curves in the worker’s benefit-output space for 
both low leader charisma (cL, green lines) and high leader charisma (cH, red lines). In the 
baseline and charisma conditions, the salary corresponds to the fixed wage w, so that the set of 
points that the worker can reach consists of a flat line (blue line). In the piece-rate condition the 
set of reachable points includes a kink (kinked blue line), because the salary starts to increase 
once output surpasses the threshold t (m = w + p⋅max[0, a – t]). The worker’s aim is to reach 
the highest indifference curve possible. In the baseline condition the utility maximizing output 
 
20 One might worry about a quantity-quality trade-off. However, workers are aware that quality may be inspected 
when they return their completed envelopes for payment. In the results section we report quality measures that 
show that workers in the charisma and incentive treatments did not increase quantity at the expense of quality. 
21 We assume that n > 0, because the speeches focus on the positive consequences of working hard rather than the 
negative effects of shirking. However, our hypotheses do not depend on this assumption (see also Section 2.2). 
We abstract from the fact that a worker’s intrinsic benefit may also depend on other workers’ performance. 
Allowing for strategic complements would considerably complicate the exposition without generating decisive 
new insights. We discuss strategic complements when we introduce the public goods game in the next section. 

 
16 
choice is aB. The corresponding levels in the charisma condition and the piece rate condition 
are aC and aP. Thus, both incentives and charisma increase performance. 
Performance pay allows the worker to reach money-output combinations that are not 
available under the fixed wage. If the marginal cost of effort (∂k/∂a) is not yet too high when 
output reaches threshold (a = t), the worker can increase utility by increasing output to a level 
above the threshold (the additional income more than compensates the marginal cost). 
Obviously, the piece rate may have no effect for some workers—if the marginal cost of effort 
is already high at the threshold, the indifference curves are very steep and such workers will be 
unable to increase their utility by working harder. However, as long as there are some workers 
in the population for whom the piece rate is attractive, overall output will strictly increase. 
FE-Hypothesis 1: The output in the piece rate condition is higher than the output in the baseline 
condition. 
The charisma effect is a direct consequence of our assumption that leader charisma 
increases the marginal intrinsic satisfaction from working harder (∂2n/∂a∂c > 0). The positive 
cross derivation flattens the indifference curves (the salary increase necessary to keep utility 
constant when effort increases gets smaller) so that the worker’s optimal output level increases. 
FE-Hypothesis 2: The output in the charisma condition is higher than the output in the baseline 
condition. 
Without further assumptions, our model does not make predictions regarding the relative 
effect sizes for charisma and incentives, because this comparison depends on the incentive 
intensity, the size of the charisma impact, and the functional forms of n and k. To make the 
comparison of effect sizes in the two treatments informative, we implemented the highest piece 
rate that still makes business sense in our environment. In this sense, we test our charisma 
manipulation against the highest piece rate that can be used without losing money. 
3.7 
Results 
We first provide descriptive statistics before analyzing the results with regression analysis. 
Descriptive statistics 
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics. On average, workers in the baseline condition return 
230.9 completed envelopes so that the average cost per letter amounts to GBP 0.123 (GBP 28.4 
/ 230.9). In line with FE-Hypotheses 1 and 2, both the piece rate treatment and the charisma 
treatment substantially increase the number of envelopes. In the piece rate condition workers 

 
17 
return, on average, 277.7 letters (an increase in average output of 20.2% relative to the baseline 
condition). However, because workers who complete more than 220 envelopes receive a piece 
rate of GBP 0.12 for each additional envelope, the workers’ average earnings increase from 
GBP 28.4 to GBP 37.2. As a consequence, there is a small increase in the average cost per letter 
to GBP 0.134 (an increase of 8.8% relative to the baseline). Non-parametric rank-sum tests 
indicate that the increase in performance is statistically significant (p = 0.025), whereas the 
increase in the cost per letter is not (p = 0.580). 
[Table 1 about here] 
In the charisma condition, workers return, on average, 271.2 letters. This performance 
is very similar to that in the piece rate treatment—a non-parametric rank-sum test reveals no 
statistically significant difference (p = 0.802). Relative to the baseline condition, performance 
in the charisma treatment is 17.4% higher. Because earnings were unaffected by the charisma 
manipulation, the higher number of completed letters also results in a substantial reduction of 
the cost per letter to GBP 0.105 (a cost decrease of 14.8% relative to the baseline condition). 
Non-parametric rank-sum tests indicate that both effects are statistically significant (p = 0.017 
in both cases, as the tests are substantively identical).22 This measurement of the cost reduction 
does not consider that the creation of a charismatic speech itself may also come at an additional 
cost. However, our data allow us to determine how much money could have been spent on the 
charismatic speech without increasing the overall cost of the donation campaign. For a planned 
number of 30,000 letters to overall cost reduction amounts to about GBP 540. Thus, as long as 
the cost of increasing the charisma of a five-minutes motivation speech does not exceed this 
amount, using charisma remains cost effective in our setting.23 
Figure 3 summarizes the main effects of our treatment conditions graphically and Figure 
4 reports the distributions of the number of letters completed across treatments. 
[Figures 3 and 4 about here] 
As mentioned in Section 3.4, we not only recorded the number of completed envelopes, 
but we also performed quality checks to investigate, for example, whether workers in the 
monetary bonus treatment were tempted to compromise on quality. Overall, our quality 
inspection yields a series of 20 check items, each of which was judged as either a PASS or a 
 
22 The variance of the distribution of the number of letters stuffed is not different between the two treatments (F-
test for the homogeneity of variances, p = 0.115). 
23 It is important to keep in mind that there was a speech in all our treatments. Thus, the relevant cost is therefore 
not the cost of producing the speech per se, but rather the cost of making the speech more charismatic. 

 
18 
FAIL.24 Out of these 20 items we generate a simple index that calculates the relative frequency 
of passed items. As a second measure we use an indicator variable for perfect quality which is 
unity if all items checked have been passed and zero otherwise.25 
The evidence presented in Table 1 suggests that workers performed their work quite 
carefully in all three conditions. In the baseline conditions workers passed on average 86% of 
the quality items. In the piece rate and charisma conditions the corresponding numbers are 88% 
and 90%, respectively. Non-parametric rank-sum tests indicate that there are no statistically 
significant differences across treatments (baseline vs. piece rate: p = 0.548, baseline vs. 
charisma: p = 0.287, piece rates vs. charisma: p = 0.670). Samples of perfect quality were 
somewhat more frequent in the piece rate condition (30%) and the charisma condition (32%) 
than in the baseline condition (21%). However, none of these differences is statistically 
significant, again using non-parametric rank-sum tests (baseline vs. piece rate: p = 0.389, 
baseline vs. charisma: p = 0.253, piece rate vs. charisma: p = 0.825). We admit that these results 
need to be interpreted with caution, because our quality data is not very precise (we only had a 
chance to inspect three envelopes per worker), but—according to the data that we have—the 
increase in completed letters observed in the piece rate and charisma conditions did not seem 
to come at the cost of decreased quality. 
Table 1 also displays the worker’s self-reported information regarding time spent on the 
task and whether they had help from friends or family. Workers in the piece rate and charisma 
conditions report to have worked about 20 minutes longer than workers in the baseline and 
seem also somewhat more likely to have had help from friends or family. However, neither of 
these differences is statistically significant (non-parametric rank-sum tests for time spent on 
task: baseline vs. piece rate: p = 0.185, baseline vs. charisma: p = 0.613, piece rate vs. charisma: 
p = 0.449; Fisher’s exact test for help from friends or family: baseline vs. piece rate: p = 0.488, 
baseline vs. charisma: p = 0.533, piece rate vs. charisma: p = 1.000). 
 
24 In particular, for each worker we randomly drew three envelopes and checked whether the material in the 
envelope was complete and in the right order, whether the handwritten code on the donation form was correct, and 
whether the letter was neatly folded and free of printing faults. In addition, we also checked whether the returned 
envelope bundles were nicely assembled (no corners bent), consistently labeled, and correctly secured with rubber 
bands. Finally, we recorded whether the envelope bundles were returned in the designated boxes and whether they 
were neatly arranged. 
25 As a consequence of a coordination problem, we failed to collect complete quality information for eight of our 
106 participants. In six cases, we performed quality checks on a subset of items, while for the remaining two 
workers we have no quality information. For the former set of workers, we compute the quality indicators on the 
subset of checked items. In the remaining two cases (one in the baseline and one in charisma), we code the quality 
indicators as missing. 

 
19 
Regression Analysis 
Table 2 reports the results of a series of regression estimations in which we further explore the 
statistical significance of the treatment effects reported above. In all estimations, we regress the 
outcome variable on indicator variables for the piece rate condition and the charisma condition. 
Our workers performed the work task alone at their homes, and interactions between workers 
during the instruction sessions were minimal (the sessions were tightly timed and workers had 
essentially no opportunity to talk). Our main estimation therefore treats each worker as an 
independent observation and we report robust standard errors (Panel A). However, because we 
cannot exclude that subtle forms of interaction may have taken place during the instruction 
sessions (e.g. non-verbal exchanges, etc.), we also include additional specifications, where we 
use a conservative approach and cluster standard errors at the session level, to allow for the 
possibility of intra-group correlation (Panel B). We use the Moulton method to correct for the 
small number of clusters (Angrist and Pischke, 2008). 
In Column (1) we consider the sample of workers who completed the work task and 
evaluate treatment effects on the number of completed letters per worker through an OLS 
estimation. The constant corresponds to the average number of completed envelopes in the 
baseline condition (231 letters), whereas the indicator variables capture the corresponding 
increase in each of our two treatment conditions, separately. The estimation results reported in 
Panel A confirm that piece-rate and charisma treatments increase output by 47 and 40 letters, 
respectively, and that both these treatment effects are statistically significant (p = 0.026 and p 
= 0.040, respectively). An F-test confirms that there is no significant difference between the 
two treatment effects (p = 0.738). Column (2) performs the same estimation, but uses a data set 
that includes the workers who dropped out of the experiment after the treatment as observations 
with zero output. Because the dropouts are concentrated in the baseline and piece rate 
conditions, we observe a decrease in the constant (i.e., a lower average output of 213 instead of 
231 letters in the baseline) and a larger and highly significant charisma coefficient (p = 0.007) 
which now indicates an increase of 58 letters. The piece rate coefficient remains similar (48 
letters), but is slightly less significant (p = 0.058). Again, the treatment effects of piece rate and 
charisma do not significantly differ (p = 0.625). 
In Column (3) we perform an OLS estimation to examine treatment effects on the cost 
per letter (measured at the worker level). The constant reveals a cost per letter of GBP 0.146 in 
the Baseline. The regression reveals that the cost reduction observed in the charisma condition 
(GBP 0.028) is statistically significant (p = 0.048), whereas the small cost increase observed in 
the piece rate condition (GBP 0.006) is not (p = 0.760). 

 
20 
[Table 2 about here] 
Columns (4) and (5) show estimations in which we regress our quality measures on 
indicator variables for the piece rate condition and the charisma condition. Column (4) uses the 
quality index as the dependent variable, whereas Column (5) uses the indicator variable for 
perfect quality. Both estimations show that neither the piece rate treatment nor the charisma 
treatment has a significant effect on the quality of the completed envelopes.26 
Panel B replicates the analysis using a more conservative estimation approach that 
accounts for within-session interdependence. Not surprisingly, standard errors are slightly 
higher when clustered at the session level, but the significance levels do not change much. The 
significance level of our main variable of interest (charisma) drops in Column (1) but the p-
value remains very close to the 5% threshold (p = 0.056). Thus, our results hold up and are only 
slightly weaker if we apply the conservative approach of clustering at the session level. 
In Table 3 we add control variables to the regressions on our main outcomes and 
consider additional outcomes collected through the worker questionnaire. Because these latter 
outcomes are self-reported and some subjects failed to respond to these questions, these results 
need to be interpreted with caution. As in the previous table, we again report estimations with 
robust standard errors (Panel A) and estimations with standard errors clustered at the session 
level (Panel B). Column (1) adds workers’ age and gender as control variables to the estimation 
in which we regress the number of completed letters per worker on indicator variables for the 
piece rate condition and the charisma condition (note we lose one observation, and hence 
statistical power, because one subject failed to report demographic information). The treatment 
effect of the piece rate condition reported in Panel A remains almost unchanged and significant 
(p = 0.035). The treatment effect of the charisma condition is slightly lower, at 37 letters, but 
remains marginally significant (p = 0.071). Column (2) repeats the same exercise for the cost 
per letter. As before we do not find a significant effect for the piece rate (p= 0.728), but charisma 
marginally significantly reduces the cost per letter (p = 0.089). Thus, using age and gender to 
 
26 We compute Minimum Detectable Effects, or MDEs (using the conventional 5% level of statistical significance 
and 80% power level), to make comparisons between our study and the ones available in the literature (McKenzie 
and Ozier, 2019). We follow Haushofer and Shapiro (2016) and report MDE only for non-significant parameters 
to distinguish between lack of power from lack of effect. The ex-post MDE is of 0.031, 0.095 and 0.308 for the 
piece-rate treatment relative to the baseline in terms of cost per letter, the quality index and perfect quality, 
respectively; and of 0.084 and 0.288 for the charisma treatment relative to the baseline in terms of the quality index 
and perfect quality. These figures suggest that any insignificant effect that we find on cost per letter and the quality 
index are not due to lack of power, but are instead the result of the small size of treatment effects. 

 
21 
control for possible imperfections in randomization across treatments leaves the pattern of our 
main results largely unchanged.27 
[Table 3 about here] 
Columns (3) to (6) confirm that neither the time spent on the task nor the frequency with 
which workers get help from friends or family are significantly affected by our treatment 
manipulations. These results hold independently of whether or not the estimation controls for 
age and gender. Panel B shows that our main results in Table 3 are robust to clustering standard 
errors at the session level. 
4 Laboratory Experiments 
Our field experiment provides evidence that enhancing the degree of charisma in a leader’s 
motivational speech can have large effects on individual follower effort—as large as those of a 
substantial increase in incentive pay. However, a better understanding of the effects of charisma 
requires more data to, for instance, test varying conditions under which it is and is not effective. 
Moreover, the results of our field experiment raise a number of questions regarding what factors 
are important for charisma to have a positive influence. Such questions are hard to study in the 
field, because a thorough investigation of the limits and mechanisms underlying the effects of 
charismatic leadership require a large number of treatments and the elicitation of measures that 
are hard to obtain naturally outside of the laboratory (e.g., data on beliefs). Thus, the ability to 
study and unpack the mechanisms underlying charisma’s effects require a more practical 
paradigm for studying its influence. To advance these objectives, we complement our field 
experiment with a series of laboratory experiments that test the motivating effect of charisma 
in a different context, using a different outcome—voluntary contributions to a public good. 
Moreover, this approach lends itself to easier replication and further experimentation. 
Our design builds on a linear public goods game with fixed groups of four players who 
interact for 10 periods. We chose the public goods game, because it is the most widely employed 
paradigm for experimentally investigating collective action. Moreover, due to its inherent 
tradeoffs between myopically selfish behavior and pro-social and efficient cooperation, the 
 
27 Using the covariates reduces the sample, which decreases statistical power and may bias parameter estimates. 
We therefore also performed estimations in which we use a maximum likelihood estimator for handling missing 
data. Under this approach, the effect of charisma is significant at the 5% level (see Appendix E Table 1 for a more 
detailed explanation and results across a range of dependent variables). In addition, in Appendix E we repeat the 
analysis of Table 2 using a Tobit model with censoring at 350 letters. These regressions account for the fact that 
workers could not complete more than 350 letters. Because only two workers (both in the charisma condition) 
completed the full 350 envelopes, the estimation results do not change much. 

 
22 
game is useful to investigate whether a leader’s communication can produce the kinds of 
transformational influences often discussed in the organizational literature (House, 1977).28 
However, it is important to note that the laboratory public good context we study differs in 
many ways from the setting and behavior in our field experiment. Rather than seeking to 
produce as close to a directly replication of the field context in the laboratory as possible, our 
aim is to investigate the effects of charisma in an alternative—and widely studied—laboratory 
setting that contains some, but not all, features of the field setting. 
We conducted three laboratory experiments in which participants are given a speech 
before they play a public goods game. To begin with a challenging test for charisma effects, we 
started with a simple setting in which we simply added a motivational speech to a typical public 
goods experiment. Our remaining two experiments introduce additional features present in the 
field experiment that might enhance the effects of charisma. Thus, we attempt to partially bridge 
the gap from highly abstract settings where charisma might be unlikely to have effects to our 
rich field setting where it seems to have a large effect.29 
In each experiment, participants play the same public goods game for 10 periods. Before 
the first contribution round subjects in the treatment conditions get to see a video, in which an 
outsider (a professional actor), who has no stakes in the game, delivers a speech intended to 
motivate the players to contribute to the public good. In the speech, the actor explains the social 
dilemma and emphasizes that the group benefits if all players act in a “morally correct” manner 
and contribute to the shared project. In the instructions participants are told that they will watch 
a video, but they do not receive any information about the purpose and origin of the message 
before actually watching the video. In addition to the incentivized contribution decisions, we 
also elicit players’ beliefs about the average contribution of the other members in their group. 
We are aware that it is unusual to provide participants with direct guidance on how to 
behave in an experiment. In many cases, such a procedure would (correctly) be deemed 
inappropriate because it is predestined to trigger undesired experimenter demand effects (Zizzo, 
2010; De Quidt et al., 2018). However, our purpose is to investigate the effectiveness of 
 
28 For other studies that use public goods games to study the effects of leadership, see Van Vugt & De Cremer, 
1999; Güth et al., 2007; Dal Bo & Dal Bo, 2014; and Kosfeld and Rustagi, 2015. 
29 We also conducted a separate study on charismatic communication, in which subjects playing similar public 
good games received written messages from other subjects encouraging them to contribute. The messages were 
written by students from the same subject pool, who received a share of the total amount contributed. In a standard 
treatment, messages were simply the ones written by these subjects, while in an “enhanced charisma” treatment 
the same messages were re-written by the research team, by adding CLTs. This manipulation of charisma had no 
effect on contributions. This study differs in many respects from the laboratory and field experiments we report 
here and represents a substantively different investigation into the effects of charismatic communication. 
Nevertheless, as it sheds light on the limits of charismatic communication, we briefly summarize the design and 
results in the appendix of this paper (see Appendix G). 

 
23 
different kinds of statements that make substantively similar requests, so a demand effect is 
always present in most comparisons we make with our data; that is, one interpretation of our 
studies is that we estimate the treatment effect of charismatic versus non-charismatic demand 
effects. In the world of practice, requests from leaders to exert a costly collective action may be 
thought of as a form of demand effect; in this sense, our experiments test whether charismatic 
leadership tactics can be used to create a significantly stronger demand effect. 
4.1 
Laboratory Experiment 1: A Stark Test 
Design and Treatments 
Participants are assigned to groups of four players that remain fixed for all 10 periods. In every 
period, each player receives an endowment of 20 points. Players can freely allocate their 
endowments between their personal account and a common pool. Each point in the personal 
account directly adds to the player’s payoff. Points that are contributed to the common pool 
yield a marginal per capita return (MPCR) of 0.4 points (i.e., a total return of 1.6 points to the 
group). We can therefore write Player i’s payoff πi, as a function of her own contribution (𝑐𝑐𝑖𝑖) 
and others’ contributions (𝑐𝑐𝑗𝑗), as: 
𝜋𝜋𝑖𝑖= 20 −𝑐𝑐𝑖𝑖+ 0.4 ∑
𝑐𝑐𝑗𝑗
4
𝑗𝑗=1
. 
In Experiment 1 we implement three treatment conditions. We run two conditions with 
different versions of the motivational speech: a charismatic and a non-charismatic one, and 
compare them to a control condition without a speech. Both motivational speeches last about 4 
minutes, have the same number of words, and are substantively very similar. Participants were 
made aware of the fact that all four members of the group in which they interact see the same 
speech. The speeches explain the intuition behind the tragedy of the commons, re-explain the 
payoff structure of the game and emphasize the social obligation of each player to act in the 
interest of the group (the full text and links to the videos are found in Appendix B). As in our 
field experiment, the difference between the two speeches is that the charismatic version makes 
extensive use of CLTs. The videos were displayed on each participant’s individual computer 
screen. 
Procedures 
Subjects received CHF 10 for their participation, as well as their accumulated earnings across 
the 10 periods of the experiment. Points were converted into money at the exchange rate of 20 
points = CHF 1 (approximately, USD 1). 

 
24 
We conducted all sessions at the University of Lausanne. Materials and instructions 
were in French.30 We ran 24 sessions in total: 9 sessions for each of the two speech treatments 
and 4 sessions for the control treatment. We recruited 24 participants for each session, but due 
to no-shows we only had 20 or 16 participants in some sessions. In total we had 436 participants 
in the experiment. All participants were students from the University of Lausanne, EPFL 
Lausanne, or EHL Lausanne. We used the software ORSEE (Greiner 2015) for recruitment. All 
sessions were run between November 2015 and March 2016. The experiment was programmed 
and conducted with z-Tree (Fischbacher, 2007). 
Manipulation checks 
As in our field experiment, we conducted objective and subjective manipulation checks to 
ensure that subjects from the same pool of students perceived the difference in charisma. Two 
expert coders coded one of the speeches independently; then they coded the other speech. Initial 
agreement on the charismatic speech, which had 40 sentences (thus 40 * 9 categories = 360 
coding events) was 96.83% (κ = .71, z = 14.31, p < 0.001). The non-charismatic speech, which 
had 32 sentences (thus 32 * 9 categories = 288 coding events) had an agreement of 99.70% (the 
κ was undefined because one coder found only one charismatic tactic in the whole speech, 
whereas the other coder found none). After reconciling their ratings, the number of charismatic 
leadership tactics used as a proportion of total sentences in the non-charismatic speech was 0%; 
that of the charismatic speech was 50% (i.e., 20 tactics over 41 sentences). This difference in 
proportions is highly significant (z = 4.64, p < 0.001, see Koopman, 1984).31 The actor 
demonstrated appropriate body language for the level of verbal tactics used. 
For the subjective manipulation check, we recruited 60 students from the University of 
Lausanne, EPFL Lausanne, or EHL Lausanne, whom we randomly assigned to watch either the 
standard (non-charismatic, n = 31) or the charismatic (n = 29) speech. We then administered 
the same questionnaires that we used in the field experiment manipulation check, and analyzed 
the results using the same methodology. The OLS estimation results indicate that the actor is 
perceived as more charismatic and more prototypical for a leader when he gives the charismatic 
speech (p < 0.001 both for the MLQ index (2.091 vs. 3.080) and for the GLI index (1.555 vs. 
2.842), see Appendix Table F1). 
 
30 For a translated sample of our instructions for participants in the laboratory experiments see Appendix H. 
31 Appendix D reports the coded results for the two speeches. 

 
25 
Predictions: Effects of Charisma on Contributions to a Public Good 
We apply the theoretical framework from Section 2.2 to a public good game with N players. 
Each player has an endowment of E units that can either be used for private consumption or can 
be contributed to the public good. We denote player i’s action, ai ∈ [0, E], as the player’s 
contribution to the public good. Each unit that a player contributes creates a marginal per capita 
return, α, for each of the N players. Player i’s material benefit therefore corresponds to m = E 
– ai + αΣiai. To obtain a closed-form solution, we assume that the intrinsic benefit is given by 
the expression: n = c (γ + δΣj≠iaj) ln ai, where γ > 0 and δ > 0.32 This function has the following 
properties (assuming that the leader’s perceived charisma, c, is always positive): i) the intrinsic 
benefit increases with a decreasing marginal rate in the follower’s action ai, ii) the marginal 
intrinsic benefit of action ai is positive even if all other players do not contribute to the public 
good, and iii) the marginal intrinsic benefit of action ai increases in the contributions of other 
players (and increasingly so when leader charisma is high), reflecting a tendency for individuals 
to exhibit conditional cooperation in linear public good games (see, e.g., Fischbacher et al. 
2001). Player i’s utility is thus given by: 
𝑢𝑢𝑖𝑖= 𝐸𝐸+ 𝛼𝛼෍𝑎𝑎𝑖𝑖
𝑖𝑖
+ 𝑐𝑐ቌ𝛾𝛾+ 𝛿𝛿෍𝑎𝑎𝑗𝑗
𝑗𝑗≠𝑖𝑖
ቍln 𝑎𝑎𝑖𝑖−𝑎𝑎𝑖𝑖. 
Players face a social dilemma; that is, it is socially efficient to contribute the full endowment to 
the public good, but it is individually rational to keep the full endowment for private 
consumption (α < 1 < αN). 
Considering that individual contributions to the public good are bounded above by the 
endowment E, Player i’s best response function is given by: 
𝑎𝑎𝑖𝑖= 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚቎𝐸𝐸,
𝑐𝑐
1 −𝛼𝛼ቌ𝛾𝛾+ 𝛿𝛿෍𝑎𝑎𝑗𝑗
𝑗𝑗≠𝑖𝑖
ቍ ቏. 
Assuming that all players have the same utility function, symmetry (ai = aj ∀ i, j) implies the 
following equilibrium contribution to the public good for every player: 
𝑎𝑎𝑖𝑖
∗= ൝
𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐
1 −𝛼𝛼−𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐(𝑁𝑁−1) ,
if 0 ≤
𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐
1 −𝛼𝛼−𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐(𝑁𝑁−1) < 𝐸𝐸,
𝐸𝐸,
otherwise.
 
 
32 This specific functional form implies that n > 0. However, adding a negative constant to the function would not 
affect the analysis so that our hypotheses hold irrespective of the sign of intrinsic utility (see also Section 2.2). 

 
26 
In this setting, an increase in the leader’s charisma has two effects. On one hand, an 
increase in charisma directly increases the follower’s intrinsic motivation. On the other hand, 
there is an indirect effect stemming from the strategic complementarity in follower 
contributions. The overall impact of an increase in charisma on contributions to the public good 
is unambiguously positive as long as equilibrium contributions are inferior to the endowment:33 
𝜕𝜕𝑎𝑎𝑖𝑖
∗
𝜕𝜕𝜕𝜕= 𝛾𝛾[1 −𝛼𝛼−𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐(𝑁𝑁−1)] + 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐(𝑁𝑁−1)
[1 −𝛼𝛼−𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐(𝑁𝑁−1)]2
> 0. 
[Figure 5 about here] 
Figure 5 graphically shows the impact of an increase in charisma on equilibrium contributions 
for a 2-player version of the model. 
LE-Hypothesis 1: In Laboratory Experiment 1, contributions to the public good are higher in 
the charisma condition than in the no charisma condition. Moreover, contributions in both 
conditions with speeches are higher than contributions in the baseline condition. 
Results 
Panel A of Figure 6 shows average contributions and average beliefs over time for the three 
treatments. The figure reveals that directionally, LE-Hypothesis 1 holds. Average contributions 
in both treatments with motivational speeches are higher than average contribution in the 
control treatment in every period, and average contributions in the charisma treatment are 
consistently higher than those in the no charisma treatment. Averaged over all periods, 
participants contribute 7.9 points in the control treatment, 10.1 points in the no charisma 
treatment and 11.2 points in the charisma treatment. Contributions in the charisma treatment 
are therefore roughly 11 percent higher than those in the no charisma condition and about 42 
percent higher than those in the control condition. The pattern of beliefs is very similar to that 
of contributions. Participants tend to slightly overestimate others’ contributions (overall 
average beliefs exceed average contributions by roughly 1 point in all three treatments), but 
beliefs are highest in the charisma condition and lowest in the control. 
[Figure 6 about here] 
 
33 We think of our control condition without a speech as a situation in which leader charisma c is very small (but 
positive), so that players still also have some intrinsic motivation to contribute to the public good. This view seems 
justified given that the written instructions to the public goods game also include (very factually delivered) portions 
highlighting the tension between individual profit and social welfare, which are more persuasively presented in 
the leader’s speeches. 

 
27 
In Table 4 we report a regression analysis of the treatment effects on contributions 
(Panel A) and beliefs (Panel B). We perform simple treatment comparisons in which we regress 
the dependent variable on treatment dummies (see columns (1) and (3)) and estimations that 
identify separate time trends for the treatments (see columns (2) and (4)). Because our primary 
interest is in differences between the no charisma and charisma conditions, we use the former 
as the omitted category. We estimate both specifications first with OLS and then with Tobit 
estimators (to account for the fact that contributions are censored at the maximum level of 20 
points) with a cluster-robust estimate of the variance. 
Our estimations reveal that the charisma treatment increases contributions by 1.1 points 
relative to the average contributions of 10.1 points in the no charisma condition (see the 
constant), while contributions in the control treatment are lower than in the no charisma 
condition by 2.2 points. However, it turns out that only the difference between the charisma 
treatment and the control treatment is significant (F-Test: Charisma = Control, p = 0.023 (OLS), 
p = 0.015 (Tobit)). The difference between the no charisma treatment and the control condition 
is not significant (p = 0.144 (OLS), p = 0.110 (Tobit)). Most importantly for our purposes, the 
difference between the two treatments with different speeches is also not significant (p = 0.353 
(OLS), p = 0.385 (Tobit)). Thus, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the charismatic and 
the non-charismatic speeches have the same effect on the participants’ contribution behavior. 
There is substantial cross-group variance in the data, which leads to large standard errors. The 
fact that behavior differs strongly across groups is not surprising, because conditional 
cooperation implies that the group composition plays a huge role for the development of 
average contributions over time (e.g., Fischbacher and Gächter, 2010). 
[Table 4 about here] 
4.2 
Laboratory Experiment 2: Including Charitable Contributions 
Design and Treatments 
Our first laboratory experiment found a modestly positive—but statistically insignificant—
treatment effect of increasing the charisma of a leader’s message on contributions. This finding 
suggests that the benefits of charisma in our field experiment might be less pronounced in other 
contexts, where many factors present in the field setting are absent. It might be that the absence 
of one or more of these factors contributed to the null result, or it may alternatively be that the 
benefits of charisma are so ephemeral as to be hard to reproduce. To shed light on these 
competing possibilities, our next two experiments add features present in our field experiment 
to the abstract public goods game used in the first laboratory experiment. 

 
28 
First, we consider the fact that our laboratory design has a diminished moral dimension 
relative to the field experiment. The public good game involves a moral element, but 
contributing to a common project that benefits fellow students may be less morally charged 
than helping hospitalized children. Our second laboratory experiment tests whether the 
charisma manipulation is more powerful when including this additional element of morality. 
The game and the payoff structure remain the same as in our first laboratory experiment. 
The only additional feature is that in experiment 2 each point that a player contributes to the 
public good also generates a donation of CHF 0.05 to the children’s hospital in Lausanne. 
Because the experiment is played for 10 periods and each player can contribute up to 20 points 
per period, an individual participant can donate up to CHF 10 throughout the experiment. 
Because our primary interest is in the comparison of the effects of the two speeches and 
the previous experiment revealed that a charismatic speech increases contributions significantly 
relative to the control condition, we only conducted two treatments: one with a charismatic 
speech and one with a non-charismatic speech. The speeches we used combine elements of the 
speeches used in the first laboratory experiment with elements of the speeches used in the field 
experiment (the full text of the two speeches and links to the videos are found in Appendix B). 
As in the previous laboratory experiment participants were made aware that all members of a 
group watch the same video. 
Procedures 
We conducted 13 sessions in total—7 for the charisma treatment and 6 for the no charisma 
treatment. We recruited 24 participants for each session, but because of no-shows some sessions 
only had 20 participants (we had 300 participants in total). The subject pool, the recruitment 
process and the software used to program and run the experiment were the same as in the first 
laboratory experiment.34 All sessions were run from November to December 2016. 
Manipulation check 
We again conducted objective and subjective manipulation checks of the two speeches. We 
followed the same procedures, although using different raters from the same subject pool in the 
subjective manipulation check. Given that the speech was very similar to the previous speech, 
the objective coders coded the speeches together until reaching full agreement. The coders 
indicated that for the non-charismatic speech the proportion of sentences including charismatic 
tactics was 14.29% (i.e., 4 tactics over 29 sentences); that of the charismatic speech was 81.82% 
 
34 For a translated sample of our instructions for participants in the laboratory experiments see Appendix H. 

 
29 
(i.e., 27 tactics over 34 sentences). This difference in proportions was significant (z = 5.19, p < 
0.001, Koopman, 1984).35 We also performed the same subjective manipulation check as in 
Laboratory Experiment 1 (using 58 students, whom we randomly assigned to watch either the 
non-charismatic (n = 29) or the charismatic (n = 29) speech). Our OLS estimations produce 
very similar results as for the previous speeches. Once again, the actor is perceived as more 
charismatic and more prototypical for a leader when he performs the charismatic speech (p = 
0.024 both for the MLQ and for the GLI index, see Appendix Table F1). 
Predictions: Effects of Adding a Charitable Donation to the Public Goods Experiment 
The intent behind including a charitable donation was to increase the importance of the moral 
dimension. The addition of the donations does not influence followers’ pecuniary returns from 
their own or others’ contributions. However, stronger moral implications may imply that 
followers experience a stronger intrinsic motivation to contribute to the public good. In our 
model, the importance of the intrinsic benefit is determined by the parameter γ. An increase in 
γ has two implications: i) a higher γ increases equilibrium contributions for a given level of 
charisma: ∂ai*/∂γ > 0, and ii) the increase in equilibrium contributions is larger the higher 
charisma: ∂2ai*/∂γ∂c > 0. These effects yield the following hypothesis: 
LE-Hypothesis 2: In Laboratory Experiment 2, contributions to the public good are higher 
than in Laboratory Experiment 1 in both the charisma condition and the no charisma condition. 
However, the increase in the charisma condition is larger so that the difference between the 
charisma condition and the no charisma condition is larger in Laboratory Experiment 2 than 
in Laboratory Experiment 1. 
Results 
Panel B of Figure 6 shows the consequences of adding the charitable donation to the public 
good game. In line with the first part of LE-Hypothesis 2, the link of the contribution to a 
donation increases average contributions in both treatments relative to the first experiment, 
from 10.1 to 13.6 points in the no charisma treatment and from 11.2 to 13.9 in the charisma 
treatment. However, these numbers also imply that the second part of LE-Hypothesis 2 is not 
supported by the data, because the difference in contributions in the charisma condition (13.9) 
and the no charisma condition (13.6) is very small. 
 
35 Appendix D reports the coded results for the two speeches. 

 
30 
Table 4 shows, in models 5 through 8, the same within-experiment regressions for 
contributions and beliefs that we discussed for the first laboratory experiment. The small 
positive charisma effect (0.320 (OLS), 1.309 (Tobit)) is not statistically significant in either 
estimation (p = 0.774 (OLS), p = 0.583 (Tobit)). The regressions also reveal that—as in the first 
experiment—the effects on beliefs are very similar to the effects on contributions. 
The results of the second experiment indicate that a morally laden environment alone 
does not guarantee that a more charismatic speech has a large effect on behavior, despite the 
fact that the strengthened moral dimension appears to increase the motivation to contribute. 
4.3 
Laboratory Experiment 3: Collective Viewing 
Design and Treatments 
A potentially important difference between our field experiment and the first two laboratory 
experiments is that, in the field experiment, the speech was given to participants in groups, 
whereas participants in our laboratory experiments watched the video individually in an isolated 
cubicle. This difference might be relevant if collectively perceiving the significance of the 
moral mission strengthens a collective sense of identity (Hogg, 2001; Turner et al., 1994) and/or 
if people respond positively to charisma because they think others will do so (Hermalin, 2017). 
In our third laboratory experiment, participants within a session watch the video as a 
group in front of a large TV. Specifically, after reading the instructions and answering the 
control questions people move to a waiting room located right in front of the lab where they 
watch the video of either a charismatic or non-charismatic speech together. Importantly, there 
was no verbal interaction between participants at any point in time. The participants were 
instructed to be silent on the way to the TV, during the video, and on the way back to the 
laboratory, and were accompanied by an experimenter during this time.36 Except for the joint 
viewing experience the experiment was identical to Laboratory Experiment 2. 
Procedures 
We ran 12 sessions with 228 participants in total. We conducted 6 sessions for each of the two 
treatments. We recruited 20 participants for each session, but due to no-shows some sessions 
only had 16 participants and one session only had 12 participants. All sessions took place in 
 
36 Note also that any opportunities for non-verbal communication between participants during this time were the 
same across conditions. 

 
31 
April and May 2017. Again, the subject pool, the recruitment process and the software used 
were the same as in the other two experiments.37 
Predictions: Effects of Group Watching 
The idea behind letting the participants watch the speech as a group was to intensify the 
perception of a collective endeavor. The stronger group perception might increase the 
complementarity between the contributions of the different followers in the group. In our model 
the complementarity between follower actions is captured by the parameter δ. The effects of an 
increase in δ are similar to those of an increase in γ (see the previous section). Our model 
suggests that the group watching procedure should increase contributions for a given level of 
charisma (∂ai*/∂δ > 0) and the increase should be particularly strong when charisma is high 
(∂2ai*/∂δ∂c > 0). According to the model, these effects should be enhanced by the fact that the 
complementarity between actions reinforces the effect of charisma. 
LE-Hypothesis 3: In Laboratory Experiment 3, contributions to the public good are higher 
than in Laboratory Experiments 1 and 2 in both the charisma condition and the no charisma 
condition. However, the increase in the charisma condition is larger so that the difference 
between the charisma condition and the no charisma condition is larger in Laboratory 
Experiment 3 than in Laboratory Experiments 1 and 2. 
Results 
The data collected in the third experiment are largely in line with LE-Hypothesis 3 and suggest 
that the experience of watching the video as a group makes a large difference for the impact of 
the charisma manipulation on behavior in the public good game. Panel C of Figure 6 shows that 
in the third experiment participants in the charisma condition consistently contribute 
substantially more to the public good than participants in the no charisma condition. Across all 
periods of the experiment, average contributions amount to 16.1 points in the charisma 
condition and to 13.6 points in the no charisma condition. This difference corresponds to an 
increase of about 19 percent, very similar to that observed in our field experiment. Panel A of 
Table 4, columns 9 and 11 confirm that in the third laboratory experiment the positive effect of 
charisma on contributions is statistically significant and provides supports for LE-Hypothesis 3 
(p = 0.034 (OLS), p = 0.023 (Tobit)). Columns 10 and 12 add time trends and interact them 
with the charisma treatment. The (significantly) negative time trend in combination with the 
 
37 The results from the Experiment 2 manipulation checks also apply to Experiment 3, because the speeches were 
exactly the same in the two experiments. 

 
32 
(non-significantly) positive interaction effect suggests that contributions tend to decline more 
slowly in the charisma treatment. If we only use first-period data, the effect of charisma on 
average contributions is rather small (16.7 points (charisma) vs. 15.6 points (no charisma), p = 
0.124 (OLS), p = 0.083 (Tobit)), but the effect on contributions tends to become larger over 
time. Period-specific tests of linear combinations of coefficients in the OLS model in column 
10 (Charisma + (Period x Charisma) x Period) reveal that the impact of charisma on 
contributions only becomes significant from Period 3 onwards (p = 0.043 in period 3). 
Average beliefs increase from 13.7 points in the no charisma condition to 15.8 points in 
the charisma condition; columns 9 and 11 of Panel B of Table 4 reveal that this effect is 
marginally significant (p = 0.051 (OLS), p = 0.078 (Tobit)). The dynamics of beliefs are similar 
to those of contributions (see columns 10 and 12). If we only look at initial beliefs in period 1 
(before any contribution was made), we do not find a significant difference in beliefs across 
treatments (p = 0.175 (OLS), p = 0.109 (Tobit)). We interpret this observation as an indication 
that the collective viewing experience is more likely to operate through the creation of a 
collective identity rather than through the belief channel. In conjunction with the absence of a 
large effect of charisma on period 1 contributions, this evidence suggests that charismatic 
leadership may be particularly helpful for helping groups maintain collective confidence in one 
another, thereby dampening the decline of contributions with repeated play. 
All standard errors reported in Table 4 are adjusted for clustering at the group level. 
These estimations are therefore based on the assumption that observations across groups within 
the same session can be regarded as independent. This approach is clean for the first and the 
second experiment (models 1 through 8) because there is no interaction between participants 
across groups after entering the laboratory in those settings, and from the beginning to the end 
of the experiment subjects are alone in their cubicle in the laboratory. In Experiment 3 (models 
9 through 12), in contrast, subjects view the video collectively in front of a TV after having 
read the experimental instructions in their cubicles. As mentioned before, we made sure that 
people did not communicate when watching the video together. Nevertheless, one might argue 
that non-verbal forms of interaction might have taken place that render the assumption of 
independence across groups questionable. We therefore also report the result of a non-
parametric rank-sum test using session averages of contributions as independent observations. 

 
33 
The rank-sum test confirms the statistical significance of the positive effect of charisma on 
contributions in Experiment 3 (p = 0.047).38 
4.4 
Discussion of Combined Laboratory Evidence 
The evidence of the effectiveness of charisma across our laboratory experiments is mixed. 
Experiment 1 finds a modestly positive, but statistically insignificant effect of charisma. 
Contrary to our predictions Experiment 2 has smaller effects. Finally, Experiment 3 yields the 
strongest and statistically significant evidence of a positive effect of charisma on contributions. 
In this section, we combine the data of all our laboratory studies to further analyze the 
overall effect of charisma on contributions to the public good. As reported above, the three 
experiments were conducted in different time periods so that comparisons across experiments 
are not as clean as comparisons within experiments. However, all experiments were conducted 
in the same laboratory using the same subject pool and protocols, so we find it meaningful and 
important to report overall comparisons. 
Table 5 reports regressions using data from all three laboratory experiments. We apply 
a conservative approach and adjust standard errors for clustering at the session level (43 
clusters).39 We first estimate the combined effect of charisma across all experiments, after 
removing the level effect of the different experiments. For this purpose, we regress 
contributions on a treatment dummy for the charisma condition and experiment dummies 
“Charity” (Experiment 2) and “Collective Viewing” (Experiment 3). We report both OLS and 
Tobit estimations (see Columns (1) and (2)). These regressions reveal that the overall effect of 
charisma on contributions in all laboratory experiments is positive and at least marginally 
significant (p = 0.060 (OLS), p = 0.029 (Tobit)). 
[Table 5 about here] 
Next, we add interaction terms between the charisma dummy and the experiment 
dummies to partial out the experiment-specific effects of charisma. These specifications yield 
new insights regarding the impact of the collective viewing experience on contribution 
behavior. By comparing the two interaction terms (“Charisma x Charity” vs. “Charisma x 
Collective Viewing”) we can perform a simple diff-in-diff analysis of the treatment effects of 
charisma in Experiments 2 and 3. Such an analysis reveals that the treatment effect in 
 
38 Because of the relatively small number of sessions (12), we do not report regressions with standard errors 
adjusted for clustering at the session level with data from Experiment 3 alone. However, in section 4.4 we perform 
such regressions with pooled data from all our laboratory experiments (43 sessions). 
39 We exclude data from the control treatment (no speech) in Experiment 1 (4 sessions), yielding a total of 43 
sessions. 

 
34 
Experiment 3 is roughly 4.5 points larger than in Experiment 2. This difference is marginally 
significant at the 10% level (F-Test: Charisma x Charity = Charisma x Collective Viewing, p = 
0.099 (OLS), p = 0.110 (Tobit)). Moreover, the fact that the experiment dummies for “Charity” 
(Experiment 2) and “Collective Viewing” (Experiment 3) are almost identical suggests that 
watching the speech together makes no difference when the speech is not very charismatic (F-
Test: Charity = Collective Viewing, p = 0.994 (OLS), p = 0.873 (Tobit)). When the speech is 
charismatic, in contrast, the group experience seems to matter in that it substantially increases 
contributions across experiments (F-Test: Charity + Charisma x Charity = Collective Viewing 
+ Charisma x Collective Viewing, p = 0.002 (OLS), p = 0.031 (Tobit)).40 
5 Conclusion 
In the organizational literature, a leader’s charismatic properties are often given great 
importance for motivating follower effort. However, this potential means of influencing 
economic behavior ranging from worker effort to voluntary pro-social acts has been largely 
ignored by economic research. To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first paper that presents 
evidence for a causal link between variation in a leader’s charisma and followers’ performance 
in economically relevant settings both with real workers and students. 
We report evidence from field and laboratory experiments that investigate whether a 
leader’s charisma—in the form of a stylistically different motivational speech—can induce 
individuals to undertake personally costly but socially beneficial actions. Our field experiment 
provides causal evidence for the motivation-enhancing effect of a charismatic speech, but it 
leaves open the question of how general such a result is and what kinds of mechanisms might 
underlie its effectiveness. To help address these questions, we present the results of a series of 
laboratory experiments. The laboratory studies suggest that charisma’s effectiveness varies and 
appears to depend on the social context in which the speech is delivered. In particular, we 
replicate the positive impact of charisma on prosocial behavior when participants listen to the 
speech together as a group, but the effects are much smaller when the speech is observed 
individually. Our combined results suggest that the co-presence of followers when attending to 
a charismatic speech may be an important factor. Because we do not find evidence that the 
collective viewing of the speech significantly affects individuals’ expectations about others (see 
Hermalin, 2017 for a theoretical account of such an effect of charisma), we believe that the 
 
40 It is also noteworthy that the regressions confirm that the treatment effect in Laboratory Experiment 3 remains 
significant when standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the session level (F-Test: Charisma + Charisma x 
Collective Viewing = 0, p = 0.019 (OLS), p = 0.014 (Tobit)). 

 
35 
most plausible explanation for this result is that charisma nurtures a collective identity (Shamir 
et al., 1993), which may be particularly valuable in maintaining a group’s resilience in the face 
of a persistent challenge.41 Given that charisma can be taught (Antonakis et al., 2011), we 
believe that documenting its effectiveness as a leadership technique is important for the practice 
of management. 
We see our paper as the starting point for a new research agenda. Future research should 
explore the scope and applicability of our results. Both the field and the laboratory experiments 
presented in this paper focus on simple, short-term tasks with moral implications. It is thus 
important to also explore the effects of charisma interventions in a larger variety of settings, 
involving more varied types of tasks, time horizons and populations of both leaders and 
followers. Indeed, recent research builds on our work (Meslec et al, 2020), finding that 
charisma, via video manipulation, can produce higher effort in a cognitive task; this charisma 
manipulation also works with on-line workers, who were exposed to a short written charismatic 
text (Fest et al., in press, Study 2). A recent meta-analysis confirms a moderate effect size across 
a variety of contexts (Ernst et al. (in press)). 
Future work should further investigate how variation in characteristics of the task, such 
as the precise moral nature, might influence the effects of charisma. If workers were stuffing 
envelopes with advertisement materials for a morally neutral product, would a charismatic 
speech be effective for inducing effort? It also seems worthwhile to further understand whether 
charisma effects fade over time and whether new and varied charismatic speeches can sustain 
a positive impact on effort. 
Moreover, one limitation of the experiments in this paper is that we manipulated 
charisma by simultaneously changing a number of tactics. As a consequence, we cannot 
determine whether some of the tactics work better than others and how they interact with each 
other and with the environment. It is possible that the effectiveness of different tactics depends 
systematically on elements of the environment (e.g. the type of behavior that the leader wants 
to stimulate, the audience that the speech targets, or the nature of the organization in which 
followers are situated). In order to provide detailed managerial advice on how to use charisma 
as a motivational tool, it is important to have a better understanding of these details. 
Finally, charisma may be a useful motivational mechanism in settings where standard 
economic approaches are not helpful. For instance, in complex, multi-task settings in which 
 
41 Please see Appendix I for additional analysis that provides some further empirical support for the interpretation 
that charisma fosters resilience. The analysis presented in Appendix I is inconsistent with alternative channels such 
as the idea that charisma fortifies conditional cooperation. 

 
36 
some dimensions of performance are hard to measure, simple pay-for-performance contracts 
may induce distorted attention and/or unproductive activities (Holmström & Milgrom 1991, 
Baker 1992). Similarly, it has also been found that output-based pay can be harmful for 
performance if the worker’s task requires creativity (Ariely et al., 2009; Byron & Khazanchi 
2012). So far, economists have had difficulties in proposing successful motivation procedures 
in those situations. Charismatic leadership might present a solution to these kinds of problems. 
 
 

 
37 
References: 
Alimo-Metcalfe, B., & Alban-Metcalfe, R. J. (2001). The development of a new 
transformational leadership questionnaire. Journal of Occupational & Organizational 
Psychology, 79, 1-27. 
Angrist, J. D., & Pischke, J. S. (2008). Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's 
Companion. Princeton University Press. 
Angrist, J. D., & Pischke, J.-S. (2010). The Credibility Revolution in Empirical Economics: 
How Better Research Design Is Taking the Con out of Econometrics. Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, 24(2), 3-30. 
Antonakis, J., Bastardoz, N., Jacquart, P. & Shamir, B. (2016). Charisma: An ill-defined and 
ill-measured gift. Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational 
Behavior, 3(1), 293-319. 
Antonakis, J., Bendahan, S., Jacquart, P. & Lalive, R. (2010). On making causal claims: A 
review and recommendations. The Leadership Quarterly, 21(6), 1086-1120. 
Antonakis, J., Fenley, M. & Liechti, S. (2011). Can charisma be taught? Tests of two 
interventions. The Academy of Management Learning and Education, 10(3), 374-396. 
Antonakis, J., Fenley, M. & Liechti, S. (2012). Learning charisma: Transform yourself into 
someone people want to follow. Harvard Business Review, June, 127-130. 
Ariely, D., Gneezy, U., Loewenstein, G. & Mazar, N. (2009). Large stakes and big mistakes. 
Review of Economic Studies, 76(2), 451-469. 
Baker, G. P. (1992). Incentive contracts and performance measurement. Journal of Political 
economy, 100(3), 598. 
Banks, G. C., Engemann, K. N., Williams, C. E., Gooty, J., McCauley, K. D. & Medaugh, M. 
R. (2017). A meta-analytic review and future research agenda of charismatic 
leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 28, 508-529. 
Barnard, C. I. (1940). The nature of leadership, Cambridge. MA: The Harvard Universtiy Press. 
Bass, B. M. (1985). Leadership and performance beyond expectations. New York: The Free 
Press. 
Bass, B. M., & Avolio, B. J. (1995). MLQ Multifactor leadership questionnaire for research: 
Permission set. Redwood City, CA: Mindgarden. 
Bass, B. M., Waldman, D. A., Avolio, B. J., & Bebb, M. (1987). Transformational leadership 
and the falling dominoes effect. Group and Organization Studies, 12(1), 73-87. 

 
38 
Bénabou, R., Falk, A., & Tirole, J. (2018). Narratives, imperatives, and moral reasoning. 
National Bureau of Economic Research (No. w24798). 
Bott, K.M., Cappelen, A.W., Sørensen, E.Ø., & Tungodden, B. (2020) You’ve got mail: A 
randomized field experiment on tax evasion. Management Science, 66(7), 2801-2819. 
Bradler, C., Dur, R., Neckermann, S., & Non, A. (2016). Employee recognition and 
performance: A field experiment. Management Science, 62(11), 3085-3099. 
Brandts, J. & Cooper, D.J. (2007). It's what you say, not what you pay: An experimental study 
of manager-employee relationships in overcoming coordination failure. Journal of the 
European Economic Association, 5(6), 1223-1268. 
Brandts, J., Cooper, D.J. & Weber, R.A. (2015). Legitimacy, communication, and leadership in 
the turnaround game. Management Science, 61(11), 2627-2645. 
Burns, J. M. (1978). Leadership. New York: Harper & Row. 
Byron, K. & Khazanchi, S. (2012). Rewards and creative performance: A meta-analytic test of 
theoretically derived hypotheses. Psychological Bulletin, 138(4), 809. 
Conger, J. A., Kanungo, R. N., Menon, S. T., & Mathur, P. (1997). Measuring charisma: 
dimensionality and validity of the Conger‐Kanungo scale of charismatic leadership. 
Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences/Revue Canadienne des Sciences de 
l'Administration, 14(3), 290-301. 
Cooper, W. H. & Richardson, A. J. (1986). Unfair comparisons. Journal of Applied Psychology, 
71(2), 179-184. 
Cronshaw, S. F. & Lord, R. G. (1987). Effects of categorization, attribution, and encoding 
processes on leadership perceptions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 72(1), 97-106. 
D’Adda, G., Darai, D., Pavanini, N. & Weber, R. 2017. Do leaders affect ethical conduct? An 
experimental study. Journal of the European Economic Association, 15(6), 1177–
1213. 
Dal Bó, E. & Dal Bó, P. 2014. “Do the right thing”: The effects of moral suasion on cooperation. 
Journal of Public Economics 117, 28-38. 
Dawes, R. M., McTavish, J., & Shaklee, H. (1977). Behavior, communication, and assumptions 
about other people's behavior in a commons dilemma situation. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 35(1), 1-11. 
De Quidt, J., Haushofer, J. & Roth, C. (2018). Measuring and bounding experimenter 
demand. American Economic Review, 108(11), 3266-3302. 
Den Hartog, D. N. & Verburg, R. M. (1997). Charisma and rhetoric: Communicative techniques 
of international business leaders. The Leadership Quarterly, 8(4), 355-391. 

 
39 
De Hoogh, A., Den Hartog, D., & Koopman, P. (2004). De ontwikkeling van de CLIO: een 
vragenlijst voor charismatisch leiderschap in organisaties. Gedrag en Organisatie, 
17(5), 354-381. 
Deutsch, M., Epstein, Y., Canavan, D., Gumpert, P., 1967. Strategies of inducing cooperation: 
An experimental study. The Journal of Conflict Resolution, 11 (3), 345-360. 
Downton, J. V. (1973). Rebel leadership: Commitment and charisma in the revolutionary 
process. New York: The Free Press. 
Eden, D. (2020). The science of leadership: A journey from survey research to field 
experimentation. The Leadership Quarterly, 101472. 
Englmaier, F., Grimm, S., Grothe, D., Schindler, D., and Schudy, S. (2019). A field experiment 
on leadership and team performance in non-routine analytical team tasks. Working 
Paper. 
Ernst, B. A., Banks, G., Loignon, A. C., Frear, K. A., Williams, C. E., Arciniega, L. M., et al. 
(in press). Virtual Charismatic Leadership and Signaling Theory: A Prospective Meta-
Analysis in Five Countries. The Leadership Quarterly. 
Fest, S., Kvaløy, O., Nieken, P., & Schöttner, A. (in press). How (not) to motivate online 
workers: Two controlled field experiments on leadership in the gig economy. The 
Leadership Quarterly. 
Fischbacher, U. (2007). z-Tree: Zurich toolbox for ready-made economic experiments. 
Experimental Economics, 10(2), 171-178. 
Fischbacher, U., Gächter, S., & Fehr, E. (2001). Are people conditionally cooperative? 
Evidence from a public goods experiment. Economics Letters, 71(3), 397-404. 
Fischbacher, U. & Gächter, S. (2010). Social preferences, beliefs, and the dynamics of free 
riding in public goods experiments. American Economic Review, 100(1), 541-56. 
Fischer, T., Hambrick, D. C., Sajons, G. B., & Van Quaquebeke, N. (2020). Beyond the 
ritualized use of questionnaires: Toward a science of actual behaviors and 
psychological states. The Leadership Quarterly, 31(4), 101449. 
Frese, M., Beimel, S. & Schoenborn, S. (2003). Action training for charismatic leadership: Two 
evaluations of studies of a commercial training module on inspirational 
communication of a vision. Personnel Psychology, 56, 671-697. 
Gneezy, U., & List, J. A. (2006). Putting behavioral economics to work: Testing for gift 
exchange in labor markets using field experiments. Econometrica, 74(5), 1365-1384. 
Grant, A. M. (2008). The significance of task significance: job performance effects, relational 
mechanisms, and boundary conditions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 9, 108–124. 

 
40 
Greiner, B. (2015). Subject pool recruitment procedures: organizing experiments with ORSEE. 
Journal of the Economic Science Association 1, 114–125. 
Gottfredson, R. K., Wright, S. L., & Heaphy, E. D. (2020). A critique of the Leader-Member 
Exchange construct: Back to square one. The Leadership Quarterly, 31(6), 101385. 
Güntner, A. V., Klonek, F. E., Lehmann-Willenbrock, N., & Kauffeld, S. (2020). Follower 
behavior renders leader behavior endogenous: The simultaneity problem, estimation 
challenges, and solutions. The Leadership Quarterly, 101441. 
Güth, W., Levati, M. V., Sutter, M. & Van Der Heijden, E. (2007). Leading by example with 
and without exclusion power in voluntary contribution experiments. Journal of Public 
Economics, 91(5-6), 1023-1042. 
Haushofer, J., & Shapiro, J. (2016). The short-term impact of unconditional cash transfers to 
the poor: experimental evidence from Kenya. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 
131(4), 1973-2042. 
Hermalin B. E. (1998). Toward an economic theory of leadership: Leading by example. 
American Economic Review, 88, 1188-1206. 
Hermalin B. E. (2017). At the helm, Kirk or Spock? The pros and cons of charismatic 
leadership. Working Paper. 
Hogg, M. A. (2001). A social identity theory of leadership. Personality & Social Psychology 
Review, 5, 184-200. 
Holmström B. (1982). Moral hazard in teams. The Bell Journal of Economics, 13, 324-340. 
Holmström, B. & Milgrom, P. (1991). Multitask principal-agent analyses: Incentive contracts, 
asset ownership, and job design. Journal of Law Economics & Organization, 7, 24. 
House, R. J. (1977). A 1976 Theory of Charismatic Leadership. In J. G. Hunt & L. L. Larson 
(Eds.), The Cutting Edge. Carbondale: Southern Illinois: University Press. 
Howell, J. M. & Frost, P. J. (1989). A laboratory study of charismatic leadership. Organizational 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 43(2), 243-269. 
Jacquart, P. & Antonakis, J. (2015). When does charisma matter for top-level leaders? Effect 
of attributional ambiguity. Academy of Management Journal, 58, 1051-1074. 
Katz, D., & Kahn, R. L. (1978). The social psychology of organizations. New York: John Wiley 
& Sons. 
Koopman, P. A. R. (1984). Confidence intervals for the ratio of two binomial proportions. 
Biometrics, 40(2), 513-517. 
Kosfeld, M. & Neckermann, S. (2011). Getting more work for nothing? Symbolic awards and 
worker performance. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 3,86–99. 

 
41 
Kosfeld, M., Neckermann, S. & Yang, X. (2014). Knowing That You Matter, Matters! The 
Interplay of Meaning, Monetary Incentives, and Worker Recognition. IZA Discussion 
Paper 8055. 
Kosfeld, M., & Rustagi, D. (2015). Leader punishment and cooperation in groups: Experimental 
field evidence from commons management in Ethiopia. American Economic Review, 
105(2), 747-83. 
Kube, S., Maréchal, M. A., & Puppe, C. (2012). The currency of reciprocity: Gift exchange in 
the workplace. American Economic Review, 102(4), 1644-62. 
Kvaløy, O., Nieken, P. & Schöttner, A. (2015). Hidden benefits of reward: A field experiment 
on motivation and monetary incentives. European Economic Review, 76, 188-199. 
Kvaløy, O. & Schöttner, A. (2015). Incentives to motivate. Journal of Economic Behavior & 
Organization, 116, 26-42. 
Landis, J. R. & Koch, G. G. (1977). The measurement of observer agreement for categorical 
data. Biometrics, 33(1), 159-174. 
Lazear, E. (2000). Performance pay and productivity. American Economic Review, 90(5): 
1346-1361. 
Lazear, E. P. & Rosen, S. (1981). Rank and order tournament: An optimal labor contract. 
Journal of Political Economy, 89. 841-864. 
Lonati, S., Quiroga, B. F., Zehnder, C. & Antonakis, J. (2018). On doing relevant and rigorous 
experiments: Review and recommendations. Journal of Operations Management, 64, 
19-40. 
McKenzie, D., & Ozier, O. (2019). Why ex-post power using estimated effect sizes is bad, but 
an ex-post MDE is not. World Bank Development Impact Blog. 
Meslec, N., Curseu, P., Fodor, O. C., & Kenda, R. (2020). Effects of charismatic leadership and 
rewards on individual performance. The Leadership Quarterly, 31(6): 101423. 
Minozzi, W., Neblo, M.A., Esterling K.M. & Lazer, D.M.J. 2015. Field experiment evidence 
of substantive, attributional, and behavioral persuasion by members of Congress in 
online town halls. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(13): 3937–
3942. 
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Moorman, R. H., & Fetter, R. (1990). Transformational 
leader behaviors and their effects on follower's trust in leader, satisfaction, and 
organizational citizenship behaviors. The Leadership Quarterly, 1(2), 107-142. 
Potters, J., Sefton, M. & Vesterlund, L. (2007). Leading-by-example and signaling in voluntary 
contribution games: an experimental study. Economic Theory, 33, 169-182. 

 
42 
Sajons, G. B. (2020). Estimating the causal effect of measured endogenous variables: A tutorial 
on experimentally randomized instrumental variables. The Leadership Quarterly, 
31(5), 101348. 
Shamir, B., House, R. J. & Arthur, M. B. (1993). The motivational effects of charismatic 
leadership: A self-concept based theory. Organization Science, 4(4), 577-594. 
Shamir, B., Arthur, M. B. & House, R. J. (1994). The rhetoric of charismatic leadership: A 
theoretical extension, a case study, and implications for research. The Leadership 
Quarterly, 5(1), 25-42. 
Shea, C. M. & Howell, J. M. (1999). Charismatic leadership and task feedback: A laboratory 
study of their effects on self-efficacy and task performance. The Leadership Quarterly, 
10, 375-396. 
Shearer, B. (2004). Piece rates, fixed wages and incentives: Evidence from a field experiment. 
Review of Economic Studies, 71, 513–534. 
Sieweke, J., & Santoni, S. (2020). Natural experiments in leadership research: An introduction, 
review, and guidelines. The Leadership Quarterly, 31(1), 101338. 
Towler, A. J. (2003). Effects of charismatic influence training on attitudes, behavior, and 
performance. Personnel psychology, 56(2), 363 - 381. 
Tur, B., Harstad, J., & Antonakis, J. (2021). Effect of charismatic signaling in social media 
settings: Evidence from TED and Twitter. The Leadership Quarterly. 
Turner, J. C., Oakes, P. J., Haslam, S. A. & McGarty, C. (1994). Self and collective: Cognition 
and social context. Personality and social psychology bulletin, 20(5), 454-463. 
van Knippenberg, D., & Sitkin, S. B. (2013). A critical assessment of charismatic-
transformational leadership research: Back to the drawing board? The Academy of 
Management Annals, 7(1), 1-60. 
Van Vugt, M. & De Cremer, D. (1999). Leadership in social dilemmas: The effects of group 
identification on collective actions to provide public goods. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 76(4), 587. 
Waldman, D. A., Bass, B. M., & Yammarino, F. J. (1990). Adding to contingent-reward 
behavior-The augmenting effect of charismatic leadership. Group & Organization 
Studies, 15(4), 381-394. 
Weber, M. (1947). The theory of social and economic organization (T. Parsons, Trans.). New 
York: The Free Press. 
Willner, A. R. (1984). The spellbinders: Charismatic political leadership. New Haven: CT.: 
Yale University Press. 

 
43 
Yukl, G. A. (1999). An evaluation of conceptual weaknesses in transformational and 
charismatic leadership theories. The Leadership Quarterly, 10(2), 285-305. 
Zizzo, D. J. (2010). Experimenter demand effects in economic experiments. Experimental 
Economics, 13(1), 75-98. 
 

 
44 
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics, Field Experiment 
Treatment 
Baseline 
Piece 
Rate 
Charisma 
p-value 
 
 
 
 
 
Workers' characteristics 
 
 
 
 
Average age of workers (in years) 
32.2 
32.6 
32.5 
0.99 
Percentage of female workers 
0.46 
0.57 
0.61 
0.41 
Experimental behavior 
 
 
 
 
Average earnings of workers (in GBP) 
28.4 
37.2 
28.4 
 
Av. number of letters completed 
230.94 
277.70 
271.22 
 
 Standard deviation 
86.66 
79.99 
80.76 
 
Max. number of letters completed 
340 
349 
350 
 
Min. number of letters completed 
90 
60 
100 
 
 25th percentile 
150 
250 
200 
 
Median number of letters completed 
210 
317 
320 
 
 75th percentile 
320 
330 
337 
 
Av. quality index 
0.86 
0.88 
0.90 
 
Rel. freq. of perfect quality 
0.21 
0.30 
0.32 
 
Av. cost per letter completed (in GBP) 
0.123 
0.134 
0.105 
 
Av. time spent on the task (in minutes) 
245 
267 
263 
 
 Standard deviation 
64.57 
68.40 
97.78 
 
Max. time spent on the task 
370 
480 
480 
 
Min. time spent on the task 
150 
160 
60 
 
Median time spent on the task 
240 
270 
240 
 
Rel. freq. of help from friends or family 
0.12 
0.19 
0.18 
 
Notes: The table provides descriptive statistics for relevant variables of our field experiment. Balance is tested by 
running a regression of workers’ characteristics on treatment dummies (Piece-rate, Charisma): we report p-values 
from a Wald test of beta(Piece-rate) = beta(Charisma) = 0 in Column 4. In the baseline and the charisma treatments 
the workers’ wage is fixed to GBP 28.4 (this corresponds to 4.5 times the hourly minimum wage). In the piece rate 
condition workers who completed more than 220 envelopes received GBP 0.12 for each additional envelope. 
Workers had received the materials to complete a maximum of 350 letters. The quality index contains 20 items 
(see section 3.4 for details). Perfect quality is unity if all checked items of the quality index have been passed and 
zero otherwise. The average cost per letter has been calculated at the treatment level (i.e., the number reported 
corresponds to the sum of worker earnings divided by the sum of letters completed by all workers in a treatment). 
One worker (in the charisma treatment) did not respond to the age question so that we have one missing 
observation. The time spent on the task and the availability of help from friends or family are self-reported by 
workers and could therefore not be verified. Some workers have not responded to these questions so that we have 
8 missing observations for each variable (time: 3 Baseline, 4 Piece Rate, 1 Charisma / help: 2 Baseline, 4 Piece 
Rate, 2 Charisma). 
 

 
45 
Table 2: Regression Analysis of Treatment Effects in the Field Experiment 
Dependent variable 
Letters 
completed 
Letters 
completed 
Cost per 
letter 
Quality 
index 
Perfect 
quality 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
Panel A: no clustering 
Piece rate 
46.757** 
47.633* 
0.006 
0.023 
0.094 
 
(20.656) 
(24.860) 
(0.018) 
(0.034) 
(0.110) 
Charisma 
40.277** 
58.509*** 
-0.028** 
0.041 
0.119 
 
(19.346) 
(21.123) 
(0.014) 
(0.030) 
(0.103) 
Constant 
230.943*** 212.711*** 
0.146*** 
0.857*** 
0.206*** 
 
(14.647) 
(16.931) 
(0.011) 
(0.025) 
(0.070) 
Panel B: clustering by session 
Piece rate 
46.757** 
47.633* 
0.006 
0.023 
0.094 
 
(22.484) 
(27.946) 
(0.017) 
(0.031) 
(0.113) 
Charisma 
40.277* 
58.509** 
-0.028* 
0.041 
0.119 
 
(20.797) 
(26.228) 
(0.015) 
(0.029) 
(0.105) 
Constant 
230.943*** 212.711*** 
0.146*** 
0.857*** 
0.206*** 
 
(15.275) 
(18.895) 
(0.011) 
(0.021) 
(0.078) 
Missing equal to "No work"? 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
R-Squared 
0.059 
0.070 
0.051 
0.019 
0.013 
Observations 
106 
111 
106 
104 
104 
Notes: In columns (1) and (2) the dependent variable is the number of letters completed at the worker level. In 
column (3) the dependent variable is the cost per letter measured at the worker level. The dependent variable in 
column (4) is an index that measures the fraction of passed items in a set of 20 quality checks at the worker level. 
The dependent variable in column (5) is unity if all 20 quality checks have been passed and zero otherwise. The 
variables “Piece Rate” and “Charisma” are indicator variables for treatments; the omitted category is “Baseline”. 
Column (1) considers only workers who returned the completed envelopes, thus setting to missing observations 
corresponding to workers who dropped out of the experiment after the treatment, but before performing the work 
task. Column (2) instead includes these observations, setting the output of workers who dropped out of the 
experiment equal to zero. The constant in column (3) does not correspond to the average cost per letter for the 
baseline treatment reported in Table 1. The reason is that in Table 1 the cost per letter has been calculated at the 
treatment level (see the notes to Table 1 for more details). Because of a coordination problem we failed to collect 
the quality information for two workers, which explains why we have only 104 observations in columns (4) and 
(5). Panel A reports robust standard errors, while Panel B displays robust standard errors clustered at the session 
level in parentheses, with Moulton method used to correct for the small number of clusters; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, 
* p<0.1. 
 
 

 
46 
Table 3: Regression Analysis of Treatment Effects in the Field Experiment (with covariates) 
Dependent variable 
Letters 
completed 
Cost per 
letter 
Time spent 
on task 
Time spent 
on task 
Help from 
friends/fam. 
Help from 
friends/fam. 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
Panel A: no clustering 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Piece rate 
45.373** 
0.007 
21.611 
23.741 
0.071 
0.085 
 
(21.257) 
(0.020) 
(17.569) 
(18.219) 
(0.097) 
(0.097) 
Charisma 
36.836* 
-0.025* 
17.788 
13.349 
0.058 
0.079 
 
(20.165) 
(0.015) 
(19.251) 
(19.192) 
(0.085) 
(0.086) 
Female 
9.490 
-0.008 
-2.739 
-0.107 
 
(17.129) 
(0.014) 
(17.234) 
(0.084) 
Age 
0.796 
-0.001* 
1.385** 
-0.000 
 
(0.567) 
(0.000) 
(0.628) 
(0.004) 
Constant 
200.977*** 0.171*** 245.313*** 202.137*** 
0.121** 
0.185 
 
(24.421) 
(0.018) 
(11.411) 
(21.855) 
(0.058) 
(0.158) 
Panel B: clustering by session 
 
 
 
 
 
Piece rate 
45.373** 
0.007 
21.611 
23.741 
0.071 
0.085 
 
(22.495) 
(0.017) 
(21.313) 
(20.614) 
(0.098) 
(0.099) 
Charisma 
36.836* 
-0.025 
17.788 
13.349 
0.058 
0.079 
 
(21.070) 
(0.015) 
(19.145) 
(18.652) 
(0.088) 
(0.090) 
Female 
9.490 
-0.008 
 
-2.739 
-0.107 
 
(18.335) 
(0.013) 
 
(16.311) 
(0.080) 
Age 
0.796 
-0.001 
 
1.385** 
-0.000 
 
(0.697) 
(0.001) 
 
(0.642) 
(0.003) 
Constant 
200.977*** 0.171*** 245.313*** 202.137*** 
0.121* 
0.185 
 
(29.851) 
(0.022) 
(14.270) 
(26.968) 
(0.065) 
(0.130) 
Missing equal to "No work" 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
R-squared 
0.073 
0.064 
0.013 
0.063 
0.007 
0.027 
Observations 
105 
105 
98 
97 
98 
97 
Notes: In column (1) the dependent variable is the number of letters completed at the worker level. In column (2) the 
dependent variable is the cost per letter measured at the worker level. The variables “Piece Rate” and “Charisma” are 
indicator variables for treatments; the omitted category is “Baseline”. These regressions also control for age and gender 
of workers. We lose one observation, because one of the workers did not report her age in the questionnaire. The 
dependent variable in columns (3) and (4) is the time spent on the task self-reported by the worker. The dependent variable 
in columns (5) and (6) is an indicator variable of whether the worker had help from friends or family. For both variables 
we report uncontrolled treatment effects and estimations controlling for age and gender. We lose another 8 observations 
in these regressions, because some workers did not fill in the section of the questionnaire that contained the questions on 
the work task (see also the notes of Table 1 for more details). Panel A reports robust standard errors, while Panel B 
displays robust standard errors clustered at the session level in parentheses, with Moulton method used to correct for the 
small number of clusters; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. 

47 
 
Table 4: Regression Analysis, Laboratory Experiments 
Notes: In Panel A the dependent variable is the contribution to the public good. The variables “Charisma” and “Control” are indicator variables for treatments; the omitted 
category is “No Charisma”. There are four estimations for each of our three laboratory experiments. We estimate pure treatment effects and a specification that controls for 
treatment-specific time trends. We report OLS and Tobit estimates (to account for the fact that contributions are censored at the maximum level of 20 points). In Panel B the 
dependent variable is the belief about others’ contributions. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the group level; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10. 
Experiment
Estimator
OLS
OLS
Tobit
Tobit
OLS
OLS
Tobit
Tobit
OLS
OLS
Tobit
Tobit
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
Dependent variable
Charisma
1.097
1.132
1.622
2.073
0.320
0.643
1.309
1.744
2.515**
1.385
5.694**
4.992**
(1.178)
(1.118)
(1.865)
(1.997)
(1.111)
(0.856)
(2.386)
(2.147)
(1.154)
(0.905)
(2.511)
(2.416)
Control
-2.188
-3.369**
-3.409
-5.349**
(1.488)
(1.451)
(2.133)
(2.236)
Period
-0.996***
-1.312***
-0.459***
-0.720***
-0.585***
-0.872***
(0.069)
(0.095)
(0.088)
(0.141)
(0.101)
(0.151)
Charisma x Period
-0.006
-0.081
-0.059
-0.081
0.205
0.116
(0.119)
(0.166)
(0.135)
(0.230)
(0.147)
(0.269)
Control x Period
0.215
0.357**
(0.134)
(0.174)
Constant
10.057***
15.537***
12.638***
19.769***
13.590***
16.115***
19.047***
22.931***
13.582***
16.797***
18.139***
22.865***
(0.891)
(0.854)
(1.479)
(1.614)
(0.735)
(0.542)
(1.776)
(1.600)
(0.968)
(0.647)
(2.150)
(1.977)
Observations
4,360
4,360
4,360
4,360
3,000
3,000
3,000
3,000
2,280
2,280
2,280
2,280
R-squared
0.019
0.124
0.000
0.033
0.031
0.072
Dependent variable
Charisma
1.120
1.269
1.387
1.741
0.476
1.087*
1.344
1.968*
2.081*
0.913
2.867*
1.658
(1.095)
(0.782)
(1.497)
(1.192)
(1.010)
(0.652)
(1.553)
(1.140)
(1.043)
(0.707)
(1.628)
(1.147)
Control
-2.467*
-3.343***
-3.266*
-4.583***
(1.371)
(0.932)
(1.706)
(1.211)
Period
-0.814***
-0.917***
-0.250***
-0.268**
-0.350***
-0.353**
(0.096)
(0.114)
(0.083)
(0.108)
(0.114)
(0.142)
Charisma x Period
-0.027
-0.064
-0.111
-0.116
0.212
0.218
(0.147)
(0.177)
(0.134)
(0.191)
(0.145)
(0.195)
Control x Period
0.159
0.245
(0.156)
(0.182)
Constant
11.012***
15.490***
12.321***
17.297***
13.779***
15.154***
15.406***
16.857***
13.743***
15.669***
15.235***
17.154***
(0.822)
(0.538)
(1.139)
(0.863)
(0.671)
(0.457)
(1.084)
(0.800)
(0.839)
(0.489)
(1.254)
(0.871)
Observations
4,360
4,360
4,360
4,360
3,000
3,000
3,000
3,000
2,280
2,280
2,280
2,280
R-squared
0.032
0.133
0.002
0.024
0.036
0.056
Contribution
Belief
Panel B
Panel A
Laboratory Experiment 1
Laboratory Experiment 2
Laboratory Experiment 3

48 
 
Table 5: Regression Analysis (All Laboratory Experiments) 
 
Notes: The dependent variable is the contribution to the public good. The variable “Charisma” is an indicator 
variable for the charisma treatment; the omitted category is “No Charisma”. The variables “Charity” and 
“Collective Viewing” are indicator variables for observations from Laboratory Experiments 2 and 3, the omitted 
category is Laboratory Experiment 1. We exclude data from the control treatment (no speech) in Laboratory 
Experiment 1. Columns (1) and (2) present OLS and Tobit estimates of the overall treatment effect of charisma 
across all three experiments (controlling for experiment-specific level effects). In columns (3) and (4) we add 
interaction effects between charisma and experiments 2 and 3. Standard errors are clustered at the session level; 
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10. 
 
 
Estimator
OLS
Tobit
OLS
Tobit
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Dependent variable
Charisma
1.201*
2.508**
1.097
1.687
(0.620)
(1.145)
(1.185)
(1.936)
Charity
3.105***
5.280***
3.533***
5.546***
(0.702)
(1.222)
(1.172)
(2.082)
Collective Viewing
4.200***
7.066***
3.525***
5.218**
(0.812)
(1.539)
(1.238)
(2.087)
Charisma x Charity
-0.777
-0.469
(1.427)
(2.532)
Charisma x Collective Viewing
1.417
4.057
(1.572)
(3.049)
Constant
10.004***
12.592***
10.057***
13.002***
(0.703)
(1.288)
(0.912)
(1.613)
Observations
8,840
8,840
8,840
8,840
R-squared
0.054
0.056
Contribution

49 
 
 
Figure 1: Job Ad used in the Recruitment Process 
 
Notes: This figure displays the original job ad as shown on the agency’s webpage. 
 
 

50 
 
Figure 2: Model Predictions – Effects of Piece Rate and Charisma 
 
Notes: The figure shows examples of indifference curves in the worker’s benefit-output space for both low 
charisma (cL, solid black lines) and high charisma (cH, dashed black lines) of the leader. In the baseline condition 
and the charisma condition the material benefit corresponds to the fixed wage w, so that the set of reachable points 
consists of a flat line (horizontal grey line). In the piece rate condition the set of reachable points includes a kink 
(increasing grey line), because the wage increases if the worker surpasses a threshold t (m = w + max[0, p(a – t)], 
where p is the piece rate. The figure displays a utility-maximizing worker’s optimal choices for each of the three 
treatments (the worker always aims at reaching the highest indifference curve possible given the set of reachable 
points). In the baseline condition the utility maximizing output choice is aB. The corresponding levels in the 
charisma condition and the piece rate condition are aC and aP. 
 
 

51 
 
Figure 3: Number of Letters Stuffed and Cost per Letter across Treatments 
 
Panel A: Average Number of Letters Stuffed 
 
Panel B: Average Cost per Letter 
 
Notes: The figures displays the average number of letters completed (Panel A) as well as the average cost per letter 
(Panel B) across treatments. The capped bars represent the standard error of the mean. The average cost per letter 
has been calculated at the worker level before averaging across workers. The displayed levels therefore correspond 
to the values reported in Table 2 rather than the values reported in Table 1. 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Average number of letters stuffed
Fixed Wage
Piece Rates
Charisma
 
0
.02
.04
.06
.08
.1
.12
.14
.16
Average cost per letter
Fixed Wage
Piece Rates
Charisma
 

52 
 
Figure 4: Distribution of Number of Letters Stuffed across Treatments 
 
Notes: The figures show the distributions of the number of completed letters across our three treatments. 
 
 
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Fixed Wage
Piece Rates
Charisma
Relative frequency
Number of letter stuffed

53 
 
Figure 5: Model Predictions – Effects of Charisma on Contributions to Public Good 
 
 
Notes: The figure illustrates how an increase in leader charisma shifts the best response functions of Players 1 
(solid and dashed black lines) and 2 (solid and dashed grey lines) and how this increases the equilibrium 
contributions of the two players. The figure is drawn for the following parameters: α = 0.8, γ = 2, δ = 0.2. Perceived 
charisma is assumed to increase from c = 0.5 to c = 0.6. 
 
 

54 
 
Figure 6: Contributions and Beliefs over Time (Laboratory Experiments) 
 
Notes: The figures show the development of public good contributions and beliefs across time 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Period
Contributions
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Period
Beliefs
Panel A: Experiment 1
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Period
Contributions
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Period
Beliefs
Panel B: Experiment 2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Period
Contributions
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Period
Beliefs
Panel C: Experiment 3
Control
No charisma
Charisma

1 
 
ONLINE APPENDIX 
Appendix A: Pictures of Field Experiment Materials 
Setup for instruction sessions at the employment agency’s office: 
 
Materials to assemble (large envelope, donation letter, donation form, return envelope) 
 
 
 

 
2 
A faulty donation letter: 
 
A completed stack of 10 envelopes (secured with a rubber band): 
 
Completed envelopes in a box: 
 
 
 

 
3 
Appendix B: Full text of speeches 
To view videos of the studio versions of the speeches used in the field and laboratory 
experiments refer to the following web-link: 
http://www.hec.unil.ch/jantonakis/charisma.htm 
 
I. Field experiment 
Standard speech: 
Hi: My name is Mike and I am working with the team that has hired you. My main task is to 
brief you on the importance of what you are going to do; but, in my spare time I will be stuffing 
envelopes too, along with my colleague Giovanna. In the next couple of minutes though, I just 
want to explain to you the nature of the fundraising campaign and to give you an overview of 
the task ahead. 
Of course, you are here to stuff envelopes and earn some money. That is clear. At the 
same time your efforts will also help Birmingham’s hospital charity achieve what is a noble 
mission, which is to help children who are sick with all kinds of serious illness. Therefore, the 
job you are doing is really important to help some children. 
You will help children because the letters you have are written to convince a potential 
donor to help the charity. Each letter can potentially help a child have a nice Christmas. Let me 
tell you why. Many gravely sick children will spend Christmas in hospital. This is obviously 
not a nice state of affairs for the children and their families. Thus, the charity will help families 
who cannot afford to be near their children during the Christmas period. They will help the 
families in a number of ways, for example, by paying for parental accommodation or by 
providing a nicely decorated room so that the families can open their Christmas presents in a 
pleasant environment. They can also help provide a playroom and toys for the children. 
Every envelope you stuff with a letter will make a difference because it is only through 
reaching potential donors that we can raise money. So, I want you to be very professional when 
you are doing your job so that you can better help the children. 
Of course, you will be paid regardless of how many envelopes you stuff. However, the more 
you do, the better; the more envelopes you stuff the more money we can potentially raise for 
them. 
Next, please follow the instructions you have been given, fold the letters and seal the 
envelopes neatly and maintain correct records. Printing this many letters sometimes produces 

 
4 
printing faults. So, scan the letters quickly to ensure that they are clean. We don’t want to turn 
away donors by sending them bad letters. A bad letter might not help raise money. 
Also, please think of the children when you do your job because every letter can 
potentially help a child. 
So you might think, well, I will just do what I have to—my extra effort won’t really 
help. Yes, your extra effort will help! Just think of how many of you are in this room and all 
the other people we have hired to do this task as well. Every letter helps. The more letters you 
can do for us, the more letters we have to send out in our fundraising drive. This of course 
means that the more donors we can potentially reach and the more you can potentially help the 
charity. At the end of the day, we may be able to make a much bigger difference to these sick 
children, which is really what matters most of all. So please do your best by doing your job as 
well as you can, to the best of your ability. Doing so will really help make a difference to the 
children. Of course, this will help you to earn some extra money too, so we all winning here. 
Remember, each letter is important: The more letters we send out the better. So do work 
as hard as you can and do work as precisely as you can. That all’s I have to say: Please do the 
best that you can because in this way we can all better help the charity. 
Thank you for listening to me. I’ll let Giovanna conclude the briefing. Thank you. 
 
Charismatic Speech: 
Hi: My name is Mike and I am working with the team that has hired you. My main task is to 
brief you on the importance of what you are going to do; but, in my spare time I will be stuffing 
envelopes too, along with my colleague Giovanna. In the next couple of minutes though, I just 
want to explain to you the nature of the fundraising campaign. So, why are you here? 
Some of you may think you are here just to stuff envelopes to earn a few quid. However, 
by being here you are going to do something special by helping Birmingham’s hospital charity 
achieve its mission; and, this is a noble mission. Your efforts will make a difference to sick 
children: Children with cancer, children with leukaemia, and children with all sorts of serious 
illnesses. This is something worth doing; I think it is a right thing to do. 
Just how are you going to do something special? Well, the letters you have are written 
to convince a potential donor to help the charity. In a way, the letter is a ticket for a child to 
attend Christmas. Let me tell you why. Many gravely sick children will spend Christmas in 
hospital. What must that be like? For the parent? The child? The family? The charity will help 
families who cannot afford to be near their children during the Christmas period. They will help 
them by paying for the parents’ accommodation in or near the hospital, by providing a nicely 

 
5 
decorated room so that the families can open their Christmas presents in a cozy environment, 
by providing a playroom and toys for the children. 
Every envelope you stuff with a letter will make a difference because it is only through 
reaching potential donors that we can raise money. So, I want you to do three things to give the 
kids a ticket to Christmas: work hard, work smart, and think of the kids you will help. 
First: Work hard. You will be paid regardless of how many envelopes you stuff. 
However, the more you do, the better; the more envelopes you stuff the more money we can 
potentially raise. 
Second: Work smart. Follow the instructions you have been given, fold the letters and 
seal the envelopes neatly and maintain correct records. Printing this many letters sometimes 
produces printing faults. So, scan the letters quickly to ensure that they are clean. We don’t 
want to turn away donors by sending them bad letters. A bad letter is a bad ticket. 
Third: Think of the kids when you do your job. You are not just stuffing envelopes to 
earn money. You are stuffing envelopes to help sickly kids too. 
So you might think, well, I will just do what I have to—will my extra effort really help? 
Yes, it will! This reminds me of story about an old man who while walking along the seashore 
noticed a girl picking up starfish and throwing them into the sea. The old man approached her 
saying: “what are you doing?” She replied: “I am throwing starfish into the sea, because the sun 
is coming up and the starfish will die.” “But,” said the man, “there are thousands of starfish, the 
sun is high, and the tide is going out. How can you possibly make a difference?” The girl bent 
down, picked up a starfish, threw it into the sea and said: “well, I made a difference to that one.” 
Remember, every letter is a ticket for a child to attend Christmas: the more tickets we 
issue, the better. Work hard, work smart, and think of the kids. Every time you open an 
envelope, imagine the flap is like a mouth that is whispering to you, “work hard, work smart, 
think of the kids.” You may think I have gone “doolally” but I know you can do it. 
So, what are we going to do? I’ll let Giovanna conclude the briefing. Thank you. 
 
 
 

 
6 
II. Laboratory experiment 1 
For French versions of these texts see http://www.hec.unil.ch/jantonakis/charisma.htm 
 
Standard speech: 
Hi, my name is Jean and I have been asked by the experimenters to brief you about the stakes 
in this game. I stand to win or lose nothing from how you play; however, there will be no greater 
pleasure for you than to see your group benefit together. Let me tell you why. 
I suppose that most of you have heard about the tragedy of the commons. It refers to a public 
good situation where there are multiple players that have a common resource to share. If they 
all contribute to the common resource they all benefit. Contributing means that they each incur 
some costs and by doing so, they collectively benefit. By protecting the public good they can 
increase public welfare. In such situations if individuals chose to not cooperate, public wealth 
is destroyed. Therefore individuals have to consider their private interests in relation to their 
collective interest; the rational action for the long term is cooperation. 
The tragedy of the commons is classic in economics because it highlights the friction between 
private and common interest. The game you will play is similar and cooperation between the 
players translates into collective increased payoffs for all. Individuals are in a dilemma and the 
utility they gain from partaking will depend on money but it can also be psychological in nature. 
You will be given 20 points in each period. Putting them all in the shared account is the 
cooperative option and putting them all in your personal account translate into looking out for 
your self-interest. With everyone doing the latter, you can make a maximum of 200 points. 
With everyone cooperating the maximum you make is 320 points, which is 60% more and 
which means more earnings for everyone. 
Of course, a player may decide to invoke the dominant strategy, which potentially has the 
highest payoffs. Here the player takes advantage of the goodwill of other contributors and never 
contributes to the public good himself. Interestingly, even if one player defects every round and 
puts nothing in the shared account, if the three other players continue to contribute they will 
still be better off and make 240 points which is 20% more than if everyone played in a selfish 
way. Of course, the defector will make more money, but then has to face the psychological cost 
of his conduct. The defector has to balance economic benefit against the psychological costs 
incurred for not having cooperated. 
Finally, think twice before you retaliate by playing selfishly following selfish actions by 
someone else. Civil rights leader Martin Luther King said the method of passive resistance is 

 
7 
not weak and it takes strength to not retaliate. This method will affect the utility of your 
opponent. 
If someone defects from the beginning consider sending this person a signal by still playing 
cooperatively. The defector will see that you still believe in him and in the value of cooperation 
in public good situations and may change. But if the defector does not change, you will still 
leave this lab knowing you served the common interest. And in the event that you are the only 
remaining contributor you can derive more utility knowing the challenge you faced all alone. 
To conclude, it is clear that cooperation is the best option for all and it is that which should be 
brought to the fore. To avoid a tragedy of the commons maximize your psychological utility 
and make yourself feel good. 
 
Charismatic speech: 
Hi, my name is Jean and I have been asked by the experimenters to brief you about the stakes 
in this game. I stand to win or lose nothing from how you play; however, there will be no greater 
pleasure for you than to see your group benefit together. Let me tell you why. 
Have you heard about the tragedy of the commons? Suppose there is a common grazing ground 
for the farmers to share. The common interest is to protect the grazing ground, so that it 
recovers, and new grass can grow on it. It is in the common interest of the famers to cooperate 
and fairly share the ground, because with cooperation they can all benefit. However, each 
farmer may have a selfish interest, to have his or her cows graze as much as possible. But if all 
farmers do that the common good will break down. The field will turn from lush green grass 
into mud. 
In this example, there is a common moral interest pitted against a selfish immoral interest. The 
game you will play is similar. Either you all cooperate and you all benefit, or you chose the 
selfish option and collectively lose. In your dilemma, there will be three things at stake: your 
monetary benefit, but also your pride, and your feeling of self-worth. Why? 
You will be given 20 points in each period. Putting them all in the shared account protects the 
public good; putting them all in your personal account protects your self-interest. If everyone 
acts selfish you all earn 200 points; however, if you all cooperate and always put all your points 
in the shared account, you can each make 320 points. That is 60% more. Who would not want 
that? 
There may be a cunning person out there thinking: “I will let the fools put their money in the 
shared account, but I will always put mine in my private account and profit from their 
cooperation.” Do you want to be this person? Would this feel right to you? Is it just? Even if 

 
8 
one of your group members puts nothing in the common account, as long you three continue to 
contribute, the cooperators can still make 240 points. That’s is 20% more than if everyone 
played selfishly. The defector may make more money, but he will walk out of this lab knowing 
he let you all down, took advantage of the group, and acted selfishly. 
Finally, think twice before you retaliate by playing selfishly following selfish actions by 
someone else. Civil rights leader Martin Luther King said the method of passive resistance is 
not weak, for it’s the strong person who does not retaliate. This method works on your 
opponent’s conscience. 
Even if someone defects from the beginning, you can send this person a signal by still 
contributing to the shared account. The defector will see that you still believe in him, in the 
common good, and that cooperation is better than defection, and may change. But if the defector 
does not change, you will still leave this lab with your head held high. And, what if you are the 
only contributor? The fewer the contributors the greater your share of honor. 
So, do what is right, do what takes courage, and think of the common good. Turn the tragedy 
of the commons into the triumph of cooperation, and walk out of this lab proud. So, what are 
you going to do? 
 
III. Laboratory experiments 2 and 3 
For French versions of these texts see http://www.hec.unil.ch/jantonakis/charisma.htm 
 
Standard speech: 
Hi, my name is Jean and I have been asked by the experimenters to brief you about the stakes 
in this game. I stand to win or lose nothing from how you play; however, there will be no greater 
pleasure for you than to see your group and the children in the hospital benefit together. Let me 
tell you why. 
Of course, you are here to participate in an experiment and to earn some money. That is clear. 
At the same time by participating in this experiment, the decisions that you take can also help 
Lausanne’s children hospital achieve what is a noble mission, which is to help children who are 
sick with all kinds of illness, including cancer, leukaemia, and other serious conditions. 
Therefore, the experiment in which you are partaking can have an impact on these children. 
In the game, there is a friction between private and common interest. Cooperation between all 
the players translates into collective increased payoffs for all players and the children too. Thus, 
players are in a dilemma and the utility they gain from partaking will depend on the money they 
make, but it can also be psychological in nature. 

 
9 
You will be given 20 points in each period. Putting them all in the shared account is the 
cooperative option with respect to the public good, which also benefits the children; putting 
them all in your personal account translates into looking out for your self-interest. If everyone 
looks out for their self-interest, you can make a maximum of 200 points. If everyone cooperates 
the maximum you make is 320 points, which is 60% more and which means more earnings for 
everyone, and also means helping the sick children in the hospital too. 
How the payoffs are set up in this game makes it quite clear that some cunning players may 
take advantage of the goodwill and the cooperation of other contributors and never contribute 
in the public account of the game. It is apparent that, in the end, defectors will earn some extra 
money, that is 440 points, but then they have to face the psychological cost of their conduct 
with respect to the other players and the children in the hospital too. The defector has to balance 
having made more money by not cooperating, against the psychological costs incurred for not 
having cooperated and for failing to help the children too. 
So you might think, “well, I will just play the game—my extra contributions to the public 
account won’t really help.” Yes, your contributions to the public account will help! Just think 
of the concrete way your individual contribution can help a child in the hospital. Every 
contribution can make a difference. The more money you contribute to the public account, the 
more money we can give to the children’s hospital. At the end of the day, we can make a 
difference to the sick children. So please contribute as much as you can. Doing so will really 
help make a difference to the children. Of course, this will help you to earn some extra money 
too, so we are all winning here. 
To conclude, it is clear that cooperation is the best option for all and it is that which should be 
brought to the fore. Even if you are the only remaining contributor maximize your monetary 
and psychological utility knowing the challenge you faced alone. 
 
Charismatic speech: 
Hi, my name is Jean and I have been asked by the experimenters to brief you about the stakes 
in this game. I stand to win or lose nothing from how you play; however, there will be no greater 
pleasure for you than to see your group and the children in the hospital benefit together. Let me 
tell you why. 
Some of you may think “I am just here just to participate in an experiment and to earn some 
money.” However, you can help Lausanne’s children hospital achieve its mission; and, this is 
a noble mission. Your efforts will make a difference to sick children: Children with cancer, 

 
10 
children with leukaemia, and children with all sorts of serious illnesses. This is something worth 
doing; I think it is a right thing to do. 
In the game there is common moral interest pitted against a selfish immoral interest. Either you 
all cooperate so you and the children benefit, or you choose the selfish option and collectively 
lose. In your dilemma, there will be three things at stake: your monetary benefit, but also your 
pride, and your feeling of self-worth. Why? 
You will be given 20 points in each period. Putting them all in the shared account protects the 
public good and benefits the children; putting them all in your personal account protects your 
self-interest. If everyone acts selfish you all earn 200 points and the children get nothing. 
However, if you all cooperate and always put all your points in the shared account, you can 
each make 320 points. That is not only 60% more for you, but you also help the sick children 
in the hospital. Who would not want that? 
There may be a cunning person out there thinking: “I will let the fools put their money in the 
shared account, but I will always put mine in my private account and profit from their 
cooperation.” It is true that this strategy allows you to earn some extra money, that is 440 points, 
but do you really want to be this person? Would this feel right to you? Is it fair to the children 
in the hospital? As a defector may make more money, but he will walk out of this lab knowing 
that he looked out for himself, that he took advantage of the group, and let the children down. 
You might wonder “will my extra contributions to the public account really help?” Yes, they 
will! This reminds me of a story about an old man who while walking along the seashore noticed 
a girl picking up starfish and throwing them into the sea. The old man approached her saying: 
“what are you doing?” She replied: “I am throwing starfish into the sea, because the sun is 
coming up and the starfish will die.” “But,” said the man, “there are thousands of starfish, the 
sun is high, and the tide is going out. How can you possibly make a difference?” The girl bent 
down, picked up a starfish, threw it into the sea and said: “well, I made a difference to that one.” 
So, do what is right, do what takes courage, and think of the common good. Even if you are the 
only one contributing in your group, well, the fewer the contributors the greater your share of 
honor. So, what are you going to do? 
 
 

 
11 
Appendix C: Debriefing Letter Sent to Field Experiment Participants 
Leaders' communication and workers' motivation: the effect of charismatic leadership 
Last week, you worked for the Birmingham Children’s Hospital (BCH). Besides making it 
possible for the BCH to send out over 34,000 letters and conduct a large direct mail fundraising 
campaign, your work has provided data for a research study. 
The purpose of the study is to investigate the effects of charismatic leadership on 
workers’ effort. Based on past research, we expect charismatic leaders to be more effective in 
motivating workers than leaders who lack charisma. However, no previous study has 
demonstrated this rigorously in an actual work environment, by monitoring effort of workers 
exposed to charismatic and non-charismatic leaders. The results of such a study can be of great 
interest for firms, government agencies and charitable organizations seeking ways to motivate 
their employees and members. 
The study is experimental in nature. Participants were randomly assigned to either a 
team leader who employed charismatic communication techniques when explaining the work 
task to them, or to a leader who did not use these communication techniques. We also wanted 
to compare the effect of charismatic leadership to that of monetary incentives: for this reason, 
some participants were randomly assigned to receive a monetary bonus for completing a large 
number of envelopes. The main outcome we measured was the number of letters stuffed by 
each participant over the work session. Thus, the reason why we did not debrief you after your 
session was over was because we wanted to avoid having information contamination effects 
between participants in different versions of the experiment. 
Your performance in the work task will be absolutely confidential. Within the study, 
you are identified exclusively through a code number, and only people who are associated with 
this research will see the performance associated with the code. Note too that we would like 
you to maintain confidentiality about the treatments we have disclosed to you-- please do not 
tell anyone about the details of this study. Remember, a crucial goal of this study is to observe 
behaviour in a natural work environment. We may conduct similar studies in the future, and if 
other workers know about this study before they participate, their data will be biased and thus 
cannot be included. 
We greatly appreciate your participation in this study. If you are interested in obtaining 
a copy of the results once the study is complete, you may contact the primary researcher at the 

 
12 
University of Birmingham, Dr. Giovanna d’Adda at g.dadda@bham.ac.uk. If you have a more 
general interest in this area of research, you may also contact Dr. d’Adda. 
If you have any complaints, concerns, or questions about this research, please feel free 
to contact, Dr. Giovanna d’Adda at g.dadda@bham.ac.uk or the Research Ethics Committee at 
dsfa@bham.ac.uk. 
Thank you very much for your participation!! 
 

13 
 
Appendix D: Objective Manipulation Check for the Field and Laboratory Experiments (Coded Results for Speeches) 
I. Field experiment 
Coded results for the Standard Speech: 
Sentence 
Text 
c1 c2 c3 c4 c5 c6 c7 c8 c9 
1 
Hi: My name is Mike and I am working with the team that has hired you. 
2 
My main task is to brief you on the importance of what you are going to do; but, in my spare time I will be stuffing 
envelopes too, along with my colleague Giovanna. 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
In the next couple of minutes though, I just want to explain to you the nature of the fundraising campaign and to give 
you an overview of the task ahead. 
4 
Of course, you are here to stuff envelopes and earn some money. 
5 
That is clear. 
6 
At the same time your efforts will also help Birmingham’s hospital charity achieve what is a noble mission, which is 
to help children who are sick with all kinds of serious illness. 
1 
7 
Therefore, the job you are doing is really important to help some children. 
1 
8 
You will help children because the letters you have are written to convince a potential donor to help the charity. 
9 
Each letter can potentially help a child have a nice Christmas. 
10 
Let me tell you why. 
11 
Many gravely sick children will spend Christmas in hospital. 
1 
12 
This is obviously not a nice state of affairs for the children and their families. 
1 
13 
Thus, the charity will help families who cannot afford to be near their children during the Christmas period. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
They will help the families in a number of ways, for example, by paying for parental accommodation or by providing 
a nicely decorated room so that the families can open their Christmas presents in a pleasant environment. 
15 
They can also help provide a playroom and toys for the children. 
16 
Every envelope you stuff with a letter will make a difference because it is only through reaching potential donors that 
we can raise money. 
1 
17 
So, I want you to be very professional when you are doing your job so that you can better help the children. 
1 
18 
Of course, you will be paid regardless of how many envelopes you stuff. 
1 
19 
However, the more you do, the better; the more envelopes you stuff the more money we can potentially raise for 
them. 
20 
Next, please follow the instructions you have been given, fold the letters and seal the envelopes neatly and maintain 
correct records. 
1 
21 
Printing this many letters sometimes produces printing faults. 
 
 

14 
 
Sentence 
Text 
c1 c2 c3 c4 c5 c6 c7 c8 c9 
22 
So, scan the letters quickly to ensure that they are clean. 
23 
We don’t want to turn away donors by sending them bad letters. 
24 
A bad letter might not help raise money. 
25 
Also, please think of the children when you do your job because every letter can potentially help a child. 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
26 
So you might think, well, I will just do what I have to—my extra effort won’t really help. 
1 
27 
Yes, your extra effort will help! 
1 
28 
Just think of how many of you are in this room and all the other people we have hired to do this task as well. 
29 
Every letter helps. 
1 
30 
The more letters you can do for us, the more letters we have to send out in our fundraising drive. 
31 
This of course means that the more donors we can potentially reach and the more you can potentially help the charity. 
32 
At the end of the day, we may be able to make a much bigger difference to these sick children, which is really what 
matters most of all. 
1 
33 
So please do your best by doing your job as well as you can, to the best of your ability. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
Doing so will really help make a difference to the children. 
1 
35 
Of course, this will help you to earn some extra money too, so we all winning here. 
36 
Remember, each letter is important: The more letters we send out the better. 
37 
So do work as hard as you can and do work as precisely as you can. 
38 
That all’s I have to say: Please do the best that you can because in this way we can all better help the charity. 
1 
39 
Thank you for listening to me. 
40 
I’ll let Giovanna conclude the briefing. 
41 
Thank you. 
 
Total by tactic 
 
 
 
4 
2 
9 
 
 
1 
 
Note: Coded categories include: c1 = metaphors or similes, c2 = rhetorical questions, c3 = stories or anecdotes, c4 = contrasts, c5 = lists, c6 = moral conviction, c7 = sentiments of the 
collective, c8 = sets high/ambitious goals, c8 = creates confidence goals can be achieved. A “1” in the coded category indicates the presence of a charismatic leadership tactic. 

15 
 
Coded results for the Charismatic Speech: 
Sentence 
Text 
c1 c2 c3 c4 c5 c6 
c7 c8 c9 
1 
Hi: My name is Mike and I am working with the team that has hired you. 
2 
My main task is to brief you on the importance of what you are going to do; but, in my spare time I will be stuffing 
envelopes too, along with my colleague Giovanna. 
1 
3 
In the next couple of minutes though, I just want to explain to you the nature of the fundraising campaign. 
4 
So, why are you here? 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Some of you may think you are here just to stuff envelopes to earn a few quid. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
However, by being here you are going to do something special by helping Birmingham’s hospital charity achieve its 
mission; and, this is a noble mission. 
1 
1 
1 
7 
Your efforts will make a difference to sick children: Children with cancer, children with leukaemia, and children 
with all sorts of serious illnesses. 
1 
1 
8 
This is something worth doing; I think it is a right thing to do. 
1 
9 
Just how are you going to do something special? 
1 
10 
Well, the letters you have are written to convince a potential donor to help the charity. 
11 
In a way, the letter is a ticket for a child to attend Christmas. 
1 
12 
Let me tell you why. 
13 
Many gravely sick children will spend Christmas in hospital. 
14 
What must that be like? 
1 
15 
For the parent? 
1 
1 
16 
The child? 
1 
17 
The family? 
1 
18 
The charity will help families who cannot afford to be near their children during the Christmas period. 
19 
They will help them by paying for the parents’ accommodation in or near the hospital, by providing a nicely decorated 
room so that the families can open their Christmas presents in a cosy environment, by providing a playroom and toys 
for the children. 
1 
20 
Every envelope you stuff with a letter will make a difference because it is only through reaching potential donors that 
we can raise money. 
1 
21 
So, I want you to do three things to give the kids a ticket to Christmas: work hard, work smart, and think of the kids 
you will help. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
22 
First: Work hard. 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
23 
You will be paid regardless of how many envelopes you stuff. 
1 
24 
However, the more you do, the better; the more envelopes you stuff the more money we can potentially raise. 
25 
Second: Work smart. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

16 
 
Sentence 
Text 
c1 c2 c3 c4 c5 c6 
c7 c8 c9 
26 
Follow the instructions you have been given, fold the letters and seal the envelopes neatly and maintain correct 
records. 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
27 
Printing this many letters sometimes produces printing faults. 
28 
So, scan the letters quickly to ensure that they are clean. 
29 
We don’t want to turn away donors by sending them bad letters. 
1 
30 
A bad letter is a bad ticket. 
1 
1 
31 
Third: Think of the kids when you do your job. 
32 
You are not just stuffing envelopes to earn money. 
1 
33 
You are stuffing envelopes to help sickly kids too. 
34 
So you might think, well, I will just do what I have to—will my extra effort really help? 
1 
1 
35 
Yes, it will! 
1 
36 
This reminds me of story about an old man who while walking along the seashore noticed a girl picking up starfish 
and throwing them into the sea. 
1 
37 
The old man approached her saying: “what are you doing?” 
38 
She replied: “I am throwing starfish into the sea, because the sun is coming up and the starfish will die.” 
39 
“But,” said the man, “there are thousands of starfish, the sun is high, and the tide is going out. 
40 
How can you possibly make a difference?” 
41 
The girl bent down, picked up a starfish, threw it into the sea and said: “well, I made a difference to that one.” 
1 
42 
Remember, every letter is a ticket for a child to attend Christmas: the more tickets we issue, the better. 
1 
43 
Work hard, work smart, and think of the kids. 
1 
1 
1 
44 
Every time you open an envelope, imagine the flap is like a mouth that is whispering to you, “work hard, work smart, 
think of the kids.” 
1 
1 
1 
1 
45 
You may think I have gone “doolally” but I know you can do it. 
1 
1 
46 
So, what are we going to do? 
1 
47 
I’ll let Giovanna conclude the briefing. 
48 
Thank you. 
Total by tactic 
5 
8 
1 
4 
9 
10 
2 
3 
2 
 
Note: Coded categories include: c1 = metaphors or similes, c2 = rhetorical questions, c3 = stories or anecdotes, c4 = contrasts, c5 = lists, c6 = moral conviction, c7 = sentiments of the 
collective, c8 = sets high/ambitious goals, c8 = creates confidence goals can be achieved. A “1” in the coded category indicates the presence of a charismatic leadership tactic. 
 
 
 

17 
 
II. Laboratory experiment 1 
Coded results for the Standard Speech: 
Sentence 
Text 
c1 c2 c3 c4 c5 c6 c7 c8 c9 
1 
Hi, my name is Jean and I have been asked by the experimenters to brief you about the stakes in this game. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
I stand to win or lose nothing from how you play; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
however, there will be no greater pleasure for you than to see your group benefit together. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Let me tell you why. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
I suppose that most of you have heard about the tragedy of the commons. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
It refers to a public good situation where there are multiple players that have a common resource to share. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
If they all contribute to the common resource they all benefit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Contributing means that they each incur some costs and by doing so, they collectively benefit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
By protecting the public good they can increase public welfare. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
In such situations if individuals chose to not cooperate, public wealth is destroyed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
Therefore individuals have to consider their private interests in relation to their collective interest; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
the rational action for the long term is cooperation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
The tragedy of the commons is classic in economics because it highlights the friction between private and common 
interest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
The game you will play is similar and cooperation between the players translates into collective increased payoffs 
for all. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
Individuals are in a dilemma and the utility they gain from partaking will depend on money but it can also be 
psychological in nature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
You will be given 20 points in each period. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
Putting them all in the shared account is the cooperative option and putting them all in your personal account 
translate into looking out for your self-interest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
With everyone doing the latter, you can make a maximum of 200 points. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
With everyone cooperating the maximum you make is 320 points, which is 60% more and which means more 
earnings for everyone. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
Of course, a player may decide to invoke the dominant strategy, which potentially has the highest payoffs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
Here the player takes advantage of the goodwill of other contributors and never contributes to the public good 
himself. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
Interestingly, even if one player defects every round and puts nothing in the shared account, if the three other players 
continue to contribute they will still be better off and make 240 points which is 20% more than if everyone played 
in a selfish way. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
Of course, the defector will make more money, but then has to face the psychological cost of his conduct. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
The defector has to balance economic benefit against the psychological costs incurred for not having cooperated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
Sentence 
Text 
c1 c2 c3 c4 c5 c6 c7 c8 c9 
25 
Finally, think twice before you retaliate by playing selfishly following selfish actions by someone else. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
Civil rights leader Martin Luther King said the method of passive resistance is not weak and it takes strength to not 
retaliate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 
This method will affect the utility of your opponent. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
If someone defects from the beginning consider sending this person a signal by still playing cooperatively. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
The defector will see that you still believe in him and in the value of cooperation in public good situations and may 
change. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
But if the defector does not change, you will still leave this lab knowing you served the common interest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
And in the event that you are the only remaining contributor you can derive more utility knowing the challenge you 
faced all alone. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
To conclude, it is clear that cooperation is the best option for all and it is that which should be brought to the fore. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
To avoid a tragedy of the commons maximize your psychological utility and make yourself feel good. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total by tactic 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
 
Note: Coded categories include: c1 = metaphors or similes, c2 = rhetorical questions, c3 = stories or anecdotes, c4 = contrasts, c5 = lists, c6 = moral conviction, c7 = sentiments of the 
collective, c8 = sets high/ambitious goals, c8 = creates confidence goals can be achieved. A “1” in the coded category indicates the presence of a charismatic leadership tactic. 

19 
 
Coded results for the Charismatic Speech: 
Sentence 
Text 
c1 c2 c3 c4 c5 c6 c7 c8 c9 
1 
Hi, my name is Jean and I have been asked by the experimenters to brief you about the stakes in this game. 
2 
I stand to win or lose nothing from how you play; 
3 
however, there will be no greater pleasure for you than to see your group benefit together. 
4 
Let me tell you why. 
5 
Have you heard about the tragedy of the commons? 
1 
6 
Suppose there is a common grazing ground for the farmers to share. 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
The common interest is to protect the grazing ground, so that it recovers, and new grass can grow on it. 
8 
It is in the common interest of the famers to cooperate and fairly share the ground, because with cooperation they 
can all benefit. 
9 
However, each farmer may have a selfish interest, to have his or her cows graze as much as possible. 
10 
But if all farmers do that the common good will break down. 
11 
The field will turn from lush green grass into mud. 
12 
In this example, there is a common moral interest pitted against a selfish immoral interest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
The game you will play is similar. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
Either you all cooperate and you all benefit, or you chose the selfish option and collectively lose. 
1 
15 
In your dilemma, there will be three things at stake: your monetary benefit, but also your pride, and your feeling of 
self-worth. 
1 
16 
Why? 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
You will be given 20 points in each period. 
18 
Putting them all in the shared account protects the public good; 
19 
putting them all in your personal account protects your self-interest. 
20 
If everyone acts selfish you all earn 200 points; 
21 
however, if you all cooperate and always put all your points in the shared account, you can each make 320 points. 
22 
That is 60% more. 
23 
Who would not want that? 
1 
1 
24 
There may be a cunning person out there thinking: “I will let the fools put their money in the shared account, but I 
will always put mine in my private account and profit from their cooperation.” 
1 
25 
Do you want to be this person? 
1 
1 
26 
Would this feel right to you? 
1 
27 
Is it just? 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
Even if one of your group members puts nothing in the common account, as long you three continue to contribute, 
the cooperators can still make 240 points. 

20 
 
Sentence 
Text 
c1 c2 c3 c4 c5 c6 c7 c8 c9 
29 
That’s is 20% more than if everyone played selfishly. 
30 
The defector may make more money, but he will walk out of this lab knowing he let you all down, took advantage 
of the group, and acted selfishly. 
1 
1 
31 
Finally, think twice before you retaliate by playing selfishly following selfish actions by someone else. 
32 
Civil rights leader Martin Luther King said the method of passive resistance is not weak, for it’s the strong person 
who does not retaliate. 
33 
This method works on your opponent’s conscience. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
Even if someone defects from the beginning, you can send this person a signal by still contributing to the shared 
account. 
35 
The defector will see that you still believe in him, in the common good, and that cooperation is better than defection, 
and may change. 
1 
1 
36 
But if the defector does not change, you will still leave this lab with your head held high. 
37 
And, what if you are the only contributor? 
1 
38 
The fewer the contributors the greater your share of honor. 
39 
So, do what is right, do what takes courage, and think of the common good. 
1 
1 
40 
Turn the tragedy of the commons into the triumph of cooperation, and walk out of this lab proud. 
41 
So, what are you going to do? 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total by tactic 
0 
8 
1 
1 
5 
3 
2 
0 
0 
 
Note: Coded categories include: c1 = metaphors or similes, c2 = rhetorical questions, c3 = stories or anecdotes, c4 = contrasts, c5 = lists, c6 = moral conviction, c7 = sentiments of the 
collective, c8 = sets high/ambitious goals, c8 = creates confidence goals can be achieved. A “1” in the coded category indicates the presence of a charismatic leadership tactic. 
 
 
 

21 
 
III. Laboratory experiments 2 and 3 
Coded results for the Standard Speech: 
Sentence 
Text 
c1 c2 c3 c4 c5 c6 c7 c8 c9 
1 
Hi, my name is Jean and I have been asked by the experimenters to brief you about the stakes in this game. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
I stand to win or lose nothing from how you play; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
however, there will be no greater pleasure for you than to see your group and the children in the hospital benefit 
together. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Let me tell you why. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Of course, you are here to participate in an experiment and to earn some money. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
6 
That is clear. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
At the same time by participating in this experiment, the decisions that you take can also help Lausanne’s children 
hospital achieve what is a noble mission, which is to help children who are sick with all kinds of illness, including 
cancer, leukemia, and other serious conditions. 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
8 
Therefore, the experiment in which you are partaking can have an impact on these children. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
In the game, there is a friction between private and common interest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
Cooperation between all the players translates into collective increased payoffs for all players and the children too. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
Thus, players are in a dilemma and the utility they gain from partaking will depend on the money they make, but it 
can also be psychological in nature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
You will be given 20 points in each period. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
Putting them all in the shared account is the cooperative option with respect to the public good, which also benefits 
the children; putting them all in your personal account translates into looking out for your self-interest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
If everyone looks out for their self-interest, you can make a maximum of 200 points. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
If everyone cooperates the maximum you make is 320 points, which is 60% more and which means more earnings 
for everyone, and also means helping the sick children in the hospital too. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
How the payoffs are set up in this game makes it quite clear that some cunning players may take advantage of the 
goodwill and the cooperation of other contributors and never contribute in the public account of the game. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
It is apparent that, in the end, defectors will earn some extra money, that is 440 points, but then they have to face 
the psychological cost of their conduct with respect to the other players and the children in the hospital too. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
The defector has to balance having made more money by not cooperating, against the psychological costs incurred 
for not having cooperated and for failing to help the children too. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
So you might think, “well, I will just play the game—my extra contributions to the public account won’t really 
help.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
20 
Yes, your contributions to the public account will help! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
21 
Just think of the concrete way your individual contribution can help a child in the hospital. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
Every contribution can make a difference. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
Sentence 
Text 
c1 c2 c3 c4 c5 c6 c7 c8 c9 
23 
The more money you contribute to the public account, the more money we can give to the children’s hospital. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
At the end of the day, we can make a difference to the sick children. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
So please contribute as much as you can. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
Doing so will really help make a difference to the children. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 
Of course, this will help you to earn some extra money too, so we are all winning here. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
To conclude, it is clear that cooperation is the best option for all and it is that which should be brought to the fore. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
Even if you are the only remaining contributor maximize your monetary and psychological utility knowing the 
challenge you faced alone. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total by tactic 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
2 
0 
1 
 
Note: Coded categories include: c1 = metaphors or similes, c2 = rhetorical questions, c3 = stories or anecdotes, c4 = contrasts, c5 = lists, c6 = moral conviction, c7 = sentiments of the 
collective, c8 = sets high/ambitious goals, c8 = creates confidence goals can be achieved. A “1” in the coded category indicates the presence of a charismatic leadership tactic. 

23 
 
Coded results for the Charismatic Speech: 
Sentence 
Text 
c1 c2 c3 c4 c5 c6 c7 c8 c9 
1 
Hi, my name is Jean and I have been asked by the experimenters to brief you about the stakes in this game. 
2 
I stand to win or lose nothing from how you play; 
3 
however, there will be no greater pleasure for you than to see your group and the children in the hospital benefit 
together. 
4 
Let me tell you why. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Some of you may think “I am just here just to participate in an experiment and to earn some money.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
6 
However, you can help Lausanne’s children hospital achieve its mission; and, this is a noble mission. 
1 
7 
Your efforts will make a difference to sick children: Children with cancer, children with leukaemia, and children 
with all sorts of serious illnesses. 
1 
8 
This is something worth doing; I think it is a right thing to do. 
1 
9 
In the game there is common moral interest pitted against a selfish immoral interest. 
10 
Either you all cooperate so you and the children benefit, or you choose the selfish option and collectively lose. 
1 
11 
In your dilemma, there will be three things at stake: your monetary benefit, but also your pride, and your feeling of 
self-worth. 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
12 
Why? 
1 
13 
You will be given 20 points in each period. 
14 
Putting them all in the shared account protects the public good and benefits the children; 
15 
putting them all in your personal account protects your self-interest. 
16 
If everyone acts selfish you all earn 200 points and the children get nothing. 
17 
However, if you all cooperate and always put all your points in the shared account, you can each make 320 points. 
18 
That is not only 60% more for you, but you also help the sick children in the hospital. 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
Who would not want that? 
1 
1 
20 
There may be a cunning person out there thinking: “I will let the fools put their money in the shared account, but I 
will always put mine in my private account and profit from their cooperation.” 
1 
21 
It is true that this strategy allows you to earn some extra money, that is 440 points, but do you really want to be this 
person? 
1 
1 
22 
Would this feel right to you? 
1 
23 
Is it fair to the children in the hospital? 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
As a defector may make more money, but he will walk out of this lab knowing that he looked out for himself, that 
he took advantage of the group, and let the children down. 
1 
1 
25 
You might wonder “will my extra contributions to the public account really help?” 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
Yes, they will! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 

24 
 
Sentence 
Text 
c1 c2 c3 c4 c5 c6 c7 c8 c9 
27 
This reminds me of a story about an old man who while walking along the seashore noticed a girl picking up starfish 
and throwing them into the sea. 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
The old man approached her saying: “what are you doing?” 
1 
29 
She replied: “I am throwing starfish into the sea, because the sun is coming up and the starfish will die.” 
30 
“But,” said the man, “there are thousands of starfish, the sun is high, and the tide is going out. 
1 
1 
31 
How can you possibly make a difference?” The girl bent down, picked up a starfish, threw it into the sea and said: 
“well, I made a difference to that one.” 
1 
32 
So, do what is right, do what takes courage, and think of the common good. 
1 
1 
33 
Even if you are the only one contributing in your group, well, the fewer the contributors the greater your share of 
honor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
So, what are you going to do? 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Total by tactic 
0 
9 
1 
2 
7 
4 
3 
0 
1 
 
Note: Coded categories include: c1 = metaphors or similes, c2 = rhetorical questions, c3 = stories or anecdotes, c4 = contrasts, c5 = lists, c6 = moral conviction, c7 = sentiments of the 
collective, c8 = sets high/ambitious goals, c8 = creates confidence goals can be achieved. A “1” in the coded category indicates the presence of a charismatic leadership tactic. 
 
 
 

25 
 
Appendix E: Robustness of main results from the field experiment to alternative specifications 
Table E1: Maximum Likelihood Analysis of Treatment Effects in the Field Experiment (with covariates) 
 
Notes: Results are reported at the worker level. The variables “Piece Rate” and “Charisma” are indicator variables for treatments; the omitted category is “Baseline”. We first 
analyze the data for full observations (Column 1 and 3) using maximum likelihood estimation to provide a basis of comparison with the OLS estimates in Table 2; as should be 
expected, we obtain the same point estimates. For the models where we add the covariates, we use maximum likelihood for missing data with a robust estimate of the variance. 
Assuming data are missing at random and linear relations between the variables, this estimator uses information from the full sample for estimation, and estimates the means, 
variances, and covariances (which may have different elements in the variance-covariance matrix depending on the missing data pattern) and computes an individual level log-
likelihood for each observation; these individual likelihoods are then summed and maximized across all observations to derive parameter estimates (see Enders 2001, 2010). 
Provided assumptions are met, this estimator is consistent and efficient and provides more precise and less biased estimates than does listwise or pairwise deletion (see also 
Schafer & Graham, 2002). Robust standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10. 
Dependent
Letters
Letters
Cost per
Cost per
Time spent
Time spent
Help from
Help from
variable
completed
completed
letter
letter
on task
on task
friends/fam.
friends/fam.
Estimation
ML
ML
ML
ML
ML
ML
ML
ML
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Piece rate
46.757**
45.547**
0.006
0.007
21.611
24.432
0.071
0.084
(20.459)
(20.863)
(0.018)
(0.019)
(17.380)
(17.934)
(0.096)
(0.095)
Charisma
40.277**
38.695**
-0.028**
-0.026*
17.788
18.225
0.058
0.072
(19.161)
(19.505)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(19.044)
(18.875)
(0.084)
(0.083)
Age
0.793
-0.001*
1.464**
0.000
(0.554)
0.000
(0.635)
(0.004)
Female
7.909
-0.007
-6.786
-0.100
(16.596)
(0.014)
(16.993)
(0.081)
Constant
230.943***
201.782***
0.146***
0.170***
245.312***
201.505***
0.121**
0.182
(14.507)
(23.897)
(0.011)
(0.017)
(11.288)
(22.213)
(0.057)
(0.153)
Observations
106
106
106
106
106
106
106
106
R-squared
0.059
0.074
0.051
0.066
0.013
0.078
0.007
0.024

26 
 
Table E2: Tobit estimation 
Dependent variable 
Letters 
completed 
Letters 
completed 
Letters 
completed 
Estimation 
Tobit 
Tobit 
Tobit 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
 
 
 
 
Piece rate 
46.757* 
48.523 
45.633 
 
(26.549) 
(34.138) 
(28.327) 
Charisma 
42.450* 
64.191** 
39.363* 
 
(21.939) 
(29.060) 
(21.791) 
Female 
 
 
7.226 
 
 
 
(21.708) 
Age 
 
 
0.769 
 
 
 
(0.700) 
Constant 
230.942*** 
209.845*** 
202.885*** 
 
(18.134) 
(25.957) 
(26.223) 
 
 
 
 
Missing equal to "No 
work" 
No 
Yes 
No 
Observations 
106 
111 
105 
Notes: Tobit regressions, standard errors clustered at the session level, and 
bootstrapped to correct for the small number of clusters in parentheses. Results are 
reported at the worker level. The variables “Piece Rate” and “Charisma” are 
indicator variables for treatments; the omitted category is “Baseline”. Column (1) 
considers only workers who returned the completed envelopes, thus setting to 
missing observations corresponding to workers who dropped out of the experiment 
after the treatment, but before performing the work task. Column (2) instead 
includes these observations, setting the output of workers who dropped out of the 
experiment equal to zero. In column (3) we lose one observation, relative to column 
(1) due to missing demographic information. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10. 

27 
 
Appendix F: Instructions, Implementation Details and Results of the 
Subjective Manipulation Checks for the Field Experiment 
1. Instructions 
Instructions to participants: 
We are interested in your perceptions about leadership. In the next few minutes, you’ll see a 
video of Mike, whose job it was to brief part-time workers about the task they were about to 
do. The job of the workers was to stuff letters into envelopes, which would be sent all across 
England to raise money for Birmingham’s hospital charity. So, please put yourself in the shoes 
of a part-time worker while doing this task. 
[Participants then watch the video] 
Instructions to participants: 
Now that you have seen the video of Mike, please take a few minutes to rate him. Please use 
the scale provided. 
0 = Not at all 
1 = Once in a while 
2 = Sometimes 
3 = Fairly often 
4 = Frequently, if not always 
Based on the video you have seen, Mike: 
1. Instils pride in me for being associated with him/her 
2. [item]1 
3. [item] 
4. [item] 
5. Talks about their most important values and beliefs 
6. [item] 
7. [item] 
8. [item] 
9. Talks optimistically about the future 
10. [item] 
11. [item] 
12. [item] 
 
 
 
1 We only provide example items and do not list all the items here for copyright reasons. The full questionnaire is 
available from the publisher, http://www.mindgarden.com. 

28 
 
Now we are interested in your general impressions of Mike. Please use the following scale: 
0 = not at all to 
1 = a little 
2 = some 
3 = pretty much 
4 = very much 
As concerns Mike in the video you have seen: 
1. How much leadership did he exhibit? 
2. To what extent do you think he is typical of a leader? 
3. How much leadership did he engage in? 
4. How willing would you be to choose him as the leader of your work group in another 
context? 
5. To what degree does he fit your image of what a leader should be? 
[Online manipulation check only] 
1. How charismatic did you find the speech? Please give your opinion on the level of 
charisma in the speech using a scale from 1 to 7, where 1 is 'Not charismatic at all' and 7 is 
'Extremely charismatic'. 
2. Do you think that performing the work task would provide you with the following? 
a. Opportunities to fully use talents 
b. Opportunity to make positive impacts on community/society 
c. Sense of personal accomplishment 
d. Goals to aspire to 
e. Satisfaction of work well done 
f. Feeling of doing useful work 
3. Do you think that performing the work task would (choose one) 
a. Provide you with a sense of identity 
b. Just be something you do to earn a living 
4. Did listening to the speech make you feel (choose one) 
 
a. Happy 
 
b. Sad 
 
c. Bored 
d. Angry 
2. Implementation of the online manipulation check 
We recruited 301 subjects from the platform Prolific Academic. The survey lasted on average 
10.25 minutes. Subjects earned a participation payment of 1.88 GBP and could earn an 
additional bonus payment of 0.5 GBP for answering correctly three attention questions on the 

29 
 
video. Failure to answer the attention questions resulted in the end of the survey. In total, 216 
subjects passed the attention checks and thus proceeded with the rating of the video. 
3. Results 
Table F1. Manipulation checks with students 
Experiment 
Field experiment 
Lab experiment 1 
Lab experiments 2-3 
Dependent variable 
MLQ 
GLI 
MLQ 
GLI 
MLQ 
GLI 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Charisma 
0.386* 
0.336 
0.989** 
1.287** 
0.376* 
0.441* 
 
(0.163) 
(0.238) 
(0.175) 
(0.256) 
(0.162) 
(0.191) 
Constant 
2.667** 
2.437** 
2.091** 
1.555** 
2.526** 
2.331** 
 
(0.118) 
(0.173) 
(0.122) 
(0.178) 
(0.114) 
(0.135) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Observations 
57 
57 
60 
60 
58 
58 
R-squared 
0.093 
0.035 
0.354 
0.304 
0.088 
0.087 
 
Table F2. Online manipulation check 
Dependent 
variable 
MLQ 
GLI 
Charisma 
rating 
Pride 
Identity 
Happy 
Sad 
Bored 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Charisma 
0.311*** 
0.148 
0.842*** 
-0.124 
-0.0369 
0.0679 
0.0166 
-0.0845 
 
(0.0866) 
(0.120) 
(0.199) 
(0.118) 
(0.0680) 
(0.0653) 
(0.0433) 
(0.0582) 
Constant 
3.828*** 
3.722*** 
4.578*** 
4.207*** 
1.457*** 
0.612*** 
0.103*** 
0.284*** 
 
(0.0645) 
(0.0863) 
(0.146) 
(0.0772) 
(0.0465) 
(0.0455) 
(0.0284) 
(0.0421) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Observations 
216 
216 
216 
216 
216 
216 
216 
216 
R-squared 
0.055 
0.007 
0.076 
0.005 
0.001 
0.005 
0.001 
0.010 
Notes: OLS regressions, robust standard errors in parentheses. MLQ: index constructed by averaging the items of 
the Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire; GLI: index constructed by averaging the items of the General 
Leadership Impression questionnaire; Charisma rating: direct rating of the level of charisma of the speech; Pride: 
index constructed by averaging the questions on meaningfulness of work (RAND Corporation survey); Identity: 
question on identity from work (Pew Research Center survey); Happy/Sad/Bored: indicator variables equal to one 
if the speech induced the corresponding emotion in the viewer. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. 

30 
 
Appendix G: Summary of Alternative Laboratory Projects on Charisma and 
Leadership 
In a different approach to studying the effects of charisma, we started an exploratory project 
that did not rely on rich speeches delivered by leaders, but rather on simple motivational 
messages written by other subjects that we subsequently manipulated to have more charismatic 
elements. The purpose of this study was to investigate whether very simple and subtle 
manifestations of charisma in a motivating message can have an impact. We thus explored the 
effect of a “charismatic enhancement” of short text messages written by student participants in 
the laboratory. This study revealed that such a subtle manipulation is not enough to affect 
behavior (at least in the context that we were interested in). Since we envision it being difficult 
to publish this alternative null result as a complete study, we report it here. 
Design and Treatments 
We used the same four-person public goods paradigm as in our laboratory studies. However, 
instead of watching a motivation speech in video form, participants received a short, written 
text message (max. 200 words) before the first contribution decision. Participants did not have 
any information about the purpose or origin of the message; the instructions simply said: 
“Before your first decision you will see a message”. 
The messages had been written by eight other participants who were recruited from the 
same subject pool and had participated in a separate laboratory session that took place earlier. 
The message writers were instructed to read the instructions for the public goods experiment 
and were then asked to write a message that would be shown to some of the groups in the 
experiment. Before they wrote their message, they were informed that their payment would 
depend on the average contribution of all groups who would see their message. Specifically, 
message writers received a show-up fee of CHF 15, plus the average public goods contribution 
of all participants who had seen their message (over all periods) multiplied by CHF 3 (i.e., they 
could get up to CHF 60 on top of their show-up fee). 
A group of subjects playing the game then saw the same randomly selected message 
after receiving instructions regarding the game and procedures but before making their initial 
contribution decisions. The message was displayed on the screen and subjects were informed 
that all members of a group saw the same message. 
We ran two treatments: In the “low-charisma” treatment each group in the experiment 
was confronted with the original version of a randomly chosen message written by a message 

31 
 
writer. In the “high-charisma” treatment, in contrast, we showed the groups alternative, more 
charismatic versions of the same messages. The modified messages had a very similar content 
and approximately the same length as the corresponding original messages, but contained a 
higher number of CLTs.2 
Procedures 
We ran 33 sessions in total. Treatments were randomized within sessions. Each group was 
randomly shown one randomly chosen message (either the original or the modified version of 
one of the eight messages). We recruited 20 participants for each session, but in one session 
only 16 people showed up. In total we therefore collected data from 656 participants (i.e. each 
of our sixteen messages was shown to about 10 groups on average). The sessions took place 
from March to May in 2015. 
Results 
Contrary to our expectations, the charismatically enhanced messages did not induce participants 
to make higher contributions than the original messages. Across all 10 periods of the experiment 
average contributions amount to 10.1 points in the charisma condition and to 10.4 points in the 
no charisma condition. This difference is not statistically significant (OLS estimation with 
standard errors adjusted for clustering at the group level, p = 0.718). Average beliefs are 11.0 
(no charisma) and 11.2 (charisma). Also, this difference is not significant (p = 0.813). 
 
 
 
2 English translations of the French messages (both the original and the modified versions) are available from the 
authors on request 

32 
 
Appendix H: Instructions for Participants in the Laboratory Experiments 
In this Appendix we provide an English translation of the originally French instructions for 
participants in Laboratory Experiment 2. The instructions for Laboratory Experiment 1 and 3 
are very similar. In particular, the instructions for Laboratory Experiment 1 do not contain the 
parts related to the donation, but are otherwise identical. The instructions for Experiment 3 are 
identical, but mention that participants watch the video together in front of a TV. 
The French versions of the instructions and English translations of the instructions to 
Laboratory Experiments 1 and 3 are available from the authors on request. 
Instructions 
Introduction 
You are about to participate in an experiment of the University of Lausanne. During this 
experiment you have the opportunity to win a sum of money that will be paid out to you at the 
end of the experiment. The amount of money that you will earn depends on your decisions. We 
therefore recommend that you: 
• read the instructions carefully and 
• think carefully about the decisions you will make. 
If you have any questions while reading the instructions or while the experiment is in progress, 
feel free to call us by raising your hand. Any communication between participants that is not 
part of the experimental procedure is absolutely prohibited. In the event of non-compliance with 
these instructions, we will be obliged to exclude you from the experience without any payment. 
In today's experiment, you will interact with other participants via your computer. The decisions 
you make will determine your earnings. Your decisions will also influence the earnings of other 
participants, just as decisions of other participants may influence your earnings. In addition, 
your decisions and the decisions of other participants will also determine the amount of money 
that the organizers of the experiment will donate to the Lausanne Children's Hospital. 
Your income is calculated in points. At the end of the experiment your points will be converted 
to Swiss Francs according to the following exchange rate: 
20 points = 1 Swiss Franc 

33 
 
Independently of your decisions in the experiment, you will also receive a fixed amount of CHF 
10 for your participation. 
The experiment consists of several identical rounds. Each round follows the exact same 
procedure. At the end of the session, your total earnings will be calculated as the sum of your 
earnings obtained in all rounds together. 
Detailed description of the experiment 
The formation of groups 
Participants will be randomly allocated to groups of four. These groups will remain unchanged 
for the duration of the experiment. This means that you will be randomly assigned to a group 
with the same three other participants for the entire experiment. You will never learn who the 
other participants in your group are, just as they will never learn who you are. 
You will make decisions in 10 consecutive rounds. In each of the 10 rounds you will be paired 
with the same three participants in your group. 
Before the first interaction, a video will appear on your computer screen. In this video a person 
will brief you about the stakes in this experiment. The other members of your group will 
watch the same video as you. After the video, the experiment will continue with the first 
interaction. You will not see any more videos in other rounds of the experiment. 
Once the decision-making process is complete, you will be asked to fill in a short questionnaire. 
All numerical examples in this description are used only to illustrate the consequences of 
different decisions and do not represent clues or suggestions as to how you should make your 
decisions during the experiment. 
Your allocation decision 
• Each of the 10 rounds in which you will participate will have the same structure. 
• At the beginning of each interaction you receive an endowment of 20 points. Each other 
member in your group also receives an endowment of 20 points. 
• Then, you have the possibility to allocate your 20 points between a personal account 
and a shared account. 
o The personal account only benefits you. 
o The shared account benefits you and the other participants in your group. In 
addition, each point you allocate to the shared account will increase the donation 
that the organizers of the experiment will make to the Lausanne Children's 
Hospital. 

34 
 
• You can allocate your 20 points as you wish between these two accounts. The other 
members of your group can also allocate their points as they wish. 
The two accounts 
The personal account: 
The points you allocate to your personal account go directly into your own earnings. For every 
point you allocate to your personal account, you earn 1 point. 
The shared account: 
Each point allocated to the shared account by any of the four group participants gives 0.4 points 
to each group member. Thus, the earnings you can earn from the group account depend on the 
amounts you and other participants in your group allocate to the shared account. For every point 
you allocate to the shared account, you and each of the other three group members earn 0.4 
points. 
The points allocated to the shared account also have implications outside the experiment. For 
each point a participant contributes to the shared account, the organizers of the experiment will 
donate 5 cents to the Lausanne Children's Hospital. 
Information on the Lausanne Children's Hospital 
The Lausanne Children's Hospital is the oldest children's hospital in Switzerland. The hospital 
is an officially recognized public service foundation. The Children's Hospital is entirely 
dedicated to the care of sick infants, children and adolescents. The hospital covers a very broad 
spectrum of health threats including medical, surgical, psychiatric and psycho-social problems. 
In addition, the Children's Hospital also sees the support and assistance of families as a high 
priority. The hospital is an establishment with a strong social mission and is deeply rooted in 
the community. 
Calculation of earnings 
Your individual earnings from each interaction are calculated as follows: 
Earnings = Points allocated to your personal account + 0.4 x Sum of points allocated to 
the shared account by you and the other group members 
To better understand the relationship between allocation decisions and earnings, consider the 
following examples: 
• If all group members allocate 20 points to their personal account and 0 points to the 
shared account, then each group member's earnings are 20 points. 

35 
 
• If all group members allocate 0 points to their personal account and 20 points to the 
shared account, then each group member's earnings are 32 points (the sum of points 
allocated to the shared account by the four players is 80 points, so that the sum of points 
multiplied by 0.4 is equal to 32 points). 
• If two group members (A and B) allocate 20 points to their private account and 0 points 
to the shared account and the other two group members (C and D) allocate 0 points to 
their private account and 20 points to the group account, then the earnings of members 
A and B are 36 points (20 points + 40 points x 0.4 = 20 points + 16 points) the earnings 
of members C and D are 16 points (0 points + 40 points x 0.4). 
Note that you personally earn more points by allocating them to your personal account. But 
overall, the group earns more if everyone allocates points to the shared account. 
Calculation of the donation to the Lausanne Children's Hospital 
Your group's contribution to the donation to the Lausanne Children's Hospital is calculated as 
follows: 
Donation = Sum of points allocated to the shared account by you and other group 
members x 0.05 Francs 
Consider the following examples: 
• If all group members allocate 20 points to their private account and 0 points to the shared 
account, the group's contribution to the donation is 0 Francs in this round. 
• If all group members allocate 0 points to their private account and 20 points to the shared 
account, the group's contribution to the donation is 4 francs in this round (80 points * 
0.05 francs). 
• If two group members (A and B) allocate 20 points to their private account and 0 points 
to the shared account and the other two group members (C and D) allocate 0 points to 
their private account and 20 to the group account, the group's contribution to the 
donation is 2 Francs in this round (40 points * 0.05 Francs). 
Expectations about other participants’ decisions 
Before each round, you will be asked to guess how much the other group members will 
contribute to the shared account. For this purpose, you will be asked to submit an estimate of 
the average number of points that the other three group members contribute to the shared 
account. 
Information on your earnings 
After each round, the computer will display the total contribution to the shared account by you 
and the other three participants in your group, your earnings, and your group's contribution to 

36 
 
the hospital donation. You can continue to the next round by clicking the "continue" button at 
the bottom of your screen. 
Your earnings in the 10 rounds of the experiment will be added up and converted to CHF. At 
the end of the experiment, you will receive this sum of money, in addition to your payment of 
CHF 10 for your participation. Also the contributions to the hospital donation in all 10 rounds 
will be added up. At the end of the experiment, the organizers will transfer the total donation 
created by all groups to the hospital. 
Summary of the experiment 
• Participants are randomly divided into groups of 4; these groups remain the same for 
the entire experiment. 
• You will participate in a total of 10 rounds. 
• Each round is identical and you will be paired with the same 3 other participants in your 
group. 
• Before the first interaction, a video will appear on your computer. 
• The other three members of your group will see the same video. 
• During each interaction you will receive an endowment of 20 points and you will have 
the possibility to allocate your points between a personal account and a shared account. 
• Each point allocated to the shared account increases the donation to the hospital. 
• Before each interaction, you will be asked for your estimate of the other three 
participants’ average contribution to the shared account. 
• Your earnings from each round will be paid to you, converted into CHF at the rate of 
20 points = CHF 1. 
Control Questions 
To ensure that you have fully understood the consequences of your decisions in this experiment, 
we ask you to complete the following set of exercises. 
First, please write down all the answers for the exercises on paper. Once you have completed 
the exercise, please enter your answers on the computer to verify that they are correct. The 
experiment can only begin when everyone has answered these questions correctly. If your 
screen is not yet on, simply move the mouse on your computer. 
Exercise 1: Everyone allocates 10 points to the shared account. 
Imagine that everyone, including you, allocates 10 points to the shared account. 
a) How much does each group member earn from the shared account (in points)? 

37 
 
b) How much does each group member earn in total (in points)? 
c) How much money will the group contribute to the donation to the hospital (in Francs)? 
Exercise 2: 3 people allocate 20 points to the shared account, 1 person allocates 0 points to it. 
Imagine that you and two other group members (B and C) allocate all your points to the shared 
account and keep nothing to yourself. Suppose that the last member of the group (D) does not 
allocate anything to the shared account and keeps everything to him- or herself. 
a) How much does each group member earn from the shared account (in points)? 
b) How much do you and players B and C earn (in points)? 
c) How much does the group member (D) earn (in points)? 
d) How much money will the group contribute to the donation to the hospital (in Francs)? 
Exercise 3: You allocate 0 points to the shared account, the others allocate 10 points each. 
Now imagine that you do not allocate anything to the shared account and that the other 3 group 
members each allocate 10 points to the shared account. 
a) How much does each group member earn from the shared account (in points)? 
b) How much do you earn (in points)? 
c) How much does each other member of the group earn (in points)? 
d) How much money will the group contribute to the donation to the hospital (in Francs)? 
 
 

38 
 
Appendix I: Additional Analysis of Dynamic Effects in Contributions in 
Laboratory Experiment 3 
In this Appendix we provide some additional analysis of dynamic effects in contributions in 
Laboratory Experiment 3. We thank an anonymous reviewer for helpful comments that inspired 
this analysis. The purpose of this analysis is to shed some additional light on possible 
mechanisms that drive the charisma effect in Laboratory Experiment 3. 
We argue that charisma may nurture a collective identity, which may build resilience to 
downward trends. Alternatively, charisma might also operate through an increase in conditional 
cooperation in that it encourages participants to contribute as much as their peers. If such a 
channel was at play, we should observe less variance in contributions at the group level in the 
charisma treatment. 
To assess the relevance of this alternative channel we took the data from Laboratory 
Experiment 3 and regressed the standard deviation of contributions at the group level (for each 
period) on an indicator variable for the charisma treatment (see column 1 of the Table I.1 
below). The results show that—if anything—there is slightly more variation in contributions in 
the charisma treatment, but the difference is not significant (p = .793). A specification that 
includes a linear time trend and the interaction between the time and the charisma variable (see 
column 4) indicates no significant changes across periods (p = 0.385). 
In addition, we also include regressions that use maximal and minimal contributions at 
the group level as the dependent variable (see columns 2 and 3 for estimations of pure treatment 
effects, and columns 5 and 6 for specifications with time trends). These analyses reveal that the 
positive effect of charisma is mostly driven by higher maximal contributions. Maximal 
contribution in the charisma treatment are significantly higher overall (see column 2, p = 0.005) 
and they decline slower over time as indicated by the significant interaction effect in column 5 
(p = 0.036). Minimal contributions, in contrast, neither differ in their overall level (column 3, p 
= 0.245), nor in their negative time trend (column 6, p = 0.778). 
These findings are not supportive of the idea that charisma increases conditional 
cooperation, because we find no evidence for a lower variation in group-level contributions in 
the charisma treatment. However, the results are in line with our interpretation that charisma 
fosters resilience: the minimal contributions within groups substantially decline over time in 
both treatments, but in the charisma treatment there are some participants who keep their 
contributions at a high level irrespectively. 

39 
 
We only report these findings in the Appendix, because our study was not designed to 
identify the relative importance of competing mechanisms. We therefore feel that it is necessary 
to be cautious with interpreting this evidence, given that this analysis is entirely post hoc and 
exploratory. 
 
Table I1: Additional Analysis of Dynamic Effects in Contributions Laboratory Experiment 3 
 
Notes: The dependent variable in columns (1) and (4) is the standard deviation of contributions at the group level 
(for every period). The dependent variables in the other columns are maximal or minimal contributions at the 
group level. The variable “Charisma” is an indicator variable for the charisma treatment; the omitted category is 
“No Charisma”. Columns (1) to (3) estimate pure treatment effects; columns (4) to (6) include treatment-specific 
time trends. All estimations are OLS regressions with standard errors clustered at the group level. *** p<0.01, ** 
p<0.05, *p<0.10. 
 
 
SD of contr.
Maximal contr. Minimal contr.
SD of contr.
Maximal contr. Minimal contr.
Dependent variable
at group level
at group level
at group level
at group level
at group level
at group level
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Charisma
0.176
2.194***
2.019
-0.431
0.380
1.672
(0.669)
(0.753)
(1.718)
(0.968)
(0.331)
(2.027)
Period
0.014
-0.524***
-0.528***
(0.101)
(0.133)
(0.145)
Charisma x Period
0.110
0.330**
0.063
(0.126)
(0.154)
(0.223)
Constant
3.761***
17.113***
9.207***
3.682***
19.993***
12.113***
(0.384)
(0.703)
(1.242)
(0.667)
(0.253)
(1.383)
Observations
570
570
570
570
570
570
R-squared
0.001
0.070
0.015
0.006
0.148
0.046

40 
 
Appendix Reference list: 
 
Enders, C. K. (2001). A primer on maximum likelihood algorithms available for use with 
missing data. Structural Equation Modeling, 8(1), 128 - 141. 
 
Enders, C. K. (2010). Applied missing data analysis: Guilford press. 
 
Schafer, J. L., & Graham, J. W. (2002). Missing data: Our view of the state of the art. 
Psychological Methods, 7(2), 147-177.