TITLE: On-Site Inspecting Zombie Lending
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2022.4452
---

On-site inspecting zombie lending 
 
 
 
DIANA BONFIM, GERALDO CERQUEIRO, HANS DEGRYSE and STEVEN ONGENA∗
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This version: December 13, 2021 
 
(First draft: October 2018) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
∗ Bonfim: Banco de Portugal and Católica-Lisbon School of Business and Economics; Cerqueiro: Católica-
Lisbon School of Business and Economics; Degryse: KU Leuven and CEPR; Ongena: University of Zurich, 
Swiss Finance Institute, KU Leuven, NTNU, and CEPR. We thank an anonymous associate editor and two 
anonymous referees, Tobias Berg (discussant), Ralph de Haas, Olivier De Jonghe (discussant), Giovanni 
Dell'Ariccia, Mark Dijkstra, Christian Effinger, Analisa Ferrando , Luís Costa Ferreira, Miguel García-
Posada (discussant), Linda Goldberg, João Granja, Boris Hofmann (discussant), Artashes Karapetyan, 
Christian Leuz (discussant), Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Elena Loutskina, Tânia Marçal, Mike 
Mariathasan, David Martinez-Miera, Robert Marquez, João Mestre, Mark Mink (discussant), Klaas Mulier, 
Lars Norden (discussant), Diane Pierret (discussant), Tomasz Piskorski (editor), Maximiano Pinheiro, 
Andrea Polo, Andrea Presbitero, Lev Ratnovski, Farzad Saidi, Pedro Santos, Carola Schenone (discussant), 
Enrico Sette, Daniel Streitz, Javier Suarez, Oren Sussman (discussant), Anjan Thakor, Razvan Vlahu, and 
seminar participants at Banco de Portugal, IMF, IWH-Halle, Lancaster, Manchester Business School, 
Utrecht University, Universidad Carlos III, De Nederlandsche Bank, ESSEC, 2nd BdE-CEMFI Financial 
Stability Conference, 10th European Banking Center workshop, FIRS2019, 8th Mofir workshop, 6th MPC 
Task Force on Banking Analysis for Monetary Policy workshop, Munich workshop on Banking and 
Institutions, 11th Swiss Winter conference on Financial Intermediation, SKEMA-Nice workshop on 
‘Economic Growth, Innovation, and Finance’, EFA2019, the 9th CInSt Banking Workshop “Banking in 
Emerging Markets: Challenges and Opportunities”, Danmarks Nationalbank Conference on the use of the 
Credit Register for Financial Stability Purposes, 3rd Annual Workshop of the ESCB Research Cluster 3 on 
“Financial Stability, Macroprudential Regulation and Microprudential Supervision”, Bundesbank – IWH – 
ECONtribute – CEPR Conference on “Financial Intermediation in a Globalized World”, 7th Bordeaux 
Workshop in International Economics and Finance, and the 2nd Annual Conference of the JRC Community 
of Practice in Financial Research Capital Markets Union: Unlocking Europe’s Economic Potential (CoPFiR 
Award for the Best Policy-relevant Research Paper). The paper previously was circulated under the title 
“`Inspect what you expect to get respect` Can bank supervisors kill zombie lending?”. We thank Francisca 
Rebelo for excellent research assistance. Bonfim and Cerqueiro acknowledge financial support from grants 
UID/GES/00407/2013 and PTDC/EGE-OGE/30314/2017 of the Portuguese Foundation for Science and 
Technology-FCT. Degryse acknowledges financial support from FWO-Flanders. Ongena acknowledges 
financial support from ERC ADG 2016 - GA 740272 lending. These are our views and do not necessarily 
reflect those of the Banco de Portugal or the Eurosystem. 

 
 
 
On-site inspecting zombie lending 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
“Zombie lending” remains a widespread practice by banks around the world. In this paper 
we exploit a series of large-scale on-site inspections made on the credit portfolios of 
several Portuguese banks to investigate how these inspections affect banks’ future lending 
decisions. We find that an inspected bank becomes 20% less likely to refinance zombie 
firms, immediately spurring their default. Overall, banks seemingly reduce zombie 
lending because the incentives to hold these loans disappear once they are forced to 
recognize losses. 
 
 

 
1 
 
1. Introduction 
Banking crises are associated with prolonged declines in financial intermediation and 
economic activity. Laeven and Valencia (2018) document that more than half of the banking 
crises in high-income countries lasted at least five years and generated a median cumulative 
output loss of 35% of GDP. An important driver is that banks continue lending to non-viable 
firms, henceforth called “zombie firms”. Banks may do so in order to avoid or delay the 
recognition of credit losses. An open question is whether and how the enforcement of 
regulation remedies the problem of banks’ zombie lending. In this paper, we address this 
question by studying “unconventional supervision” stemming from two special on-site 
inspection programs that reflect a coordinated effort of bank supervisors. 
The importance of zombie lending and its implications for the economy have been 
discussed by policy makers and academics alike. Zombie lending affects the allocation of 
credit. Through its impact on product market competition, it can have important effects on 
productivity and economic growth (Peek and Rosengren, 2005; Caballero et al., 2008; 
Schivardi et al., 2020; Adalet McGowan et al., 2018).1 Regulators and supervisors have been 
struggling to deal with loan evergreening (in which banks “revive” a loan close to default by 
granting further credit to the same firm) by banks who keep refinancing zombie firms. 
Giannetti and Simonov (2013) for example show that bank bailouts with sufficiently large 
recapitalizations may mitigate evergreening. However, recent evidence in Blattner et al. (2021) 
shows that the imposition of stricter capital requirements in Portugal did not curb zombie 
lending, since this gave banks greater incentives to avoid recognizing losses. More generally, 
recent evidence documents that in spite of the stricter regulatory environment in Europe, 
 
1 The Financial Times writes in its February 23, 2018, edition: “On average, across the US, Japan, Australia and 
western Europe, the proportion of firms that are zombies has risen five-fold since 1987, from 2 to 10 percent”. 
See https://www.ft.com/content/40c44992-17c3-11e8-9376-4a6390addb44. Banerjee and Hofmann (2018) study 
the importance of publicly listed zombie firms in 14 countries. They show that their presence has ratcheted up 
since the late 1980s. 

 
2 
 
zombie lending became widespread following the global financial crisis (see for example 
Acharya et al., 2019). We ask whether bank supervisory on-site inspection programs may offer 
part of the solution, in case banks adjust their behavior when facing stricter supervisory 
scrutiny. 
We show that more stringent supervision of banks ex post turns out to be an effective 
tool in mitigating zombie lending. The “unconventional supervision” episode we study 
captures a combined effort of the Troika (i.e., the International Monetary Fund, European 
Central Bank and European Commission), the banks’ usual supervisor (Banco de Portugal), 
and hired external auditors. In particular, employing granular micro data, we exploit actual on-
site bank inspections of the credit portfolios of the largest Portuguese banks to investigate how 
such inspections affect banks’ behavior towards the refinancing of zombie firms. The main 
goal of the inspections was to validate the quality of assets that the banks were using as inputs 
for their regular risk assessments. These validation exercises implied an unprecedented level 
of intrusion, since the inspectors analyzed a large number of individual credit files of the 
inspected banks and had the freedom to collect additional information from the borrowers 
themselves. The timing and the intrusiveness of the inspection program came largely as a 
surprise to the banking sector. 
We study two special inspection programs to investigate to which extent 
unconventional bank supervision can mitigate zombie lending by banks.2 The first, which took 
place in the middle of 2012, focused on the construction and real estate sectors (referenced to 
as the “sectoral inspection”). The second took place in the middle of 2013 and comprised all 
sectors (referenced to as the “general inspection”). We analyze the effect of those inspections 
on a bank’s willingness to refinance a zombie firm using quarterly data and triple-difference 
 
2 Zombie lending in Portugal has been documented for example by Azevedo et al. (2018), Blattner et al. (2021), 
and Gouveia and Osterhold (2018). In Appendix 1 we characterize zombie lending in our sample. 

 
3 
 
regressions, which we saturate with firm*year-quarter, bank*year-quarter, and firm*bank fixed 
effects. Our identification thus comes from comparing the triple difference in lending: (i) to 
the same firm by an inspected versus a non-inspected bank, (ii) by the same bank to zombie 
versus non-zombie firms, and (iii) for the same firm-bank pair before versus after the 
inspections. Our main results stem from within-bank comparisons but remain valid in less 
saturated specifications. 
We find that an inspected bank is about 4 percentage points less likely to refinance a 
zombie firm after the inspection (relative to a non-inspected bank, to a non-zombie firm, and 
to the pre-inspection period). The estimated effect holds across different specifications and for 
different definitions of a zombie firm, and it is quantitatively similar for the two inspection 
episodes we analyze. Moreover, it is economically important as it represents 20% of the 
unconditional probability that a zombie firm is refinanced.3 
We next question why inspected banks are changing their lending behavior. The 
inspected banks were forced to recognize the lower quality of their credit portfolios (and bear 
the corresponding capital costs). Consequently, one possibility is that banks reduce zombie 
lending because the cost of maintaining those loans just went up. A second possibility is that 
the breadth and intrusiveness of the inspections have a broader disciplining effect on banks. 
That is, banks may be reducing zombie lending in order to reduce the likelihood and 
supervisory implications of future inspections. 
Our evidence points to the former explanation. To distinguish between the two 
mechanisms, we focus on the sectoral inspections, which enable us to compare how inspected 
banks changed their lending behavior in inspected (construction and real estate) and non-
inspected sectors. If the inspections had a general disciplining effect, we should see a 
 
3 We address concerns about potential differences between inspected banks and non-inspected banks in our 
robustness section. 
 

 
4 
 
significant drop in banks’ propensity to refinance zombie firms also in non-inspected sectors. 
However, we find that banks reduce their propensity to refinance zombie firms only in the 
inspected sectors. Our results suggest that inspecting banks across all sectors is therefore 
necessary to modify banks’ behavior across the board. Further, encouraging a prompt 
recognition of losses decreases incentives for zombie lending. 
We also investigate how the inspections affect firm default. A bank that refinances a 
zombie borrower is preventing this firm from defaulting on its outstanding debt. We find that 
within a year after the inspection of their bank, zombies are 1 to 2 percentage points more likely 
to default. 
Finally, we test whether the inspections had any macro effects by estimating 
regressions at the industry-level. We find that, following the inspections, industries with a 
higher exposure to the inspections experienced a higher rate of firm creation and increases in 
average productivity. Therefore, these results suggest that the inspections had a cleansing effect 
in the economy. 
Although direct bank supervision is a crucial pillar of regulatory oversight, prior 
empirical evidence on how it affects (future) bank credit decisions at the loan level is, to the 
best of our knowledge, scant.4 The studies closest to ours are Granja and Leuz (2019) and 
Haselmann et al. (2019) who study transitions across different supervisors. Granja and Leuz 
(2019) find that stricter bank supervision following the Dodd-Frank Act leads to an increase in 
small business loans and higher entry and exit rates.5 Haselmann et al. (2019) find that banks 
 
4 Agarwal et al. (2014) find that federal regulators are systematically tougher than state regulators, downgrading 
supervisory ratings almost twice as frequently, and that banks consequently report worse asset quality, higher 
regulatory capital ratios, and lower return on assets. Delis et al. (2018) find that regulatory interventions in the US 
promote bank accounting quality, especially during periods of crisis. Gropp et al. (2019b) study banks' incentives 
to engage in regulatory arbitrage to increase their capital ratios and find that arbitrage is more pronounced in 
countries where national supervisors have more discretion to engage in regulatory forbearance. 
5 A few studies have looked at the impact of the intrusiveness of bank supervision on bank level outcomes. These 
studies found that supervision reduces the probability of bank failure and increases bank profitability (Rezende 
and Wu, 2013; Fuster et al., 2018; Hirtle et al., 2019). Eisenbach et al. (2019) exploit unique data on the working 
hours of Federal Reserve System bank supervisors to find that supervision exhibits large economies of scale and 

 
5 
 
under direct supervision of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) in Europe report higher 
risk-weights, higher probability of default and lower collateral ratios relative to non-SSM 
banks lending to the same firm. Our paper adds to this literature by studying the impact of 
actual bank supervisory on-site inspections that aim to assess whether banks’ provisioning 
levels were adequate. Ivanov and Wang (2019) find that banks reduce loan commitments, 
increase monitoring and adversely revise their internal risk estimates for borrowers under 
increased supervisory scrutiny. Our analysis deals with the impact of heterogeneous 
supervisory scrutiny at bank-firm level on zombie lending. Angelini et al. (2020) find that 
banks that are subject to supervisory inspections become more likely to recognize loans as non-
performing. This leads to a temporary contraction in credit, but also to a change in portfolio 
composition towards more productive firms. We contribute to this literature by showing how 
large-scale, highly intrusive bank inspections can mitigate a pervasive problem in banking, i.e., 
zombie lending. Our results show that encouraging the prompt and encompassing recognition 
of losses mitigates the likelihood that zombie firms continue to be refinanced, thereby 
contributing to a better allocation of resources in the economy. 
Other related work considers the impacts of bank stress tests on bank lending behavior. 
Cortés et al. (2020) find that stress-tested US lenders reduce the supply of credit to smaller and 
riskier businesses, but the slack is picked up by non-stress tested banks. Large banks, which 
are often better able to influence the action of supervisors and regulators, do not receive 
preferential treatment in these stress-tests (Schneider et al., 2020). Pierret and Steri (2019) 
show that higher capital requirements are not a substitute for supervisory scrutiny when aiming 
for prudent lending in the US. Our paper deals with coordinated supervision for a subset of 
 
that increased supervision reduces bank distress. Kok et al. (2021) present empirical evidence that the 
intrusiveness of the supervisory scrutiny associated to stress testing has a disciplining effect on bank risk. 

 
6 
 
banks in specific sectors. This allows to compare bank lending behavior towards inspected and 
non-inspected sectors. 
2. Conceptual framework: origins, consequences, and remedies 
a. Origins of zombie lending 
Zombie lending may occur in an economy for several reasons. If we consider a zombie 
to be an unviable firm that is artificially kept alive by banks, the existence of zombie lending 
can arise from both borrower and bank characteristics. Furthermore, our empirical strategy 
examines the role supervisors might also play in shaping this phenomenon. In this section we 
discuss these possible drivers of zombie lending, in order to anchor our empirical analysis. 
We start with the borrowers’ side. Borrowers may face debt overhang problems as in 
Myers (1977), implying that income generated from new projects is partially appropriated by 
previous debtholders. While the debt overhang problem can occur for highly indebted but 
solvent firms, it tends to be even more severe for insolvent firms. In both cases, newly issued 
debt makes the debt overhang problem more severe in the absence of concessions from existing 
debtholders or the injection of equity by new shareholders. While firms’ shareholders have 
incentives to issue debt, creditors may not necessarily step in. As we explain in Section 4, we 
employ negative equity as our main indicator of zombie firms, but consider also alternative 
measures. 
We now turn to the banks’ side. Banks could engage in zombie lending for three 
reasons. First, as Hu and Varas (2021) point out, banks optimally continue lending to 
sufficiently reputable firms after learning bad news about them due to the prospect of these 
firms accessing market or uninformed finance. Second, banks may engage in zombie lending 
to specific firms to preserve valuable relationships stemming from information or cross-selling 
possibilities to the firm itself (e.g., Bolton et al., 2016), or to prevent disruptions of supply 

 
7 
 
chains towards other bank customers (e.g., Giannetti and Saidi 2019, Gourinchas et al. 2020). 
Third, banks can lend to zombie firms to keep their own book equity unaffected by preventing 
distressed zombie borrowers going into loan default. Banks could do so by increasing their 
loan exposure to those borrowers such that previously granted loans do not go into default 
status, i.e., evergreening of loans (e.g., Peek and Rosengren 2005, Caballero et al. 2008, 
Giannetti and Simonov 2013, Bruche and Llobet 2014, Schivardi et al. 2020, Acharya et al. 
2020). Such behavior is eventually reflected in a lower ability to repay these loans. A bank’s 
capital buffer plays a key role, since lower capitalized banks have greater incentives to keep 
their book equity unaffected relative to better capitalized banks (Andrews and Petroulakis, 
2019). Since our goal is to isolate the effect of the inspections on banks’ lending behavior, our 
empirical analysis will need to mute any potential differences across banks in their capital 
levels. 
Finally, we turn to the supervisory incentives in handling zombie lending by their 
supervised banks. Banks’ possibilities to engage in zombie lending depend upon the scrutiny 
and supervisory forbearance. The degree of optimal regulatory forbearance of zombie lending 
by national regulators is modeled in Acharya (2003) and Steinkamp et al. (2021). In Acharya 
(2003), there is too much regulatory forbearance compared to the first best due to externalities 
among regulators and their supervised banks. A greater degree of forbearing in one country 
negatively affects the competitive position of banks in less forbearing countries, leading to 
greater regulatory forbearance in equilibrium. Steinkamp et al. (2021) further point to the 
common-pool problem of a monetary union. National regulators have incentives to be lenient 
regarding ’loan performance’ as ’performing loans’ can be pledged as collateral to the 
Eurosystem of central banks. The potential costs of bank failures are then partially shifted to 
the Eurosystem. Our empirical setting focuses on a treatment where regulatory forbearance is 

 
8 
 
reduced for the inspected banks due to the joint inspection by the IMF, EU and the Banco de 
Portugal. 
b. Consequences of zombie lending 
The firm, bank and supervisory-specific reasons for zombie lending may impact the 
macro-economic allocational efficiency in an economy. This happens when there are drops in 
productivity that stem from credit misallocation. As Laeven et al. (2020) note, the credit 
misallocation has an indirect and direct channel. The indirect channel takes place when zombie 
lending leads to distorted competition in the product and input markets (Schivardi et al. 2020, 
Tracey 2019). The direct channel reduces aggregate productivity by keeping low-productivity 
firms alive and by imposing credit constraints on the high-productivity firms (Andrews et al. 
2017; Banerjee and Hoffmann 2018, 2020; Blattner et al. 2021; Acharya et al. 2020). These 
distributional issues are important to evaluate the effects of inspections on capital allocation in 
an economy. Therefore, in our paper we not only quantify the effect of inspections on lending 
behavior of banks, but we also investigate the effect of the inspections on firm entry and 
aggregate productivity. 
c. Remedies for zombie lending 
The crucial question is, therefore, how can regulators tackle zombie lending. There is 
evidence that requiring banks to hold more capital can be an effective tool, since low-
capitalized banks are more prone to zombie lending (e.g. Acharya et al. 2020, Caballero et 
al. 2008, Giannetti and Simonov 2013, Schivardi et al. 2020). However, recent work by 
Blattner et al. (2021) shows that the imposition of stricter capital requirements in Portugal did 
not curb zombie lending, since the steeper capital requirements gave banks greater incentives 
to avoid recognizing losses. 

 
9 
 
The evidence in Blattner et al. (2021) supports the use of alternative ways to avoid the 
emergence of zombie lending, such as the inspections analyzed in this paper. We note, 
however, that the on-site inspections were costly in several dimensions. First, they were 
unexpectedly intrusive in the sense that auditors had the freedom not only to analyze the credit 
books, but also talk to borrowers, possibly eroding reputational capital of the banks. Second, 
banks had to mobilize resources to host the inspecting teams and satisfy their requests. Third, 
the ex-post costs imposed by supervisors in terms of loan provisioning were not only high but 
also concentrated in a short time frame. Finally, and perhaps more importantly, these 
inspections are very intensive in human capital, substantially increasing the costs of bank 
supervision. The inspections we discuss in this paper involved a total of 58 employees of the 
Banco de Portugal and 289 external auditors, who combined spent 153,000 working hours (if 
remunerated between around 20 and 100 euros per hour, implying a potential total cost of 
around 10 million euros), going through individual credit files which covered loans amounts 
equal to €92 billion (about 43% of the Portuguese GDP in 2019). 
3. Institutional setting 
The Portuguese Government signed in May of 2011 a financial assistance program with 
the International Monetary Fund, the European Commission, and the European Central Bank. 
At that time, several European countries, including Spain and Ireland, were dealing with 
extensive crises in their banking sectors. For this reason, the national supervisory authority 
(Banco de Portugal) was called to implement a program of special on-site inspections to assess 
the health of the banking sector in Portugal. 
The main goal of the inspection program was to assess the credit portfolios and validate 
the quality of assets that these banking groups were using as inputs for their risk assessment. 
The inspections were carried out in the eight largest national banking groups, which altogether 
represented about 80% of the total assets of the banking system. The selection was imposed by 

 
10 
 
supervisors and based only on bank size. It would not be feasible to inspect all banks at once, 
as intrusive inspection programs are very costly in terms of both the coordination effort 
between the many parties involved and the human resources used.6 
These inspections were unconventional in at least three dimensions. The first is the 
level of granularity, as the auditors had to analyze selected loans one-by-one. Second, banks 
had to mobilize resources to host the inspecting teams and satisfy their information requests 
promptly, facilitating the information flow. Third, the inspections were unexpectedly intrusive 
in the sense that auditors had the freedom not only to analyze the credit books and talk to loan 
officers, but also to seek additional information directly from borrowers and to perform on-site 
visits. 
There were three inspection waves. The first was carried out between end-July and end-
November of 2011 and targeted loans to households. The second and third inspections targeted 
corporate loans and are the focus of our analysis. We describe these two inspections below. 
a. Sectoral inspection 
The construction and real estate sectors were particularly hit during the Great Recession 
and the ensuing European sovereign debt crisis (Azevedo et al., 2018). Since the Portuguese 
banks were considerably exposed to these sectors, Banco de Portugal carried a special on-site 
inspection program directed at the construction and real estate sectors. We refer to this 
inspection as the Sectoral Inspection.7 
The inspections involved the eight largest banking groups and were carried out between 
July and November of 2012. The reference period is June 2012, meaning that only loans 
 
6 The inspection program was monitored by a committee that included experts from Banco de Portugal, but also 
from the International Monetary Fund, the European Central Bank, the European Commission and three additional 
European central banks (Banco de España, the National Bank of Belgium, and Banque de France). 
7 For additional details: https://www.bportugal.pt/sites/default/files/anexoscombp20121203_en.pdf. 

 
11 
 
granted up to this point were eligible for inspection.8 The inspections focused not only on loans 
granted to firms operating in the construction and real estate sectors, but also on firms in sectors 
with close links to the construction sector (mainly suppliers and the tourism sector). For the 
eight banking groups as a whole, the total exposure eligible amounted to €69 billion, which 
accounts for around 40% of their corporate lending portfolio. A sample of 2,856 firms that 
accounted for a total of €39 billion loans (or 56% of the eligible portfolio) was audited. While 
most firms were randomly assigned to the inspected portfolios, a few large borrowers were 
hand-picked for inspection. 
The final report was released on December 3, 2012. The report concluded that the eight 
banking groups inspected needed to reinforce impairments by €861 million (around 2.2% of 
the overall amount of exposures assessed). Importantly, the inspected banks were not instructed 
to stop lending to any particular firm; they were simply forced to recognize the lower quality 
of their credit portfolios and bear the corresponding costs in the form of higher impairments. 
Given that supervisors and auditors were working with a sample, the final outcome of the 
inspection was the extrapolation, for the total loan portfolio, of additional impairments that 
banks had to recognize. Therefore, any changes in lending behavior we observe are ultimately 
the decision of the bank and not the forceful recognition of individual inspected exposures. 
b. General inspection 
The same eight banking groups were subject to another inspection in the second and 
third quarter of 2013. The reference period for this second inspection is April 2013, meaning 
 
8 The European Banking Authority’s Capital Exercise was held in November 2011 and could be a potential 
confounding event taking place in the pre-event window (e.g., Gropp et al., 2019a, and Degryse et al., 2021 for 
Portugal). Another event in pre-inspections window was the implementation of the very long-term refinancing 
operations (vLTRO) by the ECB in December 2011 (Jasova et al., 2021, also for Portugal). The set of banks that 
could be affected by these two events does not coincide with the set of inspected banks in our analysis. More 
importantly, as we explain below when describing our empirical methodology, our within-bank comparison of 
loans to different firms and sectors mitigates such concerns. 

 
12 
 
that only loans granted up to this point were eligible for inspection. The purpose of this 
inspection was again to assess the adequacy of these banks’ provisioning levels. 
In contrast to the sectoral inspection, all corporate loans (except mortgages and loans 
granted to public entities) were eligible. To minimize any potential overlap between the two 
inspections, we drop from the analysis all firms in the construction and real estate sectors, since 
these sectors were already covered by the previous inspection. 
The total exposure covered was €93 billion, including off-balance-sheet exposures such 
as guarantees conceded and committed credit lines. A sample of 2,206 firms that accounted for 
a total of €53 billion loans (or 50% of the eligible portfolio) were audited. In this case, the 
random selection of firms was complemented with an analysis of credits for which it was 
estimated a high likelihood of impairment deviation. 
The final report was released on Aug 2, 2013. The report concluded that the eight 
banking groups inspected needed to reinforce impairments by €1.1 billion (around 2.1% of the 
overall amount of exposures assessed).9 As before, the banks were not mandated to target any 
individual loans or firms. 
4. Data and variables 
a. Data sources 
Our analysis uses three comprehensive datasets. First, we obtain from the Central 
Credit Register (maintained by the Banco de Portugal) nearly all loans granted to non-financial 
firms in Portugal. It has nearly full coverage, since the reporting threshold is set at a minimum 
of 50 euros and reporting is mandatory for all banks and credit institutions. For each reported 
exposure there is monthly information on loan amounts, loan types and loan status. 
 
9 For additional details: https://www.bportugal.pt/en/comunicado/credit-portfolio-impairment-review-exercise-
confirms-resilience-and-robustness-national. 

 
13 
 
We aggregate the credit register data at the quarterly frequency and match these loan-
level data to both firm-level and bank-level data. Firm-level data include detailed balance-sheet 
and financial statements, as well as location, employment, and age for all firms operating in 
Portugal. All Portuguese firms are required to file this information on an annual basis. Bank-
level data include accounting and prudential information for all banks operating in Portugal. 
Our final dataset is a panel at the firm-bank-quarter level that covers all loans granted in 
Portugal. 
b. Sample period 
Our main sample period is from 2011:Q3 to 2014:Q3. For each of the two inspections 
analyzed, we build a sample with ten quarters: four quarters before the inspection, the two 
quarters during which the inspection takes place, and four quarters after the inspection. For the 
Sectoral Inspection, the corresponding timeline is: 2011:Q3 – 2012:Q2 (pre-inspection), 
2012:Q3 – 2012:Q4 (inspection), and 2013:Q1 – 2013:Q4 (post-inspection). For the General 
Inspection, the timeline is: 2012:Q2 – 2013:Q1 (pre-inspection), 2013:Q2 – 2013:Q3 
(inspection), and 2013:Q4 – 2014:Q3. 
c. Variables 
We define our variables in Table 1. Zombie lending (or evergreening) consists of 
repeated lending to firms that are insolvent, through which the bank attempts to postpone losses 
or eventually hope for a possible recovery of the firm. To capture this behavior, we focus on 
new loans being granted to existing borrowers. We define New loan as an indicator of whether 
the bank strictly increases its supply of credit to an existing borrower, including lines of credit 
(that is, it includes both drawn and undrawn loan amounts). 

 
14 
 
We define Zombie firm as one with negative equity in the previous year.10 Interestingly, 
our definition of zombie firms has become widely used during 2020 and 2021 to evaluate the 
viability of firms affected by the COVID pandemic (see for example Carletti et al., 2020). The 
economic rationale behind our definition is that this is a firm that is technically insolvent.11 It 
is quite risky for a lender to refinance such highly levered firms. Although one may argue that 
banks can price in this risk, charging a high loan rate would raise financing costs and thus make 
these firms even more financially distressed. The available empirical evidence suggests that 
the opposite actually happens, as banks grant loans at soft terms to zombie firms (Caballero et 
al., 2008; Acharya et al., 2019). While this is our main definition of a zombie firm, we show 
that our results hold when we employ multiple alternative definitions. 
As mentioned in Section 2, the inspection programs applied only to the eight largest 
banks in Portugal. The variable Inspected bank indicates whether the bank was subject or not 
to the inspections. Default is an indicator for whether the firm is in default with a current lender. 
Loan default is defined as overdue principal and/or interest for more than 90 days. 
The four variables discussed above form the backbone of our empirical analysis. We 
also provide information about some additional variables that, while not directly used in 
estimation, help understand our data and sample characteristics. First, we compute two 
relationship measures: the duration of relationship (in years) and an indicator of whether the 
firm has a main bank (i.e., a bank that concentrates at least 75% of the firm’s loans). Second, 
we collect some firm characteristics: an indicator of whether the firm is small (with number of 
employees below 50 and annual balance sheet total below €10 million), the age of the firm 
defined as number of years since incorporation, the number of employees, the firm’s leverage 
 
10 As mentioned in sections 3.1. and 3.2., most inspected firms were randomly selected. A few firms were added 
to the inspection pool based on their economic importance (sectoral inspection) or high expected impairment 
deviation (general inspection). In both cases, having negative equity was not part of the selection process. 
11 We acknowledge that this measure is better suited for market rather than for book values. We note, however, 
that Portugal adopted in 2010 the IFRS accounting standards, which require most assets to be marked-to-market. 

 
15 
 
ratio (total liabilities scaled by assets), and the firm’s profitability (measured by its return on 
assets). 
d. Summary statistics 
Table 2 presents the summary statistics of the data. Our data offer three sources of 
variation: across firms, across banks, and across time (year-quarters). The sample period is 
from 2011:Q3 to 2014:Q3 and comprises the two inspection events. In Appendix Table A2 we 
provide separate descriptive statistics for the two inspections. As explained below, our 
estimation sample only uses firms that borrow from multiple banks, since we employ 
firm*year-quarter fixed effects. 
The unconditional probability that a bank refinances an existing borrower in a given 
quarter is 18.4%. The fraction of zombie firms in our sample is almost 15%. More than 62% 
of the loans in our sample were granted by one of the eight banks that were subject to the 
inspections. The fraction of firms in default with a current lender is 10.5%. These four variables 
are the key ingredients of our regressions. 
Concerning the other variables, average relationship duration is 6 years and only 15.4% 
of the firms have a main lender (i.e., at least 75% of their loans were granted by one bank). The 
remaining variables show that firms are on average small, highly leveraged, and unprofitable. 
5. Empirical methodology 
We want to measure the causal impact of the inspections on a bank’s propensity to 
refinance a zombie firm.12 We estimate separate regressions for each of the two inspections 
using eight quarters of data: the four quarters before the inspection and the four quarters after 
the inspection. We omit the two quarters during which the inspections are taking place in order 
 
12 In Appendix 2 we present difference-of-means comparisons between zombie and non-zombie firms and in 
Appendix 3 we validate our definition of zombie firm. 

 
16 
 
to identify clear before and after changes. We estimate triple differences regressions, which in 
its most saturated specification is: 
NewLoanfbt = αft + αbt + αbf + β൫Inspectedb×Zombief×Postt൯ + ϵfbt, 
(1) 
where NewLoanfbt equals one whenever there is strictly positive loan growth from quarter t to 
t+1 within a firm-bank pair, zero otherwise.13 Zombief indicates whether firm f is considered 
to be zombie or not based on its previous year’s financials. Inspectedb indicates whether bank 
b is subject to inspections or not. The coefficient of interest 𝛽𝛽 measures how the propensity of 
an inspected bank (relative to a non-inspected bank) to refinance a zombie firm (relative to a 
non-zombie firm) changes after the inspection (relative to the pre-inspection period). αft, αbt 
and αbf capture firm*year-quarter, bank*year-quarter, and bank*firm fixed effects, 
respectively. 𝜖𝜖𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 is the error term. We cluster standard errors at the bank-year-quarter level, 
as this is the level of variation for our treatment variable.14 
The two-way fixed effects account for time-varying unobserved heterogeneity both 
across firms (such as changes in credit demand, as in Khwaja and Mian, 2008) and across banks 
(such as changes in credit supply), and control for potential biases due to firm-bank matching. 
Our identification thus comes from comparing the change in lending: (i) for the same firm from 
an inspected bank relative to a non-inspected bank, (ii) by the same bank to zombie firms 
relative to non-zombie firms, and (iii) for the same firm-bank pair before and after the 
inspections.15 
 
13 In the Appendix we report the main results using instead credit growth as dependent variables (Tables A4, A5, 
and A6). The results remain broadly consistent. 
14 Our standard errors do not change significantly if we additionally cluster at the firm level. 
15 The high number of fixed effects may limit the external validity of our results. In fact, equation (1) uses variation 
only from firms that borrow from at least two banks, and in which one of them is inspected and the other is not. 
For this reason, we also present results from less restrictive regression models with one-way effects (firm, bank, 
and time). 

 
17 
 
One final point that merits discussion is the comparison between inspected and non-
inspected banks. Since the inspected banks are substantially larger than the non-inspected 
banks, one could argue that they are also likely to differ in other relevant dimensions, such as 
their lending policies. We note, however, that the regression in equation (1) is performing a 
within-bank comparison. In order to address any lingering concerns regarding potential 
differences between inspected and non-inspected banks, we perform two additional tests. First, 
we test for the plausibility of the parallel trends assumption by investigating the period-by-
period adjustment of our dependent variable during the inspection windows. That is, we 
examine whether before the inspections the inspected and non-inspected banks changed their 
exposures to zombie (relative to non-zombie) firms at similar rates. Second, we re-estimate 
equation (1) using only the four smallest banks that are inspected and compare them to the four 
largest banks that are not inspected. This sample restriction should improve our estimate of the 
counterfactual, as it helps balance the inspected and non-inspected banks in terms of size (and 
presumably other relevant unobservable characteristics). 
6. Results 
a. Evidence from the general inspection 
We start by showing results for the general inspection, since this was the broadest and 
most penalizing inspection for banks.16 The estimation window for the general inspection is as 
follows. The inspection period was during the second and third quarter of 2013. We thus focus 
on the four quarters preceding the inspection (2012:Q2 – 2013:Q1) and on the four quarters 
following the inspection (2013:Q4 – 2014:Q3). We include all sectors except construction and 
 
16 On the one hand, this inspection covered corporate loans from all sectors (except mortgages and loans granted 
to public entities). The fact that it covered all economic sectors is important from an external validity viewpoint 
(recall that the sectoral inspection focuses only on the construction and real estate sectors). On the other hand, the 
general inspection was responsible for the largest increase in bank losses (more than €1 billion). 

 
18 
 
real estate to avoid overlap with the sectoral inspection. Including those sectors does not alter 
our results. 
We present the results in Table 3. The estimation sample contains firms with 
outstanding loans from at least two banks. The coefficient of interest is the triple interaction 
term, which measures how the propensity of an inspected bank (relative to a non-inspected 
bank) to refinance a zombie firm (relative to a non-zombie firm) changes after the inspection 
(relative to the pre-inspection period). 
 We estimate four specifications. Model (1) is a standard three-way fixed effects model 
that controls for time, firm, and bank fixed effects. Model (2) adds firm*year-quarter fixed 
effects that force the model to compare relative lending by inspected and non-inspected banks 
to the same firm. Model (3) adds bank*year-quarter fixed effects that force the model to 
compare relative lending by the same bank to zombie and non-zombie firms. Model (4) is our 
Equation (1) which further includes firm*bank fixed effects that forces comparison within a 
lending relationship. Models (1) to (3) allow to estimate (some of the) double interaction terms. 
In Model (4) these double interaction terms are completely absorbed by the fixed effects. 
Table 3 shows that the estimated coefficient for the triple interaction is negative and 
statistically significant across all specifications, indicating that inspected banks became less 
likely to refinance zombie firms after the inspections. The estimated coefficient is 
economically relevant as it indicates a 3.7 percentage points drop in their refinancing 
propensity. This corresponds to 20% of the unconditional likelihood of a zombie firm being 
refinanced during our sample period (which equals 18%). 
The estimated coefficients for the remaining double interaction terms are also 
interesting. The negative estimates in Models (1) to (3) for the variable Inspected × Zombie 
show that, before the inspections, inspected banks were less likely than the non-inspected banks 
to refinance zombie firms. The positive estimates obtained in Models (1) and (2) for Inspected 

 
19 
 
× Post suggest that the behavior of the inspected banks towards healthier firms also changes. 
In particular, the inspections lead to a reallocation of credit from zombie to healthy firms. The 
insignificant estimate in Model (1) for the variable Zombie × Post suggests that the non-
inspected banks did not pick their zombie borrowers that were discarded by the inspected 
banks. The perception of a more intrusive and permanent supervisory action might have 
changed even the behavior of the banks that were not so closely under the radar of the 
supervisors. 
The next question we ask is which types of firms were primarily affected by the 
inspections. In Table 4 we present estimates from split regressions based on two firm 
characteristics: age and size. Columns (1) and (2) compare younger with older firms using a 
10-year cutoff. Columns (3) and (4) compare small with large firms. Small firms have less than 
50 employees and an annual turnover or balance sheet total below €10 million. The empirical 
specification is analogous to our baseline Model (4) in Table 3, which controls for firm*year-
quarter, bank*year-quarter, and firm*bank fixed effects. 
The first two columns show that inspected banks became less likely to refinance both 
firms that are younger than 10 years (by 3.3 percentage points) or older than 10 years (by 3.7 
percentage points). The difference between the two coefficients is economically small. This 
finding addresses the concern that our definition of zombie firm might pick up young firms 
with high growth opportunities. Regarding size, the large firms exhibit a much larger estimated 
effect than the small firms. However, the former coefficient is estimated more imprecisely, due 
to the small number of large firms in our sample. 
b. Identification tests 
i. 
Parallel trends assumption 
One potential concern could be that before the inspections the inspected banks are 
already reducing their exposure to zombie firms more aggressively than the non-inspected 

 
20 
 
banks, which would be a direct violation of the parallel trends assumption. To assess the 
plausibility of this concern, we investigate the dynamic behavior of our dependent variable 
over our sample window. 
In Figure 1 we plot the series of coefficients and corresponding 95% confidence 
intervals from estimating regressions analogous to Model (4) of Table 3, in which we replace 
Post by a sequence of time dummies spanning our entire estimation period. The shadowed 
region indicates the period during which the inspections were taking place.17 
The timing evidence corroborates a causal interpretation of our results. The plot shows 
no evidence of pre-trends, meaning that inspected and non-inspected banks were changing their 
exposure to zombie firms roughly at the same rate before the inspectors arrived. Right after the 
inspections start we see that inspected banks become less likely to refinance zombie firms 
relative to non-inspected banks. The speed of adjustment is also interesting. Although the final 
report was released only in December, the inspected banks started reducing their exposure to 
zombie firms right away. This suggests that inspected banks knew that they were 
overestimating the quality of their credit portfolios, and precautionarily decided to start 
cleaning their balance sheets in advance to spread such costs over a longer period. 
ii. 
Inspected versus non-inspected banks 
The inspected banks are larger – and thus necessarily different – from the non-inspected 
banks. We attempt to improve our counterfactual estimate with two matching procedures. 
First, we select the four smallest inspected banks and compare them to the four largest 
non-inspected banks. This procedure brings us one step closer towards balancing our inspected 
and non-inspected banks in terms of size (and presumably other relevant unobservable 
 
17 In Appendix Figure A2 we provide separate time-series plots using raw data. The figure shows that, prior to the 
inspections, inspected banks were increasing their refinancing rate roughly at the same rate for zombie and non-
zombie firms. Following the inspections, inspected banks reduced new lending substantially more to zombie than 
to non-zombie firms. At the same time, non-inspected banks do not appear to change substantially their new 
lending behavior vis-à-vis zombie firms. 

 
21 
 
characteristics). Panel A of Table 5 repeats the analysis of Table 3 using this smaller but more 
balanced sample of banks. Consistent with our previous results, we obtain negative and 
statistically significant estimates for our triple interaction variable. The point estimate we 
obtain for our coefficient of interest in Model (4) is actually larger. It indicates that an inspected 
bank becomes 4.8 percentage points less likely to refinance a zombie firm after the inspection. 
This figure is economically relevant, since it equals 26% of the unconditional likelihood of a 
zombie firm being refinanced during our sample period. The results in Panel A of Table 5 show 
that the difference in size between inspected and non-inspected banks cannot explain our 
previous results.18 
Second, we match inspected and non-inspected banks on their level of capitalization as 
bank capital has been shown to be an important determinant of zombie lending (e.g., Andrews 
and Petroulakis, 2019). To control for this alternative mechanism, we match each of the eight 
inspected banks with one non-inspected banks with a similar capital ratio, measured as of 
2010:Q4 (i.e., right before the Troika intervention).19 
We present the results in Panel B of Table 5. The results we obtain with this alternative 
matching strategy remain economically relevant and statistically significant. Moreover, the 
estimates obtained are comparable to those we discussed in Panel A of the same table. Since 
there are no significant differences in bank capital between the inspected and non-inspected 
 
18 The results show that using the full sample of banks may lead to underestimation of the effects of the inspections. 
This downward bias is consistent with our earlier finding (in Table 3) that inspected banks were less likely than 
the non-inspected banks to refinance zombie firms beforehand. Panel A of Table 5 confirms that using the 
subsample of banks improves our estimate of the counterfactual. In particular, the insignificant estimates we 
obtain in Models (2) and (3) for the variable Inspected × Zombie show that the subsample of inspected banks is 
no longer less likely to refinance zombie firms than the non-inspected banks prior to the inspections. 
19 The set of uninspected banks contains many banks that are very small, and thus hardly comparable to our 
inspected banks. Therefore, we dropped all these very small banks and considered only the 20% largest 
uninspected banks, or 14 banks in total. We then matched each of the eight inspected banks with one uninspected 
bank with the closest capital ratio. Therefore, our final estimation sample contains 16 banks. The difference in 
average bank capital between the inspected and non-inspected banks is only 0.003 (10.9% versus 10.6%, 
respectively). 

 
22 
 
banks, we therefore conclude that the supervisory channel in mitigating zombie lending is at 
work. 
iii. 
Classification of zombie firms 
In our main definition a zombie firm has negative equity. In Table 6 we consider 
alternative definitions of zombies. In Panel A we analyze other dimensions of financial distress 
while in Panel B we compare firms that ended up as zombies via the asset or liability side. We 
obtain all estimates from our baseline regression model that controls for firm*year-quarter, 
bank*year-quarter, and firm*bank fixed effects (Equation (1); Model (4) of Table 3). As in our 
baseline specification, standard errors are clustered at the bank-year-quarter level. 
We start with Panel A. Model (1) defines a zombie firm when it has negative equity for 
at least 2 years. This is a more stringent definition than in our baseline model which defines 
zombie firms as having negative equity for at least one year. Adalet McGowan et al. (2018) 
and Acharya et al. (2019) identify low-quality firms as those with low ability to service existing 
debt. Following the definitions used in these studies, Model (2) employs low interest coverage 
over the past three years as a proxy for zombie firm. A firm with low interest coverage is in 
the first quartile of the distribution of interest coverage, computed as net profits over interest 
expenses. In Model (3) we employ a measure based on default risk. In particular, a zombie is 
a firm with an estimated probability of default in the top quartile of the previous year’s 
distribution.20 Our results should not be interpreted as evidence of risk shifting, since we are 
analyzing a bank’s decision to refinance an existing borrower.21 
 
20 The risk model was developed by Banco de Portugal and it estimates one-year ahead default probabilities. The 
model uses two of the datasets used in our paper: the loan-level data and the firm-level accounting data. A firm is 
considered to be in default if it has 2.5 per cent or more of its total outstanding loans overdue (defined as missing 
payments for more than 90 days). The model uses several firm-level indicators on leverage, profitability, liquidity, 
and size, as well as macroeconomic variables (see Antunes et al. (2016) for details). The model does not include 
negative equity as an input, but it includes financial leverage. 
21 Since one of the inputs in the risk model is financial leverage, this induces a mechanical correlation between a 
firm having negative equity and a high default probability. We note, however, that the correlation is not perfect. 
For the sample used in this table, 84% of the observations are classified in the same way using the two definitions 
(10% of the firms are zombies in both definitions, 74% are not zombies in neither). 5% of the observations have 

 
23 
 
Caballero et al. (2008) and Acharya et al. (2019) identify zombie firms as low-quality 
firms who receive subsidized credit. We follow this approach in Model (4) and label a firm as 
zombie if in a given year: (i) the average interest rate paid by the firm are below the interest 
paid by the most creditworthy firms in our sample (proxied by the interest rate paid by the 
firms with a probability of default in the bottom quartile), and (ii) has an estimated probability 
of default in the top quartile of the previous year’s distribution.22 The only dimension in which 
our interest rate subsidy measure cannot match that used by Acharya et al. (2019) is the split 
between short- and long-term debt as we lack information on this in our dataset. The trade-off 
is that the dataset used covers the entire universe of firms in a country, including the very small 
ones. This concern is alleviated by the low-rate environment prevailing in 2012 and the very 
low slope of yield curves, which should lead to very small differences in short- and long-term 
interest rates. 
The estimated coefficient for the triple interaction is negative across all specifications 
shown and statistically significant. In terms of economic magnitude, the point estimates 
indicate that inspected banks became 1.8 to 3.2 percentage points less likely to refinance 
zombie firms than non-inspected banks after the inspection. 
We now turn to Panel B. Since we define a zombie firm as one with negative equity, it 
is important to understand whether the firm became a zombie because of asset write-downs or 
because of an increase in liabilities. First, operational zombies are those firms that fell into 
negative equity due to a decrease in assets (and that did not experience an increase in liabilities). 
Second, financial zombies fell into negative equity due to an increase in liabilities (and did not 
experience a decrease in assets). We also consider a third category that combines the previous 
 
negative equity but are not amongst the top quartile of the default probability distribution. 12% of the firms have 
high default probabilities but do not have negative equity. 
22 Acharya et al. (2019) impose the additional condition that the firm must have previously borrowed from the 
same bank. This condition is already incorporated in our baseline definition since we analyze a bank’s decision 
to refinance an existing borrower. 

 
24 
 
two types, i.e., firms that ended up with negative equity due to both a reduction in assets and 
an increase in liabilities. Using these definitions, our zombie firm sample contains 39.7% 
operational zombies, 24.4% financial zombies, and 35.9% that are both operational and 
financial zombies. We compute these statistics using data for the four quarters before the 
general inspection. 
In column 1 we replicate our baseline result (column 4 of Table 3) in which a zombie 
firm is any firm with negative equity. Column 2 focuses on financial zombies, column 3 focuses 
on operational zombies, and column 4 focuses on firms that are both operational and financial 
zombies. All three coefficients in columns 2 to 4 are statistically significant and economically 
relevant, indicating that all three types of zombie help explain our results. We note, however, 
that the drop in the likelihood that a zombie firm is refinanced by an inspected bank is almost 
twice as large for financial zombies (-4.5 percentage points) than for operational zombies (-2.4 
percentage points). 
c. Why do inspected banks change their lending behavior? 
The results so far show that unconventional supervision through more intrusive bank 
supervision helps mitigate zombie lending. Our next question is why. We propose two possible 
mechanisms. The first is that banks are less likely to refinance zombie firms simply because 
the benefit of doing so was taken away by supervisors. Evergreening arises in the first place 
because banks want to avoid recognizing losses on their bad borrowers. However, the main 
outcome of the inspections was precisely to make banks build additional provisions against 
these loans. As it becomes costly for a bank to keep zombie firms in its portfolio, the bank has 
less incentives to refinance them. The second mechanism is that the inspections are disciplining 
banks. That is, banks may be reducing zombie lending in order to reduce the likelihood of 
future inspections and thus to avoid the costs associated with such inspections. 

 
25 
 
We employ the sectoral inspection in an attempt to distinguish between these two 
mechanisms. Recall that the sectoral inspection focused on loans granted to firms operating in 
the construction and real estate sectors. We can thus compare how an inspected bank changed 
its lending behavior in inspected and non-inspected sectors. 
If inspected banks reduce zombie lending because these loans are costlier to keep, we 
should see no significant change in their propensity to refinance zombie firms in uninspected 
sectors. In other words, taking a “small bath” through the inspected sectors might mitigate 
zombie lending in the inspected sectors only. In contrast, if banks worry about the possibility 
of future inspections and the actions associated with them, then we should also see a significant 
drop in their propensity to refinance zombie firms in uninspected sectors. In the latter case, a 
“big bath” as implemented by the general inspection would not be required as banks would 
already modify their behavior towards zombie firms in uninspected sectors. 
We investigate how inspected banks change their lending behavior to zombie firms in 
the inspected and non-inspected sectors. Our empirical model is again Equation (1). The 
estimation window for this sectoral inspection is as follows. The inspection period was during 
the third and fourth quarter of 2012, which we omit from the estimation sample. Consistent 
with our analysis of the general inspection, we take one year before the inspections started and 
one year after they ended. The resulting estimation period is 2011:Q3 to 2012:Q2 (pre-
inspection) and 2013:Q1 to 2013:Q4 (post-inspection). 
First, we focus on the inspected sectors. We present the results in Table 7. The 
estimation sample contains all firms in the construction and real estate sectors with outstanding 
loans from at least two banks. All variables and specifications are otherwise similar to Table 
3. The estimated coefficient for the triple interaction is negative across all specifications and 
similar to those obtained in the general inspection. According to the point estimate in Model 

 
26 
 
(4), inspected banks became 4.4 percentage points less likely to refinance zombie firms in the 
construction and real estate sectors after this sectoral inspection.23 
The spillovers of the sectoral inspections to other banks and firms are now different 
from those seen in the general inspection. On the one hand, the positive estimate in Model (1) 
for the variable Zombie × Post suggests that the non-inspected banks may have picked up some 
of the zombie borrowers that were cut loose by the inspected banks. On the other hand, the 
insignificant estimates obtained in Models (1) and (2) for Inspected × Post suggest that 
inspected banks did not change their lending behavior vis-à-vis healthy firms in the 
construction and real estate sectors. 
Second, we repeat the analysis using the uninspected sectors. We select two sectors 
with limited direct links to the construction and real estate sectors. The accommodation and 
food services sectors are appropriate candidates since they have similar characteristics to the 
real estate and accommodation sectors in terms of being non-tradeable sectors, equally 
downstream, and with similar loading to the economy (see Figure 2). Since these sectors were 
not object of inspection, we use them to perform a within-bank comparison that allows to 
discriminate between the two possible mechanisms at play (forced recognition of losses versus 
disciplining effects). The results reported in Table 8 show that the estimates for the variable of 
interest are always insignificant and economically small. This demonstrates that the reduction 
in zombie lending was indeed driven by the inspections, and the “small bath” inspection does 
not induce banks to modify their lending towards zombie firms in unrelated sectors in a 
different way than other non-inspected banks do. 
In Figure 3 we investigate the period-by-period behavior of our coefficients of interest 
over our sample window for the inspected (top) and non-inspected (bottom) sectors. The timing 
 
23 In Appendix Table A7 we analyze in the same regression how firms in the construction and real estate sectors 
were affected in the two inspections. Focusing on the most saturated specification in column 4, we find that the 
first inspection (sectoral) led to a larger reduction in the refinancing of zombie firms than the second (general). 

 
27 
 
evidence corroborates a causal interpretation of our results. The top plot shows that inspected 
and non-inspected banks were changing their exposure to zombie firms in the construction and 
real estate sectors roughly at the same rate before the inspectors arrived. The bottom plot 
displays only insignificant coefficients both prior to and after the inspection, for the 
uninspected sectors. These results suggest that the prevailing mechanism explaining the 
contraction of zombie lending after the inspections comes from the forced recognition of losses, 
as banks do not change their behavior in sectors that were not under the radar of the 
supervisors.24 
d. Bank inspections and firm default 
A bank that “evergreens” loans to its zombie borrowers is essentially preventing these 
firms from defaulting on their outstanding debt. If inspections are reducing banks’ incentives 
to evergreen outstanding loans, then the affected firms should become more likely to default 
after the inspections. Table 9 tests this where the dependent variable is an indicator of whether 
the firm defaults on that particular lender in that particular quarter. Models (1) and (2) focus 
on the general inspections, while Models (3) and (4) focus on the sectoral inspections. We 
follow the same methodology and use the same estimation samples as in Table 3 (for the 
general inspection) and Table 7 (for the sectoral inspection). 
For each inspection we present estimates from two specifications. In the first 
specification (Models (1) and (3)), we estimate an average effect across all firms while 
controlling for bank and firm*year-quarter fixed effects. We use this specification to test 
whether firms became more likely to default on an inspected bank (relative to the non-inspected 
 
24 In Figure 3 we can see that there is virtually no response by banks during the sectoral inspection period. This 
contrasts with the evidence in Figure 1, which shows a prompt response by inspected banks right at the start of 
the general inspection. Recall that the sectoral inspection was the first inspection in chronological terms. So, the 
pattern observed in Figure 3 is consistent with a wait-and-see strategy until the banks received the final report for 
the first time. The prompt response by banks in Figure 1 is unsurprising, since banks already underwent through 
a similar process in the past and know what lies ahead (i.e., recognize the lower quality of their loan portfolios 
and reinforce impairments accordingly). 

 
28 
 
banks) after the inspections. The estimated coefficients are positive and statistically significant 
for both inspections, confirming that firms are on average more likely to default on banks that 
were inspected. 
In the second specification (Models (2) and (4)), we further differentiate between 
zombie and non-zombie firms. This enables us to also control for bank*year-quarter and 
firm*bank fixed effects. The coefficient of interest is the same triple interaction term that we 
analyzed in all our previous estimation tables. We obtain positive and statistically significant 
estimates for both inspections, showing that there is an incremental increase in the likelihood 
of default for a zombie firm relative to a non-zombie. That is, within a year after the inspections 
a zombie firm is more likely to default, by 1 to 2 percentage points, on a lender that is inspected. 
This is consistent with our prior evidence that inspected banks become less likely to refinance 
these zombie firms after the inspections. 
e. Economic effects of the inspections 
Zombie firms impose costs on the economy because they prevent “creative 
destruction”. By staying alive, they congest markets and therefore prevent some good firms 
from entering. In this subsection we test whether the inspections had positive real effects. To 
this end, we estimate regressions at the industry-level to assess aggregate effects of the general 
inspections. 
We focus on three outcome variables: the rate of firm entry in the industry, average 
labor productivity, and average capital productivity. The productivity measures equal the 
industry’s gross value added scaled by either the number of employees or capital stock. Gross 
added value is defined as output minus intermediate consumption. In order to minimize the 
effects of other confounding macro shocks, we analyze the within-industry change of each of 
these three variables over a short period: from 2012 (the year before the inspection) to 2014 
(the year after the inspection). This means, for example, that our measure of firm entry is 

 
29 
 
computed as the number of firms created in 2014 divided by the number of firms operating in 
the same sector in 2012. We compute the two productivity measures as the within-industry 
relative changes from 2012 to 2014. 
Next, we measure how exposed a given industry is to the inspections through their 
banks. We create the variable Industry exposure as the product of two variables. The first is 
the fraction of outstanding loans by inspected banks to firms in a given sector in 2012, capturing 
the importance of inspected banks for that sector right before the general inspections. The 
second is the fraction of zombie firms in that sector in 2012. We should see a cleansing effect 
of the inspections mainly if the sector is populated by zombie firms. We standardize the 
variable Industry exposure with a standard deviation of one. 
Using the variables described above we run in Table 10 regressions at the sector level 
(two-digit NACE codes). In order to obtain estimates that are meaningful from an aggregate 
perspective, we use as weights the number of firms in each sector in 2012. We find that, 
following the inspections, industries with a higher exposure to the inspections experienced a 
higher rate of firm creation and increases in average productivity: a one standard deviation 
increase in Industry exposure increases firm entry rate by 32%, labor productivity by 62%, and 
capital productivity by 80%. Therefore, these results suggest that the inspections had a 
cleansing effect in the economy. 
7. Conclusion 
Zombie lending remains a widespread practice by banks in developed countries and 
that in spite of growing regulatory pressure. We exploit large-scale intrusive on-site inspections 
made on the credit portfolios of several Portuguese banks to investigate how these inspections 
affect banks’ future lending decisions. 
We find that following this unconventional supervision an inspected bank becomes 
20% less likely to refinance a zombie firm. This finding holds for two different inspection 

 
30 
 
episodes, for different definitions of a zombie firm, and is not driven by differences between 
inspected and non-inspected banks. Consistent with the view that banks evergreen loans to 
prevent their zombie borrowers from defaulting, we find that zombie firms more likely default 
on an inspected lender after the inspections. 
Finally, we question why banks are changing their lending behavior. If the inspections 
have a disciplining effect on banks, then we should see a significant drop in their propensity to 
refinance zombie firms in all sectors. However, we find that banks change their lending 
decisions only in the inspected sectors, and not in uninspected sectors. Therefore, banks seem 
to reduce zombie lending because these loans are costlier to maintain. Inspecting banks across 
a wide array of sectors seems therefore necessary to modify banks’ behavior across the board. 
However, these inspections are costly and cannot be repeated permanently. 
The mechanisms at play are thus crucial to advice policymakers. The mechanism we 
uncover is the recognition of losses rather than a more general disciplining effect. Policies that 
promote an encompassing and prompt recognition of losses, as those adopted by the SSM, can 
effectively mitigate zombie lending in the aftermath of a crisis. 
 

 
31 
 
References 
Acharya, V. (2003). “Is the International Convergence of Capital Adequacy Regulation 
Desirable”, Journal of Finance, 58, 2745-82. 
 
Acharya, V., T. Eisert, C. Eufinger and C. Hirsch (2019). “Whatever It Takes: The Real Effects 
of Unconventional Monetary Policy”, Review of Financial Studies, 32(9), 3366–3411. 
 
Adalet McGowan, M., D. Andrews and V. Millot (2017). (2018). “The Walking Dead? Zombie 
Firms and Productivity Performance in OECD Countries”, Economic Policy, 33(96), 685–736. 
 
Agarwal, S., D. Lucca, A. Seru and F. Trebbi (2014). “Inconsistent Regulators: Evidence From 
Banking”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(2), 889-938. 
 
Albertazzi, U. and D. J. Marchetti (2010). “Credit Supply, Flight to Quality and Evergreening: 
An Analysis of Bank-firm Relationships after Lehman”, Banca d’Italia Working Paper 756. 
 
Andrews, D. and F. Petroulakis (2019). “Breaking the Shackles: Zombie Firms, Weak Banks 
and Depressed Restructuring in Europe.” ECB Working Paper No. 2240. 
 
Angelini, P., F. Lotti, A. Passalacqua and G. Soggia (2020), “The Real Effects of Bank 
Supervision: Evidence from On-Site Bank Inspections”, Working Paper. 
 
Antunes, A., Gonçalves, H., and P. Prego (2016), “Firm Default Probabilities Revisited”, 
Banco de Portugal Economic Studies 2, 21-45. 
 
Azevedo, N., M. Mateus and A. Pina (2018). “Bank Credit Allocation and Productivity: 
Stylized Facts for Portugal”, Banco de Portugal Working Paper 25 2018. 
 
Banerjee, R. and B. Hofmann (2018). “The Rise of Zombie Firms: Causes and Consequences”, 
BIS Quarterly Review, September, 67-78. 
 
Banerjee, R. and B. Hofmann (2020) “Corporate Zombies: Anatomy and Lifecyle”, BIS 
Working Papers No 882. 
 
Beck, T., H. Degryse, R. De Haas, and N. van Horen (2018). “When Arm's Length is Too Far. 
Relationship Banking over the Credit Cycle”, Journal of Financial Economics, 127, 174-196. 
 
Blattner, L., L. Farinha and F. Rebelo (2021). “When Losses Turn into Loans: The Cost of 
Weak Banks”, Banco de Portugal Working Paper 16. 
 
Bolton, P., X. Freixas, L. Gambacorta, and P. E. Mistrulli (2016). “Relationship and 
Transaction Lending in a Crisis”, Review of Financial Studies, 29, 2643- 2676. 
 
Bruche, M. and G. Llobet (2014), “Preventing Zombie Lending”, Review of Financial Studies 
27(3), 923–956. 
 
Caballero, R. J., T. Hoshi, and A. K. Kashyap (2008). “Zombie Lending and Depressed 
Restructuring in Japan”, American Economic Review, 98, 1943–1977. 
 

 
32 
 
Carletti, E., Oliviero, T., Pagano, M., Pelizzon, L., and M. Subrahmanyam. (2020). “The 
COVID-19 Shock and Equity Shortfall: Firm-Level Evidence from Italy”, Review of Corporate 
Finance Studies, 9(3), 534–568. 
 
Cortés, K., Y. Demyanyk, L. Li, E. Loutskina, and P. Strahan (2020). “Stress Tests and Small 
Business Lending”, Journal of Financial Economics, 136, 260-279. 
 
Degryse, H., S. Karmakar, and A. Karapetyan (2021). “To Ask or Not To Ask? Bank Capital 
Requirements and Loan Collateralization”, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming. 
 
Delis, M., I. Hasan, M. Iosifidi, and L. Li (2018). “Accounting Quality in Banking: The Role 
of Regulatory Interventions”, Journal of Banking and Finance, 97, 297-317. 
 
Eisenbach, T.M., D.O. Lucca, and R.M. Townsend (2020). “The Economics of Bank 
Supervision”, FRB of NY Staff Report No. 769. 
 
Fuster, A., M. Plosser, and J. Vickery (2018). “Does CFPB Oversight Crimp Credit?”, FRB of 
NY Staff Reports No. 857. 
 
Giannetti, M. and F. Saidi (2019), “Shock Propagation and Banking Structure”, Review of 
Financial Studies 32(7), 2499-2540. 
 
Giannetti, M., and A. Simonov (2013). “On the Real Effects of Bank Bailouts: Micro Evidence 
from Japan”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5, 135–67. 
 
Gourinchas, P-O., S. Kalemli-Ozcan, V. Penciakova, and N. Sander (2020), “Covid-19 and 
SME Failures”, NBER Working Paper No. 27877. 
 
Gouveia, A.F. and C. Osterhold (2018). “Fear the Walking Dead: Zombie Firms, Spillovers 
and Exit Barriers”, Banco de Portugal Working Paper 11. 
 
Granja, J., and C. Leuz (2019). “The Death of a Regulator: Strict Supervision, Bank Lending 
and Business Activity”, Working Paper. 
 
Gropp, R, T. Mosk, S. Ongena and C. Wix (2019a). “Bank Response to Higher Capital 
Requirements: Evidence from a Quasi-natural Experiment”, Review of Financial Studies, 32 
(1), 266-299. 
 
Gropp, R, T. Mosk, S. Ongena, I. Simac and C. Wix (2019b). “Arbitraging Regulatory Bank 
Capital: Evidence from a Quasi-Natural Experiment”, Working Paper. 
 
Haselmann, R., S. Singla, and V. Vig (2019). “Supra(National) Supervision”, Working Paper. 
 
Hirtle, B., A. Kovner, and M. Plosser (2019). “The Economics of Bank Supervision”, FRB of 
NY Staff Report No. 768. 
 
Hu, Y. and F. Varas (2021), “A Theory of Zombie Lending”, Journal of Finance, forthcoming. 
 
Ivanov, I., and J. Wang (2019). “The Impact of Bank Supervision on Corporate Credit”, 
Working Paper. 

 
33 
 
 
Jasova, M., C. Mendicino, and D. Supera (2021), “Policy Uncertainty, Lender of Last Resort 
and the Real Economy”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 118, 381-398. 
 
Khwaja, A. I., and A. Mian (2008). “Tracing the Impact of Bank Liquidity Shocks: Evidence 
from an Emerging Market”, American Economic Review, 98, 1413–1442. 
 
Kok, C. , C. Müller, S. Ongena and C. Pancaro, (2021). “The Disciplining Effect of 
Supervisory Scrutiny in the EU-wide Stress Test”, Working Paper. 
 
Laeven, L., G. Schepens and I. Schnabl (2020). “Zombification in Europe in Times of 
Pandemic”, available at https://voxeu.org/article/zombification-europe-times-pandemic 
 
Myers, S. (1977). “Determinants of Corporate Borrowings,” Journal of Financial Economics, 
5, 147–175. 
 
Peek, J., and E. S. Rosengren (2005). “Unnatural Selection: Perverse Incentives and the 
Allocation of Credit in Japan”, American Economic Review, 95, 1144–1166. 
 
Pierret, D., and R. Steri (2019). “Stressed Banks”, Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper No. 
17-58. 
 
Rezende, M., and J. J. Wu. (2014). “The Effects of Supervision on Bank Performance: 
Evidence from Discontinuous Examination Frequencies”, Working Paper. 
 
Schivardi, F., E. Sette, and G. Tabellini (2020). “Identifying the Real Effects of Zombie 
Lending”, Review of Corporate Finance Studies, 9(3), 569–592. 
 
Schneider, T. I., Strahan, P. E., and Yang, J. (2020). “Bank Stress Testing: Public Interest or 
Regulatory Capture?” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. w26887. 
 
Steinkamp, S., A. Tornell, and F. Westermann (2021). “Evergreening in the Euro Area: 
Evidence from Survey Data and a Conceptual Framework”, CESIfo Economic Studies, 1-34. 
 
Storz, M., M. Koetter, R. Setzer, and A. Westphal (2017). “Do We Want These Two to Tango? 
On Zombie Firms and Stressed Banks in Europe”, Working Paper. 
 
 

 
34 
 
Figure 1 – Zombie lending around the general inspection 
The figure uses quarterly data for the period 2012:Q2 to 2014:Q3. The shadowed region 
corresponds to the two inspection quarters (2013:Q2 and 2013:Q3). The graph plots period-by-
period coefficients and 95% confidence intervals that we obtain by replacing in equation (1) 
the variable Post in the triple interaction by a sequence of period dummies spanning all periods 
used in the estimation window. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-year-quarter level. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
35 
 
Figure 2 – Average revenue in the inspected and non-inspected sectors 
The figure plots average revenue in the two following sectors: Construction and real estate 
(inspected sector) and Accommodation and food services (non-inspected sector). Annual data 
are from Statistics Portugal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
36 
 
Figure 3 – Zombie lending around the Sectoral Inspection 
The figure uses quarterly data for the period 2011:Q3 to 2013:Q4. The shadowed region 
corresponds to the two inspection quarters (2012:Q3 and 2012:Q4). Each graph plots period-
by-period coefficients that we obtain by replacing in equation (1) the variable Postt in the triple 
interaction by a sequence of period dummies spanning all periods used in the estimation 
window. The top graph includes firms from the Construction and Real Estate sector, and the 
bottom graph includes firms from the Accommodation and Food Services sector. Standard 
errors are clustered at the bank-year-quarter level. 
 
Construction and Real Estate 
 
 
Accommodation and Food Services 
 

 
37 
 
Table 1 – Description of variables 
The table defines the main variables used in the paper. 
 
Variable 
Definition 
Main variables 
 
New loan 
= 1 if there is strictly positive loan growth from quarter t-1 to t 
within a firm-bank pair; = 0 otherwise. Loans include outstanding 
effective exposures and undrawn lines of credit, i.e., the total 
exposure of a bank to a firm. 
Zombie firm 
= 1 if the firm had negative equity in t-1; = 0 otherwise. 
Inspected bank 
= 1 if bank is subject to the mandatory onsite inspections 
Default 
= 1 if the firm is in default with the bank (over 90 days credit 
overdue); = 0 otherwise 
 
 
Other variables 
 
Duration 
Duration of relationship (in years). 
Main bank 
= 1 if bank has at least 75% of total loans 
Small firm 
= 1 if the firm employs < 50 workers and has annual turnover or 
assets < EUR 10 million; = 0 otherwise. 
Age 
Years since firm incorporation 
Employment 
Number of employees 
Leverage 
= Total liabilities / Assets. 
Profitability 
= Net income / Assets. 
 
 
 

 
38 
 
Table 2 – Descriptive statistics 
The statistics are based on quarterly data for the period 2011:Q3 to 2014:Q3 and cover the two 
bank inspections. The number of observations is 2,525,984. 
 
Variable 
Mean 
Std Dev 
P25 
Median 
P75 
Main variables 
 
 
 
 
 
New loan 
0.184 
0.387 
0 
0 
0 
Zombie firm 
0.146 
0.353 
0 
0 
0 
Inspected bank 
0.622 
0.485 
0 
1 
1 
Default 
0.105 
0.306 
0 
0 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other variables 
 
 
 
 
 
Duration 
5.99 
4.56 
2.17 
4.83 
9.33 
Main bank 
0.154 
0.361 
0 
0 
0 
Small firm 
0.905 
0.293 
1 
1 
1 
Employment 
27 
209 
3 
6 
16 
Leverage 
71.4 
32.2 
49.6 
69.5 
87.2 
Profitability 
-2.36 
11 
-3.57 
0.399 
2.65 
 
 
 

 
39 
 
Table 3 – General Inspection and zombie lending 
The regressions use quarterly data for the period 2012:Q2 to 2014:Q3 excluding the two 
inspection quarters (2013:Q2 and 2013:Q3). The sample includes firms from all sectors except 
Construction and Real Estate. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-year-quarter level. ***, 
**, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. 
 
Dependent variable: 
New loan from existing lender 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
 
 
 
 
Inspected × Zombie × Post 
-0.034*** 
-0.024* 
-0.028** 
-0.037*** 
 
[-2.787] 
[-1.912] 
[-2.191] 
[-5.216] 
Inspected × Zombie 
-0.007 
-0.020** 
-0.019** 
 
 
[-1.050] 
[-2.428] 
[-2.335] 
 
Inspected × Post 
0.026*** 
0.031*** 
 
 
 
[4.464] 
[5.338] 
 
 
Zombie × Post 
0.001 
 
 
 
 
[0.161] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Year-quarter FE 
Yes 
- 
- 
- 
Firm FE 
Yes 
- 
- 
- 
Firm×Year-quarter FE 
- 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Bank FE 
Yes 
Yes 
- 
- 
Bank×Year-quarter FE 
- 
- 
Yes 
Yes 
Firm×Bank FE 
- 
- 
- 
Yes 
Number of observations 
986,795 
986,795 
986,795 
986,795 
R-squared 
0.175 
0.412 
0.414 
0.584 
 

 
40 
 
Table 4 – Exploring firm heterogeneity 
The regressions use quarterly data for the period 2012:Q2 to 2014:Q3 excluding the two 
inspection quarters (2013:Q2 and 2013:Q3). The sample includes firms from all sectors except 
Construction and Real Estate. Young firms are 10 years or less of age, while Mature firms have 
more than 10 years. Firm age is defined as years since incorporation. Small (Large) firms have 
less (more) than 50 employees and an annual turnover or balance sheet total below (above) €10 
million. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-year-quarter level. ***, **, and * indicate 
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. 
 
Dependent variable 
New loan from existing lender 
Firm type: 
Young 
Mature 
 
Small 
Large 
 
(1) 
(2) 
 
(3) 
(4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inspected × Zombie × Post 
-0.033*** 
-0.037*** 
 
-0.038*** 
-0.106* 
 
[-3.218] 
[-4.200] 
 
[-5.309] 
[-1.775] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Year-quarter FE 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
Firm FE 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
Firm×Year-quarter FE 
Yes 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Yes 
Bank FE 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
Bank×Year-quarter FE 
Yes 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Yes 
Firm×Bank FE 
Yes 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Yes 
Number of observations 
296,361 
667,073 
 
860,791 
16,436 
R-squared 
0.634 
0.570 
 
0.599 
0.497 
 
 
 

 
41 
 
 
Table 5 – Inspected versus non-inspected banks 
 
PANEL A – Matching inspected and non-inspected banks on asset size 
 
The regressions use quarterly data for the period 2012:Q2 to 2014:Q3 excluding the two 
inspection quarters (2013:Q2 and 2013:Q3). The sample includes firms from all sectors except 
Construction and Real Estate. The sample is also restricted to the four smallest inspected banks 
and the four largest non-inspected banks. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-year-quarter 
level. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. 
 
Dependent variable: 
New loan from existing lender 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
 
 
 
 
Inspected × Zombie × Post 
-0.024** 
-0.027 
-0.030* 
-0.049*** 
 
[-2.407] 
[-1.566] 
[-1.759] 
[-2.919] 
Inspected × Zombie 
0.014** 
0.004 
0.005 
 
 
[2.097] 
[0.382] 
[0.438] 
 
Inspected × Post 
0.035*** 
0.036*** 
 
 
 
[6.917] 
[4.573] 
 
 
Zombie × Post 
-0.000 
 
 
 
 
[-0.027] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Year-quarter FE 
Yes 
- 
- 
- 
Firm FE 
Yes 
- 
- 
- 
Firm×Year-quarter FE 
- 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Bank FE 
Yes 
Yes 
- 
- 
Bank×Year-quarter FE 
- 
- 
Yes 
Yes 
Firm×Bank FE 
- 
- 
- 
Yes 
Number of observations 
276,746 
276,746 
276,746 
276,746 
R-squared 
0.296 
0.514 
0.516 
0.666 
 
 
 

 
42 
 
 
PANEL B – Matching inspected and non-inspected banks on capital ratio 
 
The regressions use quarterly data for the period 2012:Q2 to 2014:Q3 excluding the two 
inspection quarters (2013:Q2 and 2013:Q3). The sample includes firms from all sectors except 
Construction and Real Estate. The sample includes all eight inspected banks plus eight non-
inspected banks with similar capital ratio (measured as of 2010:Q4) using a one-to-one 
matching procedure. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-year-quarter level. ***, **, and 
* indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. 
 
Dependent variable: 
New loan from existing lender 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
 
 
 
 
Inspected × Zombie × Post 
-0.063*** 
-0.040*** 
-0.043*** 
-0.051*** 
 
[-9.488] 
[-3.757] 
[-4.097] 
[-4.610] 
Inspected × Zombie 
0.005 
-0.027*** 
-0.026*** 
 
 
[1.224] 
[-3.935] 
[-3.789] 
 
Inspected × Post 
0.031*** 
0.039*** 
 
 
 
[8.766] 
[7.422] 
 
 
Zombie × Post 
0.027*** 
 
 
 
 
[5.473] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Year-quarter FE 
Yes 
- 
- 
- 
Firm FE 
Yes 
- 
- 
- 
Firm×Year-quarter FE 
- 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Bank FE 
Yes 
Yes 
- 
- 
Bank×Year-quarter FE 
- 
- 
Yes 
Yes 
Firm×Bank FE 
- 
- 
- 
Yes 
Number of observations 
743,864 
743,864 
743,864 
743,864 
R-squared 
0.192 
0.442 
0.443 
0.599 
 
 
 

 
43 
 
 
Table 6 – Classification of zombie firms 
 
PANEL A – Alternative definitions of zombie firms 
 
The regressions use quarterly data for the period 2012:Q2 to 2014:Q3 excluding the two 
inspection quarters (2013:Q2 and 2013:Q3). The sample includes firms from all sectors 
except Construction and Real Estate. A firm with low interest coverage is in the first 
quartile of the distribution of interest coverage, computed as net profits over interest 
expenses, during three consecutive years. A firm with a high probability of default is in 
the top quartile of the previous year’s distribution of default probabilities, estimated using 
Banco de Portugal’s internal credit risk model (see Antunes et al. (2016)). A firm has 
subsidized credit if in a given year: (i) it has an estimated probability of default in the top 
quartile of the previous year’s distribution, and (ii) the actual interest expenses paid by 
the firm are below the interest expenses paid by the most creditworthy firms in the sample 
(defined as those with probability of default in the bottom quartile). Standard errors are 
clustered at the bank-year-quarter level. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 
5%, and 10% levels, respectively. 
 
Dependent variable: 
New loan from existing lender 
Zombie measure: 
2 years of 
negative 
equity 
Low 
interest 
coverage 
 (3 years) 
High 
probability 
of default 
Subsidized 
credit 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
 
 
 
 
Inspected × Zombie × 
Post 
-0.028*** 
-0.032*** 
-0.031*** 
-0.018* 
 
[-3.918] 
[-4.223] 
[-4.870] 
[-1.886] 
 
 
 
 
 
Year-quarter FE 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Firm FE 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Firm×Year-quarter FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Bank FE 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Bank×Year-quarter FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Firm×Bank FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Number of observations 
759,498 
985,055 
985,055 
985,055 
R-squared 
0.594 
0.581 
0.582 
0.581 
 
 
 
 

 
44 
 
 
 
 
Panel B – Operational versus financial zombies 
 
The regressions use quarterly data for the period 2012:Q2 to 2014:Q3 excluding the two 
inspection quarters (2013:Q2 and 2013:Q3). The sample includes firms from all sectors 
except Construction and Real Estate. Column 1 replicates column 4 of Table 4. 
Operational zombie is a firm that fell into negative equity in year t-1 due to a decrease in 
assets between t-2 and t-1 (and that did not experience an increase in liabilities). Financial 
zombie is a firm that fell into negative equity in year t-1 due to an increase in liabilities 
between t-2 and t-1 (and that did not experience a decrease in assets). Firms in the last 
column experienced both a decrease in assets and an increase in liabilities in the year they 
became zombies. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-year-quarter level. ***, **, 
and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. 
 
Dependent variable: 
New loan from existing lender 
Type of zombie: 
Any 
Operational 
Financial 
Operational 
& Financial 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
 
 
 
 
Inspected × Zombie × 
Post 
-0.037*** 
-0.024** 
-0.045*** 
-0.037*** 
 
[-5.216] 
[-2.490] 
[-3.706] 
[-3.853] 
 
 
 
 
 
Year-quarter FE 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Firm FE 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Firm×Year-quarter FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Bank FE 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Bank×Year-quarter FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Firm×Bank FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Number of observations 
965,640 
965,640 
965,640 
965,640 
R-squared 
0.584 
0.580 
0.580 
0.580 
 
 
 

 
45 
 
 
Table 7 – Sectoral Inspection and zombie lending in the inspected sectors 
The regressions use quarterly data for the period 2011:Q3 to 2013:Q4 excluding the two 
inspection quarters (2012:Q3 and 2012:Q4). The sample includes only firms from the 
Construction and Real Estate sector. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-year-quarter 
level. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. 
 
Dependent variable: 
New loan from existing lender 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
 
 
 
 
Inspected × Zombie × 
Post 
-0.051*** 
-0.028** 
-0.030** 
-0.044*** 
 
[-4.222] 
[-2.159] 
[-2.261] 
[-3.320] 
Inspected × Zombie 
0.006 
-0.023** 
-0.021** 
 
 
[0.918] 
[-2.540] 
[-2.345] 
 
Inspected × Post 
0.001 
-0.002 
 
 
 
[0.095] 
[-0.193] 
 
 
Zombie × Post 
0.027*** 
 
 
 
 
[3.646] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Year-quarter FE 
Yes 
- 
- 
- 
Firm FE 
Yes 
- 
- 
- 
Firm×Year-quarter FE 
- 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Bank FE 
Yes 
Yes 
- 
- 
Bank×Year-quarter FE 
- 
- 
Yes 
Yes 
Firm×Bank FE 
- 
- 
- 
Yes 
Number of observations 
220,315 
220,315 
220,315 
220,315 
R-squared 
0.203 
0.437 
0.444 
0.622 
 
 
 

 
46 
 
 
Table 8 – Sectoral Inspection and zombie lending in non-inspected sectors 
The regressions use quarterly data for the period 2011:Q3 to 2013:Q4 excluding the two 
inspection quarters (2012:Q3 and 2012:Q4). The sample includes only firms from the 
Accommodation and Food Services sector. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-year-
quarter level. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, 
respectively. 
 
Dependent variable: 
New loan from existing lender 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
 
 
 
 
Inspected × Zombie × 
Post 
0.001 
-0.005 
-0.007 
-0.008 
 
[0.036] 
[-0.271] 
[-0.376] 
[-0.454] 
Inspected × Zombie 
-0.011 
-0.011 
-0.012 
 
 
[-1.097] 
[-0.973] 
[-1.021] 
 
Inspected × Post 
0.001 
0.012 
 
 
 
[0.085] 
[1.079] 
 
 
Zombie × Post 
-0.002 
 
 
 
 
[-0.201] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Year-quarter FE 
Yes 
- 
- 
- 
Firm FE 
Yes 
- 
- 
- 
Firm×Year-quarter FE 
- 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Bank FE 
Yes 
Yes 
- 
- 
Bank×Year-quarter FE 
- 
- 
Yes 
Yes 
Firm×Bank FE 
- 
- 
- 
Yes 
Number of observations 
70,524 
70,524 
70,524 
70,524 
R-squared 
0.197 
0.453 
0.464 
0.647 
 
 
 

 
47 
 
 
Table 9 – Bank inspections and firm default 
The regressions in columns (1) and (2) use quarterly data for the period 2012:Q2 to 
2014:Q3 excluding the two inspection quarters (2013:Q2 and 2013:Q3), and the 
estimation sample includes firms from all sectors except Construction and Real Estate. 
The regressions in columns (3) and (4) use quarterly data for the period 2011:Q3 to 
2013:Q4 excluding the two inspection quarters (2012:Q3 and 2012:Q4), and the 
estimation sample includes only firms from the Construction and Real Estate sector. 
Standard errors are clustered at the bank-year-quarter level. ***, **, and * indicate 
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. 
 
Dependent variable: 
Firm defaults on current lender 
Inspection: 
General 
 
Sectoral 
 
(1) 
(2) 
 
(3) 
(4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inspected × Post 
0.002 
 
 
0.009* 
 
 
[1.151] 
 
 
[1.729] 
 
Inspected × Zombie × Post 
 
0.009* 
 
 
0.016* 
 
 
[1.936] 
 
 
[1.662] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Year-quarter FE 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
Firm FE 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
Firm×Year-quarter FE 
Yes 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Yes 
Bank FE 
Yes 
- 
 
Yes 
- 
Bank×Year-quarter FE 
- 
Yes 
 
- 
Yes 
Firm×Bank FE 
- 
Yes 
 
- 
Yes 
Number of observations 
986,960 
986,960 
 
260,479 
260,479 
R-squared 
0.680 
0.864 
 
0.690 
0.860 
 
 
 

 
48 
 
 
 
Table 10 – Macro effects of the General Inspection 
The unit of analysis is the two-digit industry (NACE) code. All industries are included 
except Construction and Real Estate. For each dependent variable we computed within-
industry changes from 2012 (the year before the inspection) to 2014 (the year after the 
inspection). The dependent variable in column (1) is the number of firms created in 2014 
divided by the number of firms operating in the same sector in 2012. The dependent 
variables in columns (2) and (3) are respectively the within-sector relative changes 
between 2012 and 2014 in average labor and capital productivity. The productivity 
measures equal the gross value added divided by either the number of employees or 
capital stock in the same sector. Industry exposure equals the fraction of outstanding loans 
by inspected banks to firms in a given sector in 2012 times the fraction of firms with 
negative equity in the same sector and year. The variable is standardized with a standard 
deviation of one. The regressions are weighted by the number of firms in the industry in 
2012. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. 
 
 
Firm creation 
 
Productivity 
Dependent variable: 
Entry rate 
 
Labor 
Capital 
 
(1) 
 
(2) 
(3) 
 
 
 
 
 
Industry exposure 
0.002* 
 
0.023** 
0.159* 
 
[1.670] 
 
[2.148] 
[1.917] 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of observations 
79 
 
79 
79 
R-squared 
0.035 
 
0.057 
0.046