TITLE: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2020.3677
---

TSpace Research Repository - tspace.library.utoronto.ca 
 
 
Revenue Management with Repeated 
Customer Interactions 
 
Andre P. Calmon, Florin D. Ciocan, Gonzalo Romero 
 
 
Version Post-print/Accepted Manuscript 
 
 
Citation 
(published version) 
Calmon, A. P., Ciocan, F. D., & Romero, G. (2020). Revenue 
management with repeated customer interactions. Management Science. 
https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2020.3677 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to cite TSpace items 
Always cite the published version, so the author(s) will receive recognition through services that track 
citation counts, e.g. Scopus. If you need to cite the page number of the author manuscript from TSpace 
because you cannot access the published version, then cite the TSpace version in addition to the published 
version using the permanent URI (handle) found on the record page. 
 
 
 
This article was made openly accessible by U of T Faculty. 
Please tell us how this access benefits you. Your story matters. 

Revenue Management with
Repeated Customer Interactions
Andre P. Calmon
Technology and Operations Management, INSEAD, Fontainebleau, France, andre.calmon@insead.edu
Florin D. Ciocan
Technology and Operations Management, INSEAD, Fontainebleau, France, ﬂorin.ciocan@insead.edu
Gonzalo Romero
Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada, gonzalo.romero@rotman.utoronto.ca
Motivated by online advertising, we model and analyze a revenue management problem where a platform
interacts with a set of customers over a number of periods. Unlike traditional network revenue management,
which treats the interaction between platform and customers as one-shot, we consider stateful customers
who can dynamically change their goodwill towards the platform depending on the quality of their past
interactions. Customer goodwill further determines the amount of budget that they allocate to the platform
in the future. These dynamics create a trade-oﬀbetween the platform myopically maximizing short-term
revenues, versus maximizing the long-term goodwill of its customers to collect higher future revenues. We
identify a set of natural conditions under which myopic policies that ignore the budget dynamics are either
optimal or admit parametric guarantees; such simple policies are particularly desirable since they do not
require the platform to learn the parameters of each customer dynamic and only rely on data that is readily
available to the platform. We also show that, if these conditions do not hold, myopic and ﬁnite look-ahead
policies can perform arbitrarily poorly in this repeated setting. From an optimization perspective, this is
one of a few instances where myopic policies are optimal or have parametric performance guarantees for a
dynamic program with non-convex dynamics. We extend our model to the cases where supply varies over
time and where customers may not interact with the platform in every period.
Key words : Revenue management, Analysis of algorithms, Dynamic Programming.
1.
Introduction
In many revenue management domains, including online advertising, on-demand services, hospi-
tality and airlines, a platform sells a limited volume of products to a portfolio of customers. The
associated pricing and allocation decisions can be broadly grouped under the umbrella term net-
work revenue management (NRM). NRM has been given signiﬁcant attention in the operations
literature (see Talluri and Van Ryzin 2005, Phillips 2005, Gallego and Topaloglu 2019, for surveys
of the ﬁeld) and deployed successfully in a wide range of commercial pricing and yield management
systems.
Much of the NRM related research assumes that there is a single, short interval in which cus-
tomers interact with the platform to potentially purchase a product. Hence, the NRM problem is
1

2
Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
formulated as a one-shot resource allocation problem. While this approach is well-understood and
highly tractable, the one-shot treatment of the underlying system is not consistent with the concept
of customer lifetime value. The idea of customer lifetime value has come to prevail in marketing
(Gupta et al. 2006, Gupta and Lehmann 2008, Reinartz and Venkatesan 2008), where the key goal
is to optimize decisions with respect to the aggregate value of the customer over his/her entire
lifetime rather than during a one-shot interaction.
The customer lifetime value is relevant to numerous revenue management applications where
customer interactions occur repeatedly over a long period of time, where the aggregate value of
a proﬁtable customer might dwarf the revenues that can be derived from a single interaction
(providing the platform is able to retain its proﬁtable customers). Thus, a decision that is seemingly
optimal over the current period could in fact decrease customer goodwill towards the platform and
reduce the value of their future business with the platform; such a decision could be highly sub-
optimal over the entire customer’s lifetime. At the same time, new technologies enable platforms
to track customer trajectories and gather data on how goodwill is aﬀected by past allocation
decisions; this has made it practically feasible to incorporate such goodwill eﬀects into a revenue
management system. Our work can thus be seen as an attempt to model and then operationalize
customer lifetime value considerations.
At an operational level, customer goodwill is the lever through which customer lifetime value can
be managed. The customer’s goodwill drives future interactions between customer and platform
in addition to being dependent on their past history of interactions. We model goodwill as a
state that evolves dynamically over time, whereby repeated interactions between platform and
customers become a sequence of distinct network revenue management problems, coupled by this
dynamic state variable. We call this the repeated network revenue management (RNRM) problem,
as opposed to the classic one-shot problem.
Repeated RM in online advertising. Although our model is generic, our structural assumptions
are grounded in the online advertising domain. The customers are advertisers who run campaigns
via online advertising platforms. A platform can repeatedly interact with a given customer over
hundreds of diﬀerent campaign cycles. The corresponding RNRM problem evolves in discrete time.
There are T periods over which the platform interacts with a ﬁxed pool of heterogeneous customers
indexed by j. At the start of each period, the platform has a limited but known supply of heteroge-
neous products (impressions), indexed by i, to be allocated to the customers. Each customer j has
a valuation vij and there is a pre-speciﬁed price pij for each product i that can be allocated to cus-
tomer j. At the start of a single period t, each customer decides the budget bj,t they are willing to
spend on their period t campaign. Subsequently, the platform decides how to allocate products to

Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
3
customers taking into account their budget constraints. In the next period, the campaign budgets
are revised and the process repeats with a renewed supply of products.
A customer’s state is speciﬁed by the budget bj,t. In online advertising, where it is relatively
frictionless for customers to switch between competing advertising platforms depending on their
expectations of campaign fulﬁllment quality, the budget they commit to an advertising campaign
serves as a proxy for their goodwill towards any speciﬁc platform. There is anecdotal evidence that
advertisers change their budgets from one campaign to another as a function of the quality of their
past experiences with the platform (Wilkens et al. 2017). Mathematically, we assume that customers
update their budgets over time according to a deterministic state update function which increases
or decreases the budget for the next period depending on the quality of the impression allocation
received in the last campaign period. We denote the quality of the allocation that customer j
receives in time t by qj,t, which we formally deﬁne in Section 3. Informally, the budget of customer
j at time t + 1 is some function
bj,t+1 = φj(bj,t,qj,t).
Given the budget dynamics speciﬁed by {φj}1≤j≤m, the task is to ﬁnd a sequence of allocations
that maximizes the total platform revenues over T periods.
Quantifying customer goodwill eﬀects on the platform’s bottom-line adds considerable complex-
ity to the underlying network revenue management problem:
• Firstly, while one-shot network revenue management is very well understood and oﬀers several
prescriptions and policies, such as Talluri and Van Ryzin (1998), that are both theoretically
near-optimal and practically tractable, one would not expect these to remain sound in a multi-
period setting. In particular, when customer goodwill eﬀects are large, such myopic policies
which are inherently short-term looking, have the potential to leave signiﬁcant revenue on the
table in the aggregate.
• At the same time, more sophisticated policies aimed at capturing these eﬀects could be imprac-
tical to implement, or even compute. One concern is the amount of customer information that
more sophisticated policies would require, such as the shape of individual customer goodwill
dynamics, or customer valuation information. To obtain this would involve either designing
incentive-compatible mechanisms to solicit the information from customers themselves, or a
procedure to estimate them from previously collected data at the customer level. While tech-
nologies such as web browser cookies allow platforms to match the identity of a customer over
many time-diﬀerentiated interactions, this approach brings its own diﬃculties, including the
cost of tracking individual customers, and the increasing governmental scrutiny of what data
is collected and how it is used. 1
1 An example of this are the European Union’s recent General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), governing the
usage of algorithms that employ customer-level data.

4
Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
In light of these challenges, the central issue we address is how to design policies for the RNRM prob-
lem that (i) admit revenue performance guarantees, and (ii) are similar, from an implementability
standpoint, to existing one-shot network revenue management policies.
1.1.
Main Contributions
For the model broadly described above, our paper makes the following contributions:
Parametrized performance guarantees for the myopic policy. By ‘myopic’ we mean a policy
which ignores customer dynamics and solves each individual NRM problem separately and without
regard to its impact towards future periods (in other words, it treats the problem as one-shot). As
alluded to in the above, such policies are desirable in terms of tractability and simplicity.
We identify suﬃcient regularity conditions on the RNRM problem structure such that the myopic
policy is a parametric approximation of the optimum. Intuitively, the necessary conditions require
similarity in the ‘bang-per-buck’ across all the products that a given customer desires: for the goods
valued by customer j, all (vij −pij)/pij = vij/pij −1 bang-per-buck ratios lie within a constant
range that is speciﬁc to that customer j. More precisely, there exists a constant 0 ≤γ < 1 such that
min
i
vij
pij

−1 ≥(1 −γ) ·

max
i
vij
pij

−1

,
where the minimum is taken over i such that vij > 0. In this case, we show a tight bound which
guarantees that the myopic policy garners at least a (1−γ) fraction of what the optimal policy can
achieve, regardless of the horizon length, number of products and customers, etc. We emphasize
that the platform does not need to know the exact ratio vij/pij for all items and customers for our
result to hold. Also, through numerical experiments, we show that the performance of the myopic
policy is often signiﬁcantly higher than the (1 −γ) bound.
Suﬃcient conditions for the optimality of the myopic policy. We show that if γ = 0, i.e. if
the bang-per-buck ratios are a constant speciﬁc to each customer, then our results imply that the
myopic policy is guaranteed to be optimal for the RNRM problem. While this assumption restricts
the generality of our model, it is consistent with contracts in the online advertising industry where
advertisers treat a certain population with speciﬁc features as fully homogeneous. Moreover, these
results hold for heterogeneous budget updates chosen from a general class of functions. For example,
one customer may be very sensitive to the service quality received, while another could be entirely
insensitive to it.
We emphasize that both of these results are surprising, since they imply that the platform can
ignore goodwill eﬀects and apply the same prescriptions suggested by one-shot network revenue
management models with a limited or no loss of optimality.
From an optimization perspective, our results on the optimality or parametric performance
guarantees for the myopic policy contribute to the dynamic optimization literature and are, to the

Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
5
best of our knowledge, one of the few instances where one can prove such results for a dynamic
program with non-convex dynamics. The technical insight that underlies our result is that, when our
assumptions hold, the problem satisﬁes what one could call a “dynamic complementary slackness”
property (cf. Proposition 4).
Hardness results. In contrast, we show that if we remove all the regularity assumptions on bang-
per-buck ratios, then both the myopic as well as any ﬁnite look-ahead heuristics can accrue an
arbitrary loss of performance with respect to the optimal policy in the RNRM problem. To prove
this we develop a family of problem instances for which we can construct feasible policies which
garner arbitrarily more revenues than myopic or look-ahead, while at the same time being lower
bounds for the true optimum. These lower bound policies accrue revenues in a highly non-smooth
fashion, purposefully depleting customer budgets over many periods only to set themselves up for
a one-time, large increase in budgets (and accordingly, revenues) at the end of the time horizon.
Our bang-per-buck regularity conditions stated above, which allow performance guarantees for the
myopic policy, can be interpreted as ensuring that the per-period revenue function remains smooth
enough over the course of the time horizon to invalidate this type of behavior.
Although, in the worst case, look-ahead policies can perform as poorly as myopic, their ability
to account for customer dynamics allows them to outperform myopic on some problem instances,
though at the cost of additional informational and computational burdens.
Existence of eﬃcient policies that use limited customer data. A crucial advantage of the
myopic policy is practicality. Its implementation only requires knowledge of the current budget con-
ﬁguration bt, but not of the budget update functions φj(·,·) nor of the customer valuation vectors
vj. Consequently, even though the underlying customer-level dynamics can be complicated and
heterogeneous, the algorithm itself is completely oblivious to their speciﬁcation. Since, in practice,
customer budget update functions and valuations would likely be estimated starting from historical
data on customer attributes and past interactions, the simplicity of the myopic policy indirectly
reduces the platform’s need to track customer-level data.2 In contrast, more sophisticated poli-
cies which track customer goodwill dynamics (for example, look-ahead policies) would presumably
require estimation from data which may be diﬃcult for the platform to acquire.
Extensions to handle uncertainty. We also provide lower bounds on the myopic policy for
two important extensions of our model: (a) uncertain customer arrivals, where customers may not
interact with the platform in some time periods and (b) uncertain supply, where the available
supply of goods may vary from one time period to the next.
2 We observe that while running our myopic policy does not require such data, estimating the parametric lower bound
given by γ does require knowledge of valuations.

6
Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
More generally, our model asks whether having more granular data on customer behavior, such
as the history of customer interactions with the platform and information on how customers value
these interactions, can lead to better decision-making. We identify conditions such that using
policies which are completely agnostic to this ﬁner grained data induces a limited loss from the
perspective of the platform’s long-term revenues. Moreover, we also show that in the absence of
these conditions such policies can perform arbitrarily badly. We believe that the question of whether
such simple and partially data-agnostic policies can perform well for complex systems is of broad
interest to the operations management literature and that our work will inspire additional research
on this topic.
2.
Literature Review
Our work has links to several existing streams of literature. On the one hand, our problem is
solvable by dynamic programming (DP), a method that has received intense attention in recent
decades. On the other hand, our problem is a network revenue management or resource allocation
problem familiar to the operations management community. Lastly, there is a burgeoning literature
on customer behavior in systems where there are repeated interactions. Our literature review is
therefore organized around these three streams.
Dynamic programming. Our problem is formulated as a shortest path dynamic program and
could, in principle, be solved via dynamic programming techniques. Solving DPs via the standard
Bellman recursion suﬀers from the well-known “curse of dimensionality”, hence research on this
topic focuses on either ﬁnding heuristics to arrive at good approximations of optimal policies, or
on identifying certain structural properties that guarantee simple policies perform well.
Good heuristics for solving such problems are often designed via approximate dynamic program-
ming (ADP), where the general approach is to construct an approximation architecture to the
value function that is amenable to eﬃcient computation. Among work on ADP methods, we point
the reader to surveys by Bertsekas (1995) and Powell (2007), as well as to some recent papers on
linear-optimization-based approaches to ADP, such as De Farias and Van Roy (2003, 2004), Desai
et al. (2012). A particular sub-stream in the ADP literature is the idea of a weakly-coupled dynamic
program, a special class of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) which can be viewed as a collection
of “easy” sub-problems linked together by a constraint on a single state variable. Hawkins (2003)
and Adelman and Mersereau (2008) provide ADP-based heuristics for such problems. Bertsimas
and Miˇsi´c (2016) explore this sub-problem structure but use a ﬂuid based heuristic. Our problem
has a similar weakly-coupled structure in the sense that each period is an individual sub-problem
and the various periods are linked together by the vector of customer goodwills. However, the

Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
7
heuristics in this literature stream, such as in Adelman and Mersereau (2008), do not yield per-
formance guarantees or computationally tractable approaches for our speciﬁc problem.3 Instead,
we focus on simple policies which can be shown to have guaranteed performance for our particular
problem structure.
An alternative approach to solving DPs is to impose certain structural assumptions that guar-
antee the optimality of simple policies as hinted at above. Denardo and Rothblum (1983) and
Sobel (1990a,b) examine DPs with aﬃne structure and provide conditions for the optimality of
myopic policies. More recently, Ning and Sobel (2018) characterize the class of decomposable aﬃne
MDPs. Similar to our model, these MDPs have continuous multidimensional endogenous states
and actions. Assuming polyhedral properties of the decomposed sets of feasible actions and aﬃne
dynamics and rewards, Ning and Sobel (2018) show that decomposable aﬃne MDPs have an aﬃne
value function and an extremal optimal policy, determined by solving a system of auxiliary equa-
tions. In contrast, the state transition in our model evolves in non-linear, non-convex fashion. To
the best of our knowledge, ours are the ﬁrst such results for non-linear systems.
Revenue management and online resource allocation. The classical literature on NRM and
resource allocation problems considers a setting in which a platform optimizes the allocation of
a ﬁnite inventory of resources to a pool of heterogeneous buyers. However, the bulk of this work
models a stateless, one-shot interaction between the platform and the buyers, while we consider
dynamic customers who can change their behavior from one period to the next. Another important
diﬀerence is that when the supply of products to be allocated over the period is known ahead of
time (or in other words, deterministic), the one-shot NRM problem can be solved to optimality
via an integer program, or even a linear program, under the assumption that customer budgets
are large compared to unit prices. Thus, most of the work within this research stream has focused
on the online case, when the supply of products evolves in an uncertain fashion and the decision
maker must sequentially make irrevocable allocation decisions as the products arrive. In contrast,
our model focuses on the deterministic case, which becomes non-trivial to solve because of the
statefulness of the customers.
For network revenue management, the ﬂuid approximations of Gallego and van Ryzin (1997)
and Talluri and Van Ryzin (1998) are of particular note. In the case where products arrive as a
point process with known rates, these yield tractable “bid-price” control policies based on linear
programming. Within this stream, Reiman and Wang (2008) and Jasin and Kumar (2012) pro-
vide more reﬁned approximations and heuristics. Several alternative supply uncertainty models
3 For example, the Lagrangian relaxation developed in Adelman and Mersereau (2008) can be shown to not be tight
unless one uses time dependent dual variables.

8
Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
which ﬂuid approximations cannot handle have been considered. Such examples include adversarial
arrivals (Karp et al. 1990, Mehta et al. 2005, Golrezaei et al. 2014), random order arrivals (Devanur
and Hayes 2009, Agrawal and Devanur 2015) and non-stationary ﬂuid arrivals (Ciocan and Farias
2012, Bateni et al. 2016). We emphasize Bateni et al. (2016), who focus on optimizing allocation
fairness instead of platform revenues. While their problem is diﬀerent from ours, the motivation
is similar: if the interaction with customers is repeated, guaranteeing them fairness beneﬁts the
platform in the long run.
In the broader revenue management literature, the last decade has brought forth some signiﬁcant
results on pricing in the presence of strategic customers. In this type of work, one considers agents
who may strategize when to purchase a product in anticipation of future discounts oﬀered by the
seller, as in Aviv and Pazgal (2008), Liu (2007), Borgs et al. (2014), Besbes and Lobel (2015),
Chen and Farias (2015), Lobel et al. (2015). While also an attempt to understand how platform
allocation and pricing policies aﬀect customer behavior, this line of work focuses on how customers
shift a purchase temporally; we do not model such eﬀects and instead model how the platform can
alter the level of customer goodwill and, ultimately, the long term proﬁts derived from customers.
Recently, Agrawal et al. (2018) investigate mechanisms for repeated auctions when an auctioneer
interacts with a buyer of limited rationality, such as a ﬁnite look-ahead buyer; while elegant, their
results only apply to a single buyer and unit auctions. Lastly, Chawla et al. (2016) consider a pricing
problem where a customer repeatedly pays for using a good, gradually learning its valuation while
reacting myopically to prices; they provide guarantees for simple “pay-per-play” mechanisms.
Customer behavior and operations interface. The lifetime value of a customer is a key met-
ric evaluating the impact of a customer acquisition or incentive plan. As platform-based models
increasingly permeate traditional service industries, there has been an interest among both prac-
titioners and academics to incorporate this metric into a company’s day-to-day operations.
A stream of papers closely related to ours focus on customers who change their goodwill towards
a platform over time through an exponentially smoothed update function that weighs current and
past experiences. Aﬂaki and Popescu (2014) examine a stylized model of a service provider inter-
acting with independent customers who remember the quality of past service, and whose retention
probability depends on the history of said service, and establish structural properties of the optimal
service rate. Recently, Kanoria et al. (2018) examine a related model where a ﬁrm chooses how to
exercise two diﬀerent quality service modes to minimize customer churn. Adelman and Mersereau
(2013) model a supplier who must allocate a ﬁnite capacity of a single type of product to multiple
customers, whose demand is modulated by past ﬁll rates; they provide ADP-based heuristics for
the supplier’s allocation policy. Technically, our paper diﬀers from these in that we consider an

Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
9
allocation problem where both customers and products are heterogeneous, which makes character-
izing the optimal policy substantially harder; also, we consider a completely deterministic model
and make no large market assumptions as in classical ﬂuid approximations where uncertainty can
help the analysis by essentially smoothing the problem. Additionally, Adelman and Mersereau
(2013) consider the long-run average criterion in their objective function, while we explicitly focus
on maximizing the platform’s revenue in a ﬁnite horizon problem,4 allowing us to model transient
eﬀects rather than just steady state behavior of the system. Lastly, L’Ecuyer et al. (2017) consider
an sponsored search platform which optimizes search result rankings to trade-oﬀbetween extract-
ing instantaneous revenues from its users, and improving their user experience to improve future
search engine traﬃc.
There are other interesting streams of work at the behavioral and operations interface, such as
on loyalty programs and how they can be integrated into more traditional revenue management
frameworks, see Chun et al. (2017), Chun and Ovchinnikov (2018), as well as work on pricing with
reference eﬀects, where customers interacting with a seller repeatedly exhibit anchoring behavior
which depends on past prices in a similar manner to our own budget dynamics, such as in Popescu
and Wu (2007), Nasiry and Popescu (2011), and Hu et al. (2016). The idea of repeated customer
interaction has also been explored in assortment selection: Ferreira and Goh (2018) show that
selectively revealing a selling season’s product assortment can extract more customer purchases.
3.
Model
We consider a discrete time model which carries over T distinct periods. The system is endowed
with a persistent population of m heterogeneous customers. These customers interact with the
same platform at every period t. In each period, the platform has a supply of n diﬀerent product
types to allocate to the pool of customers. We assume this supply is replenished at the start of
each period to some deterministic level si for product i.
Valuations and prices. Customer j has a constant valuation vij for one unit of a product of
type i, and we denote by vj customer j’s vector of valuations for products 1 ≤i ≤n. The platform
allocates product type i to customer j at a time-invariant unit price pij; we denote by pj the vector
of prices customer j pays per unit of products 1 ≤i ≤n. We assume that vij ≥pij for every i and
j.
Customer state. At period t, each customer j is endowed with a budget bj,t to purchase products
in that period. To simplify the exposition, we assume bj,t ∈[0,1] for each customer j and period t.
We further denote by bt the vector of customer budgets at period t.
4 Our results can be naturally extended to the inﬁnite horizon discounted criterion.

10
Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
Control. At period t, the platform chooses the allocation xt ∈[0,s1]m × ... × [0,sn]m of products
to customers from the feasible set X(bt):
n
X
i=1
pijxij,t ≤bj,t,
∀1 ≤j ≤m
(1)
m
X
j=1
xij,t ≤si,
∀1 ≤i ≤n.
(2)
xij,t ≥0,
∀1 ≤i ≤n,1 ≤j ≤m.
We deﬁne the vector xj,t = (x1j,t,...,xnj,t) to refer to the vector of allocations of products to
customer j in period t, and the feasible set Xj(bj,t) to refer to the projection of X(bt) to customer j’s
allocations. Note that we allow fractional allocations of products. In applications such as online ad
allocation where the volume of products transacted is large, it could be argued that the optimality
gap versus the best integral solution is small. Such an assumption allows us to simplify the problem
without losing any essential insights.
Platform revenues and customer utilities. In period t and for a feasible allocation xt, the
platform garners revenues
R(xt) =
n
X
i=1
m
X
j=1
pijxij,t.
We assume that customer j’s utility function is linear in her allocation. Speciﬁcally,
Uj(bj,t,xj,t) =
(Pn
i=1(vij −pij)xij,t
if xj,t ∈Xj(bj,t)
0
if xj,t /∈Xj(bj,t),
Additionally, for a given budget bj,t, we denote the maximum possible utility that customer j could
attain by
U ∗
j (bj,t) =
max
yt∈Xj(bj,t)Uj(bj,t,yt).
We emphasize that if y∗
t is an optimal solution to this problem, i.e. it is feasible and attains
U ∗
j (bj,t), then P
i pijy∗
i,t = min(bj,t,Pn
i=1 pijsi). Namely, when computing the maximum possible
utility for customer j in period t, either the budget constraint becomes tight or all the supply that
the customer is interested in is exhausted.
Budget state dynamics. Our model of budget dynamics formalizes the concept of customer
goodwill which we introduced in Section 1. We allow budgets to evolve over time as a deterministic
process {bt}1≤t≤T speciﬁed by budget update functions φj(·,·) which are potentially heterogeneous
across customers. We allow for a broad range of memoryless functions φj(·,·) that depend on (i)
customer j’s current budget and (ii) the “service quality” provided to customer j in the current
period. We assume that the latter is a function of that customer’s allocation in the current period

Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
11
xj,t and her available budget bj,t. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne the service quality provided to customer j
in period t as
qj(bj,t,xj,t) ≜



Uj(bj,t,xj,t)
U ∗
j (bj,t)
,
if bj,t > 0
1,
if bj,t = 0.
(3)
Intuitively, qj(bj,t,xj,t) is the ratio of the utility customer j garnered from her allocation xj,t and
the maximum utility she could have garnered at state bj,t, equal to U ∗
j (bj,t). Clearly, the deﬁnition
implies that the range of qj(·,·) is the interval [0,1] for any xj,t ∈Xj(bj,t).
We deﬁne the service quality qj to be 1 when the budget level is 0; this is a corner case that can
be avoided by having bj,t ∈[bmin
j
,bmax
j
] for each customer j and period t, where bmin
j
> 0. Although
this results in a more general formulation, it also requires additional notation to project the budget
back and forth between [bmin
j
,bmax
j
] and [0,1]. For the sake of clarity, we assume that bj,t ∈[0,1] for
each customer j and period t, although our results extend to this more general case.
As a result, the domain and range of the budget update function φj (bj,t,qj (bj,t,xj,t)) are
φj : [0,1]2 →[0,1]. To denote the updated budget state vector induced by the budget update
φj (bj,t,qj (bj,t,xj,t)), we use the vector notation φ (bt,q(bt,xt)). Thus, budgets over two periods
are linked by the equation
bt+1 =φ (bt,q(bt,xt)).
We note several connections between our choice of service quality metric and the the broader
literature. In supply chains, the fraction of the customer’s demand that is served with the available
inventory, or ﬁll rate, is a commonly monitored metric of supplier performance. For example, Gaur
and Park (2007) and Adelman and Mersereau (2013) study supplier systems where customers place
orders for a homogeneous good, and use ﬁll rates as a measure of service quality in a way that is
similar to our approach. One can think of our service quality metric qj(bj,t,xj,t) as a natural ana-
logue (in the online advertising context) to the ﬁll rate deﬁned in Adelman and Mersereau (2013).
Speciﬁcally, U ∗
j (bj,t) can be interpreted as the (best-case) utility that the advertiser demands,
whereas Uj(bj,t,xj,t) can be interpreted as the utility that is actually served to the advertiser under
the allocation xt.
The comparison between Uj(bj,t,xj,t) and U ∗
j (bj,t) is also related to the concept of envy-freeness
(Foley 1967). Namely, U ∗
j (bj,t) is envy-free in the sense that it achieves the highest utility for
customer j compared to any other allocation; thus, qj(bj,t,xj,t) can be interpreted as measuring
how close xj,t is to an envy-free allocation, in percentage terms.
A last remark is that in crafting such a model of customer goodwill one could ostensibly deﬁne
a diﬀerent service quality metric than the one used here. We believe ours is the right choice for a
few reasons:

12
Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
• First, it satisﬁes the condition that the metric qj(·) should be increasing in the utility derived
over the set of feasible allocations that customer j can receive at their current budget level.
• Second, our quality metric is scale-free in the sense that, if we change the scale of v and p
by multiplying by a common constant (i.e., as if we converted the values of v and p into a
diﬀerent currency), we obtain the same quality as before; requiring scale-freeness invalidates
other candidates, such as un-normalized metrics like Uj(bj,t,xj,t). It can be shown that such
an alternative budget update can suﬀer from ill-conditioning.5
Special Budget Update Case: Exponential Smoothing. While our results require some min-
imal structure on the budget update function of each customer φj(·,·), made precise in Assumption
1 in Section 4, our analysis accommodates a broad class of possible update functions. A natural
example is an exponentially smoothed function of the form
φj(bj,qj) = αj · bj + (1 −αj) · qj,
(4)
for any (bj,qj) ∈[0,1]2 and some αj ∈[0,1]. Note that this budget update function maintains a
convex combination of the current budget level and service quality.
The exponentially smoothed update of the type (4) has been frequently considered in the liter-
ature on customer behavior as a model for customer state dynamics. For example, Gaur and Park
(2007), Adelman and Mersereau (2013) and Aﬂaki and Popescu (2014) use exponential smoothing
as an update function for customer goodwill evolution, while Nasiry and Popescu (2011) and Hu
et al. (2016) use it for customer reference prices.
Dynamic programming formulation. Having stated the primitives of our model, we are now
ready to formulate the platform’s optimization, which is to ﬁnd a sequence of allocation policies
{xt}1≤t≤T that solve the following problem:
J ∗
T (b1) = max
x1,...,xT
T
X
t=1
R(xt)
s.t. xt ∈X(bt),
∀t
(5)
bt+1 =φ (bt,q(bt,xt)),
∀t.
We note that the cost-to-go is indexed by the problem’s remaining horizon length. Problem (5)
is a deterministic dynamic program which, for any initial budget b and feasible allocation x, can
be solved by a Bellman recursion of the form:
J ∗
τ (b) ≜max
x∈X(b){R(x) + J ∗
τ−1 (φ (b,q(b,x)))},
∀1 ≤τ ≤T,
(6)
5 An example of ill-conditioning in the case of an un-normalized update is that a customer’s budget can decrease to
zero even though they keep receiving the maximum possible utility.

Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
13
with the boundary condition J ∗
0 (b) = 0.
Moreover, while we present the problem in a ﬁnite horizon setting, we emphasize that our results
can be extended to a discounted inﬁnite-horizon version of the problem.
Finally, for any policy π, specifying a sequence of feasible allocations xπ
1,...,xπ
T, we deﬁne
J π
T (b1) ≜
T
X
t=1
R(xπ
t ).
In particular, we now deﬁne the natural myopic policy for problem (5).
The myopic policy. As its name suggests, the myopic policy simply maximizes the platform’s
short-term revenue in each period, regardless of the customers’ budget dynamics between periods.
Thus in each period t ∈{1,...,T}, and given the available budgets bt, the myopic policy solves the
following linear program:
MY(bt) = max
xt
R(xt)
s.t. xt ∈X(bt).
(7)
Throughout our paper, the myopic policy is denoted by the superscript MY , i.e. xMY
t
∈X(bt)
and R(xMY
t
) = MY(bt). The myopic policy follows the natural budget update
bt+1 =φ
 bt,q
 bt,xMY
t

.
3.1.
Model Discussion
The Bellman equation (6) emphasizes that our model captures the following trade-oﬀ: in each
period the platform must ﬁnd a balance between myopically maximizing its short-term revenue in
that period, and providing a service quality to its customers that maximizes the revenue that can
be garnered in the remaining horizon. Addressing this trade-oﬀcan be diﬃcult due to the following
model features:
1. The potential heterogeneity in the bang-per-buck vij/pij −1 that diﬀerent items i provide
for each customer j and the revenue that the platform collects for their allocation pij, can
create a conﬂict between the allocations the customers and the platform would prefer. For
example, replacing a customer’s preferred item by an alternative that garners more revenue
in the current period can, in principle, have dramatically diﬀerent eﬀects on customer utility
and, consequently, their future budget trajectories.
2. Customers can additionally be heterogeneous in their budget update functions, and in par-
ticular in the extent of their reaction to the service quality they receive, which is a function
of their utility (cf. equation (3)). Some customers may be highly sensitive to receiving low
service quality and drastically reduce their budget in the next period, e.g. the exponential

14
Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
smoothing budget update function in equation (4) with αj = 0, while others may have a much
more stable budget update function, e.g. the exponential smoothing budget update function
in equation (4) with αj = 1.
Our main results in Section 4 will address the relative importance of these challenges as they
pertain to the platform’s ability to maximize its revenue using relatively simple policies.
3.2.
Value Function Behavior
Although our problem is a shortest path DP, it is quite challenging to solve, both from a com-
putational, as well as a structural perspective. In this section, we provide preliminary evidence of
this by exhibiting the ill behavior of the value function of problem (5), as deﬁned in equation (6).
Speciﬁcally, in Proposition 1 below we show that the value function can be decreasing in customer
budget levels, as well as not being quasi-concave nor quasi-convex.
First, we emphasize that in equation (6) computing J1 requires solving a linear program, while
computing Jt for t ∈{2,...,T} may require solving a non-convex optimization problem due to the
constraint bt+1 = φ (bt,q(bt,xt)). In particular, this is already the case when computing J3 even
under the simple exponential smoothing budget update equation (4). Speciﬁcally, since
bj,3 = αjbj,2 + (1 −αj)Uj(bj,2,xj,2)
U ∗
j (bj,2)
= α2
jbj,1 + αj(1 −αj)Uj(bj,1,xj,1)
U ∗
j (bj,1)
+ (1 −αj)2
Uj(bj,2,xj,2)
U ∗
j

αjbj,1 + (1 −αj)
Uj(bj,1,xj,1)
U∗
j (bj,1)
,
J3 is non-convex in the ﬁrst period allocation xj,1, see Proposition 1 for a numerical example. Thus,
even though our problem is a shortest-path DP, it is computationally hard to ﬁnd its optimum
even assuming that the platform has full information about customer characteristics.
One question that arises with respect to our model is whether having customers with larger initial
budgets is always beneﬁcial for the platform. Another is whether there exist modiﬁed prices ˜p that
can incorporate the consumer’s valuations into the platform’s objective function such that acting
myopically with respect to the modiﬁed prices ˜p attains the optimal revenue for the platform.
Speciﬁcally, it may be tempting to hope that there exist adjusted prices ˜p which can replace the
actual prices p in the myopic linear program, such that the policy obtained by solving
max
xt
X
i
X
j
˜pijxij,t
s.t. xt ∈X(bt),
(8)
at each period t is optimal. Proposition 1, stated below, answers both questions in the negative by
providing an instance of problem (5) that does not satisfy either of these statements.
Proposition 1. There exist instances of problem (5) such that

Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
15
1
Goods
s1 = 0.5
1
Customers
2
2
s2 = 2
3
p11 = 1.5,v11 = 3
p12 = 1.5,v12 = 3
p22 = 1,v22 = 1.1
(a) Model parameters.
b2
b1
(b) Contour plot of J2(b).
Figure 1
Instance that showcases problem ill behavior in Proposition 1.
Budget updates are given by equation (4). We assume α1 = α2 = 0.2. The initial budget that maximizes J2 is
(0.45, 1.0) and is highlighted is in the picture with a star.
(i) Increasing the customer’s initial budgets decreases the platform’s optimal revenue.
(ii) The revenue-to-go function is neither quasi-concave nor quasi-convex.
(iii) For any modiﬁed prices ˜p ̸= 0, the myopic policy with respect to ˜p is guaranteed to be strictly
sub-optimal.
Proof. Consider the instance of problem (5) deﬁned in Figure 1. It consists of two products
and two customers, where the customers update their budgets according to equation (4). Moreover,
Figure 1b displays the contour plots of J2(b), which satisfy the ﬁrst two statements in the lemma.
For the last statement in the lemma, it can be veriﬁed that for T = 3 the unique optimal
allocation of products can be such that all the supply and budget constraints are non-binding. For
instance, if the initial budgets are b = (0.15,0.3), the unique optimal allocation in the ﬁrst period is
x∗
11,1 = 0.063, x∗
12,1 = 0.01, and x∗
22,1 = 0, and it is optimal not to spend all of the customers’ budgets
even if there is supply available. Note that since the unique optimal solution is in the interior of
the polyhedron X(b1), then the myopic policy will be sub-optimal for any linear objective, i.e. for
any modiﬁed prices ˜p ̸= 0.
□
In short, in the instance in Figure 1 it is optimal for the platform to withhold feasible allocations;
even if supply and demand are available, it may be optimal not to match them. The intuition behind
this observation comes from the temporal dynamics captured in problem (5) and the deﬁnition
of the service quality in equation (3). Speciﬁcally, it may be counterproductive to let customers’
budgets grow too large when the system is supply constrained, since it may then be impossible to
satisfy all their demands simultaneously. Moreover, this induced low service quality may lead to
disappointed customers signiﬁcantly reducing their budget in future interactions with the platform.

16
Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
The complexity of this problem is compounded by the heterogeneity in the customers’ budget
update functions.
Importantly, Proposition 1(iii) states that, in general, the optimal policy for the RNRM problem
cannot be obtained by solving any (modiﬁed) linear program at every stage as in equation (8).
The unique interior-point solution from the proof of Proposition 1 cannot be the solution of an LP
since it would never leave supply and demand unmatched. This shows that no linear-programming
based approach can be optimal for this instance. We emphasize that the parameters of the instance
in Figure 1 are reasonable for the model and do not correspond to a corner case.
4.
Parametric Guarantees for the Myopic Policy
As discussed in the introduction, the desired features of a good heuristic policy for our problem are
computational simplicity and as little use of customer-speciﬁc data as possible, since this data may
be diﬃcult to acquire in practice. However, it seems unlikely that such policies would perform well
in the full generality of our setting. If this were the case, it would imply that, across all instances
permitted by our model, customer dynamics can be ignored no matter how drastically they can
alter customer budget trajectories, suggesting that our model is degenerate. Thus, we focus on
injecting realistic regularity assumptions into the model, which will allow us to show performance
guarantees for simple policies.
In this section, we show that the myopic policy is, in fact, a good heuristic policy under such
relatively unrestrictive regularity assumptions on the problem structure. Speciﬁcally, we derive
parametric worst-case performance guarantees for the myopic policy versus the optimum of problem
(5), where the parametrization is in terms of the heterogeneity in the bang-per-buck of each item
that a customer is interested in.
In our analysis, we make use of the budget trajectory induced by providing a ﬁxed level of service
quality, q ∈[0,1], to a customer in each period. We thus use for convenience a shorthand notation
for the composition of the budget update function with itself under a ﬁxed service quality.
Deﬁnition 1. For each customer j and ﬁxed service quality q ∈[0,1], let φt
j be deﬁned as
φ1
j(b,q) ≜φj(b,q),
φt
j(b,q) ≜φj(φt−1
j
(b,q),q),
∀t > 1.
To denote the updated budget state vector induced by the budget update φt
j (b,q), we use the vector
notation φt (b,q).
In order to derive a worst-case performance guarantee for the myopic policy, we ﬁrst introduce
two assumptions on the dynamics of customer budgets:
Assumption 1. For any customer j, the budget update function φj(b,q) is such that:

Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
17
(i) It is non-decreasing in each component. Namely,
(a) φj(bh,q) ≥φj(bl,q)
for each q ∈[0,1] bh,bl ∈[0,1], bh ≥bl
(b) φj(b,qh) ≥φj(b,ql)
for each b ∈[0,1] qh,ql ∈[0,1], qh ≥ql.
(ii) For any (b,q) ∈[0,1]2, φj(b,q) ≥min{b,q}.
(iii) For any b ∈[0,1] and t ∈{1,2,...}, φt
j(b,(1 −ϑ)) ≥(1 −ϑ) · φt
j(b,1), for any ϑ ∈[0,1].
Assumption 1(i) imposes the natural condition that, for each customer j, having a larger budget
or receiving a higher service quality cannot lead to a smaller budget in the next state. In particular,
Assumption 1(i) implies that φt−1
j
(bj,1) is an upper bound on the budget state of customer j in
period t, when starting from the initial budget bj.
Assumption 1(ii) imposes some smoothness on the customer budget update. Speciﬁcally, the
current budget can be interpreted as a summary statistic of the history of past service quality
provided to the customer. Then, Assumption 1(ii) requires that the updated summary statistic
cannot be lower than both its initial value and the new observation that it is being updated with.
Any averaging rule will satisfy this assumption, e.g. the exponential smoothing budget update
discussed in Section 3.
Finally, Assumption 1(iii) states that, for each customer, the budget induced by providing a
consistent service quality of (1 −ϑ) is no worse than scaling by (1 −ϑ) the budget induced by
consistently providing perfect service quality (i.e. q = 1). Note that the exponential smoothing
budget update in equation (4) satisﬁes Assumption 1(iii). To build additional insight, we give
examples of budget update functions which violate these assumptions in Appendix EC.1 of the
e-companion.
Importantly, Assumption 1(i) allows us to derive the following relaxation of the platform’s prob-
lem which will be useful in the proof of this section’s main result: ﬁnd a sequence of allocations
{xt}1≤t≤T that maximizes the total revenue collected by the platform, assuming the largest possible
budget update in each period t starting from the initial budgets b1, i.e. assuming bj,t = φt−1
j
(bj,1,1)
for each customer j and period t ∈{2,...,T}. This natural relaxation can be cast in terms of the
following linear program:
J relax
T
(b1) = max
x1,...,xT
T
X
t=1
R(xt)
s.t. xt ∈X
 φt−1 (b1,1)

,
∀t.
(9)
We emphasize that J relax
T
(b1) = MY(b1)+PT
t=2 MY(φt−1 (b1,1)); in other words, it is an optimistic
revenue upper bound which assumes all customer goodwill can be maximized at all times. The
following proposition formalizes the relationship between the optimal objective value of problems
(5) and (9). Its proof is presented in Appendix EC.2 in the e-companion to this paper.

18
Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
Proposition 2. Under Assumption 1(i), J relax
T
(b1) ≥J ∗
T (b1) for any horizon T ≥1 and initial
budget state b1.
Note that Assumption 1 is not suﬃcient to ensure good performance of the myopic policy. In
fact, the instance in the proof of Proposition 1, where the myopic policy is sub-optimal, satisﬁes
this assumption.
We now move on to discussing our second assumption, which refers to the products’ bang-per-
buck ratios for each customer. This assumption yields the parametrization of our performance
bound. It is motivated by the intuition that, in practice, while there may be signiﬁcant heterogeneity
in the products that a given customer desires, one would expect that the bang-per-buck
vij −pij
pij
= vij
pij
−1
among a customer’s desired goods to be similar. We state this precisely below:
Assumption 2. We assume that each customer j is endowed with a characteristic set Aj ⊆[n] of
products such that
(i) mini∈Aj
n
vij
pij
o
−1 ≥(1 −γ) ·

maxi∈Aj
n
vij
pij
o
−1

for some γ ∈[0,1],
(ii) For all i /∈Aj,vij = pij = 0.
Assumption 2 imposes some smoothness on the customers’ preferences, which propagate to the
customers’ budget update through the service quality they perceive. Eventually, since the customer
budgets provide an upper bound on the revenues the platform can collect, Assumption 2 rules out
extremely non-smooth behavior of the platform’s revenues.
Although Assumptions 1 and 2 impose structure on the general RNRM problem, a priori it is
not clear this should help bound the performance of the myopic policy. Speciﬁcally,
• Even in the case that γ = 0, namely when for each customer the bang-per-buck ratio is the same
across items, supply scarcity might still make it optimal to ration this supply to customers
with diﬀerent potentials for future revenues in a non-myopic fashion.
• Although restricting heterogeneity via Assumption 2 could, in principle, restrict the amount of
sub-optimality myopic accrues over one period, it is not clear why this sub-optimality would
not compound over time, eventually leading to a large gap versus the optimal policy.
• Moreover, the structure on the customers’ budget update functions imposed by Assumption 1
still allows for high heterogeneity, which remains as an important challenge that the platform
needs to address when making its allocation decisions.
The following section shows that, surprisingly, Assumptions 1 and 2 are suﬃcient for the myopic
policy to be (1 −γ)-optimal in the RNRM problem.

Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
19
4.1.
A Parametric Worst-Case Guarantee for the Myopic Policy
Our main result shows that simple, myopic policies admit parametric guarantees under Assump-
tions 1 and 2, as explained below.
Theorem 1. For any horizon T and initial budget state b1, let {xMY
t
}1≤t≤T be the myopic policy
deﬁned in Section 3.
Then, under Assumptions 1 and 2, {xMY
t
}1≤t≤T is (1 −γ)-optimal for problem (5), i.e.
J MY
T
(b1) ≥(1 −γ) · J ∗
T (b1).
The proof of this result, which is presented in Appendix EC.2 in the e-companion to this paper,
depends on auxiliary results which are presented in detail in the next subsection.
Theorem 1 shows that the level of heterogeneity in the bang-per-buck that each customer derives
from the diﬀerent products she is interested in, measured by the parameter (1 −γ) in Assumption
2, directly deﬁnes a worst-case performance guarantee for the myopic policy in maximizing the
revenue collected by the platform. We emphasize that the (1 −γ) guarantee is independent of the
length of the horizon T, or the number of customers m and products n. In other words, the myopic
policy does not “compound” sub-optimality, with the (1 −γ) gap remaining invariant at every
stage of the time horizon.
Moreover, the myopic policy has additional features that make it very attractive in practice.
First, it is easy to compute since it only requires solving a linear program in each period. In fact,
our result shows that continuing to use current technology built around the deterministic LP-
based approaches that are common in the one-shot NRM literature is approximately optimal. In
contrast, computing the optimal policy, or even a heuristic like look-ahead policies (see Section 5),
may require solving a dynamic program where the revenue-to-go function is not quasi-concave nor
quasi-convex, and it cannot be solved to optimality by a linear programmming based heuristic (cf.
Proposition 1 and Figure 1).
Second, the myopic policy only requires knowledge of the prices, the supply of products, and
the budgets available from each customer in the current period, but is agnostic to the customers’
budget dynamics. In contrast, computing the optimal policy additionally requires knowledge of the
customer valuations for each product and the customers’ budget update functions. Although for
simplicity we assumed a full-information setup where this information is available to the platform,
in practice this may not be the case. In a private information setting, the platform may need to
design a truthful mechanism or alternatively face the consequences of misspeciﬁed valuations.
Returning to the instance deﬁned in Figure 1 with a horizon of T = 3 periods, which was our
example of bad behavior of the value function in Section 3.2, we computed the actual worst-case
performance of the myopic policy by full enumeration. This is attained for an initial budget of 0.01

20
Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
1
Products
s1 ≥1/p1
1
Customers
b1,1 = δ · p1
2
b2,1 = δ · p2
2
s2 = δ
p11 = p1,v11
p22 = p2,v22
p21 = p1,v21
Figure 2
Instance that achieves the bound in Theorem 1. We assume δ is small and v11 ≤v21.
for both customers, where the myopic policy collects about 66% of the optimal revenue. We note
that in the instance in Figure 1 we have γ = 0.9.
The performance of the myopic policy in the instance in Figure 1 may suggest that the (1 −γ)
bound provided in Theorem 1 is loose. This is, however, not the case and the bound in Theorem
1 is tight in γ. We show this fact by introducing an instance that achieves the bound.
Example 1. Consider the instance with two products and two customers depicted in Figure 2
and assume T = 2. In this instance, there is ample supply of the ﬁrst product (s1 ≥1/p1), while
there is limited supply of the second product (s2 = δ). The ﬁrst customer desires both products,
pays p11 = p21 = p1 for each product, and values the second product more than the ﬁrst (v11 > v21).
Speciﬁcally,
v11/p1−1
v21/p1−1 = v11−p1
v21−p1 = 1 −γ. The second customer only desires the second product at a
price p22 = p2. We assume small initial budgets, b1,1 = δ · p1 and b2,1 = δ · p2, for some parameter
δ > 0. For both customers, we assume that the budget update function is an exponentially smoothed
function as in (4).
The next proposition, which we prove in Appendix EC.2, formalizes that the above instance
achieves the bound in Theorem 1.
Proposition 3. The instance described in Example 1 achieves the bound in Theorem 1 as δ →0.
We explore the performance of the myopic policy computationally in Section 4.3.
4.2.
Optimality of the Myopic Policy when γ = 0
The main purpose of this section is to present a special case of Theorem 1, namely Theorem 2 which
imposes the additional condition that γ = 0, i.e. that all goods within a customer’s preferred basket
have constant bang-per-buck. We speciﬁcally focus on this case for two reasons (a) its additional
assumptions are motivated by online advertising practice and are suﬃcient for establishing the
optimality of myopic policies, and (b) it provides an easier to analyze “base case” for Theorem 1.
Thus, in proving the optimality result for γ = 0, we will build important technical machinery that
we use for proving Theorem 1, combined with some other additional, non-trivial steps.

Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
21
Note that the γ = 0 assumption is practically motivated by the structure of campaign contracts
in certain online advertising systems. In particular, many such systems allow advertisers to target
speciﬁc features, such as geographical location, age group, or household income, that their deliv-
ered impressions must satisfy. The space of features characterizing these impression types is often
quite rich, and as such it is a daunting task for an advertiser to value each particular feature com-
bination. To avoid these complexities, campaign contracts allow an advertiser to specify a subset
of the feature space, such as (..., age group = 18 −29 or 30 −39, state = MA or NH or VT, ...),
which identiﬁes the range of acceptable impressions for the advertiser’s campaign, akin to our
deﬁnition of the characteristic set Aj. It is implicitly understood that the advertiser values all the
impressions in this set equally at some value vij = vj, and the campaign contract sets a single price
pij = pj for any impression in this set. In fact, this campaign structure is slightly more restrictive
than Assumption 2 with γ = 0, since it enforces that valuations and prices are constant across one
advertiser’s acceptable goods basket, rather than requiring this just for their bang-per-buck ratios.
A consequence of Assumption 2 with γ = 0 is that the budget update function is simpliﬁed.
Namely, denoting customer j’s constant valuation to price ratio by ρj ≜
vij
pij for any i ∈Aj, the
service quality experienced by customer j in period t becomes:
qj(bj,xj) =
P
i∈Aj(vij −pij)xij
U ∗
j (bj)
=
(ρj −1)P
i∈Aj pijxij
(ρj −1)P
i∈Aj pijy∗
i
=
P
i∈Aj pijxij
min

bj,P
i∈Aj pijsi
,
(10)
where y∗is an optimal solution to U ∗
j (bj), i.e., the service quality provided to customer j becomes
the fraction of customer j’s budget that was used by the platform, or her ﬁll rate. In particular,
qj(bj,xj) becomes independent of the customer’s product valuations.
Having said that, we emphasize that the issues of supply scarcity and heterogeneity in customer
update functions still remain. In particular, we would still expect to see the trade-oﬀbetween short-
term platform revenues and the long-term goodwill of the customers. For example if a customer is
very sensitive to service quality, it could be better to prioritize this customer even if this contradicts
the myopic policy. As a result, it is natural to expect that the myopic policy will remain sub-optimal,
even in the presence of this structure that appears to simplify the problem. On the contrary, the
theorem which we prove next shows that γ = 0 is suﬃcient for myopic optimality.
Before stating this theorem, we introduce two additional pieces of notation which we use in the
theorem’s proof, together with a key proposition that enables the result. We use µj,t to denote an
optimal dual variable associated to the budget constraint (1) of customer j, and λi,t to denote an
optimal dual variable associated to the supply constraint (2) of item i in the myopic optimization
problem (7) solved in period t. We deﬁne µt = (µ1,t,...,µm,t) and λt = (λ1,t,...,λn,t). The key
proposition is:

22
Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
Proposition 4 (Dynamic Complementary Slackness). Under Assumptions 1 and 2 with γ = 0, let
xMY
1
be a myopic allocation with budgets b1. Similarly, let xMY
2
be a myopic allocation with the
updated budgets b2 = φ (b1,q(b1,xMY
1
)). Then, if P
i∈Aj pijxMY
ij,1 < bj,1 there exists a dual optimal
solution (µ2,λ2) associated to xMY
2
such that µj,2 = 0 for each customer j.
Informally, this proposition states that, given our assumptions and γ = 0, if the myopic policy
does not exhaust a customer’s budget in some time period, then the marginal value of increasing
that customer’s budget in the next period is zero. In other words, Proposition 4 shows that our
model satisﬁes what one could call “dynamic complementary slackness”. This is formally proved
in Appendix EC.2 in the e-companion to this paper.
The dynamic complementary slackness proposition is crucial to the next theorem which states
that if γ = 0 the myopic policy is optimal. To develop some intuition for this, consider the case when
T = 2 and the platform performs a myopic allocation at t = 1. By equation (10), bj,2 expands at the
maximum possible rate for customers whose budgets were fully extracted, i.e. bj,1 = P
i∈Aj pijxMY
ij,1 .
At the same time, for customers with bj,1 > P
i∈Aj pijxMY
ij,1 for which bj,2 possibly contracted (i.e.
bj,2 < bj,1), Proposition 4 guarantees that µj,2 = 0. Thus we can, without loss of generality, assume
bj,2 = φj(bj,1,1) without aﬀecting the revenues in the second period. Hence, myopic revenues are
equal to the revenues obtained had service quality been 1 for all customers at period t = 1, and
must therefore be optimal. The formal theorem is stated and proved next.
Theorem 2. For any horizon T and initial budget state b1, let {xMY
t
}1≤t≤T be the myopic policy
deﬁned in Section 3. Then, under Assumptions 1 and 2 with γ = 0,
(i) {xMY
t
}1≤t≤T is an optimal solution to problem (9), i.e. J MY
T
(b1) = J relax
T
(b1).
(ii) {xMY
t
}1≤t≤T is an optimal solution to problem (5), i.e. J MY
T
(b1) = J ∗
T(b1).
Proof. We show that J MY
T
(b1) = J relax
T
(b1). Since {xMY
t
}1≤t≤T is feasible for problem (5), then
Proposition 2 implies J MY
T
(b1) = J ∗
T(b1) = J relax
T
(b1). The proof is by induction on the horizon
length T.
Base Case: If T = 1, then the RNRM problem collapses to the one-shot NRM problem and
J MY
1
(b1) = J ∗
1 (b1) = J relax
1
(b1).
Induction Step: Assume the statement of the Theorem holds for any problem with horizon length
(T −1), for some T ≥2. Let {bt}2≤t≤T be the budget states induced by {xMY
t
}1≤t≤T −1. Hence, for
any budget state b2, {xMY
t
(b2)}t∈{2,...,T } ∈arg maxJ ∗
T −1(b2) = J relax
T −1 (b2), where we are abusing the
notation to emphasize the dependence of the allocations xMY
t
on the budget state b2. In particular,
since J ∗
T −1(b2) = J relax
T −1 (b2), it follows that J ∗
T −1(b2) can be computed by solving the associated
linear program (9). Let

(λrelax
t
,µrelax
t
)
 
2≤t≤T be associated optimal dual solutions.
For each customer j there are two possible cases:

Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
23
(a) If P
i∈Aj pijxMY
ij,1 = bj,1, then it follows from Assumption 2 with γ = 0 that qj
 bj,1,xMY
j,1

= 1
(cf. equation (10)) and bj,2 = φj (bj,1,1).
(b) If P
i∈Aj pijxMY
ij,1 < bj,1, then from Proposition 4 it follows that µj,2 = 0. Moreover, from
Assumption 1(ii) we have φT −2
j
(bj,2,1) ≥... ≥bj,2. Since the optimal objective value of a max-
imization linear program is concave on the right hand side of the constraints, then µrelax
j,T
≤
... ≤µrelax
j,2
= µj,2 = 0, see Bertsimas and Tsitsiklis (1997). From dual feasibility (µrelax
j,t
≥0 for
each t ∈{2,...,T}) we conclude that P
i∈Aj pijxMY
ij,1 < bj,1 implies µrelax
j,t
= 0 for each period t ∈
{2,...,T}. Namely, increasing the budget bj,2 to its upper bound φj (bj,1,1) (hence φt−2
j
(bj,2,1)
to φt−1
j
(bj,1,1) for each t ∈{2,...,T}) does not impact the feasibility or optimality of the
allocations {xMY
t
(b2)}2≤t≤T in the subproblem with horizon T −1 starting in period t = 2.
Therefore, we conclude that
J MY
T
(b1) = MY(b1) +
T
X
t=2
MY
 φt−2 (b2,1)

= MY(b1) +
T
X
t=2
MY
 φt−1 (b1,1)

= J relax
T
(b1).
From Propositon 2, J MY
T
(b1) = J ∗
T(b1) = J relax
T
(b1). This concludes the proof.
□
Before discussing the result in Theorem 2, we remark that its proof does not require Assumption
1(iii) since γ = 0. The latter is required in the proof of Theorem 1, which allows for γ ̸= 0.
Theorem 2(ii) implies that, under Assumptions 1 and 2, when γ = 0 an optimal policy for
problem (5) with horizon T can be computed by sequentially solving T linear programs, using the
myopic allocation in one period to update the customers’ budget state in the next period. Moreover,
Theorem 2(i) shows that under these conditions the optimal objective function of problem (5)
can be computed by solving one larger linear program for the whole horizon T, where the largest
possible budget update is assumed for each customer in each period, i.e. problem (9). Note that
then the budget state in one period is independent of the allocation in previous periods.
Additionally, Theorem 2 shows that under Assumptions 1 and 2 some of the problematic features
of the general problem discussed in Proposition 1 are no longer present when γ = 0. In particular,
the platform always beneﬁts from customers with higher budgets. This argument is formalized in
the following corollary, which is proved in the e-companion to this paper.
Corollary 1. Under Assumptions 1 and 2 with γ = 0, J ∗
T (b1,h) ≥J ∗
T (b1,l) for any horizon T ≥2
and budget states b1,h, b1,l such that b1,h ≥b1,l component-wise.
4.3.
Numerical Performance of the Myopic Policy
We now proceed to investigate the numerical performance of the myopic policy. Since computing
the optimal solution to problem (5) is, in general, hard, we will use J relax
T
(b1) as a benchmark, i.e.
the revenue obtained by the platform when the budgets increase at the highest possible rate, which
can be computed by solving the linear program (9). Recall that Proposition 2 shows that this is

24
Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
Figure 3
Boxplot of the ratio between the revenue of the myopic policy and the optimal revenue when budgets
always increase at the largest possible rate. The box plot for each value of γ represents the distribution of ratios
sampled from 250,000 randomly generated problem instances. The dotted line is the 1 −γ bound. For these
simulations, n ∈[3,10], T ∈[3,15], and n = m.
a valid upper bound on the optimal revenue. More speciﬁcally, assuming that customers have an
exponential smoothing budget update function given by (4), we compute the performance ratio
r (n,m,T,α,b1,s,{pij},{vij}) = J MY
T
(b1)
J relax
T
(b1)
(11)
for randomly generated instances of problem (5) with parameters (n,m,T,α,b1,s,{pij},{vij}).
Note that calculating J MY
T
(b1) involves solving a sequence of linear programs. For diﬀerent values
of γ, we sample 250,000 problem instances and calculate the performance ratio (11) for each
instance. The sampling procedure is described in detail in Appendix EC.5.1 in the e-companion to
this paper.
The distribution of ratios r for diﬀerent values of the parameter γ is depicted through box plots
in Figure 3. The dotted line represents the (1 −γ) bound from Theorem 1. Note that for γ ≤0.7,
the revenue collected by the myopic policy is at least 85% of the revenue obtained when budgets
increase at the highest possible rate (and therefore at least 85% of the optimal revenue) for over
75% of the randomly generated instances. However, there are many outliers in the simulation with
a performance close to the (1 −γ) bound from Theorem 1, which is tight (cf. Proposition 3).
5.
Problem Instances Where Simple Policies Fail
Having determined that under certain regularity assumptions myopic policies can perform well,
we now examine the performance of myopic and other natural policies if we do not impose any
regularity assumption on our baseline model.
First, we deﬁne another candidate class of heuristic policies for our problem, namely ﬁnite
look-ahead policies. The reason we study this class of policies is that they have been successfully

Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
25
used in a large number of dynamic programming applications where myopic policy performance
is unsatisfactory (see for example the survey of Bertsekas 2005). Moreover, unlike myopic, ﬁnite
look-ahead policies explicitly account for customer goodwill eﬀects, and is it reasonable to expect
that they would perform well. We will show in this section that, in fact, look-ahead policies, together
with the myopic policy, perform arbitrarily badly when we remove all our previous assumptions.
We begin with the deﬁnition of a look-ahead policy.
The L-step Look-ahead Policy πL-LA. For any horizon T, in each period t ≤T the L-step look-
ahead policy

xL−LA
t
 
1≤t≤T implements the ﬁrst period allocation of the policy that maximizes
the revenue garnered by the platform in the next min(L + 1,T −t + 1) periods, i.e. in whatever
is shorter between the current period plus the following L periods and the remaining horizon. To
simplify the notation let us deﬁne ˆL = min(L+1,T −t+1). We note that the myopic policy deﬁned
in Section 3 is a degenerate example of an L-step look-ahead policy with L = 0.
Speciﬁcally, for any parameter L ≤T −1, period t ≤T, and budget state bt, let
n
y
ˆL
k
o
1≤k≤ˆL ∈
arg maxJ ∗
ˆL (bt). Then, xL−LA
t
= y
ˆL
1 . We emphasize that the L-step look-ahead policy is a rolling
horizon policy that requires solving a dynamic program in each period. However, it is oblivious
to the customers’ budget dynamics beyond the horizon ˆL = min(L + 1,T −t + 1). The L-step
look-ahead policy follows the natural budget update
bt+1 =φ
 bt,q
 bt,xL−LA
t

.
Arbitrary Sub-optimality Gap for Myopic and L-step Look-ahead Policies. In the fol-
lowing, we provide a family of instances of problem (5) where ﬁnite look-ahead policies, as well as
myopic which is a degenerate case with L = 0, perform arbitrarily badly in an asymptotic regime
as the number of customers of the platform grows. These results illustrate that problem (5) is hard
to solve in general.
Example 2. Consider a T period instance with m + 1 customers. The ﬁrst m customers have the
same exponentially smoothed update as deﬁned in (4), with common parameter αj = α:
φ(bj,qj(bj,xj)) = α · bj + (1 −α)qj(bj,xj),
∀1 ≤j ≤m.
We set α such that αL = 1/2. The (m + 1)-th customer does not update her budget, i.e. she has an
exponentially smoothed update with αm+1 = 1.
There are a total of m + 1 products. The ﬁrst m are indexed by 11,...,1j,...,1m, while the last
is indexed by 2. The supply of product 1j is s1j =
1
m2 , while the supply of product 2 is s2 = m. We
set T = 3logα(e−1)log m. Furthermore:

26
Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
1. For customers 1 ≤j ≤m and some scale parameter η > 2, the product valuations are
v1lj =
(
ηm + 1,
if l = j,
m + 1 −1
m,
if l ̸= j,
v2j = 1,
∀j
p1lj =
(
1,
if l = j,
1 −1
m,
if l ̸= j
p2j = 1,
∀j.
2. For customer m + 1, v1l(m+1) = p1l(m+1) = 0 for 1 ≤l ≤m and v2(m+1) = p2(m+1) =
1
m2 .
3. For all customers 1 ≤j ≤m, the starting budget is b1,j =
η
η+m−1, while for customer (m + 1),
the starting (and constant) budget is b(m+1),1 = 1.
Proposition 5. On the instance described in Example 2, with η > 2 and m ≥max
n
1
α2 , 2(η−1)
η−2
o
,
both the myopic policy and the L-step look-ahead policy, for any L ≥1, produce revenues that are
an o
  log m
m

fraction of the optimum.
The proof of proposition 5 is provided in the e-companion to this paper.
To conclude this section, we make some observations about why look-ahead policies can perform
so poorly in this context. In our instance deﬁned in Example 2, products 1l, which are the ones with
positive utility for the customers, are scarce enough that it is not feasible to simultaneously satisfy
all customers 1 ≤j ≤m when their budgets are non-negligible. Thus, the feasible strategy that we
exploit is to fully deplete the budgets of customers 2 ≤j ≤m to essentially 0, when it becomes
possible to fully satisfy them with the scarce supply of positive utility products 1l. This allocation
induces a one-time jump in their budget from 0 to approximately (1 −α) between periods T −1
and T, which is then monetized in the last period T. As a consequence, the revenues garnered by
this feasible policy over the time horizon are highly non-smooth, with essentially all its revenues
coming in the last period. Such a strategy cannot be found by πL-LA due to its limited look-ahead
L < T; indeed, in only L periods it is not possible to ration the 1l products in such a way as to
cause a similar coordinated one-time jump in budgets.
6.
Extensions
Two important features of our model are the presence of the same pool of customers in each
period, and the time-invariance of the available supply. We now introduce two extensions which
incorporate uncertainty in each of these dimensions. We assume throughout this section that γ = 0,
which simpliﬁes the customers’ utility as in equation (10).
6.1.
Uncertain Customer Arrivals
We now consider the extension of our base model where customers do not necessarily show up in
every single period. Speciﬁcally, we develop a worst-case model where customers can be absent
from the system at arbitrary times. We naturally assume that customers only update their budgets
in periods when they are present. Then, a customer’s budget in period t depends on her budget
and service level received in her last interaction with the platform (need not be at t −1).

Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
27
We present the main results here, and defer the technical analysis of the results to Appendix
EC.4.1 in the e-companion to this paper.
We ﬁrst remark on the diﬃculty of establishing bounds when we allow for customers to skip
periods of interaction with the platform. Recall that our myopic optimality result for γ = 0 crucially
relies on a “dynamic complementary slackness” condition stated in Proposition 4. Informally, this
condition states that, as long as all customers are always present, if a customer’s budget constraint
at time t is not tight, then this customer will never have a positive shadow price on their budget
at any point in the future. Intuitively, the fact that the active set of customers changes over time
now breaks dynamic complementary slackness: a customer whose budget constraint was not tight
at time t may have a positive shadow price at t+1 in the case that other more proﬁtable customers
from period t are not present in t+1. Thus, the technical challenge to establishing lower bounds for
the myopic policy in this model will be to replace dynamic complementary slackness with weaker
conditions (see Proposition 8 and the discussion before it in the e-companion to this paper).
Our ﬁrst result in this section shows a parametric lower bound on the performance of the myopic
policy. Namely, in this model the revenue collected by the optimal policy must be at most T times
the revenue collected by the myopic policy, where T is the horizon the RNRM problem.
Theorem 3. Under Assumptions 1 and 2 with γ = 0, for any horizon T and initial budget state
b1,
J MY
T
(b1) ≥J ∗
T(b1)
T
.
We emphasize that this bound holds in a worst-case model, where nature has full power to choose
when each customer is present in the system. A natural question is whether the bound in Theorem
3 can be improved in this adversarial setup. The following example and proposition answer it on
the negative; interestingly enough, this is achieved via an instance with a single product type:
Example 3. Consider any integer T and α ∈[0,1) such that 1/(1−α) is integer. Let there be n = 1
products, and m = 1+(T −1)/(1−α) customers. For customer 1, we set p11 = 1, v11 = 2 and their
starting budget to b1,1 = 1. Customer 1 is present at period t = 1 but never returns to the system.
We index customers 2,...,(T −1)/(1 −α) by {j1,...,j1/(1−α)} for all 2 ≤j ≤T. Customer jl, for
1 ≤l ≤1/(1 −α), is present in the system only at times t = 1 and t = j. Moreover, p1jl = 1 −δ, for
some δ > 0, and v1jl = 2. Customer jl starts with budget bjl,1 = δ. The budget update function of
all customers is φ(b,q) = αb + (1 −α)q.
The above instance attains the bound of 1/T, as the following proposition shows.
Proposition 6. The bound in Theorem 3 is tight. Namely, for the instance in Example 3,
limδ→0 J MY
T
(b1)/J ∗
T(b1) = 1/T.

28
Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
Proposition 6 shows that if customers are not necessarily present in each period, then the per-
formance of the myopic policy can be arbitrarily bad when compared to the optimal policy as the
length of the horizon grows. This is in stark contrast to our results in Section 4, which showed that,
for any horizon length, the myopic policy was either optimal or it had a parametric performance
guarantee when all customers are present in each period.
We emphasize that the instance in Example 3 is fairly general with respect to the customer
budget updates, in that the value of the parameter α in their exponential smoothing function is
not very restrictive. Having said that, the instance in Example 3 is somewhat artiﬁcial in that
the most proﬁtable customer joins the platform in the ﬁrst period and then never returns. Then,
the myopic policy allocates the item to her at ﬁrst, without taking into account that all the other
customers will receive low service and hence will have a negligible budget when they come back to
the platform. As a result, the platform collects minimal revenue in each period after the ﬁrst.
It is thus interesting to ask whether slightly restricting nature’s power to choose a worst-case
sequence of customer arrivals can improve this lower bound, by removing such “corner case”
instances. We explore this question in the remainder of this subsection.
Improved Bounds. Example 3 suggests that the myopic policy performs poorly on instances
where it allocates many products to customers who at present look the most proﬁtable, but who in
the future will return infrequently, or even never return at all to the system, no matter how large
the time horizon T. One realistic assumption that could avoid this diﬃculty is to make sure that
the gap between customer arrivals cannot scale with T:
Assumption 3. Assume that each customer must be present at least once every L periods. Namely,
let tk
j and tk+1
j
denote the periods in which any given customer j arrives for the k-th and k + 1-th
times, respectively. Then any inter-arrival time for this customer, tk+1
j
−tk
j, is at most L.
This assumption can be interpreted as saying that, while customers may exhibit some infrequency
in their returns to the platform, the length of a “cycle” of inactivity cannot be arbitrarily large.
We believe that this is a reasonable assumption in an online advertising context, since it is unlikely
an advertiser would not schedule any campaigns for an extended amount of time.
Returning to Example 3, Assumption 3 no longer allows T to scale arbitrarily: to enforce the
arrival pattern where customer one can be present only at time t = 1, we require that T ≤L.
Enforcing Assumption 3 for this instance naturally gives us a 1/L bound. One could then hope
that, even for instances where T ≫L, the performance of myopic remains independent of T.
We next show that this indeed turns out to be true: we provide bounds that only depend on
L, and possibly on the shape of the customer budget update functions. We emphasize that these
bounds are still the result of a worst-case analysis on the customers’ arrival pattern, but up to
every customer returning to the system at least every L periods as per Assumption 3.

Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
29
We begin by precisely stating a result for a single product type, which matches the instance
family from Example 3, and provides a stronger bound on the performance of the myopic policy.
Theorem 4. Under Assumptions 1-3 with γ = 0, if n = 1 then for any horizon T and initial budget
state b1,
J MY
T
(b1) ≥
J ∗
T(b1)
min(L + 1,T).
For T ≫L, Theorem 4 provides a 1/(L + 1) bound that nearly matches the 1/L performance
of the myopic policy in Example 3 under Assumption 3. We remark that, as discussed earlier,
since customers are not present in the system in every period then the “dynamic complementary
slackness” condition from Proposition 4 no longer holds. Therefore, showing Theorem 4 requires
new proof techniques, which we explain in detail in Appendix EC.4.1 in the e-companion to this
paper.
A similar analysis for the general case where the platform allocates multiple products leads to
the following bound on the performance of the myopic policy:
Theorem 5. Let ¯α ∈[0,1] be deﬁned as:
¯α =
min
j∈[m],b∈[0,1]{φj(b,1)}.
Under Assumptions 1-3 with γ = 0, for any horizon T and initial budget state b1,
J MY
T
(b1) ≥
J ∗
T(b1)
min
 L + 1
¯α,T
.
In Theorem 5, ¯α can be interpreted as a lower bound on the one-time increase in budget of a
customer who receives full service. Note that, if φj is deﬁned as an exponential smoothing update
with parameter αj (as in equation (4)), then ¯α = 1 −maxj αj.
The bound for multiple products from Theorem 5 depends on the customer budget update
functions, and as a result can be weaker than the bound for one product from Theorem 4. Having
said that, there are special cases where the bound in Theorem 5 recovers the full strength of the
bound in Theorem 4. Speciﬁcally, this is the case if all customers follow an exponential smoothing
budget update (as in equation (4)) with parameter αj = 0, i.e. if all customers are fully reactive and
their updated budget always matches the service quality they received the last time they interacted
with the platform (and hence ¯α = 1).
Note that implementing the optimal policy in this model would require a perfect forecast of the
sequence of customer arrivals over time. In practice, this requirement adds a new and signiﬁcant
diﬃculty to the learning problem that the platform would face in order to be able to collect a high
revenue from customers. As a result, this feature puts an even higher premium on simple policies,
such as myopic, having a guaranteed performance. Our results are important since they show that,

30
Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
as long as customers come back to the platform often enough, a platform acting myopically is still
guaranteed to garner a signiﬁcant fraction of the optimal revenues. For example, if customers come
back to he platform at least for every other campaign, i.e. L = 2, then the platform is guaranteed
to collect at least one third of the optimal revenue.
To conclude this section, we examine the numerical performance of the myopic policy with
uncertain customer arrivals for randomly generated systems in Appendix EC.5.2 in the e-companion
to this paper. To summarize, we ﬁnd that the myopic policy collects at least 90% of the optimal
revenue for 98% of the sampled systems, suggesting that its average performance is signiﬁcantly
higher than the worst-case bounds we derived in this section.
6.2.
Time-Varying Supply
We extend our original model by assuming that the supply of goods changes from one period to the
next. We assume that, in each period t, the supply of good i, which we now denote by si,t, lies within
the interval [(1 −ϵ)¯si,(1 + ϵ)¯si], where ϵ is the same for all goods6. We denote st = (s1,t,...,sn,t)
and ¯s = (¯s1,..., ¯sn). We also extend our notation and denote the feasible allocation set at time t
by X(bt,st), where X(bt,st) is
n
X
i=1
pijxij,t ≤bj,t,
∀1 ≤j ≤m
m
X
j=1
xij,t ≤si,t,
∀1 ≤i ≤n.
xij,t ≥0,
∀1 ≤i ≤n,1 ≤j ≤m.
Note the dependence of X on the random vector st. Furthermore, the myopic allocation for budgets
bt and some supply vector s (for example, equal to st or ¯s) becomes
xMY
t
(bt,s) ∈arg max
xt
R(xt)
s.t. xt ∈X(bt,s),
(12)
where we emphasize that this allocation is deﬁned based on s and we make this explicit by
parametrizing xMY
t
on current budget bt and supply s.
The scaled myopic allocation policy. We examine the performance of the scaled myopic allo-
cation policy. In each period t, for customer budgets bt and supply st, the scaled myopic allocation
denoted by xS−MY
t
(bt,st), is constructed by calculating the myopic allocation with budgets bt and
supply ¯s (as deﬁned in (12)) and scaling it by a factor 1 −ϵ. Namely, set
xS−MY
t
(bt,st) ≜(1 −ϵ) · xMY
t
(bt,¯s).
(13)
6 The result also holds if ϵ was the maximum possible deviation across all goods; for simplicity we assume common ϵ.

Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
31
This allocation is guaranteed to be feasible since, if st ≥(1 −ϵ)¯s, xMY
t
(bt,¯s) ∈X(bt,¯s) implies
(1 −ϵ)xMY
t
(bt,¯s) ∈X(bt,st). The only additional information that the scaled myopic information
uses compared to the myopic policy is the range supply variation ϵ. Similar to the myopic policy,
it does not use information about consumers’ valuations and budget update functions. We denote
the total revenue of this policy for a given starting budget b1 and horizon T by J S−MY
T
(b1).
Qualitatively, the scaled myopic allocation xS−MY
t
(bt,st) diﬀers from the myopic policy
xMY
t
(bt,st) in one important way: it guarantees a somewhat “linear” allocation across customers
as st varies. Since the scaled myopic allocation is anchored around the constant supply level ¯s, the
service quality received by each customer will be at least a fraction of the optimal quality level if
supply was equal to ¯s. On the other hand, this is not the case if we were to use xMY
t
(bt,st) instead
of xMY
t
(bt,¯s): if st decreases, the new allocation might disproportionately reduce the amount of
goods allocated to low-price customers when compared to the scaled myopic allocation. These low-
price customers might end up with a low service quality level and, as a result, a low budget in the
next period. Then, depending on the supply of goods in the next period, this might lead to loss of
revenue compared to the optimal policy.
Formally, given the deﬁnition of xS−MY
t
(bt,st), we have for any customer j and period t,
X
i
pijxS−MY
ij,t
(bt,st) ≥(1 −ϵ)
X
i
pijxMY
ij,t (bt,¯s).
Also, given the bounded variability of supply, min{bj,P
i pijsi,t} ≤(1+ϵ)min{bj,t,P
i pij¯si}. Thus,
when starting with common budget bt, we can bound the quality level of the scaled myopic policy,
which we denote qS−MY
t
, by the quality level of the myopic policy with constant supply, which we
denote qMY
t
:
qS−MY
j,t
(bj,t,xS−MY
j,t
,st) =
P
i pijxS−MY
ij,t
(bj,t,st)
min{bj,P
i pijsi,t}
≥(1 −ϵ)P
i pijxMY
ij,t (bj,t,¯s)
(1 + ϵ)min{bj,t,P
i pij¯si} ≥(1−ϵ)2qMY
j,t (bj,t,xMY
j,t ,¯s),
(14)
where in the last inequality we use the deﬁnition of qMY
t
and the fact that 1−ϵ
1+ϵ ≥(1 −ϵ)2. Note
that, to make the dependence of varying supply explicit, we have overloaded the notation for the
quality level to include the supply vector as a parameter.
With the observation above in hand, we state a theorem which bounds the performance of the
scaled myopic policy for every supply path bounded by [(1 −ϵ)¯si,(1 + ϵ)¯si].
Theorem 6. Let J ∗
T(b1) be the optimal revenue for the system with time-varying supply for a
starting budget b1 and a horizon of T. If for each period t and good i we have si,t ∈[(1 −ϵ)¯si,(1 +
ϵ)¯si], then under Assumptions 1 and 2 with γ = 0,
J S−MY
T
(b1)
J ∗
T(b1)
≥(1 −ϵ)4.

32
Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
We make a few remarks regarding Theorem 6 and the underlying model. First, as we detail in
Appendix EC.4.2 in the e-companion to this paper, the proof of this result crucially depends on the
fact that Proposition 7 functions in a more general, black-box fashion, than we used it in Theorem
1. That is, Proposition 7 allows us to compare the revenues of separate systems which follow the
sequences of service qualities {qS−MY
t
} and, respectively, {(1−ϵ)2qMY
t
}, given the fact that, as per
equation (14), the former service quality is lower bounded by the latter for the same budget.
Secondly, one can compare our model to the ﬂuid models typically used in the revenue man-
agement literature (Gallego and van Ryzin 1997, Talluri and Van Ryzin 1998, Jasin and Kumar
2012). There, one typically models varying supply as arrivals coming from a Poisson process with
rate λ, together with a heuristic control policy that allocates each arriving supply unit in an online
fashion. It is then possible to prove that, as the arrival rate is increased to θλ and the other relevant
dimensions of the problem are also scaled up by the same θ, the heuristic’s loss in the scaled system
with respect to the optimal policy vanishes with θ. It is in fact possible to rephrase our result as
a similar ﬂuid bound where ϵ vanishes with θ, but we present our result in its current form as we
believe it makes the proof (particularly the use of Proposition 7) more transparent and simple.
We denote J S−relax
T
as the revenue when budgets increase at the maximum possible rate (quality
level is always one) and supply varies over time. We note that J S−relax
T
is an upper bound to
the optimal revenue. In Appendix EC.5.3 in the e-companion to this paper, we present numerical
simulations where we sample randomly generated systems and observe that, in general, a modiﬁed
version of the scaled myopic policy (which satisﬁes Theorem 6) collects at least 95% of the optimal
revenue. Furthermore, even for large values of ϵ, the scaled myopic policy collects at least half of
the optimal revenue. We also present simulations where we assume that supply evolves according
to a discrete-time random walk and we ﬁnd that the “regular” myopic policy captures at least 80%
of the optimal revenue.
7.
Conclusions
In this paper, we have considered a multi-period model of network revenue management where
customers’ behavior changes from one period to another as a function of the quality of the past
interactions between the customers and the platform controlling the allocation of products. While
the problem is hard to solve in general, we have shown that by imposing reasonable conditions on
the problem structure, simple myopic policies which ignore future customer behavior work well.
Additionally, we have provided guarantees in the case that there is uncertainty both on the side of
customers and of supply.
We hope that our model and results inspire further eﬀorts to understand whether classical oper-
ations management prescriptions are transferable to dynamic settings where customer interactions

Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
33
repeat over time. Speciﬁcally, two avenues are worth exploring: (i) understanding how prices, along
with allocations should be set in such repeated settings and (ii) building a model where customers
can explicitly switch between competing platforms, depending on their history of service quality.
Acknowledgments
The research of the third author was partially supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada (NSERC) Discovery Grant. The authors thank the participants of the research seminars
at INSEAD, the Industrial Engineering Department at the University of Chile, the Rotman School of Man-
agement at the University of Toronto, Singapore Management University, and UCLA Anderson School of
Management, for providing feedback on earlier versions of this research. The authors also thank Chung Piaw
Teo (the department editor handling this paper) as well as the anonymous associate editor and reviewers for
their comments, which helped to substantially improve both the content and exposition of this work.
References
Adelman D, Mersereau AJ (2008) Relaxations of weakly coupled stochastic dynamic programs. Operations
Research 56(3):712–727.
Adelman D, Mersereau AJ (2013) Dynamic capacity allocation to customers who remember past service.
Management Science 59(3):592–612.
Aﬂaki S, Popescu I (2014) Managing retention in service relationships. Management Science 60(2):415–433.
Agrawal S, Daskalakis C, Mirrokni V, Sivan B (2018) Robust repeated auctions under heterogeneous buyer
behavior. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.00494 .
Agrawal S, Devanur NR (2015) Fast algorithms for online stochastic convex programming. Proceedings of the
Twenty-Sixth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2015, San Diego, CA,
USA, January 4-6, 2015, 1405–1424.
Aviv Y, Pazgal A (2008) Optimal pricing of seasonal products in the presence of forward-looking consumers.
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 10(3):339–359.
Bateni MH, Chen Y, Ciocan DF, Mirrokni V (2016) Fair resource allocation in a volatile marketplace.
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, 819–819, EC ’16 (New York,
NY, USA: ACM), ISBN 978-1-4503-3936-0.
Bertsekas DP (1995) Dynamic programming and optimal control, volume 2 (Athena Scientiﬁc Belmont, MA).
Bertsekas DP (2005) Dynamic programming and suboptimal control: A survey from adp to mpc. European
Journal of Control 11(4-5):310–334.
Bertsimas D, Miˇsi´c VV (2016) Decomposable markov decision processes: A ﬂuid optimization approach.
Operations Research 64(6):1537–1555.
Bertsimas D, Tsitsiklis JN (1997) Introduction to linear optimization (Athena Scientiﬁc).
Besbes O, Lobel I (2015) Intertemporal price discrimination: Structure and computation of optimal policies.
Management Science 61(1):92–110.
Borgs C, Candogan O, Chayes J, Lobel I, Nazerzadeh H (2014) Optimal multiperiod pricing with service
guarantees. Management Science 60(7):1792–1811.
Chawla S, Devanur NR, Karlin AR, Sivan B (2016) Simple pricing schemes for consumers with evolving
values. Proceedings of the twenty-seventh annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms, 1476–
1490 (Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics).
Chen Y, Farias VF (2015) Robust dynamic pricing with strategic customers. EC, 777.

34
Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
Chun SY, Iancu D, Trichakis N (2017) Loyalty Program Liabilities and Point Values. SSRN Scholarly
Paper ID 2924480, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY, URL https://papers.ssrn.
com/abstract=2924480.
Chun SY, Ovchinnikov A (2018) Strategic Consumers, Revenue Management, and the Design of Loyalty
Programs. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2606791, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY, URL
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2606791.
Ciocan D, Farias V (2012) Model predictive control for dynamic resource allocation. mathematics of opera-
tions research. Mathematics of Operations Research 37(3):501–525.
De Farias DP, Van Roy B (2003) The linear programming approach to approximate dynamic programming.
Operations research 51(6):850–865.
De Farias DP, Van Roy B (2004) On constraint sampling in the linear programming approach to approximate
dynamic programming. Mathematics of operations research 29(3):462–478.
Denardo EV, Rothblum UG (1983) Aﬃne structure and invariant policies for dynamic programs. Mathemat-
ics of Operations Research 8(3):342–365.
Desai VV, Farias VF, Moallemi CC (2012) Approximate dynamic programming via a smoothed linear pro-
gram. Operations Research 60(3):655–674.
Devanur NR, Hayes TP (2009) The adwords problem: online keyword matching with budgeted bidders under
random permutations. Proceedings of the 10th ACM conference on Electronic commerce, 71–78 (ACM).
Ferreira K, Goh J (2018) Assortment rotation and the value of concealment. Harvard Business School Tech-
nology & Operations Mgt. Unit Working Paper (17-041).
Foley DK (1967) Resource allocation and the public sector. Yale Econ Essays (7(1)).
Gallego G, Topaloglu H (2019) Revenue management and pricing analytics, volume 209 (Springer).
Gallego G, van Ryzin G (1997) A multiproduct dynamic pricing problem and its applications to network
yield management. Operations Research 45(1):pp. 24–41.
Gaur V, Park YH (2007) Asymmetric consumer learning and inventory competition. Management Science
53(2):227–240.
Golrezaei N, Nazerzadeh H, Rusmevichientong P (2014) Real-time optimization of personalized assortments.
Management Science 60(6):1532–1551.
Gupta S, Hanssens D, Hardie B, Kahn W, Kumar V, Lin N, Ravishanker N, Sriram S (2006) Modeling
customer lifetime value. Journal of service research 9(2):139–155.
Gupta S, Lehmann DR (2008) Models of customer value. Handbook of Marketing Decision Models, 255–290
(Springer).
Hawkins JT (2003) A Langrangian decomposition approach to weakly coupled dynamic optimization problems
and its applications. Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Hu Z, Chen X, Hu P (2016) Dynamic pricing with gain-seeking reference price eﬀects. Operations Research
64(1):150–157.
Jasin S, Kumar S (2012) A re-solving heuristic with bounded revenue loss for network revenue management
with customer choice. Mathematics of Operations Research 37(2):313–345.
Kanoria Y, Ilan L, Lu J (2018) Managing customer churn via service mode control URL https://papers.
ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3188226.
Karp RM, Vazirani UV, Vazirani VV (1990) An optimal algorithm for on-line bipartite matching. Proceedings
of the twenty-second annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, 352–358 (ACM).
Liu Y (2007) The long-term impact of loyalty programs on consumer purchase behavior and loyalty. Journal
of Marketing 71(4):19–35, ISSN 00222429.
Lobel I, Patel J, Vulcano G, Zhang J (2015) Optimizing product launches in the presence of strategic
consumers. Management Science 62(6):1778–1799.
L’Ecuyer P, Maill´e P, Stier-Moses NE, Tuﬃn B (2017) Revenue-maximizing rankings for online platforms
with quality-sensitive consumers. Operations Research 65(2):408–423.

Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
35
Mehta A, Saberi A, Vazirani U, Vazirani V (2005) Adwords and generalized on-line matching. FOCS 2005:
Proceedings of the 46th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, 264–273 (IEEE
Computer Society).
Nasiry J, Popescu I (2011) Dynamic pricing with loss-averse consumers and peak-end anchoring. Operations
research 59(6):1361–1368.
Ning J, Sobel MJ (2018) Easy Aﬃne Markov Decision Processes. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2959096, Social
Science Research Network, Rochester, NY, URL https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2959096.
Phillips RL (2005) Pricing and revenue optimization (Stanford University Press).
Popescu I, Wu Y (2007) Dynamic pricing strategies with reference eﬀects. Operations Research 55(3):413–
429.
Powell WB (2007) Approximate Dynamic Programming: Solving the curses of dimensionality, volume 703
(John Wiley & Sons).
Reiman MI, Wang Q (2008) An asymptotically optimal policy for a quantity-based network revenue man-
agement problem. Mathematics of Operations Research 33(2):257–282.
Reinartz WJ, Venkatesan R (2008) Decision models for customer relationship management (crm). Handbook
of marketing decision models, 291–326 (Springer).
Sobel MJ (1990a) Higher-order and average reward myopic-aﬃne dynamic models. Mathematics of operations
research 15(2):299–310.
Sobel MJ (1990b) Myopic solutions of aﬃne dynamic models. Operations Research 38(5):847–853.
Talluri K, Van Ryzin G (1998) An analysis of bid-price controls for network revenue management. Manage-
ment Science 44(11):1577–1593, ISSN 0025-1909.
Talluri KT, Van Ryzin GJ (2005) The theory and practice of revenue management. International Series in
Operations Research & Management Science (New York: Springer), ISBN 0-387-24376-3.
Wilkens CA, Cavallo R, Niazadeh R (2017) Gsp: The cinderella of mechanism design. Proceedings of the
26th International Conference on World Wide Web, 25–32 (International World Wide Web Conferences
Steering Committee).

e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
ec1
E-Companion to:
Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
EC.1.
Examples of Budget Update Functions Which Violate
Assumption 1
To build more insight into the budget update functions allowed by Assumption 1, we also discuss
which types of functions would violate it, focusing speciﬁcally on assumptions (ii) and (iii). Broadly
speaking, such examples either involve “large penalties” or “large rewards”.
A type of update which violates both Assumptions 1(ii) and (iii) is one which has “large penal-
ties”, such as
φ(b,q) = (αb + (1 −α)q) · I{q ≥q0},
for some α,q0 ∈(0,1). This rules out ultimatum like update functions, where the customer only
brings positive budget in the next period if her service quality in the current period exceeds some
minimum threshold.
Another example update, which this time satisﬁes Assumptions 1(i) and (ii), but not (iii), is
φ(b,q) =
(
1,
if q = 1
min{b,q},
otherwise.
Then, for some δ small enough and t = 1,
φ(δ,1 −ϑ) = δ < (1 −ϑ) = (1 −ϑ)φ(δ,1),
which violates Assumption 1 (iii), due to the disproportionately “large reward” when q = 1.
EC.2.
Appendix for Section 4
We organize this appendix into three pieces. First, we prove that J relax
T
(b1) is indeed an upper
bound problem for J ∗
T(b1), together with a helper lemma. Then, in a separate subsection (Section
EC.2.1), we provide the proofs pertaining to Theorem 2, which is the myopic optimality result for
γ = 0. Lastly, the second subsection (Section EC.2.2) contains the proof of Theorem 1, which is
the parametric performance guarantees result for general γ, and all its auxiliary results, ﬁnalizing
with the proof of the tightness of the bound in Theorem 1.
As stated above, we begin by restating and proving a proposition from Section 4, which shows
that the relaxed problem where customers always receive the maximum service quality is indeed
an upper on the RNRM optimal objective value:

ec2
e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
Proposition 2. Under Assumption 1(i), J relax
T
(b1) ≥J ∗
T (b1) for any horizon T ≥1 and initial
budget state b1.
Proof. Let {x∗
t}t∈{1,...,T } be an optimal policy for problem (5) with initial budgets b1, and let
b∗
t be the budget trajectory induced by it, i.e. b∗
t+1 = φ (b∗
t,q(b∗
t,x∗
t)) for each t ∈{1,...,T −1},
where b∗
1 = b1. From Assumption 1(i), b∗
j,t ≤φt−1
j
(bj,1,1) for each period t and customer j. Then,
J relax
T
(b1) = MY(b1) +
T
X
t=2
MY
 φt−1 (b1,1)

≥MY(b1) +
T
X
t=2
MY(b∗
t) ≥J ∗
T (b1),
where the ﬁrst inequality follows from Lemma 1 below. The second inequality follows from x∗
t ∈
X(b∗
t) for each period t, which implies that R(x∗
t) ≤MY(b∗
t).
□
It is not hard to see that MY(b) is monotonically increasing in the budget state vector b. The
following lemma formalizes this observation.
Lemma 1. Let b, ¯b, be such that ¯bj ≥bj for each customer j. Then, MY
 ¯b

≥MY(b).
Proof. Let xMY be a myopic policy with budgets b. Note that ¯bj ≥bj implies xMY ∈X
 ¯b

.
Hence, MY
 ¯b

≥R(xMY ) = MY(b).
□
EC.2.1.
Proofs for Theorem 2
The main technical proposition of this section now follows and is restated from Section 4; this is
a key result in the proof of Theorem 2. As noted in Section 4, the proposition captures a notion
of “dynamic complementary slackness”. Before we restate it, we observe that the dual for problem
(7), which is the linear program which can be solved to ﬁnd the myopic policy, is
min
µt,λt
n
X
i=1
siλi,t +
m
X
j=1
bj,tµj,t
s.t. λi,t + pijµj,t ≥pij,
∀1 ≤i ≤n,1 ≤j ≤m
λi,t ≥0
∀1 ≤i ≤n
µj,t ≥0
∀1 ≤j ≤m,
where we remind that µj,t denotes an optimal dual variable associated to the budget constraint (1)
of customer j, and λi,t denotes an optimal dual variable associated to the supply constraint (2) of
item i. We then have:
Proposition 4 (Dynamic Complementary Slackness). Under Assumptions 1 and 2 with γ = 0, let
xMY
1
be a myopic allocation with budgets b1. Similarly, let xMY
2
be a myopic allocation with the
updated budgets b2 = φ (b1,q(b1,xMY
1
)). Then, if P
i∈Aj pijxMY
ij,1 < bj,1 there exists a dual optimal
solution (µ2,λ2) associated to xMY
2
such that µj,2 = 0 for each customer j.
The proof of Proposition 4 requires some auxiliary results, which we prove ﬁrst. We begin with
the following deﬁnition:

e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
ec3
Deﬁnition 2. Let xMY
1
be a myopic allocation with budgets b1 such that there exists a customer j
with a strictly loose budget constraint, i.e. such that P
i∈Aj pijxMY
ij,1 < bj,1. Then, customer j deﬁnes
a non-empty class of customers Cj ⊆{1,...,m} as follows.
Start with Cj = {j}. In each iteration deﬁne the set of customers
Dj(Cj) =


k ∈{1...,n} : xMY
ik,1 > 0 for some i ∈
[
l∈Cj
Al


.
While Dj(Cj) ̸= Cj, update Cj = Dj(Cj) and iterate.
Note that by construction the class of customers Cj has the property that all the items that the
customers in Cj are interested in are allocated by xMY
1
, if at all, to customers in Cj only. Namely,
the class of customers Cj is such that xMY
ik,1 = 0 for any i ∈S
l∈Cj Al, k /∈Cj.
Furthermore, the following Lemma shows that since P
i∈Aj pijxMY
ij,1 < bj,1 it must be the case
that all the items that customers in the class Cj are interested in are fully allocated by xMY
1
to
customers in the class Cj. This property will be instrumental in the proof of Proposition 4.
Lemma 2. Let xMY
1
be a myopic allocation with budgets b1 such that there exists a customer j
with P
i∈Aj pijxMY
ij,1 < bj,1, and let Cj be the associated class of customers from Deﬁnition 2, then
X
l∈Cj
xMY
il,1 = si, for all i ∈
[
l∈Cj
Al.
Proof. Assume for a contradiction that there exists an item i ∈S
l∈Cj Al with a strictly loose
supply constraint, i.e. such that P
l∈Cj xMY
il,1 < si. We show that then there must exist an feasible
augmenting path in the network induced by xMY
1
, contradicting its myopic optimality.
The construction of the class Cj in Deﬁnition 2 speciﬁes a path from customer j to item i,
through items k ∈S
l∈Cj Al and customers l ∈Cj. Let us denote this path by pathj(i). Assume,
without loss of generality, that pathj(i) is composed of r ≥1 items labeled {k1,...,kr}, and r
customers labeled {l1,...,lr}, where l1 = j and kr = i. Namely, pathj(i) = {l1,k1,...,lr,kr}. We
show that pathj(l) is an augmenting path.
Speciﬁcally, consider moving a ﬂow η > 0 small enough from item i to customer j through
pathj(i) while keeping the spend of each customer in the path, except j, the same. Namely, denote
ηr = η and η0 = 0, and for each s ∈{1,...,r} consider increasing the allocation xMY
ksls,1 by ηs, and
decreasing the allocation xMY
ks−1ls,1 by ηs−1, such that pkslsηs = pks−1lsηs−1 for each s ∈{2,...,r}.
Equivalently, ηs = Qr
q=s+1
pkqlq
pkq−1lq η for each s ∈{1,...,r}. We now verify that this change to xMY
1
is feasible for η > 0 small enough and strictly improves the revenue collected by the platform, a
contradiction.

ec4
e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
The feasibility of the change to xMY
1
is guaranteed for any η > 0 such that
η ≤min


min
s∈{1,...,r−1}
 
rY
q=s+1
pkq−1lq
pkqlq
xMY
ksls+1,1
!
,
bj,1 −P
k∈Aj pkjxMY
kj,1
pk1j
rY
q=2
pkq−1lq
pkqlq
,si −
X
l∈Cj
xMY
il,1

,
where the ﬁrst term in the outer min guarantees the non-negativity of the modiﬁed allocations
(i.e. ηs ≤xMY
ksls+1,1 for each s ∈{1,...,r −1}, where xMY
ksls+1,1 > 0 by the construction of the class Cj
in Deﬁnition 2), the second term in the outer min guarantees the budget feasibility for customer
j (i.e. P
i∈Aj pijxMY
ij,1 + pk1jη1 ≤bj,1), and the third term in the outer min guarantees the supply
feasibility for item i.
Finally, since by construction the change to xMY
1
keeps the spend of each customer in pathj(i),
except j, the same, then it follows that the strict increase in the revenue collected by the platform
is equal to pk1,jη1 = pk1,j
Qr
q=2
pkqlq
pkq−1lq η > 0. This concludes the proof.
□
Before proving Proposition 4, we also require the next auxiliary lemma, which states that, if
γ = 0, then the allocation to a customer j will remain budget-feasible in the next period. We note
that the proof depends crucially on Assumption 1(ii), while the proof can be extended to diﬀerent,
including un-normalized, service quality metrics.
Lemma 3. Let xMY
1
be a myopic allocation with budgets b1, and let b2 be the updated budgets,
i.e. b2 =φ (b1,q(b1,xMY
1
)). Then, under Assumptions 1 and 2 with γ = 0, xMY
1
∈X(b2), i.e.
X
i∈Al
pilxMY
il,1 ≤bl,2 for each customer l.
(EC.1)
Proof. First, assume bj,1 ≤qj(bj,1,xMY
j,1 ). Note that then
bj,2 = φj(bj,1,qj(bj,1,xMY
j,1 )) ≥min(bj,1,qj(bj,1,xMY
j,1 )) = bj,1 ≥
X
i∈Aj
pijxMY
ij,1 ,
where the ﬁrst inequality follows from Assumption 1(ii).
Now assume bj,1 > qj(bj,1,xMY
j,1 ). Then,
bj,2 = φj(bj,1,qj(bj,1,xMY
j,1 )) ≥qj(bj,1,xMY
j,1 ) =
P
i∈Aj pijxMY
ij,1
min
n
bj,1,P
i∈Aj pijsi
o ≥
X
i∈Aj
pijxMY
ij,1 .
where the ﬁrst inequality follows from Assumption 1(ii), the second equality follows from
Assumption 2 with γ = 0 (cf. equation (10)), and the second inequality follows from bj,1 ∈[0,1].
□
Having established these auxiliary results, we are now ready to prove Proposition 4:

e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
ec5
Proof of Proposition 4. Assume, for contradiction, that there exists a customer j such that
P
i∈Aj pijxMY
ij,1 < bj,1, and µj,2 > 0 for all dual optimal solutions associated to all myopic allocations
with budgets b2.
First, note that µj,2 > 0 for all dual optimal solutions associated to all myopic allocations with
budgets b2 implies that for a scalar δ > 0 small enough, ˜µj,2 > 0 for all dual optimal solutions
associated to all myopic allocations with budgets ˜b2 = b2 +δej. In particular, let ˜x2 be an optimal
myopic allocation with budgets ˜b2, i.e. ˜x2 ∈X

˜b2

and R(˜x2) = MY(˜b2).
Since P
i∈Aj pijxMY
ij,1 < bj,1, let Cj be the associated class of customers from Deﬁnition 2. We will
show that assuming ˜µj,2 > 0 for all dual optimal solutions associated to all myopic allocations with
budgets ˜b2 implies that all the customers in the class Cj spent at least as much under allocation ˜x2
than under allocation xMY
1
, and customer j spent strictly more. Namely, that the class of customers
Cj is such that
X
i∈Ak
pikxMY
ik,1 ≤
X
i∈Ak
pik˜xik,2 for each k ∈Cj, and
X
i∈Aj
pijxMY
ij,1 <
X
i∈Aj
pij˜xij,2 for j.
(EC.2)
Before proving that (EC.2) holds, we argue that (EC.2) leads to a contradiction. Speciﬁcally, since
customer j spent strictly more under allocation ˜x2 than under allocation xMY
1
, i.e. P
i∈Aj pijxMY
ij,1 <
P
i∈Aj pij˜xij,2, and from Lemma 2 all the items that customers in the class Cj are interested in
are fully allocated by xMY
1
to customers in the class Cj, i.e. P
l∈Cj xMY
il,1 = si for all i ∈S
l∈Cj Al,
then there must exist a customer k1 ∈Cj \ {j} and item i1 ∈Aj ∩Ak1 such that some fraction
of item i1 that was assigned by xMY
1
to customer k1 is now assigned by ˜x2 to customer j, i.e.
xMY
i1k1,1 > ˜xi1k1,2 ≥0 and 0 ≤xMY
i1j,1 < ˜xi1j,2. Similarly, since all the customers in the class Cj spent at
least as much under allocation ˜x2 than under allocation xMY
1
, i.e. P
i∈Ak pikxMY
ik,1 ≤P
i∈Ak pik˜xik,2
for each k ∈Cj, then there must be a customer k2 ∈Cj \ {j,k1} and item i2 ∈Ak1 ∩Ak2 such that
some fraction of item i2 that was assigned by xMY
1
to customer k2 is now assigned by ˜x2 to customer
k1, i.e. xMY
i2k2,1 > ˜xi2k2,2 ≥0 and 0 ≤xMY
i2k1,1 < ˜xi2k1,2. Note that we can assume k2 ̸= j without loss of
generality, otherwise we would obtain a feasible augmenting path to improve xMY
1
, contradicting
its myopic optimality. By iterating this argument |Cj| times, we conclude that either there must
exist a feasible augmenting path to improve xMY
1
, or there must exist an advertiser k ∈Cj such
that P
i∈Ak pikxMY
ik,1 > P
i∈Ak pik˜xik,2, a contradiction with (EC.2).
What is left to be shown, is that ˜µj,2 > 0 for all dual optimal solutions associated to all myopic
allocations with budgets ˜b2 implies equation (EC.2). We reconstruct the class Cj as follows. We
iteratively construct a class of customers Ej ⊆{1,...,m} such that in ﬁnitely many iterations
Ej = Cj and (EC.2) is satisﬁed, which leads to a contradiction as previously discussed. Speciﬁcally,

ec6
e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
we start with Ej = {j} ⊆Cj, and note that ˜µj,2 > µj,1 = 0. Then, we add a customer l ∈Cj \Ej to the
class Ej in each iteration such that the updated class preserves the properties that ˜µk,2 > µk,1 ≥0
for all k ∈Ej, and Ej ⊆Cj. In more details, each iteration follows the next three steps.
1. We show that since, by construction, ˜µk,2 > µk,1 ≥0 for all k ∈Ej, all the customers in the
class Ej spent at least as much under allocation ˜x2 than under allocation xMY
1
, and customer
j spent strictly more. Namely, that the class of customers Ej is such that
X
i∈Ak
pikxMY
ik,1 ≤bk,2 ≤˜bk,2 =
X
i∈Ak
pik˜xik,2 for each k ∈Ej, and
X
i∈Aj
pijxMY
ij,1 ≤bj,2 < ˜bj,2 =
X
i∈Aj
pij˜xij,2 for j ∈Ej.
(EC.3)
In both cases in (EC.3) the ﬁrst inequality follows from Lemma 3 (where Assumptions 1 and
2 with γ = 0 are used), the second inequality follows from ˜b2 = b2 + δej and j ∈Ej, and the
last equality follows from ˜µk,2 > µk,1 ≥0 for all k ∈Ej.
2. Since, by construction, Ej ⊆Cj, and from Lemma 2 all the items that customers in the class Cj
are interested in are fully allocated by xMY
1
to customers in the class Cj, i.e. P
l∈Cj xMY
il,1 = si
for all i ∈S
l∈Cj Al, then note that (EC.3) implies that there exists a customer l ∈Cj \ Ej and
item i ∈S
k∈Ej Ak ∩Al such that some fraction of item i that was assigned by xMY
1
to customer
l is now assigned by ˜x2 to some customer k ∈Ej, i.e. xMY
il,1 > ˜xil,2 ≥0 and 0 ≤xMY
ik,1 < ˜xik,2 for
some l ∈Cj \ Ej, k ∈Ej, and i ∈Ak ∩Al.
3. Consider the customers l ∈Cj \ Ej and k ∈Ej, and the item i ∈Ak ∩Al, characterized in step
2. We now show that ˜µl,2 > µl,1 ≥0. Speciﬁcally,
(1 −µl,1)pil = λi,1 ≥(1 −µk,1)pik > (1 −˜µk,2)pik = λi,2 ≥(1 −˜µl,2)pil,
(EC.4)
which implies ˜µl,2 > µl,1 ≥0. In (EC.4), the ﬁrst equality follows from xMY
il,1 > 0 and com-
plementary slackness, the ﬁrst and last inequalities follow from dual feasibility, the second
inequality follows from ˜µk,2 > µk,1 since k ∈Ej, the second equality follows from ˜xik,2 > 0 and
complementary slackness.
Finally, update the class of customers Ej by adding customer l ∈Cj \ Ej to it, i.e. let
Ej = Ej ∪{l}. Hence, the updated class Ej is such that ˜µk,2 > µk,1 ≥0 for all k ∈Ej, and
Ej ⊆Cj. Iterate by going to step 1.
To summarize, we start with Ej = {j} ⊆Cj and in each iteration we add a customer l ∈Cj \ Ej to
the class Ej, such that (EC.3) is preserved. Since Cj has ﬁnitely many members, in ﬁnitely many
iterations Ej = Cj and (EC.2) is satisﬁed. Speciﬁcally, (EC.2) is equivalent to (EC.3) in step 1 of
the iteration for Ej = Cj. Finally, (EC.2) leads to a contradiction as previously discussed. This
concludes the proof.
□

e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
ec7
Having completed the technical steps used in the proof of Theorem 2, we observe that we only
require the following consequence of Assumption 2 with γ = 0 for the result to go through: that
the service quality provided to each customer satisﬁes equation (10). This observation will be
formalized in the next subsection.
We conclude this subsection by restating and proving Corollary 1.
Corollary 1. Under Assumptions 1 and 2 with γ = 0, J ∗
T (b1,h) ≥J ∗
T (b1,l) for any horizon T ≥2
and budget states b1,h, b1,l such that b1,h ≥b1,l component-wise.
Proof. From Assumption 1(i) we have φt−1(b1,h,1) ≥φt−1(b1,l,1) component-wise, for each
t ∈{2,...,T}. Hence,
J ∗
T (b1,h) = J relax
T
(b1,h) = MY(b1,h) +
T
X
t=2
MY
 φt−1 (b1,h,1)

≥MY(b1,l) +
T
X
t=2
MY
 φt−1 (b1,l,1)

= J relax
T
(b1,l) = J ∗
T (b1,l)
where the ﬁrst and last equalities follow from Theorem 2, and the inequality follows from Lemma
1 at the start of Appendix EC.2.
□
EC.2.2.
Proofs for Theorem 1
We begin this section by providing a roadmap of the proof. Observe that, for any budget bj and
allocation xj, the service quality perceived by customer j can be bounded in the following way
using Assumption 2:
qj(bj,xj) =
P
i∈Aj(vij −pij)xij
P
i∈Aj(vij −pij)y∗
i (bj,1)
≥

mini∈Aj
n
vij
pij
o
−1
P
i∈Aj pijxij

maxi∈Aj
n
vij
pij
o
−1
P
i∈Aj pijy∗
i (bj)
≥(1 −γ) ·
P
i∈Aj pijxij
min

bj,P
i∈Aj pijsi
.
(EC.5)
Thus, the service quality can be lower bounded by a modiﬁed service quality, which essentially
assumes γ = 0 and scales down the result by a factor of 1 −γ.
Now, recall from Theorem 2, that if γ = 0, then J MY
T
(b1) is equal to the revenues of the myopic
policy in a system where service quality is always equal to 1 (which we denoted by J relax
T
(b1)).
This result, coupled with equation (EC.5), suggests lower bounding J MY
T
(b1) by a system where
service quality is always equal to 1 −γ instead. Formally, we deﬁne this system as:
J LBMY
T
(b1) = max
x1,...,xT
T
X
t=1
R(xt)
s.t. xt ∈X
 φt−1 (b1,1 −γ)

,
∀t.
(EC.6)

ec8
e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
Analogous to problem (9), we emphasize that J LBMY
T
(b1) = MY(b1)+PT
t=2 MY(φt−1 (b1,1 −γ)).
In order to prove Theorem 1, we will then show that, indeed,
J MY
T
(b1) ≥J LBMY
T
(b1).
We do so in Proposition 7 via a coupling argument. Having established this lower bound on the
performance of the myopic policy, the bound of (1−γ) with respect to the optimal revenue follows
naturally, as concluded in the proof of Theorem 1.
We begin the proofs in this section by showing a corollary which proves an extension of Theorem
2 and Corollary 1 that is important in the derivation for the lower bound of the myopic policy
performance.
Corollary 2. Under Assumption 1, for any horizon T, initial budget state b1, and parameter
γ ∈[0,1), Theorem 2 and Corollary 1 also hold for any service quality that satisﬁes equation (10),
and such that it is scaled in the budget update function as φj (bj,(1 −γ)qj) for each customer j.
Proof. It is straightforward to replicate the proofs of Theorem 2 and Corollary 1 under these
assumptions. We omit the details for the sake of brevity.
□
The next proposition establishes that the simpler policy deﬁned by (EC.6), where the service
quality is set to 1 −γ in each period, is indeed a valid lower bound on the performance of myopic.
Proposition 7. Let {xMY
t
}1≤t≤T be the myopic policy deﬁned in Section 3. Under Assumptions 1
and 2, J MY
T
(b1) ≥J LBMY
T
(b1) for any horizon T ≥2 and initial budget state b1.
Proof. The proof structure is as follows. We consider the revenues collected by the myopic policy
under diﬀerent budget updates, parametrized by an index k ∈{2,...,T}. Speciﬁcally, we assume
that the true budget update bt+1 =φ (bt,q(bt,xMY
t
)) is followed between the ﬁrst k periods, while
a modiﬁed budget update is followed in the rest of the horizon. The modiﬁed budget update
is speciﬁed below, but informally it is characterized by an alternative service quality measure
(1 −γ)˜q(bt,xMY
t
), where ˜q(bt,xMY
t
) satisﬁes equation (10). One interpretation of this alternative
service quality measure is that it assumes a constant bang-per-buck ratio for each customer and
then it scales the result by (1 −γ).
Although the net eﬀect of using the modiﬁed budget update on the total revenue collected by
the myopic policy is a priori unclear, we show that it is actually nondecreasing in the index k (cf.
equation (EC.7)), i.e. the larger the number of periods where the modiﬁed budget update is used
the smaller the total revenue collected by the myopic policy. This result is useful since it implies
the statement in the proposition as a special case (cf. equation (EC.8)).
More precisely, let {xMY
t
}t∈{1,...,k} be the myopic policy starting from the initial budget
state b1 and following the true budget update bt+1 = φ (bt,q(bt,xMY
t
)) for each period t ∈
{1,...,k −1}. Additionally, let

˜xMY
k,t
 
t∈{k+1,...,T } be the myopic policy starting from the budget

e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
ec9
state bk and following the modiﬁed budget update ˜bk+1 = φ (bk,(1 −γ)˜q(bk,xMY
k
)), and ˜bt+1 =
φ

˜bt,(1 −γ)˜q

˜bt, ˜xMY
k,t

for each period t ∈{k+2,...,T −1}, where the alternative service qual-
ity function ˜qj

˜bj,t, ˜xMY
j,k,t

≜
P
i∈Aj pij ˜xMY
ij,k,t
min

˜bj,t,P
i∈Aj pijsi
 satisﬁes equation (10), and it is scaled by (1 −γ).
Then,
we
show
that
the
total
revenue
collected
by
the
myopic
policy
n
{xMY
t
}t∈{1,...,k} ,

˜xMY
k,t
 
t∈{k+1,...,T }
o
is nondecreasing in the index k. Speciﬁcally, for each
k ∈{2,...,T},
k
X
t=1
R
 xMY
t

+
T
X
t=k+1
R
 ˜xMY
k,t

≥
k−1
X
t=1
R
 xMY
t

+
T
X
t=k
R
 ˜xMY
k−1,t

.
(EC.7)
Therefore, in particular,
J MY
T
(b1) =
T
X
t=1
R
 xMY
t

≥R
 xMY
1

+
T
X
t=2
R
 ˜xMY
1,t

= J LBMY
T
(b1),
(EC.8)
where the last equality follows from Theorem 2 and Corollary 2.
We prove equation (EC.7). The proof is by induction on the length of the horizon T.
Base Case: Consider T = 2. Namely, we prove equation (EC.7) for k = 2, i.e. R(xMY
1
)+R(xMY
2
) ≥
R(xMY
1
) + R
 ˜xMY
2,2

. We show ˜xMY
2,2 ∈X(b2), hence R
 ˜xMY
2,2

≤MY(b2) = R(xMY
2
). Speciﬁcally,
bj,2 = φj
 bj,1,qj
 bj,1,xMY
j,1

= φj
 
bj,1,
P
i∈Aj(vij −pij)xMY
ij,1
P
i∈Aj(vij −pij)y∗
i (bj,1)
!
≥φj

bj,1,

mini∈Aj
n
vij
pij
o
−1
P
i∈Aj pijxMY
ij,1

maxi∈Aj
n
vij
pij
o
−1
P
i∈Aj pijy∗
i (bj,1)


≥φj

bj,1,(1 −γ)
P
i∈Aj pijxMY
ij,1
min

bj,1,P
i∈Aj pijsi



= φj
 bj,1,(1 −γ)˜qj
 bj,1,xMY
j,1

= ˜b2
j
≥
X
i∈Aj
pij˜xMY
ij,2,2,
where the ﬁrst inequality follows from Assumption 1(i), the second inequality follows from Assump-
tions 1(i) and 2(i), and the third inequality follows from ˜xMY
2,2 ∈X

˜b2

.
Induction Step: For any T ≥3 assume that equation (EC.7) holds for any problem with horizon
T −1, and for each policy deﬁned by a parameter k ∈{2,...,T −1}.
First, note that this implies that equation (EC.7) holds for any problem with horizon T, and for
each policy deﬁned by a parameter k ∈{3,...,T}. Speciﬁcally, equation (EC.7) for a problem with

ec10
e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
horizon (T −1) ≥2 and a policy deﬁned by a parameter k ∈{2,...,T −1} implies equation (EC.7)
for a problem with horizon T and a policy deﬁned by a parameter (k + 1). Namely,
k+1
X
t=1
R
 xMY
t

+
T
X
t=k+2
R
 ˜xMY
(k+1),t

= R
 xMY
1

+
k+1
X
t=2
R
 xMY
t

+
T
X
t=k+2
R
 ˜xMY
(k+1),t

≥R
 xMY
1

+
k
X
t=2
R
 xMY
t

+
T
X
t=k+1
R
 ˜xMY
k,t

=
k
X
t=1
R
 xMY
t

+
T
X
t=k+1
R
 ˜xMY
k,t

.
It remains to show that equation (EC.7) holds for k = 2. Namely, P2
t=1 R(xMY
t
) +
PT
t=3 R
 ˜xMY
2,t

≥R(xMY
1
) + PT
t=2 R
 ˜xMY
1,t

. Or equivalently,
R
 xMY
2

+
T
X
t=3
R
 ˜xMY
2,t

≥
T
X
t=2
R
 ˜xMY
1,t

.
(EC.9)
Equation (EC.9) follows from Corollaries 1 and 2. Speciﬁcally, inequality (EC.9) compares
the revenue collected by two myopic allocations with the same scaled budget update function
˜bt+1 = φ

˜bt,(1 −γ)˜q

˜bt, ˜xMY
k,t

with initial budgets b2 and ˜b2, respectively, such that b2 ≥˜b2
component-wise. This concludes the proof of equation (EC.7).
Finally, equation (EC.8) follows from equation (EC.7) by comparing the largest left hand side
(k = T) with the smallest right hand side (k = 2). This concludes the proof.
□
We are now ready to complete the proof of the main result in Section 4.
Theorem 1. For any horizon T and initial budget state b1, let {xMY
t
}1≤t≤T be the myopic policy
deﬁned in Section 3.
Then, under Assumptions 1 and 2, {xMY
t
}1≤t≤T is (1 −γ)-optimal for problem (5), i.e.
J MY
T
(b1) ≥(1 −γ) · J ∗
T (b1).
Proof. We have the following chain of inequalities,
J MY
T
(b1) ≥J LBMY
T
(b1) ≥(1 −γ)J relax
T
(b1) ≥(1 −γ)J ∗
T (b1),
where the ﬁrst and last inequalities follow from Propositions 7 and 2, respectively. The second
inequality follows from Assumption 1(iii), since then any solution to problem (9) scaled by (1−γ)
is feasible in problem (EC.6). Speciﬁcally, (1 −γ)X(φt−1 (b1,1)) ⊆X(φt−1 (b1,1 −γ)) for each
t ∈{1,...,T}. This completes the proof.
□
We conclude this subsection by proving the tightness of the bound in Theorem 1.
Proposition 3. The instance described in Example 1 achieves the bound in Theorem 1 as δ →0.

e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
ec11
Proof. We explicitly construct the allocation under the myopic policy and a feasible policy
whose revenues lower bound those of the optimal policy.
Myopic Policy Allocation: In t = 1, the myopic policy sets xMY
11,1 = δ, xMY
22,1 = δ, and xMY
12,1 = xMY
21,1 =
0. The ﬁrst-period revenue is δ · (p1 + p2). Note that xMY
22,1 supply exhausts the supply of product
two, and this is the unique myopic solution.
The ﬁrst customer’s utility in the ﬁrst period is U1(b1,1,xMY
1,1 ) = (v11 −p1)δ while U ∗
1 (b1,1) =
(v12 −p1)δ. Thus, q1,1 = (v11−p1)δ
(v12−p1)δ = 1 −γ and the ﬁrst customer’s second period initial budget is
b1,2 = α1b1,1 + (1 −α1)(1 −γ). The second customer’s utility in the ﬁrst period is U2(b2,1,xMY
2,1 ) =
(v22 −p2)δ while U ∗
2 (b2,1) = (v22 −p2)δ. Thus, q2,1 = (v22−p2)δ
(v22−p2)δ = 1 and the second customer’s second
period initial budget is b2,2 = α2b2,1 + (1 −α2) ≥b2,1.
In t = 2, the myopic policy sets xMY
11,2 =
b1,2
p1 =
α1b1,1+(1−α1)(1−γ)
p1
, xMY
22,2 = δ, and xMY
12,2 = xMY
21,2 = 0.
Note that we are able to allocate the whole supply of the second product to the second customer
since b2,2 ≥b2,1. We are also able to spend all the budget of the ﬁrst customer since the supply of
good one is large.
The second period myopic revenue is
b1,2 + δp2 = α1b1,1 + (1 −α1)(1 −γ) + δp2 = δ(α1p1 + p2) + (1 −α1)(1 −γ).
The total proﬁt of the myopic policy over the two periods is
J MY
2
(b1) = δ((1 + α1)p1 + 2p2) + (1 −α1)(1 −γ).
We now examine the allocation policy which lower bounds the optimal.
Optimal Policy Lower Bound Allocation: We denote this policy π. In t = 1, the optimal policy
sets xπ
21,1 = δ, and xπ
12,1 = xπ
21,1 = xπ
22,1 = 0. The ﬁrst-period revenue is δ · p1, which is strictly less
than the myopic policy.
The ﬁrst customer’s utility in the ﬁrst period is U1(b1,1,xπ
1,1) = U ∗
1 (b1,1) = (v12 −p1)δ. Thus,
q1,1 = 1 and the ﬁrst customer’s second period initial budget is b1,2 = α1b1,1 + (1 −α1).
The second customer’s utility in the ﬁrst period is U2(b2,1,xπ
2,1) = 0 while U ∗
2 (b2,1) = (v22 −p2)δ.
Thus, q2,1 = 0 and the second customer’s second period initial budget is b2,2 = α2b2,1 ≤b2,1.
In t = 2, the lower bound policy sets xπ
11,2 = b1,2/p1,xπ
22,2 = b2,2/p2, and xπ
12,2 = x∗
21,2 = 0. As
before, we are able to spend all the budget of the ﬁrst customer since the supply of the ﬁrst good
is large. The lower policy’s revenue in the second period is
b1,2 + b2,2 = α1b1,1 + (1 −α1) + α2b2,1 = δ(α1p1 + α2p2) + (1 −α1).
The total revenue of the lower bound policy over the two periods is
J π
2 (b1) = δ((1 + α1)p1 + α2p2) + (1 −α1).

ec12
e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
The ratio between the two revenues is
J MY
2
(b1)
J ∗
2 (b1) ≤J MY
2
(b1)
J π
2 (b1) = δ((1 + α1)p1 + 2p2) + (1 −α1)(1 −γ)
δ((1 + α1)p1 + α2p2) + (1 −α1)
.
(EC.10)
Thus, if the initial budgets are very small, i.e. δ →0, we have
lim
δ→0
J MY
2
(b1)
J ∗
2 (b1) = 1 −γ,
achieving the bound from Theorem 1.
□
EC.3.
Proofs from Section 5
In this section, we prove our result regarding the sub-optimality of L look-ahead policies.
Proposition 5. On the instance described in Example 2, with η > 2 and m ≥max
n
1
α2 , 2(η−1)
η−2
o
,
both the myopic policy and the L-step look-ahead policy, for any L ≥1, produce revenues that are
an o
  log m
m

fraction of the optimum.
Proof. We ﬁrst prove this statement for the myopic policy MY. The proof proceeds in two
parts. First, in part 1 we characterize the allocation that the myopic policy induces and upper
bound the revenues it can garner over the T time periods. In the second part, we construct a
sub-optimal policy and lower bound the revenues it garners. The result then follows by comparing
these upper and lower bounds.
Part 1. Assume that at some time t all customers 1 ≤j ≤m have their current budget bj,t =
η
η+m−1. For this budget level, consider an allocation xuniform which, for all j ∈{1,...,m}, allocates
product 1j to customer j and then ﬁlls their remaining budgets with product 2. Finally, xuniform
ﬁlls customer (m + 1)’s budget with the remaining supply of product 2. Namely,
xuniform
1lj,t
=
(
1
m2 , if l = j and l,j ∈{1,...,m},
0, if l ̸= j and l,j ∈{1,...,m},
xuniform
2j
=
(
η
η+m−1 −
1
m2 , if j ∈{1,...,m},
m −
ηm
η+m−1 + 1
m, if j = m + 1.
(EC.11)
It is easy to verify that xuniform is budget feasible for any η > 2 and m ≥1.
Applying Lemma 4, where the assumptions that η > 2 and m ≥
n
1
α2 , 2(η−1)
η−2
o
are used, we know
that at t = 1 with a budget b1 as deﬁned in Example 2, the myopic policy implements the allo-
cation xuniform. It is easy to verify that φ(bj,1,q(bj,1,xuniform
j
)) = bj,1 =
η
η+m−1 for all customers
j ∈{1,...,m}. Thus, b1 is a ﬁxed-point under the myopic policy; this implies that MY satisﬁes
bj,t =
η
η+m−1 for all customers j ∈{1,...,m} and periods t = 1,...,T. We can then construct an
upper bound on J MY by assuming that the myopic policy completely exhausts customer budgets
in each period over the horizon T:
J MY(b1) ≤T

ηm
η + m −1 + 1

= 3logα(e−1)log m

ηm
η + m −1 + 1

= Θ(log m),
(EC.12)

e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
ec13
where the term
ηm
η+m−1 corresponds to the budgets of customers 1,...,m, and the 1 corresponds to
the budget of customer (m + 1).
Part 2. Now, let us consider an alternative policy πdeplete, which concentrates all the items on
customer 1 for each period t such that 1 ≤t ≤T −2. Namely, for 1 ≤t ≤T −2, πdeplete sets:
xdeplete
1lj,t
=
(
1
m2 , if j = 1
0, otherwise,
and ﬁlls the remaining customer budgets with product 2. Clearly, for all customers 2 ≤j ≤m and
periods t ≤T −2, qj,t(bj,t,xdeplete
j,t
) = 0 so that bj,t+1 = αbj,t. Thus, under the πdeplete policy, the
budget of each customer 2 ≤j ≤m at time T −1 will be small enough such that the customer can
be fully satisﬁed by only allocating a fraction of item 1j to her. Namely,
bj,T −1 = αT −2
η
η + m −1 = αlogα(m−3)−2
η
η + m −1 =
1
α2m3
η
η + m −1 ≤
1
α2m3 ≤1
m2 ,
where the ﬁrst inequality follows from
η
η+m−1 ≤1 for any m ≥1, and the second inequality follows
from the assumption m ≥
1
α2 . Then, at period T −1 the policy πdeplete sets:
xdeplete
1lj,T −1 =





0, if j = 1
αT −2
η
η+m−1, if j ̸= 1,l = j
0, otherwise,
thus obtaining qj,T −1(bj,T −1,xdeplete
j,T −1 ) = 1 and bj,T = αbj,T −1 + (1 −α) ≥1 −α for all customers 2 ≤
j ≤m. Lastly, in period T, πdeplete exhausts the budgets of all customers 2 ≤j ≤m with products
of type 2. Therefore,
J πdeplete(b) ≥(1 −α)(m −1) = Θ(m).
(EC.13)
Combining equations (EC.12) and (EC.13), we obtain that:
J MY(b1)
J ∗(b1) ≤
J MY(b1)
J πdeplete(b1) = o
log m
m

.
Where the inequality holds since J πdeplete(b1) is a lower bound on J ∗(b1).
The proof that
J πL-LA(b1)
J ∗(b1)
= o
log m
m

,
proceeds similarly and is omitted. The main diﬀerence is that we use a diﬀerent argument to show
that starting at b1, πL-LA allocates uniformly products 1j to j, thus implying that b1 remains a
steady state budget. This argument is precisely described in Lemma 4.
□
Lemma 4. On the instance described in Example 2, and for η > 2 and m ≥
n
1
α2 , 2(η−1)
η−2
o
, both the
myopic and L-step look-ahead policies produce xuniform as the optimal allocation for t = 1.

ec14
e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
Proof. We prove, separately for the case of the myopic policy and the L-step look-ahead policy,
that xuniform is yielded as the optimal allocation on the instance described in Example 2.
Part 1: Myopic policy. Note that at period t = 1 all customers 1 ≤j ≤m start with equal budget
levels. Therefore, by symmetry, the optimal allocation can be either one which allocates each good
{1j}1≤j≤m to the corresponding customers 1 ≤j ≤m, which is xuniform, or one which concentrates all
these goods to, without loss of generality, customer 1 only. By examination, we can see that at this
budget level, xuniform
2j
=
η
η+m−1 −
1
m2 for customers 1 ≤j ≤m, and thus xuniform
2(m+1) = m−
mη
η+m−1 −1
m > 0
for customer (m + 1), while all customers 1 ≤j ≤m have their budgets exhausted. Since the price
garnered by allocating good 1j to customer j is higher than the price of allocating some other good
1l, l ̸= j, to customer j, then under the concentrated allocation there is less leftover of good 2 to
allocate to customer (m + 1), and as such xuniform garners more revenues in this period than the
concentrated allocation. This highlights the purpose of customer (m+1) in Example 2: without this
customer, the optimal myopic solution at t = 1 would be non-unique, with both concentrated and
uniform allocations yielding the same objective value, whereas the presence of customer (m + 1)
solves this issue and guarantees that xuniform is the unique myopic allocation.
Part 2: L-step look-ahead. Consider the L-step look-ahead policy with a starting budget bj,1 =
η
η+m−1 for 1 ≤j ≤m. Note that the structure of the problem is such that it is always optimal to
fully exhaust the budget of a customer 1 ≤j ≤m; moreover, since the supply of good 2 is m, it is
always possible to exhaust these budgets. Thus, the optimal sequence of allocations produced by
πL-LA is the one that maximizes PL+1
t=1
Pm
j=1 bj,t.
First, note that under any sequence of allocations z1,...,zL+1, the budget trajectories in the
L+1 periods, namely b1,...,bL+1, are such that for any j, bj,t ≥αL
η
η+m−1 ≥
η
2(η+m−1). This implies
1
m2 ≤
η
2(η+m−1) ≤bj,t, where the ﬁrst inequality holds for any m ≥2 and η ≥2, and thus xuniform is
feasible for any bt along the budget path. Moreover,
U ∗
j (bj,t) = ηm 1
m2 + mmin
bj,t −
1
m2
1 −1
m
, m −1
m2

= η
m + min
m2bj,t −1
m −1
, m −1
m

,
(EC.14)
and, since bj,t ≥
η
2(η+m−1), then
m2bj,t−1
m−1
≥
ηm2
2(η+m−1) −1
m−1
≥1 ≥m−1
m
as long as η > 2 and m ≥2(η−1)
η−2 .
Thus, equation (EC.14) becomes
U ∗
j (bj,t) = η −1
m
+ 1,
for t ≤L + 1.
(EC.15)
Now observe that given any budget level bt such that bj,t ≥
η
2(η+m−1) and for any feasible alloca-
tion x,
X
j
qj,t(bj,t,xj) =
X
j
ηmx1jj + mP
l̸=j x1lj
U ∗
j (bj,t)
=
ηmP
j x1jj + mP
j
P
l̸=j x1lj
η−1
m + 1
.

e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
ec15
We can cast optimizing P
j qj,t(bj,t,xj) as the fractional knapsack problem:
max
x≥0
ηmP
j x1jj + mP
j
P
l̸=j x1lj
η−1
m + 1
s.t.
X
j
x1lj ≤1
m2 ,
∀l.
Since we have set η > 2, the solution to the knapsack is the one that allocates all the supply of
good 1j to customer j, for each 1 ≤j ≤m, i.e. sets x1jj to its maximum feasible value for all j,
which is precisely the allocation xuniform. This implies that, starting at t = 1, choosing xuniform at
t = 1,...,L + 1 maximizes each P
j qj,t(bj,t,xj), and consequently PL+1
t=1
Pm
j=1 bj,t. Thus xuniform is
the optimal ﬁrst period allocation for πL-LA.
□
EC.4.
Proofs from Section 6
In this section, we provide the proofs from two extensions to our model described in Sections 6.1
and 6.2, respectively.
EC.4.1.
Proofs from Section 6.1
In this subsection, we start by deﬁning additional notation that is relevant in the extension with
uncertain customer arrivals. Then, we prove several bounds on the performance of the myopic
policy in this context, including all the necessary auxiliary results.
Let P t be the set of customers that are present in period t ∈{1,...,T}. Let It be the set
of customers that are present in period t and do not get full service by the myopic policy, i.e.
It =

j : qMY
j,t < 1
 
.
Let b∗
j,t and bMY
j,t be customer’s j budget in period t if the platform follows the optimal or myopic
policy in each period τ ∈{1,...,t −1}, respectively.
Consider an optimal dual solution associated to the myopic allocation in period t. Let µMY
j,t
be
the dual variable of customer’s j budget constraint, and λMY
i,t
be the dual variable of product’s i
supply constraint.
First, we prove the result that if we allow a completely arbitrary arrival pattern, the performance
of myopic is lower bounded by 1/T times the performance of the optimal policy.
Theorem 3. Under Assumptions 1 and 2 with γ = 0, for any horizon T and initial budget state
b1,
J MY
T
(b1) ≥J ∗
T(b1)
T
.
Proof. We prove
J ∗
T(b1) ≤
T
X
t=1
t
X
τ=1
R
 xMY
τ

≤T · J MY
T
(b1).
(EC.16)

ec16
e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
The second inequality in (EC.16) is trivial. We show that
R(x∗
t) ≤
t
X
τ=1
R
 xMY
τ

for each t ∈{1,...,T}.
(EC.17)
The ﬁrst inequality in (EC.16) then follows by adding up (EC.17) over t ∈{1,...,T}.
First, note that R(x∗
1) ≤R(xMY
1
). Hence, (EC.17) holds for t = 1.
For any T ≥2, consider an arbitrary time t ∈{2,...,T}. Let Gt be the set of customers that
either are present in period t for the ﬁrst time, or get full service by the myopic policy in each
period τ ∈{1,...,t −1} that they are present in. Namely,
Gt =
(
j : j /∈
t−1
[
τ=1
P τ or qMY
j,τ = 1 ∀τ ∈{1,...,t −1} such that j ∈P τ
)
.
Assumption 1 (i) then implies b∗
j,t ≤bMY
j,t for all j ∈Gt, hence
X
j∈Gt
X
i∈Aj
pijx∗
ij,t ≤R
 xMY
t

.
(EC.18)
On the other hand, by deﬁnition of the sets Gt and It, for any customer j /∈Gt there must exist
a period τ < t such that customer j did not get full service, i.e. such that j ∈Iτ. Moreover, note
that from Assumption 2 with γ = 0 it follows that for each τ ∈{1,...,t −1}
X
j∈Iτ
X
i∈Aj
pijx∗
ij,t ≤
X
i∈S
j∈Iτ Aj
max
j∈Iτ {pij}Si ≤
X
i∈S
j∈Iτ Aj
λMY
i,τ Si ≤
X
j
bMY
j,τ µMY
j,τ +
X
i
SiλMY
i,τ = R
 xMY
τ

,
(EC.19)
where the ﬁrst inequality follows since the revenue collected from customers j ∈Iτ for each product
in any period is upper bounded by allocating all the supply of each item they are interested in,
S
j∈Iτ Aj, to the highest paying customer among them, arg maxj∈Iτ {pij}. The second inequality
holds since, from Assumption 2 with γ = 0, j ∈Iτ implies that customer j’s budget constraint
is loose in period τ (cf. equation 10), hence by complementary slackness µMY
j,τ = 0 for all j ∈Iτ,
and then by dual feasibility λMY
i,τ
≥pij for all i ∈Aj and j ∈Iτ. The third inequality holds since
µMY
j,τ ≥0 for all j, and λMY
i,τ
≥0 for all i. Finally, the equality follows from strong duality of the
linear program that computes the myopic allocation.
Therefore,
R(x∗
t) ≤
t−1
X
τ=1
X
j∈Iτ
X
i∈Aj
pijx∗
ij,t +
X
j∈Gt
X
i∈Aj
pijx∗
ij,t ≤
t
X
τ=1
R
 xMY
τ

,
where the ﬁrst inequality follows since each customer j ∈P t either belongs to Gt or to at least one
set Iτ, τ ∈{1,...,t −1}. The second inequality follows from equations (EC.18) and (EC.19). This
completes the proof of (EC.17). The result in the theorem follows from adding up (EC.17) over
t ∈{1,...,T}.
□

e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
ec17
We now restate and prove the proposition showing the tightness of the bound from Theorem 3.
Proposition 6. The bound in Theorem 3 is tight. Namely, for the instance in Example 3,
limδ→0 J MY
T
(b1)/J ∗
T(b1) = 1/T.
Proof. We compare the revenues of the myopic and those of another feasible policy whose
revenues lower bound those of the optimal policy. We assume that δ is such that δ/(1 −δ) < 1, as
well as δ ≤(1 −δ)(1 −α)/(T −1).
Myopic policy: At t = 1, this policy allocates the entirety of the good to the ﬁrst customer, for
a revenue of 1. The other customers receive nothing and they transition to a budget of αδ. Then,
when customer jl arrives at time j, they are allocated αδ/(1 −δ) of the good; this is feasible since
over all customers present at 2 ≤j ≤T, we allocate a total of δ/(1 −δ) ≤1 by construction.
Thus,
J MY
T
(b1) ≤1 + T −1
1 −α αδ = 1 + (T −1)
α
1 −αδ.
Lower bound policy to the optimal: Let us denote this policy by π. At t = 1 this policy ﬁrst
allocates the good equally to all customers jl, over all 2 ≤j ≤T and 1 ≤l ≤1/α, and then allocates
any leftover to customer 1. Since by assumption, δ ≤(1−δ)(1−α)/(T −1), the budget constraint of
these customers will be binding, and the allocation customer jl will be set to δ/(1−δ). This implies
that the service quality of customer jl is equal to 1, and the budget in the next period in which
they are present is then αδ +(1−α). The revenues accrued in the ﬁrst period are (T −1)/(1−α)δ
from customers jl, plus a revenue of 1 −(T −1)/(1 −α)δ/(1 −δ) from customer 1.
Consequently, in any period t = j ∈{2,...,T}, customers jl for l ∈{1,...,1/(1 −α)} will collec-
tively have (αδ +(1−α))/(1−α) = αδ/(1−α)+1 in budget, and as such the platform can allocate
all of the product to them for an aggregate spend of 1 −δ. The revenues in periods 2,...,T are
thus (T −1)(1 −δ). We then have
J π
T (b1) = 1 −T −1
1 −α
δ
1 −δ + T −1
1 −α δ + (T −1)(1 −δ) = 1 −T −1
1 −α
δ2
1 −δ + (T −1)(1 −δ).
Summing up, we have as δ becomes small,
lim
δ→0
J MY
T
(b1)
J ∗
T(b1) ≤lim
δ→0
J MY
T
(b1)
J π
T (b1) = 1
T .
□
We now prove the main result in this subsection, which shows that if customers must be present
at the platform at least once every L periods, see Assumption 3, then the worst-case performance
of the myopic policy, when the platform allocates a single product, depends on L and does not
scale as the problem’s horizon T grows.

ec18
e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
Theorem 4. Under Assumptions 1-3 with γ = 0, if n = 1 then for any horizon T and initial budget
state b1,
J MY
T
(b1) ≥
J ∗
T(b1)
min(L + 1,T).
Proof. For any T ≤L+1 the result follows from Theorem 3. Therefore, assume T > L+1. We
prove
J ∗
T(b1) ≤
T
X
t=1
t
X
τ=max(1,t−L)
R
 xMY
τ

≤(L + 1) · J MY
T
(b1).
(EC.20)
The second inequality in (EC.20) is trivial. We show that
R(x∗
t) ≤
t
X
τ=max(1,t−L)
R
 xMY
τ

for each t ∈{1,...,T}.
(EC.21)
The ﬁrst inequality in (EC.20) then follows by adding up (EC.21) over t ∈{1,...,T}.
For any t ≤L + 1, (EC.21) follows from (EC.17). Therefore, assume T ≥t > L + 1.
Let Ct be the set of customers that cannot aﬀord their optimal allocation in period t with the
budget induced by following the myopic policy, i.e.
Ct =

j : pijx∗
ij,t > bMY
j,t
 
.
First, note that pijx∗
ij,t ≤bMY
j,t
for any customer j /∈Ct. Hence, the solution xij = 0 for all j ∈Ct,
and xij = x∗
ij,t for all j /∈Ct, is myopic feasible in period t. Therefore,
X
j /∈Ct
pijx∗
ij,t ≤R
 xMY
t

.
(EC.22)
Additionally, each customer j ∈Ct must have gotten less than full service in some period τ ∈
{1,...,t −1}, otherwise Assumption 1 (i) would imply pijx∗
ij,t ≤b∗
j,t ≤bMY
j,t
and j /∈Ct. Moreover,
we can partition the set Ct into subsets Ct
τ, τ ∈{1,...,t −1}, according to the latest period that
each customer in Ct got less than full service. Namely, let
Ct
τ =

j : pijx∗
ij,t > bMY
j,t , qMY
j,τ < 1, qMY
j,l = 1 ∀l ∈{τ + 1,...,t −1} such that j ∈P l 
.
Then, the sets Ct
τ, τ ∈{1,...,t−1}, are disjoint and Ct = St−1
τ=1 Ct
τ. Note that τ < t−L is possible,
i.e. is possible that τ could not be counted in the right hand side of (EC.21).
Let ˆj be the customer in Ct willing to pay the highest price for the item, i.e. ˆj = arg maxj∈Ct pij.
Let τ ∈{1,...,t −1} be such that ˆj ∈Ct
τ. Then, from Assumption 2 with γ = 0 it follows that
X
j∈Ct
pijx∗
ij,t ≤piˆjSi ≤λMY
i,τ Si ≤
X
j
bMY
j,τ µMY
j,τ + SiλMY
i,τ = R
 xMY
τ

,
(EC.23)

e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
ec19
where the ﬁrst inequality follows since the revenue collected from customers j ∈Ct in any period
is upper bounded by allocating all the supply of the item to the highest paying customer among
them, ˆj. The second inequality holds since, from Assumption 2 with γ = 0, j ∈Ct
τ implies that
customer j’s budget constraint is loose in period τ (cf. equation 10), hence by complementary
slackness µMY
j,τ
= 0 for all j ∈Ct
τ, and then by dual feasibility λMY
i,τ
≥pij for all j ∈Ct
τ, and in
particular λMY
i,τ ≥piˆj. The third inequality holds since µMY
j,τ ≥0 for all j, and λMY
i,τ ≥0. Finally, the
equality follows from strong duality of the linear program that computes the myopic allocation.
Therefore, adding up (EC.22) and (EC.23) we conclude
R(x∗
t) =
X
j∈Ct
pijx∗
ij,t +
X
j /∈Ct
pijx∗
ij,t ≤R
 xMY
τ

+ R
 xMY
t

.
(EC.24)
If τ ≥t −L then (EC.24) implies (EC.21). Hence, assume 1 ≤τ < t −L. Then,
R(x∗
t) ≤R
 xMY
τ

+ R
 xMY
t

≤
t−1
X
l=t−L
R
 xMY
l

+ R
 xMY
t

=
t
X
l=t−L
R
 xMY
l

,
where the ﬁrst inequality follows from (EC.24), and the second inequality follows from Proposition
8 below. This completes the proof.
□
The following key proposition, which we used to conclude our proof of Theorem 4, shows that, if
we consider some time period τ and then a “cycle” of L time periods {t,...,t+L−1} for arbitrary
τ < t ≤T −L+1, then the myopic revenues in period τ are no more than the myopic revenues over
the entire cycle {t,...,t + L −1}:
R
 xMY
τ

≤
t+L−1
X
r=t
R
 xMY
r

.
We note that, while it is plausible that this inequality is true since by Assumption 3 all present
customers at time τ are guaranteed to also be present at some time during the cycle, this statement
is not a priori obvious. For example, τ could occur long before t, the start of the cycle; moreover,
at this τ, customers could start in a highly proﬁtable budget state that the system never returns
to, and thus the platform could extract more revenue at τ than over the cycle.
From this perspective, one can also interpret this inequality as generalizing key elements in the
proof of Theorem 2, to the uncertain customers case. Namely, if L = 1 then all customers are always
present in the system, and we can apply Lemma 3, which we use for the “dynamic complementary
slackness” argument. This lemma says that it is always feasible to repeat the myopic allocation from
some time t at the next period t+1, implying that myopic per period revenues are non-decreasing.
Thus, for L = 1, our old analysis proves that
R
 xMY
τ

≤R
 xMY
t

,
for all t > τ,

ec20
e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
no matter what the starting budget at time τ was. The inequality which we present in the next
proposition generalizes this for any L ≥1, at the expense of weakening the RHS to be revenues
over an entire cycle of length L:
Proposition 8. Under Assumptions 1-3 with γ = 0, for any horizon T and periods 1 ≤τ ≤t −1
such that t −1 ≤T −L,
R
 xMY
τ

≤
t+L−1
X
r=t
R
 xMY
r

.
Proof. For arbitrary periods 1 ≤τ ≤t −1 such that t −1 ≤T −L, we construct allocations xt
r,
for periods r within the “cycle” {t,...,t + L −1}, such that
R
 xMY
τ

≤
t+L−1
X
r=t
R(xt
r),
(EC.25)
and
t+L−1
X
r=t
R(xt
r) ≤
t+L−1
X
r=t
R
 xMY
r

.
(EC.26)
We prove (EC.25) in Lemma 5 and (EC.26) in Lemma 6. The proofs of both Lemmas, shown
below, depend on xt
r which we construct next.
In order to construct xt
r, r ∈{t,...,t+L−1}, we iteratively deﬁne a restricted-supply system for
each period before the cycle u ∈{τ,...,t −1}. The allocations xt
r, which happen for time periods
inside the cycle {t,...,t + L −1}, will then depend on the restricted-supply system deﬁned for
periods outside the cycle, i.e. in {τ,...,t−1}. The available supply in the restricted-supply system
will be less than s; while this may seem counterproductive, reducing supply will help in establishing
the lower bound in equation (EC.26).
Construction of Restricted-Supply System (Before the Cycle):
To
construct
the
restricted-
supply system in each period u ∈{τ,...,t −1}, we ﬁrst specify the budget of each customer and
then the supply of each product. These are conceptually deﬁned as follows.
The budgets are set equal to the amounts induced by the myopic allocation in the original system
with full supply, bMY
j,u . In other words, in the restricted-supply system budgets do not follow our
usual dynamics; instead, the budget path in this system is “hard-coded” to be bMY
j,u , regardless of
the allocation implemented in each period in the restricted-supply system.
The deﬁnition of the supply available in each period is more intricate. Initially, in period τ, a
supply xMY
ij,τ of product i is “tied” to each customer j. The supply “tied” to customer j in period
τ will then only be available to the platform the next time customer j is present. If customer j
returns to the platform before period t, the platform can then potentially reallocate the supply
associated to customer j to some higher-paying customers and the supply then becomes “tied” to
these customers. The items will then only become available again to the platform when the higher-
paying customers that became “tied” to the items return. This reallocation process guarantees that

e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
ec21
at any period u ∈{τ +1,...,t−1} there will be a supply of item i of at most P
j xMY
ij,τ available to the
platform. In this restricted-supply system, we assume that the platform allocates items myopically
in each period based on the available supply. We will argue that this reallocation process guarantees
that the items originally allocated by the myopic policy in period τ are progressively reallocated
in a manner that garners higher revenue.
Formally, we deﬁne the initial restricted-supply allocation for period τ as
xRS
ij,τ =
(
xMY
ij,τ if j ∈P τ,i ∈Aj,
0 otherwise.
We emphasize that, by deﬁnition, xRS
ij,τ = 0 for all j /∈P τ. Then, the restricted-supply system for
each period u ∈{τ + 1,...,t −1} is deﬁned iteratively as follows.
(i) Let each customer’s budget be equal to the budget induced by using the myopic policy in
the model with full supply in each period, i.e. bj,u = bMY
j,u for each customer j.
(ii) Let lj(u) be the last period, before period u, that customer j was present in the platform,
where we deﬁne lj(u) = −1 if period u is the ﬁrst time customer j is present. Similarly, let lτ
j (u) ∈
{τ,...,u −1} be the last period, before period u and truncated by τ, that customer j was present
in the platform, i.e. lτ
j (u) = max(lj(u),τ). Then, deﬁne the restricted supply in period u as
sRS
i,u =
X
j∈P u
xRS
ij,lτ
j (u),
where xRS
u
is a myopic allocation in the restricted-supply system in period u. For example, at u =
τ +1 the deﬁnition of the restricted supply evaluates to sRS
i,τ+1 = P
j∈P τ+1 xRS
ij,lτ
j (τ+1) = P
j∈P τ+1 xRS
ij,τ.
Recall that for any j /∈P τ, xRS
ij,τ = 0 by deﬁnition.
Construction of xt
r (Within the Cycle): Let f t
j ∈{t,...,t + L −1} be the ﬁrst period such that
customer j joins the platform during the cycle {t,...,t+L−1}, which is well deﬁned by Assumption
3. Additionally, let F t
r be the set of customers that show up for the ﬁrst time in the cycle {t,...,t+
L −1} in period r ∈{t,...,t + L −1}, i.e.
F t
r = {j : f t
j = r}.
Recall that from Assumption 3 all customers must appear at least once in any interval of L periods.
Therefore, the sets {F t
r}r∈{t,...,t+L−1} are a partition of all the customers in the system, which will
be useful in the proofs of Lemmas 5 and 6 below.
Then, the allocation xt
r for each period r ∈{t,...,t + L −1} is deﬁned as follows,
xt
ij,r =
(
xRS
ij,lτ
j (ft
j ) if r = f t
j,
0 otherwise.
This concludes the construction of the allocation xt
r, r ∈{t,...,t + L −1}.
Using xt
r as constructed, Lemma 5 shows (EC.25), and Lemma 6 shows (EC.26). The statement
in the proposition then follows from (EC.25) and (EC.26).
□

ec22
e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
Before proving Lemmas 5 and 6, which complete the proof of Theorem 4, we pause for a moment
to discuss why we restrict the proof of Theorem 4 to a single product. The key equations that
illustrate the reason are (EC.23) and (EC.24). Speciﬁcally, if we allow for multiple products then
we would have to consider one equation (EC.23) per product. As a result, we would end up with
up to one term R(xMY
τ
) per product in equation (EC.24). Consequently, it would be necessary to
modify Proposition 8 to include several expressions R(xMY
τ
) on the left hand side, or alternatively,
the corresponding left hand side terms from the appropriate equation (EC.23) related to each
product. In either case, it is unclear how to modify the restricted-supply system from the proof
of Proposition 8, which deﬁne the allocation {xt
r}r∈{t,...,t+L−1}, to accommodate these additional
terms, while simultaneously preserving myopic feasibility and the revenue guarantee. In fact, even
doing so for a single product requires a non-trivial analysis that relies on heavy machinery, as
illustrated by the proofs of Lemmas 5 and 6 that we complete next.
Lemma 5. Under Assumptions 1-3 with γ = 0, for any horizon T and periods 1 ≤τ ≤t −1 such
that t −1 ≤T −L. Let xt
r, r ∈{t,...,t + L −1}, be the allocation constructed in the proof of
Proposition 8. Then,
R
 xMY
τ

≤
t+L−1
X
r=t
R(xt
r).
Proof. For any period u ∈{τ,...,t −1}, let xRS
u
be a myopic solution of the restricted-supply
system in period u deﬁned in the proof of Proposition 8.
The proof is by induction on t, holding τ ﬁxed; essentially we are inducting on the length of the
interval from τ to t −1.
Base Case: Assume t = τ + 1, then
R
 xMY
τ

=
X
j∈P τ
X
i∈Aj
pijxMY
ij,τ =
τ+L
X
r=τ+1
X
j∈F τ+1
r
X
i∈Aj
pijxMY
ij,τ =
τ+L
X
r=τ+1
X
j∈F τ+1
r
X
i∈Aj
pijxRS
ij,τ
=
τ+L
X
r=τ+1
X
j∈F τ+1
r
X
i∈Aj
pijxRS
ij,lτ
j (r) =
τ+L
X
r=τ+1
X
j∈F τ+1
r
X
i∈Aj
pijxτ+1
ij,r =
τ+L
X
r=τ+1
X
j∈P r
X
i∈Aj
pijxτ+1
ij,r
=
τ+L
X
r=τ+1
R
 xτ+1
r

,
where the second equality follows since from Assumption 3 F τ+1
r
, r ∈{τ + 1,...,τ + L}, is a
partition of all the customers in the system. The third equality is by deﬁnition of xRS
τ . The fourth
equality follows since lτ
j (r) = τ for all customers j ∈F τ+1
r
and periods r ∈{τ + 1,...,τ + L} (see
the deﬁnitions of lτ
j (r) and F τ+1
r
in the proof of Proposition 8). The ﬁfth equality is by deﬁnition
of xτ+1
r
, r ∈{τ + 1,...,τ + L}. The sixth equality follows since, by deﬁnition, xτ+1
ij,r = 0 for all
j ∈P r \ F τ+1
r
, r ∈{τ + 1,...,τ + L}.

e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
ec23
Induction Step: Assume the statement of the lemma holds for t, then
R
 xMY
τ

≤
t+L−1
X
r=t
R(xt
r) =
t+L−1
X
r=t
X
j∈P r
X
i∈Aj
pijxt
ij,r
=
t+L−1
X
r=t
X
j∈F tr
X
i∈Aj
pijxt
ij,r
=
X
j∈F t
t
X
i∈Aj
pijxt
ij,t +
t+L−1
X
r=t+1
X
j∈F tr
X
i∈Aj
pijxt
ij,r
=
X
j∈F t
t
X
i∈Aj
pijxt
ij,t +
t+L−1
X
r=t+1
X
j∈F t+1
r
\F t
t
X
i∈Aj
pijxt+1
ij,r
=
t+L
X
r=t+1
X
j∈F t+1
r
∩F t
t
X
i∈Aj
pijxt
ij,t +
t+L−1
X
r=t+1
X
j∈F t+1
r
\F t
t
X
i∈Aj
pijxt+1
ij,r
=
t+L
X
r=t+1
X
j∈F t+1
r
∩F t
t
X
i∈Aj
pijxRS
ij,lτ
j (t) +
t+L−1
X
r=t+1
X
j∈F t+1
r
\F t
t
X
i∈Aj
pijxt+1
ij,r
≤
t+L
X
r=t+1
X
j∈F t+1
r
∩F t
t
X
i∈Aj
pijxRS
ij,t +
t+L−1
X
r=t+1
X
j∈F t+1
r
\F t
t
X
i∈Aj
pijxt+1
ij,r
=
t+L
X
r=t+1
X
j∈F t+1
r
∩F t
t
X
i∈Aj
pijxt+1
ij,r +
t+L−1
X
r=t+1
X
j∈F t+1
r
\F t
t
X
i∈Aj
pijxt+1
ij,r
=
t+L
X
r=t+1
X
j∈F t+1
r
X
i∈Aj
pijxt+1
ij,r
=
t+L
X
r=t+1
X
j∈P r
X
i∈Aj
pijxt+1
ij,r =
t+L
X
r=t+1
R
 xt+1
r

.
The ﬁrst inequality follows from the induction hypothesis. The second equality follows since, by
deﬁnition, xt
ij,r = 0 for all j ∈P r \ F t
r, r ∈{t,...,t + L −1}. The fourth equality holds because, by
deﬁnition, xt+1
ij,r = xt
ij,r = xRS
ij,lτ
j (r) for all customers j ∈F t
r = F t+1
r
\F t
t for all periods r ∈{t+1,...,t+
L}. The ﬁfth equality follows since from Assumption 3 F t+1
r
, r ∈{t + 1,...,t + L}, is a partition of
all the customers in the system. The sixth equality is by deﬁnition of xt
t. The seventh equality is
by deﬁnition of xt+1
r
, for each customer j ∈F t
t and period r ∈{t + 1,...,t + L}. The ninth equality
follows since, by deﬁnition, xt+1
ij,r = 0 for all j ∈P r \ F t+1
r
, r ∈{t + 1,...,t + L}.
To conclude, the second inequality holds since from Assumption 3 {F t+1
r
}t+L
r=t+1 is a partition of
all the customers and the allocation xRS
i,j,lτ
j (t) is feasible in the restricted-supply system in period
t. In fact, by deﬁnition P
j∈P r xRS
ij,lτ
j (t) = sRS
i,t , hence xRS
i,j,lτ
j (t) is supply feasible. Moreover, xRS
i,j,lτ
j (t) is
also budget feasible since
X
i∈Aj
pijxRS
ij,lτ
j (t) ≤
X
i∈Aj
pijxMY
ij,lτ
j (t) ≤bMY
j,t .

ec24
e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
In the latter chain of inequalities, the ﬁrst inequality follows since by deﬁnition7 xRS
ij,τ = xMY
ij,τ, and,
for each u ∈{τ + 1,...,t −1}, xMY
u
is deﬁned on a problem with the same budgets and uniformly
larger supply than xRS
u . The last inequality follows from Lemma 3, where Assumptions 1 and 2
with γ = 0 are used. This completes the proof of the lemma.
□
Lemma 6. Under Assumptions 1-3 with γ = 0, for any horizon T and periods 1 ≤τ ≤t −1 such
that t −1 ≤T −L. Let xt
r, r ∈{t,...,t + L −1}, be the allocation constructed in the proof of
Proposition 8. Then,
t+L−1
X
r=t
R(xt
r) ≤
t+L−1
X
r=t
R
 xMY
r

.
Proof. For any period u ∈{τ,...,t −1}, let xRS
u
be a myopic solution of the restricted-supply
system in period u deﬁned in the proof of Proposition 8. We prove that the allocation xt
r is myopic
feasible in each period r ∈{t,...,t + L −1}.
First, xt
r is budget feasible in each period r ∈{t,...,t + L −1} since
X
i∈Aj
pijxt
ij,r = 0 ≤bMY
j,r ∀j, ∀r ∈{t,...,t + L −1} \ {f t
j},
where the equality follows from the deﬁnition of the allocation xt
r for r ̸= f t
j. Additionally, for each
customer j and period r = f t
j,
X
i∈Aj
pijxt
ij,r =
X
i∈Aj
pijxt
ij,ft
j =
X
i∈Aj
pijxRS
ij,lτ
j (ft
j ) ≤
X
i∈Aj
pijxMY
ij,lτ
j (ft
j ) ≤bMY
j,ft
j,
where the equality follows from the deﬁnition of the allocation xt
r for r = f t
j. The ﬁrst inequality
follows since by deﬁnition xRS
ij,τ = xMY
ij,τ, and for each u ∈{τ + 1,...,t −1}, xMY
u
is deﬁned on a
problem with the same budgets and uniformly larger supply than xRS
u . The last inequality follows
from Lemma 3, where Assumptions 1 and 2 with γ = 0 are used.
Second, we show that xt
r is supply feasible since
t+L−1
X
r=t
X
j∈P r
xt
ij,r =
t+L−1
X
r=t
X
j∈F tr
xRS
ij,lj(r) ≤
X
j∈P τ
xMY
ij,τ ≤Si.
(EC.27)
In equation (EC.27), the equality follows from the deﬁnition of xt
r, r ∈{t,...,t + L −1}, and we
show that the ﬁrst inequality holds via an induction argument in the following.
The proof that Pt+L−1
r=t
P
j∈F tr xRS
ij,lj(r) ≤P
j∈P τ xMY
ij,τ is by induction on t, holding τ ﬁxed as in
Lemma 5.
7 By convention we deﬁne xMY
ij,τ = 0 for all customers j /∈P τ.

e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
ec25
Base Case: Assume t = τ + 1, then
τ+L
X
r=τ+1
X
j∈F τ+1
r
xRS
ij,lτ
j (r) =
τ+L
X
r=τ+1
X
j∈F τ+1
r
xRS
ij,τ =
τ+L
X
r=τ+1
X
j∈F τ+1
r
xMY
ij,τ =
X
j∈P τ
xMY
ij,τ.
where the ﬁrst equality follows since lτ
j (r) = τ for all j ∈F τ+1
r
, r ∈{τ + 1,...,τ + L}, the second
equality is by deﬁnition of xRS
τ , and the last equality follows since from Assumption 3 F t
r, r ∈
{t,...,t + L −1}, is a partition of all the customers in the system, for any t.
Induction Step: Assume the statement holds for t, then
t+L
X
r=t+1
X
j∈F t+1
r
xRS
ij,lτ
j (r) =
t+L
X
r=t+1
X
j∈F t+1
r
\F t
t
xRS
ij,lτ
j (r) +
t+L
X
r=t+1
X
j∈F t+1
r
∩F t
t
xRS
ij,lτ
j (r)
=
t+L
X
r=t+1
X
j∈F t+1
r
\F t
t
xRS
ij,lτ
j (r) +
X
j∈F t
t
xRS
ij,t
=
t+L−1
X
r=t+1
X
j∈F tr
xRS
ij,lτ
j (r) +
X
j∈F t
t
xRS
ij,t
≤
t+L−1
X
r=t
X
j∈F tr
xRS
ij,lτ
j (r)
≤
X
j∈P τ
xMY
ij,τ,
where the second equality follows since lτ
j (r) = t for all customers j ∈F t+1
r
∩F t
t and periods r ∈
{t + 1,...,t + L}, and from Assumption 3 F t+1
r
, r ∈{t + 1,...,t + L}, is a partition of all the
customers in the system. The third equality holds because F t
r = F t+1
r
\F t
t for all r ∈{t+1,...,t+L}.
The ﬁrst inequality follows since xRS
t
is feasible in the restricted supply-system, hence for each
product i, P
j∈P t xRS
ij,t ≤sRS
i,t = P
j∈P t xRS
ij,lτ
j (t) and P t = F t
t , while the second inequality follows from
the induction hypothesis. This completes the proof of the second inequality in equation (EC.27).
In order to conclude, we return to equation (EC.27): since the allocation xt
r is myopic feasible in
each period r ∈{t,...,t+L−1}, it follows that any myopic solution can only improve the revenues
over xt
r, i.e. R(xt
r) ≤R(xMY
r
), completing the proof of the lemma.
□
We conclude this subsection with the proof of Theorem 5, which provides a parametric lower
bound on the performance of the myopic policy when the platform allocates multiple products,
i.e. for n ≥1. This bound depends both on the parameter L and on the shape of the customers’
budget update functions.
Theorem 5. Let ¯α ∈[0,1] be deﬁned as:
¯α =
min
j∈[m],b∈[0,1]{φj(b,1)}.

ec26
e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
Under Assumptions 1-3 with γ = 0, for any horizon T and initial budget state b1,
J MY
T
(b1) ≥
J ∗
T(b1)
min
 L + 1
¯α,T
.
Proof. Fix some t ≤T. We assume that t > L + 1, or otherwise we can directly use Theorem 3
where we have shown that
R(x∗
t) ≤
t
X
τ=1
R(xMY
τ
).
Similarly to the proof of Theorem 3, deﬁne Gt to be the set of customers who have received full
service in each period up to time t (note that by Assumption 3, such customers must have been
present in the system before t > L + 1). For customers j ∈Gt,
bMY
j,t ≥b∗
j,t ≥¯αb∗
j,t.
Furthermore, following the reasoning from equation (EC.24), for τ ∈{t −L,...,t −1},
X
j∈Iτ
X
i∈Aj
pijx∗
ij,t ≤R(xMY
τ
).
It remains to handle the customers who are present at t but belong to neither Gt, nor
∪τ∈{t−L,...,t−1}Iτ; let us call this set Qt. These are customers who, via the myopic policy, have
received full service at every time greater than or equal to t −L up to t −1, but which did not
receive full service in some period before t−L−1. Consider one such customer j ∈Qt. There must
be at least one time between t −L and t −1 when j was present in the system, by Assumption
3, and when j received full service, by construction. Thus, the myopic policy budget that this
customer will have at time t is at least:
bMY
j,t ≥¯α = min
b∈[0,1]{φj(b,1)} ≥¯αb∗
j,t.
Recalling that for j ∈Gt, bMY
j,t ≥b∗
j,t ≥¯αb∗
j,t, and since the objective value of the LP that the myopic
policy solves in period t is homogeneous in the RHS of the budget constraints,
X
j∈Gt∪Qt
X
i∈Aj
pijx∗
ij,t ≤1
¯αR(xMY
t
),
Putting everything together, we have:
R(x∗
t) ≤
t−1
X
τ=t−L
X
j∈Iτ
X
i∈Aj
pijx∗
ij,t +
X
j∈Gt
X
i∈Aj
pijx∗
ij,t +
X
j∈Qt
X
i∈Aj
pijx∗
ij,t
≤
t−1
X
τ=t−L
R
 xMY
τ

+ 1
¯αR
 xMY
t

,

e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
ec27
Thus, we can sum over all t ∈{1,...,T} to obtain:
T
X
t=1
R(x∗
t) ≤
T
X
t=1


t−1
X
τ=max(t−L,1)
R
 xMY
τ

+ 1
¯αR
 xMY
t


≤

L + 1
¯α

T
X
t=1
R
 xMY
t

.
□
EC.4.2.
Proofs for Section 6.2
In this section, we give a proof of our main result for the varying supply case. We begin by restating
this result:
Theorem 6. Let J ∗
T(b1) be the optimal revenue for the system with time-varying supply for a
starting budget b1 and a horizon of T. If for each period t and good i we have si,t ∈[(1 −ϵ)¯si,(1 +
ϵ)¯si], then under Assumptions 1 and 2 with γ = 0,
J S−MY
T
(b1)
J ∗
T(b1)
≥(1 −ϵ)4.
At a high level, the proof of the above theorem compares the scaled myopic revenues J S−MY
T
(b1)
in the varying supply system with supply st with a system in which the supply level is constantly
at ¯s, and in which the service quality is set to (1−ϵ)2. To give some intuition for the (1−ϵ)2 factor,
recall that by Equation 14,
qS−MY
j,t
(bj,t,xS−MY
j,t
,st) ≥(1 −ϵ)2qMY
j,t (bj,t,xMY
j,t ,¯s),
where on the right hand side, we have the quality of service achieved by the myopic policy if supply
were constant. In a way similar to that of Theorem 1, we leverage this inequality to compare the
trajectories of two systems following the distinct budget updates implied by these service qualities.
We observe that, here, the gap of (1 −ϵ)2 comes from the variation of st, whereas in Theorem 1
the 1 −γ gap comes from the heterogeneity in bang-per-buck ratios.
We start with a lemma which compares the revenues in two auxiliary systems, which we refer
to by H and S-LBMY. Both have initial budget b1, and the goods supply is equal to ¯s in every
period. Furthermore,
(i) In system H, the quality of service at time t and budget bt is deﬁned as qS−MY
j,t
(bj,t,xS−MY
j,t
,st).
We denote by J H
T (b1) the revenues of this system under the myopic policy xMY (bt,¯s).
(ii) In system S-LBMY, the quality of service at time t and budget bt is always equal to (1 −ϵ)2.
Denote by J S−LBMY
T
(b1) the myopic policy revenues of this system. This can be phrased as
the following optimization:
J S−LBMY
T
(b1) = max
x1,...,xT
T
X
t=1
R(xt)
s.t. xt ∈X
 φt−1  b1,(1 −ϵ)2
,
∀t,
(EC.28)

ec28
e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
and we have J S−LBMY
T
(b1) = MY(b1) + PT
t=2 MY

φt−1 
b1,(1 −ϵ)
2
We note that this
system is similar to the system deﬁned in (EC.6), except that we set the ﬁxed quality of
service to (1 −ϵ)2 instead of 1 −γ.
We then have:
Lemma 7. For any horizon T ≥2 and budget b1, J H
T (b1) ≥J S−LBMY
T
(b1) .
Proof. Note that, as per equation (14),
qS−MY
j,t
(bj,t,xS−MY
j,t
,st) ≥(1 −ϵ)2qMY
j,t (bj,t,xMY
j,t ,¯s)
We can then use this inequality to repeat the proof of Proposition 4 by setting ˜qt(bt,xMY
t
) =
qMY
t
(bt,xMY
t
), to obtain obtain that: J H
T (b1) ≥J S−LBMY
T
(b1). The only change in the proof is that
the chain of inequalities in the base case compares the budget update functions of systems H and
LBMY.
□
We note that in system H, both the quality of service and budget paths exactly follow those of
the original varying supply system under the policy xS−MY
t
. Also, while Lemma 7 is not suﬃcient
to bound J ∗
T(b1) itself, it provides a crucial intermediate inequality towards this goal. In particular,
Lemma 7 compares, for a system where supply is always equal to ¯s instead of varying, the eﬀect
of following the same budget update as the varying supply system, qS−MY
t
(bt,xS−MY
t
), versus
following the budget update qMY
t
(bt,xMY
t
), which would transpire for ﬁxed supply ¯s.
Having established this, it remains to (a) bound the performance of J S−MY
T
(b1) versus J H
T (b1),
and then (b) bound the performance of J S−LBMY
T
(b1) versus J ∗
T(b1). We do this in the next lemma:
Lemma 8. For any T ≥2 and starting budget b1, we have
(i) J S−MY
T
(b1) ≥(1 −ϵ) · J H
T (b1).
(ii) J S−LBMY
T
(b1) ≥(1 −ϵ)3 · J ∗
T(b1).
Proof. For part 1, recall that system H is designed in such a way that it shares the same budget
path as the real stochastic system. Since in system H we are using the myopic policy, and using
the deﬁnition of the scaled myopic policy, we have that (1 −ϵ)xMY
t
(bt,¯s) ≤xS−MY
t
(bt,st); thus, at
every t, P
ij pijxS−MY
ij,t
(bt,st) ≥(1 −ϵ)P
ij pijxMY
ij,t (bt,¯s). The inequality then directly follows.
For part 2, note that J S−LBMY
T
(b1) ≥(1 −ϵ)2J relax
T
(b1), where J relax
T
(b1) is deﬁned as in
equation (9) to set the service quality to 1 at every period and receive constant supply ¯s. Since
(1 + ϵ)¯s ≥st, it immediately follows that J relax
T
(b1) ≥(1 + ϵ)−1J ∗
T(b1) ≥(1 −ϵ)J ∗
T(b1). Thus,
J S−LBMY
T
(b1) ≥(1 −ϵ)3 · J ∗
T(b1).
□
Armed with the above lemmas, we can now complete the proof of Theorem 6.

e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
ec29
Proof of Theorem 6. We have,
J S−MY
T
(b1) ≥(1 −ϵ)J H
T (b1) ≥(1 −ϵ)J S−LBMY
T
(b1) ≥(1 −ϵ)4J ∗
T(b1),
where the ﬁrst inequality follows from part 1 of Lemma 8, the second from Lemma 7, and the third
from part 2 of Lemma 8.
□
EC.5.
Numerical Experiments
In this section, we describe the sampling procedure for the numerical experiments in Section 4.3
and present a set of numerical experiments that illustrate the performance of the myopic policy in
the extensions to our model detailed in Section 6.
EC.5.1.
Sampling Procedure for the Numerical Experiments from Section 4.3
For each value of γ the parameters of each problem instance in the simulation in Section 4.3 were
sampled as follows:
• n is sampled form a discrete uniform with support {3,...,10} and we set m = n;
• T is sampled from a discrete uniform distribution with support {3,...,15};
• Each component of the smoothing parameters α, the initial budget b1, and the supply s, is
sampled from a uniform distribution with support [0,1];
• Every customer is connected to at least one item (customer j is connected to product i = j).
All other edges in the network are generated with some probability δ ∈[0,1], where for each
problem instance δ is sampled from a uniform distribution on [0,1];
• For each customer j, we sample a parameter ρ from a uniform distribution with support [0,2].
Then the valuations {vij} and prices and {pij} are uniformly sampled from the circular sector
deﬁned by (1 −γ)ρ ≤vij/pij −1 ≤ρ and v2
ij + p2
ij ≤25.
EC.5.2.
Numerical Experiments from Section 6.1: Uncertain Customer Arrivals
We examine the numerical performance of the myopic policy with uncertain customer arrivals for
randomly generated systems. We ﬁnd that the myopic policy collects at least 90% of the optimal
revenue for 98% of the sampled systems.
More speciﬁcally, for each value of L we sample system parameters and customer arrivals as
follows:
• n and m are sampled from a discrete uniform with support {1,...,5} and {1,...,10}, respec-
tively;
• For each customer j, the size of the characteristic set Aj is sampled from a discrete uniform
with support {1,...,n}. Then, given the size of Aj, the products in Aj are chosen through
random sampling among available products;

ec30
e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
Figure EC.1
Boxplot of the ratio JMY
T
/Jrelax
T
when customer arrivals are uncertain and customers arrive at
least every L periods. The box plot for each value of L represents the distribution of ratios sampled from
1,000,000 randomly generated problem instances.
• T is sampled from a discrete uniform distribution with support {2,...,15};
• We assume customers have an exponentially smoothed budget update as in (4). Each compo-
nent of the smoothing parameters α, the initial budget b1, and the supply s, is sampled from
a uniform distribution with support [0,1];
• For each customer j, we sample a parameter ρ from a uniform distribution with support [0,2].
Then the valuations {vij} and prices and {pij} are uniformly sampled from the circular sector
deﬁned by ρ ≤vij/pij −1 ≤ρ and v2
ij + p2
ij ≤25;
• For each customer we sample interarrival intervals from a discrete uniform distribution with
support {1,...,L} until the horizon T is reached.
With a slight abuse of notation, we denote by J relax
T
the revenue collected by the platform when
every time a customer is present in the platform its budget grows at the maximum possible rate
(the quality level is one). Figure EC.1 depicts the boxplots of the ratio J MY
T
/J relax
T
(which is an
upper bound for J MY
T
/J ∗
T) for diﬀerent values of L. For each value of L, we randomly sampled 1
million systems. We note that the myopic policy collect at least 90% of the optimal revenue for 98%
of the sampled systems. Furthermore, while Example 2 states that the worst-case performance of
the myopic policy scales with L, the worst-case ratios in the simulation do not seem to scale with
L. We believe this occurs because randomly sampling a system instance similar to the instance
in Example 3 becomes more unlikely as L increases, since it involves having L customers appear
sequentially in a problem horizon of length L.
EC.5.3.
Numerical Experiments from Section 6.2: Time-Varying Supply
We ﬁrst observe that the scaled myopic policy, while admitting the theoretical bound from Theorem
6, is potentially quite wasteful. That is, if it scales xMY
t
(bt,¯s) by 1 −ϵ, the platform can end up

e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
ec31
with leftover products and unspent customer budgets which could still be proﬁtably matched; this
motivates us to modify the policy so as to perform these additional allocations. We tack on an
additional adjustment to the scaled myopic policy as we ﬁnd it improves performance in numerical
experiments, but it does not change the lower bound. The modiﬁcation proceeds as follows:
The modiﬁed scaled myopic allocation policy. In each period t, for customer budgets bt
and supply st, the modiﬁed scaled myopic allocation denoted by xMS−MY
t
(bt,st), is constructed in
three steps:
a) First, calculate the myopic allocation with budgets bt and supply ¯s and scale it by a factor
1 −ϵ. Namely, compute (1 −ϵ) · xMY
t
(bt,¯s);
b) Let bL
t and sL
t be, respectively, the budget and supply leftover after allocation (1 −ϵ) ·
xMY (bt,¯s). Speciﬁcally, for customer j, bL
j,t = bj,t −(1 −ϵ) · P
i pijxMY
ij
(bt,¯s) and, for good i,
sL
i,t = si,t −(1 −ϵ) · P
j xMY
ij,t (bt,¯s). Compute the myopic allocation with leftover budget and
supply, namely, xMY
t
(bL
t ,sL
t );
c) Then, the scaled myopic allocation is deﬁned as the sum of the allocation of the two previous
steps, i.e. xMS−MY
t
(bt,st) ≜(1 −ϵ) · xMY
t
(bt,¯s) + xMY
t
(bL
t ,sL
t ).
The modiﬁed policy xMS−MY
t
(bt,st) diﬀers from the scaled myopic policy xS−MY
t
(bt,st) only
through the allocation padding that occurs though the term xMY
t
(bL
t ,sL
t ). It can be seen that this
policy trivially also satisﬁes Theorem 6; however for simplicity we chose to present our results in
Section 6.2 using a more straightforward policy.
We denote by J S−relax
T
the revenue when budgets increase at the maximum possible rate (quality
level is always one) and supply varies over time. In Figure EC.2, we depict the box plots of the
distribution of the ratio J S−MY
T
/J S−relax
T
for diﬀerent values of ϵ. Each sample corresponds to a
randomly generated allocation problem (in a similar vein to the simulation in Section EC.5.2 but
we assume that all customers are present in each period), and for each value of ϵ we sampled
one million allocation problems. In general, the scaled myopic policy collects at least 95% of the
optimal revenue and, even for large values of ϵ, the scaled myopic policy collects at least half of the
optimal revenue. The simulation also indicates that the bound in Theorem 6 is potentially loose.
Devising tight bounds for the performance of the scaled myopic policy (and other policies) is a
promising direction of future research.
Finally, we examine the performance of the “regular” myopic policy (i.e. we use the policy deﬁned
in 12 ) in a setting where the supply for each good follows a random walk. Namely, the supply of
good i in period t = 1 is si,1 = ¯si and, for t > 1, we have si,t = max{si,t−1 + Zt,0}, where Zt is a
uniform random variable with support [−ϵ · ¯si,ϵ · ¯si]. We calculate the ratio J MY
T
/J S−relax
T
(which
is an upper bound for the ratio J MY
T
/J ∗
T) for diﬀerent values of ϵ. For each value of ϵ, one million
problem instances were randomly sampled. The boxplot of the ratios is depicted in Figure EC.3.

ec32
e-companion to Calmon, Ciocan, Romero: Revenue Management with Repeated Customer Interactions
Figure EC.2
Boxplot of the ratio JS−MY
T
/JS−relax
T
when the supply of each good vary in a bounded range. The
box plot for each value of ϵ represents the distribution of ratios sampled from 1,000,000 randomly generated
problem instances. We note that the y-axis does not start at zero.
Figure EC.3
Boxplot of the ratio JMY
T
/JS−relax
T
when supply of each good vary according to a random walk.
The box plot for each value of ϵ represents the distribution of ratios sampled from 1,000,000 randomly generated
problem instances.
Even in this case, where supply does not vary within a bounded range, the myopic policy has a
near-optimal average performance and, in general, captures at least 80% of the optimal revenue.