TITLE: The Effect of Patent Protection on Inventor Mobility
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2019.3500
---

This is a postprint version of the following published document:
Melero, E., Palomeras, N. & Wehrheim, D. (2020). 
The Effect of Patent Protection on Inventor Mobility. 
Management Science, 66 (12), pp. 5485-5504.
DOI: 10.1287/mnsc.2019.3500
© 2020 INFORMS 

The eﬀect of patent protection on inventor mobility∗
Eduardo Melero†a, Neus Palomerasa, and David Wehrheimb
aUniversidad Carlos III de Madrid
bIESE Business School
Forthcoming, Management Science
ABSTRACT
This article investigates the eﬀect of patent protection on the mobility of early-career employee-inventors.
Using data on patent applications ﬁled at the US Patent and Trademark Oﬃce between 2001 and
2012 and examiner leniency as a source of exogenous variation in patent protection, we ﬁnd that one
additional patent granted decreases the likelihood of changing employers, on average, by 23 percent.
This decrease is stronger when the employee has fewer coinventors, works outside the core of the ﬁrm,
and produces more basic-research innovations. These ﬁndings are consistent with the idea that patents
turn innovation-related skills into patent-holder-speciﬁc human capital.
KEYWORDS: inventors, patents, mobility, speciﬁc human capital, examiner leniency
∗We are grateful to Ashish Arora, Manuel F. Bag¨u´es, Stefano H. Baruﬀaldi, Bruno Cassiman, Emre Ekinci,
Andrea Fosfuri, Karin Hoisl, Peter Mueser, Pablo Ruiz-Verd´u, Evan Starr, Giovanni Valentini, and Natalia
Zinovyeva, as well as the conference participants at the SMS Special Conference on Strategic Human Capital
(Milan, 2017); the Barcelona GSE Summer Forum (2017); the SEI Faculty Workshop (Madrid, 2017); the Munich
Summer Institute (2017); the 10th Annual Conference on Innovation Economics (Chicago, 2017); the INSEAD
Workshop on Innovators Mobility (Fontainebleau, 2018); and seminar participants at Universidad Carlos III de
Madrid (2017) for their useful comments and suggestions. All errors are our own. The authors acknowledge
ﬁnancial support from the Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities through projects ECO2015-
65599-P, ECO2015-69615-R, PGC2018-098767-B-C21, PGC2018-096316-B-I00 and PGC2018-094418-B-I00 and
the Madrid regional government through project EARLYFIN-CM #S2015/HUM-3353.
†Corresponding author: eduardo.melero@uc3m.es
1

1.
Introduction
The inter-ﬁrm mobility of skilled workers is a key factor behind the dissemination of knowl-
edge, as ﬁrst noticed by Arrow (1962). Especially relevant in this respect is the case of R&D
workers, given the tacit technological knowledge that they frequently embody. Accordingly, past
research has been interested in understanding the determinants of this type of mobility at the
individual (Hoisl, 2007; Palomeras and Melero, 2010; Ganco, 2013), organizational (Paruchuri
et al., 2006) and institutional (Marx et al., 2009; Hombert and Matray, 2016; Akcigit et al.,
2016) levels. A good understanding of these determinants may allow ﬁrms to design innovation
strategies to proﬁt from (and not be damaged by) the knowledge spread by moving workers.
The role of institutional factors on the mobility of R&D workers is of particular interest, as
its consequences for knowledge diﬀusion concern both managers and policy-makers. Previous
research has paid particular attention to the laws that govern noncompete agreements. These
agreements expressly prevent departing employees from working for competitors and have a di-
rect negative impact on the interﬁrm mobility of skilled talent (Gilson, 1999; Fallick et al., 2006;
Marx et al., 2009; Marx, 2011). Nevertheless, the literature has overlooked other legal mecha-
nisms that may pose implicit barriers to mobility by preventing R&D workers from transferring
knowledge across employers.1
This paper contributes to ﬁlling this gap in the literature by investigating the eﬀect of
patent protection on inventor mobility. The premise of our study is that inventors possess tacit
knowledge that can contribute to the implementation (or further development) of the innovations
that they have created, as documented by Zucker et al. (1998).
At the same time, ﬁrms’
proprietary technologies usually operate as complementary assets to employees’ human capital,
turning it less redeployable in other companies (Campbell et al., 2012).
As a consequence,
we suggest that patent protection turns the innovation-related skills of the R&D workers into
patent-holder-speciﬁc human capital and therefore decreases inventor mobility. We formalize
these ideas in a simple model and derive two additional implications concerning this negative
eﬀect of patent protection on mobility: (i) it inversely depends on the existence of other ﬁrm-
speciﬁc human capital (e.g., complementarities between the inventor and the ﬁrm’s resources),
and (ii) it is more intense when the role of the inventor in the implementation of the innovation
1An exception is Ganco et al. (2015), who investigate the negative relationship between a ﬁrm’s reputation
for IP enforcement and outbound mobility. They implicitly assume the instrumentality of patent protection in
generating a retention eﬀect at high-litigiousness ﬁrms. However, they do not explicitly analyze the role of patents.
2

is more relevant (e.g., for innovations that build on basic research).
We empirically investigate the eﬀect of patenting on inventor mobility by comparing the
trajectories of inventors with diﬀerent numbers of granted patents among those with a given
number of applications. This analysis poses an important methodological diﬃculty. Inventors
with high (unobservable) talent are arguably more likely to produce innovations that satisfy
legal patentability requirements than inventors with less talent. Thus, a simple comparison of
inventors with approved applications and those without them may lead to inferences that mirror
only their underlying dissimilarities. We address this challenge by using diﬀerences in leniency
across patent examiners as a source of exogenous variation in the number of granted patents
(Sampat and Williams, 2019) to estimate the causal relationship. The validity of this instrument
is supported by qualitative evidence regarding the allocation of patent applications to examiners
at the United States Patent and Trademark Oﬃce (USPTO) (Cockburn et al., 2003; Lemley
and Sampat, 2012) and by our own exogeneity tests.
Our analysis is based on the career trajectories of 67,775 inventors who ﬁled their ﬁrst patent
application with the USPTO between 2001 and 2012. By identifying inventors’ early career
moves from patent application data, our results show a negative eﬀect of patent protection
on mobility. One additional patent granted (due to a “lucky” examiner assignment) leads, on
average, to a 23 percent decrease in the probability of changing employers. As expected, this
negative eﬀect is stronger for inventors with fewer coauthors, those who work outside their ﬁrms’
core technologies, and those working on innovations in the realm of basic research.
Our ﬁndings provide new insights into several domains. First, we contribute to the analysis
of the impact of institutional factors on the mobility of high-skilled workers. We suggest that
patents preclude some inventor moves that would otherwise occur. To the extent that reduced
mobility leads to worse employer-employee matches and lower diﬀusion of tacit knowledge, this
result has potentially important policy implications for the patent system as an institution in-
tended to foster innovation. Second, in terms of managerial implications, our results suggest that
patents may work as devices to retain inventive talent. Thus, patent-intensive innovative ﬁrms
may ﬁnd it particularly proﬁtable to implement long-term-oriented human resources practices.
Finally, our ﬁndings have a methodological implication by documenting that patent grant events
have a signiﬁcant impact on the behavior of ﬁrms and inventors. This implies that any research
in the ﬁeld of inventor career dynamics exclusively using data from granted patent applications
may suﬀer from selection bias.
3

2.
Theoretical framework
2.1.
A model of patent protection and inventor mobility
Inventor employees are responsible for the overwhelming majority of patented innovations,
but most of them do not own the corresponding property rights. Employment contracts usually
stipulate that the employer, not the inventor, holds the property rights on innovations made
on the job (Merges, 1999). This generates interesting implications for the relationship between
patent protection and inventor mobility, which we develop below in a simple model.
We consider an inventor-employee who creates an innovation for which her ﬁrm applies for
patent protection.
We distinguish two additive components of the inventor’s marginal pro-
ductivity with a given employer (both of them fully observable): (i) inventive productivity,
which reﬂects the match between the inventor’s inventive abilities and the employer, and (ii)
innovation-related skills, which reﬂect the tacit knowledge the inventor has acquired on the
speciﬁc innovation while developing it.
First, we assume that the value of the inventive productivity (not related to the focal innova-
tion) of a given inventor with each potential employer follows a random process. Each combina-
tion of inventor i and employer k generates some match-idiosyncratic productivity φik ⩾0.2 To
study mobility, the relevant inventive productivities to be compared are φij, her match with the
current employer (j), and ¯φij = maxk̸=j{φik}, her best match among the rest of the (otherwise
identical) alternative employers. Only the diﬀerence between these two components is relevant
for the moving behavior. Hence, we deﬁne θi = φij −¯φij as the relative quality of the match
of the inventor with her current employer, and we assume that it follows a strictly increasing
cumulative distribution function G(θi).
The second (and key) component of the inventor’s marginal productivity concerns her (fo-
cal) innovation-related skills. In line with the evidence provided by Zucker et al. (1998), we
assume that the development of an innovation into an actual product ready for market launch,
further development, or internal implementation is not a trivial process and beneﬁts consider-
ably from the involvement of its creators. To characterize the value of these skills, we assume
that (i) the new technology is public knowledge by the time of the patent decision due to the
earlier publication of the application and (ii) patent rights provide their owners with an eﬀective
2Although we analyze the moving decision in a given moment of time, φik changes over time. Thus, a given
inventor is not necessarily employed by her best match in that focal moment, and a change of employer may
increase her inventive productivity.
4

monopoly. Therefore, the patent oﬃce’s decision determines whether the applicant ﬁrm receives
monopoly rights on the innovation or any ﬁrm in the market can implement it. We abstract
from technology markets by assuming that transactions in them are prohibitively costly.
To compute the value of innovation-related skills, we ﬁrst deﬁne the proﬁts that a ﬁrm obtains
from exploiting an innovation generated by inventor i at ﬁrm j as πR
m,n, where m = {i, −i}
denotes whether the ﬁrm employs the inventor, n = {j, −j} denotes whether the ﬁrm is the
patent applicant (and current employer), and R = {M, C} indicates whether the innovation is
exploited in monopoly or competition, according to whether the patent is granted.
Importantly, the innovation-related skills of the inventor grant the ﬁrm that employs her an
eﬃciency advantatge in the exploitation of the innovation. We allow for these skills to be partly
speciﬁc to the current employer since they may be complementary to some of its resources,
such as technological assets or coinventors. Hence, in a setting without patent protection, the
innovation-related skills of inventor i generate proﬁts πC
i,j for her current employer and proﬁts
πC
i,−j for alternative employers, with πC
i,j > πC
i,−j. Because of competition, ﬁrms lacking the
eﬃciency advantage contributed by the inventor would make zero proﬁts.
If the patent is
granted, only the patent holder can implement the innovation and will obtain monopoly proﬁts
πM
i,j if the inventor stays and monopoly proﬁts πM
−i,j if she leaves, with πM
i,j > πM
−i,j. Thus, the
inventor’s set of innovation-related skills generates rents of πM
i,j −πM
−i,j if employed by the patent
holder and has zero value for alternative employers.
We assume that each ﬁrm makes a wage oﬀer to the inventor that equals her marginal
productivity in the company.3 This oﬀer is the result of adding the two components described
above. The inventor will move away from her current employer if she receives a better oﬀer. In
the absence of patent protection, the inventor will switch employers if and only if θi ⩽πC
i,−j−πC
i,j.
This occurs when the added value of the ﬁrm-speciﬁc component of her innovation-related skills
in competition is not large enough to compensate for a bad relative match with the current
employer.
With patent protection, the full set of innovation-related skills is patent-holder-
speciﬁc. Moreover, the patent allows the current employer to obtain some monopoly proﬁts
from the innovation even if the inventor leaves. Therefore, the inventor will move if and only
if θi ⩽πM
−i,j −πM
i,j. This occurs when the added value of the full set of her innovation-related
skills in monopoly is not large enough to compensate for a bad relative match with the current
3Note that we only make this assumption for exposition purposes. With public information on all the compo-
nents of productivity, the inventor always ends up being employed by the ﬁrm where she generates the highest
value. The wage determination process may aﬀect how the inventor and her ﬁnal employer share the surplus with
respect to her best employment alternative but not the mobility outcome.
5

employer.
Combining the conditions for mobility with and without patent protection, we ﬁnd that
patents have a negative eﬀect on employee mobility if and only if the following is true:
πM
i,j −πM
−i,j > πC
i,j −πC
i,−j
(1)
The left-hand side of the inequality represents the added value in a monopoly setting of the
full set of innovation-related skills. The right-hand side represents the value in a competitive
setting of the subset of those skills that is speciﬁc to the current employer. Inequality (1) implies
that some inventors with πM
−i,j−πM
i,j < θi < πC
i,−j−πC
i,j move to an employer with a better match in
the absence of patent protection but are retained otherwise. Formally, Inequality (1) implies that
patent grants will reduce the probability of inventor mobility, as G(πM
−i,j−πM
i,j)−G(πC
i,−j−πC
i,j) <
0 for any strictly increasing cumulative distribution function G. Based on this framework, we
next develop a set of testable implications. The Online Appendix, Section A.1, provides further
details on their mechanisms and formal derivation.
2.2.
Testable implications
The key insight behind Inequality (1) is that patent protection aﬀects innovation-related skills
in two important ways. First, it converts them into fully patent-holder-speciﬁc human capital,
which leads to a decrease in inventor mobility (the human capital eﬀect).
Second, patents
change the market structure from competition to monopoly. Since competitive pressures lead
companies to more intensely exploit eﬃciency gains, this change in market structure reduces
the marginal value of innovation-related skills.4 In particular, it reduces the value of the ﬁrm-
speciﬁc component of these skills, leading to an increase in mobility (the product-market eﬀect).
If innovation-related skills are mostly general, the product-market eﬀect will only be of second
order, and the net impact of patent protection on mobility will be negative. On the contrary, if
these skills are to a large extent speciﬁc to the current employer even in the absence of patents,
then the product-market eﬀect of patent protection could dominate the human capital eﬀect and
lead to a positive eﬀect of patents on mobility. Thus, the ﬁrst implication of our analysis is that
patent protection will have a negative eﬀect on mobility as long as the ﬁrm-speciﬁc component
of innovation-related skills is small enough.
4Any cost advantage contributed by the inventor, for example, will have a stronger impact in competition than
in monopoly (see Online Appendix, Section A.1).
6

A second implication of this double-edged eﬀect of patents is that, as the ﬁrm-speciﬁc compo-
nent of innovation-related skills increases, the human capital eﬀect becomes less relevant, while
the product-market eﬀect gains importance. Thus, the hypothesized negative eﬀect of patent
protection on mobility is attenuated. In terms of Inequality (1), this component has a stronger
impact on the right-hand side (i.e., competition) than on the left-hand side (i.e., monopoly)
and makes the inequality less likely to hold. In empirical terms, we capture the relevance of
ﬁrm-speciﬁc skills with the number of coauthors with whom the inventor works and her posi-
tion within the technological core of the company. Hence, we expect that the eﬀect of patent
protection on inventor mobility should be positively moderated by these two factors.
The practical relevance of Inequality (1) depends on the importance of the skills of the
inventor for the exploitation of the innovation. Accordingly, a third implication from our anal-
ysis indicates that the eﬀect of patent protection on inventor mobility should be more intense
when these skills are particularly useful for the implementation or further development of the
innovation. This is likely to be the case for innovations with a more basic-research orientation.
The development of such innovations into potentially marketable products is usually a long and
uncertain journey, in which the role of tacit knowledge is critical (Zucker et al., 2002). In com-
parison, the implementation of applied innovations is a more straightforward process. Hence,
we expect that the negative eﬀect of patent protection on mobility should be more intense for
basic-research innovations than for applied ones.
2.3.
The role of inventor ability
The analysis of the relationship between patenting and inventor mobility has thus far been
framed in terms of the value of the skills connected to the focal innovation.
However, the
existence of general inventor ability that cannot be observed by the econometrician may aﬀect
our capacity to detect that relationship in practice. In this section, a simple extension of our
model provides some insights into how this unobserved inventor ability aﬀects our empirical
analysis.
Let us assume that the value the inventive productivity of inventor i with employer k, deﬁned
above as φik, is a complementary combination between the inventor’s general ability δi ⩾0 and
a pure match-idiosyncratic component of productivity ϵik ⩾0, so that φik = δiϵik. Accordingly,
the relative quality of the match with the current employer is θi = δi(ϵij −¯ϵij), where ϵij is the
pure match-idiosyncratic component of inventor i’s productivity with her current employer, and
7

¯ϵij = maxk̸=j{ϵik} is her best ϵik among the other employers. Inventor ability δi ampliﬁes any
underlying diﬀerences in the quality of the match across employers. Crucially, it also increases
the heterogeneity in the relative match with the current employer θi. In addition, our analysis
in Section 2.1 indicates that only inventors with values of θi suﬃciently below zero will move.
Hence, some inventors with a negative diﬀerence in the pure match component ϵij −¯ϵij and
high ability levels δi will switch ﬁrms, whereas otherwise similar inventors with less ability will
remain with their current employer.
This simple extension indicates a positive relationship between inventor ability and mobility,
as suggested by previous empirical studies (Palomeras and Melero, 2010; Akcigit et al., 2016;
Moretti and Wilson, 2017). In our context, this possibility is an empirical concern because high-
ability inventors may also enjoy a higher probability of obtaining patent protection for their
innovations. The patentability requirements of novelty, usefulness and nonobviousness used by
the USPTO suggest that this would be the case. Thus, if inventor ability can be observed by
the market but not by the econometrician, the estimates of the eﬀect of patenting on mobility
will be upward biased unless some source of exogenous variation in patent grants is used.
2.4.
Patents as signals of human capital
A related issue emerges when ﬁrms cannot observe inventor ability δi (and therefore also
ignore φik) and, given the patentability requirements, rely on patent grants as signals of such
ability. It follows from the above discussion that expected inventor ability increases the hetero-
geneity in the expected relative quality of the match. Some inventors with a moderately bad
pure match with their current employer will leave if the patent is granted and remain otherwise.
Hence, if patent grants serve as signals of ability, they will have a positive impact on mobility.
Analogously, if the pure match component of productivity with the current employer ϵij can-
not be observed, patent grants may be used as signals of the quality of that match. In that
case, patents will generate a positive update in the expected value of θi and reduce mobility.
Consequently, a signaling eﬀect of patent grants could drive the estimated eﬀect of patenting
on mobility up or down, depending on whether they are used as signals of ability (δi) or sig-
nals of the match with the current employer (ϵij), respectively. These signaling mechanisms
cannot be circumvented with the use of exogenous variation in patent grants unless we make
rather extreme assumptions on the observability of such variation.5 Therefore, we acknowledge
5In particular, when using examiner leniency as an instrument for patent grants, we would need to assume
that the market observes (and discounts) leniency to rule out the signaling argument.
8

the signaling argument as an alternative mechanism behind our estimated eﬀects of patenting
on mobility, and in Section 6, we discuss the extent to which it is compatible with the rest of
evidence presented in the article.
3.
Data and methods
3.1.
Description of the data
Our study combines data from several sources. We begin with the USPTO Patent Examina-
tion Research (PatEx) dataset, which sources its information from the public Patent Application
Information Retrieval (PAIR) database. PAIR contains detailed information on published patent
applications ﬁled with the USPTO. This includes standard data, such as the ﬁling date, techno-
logical classiﬁcation and application type, as well as data about the examination process, such
as its current application status and the identity and art unit of the examiner (see Graham
et al., 2018, for details). We identify from this dataset every original utility patent application
ﬁled between 2001 and 2012. We are constrained to this time period due to the availability
of data on applications. Applications only began to be made public regardless of whether the
patent was granted after the implementation of the American Inventors Protection Act (AIPA)
in November 2000.6
To identify the ﬁrm responsible for ﬁling the patent application, we use the information on
ownership reassignments from inventors to their (presumed) employers available in the USPTO
Patent Assignment Dataset.7
Our sample eﬀectively runs until September 2012, when the
process of reassignments was made unnecessary. From our original set of approximately 3.6
million patent applications, we identify approximately 2.8 million that were reassigned from the
inventors to their employers.
Next, we use data from the PatentsView initiative (www.patentsview.org) to identify the
inventors listed in our sample of applications and compile their career histories. This dataset
contains the results of the disambiguation algorithm speciﬁc to the inventor data provided
in Li et al. (2014), which allows the robust identiﬁcation of individual inventors across patent
6PAIR covers approximately 95% of the regular utility ﬁlings from 2001 to 2012 (Graham et al., 2018). The
remaining 5% of applications correspond to: (i) applications that were abandoned before the 18-month publication
lag and (ii) applications that opted out of pre-grant publication (thus relinquishing the possibility of international
protection) and for which patents were not eventually granted. According to Graham et al. (2018), the applications
covered by PatEx are very similar to the population of USPTO applications.
7Before September 2012, the USPTO considered the inventor to be the owner of the application. Since inventors
typically have contractual obligations to transfer ownership to their employer, it was necessary to submit to the
USPTO a chain of title from the inventor to the assignee (i.e., the ﬁrm) (Marco et al., 2015).
9

applications (since 2001) and granted patents (since 1976).8 Through these data, we can identify
2.1 million disambiguated individual inventors.
We impose the following three restrictions on the merged dataset.
First, we focus our
analysis on inventors who ﬁled their ﬁrst patent application between 2001 and 2012. This sample
represents a subset of inventors who are in their early careers, that is, in their ﬁrst ten years (at
most) of inventive activity. We select these inventors for the following reasons. Primarily, the
initial steps of an inventor’s career are more likely to be aﬀected by the outcome of one or a few
patent applications. Thus, if patents have an eﬀect on mobility, it will be more clearly detected
among inventors at the beginning of their careers. Moreover, regression to the mean in random
processes eliminates the variation in the average patent examiner leniency among inventors with
a large number of applications. Thus, our identiﬁcation strategy would be less eﬀective for the
subpopulation of more experienced inventors. Second, we focus on inventors who receive at least
one decision on an application during our sample period, given our aim of identifying the impact
of the patent oﬃce’s decisions. In particular, we require that they receive a ﬁrst decision on their
application prior to 2012 to ensure that we have at least a nine-month window within which to
observe mobility for the last cohort in the data. Third, given our interest in employee inventors,
we further restrict our sample to inventors who started their careers at a company. To capture
them, we select applications assigned to originating ﬁrms included in the Standard and Poor’s
(S&P) Capital IQ database, which provides the names and transactions (such as mergers and
acquisitions) for the most extensive set of public and privately held U.S. ﬁrms. To match the
ﬁrm names from Capital IQ with the assignee names, we ﬁrst apply the name standardization
procedure used in the NBER patent data project.9 We then run the Jaro-Winkler algorithm to
correct for typos and misspellings, grouping together records with an overlap of 90% or higher.
Finally, we apply exact string matching to select the ﬁnal list of standardized assignee names
that coincide exactly with ﬁrm names in Capital IQ.
To detect inventor mobility, we infer employer changes from changes in the assignee between
two consecutive applications, following Hoisl (2007). An analogous method based on granted
patents is common in the literature (see, e.g., Marx et al., 2009; Palomeras and Melero, 2010;
Singh and Agrawal, 2011; Ganco et al., 2015). Because our approach is based on applications and
8We are grateful to the PatentsView team for sharing these data with us. PatentsView is supported by the
Oﬃce of the Chief Economist at the USPTO, with additional support from the U.S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA). The PatentsView platform was established in 2012 and is a collaboration among the USPTO, USDA,
Center for the Science of Science and Innovation Policy at the American Institutes for Research, the University
of California, Berkeley, Twin Arch Technologies, and Periscopic.
9See https://sites.google.com/site/patentdataproject.
10

not granted patents, it suﬀers less from the concern that the sample may be biased towards high-
skilled inventors (i.e., those who have met the USPTO patentability requirements). However, it
shares with them a number of acknowledged limitations (Palomeras and Melero, 2010; Ge et al.,
2016). We discuss below those with implications for our current exercise.
First, an inventor’s career can only be tracked if she repeatedly appears in patent applica-
tions. Otherwise, she is censored out of the sample. One potential concern of this approach
is that inventors whose applications are not granted may be less likely to apply again in the
future. This would be problematic if the attrition were not randomly distributed across movers
and stayers. For example, a moving inventor’s likelihood of changing research areas and ﬁling
new patent applications may depend (positively or negatively) on whether her previous inno-
vations are patent-protected. Furthermore, applying for patents is largely a ﬁrm-level decision,
and there may be substantial heterogeneity among ﬁrms in the intensity of patent use. All
the inventors in our population have, by deﬁnition, been included in an application by their
initial employers. Thus, it is natural to expect that they tend to be initially employed by ﬁrms
with relatively high patent intensity and that movers will tend to switch to less patent-intensive
employers. Therefore, measuring inventor mobility with patent applications poses an attrition
problem that might aﬀect the validity of our results. We address this issue in Section 4.3.
Second, identifying inventors through the names that appear in patent documents may lead
to misclassiﬁcation errors, which we mitigate using the name disambiguation algorithm provided
by Li et al. (2014). As remarked by Ge et al. (2016), other potentially important sources of
misclassiﬁcation in tracking mobility with patent data are the inability to detect the exact point
in time at which a move takes place (not relevant for our study) and the recording as moves of
contract R&D, collaborations, or mergers and acquisitions. To address this last problem, we do
not consider as actual moves the following changes in assignee: (i) those that are followed by a
return to the initial employer within less than one year, as these cases most likely reﬂect contract
research or collaborations; (ii) those due to mergers and acquisitions, which are detected through
information provided by Capital IQ. The existence of some remaining misclassiﬁcation error is
unavoidable due to the nature of the large-scale representative sample used in our study.
Our ﬁnal sample consists of inventors who started their careers at one of our identiﬁed
Capital IQ ﬁrms during the period of 2001–2011 and who received a ﬁrst decision on a patent
application prior to 2012. We track inventors from their ﬁrst application until they move or
until their last application with the initial ﬁrm. The resulting dataset comprises 67,775 ﬁrst-
11

time inventors employed by 2,231 originating ﬁrms and who ﬁled 320,874 applications during
the sample period. We detect 13,984 ﬁrst-employer changes for those inventors, suggesting that
approximately 20% of them moved at least once over the 11-year sample period. This number
is not far from the 37% over a 25-year period detected by Hoisl (2007).
3.2.
Econometric speciﬁcation
To identify how patent grants aﬀect subsequent inventor mobility, we estimate the probability
that an inventor changes her employer between application year t and application year t + 1,
conditional on not having moved at t. We use a linear probability model to estimate the hazard
that an inventor moves as follows:
Probabilityijt (Yij,t+1 = 1) = α + β Patents grantedit + γ Zit + κ Di + ηt + τj + εijt,
(2)
where i indexes inventors, j indexes their employers, and t is an ordinal index of the application
year.
The dependent variable, Yij,t+1, is an indicator that equals one if an inventor moves
between t and t + 1. When inventors ﬁle several applications in a given year, we consolidate the
information on an annual basis.10 Hence, our measure of mobility records whether the inventor
changed employers at least once during that observation window.11
Our main variable of interest, Patents grantedit, is the total number of patents issued to
inventor i up to t (included). The vector Zit contains a range of time-variant covariates. First,
and most important, Zit contains the total number of applications ﬁled by inventor i up to t, as
we want to compare inventors that ﬁled the same number of applications. Second, we condition
on the time elapsed since the inventor’s ﬁrst decision year (in spells of 365 days), allowing
mobility decisions to be shaped by seniority. Third, to account for technological diﬀerences
in mobility rates, we include indicators for the six nonexclusive NBER categories in which the
applications are classiﬁed. Di represents the year in which the inventor receives her ﬁrst decision
from the patent oﬃce. This cohort indicator controls for the fact that inventors entering later
in the panel have less time to move than do those entering earlier. Finally, ηt are year ﬁxed
10Note that this implies considering inventors with at least 2 applications in 2 diﬀerent years.
11Because t indexes application years and not calendar years, the time window between two consecutive values
of t may be longer than one year if the inventor takes longer than that to apply for a patent again. Thus, an
inventor with a ﬁrst patent application in 2001, a ﬁrst decision in 2002, and subsequent applications in 2004,
2005, 2008 and 2010 contributes to our sample with four time windows of unequal length.
12

eﬀects that account for period diﬀerences, and τj are ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects, as we want to eliminate
ﬁrm-level unobserved heterogeneity. We cluster standard errors at the inventor level, although
clustering at the ﬁrm level produces almost identical results.
One important challenge in the estimation of Equation (2) is that β may be upward biased
if it captures the combined impact of patent grants and omitted inventor characteristics. As
explained in Section 2.3, inventors of higher quality may be both more likely to obtain granted
patents and more likely to switch employers.
Failing to account for this would lead us to
mistakenly attribute a causal impact of patents on mobility due to the confounding eﬀect of
inventor ability. A second source of bias stems from the fact that patent applications cannot
be deﬁnitively rejected, only “abandoned” by the applicants. After a rejection from the patent
oﬃce, applicants can always “resubmit” an updated patent application, accommodating the
USPTO examiners’ criticism, typically by narrowing down the scope of the claims (Sampat and
Williams, 2019). Therefore, although the feedback from the patent oﬃce is potentially important
in driving abandonment, unobserved innovation characteristics may also aﬀect the applicant’s
prosecution eﬀorts and, consequently, the probability of an eventual grant decision. To overcome
these identiﬁcation challenges, one needs some exogenous source of variation in the likelihood
of patent grants that does not belong directly in the mobility equation. We next discuss the
extent to which patent examiner leniency meets these requirements.
3.3.
Identiﬁcation strategy
To construct an instrument that allows us to identify the eﬀect of patent grants on mobil-
ity, we build on the previous research on the patent examination procedures at the USPTO.
Although the process is relatively structured and standardized, patent examiners have consider-
able discretion in how they conduct the examination. This inﬂuences the outcome of otherwise
similar patent applications. Lemley and Sampat (2012) ﬁnd an 11-percentage-point diﬀerence in
the grant rate between the least and the most experienced examiners in a given technology area.
Frakes and Wasserman (2016) report diﬀerences in the odds of patent approval by examiner
cohort, which they attribute to diﬀerences in the training received at hiring. Accordingly, we
exploit diﬀerences in leniency across patent examiners as a source of variation in patent grants,
following a similar approach to recent studies that investigate the impact of patent grants on
ﬁrm and technology-level outcomes (Gaul´e, 2018; Sampat and Williams, 2019). Our main iden-
tiﬁcation assumption is that examiner leniency is only related to the mobility of an inventor
13

through her expected number of patents granted. While our exogeneity checks in Section 4.2
and Online Appendix A.2 suggest that this is the case, a description of the process for allocating
applications to examiners may help to understand the rationale behind this assumption.
Upon arriving at the USPTO, patent applications are received by a central oﬃce, where
they are assigned an application number, patent class and subclass codes and are then allocated
accordingly to one of the art units in charge of the examination process.
Once in the art
unit, a supervisory patent examiner (SPE) assigns the application to a speciﬁc examiner. Each
art unit has discretion over how work is organized, including how applications are allocated
to examiners by SPEs. Interviews with patent examiners conducted by Lemley and Sampat
(2012) reveal that this assignment process is done according to either arbitrary rules (such as
the last digit of the application number), docket management needs or/and familiarity with the
technology. There is no evidence from these interviews that SPEs engage in any substantive
evaluation of applications that could inform about their patent-worthiness.
Therefore, it is
unlikely that they assign applications to examiners according to this dimension. The empirical
evidence is consistent with these observations. The work by Lemley and Sampat (2012), Righi
and Simcoe (2019) and Sampat and Williams (2019) shows that patent applications assigned to
lenient and strict patent examiners within an art unit have similar observable characteristics at
the time of application.
3.3.1.
Average examiner leniency as an instrumental variable
Our objective is to obtain an instrumental variable for the number of applications granted to
an inventor up to a given point in time. We start by operationalizing examiner leniency at the
application level. In the spirit of Gaul´e (2018), we compute time-varying measures of leniency
as follows:
Ejkat = Grantskat −1(Grantj = 1)
Reviewskat −1
(3)
and
Ujat = Grantsat −1(Grantj = 1)
Reviewsat −1
,
(4)
where Ejkat is the approval rate of examiner k in art unit a assigned to review application j
submitted at time t. Reviewskat and Grantskat represent the number of applications in art unit
a and application year t that examiner k has reviewed and granted, respectively.12 Similarly,
12To avoid overstating variations in leniency when the number of applications per examiner is small, we consider
only examiners who reviewed at least ten applications within an art-unit-year (Sampat and Williams, 2019).
14

Ujat is the approval rate of art unit a and is constructed as the share of reviewed applications
ﬁled in year t that were granted by art unit a, excluding the focal patent.13 The diﬀerence
between Ejkat and Ujat represents the relative leniency faced by an inventor who ﬁles patent
application j in year t assigned to examiner k within art unit a. For a single patent application,
the corresponding examiner’s relative leniency, Ejkat −Ujat, is a suitable instrument for whether
that application is granted.
However, we are interested in obtaining an instrument for the
inventor’s total number of applications granted up to a given point in time. Accordingly, we
average Ejkat −Ujat across the nit patents applied for by inventor i up to year t, and obtain the
inventor-level average examiner leniency at t as follows:
Lit = 1
nit
nit
X
j=1
(Ejkat −Ujat).
(5)
4.
Results: Patent protection and inventor mobility
4.1.
Descriptive statistics
Table 1 provides the descriptive statistics for the main variables used in this study. The
unit of observation in our analysis is the inventor-application year. The ﬁgures indicate that
85% of our sample of early-career inventors have at least one granted patent, with an average of
2.2 granted patents and 7.7 applications per inventor. On average, 10% of the inventors change
employers between two application years. Because the average duration of such a window is of
1.7 years, this amounts to an annual mobility rate of approximately 6%.
13Note that our instrument diﬀers from that proposed by Gaul´e (2018) in two respects. First, while he considers
the overall approval rate of an examiner, we follow Sampat and Williams (2019) in adjusting for art unit. We do
this because 39% of examiners in our sample reviewed patent applications for multiple art units in the same year.
Second, our equations diﬀer in the denominator, as we use the number of applications reviewed rather than the
number of applications ﬁled. However, nothing hinges on the use of the leniency measure of Gaul´e (2018).
15

Table 1: Descriptive statistics
Variable
Mean
SD
p10
p50
p90
Observations
Move
0.10
0
0
1
129,740
Any patent granted
0.85
0
1
1
129,740
# of patents granted
2.2
3.6
0
1
5
129,740
# of basic patents granted
0.45
1.2
0
0
1
74,430
# of applied patents granted
2.3
3.4
0
1
5
94,737
Average patent scope
0.95
0.85
0
0.83
1.7
116,766
Examiner leniency
0.005
0.088
-0.095
0.008
0.103
129,740
Examiner scope leniency
0.0002
0.0014
-0.0014
0.0001
0.0020
116,766
# of applications ﬁled
7.7
10.6
1
4
17
129,740
Years since 1st decision
3.1
2.0
1
3
6
129,740
# of coinventors
11.1
12.3
2
7
25
129,740
# of USPC classes
2.9
2.3
1
2
6
129,740
% of applications in ﬁrm’s core
0.30
0.39
0
0
1
129,740
# of applications per ﬁrm
1,269
1,779
15
463
4,320
129,740
Sales ($m)
47,340
45,748
1,082
34,589
106,916
68,213
# of expired patents
0.64
1.7
0
0
2
33,813
# of post self cites
3.8
67.7
0
0
5
33,813
# of post cites
6.7
21.7
0
2
16
33,813
Enforceability index
-0.68
1.6
-3.8
-0.07
0.90
33,813
Female
0.09
0
0
0
33,813
# of pre self cites
9.2
186.8
0
1
11
33,813
# of pre cites
11.4
38.5
0
3
27
33,813
4.2.
Patent grants and inventor mobility
Table 2 provides the main results of our analysis. In Column 1, we present the OLS estimates
of the baseline speciﬁcation relating mobility to the number of patents granted and our main
set of controls. We ﬁnd a small, positive and signiﬁcant relationship between patent grants and
mobility. This relationship cannot be interpreted as causal, however. As argued above, there
are reasons for which we should expect unobservable factors to aﬀect both the extent to which
an inventor’s patent applications are approved and her subsequent mobility.
Turning to the instrumental variable approach, Column 2 presents the ﬁrst stage, in which
we regress the number of patents granted on average examiner leniency. As expected, the instru-
ment is positive and highly signiﬁcant; a one-standard-deviation increase in the average leniency
of the examiners assigned to review an inventor’s patent applications is associated with a six-
percentage-point increase in the number of patents issued for the average inventor-year. The
ﬁrst-stage F-statistic of the excluded instrument is large and well above the rule of thumb for
weak instruments proposed by Stock and Yogo (2005), indicating that the instrument explains
a substantial part of the variation in granted patents. Column 3 reports the result from the
second-stage regressions estimating Equation (2), with the main variable of interest replaced
with the predicted number of patents granted from the ﬁrst stage. The coeﬃcient is strongly
negative and signiﬁcant at the 1% level. The point estimate implies that an exogenous increase
16

in one successful patent application reduces the probability of moving by 2.3 percentage points,
which represents a 23% decrease over the sample probability of 10%. This result is economi-
cally signiﬁcant. For context, Marx et al. (2009) ﬁnd that Michigan’s adoption of enforceable
noncompete agreements in 1985 reduced inventor mobility by approximately 8%, and Bala-
subramanian et al. (2018) document that the 2015 noncompete ban for technology workers in
Hawaii increased mobility by 11%. Since Starr et al. (2019) report a noncompete signing rate
for high-skilled workers (e.g., computer, mathematical, engineering) of 36%, the relative eﬀect of
noncompetes on mobility can be approximately estimated to be between 22% and 30%. These
numbers are within the same range as our results for the eﬀect of patent protection.
For the ease of estimation and interpretation, we use linear probability models as our main
speciﬁcation throughout the paper. In Column 4 of Table 2, however, we report the results
from a probit model where we implement the instrumental variable estimator by using the
control function method (see Blundell and Powell, 2004). This leads to qualitatively and quan-
titatively similar results for the estimated eﬀect of the number patents granted, supporting the
notion that the linear 2SLS model is a reasonable approximation to obtain average partial eﬀects.
Table 2: Patent grants and inventor mobility
OLS
2SLS
Probit
Estimation method
OLS
(1st st.)
(2nd st.)
(2nd st.)
# of pats
Dependent variable
Move
granted
Move
Move
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Examiner leniency
1.577∗∗∗
(0.062)
# of patents granted
0.001∗∗∗
(0.000)
# of patents granted (instr.)
-0.023∗∗∗
-0.020∗∗∗
(0.007)
(0.005)
Years since 1st decision (L)
0.029∗∗∗
0.131∗∗∗
0.033∗∗∗
0.031∗∗∗
(0.003)
(0.029)
(0.003)
(0.003)
Firm FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
First decision year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Calendar year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
# of applications ﬁled FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Technological class FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
F-statistic
430
Exogeneity test (p-value)
0.000
N = 129, 740.
Number of inventors:
67,775.
Number of ﬁrms:
2,231.
The
estimation period is 2001–2011. Robust standard errors are clustered by inventor
(in parentheses). The exogeneity test is a Hausman-based test. The test for weak
instruments is the Cragg-Donald Wald F-statistic. Column 4 displays the average
marginal eﬀect from a probit model with endogenous regressors.
∗p < 0.10, ∗∗p < 0.05, ∗∗∗p < 0.01.
17

Overall, these instrumental variable speciﬁcations provide evidence suggesting that patent
grants cause, on average, a decrease in the subsequent mobility of early-career inventors. Since
the consistency of these results depends on the validity of average examiner leniency as an
instrument for patent grants, we provide a series of supporting exogeneity tests. We ﬁrst test
whether the application portfolios of the inventors assigned to tough and lenient examiners are
similar in terms of the observable characteristics that predict granting probability at the time
of ﬁling. Following Sampat and Williams (2019), we use the variables patent family size and
number of claims to predict the probability of patent approval. Based on these predictions, we
compute inventor-level predicted grant rates. Figure 1 shows that average examiner leniency is
visually orthogonal to the predicted grant rate, although it is clearly related with the actual
grant rate (see details of this test in Online Appendix A.2.1).
Figure 1: Probability of patent grants by average examiner leniency
.4
.6
.8
1
Inventor Grant Rate and Predicted Grant Rate
−.4
−.2
0
.2
.4
Inventor Average Examiner Leniency Percentile
 Inventor Grant Rate
 Inventor Predicted Grant Rate
The ﬁgure relates the average examiner leniency with the inventor-level grant rate and predicted grant-rate. The
predicted grant rate is based on two observable proxies for patent value at the time of ﬁling (patent family size
and claims count). The graph was generated using Michael Stepner’s binscatter for Stata.
We also perform the following set of additional tests, which are fully discussed in Online
Appendix A.2. First, we provide evidence suggesting that average examiner leniency is also
orthogonal to inventor characteristics that impact mobility.
Second, we document that our
approach of taking deviations in examiner grant rates from art-unit-year averages [see Equations
(3) and (4)] is equivalent to running the analysis with raw grant rates and controlling for art-
18

unit-year ﬁxed eﬀects (as in Sampat and Williams, 2019). Third, we investigate whether the
existence of examiner specialization within art units (as reported by Righi and Simcoe, 2019)
aﬀects our results. We do so by replicating our analysis when computing examiner leniency
at the art-unit-subclass level. Fourth, we also replicate the analysis for the subsample of art
units where, according to Feng and Jaravel (forthcoming), the SPEs assign patent applications to
examiners based on the last digit of the application’s serial number. These are art units for which
the “next-to-random” application allocation assumption is particularly plausible. Our results
remain robust to such considerations. Other potential concerns generated by the nature of our
empirical analysis (not strictly related to the use of our instrumental variable) are addressed in
the next section.
4.3.
Robustness checks
In this section, we provide a variety of additional tests that conﬁrm the robustness of our
baseline ﬁndings. We also address the concern that our estimates could be aﬀected by some
attrition eﬀect generated by our approach of detecting mobility with patent applications. We
summarize the results of both kinds of checks in Table 3.14
First, our baseline model incorporates ﬁxed eﬀects for six broad technology ﬁelds (NBER
categories). To account for technological eﬀects at a more disaggregated level, in Column 1, we
estimate our main speciﬁcation with technology eﬀects that include 414 patent-class ﬁxed eﬀects.
The point estimate from this more stringent speciﬁcation is similar to and not statistically
distinguishable from the baseline point estimate presented in Table 2, suggesting that the impact
of patents on mobility is not driven by characteristics of technology sub-ﬁelds not captured by
our six broad technology category dummies.15
Second, we address the concern that our estimated eﬀect may be driven by the resolution of
the uncertainty surrounding an application. In Equation (2), the control for the total number of
applications ﬁled by an inventor includes granted, abandoned and pending patent applications.
The estimated eﬀect of patent grants may therefore be related to the release of the decision
regarding the application rather than to the granting of the patent itself. For this reason, in
14See Online Appendix, Table A.3 for a summary of the relative eﬀect sizes of our estimates of patenting across
the diﬀerent speciﬁcations and subsamples reported in the paper.
15Patent classes are deﬁned according to the United States Patent Classiﬁcation (USPC). We choose to report
the rest of the analyses in the article while accounting for NBER category ﬁxed eﬀects to remain consistent
with existing studies on inventor mobility and with previous research using examiner leniency as an instrumental
variable. Nonetheless, we replicate all of them using USPC class ﬁxed eﬀects. The corresponding results are
qualitatively and quantitatively similar to those presented here.
19

Column 2, we drop pending applications and re-estimate the model with dummies controlling
for the number of applications reviewed. The coeﬃcient of interest is slightly weaker in this case
but remains statistically signiﬁcant.
Third, we collapse our panel data into a cross-sectional structure by considering inventor
mobility in any moment after the ﬁrst decision. This strategy reduces the concerns of poten-
tial oversampling of frequent applicants. It may also oﬀer a more precise identiﬁcation of our
parameter of interest, as we can more neatly exploit variations caused by examiner leniency.
The results, reported in Column 3, show that the estimate from this procedure is qualitatively
similar to the baseline estimate. The point estimate of -0.027 implies that obtaining a positive
ﬁrst answer decreases the probability of moving in the next years by approximately 18% on
average. A comparison of this eﬀect size with our baseline of 23% allows us to evaluate whether
the impact of patenting on mobility operates at the intensive and/or extensive margin. The
results indicate that the eﬀect is present at both margins, as the eﬀect of the ﬁrst patent grant
on inventor mobility is similar to the average eﬀect of having one additional patent.
Fourth, to rule out the possibility that the eﬀect we detect is driven by outlier inventors, we
exclude superstar inventors (those at the top 5% of the distribution according to the number
of applications submitted to the USPTO) from our sample. In Column 4, we again observe
qualitatively and quantitatively similar results to those of our baseline estimation.
Finally, we run three robustness checks to examine the extent to which the sample attrition
inherent to measuring inventor mobility with subsequent patent applications is an issue in our
study. As suggested in Section 3.1, this would be the case if moving inventors had diﬀerent
probabilities of ﬁling new applications and those diﬀerences were contingent on previous patent
grants. We ﬁrst address this issue by considering one potentially important underlying reason
behind the diﬀerential attrition of movers and stayers, i.e., changes in technological areas. It
is reasonable to expect that moving inventors are more likely to switch areas than stayers. A
change in the area of research, in turn, may make the moving inventors more or less likely to
apply for patents again (and be included in our sample) in the near future. In Column 5, we
deal with this possibility by restricting the sample to pharmaceutical inventors (based on U.S.
patent classes 424 and 514). Pharmaceutical scientists make a good testing ﬁeld for this concern
because they are very unlikely to switch areas (Paruchuri et al., 2006). Scientists researching
cures for cancer, for instance, typically spend a lifetime in this area. Moreover, the research
output in this ﬁeld usually leads to patent ﬁlings, thus further reducing attrition concerns. The
20

estimated coeﬃcient for inventors in this group is -0.030, which implies an average reduction
of 25% in inventor mobility for an additional patent (average mobility rate of pharmaceutical
inventors between two patenting years is approximately 12%). This is only slightly larger than
the average eﬀect in the overall sample.
More generally, we investigate the extent to which sample attrition due to lack of reapplica-
tions is likely to drive our results. In Column 6, we restrict the sample to inventors who ﬁled
patents before 2007, so that we have a complete 5-year time window to observe another appli-
cation. This approach implies dropping more than half of the observations of the sample, but it
substantially increases the reapplication rate.16 The coeﬃcient of interest for this subsample is
negative and signiﬁcant. Although the -0.033 point estimate is larger than that of our baseline
in absolute terms, it is very similar in relative terms (i.e., 21% vs. 23%). As a complementary
approach, we examine how our main results are altered by the variation in patenting intensity
across industries. Intuitively, if inventor sample attrition due to lack of reapplications generates
some bias, it will be particularly present in industries with less intensive patenting activity. To
test this, we ﬁrst calculate patenting intensities using all ﬁrms in the Compustat/CRSP database
by ﬁnding the (time-varying) average number of patents per R&D dollar at the two-digit SIC
code level.17 Next, we merge this data with the subsample of ﬁrms in our dataset for which we
have industry classiﬁcation data (i.e., those listed in Compustat) and then split the sample into
observations with high and low patenting intensities based on the sample median. In Columns
7 and 8 we ﬁnd, in two split sample regressions, that the point estimate is -0.023 in the low
patenting-intensity group and -0.034 in the high patenting-intensity group. Evaluated at their
respective sample means, however, these point estimates imply economically identical eﬀects.
Having one additional patent leads to an average 26% reduction in mobility in both types of
sectors. In unreported tests, we further conﬁrm these results by using the full sample and intro-
ducing the (instrumented) interaction between patents and a patenting-intensity group dummy.
This generates a nonsigniﬁcant coeﬃcient of -0.003 on the interaction term.
16While 54% of ﬁrst-time inventors reappear at least once in our data, this percentage increases to 73% when
we impose this restriction.
17Patent data for publicly traded ﬁrms in the Compustat/CRSP-merged universe come from Kogan et al.
(2017).
21

Table 3: Robustness tests
Estimation method: 2SLS
Reviewed
First
Non-
Filing year
Low patent
High patent
Sample
All
applications
decision
superstars
Pharma
⩽2006
intensity
intensity
Dependent variable: Move
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Patent granted (instr.)
-0.027∗∗
(0.012)
# of patents granted (instr.)
-0.027∗∗∗
-0.017∗∗∗
-0.026∗∗∗
-0.030∗
-0.033∗∗
-0.023∗
-0.034∗
(0.008)
(0.005)
(0.008)
(0.017)
(0.015)
(0.014)
(0.019)
Redeﬁned (USPC class) Tech class FE
Yes
First-stage F-statistic
400
2,559
4,912
828
177
352
132
81
Exogeneity test (p-value)
0.000
0.005
0.378
0.000
0.036
0.007
0.035
0.022
N
129,721
127,248
66,285
123,596
23,069
58,351
34,567
33,563
# of inventors
67,764
66,660
66,285
67,240
12,921
42,897
18,600
18,342
# of ﬁrms
2,231
2,209
2,052
2,228
1,241
1,682
380
551
Robust standard errors are clustered by inventor (in parentheses). The exogeneity test is a Hausman-based test. The test for weak instruments is the
Cragg-Donald Wald F-statistic. All regressions control for the number of years since the inventor’s ﬁrst decision (log), ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects, ﬁxed eﬀects
for the number of applications ﬁled by the inventor, the technology ﬁeld, the year of the inventor’s ﬁrst decision and the calendar year. Nonsuperstar
inventors are deﬁned as belonging to the bottom 95% of the patent application distribution. Pharmaceutical scientists are identiﬁed using USPC
classes 424 and 514, which are both deﬁned as drug, bio-aﬀecting, and body-treating compositions. We calculate the industry patenting intensity for
Compustat ﬁrms by ﬁnding the average number of patents per $m of R&D at the two-digit SIC code level in the last ﬁve years before the focal year.
High (low) patenting-intensive industries are those where this ration is above (below) the sample median of 0.08. ∗p < 0.10, ∗∗p < 0.05, ∗∗∗p < 0.01.
22

4.4.
Extension: The scope of patent protection
Because of our reliance on examiner leniency as an instrumental variable for patent grants,
it is likely that our baseline results represent the local average treatment eﬀect of an addi-
tional granted patent for the group of inventors producing innovations around the margin of
approval and rejection. In this section, we extend the notion of patent protection beyond the
granted/nongranted dichotomy and focus on patent scope as a more ﬁne-grained measure of the
concept (Lerner, 1994; Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2004). This analysis allows us to evaluate
the eﬀect of a marginal increase in the scope of protection, which may occur at any point in the
distribution of patentability.
To operationalize the scope of patent protection, we use a metric based on patent claims.
The claims of a patent document describe, in technical terms, the diﬀerent elements of the
underlying technology, delimiting the technological space covered by the patent.
Kuhn and
Thompson (2019) show that the length of the ﬁrst claim in a patent document is the best
available measure of the patent scope. The rationale behind this measure is that shorter claims
result in a broader scope because each added word introduces more conditions that a competitor
must meet to be considered an infringer. Thus, the applicant has incentives to write the claims
as short as possible in the application to aim for the broadest possible protection.
On the
other hand, examiners typically amend the claims during examination adding words (Kuhn and
Thompson, 2019; Marco et al., 2019). The scope of patent protection is, therefore, aﬀected by the
examination process and inﬂuenced by individual examiners, as further supported by anecdotal
evidence (Cockburn et al., 2003; Lemley and Sampat, 2012). Consequently, how strict or lenient
examiners are when evaluating claims can also be used as an instrumental variable to estimate
the eﬀect of the patent scope on mobility.
To construct our measure of patent scope, we start with the number of words in the ﬁrst
claim of the patents issued to an inventor. To be able to use the full sample of patent applications
and given that nongranted applications have no approved claim, we compute the inverse of the
ﬁrst-claim length and assign a value of zero to nongranted applications. Finally, we average the
indicator at the inventor level.18 Higher values of this indicator (average patent scope) denote
that the inventor has a patent portfolio of broader scope. Second, to construct the instrument
for patent scope, we compute the average examiner scope leniency by following the process
18Kuhn and Thompson (2019) note that this measure of scope is not suitable for the analysis in biotechnology.
Therefore, we exclude ﬁlings from this technology center.
Further, to make claim length comparable across
diﬀerent technology ﬁelds, we scale it by the respective mean at the art-unit-year level.
23

described in Equations (3) to (5) but using the inverse of the number of words approved in the
ﬁrst claim instead of patent grant rates.
Table 4 presents the results. Column 1 reports the simple OLS estimates, which are small, but
negative and signiﬁcant. Column 2 shows the ﬁrst stage where we regress the inventor’s average
patent scope on the average examiner scope leniency. The estimated eﬀect of the instrument is
positive, as expected, and statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level. Column 3 reports the second
stage. In line with our ﬁndings for patent grants, we estimate a negative and signiﬁcant eﬀect
of the scope of patent protection on mobility. The point estimate implies that a one standard
deviation increase in the average of the inverse of the claim length leads to a 29% reduction in
the probability of leaving.
In Columns 4 to 6, we examine the extent to which these results are driven by the fact that
we include nongranted patents, which have zero scope. To do so, we repeat the analysis of the
eﬀect of patent scope considering granted patents only. This poses a selection problem that we
address with a Heckman correction process. We use the average examiner leniency in patent
grants to address the sample selection problem and the examiner leniency in patent scope for
the subsequent 2SLS instrumental variable estimation. The estimated eﬀect of patent scope on
mobility, available in Column 6, is almost identical to that of Column 3.
Two important conclusions emerge from the scope analysis. First, the results suggest that
the negative estimated eﬀect of patenting on mobility is not driven by the subset of inventors
whose innovations lie around the approval threshold, but that it is a more general phenomenon.
Second, these ﬁndings reinforce the idea that the impact of patent protection on inventor mobility
operates not only on the extensive margin (through obtaining a patent for an innovation) but
also on the intensive margin (in this case, through a broader protection for the granted patents).
24

Table 4: Patent scope and inventor mobility
Sample
All
All
All
Patents
Patents
Patents
Estimation method
OLS
OLS
2SLS
OLS
OLS
2SLS
(1st st.)
(2nd st.)
(1st st.)
(2nd st.)
Average
Average
Dependent variable
Move
patent scope
Move
Move
patent scope
Move
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Average patent scope
-0.007∗∗∗
0.004∗∗
(0.001)
(0.002)
Examiner scope leniency
70.322∗∗∗
104.178∗∗∗
(3.377)
(6.761)
Average patent scope (instr.)
-0.034∗∗∗
-0.035∗∗∗
(0.009)
(0.009)
Inverse mills ratio
-0.142∗∗∗
-0.352∗∗∗
-0.194∗∗∗
(0.035)
(0.121)
(0.037)
First-stage F-statistic
1,681
3,587
Exogeneity test (p-value)
0.002
0.001
N
116,766
116,766
116,766
99,264
99,264
99,264
# of inventors
60,928
60,928
60,928
50,860
50,860
50,860
# of ﬁrms
1,873
1,873
1,873
1,671
1,671
1,671
The estimation period is 2001–2011.
Robust standard errors are clustered by inventor (in parentheses).
The
exogeneity test is a Hausman-based test. The test for weak instruments is the Cragg-Donald Wald F-statistic. All
regressions control for the number of years since the inventor’s ﬁrst decision (log), ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects, ﬁxed eﬀects for
the technology ﬁeld, the year of the inventor’s ﬁrst decision and the calendar year. The words present in the ﬁrst
independent claim are standardized at the level of the art unit and ﬁling year. Because of how language is used in
their claims, we exclude patents examined by the “Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry” center (see Kuhn and
Thompson, 2019). ∗p < 0.10, ∗∗p < 0.05, ∗∗∗p < 0.01.
5.
Heterogeneous impact of patent grants
Thus far, we have presented robust evidence consistent with our leading hypothesis that
patent protection decreases subsequent inventor mobility.
In this section, we test the addi-
tional implications generated by the idea that this negative eﬀect is, at least in part, driven by
innovation-related skills that become patent holder speciﬁc.
First of all, we have argued that the eﬀect of patent protection on mobility will be less intense
when complementarities with other resources of the company make the inventor’s innovation-
related skills inherently ﬁrm speciﬁc (thus weakening the human capital eﬀect and strengthening
the product market eﬀect of patents). In empirical terms, we capture the inventor’s comple-
mentarities with her employer’s resources through the following: (i) the number of coinventors
collaborating with her at the company and (ii) an indicator of whether she works in the tech-
nological core of the company. The extent to which an inventor works in teams is a natural
measure of the complementarities between her and her employer.
As documented by Singh
and Agrawal (2011), the tacit knowledge embodied by an individual inventor tends to remain
contained among close collaborators (i.e., coinventors) rather than diﬀusing widely inside the
25

ﬁrm. At one extreme, if the inventor is a sole author, she will be valuable in isolation for the
eﬃcient implementation of the innovation, as she will likely be the only person who embodies
the necessary tacit know-how. Conversely, when the innovation is the product of teamwork,
the implementation knowledge contributed by an individual will depend on the extent to which
she collaborates with other the team members. Consequently, the negative eﬀect of patents on
mobility should be less intense for inventors with multiple coauthors.
Analogously, the extent to which the inventor works in a technological area in which her
employer is particularly research active captures the potential complementarity between the
inventor and her employer’s technological resources.
In these areas, usually referred by the
innovation literature as “core technology areas,” ﬁrms are likely to have well-established trajec-
tories of research (Song et al., 2003). This implies that routines, procedures and know-how in
those areas are deeply embedded in the ﬁrm, and the skills of an individual inventor can hardly
be implemented in isolation. Thus, we also expect that the negative impact of patent grants on
mobility is larger for inventors working outside the ﬁrm’s core areas than for those employed in
the ﬁrm’s core.
We investigate the eﬀects of these two sources of heterogeneity using the following variables:
(i) the natural logarithm of (one plus) the number of unique coinventors with whom an inventor
has worked in her applications up to t and (ii) the percentage of her patent applications that
fall in the ﬁrm’s core technology areas. Following Song et al. (2003), we consider a technological
area as part of the core if its corresponding patent class appears with a frequency greater than
10% in the ﬁrm’s application portfolio (over the entire sample period). In this analysis, we also
control for the inventor’s degree of specialization (captured by the number of diﬀerent patent
classes into which her applications fall) and ﬁrm size (proxied by the number of applications
ﬁled by the ﬁrm in that year), which are necessary controls to consistently estimate the eﬀects
of coinventors and core areas.
Panel A of Table 5 presents the results of speciﬁcations that include the (instrumented)
interactions between the number of patent grants an inventor received and her complementarities
with other resources of the organization. The ﬁrst column reproduces the baseline model to
which we add the above-mentioned variables.
In Columns 2 and 3, we separately add the
(instrumented) multiplicative terms. As expected, the estimates from the interaction eﬀects
show that the negative impact of patent grants on mobility is most intense for solo inventors
and for inventors working outside the ﬁrm’s core technologies. As the inventor has a larger
26

group of coauthors and her work falls more in the core areas of the ﬁrm, this negative eﬀect
is attenuated.
In Column 4, both interactions are considered simultaneously.
The positive
estimated interaction eﬀect of the number of patents and coinventors decreases to nonsigniﬁcant
levels, but the estimated moderating eﬀect of the core remains virtually unchanged. Overall,
these results support the implication that the negative impact of patent protection on inventor
mobility is stronger in the absence of other sources of speciﬁc human capital.
The second source of heterogeneous eﬀects from our theoretical framework concerns the im-
portance of the inventor’s skills for the implementation or further development of her innovation.
If, as argued, patent protection turns innovation-related skills into patent-holder-speciﬁc human
capital, the impact of a patent grant on mobility should be more intense when these skills are
more relevant. We capture the relative importance of the inventor’s implementation skills by
distinguishing between whether her innovations are closer to basic or applied research. Basic
research involves early stage technologies for which the returns are diﬃcult to identify and ap-
propriate; therefore, the knowledge behind them is typically less codiﬁed and more diﬃcult to
transfer (Cassiman et al., 2018). Thus, ensuring the correct translation of this complex and
more tacit knowledge into commercializable products is likely to require the involvement of the
individuals that closely work with it (Zucker et al., 2002). Innovations based on applied research,
on the other hand, are more likely to involve explicit, codiﬁed and transferable knowledge, which
makes the involvement of the individual inventor less important for their implementation. Hence,
we expect that the negative eﬀect of patent protection on mobility should be more intense for
innovations in the sphere of basic knowledge.
To distinguish between innovations that build on basic vs applied research, we rely on the
presence of nonpatent literature (NPL) references in the list of citations included in patent
documents (Fleming and Sorenson, 2004; Arora et al., 2017). We deﬁne patented innovations
as basic-research oriented if the majority of NPL references consist of citations to scientiﬁc
documents, and applied-research oriented otherwise.19 We instrument our variables of interest,
the number of basic (applied) patents granted, with the average examiner leniency among basic
(applied) applications.20 As the results of Panel B of Table 5 show, the estimated negative eﬀect
19NPLs references include scientiﬁc publications, as well as, e.g., books, abstract meetings and abstract ser-
vices, trade journals, presentations at trade fairs, patent oﬃce actions, and search reports. To identify scientiﬁc
publications, we linked the list of NPL references to Thomson Reuters Master Journal List which comprises all
active titles that are eligible for inclusion in the Essential Science Indicators.
20Note that backward citations information is available for granted patents only. Therefore, our distinction
between basic and applied patent applications is based on the USPC class-subclass combinations to which they
belong. We deﬁne applications as basic (applied) if they belong to a USPC class-subclass where the share of NPL
references is above (below) the sample median.
27

of patent protection on mobility is, as expected, stronger for basic innovations than for applied
ones (and the diﬀerence is statistically signiﬁcant at the 10% level).
In summary, the heterogeneity analysis presented in this section supports the idea that
patent protection has a negative eﬀect on inventor mobility by converting innovation-related
skills into patent-holder-speciﬁc human capital. First, the impact of patents is stronger in the
absence of other sources of ﬁrm-speciﬁc human capital – i.e., when the innovation is developed
with fewer coauthors and fewer ﬁrm resources are devoted to the focal technology. Moreover,
the eﬀect is particularly intense for patents based on basic research, which arguably require a
more active role of their inventors for implementation.
Table 5: Patent grants, interaction with ﬁrm-speciﬁc skills, research direction and inventor mobility
Panel A:
Panel B:
Interaction with ﬁrm speciﬁc skills
Research direction
Estimation method: 2SLS
Dependent variable: Move
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
# of patents granted (instr.)
-0.023∗∗∗
-0.061∗∗∗
-0.045∗∗∗
-0.062∗∗∗
(0.007)
(0.023)
(0.011)
(0.023)
# of patents granted
0.018∗∗
0.008
× # of coinventors (L) (instr.)
(0.008)
(0.009)
# of patents granted
0.066∗∗∗
0.062∗∗∗
× % of applications in ﬁrm’s core (instr.)
(0.020)
(0.021)
# of coinventors (L)
-0.002
-0.041∗∗
-0.000
-0.018
(0.002)
(0.018)
(0.002)
(0.020)
% of applications in ﬁrm’s core
-0.031∗∗∗
-0.033∗∗∗
-0.154∗∗∗
-0.149∗∗∗
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.037)
(0.038)
# of USPC classes (L)
-0.019∗∗∗
-0.014∗∗∗
0.002
0.004
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.007)
(0.006)
# of applications per ﬁrm (L)
-0.050∗∗∗
-0.046∗∗∗
-0.051∗∗∗
-0.049∗∗∗
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
# of basic patents granted (instr.)
-0.100∗∗
(0.045)
# of applied patents granted (instr.)
-0.025∗∗
(0.010)
First-stage F-statistic
407
98
97
32
47
199
Exogeneity test (p-value)
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.007
0.003
N
129,740
129,740
129,740
129,740
74,430
94,737
# of inventors
67,775
67,775
67,775
67,775
37,398
46,644
# of ﬁrms
2,231
2,231
2,231
2,231
1,579
1,655
The estimation period is 2001–2011. Robust standard errors are clustered by inventor (in parentheses). The exogeneity
test is a Hausman-based test. The test for weak instruments is the Cragg-Donald Wald F-statistic. All regressions control
for the number of years since the inventor’s ﬁrst decision (log), ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects, ﬁxed eﬀects for the number of applications
ﬁled by the inventor, the technology ﬁeld, the year of the inventor’s ﬁrst decision and the calendar year. Panel B further
includes ﬁxed eﬀects for the number of basic or applied applications ﬁled by the inventor. Basic (applied) patents are
deﬁned as those where the majority of backward citations are nonpatent (patent) literature citations.
∗p < 0.10, ∗∗p < 0.05, ∗∗∗p < 0.01.
28

6.
Discussion of alternative interpretations
In principle, patent protection may reduce inventor mobility through mechanisms other than
the transformation of innovation-related skills into patent-holder-speciﬁc human capital. In this
section, we discuss two prominent alternative explanations: the existence of ﬁnancial constraints
that can be mitigated with patent rights and the potential signaling role of patents. We also
provide additional evidence in support of our suggested mechanism by showing that inventor
turnover negatively aﬀects the use of the protected technology by the patent holder.
6.1.
Financial constraints
Patents may serve as a value certiﬁcate and collateral for investors, facilitating access to
debt and venture capital ﬁnancing (Mann, 2018; Gaul´e, 2018). In that case, ﬁrms that secure
patent protection for their innovations would diﬀer from ﬁrms that do not in their ability to
raise funds to continue with their activity in a speciﬁc technology. Consequently, frictions in
ﬁnancial markets may prevent ﬁrms without granted patents from retaining their inventors.
This ﬁnancial constraint interpretation could explain the overall negative eﬀect of patents on
mobility that we document. We next explore its plausibility.
First, we investigate whether our results could be driven by the subsample of inventors whose
employers went out of business. If patents aﬀect ﬁrm survival by loosening ﬁnancial constraints,
a substantial number of inventor moves following patent rejections may be motivated by their
employers’ bankruptcies. We address this possibility by estimating our main speciﬁcation con-
sidering only moves from source ﬁrms that have at least one patent ﬁled in the years after the
detected employer change. The results of this analysis are available in Column 1 of Table 6.
They are nearly identical to the results of our baseline estimation.
Second, we repeat our main analysis separately for the subsamples of inventors working in
small and big ﬁrms. If ﬁnancial constraints were behind the negative eﬀect of patent grants on
mobility, the eﬀect should be larger for those inventors working in smaller ﬁrms, which are more
likely to suﬀer from them (Beck et al., 2005). On the other hand, if our main result is driven
by the speciﬁcity of the inventor’s implementation skills to the patent holder, the eﬀect should
be more important in larger organizations. This is because, in comparison with small start-ups,
large ﬁrms are more likely to possess the downstream specialized complementary assets necessary
for the commercialization of an innovation. This increases the likelihood that their technology
29

is developed in-house instead of being licensed out (Arora and Ceccagnoli, 2006).
To classify companies according to their size, we deﬁne as small ﬁrms those in the lowest
quartile of our sample in terms of the number of patent applications ﬁled with the USPTO in a
given year.21 Columns 2 and 3 of Table 6 show the results when we split the sample accordingly.
The estimated eﬀect of patent grants on mobility is close to zero and insigniﬁcant in the case of
small ﬁrms, whereas it is large, negative, and signiﬁcant for large ﬁrms. As shown in Column
4, however, the diﬀerence betweeen the two estimated eﬀects is not statistically signiﬁcant.
For robustness purposes, we use the ﬁrms’ net sales as an alternative measure of size for the
subsample of ﬁrms included in Compustat and deﬁne small ﬁrms analogously. The analysis
using this alternative size distinction, presented in the last three columns of Table 6, shows
very similar results. Overall, the evidence displayed in Table 6 is inconsistent with the ﬁnancial
constraint interpretation of our main ﬁndings and well aligned with our preferred explanation.
Table 6: Patent grants, ﬁrm survival, ﬁrm size and inventor mobility
Estimation method: 2SLS
Active
Small
Big
CS: Small
CS: Big
Sample
ﬁrms
ﬁrms
ﬁrms
All
ﬁrms
ﬁrms
CS: All
Dependent variable: Move
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
# of patents granted (instr.)
-0.025∗∗∗
-0.005
-0.028∗∗∗
-0.030∗∗∗
-0.008
-0.036∗∗∗
-0.039∗∗∗
(0.007)
(0.018)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.022)
(0.013)
(0.014)
# of patents granted
0.027
0.046
× # Small ﬁrm (instr.)
(0.021)
(0.032)
Small ﬁrm
-0.009
-0.116
(0.044)
(0.079)
First-stage F-statistic
425
181
312
119
75
142
35
Exogeneity test (p-value)
0.000
0.731
0.000
0.000
0.621
0.000
0.002
N
128,556
31,622
98,070
129,740
16,837
51,334
68,213
# of inventors
66,917
19,750
50,171
67,775
10,243
27,037
36,214
# of ﬁrms
2,020
2,111
330
2,231
685
140
790
The estimation period is 2001–2011. Robust standard errors are clustered by inventor (in parentheses). The exogeneity
test is a Hausman-based test. The test for weak instruments is the Cragg-Donald Wald F-statistic. All regressions
control for the number of years since the inventor’s ﬁrst decision (log), ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects, ﬁxed eﬀects for the number of
applications ﬁled by the inventor, the technology ﬁeld, the year of the inventor’s ﬁrst decision and the calendar year.
The sample in Columns 5–7 is restricted to Compustat (CS) ﬁrms. In Columns 2–4 and 5–7, a ﬁrm is classiﬁed as
small (big) if its application portfolio or net sales are below (above) the 25th sample percentile in a given year, which
corresponds to 68 applications or 7,305 $m in net sales. ∗p < 0.10, ∗∗p < 0.05, ∗∗∗p < 0.01.
21Using alternative quantiles to classify small ﬁrms, such the lowest tercile or quintile, does not alter our results.
Note that accounting for ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects in the analysis requires that even the smallest ﬁrms in our sample have
at least two patent applications.
30

6.2.
Patents as a signal of match quality
Patent grants may serve as signals of an inventor’s human capital, as discussed in Section 2.3.
If patents signal inventor ability, they should lead to increased mobility. This, however, appears
to be inconsistent with our ﬁndings for early inventors. Patents can also signal a good employer-
employee match, as they indicate that the inventor and the ﬁrm have successfully completed a
discovery process together. If the match quality is not easily observable, the signaling eﬀect of
patents would lead to a decrease in mobility. Furthermore, the signal would be stronger when
the inventor has fewer coauthors and the innovation falls outside the core of the ﬁrm. Therefore,
match signaling is a potential alternative driver of our results.
Nevertheless, there are some arguments that question this alternative interpretation. First,
the signaling mechanism is diﬃcult to reconcile with the ﬁnding that patents have a stronger
negative eﬀect on mobility for innovations closer to basic research. Basic research is inherently
less focused and more uncertain than applied research (Rosenberg, 1990).
Accordingly, the
value of innovations in this realm should be more diﬃcult to identify, and patents covering them
should provide noisier signals. Second, our focus on post-AIPA patent ﬁlings means that the
vast majority of applications are already published by the grant date. This implies that much
of the key technological information about patented innovations is released at the publication
date (Hegde and Luo, 2018). Thus, although the grant decision may provide the market with
some additional information on the quality of the match, we expect that the majority of such
information is conveyed in the publication of the application.
6.3.
Evidence on postmobility knowledge usage
To shed further light on our proposed mechanism, we analyze the impact of inventor mobility
on the extent to which the patent holder continues to use her innovations. If the inventor’s
tacit knowledge plays an important role in the implementation and further development of
these innovations, her departure will negatively impact the ﬁrm’s ability to exploit them. We
use patent expiration (i.e., the decision to not renew a patent) as our main measure of the
ﬁrms’ knowledge usage behavior. Since renewal fees have to be paid at regular intervals (every
four years until year 12) to keep patent protection active, ﬁrms have to periodically determine
whether patent renewal is worthwhile. Thus, if the premise of our analysis holds, we should
expect an increase in the ﬁrms’ propensity to let patents expire as a result of a mobility event.
31

We operationalize patent expiration with a dummy variable capturing whether at least one of
the inventor’s patents that had to go through its ﬁrst renewal during the last spell has been left
to expire.22 As an alternative proxy for the degree of technology usage, we draw on the citations
received by the inventor’s patent(s) from future patents by the patent holder, commonly referred
to as self-citations. If innovation-related knowledge is important for retention decisions, inventor
departures should curtail the ﬁrm’s ability to build on her patented innovations, which should
be reﬂected fewer in self-citations.
The sample for this analysis is restricted to inventors with at least one granted patent and is,
therefore, not a random subsample of the population of inventors. As in Section 4.4, we address
this problem by using Heckman’s two-step sample selection correction under the identifying
assumption that the selection model contains one covariate – i.e., examiner leniency – that is
correlated with patent grants but not with patent use (renewal decisions and self-citations). A
more general concern in this analysis is that mobility events cannot be considered exogenous
determinants of patent renewals (or citation patterns). Unobservable technology characteristics
can simultaneously aﬀect mobility and patent renewal decisions (and citation patterns). We
address this issue by using plausibly exogenous instrumental variables of inventor mobility based
on the level of enforcement of noncompete covenants in the inventor’s state. In particular, we
use the enforceability index proposed by Starr (2019) and its interaction with the sex of the
inventor.23
We implement the instrumental variable estimator using 2SLS and introduce an
extensive set of inventor-level and technology-level control variables.
In Table 7, we ﬁrst present the results of the analysis with the expired patent dummy as
the dependent variable.
In Column 3, we observe a positive and signiﬁcant estimate of the
coeﬃcient of mobility. After an inventor moves, there is a 53% increase in the probability that
her former employer allows at least one of her patents to expire. This result is consistent with
our argument that inventor mobility causes a loss of implementation know-how. The idea is
reinforced by the analysis of self-citations received by the inventor’s patents. Column 5 reports
a negative and signiﬁcant coeﬃcient of mobility on the number of self-citations, suggesting that
inventor departures lead to less follow-on innovation by the originating ﬁrm.
22Information on patent maintenance fee events since September 1981 is available on the USPTO website.
23Sex as an instrument for mobility has been used in the past, for example, by Kim and Marschke (2005).
Inventor sex was coded by matching the ﬁrst name of inventors listed on the patent with common male and
female ﬁrst names collected from Gender API (see https://gender-api.com).
32

Table 7: Postmobility, patent expiration and knowledge usage
OLS
2SLS
2SLS
Estimation method
OLS
(1st st.)
(2nd st.)
OLS
(2nd st.)
Patent
Patent
# of post
# of post
Dependent variable
expired
Move
expired
self cites (L)
self cites (L)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Move
0.022∗∗∗
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.008)
(0.011)
Enforceability index
-0.006∗∗∗
(0.001)
Enforceability index
-0.009∗∗
× Female
(0.004)
Move (instr.)
0.532∗∗
-0.652∗
(0.258)
(0.379)
Female
0.026∗∗
-0.001
0.023∗
-0.023
-0.022
(0.012)
(0.006)
(0.013)
(0.017)
(0.017)
# of post cites (L)
0.174∗∗∗
0.172∗∗∗
(0.008)
(0.008)
# of pre cites (L)
-0.041∗∗∗
0.014∗∗∗
-0.048∗∗∗
-0.069∗∗∗
-0.061∗∗∗
(0.004)
(0.002)
(0.005)
(0.007)
(0.008)
# of pre self-cites (L)
-0.023∗∗∗
-0.024∗∗∗
-0.011
0.498∗∗∗
0.477∗∗∗
(0.004)
(0.002)
(0.008)
(0.011)
(0.012)
# of patents granted (L)
0.230∗∗∗
-0.003
0.216∗∗∗
-0.011
0.001
(0.007)
(0.003)
(0.009)
(0.011)
(0.014)
% of patents in ﬁrm’s core
-0.046∗∗∗
-0.016∗∗∗
-0.037∗∗∗
0.094∗∗∗
0.085∗∗∗
(0.009)
(0.004)
(0.010)
(0.013)
(0.014)
Average patent scope
-0.013∗∗∗
0.004∗
-0.017∗∗∗
0.001
0.006
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.007)
# of coinventors (L)
0.005
-0.044∗∗∗
0.009
0.024∗∗∗
0.032∗∗∗
(0.004)
(0.002)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.009)
# of applications per ﬁrm (L)
0.039∗∗∗
-0.013∗∗∗
0.046∗∗∗
0.013∗∗∗
0.005
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.006)
Inverse mills ratio
0.212∗∗
0.041
0.155
-0.450∗∗∗
-0.350∗∗
(0.092)
(0.058)
(0.104)
(0.128)
(0.141)
F-statistic
40
Exogeneity test (p-value)
0.000
0.000
N = 33, 813.
Number of inventors: 18,043.
Number of ﬁrms:
1,109.
The estimation period is
2001–2011. Robust standard errors are clustered by inventor (in parentheses). The exogeneity test
is a Hausman-based test. The test for weak instruments is the Cragg-Donald Wald F-statistic. All
regressions control for the number of years since the inventor’s ﬁrst decision (log), ﬁxed eﬀects for
the technology ﬁeld, the year of the inventor’s ﬁrst decision and the calendar year. The enforceability
scores for each state are from Starr (2019). Since noncompetes are enforceable in the state where the
employee is located, we use information on the inventor’s location from the last patent application
prior to observing the outcome. # of pre self-cites (pre cites) are the citations received from patents
owned by the focal (other) assignees before year t (i.e., the year in which an inventor is observed to
stay or exit). # of post self-cites (post cites) are the citations received from patents owned by the focal
(other) assignees in a 5-year window after year t. ∗p < 0.10, ∗∗p < 0.05, ∗∗∗p < 0.01.
To sum up, the overall negative eﬀect of patents on mobility documented in this article
for early-career inventors does not have a unique possible interpretation. In particular, it is
plausible that the role of patents as signals of a good inventor-ﬁrm match partially accounts
for it. Nevertheless, given the post-AIPA context of our analysis (with pre-grant publication of
applications), the results of our heterogeneity analysis, and the evidence of a decrease in post-
mobility usage of patented knowledge, our preferred explanation for the main ﬁndings is the
existence of innovation-related skills speciﬁc to the patented technology. Finally, although our
analysis does not explicitly test the possibility that patents act as signals of inventor ability, our
33

ﬁndings suggest that such an ability-signalling process would be dominated by other mechanisms
that operate in the opposite direction in the relationship between patenting and mobility.
7.
Conclusion
In this study, we investigate the eﬀect of patent protection on inventor mobility. We argue
that patent rights decrease interﬁrm mobility to the extent that inventors have tacit knowl-
edge that is especially valuable in the implementation or further development of their patented
innovations. Patents convert these innovation-related skills into patent-holder-speciﬁc human
capital, thus discouraging mobility.
To test this idea, we examine the impact of obtaining a patent on the mobility patterns of
early-career inventors involved in patent applications. Since inventions that result in granted
and not granted patents are expected to be inherently diﬀerent, we adopt an instrumental vari-
ables approach to estimate the eﬀect of patenting on inventor mobility. In particular, we use the
variations in the granting rates among patent examiners within an art unit and ﬁling year as an
exogenous source of variation in patent grants. We analyze the early careers of employee inven-
tors who apply for patents at the USPTO for the ﬁrst time between 2001 and 2011. Our results
indicate that receiving a patent grant causes a substantial decrease in mobility. Moreover, we
ﬁnd support for the following additional predictions that characterize our proposed mechanism:
(i) patents have a weaker negative eﬀect on mobility in the presence of other sources of ﬁrm-
speciﬁc human capital (collaboration with coinventors and working in the technological core of
the ﬁrm), and (ii) patents have a stronger negative eﬀect on mobility when the involvement of
the inventor is particularly important for implementation (innovations built on basic research).
We also provide complementary evidence showing that an inventor move negatively aﬀects the
subsequent use of her patented innovations, which is consistent with the idea that inventors
hold innovation-related skills useful for implementation. Overall, this combination of ﬁndings
suggests that, while other mechanisms may play a role in explaining the negative eﬀect of patent
protection on inventor mobility, an interpretation based on patent-holder-speciﬁc human capital
is the most plausible in our setting.
These results have some relevant implications.
First, they suggest that patents, despite
disclosing codiﬁed technical knowledge, may hamper the diﬀusion of tacit know-how that comes
with interﬁrm mobility. There is an ongoing debate among scholars about whether patent rights
34

help or hinder the spread of knowledge and, ultimately, the generation of further innovations. On
the one hand, patents encourage the disclosure of information that would otherwise be kept secret
and promote technology trade (Moser, 2011). On the other hand, the recombinant nature of new
knowledge, coupled with the fragmentation of ownership rights and steep transaction costs, may
turn the patent system into an obstruction for the transfer of technological information (Heller
and Eisenberg, 1998). Recent research on the impact of patents on subsequent innovation has
produced mixed evidence (Galasso and Schankerman, 2015; Sampat and Williams, 2019). In this
context, our examination of the eﬀect of patents on inventor mobility adds a new perspective to
the debate, allowing for a more comprehensive view of the relationship between patents and the
diﬀusion of knowledge. In particular, our results suggest that patent protection, by inducing
lower mobility, may as well reduce the spread of noncodiﬁed knowledge associated with the
protected technology and, more generally, of other know-how not related to the replicability of
a speciﬁc innovation.
Furthermore, the reduction in mobility induced by patents may also contribute to an ineﬃ-
cient allocation of inventive skills. To the extent that inventors’ career moves are motivated by
employer-employee match improvements, patents, by discouraging mobility, will inhibit these
eﬃciency improvements. On the bright side, our results suggest that patents, by making some
inventor skills patent-holder-speciﬁc, shift the incentives to invest in human capital from the
employees (i.e., the inventors) to their employers (i.e., the patent holders). This shift may en-
courage some eﬃcient investments in training that might not have been otherwise made by the
inventors themselves because of ﬁnancial constraints or risk considerations. More generally, by
contributing to the retention of their R&D workers, the patent system may provide incentives
to companies to invest in long-term-oriented human resources practices. Finally, our ﬁndings
bring to light an important methodological issue. If patent protection aﬀects the mobility of
inventors, tracking their careers through their issued patents (as most studies have done thus
far) introduces a downward bias in the detection of mobility. This bias may also extend to the
analysis of any research question related to inventor career dynamics, from mobility studies to
analyses of knowledge spillovers or coinventor networks. To avoid this problem, future studies
in the ﬁeld should rely on information from all, not only granted, patent applications.
35

References
Akcigit, U., S. Baslandze, and S. Stantcheva (2016). Taxation and the international mobility of inventors. Amer-
ican Economic Review 106(10), 2930–81.
Arora, A., S. Belenzon, and A. Patacconi (2017). The decline of science in corporate R&D. Strategic Management
Journal 39(1), 3–32.
Arora, A. and M. Ceccagnoli (2006). Patent protection, complementary assets, and ﬁrms’ incentives for technology
licensing. Management Science 52(2), 293–308.
Arrow, K. (1962).
The economic implications of learning by doing. The Review of Economic Studies 29(3),
155–173.
Balasubramanian, N., J. W. Chang, M. Sakakibara, J. Sivadasan, and E. Starr (2018). Locked in? The en-
forceability of covenants not to compete and the careers of high-tech workers. US Census Bureau Center for
Economic Studies Paper No. CES-WP-17-09.
Beck, T., A. Demirguc-Kunt, and V. Maskimovic (2005). Financial and legal constraints to growth: Does ﬁrm
size matter? The Journal of Finance 60(1), 137–177.
Blundell, R. and J. Powell (2004).
Endogeneity in semiparametric binary response models.
The Review of
Economic Studies 71(3), 655–679.
Campbell, B. A., M. Ganco, A. M. Franco, and R. Agarwal (2012). Who leaves, where to, and why worry? Em-
ployee mobility, entrepreneurship and eﬀects on source ﬁrm performance. Strategic Management Journal 33(1),
65–87.
Cassiman, B., R. Veugelers, and S. Arts (2018). Mind the gap: Capturing value from basic research through
combining mobile inventors and partnerships. Research Policy 47(9), 1811–1824.
Cockburn, I., S. Kortum, and S. Stern (2003).
Are all patent examiners created equal?
Examiners, patent
characteristics and litigation outcomes. In W. Cohen and S. Merril (Eds.), Patents in the Knowledge-Based
Economy, pp. 17–53. National Academies Press.
Fallick, B., C. Fleischman, and J. Rebitzer (2006). Job-hopping in silicon valley: Some evidence concerning the
microfoundations of a high-technology cluster. The Review of Economics and Statistics 88(3), 472–481.
Feng, J. and X. Jaravel (forthcoming). Crafting intellectual property rights: Implications for patent assertion
entities, litigation, and innovation. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
Fleming, L. and O. Sorenson (2004). Science as a map in technological search. Strategic Management Journal 25(8-
9), 909–928.
Frakes, M. and M. Wasserman (2016). Patent oﬃce cohorts. Duke Law Journal 65(8), 1601–1655.
Galasso, A. and M. Schankerman (2015). Patents and cumulative innovation: Causal evidence from the courts.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(1), 317–369.
Ganco, M. (2013). Cutting the gordian knot: The eﬀect of knowledge complexity on employee mobility and
entrepreneurship. Strategic Management Journal 34(6), 666–686.
Ganco, M., R. Ziedonis, and R. Agarwal (2015). More stars stay, but the brightest ones still leave: Job hopping
in the shadow of patent enforcement. Strategic Management Journal 36(5), 659–685.
Gaul´e, P. (2018). Patents and the success of venture-capital backed startups: Using examiner assignment to
estimate causal eﬀects. The Journal of Industrial Economics 66(2), 350–376.
Ge, C., K.-W. Huang, and I. Png (2016). Engineer/scientist careers: Patents, online proﬁles, and misclassiﬁcation
bias. Strategic Management Journal 37(1), 232–253.
Gilson, R. J. (1999). The legal infrastructure of high technology industrial districts: Silicon valley, route 128, and
covenants not to compete. New York University Law Review 74, 575.
Graham, S. J., A. C. Marco, and R. Miller (2018). The USPTO Patent Examination Research Dataset: A window
on patent processing. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 27(3), 554–578.
Hegde, D. and H. Luo (2018). Patent publication and the market for ideas. Management Science 64(2), 652–672.
Heller, M. and R. Eisenberg (1998). Can patents deter innovation? The anticommons in biomedical research.
Science 280(5364), 698–701.
36

Hoisl, K. (2007). Tracing mobile inventors – The causality between inventor mobility and inventor productivity.
Research Policy 36(5), 619–636.
Hombert, J. and A. Matray (2016). The real eﬀects of lending relationships on innovative ﬁrms and inventor
mobility. The Review of Financial Studies 30(7), 2413–2445.
Kim, J. and G. Marschke (2005). Labor mobility of scientists, technological diﬀusion, and the ﬁrm’s patenting
decision. The RAND Journal of Economics 36(2), 298–317.
Kogan, L., D. Papanikolaou, A. Seru, and N. Stoﬀman (2017). Technological innovation, resource allocation, and
growth. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(2), 665–712.
Kuhn, J. M. and N. C. Thompson (2019).
How to measure and draw causal inferences with patent scope.
International Journal of the Economics of Business 26(1), 5–38.
Lanjouw, J. and M. Schankerman (2004). Patent quality and research productivity: Measuring innovation with
multiple indicators. The Economic Journal 114(495), 441–465.
Lemley, M. and B. Sampat (2012). Examiner characteristics and patent oﬃce outcomes. Review of Economics
and Statistics 94(3), 817–827.
Lerner, J. (1994). The importance of patent scope: An empirical analysis. The RAND Journal of Economics 25(2),
319–333.
Li, G.-C., R. Lai, A. D’Amour, D. Doolin, Y. Sun, V. Torvik, A. Yu, and L. Fleming (2014). Disambiguation and
co-authorship networks of the U.S. patent inventor database (1975 – 2010). Research Policy 43(6), 941–955.
Mann, W. (2018). Creditor rights and innovation: Evidence from patent collateral. Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics 130(1), 25–47.
Marco, A., A. Myers, S. Graham, P. D‘Agostino, and K. Apple (2015). The USPTO patent assignment dataset:
Descriptions and analysis. USPTO Working Paper No. 2015-2.
Marco, A. C., J. D. Sarnoﬀ, and C. A. deGrazia (2019). Patent claims and patent scope. Research Policy 48(9),
103790.
Marx, M. (2011). The ﬁrm strikes back: Non-compete agreements and the mobility of technical professionals.
American Sociological Review 76(5), 695–712.
Marx, M., D. Strumsky, and L. Fleming (2009). Mobility, skills, and the michigan non-compete experiment.
Management Science 55(6), 875–889.
Merges, R. P. (1999). The law and economics of employee inventions. Harvard Journal of Law & Technology 13(1),
1–54.
Moretti, E. and D. J. Wilson (2017). The eﬀect of state taxes on the geographical location of top earners: Evidence
from star scientists. American Economic Review 107(7), 1858–1903.
Moser, P. (2011). Do patents weaken the localization of innovations? Evidence from world’s fairs. The Journal
of Economic History 71(2), 363–382.
Palomeras, N. and E. Melero (2010). Markets for inventors: Learning-by-hiring as a driver of mobility. Manage-
ment Science 56(5), 881–895.
Paruchuri, S., A. Nerkar, and D. C. Hambrick (2006). Acquisition integration and productivity losses in the
technical core: Disruption of inventors in acquired companies. Organization Science 17(5), 545–562.
Righi, C. and T. Simcoe (2019). Patent examiner specialization. Research Policy 48(1), 137–148.
Rosenberg, N. (1990). Why do ﬁrms do basic research (with their own money)? Research Policy 19(2), 165–174.
Sampat, B. and H. L. Williams (2019). How do patents aﬀect follow-on innovation? Evidence from the human
genome. American Economic Review 109(1), 203–236.
Singh, J. and A. Agrawal (2011).
Recruiting for ideas: How ﬁrms exploit the prior inventions of new hires.
Management Science 57(1), 129–150.
Song, J., P. Almeida, and G. Wu (2003). Learning-by-hiring: When is mobility more likely to facilitate inter-ﬁrm
knowledge transfer? Management Science 49(4), 351–365.
Starr, E. (2019).
Consider this: Training, wages, and the enforceability of covenants not to compete.
ILR
Review 72(4), 783–817.
Starr, E., J. J. Prescott, and N. Bishara (2019). Noncompetes in the U.S. labor force. University of Michigan
37

Law & Economics Research Paper No. 18-013.
Stock, J. and M. Yogo (2005).
Testing for weak instruments in linear IV regression.
In D. Andrews (Ed.),
Identiﬁcation and Inference for Econometric Models, pp. 80–108. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Zucker, L. G., M. R. Darby, and M. B. Brewer (1998). Intellectual human capital and the birth of U.S. biotech-
nology enterprises. The American Economic Review 88(1), 290–306.
Zucker, L. G., M. R. Darby, and M. Torero (2002). Labor mobility from academe to commerce. Journal of Labor
Economics 20(3), 629–660.
38

Online Appendix for “The Eﬀect of Patent Protection on
Inventor Mobility” by Eduardo Melero, Neus Palomeras and
David Wehrheim
This Online Appendix provides additional material to the results presented in “The Eﬀect of
Patent Protection on Inventor Mobility.” In Section A.1, we provide the details on the conditions
under which patent protection leads to a reduction in inventor mobility and derive the testable
implications presented in Section 2.2 of the main article. In Section A.2, we discuss and report
additional robustness checks for the instrumental variables approach that supplement Section
4.2 of the paper. In Section A.3, we oﬀer a summary of the relative eﬀect sizes of our estimates
of patenting on mobility across the diﬀerent speciﬁcations and subsamples reported in the paper.
A.1.
Patent protection and inventor mobility: Formal deriva-
tion of testable implications
To characterize the elements of Inequality (1) in the main article, we assume that the proﬁts
from an innovation derive from its market introduction. The demand for the innovation can
be represented by the following inverse linear demand function relating price p to quantity
q:
p = a −bq, with a, b > 0. The implementation advantage contributed by the inventor’s
innovation-related skills takes the form of lower production costs.
Because those skills are
partially ﬁrm speciﬁc, we need to deﬁne three types of situations. First, any ﬁrm taking the
innovation to market without the help of the inventor will face a constant marginal production
cost of c, with 0 < c < a
2.
Second, if the inventor remains with the current employer, the
employer can introduce the innovation at a marginal cost of 0. Finally, if a diﬀerent employer
hires away the inventor and implements the innovation using her contribution, this ﬁrm will
face a marginal cost of dc, with 0 < d < 1. Therefore, c captures the cost reduction due to the
inventor’s innovation-related skills, and d captures the degree of ﬁrm speciﬁcity of those skills.
Within this framework, if a patent is granted, the current employer of the inventor will
obtain monopoly proﬁts πM
i,j = a2
4b if the inventor stays and πM
−i,j = (a−c)2
4b
if the inventor leaves.
Alternative employers cannot make any proﬁt from the patent-protected innovation.
If the
patent is not granted, any competitor can implement the innovation at a marginal cost of c.
The ﬁrm employing the inventor, however, enjoys a cost advantage that allows it to set a price
i

of p = c and serve the whole market. The ﬁrm employing the inventor, therefore, will obtain
proﬁts πC
i,j =
c(a−c)
b
if it is the initial employer j and πC
i,−j =
(c−dc)(a−c)
b
if it is any other
employer. Therefore, Inequality (1) in the paper – stating the conditions under which patents
have a negative eﬀect on mobility – can be rewritten as follows:
2ac −c2
4b
−dc(a −c)
b
> 0
(A.1)
After some rearrangement of terms, the condition established in Inequality (A.1) can be
reduced to d < ˆd, with ˆd = 1
4( a
a−c + 1) > 0. In other words, patent protection generates a
negative eﬀect on inventor mobility as long as the share of the inventor’s innovation-related
skills that is ﬁrm speciﬁc is small enough.
Our second implication from Section 2.2 in the paper is that the eﬀect of patenting on
mobility is positively moderated by the importance of the inventor’s ﬁrm-speciﬁc innovation-
related skills, as captured by her complementarities with the ﬁrm’s resources. The negative eﬀect
of patents on mobility is attenuated or can even turn positive as d increases. This implication
can be easily proved using Inequality (A.1). The left-hand side of this inequality captures the
net change caused by patents in the balance of the inside vs.
outside value of innovation-
related skills. Hence, the probability of switching employers decreases monotonically with that
expression. Consequently, stating that ﬁrm-speciﬁc skills positively moderate the eﬀect of patent
protection on mobility is equivalent to stating that the left-hand side of Inequality (A.1) decreases
with d. In mathematical terms, we need to show that the derivative of such an expression with
respect to d is negative. That is:
−c(a −c)
b
< 0
(A.2)
which always holds given our assumptions regarding a, b and c.
The two implications stated above follow a similar rationale. Without patent protection,
monopoly pricing is not possible. Instead, the ﬁrm employing the inventor sets p = c, which
is below the optimal monopoly price, and sells an amount of the innovative product above the
optimal monopoly amount. This means that the marginal proﬁt of a cost reduction is higher
without patent protection. This is the product market eﬀect: the marginal value of ﬁrm-speciﬁc
skills dc is lower with patent protection, leading to a positive eﬀect on mobility. On the other
hand, patent protection turns the general component of the inventor’s innovation-related skills,
ii

(1 −d)c, into patent-holder-speciﬁc human capital.
This is the human capital eﬀect, which
generates an important retention eﬀect of patents that will dominate in the determination of
the total eﬀect if d is small enough, and it becomes weaker as d increases.
Our third implication is that the negative eﬀect of patent protection on mobility should be
more intense when the innovation-related skills of the inventor are particularly relevant for the
implementation of the new technology (for example, when it is closer to basic science). In our
model, those skills are captured by c. Therefore, the implication is equivalent to stating that
the derivative of the left-hand side of Inequality (A.1) with respect to c must be positive, at
least for the range where d < ˆd. Such a derivative can be stated as follows:
a −c
2b
−d(a −2c)
b
> 0
(A.3)
After some rearrangement of terms, Inequality (A.3) can be expressed as d < ˆˆd, with ˆˆd =
1
2(
c
a−2c + 1). Thus, the eﬀect of patent protection on mobility is negatively moderated by the
importance of innovation-related skills only if a small enough share of those skills is ﬁrm speciﬁc.
If this range includes the range for which patents have a negative eﬀect on mobility (d < ˆd), then
the negative eﬀect of patenting on mobility is intensiﬁed by the importance of innovation-related
skills. In other words, the third implication is generally true as long as ˆd < ˆˆd, which is always
the case given our assumptions regarding a, b and c.
A.2.
Exogeneity checks for average examiner leniency
A.2.1.
Investigating selection
For the average examiner leniency to be a valid instrumental variable for the number of
patents granted to an inventor, it must satisfy the exclusion restriction. The institutional details
provided in Section 3.3 in the article suggest that the assignment of applications to examiners
is plausibly orthogonal to the drivers of inventor mobility, and the exogeneity tests for examiner
leniency provided at the patent level by Sampat and Williams (2019) suggest that this is the
case. We provide two empirical tests that support the validity of the instrument at the inventor
level.1
First, we test whether the application portfolios of the inventors assigned to tough or lenient
examiners are similar in terms of the observable characteristics that predict granting probability
1We thank an anonymous referee for suggesting these two pieces of analysis.
iii

at the time of ﬁling. As discussed in Lemley and Sampat (2012), the assessment of whether a
certain type of invention is assigned to examiners with a certain leniency is challenging for the
following two reasons: (i) it is diﬃcult to identify variables that at the time of application would
capture the characteristics of the underlying invention, and (ii) much of the front-page infor-
mation contained in patent documents is not available in applications. Sampat and Williams
(2019) propose the following two measures for such a purpose that are available at the time of
ﬁling: patent family size (# of countries in which patent equivalents have been applied for) and
the number of claims listed in the application. We follow their approach and assess whether
these variables are predictive of patent grants. In line with the ﬁndings in Sampat and Williams
(2019), an F-test of joint signiﬁcance reveals that both measures have a signiﬁcant positive eﬀect
on grant decisions (F=113; p-value = 0.000). Next, we average the predicted grant probabili-
ties across individuals and regress it on average examiner leniency. This produces an estimated
coeﬃcient of 0.0005 with a standard error of 0.0005, suggesting that there is no systematic rela-
tionship between the two variables. As displayed in the nonparametric representation in Figure
1 in the article, there is also no visual relationship between the average predicted probabilities
of patent grants and our instrument of average examiner leniency.
Second, we examine the correlation between examiner leniency and an index of the likelihood
of changing employers based on the inventor’s set of observable characteristics.
In addition
to the array of ﬁxed eﬀects, this index includes several additional individual characteristics
based on pre-patent ﬁling measures.
In particular, we follow prior patent-based studies on
the determinants of inventor mobility (e.g., Song et al., 2003; Hoisl, 2007; Palomeras and
Melero, 2010; Marx, 2011) and include a measure of inventor productivity (# of applications
ﬁled/tenure), inventor specialization (# of unique patent classes), the inventor’s collaborative
ties (# of unique coinventors), her expertise in the ﬁrm’s core technology areas (as % of total
applications ﬁled), her experience (time since 1st decision) and the size of her current employer
(# of applications ﬁled by the employer).
We run a probit model, which is more suitable
for the purpose of obtaining speciﬁc predictions than a linear probability model (Wooldridge,
2014). Column 1 of Table A.1 reports the results for the determinants of inventor mobility,
which are all statistically signiﬁcant. The resulting mobility index captures approximately 16%
of the variation in actual mobility. In Column 2 of Table A.1, we then regress this mobility
index on examiner leniency. As the results show, the correlation between \
Move and examiner
leniency is close to zero and statistically insigniﬁcant. Thus, there appears to be no evidence
iv

that inventors with characteristics that make them more likely to move are particularly likely
to be assigned to more lenient examiners.
Table A.1: Examiner leniency, and patent grants and mobility
Panel A: Investigating selection
Panel B: Deviations vs. ﬁxed eﬀects
Sample
All
All
1st decision
1st decision
Estimation method
Probit
OLS
OLS
OLS
Patent
Patent
Dependent variable
Move
\
Move
issued
issued
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Examiner leniency
-0.002
0.846∗∗∗
(0.005)
(0.018)
Examiner approval rate
0.846∗∗∗
(0.018)
Years since 1st decision (L)
0.020∗∗∗
(0.003)
# of coinventors (L)
-0.009∗∗∗
(0.001)
% of applications in ﬁrm’s core
-0.039∗∗∗
(0.003)
# of USPC classes (L)
-0.042∗∗∗
(0.002)
# of applications per ﬁrm (L)
-0.034∗∗∗
(0.002)
Productivity (L)
-0.122∗∗∗
(0.005)
Firm FE
Yes
No
No
No
First decision year FE
Yes
No
No
No
Calendar year FE
Yes
No
No
No
# of applications ﬁled FE
No
No
No
No
Art unit ×
Technological class FE
Yes
No
No
Filing year
N
129,740
129,740
66,285
66,285
# of inventors
67,775
67,775
66,285
66,285
# of ﬁrms
2,231
2,231
2,052
2,052
The estimation period is 2001–2011. Robust standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by inventor in
columns 1 and 2; and by art unit in columns 3 and 4. Column 1 displays average marginal eﬀects. ∗p < 0.10,
∗∗p < 0.05, ∗∗∗p < 0.01.
A.2.2.
Fixed eﬀects vs. deviations
The work by Sampat and Williams (2019) supports the validity of examiner leniency as an
instrument for patent grants, when accounting for art-unit-year ﬁxed eﬀects. Because inventors
may ﬁle applications in diﬀerent technological areas, we cannot explicitly control for such ﬁxed
eﬀects in our regressions. Instead, we implicitly account for them by averaging, at the inventor
level, the diﬀerences between the grant rate of the assigned examiner and the grant rate of the
corresponding art unit and year [see Equations (3), (4) and (5) in Section 3.3.1 in the article].
To show that the two approaches are essentially equivalent, in Columns 3 and 4 of Table A.1, we
restrict our analysis to the ﬁrst application decision. In Column 3, we use the deviations from
v

art-unit means in a given application year, and in Column 4, we use the examiner’s raw approval
rate in combination with a set of art-unit-by-application-year ﬁxed eﬀects. As can be seen, in
both speciﬁcations, we obtain a coeﬃcient of 0.846 with a standard error of 0.018. Interestingly,
these point estimates are also similar in magnitude to that reported in Sampat and Williams
(2019).2
A.2.3.
Addressing examiner specialization
In this subsection, we address the concern raised by Righi and Simcoe (2019), who provide
evidence of patent examiner specialization within art units.
If such specialization is corre-
lated with examination outcomes (as also suggested by these authors) and, simultaneously, with
omitted factors that drive employee-inventor mobility patterns, then our instrumental-variable
estimator would be ﬂawed.
Since Righi and Simcoe (2019) note that examiner specialization disappears within subclasses
for most technology centers, we replicate our instrument at the art-unit-subclass level. However,
at this level of disaggregation, we are left with approximately one-third of the observations since
many cells are not available for estimation. In addition, we need to exclude those technology
centers from the analysis where, according to Righi and Simcoe (2019), some within-subclass
specialization remains [i.e., (1600) Biotech and Organic Chemistry and (1700) Chemistry and
Materials Engineering]. Thus, to obtain an instrument with suﬃcient variation, we build the
within-subclass examiner leniency measure using a 3-year moving window when computing grant
rates. Everything else remains the same as in our main analysis. Panel A of Table A.2 reports the
replication of our baseline results on this subsample of 74,288 observations and the alternative
instrument. As can be seen, the coeﬃcient on the instrumented number of patents granted (in
Column 3) continues to be negative and signiﬁcant.
A.2.4.
“Next-to-random” allocation of patent applications
In Panel B of Table A.2, we repeat our main analysis for a subsample of patent applications
examined in art units where the “next-to-random” assumption on the allocation of applications
to examiners is particularly likely to hold.
According to qualitative evidence reported by
Lemley and Sampat (2012), some art units allocate applications to examiners based on the last
digit of the serial number of the application. Because the serial numbers are assigned at the
2For the sake of comparison with Sampat and Williams (2019), we do not include ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects in these
speciﬁcations.
vi

central oﬃce of the USPTO according to the order of arrival, their last digits are orthogonal
to the application characteristics. Accordingly, Feng and Jaravel (forthcoming) use data from
USPTO records to make a systematic analysis of this pattern that allows them to determine
which art units tend to use a last-digit rule for the assignment of applications.3 Relying on
their classiﬁcation, we repeat our baseline analysis for the subsample of art units that tend to
allocate applications to examiners using the last digits of serial numbers.4 The 2SLS coeﬃcient
presented in Column 6 of Table A.2 shows that our results are virtually unaﬀected by the
removal of potentially problematic art-unit-years; considering that the probability of changing
employers is reduced to 9% for this subsample, these estimates imply that an exogenous increase
of one granted patent decreases mobility by approximately 22%.
Table A.2: Addressing examiner specialization
Panel A: Examiner leniency
Panel B: Art units with
within USPC-subclasses
assignment based on last digit
OLS
2SLS
OLS
2SLS
Estimation method
OLS
(1st st.)
(2nd st.)
OLS
(1st st.)
(2nd st.)
# of pats
# of pats
Dependent variable
Move
issued
Move
Move
issued
Move
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
# of patents issued
0.002∗∗∗
0.002∗∗∗
(0.000)
(0.000)
# of patents issued (instr.)
-0.086∗∗∗
-0.020∗∗
(0.029)
(0.009)
Examiner leniency
0.450∗∗∗
1.289∗∗∗
(0.098)
(0.118)
F-statistic
21
170
Exogeneity test (p-value)
0.000
0.006
N
74,288
74,288
74,288
74,146
74,146
74,146
# of inventors
34,753
34,753
34,753
35,944
35,944
35,944
# of ﬁrms
1,573
1,573
1,573
1,432
1,432
1,432
The estimation period is 2001–2011. Robust standard errors are clustered by inventor (in parentheses).
The exogeneity test is a Hausman-based test. The test for weak instruments is the Cragg-Donald Wald
F-statistic. All regressions control for the number of years since the inventor’s ﬁrst decision (log), ﬁrm
ﬁxed eﬀects, ﬁxed eﬀects for the number of applications ﬁled by the inventor, the technology ﬁeld, the
year of the inventor’s ﬁrst decision and the calendar year. Following Righi and Simcoe (2019), the in-
strument at the art-unit-year-USPC-subclass level excludes the “Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry”
and “Chemistry and Materials Engineering” technology centers. The art-unit-years where application
assignment to examiners is determined by the last digit of the serial number of the patent application
are from Feng and Jaravel (forthcoming). ∗p < 0.10, ∗∗p < 0.05, ∗∗∗p < 0.01.
As with any instrumental variable, we cannot completely rule out the possibility that average
examiner leniency is correlated with some unobserved factor aﬀecting our outcome of interest.
3Feng and Jaravel (forthcoming) rely on the same divergence index and test statistics used in Righi and Simcoe
(2019) to detect specialization, but they instead use it to detect the degree of concentration of patent examiners
on certain last digits in comparison to a theoretical uniform distribution.
4We thank the authors for sharing their data with us.
vii

However, the diﬀerent exogeneity tests performed in this section place some bounds on that
concern. This, combined with qualitative and quantitative evidence provided in related studies,
oﬀers us some conﬁdence that this variable satisﬁes the exclusion restriction for the purpose of
our study.
A.3.
Summary of results of the article
Table A.3: Relative sizes of estimated eﬀects (one additional patent)
Description
Speciﬁcation
Observations
Average Mobility
Relative Impact
Baseline
Table 2, column 3
129,740
0.10
23%
Additional controls
Table 5, column 1
129,740
0.10
23%
Narrower tech classes FEs
Table 3, column 1
129,721
0.10
27%
Reviewed applications
Table 3, column 2
127,248
0.10
17%
First decision
Table 3, column 3
66,285
0.15
18%
Nonsuperstar inventors
Table 3, column 4
123,596
0.11
24%
Pharmaceutical inventors
Table 3, column 5
23,069
0.12
25%
Filing year ⩽2006
Table 3, column 6
58,351
0.16
21%
Industries with low patenting intensities
Table 3, column 7
34,567
0.09
26%
Industries with high patenting intensities
Table 3, column 8
33,563
0.13
26%
Active ﬁrms
Table 6, column 1
128,556
0.10
25%
Larger ﬁrms (in terms of applications)
Table 6, column 3
98,070
0.09
31%
Larger ﬁrms (in terms of sales)
Table 6, column 6
51,334
0.10
36%
viii

References
Feng, J. and X. Jaravel (forthcoming). Crafting intellectual property rights: Implications for patent assertion
entities, litigation, and innovation. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
Hoisl, K. (2007). Tracing mobile inventors – The causality between inventor mobility and inventor productivity.
Research Policy 36(5), 619–636.
Lemley, M. and B. Sampat (2012). Examiner characteristics and patent oﬃce outcomes. Review of Economics
and Statistics 94(3), 817–827.
Marx, M. (2011). The ﬁrm strikes back: Non-compete agreements and the mobility of technical professionals.
American Sociological Review 76(5), 695–712.
Palomeras, N. and E. Melero (2010). Markets for inventors: Learning-by-hiring as a driver of mobility. Manage-
ment Science 56(5), 881–895.
Righi, C. and T. Simcoe (2019). Patent examiner specialization. Research Policy 48(1), 137–148.
Sampat, B. and H. L. Williams (2019). How do patents aﬀect follow-on innovation? Evidence from the human
genome. American Economic Review 109(1), 203–236.
Song, J., P. Almeida, and G. Wu (2003). Learning-by-hiring: When is mobility more likely to facilitate inter-ﬁrm
knowledge transfer? Management Science 49(4), 351–365.
Wooldridge, J. (2014). Quasi-maximum likelihood estimation and testing for nonlinear models with endogenous
explanatory variables. Journal of Econometrics 182(1), 226–234.
ix