TITLE: Discretionary Remote Working Helps Mothers Without Harming Non-mothers: Evidence from a Field Experiment
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2019
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2018.3237
---

LBS Research Online
E Sherman
Discretionary Remote Working Helps Mothers Without Harming Non-mothers: Evidence from a Field
Experiment
Article
This version is available in the LBS Research Online repository: https://lbsresearch.london.edu/
id/eprint/1064/
Sherman, E
(2020)
Discretionary Remote Working Helps Mothers Without Harming Non-mothers: Evidence from a Field
Experiment.
Management Science, 66 (3). pp. 1351-1374. ISSN 0025-1909
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2018.3237
INFORMS (Institute for Operations Research and Management Sciences)
https://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/10.1287/mnsc.20...
Users may download and/or print one copy of any article(s) in LBS Research Online for purposes of
research and/or private study. Further distribution of the material, or use for any commercial gain, is
not permitted.

Discretionary Remote Working Helps Mothers Without Harming Non-Mothers: 
Evidence From a Field Experiment 
 
Eliot L. Sherman1 
London Business School 
esherman@london.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
October 17, 2018 
 
 
 
 
1 Direct all correspondence to Eliot L. Sherman: esherman@london.edu; 44 20 7000 8914. I wish to thank 
Lawrence W. Sherman, Tariq Ahmed, Nick Skinner, Lydia Seymour, the Abcam executive leadership team, all 
study participants, the associate editor, three anonymous reviewers, and audience members at the 2018 London 
Business School Organisational Behaviour Faculty Lab. I am grateful to the Leadership Institute at London 
Business School for supporting this research. The usual disclaimer applies. 
 

The organization of family life constitutes a significant obstacle, if not the primary obstacle, to 
the realization of gender equity in the workplace (Hewlett 2002, Williams 2010, Petersen et al. 
2014).2 Compared to men, women spend at least twice as much time providing childcare (Sayer 
et al. 2004, Lamb and Tamis-Lemonda 2004) and, as a result, experience a significant decline 
in work hours following motherhood (Bertrand et al. 2010, Killewald and Garcia-Manglano 
2016). Furthermore, disproportionate childcare responsibilities compel women to endure sleep 
disruptions at a greater rate (Maume et al. 2009), refuse travel assignments and late meetings 
more frequently (Maume 2006), spend many more hours each week multitasking (Sullivan 
1997, Offer and Schneider 2011), and miss work more often to provide urgent childcare 
(Maume 2008). Parenthood is also associated with a considerable increase in household labor 
for women—but not men—which is, in turn, negatively correlated with earnings (Sanchez 
and Thomson 1997, Noonan 2001). 
 
It is little wonder, then, that women’s professional attainment continues to suffer, 
despite the fact that by some measures the human capital of women now exceeds that of men 
in the aggregate.3 Although it remains unclear exactly how much of the attainment gap is 
attributable to motherhood, this amount appears to be growing, as “ideal worker” norms 
prescribing continuous availability (Acker 1990, Kelly et al. 2010) collide with “intensive 
mothering” norms (Hays 1996), which suggest that mothers are fundamentally deficient 
unless they prioritize “meeting the needs of dependent children above all other activities” 
(Correll et al. 2007, p. 1306). By one estimate, for example, the portion of the gender wage 
gap in Denmark that is due to children doubled to 80% between 1980 and 2013 (Kleven et al. 
 
2 The conceptualization of family life, both in this paper and in the research on which I draw, presumes 
heteronormativity. This constitutes an important scope condition, particularly in light of evidence that 
homosexual couples allocate childcare more equally than do heterosexual couples (McPherson 1993; Chan et al. 
1998). 
 
3 For example, according to the U.S. Census women are more likely than men to have a bachelor’s degree 
(https://www.census.gov/newsroom/blogs/random-samplings/2015/10/women-now-at-the-head-of-the-class-
lead-men-in-college-attainment.html, accessed October 2018.) 

2018). 
 
Cognizant of the constraints that caregiving imposes on their female employees, many 
firms maintain “flexibility” policies designed to mitigate conflict between work and family life 
(for a recent review, see Kossek and Lautsch 2018). However, while flexibility policies take 
many forms—such as compressed workweeks, job sharing, and reduced hours with pro-rated 
pay—their ultimate effect is to limit policy users’ presence in the workplace. Accordingly, 
many women avoid using the reduced-hours policies that are available to them out of concern 
for the career penalties that would result (Bailyn 1993 [2006], Blair-Loy and Wharton 2002, 
Briscoe and Kellogg 2011). Such concerns are well founded, as women who use reduced-hours 
policies experience slower wage growth (Glass 2004), fewer promotions (Kalleberg and Reskin 
1995), lower quality work assignments (Stone and Hernandez 2013) and difficulty maintaining 
relationships with mentors (Turco 2010). Consequently, relatively low uptake of reduced-hours 
policies by the employees who stand to benefit the most from them has proven to be a 
“remarkably resilient problem” (Williams et al. 2013, p. 209). 
 
The practice of allowing all employees to work remotely at their discretion may 
constitute a promising alternative.4 Even a limited amount of remote working could 
meaningfully reduce the conflict between work and family demands for women, potentially 
improve their job performance, and—critically—be appealing enough to men as to result in 
gender-neutral usage patterns. The latter point is particularly important, insofar as the gendered 
nature of reduced-hours policy usage perpetuates the very stereotypes regarding commitment 
and competence that continue to hinder women professionally (Epstein et al. 1999, Blair-Loy 
2003, Ridgeway and Correll 2004, Turco 2010). 
Accordingly, the goal of this paper is to assess whether discretionary remote working, 
 
 
4 I use the term remote working in lieu of “telecommuting,” as no commuting is involved, and “working from 
home,” as the distinguishing feature is working outside of the office, which may or may not entail working at 
home. 

as an organizational practice, can ameliorate disparities between mothers and non-mothers in a 
white-collar workplace. I pursue this goal in three primary ways. First, I assess whether 
mothers, fathers, and childless employees exhibit different propensities to work remotely when 
given the discretion to do so. Second, I evaluate the effects of working remotely across these 
employee subgroups with respect to both the work-family interface and self-reported job 
performance. Third, I gather evidence regarding the potential coordination costs of remote 
working, as this speaks to the feasibility of implementing the practice on a long-term basis. 
Taken together, this approach—in terms of both subject matter and methodology—is consistent 
with recent calls for scholarship that informs the practice of evidence-based management 
(Rousseau 2006, Rousseau and Gunia 2016). 
 
The field site for this research was Abcam PLC, a mid-sized life sciences company 
headquartered in Cambridge, England. I evaluated remote working at Abcam via a four-week 
randomized experiment with a repeated cross-over design. Reliance upon an experimental 
framework was critical, since employees who acquire remote working privileges in an ad hoc 
manner are also likely to differ systematically with respect to their human and social capital 
from employees who do not (Weeden 2005, Davis and Kalleberg 2006, Hornung et al. 2008, 
Wharton et al. 2008, Golden 2008). 
 
The distinguishing feature of cross-over experiments is that they allow each subject to 
receive the treatment and to serve as their own control. Specifically, subjects are randomly 
assigned to receive either the treatment or control initially, and then “cross over” to the other 
condition after a fixed amount of time. These switches occur more than once in a repeated trial. 
This design confers three primary advantages compared with a traditional experimental 
framework—sometimes referred to as a “parallel group trial”—in which subjects exclusively 
receive either the treatment or control stimulus (Fisher 1935). First, it obviates equity concerns 
among the subject population regarding the practice of random assignment (Levitt and List 

2009). This is not a trivial matter, as such concerns can preclude an otherwise receptive 
organization from collaborating. Second, it offers greater statistical power than a parallel group 
trial with an equivalent number of subjects—a particularly beneficial feature, in light of the 
propensity for under-powered experiments to produce results that fail to replicate (Simmons et 
al. 2011), as well as the substantial financial cost of experiments conducted in the field 
(Broockman et al. 2017). Third, and perhaps most importantly, cross-over designs can recover 
more accurate treatment effects insofar as they remove fixed subject variance from estimate 
residuals (Greenwald 1976, Hills and Armitage 1979). A comprehensive statistical discussion 
of this methodology can be found in Jones and Kenward (2015). 
I randomly assigned half of the participants to follow the remote working policy in 
weeks one and three of the experiment and the other half to follow the policy in weeks two and 
four, surveying all participants after each week. The remote working policy stated that 
participants should work from home “as much as was sensible, given [their] professional 
responsibilities,” whereas during control weeks I instructed participants to work from home as 
much as they normally would. For most, this entailed coming into the office every day, as the 
base rate of remote working at Abcam was quite low prior to the trial. 
 
To preview my results, with a 92% completion rate and across 748 person-weeks, I find 
no significant difference during experimental weeks in self-selection into the number of weekly 
remote working days across men and women, parents and non-parents, or mothers and fathers. 
I also find no difference across all subgroups in the total number of hours worked in treatment 
versus control weeks. In terms of outcomes, remote working significantly reduces family-work 
conflict for mothers—but not for fathers or non-parents—and significantly improves job 
performance for most subgroups, though the improvements are especially pronounced for 
mothers. Remote working also improves job satisfaction for all subgroups with the exception of 
mothers, whose job satisfaction is not discernibly different during treatment weeks. In terms of 

potential coordination costs, remote working reduces co-worker helping among non-parents, 
but does not have a discernible influence on the co-worker helping behavior of parents. 
Furthermore, this effect appears during the first half of the experiment but not the second, 
suggesting that it was attenuated once employees gained more experience with the logistics of 
working remotely. Finally, interdependence of employees’ work does not affect the relationship 
between remote working and job performance for mothers, though there is some evidence that 
performance benefits are attenuated for non-mothers with highly interdependent roles. Twenty-
two semi-structured interviews conducted with subjects that I selected at random (e.g., Chan 
and Anteby 2016) corroborate and contextualize these conclusions. 
 
My findings contribute to the work-family and labor market inequality literatures by 
illustrating, in a field setting where external validity was strong (Morgan and Winship 2007 
[2014]), a relatively straightforward way in which organizations can serve as “equalizers” by 
arresting the reproduction of gender-based inequality within their ranks (Ranganathan and 
Pedulla 2018). Evidence of this nature remains in short supply, despite decades of attention 
from scholars: As Dobbin and colleagues (2015, p. 1014) note, “studies of the causes of 
inequality are legion, but studies of remedies are rare.” This study is also somewhat distinctive 
insofar as the preponderance of field experiments in labor markets involve audits of hiring 
practices (Pager 2003, Bertrand and Mullainathan 2004, Correll et al. 2007, Tilcsik 2011, 
Gaddis 2015, Kang et al. 2016, Rivera and Tilcsik 2017, Weissharr 2018, Quadlin 2018). 
While this work is immensely valuable in its own right, the relative paucity of field 
experiments that extend beyond the hiring interface limits the accumulation of causal evidence 
regarding other aspects of the employment relationship. Two recent exceptions (Kelly et al. 
2014, Bloom et al. 2015) are particularly germane to the present research. Accordingly, below I 
discuss in some detail how this project builds on and extends their results. 
 

HOW DOES MOTHERHOOD CONSTRAIN WOMEN PROFESSIONALLY? 
Recent scholarship linking the organization of family life to the persistence of labor market 
inequality emphasizes the irreconcilability of two powerful trends (Pedulla and Thebaud 
2015). The first trend involves the proliferation of “ideal worker” norms which compel 
employees to pursue their professional obligations at the expense of all other commitments, 
domestic or otherwise (Acker 1990, Williams 2001). This ethos is effectively illustrated by 
Kelly and colleagues (2010, p. 290), who observed workers debating “whether it is legitimate 
to leave work to care for a sick child, to take vacation, or to recover from a cold.” Where the 
ideal worker norm is especially strong—generally speaking, in white-collar professions and 
managerial roles (Coser 1974; Jacobs and Gerson 2004)—long hours and uninterrupted 
availability are viewed as proxies for commitment (Epstein et al. 1999). These effort displays 
are common precursors to attainment because differences in output quality are often difficult 
to measure (Blair-Loy 2003, Sharone 2004) and because extensive credentialing may render 
employees relatively comparable otherwise (Goldin 2014). The diffusion of tournament 
compensation systems, such as “up or out” promotion tracks in academia, law, and 
management consulting, contributes to the presence of large discontinuities in pay for 
workers whose relative rank exceeds that of their colleagues by even a small margin 
(Connelly et al. 2014). This further compels employees to engage in “overwork,” or 
workweeks that exceed 50 hours (Cha 2010). Overwork is especially prevalent in the United 
States, where dual-earner couples log more work hours than their counterparts almost 
anywhere else in the world (Meyers and Gornick 2005), reflecting a ten percent increase 
during the last three decades (Mishel 2013). 
Ideal worker norms have proliferated in concert with a second trend: The ascendance 
of “intensive mothering” as a cultural imperative that exacerbates long-standing inequities in 
the division of domestic labor (Hays 1996). Intensive mothering departs from gender-

essentialist beliefs regarding the superiority of female caregiving—beliefs that remain 
stubbornly prevalent, even among those who otherwise endorse gender egalitarianism (Cotter 
et al. 2011)—to suggest that mothers are fundamentally deficient unless they prioritize 
“meeting the needs of dependent children above all other activities” (Correll et al 2007, p. 
1306). 
The extent to which intensive mothering transcends boundaries of class, race, and 
income remains subject to debate. Recent scholarship suggests that the central imperative of 
perpetual self-sacrifice affects women irrespective of class, as Hays (1996) originally 
suggested. That is, low-income mothers “embrace and perform intensive mothering in the 
absence of larger social supports for their children’s upbringing and at a cost to their own 
emotional and physical well-being” (Elliott et al. 2015, p. 351, see also Edin and Kefalas 
2011). Other research suggests that some of the most prominent manifestations of intensive 
mothering, such as time-consuming intervention in children’s education, are primarily 
hallmarks of the middle class (Lareau 2000, Vincent and Ball 2007). 
Without adjudicating between these perspectives, it is sufficient to observe that 
intensive mothering, as an ideology, motivates an array of behaviors that are, to a greater or 
lesser degree, effectively incompatible with white-collar work as it is presently organized 
(Nelson 2010). Prominent examples include long-duration breastfeeding (Gatrell 2007, 
Rippeyoung and Noonan 2012) and co-sleeping (Sears and Sears 1992)—both of which tend 
to excuse men from routine sleep disruption (Maume et al. 2009, 2010)—as well as a time-
intensive approach to meal consumption, which emphasizes home preparation and the use of 
organic materials for the express purpose of mitigating health risks (Moisio et al. 2004, 
Afflerback et al. 2013).5 Likewise, with respect to older children, this ideology compels 
 
 
5 The link between home-prepared organic food and mitigated health risk remains dubious, particularly as there 
is no scientific consensus regarding the definition of organic (Lyons et al. 2001). 

mothers to engage with a wide range of children’s extracurricular activities, in addition to the 
routine medical appointments and vehicular transport that permeate familial life (Lareau 
2002, Stone 2008). At least in part as a result of this, the amount of time that mothers 
presently spend with their children is equivalent to the 1960s, when working full-time was 
the exception instead of the norm (Bianchi et al. 2006). 
 
Professional Responses to Motherhood 
The collision of ideal worker and intensive mothering norms evokes guilt and emotional 
anguish in women (Simon 1995, Glavin et al. 2011). It also makes attainment far more 
difficult for working mothers than for men or childless women, particularly in light of men’s 
inability or unwillingness to assume greater childcare responsibilities. This dynamic is 
implicated in two common responses to childbirth exhibited by professional women. The first 
is to exit the labor market entirely, at least temporarily. For example, Cha (2010, p. 324) 
found that “the odds of quitting are 112 percent higher for mothers in professional 
occupations when their husbands work long hours,” while 60% of the women interviewed by 
Stone (2008) cited their husband’s unavailability for childcare in their decision to leave their 
professional careers. Although many women who quit the labor market after childbirth later 
return, even brief interruptions in employment can negatively affect their attainment for many 
years to come (England et al. 2016, Wilde et al. 2010). Consistent with this, a large-scale 
audit study recently found that mothers who “opted out” of working for familial reasons were 
less likely to be called back regarding subsequent job applications than both continuously 
employed women and women who had lost their previous job due to non-familial reasons 
(Weissharr 2018). Evidence that mothers can regain their lost earnings power by their 40s 
and 50s (Kahn et al. 2014) may, meanwhile, provide little comfort. 
 
A second common response to motherhood for professional women, which is also 

conditioned at least in part on men’s relative unavailability for childcare, is to work in a part-
time or reduced-hours capacity (Becker and Moen 1999, Stone 2008). This is generally 
suboptimal for several reasons. First, there is evidence that women participating in reduced-
hours policies are often compelled to work more than their designated hours (Blair-Loy 2003, 
Webber and Williams 2008), with the balance effectively constituting free labor. Second, in 
many cases the relationship between part-time hours worked and earnings is non-linear (Goldin 
2014), such that workers earn less—sometimes substantially less (Bardasi and Gornick 
2008)—than their pro-rated full-time equivalent pay. Third, reduced-hours participation is, by 
definition, incompatible with “overwork.” This is problematic because the financial returns to 
overwork have increased dramatically during the last forty years, to the extent that men’s 
disproportionate propensity for overwork effectively offset the wage gains made by women as 
a result of their comparatively greater educational achievements (Cha and Weeden 2014). 
 
Perhaps most detrimental, however, is the fact that even a short reduced-hours stint can 
substantively alter the way a white-collar worker is viewed by her co-workers and supervisors. 
At issue is the belief that any deviation from full-time employment contravenes ideal worker 
norms (Acker 1990), adherence to which constitutes an informal but unyielding prerequisite for 
career progression. Specifically, insofar as role commitment—manifested via continuous 
availability—is the core ideal worker tenet (Correll and Benard 2006), part-time workers are 
denigrated as “time deviants” (Epstein et al. 1999) whose behavior renders them unworthy of 
further advancement (Blair-Loy and Cech 2014). For example, reduced-hours workers are often 
transferred to less impactful assignments and face the prospect of mentors withdrawing 
essential support (Turco 2010, Stone and Hernandez 2013). Likewise, in one finance firm 
female reduced-hours workers were evaluated as lower-performing than co-workers who did 
not use the policies (Wharton et al. 2008), while women who used some portion of their sick 
leave when their children fell ill had significantly lower earnings compared with otherwise 

equivalent managers who did not (Blair-Loy and Wharton, 2004). It is, in large part, the 
stigmatizing effect of reduced-hours policy use that motivates many professional women to quit 
rather than work part time (Stone 2008, Williams et al. 2013). 
 
The evaluative discount that reduced-hours workers suffer is sustained by the fact that 
usage is highly gendered (Ridgeway and Correll 2004), to the extent that—in some white-collar 
workplaces—women’s ideal worker commitment is perennially suspect solely by virtue of their 
potential for motherhood, and with it, policy use (Turco 2010, Rivera and Tilcsik 2017). Even 
in less extreme work settings, reduced-hours policy use is sufficiently confirmatory as to trigger 
the host of negative stereotypes that subsequently hinder attainment (Benard et al. 2007). It 
remains to be seen, however, whether such stereotypes would obtain from the use of a policy 
that was more gender neutral in its uptake—and that may, as a result, be more compatible with 
the ideal worker image. As Thebaud and Pedulla (2016, p. 611) note, “Men’s responses to 
supportive work–family policies depend largely on their perceptions of what they believe 
their male peers want, and by extension, what kind of behavior they would hold them 
accountable to.” 
 
Remote Working as an Organizational Intervention 
Evidence regarding the consequences of remote working remains decidedly mixed. On one 
hand, studies often suggest that increasing employees’ schedule control reduces the conflict 
between work and family demands, among other beneficial outcomes (Galinksy et al. 1996, 
Voydanoff 2004, 2007, Grzywacz et al. 2008, Gareis and Barnett 2002). On the other hand, 
research also suggests that the benefits of greater schedule control may be a mirage, or at 
least limited—and that, instead, such practices constitute an insidious way for white-collar 
workplaces to wring a greater number of work hours from their employees than would 
otherwise be possible (Briscoe 2007, Blair-Loy 2009). 

 
Findings remain mixed for several reasons. First, studies often conflate different types 
of policy use, which complicates the interpretation of their results. As Glass and Finley 
(2002, p. 323) note in their review, “A major measurement issue that emerged was the 
tendency to group family-responsive policies together in the analysis, obscuring which 
particular policy or combination of policies was affecting the reported outcomes. This 
occurred most often with regard to flexible work arrangements.” For example, there is 
correlational evidence that remote working—as distinct from other forms of flexibility—can 
provide psychological benefits to women with children in particular (Kossek et al. 2006) 
without constraining earnings growth for either sex (Glass and Noonan 2016). 
 
The second reason that scholarship continues to produce mixed results may be 
attributable to the relatively high incidence of correlational studies. This constitutes a non-
trivial methodological limitation, insofar as the antecedents and consequences of remote 
working vary systematically as a function of employees’ human and social capital (Weeden 
2005, Davis and Kalleberg 2006, Hornung et al. 2008, Wharton et al. 2008, Golden 2008). 
Two experimental studies constitute exceptions that are particularly germane; accordingly, I 
review them here in some depth. First, Kelly and colleagues (2014) conducted a group-
randomized trial called STAR with employees in the IT department of a U.S.-based Fortune 
500 company. Second, Bloom and colleagues (2015) conducted an experiment with call-center 
workers in China. 
 
The STAR experiment was designed, in part, to reduce work-family conflict by 
increasing employees’ schedule control and supervisors’ support for employees’ family and 
personal matters. Treatment entailed a four-hour training session for supervisors, encouraging 
them to demonstrate support for employees’ personal lives, and an eight-hour training session 
for employees and supervisors, in which participants discussed “new ways of working to 
increase employees’ control over their work time and demonstrate greater support for others’ 

personal obligations” (Kelly et al. 2014, p. 490). A six-month follow-up survey of 717 
participants indicated that STAR significantly reduced family-work conflict, increased 
employees’ schedule control, and increased the amount of hours per week that participants 
worked from home, among other outcomes. 
 
While the STAR experiment is comprehensive and compelling, the treatment was—
consistent with its goal of changing the firm’s cultural schemas (Sewell 1992)—multi-faceted 
and complex. That is, while experimental groups were effectively exposed to the same 
treatment, the manner in which they capitalized on that treatment varied, insofar as groups 
decided among themselves how best to act on what they had learned. As a result, it is not clear 
to what extent remote working specifically can be implicated in the reduction of family-work 
conflict—as opposed to schedule control more generally or other aspects of the treatment, such 
as increases in emotional support from supervisors and co-workers.6 In addition, the question of 
employee performance was beyond the scope of the investigation reported in both the initial 
trial and its subsequent follow-up (Moen et al. 2016). 
 
Bloom and colleagues (2015) examined the impact of remote working specifically with 
respect to employee performance, finding generally positive effects in the context of call center 
work. Accordingly, it is useful to highlight several points of divergence between their 
experiment and the present study. First, Bloom and colleagues conducted their experiment in 
China, which remains in many ways distinct from Western professional culture (e.g., Otis 
2008). Second, Bloom and colleagues required subjects in the treatment condition to work from 
home for four days per week for the entirety of the trial. This represents an extreme version of 
remote working: For example, one review characterized remote working for more than 2.5 days 
per week as “high-intensity” (Gajendran and Harrison 2007). By comparison, my design elicits 
 
 
6 For example, the authors measured schedule control via an eight-item scale, of which only one item pertained to 
remote working. 

workers’ revealed preferences with respect to the optimal number of remote working days, 
which was half of the amount required by Bloom and colleagues. Third, while Bloom and 
colleagues’ experiment measured employee performance very effectively, they did not 
investigate the effects of remote working on the work-family interface. Finally, as Bloom and 
colleagues note, “The job of a call center employee is particularly suitable for telecommuting. 
It requires neither teamwork nor in-person face time,” conditions which are “far from 
universal” (Bloom et al. 2015, p. 213). As a result, it is still unclear how remote working affects 
employees whose professional responsibilities are less portable, which constitutes a sizeable 
portion of white-collar work. Assessing the potential coordination costs of remote working for 
these employees is crucial, however, insofar as it speaks to the organizational feasibility of 
maintaining such a policy over the long term. 
 
METHODS 
 
Randomized cross-over design. I investigated the uptake and consequences of remote 
working using a randomized field experiment with a repeated cross-over design. Cross-over 
experiments are commonly used in medical trials (e.g., Hills and Armitage 1979, Martins et al. 
2018), as they economize statistical power and thereby reduce the cost of subject recruitment. 
But they are employed much more infrequently in the social sciences—so much so, in fact, that 
“experiment” is often synonymous with parallel group trial, in which subjects are randomly 
exposed to either a treatment or control stimulus, with analysis entailing a comparison of means 
(Fisher 1935).7 By contrast, in a cross-over study subjects are randomly assigned to a sequence 
 
 
7 The defining feature of an experiment is not random assignment to parallel groups but, rather, the presence of 
an exogenously-induced manipulation. As Jackson and Cox (2013, p. 28) note, “Broadly, the investigation is an 
experiment if the investigator controls the allocation of treatments to the individuals in the study and the other 
main features of the work, whereas it is observational if, in particular, the allocation of treatments has already 
been determined by some process outside the investigator’s control and detailed knowledge.” 
 

of treatments that occur over a set number of periods. In a balanced design, which I employ, 
subjects are allocated an equivalent number of sequences, periods, and treatments. Specifically, 
I randomized subjects to either an ABAB or BABA sequence, where A indicates a treatment 
week and B indicates a control week.8 For treatment weeks, I instructed participants to “relax 
the assumption that work must necessarily be done in the office and, instead, work remotely 
for as much as is sensible given your professional responsibilities.” For control weeks, I 
instructed participants to proceed as usual, that is, to “work in the office as much as you 
would normally do.” I informed participants of their assigned sequence in the week before 
the experiment began. 
 
Cox (1958) and Greenwald (1976) appraise the strengths and weaknesses of this type of 
design—sometimes referred to as “within-subjects” by psychologists—in comparison to a 
traditional parallel group trial. In terms of threats to internal validity, the potential for a “carry 
over” effect, which “occurs when the effect of one treatment persists in some fashion at the 
time of measurement of the effect of another” (Greenwald, 1976, p. 318), constitutes the 
primary difference. At issue in medical trials is the potential for trace amounts of the drug 
under study to remain with subjects who received it during the first period when measures are 
taken from them during the subsequent placebo period. With respect to remote working, the 
concern would be that—for example—the psychological benefits that accrued to subjects who 
received the treatment in week one effectively “carried over” to their subsequent control week, 
to the extent that they are no longer comparable to subjects randomized to the alternative 
sequence. 
 
In order to address this concern, cross-over experiments usually separate treatments 
temporally by inserting a “wash-out period” between them (e.g., Farr et al. 2017). In this case, 
 
8 I used STATA to produce simple random assignment of the entire sample, generating random numbers for all 
participants, ranking the numbers in descending order, and then splitting them in half to separate ABAB 
participants from BABA ones. 
 

the weekend served as my washout period. No problems arise if it can be reasonably assumed 
that this is sufficient to preclude the initial treatment from affecting subsequent ones (Cox 
1958), while for some investigations a wash-out period may not be necessary (Martens et al. 
2018). A useful feature of cross-over experiments, however, is the ability to test for carry-over 
effects directly, in order to determine whether the wash-out period was in fact sufficient. Below 
I describe the steps that I took in order to do so: In short, I found no evidence of a treatment-by-
sequence interaction effect. This indicates that the wash-out period was effective. 
 
Subjects and recruitment. My research site was Abcam PLC, a mid-sized life 
sciences firm headquartered in Cambridge, England. The company was founded in 1998 with 
the goal of facilitating the worldwide sale of antibodies and related products, such as peptides 
and proteins, via the Internet. Its customer base is primarily research scientists. In 2016, Abcam 
earned approximately £50 million on revenues of £170 million. It has been listed on the United 
Kingdom’s Financial Times Stock Exchange (FTSE) since 2005. 
 
At the time of the experiment Abcam employed approximately 1,000 people 
worldwide, of whom 434 were located in Cambridge. To assist with recruiting subjects in the 
Cambridge office, I asked line managers from the company’s different departments to 
disseminate an e-mail that I wrote informing eligible employees about the experiment and 
endorsing their participation (see Appendix A). The only employees who were deemed 
ineligible were those whose responsibilities exclusively required their physical presence onsite. 
In effect, this meant certain logistics workers involved in handling, packaging, and storing 
materials. 
 
In order to register for the experiment, participants filled out a baseline survey in which 
they reported demographic information and responded to the scale items that constituted my 
independent and dependent measures. 203 employees, or 45% of the workforce in Cambridge, 

signed up.9 In order to encourage participation—and, importantly, to avoid subject attrition 
during the experiment—I offered each participant a £50 gift voucher to John Lewis, a popular 
retailer, conditional on the completion of all four weekly surveys subsequent to the baseline 
survey. Ensuring a high level of completion is crucial for field experiments, because the 
systematic attrition of subjects can complicate the analysis and interpretation of experimental 
results (Levitt and List 2009, Baldassarri and Abascal 2017). Of the 203 employees who signed 
up initially, 187—or 92%—completed all four weekly surveys, and therefore serve as the basis 
for the analysis I report below.10 I attribute this completion rate, which is comparable to the rate 
reported by Kelly and colleagues (2014), to the financial inducement I provided and the brevity 
of the weekly surveys that I assigned, each of which took approximately four minutes to fill 
out. 
 
T-tests indicated that participants and non-participants were not statistically 
distinguishable by gender (p = 0.98). Participants did earn less on average than non-participants 
(£44,730 versus £60,980).11 However, this difference is attributable to the fact that the highest 
earners in the firm, such as the CEO and the CFO, did not participate in the experiment. 
Conditioning the comparison on those earning less than £200,000 per year, for example—
which excludes just the twelve highest earners in the firm—renders participant and non-
participant salaries statistically indistinguishable. Thus the external validity of the volunteer 
 
9 I assigned 102 participants to the ABAB sequence and 101 participants to the BABA sequence. In my analytic 
sample, 93 participants received the ABAB sequence and 94 received the BABA sequence. 
 
10 An additional 25 employees expressed interest in joining the experiment during the first week. In response, I 
assigned them to the BABA sequence, in order to avoid circumscribing their potential number of remote 
working days during their first exposure to the treatment. Of these 25 employees, 24 completed all four weekly 
surveys. I conducted the analysis that I describe in this section with and without their data included. The 
inclusion of their responses did not meaningfully alter the pattern of results that I observed; accordingly, I 
excluded their responses from all the models that I report, and restricted the data to those subjects who were 
randomized to their respective sequences. 
 
11 The salary comparisons are missing data from 13 study participants, for whom earnings information was not 
available. Overall the average annual salary at the firm was £54,428, with a standard deviation of £50,656. 
 

sample, with respect to the company overall as well as similar companies, should be relatively 
strong. 
 
The experiment ran for four weeks, beginning on Monday, September 25, 2017, with 
outcomes measured via online surveys at the end of each week. Surveys went live at noon on 
Friday and closed at 9 AM on the following Monday. In terms of race and nationality, subjects 
were predominately white and British. The average participant age was 34 years; 52% were 
female; 37% had at least one child in their household; 44% lived with a spouse; and 39% could 
reasonably be classified as managers, in that they supervised at least one person who reported 
directly to them. At baseline, the average number of weekly working hours was 38. See Table 
1 for a full list of descriptive statistics. 
 
The average number of weekly remote working days prior to the experiment was 0.33, 
but this distribution was highly skewed: 67% of employees reported that they never worked 
from home, 11% reported working from home a half day per week, 18% reported working 
from home one day per week, and 4% reported working from home for more than one day per 
week. Importantly, however, subjects did not exhibit significant variation in remote working 
propensity by subgroup prior to the experiment (see Table 2). 
***** Insert Tables 1 and 2 About Here ***** 
 
Measures.12 My assumption was that longer surveys would result in a higher rate of 
subject attrition. Accordingly, I only included measures that I deemed absolutely essential to 
the project. Further, in order to increase comparability with prior research, wherever possible I 
included the same scale items that Kelly and colleagues (2014) used. Accordingly, with respect 
to family-to-work conflict, I utilized the five-item scale developed by Netermeyer and 
 
12 In addition to what I report in this section, I collected—but did not use—the following two measures. First, in 
the baseline survey that subjects took prior to the experiment, I included one question that assessed respondents’ 
level of elder care responsibilities. These were minimal overall. Second, at Abcam’s request, in the baseline 
survey and the weekly surveys I included a question which measured how likely respondents were to 
recommend working at Abcam to a friend. 

colleagues (1996). The scale includes items such as, “Things I wanted to do at work didn’t get 
done because of the demands of my family or personal life.” I focused on the family-to-work 
direction because remote working is presumably beneficial insofar as it limits the demands of 
home life—such as a sick child—from precluding the completion of work. Brevity concerns 
precluded me from measuring work-to-family conflict as well, though this direction also 
appeared less germane to remote working specifically. 
I measured job performance via the three-item scale developed by Welbourne and 
colleagues (1998), which includes items such as, “How would you evaluate your job 
performance with respect to the quality of your work output?” I measured job satisfaction using 
the three-item scale developed by Camman and colleagues (1983), which includes items such 
as, “In general, I like working at my job.” In order to evaluate whether remote working created 
coordination costs, I measured co-worker helping behavior via the four-item scale developed 
by Dekas and colleagues (2013), which includes items such as “I helped others who had heavy 
workloads.” I also measured job interdependence—at baseline only—via the five-item scale 
developed by Van der Vegt and colleagues (2001), which includes items such as “I have to 
obtain information and advice from my colleagues in order to complete my work.” 
I measured all scale items from one to five, anchoring on “strongly disagree” and 
“strongly agree,” respectively. See Appendix 2 for a complete list of these scale items. In terms 
of non-scale measures, I assessed weekly remote working days from zero to five in half-day 
increments; weekly work hours; weekly flex hours, that is, hours worked outside of 8:00 AM to 
6:00 PM; and weekly leave days, that is, sickness or vacation days taken. 
 
Manipulation check. During the experiment subjects reported working an average of 
2.14 days remotely during treatment weeks versus 0.49 days remotely during their control 
weeks, a more than three-fold relative increase. A T-test indicates that this constituted a 
significant difference (p = 0.000), meaning that the manipulation was successful. 

 
RESULTS 
I first conducted a series of T-tests in order to determine whether the uptake of remote working 
days exhibited significant variation with respect to gender or other demographic differences 
(see Table 3). I observed no clearly significant difference at the 0.05 level in the number of 
remote working days taken during treatment weeks by gender (p = 0.06), parenthood (p = 
0.07), fatherhood (p = 0.24), or motherhood (p = 0.28). Furthermore, while it is not a 
statistically significant comparison, mothers actually took slightly fewer remote working days 
than non-mothers (1.95 versus 2.18) and parents took slightly fewer remote working days than 
non-parents (1.95 versus 2.25). Women did, however, report taking more remote working days 
overall than men (2.28 versus 1.98), though again this difference was not statistically 
significant. The key point, though, is that the magnitude of the policy effect was not 
meaningfully different: Abcam employees elected to work remotely about two days per week 
during their treatment weeks, compared with a half day during control weeks. Figure 1 shows 
the uptake of remote working days during treatment and control weeks for each employee 
subgroup. 
***** Insert Table 3 and Figure 1 About Here ***** 
 
Given the frequency with which children’s health and related circumstances require 
unanticipated childcare during the workday, and the extent to which this is disproportionately 
addressed by mothers (Maume 2008, Kelly et al. 2010), I examined whether subjects took 
fewer days of sick or holiday leave during remote working weeks. T-tests indicated that remote 
working weeks did not influence the number of leave days taken with respect to the full sample 
(p = 0.36). T-tests also indicated that subjects did not log significantly different work hours in 
total during remote working weeks versus control weeks (36.47 versus 36.18, p = 0.66). This is 
consistent with Kelly and colleagues (2014), who did not observe a “work intensification” 

effect as a result of increased schedule control (cf. Schieman 2013). Subjects did report 
working more flex hours—that is, hours outside of 8:00 AM to 6:00 PM—during remote 
working weeks versus control weeks (3.04 versus 1.37, p = 0.000). 
 
In terms of family-work conflict, job performance, job satisfaction, and helping, I 
estimated the within-person treatment effect of being in a remote working week versus a 
control week. I selected this modeling approach because it evaluates the effects of a change in 
remote working policy, which both addresses my research question directly and is what I 
randomized. I did not randomize the number of remote working days that subjects took during 
their treatment weeks—but, as I note below, estimating my dependent variables as a function of 
this recovers a similar pattern of results. 
 
Accordingly, I regressed my outcomes of interest on a binary indicator of treatment 
versus control week for each participant with fixed effects for individual and week included.13 
In each case, I estimated the effect for the full sample at first and then solely for the relevant 
employee subgroups.14 The results of these regressions, and the corresponding effect sizes, are 
shown in Tables 4 to 7 below. Following Kelly and colleagues (2014) I characterize effect 
sizes using Cohen’s d (1988), which is a between-subjects measure obtained by dividing the 
relevant coefficient estimate by its standard deviation. Cohen (1988) classified effect sizes of 
0.2 as small, 0.5 as moderate, and 0.8 as large, but also cautioned that these are not rigid 
benchmarks and must instead be interpreted in light of the research question, study context, and 
prior findings (see also Prentice and Miller 1992). 
 ***** Insert Table 4 and Figures 2 and 3 About Here ***** 
 
 
13 One distinction between this approach and the approach employed by Kelly and colleagues (2014) is that I do 
not incorporate the baseline survey measures into my analysis, as they do by measuring the effect of the 
intervention as the change from baseline. Rather, I utilize the cross-over design to compare the effects of within-
person changes from treatment to control weeks during the four weeks that the experiment was running. 
 
14 Estimating the models reported in Tables 4 – 7 without the inclusion of weekly fixed effects does not 
substantively alter the pattern of results that I observe. 

 
Table 4 shows the effect of remote working on family-to-work conflict. The effect is 
not statistically significant across the full sample, but the subgroup differences are pronounced. 
In particular, I observe a small and marginally significant (p = 0.051) reduction in family-work 
conflict for parents. However, this effect is driven by mothers—for whom the effect is medium 
by Cohen’s (1988) classification and clearly significant—and is not statistically significant for 
fathers. Perhaps unsurprisingly, non-parents do not exhibit any change in family-to-work 
conflict as a result of remote working. See Figure 2 for a between-subjects comparison of 
means across subgroups. 
 
Another way to think about the impact of this policy on mothers is to compare the mean 
levels of family-to-work conflict reported by mothers during treatment weeks to the mean levels 
reported by non-mothers of both sexes during the control weeks. These means are, respectively, 
1.58 and 1.55. In other words, the effect of the policy is to render the amount of family-work 
conflict experienced by mothers effectively equivalent to the levels exhibited by all other 
employees. By comparison, mothers’ mean family-work conflict during control weeks in the 
experiment was 2.08, which is the highest of any subgroup (see Figure 3 for an illustration). 
This is particularly meaningful in light of a separate within-subjects regression, which I report 
here but do not include in my main analysis, that indicated a negative relationship between 
family-work conflict and job performance across the full sample (β = -0.18, p = 0.000). 
***** Insert Table 5 and Figure 4 About Here ***** 
Table 5 shows the effect of remote working on job performance. There is a small but 
positive effect across the full sample, as well as within the subsamples of men, women, and 
parents. Notably, however, the effect is largest—medium, per Cohen’s (1988) classification, 
and clearly significant—for mothers. No significant effect obtains in the subsample of fathers, 
indicating that the effect on parents is driven by mothers. See Figure 4 for a between-subjects 
comparison of means across subgroups. 

***** Insert Table 6 and Figure 5 About Here ***** 
Table 6 shows the effect of remote working on job satisfaction. These results are 
somewhat surprising, in that women generally and mothers specifically do not report a positive 
and at least marginally significant effect, despite seeming to benefit the most from the policy in 
terms of reduced family-to-work conflict and increased job performance. Instead, remote 
working did not discernibly influence the job satisfaction of women or mothers. The fact that 
men reported significantly greater job satisfaction from remote working while women did not 
is inconsistent with Moen and colleagues (2016), who did not observe a gender difference in 
job satisfaction as a result of the STAR intervention. Interestingly, remote working has a small 
but clearly significant impact on the job satisfaction of non-parents, a point to which I return in 
the discussion section. See Figure 5 for a between-subjects comparison of means across 
subgroups. 
***** Insert Table 7 and Figure 6 About Here ***** 
Lastly, I assessed the potential co-worker coordination costs of remote working in two 
different ways. The first is shown in Table 7. Remote working has a small but significant 
negative effect on co-worker helping for both men and women. Notably, however, this effect is 
driven by non-parents, as the effect is not statistically significant for parents, mothers, or 
fathers. See Figure 6 for a between-subjects comparison of means across subgroups. 
In addition, I investigated whether the effect of remote working on co-worker helping 
obtained during both the first and second halves of the experiment. By regressing co-worker 
helping on a series of dummy variables for each week with person fixed effects included and 
week one as the reference category, I found that helping behavior in week two was not 
significantly different from week one. Yet helping behavior in weeks three and four were 
significantly higher than week one. Consistent with this, I estimated a model that excluded 
weeks one and two; that model indicated that there was no statistically significant effect of 

remote working on helping behavior (p = 0.493). This pattern of results suggests that the 
negative effect of remote working on co-working helping receded once employees gained more 
experience with the logistics of working remotely, an insight that was corroborated with my 
interview subjects as noted below. 
The second way I assessed potential coordination costs was by re-estimating the models 
from Tables 4 and 5 conditional on each subject’s self-reported level of job interdependence 
with co-workers. Specifically, I re-estimated the models conditional on being greater than or 
equal to, or below, the median of 3.2. With respect to family-to-work conflict, a concern might 
be that the benefits of remote working do not accrue to mothers whose responsibilities entail an 
above-average level of interdependence with others. This was not the case, however, as the 
effect was comparably significant for mothers above and below the median (p = 0.014 and p = 
0.000, respectively) and essentially equivalent in size (β = -0.52 and β = -0.55, respectively). 
Likewise, in terms of job performance, the effect remained significant for mothers above and 
below the interdependence median (p = 0.002 and p = 0.013, respectively) and was essentially 
identical in size (β = 0.36 and β = 0.35, respectively). With that being said, the job performance 
benefits of remote working were attenuated for the full sample of workers whose 
interdependence was above the median (β = 0.08, p = 0.09), though there was no difference for 
family-work conflict. 
 
Robustness Checks 
 
Carry-over effects. I tested for the presence of carry-over effects by investigating 
whether selection into, and the effects of, remote working exhibited variation by sequence—
that is, the order in which I randomly assigned subjects to treatment versus control weeks.15 
 
 
15 This is sometimes referred to as a “treatment-by-period” interaction for cross-over experiments that are not 
repeated. 

With respect to the former, I estimated the number of remote working days taken as a function 
of remote working week, sequence, and an interaction between the two, as well as individual 
fixed effects. The interaction effect was not statistically significant (p = 0.70), indicating that 
the effect of remote working condition on the number of remote working days taken did not 
differ based on the sequence to which I assigned subjects. 
 
Likewise, in order to test whether carry-over influenced the effect of remote working on 
family-work conflict, job performance, job satisfaction, and co-worker helping, I regressed each 
respective measure on a binary indicator of remote working week, a binary indicator of 
sequence, and an interaction between the two, as well as individual fixed effects. In all cases 
the interaction effect was not significant, returning p-values of 0.75, 0.58, 0.87, and 0.11, 
respectively. In sum, the lack of a significant interaction effect demonstrates that the effect of 
the treatment was not different for subjects who received one sequence versus the other, 
indicating an absence of carry-over. 
 
Dose-response relationship. As noted above, I estimated the effect of being in a 
treatment versus control week because this is what I randomized. However, as a robustness 
check, I also estimated variation in family-work conflict, job performance, job satisfaction, and 
helping behavior as a linear function of the number of remote working days taken. The results 
of these regressions, which are consistent with my main analysis, are shown in Appendices 3 
to 6. 
 
Possible Hawthorne effects. I also considered whether my results were influenced by 
a “Hawthorne effect.” Broadly speaking, the Hawthorne effect refers to the potential for worker 
productivity—or any other outcome under study—to be influenced by subjects’ knowledge that 
they are being observed, independent of any exogenous manipulation introduced by the 
researcher. The term is derived from a series of experiments that the National Research Council 
conducted in Western Electric’s Hawthorne Plant, in Cicero, Illinois, beginning in 1924 (e.g., 

Roethlisberger and Dickson 1939 [2003]). The initial and most well-known experiments 
investigated whether better lighting could increase worker productivity, while later experiments 
altered the room size, introduced fans, and relaxed the regulations around talking, among other 
interventions. Subsequent summaries of these experiments (e.g., Ruch and Zimbardo 1971, 
Blalock and Blalock 1982) incorrectly asserted that worker productivity increased with every 
exogenously-induced manipulation, suggesting that subjects’ awareness of participating in an 
experiment constituted a substantial confound. In contrast, re-analyses of the original data 
uncovered no evidence of a Hawthorne effect at the Hawthorne plant (Jones 1992, Leavitt and 
List 2011). As Zizzo (2010: 79) states, “The comparative weakness and ambiguity of the 
evidence implies that, notwithstanding its enduring textbook appeal, it can hardly be used to 
argue for [experimenter demand effects] being an all pervasive confound.” 
 
The issue of subject awareness nevertheless remains a concern for field experiments. 
The most straightforward way to address this empirically is to include a separate control group 
as a “placebo,” and provide them with a purposefully inert treatment in order to determine 
whether the mere act of being studied constitutes a confound (e.g., Nyhan and Reifler 2015). 
The sample size demands of this approach, however, are considerable, and unfortunately could 
not be met in the Abcam experiment. An alternative, suggested by Orne (1973), involves 
“postexperimental inquiries” designed to elicit any suspicions that subjects may have 
maintained during the course of the experiment. I pursued this approach via 22 semi-structured 
interviews, as I describe below. None of these conversations indicated that participants had 
experienced “special attention” as a result of their participation (Jones 1992) or been aware of 
and responsive to my hypotheses ex ante. 
 
Contextualizing Quantitative Results with Qualitative Data 
In order to corroborate and contextualize my quantitative results, I conducted twenty-two semi-

structured interviews with subject participants I selected at random (Chan and Anteby 2016). In 
each interview, I asked subjects to describe their professional responsibilities at Abcam, as well 
as their positive and negative experiences during the experiment. I probed further with respect 
to family-work conflict, job performance and coordination costs specifically insofar as this 
information did not emerge organically from subjects’ initial responses. 
 
Family-work conflict. The parents that I interviewed were unanimous in their belief 
that remote working made it easier to manage work and family life. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the 
views of mothers were especially pronounced in this regard. Amelia, a 33-year-old accounting 
manager, noted “It had such a positive impact. You know, my children are six and three, so 
evenings are always a stressful time, and when I’m not leaving the office till six PM, not 
getting home until seven PM most nights, it puts you behind before you’ve even started.”16 
Amanda, a 38-year-old in the human resources department, agreed: 
 
Some days are easier for me than others. But, say like on a Tuesday, I have got to leave the 
 
house at 7:30 AM, drop one child off in one place, the other child off in the next, and I don’t 
 
actually get into work until 9:00 AM, so I have already done an hour and a half just driving 
 
around. I am generally, if the traffic is bad, rushing in, so I’m feeling on edge already. 
 
And, then I have got all of that at the back end of the day as well. Whereas, when I was at 
 
home, it was closer, instead of taking me an hour and half to sort the kids out, I could do that in 
 
half an hour … So, I think I felt a lot calmer, and as a result I probably approached my work in 
 
a much calmer way, as opposed to this sort of, frantic juggle. 
 
 
 
 
Fathers also articulated work-life benefits, though they tended to emphasize the fact that 
remote working increased their presence and engagement with family members as opposed to 
allowing them to contribute more logistically. As Oliver, a 34-year-old in a supply management 
role, described it: 
 
Family-wise, [remote working was] great. Yeah, I’m essentially here for an extra hour 
 
because I’m obviously not commuting. So that’s good. It’s just easier. Work finishes and I’m 
 
already home. And then [my family gets] a better version of me. Usually the first thing they see 
 
of me is me tired, off my bike and wanting to have five minutes to get myself sorted out. So 
 
yeah, they probably get a more awoke, more calm me, which is good. 
 
 
 
 
16 I use pseudonyms throughout in lieu of subjects’ real names. 

 
While non-parents reported no reduction in family-work conflict, many did point out 
that the ability to work remotely did help them manage the interface between work and other 
aspects of their lives. As Jason, a 27-year-old in the information technology group, stated: “It’s 
not the same as having kids to take care of or take to school or whatever, but everybody has 
stuff that needs to get done every day, so it just helps with that … And, you know, being able to 
get a bit more sleep. I think I noticed a massive benefit from doing that, absolutely.” Some 
respondents also linked the additional sleep they were able to get during remote working weeks 
to increased job performance, as described below. 
 
Job performance. Almost all interview subjects reported experiencing productivity 
gains from their remote working weeks, whereas the few that did not viewed the effect of 
remote working as purely neutral. Subjects articulated two primary mechanisms through which 
remote working enhanced their productivity: By reducing the social distractions of the office 
and by eliminating the exigencies of commuting. Regarding the social distractions of the office, 
Sally, a 31-year-old personal assistant, concisely summarized the consensus view: “I was more 
productive because less people were interrupting me and asking me bits and pieces.” Arthur, a 
36-year-old change manager, elaborated further: 
 
There is no worse place in the office to be than next to the printers. People just come and say 
 
“Hello” as they’re collecting their one pages, and then you end up getting distracted quite a lot. 
 
So I have experienced a lot of that lately … But when I’m working from home, there’s less of 
 
that, and actually, it’s easier to manage because if someone Skypes me, I can make a decision 
 
about whether I reply to that immediately or later. Whereas, when I’m in the office and 
 
someone comes and talks to me, I’m less likely to say, “Come back later,” in the politest way 
 
possible. 
 
 
The habitual interruptions that are part and parcel of office life impede concentration in 
addition to taking time away from work, as Amanda noted: “[While remote working] I could 
spend a whole hour doing some say, data analysis, without having to stop every 10 minutes or 
20 minutes to answer a random question, and then come back to it. And, then it takes a few 
minutes to get back in the zone of what you’re doing … I think the quality of what I was 
doing was better, because it was more consistent.” 

Subjects also explicitly linked reduced commuting time to improved performance. 
Donna, a 47-year-old senior scientist working on new product development, said that “Waking 
up, I mean, every day at six and spending two hours in traffic to go to work, it’s really tiring 
and sometimes I notice that my performance is a little bit slow … at the end of the week, I am 
arriving to work really, really tired.” Similarly, Sally related a benefit of not having to commute 
every day: “It’s hard when you’re a working mum because you feel—you don’t want to be the 
person clock watching and bang on four PM you’re out of the door, but you have to do that.” 
 
Coordination costs. Some subjects reported initial challenges regarding the logistics 
of Skype meetings, but often noted that these were ironed out as the trial proceeded. As Oliver 
described, “There’s a lot of meetings that were stalled by five or ten minutes because of getting 
the IT ready, set up and working as expected … Actually now, if we re-ran the trial, I think it 
would be loads better. Everyone knows how to add Skype to a meeting and do the invite.” 
Roger, a 37-year-old information technology manager who fielded support requests during the 
trial, concurred with this assessment: “Yeah, some systems, it must have been the first time 
they had tried to use them from home, so we had a few [issues]. But, it was remarkable how 
after that first cycle—so in week one, week two, we saw that a lot. Week three, week four we 
didn’t.” 
 
By comparison, Amelia related that “I found I was a lot more prompt for meetings, 
because it was a case of—I just had to dial in at the right time rather than having to, you know, 
walk round, find a room, grab a cup of tea on the way. So timing-wise and meeting-wise, I 
thought it was actually more efficient, and I didn’t have any Skype problems, which was good.” 
Jason agreed: “I don’t remember there being any time when I thought I’m blocked on my work 
because somebody is working remotely and I can’t talk to them.” Likewise, Donna described: 
I had a long conversation with a technician that was trying to set up an experiment that I 
asked him to do and together, working remotely, we were able to discover a new thing about 
this protein and go through the literature and it was exciting. And, then here also we were 
working at a 50-mile distance to each other, and we get to the point that we solved the 

problem, so that was really good. So, I never had any kind of issue working from home. 
 
In terms of logistics, the most common complaint that surfaced during my interviews 
was the absence of dual monitors when working remotely—as compared with the office, where 
each workstation was equipped with two monitors. A secondary concern, which was raised by 
employees working in sales, involved ensuring reimbursement for long distance calls made to 
clients via personal phones while working from home. 
Overall, however, subjects appeared to be satisfied with their experience during the 
experiment. As Roger related: 
I mean, I have said it a few times, just how well received it was. For a company like Abcam, 
which is like kind of, 96% of people come to work every single day and sit at their desk, I 
have been really impressed with how passionately people embraced it. And, you can see that 
there must have been some pent-up desire in a lot of places to do this. I think one of the guys 
was saying, I think he went over to our Unit 200 building, which is where most of the 
marketing team work, and he was like, ‘There was no one there, they were all at home,’ and 
he saw that as a really good thing. 
 
Likewise, Marshall, a 48-year-old executive, stated: 
My own experience, I think as I mentioned to you, was I was more engaged, more productive, 
less fatigued and the quality of my work was better and I think my observations around my 
team was exactly the same, not surprisingly. So, I think what it did do was bust a number of 
myths for me that actually people wouldn’t work or that they needed my close supervision … 
And, the other thing was this concept that you’ve got to have one-to-one [meetings] face-to-
face was just a complete and utter myth … because as I mentioned, I think it’s perfectly 
normal to [meet] with people in Boston or in Shanghai on Skype, so why would I assume it’s 
not okay to do that in the U.K.? 
 
 
DISCUSSION 
Scholars have spent decades diagnosing gender-based disparities in professional attainment. 
This effort has produced a comprehensive list of antecedents but few potential solutions. And 
the solutions that have been put into practice do not seem to be working. The general 
consequence of reduced-hours flexibility policies, for example, is to maintain women’s labor 
market attachment at the cost of their achievement (Mandel and Semyonov 2006, Williams et 
al. 2013). Broader discussions of ensuring equal pay for equal work, meanwhile, obscure a 
larger issue: Given the inequitable provision of childcare, equal work is, in practice, not 

actually an option for many women (Kleven et al. 2018). This stark reality motivates an 
academic imperative: Redesigning organizations to reduce the inequality that persists within 
their ranks (Correll et al. 2014, Ranganathan and Pedulla 2018). The practice of discretionary 
remote working, while hardly a panacea in and of itself, may represent a promising step in 
this direction, specifically with respect to mothers working in white-collar firms. 
 
Accordingly, in this paper I pursued three primary goals: First, to evaluate whether 
employee subgroups selected into remote working days at different rates when offered the 
opportunity to do so; second, to examine the impact of remote working with respect to the 
work-family interface and job performance; and third, to assess potential coordination costs, 
which could conceivably preclude organizations from implementing discretionary remote 
working as a long-term policy. To accomplish this, I conducted a randomized field 
experiment with a repeated cross-over design. This methodology—which is readily imitable 
and well-suited for randomized trials conducted outside the laboratory—was necessary 
because of differential selection into ad hoc remote working arrangements conditional on 
human and social capital, which confounds the interpretation of remote working’s impact 
(Weeden 2005, Davis and Kalleberg 2006, Hornung et al. 2008, Wharton et al. 2008, Golden 
2008). 
 
I can report the following results, some of which constitute contributions to the work-
family and labor market inequality literatures. First, there was no significant difference in the 
uptake of remote working days during experimental weeks across men, women, parents, non-
parents, mothers or fathers. It also bears noting that, while some comparisons approached 
marginal levels of statistical significance, they were not meaningfully different: All employee 
subgroups, on average, selected into about two days of remote working per week. This 
constitutes a contribution because the career penalties associated with reduced-hours 
flexibility policies are sustained, at least in part, by their highly gendered usage patterns 

(Williams et al. 2013). Accordingly, by making remote working discretionary and distinct 
from reduced-hours policies, it may be possible to decouple the practice from stigmatizing 
associations with sex and motherhood. To be clear, it would be premature to conclude from 
this evidence that remote working does not engender career penalties. My results are, 
however, consistent with Glass and Noonan (2016), who found that remote working during 
regular business hours did not constrain salary growth for men or women—whereas, 
compared with men, mothers were disproportionately penalized for work hour reductions. 
 
The revealed preference of two remote working days per week that the experiment 
elicited is also worth noting, in light of the Chinese call center results reported by Bloom and 
colleagues (2015). In their experiment, which evaluated the effects of working remotely for 
four days per week, subjects reported feeling lonely and socially isolated; as a result, a 
significant portion of them elected not to participate in the remote working program when it 
was later rolled out across the entire company. Likewise, my interview subjects were united 
in their view that working remotely for four or five days per week would be unappealing, 
largely because they would miss the social interaction afforded by the office—though they 
did, of course, find a moderate amount of remote working, at their own discretion, highly 
valuable. 
 
Second, I found that while the effects of remote working were positive overall, 
mothers benefited the most. Specifically, remote working reduced family-work conflict for 
mothers, but not fathers or non-parents. Remote working also improved job performance for 
most employees, but mothers saw by far the largest gain. To contextualize these findings, I 
compared the mean levels of family-work conflict reported by mothers during treatment 
weeks to the mean levels reported by non-mothers, both male and female, during control 
weeks: These means were effectively equivalent. In other words, the effect of remote 
working was to level the playing field between mothers and other employees in terms of 

family-work conflict. Mothers also reported the greatest job performance of any subgroup in 
the trial during remote working weeks. This hints at the possibility that remote working could 
“unlock” productivity in mothers that would be otherwise contained by their disproportionate 
caregiving duties. It is also worth noting in light of the evidence that women, particularly 
educated women, increasingly underestimate the effect that motherhood will have on their 
future labor supply (Kuziemko et al. 2018), notwithstanding a general awareness that 
professional success requires tradeoffs not demanded of men (Gino et al. 2015). 
 
Of course, these effects would mean little if remote working, as a policy, could not be 
feasibly implemented by organizations in the long run. Impediments to feasibility include 
coordination costs with respect to work interdependence and informal resistance on the part 
of employees. The latter is not a trivial concern, given that programs designed to ameliorate 
inequities for a particular demographic group may engender backlash on the part of the 
majority (Dobbin et al. 2015). This did not appear to be the case with respect to remote 
working, however. For example, my interview subjects did not interpret the policy as an 
explicit attempt to address the professional challenges that women in general and mothers in 
particular face. In addition, non-parents actually reported the greatest increase in job 
satisfaction as a result of remote working. Despite its targeted impact, remote working 
appears to be a policy with universal appeal. 
 
The evidence regarding coordination costs is slightly more nuanced. Non-parents 
reported a decrease in co-worker helping behavior as a result of remote working during the 
first half of the experiment, though parents did not. This effect receded during the second 
half, however, consistent with interview subjects’ assessment that it took a week to acclimate 
to the technological particulars of remote working. Somewhat more concerning was the fact 
that the performance benefits of remote working were attenuated for workers whose levels of 
job interdependence was above the median. This did not apply to mothers, however, who 

accrued performance benefits regardless of how interdependent their role was. 
 
Lastly, one non-finding warrants mentioning: I did not observe an increase—or 
decrease—in overall work hours as a result of remote working. This is important to note, as 
work-family scholars sometimes caution that attempts to increase employees’ control over 
the time and place of their work could have unintended consequences vis-à-vis the amount of 
work that they are compelled to do (Schieman 2013). This prediction was not supported by 
evidence from the Abcam experiment, however. 
 
Notwithstanding its contributions, this research is subject to several notable 
limitations. First and foremost, it would be reckless to extrapolate long-term effects on the 
basis of a four-week trial. A permanent remote working policy could, for example, result in a 
more traditionally gendered uptake of remote working days, while the absence of predictable 
in-office “control” weeks and a predetermined trial end date could produce a greater 
propensity for coordination failure. Clearly, further longitudinal study is required in order to 
determine whether the patterns that I observed would hold for a firm that made remote 
working continually available to all its employees. Such further study is feasible, however, in 
light of the fact that Abcam altered its company policy after the experiment by allowing all 
eligible employees to work remotely at their discretion. 
 
Second, my results cannot generalize beyond white-collar workplaces that are similar 
in character to Abcam. This constitutes a meaningful scope condition with respect to remote 
working because the practice requires managers to place an inordinate amount of trust in their 
workers. One cannot presume, ex ante, that this trust will always be rewarded—particularly 
within a workforce that is less intrinsically motivated and professionally engaged than is 
typically the case for knowledge workers. Likewise, it bears noting that the kind of firm that 
participates in a field experiment is, by definition, somewhat distinct from the total 
population of firms—just as the Abcam employees who participated in my study may be 

systematically different from those who did not. These potential confounds are a necessary 
feature of field experiments specifically and organizational research more generally, but it is 
important to remain cognizant of them when considering the generalizability of results. 
 
My reliance on self-report measures constitutes a third limitation. While this was less 
of a concern for family-work conflict and job satisfaction—for which self-report is generally 
considered sufficient—it would have been ideal to measure job performance unobtrusively. 
This is, however, not a straightforward proposition for white-collar work output, which is 
often difficult to quantify (Goldin 2014).17 With that being said, there are professions—
notably law—in which billable hours constitute the most important measure of productivity 
(Briscoe and Kellogg 2011, Azmat and Ferrer 2017). Law firms may therefore be an ideal 
setting in which to further examine the performance implications of remote working. 
 
Across industries and professions, a dramatic revision of work practices is necessary 
before long-awaited progress can be made. Determining the form that these revisions should 
take must be an imperative for future organizational scholarship. 
 
 
 
 
17 Abcam did report significant revenue growth during the period in which the trial ran, suggesting that remote 
working did not damage firm-level financial performance. 

REFERENCES 
 
Acker J (1990) Hierarchies, jobs, bodies: A theory of gendered organizations. Gend. Soc. 
4(2):139-158. 
Afflerback S, Carter SK, Anthony AK, Grauerholz L (2013) Infant feeding consumerism in 
the age of intensive mothering and risk society. J. Consumer Cult. 13(3):387-405. 
Azmat G, Ferrer R (2017) Gender gaps in performance: Evidence from Young Lawyers. J. 
Political Econ. 125(5):1306-1355. 
Bailyn L (1993 [2006]) Breaking the Mold: Redesigning Work for Productive and Satisfying 
Lives (Cornell University Press, Ithaca). 
Baldassarri D, Abascal M (2017) Field experiments across the social sciences. Ann. Rev. 
Sociol. 43:41-73. 
Bardasi E, Gornick JC (2008) Working for less? Women’s part-time wage penalties across 
countries. Fem. Econ. 14(1):37-72. 
Becker PE, Moen P (1999) Scaling back: Dual-earner couples’ work-family strategies. J. 
Marriage Fam. 61(4):995-1007. 
Benard S, Paik I, Correll SJ (2007) Cognitive bias and the motherhood penalty. Hastings Law 
J. 59:101-129. 
Bertrand M, Mullainathan S (2004) Are Emily and Greg more employable than Lakisha and 
Jamal? Am. Econ. Rev. 94:991-1013. 
Bertrand M, Goldin C, Katz LF (2010) Dynamics of the gender gap for young professionals 
in the financial and corporate sectors. Am. Econ. J. 2(3):228-255. 
Bianchi SM, Robinson JP, Milke M (2006) The Changing Rhythms of American Family Life 
(Russell Sage, New York). 
Blair-Loy M. (2003 [2009]) Competing Devotions: Career and Family Among Women 
Executives (Harvard University Press, Cambridge). 
Blair-Loy M. (2009) Work without end? Scheduling flexibility and work-to-family conflict 
among stockbrokers. Work Occup. 36(4):279-317. 
Blair-Loy M, Wharton AS (2002) Employees’ use of work-family policies and the workplace 
social context. Soc. Forces 80(3):813-845. 
Blair-Loy M, Cech E (2014) Consequences of flexibility stigma among academic scientists 
and engineers. Work Occup. 41(1):86-110. 
Blalock AB, Blalock HM (1982) Introduction to Social Research (Prentice-Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs). 
Bloom N, Liang J, Robert J, Ying ZJ (2015) Does working from home work? Evidence from 
a Chinese experiment. Q. J. Econ. 130(1):165-218. 
Broockman DE, Kalla JL, Sekhon JS (2017) The design of field experiments with survey 
outcomes: A framework for selecting more efficient, robust, and ethical designs. Political 
Anal. 25(4):435-464. 
Briscoe F (2007) From iron cage to iron shield? How bureaucracy enables temporal 
flexibility for professional service workers. Organ. Sci. 18(2):297-314. 
Briscoe F, Kellogg KC (2011) The initial assignment affect: Local employer practices and 
positive career outcomes for work-family program users. Am Sociol. Rev. 76(2):291-319. 
Cammann C, Fichman M, Jenkins GD, Klesh J (1983) Michigan organizational assessment 
questionnaire. Seashore SE, Lawler EE, Mirvis PH, Camman C, eds. Assessing 
Organizational Change: A Guide to Methods, Measures, and Practices (Wiley-
Interscience, New York), 71–138. 
Cha Y (2010) Reinforcing separate spheres: The effect of spousal overwork on men’s and 
women’s employment in dual-earner households. Am Sociol. Rev. 75(2):303-329. 
Cha Y, Weeden KA (2014) Overwork and the slow convergence in the gender gap in wages. 

Am Sociol. Rev. 79(3):457-484. 
Chan CK, Anteby M (2016) Task segregation as a mechanism for within-job inequality: 
Women and men of the transportation security administration. Admin. Sci. Quart. 61(2): 
184-216. 
Chan RW, Brooks RC, Raboy B, Patterson CJ (1998) Division of labor among lesbian and 
heterosexual parents: Associations with child’s adjustment. J. Fam. Psychol. 12(3): 402-
419. 
Cohen J (1988) Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences (Academic Press, San 
Diego). 
Connelly BL, Tihanyi L, Crook TR, Gangloff KA (2014) Tournament theory: Thirty years of 
contests and competitions. J. Manag. 40(1):16-47. 
Correll SJ, Benard S (2006) Biased estimators? Comparing status and statistical theories of 
gender discrimination. Advances in Group Processes 23:89-116. 
Correll SJ, Benard S, Paik I (2007) Getting a job: Is there a motherhood penalty? Am. J. 
Sociol. 112(5):1297-1338. 
Correll SJ, Kelly EL, O’Connor LT, Williams JC (2014) Redesigning, redefining work. Work 
Occup. 41(1):3-17. 
Coser LA (1974) Greedy Institutions: Patterns of Undivided Commitment (Free Press, New 
York). 
Cotter D, Hermsen JM, Vanneman R (2011) The end of the gender revolution? Gender role 
attitudes from 1977 to 2008. Am. J. Sociol. 117(1):259-289. 
Cox DR (1958) Planning of Experiments (John Wiley & Sons, New York). 
Davis AE, Kalleberg AL (2006) Family-friendly organizations? Work and family programs 
in the 1990s. Work Occup. 33(2):191-223. 
Dekas KH, Bauer TN, Welle B, Kurkoski J, Sullivan S (2013) Organizational citizenship 
behavior, version 2.0: A review and qualitative investigation of OCBs for knowledge 
workers at Google and beyond. Acad. Manag. Perspect. 27(3):219-237. 
Edin K, Kefalas M (2011) Promises I Can Keep: Why Poor Women Put Motherhood Before 
Marriage (University of California Press, Oakland). 
Elliott S, Powell R, Brenton J (2015) Being a good mom: Low-income, black single mothers 
negotiate intensive mothering. J. Fam. Issues 36(3):351-370. 
England P, Bearak J, Budig MJ, Hodges MJ (2016) Do highly paid, highly skilled women 
experience the largest motherhood penalty? Am Sociol. Rev. 81(6):1161-1189. 
Epstein CF, Seron C, Oglensky B, Saute R (1999) The Part Time Paradox: Time Norms, 
Professional Lives, Family and Gender (Routledge, New York). 
Fisher RA (1935) The Design of Experiments (Hafner, New York). 
Gaddis SM (2015) Discrimination in the credential society: An audit study of race and 
college selectivity in the labor market. Soc. Forces 93(4):1451-1479. 
Gajendran RS, Harrison DA (2007) The good, the bad, and the unknown about 
telecommuting: Meta-analysis of psychological mediators and individual consequences. J. 
Appl. Psychol. 92(6):1524-1541. 
Galinksy E, Bond JT, Friedman DE (1996) The role of employers in addressing the needs of 
employed parents. J. Soc. Issues 52(3):111-136. 
Gareis KC, Barnett RC (2002) Under what conditions do long work hours affect 
psychological distress? Work Occup. 29(4):483-497. 
Gatrell CJ (2007) Secrets and lies: Breastfeeding and professional paid work. Soc. Sci. Med. 
65(2):393-403. 
Gino F, Wilmuth CA, Brooks AW (2015) Compared to men, women view professional 
advancement as equally attainable, but less desirable. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
112(40): 12354-12359. 

Glass J (2004) Blessing or curse? Work-family policies and mother’s wage growth over time. 
Work Occup. 31(3):367-394. 
Glass JL, Finley A (2002) Coverage and effectiveness of family-responsive workplace 
policies. Hum. Res. Manag. Rev. 12(3):313-337. 
Glass JL, Noonan MC (2016) Telecommuting and earnings trajectories among American 
women and men 1989-2008. Soc. Forces 95(1):217-250. 
Glavin P, Schieman S, Reid S (2011) Boundary-spanning work demands and their 
consequences for guilt and psychological distress. J. Health Soc. Behav. 52(1):43-57. 
Golden L (2008) Limited access: Disparities in flexible work schedules and work-at-home. J. 
Fam. Econ. Issues 29:86-109. 
Goldin C (2014) A grand gender convergence: Its last chapter. Am. Econ. Rev. 104(4):1091-
1119. 
Goldin C, Katz LF (2016) A most egalitarian profession: Pharmacy and the evolution of a 
family-friendly occupation. J. Labor Econ. 34(3):705-746. 
Greenwald AG (1976) Within-subjects designs: To use or not to use? Psychol. Bull. 
83(2):314-320. 
Grzywacz JG, Carlson DS, Shulkin S (2008) Schedule flexibility and stress: Linking formal 
flexible arrangements and perceived flexibility to employee health. Comm. Work Fam. 
11(2):199-214. 
Hays S (1996) The Cultural Contradictions of Motherhood (Yale University Press, New 
Haven). 
Hewlett SA (2002) Creating a Life: Professional Women and the Quest for Children (Talk 
Maramax Books, New York). 
Hills M, Armitage P (1979) The two-period cross-over clinical trial. Brit. J. Clinical Pharm. 
8:7-20. 
Hollis S, Campbell F (1999) What is meant by intention to treat analysis? Survey of 
published randomised controlled trials. BMJ 319(7211):670-674. 
Hornung S, Rousseau DM, Glaser J (2008) Creating flexible work arrangements through 
idiosyncratic deals. J. Appl. Psychol. 93(3):655-664. 
Jackson M, Cox DR (2013) The principles of experimental design and their application in 
sociology. Ann. Rev. Sociol. 39:27-49. 
Jacobs JA, Gerson K (2004) The Time Divide: Work, Family, and Gender Inequality 
(Harvard University Press, Cambridge). 
Jones B, Kenward MG (2015) Design and Analysis of Cross-over Trials (Taylor & Francis 
Group, London). 
Kahn JR, Garcia-Manglano J, Bianchi SM (2014) The motherhood penalty at midlife: Long-
term effects of children on women’s careers. J. Marriage Fam. 76(1):56-72. 
Kalleberg AL, Reskin B (1995) Gender differences in promotion in the United States and 
Norway. Res. Soc. Stratif. Mobil. 14:237-264. 
Kelly EL, Ammons SK, Chermack K, Moen P (2010) Gendered challenge, gendered 
response: Confronting the ideal worker norm in a white-collar organization. Gend. Soc. 
24(3):281-303. 
Kelly EL, Moen P, Oakes JM, Fan W, Okechukwu C, Davis KD, Hammer LB, Kossek EE, 
King RB, Hanson GC, Mierzwa F, Casper LM (2014) Changing work and work-family 
conflict: Evidence from the work, family, and health network. Am Sociol. Rev. 79(3):485-
516. 
Killewald A, Garcia-Manglano J (2016) Tethered lives: A couple-based perspective on the 
consequences of parenthood for time use, occupation, and wages. Soc. Sci. Res. 60:266-
282. 
Klevin HJ, Landais C, Søgaard JE (2018) Children and gender inequality: Evidence from 

Denmark. Working paper. 
Kossek EE, Lautsch BA, Eaton SC (2006) Telecommuting, control, and boundary 
management: Correlates of policy use and practice, job control, and work-family 
effectiveness. J. Vocat. Behav. 68:347-367. 
Kossek EE, Lautsch BA (2018) Work-life flexibility for whom? Occupational status and 
work-life inequality in upper, middle, and lower level jobs. Acad. Manag. Annals 12(1):5-
36. 
Kuziemko I, Pan J. Shen J, Washington E (2018) The mommy effect: Do women anticipate 
the employment effects of motherhood? NBER Working Paper No. 24740. 
Lamb ME, Tamis-Lemonda CS (2004) The Role of the Father: An Introduction. Lamb, ME 
ed. The Role of the Father (John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken), 1-31. 
Lareau A (2000) Home Advantage: Social Class and Parental Intervention in Elementary 
Education (Rowman & Littlefield, Lantham). 
Lareau A (2002) Invisible inequality: Social class and childrearing in black families and 
white families. Am Sociol. Rev. 67(5):747-776. 
Levitt SD, List JA (2009) Field experiments in economics: The past, the present, and the 
future. Eur. Econ. Rev. 53(1):1-18. 
Lyons K, Lockie S, Lawrence G (2001) Consuming ‘green’: The symbolic construction of 
organic foods. Rural Sociol. 11(3):197-210. 
Mandel H, Semyonov M (2006) A welfare state paradox: State interventions and women’s 
employment opportunities in 22 countries. Am. J. Sociol. 111(6):1910-1949. 
Martens CR, Denman BA, Mazzo MR, Armstrong ML, Reisdorph N, McQueen MB, 
Chonchol M, Seals DR (2018) Chronic nicotinamide riboside supplementation is well-
tolerated and elevates NAD+ in healthy middle-aged and older adults. Nat. Commun. 
9(1286):1-11. 
Maume DJ (2006) Gender differences in restricting work efforts because of family 
responsibilities. J. Marriage Fam. 68(4):859-869. 
Maume DJ (2008) Gender differences in providing urgent childcare among dual-earner 
parents. Soc. Forces 87(1):273-297. 
Maume DJ, Sebastian RA, Bardo AR (2009) Gender differences in sleep disruption among 
retail workers. Am Sociol. Rev. 74(6):989-1007. 
Maume DJ, Sebastian RA, Bardo AR (2010) Gender, work-family responsibilities, and sleep. 
Gend. Soc. 24(6):746-768. 
McPherson D (1993) Gay Parenting Couples: Parenting Arrangements, Arrangement 
Satisfaction, and Relationship Satisfaction. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. 
Meyers M, Gornick J (2005) Policies for reconciling parenthood and employment: Drawing 
lessons from Europe. Challenge 48:39-61. 
Miller CC (2017) How to close the gender gap: Let employees control their schedules. The 
New York Times, February 7. 
Mishel L (2013) Vast majority of wage earners are working harder, and for not much more: 
Trends in U.S. work hours and wages 1979-2007. Issue Brief No. 348. Washington, 
DC: Economic Policy Institute. 
Moen P, Kelly EL, Fan W, Lee S, Almeida D, Kossek EE, Buxton OM (2016) Does a 
flexibility/support organizational initiative improve high-tech employees’ well-being? 
Evidence from the work, family, and health network. Am Sociol. Rev. 81(1):134-164. 
Moisio R, Arnould EJ, Price LL (2004) Between mothers and markets: Constructing family 
identity through homemade food. J. Consumer Cult. 4(3):361-384. 
Morgan SL, Winship C (2007 [2014]) Counterfactuals and Causal Inference (Cambridge 
University Press, New York). 
Nelson MK (2010) Parenting Out of Control: Anxious Parents in Uncertain Times (NYU 

Press, New York). 
Netermeyer RG, Boles JS, McMurrian R (1996) Development and validation of work-family 
conflict and family-work conflict scales. J. Appl. Psychol. 81(4):400-410. 
Noonan MC (2001) The impact of domestic work on men’s and women’s wages. J. Marriage 
Fam. 63(4):1134-1145. 
Nyhan B, Reifler J (2015) The effect of fact-checking on elites: A field experiment on U.S. 
state legislators. Am. J. Political Sci. 59(3):628-640. 
Offer S, Schneider B (2011) Revisiting the gender gap in time-use patterns: Multitasking and 
well-being among mothers and fathers in dual-earner families. Am Sociol. Rev. 76(6):809-
833. 
Orne MT (1973) Communication by the total experimental situation: Why it is important, 
how it is evaluated, and its significance for the ecological validity of findings. Pliner P, 
Krames L, Alloway TM, eds. Communication and Affect (Academic Press, New York), 
157-191). 
Pager D (2003) The mark of a criminal record. Am. J. Sociol. 108(5):937-975. 
Pedulla DS, Thebaud S (2015) Can we finish the revolution? Gender, work-family ideals, and 
institutional constraint. Am Sociol. Rev. 80(1):116-139. 
Petersen T, Penner AM, Høgsnes G (2014) From motherhood penalties to husband premia: 
The new challenge for gender equality and family policy, lessons from Norway. Am. J. 
Sociol. 119(5):1434-1472. 
Prentice DA, Miller DT (1992) When small effects are impressive. Psychol. Bull. 112(1):160-
164. 
Quadlin N (2018) The mark of a woman’s record: Gender and academic performance in 
hiring. Am Sociol. Rev. forthcoming. 
Ranganathan A, Pedulla D (2018) Organizations as network equalizers? Employer-provided 
childcare and the labor supply of working mothers. Working paper. 
Ridgeway CL, Correll SJ (2004) Motherhood as a status characteristic. J. Soc. Issues 
60(4):683-700. 
Rippeyoung PLF, Noonan MC (2012) Is breastfeeding truly cost-free? Income consequences 
of breastfeeding for women. Am Sociol. Rev. 77(2):244-267. 
Rivera LA, Tilcsik A (2017) Class advantage, commitment penalty: The gendered effect of 
social class signals in an elite labor market. Am Sociol. Rev. 81(6):1097-1131. 
Roethlisberger FJ, Dickson WJ (1939 [2003]) Management and the Worker (Harvard 
University Press, Cambridge). 
Rousseau DM (2006) Is there such a thing as ‘evidence-based management’? Acad. Manag. 
Rev. 31(2):256-269. 
Rousseau DM, Gunia B (2016) Evidence-based practice: The psychology of EBP 
Implementation. Ann. Rev. Psychol. 67:667-692. 
Ruch FL, Zimbardo PG (1971) Psychology and Life, 8th Edition (Scott Foresman, Glenview). 
Sanchez L, Thomson E (1997) Becoming mothers and fathers: Parenthood, gender, and the 
division of labor. Gend. Soc. 11(6):747-772. 
Sayer LC, Bianchi SM, Robinson JP (2004) Are parents investing less in children? Trends in 
mothers’ and fathers’ time with children. Am. J. Sociol. 110(1):1-43. 
Schieman S (2013) Job-related resources and the pressures of working life. Soc. Sci. Res. 
42:271-282. 
Sears W, Sears M (1992) The Baby Book: Everything You Need to Know About Your Baby—
From Birth to Age Two (Little, Brown & Co., New York). 
Sewell WH (1992) A theory of structure: Duality, agency, and transformations. Am. J. Sociol. 
98(1):1-29. 
Sharone O (2004) Engineering Overwork: Bell Curve Management at a High-Tech Firm. 

Epstein CF, Kalleberg AL, eds. Fighting for Time: Shifting Boundaries of Work and 
Social Life (Russell Sage Foundation, New York), 191-218. 
Simmons JP, Nelson LD, Simonsohn U (2011) False-positive psychology: Undisclosed 
flexibility in data collection and analysis allows presenting anything as significant. 
Psychol. Sci. 22(11):1359-1366. 
Simon RW (1995) Gender, multiple roles, role meaning, and mental health. J. Health Soc. 
Behav. 36(2):182-194. 
Stone P (2008) Opting Out? Why Women Really Quit Careers and Head Home (University of 
California Press, Oakland). 
Stone P, Hernandez LA (2013) The all-or-nothing workplace: Flexibility stigma and ‘opting 
out’ among professional-managerial women. J. Soc. Issues 69(2):235-256. 
Sullivan O (1997) Time waits for no (wo)man: An investigation of the gendered experience 
of domestic time. Sociology 31(2):221-239. 
Thebaud S, Pedulla DS (2016) Masculinity and the stalled revolution: How gender ideologies 
and norms shape young men’s responses to work-family policies. Gend. Soc. 30(4):590-
617. 
Tilcsik A (2011) Pride and prejudice: Employment discrimination against openly gay men in 
the United States. Am. J. Sociol. 117(2):586-626. 
Turco CJ (2010) Cultural foundations of tokenism. Am Sociol. Rev. 75(6):894-913. 
Van der Vegt GS, Evans BJM, Van De Vliert E (2001) Patterns of interdependence in work 
teams: A two-level investigation of the relations with job and team satisfaction. Pers. 
Psychol. 54:51-69. 
Voydanoff P (2004) The effects of work demands and resources on work-to-family conflict 
and facilitation. J. Marriage Fam. 66(2):398-412. 
Voydanoff P (2007) Work, Family, and Community: Exploring Interconnections (Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah). 
Vincent C, Ball SJ (2007) ‘Making up’ the middle class child: Families, activities, and class 
dispositions. Sociology 41(6):1061-1077. 
Webber G, Williams C (2008) Mothers in ‘good’ and ‘bad’ part-time jobs: Different 
problems, same results. Gend. Soc. 22(6):752-777. 
Weeden KA (2005) Is there a flexiglass ceiling? Flexible work arrangements and wages in 
the United States. Soc. Sci. Res. 34:454-482. 
Weisshaar K (2018) From opt out to blocked out: The challenges of labor market re-entry 
after family-related employment lapses. Am Sociol. Rev. 83(1):34-60. 
Welbourne TM, Johnson DE, Erez A (1998) The Role-based performance scale: Validity 
analysis of a theory-based measure. Acad. Manag. J. 41(5):540-555. 
Wharton AS, Chivers S, Blair-Loy M (2008) Use of formal and informal work family 
policies on the digital assembly line. Work Occup. 35(3):327-350. 
Wilde ET, Batchelder L, and Ellwood DT (2010) The mommy track divides: The impact of 
childbearing on wages of women of differing skill levels. NBER Working Paper No. 
16582. 
Williams JC (2001) Unbending Gender: Why Family and Work Conflict and What to do 
About it (Oxford University Press, New York). 
Williams JC (2010) Reshaping the Work-Family Divide: Why Men and Class Matter 
(Harvard University Press, Cambridge). 
Williams JC, Blair-Loy M, Berdahl JL (2013) Cultural schemas, social class, and the 
flexibility stigma. J. Soc. Issues 69(2):209-234. 
Zizzo DJ (2010) Experiment demand effects in economic experiments. Exp. Econ. 13(1):75-
98. 
 

 
 
 

Table 1 – Descriptive Statistics 
Variable 
Min. 
Max. 
Mean 
S.D. 
Age (in years) 
Female 
Mother 
Father 
At least one child in household 
Annual salary (in pounds sterling) 
19 
0 
0 
0 
0 
15,000 
65 
1 
1 
1 
1 
170,000 
34.10 
0.52 
0.18 
0.19 
0.37 
44,730.01 
8.16 
0.50 
0.38 
0.39 
0.48 
21,441.48 
Manager 
Living with spouse 
Living with partner 
Living with housemates 
Living alone 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0.39 
0.44 
0.29 
0.14 
0.12 
0.49 
0.50 
0.46 
0.35 
0.33 
Weekly work hours at baseline 
0 
60 
38 
6.28 
Remote working days at baseline 
0 
5 
0.33 
0.63 
Family-to-work conflict at baseline 
Job performance at baseline 
1 
2 
4.8 
5 
1.78 
4.05 
0.84 
0.57 
Job satisfaction at baseline 
1 
5 
3.97 
0.80 
Helping behavior at baseline 
2.75 
5 
4.20 
0.50 
Job interdependence at baseline 
Flex hours at baseline 
 
Pooled Control Week Measures 
Weekly work hours 
Flex hours 
Remote working days 
Family-to-work conflict 
Job performance 
Job satisfaction 
Helping behavior 
 
Pooled Treatment Week Measures 
Weekly work hours 
Flex hours 
Remote working days 
Family-to-work conflict 
Job performance 
Job satisfaction 
Helping behavior 
1.4 
0 
 
 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
 
 
0 
0 
0 
1 
2 
1 
1 
4.6 
20 
 
 
75 
19 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
 
 
60 
42 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
3.12 
2.17 
 
 
36.18 
1.37 
0.49 
1.64 
3.98 
3.80 
3.93 
 
 
36.47 
3.04 
2.14 
1.60 
4.10 
3.91 
3.81 
0.56 
3.33 
 
 
8.90 
2.80 
0.93 
0.86 
0.61 
0.84 
0.61 
 
 
9.27 
6.04 
1.54 
0.84 
0.59 
0.84 
0.72 
N = 187 participants, 748 participant-weeks 
Note: Subjects can work zero hours in a week due to vacation time. 
 
 
Table 2 – Uptake of Remote Working Days per Week at Baseline Across Subsamples 
 
Sample restriction 
Min. 
Max. 
Mean 
S.D. 
T-test 
Full sample 
Men 
Women 
Parents 
Non-parents 
Mothers 
Fathers 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
5 
3 
5 
5 
3 
5 
2 
0.33 
0.32 
0.35 
0.37 
0.31 
0.44 
0.31 
0.63 
0.59 
0.68 
0.73 
0.57 
0.94 
0.47 
N/A 
p = 0.77 
p = 0.77 
p = 0.56 
p = 0.56 
p = 0.30 
p = 0.76 
Note: T-tests indicate comparisons between the focal subgroup and the rest of the sample. 
 
 
Table 3 – Uptake of Remote Working Days per Week During Treatment Weeks Across Subsamples 
Sample restriction 
Min. 
Max. 
Mean 
S.D. 
T-test 
Full sample 
Men 
Women 
Parents 
Non-parents 
Mothers 
Fathers 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
2.14 
1.99 
2.28 
1.95 
2.25 
1.95 
1.95 
1.54 
1.58 
1.48 
1.40 
1.60 
1.22 
1.56 
N/A 
p = 0.06 
p = 0.06 
p = 0.07 
p = 0.07 
p = 0.28 
p = 0.24 
Note: T-tests indicate comparisons between the focal subgroup and the rest of the sample. 
 
 
 
 

Figure 1 – Uptake of Remote Working Days per Week During Experiment Across Subsamples 
 
Note: Figure depicts a between-subjects comparison of means. 
 
 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Full Sample
Men
Women
Parents
Non-Parents
Mothers
Fathers
Control week
Treatment Week

Table 4 – The Effect of Remote Working on Family-to-work Conflict by Subgroup, Within Subjects 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
 
Family-work 
Conflict 
Family-work 
Conflict 
Family-work 
Conflict 
Family-work 
Conflict 
Family-work 
Conflict 
Family-work 
Conflict 
Family-work 
Conflict 
Sample restriction 
 
Remote working week 
Full sample 
 
-0.0416 
Men 
 
0.0773 
Women 
 
-0.147* 
Parents 
 
-0.185+ 
Non-parents 
 
0.0424 
Mothers 
 
-0.492** 
Fathers 
 
0.0986 
 
 
Individual fixed effects 
 
Week fixed effects 
 
Cohen’s d 
(0.0487) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.05 
(0.0738) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.09 
(0.0638) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.19 
(0.0945) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.21 
(0.0538) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.05 
(0.133) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.57 
(0.131) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.11 
Observations 
748 
356 
392 
276 
472 
132 
144 
R2 
0.002 
0.010 
0.029 
0.021 
0.003 
0.130 
0.010 
Standard errors in parentheses 
Cohen (1988) describes an effect size of 0.20 as small, an effect size of 0.50 as medium, and an effect size of 0.80 as large. 
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01 
 
 
Figure 2 – The Effect of Remote Working on Family-to-work Conflict, Between Subjects 
 
Note: Figure depicts a pooled comparison of means. 
 
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
Full Sample
Men
Women
Parents
Non-Parents
Mothers
Fathers
Control week
Treatment Week

Figure 3 – The Effect of Remote Working on Family-to-work Conflict for Mothers Versus Non-Mothers 
 
Note: Figure depicts a pooled comparison of means. 
 
 
 
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
Mothers
Non-Mothers
Control week
Treatment Week

Table 5 – The Effect of Remote Working on Job Performance, Within Subjects 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
 
Performance 
Performance 
Performance 
Performance 
Performance 
Performance 
Performance 
Sample restriction 
 
Remote working week 
Full sample 
 
0.118** 
Men 
 
0.106* 
Women 
 
0.126** 
Parents 
 
0.225** 
Non-parents 
 
0.0551 
Mothers 
 
0.336** 
Fathers 
 
0.118 
 
 
Individual fixed effects 
 
Week fixed effects 
 
Cohen’s d 
(0.0344) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.20 
(0.0525) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.17 
(0.0452) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.22 
(0.0561) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.38 
(0.0431) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.09 
(0.0826) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.53 
(0.0765) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.22 
Observations 
748 
356 
392 
276 
472 
132 
144 
R2 
0.023 
0.024 
0.039 
0.093 
0.018 
0.163 
0.056 
Standard errors in parentheses 
Cohen (1988) describes an effect size of 0.20 as small, an effect size of 0.50 as medium, and an effect size of 0.80 as large. 
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01 
 
 
 
Figure 4 – The Effect of Remote Working on Job Performance, Between Subjects 
 
Note: Figure depicts a pooled comparison of means. 
 
 
3.4
3.6
3.8
4.0
4.2
4.4
Full Sample
Men
Women
Parents
Non-Parents
Mothers
Fathers
Control week
Treatment Week

Table 6 – The Effect of Remote Working on Job Satisfaction by Subgroup, Within Subjects 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
 
Job 
Satisfaction 
Job 
Satisfaction 
Job 
Satisfaction 
Job 
Satisfaction 
Job 
Satisfaction 
Job 
Satisfaction 
Job 
Satisfaction 
Sample restriction 
 
Remote working week 
Full sample 
 
0.107** 
Men 
 
0.203** 
Women 
 
0.0172 
Parents 
 
0.101+ 
Non-parents 
 
0.110* 
Mothers 
 
0.0398 
Fathers 
 
0.133+ 
 
 
Individual fixed effects 
 
Week fixed effects 
 
Cohen’s d 
(0.0364) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.13 
(0.0482) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.24 
(0.0530) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.02 
(0.0546) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.13 
(0.0480) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.13 
(0.0834) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.08 
(0.0693) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.18 
Observations 
748 
356 
392 
276 
472 
132 
144 
R2 
0.029 
0.095 
0.029 
0.024 
0.042 
0.089 
0.062 
Standard errors in parentheses 
Cohen (1988) describes an effect size of 0.20 as small, an effect size of 0.50 as medium, and an effect size of 0.80 as large. 
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01 
 
 
 
Figure 5 – The Effect of Remote Working on Job Satisfaction, Between Subjects 
 
Note: Figure depicts a pooled comparison of means. 
 
3.4
3.6
3.8
4.0
4.2
4.4
Full Sample
Men
Women
Parents
Non-Parents
Mothers
Fathers
Control week
Treatment Week

Table 7 – The Effect of Remote Working on Co-Worker Helping Behavior by Subgroup, Within Subjects 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
 
Helping 
Helping 
Helping 
Helping 
Helping 
Helping 
Helping 
Sample restriction 
 
Remote working week 
Full sample 
 
-0.127** 
Men 
 
-0.118* 
Women 
 
-0.138* 
Parents 
 
-0.00168 
Non-parents 
 
-0.201** 
Mothers 
 
0.0250 
Fathers 
 
-0.0298 
 
 
Individual fixed effects 
 
Week fixed effects 
 
Cohen’s d 
(0.0414) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.19 
(0.0578) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.19 
(0.0590) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.19 
(0.0559) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.00 
(0.0567) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.29 
(0.0884) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.05 
(0.0695) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
0.06 
Observations 
748 
356 
392 
276 
472 
132 
144 
R2 
0.036 
0.024 
0.059 
0.037 
0.050 
0.088 
0.040 
Standard errors in parentheses. 
Cohen (1988) describes an effect size of 0.20 as small, an effect size of 0.50 as medium, and an effect size of 0.80 as large. 
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01 
 
Figure 6 – The Effect of Remote Working on Helping Behavior, Between Subjects 
 
Note: Figure depicts a pooled comparison of means. 
 
3.4
3.6
3.8
4.0
4.2
Full Sample
Men
Women
Parents
Non-Parents
Mothers
Fathers
Control week
Treatment Week

Appendix 1: Subject Recruitment Email 
 
Abcam has been approached by London Business School to collaborate on a research project. 
You are eligible to participate and I strongly encourage you to do so. Your involvement will 
contribute to the generation of important research and, in exchange for your time, you will 
receive a £50 John Lewis voucher. Further details are included below. 
 
The purpose of the project is to evaluate the effects of remote working, defined as work 
that is completed from outside of the office - for example at your home, or in a coffee shop. 
The project will run for four consecutive weeks beginning on Monday, September 25. During 
two of these weeks we will ask you to relax the assumption that work must necessarily be 
done in the office and, instead, work remotely for as much as is sensible given your 
professional responsibilities. The other two weeks will be business as usual: You will work in 
the office as much as you would normally do. You will know in advance which weeks will 
emphasise remote working and which weeks will consist of business as usual. 
 
The impact of remote working will be evaluated via a short weekly survey that you 
will complete electronically on your phone, tablet, or computer. Each survey is very brief, 
requiring approximately four minutes to complete. However, there is a limited window to 
complete each survey: Each week the link will be e-mailed to you on Friday at noon and will 
only stay open through 23:59 on Sunday. You must complete every survey in order to 
receive the £50 John Lewis voucher. 
 
Please click on the link at the bottom of this e-mail if you wish to register for the project. The 
link will take you to a website where you will indicate your consent to participate. You will 
then complete a baseline survey which is required for enrolment in the project. Please note 
that the baseline survey is slightly longer than the weekly surveys you will complete 
throughout the project period. Thank you for your consideration! 

Appendix 2 – Scale Items 
Scale 
Source 
Items 
Family-to-work conflict 
Netemeyer et al. (1996) 
The demands of my family or personal relationships interfered with work-related activities. 
 
 
 
 
 
Job performance 
 
 
 
Job satisfaction 
 
 
 
Co-worker helping 
 
 
 
 
Job interdependence 
 
 
 
 
 
Welbourne et al. (1998) 
 
 
 
Camman et al. (1983) 
 
 
 
Dekas et al. (2013) 
 
 
 
 
Van der Vegt et al. (2001) 
I had to put off doing things at work because of demands on my time from home. 
Things I wanted to do at work didn’t get done because of the demands of my family or personal life. 
My home life interfered with my responsibilities at work, such as getting to work on time, accomplishing daily tasks, and working overtime. 
Family-related strain interfered with my ability to perform job-related duties. 
 
How would you evaluate your job performance with respect to the quantity of your work output? 
How would you evaluate your job performance with respect to the quality of your work output? 
How would you evaluate your job performance with respect to the accuracy of your work output? 
 
In general, I like working at my job. 
In general, I am satisfied with my job. 
I am generally satisfied with the kind of work I do in my job. 
 
I helped others who had heavy workloads. 
I willingly helped others solve work-related problems. 
I was always ready to lend a helping hand to those around me. 
I communicated with others before initiating actions that might affect them. 
 
I have to obtain information and advice from my colleagues in order to complete my work. 
I depend on my colleagues for the completion of my work. 
I have a one-person job; I rarely have to check or work with others. (Reverse-coded) 
I have to work closely with my colleagues to do my work properly. 
In order to complete their work, my colleagues have to obtain information and advice from me. 
All items except for job performance were measured on the following scale: 1 = strongly disagree, 2 = disagree, 3 = neither agree nor disagree, 4 = agree, 5 = strongly agree. 
Job performance was measured on the following scale: 1 = needs much improvement, 2 = needs some improvement, 3 = satisfactory, 4 = good, 5 = excellent. 
 
 
 
 

Appendix 3 – The Effect of Weekly Remote Working Days on Family-to-work Conflict by Subgroup, Within Subjects 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
 
Family-work 
Conflict 
Family-work 
Conflict 
Family-work 
Conflict 
Family-work 
Conflict 
Family-work 
Conflict 
Family-work 
Conflict 
Family-work 
Conflict 
Sample restriction 
 
Remote working days 
Full sample 
 
-0.00412 
Men 
 
0.0260 
Women 
 
-0.0293 
Parents 
 
-0.103* 
Non-parents 
 
0.0429* 
Mothers 
 
-0.214** 
Fathers 
 
-0.0261 
 
 
Individual fixed effects 
 
Week fixed effects 
(0.0196) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0298) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0256) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0403) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0207) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0622) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0529) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Observations 
748 
356 
392 
276 
472 
132 
144 
R2 
0.001 
0.008 
0.016 
0.034 
0.014 
0.115 
0.007 
Standard errors in parentheses. 
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01 
 
 
Appendix 4 – The Effect of Weekly Remote Working Days on Job Performance by Subgroup, Within Subjects 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
 
Performance 
Performance 
Performance 
Performance 
Performance 
Performance 
Performance 
Sample restriction 
 
Remote working days 
Full sample 
 
0.0144 
Men 
 
-0.0106 
Women 
 
0.0355+ 
Parents 
 
0.0481+ 
Non-parents 
 
0.000198 
Mothers 
 
0.114** 
Fathers 
 
0.00141 
 
 
Individual fixed effects 
 
Week fixed effects 
(0.0140) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0214) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0182) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0248) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0167) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0399) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0312) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Observations 
748 
356 
392 
276 
472 
132 
144 
R2 
0.005 
0.010 
0.026 
0.039 
0.013 
0.094 
0.034 
Standard errors in parentheses. 
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01 
 
 
 

Appendix 5 – The Effect of Weekly Remote Working Days on Job Satisfaction by Subgroup, Within Subjects 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
 
Job 
Satisfaction 
Job 
Satisfaction 
Job 
Satisfaction 
Job 
Satisfaction 
Job 
Satisfaction 
Job 
Satisfaction 
Job 
Satisfaction 
Sample restriction 
 
Remote working days 
Full sample 
 
0.0548** 
Men 
 
0.0748** 
Women 
 
0.0352+ 
Parents 
 
0.0774** 
Non-parents 
 
0.0458* 
Mothers 
 
0.0674+ 
Fathers 
 
0.0804** 
 
 
Individual fixed effects 
 
Week fixed effects 
(0.0145) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0196) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0210) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0230) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0186) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0381) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0273) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Observations 
748 
356 
392 
276 
472 
132 
144 
R2 
0.039 
0.085 
0.038 
0.060 
0.044 
0.116 
0.103 
Standard errors in parentheses 
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01 
 
 
Appendix 6 – The Effect of Weekly Remote Working Days on Job Co-Worker Helping by Subgroup, Within Subjects 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
 
Helping 
Helping 
Helping 
Helping 
Helping 
Helping 
Helping 
Sample restriction 
 
Remote working days 
Full sample 
 
-0.0330* 
Men 
 
-0.0259 
Women 
 
-0.0388 
Parents 
 
0.00924 
Non-parents 
 
-0.0533* 
Mothers 
 
0.0337 
Fathers 
 
-0.00991 
 
 
Individual fixed effects 
 
Week fixed effects 
(0.0167) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0235) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0237) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0240) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0222) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0409) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
(0.0281) 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Observations 
748 
356 
392 
276 
472 
132 
144 
R2 
0.026 
0.013 
0.051 
0.038 
0.032 
0.094 
0.040 
Standard errors in parentheses 
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01