TITLE: Production Chain Organization in the Digital Age: Information Technology Use and Vertical Integration in U.S. Manufacturing
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2019.01586
---

TSpace Research Repository 
 
tspace.library.utoronto.ca 
 
 
 
Production Chain Organization in the Digital 
Age: Information Technology Use and 
Vertical Integration in U.S. Manufacturing 
 
Chris Forman , Kristina McElheran 
 
Version Accepted Manuscript 
 
Citation 
(published version) 
Chris Forman; , Kristina McElheran (2024) Production Chain 
Organization in the Digital Age: Information Technology Use and 
Vertical Integration in U.S. Manufacturing. Management Science 
71(2):1027-1049. 
 
Copyright / License Copyright © 2024, INFORMS 
 
 
DOI https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2019.01586 
Publisher’s Statement This is an accepted manuscript of an article published by INFORMS in 
Management Science: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2019.01586 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to cite TSpace items 
 
Always cite the published version, so the author(s) will receive recognition through services that track 
citation counts, e.g. Scopus. If you need to cite the page number of the author manuscript from TSpace 
because you cannot access the published version, then cite the TSpace version in addition to the published 
version using the permanent URI (handle) found on the record page. 
 
This article was made openly accessible by U of T Faculty. 
Please tell us how this access benefits you. Your story matters. 
 

 
 
Production Chain Organization in the Digital Age: 
Information Technology Use and Vertical Integration in U.S. 
Manufacturing* 
 
Chris Forman 
Charles H. Dyson School of Applied 
Economics and Management 
Cornell SC Johnson College of Business 
Cornell University 
Warren Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853 
Kristina McElheran 
University of Toronto 
UTSC Dept of Management 
& Rotman School of Management 
1265 Military Trail 
Toronto, ON M1C 1A4 
 
Forthcoming in Management Science 
 
Abstract 
Advances in information technology (IT) may affect the organizational design of production. Exploiting 
the rapid diffusion of the internet in the U.S., we assess the sensitivity of production chain organization to 
this innovation in IT access and use. Extending theories of the firm that recognize the importance of 
downstream transfers (selling, as opposed to sourcing) and plural governance in organizational design, we 
predict IT-driven shifts in downstream vertical integration. In a detailed panel of Census Bureau data for 
over 5,600 manufacturing plants, we observe the extent of a production unit’s downstream transactions 
within the firm, alongside concurrent sales to external customers-–a mix we refer to as plural selling. Our 
main finding is that the use of the internet for external coordination precipitated a significant decline in 
downstream vertical integration across the manufacturing sector. Instrumental variables estimation points 
to a causal relationship but also heterogeneous treatment effects. Key drivers of plural organization, such 
as complementarities and constraints across differently-governed transactions, help explain such 
heterogeneity, as does concurrent use of internal production-management IT. Ours is the first study to 
leverage a plural governance framework and large-scale micro data to understand how U.S. production 
chain organization shifted in response to this rapid and far-reaching technological change. 
 
Keywords: information technology, plural governance, vertical integration, internet, firm boundaries, 
organizational design 
 
* Any views expressed are those of the authors and not those of the U.S. Census Bureau. The Census Bureau's 
Disclosure Review Board and Disclosure Avoidance Officers have reviewed this information product for 
unauthorized disclosure of confidential information and have approved the disclosure avoidance practices applied to 
this release. This research was performed at the Atlanta, Boston and Cornell (supported by the Cornell Center for the 
Social Sciences) Federal Statistical Research Data Centers, under FSRDC Project Number 1069 (CBDRB-FY22-
279). Support for the RDC network from NSF(ITR-0427889) is gratefully acknowledged, as is support from the 
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC). Thanks are due to Francine Lafontaine, 
Chad Syverson, Teresa Fort, Avi Goldfarb, Shane Greenstein, Manpreet Hora, Brian Silverman, and seminar 
participants at Harvard Business School, Carnegie Mellon University, Michigan State University, New York 
University, University of Calgary, University of Maryland, University of Texas at Dallas, the Virtual Digital 
Economy seminar, NBER Summer Institute and Productivity Lunch, the RDC Annual Conference, the Workshop on 
Information Systems and Economics (WISE), MIT’s Organizational Economics Lunch, the Center for Economic 
Studies, the ZEW ICT Conference, and the Smith Innovation and Entrepreneurship Conference for helpful feedback. 
Research assistance was provided by Wang Jin and Jin Woo Chang. We are indebted to T. Lynn Riggs, Jim Davis, 
and Wang Jin for their suggestions and support. All errors remain our own. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
1 
 
1. 
Introduction 
Understanding the economic implications of new technologies requires consideration not only of 
improvements to existing processes, but also of how they may be redesigned. Steam power and electricity 
transformed production in the 19th and 20th centuries, but only after widespread economic reorganization 
(Rosenberg and Trajtenberg 2004, Jovanovic and Rousseau 2005). Digital technologies arguably sparked 
a similar upheaval in this century (David 1990, Brynjolfsson and McAfee 2014), yet many organizational 
implications remain poorly understood. We explore how the rise of the internet – a central catalyst of 
today’s digital transformation– affected the vertical organization of production in U.S. manufacturing. 
Longstanding research in management and economics contends that, by lowering communication and 
coordination costs, IT may alter the organizational design of firms (Malone et al. 1987, Bresnahan et al. 
2002, Brynjolfsson and Hitt 2003, Bloom et al. 2014). Particular attention has been paid to whether IT use 
might lead firms to become less vertically integrated.1 More-recent work finds a mixed relationship 
between IT and vertical organization, depending on a firm’s external context (Ray et al. 2009), asset 
characteristics (Ray et al. 2013), or the nature of the IT (Dewan and Ren 2011, Gong et al. 2016). We 
explore IT-related changes in the organization of vertical transactions from a novel theoretical 
perspective. This perspective, combined with largely untapped establishment-level data on transaction 
flows across the U.S. manufacturing sector and detailed measures of IT use, yields new insights into how 
digital coordination may substitute for ownership-based control in modern production. 
We find that internet-led shocks to external value-chain coordination resulted in a substantial 
reduction in downstream vertical integration. Heterogeneity across plants (even within the same firm), as 
well as across distinct uses of IT, sheds new light on how firms adopt, combine, and adapt to novel 
technologies. Our study complements prior research in a few key ways. 
To begin, we ground our study in plural governance theory, which seeks to explain firms’ 
simultaneous use of “distinct control mechanisms for the same function” (Bradach and Eccles 1989, p. 
 
1 See Malone et al. (1987), Gurbaxani and Whang (1991), Clemons and Row (1992), and Clemons et al. (1993) for 
early theory; see Brynjolfsson et al. (1994), Dewan et al. (1998), and Hitt (1999) for early evidence. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
2 
 
97). In other words, this framework does not neatly characterize firms as integrated, not-integrated, or 
even “hybrid” (Williamson 1991, Ménard 2012) across similar activities, and it is consistent with the 
diversity of governance structures observed in practice (Sørensen et al. 2022). This departs from the 
widely-used transaction cost economics (TCE) framework (Coase 1937, Williamson 1985), which 
examines organizational design through the lens of a “make-versus-buy” decision at the transaction level. 
TCE pushes predictions toward “pure” firm types that rely on one governance mode or the other 
(Parmigiani 2007, Puranam et al. 2013). Plural governance theory, in contrast, admits much greater 
diversity and accommodates the vital insight that organizational design will be shaped not only by 
transaction-level features but also by cross-transaction interdependencies and past design choices 
(Argyres and Liebeskind 2002, Nickerson and Silverman 2003, Leiblein and Miller 2003, Jacobides and 
Hitt 2005, Argyres and Zenger 2012, Puranam et al. 2013). Grounding our study in plural governance 
leverages these advances in the theory of the firm and opens up new avenues of inquiry. 
One such avenue is attention to the production-unit level of analysis. Key drivers of plural forms, 
such as information and incentive complementarities across governance modes (Dutta et al. 1995, Heide 
2003) operate at the level of a “system” or “portfolio” of connected activities. Thus, within-firm variation 
requires attention (Harrigan 1985, Puranam et al. 2013). We exploit establishment-level administrative 
data to both align with the theory and identify patterns that could be obscured in a firm-level analysis. 
Large-scale studies of plural organizational forms are uncommon outside of certain settings.2 Yet, this 
design—sometimes referred to as “taper integration” (Harrigan 1985) –-is quite prevalent in our research 
context. U.S. manufacturers predominantly mix vertically-integrated downstream transfers with sales to 
external customers (Atalay et al. 2014), a practice we refer to as plural selling and take as an apt lens 
through which to explore shifts in production chain organization. 
Such shifts are ultimately an empirical question, as the net effect of interdependencies across 
distinctly-governed activities in plural forms is, absent strong assumptions, fundamentally ambiguous 
 
2 Franchising is the notable exception; see Lafontaine and Slade (2007) and Sørensen et al. (2022) for reviews. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
3 
 
(Puranam et al. 2013). Indeed, ambiguity is not new to the IT and vertical design literature: earlier TCE-
grounded studies sought to predict the effect of generic IT, which may enhance both internal and external 
coordination, potentially increasing and/or decreasing vertical integration (Gurbaxani and Whang 1991). 
This left net organizational design outcomes up to empirical arbitration (Hitt 1999), or required additional 
information about the external “orientation” of the IT (Dewan and Ren 2011) to resolve. 
We also disentangle external from internal margins of IT use. This is critical if the internet had a 
disproportionate impact on external coordination among value chain partners (Afuah 2003). However, 
even with visibility to the origin of different influences on organizational design, ultimate outcomes are 
difficult to predict in plural-governance contexts. Specifically, the cross-transaction complementarities 
and constraints giving rise to plural forms generate predictions that are more-nuanced than those found in 
TCE. 3 Leveraging plural governance theory leads us to develop a number of novel testable propositions 
that disentangle mechanisms and bring into focus new contingencies to take to the data. 
 For instance, motivated by arguments that plural governance, despite its higher organization and 
administration costs, may arise from a need for flexibility (e.g., Chondrakis et al. 2022), we examine 
whether plants that were plurally-governed, ex ante, responded more strongly to the rise of the internet. If 
plural organization eases reallocation across distinct governance modes, plants organized in this fashion 
may be better-positioned to exploit sudden declines in external coordination costs. In addition, cross-
transaction complementarities and constraints central to plural governance theory point to other likely 
sources of heterogeneity. We thus develop intuitions rooted in this framework that predict variation based 
on a plant’s pre-internet vertical integration and capacity utilization, as well. 
We further anticipate IT-based heterogeneity, predicting that cross-mode interdependencies will 
generate stronger external internet-based effects in the presence of internal IT for coordination and 
management of the production process. However, details of the vintage and nature of the IT systems 
 
3 Basically, ambiguity with respect to the net effects of IT on vertical scope remains in our study, but for theoretical, 
rather than empirical, reasons (which we develop at length in Sections 2 and 3). We clarify key theoretical tensions 
and then address them with unusually detailed IT measures that correspond to core mechanisms in the theory. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
4 
 
require care. 4 Such nuances are usefully captured in our data. 
Thus, in addition to its theoretical contribution, novel measurement based on detailed U.S. Census 
Bureau micro data is central to our study. The 1999 Computer Network Use Supplement (CNUS) 
captured plant-level internet use, separating the sharing of information with external value chain partners 
from coordination with other company units. It provides data on production-focused IT as well as older IT 
for external and internal coordination. Rich administrative data further supply key information on plants 
and their parent firms across the decade that saw the rapid rise of the commercial internet (1992 – 2002). 
To assess the effect of internet use on production chain organization, we leverage observed changes 
over time in the value of output transferred to other plants within the same firm “for further assembly, 
fabrication, or manufacture.” This measure directly captures output destined for additional transformation 
in a vertically-interdependent production process – an intuitive definition of vertical integration.5 Yet, 
internally-governed transfers represent only one side of the plural governance coin; external transfers 
matter, as well. To gauge both magnitude and direction of changes in plural selling across diverse units, 
we normalize internal transfers by total value shipped by the plant. This “internal transaction ratio” (ITR) 
captures a plant’s relative reliance on ownership-based control of downstream vertical transactions. 
We first analyze changes in the ITR in a sample of ~5,600 plants that consistently pursued plural 
selling in the pre-period. A one-standard-deviation increase in external coordination over the internet was 
associated with an ~8% decline in the ITR, on average. This reflects a concomitant 20% decline in the 
unscaled value of internal transfers (the ITR numerator), and a 4% rise in total value shipped (the ITR 
denominator), when modeled separately. Instrumental variables, timing falsification, and numerous other 
tests point to a causal relationship between internet use for external coordination and a significant and 
widespread decline in vertical integration among U.S. manufacturing plants in the early 2000s. 
 
4 Before the internet, external coordination in the value chain often took place over Electronic Data Interchange 
(EDI) networks (Gong et al. 2016). Conversely, internal coordination is the central goal of Enterprise Resource 
Planning (ERP) software (Hitt et al. 2002, Nguyen and Atrostic 2006, Bai et al. 2018). 
5 Definitions of “vertical integration” vary widely. Ours aligns with large-scale evidence regarding production chain 
organization in the U.S. as well as influential “parables” in the theory of the firm (see Atalay et al. 2014, p. 1121). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
5 
 
This relationship varied strikingly across units – even within a given firm—based on pre-internet 
organizational design. First, we find the main effect to be concentrated among units that relied on plural 
selling, ex ante, consistent with increased flexibility in plural forms despite the higher-cost organizational 
design. That said, some of the most-constrained plants demonstrated the greatest net adjustments to new 
IT. Plants characterized by significant vertical linkages to other units within their firms demonstrated a 
greater IT-related decrease in the intensity of vertical integration, shifting a greater share of activity 
towards market-based transactions. A similar pattern appears with capacity utilization: plants closer to full 
capacity, pre-internet, allocated relatively more production outside the firm, on net. Such patterns are 
consistent with strong dependencies across transactions and past unit-level design choices that would be 
obscured in a standard TCE analysis, yet which significantly amplified organizational responses to the 
internet’s introduction of low-cost, flexible coordination throughout the value chain. 
We find IT-based heterogeneity, as well. Concurrent use of IT for monitoring and managing internal 
production processes accentuates the effects of externally-focused use of the internet. This is contrary to 
common assumptions that external and internal IT would act as substitutes in the firm boundary decision 
(e.g., Malone et al. 1987; Gurbaxani and Whang 1991). Yet, such complementarity arises only with 
production management IT. Internet-based information sharing among internal units had no measurable 
impact on downstream vertical design. 
Our study contributes to a few streams of work. First, it adds a plural governance frame and evidence 
of cross-transaction complementarities and constraints to information-systems (IS) research on IT and 
vertical scope. Prior work emphasizes external contingencies (e.g., Ray et al. 2009), whereas we focus on 
internal ones rooted in organizational design. Rai et al. (2015) is most-related, looking at IT use among 
plural-sourcing utilities; yet we find complementarity, rather than substitution, between certain internal 
and external uses of IT. We also observe patterns in a much broader firm population and shed light on 
downstream transfers, complementing the predominant focus on sourcing. Finally, evidence that past 
design choices interact with IT at the unit level to augment organizational responses to IT use is, to our 
knowledge, new to this literature. It is also relevant to a growing interest in the organizational details and 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
6 
 
practice of digital transformation (Bharadwaj et al. 2013, Westerman et al. 2014, Vial 2019). 
More broadly, understanding the organization of economic activity according to the rules of the firm, 
those of the market, or—as we underscore here –both at once, is vital to management and economics 
research (Santos and Eisenhardt 2005, Lafontaine and Slade 2007). This literature has also focused 
predominantly on the discrete “make-versus-buy” decision (e.g., Nickerson and Silverman 2003, Mayer 
and Nickerson 2005, Forbes and Lederman 2009), or plural sourcing (e.g., Jacobides and Hitt 2005, 
Rothaermel et al. 2006, Parmigiani 2007, Anderson et al. 2019; Chondrakis et al. 2022). Determinants of 
downstream integration, a key dimension of vertical structure (Jacobides and Billinger 2006, Kapoor 
2013), have been little-explored— far less, the impact of IT use. Yet, the potential of digital technologies 
to shape organizational design is of growing interest (Hubbard 2000, Baker and Hubbard 2003, 2004, 
Bloom et al. 2014, Wu et al. 2019, Kretschmer and Khashabi 2020). Our study yields new insights into 
the reorganization of U.S. production during a period of important and far-reaching technological change. 
2. 
Background & Approach 
2.1. Prior Research on IT and Vertical Integration 
How IT use impacts the organizational design of firms is a question of longstanding interest. Drawing 
primarily on TCE (Coase 1937; Williamson 1985, 1991), a leading prediction has been that IT investment 
will lead to less-integrated firms (Malone et al. 1987). This “Electronic Markets Hypothesis” anticipated 
that IT-driven reductions in external coordination costs would cause firms to increasingly rely on markets, 
rather than hierarchies, to conduct business.6 However, generic IT investment may be used to improve 
both efficiency and coordination— both within and between firms—yielding ultimately ambiguous 
predictions (e.g., Gurbaxani and Whang 1991). 
Empirical evidence on the topic has likewise been mixed. Industry and firm-level IT capital have 
been associated with less vertical integration (Brynjolfsson et al. 1994, Hitt 1999), and vice versa (Dewan 
et al. 1998, Hitt 1999). Ray et al. (2009) find the relationship to depend on a firm’s external market 
 
6 Critics countered with a predicted a “move to the middle” characterized by increased outsourcing concentrated 
among fewer suppliers (Clemons and Row 1992, Clemons et al. 1993, Bakos and Brynjolfsson 1993). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
7 
 
characteristics, while Ray et al. (2013) find the specificity of a firm’s assets to moderate the relationship. 
2.2. Internal vs. External IT 
Dewan and Ren (2011) address the ambiguity in prior work by developing a contingent view of the 
relationship between IT and vertical integration, depending on the external “orientation” of a firm’s 
software. This distinction usefully disentangles applications intended to lower the costs of market-based 
transactions from other IT. Relying on TCE, they argue that externally-focused software for customer 
relationship management (CRM) or supply chain management (SCM) tends to complement reduced 
vertical scope. Such external IT is assumed – both theoretically and by how they construct the 
measures— to work counter to other enterprise software in its effects on vertical integration. 
Although we also move beyond generic IT, disentangling external from internal uses, we do not 
impose substitution between them, either conceptually or empirically. We further distinguish the older 
types of IT examined in their study from the ubiquity, ease of use, and open standards of internet-based 
IT, which may have distinctive effects on firm boundary decisions (Afuah 2003, Gong et al. 2016). 
2.3. Theory-Measurement Gaps 
Across this body of work, reliance on TCE gives rise to a persistent theory-measurement gap that largely 
goes unrecognized. TCE takes the transaction as the fundamental unit of analysis, evaluating whether an 
input would be most-efficiently “made” or “bought” in the context of a specific exchange relationship. At 
the transaction level, this is a discrete choice, with mechanisms that push either towards or away from 
internal governance. Aggregated across transactions without additional assumptions, TCE predicts “pure” 
types (Parmigiani 2007), yielding little insight into how much should be made versus bought (Puranam et 
al. 2013, Anderson et al. 2019). Lacking a way to explain degrees of integration, empirical TCE has often 
forced a fit between theory and data via arbitrary cutoffs for being “vertically integrated.”7 
The empirical IS literature linking IT use to vertical design largely elided this tension, forming 
predictions based on discrete, transactions-level TCE logic, while relying on continuous firm-level 
 
7 Monteverde and Teece (1982) observed sourcing of the same inputs both internally and externally in the 
automotive supply chain, choosing 80% as the cutoff for vertical integration. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
8 
 
measures. Typically, such measures combine vertical scope, defined by breadth of industry participation, 
with intensity of integration, measured using input-output relationships in the aggregate economy (see 
www.bea.gov). This usefully accounts for interdependencies among steps in the production chain – a key 
driver of coordination costs in vertical integration (Thompson 1967) and also likely to be impacted by IT 
use (Dewan and Ren 2011). However, it also introduces a number of challenges. 
First, it confounds vertical with horizontal scope (Hitt 1999), despite key theoretical and managerial 
differences (Thompson 1967; Hitt 1999, Dewan and Ren 2011). Second, firms are rarely fully 
“integrated” according to this metric. Instead, mixing of transaction types dominates in practice, 
suggesting a need for more-nuanced explanations to fit the data. Finally, aggregate input-output 
relationships are quite stable over time (Atalay et al. 2014). Thus, changes in vertical structure will be 
observed only in cases of “lumpy” addition or subtraction of entire facilities (Hitt 1999) or shifts across 
coarsely-defined business segments (Villalonga 2004). This may obscure important interdependencies 
and constraints (Harrigan 1985, Villalonga 2004), calling for higher-fidelity measures, as well. 
2.4. Production-Unit Level of Analysis 
Our approach narrows the gap between theory and measurement in a few ways. To begin, we model 
vertical integration in a more fine-grained and flexible manner. In particular, we focus on continuous 
adjustments in the intensity of vertical integration at the establishment level, rather than at the firm level. 
We note that units within diversified firms often participate in distinct markets with distinct external 
demand and competition, both of which may influence vertical integration (Ray et al. 2009, Stenbacka 
and Tombak 2012). Establishments – particularly in manufacturing – also vary in their production 
functions and productivity (Syverson 2011). This suggests distinct vertical interdependencies and distinct 
capabilities for participating in distributed value chains (Jacobides and Hitt 2005). Prior work emphasizes 
system- or portfolio- level interdependencies that are operate at the sub-firm level (Rothaermel et al. 
2006; Novak and Stern 2009), yet are usefully modeled at the production-unit level (Harrigan 1985). 
Finally, IT use has been found to vary among establishments within firms (McElheran 2014). Thus, a 
firm-level view could obscure within-firm variation in critical theoretical and empirical relationships. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
9 
 
2.5. Downstream Transactions 
Another notable feature of our study is that, while prior work has focused overwhelmingly on sourcing, 
both our conceptual framework and empirical measures focus on selling. Many core intuitions readily 
transfer over, as key information and incentive challenges shaping sourcing decisions similarly affect 
downstream transfers. For instance, market-based coordination costs, such as searching for appropriate 
value chain partners, negotiating contract terms, and monitoring contract adherence arise on both the 
selling and buying sides of most transactions. In fact, sellers disproportionately bear many classic 
“marketing” costs such as communicating product features to potential customers (Coase 1937). “Hold-
up” risks arising from specialized investments (Williamson 1991), such as customized designs or 
production equipment, likewise apply as readily to sellers as to buyers. 
We further justify our downstream view on vertical organization by noting that the costs of 
coordinating – or failing to – may in fact be greater from the perspective of upstream producers. 
Longstanding research in operations management recognizes the infamous “bullwhip effect” (Lee et al. 
1997, Simchi-Levi et al. 1999), whereby information distortions in supply chains increase with distance 
from end-user demand. This makes aligning production with demand more difficult, the further upstream 
in the value chain. Thus, manufacturers of intermediate goods for further transformation and producers of 
final goods for distribution may rely even more heavily on downstream-focused control mechanisms. 
As in sourcing, ownership provides one lever for exerting downstream control. Forward integration 
has been studied extensively in retailing (Lafontaine and Shaw 2005, Lafontaine and Slade 2007) and 
distribution (Dutta et al. 1995). Harrigan’s (1985) small-sample manufacturing study does not 
differentiate between backward and forward integration. It does, however, emphasize that firms “need not 
own a vertically related unit in order to enjoy the advantages vertical control provides” (Harrigan 1985, p. 
421). Although we focus on the simple distinction between ownership versus non-ownership governance 
of downstream transactions, many arrangements exist to solve control challenges without co-ownership of 
facilities (Bradach and Eccles 1989). Some, such as elaborate formal contracts for supply chain 
coordination, further depend on the capabilities of modern IT (Simchi-Levi et al. 1999, Lee and Whang 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
10 
 
2000). 
2.6. 
Beyond TCE: Plural Governance 
Despite its continued prominence, TCE’s discrete classification of firms into “make, buy,” or even 
“hybrid” (Williamson 1991) has received substantial reformulation over the years. Critics note that firms 
often make and buy the same input (Adelman 1949, Harrigan 1985, Bradach and Eccles 1989). Such 
plural or “concurrent” sourcing has been broadly documented (Veugelers and Cassiman 1999, Jacobides 
and Hitt 2005, Parmigiani 2007, Chondrakis et al. 2022), including studies of partial outsourcing (Parker 
and Anderson 2002, Stenbacka and Tombak 2012, Anderson et al. 2019). Sørensen et al. (2022) review 
plural governance research on concurrent sourcing, franchising, and dual distribution. Plural selling, also 
termed “taper integration” or “vertical permeability,” is noted in a few studies (Harrigan 1985, Jacobides 
and Billinger 2006, Rothaermel et al. 2006, Luo et al. 2012, Ménard 2013, Kapoor 2013). However, the 
limited prior work addressing plural selling does so alongside plural sourcing, typically treating them as 
theoretically equivalent; here, we restrict attention to downstream transactions. 
We define plural selling as a production unit transferring output to downstream units within the firm 
while simultaneously selling output to external customers. While much less-studied than other plural 
forms, plural selling is actually quite prominent in U.S. goods-producing sectors. Using large-scale 
administrative data on downstream shipments, Atalay et al. (2014) find that many producers own links in 
vertically-related production chains yet transfer only a fraction of output to co-owned facilities. Based on 
the share of shipments to co-owned locations with significant input-output linkages, only ~1% of 
establishments appear fully “vertically integrated” (Atalay et al. 2014, p. 1127). Viewed through a plural 
governance lens, most can be seen to follow practices consistent with plural selling. We thus take it as an 
apt theoretical framework for predicting changes in production chain organization during the rise of the 
internet. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
11 
 
3. Conceptual Framework 
3.1. Drivers of Plural Governance 
Scholars increasingly agree on the stability and benefits of plural forms of organization.8 Recapitulating 
this fast-growing literature here is beyond the scope of our study. Instead, we summarize core theoretical 
drivers of plural governance, establishing intuitions to take to the data. 
3.1.1. Demand for Flexibility. One hypothesized driver of plural forms is a strategic demand for 
flexibility. For instance, mixing internal and external governance has been associated with the quest to 
optimize capacity in the face of demand uncertainty or other disruptions (Adelman 1949, Harrigan 1985). 
Rothaermel et al. (2006) link it to flexibility in product offerings, finding larger product portfolios among 
computer manufacturers that pursued taper integration in the mid-1990s. Chondrakis et al. (2022) find 
that plurally-governed legal firms were more-able to meet new demand for coordination in patent 
prosecution services. 
In our manufacturing setting, where plural governance is prevalent but not universal, plants that are 
plurally governed in pursuit of flexibility may be relatively more responsive to an IT-driven shock. 
Conversely, those that pursue “pure” governance modes for strategically important reasons—such as full 
vertical integration to protect valuable intellectual property (Mayer and Nickerson 2005) or to forestall 
competition (de Fontenay and Gans 2005)– are likely to be relatively insensitive to IT-driven changes in 
coordination costs. Thus, care is essential at the margins between “pure” and plurally-governed types. 
We build on these insights both in our initial sample construction (see Section 4) as well as our 
exploration of differential responses for plural versus “pure” plant types (Section 6). For the latter, we 
anticipate a greater response among plants that were engaged in plural selling, pre-internet. 
3.1.2. Cross-Mode Complementarities. Numerous studies have detailed the gains from being able to 
monitor and discipline internal and external activities against each other (e.g., Bradach and Eccles 1989, 
Dutta et al. 1995, Stenbacka and Tomback 2012, Ménard 2013, Puranam et al. 2013). Even a small 
amount of activity in a complementary mode may be sufficient to resolve adverse selection and moral 
 
8 See Ménard (2013) and Sørensen et al. (2022) for discussion and reviews. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
12 
 
hazard problems (Heide 2003), or address knowledge challenges such as learning about input costs or 
how to integrate discrete components in an overall system (Parker and Anderson 2002, Anderson et al. 
2019). Access to distinct sources of innovation and market knowledge are also argued to be important 
drivers of plural governance (Adelman 1949, Veugelers and Cassiman 1999, Parmigiani 2007, Kapoor 
2013). 
In a detailed case-study exploring these themes in practice, the apparel manufacturer “Fashion Inc.” 
exploited its competences in production and R&D to supply both downstream internal units and external 
customers, improving monitoring and performance in both modes. Greater vertical “permeability” was 
also credited with helping it find new downstream market opportunities (Jacobides and Billinger 2006). 
A central implication is that cross-mode complementarities in plural organizations will generate 
ambiguous predictions about the relationship between different types of IT use and vertical integration. If 
improved external IT increases visibility to market demand in ways that also support more-productive or 
more-innovative production, it is not clear whether more external sales or more integrated production will 
prevail. This is not a mere hypothetical. Returning to the “Fashion Inc.” case, the firm relied on enterprise 
resource planning (ERP) software – typically viewed as a tool for internal coordination – to standardize 
and coordinate orders within the firm. Yet, this also improved how it managed external sales, ultimately 
reducing its net intensity of vertical integration (Jacobides and Billinger 2006). 
To the extent that plural governance arises from such cross-mode interdependencies, a given form of 
enhanced coordination (internal vs. external IT) may not be directly responsible for a corresponding 
increase in that activity (integrated vs. external transactions). This clashes with TCE-based intuitions, 
which impose substitution between internal and external transfers in the firm boundary decision 
(Parmigiani 2007; Puranam et al. 2013), as well as between internal and external uses of IT (Hitt 1999, 
Dewan and Ren 2011, Rai et al. 2015). Taking a plural governance view, instead, makes sharp predictions 
as to average main effects quite tenuous, while illuminating new contingencies to explore. 
In particular, plants with significant vertical linkages within the firm provide an interesting setting in 
which to explore heterogeneity. Significant internal commitments, pre-internet, could reflect firm-specific 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
13 
 
investments. According to TCE (e.g., Williamson 1991), this would tend to constrain a plant’s ability or 
willingness to transact outside the firm. A plural governance lens, however, suggests that plants having 
already sunk the costs of “dual” modes (e.g., Parmigiani 2007) and/or enjoying the insights arising from 
internal production (e.g. Anderson et al. 2019) may, in fact, be better-positioned to shift their downstream 
allocations toward external customers. We explore this potential contingency, empirically, in Section 6. 
3.1.3. Costs & Constraints. Key organizational costs and constraints, as well, have been argued to drive 
plural organization. Note that plural selling is more-costly than “pure” governance of downstream 
transfers, as it requires the formation and management of distinct governance modes at the same time 
(Rothaermel et al. 2006, Parmigiani 2007). Net gains from maintaining both modes, therefore, will hinge 
on an ability to defray those costs, possibly by sharing resources across distinct activities. For a given 
manufacturing plant, this likely means producing for both internal and external consumption on the same 
machinery. This can lead to cross-mode competition, rather than complementarity, particularly if there are 
limits to scale in production or administration (e.g., Coase 1937, Puranam et al. 2013). 
What does this mean for responses to the internet? It could imply that more-constrained plants will 
have less capacity to reorganize in the face of technological change, dampening the magnitude of a shift 
toward market-based transactions. However, as with the complementarities described above, cross-mode 
constraints can also generate non-obvious responses to a shift in coordination costs. For example, IT-
driven gains in meeting downstream demand could free up capacity to produce more for either internal or 
external sales – or a mix of both. Given this theoretical ambiguity, we explore heterogeneity based on 
differences in ex ante production capacity empirically. That said, a larger response among more-
constrained plants would be consistent with this difficult-to-observe type of cross-mode dependency. 
3.2. IT & Coordination Costs in the Internet Age 
While organizational design considerations have dominated the development of theoretical mechanisms, 
IT use has long been argued to reduce coordination and transaction costs both within and between firms 
(Gurbaxani and Whang 1991). Many applications of IT enhance and/or lower the costs of “making sure 
that the right things and the right people are in the right place at the right time,” (Brynjolfsson et al. 1994, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
14 
 
p. 1632). This may be internal, such as improving the flow of information to decision-makers or 
monitoring employees; or external, such as receiving and processing orders from customers. 
Such intuitions pre-date the internet. However, the internet’s open, low-cost standards and greater 
ease of use have been disproportionately linked to improvements in external coordination (Afuah 2003, 
Gong et al. 2016). Thus, we anticipate the rise of the internet to be most-informative about changes in the 
cost or effectiveness of coordinating with value-chain partners. Unlike prior work, we do not need to 
assume this, as measuring external coordination directly is a key advantage of our data (see Section 4). 
3.2.1. External Coordination. Over the past few decades, IT has transformed the management of 
vertically-linked activities in the value chain. Firms increasingly rely on supply chain and logistics IT to 
share inventory and order status data directly with vendors and customers, enabling upstream producers to 
determine production schedules for downstream demand, reducing both excess inventory and shortages 
throughout the value chain (Simchi-Levi et al. 1999, Lee and Whang 2000). 
Before the internet, between-firm coordination using IT relied on proprietary networks such as 
electronic data interchange (EDI). Coordination was only possible between known and approved users, 
typically already embedded in strategic vertical chain relationships (Bakos and Nault 1997). With the 
internet, potential (not just existing) partners gained access to product descriptions, prices, and firm 
attributes, as well as visibility into on-hand inventory and real-time logistics outside their firm 
boundaries. Internet-based IT further improved real-time monitoring and information exchange, helping 
to find new opportunities for deploying specialized assets and significantly reducing the uncertainty, 
asymmetric information, and asset specificity underlying many TCE-style “holdup” risks (Afuah 2003). 
The sudden widespread availability of the internet for external coordination in the mid-1990s, which we 
label external IT for simplicity, will have lowered the costs of market-based transactions, all else equal. 
3.2.2. Two Kinds of Internal Coordination – and Why They Matter. Yet, despite the internet’s 
notable ability to facilitate inter-firm coordination (Afuah 2003, Brews and Tucci 2004, Gong et al. 
2016), its general-purpose nature makes it applicable along multiple margins, potentially reducing internal 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
15 
 
coordination and production costs, as well. It is thus important, both conceptually and empirically, to 
disentangle inter-firm use from intra-firm use of the internet. Because our setting allows us to separate 
coordination between units of the same firm from other production relationships and activities, we refer to 
the use of the internet for cross-unit coordination within the firm as internal IT. 
That said, such symmetry in labeling (“external” vs. “internal”) may obscure quite-asymmetric 
magnitudes of change associated with novel internet-based capabilities. Pre-internet, firms typically relied 
on a range of material requirements planning (MRP) or enterprise resource planning (ERP) software to 
facilitate internal coordination; such applications were also on the rise across the manufacturing sector in 
the 1990s and early 2000s (Nguyen and Atrostic 2006; Bai et al. 2018). Use of the internet, per se, for 
internal coordination was also diffusing, though following different patterns than between-firm usage 
(Forman, et al. 2005). Given our interest in shocks to external coordination, we focus, first, on isolating 
changes in vertical downstream integration attributable to plant-level adoption of external internet, while 
partialing out other uses of IT. We can then interact them to explore IT-based complementarities. 
Along these lines, there is another type of internal IT we must consider. Note that between-unit 
coordination is conceptually distinct from within-unit coordination. Particularly in the manufacturing 
context, “shop floor” applications have been widely available to improve a production unit’s internal 
production process design, scheduling, and monitoring. Such applications are essential for flexible and/or 
complex manufacturing, as they reduce inventory and downtime due to changeovers, inefficient 
scheduling, or machine failures. Such uses of IT are increasingly important in an age of shortening 
product lifecycles, dynamic e-commerce-driven demand, and globally dispersed supply chains. These 
applications are often very localized, as they require integration with specific production processes – 
some of which are embodied in shop-floor automation. Thus, they may vary widely among plants, even 
within a given firm. We label this localized use of IT production IT. 
As mentioned above, a central contribution of our study lies in the ability to disentangle these widely-
ranging uses of IT. This is helpful on two fronts. First, observing what type of IT is deployed, and where, 
allows us to pin down the initial locus of organizational change and draw out managerial implications. In 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
16 
 
other words, it answers open questions about what specific IT capabilities (rather than generic IT 
investment) might lead to which organizational changes, particularly as organizational adjustment plays 
out over time. Second, it grants greater precision in linking our measures to common expectations 
regarding IT use and organizational design – and clarifies where plural governance theory yields novel 
intuitions. In TCE-based studies, enhanced internal coordination is expected to support greater vertical 
integration, while enhanced external coordination will push towards greater use of hierarchies (e.g., 
Malone et al. 1987). Yet such organizational responses become more-nuanced once we employ a plural 
selling framework. We return to these nuances in our discussion of heterogeneity, below. 
3.3. Testable Propositions 
Grounding our analysis within plural governance therefore adds insight. Yet it makes sharp predictions of 
ultimate outcomes problematic for the reasons described above. We make progress, conceptually, by first 
noting that net design outcomes arise from a process of organizational adjustment that begins with an 
initial shift – one that remains intuitive in light of prior work. Drawing on the IT productivity literature 
(e.g., Brynjolfsson and Hitt 2003), we anticipate that, all else equal – particularly, barring any demand or 
production capacity constraints --total output should increase with the adoption of external IT. 
This is a statement about output, yet it has testable implications with respect to organizational design, 
depending on the maintained assumptions. Consider that if the level of internal activity were to be held 
fixed, increasing activity (sales) on the external margin would cause the relative intensity of vertically 
integrated activity to decrease, on net. This could be a reasonable expectation in certain cases, for instance 
if only a small amount of internal activity is need to apply competitive pressure to external value chain 
partners (Dutta et al. 1995) or sustain systems integration knowledge (Anderson et al. 2019). Under such 
assumptions, external IT use would feed entirely into increased sales, reducing the relative intensity of 
vertical integration as captured by the internal transaction ratio (ITR): 
Proposition 1: External IT will lead to a reduction in ITR without meaningful changes in 
the level of internally-governed transfers. 
The conditions under which this “denominator-only” pattern will hold are relatively restrictive, however, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
17 
 
and they conflict with how complementarities between internal and external activities are commonly 
discussed in plural governance theory, as outlined above. 
A strict interpretation of complementarity predicts increasing returns to one activity in the increasing 
level of the other (Brynjolfsson and Milgrom 2013). Thus, in the presence of such cross-mode 
complementarities, external IT use should lead to increases in both external and internal transfers. This 
could potentially leave the ITR – and, hence, the observed intensity of downstream vertical integration – 
relatively unaffected. In this case, cross-mode complementarities will have a “countervailing” effect: 
Proposition 2: External IT use will lead to increases in both external and internal transfers, 
while leaving the observed ITR relatively unaffected. 
 
Little (or even no) effect represents a lower bound on the range of absolute-value changes in the ITR that 
could result from shifts in both the numerator and denominator of the ITR. We address this by 
investigating changes in internal transfers and external sales separately, as well. 
 Finally, as discussed above, constraints across governance modes or time may also play an important 
role in plural governance. Indeed, they could promote an even greater observed shift in the vertical 
organization of production by forcing a reallocation of activity that had previously been internal to the 
firm out to the market. An extreme case of this in “pure” modes would be shifting from fully vertically 
integrated to fully outsourced, requiring considerable divestment or acquisition of facilities, with 
commensurate frictions (e.g., Monteverde and Teece 1982). A more-incremental version is possible in 
plural selling, particularly if system- or firm-level constraints impose substitution between internal and 
external activity. For instance, diseconomies of scale in production, such as increasing marginal costs, 
capacity constraints, or administrative limits to scale (Coase 1937), may promote plural forms (Puranam 
et al. 2013). In such cases, any increase in external sales may come at the expense of internally-governed 
transfers. Such substitution in the firm boundary decision will generate a third testable pattern: 
Proposition 3: External IT use will lead to increases in external transfers and decreases in 
internal transfers, significantly decreasing the ITR. 
Without additional information, the likelihoods of these competing propositions are ambiguous. Thus, the 
main net effect is ultimately an empirical question. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
18 
 
3.4. 
Heterogeneity & Mechanism Tests 
Countervailing mechanisms underly these propositions, and may be leveraged to deepen insight. 
Moreover, our interest in dynamics pushes us to investigate not just whether production chains tended to 
reorganize in response to the rise of the internet, but also why. As discussed above, plural governance 
theory points to a few contingencies of interest. 
We recognize that in the absence of sharp main-effect predictions, an “abductive” approach – one that 
characterizes potential explanations and then assesses their likely salience – is increasingly preferred, 
particularly in management research (King et al. 2021). Indeed, several of our tests, particularly with 
respect to different uses of IT, align with this style of investigation. Yet, given the theoretical importance 
of governance inseparability (Argyres and Liebeskind 2002), contractual complementarity (Novak and 
Stern 2009), cross-mode learning (Heide 2003; Anderson et al. 2019), production constraints (Puranam et 
al. 2013), and past value chain commitments (Jacobides and Hitt 2005) in the related literature, we draw 
out a few key contingences and their implications, here, before turning to the data. 
Our empirical approach takes the downstream vertical organization of U.S. manufacturing plants, pre-
internet, as given. Thus, we do not seek to identify distinct drivers of plural governance in our data. This 
is primarily because our core research question centers on the dynamics arising from a rapid and far-
reaching technological advance. In addition, core drivers of plural organization need not be mutually 
exclusive.9 However, to the extent that different organizational drivers of plural governance play an 
important role in vertical production chain organization, as described above, we expect pre-internet plural 
selling, significant within-firm vertical linkages, and limited production capacity to each have the 
potential to amplify organizational responses to external IT through the channels of flexibility and cross-
transaction complementarities and constraints. 
Further, to better understand the role of IT in shaping organizational design, we investigate 
interactions among different types of information technologies, a few of which are easily motivated, up 
 
9 Prior research emphasizes the challenges of disentangling specific mechanisms without strong assumptions 
(Puranam et al. 2013) or restrictions on the empirical context (Parmigiani 2007). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
19 
 
front. For instance, given the high fixed costs of EDI adoption (Bakos and Nault 1997), we anticipate that 
it will act as a substitute for external IT, all else equal. With regard to internal uses of IT, cross-mode 
interactions in plural forms can give rise to outcomes that conflict with common TCE-based intuitions. A 
useful case-in-point is “Fashion Inc.” described above (Jacobides and Billinger 2006). If generalizable in 
a broader population, we should observe complementary interactions between external IT and ERP, and, 
for similar reasons, external IT and production IT. We leave other IT interactions to post hoc exploration. 
 
4. Data 
Our analysis relies on a panel of detailed U.S. Census Bureau micro data collected at the plant level. The 
dependent variable and most controls come from the Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM). Stratified 
by size and industry, with response required by law, the ASM captures ~70% of sector-wide economic 
activity in the certainty subsample, alone.10 Establishment-level identifiers link to the 1999 Computer 
Network Use Supplement (CNUS) describing plant use of networked computers and other IT (Atrostic 
and Nguyen 2005, Ngyuen and Atrostic 2006), and to the 1992 and 2002 Census of Manufactures (CMF). 
Conducted every five years, the CMF covers the entire population of ~300,000 manufacturing 
establishments in the country. Establishment and firm identifiers in the Longitudinal Business Database 
(LBD) link plants to their parent firms and grant visibility to firm-level changes in asset composition 
beyond what is visible in the ASM, for which the sampling frame rotates every year ending in ‘4 or ‘9.11 
Because our identification strategy requires plants be observable in both full-census years, our results 
represent changes among plants that survived from 1992 to 2002. These tend to be larger and more 
vertically-integrated than the overall population, on average: the mean ITR for plants belonging to multi-
unit firms (single units are always zero) is 12% in our analysis sample, versus 5.4% in the 2002 CMF. 
Thus, our findings may be interpreted as most-meaningful for the larger multi-unit plants that also 
 
10 Smaller plants are randomly included in the sample frame every five years. For more details of the ASM 
methodology, see: https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/asm/technical-documentation/methodology.html. 
11 This will cause some – often smaller – units of firms to become unobservable beyond basic characteristics such as 
employment and primary industry (from the LBD). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
20 
 
account for the lion’s share of activity in this sector. 
Given our interest in plural forms of organization, we take steps to identify plural-selling versus 
“pure”-type plants that could have systematically different responses to IT-driven changes in 
coordination. We thus flag vertically-integrated “captive” plants that consistently transfer output 
exclusively within the firm in the pre-period, as well as non-integrated plants that sell exclusively outside 
the firm. We exclude from our initial sample plants for which the ITR is either 0 or above the 95th 
percentile for the three years available prior to the start of our estimation window. This leaves a core 
sample of approximately 5,600 establishments. Table 1 reports descriptive statistics from 1992 and 2002 
for key variables; Appendix Table A.1 presents their correlation matrix. 
4.1. Downstream Vertical Integration. Our main dependent variable, the internal transaction ratio 
(ITR), is the value of output transferred from the plant to other units within the firm for “further assembly, 
fabrication, or manufacture,” divided by total sales. The numerator directly captures output destined for 
further transformation in a vertically-integrated production process. As such, it neatly distinguishes 
vertical integration from horizontal diversification, which is often difficult with other available measures 
(Hitt 1999, Villalonga 2004). Normalizing by total sales (the sum of internal and external transfers, per 
the survey instructions) identifies the relative “internal intensity” of plural selling at the plant. It also 
reduces skewness and eases comparisons across plants of different sizes. 
This continuous ratio accounts for interdependencies between internal and external transfers that may 
affect ultimate organizational design. For example, if, as in Proposition 1, the value of internal transfers 
remains relatively stable while external transfers change, reduced vertical integration will be observable 
only by comparing such ratios before and after external IT adoption. We explore changes in unscaled 
internal transfers and total sales, separately, to look for patterns consistent with Propositions 2 or 3. 
The ITR measure varies more flexibly and frequently than the changes in facility ownership or 
industry participation used to study vertical reorganization in prior work. In the overall ASM, the 
percentage of value that stays within the firm is frequently zero and sometimes 100%, with every value 
in-between. In our analysis sample, the mean ITR for 1992 is 14%, falling to 12% in 2002. There is also a 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
21 
 
great deal of year-over-year variance at the plant level, consistent with flexibility in plural governance. 
4.2. IT Data. To investigate the impact of an internet-driven change in coordination costs, we leverage 
the 1999 CNUS, which provides detailed data on plant-level use of a variety of IT soon after the rise of 
the commercial internet in 1995. Specifically, it asks whether a particular type of information exchange is 
taking place with suppliers, customers, or other internal company units, as well as what type of network 
the plant uses. The types of information covered are: design specifications, product descriptions or 
catalog, demand projections, order status, production schedules, inventory data, and logistics or 
transportation. To facilitate interpretation and analysis, we construct indices of external IT and internal IT 
(see Appendix B for details). In our sample, 53% of establishments adopted some type of externally-
focused use of the internet by 1999. Table 1 reports a mean value for external IT of 0.13, equivalent to 
nearly two “practices,” while the standard deviation of 0.19 is equivalent to nearly three practices. In 
contrast, the mean of the internal IT index is much higher at 0.36, or roughly five practices, with a 
likewise greater standard deviation of 0.38. This suggests greater penetration but also greater variation in 
cross-unit (internal) use of the internet by 1999. 
The CNUS also covers many uses of IT for production management, which we index to capture 
production IT; binary indicators for EDI and ERP are also available. Because these three measures do not 
rely on internet infrastructure, we can only rely on cross-sectional variation in these measures to identify 
their effects. Our only quantitative measure of IT investment comes from the ASM, in the form of capital 
expenditures for computer and data-processing equipment, which Census collects from 1992 onward 
(which we log - details in Appendix B). 
A relevant consideration for plant-level analysis is the locus of decision-making authority for IT 
adoption. While IT use is commonly measured at the firm level, prior work demonstrates that U.S. plants 
frequently have local discretion over IT purchases (McElheran 2014). Our data do not directly reveal 
where IT decisions are made. However, we can probe within-firm variation in external IT to gauge the 
extent of establishment-level discretion with respect to IT use. Specifically, for each plant in the CNUS, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
22 
 
we identify the extensive margin of any type of external IT being used, and then compute the fraction of 
CNUS establishments12 within each firm with at least some use. Figure 1 shows the distribution of firms 
in our sample, arranged by quartile according to the percentage of a firm’s facilities with external IT. 
Intermediate levels of usage dominate: 66% have within-firm usage rates between 20-60%. In contrast, 
only 17% have rates between 0-20%, and only 4% exceed 80%. From this, we infer that modelling IT use 
at the establishment level is both conceptually and empirically sound. 
4.3. Controls. A particular concern for identifying the effect of shifts in coordination costs is whether the 
ITR might shift, instead, due to internal productivity improvements (Hitt 1999, Jacobides and Hitt 2005). 
While we view this as an important mechanism to include in our assessment of how IT ultimately affects 
vertical design, we also explore the implications of partialing out improvements in a plant’s productivity. 
We leverage an estimate of plant total factor productivity (TFP) provided in the ASM (Cooper et al. 
1999). We also control for overall firm composition (including non-manufacturing establishments) with 
the logged count of all sites belonging to the firm (in the LBD).13 Because both TFP and firm composition 
may be endogenously related to IT use, we verify that all reported results are robust to their exclusion. 
Each plural-selling plant is embedded within a larger set of transactions within and between firms. 
While precisely mapping a given plant’s value chain network is beyond the reach of even Census data, we 
are nevertheless able to control for changes in a plant’s downstream demand both within the firm and in 
the external market (see Appendix B). We also include two controls for the presence of competition in the 
plant’s primary industry (see Ray et al. 2009). Other plant-level and time-varying controls include on-
hand inventory (Milgrom and Roberts 1988), employee skill mix (Fichman and Melville 2014), and 
complexity of the production process proxied by the number of products (Forbes and Lederman 2009). 
5. Empirical Approach 
Following Section 3, we wish to understand the impact of IT investments arising from the introduction of 
 
12 We compute firm-level ratios within the CNUS sample, as IT use is not observable outside the survey frame. 
13 Controls based on firm-wide employment yield similar results but are omitted for brevity. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
23 
 
the commercial internet on the relative intensity of ownership-based control over vertical transfers, while 
allowing for cross-transaction complements and constraints. Given that we observe annual data, we 
aggregate shipments and internal transfers by plant-year, focusing on the share of the value destined for 
within the firm. Using this internal transaction ratio (ITR), we estimate the following linear model 
𝐼𝑇𝑅௜௧ൌ𝛼൅𝛽𝐸𝑋𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑁𝐴𝐿_𝐼𝑇௜௧൅𝛾𝑍௜௧൅𝜇௜൅𝜏௧൅𝜀௜௧ 
 
 
(1) 
over two periods, 1992 and 2002.14 EXTERNAL_IT is a measure of the intensity with which external IT 
has been adopted at the plant. Both the production unit and the econometrician observe characteristics that 
vary at the plant level over time and may influence the net benefits of external versus internal transfers. 
We incorporate plant fixed effects to control for unobserved time-invariant plant characteristics and year 
indicators to absorb time-varying macroeconomic factors that might affect the organization of production 
chain activities for reasons unrelated to IT use at the plant level. Zit denotes a vector of controls as 
described in section 4.3. 
5.1. Timing. Our start and end dates represent the complete census years bracketing the introduction and 
diffusion of the commercial internet. Critically, our panel starts before the internet is available, so 
EXTERNAL_IT in (1) is zero for all plants in 1992. This provides a clean “pre-treatment” period before 
various applications emerge to exploit the internet’s new open platform. The CNUS survey is for 1999; 
by then, the diffusion of internet use was well under way, particularly across the larger plants prominent 
in our sample. We thus observe differences in IT adoption that took place between the introduction of the 
internet in 1995 and 1999 across the manufacturing sector. 
Significant IT-related changes are widely understood to appear with a lag (Brynjolfsson and Hitt 
2003, Tambe and Hitt 2012). Thus, we take the next full economic census in 2002 as a useful end-date for 
our analysis sample. Not only does this allow potentially-critical organizational adjustment to take place, 
it grants visibility to the universe of U.S. manufacturing plants in both years, yielding the largest and 
most-representative panel possible, including all key controls (see Section 4 and Appendix B). 
 
14 Estimating equation (1) using robust clustered standard errors yields identical results to a cross-sectional two-
period difference regression. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
24 
 
5.2. Functional Form. Note that the dependent variable is bounded by 0 and 1, thus we view our core 
estimation results as a linear approximation to an underlying nonlinear model. We also further examine 
the robustness of our results to alternative nonlinear approaches that make a different set of parametric 
assumptions, in particular panel fractional probit and tobit models. See Section 6. 
5.3. Endogeneity and Causal Interpretation. Our approach shares similarities with prior work that 
estimates the relationship between IT and organizational design by regressing IT investments on firm 
boundary decisions (e.g., Hitt 1999, Ray et al. 2009). Strong assumptions are typically needed to interpret 
this relationship as causal, and we address the standard concerns with instrumental variables estimation, 
timing falsification tests, and other tests of the robustness of a causal interpretation, below. 
6. Results 
6.1. Baseline Findings 
In Table 2 we estimate equation (1) to explore the relationship between the ITR and external IT. 
Consistent with prior work using dependent variables bounded between zero and one (e.g., Athey and 
Stern 2002), the “within” R-squared values in the first four columns are fairly low; we therefore also 
report R-squared statistics incorporating the explanatory power of the plant-level fixed effects, which 
account for any time-invariant plant-level factors. Column 1 correlates the external IT index with the ITR 
without additional controls. Column 2 adds a number of controls for possible time-varying confounds; 
column 3 adds controls for TFP and parent-firm composition. The coefficient of roughly -0.06 (significant 
at the 1% level) remains practically unchanged and indicates a one-standard-deviation increase in external 
IT use (roughly three external uses of the internet) would be associated with a 1.14 percentage-point 
lower ITR, on average. This represents an 8% decline from the 1992 mean of 14%. 
Column 4 reports estimates that are robust to the inclusion of the other IT measures. This is useful for 
ruling out a number of alternative IT-based influences on organizational design. The coefficients on the 
other IT measures are relatively imprecise, with the exception of production IT. Note that this pattern of 
imprecise estimates could be related to strong interdependencies between external IT and the other IT 
measures, as discussed in Section 3.4. Appendix Table A.1 indicates interdependencies in adoption, as 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
25 
 
external IT has a pairwise correlation with internal IT and production IT of 0.56 and 0.49, respectively, 
that are significant at the one-percent level. To investigate the stand-alone effect of other margins of IT 
use, we also tested whether coefficients on internal IT and generic IT investment remain imprecise when 
estimated without the other IT controls. This was, indeed, the case (we do not report noisy coefficients in 
the interest of brevity), further justifying our focus on interpreting the effects of external IT.15 In contrast, 
production IT has a significant negative stand-alone coefficient, despite its apparently “internal” 
orientation. We return to this in our exploration of heterogeneity in the main effects, below. 
The final two columns in Table 2 analyze the numerator and denominator of the ITR separately, 
allowing us to assess which of the competing propositions in Section 3.3 is more consistent with our data. 
Column 5 reports a significant negative relationship between logged nominal internal transfers and 
external IT use: a one-standard-deviation increase in external IT is associated with a 20% reduction16 in 
internal transfers, all else equal. The average plant had $18.1M in internal transfers in 1992; this thus 
represents a roughly $3.6M reduction at the mean.17 
In column 6, a one-standard-deviation increase in external IT is associated with ~ 4% higher total 
value shipped. This represents an increase of $4.5M, only a fraction of the $119.5M mean value in 1992. 
This is net of any reductions in internal transfers, as the latter are a component of total value shipped (by 
definition). Thus, external sales increased not only in absolute terms, but also “made up” for the fall in 
internal transfers observed in column 5, which would have pulled down this measure. Overall, Table 2 
reveals a pattern most consistent with the amplifying pattern of Proposition 3: the ITR not only falls 
significantly with external IT use, but the level of internal activity does, as well. 
6.2. Instrumental Variable Estimates 
We have so far treated external IT usage as exogenous. To investigate how standard endogeneity concerns 
might influence our findings, we instrument for external IT in Table 3. Our first measure uses certain 
 
15 We thus also found no significant interaction between external IT and these other IT measures (not reported). 
16 Because the dependent variable is logged, taking exponents yields a roughly 20% reduction. 
17 The specification reported in column 5 includes an added control for total value shipped to address issues related 
to the effects of plant scale on internal transfers. This result is, however, robust to omitting this control. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
26 
 
firm-level IT capabilities to instrument for external IT use at the plant. We expect that IT expertise 
elsewhere in the firm makes adoption of external IT at the focal plant more likely, without directly 
impacting local organizational design considerations. We capture IT fitting this description with a CNUS-
based measure of CAD/CAE (computer-aided design and computer-aided engineering) at other plants 
within the same firm, calculated as a percentage of observed plants belonging to the same firm. This 
should be a useful proxy for general IT capabilities within the firm, whereas adoption elsewhere should 
not directly improve the focal plant’s ability to coordinate with external partners. 
Our second instrument uses adoption of external IT by competing firms in the same three-digit 
NAICS industry in other locations where the focal firm has plants. This instrument is similar to ones used 
in Forman, et al. (2008). The identifying assumption is that adoption by competitors in other geographic 
markets where the firm also has a plant will increase the likelihood of external internet use by a plant 
belonging to the same parent. Such internal knowledge- or capabilities-sharing regarding external IT 
should decrease the local costs of external IT adoption, but again should not directly influence local costs 
and benefits of transacting inside and/or outside the firm. 
Our final instrument is based on the FCC’s Hybrid Cost Proxy Model (HCPM – see Prieger 2003). 
The HCPM is an economic engineering model that computes the cost of providing telecommunications 
services based on a location’s geographic terrain and subscriber density. Increases in local proxy costs 
should be associated with higher operating costs for internet service providers, likely leading to higher 
adoption costs or lower service quality for internet at the plant level.18 
The top portion of Table 3 presents the first stage results of our LIML instrumental variable 
regressions. We present only the coefficient estimates for variables representing the above maintained 
exclusion restriction assumptions; a full set of first-stage coefficient estimates are available in Table A.2. 
Column 1 includes only adoption of CAD/CAE within the firm, Column 2 includes only non-local 
competitor use of external IT, Column 3 includes only the proxy cost model, Column 4 uses both 
 
18 Proxy costs are not available from the model for about one third of the wire centers; we follow Prieger (2003) in 
using the proxy cost of the nearest wire center; where missing, we use the proxy cost of the closest ZIP code. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
27 
 
competitor adoption and proxy cost instruments, and Column 5 presents the results using all instruments 
together. The first-stage correlations all have the expected sign, with F-statistics ranging from 9.54 to 
227.55, at or above the Stock and Yogo (2005) critical threshold for weak instruments using the criteria of 
maximal LIML size greater than 10%. 
The bottom portion of Table 3 presents the second-stage results. As in the top portion of Table 3, we 
present only coefficient estimates for key variables; the complete set of coefficient estimates is available 
in Table A.3. Although the direction of the estimated effect is stable across specifications, magnitudes are 
generally larger than the comparable OLS estimates, and significances vary. We speculate that the 
difference in estimates across the two models may be, in part, due to heterogeneous effects of external IT 
on internal transfers; that is, overall, the local average treatment effect (LATE) for external IT use may be 
largest for plants that are most-influenced by competitor adoption of IT, IT-related capabilities within the 
firm, and the local costs of delivering telecommunications services. Overall, this supports a causal 
interpretation that external IT use led to a decline in the percentage of internal transfers, however the 
average treatment effect is difficult to pin down due to heterogeneity in compliance across establishments. 
6.3. Robustness: Timing Falsification, Nonlinear Models, and Additional Controls 
A standard identification concern in studies involving IT adoption is reverse causality (Tambe and Hitt 
2012), which is addressed by the IV estimation above. However, we are able to further probe the timing 
of organizational and technological change in our panel setting. A timing falsification exercise, where we 
examine whether observed external IT adoption in 1999 was associated with changes in ITR that 
preceded the introduction of the commercial internet further supports a causal interpretation of the 
patterns in Table 2 (see discussion in Appendix B and columns 1 – 4 of Table A.4). Moreover, we find 
our results to be robust to other functional forms such as nonlinear fractional response models and one-
sided and two-sided tobit models. Both approaches yield consistent patterns (discussed in Appendix B 
and reported in columns 5 – 8 of Table A.4). 
Another alternative explanation is the potential for unobserved changes in the firm composition (i.e., 
firm composition changes not addressed by our controls in Table 2) to affect both IT use and local plant-
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
28 
 
level governance decisions. Adoption and use of IT systems have been shown to influence the likelihood 
of mergers and acquisitions, or mergers and acquisitions (M&A) (Benitez et al. 2018, Cao et al. 2022). 
External IT and other margins of IT could therefore be correlated with M&A, and, by changing firm 
structure, M&A transactions could influence plant-level ITR, creating an omitted variable bias. We 
therefore explore the robustness of our results to additional controls for changes in parent firm structure. 
The ASM contains detailed information linking establishments to their parent firms, and, through linkages 
to the LBD, we are able to observe how these change over time. Using these data, we construct three 
controls: (1) whether the plant has changed firms between 1992 and 2002, (2) the percentage of other 
establishments in the focal plant’s firm in 1992 that have changed firms by 2002 (only if observed in 
2002), and (3) the growth in the size (measured by number of establishments) of the focal plant’s 1992 
firm between 1992 and 2002 (only if nonzero in 2002). The results, included in Appendix Tables A.5 and 
A.6, show that our main findings are extremely robust to the inclusion of these variables. 
6.4. Within-Firm Heterogeneity and Mechanism Tests 
The findings reported thus far are only averages. In Table 4, we exploit the richness of our empirical 
setting to explore variation in the effects of external IT depending upon the ex-ante organization of 
production within the firm and other uses of IT. 
6.4.1. Plural vs. “Pure” Types. Column 1 mimics Column 3 of Table 2, but includes in the sample 
plants that consistently either never or almost-always transferred output outside the firm in the pre-sample 
period. These are “pure”-type plants that can be characterized discretely, either “integrated” in the sense 
of transferring output only to other units in the firm, or “not-integrated”– i.e., using the market for all 
vertical transactions. The magnitude of the point estimate for external IT goes down– by roughly one-half 
– once these non-plural plants are included in the sample. In column 2, in the same less-restricted sample, 
we interact the index of external internet uses with an indicator for plants that consistently pursued plural 
selling in the pre-sample period. Here, we observe that all of the reduction in the ITR associated with 
external IT arose among the plurally-governed plants. This is consistent with greater flexibility to adapt to 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
29 
 
external shocks in plural organizational forms (e.g., Chondrakis et al. 2022), as discussed in Section 3. 
6.4.2. Internal Vertical Linkages. Column 3 explores the importance of considering another dimension 
of the ex-ante vertical organization of production within the firm: significant internal vertical linkages 
across production units within the firm. Returning to our main sample, we construct an indicator for 
plants that have a potentially important “internal customer” somewhere within the same firm prior to the 
internet. To calculate this vertical interdependence, we follow Atalay et al. (2014) to identify plants 
whose output is used by other plants within the firm as part of a non-trivial link in the vertical production 
chain. Such a link is presumed to exist between a plant in industry A and a plant in industry B when 
industry A produces a commodity constituting at least five percent19 of the intermediate materials 
purchased by firms in industry B, according to the 2002 Benchmark Input-Output tables (www.bea.gov). 
We observe in column 3 that declines in the ITR associated with external internet use are concentrated 
among plants that had a non-trivial pre-existing vertical linkage to another unit within the parent firm. 
This pattern could arguably be counter-intuitive without the plural governance perspective. Consider 
that these plants have a greater demand for internal coordination, pre-internet (e.g., McElheran 2014). 
Further, vertical interdependence in production is considered to be among the most-costly organizational 
designs to coordinate (Thompson 1967, Dewan and Ren 2011). Thus, this approach identifies a subset of 
plants whose organization of transactions, pre-internet, entailed significant internal coordination costs. If 
this were optimal, for instance because of strategic needs to integrate or inability to coordinate vertically 
without co-ownership of facilities (e.g. Novak and Stern 2009), one would expect an increase in internal 
activity, once internet-based coordination relaxed the coordination constraint. Instead, easing coordination 
costs led to significant reductions in downstream vertical integration. 
This is consistent with strong cross-transaction interdependencies in plurally-governed organizations 
(Puranam et al. 2013), as discussed in Section 3. Other constraints could also be at work (see below), 
including past commitments and organizational inertia (Jacobides and Hitt 2005). These potential drivers 
 
19 Our results are robust to using different thresholds for identifying a “substantial vertical link.” 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
30 
 
of plural forms need not be mutually exclusive, and disentangling them is beyond the scope of our study. 
This heterogeneity test, however, reinforces our interpretation of Table 2: if adoption of external IT 
primarily only increased sales (Proposition 1, the “denominator only” effect), the impact should be 
observable outside this sub-population; yet the un-interacted coefficient is small and imprecise. 
6.4.3. Constraints on Scaling. Column 4 explores the effect of physical constraints on scaling 
production, another hypothesized driver of plural governance. Here, we take advantage of the Census 
Bureau’s Plant Capacity Utilization (PCU) Survey to observe production constraints in the pre-sample 
period.20 An indicator of high capacity utilization – greater than 75% in this specification – amplifies the 
effect of external internet use. While the interaction term is only significant at the 10% level, the linear 
combination for more-constrained plants yields a coefficient of -0.117 and is significant at the 1% level. 
This coefficient is -0.140 and significant at the 1% level for plants that were using 80% or more of their 
pre-period available capacity (not reported for brevity). 
Two observations are in order. First, the direct effect of external IT in this specification is significant. 
This suggests that less-constrained plants (i.e., those with greater excess capacity) leveraged the internet 
to become less vertically integrated. This is consistent with facilities having larger minimum efficient 
scale using enhanced external coordination to find supply-side economies of scale outside the firm 
(Harrigan 1985, Kapoor 2013). A “denominator only” effect (Proposition 1) may be the most appropriate 
explanation for how vertical integration declines in this sub-group. Second, however, the large negative 
interaction terms suggests that, among plants where production scaling was most-constrained, external 
transfers may have come at the expense of internal transfers, more consistent with Proposition 3. 
6.4.4. Robustness & Heterogeneity in IT Usage. We cannot directly observe coordination costs – nor 
how they shift with the use of internet-based IT. However, we gain insight by examining different 
approaches to between-firm coordination. Column 5 of Table 4 splits external IT by whether specific uses 
represent the sharing of static versus dynamic information. Specifically, we designate the sharing of 
 
20 For more details on the survey, see Gorodnichenko and Shapiro (2011). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
31 
 
design and product specifications or catalog information as “static,” while we designate logistics or 
transportation, on-hand inventory, production schedules, order status, or demand projections as 
“dynamic.” While the former can still have coordination benefits, we conjecture that sharing real-time 
information about supply and demand will more directly mitigate costly coordination of vertically-linked 
activities having to operate without the control benefits of co-ownership. Indeed, we observe that dynamic 
coordination over the internet has a stronger association with declines in the ITR, consistent with this 
mechanism. 
Column 6 explores robustness to another dimension of how we define external IT. While prior work 
emphasizes the benefits of coordinating both upstream and downstream in production chains (e.g., 
Simchi-Levi et al. 1999, Lee and Whang 2000), column 6 shows that our core results are robust to 
excluding upstream coordination from the external IT index. The coefficient on external IT when it 
includes only measures of downstream-focused (Customer-Only) coordination is -0.046, a slightly lower 
point estimate but within the 95% confidence interval for the coefficient in column 3 of Table 2. 
The next three columns test the intuitions developed in Section 3.4 regarding heterogeneity based on 
other uses of IT. Recall that for all three of these IT measures, we cannot exploit a clean pre- and post-
internet shift in this measure, as it is not dependent on the new internet infrastructure; thus, these effects 
are identified off of cross-sectional variation. Column 7 explores the extent to which internet-based 
coordination substitutes for earlier technologies – in particular, EDI. The interaction effect between EDI 
and internet-based external IT is positive, indicating that plants already on an EDI network demonstrated 
less of a response to new internet-based IT, as anticipated: the linear combination of the two is smaller 
than the other main effects (i.e., column 3 of Table 2) and only significant at the ten-percent level. 
Column 8 reports on interactions with ERP. While we had anticipated a positive interaction, in line with 
the “Fashion Inc.” case study (Jacobides and Billinger 2005), the interaction effect is not statistically 
significant in our setting. 
That said, we had similarly anticipated a positive interaction between external IT and production 
technology aimed at making shop-floor production more productive – and possibly more responsive to 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
32 
 
external demand. Column 9 shows that almost all of the effect of external IT can be found among plants 
that were also using IT for internal production management. The linear combination is large at -0.094 and 
significant at the 1% level. This is consistent with the importance of productive capabilities influencing 
vertical scope (Hitt 1999; Jacobides and Hitt 2005), and complementarities between certain types of 
internal and external IT in the firm boundary decision. 
6.4.5. Robustness in Firm-Level Analysis. While our focal analyses does not seek to estimate the 
aggregate impact of external IT across the entire firm, the plants we track across this pivotal decade are 
embedded within broader firm contexts. However, data limitations constrain our ability to incorporate this 
broader context by conducting a firm-level analysis. Recall that our sample consists of plants that exist 
across both years of our data, have received the long survey of the ASM in 1992 and 2002 (which allows 
us to observe internal plant transfers), and have received the CNUS survey in 1999. As a result of this 
approach, we do not observe activity from all establishments within a firm – nor even all of its 
manufacturing establishments. Moreover, for those units we do observe in at least one year, entry and exit 
make it difficult to identify the effects of external IT on transaction flows at the firm level using our 
baseline two-period model. 
Given these constraints, we can only explore the robustness of our findings to a firm-level analysis by 
exploiting cross-sectional variance in our 2002 data to assess the effects of external IT across a broader 
set of establishments. Results are presented in Appendix Table A.7, sample construction details and 
discussion may be found in Appendix B. On average, we find a much noisier relationship between 
external IT and downstream vertical integration when aggregated to the firm level. Such an approach 
obscures the margins of variation underlying the establishment-level findings, and points to the 
importance of the unit-level approach in plural governance research (see Section 2.4). Heterogeneity 
among firms can be observed, however, in line with our original predictions: firms comprised largely of 
plural-selling establishments, pre-internet, show the same digitally-enabled re-organization away from 
vertical integration. This again points to greater flexibility among plurally-governed organizations and the 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
33 
 
importance of past organizational design choices. 
7. Discussion & Conclusion 
This study explores IT-related changes in the vertical organization of production chains from a new 
perspective that complements prior work by combining plural governance theories of the firm with 
unusually detailed administrative data at the establishment level, both of which are novel to this literature. 
This approach yields new insights into how digital coordination may substitute for ownership in the 
vertical organization of production in modern firms. 
In a large sample of plants representing a large majority of economic activity across the sector, we 
find a robust causal relationship between internet-enhanced external coordination and a decline in 
downstream vertical integration in U.S. manufacturing in the early 2000s. Levels of market-based activity 
not only increased, but external sales also rose at the expense of within-firm transfers, consistent with our 
predictions. A number of pre-internet organizational design features further augmented the observed 
vertical integration declines, on net, as did certain uses of internal IT. 
Our exploration of heterogeneity arising from ex-ante organizational design required the development 
of new intuitions regarding IT and vertical integration, extending beyond classic TCE-based predictions. 
Recognition has grown in the past twenty years that vertical integration decisions will be shaped not only 
by transaction-level features, but also by cross-transaction interdependencies and past design choices. 
While this may incorporate certain TCE-based mechanisms (e.g., Argyres and Zenger 2012), a growing 
body of work calls for a richer view of organizational design and dynamics – a call we answer in this 
study. Plural governance both fits our empirical context and leverages these advances in the theory of the 
firm to shed light on how interdependencies across governance modes and time periods may amplify 
organizational adjustments to shocks such as the internet. 
Testing these more-nuanced predictions, we found that plants that were plurally governed before the 
rise of the internet demonstrated greater responsiveness to external IT, consistent with greater flexibility 
in plural forms despite the higher-cost organizational design. This is useful not only for understanding 
dynamics in organizational design (Nickerson and Silverman 2003, Argyres and Bigelow 2010, Anderson 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
34 
 
et al. 2019), but also for learning which organizational features may help or hinder adjustment in the face 
of novel IT. This is of rising interest, as “digital transformation” becomes a topic of urgent managerial 
attention (Bharadwaj et al. 2013, Westerman et al. 2014, Vial et al. 2019). 
We also found – perhaps surprisingly – that some of the most-constrained plants demonstrated the 
greatest net adjustments. Plants with significant ex-ante vertical interdependencies within the firm or with 
limited available production capacity more-aggressively shifted away from ownership-based governance 
of their downstream transactions. This is consistent with cross-mode interdependencies arising from 
organizational constraints and/or “dual mode” capabilities that shaped the overall system of transactions, 
once external coordination costs were reduced. The plural governance frame is essential to explaining 
these patterns in the results. 
Finally, extending plural-governance intuitions to examine interdependencies among different uses of 
IT yielded new insights, as well. In contrast to prior findings of substitution (Dewan and Ren 2011, Rai et 
al. 2015), we found that internally-focused production IT reinforced the effect of internet-based external 
coordination, consistent with complementarity in the firm boundary decision. Cross-unit coordination via 
the internet within the firm had relatively no effect, likely because of asymmetries in how the widespread 
and open internet platform shifted internal versus external coordination compared to pre-internet IT. 
The potential for IT to alter the vertical organizational design of firms by lowering information and 
coordination costs has been a topic of vital interest across management and economics research (Malone 
et al. 1987; Gurbaxani and Whang 1991; Hitt 1999; Baker and Hubbard 2003, 2004; Afuah 2003; Ray et 
al. 2009; Dewan and Ren 2001, inter alia). Yet, while other aspects of IT and firm structure have been 
explored, such as M&A (Benitez et al. 2018, Cao et al. 2022) and alliances (Tafti et al. 2013, Liu and 
Ravichandran 2015, Ravichandran and Giura 2019), the relationship between IT and ownership-based 
control of vertical production has received comparatively little attention of late – despite dramatic 
changes in both IT and production chain (including supply chain) organization in recent decades. 
Consider, first, the nature and rate of innovation in IT. The rise of the commercial internet rapidly 
ushered in a widespread availability of open, low-cost communication standards and greater ease of use 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
35 
 
across a broad range of IT applications. Its implications extend far beyond our study, which focuses on 
the internet’s initial diffusion in the mid-1990s and early 2000s. Yet, by examining the introduction of 
this paradigm shift in IT, we can more-cleanly identify its effects, including disentangling distinct 
margins of use and ruling out a large number of alternative explanations. The common absence of a 
distinct “pre-treatment” period, not to mention systematic measures, represent ongoing challenges for 
empirical studies of the economic effects of innovative IT (e.g., McElheran 2018). 
Further, by directly examining vertical transfers in interdependent production processes, we shed light 
on a margin of structural reorganization that has been inaccessible in standard data sets. In particular, the 
production chain reorganization we observe took place without costly changes in facility ownership. This 
flexible and more-continuous vertical dis-integration, and the extent to which it may have grown with 
accelerating digitization subsequent to our data, is an important question in need of further investigation. 
Our study also sheds light on mechanisms with important managerial implications. Notably, we find 
that plurally-governed plants were disproportionately responsive to changes in IT use, suggesting that this 
organizational design may ease the response to IT-related shocks. While “pure” organizational types may 
have been less-responsive for strategic reasons beyond the reach of our data, our study suggests that the 
dynamic response to novel IT use has deep organizational roots. Practically speaking, therefore, managers 
seeking to exploit innovations in IT should consider whether the design of control mechanisms within the 
organization – e.g., the extent of vertical integration -- supports IT-related objectives. This a specific 
example of more-general arguments in favor of strategic alignment between features of the organizational 
context and desired uses of IT (e.g., Mithas et al. 2013, Bharadwaj et al. 2013). Even more-concretely, we 
find that dynamic coordination (related to logistics, order status, or on-hand inventory) and specific 
combinations of external IT and internal production technology disproportionately eased external 
coordination challenges. This aligns with a growing recognition that particular applications of IT may be 
more important than sheer levels of investment (e.g., Dewan and Ren 2011) 
Evolution in production chain organization and management has proceeded alongside advances in IT. 
Recognition is now quite widespread that value chains have become more dispersed, lean, and dependent 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
36 
 
on non-ownership control mechanisms to align and coordinate supply and demand across time and space. 
Our study points to a causal relationship between this trend and the use of internet-based IT. That said, 
strict causation (running from IT use to changes in production chain organization) may not be the only 
relationship of interest – particularly as cycles of digitization accelerate. Understanding complementary 
and reinforcing cycles of digital and organizational innovation is becoming increasingly important as 
rates of change accelerate (e.g., Brynjolfsson et al. 2021) 
In response, a burgeoning research area seeks to understanding the relationship between IT and 
organizations through the lens of complementarities (e.g., Bresnahan et al. 2002, Tambe et al. 2012, 
Brynjolfsson and McElheran 2016, Puranam et al. 2013, Wu et al. 2019; Brynjolfsson et al. 2021). If 
payoffs from one organizational decision are increasing in the presence of another, their co-movement is 
inherently informative about how shifts in the cost of one complement (e.g., information exchange) 
should impact another (e.g., organizational design). From this perspective, our results can be viewed as an 
example of the “correlation” test for complementarities (Brynjolfsson and Milgrom 2013) between IT and 
organizational design. How this may affect firm performance – and variation in returns to IT use –is 
another vital question for future investigation. 
Finally, our study brings downstream vertical organization into focus, despite an overwhelming focus 
on upstream “make-vs-buy” decisions in prior work. It also highlights the importance of heterogeneity 
across plants, as well as across distinct uses of IT. These distinctive features of our approach shed new 
light on how firms adopt, combine, and adapt to novel technologies. 
Certain limitations of our study are worth bearing in mind. First, we acknowledge that any study that 
relies on observational data must be cautious with causal interpretations, and, while we address a large 
number of standard identification concerns, there are limits to what is possible, even in the detailed 
Census Bureau data. In addition, we cannot rule out unobserved heterogeneity at an even lower level of 
aggregation (e.g., at the transaction level) that may be worth exploring and may yield distinct empirical 
and theoretical implications. Further, our econometric approach and limitations of the data (e.g., the 
timing of complete census years) require that plants be observed over a ten-year difference. This may 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
37 
 
impose a survivor bias on our findings, suggesting care in assuming that these effects hold equally for 
new or at-risk firms that do not persist across our sample. Finally, our empirical setting is confined to the 
manufacturing sector and to a particular point in time when the diffusion of internet-based IT was quite 
rapid. Thus, the extent to which these findings generalize to other sectors and other generations of 
technology over time warrants additional study. 
Despite these limitations, our study forges new connections between underutilized theories of the firm 
and novel data to understand the relationship between IT use and organizational design. Ultimately, our 
approach opens up more new avenues of inquiry than it resolves, and much work remains to be done. We 
hope our findings inspire further exploration of these far-ranging and increasingly important phenomena. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
38 
 
References 
Adelman MA (1949) The large firm and its suppliers. Rev Econom. Statist. 31(2):113-118. 
Afuah, A (2003) Redefining firm boundaries in the face of the internet: are firms really shrinking? Acad. 
Management Rev. 28(1):34-53. 
Anderson Jr, E., Jiang X., Parker GG, Tan B (2019) Systems integration and the dynamics of partial 
outsourcing. Production Oper. Management, 28(2): 319-340. 
Argyres NS, Bigelow L (2010). Innovation, modularity, and vertical deintegration: Evidence from the 
early US auto industry. Organ. Sci. 21(4): 842-853. 
Argyres NS, Zenger TR (2012) Capabilities, transaction costs, and firm boundaries. Organ. Sci. 
23(6):1643-1657. 
Argyres NS, Liebeskind, JP (2002) Governance inseparability and the evolution of US biotechnology 
industry. J. of Econom. Behav. Organ.47(2): 197-219. 
Atalay E, Hortacsu A, Syverson C (2014) Vertical integration and input flows. Amer. Econom. Rev. 
104(4):1120-48. 
Athey S, Stern, S (2002) The impact of information technology on emergency health care reforms. RAND 
J. of Econom. (33): 399-432. 
Atrostic BK, Nguyen SV (2005) IT and productivity in U.S. Manufacturing: Do computer networks 
matter? Econom. Inquiry 43(3):493-506. 
Bai J, Jin W, McElheran K, Williams R (2018) The Effects of Technology Adoption on Firms, Supply 
Chains, and Rivals. SSRN working paper http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3259180. 
Baker GP, Hubbard TN (2003) Make versus buy in trucking: Asset ownership, job design, and 
information. Amer. Econom. Review 93(3):551-572. 
Baker GP, Hubbard TN (2004) Contractibility and asset ownership: On-board computers and governance 
in U.S. trucking. Quart. J. Econom. (119):1443-79. 
Bakos JY, Brynjolfsson E (1993) Information technology, incentives, and the optimal number of 
suppliers. J. Management. Inform Systems 10(2):37-53. 
Bakos JY, Nault BR (1997) Ownership and investment in electronic networks. Inform. Systems Res. 
8(4):321-341. 
Benitez J, Ray G, Henseler J (2018) Impact of Information Technology Infrastructure Flexibility on 
Mergers and Acquisitions. MIS Quart. 41(1):25-43. 
Bharadwaj A, El Sawy OA, Pavlou PA, Venkatraman NV (2013). Digital business strategy: toward a next 
generation of insights. MIS Quart. 471-482. 
Bloom N, Garicano L, Sadun R, Van Reenen J (2014) The distinct effects of information technologies 
and communication technologies on firm organization. Management. Sci. 60(12):2859-2885. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
39 
 
Bradach JL, Eccles RG (1989) Price, authority, and trust: From ideal types to plural forms. Annual 
Review of Sociology 97-118. 
Bresnahan TF, Brynjolfsson E, Hitt LM (2002) Information technology, workplace organization, and the 
demand for skilled labor: Firm-level evidence. Quart. J. Econom. 117(1):339-376. 
Brews P, Tucci C (2004) Exploring the structural effects of internetworking. Strategic Mgmt. J. 25: 429-
51. 
Brynjolfsson E, Hitt, LM (2003) Computing productivity: Firm-level evidence. Rev.Econom. Statist. 
85(4):793-808. 
Brynjolfsson E, Jin W, McElheran K (2021). The power of prediction: predictive analytics, workplace 
complements, and business performance. Business Econom. 56(4):217-239. 
Brynjolfsson E, Malone T, Gurbaxani V, Kambil A (1994) Does information technology lead to smaller 
firms? Management. Sci. 40(12):1645-1662. 
Brynjolfsson E, McAfee A (2014) The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of 
Brilliant Technologies. WW Norton & Company. 
Brynjolfsson E, McElheran, K. (2016). Data in action: data-driven decision making in US manufacturing. 
US Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies Paper No. CES-WP-16-06. 
Brynjolfsson E, Milgrom P (2013) Complementarity in organizations. Handbook of Organ. Economics, 
eds. R. Gibbons and J. Roberts. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 11-55 
Cao C, Ray G, Subramani M, Gupta A (2022). Enterprise Systems and the Likelihood of Horizontal, 
Vertical, and Conglomerate Mergers and Acquisitions. MIS Quart 46(2) 1227-1242. 
Chondrakis G, Melero E, Sako M (2022). The effect of coordination requirements on sourcing decisions: 
Evidence from patent prosecution services. Strategic Management J. 43(6):1141-1169. 
Clemons EK, Row MC (1992). Information technology and industrial cooperation: The changing 
economics of coordination and ownership. J. Mgmt. Info. Systems 9(2): 9-28. 
Clemons EK, Reddi SP, Row MC (1993) The impact of information technology on the organization of 
economic activity: the “move to the middle” hypothesis. J. Mgmt. Info. Systems 10(2):9-35. 
Coase RH (1937) The Nature of the Firm. Economica 4:386-405. 
Cooper R, Haltiwanger J, Power L (1999) Machine replacement and the business cycle: Lumps and 
bumps. Amer. Econom. Rev.89(4):921-946. 
David PA (1990) The dynamo and the computer: An historical perspective on the modern productivity 
paradox. Amer. Econom. Rev, 80(2): .355-361. 
de Fontenay, CC, Gans J. (2005) Vertical integration in the presence of upstream competition. RAND J. of 
Economics, 544-572. 
Dewan S, Michael SC, Min C (1998) Firm Characteristics and Investments in Information Technology: 
Scale and Scope Effects. Info. Systems Research. 9(3):219-232. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
40 
 
Dewan S, Ren F (2011) Information technology and firm boundaries: Impact on firm risk and return 
performance. Info. Systems Research. 22(2):369-388. 
Dutta S, Bergen M, Heide JB, John G (1995) "Understanding dual distribution: the case of reps and house 
accounts." J. of Law, Economics, & Organ. 11(1):189-204. 
Fichman RG, Melville NP (2014) How posture-profile misalignment in it innovation diminishes returns: 
Conceptual development and empirical demonstration. J. Mgmt. Info. Systems. 31(1): 203-240. 
Forbes S, Lederman M (2009) Adaptation and vertical integration in the airline industry. Amer. Econ. Rev 
99(5):1831-49. 
Forman C, Goldfarb A, Greenstein S (2005) How did location affect adoption of the commercial Internet? 
Global village vs. urban leadership. Journal of Urban Econom. 58(3): 389-420. 
Forman C, Goldfarb A, Greenstein S (2008) Understanding inputs into innovation: Do cities substitute for 
internal firm resources? J. Econom. Mgmt. Strat. 17(2):295-316. 
Gong F, Nault BR, Rahman MS (2016) Research note—an internet-enabled move to the market in 
logistics. Info. Systems Research. 27(2):440-452. 
Gorodnichenko Y, Shapiro MD (2011) Using the survey of plant capacity to measure capital utilization. 
US Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies Paper # CES-WP-11-19. 
Gurbaxani V, Whang S (1991) The impact of information systems on organizations and markets. 
Communications of the ACM 34(1):59-73. 
Harrigan KR (1985) Vertical integration and corporate strategy. Acad. Management J. 28(2):397-425. 
Heide JB (2003) Plural governance in industrial purchasing. J. of Marketing 67(4):18-29. 
Hitt LM (1999) Information technology and firm boundaries: Evidence from panel data. Info. Systems 
Research. 10(2):134-149. 
Hitt LM, Wu DJ, Zhou X (2002) Investment in enterprise resource planning: Business impact and 
productivity measures. J. Mgmt. Info. Systems. 19(1):71-98. 
Hubbard TN (2000) The demand for monitoring technologies: The case of trucking. Quart. J. Econom. 
115(2):533-560 
Jacobides MG, Billinger S (2006) Designing the boundaries of the firm: From “make, buy, or ally” to the 
dynamic benefits of vertical architecture. Org. Sci. 17(2):249-261. 
Jacobides MG, Hitt LM (2005) Losing sight of the forest for the trees? Productive capabilities and gains 
from trade as drivers of vertical scope. Strategic Management J. 26(13):1209-1227. 
Jovanovic B, Rousseau PL (2005) General purpose Technologies in Handbook of Economic Growth, ed. 
By P Aghion and SN Durlauf, 1(1181-1224). Elsevier, Chapter 18. 
Kapoor R (2013) Persistence of integration in the face of specialization: How firms navigated the winds 
of disintegration and shaped the architecture of the semiconductor industry. Organ. Sci. 24(4): 1195-
1213. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
41 
 
King, A., Goldfarb, B., & Simcoe, T. (2021). Learning from testimony on quantitative research in 
management. Academy of Management Review, 46(3), 465-488. 
Kretschmer T, Khashabi P (2020) Digital transformation and organization design: An integrated 
approach. California Management Review, 62(4): 86-104. 
Lafontaine F, Shaw K (2005). Targeting managerial control: Evidence from franchising. RAND Journal 
of Econom. 36(1): 131-150. 
Lafontaine F, Slade M (2007) Vertical integration and firm boundaries: The evidence. J. Econom. Lit. 
45(3):629-685. 
Lee HL, Padmanabhan V, Whang S (1997) Information distortion in the supply chain: The bullwhip 
effect. Management. Sci. 43(4):546-558. 
Lee HL, Whang S (2000) Information sharing in a supply chain. International. J. Manufacturing 
Technology and Management. 1(1):79-93. 
Leiblein MJ, Miller DJ (2003). An empirical examination of transaction‐and firm‐level influences on the 
vertical boundaries of the firm. Strategic Management J., 24(9):839- 859. 
Liu Y, Ravichandran T. (2015). Alliance experience, IT-enabled knowledge integration, and ex ante value 
gains. Organ. Sci. 26(2):511-530. 
Luo J, Baldwin CY, Whitney D E, Magee CL (2012). The architecture of transaction networks: a 
comparative analysis of hierarchy in two sectors. Indust. Corporate Change, 21(6):1307-1335. 
Malone T, Yates J, Benjamin RI (1987) Electronic markets and electronic hierarchies. Comm. of the ACM 
30(6):484-497. 
Mayer KJ, Nickerson JA (2005) Antecedents and performance implications of contracting for knowledge 
workers: Evidence from information technology services. Organ. Sci. 16(3): 25-242. 
McElheran K (2014). Delegation in multi‐establishment firms: Evidence from it purchasing. J. of 
Economics & Management Strategy, 23(2):225-258. 
McElheran, K (2018). Economic measurement of AI. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic 
Research. https://conference.nber.org/conf_papers/f114642.pdf. 
Ménard C (2012) Hybrid modes of organization. Alliances, joint ventures, networks, and other “strange” 
animals. Robert Gibbons et John Roberts. The Handbook of Organ. Econom: 1066-1108. 
Ménard C (2013). Plural forms of organization: Where do we stand? Managerial and Decision Econom. 
34(3-5):124-139. 
Mithas S, Tafti A, Mitchell W (2013). How a firm's competitive environment and digital strategic posture 
influence digital business strategy. MIS Quart.: 511-536. 
Monteverde K, Teece, DJ (1982) Supplier switching costs and vertical integration in the automobile 
industry. Bell J. of Economics, pp.206-213. 
Milgrom P, Roberts J (1988) Communication and inventory as substitutes in organizing production. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
42 
 
Scandinavian J. Econom. 90: 275-289. 
Nguyen S, Atrostic BK (2006) How businesses use information technology: Insights for measuring 
technology and productivity. CES Working Paper Series No. 06-15. 
 Nickerson, JA, Silverman, BS (2003). Why firms want to organize efficiently and what keeps them from 
doing so: Inappropriate governance, performance, and adaptation in a deregulated industry. Admin. 
Sci. Quart., 48(3), 433-465. 
Novak S, Stern S (2009). Complementarity among vertical integration decisions: Evidence from 
automobile product development. Management Sci., 55(2) 311-332. 
Parker GG, Anderson Jr, EG (2002). From buyer to integrator: The transformation of the supply‐chain 
manager in the vertically disintegrating firm. Production Oper. Management 11(1):75-91. 
Parmigiani A (2007) Why do firms both make and buy? An investigation of concurrent sourcing. 
Strategic Mgmt. J. 28(3):285-311. 
Prieger JE (2003) The supply side of the digital divide: Is there equal availability in the broadband 
internet access market? Economic Inquiry 41(2):346-363. 
Puranam P, Gulati R, Bhattacharya S (2013) How much to make and how much to buy? An analysis of 
optimal plural sourcing strategies. Strategic Management J., 34(10):1145-1161. 
Rai A, Arikan I, Pye J, Tiwana A (2015) Fit and misfit of plural sourcing Strategies and IT-enabled process 
integration capabilities. MIS Quart. 39(4):865-886. 
Ravichandran T, Giura SI (2019) Knowledge transfers in alliances: Exploring the facilitating role of 
information technology. Inform. Systems Res.30(3):726-744. 
Ray G, Wu D, Konana P (2009) Competitive environment and the relationship between IT and vertical 
integration. Info. Systems Res. 20(4):585-603. 
Ray G, Xue L, Barney JB (2013) Impact of information technology capital on firm scope and 
performance: The role of asset characteristics. Acad. of Management J. 56(4): 1125-1147. 
Rosenberg N, Trajtenberg M (2004) A general-purpose technology at work: The corliss steam engine in 
the late-nineteenth-century United States. J. Econom. History 64(1):61-99. 
Rothaermel, FT, Hitt MA, Jobe LA (2006). Balancing vertical integration and strategic outsourcing: 
effects on product portfolio, product success, and firm performance. Strategic Management J., 
27(11): 1033-1056. 
Santos FM, Eisenhardt KM (2005) Organizational boundaries and theories of organization. Organ. Sci. 
16(5):491-508. 
Simchi-Levi D, Kaminsky P, Simchi-Levi, E (1999). Designing and managing the supply chain: 
Concepts, strategies, and cases. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Sørensen SB, G Hoetker, MJ Leiblein, T Mellewigt (2022) Crossing the streams of plural governance 
research: Simultaneously considering franchising, dual distribution, and concurrent sourcing. J. of 
Management. ePub ahead of print: https://doi.org/10.1177/01492063221115061. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
43 
 
Stenbacka, R., & Tombak, M. (2012). Make and buy: Balancing bargaining power. J. of Econom. 
Behavior & Organization, 81(2), 391-402. 
Stock JH, Yogo M (2005) Testing for weak instruments in linear IV regression. In Identification and 
Inference for Econometric Models, ed. D. W. K. Andrews, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK, 80-108. 
Syverson C (2011). What determines productivity? J. of Econom. Literature, 49(2):326-65. 
Tafti A, Mithas S, Krishnan MS (2013) The effect of information technology–enabled flexibility on 
formation and market value of alliances. Management Sci. 59(1): 207-225. 
Tambe P, Hitt LM (2012) The productivity of information technology investments: New evidence from 
IT labor data. Info. Sys. Research 23(3): 599-617. 
Tambe P, Hitt LM, Brynjolfsson E (2012). The extroverted firm: How external information practices 
affect innovation and productivity. Management Sci. 58(5): 843-859. 
Thompson JD (1967). Organizations in Action: Social Science Bases of Administration. New York: 
Routlege. 
Veugelers R, Cassiman B (1999) Make and buy in innovation strategies: evidence from Belgian 
manufacturing firms. Res. Policy, 28(1):63-80. 
Vial, G. (2019). Understanding digital transformation: A review and a research agenda. J. of Strategic 
Info. Systems, 28(2), 118-144. 
Villalonga B (2004). Does diversification cause the "diversification discount"? Finan. Management, 5-27. 
Westerman, G., Bonnet, D., & McAfee, A. (2014). Leading Digital: Turning Technology into Business 
Transformation. Harvard Business Press. 
Williamson OE. 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. The Free Press: New York. 
Williamson OE. 1991. Comparative economic organization: The analysis of discrete structural 
alternatives. Admin. Sci. Quart. 36:269-296. 
Wu L, Bowen L, Hitt LM (2019) Data analytics supports decentralized innovation. Management. Sci. 
65(10):4863-4877. 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
44 
 
Figure 1. Distribution of Firms Across External IT Adoption Quartile 
 
This Figure shows the concentration of the extensive margin of external IT in the firm. We compute the fraction of 
establishments in the focal establishment’s firm with some form of external IT. The figure represents a histogram of this 
distribution. Census disclosure clearance date 6/14/2022. 
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics 1992 & 2002 
Year 
1992 
2002 
 
Mean 
Std. Dev. 
Mean 
Std. Dev. 
Internal transaction ratio (ITR) 
0.14 
0.26 
0.12 
0.26 
Total internal transfers ($ Millions) 
18.1 
77.6 
20.2 
96.4 
Total sales ($ Millions) 
119.5 
344.7 
159.5 
506.1 
External IT index 
0 
0 
0.13 
0.19 
Log inventory-to-sales ratio 
0.05 
0.06 
0.05 
0.08 
Skill mix 
0.33 
0.18 
0.33 
0.19 
Log downstream internal demand 
3.68 
5.23 
3.86 
5.35 
Log downstream external demand 
10.93 
6.90 
11.33 
7.10 
Has local competitors 
0.91 
0.29 
0.94 
0.24 
Local industry Herfindahl 
0.44 
0.32 
0.40 
0.31 
Log number of products 
1.20 
0.78 
1.05 
0.78 
Log number of firm units 
4.40 
1.70 
4.82 
1.70 
Internal IT index 
0 
0 
0.36 
0.38 
Log generic IT investment 
2.25 
2.35 
2.19 
2.38 
Production IT index 
N/A 
N/A 
0.49 
0.38 
Notes: Number of observations is approximately 5,600 per year (rounded per Census disclosure avoidance policy). Log generic 
IT capital expenditure and log inventory-to-sales ratio are winsorized at the 99th percentile. Census disclosure clearance date 
5/21/2018. 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
0‐20
20‐40
40‐60
60‐80
80‐100
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
45 
 
Table 2. IT and Organization of Vertical Commodity Flows 
Models 
(1) 
No 
Controls 
 
(2) 
Some 
Controls 
 
(3) 
All 
Non-IT 
Controls 
(4) 
Add Other 
IT 
 
(5) 
Unscaled 
Internal 
Transfers 
(6) 
Total 
Output 
 
Dependent Variable 
ITR 
ITR 
ITR 
ITR 
Log 
Internal 
Transfers 
Log Total 
Value 
Shipped 
External IT index 
 
-0.064*** 
(0.020) 
-0.061*** 
(0.020) 
-0.060*** 
(0.019) 
-0.062*** 
(0.022) 
-1.307*** 
(0.415) 
0.193*** 
(0.054) 
Log inventory-to-sales 
ratio 
 
 
-0.181*** 
(0.057) 
-0.221*** 
(0.058) 
-0.221*** 
(0.058) 
-3.033*** 
(0.924) 
-1.803*** 
(0.214) 
Skill mix 
 
-0.017 
(0.022) 
-0.020 
(0.022) 
-0.018 
(0.022) 
-0.406 
(0.384) 
-0.202*** 
(0.075) 
Log downstream internal 
demand 
 
0.005*** 
(0.001) 
0.003** 
(0.001) 
0.003** 
(0.001) 
0.016 
(0.021) 
0.004 
(0.003) 
Log downstream external 
demand 
 
-0.005* 
(0.003) 
-0.005* 
(0.003) 
-0.005* 
(0.003) 
-0.009 
(0.042) 
-0.003 
(0.008) 
Has local competitors 
 
0.025 
(0.018) 
0.025 
(0.018) 
0.026 
(0.018) 
0.229 
(0.325) 
0.138*** 
(0.041) 
Local industry Herfindahl 
 
0.022 
(0.029) 
0.023 
(0.029) 
0.024 
(0.029) 
0.629 
(0.454) 
0.569*** 
(0.080) 
Number of products 
 
0.001 
(0.005) 
0.001 
(0.005) 
0.001 
(0.005) 
0.659*** 
(0.095) 
0.160*** 
(0.016) 
Total factor productivity 
 
 
-0.021** 
(0.009) 
-0.021** 
(0.009) 
-0.265* 
(0.138) 
0.325*** 
(0.031) 
Log number of firm units 
 
 
0.013*** 
(0.003) 
0.013*** 
(0.003) 
0.088* 
(0.048) 
0.022*** 
(0.008) 
Internal IT index 
 
 
 
0.017 
(0.012) 
0.311 
(0.209) 
-0.075*** 
(0.028) 
Log generic IT investment 
 
 
 
-0.002 
(0.001) 
0.027 
(0.025) 
0.043*** 
(0.004) 
Production IT index 
 
 
 
-0.021** 
(0.010) 
-0.347* 
(0.193) 
0.0484* 
(0.028) 
Log total value shipped 
 
 
 
 
0.730*** 
(0.094) 
 
2002 Indicator 
-0.009* 
(0.005) 
-0.007 
(0.005) 
-0.012** 
(0.005) 
-0.009 
(0.006) 
-0.894*** 
(0.113) 
0.266** 
(0.016) 
Observations 
11,500 
11,500 
11,500 
11,500 
11,500 
11,500 
Plants 
5,600 
5,600 
5,600 
5,600 
5,600 
5,600 
R-squared 
0.006 
0.013 
0.018 
0.019 
0.072 
0.256 
R-squared with fixed 
effects 
0.708 
0.710 
0.712 
0.712 
0.696 
0.935 
Notes: Unit of observation is a plant-year (numbers of observations are approximate per Census disclosure avoidance policy). 
Sample includes annual data from 1992 and 2002. Regressions include plant-specific fixed effects. Robust standard errors, 
clustered by plant, in parentheses. *significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%. Census disclosure 
clearance dates 5/21/2018 and 6/14/2022. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
46 
 
Table 3: Instrumental Variable Estimates of Table 2, Column 3 
 
Models 
 
 
 
 
(1) 
Other 
Internal 
Adopters of 
CAD/CAE 
(2) 
Competitor 
External 
IT 
Index 
(3) 
Log of 
Proxy Cost 
 
 
(4) 
Two 
Instruments 
 
 
(5) 
All 
instruments 
 
 
First Stage: Dependent Variable is External IT 
Other internal adopters of CAD/CAE 
0.138*** 
(0.009) 
 
 
 
-0.120** 
(0.010) 
Competitor external IT index 
 
0.505*** 
(0.060) 
 
0.497*** 
(0.060) 
0.346*** 
(0.060) 
Log of proxy cost 
 
 
-0.019*** 
(0.006) 
-0.016** 
(0.006) 
-0.016** 
(0.006) 
F-statistic 
70.13 
227.55 
9.54 
36.39 
79.73 
Stock-Yogo (2005) critical values 
8.96 
8.96 
8.96 
11.59 
12.83 
Second Stage: Dependent Variable is Internal Transfer Ratio 
External IT index 
-0.301*** 
(0.099) 
-0.237 
(0.149) 
-1.116* 
(0.603) 
-0.362** 
(0.159) 
-0.334*** 
(0.097) 
Observations 
11,500 
11,500 
10,500 
10,500 
10,500 
Plants 
5,600 
5,600 
5,200 
5,200 
5,200 
Overidentification test (p-value) 
NA 
NA 
NA 
0.114 
0.267 
Notes: Unit of observation is a plant-year (numbers of observations are approximate per Census disclosure avoidance policy). 
Dependent variable is the internal transaction ratio (ITR). Sample includes annual data from 1992 and 2002. Regressions 
include plant-specific fixed effects and a 2002 indicator. Controls are the same as those in column 3 of Table 2. First stage 
dependent variable is the external IT index. Stock and Yogo (2005) critical values are reported for maximal LIML size > 
10%. Overidentification test uses Hansen J statistic. Robust standard errors, clustered by plant, in parentheses. *significant at 
10%; **significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Census disclosure clearance date 5/21/2018. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116

 
47 
 
Table 4: Heterogeneity and Mechanism Tests 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
Models 
No sample 
restrictions 
 
 
Interact with 
pre-sample 
plural selling 
restriction 
Vertical 
link 
interaction 
 
Plant 
capacity 
interaction 
>75% PCU 
Type of 
coordination 
 
 
Customer-
only 
external IT 
 
EDI 
 
 
 
ERP 
 
 
 
Internal 
production 
technology 
 
 
Dependent Variable 
ITR 
ITR 
ITR 
ITR 
ITR 
ITR 
ITR 
ITR 
ITR 
External IT index 
-0.030** 
(0.013) 
0.075*** 
(0.016) 
0.012 
(0.014) 
-0.043** 
(0.021) 
 
-0.046** 
(0.018) 
-0.092*** 
(0.028) 
-0.066** 
(0.026) 
0.021 
(0.033) 
External IT x ITR 
restrictions 
 
-0.177*** 
(0.020) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
External IT index x vertical 
link indicator 
 
 
-0.116*** 
(0.025) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Production IT index 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.002 
(0.012) 
External IT index x high 
plant capacity utilization 
 
 
 
-0.074* 
(0.044) 
 
 
 
 
 
External dynamic coordination 
 
 
 
-0.056** 
(0.022) 
 
 
 
External static coordination 
 
 
 
0.004 
(0.015) 
 
 
 
External IT index x EDI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.054* 
(0.031) 
 
 
External IT index x ERP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.015 
(0.031) 
 
External IT index x 
Production IT index 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.115** 
(0.050) 
Linear combination of 
interaction terms 
 
-0.102*** 
(0.017) 
-0.048*** 
(0.018) 
-0.117*** 
(0.041) 
 
 
-0.038* 
(0.022) 
-0.051** 
(0.024) 
-0.094*** 
(0.030) 
Observations 
22,000 
22,000 
22,000 
11,500 
11,500 
11,500 
11,500 
11,500 
11,500 
Plants 
11,000 
11,000 
11,000 
5,600 
5,600 
5,600 
5,600 
5,600 
5,600 
R-squared 
0.008 
0.015 
0.009 
0.019 
0.018 
0.018 
0.019 
0.019 
0.020 
R-squared with fixed effects 
0.733 
0.735 
0.734 
0.712 
0.712 
0.712 
0.712 
0.712 
0.712 
Notes: Unit of observation is a plant-year (numbers of observations are approximate per Census disclosure avoidance policy). Sample includes annual data from 
1992 and 2002. Regressions include plant-specific fixed effects, 2002 indicator, and all of the controls from Table 2, column 3, except internal IT. Column 4 
includes an indicator for missing data from the match with the Plant Capacity Utilization Tables (not reported) that does not affect our reported results and serves 
to keep the sample stable for Census disclosure avoidance purposes. Robust standard errors, clustered by plant, in parentheses. *significant at 10%; **significant 
at 5%; ***significant at 1%. Census disclosure clearance date 5/21/2018. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3396116