TITLE: The Role of Social Media in the Corporate Bond Market: Evidence from Twitter
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2022.4589
---

TSpace Research Repository 
tspace.library.utoronto.ca 
The Role of Social Media in the Corporate 
Bond Market: Evidence from Twitter 
Eli Bartov, Lucile Faurel & Partha Mohanram 
Version Accepted Manuscript 
Citation 
(published version) 
Bartov, E., Faurel, L., & Mohanram, P. (2023). The role of social media 
in the corporate bond market: Evidence from twitter. Management 
Science, 69(9), 5638-5667. 
Copyright / License Copyright © 2022, INFORMS 
DOI https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2022.4589. 
Publisher’s Statement This is an accepted manuscript of an article published by INFORMS in 
Management Science. 
How to cite TSpace items 
Always cite the published version, so the author(s) will receive recognition through services that track 
citation counts, e.g. Scopus. If you need to cite the page number of the author manuscript from TSpace 
because you cannot access the published version, then cite the TSpace version in addition to the published 
version using the permanent URI (handle) found on the record page. 
This article was made openly accessible by U of T Faculty. 
Please tell us how this access benefits you. Your story matters. 

 
 
The Role of Social Media in the Corporate Bond Market: 
Evidence from Twitter 
 
 
Eli Bartov 
Leonard N. Stern School of Business 
New York University 
ebartov@stern.nyu.edu 
 
Lucile Faurel 
W.P. Carey School of Business 
Arizona State University 
lucile.faurel@asu.edu 
* 
Partha Mohanram 
Rotman School of Management 
University of Toronto 
partha.mohanram@rotman.utoronto.ca 
 
 
Forthcoming at Management Science 
 
October 2022 
 
ABSTRACT: 
Prior studies document the role social media information plays in the stock market as well as the 
important dissimilarities between the bond and stock markets. Bridging these two literatures, we 
examine the role of social media information in the corporate bond market. Analyzing a broad 
sample of messages by Twitter individual users, posted just prior to earnings announcements, 
containing bond, credit risk, and fundamental information, we find that aggregate Twitter opinion 
(OPI) predicts upcoming announcement bond returns and changes in CDS spreads, and is 
associated with future changes in bond yield spreads and credit ratings, thereby providing 
economically important information to the bond market. This interpretation is bolstered by results 
from a variety of cross-sectional analyses. Finally, we document an association between OPI and 
future changes in default risk, which casts light on the nature of the Twitter information underlying 
our findings. Overall, our findings demonstrate that Twitter appears to disseminate potentially 
economically important information to even the presumably sophisticated bond and CDS 
investors, as well as information intermediaries. 
 
Keywords: Twitter, social media, credit risk, default risk, bankruptcy risk, earnings, CDS, bond 
yield, bond returns. 
 
This paper benefited from comments and suggestions from Aleksander Aleszczyk (discussant), Andy Call, Artur 
Hugon, Roberto Vincenzi, as well as workshop participants at the Arizona State University / University of Arizona 
Joint Accounting Conference, Egyptian Online Seminars in Business, Accounting and Economics, North Carolina 
State University, University of Glasgow, Utah State University, the 2021 AAA Financial Accounting and Reporting 
Section Midyear Meeting, and the 2021 AAA Annual Meeting. Partha Mohanram acknowledges financial support 
from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) of Canada. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

1 
The Role of Social Media in the Corporate Bond Market: 
Evidence from Twitter 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The rise of the Internet has led to an explosion of new sources of information that are easily 
accessible to the public at large and to capital market participants in particular, which, in turn, 
brought together investors around the globe, enabling an open exchange of information and ideas. 
Undoubtedly, the biggest revolution in the dissemination of financial information on the Internet 
has been the advent of social media platforms, such as Twitter and Reddit, that allow users to post 
instantaneously to a wide audience their views about firms and their prospects. 
Academic research in both finance and accounting focuses on the usefulness of information 
from online sources and social media platforms for stock market participants. Hirschey et al. 
(2000) find that investment reports on bulletin boards such as Motley Fool predict stock returns. 
Chen et al. (2014) demonstrate that information in reports on the SeekingAlpha portal helps predict 
earnings and long-window stock returns following their posting. Jame et al. (2016) find that 
crowdsourced (Estimize) forecasts are a useful supplementary source of information in capital 
markets, and Jung et al. (2018) show that corporate adoption of social media (especially Twitter) 
is increasing rapidly. Finally, Bartov et al. (2018) show that the aggregate opinion from individual 
Twitter messages successfully predicts a firm’s forthcoming quarterly earnings and announcement 
stock returns. Collectively, these papers highlight the informational value of online sources and 
social media platforms for equity investors. 
In assessing the usefulness of social media information, both prior research and the 
investment community—which has been using predictive information in social media to inform 
investment strategies (Wall Street Journal 2014)—focus on the stock market, paying little attention 
to an important segment of the financial markets, the bond markets.1 However, there are 
 
1 According to the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA), at the end of 2017, the total 
amount of debt outstanding in U.S. bond markets exceeds $40.7 trillion, of which more than $9 trillion is corporate 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

2 
considerable differences between the nature of the participants in the stock and corporate bond 
markets and the information they require, as well as between the structure and trading mechanism 
underlying the two markets. 
First, in contrast to the stock market, where retail stock investors actively trade in 
exchanges, corporate bond investors are almost exclusively institutions, such as broker-dealers and 
large financial institutions (e.g., banks, hedge funds, insurance companies), which, unlike retail 
investors, are generally sophisticated market participants. Second, parties with access to private 
information rate corporate bonds. Clearly, these ratings provide potentially relevant information 
to bond investors that can serve, for example, as an independent check on the accuracy and 
reliability of analysts’ bond recommendations. Third, the nature of information required by stock 
investors—primarily related to earnings and earnings growth (e.g., Ohlson and Juettner-Nauroth 
2005)—differs substantially from that required by bond investors, predominantly pertaining to 
credit risk and particularly default risk (see, e.g., Fama and French 1993; De Franco et al. 2009).2 
Fourth, in contrast to the stock market, trading in the corporate bond market is primarily in 
decentralized over-the-counter (OTC) markets, which are less regulated and transparent than stock 
exchanges.3 In summary, prior studies highlight major dissimilarities between the stock and 
corporate bond markets and conclude that the dissimilarities may lead to systematic differences in 
the distribution of bond-related public information and the bond market reaction to this 
information. 
This suggests that the extent to which social media platforms disseminate relevant 
 
debt, compared to the U.S. stock market capitalization of $32.1 trillion (https://www.sifma.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/09/US-Capital-Markets-Deck-2018-09-06-SIFMA.pdf, accessed March 15, 2022). 
 
2 Default risk arises when a bond issuer is unable to make timely interest or principal payments. Credit risk includes 
default risk, downgrade risk (risk of a decrease in credit rating), and credit spread risk (risk of credit spreads widening). 
 
3 Transactions in financial markets are either organized in exchanges, such as the New York Stock Exchange or 
Nasdaq, or occur OTC. Unlike exchange trades, OTC trades are executed directly between two parties without a 
central exchange or a broker. Consequently, a trade can be executed between two participants in OTC markets without 
others being aware of the price of the completed transaction. As OTC markets are not subject to the regulations of 
major exchanges (e.g., timely information disclosure), they are less transparent. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

3 
information to bond market participants is an open and interesting empirical question. We thus 
study the following research question: does social media provide relevant and economically 
important information to the corporate bond market? 
To study this question, we analyze the aggregate opinion from individual messages posted 
on Twitter just prior to a firm’s quarterly earnings release (henceforth, aggregate Twitter opinion 
or OPI). We estimate OPI by first analyzing the content of each tweet using textual analysis, and 
then aggregating the textual-analysis results across all tweets by firm-quarter. In deriving OPI, we 
employ commonly used dictionaries that identify the negative and positive words in each 
individual tweet. We restrict our sample to tweets mentioning words and phrases related to bond, 
credit risk, fundamentals, and/or securities trading. We measure OPI in a short period prior to 
quarterly earnings announcements because Twitter users pay special attention to companies’ 
performance and value just prior to their earnings releases, as evidenced by a spike in Twitter 
activity during that period (see, e.g., Ranco et al. 2015; Curtis et al. 2016; Gabrovšek et al. 2017). 
We choose Twitter as our data source because, among other reasons, Twitter information is rich 
and reflects numerous and widely diverse opinions, suggesting it may cover many aspects of firm 
attributes of interest not only to equity investors, but also to bond investors. However, we 
acknowledge that Twitter information may not be relevant to bond investors as the discussion on 
Twitter may primarily pertain to stocks’ prospects and stock prices, not bonds. Further, while 
Bartov et al. (2018) find that Twitter is informative to the stock market, Twitter’s individual users 
may be generally unsophisticated and thus provide little incremental information to the more 
complex and less transparent corporate bond market. 
We begin our empirical investigation by testing the ability of OPI to predict bond returns 
and changes in credit default swap (CDS) contracts’ spreads around the upcoming quarterly 
earnings announcements.4 We focus on a short window around earnings announcements because 
 
4 The “spread” of a CDS contract is an annual fixed premium paid by the protection buyer to the protection seller over 
the length of the contract, quoted in basis points per annum of the contract’s notional amount. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

4 
prior research shows that bond-trading volume increases sharply around earnings announcements 
(Easton et al. 2009; Callen et al. 2009; Ronen and Zhou 2013; Even-Tov 2017). A significant 
association between OPI and announcement bond returns/changes in CDS spreads would 
demonstrate that OPI provides economically important, forward-looking valuation-relevant 
information to the bond market. To complement these short-window tests, we also examine the 
association between OPI and changes in bond yield spreads—where the spread is the difference 
between the yield to maturity of a traded bond and the yield to maturity of a Treasury security with 
a corresponding duration—over two alternative long windows, [q-1; q+1] and [q-1; q+3], where q 
is the quarter where OPI is measured. 
We find that OPI is significantly positively associated with bond returns and significantly 
negatively associated with changes in CDS spreads around quarterly earnings announcements. Our 
results control for earnings surprises and announcement stock returns, suggesting that the bond 
market reaction is incremental to, and not merely a reflection of the previously documented 
association between aggregate Twitter opinion and future earnings and stock returns. In addition, 
Easton et al. (2009) show that bond prices are more sensitive to bad earnings news than good 
earnings news, consistent with the nonlinear payoff structure of bonds. Using analyst earnings 
forecast errors to measure the nature of the news, we confirm this finding in our setting, by showing 
that the association between OPI and announcement bond returns (changes in CDS spreads) is 
more positive (more negative) for bad news compared to good news. Cross-sectional tests indicate 
that the association between OPI and announcement bond returns/changes in CDS spreads is 
stronger for tweets containing information directly related to bonds and credit risk and when 
information uncertainty is high. Further, we corroborate these findings in long-windows tests using 
changes in bond yield spreads. 
Next, we investigate whether Twitter information is associated with the information used 
by intermediaries, specifically credit rating agencies. To that end, we test whether OPI is 
associated with a future credit rating change, measured by the likelihood of a credit rating 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

5 
downgrade or upgrade. Consistent with the nonlinear payoff structure of bonds, we find that OPI 
is significantly negatively associated with the probability of a future credit rating downgrade, but 
insignificantly related to the probability of a future upgrade. These results suggest that aggregate 
Twitter opinion reflects the information used by credit rating agencies, and hence further supports 
that Twitter may be a potentially relevant source of information. 
Finally, we assess the nature of the Twitter information underlying our results. Clearly, for 
Twitter information to be useful, it must be forward looking and valuation relevant. As the 
prediction of default is of a prime interest to bond investors (Hillegeist et al. 2004; Beaver et al. 
2011; Akins 2018), we examine whether OPI is associated with future changes in default risk. We 
measure changes in default risk as changes in implied default probability from three popular 
models: the Altman Z-Score, the Ohlson O-Score, and the Black-Scholes-Merton models. We find 
that OPI is strongly negatively associated with future changes in implied default probability for all 
three measures. Further, this association is stronger for speculative-grade bonds, confirming 
findings in prior studies that speculative-grade bond prices show a greater sensitivity to news 
compared to investment-grade bonds (Easton et al. 2009; Gkougkousi 2014; Even-Tov 2017). 
Likewise, this association is stronger for firms with greater information uncertainty, where Twitter 
information is more likely to be incrementally meaningful. 
Overall, our findings suggest that aggregate Twitter opinion appears to disseminate 
potentially relevant and economically important information, not only for stock market investors 
as documented by Bartov et al. (2018), but also for corporate bond market investors and 
information intermediaries. We contribute to the literatures on the role of social media in capital 
markets and the role of earnings and financial disclosures in the corporate bond market. These two 
literatures have demonstrated, respectively, that Twitter information helps predict quarterly 
earnings and announcement stock-price changes (Bartov et al. 2018), and that the nonlinear payoff 
structure of bonds has important implications for the reaction of bond prices to earnings news 
(Easton et al. 2009). We contribute to these literatures by providing novel evidence that social 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

6 
media conveys economically important information to even the presumably sophisticated investors 
who dominate the corporate bond market, an important financial market that differs significantly 
from the stock market, as well as to credit rating agencies. Our findings may thus inform bond and 
CDS investors, bond analysts, and credit rating agencies in their investing and credit analysis. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents a review of the 
relevant prior literature. Section III develops our research question and outlines the research 
design. Section IV describes the data, and Section V presents the empirical results. The final 
section, Section VI, summarizes our main findings and conclusions. 
 
II. 
REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE 
Our study relates to the literatures on the role of social media in capital markets, the 
differences between stock and corporate bond markets, and the role of financial disclosures in the 
corporate bond market. 
The Role of Social Media in Capital Markets 
There is a growing literature in finance and accounting on the role of social media in capital 
markets. Hirschey et al. (2000) find that investment reports on bulletin boards such as Motley Fool 
predict stock returns. Chen et al. (2014) investigate the extent to which investor opinions predict 
future stock returns and earnings surprises, by conducting textual analysis of articles posted on the 
Seeking Alpha portal as well as readers’ comments in response to these articles. They find that the 
views expressed in both articles and commentaries predict future long-window stock returns and 
earnings surprises. Jame et al. (2016) find that crowdsourced earnings forecasts on the Estimize 
platform are a useful supplementary source of information to predict earnings. Jung et al. (2018) 
show that corporate adoption of social media, such as Facebook and especially Twitter, is 
increasing rapidly. Curtis et al. (2016) document that high levels of social media activity (on 
Twitter and StockTwits) are associated with greater stock market reaction to earnings news. 
Finally, more closely related to our study, Bartov et al. (2018), find that aggregate Twitter opinion 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

7 
successfully predicts a firm’s forthcoming quarterly earnings and announcement stock returns. 
However, this research focuses solely on the stock market, paying little attention to the role 
of social media in the corporate bond market. Still, as discussed below, ample empirical evidence 
indicates substantial differences between the stock and corporate bond markets. Whether the 
findings of the research focusing on the stock market can be extrapolated to the corporate bond 
market is, thus, an open empirical question. 
 
Differences between Stock and Corporate Bond Markets 
Fama and French (1993) find that the excess market return factor and two mimicking 
returns for the size and book-to-market factors, which together explain the cross-sectional variation 
in stock returns, have generally little explanatory power for the variation in returns of corporate 
bonds once two mimicking portfolios for a term premium and a default premium are introduced to 
the regression. Ohlson and Juettner-Nauroth (2005) show that earnings and short- and long-term 
earnings growth are important for equity valuation, and Datta and Dhillon (1993) observe that if 
earnings news indicates that the variance (as opposed to mean) of expected cash flows changes, 
stock and bond returns are expected to adjust in opposite directions. 
De Franco et al. (2009) document differences between the bond and stock markets 
including that the distribution of bond analysts’ recommendations of buy, hold, and sell is less 
positively skewed than that of stock analysts, and that the market reaction to analyst reports is 
stronger in the bond market than in the stock market. They conclude, “Our results are consistent 
with bond analysts issuing more negative reports than equity analysts and providing more 
information about low credit quality bonds as a result of the asymmetric demand for negative 
information by bond investors.” Finally, McCrum (2018) reports that, unlike the stock market, 
liquidity in the corporate bond market is limited as most bonds do not trade. 
Collectively, these studies point to major dissimilarities between the stock and corporate 
bond markets and highlight considerable differences in the information required by investors in 
the two markets and in their response to information. Given these differences, the importance of 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

8 
aggregate Twitter opinion to the corporate bond market is unclear, notwithstanding the findings in 
prior research showing the important role of aggregate Twitter opinion in the stock market. 
 
The Role of Financial Disclosures in the Corporate Bond Market 
 
The literature on the role of financial disclosures in the corporate bond market investigates 
a variety of perspectives. Examining bond returns around quarterly earnings announcements, 
Easton et al. (2009) find that bond prices respond to quarterly earnings announcements. They 
document a positive association between annual bond returns and both annual changes in earnings 
and annual analyst forecast errors. They further show that these effects are stronger for negative 
earnings news and riskier bonds, consistent with the nonlinear payoff structure of bonds affecting 
the role of earnings in the bond market. DeFond and Zhang (2014) ﬁnd that the bond price reaction 
to bad news is timelier than that of stock prices. They further show that speculative-grade bonds 
have a stronger reaction than investment-grade bonds to bad news, which suggests earnings news 
has a larger effect on bond prices when default risk is higher.5 Callen et al. (2009) find that CDS 
spreads reflect information about default risk conveyed in earnings, cash flows, and accruals. 
 
Gkougkousi (2014) examines the role of aggregate corporate earnings in the corporate 
bond market and documents a negative (positive) association between aggregate earnings changes 
and investment-grade (speculative-grade) corporate bond market returns. She also finds that the 
aggregate earnings-returns relation is lower (i.e., less positive or more negative) for bonds with 
higher credit ratings and longer maturities. Even-Tov (2017) finds that the bond price reaction to 
quarterly earnings announcements predicts post-announcement stock returns, with the predictive 
ability being driven by non-investment-grade bonds. Cassar et al. (2015) hypothesize and find that 
accrual accounting interacts with other information sources to reduce information asymmetries 
between small business borrowers and lenders, thereby lowering borrowers’ cost of debt. 
Consistent with their findings, Akins (2018) provides evidence that better reporting quality is 
 
5 Employing small samples of only 26 and 66 firms, respectively, Hotchkiss and Ronen (2002) and Ronen and Zhou 
(2013) provide similar evidence of a positive bond price reaction to earnings announcement news. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

9 
associated with less uncertainty about credit risk, and that reporting quality is more important in 
reducing uncertainty when debt market participants have less private information. Finally, 
evidence by Bonsall and Miller (2017) suggests that the readability of a firm’s financial disclosure 
influences bond market intermediaries’ opinions and firms’ cost of debt. 
While our research question differs considerably from the questions addressed by these 
related studies, we consider their results when designing our analyses. Specifically, our tests 
include partitions of the data based on whether earnings convey negative or positive news, the 
riskiness of bonds, and information uncertainty underlying the bond issuer. 
 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
This section delineates the methodology used to construct our dependent and test variables 
and outlines the research design. 
Variable Definitions 
The Test Variable 
The test variable for our research question is the aggregate Twitter opinion, OPI, during 
the window [-10;-3], where day 0 is the earnings announcement date. We end our OPI 
measurement window on day -3 because some of our tests involve the window [-2;+2]. We focus 
on the window [-10;-3] because prior research documents a concentration of Twitter activity in the 
period just prior to quarterly earnings announcements (Ranco et al. 2015; Curtis et al. 2016; 
Gabrovšek et al. 2017) and because bond market participants pay attention and react to earnings 
news (e.g., Datta and Dhillon 1993; Easton et al. 2009; Callen et al. 2009; Defond and Zhang 2014; 
Ronen and Zhou 2013; Even-Tov 2017). 
Along the lines of Bartov et al. (2018), we measure OPI using textual-analysis 
methodologies focusing on the words that comprise each individual tweet.6 More specifically, OPI 
is the single factor constructed from a factor analysis using three vocabulary-based measures, each 
 
6 As detailed in our validity check section, we also employ an alternate measure of aggregate Twitter opinion, 
OPI_BAYES. The qualitatively similar results are tabulated in the Online Appendix (Tables OA3 to OA6). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

10 
related to a word list (or dictionary) commonly used in the literature: the Loughran and McDonald 
(2011) word list, the Harvard IV-4 word list, and the Hu and Liu (2004) word list. Using each word 
list, we compute an opinion measure as minus one multiplied by the sum of the number of negative 
words weighted by {1 + [Log(1 + Number of Followers)]}, scaled by one plus the number of 
words classified as either positive or negative. As these three underlying opinion measures are 
correlated, the factor analysis yields a single factor, which we label OPI.7
 
 
The Dependent Variables 
Our first set of tests focuses on whether Twitter provides economically important 
information to the corporate bond market. To that end, we examine whether OPI helps predict 
announcement bond returns and changes in CDS spreads over a short window around earnings 
announcements and whether OPI is associated with changes in bond yield spreads over two 
alternative long windows. 
We measure announcement bond returns, BONDRET[-2;+2], as buy-and-hold adjusted bond 
returns (multiplied by 100 for ease of presentation) over the window [-2;+2], where day 0 is the 
firm’s quarterly earnings announcement date. To compute bond returns, we retrieve prices of all 
corporate bond trades during our sample period from the Trace database. We compute buy-and-
hold adjusted bond returns following the methodology in Bessembinder et al. (2009), Dick-Nielsen 
(2009; 2014), Easton et al. (2009), and Even-Tov (2017).8 Next, Callen et al. (2009) argue that a 
credit default swap (CDS) is a pure credit default instrument that provides the cleanest measure of 
 
7 Appendices C and D provide examples of tweets and demonstrate how the textual-analysis methodology quantifies 
their content. Our results hold and our inferences are unchanged when using either the individual OPI measures or 
their simple average as alternative variables. 
 
8 We exclude all cancelled, corrected, commission, special trades, and all trades under $100,000. We then weight each 
of the remaining bond trades by dollar value to compute daily clean prices for each traded bond. The Trace database 
compiles “clean” bond price data (prices of bond trades occurring between coupon payment dates, which already 
reflect the accrued interest up to the day of the trade, are “dirty” bond prices, while “clean” bond prices do not include 
accrued interest). Thus, we add accrued interest to calculate a daily dirty price for each traded bond, which we use in 
computing daily raw bond returns. We adjust each daily raw return by subtracting the risk-free rate on that day, using 
the return on a Treasury security with similar maturity. We require the absolute value of the daily-adjusted bond 
returns to be less than 20% to eliminate erroneous data. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

11 
credit risk. Consistent with Callen et al. (2009), we define the change in CDS spread, 
ΔCDSSPREAD, as a percentage of the notional principle of the underlying instrument. Following 
the standard in the literature (e.g., Micu et al. 2004; Ashcraft and Santos 2009; Bai and Wu 2016), 
we focus on five-year CDS contracts denominated in U.S. dollars with modified restructuring 
(MR) type documentation and senior tier, as these are the most common and liquid CDS contracts.9 
Similar to our estimation of bond returns, we measure ΔCDSSPREAD over the window [-2;+2], 
where day 0 is the firm’s quarterly earnings announcement date. Lastly, we measure the change in 
bond yield spread, YIELD—where bond yield spread is the difference between the yield to 
maturity of a traded bond and the yield to maturity of a Treasury security with a corresponding 
duration—over two alternative long windows: one from the last day of quarter q-1 to the last day 
of quarter q+1 and the other from the last day of quarter q-1 to the last day of quarter q+3, where 
q is the quarter during which OPI is measured. While both long windows serve to complement the 
short-window tests around earnings announcements, the second window compares the same fiscal 
quarter across years and thus is unlikely to be affected by seasonality. 
For our second set of tests, the one concerning credit rating changes, we define two 
indicator variables, DOWNGRADE and UPGRADE, indicating, respectively, whether the traded 
bond exhibits a decrease or an increase in rating of S&P Global Ratings (S&P).10 In line with our 
tests for changes in bond yield spreads, we measure credit rating downgrades and upgrades over 
two alternative long windows, the next three or nine months after the OPI window, [-2;+65] or [-
2;+190], where day 0 is the firm’s quarterly earnings announcement date . 
Our third and final set of tests examines the change in implied default probability using 
 
9 The MR type documentation refers to a debt restructuring clause in the CDS contract, which triggers settlement 
under the CDS contract. Senior tier refers to the bond instrument underlying the CDS contract. 
 
10 Currently there are nine registered Nationally Recognized Statistical Rating Organizations (NRSROs), overseen by 
the SEC’s Office of Credit Ratings, which was created by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer 
Protection Act of July 21, 2010. In September 29, 2006, Congress passed the Credit Rating Agency Reform Act, 
requiring the SEC to establish guidelines for determining which credit rating agencies qualify as NRSROs. We use 
S&P ratings because S&P Global Ratings was the first (with Moody’s Investors Service) to become an NRSRO in 
1975, and because it is considered a market leader among the nine rating agencies. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

12 
three alternative approaches for estimating default probability: the Altman Z-Score (ΔZ-PROB), 
the Ohlson O-Score (ΔO-PROB), and the Black-Scholes-Merton models (ΔBSM-PROB). For each 
approach, we measure the change in default probability (expressed in percentage), over two 
alternative long windows from quarter q-1 to either quarter q+1 or quarter q+3. 
Our first approach for estimating default probability is based on Altman (1968), who 
combines five fundamental signals into a single index called Z-Score that measures how shielded 
or protected a firm is from bankruptcy. The five fundamentals relate to liquidity (working capital 
/ total assets), retention of earnings (retained earnings / total assets), profitability (EBIT / total 
assets), coverage of liabilities (market capitalization / total debt), and asset turnover (sales / total 
assets).11 Our second approach is based on Ohlson (1980), who develops an index (O-Score) more 
comprehensive than Z-Score, by including factors that either shield a firm from bankruptcy (e.g., 
profitability; cash flows; profitability increase), or make bankruptcy more likely (e.g., losses, 
negative equity). We convert the Z-Score and O-Score into probabilities by applying the logit 
function to the negative of the Z-Score (as higher Z-Score represents lower risk) and to the O-
Score, respectively. Our third approach is based on the procedure outlined in Hillegeist et al. (2004) 
and Bharath and Shumway (2008) and follows from Hillegeist et al.’s (2004) finding that default 
risk estimates based on the option-pricing models of Black and Scholes (1973) and Merton (1974) 
outperform Z-Score and O-Score. Black-Scholes-Merton structurally model credit risk by viewing 
a company’s equity as a call option on its assets. The unique inputs to this model are market-based 
measures, including market value of equity and stock return volatility. 
 
Research Design 
Our research question asks: does aggregate Twitter opinion convey economically 
important information to the corporate bond market? To study this question, we first examine 
 
11 The definition of ΔZ-PROB in Appendix A details the Altman’s (1968) model and the original coefficients we 
employ using quarterly data. As a validity check, we alternatively calculate Z-scores using the Altman’s (1968) model 
and either the Begley et al.’s (1996) or the Hillegeist et al.’s (2004) re-estimated coefficients. The (untabulated) results 
using these two alternative specifications are qualitatively similar from the tabulated results. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

13 
whether OPI predicts bond returns and changes in CDS spreads around the upcoming earnings 
announcements. We then examine whether OPI is associated with changes in bond yield spreads 
using longer window tests. 
Ex-ante, the impact of Twitter information on bond returns/changes in CDS spreads is 
unclear. If the wisdom of crowds effect demonstrated in the stock market by Bartov et al. (2018) 
extends to the corporate bond market, Twitter could potentially provide information relevant to 
the pricing of corporate bonds. Moreover, prior research documents that bond investors misprice 
fundamental information (e.g., Bhojraj and Swaminathan 2009). This opens-up the possibility that 
Twitter information may be relevant for bond market participants. Conversely, bond investors are 
generally considered sophisticated, and hence any potentially relevant information on Twitter may 
have already reached them by the time it is posted, and hence already be largely impounded in 
bond prices and CDS spreads. In addition, even if Twitter information is original, it is not clear 
whether its effect on bond prices and CDS spreads would be large enough to allow detection among 
all other influences in the data. Hence, it is an empirical question as to whether aggregate Twitter 
opinion predicts changes in bond prices and CDS spreads. Similar arguments can be made for the 
association between aggregate Twitter opinion and changes in bond yields spreads. 
We test whether OPI predicts bond returns (BONDRET) or changes in CDS spreads 
(ΔCDSSPREAD) using a short window around earnings announcement, by estimating the 
following model: 
BONDRETi,q,[-2;+2] or ΔCDSSPREADi,q,[-2;+2] 
 =  + 1*OPIi,q,[-10;-3] + 2*FEi,q + 3*STOCKRETi,q,[-2;+2] + 4*STOCKRETi,q,[-10;-3] 
 + 5*RP_OPIi,q,[-10;-3] + 6*LEVi,q + 7*ROAi,q + 8*SIZEi,q + 9*MBi,q + 10*ANLi,q (1) 
+ 11*INSTi,q + 12*Q4i,q + 13*LOSSi,q-1 + 14*HORIZONi,q + 15*RATINGi,q 
+ 16*SPECi,q + 17*SUBORDi,q + Σδj*INDj + Σδf*CALQTRf + i,q,[-2;+2] 
The dependent variable for our long-window tests is changes in bond yield spreads (YIELD), and 
the model contains a subset of the variables used for the short-window tests, as follows: 
YIELDi,[q-1;q+k] =  + 1*OPIi,q,[-10;-3] + 2*FEi,q + 3*STOCKRETi,q,[-2;+2] 
 + 4*STOCKRETi,q,[-10;-3] + 5*RP_OPIi,q,[-10;-3] + 6*LEVi,q + 7*ROAi,q (2) 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

14 
 + 8*SIZEi,q + 9*MBi,q + 10*HORIZONi,q + 11*RATINGi,q + 12*SPECi,q 
 + 13*SUBORDi,q + Σδj*INDj + Σδf*CALQTRf + i,[q-1;q+k] 
If aggregate Twitter opinion is economically meaningful in the bond market, we expect 
positive (negative) news in OPI to lead to positive (negative) bond returns. Hence, when the 
dependent variable is BONDRET, we expect 1, the coefficient on OPI, in Equation (1) to be 
significantly positive. Likewise, we expect positive (negative) news in OPI to lead to reduced 
(increased) CDS/bond yield spreads. Hence, we expect 1 in Equations (1) and (2) to be 
significantly negative when the dependent variable is, respectively, ΔCDSSPREAD and ΔYIELD. 
An association between aggregate Twitter opinion and changes in bond/CDS prices or 
bond yield spreads may be driven by the corporate bond market learning from earnings news 
and/or the stock market reaction to earnings announcements. Indeed, Bartov et al. (2018) show 
that aggregate Twitter opinion helps predict earnings and announcement stock returns. We thus 
include in Equations (1) and (2) two control variables: earnings surprise (FE) and announcement 
stock returns (STOCKRET[-2;+2]). FE is the I/B/E/S reported quarterly earnings per share less the 
latest consensus analyst quarterly earnings per share forecast just prior to the quarterly earnings 
announcement date, scaled by the stock price as of the forecast date (multiplied by 100). 
STOCKRET[-2;+2] is Carhart’s (1997) four factor buy-and-hold abnormal stock returns (multiplied 
by 100) over the window [-2;+2], where day 0 is the firm’s quarterly earnings announcement date. 
Based on the findings and discussion in Datta and Dhillon (1993, Table 3), we expect the 
coefficients on FE and STOCKRET[-2;+2] to be positive in Equation (1) when the dependent variable 
is BONDRET and negative in Equations (1) and (2) when the dependent variable is ΔCDSSPREAD 
and ΔYIELD, respectively. However, the effect of each variable may be reduced due to the positive 
correlation between these two variables. 
To control for other information that reaches the capital markets during the window 
[-10;-3] and may confound our findings, we introduce two additional variables. STOCKRET[-10;-3] 
is the Carhart’s (1997) four factor buy-and-hold abnormal stock returns for the firm over the 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

15 
window [-10;-3] (multiplied by 100). RP_OPI is a measure of the aggregate opinion from 
traditional news over the window [-10;-3], retrieved from the RavenPack database. This variable 
controls for concurrent information and opinion from traditional news media (e.g., print magazines 
and newspapers), notwithstanding major differences between traditional news media and social 
media, including quality, reach, frequency, usability, immediacy, permanence, and way of 
operation (one source to many receivers as opposed to many sources to many receivers). The 
coefficient on STOCKRET[-10;-3] is expected to be positive (negative) in Equation (1) when the 
dependent variable is BONDRET (ΔCDSSPREAD), and negative in Equation (2) when the 
dependent variable is ΔYIELD, if stock prices lead bond prices/yields and CDS spreads. 
We control for firm characteristics by including the following four variables. LEV, our 
measure of leverage, is total debt scaled by total assets. ROA, our measure of profitability, is net 
income before extraordinary items scaled by average total assets. SIZE, our measure of firm size, 
is the natural logarithm of market value of equity. MB is the market-to-book ratio. We control for 
bond characteristics using the following four variables. HORIZON is the number of days between 
the quarterly earnings announcement date and the traded bond’s maturity date. RATING is the S&P 
rating converted to a numerical scale from 1 to 22 (AAA = 1, AA+ = 2, …, D = 22). SPEC is an 
indicator variable equal to one if the traded bond has a S&P rating below BBB-, zero otherwise. 
SUBORD is an indicator variable equal to one for firms with at least one subordinated bond, zero 
otherwise. If a firm has more than one traded bond, HORIZON, RATING, and SPEC are aggregated 
at the firm-quarter level using value-weighted means. Finally, for the short-window tests, we 
include four control variables shown by prior research to relate to capital market participants’ 
reaction around earnings announcements: ANL, the number of analysts in consensus I/B/E/S/ 
quarterly earnings forecast; INST, institutional investor holding; Q4, an indicator variable for the 
fourth fiscal quarter; and LOSS, an indicator variable for past quarterly loss. In addition, all 
specifications include industry and calendar quarter fixed effects, as Chava and Jarrow (2004) 
document the importance of including industry fixed effects for credit risk analysis. Appendix A 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

16 
provides additional details regarding the definition and computation of our variables.12 
Next, we test whether aggregate Twitter opinion reflects the information used by 
information intermediaries, more specifically credit rating agencies (e.g., S&P, Moody’s, and 
Fitch). Credit rating agencies help bond market participants evaluate credit risk, price debt 
securities, as well as create a robust secondary market for those issues, by providing high-quality, 
objective, value-added analytical information to the market. However, the agencies, whose credit 
ratings principally rely on the public information provided by the rated company, do not perform 
an audit of the rated company’s books, or otherwise take upon themselves to verify information 
provided by the rated company. Instead, they rely on the integrity and quality of the rated 
company’s publicly available financial statements.13 Indeed, there have been documented cases of 
rating agencies ignoring emerging relevant sources of information, e.g., their failure to incorporate 
signals from the CDS market in a timely fashion when rating mortgage-backed securities during 
the financial crisis in 2007-2008. In contrast, Twitter users may rely on information other than 
financial statement information, and consequently may provide information not reflected in 
ratings. Another potential advantage of Twitter information is that it benefits from the wisdom of 
crowds. Thus, Twitter might potentially provide information incremental to the information set 
used by these rating agencies, and hence be associated with changes in credit ratings. This 
motivates our second set of tests, which consists of a multinomial logit model that considers the 
possibility of either a downgrade or an upgrade in credit ratings.14 Specifically, we estimate the 
following specification: 
,
,
[ 2;
]
[ 2;
]
Pr(
1, 1)
log
Pr(
0)
i -
i
t
-
t
RATING
-
RATING
+
+



=





=


 =  + 1*OPIi,q,[-10;-3] + 2*FEi,q + 3*STOCKRETi,q,[-2;+2] 
 
12 We examine the sensitivity of our results to specifications that consider changes in the control variables, instead or 
in addition to levels, and find our results (tabulated in the Online Appendix, Tables OA15 to OA17) are robust. 
 
13 For more details, see “U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission Public Hearing - November 15, 2002: Role and 
Function of Credit Rating Agencies in the U.S. Securities Markets,” at: 
https://www.sec.gov/news/extra/credrate/standardpoors.htm, accessed March 15, 2022. 
 
14 Results (not tabulated for parsimony) are nearly indistinguishable if we estimate separate logistic regressions for 
credit rating downgrades or upgrades. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

17 
 + 4*STOCKRETi,q,[-10;-3] + 5*RP_OPIi,q,[-10;-3] + 6*LEVi,q + 7*ROAi,q (3) 
 + 8*SIZEi,q + 9*MBi,q + 10*HORIZONi,q + 11*RATINGi,q + 12*SPECi,q 
 + 13*SUBORDi,q + Σδj*INDj + Σδf*CALQTRf + i,[-2;+t] 
where ΔRATING[-2;+t] (t = 65 or 190) is either equal to minus one if a traded bond has a credit rating 
downgrade, equal to one if a traded bond has an upgrade, and zero if there is no change in credit 
rating. This specification allows for the possibility of either a downgrade or an upgrade in the three 
or nine months after the OPI window. If aggregate Twitter opinion is associated with changes in 
credit ratings, we expect 1 in Equation (3), the coefficient on OPI, to be significantly negative for 
downgrades and significantly positive for upgrades. A significant association between OPI and 
credit rating changes would suggest that either credit rating agencies utilize the aggregate Twitter 
opinion in their credit rating decisions or the information they use is correlated with the Twitter 
information. We also introduce variables that control for possible confounding effects, namely 
earnings news, stock market reaction, information from sources other than Twitter, firm 
characteristics, and bond characteristics. The control variables and fixed effects are the same as 
Equation (2), as the dependent variables are measured over similar windows. We measure the 
rating changes over two alternative long windows, three or nine months, as opposed to a short 
window around earnings announcements, because rating agencies follow a bureaucratic process 
and do not necessarily update ratings continuously. 
Finally, we assess the nature of the information conveyed by OPI to the corporate bond 
market. As discussed earlier, for Twitter information to be potentially useful, it must be forward 
looking and valuation relevant to bond market participants. For bond market participants, 
predicting default is of prime interest (Hillegeist et al. 2004; Beaver et al. 2011; Akins 2018). We 
thus test whether aggregate Twitter opinion is associated with future changes in default risk by 
estimating the following model: 
ΔPROBi,[q-1;q+k] =  + 1*OPIi,q,[-10;-3] + 2*FEi,q + 3*STOCKRETi,q,[-2;+2] 
 + 4*STOCKRETi,q,[-10;-3] + 5*RP_OPIi,q,[-10;-3] + *LEVi,q + 7*ROAi,q (4) 
 + 8*SIZEi,q + 9*MBi,q + 10*HORIZONi,q + 11*RATINGi,q + 12*SPECi,q 
 + 13*SUBORDi,q + Σδj*INDj + Σδf*CALQTRf + i,[q-1;q+k] 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

18 
where ΔPROB is either ΔZ-PROB, ΔO-PROB or ΔBSM-PROB, and k equals one or three. If 
aggregate Twitter opinion is associated with future changes in default risk, we would expect 1 in 
Equation (4), the coefficient on OPI, to be significantly negative (i.e., more positive Twitter 
opinion is associated with lowered default risk and vice versa). In addition to our test variable 
(OPI), similar to Equations (2) and (3), Equation (4) contains variables and fixed effects that 
control for possible confounding effects, namely earnings news, stock market reaction, 
information from sources other than Twitter, firm characteristics, and bond characteristics. 
 
IV. 
DATA 
Sample Selection 
Our sample consists of historical Twitter data, purchased from Gnip, a provider of social 
data and analytics (now a subsidiary of Twitter). We use Twitter data to test our hypotheses for 
two primary reasons. First, Twitter information is rich and encompasses numerous and widely 
diverse opinions, suggesting it may cover many aspects of firm attributes of interest not only to 
equity investors, but also to bond investors. In addition, this wide diversity—which makes the 
opinions less likely to exhibit herding, a phenomenon that plagues traditional information 
intermediaries (e.g., financial analysts), as well as social media platforms (e.g., blogs, investing 
portals) that post a central piece of information on which users comment—allows users to tap into 
the Wisdom of Crowds, where the aggregation of information provided by many (non-expert) 
individuals often predicts outcomes more precisely than experts. Second, Twitter’s short format 
(initially up to 140 characters, now 280 characters) and ease of information search (e.g., the use of 
cashtags) make it an ideal medium to share information in a timely fashion, in contrast to the longer 
format and potentially reduced timeliness of research reports or articles. Still, we acknowledge 
that the information in tweets may be uninformative or even misleading for two reasons. First, 
Twitter is an unregulated platform with potentially uninformed anonymous users. Second, much 
of the discussion on Twitter may pertain to stocks’ prospects and prices, particularly with the use 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

19 
of the cashtag (“$” prefix) placed before a ticker symbol to refer to a firm’s stock. Twitter 
information may hence only be indirectly relevant to bond market participants, and consequently 
may have only a second- or perhaps even a third-order effect in predicting bond riskiness and 
value, which, in turn, may be hard to detect among all other influences in the data. 
Our data comprise the full archive of tweets with cashtags, i.e., stock symbols preceded by 
the dollar sign (e.g., $AAPL for Apple; $PEP for PepsiCo). We limit our sample to tweets with 
cashtags in an effort to increase confidence that the tweets relate to the firm financial performance 
and value, thereby increasing the relevance of our measures. We use the Trace database to obtain 
corporate bond transaction information (e.g., bond prices, bond yield spreads), the Markit database 
for CDS contract data, and the Mergent Fixed Income Securities (FISD) database to gather bond-
issuance information (e.g., issue size, issue date, bond features) and other bond-specific 
information (e.g., coupon rate, frequency of coupon payment, bond ratings). We retrieve the data 
on opinions expressed in traditional media channels from the RavenPack database. Finally, we 
retrieve accounting, stock price, analyst forecast, and institutional ownership data, respectively, 
from the Compustat quarterly, CRSP daily stock, I/B/E/S, and Thomson-Reuters 13F databases. 
Table 1 presents the effects of our sample selection process on the sample size. Our initial 
sample contains 10,894,037 tweets (66,290 firm-quarters from 4,733 unique firms) with cashtags 
from Russell 3000 firms between March 21, 2006 and December 31, 2012. Following Da et al. 
(2011), we consider all stocks ever included in the Russell 3000 Index during our sample period. 
We drop tweets containing multiple stock symbols to know precisely which firm each tweet refers 
to, reducing the sample to 8,713,182 tweets (61,357 firm-quarters; 4,668 unique firms). Next, we 
require that the firms mentioned in the tweets have Compustat data, decreasing our sample size to 
8,674,195 tweets (60,638 firm-quarters; 4,596 unique firms). We then exclude tweets prior to 
December 17, 2008 due to limited Twitter activity and limited use of cashtags in Twitter prior to 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

20 
2009, reducing the sample to 8,462,761 tweets (54,906 firm-quarters; 4,132 unique firms).15 
Given the focus of this paper, we only consider tweets pertaining to firms with traded bonds 
for which bond returns are available, which reduces the sample size to 3,139,188 tweets (9,717 
firm-quarters; 1,193 unique firms). We then manually clean the list of ticker symbols and cashtags 
in our sample to eliminate observations that do not represent tweets about stock tickers.16 This 
results in a sample of 2,692,185 tweets (9,404 firm-quarters; 1,158 unique firms). Our next data 
filter is crucial: we focus on tweets that mention words and phrases either related to bonds, credit 
risk, firm fundamentals or securities trading. We screen for tweets related to bonds and credit risk 
using the credit risk dictionary from Sethuraman (2019) augmented with additional words and 
phrases inspired from Campbell et al. (2014), while we use the list of words and phrases related to 
both fundamentals and securities trading from Bartov et al. (2018). This ensures that the tweets 
provide information relevant to debt securities and results in a sample of 2,159,448 tweets (9,347 
firm-quarters; 1,158 unique firms). Finally, to ensure that Twitter information is more likely to 
contain fundamental information, we focus on tweets from the eight-trading-day period [-10;-3] 
prior to quarterly earnings announcements (day 0), released over the period January 1, 2009 to 
December 31, 2012. The final sample consists of 232,930 tweets from 25,502 distinct users, 
corresponding to 7,356 firm-quarters and representing 1,037 unique firms.17 As firms can have 
more than one traded bond, these 7,356 firm-quarters correspond to 29,287 bond-quarters. 
 
Sample Descriptive Statistics 
Table 2 presents sample distribution of tweets, bond-quarters, and firm-quarters by 
calendar quarter (Panel A) and industry (Panel B). Panel A documents an increase in Twitter 
 
15 The sample period begins ten trading days before January 1, 2009 because our test variable, OPI, is computed during 
the window [-10;-3]. The sample period ends on December 31, 2012, the end of our Twitter data. 
 
16 We delete tweets in which the ticker symbol mentioned has a generic meaning and does not refer to a company’s 
stock (e.g., $CASH, $GDP, $M, etc.), as well as tweets in which the ‘‘$’’ symbol is used not as a cashtag, but rather 
to refer to a generic word (e.g., $ALE for sale; $LOW for slow; $WAG for swag). 
 
17 The Twitter user accounts in our sample are labelled as “person.” While this provides assurance that the tweets are 
from individuals, and not company accounts, the identities of the users are not beyond doubt as most of the identifying 
information is self-reported. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

21 
activity over our sample period, with tweets per calendar quarter increasing from 673 tweets in the 
first quarter of 2009 to 40,551 tweets in the second quarter of 2012. This pattern reflects the 
increased popularity of social media during our sample period. Parallel to the increase in tweets, 
the numbers of bond-quarters and firm-quarters also increase substantially, respectively from 837 
and 146 in the first quarter of 2009 to 2,257 and 610 in the fourth quarter of 2012. 
Panel B of Table 2 presents comparisons of the sample distributions of tweets, bond-
quarters, and firm-quarters with that of the Compustat universe across 48 Fama and French (1997) 
industry groupings. Our samples of tweets, bonds, and firms span all industries, with a distribution 
across industries fairly similar to the Compustat universe and little evidence of industry clustering. 
 
Descriptive Statistics for the Regression Analysis Variables 
Table 3 presents descriptive statistics for the variables used in our regressions. Our opinion 
variable, OPI, derived from factor analysis, has a mean close to zero (0.005), by construction, and 
a higher median of 0.467. BONDRET[-2;+2] has a positive mean and median of 0.118% and 0.074%, 
respectively. ΔCDSSPREAD, which moves in the opposite direction as bond returns, has a negative 
mean (-0.412%) and median (-0.278%). Similarly, ΔYIELD has negative means (-0.173 and -
0.095) and medians (-0.230 and -0.248) over the [q-1;q+1] and [q-1;q+3] windows, respectively. 
The incidence of bond downgrades (4.6%) is higher than upgrades (4.0%) over the [-2;+65] 
window, but identical (10.3%) over the [-2;+190] window. Our proxies for changes in default risk 
(ΔZ-PROB, ΔO-PROB, and ΔBSM-PROB) have means (medians) ranging from -3.796% to 
0.037% (-0.125% to 0.001%) and show considerable variation. For example, ΔZ-PROB[q-1;q+1] is -
1.810% at the first quartile and 1.442% at the third quartile. Interestingly, the mean (median) 
forecast error, FE, is close to zero at 0.014% (0.070%). STOCKRET[-2;+2], the announcement stock 
returns, has a small negative mean (median) of -0.125% (-0.098%), while STOCKRET[-10;-3], the 
stock returns during the OPI window, has a small positive mean (median) of 0.283% (0.277%). 
RP_OPI, the proxy for aggregate opinion from traditional news media, has a negative mean of -
0.135, consistent with overall pessimism in traditional media (Tetlock 2007; Engelberg 2008). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

22 
Furthermore, RP_OPI exhibits a relatively low standard deviation (0.187) compared to that of OPI 
(0.985), suggesting more divergence of opinion in Twitter. 
The statistics of our two firm size measures, ASSETS (mean = 40,978 $million; median = 
9,817 $million) and MVE (mean = 17,596 $million; median = 6,351 $million), suggest that the 
sample consists of large firms, which is not surprising given the requirement that they have traded 
bonds. The mean (2.8) and median (1.8) MB, the market-to-book ratio, suggest the sample includes 
a relatively small number of intangible-intensive firms whose MB tends to be higher. The sample 
also consists of firms in relatively strong information environments, as evidenced by the mean 
ANL of 2.5, which corresponds to over eleven analysts, and the first quartile of ANL, 2.2, which 
corresponds to over eight analysts (ANL is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of 
analysts). The average firm has 72.5% of its shares held by institutional investors (median = 
78.6%), indicating sophisticated ownership dominates our sample. Finally, just under a quarter of 
our sample (23.6%) corresponds to earnings announcements of fourth-quarter results (Q4), while 
less than a fifth of our sample (19.7%) reports a quarterly loss in the previous quarter. 
The bond characteristics suggest that sample firms have traded bonds with a mean (median) 
horizon of 3,165 (2,494) days. The mean (median) rating is 10.8 (10.0) which is just above 
investment grade. 43.5% of all firm-quarters have speculative-grade (i.e., non-investment grade) 
bonds. Finally, 16.3% of firm-quarters have at least one subordinated traded bond. 
 
Correlation Coefficients 
Pairwise correlation coefficients among the key test variable, OPI, and the dependent 
variables for our models outlined above are tabulated in the online appendix (Table OA1). OPI 
has a significantly positive correlation with BONDRET[-2;+2] and significant negative correlations 
with ΔCDSSPREAD and ΔYIELD. In addition, consistent with the nonlinear payoff structure of 
bonds, OPI is significantly negatively correlated with DOWNGRADE, but either insignificantly or 
positively correlated with UPGRADE. Overall, this suggests aggregate Twitter opinion is 
economically important for bond market participants. In addition, OPI has significantly negative 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

23 
correlations with the changes in implied default probability measures (ΔZ-PROB, ΔO-PROB, and 
ΔBSM-PROB). This may be viewed as prima facie evidence of an association between aggregate 
Twitter opinion and future changes in default risk. 
The correlation matrix between OPI and the control variables used in our regression 
analyses is tabulated in the online appendix (Table OA2). Not surprising, the correlation between 
OPI and RP_OPI, is modest, only 0.13 (Spearman) and 0.12 (Pearson). Still, the two correlation 
coefficients are highly statistically significant (p-values < 0.01), reinforcing the importance of 
controlling for aggregate opinion in traditional media. Overall, the small pairwise correlation 
coefficients among our control variables indicate that there is little evidence of a multi-collinearity 
problem in our data (one notable exception is SIZE, which, as might be expected, is positively 
correlated with ROA and ANL, and negatively correlated with LOSS, RATING, and SPEC). 
 
V. 
EMPIRICAL RESULTS 
Does Aggregate Twitter Opinion Convey Economically Important Information? 
To examine whether Twitter conveys economically meaningful information to the 
corporate bond market, we first estimate Equation (1) for the full sample and for two subsamples 
partitioned by the sign of the earnings news, positive or negative. The dependent variable is either 
bond returns (BONDRET) or changes in CDS spreads (ΔCDSSPREAD), measured in the [-2;+2] 
window around earnings announcements. The results are presented in Table 4, Panel A. The first 
three columns use BONDRET as the dependent variable. In the full sample, we find that OPI has 
a significantly positive coefficient on 0.053 (t-statistic = 3.18). Recall that the regression controls 
for a number of possible confounds including the earnings forecast error (FE) and the stock market 
reaction to the earnings news (STOCKRET[-2;-+2]).18 This suggests that the ability of OPI to predict 
announcement bond returns is incremental to any mechanical association with the stock market 
 
18 It is important to control for contemporaneous stock returns in a test with bond returns as a dependent variable 
because prior research, notably Fama and French (1993) and Even-Tov (2017), documents a positive correlation 
between stock returns and bond returns around earnings announcements. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

24 
reaction. The interquartile range of OPI in the sample of 6,862 observations included in this 
regression is 1.526 (0.803 minus -0.723). From an economic significance perspective, a coefficient 
on OPI of 0.053 implies a difference in BONDRET between observations in the 25th and 75th 
percentiles of the OPI distribution of 0.081% (= 1.526*0.053), i.e., 8.1 basis points over a five-
day window, which translates into 4.16% annualized returns. 
Easton et al. (2009) find that the corporate bond market is more sensitive to bad news as 
opposed to good news and ascribe this finding to the nonlinear payoff structure of bonds. Using 
the realized earnings forecast error (FE) as a proxy for news, we partition our sample into bad 
news (FE < 0) and good news (FE ≥ 0) subsamples and rerun our tests. The results, presented in 
the next two columns of Table 4, Panel A, show, as expected, that the effect of OPI on 
announcement bond returns is stronger for bad news than for good news. The coefficient on OPI 
is 0.140 (t-statistic = 3.55) in the bad news subsample, but only 0.015 (t-statistic = 0.76) in the 
good news subsample, with a significant difference of 0.125 (t-statistic = 2.85).19 Since the OPI 
window precedes the earnings announcement, one way to interpret these findings is that bond 
market participants seem to weight past Twitter opinion based on the ex post sign of the earnings 
news revealed by the earnings announcement. This interpretation would imply bond investors react 
to Twitter information in a delayed fashion conditional on the revelation of the sign of the earnings 
news. 
The three right-most columns of Table 4, Panel A, repeat the analysis with 
ΔCDSSPREAD[-2;+2] as the dependent variable. Consistent with the BONDRET results, we find a 
significantly negative coefficient on OPI of -0.438 (t-statistic = -3.68) for the full sample. This 
coefficient represents a decrease in CDS spreads of 0.665% (= 1.518*-0.438), over the earnings 
announcement window, for an interquartile increase in OPI (0.757 minus -0.761, in the sample of 
3,500 observations). In comparison, the sample mean and median change in CDS spreads are only 
 
19 The significance of the difference in the coefficients is computed using a differences-in-means test with a pooled 
estimate of standard error. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

25 
-0.434% and -0.280%, respectively. We also find a stronger association for bad news (coefficient 
on OPI = -0.816; t-statistic = -2.72) than for good news (coefficient on OPI = -0.224; t-statistic = 
-1.71), with a marginally significant difference of -0.592 (t-statistic = -1.81). Overall, the results 
in Table 4, Panel A, support that aggregate Twitter opinion predicts upcoming announcement bond 
returns and changes in CDS spreads, primarily when firms are experiencing bad news. 
We next carry out cross-sectional tests to determine whether the ability of OPI to predict 
announcement bond returns and changes in CDS spreads is stronger in settings where OPI may 
have a more salient role. Our first partition is based on the contents of the tweets. Recall that our 
sample includes tweets pertaining to bonds, credit risk, firm fundamentals, and/or securities 
trading. If the tweets contain information directly pertinent to bonds or credit risk, they should 
elicit a stronger response from the bond market than tweets pertaining to firm fundamentals or 
trading. For each firm-quarter observation, we thus calculate the proportion of tweets that are 
related to bonds and/or credit risk (%BOND) and partition the sample into subsamples of high and 
low %BOND. We then estimate Equation (1) for the two partitions. The results are presented in 
Panel B of Table 4.20 As the results indicate, the ability of OPI to predict both announcement bond 
returns and changes in CDS spreads is significantly stronger when a greater portion of the tweets 
pertains specifically to bond and/or credit risk information. For instance, in the regression for 
BONDRET, the coefficient on OPI is positive, 0.100, and highly significant (t-statistic = 4.30) for 
the high %BOND subsample and insignificant -0.003 (t-statistic = -0.12) for the low %BOND 
tweet subsample, with the difference between these two coefficients, 0.103, being highly 
significant (t-statistic = 2.85). We find similar results for ΔCDSSPREAD. 
Our next partition is motivated by findings in prior research that indicate speculative-grade 
bond prices show a greater sensitivity to news than investment-grade (e.g., Gkougkousi 2014; 
Even-Tov 2017), suggesting that the ability of OPI to predict announcement bond returns/changes 
 
20 In Panels B, C, and D of Tables 4-7, only the results for OPI coefficients are presented. For parsimony, coefficients 
on the control variables are not reported. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

26 
in CDS spreads should be more pronounced for speculative-grade bonds than investment-grade 
bonds. We test this by estimating Equation (1) for subsamples of speculative-grade and 
investment-grade bonds. Panel C of Table 4 displays the results. We find positive (negative) 
coefficients on OPI for announcement bond returns (changes in CDS spreads) for both subsamples. 
The differences in coefficients between the two subsamples are statistically insignificant, however. 
Our final partition is motivated by Akins (2018), who documents that higher reporting 
quality is associated with less uncertainty about credit risk. Twitter information may thus provide 
greater incremental information for firms with high information uncertainty (i.e., lower reporting 
quality) and higher uncertainty about credit risk. Consistent with prior research (Jiang et al. 2005; 
Zhang 2006), we use stock return volatility to measure information uncertainty and estimate 
Equation (1) for subsamples of high and low uncertainty. The results are presented in Panel D of 
Table 4. Consistent with our conjecture, the ability of OPI to predict BONDRET is stronger in the 
high information uncertainty subsample. The coefficient on OPI for the high uncertainty 
subsample is 0.091 (t-statistic = 2.86) as opposed to 0.022 (t-statistic = 1.24) for the low 
uncertainty subsample, with the difference between the coefficients, 0.069, being marginally 
significant (t-statistic = 1.90). This is consistent with the evidence in Akins (2018) and suggests 
that the salience of information from Twitter for debt investors increases with information 
uncertainty. However, when we repeat the analysis using ΔCDSSPREAD, we do not find a 
significant difference in the coefficient on OPI between the two subsamples. 
To complement our short-window tests, we employ Equation (2) that estimates the 
association between OPI and changes in bond yield spreads (ΔYIELD) over two alternative 
windows, [q-1;q+1] and [q-1;q+3], where q is the quarter where OPI is measured.21 In Equation 
(2), we expect the coefficient on ΔYIELD to be negative, as more positive news in OPI would be 
 
21 The bond yield spread is the difference between the yield to maturity of a traded bond and the yield to maturity of 
a Treasury security with a corresponding duration. If a firm has more than one traded bond, we calculate the weighted 
average yield spread of the individual bonds. The yields on Treasury securities are from the H.15 release published 
by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

27 
associated with lower bond yield spreads. The results are presented in Table 5. As before, Panel A 
presents the results for the entire sample, and Panels B, C, and D the results from cross-sectional 
analyses. Consider the results in Panel A first. The coefficients on OPI for both windows are 
significantly negative. For [q-1;q+1], the coefficient on OPI is, as expected, negative (-0.166) and 
highly significant (t-statistic = -3.29). Likewise, for [q-1;q+3], the coefficient on OPI is negative, 
-0.269, and highly significant (t-statistic = -3.58). These coefficients represent a decrease in bond 
yield spreads of 0.259 (= 1.562*-0.166) and 0.425 (= 1.580*-0.269), over the windows [q-1;q+1] 
and [q-1;q+3], respectively, for an interquartile increase in OPI (i.e., 0.758 minus -0.804, and 0.757 
minus -0.823, in the samples of 5,402 and 5,228 observations, respectively). In contrast, the sample 
mean (median) change in bond yield spreads is only -0.145 (-0.224) and -0.083 (-0.239), 
respectively. 
We next carry out cross-sectional tests to determine whether the association between OPI 
and ΔYIELD is stronger in settings where OPI is expected to have a more salient effect. 
Specifically, we re-estimate Equation (2) using the same three partitions used in Table 4.22 Table 
5, Panel B, presents results for subsamples of high and low proportions of bond/credit risk-related 
tweets. Consistent with expectations, we find a significantly negative coefficient on OPI for the 
high %BOND subsample (coefficient = -0.210; t-statistic = -3.27), while the coefficient on OPI 
for the low %BOND subsample is insignificant (coefficient = -0.120; t-statistic = -1.40). Contrary 
to the results in Panel B of Table 4, however, the difference between these two OPI coefficients is 
insignificant. Table 5, Panel C, tests whether the association between OPI and ΔYIELD is more 
pronounced for speculative-grade bonds as opposed to investment-grade bonds. While OPI is 
significantly associated with ΔYIELD for both speculative-grade and investment-grade bonds, as 
expected the coefficient on OPI is significantly larger for speculative-grade bonds (-0.362; t-
statistic = -2.73) than for investment-grade bonds (-0.127; t-statistic = -3.98), with the difference 
 
22 Panels B, C, and D of Tables 5 and 7 (Table 6) present only the results for the [q-1;q+1] ([-2;+65]) window. The 
results for the [q-1;q+3] ([-2;+190]) window are similar and not tabulated for parsimony. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

28 
between these two coefficients, -0.235 being marginally significant (t-statistic = -1.72). Panel D 
partitions our sample on the basis of information uncertainty. Consistent with our conjecture, the 
association between OPI and ΔYIELD is significantly more pronounced for the high information 
uncertainty subsample. The coefficient on OPI for the high uncertainty subsample is -0.380 (t-
statistic = -4.20) as opposed to -0.061 (t-statistic = -0.86) for the low uncertainty subsample, with 
the difference between these coefficients, -0.319, being highly significant (t-statistic = -2.77). 
Collectively, the results from Tables 4 and 5 support our conjecture that Twitter reflects 
information used by investors in the corporate bond market. 
 
Aggregate Twitter Opinion and Future Changes in Credit Ratings 
Our results thus far suggest that aggregate Twitter opinion provides economically 
meaningful information to the corporate bond market, as it is associated with announcement bond 
returns, changes in CDS spreads, and changes in bond yield spreads. Our second set of tests 
examines whether Twitter information is associated with changes in credit ratings. We examine 
this by estimating a multinomial logit specified in Equation (3) that considers the likelihood of 
either a downgrade or an upgrade in S&P credit ratings in the three or nine months after the OPI 
window. 
Table 6, Panel A, presents the results, where the coefficients for downgrades and upgrades 
are presented side-by-side. As the results indicate, OPI is strongly negatively associated with 
downgrades, but insignificantly related to upgrades. To illustrate, for the window [-2;+65], the 
coefficients on OPI for downgrades is -0.250 (t-statistic = -3.97), while the coefficient for upgrade 
is only -0.066 (t-statistic = -1.00). The difference between these two coefficients, -0.184, is 
significant (t-statistic = -2.01). The results are almost identical for the longer window [-2;+190]. 
These results suggest that aggregate Twitter opinion provides information that is incremental to 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

29 
that reflected in the credit ratings, but only for rating downgrades.23 This is consistent with the 
results in prior literature and our earlier results that suggest a greater relevance of negative 
information in the corporate bond market, as well as with the findings in Gu and Kurov (2020) that 
tweets provide new information about analysts’ stock recommendations and price targets. 
We next test whether the association between Twitter information and credit rating changes 
is stronger in settings where such information is likely to have greater salience—i.e., for 
observations with greater bond-related tweets, for speculative bonds, and in settings of high 
information uncertainty. Table 6, Panel B, presents the results for subsamples of high and low 
proportions of bond/credit risk-related tweets. OPI is significantly associated with credit rating 
downgrades in the high %BOND subsample (coefficient = -0.278; t-statistic = -3.32) as well as in 
the low %BOND subsample (coefficient -0.199; t-statistic -2.07). The difference between the 
coefficients, -0.078, however, is insignificant (t-statistic = -0.61). There is an insignificant 
difference between the coefficients on OPI for UPGRADE, with the coefficients being 
insignificant for both subsamples. Table 6, Panel C, presents the results for the partition based on 
speculative-grade and investment-grade bonds. As expected, OPI is significantly negatively 
associated with credit rating downgrades for speculative bonds (coefficient = -0.356; t-statistic = 
-3.77), while the association is insignificant for investment-grade bonds (coefficient = -0.107; t-
statistic = -1.20). The difference between the two coefficients, -0.249, is significant (t-statistic = 
-1.92). For credit rating upgrades, OPI coefficients and differences are insignificant. Finally, Table 
6, Panel D, presents the results for the partition based on information uncertainty. OPI is 
significantly negatively associated with credit rating downgrades for both high information 
uncertainty (coefficient = -0.247; t-statistic = -3.06) and low information uncertainty (coefficient 
 
23 To be sure, our results do not necessarily imply that credit rating agencies rely on the aggregate Twitter opinion 
when revising their ratings. It is possible that, in their credit rating decisions, they utilize other information that is 
associated with the Twitter information. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

30 
= -0.187; t-statistic = -2.03) subsamples. The difference between the coefficients is insignificant 
at -0.059 (t-statistic = -0.48), however. For credit rating upgrades, as before, the coefficients on 
OPI are insignificant for both subsamples, as is the difference between the coefficients. 
Overall, the results in Table 6 offer additional insight into how Twitter information conveys 
economically meaningful information to the corporate bond market by providing evidence of an 
association between OPI and future credit rating changes. Specifically, the findings suggest that 
Twitter information is relevant for credit rating downgrades but not for upgrades, consistent with 
the nonlinear payoff structure of bonds. Further, the information is particularly relevant for 
speculative bonds as opposed to investment-grade bonds. Interestingly, the information is relevant 
for subsamples with high and low proportions of bond/credit risk-related tweets as well as in 
settings of high and low information uncertainty. This highlights that Twitter provides information 
pertaining to future credit rating changes in all settings, even where Twitter opinion is less expected 
to play a salient role (i.e., low proportions of bond/credit risk-related tweets and low information 
uncertainty). 
 
Aggregate Twitter Opinion and Future Changes in Default Risk 
Our third and final set of tests examines the nature of the Twitter information underlying 
our findings by examining whether aggregate Twitter opinion is associated with future changes in 
default risk. To that end, we estimate Equation (4), which regresses changes in implied default 
probability on OPI and control variables. Table 7 reports the results for the full sample (Panel A) 
and from cross-sectional analyses (Panels B-D). Consider the results in Panel A first. The first two 
columns present results using ΔZ-PROB as the dependent variable for [q-1;q+1] and [q-1;q+3]. In 
both regressions, OPI has a significantly negative coefficient; the coefficient on OPI for ΔZ-
PROB[q-1;q+1] is -0.544 (t-statistic = -6.28), and the coefficient on OPI for ΔZ-PROB[q-1;q+3] is almost 
twice as large at -0.943 (t-statistic = -8.28). For an interquartile increase in OPI in each sample, 
these coefficients represent a decrease in ΔZ-PROB of 0.836 (= 1.536*-0.544) and 1.443 (= 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

31 
1.530*-0.943), over the windows [q-1;q+1] and [q-1;q+3], respectively, which represent 9.5 to 
11.8 times the sample mean or median of ΔZ-PROB. The next sets of columns present similar 
results for ΔO-PROB and even stronger results for ΔBSM-PROB. As we control for FE and 
STOCKRET[-2;+2], our findings are incremental to the association between OPI and earnings and 
announcement stock returns documented in Bartov et al. (2018). Overall, we find strong support 
that OPI potentially provides information related to future changes in default risk. 
 
We next carry out cross-sectional tests to determine whether the association between OPI 
and changes in default risk is stronger in settings where OPI may have a more salient effect. We 
re-estimate Equation (4) using the same three partitions used before. Table 7, Panel B, focuses on 
subsamples of high and low proportion of bond/credit risk-related tweets. Interestingly, there is no 
difference between these two subsamples for any of the three credit risk measures, i.e., both 
bond/credit risk-related tweets and tweets related to firm fundamentals or securities trading are 
associated with future changes in default risk. This is an interesting contrast to our prior results, 
especially for our short-window tests, which were more pronounced for the high %BOND 
subsample. While OPI has a greater ability to predict announcement bond returns and changes in 
CDS spreads when %BOND is higher, the proportion of bond/credit risk-related tweets does not 
seem to have similar implications for the association between OPI and changes in default risk. 
Table 7, Panel C, tests whether the association between OPI and ΔPROB may be more 
pronounced for speculative-grade bonds as opposed to investment-grade bonds. As the results 
indicate, OPI is significantly associated with ΔPROB in all specifications for both speculative-
grade and investment-grade bonds. More importantly, we find that the coefficient on OPI is 
significantly larger in magnitude for speculative-grade bonds than investment-grade bonds for all 
the three measures of ΔPROB. For instance, in the regression where ΔZ-PROB is the dependent 
variable, the coefficient on OPI is -0.750 (t-statistic = -3.89) for speculative-grade bonds and 
-0.368 (t-statistic = -5.61) for investment-grade bonds, with the difference between these two 
coefficients, -0.382 being marginally significant (t-statistic = -1.87). We find stronger statistically 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

32 
significant differences in the OPI coefficients between speculative-grade bonds and investment-
grade bonds for ΔO-PROB and ΔBSM-PROB, -0.382 (t-statistic = -2.13) and -2.218 (t-statistic = -
5.20), respectively. These findings, which are consistent with the findings in Gkougkousi (2014) 
and Even-Tov (2017), suggest that Twitter provides information pertaining to future changes in 
default risk that is more relevant for firms with speculative-grade bonds. 
 
Finally, Table 7, Panel D, estimates Equation (4) for the subsamples of high and low 
information uncertainty. Consistent with our conjecture, the association between OPI and ΔPROB 
is significantly more pronounced for the high information uncertainty subsample as opposed to the 
low information uncertainty subsample for all three alternative measures of changes in implied 
default probability. For example, when ΔZ-PROB is the dependent variable, the coefficient on OPI 
for the high uncertainty subsample, -0.942 (t-statistic = -5.04), is more than fourfold higher than 
the -0.215 (t-statistic = -3.60) coefficient on OPI for the low uncertainty subsample, and the 
difference between these two coefficients, -0.726, is highly significant (t-statistic = -3.70). This 
corroborates the evidence in Akins (2018) and suggests that the salience of information from 
Twitter for debt investors increases with information uncertainty. Overall, the results from Table 
7 indicate the information OPI conveys to the bond market relates to changes in default risk. 
 
Robustness and Additional Analyses 
In addition to our primary vocabulary based OPI measure, we create an alternate measure, 
OPI_BAYES, based on the enhanced naïve Bayes algorithm developed by Narayanan et al. (2013). 
This algorithm identifies individual tweets as negative, positive, or neutral, and provides a 
probability level (between 50% and 100%) for reliability. To compute OPI_BAYES, we first 
weight each tweet by its probability and follow a similar process as we do for our primary OPI 
measure to aggregate individual tweets. Specifically, we weight each tweet by [1 + Log 
(1 + Number of Followers)]. Finally, OPI_BAYES is minus one multiplied by the weighted number 
of negative tweets, scaled by one plus the sum of the probability levels for positive and negative 
tweets. We rerun all the tests in the paper using OPI_BAYES as our metric of aggregate Twitter 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

33 
opinion. The results are qualitatively similar and tabulated in the first four tables of our Online 
Appendix (Tables OA3 to OA6). 
Bartov et al. (2018) find that tweets conveying original information as well as tweets 
disseminating existing information predict upcoming earnings and announcement stock returns. 
Following their classification, we examine and find that the results (tabulated in the Online 
Appendix, Tables OA7 to OA10) also hold in our setting for both original tweets (50,937 tweets 
or 22% of our sample) as well as dissemination tweets (182,533 tweets or 78%). To provide 
examples, when estimating Equation (1) with CDSSPREAD as the dependent variable, the OPI 
coefficients are significantly negative, -0.257 (t-statistic = -1.86) and -0.348 (t-statistic = -2.99), 
respectively, for original and dissemination tweets. Moreover, the difference between the two 
coefficients is statistically insignificant (t-statistic = -0.50). Likewise, when estimating Equation 
(4) with ΔBSM-PROB[q-1;q+1] as the dependent variable, OPI exhibits significantly negative 
coefficients for original and dissemination tweets, -2.053 (t-statistic = -9.45) and -1.603 (t-statistic 
= -8.70), respectively, and the difference between the two coefficients is again statistically 
insignificant (t-statistic = 1.58). Thus, our findings hold for original tweets as well as dissemination 
tweets, suggesting that, like the stock market, Twitter also plays a dual role of communicating new 
information and disseminating existing information in the corporate bond market. 
Prior research (e.g., Mao et al. 2012; Curtis et al. 2016) documents that social-media 
activity per se (i.e., number of messages) may be informative to investors. To confirm that 
aggregate Twitter opinion, not merely Twitter activity, underlies our findings, we test the 
sensitivity of our findings to the level of Twitter activity. To that end, we first partition our sample 
into two subsamples based on Twitter activity, measured as the number of tweets posted by 
individual investors during the OPI window, [-10;-3], and then we replicate our tests separately 
for each subsample. The results (tabulated in the Online Appendix, Tables OA11 to OA14) are 
robust. For instance, when estimating Equation (1) with CDSSPREAD as the dependent variable, 
the OPI coefficients are significantly negative, -0.536 (t-statistic = -3.54) and -0.473 (t-statistic = 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

34 
-2.28), respectively, for the high and low Twitter activity subsamples. Moreover, the difference in 
the coefficients between the two subsamples is not statistically significant (t-statistic = -0.25). 
Similarly, when estimating Equation (4) with ΔBSM-PROB[q-1;q+1] as the dependent variable, OPI 
exhibits significantly negative coefficients for the high and low Twitter activity subsamples 
(-2.339 and -1.901, respectively, with t-statistics = -8.56 and -7.94), and the difference in the 
coefficients between the two subsamples is again statistically insignificant (t-statistic = -1.21). 
Thus, our findings are not driven by Twitter activity, but rather by the aggregate opinion derived 
from individual tweets. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Prior research in accounting and finance examining the relevance and reliability of 
information from online and social media platforms for capital market participants focuses on the 
stock market. The goal of our study is to shine a light on the informational role of social media in 
the corporate bond market. For that purpose, we analyze the aggregate opinion of individual 
Twitter messages about firms and their prospects for a broad sample of Russell 3000 firms, 
focusing on tweets related to bonds, credit risk, and fundamental information. 
Our first set of tests examines whether Twitter conveys economically important 
information to corporate bond market participants. We examine whether Twitter information helps 
predict bond returns and changes in CDS spreads around earnings announcements and whether 
Twitter information is associated with future changes in bond yield spreads. We find that aggregate 
Twitter opinion successfully predicts announcement bond returns and changes in CDS spreads and 
is negatively associated with future changes in bond yield spreads. These results hold after 
controlling for earnings news and announcement stock returns, and other controls, including the 
opinion from traditional media channels. Further, these associations are more pronounced when 
the underlying earnings news is negative, consistent with the nonlinear payoff structure of bonds. 
Our second set of tests examines whether aggregate Twitter opinion is associated with 
future changes in credit ratings. We find that aggregate Twitter opinion is negatively associated 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

35 
with the probability of rating downgrades, but insignificantly related to the probability of upgrades. 
These results suggest that Twitter information reflects the information used by credit rating 
agencies, but only for credit rating downgrades. To better understand the nature of information 
conveyed by Twitter to the corporate bond market, our third and final set of tests examines whether 
aggregate Twitter opinion is associated with future changes in default risk. We document a 
significantly negative association between aggregate Twitter opinion and future changes in implied 
default probability. This association is more pronounced for firms with speculative-grade bonds 
and firms in more uncertain information environments. Thus, Twitter appears to provide a 
potentially relevant signal to bond market participants pertaining to default risk. 
Overall, our findings suggest that aggregate Twitter opinion is potentially relevant and 
economically important, not only for stock market investors as documented by Bartov et al. (2018), 
but also for corporate bond market participants. We contribute to the literatures on the role of 
social media in capital markets and the role of earnings and financial disclosures in the corporate 
bond market. These two literatures have demonstrated, respectively, that Twitter information helps 
predict quarterly earnings and announcement stock-price changes (Bartov et al. 2018), and that the 
nonlinear payoff structure of bonds has important implications for the reaction of bond prices to 
earnings news (Easton et al. 2009). We contribute to these literatures by being the first to show 
that Twitter information predicts bond announcement returns and changes in CDS spreads and is 
associated with future changes in bond yield spreads and credit ratings, in a manner consistent 
with the nonlinear payoff structure of bonds. We also shed light on the nature of the information 
conveyed by aggregate Twitter opinion to the corporate bond market (i.e., changes in default risk). 
Notably, we provide novel evidence that social media appears to convey economically important 
information to even the presumably sophisticated investors who dominate the corporate bond 
market, an important financial market that differs significantly from the stock market, as well as 
to credit rating agencies. Our results may thus inform bond and CDS investors, bond analysts, and 
credit rating agencies. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

36 
References 
Akins, B. 2018. Financial reporting quality and uncertainty about credit risk among ratings 
agencies. The Accounting Review 93(4): 1–22. 
Ashcraft, A. and J. Santos. 2009. Has the CDS market lowered the cost of corporate debt? Journal 
of Monetary Economics 56(4): 514–523. 
Altman, E. 1968. Financial ratios, discriminant analysis and the prediction of corporate 
bankruptcy. Journal of Finance 23: 589–609. 
Bai, J. and L. Wu. 2016. Anchoring credit default swap spreads to firm fundamentals. Journal of 
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 51: 1521–1543. 
Bartov, E., L. Faurel and P. Mohanram. 2018. Can Twitter help predict firm-level earnings and 
stock returns? The Accounting Review 93: 25–57. 
Beaver, W., M. Correia and M. McNichols. 2011. Financial statement analysis and the prediction 
of financial distress. Foundations and Trends in Accounting 5(2): 99–173. 
Begley, J., J. Ming and S. Watts. 1996. Bankruptcy classification errors in the 1980s: An empirical 
analysis of Altman’s and Ohlson’s models. Review of Accounting Studies 1: 267–284. 
Bessembinder, H., K. Kahle, W. Maxwell and D. Xu. 2009. Measuring abnormal bond 
performance. Review of Financial Studies 22: 4219–4258. 
Bharath, S. and T. Shumway. 2008. Forecasting Default with the Merton Distance to Default 
Model. Review of Financial Studies 21(3): 1339–1369. 
Bhojraj, S. and B. Swaminathan. 2009. How does the corporate bond market value capital 
investments and accruals? Review of Accounting Studies 14: 31–62. 
Black, F. and M. Scholes. 1973. The pricing of options and corporate liabilities. Journal of 
Political Economy 7: 637–654. 
Bonsall, S. and B. Miller. 2017. The impact of narrative disclosure readability on bond ratings and 
the cost of debt capital. Review of Accounting Studies 22(2): 608–643. 
Callen, J., J. Livnat and D. Segal. 2009. The impact of earnings on the pricing of credit default 
swaps. The Accounting Review 84(5): 1363–1394. 
Campbell, J., H. Chen, D. Dhaliwal, H. Lu, and L. Steele. 2014. The Information Content of 
Mandatory Risk Factor Disclosures in Corporate Filings. Review of Accounting Studies 19(1): 
396–455. 
Carhart, M. 1997. On persistence in mutual fund performance. Journal of Finance 52: 57–82. 
Cassar G., C. Ittner and K. Cavalluzzo. 2015. Alternative information sources and information 
asymmetry reduction: Evidence from small business debt. Journal of Accounting and 
Economics 59(2-3): 242–263. 
Chava, S., and R. Jarrow. 2004. Bankruptcy prediction with industry effects. Review of Finance 8: 
537–569. 
Chen, H., P. De, Y. Hu and B. Hwang. 2014. Wisdom of crowds: The value of stock opinions 
transmitted through social media. Review of Financial Studies 27: 1367–1403. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

37 
Curtis, A., V. Richardson and R. Schmadebeck. 2016. Investor attention and the pricing of earnings 
news.’ In Handbook of Sentiment Analysis in Finance, edited by Mitra, G., and X. Yu: Chapter 
8, 212–232. London, U.K.: Albury Press. 
Da, Z., J. Engelberg, P. Gao. 2011. In search of attention. Journal of Finance 66: 1461–1499. 
Datta, S. and U. Dhillon. 1993. Bond and stock market response to unexpected earnings 
announcements. The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 28(4): 565–577. 
DeFond, M. and J. Zhang. 2014. The timeliness of bond market reaction to bad earnings news. 
Contemporary Accounting Research 31: 911–936. 
De Franco, G., F. Vasvari and R. Wittenberg-Moerman. 2009. The informational role of bond 
analysts. Journal of Accounting Research 47: 1201–1248. 
Dick-Nielsen, J. 2009. Liquidity biases in TRACE. The Journal of Fixed Income 19: 43–55. 
Dick-Nielsen, J. 2014. ‘How to clean enhanced TRACE data.’ Working paper, Copenhagen 
Business School. 
Easton, P., S. Monahan and F. Vasvari. 2009. Initial evidence on the role of accounting earnings 
in the bond market. Journal of Accounting Research 47: 721–766. 
Engelberg, J. 2008. Costly information processing: Evidence from earnings announcements. 
Working paper, University of California San Diego, San Diego, California. 
Even-Tov, O. 2017. When does the bond price reaction to earnings announcements predict future 
stock returns? Journal of Accounting and Economics 64: 167–182. 
Fama, E. and K. French. 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds.’ Journal 
of Financial Economics 33: 3–56. 
Fama, E. and K. French. 1997. Industry costs of equity. Journal of Financial Economics 43: 153–
193. 
Gabrovšek P, D. Aleksovski, I. Mozetič and M. Grčar. 2017. Twitter sentiment around the earnings 
announcement events. PLoS ONE 12(2): e0173151. 
Gkougkousi, X. 2014. Aggregate earnings and corporate bond markets. Journal of Accounting 
Research 52(1): 75–106. 
Gu C., and A. Kurov. 2020. Informational role of social media: Evidence from Twitter sentiment. 
Journal of Banking & Finance, 121: Article 105969. 
Hillegeist, S., E. Keating, D. Cram and K. Lundstedt. 2004. Assessing the probability of 
bankruptcy. Review of Accounting Studies 9: 5–34. 
Hirschey, M., V. Richardson and S. Scholz. 2000. Stock price effects of Internet buy-sell 
recommendations: The Motley Fool case. Financial Review 35: 147–174. 
Hotchkiss, E. and T. Ronen. 2002. The informational efficiency of the corporate bond market: an 
intraday analysis. Review of Financial Studies 15: 1325–1354. 
Hu, M. and B. Liu. 2004. Mining and summarizing customer reviews. Proceedings of the ACM 
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

38 
Jame, R., R. Johnston, S. Markov and M. Wolfe. 2016. The value of crowdsourced earnings 
forecasts. Journal of Accounting Research 54(4): 1077–1110. 
Jiang, G., C. Lee and Y. Zhang. 2005. Information uncertainty and expected returns. Review of 
Accounting Studies 10: 185–221. 
Jung, M., J. Naughton, A. Tahoun and C. Wang. 2018. Do firms strategically disseminate? 
Evidence from corporate use of social media. The Accounting Review 93: 225–252. 
Loughran, T. and B. McDonald. 2011. When is a liability not a liability? Textual Analysis, 
Dictionaries, and 10-Ks. Journal of Finance 66: 35–65. 
Mao, Y., W. Wei, B. Wang and B. Liu. 2012 Correlating S&P 500 stocks with Twitter data. 
Proceedings of the First ACM International Workshop on Hot Topics on Interdisciplinary 
Social Networks: 69–72. 
McCrum, D. 2018. Most bonds don’t trade. Financial Times: Sept 10. 
Merton, R. 1974. On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest rates. Journal of 
Finance 29: 449–470. 
Micu, M., E. Remolona and P. Woolridge. 2004. The price impact of rating announcements: 
evidence from the credit default swap market. BIS Quarterly Review June Issue: 55–65. 
Narayanan, V., I. Arora and A. Bhatia. 2013. Fast and accurate sentiment classification using an 
enhanced Naive Bayes model. Intelligent Data Engineering and Automated Learning IDEAL 
2013. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 8206: 194–201. 
Ohlson, J. 1980. Financial Ratios and the Probabilistic Prediction of Bankruptcy. Journal of 
Accounting Research 18: 109–131. 
Ohlson, J. and B. Juettner-Nauroth. 2005. Expected EPS and EPS Growth as Determinants of 
Value. Review of Accounting Studies 10: 349–365. 
Ranco G, D. Aleksovski, G. Caldarelli, M. Grčar and I. Mozetič . 2015. The effects of Twitter 
sentiment on stock price returns. PLoS ONE 10(9): e0138441. 
Ronen, T. and X. Zhou. 2013. Trade and information in the corporate bond market. Journal of 
Financial Markets 16: 61–103. 
Sethuraman, M. 2019. The effect of reputation shocks to rating agencies on corporate disclosures. 
The Accounting Review 94: 299–326. 
Shumway, T. 1997. The delisting bias in CRSP data. Journal of Finance 52: 327–340. 
Tetlock, P. 2007. Giving content to investor sentiment: The role of media in the stock market. 
Journal of Finance 62: 1139–1168. 
Wall Street Journal. 2014. Study: Crowdsourced Stock Opinions Beat Analysts, News. March 19. 
Zhang, X. 2006. Information Uncertainty and Stock Returns. Journal of Finance 61: 105–136. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

39 
APPENDIX A: Variable Definitions 
 
Variable 
Definition 
ANL 
Natural logarithm of one plus the number of analysts in the latest I/B/E/S consensus analyst 
quarterly earnings per share (EPS) forecast prior to the quarter end date. 
ASSETS 
Total assets (ATQ). 
BONDRET (%) 
Buy-and-hold adjusted bond returns for the window specified, where day 0 is the quarterly earnings 
announcement date, multiplied by 100, using the Trace database. We exclude cancelled, corrected, 
commission, special trades and all trades under $100,000. We weight each of the remaining bond 
trades by dollar value to compute daily “clean” prices (prices before accrued interest) for each 
traded bond. We then add accrued interest to each clean price to calculate daily “dirty” prices (prices 
after accrued interest) for each traded bond, and compute daily raw bond returns using daily dirty 
prices. We adjust each daily raw return by subtracting the risk-free rate on that day, using the return 
on a Treasury security with similar maturity. We require the absolute value of the daily-adjusted 
bond returns to be less than 20% to eliminate erroneous data. We compute buy-and-hold adjusted 
bond returns for the window specified for each traded bond. Finally, if a firm has more than one 
traded bond in the quarter, we aggregate the individual buy-and-hold adjusted bond returns at the 
firm level using a value-weighted mean. 
ΔBSM-PROB (%) 
Change in implied default probability, multiplied by 100, where implied default probability is 
estimated based on the Black-Scholes-Merton model, as outlined in Hillegeist et al. (2004) and 
Bharath and Shumway (2008).24 The default probability is estimated using the following standard 
normal distribution model: 
2
ln(
/
)
(
(
/ 2))
A
A
A
V
X
N





+
−
−




 (5) 
where VA is market value of assets ((CSHOQ*PRCCQ)+X), X is face value of debt 
(DLCQ+0.5*DLTTQ), μ is expected return on assets (measured using most recent VA return), and σA
is asset volatility (estimated iteratively using equity volatility and VA return). 
ΔCDSSPREAD (%) 
Change in credit default swap (CDS) spread, for five-year CDS contracts denominated in U.S. 
dollars with MR type documentation and senior (‘SNRFOR’) tier, for the window specified, where 
day 0 is the quarterly earnings announcement date, computed as the CDS spread on the last day of 
the window divided by the CDS spread on the first day of the window minus one, multiplied by 
100, using the Markit database. 
ΔO-PROB (%) 
Change in implied default probability, multiplied by 100, where implied default probability is 
estimated based on O-Score converted into probability using the logit function and O-Score is 
computed using Ohlson’s (1980) model as follows: 
O = -1.32 - 0.407*Log(ATQ*1,000,000/GNPIndex) + 6.03*(LTQ/ATQ) 
- 1.43*(ACTQ-LCTQ)/ATQ + 0.0757*(LCTQ/ACTQ) - 2.37*X - 1.83*(NIQ/ATQ) 
- 1.72*(4*(PIQ+DPQ))/LTQ + 0.285*Y - 0.521*(NIQ - LNIQ)/ ((abs(NIQ)+abs(LNIQ)) (6) 
where X=1 if LTQ>ATQ, 0 otherwise, and Y=1 if NIQ<0 and LNIQ<0, 0 otherwise. 
ΔRATING 
Categorical variable equal to minus one if a traded bond has a decrease in S&P rating (i.e., 
downgrade), equal to plus one if a traded bond has an increase in S&P rating (i.e., upgrade), zero 
otherwise, using the Mergent FISD database. 
ΔYIELD 
Change in bond yield spread, where bond yield spread is the difference between the yield to maturity 
of a traded bond and the yield to maturity of a Treasury security with a corresponding duration, 
using the Trace database. If a firm has more than one traded bond, we calculate the weighted average 
yield spread of the individual bonds. The yields on Treasury securities are from the H.15 release 
published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
ΔZ-PROB (%) 
Change in implied default probability, multiplied by 100, where implied default probability is 
estimated based on Z-Score converted into probability using the logit function and Z-Score is 
computed using Altman’s (1968) model as follows: 
Z = 1.2*(ACTQ-LCTQ)/ATQ + 1.4*(REQ/ATQ) + 3.3*(4*NIQ-XINTQ-TXTQ)/ATQ 
 + 0.6*(PRCCQ*CSHOQ)/LTQ + 0.999*(4*SALEQ/ATQ) (7) 
 
24 Additional details are available in the Appendix of Hillegeist et al. (2004). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

40 
DOWNGRADE 
Indicator variable equal to one if a traded bond has a decrease in S&P rating, zero otherwise, using 
the Mergent FISD database. 
FE (%) 
Analyst earnings forecast error, measured as I/B/E/S reported quarterly EPS less the latest I/B/E/S 
consensus analyst quarterly EPS forecast just prior to the quarterly earnings announcement date, 
scaled by stock price as of the forecast date, multiplied by 100. 
HORIZON 
Number of days between the quarterly earnings announcement date and the traded bond’s maturity 
date, using the Mergent FISD database. If a firm has more than one traded bond, we aggregate the 
individual bond horizons at the firm level using a value-weighted mean. 
INST 
Number of shares held by institutional investors scaled by total shares outstanding as of the quarter 
end date, using the Thomson-Reuters 13F database. 
LEV 
Total (short-term and long-term) debt scaled by total assets (DLTTQ+DLCQ)/ATQ). 
LOSS 
Indicator variable equal to one if earnings before extraordinary items (IBQ) is strictly negative in 
the quarter, zero otherwise. 
MB 
Ratio of market value to book value of equity ([CSHOQ*PRCCQ]/CEQQ) as of the quarter end 
date. 
MVE 
Market value of equity (CSHOQ*PRCCQ). 
OPI 
Single factor from a factor analysis using three vocabulary-based measures. The number of words 
classified as negative in each tweet is weighted by the number of followers of the user 
{1 + [Log(1 + Number of Followers)]}. Each measure is defined as minus one multiplied by the 
sum of the weighted number of negative words during the eight-trading-day window [-10;-3], where 
day 0 is the quarterly earnings announcement date, scaled by one plus the number of words 
classified as positive or negative. The three measures employ, respectively, the following word lists 
and exclude words with negations: the Loughran and McDonald (2011) word list, the Harvard 
Psychosociological Dictionary (i.e., Harvard IV-4 TagNeg H4N) word list, and the Hu and Liu 
(2004) word list. 
%BOND 
Proportion of bond and/or credit risk-related tweets, measured as the percentage of tweets with bond 
and/or credit risk-related words and phrases. 
Q4 
Indicator variable equal to one if the quarter is the fourth fiscal quarter, zero otherwise. 
RATING 
S&P rating converted as AAA=1, AA+=2, …, D=22, using the Mergent FISD database. If a firm 
has more than one traded bond in the quarter, we calculate the weighted average S&P rating of the 
individual bonds. 
ROA 
Net income before extraordinary items (IBQ) scaled by average total assets (ATQ). 
RP_OPI 
Minus one multiplied by the number of traditional news events classified as negative during the 
eight-trading-day window [-10;-3], where day 0 is the quarterly earnings announcement date, using 
the RavenPack database. Each traditional news event is weighted by RavenPack’s ESS (Event 
Sentiment Score) rescaled to range between 0 and 1, where higher values indicate stronger 
sentiment. The measure is scaled by one plus the sum of the ESS rescaled for positive or negative 
traditional news events. 
SIZE 
Natural logarithm of MVE as of the quarter end date. 
SPEC 
Indicator variable equal to one for traded bonds with S&P rating below BBB-, zero otherwise, using 
the Mergent FISD database. If a firm has more than one traded bond in the quarter, we use the 
weighted average rating of individual bonds. 
STOCK RETURN 
VOLATILITY 
Stock return volatility, measured as the standard deviation of daily stock returns over the calendar 
year prior to the quarterly earnings announcement date, using the CRSP daily database. 
STOCKRET (%) 
Using Carhart’s (1997) four-factor model, we measure the buy-and-hold abnormal returns for firm 
i over the trading days around the quarterly earnings announcement date (day 0), as: 
STOCKRET = ∏ (1 + Rit) – ∏ (1 + ERit) (8) 
where, Rit is the daily return for firm i on day t, inclusive of dividends and other distributions, and 
ERit is the expected return on day t for that firm. Returns are multiplied by 100. If a firm delists 
during the return accumulation window, we compute the remaining return by using the CRSP daily 
delisting return, reinvesting any remaining proceeds in the appropriate benchmark portfolio, and 
adjusting the corresponding market return to reflect the effect of the delisting return on our measures 
of expected returns. Following Shumway (1997), we set missing performance-related delisting 
returns to -100%. We compute the daily abnormal returns using Carhart’s (1997) four-factor model 
by first estimating the following model using a 40-trading-day hold-out period, starting 55 trading 
days prior to the earnings announcement date: 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

41 
 Rit – RFt = ai + bi(RMRFt) + si(SMBt) + hi(HMLt) + pi(UMDt) + eit (9) 
where, Rit is defined as before, RFt is the one-month T-bill daily return, RMRFt is the daily excess 
return on a value-weighted aggregate stock market proxy, SMBt is the size factor, HMLt is the book-
to-market factor, and UMDt is the momentum factor. We use the estimated slopes from Equation (9), 
bi, si, hi, and pi, to compute the expected return for firm i on day t as follows: 
ERit = RFt + bi(RMRFt) + si(SMBt) + hi(HMLt) + pi(UMDt) (10) 
RF, RMRF, SMB, HML, and UMD are obtained from Professor Kenneth French’s web site 
(http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html, accessed March 15, 
2022). 
SUBORD 
Indicator variable equal to one if the firm has at least one traded bond in the quarter that is 
subordinated (identified as security_level other than ‘SEN’ or ‘SS’ in the Mergent FISD database, 
zero otherwise. 
UPGRADE 
Indicator variable equal to one if a traded bond has an increase in S&P rating, zero otherwise, using 
the Mergent FISD database. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

42 
APPENDIX B: Selecting Individual Tweets 
 
We select individual tweets containing bond-, credit risk-, fundamentals-, and/or securities trading-
related words and phrases. The list of bond- and/or credit risk-related words and phrases is 
compiled using the credit risk dictionary in Sethuraman (2019) augmented with additional words 
and phrases inspired from Campbell et al. (2014). It includes the following words and phrases: 
 
acquisition, additional capital, additional financing, adverse effect, adverse impact, agreement, 
amend, amendment, anti-takeover provision, anti-takeover provisions, asset sale, asset sales, 
assurance, assure, bad debt, balance, bank, bank borrowing, bank debt, bankrupt, bankruptcy, 
base, bond, bondholder, borrow, borrowing, borrowing base, borrowing capacity, callable, 
capital, capital deficiency, capital expenditure, capital expenditures, capital lease, capital leases, 
carryforward, cash need, cash, cdo, cds, cease, ceased, chapter 11, chapter 7, claim, close, 
closure, collateral, collection, commitment, competition, competitor, concentrated ownership, 
concern, contingency, contract, contractual obligation, covenant, convertible, coupon, covenant, 
covenants, coverage, coverage ratio, credit, credit facilities, credit facility, credit line, credit 
rating, credit risk, creditworthiness, curve, debt, debt agreement, debt balance, debt burden, debt 
covenant, debt discount, debt expense, debt financing, debt level, debt obligation, debt repayment, 
debt service, decline in price, decline in stock price, decline, deem, default, default provision, 
deficit, defined benefit, delay, derivative, difficulty, dilution, discontinue, discontinue operation, 
discontinued, disposal, disposal activity, disposition, disruption, dividends, doubt, downgrade, 
drop, duration, elimination, event, exit, expenditure, expense, face value, facilities, facility, fail, 
failure, family, file, filing, finance, financial, financial condition, financial covenant, financing, 
financing arrangement, financing costs, fitch, flow, force, foreclose, funded status, future, going, 
going concern, grade, growth, holder, illiquid market, immediately, impact, impairment, 
improvements, inability, incur, indebted, indebtedness, indenture, inflation, insider sales, insider, 
insurance, interest, interest payment, invest, investment, issuance, issuance cost, issue, junior, 
junk, lack, late, lawsuit, lease, lease commitment, lease commitments, lease obligation, leasehold, 
leases, leasing, legal, lender, leverage, leverage ratio, leveraged lease, leveraged leases, liability, 
libor, lien, likely to, limitation, limited trading, liquid, liquidation, liquidity, liquidity need, 
liquidity position, listing, litigation, loan, loan agreement, locked-in lease, locked-in leases, long-
term debt, loss, mandatory contribution, market risk, material impact, maturity, mbs, meet, 
merger, modification, moody, mortgage, negative cash , negative operating cash flow , negotiate, 
negotiation, net loss, new credit, new financing, note, notes, o.p.e.b., obligation, obligations, 
offering, opeb, operating loss, operating losses, outstanding, ownership, payable, payment, 
penalty, penny stock, penny, pension, poors, postretirement, prepayment, pressure, prime, prime 
rate, principal, proceed, proceeds, profitability, protection, raise, rate, rate risk, rating, 
recoverability, redeem, reduction, refinance, refinancing, 
reinsurance, renegotiation, 
reorganization, reorganize, repay, repayment, reserve, reserves, restatement, restriction, 
restructure, restructuring, result, retire, reversal, revolver, revolving, revolving credit, risk factor, 
risk, sale, schedule, secondary, secure, secured, securities, security, seek, sell asset, senior, settle, 
settlement, severance, severe, severity, speculative, spread, strategy, strong, structure, subject to, 
subordinate, subordinated, substantial, substantial doubt, success, sufficient, sufficient cash, 
swap, term, terminate, termination, unable, underfunded pensions, underwriting, unless, upgrade, 
valuation, variable rate, vendor, violation, volatility, warrant, workforce reduction, working cap, 
working capital, worth, write, write down, write off, writedown , write-down , writeoff , write-off , 
yield 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

43 
The list of fundamentals-related words and phrases is based on the list compiled by Bartov et al. 
(2018) and includes the following: 
 
accounting, acquir, adjusted, aggressive, asset, balance sheet, boosted, business model, capacity, 
capital, cash, CDS, charge, compete, competit, conservative, consumer, contract, corporat, 
covenant, customer, debt, decline, demand, dividend, earning, ebit, ebitda, effective, eps, equity, 
executive, expense, financial statement, fiscal, forecast, fraud, gaap, gain, goodwill, growth, in the 
black, in the green, in the red, income, income statement, industry, inflate, innovati, internal 
control, inventory, investigat, lawsuit, legal, lever, liquidity, loss, m&a, margin, miss, noi, nopat, 
normalized, obfuscate, oibda, operating, overstat, patent, peer, per share, ponzi, pro forma, pro-
forma, produc, profit, proforma, pyramid, rating, red flag, reserv, resource, restructur, results, 
revenue, risk, roll-up, sales, solven, supplier, surprise, takeover, technolog, whisper, writedown, 
write-down, writeoff, write-off, yearend, year-end. 
 
The list of securities trading-related words and phrases is based on the list compiled by Bartov et 
al. (2018) and includes the following: 
 
after hour, analyst, bear, bought, break, bull, buy, call, climb, close, cover, downgrade, downside, 
halt, high, invest, long, low, market, move, moving, open, play, position, price, put, quote, rally, 
resistance, sell, share, short, sold, spike, stock, stop, support, target, trade, trading, tumble, 
upgrade, upside, valuation, value, volume. 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

44 
APPENDIX C: Examples of Individual Tweets 
 
Date 
Ticker 
Tweet 
Username 
Followers 
04/19/2009 
BAC 
$bac raises cc rates on ppl under 10 pct -they 
are getting ppl who can pay down to do it. Bad 
debt=% of cc rec. =less writeoffs butno1cares 
bnkr0 
0 
04/08/2010 
MEE 
$mee , explosion wont affect rating, says 
moodys 
Jamielissette 
0 
07/15/2010 
APA 
$APA getting BP Alaska assets on the cheap at 
about 2.2x cash flow, but doubling leverage in 
the process. 
AJInsight 
0 
02/02/2011 
EQIX 
Looking at $EQIX // very interesting...too much 
debt accumulated too soon...will look into 
this...but not before earnings! 
Princebhojwani 
45 
11/08/2011 
DYN 
$DYN Restructuring Agreement with Holders 
of Over $1.4B Of Sr Notes; 4 Subsidiaries File 
for Relief Under Chapter 11 
Benziga 
26,437 
01/25/2012 
GTIV 
Gentiva Health Services, Inc. was rated High 
Risk. #Stocks #Risk $GTIV #Healthcare 
Direports 
332 
02/08/2012 
FTR 
Frontier Communications is mired in #fraud & 
on its way to zero. Grab puts before this POS is 
filing for bankruptcy. $FTR #options #FCC 
Pellucidigm 
244 
02/24/2012 
DYN 
RT @bman_microcaps: $DYN bottom play 
inching **Yeah..but bankruptcy? 
Urbane_Gorilla 
2,472 
04/16/2012 
CSCO 
@jimiuorio damn straight, $CSCO is going 
bankrupt 
trader_74 
0 
04/30/2012 
DYN 
Carlyle Group hedge fund fights to derail 
Dynegy bankruptcy settlement 
http://t.co/GeWJQJG6 $DYN 
Amyposzywak 
64 
05/03/2012 
AONE 
@SamSntar want to take a peek at balance 
sheet of $AONE given the losses and 
WRITEOFFS and missing cash coming?? 
wind4me 
5,957 
08/01/2012 
ANR 
$ANR Chapter 11 comin??? Staying away 
from this knife for now 
KrustyLovesYou 
7 
08/01/2012 
NLY 
@MicroFundy also appreciate the fact that 
$NLY seems to understand current risks and are 
maintaining leverage at low end of their typ. 
Range 
templec4 
2,673 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

45 
APPENDIX D: Measuring and Aggregating Opinion from Individual Tweets 
 
Commercial Metals Company (CMC), Quarterly earnings announcement date: January 6, 2012 
 
10 tweets in our sample mentioning $CMC between December 22, 2011 and January 3, 2012 
 
# 
Tweet 
Followers 
1 
$CMC http://t.co/YCtIhX5t Long setup to watch 
9,160 
2 
@DMAugustine Yes, but couldn't get going today $CMC 
3,581 
3 
$CMC Icahn Sends Letter; Says Will Drop Proxy if 40.1% of Shares Not Tendered 
26,730 
4 
Icahn vows to continue fight for Commercial Metals if he receives 40.1% of shares in tender offer. 
http://t.co/wY4d2aqT $CMC #mna #stocks 
2,753 
5 
$CMC last price 13.93 below SMA20 and S2 on 6.65x relative volume (ATR: 0.48) 
34 
6 
$CMC Announces an Amended Five-Year Credit Agreement and an Amended Receivables 
Purchase Agreement 
26,807 
7 
RT @Benzinga: $CMC Announces an Amended Five-Year Credit Agreement and an Amended 
Receivables Purchase Agreement 
2,028 
8 
$CMC Commercial Metals Company Announces an Amended Five-Year Credit... 
http://t.co/g9DfQPzb 
174 
9 
$CMC Commercial Metals Company Sends Letter to Stockholders http://t.co/nYX3Mjbf 
173 
10 
SCALPSWINGSTRADDLE: THE_YAK: $CMC says Icahn's offer too low, urges shareholders 
http://t.co/X7839RzC 
69 
 
# 
Number of Negative / Positive Words 
Loughran and McDonald 
Harvard IV-4 
Hu and Liu 
OPI_A 
OPI_B 
OPI_C 
Neg. 
Pos. 
Neg. 
Pos. 
Neg. 
Pos. 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
3 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
4 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
1 
5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
6 
0 
0 
0 
3 
0 
0 
7 
0 
0 
0 
3 
0 
0 
8 
0 
0 
0 
2 
0 
0 
9 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
10 
0 
0 
2 
1 
0 
0 
 
OPI_A = 0 
 
OPI_B = -1 * (1*{1+[Log(1+3581)]} + 1*{1+[Log(1+26730)]} + 1*{1+[Log(1+2753]} 
 + 2*{1+[Log(1+69)]}) / (1+5+11) = -2.341 
 
OPI_C = 0 
 
OPI = single factor using OPI_A, OPI_B, OPI_C = -0.780 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

46 
APPENDIX D (cont’d) 
 
Charles Schwab Corporation (SCHW), Quarterly earnings announcement date: January 18, 2011 
 
10 tweets in our sample mentioning $SCHW between January 3, 2011 and January 12, 2011 
 
# 
Tweet 
Followers 
1 
Charles Schwab $SCHW Broke Resistance http://wibi.us/dNBs5i 
170 
2 
Just installed $SCHW iPhone app. No live updating of quotes or PnL, trade entry only marginally 
easier than mobile browser. Good start $$ 
320 
3 
Schwab $SCHW to pay more than $118M to settle SEC suit 
3,756 
4 
Schwab (SCHW) Statement on Resolution Related to the YieldPlus Fund ... $schw ... 
http://tinyurl.com/2dvzh5j 
705 
5 
Schwab Agrees to Pay $119 Million to Settle SEC Claims http://bit.ly/eOrZ5g $SCHW 
27,737 
6 
BloombergNow Schwab Agrees to Pay $119 Million to Settle SEC Claims http://bit.ly/eOrZ5g 
$SCHW 
3,180 
7 
RT @BloombergNow: Schwab Agrees to Pay $119 Million to Settle SEC Claims 
http://bit.ly/eOrZ5g $SCHW 
36,937 
8 
RT @BloombergNow: Schwab Agrees to Pay $119 Million to Settle SEC Claims 
http://bit.ly/eOrZ5g $SCHW 
343 
9 
SEC settles with $SCHW for $119M for misleading investors & failing to prevent the misuse of 
nonpublic information 
408 
10 
$SCHW http://chart.ly/6wa4ehl Retail investor is back? Watch for a break of 18.25 
500 
 
# 
Number of Negative / Positive Words 
Loughran and McDonald 
Harvard IV-4 
Hu and Liu 
OPI_A 
OPI_B 
OPI_C 
Neg. 
Pos. 
Neg. 
Pos. 
Neg. 
Pos. 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
2 
0 
2 
0 
2 
0 
2 
1 
2 
3 
0 
0 
0 
3 
0 
0 
4 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
5 
1 
0 
0 
2 
0 
0 
6 
1 
0 
0 
2 
0 
0 
7 
1 
0 
0 
2 
0 
0 
8 
1 
0 
0 
2 
0 
0 
9 
3 
0 
1 
0 
3 
0 
10 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
 
OPI_A = -1 * (1*{1+[Log(1+27737)]} + 1*{1+[Log(1+3180)]} + 1*{1+[Log(1+36937]} 
 + 1*{1+[Log(1+343)]} + 3*{1+[Log(1+408)]} + 1*{1+[Log(1+500)]}) / (1+8+2) = -6.083 
 
OPI_B = -1 * (1*{1+[Log(1+170)]} + 3*{1+[Log(1+408)]} + 1*{1+[Log(1+500)]}) / (1+3+14) = -1.132 
 
OPI_C = -1 * (2*{1+[Log(1+170)]} + 1*{1+[Log(1+320)]} + 3*{1+[Log(1+408]} 
 + 1*{1+[Log(1+500)]}) / (1+7+2) = -4.731 
 
OPI = single factor using OPI_A, OPI_B, OPI_C = -3.982 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

47 
TABLE 1 
Sample Selection 
 
Criterion 
Tweets 
Firm-Quarter 
Observations 
Unique 
Firms 
Tweets between March 21, 2006 and December 31, 2012 
with $ tag followed by ticker symbols of Russell 3000 
firms 
10,894,037
66,290 
4,733 
Tweets pertaining to a single stock symbol 
8,713,182
61,357 
4,668 
Availability of data on the Compustat database 
8,674,195
60,638 
4,596 
Tweets on or after December 17, 2008 (i.e., ten trading 
days prior to January 1, 2009) 
8,462,761
54,906 
4,132 
Firms with traded bonds and bond return data using the 
Trace database 
3,139,188
9,717 
1,193 
Tweets pertaining to a ticker symbol with no generic 
meaninga 
2,692,185
9,404 
1,158 
Tweets mentioning bond-, credit risk-, fundamentals-, 
and/or securities trading-related words and phrasesb 
2,159,448
9,347 
1,158 
Tweets in the trading-day window [-10;-3]c 
232,930
7,356 
1,037 
Final Sample 
232,930
7,356 
1,037 
 
a The complete list of ticker symbols with generic meaning is: $A, $AH, $AI, $AIR, $ALE, $AM, $AME, $AN, $AP, 
$B, $BC, $BIG, $C, $CAM, $CASH, $CDS, $D, $DOW, $DV, $EE, $EF, $EL, $END, $FOR, $G, $GDP, $H, $HA, 
$HAE, $HAR, $HE, $HITT, $HOME, $HOT, $HT, $IM, $IN, $IR, $K, $L, $LIFE, $LOW, $M, $MALL, $MAN, 
$MTG, $NEWS, $O, $OME, $OMG, $P, $QUAD, $R, $RT, $SIX, $UA, $WAG, $WIN, $X, $Y. 
 
b See Appendix B for the list of bond-, credit risk-, fundamentals-, and/or securities trading-related words and phrases. 
 
c Day 0 is the quarterly earnings announcement date, and quarterly earnings announcement dates are between January 
1, 2009 and December 31, 2012. 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

48 
TABLE 2 
Sample Distribution 
 
Panel A: Distribution by Calendar Quarter 
 
Calendar Quarter 
Tweets 
 
Bond-Quarters 
 
Firm-Quarters 
 
N 
% 
 
 N 
 % 
 
 N 
% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2009, Jan-Mar 
673 
0.29 
 
837 
2.86 
 
146 
1.99 
 
2009, Apr-Jun 
2,746 
1.18 
 
1,258 
4.29 
 
265 
3.60 
 
2009, Jul-Sept 
3,412 
1.46 
 
1,434 
4.90 
 
321 
4.36 
 
2009, Oct-Dec 
3,629 
1.56 
 
1,470 
5.02 
 
316 
4.30 
 
2010, Jan-Mar 
5,232 
2.25 
 
1,813 
6.19 
 
423 
5.75 
 
2010, Apr-Jun 
5,594 
2.40 
 
1,816 
6.20 
 
438 
5.96 
 
2010, Jul-Sept 
6,361 
2.73 
 
1,789 
6.11 
 
465 
6.32 
 
2010, Oct-Dec 
5,962 
2.56 
 
1,879 
6.42 
 
462 
6.28 
 
2011, Jan-Mar 
17,300 
7.43 
 
2,167 
7.40 
 
574 
7.80 
 
2011, Apr-Jun 
15,950 
6.85 
 
2,118 
7.23 
 
583 
7.93 
 
2011, Jul-Sept 
20,164 
8.66 
 
1,972 
6.73 
 
526 
7.15 
 
2011, Oct-Dec 
27,658 
11.87 
 
2,065 
7.05 
 
540 
7.34 
 
2012, Jan-Mar 
28,552 
12.26 
 
2,175 
7.43 
 
567 
7.71 
 
2012, Apr-Jun 
40,551 
17.41 
 
2,125 
7.25 
 
557 
7.57 
 
2012, Jul-Sept 
23,773 
10.20 
 
2,112 
7.21 
 
563 
7.65 
 
2012, Oct-Dec 
25,373 
10.89 
 
2,257 
7.71 
 
610 
8.29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All 
232,930 
100.00 
 
29,287 
100.00 
 
7,356 
100.00 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

49 
TABLE 2 (continued) 
Panel B: Distribution by Industry based on Fama-French 48-Industry Classification 
 
Industry Group & Description 
 Tweets 
 Bond-Quarters 
 Firm-Quarters 
Compustat 
N 
 % 
 N 
 % 
 N 
 % 
 % 
1: Agriculture 
404 
0.17 
29 
0.10 
25 
0.34 
0.38 
2: Food Products 
2,872 
1.23 
440 
1.50 
174 
2.37 
1.34 
3: Candy and Soda 
480 
0.21 
123 
0.42 
33 
0.45 
0.33 
4: Alcoholic Beverages 
1,922 
0.82 
407 
1.39 
65 
0.88 
0.27 
5: Tobacco Products 
759 
0.33 
234 
0.80 
32 
0.43 
0.10 
6: Recreational Products 
365 
0.16 
28 
0.10 
17 
0.23 
0.57 
7: Entertainment 
7,773 
3.34 
202 
0.69 
121 
1.64 
1.25 
8: Printing and Publishing 
671 
0.29 
77 
0.26 
47 
0.64 
0.47 
9: Consumer Goods 
2,277 
0.98 
300 
1.02 
80 
1.09 
1.05 
10: Apparel 
589 
0.25 
55 
0.19 
47 
0.64 
0.95 
11: Healthcare 
1,901 
0.82 
268 
0.92 
154 
2.09 
1.30 
12: Medical Equipment 
2,584 
1.11 
339 
1.16 
147 
2.00 
2.82 
13: Pharmaceutical Products 
12,826 
5.51 
1,133 
3.87 
361 
4.91 
6.86 
14: Chemicals 
3,293 
1.41 
426 
1.46 
179 
2.43 
1.79 
15: Rubber and Plastic Products 
78 
0.03 
31 
0.11 
16 
0.22 
0.49 
16: Textiles 
135 
0.06 
30 
0.10 
19 
0.26 
0.19 
17: Construction Materials 
1,491 
0.64 
194 
0.66 
99 
1.35 
1.23 
18: Construction 
2,081 
0.89 
220 
0.75 
119 
1.62 
0.84 
19: Steel Works, Etc. 
3,185 
1.37 
364 
1.24 
111 
1.51 
1.08 
20: Fabricated Products 
8 
0 
1 
0.00 
1 
0.01 
0.16 
21: Machinery 
4,057 
1.74 
728 
2.49 
131 
1.78 
2.38 
22: Electrical Equipment 
857 
0.37 
108 
0.37 
67 
0.91 
1.46 
23: Automobiles and Trucks 
3,859 
1.66 
371 
1.27 
102 
1.39 
1.30 
24: Aircraft 
2,215 
0.95 
459 
1.57 
79 
1.07 
0.41 
25: Shipbuilding, Railroad Equipment 
165 
0.07 
20 
0.07 
18 
0.24 
0.16 
26: Defense 
526 
0.23 
97 
0.33 
32 
0.43 
0.16 
27: Precious Metals 
586 
0.25 
79 
0.27 
21 
0.29 
1.55 
28: Non-Metallic and Metal Mining 
2,517 
1.08 
126 
0.43 
53 
0.72 
1.69 
29: Coal 
4,189 
1.8 
190 
0.65 
90 
1.22 
0.33 
30: Petroleum and Natural Gas 
19,962 
8.57 
2,092 
7.14 
672 
9.13 
4.85 
31: Utilities 
8,003 
3.44 
1,805 
6.16 
422 
5.74 
3.94 
32: Communications 
9,848 
4.23 
2,049 
7.00 
301 
4.09 
3.19 
33: Personal Services 
1,023 
0.44 
155 
0.53 
63 
0.86 
1.00 
34: Business Services 
27,498 
11.80 
1,026 
3.50 
379 
5.15 
9.97 
35: Computers 
11,362 
4.88 
781 
2.67 
194 
2.64 
2.79 
36: Electronic Equipment 
9,735 
4.18 
612 
2.09 
341 
4.64 
5.51 
37: Measuring and Control Equipt 
1,091 
0.47 
121 
0.41 
78 
1.06 
1.57 
38: Business Supplies 
2,377 
1.02 
337 
1.15 
148 
2.01 
0.83 
39: Shipping Containers 
424 
0.18 
80 
0.27 
38 
0.52 
0.20 
40: Transportation 
4,451 
1.91 
589 
2.01 
201 
2.73 
2.73 
41: Wholesale 
1,752 
0.75 
212 
0.72 
152 
2.07 
2.69 
42: Retail 
12,910 
5.54 
1,354 
4.62 
354 
4.81 
3.45 
43: Restaurants, Hotels, Motels 
4,841 
2.08 
232 
0.79 
79 
1.07 
1.31 
44: Banking 
21,804 
9.36 
4,619 
15.77 
417 
5.67 
10.64 
45: Insurance 
10,005 
4.29 
2,280 
7.79 
465 
6.32 
2.76 
46: Real Estate 
415 
0.18 
40 
0.14 
21 
0.29 
1.06 
47: Trading 
16,245 
6.97 
2,397 
8.18 
500 
6.80 
6.23 
48: Miscellaneous 
4,519 
1.94 
1,427 
4.87 
91 
1.24 
2.37 
 All Industries 
232,930 100.00 
29,287 100.00 
7,356 
100.00 
100.00 
 
The sample consists of 232,930 tweets (16,947 distinct users) covering 29,287 bond-quarter observations and 7,356 firm-
quarter observations (1,037 distinct firms), with earnings announcement dates between January 1, 2009 and December 31, 
2012. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

50 
TABLE 3 
Descriptive Statistics 
 
Variable 
 
P1 
Q1 
Mean 
Median 
Q3 
P99 
Std. Dev. 
OPI 
 -2.695 
-0.695 
0.005 
0.467 
0.803 
0.945 
0.985 
 
BONDRET[-2;+2] (%) 
 -6.308 
-0.369 
0.118 
0.074 
0.562 
6.602 
1.647 
 
ΔCDSSPREAD[-2;+2] (%) -22.799 
-3.560 
-0.412 
-0.278 
1.979 
28.727 
7.461 
 
ΔYIELD[q-1;q+1] 
 -14.093 
-1.072 
-0.173 
-0.230 
0.401 
19.472 
3.550 
 
ΔYIELD[q-1;q+3] 
 -15.319 
-1.175 
-0.095 
-0.248 
0.381 
26.939 
4.509 
 
DOWNGRADE[-2;+65] 
 0.000 
0.000 
0.046 
0.000 
0.000 
1.000 
0.211 
 
DOWNGRADE[-2;+190] 
 0.000 
0.000 
0.103 
0.000 
0.000 
1.000 
0.304 
 
UPGRADE[-2;+65] 
 0.000 
0.000 
0.040 
0.000 
0.000 
1.000 
0.197 
 
UPGRADE[-2;+190] 
 0.000 
0.000 
0.103 
0.000 
0.000 
1.000 
0.304 
 
ΔZ-PROB[q-1;q+1] (%) 
 -30.500 
-1.810 
-0.052 
-0.069 
1.442 
31.883 
7.042 
 
ΔZ-PROB[q-1;q+3] (%) 
 -32.219 
-2.034 
-0.115 
-0.125 
1.423 
34.510 
7.579 
 
ΔO-PROB[q-1;q+1] (%) 
 -23.177 
-0.234 
0.037 
0.001 
0.266 
26.901 
4.623 
 
ΔO-PROB[q-1;q+3] (%) 
 -23.669 
-0.217 
0.003 
-0.001 
0.240 
26.143 
4.484 
 
ΔBSM-PROB[q-1;q+1] (%) 
 -65.717 
-0.050 
-2.140 
0.000 
0.000 
51.622 
14.228 
 
ΔBSM-PROB[q-1;q+3] (%) 
 -86.609 
-0.194 
-3.796 
0.000 
0.000 
61.681 
19.067 
 
FE (%) 
 -7.143 
-0.052 
0.014 
0.070 
0.259 
3.597 
1.124 
 
STOCKRET[-2;+2] (%) 
-23.553 
-3.760 
-0.125 
-0.098 
3.632 
22.619 
7.318 
STOCKRET[-10;-3] (%) 
-15.563 
-2.270 
0.283 
0.277 
2.761 
17.640 
5.149 
RP_OPI 
 -0.757 
-0.230 
-0.135 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
0.187 
 
LEV 
 0.000 
0.163 
0.288 
0.272 
0.396 
0.755 
0.177 
 
ROA 
 -0.098 
0.002 
0.008 
0.009 
0.018 
0.061 
0.021 
 
ASSETS 
 
453 
3,771 
40,978 
9,817 
29,534 
830,412 
111,025 
 
MVE 
 
157 
2,141 
17,596 
6,351 
16,970 
185,828 
32,348 
 
SIZE 
 5.057 
7.669 
8.703 
8.756 
9.739 
12.133 
1.527 
 
MB 
 0.293 
1.156 
2.837 
1.802 
2.945 
29.814 
3.851 
 
ANL 
 0.000 
2.197 
2.475 
2.708 
2.996 
3.584 
0.813 
 
INST 
 0.000 
0.645 
0.725 
0.786 
0.897 
1.000 
0.252 
 
Q4 
 0.000 
0.000 
0.236 
0.000 
0.000 
1.000 
0.424 
 
LOSS 
 0.000 
0.000 
0.197 
0.000 
0.000 
1.000 
0.398 
 
HORIZON 
 
296 
1,643 
3,165 
2,494 
3,990 
10,934 
2,263 
 
RATING 
 1.866 
7.237 
10.847 
10.000 
13.501 
23.000 
4.925 
 
SPEC 
 0.000 
0.000 
0.435 
0.000 
1.000 
1.000 
0.496 
 
SUBORD 
 0.000 
0.000 
0.163 
0.000 
0.000 
1.000 
0.369 
 
 
The sample consists of 7,356 firm-quarter observations (1,037 distinct firms), with earnings announcement dates between 
January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2012. See Appendix A for variable definition. To mitigate the influence of outliers, all 
continuous variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. In Panels B and C, figures above/below diagonal represent 
Spearman/Pearson correlation coefficients, and ***,**,* represent statistical significance at p < 0.01, p < 0.05, and p < 0.10 
(two-tailed), respectively. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

51 
TABLE 4 
Twitter Opinion, Bond Returns and Changes in CDS Spreads 
around Earnings Announcements 
BONDRET[-2;+2] or ΔCDSSPREAD[-2;+2] =  + 1*OPI[-10;-3] + 2*FE + 3*STOCKRET[-2;+2] 
 + 4*STOCKRET[-10;-3] + 5*RP_OPI[-10;-3] + 6*LEV + 7*ROA + 8*SIZE 
 + 9*MB + `10*ANL + 11*INST + 12*Q4 + 13*LOSS + 14*HORIZON 
 + 15*RATING + 16*SPEC + 17*SUBORD + Σδj*INDj + Σδf*CALQTRf + [-2;+2] 
 
Panel A: Entire Sample 
 
Variable 
BONDRET[-2;+2] 
 
ΔCDSSPREAD[-2;+2] 
All 
 
FE < 0 
FE ≥ 0 
 
All 
 
FE < 0 
FE ≥ 0 
I 
 
II 
III 
 
IV 
 
V 
VI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OPI 
0.053*** 
0.140*** 0.015 
 
-0.438*** 
-0.816*** -0.224* 
 
(3.18) 
(3.55) 
(0.76) 
(-3.68) 
(-2.72) 
(-1.71) 
FE 
0.047 
0.003 
0.126** 
-0.425** 
-0.029 
-0.799** 
 
(1.64) 
(0.15) 
(2.10) 
(-2.52) 
(-0.18) 
(-2.24) 
STOCKRET[-2;-+2] 
0.067*** 
0.074*** 0.060*** 
-0.254*** 
-0.296*** -0.198*** 
 
(13.52) 
(9.80) 
(10.48) 
(-8.82) 
(-5.75) 
(-6.07) 
STOCKRET[-10;-3] 
0.015*** 
0.006 
0.018*** 
-0.086*** 
-0.135** 
-0.049 
 
(3.15) 
(0.68) 
(3.33) 
(-2.59) 
(-2.35) 
(-1.24) 
RP_OPI 
-0.111 
0.004 
-0.123 
-1.301* 
0.230 
-1.891** 
 
(-0.97) 
(0.02) 
(-1.03) 
(-1.82) 
(0.16) 
(-2.31) 
LEV 
-0.418*** 
-0.392* 
-0.388** 
-1.134 
1.134 
-1.366 
 
(-2.87) 
(-1.65) 
(-2.20) 
(-1.05) 
(0.57) 
(-1.01) 
ROA 
-1.658 
-4.849** -0.324 
5.134 
-8.063 
18.567 
 
(-1.24) 
(-2.28) 
(-0.18) 
(0.44) 
(-0.37) 
(1.44) 
SIZE 
-0.045* 
-0.001 
-0.039 
-0.239 
-0.528 
-0.064 
 
(-1.72) 
(-0.03) 
(-1.33) 
(-1.07) 
(-1.15) 
(-0.26) 
MB 
0.002 
-0.002 
0.003 
-0.052 
-0.036 
-0.068 
 
(0.31) 
(-0.18) 
(0.49) 
(-1.38) 
(-0.42) 
(-1.51) 
ANL 
0.047 
0.023 
0.098* 
0.346 
0.448 
-0.004 
 
(0.92) 
(0.21) 
(1.70) 
(0.94) 
(0.65) 
(-0.01) 
INST 
-0.150 
-0.419** 
0.064 
-0.374 
-3.710 
0.736 
 
(-1.34) 
(-2.08) 
(0.48) 
(-0.29) 
(-1.54) 
(0.66) 
Q4 
0.018 
0.187 
-0.012 
0.276 
-0.741 
0.625 
 
(0.28) 
(1.24) 
(-0.17) 
(0.68) 
(-0.85) 
(1.23) 
LOSS 
0.111* 
0.080 
0.084 
-0.882* 
-0.260 
-0.704 
 
(1.68) 
(0.73) 
(1.02) 
(-1.82) 
(-0.27) 
(-1.26) 
HORIZON 
0.001 
0.001 
0.001 
0.001 
-0.001 
0.001 
 
(0.79) 
(0.45) 
(0.70) 
(0.05) 
(-1.32) 
(1.06) 
RATING 
0.002 
-0.034** 
0.019 
-0.013 
0.085 
-0.072 
 
(0.17) 
(-2.18) 
(1.54) 
(-0.17) 
(0.49) 
(-0.83) 
SPEC 
-0.153* 
-0.074 
-0.169* 
0.699 
-0.886 
1.326** 
 
(-1.94) 
(-0.51) 
(-1.88) 
(1.31) 
(-0.88) 
(2.16) 
SUBORD 
0.143** 
0.164 
0.108 
-0.936** 
-1.083 
-1.064** 
 
(2.05) 
(1.24) 
(1.29) 
(-2.29) 
(-1.08) 
(-2.28) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N 
6,862 
 
2,008 
4,854 
 
3,500 
 
907 
2,593 
Adj. R2 (%) 
11.35 
 
17.16 
10.14 
 
9.09 
 
18.19 
7.83 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

52 
TABLE 4 (cont’d) 
 
Panel B: Sample Partitioned by Proportion of Bond/Credit Risk-Related Tweets (%BOND) 
 
 
Variable 
BONDRET[-2;+2] 
ΔCDSSPREAD[-2;+2] 
 
High 
%BOND 
Low 
% BOND 
Diff 
 
High 
%BOND 
Low 
% BOND 
Diff 
 
I 
II 
 
III 
IV 
 
OPI 
0.100*** 
-0.003 
0.103*** 
-0.745*** 
-0.164 
-0.581** 
 
(4.30) 
(-0.12) 
(2.85) 
 
(-4.75) 
(-0.87) 
(-2.37) 
 
N 
3,434 
3,428 
 
 
1,781 
1,719 
 
 
Adj. R2 (%) 
14.35 
10.88 
 
 
12.20 
11.13 
 
 
 
 
Panel C: Sample Partitioned by Bond Risk (Speculative-Grade vs. Investment-Grade) 
 
 
Variable 
BONDRET[-2;+2] 
 
ΔCDSSPREAD[-2;+2] 
 
Speculative 
Investment 
Diff 
 Speculative 
Investment 
Diff 
 
I 
II 
 
III 
IV 
 
OPI 
0.070** 
0.048*** 
0.022 
 
-0.659** 
-0.386*** 
-0.273 
 
 
(1.97) 
(3.23) 
(0.58) 
 
(-2.02) 
(-2.89) 
(-0.77) 
 
N 
2,926 
3,936 
 
 
749 
2,751 
 
 
Adj. R2 (%) 
16.16 
6.48 
 
 
20.21 
8.39 
 
 
 
 
Panel D: Sample Partitioned by Information Uncertainty 
 
 
Variable 
BONDRET[-2;+2] 
 
ΔCDSSPREAD[-2;+2] 
 
High 
Uncertainty 
Low 
Uncertainty 
Diff 
 
High 
Uncertainty 
Low 
Uncertainty 
Diff 
 
I 
II 
 
III 
IV 
 
OPI 
0.091*** 
0.022 
0.069* 
 
-0.314 
-0.592*** 
0.278 
 
 
(2.86) 
(1.24) 
(1.90) 
 
(-1.30) 
(-4.47) 
(1.01) 
 
N 
3,369 
3,456 
 
 
1,269 
2,228 
 
 
Adj. R2 (%) 
14.82 
7.45 
 
 
12.82 
9.21 
 
 
 
This table presents the regression results using standard errors clustered by firm. The sample consists of 7,356 firm-quarter 
observations (1,037 distinct firms), with earnings announcement dates between January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2012. 
Industry and calendar quarter fixed effects are included in all panels but not reported for brevity as well as control variables 
in Panels B, C, and D. Panel A presents the regression results for the entire sample. Models II and V (Models III and VI) 
present results for the bad (good) earnings news subsample, which consists of 2,021 (4,946) firm-quarter observations, 
covering 696 (906) distinct firms, with earnings announcement dates between January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2012, and 
FE < 0 (FE ≥ 0). Panel B presents the regression results for high and low %BOND subsamples. High (low) %BOND 
subsample consists of firm-quarter observations where the percentage of tweets with bond and/or credit risk-related words 
and phrases is above (below) the sample median. Panel C presents the regression results for speculative-grade and 
investment-grade subsamples. The speculative-grade (investment-grade) subsample consists of 3,151 (4,096) firm-quarter 
observations, covering 570 (531) distinct firms, with earnings announcement dates between January 1, 2009 and December 
31, 2012, and traded bonds with weighted average S&P ratings below BBB- (at or above BBB-). Panel D presents the 
regression results for high information uncertainty and low information uncertainty subsamples. The high (low) information 
uncertainty subsample consists of 3,658 (3,653) firm-quarter observations, covering 678 (580) distinct firms, with earnings 
announcement dates between January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2012, and observations above (below) sample median stock 
return volatility for each calendar quarter, measured as the standard deviation of daily stock returns over the calendar year 
prior to the quarterly earnings announcement date. t-statistics are in parentheses below coefficient estimates. For the 
variables of interest, coefficient estimates and t-statistics are bolded. ***,**,* represent statistical significance at p < 0.01, p < 
0.05, and p < 0.10 (two-tailed), respectively. See Appendix A for variable definitions. To mitigate the influence of outliers, 
all continuous variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

53 
TABLE 5 
Twitter Opinion and Future Changes in Bond Yield Spreads 
 
ΔYIELD[q-1;q+k] =  + 1*OPI[-10;-3] + 2*FE + 3*STOCKRET[-2;+2] + 4*STOCKRET[-10;-3] 
 + 5*RP_OPI[-10;-3] + 6*LEV + 7*ROA + 8*SIZE + 9*MB + 10*HORIZON 
 + 11*RATING + 12*SPEC + 13*SUBORD + Σδj*INDj + Σδf*CALQTRf + [q-1;q+k] 
 
Panel A: Entire Sample 
 
Variable 
ΔYIELD 
[q-1;q+1] 
[q-1;q+3] 
 
I 
II 
 
 
 
 
 
OPI 
-0.166*** 
-0.269*** 
 
(-3.29) 
(-3.58) 
 
FE 
-0.211*** 
-0.022 
 
 
(-2.60) 
(-0.22) 
 
STOCKRET[-2;-+2] 
-0.005 
0.004 
 
 
(-0.52) 
(0.33) 
 
STOCKRET[-10;-3] 
0.017 
-0.027* 
 
 
(1.40) 
(-1.70) 
 
RP_OPI 
0.241 
0.194 
 
 
(1.04) 
(0.60) 
 
LEV 
-1.159*** 
-1.553** 
 
 
(-2.70) 
(-2.33) 
 
ROA 
5.892 
9.436* 
 
 
(1.28) 
(1.88) 
 
SIZE 
0.270*** 
0.434*** 
 
(3.51) 
(3.50) 
 
MB 
0.035 
0.081* 
 
 
(1.62) 
(1.64) 
 
HORIZON 
0.001 
0.001 
 
 
(0.04) 
(0.29) 
 
RATING 
0.173*** 
0.314*** 
 
(3.89) 
(4.20) 
 
SPEC 
-0.351 
-0.547 
 
 
(-1.44) 
(-1.33) 
 
SUBORD 
0.031 
-0.137 
 
 
(0.17) 
(-0.53) 
 
 
 
 
 
N 
5,402 
5,228 
 
Adj. R2 (%) 
4.15 
7.31 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

54 
TABLE 5 (cont’d) 
 
Panel B: Sample Partitioned by Proportion of Bond/Credit Risk-Related Tweets (%BOND) 
 
 
Variable 
ΔYIELD[q-1;q+1] 
 
High 
%BOND 
Low 
% BOND 
Diff 
 
I 
II 
 
OPI 
-0.210*** 
-0.120 
-0.090 
 
 
(-3.27) 
(-1.40) 
(-0.84) 
 
N 
2,742 
2,660 
 
 
Adj. R2 (%) 
5.97 
5.18 
 
 
 
Panel C: Sample Partitioned by Bond Risk (Speculative-Grade vs. Investment-Grade) 
 
 
Variable 
ΔYIELD[q-1;q+1] 
 
Speculative 
Investment 
Diff 
 
I 
II 
 
OPI 
-0.362*** 
-0.127*** 
-0.235* 
 
 
(-2.73) 
(-3.98) 
(-1.72) 
 
N 
1,954 
3,448 
 
 
Adj. R2 (%) 
8.86 
4.95 
 
 
 
Panel D: Sample Partitioned by Information Uncertainty 
 
 
Variable 
ΔYIELD[q-1;q+1] 
 
High 
Uncertainty 
Low 
Uncertainty 
Diff 
 
I 
II 
 
OPI 
-0.380*** 
-0.061 
-0.319*** 
 
(-4.20) 
(-0.86) 
(-2.77) 
 
N 
2,483 
2,891 
 
 
Adj. R2 (%) 
5.00 
9.32 
 
 
 
This table presents the regression results using standard errors clustered by firm. The sample consists of 7,356 firm-quarter 
observations (1,037 distinct firms), with earnings announcement dates between January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2012. 
Industry and calendar quarter fixed effects are included in all panels but not reported for brevity as well as control variables 
in Panels B, C, and D. Panel A presents the regression results for the entire sample. Panel B presents the regression results 
for high and low %BOND subsamples. High (low) %BOND subsample consists of firm-quarter observations where the 
percentage of tweets with bond and/or credit risk-related words and phrases is above (below) the sample median. Panel C 
presents the regression results for speculative-grade and investment-grade subsamples. The speculative-grade (investment-
grade) subsample consists of 3,151 (4,096) firm-quarter observations, covering 570 (531) distinct firms, with earnings 
announcement dates between January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2012, and traded bonds with weighted average S&P ratings 
below BBB- (at or above BBB-). Panel D presents the regression results for high information uncertainty and low 
information uncertainty subsamples. The high (low) information uncertainty subsample consists of 3,658 (3,653) firm-
quarter observations, covering 678 (580) distinct firms, with earnings announcement dates between January 1, 2009 and 
December 31, 2012, and observations above (below) sample median stock return volatility for each calendar quarter, 
measured as the standard deviation of daily stock returns over the calendar year prior to the quarterly earnings announcement 
date. t-statistics are in parentheses below coefficient estimates. For the variables of interest, coefficient estimates and t-
statistics are bolded. ***,**,* represent statistical significance at p < 0.01, p < 0.05, and p < 0.10 (two-tailed), respectively. 
See Appendix A for variable definitions. To mitigate the influence of outliers, all continuous variables are winsorized at the 
1st and 99th percentiles. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

55 
TABLE 6 
Twitter Opinion and Future Changes in Credit Ratings 
 
[ 2;
]
[ 2;
]
Pr(
1, 1)
log
Pr(
0)
-
t
-
t
RATING
-
RATING
+
+



=





=


 =  +1*OPI[-10;-3] +2*FE + 3*STOCKRET[-2;+2] + 4*STOCKRET[-10;-3] 
 + 5*RP_OPI[-10;-3] + 6*LEV + 7*ROA + 8*SIZE + 9*MB + 10*HORIZON 
 + 11*RATING + 12*SPEC + 13*SUBORD + Σδj*INDj + Σδf*CALQTRf + [-2;+t] 
 
Panel A: Entire Sample 
 
Variable 
[-2;+65] 
 
[-2;+190] 
DOWN 
GRADE 
UP 
GRADE 
 
DOWN 
GRADE 
UP 
GRADE 
I 
II 
 
III 
IV 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OPI 
-0.250*** 
-0.066 
 
-0.259*** 
0.013 
 
(-3.97) 
(-1.00) 
 
(-4.69) 
(0.24) 
FE 
-0.133*** 
0.035 
 
-0.140*** 
0.100** 
 
(-2.93) 
(0.63) 
 
(-3.34) 
(2.47) 
STOCKRET[-2;-+2] 
-0.026*** 
0.005 
 
-0.021*** 
0.011** 
 
(-2.82) 
(0.60) 
 
(-3.10) 
(2.03) 
STOCKRET[-10;-3] 
-0.007 
-0.001 
 
-0.012 
-0.001 
 
(-0.61) 
(-0.10) 
 
(-1.43) 
(-0.14) 
RP_OPI 
-1.060*** 
-0.028 
 
-0.522** 
-0.098 
 
(-3.26) 
(-0.07) 
 
(-1.96) 
(-0.36) 
LEV 
1.494*** 
-0.061 
 
1.996*** 
-0.170 
 
(3.23) 
(-0.13) 
 
(4.15) 
(-0.43) 
ROA 
-13.214*** 
11.864** 
-14.136*** 
8.772*** 
 
(-4.48) 
(2.36) 
 
(-4.81) 
(2.75) 
SIZE 
-0.515*** 
0.026 
 
-0.563*** 
-0.015 
 
(-6.51) 
(0.39) 
 
(-7.05) 
(-0.23) 
MB 
-0.058 
0.020 
 
-0.018 
0.016 
 
(-1.58) 
(1.12) 
 
(-0.75) 
(1.09) 
HORIZON 
-0.001* 
-0.001* 
 
-0.001*** 
-0.001*** 
 
(-1.89) 
(-1.94) 
 
(-2.51) 
(-2.84) 
RATING 
-0.282*** 
-0.029 
 
-0.342*** 
-0.044** 
 
(-8.68) 
(-1.37) 
 
(-10.29) 
(-2.21) 
SPEC 
0.966*** 
1.489*** 
1.190*** 
1.369*** 
 
(3.35) 
(6.18) 
 
(4.36) 
(6.46) 
SUBORD 
0.485*** 
0.071 
 
0.541*** 
0.192 
 
(2.60) 
(0.37) 
 
(2.95) 
(1.10) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N 
6,862 
 
6,862 
N DOWNGRADE=1 
321 
 
699 
N UPGRADE=1 
274 
 
707 
Pseudo R2 (%) 
12.59 
 
13.02 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

56 
TABLE 6 (cont’d) 
 
Panel B: Sample Partitioned by Proportion of Bond/Credit Risk-Related Tweets (%BOND) 
 
Variable 
DOWNGRADE[-2;+65] 
 
UPGRADE[-2;+65] 
High 
%BOND 
Low 
%BOND 
Diff 
 
High 
%BOND 
Low 
%BOND 
Diff 
I 
II 
 
III 
IV 
OPI 
-0.278*** 
-0.199** 
-0.078 
 
-0.052 
-0.040 
-0.013 
 
(-3.32) 
(-2.07) 
(-0.61) 
 
(-0.56) 
(-0.41) 
(-0.09) 
N 
3,434 
3,428 
 
 
3,434 
3,428 
 
N DOWNGRADE=1 
170 
151 
 
 
170 
151 
 
N UPGRADE=1 
138 
136 
 
 
138 
136 
 
Pseudo R2 (%) 
15.56 
15.20 
 
 
15.56 
15.20 
 
 
Panel C: Sample Partitioned by Bond Risk (Speculative-Grade vs. Investment-Grade) 
Variable 
DOWNGRADE[-2;+65] 
 
UPGRADE[-2;+65] 
Speculative 
Investment 
Diff 
 
Speculative 
Investment 
Diff 
I 
II 
 
III 
IV 
OPI 
-0.356*** 
-0.107 
-0.249* 
 
-0.007 
-0.112 
0.105 
 
(-3.77) 
(-1.20) 
(-1.92) 
 
(-0.08) 
(-1.03) 
(0.74) 
N 
2,926 
3,936 
 
 
2,926 
3,936 
 
N DOWNGRADE=1 
156 
165 
 
 
156 
165 
 
N UPGRADE=1 
181 
93 
 
 
181 
93 
 
Pseudo R2 (%) 
14.09 
17.52 
 
 
14.09 
17.52 
 
 
Panel D: Sample Partitioned by Information Uncertainty 
Variable 
DOWNGRADE[-2;+65] 
 
UPGRADE[-2;+65] 
High 
Uncertainty 
Low 
Uncertainty 
Diff 
 
High 
Uncertainty 
Low 
Uncertainty 
Diff 
I 
II 
 
III 
IV 
OPI 
-0.247*** 
-0.187** 
-0.059 
 
-0.003 
-0.104 
0.101 
 
(-3.06) 
(-2.03) 
(-0.48) 
 
(-0.03) 
(-1.02) 
(0.74) 
N 
3,369 
3,456 
 
 
3,369 
3,456 
 
N DOWNGRADE=1 
226 
94 
 
 
226 
94 
 
N UPGRADE=1 
166 
102 
 
 
166 
102 
 
Pseudo R2 (%) 
17.66 
9.70 
 
 
10.69 
10.18 
 
 
This table presents the multinomial logit regression results using standard errors clustered by firm. The sample consists of 
7,356 firm-quarter observations (1,037 distinct firms), with earnings announcement dates between January 1, 2009 and 
December 31, 2012. Industry and calendar quarter fixed effects are included in all panels but not reported for brevity as well 
as control variables in Panels B, C, and D. Panel A presents the regression results for the entire sample. Panel B presents the 
regression results for high and low %BOND subsamples. High (low) %BOND subsample consists of firm-quarter 
observations where the percentage of tweets with bond and/or credit risk-related words and phrases is above (below) the 
sample median. Panel C presents the regression results for speculative-grade and investment-grade subsamples. The 
speculative-grade (investment-grade) subsample consists of 3,151 (4,096) firm-quarter observations, covering 570 (531) 
distinct firms, with earnings announcement dates between January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2012, and traded bonds with 
weighted average S&P ratings below BBB- (at or above BBB-). Panel D presents the separate logit regression results for 
high information uncertainty and low information uncertainty subsamples. The high (low) information uncertainty 
subsample consists of 3,658 (3,653) firm-quarter observations, covering 678 (580) distinct firms, with earnings 
announcement dates between January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2012, and observations above (below) sample median stock 
return volatility for each calendar quarter, measured as the standard deviation of daily stock returns over the calendar year 
prior to the quarterly earnings announcement date. z-statistics (and t-statistics for Panels B, C, and D) are in parentheses 
below coefficient estimates. For the variables of interest, coefficient estimates, z-statistics, and t-statistics are bolded. ***,**,* 
represent statistical significance at p < 0.01, p < 0.05, and p < 0.10 (two-tailed), respectively. See Appendix A for variable 
definitions. To mitigate the influence of outliers, all continuous variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

57 
TABLE 7 
Twitter Opinion and Future Changes in Implied Default Probability 
 
ΔPROB[q-1;q+k] =  + 1*OPI[-10;-3] + 2*FE + 3*STOCKRET[-2;+2] + 4*STOCKRET[-10;-3] 
 + 5*RP_OPI[-10;-3] + 6*LEV + 7*ROA + 8*SIZE + 9*MB + 10*HORIZON 
 + 11*RATING + 12*SPEC + 13*SUBORD + Σδj*INDj + Σδf*CALQTRf + [q-1;q+k] 
 
Panel A: Entire Sample 
 
Variable 
 ΔZ-PROB 
 ΔO-PROB 
 ΔBSM-PROB 
[q-1;q+1] [q-1;q+3] 
 [q-1;q+1] [q-1;q+3] 
 [q-1;q+1] [q-1;q+3] 
 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
VI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OPI 
-0.544*** -0.943*** -0.173*** -0.294*** 
 
-1.982*** -2.811*** 
 
(-6.28) 
(-8.28) 
 
(-2.84) 
(-4.55) 
 
(-10.78) 
(-10.65) 
 
FE 
-0.417*** 
-0.249 
 
-0.149 
-0.044 
 
-1.443*** 
-0.410 
 
 
(-2.89) 
(-1.60) 
 
(-0.99) 
(-0.29) 
 
(-3.85) 
(-0.82) 
 
STOCKRET[-2;-+2] 
-0.102*** -0.105*** 
-0.041*** -0.034** 
-0.137*** -0.160*** 
 
(-5.66) 
(-5.39) 
 
(-3.07) 
(-2.55) 
 
(-3.48) 
(-3.32) 
 
STOCKRET[-10;-3] 
-0.055** 
-0.069** 
0.009 
-0.019 
 
-0.071 
-0.118** 
 
(-2.24) 
(-2.57) 
 
(0.47) 
(-0.98) 
 
(-1.50) 
(-1.97) 
 
RP_OPI 
-0.397 
0.713 
 
-0.150 
0.062 
 
0.696 
4.785*** 
 
(-0.66) 
(1.03) 
 
(-0.36) 
(0.14) 
 
(0.74) 
(3.62) 
 
LEV 
-1.947*** -3.109*** 
-0.946 
-0.552 
 
-4.499*** -8.042*** 
 
(-2.58) 
(-3.04) 
 
(-1.24) 
(-0.81) 
 
(-2.97) 
(-3.60) 
 
ROA 
-26.972*** 
-4.646 
 
-5.896 
2.047 
 
25.240* 
66.047*** 
 
(-3.01) 
(-0.36) 
 
(-0.96) 
(0.35) 
 
(1.83) 
(3.30) 
 
SIZE 
0.111 
-0.009 
 
0.029 
0.081 
 
0.294 
1.378*** 
 
(1.07) 
(-0.06) 
 
(0.30) 
(0.91) 
 
(1.44) 
(4.59) 
 
MB 
-0.055 
-0.016 
 
-0.085** 
-0.102*** 
-0.003 
0.149 
 
 
(-1.34) 
(-0.33) 
 
(-2.19) 
(-2.87) 
 
(-0.04) 
(1.48) 
 
HORIZON 
-0.001 
-0.001 
 
-0.001 
-0.001** 
 
0.001 
0.001 
 
 
(-0.11) 
(-0.10) 
 
(-0.66) 
(-2.20) 
 
(0.68) 
(0.60) 
 
RATING 
0.046 
0.084 
 
0.014 
0.044 
 
0.091 
0.373*** 
 
(1.12) 
(1.30) 
 
(0.50) 
(1.62) 
 
(1.28) 
(3.52) 
 
SPEC 
0.110 
0.212 
 
0.130 
0.009 
 
-0.624 
-0.061 
 
 
(0.35) 
(0.48) 
 
(0.72) 
(0.05) 
 
(-1.04) 
(-0.06) 
 
SUBORD 
-0.227 
-0.243 
 
-0.083 
-0.189 
 
-1.222** 
-1.813* 
 
 
(-0.74) 
(-0.52) 
 
(-0.40) 
(-0.72) 
 
(-2.15) 
(-1.86) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N 
6,227 
6,107 
 
5,368 
5,276 
 
6,755 
6,749 
 
Adj. R2 (%) 
5.97 
6.73 
 
3.15 
2.71 
 
7.41 
8.78 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991

58 
TABLE 7 (cont’d) 
 
Panel B: Sample Partitioned by Proportion of Bond/Credit Risk-Related Tweets (%BOND) 
 
 
Variable 
ΔZ-PROB[q-1;q+1] 
ΔO-PROB[q-1;q+1] 
ΔBSM-PROB[q-1;q+1] 
High 
%BOND 
Low 
%BOND 
Diff 
High 
%BOND 
Low 
%BOND 
Diff 
High 
%BOND 
Low 
%BOND 
Diff 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
VI 
OPI 
-0.478*** 
-0.647*** 0.169 
-0.176** 
-0.173** -0.004 
-2.051*** 
-1.901*** 
-0.150 
 
(-4.17) 
(-4.94) 
(0.97) 
(-1.98) 
(-1.99) 
(-0.03) 
(-7.67) 
(-7.75) 
(-0.41) 
N 
3,068 
3,159 
 
2,585 
2,783 
 
3,379 
3,376 
 
Adj. R2 (%) 
6.69 
7.44 
 
4.32 
4.71 
 
8.43 
8.57 
 
 
Panel C: Sample Partitioned by Bond Risk (Speculative-Grade vs. Investment-Grade) 
 
 
Variable 
ΔZ-PROB[q-1;q+1] 
ΔO-PROB[q-1;q+1] 
ΔBSM-PROB[q-1;q+1] 
Spec. 
Inv. 
Diff 
Spec. 
Inv. 
Diff 
Spec. 
Inv. 
Diff 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
VI 
OPI 
-0.750*** 
-0.368*** 
-0.382* 
-0.422** 
-0.041** 
-0.382** -3.372*** 
-1.153*** -2.218***
 
(-3.89) 
(-5.61) 
(-1.87) 
(-2.37) 
(-2.31) 
(-2.13) 
(-8.44) 
(-7.68) 
(-5.20) 
N 
2,745 
3,482 
 
2,516 
2,852 
 
2,852 
3,903 
 
Adj. R2 (%) 
7.96 
5.55 
 
4.95 
5.12 
 
9.55 
8.59 
 
 
Panel D: Sample Partitioned by Information Uncertainty 
 
 
Variable 
ΔZ-PROB[q-1;q+1] 
ΔO-PROB[q-1;q+1] 
ΔBSM-PROB[q-1;q+1] 
High 
Uncert. 
Low 
Uncert. 
Diff 
High 
Uncert. 
Low 
Uncert. 
Diff 
High 
Uncert. 
Low 
Uncert. 
Diff 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
VI 
OPI 
-0.942*** 
-0.215*** -0.726*** -0.493*** 
-0.021 
-0.472*** -3.817*** -0.356*** -3.461*** 
 
(-5.04) 
(-3.60) 
(-3.70) 
(-2.93) 
(-1.29) 
(-2.80) 
(-10.83) 
(-5.24) 
(-9.64) 
N 
2,981 
3,217 
 
2,494 
2,841 
 
3,311 
3,428 
 
Adj. R2 (%) 
7.86 
6.07 
 
5.08 
4.93 
 
10.31 
6.46 
 
 
This table presents the regression results using standard errors clustered by firm. Changes in implied default probability (in %) are 
estimated based on changes in Z-Score (Z-PROB), O-Score (O-PROB), and the Black-Scholes-Merton model (BSM-PROB) between 
quarter q-1 and either quarter q+1 or quarter q+3, where quarter q is the quarter during which OPI is measured. The sample consists 
of 7,356 firm-quarter observations (1,037 distinct firms), with quarterly earnings announcement dates between January 1, 2009 and 
December 31, 2012. Industry and calendar quarter fixed effects are included in all panels but not reported for brevity as well as control 
variables in Panels B, C, and D. Panel A presents the regressions for the entire sample. Panel B of this table presents the regression 
results for high and low %BOND subsamples. High (low) %BOND subsample consists of firm-quarter observations where the 
percentage of tweets with bond and/or credit risk-related words and phrases is above (below) the sample median. Panel C presents the 
regression results for speculative-grade and investment-grade subsamples. The speculative-grade (investment-grade) subsample 
consists of 3,151 (4,096) firm-quarter observations, covering 570 (531) distinct firms, with earnings announcement dates between 
January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2012, and traded bonds with weighted average S&P ratings below BBB- (at or above BBB-). Panel 
D presents the regression results for high information uncertainty and low information uncertainty subsamples. The high (low) 
information uncertainty subsample consists of 3,658 (3,653) firm-quarter observations, covering 678 (580) distinct firms, with 
earnings announcement dates between January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2012, and observations above (below) sample median stock 
return volatility for each calendar quarter, measured as the standard deviation of daily stock returns over the calendar year prior to the 
quarterly earnings announcement date. t-statistics are in parentheses below coefficient estimates. For the variables of interest, 
coefficient estimates and t-statistics are bolded. ***,**,* represent statistical significance at p < 0.01, p < 0.05, and p < 0.10 (two-tailed), 
respectively. See Appendix A for variable definitions. To mitigate the influence of outliers, all continuous variables are winsorized at 
the 1st and 99th percentiles. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4255991