TITLE: Acquisitions and Technology Value Revision
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2023.4890
---

The University of Manchester Research
Acquisitions and Technology Value Revision
DOI:
10.1287/mnsc.2023.4890
Document Version
Accepted author manuscript
Link to publication record in Manchester Research Explorer
Citation for published version (APA):
Gao, N., Cai, X., De Cesari, A., & Peng, N. (2024). Acquisitions and Technology Value Revision. MANAGEMENT
SCIENCE, 70(7), 4283-4305. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2023.4890
Published in:
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
Citing this paper
Please note that where the full-text provided on Manchester Research Explorer is the Author Accepted Manuscript
or Proof version this may differ from the final Published version. If citing, it is advised that you check and use the
publisher's definitive version.
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the Research Explorer are retained by the
authors and/or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and
abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
Takedown policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please refer to the University of Manchester’s Takedown
Procedures [http://man.ac.uk/04Y6Bo] or contact openresearch@manchester.ac.uk providing relevant details, so
we can investigate your claim.
Download date:13. Jun. 2026

Acquisitions and Technology Value Revision⋆
Xiangshang Caia, Amedeo De Cesarib, Ning Gaob, Ni Pengc
aEssex Business School, University of Essex, Colchester, CO4 3SQ, United Kingdom
bThe Accounting and Finance Group, Alliance Manchester Business School, The University of Manchester,
Manchester, M15 6PB, United Kingdom
cSchool of Business and Management, Queen Mary University of London, London, E1 4NS, United Kingdom
September 1, 2022
Abstract
Acquisition announcements coincide with upward value revisions for the target firms’ technology
peers, which are not due to economic relations based on product market, supply chain, or geo-
graphical location. Such a phenomenon is robust across sub-sample periods, not specific to merger
or technology waves, and not related to product-market structure and the unique innovation fea-
tures of certain technology-intensive industries. Firms experience more dramatic value revisions
when they have deeper technology overlaps with their targets, are more dependent on technology, or
when a transaction features higher premium or greater technology overlap between the acquirer and
target. Our mechanism analysis provides evidence that is primarily consistent with the Acquisition-
Probability Hypothesis whereby acquisition announcements elevate expected technology synergies
and merger prospects for peers; and partially in line with the Enhanced-Investment Hypothesis
that peers’ revaluations correlate with increased technology investments. We do not find any ev-
idence in line with the Competition-Balance Hypothesis which attributes peers’ value revisions to
the change in industrial competition intensity. Overall, our results demonstrate that acquisition
announcements disseminate novel information about the value of technology that is of common
interest among firms with close technologies.
Keywords:
technology peer, information transmission, mergers and acquisitions, innovation,
valuation.
JEL Classification: G14; G32; G34.
⋆We are grateful for the helpful comments from the editor, an anonymous associate editor, two anonymous referees,
Alice Bonaime, Michael Brennan, Jun Chen, R¨udiger Fahlenbrach, Davidson Heath, Chenchen Huang, Dirk Jenter,
Arif Khurshed, Azimjon Kuvandikov, Xiang Li, Luca Xianran Lin, Michael Naef, Dennis Philip, Dimitris Petmezas,
Chaoyuan She, Qing Tong, Francesco Vallascas, Julian Williams, Nianhang Xu, David Yermack, Cheng Zeng, Chendi
Zhang, and conference or seminar participants at the 2019 Annual Corporate Finance Conference (www.bmcfc.com),
the 2019 EFMA Annual Meeting, the 2019 Eurofidai-ESSEC Paris Conference, the 2020 American Finance Association
(AFA) Annual Meeting, Bath University, University of Bristol, Durham University, University of Essex, King’s College
London, Nanjing University, and Renmin University. All errors are ours.
Email addresses: xiangshang.cai@essex.ac.uk (Xiangshang Cai), amedeo.decesari@manchester.ac.uk
(Amedeo De Cesari), ning.gao@manchester.ac.uk (Ning Gao), n.peng@qmul.ac.uk (Ni Peng)

1. Introduction
A quest widely pursued by financial economists is to understand how information diffuses from
informed parties to uninformed ones, and how asset prices facilitate such processes (e.g., Duffie
et al., 2010b; Grossman, 1976; Grossman and Stiglitz, 1980; Hayek, 1945; Kyle, 1985). A notable
literature shows that acquisitions, consequential as they are, disseminate information of common
interest about the fundamentals of economically-related firms. Studies have shown that acquisitions
impact not only stock prices but also the real behavior of those firms that relate to the merging
firms through product markets (e.g., Cai et al., 2011; Eckbo, 1983; Fee and Thomas, 2004; Phillips
and Zhdanov, 2013; Servaes and Tamayo, 2013; Shahrur, 2005; Song and Walkling, 2000; Stillman,
1983) or supply chains (e.g., Bernile and Lyandres, 2019; Fee and Thomas, 2004; Shahrur, 2005).
Missing from this literature, however, is another essential economic relation—technology links.
The importance of technology and technology links is evident. First, previous literature has
established technological innovation as a primary driver of business success (e.g., Bloom and
Van Reenen, 2002; Hall et al., 2005; Jaffe, 1986; Kogan et al., 2017) and economic growth (e.g.,
Aghion and Howitt, 1992; Romer, 1986; Schumpeter, 1942; Spence, 1984). Second, technology syn-
ergies constitute an essential merger motive for companies (e.g., Acemoglu et al., 2010; Ahuja and
Katila, 2001; Bena and Li, 2014; Cassiman and Veugelers, 2006; Fr´esard et al., 2020; Phillips and
Zhdanov, 2013; Sevilir and Tian, 2012; Zhao, 2009). Third, companies often possess technologies
that are close to each other. In today’s knowledge-based economy, firms are often technology peers
who innovate in closely analogous technology categories (henceforth called “technology peers” or
“peers”; we formally define peers in Sections 2.1 and 2.2). Well-known companies like IBM and
Intel, while serving distinct product markets, overlap on multiple technological fronts (Bloom et al.,
2013). Peers are related through their extensive network of citations, licensing agreements, talents,
and collaborations, may compete with one another, and, therefore, have correlated fundamentals
(e.g., Baghai et al., 2019; Fulghieri and Sevilir, 2011; Hall et al., 2001; Katz and Shapiro, 1986). In
this paper, we ask two questions: 1) to what extent do acquisitions generate and transmit informa-

tion about the value of technology that is of common interest among technologically close firms?
and 2) what is (are) the mechanism(s) of the underlying information transmission process?
It may be hard to appreciate, in the first instance, that firms in the same technology space could
operate in different industries or product markets. However, previous literature has provided ample
evidence on the differences between technology space and product market. Schmookler (1966, p.20)
and Jaffe (1986, p.985) note that the products designed based on the patent for solids dispensing
range from toothpaste tubes to manure spreaders. Bloom et al. (2013) highlight that IBM, Apple,
Motorola, and Intel are all close in technology; however, only IBM and Apple compete in the
personal computer market, and Motorola and Intel compete in the semiconductor market. Bena
and Li (2014) also claim that technological overlap transcends traditional industry classifications.
In our sample, only 22%, 36%, 40%, and 34% of a target firm’s technology peers fall into the target
firm’s segment-based product market (Bloom et al., 2013), 3-digit SIC code industry, Fama-French
48 (FF-48) industry, and Text-based Network Industry Class (TNIC)(Hoberg and Phillips, 2010),
respectively. Moreover, technology space has limited overlap with other economic relations—only
12% (14%) of the peers are target firms’ customers (suppliers) and only 14% reside in the states in
which target firms are headquartered.
Our analysis contains two inter-related parts. In the first part, we establish that acquisitions
disseminate novel information about the value of technologies that are closely linked, via examining
the stock-price reaction of target firms’ technology peers at the acquisition announcement. For a
sample of acquisitions announced during the 1984–2010 period, we find that target firms’ technology
peers receive a statistically significant cumulative average abnormal return (CAAR) ranging from
0.20% to 0.29% over the window (−2, +2) centered around the announcement day (day 0), under
various definitions of peers according to the previous literature. This is equivalent to $612–1,517
million (in 2010 dollars) in an average target firm’s technology space (i.e., a set of around 40 firms
closest to a target firm in technology). When we sort all the firms, for which we can measure the
closeness of their technology to that of the target firms, into deciles, we find that the abnormal
returns increase almost monotonically from the most distant decile to the closest decile. As is
2

indicated at the beginning of this paper, firms could be linked through other economic relations,
and the concern for our study is that technology links may simply reflect product-market relations
(e.g., Eckbo, 1983; Hoberg and Phillips, 2010; Hou, 2007; Song and Walkling, 2000; Stillman, 1983),
supply-chain partnerships (e.g., Bernile and Lyandres, 2019; Cohen and Frazzini, 2008; Chu et al.,
2019; Fee and Thomas, 2004; Hertzel et al., 2008; Menzly and Ozbas, 2010; Shahrur, 2005), or
geographical neighborhood effects (Chu et al., 2019; Dougal et al., 2015; Engelberg et al., 2018;
Korniotis and Kumar, 2013; Pirinsky and Wang, 2006). However, we find the positive association
between peers’ abnormal returns and their technology closeness with target firms remains signifi-
cant after we control for these alternative economic links using various methods. These methods
include double sorting based on technology closeness and an alternative economic link, placebo
tests based on empirical distributions simulated using the non-peer firms linked via an alterna-
tive economic relation, and regression analysis incorporating other economic links. These results
show that technology links convey additional information in the presence of alternative economic
relations.
Moreover, we find that the positive value revision strengthens for peers that invest more in
research and development (R&D) or whose value is more dependent on technology, confirming the
observed value revision is related to technology. Such value revision is also stronger for deals with
larger acquisition premia and deals in which the acquirer and the target are peers, reinforcing the
information-disseminating role of acquisitions.
In our tests designed to explore the boundary of the baseline finding, we demonstrate that peer
value revision is a robust economic phenomenon rather than being specific to sub-sample periods or
being the byproduct of merger or technology waves, industrial structure, and the unique innovation
features of the pharmaceutical and IT industries.
In the second part of our analysis, we investigate several possible underlying mechanisms of the
information dissemination process along technology links. According to the theories presented in the
literature, three mechanisms have been suggested, namely the Acquisition-Probability Hypothesis,
the Enhanced-Investment Hypothesis, and the Competition-Balance Hypothesis.
3

As was mentioned earlier, a substantial body of literature shows that technology drives merger
synergies (e.g., Bena and Li, 2014; Sevilir and Tian, 2012; Zhao, 2009). The Acquisition-Probability
Hypothesis maintains that acquisition announcements convey information about the common com-
ponent of technology synergies available to firms that are technologically close. At the deal an-
nouncement, the acquiring firm bids up the price of the target firm’s technology assets in the ex-
pectation of high technology synergies. The peers’ market reaction reflects the elevated expectation
of technology synergies and the concurrent increase in acquisition probability (Song and Walkling,
2000). Specifically, an acquisition announcement reveals the acquiring firm’s private information
about the technology synergies common to a target firm and its peers. The announcement, there-
fore, increases the expected synergies for technology peers and raises the anticipated acquisition
probability, which is a positive function of the expected synergies. Such a signal is credible because
of the acquiring firm’s information advantage and its financial commitment to the proposed deal.
In line with the Acquisition-Probability Hypothesis, we find technology peers’ abnormal returns are
greater when peers are more vulnerable to acquisitions. Furthermore, a firm is more likely to be
an acquisition target in a year when one or more of its peers received an acquisition bid in the
previous year. Consistent with acquisitions disseminating information, peers’ abnormal returns in
withdrawn deals are nearly as large as they are in successful deals because truthful information
about acquisition prospects and synergies, once revealed, cannot be nullified. Moreover, the target
firms’ abnormal returns do not dissipate if the target is subsequently acquired, further demonstrat-
ing the relevance of acquisition prospects to value revisions. In an extended analysis, we examine
who acquires the peers subsequently. We find that subsequent acquirers are more likely to be those
that overlap with peers in technology, product market, and geographical location, or those that
are peers’ suppliers. A priori, these economically–related firms are more likely to benefit from the
expected elevation in synergies. However, we also find that firms that overlap with peers in both
technology and product markets are not more likely to be acquirers than other randomly selected
firms, consistent with the notion that “business stealing” reduces expected technology synergies
(Bena and Li, 2014, p.1945 and Table VI; Bloom et al., 2013). In another extended analysis, we
4

ask whether the peers’ value revisions become weaker as more and more peers in a technology field
are taken over, bidding costs start to rise, the novelty of an acquisition announcement reduces,
and the update in acquisition probability mitigates.
Indeed, we find that the peers’ CAAR is
indistinguishable from zero when the acquisition intensity in a technology space begins to decline.
The disseminated new information could incentivize peer firms to enhance their value-increasing
innovation activities (Phillips and Zhdanov, 2013). The Enhanced-Investment Hypothesis postu-
lates that the prospect of selling out to large firms motivates small firms to innovate. Upgraded
technology and enhanced innovation capacity, in turn, makes firms more attractive acquisition tar-
gets. Stronger technology fundamentals should increase the value of independent firms too, if the
realization of technology value does not depend on bringing resources together under common con-
trol. To test the validity of the Enhanced-Investment Hypothesis, we investigate how firms’ R&D
investments change after their peers are pursued as acquisition targets. We find that, although
firms on average do not increase their R&D expenditure after their peers become targeted, small
firms do raise their R&D spending, as predicted by Phillips and Zhdanov (2013). Nonetheless, we
fail to find any significant relation between the change in peers’ R&D spending and their abnormal
returns.
Acquisitions built on technology synergies could shift the competition balance in peers’ prod-
uct markets. A priori, the Competition-Balance Hypothesis predicts mixed effects of technology
closeness on peers’ stock prices. To the extent that mergers produce more efficient rivals (e.g.,
Bena and Li, 2014; Henderson and Cockburn, 1996; Sevilir and Tian, 2012), peers should suffer
from negative abnormal returns, which contradicts the positive peer abnormal returns found in
our baseline analysis. However, it is also possible that acquirers take over the target firms in so-
called “killer acquisitions” with the intention to discontinue the targets’ on-going R&D projects to
preempt future competition (Cunningham et al., 2021). Positive peer returns could, therefore, be
explained by the enhanced anti-competitive rents that benefit all peers and harm the customers of
the merging firms (Eckbo, 1983). Contrary to this view, however, we find that the customers of
acquiring firms do not suffer from negative abnormal returns on average, or in deals most likely
5

to be classified as “killer acquisitions.” Furthermore, peers’ positive returns are not significantly
stronger even when the acquirer is in a less competitive product market and supposed to possess
greater anti-competitive power. Similarly, the customers’ abnormal returns in deals that are most
likely to be anti-competitive (defined following Cunningham et al. (2021)) are not distinguishable
from those in similar deals that are unlikely to be anti-competitive.
Overall, our evidence does not point to the Competition-Balance Hypothesis. There is some
mixed evidence in support of the Enhanced-Investment Hypothesis. The evidence is primarily in
line with the Acquisition-Probability Hypothesis.
Our study adds to three strands of literature. First, we contribute to the literature showing
that mergers and acquisitions disseminate novel information about company fundamentals.
In
particular, by highlighting the essential role that acquisitions play in conveying information of
common interest about the value of technology among technology peers, we add to the previous
studies that have examined the informational role of acquisitions in industries and product markets
(e.g., Cai et al., 2011; Eckbo, 1983; Fee and Thomas, 2004; Shahrur, 2005; Song and Walkling,
2000; Stillman, 1983) and along supply chains (e.g., Bernile and Lyandres, 2019; Fee and Thomas,
2004; Shahrur, 2005). Second, our study adds to the literature showing that economic links serve
as important information conduits in financial markets. A strand of literature examines return
predictability (or lead-lag price relations) along economic links such as product market rivalry,
supply-chain relations, and geo-economic neighborhood (e.g., Cohen and Frazzini, 2008; Hou, 2007;
Menzly and Ozbas, 2010).
In a closely related paper, Lee et al. (2019) find significant return
predictability along the technology links. Conceptually, these studies build on slow information
diffusion and investors’ inattention. In contrast, our study relies on the stock market’s rational
reaction to new information revealed by significant corporate events whose importance for infor-
mation transmission has been suggested but not investigated in previous studies (e.g., Cohen and
Frazzini, 2008; Hirshleifer et al., 2013; Hong and Stein, 2007). Return-predictability analysis also
faces the critique on its underlying rationale and econometric soundness (Harvey et al., 2016; Hou
et al., 2020). Ali and Hirshleifer (2020) further show that the return predictability along tech-
6

nology links and other economic relations can be subsumed by an analyst coverage factor. While
the return-predictability-based evidence has been dubious in terms of substantiating technology
links’ information-transmission role, we establish such a role through peers’ stock-market responses
to significant corporate events. Importantly, the context of significant corporate events allows us
to analyze in depth the mechanisms of the underlying information dissemination which would be
impossible using the return-predictability framework. Third, we contribute to a broad literature
that analyzes how markets and the price system aggregate information dispersedly held by eco-
nomic agents with heterogeneous information sets (e.g., Duffie et al., 2010a,b; Grossman, 1976;
Grossman and Stiglitz, 1980; Hayek, 1945). Our study relates to this literature and provides micro
evidence on the essential roles played by corporate-control transactions and technology links in the
information-transmission process.
Several recent works have also studied the role of technology links in relation to acquisitions,
applying different focuses. Bena and Li (2014) find that technology overlap positively predicts
merger pairing and enhances the patenting outcome of the combined firm.
Sears and Hoetker
(2014) meanwhile report that technology overlap between merging firms significantly influences
merger performance. We, however, focus on the role of acquisitions and technology links in trans-
mitting information of common interest among technology peers. Using the text-based measure
of Arts et al. (2018), Testoni (2022) also finds that the stock price of technology peers reacts
positively to acquisitions. Building on the strategy literature (e.g., Barney, 1988; Rumelt, 1991;
Wernerfelt, 1984), he posits that technology resources underpin firm-value spillover. Our study is
distinct from his in that we conduct a comprehensive analysis to establish peers’ value revision as
a robust economic phenomenon, highlight the informational role of corporate-control transactions
and technology links, and importantly, investigate the validity of various information-transmission
mechanisms suggested in the previous literature.
The rest of our paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes the data and methodology; and
Section 3 presents our baseline results on the technology peers’ abnormal returns. In Sections 4,
5, and 6, we investigate the mechanisms of information transmission. Finally, in Section 7, we
7

conclude.
2. Data and Methodology
In this section, we introduce our sample and data, and define the measures of firms’ technology
closeness and abnormal returns. We describe all variables used in our analysis in Table 1 and
provide more details where necessary in the Online Appendix.
2.1. The Technology Proximity Score and Technology Peer Candidates
A key objective of our empirical analysis is to examine whether and how acquisition announce-
ments disseminate information about technology value that is of common interest among technology
peers. Since the spectrum of innovation activities can be represented by a comprehensive set of in-
novation categories available to all firms, in principle, we can measure a firm’s innovation activities
using a vector whose element is the fractional resources (e.g., knowledge, inventors, equipment, and
funds) the firm dedicates to each category. Importantly, this vector can be compared across two
firms to measure the technology components that are of common interest, allowing us to measure
technology closeness between two firms and to identify technology peers. Firms’ technologies have
more in common when their vectors overlap to a greater extent. Unfortunately, the fraction of
resources dedicated to each innovation category is not directly observable. Therefore, following the
previous literature (e.g., Bena and Li, 2014; Ma, 2020), we use the output-based measure of inno-
vation activities in the spirit of Jaffe (1986), namely the Technology Proximity Score (see Section
III of the Online Appendix for a technical note). This measure is based on the patents granted
to firms and reflects the common components in patented innovation output between two firms.
While being widely used, this measure admittedly has some limitations. First, it does not reflect
all the resources invested in a firm’s innovation activities, for example the input of prior knowledge.
Second, it assumes the technology components of common interest exist only within the same cat-
egory rather than across categories (Bloom et al., 2013). Third, a few technology classes contain
a disproportionate fraction of patents and could undermine this measure’s representativeness. To
8

address such weaknesses, in Section 3.4, we adopt two alternative measures of technology proximity,
namely the Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio (see Bena and Li, 2014; Ma, 2020) and the Mahalanobis
Distance (see Bloom et al., 2013), and confirm our findings to be robust. We define these alterna-
tive measures in Table 1 of the main body and provide more details of their construction in Section
IV of the Online Appendix.
It is also pertinent to ask whether technology closeness reflects innovations that are substitutes
or complements. While previous literature does not provide a clear indication (to the best of our
knowledge), we posit that technology closeness among firms represents both complementary and
substitutionary opportunities. We clarify this conceptual issue in Section V of the Online Appendix.
Regarding innovation categories, we specifically consider the patents granted to US-listed firms
by the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), and compiled by Kogan et al. (2017),
who also provide United States Patent Classification (USPC) classes, patents’ issue dates, and
estimates of patents’ market values.1 For each pair of US-listed firms in a calendar month, we use
the patent data mentioned above to calculate their Technology Proximity Score (Jaffe, 1986). This
calculation requires information on patents granted over the 60 months preceding the calendar
month in question. We use the Technology Proximity Score to select a firm’s technology peers
(defined below in detail) from all the listed firms with required data available (which we call peer
candidates).
We provide the descriptive statistics of the sample of all firm pairs with valid Technology Prox-
imity Scores in Table OAT2 of the Online Appendix. Panel A shows that the monthly number of
firms ranges from 1,652 to 2,927 and it peaks in year 2001 after which it declines. Panel B contains
the average Technology Proximity Score of all the firm pairs for each calendar month, which is
stable before 1998 and trends upward thereafter. In Table OAT3 and Table OAT4 of the Online
Appendix, the summary statistics of the Mahalanobis Distance and the Knowledge-Base Overlap
1We thank Professors Leonid Kogan, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Amit Seru, and Noah Stoffman for making their
dataset available online. The dataset covers all utility patents issued by the USPTO from January 1926 to November
2010, at the time when we downloaded the data.
9

Ratio, respectively, exhibit broadly similar patterns.
2.2. Technology Peers and Technology Space
A firm’s technology space consists of all of its technology peers. Only those peer candidates
with sufficiently high values of the Technology Proximity Score are selected as a firm’s technology
peers. While it is inevitably subjective to choose the threshold to define technology peers, we follow
a procedure analogous to that adopted by Hoberg and Phillips (2010) which identifies technology
spaces that are similar in coarseness to three-digit SIC (SIC-3) industries. Since around 2% of
all possible pairs of Compustat firms belong to the same SIC-3 industry, we define two firms as
technology peers if their Technology Proximity Score is higher than the 98th percentile across all
the firm pairs in a month. This definition implies that the number of technology peers in a month
is comparable to the number of SIC-3 industry peers, and it allows us to compare the technology
peers to industry peers in some of our subsequent analyses. The 98th percentile also ensures that
the size of a firm’s technology space is constant over time relative to the number of firm pairs for
which we can calculate a technology proximity score.
Panel C of Table OAT2 in the Online Appendix reports the value of the 98th percentile of
the pairwise Technology Proximity Score by month. This threshold follows an increasing trend
throughout our sample period.
2.3. Product Proximity Score and Segment Product Market
Previous literature has identified the product market as an important channel of information
dissemination. In our baseline and additional analyses, we control for this important information
channel. To do this, we follow Bloom et al. (2013) to build a segment-based Product Proximity Score
that allows us to ascertain how close a firm is to an acquisition target in the product market. The
formula for this score is analogous to that for our Technology Proximity Score with the important
difference being that, instead of using patent data, we now use the information on the distribution
of a firm’s sales across SIC-3 segments retrieved from Compustat. A firm is deemed to be in a
target firm’s product market if, in the previous year, the firm’s Product Proximity Score relative
10

to the target is above the 98th percentile of the distribution of this score across all possible firm
pairs. The binary variable Product Market Dummy identifies peers from the same segment-based
product market.
2.4. Acquisition Targets and Their Technology Peers
Our sample of acquisitions is from the Thomson SDC mergers and acquisitions (M&A) database
and comprises the deals between listed bidders and targets announced during the 1984–2010 period.
We only keep those transactions defined by SDC as “mergers” or “acquisitions of majority interests”
to ensure all deals involve a change of control rights. The targets and acquirers are required not
to be from the financial (SIC Code 6000–6999) or utilities (SIC Code 4900–4999) sectors, similar
to Phillips and Zhdanov (2013).
The transaction values must be above 10 million as reported
in Thomson SDC M&A database. We drop those deals without the information required to be
available from other data sources. For each acquisition target, we calculate a Technology Proximity
Score with each peer candidate. After calculating this score, we also exclude the peer candidates
from the financial and utilities sectors.
Panel A of Table OAT5 of the Online Appendix reports the number of acquisition targets and
their technology peers by year of deal announcement. Over the whole sample period, there are 1,307
targets with patent data and a total (average) of non-unique 2,382,596 (1,822.95) peer candidates (a
firm can be a candidate for more than one target). Based on the set of proximity-score thresholds,
only 1,300 targets have at least one technology peer, and the total (average) number of non-unique
technology peers is 51,728 (39.79). Observations for some targets and peers cannot be used in our
tests owing to the lack of CRSP stock return data, which further reduces the number of targets
to 1,257. The average number of technology peers and peer candidates for each acquisition target
peaks around the internet bubble period (1998–2003) and there is no obvious trend.
In Panel B of Table OAT5 of the Online Appendix, we observe that 58% of the acquisition targets
are concentrated in the following five Fama-French 48 (FF-48) industries: “business services” (184),
“electronic equipment” (171), “medical equipment” (138), “computers” (121), and “pharmaceutical
11

products” (111). In the sample of technology peers, the share of these five industries altogether is
slightly above 60%. These findings are not surprising considering these are innovative industries.
In Table OAT6 of the Online Appendix, we show that the overlap between technology space
and product market is limited, by reporting the number of technology peers inside and outside the
targets’ product markets. Over the whole sample period, the fraction of technology peers from out-
side the targets’ product markets is between 60% and 78%, depending on the industry classification
used (namely, the segment product market, the SIC-3 industry, the FF-48 industry, and the text-
based industry classification industries that are calibrated to match SIC-3 industries on granularity
(TNIC-3 here after)(Hoberg and Phillips, 2010, 2016)). In the same table, we also show that the
overlap is limited between technology space and other economic relations (namely, customers or
suppliers of the target firms and firms with headquarters in their target firms’ headquarter states).
Such limited overlaps suggest our baseline finding along the technology links is likely to be novel
and distinct from other economic relations. We formally test this conjecture in subsequent sections.
Table OAT7 of the Online Appendix contains the descriptive statistics of the characteristics
of the acquiring firms, target firms, technology-peer candidates, technology peers, and acquisition
deals in our dataset. Acquiring firms are larger, more profitable, and have higher revenue growth
than their targets and the targets’ peers. They also have lower ownership concentration, with a
smaller fraction of closely-held shares. In our sample of acquisitions, 46% are horizontal and 81%
are completed.
2.5. Calculation of Abnormal Returns
We measure technology value revision using the technology peers’ abnormal returns during the
deal announcement period. To calculate the abnormal returns, we use the market model estimated
between 300 and 61 trading days before the acquisition announcement with at least 100 valid daily-
return observations, where the market index is the value-weighted index of all CRSP firms. Since
every target has one or more technology peers and the peers’ stock returns are measured over the
same period, cross-correlation among peers’ returns could bias the return standard error downward
12

(Fama, 1998).
Therefore, when examining the significance of peers’ value revision, we use the
abnormal returns measured on an equal-weighted portfolio of all the peers of an acquisition target.
This method is consistent with a trading strategy by a rational investor who wants to systematically
exploit the announcement of an acquisition by investing in an equal-weighted portfolio of target
technology peers.
3. Abnormal Returns on Target Technology Peers
3.1. Abnormal Returns on the Peer Portfolios
In Panel A of Table 2, we report the cumulative average abnormal returns (CAARs) for the peer
portfolios, averaged across all targets, over various event windows around the deal announcement
day.
The CAARs are positive and statistically significant at the 5% level or above for all the
windows. Specifically, the CAARs over the (−2, 0), (0, +2), (−2, +2), and (−5, +5) event windows
are 0.06%, 0.20%, 0.26%, and 0.40%, respectively. A CAAR of 0.26% measured over the window of
(−2,+2) translates into a value increase of $612 million in an average target’s technology space in
2010 dollars (the median increase is $211 million). The magnitude is comparable to the industry
rivals’ CAAR that Song and Walkling (2000) report, i.e., 0.35% for the window of (−1, 0) and 0.56%
for the window of (−5, +5). In Panel B of Table 2, we consider several alternative estimators for the
abnormal returns over the (−2,+2) event window, namely the market-model-adjusted return, the
market-model estimator using regressions with GARCH (1,1) errors, the Scholes-Williams abnormal
return (Scholes and Williams, 1977), and the Fama-French three-factor model adjusted return
(Fama and French, 1993). Across these alternative estimators, the peer portfolios earn significant
positive abnormal returns ranging from 0.19% to 0.47%. In Table OAT8 of the Online Appendix, we
obtain qualitatively similar findings by calculating the CAARs on individual technology peers. In
Panel C of Table 2, we define technology peers using the Mahalanobis Distance and the Knowledge-
Base Overlap Ratio, and we find the CAAR on peer portfolios is statistically significant at the 1%
level and equal to 0.29% and 0.20%, respectively, consistent with the CAAR for peers defined based
on the Technology Proximity Score. In Panel D, we report the CAAR on target firms over various
13

windows. Consistent with the previous literature (e.g., Fee and Thomas, 2004), the target CAAR is
statistically significant at the 1% level and ranges from 19.99% to 27.82%. The substantial positive
target CAAR is consistent with a significant value of the technology synergies expected by the
combining firms.
We have defined technology peers such that they all have a Technology Proximity Score with
their corresponding acquisition targets greater than 98% of all peer candidates. In Table OAT9
of the Online Appendix, we establish the value relevance of the Technology Proximity Score, by
examining how this score relates to the CAAR (estimated for the (−2, +2) event window) on
portfolios of peer candidates.
Specifically, in each calendar month, we form the deciles of all
candidate firms based on the non-zero values of the Technology Proximity Score. A peer candidate
may fall into several deciles due to its varying degree of overlap with various target firms. Again,
we form an equal-weighted portfolio of all candidate firms for each target. We find that the CAAR
on peer-candidate portfolios increases monotonically from the first decile (lowest proximity) to the
tenth decile (highest proximity), except for the fourth decile.
3.2. Alternative Information-Transmission Channels
Our baseline result above shows that acquisition announcements disseminate information on
technology value that is of common interest among technology peers. However, information spillover
due to alternative economic relations may also exist between firms that are close in technology.
As mentioned above, previous studies have provided evidence showing that information is diffused
among product-market rivals, supply-chain partners, and geographical neighbors. Therefore, a con-
cern with our baseline result is that the technology links simply capture other underlying economic
relations.
In this section, we perform several robustness tests to examine whether peers’ value revision
is due to alternative economic links. In Table 3, we report the CAARs for the (−2, +2) event
window on the following four portfolios of peer candidates, sorted according to their relation with
the respective target firms in terms of technology space and product market: 1) peer candidates
14

that are neither in the target firms’ technology spaces nor in the target firms’ product markets; 2)
peer candidates that are in the target firms’ technology spaces but not in the target firms’ product
markets; 3) peer candidates that are not in the target firms’ technology spaces but in the target
firms’ product markets; and 4) peer candidates that are in both the target firms’ technology spaces
and product markets. We consider four definitions of product market based on 1) segment product
market (Bloom et al., 2013), 2) SIC-3 industry, 3) FF-48 industry, and 4) the TNIC-3 industry
(Hoberg and Phillips, 2010, 2016). Regardless of how we define the product market, the CAARs on
peer-candidate portfolios are significantly positive at the 5% level or above, except for the first type
of portfolios, i.e., those that contain the peer candidates that reside neither in their corresponding
targets’ technology spaces nor in the targets’ product markets.
Importantly, technology peers
benefit from a significant (at the 1% level) increase in their stock market valuations even when
they operate in product markets different from those of their corresponding targets (ranging from
0.18% to 0.32% across various product-market definitions).
The magnitude of the increase is
comparable to the CAAR on the non-peer candidates in the same product market (ranging from
0.17% to 0.25%). It is not surprising that those peer candidates that reside in both the targets’
technology spaces and product markets experience even greater abnormal returns (between 0.33%
and 0.46%).
Similarly, in Table 3, we observe that the CAARs on the portfolios of technology peers are
positive and statistically significant at the 1% level even when peers are not in their target firms’
supply chains or not from the target firms’ states (we provide more details about their construction
in Section XII of the Online Appendix). Furthermore, the abnormal returns on the portfolios of
firms that are not technology peers are statistically insignificant.
In Section XIII of the Online Appendix, we further strengthen our baseline finding using placebo
tests based on the empirical distributions of CAAR (−2, +2) on randomly selected portfolios of
peer candidates. These placebo tests indicate that our baseline result is robust.
Overall, we show that technology links and product-market links play roles of similar importance
in the process of information transmission. Importantly, the informational role of technology links
15

is statistically and economically significant even in the absence of product-market relations, supply-
chain partnerships, and geographical proximity.
3.3. Multivariate Analysis
In Panel A of Table 4, we estimate several multivariate models to study the significance of
technology closeness in the information transmission to peer firms, controlling for the influence of
product-market overlap and other factors. We also control for deal fixed effects which reflect both
observable and unobservable deal and target characteristics (e.g., the timing of the announcement;
how the target interacts with its peer candidates). We estimate the regressions on a sample that
includes all the peer candidates of our acquisition targets, including the peers. The dependent
variable is peer candidates’ CAR measured over the event window (−2, +2). Detailed definitions
and the construction of all the explanatory variables are in Table 1 and the Online Appendix. Given
that we have multiple peer candidates for each deal, the standard errors are adjusted for clustering
within deals. The findings are qualitatively the same if we cluster the standard errors by year or
by patent class (see Table OAT11 and Table OAT12 in the Online Appendix).
In the first column of Panel A, we find a positive and statistically significant relation between
a peer candidate’s CAR and its technology closeness to its corresponding acquisition target as
measured by the Technology Proximity Score. The coefficient is 0.486 and statistically significant
at the 1% level. In column (2), we obtain a similar result for a dummy variable that indicates
technology peers. The coefficient on the peer dummy is 0.281, indicating that a peer on average has
a CAR that is 0.281 percentage points greater than non-peer candidates. We obtain qualitatively
similar findings when we control for product-market overlap in columns (3) and (4) through the
inclusion of the Product Proximity Score whose coefficient is positive and statistically significant at
the 10% level or above. Our result persists when we use alternative measures of product-market
overlap (see Section XV and Table OAT13 of the Online Appendix), namely the SIC-3 industry,
TNIC-3 industry, and the segment-based Product Market Dummy. In columns (5) and (6), we
conduct a horse race of all possible information channels that could underpin the information
16

transmission of an acquisition announcement to target firms’ technology peers. Specifically, we
include the Same State Dummy, Supplier Dummy, and Customer Dummy to evaluate the effects
of geographical location (e.g., Chu et al., 2019) and supply-chain relations (e.g., Fee and Thomas,
2004). We find that, while the coefficients on Technology Proximity Score and Technology-Peer
Dummy remain statistically significant at the 1% level, the coefficients on Same State Dummy,
Supplier Dummy, and Customer Dummy are economically weak and statistically insignificant. An
F-test shows that the coefficients on these three dummies are jointly insignificant. Adding these
three variables does not contribute much to the goodness of fit of the model either. Overall, the
result in Panel A confirms technology closeness and product-market overlap as two prominent
channels of information transmission for target firms’ technology peers. Since the geographical
location and supply-chain relations have a negligible effect on peers’ market response, we use the
more parsimonious models specified in columns (3) and (4) as our preferred specifications for our
subsequent analyses, following the recommendation of Wooldridge (2010, p. 148).
A confounding issue remains that a target’s technology peers may also be technologically close
to the acquirer, given that acquirers tend to pursue firms from the same technology space (Bena
and Li, 2014). The information transmission process may originate from the acquirer rather than
the target.
We rule out this possibility by excluding the acquirers’ technology peers from our
sample.
Our findings are robust to this alteration (see Section XVI and Table OAT14 of the
Online Appendix). Another issue may arise due to the disproportional clustering of patents in
several classes, as is discussed in Section 2.1. However, our result persists when we adjust the
standard errors for clustering within patent classes (see Section XIV and Table OAT12 of the
Online Appendix). In Section 3.4, we also adopt an alternative measure of technology closeness
(i.e., the Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio) to address the possible issues with our variable of interest
due to disproportional patenting in some classes.
17

3.4. Robustness of Peer Value Revision to Alternative Measures of Technology Closeness
Measuring technology closeness is central to our analysis. As was mentioned earlier, while Jaffe’s
(1986) measure is arguably the most widely used, it has some limitations, and other meaningful
measures have since been developed in the literature. In this subsection, we examine to what extent
our findings are robust to two alternative measures of technology closeness.
The first measure is the Mahalanobis Distance proposed by Bloom et al. (2013). This measure
considers not only the overlap among patents filed in the same patent class (as the Technology
Proximity Score, i.e., Jaffe’s (1986) measure, does) but also the interaction across patent classes,
based on the extent to which different classes are co-located in the same firms (Bloom et al., 2013,
pp.1358–1359). As we show earlier in Panel C of Table 2, the technology peers defined based on
the Mahalanobis Distance have a significant CAAR of 0.29%, slightly higher than the CAAR when
we define technology peers based on the Technology Proximity Score (0.26%). In the multivariate
results reported in column (1) in Panel B of Table 4, we find the coefficient on the Mahalanobis
Peer Dummy is 0.308 and statistically significant at the 1% level, confirming our baseline finding.
The second measure is the Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio used in Bena and Li (2014) and
Ma (2020). Instead of focusing on innovation outputs, this alternative measure emphasizes the
previous knowledge based on which firms conduct their innovation. A firm’s knowledge base is
measured using the pool of prior patents cited by the firm’s existing patents and, accordingly,
the Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio measures the common component of all the citations made
by a pair of firms. Therefore, this measure focuses on the knowledge input to firms’ innovation
activities. Since this measure does not rely on innovation output, it is less subject to the issue
of disproportional patenting in some classes mentioned in Section 2.1. As we showed earlier in
Panel C of Table 2, when we define technology peers using the Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio (i.e.,
Knowledge-Base Peer Dummy), the CAAR on peers is 0.20% and significant at the 1% level. In
column (2) in Panel B of Table 4, we find the coefficient on the Knowledge-Base Peer Dummy is
0.153 and statistically significant at the 5% level.
In columns (3) and (4), we control for the Product Proximity Score, and report slightly smaller
18

but positive and statistically significant (at the 10% level or higher) coefficients on the Mahalanobis
Peer Dummy and the Knowledge-Base Peer Dummy, respectively.
Overall, the technology peers’ positive abnormal returns are robust to alternative measures of
technology closeness.
3.5. Further Validation of the Information Spillover via Technology Links
To further validate the presence of information spillover via technology links, we perform several
conditioning tests based on the significance of information signaled by an acquisition announcement
and the relevance of technology. The intuition is that our baseline result should be stronger if the
signal is more consequential or the technology is more relevant.
First, we expect peers to experience stronger price revisions when the premium offered to a
target is higher. A higher premium sends a stronger signal and indicates a greater technology value
revision of technology. Second, information transmission along technology links should be more
relevant for peer candidates that are more technology dependent. To measure a firm’s technology
dependence, we construct two variables, namely, the High Patent-Value Dummy and the High R&D
Dummy. Third, Bena and Li (2014) report that firms with close technology spaces are more likely
to put their resources under common control to exploit technology synergies. Thus, we expect peer
abnormal returns to be more positive for deals involving firms having common technologies because
the merger of two firms that are closer in technology arguably sends a stronger signal about the
value of technology synergies common among peers.
In Panel C of Table 4, we introduce several interaction terms to test the predictions above. As
expected, we find that the coefficient on the interaction between the High Acquisition-Premium
Dummy and the Technology Proximity Score is positive and significant at the 5% level in column
(1). In column (2), the coefficient on the Technology Proximity Score is significantly more positive
when the High Patent-Value Dummy equals one. We observe similar findings when we replace High
Patent-Value Dummy with High R&D Dummy in column (3). Finally, the result of column (4)
shows that peers’ positive value revision is concentrated among deals where the acquirer is in the
19

target’s technology space. In columns (1) and (4), the High Acquisition-Premium Dummy and the
Acquirer-Target Same Technology-Space Dummy, which are defined at the deal level, are absorbed
by the deal fixed effects.
3.6. The Boundaries of the Main Finding
In this subsection, we explore the boundaries of our main finding. The objective is to understand
whether our main finding is a robust economic phenomenon or just a byproduct of merger waves,
technology waves, or certain industry structure or technology features. For this purpose, in Table
OAT15 of the Online Appendix, we examine the heterogeneity of our main finding over various
sample periods and across various industrial structures and technological features.
We begin by examining whether our main finding is confined to the earlier sample period
(no later than 1997) or the later one (after 1997). Column (1) of Table OAT15 shows that our
main finding is present in both sample periods. The coefficient on the interaction term between
Later Sample-Period Dummy and Technology Proximity Score is statistically insignificant while
the positive coefficient on the Technology Proximity Score is significant at the 1% level. In column
(2), we proceed to examine whether the dot-com bubble period (1998–2001) makes any difference,
considering the boom of dot-com investment may have driven both the peers’ abnormal returns
and their technology closeness with respect to target firms. The result shows that the dot-com
bubble period does not make a significant difference to our main finding. In columns (3) and (4),
we examine whether our result is specific to the periods of aggregate merger waves. If our finding
only appears during merger waves, there is a concern that broad merger waves may underpin both
acquisition announcements and peers’ abnormal returns, which leads to our result. Therefore, we
follow Harford (2005) and consider an Industry Merger-Wave Dummy that captures the years of
merger waves. We also form another variable (High Capital Liquidity Dummy) to indicate the years
when overall capital liquidity is abundant because Harford (2005) finds that high capital liquidity is
a necessary condition for merger waves to occur. The results in columns (3) and (4) show that the
effect of Technology Proximity Score on peers’ abnormal returns is not significantly different during
20

merger waves (column (4)) or when capital liquidity is high (column (3)). In columns (5) and (6),
we interact the Technology Proximity Score with two innovation-wave dummies (one built at the
industry level and the other at the patent-class level), based on breakthrough patents (Kelly et al.,
2021). The coefficients on these interactions with Industry Innovation-Wave Dummy and Patent-
Class Innovation-Wave Dummy are statistically insignificant, while on Technology Proximity Score
the coefficients remain positive and significant. In columns (7) to (10), we further examine whether
our main finding is related to the technology or product structure of targets’ and peer candidates’
industry. Specifically, we construct a Low Technology-Concentration Dummy for both target and
peer candidate according to the patent-based Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) of SIC-3 industries
and similar dummies according to the sales-based HHI of SIC-3 industries (namely, the Low Product-
Concentration Dummy for both target and peer candidate). The former and the latter pair of
dummy variables measure the level of technological and product-market competition in an industry,
respectively. The results presented in columns (7) to (10) show that our main finding is present
regardless of the targets’ and peer candidates’ industry structure. In columns (11) to (14), we
specifically examine how our main finding varies for pharmaceutical and IT industries because of
their unique innovation feature (Guler and Nerkar, 2012; Lyytinen and Rose, 2003). The results of
these tests do not show that our main finding differs significantly in those two industries. Overall,
the results presented in Table OAT15 demonstrate that our main finding is a robust economic
phenomenon across various time periods, industrial structures, and innovation features.
3.7. Summary of Findings
In summary, the technology peers of acquisition targets earn significantly positive abnormal
returns during the acquisition announcement. These are robust to alternative CAR estimators,
alternative definitions of technology closeness, and various tests that control for a comprehensive
set of confounding inter-firm economic relations and firm and deal characteristics.
Additional
analyses confirm that our main finding is a robust economic phenomenon rather than a byproduct
of merger or technology waves, a certain industry structure, or technology features. The cross-
21

sectional tests based on targets’ acquisition premiums, peers’ value-dependence on technology, and
target and acquirer technology overlap offer evidence corroborating the importance of technology
links for the peers’ value revision.
As we have introduced in Section 1, theory suggests several possible mechanisms underpinning
the peers’ value revision. Which mechanism(s) is (are) more consistent with the data than others?
We will analyze the validity of these alternative hypotheses in the following sections.
4. The Acquisition-Probability Hypothesis
Previous studies show that technology synergies constitute a primary merger motive (Acemoglu
et al., 2010; Ahuja and Katila, 2001; Bena and Li, 2014; Cassiman and Veugelers, 2006; Fr´esard
et al., 2020; Phillips and Zhdanov, 2013; Sevilir and Tian, 2012; Zhao, 2009). Building on the
previous literature, the Acquisition-Probability Hypothesis posits that an acquisition announcement
disseminates novel information about the common component of technology synergies, which raises
both the expected value of synergies and merger prospects for technology peers. For information
dissemination to occur, two conditions are necessary. First, firms with close technology spaces
should have fundamentals in common that affect firm value. It is safe to assume that a firm’s
technology resource bears substantially on its current and future cash flows.
Moreover, firms
with similar technology have common fundamentals through their shared categories of innovation
output and knowledge base, and shared networks of citations, licensing agreements, talents, and
collaborations (e.g., Baghai et al., 2019; Fulghieri and Sevilir, 2011; Hall et al., 2001; Katz and
Shapiro, 1986), and these firms interact through the effects of technology spillover (Bloom et al.,
2013). Therefore, it is also safe to argue that technology peers have common components in their
valuations, and signals about the value of one firm should convey useful information about its
peers. Second, the acquisition process should generate novel information that the stock market
has not possessed previously. Having much at stake, the acquirers are keen to understand what
they are about to acquire. Distinct from investors at arm’s length, acquirers are often in a suitable
position to gather private information about a target firm’s value both as a stand-alone firm and in
22

a combined business. Especially in friendly deals, which constitute most acquisition transactions,
acquirers have the privilege of accessing the target firms’ value-sensitive information.2 Moreover,
in cases where the acquirer and target are closer in their technology space (Bena and Li, 2014),
acquiring firms have even better expertise to assess technologies. In contrast, investors in the stock
market are often poorly informed about technology value. Firms are often reluctant to disclose
sensitive information about their technologies (e.g., Bhattacharya and Ritter, 1983; Maksimovic
and Pichler, 2001) and stock market is often slow in processing technological information (e.g.,
Chan et al., 2001; Cohen et al., 2013; Eberhart et al., 2004; Hirshleifer et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2019;
Lev and Sougiannis, 1996). Previous research has also found that individuals put less emphasis
on complicated information (Song and Schwarz, 2010).
Therefore, a clear gap exists between
the informed acquirers and the less informed investors regarding technology value and possible
synergies. Overall, we expect acquisitions to play an essential role in transmitting novel information
to the stock market about technology valuation.
To elaborate on the mechanism, we conceptualize the Acquisition-Probability Hypothesis as
follows.
An acquisition announcement sends a positive signal that the common component of
technology synergies is greater than previously expected, which in turn increases the value of a
target firm’s peer that is a prospective acquisition target.
The increment to the value of the
peer, denoted as V I, can be expressed as a function of the change in its acquisition probability
and the change in the share of the expected synergies obtained by the peer firm’s shareholders
upon an acquisition.
Assume the ex-ante expected synergies to be zero for simplicity, without
loss of generality. The ex-ante expected acquisition probability would be zero too because of the
lack of synergy. We then have V I = π × G where π is the expected acquisition probability and
G is the peer firm’s share of expected synergies, conditional on a bid being announced. Let S
denote the total synergy value from the prospective acquisition of a peer firm and p(S) denote the
2Many popular readings describe how companies follow rigorous procedures to assess the value of a tar-
get firm’s patent portfolio (for example http://info.ipvisioninc.com/IPVisions/bid/33855/Patent-Due-Diligence-in-
Mergers-Acquisition-Transactions-Overview).
23

density function of the distribution of S. Importantly, S contains components that are common
across technology peers.
In other words, S contains a component that is achievable both in a
currently announced acquisition and in subsequent acquisitions of the target firm’s technology
peers. If the prospective acquisition does indeed happen, the merging firms would split the synergies
according to a sharing rule λ ∈(0,1), where the target gets (1 −λ)S and the acquirer λS. The
outside investors do not know S but know p(S) conditional on their information set. Then we
have π =
R +∞
C
λ
p(S|bid)dS because a bidder would not bid when λS < C, where C is the bidding
cost. The peer’s share of expected synergy is G =
R +∞
C
λ
(1 −λ)S × p(S|bid)dS. The emergence
of an acquisition announcement in a firm’s technology space sends a positive signal s about S,
which adds to the outside investors’ information set and shifts p(S) to the right for the technology
peers. In other words, p(S) becomes p(S|bid) after being shifted to the right. Consequently, V I is
positive as both π and G increase from zero to positive after the right shift. It becomes clear that
a peer’s value revision is the outcome of the updates to both the value of expected synergies and
the acquisition prospects. Since S is a determinant of both the expected acquisition probability
(π) and the peer firm’s share of the expected synergy (G), an empirical distinction between these
two parts can be difficult to draw.
The above framework predicts positive abnormal returns for the target firms’ technology peers,
which we find from our baseline empirical analysis. Apart from this prediction, this framework
also implies several additional predictions. First, since a higher premium sends a stronger signal
and shifts the distribution of S by more, the value revision for technology peers should increase
with the premium. Second, since S is driven by technology, the value revision should be stronger
for those peers that are more dependent on technology (as reflected in more investments in R&D
or greater contribution of technology to total firm value). Third, Bena and Li (2014) posit that
technology synergy is greater between two firms with greater technology closeness. Therefore, the
acquisition signal should be more relevant for technology valuation when an acquisition happens
between firms with closer technologies, which leads to greater value revision among peers, ceteris
paribus.
24

Our empirical findings in Panel C of Table 4 are consistent with the predictions above. That
said, these predictions could also be consistent with the Enhanced-Investment Hypothesis which we
explain in Section 5. To further examine the validity of the Acquisition-Probability Hypothesis, we
perform additional analyses below.
4.1. Additional Evidence for the Acquisition-Probability Hypothesis
We test three predictions that closely relate to acquisition probability. First, as is explained
in Section 4, the acquisition announcement shifts the distribution of synergies to the right for
targets’ technology peers, which increases the peers’ subsequent acquisition probability. Second,
peers that are easier to acquire (i.e., more vulnerable to acquisitions) are more likely to become
future acquisition targets, ceteris paribus. Thus, we expect these peers to earn higher abnormal
returns during the acquisition announcement.
Third, since the truthful information revelation
about synergies cannot be reversed, peers’ abnormal returns should not be reversed even if the
current acquisition is withdrawn, as long as the withdrawal is not due to reasons related to the
deterioration of expected synergies.
4.1.1. The Likelihood of a Technology Peer’s Future Acquisition
As explained above, if the Acquisition-Probability Hypothesis plays an important role in the
information-transmission process, we expect firms having acquired technology peers in the preceding
year to be more likely to be acquired in the current year. In Table 5, we report the estimates from
alternative linear-probability specifications for a firm’s acquisition probability.3
We consider a
sample that includes all the firm-years (excluding firms from the financial and utilities sectors, and
firms without any patents) in the Compustat-CRSP merged database and acquisitions from SDC
over the 1984–2010 period. The key test variable is the Previous-Acquisition Dummy which is one
if a firm is the technology peer of one or more of the target firms receiving an acquisition bid in
3We use the linear-probability specifications because non-linear models, such as the Probit model, yield biased
estimates when the number of fixed effects is large and the group size is small (e.g., Hsiao, 1996; Kalbfleisch and
Sprott, 1970).
25

the preceding year and zero otherwise. All the control variables are measured in the preceding year
and are selected following Cremers et al. (2009) and Cain et al. (2017).
The six alternative models in Table 5 offer a consistent conclusion: the likelihood of a firm
becoming an acquisition target in the current year is significantly higher when one or more of the
firm’s technology peers have received an acquisition bid in the preceding year. Consistent with the
Acquisition-Probability Hypothesis, the coefficient on the Previous-Acquisition Dummy is always
positive and statistically significant (at the 5% level or above). If we hold all the other variables
at their means, firms with technology peers acquired in the preceding year have a higher likelihood
of being an acquisition target in the current year by 0.70 to 1 percentage points.
Given that
the unconditional sample average probability of a firm being acquired is around 5%, the increase is
economically significant. In Table OAT16 of the Online Appendix, we use the test variable Previous-
Acquisition Proximity Score instead. Previous-Acquisition Proximity Score is the value-weighted
average of the technology proximity scores between the firm in question and all the acquisition
targets in the previous year. As expected, the coefficient on this variable is always positive and
statistically significant at the 5% level or above, consistent with our finding in Table 5.
4.1.2. Acquisition Vulnerability and Abnormal Returns on Technology Peers
In line with the Acquisition-Probability Hypothesis, in Table 6, we observe a positive relation
between a peer’s acquisition vulnerability (i.e., the firm’s ex-ante acquisition probability) and its
abnormal returns at the acquisition announcement. In Table OAT17 of the Online Appendix, we
follow Cremers et al. (2009) and Cain et al. (2017) to specify three alternative models estimating
a firm’s acquisition vulnerability, and to test whether acquisition vulnerability is associated with
the peers’ abnormal returns. We calculate a firm’s Acquisition Vulnerability using the coefficients
estimated from the logistic models in Table OAT17 of the Online Appendix. Consistent with the
Acquisition-Probability Theory, in Table 6, we find that the coefficient on Acquisition Vulnerability
is universally positive and statistically significant. This result indicates that peers more exposed
to acquisition opportunities experience greater value revision.
26

4.1.3. Abnormal Returns on Targets and Peers of Withdrawn Deals
As mentioned in the Introduction (Section 1), peers’ abnormal returns are nearly as large in
withdrawn deals as those in completed deals. This result can be interpreted in the framework of the
Acquisition-Probability Hypothesis. Specifically, because it involves a costly search and investigation
to identify technology synergies (e.g., Rhodes-Kropf and Robinson, 2008), potential acquirers often
rely on price signals to infer possible sources of synergy. According to the Acquisition-Probability
Hypothesis, acquisition announcements generate and transmit novel information about the com-
mon component of technology synergies available among peers, and such announcements put the
targets and their peers under the spotlight as valuable sources of synergy. Once highlighted, these
companies will attract potential bidders, which is true even if the current deal is not completed
because the cancellation of a transaction cannot nullify the novel and true information revealed.
Therefore, peers’ abnormal returns at deal announcement should be insensitive to the deal with-
drawal. Similarly, a target’s abnormal returns at announcement should not dissipate over time if
it is subsequently acquired.4
In Panel A of Table OAT18 of the Online Appendix, we find the CAAR on technology peers is
0.28% (significant at the 10% level) for withdrawn deals, even slightly higher than the peer CAAR
of 0.25% for completed deals. In Panel B, we show that it takes only 12 months for the target firms
of withdrawn deals to lose their positive value revision at the deal announcement, if they are not
subsequently acquired within five years. For instance, the target CAAR is 39% between month −1
and month +12 (month 0 is the announcement month) and statistically significant (t-statistic =
6.396) for the targets that are subsequently acquired. In contrast, for targets that are not subse-
quently acquired, the CAAR is only 4.27% and statistically insignificant, reversing their abnormal
returns at announcement. It appears that only when their subsequent acquisition prospects do
not vanish, do targets experience significant and lasting value revisions after deal withdrawal. In
4While it is tempting to claim the same for peers, the magnitude of peers’ short-term CARs is small. Thus, the
long-term CAR is insignificant given that it is small relative to the standard error. There is a statistical power issue
here.
27

Panel C, we further clean up the sample of withdrawn deals where the target is not subsequently
acquired, by removing those deals withdrawn because the deal price is deemed excessive by the
acquirer or because the fundamentals of the target firm and/or business environment deteriorate.5
The remaining withdrawals would be most likely due to non-price reasons, such as regulatory in-
junction and antitrust investigations, which also affect the prospects of future acquisitions. We
perform this additional robustness check because we are concerned that the post-transaction dif-
ference in target CAAR between the completed and withdrawn deals is caused by the acquirer’s
negative perception rather than subsequent acquisition prospects. However, for this clean sample,
we find the target gains are still reversed within 24 months—the CAAR is 6.35% over the (−1,
+24) window but statistically insignificant (t-statistic = 0.763). In Table OAT19 and Section XX
of the Online Appendix, we alternatively use the targets’ average buy-and-hold abnormal returns
(ABHAR) and find similar results.
Overall, the findings we provide in this and the previous sections are in line with the predictions
of the Acquisition-Probability Hypothesis.
4.2. Who Later Acquires the Peers?
The Acquisition-Probability Hypothesis posits that peers’ value revision is driven by their ele-
vated expectation of technology synergies and merger prospects. It would be natural to ask who
subsequently acquires the peers. To answer this question, we need to ask: which companies are
likely to benefit from the technology synergies common for peers? In Section XXII of the Online
Appendix, we report the results of our empirical analysis. Our findings are in line with the view
that various economically-related firms are more likely to be future acquirers, as is suggested by the
previous literature. Specifically, we observe that future acquirers are more likely to be close to peers
in terms of technology (Bena and Li, 2014), products (Eckbo, 1983; Hoberg and Phillips, 2010),
5More specifically, the reasons behind these withdrawals include poor target performance (nine deals), objection
from the shareholders of the acquirer (eight deals), poor business environment (six deals), reduction of the bid price
by the acquirer (two deals), or undetermined reasons (nineteen deals). To obtain the reasons for withdrawal, we
manually gather information from four sources, including Dow Jones Newswires, Reuters Newswires, the Wall Street
Journal, and the Financial Times.
28

geographical locations (Jaffe et al., 1993), or be the suppliers of the peers (Fan and Goyal, 2006).
However, customers are unlikely to be future acquirers. Moreover, we find that the likelihood of
being an acquirer is lower for firms that are also product-market rivals of the peers, consistent
with the finding of Bena and Li (2014). We do not find any evidence showing that local firms,
customers, or suppliers that are close in technology are more likely to acquire the peers, contrary
to the prediction based on the previous literature (e.g., Jaffe et al., 1993; Fr´esard et al., 2020). We
provide more details about the hypothesis development, empirical method, and empirical results in
Section XXII of the Online Appendix.
4.3. Peer Abnormal Returns and the Declining Acquisition Intensity
As more and more peers are acquired in a technology field, the novelty of an acquisition an-
nouncement should decline and bidding costs should rise (e.g., greater searching cost). Accordingly,
our baseline result should weaken for the remaining firms in the technology space as the acquisition
prospects of peers begin to diminish.
To test this hypothesis, we construct a Declining Acquisition-Intensity Dummy to indicate the
acquisitions announced in a period when the peers’ subsequent acquisition probabilities are likely
to update negatively. Specifically, Declining Acquisition-Intensity Dummy takes the value of one
if the count of the target firm’s peers acquired in the 12 months after the deal announcement is
smaller than the count in the 12 months before the deal announcement. In Table OAT20 of the
Online Appendix, we regress peers’ CAR on the Declining Acquisition-Intensity Dummy and find
this variable has a significantly negative coefficient in all specifications, ranging from −0.446 to
−0.368. Since the Declining Acquisition-Intensity Dummy is defined at the deal level, we cannot
control for deal fixed effects. Instead, we control for several deal characteristics, e.g., Deal Value
and Horizontal-Merger Dummy. Our result is robust to the inclusion of these deal characteristics.
29

5. The Enhanced-Investment Hypothesis
The primary argument of the Enhanced-Investment Hypothesis is that firms increase their in-
novation activities following the acquisitions of their technology peers, which is value-enhancing.
Phillips and Zhdanov (2013) argue that an active acquisition market boosts firms’ incentives to
innovate, which makes the firms and their technology assets more attractive to potential acquirers.
Even in the absence of prospective acquisitions, valuable innovation activities (such as R&D) could
enhance the value of firms as independent entities. Phillips and Zhdanov (2013) expect increases
in R&D expenditures to be more substantial for small firms because their likelihood of being taken
over is higher.
In Table 7, we evaluate whether and how firms alter their R&D investments following acqui-
sitions of their technology peers. Our specifications are largely based on Table 3 in Phillips and
Zhdanov (2013), except that we also control for the lagged value of R&D investments since these
investments are highly persistent and we are interested in the change in R&D rather than the level
itself. In columns (1) and (4) of Table 7, the coefficient on Previous-Acquisition Dummy is positive
but statistically insignificant. Therefore, the circumstance that at least one of a firm’s technology
peers is acquired in the previous year, on average, does not lead to a significant revision in the firm’s
R&D investments. The Previous-Acquisition Dummy is then interacted with two different firm-
size measures in columns (2), (3), (5), and (6). An obvious split emerges as predicted by Phillips
and Zhdanov (2013)—following the acquisitions of peers, small firms’ R&D expenditures increase
significantly by around 5.9% and 5.4% of firms’ revenues (columns (2) and (5), respectively). The
same does not happen to larger firms for which there is a significant decline of approximately 4.2%
and 4.9% of revenues (columns (2) and (5), respectively). In Table OAT22 of the Online Appendix,
we show that the findings are robust if we use the alternative test variable Previous-Acquisition
Proximity Score that captures the average level of technology proximity between the focal firm and
those that are taken over in the prior period. In Table 8, we further analyze whether the peers’
abnormal returns at announcement vary according to the level of R&D increase from the year be-
30

fore the acquisition announcement to the year after. We find that the peers’ returns are insensitive
to the change in their R&D spending, irrespective of peers’ size, indicating peers’ upward value
revisions are unlikely to be related to the changes in their innovation activities.
Overall, there is rather limited support for the Enhanced-Investment Hypothesis. This hypoth-
esis cannot explain the value revisions that peers systematically experience. Small peers appear to
react to the deal announcement by spending more on R&D, which nontheless does not appear to
be value-enhancing. However, other peers seem to follow a different strategy.
6. The Competition-Balance Hypothesis
The technology synergies of business combinations could tip the balance of competition in the
product market because technology peers are often, although not always, product-market rivals. A
priori, the Competition-Balance Hypothesis has mixed predictions for the peers’ abnormal returns.
On the one hand, peer returns could react negatively to the extent that mergers produce more
efficient rivals. Henderson and Cockburn (1996) posit that merging firms enjoy economies of scale
and scope in their R&D activities. Previous literature (e.g., Bena and Li, 2014; Sevilir and Tian,
2012) find companies’ innovation capacity improves after acquisitions. Bloom et al. (2013) sug-
gest that companies that benefit from mutual technology spillover could also suffer from “business
stealing” (i.e., loss of revenue to rivals). On the other hand, rivals could benefit from the market
power generated by acquisitions.
In their novel study, Cunningham et al. (2021) highlight the
presence of “killer acquisitions” among merger transactions. They find that a considerable propor-
tion of acquirers take over innovative targets simply to discontinue the targets’ R&D projects and
preempt competition. The enhanced market power enables incumbent companies to obtain anti-
competitive rents, benefiting product-market rivals while hurting customers. Our baseline finding
of positive peer value revision contradicts the argument that acquisitions create more efficient rivals
that harm peers, but could be consistent with the possibility of “killer acquisitions.” In further
analysis reported in Panel A of Table 9, we find customers of acquiring firms, on average, do not
suffer value loss from the acquisitions. Some sub-groups of customers (e.g., small customers and
31

regional customers; defined in Section XXIII of the Online Appendix) even earn positive abnor-
mal returns upon the deal announcement. When we separate our sample into acquisitions in the
high-competition industries and those in the low-competition industries (measured by the sales-
based Herfindahl-Hirschman Index), we find the CAARs on customer portfolios are statistically
indistinguishable between these two groups, suggesting the effect of market power is unlikely to
be a major force driving our results. While the sign of customer CAAR is negative on average
(−0.02%) when industrial competition is low, the statistical significance is low too (t = −0.465).
In Panel B, the non-negative customer CAAR persists when we restrict our acquisition sample to
deals that fall just below the antitrust thresholds (by either 5% or 10%) where “killer acquisitions”
are most likely (Cunningham et al., 2021, p.686). We also compare these deals to those that fall
within 5% (or 10%) above the antitrust thresholds. These two groups are arguably distinct in
their anti-competitive intentions but similar on other aspects (Cunningham et al., 2021). However,
we find that peers’ abnormal returns are statistically indistinguishable between these two groups,
again suggesting market power is unlikely a primary driver of peers’ value revision.
7. Conclusion
We find acquisitions disseminate information of common interest about the value of technol-
ogy among the target firms’ technology peers.
This finding is a robust economic phenomenon
not explained by other economic relations, merger or technology waves, specific product-market
structures, or innovation features. Our study shows that corporate-control transactions and tech-
nology links, combined, play an important role in the information dissemination process regarding
the value of technology. Our analysis of possible mechanisms shows that the elevated expectation
of technology synergies and acquisition prospects for technology peers play a primary role in the
information transmission. While the value of technology is often elusive, our study shows that
technology links and the market for corporate control contribute significantly to the price discovery
of technology assets.
32

References
Acemoglu, D., R. Griffith, P. Aghion, and F. Zilibotti (2010). Vertical integration and technology: theory
and evidence. Journal of the European Economic Association 8(5), 989–1033.
Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1992). A model of growth through creative destruction. Econometrica 60(2),
323–351.
Ahuja, G. and R. Katila (2001). Technological acquisitions and the innovation performance of acquiring
firms: a longitudinal study. Strategic Management Journal 22(3), 197–220.
Ali, U. and D. Hirshleifer (2020). Shared analyst coverage: Unifying momentum spillover effects. Journal of
Financial Economics 136(3), 649–675.
Arts, S., B. Cassiman, and J. C. Gomez (2018). Text matching to measure patent similarity. Strategic
Management Journal 39(1), 62–84.
Baghai, R., R. Silva, and L. Ye (2019). Teams and bankruptcy. Working Paper, Swedish House of Finance
Research Paper.
Barney, J. B. (1988). Returns to bidding firms in mergers and acquisitions: Reconsidering the relatedness
hypothesis. Strategic Management Journal 9(S1), 71–78.
Bena, J. and K. Li (2014).
Corporate innovations and mergers and acquisitions.
The Journal of Fi-
nance 69(5), 1923–1960.
Bernile, G. and E. Lyandres (2019). The Effects of Horizontal Merger Operating Efficiencies on Rivals,
Customers, and Suppliers. Review of Finance 23(1), 117–160.
Bhattacharya, S. and J. R. Ritter (1983). Innovation and communication: Signalling with partial disclosure.
The Review of Economic Studies 50(2), 331–346.
Bloom, N., M. Schankerman, and J. Van Reenen (2013).
Identifying technology spillovers and product
market rivalry. Econometrica 81(4), 1347–1393.
Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen (2002). Patents, real options and firm performance. The Economic Jour-
nal 112(478), C97–C116.
Cai, J., M. H. Song, and R. A. Walkling (2011). Anticipation, acquisitions, and bidder returns: industry
shocks and the transfer of information across rivals. The Review of Financial Studies 24(7), 2242–2285.
Cain, M. D., S. B. McKeon, and S. D. Solomon (2017). Do takeover laws matter? Evidence from five decades
of hostile takeovers. Journal of Financial Economics 124(3), 464–485.
Cassiman, B. and R. Veugelers (2006). In search of complementarity in innovation strategy: internal R&D
and external knowledge acquisition. Management Science 52(1), 68–82.
Chan, L. K. C., J. Lakonishok, and T. Sougiannis (2001).
The stock market valuation of research and
development expenditures. The Journal of Finance 56(6), 2431–2456.
Chu, Y., X. Tian, and W. Wang (2019). Corporate innovation along the supply chain. Management Sci-
ence 65(6), 2445–2466.
Cohen, L., K. Diether, and C. Malloy (2013). Misvaluing innovation. The Review of Financial Studies 26(3),
635–666.
Cohen, L. and A. Frazzini (2008). Economic links and predictable returns. The Journal of Finance 63(4),
1977–2011.
Cremers, K. J. M., V. B. Nair, and K. John (2009). Takeovers and the cross-section of returns. The Review
of Financial Studies 22(4), 1409–1445.
Cunningham, C., F. Ederer, and S. Ma (2021). Killer acquisitions. Journal of Political Economy 129(3),
649–702.
Dougal, C., C. A. Parsons, and S. Titman (2015). Urban vibrancy and corporate growth. The Journal of
Finance 70(1), 163–210.
Duffie, D., G. Giroux, and G. Manso (2010a).
Information percolation.
American Economic Journal:
Microeconomics 2(1), 100–111.
Duffie, D., S. Malamud, and G. Manso (2010b). The relative contributions of private information sharing and
public information releases to information aggregation. Journal of Economic Theory 145(4), 1574–1601.
33

Eberhart, A. C., W. F. Maxwell, and A. R. Siddique (2004). An examination of long-term abnormal stock
returns and operating performance following R&D increases. The Journal of Finance 59(2), 623–650.
Eckbo, B. (1983).
Horizontal mergers, collusion, and stockholder wealth.
Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics 11(1), 241–273.
Engelberg, J., A. Ozoguz, and S. Wang (2018). Know thy neighbor: Industry clusters, information spillovers,
and market efficiency. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 53(5), 1937–1961.
Fama, E. F. (1998). Market efficiency, long-term returns, and behavioral finance. Journal of Financial
Economics 49(3), 283–306.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. Journal of
Financial Economics 33(1), 3–56.
Fan, J. P. and V. K. Goyal (2006). On the patterns and wealth effects of vertical mergers. The Journal of
Business 79(2), 877–902.
Fee, C. and S. Thomas (2004). Sources of gains in horizontal mergers: evidence from customer, supplier,
and rival firms. Journal of Financial Economics 74(3), 423–460.
Fr´esard, L., G. Hoberg, and G. M. Phillips (2020). Innovation activities and integration through vertical
acquisitions. The Review of Financial Studies 33(7), 2937–2976.
Fulghieri, P. and M. Sevilir (2011). Mergers, spinoffs, and employee incentives. The Review of Financial
Studies 24(7), 2207–2241.
Grossman, S. (1976). On the efficiency of competitive stock markets where trades have diverse information.
The Journal of Finance 31(2), 573–585.
Grossman, S. J. and J. E. Stiglitz (1980). On the impossibility of informationally efficient markets. The
American Economic Review 70(3), 393–408.
Guler, I. and A. Nerkar (2012). The impact of global and local cohesion on innovation in the pharmaceutical
industry. Strategic Management Journal 33(5), 535–549.
Hall, B. H., A. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg (2005). Market value and patent citations. The RAND Journal of
Economics 36(1), 16–38.
Hall, B. H., A. B. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg (2001). The NBER patent citation data file: lessons, insights
and methodological tools. Working Paper, NBER.
Harford, J. (2005). What drives merger waves? Journal of Financial Economics 77(3), 529–560.
Harvey, C. R., Y. Liu, and H. Zhu (2016). . . . and the cross-section of expected returns. The Review of
Financial Studies 29(1), 5–68.
Hayek, F. A. (1945). The use of knowledge in society. The American Economic Review 35(4), 519–530.
Henderson, R. and I. M. Cockburn (1996).
Scale, scope, and spillovers: The determinants of research
productivity in drug discovery. The RAND Journal of Economics 27(1), 32–59.
Hertzel, M. G., Z. Li, M. S. Officer, and K. J. Rodgers (2008). Inter-firm linkages and the wealth effects of
financial distress along the supply chain. Journal of Financial Economics 87(2), 374–387.
Hirshleifer, D., P. Hsu, and D. Li (2013). Innovative efficiency and stock returns. Journal of Financial
Economics 107(3), 632 – 654.
Hoberg, G. and G. Phillips (2010). Product market synergies and competition in mergers and acquisitions:
A text-based analysis. The Review of Financial Studies 23(10), 3773–3811.
Hoberg, G. and G. Phillips (2016). Text-based network industries and endogenous product differentiation.
Journal of Political Economy 124(5), 1423–1465.
Hong, H. and J. C. Stein (2007).
Disagreement and the stock market.
Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives 21(2), 109–128.
Hou, K. (2007). Industry information diffusion and the lead-lag effect in stock returns. The Review of
Financial Studies 20(4), 1113–1138.
Hou, K., C. Xue, and L. Zhang (2020). Replicating anomalies. The Review of Financial Studies 33(5),
2019–2133.
34

Hsiao, C. (1996). Logit and Probit Models. In M´aty´as, L., and P. Sevestre (eds.): The econometrics of panel
data: handbook of theory and applications. Second Edition. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Jaffe, A. B. (1986). Technological opportunity and spillovers of R&D: Evidence from firms’ patents, profits
and market value. The American Economic Review 76(5), 984–1001.
Jaffe, A. B., M. Trajtenberg, and R. Henderson (1993). Geographic localization of knowledge spillovers as
evidenced by patent citations. the Quarterly Journal of Economics 108(3), 577–598.
Kalbfleisch, J. D. and D. A. Sprott (1970). Application of likelihood methods to models involving large
numbers of parameters. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological) 32(2), 175–
208.
Katz, M. L. and C. Shapiro (1986). How to license intangible property. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics 101(3), 567–589.
Kelly, B., D. Papanikolaou, A. Seru, and M. Taddy (2021). Measuring technological innovation over the long
run. American Economic Review: Insights 3(3), 303–20.
Kogan, L., D. Papanikolaou, A. Seru, and N. Stoffman (2017). Technological innovation, resource allocation,
and growth. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(2), 665–712.
Korniotis, G. M. and A. Kumar (2013). State-level business cycles and local return predictability. The
Journal of Finance 68(3), 1037–1096.
Kyle, A. S. (1985). Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica 53(6), 1315–1335.
Lee, C. M., S. T. Sun, R. Wang, and R. Zhang (2019). Technological links and predictable returns. Journal
of Financial Economics 132(3), 76–96.
Lev, B. and T. Sougiannis (1996). The capitalization, amortization, and value-relevance of R&D. Journal
of Accounting and Economics 21(1), 107–138.
Lyytinen, K. and G. M. Rose (2003). The disruptive nature of information technology innovations: the case
of internet computing in systems development organizations. MIS Quarterly 27(4), 557–596.
Ma, S. (2020). The life cycle of corporate venture capital. The Review of Financial Studies 33(1), 358–394.
Maksimovic, V. and P. Pichler (2001). Technological innovation and initial public offerings. The Review of
Financial Studies 14(2), 459–494.
Menzly, L. and O. Ozbas (2010). Market segmentation and cross-predictability of returns. The Journal of
Finance 65(4), 1555–1580.
Patell, J. M. (1976). Corporate forecasts of earnings per share and stock price behavior: Empirical test.
Journal of Accounting Research 14(2), 246–276.
Phillips, G. M. and A. Zhdanov (2013). R&D and the incentives from merger and acquisition activity. The
Review of Financial Studies 26(1), 34–78.
Pirinsky, C. and Q. Wang (2006). Does corporate headquarters location matter for stock returns?
The
Journal of Finance 61(4), 1991–2015.
Rhodes-Kropf, M. and D. T. Robinson (2008). The market for mergers and the boundaries of the firm. The
Journal of Finance 63(3), 1169–1211.
Romer, P. M. (1986). Increasing returns and long-run growth. Journal of Political Economy 94(5), 1002–
1037.
Rumelt, R. P. (1991). How much does industry matter? Strategic Management Journal 12(3), 167–185.
Schmookler, J. (1966). Invention and Economic Growth. Harvard University Press.
Scholes, M. and J. Williams (1977). Estimating betas from nonsynchronous data. Journal of Financial
Economics 5(3), 309–327.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1942). Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. New York: Harper and Brothers.
Sears, J. and G. Hoetker (2014). Technological overlap, technological capabilities, and resource recombination
in technological acquisitions. Strategic Management Journal 35(1), 48–67.
Servaes, H. and A. Tamayo (2013). The impact of corporate social responsibility on firm value: The role of
customer awareness. Management Science 59(5), 1045–1061.
Sevilir, M. and X. Tian (2012). Acquiring innovation. AFA 2012 Chicago Meetings Paper.
35

Shahrur, H. (2005). Industry structure and horizontal takeovers: Analysis of wealth effects on rivals, sup-
pliers, and corporate customers. Journal of Financial Economics 76(1), 61–98.
Song, H. and N. Schwarz (2010). If it’s easy to read, it’s easy to do, pretty, good, and true: fluency effects
on judgment, choice, and processing style. Psychologist 23, 108–111.
Song, M. H. and R. A. Walkling (2000). Abnormal returns to rivals of acquisition targets: A test of the
‘acquisition probability hypothesis’. Journal of Financial Economics 55(2), 143–171.
Spence, M. (1984). Cost reduction, competition, and industry performance. Econometrica 52(1), 101–121.
Stillman, R. (1983). Examining antitrust policy towards horizontal mergers. Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics 11(1), 225–240.
Testoni, M. (2022). The market value spillovers of technological acquisitions: Evidence from patent-text
analysis. Strategic Management Journal 43(5), 964–985.
Wernerfelt, B. (1984). A resource-based view of the firm. Strategic Management Journal 5(2), 171–180.
Wooldridge, J. M. (2010). Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. MIT Press.
Zhao, X. (2009). Technological innovation and acquisitions. Management Science 55(7), 1170–1183.
36

Table 1: Variable Definitions
Name
Definition
Acquisition Vulnerability
The ex-ante likelihood that a technology peer is acquired, estimated using a binomial logistic model
Acquirer-Target
Same
Technology-Space
Dummy
A binary variable that equals one if the acquirer and target are in the same technology space (source:
Kogan et al. (2017))
Age
The natural logarithm of a firm’s age in years based on the Compustat IPO year, if available; otherwise
on the beginning date in CRSP, if available; otherwise on the first fiscal year available in Compustat
Age Squared
The square of Age
Blockholder Dummy
A binary variable that equals one when there is at least one institutional blockholder with a 5% or
higher ownership stake in the firm (source: Thomson/CDA Spectrum)
Cash Ratio
The natural logarithm of cash and short-term investments over total assets (source: Compustat)
Closely Held Shares
The fraction of shares held by long-term shareholders such as insiders, corporations, and blockholders
(source: Datastream)
Customer Dummy
A binary variable that equals one if a peer candidate is in the downstream industry of the target
firm’s industry with a Customer Input Coefficient (CIC) greater than 1%. The CIC is the value of an
upstream industry’s output sold to the downstream industry divided by the value of the downstream
industry’s total output (source: Bureau of Economic Analysis)
Dividend-Payment
Dummy
A binary variable which equals one if a firm pays dividends in a year and zero otherwise (source:
Compustat)
HHI
Sales-based Herfindahl-Hirschman index for the SIC-3 industry in which a peer operates (source:
Compustat).
High
Acquisition-
premium Dummy
A binary variable that equals one if the acquisition premium of a deal is higher than the median
premium of all deals in the same year. The premium is measured using the five-day (−2, +2) market-
model abnormal returns of the target firm at the deal announcement (source: CRSP)
Hostile Takeover Index
A variable reflecting the probability that a firm receives a hostile takeover threat (Cain et al., 2017,
p.474). Source: Prof. Stephen McKeon’s website, https://pages.uoregon.edu/smckeon/.
High
Patent-Value
Dummy
A binary variable that equals one if the ratio of the total value of patents a peer candidate received
over the previous five years (source: Kogan et al. (2017)) to the candidate’s total assets minus the
book value of equity plus the market value of equity (source: Compustat) is higher than the median
value for all peer candidates in the same year
High R&D Dummy
A binary variable that equals one if the research and development expense scaled by sales of a peer
candidate is higher than the median for all peer candidates in the same year (source: Compustat)
Institutional Ownership
The proportion of stock owned by institutional investors (source: Thomson Reuters Institutional (13f)
Holdings)
Knowledge-Base Overlap
Ratio
The number of patents in the Common Knowledge Space scaled by the total number of patents that
receive at least one citation from either the target or the peer candidate over the past 60 months.
For each acquisition target and peer candidate pairing, the Common Knowledge Space is the set of
prior patents cited by both the patents that the target issued and the patents that the peer candidate
issued over the past 60 months (source: Kogan et al. (2017))
Knowledge-Base
Peer
Dummy
A binary variable that is one for firms that, in the month of an acquisition, have a Knowledge-Base
Overlap Ratio with the target firm greater than the 98th percentile of the values of this variable across
all the possible peers in the same month
Lagged R&D
The lagged R&D expenditures scaled by sales (source: Compustat)
Large-Size Dummy
A binary variable that equals one if the logarithm of a firm’s market capitalization is higher than the
sample median in a year (source: Compustat)
Leverage
Debt in current liabilities plus long-term debt, scaled by total assets (source: Compustat)
M/B Ratio
The market-to-book ratio which is total assets minus the book value of equity plus the market value
of equity, scaled by total assets (source: Compustat)
Mahalanobis Distance
The Mahalanobis extension, by Bloom et al. (2013), of the Technology Proximity Score that accounts
for the distance between every two technology classes measured by the co-location of technology classes
within firms (source: Kogan et al. (2017))
Mahalanobis
Peer
Dummy
A binary variable that is set to one for firms that, in the month of an acquisition, have a Mahalanobis
Distance with the target greater than the 98th percentile of the values of this variable across all the
possible firm pairs in the same month
Market Cap
The natural logarithm of the market value of equity (source: Compustat), inflation-adjusted using the
CPI. The base year is 1983 (source: FRED)
Net Working Capital
Net working capital divided by sales (source: Compustat)
P/E Ratio
The price-earnings ratio which is the ratio of a firm’s stock price to its earnings per share (source:
Compustat)
PPE
The net value of property, plant, and equipment over total assets (source: Compustat)
37

Previous-Acquisition
Dummy
A binary variable that equals one if a firm is the technology peer of at least one acquisition target in
the preceding year (source: Thomson SDC Platinum M&A database; Kogan et al. (2017))
Product Market Dummy
A binary variable that is one for firms that, in the year preceding an acquisition, have a Product
Proximity Score with the target greater than the 98th percentile of this score across all the possible
firm pairs in the same year
Product Proximity Score
A score constructed following Bloom et al. (2013) which is analogous to the Technology Proximity
Score but based on the distribution of a firm’s sales across SIC-3 segments (source: Compustat)
R&D
R&D expenditures scaled by sales (source: Compustat)
R&D Increase
The change in R&D expenditures scaled by sales from the year before to the year after an acquisition
(source: Thomson SDC Platinum M&A database; Compustat)
ROA
The return on assets which is measured by earnings before interest and taxes over total assets (source:
Compustat)
Sales Increase
The change in sales relative to the previous year (source: Compustat)
Same
FF-48
Industry
Dummy
A binary variable that equals one if a peer candidate and the corresponding acquisition target are in
the same Fama-French 48 industry (source: Prof. Kenneth French’s website; CRSP)
Same
SIC-3
Industry
Dummy
A binary variable that equals one if a peer candidate and the corresponding acquisition target are in
the same SIC-3 industry (source: CRSP)
Same State Dummy
A binary variable that equals one if the headquarters of a peer candidate and those of the acquisition
target are in the same state (source: Compustat and Augmented 10-X Header Data from Prof. Bill
McDonald’s website)
Same TNIC-3 Dummy
A binary variable that equals one if a peer candidate and the corresponding acquisition target are in
the same TNIC-3 industry (Hoberg and Phillips, 2010) (source: website of Prof. Gerard Hoberg and
Prof. Gordon Phillips)
Supplier Dummy
A binary variable that equals one if a peer candidate is in the upstream industry of the corresponding
target firm’s industry with a Customer Input Coefficient (CIC) greater than 1%.
The CIC is the
value of an upstream industry’s output sold to the downstream industry divided by the value of the
downstream industry’s total output (source: Bureau of Economic Analysis)
Technology
Proximity
Score
A score calculated each month based on the cosine similarity between the technology of two firms
(Jaffe, 1986). A firm’s technology is proxied by a vector whose elements are the values of patents in
the USPC technology classes granted to the firm in the previous 60 months scaled by the value of all
patents the firm received in the same period (source: Kogan et al. (2017))
Technology-Peer Dummy
A binary variable that is one for firms that, in the month of an acquisition, have a Technology Proximity
Score with the target greater than the 98th percentile of the score for all the possible firm pairs
Vdshock
The detrended annual percentage change in the size of the downstream industry using the input-output
matrix (source: Bureau of Economic Analysis) calculated following Phillips and Zhdanov (2013)
38

Table 2: The Abnormal Returns on the Target Firms and the Portfolios of Their Technology Peers
This table reports the abnormal returns on the target firms and the portfolios of their technology peers. Panels A, B,
and C report the cumulative average abnormal returns (CAARs) on the equal-weighted portfolios of target technology
peers during the deal announcement of their respective targets. We describe the samples of acquisitions and peers in
Table OAT5 of the Online Appendix. In Panel A, the cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) of each firm, measured
over different windows (day 0 is the deal announcement day), are estimated using the market model with the value-
weighted market index of all CRSP firms. The standardized cross-sectional test (StdCsect Z) is an extension of the
Patell test (Patell, 1976) which takes into account information on the cross-sectional variance to correct for variance
increases. Panel B reports the CAARs on the technology-peer portfolios estimated using different models over the
five-day window (−2, +2) centered on the acquisition announcement day. We estimate each firm’s CAR based on
the market model, the market-adjusted returns (i.e., the actual stock returns minus the market returns), the market
model with GARCH (1,1) errors, the Scholes-Williams procedure (Scholes and Williams, 1977), and the Fama-French
three-factor model. Reported in Panel B is also the number of positive vis-`a-vis negative abnormal returns. The
time-series (CDA) t-test is a time-series standard deviation test that uses the entire sample for variance estimation;
the generalized sign Z test is a nonparametric test that controls for the asymmetry of positive and negative abnormal
returns in the estimation period. Panel C reports the market-model CAARs on the technology-peer portfolios where
target technology peers are defined based on alternative technology proximity measures (defined in Table 1). Panel D
reports the market-model CARs on the target firms during the deal announcement. *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.
Panel A. CAAR on the Portfolios of Target Technology Peers Over the Acquisition Announcement Period (Market-Model-
Adjusted)
Day
Number of Portfolios
CAAR
StdCsect Z
CAAR (−2, 0)
1257
0.06%
1.826**
CAAR (0, +2)
1257
0.20%
3.477***
CAAR (−2, +2)
1257
0.26%
4.014***
CAAR (−5, +5)
1257
0.40%
3.768***
Panel B. CAAR (−2, +2) on the Portfolios of Target Technology Peers Using Alternative Estimation Methods and Test Statistics
Estimation Method
Number of
Portfolios
CAAR
Positive :
Negative
ARs
StdCsect
Z
Time-
Series
(CDA) t
Generalized
Sign Z
Market-Model-Adjusted Return
1257
0.26%
688:569
4.014***
3.145***
4.089***
Market-Adjusted Return
1257
0.47%
716:541
6.362***
5.538***
4.672***
Market Model with GARCH (1,1)
1257
0.29%
704:553
n/a
3.484***
4.840***
Scholes-Williams Abnormal Return
1257
0.26%
688:569
4.018***
3.125***
3.981***
Fama-French-Model-Adjusted Return
1257
0.19%
658:599
3.506***
2.475***
2.768***
Panel C. CAAR (−2, +2) on the Portfolios of Target Technology Peers Using Alternative Definitions of Target Technology
Peers (Market-Model-Adjusted)
Technology Proximity Measures
Number of Portfolios
CAAR
StdCsect Z
Mahalanobis Distance
1254
0.29%
4.466***
Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio
1202
0.20%
3.403***
Panel D. CAAR on the Target Firms Over the Acquisition Announcement Period (Market-Model-Adjusted))
Day
Number of Firms
CAR
StdCsect Z
CAAR (−2, 0)
1252
19.99%
26.568***
CAAR (0, +2)
1252
23.27%
29.051***
CAAR (−2, +2)
1252
25.85%
32.098***
CAAR (−5, +5)
1252
27.82%
32.822***
39

Table 3: Comparison Between the Technology and Alternative Spillover Effects
This table reports the cumulative average abnormal returns (CAARs) on the equal-weighted portfolios of technology-peer candidates. Different peer-candidate
portfolios are formed based on their relations to their corresponding target firms and the intersections of such relations. A peer candidate is considered as being
in its corresponding target’s technology space if it is a technology peer (i.e., the variable Technology Peer Dummy takes a value of one). Peer-candidate portfolios
are also built in consideration of product-market (based on the variables Product Market Dummy, Same SIC-3 Industry Dummy, Same FF-48 Industry Dummy,
and Same TNIC-3 Industry Dummy), geographic (based on the variable Same State Dummy), and supply-chain relations (based on the variables Supplier Dummy
and Customer Dummy) between targets and peer candidates. Detailed variable definitions can be found in Table 1. The cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) of
each firm, which are measured over the window (−2, +2), are estimated using the market model with the value-weighted market index of all CRSP firms. The
standardized cross-sectional test (StdCsect Z) is an extension of the Patell test (Patell, 1976) that takes into account information on the cross-sectional variance
to correct for variance increases. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively.
Technology Peer Dummy=0
Technology Peer Dummy=1
Number of
Portfolios
CAAR
StdCsect Z
Number of
Portfolios
CAAR
StdCsect Z
Product Market Dummy=0
1185
0.05%
0.323
1176
0.24%
3.226***
Product Market Dummy=1
940
0.25%
2.786***
715
0.46%
3.359***
Same SIC-3 Industry Dummy=0
1264
0.04%
0.391
1249
0.18%
2.864***
Same SIC-3 Industry Dummy=1
1210
0.22%
2.930***
903
0.37%
3.437***
Same FF-48 Industry Dummy=0
1257
0.04%
0.387
1237
0.18%
2.756***
Same FF-48 Industry Dummy=1
1251
0.17%
2.519***
1023
0.33%
3.764***
Same TNIC-3 Industry Dummy=0
813
0.08%
1.035
805
0.32%
3.029***
Same TNIC-3 Industry Dummy=1
750
0.18%
2.089**
599
0.37%
2.940***
Same State Dummy=0
1191
0.05%
0.306
1181
0.26%
3.852***
Same State Dummy=1
1186
0.11%
0.967
797
0.50%
2.705***
Supplier Dummy=0
1264
0.04%
0.488
1254
0.28%
4.119***
Supplier Dummy=1
876
0.11%
0.926
605
0.14%
1.146
Customer Dummy=0
1264
0.06%
0.65
1251
0.26%
4.101***
Customer Dummy=1
669
0.12%
0.665
443
0.36%
1.316*
40

Table 4: The Determinants of the Abnormal Returns on Peer Candidates
This table reports the estimates of the determinants of technology-peer candidates’ cumulative abnormal returns
(CARs). The sample includes all the peer candidates with valid data. The dependent variable is a peer candidate’s
CAR. The CAR on each firm, measured over the window (−2, +2), is estimated using the market model with the
value-weighted market index of all CRSP firms. In Panel A, we regress a peer candidate’s CAR on the Technology
Proximity Score or the Technology-Peer Dummy, controlling for the Product Proximity Score between a peer candidate
and its corresponding acquisition target, the spillover effects through geographical channels (Same State Dummy)
and supply chains (Supplier Dummy and Customer Dummy), and other firm characteristics. In Panel B, we regress
a peer candidate’s CAR on alternatives to the Technology-Peer Dummy (namely Mahalanobis Peer Dummy and
Knowledge-Base Peer Dummy), controlling for Product Proximity Score and other firm characteristics.
In Panel
C, we add several interaction terms built using the Technology Proximity Score with the High Acquisition-Premium
Dummy, the High Patent-Value Dummy, the High R&D Dummy, and the Acquirer-Target Same Technology-Space
Dummy. Other control variables in Panel C include Product Proximity Score, Sales Increase, Closely Held Shares,
Leverage, Market Cap, ROA, M/B Ratio, and HHI. All the variables in this table are defined in Table 1. The t-
statistics, clustered by deal, are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and
0.01 levels respectively.
Panel A. CARs of Peer Candidates–Effects of Technology Relations
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Technology Proximity Score
0.486***
0.435***
0.449***
(3.78)
(3.63)
(3.63)
Technology-Peer Dummy
0.281***
0.238***
0.237***
(3.69)
(3.26)
(3.15)
Sales Increase
0.000
−0.000
0.024
0.024
0.025
0.024
(0.00)
(−0.01)
(0.76)
(0.75)
(0.77)
(0.75)
Closely Held Shares
−0.035
−0.036
−0.045
−0.046
−0.065
−0.066
(−0.94)
(−0.97)
(−1.11)
(−1.13)
(−1.49)
(−1.52)
Leverage
−0.010
−0.012
0.013
0.013
0.049
0.049
(−0.16)
(−0.18)
(0.20)
(0.20)
(0.73)
(0.73)
Market Cap
−0.003
−0.002
−0.008
−0.006
−0.006
−0.005
(−0.30)
(−0.18)
(−0.69)
(−0.58)
(−0.52)
(−0.42)
ROA
−0.166*
−0.171*
−0.136
−0.140
−0.135
−0.139
(−1.76)
(−1.81)
(−1.40)
(−1.44)
(−1.40)
(−1.44)
M/B Ratio
−0.138***
−0.139***
−0.136***
−0.137***
−0.142***
−0.143***
(−10.38)
(−10.38)
(−9.84)
(−9.85)
(−10.32)
(−10.33)
HHI
−0.141*
−0.147*
−0.137
−0.139*
−0.123
−0.126
(−1.80)
(−1.87)
(−1.62)
(−1.65)
(−1.44)
(−1.46)
Product Proximity Score
0.135*
0.164**
0.114
0.143**
(1.90)
(2.25)
(1.60)
(1.96)
Same State Dummy
0.053
0.055
(1.01)
(1.04)
Supplier Dummy
0.100
0.102
(1.39)
(1.43)
Customer Dummy
−0.059
−0.056
(−0.76)
(−0.72)
Joint Significant Wald Test of Same State Dummy,
Supplier Dummy, and Customer Dummy (p-value)
0.412
0.399
Deal Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
R2
0.036
0.036
0.038
0.038
0.039
0.039
Observations
1543391
1543391
1334932
1334932
1188322
1188322
41

Panel B. CARs of Peer Candidates–Alternative Definitions of Target Technology Peers
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Mahalanobis Peer Dummy
0.308***
0.260***
(3.76)
(3.32)
Knowledge-Base Peer Dummy
0.153**
0.119*
(2.48)
(1.87)
Sales Increase
−0.000
0.000
0.024
0.024
(−0.01)
(0.01)
(0.75)
(0.77)
Closely Held Shares
−0.036
−0.036
−0.046
−0.046
(−0.96)
(−0.96)
(−1.13)
(−1.12)
Leverage
−0.012
−0.012
0.013
0.015
(−0.18)
(−0.18)
(0.19)
(0.22)
Market Cap
−0.002
−0.003
−0.007
−0.007
(−0.22)
(−0.30)
(−0.61)
(−0.67)
ROA
−0.169*
−0.174*
−0.138
−0.142
(−1.79)
(−1.85)
(−1.42)
(−1.46)
M/B Ratio
−0.139***
−0.138***
−0.136***
−0.136***
(−10.39)
(−10.34)
(−9.85)
(−9.83)
HHI
−0.146*
−0.153*
−0.139*
−0.141*
(−1.86)
(−1.94)
(−1.65)
(−1.67)
Product Proximity Score
0.158**
0.191***
(2.19)
(2.59)
Deal Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
R2
0.036
0.036
0.038
0.038
Observations
1543391
1543391
1334932
1334932
Panel C. CARs of Peer Candidates–Technology Proximity and Interactions Terms
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
High Acquisition-Premium Dummy*
0.653**
Technology Proximity Score
(2.50)
High Patent-Value Dummy*
0.328**
Technology Proximity Score
(2.07)
High R&D Dummy*
0.490**
Technology Proximity Score
(2.53)
Acquirer-Target Same Technology-Space Dummy*
0.593*
Technology Proximity Score
(1.89)
Technology Proximity Score
0.093
0.210*
0.080
0.126
(0.56)
(1.70)
(0.62)
(0.73)
High Patent-Value Dummy
0.112***
(5.67)
High R&D Dummy
0.100**
(2.40)
Product Proximity Score
0.122*
0.131*
0.108
0.113
(1.72)
(1.85)
(1.52)
(1.43)
Other Control Variables
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Deal Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
R2
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.038
Observations
1324826
1334932
1334932
1016665
42

Table 5: The Determinants of a Firm’s Likelihood of Being an Acquisition Target
This table reports the estimates from linear probability models of the determinants of the likelihood a firm being an acquisition target in a year. The dependent
variable is a binary variable equal to one when a firm is an acquisition target in a year (year t) and zero otherwise. The sample comprises all the firm-years
(excluding firms from the financial and utilities sectors) in the Compustat-CRSP merged database and all the acquisitions from the Thomson SDC Platinum
M&A database over the 1984–2010 period. The firm-years that do not obtain any patents in the five years before year t are excluded because, for them, neither
the technology space nor the technology peers can be identified. The variable Previous-Acquisition Dummy is one if at least one of the firm’s technology peers was
an acquisition target in the previous year (year t–1) and zero otherwise. All the independent variables are measured in the previous year (year t–1) and defined
in Table 1. The industry fixed effects are based on the Fama-French 48 industry definitions. t-statistics, clustered by firm, are in parentheses. *, **, and ***
denote statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Previous-Acquisition Dummy
0.009***
0.010***
0.010***
0.007***
0.008***
0.007**
(3.55)
(3.62)
(3.47)
(2.67)
(2.74)
(2.32)
M/B Ratio
−0.006***
−0.006***
−0.007***
−0.006***
−0.006***
−0.007***
(−8.47)
(−8.43)
(−8.90)
(−8.09)
(−8.04)
(−8.49)
PPE
−0.027***
−0.026***
−0.027***
−0.025***
−0.025***
−0.027**
(−2.84)
(−2.78)
(−2.63)
(−2.65)
(−2.58)
(−2.52)
Cash Ratio
−0.001
−0.001
0.001
−0.001
−0.001
−0.000
(−0.57)
(−0.64)
(0.55)
(−1.16)
(−1.24)
(−0.10)
Blockholder Dummy
0.017***
0.017***
0.013***
0.017***
0.018***
0.013***
(6.63)
(6.71)
(4.64)
(6.72)
(6.83)
(4.67)
Market Cap
−0.004***
−0.004***
−0.003***
−0.004***
−0.004***
−0.003***
(−5.35)
(−5.33)
(−3.47)
(−5.32)
(−5.34)
(−3.44)
Leverage
0.027***
0.027***
0.032***
0.028***
0.028***
0.033***
(3.43)
(3.46)
(3.82)
(3.57)
(3.60)
(3.91)
ROA
−0.015**
−0.013**
−0.017**
−0.013**
−0.011*
−0.015**
(−2.29)
(−2.05)
(−2.51)
(−2.00)
(−1.71)
(−2.12)
Age
−0.011**
−0.014**
(−2.13)
(−2.57)
Age Squared
0.002**
0.003**
(2.02)
(2.43)
Hostile Takeover Index
0.011
0.006
(0.65)
(0.38)
Industry Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Industry-Year Fixed Effects
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
R2
0.016
0.016
0.016
0.040
0.041
0.043
Observations
41562
41562
36755
41562
41562
36755
43

Table 6: Acquisition Vulnerability and the Abnormal Returns on Technology Peers
This table reports the regression estimates of how a technology peer’s ex-ante vulnerability to acquisitions impacts its
cumulative abnormal return (CAR) at the deal announcement. The sample contains the technology peers of columns
(7) and (8) of Panel A Table OAT5 of the Online Appendix. The dependent variable (i.e., the CAR on each firm),
measured over the window (−2, +2), is estimated using the market model with the value-weighted market index of
all CRSP firms. The variable Acquisition Vulnerability is measured by a firm’s probability of being an acquisition
target in the acquisition year. It is estimated based on the coefficients of columns (1), (2), and (3) of Table OAT17
of the Online Appendix for columns (1)-(2), (3)-(4), and (5)-(6) respectively. The other independent variables are
defined in Table 1. All the independent variables are measured in the year t–1 and defined in Table 1. t-statistics,
clustered by deal, are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels,
respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Acquisition Vulnerability
22.050***
16.584**
19.727***
11.692*
22.325***
16.252*
(5.86)
(2.11)
(5.80)
(1.74)
(5.46)
(1.93)
Product Proximity Score
0.261
0.263
0.194
(1.59)
(1.60)
(1.17)
Sales Increase
0.207
0.196
0.173
(1.28)
(1.22)
(1.05)
Closely Held Shares
−0.488
−0.529
−0.530
(−1.47)
(−1.59)
(−1.47)
Leverage
−0.426
−0.318
−0.488
(−1.00)
(−0.74)
(−1.07)
Market Cap
−0.022
−0.049
−0.042
(−0.42)
(−1.01)
(−0.87)
ROA
−0.472
−0.477
−0.259
(−1.22)
(−1.22)
(−0.67)
M/B Ratio
−0.060
−0.074*
−0.048
(−1.36)
(−1.68)
(−0.96)
HHI
−0.306
−0.295
−0.293
(−0.65)
(−0.63)
(−0.63)
Deal Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
R2
0.068
0.080
0.068
0.080
0.072
0.083
Observations
41401
28433
41401
28433
36655
26343
44

Table 7: The Previous Acquisition of Technology Peers and Firms’ R&D Investment
This table reports the estimate of the impact of acquisition activities on the R&D investments of targets’ technology
peers. The dependent variable is a firm’s R&D expenditure divided by sales in a year (year t). The sample comprises
all the firm-years (excluding firms from the financial and utilities sectors) in the Compustat-CRSP merged database
and all the acquisitions from the Thomson SDC Platinum M&A database over the 1984–2010 period. Firm-years
that do not obtain any patents in the past five years are excluded because, for them, neither the technology space
nor the technology peers can be identified. The variable Previous-Acquisition Dummy is set to one if at least one
of the firm’s technology peers was an acquisition target in the previous year (year t–1) and zero otherwise. All the
independent variables are measured in the previous year and defined in Table 1. The industry fixed effects are based
on the Fama-French 48 industry definitions. t-statistics, clustered by firm, are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Previous Acquisition Dummy
0.011
0.059***
0.121***
0.006
0.054***
0.123***
(1.43)
(4.18)
(5.21)
(0.76)
(3.72)
(5.03)
Previous-Acquisition Dummy*
−0.101***
−0.103***
Large-Size Dummy
(−5.66)
(−5.52)
Previous-Acquisition Dummy*
−0.021***
−0.023***
Market Cap
(−5.94)
(−5.98)
Large-Size Dummy
0.006
0.008
(0.63)
(0.77)
Market Cap
−0.016***
−0.001
−0.016***
0.000
(−4.90)
(−0.46)
(−4.76)
(0.17)
Lagged R&D
0.663***
0.662***
0.662***
0.660***
0.659***
0.659***
(30.36)
(30.31)
(30.28)
(29.81)
(29.78)
(29.75)
Vdshock
−0.046
−0.050
−0.050
−0.096
−0.089
−0.088
(−0.35)
(−0.37)
(−0.38)
(−0.77)
(−0.72)
(−0.71)
Age
−0.018***
−0.019***
−0.017**
−0.020***
−0.021***
−0.019***
(−2.64)
(−2.85)
(−2.51)
(−2.78)
(−3.00)
(−2.67)
PPE
−0.144***
−0.148***
−0.145***
−0.140***
−0.143***
−0.140***
(−3.16)
(−3.24)
(−3.16)
(−2.99)
(−3.06)
(−2.99)
Cash Ratio
0.035***
0.034***
0.035***
0.036***
0.036***
0.036***
(9.03)
(8.86)
(9.02)
(9.04)
(8.88)
(9.02)
Net Working Capital
−0.090
−0.090
−0.091*
−0.092
−0.091
−0.092
(−1.64)
(−1.64)
(−1.65)
(−1.63)
(−1.63)
(−1.64)
P/E Ratio
−0.000***
−0.000***
−0.000***
−0.000***
−0.000***
−0.000***
(−5.49)
(−5.61)
(−5.42)
(−5.48)
(−5.60)
(−5.42)
Dividend-Payment Dummy
−0.007
−0.016*
−0.009
−0.007
−0.015
−0.008
(−0.86)
(−1.77)
(−1.08)
(−0.76)
(−1.61)
(−0.98)
Institutional Ownership
−0.069***
−0.067***
−0.069***
−0.069***
−0.066***
−0.070***
(−3.49)
(−3.36)
(−3.53)
(−3.42)
(−3.26)
(−3.46)
Industry Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Industry-Year Fixed Effects
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
R2
0.633
0.633
0.633
0.637
0.637
0.637
Observations
37961
37961
37961
37909
37909
37909
45

Table 8: The Abnormal Returns on Technology Peers and R&D Increase
This table reports the regression estimates of how a technology peer’s cumulative abnormal return (CAR) at the
acquisition announcement varies according to the peer’s change in R&D expenditures.
The sample contains the
technology peers of columns (7) and (8) of Panel A Table OAT5 of the Online Appendix. The dependent variable,
measured over the window (−2, +2), is estimated using the market model with the value-weighted market index of
all CRSP firms. The variable R&D Increase is the change in R&D expenditures scaled by sales from the year before
the acquisition to the year after. All the independent variables are defined in Table 1. t-statistics, clustered by deal,
are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
R&D Increase
0.0023
−0.0365
0.0167
−0.0162
(0.09)
(−1.13)
(0.56)
(−0.43)
R&D Increase*
−0.0447
−0.0599
Large-Size Dummy
(−0.91)
(−0.96)
Large-Size Dummy
−0.2747**
−0.2966**
(−2.49)
(−2.12)
Product Proximity Score
0.2996**
0.2993**
(2.03)
(2.03)
Sales Increase
0.2020
0.2050
(1.37)
(1.39)
Closely Held Shares
−0.3783
−0.2943
(−1.40)
(−1.11)
Leverage
−0.0591
−0.1024
(−0.20)
(−0.34)
Market Cap
−0.0846**
(−2.52)
ROA
−0.1397
−0.2496
(−0.47)
(−0.85)
M/B Ratio
−0.0957***
−0.1021***
(−3.16)
(−3.39)
HHI
0.4382
0.4456
(1.01)
(1.02)
Deal Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
R2
0.080
0.102
0.081
0.102
Observations
39335
25837
39278
25837
46

Table 9: The Abnormal Returns on the Customers of Acquiring Firms
This table reports the cumulative average abnormal returns (CAARs) on the portfolios of potential customers of the
acquiring firms. The CAR on each firm, measured over the window (−2, +2), is estimated using the market model
with the value-weighted market index of all CRSP firms. For each acquiring firm, we form equal-weighted portfolios of
several types of potential customers. The sample of acquisitions and peers are described in Table OAT5 of the Online
Appendix. Generic customers are firms that belong to an industry in the downstream of the acquiring-firm industry
with a Customer Input Coefficient (CIC) greater than 1%. The CIC is the value of the upstream industry’s output
sold to the downstream industry divided by the value of the downstream industry’s total output. Main customers
are firms belonging to the customer industry with the highest purchase volume from the acquiring-firm industry as
a percentage of the acquiring-firm industry’s output. Reliant customers are firms in the customer industry with the
highest CIC. Small customers have a below-median market capitalization among all the generic customers. Regional
customers have headquarters in the same geographical regions as their corresponding acquiring firms. In Panel A,
we report the abnormal returns on the customer portfolios for the full sample of deals and sub-samples by industry
competition level. A deal is classified as being in a high or low competition industry according to the sales-based
Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) of the acquiring firm’s four-digit SIC industry. If, in the year before the deal
announcement, this variable is lower (greater) than the sample median of the same year, the deal is classified as
taking place in a high (low) competition industry. In Panel B, we report the abnormal returns on the customer
portfolios for deals that fall in the ranges of [5%, 0] ([10%, 0]) below and [0, 5%] ([0, 10%]) above the Federal Trade
Commission (FTC) review threshold (HSR threshold), which is constructed in the spirit of Cunningham et al. (2021).
The standardized cross-sectional test (StdCsect Z) is an extension of the Patell test (Patell, 1976) that takes into
account information on the cross-sectional variance to correct for variance increases. We report the t-statistics from
a t-test of the equality of means of sub-samples between high and low competition industries in Panel A, and similar
t-statistics for the sub-samples of deals just below and just above the HSR threshold in Panel B. *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.
Panel A. CAAR on the Portfolios of Customers of Acquiring Firms
Generic
Customers
Main
Customers
Reliant
Customers
Small
Customers
Regional
Customers
Full Sample
N
737
726
728
710
682
CAAR
0.12%
0.10%
0.17%
0.35%
0.42%
StdCsect Z
0.792
0.827
1.327*
3.197***
2.307**
High-Competition Industry
N
394
390
390
386
378
CAAR
0.24%
0.20%
0.28%
0.51%
0.50%
StdCsect Z
1.445*
1.337*
1.973**
3.357***
2.544***
Low-Competition Industry
N
343
336
338
324
304
CAAR
−0.02%
−0.02%
0.04%
0.16%
0.33%
StdCsect Z
−0.465
−0.562
−0.365
0.998
0.739
Difference
CAAR
0.26%
0.21%
0.25%
0.34%
0.17%
t-statistics
1.428
0.795
0.862
1.175
0.549
Panel B. CAAR on the Portfolios of Customers of Acquiring Firms around FTC Review Threshold
Generic
Customers
Main
Customers
Reliant
Customers
Small
Customers
Regional
Customers
5% Below Threshold
N
8
8
8
8
8
CAAR
1.07%
0.47%
−0.14%
1.88%
1.49%
StdCsect Z
1.409*
1.081
−0.235
1.039**
1.726**
5% Above Threshold
N
10
10
10
9
9
CAAR
0.87%
0.01%
0.09%
1.00%
1.94%
StdCsect Z
0.68
0.184
0.136
0.437
1.696**
Difference
CAAR
−0.20%
−0.46%
0.23%
−0.87%
0.45%
t-statistics
−0.197
−0.604
0.198
−0.612
0.321
10% Below Threshold
N
26
26
25
24
23
CAAR
−0.17%
0.05%
1.02%
0.48%
0.18%
StdCsect Z
0.625
0.911
1.624*
2.350***
1.811**
10% Above Threshold
N
22
21
22
21
21
CAAR
−0.26%
−1.18%
−0.77%
−0.18%
−0.21%
StdCsect Z
−1.076
−1.787**
−1.767**
−0.655
−0.428
Difference
CAAR
−0.09%
−1.23%
−1.79%
−0.67%
−0.39%
t-statistics
−0.123
−1.419
−1.671
−0.649
−0.354
47

Online Appendix for “Acquisitions and Technology Value Revision”
Xiangshang Cai, Amedeo De Cesari, Ning Gao, and Ni Peng
1

Online Appendix for “Acquisitions and Technology Value Revision”
I. Overview of the Online Appendix
While we describe all the main variables in Table 1 of the main body, some details of variable
construction are left out for brevity, for example the details for the Technology Proximity Score and
the Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio. In this Online Appendix we provide more details of variable
descriptions and construction, where necessary.
We also provide information on the tests mentioned in the main body that either complement
our main analysis or demonstrate the robustness of our findings.
List of Content
Section II: Definitions of the Variables Used Only in the Online Appendix
Section III: The Technology Proximity Score of Firm Pairs and the Technology Peers of Acquisition
Targets
Section IV: Alternative Patent-Based Measures of Technology Closeness
Section V: The Technology Proximity Score: Complements or Substitutes
Section VI: The Summary Statistics of the Technology Closeness Measures
Section VII: Sample Description
Section VIII: Difference between Technology Space and Other Economic Relations
Section IX: Firm and Deal Characteristics
Section X: CAAR of Individual Technology Peers
Section XI: Abnormal Returns across Technology Proximity Deciles
Section XII: Comparison between Technology and the Other Spillover Channels
Section XII.A: Identifying a Firm’s State
Section XII.B: Identifying Customers and Suppliers
Section XIII: Placebo Tests
2

Section XIV: Robustness: The Determinants of the Abnormal Returns on Peer Candidates – Stan-
dard Errors Clustered by Year or by Patent Class
Section XV:
Robustness:
The Determinants of the Abnormal Returns on Peer Candidates –
Controlling for Alternative Measures of the Industry Relations
Section XVI: The Determinants of the Abnormal Returns on Peer Candidates – Excluding Acquir-
ers’ Technology Peers
Section XVII: Boundaries of the Main Finding
Section XVIII: Previous-Acquisition Proximity Score and a Firm’s Likelihood of Being an Acqui-
sition Target
Section XIX: Estimating Acquisition Vulnerability
Section XX: Abnormal Returns for Withdrawn Deals
Section XXI: Abnormal Returns on Technology Peers and Acquisition Intensity
Section XXII: Who Later Acquires the Peers?
Section XXIII: Customers of Acquiring Firms
Section XXIV: Previous-Acquisition Proximity Score and Firms’ R&D Investment
II. Definitions of the Variables Used Only in the Online Appendix
In Table OAT1, we define the variables that appear only in the Online Appendix.
III. The Technology Proximity Score of Firm Pairs and the Technology Peers of Ac-
quisition Targets
For a calendar month, we assume that a firm’s technology can be represented by the classes
of patents granted to the firm in the previous 60 months. For example, a firm’s technology in
February 1991 can be represented by the classes of the patents the firm received from February
1986 to January 1991. We follow Jaffe (1986) to calculate a firm-pair’s Technology Proximity Score,
which measures the closeness of the two firms’ technology. We compute the score between two
3

generic firms A and B as follows
Pa,b =
SaS′
b
p
SaS′a
p
SbS′
b
where the vectors Sa = (Sa,1, Sa,2, . . . , Sa,K) and Sb = (Sb,1, Sb,2, . . . , Sb,K) denote the technology
of firms A and B, respectively, while k ∈(1, K) is the technology class. Sa,k (Sb,k) is the total
value of issued patents to firm A (firm B) in technology class k in the previous 60 months to the
total value of issued patents to firm A (firm B) in all technology classes over the same period. The
value of each patent is measured using the stock market response to the announcement of a given
new patent granted (Kogan et al., 2017). Thus, unlike Jaffe (1986), we rely on a value-weighted
proximity score. The score cannot be computed for a pair of firms if any of them has no patent
granted in the previous 60 months. We rely on the patent dataset created by Kogan et al. (2017) to
compute our score. This dataset contains information on granted patents, their USPC technology
classes, and their market values.
If the Technology Proximity Score between the target of an acquisition and a peer-candidate
firm is higher than the 98th percentile of the distribution of the pairwise Technology Proximity Score
among all candidates in the month of the acquisition, the peer candidate is considered a technology
peer of the acquisition target. A firm’s technology space comprises all its technology peers. The
technology spaces based on the 98th percentile are similar in granularity to the three-digit SIC
industries. For the technology peers, the value of the binary variable Technology-Peer Dummy is
set to one.
IV. Alternative Measures of Technology Closeness
We consider two alternative measures of technology closeness starting from a proximity score
that considers the spillovers among patents belonging to different technology classes. Bloom et al.
(2013) argue that an important limitation of the proximity score advocated by Jaffe (1986) is its
underlying assumption that technology spillovers can only occur within the same technology class.
The authors propose a Mahalanobis extension of the Technology Proximity Score that reflects the
4

distance between each pair of technology classes based on the distribution of a firm’s patents across
all possible technology classes.
The logic behind this approach is that if firms tend to obtain
patents across a sub-set of patent classes then these classes can be considered more proximate to
one another than other classes. For each month and pair of firms, we closely follow Bloom et al.
(2013) to calculate the Mahalanobis Distance measure using patent data over the past 60 months.
Specifically, we compute the Mahalanobis Distance between two generic firms A and B as follows
Ma,b =
SaΩS′
b
p
SaS′a
p
SbS′
b
, where the vectors Sa and Sb are defined in Section III of the Online Appendix, which denote
the technology of firms A and B, respectively. Ωis a weighting matrix, and element Ωi,j of the
matrix measures the closeness of patents in patent classes i and j. If patent classes i and j coincide
frequently within the same firm, then Ωi,j will be close to one. The Online Appendix of Bloom
et al. (2013, pp.1358–1359) provides the technical details of the definition of Ωi,j. We compute the
share of a firm’s patents in a particular class based on the patents’ market values. The value of
each patent is measured using the stock market response to the announcement of the granting of a
new patent (Kogan et al., 2017).
Following Bena and Li (2014) and Ma (2020), we also measure technology closeness by evaluating
whether, and to what extent, the patents of two firms cite common prior patents. This alternative
measure complements the Technology Proximity Score in that 1) it relies on the knowledge input
for innovation activities rather than innovation output and 2) it is less subject to the concern
that patented innovation outputs cluster disproportionally in certain popular patent classes, as we
discuss in Section 2.1 of the main body of our paper. Specifically, for each month, we build a
citation-based measure that aims to capture overlaps in firms’ knowledge bases. For an acquisition
target and a peer candidate, we define their Common Knowledge Space as the set of patents that
are cited at least once by both the target’s patents and the candidate’s patents issued over the
past 60 months. The Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio between the target and the peer candidate
5

is the number of patents in the Common Knowledge Space between the two firms scaled by the
total number of patents that receive at least one citation from either the target or the candidate
(or both) over the same period.
In each calendar month, we obtain the distributions of the two alternative measures of technol-
ogy closeness for all possible pairs of firms in our sample and obtain the values of the 98th percentiles.
A target firm’s technology peers are then defined as those peer candidates with proximity scores
above these thresholds. The binary variables Mahalanobis-Peer Dummy and Knowledge-Base Peer
Dummy take a value of one for these firms and zero otherwise.
V. The Technology Proximity Score: Complements or Substitutes
It is intriguing to ask whether technology closeness reflects substitution or complementarity.
The previous literature does not provide a clear indication of this, as far as we know. However, it is
possible that technology overlap between firms represents both complementary and substitutionary
opportunities. In this regard, our Technology Proximity Score measure assumes that the set of
innovation categories corresponds to the pool of patent classes formally defined by the USPTO.
On the one hand, patents in the same patent class could represent complementary opportunities.
For example, both patent US8472410 (Rake Receiver Architecture within a WCDMA Terminal)
and patent US6990091 (Method and Apparatus for Fast WCDMA Acquisition) are in the United
States Patent Class 370 (Multiplex Communications). These two patents represent complementary
technology, as both patents are used in WCDMA, a standard for the third generation of wireless
mobile telecommunications technology. On the other hand, patents in the same patent class could
represent substitutionary opportunities. For example, both patent US6990091 (Method and Appa-
ratus for Fast WCDMA Acquisition) and patent US7778225 (Method and Apparatus for Dynamic
Packet Transport in CDMA2000 Networks) are in the United States Patent Class 370 (Multiplex
Communications). These two patents represent substitutionary technology, as the two patents are
used in WCDMA and CDMA2000, respectively. CDMA2000 is a technology standard that com-
petes against WCDMA in the third generation of wireless mobile telecommunications technology
6

market.
Innovation activities in the same technology field inevitably rely on, consolidate, and improve
existing technologies and, at the same time, generate new technologies that potentially displace ex-
isting ones, as is postulated by Schumpeter (1942) and Aghion and Howitt (1992). Importantly, an
acquisition announcement should have value implications for both substitutes and complements.
Specifically, the acquisition announcement attaches a high value to the synergies obtained from
acquiring and integrating a certain technology. Upon observing the acquisition, the stock mar-
ket realizes that equivalent synergies are likely to be achievable through acquiring similar and
substitutionary technologies, which leads to the higher valuation of these substitutes. Regarding
complementary technologies, to the extent that they contribute to a package of technology resources
that produce synergies now deemed to be worth more, their value should also be higher following
the acquisition announcement.
From the perspectives of future acquirers, if they receive a signal that potential technology
synergies are greater than previously expected, either from acquiring the substitutes or the comple-
ments of the targets’ technology, they will be incentivized to investigate and tap such opportunities
through acquisitions.
It would be informative to conduct further empirical analyses based on substitutes or comple-
ments. However, the interactions among technologies are complex and, to the best of our knowledge,
there is a lack of suitable data and methods for us to measure and study such complexity.
The above discussions relate to substitutes/complements from a technical point of view. Similar
technologies may also lead to the emergence of substitutes/complements in the product markets.
Previous literature primarily focuses on the substitution effect, i.e., the competition effect or the
‘business stealing’ effect (see, e.g., Bloom et al., 2013; Aghion and Howitt, 1992). The product-
market substitution effect predicts that technology peers who compete in the same product market
as the acquisition targets should have lower abnormal returns at the acquisition announcement
(Bena and Li, 2014), which is opposite to what we find in Table 3 of the main body.
7

VI. The Summary Statistics of the Technology Closeness Measures
In Tables OAT2, OAT3, and OAT4 of the Online Appendix, we report the summary statistics
of the Technology Proximity Score, the Mahalanobis Distance, and the Knowledge-Base Overlap
Ratio respectively. Specifically, included in these tables are the monthly number of firm pairs, the
monthly average across firm pairs of these measures, and the 98th percentile of their distribution
in a month which we use to define technology peers.
VII. Sample Description
Table OAT5 of the Online Appendix reports the sample distribution and attrition of the acqui-
sition targets and their technology peers, by year and by industry.
VIII. Difference between Technology Space and Other Economic Relations
In Table OAT6 of the Online Appendix, we report the overlap between technology space
and other measured economic relations, namely several measures of target firms’ product mar-
ket (segment-based product market (Bloom et al., 2013), three-digit SIC industries (SIC-3), Fama-
French 48 industries (FF-48), text-based TNIC-3 industries (Hoberg and Phillips, 2010)), customers
or suppliers of the target firms, and firms with headquarters in the same states as where target
firms’ headquarters are located.
IX. Firm and Deal Characteristics
In Table OAT7 of the Online Appendix, we report the characteristics of acquiring firms, target
firms, technology peer candidates, technology peers, and acquisition transactions.
X. CAAR of Individual Technology Peers
In Table OAT8 of the Online Appendix, we report the CAARs for the individual technology
peers.
8

XI. Abnormal Returns across Technology Proximity Deciles
In Table OAT9 of the Online Appendix, we report how the peer candidates’ CAARs change
across the deciles formed according to the candidates’ technology proximity to their respective
acquisition targets.
XII. Comparison between Technology and the Other Spillover Channels
In Table 3 of the main body, we formally test the robustness of the technology spillover effect
with respect to alternative economic relations.
In this section, we provide more details of the various economic relations analyzed in Section
3.2 of the main body.
XII.A. Identifying a Firm’s State
The state of a firm’s headquarters is identified using information taken from the dataset created
by Prof. Bill McDonald.1 Since this dataset does not cover our early sample period of 1983–1994,
we backfill these early years using information from the first year available in the above dataset,
unless a firm is not covered by this dataset. In such a case, we use the headquarters information from
Compustat. Companies are further classified into the following six geographical regions based on
the state in which their headquarters is based: Northeast, Southeast, Southwest, Mideast, Midwest,
and West.
XII.B. Identifying Customers and Suppliers
We identify the potential customers and suppliers of target firms following Shahrur (2005).
Specifically, we use the benchmark input-output tables from the Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA) to find the suppliers/customers in the upstream/downstream of the supply chain.
The
input-output tables report the estimate of the dollar value of the output of a specific supplier
1We
thank
Prof.
Bill
McDonald
for
making
this
dataset
available
on
his
website
https://sraf.nd.edu/data/augmented-10-x-header-data.
9

industry used as an input by a given customer industry. We define Customer Input Coefficient
(CIC) as the value of an upstream industry’s output sold to the downstream industry divided
by the value of the downstream industry’s total output. We only select single-segment firms as
potential customers or suppliers. The stock returns on multiple-segment firms are complicated by
information from irrelevant industries (Cen et al., 2013). Moreover, some of the multi-segment
customer firms even contain segments in the industries of the acquiring firm or the target firm.
XIII. Placebo Tests
In Table OAT10 of the Online Appendix, we further strengthen our baseline finding using
placebo tests based on the empirical distribution of CAAR (−2,+2) estimated using randomly-
selected portfolios of peer candidates. We find that the CAAR on actual technology peer portfolios
(i.e., 0.26%) is larger than the 99th percentile of the empirical distribution of CAAR simulated from
1,000 randomly selected samples of peer candidates who reside outside of their respective acquisition
targets’ technology spaces. This finding shows that it is unlikely that our baseline result in Table
2, i.e., peers’ positive value revision upon acquisition announcement, is obtained by chance.
In Table OAT10, we also consider four alternative industry (i.e., product market) classifications
and draw similar conclusions for technology peers in or not in the same industry. For example,
the CAAR for the peer portfolios in (not in) the same SIC-3 industry as that of their respective
targets, which is 0.37% (0.18%), is no less than the 95th (99th) percentile of the distribution of
CAAR estimated from 1,000 randomly drawn samples of peer candidates that are not in their
corresponding targets’ technology spaces and operate in a SIC-3 industry that is the same as
(different from) that of the acquisition targets. The findings are similarly significant for the other
definitions of industry, except for the TNIC-3 industry classification. The CAAR for the technology
peers in the same TNIC-3 industry as that of their targets’ is slightly below the 90th percentile for
the corresponding randomly drawn sample. For technology peers not in their corresponding targets’
TNIC-3 industries, we, again, find their CAAR lies above the 99th percentile of the simulated
distribution.
10

In the same table, we also repeat the above analysis based on supply-chain relations and ge-
ographical locations. It is notable here that the CAAR for peers from and not from the target
firms’ states are greater than the 99th percentile of the CAAR distribution for the corresponding
randomly drawn portfolios of peer candidates. Results of similar statistical strength are reported
for portfolios of peers not in the upstream (suppliers’) or downstream (customers’) industries. In
contrast, the CAARs for peers in the upstream (downstream) industry is well below (around) the
90th percentile of the distribution of the respective benchmark portfolio.
Overall, the results in Table OAT10 show that our baseline finding is unlikely to be due to
chance. However, the statistical weakness of some of the results in this section may raise some
concerns about the importance of overlaps between a firm’s technology and other types of economic
link, which could inflate the significance of the technology peer effect. In our regression analyses,
we include a range of variables that capture inter-firm economic relations beyond technology links.
We find that the CAAR being greater for technology peers than non-peer candidates is robust to
the inclusion of these controls.
XIV. Robustness: The Determinants of the Abnormal Returns on Peer Candidates –
Standard Errors Clustered by Year or by Patent Class
In Table OAT11 and Table OAT12 of the Online Appendix, we estimate several multivariate
models to evaluate the effect of technology closeness on peer candidates’ abnormal returns around
acquisition announcements, with the standard errors adjusted for clustering by year and patent
class, respectively.
XV. Robustness: The Determinants of the Abnormal Returns on Peer Candidates –
Controlling for Alternative Measures of the Industry Relations
In Columns (3) and (4) of Panel A of Table 4 in the main body, we find our baseline result is
robust when we control for industry overlap through the inclusion of the Product Proximity Score.
In Table OAT13 of the Online Appendix, we control for alternative measures of product-market
11

overlap using SIC-3, TNIC-3, and the segment-based Product Market Dummy. Our baseline result
remains qualitatively the same.
XVI. Robustness: The Determinants of the Abnormal Returns on Peer Candidates –
Excluding Acquirers’ Technology Peers
In Table OAT14 of the Online Appendix, we estimate several multivariate models to evaluate
how technology closeness relates to peer candidates’ abnormal returns around acquisition announce-
ments, using a sample that excludes the acquirers’ technology peers.
XVII. Boundaries of the Main Finding
In Section 3.6 of the main body, we discuss the boundaries of our main finding based on the
results reported in Table OAT15 of the Online Appendix. The objective is to understand whether
our main finding represents a robust economic phenomenon or just a byproduct of merger waves,
technology waves, or certain industry structures or technology features.
XVIII. Previous-Acquisition Proximity Score and a Firm’s Likelihood of Being an
Acquisition Target
In Table 5 of the main body, we estimate the effect of the Previous-Acquisition Dummy on
a firm’s likelihood of being an acquisition target. In Table OAT16 of the Online Appendix, as
a robustness test, we estimate the effect of the Previous-Acquisition Proximity Score on a firm’s
likelihood of being an acquisition target. The result remains qualitatively the same.
XIX. Estimating Acquisition Vulnerability
In Table 6 of the main body, we estimate how a technology peer’s Acquisition Vulnerability
affects its CAR at acquisition announcement. In Table OAT17 of the Online Appendix, we report
the results of the regressions that we use to estimate firms’ Acquisition Vulnerability.
12

XX. Abnormal Returns for Withdrawn Deals
In Table OAT18 of the Online Appendix, we report firms’ CAAR for withdrawn transactions.
Panel A contains the CAARs at the acquisition announcement on target firms and their technology
peers. Panel B reports the target firms’ CAAR up to 48 months after the deal announcement.
In Panel C, we repeat the analysis in Panel B, using a cleaned sample of withdrawn deals. We
clean the sample by removing the transactions where the withdrawals were undertaken because the
deal price was deemed excessive by the acquirer or because the fundamentals of the target firm
and/business environment deteriorated.
In Table OAT19 of the Online Appendix, we repeat our analysis in Panels B and C of Ta-
ble OAT18 of the Online Appendix and report the target abnormal returns for withdrawn deals
measured using the Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Return (BHAR).
XXI. Abnormal Returns on Technology Peers and Acquisition Intensity
In Table OAT20 of the Online Appendix, we estimate how the technology peers’ CARs relate
to the change of acquisition intensity in a target firm’s technology field.
XXII. Who Later Acquires the Peers?
If peers’ revaluation is driven by the increased expectation of technology synergies and merger
prospects, it would be natural to ask who acquires the peers in subsequent periods. In other words,
which companies are likely to benefit from the technology synergies common to the peers?
The previous literature suggests that the answer is likely to rest with economically related firms.
Several predictions are therefore in place. First, as Bena and Li (2014) postulate, companies with
closer technologies are more likely to benefit from technology synergies. We, therefore, predict
that companies with a higher Technology Proximity Score with the peer firms are more likely
to acquire those peers. Second, geographically closer companies are more likely to benefit from
technology spillover and technology synergies because knowledge spillovers are notably localized
13

(e.g. Jaffe et al., 1993). The prediction is, therefore, that companies located in peers’ states are
more likely to be subsequent acquirers, especially when they are also technologically close. Third, a
substantial literature finds that horizontal mergers are often motivated by efficiency gains (Eckbo,
1983; Hoberg and Phillips, 2010). Along this line of reasoning, we predict that peers are more
likely to be acquired by companies in the same industry. However, companies overlapping in both
technology and product market could have limited synergies due to the “business stealing” effect (see
Bloom et al., 2013). Along these lines, the coexistence of technology closeness and product-market
overlap should reduce a company’s intention to acquire the peers.
Fourth, vertical integration
generates notable gains for the acquiring firms (Fan and Goyal, 2006). Theoretical work on this
front is extensive (see the survey of Lafontaine and Slade, 2007). Importantly, in their recent study,
Fr´esard et al. (2020) find firms are more likely to be the acquisition targets of supply-chain partners
when their innovation is realized and already protected by legally enforceable patents, while less
likely when their innovation is still at the unrealized stage of R&D. Their findings are consistent
with the prediction of the property rights theory (Grossman and Hart, 1986; Hart and Moore,
1990) because, with realized innovations, the incentive to commercialize the innovation becomes
important relative to the incentive to innovate. In such a context, vertical integration optimally
allocates control to firms that are good at commercializing. According to this line of reasoning, we
predict that suppliers and/or customers of peers are more likely to be acquirers, especially when
they are technologically close.
Our empirical strategy is analogous to that of Bena and Li (2014, p.1930) and Bouwman (2011,
pp. 2374–2375). Specifically, we follow two steps. First, we limit our samples to the peers that
subsequently receive an acquisition proposal in the year following the current acquisition (454
subsequent acquisitions). Second, for each subsequent acquirer, we randomly draw five pseudo
acquirers out of all firms that do not acquire in the same year (2270 firms). We then compute the
Technology Proximity Score, Product Proximity Score, Same State Dummy, Customer Dummy, and
Supplier Dummy for these actual and pseudo acquirers with respect to the peers and include them
as independent variables of interest in conditional logit regressions that estimate the probability of
14

a firm being an actual acquirer of target firms’ technology peers. We perform the random draw of
pseudo acquirers 1000 times to generate the empirical distribution of each coefficient and report
the critical percentiles in Panel A of Table OAT21 of the Online Appendix.
The result shows
that the Technology Proximity Score, Product Proximity Score, Same State Dummy, and Supplier
Dummy all have their 5th percentiles above zero, while the Customer Dummy has its 5th percentile
below zero (i.e.,−0.627). These findings show that future acquirers are more likely to be companies
that are close to peers in terms of technology, products, and geographical locations, or companies
that are from the upstream of the supply chain. Customers are unlikely to be future acquirers,
however.
Moreover, in Panel C, we find that the interaction term Technology Proximity Score
× Product Market Dummy has a negative 95th percentile of −2.385, suggesting product-market
rivals who have close technologies are less likely to be acquirers, consistent with the view that
“business stealing” reduces expected technology synergies (Bena and Li, 2014; Bloom et al., 2013).
Furthermore, we find the interaction terms Technology Proximity Score × Same State Dummy,
Technology Proximity Score × Customer Dummy, and Technology Proximity Score × Supplier
Dummy have intervals of [−1.741, 1.691], [−4.319, 0.737], and [−2.237, 3.032] between their 5th and
95th percentiles, respectively, showing that local firms, customers, or suppliers that have closer
technology are not more likely to acquire the peers, contrary to the predictions.
In Panels B and D of Table OAT21 of the Online Appendix, we evaluate the robustness of the
findings in Panels A and C by replacing the Technology Proximity Score with the Technology-Peer
Dummy. Our findings remain robust.
XXIII. Customers of Acquiring Firms
In Table 9 of the main body, we report the CAARs of the portfolios of the acquiring firms’ po-
tential customers following Shahrur (2005), as explained in Section XII.B of the Online Appendix.
We form portfolios of several types of customer as described below.
Generic Customers: a generic customer refers to a firm that belongs to an industry in the down-
15

stream of the acquiring-firm industry with CIC greater than 1%.
Main Customers: a main customer is a firm belonging to a customer industry that has the highest
purchase volume from the acquiring-firm industry as a percentage of the acquiring-firm industry’s
output.
Reliant Customers: a reliant customer is a firm in a customer industry with the highest CIC.
Small Customers: a small customer has below-median market capitalization among all the generic
customers.
Regional Customers: a regional customer has its headquarters in the same geographical region as
the corresponding acquiring firm. Firms are grouped into the following six geographical regions
based on the states in which they are headquartered: Northeast, Southeast, Southwest, Mideast,
Midwest, and West. Firms’ headquarters are obtained as explained in Section XII.A of the Online
Appendix.
XXIV. Previous-Acquisition Proximity Score and Firms’ R&D Investment
In Table 7 of the main body, we estimate the effect of the Previous Acquisition Dummy on firms’
R&D investment. In Table OAT22 of the Online Appendix, as a robustness test, we estimate the
effect of the Previous-Acquisition Proximity Score on firms’ R&D investment. The result remains
qualitatively the same.
16

References
Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1992). A model of growth through creative destruction. Econometrica 60(2),
323–351.
Bena, J. and K. Li (2014).
Corporate innovations and mergers and acquisitions.
The Journal of Fi-
nance 69(5), 1923–1960.
Bloom, N., M. Schankerman, and J. Van Reenen (2013).
Identifying technology spillovers and product
market rivalry. Econometrica 81(4), 1347–1393.
Bouwman, C. H. (2011). Corporate governance propagation through overlapping directors. The Review of
Financial Studies 24(7), 2358–2394.
Cen, L., K. Chan, S. Dasgupta, and N. Gao (2013). When the tail wags the dog: Industry leaders, limited
attention, and spurious cross-industry information diffusion. Management Science 59(11), 2566–2585.
Daniel, K., M. Grinblatt, S. Titman, and R. Wermers (1997). Measuring mutual fund performance with
characteristic-based benchmarks. The Journal of Finance 52(3), 1035–1058.
Eckbo, B. (1983).
Horizontal mergers, collusion, and stockholder wealth.
Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics 11(1), 241–273.
Fan, J. P. and V. K. Goyal (2006). On the patterns and wealth effects of vertical mergers. The Journal of
Business 79(2), 877–902.
Fr´esard, L., G. Hoberg, and G. M. Phillips (2020). Innovation activities and integration through vertical
acquisitions. The Review of Financial Studies 33(7), 2937–2976.
Goldschlag, N., T. J. Lybbert, and N. J. Zolas (2016). An ‘algorithmic links with probabilities’ crosswalk
for uspc and cpc patent classifications with an application towards industrial technology composition. US
Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies paper no. CES-WP-16-15.
Grossman, S. J. and O. D. Hart (1986). The costs and benefits of ownership: A theory of vertical and lateral
integration. Journal of Political Economy 94(4), 691–719.
Harford, J. (2005). What drives merger waves? Journal of Financial Economics 77(3), 529–560.
Hart, O. and J. Moore (1990). Property rights and the nature of the firm. Journal of Political Economy 98(6),
1119–1158.
Hoberg, G. and G. Phillips (2010). Product market synergies and competition in mergers and acquisitions:
A text-based analysis. The Review of Financial Studies 23(10), 3773–3811.
Jaffe, A. B. (1986). Technological opportunity and spillovers of R&D: Evidence from firms’ patents, profits
and market value. The American Economic Review 76(5), 984–1001.
Jaffe, A. B., M. Trajtenberg, and R. Henderson (1993). Geographic localization of knowledge spillovers as
evidenced by patent citations. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 108(3), 577–598.
Kelly, B., D. Papanikolaou, A. Seru, and M. Taddy (2021). Measuring technological innovation over the long
run. American Economic Review: Insights 3(3), 303–20.
Kim, K., A. Gopal, and G. Hoberg (2016).
Does product market competition drive CVC investment?
Evidence from the US IT industry. Information Systems Research 27(2), 259–281.
Kogan, L., D. Papanikolaou, A. Seru, and N. Stoffman (2017). Technological innovation, resource allocation,
and growth. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(2), 665–712.
Lafontaine, F. and M. Slade (2007). Vertical integration and firm boundaries: The evidence. Journal of
Economic Literature 45(3), 629–685.
Ma, S. (2020). The life cycle of corporate venture capital. The Review of Financial Studies 33(1), 358–394.
Patell, J. M. (1976). Corporate forecasts of earnings per share and stock price behavior: Empirical test.
Journal of Accounting Research 14(2), 246–276.
Scholes, M. and J. Williams (1977). Estimating betas from nonsynchronous data. Journal of Financial
Economics 5(3), 309–327.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1942). Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. New York: Harper and Brothers.
Shahrur, H. (2005). Industry structure and horizontal takeovers: Analysis of wealth effects on rivals, sup-
pliers, and corporate customers. Journal of Financial Economics 76(1), 61–98.
17

Wermers, R. (2003). Is money really ’smart’? new evidence on the relation between mutual fund flows,
manager behavior, and performance persistence. Working Paper.
18

Table OAT1: Definitions of Variables Used Only in the Online Appendix
Name
Definition
Capital Liquidity
For each year, capital liquidity is defined as the four-quarter average of the spread between the rate on
commercial & industrial loans minus the federal funds rate (source: Prof. Stephen McKeon’s website)
Completed-Deal Dummy
A binary variable that equals one for completed deals (source:
Thomson SDC Platinum M&A
database)
Deal Value
The natural logarithm of the deal’s value (source: Thomson SDC Platinum M&A database) inflation-
adjusted using the CPI. The base year is 1983 (source: FRED)
Declining
Acquisition-
Intensity Dummy
A binary variable that equals one if the number of a target firm’s technology peers acquired in the
12 months before an acquisition is not lower than the number of the target firm’s technology peers
acquired in the following 12 months (source: Thomson SDC Platinum M&A database; Kogan et al.
(2017))
Dormant Period
The natural logarithm of the number of days since a previous acquisition announcement in the same
technology space (source: Thomson SDC Platinum M&A database; Kogan et al. (2017))
Dot-Com
Bubble
Dummy
A binary variable that equals one if a deal is announced during the Dot-Com bubble period of 1998-
2001 (source: Thomson SDC Platinum M&A database)
High
Capital
Liquidity
Dummy
A binary variable that equals one if a deal is announced during a period when capital liquidity is
higher than the sample median. For each year, capital liquidity is defined as the four-quarter average
of the spread between the rate on commercial & industrial loans and the federal funds rate (source:
Thomson SDC Platinum M&A database and Prof. Stephen McKeon’s website)
Horizontal-Merger
Dummy
A binary variable that equals one if the target and the acquirer share the same three-digit SIC
code(source: CRSP)
Industry
Innovation-
Wave Dummy
A binary variable that equals one if the SIC-3 industry of the target firm experiences an innovation
wave in the year of the acquisition. A SIC-3 industry’s innovation wave occurs if the per capita (source:
FRED) number of breakthrough patents (source: Kelly et al. (2021)) issued by the USPTO in the
SIC-3 industry in a year is higher than the 90th percentile of the yearly per capita number in the same
SIC-3 industry over the entire sample period. Patents are attributed to industries using the USPC to
NAICS crosswalk constructed by Goldschlag et al. (2016) and the concordance between NAICS and
SIC codes from the Census Bureau
Industry
Merger-Wave
Dummy
A binary variable that equals one if a deal is announced during an industry merger wave period defined
following Harford (2005) (source: Thomson SDC Platinum M&A database)
IT
Industry
Dummy:
Target (Candidate)
A binary variable that equals one if a target (candidate) firm is in the information technology industry
as defined in Kim et al. (2016) (source: CRSP)
Later
Sample-Period
Dummy
A binary variable that equals one if a deal is announced after 1997 (source: Thomson SDC Platinum
M&A database)
Low
Product-
Concentration
Dummy:
Target (Candidate)
A binary variable that equals one if the sales-based Herfindahl-Hirschman index for the SIC-3 industry
in which the target (peer candidate) operates is lower than the median value of the same variable for
all of the targets (peer candidates) in the same year (source: Compustat)
Low
Technology-
Concentration
Dummy:
Target (Candidate)
A binary variable that equals one if the patent-based Herfindahl-Hirschman index (based on the
number of patents issued over the past 60 months) for the SIC-3 industry in which the target (peer
candidate) operates is lower than the median value of the same variable for all targets (peer candidates)
in the same year (source: CRSP; Kogan et al. (2017))
Patent-Class Innovation-
Wave Dummy
A binary variable that equals one if the patent-value-weighted proportion of a target firm’s patent
classes experiencing innovation waves is greater than the median across all target firms in a year. A
patent class experiences an innovation wave when the per capita (source: FRED) number of break-
through patents (source: Kelly et al. (2021)) issued by the USPTO in the patent class in a year is
higher than the 90th percentile of the yearly per capita number in this class over the entire sample
period
Pharmaceutical Industry
Dummy: Target (Candi-
date)
A binary variable that equals one if a target (candidate) firm is in the pharmaceutical industry as
defined in Bloom et al. (2013) (source: CRSP)
Previous-Acquisition
Proximity Score
The value-weighted average of the Technology Proximity Score between a firm and all of the acquisition
targets in the previous year (source: Thomson SDC Platinum M&A database; Kogan et al. (2017))
Relative Patent Value
The ratio of the total value of a firm’s patents received by the firm over the previous five years (source:
Kogan et al. (2017)) to its enterprise value (i.e., total assets minus the book value of equity plus the
market value of equity) (source: Compustat)
19

Table OAT2: Summary Statistics for the Firm-Pair Technology Proximity Score
This table contains the descriptive statistics of the firm-pair Technology Proximity Scores for our baseline dataset
during the 1984–2010 period. The Technology Proximity Score is computed following Jaffe (1986), using the patent
dataset of Kogan et al. (2017) for US-listed firms. The Technology Proximity Score for a specific pair of firms measures
the closeness of these two firms’ technology. For each calendar month over our sample period, we rely on the patents
granted in the previous 60 months to compute the proximity scores of all possible firm-pairs in the patent dataset.
We exclude from the computation the firms that do not receive any patent over the 60 months. A detailed definition
of the score can be found in Table 1. Panel A reports the number of firms in the firm-pair Technology Proximity
Score dataset by calendar month. Panel B contains the average proximity score of all the firm-pairs for each calendar
month. Panel C reports, for each month, the 98th percentile of the proximity scores of all firm-pairs. The 98th
percentile is important because we require the proximity score of a technology peer to be higher than this threshold.
Panel A. The Number of Firms in the Firm-Pair Technology Proximity Score Dataset by Calendar Month
Year
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
1984
1652
1664
1661
1664
1667
1669
1675
1683
1693
1694
1698
1704
1985
1708
1708
1712
1718
1719
1715
1720
1725
1726
1710
1706
1703
1986
1697
1696
1706
1709
1718
1719
1721
1737
1736
1740
1738
1746
1987
1748
1760
1774
1793
1795
1795
1808
1816
1813
1821
1828
1840
1988
1849
1855
1863
1873
1883
1890
1897
1902
1901
1904
1899
1900
1989
1893
1891
1891
1894
1899
1895
1895
1900
1909
1903
1910
1908
1990
1900
1904
1909
1908
1902
1903
1913
1904
1910
1910
1895
1899
1991
1896
1896
1893
1889
1880
1871
1873
1870
1867
1863
1873
1871
1992
1874
1879
1882
1885
1883
1892
1893
1891
1893
1887
1884
1884
1993
1887
1885
1891
1887
1885
1887
1890
1897
1897
1888
1898
1898
1994
1887
1899
1904
1924
1935
1946
1958
1958
1968
1970
1975
1981
1995
1976
1976
1983
1985
1998
2000
2007
2018
2028
2023
2046
2049
1996
2053
2067
2076
2084
2106
2123
2135
2154
2172
2178
2186
2196
1997
2216
2231
2246
2260
2288
2293
2296
2309
2320
2337
2348
2357
1998
2365
2379
2394
2404
2422
2441
2455
2479
2487
2499
2515
2525
1999
2538
2557
2579
2582
2580
2577
2581
2596
2599
2604
2614
2641
2000
2652
2672
2689
2697
2703
2715
2729
2730
2769
2787
2802
2814
2001
2826
2841
2848
2871
2875
2888
2889
2894
2907
2907
2915
2919
2002
2920
2924
2927
2923
2921
2925
2916
2919
2917
2915
2913
2913
2003
2904
2906
2911
2910
2898
2888
2872
2865
2857
2834
2820
2808
2004
2801
2802
2797
2778
2774
2761
2754
2737
2727
2705
2691
2657
2005
2632
2651
2656
2665
2661
2650
2636
2624
2617
2606
2586
2578
2006
2561
2572
2568
2562
2552
2550
2540
2529
2530
2525
2509
2504
2007
2498
2501
2503
2492
2477
2472
2468
2465
2457
2452
2450
2437
2008
2423
2424
2419
2408
2404
2402
2399
2395
2391
2383
2378
2377
2009
2360
2351
2343
2337
2331
2332
2321
2321
2309
2308
2308
2296
2010
2295
2288
2284
2273
2268
2257
2250
2239
2228
2213
2211
2192
20

Panel B. The Average Value of the Technology Proximity Score by Calendar Month
Year
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
1984
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.019
0.020
0.019
0.020
1985
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.019
0.020
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.020
0.020
0.020
1986
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
1987
0.019
0.019
0.018
0.018
0.018
0.018
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
1988
0.018
0.019
0.018
0.018
0.018
0.019
0.018
0.018
0.018
0.018
0.018
0.018
1989
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
1990
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
1991
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.019
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
1992
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
1993
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
1994
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
1995
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
1996
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
1997
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.021
0.021
0.021
1998
0.021
0.021
0.021
0.021
0.021
0.021
0.021
0.021
0.022
0.022
0.021
0.022
1999
0.022
0.022
0.022
0.022
0.022
0.022
0.022
0.022
0.022
0.022
0.022
0.022
2000
0.022
0.022
0.022
0.022
0.022
0.022
0.022
0.022
0.022
0.022
0.022
0.022
2001
0.022
0.023
0.023
0.023
0.023
0.023
0.023
0.023
0.023
0.023
0.023
0.023
2002
0.023
0.023
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
2003
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
2004
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.025
2005
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.026
0.026
0.026
0.026
0.026
0.026
0.026
0.026
0.027
2006
0.027
0.027
0.027
0.027
0.028
0.027
0.028
0.028
0.028
0.028
0.029
0.029
2007
0.029
0.029
0.029
0.029
0.029
0.030
0.030
0.030
0.030
0.030
0.030
0.030
2008
0.031
0.031
0.031
0.031
0.031
0.031
0.031
0.031
0.031
0.031
0.031
0.032
2009
0.032
0.032
0.032
0.032
0.033
0.033
0.033
0.033
0.033
0.033
0.033
0.034
2010
0.034
0.034
0.034
0.034
0.034
0.035
0.034
0.035
0.035
0.035
0.035
0.035
21

Panel C. The 98th Percentile of the Firm-Pair Technology Proximity Score
Year
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
1984
0.258
0.257
0.258
0.259
0.259
0.259
0.258
0.257
0.256
0.256
0.255
0.256
1985
0.256
0.257
0.257
0.256
0.256
0.258
0.257
0.255
0.254
0.257
0.258
0.259
1986
0.260
0.261
0.258
0.259
0.259
0.257
0.256
0.257
0.255
0.254
0.255
0.254
1987
0.253
0.251
0.249
0.247
0.249
0.248
0.251
0.253
0.251
0.252
0.253
0.252
1988
0.251
0.251
0.251
0.252
0.251
0.252
0.251
0.250
0.249
0.249
0.250
0.252
1989
0.255
0.257
0.258
0.258
0.259
0.261
0.262
0.263
0.264
0.267
0.267
0.265
1990
0.268
0.267
0.267
0.266
0.264
0.267
0.268
0.269
0.268
0.268
0.269
0.268
1991
0.268
0.268
0.269
0.269
0.270
0.270
0.272
0.273
0.272
0.274
0.272
0.273
1992
0.272
0.272
0.273
0.276
0.275
0.276
0.276
0.277
0.279
0.283
0.284
0.285
1993
0.287
0.286
0.285
0.289
0.291
0.290
0.291
0.291
0.290
0.290
0.290
0.289
1994
0.289
0.287
0.287
0.288
0.286
0.286
0.285
0.288
0.290
0.289
0.289
0.290
1995
0.290
0.289
0.289
0.291
0.290
0.292
0.291
0.291
0.296
0.296
0.296
0.296
1996
0.294
0.291
0.289
0.292
0.295
0.295
0.296
0.295
0.296
0.299
0.301
0.304
1997
0.306
0.309
0.310
0.312
0.313
0.312
0.312
0.314
0.316
0.321
0.326
0.328
1998
0.330
0.332
0.331
0.333
0.333
0.334
0.342
0.342
0.347
0.345
0.347
0.349
1999
0.351
0.354
0.353
0.352
0.353
0.354
0.357
0.356
0.358
0.361
0.360
0.362
2000
0.364
0.364
0.367
0.367
0.367
0.367
0.370
0.370
0.367
0.369
0.369
0.368
2001
0.370
0.373
0.374
0.375
0.378
0.381
0.383
0.383
0.382
0.386
0.388
0.388
2002
0.392
0.392
0.396
0.398
0.400
0.401
0.401
0.401
0.401
0.400
0.400
0.402
2003
0.401
0.400
0.401
0.404
0.404
0.403
0.400
0.400
0.401
0.400
0.401
0.402
2004
0.403
0.407
0.407
0.405
0.411
0.416
0.422
0.420
0.426
0.427
0.427
0.427
2005
0.428
0.427
0.427
0.432
0.431
0.435
0.435
0.430
0.438
0.442
0.442
0.448
2006
0.451
0.454
0.454
0.455
0.460
0.459
0.461
0.468
0.469
0.469
0.474
0.473
2007
0.476
0.481
0.479
0.483
0.484
0.487
0.490
0.491
0.492
0.493
0.497
0.501
2008
0.504
0.506
0.505
0.505
0.503
0.503
0.508
0.512
0.516
0.516
0.517
0.521
2009
0.525
0.527
0.527
0.534
0.542
0.545
0.549
0.550
0.548
0.546
0.549
0.557
2010
0.558
0.562
0.564
0.574
0.579
0.582
0.582
0.586
0.592
0.594
0.596
0.596
22

Table OAT3: Summary Statistics for the Firm-Pair Mahalanobis Distance
This table contains the descriptive statistics of the firm-pair Mahalanobis Distance for our dataset during the 1984–
2010 period. The Mahalanobis Distance is computed following Bloom et al. (2013) and using the patent dataset of
Kogan et al. (2017) for US-listed firms. The Mahalanobis Distance for a specific pair of firms measures the closeness
of these two firms’ technology. For each calendar month over the sample period, we rely on the patents granted in the
previous 60 months to compute the Mahalanobis Distance of all possible firm-pairs in the patent dataset. We exclude
from the computation the firms that do not receive any patent over the selected 60 months. A detailed definition of
the Mahalanobis Distance can be found in Table 1. Panel A reports the number of firms in the firm-pair Mahalanobis
Distance dataset by calendar month. Panel B contains the average Mahalanobis Distance of all the firm-pairs for each
calendar month. Panel C reports, for each month, the 98th percentile of the Mahalanobis Distance of all firm-pairs.
The 98th percentile is important because we require the Mahalanobis Distance of a technology peer to be higher than
this threshold.
Panel A. The Number of Firms in the Firm-Pair Mahalanobis Distance Dataset by Calendar Month
Year
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
1984
1652
1664
1661
1664
1667
1669
1675
1683
1693
1694
1698
1704
1985
1708
1708
1712
1718
1719
1715
1720
1725
1726
1710
1706
1703
1986
1697
1696
1706
1709
1718
1719
1721
1737
1736
1740
1738
1746
1987
1748
1760
1774
1793
1795
1795
1808
1816
1813
1821
1828
1840
1988
1849
1855
1863
1873
1883
1890
1897
1902
1901
1904
1899
1900
1989
1893
1891
1891
1894
1899
1895
1895
1900
1909
1903
1910
1908
1990
1900
1904
1909
1908
1902
1903
1913
1904
1910
1910
1895
1899
1991
1896
1896
1893
1889
1880
1871
1873
1870
1867
1863
1873
1871
1992
1874
1879
1882
1885
1883
1892
1893
1891
1893
1887
1884
1884
1993
1887
1885
1891
1887
1885
1887
1890
1897
1897
1888
1898
1898
1994
1887
1899
1904
1924
1935
1946
1958
1958
1968
1970
1975
1981
1995
1976
1976
1983
1985
1998
2000
2007
2018
2028
2023
2046
2049
1996
2053
2067
2076
2084
2106
2123
2135
2154
2172
2178
2186
2196
1997
2216
2231
2246
2260
2288
2293
2296
2309
2320
2337
2348
2357
1998
2365
2379
2394
2404
2422
2441
2455
2479
2487
2499
2515
2525
1999
2538
2557
2579
2582
2580
2577
2581
2596
2599
2604
2614
2641
2000
2652
2672
2689
2697
2703
2715
2729
2730
2769
2787
2802
2814
2001
2826
2841
2848
2871
2875
2888
2889
2894
2907
2907
2915
2919
2002
2920
2924
2927
2923
2921
2925
2916
2919
2917
2915
2913
2913
2003
2904
2906
2911
2910
2898
2888
2872
2865
2857
2834
2820
2808
2004
2801
2802
2797
2778
2774
2761
2754
2737
2726
2705
2691
2657
2005
2632
2651
2656
2665
2661
2650
2636
2624
2617
2606
2586
2578
2006
2561
2572
2568
2562
2552
2550
2540
2529
2530
2525
2509
2504
2007
2498
2501
2503
2492
2477
2472
2468
2465
2457
2452
2450
2437
2008
2423
2424
2419
2408
2404
2402
2399
2395
2391
2383
2378
2377
2009
2360
2351
2343
2337
2331
2322
2321
2321
2309
2308
2308
2296
2010
2295
2288
2284
2273
2268
2257
2250
2239
2228
2213
2211
2192
23

Panel B. The Average Value of the Mahalanobis Distance by Calendar Month
Year
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
1984
0.043
0.042
0.043
0.043
0.042
0.042
0.042
0.042
0.041
0.041
0.041
0.041
1985
0.041
0.042
0.041
0.041
0.041
0.042
0.042
0.041
0.041
0.042
0.043
0.042
1986
0.043
0.042
0.042
0.042
0.041
0.041
0.040
0.040
0.040
0.039
0.039
0.039
1987
0.039
0.038
0.037
0.036
0.037
0.037
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.037
1988
0.037
0.037
0.036
0.036
0.036
0.036
0.036
0.036
0.036
0.036
0.036
0.036
1989
0.037
0.037
0.037
0.037
0.037
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.039
0.038
0.038
1990
0.039
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.038
1991
0.038
0.038
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.040
0.039
0.040
1992
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.039
0.039
0.039
1993
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
1994
0.039
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.037
0.037
0.037
0.037
0.037
0.037
0.037
0.037
1995
0.038
0.038
0.037
0.037
0.037
0.038
0.037
0.037
0.037
0.038
0.037
0.037
1996
0.037
0.037
0.037
0.037
0.037
0.036
0.037
0.036
0.036
0.037
0.036
0.037
1997
0.037
0.037
0.036
0.037
0.036
0.036
0.036
0.036
0.036
0.036
0.037
0.037
1998
0.037
0.037
0.037
0.037
0.037
0.037
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.038
1999
0.039
0.039
0.038
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.040
0.039
0.040
2000
0.040
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
2001
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.039
0.040
0.040
0.040
0.040
0.040
0.040
0.041
0.040
2002
0.041
0.040
0.040
0.041
0.041
0.041
0.041
0.041
0.041
0.041
0.041
0.041
2003
0.041
0.041
0.041
0.041
0.042
0.042
0.041
0.041
0.041
0.042
0.042
0.042
2004
0.042
0.042
0.042
0.042
0.042
0.043
0.044
0.044
0.044
0.044
0.044
0.044
2005
0.045
0.044
0.045
0.045
0.045
0.045
0.046
0.046
0.046
0.047
0.047
0.048
2006
0.048
0.048
0.048
0.049
0.049
0.049
0.050
0.050
0.051
0.051
0.052
0.052
2007
0.052
0.052
0.053
0.053
0.053
0.053
0.053
0.053
0.053
0.054
0.054
0.054
2008
0.055
0.055
0.055
0.055
0.055
0.055
0.055
0.056
0.056
0.056
0.056
0.056
2009
0.057
0.058
0.058
0.058
0.059
0.059
0.059
0.059
0.059
0.059
0.059
0.060
2010
0.060
0.060
0.060
0.060
0.060
0.060
0.060
0.061
0.061
0.061
0.061
0.061
24

Panel C. The 98th Percentile of the Mahalanobis Distance
Year
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
1984
0.387
0.385
0.385
0.386
0.386
0.384
0.383
0.382
0.376
0.378
0.377
0.377
1985
0.377
0.380
0.380
0.379
0.380
0.383
0.381
0.382
0.380
0.383
0.388
0.385
1986
0.388
0.389
0.384
0.385
0.381
0.383
0.378
0.375
0.372
0.372
0.372
0.369
1987
0.367
0.363
0.359
0.353
0.357
0.357
0.361
0.362
0.360
0.363
0.363
0.360
1988
0.357
0.356
0.355
0.357
0.356
0.358
0.354
0.353
0.354
0.354
0.354
0.355
1989
0.358
0.363
0.365
0.365
0.367
0.371
0.372
0.374
0.377
0.383
0.379
0.379
1990
0.384
0.380
0.378
0.379
0.379
0.381
0.380
0.381
0.379
0.379
0.381
0.379
1991
0.381
0.382
0.384
0.386
0.388
0.388
0.387
0.389
0.389
0.393
0.392
0.395
1992
0.395
0.393
0.393
0.396
0.396
0.396
0.395
0.398
0.397
0.402
0.404
0.405
1993
0.409
0.408
0.406
0.413
0.415
0.413
0.415
0.414
0.413
0.414
0.413
0.413
1994
0.416
0.409
0.409
0.407
0.401
0.402
0.402
0.402
0.403
0.403
0.402
0.405
1995
0.408
0.408
0.407
0.409
0.411
0.412
0.406
0.406
0.412
0.412
0.409
0.410
1996
0.408
0.404
0.402
0.403
0.406
0.406
0.406
0.406
0.407
0.410
0.411
0.417
1997
0.420
0.420
0.421
0.424
0.423
0.422
0.423
0.422
0.425
0.429
0.437
0.439
1998
0.441
0.443
0.439
0.445
0.447
0.446
0.459
0.457
0.465
0.465
0.466
0.470
1999
0.472
0.476
0.474
0.476
0.477
0.477
0.481
0.482
0.487
0.492
0.489
0.493
2000
0.494
0.489
0.490
0.489
0.488
0.488
0.490
0.494
0.488
0.491
0.494
0.493
2001
0.495
0.497
0.499
0.501
0.506
0.510
0.511
0.512
0.510
0.514
0.519
0.518
2002
0.520
0.521
0.523
0.527
0.527
0.527
0.531
0.529
0.531
0.532
0.533
0.535
2003
0.534
0.535
0.536
0.540
0.542
0.541
0.537
0.538
0.538
0.541
0.541
0.543
2004
0.546
0.547
0.547
0.544
0.552
0.558
0.568
0.565
0.572
0.573
0.574
0.573
2005
0.576
0.573
0.572
0.575
0.576
0.580
0.582
0.580
0.591
0.593
0.599
0.604
2006
0.608
0.609
0.610
0.611
0.619
0.619
0.623
0.631
0.635
0.635
0.640
0.639
2007
0.643
0.649
0.648
0.654
0.656
0.660
0.664
0.661
0.664
0.665
0.666
0.672
2008
0.674
0.679
0.676
0.675
0.673
0.670
0.676
0.684
0.684
0.681
0.684
0.689
2009
0.696
0.700
0.701
0.707
0.714
0.721
0.721
0.721
0.717
0.716
0.719
0.731
2010
0.733
0.735
0.736
0.743
0.745
0.749
0.749
0.752
0.759
0.762
0.762
0.761
25

Table OAT4: Summary Statistics for the Firm-Pair Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio
This table contains the descriptive statistics of the firm-pair Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio for our dataset during
the 1984–2010 period. The Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio is computed following Bena and Li (2014) and Ma (2020)
and using the patent dataset of Kogan et al. (2017) for US-listed firms. The Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio for a
specific pair of firms measures the closeness of these two firms’ technology. For each calendar month over the sample
period, we rely on the patents granted in the previous 60 months to compute the Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio of
all possible firm-pairs in the patent dataset. We exclude from the computation the firms that do not receive any
patent over the selected 60 months. A detailed definition of the Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio can be found in
Table 1. Panel A reports the number of firms in the firm-pair Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio dataset by calendar
month. Panel B contains the average Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio of all the firm-pairs for each calendar month.
Panel C reports, for each month, the 98th percentile of the Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio of all firm pairs. The 98th
percentile is important because we require the Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio of a technology peer to be higher than
this threshold.
Panel A. The Number of Firms in the Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio Dataset by Calendar Month
Year
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
1984
1699
1702
1698
1701
1701
1703
1708
1716
1726
1727
1732
1738
1985
1741
1742
1745
1752
1752
1748
1751
1755
1755
1740
1737
1735
1986
1730
1730
1740
1742
1754
1758
1761
1776
1775
1779
1777
1785
1987
1788
1798
1811
1833
1837
1839
1851
1859
1859
1868
1877
1889
1988
1897
1902
1908
1918
1929
1936
1943
1949
1950
1954
1950
1953
1989
1946
1945
1945
1948
1953
1951
1951
1956
1966
1961
1972
1972
1990
1966
1966
1963
1962
1955
1955
1964
1955
1960
1962
1947
1951
1991
1951
1950
1946
1945
1936
1924
1926
1923
1922
1918
1929
1926
1992
1933
1934
1933
1937
1935
1943
1945
1943
1946
1940
1939
1939
1993
1946
1942
1946
1944
1942
1944
1947
1952
1952
1945
1956
1956
1994
1949
1957
1959
1978
1988
2000
2011
2012
2020
2021
2027
2033
1995
2031
2030
2037
2038
2051
2053
2059
2073
2084
2081
2102
2107
1996
2117
2128
2137
2143
2163
2181
2194
2213
2231
2238
2247
2258
1997
2281
2293
2309
2323
2351
2356
2361
2376
2386
2404
2415
2424
1998
2437
2448
2463
2472
2488
2509
2522
2546
2551
2563
2583
2595
1999
2611
2629
2651
2653
2654
2651
2657
2672
2679
2683
2692
2722
2000
2741
2754
2769
2775
2778
2788
2804
2802
2838
2856
2871
2883
2001
2899
2910
2912
2936
2940
2953
2955
2958
2974
2976
2986
2990
2002
2994
2993
2994
2990
2988
2991
2982
2985
2982
2982
2980
2984
2003
2978
2977
2981
2980
2969
2957
2939
2931
2923
2904
2890
2881
2004
2876
2867
2857
2837
2833
2818
2811
2793
2782
2762
2749
2718
2005
2701
2712
2712
2723
2720
2711
2697
2684
2677
2668
2647
2645
2006
2633
2637
2629
2623
2612
2607
2596
2586
2585
2579
2564
2560
2007
2555
2555
2556
2542
2528
2522
2517
2514
2508
2504
2501
2491
2008
2483
2485
2479
2468
2462
2459
2457
2453
2450
2442
2438
2436
2009
2419
2409
2402
2395
2388
2379
2378
2378
2366
2361
2361
2352
2010
2352
2346
2342
2332
2326
2315
2310
2298
2288
2272
2269
2253
26

Panel B. The Average Value of the Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio by Calendar Month
Year
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
1984
4.37E-05
4.38E-05
4.41E-05
4.39E-05
4.40E-05
4.39E-05
4.39E-05
4.39E-05
4.36E-05
4.39E-05
4.40E-05
4.44E-05
1985
4.42E-05
4.45E-05
4.45E-05
4.44E-05
4.49E-05
4.51E-05
4.52E-05
4.53E-05
4.53E-05
4.57E-05
4.58E-05
4.56E-05
1986
4.55E-05
4.51E-05
4.46E-05
4.45E-05
4.45E-05
4.44E-05
4.44E-05
4.43E-05
4.43E-05
4.44E-05
4.45E-05
4.40E-05
1987
4.38E-05
4.39E-05
4.35E-05
4.30E-05
4.33E-05
4.36E-05
4.43E-05
4.42E-05
4.44E-05
4.47E-05
4.47E-05
4.42E-05
1988
4.42E-05
4.42E-05
4.43E-05
4.43E-05
4.41E-05
4.48E-05
4.49E-05
4.49E-05
4.50E-05
4.55E-05
4.58E-05
4.55E-05
1989
4.60E-05
4.66E-05
4.74E-05
4.78E-05
4.80E-05
4.86E-05
4.91E-05
4.93E-05
4.95E-05
5.01E-05
4.94E-05
4.95E-05
1990
5.01E-05
5.02E-05
5.07E-05
5.09E-05
5.11E-05
5.16E-05
5.16E-05
5.20E-05
5.16E-05
5.14E-05
5.22E-05
5.20E-05
1991
5.22E-05
5.26E-05
5.30E-05
5.29E-05
5.34E-05
5.39E-05
5.36E-05
5.37E-05
5.36E-05
5.39E-05
5.38E-05
5.38E-05
1992
5.38E-05
5.38E-05
5.40E-05
5.41E-05
5.39E-05
5.35E-05
5.40E-05
5.42E-05
5.42E-05
5.44E-05
5.45E-05
5.48E-05
1993
5.48E-05
5.50E-05
5.51E-05
5.52E-05
5.59E-05
5.58E-05
5.60E-05
5.57E-05
5.65E-05
5.67E-05
5.66E-05
5.73E-05
1994
5.82E-05
5.78E-05
5.69E-05
5.62E-05
5.61E-05
5.60E-05
5.58E-05
5.61E-05
5.62E-05
5.60E-05
5.65E-05
5.69E-05
1995
5.73E-05
5.76E-05
5.80E-05
5.82E-05
5.78E-05
5.85E-05
5.89E-05
5.89E-05
5.93E-05
6.04E-05
6.02E-05
6.05E-05
1996
6.06E-05
6.05E-05
6.05E-05
6.06E-05
6.00E-05
5.97E-05
5.97E-05
6.00E-05
6.09E-05
6.14E-05
6.15E-05
6.15E-05
1997
6.18E-05
6.22E-05
6.22E-05
6.23E-05
6.22E-05
6.23E-05
6.25E-05
6.26E-05
6.34E-05
6.32E-05
6.34E-05
6.38E-05
1998
6.37E-05
6.39E-05
6.41E-05
6.44E-05
6.47E-05
6.54E-05
6.65E-05
6.63E-05
6.71E-05
6.78E-05
6.82E-05
6.88E-05
1999
6.89E-05
6.91E-05
6.98E-05
7.05E-05
7.08E-05
7.11E-05
7.15E-05
7.16E-05
7.17E-05
7.23E-05
7.27E-05
7.33E-05
2000
7.38E-05
7.37E-05
7.37E-05
7.40E-05
7.45E-05
7.50E-05
7.51E-05
7.57E-05
7.51E-05
7.50E-05
7.58E-05
7.62E-05
2001
7.60E-05
7.64E-05
7.72E-05
7.73E-05
7.79E-05
7.93E-05
7.99E-05
8.02E-05
7.97E-05
8.05E-05
8.13E-05
8.20E-05
2002
8.21E-05
8.23E-05
8.23E-05
8.29E-05
8.35E-05
8.37E-05
8.47E-05
8.47E-05
8.55E-05
8.58E-05
8.66E-05
8.65E-05
2003
8.73E-05
8.78E-05
8.76E-05
8.78E-05
8.77E-05
8.84E-05
8.88E-05
8.89E-05
8.88E-05
8.98E-05
8.97E-05
9.01E-05
2004
9.05E-05
9.04E-05
9.06E-05
9.11E-05
9.16E-05
9.21E-05
9.24E-05
9.33E-05
9.38E-05
9.49E-05
9.50E-05
9.54E-05
2005
9.54E-05
9.48E-05
9.50E-05
9.50E-05
9.54E-05
9.67E-05
9.78E-05
9.85E-05
9.84E-05
9.89E-05
9.96E-05
9.98E-05
2006
1.00E-04
1.01E-04
1.01E-04
1.01E-04
1.01E-04
1.02E-04
1.03E-04
1.03E-04
1.05E-04
1.05E-04
1.07E-04
1.07E-04
2007
1.08E-04
1.09E-04
1.09E-04
1.10E-04
1.11E-04
1.11E-04
1.11E-04
1.10E-04
1.10E-04
1.10E-04
1.11E-04
1.12E-04
2008
1.12E-04
1.13E-04
1.13E-04
1.13E-04
1.14E-04
1.14E-04
1.14E-04
1.16E-04
1.16E-04
1.16E-04
1.17E-04
1.17E-04
2009
1.18E-04
1.19E-04
1.18E-04
1.19E-04
1.19E-04
1.19E-04
1.19E-04
1.19E-04
1.20E-04
1.21E-04
1.21E-04
1.22E-04
2010
1.22E-04
1.22E-04
1.23E-04
1.24E-04
1.24E-04
1.24E-04
1.25E-04
1.26E-04
1.27E-04
1.27E-04
1.27E-04
1.26E-04
27

Panel C. The 98th Percentile of the Firm-pair Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio
Year
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
1984
9.81E-05
9.71E-05
1.03E-04
1.02E-04
1.02E-04
1.02E-04
1.02E-04
1.09E-04
1.07E-04
1.09E-04
1.10E-04
1.13E-04
1985
1.10E-04
1.29E-04
1.29E-04
1.23E-04
1.27E-04
1.29E-04
1.28E-04
1.28E-04
1.40E-04
1.59E-04
1.61E-04
1.61E-04
1986
1.61E-04
1.60E-04
1.55E-04
1.51E-04
1.43E-04
1.43E-04
1.34E-04
1.23E-04
1.26E-04
1.24E-04
1.27E-04
1.14E-04
1987
1.19E-04
1.12E-04
1.07E-04
9.49E-05
9.51E-05
9.72E-05
1.03E-04
1.01E-04
1.07E-04
1.01E-04
9.87E-05
8.94E-05
1988
8.78E-05
8.78E-05
8.73E-05
8.63E-05
8.47E-05
8.99E-05
8.87E-05
9.59E-05
9.65E-05
1.03E-04
1.06E-04
1.07E-04
1989
1.13E-04
1.16E-04
1.22E-04
1.31E-04
1.34E-04
1.37E-04
1.43E-04
1.42E-04
1.43E-04
1.50E-04
1.42E-04
1.43E-04
1990
1.47E-04
1.45E-04
1.47E-04
1.49E-04
1.52E-04
1.68E-04
1.63E-04
1.72E-04
1.69E-04
1.67E-04
1.75E-04
1.71E-04
1991
1.70E-04
1.71E-04
1.73E-04
1.72E-04
1.80E-04
1.88E-04
1.85E-04
1.91E-04
1.88E-04
1.96E-04
1.95E-04
2.01E-04
1992
1.89E-04
1.85E-04
1.88E-04
1.85E-04
1.85E-04
1.78E-04
1.72E-04
1.71E-04
1.71E-04
1.74E-04
1.74E-04
1.79E-04
1993
1.73E-04
1.78E-04
1.78E-04
1.83E-04
1.91E-04
1.84E-04
1.87E-04
1.84E-04
1.92E-04
1.99E-04
1.96E-04
2.01E-04
1994
2.12E-04
2.02E-04
1.99E-04
1.89E-04
1.78E-04
1.74E-04
1.66E-04
1.63E-04
1.64E-04
1.67E-04
1.69E-04
1.75E-04
1995
1.83E-04
1.89E-04
1.88E-04
1.93E-04
1.85E-04
1.91E-04
1.91E-04
1.85E-04
1.91E-04
2.00E-04
1.92E-04
1.98E-04
1996
1.97E-04
1.99E-04
1.99E-04
1.99E-04
1.91E-04
1.84E-04
1.84E-04
1.80E-04
1.84E-04
1.87E-04
1.85E-04
1.83E-04
1997
1.77E-04
1.79E-04
1.77E-04
1.75E-04
1.59E-04
1.62E-04
1.62E-04
1.62E-04
1.62E-04
1.62E-04
1.61E-04
1.64E-04
1998
1.66E-04
1.64E-04
1.64E-04
1.68E-04
1.68E-04
1.72E-04
1.86E-04
1.83E-04
1.91E-04
1.96E-04
1.98E-04
2.03E-04
1999
2.04E-04
1.99E-04
2.00E-04
2.08E-04
2.08E-04
2.10E-04
2.13E-04
2.13E-04
2.14E-04
2.21E-04
2.25E-04
2.28E-04
2000
2.31E-04
2.28E-04
2.28E-04
2.32E-04
2.36E-04
2.39E-04
2.37E-04
2.44E-04
2.37E-04
2.36E-04
2.41E-04
2.43E-04
2001
2.42E-04
2.46E-04
2.57E-04
2.59E-04
2.66E-04
2.74E-04
2.80E-04
2.85E-04
2.82E-04
2.87E-04
2.95E-04
3.01E-04
2002
3.02E-04
3.03E-04
3.01E-04
3.12E-04
3.24E-04
3.28E-04
3.41E-04
3.46E-04
3.57E-04
3.64E-04
3.76E-04
3.75E-04
2003
3.90E-04
3.97E-04
3.97E-04
3.99E-04
4.10E-04
4.18E-04
4.25E-04
4.32E-04
4.32E-04
4.46E-04
4.48E-04
4.54E-04
2004
4.61E-04
4.63E-04
4.72E-04
4.85E-04
4.95E-04
5.13E-04
5.23E-04
5.46E-04
5.57E-04
5.72E-04
5.78E-04
5.96E-04
2005
6.01E-04
5.99E-04
6.04E-04
6.05E-04
6.14E-04
6.34E-04
6.48E-04
6.56E-04
6.71E-04
6.81E-04
6.93E-04
7.00E-04
2006
7.14E-04
7.23E-04
7.32E-04
7.45E-04
7.56E-04
7.68E-04
7.93E-04
8.08E-04
8.27E-04
8.41E-04
8.70E-04
8.73E-04
2007
8.88E-04
9.00E-04
9.07E-04
9.25E-04
9.39E-04
9.43E-04
9.38E-04
9.26E-04
9.32E-04
9.35E-04
9.34E-04
9.53E-04
2008
9.56E-04
9.62E-04
9.63E-04
9.81E-04
9.90E-04
9.90E-04
9.93E-04
1.01E-03
1.02E-03
1.02E-03
1.03E-03
1.03E-03
2009
1.05E-03
1.07E-03
1.06E-03
1.07E-03
1.07E-03
1.08E-03
1.07E-03
1.07E-03
1.08E-03
1.10E-03
1.10E-03
1.10E-03
2010
1.11E-03
1.11E-03
1.12E-03
1.12E-03
1.12E-03
1.13E-03
1.14E-03
1.16E-03
1.16E-03
1.17E-03
1.17E-03
1.15E-03
28

Table OAT5: The Sample Distribution and Attrition of the Acquisition Targets and Their Technology Peers
This table reports the number of acquisition targets and their technology peers by calendar year and industry. Panel A reports the sample distribution and
attrition by year. Column 1 contains the number of targets in all the acquisitions announced between January 1, 1984 and December 31, 2010, covered by
the Thomson Reuters SDC Platinum M&A database. Column 2 reports the number of targets with patent data. Column 3 reports the average number of
technology-peer candidates per target. Column 4 reports the average monthly 98th percentiles of the Technology Proximity Score (defined in Table 1), i.e., the
threshold values used to define the technology peers by month. Column 5 reports the number of targets that have technology peers. Column 6 reports the
number of peers averaged across the acquisition targets. Column 7 reports the number of targets that have technology peers which have the required stock return
data from CRSP. Column 8 reports the number of technology peers with valid stock return data averaged across the target firms. Panel B reports the sample
distribution across the Fama-French 48 industries.
Panel A. Sample Distribution by Year
Year
Number of
Acquisition
Targets Covered
by SDC
Number of
Acquisition
Targets with
Valid Patent
Data
Number of
Technology-
Peer
Candidates per
Acquisition
Target
Average
Technology
Proximity Score
Threshold
Value
Number of
Acquisition
Targets Having
Technology
Peers
Number of
Technology
Peers per
Acquisition
Target
Number of
Targets with
Technology
Peers that Have
Valid
Stock-Return
Data
Number of
Peers with
Valid
Stock-Return
Data per
Acquisition
Target
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
1984
89
28
1409.143
0.257
27
32.481
26
31.538
1985
119
45
1429.422
0.257
45
36.244
45
34.667
1986
119
52
1435.038
0.257
52
33.058
51
31.569
1987
118
38
1458.368
0.251
38
23.053
38
22.079
1988
125
45
1489.422
0.251
43
30.791
43
29.744
1989
88
33
1459.364
0.261
33
27.909
31
28.355
1990
50
15
1460.200
0.267
15
29.467
14
26.286
1991
52
16
1434.563
0.271
16
30.500
16
29.813
1992
43
15
1493.133
0.277
15
32.067
15
30.733
1993
74
17
1553.647
0.289
16
43.000
16
42.000
1994
133
43
1658.047
0.288
43
44.372
43
42.744
1995
179
54
1750.667
0.292
54
34.630
54
33.019
1996
192
55
1832.127
0.296
54
30.352
54
28.407
1997
245
70
1941.271
0.315
70
35.800
70
33.743
1998
276
103
2032.466
0.339
103
37.262
101
34.693
1999
262
102
2054.039
0.356
102
51.186
100
47.960
2000
225
85
2046.624
0.367
85
36.035
79
32.962
2001
162
59
2087.237
0.380
59
51.407
56
50.000
2002
91
45
2078.156
0.399
45
45.267
43
44.256
Continued On Next Page
29

Year
Number of
Acquisition
Targets Covered
by SDC
Number of
Acquisition
Targets with
Valid Patent
Data
Number of
Technology
Peer
Candidates per
Target
Average
Technology
Proximity Score
Threshold
Value
Number of
Acquisition
Targets Having
Technology
Peers
Number of
Technology
Peers per
Acquisition
Target
Number of
Targets with
Technology
Peers that Have
Valid
Stock-Return
Data
Number of
Peers with
Valid
Stock-Return
Data per
Acquisition
Target
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
2003
99
45
2052.578
0.401
45
65.067
44
60.114
2004
96
44
1977.023
0.416
43
44.953
40
43.600
2005
110
56
1973.018
0.435
56
49.571
52
47.385
2006
108
54
1959.074
0.462
54
36.667
46
31.913
2007
107
56
1905.804
0.488
56
37.089
51
32.235
2008
80
50
1801.800
0.510
49
47.673
48
45.271
2009
75
48
1706.063
0.541
48
49.417
48
45.896
2010
72
34
1576.971
0.580
34
22.471
33
21.364
Total
3389
1307
1822.95
0.352
1300
39.791
1257
37.498
30

Panel B. Distribution of Acquisition Targets and Technology Peers by the Fama-French 48 Industries
Fama-French 48 Industry
Number of
Acquisition
Targets Having
Technology
Peers
Percentage of
Acquisition
Targets having
Technology
Peers
Number of
Technology
Peers
Percentage of
Technology
Peers
Agriculture
3
0.24%
65
0.14%
Food Products
10
0.80%
474
1.01%
Candy & Soda
2
0.16%
77
0.16%
Beer & Liquor
1
0.08%
145
0.31%
Tobacco Products
0
0.00%
21
0.04%
Recreation
16
1.27%
282
0.60%
Entertainment
11
0.88%
116
0.25%
Printing and Publishing
3
0.24%
111
0.24%
Consumer Goods
31
2.47%
982
2.08%
Apparel
6
0.48%
146
0.31%
Healthcare
11
0.88%
545
1.16%
Medical Equipment
138
10.98%
4439
9.42%
Pharmaceutical Products
111
8.83%
11751
24.93%
Chemicals
34
2.70%
1584
3.36%
Rubber and Plastic Products
27
2.15%
437
0.93%
Textiles
5
0.40%
271
0.57%
Construction Materials
32
2.55%
900
1.91%
Construction
5
0.40%
120
0.25%
Steel Works Etc.
15
1.19%
419
0.89%
Fabricated Products
5
0.40%
99
0.21%
Machinery
73
5.81%
1455
3.09%
Electrical Equipment
26
2.07%
1825
3.87%
Automobiles and Trucks
22
1.75%
608
1.29%
Aircraft
17
1.35%
266
0.56%
Shipbuilding, Railroad Equipment
1
0.08%
59
0.13%
Defense
9
0.72%
86
0.18%
Precious Metals
3
0.24%
53
0.11%
Non-Metallic and Industrial Metal Mining
3
0.24%
134
0.28%
Coal
0
0.00%
22
0.05%
Petroleum and Natural Gas
19
1.51%
659
1.40%
Communication
25
1.99%
895
1.90%
Personal Services
0
0.00%
160
0.34%
Business Services
184
14.64%
6662
14.13%
Computers
121
9.63%
2480
5.26%
Electronic Equipment
171
13.60%
4386
9.31%
Measuring and Control Equipment
58
4.61%
1934
4.10%
Business Supplies
24
1.91%
610
1.29%
Shipping Containers
6
0.48%
337
0.71%
Transportation
4
0.32%
171
0.36%
Wholesale
14
1.11%
803
1.70%
Retail
6
0.48%
238
0.50%
Restaurants, Hotels, Motels
4
0.32%
60
0.13%
Others
1
0.08%
248
0.53%
Total
1257
100.00%
47135
100.00%
31

Table OAT6: Difference between Technology Space and Other Spaces
This table compares the number of technology peers (percentage in parentheses) that belong to their corresponding target firms’ product markets (Bloom et al.,
2013), three-digit SIC industries, FF-48 industries, text-based TNIC-3 industry spaces (Hoberg and Phillips, 2010), downstream industries, upstream industries,
and states to the number of technology peers (percentage in parentheses) that do not.
Year
Number of
Acquisition
Targets
Number of
Technology Peers
Number of
Technology Peers
in the Targets’
Product Markets
Number of
Technology Peers
NOT in the
Targets’ Product
Markets
Number of
Technology Peers
in the Targets’
SIC-3 Industries
Number of
Technology Peers
NOT in the
Targets’ SIC-3
Industries
Number of
Technology Peers
in the Targets’
FF-48 Industries
Number of
Technology Peers
NOT in the
Targets’ FF-48
Industries
1984
26
820
80
633
82
738
173
647
1985
45
1560
170
1209
199
1361
310
1250
1986
51
1610
174
1117
174
1436
319
1291
1987
38
839
137
593
137
702
193
646
1988
43
1279
101
911
98
1181
199
1080
1989
31
879
147
618
178
701
206
673
1990
14
368
52
273
39
329
58
310
1991
16
477
184
262
96
381
112
365
1992
15
461
140
279
116
345
129
332
1993
16
672
43
559
75
597
107
565
1994
43
1838
495
1144
556
1282
600
1238
1995
54
1783
462
1106
529
1254
627
1156
1996
54
1534
225
1171
360
1174
451
1083
1997
70
2362
406
1644
693
1669
745
1617
1998
101
3504
734
2327
1253
2251
1360
2144
1999
100
4796
1071
3100
1750
3046
1883
2913
2000
79
2604
410
1542
1001
1603
1087
1517
2001
56
2800
537
1821
1347
1453
1391
1409
2002
43
1903
315
1229
764
1139
807
1096
2003
44
2645
498
1538
1558
1087
1617
1028
2004
40
1744
280
1212
803
941
872
872
2005
52
2464
402
1530
1148
1316
1315
1149
2006
46
1468
213
1036
702
766
761
707
2007
51
1644
357
1036
682
962
785
859
2008
48
2173
422
1256
1078
1095
1136
1037
2009
48
2203
319
1162
1200
1003
1299
904
2010
33
705
92
491
255
450
282
423
Total
1257
47135
8466 (22%)
30799 (78%)
16873 (36%)
30262 (64%)
18824 (40%)
28311 (60%)
32

Year
Number of
Technology Peers
in the Targets’
TNIC-3
Industries
Number of
Technology Peers
NOT in the
Targets’ TNIC-3
Industries
Number of
Technology Peers
in the
Downstream of
the Target
Number of
Technology Peers
NOT in the
Downstream of
the Target
Number of
Technology Peers
in the Upstream
of the Target
Number of
Technology Peers
NOT in the
Upstream of the
Target
Number of
Technology Peers
in the Targets’
States
Number of
Technology Peers
NOT in the
Targets’ States
1984
0
815
0
815
58
668
1985
9
1535
14
1530
98
1309
1986
137
1466
141
1462
94
1412
1987
4
829
5
828
48
724
1988
43
1234
67
1210
116
1002
1989
103
775
129
749
103
730
1990
18
349
49
318
33
320
1991
90
384
120
354
36
408
1992
16
442
22
436
38
375
1993
68
600
81
587
67
560
1994
138
1696
235
1599
181
1441
1995
186
1592
335
1443
158
1489
1996
81
1452
202
1331
142
1253
1997
470
1892
8
2352
13
2347
332
1773
1998
819
2685
511
2989
624
2876
415
2557
1999
1625
3171
1042
3752
1147
3647
594
3239
2000
646
1958
557
2047
653
1951
191
1798
2001
1144
1656
751
2049
834
1966
357
1623
2002
519
1384
20
1883
29
1874
237
1054
2003
1115
1530
526
2119
602
2043
333
1662
2004
664
1080
305
1439
385
1359
352
932
2005
907
1557
618
1846
709
1755
338
1493
2006
485
983
430
1038
423
1045
135
1044
2007
514
1130
0
1644
0
1644
211
919
2008
1010
1163
0
2170
0
2170
356
1393
2009
969
1234
0
2202
0
2202
297
1286
2010
199
506
0
703
0
703
98
470
Total
11086 (34%)
21929 (66%)
5661 (12%)
41402 (88%)
6819 (14%)
40244 (86%)
5418 (14%)
32934 (86%)
33

Table OAT7: Summary Statistics of Firm and Deal Characteristics
This table contains the summary statistics of the characteristics of acquiring firms (Panel A), target firms (Panel B),
technology-peer candidates (Panel C), technology peers (Panel D), and M&A deals (Panel E). Detailed definitions of
these variables are in Table 1 and Table OAT1 of the Online Appendix. The samples of acquisitions and technology
peers are described in Table OAT5 of the Online Appendix.
Panel A. Acquiring Firms
Variable
Obs.
Mean
Median
Std.
Sales Increase
1,116
0.1138
0.1073
0.2109
Closely Held Shares
1,053
0.1570
0.1110
0.1880
Leverage
1,152
0.1832
0.1618
0.1610
Market Cap
1,159
7.1889
7.1306
2.1761
ROA
1,158
0.0948
0.1091
0.1256
M/B Ratio
1,158
2.5493
1.9571
1.8939
HHI
1,159
0.1518
0.1164
0.1093
Panel B. Target Firms
Variable
Obs.
Mean
Median
Std.
Sales Increase
1,195
0.0749
0.0853
0.2795
Closely Held Shares
833
0.2259
0.1800
0.2000
Leverage
1,230
0.1797
0.1312
0.1893
Market Cap
1,234
4.9744
4.8397
1.7986
ROA
1,238
−0.0119
0.0591
0.2496
M/B Ratio
1,234
2.1653
1.5693
1.7859
HHI
1,242
0.1599
0.1225
0.1181
Panel C. Technology-Peer Candidates
Variable
Obs.
Mean
Median
Std.
Sales Increase
2,205,243
0.0424
0.0793
0.3826
Closely Held Shares
1,786,016
0.2316
0.1783
0.2076
Leverage
2,306,899
0.1921
0.1545
0.1916
Market Cap
2,307,661
5.2248
5.0360
2.1869
ROA
2,311,579
−0.0209
0.0650
0.2828
M/B Ratio
2,307,467
2.3739
1.6265
2.1607
HHI
2,225,983
0.1446
0.1045
0.1352
Panel D. Technology Peers
Variable
Obs.
Mean
Median
Std.
Sales Increase
47,234
0.0360
0.0908
0.4723
Closely Held Shares
38,694
0.2188
0.1667
0.2012
Leverage
49,993
0.1712
0.1111
0.1969
Market Cap
50,069
5.2888
5.0068
2.2265
ROA
50,130
−0.0935
0.0394
0.3474
M/B Ratio
50,065
2.8245
1.9345
2.4820
HHI
48,773
0.1112
0.0641
0.1077
Panel E. Deals
Variable
Obs.
Mean
Median
Std.
Deal Value
1,307
5.4273
5.2674
1.7979
Horizontal-Merger Dummy
1,307
0.4614
0
0.4987
Completed-Deal Dummy
1,307
0.8057
1
0.3958
Dormant Period
1,307
5.1032
4.8828
2.0677
34

Table OAT8: The Abnormal Returns on Technology Peers – Firm-Level Evidence
This table reports the cumulative average abnormal returns (CAARs) on technology peers during the deal announce-
ment of their respective targets. We describe the samples of acquisitions and peers in Table OAT5 of the Online
Appendix. In Panel A, the cumulative abnormal return (CAR) of each firm, measured over different windows (day
0 being the deal announcement day), is estimated using the market model with the value-weighted market index of
all CRSP firms. The standardized cross-sectional test (StdCsect Z) is an extension of the Patell test (Patell, 1976)
which takes into account information on the cross-sectional variance to correct for variance increases. Panel B reports
the CAARs on the technology peers, estimated using different models. The CAARs are measured over a five-day
window (−2, +2) centered on the acquisition announcement day. In particular, we estimate each firm’s CAR based
on the market model (as we do in Panel A), the market-adjusted returns (i.e. the actual stock returns minus the
market returns), the market model with GARCH (1,1) errors, the Scholes-Williams procedure (Scholes and Williams,
1977), and the Fama-French three-factor model. Reported in Panel B is also the number of positive vis-`a-vis negative
abnormal returns. The time-series (CDA) t-test is a time-series standard deviation test that uses the entire sample
for variance estimation; the generalized sign Z test is a nonparametric test that controls for the asymmetry of positive
and negative abnormal returns in the estimation period. Panel C reports the market-model CAARs on the technology
peers where target technology peers are defined based on alternative technology proximity measures (defined in Table
1). *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.
Panel A. Abnormal Returns Over the Acquisition Announcement Period (Market-Model-Adjusted)
Day
Number of Peers
CAAR
StdCsect Z
CAAR (−2, 0)
47121
0.15%
4.238***
CAAR (0, +2)
47123
0.23%
6.698***
CAAR (−2, +2)
47123
0.33%
7.284***
CAAR (−5, +5)
47124
0.55%
7.893***
Panel B. CAAR (−2, +2) Using Alternative Estimation Methods and Test Statistics
Estimation Method
Number of
Peers
CAAR
Positive :
Negative
ARs
StdCsect
Z
Time-
series
(CDA) t
Generalized
Sign Z
Market-Model-Adjusted Return
47123
0.33%
22962:24161
7.284***
3.667***
7.936***
Market-Adjusted Return
47123
0.55%
23532:23591
11.103***
6.022***
10.238***
Market Model with GARCH (1,1)
47123
0.49%
23370:23753
n/a
5.474***
8.987***
Scholes-Williams Abnormal Return
47123
0.32%
22990:24133
7.063***
3.497***
7.595***
Fama-French-Model-Adjusted Return
47123
0.23%
22757:24366
5.664***
3.321***
4.788***
Panel C. CAAR (−2, +2) Using Alternative Definitions of Target Technology Peers (Market-Model-Adjusted)
Technology Proximity Measures
Number of Peers
CAAR
StdCsect Z
Mahalanobis Distance
47222
0.39%
9.045***
Knowledge-Base Overlap Ratio
50580
0.22%
6.537***
35

Table OAT9: Abnormal Returns on the Portfolios of Technology-Peer Candidates across Technology
Proximity Deciles
This table reports the cumulative average abnormal return (CAAR) on the portfolios in each decile formed according
to the technology peer candidates’ proximity to their respective acquisition targets. The first (tenth) decile contains
the portfolios of peer candidates with the lowest (highest) values of the Technology Proximity Score, excluding zero
scores. We group the peer candidates into a portfolio if they have the same corresponding target and belong to the
same decile. The deciles are defined in each month according to the values of the Technology Proximity Score among
all the firms with valid data in that month. The cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) of each firm, which are over
the window (−2, +2), are estimated using the market model with the value-weighted market index of all CRSP firms.
The standardized cross-sectional test (StdCsect Z) is an extension of the Patell test (Patell, 1976) that takes into
account information on the cross-sectional variance to correct for variance increases. *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.
Technology Proximity
Score Group
Average Proximity
Score
Number of Portfolios
CAAR
StdCsect Z
1st Decile
0.002
1256
−0.02%
−0.117
2nd Decile
0.005
1250
0.09%
0.929
3rd Decile
0.011
1249
0.10%
0.713
4th Decile
0.02
1246
−0.01%
−0.081
5th Decile
0.034
1246
0.10%
2.129**
6th Decile
0.055
1247
0.13%
1.354*
7th Decile
0.091
1248
0.14%
2.101**
8th Decile
0.156
1244
0.15%
2.515***
9th Decile
0.298
1247
0.16%
2.791***
10th Decile
0.677
1255
0.27%
3.914***
36

Table OAT10: Placebo Tests Based on the CAAR Distribution of the Portfolios of Randomly-Selected
Peer Candidates
This table compares the cumulative average abnormal returns (CAARs) on different technology-peer portfolios to
the distribution of CAARs on non-peer portfolios containing the randomly-selected peer candidates that are not
technology peers of their corresponding acquisition targets. In the first column, we report the CAARs on different
equal-weighted portfolios of the actual technology peers. We form the technology-peer portfolios based on the peers’
relation to their corresponding target firms considering the following binary variables: Product Market Dummy,
Same SIC-3 Industry Dummy, Same FF-48 Industry Dummy, Same TNIC-3 Industry Dummy, Same State Dummy,
Customer Dummy, and Supplier Dummy. Detailed variable definitions can be found in Table 1. In each draw of non-
peer candidates (i.e., candidates that are not peers), we randomly select a number of non-peer candidates equal to the
number of peers used to calculate the peer CAARs, without replacement. We then allocate these non-peer candidates
to their respective targets to form non-peer portfolios and calculate their CAARs. For example, when a peer is not
in the corresponding target’s product market, neither is the randomly-selected non-peer candidate. We replicate this
process 1000 times to determine the empirical CAAR distribution. The cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) of each
firm, measured over the window (−2, +2), are estimated using the market model with the value-weighted market
index of all CRSP firms.
The
CAARs
on
Actual
Technology-Peer
Portfolios
The CAAR Distributions of Randomly-Selected Non-Peer Portfolios
Mean
Median
75th
90th
95th
99th
All Firms:
0.26%
0.05%
0.05%
0.08%
0.10%
0.12%
0.15%
Product Market Dummy=1:
0.46%
0.24%
0.24%
0.32%
0.40%
0.45%
0.55%
Product Market Dummy=0:
0.24%
0.05%
0.05%
0.08%
0.11%
0.13%
0.17%
Same SIC-3 Industry Dummy=1:
0.37%
0.20%
0.20%
0.27%
0.34%
0.37%
0.42%
Same SIC-3 Industry Dummy=0:
0.18%
0.04%
0.04%
0.08%
0.11%
0.13%
0.17%
Same FF-48 Industry Dummy=1:
0.33%
0.15%
0.15%
0.20%
0.25%
0.29%
0.33%
Same FF-48 Industry Dummy=0:
0.18%
0.04%
0.04%
0.08%
0.11%
0.13%
0.17%
Same TNIC-3 Industry Dummy=1:
0.37%
0.24%
0.24%
0.32%
0.40%
0.45%
0.55%
Same TNIC-3 Industry Dummy=0:
0.32%
0.07%
0.07%
0.12%
0.16%
0.19%
0.23%
Same State Dummy=1:
0.50%
0.09%
0.09%
0.19%
0.30%
0.37%
0.48%
Same State Dummy=0:
0.26%
0.05%
0.05%
0.08%
0.11%
0.12%
0.16%
Customer Dummy=1:
0.36%
0.11%
0.10%
0.26%
0.41%
0.50%
0.64%
Customer Dummy=0:
0.26%
0.05%
0.05%
0.08%
0.11%
0.12%
0.16%
Supplier Dummy=1:
0.14%
0.11%
0.10%
0.20%
0.29%
0.33%
0.46%
Supplier Dummy=0:
0.28%
0.04%
0.04%
0.07%
0.10%
0.12%
0.14%
37

Table OAT11: The Determinants of Abnormal Returns on Peer Candidates – Standard Errors Clustered
by Year
This table reports the estimates of the determinants of technology-peer candidates’ cumulative abnormal returns
(CARs). The sample includes all of the peer candidates with valid data. The dependent variable is a peer candidate’s
CAR. Moreover, the CAR on each firm, measured over the window (−2, +2), is estimated using the market model with
the value-weighted market index of all CRSP firms. We regress a peer candidate’s CAR on the Technology Proximity
Score or the Technology-Peer Dummy, controlling for the Product Proximity Score between a peer candidate and
its corresponding acquisition target, the spillover effects through geographical channels (Same State Dummy) and
supply chains (Supplier Dummy and Customer Dummy), and other firm characteristics (these variables are defined
in Table 1). The t-statistics, clustered by year, are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at
the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Technology Proximity Score
0.486***
0.435***
0.449***
(5.51)
(3.87)
(4.29)
Technology-Peer Dummy
0.281***
0.238***
0.237***
(5.36)
(3.37)
(3.34)
Sales Increase
0.000
−0.000
0.024
0.024
0.025
0.024
(0.00)
(−0.01)
(0.50)
(0.49)
(0.52)
(0.51)
Closely Held Shares
−0.035
−0.036
−0.045
−0.046
−0.065
−0.066
(−0.61)
(−0.63)
(−0.72)
(−0.73)
(−1.01)
(−1.03)
Leverage
−0.010
−0.012
0.013
0.013
0.049
0.049
(−0.07)
(−0.08)
(0.08)
(0.08)
(0.30)
(0.30)
Market Cap
−0.003
−0.002
−0.008
−0.006
−0.006
−0.005
(−0.12)
(−0.08)
(−0.30)
(−0.26)
(−0.23)
(−0.19)
ROA
−0.166
−0.171
−0.136
−0.140
−0.135
−0.139
(−0.97)
(−1.00)
(−0.89)
(−0.91)
(−0.85)
(−0.87)
M/B Ratio
−0.138***
−0.139***
−0.136***
−0.137***
−0.142***
−0.143***
(−8.24)
(−8.27)
(−7.48)
(−7.51)
(−8.02)
(−8.05)
HHI
−0.141
−0.147
−0.137
−0.139
−0.123
−0.126
(−0.82)
(−0.85)
(−0.84)
(−0.86)
(−0.80)
(−0.81)
Product Proximity Score
0.135*
0.164**
0.114**
0.143**
(1.94)
(2.41)
(2.06)
(2.70)
Same State Dummy
0.053
0.055
(0.92)
(0.95)
Supplier Dummy
0.100
0.102
(0.97)
(0.99)
Customer Dummy
−0.059
−0.056
(−0.87)
(−0.82)
Joint Significant Wald Test of Same State Dummy,
Supplier Dummy, and Customer Dummy (p-value)
0.473
0.475
Deal Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
R2
0.036
0.036
0.038
0.038
0.039
0.039
Observations
1543391
1543391
1334932
1334932
1188322
1188322
38

Table OAT12: The Determinants of Abnormal Returns on Peer Candidates – Standard Errors Clustered
by Patent Class
This table reports the estimates of the determinants of target technology-peer candidates’ cumulative abnormal
returns (CARs). The sample includes all target peer candidates with valid data. The dependent variable is a target
peer candidate’s CAR. The CAR on each firm, measured over the window (−2, +2), is estimated using the market
model with the value-weighted market index of all CRSP firms. We regress a target peer candidate’s CAR on the
Technology Proximity Score or the Technology-Peer Dummy, controlling for the Product Proximity Score and other
firm characteristics. All the variables are defined in Table 1. The t-statistics, clustered by deal and the primary
patent class, are in parentheses. A peer candidate’s primary patent class is the class in which the peer candidate
has received the highest cumulative value of patents over the previous 60 months. *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.
(1)
(2)
Technology Proximity Score
0.435***
(3.70)
Technology-Peer Dummy
0.238***
(3.50)
Product Proximity Score
0.135**
0.164**
(2.01)
(2.33)
Sales Increase
0.024
0.024
(0.60)
(0.58)
Closely Held Shares
−0.045
−0.046
(−0.92)
(−0.94)
Leverage
0.013
0.013
(0.17)
(0.16)
Market Cap
−0.008
−0.006
(−0.65)
(−0.56)
ROA
−0.136
−0.140
(−1.09)
(−1.12)
M/B Ratio
−0.136***
−0.137***
(−9.24)
(−9.25)
HHI
−0.137
−0.139
(−1.46)
(−1.48)
Deal Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
R2
0.038
0.038
Observations
1334932
1334932
39

Table OAT13: The Determinants of Abnormal Returns on Peer Candidates – Alternative Measures of
Product-Market Relations
This table reports the estimates of the determinants of technology-peer candidates’ cumulative abnormal returns
(CARs). The sample includes all the peer candidates with valid data. The dependent variable is a peer candidate’s
CAR. The CAR on each firm, measured over the window (−2, +2), is estimated using the market model with the
value-weighted market index of all CRSP firms. We regress a peer candidate’s CAR on the Technology Proximity
Score or the Technology-Peer Dummy, controlling for several alternative measures of the industry relations between
the peer candidates and the corresponding acquisition targets (Same SIC-3 Industry Dummy, Same TNIC-3 Industry
Dummy or Product Market Dummy), and other firm characteristics. All of the variables are defined in Table 1. The
t-statistics, clustered by deal, are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and
0.01 levels, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Technology Proximity Score
0.414***
0.444***
0.467***
(3.46)
(3.29)
(3.73)
Technology-Peer Dummy
0.234***
0.254***
0.260***
(3.29)
(2.92)
(3.44)
Same SIC-3 Industry Dummy
0.129*
0.153**
(1.83)
(2.12)
Same TNIC-3 Industry Dummy
0.105
0.137
(1.05)
(1.35)
Product Market Dummy
0.184**
0.210***
(2.42)
(2.68)
Sales Increase
−0.001
−0.001
0.043
0.043
0.024
0.024
(−0.02)
(−0.04)
(1.35)
(1.33)
(0.77)
(0.75)
Closely Held Shares
−0.034
−0.035
−0.052
−0.053
−0.046
−0.047
(−0.92)
(−0.94)
(−1.20)
(−1.22)
(−1.12)
(−1.15)
Leverage
−0.004
−0.005
0.001
0.001
0.012
0.011
(−0.07)
(−0.07)
(0.02)
(0.01)
(0.18)
(0.16)
Market Cap
−0.003
−0.002
−0.001
−0.000
−0.008
−0.006
(−0.26)
(−0.16)
(−0.09)
(−0.00)
(−0.69)
(−0.57)
ROA
−0.164*
−0.168*
−0.154
−0.157
−0.136
−0.140
(−1.75)
(−1.79)
(−1.54)
(−1.57)
(−1.40)
(−1.45)
M/B Ratio
−0.139***
−0.139***
−0.144***
−0.144***
−0.136***
−0.136***
(−10.41)
(−10.42)
(−9.57)
(−9.58)
(−9.84)
(−9.85)
HHI
−0.123
−0.125
−0.200**
−0.204**
−0.142*
−0.146*
(−1.57)
(−1.59)
(−2.09)
(−2.13)
(−1.68)
(−1.73)
Deal Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
R2
0.036
0.036
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.038
Observations
1543391
1543391
1201980
1201980
1334932
1334932
40

Table OAT14: The Determinants of Abnormal Returns on Peer Candidates – Excluding Acquirers’
Technology Peers
This table reports the estimates of the determinants of target technology-peer candidates’ cumulative abnormal
returns (CARs). The dependent variable is a target peer candidate’s CAR. The CAR on each firm, measured over
the window (−2, +2), is estimated using the market model with the value-weighted market index of all CRSP
firms. We regress a target peer candidate’s CAR on the Technology Proximity Score or the Technology-Peer Dummy,
controlling for the Product Proximity Score and other firm characteristics. All the variables are defined in the Table
1. The sample includes the target peer candidates with valid data except those that are technology peers of the
corresponding acquirers. The t-statistics, clustered by deal, are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote the statistical
significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.
(1)
(2)
Technology Proximity Score
0.395***
(3.01)
Technology-Peer Dummy
0.198**
(2.49)
Product Proximity Score
0.095
0.119
(1.30)
(1.60)
Sales Increase
0.020
0.020
(0.64)
(0.62)
Closely Held Shares
−0.043
−0.044
(−1.03)
(−1.05)
Leverage
−0.003
−0.004
(−0.05)
(−0.05)
Market Cap
−0.007
−0.006
(−0.67)
(−0.58)
ROA
−0.128
−0.131
(−1.30)
(−1.33)
M/B Ratio
−0.137***
−0.137***
(−9.73)
(−9.75)
HHI
−0.134
−0.136
(−1.59)
(−1.61)
Deal Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
R2
0.038
0.038
Observations
1307905
1307905
41

Table OAT15: Boundaries of the Main Finding
This table reports the cross-sectional variation of the effect of the Technology Proximity Score on the target firms’ technology-peer candidates’ value revision.
The dependent variable is a peer candidate’s CAR. The CAR on each firm, measured over the window (−2, +2), is estimated using the market model with the
value-weighted market index of all CRSP firms. We regress this variable on the Technology Proximity Score and several interaction terms built using the Technology
Proximity Score with dummy variables for specific sub-periods (Later Sample-Period Dummy and Dot-Com Bubble Dummy), merger waves (High Capital Liquidity
Dummy and Industry Merger-Wave Dummy), innovation waves (Industry (Patent-Class) Innovation-Wave Dummy), industry-level technological concentration
(Low Technology-Concentration Dummy: Target (Candidate)), product market concentration (Low Product-Concentration Dummy: Target (Candidate) ), and
specific industries (Pharmaceutical Industry Dummy: Target (Candidate) and IT Industry Dummy: Target (Candidate)). The control variables are the same as
those in Panel C of 4. All of the variables are defined in Table 1 and Table OAT1 of the Online Appendix. The t-statistics, clustered by deal, are in parentheses.
*, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Dummy Variable
Later Sample-Period
Dot-Com Bubble
High Capital Liquidity
Industry Merger-Wave
Industry
Innovation-Wave
Dummy Variable *
0.053
0.230
−0.169
0.483
0.588
Technology Proximity Score
(0.25)
(0.74)
(−0.70)
(1.54)
(1.46)
Technology Proximity Score
0.393***
0.365***
0.538***
0.349**
0.460**
(2.62)
(2.58)
(3.62)
(2.54)
(2.22)
Other Control Variables
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Deal Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
R2
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.038
Observations
1334932
1334932
1334932
1334932
848673
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Dummy Variable
Patent-Class
Innovation-wave
Low Technology-
Concentration: Target
Low Technology-
Concentration:
Candidate
Low
Product-Concentration:
Target
Low
Product-Concentration:
Candidate
Dummy Variable *
−0.105
0.037
0.223
−0.059
0.083
Technology Proximity Score
(−0.28)
(0.15)
(1.29)
(−0.23)
(0.53)
Technology Proximity Score
0.620***
0.412**
0.284**
0.473***
0.382***
(2.91)
(2.57)
(2.15)
(3.16)
(2.80)
Other Control Variables
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Deal Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
R2
0.039
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.038
Observations
904260
1334932
1334932
1292701
1334932
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
Dummy Variable
Pharmaceutical Industry
(Target)
Pharmaceutical Industry
(Candidate)
IT Industry (Target)
IT Industry (Candidate)
Dummy Variable *
0.497
−0.018
−0.190
−0.156
Technology Proximity Score
(0.69)
(−0.07)
(−0.75)
(−0.69)
Technology Proximity Score
0.400***
0.432***
0.483***
0.471***
(3.28)
(3.59)
(3.19)
(3.29)
Other Control Variables
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Deal Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
R2
0.038
0.038
0.038
0.038
Observations
1334932
1334932
1334932
1334932
42

Table OAT16: The Determinants of a Firm’s Likelihood of Being an Acquisition Target—Previous-Acquisition Proximity Score
This table reports the linear probability model estimates of the determinants of the likelihood a firm being an acquisition target in a given year. The dependent
variable is a binary variable equal to one when a firm is an acquisition target in a year (year t) and zero otherwise. The sample comprises all the firm-years
(excluding firms from the financial and utilities sectors) in the Compustat-CRSP merged database and all the acquisitions from the Thomson SDC Platinum
M&A database over the 1984–2010 period. Firm-years that do not obtain any patents in the five years before year t are excluded because, for them, neither the
technology space nor the technology peers can be identified. The variable Previous-Acquisition Proximity Score is the value-weighted average of the technology
proximity scores measured between the firm in question and all the acquisition targets in the previous year (year t–1). All the independent variables are measured
in the previous year (year t–1) and defined in Table 1 and Table OAT1 of the Online Appendix. The industry fixed effects are based on the Fama-French 48
industry definitions. t-statistics, clustered by year, are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Previous-Acquisition Proximity Score
0.069***
0.071***
0.078***
0.082**
0.084**
0.082**
(2.60)
(2.66)
(2.65)
(2.50)
(2.54)
(2.28)
M/B Ratio
−0.006***
−0.006***
−0.007***
−0.006***
−0.006***
−0.007***
(−8.44)
(−8.43)
(−8.93)
(−7.99)
(−7.99)
(−8.47)
PPE
−0.029***
−0.029***
−0.031***
−0.028***
−0.027***
−0.030***
(−3.06)
(−3.01)
(−2.91)
(−2.84)
(−2.78)
(−2.77)
Cash Ratio
−0.001
−0.001
0.001
−0.001
−0.002
−0.000
(−0.64)
(−0.72)
(0.42)
(−1.26)
(−1.37)
(−0.25)
Blockholder Dummy
0.017***
0.018***
0.014***
0.018***
0.018***
0.014***
(6.67)
(6.77)
(4.73)
(6.76)
(6.88)
(4.74)
Market Cap
−0.004***
−0.004***
−0.003***
−0.004***
−0.004***
−0.003***
(−5.25)
(−5.20)
(−3.41)
(−5.30)
(−5.29)
(−3.43)
Leverage
0.027***
0.027***
0.033***
0.028***
0.029***
0.034***
(3.39)
(3.42)
(3.81)
(3.54)
(3.57)
(3.92)
ROA
−0.015**
−0.013**
−0.017**
−0.013**
−0.011*
−0.015**
(−2.27)
(−2.03)
(−2.48)
(−1.96)
(−1.67)
(−2.08)
Age
−0.012**
−0.014**
(−2.07)
(−2.53)
Age Squared
0.002*
0.003**
(1.92)
(2.34)
Hostile Takeover Index
0.008
0.003
(0.48)
(0.19)
Industry Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Industry-Year Fixed Effects
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
R2
0.015
0.015
0.015
0.040
0.040
0.042
Observations
40190
40190
35509
40190
40190
35509
43

Table OAT17: Acquisition Vulnerability Estimation
This table reports the logistic regression estimates of the likelihood of a firm being an acquisition target in a year
(year t), used in Table 6 as the variable of interest. The sample comprises all the firm-years (excluding firms from the
financial and utilities sectors) in the Compustat-CRSP merged database over the 1984–2010 period. Firm-years that
do not have any patents granted in the five years before year t are excluded because, for them, neither the technology
space nor the technology peers can be identified. The dependent variable is a binary variable equal to one when a
firm is an acquisition target in year t and zero otherwise. All the independent variables are measured in the year t–1
and defined in Table 1 and Table OAT1 of the Online Appendix. t-statistics, clustered by year, are in parentheses.
*, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
Constant
−2.302***
−1.868***
−2.313***
(−27.84)
(−13.90)
(−26.21)
M/B Ratio
−0.108***
−0.122***
−0.130***
(−6.21)
(−6.77)
(−6.77)
PPE
−0.589***
−0.663***
−0.621***
(−3.93)
(−4.38)
(−3.83)
Cash Ratio
0.007
0.011
0.030
(0.41)
(0.59)
(1.58)
Blockholder Dummy
0.298***
0.318***
0.238***
(6.43)
(6.83)
(4.82)
Market Cap
−0.066***
−0.053***
−0.030**
(−5.62)
(−4.12)
(−2.20)
Leverage
0.469***
0.508***
0.552***
(3.90)
(4.20)
(4.44)
ROA
−0.268***
−0.308***
−0.381***
(−2.67)
(−3.06)
(−3.70)
Age
−0.114
(−1.26)
Age Squared
0.013
(0.68)
Capital Liquidity
−0.186***
(−5.36)
Hostile Takeover Index
−0.156
(−0.56)
Pseudo R2
0.013
0.015
0.011
Observations
41562
41562
36755
44

Table OAT18: Abnormal Returns on Target Firms and their Technology Peers for Withdrawn Deals
This table reports the cumulative average abnormal returns (CAARs) on the targets and their technology peers. In Panel A, we divide the deals in our sample into
two groups based on whether a deal is completed or withdrawn, and calculate the CAARs on target firms and on the portfolios of their technology peers during the
deal announcement period. The CAARs are measured over a five-day window (−2, +2) centered on the acquisition announcement day. The cumulative abnormal
return (CAR) of each firm is estimated using the market model with the value-weighted market index of all CRSP firms. The standardized cross-sectional test
(StdCsect Z) is an extension of the Patell test (Patell, 1976) which takes into account information on the cross-sectional variance to correct for variance increases.
Panel B and Panel C report the cumulative average abnormal returns (CAARs) on the targets of withdrawn deals for various time windows. The CAR on each
firm is estimated using the Fama-French three-factor model based on monthly data. We estimate the model parameters using the data from 72 to 13 months before
the month in which the deal is announced (month zero), requiring valid data for at least six months over the estimation window. Panel B reports the CAARs
for several windows relative to month zero, the announcement month. For example, (−1, +24) means the CAR on each firm is measured over the window from
one month before to 24 months after the month of the announcement. In Panel C, we further clean up the sample of targets that are not subsequently acquired,
by removing the deals withdrawn because the price is considered too high by the acquirer or there has been a reported deterioration in the fundamentals of the
target firm and/or business environment. We also drop the deals where the reason for withdrawal is unknown. We report the CAARs of this cleaned sample for
the same time windows as in Panel B. The time-series (CDA) t-test is a time-series standard deviation test that uses the entire sample for variance estimation.
*, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.
Panel A. CAARs over the Acquisition Announcement Period
Completed Deals
Withdrawn Deals
Event Time
Period (in days)
N
CAAR
StdCsect Z
N
CAAR
StdCsect Z
Target Firms
(−2,+2)
1001
27.01%
29.895***
219
21.15%
11.925***
Portfolios of Technology-Peers
(−2,+2)
1010
0.25%
3.569***
222
0.28%
1.552*
Panel B. The Target CAARs of Withdrawn Deals
Event Time Period
Total Sample
Subsequently Acquired
Not Subsequently Acquired
(in Months)
N
CAAR
Time-Series t
N
CAAR
Time-Series t
N
CAAR
Time-Series t
(−1, 0)
211
27.73%
18.944***
105
31.55%
13.656***
106
23.94%
12.565***
(−1, +1)
211
28.42%
15.852***
105
35.01%
12.373***
106
21.88%
9.379***
(−1, +6)
211
21.53%
7.356***
105
34.59%
7.486***
106
8.60%
2.257**
(−1, +12)
211
21.60%
5.578***
105
39.09%
6.396***
106
4.27%
0.847
(−1, +24)
211
20.73%
3.927***
105
40.83%
4.901***
106
0.81%
0.118
(−1, +48)
211
16.43%
2.245**
105
42.82%
3.707***
106
−9.71%
−1.019
(+1, +6)
204
−6.41%
−2.527***
100
3.19%
0.798
104
−15.63%
−4.738***
(+1, +12)
204
−6.34%
−1.767**
100
7.92%
1.400*
104
−20.05%
−4.296***
(+1, +24)
204
−7.24%
−1.428*
100
9.74%
1.217
104
−23.57%
−3.572***
(+1, +48)
204
−11.68%
−1.629*
100
11.83%
1.045
104
−34.29%
−3.674***
45

Panel C. The Target CAARs of Deals Withdrawn due to Non-Price Reasons (for Targets not Subsequently Acquired)
Event Time Period (in Months)
N
CAAR
Time-Series t
(−1, 0)
65
25.77%
11.162***
(−1, +1)
65
21.81%
7.715***
(−1, +6)
65
18.70%
4.050***
(−1, +12)
65
14.36%
2.351***
(−1, +24)
65
6.35%
0.763
(−1, +48)
65
−16.77%
−1.453*
(+1, +6)
63
−7.30%
−1.825**
(+1, +12)
63
−11.77%
−2.081**
(+1, +24)
63
−20.03%
−2.505***
(+1, +48)
63
−43.89%
−3.881***
46

Table OAT19: Abnormal Returns on Target Firms for Withdrawn Deals – Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns (BHAR)
This table reports the average buy-and-hold abnormal returns (ABHARs) on the targets of withdrawn deals for various time windows. The BHAR on each firm is
estimated using the DGTW benchmarks (see Daniel et al., 1997; Wermers, 2003) based on monthly data. Panel A reports the BHARs on target firms for several
windows relative to the month of the acquisition announcement (month zero). For example, (−1, +24) means the ABHAR on each firm is measured over the
window from one month before to 24 months after month zero. A target is classified as subsequently acquired if it is acquired within the five years after month
zero. Otherwise, a target is deemed to have not been subsequently acquired. In Panel B, we further clean up the sample of targets of withdrawn deals that are
not subsequently acquired, by removing the deals withdrawn because the price is considered too high by the acquirer or there has been a reported deterioration in
the fundamentals of the target firm and/or business environment. We also drop the deals where the reason for withdrawal is unknown. We report the ABHARs
of this cleaned sample for the same time windows. The time-series (CDA) t-test is a time-series standard deviation test that uses the entire sample for variance
estimation. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.
Panel A. Target ABHARs of Withdrawn Deals
Event Time Period
Total Sample
Subsequently Acquired
Not Subsequently Acquired
(in Months)
N
ABHAR
Time-Series t
N
ABHAR
Time-Series t
N
ABHAR
Time-Series t
(−1, 0)
204
26.48%
9.340***
98
29.58%
7.250***
106
23.61%
5.993***
(−1,1)
204
27.41%
8.130***
98
35.25%
6.840***
106
20.15%
4.679***
(−1,6)
204
23.04%
4.991***
98
33.76%
5.731***
106
13.12%
1.900*
(−1,12)
204
22.20%
4.012***
98
35.94%
5.541***
106
9.50%
1.099
(−1,24)
204
27.02%
3.452***
98
40.57%
5.913***
106
14.49%
1.067
(−1,48)
204
24.47%
1.826*
98
37.24%
5.133***
106
12.67%
0.508
(1,6)
196
−4.87%
−1.850*
93
0.71%
0.212
103
−9.91%
−2.522**
(1,12)
196
−7.18%
−2.231**
93
1.65%
0.427
103
−15.14%
−3.078***
(1,24)
196
−5.76%
−1.201
93
4.54%
1.08
103
−15.06%
−1.834*
(1,48)
196
−15.41%
−2.550**
93
1.47%
0.306
103
−30.64%
−2.932***
Panel B. Target ABHARs of the Deals Withdrawn due to Non-Price Reasons (for Targets not Subsequently Acquired)
Event Time Period (in Months)
N
ABHAR
Time-Series t
(−1, 0)
65
28.20%
5.891***
(−1,1)
65
23.85%
6.021***
(−1,6)
65
27.88%
2.892***
(−1,12)
65
24.62%
2.011**
(−1,24)
65
24.79%
1.244
(−1,48)
65
22.24%
0.595
(1,6)
62
−3.23%
−0.771
(1,12)
62
−8.17%
−1.496
(1,24)
62
−13.64%
−1.335
(1,48)
62
−31.40%
−2.415**
47

Table OAT20: The Abnormal Returns on Technology Peers and Acquisition Intensity
This table reports the regression estimates of how a target’s technology peer’s cumulative abnormal return (CAR) at
the time of the acquisition announcement varies according to the change in acquisition intensity targeted at a firm’s
technology peers. The sample contains the technology peers described in columns (7) and (8) of Panel A Table OAT5
of the Online Appendix with valid data. The dependent variable (the CAR on each firm), measured over the window
(−2, +2), is estimated using the market model with the value-weighted market index of all CRSP firms. The variable
Declining Acquisition-Intensity Dummy equals one if the number of a target firm’s technology peers acquired in the
12 months before the acquisition announcement month is not lower than the number of the target firm’s technology
peers acquired in the 12 months following this month and zero otherwise. The other independent variables are defined
in Table 1 and Table OAT1 of the Online Appendix. The industry fixed effects are based on the Fama-French 48
industry definitions. t-statistics, clustered by deal, are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance
at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Declining Acquisition-Intensity Dummy
−0.446***
−0.353**
−0.354*
−0.368**
(−2.69)
(−2.33)
(−1.95)
(−2.01)
Product Proximity Score
0.230
0.231
(1.18)
(1.19)
Sales Increase
0.150
0.150
(1.08)
(1.08)
Closely Held Shares
−0.355
−0.360
(−1.33)
(−1.35)
Leverage
−0.130
−0.127
(−0.43)
(−0.42)
Market Cap
−0.051
−0.051
(−1.55)
(−1.56)
ROA
−0.226
−0.229
(−0.73)
(−0.74)
M/B Ratio
−0.111***
−0.111***
(−3.61)
(−3.61)
HHI
0.222
0.229
(0.42)
(0.43)
Deal Value
0.014
(0.23)
Horizontal-Merger Dummy
−0.027
(−0.15)
Completed-Deal Dummy
0.429**
(1.96)
Dormant Period
0.026
(0.52)
Constant
0.432***
(3.68)
Industry Fixed Effects
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year Fixed Effects
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
R2
0.001
0.005
0.006
0.007
Observations
47135
47135
29491
29491
48

Table OAT21: The Future Acquirers of Technology Peers
This table reports the percentiles, the mean, and the standard deviation of the empirical distributions of the coefficients on the determinants of the likelihood
that a firm acquires a technology peer in the year following the acquisition, estimated using 1,000 iterations. The acquirer sample is constructed based on the
peers that receive an actual bid in the year following an acquisition. In each iteration, the coefficients are obtained by estimating a conditional logit regression
using a dataset that includes both the actual acquirers of the technology peers and, for each peer, a control group of five randomly-chosen pseudo acquirers. The
dependent variable in the conditional logit specification is one for the actual future acquirers and zero for the pseudo acquirers. Deal fixed effects are included
in all estimations. The variables Technology Proximity Score, Technology-Peer Dummy, Product Proximity Score, Product Market Dummy, Same State Dummy,
Customer Dummy, and Supplier Dummy are constructed using information on the relations between each technology peer and the respective acquirers. All the
variables are defined in Table 1 and Table OAT1 of the Online Appendix.
Panel A. The Future Acquirers of Technology Peers – Technology Proximity Score
1%
5%
10%
50%
90%
95%
99%
mean
Std.
Technology Proximity Score
3.502
3.754
3.913
4.477
5.145
5.420
5.701
4.513
0.490
Product Proximity Score
2.677
2.829
2.898
3.167
3.513
3.606
3.827
3.192
0.243
Same State Dummy
0.107
0.241
0.316
0.576
0.829
0.891
1.015
0.575
0.197
Customer Dummy
−0.929
−0.627
−0.466
0.008
0.451
0.568
0.902
−0.005
0.372
Supplier Dummy
−0.143
0.061
0.156
0.488
0.821
0.927
1.153
0.487
0.266
Sales Increase
−0.243
−0.095
−0.015
0.297
0.634
0.741
0.968
0.312
0.259
M/B Ratio
−0.166
−0.137
−0.124
−0.073
−0.024
−0.009
0.020
−0.074
0.039
ROA
−0.691
−0.400
−0.256
0.276
0.878
1.025
1.304
0.288
0.441
Leverage
−2.006
−1.735
−1.584
−1.034
−0.525
−0.347
−0.112
−1.042
0.418
R&D
−0.146
−0.096
−0.070
−0.005
0.053
0.072
0.099
−0.007
0.050
Market Cap
0.439
0.471
0.479
0.533
0.586
0.597
0.628
0.533
0.040
Relative Patent Value
−0.205
−0.016
0.097
0.497
0.931
1.069
1.284
0.507
0.328
Pseudo R2
0.663
0.673
0.679
0.698
0.719
0.724
0.737
0.698
0.016
Observations
2724
2724
2724
2724
2724
2724
2724
2724
0
49

Panel B. The Future Acquirers of Technology Peers – Technology-Peer Dummy
1%
5%
10%
50%
90%
95%
99%
Mean
Std.
Technology-Peer Dummy
1.715
1.864
1.966
2.294
2.660
2.768
3.067
2.304
0.280
Product Proximity Score
2.888
3.039
3.097
3.373
3.699
3.792
4.006
3.387
0.230
Same State Dummy
0.148
0.281
0.352
0.597
0.830
0.893
0.987
0.593
0.184
Customer Dummy
−0.864
−0.632
−0.498
−0.034
0.376
0.510
0.782
−0.044
0.349
Supplier Dummy
−0.019
0.149
0.230
0.543
0.856
0.964
1.130
0.544
0.247
Sales Increase
−0.174
−0.060
0.014
0.303
0.589
0.673
0.831
0.303
0.221
M/B Ratio
−0.160
−0.133
−0.120
−0.077
−0.030
−0.015
0.011
−0.076
0.036
ROA
−0.582
−0.393
−0.267
0.218
0.734
0.886
1.118
0.224
0.388
Leverage
−1.947
−1.731
−1.581
−1.097
−0.613
−0.488
−0.215
−1.098
0.376
R&D
−0.121
−0.085
−0.065
−0.009
0.043
0.057
0.079
−0.011
0.042
Market Cap
0.461
0.486
0.497
0.545
0.592
0.606
0.634
0.545
0.037
Relative Patent Value
0.060
0.233
0.328
0.710
1.114
1.219
1.464
0.716
0.305
Pseudo R2
0.635
0.643
0.649
0.668
0.687
0.693
0.705
0.668
0.015
Observations
2724
2724
2724
2724
2724
2724
2724
2724
0
50

Panel C. The Future Acquirers of Technology Peers – Technology Proximity Score and Interactions Terms
1%
5%
10%
50%
90%
95%
99%
mean
Std.
Technology Proximity Score * Product Market Dummy
−6.081
−5.302
−4.928
−3.884
−2.717
−2.385
−1.580
−3.855
0.889
Technology Proximity Score * Same State Dummy
−2.307
−1.741
−1.412
−0.225
1.262
1.691
3.037
−0.125
1.088
Technology Proximity Score * Customer Dummy
−5.154
−4.319
−3.886
−2.055
0.084
0.737
2.286
−1.970
1.583
Technology Proximity Score * Supplier Dummy
−3.137
−2.237
−1.678
0.247
2.438
3.032
4.025
0.317
1.621
Technology Proximity Score
5.256
5.622
5.798
6.514
7.338
7.639
8.276
6.550
0.618
Product Market Dummy
2.168
2.346
2.439
2.788
3.194
3.317
3.499
2.806
0.294
Same State Dummy
0.249
0.392
0.450
0.692
0.930
0.998
1.116
0.691
0.184
Customer Dummy
0.017
0.251
0.366
0.755
1.166
1.295
1.494
0.764
0.321
Supplier Dummy
0.138
0.288
0.386
0.737
1.071
1.184
1.382
0.734
0.270
Sales Increase
−0.223
−0.094
−0.006
0.242
0.511
0.586
0.788
0.243
0.207
M/B Ratio
−0.146
−0.122
−0.108
−0.064
−0.022
−0.008
0.010
−0.065
0.034
ROA
−0.759
−0.530
−0.401
0.055
0.548
0.687
0.925
0.074
0.366
Leverage
−2.173
−1.942
−1.821
−1.355
−0.879
−0.787
−0.522
−1.351
0.361
R&D
−0.089
−0.062
−0.047
0.001
0.048
0.060
0.060
0.000
0.038
Market Cap
0.456
0.481
0.491
0.537
0.586
0.599
0.624
0.538
0.037
Relative Patent Value
−0.261
−0.098
−0.004
0.343
0.748
0.869
1.006
0.358
0.289
Pseudo R2
0.608
0.615
0.621
0.639
0.659
0.666
0.673
0.640
0.015
Observations
2724
2724
2724
2724
2724
2724
2724
2724
0
51

Panel D. The Future Acquirers of Technology Peers – Technology-Peer Dummy and Interactions Terms
1%
5%
10%
50%
90%
95%
99%
Mean
Std.
Technology-Peer Dummy * Product Market Dummy
−3.038
−2.788
−2.593
−1.978
−1.300
−1.102
−0.602
−1.956
0.513
Technology-Peer Dummy * Same State Dummy
−1.253
−0.996
−0.844
−0.192
0.533
0.763
1.390
−0.154
0.689
Technology-Peer Dummy * Customer Dummy
−2.615
−1.930
−1.697
−0.498
0.863
1.267
2.039
−0.445
1.000
Technology-Peer Dummy * Supplier Dummy
−2.160
−1.809
−1.502
−0.438
0.899
1.263
2.012
−0.362
0.929
Technology-Peer Dummy
2.773
2.947
3.021
3.359
3.748
3.879
4.090
3.373
0.287
Product Market Dummy
2.130
2.298
2.382
2.676
3.037
3.133
3.331
2.689
0.254
Same State Dummy
0.312
0.426
0.483
0.682
0.885
0.927
1.039
0.683
0.155
Customer Dummy
−0.068
0.141
0.245
0.607
0.973
1.098
1.304
0.611
0.292
Supplier Dummy
0.340
0.500
0.566
0.853
1.146
1.248
1.409
0.854
0.225
Sales Increase
−0.156
−0.052
0.016
0.220
0.433
0.487
0.606
0.223
0.163
M/B Ratio
−0.133
−0.112
−0.103
−0.065
−0.024
−0.015
0.005
−0.065
0.030
ROA
−0.702
−0.502
−0.400
−0.019
0.397
0.496
0.666
−0.015
0.301
Leverage
−2.134
−1.877
−1.794
−1.400
−0.989
−0.881
−0.722
−1.399
0.308
R&D
−0.077
−0.056
−0.045
−0.008
0.030
0.042
0.064
−0.007
0.030
Market Cap
0.490
0.507
0.518
0.556
0.602
0.613
0.636
0.559
0.033
Relative Patent Value
0.058
0.227
0.315
0.616
0.984
1.095
1.219
0.633
0.261
Pseudo R2
0.549
0.557
0.562
0.579
0.598
0.602
0.613
0.579
0.014
Observations
2724
2724
2724
2724
2724
2724
2724
2724
0
52

Table OAT22: The Previous Acquisition of Technology Peers and Firms’ R&D Investment—Previous-
Acquisition Proximity Score
This table reports the estimates of the impact of acquisition activities on the R&D investments of targets’ technology
peers. The dependent variable is a firm’s R&D expenditure divided by sales in a year (year t). The sample comprises
all the firm-years (excluding firms from the financial and utilities sectors) in the Compustat-CRSP merged database
and all the acquisitions from the Thomson SDC Platinum M&A database over the 1984-2010 period. Firm-years in
which no patents were obtained in the past five years are excluded because, for them, neither the technology space
nor the technology peers can be identified. The variable Previous-Acquisition Proximity Score is the value-weighted
average of the technology proximity scores between the firm and all the acquisition targets in the previous year. All
the independent variables are measured in the previous year and defined in Table 1 and Table OAT1 of the Online
Appendix. The industry fixed effects are based on the Fama-French 48 industry definitions. t-statistics, clustered by
firm, are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Previous-Acquisition Proximity Score
0.337
1.447***
2.589***
0.245
1.347***
2.445***
(1.60)
(3.43)
(4.26)
(1.32)
(3.53)
(4.34)
Previous-Acquisition Proximity Score *
−2.021***
−2.011***
Large-Size Dummy
(−4.58)
(−4.61)
Previous-Acquisition Proximity Score *
−0.378***
−0.371***
Market Cap
(−5.12)
(−5.02)
Large-Size Dummy
−0.005
−0.004
(−0.35)
(−0.25)
Market Cap
−0.018***
−0.003
−0.017***
−0.003
(−5.23)
(−1.02)
(−4.99)
(−0.77)
Lagged R&D
0.660***
0.658***
0.658***
0.656***
0.654***
0.655***
(30.62)
(30.55)
(30.51)
(30.10)
(30.04)
(29.99)
Vdshock
−0.019
−0.027
−0.027
−0.077
−0.064
−0.063
(−0.14)
(−0.20)
(−0.20)
(−0.62)
(−0.51)
(−0.50)
Age
−0.019***
−0.018***
−0.016**
−0.020***
−0.020***
−0.018**
(−2.66)
(−2.58)
(−2.30)
(−2.81)
(−2.73)
(−2.47)
PPE
−0.148***
−0.157***
−0.157***
−0.144***
−0.153***
−0.154***
(−3.26)
(−3.46)
(−3.44)
(−3.10)
(−3.31)
(−3.30)
Cash Ratio
0.035***
0.033***
0.034***
0.036***
0.034***
0.035***
(8.88)
(8.44)
(8.52)
(8.89)
(8.42)
(8.51)
Net Working Capital
−0.093*
−0.093*
−0.093*
−0.094*
−0.094*
−0.094*
(−1.69)
(−1.69)
(−1.70)
(−1.67)
(−1.68)
(−1.68)
P/E Ratio
−0.000***
−0.000***
−0.000***
−0.000***
−0.000***
−0.000***
(−5.16)
(−5.14)
(−4.99)
(−5.13)
(−5.07)
(−4.95)
Dividend-Payment Dummy
−0.004
−0.013
−0.006
−0.003
−0.011
−0.005
(−0.44)
(−1.43)
(−0.71)
(−0.34)
(−1.19)
(−0.57)
Institutional Ownership
−0.071***
−0.072***
−0.082***
−0.072***
−0.073***
−0.083***
(−3.53)
(−3.61)
(−4.05)
(−3.50)
(−3.55)
(−4.00)
Industry Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Industry-Year Fixed Effects
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
R2
0.633
0.634
0.634
0.637
0.637
0.637
Observations
36667
36667
36667
36618
36618
36618
53