TITLE: The Implications of Credit Risk Modeling for Banks’ Loan Loss Provisions and Loan-Origination Procyclicality
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2018
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2018.3041
---

TSpace Research Repository 
 
tspace.library.utoronto.ca 
 
 
The Implications of Credit Risk Modeling for 
Banks’ Loan Loss Provisions and Loan-
Origination Procyclicality 
 
Gauri Bhat, Stephen G. Ryan & Dushyantkumar Vyas 
 
 
Version Accepted Manuscript 
 
Citation 
(published version) 
Bhat, G., Ryan, S. G., & Vyas, D. (2019). The implications of credit risk 
modeling for banks’ loan loss provisions and loan-origination 
procyclicality. Management Science, 65(5), 2116-2141. 
 
DOI https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2018.3041 
 
Publisher’s Statement This is an accepted manuscript of an article published by INFORMS in 
Management Science. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to cite TSpace items 
 
Always cite the published version, so the author(s) will receive recognition through services that track 
citation counts, e.g. Scopus. If you need to cite the page number of the author manuscript from TSpace 
because you cannot access the published version, then cite the TSpace version in addition to the published 
version using the permanent URI (handle) found on the record page. 
 
This article was made openly accessible by U of T Faculty. 
Please tell us how this access benefits you. Your story matters. 
 

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Implications of Credit Risk Modeling for Banks’ 
Loan Loss Provisions and Loan-Origination Procyclicality 
 
 
Gauri Bhat 
 Cox School of Business 
Southern Methodist University 
6212 Bishop Blvd. 
Dallas, TX 75275-0333 
gbhat@smu.edu 
 
Stephen G. Ryan* 
Leonard N. Stern School of Business 
New York University 
44 West 4th Street, Suite 10-73 
New York, NY 10012-1118 
sryan@stern.nyu.edu 
 
Dushyantkumar Vyas 
UTM Dept. of Management & Rotman School of Management 
University of Toronto 
105 St. George Street 
Toronto, ON M5S1L2 
dushyant.vyas@utoronto.ca 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
* Corresponding author. We are grateful for useful comments from Mary Barth, the anonymous 
associate editor and three reviewers, Anne Beatty, Bill Greene, Christian Leuz, Jim Wahlen, Joel 
Waldfogel, Helen Zhang, and participants of research seminars and conferences at the AAA 
Midwestern Region, University of British Columbia, University of Chicago, Columbia 
University, University of Iowa, University of Miami, University of Minnesota, New York 
Federal Reserve Bank, New York University, Saint Louis University, Singapore Management 
University, Temple University, the University of Toronto, Washington University in St. Louis, 
and Yale University. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409 
The Implications of Credit Risk Modeling for Banks’ 
Loan Loss Provisions and Loan-Origination Procyclicality 
 
 
Abstract. Economic policymakers express concern that procyclical lending by banks imperils 
financial stability. Prior research finds that banks that record timelier loan loss provisions 
originate more loans during downturns, consistent with loan-loss-provision timeliness mitigating 
loan-origination procyclicality. Motivated by this concern and research, we examine whether 
banks’ credit risk modeling disciplines both their loan loss provisions and loan origination. We 
identify two forms of credit risk modeling from banks’ financial report disclosures: statistical 
modeling of the drivers of past loan losses and stress testing of future loan losses to adverse 
scenarios. We show that banks’ credit-risk-modeling disclosures are positively associated with 
their loan-loss-provision timeliness, with the ability of their provisions to predict future loan 
charge-offs, and with their loan origination during downturns. We further show that these 
associations vary in predictable ways across the two forms of credit risk modeling when we 
distinguish homogeneous from heterogeneous loans and stable periods from downturns. 
 
Keywords: credit risk modeling, loan loss provisions, timeliness, procyclicality, financial crisis, 
disclosure. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409 
1 
 
1. Introduction 
Banks primarily assume credit risk by originating and holding loans. Banks engage in credit risk 
modeling to understand and manage loan credit risks, as well as to satisfy the requirements of 
FAS 5’s incurred loss model (including related SEC and bank regulatory guidance) for the 
accrual of credit losses on loans.1 In this paper, we argue that credit risk modeling increases the 
timeliness and range of banks’ information about loan losses, thereby disciplining their loan loss 
provisions and loan originations. We identify two distinct but non-mutually exclusive and 
complementary forms of credit risk modeling from disclosures in banks’ 1995–2009 Form 10-K 
filings: statistical modeling of the drivers of past loan losses (statistical modeling) and stress 
testing of future loan losses to severely adverse scenarios (stress testing). 
We empirically examine the associations of banks’ credit-risk-modeling disclosures with 
their loan-loss-provision timeliness, the ability of their loan loss provisions to predict future net 
loan charge-offs, and their loan-origination procyclicality. Two related conjectures motivate 
these analyses. First, policymakers often claim that banks delay loan loss provisions during 
stable periods and thus must record larger provisions in downturns, reducing their regulatory 
capital adequacy and causing them to cut back on loan originations (Dugan 2009, Curry 2013).2 
                                                           
1 FAS 5, Accounting for Contingencies, specifies loss accrual only for loss contingencies that are incurred, probable 
of realization, and capable of reasonable estimation (Ryan 2011, Section 3.1.2). SAB 102, Selected Loan Loss 
Allowance Methodology and Documentation Issues, requires banks to estimate loan loss allowances under FAS 5 
using systematic and consistently applied processes (Beck and Narayanamoorthy 2013). Bank regulators provide 
extensive guidance regarding the application of FAS 5 for homogeneous loan types (Ryan 2011, Section 3.1.3). We 
refer to FAS 5, SAB 102, and bank regulatory guidance collectively as FAS 5 or the incurred loss model. 
2 Dugan (2009) states that “in the booming part of the economic cycle in the earlier part of this decade, the ratio of 
loan loss reserves to total loans went down, not up – even though there was broad recognition that the cycle would 
soon have to turn negative. Conversely, when the turn finally did come, and the tidal wave of losses began hitting 
shore, banks have had to recognize losses through a sudden series of increased provisions to the loan loss reserve, 
which in turn has more than offset earnings and eaten into precious capital. Stated differently, rather than being 
counter-cyclical, loan loss provisioning has become decidedly pro-cyclical, magnifying the impact of the downturn.” 
To remedy this alleged problem, Dugan asks “whether there ought to be changes made to the incurred loss model.” 
Similarly, Curry (2013) states that the “financial crisis revealed a distinct flaw in the incurred loss model. By 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
2 
 
We conjecture that limitations of banks’ credit risk modeling, not just the conditions that must be 
met to accrue for loan losses under FAS 5, may delay loan loss provisions. If so, policies that 
improve banks’ credit risk modeling should mitigate policymakers’ concern. Second, we 
conjecture that variation in the quality of credit risk modeling across banks may help explain 
Beatty and Liao’s (2011) finding that banks that record timelier loan loss provisions issue more 
capital during both stable periods and downturns, allowing them to originate more loans during 
downturns (Ryan 2017). That is, better credit risk modeling may improve a bank’s understanding 
of the credit risks of its loans, and this understanding may yield both timelier loan loss provisions 
and less procyclical loan originations. 
Banks’ credit-risk-modeling disclosures, particularly about stress testing, are limited in 
extent and frequency. These limitations make it difficult to rank disclosures based on quality and 
to distinguish banks’ usage of credit risk modeling from their disclosure of that usage. We cope 
with these limitations in three ways. First, we assume that non-disclosure of a particular form of 
credit risk modeling implies only that a bank uses a less extensive or sophisticated approach, not 
that it does not use the form. Second, we conduct our primary empirical analyses using an 
ordinal measure of credit-risk-modeling disclosures that equals the sum of indicator variables for 
bank-year disclosures of statistical modeling and stress testing. Third, we conduct these analyses 
using two distinct two-stage approaches that attempt to distinguish banks’ usage of credit risk 
modeling from their disclosure of that usage. The first and primary approach is two-stage least 
squares (2SLS) using a measure of bank sophistication as the instrument for usage. Prior 
research provides evidence that more sophisticated banks are more likely to engage in risk 
                                                           
requiring banks to wait for an ‘incurred’ loss event to recognize the resulting impairment, the model precludes banks 
from taking appropriate provisions for emerging risks that the bank can reasonably anticipate to occur.” 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
3 
 
modeling (e.g., Liu et al. 2004, Pérignon and Smith 2010), indicating that this instrument is 
relevant. Our use of this instrument assumes that bank sophistication does not directly affect the 
dependent variables in our second-stage models. To corroborate the 2SLS approach, similar to 
Bhat and Ryan (2015) we also use a second two-stage approach that statistically decomposes 
credit-risk-modeling disclosures into a usage component explained by bank sophistication and a 
disclosure component explained by proxies for the external demand for and banks’ voluntary 
choice to supply credit risk modeling disclosures drawn from the prior literature. 
We conduct these primary analyses for banks’ entire loan portfolios and the overall 
sample period. Following prior banking research, we conduct these analyses controlling for 
many observable bank characteristics and macroeconomic variables. In some models, we also 
include bank fixed effects to capture unobservable time-invariant bank characteristics. 
We also conduct descriptive empirical analyses using the statistical modeling and stress-
testing indicators. Based on discussion below as to when these forms of credit risk modeling are 
most likely to be effective, these analyses distinguish the primary homogeneous loan type (real 
estate loans) from the primary heterogeneous loan type (commercial and industrial loans) and/or 
stable periods from downturns. Given the limited frequency of banks’ credit-risk-modeling 
disclosures, particularly for stress testing, we do not attempt to distinguish banks’ usage of 
specific forms of credit risk modeling from their disclosure of that usage. 
Statistical modeling provides estimates of banks’ credit losses on existing loans based on 
historical data about loan characteristics, loan performance, and economic conditions. As for all 
forms of statistical analysis, the availability of larger samples of observations of more similar 
phenomena improves the specification and power of statistical modeling. Larger samples of 
observations of more similar phenomena are available for homogeneous loans in stable periods 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
4 
 
than for this type of loan in downturns or for heterogeneous loans in any type of period.3 Hence, 
we expect statistical modeling to be most effective for homogeneous loans during stable periods. 
Statistical modeling is the form of credit risk modeling most often disclosed by banks. 
This likely occurs because homogeneous loans on average constitute over three quarters of 
banks’ loans, banks can conduct statistical modeling at varying levels of sophistication and cost, 
and statistical modeling yields measures of loan losses that meet FAS 5’s requirements to accrue 
only for losses that are incurred, probable, and reasonably estimable. 
Stress testing involves the development and estimation of the effects of low probability 
but currently relevant adverse scenarios that, were they to occur, would sharply increase banks’ 
credit losses on loans. To develop relevant scenarios, banks engaging in stress testing must pay 
close attention to current loan characteristics, loan performance, and the economic conditions 
that drive credit losses on loans. These economic conditions vary across loan types. For example, 
real estate prices, which follow long cycles, drive credit losses on real estate loans,4 while shorter 
business cycles drive credit losses on commercial and industrial loans.5 We expect banks 
engaging in stress testing for a loan type to be more aware of the potential for loan losses to rise 
in downturns in the economic conditions that affect that type, and thus to originate that type of 
loan more sensibly during stable periods. We also expect these banks to diagnose deterioration in 
loan performance and economic conditions on a timelier basis and to manage loans more 
                                                           
3 This helps explain why banks primarily accrue for loan losses on homogeneous loans at the loan pool level and on 
heterogeneous loans at the individual loan level (Ryan 2011, Section 3.1.4). 
4 Federal Reserve data indicate that banks’ annualized percentage net loan charge-offs of real estate loans averaged 
1.91% during the financial crisis and its aftermath in 2007:Q3–2010:Q4, about 15 times the 0.13% rate during the 
generally favorable 1995:Q1–2007:Q3. 
5 Federal Reserve data indicate that banks’ annualized percentage net loan charge-offs of commercial and industrial 
loans averaged 1.95% from 2008:Q4 to 2010:Q4 and 1.67% from 2001:Q3 to 2003:Q2, i.e., during two recessions 
and their aftermaths, over six times the 0.25% rate during the generally favorable 2005:Q1–2006:Q3 and 1994:Q1–
1998:Q3 periods. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
5 
 
effectively when such deterioration occurs. We expect stress testing to be effective for all loan 
types, but particularly for commercial and industrial loans, the loan type for which credit losses 
vary most strongly with the business cycle (Ryan 2007, pp. 113-114, Caouette et al. 2008). 
Relatively few banks disclose stress testing. This likely occurs because stress testing 
requires sophistication and involves non-trivial costs, and because loan losses that arise if low 
probability scenarios occur in the future do not meet FAS 5’s requirements for loss accruals.6 
While we expect statistical modeling and stress testing to be most effective for the loan 
types and economic conditions discussed above, we do not expect them to be useless in other 
circumstances. To illustrate this subtle point, assume that a severe drop in real estate prices 
causes a sharp rise in loss rates on real estate loans, and that these loss rates gradually stabilize at 
a higher level. When the severe drop in real estate prices occurs, stress testing is most effective, 
as this is the sort of occurrence that stress testing evaluates. Meanwhile, statistical modeling is 
less effective but not useless, because estimated historical loss rates continue to have some 
association with current loss rates. The effectiveness of statistical modeling gradually increases 
over time as historical loss rates incorporate banks’ experience of the higher loss rates. 
Meanwhile, stress testing is less effective but again not useless as the likelihood that conditions 
remain stable rises but never attains certainty. These roughly contemporaneous changes in the 
effectiveness of statistical modeling and stress testing are associated but not causally related. 
Stress testing gains effectiveness when real estate prices drop and statistical modeling gains 
effectiveness as loss rates stabilize not because the other form of credit risk modeling loses 
                                                           
6 For example, FAS 5 defines “probable” as “likely to occur”, which EITF Topic No. D-80 (ASC 310-10-35-19) 
clarifies is “a higher level of likelihood than more likely than not”. In practice, firms often define probable as 70% 
or more likely (Ryan 2011, Section 3.1.2). Hence, FAS 5 requires a far higher probability threshold for loss 
recognition than the low probability events examined in stress testing.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
6 
 
effectiveness, but because the two forms of credit risk modeling primarily capture different loan 
types, economic conditions, and moments of the distribution of loan losses.7 
We conduct three sets of empirical analyses. First, we examine the associations of the 
credit-risk-modeling variables with a measure of the timeliness of banks’ loan loss provisions, 
the association of banks’ quarterly loan loss provisions with their next-quarter changes in non-
performing loans. Following prior literature, we infer greater loan-loss-provision timeliness 
when this association is more positive. We find that the ordinal credit-risk-modeling variable is 
positively associated with this measure during our overall sample period. We find that the 
statistical-modeling indicator is positively associated with this measure for real estate loans 
during stable periods, but not for this type of loan during downturns or for commercial and 
industrial loans during any period. We find that the stress-testing indicator is positively 
associated with this measure for commercial and industrial loan types during downturns, but not 
for this type of loan during stable periods or for real estate loans during any period.8 
Second, we examine the associations of the credit-risk-modeling variables with the ability 
of banks’ quarterly loan loss provisions to predict their net loan charge-offs over the following 
two and four quarters, windows suggested by bank regulatory guidance. We find that the ordinal 
                                                           
7 The discussion in this paragraph further motivates our use of the ordinal credit-risk-modeling variable in the 
primary empirical analyses. This discussion also partly explains why we do not tabulate or discuss tests of the 
differences in the coefficients on the test variables in the descriptive empirical analyses using the statistical 
modeling and stress-testing indicators. (The other reason is the infrequency of banks’ stress testing disclosures.) For 
completeness, however, we footnote the results of these tests. 
8 In prior drafts, we also examined a second measure of loan-loss-provision timeliness, the percentage of banks’ 
cumulative loan loss provisions from 2007 to 2010 that they record from the beginning of 2007 to three points in 
time during the financial crisis, the year-ends of 2007 (i.e., early), 2008 (i.e., middle), and 2009 (i.e., late). 
Following Vyas (2011), we infer greater loan-loss-provision timeliness when a bank records a higher percentage of 
its cumulative loan loss provision by a point in time, controlling for the percentage of the bank’s economic loan 
losses it has experienced up to that point. We find that stress testing is positively associated with this measure early 
in the crisis (2007), when highly adverse conditions abruptly arose. We find that statistical modeling is positively 
associated with this measure late in the crisis (2009), after banks had experienced elevated loss rates for sufficient 
time to revise their loss estimates upward reliably. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
7 
 
credit-risk-modeling variable is positively associated with this ability during our overall sample 
period. We find that the statistical-modeling indicator is positively associated with this ability for 
real estate loans during stable periods, but not for this loan type during downturns or for 
commercial and industrial loans during any period. We find that the stress-testing indicator is 
positively associated with this ability for both real estate and commercial and industrial loans 
during downturns, but not during stable periods. 
Third, we examine the associations of the credit-risk-modeling variables with three 
measures of banks’ loan-origination procyclicality. The first is the association between banks’ 
quarterly loan loss provisions and their loan growth over the current and next three quarters. 
Following Laeven and Majnoni (2003), we infer reduced procyclicality when this association is 
less negative. We find that the ordinal credit-risk-modeling variable is associated with less 
procyclical total loan originations during the overall sample period. We find that the statistical-
modeling indicator is associated with less procyclical originations of real estate loans during 
stable periods, but not of this type of loans during downturns or of commercial and industrial 
loans during any period. We find that the stress-testing indicator is associated with less 
procyclical originations of commercial and industrial loans during downturns, but not of this type 
of loan during stable periods or of real estate loans during any period. 
The second loan-origination procyclicality measure is the association between an 
indicator for negative current quarterly growth in gross domestic product (GDP) and total loan 
growth over the current and next three quarters. Banks’ behavior during downturns drives this 
procyclicality measure more strongly than the first measure. Following Bikker and Metzemakers 
(2005), we infer reduced procyclicality when this association is less negative. We find that the 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
8 
 
ordinal credit-risk-modeling variable is associated with less procyclical total loan originations 
during our overall sample period. 
The third procyclicality measure is a modification of the second measure that better 
captures the primary driver of credit losses on real estate loans over the current and following 
three quarters. This measure is the association of the cumulative decline in the subprime-
mortgage-related ABX index from its inception in January 2006 to the current quarter with 
growth in real estate loans. We find that the ordinal credit-risk-modeling variable is associated 
with less procyclical real estate loan originations during the financial crisis period. 
This study contributes to two empirical literatures. The first identifies bank 
characteristics, such as loan portfolio composition and health-related incentives to exercise 
discretion, that are associated with the timeliness or predictive ability for future net loan charge-
offs of banks’ loan loss provisions (e.g., Liu and Ryan 1995, 2006, Nichols et al. 2009, Bhat et 
al. 2016). Understanding the determinants of these attributes of banks’ loan loss provisions is 
important because these provisions are the primary accrual estimates for most banks. We find 
that our credit-risk-modeling variables are positively associated with the timeliness and 
predictive ability for future net loan charge-offs of banks’ loan loss provisions. The second 
literature examines the associations of loan-loss-provision timeliness with banks’ loan-
origination procyclicality and overall risk-taking (e.g., Beatty and Liao 2011, Bushman and 
Williams 2012, 2015). Due to the recent financial crisis, procyclicality is of deep policy interest 
(Bank for International Settlements 2008, Financial Stability Forum 2009a,b, United States 
Treasury 2009). We find that our credit-risk-modeling variables are associated with reduced 
loan-origination procyclicality. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
9 
 
2. Credit Risk Modeling 
2.1. Additional Details about Statistical Modeling and Stress Testing 
In this section, we provide additional details about statistical modeling and stress testing, trying 
not to repeat the lengthy descriptions of these forms of credit risk modeling in the introduction. 
In particular, we describe how banks vary considerably in their credit risk modeling usage. We 
base this description on various public sources9 and one author’s litigation experience. 
Statistical modeling typically corresponds to banks’ modeling of loan credit risk in terms 
of two primary parameters, the probability of default and the loss given default, under the 
approach developed for regulatory capital purposes in the Basel II Agreement. Banks typically 
estimate these credit-loss parameters using one or more of the following types of information: (1) 
initial loan attributes such as loan type, maturity, and loan-to-value ratio; (2) initial borrower 
attributes such as credit score and loan-to-income ratio; (3) current payment statuses and 
payment histories such as number of days past due and number of payments made, respectively; 
and (4) current relevant economic conditions such as house prices and GDP. 
Sophisticated banks develop and estimate customized multivariate statistical models of 
loan credit-loss parameters as functions of rich sets of all four types of variables. Less 
sophisticated banks estimate these parameters using similarly extensive but generic vendor-
supplied models, simple spreadsheet models that capture a few key underwriting criteria and loan 
                                                           
9 Variation in banks’ use of credit risk modeling for loan loss reserving and credit risk management purposes is well 
documented in bank industry surveys (KPMG 2013; McGladrey 2013), bank regulatory research and policy 
documents around the formulation and implementation of the Basel II agreement (Jones and Mingo 1998; Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision 1999), articles in trade publications (Novikov-Jank et al. 2008; Wisnewski 
2013), credit rating agency documents (Moody’s 2011), and documentation of vendor models (CoreLogic’s 
extensive documentation of its models and data for residential mortgages at www.corelogic.com). The relatively 
recent and rapid development of sophisticated credit risk models (Duffie and Singleton 2003; Lando 2004) helps 
explain this variation. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
10 
 
performance status buckets, or other approaches that involve intermediate levels of 
customization and complexity. 
Sophisticated banks “back test” their statistical modeling–generated loan credit loss 
parameter estimates. That is, they compare prior period estimates to realized values to date to 
identify trends in the parameters. These banks also conduct various other forms of model 
validation and calibration. 
Banks often base stress-testing scenarios on adverse events that have occurred previously. 
The available historical events upon which to base these scenarios change over time. For 
example, banks conducting stress testing now likely use the financial crisis as the most adverse 
credit loss/illiquidity scenario, whereas prior to the crisis banks likely used the much less severe 
Russian debt/hedge fund crisis in the second half of 1998 as the corresponding scenario. Banks 
also may base stress scenarios on expert judgment about events that have not previously occurred 
but that conceivably might occur. Because stress testing requires risk-modeling expertise and 
involves non-trivial cost, banks conducting stress testing usually are large and sophisticated. 
In addition to bank size and sophistication, banks’ credit risk modeling usage likely is 
correlated with banks’ loan portfolio composition, credit risk, financial health, and other 
characteristics. Prior research finds that many of these bank characteristics are also associated 
with loan-loss-provision timeliness and the ability of loan loss provisions to predict future net 
loan charge-offs. To mitigate the possibility that our results reflect correlated bank 
characteristics, in each of the primary empirical analyses we control for a large number of these 
characteristics. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
11 
 
2.2. Credit-Risk-Modeling Disclosure Variables 
We hand collected disclosures of statistical modeling of the drivers of past loan losses and stress 
testing of future loan losses to adverse scenarios from the 1995–2009 Form 10-K filings of 
commercial bank holding companies (banks) using 10-K Wizard.10,11 Using the Adobe Acrobat 
Pro search function, we searched each filing for disclosures of statistical modeling using terms 
such as “model,” “historical loss experience,” “statistical,” and “credit migration,” as well as 
related terms using the stemming option. We searched each filing for disclosures of stress testing 
using individual terms such as “stress,” “scenario,” and “backtest,” as well as related terms and 
pairs of “stress” and “test” or “analysis” occuring within 10 or 25 words of each other. We read 
through each search result and manually coded the indicator variable MODEL (STRESS) as 1 if 
the bank discloses that it employs statistical modeling (stress testing) in a year and 0 otherwise.12 
These indicators take value of 0, for example, in filings where banks discuss how they might be 
required conduct stress tests rather than that they perform those tests. The ordinal variable CRM 
is the sum of MODEL and STRESS. In the empirical analyses, we use the values of the credit-
risk-modeling variables from the most recent prior year to ensure that the corresponding form of 
credit risk modeling is predetermined and used during the year examined.13 
                                                           
10 We also collected disclosures from 1993 and 1994, but do not use these disclosures owing to their infrequency. 
11 We examine statistical modeling and stress testing because they are the most common forms of historically 
focused and forward-looking, respectively, credit risk modeling disclosed by banks. Moreover, banks can apply both 
of these forms of credit risk modeling each period to all types of loans. Banks disclose two additional forms of credit 
risk modeling: (1) credit scoring to inform the credit granting decision, typically for homogeneous loans; and (2) 
credit risk rating, typically for heterogeneous loans. We do not examine credit scoring, as it occurs only at the credit 
granting decision, or credit risk rating, as it is subject to incentive problems for loan officers and credit rating 
agencies that yield lags and biases in these ratings (Udell 1989; Berger and Udell 2002; Kraft 2015; Bessis 2011). 
12 Appendix B provides the definitions of all model variables. 
13 Given the limitations of banks’ credit-risk-modeling disclosures discussed in the introduction, we conduct 
specification tests for the primary analyses in which we redefine the credit-risk-modeling variables assuming that a 
bank that discloses statistical modeling or stress testing in any year during the sample period enagages in that form 
of credit risk modeling throughout the sample period. We footnote the results of these specification tests. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
12 
 
Appendix A provides representative examples of banks’ disclosures of statistical 
modeling and stress testing. These sample disclosures and the descriptive analyses reported in 
Table 1 indicate that the disclosures are relatively infrequent and usually terse when made. Since 
banks must engage in at least a minimal level of credit risk modeling to make loan decisions and 
calculate loan loss provisions, they do not appear to disclose their credit risk modeling fully. This 
may reflect the absence of disclosure requirements or well-established disclosure practices 
during our sample period, as well as the considerable difficulty involved in developing and 
validating credit risk modeling. It is unlikely to be attributable to banks being concerned about 
proprietary costs, given the voluminous information they are required to provide about their 
estimated and realized credit losses under GAAP, SEC Industry Guide 3, and bank regulatory 
reporting requirements. Moreover, banks’ credit-risk-modeling disclosures are too high-level and 
aggregated to reveal proprietary information. 
3. Credit-Risk-Modeling Disclosures and Discipline over Loan Loss Accruals 
In this section, we develop and estimate the empirical models used to test for the associations of 
the credit-risk-modeling variables with banks’ loan-loss-provision timeliness and the ability of 
their loan loss provisions to predict future net loan charge-offs. 
3.1. Loan-Loss-Provision Timeliness 
We base our measure of loan-loss-provision timeliness on prior research, which typically 
evaluates the timeliness of loan loss provisions relative to changes in non-performing loans. 
Specifically, following Liu and Ryan (1995), Nichols et al. (2009), Beatty and Liao (2011), and 
others, we deem quarterly loan loss provisions to be timelier when they are more positively 
associated with the next-quarter change in non-performing loans. For reasons discussed in the 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
13 
 
introduction, we expect the ordinal credit-risk-modeling variable (CRM) to be positively 
associated with this measure of loan-loss-provision timeliness during the overall sample period. 
We expect the statistical-modeling indicator (MODEL) to be positively associated with this 
provision timeliness measure for real estate loans during stable periods. We expect the stress-
testing indicator (STRESS) to be positively associated with the measure for all loan types, 
particularly commercial and industrial loans, during downturns. 
To estimate this measure of loan-loss-provision timeliness, we regress the loan loss 
provision for the current quarter divided by prior quarter total loans (LLPt) on: (1) the change in 
non-performing loans from quarter-end t-2 to quarter-end t divided by quarter t-1 total loans 
(ΔNPLt-2,t) and the change in non-performing loans for quarter t+1 divided by quarter t total loans 
(ΔNPLt+1); (2) either CRM or MODEL and STRESS for the prior year, both separately and 
interacted with ΔNPLt+1; and (3) an extensive set of control variables: 
 
LLPt = β0 + β1ΔNPLt-2,t
 
+ β2ΔNPLt+1 + β3CRM + β4(ΔNPLt+1×CRM) 
 
 (1) 
+ ∑
 
௝ஹହβjcontrols + εt 
 
 
LLPt = β0 + β1ΔNPLt-2,t
 
+ β2ΔNPLt+1 + β3MMODEL + β3SSTRESS 
 
 (1MS) 
+β4M(ΔNPLt+1×MODEL) + β4S(ΔNPLt+1×STRESS) + ∑
 
௝ஹହβjcontrols + εt. 
 
In equation (1), we expect the coefficient β4 on ΔNPLt+1×CRM to be positive, consistent with 
credit risk modeling increasing loan-loss-provision timeliness. In equation (1MS), we expect the 
coefficient β4M on ΔNPLt+1×MODEL to be positive for real estate loans during stable periods and 
the coefficient β4S on ΔNPLt+1×STRESS to be positive for both types of loans, particularly 
commercial and industrial loans, during downturns. Throughout, we suppress time subscripts 
except where necessary for clarity. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
14 
 
Equation (1) includes a large number of control variables motivated by the prior banking 
literature (Liu and Ryan 1995,2006, Laeven and Majnoni 2003, Beatty and Liao 2011, Bushman 
and Williams 2012,2015, Bhat and Ryan 2015, Bhat et al. 2016). We control for the following 
bank characteristics: the natural logarithm of prior quarter total assets (SIZE) to capture banks’ 
resources and sophistication, an indicator for commercial and industrial loans divided by total 
loans above the sample median for the year (C&I_High) to capture banks’ loan portfolio 
composition, the Tier 1 capital ratio (TIER1) to capture banks’ solvency, earnings before the 
provision for loan losses divided by prior quarter assets (EBP) to capture banks’ profitability, net 
loan charge-offs divided by prior quarter loans (NCO) to capture banks’ realized credit losses on 
loans, prior quarter allowance for loan losses divided by prior quarter loans (ALLt-1) to capture 
banks’ cumulative prior loan loss accruals, prior quarter loans divided by prior quarter assets 
(LOANSt-1) to capture banks’ asset composition, and the percentage change in total loans in 
quarter t (%∆LOANS) to capture banks’ loan growth. Following Bhat and Ryan (2015) we 
include two variables to capture banks’ disclosure of non-credit risks. The ordinal variable 
MktRisk takes a value from 0 to 5 based on the extensiveness of banks’ market risk disclosures; 
this variable increases by one as banks disclose each of repricing gap, market risk sensitivity, 
Value at Risk, backtesting of market risk models, and stress testing of these models. The 
indicator variable OpRisk takes a value of 1 if the bank discloses details about operational risk 
management. We control for macroeconomic conditions and uncertainty using the change in the 
unemployment rate for the quarter (ΔUNRATE) (Beatty and Liao 2011) and the end-of-quarter 
CBOE Volatility Index (VIX), respectively. 
We estimate equation (1) for the overall sample period 1996–2010 using five approaches: 
pooled OLS for the models without and with the test variables, with fixed bank effects to capture 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
15 
 
unobservable time-invariant bank characteristics, and two distinct two-stage approaches with 
first stages that attempt to distinguish banks’ credit-risk-modeling usage from their disclosure of 
that usage. The first and primary of these approaches is two-stage least squares (2SLS). We use a 
measure of bank sophistication as the instrument for credit-risk-modeling usage based on prior 
research evidence that, consistent with economic intuition, more sophisticated banks engage in 
(higher quality) risk modeling (e.g., Liu et al. 2004, Pérignon and Smith 2010), indicating that 
the instrument is relevant.14 We emphasize that our use of this instrument is valid only under the 
difficult-to-test assumption that bank sophistication affects the dependent variables in our 
second-stage models (loan loss provisions, net loan charge-offs, and loan growth) only through 
its effect on banks’ credit risk modeling usage (the exclusion restriction). That is, bank 
sophistication cannot affect these dependent variables directly or through unobserved variables, 
conditional on the other explanatory variables included in the second-stage models. We view the 
assumption as reasonable, because, to the best of our knowledge, no prior empirical study that 
uses bank sophistication as a direct determinant of any of our dependent variables. Moreover, the 
other explanatory variables included in these models control for banks’ size, financial health, 
asset composition, loan credit risk, loan growth, and voluntary disclosures of market and 
operating risks. However, the possibility that this assumption is not satisfied remains. 
To corroborate the 2SLS approach, similar to Bhat and Ryan (2015) we also use a second 
two-stage approach that statistically decomposes the indicators for banks’ credit-risk-modeling 
                                                           
14 Our use of bank sophistication as an instrument for credit-risk-modeling can also be justified from practitioner 
sources. For example, Christiano Zazzara (2016), S&P Global Head of Risk Services Europe, states: “According to 
Mark Carey of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, ‘in the last 20 years models have crept into accounting’, 
and the only way to get a forward looking measure of credit losses is via the use of credit models. Currently, several 
sophisticated Banks rely on a “centralized” credit risk modelling and data framework, which is then adjusted to 
serve specific capital requirements, stress testing and accounting needs.” (Emphasis added.) 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
16 
 
disclosures into a usage component explained by bank sophistication and a disclosure component 
explained by four proxies for the external demand for and banks’ voluntary choice to supply 
credit risk modeling disclosures. These proxies are: (1) banks’ pre-LLP return on assets, which 
empirically appears primarily to capture the benefits of voluntary disclosure (Lang and 
Lundholm 1993, Leuz and Verrecchia 2000), but it could also capture the proprietary costs of 
voluntary disclosure (Healy and Palepu 2001); (2) net loan charge-offs, a primary predictor of 
future credit losses (Harris et al. 2017), which we expect to be positively associated with the 
demand for credit risk modeling disclosures; (3) banks’ voluntary disclosures of operating risk, 
which we expect to capture their propensity to disclose any form of risk modeling;15 and (4) an 
indicator for big N auditors, who we expect to have higher bank industry expertise and 
reputational incentives and thus to encourage banks to provide higher overall disclosure quality 
(Dunn and Mayhew 2004). 
Bank sophistication is a multi-dimensional construct. Hence, in both of the two-stage 
approaches we proxy for bank sophistication (SOPHIST) as the first principal component of four 
variables: indicator variables for a complex bank holding company according to the Federal 
Reserve and for disclosure of the employment of a chief risk officer in the most recent Form 10-
K filing, and the natural logarithms of the total notional amounts of derivatives and of the dollar 
amount of sponsored securitizations reported by Asset-Backed Alert. 
In the 2SLS approach, first-stage OLS models regress CRM or ΔNPLt+1×CRM on 
SOPHIST and ΔNPLt+1×SOPHIST, with all the control variables in equation (1) included in both 
                                                           
15 The broad voluntary disclosure literature shows that firm characteristics are associated with firms’ propensity to 
make voluntary disclosures of various types (e.g., Lang and Lundholm 1993). A number of studies, mostly 
examining samples from specific countries, show similar associations for risk disclosures. For example, Elshandidy 
et al. (2013) find that firms that riskier firms and firms with higher compliance with mandatory risk disclosures are 
more likely to make voluntary disclosures. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
17 
 
models. As discussed in Section C.2 of Appendix C, the Cragg-Donald F-statistic indicates that 
SOPHIST and ΔNPLt×SOPHIST are strong instruments in the first-stage models for equation (1) 
and the subsequent equations in the paper. The predicted values of CRM and ΔNPLt+1×CRM 
from the estimations of the first-stage models, which are reported in Table C1, Panel A, replace 
the corresponding variables in the second-stage model. To satisfy the exclusion restriction, 
SOPHIST and ΔNPLt+1× SOPHIST are excluded from the second-stage model. 
In the decomposition approach, a first-stage probit model regresses CRM on SOPHIST, to 
capture credit risk modeling usage, and on four variables that we expect to be positively 
associated with banks’ disclosure of credit risk modeling but relatively uncorrelated with their 
usage of credit risk modeling: EBP, NCO, OpRisk, and indicator for an auditor in the top 4 or 6 
depending on the year (BigN).16 Based on the estimation of the estimation of this model reported 
in Table C1, Panel B, we decompose CRM into three components: its predicted value based on 
SOPHIST (CRMusage), its predicted value based on the four disclosure variables (CRMdisc), and 
the residual (CRMresid), which could capture either credit risk modeling usage or disclosure. We 
substitute these components for CRM in the second-stage estimation of equation (1). 
We estimate equation (1MS) using pooled OLS for four subsamples of bank-quarters in 
our overall 1996–2010 period: above-median real estate loans and stable conditions, above-
median real estate loans and downturns, above-median commercial and industrial loans and 
stable conditions, and above-median commercial and industrial loans and downturns. We define 
downturns as the NBER-determined recessions 2001:Q2–Q4 and 2007:Q4–2009:Q2, in each 
case removing the last quarter by which time the return of economic stability was evident. 
                                                           
16 The number of large auditing firms diminishes from six to four over our sample period due to 1998 merger of 
Price Waterhouse and Coopers and Lybrand and the 2002 dissolution of Arthur Andersen. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
18 
 
3.2. Sample Selection and Descriptive Statistics 
Table 1, Panel A describes the sample selection process. For a bank-year observation to be 
included in the full sample, we require the observation: (1) to be publicly traded on NYSE, 
AMEX, or NASDAQ; (2) to have assets above $150 million; (3) to have Form 10-K filings 
available on 10K Wizard for the most recent prior year (in order to hand collect the credit-risk-
modeling disclosures); and (4) to have quarterly financial data available on Bank Compustat. The 
sample period is 1996:Q1 to 2010:Q4, a period that according to the National Bureau of 
Economic Research (NBER) encompasses two booms (1996:Q1–2001:Q1 and 2003:Q1–
2007:Q4), two recessions (2001:Q2–Q4 and 2008:Q1–2009:Q2), and two slow-growth periods 
following recessions (2002:Q1–Q4 and 2009:Q3–2010:Q4). These requirements yield 16,282 
bank-quarter observations for 479 unique banks for the estimation of equation (1). 
Table 1, Panel B reports the frequencies with which CRM takes values of 1 or 2 for the 
overall sample and for each year from 1995 to 2009. For the overall sample, CRM takes a value 
of 1 (2) for 2,029 (76) observations, indicating that in the vast majority of cases banks disclose at 
most one form of credit risk modeling. The number of observations with non-zero CRM rises 
considerably over time, from 7 observations in 1995 to 277 observations in 2009. These 
increasing frequencies reflect the fact the vast majority of banks that disclose a form of credit 
risk modeling in a year also disclose that form in the next year.17 
Table 1, Panel C provides descriptive statistics for the variables in equation (1). The 
mean of CRM is 0.134, reflecting the relatively low frequency of banks’ credit-risk-modeling 
disclosures, particularly in the earlier sample years, discussed above. The bulk of the sample 
                                                           
17 Taking into account the loss of sample banks over time due to mergers and acquisitions and other reasons, only 17 
(6) banks stop disclosing statistical modeling (stress testing) across our 15-year sample period. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
19 
 
observations are well capitalized and profitable. The means of ΔNPL and ΔUNRATE are positive 
owing to the financial crisis in the last four years of the sample period. 
Table 1, Panel D reports variable means and medians for the subsamples of observations 
taking each of the three values of CRM. The means and medians of SIZE, MktRisk, and OpRisk 
increase monotonically with CRM, consistent with banks that are larger or disclose more about 
their non-credit risks being more likely to disclose credit risk modeling. The means and medians 
of LLP, NCO, and ΔUNRATE increase monotonically with CRM, reflecting banks’ increased 
disclosure of credit risk modeling when loan performance and economic conditions deteriorate. 
Table 2 reports Pearson correlations of the variables. In line with the descriptive statistics 
reported in Table 1, Panel D, CRM is significantly positively correlated with SIZE, MktRisk, and 
OpRisk. CRM is also significantly positively correlated with LLP, C&I_High, NCO, ΔUNRATE, 
and VIX, consistent with banks that accept higher credit risk or operate under less favorable 
economic conditions being more likely to disclose credit risk modeling. 
Consistent with prior research, LLP is significantly positively correlated with the credit 
loss related variables ΔNPL, C&I_High, NCO, ΔUNRATE, and VIX. The latter two 
(macroeconomic) variables are highly positively correlated (57%); consequently, these variables 
is some cases are individually insignificant (but generally are collectively significant) in the 
empirical models. 
3.3. Loan-Loss-Provision Timeliness Estimations 
Equation (1). Table 3, Panel A reports the estimation of equation (1) for the overall sample 
period. Column (1) [(2)] reports the estimation of the base model without [with] the interactive 
test variable ΔNPLt,t+1×CRM. Column (3) reports the estimation of the base model adding fixed 
bank effects. Column (4) reports the estimation of the second-stage of the 2SLS approach; 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
20 
 
Appendix C develops the first-stage models and Table C1, Panel A reports the pooled OLS 
estimation of these models. Column (5) reports the pooled OLS estimation of the model 
replacing CRM with its components CRMusage, CRMdisc, and CRMresid; Appendix C develops the 
first-stage probit model used to estimate these components and the model estimation is reported 
in Table C1, Panel B. Throughout, we report standard errors calculated clustering observations 
by bank and quarter for panel regressions and heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors for cross-
sectional regressions.18 
We first discuss the coefficients on the control variables. Most of these coefficients are 
consistently significant or not across most or all of the five estimations, so for brevity we discuss 
only the coefficients in the base model without the test variables reported in column (1). 
Consistent with extensive prior research on the bank-specific and macroeconomic determinants 
of loan loss provisions (Wahlen 1994, Beatty and Liao 2011, Bhat et al. 2016), the coefficients 
on ΔNPLt-2,t, ΔNPLt,t+1, NCO, LOANS, %ΔLOANS, ΔUNRATE, and VIX are positive and 
significant at the 1% level. Consistent with larger and more sophisticated banks assuming greater 
credit risk, the coefficients on CRM and OpRisk are positive and significant at the 1% level, 
although the coefficient on SIZE is insignificant. Consistent with more profitable banks 
experiencing lower credit losses, the coefficient on EBP is significantly negative at the 5% level. 
The coefficient β4 on the interactive test variable ΔNPLt,t+1×CRM is significantly positive 
at the 5% level in the base model reported in column (2) and the fixed effects model reported in 
column (3), indicating that credit-risk-modeling disclosures are associated with increased loan-
                                                           
18 The results of our primary analyses are robust to including time effects or linear time trends in the empirical 
models. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
21 
 
loss-provision timeliness.19 Consistent with these results being attributable to banks’ credit-risk-
modeling usage rather than to their disclosure of that usage, β4 is significant at the 5% level in the 
2SLS model reported in column (4), and the coefficient on ΔNPLt,t+1×CRMusage is significant at 
the 10% level in the decomposition model reported in column (5). The coefficient on 
ΔNPLt,t+1×CRMresid is also significant at the 10% level. 
Equation (1MS). Table 3, Panel B reports the estimations of equation (1MS) for four 
subsamples of bank-quarters: above-median real estate loans and stable conditions (column 1), 
above-median real estate loans and downturns (column 2), above-median commercial and 
industrial loans and stable conditions (column 3), and above-median commercial and industrial 
loans and downturns (column 4). For brevity, we do not discuss the coefficients on the control 
variables, which usually are similar to those reported in Panel A and similar across the four 
subsamples. 
As expected, the coefficient β4M on ΔNPLt+1×MODEL is significantly positive at the 5% 
level in the above-median real estate loan and stable period subsample reported in column (1), 
consistent with statistical modeling enhancing loan-loss-provision timeliness for this subsample. 
This coefficient is insignificant in the other subsamples. As expected, the coefficient β4S on 
ΔNPLt+1×STRESS is significantly positive at the 1% level in the above-median commercial and 
industrial loans and downturn subsample reported in column (4), consistent with stress testing 
enhancing loan-loss-provision timeliness for this subsample. Unexpectedly, β4S is insignificant in 
                                                           
19 To mitigate concerns about changes in the frequency of banks’ credit-risk-modeling disclosures over the sample 
period, we repeat the OLS estimation reported in column (2) redefining CRM under the assumption that a bank that 
discloses statistical modeling or stress testing in any year during the sample period engages in that form of credit 
risk modeling throughout the sample period. The results are robust to this redefinition; the coefficient β4 on 
ΔNPLt,t+1×CRM is positive and significant at the 5% level. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
22 
 
the above-median real estate loans and downturn subsample reported in column (2). This 
coefficient is insignificant in the stable period subsamples reported in columns (1) and (3).20 
In summary, the results reported in Table 3 suggest that banks’ use of statistical modeling 
enhances banks’ loan-loss-provision timeliness on average across our sample period as well as 
for real estate loans during stable periods. These results suggest that banks’ use of stress testing 
enhances banks’ loan-loss-provision for commercial and industrial loans during downturns. 
3.4. Ability of Loan Loss Provisions to Predict Future Net Loan Charge-offs 
 
In this section, we develop a model of the ability of quarterly loan loss provisions to 
predict future net loan charge-offs that is similar to the models in Wahlen (1994) and Bhat et al. 
(2016). We deem quarterly loan loss provisions that are more positively associated with net loan 
charge-offs over the following two and four quarters, denoted NCOt+1,t+s, for s equal to 2 or 4, to 
be better predictors. Under bank regulatory guidance for homogeneous loans, loan loss 
provisions should predict future net loan charge-offs over these windows.21 We expect credit risk 
modeling to increase the ability of banks’ quarterly loan loss provisions to predict future net loan 
charge-offs on average over our sample period. We expect statistical modeling to increase the 
ability of banks’ quarterly loan loss provisions to predict future net loan charge-offs for real 
estate loans (NCOREAL) during stable periods. We expect stress testing to increase the ability of 
                                                           
20 The difference between the coefficients β4M on ΔNPLt+1×MODEL in columns (1) and (2) is statistically 
insignificant. The difference between the coefficients β4S on ΔNPLt+1×STRESS in columns (3) and (4) is statistically 
significant at the 1% level. 
21 Bank regulatory guidance for consumer loans and residential mortgages loans requires banks (1) to charge off 
these loans at no later than 120 or 180 days past due and (2) to accrue loan loss allowances sufficient to cover 
expected net loan charge-offs over the period that incurred losses are expected to emerge, which this guidance 
suggests is twelve months for performing loans (Ryan 2011, Section 3.1.3). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
23 
 
banks’ quarterly loan loss provisions to predict future net loan charge-offs for all loan types, 
particularly commercial and industrial loans (NCOC&I), during downturns. 
This model regresses NCOt+1,t+s or NCOREALt+1,t+s and NCOC&It+1,t+s on (1) LLP; (2) 
CRM or MODEL and STRESS; (3) LLP times CRM or MODEL and STRESS; and (4) control 
variables: 
 
NCOt+1,t+s= δ0 + δ1LLPt + δ2CRM + δ3LLPt×CRM + ∑
 
௝ஹସδj controls + εt 
 (2) 
 
 
NCOREALt+1,t+s or NCOC&It+1,t+s = δ0 + δ1LLPt + δ2MMODEL + δ2SSTRESS 
 (2MS) 
+ δ3MLLPt×MODEL + δ3SLLPt×STRESS + ∑
 
௝ஹସδj controls + εt. 
 
 
In equation (2), we expect the coefficient δ3 on LLPt×CRM to be positive, consistent with credit 
risk modeling increasing the ability of loan loss provisions to predict future net loan charge-offs. 
In equation (2MS), we expect the coefficient δ3M on LLPt×MODEL to be positive for real estate 
loans during stable periods and the coefficient δ3S on LLPt×STRESS to be positive for all types of 
loans, particularly commercial and industrial loans, during downturns. 
The control variables in equations (2) and (2MS) are the same as those in equation (1) 
except that we include NPLt-1 as an additional control given its predictive power over future net 
loan charge-offs (Wahlen 1994, Bhat et al. 2016). We estimate equation (2) over the overall 
sample period using the same five approaches used to estimate equation (1). We estimate 
equation (2MS) using pooled OLS for the same four subsamples of bank-quarters used to 
estimate equation (1MS). 
3.5. Ability of Loan Loss Provisions to Predict Future Net Loan Charge-offs Estimations 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
24 
 
Table 4, Panel A reports the estimations of equation (2) with the dependent variable defined as 
NCOt+1,t+2 for the overall sample period; to conserve space, we do not tabulate or discuss the 
directionally identical but statistically slightly weaker results obtained with the dependent 
variable defined as NCOt+1,t+4. The five columns of the panel reflect the estimations using the 
same approaches as in Panel A of Table 3. 
We first discuss the coefficients on the control variables. For brevity, we again discuss 
only the coefficients in the base model reported in column (1). The coefficient on SIZE is 
positive and significant at the 1% level, likely reflecting the fact that large banks write more 
consumer loans, which exhibit consistently high net loan charge-offs (Ryan and Keeley 2013), 
although the coefficient on C&I_High is positive and significant at the 10% level. Not 
surprisingly, the coefficients on LLP, NCO, ΔNPLt, NPLt-1, and LOANS are positive and 
significant, and the coefficient on GDP is negative and significant, all at the 1% level. The 
coefficient on %ΔLOANS is negative and significant at the 1% level, likely reflecting the fact 
that it takes time for new loans to be charged off. The coefficient on CRM is positive and 
significant at the 5% level, consistent with firms that engage in credit risk modeling experiencing 
higher credit losses. 
As expected, the coefficient δ3 on the interactive test variable LLP×CRM is positive and 
significant at the 5% level in the base model reported in column (2) and at the 1% level in the 
fixed effects model reported in column (3), indicating that credit-risk-modeling disclosures are 
positively associated with the ability of loan loss provisions to predict future loan charge-offs. 22 
                                                           
22 To mitigate concerns about changes in the frequency of banks’ credit-risk-modeling disclosures over the sample 
period, we repeat the OLS estimation reported in column (2) redefining CRM under the assumption that a bank that 
discloses statistical modeling or stress testing in any year during the sample period enagages in that form of credit 
risk modeling throughout the sample period. The results are robust to this redefinition; the coefficient δ3 on 
LLP×CRM is positive and significant at the 5% level. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
25 
 
Consistent with these results being attributable to banks’ credit-risk-modeling usage rather than 
to their disclosure of that usage, δ3 is positive and significant at the 1% level in the 2SLS model 
reported in column (4), and the coefficient on LLP×CRMusage is positive and significant the 1% 
level in the decomposition model reported in column (5). 
Table 4, Panel B reports the estimations of equation (2MS). The estimations reported in 
columns (1) and (2) of the panel are for the model with dependent variable NCOREALt+1,t+2 and 
are estimated over the stable and downturn, respectively, subperiods. The estimations reported in 
columns (3) and (4) are for the model with dependent variable NCOC&It+1,t+2 and are estimated 
over the stable and downturn, respectively, subperiods. We do not discuss the coefficients on the 
control variables, which are generally similar to those discussed above for the overall sample 
period estimations with the dependent variable defined as NCOt+1,t+2. 
In the NCOREALt+1,t+2 model estimations, as expected the coefficient δ3M on 
LLP×MODEL is positive and significant at the 1% level in column (1), consistent with statistical 
modeling enhancing the ability of banks’ loan loss provisions to predict future charge-offs of real 
estate loans during stable periods. This coefficient is insignificant in column (2) for downturns. 
Also as expected, the coefficient δ3S on LLP×STRESS is positive and significant at the 5% level 
in column (2), consistent with stress testing enhancing the ability of banks’ loan loss provisions 
to predict future charge-offs of real estate loans during downturns. This coefficient is 
insignificant in column (1) for stable periods. 
In the NCOC&It+1,t+2 model estimations, as expected the coefficient δ3S on LLP×STRESS 
is positive and significant at the 1% level in column (4), consistent with stress testing enhancing 
the ability of banks’ loan loss provisions to predict future charge-offs of commercial and 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
26 
 
industrial loans during downturns. This coefficient is insignificant in column (3) for stable 
periods. The coefficient δ3M on LLP×MODEL is insignificant in both columns.23 
4. Credit-Risk-Modeling Disclosures and Loan-Origination Procyclicality 
We expect banks that engage in credit risk modeling to exhibit less procyclical loan originations 
for three related reasons. First, evidence provided in Section 3 indicates that credit-risk-modeling 
disclosures are associated with enhanced loan-loss-provision timeliness and ability of provisions 
to predict future net loan charge-offs. Second, prior research argues and shows empirically that 
banks that record timelier loan loss provisions build larger regulatory capital cushions that enable 
them originate more loans during downturns. Specifically, Laeven and Majnoni (2003) and 
Dugan (2009) argue that banks that record larger allowances for loan losses during stable times 
are able to absorb the higher level of net loan charge-offs that occur during downturns. Beatty 
and Liao (2011) provide evidence that banks that record timelier loan loss provisions issue more 
capital during both stable periods and recessions and originate more loans during recessions. 
Third, we expect banks that engage in credit risk modeling to have better understandings of the 
adequacy of their allowances for loan losses and thus the ability of their reported capital cushions 
to absorb future net loan charge-offs. 
4.1. Loan-Origination Procyclicality Measures 
 
In this section, we develop three measures of loan-origination procyclicality and related models 
and expectations. 
                                                           
23 The difference in the coefficients δ3M on LLP×MODEL in columns (1) and (2) is statistically insignificant. The 
difference in the coefficients δ3S on LLP×STRESS in columns (3) and (4) is statistically significant at the 1% level. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
27 
 
First Measure. Laeven and Majnoni (2003) hypothesize that “a bank shows imprudent loan loss 
provisioning behavior—susceptible to have procyclical effects on banks’ capital—if…Loan loss 
provisions are negatively related to loan growth.” Laeven and Majnoni test this hypothesis by 
regressing loan loss provisions on contemporaneous loan growth. We instead reverse the 
relationship and regress the natural logarithm of banks’ one plus loan growth during the current 
and three future quarters (LOANGRt-1,t+3) on quarterly loan loss provisions. We do this in part to 
be able to interact our credit-risk-modeling variables with loan loss provisions and in part 
because loan growth is the more natural dependent variable in the analysis of loan-origination 
procyclicality. We infer reduced procyclicality when the association of banks’ quarterly loan loss 
provisions and this loan growth measure is less negative, i.e., when banks decrease loan 
originations less as loan loss provisions increase. 
We expect credit risk modeling to reduce this loan-origination procyclicality measure 
during our overall sample period. We expect statistical modeling to reduce this procyclicality 
measure for growth in real estate loans (REALGRt-1,t+3) during stable periods. We expect stress 
testing to reduce this measure for all loan types, particularly growth in commercial and industrial 
loans (C&IGRt-1,t+3), during downturns. We test these expectations using the following models: 
 
 
 
LOANGRt-1,t+3= B0 + B1LLPt + B2CRM + B3(LLP×CRM) 
 
 
 (3) 
+ ∑
 
௝ஹସBjcontrolsj + εt-1,t+3. 
 
 
 
REALGRt-1,t+3 or C&IGRt-1,t+3= B0 + B1LLPt + B2MMODEL + B2SSTRESS 
 (3MS) 
+ B3M(LLP×MODEL)+ B3S(LLP×STRESS) 
+ ∑
 
௝ஹସBjcontrolsj + εt-1,t+3. 
 
In equation (3), we expect the coefficient B3 on LLPt×CRM to be positive, consistent with credit 
risk modeling increasing the ability of loan loss provisions to predict future net loan charge-offs. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
28 
 
In equation (3MS), we expect the coefficient B3M on LLPt×MODEL to be positive for growth in 
real estate loans during stable periods. We expect the coefficient B3S on LLPt×STRESS to be 
positive for growth in all types of loans, particularly commercial and industrial loans, during 
downturns. 
The control variables in equations (3) and (3MS) include all the controls in equation (1) 
except %ΔLOANS, which we exclude owing to its overlap with the dependent variable. These 
equations also include ALL/NPL to capture the adequacy of banks’ allowance for loan losses 
(Beatty and Liao 2011), and DEMAND, the percentage of bank officers reporting stronger loan 
demand during the quarter in the Federal Reserve’s Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on 
Bank Lending Practices (Lown and Morgan 2006), to capture loan demand. Controlling for loan 
demand enables the coefficients on the test variables to better capture loan supply (Acharya and 
Ryan 2016). 
We estimate equation (3) over the overall sample period using the same five approaches 
used to estimate equation (1). We estimate equation (3MS) using pooled OLS for the same four 
subsamples of bank-quarters used to estimate equation (1MS). 
Second Measure. Following Bikker and Metzemakers (2005), we also evaluate procyclicality in 
terms of the association between an indicator for negative quarterly GDP growth (GDPDECR) 
and LOANGRt-1,t+3, inferring reduced procyclicality when this association is less negative. We 
expect credit risk modeling to reduce this loan-origination procyclicality measure. We test this 
expectation using the following model: 
 
 
 
LOANGRt-1,t+3= C0 + C1CRM + C2GDPDECR + C3(GDPDECR×CRM) 
 (4) 
+ ∑
 
௝ஹସCjcontrolsj + εt-1,t+3. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
29 
 
We expect the coefficient C3 on GDPDECRt×CRM to be positive. The control variables are the 
same as in equation (3) except that we exclude ΔUNRATE, VIX, and DEMAND to avoid 
multicollinearity with GDPDECR. We estimate equation (4) only for the overall sample, because 
partitioning on stable versus downturn periods would eliminate variation in GDPDECR. 
Third Measure. Bikker and Metzemakers’s (2005) use of negative GDP growth as a proxy for 
downturns is more appropriate for commercial and industrial loans than for real estate loans. 
Accordingly, we modify Bikker and Metzemakers’s approach to evaluate the procyclicality of 
banks’ origination of real estate loans by replacing GDPDECR with the cumulative decrease in 
the subprime-mortgage-related ABX index, averaging across all tranches, from the inception of 
the index in January 2006 to the current quarter (ABXDECR). The ABX index is highly sensitive 
to declines in real estate prices, which drive losses on real estate loans. We measure 
procyclicality as the association between ABXDECR and REALGRt-1,t+3: 
 
 
 
REALGRt-1,t+3= D0 + D1CRM + D2ABXDECR + D3(ABXDECR×CRM) 
 
 (5) 
+ ∑
 
௝ஹସDjcontrolsj + εt-1,t+3. 
 
We expect the coefficient D3 on ABXDECR×CRM to be positive. The control variables are the 
same as in equation (4). We estimate equation (5) over the quarters from 2007:Q1 to 2008:Q2, 
the period over which the (junior) tranches of the ABX index lost the (vast) majority of their 
value, for which ABXDECR should have high signal value. 
4.2. Loan-Origination Procyclicality Estimations 
Equation (3). Table 5, Panel A reports the estimation of equation (3) for the overall sample 
period. The five columns of the panel reflect the estimations using the same approaches as in 
Panels A of Tables 3 and 4. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
30 
 
We first discuss the coefficients on the control variables. For brevity, we again discuss 
only the coefficients in the base model reported in column (1). The coefficient on CRM is 
significantly negative at the 5% level, indicating that credit-risk-modeling disclosures are on 
average associated with reduced loan origination. The coefficients on SIZE and LOANS are 
significantly negative at the 1% and 10% level, respectively, perhaps because it is harder for 
larger banks that hold more loans to grow their loan portfolios. The coefficient on C&I_High is 
significantly positive at the 5% level. The coefficient on TIER1 is significantly negative at the 
1% level, perhaps because loan growth reduces capital ratios or because banks with higher 
capital ratios are more risk averse.24 The coefficient on EBP (NCO) is significantly positive 
(negative) at the 1% level, indicating higher loan growth for more profitable (lower credit loss) 
banks. The coefficient on ALL/NPL is significantly positive at the 1% level, consistent with 
better-reserved banks being more willing to extend loans. The coefficient on DEMAND is 
significantly positive at the 1% level, indicating higher loan growth when loan demand is higher. 
The inclusion of DEMAND swamps the effects of the other macroeconomic variables, rendering 
the coefficients on ΔUNRATE and VIX insignificant. 
As expected, the coefficient B3 on LLP×CRM is significantly positive at the 10% level in 
the pooled OLS estimation of the base model reported in column (2), although it is insignificant 
in the fixed effects estimation reported in column (3), providing weak and inconsistent evidence 
that credit-risk-modeling disclosures are associated with reduced loan-origination 
procyclicality.25 Providing evidence that is both stronger and consistent with this result being 
                                                           
24 A bivariate regression of LOANGR on TIER1 yields a positive and significant coefficient. 
25 To mitigate concerns about changes in the frequency of banks’ credit-risk-modeling disclosures over the sample 
period, we repeat the OLS estimation reported in column (2) redefining CRM under the assumption that a bank that 
discloses statistical modeling or stress testing in any year during the sample period enagages in that form of credit 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
31 
 
attributable to banks’ credit-risk-modeling usage rather than to their disclosure of that usage, B3 
is significant at the 1% level in the 2SLS estimation reported in column (4), and the coefficient 
on LLP×CRMusage is significantly positive at the 1% level in the decomposition approach 
reported in column (5). Moreover, the coefficient on LLP×CRMdisc is significantly negative at 
the 10% level in column (5); this negative coefficient likely explains the weak and inconsistent 
results in columns (2) and (3). 
The following calculation gives a sense for the economic significance of the positive 
coefficient B3 on LLP×CRM in the base model estimation reported in column (2). A one-
standard deviation increase in LLP yields 0.75% higher loan growth when CRM equals 1 than 
when it equals 0, holding all other explanatory variables constant at their means. 
Equation (3MS). Columns (1) and (2) of Panel B of Table 5 report estimations of equation 
(3MS) with dependent variable REALGR for the stable and downturn subperiods, respectively, of 
the overall sample. Columns (3) and (4) of the panel report estimations of equation (3MS) with 
dependent variable C&IGR for the stable and downturn subperiods, respectively. For brevity, we 
do not discuss the coefficients on the control variables, which are similar to those reported in 
Table 5, Panel A. 
As expected, the coefficient B3M on LLP×MODEL is significantly positive at the 10% 
level in the regression with dependent variable REALGR for stable periods reported in column 
(1), consistent with statistical modeling mitigating the procyclical relationship between loan loss 
provisions and real estate loan growth during stable periods. This coefficient is insignificant in 
the other subsamples. As expected, the coefficient B3S on LLP×STRESS is significantly positive 
                                                           
risk modeling throughout the sample period. The results are not robust to this redefinition; the coefficient B3 on 
LLP×CRM is positive but not significant (t-stat=1.03). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
32 
 
at the 10% level in the regression with dependent variable C&IGR during downturns reported in 
column (4), consistent with stress testing mitigating the procyclical relationship between loan 
loss provisions and commercial and industrial loan growth during downturns. Unexpectedly, B3S, 
while positive, is insignificant in the regression for real estate loan growth and downturns 
reported in column (2). This coefficient is insignificant in the regressions for both loan types 
during stable periods reported in columns (1) and (3).26 
Equation (4). Column (1) of Table 6 reports the pooled OLS estimation of equation (4) for the 
overall sample period. We again do not discuss the coefficients on the control variables, which 
are similar to those reported in Table 5, Panel A. Consistent with the findings of Bikker and 
Metzemakers (2005), the coefficient on GDPDECR is significantly negative at the 1% level, 
consistent with loan growth being lower when GDP growth is negative, i.e., on average loan 
origination is procyclical. As expected, the coefficient C3 on GDPDECR×CRM is significantly 
positive at the 5% level, indicating that credit-risk-modeling disclosures are associated with 
reduced loan-origination procyclicality. 
The following calculation gives a sense for the economic significance of the positive 
coefficient C3 on GDPDECR×CRM. GDPDECR taking a value of 1 rather than 0 yields 2.60% 
higher loan growth when CRM equals 1 than when it equals 0, holding all other explanatory 
variables constant at their means. 
Equation (5). Table 6, column (2) reports the pooled OLS estimation of equation (5) for the 
overall sample period. We again do not discuss the coefficients on the control variables, which 
                                                           
26 The differences in the coefficients B3M on LLP×MODEL in columns (1) and (2) and in the coefficients B3S on 
LLP×STRESS in columns (3) and (4) are statistically insignificant. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
33 
 
are similar to those reported in Table 5, Panel A. As expected, the coefficient D3 on 
ABXDECR×CRM is significantly positive at the 5% level, indicating that credit-risk-modeling 
disclosures are associated with reduced loan-origination procyclicality. 
The following calculations give a sense for the economic significance of the positive 
coefficient D3 on ABXDECR×CRM. ABXDECR taking a value of 1 rather than 0 yields 0.08% 
higher growth in real estate loans when CRM equals 1 than when CRM equals 0, holding all 
other explanatory variables constant at their means. This economically modest incremental 
growth may reflect the problematic state of the real estate market during the 2007:Q1-2008:Q2 
estimation period. 
5. Conclusion 
In this study, we provide evidence that banks’ financial report disclosures of credit risk modeling 
are associated with enhanced loan-loss-provision timeliness, enhanced ability of loan loss 
provisions to predict future net loan charge-offs, and reduced loan-origination procyclicality on 
average for our overall sample from 1996:Q1 to 2010:Q4. We employ two approaches that 
provide evidence suggesting that these findings are attributable to banks’ credit-risk-modeling 
usage, rather than to their disclosure of that usage. We emphasize, however, that banks’ credit-
risk-modeling disclosures are limited in their frequency and extent, which makes it difficult to 
distinguish banks’ usage of credit risk modeling from their disclosure of that usage. 
We further examine how the documented associations vary for disclosures of two distinct 
forms of credit risk modeling (statistical modeling of historical loan losses and stress tests of 
future loan losses), two subperiods of the overall sample (stable periods and downturns), and two 
types of loans (homogeneous real estate loans and heterogeneous commercial and industrial 
loans). We find that statistical modeling has significant desirable effects for real estate loans 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
34 
 
during stable periods, while stress testing has significant desireable effects during downturns, 
particularly for commercial and industrial loans. 
Our results raise two questions for future research. First, would bank regulatory 
requirements for improved credit risk modeling or financial reporting requirements for enhanced 
credit-risk-modeling disclosures help mitigate policymakers’ concern that delay in banks’ loan 
loss provisions during stable periods requires banks to record larger provisions in downturns, 
reducing their regulatory capital adequacy and causing them to cut back on loan originations 
(Dugan 2009, Curry 2013)? Second, does variation in banks’ credit risk modeling explain Beatty 
and Liao’s (2011) finding that banks that record timelier loan loss provisions issue more capital 
during both stable periods and downturns, allowing banks to originate more loans during 
downturns (Ryan 2017)? We believe the answers to both questions are likely to be yes. However, 
because we identify banks’ credit risk modeling based on their existing, largely voluntary 
disclosures in financial reports, we cannot draw direct inferences about potentially desirable 
requirements for credit risk modeling or related disclosures from our results. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
35 
 
References 
 
Acharya V, Ryan S (2016) Banks’ financial reporting and financial system stability. J. Accounting 
Res. 54:277–340. 
Bank for International Settlements (2008) Note for the FSF working group on market and 
institutional resilience, addressing financial system procyclicality: A possible framework. 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (1999) Credit risk modeling: Current practices and 
applications (April). 
Beatty A, Liao S (2011) Do delays in dxpected loss recognition affect banks' willingness to lend? 
J. Accounting Econom. 52(1):1–20. 
Beck P, Narayanamoorthy G (2013) Did the SEC impact banks’ loan loss reserve policies and 
their informativeness? J. Accounting Econom. 56(2–3):42–65. 
Berger A, Udell G (2002) Small business credit availability and relationship ending: The 
importance of bank ownership structure. Econom. J. 112(477):F32–F53. 
Bessis J (2011) Risk Management in Banking, 3rd Edition (John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, N.J.). 
Bhat, G., Lee J, Ryan S (2016) Utilizing loan loss indicators by loan type to sharpen the 
evaluation of the determinants and implications of banks’ loan loss accruals. Working 
paper, Southern Methodist University, Dallas. 
Bhat G, Ryan S (2015) The impact of risk modeling on the market perception of banks’ 
estimated fair value gains and losses for financial instruments. Accounting Organizations 
Society 46:81–95. 
Bikker J, Metzemakers P (2005) Bank provisioning behavior and procyclicality. J. International 
Financial Markets, Institutions Money 15:141–147. 
Bushman R, Williams C (2012) Accounting discretion, loan loss provisioning, and discipline of 
banks’ risk-taking. J. Accounting Econom. 54(1):1–18. 
Bushman, R, Williams C (2015) Delayed expected loss recognition and the risk profile of banks. 
J. Accounting Res. 53:511–553. 
Caouette J, Altman E, Narayanan P, Nimmo R (2008) Managing Credit Risk: The Great 
Challenge for Global Financial Markets (John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, N.J.). 
Curry T (2013) Remarks before the AICPA banking conference, Washington D.C. (September 
16). 
Duffie D, Singleton K (2003) Credit Risk: Pricing, Measurement, and Management (Princeton 
University Press, Princeton). 
Dugan J (2009) Remarks before the Institute of International Bankers, Loan loss provisioning and 
pro-cyclicality (March 2). 
Dunn K, Mayhew B (2004) Audit firm industry specialization and client disclosure quality. Rev. 
Accounting Stud. 9:35–58. 
Elshandidy T, Fraser I, Hussainey K (2013) Aggregated, voluntary, and mandatory risk 
disclosure incentives: Evidence from UK FTSE all-share companies. International Rev. 
Financial Analysis 30: 320–333. 
Financial Stability Forum (2009a) Report of the FSF working group on provisioning (March). 
Financial Stability Forum (2009b) Report of the Financial Stability Forum on addressing 
procyclicality in the financial system (April 2). 
Harris T, Nissim D, Khan U (2017) The expected rate of credit losses on banks’ loan portfolios. 
Accounting Rev. Forthcoming. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
36 
 
Healy P, Palepu K (2001) Information asymmetry, corporate disclosure, and the capital markets: 
A review of the empirical disclosure literature. J. Accounting Econom. 31: 405–440. 
Jones D, Mingo J (1998) Industry practices in credit risk modeling and internal capital 
allocations: Implications for a models-based regulatory capital standard. FRBNY Econom. 
Policy Rev. 4(3):53–60. 
KPMG LLP (2013) Credit risk management practices: 2012 survey on the allowance for loan 
and lease losses (May), 
http://www.kpmg.com/US/en/IssuesAndInsights/ArticlesPublications/Documents/survey-
allowance-loan-lease-losses-2012.pdf. 
Kraft P (2015) Do rating agencies cater? Evidence from rating-based contracts. J. Accounting 
Econom. 59:264–283. 
Laeven L, Majnoni G (2003) Loan loss provisioning and economic slowdowns: Too much, too 
late? J. Financial Intermediation 12(2):178–197. 
Lando D (2004) Credit Risk Modeling: Theory and Applications (Princeton University Press, 
Princeton, N.J.). 
Lang M, Lundholm R (1993) Cross-sectional determinants of analyst ratings of corporate 
disclosure. J. Accounting Res. 31(2):246–271. 
Leuz C, Verrecchia R (2000) The economic consequences of increased disclosure. J. Accounting 
Res. 38(Supplement):91–124. 
Liu C, Ryan S (1995) The effect of bank loan portfolio composition on the market reaction to 
and anticipation of loan loss provisions. J. Accounting Res. 33(1):77–94. 
Liu C, Ryan S (2006) Income smoothing over the business cycle: Changes in banks’ coordinated 
management of provisions for loan losses and loan charge-offs from the pre-1990 bust to 
the 1990s boom. Accounting Rev. 81(2):421–441. 
Liu C, Ryan S, Tan H (2004) How banks’ value-at-risk disclosures predict their total and priced 
risk: Effects of bank technical sophistication and learning over time. Rev. Accounting 
Stud. 9(2–3):265–294. 
Lown C, Morgan D (2006) The credit cycle and the business cycle: New findings using the loan 
officer opinion survey. J. Money, Credit, Banking 38:1575–1597. 
McGladrey LLP (2013) McGladrey loan loss reserve survey. 
http://mcgladrey.com/content/dam/mcgladrey/pdf/2013_loan_loss_survey.pdf. 
Moody’s (2011) Modeling commercial real estate loan credit risk: An overview, Version 2.0. 
http://www.moodysanalytics.com/~/media/Insight/Quantitative-Research/Default-and-
Recovery/2011/11-03-05-Modeling-CRE-Loan-Credit-Risk-An-Overview.ashx. 
Nichols C, Wahlen J, Wieland M (2009) Publicly traded versus privately held: Implications for 
conditional conservatism in bank accounting. Rev. Accounting Stud. 14 (1):88–122. 
Novikov-Jank A, Mandapaka R, Josephal S (1998) Allowance for loan and lease loss reserves: 
Modeling challenges and recommendations. RMA J. 91(3):48–53. 
Pérignon C, Smith D (2010) The level and quality of value-at-risk disclosure by commercial 
banks. J. Bus. Finance 34(4):362–377. 
Ryan S (2007) Financial Instruments and Institutions: Accounting and Disclosure Rules, 2nd ed. 
(John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, N.J.). 
Ryan S (2011) Financial reporting for financial instruments. Foundations Trends Accounting 
6:187–354. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
37 
 
Ryan S (2017) Do the effects of accounting requirements on banks’ regulatory capital adequacy 
undermine financial stability? Annual Rev. Financial Econom. 9:1–20. 
Ryan S, Keeley J (2013) Discussion of “Did the SEC impact banks’ loan loss reserve policies 
and their informativeness?” J. Accounting Econom. 56:66–78. 
Sanderson E, Windmeijer F (2016) A weak instrument F-test in linear IV models with multiple 
endogenous variables. J. Econometrics 190:212–221. 
Stock J, Yogo M (2005) Testing for weak instruments in linear IV regression. Andrews D, Stock 
J, eds. Identification and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas 
Rothenberg, Chap. 5 (Cambridge University Press, New York). 
Udell G (1989) Loan quality, commercial loan review, and loan officer contracting. J. Banking 
Finance 13(3):367–382. 
United States Treasury (2009) Financial Regulatory Reform, A New Foundation: Rebuilding 
Financial Supervision and Regulation. 
http://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/Documents/FinalReport_web.pdf. 
Vyas D (2011) The timeliness of accounting write-downs during the recent financial crisis. J. 
Accounting Res. 49(3):823–860. 
Wahlen J (1994) The nature of information in commercial bank loan loss disclosures. Accounting 
Rev. 69(3):455–478. 
Wisnewski M (2013) Case study: MidSouth finds way to tame “monster” reporting process. 
Amer. Banker (May 2). 
Zazzara C (2016) Risk insight: Internal default risk models – alive and kicking? (October 12) 
https://marketintelligence.spglobal.com/blog/risk-insight-internal-default-risk-models-
alive-and-kicking. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
38 
 
APPENDIX A 
Credit-Risk-Modeling Disclosure Indicator Variables 
 
We hand collected banks’ disclosures in their Form 10-K filings from 1995-2009 about two 
credit-risk-modeling activities: statistical modeling of the drivers of past loan losses (MODEL) 
and stress testing of future loan losses to adverse scenarios (STRESS). Each activity is scored 1 
or 0. We chose the sample disclosures randomly. 
 
 
 
# of firms 
(firm 
quarters) 
with scores 
of 1 
Sample disclosures 
MODEL 
=0 or 1 
Does the 
bank 
disclose 
the use of 
statistical 
modeling? 
78 firms 
(1,226 firm- 
quarters) 
Bank of America Corporation 10K 2009 
 
We use proprietary models to measure the capital 
requirements for credit, country, market, operational 
and strategic risks. 
 
Statistical models are built using detailed behavioral 
information from external sources such as credit 
bureaus and/or internal historical experience. These 
models are a component of our consumer credit risk 
management process and are used, in part, to help 
determine both new and existing credit decisions, 
portfolio management strategies including 
authorizations and line management, collection 
practices and strategies, determination of the 
allowance for loan and lease losses, and economic 
capital allocations for credit risk. 
 
STRESS 
=0 or 1 
Does the 
bank 
disclose 
the use of 
stress 
testing? 
39 firms 
(353 firm-
quarters) 
Zions Bancorporation 10K 2009 
 
The Company periodically stress tests its CRE loan 
portfolio. This testing is back-tested and the results of 
the testing are reviewed regularly with the 
management, rating agencies, and various banking 
regulators. The stress testing methodology includes a 
loan-by-loan Monte Carlo simulation, which is an 
approach that measures potential loss of principal and 
related revenues. The Monte Carlo simulation stresses 
the probability of default and loss given default for 
CRE loans based on a variety of factors including 
regional economic factors, loan grade, loan-to-value, 
collateral type, and geography. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
39 
 
APPENDIX B 
Variable Definitions 
 
 
Variable 
Definition 
Credit Risk Modeling (CRM) Variables:
MODEL 
Indicator variable that takes a value of 1 if the bank discloses the use of statistical 
modeling of the drivers of past loan losses in its most recent Form 10-K 
filing 
STRESS 
Indicator variable that takes a value of 1 if the bank discloses the use of stress 
tests of future loan losses to adverse scenarios in its most recent Form 10-K 
filing 
CRM 
MODEL plus STRESS. An ordinal variable with a minimum value of 0 and a 
maximum value of 2 
 
Loan Loss Accrual Variables: 
LLP 
Loan loss provision divided by prior quarter total loans 
ALL/NPL 
Allowance for loan losses divided by non-performing loans 
ALL t-1 
Prior quarter allowance for loan losses divided by prior quarter total loans 
 
Non-performing Loan (NPL) Variables:
NPL 
Non-performing loans divided by prior quarter total loans 
ΔNPL 
Change in non-performing loans divided by quarter t-1 total loans 
ΔNPLt-2,t 
ΔNPL from quarter-end t-2 to quarter-end t 
ΔNPLt+1 
ΔNPL for quarter t+1 
 
Net Loan Charge-off (NCO) Variables:
NCOt+1,t+s 
Net loan charge-offs for quarters t+1 to t+s divided by quarter t-1 total loans 
NCOREALt+1,t+s 
Net charge-offs of real estate loans for quarters t+1 to t+s divided by quarter t-1 
real estate loans 
NCOC&It+1,t+s 
Net charge-offs of commercial and industrial loans for quarters t+1 to t+s divided 
by quarter t-1 commercial and industrial loans 
 
Bank Characteristics: 
SIZE 
Natural logarithm of prior quarter total assets 
C&I_High 
Indicator variable that takes a value of 1 for above-median commercial and 
industrial loans divided by total loans for the bank-year 
MktRisk 
Ordinal variable that takes a value from 0 to 5, increasing by one if the bank 
discloses each of repricing GAP, market risk sensitivity, Value at Risk, back-
testing of market risk models, and stress testing of market risk models in its most 
recent Form 10-K filing 
OpRisk 
Indicator variable that takes a value of 1 if the bank discloses details about its 
operational risk management in its most recent Form 10-K filing 
TIER1 
Tier 1 risk-adjusted capital ratio for prior quarter 
EBP 
Pre-tax earnings before tje loan loss provision divided by prior quarter total 
assets 
NCO 
Net loan charge-offs divided by prior quarter total loans 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
40 
 
NPLt-1 
Non-performing loans divided by prior quarter total loans 
LOANSt-1 
Prior quarter loans divided by prior quarter total assets 
%∆LOANS 
Change in total loans divided by prior quarter total loans 
 
 
Loan Growth Variables: 
LOANGR 
Natural logarithm of one plus growth in total loans from end of quarter t-1 to 
end of quarter t+3 
REALGR 
Natural logarithm of one plus growth in real estate loans from end of quarter 
t-1 to end of quarter t+3 
C&IGR 
Natural logarithm of one plus growth in commercial and industrial loans from 
end of quarter t-1 to end of quarter t+3 
 
Macroeconomic Variables: 
ΔUNRATE 
Percentage change in the nationwide unemployment rate from the U. S. 
Department of Labor 
VIX 
Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) Volatility Index® 
ABXDECR 
Decline in the price of the ABX index (average of all tranches) from its 
inception in January 2006 to the end of the current quarter 
DEMAND 
The average of the net percentages of bank loan officers reporting stronger 
demand for commercial and industrial loans and for consumer loans in the 
Federal Reserve’s quarterly Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank 
Lending Practices 
GDP 
Growth in U.S. gross domestic product 
GDPDECR 
Indicator variable that takes a value of one for quarters with negative GDP 
growth 
 
 
Two-Stage Least Squares and Decomposition Approaches Variables: 
BigN 
An indicator variable that takes a value of one if the bank’s auditor for the 
year is one of Arthur Andersen, Coopers & Lybrand, Ernst & Young, 
Deloitte & Touche, KPMG, and PriceWaterhouseCoopers 
COMPLEX 
An indicator variable that takes a value of one if the Federal Reserve’s Bank 
Holding Company Complexity Indicator (RSSD9057) equals 1 or 3-8 
LOG_NOTIONAL 
The natural logarithm of the total notional amount of derivatives 
LOG_SEC_VOL 
The natural logarithm of the total dollar amount of securitizations sponsored 
by the bank during the sample period reported by Asset Backed Alert 
CRO 
An indicator variable that takes a value of one if the bank discloses the 
employment of a chief risk officer in its most recent Form 10-K filing 
SOPHIST 
The first principal component of COMPLEX, LOG_NOTIONAL, 
LOG_SEC_VOL, and CRO. Used as an instrumental variable for the 2SLS 
analysis 
Undeflated variables and the numerators of deflated variables other than percentage change or 
growth variables are measured during the current quarter (t) for flow (including percentage 
change and growth) variables or as of the end of that quarter for stock variables unless indicated 
otherwise. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
41 
 
APPENDIX C 
First-Stage Models in the Two-Stage Least Squares and Decomposition Approaches 
 
 
C.1. Description 
As discussed in the introduction, we observe banks’ financial report disclosures of their 
credit risk modeling, not their usage of credit risk modeling. Moreover, banks relatively 
infrequently provide these disclosures. In the primary analyses discussed in the text, we employ 
two approaches to attempt to provide evidence as to whether our results are driven by banks’ 
credit-risk-modeling usage or their disclosure of that usage: (1) two-stage least squares (2SLS) 
with a measure of bank sophistication as the instrument for usage; and (2) a statistical 
decomposition of credit-risk-modeling disclosures into a usage component explained by bank 
sophistication and a disclosure component explained by proxies for the external demand for and 
banks’ voluntary choice to supply credit risk modeling disclosures, similar to Bhat and Ryan 
(2015). In this appendix, we develop the first-stage models in the 2SLS and decomposition 
approaches, and we discuss the estimations of these models. 
Prior research provides evidence that more sophisticated banks are more likely to engage 
in (higher quality) risk modeling (e.g., Liu et al. 2004, Pérignon and Smith 2010). Accordingly 
we expect that more sophisticated banks are more likely to engage in credit risk modeling. The 
first-stage models in both approaches incorporate this expectation. Because bank sophistication 
is a multi-dimensional construct, in both the two-stage approaches we use a measure of bank 
sophistication (SOPHIST) that equals the first principal component of four proxies for the 
construct: (1) an indicator variable derived from the Federal Reserve’s bank holding company 
complexity indicator RSSD9057 that takes a value of 1 for complex banks (RSSD9057 equal to 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
42 
 
1 or 3-8) and 0 otherwise (COMPLEX); 27 (2) the natural logarithm of the notional amount of 
derivatives (LOG_NOTIONAL); (3) the natural logarithm of securitization deal volume from 
Asset Backed Alert (LOG_SEC_VOL); and (4) an indicator for banks that report the employment 
of a chief risk officer in their Form 10-K that year (CRO). 
C.2. 2SLS Approach 
In this approach, for each of the second-stage models—equations (1), (2), and (3), whose 
estimations are reported in column (3) of Panel A of Tables 3, 4, and 5, respectively—we 
estimate first-stage models that predict the ordinal credit-risk-modeling disclosure variable CRM 
(another variable times CRM) in terms of an instrument for credit-risk-modeling usage (the other 
variable times the instrument) and the control variables in the second-stage model. We use 
SOPHIST as the instrument for credit-risk-modeling usage. We emphasize that our use of this 
instrument is valid only under the difficult-to-test assumption that bank sophistication affects the 
(loan loss provision, net loan charge-off, and loan origination procyclicality) dependent variables 
in our second-stage models only through its effect on banks’ credit risk modeling usage, i.e., not 
directly or through unobserved variables, conditional on the other explanatory variables in the 
second-models. We view this assumption as reasonable because the other explanatory variables 
included in these models control for banks’ size, financial health, asset composition, loan credit 
risk, loan growth, and voluntary disclosures of market and operating risks. Moreover, to the best 
of our knowledge prior literature has not used bank sophistication as a direct determinant of any 
of our dependent variables. 
                                                           
27 RSSD9057 is defined on the Federal Reserve Board’s Research, Statistics, Supervision and Regulation, and 
Discount and Credit Database. See http://www.federalreserve.gov/apps/mdrm/data-
dictionary/search/item?keyword=9057&show_short_title=False&show_conf=False&rep_status=All&rep_state=Ope
ned&rep_period=Before&date_start=99991231&date_end=99991231. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
43 
 
In each of the second-stage models, we replace CRM as well as the other variable times 
CRM with their predicted values from the first-stage models. SOPHIST is not included in the 
second-stage models to satisfy the exclusion restriction. 
As the estimations of the first-stage models for the various second-stage models yield 
similar results, to conserve space, we tabulate and discuss only the estimated first-stage models 
for the second-stage model equation (1). These first-stage models explain CRM and 
ΔNPLt+1×CRM: 
 
CRM or (ΔNPLt+1×CRM) = a + b1SOPHIST + b2(ΔNPLt+1×SOPHIST) 
 
 (C1) 
+ ∑s≥3 bs second-stage controls + e. 
 
(The first-stage models for equations (2) and (3) explain CRM and LLPt×CRM.) We expect the 
coefficient on SOPHIST to be positive when CRM is the dependent variable and the coefficient 
on ΔNPLt×SOPHIST to be positive when ΔNPLt+1×CRM is the dependent variable. We evaluate 
the collective strength of SOPHIST and ΔNPLt×SOPHIST as instruments for CRM and 
ΔNPLt+1×CRM using the Cragg-Donald F-statistic (Sanderson and Windmeijer 2016).  
Panel A of Table C1 reports the pooled OLS estimations of equation (C1), suppressing 
the coefficients on the control variables to conserve space. In first-stage model for CRM, the 
coefficient on SOPHIST is significant at the 1% level. In first-stage model for ΔNPLt+1×CRM, 
the coefficient on ΔNPLt+1×SOPHIST is also significant at the 1% level. The Cragg-Donald F-
statistic for the collective strength of the instruments in the two models equals 132.1, which far 
exceeds the Stock-Yogo (2005) critical value of 7.03. Hence, SOPHIST and ΔNPLt×SOPHIST 
appear to be collectively strong instruments.28 
                                                           
28 The Cragg-Donald F-statistic for the collective strength of the instruments in the two first-stage models for 
equation (2) [(3)] equals 77.4 [106.4]. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
44 
 
C.3. Decomposition Approach 
This approach statistically decomposes CRM into three components: (1) the projection 
based on SOPHIST, which we expect to capture banks’ credit-risk-modeling usage; (2) the 
projection based on four variables that we expect to proxy for the external demand for and 
banks’ voluntary choice to supply credit risk modeling disclosures but to be relatively 
uncorrelated with their usage of credit risk modeling; and (3) a residual. In each of the second-
stage models, we replace CRM with its three component projections from the first-stage models. 
The four predictors of credit-risk-modeling disclosure are: (1) banks’ pre-LLP return on 
assets, which empirically appears to capture the benefits of voluntary disclosure (Lang and 
Lundholm 1993, Leuz and Verrecchia 2000), but could also capture the proprietary costs of 
voluntary disclosure Healy and Palepu 2001); (2) net loan charge-offs, a primary predictor of 
future credit losses (Harris, Nissim, and Khan 2017) that we expect to be positively associated 
with the demand for credit risk modeling disclosures; (3) banks’ voluntary disclosures of 
operating risk, which we expect to capture their propensity to disclose any form of risk 
modeling;29 and (4) an indicator for big N auditors, who we expect to have higher bank industry 
expertise and reputational incentives and thus to encourage banks to provide higher overall 
disclosure quality (Dunn and Mayhew 2004). This yields the following model: 
 
CRM = a + b1EBP + b2NCO + b3OpRisk + b4BigN + b5SOPHIST + e. 
 
 (C2) 
 
 
 
We expect the coefficients on all the explanatory variables in equation (C2) to be positive.  
                                                           
29 The broad voluntary disclosure literature shows that firm characteristics are associated with firms’ propensity to 
make voluntary disclosures of various types (e.g., Lang and Lundholm 1993). A number of studies, mostly 
examining samples from specific countries, show similar associations for risk disclosures. For example, Elshandidy 
et al. (2013) find that firms that riskier firms and firms with higher compliance with mandatory risk disclosures are 
more likely to make voluntary disclosures. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
45 
 
 
Panel B of Table C1 reports the probit estimation of equation (C2). The model fit is 
reasonably good with a pseudo R2 of 13.5%. As expected, the coefficients on BigN and 
SOPHIST are positive and significant at the 1% level; the coefficient on the other explanatory 
variables are insignificant. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
46 
 
TABLE C1 
 
Panel A: Two-Stage Least Squares Approach: First-Stage Models for Equation (1) 
 
(1) 
(2) 
Variables 
Dep var = 
CRM 
Dep var = 
ΔNPLt+1×CRM
SOPHIST 
0.0361*** 
0.000 
 
[3.55] 
[-0.73] 
ΔNPLt+1×SOPHIST 
0.235 
0.0747*** 
 
[0.35] 
[5.13] 
Include controls from second-stage model 
YES 
YES 
# Observations 
16,282 
16,282 
Cragg Donald F -statistic 
132.1 
Stock-Yogo weak instrument test critical value: 10% maximal 
size 
7.03 
 
Panel B: Credit-Risk-Modeling Disclosure Decomposition Approach: First-Stage Model 
 
 
Variables 
CRM 
EBP 
-22.436 
 
[-1.17] 
NCO 
4.522 
 
[0.24] 
OpRisk 
0.189 
 
[1.44] 
BigN 
0.521*** 
 
[4.84] 
SOPHIST 
0.198*** 
 
[6.64] 
Constant 
-1.368*** 
 
[-11.63] 
Observations 
17,282 
Pseudo R-squared 
13.53% 
Panel A reports the pooled OLS estimations of equation (C1), the first-stage models for the second-stage 
model equation (1) in the two-stage least squares approach, whose estimation is reported in column (3) of 
Panel A of Table 3. These models include SOPHIST and ΔNPLt+1×SOPHIST as instruments for CRM and 
ΔNPLt+1×CRM. The coefficients on the control variables from the second-stage model are not tabulated. 
Panel B of the table reports the probit estimation of equation (C2), the first-stage model in the credit-risk-
modeling disclosure decomposition approach similar to Bhat and Ryan (2015). This estimation is used to 
decompose CRM into the components associated with credit-risk-modeling usage (the projection based on 
SOPHIST), credit-risk-modeling disclosure (the projection based on EBP, NCO, OpRisk, and BigN), and 
the residual. Continuous variables are winsorized at the top and bottom 1%. Standard errors are calculated 
clustering observations by bank in Panel A and by bank and quarter in Panel B. Coefficient t-statistics in 
Panel A and Z-statistics in Panel B are reported in square brackets. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 
1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively, using two-tailed tests. All variables are defined in Appendix B. The 
two-stage least squares and decomposition approaches are described in Appendix C. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
47 
 
 
Table 1 
Sample Selection and Descriptive Statistics 
 
 
Panel A: Sample Selection 
Firm-quarter observations with Bank Compustat data in 1996:Q1-2010:Q4, 
 non-zero total assets, and valid GVKEY 
41,527
Firm-quarter observations also with most recent prior year credit-risk-modeling 
 disclosure variables 
19,108
Firm-quarter observations also with all equation (1) variables 
16,282
 
 
Panel B: Frequency Credit-Risk-Modeling Disclosures by Year 
  
Number of observations 
Year 
 CRM=1 
 CRM=2
1995 
7 
0 
1996 
12 
0 
1997 
16 
0 
1998 
24 
0 
1999 
57 
0 
2000 
72 
0 
2001 
114 
4 
2002 
149 
3 
2003 
173 
4 
2004 
189 
4 
2005 
213 
4 
2006 
236 
4 
2007 
236 
8 
2008 
254 
16 
2009 
277 
29 
Total 
2,029 
76 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
48 
 
Table 1 (continued) 
 
Panel C: Descriptive Statistics for Overall Sample (N=16,282) 
 
Mean 
Std. Dev 
25% 
Median 
75% 
LLP 
0.002 
0.003 
0.000 
0.001 
0.002 
ΔNPLt-2,t 
0.002 
0.007 
-0.001 
0.000 
0.003 
ΔNPLt+1 
0.001 
0.005 
-0.001 
0.000 
0.002 
CRM 
0.134 
0.354 
0 
0 
0 
MODEL 
0.115 
0.319 
0 
0 
0 
STRESS 
0.019 
0.138 
0 
0 
0 
SIZE 
7.634 
1.562 
6.488 
7.284 
8.433 
C&I_High 
0.491 
0.500 
0 
0 
1 
MktRisk 
1.667 
0.567 
1 
2 
2 
OpRisk 
0.142 
0.349 
0 
0 
0 
TIER1 
11.751 
2.916 
9.900 
11.320 
13.080 
EBP 
0.005 
0.002 
0.003 
0.005 
0.006 
LLAt-1 
0.015 
0.006 
0.012 
0.014 
0.017 
LOANSt-1 
0.661 
0.114 
0.601 
0.673 
0.736 
%ΔLOANt 
0.028 
0.061 
-0.001 
0.019 
0.041 
NCO 
0.001 
0.002 
0.000 
0.001 
0.001 
ΔUNRATE 
1.341 
5.697 
-2.3 
0.0 
3.8 
VIX 
21.932 
8.039 
16.23 
21.53 
25.61 
 
 
Panel D: Descriptive Statistics for Subsamples Based on Credit-Risk-Modeling Disclosure 
Values 
 
CRM = 0 
CRM = 1 
CRM = 2 
 
(N=14,177) 
(N=2,029) 
(N=76) 
 
Mean 
Median
Mean 
Median
Mean 
Median
LLP 
0.002 
0.001 
0.003 
0.001 
0.006 
0.004 
ΔNPLt-2,t 
0.002 
0.000 
0.003 
0.001 
0.001 
0.000 
ΔNPLt+1 
0.001 
0.000 
0.001 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
SIZE 
7.447 
7.164 
8.822 
8.569 
10.900 
11.958 
C&I_High 
0.479 
0.000 
0.557 
1.000 
0.789 
1.000 
MktRisk 
1.655 
2.000 
1.727 
2.000 
2.303 
2.000 
OpRisk 
0.115 
0.000 
0.319 
0.000 
0.434 
0.000 
TIER1 
11.870 
11.420 
10.954 
10.600 
10.783 
9.890 
EBP 
0.005 
0.005 
0.004 
0.005 
0.005 
0.006 
LLAt-1 
0.015 
0.014 
0.017 
0.014 
0.023 
0.022 
LOANSt-1 
0.664 
0.674 
0.642 
0.665 
0.635 
0.636 
%ΔLOANt 
0.030 
0.020 
0.017 
0.010 
0.004 
-0.008 
NCO 
0.001 
0.001 
0.002 
0.001 
0.005 
0.004 
ΔUNRATE 
1.236 
0.000 
2.041 
0.000 
2.208 
0.500 
VIX 
21.941 
21.530 
21.800 
19.520 
23.833 
23.210 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
49 
 
Table 2 
Pearson Correlations 
 
 
 
LLP 
ΔNPLt-2,t ΔNPLt+1 CRM 
SIZE 
C&I_ 
High 
MktRisk OpRisk TIER1 
EBP 
ALL 
LOANS %ΔLOAN NCO
ΔUNRATE
ΔNPLt-2,t 
0.359 
 
 
ΔNPLt+1 
0.148 
0.174 
 
 
CRM 
0.164 
0.042 
0.023 
 
SIZE 
0.171 
0.011 
-0.001 
0.323 
 
C&I_High 
0.081 
-0.004 
-0.006 
0.0624
0.270 
 
MktRisk 
0.028 
-0.011 
-0.005 
0.067 
0.272 
0.072 
 
OpRisk 
0.207 
0.071 
0.037 
0.201 
0.359 
0.137 
0.106 
 
TIER1 
-0.086 
-0.061 
-0.035 
-0.105
-0.306
-0.192 
-0.092 
-0.095 
 
EBP 
-0.198 
-0.172 
-0.092 
-0.006
0.216 
0.106 
0.068 
-0.033 
0.030 
ALL 
0.390 
0.043 
-0.064 
0.107 
0.183 
0.147 
0.013 
0.132 
0.001 -0.011
LOANS 
0.074 
0.139 
0.114 
-0.063
-0.220
0.002 
-0.099 
-0.097 
-0.323 -0.018 -0.083
%ΔLOAN 
-0.131 
-0.003 
-0.007 
-0.075
-0.038
-0.001 
0.009 
-0.066 
-0.043 0.100 -0.152
0.025 
NCO 
0.822 
0.210 
0.062 
0.163 
0.191 
0.080 
0.025 
0.209 
-0.063 -0.176
0.509 
0.022 
-0.179 
ΔUNRATE 
0.222 
0.276 
0.222 
0.047 
0.011 
0.005 
-0.012 
0.075 
-0.050 -0.172 -0.045
0.094 
-0.096 
0.133
VIX 
0.251 
0.217 
0.167 
0.001 
0.012 
-0.001 
0.008 
0.026 
0.001 -0.086
0.104 
0.001 
-0.087 
0.191
0.572 
Correlations significant at the 5% level using a two-tailed test are in boldface font.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
50 
 
Table 3 
Association of Credit-Risk-Modeling Disclosures with the Timeliness of Quarterly Loan 
Loss Provisions Relative to Next-Quarter Change in Non-Performing Loans 
 
 
Panel A: Pooled Estimations of Equation (1) for the Overall Sample Period 
Variables 
(1) 
Restricted 
Base Model 
(2) 
Full 
Base Model
(3) 
Fixed Effects
(4) 
Second-
stage 
2SLS 
(5) 
Second-stage 
Decomposition
ΔNPLt-2,t 
0.059*** 
0.059*** 
0.057*** 
0.058*** 
0.058*** 
 
[11.31] 
[11.27] 
[15.12] 
[14.63] 
[11.24] 
ΔNPLt+1 
0.027*** 
0.022*** 
0.018*** 
0.011 
-0.024 
 
[3.66] 
[2.94] 
[3.08] 
[1.18] 
[-0.89] 
CRM 
0.000*** 
0.000*** 
0.000*** 
0.001* 
 
 
[3.19] 
[2.72] 
[2.59] 
[1.95] 
 
CRMusage 
 
 
 
 
0.000 
 
 
 
 
 
[1.61] 
CRMdisc 
 
 
 
 
0.000 
 
 
 
 
 
[1.56] 
CRMresid 
 
 
 
 
0.000* 
 
 
 
 
 
[1.75] 
ΔNPLt+1×CRM 
 
0.029** 
0.031** 
0.097** 
 
 
 
[2.40] 
[2.15] 
[2.11] 
 
ΔNPLt+1×CRMusage 
 
 
 
 
0.082* 
 
 
 
 
 
[1.67] 
ΔNPLt+1×CRMdisc 
 
 
 
 
0.019 
 
 
 
 
 
[0.68] 
ΔNPLt+1×CRMresid 
 
 
 
 
0.010* 
 
 
 
 
 
[1.89] 
SIZE 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
-0.000 
0.000 
 
[1.55] 
[1.58] 
[1.44] 
[-0.44] 
[0.70] 
C&I_High 
0.000*** 
0.000*** 
0.000 
0.000*** 
0.000*** 
 
[2.87] 
[2.81] 
[1.63] 
[2.95] 
[2.72] 
TIER1 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
 
[0.23] 
[0.29] 
[0.93] 
[0.51] 
[0.18] 
EBP 
-0.032** 
-0.032** 
-0.063*** 
-0.029** 
-0.031** 
 
[-2.35] 
[-2.37] 
[-4.53] 
[-2.57] 
[-2.26] 
ALL t-1 
-0.005 
-0.005 
-0.018*** 
-0.005 
-0.005 
 
[-1.10] 
[-1.09] 
[-3.36] 
[-1.15] 
[-1.06] 
LOANSt-1 
0.001*** 
0.001*** 
0.001*** 
0.001*** 
0.001*** 
 
[3.81] 
[3.84] 
[3.31] 
[4.58] 
[3.83] 
%ΔLOANS 
0.001*** 
0.001*** 
0.000 
0.001*** 
0.001*** 
 
[3.08] 
[3.05] 
[0.70] 
[3.08] 
[3.10] 
MktRisk 
0.000 
0.000* 
-0.000* 
0.000 
0.000* 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
51 
 
 
[1.64] 
[1.68] 
[-1.90] 
[1.31] 
[1.94] 
Table 3 (continued) 
 
OpRisk 
0.000*** 
0.000*** 
0.000** 
0.000* 
0.000*** 
 
[2.97] 
[3.02] 
[2.47] 
[1.75] 
[2.64] 
NCO 
0.872*** 
0.872*** 
0.859*** 
0.865*** 
0.872*** 
 
[33.59] 
[33.42] 
[45.02] 
[45.94] 
[33.30] 
UNRATE 
0.000** 
0.000** 
0.000** 
0.000*** 
0.000** 
 
[2.24] 
[2.20] 
[2.18] 
[3.42] 
[2.18] 
VIX 
0.000*** 
0.000*** 
0.000*** 
0.000*** 
0.000*** 
 
[4.08] 
[4.04] 
[9.08] 
[7.43] 
[4.02] 
Constant 
-0.001** 
-0.001** 
-0.001 
-0.000* 
-0.001*** 
 
[-2.31] 
[-2.35] 
[-1.45] 
[-1.87] 
[-2.65] 
 
 
 
 
 
# Observations 
16,282 
16,282 
16,282 
16,282 
16,282 
Adjusted R2 
72.45% 
72.49% 
73.25% 
71.52% 
72.49% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
52 
 
Table 3 (continued) 
 
 
Panel B: Pooled Estimations of Equation (1) for Subsamples with Above-Median Real 
Estate or Commercial and Industrial Loans and Stable or Downturn Subperiods 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Variables 
Stable 
Downturn 
Stable 
Downturn 
 
Real_High=1 
Real_High=1 
C&I_High=1 
C&I_High=1 
ΔNPLt-2,t 
0.055*** 
0.073*** 
0.068*** 
0.060*** 
 
[6.10] 
[6.47] 
[6.31] 
[7.34] 
ΔNPLt+1 
0.014 
0.040*** 
0.031*** 
0.022** 
 
[1.11] 
[3.97] 
[3.45] 
[2.43] 
MODEL 
0.000 
-0.000 
-0.000 
0.001* 
 
[0.15] 
[-0.03] 
[-0.37] 
[1.72] 
STRESS 
0.000*** 
-0.000 
0.000** 
-0.000 
 
[6.15] 
[-0.37] 
[2.44] 
[-0.30] 
ΔNPLt+1×MODEL 
0.043** 
0.057 
0.011 
0.059 
 
[2.35] 
[1.43] 
[0.53] 
[1.11] 
ΔNPLt+1×STRESS 
-0.019 
0.087 
-0.013 
0.127*** 
 
[-0.60] 
[1.62] 
[-0.44] 
[5.19] 
SIZE 
0.000 
0.000*** 
-0.000 
0.000*** 
 
[1.03] 
[2.96] 
[-0.56] 
[2.95] 
TIER1 
-0.000 
-0.000 
-0.000 
0.000 
 
[-1.32] 
[-0.41] 
[-0.04] 
[1.26] 
EBP 
-0.060*** 
-0.038 
0.001 
-0.069*** 
 
[-3.28] 
[-1.60] 
[0.07] 
[-3.99] 
ALL t-1 
-0.003 
-0.036** 
-0.007 
-0.015 
 
[-0.59] 
[-2.32] 
[-0.96] 
[-0.67] 
LOANSt-1 
0.001*** 
0.001*** 
0.001** 
0.001* 
 
[2.82] 
[2.80] 
[2.15] 
[1.81] 
∆LOANS 
0.001 
-0.000 
0.001* 
0.004** 
 
[1.51] 
[-0.20] 
[1.75] 
[2.17] 
MktRisk 
0.000 
-0.000 
0.000* 
-0.000 
 
[1.20] 
[-1.14] 
[1.91] 
[-1.39] 
OpRisk 
0.000 
-0.000* 
0.000** 
0.000 
 
[1.21] 
[-1.88] 
[2.56] 
[0.78] 
NCO 
0.838*** 
0.919*** 
0.909*** 
0.989*** 
 
[20.92] 
[30.96] 
[26.57] 
[15.85] 
Constant 
0.000 
-0.001 
0.000 
-0.002* 
 
[0.11] 
[-1.05] 
[0.14] 
[-1.70] 
# Observations 
6,843 
1,036 
6,944 
1,043 
Adjusted R2 
71.08% 
67.05% 
74.67% 
71.67% 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
53 
 
Table 3 (continued) 
 
 
Panel A reports pooled estimations of equation (1) for the overall sample of 16,282 bank-quarter 
observations from 1996Q1-2010Q4. These estimations associate the ordinal credit-risk-modeling 
variable CRM with the timeliness of banks’ quarterly loan loss provisions (LLPt) measured relative 
to the next-quarter change in non-performing loans (ΔNPLt+1). Equation (1) regresses LLPt on: (1) 
ΔNPLt+1; (2) CRM, both separately and interacted with ΔNPLt+1; and (3) control variables, 
including the change in non-performing loans over the current and prior quarter (ΔNPLt-2,t). 
Column 1 (2) reports the OLS estimation of equation (1) excluding (including) the test variable 
ΔNPLt+1×CRM. Column 3 reports the estimation of the equation including bank fixed effects. 
Column 4 reports the second stage of a 2SLS estimation of the equation; the estimations of the 
first-stage models are reported in Panel A of Table C1. Column 5 reports the OLS estimation of 
the equation replacing CRM with three components estimated based on the probit estimation 
reported in Panel B of Table C1: the predicted value of CRM based on SOPHIST, a proxy for bank 
sophistication (CRMusage); the predicted value of CRM based on EBP, NCO, OpRisk, and BigN, 
proxies for bank disclosure (CRMdisc); and the residual (CRMresid). Panel B reports pooled OLS 
estimations of equation (1MS)—which is equation (1) replacing CRM with the credit-risk-
modeling indicator variables, MODEL and STRESS—for subsamples of the overall sample with 
above-median real estate loans (Real_High =1) or above-median commercial and industrial loans 
(C&I_High =1) and in stable periods or downturns. Columns 1 and 2 report the estimations for 
Real_High =1 and the stable and downturn, respectively, subperiods of the overall sample period. 
Columns 3 and 4 report the estimations for C&I_High =1 and the stable and downturn, 
respectively, subperiods. All variables are defined in Appendix B. Continuous variables are 
winsorized at the top and bottom 1% of their distributions. Standard errors for OLS regressions 
are calculated clustering observations by bank and quarter. Standard errors for the fixed effects 
and 2SLS analyses are calculated clustering observations by bank. Coefficient t-statistics are 
reported in square brackets. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, 
respectively, using two-tailed tests. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
54 
 
Table 4 
Association of Credit-Risk-Modeling Disclosures with the Ability of Quarterly Loan Loss 
Provisions to Predict Net Loan Charge-offs over the Next Two Quarters 
 
 
Panel A: Pooled Estimations of Equation (3) for the Overall Sample Period 
Variables 
(1) 
Restricted 
Base Model 
(2) 
Full 
Base Model 
(3) 
Fixed Effects 
(4) 
Second-stage 
2SLS 
(5) 
Second-stage 
Decomposition 
LLP 
0.605*** 
0.574*** 
0.504*** 
0.373*** 
0.127 
 
[13.50] 
[10.72] 
[10.56] 
[4.10] 
[1.10] 
CRM 
0.000** 
0.000 
-0.000* 
0.002 
 
[2.22] 
[0.54] 
[-1.71] 
[1.49] 
CRMusage 
 
 
 
-0.001 
 
 
 
[-1.28] 
CRMdiscl 
 
 
 
0.001** 
 
 
 
[2.50] 
CRMresid 
 
 
 
0.000 
 
 
 
 
[1.28] 
LLP×CRM 
 
0.095** 
0.132*** 
0.600** 
 
 
 
[1.97] 
[2.63] 
[2.37] 
 
LLP×CRMusage 
 
 
 
 
1.135*** 
 
 
 
 
 
[4.76] 
LLP×CRMdisc 
 
 
 
 
-0.364 
 
 
 
 
 
[-1.53] 
LLP×CRMresid 
 
 
 
 
-0.005 
 
 
 
 
 
[-0.23] 
SIZE 
0.000*** 
0.000*** 
0.001*** 
0.000 
0.000*** 
 
[7.49] 
[7.40] 
[6.71] 
[0.34] 
[5.56] 
C&I_High 
-0.000 
-0.000 
-0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
 
[-0.05] 
[-0.09] 
[-0.39] 
[0.62] 
[0.10] 
TIER1 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
 
[1.44] 
[1.23] 
[1.62] 
[0.78] 
[0.91] 
EBP 
0.005 
0.009 
0.002 
0.048 
0.000 
 
[0.19] 
[0.34] 
[0.07] 
[1.26] 
[0.01] 
ALLt-1 
0.076*** 
0.075*** 
0.091*** 
0.072*** 
0.065*** 
 
[5.01] 
[4.99] 
[5.16] 
[5.01] 
[4.78] 
LOANSt-1 
0.002*** 
0.002*** 
0.002*** 
0.002*** 
0.002*** 
 
[3.90] 
[3.84] 
[3.05] 
[3.64] 
[4.12] 
%ΔLOANS 
-0.001*** 
-0.001*** 
-0.001*** 
-0.001 
-0.001*** 
 
[-2.84] 
[-2.86] 
[-2.64] 
[-0.76] 
[-3.09] 
OpRisk 
0.000*** 
0.000*** 
0.001*** 
0.000 
0.000** 
 
[3.20] 
[3.13] 
[3.42] 
[0.53] 
[2.41] 
MktRisk 
-0.000 
-0.000 
-0.000 
-0.000 
0.000 
 
[-0.04] 
[-0.14] 
[-1.11] 
[-0.03] 
[0.21] 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
55 
 
Table 4 (continued) 
 
 
 
NCOt 
0.138** 
0.140** 
-0.031 
0.140** 
0.116** 
 
[2.55] 
[2.56] 
[-0.67] 
[2.28] 
[2.31] 
ΔNPLt 
0.119*** 
0.120*** 
0.121*** 
0.122*** 
0.125*** 
 
[9.61] 
[9.59] 
[9.81] 
[8.72] 
[10.26] 
NPLt-1 
0.060*** 
0.060*** 
0.077*** 
0.062*** 
0.067*** 
 
[6.69] 
[6.69] 
[8.09] 
[6.89] 
[7.39] 
UNRATE 
0.000*** 
0.000*** 
0.000*** 
0.000*** 
0.000*** 
 
[3.17] 
[3.18] 
[8.44] 
[4.05] 
[2.97] 
VIX 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000*** 
0.000*** 
0.000 
 
[1.47] 
[1.42] 
[6.38] 
[3.39] 
[1.61] 
Constant 
-0.005*** 
-0.005*** 
-0.008*** 
-0.003*** 
-0.004*** 
 
[-5.87] 
[-5.71] 
[-7.45] 
[-4.31] 
[-5.36] 
 
 
 
 
 
# Observations 
14,694 
14,694 
14,694 
14,694 
14,694 
Adjusted R2 
59.54% 
59.64% 
63.72% 
47.23% 
60.54% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
56 
 
Table 4 (continued) 
 
Panel B: Pooled OLS Estimations of Equation (3) by Loan Type for the Stable and Downturn 
Subperiods 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Variables 
Stable 
Downturn 
Stable 
Downturn 
 
Dep Var = NCOREALt+1,t+2 
Dep Var = NCOC&It+1,t+2 
LLP 
0.349*** 
0.483*** 
0.573*** 
0.580*** 
 
[6.77] 
[4.61] 
[8.07] 
[8.64] 
MODEL 
-0.000 
-0.000 
0.000 
0.001 
 
[-1.03] 
[-1.00] 
[1.53] 
[0.89] 
STRESS 
0.001* 
0.000 
-0.000 
-0.001 
 
[1.81] 
[0.23] 
[-1.12] 
[-0.89] 
LLP×MODEL 
0.167*** 
0.103 
0.173 
0.046 
 
[2.71] 
[1.20] 
[1.56] 
[0.21] 
LLP×STRESS 
0.121 
0.204** 
-0.086 
0.549*** 
 
[1.04] 
[2.52] 
[-0.78] 
[3.41] 
SIZE 
0.000*** 
0.001*** 
0.000 
0.000 
 
[3.92] 
[2.66] 
[1.17] 
[1.30] 
TIER1 
0.000*** 
0.000 
-0.000 
0.000 
 
[3.35] 
[1.02] 
[-0.60] 
[0.54] 
EBP 
-0.077*** 
-0.033 
0.002 
-0.041 
 
[-4.05] 
[-0.94] 
[0.04] 
[-0.98] 
ALLt-1 
0.025** 
0.102*** 
0.048** 
0.025 
 
[2.12] 
[2.86] 
[2.36] 
[0.61] 
LOANSt-1 
0.003*** 
0.005*** 
0.002*** 
0.006*** 
 
[5.00] 
[4.30] 
[2.97] 
[2.86] 
%ΔLOANS 
-0.002*** 
-0.002 
-0.003*** 
-0.004** 
 
[-5.75] 
[-1.17] 
[-3.07] 
[-2.17] 
MktRisk 
-0.000 
-0.000** 
0.000 
0.001*** 
 
[-0.48] 
[-2.28] 
[0.89] 
[2.86] 
OpRisk 
0.000*** 
0.001** 
-0.000 
0.000 
 
[3.35] 
[2.31] 
[-0.74] 
[0.28] 
NCOt 
-0.245*** 
-0.831*** 
-0.298*** 
-0.528*** 
 
[-3.65] 
[-7.40] 
[-3.89] 
[-4.24] 
NCOREALt 
0.659*** 
1.049*** 
 
 
 
[8.49] 
[7.20] 
 
 
NCOCOMMLt 
 
0.285*** 
0.441*** 
 
 
 
 
[6.90] 
[5.76] 
ΔNPLt 
0.100*** 
0.170*** 
0.164*** 
0.066*** 
 
[6.17] 
[8.96] 
[8.10] 
[3.12] 
NPLt-1 
0.055*** 
0.082*** 
0.081*** 
0.038* 
 
[7.11] 
[5.76] 
[5.06] 
[1.75] 
Constant 
-0.004*** 
-0.008*** 
-0.002 
-0.005* 
 
[-4.15] 
[-3.48] 
[-1.44] 
[-1.81] 
# Observations 
12,324 
1,911 
12,361 
1,917 
Adjusted R2 
54.47% 
62.13% 
21.64% 
18.17% 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
57 
 
 
Table 4 (continued) 
 
 
Panel A reports pooled estimations of equation (2) for the 14,694 bank-quarter observations in the 
overall sample from 1996Q1-2010Q4 with the necessary data. These estimations associate the ordinal 
credit-risk-modeling variable CRM with the ability of banks’ quarterly loan loss provisions (LLPt) to 
predict predict net loan charge-offs over the following two quarters (NCOt+1,t+2). Equation (2) 
regresses NCOt+1,t+2 on (1) LLPt; (2) CRM, both separately and interacted with LLPt; and (3) control 
variables. Columns (1)-(5) report estimations of equation (2) using five approaches that are described 
in the notes to Table 3 regarding the same columns of Panel A of that table. Panel B reports pooled 
OLS estimations of equation (2MS)—which is equation (2) replacing CRM with the credit-risk-
modeling indicator variables, MODEL and STRESS, and replacing NCOt+1,t+2 with net charge-offs 
over the next two quarters of either real estate loans (NCOREALt+1,t+2) or commercial and industrial 
loans (NCOC&It+1,t+2)—for the stable period or downturn subperiods of the overall sample. Columns 
1 and 2 report estimations of the model with dependent variable NCOREALt+1,t+2 for the stable and 
downturn, respectively, subperiods. Columns 3 and 4 report estimations of the model with dependent 
variable NCOC&It+1,t+2 for the stable and downturn, respectively, subperiods. All variables are 
defined in Appendix B. Continuous variables are winsorized at the top and bottom 1% of their 
distributions. Standard errors for OLS regressions are calculated clustering observations by bank and 
quarter. Standard errors for the fixed effects and 2SLS analyses are calculated clustering observations 
by bank. Coefficient t-statistics are in square brackets. ***, **, and * denotes significance at the 1%, 
5%, and 10% levels, respectively, using two-tailed tests. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
58 
 
Table 5 
Association of Credit-Risk-Modeling Disclosures with Loan-Origination Procyclicality 
Measured as the Association of Loan Loss Provisions with Loan Growth 
 
 
Panel A: Pooled Estimations of Equation (3) for the Overall Sample Period 
Variables 
(1) 
Restricted 
Base Model 
(2) 
Full 
Base Model 
(3) 
Fixed Effects 
(4) 
Second-stage 
2SLS 
(5) 
Second-stage 
Decomposition 
LLP 
-0.708 
-1.479 
-3.923*** 
-6.906*** 
-11.417*** 
 
[-0.58] 
[-1.12] 
[-3.68] 
[-3.61] 
[-2.76] 
CRM 
-0.018** 
-0.026*** 
-0.011 
-0.114 
 
 
[-2.31] 
[-2.95] 
[-1.13] 
[-1.57] 
 
CRMusage 
 
 
 
-0.101*** 
 
 
 
[-2.83] 
CRMdiscl 
 
 
 
-0.060*** 
 
 
 
[-3.46] 
CRMresid 
 
 
 
-0.008** 
 
 
 
[-2.09] 
LLP×CRM 
 
2.876* 
0.527 
24.196*** 
 
 
 
[1.87] 
[0.31] 
[3.29] 
 
LLP×CRMusage 
 
 
 
 
30.736*** 
 
 
 
 
 
[3.83] 
LLP×CRMdiscl 
 
 
 
 
-12.693* 
 
 
 
 
 
[-1.65] 
LLP×CRMresid 
 
 
 
 
-0.136 
 
 
 
 
 
[-0.17] 
SIZE 
-0.009*** 
-0.009*** 
-0.087*** 
-0.007 
-0.005** 
 
[-3.61] 
[-3.66] 
[-12.91] 
[-1.64] 
[-1.97] 
C&I_High 
0.011** 
0.011** 
0.015** 
0.010* 
0.013*** 
 
[2.29] 
[2.29] 
[2.40] 
[1.88] 
[2.58] 
TIER1 
-0.004*** 
-0.004*** 
0.001 
-0.004*** 
-0.004*** 
 
[-3.34] 
[-3.43] 
[1.12] 
[-3.98] 
[-3.42] 
EBP 
11.400*** 
11.441*** 
7.519*** 
11.531*** 
10.263*** 
 
[8.07] 
[8.08] 
[7.28] 
[8.49] 
[7.72] 
ALLt-1 
-2.293*** 
-2.333*** 
-4.062*** 
-2.615*** 
-2.388*** 
 
[-4.46] 
[-4.52] 
[-9.35] 
[-5.76] 
[-4.58] 
LOANSt-1 
-0.055* 
-0.056* 
-0.217*** 
-0.065** 
-0.048 
 
[-1.65] 
[-1.70] 
[-5.50] 
[-2.13] 
[-1.49] 
OpRisk 
-0.006 
-0.006 
0.019** 
-0.005 
0.002 
 
[-0.86] 
[-0.88] 
[2.23] 
[-0.62] 
[0.32] 
MktRisk 
0.004 
0.004 
0.004 
0.002 
0.003 
 
[0.86] 
[0.82] 
[0.60] 
[0.47] 
[0.64] 
NCO 
-8.060*** 
-7.980*** 
-3.460*** 
-7.282*** 
-8.113*** 
 
[-4.36] 
[-4.29] 
[-2.66] 
[-4.83] 
[-4.41] 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
59 
 
Table 5 (continued) 
 
ΔNPL 
0.507 
0.540 
1.056*** 
0.774** 
0.587 
 
[1.22] 
[1.31] 
[4.02] 
[2.41] 
[1.43] 
ALL/NPL 
0.002*** 
0.002*** 
0.002*** 
0.002*** 
0.002*** 
 
[5.38] 
[5.37] 
[5.50] 
[5.22] 
[5.35] 
UNRATE 
-0.000 
-0.000 
0.001** 
-0.000 
-0.000 
 
[-0.36] 
[-0.37] 
[2.10] 
[-0.87] 
[-0.49] 
VIX 
0.000 
0.000 
-0.000* 
0.000 
0.000 
 
[0.48] 
[0.46] 
[-1.95] 
[0.30] 
[0.21] 
DEMAND 
0.001*** 
0.001*** 
0.001*** 
0.001*** 
0.001*** 
 
[6.28] 
[6.31] 
[10.44] 
[11.62] 
[6.35] 
Constant 
0.234*** 
0.238*** 
0.931*** 
0.262*** 
0.290*** 
 
[5.99] 
[6.21] 
[14.63] 
[6.45] 
[7.67] 
 
 
 
 
 
# Observations 
15,879 
15,879 
15,879 
15,879 
15,879 
Adjusted R2 
18.6% 
18.6% 
38.8% 
14.8% 
19.6% 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
60 
 
Table 5 (continued) 
 
 
Panel B: Pooled OLS Estimations of Equation (3MS) by Loan Type for the Stable and 
Downturn Subperiods 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Variables 
Stable 
Downturn 
Stable 
Downturn 
 
Dep Var = REALGRt-1,t+3 
Dep Var = C&IGRt-1,t+3 
LLP 
-4.605** 
2.449 
-5.458** 
-1.871 
 
[-2.34] 
[0.73] 
[-2.34] 
[-0.43] 
MODEL 
-0.035*** 
0.001 
-0.018 
0.005 
 
[-2.94] 
[0.07] 
[-1.02] 
[0.18] 
STRESS 
-0.061** 
-0.045 
-0.042* 
-0.078* 
[-2.55] 
[-1.48] 
[-1.79] 
[-1.72] 
LLP×MODEL 
4.037* 
-1.537 
-2.907 
-4.954 
 
[1.66] 
[-0.51] 
[-0.92] 
[-1.06] 
LLP×STRESS 
0.874 
8.553 
1.391 
13.384* 
 
[0.26] 
[1.09] 
[0.36] 
[1.77] 
SIZE 
-0.012*** 
-0.006 
0.003 
0.002 
 
[-4.85] 
[-0.72] 
[0.95] 
[0.40] 
TIER1 
-0.004*** 
-0.004** 
-0.002 
-0.003 
 
[-3.85] 
[-2.32] 
[-1.22] 
[-0.82] 
EBP 
12.906*** 
6.633*** 
12.009*** 
5.871*** 
 
[7.81] 
[2.70] 
[6.00] 
[2.60] 
LLAt-1 
-1.947*** 
-1.822 
-2.906*** 
-4.899*** 
 
[-3.25] 
[-1.34] 
[-3.28] 
[-2.78] 
LOANSt-1 
-0.081** 
-0.072 
-0.021 
-0.010 
 
[-2.15] 
[-1.40] 
[-0.42] 
[-0.11] 
MarketRisk 
0.009* 
0.017** 
-0.005 
-0.013 
 
[1.75] 
[1.98] 
[-0.82] 
[-1.20] 
OpRisk 
-0.011 
-0.006 
-0.021* 
0.003 
 
[-1.26] 
[-0.48] 
[-1.75] 
[0.17] 
NCO 
-5.796** 
-12.578*** 
-8.120*** 
-9.721 
 
[-2.49] 
[-4.55] 
[-2.91] 
[-1.62] 
ΔNPL 
0.616 
-1.582 
-0.605 
-0.913 
 
[1.26] 
[-1.41] 
[-0.78] 
[-1.36] 
ALL/NPL 
0.003*** 
0.003*** 
0.002*** 
0.001 
 
[5.11] 
[3.15] 
[3.28] 
[0.47] 
Constant 
0.279*** 
0.206*** 
0.114** 
0.126 
 
[7.15] 
[2.78] 
[1.97] 
[1.26] 
# Observations 
13,197 
1,902 
13,796 
2,051 
Adjusted R2 
12.60% 
10.12% 
7.86% 
6.38% 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
61 
 
Table 5 (continued) 
 
 
Panel A reports pooled estimations of equation (3) for the 15,879 bank-quarter observations in the 
overall sample from 1996Q1-2010Q4 with the necessary data. These estimations associate the ordinal 
credit-risk-modeling variable CRM with the association of quarterly loan loss provisions (LLPt) with 
loan growth from the end of quarter t-1 to the end of quarter t+3 (LOANGRt-1,t+3). Following Laeven 
and Majnoni (2003), we infer (greater) loan-origination procyclicality from a (more) negative 
association of LLPt with LOANGRt-1,t+3. Equation (3) regresses LOANGRt-1,t+3 on: (1) LLPt; (2) CRM, 
both separately and interacted with LLPt; and (3) control variables. Columns (1)-(5) report estimations 
of equation (2) using five approaches that are described in the notes to Table 3 regarding the same 
columns of Panel A of that table. Panel B reports pooled OLS estimations of equation (3MS)—which 
is equation (3) replacing CRM with the credit-risk-modeling indicator variables, MODEL and 
STRESS, and replacing LOANGRt+1,t+2 with four-quarter growth of either real estate loans 
(REALGRt+1,t+2) or commercial and industrial loans (C&IGRt+1,t+2)—for the stable period or 
downturn subperiods of the overall sample. Columns 1 and 2 report estimations of the model with 
dependent variable REALGRt+1,t+2 for the stable and downturn, respectively, subperiods. Columns 3 
and 4 report estimations of the model with dependent variable C&IGRt+1,t+2 for the stable and 
downturn, respectively, subperiods. All variables are defined in Appendix B. Continuous variables 
are winsorized at the top and bottom 1% of their distributions. Standard errors for OLS regressions 
are calculated clustering observations by bank and quarter. Standard errors for the fixed effects and 
2SLS analyses are calculated clustering observations by bank. Coefficient t-statistics are in square 
brackets. ***, **, and * denotes significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively, using two-
tailed tests. 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
62 
 
Table 6 
Association of Credit-Risk-Modeling Disclosures with Loan Origination Procyclicality 
Measured as the Association of Decreases in GDP or the ABX Index with Loan Growth 
 
 
 
(1) 
(2) 
Dep Var = 
LOANGRt-1,t+3 
REALGRt-1,t+3 
MACRODECR = 
GDPDECR 
ABXDECR 
Variables 
 
 
LLP 
-1.681 
0.941 
 
[-1.25] 
[0.49] 
CRM 
-0.023*** 
-0.076*** 
 
[-2.69] 
[-3.81] 
MACRODECR 
-0.053*** 
-0.000 
[-4.97] 
[-1.24] 
MACRODECR×CRM 
0.027** 
0.001** 
 
[2.40] 
[2.47] 
SIZE 
-0.008*** 
-0.002 
 
[-3.31] 
[-0.44] 
C&I_High 
0.011** 
0.013 
 
[2.16] 
[1.42] 
TIER1 
-0.004*** 
-0.003 
 
[-3.38] 
[-0.94] 
EBP 
11.490*** 
4.553** 
 
[7.30] 
[2.17] 
LLAt-1 
-2.099*** 
-1.320 
 
[-3.94] 
[-1.17] 
LOANSt-1 
-0.057 
0.021 
 
[-1.62] 
[0.27] 
MktRisk 
0.004 
0.022** 
 
[0.86] 
[2.44] 
OpRisk 
-0.009 
-0.008 
 
[-1.22] 
[-0.53] 
NCO 
-8.944*** 
-14.457*** 
 
[-4.79] 
[-8.81] 
ΔNPL 
0.285 
-1.798*** 
 
[0.66] 
[-3.70] 
ALL/NPL 
0.003*** 
0.001 
 
[5.33] 
[1.08] 
Constant 
0.222*** 
0.125 
 
[6.00] 
[1.32] 
# Observations 
15,879 
1,581 
Adjusted R2 
15.90% 
7.00% 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409

 
63 
 
Table 6 (continued) 
 
 
Column (1) reports the pooled OLS estimation of equation (4) for the 15,879 bank-quarter 
observations in the overall sample from 1996Q1-2010Q4 with the necessary data. This estimation 
associates the ordinal credit-risk-modeling variable CRM with the association of an indicator for 
negative quarterly GDP growth (GDPDECRt) and loan growth from the end of quarter t-1 to the end 
of quarter t+3  (LOANGRt-1,t+3). Following Bikker and Metzemakers (2005), we infer (greater) 
procyclicality from a more negative assocation of GDPDECRt and LOANGRt-1,t+3. Equation (4) 
regresses LOANGRt-1,t+3 on: (1) GDPDECRt; (2) CRM, both separately and interacted with 
GDPDECRt; and (3) control variables. Column (2) reports the pooled OLS estimation of equation (5) 
for the 1,581 bank-quarter observations in the overall sample from 2007Q1-2008Q2 with the 
necessary data. This estimation associates CRM with the association of the cumulative decline in the 
ABX index from its inception in January 2006 to quarter t (ABXDECR) and LOANGRt-1,t+3. We infer 
(greater) procyclicality from a (more) negative assocation of ABXDECRt and LOANGRt-1,t+3. Equation 
(5) regresses LOANGRt-1,t+3 on: (1) ABXDECRt; (2) CRM, both separately and interacted with 
ABXDECRt; and (3) control variables. The 2007Q1-2008Q2 period is when changes in the ABX index 
had significant signal value. All variables are defined in Appendix B. Continuous variables are 
winsorized at the top and bottom 1% of their distributions. Standard errors are calculated clustering 
observations by bank and quarter. Coefficient t-statistics are in square brackets. ***, **, and * denotes 
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively, using two-tailed tests. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1978409