TITLE: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2021.3986
---

Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and
Growth in a Data Economy*
Lin William Cong
SC Johnson College of Business, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, will.cong@cornell.edu
Danxia Xie
Institute of Economics, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 100084, xiedanxia@tsinghua.edu.cn
Longtian Zhang
School of International Trade and Economics, Central University of Finance and Economics, Beijing, China 102206,
zhanglongtian@cufe.edu.cn
We build an endogenous growth model with consumer-generated data as a new key factor for knowledge
accumulation. Consumers balance between providing data for proп¬Ғt and potential privacy infringement.
Intermediate good producers use data to innovate and contribute to the п¬Ғnal good production, which fuels
economic growth. Data are dynamically nonrival with п¬Ӯexible ownership while their production is endogenous
and policy-dependent. Although a decentralized economy can grow at the same rate (but are at diп¬Җerent
levels) as the social optimum on the Balanced Growth Path, the R&D sector underemploys labor and
overuses dataвҖ”an ineп¬ғciency mitigated by subsidizing innovators instead of direct data regulation. As a
data economy emerges and matures, consumersвҖҷ data provision endogenously declines after a transitional
acceleration, allaying long-run privacy concerns but portending initial growth traps that call for interventions.
Key words : Big Data, Data Ownership, Endogenous Growth, Innovation, Non-rivalry, Privacy Regulation
History : Initially written in October 2019 and п¬Ғrst submitted on April 16, 2020.
* We thank Jasmine Cheng, Kay Giesecke, Shiyang Huang, Laura Veldkamp, Ji Yan, Buyuan Yang, Liyan Yang, and
the anonymous associate editor and referees for their feedback. We also thank conference and seminar participants
at the Midwest Macroeconomics Meeting, Australasian Finance and Banking Conference, Delhi School of Economics
and the Econometric Society Winter School, Machine LawyeringвҖҷs Conference for helpful comments and discussions.
Cong and Xie are grateful for the п¬Ғnancial support from the Ewing Marion Kauп¬Җman Foundation and from the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 71973076), respectively. The contents of this publication
are solely the responsibility of the authors.
1
arXiv:2109.10028v1 [econ.TH] 21 Sep 2021

2
Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
1.
Introduction
Data not only help produce new products and services, but also are used in research and develop-
ment and knowledge creation, which in turn improves production eп¬ғciency.1 Endogenous genera-
tion, dynamic nonrivalry, and п¬Ӯexible ownership of data distinguish them from labor and capital,
with implications for labor market allocations and policies. Meanwhile, the proliferation of big data
applications often comes at the expense of consumer privacy and is associated with discrimination
and misuse.2 Despite the introduction of data privacy laws ranging from the General Data Protec-
tion Regulation (GDPR) to the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) to JapanвҖҷs Act on the
Protection of Personal Information, we know little about how data (mis)usage, digital infrastruc-
ture, and privacy regulation aп¬Җect knowledge accumulation and the growth of a dynamic economy
where data are the new key driver.
To п¬Ғll in this gap, we build on Romer (1990) to develop an endogenous growth model of the data
economy. Our key innovation lies in that consumer data add to R&D and knowledge accumulation.
At the same time, data are by-products of economic activities with potential privacy issues, which
diп¬Җer from other input factors such as labor or capital because growth can endogenously feed
back to data generation. Consumers in our baseline model choose the quantity of data to sell to
intermediate п¬Ғrms, cognizant of potential information leakage and misuses. Innovative intermediate
п¬Ғrms utilize the raw data for research that contributes to the п¬Ғnal good production. Speciп¬Ғcally,
data are transformed into intermediate goods (information products included)вҖ”a feature absent
in other models. Data can generate spillovers through knowledge accumulation, which is further
enhanced when they are traded over time and used by multiple parties with little reproduction costs
(both static and dynamic nonrivalry). These eп¬Җects are moderated in the model by the disutility
from potential data privacy violation.
We show that a decentralized economy grows at the same rate as the social optimum on the
Balanced Growth Path (BGP). But social welfare and consumer surplus are strictly lower due
to underemployment and data overuse in the R&D sector. Monopolistic markups in the produc-
tion of intermediate goods lead to a crowding out of labor in R&D (Jones 1995), producers then
compensate the underemployment of labor in R&D by more aggressive utilization of data. The
1 Data have become a key input to many technology and п¬Ғnancial п¬Ғrms (e.g., Veldkamp and Chung 2019, Arrieta-
Ibarra et al. 2018, Cong et al. 2019); Manyika et al. (2011) estimate that big data research is believed to save over
100 billion Euros for Europe, and reduce medical care cost of the United States by 8% or 300 billion dollars annually.
2 Cambridge Analytica and FacebookвҖҷs data scandal presents a salient example (Confessore 2018). The United States
have the highest ratio of data records stolen relative to population (over 6 billion stolen records, exceeding the
population by 19 times, Sobers 2020). Data from China Judgements Online and China Academy of Information and
Communications Technology also reveal that civil and criminal cases of data leakage have been increasing in lock-steps
with the growth of ChinaвҖҷs digital economy.

Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
3
crowding-out of labor crowds in data usage in R&D to a socially excessive level. R&D labor employ-
ment and data usage can thus deviate signiп¬Ғcantly from those in the social plannerвҖҷs solution,
especially in the initial phase of BGP (albeit less severe in the long run).
Diп¬Җerent from recent studies such as Jones and Tonetti (2020), data are overused even when
they are nonrival and owned by consumers who directly factor in the disutility from data leakage
or abuse. Direct regulation on data usage comes at the cost of economic growth and constitutes a
wealth transfer from future generations to current generations. Rather than taxing data overuse,
our model reveals that subsidizing R&D wage or intermediate producers are more eп¬Җective at
mitigating the social ineп¬ғciency. Moreover, because data expand the innovation possibility frontier
which exhibits diminishing returns to scale, historical data usage reduces the beneп¬Ғt of future data
usage, potentially leading to a declining data provision per capita in the long run.
As the economy transitions into a steady growth, data provision by consumers can undergo
accelerated growth before declining. Importantly, a low initial growth may limit data generation
even in the plannerвҖҷs solution, which further delays the transition to high growth stages in the long
runвҖ”a form of growth trap. Interventions such as foreign aid for digital infrastructure development
can help escape the trap, but only to the extent that the data generating constraint is still binding,
i.e., when economic activities translate into limited volumes of data.
Our paper primarily contributes to the emerging literature on information and the data economy.
Relative to earlier studies on the social value, sales, and property rights of information (e.g.,
Hirshleifer 1971, Admati and Pп¬Ӯeiderer 1990, Murphy 1996), recent studies focus on connecting
digital information with privacy issues (e.g., AkВёcura and Srinivasan 2005, Casadesus-Masanell and
Hervas-Drane 2015) or the nonrivalry of data and competition (e.g., Ichihashi 2020a, Easley et al.
2019). We diп¬Җer by being the п¬Ғrst to connect data usage to knowledge accumulation and endogenous
growth with privacy considerations. Furthermore, our model complements studies microfounding
data privacy concerns (e.g. Ichihashi 2020b, Liu et al. 2020), and is broadly consistent with empirical
patterns on the correlation of data economy size with regulation, privacy issues, and declining labor
income share in the United States and around the world (Karabarbounis and Neiman 2014, Tang
2019, Abis and Veldkamp 2020, Barkai 2020, Liao et al. 2020).
As such, our theory adds to the large literature on economic growth, especially recent studies
embedding data into growth models by allowing them to directly enter production. For example,
Jones and Tonetti (2020) highlights the underutilization of data due to its nonrivalry and the
importance of giving data property rights to consumers; Farboodi and Veldkamp (2020) emphasizes
that data have bounded returns in long-run growth. We complement Jones and Tonetti (2020)
by allowing data to facilitate knowledge accumulation in a semi-endogenous growth model (Jones
1995, 2016) and accounting for the consumersвҖҷ data privacy concerns in the spirit of Stokey (1998)

4
Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
and Acemoglu et al. (2012).3 Through a mechanism diп¬Җerent from Farboodi and Veldkamp (2020),
we also п¬Ғnd that data play a limited role in the long run.
2.
The Model
We incorporate data production, data-based innovation, knowledge accumulation, and data pri-
vacy concerns into a macroeconomic model to characterize economic growth. Our dynamic вҖңdata
economyвҖқ consists of representative agents who are both consumers and workers, innovative inter-
mediate producers, and a п¬Ғnal good producer. Time is continuous and inп¬Ғnite.
2.1.
Representative Consumers
A population of homogeneous representative consumers (or households) grow at a constant rate
n and is L(t) at time t. Besides consumption, they each choose in each period to supply one
unit of labor inelastically in either the R&D sector (intermediate good production) or п¬Ғnal good
production.
Each consumer produces data as by-products of consumption (e.g., Veldkamp 2005) and can
sell the data to intermediate good producers.4 However, the data involve personal information and
risk leakage and misuse, leading to a disutility that they consider when selling data. We follow the
literature (e.g., Jones and Tonetti 2020) to allow data to fully depreciate in every period in the
baseline model, but relax this assumption in Online Appendix 2.2 and further discuss it in Section
3.5.
Each consumerвҖҷs utility maximization problem is then:
max
c(t),П•(t)
Z вҲһ
0
eвҲ’(ПҒвҲ’n)t
c(t)1вҲ’Оі вҲ’1
1 вҲ’Оі
вҲ’П•(t)Пғ

dt,
(1)
subject to
Лҷa(t) = (r(t) вҲ’n)a(t) + w(t) + pП•(t)П•(t) вҲ’c(t),вҲҖt вҲҲ[0,вҲһ),
(2)
and
ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) вүӨЛҷc(t)
c(t) + s.
(3)
Here, c(t) is the per capita consumption level at time t and П•(t) is the quantity of data a con-
sumer provides to potential intermediate producers for R&D. ПҒ is the consumersвҖҷ discount rate,
the reciprocal of Оі (also indistinguishable from the coeп¬ғcient of risk aversion) is the elasticity
of intertemporal substitution (EIS) of consumption, and Пғ parameterizes the disutility of data
3 Unlike the growth literature focusing on п¬ҒrmsвҖҷ property rights, we allow consumers to own and sell data.
4 вҖңSellingвҖқ can be broadly interpreted: For example, not having to pay for the use of Gmail can be viewed as
compensation to consumers for allowing Google to use their data in ways delineated in the usual terms and conditions.
In Section 3.6, we allow п¬Ғrms to own data as in Jones and Tonetti (2020) and derive additional insights in addition
to showing robustness of the main results.

Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
5
misuse or privacy violation, П•(t)Пғ, which also depends on the quantity of data provided. s repre-
sents the tightness of this constraint and depends on the digital infrastructure, legal development,
and privacy regulation policy of the country. We normalize s to zero in the baseline and discuss
comparative statics with respect to s later to understand the impact of policy intervention.
In the budget constraint (2), a(t) is the asset held by a consumer at time t and r(t) is its interest
rate. w(t) and pП•(t) are the time-t wage for labor and price of data, respectively. The relevant
variables for transitional dynamics are the growth rates of data contribution and consumption. To
see this, we can derive the systemвҖҷs evolution in the form of Euler equations from the Hamilton:
Лҷc(t)
c(t) = r(t) вҲ’ПҒ
Оі
(4)
and
ЛҷpП•(t)
pП•(t) вҲ’(Пғ вҲ’1) ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) = r(t) вҲ’ПҒ.
(5)
Constraint (3) therefore requires the growth rate of data provision to be bounded by the correspond-
ing growth rate of consumption, which is natural and ensures analytical tractability. Moreover, (3)
directly implies that П•(t) вүӨПҮc(t) for some constant ПҮ > 0, which other recent studies feature. In
other words, data are by-products of economic activities and cannot exceed a п¬Ғxed proportion of
consumption activities.
2.2.
The Final Good Producer
A representative п¬Ғnal good producer operates in a competitive environment with a production
function,
Y (t) = LE(t)ОІ
Z N(t)
0
x(v,t)1вҲ’ОІ dv,
(6)
where LE(t) is the labor employed and N(t) is the number of varieties of intermediate goods
used in the п¬Ғnal good production at time t. x(v,t) is the total amount of intermediate good of
variety v which can only be used in the п¬Ғnal good production for one period. We can view price
px(v,t) as the rental fee of patents. Finally, ОІ is the elasticity coeп¬ғcient of labor in the п¬Ғnal good
production. The п¬Ғnal good producerвҖҷs proп¬Ғt maximization over labor employed and the amount
of each intermediate good yields the п¬Ғrst order conditions:
x(v,t) =
 1 вҲ’ОІ
px(v,t)
 1
ОІ
LE(t),
(7)
and
w(t) = ОІLE(t)ОІвҲ’1
Z N(t)
0
x(v,t)1вҲ’ОІ dv.
(8)

6
Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
2.3.
Intermediate Producers
An unlimited pool of potential intermediate producers decide whether and how much to conduct
research, the success of which gives them monopoly over the intermediate product developed.
An intermediate producer therefore enters the market by conducting R&D and evaluating the
prospective proп¬Ғt from success less the costs of labor and data as inputs for R&D. We solve the
intermediate producersвҖҷ problem through backward induction.
Production phase. Upon R&D success, each entrant produces a distinct variety of intermediate
goods in a monopolistic market. The present value of an intermediate good of variety v is
V (v,t) =
Z вҲһ
t
exp

вҲ’
Z s
t
r(П„)dП„

ПҖ(v,s)ds,
(9)
where the proп¬Ғt from the intermediate good of variety v in a single period of time t is
ПҖ(v,t) = px(v,t)x(v,t) вҲ’ПҲx(v,t).
(10)
Here, ПҲ is the marginal cost of this production process, which is set as constant in this economy.
Substituting (7) into (10) and taking derivative with respect to px(v,t) yields the optimal price
of each variety of intermediate good:
px(v,t) =
ПҲ
1 вҲ’ОІ ,
(11)
which is the same among diп¬Җerent varieties and diп¬Җerent periods. Next, substitute (11) into (7):
x(v,t) =
(1 вҲ’ОІ)2
ПҲ
 1
ОІ
LE(t) вүЎx(t),
(12)
which implies that production quantity is independent of the variety.
Substituting (11) and (12) into (6) and (10), respectively, we get
ПҖ(v,t) =
ПҲ1вҲ’1
ОІ ОІ
(1 вҲ’ОІ)1вҲ’2
ОІ LE(t) вүЎПҖ(t)
(13)
and
Y (t) =
(1 вҲ’ОІ)2
ПҲ
 1
ОІ вҲ’1
N(t)LE(t).
(14)
Also, we derive the wage rate as:
w(t) = ОІ
(1 вҲ’ОІ)2
ПҲ
 1
ОІ вҲ’1
N(t).
(15)

Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
7
Entry and R&D phase. Potential intermediate producers enter by conducting R&D using
both labor (researchers, including those working on computing, and AI to allow us to use data more
eп¬ғciently), LR(t), and data purchased from consumers, П•(t)L(t).5 We assume that intermediate
producers pay a вҖңdata processing costвҖқ before they use data for R&D:
ОёП•(t)ПҶ,
where
Оё вүҘ0
and
ПҶ > 1.
(16)
For simplicity, we set Оё = 0 in the baseline model, and solve in Section 3.6 the general case in which
Оё > 0 and ПҶ > 1 ensure that the cost function is increasing and convex. We need Оё > 0 when we
allow п¬Ғrm ownership of data because otherwise the solution is trivial: Firms certainly use up all
the data if there is not any data processing cost.
We also specify the evolution of the aggregate innovation possibility frontier (number of varieties)
as:
ЛҷN(t) = О·N(t)О¶[П•(t)L(t)]ОҫLR(t)1вҲ’Оҫ = О·N(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫlR(t)1вҲ’ОҫL(t),
(17)
where О· > 0 is an eп¬ғciency term of innovation, Оҫ вҲҲ(0,1) represents the relative contribution of
data and labor in innovating process, 0 < О¶ < 1 captures the spillover eп¬Җect of knowledge, П•(t)L(t)
corresponds to data provided by all the consumers in the period, LR(t) is labor employed in R&D
sector, and lR(t) = LR(t)/L(t) denotes the fraction of labor employed in the R&D sector.6 Labor
market clearing condition requires LE(t) + LR(t) вүӨL(t).
The fact that data enter the R&D of intermediate goods distinguishes our paper from studies
such as Jones and Tonetti (2020) that have data only entering directly into п¬Ғnal good productions
(similar to the x(v,t) in our model). While it holds for data-intensive industries (e.g., self-driving
cars) that use data directly as inputs, other industries instead use non-data intermediate goods as
inputs. Data, in addition to R&D labor, can be useful for creating those intermediate goods, which
our model captures. As Romer (1990) aptly puts, вҖңan intermediate-goods sector uses the designs
from the research sector together with forgone output to produce the large number of producer
durables that are available for use in п¬Ғnal-goods production at any time.вҖқ Our model speaks to
non-data-intensive industries as well.
An intermediate producer decides how much labor LR(t) = lR(t)L(t) and data П•(t)L(t) to employ
and purchase to maximize the expected net proп¬Ғt:
max
LR(t),П•(t)О·N(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫlR(t)1вҲ’ОҫL(t)V (t) вҲ’w(t)lR(t)L(t) вҲ’pП•(t)П•(t)L(t).
5 In some sense, data acquired by п¬Ғrms are their intangible capital, akin to customer capital discussed in recent studies
(e.g., Dou et al. 2019).
6 We follow the convention in the literature to maintain constant return to scale of inputs; О¶ > 0 corresponds to
the positive external returns due to the cumulative nature of innovation (e.g., Chang 1995, Cong and Howell 2020),
whereas О¶ < 1 follows the innovation of Jones (1995) over Romer (1990) to reп¬Ӯect that it becomes harder to come up
with new varieties of intermediate goods as the variety expands.

8
Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
The п¬Ғrst order conditions yield two free-entry conditions:
О·ОҫN(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫвҲ’1lR(t)1вҲ’ОҫV (t) = pП•(t),
(18)
and
О·(1 вҲ’Оҫ)N(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫlR(t)вҲ’ОҫV (t) = w(t).
(19)
Intermediate producers enter until the marginal beneп¬Ғts of adding data or labor equal to the
marginal costs.
2.4.
Equilibrium Deп¬Ғnition
An equilibrium in our model is an allocation in which all intermediate producers choose
{px(v,t),П•(t),LR(t)}вҲһ
vвҲҲ[0,N(t)],t=0 to maximize the discounted value of proп¬Ғts, the evolution of
{N(t)}вҲһ
t=0 is determined by free entry, the evolution of {r(t),w(t),pП•(t)}вҲһ
t=0, is consistent with mar-
ket clearing, the evolution of {LE(t),x(v,t)}вҲһ
vвҲҲ[0,N(t)],t=0 is consistent with the п¬Ғnal good producerвҖҷs
proп¬Ғt maximization, and the evolution of {c(t),П•(t),LE(t),LR(t)}вҲһ
t=0 is consistent with consumersвҖҷ
utility maximization.
2.5.
Distinguishing Features of Data
Although the functional forms of how data enter the production function of intermediate goods
resemble that of R&D-speciп¬Ғc labor, the role of data in economic growth is fundamentally diп¬Җerent
from labor or capital. It is worth clarifying the distinguishing features of data before we proceed
to solve the model.
First, whereas population dynamics are exogenous in many growth models (such as the possible
supply of labor), data are endogenized by consumption which is itself endogenous and depends
on data usage in knowledge accumulation. Privacy regulations such as the GDPR and CCPA can
aп¬Җect the endogenous production and usage of data while population growth is more organic and
hard to regulate with immediate eп¬Җects. Also, note that neither capital nor labor usage causes
disutility from privacy concerns.
Another key distinguishing feature of data our paper highlights is dynamic nonrivalry. In Jones
and Tonetti (2020), all п¬Ғrms need data for production and the nonrivalry is static and cross-
sectional. In our model, only potential intermediate producer needs to use raw data in every period,
although the entrants and incumbents are beneп¬Ғting from the same data without incurring high
reproduction costs. Because data are traded between intermediate producers entering in diп¬Җerent
periods, the focus is more on data nonrivalry over time.
This is implicit in our setup: Even though data are fully depreciated every period, they contribute
to knowledge accumulation over time in terms of varieties of intermediate goods, which diп¬Җers

Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
9
from the literature that only allows labor to enter the evolution. Intuitively, a п¬Ғrm may innovate
incrementally by observing other п¬ҒrmsвҖҷ previous data-based innovations. As such, data create
knowledge spillovers to future periods by creating new varietiesвҖ”a form of dynamic nonrivalry.
One more distinguishing feature of data from R&D-speciп¬Ғc labor is that data can be owned by
п¬Ғrms but labor cannot. Traditional п¬Ғrms use long-term labor contracts while recent on-demand
labor or freelance services as seen in Uber, TaskRabbit, Scripted, and AmazonвҖҷs Mechanical Turks
require spot compensations (The Economist 2018). Neither entails п¬Ғrm ownership.
We further elaborate on dataвҖҷs endogenous production and usage as by-products of economic
activities, nonrivalry under knowledge accumulation and creative destruction, and п¬Ӯexible owner-
ship in Sections 3.4, 3.5, and 3.6, respectively, as we characterize the equilibrium.
3.
Data Economy on the Balanced Growth Path
We п¬Ғrst solve the model along the Balanced Growth Path (BGP), which requires that all variables
are growing at the same constant rateвҖ”a steady state of transformed variables that the literature
focuses on. Constant growth then implies r(t) = rвҲ—(Eq.(4)). We then identify ineп¬ғcient data
overuse and underprovision of R&D labor, explore policy remedies, and discuss the implications of
data nonrivalry and ownership.
3.1.
Growth Rate and Labor Share in a Decentralized Economy
Proposition 1. The economic growth of the decentralized economy on the balanced growth path
does not exhibit scale eп¬Җect, and the BGP growth rates can be expressed as follows
gвҲ—
c = gвҲ—
y = gвҲ—
N = gвҲ—=

Пғ
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n.
(20)
The constraint on data provision per capita never binds under BGP, and its growth rate is:
gвҲ—
П• = 1 вҲ’О¶
Оҫ
gвҲ—вҲ’1
Оҫ n =

1 вҲ’Оі
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n < 0.
(21)
Online Appendix 1.2 contains the proof. Here, gвҲ—
П• is negative: As the economy grows on a BGP,
the data each person contributes steadily decrease in the long run, although the aggregate data
use can still grow.
Because we recognize data as an input into the innovation possibility frontier, the BGP growth
rates are related to not only the population growth (n), but also consumersвҖҷ EIS (1/Оі), relative
contribution of data to innovation (Оҫ), and knowledge accumulation in the form of varieties of
intermediate goods.

10
Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
Speciп¬Ғcally, note that all growth rates on BGP are ultimately driven by the exogenous population
growth rate n; growth rates become zeros when n becomes zero.7 In Online Appendix 2.1, we derive
the parameter ranges for a BGP equilibrium to exist and to be unique. We restrict our discussions
within these parameter ranges throughout the paper.
Next, when Оі converges to 1, consumersвҖҷ utility function converges to a logarithmic form as in
Jones (1995), the BGP growth rate becomes, according to (20)
gвҲ—
ОівҶ’1 =
n
1 вҲ’О¶ .
(22)
Here, only knowledge accumulation and population growth rate inп¬Ӯuence the BGP growth rate.
Yet, in contrast with gвҲ—
Jones = n(1вҲ’Оҫ)/(1вҲ’О¶) in Jones (1995), our BGP growth rate is higher under
the same set of parameters because data add positively to the innovation possibility frontier.
In general, when Оі > 1 (as empirical studies in the macro and behavioral literature consistently
estimate, e.g., Lucas 1969, Coen 1969, Vissing-JГёrgensen 2002), we п¬Ғnd that BGP growth rate
increases with Оҫ, the extent that data inп¬Ӯuence innovation possibility frontier. Counter-intuitively,
BGP growth rate also increases in Пғ, the severity of privacy concerns, and converges to (22).
This general equilibrium eп¬Җect stems from the fact that consumers in equilibrium require a higher
growth rate to compensate for the disutility from greater privacy concerns or information leakage.8
Finally, the relationship between Оі and growth rate is negative: Consumers prefer lower growth
rate and thus less production when they are less willing to substitute current consumption with
future consumption.
Besides growth rates, we derive the following result regarding labor shares in Online Appendix
1.3:
Proposition 2. In this decentralized economy, the share of labor employed by the R&D sector
sD is constant in BGP, which is determined by
sD =
1
1 + ОҳD
,
where
ОҳD =
gвҲ—Оі + ПҒ вҲ’n
gвҲ—(1 вҲ’Оҫ)(1 вҲ’ОІ).
Here, the subscript вҖңDвҖқ stands for decentralized. A larger growth rate gвҲ—encourages п¬Ғrms to
employ more labor in R&D. When the population stops growing (gвҲ—= 0), labor in the R&D sector
becomes zero because without growth, using labor in R&D only leads to distuility of consumers.
7 Like Jones (1995), our model does not suп¬Җer from the scale eп¬Җect in, for example, Romer (1990), whose endogenous
growth rates depend on population level.
8 Similar phenomenon can also be found in Stokey (1998): Higher growth rates are needed in equilibrium when there
is greater pollution because people dislike the harm caused by pollution and require compensation.

Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
11
3.2.
Growth Rate and Labor Share under the PlannerвҖҷs Solution
We now derive the BGP growth rates and the shares of labor allocated in the two sectors under
socially optimal allocations, which constitute a benchmark for comparison with those in the decen-
tralized economy. The equilibrium in a decentralized economy is not socially optimal because of
monopolistic competition and knowledge spillover (the First Welfare Theorem fails here).
A social planner maximizes the utility of representative consumer/household, (1), subject to
the resource constraint. The resource constraint requires that the aggregate consumption C(t) =
c(t)L(t) equals the aggregate net output, which we denote by eY (t). In other words,
C(t) = eY (t) вүЎLE(t)ОІ
Z N(t)
0
x(v,t)1вҲ’ОІ dv вҲ’
Z N(t)
0
ПҲx(v,t)dv.
We п¬Ғrst characterize the static allocation given N(t) in every period. The social planner chooses
the optimal level of intermediate goods input [x(v,t)]vвҲҲ[0,N(t)] at each time t given the time paths
of C(t), П•(t), and N(t), which is equivalent to maximizing eY (t) with respect to x(v,t). Thus, the
optimal net output is:
eYS(t) =

ПҲ
1 вҲ’ОІ
1вҲ’1
ОІ
ОІN(t)LE(t),
(23)
where the subscript вҖңSвҖқ indicates the social plannerвҖҷs problem. Relative to the decentralized econ-
omy (14), eYS is larger with a markup of (1 вҲ’ОІ)1вҲ’1
ОІ /(2 вҲ’ОІ) given the same level of labor and
technology. This diп¬Җerence comes from the monopoly power in a decentralized economy, which
lowers the provision of intermediate goods and thus, the net output of the п¬Ғnal good.
Given (23), the social planner solves (dropping the subscript вҖңSвҖқ to simplify notation):
max
c(t),П•(t)
Z вҲһ
0
eвҲ’(ПҒвҲ’n)t
c(t)1вҲ’Оі вҲ’1
1 вҲ’Оі
вҲ’П•(t)Пғ

dt,
(24)
subject to
ЛҷN(t) = О·N(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫlR(t)1вҲ’ОҫL(t),
(25)
c(t) =

ПҲ
1 вҲ’ОІ
1вҲ’1
ОІ
ОІN(t)lE(t),
(26)
lR(t) + lE(t) = 1.
(27)
(25) is the innovation possibility frontier, (26) is the simpliп¬Ғed resource constraint, and (27) requires
labor market clearing. In Online Appendix 1.4, we derive the following proposition:
Proposition 3. With Оі > 1, BGP growth rates in the social plannerвҖҷs problem are the same as
those in the decentralized economy.

12
Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
Despite the lower net aggregate output relative to the plannerвҖҷs solution, the decentralized data
economy grows at the same rate. The growth rates are determined by the п¬Ғnal goods production and
the usage of data. The former is the same under the decentralized and the plannerвҖҷs solutions. The
latter exhibits a gap due to the markup created by the data price mechanism in the decentralized
economy (as opposed to the plannerвҖҷs directly setting data usage), which causes the decentralized
equilibrium to be less socially eп¬ғcient. But, the gap is a constant and does not manifest in growth
rates.
Reminiscent of Jones (1995), growth rates alone cannot fully characterize the performance of an
economy. We thus also examine the labor share in R&D and derive in Online Appendix 1.5:
Proposition 4. In the social plannerвҖҷs problem, the share of labor allocated in the R&D sector
sS is constant in BGP, which is determined by
sS =
1
1 + ОҳS
,
where
ОҳS = (Пғ вҲ’Оҫ)n + ОҫПҒ
Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оҫ)gвҲ—
S
вҲ’(Пғ вҲ’Оҫ)(1 вҲ’О¶)
Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оҫ)
.
(28)
Without monopolistic production, the result diп¬Җers from that in the decentralized economy. To
ensure sS вҲҲ[0,1], i.e., ОҳS вүҘ0, we also note that the BGP growth rate under the plannerвҖҷs solution
cannot be too high:
0 < gвҲ—
S вүӨ
1
1 вҲ’О¶

n +
Оҫ
Пғ вҲ’Оҫ ПҒ

.
(29)
This upper limit consists of three components: knowledge accumulation, population growth, and a
data-related term. Intuitively, a social planner does not want the growth of the economy to be too
fast since higher growth rates require more data usage, which can create excessive data leakage or
privacy violations in expectation. When Оі > 1, gвҲ—
S is given by (20) and (29) always holds. But when
Оі < 1, it is possible that the upper limit binds and the plannerвҖҷs solution features slower growth.
3.3.
Misallocation and Data Overuse in a Decentralized Economy
Endogenous labor allocations between production and R&D sectors inп¬Ӯuence other variables in
equilibrium. In particular, with n, ОІ, Оі and ПҒ taking on standard values from the existing literature,
the labor allocation in the R&D sector in the social plannerвҖҷs problem is always larger than that
in the decentralized economy. Figure 1 plots this diп¬Җerence as we vary the inп¬Ӯuence of data in
innovation possibility frontier (Оҫ), knowledge accumulation through innovation possibility frontier
(О¶), and the severity of privacy concerns in the consumersвҖҷ utility function (Пғ). The larger Пғ is,
the more the failure to internalize privacy concerns creates misallocation; the overuse of data and
underallocation of labor in R&D are especially severe when data are important for innovation
(large Оҫ) and knowledge accumulation is slow (small О¶).
Our model thus reveals a new source of ineп¬ғciency in the decentralized economy, even though
the growth rates are the same as those in the plannerвҖҷs solution: undersupply of labor and overuse

Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
13
(a) Пғ = 1.5
(b) Пғ = 2.5
(c) Оҫ = 0.5
(d) Оҫ = 0.6
Figure 1
Diп¬Җerence in labor employed in the R&D sector between the two cases
Notes: The п¬Ғgure shows the diп¬Җerence of labor allocated in R&D sector between decentralized economy
and the social plannerвҖҷs problem. Light color represents larger diп¬Җerences (greater misallocation) and dark
represents smaller ones. Other parameters are set as n = 0.02, ОІ = 2/3, Оі = 2.5, ПҒ = 0.03, which are standard
values used in existing literature. Оҫ вҲҲ[0,1], Пғ > 1 ensures the convexity of disutility term in consumerвҖҷs utility
function and О¶ вҲҲ[0,1] ensures the existence of BGP.
of data in the R&D sector. This п¬Ғnding contrasts and complements recent studies such as Jones
and Tonetti (2020), which predicts an underutilization of data due to its nonrival nature. In our
setting, data are overused even when owned by consumers who directly factor in the disutility from
data leakage and/or abuse.
Similar to Jones (1995), the underallocation of labor in the R&D sector comes from monopolistic
markups in the production of intermediate goods. The п¬Ғnal good producer employs more labor to
compensate for the lower production and usage of intermediate goods, which in turn crowds out
labor employed in R&D. The crowding out of labor in R&D is exacerbated because intermediate
producers are less reliant on labor, once data enter the evolution of the innovation possibility
frontier (unlike Jones 1995, in which labor is the only input for the innovation possibility frontier).
To maintain the same growth rate as in the plannerвҖҷs solution, intermediate producers have to
compensate the underemployment of labor in R&D by more aggressive utilization of data. In other
words, this crowding-out eп¬Җect of labor crowds in data usage in the R&D sector to a socially

14
Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
excessive level. Given the parameter set we have, data usage is four to п¬Ғve times higher in the
decentralized economy than in the social plannerвҖҷs problem.
3.4.
Data Generation and Regulatory Policies
Diп¬Җerent from R&D-speciп¬Ғc labor, the production of data is endogenized by consumption, which
itself is also endogenous. More data supplied add to innovations on variety, which in turn spurs
consumption (e.g., in BGP), which then further relaxes the data generating constraint. Such a
feedback is absent when it comes to labor or capital in that consumption is typically decoupled
from the exogenous evolution of population size or the growth in potential capital to be allocated.
As such, privacy regulations reducing s in (3) may aп¬Җect the production and thus the usage
of data.9 However, reducing s would reduce growth rate and would not lead to welfare improve-
ment without sacriп¬Ғcing growth, if it improves welfare at all. A full analytical characterization
is not tractable, not to mention that such an intervention entails intergenerational transfers in
practice which can be controversial. We therefore restrict our discussion in this section to policy
interventions that preserve growth rates in the plannerвҖҷs BGP solution.
We п¬Ғnd that levying a tax on the usage of data alters the transitional dynamics but is ineп¬Җective
in bringing the equilibrium allocations in decentralized economy closer to the social plannerвҖҷs
solution because as discussed in Online Appendix 3.1.1, it does not solve the underemployment
of labor in R&D but only slows down the economy before it eventually returns to the original
BGP path. However, subsidizing labor wage rate in the R&D sector or subsidizing intermediate
producers in terms of proп¬Ғt proves to be eп¬Җective. Appendices 3.1.2 and 3.1.3 derive these optimal
subsidies.
The intuition is that labor wage is pinned down by both the R&D and production sectors, and a
subsidy directly aп¬Җecting the wage level alters the labor share. Speciп¬Ғcally, because labor allocations
are derived from equalizing wages in the R&D sector and production sector, a government can apply
taxes or subsidies to adjust the prices of factors to alleviate the overuse of data in intermediate
producersвҖҷ R&D. For example, a subsidy of rate 0 < П„(t) < 1 to the R&D sector for employing
labor would modify (19) into
О·(1 вҲ’Оҫ)N(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫlR(t)вҲ’ОҫV (t) = П„(t)w(t),
while (15) remains unchanged. Then, one can derive the desirable П„(t) by equating the labor share
to that in the social plannerвҖҷs problem.10 To avoid overuses of data and potential privacy violations,
9 Both the GDPR and the CCPA give individuals certain rights over the collection and usage of their personal
information, but they diп¬Җer in multiple aspects (e.g. Hospelhorn 2020). For example, CaliforniaвҖҷs being a much larger
economy implies more severe penalties than that of the GDPR, which maps to a tighter constraint (3).
10 In Online Appendix 3.1.2, we show that this subsidy rate should be a constant. Because only the changing rate
of variables may inп¬Ӯuence growth rates (as seen in Online Appendix 1.2), applying a п¬Ғxed subsidy rate does not
introduce further distortions into the model.

Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
15
intermediate producers should be incentivized to employ more labor for innovation with subsidies
on wages in the R&D sector, which would lower data usage.
In contrast, data price is pinned down by intermediate producers and consumers. The consumersвҖҷ
joint decision on consumption and data provision implies that they care about the growth rate of
data provision, not the level, as seen in (5). In a sense, a direct tax on data purchase is decou-
pled from the data provision and because of that, would not alter the equilibrium labor share.11
Consequently, the underemployment in the R&D and data overuse persist.
Our п¬Ғndings have important policy implications because the current debate has centered on
privacy regulations, which decisively aп¬Җect the data economyвҖҷs growth. We demonstrate how R&D
labor relates to the increasing use of data and how labor market policies can eп¬Җectively reduce
excessive data overuse to improve the social welfare.
3.5.
Historical Data and Dynamic Data Nonrivalry
One unique and important property of data we highlight thus far is dynamic nonrivalry. Beyond
its implicit manifestation through the evolution of intermediate good varieties in the baseline
speciп¬Ғcation, we now extend our discussion of dynamic nonrivalry by explicitly modeling the trading
of historical data and the associated creative destruction. Speciп¬Ғcally, instead of one potential
intermediate producer using data for research (and entry) with full depreciation, we now assume:
вҖў Data generated at time t can also be used and traded in the following M > 0 periods. Historical
data depreciate at a rate of Оҙ.
вҖў Potential intermediate producers can purchase not only data from current consumers, but also
historical data from existing intermediate producers entering in the past M periods. The new and
historical data bundles are perfect substitutes.
вҖў The owners of historical data determine the proportion of data sold to newcomers, fully rec-
ognizing potential creative destruction.
вҖў If historical data are reused by new intermediate producers, disutility of contributing con-
sumers is also cumulative according to the usage.
In a sense, data become a stock variable whereas labor is a п¬Ӯow variable in the intermediate
good production function. Online Appendix 3.2 contains detailed derivation and discussion, which
are summarized here:
Proposition 5. Dynamic data nonrivalry under creative destruction as speciп¬Ғed does not
change the BGP growth rates or labor share in the decentralized economy and social plannerвҖҷs prob-
lem. However, incumbent intermediate producers are always willing to sell more than the social
11 A non-constant tax rate would not work either because it alters the BGP growth rate in the decentralized economy
which is originally the same as that in the social plannerвҖҷs solution.

16
Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
optimal level of historical data to entrants in the decentralized economy, as long as the negative
eп¬Җect of creative destruction does not come to an extreme level.
The implicit dynamic nonrivalry in our baseline model still exists: Data are transformed into
new varieties of intermediate goods, and the existing level of varieties can aп¬Җect the R&D process
in future. But, the proposition demonstrates that the key п¬Ғndings are robust to explicitly modeling
data nonrivalry and the direct use of historical data. Therefore, the diп¬Җerences between our п¬Ғndings
and Jones and Tonetti (2020)вҖҷs are driven by the dynamic nature of data usage we model, not by
the simple consideration of nonrivalry. Moreover, the proposition has implications for regulating
data resale among intermediate producers, an interesting topic for future studies.
3.6.
Data Ownership
So far, we have allowed consumers to own data and the п¬Ғrms (intermediate producers) to acquire
data by paying the consumers. We now consider cases with positive data processing cost Оё > 0
under both consumer ownership and п¬Ғrm ownership (detail derivation in Online Appendix 3.3).
Оё > 0 would not aп¬Җect much of the equilibrium outcomes when consumers own data as long as the
knowledge spillover eп¬Җect is moderate, but consumersвҖҷ EIS are reasonably moderate and the data
processing cost is suп¬ғciently convex (which holds true due to e.g., curse of dimensionality). The
main new insight from the analysis is the positive BGP growth rate of data provision when п¬Ғrms
own data. In other words, data usage under BGP could be increasing when п¬Ғrms own data, which
is diп¬Җerent from the decreasing trend when consumers own data.
Intuitively, because п¬Ғrms no longer need to pay consumers for data usage, they no longer bear
the disutility of potential privacy violation. Although they still pay a mechanical вҖңdata processing
costвҖқ, it does not push the BGP growth rate of data provision to negative as we have seen in the case
in which consumers own data. That said, under standard parameter values, e.g., Оҫ = 0.5, О¶ = 0.85,
and ПҶ > 1, the BGP growth rate of other variables, gвҲ—, is still larger than gвҲ—
П•. This is consistent
with our baseline model: Data usage becomes trivial in BGP compared with consumption as time
passes.
Moreover, Sections 3.5 and 3.6 demonstrate that our п¬Ғnding on data overuse is robust to nonri-
valry and ownership variation. This result diп¬Җers from and complements Jones and Tonetti (2020)
which emphasizes the underutilization of data due to its cross-sectional nonrivalry and the impor-
tance of consumer data ownership. Because data add to innovation over time and have persist
beneп¬Ғts in our model (instead of only entering contemporary production as in Jones and Tonetti
(2020)), п¬Ғrms are more willing to utilize and purchase data if consumers own data.

Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
17
4.
Transitional Dynamics: A Numerical Analysis
The transitional dynamics of the data economy onto a BGP also reveal interesting patterns, as we
demonstrate numerically with the baseline model setup. Even without regulations restricting the
use of data, a decline in data usage could occur as the economy grows, which mitigates the concern
of data privacy. At the same time, for data economies with minimal initial growth, the process of
data generation dictates that they may be trapped in low-growth regimes for a long time without
any intervention to improve digital infrastructure or relax privacy regulation.
4.1.
Methodology and Calibration
Similar to Jones (2016), we focus on the plannerвҖҷs solution in this numerical exercise mainly for
tractability. This would be the situation if a benevolent government implements policies, balancing
privacy protection and growth, such as the subsidy scheme we mentioned earlier. Instead of a formal
calibration designed to replicate any countryвҖҷs data, this analysis is best viewed as an illustration
of the basic transitional dynamics that are possible in our theoretical framework.
We derive in Online Appendix 2.3 a system of diп¬Җerential equations that describe the dynamics
of the plannerвҖҷs economy. They consist of a constraint on data generation (3) and three state-like
variables whose interpretations and steady state values are shown in Table 1. Other variables can
be derived from them. We solve the system of diп¬Җerential equations using вҖңreverse shootingвҖқ (Judd
1998)12 Table 2 provides a summary of parametrization.
Table 1
State-like variables for studying transitional dynamics
Variable Meaning
Steady state value
gN(t)
Growth rate of variety of intermediate goods
(20)
gВө(t)
Growth rate of shadow price corresponding to technology change gвҲ—
Вө = Пғ(1вҲ’О¶)вҲ’Оҫ
Оҫ
gвҲ—
N вҲ’Пғ
Оҫ n
lE(t)
Ratio of labor employed in production sector
(28)
4.2.
Results and Discussions
We can simulate the paths of the three state-like variables before reaching equilibrium for diп¬Җerent
values of Пғ, which stands for the extent of disutility caused by privacy leakage. We can then derive
the paths of other variables like c(t) and П•(t). Figure 2 provides an illustration of the transitional
dynamics for Пғ = 1.5 with and without the data provision constraint here. Other cases exhibit
similar patterns, which we discuss further in Online Appendix 2.4.
12 We start from the steady state and run the system backward according to the three diп¬Җerential equations. We п¬Ғrst
п¬Ғnd the values of the three state-like variables that minimize the distance between their growth rates and zero, since
they all converge to nonzero constants in the steady state. For other parameters, we choose the standard values in
the existing literature or plausible values if they are not discussed in extant studies (Оҫ, Пғ, and О¶). We set Оҫ = 0.5 to
indicate that data and labor contribute equally in creating new varieties; we discuss various choices of Пғ in Online
Appendix 2.4; we set О¶ to be a value less than one following Jones (1995).

18
Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
Table 2
Parameters for studying transitional dynamics
Variable Meaning
Value
Source
ОІ
Contribution of labor in п¬Ғnal good production function
2/3
Standard
Оі
Reciprocal of Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution
2.5
Standard
ПҒ
Subjective discount factor
0.03
Standard
Оҫ
Contribution of data in innovation possibility frontier
0.5
Discretionary
О¶
Knowledge accumulation through innovation possibility frontier
0.85
Discretionary
Пғ
Severity of consumersвҖҷ privacy concern
1.5
Discretionary
n
Population growth rate
0.02
Standard
О·
Eп¬ғciency term in innovation possibility frontier
1
Standard
(a) Growth rates of consumption and
intermediate goods varieties (without constraint)
(b) Labor allocation and growth rate of data
provision (without constraint)
(c) Growth rates of consumption and
intermediate goods varieties (with constraint)
(d) Labor allocation and growth rate of data
provision (with constraint)
Figure 2
Key variables along transitional path when Пғ = 1.5
Notes: These п¬Ғgures show the transitional dynamics of the social plannerвҖҷs problem when Пғ = 1.5, with and
without the constraint of data provision. The economies undergo long but relatively steady states before
п¬Ғnally reaching BGP at the end points.
Several robust patterns emerge. No matter where an economy starts before BGP, the growth
rate of consumption and variety both move to the steady state levels, and a transition can happen
relatively quickly once the economy reaches nontrivial growth (suп¬ғciently away from zero), as
(a) and (c) show. Moreover, as shown in (b) and (d), the growth rate of data provision decreases
from positive to negative in BGP. For an economy starting from low growth, the provision of data
increases rapidly for the accumulation of varieties of intermediate goods, which contributes to the

Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
19
п¬Ғnal good production and growth in consumption. Along this transitional path, labor moves from
production sector to R&D sector, which reп¬Ӯects how labor is used to compensate for the decreasing
provision of data.
Notice that in Panel (a), diп¬Җerent from the growth rate of variety, the growth rate of consumption
undergoes some periods of negative growth before increasing to the positive growth rate without
constraints on data provision. The temporary pain is common in the growth literature (e.g. Brock
and Taylor 2010) and indicates that at the beginning of the adjustment to high BGP growth, labor
moves out from the production sector, which causes the decrease of output and consumption. But
data are unique because economic activities constrain their supply, as is clear from (d) in which
data provision is binding from time 0 to 400. The temporary pain is absent because moving labor
away from production is not as costly as before, due to declines in data provision (which lead to
slower growth rates).
The transitional dynamics is also broadly consistent with the empirical patterns in Abis and
Veldkamp (2020) that the labor income share in knowledge work is decreasing. Formally, labor
income share is decreasing in lR(t) in our model:
Labor Income Share =
w(t)L(t)
pП•(t)П•(t)L(t) = О·(1 вҲ’Оҫ)N(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫlR(t)1вҲ’ОҫV (t)L(t)
О·ОҫN(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫlR(t)1вҲ’ОҫV (t)L(t)
1
lR(t) = 1 вҲ’Оҫ
Оҫ
1
lR(t).
With similar extent of labor allocation in intermediate and п¬Ғnal goods in production sectors under
the decentralized economy, our numerical simulations reveal this decreasing trend of labor income
share as lR(t) increases in transitional states.
4.3.
Implications for Growth Trap and Privacy Concerns
Comparing the cases with and without the constraint of data provision, we п¬Ғnd that constraint (3)
binds for an economy with low initial growth rate. The per capita data contribution is also much
lower than the case without the constraint. Importantly, for an economy starting with a growth
rate close to zero, it takes almost 200 additional time periods (years) for it to reach BGP. Even
after reaching BGP growth, the economyвҖҷs output could be signiп¬Ғcantly lower due to the delay
of accelerated growth. The intuition is straightforward: Initial low growth limits data generation,
which negatively feeds back to growth because data constitute an input factor for innovations in
intermediate good variety.
An intervention to boost the initial growth rate is crucial for escaping such a growth trap. Mean-
while, we should notice that the social planner problem is at a national level. Thus, intervention to
relax the data provision constraint (3) here is more at an international level, e.g., actions taken by
the World Bank or IMF or fellow countries in European Union to improve digital infrastructure and
data collection/storage eп¬ғciency or share expertise, which relax (3). Also, if the central planner

20
Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
is originally too budget/cash constrained to improve data infrastructure, foreign subsidies might
help relax the binding constraint temporarily.
Global waves of technological innovations such as the Internet and AI take place when countries
are having diп¬Җerent population growth and diп¬Җerent environments for technology transfer and
spillover. This can lead to vastly diп¬Җerent transitional dynamics. The tightness of data constraint s
does not aп¬Җect the BGP growth rates, but aп¬Җects transitional dynamics. For example, the United
States and Europe are in the same stage of development when data economy emerges, but the
diп¬Җerence in privacy protection (diп¬Җerent s) makes them tread diп¬Җerent paths, reaching BGP at
diп¬Җerent times.
First, as the economy just starts to grow, data can signiп¬Ғcantly facilitate the transition to BGP,
as illustrated in Figure 3: Economies 1 and 2 have the same parameters but start at diп¬Җerent
stages in their transitions to BGP, with Economy 1 trapped in near zero growth for a prolonged
period of time. An intervention to enhance data facilities and digital infrastructure or to relax
privacy regulation (increasing s) can help escape the growth trap earlier. However, even when such
interventions fully relax (3), i.e., s вҶ’вҲһ, they compensate the lagging behind Economy 2 only
partially.
In the long run, because the knowledge accumulation parameter О¶ is set to be smaller than one, it
becomes less eп¬Җective to provide more data for creating new varieties of intermediate goods as the
existing varieties accumulate. Thus, the growth rate of data provision decreases after some periods
of increase. As data become less productive in the innovation process, the economy substitutes the
use of data with more labor to focus on better exploitation of data. Finally, as the economy matures
(transition to BGP), the beneп¬Ғt of using data is diminishing but individualвҖҷs privacy concerns
remain, which reduce each consumerвҖҷs endogenous data contribution. In that regard, privacy issues
in the long run may not be as severe as current debates indicate. Instead, regulatory policies could
focus on the overuse of data in the R&D sector, as discussed in Section 3.4.
5.
Conclusion
We develop an endogenous growth model against the backdrop of the rise of big data and digital
economy. Although a decentralized economy on the balanced growth path grows at the same rate
as in the socially optimal allocations, data are ineп¬ғciently overused and R&D is understaп¬Җed.
Consumers suп¬Җer since they are inadequately compensated for potential information leakage and
privacy violation. When consumers own data, data privacy concerns become allayed in the long run
because the use of data eventually declines. However, less developed economies with low growth
at the dawn of the data economy may face a new form of poverty trap that potentially warrants
interventions.

Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
21
Figure 3
Diп¬Җerent pre-BGP Paths Given Diп¬Җerent Starting Points and Diп¬Җerent Privacy Policies
Notes: These panels show the transitional dynamics of two economies with the same parameters but diп¬Җerent
starting points. The full line and the dash line show the paths of the two economies with s = 0, the dotted
line shows the path of Economy 1 when its privacy policy becomes loose (s = 0.078), and the dash dotted
line shows the path of Economy 1 when privacy regulation is completely relaxed (s вҶ’вҲһ).
For the п¬Ғrst time, we treat data as an input factor besides labor in the process of creating new
varieties of intermediate goods, which subsequently fuel the production of п¬Ғnal good and long-run
growth. We highlight dataвҖҷs endogenous generation as by-products of economic activities, nonri-
valry in a dynamic environment, and п¬Ӯexible ownership. For tractability and focus, we necessarily
leave out certain aspects of the data economy such as п¬Ғnal goods diп¬Җerentiation. Therefore, our
п¬Ғndings should be taken as п¬Ғrst-order benchmark results rather than foregone conclusions.
References
Abis S, Veldkamp L (2020) The Changing Economics of Knowledge Production. Working Paper .
Acemoglu D, Aghion P, Bursztyn L, Hemous D (2012) The Environment and Directed Technical Change.
American Economic Review 102(1):131вҖ“166.
Admati AR, Pп¬Ӯeiderer P (1990) Direct and Indirect Sale of Information. Econometrica 58(4):901вҖ“928.
AkВёcura MT, Srinivasan K (2005) Research Note: Customer Intimacy and Cross-Selling Strategy. Management
Science 51(6):1007вҖ“1012.
Arrieta-Ibarra I, Goп¬ҖL, JimВҙenez-HernВҙandez D, Lanier J, Weyl EG (2018) Should We Treat Data as Labor?
Moving Beyond вҖңFreeвҖқ. AEA Papers and Proceedings 108:38вҖ“42.

22
Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
Barkai S (2020) Declining Labor and Capital Shares. Journal of Finance 75(5):2421вҖ“2463.
Brock WA, Taylor MS (2010) The Green Solow Model. Journal of Economic Growth 15(2):127вҖ“153.
Casadesus-Masanell R, Hervas-Drane A (2015) Competing with Privacy. Management Science 61(1):229вҖ“
246.
Chang HF (1995) Patent Scope, Antitrust Policy, and Cumulative Innovation. RAND Journal of Economics
26(1):34вҖ“57.
Coen RM (1969) Tax Policy and Investment Behavior: A Comment. American Economic Review 59(3):370вҖ“
379.
Confessore N (2018) Cambridge Analytica and Facebook: The Scandal and the Fallout So Far. New York
Times April 4th.
Cong LW, Howell ST (2020) Policy Uncertainty and Innovation: Evidence from IPO Interventions in China.
Working Paper 24657, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cong LW, Li B, Zhang T (2019) Alternative data for п¬Ғntech and business intelligence. Available at SSRN
3521349 .
Dou W, Ji Y, Reibstein D, Wu W (2019) Inalienable Customer Capital, Corporate Liquidity, and Stock
Returns. Journal of Finance, forthcoming .
Easley D, Huang S, Yang L, Zhong Z (2019) The Economics of Data. Working Paper .
Farboodi M, Veldkamp L (2020) Long-Run Growth of Financial Data Technology. American Economic
Review 110(8):2485вҖ“2523.
Hirshleifer J (1971) The Private and Social Value of Information and the Reward to Inventive Activity.
American Economic Review 61(4):561вҖ“574.
Hospelhorn S (2020) California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) vs. GDPR. Inside Out Security Blog June
17, URL https://www.varonis.com/blog/ccpa-vs-gdpr/#_.
Ichihashi S (2020a) Competing Data Intermediaries. Working Paper .
Ichihashi S (2020b) Online Privacy and Information Disclosure by Consumers. American Economic Review
110(2):569вҖ“595.
Jones CI (1995) R&D-Based Models of Economic Growth. Journal of Political Economy 103(4):759вҖ“784.
Jones CI (2016) Life and Growth. Journal of Political Economy 124(2):539вҖ“578.
Jones CI, Tonetti C (2020) Nonrivalry and the Economics of Data. American Economic Review 110(9):2819вҖ“
2858.
Judd KL (1998) Numerical Method in Economics (Cambridge: MIT Press).
Karabarbounis L, Neiman B (2014) The Global Decline of the Labor Share. Quarterly Journal of Economics
129(1):61вҖ“103.

Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
23
Liao L, Wang Z, Yan H, Yang J, Zhou C (2020) Angry borrowers: Negative reciprocity in a п¬Ғnancial market.
Working Paper .
Liu JZ, Sockin M, Xiong W (2020) Data Privacy and Temptation. Working Paper 27653, National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Lucas RE (1969) Labor-Capital Substitution in U.S. Manufacturing. Harberger A, Bailey MJ, eds., The
Taxation of Income from Capital, 223вҖ“274 (Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution).
Manyika J, Chui M, Brown B, Bughin J, Dobbs R, Roxburgh C, Byers AH (2011) Big Data: The Next
Frontier for Innovation, Competition and Productivity. Technical report, Institute M. G. McKinsey &
Company.
Murphy RS (1996) Property Rights in Personal Information: An Economic Defense of Privacy. Georgetown
Law Journal 84(7):2381вҖ“2417.
Romer PM (1990) Endogenous Technological Change. Journal of Political Economy 98(5):S71вҖ“S102.
Sobers R (2020) The World in Data Breaches. Inside Out Security Blog March 29, URL https://www.
varonis.com/blog/the-world-in-data-breaches/.
Stokey NL (1998) Are there Limits to Growth? International Economic Review 39(1):1вҖ“31.
Tang H (2019) The Value of Privacy: Evidence from Online Borrowers. Working Paper .
The Economist (2018) Worries about the Rise of the Gig Economy are Mostly Overblown. The Economist
Oct. 4th:64вҖ“66.
Veldkamp L (2005) Slow Boom, Sudden Crash. Journal of Economic Theory 124(2):230вҖ“257.
Veldkamp L, Chung C (2019) Data and the Aggregate Economy. Working Paper .
Vissing-JГёrgensen A (2002) Limited Asset Market Participation and the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substi-
tution. Journal of Political Economy 110(4):825вҖ“853.

Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
1
Proofs and Extended Discussions
1.
Proofs of Lemmas and Propositions
1.1.
The Growth Rate of Labor Allocations in BGP
Lemma A.1. In BGP, the ratios of labor employed in production sector and R&D sector both
converge to constants, thus their growth rates are both zero.
Proof of Lemma.
From the labor market clearing condition, we have lE(t) + lR(t) = 1, and
0 вүӨlE(t),lR(t) вүӨ1. Since we need the growth rates of all endogenous variables to be constant in
BGP, if lE(t) or lR(t) grows in BGP, it becomes larger than 1 eventually, which contradicts the
deп¬Ғnitions. Meanwhile, if one of them grows at a negative rate in BGP, from the market clearing
condition, the other one should grow positively, which also contradicts with the deп¬Ғnition. Thus,
we can conclude that, the only possible situation is that the two variables both remain constant in
BGP, i.e.,
ЛҷlE(t)
lE(t) =
ЛҷlR(t)
lR(t) = 0.
Q.E.D.
This is a very general conclusion, which will be used for many times in the following proofs.
Thus, we use it directly as given from now on. Notice that we can only use this conclusion in BGP,
while in other non-BGP states, the growth rates of these two ratios may not be constant.
1.2.
Proof of Proposition 1: BGP Growth Rates in Decentralized Model
Proof of Proposition 1.
Combine the free-entry condition of labor (19) and the wage determin-
ing equation from the п¬Ғnal good producer side (15) together, and change it into the form of growth
rate, we have
О¶
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) + Оҫ ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) +
ЛҷV (t)
V (t) =
ЛҷN(t)
N(t).
(A.1)
Recall that in BGP, r(t) = rвҲ—, then the patent value shown in (9) is reduced to
V (t) =
Z вҲһ
t
eвҲ’rвҲ—(sвҲ’t)ПҖ(s)ds
=
Z вҲһ
t
eвҲ’rвҲ—(sвҲ’t)en(sвҲ’t)ПҖ(t)ds
= ПҖ(t)
rвҲ—вҲ’n,
where the second equation comes from (13). Thus, the growth rate of V (t) is
ЛҷV (t)
V (t) = ЛҷПҖ(t)
ПҖ(t) = n.
(A.2)

2
Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
Plug (A.2) into (A.1), we have
(О¶ вҲ’1)
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) + Оҫ ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) + n = 0.
(A.3)
Meanwhile, the per capita output growth rate of the economy g(t) can be represented by the
growth rate of п¬Ғnal good production or variety (from (14)), that is
g(t) = Лҷy(t)
y(t) =
ЛҷY (t)
Y (t) вҲ’n =
ЛҷN(t)
N(t).
Also, from the innovation possibility frontier (17), we have
g(t) =
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) = О·N(t)О¶вҲ’1П•(t)ОҫlR(t)1вҲ’ОҫL(t).
(A.4)
Next, we want to pin down the growth rate of N(t) and П•(t). Consider the free-entry condition
of data (18) and rewrite it into the form of growth rate, and plug in (A.2), we have
ЛҷpП•(t)
pП•(t) = О¶
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) + (Оҫ вҲ’1) ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) +
ЛҷV (t)
V (t) = О¶
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) + (Оҫ вҲ’1) ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) + n.
Then, from the Euler equation of consumption (4) and the Euler equation of data (5), we have
1
Оі
 ЛҷpП•(t)
pП•(t) вҲ’(Пғ вҲ’1) ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t)

=О¶
Оі
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) + Оҫ вҲ’Пғ
Оі
ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) + 1
Оі n = Лҷc(t)
c(t) = Лҷy(t)
y(t) =
ЛҷN(t)
N(t),
where the second equation comes from the fact that in BGP, the growth rate of consumption is
the same as that of output. Rewrite the above equation, we get the following expression
(О¶ вҲ’Оі)
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) + (Оҫ вҲ’Пғ) ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) + n = 0.
(A.5)
Then, we can derive the growth rate of П•(t) and N(t) from (A.3) and (A.5), that is
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) =

Пғ
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n
and
ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) = вҲ’1
Оҫ n + 1 вҲ’О¶
Оҫ
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) =

1 вҲ’Оі
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n.
Now, from (A.4), we have
gвҲ—=

Пғ
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n.
Q.E.D.

Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
3
1.3.
Proof of Proposition 2: Labor Allocations in BGP in Decentralized Model
Proof of Proposition 2.
From (A.4) we know that in BGP, N(t)О¶вҲ’1П•(t)ОҫL(t) is constant among
all the periods t, thus
gвҲ—= О·N(t)О¶вҲ’1П•(t)Оҫ(lвҲ—
R)1вҲ’ОҫL(t),вҲҖt.
Combine (19) and (15), then plug in (9) and (13), we have
(1 вҲ’Оҫ)(1 вҲ’ОІ)gвҲ—((lвҲ—
R)вҲ’1 вҲ’1) = rвҲ—вҲ’n
Meanwhile, from (4) we can also derive gвҲ—, then combine it with the above equation, we have
gвҲ—= 1
Оі (rвҲ—вҲ’ПҒ) =1
Оі

(1 вҲ’Оҫ)(1 вҲ’ОІ)gвҲ—((lвҲ—
R)вҲ’1 вҲ’1) + n вҲ’ПҒ

вҮ’
lвҲ—
R =
(1 вҲ’Оҫ)(1 вҲ’ОІ)
Оі + (1 вҲ’Оҫ)(1 вҲ’ОІ) + ПҒвҲ’n
gвҲ—
.
Let
ОҳD =
gвҲ—Оі + ПҒ вҲ’n
gвҲ—(1 вҲ’Оҫ)(1 вҲ’ОІ),
where, gвҲ—is shown in (20) in the main text. Then, the ratio of labor employed in R&D sector is
sD =
1
1 + ОҳD
.
Q.E.D.
1.4.
Proof of Proposition 3: BGP Growth Rates in Social PlannerвҖҷs Problem
Proof of Proposition 3.
We should п¬Ғrst solve the static problem before we get to the dynamic
problem. Taking other variables as given, the net output eY (t) can be maximized by choosing the
optimal intermediate good usage xS(v,t) as
xS(v,t) =

ПҲ
1 вҲ’ОІ
вҲ’1
ОІ
LE(t).
(A.6)
Then, substitute this into the deп¬Ғnition of net output, we get the optimal net output which is shown
in (23). After that, the social plannerвҖҷs problem is set from (24) to (27). To solve this problem, we
п¬Ғrst set up the current-value Hamiltonian equation as
H = c(t)1вҲ’Оі вҲ’1
1 вҲ’Оі
вҲ’П•(t)Пғ + О»(t)
"
ПҲ
1 вҲ’ОІ
1вҲ’1
ОІ
ОІN(t)lE(t) вҲ’c(t)
#
+ Вө(t)О·N(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫlR(t)1вҲ’ОҫL(t),
where О»(t) and Вө(t) are the shadow prices corresponding to the constraints (26) and (25), respec-
tively. Now, write the markup as
A =

ПҲ
1 вҲ’ОІ
1вҲ’1
ОІ
,

4
Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
and derive the necessary conditions with respect to c(t), П•(t), lE(t) and N(t), we then have the
following equations:
вҲӮH
вҲӮc(t) = c(t)вҲ’Оі вҲ’О»(t) = 0,
(A.7)
вҲӮH
вҲӮП•(t) = вҲ’ПғП•(t)ПғвҲ’1 + Вө(t)ОҫО·N(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫвҲ’1lR(t)1вҲ’ОҫL(t) = 0,
(A.8)
вҲӮH
вҲӮlE(t) = О»(t)ОІAN(t) вҲ’Вө(t)О·(1 вҲ’Оҫ)N(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫlR(t)вҲ’ОҫL(t) = 0
(A.9)
and
вҲӮH
вҲӮN(t) = О»(t)AОІlE(t) + Вө(t)О·О¶N(t)О¶вҲ’1П•(t)ОҫlR(t)1вҲ’ОҫL(t) = вҲ’ЛҷВө(t) + (ПҒ вҲ’n)Вө(t).
(A.10)
This system can be expressed by the seven equations from (25) to (27) and from (A.7) to (A.10).
Consider (A.9), move the second term to the right hand side, change the equation into the form
of growth rate, and substitute the growth rate of О»(t) and Вө(t) derived from (A.7) and (A.8), we
have13
ЛҷО»(t)
О»(t) +
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) = ЛҷВө(t)
Вө(t) + О¶
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) + Оҫ ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) + n
вҮ’
вҲ’Оі Лҷc(t)
c(t) + (1 вҲ’О¶)
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) вҲ’ЛҷВө(t)
Вө(t) вҲ’Оҫ ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) вҲ’n = 0
вҮ’
вҲ’Оі Лҷc(t)
c(t) +
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) вҲ’Пғ ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) = 0.
Notice that the growth rate of c(t) is what we want to derive, which can be deп¬Ғned as gвҲ—, then
Лҷc(t)
c(t) = gвҲ—= 1
Оі
 ЛҷN(t)
N(t) вҲ’Пғ ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t)
!
.
(A.11)
Next, we pin down the growth rate of N(t) and П•(t). From (A.9), we have
О»(t)
Вө(t) = О·(1 вҲ’Оҫ)
ОІA
N(t)О¶вҲ’1lR(t)вҲ’ОҫП•(t)ОҫL(t).
Then, (A.10) can be reformed as
О»(t)
Вө(t)AОІlE(t) + О·О¶N(t)О¶вҲ’1П•(t)ОҫlR(t)1вҲ’ОҫL(t) = вҲ’ЛҷВө(t)
Вө(t) + (ПҒ вҲ’n)
вҮ’
[О·(1 вҲ’Оҫ)lE(t) + О·О¶lR(t)]N(t)О¶вҲ’1П•(t)ОҫlR(t)вҲ’ОҫL(t) = О¶
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) + (Оҫ вҲ’Пғ) ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) + ПҒ.
(A.12)
Since the right hand side is constant in BGP, the left hand side should also be constant. Thus, we
have
(О¶ вҲ’1)
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) + Оҫ ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) + n = 0.
(A.13)
13 Here, we expect that lE and lR converge to a constant in BGP, as has been shown in Online Appendix 1.1.

Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
5
Meanwhile, we can derive the production function (in per capita form) in the social plannerвҖҷs
problem as
yS(t) = AN(t)lE(t)
Thus, the growth rate of the economy is
gвҲ—=
ЛҷN(t)
N(t).
(A.14)
Combine (A.14) with (A.11) and also (A.13), we get
gвҲ—
S =

Пғ
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n,
(A.15)
which is the same as that in the decentralized model. The growth rates of other related variables
can be derived similarly. Q.E.D.
We can come back to the following illustrations after reading Appendices 1.5 and 2.1. We should
notice that although the result of growth rate here equals to that in the decentralized model, in
Online Appendix 1.5, the result of labor share in R&D sector requires the growth rate to be within
a certain range. From (A.16) in Online Appendix 1.5 we know that gвҲ—
S should satisfy the following
condition:
0 < gвҲ—
S <
1
1 вҲ’О¶

n +
Оҫ
Пғ вҲ’Оҫ ПҒ

.
Plug in the expression of gвҲ—
S, we have
0 < О¶ < 1 вҲ’(1 вҲ’Оі)
n(Пғ вҲ’Оҫ)
ПҒПғ
+ Оҫ
Пғ

.
When Оі > 1, from (A.20) in Online Appendix 2.1 we have 0 < О¶ < 1 вҲ’(1 вҲ’Оі) Оҫ
Пғ, which includes
the above condition. However, when 0 < Оі < 1, we have 0 < О¶ < 1 вҲ’(1 вҲ’Оі)

n
ПҒ + Оҫ
Пғ

, the condition
above is not always satisп¬Ғed. Since in literature, we usually think that Оі > 1, the social plannerвҖҷs
problem is always meaningful.
1.5.
Proof of Proposition 4: Labor Allocations in BGP in Social PlannerвҖҷs Problem
Proof of Proposition 4.
Similar to the decentralized economy, in social plannerвҖҷs problem we
also have
gвҲ—= О·N(t)О¶вҲ’1П•(t)Оҫ(lвҲ—
R)1вҲ’ОҫL(t),вҲҖt.
Combine (A.12) and (A.13), and plug in the above equation, in BGP we have
[(1 вҲ’Оҫ)(1 вҲ’lвҲ—
R) + О¶lвҲ—
R]gвҲ—(lвҲ—
R)вҲ’1 = О¶
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) + (Оҫ вҲ’Пғ) ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) + ПҒ
вҮ’
[(1 вҲ’Оҫ)(1 вҲ’lвҲ—
R) + О¶lвҲ—
R]gвҲ—(lвҲ—
R)вҲ’1 =

1 вҲ’Пғ
Оҫ (1 вҲ’О¶)
 ЛҷN(t)
N(t) +
Пғ
Оҫ вҲ’1

n + ПҒ
вҮ’

(1 вҲ’Оҫ)(1 вҲ’lвҲ—
R) +
Пғ
Оҫ вҲ’1

(1 вҲ’О¶)lвҲ—
R

gвҲ—(lвҲ—
R)вҲ’1 =
Пғ
Оҫ вҲ’1

n + ПҒ.

6
Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
As a result, we have
lвҲ—
R =
1
1 + ОҳS
,
where,
ОҳS = (Пғ вҲ’Оҫ)n + ОҫПҒ
Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оҫ)gвҲ—
S
вҲ’(Пғ вҲ’Оҫ)(1 вҲ’О¶)
Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оҫ)
,
(A.16)
and gвҲ—
S is given in (A.15). Q.E.D.
2.
Extended Discussions
2.1.
The Existence and Uniqueness of BGP
Proposition A.1. In this data-driven innovation model, there exists a unique BGP which is
given in Proposition 1, if the following condition is satisп¬Ғed
0 < О¶ <
(
1 вҲ’Оҫ
Пғ(1 вҲ’Оі),
if Оі > 1;
1 вҲ’(1 вҲ’Оі)

n
ПҒ + Оҫ
Пғ

,
if 0 < Оі < 1.
Proof of Proposition A.1.
To ensure the existence of BGP, the growth rate of the economy
should satisfy two conditions. The п¬Ғrst one requires gвҲ—> 0, which makes
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі) >0
вҮ’
О¶ <1 вҲ’Оҫ
Пғ(1 вҲ’Оі).
(A.17)
The second one requires that the growth rate should satisfy the transversality condition (TVC),
i.e.,
lim
tвҶ’вҲһ
"
exp

вҲ’
Z t
0
r(s)ds
Z N(t)
0
V (v,t)dv
#
= 0.
(A.18)
In BGP, the TVC is simpliп¬Ғed into
lim
tвҶ’вҲһeвҲ’rвҲ—tN(t)V (t) =0
вҮ’
lim
tвҶ’вҲһe(gвҲ—+nвҲ’rвҲ—)tN(0)V (0) =0,
which leads to the condition gвҲ—+nвҲ’rвҲ—< 0. Meanwhile, from (4) we can know that rвҲ—= ОіgвҲ—+n+ПҒ,
then
gвҲ—+ n вҲ’ОіgвҲ—вҲ’n вҲ’ПҒ <0
вҮ’
gвҲ—<
ПҒ
1 вҲ’Оі
вҮ’
О¶ <1 вҲ’(1 вҲ’Оі)
n
ПҒ + Оҫ
Пғ

.
(A.19)
Combine (A.17) and (A.19), and О¶ > 0 (positive technology spillover), we have
0 < О¶ <
(
1 вҲ’Оҫ
Пғ(1 вҲ’Оі),
if Оі > 1;
1 вҲ’(1 вҲ’Оі)

n
ПҒ + Оҫ
Пғ

,
if 0 < Оі < 1,
(A.20)
which is what we require the spill-over eп¬Җect О¶ to be. Q.E.D.

Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
7
2.2.
Data Accumulation
In our baseline model, data are set to be fully depreciated in every period. One might think that
in reality, data involved in the innovation possibility frontier can accumulate. This is always the
case, since time-series data usually contain useful information. To model this formally, we let the
innovation possibility frontier be:
ЛҷN(t) = О·N(t)О¶ОҰ(t)ОҫlR(t)1вҲ’ОҫL(t),
where ОҰ(t) denotes the total quantity of data accumulated in R&D activities at time t. Its law of
motion is then:
ЛҷОҰ(t) = П•(t) вҲ’ОәОҰ(t),
(A.21)
where, П•(t) is the same as that in the previous sections, and Оә here represents the depreciation
rate of data, i.e., the rate that data become out of date every period. Other settings are still the
same as the baseline model. By introducing this adjustment into the baseline model, we have the
following proposition.
Proposition A.2. In the case that data involved in the innovation possibility frontier can accu-
mulate, the growth of the economy in BGP remains similar as that in the case without data accu-
mulation.
Proof of Proposition A.2.
From (A.21), in BGP, we still need the growth rate of ОҰ(t) to be
constant, i.e.,
ЛҷОҰ(t)
ОҰ(t) = П•(t)
ОҰ(t) вҲ’Оә,
which makes the right hand side of the equation be constant as well. Then, the growth rate of
information in every period П•(t) is the same as that of total data accumulation ОҰ(t), i.e.,
ЛҷОҰ(t)
ОҰ(t) = ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t)
In the baseline model, all the derivations only involve the growth rate of the endogenous variables,
except the innovation possibility frontier, the only place where the level value of П•(t) appears.
Then, we can still derive the similar results simply by replacing the growth rate of П•(t) with ОҰ(t)
in appropriate places. Q.E.D.
2.3.
Derivation of the Diп¬Җerential Equation System in Section 4
For simplicity, here we assume that ПҲ = 1 вҲ’ОІ. First, combining (A.8) and (A.9), we have
вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оҫ)
Пғ вҲ’Оҫ
ЛҷlR(t)
lR(t) + Оҫ
ЛҷlR(t)
lR(t)
=

О¶ вҲ’1 +
ОҫО¶
Пғ вҲ’Оҫ

gN(t) +

1 +
Оҫ
Пғ вҲ’Оҫ

gВө(t) +

1 +
Оҫ
Пғ вҲ’Оҫ

n вҲ’gО»(t).

8
Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
Consider that
ЛҷlR(t)
lR(t) = вҲ’
ЛҷlE(t)
1 вҲ’lE(t),
and from the resource constraint (26) and (A.7), we have
gc(t) = gN(t) +
ЛҷlE(t)
lE(t) = вҲ’1
Оі gО»(t).
(A.22)
Then, the law of motion of lE(t) can be derived as
ЛҷlE(t) =

Оі + О¶ вҲ’1 +
ОҫО¶
ПғвҲ’Оҫ

gN(t) +

1 +
Оҫ
ПғвҲ’Оҫ

gВө(t) +

1 +
Оҫ
ПғвҲ’Оҫ

n

Оҫ(1вҲ’Оҫ)
ПғвҲ’Оҫ вҲ’Оҫ

1
1вҲ’lE(t) вҲ’
Оі
lE(t)
(A.23)
and the growth rate of П•(t) can be represented as
gП•(t) =
1
Пғ вҲ’Оҫ
"
gВө(t) + О¶gN(t) вҲ’(1 вҲ’Оҫ)
ЛҷlE(t)
1 вҲ’lE(t) + n
#
.
(A.24)
From (A.9) and (A.10), we derive the law of motion of gВө(t) as
ЛҷgВө(t) = (gВө(t) вҲ’ПҒ + n)
"
(О¶ вҲ’1)gN(t) + ОҫgП•(t) + Оҫ
ЛҷlE(t)
1 вҲ’lE(t) + n +
(1 вҲ’Оҫ вҲ’О¶)ЛҷlE(t)
О¶ + (1 вҲ’Оҫ вҲ’О¶)lE(t)
#
.
(A.25)
Similarly, the law of motion of gN(t) is
ЛҷgN(t) = gN(t)
"
(О¶ вҲ’1)gN(t) + ОҫgП•(t) вҲ’(1 вҲ’Оҫ)
ЛҷlE(t)
1 вҲ’lE(t) + n
#
.
(A.26)
In conclusion, the system of diп¬Җerential equations of the three state-like variables are (A.26),
(A.25), and (A.23). After deriving the transitional dynamics of these three state-like variables,
other variables such as gc(t) and gП•(t) can be derived from (A.22) and (A.24), respectively.
2.4.
Additional Results on Transitional Dynamics
To demonstrate the robustness of our п¬Ғndings, we show in Figure 1 and Figure 2 the transitional
dynamics when Пғ, the disutility parameter, takes other values with and without the data provision
constraint, respectively.
We further illustrate the evolution of data provision in Figure 3 by plotting the level of and
cumulative level of usage/provision. The initial value of data provision is set to П•(0) = 1 by taking
Пғ = 1.5, we observe a peak of data provision which decreases rapidly to a low level while the
cumulative data provision remains on a plateau. As we have discussed previously, the eп¬Җect of data
in our model still exists in the form of new varieties of intermediate goods over time.

Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
9
(a) Пғ = 2.0 (without constraint)
(b) Пғ = 2.0 (without constraint)
(c) Пғ = 2.5 (without constraint)
(d) Пғ = 2.5 (without constraint)
(e) Пғ = 3.0 (without constraint)
(f) Пғ = 3.0 (without constraint)
Figure 1
Key variables along transitional path with diп¬Җerent values of Пғ, without data provision constraint
Notes. These п¬Ғgures show the transitional dynamics of the social plannerвҖҷs problem when Пғ =
2.0,2.5 and 3.0, without the constraint of data provision. The economies undergo long but relatively steady
states before п¬Ғnally reaching BGP at the end points.
3.
Model Extensions: Proofs and Further Discussion
3.1.
Policy Implications on BGP
First, as we prove in Online Appendix 3.3.1, reducing s through privacy policy regulation would
reduce growth rate, and would not lead to welfare improvement without sacriп¬Ғcing growth, if it
improves welfare at all. Solving the case explicitly is diп¬ғcult, we therefore restrict our discussion
here to policy interventions that preserve growth rates.
3.1.1.
Ineп¬Җectiveness of Taxing Data Usage

10
Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
(a) Пғ = 2.0 (with constraint)
(b) Пғ = 2.0 (with constraint)
(c) Пғ = 2.5 (with constraint)
(d) Пғ = 2.5 (with constraint)
(e) Пғ = 3.0 (with constraint)
(f) Пғ = 3.0 (with constraint)
Figure 2
Key variables along transitional path with diп¬Җerent values of Пғ, with data provision constraint
Notes. These п¬Ғgures show the transitional dynamics of the social plannerвҖҷs problem when Пғ =
2.0,2.5 and 3.0, with the constraint of data provision. The economies undergo long but relatively steady
states before п¬Ғnally reaching BGP at the end points.
Proposition A.3. Levying a tax on the usage of data alters the transitional dynamics but
is ineп¬Җective in bringing the equilibrium allocations in decentralized economy closer to the social
plannerвҖҷs solution because the decentralized economy eventually returns to the original BGP path.
Proof of Proposition A.3.
First, we should prove that the optimal tax rate on data usage should
be constant to ensure the BGP growth rates not deviate from the level in baseline model. If we
add a tax term on the free-entry condition of data provision, i.e.,
О·ОҫN(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫвҲ’1lR(t)1вҲ’ОҫV (t) = П„(t)pП•(t)
(A.27)

Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
11
(a) Provision Level (without constraint)
(b) Cumulative Level (without constraint)
(c) Provision Level (with constraint)
(d) Cumulative Level (with constraint)
Figure 3
Flow and cumulative levels of data provision with Пғ = 1.5, with and without data provision constraint.
Notes. These п¬Ғgures show the level change and cumulative level change of data provision before reaching
BGP when Пғ = 1.5, with and without the constraint of data provision.
where П„(t) is the tax rate. Rewrite (A.27) into the form of growth rate, we have
gpП•(t) + gП„(t) = О¶gN(t) + (Оҫ вҲ’1)gП•(t) + (1 вҲ’Оҫ)glR(t) + gV (t).
Then, combine the above equation with (5), we have (in BGP)
gП„(t) = О¶gN(t) + (Оҫ вҲ’Пғ)gП•(t) вҲ’rвҲ—+ n + ПҒ.
(A.28)
Also, recalling (4), (A.28) can be further written as
gП„(t) = О¶gN(t) + (Оҫ вҲ’Пғ)gП•(t) вҲ’Оіgc(t) + n = (О¶ вҲ’Оі)gвҲ—+ (Оҫ вҲ’Пғ)gвҲ—
П• + n.
If we want the growth rates gвҲ—and gвҲ—
П• to be the same as social optimum, we can derive that
gП„(t) = (О¶ вҲ’Оі)

Пғ
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n + (Оҫ вҲ’Пғ)

1 вҲ’Оі
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n + n = 0.
Thus, tax rate П„(t) should be a constant in BGP. In other words, as long as the tax rate is a
constant over time, BGP growth rate remains the same.
Then, we want to show the optimal tax rate that can make the allocations in decentralized
economy close to the solution in social plannerвҖҷs problem. Imagine a decentralized economy in

12
Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
BGP, the government suddenly announces a п¬Ғxed rate of tax on data collection by intermediate
producers from consumers, П„, in order to push the economy close to social optimum, i.e., make the
labor allocations in both sectors and data provision level the same as social optimum. In this case,
we have to derive the labor share in the two sectors in another way, as shown below. Consider that
in BGP,
gвҲ—= О·N(t)О¶вҲ’1П•(t)Оҫ(lвҲ—
R)1вҲ’ОҫL(t)
and the free-entry condition of data (in BGP)
О·ОҫN(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫвҲ’1(lвҲ—
R)1вҲ’ОҫV (t) = П„(t)pП•(t).
Combining the above two equations, and plug in the BGP value of V (t), we have
gвҲ—ОҫN(t)П•(t)вҲ’1V (t)L(t)вҲ’1 = П„pП•(t)
вҮ’
gвҲ—ОҫN(t)П•(t)вҲ’1
ПҲ
1вҲ’1
ОІ ОІ
(1вҲ’ОІ)
1вҲ’2
ОІ LE(t)
rвҲ—вҲ’n
L(t)вҲ’1 = П„pП•(t)
вҮ’
gвҲ—Оҫ
ПҲ
1вҲ’1
ОІ ОІ
(1вҲ’ОІ)
1вҲ’2
ОІ lвҲ—
E
ОіgвҲ—+ ПҒ вҲ’nN(t)П•(t)вҲ’1pП•(t)вҲ’1 = П„
(A.29)
Notice that in BGP, N(t)П•(t)вҲ’1pП•(t)вҲ’1 converges to constant since
gвҲ—
N вҲ’gвҲ—
П• вҲ’gвҲ—
pП• = 0.
Thus, we can rewrite this term as N(t0)П•(t0)вҲ’1pП•(t0)вҲ’1, where t0 is one of the periods in BGP. Go
on with (A.29), we п¬Ғnally derive the labor share in R&D sector as
lвҲ—
R = 1 вҲ’(ОіgвҲ—+ ПҒ вҲ’n)П„(1 вҲ’ОІ)1вҲ’2
ОІ
ОҫgвҲ—ПҲ1вҲ’1
ОІ ОІ
N(t0)П•(t0)вҲ’1pП•(t0)вҲ’1
(A.30)
On the other hand, notice that lвҲ—
R should equal to the result coming from the free-entry condition
of labor (19), then, (The derivation process is still the same as we do in Online Appendix 1.3, with
no inп¬Ӯuences from adding the tax term of data collection.)
1 вҲ’(ОіgвҲ—+ ПҒ вҲ’n)П„(1 вҲ’ОІ)1вҲ’2
ОІ
ОҫgвҲ—ПҲ1вҲ’1
ОІ ОІ
N(t0)П•(t0)вҲ’1pП•(t0)вҲ’1 =
1
1 +
gвҲ—Оі+ПҒвҲ’n
gвҲ—(1вҲ’Оҫ)(1вҲ’ОІ)
.
As a result, the term П„N(t0)П•(t0)вҲ’1pП•(t0)вҲ’1 should always be constant. This means that changes
in tax rate П„ are always cancelled by changes in N(t), П•(t) and pП•(t) together, while the labor
share in the two sectors remain unchanged. Thus, levying tax on data collection will not push the
BGP results in decentralized economy close to the social plannerвҖҷs problem. Deп¬Ғnitely, levying tax
on data collection changes the usage of data and labor employment in the transitional state, but
the economy will return to the previous path in BGP. Q.E.D.

Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
13
3.1.2.
Optimal Subsidy on Labor Employment in R&D Sector Although levying a
tax directly on data usage comes out to be ineп¬Җective, we can still adjust the BGP path of the
decentralized economy through indirect ways. First, we consider subsidizing the wage rate of labor
employed in R&D sector. If П„(t) denotes the gross subsidy rate14, the free-entry condition of labor
employment (19) becomes
О·(1 вҲ’Оҫ)N(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫlR(t)вҲ’ОҫV (t) = П„(t)w(t).
(A.31)
Then, we have the following proposition.
Proposition A.4. In order to push labor allocations in decentralized economy close to the solu-
tion in the social plannerвҖҷs problem without deviating from the BGP growth rates, the subsidy rate
on labor employment in R&D sector П„(t) should be constant, which is determined by
П„(t) = П„ вҲ—= (1 вҲ’ОІ)[(Пғ вҲ’Оҫ)n + ОҫПҒ вҲ’(Пғ вҲ’Оҫ)(1 вҲ’О¶)gвҲ—]
ОіgвҲ—+ ПҒ
< 1,
where, gвҲ—is BGP growth rate derived in Proposition 1.
Proof of Proposition A.4.
First, we prove that the optimal subsidy rate should be constant
to ensure that the BGP growth rates do not deviate from previous levels. Rewrite the adjusted
free-entry condition (A.31) into a form of growth rates, we have
О¶gN(t) + ОҫgП•(t) вҲ’ОҫglR(t) + gV (t) = gП„(t) + gw(t).
Also, from the determining equation of wage in production sector (15), rewrite it into growth rate
form:
gw(t) = gN(t).
In BGP, glR(t) = 0, gV (t) = n. Thus, combining the above two equations, we derive the growth rate
of subsidy rate as
gП„(t) = (О¶ вҲ’1)gN(t) + ОҫgП•(t) + n.
If we want the growth rates gвҲ—and gвҲ—
П• to be the same as the solution in the social plannerвҖҷs problem,
we derive that
gП„(t) = (О¶ вҲ’1)

Пғ
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n + Оҫ

1 вҲ’Оі
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n + n = 0.
Thus, the subsidy rate should also be constant.
14 Here, П„(t) is set together with wage w(t), which is a kind of cost. Then, it is a subsidy rate if 0 < П„(t) < 1, while it
is a tax rate if П„(t) > 1. In the next section, we set П„ вҖІ(t) together with proп¬Ғt V (t), which is a kind of revenue. In this
occasion, the meaning becomes opposite: It is a subsidy rate if П„ вҖІ(t) > 1, while it is a tax rate if 0 < П„ вҖІ(t) < 1.

14
Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
Then, we determine the optimal subsidy rate. Go on with the derivation process in Online
Appendix 1.3 by replacing the free-entry condition (19) with (A.31), we п¬Ғnally derive the labor
share in the R&D sector with subsidy as
(sD)вҖІ =
1
1 + (ОҳD)вҖІ ,
where,
(ОҳD)вҖІ =
П„

Оі + ПҒвҲ’n
gвҲ—

(1 вҲ’Оҫ)(1 вҲ’ОІ),
here, gвҲ—is shown in (20). After that, we derive the optimal subsidy rate of wage in R&D sector
by letting the labor share in the decentralized model equal to that in the social plannerвҖҷs problem,
i.e.,
П„(t) = П„ вҲ—= (1 вҲ’ОІ)[(Пғ вҲ’Оҫ)n + ОҫПҒ вҲ’(Пғ вҲ’Оҫ)(1 вҲ’О¶)gвҲ—]
ОіgвҲ—+ ПҒ вҲ’n
.
Q.E.D.
3.1.3.
Optimal Subsidy on Proп¬Ғts from Intermediate Good Productions An alter-
native way of pushing the decentralized model close to the solution of social plannerвҖҷs problem is
to subsidize intermediate producers directly. Formally, denote П„ вҖІ(t) as the subsidy rate of proп¬Ғt,
then in BGP, total value of a patent
V (t) = ПҖ(t)
rвҲ—вҲ’n
(A.32)
becomes
V (t) = П„ вҖІ(t)ПҖ(t)
rвҲ—вҲ’n .
(A.33)
Then, we propose the following proposition.
Proposition A.5. In order to push labor allocations in decentralized economy close to the solu-
tion in social plannerвҖҷs problem without deviating from the BGP growth rates, the subsidy rate on
proп¬Ғt from intermediate good productions П„ вҖІ(t) should be constant, which is determined by
П„ вҖІ(t) = (П„ вҖІ)вҲ—=
ОіgвҲ—+ ПҒ вҲ’n
(1 вҲ’ОІ)[(Пғ вҲ’Оҫ)n + ОҫПҒ вҲ’gвҲ—(Пғ вҲ’Оҫ)(1 вҲ’О¶)] > 1,
where, gвҲ—is BGP growth rate derived in Proposition 1.
Proof of Proposition A.5.
Similarly, we should п¬Ғrst prove the constancy of subsidy rate П„ вҖІ(t).
Combining the free-entry condition of labor (19) and the wage determining equation in production
side (15), and then plugging it into the BGP form of V (t) shown in (A.33), we have
О·(1 вҲ’Оҫ)N(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫlR(t)вҲ’ОҫV (t) = w(t) = ОІ
(1 вҲ’ОІ)2
ПҲ
 1
ОІ вҲ’1
N(t)
вҮ’
О·(1 вҲ’Оҫ)N(t)О¶вҲ’1П•(t)ОҫlR(t)вҲ’Оҫ
П„ вҖІ(t)
ПҲ
1вҲ’1
ОІ ОІ
(1вҲ’ОІ)
1вҲ’2
ОІ LE(t)
rвҲ—вҲ’n
= ОІ
(1 вҲ’ОІ)2
ПҲ
 1
ОІ вҲ’1
(A.34)

Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
15
Rewrite this equation into the form of growth rate, we have
(О¶ вҲ’1)gN(t) + ОҫgП•(t) + gП„вҖІ(t) + n = 0.
If we want the growth rate gвҲ—and gвҲ—
П• to be the same as the solution in the social plannerвҖҷs problem,
we derive
gП•вҖІ(t) = (1 вҲ’О¶)gвҲ—вҲ’ОҫgвҲ—
П• вҲ’n = 0.
Thus, the subsidy rate should be constant.
Then we determine the optimal subsidy rate. Go on with (A.34), we have
gвҲ—(1 вҲ’Оҫ)(lвҲ—
R)вҲ’1
П„ вҖІ
ПҲ
1вҲ’1
ОІ ОІ
(1вҲ’ОІ)
1вҲ’2
ОІ lE(t)
rвҲ—вҲ’n
= ОІ
(1 вҲ’ОІ)2
ПҲ
 1
ОІ вҲ’1
вҮ’
gвҲ—(1 вҲ’Оҫ)(lвҲ—
R)вҲ’1
П„ вҖІ
ПҲ
1вҲ’1
ОІ ОІ
(1вҲ’ОІ)
1вҲ’2
ОІ lвҲ—
E
ОіgвҲ—+ ПҒ вҲ’n = ОІ
(1 вҲ’ОІ)2
ПҲ
 1
ОІ вҲ’1
вҮ’
(lвҲ—
R)вҲ’1 вҲ’1 =
ОіgвҲ—+ ПҒ вҲ’n
gвҲ—(1 вҲ’Оҫ)П„ вҖІ(1 вҲ’ОІ).
To make the labor employment the same as that in the social plannerвҖҷs problem, we need
(lвҲ—
R)вҲ’1 вҲ’1 =
ОіgвҲ—+ ПҒ вҲ’n
gвҲ—(1 вҲ’Оҫ)П„ вҖІ(1 вҲ’ОІ) = (Пғ вҲ’Оҫ)n + ОҫПҒ
Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оҫ)gвҲ—
вҲ’(Пғ вҲ’Оҫ)(1 вҲ’О¶)
Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оҫ)
вҮ’
П„ вҖІ =
ОіgвҲ—+ ПҒ вҲ’n
(1 вҲ’ОІ)[(Пғ вҲ’Оҫ)n + ОҫПҒ вҲ’gвҲ—(Пғ вҲ’Оҫ)(1 вҲ’О¶)].
Q.E.D.
3.2.
Data Nonrivalry and Creative Destruction
Formally, the innovation possibility frontier becomes
ЛҷN(t) = О·N(t)О¶D(t)ОҫLR(t)1вҲ’Оҫ,
(A.35)
where, D(t) is the composite data used by potential intermediate producers, which consist of new
data collected from consumers, П•(t), and historical data bundles bought from existing intermediate
producers in the past M periods, B(t). The composite data are represented as
D(t) = ОұП•(t)L(t) + (1 вҲ’Оұ)B(t),
where Оұ represents the relative importance between historical and new data in the data composite.
If we rearrange the existing intermediate producers by the order of entering time, and set Оҙ as the
depreciation rate, we can deп¬Ғne the historical data bundle as:
B(t) =

M вҲ’1
Пө
Z tвҲ’dt
tвҲ’M
 ОҙtвҲ’sd(t,s)П•(s)L(s)
 ПөвҲ’1
Пө ds

Пө
ПөвҲ’1
,

16
Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
where, d(t,s) stands for the proportion of time t usage of data that are generated at time s
(s < t), and Пө is the elasticity coeп¬ғcient of data collected from diп¬Җerent periods. We underline those
variables related to data generated in the past and traded in current period, from the perspective
of potential intermediate producers in the current period. Similarly, we overline those variables
related to data generated in current period and traded in future periods.
For consistency with the baseline model, let us consider the case when consumers own data.
A potential intermediate producer can not only collect new data from consumers, but also buy
historical data from existing intermediate producers with a depreciation rate of Оҙ. Thus, given the
prices of data generated from time (tвҲ’M) to (t+M), a potential intermediate producer decides the
quantity of data to collect from consumers, the quantity of data to buy from existing intermediate
producers entering in the past M periods, and the quantity of data to sell to potential intermediate
producers who will enter in the following M periods.
The consumerвҖҷs utility maximization problem now becomes
max
c(t),П•(t)
Z вҲһ
0
eвҲ’(ПҒвҲ’n)t
c(t)1вҲ’Оі
1 вҲ’Оі вҲ’П•(t)Пғ
Z t+M
t
ОҙsвҲ’t ВҜd(s,t)ds

dt,
(A.36)
where ВҜd(s,t) means the proportion of data generated at time t and sold to intermediate producers
at time s (s > t). It is taken as given by consumers but is endogenously determined by the corre-
sponding intermediate producers. The budget constraint (2) and the data provision constraint (3)
remain the same. Meanwhile, it is straightforward that п¬Ғrms use all the new data they collect from
consumers, so we need d(t,t) = 1. We can expect ВҜd(s,t) to be constant in BGP since ВҜd(s,t) вҲҲ[0,1].15
Then, the term
R t+M
t
ОҙsвҲ’t ВҜd(s,t)ds should also be a constant in BGP. Thus, the necessary conditions
with respect to c(t) and П•(t) are still the same as our baseline model in BGP, which are shown in
(4) and (5).
3.2.1.
The Decentralized Economy The production process is still the same as that in our
baseline model. Now, consider the R&D process of potential intermediate producers. Their proп¬Ғt
maximization problem becomes
max
LR(t),{d(s,t)}t+M
s=t+dt,
{d(t,s)}tвҲ’dt
s=tвҲ’M ,П•(t)
О·N(t)О¶D(t)ОҫLR(t)1вҲ’Оҫ

V (t) вҲ’
Z t+M
t+dt
eвҲ’О»(s,t)(sвҲ’t)V (s)ds

вҲ’w(t)LR(t)
вҲ’pП•(t)П•(t)L(t) + L(t)
Z t+M
t+dt
ВҜpП•(s,t) ВҜd(s,t)П•(t)ds
вҲ’
Z tвҲ’dt
tвҲ’M
pП•(t,s)d(t,s)П•(s)L(s)ds,
(A.37)
15 Refer to the conclusion that labor employment share in R&D and production sectors is constant in BGP, which is
shown in Online Appendix 1.1.

Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
17
where pП•(t,s) is the price of data collected at time s and sold to potential intermediate producers
at time t, (t > s), ВҜpП•(s,t) is the price of data collected at time t and sold to potential intermediate
producers at time s, (t < s), and V (t) is the total discounted production proп¬Ғt of the intermediate
good invented at time t. П•(t) and pП•(t) are new data collected from consumers at time t and the
corresponding price, respectively. Selling data to future intermediate producers makes the seller
face the risk of creative destruction: SellersвҖҷ own patents become valueless according to a Poisson
process with an arrival rate О»(s,t), which is assumed to have the following form:
О»(s,t) = c0 ВҜd(s,t)2.
Notice that intermediate producers will never collect new data again if they succeed in entering the
market, thus the data they can sell to future intermediate producers are always within the range
they collect from consumers at current period, i.e.,
ВҜd(s,t) вҲҲ[0,1],вҲҖs,t.
Also, we assume that only incumbent intermediate producers can sell historical data to entrant
ones, that is, consumers cannot resell their historical data.
The proп¬Ғt maximization problem of a potential intermediate producer (A.37) consists of п¬Ғve
terms. The п¬Ғrst term is the total beneп¬Ғt that it can get if it succeeds in R&D and enters the
market, minus the expected total loss of creative destruction coming from selling data to future
intermediate producers. The second and third terms are the same as those in our baseline model:
the wage cost and the cost of new data collected from consumers. The fourth term is the revenue
from selling data to future intermediate producers. The last term is the cost of buying historical
data from the intermediate producers who entered in earlier periods.
From the potential intermediate producersвҖҷ proп¬Ғt maximization in (A.37), we know that the п¬Ғrst
order condition with respect to LR(t) is similar to the baseline model, i.e.,
О·(1 вҲ’Оҫ)N(t)О¶D(t)ОҫLR(t)вҲ’ОҫV (t) = w(t).
(A.38)
The п¬Ғrst order condition with respect to П•(t) is
О·ОҫN(t)О¶D(t)ОҫвҲ’1LR(t)1вҲ’ОҫV (t)ОұL(t) = pП•(t)L(t) вҲ’L(t)
Z t+M
t+dt
ВҜpП•(s,t) ВҜd(s,t)ds
вҮ’
ОұО·ОҫN(t)О¶D(t)ОҫвҲ’1LR(t)1вҲ’ОҫV (t) = pП•(t) вҲ’
Z t+M
t+dt
ВҜpП•(s,t) ВҜd(s,t)ds.
(A.39)
For any s вҲҲ(t,t + M], the п¬Ғrst order condition with respect to ВҜd(s,t) is
L(t)ВҜpП•(s,t)П•(t) = 2О·N(t)О¶D(t)ОҫLR(t)1вҲ’ОҫeвҲ’c0 ВҜd(s,t)2(sвҲ’t)c0 ВҜd(s,t)(s вҲ’t)V (s).
(A.40)

18
Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
For any s вҲҲ[t вҲ’M,t), the п¬Ғrst order condition with respect to d(t,s) is
(1 вҲ’Оұ)О·ОҫN(t)О¶D(t)ОҫвҲ’1LR(t)1вҲ’ОҫB(t)
1
Пө M вҲ’1
Пө 
ОҙtвҲ’sd(t,s)П•(s)L(s)
вҲ’1
Пө ...
ОҙtвҲ’sП•(s)L(s)

V (t) вҲ’
Z t+M
t+dt
eвҲ’О»(s,t)(sвҲ’t)V (s)ds

= pП•(t,s)П•(s)L(s)
(A.41)
In equilibrium, the demand and supply of historical data are equal, i.e.,
d(t,s) = ВҜd(t,s),вҲҖt > s.
Also, the prices of historical data follow:
pП•(t,s) = ВҜpП•(t,s),вҲҖt > s.
Combining (A.40) with (A.41), we solve for d(t,s) and their corresponding prices given other
variables, i.e., (s < t,t вҲ’s вүӨM)
(1 вҲ’Оұ)О·ОҫN(t)О¶D(t)ОҫвҲ’1LR(t)1вҲ’ОҫB(t)
1
Пө M вҲ’1
Пө 
ОҙtвҲ’sd(t,s)П•(s)L(s)
вҲ’1
Пө ОҙtвҲ’sП•(s)L(s)...

V (t) вҲ’
Z t+M
t+dt
eвҲ’О»(s,t)(sвҲ’t)V (s)ds

= 2О·N(s)О¶D(s)ОҫLR(s)1вҲ’ОҫeвҲ’c0 ВҜd(t,s)2(tвҲ’s)c0 ВҜd(s,t)(t вҲ’s)V (t)
вҮ’
d(t,s)1+ 1
Пө eвҲ’c0d(t,s)2(tвҲ’s) = (1 вҲ’Оұ)Оҫ
2c0(t вҲ’s)Оҙ(1вҲ’1
Пө)(tвҲ’s)eВҜgD(sвҲ’t)D(t)вҲ’1B(t)
1
Пө M вҲ’1
Пө [П•(t)L(t)]1вҲ’1
Пө ...

1 вҲ’
Z t+M
t+dt
eвҲ’О»(s,t)(sвҲ’t) V (s)
V (t) ds

вҮ’
d(t,s)1+ 1
Пө eвҲ’c0 ВҜd(t,s)2(tвҲ’s) = (1 вҲ’Оұ)Оҫ
2c0(t вҲ’s)Оҙ(1вҲ’1
Пө)(tвҲ’s)eВҜgD(sвҲ’t)D(t)вҲ’1B(t)
1
Пө M вҲ’1
Пө [П•(t)L(t)]1вҲ’1
Пө ...

1 вҲ’
Z t+M
t+dt
eвҲ’(c0d(s,t)2вҲ’n)(sвҲ’t)ds

,
(A.42)
where ВҜgD = О¶gN + ОҫgD + (1 вҲ’Оҫ)n.
Note that in BGP, gD = max{gП• + n,gB}, gV = n, and
gB = d
dt

M
1
1вҲ’Пө +
Пө
Пө вҲ’1 ln
Z tвҲ’dt
tвҲ’M
(ОҙtвҲ’sd(t,s)П•(s)L(s))
ПөвҲ’1
Пө ds

=
Пө
Пө вҲ’1
d
dt

ln
Z tвҲ’dt
tвҲ’M
(ОҙtвҲ’sd(t,s)П•(t вҲ’M)L(t вҲ’M)e(gвҲ—
П•+n)(sвҲ’t+M))
ПөвҲ’1
Пө ds

=
Пө
Пө вҲ’1
d
dt
Пө вҲ’1
Пө
(lnП•(t вҲ’M) + lnL(t вҲ’M)) + ln
Z tвҲ’dt
tвҲ’M
(ОҙtвҲ’sd(t,s)e(gвҲ—
П•+n)(sвҲ’t+M))
ПөвҲ’1
Пө ds

= gП• + n +
Пө
Пө вҲ’1
d
dt

ln
Z tвҲ’dt
tвҲ’M
(ОҙtвҲ’sd(t,s)e(gвҲ—
П•+n)(sвҲ’t+M))
ПөвҲ’1
Пө ds

= gП• + n.
The last equation follows from the fact that the term ОҙtвҲ’sd(t,s)e(gвҲ—
П•+n)(sвҲ’t+M), s вҲҲ[t вҲ’M,t) is not
time varying. Thus, we have gD = gП• + n, and ВҜgD = О¶gN + ОҫgП• + n.

Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
19
Now, let us consider (A.39). First, it is obvious that in BGP,
ЛҷpП•(s,t)
pП•(s,t) вүӨЛҷpП•(t)
pП•(t).
Otherwise, after a certain period, when the price of historical data exceeds the price at which they
are newly sold, intermediate producers can get arbitrage by buying and selling historical data.
Thus, the growth rate of the term
pП•(t) вҲ’
Z t+M
t+dt
ВҜpП•(s,t) ВҜd(s,t)ds
is just the same as that of pП•(t), which is denoted as gpП•.16 Now, transforming (A.39) into the form
of growth rate and plugging in the relation of growth rates derived in BGP, we get
О¶gN + ОҫgD + (1 вҲ’Оҫ)n + n = gП• + n + gpП•
вҮ’
О¶gN + Оҫ (gП• + n) + (1 вҲ’Оҫ)n = gП• + gpП•
вҮ’
О¶gN + (Оҫ вҲ’1)gП• + n = gpП•.
(A.43)
Combining (A.43) with the Euler equation derived from consumersвҖҷ problem (5), we get (note that
in BGP, gc = gN = gвҲ—)
О¶gN + (Оҫ вҲ’1)gП• + n = (Пғ вҲ’1)gП• + Оіgc
вҮ’
(О¶ вҲ’Оі)gвҲ—+ (Оҫ вҲ’Пғ)gвҲ—
П• + n = 0.
(A.44)
Meanwhile, from (A.38), as well as the wage determining equation from the п¬Ғnal good producer
side (15), we have
О¶gN + ОҫgD вҲ’Оҫn + gV = gN
вҮ’
(О¶ вҲ’1)gN + Оҫ(gП• + n) вҲ’Оҫn + n = 0
вҮ’
(О¶ вҲ’1)gвҲ—+ ОҫgвҲ—
П• + n = 0.
(A.45)
Combining (A.44) and (A.45), we derive the BGP growth rates of variety and data provision, which
are the same as those in our baseline model.
gвҲ—=

Пғ
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n
16 We can further discuss the growth rates of historical data and new data prices. If ЛҷpП•(s,t)/pП•(s,t) < ЛҷpП•(t)/pП•(t),
then we can expect that in a certain period, the price of new data becomes much larger than that of historical data,
or we can say that the price of historical data becomes trivial compared with that of the new data. In this case, it
is obvious that intermediate producers demand all of the historical data since they are very cheap, i.e., d(s,t) вҶ’1.
Then, we can derive the optimal d(s,t) directly and the results of other variables remain unchanged. As a result, in
the following analysis, we just consider the case that ЛҷpП•(s,t)/pП•(s,t) = ЛҷpП•(t)/pП•(t).

20
Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
and
gвҲ—
П• =

1 вҲ’Оі
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n.
Since there is no change in the evolution of labor allocations, the expression of labor employment
in R&D sector is also the same.
Now, we derive the proportion of data sharing. From (A.42) we have the growth rate of the right
hand side as
вҲ’gD + 1
Пө gB +

1 вҲ’1
Пө

(gП• + n) = 0.
Thus, the left hand side is a constant determined by
d
1+ 1
Пө
D
eвҲ’c0d2
D(tвҲ’s) = (1 вҲ’Оұ)Оҫ
2c0(t вҲ’s)Оҙ(1вҲ’1
Пө)(tвҲ’s)eВҜgD(sвҲ’t)M вҲ’1
Пө

1 вҲ’
Z t+M
t+dt
eвҲ’(c0dD(r,t)2вҲ’n)(rвҲ’t)dr

...
D(t)вҲ’1B(t)
1
Пө [П•(t)L(t)]1вҲ’1
Пө .
The terms D(t)вҲ’1B(t)
1
Пө [П•(t)L(t)]1вҲ’1
Пө can be further represented by
D(t)вҲ’1B(t)
1
Пө [П•(t)L(t)]1вҲ’1
Пө
=
n
ОұB(t)вҲ’1
Пө [П•(t)L(t)]
1
Пө + (1 вҲ’Оұ)B(t)1вҲ’1
Пө [П•(t)L(t)]
1
Пө вҲ’1oвҲ’1
вүЎ
h
ОұвҲҶ
вҲ’1
Пө
D + (1 вҲ’Оұ)вҲҶ
1вҲ’1
Пө
D
iвҲ’1
,
(A.46)
where,
вҲҶD =B(t)[П•(t)L(t)]вҲ’1
=[П•(t)L(t)]вҲ’1

M вҲ’1
Пө
Z tвҲ’dt
tвҲ’M
(ОҙtвҲ’rdD(t,r)П•(r)L(r))
ПөвҲ’1
Пө dr

Пө
ПөвҲ’1
=M
1
1вҲ’Пө
Z tвҲ’dt
tвҲ’M
(ОҙtвҲ’rdD(t,r)e(gвҲ—
П•+n)(rвҲ’t))
ПөвҲ’1
Пө dr

Пө
ПөвҲ’1
.
(A.47)
In order to derive the proportion of historical data trading, suppose that data generated at time
t can only be sold to intermediate producer entering at time t + M. Also, it is reasonable to guess
that d(t + M,t) = d(t + 2M,t + M) = ... = dD, since they are all proportions within the range of
[0,1] and have the same time interval. Then, (A.42) is simpliп¬Ғed as
d
1+ 1
Пө
D
eвҲ’c0d2
DM = (1 вҲ’Оұ)Оҫ
2c0M Оҙ(1вҲ’1
Пө)MeвҲ’ВҜgDMM вҲ’1
Пө
h
1 вҲ’eвҲ’(c0d2
DвҲ’n)Mih
Оұ(вҲҶвҖІ
D)вҲ’1
Пө + (1 вҲ’Оұ)(вҲҶвҖІ
D)1вҲ’1
Пө
iвҲ’1
,
where,
вҲҶвҖІ
D = M
1
1вҲ’Пө ОҙMdDeвҲ’(gвҲ—
П•+n)M.
(A.48)
Thus, dD can be derived numerically given the values of parameters. We refer to Jones and Tonetti
(2020) to set Оұ = 0.5, Пө = 50, and c0 = 0.2 and we take M = 1 and Оҙ = 0.9, Оҫ = 0.5, О¶ = 0.85, Оі = 2.5,

Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
21
n = 0.02, and Пғ = 1.5. We then get dD = 0 or dD = 3.70 > 1. We omit the trivial result of zeros and
focus on the non-zero result. It seems that the negative eп¬Җect of creative destruction is too trivial
to make the optimal choice of incumbent intermediate producers be within an appropriate range,
if we take c0 = 0.2 as Jones and Tonetti (2020) do in their paper. However, if we increase c0 to 4,
the optimal choice of dD becomes 0.92, which is now a reasonable value. We discuss this further
after deriving the corresponding result for the social plannerвҖҷs problem.
3.2.2.
The Social PlannerвҖҷs Problem The social plannerвҖҷs problem is similar to the baseline
model shown from (24) to (27), except that the consumersвҖҷ utility function (24) is now (A.36), and
the innovation possibility frontier (25) is now (A.35).
The maximization problem is shown as
max
c(t),{d(s,t)}t+M
s=t+dt,
{d(t,s)}tвҲ’dt
s=tвҲ’M ,П•(t)
Z вҲһ
0
eвҲ’(ПҒвҲ’n)t
c(t)1вҲ’Оі вҲ’1
1 вҲ’Оі
вҲ’П•(t)Пғ
Z t+M
t
ОҙsвҲ’t ВҜd(s,t)ds

dt,
s.t.
ЛҷN(t) = О·N(t)О¶D(t)ОҫLR(t)1вҲ’Оҫ,
c(t) =

ПҲ
1 вҲ’ОІ
1вҲ’1
ОІ
ОІN(t)lE(t),
and lE(t) + lR(t) = 1. Let
A =

ПҲ
1 вҲ’ОІ
1вҲ’1
ОІ
,
we set up the current-value Hamiltonian equation as
H = c(t)1вҲ’Оі вҲ’1
1 вҲ’Оі
вҲ’П•(t)Пғ
Z t+M
t
ОҙsвҲ’t ВҜd(s,t)ds + О»(t)[AОІN(t)lE(t) вҲ’c(t)] + Вө(t)О·N(t)О¶D(t)ОҫLR(t)1вҲ’Оҫ.
The necessary conditions with respect to c(t), П•(t), lE(t), and N(t) are
вҲӮH
вҲӮc(t) = c(t)вҲ’Оі вҲ’О»(t) = 0,
(A.49)
вҲӮH
вҲӮП•(t) = вҲ’ПғП•(t)ПғвҲ’1
Z t+M
t
ОҙsвҲ’t ВҜd(s,t)ds + Вө(t)ОұО·ОҫN(t)О¶D(t)ОҫLR(t)1вҲ’Оҫ
1
П•(t) = 0,
(A.50)
вҲӮH
вҲӮlE(t) = О»(t)ОІAN(t) вҲ’Вө(t)О·(1 вҲ’Оҫ)N(t)О¶D(t)ОҫlR(t)вҲ’ОҫL(t)1вҲ’Оҫ = 0
(A.51)
and
вҲӮH
вҲӮN(t) = О»(t)AОІlE(t) + Вө(t)О·О¶N(t)О¶вҲ’1D(t)ОҫlR(t)1вҲ’ОҫL(t)1вҲ’Оҫ = вҲ’ЛҷВө(t) + (ПҒ вҲ’n)Вө(t).
(A.52)

22
Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
For the necessary conditions of ВҜd(s,t) and d(t,s), we should derive them in other ways. For
certain periods t and s (s < t, t вҲ’s вүӨM), the Hamiltonian equation is rewritten into the following
form
e
H =c(s)1вҲ’Оі вҲ’1
1 вҲ’Оі
вҲ’П•(s)Пғ
Z s+M
s
ОҙrвҲ’s ВҜd(r,s)dr + eвҲ’(ПҒвҲ’n)(tвҲ’s)
c(t)1вҲ’Оі вҲ’1
1 вҲ’Оі
вҲ’П•(t)Пғ
Z t+M
t
ОҙrвҲ’t ВҜd(r,t)dr

...
+ О»(s)[AОІN(s)lE(s) вҲ’c(s)] + Вө(s)О·N(s)О¶D(s)ОҫLR(s)1вҲ’Оҫ + О»(t)[AОІN(t)lE(t) вҲ’c(t)]...
+ Вө(t)О·N(t)О¶D(t)ОҫLR(t)1вҲ’Оҫ.
In equilibrium, we have ВҜd(t,s) = d(t,s) = d(t,s). Then, the п¬Ғrst order condition with respect to
d(t,s) is
вҲӮe
H
вҲӮd(t,s) = вҲ’П•(s)ПғОҙtвҲ’s + Вө(t)(1 вҲ’Оұ)О·ОҫN(t)О¶D(t)ОҫвҲ’1LR(t)1вҲ’ОҫB(t)
1
Пө M вҲ’1
Пө [ОҙtвҲ’sd(t,s)П•(s)L(s)]вҲ’1
Пө ...
ОҙtвҲ’sП•(s)L(s) = 0.
(A.53)
Consider that in BGP, d(t,s),вҲҖt,s should be constants, thus
Z t+M
t
ОҙtвҲ’s ВҜd(s,t)ds
should also be a constant, which we denote by ВҜ
M. Then, from (A.50), we derive the shadow price
Вө(t) as
Вө(t) = Пғ ВҜ
M
ОұО·Оҫ П•(t)ПғN(t)вҲ’О¶D(t)вҲ’ОҫlR(t)ОҫвҲ’1L(t)ОҫвҲ’1.
Substitute this into (A.53), we have
П•(s)ПғОҙtвҲ’s =
ВҜ
MПғ(1 вҲ’Оұ)
Оұ
П•(t)ПғD(t)вҲ’1B(t)
1
Пө M вҲ’1
Пө [ОҙtвҲ’sd(t,s)П•(s)L(s)]вҲ’1
Пө ОҙtвҲ’sП•(s)L(s)
вҮ’
d(t,s) =
 ВҜ
MПғ(1 вҲ’Оұ)
Оұ
П•(t)ПғП•(s)вҲ’ПғD(t)вҲ’1B(t)
1
Пө M вҲ’1
Пө ОҙвҲ’1
Пө (tвҲ’s)[П•(s)L(s)]1вҲ’1
Пө
Пө
вҮ’
d(t,s) =
 ВҜ
MПғ(1 вҲ’Оұ)
Оұ
ОҙвҲ’1
Пө (tвҲ’s)eВҜgS(sвҲ’t)M вҲ’1
Пө П•(t)1вҲ’1
Пө D(t)вҲ’1B(t)
1
Пө L(t)1вҲ’1
Пө
Пө
,
(A.54)
where,
ВҜgS =

вҲ’Пғ + 1 вҲ’1
Пө

gвҲ—
П• +

1 вҲ’1
Пө

n.
From (A.51), by moving the second term to the right hand side, changing the equation into the
form of growth rate, and substituting the growth rate of О»t and Вөt derived from (A.49) and (A.50),
we have
ЛҷО»(t)
О»(t) +
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) = ЛҷВө(t)
Вө(t) + О¶
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) + Оҫ
ЛҷD(t)
D(t) вҲ’Оҫn
вҮ’
вҲ’Оі Лҷc(t)
c(t) + (1 вҲ’О¶)
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) вҲ’ЛҷВө(t)
Вө(t) вҲ’Оҫ
ЛҷD(t)
D(t) + Оҫn = 0
вҮ’
вҲ’Оі Лҷc(t)
c(t) +
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) вҲ’Пғ ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) = 0.
(A.55)

Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
23
Notice that the growth of c(t) is what we want to derive, which can be deп¬Ғned as gвҲ—, then
Лҷc(t)
c(t) = gвҲ—= 1
Оі
 ЛҷN(t)
N(t) вҲ’Пғ ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t)
!
.
(A.56)
Next, we work to pin down the growth rate of N(t) and П•(t). From (A.51), we have
О»(t)
Вө(t) = О·(1 вҲ’Оҫ)
ОІA
N(t)О¶вҲ’1lR(t)вҲ’ОҫD(t)ОҫL(t)1вҲ’Оҫ.
Then, (A.52) can be reformed as
О»(t)
Вө(t)AОІlE(t) + О·О¶N(t)О¶вҲ’1D(t)ОҫlR(t)1вҲ’ОҫL(t)1вҲ’Оҫ = вҲ’ЛҷВө(t)
Вө(t) + (ПҒ вҲ’n)
О· [(1 вҲ’Оҫ)lE(t) + О¶lR(t)]N(t)О¶вҲ’1D(t)ОҫlR(t)вҲ’ОҫL(t)1вҲ’Оҫ = О¶
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) + Оҫ
ЛҷD(t)
D(t) вҲ’Пғ ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) + ПҒ вҲ’(1 + Оҫ)n
О· [(1 вҲ’Оҫ)lE(t) + О¶lR(t)]N(t)О¶вҲ’1D(t)ОҫlR(t)вҲ’ОҫL(t)1вҲ’Оҫ = О¶gN + (Оҫ вҲ’Пғ)gП• + ПҒ вҲ’n.
(A.57)
Since the right hand side is constant in BGP, the left hand side should also be constant. Thus, we
have
(О¶ вҲ’1)
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) + Оҫ
ЛҷD(t)
D(t)(1 вҲ’Оҫ)n = (О¶ вҲ’1)gN + ОҫgП• + n = 0.
(A.58)
We can easily derive that the BGP growth rate of variety gвҲ—
N is that of the economy gвҲ—. Combining
(A.56) with (A.58), we still get the same BGP growth rates as in our baseline model
gвҲ—=

Пғ
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n,
and
gвҲ—
П• =

1 вҲ’Оі
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n,
We then calculate the labor employment in R&D sector in BGP. Eq. (A.57) can be rewritten as:
О· [(1 вҲ’Оҫ)lE(t) + О¶lR(t)]N(t)О¶вҲ’1D(t)ОҫlR(t)вҲ’ОҫL(t)1вҲ’Оҫ = О¶gN + (Оҫ вҲ’Пғ)gП• + ПҒ вҲ’n.
Then, let gвҲ—= О·N(t)О¶вҲ’1D(t)Оҫ(lвҲ—
R)1вҲ’ОҫL(t)1вҲ’Оҫ, (A.12) can be further rewritten as:
[(1 вҲ’Оҫ)(1 вҲ’lвҲ—
R) + О¶lвҲ—
R]gвҲ—(lвҲ—
R)вҲ’1 = О¶gвҲ—+ Оҫ(gвҲ—
П• + n) вҲ’ПғgвҲ—
П• + ПҒ вҲ’(1 + Оҫ)n
вҮ’
[(1 вҲ’Оҫ)(1 вҲ’lвҲ—
R) + О¶lвҲ—
R]gвҲ—(lвҲ—
R)вҲ’1 =

О¶ + (Оҫ вҲ’Пғ)(1 вҲ’Оі)
Пғ

gвҲ—+ ПҒ вҲ’n
вҮ’
[(1 вҲ’Оҫ)(1 вҲ’lвҲ—
R) + О¶lвҲ—
R]gвҲ—(lвҲ—
R)вҲ’1 =

1 + Пғ(О¶ вҲ’1)
Оҫ

gвҲ—+
Пғ
Оҫ вҲ’1

n + ПҒ.
(A.59)
We have the same labor allocations as those in our baseline model.
Finally, we derive the historical data trading proposition. From (A.54) we have the growth rate
of the right hand side as

1 вҲ’1
Пө

gП• +
1
Пө

gB вҲ’gD +

1 вҲ’1
Пө

n = 0.

24
Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
Thus, d(t,s) is a constant determined by (A.54). The terms П•(t)1вҲ’1
Пө B(t)
1
Пө вҲ’1L(t)1вҲ’1
Пө can be further
represented by expression similar to (A.46), except that d(t,s) may be diп¬Җerent, i.e.,
П•(t)1вҲ’1
Пө D(t)вҲ’1B(t)
1
Пө L(t)1вҲ’1
Пө =
h
ОұвҲҶ
вҲ’1
Пө
S
+ (1 вҲ’Оұ)вҲҶ
1вҲ’1
Пө
S
iвҲ’1
,
where,
вҲҶS = M
1
1вҲ’Пө
Z tвҲ’dt
tвҲ’M
(ОҙtвҲ’rdS(t,r)e(gвҲ—
П•+n)(rвҲ’t))
ПөвҲ’1
Пө dr

Пө
ПөвҲ’1
.
(A.60)
Similar to the last section, a simpliп¬Ғed version of this model can help us understand this problem
further. We also assume that data generated at time t can only be sold to intermediate producer
entering at time t+M. Also, it is reasonable to guess that d(t+M,t) = d(t+2M,t+M) = ... = dS
since they are all proportions within the range of [0,1] and have the same time interval. Then,
(A.54) is simpliп¬Ғed as
d
1
Пө
S = ОҙвҲ’MПғ(1 вҲ’Оұ)
Оұ
ОҙвҲ’1
Пө MeвҲ’ВҜgSMM вҲ’1
Пө
h
Оұ(вҲҶвҖІ
S)вҲ’1
Пө + (1 вҲ’Оұ)(вҲҶвҖІ
S)1вҲ’1
Пө
iвҲ’1
,
where,
вҲҶвҖІ
S = M
1
1вҲ’Пө ОҙMdSeвҲ’(gвҲ—
П•+n)M.
(A.61)
We use the same parameters as those in the decentralized economy, which leads to dS = 0 or
dS = 0.53 вҲҲ(0,1). We also focus on the non-zero result. Notice that creative destruction does not
aп¬Җect the social plannerвҖҷs solution, so this result still holds when we increase the value of c0.
Comparing the optimal selling proportion derived in these two diп¬Җerent situations (dD and dS), we
conclude that incumbent intermediate producers are always inclined to sell more historical data to
entrants than the social optimal level, unless the negative eп¬Җect of creative destruction becomes
too large.17
3.3.
Data Ownership: Firms versus Consumers
We extend the model to allow diп¬Җerent speciп¬Ғcations of data ownership. As described earlier, the
п¬Ғrm ownership problem becomes trivial with zero data processing cost (Оё = 0). Also, it is not
tractable to analyze the case that consumers pay the п¬Ғrms for decreasing the usage of data in order
to lower their disutilities from privacy violation. For both reasons, we focus on Оё > 0 in (16)вҖ”a
friction representing the cost of handling data by п¬Ғrms.
17 Given the parameters we use, we п¬Ғnd that dD becomes smaller than dS when c0 increases to 14.

Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
25
3.3.1.
Analysis with Consumer Ownership of Data Let us п¬Ғrst consider what happens to
our baseline model once we have non-trivial вҖңdata processing costвҖқ by п¬Ғrms. When consumers own
data, the budget constraint of consumers is still the same as (2), and so are other conditions that
we do not mention in this section. What makes the model diп¬Җerent here is the proп¬Ғt maximization
problem of potential intermediate producers who now have to pay the вҖңdata processing costвҖқ in
addition to the fees given to consumers. Then, we have the following proposition.
Proposition A.6. With Оё > 0 and consumer ownership of data, the BGP growth rates and
labor allocations are the same as those in the baseline model, provided Пғ(2вҲ’О¶)+(Оҫ +ПҶ)(Оі вҲ’1) > 0.
Proof of Proposition A.6.
The condition Пғ(2 вҲ’О¶) + (Оҫ + ПҶ)(Оі вҲ’1) > 0 holds easily when the
knowledge spillover eп¬Җect is not so large and consumersвҖҷ EIS are rather small.
The maximization problem of intermediate producers now becomes
max
LR(t),П•(t)О·N(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫlR(t)1вҲ’ОҫL(t)V (t) вҲ’w(t)lR(t)L(t) вҲ’ОёП•(t)ПҶ вҲ’pП•(t)П•(t)L(t).
Free-entry conditions with respect to labor is still the same as (19), while the other free-entry
condition becomes
О·ОҫN(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫвҲ’ПҶlR(t)1вҲ’ОҫV (t)L(t) = pП•(t)L(t)
П•(t)ПҶвҲ’1 + ОёПҶ.
(A.62)
Since pП•(t), П•(t) and L(t) all grow in constant rates in BGP, we go on with deriving the BGP
growth rates by discussing diп¬Җerent situations separately.
Case 1. In BGP, if gвҲ—
pП• + n > (ПҶ вҲ’1)gвҲ—
П•, it can be derived that the right hand side of (A.62)
converges to the п¬Ғrst term, i.e.,
О·ОҫN(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫвҲ’ПҶlR(t)1вҲ’ОҫV (t)L(t) вүҲpП•(t)L(t)
П•(t)ПҶвҲ’1 .
Then, the free-entry condition becomes the same as that in (18). Consequently, the BGP growth
rates become the same as those shown in Proposition 1. Furthermore, from
ЛҷpП•(t)
pП•(t) = (Пғ вҲ’1) ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) + Оі Лҷc(t)
c(t) =

Пғ + Оі вҲ’1
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n,
we can derive the condition as
gвҲ—
pП• + n >(ПҶ вҲ’1)gвҲ—
П•
вҮ’

Пғ + Оі вҲ’1
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n + n >(ПҶ вҲ’1)

1 вҲ’Оі
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n
вҮ’
Пғ(2 вҲ’О¶) + (Оҫ + ПҶ)(Оі вҲ’1) >0,
which is always the case given the values of the above parameters.

26
Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
Case 2. If gвҲ—
pП• +n вүӨ(ПҶвҲ’1)gвҲ—
П•, it can be derived that the right hand side of (A.62) converges to a
constant. Then, this problem becomes the same as the case when п¬Ғrms own data. Then, the BGP
growth rate of pП•(t) becomes
ЛҷpП•(t)
pП•(t) = (Пғ вҲ’1) ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) + Оі Лҷc(t)
c(t) =
(Пғ вҲ’1)(2 вҲ’О¶) + Оі(Оҫ + ПҶ)
ПҶ(1 вҲ’О¶) вҲ’Оҫ

n.
And the condition becomes
gвҲ—
pП• + n вүӨ(ПҶ вҲ’1)gвҲ—
П•
вҮ’
(Пғ вҲ’1)(2 вҲ’О¶) + Оі(Оҫ + ПҶ)
ПҶ(1 вҲ’О¶) вҲ’Оҫ

n + n вүӨ(ПҶ вҲ’1)

2 вҲ’О¶
ПҶ(1 вҲ’О¶) вҲ’Оҫ

n
вҮ’
Пғ(2 вҲ’О¶) + (Оҫ + ПҶ)(Оі вҲ’1) вүӨ0,
which does not exist given the standard values of the parameters.
Thus, the BGP growth rates when consumers own data are
gвҲ—=

Пғ
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n
(A.63)
and
ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) = вҲ’1
Оҫ n + 1 вҲ’О¶
Оҫ
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) =

1 вҲ’Оі
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n,
which are the same as those shown in Proposition 1. Obviously, the labor allocations in BGP is
still the same as those shown in Proposition 2. Q.E.D.
In general, we assume Пғ > 0, О¶ вҲҲ[0,1], Оҫ вҲҲ[0,1], ПҶ > 1, Оі > 1. Thus, the proposition exists when
we take standard values of the parameters. The BGP growth rate of consumption is now larger
than that of the data provision. However, if we make the data provision constraint (3) tighter, i.e.,
let s be smaller so that the constraint binds in BGP, we have lower growth rates. Formally, if s
satisп¬Ғes
s < gвҲ—
П• вҲ’gвҲ—=

1 вҲ’Оі вҲ’Пғ
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n,
we always have
(gвҲ—
П•)вҖІ = (gвҲ—)вҖІ + s.
(A.64)
Then, Eq. (A.5) derived from the free-entry condition of data (18) fails. Thus, we combine (A.3)
with (A.64) to derive the BGP growth rates in this case as
(gвҲ—)вҖІ =
Оҫs + n
1 вҲ’О¶ вҲ’Оҫ <

Пғ
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n = gвҲ—,
(A.65)
which means the BGP growth rate in this case is always lower than that in our baseline model.
In addition, we consider the social plannerвҖҷs problem, which leads to the following proposition.

Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
27
Proposition A.7. With Оё > 0 in the social plannerвҖҷs problem, the BGP growth rate as well as
labor allocations still do not change compared with the baseline model, provided ОіПғ + (ПҶ вҲ’1)(Оі вҲ’
1) + 1 > 0.
Proof of Proposition A.7.
The condition ОіПғ +(ПҶвҲ’1)(Оі вҲ’1)+1 > 0 holds easily when the вҖңdata
processing costвҖқ is convex and consumersвҖҷ consumption growth is rather insensitive to real interest
rates.
In the social plannerвҖҷs problem, the resource constraint now becomes
C(t) = eY (t) вүЎLE(t)ОІ
Z N(t)
0
x(v,t)1вҲ’ОІ dv вҲ’
Z N(t)
0
ПҲx(v,t)dv вҲ’ОёП•(t)ПҶ.
Then, the optimal net output becomes
c(t) =

ПҲ
1 вҲ’ОІ
1вҲ’1
ОІ
ОІN(t)lE(t) вҲ’ОёП•(t)ПҶ
L(t) .
(A.66)
Thus, (A.8) becomes
вҲӮH
вҲӮП•(t) = вҲ’ПғП•(t)ПғвҲ’1 вҲ’ОёПҶО»(t)П•(t)ПҶвҲ’1
L(t)
+ Вө(t)ОҫО·N(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫвҲ’1lR(t)1вҲ’ОҫL(t) = 0.
(A.67)
Since c(t)вҲ’Оі = О»(t), we should п¬Ғrst discuss the value of the additional term in BGP. This term
converges to zero when
вҲ’Оі Лҷc(t)
c(t) + (ПҶ вҲ’1) ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) < n.
If the above inequality is satisп¬Ғed, the BGP growth rates will be the same as those we derived in
Proposition 3. Then, we further derive the inequality as
вҲ’Оі

Пғ
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n + (ПҶ вҲ’1)

1 вҲ’Оі
(1 вҲ’О¶)Пғ вҲ’Оҫ(1 вҲ’Оі)

n <n
вҮ’
ОіПғ + (ПҶ вҲ’1)(Оі вҲ’1) > вҲ’1,
(A.68)
which is always the case given standard values of the above parameters. Thus, we can verify that
Proposition 3 is still satisп¬Ғed in this new setting. Obviously, labor allocations in BGP are still the
same as those shown in Proposition 4. Q.E.D.
Similarly, this proposition also holds when we take standard values of the parameters. Proposi-
tions A.6 and A.7 both show that our baseline model is robust under general data processing cost
Оё.

28
Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
3.3.2.
Analysis with Firm Ownership of Data When п¬Ғrms own data, consumersвҖҷ budget
constraint (2) now becomes
Лҷa(t) = (r(t) вҲ’n)a(t) + w(t) вҲ’c(t),вҲҖt вҲҲ[0,вҲһ).
Then, we have the following proposition about the BGP growth rates and labor allocations in this
model.
Proposition A.8. If п¬Ғrms own data, the BGP growth rate becomes
gвҲ—
c = gвҲ—
N = gвҲ—
y = gвҲ—=

Оҫ + ПҶ
ПҶ(1 вҲ’О¶) вҲ’Оҫ

n,
(A.69)
gвҲ—
П• =

2 вҲ’О¶
ПҶ(1 вҲ’О¶) вҲ’Оҫ

n > 0.
(A.70)
Labor allocations in this case have the same form as those shown in Proposition 2, except that the
corresponding BGP growth rates take (A.69) and (A.70) here.
Proof of Proposition A.8.
When п¬Ғrms own data, the proп¬Ғt maximization problem of a potential
intermediate producer becomes
max
LR(t),П•(t)О·N(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫlR(t)1вҲ’ОҫL(t)V (t) вҲ’w(t)lR(t)L(t) вҲ’ОёП•(t)ПҶ.
Thus, the free-entry conditions in this case are:
(1 вҲ’Оҫ)О·N(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫlR(t)вҲ’ОҫV (t) = w(t)
(A.71)
and
ОҫО·N(t)О¶П•(t)ОҫвҲ’1lR(t)1вҲ’ОҫL(t)V (t) = ОёПҶП•(t)ПҶвҲ’1.
(A.72)
Next, we derive the BGP growth rate in this case. Similarly, we still have (A.2) and (A.3). Now,
from (A.72), we rewrite it as
О¶
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) + (Оҫ вҲ’1) ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) + (1 вҲ’Оҫ)
ЛҷlR(t)
lR(t) + n +
ЛҷV (t)
V (t) = (ПҶ вҲ’1) ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t)
In BGP, this equation can be further derived as
О¶
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) + (Оҫ вҲ’ПҶ) ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) + 2n = 0.
(A.73)
Combining (A.73) with (A.3), we derive the BGP growth rate as
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) =

Оҫ + ПҶ
ПҶ(1 вҲ’О¶) вҲ’Оҫ

n.
Meanwhile, the BGP growth rate of data provision is
ЛҷП•(t)
П•(t) = вҲ’n
Оҫ + 1 вҲ’О¶
Оҫ
ЛҷN(t)
N(t) =

2 вҲ’О¶
ПҶ(1 вҲ’О¶) вҲ’Оҫ

n > 0.
The labor allocations in this case have the same form as those shown in Proposition 2, except
that the BGP growth rate is diп¬Җerent here. Q.E.D.

Appendix to Cong, Xie, and Zhang: Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy
29
In (3), we require that the growth rate of data provision should not exceed the growth rate of
consumption. As a result, when 2вҲ’О¶ > Оҫ +ПҶ, the constraint binds. In this case, free-entry condition
of data fails since п¬Ғrms always require excessive data. We can then calculate the growth rates from
the free-entry condition of labor (19) as
gвҲ—= gвҲ—
П• =
n
1 вҲ’О¶ вҲ’Оҫ ,
which means the constraint (3) aп¬Җects the BGP growth rates in this case. Also, following Jones
and Tonetti (2020), the innovation possibility frontier in this paper is set as
ЛҷNt = 1
ПҮLE(t),
which can be viewed as setting the knowledge spillover eп¬Җect О¶ to be 0, while data are set as
diп¬Җerent characters. Then, the condition Оҫ + ПҶ < 2 вҲ’О¶ is likely to be satisп¬Ғed when we take proper
values of Оҫ and ПҶ. As a result, we can derive similar conclusion under this condition: When п¬Ғrms
own data, they are inclined to use up all the data they have.