TITLE: Socially Beneficial Rationality: The Value of Strategic Farmers, Social Entrepreneurs, and For-Profit Firms in Crop Planting Decisions
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2019
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2018.3133
---

TSpace Research Repository 
 
tspace.library.utoronto.ca 
 
 
Socially Beneficial Rationality: The Value of 
Strategic Farmers, Social Entrepreneurs and 
For-Profit Firms in Crop Planting Decisions 
 
Ming Hu, Yan Liu & Wenbin Wang 
 
Version Pre-print or submitted manuscript. 
 
Citation 
(published version) 
Hu, M., Liu, Y., & Wang, W. (2019). Socially beneficial rationality: The 
value of strategic farmers, social entrepreneurs, and for-profit firms in 
crop planting decisions. Management Science, 65(8), 3654-3672. 
 
Copyright / License Copyright © 2019, INFORMS 
 
DOI https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2018.3133 
Publisher’s Statement This is a submitted manuscript of an article published by INFORMS in 
Management Science. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to cite TSpace items 
 
Always cite the published version, so the author(s) will receive recognition through services that track 
citation counts, e.g. Scopus. If you need to cite the page number of the author manuscript from TSpace 
because you cannot access the published version, then cite the TSpace version in addition to the published 
version using the permanent URI (handle) found on the record page. 
 
This article was made openly accessible by U of T Faculty. 
Please tell us how this access benefits you. Your story matters. 
 

Socially Beneﬁcial Rationality:
The Value of Strategic Farmers, Social Entrepreneurs and
For-Proﬁt Firms in Crop Planting Decisions
Ming Hu
Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3E6, ming.hu@rotman.utoronto.ca
Yan Liu
College of Management and Economics, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, yan.liu@tju.edu.cn
Wenbin Wang
School of International Business Administration, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Shanghai, China 200433,
wang.wenbin@shufe.edu.cn
September 24, 2017
Price ﬂuctuations in agricultural markets are an obstacle to poverty reduction for small-scale farmers in
developing countries. We build a micro-foundation to study how farmers of heterogeneous production costs,
under price ﬂuctuations, make crop-planting decisions over time to maximize their incomes. We consider both
strategic farmers, who rationally anticipate the near-future prices as a basis for making planting decisions,
and na¨ıve farmers, who shortsightedly react to recent crop prices. The latter behavior may cause recurring
over- or under-production, which leads to price ﬂuctuations. We ﬁnd it important to cultivate a suﬃcient
number of strategic farmers, because their self-interested behavior alone, made possible by suﬃcient market
information, can reduce price volatility and beneﬁt all focal farmers. In the absence of strategic farmers,
a well-designed pre-season procurement contract, oﬀered by a social entrepreneur or a for-proﬁt ﬁrm to a
fraction of contract farmers, brings beneﬁt to all focal farmers as well as to the ﬁrm itself. More strikingly, the
contract not only brings equity in the long run among farmers of the same production cost, but also reduces
income disparity over time among farmers of heterogeneous costs, regardless of whether they are contract
farmers or not. On the other hand, a non-socially-optimal contract may reﬂect a social entrepreneur’s over-
subsidy tendency, or a for-proﬁt ﬁrm’s speculative incentive to mitigate but not eliminate the market price
ﬂuctuation, both preventing farmers from achieving the most welfare.
1.
Introduction
In developing countries, small-scale farmers are among the poorest, and they are faced with con-
siderable income uncertainty. One of the main obstacles to poverty reduction for them is the price
ﬂuctuation in agricultural markets. In China, for example, farmers who plant fruit or vegetables
(such as watermelon, oranges, loquat, gourds, cabbage, etc.) often go bankrupt after a rich harvest
1
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

2
because prices are slashed in local markets (China News 2014); and in India, small local onion and
potato growers suﬀered a more than 50% price drop from 2015 to 2016 (Sharma 2016, Buradikatti
2016). In fact, price ﬂuctuations, far from being rare, are widely observed in agricultural markets.
According to a report published jointly by a number of international organizations such as the
Food and Agriculture Organization, World Bank and World Trade Organization, agricultural mar-
kets are intrinsically subject to greater price variation than other markets (UNCTAD 2011). From
1983 to 1997 the market prices for Robusta coﬀee beans ﬂuctuated by 40 percent to 195 percent
(Oli Brown and Gibson 2008), and the prices of oranges in local Chinese markets (see Figure 1)
show evidence of strong cyclic annual price swings. As price ﬂuctuation is a signiﬁcant obstacle to
improvements in the welfare of small-scale farmers, in this paper we study strategies, enabled by
individuals or institutions, that can stabilize prices and increase small-scale farmers’ welfare.
Figure 1
Orange Price ﬂuctuation (data from WIND database www.wind.com.cn)
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
04/01/08
03/01/09
03/01/10
03/01/11
03/01/12
RMB/kg
Note. As shown by the discontinuous data points, prices on the orange market are available only at a certain time
every year as oranges are perishable and farmers in China harvest them only once a year.
The explanation of perpetuating market price ﬂuctuations in the agricultural market has been
developed since the celebrated, macro-economic, cobweb theorem (Ezekiel 1938). That is, the pro-
duction is determined by the farmers’ response to the price and farmers often make short-sighted
crop-planting decisions based on the relatively easily obtained prices of the previous season, or
blindly do what other farmers are doing (the latter action even further ampliﬁes that irrational-
ity). Bariyo (2014) reported farmers’ back-and-forth decisions to abandon and then resume coﬀee
cultivation on the basis of the latest market prices. Making crop planting decisions in such a way
is easy for farmers and seems logical to them, but it ignores the interaction between crop supply
and the resulting price in the market, and therefore often leads to price ﬂuctuations. Here are two
recent examples that manifest the cobweb phenomenon.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

3
Example 1. The unprecedented high market price of apples before 2015 induced some farm-
ers in China to expand their planting areas. The resulting overproduction led to ﬁerce market
competition and a signiﬁcant price drop in 2015 (China National Radio 2015).
Example 2. The high prices of other staples have encouraged many small farmers in Brazil to
stop planting beans, which led to the bean shortage that has sent bean prices skyrocketing in 2016
(Parkin and Lewis 2016).
In both examples, farmers who follow the latest market price suﬀer a welfare loss later due to
the overproduction of the crops they plant, and they miss the chance to plant other crops that
would have been more proﬁtable. The extant literature on the cobweb phenomenon often takes the
supply and demand curves as exogenously given. However, these curves are determined by farmers’
individual incentives and planting decisions. To study welfare improving mechanisms, we start
with individual farmer’s utility maximization problem. We ﬁrst show how farmers’ (involuntarily)
short-sighted behavior leads to a recurring boom-and-bust, which provides a micro-foundation for
the cobweb phenomenon. Then we further study sustainable and incentive-compatible mechanisms
that are applied to a fraction of farmers but can help other farmers increase their welfare.
The recurring slashing of prices and loss in farmers’ welfare are attributed largely to farmers’
diﬃculty in obtaining market information, predicting future prices and assessing the eﬀect of their
planting decisions on themselves. There have been repeated eﬀorts by governments, market institu-
tions, and non-proﬁt organizations (NGOs) to prevent farmers from behaving short-sightedly. For
instance, governments, NGOs, and business sectors use information and communication technol-
ogy to disseminate information, such as historical and current market prices, weather information
and advisories about near-future market prices, to farmers (see examples in Chen and Tang 2015).
Such practices, however, may not be very eﬀective since not all farmers can obtain or process the
market information, partly due to the limited access to education in developing countries (Epstein
and Yuthas 2012). It is very likely that only a small fraction of farmers are able to use the market
information to predict the near-future market prices and make planting decisions that maximize
their individual welfare. Since the farmers who can do so are self-serving, it is not clear whether
their decisions also improve the welfare of the other farmers or make it even worse.
We begin our analysis by building a stylized multi-period model that captures the involuntarily
irrational behavior of farmers who base their planting decisions on the previous season’s market
price. Building on this model, we study the impact of those self-serving, forward-looking farmers,
referred to as strategic farmers, on the welfare of the other farmers who are short-sighted, referred
to as na¨ıve farmers. We ﬁnd that the strategic farmers’ ability to predict the near-future market
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

4
price can help stabilize the market price, thereby beneﬁting all farmers who have no production
cost advantage, hereafter, referred to as focal farmers. This implies that the strategic farmers’
forward-looking behavior can be both self-serving and socially beneﬁcial. On the other hand, we
show that the beneﬁts are greatly discounted when the number of strategic farmers is small or
when na¨ıve farmers have limited savings and would exit farming permanently due to bankruptcy.
Therefore it is imperative to explore other solutions.
Contract farming is another way to oﬀer farmers a guaranteed market outlet and reduce their
welfare uncertainty. There is a pre-season procurement contract between the farmers and the
buyer, with a speciﬁc procurement price and date for near-future transactions. In practice most
of the contract farming projects are initiated by social entrepreneurs (SEs) and for-proﬁt ﬁrms.
For instance, Starbucks has contract-farming agreements with local farmers who plant coﬀee beans
in Thailand and Indonesia (Rungfapaisarn 2013). Unlike government and NGOs who give free
aids to the poor, for-proﬁt ﬁrms have proﬁt-making goals and SEs balance for-proﬁt goals with
social objectives. It is reported that many SEs in the agricultural business expect the procurement
contracts to ﬁght poverty and guarantee a reliable supply of agricultural products (Fraser 2012).
For a SE, we are interested in identifying a contract that both improves farmers’ welfare and brings
enough proﬁt to sustain its own operations. For a proﬁt-driven ﬁrm, we focus on a setting when
the goal of proﬁt maximization is compatible with improving farmers’ welfare.
Speciﬁcally, building on the micro-foundation of farmers’ utility maximization, we study farming
contracts between farmers with heterogeneous production costs and a ﬁrm (SE or proﬁt-driven
enterprise) that oﬀers a constant procurement price to a fraction of farmers. We ﬁnd that there
exists a unique price under which both farmers and the SE beneﬁt. This price depends on the
potential market size and farmers’ production costs. A lower price (i.e., insuﬃcient subsidy) does
not alleviate the market ﬂuctuation, while a higher price (i.e., over-subsidy) distorts the market
and hurts both the ﬁrm and some farmers. Moreover, we ﬁnd that the optimal contract not only
brings equity in the long run among farmers of the same production cost, but also reduces income
disparity over time among farmers of heterogeneous costs, regardless of whether they are contract
farmers or not. This ﬁnding highlights the additional beneﬁt of the win-win contract in creating
fairness. When extending the contract form to time-varying procurement prices, we show that the
prices in the optimal time-varying contracts converge to the same unique price.
The contract design for a for-proﬁt ﬁrm, however, is more subtle. In a setting where a for-proﬁt
ﬁrm has to pay a high price to source from an external market if not satisﬁed by contract farmers,
the above optimally-designed contract for the SE also increases the for-proﬁt ﬁrm’s proﬁt and
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

5
meanwhile improves farmers’ welfare. But it does not always maximize the ﬁrm’s proﬁt. It is likely
that the for-proﬁt ﬁrm has a speculative incentive to mitigate but not completely eliminate the
market price ﬂuctuation. In such a case, the for-proﬁt ﬁrm alternates sourcing between contract
farmers and the external market to enjoy the most cost eﬃciency, preventing farmers from achieving
their most welfare. Therefore, regulation on for-proﬁt ﬁrms may be needed.
This paper contributes to the literature that addresses the challenges of reducing agricultural
market ﬂuctuations and improving farmers’ welfare in developing economies. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst
build a micro-foundation of farmers’ utility maximization, which enables a detailed welfare analy-
sis. Second, with the micro-foundation, we study interactions among farmers with heterogeneous
production costs in jointly determining the crop’s price, which in turn aﬀects their welfare. We
show that self-interested behavior by individual farmers can be socially beneﬁcial. Third, we design
procurement contracts for social entrepreneurs or proﬁt-driven ﬁrms that are oﬀered to a fraction
of farmers and are win-win for both the organization and all focal farmers. In sum, our results
demonstrate that self-interested behavior by individual farmers, social entrepreneurs, or proﬁt-
driven ﬁrms can be socially beneﬁcial at the same time, beneﬁting all focal stakeholders, with
carefully disclosed information or optimally-designed contracts oﬀered to a fraction of farmers.
2.
Literature Review
Our paper is closely related to the works on the cobweb phenomenon in the macro-economics and
agronomics literature. Ezekiel (1938) ﬁrst attributes the phenomenon (recurring cyclical herding in
production) to the fact that producers often base their short-run production plans on the assump-
tion that the present prices will continue. Our paper diﬀers from that literature in three ways. First,
our goal is to illustrate that the self-interested behavior of strategic farmers, social entrepreneur
and for-proﬁt ﬁrms can reduce the price ﬂuctuations, whereas the focus of the cobweb theory is to
explain the price oscillations observed in various markets. Notably, we take the perspective that
such price oscillations can be mitigated by carefully designed, incentive-compatible mechanisms.
Second, one key feature of our model is that we build a micro-foundation of an individual
farmer utility model with heterogeneous production costs, such that the supply curve is derived
from farmers’ utility maximization rather than being exogenously assumed as it is in the cobweb
models. With such a utility-based model, we can also evaluate each individual farmer’s welfare.
For example, we show that a carefully designed contract oﬀered to a fraction of farmers beneﬁts
all focal stakeholders and, at the same time, reduces income disparity among farmers.
Third, the cobweb models lead to the discussion about the rational expectations assumption and
its validity for all farmers (see, e.g., Nerlove 1958). This assumption is often made in the operations
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

6
literature on strategic consumers (see, e.g., Su 2010, Cachon and Swinney 2011 and references
therein). We consider a fraction of farmers who have rational expectations or who contract with
social entrepreneurs or for-proﬁt ﬁrms. This feature emphasizes interactions via the market prices
among farmers who have diﬀerent rationality or access to external farming contracts. In a diﬀerent
context but a similar spirit, Su (2010) and Cachon and Swinney (2009) consider the interactions
between myopic and forward-looking customers, and Hu et al. (2017) consider the interactions
among customers who have diﬀerent granularity of information about the service system congestion.
The latter shows that in the presence of information cost, a fraction of customers may intentionally
ignore the real-time information, thereby beneﬁting social welfare. Aﬂaki et al. (2015) ﬁnd that in
the presence of hassle cost, a fraction of forward-looking customers may intentionally choose not
to search for more information and this rational ignorant behavior may beneﬁt the society.
We also contribute to the economics and operations management literature on “social herding,”
as our model captures the farmers’ shortsighted herding behavior in planting or abandoning crops.
Veeraraghavan and Debo (2009) identify the herding eﬀect in queues where consumers infer service
quality from the length of the queue. In our model, herding is an outcome of farmers’ shortsighted
reactions to recent prices, and we study the role of self-serving strategic farmers and ﬁrms in
alleviating the herding in crop planting. We provide a solution under which the herding eﬀect can
be eliminated by oﬀering a carefully designed contract, which beneﬁts both farmers and ﬁrms.
Notably as opposed to the social herding eﬀect, Tereyagoglu and Veeraraghavan (2012), Agrawal
et al. (2016) and Momot et al. (2016) consider consumers’ purchasing behavior that depends on
their intrinsic desire for exclusivity. More broadly, this paper is related to this emerging literature
on social operations management, which focuses on how social interactions leading to collective
social behaviors (in this paper, individual farmers’ planting decisions collectively determine the
total production quantity and market price), have an impact on ﬁrms’ operational decisions (in this
paper, procurement), and how operational decisions (in this paper, contract farming) can inﬂuence
the formation of collective social behaviors.
Our study also links to the literature showing that a lack of information can lead to endogenized
uncertainty in business practices. For example, the well-known “bullwhip eﬀect” (see Lee et al.
1997) shows that lack of the information about the true customer demand causes the variance
of order quantities to increase as one moves upstream along the supply chain. Hu et al. (2015)
show that sales uncertainty can occur when customers are more inﬂuenced by others when making
purchasing decisions. Cooper et al. (2006) show that incorrect beliefs about customer behavior
cause a spiral-down eﬀect, i.e., revenues systematically decrease over time. In contrast, we focus
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

7
on investigating win-win mechanisms that can be implemented by informed individuals, a social
entrepreneur or a for-proﬁt ﬁrm, to reduce the negative eﬀects of the lack of market information.
Poverty alleviation in developing countries has been studied in the burgeoning operations man-
agement literature that focuses on the design of socially responsible operations (see Sodhi and
Tang 2014 for a comprehensive review). Many of those studies explore the value of disclosing mar-
ket information in helping farmers improve their welfare. For instance, Chen et al. (2013) study
Indian conglomerate ITC’s new business model, where the ﬁrm helps farmers to obtain various
information through E-Choupals network and allows farmers to sell directly to the ﬁrm. Chen
and Tang (2015) examine the value of both private and public signals of the agricultural market.
Chen et al. (2015) investigate the incentives for knowledge sharing among competing farmers. Tang
et al. (2015) examine whether under a Cournot competition, farmers should utilize market infor-
mation to optimize their production plans when both the market potential and the process yield
are uncertain. Belloni et al. (2016) show that a monopsonistic buyer (a downstream principal in
general) with private demand information can contract with segmented farmers (upstream agents)
to restore the ﬁrst-best productive eﬃciency. Our paper diﬀers from those papers in that we focus
on the scenario when the market information is not available to all the farmers. We consider some
farmers that can only react shortsightedly to the market, and study how these farmers’ welfare is
aﬀected by self-serving strategic farmers and ﬁrms. By modeling farmers’ dynamic crop planting
decisions over time, we ﬁnd that the self-serving individuals and ﬁrms can also be beneﬁcial to
all focal farmers. In terms of methodology, we adopt a multi-period model with interactions both
within and across periods, whereas all the aforementioned papers build a one-period model.
Finally, our paper is also related to the literature on price protection mechanisms. Nicholls
and Opal (2005) review price protection implemented through fair trade operations and study
its eﬀectiveness. Haight (2011) suggests that a fair-trade certiﬁcation model, which guarantees a
ﬁxed price if the farmers meet high production standards, can be poorly implemented and only
applied to limited types of crops (Fair Trade USA 2012). Annan and Schlenker (2015) study the
eﬀectiveness of federal crop insurance in the U.S. They argue that this government program may
be a disincentive for farmers to adapt to extreme weather. Most of the papers referred to above
are empirical studies. In our paper, we develop an analytical model to study the eﬀectiveness
of a pre-season procurement contract, oﬀered by an SE or a for-proﬁt ﬁrm, in reducing market
ﬂuctuation and improving farmers’ welfare. We identify many potential risks associated with the
contract and ﬁnd that a careful design is crucial to the eﬀectiveness of such a contract. Federgruen
et al. (2016) consider a manufacturer that oﬀers a menu of contracts to a set of contract farmers.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

8
They focus on information asymmetry in farmers’ characteristics and develop eﬃcient approaches
to designing the contracts. Mu et al. (2015) consider intermediaries who compete in collecting milk
from farmers. They ﬁnd competition can either hurt or improve the quality of the milk, depending
on quality test mechanism. Lee et al. (2000) study the price adjustment mechanism that aims to
reduce price uncertainty but they study an entirely diﬀerent setting.
3.
Model
We study a multi-period model in which farmers make planting decisions for a single crop in each
period over an inﬁnite horizon with no time discounting. The individual farmers are inﬁnitesimally
small-scale, and the size of the farmer population is normalized to 1. At the beginning of period t,
each farmer observes pt−1, the crop’s market price in the end of previous period t −1 and decides
whether or not to cultivate the crop in the current period t. The planting decision depends on each
farmer’s individual assessment of the near-future crop price and the cost of planting the crop. The
crop production takes one full period. At the end of the period, all of the harvested crop is sold to
the market with the price pt determined by the total output from all farmers.
Farmers are heterogeneous in their capability of assessing crop prices. We assume a fraction, α,
of the farmers is strategic and the remaining is na¨ıve. Speciﬁcally, the strategic farmers have full
information about the market and can take rational expectation to predict the near-future market
price pt, but na¨ıve farmers are incapable of correctly predicting the market price and they simply
take pt−1 from the last period as the indicator of the near-future price at the end of period t.
Besides, farmers also have heterogeneous endowment of production costs, denoted as c, which is
uniformly distributed on [0, ¯c] capturing the idiosyncratic production capabilities among farmers.
Let F denote the cumulative distribution function (c.d.f.) of production cost c. We model a farmers’
perceived utility of planting the crop as the farmer’s individual assessed market price minus its
production cost. That is, a strategic farmer’s perceived utility, denoted by us
t, and a na¨ıve farmer’s
perceived utility, denoted by un
t , are
us
t = pt −c,
un
t = pt−1 −c,
(1)
respectively. We focus on small-scale farmers and premise that farmers are unlikely to collaborate
to make joint production decisions, given their heterogeneity along two dimensions as mentioned.
In the beginning of each period, a farmer chooses to cultivate the crop if and only if his perceived
utility is no less than zero. Our model could accommodate the heterogeneity in farmers’ outside
options as well, by interpreting c as a general cost including farmers’ opportunity cost of farming.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

9
For instance, c could represent the heterogeneous income farmers would have received if they left
their land and traveled to a city to become migrant workers. Moreover, we will extend our model by
considering endogenized outside options, the values of which are based on the farmers’ individual
perceived utility of planting other crops (see Section 6.1).
As farmers are inﬁnitesimal and the size of the farmer population is scaled to 1, the total amount
of crop produced by all strategic farmers and na¨ıve farmers in period t, denoted as qs
t and qn
t , are
qs
t = αPr(us
t ≥0) = αF(pt),
qn
t = (1 −α)Pr(un
t ≥0) = (1 −α)F(pt−1).
(2)
As observed in many developing countries, it is not economical for small-scale farmers to store
or transport their crops, especially perishable crops, to distant markets. Thus, in our model we
assume all the crop is sold to a market which all the farmers have access to. We use a deterministic
model to study how to inﬂuence farmers’ shortsighted behavior, leaving aside the uncontrollable
yield uncertainty which will be taken into account in Section 6.2. Let Ωdenote the potential market
size. As farmers sell the homogeneous crop, the market would be cleared at a market clearing price,
associated with the total production quantity:
pt = Ω−bqt = Ω−b(qs
t + qn
t ) = Ω−b[αF(pt) + (1 −α)F(pt−1)],
(3)
where b > 0 measures how the market price is sensitive to the production quantity, and in particular,
every unit increase in the total supply quantity would lead to the market price to drop by $b. The
larger the value of b, the more sensitive the market price to the production quantity. Note that pt
appears in both sides of the above equality, implying that the strategic farmers rationally anticipate
the future price when making planting decisions. Equations (1)-(3) indicate that farmers interact
indirectly with one another through the market price. That is, the collection of all individual
farmers’ planting decisions determines the market price, which in turn aﬀects the realized utility of
each one of them. For ease of exposition we make the following assumptions throughout the paper.
Assumption 1 (Diversity in Planting Decisions). ¯c ≤Ω≤b + ¯c.
Assumption 1 rules out some trivial cases: Ω≥¯c avoids the situation that some farmers will
never plant the crops regardless of the market price; Ω−b ≤¯c eliminates that all farmers will plant
crops even at the lowest possible market price.
Assumption 2 (Regular Initial Price). (a) 0 ≤Ω−b ≤p0 ≤Ωand (b) p0 ≤¯c.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

10
Assumption 2 regulates the initial market price. Assumption 2(a) is a natural assumption due
to the fact that pt = Ω−bqt and 0 ≤qt ≤1 for t ≥1. We could further narrow the range of p0 as
stated in Assumption 2(b) without loss of generality (WLOG). This is because: (i) according to
(2) and (3), p0 inﬂuences the farmers’ crop production q1 and market price p1 only through F (p0);
and (ii) for any p0 > ¯c we have F (p0) = F (¯c) = 1, since F (·) is the c.d.f. of a random variable with
support on [0, ¯c]. Hence, any price beyond ¯c is essentially equivalent to ¯c in the sense that they
have the same inﬂuence on the dynamics.
In what follows, we will ﬁnd the connection between farmers’ na¨ıve behavior and cyclical market
ﬂuctuations, and examine the role of strategic farmers in inﬂuencing the farmers’ planting decisions
and the market prices. In Sections 4 and 5 we focus anew on social entrepreneurs and for-proﬁt
ﬁrms that self-interestedly induce na¨ıve farmers not to make shortsighted decisions. Now we use
Equations (1)-(3) to derive the market price evolution. Deﬁne
¯p :=
¯c
¯c + bΩ.
(4)
As we will see below that without market interferences, the market price ﬂuctuates around ¯p, i.e.,
if p0 > ¯p, then p1 < ¯p, and vice versa. All our results in the rest would hold for a system with p0 > ¯p,
when the potential market interferences start from period 2. Hence, WLOG, we assume:
Assumption 3 (WLOG). p0 < ¯p.
In fact, Assumptions 1-3 can be combined into one: max{0, ¯c −b} ≤Ω−b ≤p0 ≤¯p.
Proposition 1 (Market Dynamics). Suppose Assumptions 1-3 hold. Denote g(α) := b−αb
¯c+αb.
(i) (Convergence) If g(α) < 1, i.e., α > b−¯c
2b , the market price process follows
pt = ¯p −g(α)(pt−1 −¯p) = ¯p + [−g(α)]t (p0 −¯p).
(5)
Then the market price process converges to ¯p, i.e., limt→∞pt = ¯p.
(ii) (Divergence) If g(α) ≥1, i.e., α ≤b−¯c
2b , the market price does not converge. In particular:
(a) If g(α) = 1, i.e., α = b−¯c
2b , the market price process alternates between two prices p2i−1 =
2¯p −p0 and p2i = p0 < p2i−1 for any i ≥1, which are centered at ¯p.
(b) If g(α) > 1, i.e., α < b−¯c
2b , there exists a threshold i′ ≥1 such that for t < 2i′ −1 the market
price process diverges according to (5), and for t ≥2i′−1 the process alternates between two constant
prices p2i−1 = Ω−b[α + (1 −α) p2i
¯c ] and p2i = ¯p −g(α)(¯c −¯p) < p2i−1 for any i ≥i′.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

11
All proofs and all results summarized in tables can be found in Online Appendices. Proposition
1 implies that pt −¯p = −g(α)(pt−1 −¯p) alternates between positive and negative values over time,
and its absolute value |pt −¯p| decreases if g(α) < 1 and (weakly) increases if g(α) ≥1. Thus, if
g(α) < 1, regardless of the initial price point, pt converges to ¯p, which we call the limiting market
price. On the contrary, if g(α) = 1, the price process alternates between two constant prices; if
g(α) > 1, the process ﬁrst diverges until a time point 2i′ −1, after which it alternates between
two constant prices, which corresponds to the scenario when all na¨ıve farmers ﬂood to plant in
even periods. Overall, compared with the price ﬂuctuation when g(α) = 1, the price oscillates more
signiﬁcantly when g(α) > 1. Notably this market evolution pattern is robust to a model variation
where each farmer decides on the amounts of resources (e.g., time and eﬀort) allocated in crop
planting vs. outside options, all as continuous decision variables, as opposed to discrete choices
when heterogeneous production costs are suﬃciently dispersed, i.e., ¯c is suﬃciently large (see Online
Appendix A). In view of Proposition 1, the size of the strategic farmers α plays a signiﬁcant role
in stabilizing the market price.
Corollary 1. Suppose Assumptions 1-3 hold. If α > 1
2, the market price process always con-
verges; When α = 0, the market price process converges if and only if b < ¯c.
Note that g(α) = b−αb
¯c+αb ≥0 decreases in the fraction of strategic farmers α. Corollary 1 shows that
if there exits a suﬃcient large fraction of strategic farmers (i.e., α > 1
2), the market price process
always converges, i.e., g(α) < 1. However, in the absence of strategic farmers (or other forms of
interference), the market price process converges naturally if and only if b < ¯c, i.e., when the market
price is not sensitive to the total supply. In that situation, the market can achieve self-healing
and no external help is needed to ensure long-term stability. Therefore, we choose to omit this
relatively simple case for expositional brevity by imposing the following assumption throughout
the rest paper, though most of the analysis can be generalized without it.
Assumption 4 (Divergence by Default). b ≥¯c.
More importantly, our model provides a micro-foundation of farmers’ utility maximization for
the boom-and-bust cobweb phenomenon (see Ezekiel 1938): When the price realized at the end of
a period is high, a large number of na¨ıve farmers ﬂood to plant the crop in the upcoming period
because they think the price will continue to be high. This results in crop over-production and a
price drop in the following period. Similarly, when the price realized at the end of a period is low,
na¨ıve farmers choose to abandon planting the crop (they may plant another crop, see Section 6.1,
or seek other outside options, such as going to the city as migrant workers), thus leading to a supply
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

12
shortage and a price rebound in the following period. The na¨ıve farmers get trapped in the vicious
cycle and suﬀer from the price ﬂuctuations caused by the recurring under- or over-production. This
unfavorable situation is persistent when there is a lack of suﬃcient strategic farmers, i.e., α ≤b−¯c
2b
(equivalently, g(α) ≥1), and will also be manifested in the following farmers’ welfare analysis.
A farmer’s individual welfare in period t is deﬁned as the market price realized at the end of
this period minus the farmer’s production cost, i.e., pt −c, if he plants the crop in period t, and 0
otherwise. Let market cycle i represent a pair of consecutive periods 2i−1 and 2i. We call a farmer’s
average welfare in cycle i his short-term welfare in that cycle. We ﬁrst analyze individual na¨ıve
farmer’s average welfare when the fraction of strategic farmers is relatively small, i.e., g(α) ≥1.
By Proposition 1, there exists i′ such that the market price process alternates between two ﬁxed
prices for cycle i ≥i′. Denote wn(c) as the average welfare of a na¨ıve farmer with production cost
c in any cycle i ≥i′. For brevity, our farmer welfare analysis will focus on the periods after cycle i′.
Proposition 2 (Farmer Welfare). Suppose Assumptions 1-4 hold and g(α) ≥1. The mar-
ket price process eventually ﬂuctuates between two constant prices p2i−1 and p2i. Consider a na¨ıve
farmer with production cost c.
(a) If c ≤p2i, the na¨ıve farmer plants the crop in both periods and wn(c) = 1
2(p2i−1 + p2i) −c > 0;
(b) If p2i < c ≤p2i−1, the na¨ıve farmer plants the crop only in period 2i and wn(c) = 1
2(p2i −c) < 0;
(c) If p2i−1 < c, the na¨ıve farmer never plants the crop and wn(c) = 0.
Figure 2
Farmer’s revenue with p2i < c ≤p2i−1.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12


Periods
Market Price 
$
$
$
$
$
$

$ A naı ve farmer’s revenue
Market price
$
$
$
$
$
$
A strategic farmer’s revenue
$
Note. Na¨ıve farmers with an intermediate cost level choose to plant the crop only in those odd periods that have
realized prices below their production cost, leading to negative welfare, as shown in Proposition 2(b).
The micro-foundation enables a detailed welfare analysis for na¨ıve farmers under price ﬂuctua-
tion beyond the cobweb theory. Proposition 2 shows that na¨ıve farmers’ welfare depends on their
production costs. Only those na¨ıve farmers who have extreme values of production costs would not
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

13
be aﬀected by market ﬂuctuation when g(α) ≥1. Those low-cost na¨ıve farmers plant the crop in all
periods as their cost is always below the market price (i.e., c ≤p2i), whereas those high-cost na¨ıve
farmers do not plant the crop in any period as their production cost always exceeds the market
price (i.e., c > p2i−1). Unfortunately, as Figure 2 illustrates, the farmers who have intermediate
cost levels (i.e., p2i < c ≤p2i−1) are hurt by the price ﬂuctuation due to their na¨ıve behavior, i.e.,
planting the crop when the latest crop price is high and abandoning the crop when the price is
low. Their individual welfare is negative as shown in Proposition 2(b).
Unlike na¨ıve farmers who have welfare loss because they unconsciously yet eﬀectively “herd”
in making planting decisions, strategic farmers can rationally anticipate market prices and avoid
herding with na¨ıve farmers. When there is a suﬃciently large fraction of strategic farmers (i.e.,
g(α) < 1, or equivalently, α > b−¯c
2b ), their self-serving planting decisions always help stabilize market
prices in the long run, and may improve na¨ıve farmers’ welfare at the same time. The following
proposition conﬁrms the role of strategic farmers in enhancing farmers’ welfare.
Proposition 3 (Socially Beneficial Rationality). Suppose Assumptions 1-4 hold and
g(α) < 1. Denote pn
2i as the lower price in any cycle i when all farmers are na¨ıve farmers.
(i) In the short run (i.e., in each cycle i): (a) Each strategic farmer obtains a (weakly) higher
surplus than the na¨ıve farmer with the same production cost; (b) Those na¨ıve farmers who have
a production cost that is not too low, i.e., c > pn
2i−2, obtain a (weakly) higher surplus than that
without strategic farmers.
(ii) In the long run (i.e., as the cycle i approaches ∞): (a) Each strategic farmer obtains the same
surplus as the na¨ıve farmer with the same production cost; (b) Those na¨ıve farmers who have a
production cost that is not too low, i.e., c > limi→∞pn
2i, obtain a (weakly) higher surplus than that
without strategic farmers.
Proposition 3 shows that in both short and long run, the strategic farmers’ forward-looking
behavior is indeed rational (part (a)), and such rational behavior is also socially beneﬁcial and
can help increase the welfare of na¨ıve farmers (part (b)). The welfare improvement for na¨ıve
farmers comes from the stabilized market price due to the presence of strategic farmers. The welfare
improvement is unambiguous for those farmers with not too low production cost, because their
planting decision is indeed aﬀected by the ﬂuctuating market prices.
The na¨ıve farmers with very low production cost, however, might obtain lower, but still positive,
welfare in the presence of strategic farmers. This is because these farmers plant in all periods and
the average price when the market price process diverges (see Proposition 1(ii-b)), could be higher
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

14
than the limiting market price ¯p when the market price process converges. Through numerical
experiments we ﬁnd that in most cases this welfare decrease is relatively small in comparison with
the welfare gain the other farmers obtain, and thus the total welfare of all farmers tends to be
improved by the presence of strategic farmers (we provide a suﬃcient condition of this result in
Part (2c) of the proof of Proposition 3 in Online Appendix E). Since these farmers with very low
costs always obtain positive surplus (Proposition 2(a)) and is not signiﬁcantly aﬀected by strategic
farmers, for the remaining of the paper, our analysis will mostly focus on those focal farmers who
do not have a production cost advantage (i.e., with a production cost that is not too low). More
speciﬁcally, we focus on farmers with a production cost that is no smaller than a threshold, denoted
as c, which is equal to the lower market price in each cycle over the long run when there are naive
farmers only (i.e., c = p0 for b = ¯c; c = Ω−b for b > ¯c, see p2i in Proposition 1 part (ii) with α = 0).
Although there is beneﬁt in being forward-looking, cultivating a suﬃcient number of strategic
farmers is still not easy. Farmers may lack the intrinsic reasoning ability or the external aids
to obtain full market information and may thus fail to make fully rational decisions. In Online
Appendix B, we discuss the impact of backward-looking strategic behavior on the market dynamics.
In addition, the size of strategic farmers aﬀects the convergence rate of the market price process.
Corollary 2. Suppose Assumptions 1-4 hold and g(α) < 1. The fraction of strategic farmers
α aﬀects only the convergence rate of the market price process but not the limiting market price.
The larger the fraction of strategic farmers α is, the faster the market price process converges.
A relatively smaller α would result in a slower price convergence and a larger loss for some na¨ıve
farmers before the market price is stabilized. If a farmer’s loss exceeds his capital or savings, he
may go bankrupt and quit the farming business, which is considered in the following.
Proposition 4 (Impact of Bankruptcy). Suppose Assumptions 1-4 hold and those farmers
who exit the market due to bankruptcy never come back. Then even when there is no strategic
farmer at all (i.e., α = 0) and the market price process would diverge without bankruptcy (i.e.,
b ≥¯c), the market price process still converges, but to a limiting market price that is higher than ¯p.
When farmers’ savings are limited, Proposition 4 shows the negative impacts of bankruptcy
on the society: the collapse of farmers who would have survived with proper interferences and a
shortage of supply in the long run resulting in a high limiting market price. This situation may
beneﬁt those farmers who have cost advantage and remain in the market, but it is at the deadly
cost of those farmers who go bankrupt and results in surplus loss for crop buyers. One can naturally
imagine that the above situation still hold when there is an insuﬃcient number of strategic farmers.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

15
Therefore, it is imperative to examine other options that hold the potential to timely stabilize the
market price and fairly distribute the beneﬁts of price stabilization.
4.
Social Entrepreneurs
In the last section, we showed that the conversion of a suﬃcient fraction of na¨ıve farmers to strate-
gic farmers would tilt the market dynamics from ﬂuctuation to stabilization. However, one often
observes that it is very diﬃcult to cultivate enough strategic farmers for several reasons. First, in
the case of fresh, local specialty fruits and vegetables, there is often a lack of extensive advisory
systems that would help farmers obtain the market information about each crop and track the
activities of other farmers. Second, farmers’ limited ability to predict crop prices and their short-
sighted behavior have remained major obstacles despite considerable advances in crop advisory
communications. Moreover, external factors such as market uncertainty may add signiﬁcant com-
plexity to the market stabilizing eﬀorts, as we will discuss later in Section 6.2. For those reasons,
in many developing countries where those problems are prevalent, it may not be as eﬀective as it
sounds to rely purely on farmers’ forward-looking behavior to stabilize the market. One remedy
can be market stabilization eﬀorts by social organizations operating in a sustainable way.
In this section, we consider a social entrepreneur (SE) who aims at improving the social welfare
but also bears in mind sustaining his own operations, when na¨ıve farmers do not voluntarily become
strategic. The SE oﬀers a fraction of farmers a pre-season procurement contract that buys out
all of their crop. We refer to this contract as a buyout contract. In this contract, SE selects and
announces a ﬁxed buyout price pb for all periods (see Section 4.3.3 for time-varying buyout prices).
At the beginning of each period each farmer who is oﬀered the contract decides whether to sign
the contract with the SE. Farmers who accepted the SE’s contract at the beginning of period
t sell their crops to the SE at the price pb at the end of period t. Right after the SE buys the
crops from the farmers, he sells them in the market at the market price of that period, pt. The
pre-season buyout contract we study here is diﬀerent from the minimum-price support program
oﬀered by an NGO or government, in terms of the timing of sales commitment. In the latter, the
farmers contract with the NGO or government and can decide to sell their crop back to them
when market prices fall below a pre-speciﬁed level after the harvest, while our contract is agreed
on before the season starts. The pre-season contract can help guide the planting decisions in the
ﬁrst place, whereas the minimum-price support program may have a delayed eﬀect. Though the
minimum-price support program can also guarantee farmers’ payoﬀs, it very likely comes at the
cost of NGOs or governments, which may not be sustainable (see, e.g., Craymer 2016). Annan and
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

16
Schlenker (2015) consider moral hazard issues in minimum-price support programs, i.e., insurance
protection reduces individual eﬀorts in ﬁghting against extreme weather conditions. We assume
away such issues in the buyout program, as we focus on the impact of price guarantee on individual
planting decisions. In the following subsection we will examine whether the aid from the SE would
bring sustainable beneﬁts to all farmers and to the SE himself as well.
4.1.
Market Equilibrium in the Presence of SE
We assume that all farmers are na¨ıve and only an exogenous, α, fraction of farmers have access
to the SE’s contract. The limited access could be attributed to many factors. For instance, some
farmers in rural areas may be too remote to be reached and others may decline to work with an
unfamiliar SE. We refer to farmers who are oﬀered the SE’s contract as type-S farmers and those
who are not as type-N farmers. A type-S farmer’s perceived utility, if he accepts the contract and
plants the crop, is pb −c. Since the farmer would otherwise still behave na¨ıvely and perceive utility
pt−1 −c, he will accept the contract only if the oﬀered price pb is strictly higher than the market
price pt−1 in the last period. Hence, a type-S farmer’s perceived utility in period t, denoted by ub
t
(where the superscript b emphasizes the buyout contract), is
ub
t = max{pb,pt−1} −c.
(6)
In other words, farmers are perceived to be incentive-compatible in deciding whether to accept
the buyout contract. The SE’s buyout contract aims at stimulating farmers to plant crops in a
period when the market price in the last period was low. We allow the contract to be evoked only
contingently, i.e., the contract can also be viewed as a form of crop insurance, which provides farm-
ers with more ﬂexibility (in Section 4.3.4, we study a contract that buys out a farmer’s production
in all periods). The corresponding quantity produced by type-S farmers, denoted by qb
t, is
qb
t = αPr(ub
t ≥0).
(7)
The perceived utility of the rest 1−α fraction of type-N farmers un
t and their production quantity
qn
t remain the same as in (1) and (2), respectively. The market clearing price in period t becomes
pt(pb;pt−1) := Ω−b(qb
t + qn
t ) = Ω−bαF(max{pb,pt−1}) −b(1 −α)F(pt−1).
(8)
Note that Ω−b is the lowest market price, so no farmers would accept a contract with buyout
price below it. By the logic in Assumption 2(b), it is easily shown that pb makes a diﬀerence only
when it is smaller than ¯c. Hence, we have the following assumption.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

17
Assumption 5. Ω−b ≤pb ≤¯c.
We now study the long-term market trends for a certain level of buyout price pb. According to
Proposition 1 and Corollary 1, when b ≥¯c and there are neither strategic farmers nor any contract
oﬀered by the SE, the market price oscillates over time, around the limiting market price ¯p. The
SE’s contract would stimulate planting the crop when the most recent market price is below pb
and thus reduce the price ﬂuctuation. The following proposition shows that the extent to which
the SE’s buyout contract can help reduce the price ﬂuctuation varies, depending on the buyout
price pb and the fraction of contract farmers α.
Proposition 5. Suppose Assumptions 1-5 hold. Denote α0 := 1 −(pb−¯p)(¯c+b)
(pb−p0)b ,α1 := 1 −¯c
b and
α2 := 1 −¯c2
b2 .
(i) Suppose pb > ¯p. (a) If α > max{α1,min{α0,α2}}, the market price process converges to ¯p −
αb(pb−¯p)
¯c+(1−α)b. (b) If α ≤α1, the price process does not converge.
(ii) Suppose pb = ¯p. If α > α2, the price process converges to ¯p. Otherwise, it does not converge.
(iii) Suppose pb < ¯p. The price process does not converge.
When the buyout price pb is greater than the limiting market price ¯p, the market price process
would converge if α > max{α1,min{α0,α2}}, i.e., there is a suﬃcient fraction of type-S farmers,
and would diverge if α ≤α1. In fact, numerical experiments show that there exists a threshold
on α in the range [α1,max{α1,min{α0,α2}}] such that when α is greater than the threshold the
market price process converges to a value that is strictly less than ¯p, and when α is less than that
threshold the process diverges. When pb is exactly equal to ¯p, the threshold on α that determines
whether the process converges is α2. For a buyout price pb that is below ¯p, the SE’s contract does
not stabilize the crop price. This is because, even if there is a large number of type-S farmers,
by the time the market price ﬂuctuates above pb no farmers would accept the buyout contract,
and thus the contract is no longer eﬀective and the price will not continue to converge. In such
situation, farmers are still exposed to signiﬁcant price risks.
When the buyout price is high (i.e., pb > ¯p) and provided to a suﬃcient number of farmers, the
SE incurs losses from his operations in the long run since the market price is strictly less than
the buyout price ¯p. Even worse, some na¨ıve farmers who are not oﬀered the contract (i.e., type-N
farmers) may give up farming in such a situation.
Corollary 3. Suppose Assumptions 1-5 hold. An inadequate subsidy (i.e., low buyout price)
does not eliminate the ﬂuctuations in the market price. Too large a subsidy (i.e., a high buyout
price), however, may create huge distortions in the market, causing many non-contract farmers to
give up farming, and result in losses for the SE.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

18
The reason behind the market distortion when pb is too high is that the market price in the long
run decreases in pb and thus a higher buyout price induces more type-S farmers to produce the crop;
more production leads to a lower market price, and crowds out more type-N farmers who are not
protected by the buyout contract. This unintended consequence is exempliﬁed by many charitable
programs whose unfair subsidies undermine the eﬀorts of those unsupported poor and thus may
end up with sustaining their poverty (see Miller 2014). Corollary 3 reveals that SE’s eﬀorts, which
are inspired by a desire to do good, do not necessarily result in a satisfactory outcome. A buyout
price that is too high beneﬁts contract farmers at the expense of non-contract farmers and may
actually create more poverty. This also provides a caveat for governments and NGOs that may
have more centralized power to oﬀer subsidies, perhaps in the name of charity. Therefore, it is
desirable to ﬁnd the optimal design of the buyout contract.
4.2.
Optimal Contract Design
As mentioned above, the SE’s goal is to improve farmers’ welfare while sustaining his own opera-
tions. The SE’s proﬁt in period t depends on the buyout price pb and the market prices in periods
t−1 and t. According to (6), if pb > pt−1, then all type-S farmers with production cost c < pb accept
the buyout contract. Thus, the SE buys crops from type-S farmers in period t at unit price pb and
then sells them at unit price pt; thus the SE’s proﬁt is (pt −pb)qb
t. If pb ≤pt−1, then no type-S
farmers accept the buyout contract in period t and thus the SE’s proﬁt in period t is 0. Formally,
SE’s proﬁt in period t can be written as
πt(pb;pt−1) :=
 (pt −pb)qb
t if pb > pt−1,
0
otherwise.
(9)
For a given pb, let ¯ws
i (c) and ¯wn
i (c) denote the average welfare of, respectively, a type-S farmer
and a type-N farmer with production cost c in cycle i. Speciﬁcally, we have
¯ws
i (c) = 1
2
n
1{ub
2i−1≥0}ws
2i−1 + 1{ub
2i≥0}ws
2i
o
and ¯wn
i (c) = 1
2
n
1{un
2i−1≥0}wn
2i−1 + 1{un
2i≥0}wn
2i
o
,
where ws
t = pb −c and wn
t = pt −c denote the welfare of, respectively, a type-S and a type-N farmer
in period t if he plants the crop, and 1{A} is an indicator function that equals 1 if condition A
holds and 0 otherwise. The indicator function is used to specify the criteria for planting the crop,
i.e., the perceived utility is nonnegative. Below we focus on analyzing the impact of the buyout
contract on farmers’ welfare. See the proof of Proposition 6 in Online Appendix H for details about
the farmers’ welfare functions ¯ws
i (c) and ¯wn
i (c), which are functions of pt in (8) and pb.
As discussed after Proposition 3, we focus on farmers with a production cost that is not too
low since their planting decision is negatively aﬀected by the ﬂuctuating prices. Hence, the SE’s
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

19
problem is to select the buyout price pb that maximizes the welfare of these focal farmers in the
long run while sustaining his own operations (i.e., not incurring a loss in any period), which can
be written as follows:
max
pb
Z ¯c
c
lim
i→∞

α ¯ws
i (c) + (1 −α) ¯wn
i (c)
1
¯cdc
(10)
s.t.
πt(pb;pt−1) ≥0 for any t.
We assume that the SE can access to a suﬃcient number of contract farmers in this section.
Assumption 6. α > α2 = 1 −¯c2
b2 .
If b ≤¯c, Assumption 6 is innocuous. Moreover, Assumption 6 can admit a set of feasible buyout
prices that stabilize the market (see Proposition 5). The same assumption will also be used in
Section 5 when a for-proﬁt ﬁrm oﬀers a buyout contract to farmers. In the following we discuss
SE’s proﬁt and farmers’ welfare.
Proposition 6 (Socially Beneficial Rationality). Suppose Assumptions 1-6 hold. pb∗=
¯p is the unique optimal solution to SE’s problem (10), under which the market price process con-
verges to ¯p and:
(a) The SE receives a positive proﬁt over any ﬁnite horizon and the proﬁt per market cycle dimin-
ishes to 0 in the limit.
(b) Both type-S and type-N farmers, with a production cost c > c, receive (weakly) higher welfare
in both the short- and long-run due to the market stabilization in the presence of SE.
Proposition 6 shows that among all the buyout prices it is only the price of ¯p that maximizes the
focal farmers’ total welfare while keeping the SE’s proﬁt nonnegative for any period. In addition, the
improvement of farmers’ total welfare is balanced. As shown in Proposition 6(b), at the individual
level, both type-S and type-N farmers achieve welfare improvement because of the SE’s contract.
Thus, by setting the buyout contract as pb = ¯p, there is a win-win-win situation for the SE, type-
S and type-N farmers. The following propositions present more detailed views of virtues of this
optimal buyout contract.
Proposition 7 (Long-Run Equity among Farmers of the Same Cost). Suppose
Assumptions 1-6 hold and the SE sets the price at pb = ¯p. Consider a farmer with production cost
c. As i approaches ∞,
(a) if c ≤¯p, the farmer plants crops in both periods and limi→∞¯ws
i (c) = limi→∞¯wn
i (c) = ¯p −c ≥0;
(b) if ¯p < c, the farmer does not plant the crop and limi→∞¯ws
i (c) = limi→∞¯wn
i (c) = 0.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

20
In the limit, under the optimal buyout contract, the market price converges to ¯p (see Proposition
5(b)), which is the same as the buyout price itself. Thus, a farmer, regardless of his type, plants the
crop in every period in the limit if his production cost is lower than ¯p and otherwise does not plant
in any period. Accordingly, as shown in Proposition 7, both type-S farmers and type-N farmers
receive identical utilities in the long run, i.e., limi→∞¯ws
i (c) = limi→∞¯wn
i (c).
Denote by wn
i (c) the average welfare of a na¨ıve farmer with production cost c in any cycle i, in
the scenario without SE and with all farmers being na¨ıve. We ﬁnd that the welfare improvement,
i.e., limi→∞¯ws
i (c) −wn
i (c) = limi→∞¯wn
i (c) −wn
i (c), however, is not monotone in a farmer’s cost
endowment c. In each period, the optimal buyout contract pb = ¯p reduces the welfare gap between
farmers who are at a cost advantage and disadvantage.
Proposition 8 (Fairness across Classes of Farmers with Heterogeneous Costs).
Suppose Assumptions 1-6 hold and the SE sets the price at pb = ¯p. There exists i′ ≥1 such that
for any given pair of production costs c1 and c2 with c1 ≤pn
2i′ < c2, where pn
2i′ is the market price
without SE, ¯ws
i (c1) −¯ws
i (c2) ≤¯wn
i (c1) −¯wn
i (c2) ≤wn
i (c1) −wn
i (c2) for all i ≥i′.
Farmers with low production costs below p2i′ have a cost advantage over those who have high
production costs above p2i′. As stated in Proposition 8, under the SE’s optimal buyout contract, the
welfare gap between high- and low-cost farmers is smaller among type-S farmers than that among
type-N farmers, which is further smaller than that among farmers in the scenario where all farmers
are na¨ıve. Therefore, SE helps not only improve the total welfare but also reduce the welfare gap
between the advantaged and disadvantaged farmers. That is, the distribution of beneﬁt also tends
to be fair across farmers with heterogeneous production costs (see Proposition 8), in addition to
the long-run fairness among farmers with the same production cost, regardless of whether they are
contract farmers or not (see Proposition 7).
4.3.
Contract Implementation and Discussion
4.3.1.
Default Risk. As shown in Part (3a) of the proof of Proposition 6 in Online Appendix
H, before the market price process converges, those farmers who are oﬀered the contract and have
a production cost less than ¯p may periodically observe the realized market price higher than the
contract price pb = ¯p at which they agreed to sell to the SE. They may realize that their average
welfare is lower than that if they plant the crop and sell it directly to the market. Thus, these
farmers may choose to default on the SE contract before the market stabilizes. However, we ﬁnd
that this possible default has no impact on the crop supply and hence the market price process is
unchanged. This is because these low-cost farmers will plant the crop in every period regardless of
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

21
whether they decide to sell in the market or to the SE. Thus, contract price adjustment or rewards
in any other form to prevent these low-cost farmers from defaulting may not be necessary.
4.3.2.
Impact of α. Similar to the result with strategic farmers (see Corollary 2), under the
optimal buyout contract, a larger size of the type-S farmers does not change the market converging
price but increases the market convergence rate. However, diﬀerent from the role of strategic
farmers, the SE’s contract is only eﬀective in one period of every market cycle, as it is executed by
farmers only when the market price is low. This leads to a slower market price convergence rate
than that under the forward-looking behavior of strategic farmers in Section 3. This ﬁnding about
the convergence rate indicates that cultivating strategic farmers can be a more eﬀective strategy
over the long run than simply oﬀering na¨ıve farmers a buyout contract. Formally, we have:
Proposition 9. Suppose Assumptions 1-6 hold and pb = ¯p. The fraction of type-S farmers, α,
aﬀects only the convergence rate of the market price process but not the limiting market price. The
larger the fraction of type-S farmers is, the faster the market price process converges. Moreover,
given the same α, the market price process with the SE’s contract converges more slowly than that
with strategic farmers.
It is widely acknowledged that approaching and convincing farmers to participate in the contract
farming can be time-consuming. One immediate implication of Proposition 9 is that SE still needs
to make the buyout contract accessible to as many farmers as possible if the budget permits. This
is because, a large number of contract farmers speeds up the price convergence process and thus
not only directly beneﬁts most contract farmers themselves but also indirectly beneﬁts all other
focal non-contract farmers by increasing their welfare within a short period of time.
4.3.3.
Dynamic Price Contract. Another approach that holds the potential in expediting
the price convergence is to oﬀer time-varying buyout price contract, though it is more complicated
to communicate and implement. Consider the following SE’s problem. Let pb := {pb
1,pb
2,...,pb
n,...}
be the time-varying pricing policy. For any given suﬃciently small ϵ > 0, deﬁne T(pb;ϵ) := min{t′ :
|pt(pb) −¯p| ≤ϵ,t ≥t′}. The objective is to ﬁnd a dynamic price contract that achieves the fastest
convergence to ¯p while the SE does not incur any loss at any time. For any given suﬃciently small
ϵ, the SE aims at solving:
minpb
T(pb;ϵ)
(11)
s.t.
πt(pb) ≥0 for all t,
where πt is deﬁned in (9).
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

22
Proposition 10. Suppose Assumptions 1-6 hold.1 The optimal solution to SE’s problem (11)
for any suﬃciently small ϵ is
(pb
2i−1,pb
2i) =

¯p + (1 −α)b
¯c + αb (¯p −p2i−2),0

for any i ≥1.
(12)
As implied by Proposition 10, SE’s dynamic contract is accepted by farmers only in odd periods
(i.e., period 2i −1 for any i), when the latest market price p2i−2 is less than ¯p and thus less than
pb
2i−1. Compared to the optimal price ¯p in the static contract (Proposition 6), the optimal price
pb
2i−1 in dynamic contract is higher and thus attracts more type-S farmers to plant the crops to
oﬀset the shortsighted behavior by na¨ıve farmers. Hence, it accelerates the price convergence. To
avoid any loss, the SE has to reduce the price pb
2i−1 over time to ensure that it is no more than the
corresponding realized market price. In the limit, as i approaches ∞, the price pb
2i−1 converges to
¯p from above. Moreover, if the constraint πt ≥0 can be relaxed, i.e., SE is able to endure losses,
the market limiting price can be achieved in one period when α is suﬃciently large.
Proposition 11. Suppose Assumptions 1-4 hold and the SE has a suﬃciently large budget and
can endure losses. If α ≥¯p−p0
¯c−p0 , then setting pb
1 = ¯p−p0
α
+ p0 stabilizes the price in one period.
Proposition 11 assumes that SE is willing to sacriﬁce itself to do good, which may not always
be true in practice.
Besides its complexity and inconvenience in revising the contract terms, another potential risk
associated with a dynamic contract, as opposed to committing to a ﬁxed buyout price, is that the
SE could be more speculative and abuse the contract when oﬀering it, in order to earn more proﬁts
in the short term. For instance, the SE could contract with farmers at a price even lower than ¯p but
strictly higher than pt−1 at the beginning of an odd period t and sell at a higher market price in
the end of that period. That could dramatically slow down the market convergence rate and result
in lower farmer welfare. Therefore, monitoring and regulating SE’s behavior can be necessary. We
will further elaborate the speculative incentive in the model with a for-proﬁt ﬁrm in Section 5.
4.3.4.
Long-Term Contract. Consider that the SE oﬀers type-S farmers a long-term con-
tract in which a constant buyout price pb is speciﬁed. If a type-S farmer accepts the contract, he
commits to cultivate the crop and sell it at pb to the SE in every period over a very long horizon.
It is reasonable to assume that a type-S farmer with a production cost c will accept the contract
1 For this result, Assumption 6 can be relaxed to α > α1.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

23
if pb ≥c, and do not otherwise. (We will verify shortly it is indeed incentive compatible for type-S
farmers to do so.) Then the market price evolves as follows:
pt = Ω−bαF(pb) −b(1 −α)F(pt−1).
(13)
We replace the deﬁnition of pt by (13) and ﬁnd that Proposition 6 still holds if we relax the
income constraint in the SE’s problem (10) to that the total income in each cycle (as opposed to
each period) is nonnegative (see Online Appendix C for more details). As a result, the optimal
long-term contract is also beneﬁcial to both the SE and farmers. However, promoting this contract
could be diﬃcult. First, na¨ıve farmers may hesitate to make any long-term commitment, as they
likely ﬁnd it diﬃcult to assess its value over the long run. Furthermore, this contract may not seem
incentive compatible: In view of conceivably higher future market prices than the oﬀered contract
price, the farmers may not be willing to be locked in at the contract price.
4.3.5.
Numerical Comparison. We numerically compare the market price trajectories in
all the models we have discussed so far, i.e., the models with (1) all na¨ıve farmers, (2) α fraction
of strategic farmers, (3) the optimal ﬁxed buyout contract, (4) the optimal dynamic contract
and (5) the optimal long-term contract. The latter three are oﬀered by the SE to α fraction
of type-S farmers. As shown in Figure 3, for the same given α, strategic farmers are the most
eﬃcient in stabilizing the market, and SE’s optimal dynamic and long-term contracts have similar
performances which are better than that of the optimal ﬁxed buyout contract.
Figure 3
Numerical comparison of diﬀerent scenarios across various α.
Market Price Evolution
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
α=0.15
Period
Price
 
 
(1) all naive
(2) strategic
(3) SE
(4) SE Dynamic
(5) SE Long−term
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
α=0.3
Period
Price
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
α=0.45
Period
Price
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
α=0.6
Period
Price
Note. Parameters: b = 11, ¯c = 10,Ω= 12.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

24
5.
Proﬁt-Driven Enterprise
While the important role of SEs and other social organizations in increasing farmers’ welfare has
been widely acknowledged, one cannot expect their participation in every aspect of the agriculture
industry. In this section, we further study the commonly seen interactions between farmers and
a proﬁt-driven ﬁrm who buys raw materials from upstream farmers for resale or may use these
materials to make products for sale. When all the farmers are na¨ıve, we have seen that the price
uncertainty is a major obstacle to a stable stream of crop supply. Given supply uncertainty leads to
operational ineﬃciency, reducing the price risks and having a stable market supply may beneﬁt all
the stages along the supply chain. Therefore, it is often in the best interest of a proﬁt-driven ﬁrm
to plan ahead to contract with farmers to ensure a safe and steady supply of agricultural products.
Given companies may not want to wait for actions taken by others, it is important to examine how
the market price risk and the resulting supply risk can be mitigated solely by a proﬁt-driven ﬁrm.
Speciﬁcally, we study the impact of a buyout contract oﬀered by a for-proﬁt ﬁrm instead of a SE.
Suppose the ﬁrm has a constant consumer demand d in each period. This demand d can also be
generally interpreted as a ﬁrm’s target level of ﬁnal product supply. Assume that one unit of crop
raw materials can be converted to one unit of ﬁnal products. If the market supply qt ≥d, the ﬁrm
buys d units of raw materials from the market at the market price pt. If qt < d, the ﬁrm has to buy
an additional quantity d −qt from an external market at a higher price pm with pm > pt for any
t ≥0. The external market is isolated from the focal market we have studied. The price diﬀerence
pm −pt can also be viewed as a penalty cost for those demands in excess of supply from the focal
market. We start with all farmers in the population being na¨ıve farmers. Just like the SE in the
previous section, the ﬁrm oﬀers a pre-season procurement contract at the beginning of each period
with a ﬁxed price pb to α fraction of na¨ıve farmers. Like before, we refer to farmers who are oﬀered
the contract as type-S farmers and the rest as type-N farmers.
Assumption 7. α < d < Ω−¯p
b .
Note that d < Ω−¯p
b
ensures that a stable market can provide suﬃcient supply to meet the ﬁrm’s
demand, while d > α states that the production by type-S farmers alone is insuﬃcient to satisfy
all of the ﬁrm’s demand. The conditions in Assumption 7 ensure that the ﬁrm hopes for a stable
market, and has the incentive to induce both types of farmers to produce enough of the crop for
the ﬁrm.
The total procurement cost to meet demand in period t is
ft(pb) :=

pb min

qb
t,d
 
+ pt [min{qt,d} −qb
t]
+ + pm (d −qt)
+ if pb > pt−1,
pt min{qt,d} + pm (d −qt)
+
otherwise,
(14)
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

25
where [x]+ := max{x,0}, pt is the market price that evolves according to (8), qb
t = αF(pb) is the
amount of crop produced by the type-S (contract) farmers, and qt is the total supply from the focal
market, which, as an inverse function of the market price, is equal to Ω−pt
b
by deﬁnition. Within
period t, the ﬁrm chooses supply sources in order of increasing procurement costs to minimize his
cost. That is, to meet demand, the ﬁrm ﬁrst uses capacity αF(pb) at price pb from contract farmers
(when pb > pt−1 and thus some type-S farmers accept the contract), then uses the market supply
with cost pt, and lastly resorts to the external market with cost pm until all the demand is met.
Note that pb and α act in a similar way that aﬀects the quantity qb
t. To increase the total
capacity of less costly supply αF(pb) from the farmers, the ﬁrm could either increase α by making
the contract accessible to more farmers or raise the buyout price pb, both of which come at a cost.
(In Section 6.2, we consider yield uncertainty. When yield uncertainty is pronounced, the ﬁrm may
want to further increase α and pb to secure supply.)
Diﬀerent from the SE’s objective, the ﬁrm’s goal is to minimize its average long-term cycle
procurement cost, i.e.,
min
pb
lim
T →∞
1
T
T
X
i=1
[f2i−1(pb) + f2i(pb)].
(15)
Note that the market evolution and farmers’ welfare under the contract are the same as speciﬁed
in Propositions 5 and 6(b) when the contract is oﬀered by the SE.
Proposition 12 (Socially Beneficial Rationality). Suppose
Assumptions
1-7
hold.
Denote by pn
2i−1 the higher price in any given cycle i when all farmers are na¨ıve farmers. Suppose
limi→∞
Ω−pn
2i−1
b
< d. If the buyout price is set to pb = ¯p for all periods, then:
(a) The market price converges to ¯p.
(b) The focal farmers with production costs not too low (i.e., c ≥c) earn a (weakly) higher welfare
than that without the contract in both short and long run. There exists an i′ > 0 such that the ﬁrm
obtains a higher welfare than that without the contract in any cycle i > i′. In particular, if b = ¯c,
pb = ¯p is an optimal solution to the ﬁrm’s problem (15).
Proposition 12 provides suﬃcient conditions under which the buyout contract with pb = ¯p beneﬁts
the proﬁt-driven ﬁrm and focal farmers in both the short and the long term. The market will
be stabilized, eliminating the negative impact of farmers’ shortsightedness and providing stable
and low-cost crop supply to the ﬁrm. Speciﬁcally, limi→∞
Ω−pn
2i−1
b
< d < Ω−¯p
b
ensures that a stable
market can provide suﬃcient supply to meet the ﬁrm’s demand, whereas an unstable market may
not. d > α further ensures that the production by type-S farmers alone (at most α) is insuﬃcient
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

26
to satisfy all of the ﬁrm’s demand. Hence, these conditions ensure that the ﬁrm has an incentive to
stabilize the market and induce both types of farmers to produce enough of the crop for the ﬁrm.
Moreover, when b = ¯c, Proposition 12(b) shows that the buyout contract with pb = ¯p is indeed
optimal among all buyout contracts under the long-run average procurement cost criterion. How-
ever, when b > ¯c, that is, when the market price is relatively more sensitive to the market supply,
the ﬁrm may be driven by the nature of proﬁt-seeking to choose a diﬀerent contract from pb = ¯p.
Proposition 13 (Speculative Firm). Suppose Assumptions 1-7 hold and b > ¯c. For a given
market price p2i′ < ¯p, if the contract price is set to pb = p2i′ + α2
α (¯p −p2i′) for any t ≥2i′:
(a) The market price process alternates between p2i−1 = ¯p + b(1−α2)
¯c
(¯p −p2i′) and p2i = p2i′, ∀i > i′.
(b) In particular, if p2i′ ≥¯p −
1
1−α2 (¯p −¯cd), then the ﬁrm earns a higher proﬁt in the long run but
the focal farmers with production costs not too low (i.e., c ≥c) earn a lower welfare than that under
the contract with pb = ¯p in both short and long run.
Proposition 13(a) implies that for any observed price p2i′ < ¯p, the ﬁrm can control the following
prices to alternate between two constant prices, p2i′ and a higher price, through a buyout contract.
In such a scenario, the ﬁrm enjoys the low market price p2i = p2i′ < ¯p in even periods and meanwhile
persuades the farmers to contract at a price pb = p2i′ + α2
α (¯p −p2i′) lower than ¯p at the beginning
of any odd period 2i + 1 in view of the most recent low price p2i′. Moreover, the starting market
price p2i′ before implementing the above strategy can be inﬂuenced through earlier buyout prices.
Proposition 13(b) further shows that the speculative behavior always brings long-term beneﬁts
to the ﬁrm if p2i′ is not too low. It is because even though the ﬁrm beneﬁts from a lower buyout
price from contract farmers, it may still need more supply from non-contract farmers. There is a
threshold of market price, i.e., ¯p −
b
b+α2 (¯p −¯cd), and p2i′ has to be no lower than this threshold in
order to attract suﬃcient type-N farmers, in addition to type-S farmers, to plant crops and meet
the total demand d in odd periods. A market price that is less than that threshold may cause
supply shortage and expensive sourcing from the external market in odd periods. Hence the ﬁrm
has incentives to mitigate the market price ﬂuctuation to avoid such a low market price. However,
as discussed above the ﬁrm does not have to completely eliminate the price ﬂuctuation. Therefore,
such a speculative behavior of the ﬁrm would sustain the market price ﬂuctuation to some extent
and result in lower welfare of farmers than that under the contract with pb = ¯p.
6.
Extensions
The unstable market supply resulting from the price ﬂuctuations is often made worse by a host of
endogenous and exogenous causes. For example, farmers may choose which crop to plant among
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

27
multiple options based on their market prices, and this decision can be inﬂuenced by crop produc-
tion yield, which is aﬀected by weather, insect pests, etc. In this section, we ﬁrst extend Section
3 to a two-crops setting in which both na¨ıve and strategic farmers choose to cultivate one of two
types of crops. In other words, the outside option of planting one crop for a farmer is endogenized
as the value of planting the other. We then further extend this model to capture the production
yield uncertainty. The same extensions can be naturally made to the settings in Sections 4 and 5.
Since the insights remain the same, for brevity we omit the similar analysis to these settings.
6.1.
Two Crops
We consider farmers that choose to plant one of two types of crops in each period. We use A and
B to denote the two crops. In line with the settings in the previous sections, we assume a farmer’s
production costs of planting crops A and B are c and ¯c −c respectively, where c is uniformly
distributed on [0, ¯c]. In addition to capturing the heterogeneity of farmers’ production costs, the
assumed cost structure reﬂects two plausible facts: ﬁrst, each farmer may have diﬀerent production
costs for diﬀerent crops; second, no farmer has cost advantages over other farmers with both crops.
The analysis can be extended to settings with production costs in more general forms.
We ﬁrst derive the quantities of crops A and B produced by na¨ıve and strategic farmers. Under
the assumed production cost structure, a na¨ıve farmer’s perceived utility of cultivating crops A
and B is uA,n
t
= pA
t−1 −c and uB,n
t
= pB
t−1 −(¯c −c), respectively. Similarly, the expected utility of
planting crop A for a strategic farmer who rationally anticipates the market price is uA,s
t
= pA
t −c,
and the expected utility of planting crop B is uB,s
t
= pB
t −(¯c −c). Compared with the single crop
model in Section 3, the value of planting one crop here can be taken as the endogenous outside
option of planting the other.2 We assume uA,τ
t
and uB,τ
t
for τ ∈{n,s} are all positive to avoid
the degeneration to the single-crop model. A na¨ıve or strategic farmer will cultivate crop A if
uA,τ
t
≥uB,τ
t
for τ ∈{n,s}, and otherwise will cultivate crop B. Thus, in period t, the quantities of
crops A and B produced by na¨ıve farmers are
qA,n
t
= (1 −α)Pr(uA,n
t
≥uB,n
t
)
and
qB,n
t
= (1 −α)Pr(uA,n
t
< uB,n
t
).
(16)
Similarly, the quantities of crops A and B produced by strategic farmers are qA,s
t
= αPr(uA,s
t
≥uB,s
t
)
and qB,s
t
= αPr(uA,s
t
< uB,s
t
). For ease of exposition, we assume crops A and B have the same
market size Ω. Then the market clearing prices of crops A and B are pA
t = Ω−b
 qA,n
t
+ qA,s
t

and
pB
t = Ω−b
 qB,n
t
+ qB,s
t

.
2 There are papers that study the farmers’ planting decisions when there are crop rotation beneﬁts, such as a larger
yield and lower farming costs on rotated farmland (see, e.g., Boyabatli et al. 2016 and related papers mentioned
therein). Our study focuses more on farmers’ planting decisions as reactions to the market-price dynamics.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

28
Proposition 14. Suppose Assumptions 1-3 hold.
(a) If g(α) ≥1, the market price process in each market does not converge.
(b) If g(α) < 1, the market prices of crops A and B are pA
t = Ω−b
2 −∆t(α) and pB
t = Ω−b
2 +∆t(α),
where ∆t(α) = 1
2 (−g(α))
t−1 (P A
1 −P B
1 ), and both converge to Ω−b
2, as t →∞.
Proposition 14 shows that when farmers are able to choose one of two crops to plant in each
period, the market evolution is similar to the patterns in the single-crop model (see Proposition
1). When there is a lack of suﬃcient number of strategic farmers, the market price process for each
crop does not converge and eventually alternates between two prices; when there is a suﬃciently
large number of strategic farmers, the price process of each crop will converge to Ω−b
2, which is
independent of the segment size of strategic farmers, α. Comparing with the single-crop model,
the key diﬀerence is that now the farmers’ outside option of cultivating one crop is endogenized
as the value of cultivating the other crop. In particular, the high price of one crop at the end of a
period encourages na¨ıve farmers to plant this crop in the next period, exacerbating the shortage
of the other crop. Hence, the market prices for two crops tend to wax and wane in alternation.
The limiting price Ω−b
2 in Proposition 14(b) implies that when there are suﬃcient strategic
farmers, eventually half of the farmers with the cost advantage for crop A, i.e., c < ¯c
2, always
cultivate crop A and the other farmers always cultivate crop B in each period. Farmers are divided
exactly in half, because the potential market sizes of both crops are assumed to be the same as Ω.
It can be shown that, when the two crops have diﬀerent market sizes, the market price of each crop
will still converge as long as: (i) there are enough strategic farmers and (ii) the diﬀerence between
the market sizes of the two crops is not too large. In the long run, the crop with a larger market
size attracts more than half of the farmers. In terms of the farmers’ welfare, the same statement
as in Proposition 3 still holds in the two-crops model, because strategic farmers continue to help
stabilize the market prices for both crops. That is, our ﬁnding about strategic farmers’ socially
beneﬁcial rationality continues to hold when there are two crops.
6.2.
Random Yield
Now we extend the previous two-crops model by considering yield uncertainty in farmers’ harvest.
This uncertainty, which is attributed to uncontrollable external factors (e.g., weather, water supply,
pests), captures the fact that the harvest quantity is often diﬀerent from the quantity actually
planted. We refer to the former as the random yield and the latter as the production quantity. We
capture yield uncertainty by the ratio of the random yield to the production quantity, and assume
that the yield uncertainty in period t for all crops in the same district is the same, denoted by γt.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

29
In line with the setting in the previous subsection, we denote by ˆqA,τ
t
and ˆqB,τ
t
for τ ∈{n,s} the
farmers’ production quantity of crops A and B for given most recent market prices pA
t−1 and pB
t−1,
respectively. The random yields of the two crops are QA,τ
t
= ˆqA,τ
t
γt and QB,τ
t
= ˆqB,τ
t
γt for τ ∈{n,s}.
We assume that yields γt for all t ≥1 are independent and identically distributed random vari-
ables with ﬁnite variance and that they are independent of farmers’ production costs. In a typical
production environment, γt ≤1, however, this is not a requirement of our model. We use γt = 1
to represent an average or normal external condition. The case of γt > 1 can capture a growing
season when crops grow very well, and γt < 1 captures a season with extreme weather or blight
that dooms a harvest. We assume E(γt) = 1.
Now we derive the farmers’ production quantities and the corresponding market prices in a
period. For na¨ıve farmers, the production quantities
 ˆqA,n
t
, ˆqB,n
t

can be written in the same way
as
 qA,n
t
,qB,n
t

in (16) under the assumption that E(γt) = 1. In contrast, the production quantities
of strategic farmers depend on the rationally anticipated market prices, which are aﬀected by
the yield. Speciﬁcally, the perceived expected utilities of planting crops A and B can be written
as: uA,s
t
= E [γP A
t ] −c and uB,s
t
= E [γP B
t ] −(¯c −c), where γ is a representative random variable
whose distribution is the same as γt for t ≥1 and is independent of these γt, and P A
t
and P B
t
are
the random market prices (see below). Then the corresponding production quantities of crops A
and B can be expressed as: ˆqA,s
t
= αPr
 uA,s
t
≥uB,s
t

and ˆqB,s
t
= αPr
 uB,s
t
≥uB,s
t

. The resulting
market clearing prices are now random, depending on the random yields of the two crops, i.e.,
P A
t = Ω−b(QA,s
t
+ QA,n
t
) and P B
t = Ω−b(QB,s
t
+ QB,n
t
).
Next we show the convergence of the random market price processes in a probabilistic sense.
Proposition 15. Suppose Assumptions 1-3 hold, var[ln
(1−α)bγ
¯c+αbE[γ2]] < ∞and b(1 −2α)E[γ2] ≤¯c.
Deﬁne I(α,γ) := ln
(1−α)b
¯c+αbE[γ2] + E[lnγ].
(a) If I(α,γ) ≤0, then the random market price processes P A
t
and P B
t
converge in probability
towards the same random variable ¯P := Ω−b
2γ, i.e.,
lim
t→∞Pr(
P A
t −¯P
 > ϵ) = lim
t→∞Pr(
P B
t −¯P
 > ϵ) = 0 for any ϵ > 0.
Moreover, the price diﬀerence between two crops converges to 0 in probability, as t goes to ∞.
(b) If I(α,γ) > 0, then the random market price processes do not converge.
As (1 −2α)E[γ2] and I(α,γ) decrease in α > 0, Proposition 15 shows that compared with a
market in which all farmers are na¨ıve, the market price processes are more likely to converge when
there are more strategic farmers. When the condition I(α,γ) ≤0 holds, the price processes converge
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

30
to a random variable ¯P, which is an aﬃne transformation of the yield uncertainty γ. If γ = 1, we
recover the deterministic two-crops model, see Proposition 14(b). When the market prices converge
to the random variable ¯P := Ω−b
2γ, the price diﬀerence between two crops diminishes, and hence
the ﬂuctuation of market prices remaining in the market comes purely from the yield uncertainty.
7.
Conclusion
In developing countries, price ﬂuctuation in agricultural markets is blocking the path to prosperity
for small-scale farmers. Although the burgeoning literature studies the value of disclosing market
information for price discovery and how that aﬀects farmers’ welfare, little attention has been
paid to farmers’ heterogeneous capability in obtaining and processing the market information.
In reality, only farmers who are educated and not in remote areas may obtain and utilize the
market information in their decision making. It thus gives rise to the concern whether eﬀorts to
disseminate market information treat all farmers fairly and whether the market is evolving in a
socially desirable way.
In this paper, we oﬀer a stylized multi-period model to study farmers’ dynamic crop-planting
decisions and their impact on the market prices. We consider both na¨ıve farmers who react short-
sightedly to the latest market price, and strategic farmers who are able to collect and utilize
market information to anticipate rationally the near-future market price. Our model builds a
micro-foundation to capture the root cause of the price ﬂuctuations observed in many agricultural
markets. That is, because na¨ıve farmers base their crop planting decisions on the latest market
price, they cyclically herd in planting the crop, thus leading to recurring over-production and price
slashing. We ﬁnd that the forward-looking behavior of strategic farmers could alleviate the herding
behavior, therefore being both rational and socially beneﬁcial in that it can stabilize the market
price and increase all focal farmers’ welfare. However, to sustain this notion of “socially beneﬁcial
rationality,” there must be a suﬃcient number of strategic farmers to collectively move the needle.
Another major ﬁnding of this paper is that even when it fails to cultivate strategic farmers,
both social entrepreneurs and for-proﬁt ﬁrms can beneﬁt all focal farmers as well as themselves
by oﬀering a pre-season buyout contract to a fraction of farmers. Those farmers then only need to
base their crop decisions on the price oﬀered by the ﬁrm. However, although a carefully designed
contract beneﬁts all focal farmers who have no cost advantage and leads to smaller income gaps
among farmers, a non-socially-optimal designed contract may reﬂect a social entrepreneur’s over-
subsidy tendency, or a for-proﬁt ﬁrm’s speculative incentive to mitigate but not eliminate the
market price ﬂuctuation, preventing farmers from achieving the most welfare. We also extend our
model to account for multiple crops and yield uncertainty. We ﬁnd that our results from the base
model still hold qualitatively in those extensions.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

31
References
Aﬂaki, A, P Feldman, R Swinney. 2015. Should consumers be strategic? Working paper, Duke University.
Agrawal, V, S Kavadias, LB Toktay. 2016. Design and introduction of conspicuous durable products. Working
paper, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta.
Annan, F, W Schlenker. 2015. Federal crop insurance and the disincentive to adapt to extreme heat. Amer.
Econo. Rev. 105(5) 262–266.
Bariyo, N. 2014. Coﬀee makes come back in east Africa as prices rise. WSJ Aug 28, 2014.
Belloni, A, G Lopomo, S Wang. 2016. Resource allocation under demand uncertainty and private information.
Management Sci. Forthcoming.
Boyabatli, O, J Nasiry, YH Zhou. 2016. Crop planning in sustainable agriculture: Dynamic farmland allo-
cation in the presence of crop rotation beneﬁts. Working paper, Singapore Management University.
Buradikatti, K. 2016. Onion growers in tears as prices crash. Hindu Mar 31, 2016.
Cachon, GP, R Swinney. 2009. Purchasing, pricing, and quick response in the presence of strategic consumers.
Management Sci. 55(3) 497–511.
Cachon, GP, R Swinney. 2011. The value of fast fashion: Quick response, enhanced design, and strategic
consumer behavior. Management Sci. 57(4) 778–795.
Chen, Y-J, JG Shanthikumar, Z-JM Shen. 2013. Training, production, and channel separation in ITC’s
e-choupal network. Prod. Oper. Management 22(2) 348–364.
Chen, Y-J, JG Shanthikumar, Z-JM Shen. 2015. Incentive for peer-to-peer knowledge sharing among farmers
in developing economies. Prod. Oper. Management 24(9) 1430–1440.
Chen, Y-J, CS Tang. 2015. The economic value of market information for farmers in developing economies.
Prod. Oper. Management 24(9) 1441–1452.
China National Radio. 2015. http://finance.cnr.cn/gundong/20151210/t20151210_520751418.shtml.
China News. 2014. http://www.chinanews.com/gn/2014/06-03/6235995.shtml.
Chopra, S, P Meindl. 2013. Supply Chain Management: Strategy, Planning, and Operation. Prentice Hall.
Cooper, WL, T Homem-de Mello, AJ Kleywegt. 2006. Models of the spiral-down eﬀect in revenue manage-
ment. Oper. Res. 54(5) 968–987.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

32
Craymer, L. 2016. Corn becomes next market China liberalizes. WSJ Mar 29, 2016.
Epstein, MJ, KJ Yuthas. 2012. Redeﬁning education in the developing world. Stanford Social Innovation
Review 10(1) 19–20.
Ezekiel, M. 1938. The cobweb theorem. Q. J. Econ. 52(2) 255–280.
Fair Trade USA. 2012. Fair Trade USA 2012 Almanac.
Federgruen, A, U Lall, AS Simsek. 2016. Supply chain analysis of contract farming. Working paper, Columbia.
Fraser, A. 2012. Four ways to make contract farming work for the very poor. Global Envision Dec 12, 2012.
Haight, C. 2011. The problem with fair trade coﬀee. Stanford Social Innovation Review 9(3) 74–79.
Hu, M, Y Li, J Wang. 2017. Eﬃcient ignorance: Information heterogeneity in a queue. Management Sci. .
Hu, M, J Milner, J Wu. 2015. Liking and following and the newsvendor: Operations and marketing policies
under social inﬂuence. Management Sci. 62(3) 867–879.
Lee, HL, V Padmanabhan, TA Taylor, S Whang. 2000. Price protection in the personal computer industry.
Management Sci. 46(4) 467–482.
Lee, HL, V Padmanabhan, S Whang. 1997. Information distortion in a supply chain: The bullwhip eﬀect.
Management Sci. 50(4) 1875–1886.
Miller, MM. 2014. Poverty, Inc. Documentary, United States.
Momot, R, E Belavina, K Girotra. 2016. The use and value of social network information in selective selling.
Chicago Booth Research Paper (16-08).
Mu, L, M Dawande, X Geng, V Mookerjee. 2015. Milking the quality test: Improving the milk supply chain
under competing collection intermediaries. Management Sci. 62(5) 1259–1277.
Nerlove, M. 1958. Adaptive expectations and cobweb phenomena. Q. J. Econ. 72(2) 227–240.
Nicholls, A, C Opal. 2005. Fair trade: Market-driven ethical consumption. Sage Publications.
Oli Brown, J, AC Gibson. 2008. Boom or Bust. International Institute for Sustainable Development.
Parkin, B, JT Lewis. 2016. Bean shortage adds insult to injury for beleaguered Brazilians. WSJ Jul 4, 2016.
Rungfapaisarn, K. 2013. Starbucks keen to maintain a reputation as a company that gives back to society.
National Jun 17, 2013.
Sharma, N. 2016. K’shetra potato farmers at receiving end as prices crash. Tribune India Jan 5, 2016.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

33
Sodhi, MS, CS Tang. 2014. Supply-chain research opportunities with the poor as suppliers or distributors
in developing countries. Prod. Oper. Management 23(9) 1483–1494.
Su, X. 2010. Optimal pricing with speculators and strategic consumers. Management Sci. 56(1) 25–40.
Tang, CS, Y Wang, M Zhao. 2015. The implications of utilizing market information and adopting agricultural
advice for farmers in developing economies. Prod. Oper. Management 24(8) 1197–1215.
Tereyagoglu, N, S Veeraraghavan. 2012. Selling to conspicuous consumers: Pricing, production, and sourcing
decisions. Management Sci. 58(12) 2168–2189.
UNCTAD, WFP. 2011. Price volatility in food and agricultural markets: Policy responses.
Veeraraghavan, S, L Debo. 2009. Joining longer queues: Information externalities in queue choice. Manu-
facturing Service Oper. Management 11(4) 543–562.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

1
Online Appendix to
“Socially Beneﬁcial Rationality:
The Value of Strategic Farmers, Social Entrepreneurs and
For-Proﬁt Firms in Crop Planting Decisions”
A.
Continuous Decisions
Consider a farmer that maximizes his own perceived utility by allocating the amount of resources
(e.g., fraction of land, time and eﬀort) q1 to cultivate a crop and/or q2 to pursue an outside option
(e.g., taking a part-time job in a city). The utility functions for these activities are
U1(q1) := p1q1 −q2
1
2
and
U2(q2) := p2q2 −q2
2
2 ,
(A.1)
where p1 represents the perceived market price for the crop and p2 is the unit reward he could
receive by taking an outside option. We assume p2 is heterogeneous among farmer, following a
uniform distribution with support [0, ¯c] in the population. The farmer is subject to a budget (or
time) constraint on the amount of resources he allocates to diﬀerent activities, i.e., q1 + q2 ≤1.
Hence, the farmer’s problem is
max
0≤q1≤1, 0≤q1+q2≤1 U1(q1) + U2(q2).
For given p1 and p2, the Lagrangian function is Z = U1(q1) + U2(q2) + λ1(1 −q1) + λ2(1 −q1 −q2).
We obtain the optimal solution q∗
1 and q∗
2 by using K-K-T conditions:









∂Z
∂q1 = (p1 −q1) −λ1 −λ2 ≤0,q1 ≥0,q1
∂Z
∂q1 = 0,
∂Z
∂q2 = (p2 −q2) −λ2 ≤0,q2 ≥0,q2
∂Z
∂q2 = 0,
∂Z
∂λ1 = 1 −q1 ≥0,λ1 ≥0,λ1
∂Z
∂λ1 = 0,
∂Z
∂λ2 = 1 −q1 −q2 ≥0,λ2 ≥0,λ2
∂Z
∂λ2 = 0.
⇒(q∗
1,q∗
2) =











(0,1)
if p2 ≥p1 + 1,
(1,0)
if p2 ≤p1 −1, p1 ≥1,
( 1−p2+p1
2
, 1+p2−p1
2
) if p1 −1 < p2 < p1 + 1, p1 ≥1,
( 1−p2+p1
2
, 1+p2−p1
2
) if 1 −p1 ≤p2 < p1 + 1, p1 < 1,
(p1,p2)
if p2 < 1 −p1, p1 < 1.
(A.2)
Lemma A.1. Suppose ¯c ≥1. For a given perceived market price p, the average amount of crop
produced by a farmer is
q(p) :=
 p
¯c = F(p)
if p ≤¯c −1,
min{p,1} −[max{0,¯c+min{p−1,1−p}}]2
4¯c
if p > ¯c −1.
(A.3)
In period t, the total amount of crop produced by strategic and na¨ıve farmers are αq(pt) and
(1 −α)q(pt−1), respectively.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

2
Proof of Lemma A.1.
Recall that farmers have heterogenous outside options, i.e., p2 is uni-
formly distributed in [0, ¯c]. For a given perceived market price p1 of the crop, next we will obtain
the average production quantity of a farmer, denoted by q(p1), through integrating q∗
1 in (A.2)
w.r.t. p2. Consider two cases: (i) p1 ≥1 and (ii) p1 < 1.
(i) p1 ≥1. q(p1) =
R max{0,p1−1}
0
1 · f(p2)dp2 +
R min{¯c,p1+1}
max{0,p1−1}
1−p2+p1
2
f(p2)dp2 +
R ¯c
min{¯c,p1+1} 0 ·
f(p2)dp2 = F(p1−1)+[F(p1+1)−F(p1−1)] 1+p1−E[p2|p1−1<p2<p1+1]
2
. Hence, if 0 ≤p1−1 < p1+1 ≤¯c,
then q(p1) = p1
¯c is linear and increasing in p1; if 0 ≤p1 −1 ≤¯c ≤p1 +1, then q(p1) = 1−[¯c−(p1−1)]2
4¯c
<
p1
¯c is concave and increasing in p1; if ¯c ≤p1 −1, then q = 1.
(ii)
p1 < 1.
q(p1) =
R max{0,1−p1}
0
p1f(p2)dp2 +
R min{¯c,p1+1}
max{0,1−p1}
1−p2+p1
2
f(p2)dp2 +
R ¯c
min{¯c,p1+1} 0 ·
f(p2)dp2 = p1F(1−p1)+[F(p1 +1)−F(1−p1)] 1+p1−E[p2|1−p1<p2<p1+1]
2
. Thus, if 0 ≤1−p1 < p1 +1 ≤
¯c, then q(p1) = p1
¯c is linear and increasing in p1; if 0 ≤1 −p1 ≤¯c ≤p1 + 1, then q(p1) = p1(1−p1)
¯c
+
¯c−(1−p1)
¯c
3p1+1−¯c
4
= p1 −[¯c−(1−p1)]2
4¯c
is concave and increasing in p1; if ¯c ≤1 −p1, then q = p1.
From above results, it can be veriﬁed that:
If ¯c ≥2, then
q(p1) =



p1
¯c = F(p1)
if p1 ≤¯c −1,
1 −[¯c+1−p1]2
4¯c
if ¯c −1 < p1 ≤¯c + 1,
1
if p1 > ¯c + 1.
(A.4)
If 1 ≤¯c < 2, then
q(p1) =









p1
¯c = F(p1)
if p1 ≤¯c −1,
p1 −[¯c−(1−p1)]2
4¯c
if ¯c −1 < p1 ≤1,
1 −[¯c+1−p1]2
4¯c
if 1 < p1 ≤¯c + 1,
1
if p1 > ¯c + 1.
(A.5)
Combining (A.4) and (A.5), we get (A.3) and the corresponding total amount of crop produced by
strategic and na¨ıve farmers.
□
B.
Backward-Looking Farmers
In this extension, we assume farmers lack full information (e.g., Ω, α and F(·)) and thus cannot
use (3) to rationally anticipate the near-future market price pt. Instead, in each period strategic
farmers predict the market price on the basis of the average price in the last two periods, i.e.,
ˆpt =
pt−1+pt−2
2
. This is a simple but widely used adaptive forecasting method (see Chopra and
Meindl 2013, Chapter 7), as it is easier to obtain the necessary information about historical prices
than future prices. The strategic farmers’ perceived utility becomes
us
t = ˆpt −c = pt−1 + pt−2
2
−c.
(B.1)
We adopt the convention that pi = p0 for any i < 0. By the same decision and price processes as in
(2)-(3) with pt replaced by ˆpt, for any t ≥1, we have
pt = Ω−b(1 −α)F(pt−1) −bαF
 pt−1 + pt−2
2

.
(B.2)
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

3
Proposition B.1. Suppose Assumptions 1-3 hold and there exist backward-looking strategic
farmers (α > 0). If b ≤¯c, then the market price converges to the limiting market price, i.e.,
lim
t→∞pt = ¯p.
Proposition B.1 tells us that as long as there are backward-looking strategic farmers, the market
price converges to the same value as if the strategic farmers had full information and were forward-
looking. More importantly, it implies that looking into the past can be as eﬃcient as looking into
the future in a stationary market.
Before the proof of Proposition B.1, we ﬁrst introduce a lemma.
Lemma B.1. Suppose Assumptions 1-3 hold. In the model with backward looking strategic farm-
ers, if b ≤¯c, then the recursive equation of market price pt(t ≥1) is
pt = Ω−b
¯c

(1 −α
2 )pt−1 + α
2 pt−2

.
Proof of Lemma B.1.
If 0 ≤pt−1 ≤¯c and 0 ≤
pt−1+pt−2
2
≤¯c for any t ≥0, then (B.2) reduces to
pt = Ω−b
¯c

(1 −α
2 )pt−1 + α
2 pt−2

.
To complete the proof, we will prove by induction that 0 ≤pt−1 ≤¯c and 0 ≤
pt−1+pt−2
2
≤¯c for any
t ≥0.
By Assumption 2 and the convention that pi = 0 for any i < 0, we have 0 ≤p0 ≤¯c and 0 ≤
p0+p−1
2
≤¯c.
For any given t ≥1, suppose 0 ≤pt−1 ≤¯c and 0 ≤
pt−1+pt−2
2
≤¯c, then we have
pt = Ω−b
¯c

(1 −α
2 )pt−1 + α
2 pt−2

< Ω−b
¯c

(1 −α
2 )(Ω−b) + α
2 (Ω−b)

= Ω−b
¯c(Ω−b) = (1 −b
¯c)(Ω−b −¯c) + ¯c ≤¯c.
Therefore, 0 ≤
pt+pt−1
2
≤¯c. We have now established that 0 ≤pt−1 ≤¯c and 0 ≤
pt−1+pt−2
2
≤¯c for any
t ≥0.
□
Proof of Proposition B.1.
We ﬁrst show the existence of the limit. By Lemma B.1,
pt −¯p = −b
¯c

(1 −α
2 )(pt−1 −¯p) + α
2 (pt−2 −¯p)

.
(B.3)
Since b ≤¯c, we have |pt −¯p| ≤(1−α
2 )|pt−1 −¯p|+ α
2 |pt−2 −¯p|, and so |pt −¯p|−|pt−1 −¯p| ≤−α
2 (|pt−1 −
¯p| −|pt−2 −¯p|). Therefore, limt→∞|pt −¯p| exists. Remember that we expect to show limt→∞pt −¯p
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

4
exists. Suppose limt→∞|pt −¯p| = A > 0 (Note that A ̸= 0. Otherwise, we are done). Thus, for any
given ϵ > 0, there exists a T such that for any t > T,
|pt −¯p| ∈(A −ϵ,A + ϵ).
(B.4)
Suppose for a contradiction that limt→∞pt −¯p does not exist. It follows from (B.4) that there must
exist a t1 with t1 −1 > T and t1 −2 > T such that pt1−1 −¯p ∈(−A −ϵ,−A + ϵ) and pt1−2 −¯p ∈
(A −ϵ,A + ϵ). Therefore, by (B.3), pt1 −¯p = −b
¯c(1 −α
2 )(pt1−1 −¯p) −b
¯c
α
2 (pt1−2 −¯p) ∈( b
¯c(1 −α)A −
ϵ′, b
¯c(1 −α)A + ϵ′). Clearly, |pt1 −¯p| /∈(A −ϵ,A + ϵ), contradicting the fact (B.4). Consequently,
limt→∞pt −¯p does exist.
Second, we compute the limit. Let limt→∞pt −¯p = B. Then by (B.3), we obtain B = 0.
□
C.
Long-Term Contract
The following proposition shows that the extent to which SE’s long-term buyout contract can help
reduce the price ﬂuctuation varies, depending on the buyout price pb and the size of type-S farmers
α.
Proposition C.1. Suppose Assumptions (1)-(5) hold. Deﬁne ˆα =
b+¯c−Ω
b(1−pb
¯c ).
(a) If α ≥ˆα, then pt = Ω−α b
¯cpb −b(1 −α) for any t ≥1.
(b) If α1 < α < ˆα, then limt→∞pt = ¯p −αb(pb−¯p)
¯c+(1−α)b.
(c) If α ≤min{α1, ˆα}, then the price process does not converge.
As in problem (10), we assume SE’s objective is to ﬁnd the buyout price pb that maximizes the
welfare of those farmers whose production costs are not too low in the long run while obtaining
adequate revenue to sustain his operations, which is given as follows:
maxpb
Z ¯c
c
lim
i→∞

α ¯ws
i (c) + (1 −α) ¯wn
i (c)
1
¯cdc
(C.1)
s.t.
π2i−1(pb) + π2i(pb) ≥0 for any i ≥1.
As in Section 4.2, we assume α > α2. Moreover, to eliminate the extreme case in Part (a) of
Proposition C.1, we assume α < ˆα. In the following we discuss SE’s proﬁt and farmers’ welfare.
Proposition C.2. Suppose Assumptions (1)-(6) hold and α < ˆα, then pb∗= ¯p is the unique
optimal solution to SE’ problem (C.1). In that case, the market price converges to ¯p and
(a) The SE receives a positive proﬁt in each cycle over any ﬁnite horizon and the proﬁt per cycle
diminishes to 0 in the limit.
(b) Both type-S and type-N farmers, with production cost c > c, receive (weakly) higher welfare
in both the short- and long-run due to the market stabilization in the presence of SE.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

5
Before we prove Proposition C.1, we ﬁrst introduce a lemma.
Lemma C.1. Suppose Suppose Assumptions (1)-(5) hold and α < ˆα.
(a) If α > α1, then limt→∞pt = ¯p −αb(pb−¯p)
¯c+(1−α)b.
(b) If α ≤α1, then the price process does not converge.
Proof of Lemma C.1.
Note that α < ˆα is equivalent to
Ω−αb
¯cpb −b(1 −α) < ¯c.
(C.2)
Part 1: We will show the price converges if α > α1 and does not converge if α = α1. Note that
α ≥α1 is the same to
b(1 −α) ≤¯c.
We have two cases.
Case 1: Suppose Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1 −α) b
¯cp0 ≤¯c.
We will show by induction that for any t ≥1,
pt = 1 −
 −(1 −α) b
¯c
t
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c

Ω−αb
¯cpb
+

−(1 −α)b
¯c
t
p0 ≤¯c,
(C.3)
from which Part 1 follows immediately.
Note that pb ≤¯c and p0 ≤¯c, so p1 = Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1 −α) b
¯cp0 ≤¯c, where the last inequality holds
because of the supposition in Case 1. Hence, (C.3) holds when t = 1. Suppose (C.3) holds when
t = i −1, and we will show it holds when t = i. One can check
pi = Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b
¯cpi−1
[by pb ≤¯c and pi−1 ≤¯c]
= Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b
¯c
n1 −
 −(1 −α) b
¯c
i−1
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c

Ω−αb
¯cpb
+

−(1 −α)b
¯c
i−1
p0
o
= 1 −
 −(1 −α) b
¯c
i
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c

Ω−αb
¯cpb
+

−(1 −α)b
¯c
i
p0
≤1 −
 −(1 −α) b
¯c
i
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c

1 −α)b
¯cp0 + ¯c

+

−(1 −α)b
¯c
i
p0
[by Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b
¯cp0 ≤¯c]
= 1 −
 −(1 −α) b
¯c
i
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
¯c + (1 −α) b
¯c +
 −(1 −α) b
¯c
i
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
p0
≤¯c.
[by p0 ≤¯c]
This establishes that (C.3) holds for any t ≥1.
Therefore, if α > α1, that is, b(1−α) < ¯c, then limt→∞pt =
Ω−α b
¯c pb
1+(1−α) b
¯c = ¯p−αb(pb−¯p)
¯c+(1−α)b. If α = α1, the
price alternates between p0 and Ω−α b
¯cpb −p0.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

6
Case 2: Suppose Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1 −α) b
¯cp0 > ¯c.
We will show there exists an i ≥0 such that pi ≤¯c and Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1 −α) b
¯cpi ≤¯c, then the
analysis follows the same as Case 1.
We have p1 = Ω−α b
¯cpb−(1−α) b
¯cp0 > ¯c, where the last inequality holds because of the supposition
in Case 2. Then p2 = Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1 −α)b < ¯c, where the last inequality holds because of (C.2).
Thus,
p3 = Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b
¯cp2 = Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b
¯c

Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b

=

1 −(1 −α)b
¯c

Ω−αb
¯cpb
+ (1 −α)b
¯cb(1 −α)
≤

1 −(1 −α)b
¯c

b(1 −α) + ¯c

+ (1 −α)b
¯cb(1 −α)
= ¯c,
where the last inequality holds because (C.2) and b(1−α) ≤¯c. This completes the proof of Case 2.
Part 2: We will show if α < α1, that is, b(1 −α) > ¯c, then the price process does not converge.
We ﬁrst show there exists an i ≥0 such that pi > ¯c. Suppose for a contradiction that there does
not exist such an i; i.e, pt ≤¯c for any t. Then by the same process as Case 1 of Part 1, we obtain
pt =
1−
 −(1−α) b
¯c
t
1+(1−α) b
¯c
(Ω−α b
¯cpb) +

−(1 −α) b
¯c
t
p0. Since (1 −α) b
¯c > 1, there must exist an i ≥0 such
that pi > ¯c, which arrives a contradiction.
Now we show the price does not converge. It follows by pi > ¯c that pi+1 = Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1−α)b < ¯c,
where the last inequality holds because of (C.2). Then
pi+2 = Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b
¯cpi+1 =

1 −(1 −α)b
¯c

Ω−αb
¯cpb
+ (1 −α)b
¯cb(1 −α)
>

1 −(1 −α)b
¯c
 (1 −α)b + ¯c

+ (1 −α)b
¯cb(1 −α) = ¯c,
where the last inequality holds by 1 −(1 −α) b
¯c < 0 and (C.2). Continuing in this fashion, we ﬁnd
that for any j ≥0,
pi+2j+1 = Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b < ¯c,
and pi+2j+2 = Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b
¯cpi+2j+1 > ¯c.
That is, the price alternates between two constant prices and does not converge.
□
Proof of Proposition C.1.
Part (a): Note that α ≥ˆα is equivalent to
Ω−αb
¯cpb −b(1 −α) ≥¯c.
We have
p1 = Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b
¯cp0 ≥Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b ≥¯c,
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

7
where the ﬁrst inequality holds because p0 ≤¯c. Consequently, p2 = Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1 −α)b ≥¯c. One
can check that for any t ≥1, pt = Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1 −α)b ≥¯c.
Parts (b) and (c): It follows immediately from Lemma C.1.
□
Before we prove Proposition C.2, we ﬁrst introduce a lemma.
Lemma C.2. Suppose Assumptions (1)-(6) hold and α < ˆα. We have
Z ¯c
c
lim
i→∞

α ¯ws
i (c;pb < ¯p)+(1−α) ¯wn
i (c;pb < ¯p)
1
¯cdc ≤
Z ¯c
c
lim
i→∞

α ¯ws
i (c;pb = ¯p)+(1−α) ¯wn
i (c;pb = ¯p)
1
¯cdc.
Proof of Lemma C.2.
Note that
lim
i→∞¯ws
i (c;pb < ¯p) =
(
pb −c
if c ≤pb,
0
otherwise,
and
lim
i→∞¯wn
i (c;pb < ¯p) =
(
¯p −αb(pb−¯p)
¯c+(1−α)b −c
if c ≤¯p −αb(pb−¯p)
¯c+(1−α)b,
0
otherwise.
Hence,
Z ¯c
c
lim
i→∞

α ¯ws
i (c;pb < ¯p) + (1 −α) ¯wn
i (c;pb < ¯p)
1
¯cdc
≤1
¯c
Z pb
c
lim
i→∞α(pb −c)dc + 1
¯c
Z ¯p−αb(pb−¯p)
¯c+(1−α)b
c
lim
i→∞(1 −α)

¯p −αb(pb −¯p)
¯c + (1 −α)b −c

dc
= α
¯c
1
2(pb −c)2 + 1 −α
¯c
1
2
 Ω−α b
¯cpb
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
−c
2
:= ∆1(pb),
where the ﬁrst inequality becomes strict when ¯p −αb(pb−¯p)
¯c+(1−α)b > ¯c.
Note also that
lim
i→∞¯ws
i (c;pb = ¯p) = lim
i→∞¯wn
i (c;pb = ¯p) =
(
¯p −c
if c ≤¯p,
0
otherwise,
so
Z ¯c
c
lim
i→∞

α ¯ws
i (c;pb = ¯p) + (1 −α) ¯wn
i (c;pb = ¯p)
1
¯cdc = 1
¯c
1
2(¯p −c)2 := ∆2.
Our objective is to show ∆1(pb) ≤∆2. Taking derivatives to ∆1(pb) yields
d∆1(pb)
dpb
= 1
¯c
n
α(pb −c) + (1 −α)
α b
¯c
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c

c −
Ω−α b
¯cpb
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
o
,
d2∆1(pb)
dpb2
= 1
¯c
n
α + (1 −α)

α b
¯c
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
2o
> 0.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

8
Letting d∆1(pb)
dpb
= 0 gives that
pb∗=
(1−α)α b
¯c
 1+(1−α) b
¯c
2 Ω+ αc −
(1−α)α b
¯c
1+(1−α) b
¯c c
α + (1 −α)
 α b
¯c
1+(1−α) b
¯c
2
.
One can check
pb∗−¯p =
1
α + (1 −α)
 α b
¯c
1+(1−α) b
¯c
2
n(1 −α)α b
¯c(¯c + b) −α¯c
 1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
2 −(1 −α) α2b2
¯c
 1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
2(¯c + b)
Ω+
α
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
c
o
=
1
α + (1 −α)
 α b
¯c
1+(1−α) b
¯c
2
n
−α¯c −α(1 −α)b
 1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
2(¯c + b)
Ω+
α
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
(Ω−b)
o
=
1
α + (1 −α)
 α b
¯c
1+(1−α) b
¯c
2
n
αb + α(1 −α) b2
¯c
 1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
2(¯c + b)
Ω−
α
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
b
o
≤
1
α + (1 −α)
 α b
¯c
1+(1−α) b
¯c
2
n
αb + α(1 −α) b2
¯c
 1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
2(¯c + b)
(¯c + b) −
α
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
b
o
= 0.
Note also that Ω−b ≤pb ≤¯p, so the convexity indicates that the maximum welfare is achieved
at either pb = Ω−b and pb = ¯p. Observe that ∆1(pb;pb = ¯p) = ∆2, so if we can show ∆1(pb;pb =
Ω−b) < ∆1(pb;pb = ¯p), then we are done.
Since pb = Ω−b = c, we have
∆1(pb;pb = Ω−b) = 0 + 1 −α
¯c
1
2
n(1 −α b
¯c)Ω+ α b2
¯c
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
−(Ω−b)
o2
.
Thus,
∆1(pb;pb = Ω−b) −∆1(pb;pb = ¯p) = 1 −α
¯c
1
2
n(1 −α b
¯c)Ω+ α b2
¯c
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
−(Ω−b)
o2
−1
¯c
1
2(¯p −c)2
= 1
¯c
1
2
n
(1 −α)
(1 −α b
¯c)Ω+ α b2
¯c
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
−(Ω−b)
2
−
 ¯p −c
2o
= 1
¯c
1
2
b2
¯c2 (Ω−b −¯c)2n
−α
 ¯c2 −(1 −α)b2o
< 0
where the last inequality holds because ¯c2 > (1 −α)b2 by α > α2.
□
Proof of Proposition C.2.
Part 1: We will show pb∗= ¯p is the unique optimal solution to SE’s
problem (C.1). We consider two scenarios.
Scenario 1: Suppose pb∗> ¯p. Proposition C.1 implies that limt→∞pt = ¯p −αb(pb∗−¯p)
¯c+(1−α)b < ¯p. Then
there exists a t′ such that for any t ≥t′, πt(pb∗) =

¯p −αb(pb∗−¯p)
¯c+(1−α)b −pb∗
qb
t < 0, which violates the
proﬁt constraint in problem (C.1). Hence, pb∗> ¯p cannot be optimal.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

9
Scenario 2: Suppose pb∗≤¯p. By Lemma C.2, we have
Z ¯c
c
lim
i→∞

α ¯ws
i (c;pb < ¯p)+(1−α) ¯wn
i (c;pb < ¯p)
1
¯cdc ≤
Z ¯c
c
lim
i→∞

α ¯ws
i (c;pb = ¯p)+(1−α) ¯wn
i (c;pb = ¯p)
1
¯cdc.
Moreover, as shown in the following Part 2, the proﬁt π2i−1(pb∗) + π2i(pb∗) ≥0 for any i ≥1 when
pb∗= ¯p.
This establishes that pb∗= ¯p is the unique optimal solution.
Part 2: We will show the SE receives a positive proﬁt in the short run and the proﬁt diminishes
to 0 in the long run.
According to the proof of Lemma C.1, the market price when pb = ¯p is as follows,
pt = ¯p −

−(1 −α)b
¯c
t
(¯p −p0).
Note that qb
2i−1 = qb
2i, so
π2i−1(pb;p2i−1) + π2i(pb;p2i) = (p2i−1 + p2i −2¯p)qb
2i−1
=
n
−

−(1 −α)b
¯c
2i−1
(¯p −p0) −

−(1 −α)b
¯c
2i
(¯p −p0)
o
qb
2i−1
=
n
−

−(1 −α)b
¯c
2i−1
(¯p −p0)

1 −(1 −α)b
¯c
o
qb
2i−1 > 0,
where the last inequality holds because (1 −α) b
¯c < 1 by α > α2. It is easy to see that
limi→∞π2i−1(pb;p2i−1) + π2i(pb;p2i) = 0.
Part 3: We will show both types of farmers with c > c receive a higher welfare in the presence of
SE.
We use pt and pn
t to denote the price in the presence of SE’s contract and in the model with
naive farmers only, respectively. If α = 0, then by b ≥¯c, we have g(α) ≥1. Hence the naive farmers’
welfare wn
i (c) is as follows,
wn
i (c) =





pn
2i−1+pn
2i
2
−c
if c ≤pn
2i−2,
pn
2i−c
2
if pn
2i−2 < c ≤pn
2i−1,
0
if c > pn
2i−1.
Next we will derive the welfare of each type of farmers and then make a comparison with wn
i (c).
Note that for each i,
pn
2i−2 ≤p2i−2 < ¯p < p2i−1 ≤pn
2i−1 and pn
2i ≤p2i.
Part 3(a): We will make the welfare comparison in the short run.
The type-S farmers’ welfare is as follows.
¯ws
i (c) =
(
¯p −c
if c ≤¯p,
0
otherwise.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

10
The type-N farmers’ welfare is as follows.
¯wn
i (c) =





p2i−1+p2i
2
−c
if c ≤p2i−2,
p2i−c
2
if p2i−2 < c ≤p2i−1,
0
if c > p2i−1.
Comparing with wn
i (c) above, we have that for any c > pn
2i−2 = c,
¯ws
i (c) ≥wn
i (c) and
¯wn
i (c) ≥wn
i (c).
Part 3(b): We will make the welfare comparison in the long run.
Both types of farmers’ welfare in the long run is given by Proposition 7. Comparing with wn
i (c),
we have that for any c > pn
2i−2 = c,
lim
i→∞¯ws
i (c) = lim
i→∞¯wn
i (c) > wn
i (c).
□
D.
Summary of Results
To ease the comparison, we summarize our main results in the following tables.
Table D.1
Price evolution and convergence
Naive farmers 1 −α
Condition Market price evolution
Converges Conv. Rate
plus fraction α of
to ˇp =
|p2i+1−ˇp|
|p2i−1−ˇp|
(1) Naive farmers
b < ¯c
pt = ¯p + (−b
¯c)t(p0 −¯p)
¯p
( b
¯c)2
b ≥¯c
no conv.
(2) Strategic farmers
g(α) < 1
pt = ¯p + [−g(α)]t(p0 −¯p)
¯p
g2(α)
g(α) ≥1
no conv.
(3) Type-S farmers under
α > α2
p1 = Ω−α b
¯c ¯p −(1 −α) b
¯cp0,
¯p
(1 −α) b2
¯c2
contract w. price ¯p
p2i−1 = ¯p + [ (1−α)b2
¯c2
]i−1(p1 −¯p),
p2i = Ω−b
¯cp2i−1
α ≤α2
no conv.
(4) Type-S farmers under
α > α1
p2i−1 =
¯c
¯c+αb[Ω−(1−α)b
¯c
p2i−2],
¯p
> (1 −α) b2
¯c2
dynamic contract
p2i = Ω−b
¯cp2i−1
α ≤α1
NA.
(5) Type-S farmers under
α > α1
pt = ¯p + [−(1−α)b
¯c
]t(p0 −¯p)
¯p
[(1 −α) b
¯c]2
long-term contract w. price ¯p α ≤α1
no conv.
(6) Backward-looking
b < ¯c
pt = Ω−b
¯c(1 −α
2 )pt−1 −b
¯c
α
2 pt−2
¯p
NA.
b ≥¯c
NA.
NA.
Note: g(α) := (1−α)b
¯c+αb , α1 := 1 −¯c
b and α2 := 1 −¯c2
b2 . We omit the trivial scenarios when market
prices take extremely high or low values (i.e., when all farmers or no farmers plant the crop).
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

11
Table D.2
Farmer welfare summary
Scenario Short-run welfare
Long-run welfare
Comparison
(i →∞)
(c ≥c)
(1)
wn
i (c) =



p2i−1+p2i
2
−c, if c ≤p2i−2,
p2i−c
2
,
if p2i−2 < c ≤p2i−1,
0
if c > p2i−1
= wn
i (c)
(2)
ws
i (c) =



p2i−1+p2i
2
−c, if c ≤p2i−2,
p2i−c
2
,
if p2i−2 < c ≤p2i−1,
0
if c > p2i−1
=
 ¯p −c, if c ≤¯p,
0
if c > ¯p
> (1);> ¯ws
i in (3);
> ¯wn
i in (2)
wn
i (c) =



p2i−1+p2i
2
−c, if c ≤p2i,
p2i−1−c
2
,
if p2i < c ≤p2i−1,
0
if c > p2i−1
=
 ¯p −c, if c ≤¯p,
0
if c > ¯p
> (1);> ¯wn
i in (3);
> ¯wn
i in (5) if c > p2i−2
(3)
¯ws
i (c) =



¯p+p2i
2
−c, if c ≤p2i−2,
p2i−c
2
,
if p2i−2 < c ≤p2i−1,
0
if c > p2i−1
=
 ¯p −c, if c ≤¯p,
0
if c > ¯p
> (1)
¯wn
i (c) =



p2i−1+p2i
2
−c, if c ≤p2i−2,
p2i−c
2
,
if p2i−2 < c ≤p2i−1,
0
if c > p2i−1
=
 ¯p −c, if c ≤¯p,
0
if c > ¯p
> (1);> ¯ws
i in (3)
(4)
¯ws
i (c)
NA.
=
 ¯p −c, if c ≤¯p,
0
if c > ¯p
> (1)
¯wn
i (c)
NA.
=

¯p −c, if c ≤¯p,
0
if c > ¯p
> (1)
(5)
¯ws
i (c) =
 ¯p −c, if c ≤¯p,
0
if c > ¯p
=
 ¯p −c, if c ≤¯p,
0
if c > ¯p
> (1);> ¯ws
i in (3);
> ¯wn
i in (5) if c > p2i−2
¯wn
i (c) =



p2i−1+p2i
2
−c, if c ≤p2i−2,
p2i−c
2
,
if p2i−2 < c ≤p2i−1,
0
if c > p2i−1
=
 ¯p −c, if c ≤¯p,
0
if c > ¯p
> (1);> ¯wn
i in (3)
Note: In scenarios (2)-(5), we assume b ≥¯c. For all 5 scenarios, we assume the market
convergence conditions (in Table D.1) hold.
E.
Proof of Propositions 1, 2, and 3
Before the proof of Proposition 1, we ﬁrst introduce two lemmas.
Lemma E.1. Suppose Assumptions (1)-(3) hold and g(α) ≤1. For any i ≥0, if pi ≤¯c, then
pi+1 ≤¯c.
Proof of Lemma E.1.
If pi ≤¯c, then by (3) we have pi = Ω−bα pi
¯c −b(1−α)F(pi−1) ≥Ω−bα pi
¯c −
b(1 −α), by which we obtain
pi ≥Ω−(1 −α)b
1 + α b
¯c
.
(E.1)
Now we show pi+1 ≤¯c. Suppose for a contradiction that pi+1 > ¯c, then it follows by pi ≤¯c and (3)
that pi+1 = Ω−αb−(1−α) b
¯cpi ≤Ω−αb−(1−α) b
¯c
Ω−(1−α)b
1+α b
¯c
, where the last inequality holds because
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

12
of (E.1). To end the proof, it suﬃces to show Ω−αb −(1 −α) b
¯c
Ω−(1−α)b
1+α b
¯c
≤¯c, which will arrive a
contradiction. We have
Ω−αb −(1 −α)b
¯c
Ω−(1 −α)b
1 + α b
¯c
−¯c = (Ω−b −¯c)
n
1 −(1 −α)b
¯c + αb
o
≤0,
where the last inequality holds because Ω≤b + ¯c and g(α) = (1−α)b
¯c+αb ≤1.
□
Lemma E.2. Suppose Assumptions (1)-(3) hold and g(α) > 1. If p2i−1 ≥¯c, then for any j ≥0,
p2i+2j = ¯p −g(α)(¯c −¯p) ≤¯c and p2i+2j+1 = Ω−b

α + (1 −α)
p2i+2j
¯c

≥¯c.
Proof of Lemma E.2.
We ﬁrst derive the expression of p2i. It follows by p2i−1 ≥¯c and (3) that
p2i = Ω−b(1 −α) −bαF(p2i). Suppose p2i > ¯c for a contradiction. Then p2i = Ω−b ≤¯c, which
contradicts our supposition. Hence it must be the case that p2i ≤¯c. Therefore, p2i = Ω−b(1−α)−
bα p2i
¯c , by which we obtain p2i = Ω−(1−α)b
1+α b
¯c
= ¯p −g(α)(¯c −¯p) ≤¯c.
Next we derive the expression of p2i+1. It follows by p2i ≤¯c and (3) that
p2i+1 = Ω−bαF(p2i+1) −b(1 −α)p2i
¯c .
(E.2)
Suppose for a contradiction that p2i+1 < ¯c. Then (E.2) reduces to p2i+1 = Ω−bα
p2i+1
¯c
−b(1−α) p2i
¯c ,
by which we obtain p2i+1 =
Ω−(1−α) b
¯c p2i
1+α b
¯c
=
Ω
 1−(1−2α) b
¯c

+(1−α)2 b2
¯c
(1+α b
¯c )2
. However,
p2i+1 −¯c = Ω
 1 −(1 −2α) b
¯c

+ (1−α)2b2
¯c
(1 + α b
¯c)2
−¯c =
1
1 + α b
¯c
(Ω−b −¯c)
 1 −g(α)

≥0,
where the last inequality holds because Ω≤b + ¯c and g(α) > 1. This contradicts our supposition
that p2i+1 < ¯c. Therefore, it must be the case that p2i+1 ≥¯c. Hence (E.2) reduces to p2i+1 = Ω−
bα −b(1 −α) p2i
¯c .
Continuing in this fashion, we could show that for any j ≥0, p2i+2j = ¯p −g(α)(¯c −¯p) ≤¯c and
p2i+2j+1 = Ω−bα −b(1 −α)
p2i+2j
¯c
≥¯c.
□
Proof of Proposition 1.
Part 1: We study the case when g(α) ≤1.
Given p0 ≤¯c in Assumption 2, Lemma E.1 implies that pi ≤¯c for any i ≥0. Thus (3) reduces to
pt = Ω−α b
¯cpt −(1 −α) b
¯cpt−1. Some algebras show that
pt =
Ω
1 + α b
¯c
−(1 −α) b
¯c
1 + α b
¯c
pt−1 = ¯p +
n
−(1 −α) b
¯c
1 + α b
¯c
ot
(p0 −¯p) = ¯p + [−g(α)]t(p0 −¯p).
If g(α) < 1, then limt→∞pt = ¯p. If g(α) = 1, then pt alternates between p0 and 2¯p −p0.
Part 2: We study the case when g(α) > 1.
We ﬁrst show there exists an i′ ≥0 such that p2i−1 ≥¯c. Suppose for a contradiction that there
does not exists such an i′, then for any t we have pt ≤¯c. Thus as in Part 1, we have for any t < j,
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

13
pt = ¯p + [−g(α)]t(p0 −¯p). Note that g(α) > 1, so there must exist an i′ ≥0 such that p2i′−1 ≥¯c
because p0 < ¯p, leading to a contradiction.
Therefore, it follows by Lemma E.2 that the market price alternates between two constant
prices.
□
Proof of Proposition 2.
Note that p2i−1 > p2i. We divide the farmers based on their production
cost endowment. (a) Suppose c ≤p2i. By (1), we have un
2i−1 = p2i−2 −c = p2i −c ≥0 and un
2i =
p2i−1 −c > p2i −c ≥0. Therefore, the farmer plants the crop in both periods. Thus wn(c) = 1
2(p2i−1 −
c)+ 1
2(p2i −c) =
p2i−1+p2i
2
−c > 0. (b) Suppose p2i < c ≤p2i−1. We have un
2i−1 = p2i−2 −c = p2i −c < 0
and un
2i = p2i−1 −c ≥0. Therefore, the farmer plants the crop only in period 2i. Thus wn(c) =
1
2(p2i −c) < 0. (c) Suppose c > p2i−1. We have un
2i−1 = p2i−2 −c = p2i −c < 0 and un
2i = p2i−1 −c < 0.
Therefore, the farmer does not plant the crop in any period. Thus wn(c) = 0.
□
Proof of Proposition 3.
Part 1a: In the presence of strategic farmers, the naive and strategic
farmers enjoy the same price in each period. Since strategic farmers can predict future prices based
on which their planting decisions are made, it is easy to see they always obtain a (weakly) higher
surplus than the naive farmers with the same production cost.
Part 1b: In the model with naive farmers only, we use pn
t and wn
i (c) to denote the price in period
t and the welfare of naive farmers with cost c in cycle i, while in the model with strategic farmers
we use pt and wns
i (c).
If α = 0, by Assumption 4, we have g(α) ≥1. As the process in the proof of Proposition 2,
the naive farmers’ welfare in the absence of strategic farmers is as follows: (a) If c ≤pn
2i−2, then
wn
i (c) =
pn
2i−1+pn
2i
2
−c. (b) If pn
2i−2 < c ≤pn
2i−1, then wn
i (c) = 1
2(pn
2i −c) < 0. (c) If c > pn
2i−1, then
wn
i (c) = 0.
In the presence of strategic farmers, the prices in cycle i are (p2i−1,p2i). In this case, the naive
farmers’ welfare is as follows. (a) If c ≤p2i−2, then wns
i (c) =
p2i−1+p2i
2
−c > 0. (b) If p2i−2 < c ≤p2i−1,
then wns
i (c) = 1
2(p2i −c) < 0. (c) If c > p2i−1, then wns
i (c) = 0.
Next we compare wn
i (c) with wns
i (c). Note that pn
2i−2 < p2i−2 < p2i−1 < pn
2i−1 and pn
2i < p2i for
each cycle i. (i) If pn
2i−2 < c ≤p2i−2, then wn
i (c) = 1
2(pn
2i −c) and wns
i (c) = 1
2(p2i−1 −c) + 1
2(p2i −c).
Since p2i > pn
2i and p2i−1 > c, it is easy to see wns
i (c) > wn
i (c). (ii) If p2i−2 < c ≤p2i−1, then wn
i (c) =
1
2(pn
2i −c) and wns
i (c) = 1
2(p2i −c). We have wns
i (c) > wn
i (c) because p2i > pn
2i. (iii) If p2i−1 < c ≤
pn
2i−1, then wn
i (c) = 1
2(pn
2i −c) < 0 and wns
i (c) = 0. Clearly, wns
i (c) > wn
i (c). (iv) If c > pn
2i−1, then
wn
i (c) = wns
i (c) = 0. Therefore, the naive farmers with production cost not too low (to be speciﬁc,
c > pn
2i−2) obtain a higher surplus than that without strategic farmers.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

14
Part 2a: Since the price is stabilized at ¯p in the long run, each strategic farmer obtains the same
surplus as the naive farmer with the same production cost.
Part 2b: In the presence of strategic farmers, the price is stabilized at ¯p. In this case, the naive
farmers with c < ¯p cultivate in both periods and thus obtain limi→∞wns
i (c) = ¯p −c, while the rest
do not cultivate and thus obtain limi→∞wns
i (c) = 0.
In the absence of strategic farmers, the price eventually alternates between two constant prices
limi→∞pn
2i−1 and limi→∞pn
2i. By Proposition 2, we have (a) If c ≤limi→∞pn
2i, then limi→∞wn
i (c) =
limi→∞pn
2i−1+limi→∞pn
2i
2
−c; (b) If limi→∞pn
2i ≤c ≤limi→∞pn
2i−1, then limi→∞wn
i (c) =
limi→∞pn
2i−c
2
; (c)
If c > limi→∞pn
2i−1, then limi→∞wn
i (c) = 0.
Note that limi→∞pn
2i < ¯p < limi→∞pn
2i−1, so comparing limi→∞wn
i (c) with limi→∞wns
i (c), one
can check limi→∞wn
i (c) < limi→∞wns
i (c) for any c > limi→∞pn
2i. Therefore, the naive farmers with
production cost not too low (i.e., c > limi→∞pn
2i) obtain a (weakly) higher surplus than that without
strategic farmers.
Part 2c: Here we provide the conditions under which the total welfare of all farmers in the long
run is improved due to the presence of strategic farmers. If b = ¯c or b > ¯c but ¯p−(Ω−b) ≥
2b¯c(b−¯c)
2b2+3b¯c−2¯c2 ,
then the aggregate welfare of all farmers is higher than that in the absence of strategic farmers.
Next we prove this result.
If α = 0 and b ≥¯c, then g(α) ≥1. Proposition 1 shows that the alternating prices (pn
2i−1,pn
2i) are
(Ω−p0,p0) if b = ¯c and (Ω−b
¯c(Ω−b),Ω−b) if b > ¯c.
For the farmers with production cost c ≤pn
2i−2, let B1 denote their welfare diﬀerence between in
the presence and in the absence of strategic farmers, then we have
B1 =
Z pn
2i−2
0
n
¯p −c −(pn
2i−1 + pn
2i
2
−c)
o
dc =
(
0
if b = ¯c,
1
2
b
¯c(¯c −b)(1 −
Ω
¯c+b)(Ω−b) < 0
if b > ¯c,
where the last inequality holds because b > ¯c and Ω≤b + ¯c. For the farmers with production cost
pn
2i−2 < c ≤¯p, let B2 denote the welfare diﬀerence between in the presence and in the absence of
strategic farmers, then
B2 =
Z ¯p
pn
2i−2
n
¯p −c −1
2(pn
2i −c)
o
dc =
(R ¯p
pn
2i−2
b−c
2 dc > 0,
if b = ¯c,
3
4b2(1 −
Ω
¯c+b)2 > 0
if b > ¯c.
For the farmers with production cost ¯p < c ≤pn
2i−1, let B3 denote the welfare diﬀerence between in
the presence and in the absence of strategic farmers, then
B3 =
Z pn
2i−1
¯p
n
0 −1
2(pn
2i −c)
o
dc =
Z pn
2i−1
¯p
1
2(c −pn
2i)dc > 0,
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

15
where the last inequality holds because c > ¯p > pn
2i. For the farmers with production cost c > pn
2i−1,
let B4 denote the welfare diﬀerence between in the presence and in the absence of strategic farmers.
It is easy to see that B4 = 0.
Apparently, if b = ¯c, then P4
i=1 Bi > 0 and hence the aggregate welfare of all farmers in the
presence of strategic farmers is higher than that in the absence of strategic farmers. Suppose b > ¯c,
we have
B1 + B2 = b
4¯c(1 −
Ω
¯c + b)

(b¯c + 2b2) + (2¯c2 −2b2 −3b¯c) Ω
¯c + b

> 0,
where the last inequality holds because
Ω
¯c+b <
2b2+b¯c
2b2+3b¯c−2¯c2 which is true following ¯p −(Ω−b) ≥
2b¯c(b−¯c)
2b2+3b¯c−2¯c2 . Given B3 > 0 and B4 = 0, it follows immediately that P4
i=1 Bi > 0. This completes the
proof of Part 2c.
□
F.
Proof of Proposition 4
When α = 0 and no farmers exit the market, the price alternates between Ω−p0 and p0 if b = ¯c.
If b > ¯c, then it eventually alternates between Ω−b
¯c(Ω−b) and Ω−b. To simplify the analysis, we
omit the short divergence periods when b > ¯c and assume the price alternates between two prices
(Ω−b
¯cplow,plow) from the very beginning.
Before the proof of Proposition 4, we ﬁrst introduce two lemmas.
Lemma F.1. Suppose Assumptions (1)-(4) hold. Deﬁne j = min

i : i
 Ω−b
¯cplow −plow

≥L
 
. In
each even period 2j + 2k for any k ≥0,
(a) if Ak ≥¯p, the farmers with Ak+1 ≤c < Ak exit the market and
p2j = plow,
and p2j+1 = Ω−b
¯cplow
p2j+2k = Ω−b
¯cAk,
and p2j+2k+1 = Ω−b
¯c
 Ω−b
¯cAk

for any k ≥1;
(b) if Ak < ¯p, no more farmers will exit and the price sticks to Ω−b
¯cAk in each following period,
where
A0 = Ω−b
¯cplow,
Ak =
1
j + k −1
 jp2j + p2j+2 + ··· + p2j+2(k−1) + L

for any k ≥1
Proof of Lemma F.1.
Before farmers start to exit the market, the price alternates between
plow and Ω−b
¯cplow where plow < ¯p < Ω−b
¯cplow, in which case the farmers with production cost
plow ≤c < Ω−b
¯cplow suﬀer a revenue loss c −plow in every even period 2i for any i ≥1.
In period 2j, by the deﬁnition of j, we have p2j = plow. Solving j(c−plow) ≥L yields c ≥L
j +p2j,
indicating that the farmers with L
j +p2j ≤c ≤Ω−b
¯cplow suﬀer an overall loss exceeding L and thus
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

16
exit the market. Note that A1 = L
j +p2j = 1
j (jp2j +L) and p2j ≤A1 ≤¯c. Moreover, A0 = Ω−b
¯cplow >
¯p.
In period 2j +1, the farmers with c < p2j cultivate the crop. Since p2j ≤A1, the exited farmers do
not aﬀect this period’s production quantity. Hence, q2j+1 = F(p2j) = plow
¯c , and p2j+1 = Ω−b
¯cplow =
A0. No farmers exit the market in this period.
In period 2j + 2, the farmers with c < p2j+1 = Ω−b
¯cplow are supposed to cultivate the crop.
However, due to the farmers with A1 ≤c < Ω−b
¯cplow has already exited the market in period 2j,
the true production is made by the farmers with c ≤A1. Hence q2j+2 = Pr(c ≤A1) = A1
¯c where the
last inequality holds because A1 ≤¯c, and thus p2j+2 = Ω−b
¯cA1. Next we have two cases.
Case (i): If A1 < ¯p, then p2j+2 > ¯p. It can be checked that p2j+2+m = Ω−b
¯cA1 for any m ≥1. To
see why this is so, observe that only the farmers with production cost lower than A1 (thus lower
than ¯p) are left in the market and the price is Ω−b
¯cA1 (thus above ¯p) above their production cost.
Therefore, all left farmers will produce in each following period and the price sticks to Ω−b
¯cA1.
Case (ii): If A1 ≥¯p, then p2j+2 = Ω−b
¯cA1 < ¯p. Solving (c −plow)j + (c −p2j+2) ≥L yields c ≥
1
j+1(jp2j + p2j+2 + L) = A2, implying that the farmers with A2 ≤c < A1 exit the market in period
2j + 2. Note that A2 =
1
j+1(jA1 + p2j+2) > p2j+2.
In period 2j + 3, the farmers with c < p2j+2 will cultivate the crop. Since p2j+2 < A2, the exited
farmers do not aﬀect this period’s production quantity. Hence, q2j+3 = F(p2j+2) =
Ω−b
¯c A1
¯c
, and
p2j+3 = Ω−b
¯c(Ω−b
¯cA1) > A1 > A2. No farmers exit the market in this period.
Continuing in this fashion, we could show that in period 2j + 2k for any k ≥0, if Ak ≥¯p, the
farmers with Ak+1 ≤c < Ak will exit the market, where Ak =
1
j+k−1[(j + k −2)Ak−1 + p2j+2(k−1)] =
1
j+k−1(jp2j + p2j+2 + ··· + p2j+2(k−1) + L). Furthermore, p2j+2k = Ω−b
¯cAk and p2j+2k+1 = Ω−b
¯c(Ω−
b
¯cAk). If Ak < ¯p, the farmers will stop exiting the market and the price will stick to Ω−b
¯cAk.
□
Lemma F.2. Suppose Assumptions (1)-(4) hold. If Ak ≥¯p for any k ≥0, then limk→∞Ak = ¯p,
and limk→∞p2j+2k = limk→∞p2j+2k+1 = ¯p.
Proof of Lemma F.2.
One has
Ak+1 −Ak =
1
j + k[(j + k −1)Ak + p2j+2k] −Ak = p2j+2k −Ak
j + k
= Ω−b
¯cAk −Ak
j + k
≤Ω−b
¯c ¯p −¯p
j + k
= 0.
Hence, a decreasing and bounded sequence {Ak} must have a limit. Suppose limk→∞Ak = Y ,
and taking limit on both sides of the equation Ak+1 =
1
j+k[(j + k −1)Ak + Ω−b
¯cAk] yields
Y =
(j+k−1)Y +Ω−b
¯c Y
j+k
. Some algebras show Y = ¯p. It follows immediately that limk→∞p2j+2k =
limk→∞p2j+2k+1 = ¯p.
□
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

17
Proof of Proposition 4.
If Ak ≥¯p for any k ≥0, Lemma F.2 shows that the price converges to
¯p. If there does exist an i such that Ai < ¯p, then by Part (b) of Lemma F.1, the price converges to
Ω−b
¯cAi > ¯p.To summarize, the market price will converge to a price that is (weakly) higher than
¯p.
□
G.
Proof of Proposition 5
Lemma G.1. Suppose Assumptions (1)-(5) hold and pb > ¯p.
1. Suppose α > α0.
(a) If α > α1, then limt→∞pt = ¯p −αb(pb−¯p)
¯c+(1−α)b.
(b) If α ≤α1, then the price process does not converge.
2. Suppose α ≤α0.
(a) If α > α2, then limt→∞pt = ¯p −αb(pb−¯p)
¯c+(1−α)b.
(b) If α ≤α1, then the price process does not converge.
Proof of Lemma G.1.
Part 1: Suppose α > α0, which is equivalent to
Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b
¯cp0 < pb.
(G.1)
Part 1(a): We will show pt converges if α > α1 and does not converge if α = α1. Note that α ≥α1
is equivalent to b(1 −α) ≤¯c.
We ﬁrst show by induction that for any t ≥1
pt =
n
1 −
 −(1 −α)b
¯c
to Ω−α b
¯cpb
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
+
 −(1 −α)b
¯c
tp0 < pb,
(G.2)
from which whether pt converges can be checked immediately. By (8), p1 = Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1−α) b
¯cp0 <
pb, where the equality holds because p0 < ¯p < pb ≤¯c and the inequality holds because of (G.1). This
establishes that (G.2) holds when t = 1.
Suppose (G.2) holds when t = i −1. Next we will show (G.2) holds when t = i. One has
pi = Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b
¯cpi−1
[by pb ≤¯c and pi−1 < pb ≤¯c]
= Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b
¯c
n
{1 −
 −(1 −α)b
¯c
i−1} Ω−α b
¯cpb
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
+
 −(1 −α)b
¯c
i−1p0
o
=
n
1 −
 −(1 −α)b
¯c
io Ω−α b
¯cpb
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
+
 −(1 −α)b
¯c
ip0
<
n
1 −
 −(1 −α)b
¯c
io(1 −α) b
¯cp0 + pb
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
+
 −(1 −α)b
¯c
ip0
[by (G.1)]
=
 −(1 −α) b
¯c
i + (1 −α) b
¯c
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
p0 + 1 −
 −(1 −α) b
¯c
i
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
pb
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

18
<
 −(1 −α) b
¯c
i + (1 −α) b
¯c
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
pb + 1 −
 −(1 −α) b
¯c
i
1 + (1 −α) b
¯c
pb
[by p0 < pb and (1 −α)b
¯c ≤1]
= pb.
This completes the induction. Therefore, if α > α1 which is (1 −α) b
¯c < 1, then limt→∞pt =
Ω−α b
¯c pb
1+(1−α) b
¯c = ¯p −αb(pb−¯p)
¯c+(1−α)b. If α = α1, then the price alternates between Ω−α b
¯cpb −p0 and p0.
Part 1(b): We will show the price does not converge when α < α1. Note that b(1 −α) > ¯c.
We ﬁrst show there exists an i ≥0 such that pi ≥pb. Suppose for a contradiction that pi < pb for
any i ≥0, then as in Part 1(a), we obtain (G.2). Since (1−α) b
¯c > 1, there must exist an i such that
pi ≥pb, contradicting our supposition.
Deﬁne j = min{i : pi ≥pb,pi−k < pb,∀k = 1,...,i}. That is, period j is the ﬁrst time that the price
goes above pb. Note that pj = Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1 −α) b
¯cpj−1 ≥pb and pj−1 < ¯p (otherwise, pj ≥pb cannot
hold), so it follows the proof of Part 2(b) that pt does not converge.
Part 2: Suppose α < α0, which is equivalent to
Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b
¯cp0 ≥pb.
(G.3)
Part 2(a): We will show if α > α2, that is, b <
¯c
√1−α, then limt→∞pt = ¯p −αb(pb−¯p)
¯c+(1−α)b.
According to Part 1(a), it suﬃces to show there exists an i ≥0 such that p2i < ¯p and p2i+1 =
Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1 −α) b
¯cp2i < pb. Then it follows the proof of Part 1(a).
Observe that
Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b
¯c(Ω−b) −¯c
≤Ω−αb
¯c
¯c
¯c + bΩ−(1 −α)b
¯c(Ω−b) −¯c
[by pb > ¯p =
¯c
¯c + bΩ]
=¯c2 −(1 −α)b2
¯c
 Ω
¯c + b −1

≤0.
[by b <
¯c
√1 −α and Ω≤¯c + b]
(G.4)
In the following we derive the formula of p2i+1. We have p1 = Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1 −α) b
¯cp0 ≥pb, where
the last inequality holds because of (G.3). Moreover, p1 = Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1 −α) b
¯cp0 < Ω−α b
¯cpb −
(1 −α) b
¯c(Ω−b) < ¯c where the last inequality holds because of (G.4). It follows by pb ≤p1 ≤¯c that
p2 = Ω−b
¯cp1 < Ω−b
¯cpb < Ω−b
¯c ¯p = ¯p < pb ≤¯c. Since p2 < pb < ¯c, p3 = Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1−α) b
¯cp2 ≤¯c where
the last inequality holds because p2 ≥Ω−b and (G.4). If p3 ≤pb, then we are done. Suppose p3 > pb,
then p4 = Ω−b
¯cp3 < Ω−b
¯cpb < ¯p < pb ≤¯c, by which it follows that p5 = Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1 −α) b
¯cp4.
Continuing in this fashion, we obtain that if p2i−1 > pb, then p2i < ¯p and
p2i+1 = Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b
¯cp2i = Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b
¯c

Ω−b
¯cp2i−1

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

19
=

1 −(1 −α)b
¯c

Ω−αb
¯cpb + (1 −α)b2
¯c2 p2i−1
=
 1 −(1 −α) b
¯c

Ω−α b
¯cpb
1 −(1 −α) b2
¯c2
+

(1 −α)b2
¯c2
in
p1 −
 1 −(1 −α) b
¯c

Ω−α b
¯cpb
1 −(1 −α) b2
¯c2
o
.
Note that (1 −α) b2
¯c2 < 1, so limi→∞p2i+1 =
 1−(1−α) b
¯c

Ω−α b
¯c pb
1−(1−α) b2
¯c2
. Recall that we expect to show there
exists an i ≥0 such that p2i < ¯p and p2i+1 < pb. To end the proof, it suﬃces to show limi→∞p2i+1 <
pb. One has
lim
i→∞p2i+1 −pb =
 1 −(1 −α) b
¯c

Ω−α b
¯cpb
1 −(1 −α) b2
¯c2
−pb =
1
1 −(1 −α) b2
¯c2
n
1 −(1 −α)b
¯c

Ω−

1 + αb
¯c −(1 −α)b2
¯c2

pbo
<
1
1 −(1 −α) b2
¯c2
n 1 −(1 −α)b
¯c

Ω−

1 + αb
¯c −(1 −α)b2
¯c2

¯c
¯c + bΩ
o
= 0.
where the last inequality holds because pb >
¯c
¯c+bΩand (1 −α) b2
¯c2 < 1. This completes the proof of
Part 2(a).
Part 2(b): We will show if α < α1, that is, b ≥
¯c
1−α, then pt does not converge.
Again, we have p1 = Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1 −α) b
¯cp0 ≥pb. If p1 > ¯c, then p2 = Ω−b, and thus p3 =
Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1 −α)(Ω−b) ≥Ω−α b
¯c¯c −(1 −α)(Ω−b) = α(Ω−b) + (1 −α)b > ¯c where the ﬁrst
inequality holds because pb ≤¯c and the second inequality holds because Ω> b and b ≥
¯c
1−α. Thus,
the price will alternate between Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1 −α)(Ω−b) and Ω−b and we are done. To end the
proof, we assume p1 ≤¯c hereafter. Then p2 = Ω−b
¯cp1 ≤Ω−b
¯cpb < Ω−b
¯c ¯p = ¯p < pb < ¯c. It follows
that p3 = Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1 −α) b
¯cp2 =

1 −(1 −α) b
¯c

Ω−α b
¯cpb + (1 −α) b2
¯c2 p1. One can check
p3 −p1 =

1 −(1 −α)b
¯c

Ω−αb
¯cpb +

(1 −α)b2
¯c2 −1

p1
≥

1 −(1 −α)b
¯c

Ω−αb
¯cpb +

(1 −α)b2
¯c2 −1

pb
[by p1 ≥pb and b ≥
¯c
1 −α >
¯c
√1 −α]
=

1 −(1 −α)b
¯c

Ω−(1 + b
¯c)pb
≥

1 −(1 −α)b
¯c

Ω−(1 + b
¯c)
¯c
¯c + bΩ

[by pb ≥
¯c
¯c + bΩand 1 −(1 −α)b
¯c ≤0]
= 0.
Continuing in this fashion, we could show if p2i−1 < ¯c, then p2i+1 > p2i−1. That is, if there does
not exist an i such that p2i−1 > ¯c, then p2i−1 is increasing in i. This monotonicity and p1 ≥pb
indicates that p2i−1 > pb, and thus p2i = Ω−b
¯cp2i−1 < pb, decreasing in i. Hence, the price does not
converge. Note that if there exists an i such that p2i−1 > ¯c, then similar to the above case that
p1 > ¯c, the price will alternate between Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1 −α)(Ω−b) and Ω−b.
□
Lemma G.2. Suppose Assumptions (1)-(5) hold and pb = ¯p.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

20
1. If α > α2, then the market price converges to ¯p.
2. Otherwise, the price process does not converge.
Proof of Lemma G.2.
Part 1: We will show pt converges if α > α2 and does not converge if
α = α2. Note that α ≥α2 is equivalent to (1 −α)b2 ≤¯c2.
We ﬁrst prepare some results. Observe that
Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b
¯c(Ω−b) −¯c
=Ω−αb
¯c
¯c
¯c + bΩ−(1 −α)b
¯c(Ω−b) −¯c
[by pb =
¯c
¯c + bΩ]
=¯c2 −(1 −α)b2
¯c
 Ω
¯c + b −1

≤0.
[by (1 −α)b2 < ¯c2 and Ω≤¯c + b]
(G.5)
Then we will show by induction that
p2t+1 = ¯p +

(1 −α)b2
¯c2
t
(p1 −¯p),
p2t+2 = Ω−b
¯cp2t+1.
(G.6)
We ﬁrst show (G.6) holds when t = 1. One has
p1 = Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b
¯cp0 > Ω−αb
¯c ¯p −(1 −α)b
¯c ¯p = ¯p,
where the last inequality holds because p0 < ¯p. Moreover, p1 = Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1 −α) b
¯cp0 < Ω−α b
¯cpb −
(1 −α) b
¯c(Ω−b) < ¯c where the last inequality holds because of (G.5). It follows by pb ≤p1 ≤¯c that
p2 = Ω−b
¯cp1 < Ω−b
¯cpb = ¯p = pb ≤¯c. Since p2 < pb ≤¯c, p3 = Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1 −α) b
¯cp2 = Ω−α b
¯cpb −
(1 −α) b
¯c(Ω−b
¯cp1) = ¯p +

(1 −α) b2
¯c2

(p1 −¯p) > ¯p where the last inequality holds because p1 > ¯p.
Moreover, p3 = Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1 −α) b
¯cp2 ≤¯c where the last inequality holds because p2 ≥Ω−b and
(G.5). Observe that pb = ¯p < p3 ≤¯c, so p4 = Ω−b
¯cp3. This establishes that (G.6) holds for t = 1.
Suppose (G.6) holds for t = i −1. Next we show (G.6) holds for t = i. We have
p2i+1 = Ω−αb
¯c ¯p −(1 −α)b
¯cp2i = Ω−αb
¯c ¯p −(1 −α)b
¯c

Ω−b
¯cp2i−1

=

1 −(1 −α)b
¯c

Ω−αb
¯c ¯p + (1 −α)b2
¯c2 p2i−1
=

1 −(1 −α)b
¯c

Ω−αb
¯c ¯p + (1 −α)b2
¯c2
n
¯p +

(1 −α)b2
¯c2
i−1
(p1 −¯p)
o
= ¯p +

(1 −α)b2
¯c2
i
(p1 −¯p) > ¯p = pb,
where the last inequality holds because p1 > ¯p. Note also that p2i+1 = Ω−α b
¯c ¯p −(1 −α) b
¯cp2i < ¯c
because p2i > Ω−b and (G.5), so p2i+2 = Ω−b
¯cp2i+1. This completes the induction.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

21
Therefore, if α > α2, then (1 −α) b2
¯c2 < 1, hence limt→∞p2i+1 = limt→∞p2i+2 = ¯p. If α = α2, then
(1 −α) b2
¯c2 = 1, hence pt alternates between p1 and Ω−b
¯cp1.
Part 2: We will show if α < α2, that is, (1 −α) b2
¯c2 > 1, then the price does not converge.
We take a brief detour that
Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b
¯c(Ω−b)
=
¯c
¯c + bΩ

1 −(1 −α)b2
¯c2

+ (1 −α)b2
¯c
≥¯c

1 −(1 −α)b2
¯c2

+ (1 −α)b2
¯c
[by Ω≤¯c + b and 1 −(1 −α)b2
¯c2 < 0]
=¯c.
(G.7)
Then we show there exists an i ≥0 such that p2i+1 ≥¯c. Suppose there does not exist such an i,
that is, pt ≤¯c for any t. Note also that
p1 = Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b
¯cp0 > Ω−αb
¯c ¯p −(1 −α)b
¯c ¯p = ¯p = pb,
then as in Part 2(a) of Lemma G.1, we have
p2i+1 =
 1 −(1 −α) b
¯c

Ω−α b
¯cpb
1 −(1 −α) b2
¯c2
+

(1−α)b2
¯c2
in
p1−
 1 −(1 −α) b
¯c

Ω−α b
¯cpb
1 −(1 −α) b2
¯c2
o
= ¯p+

(1−α)b2
¯c2
i
(p1−¯p)
where the last equality holds because pb = ¯p. Note that p1 > ¯p, so p2i+1 is increasing in i because
(1 −α) b2
¯c2 > 1, by which we know there must exist an i such that p2i+1 ≥¯c.
Let j = min{i : p2i+1 ≥¯c}. Since p2j+1 ≥¯c ≥pb, p2j+2 = Ω−bF(p2j+1) = Ω−b, and p2j+3 =
Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1−α) b
¯cp2j+2 = Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1−α) b
¯c(Ω−b) ≥¯c, where the last inequality holds because of
(G.7). It can be checked that the price alternates between Ω−α b
¯cpb −(1−α) b
¯c(Ω−b) and Ω−b.
□
Lemma G.3. Suppose Assumptions (1)-(5) hold and pb < ¯p. Then the price process does not
converge.
Proof of Lemma G.3.
Whenever the low price in each cycle falls into the range of [pb, ¯p] which
is a necessary process for convergence, the contract is not eﬀective anymore and thus the price
process will stop converging because the price does not converge when b ≥¯c in the model with
naive farmers only and no contract. Therefore, the price does not converge if pb < ¯p.
□
Proof of Proposition 5
The result follows immediately by combining Lemmas G.1, G.2, and
G.3.
□
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

22
H.
Proof of Propositions 6, 7, and 8
Proof of Proposition 6.
Part 1: We will show pb∗= ¯p is the unique optimal solution to SE’s
problem (10). We consider three scenarios.
Scenario 1: Suppose pb∗> ¯p. Proposition 5 implies that limt→∞pt = ¯p −αb(pb∗−¯p)
¯c+(1−α)b < ¯p. Then there
exists a t′ such that for any t ≥t′, πt(pb∗) =

¯p −αb(pb∗−¯p)
¯c+(1−α)b −pb∗
qb
t < 0, which violates the proﬁt
constraint in problem (10). Hence, pb∗> ¯p cannot be optimal.
Scenario 2: Suppose pb∗= ¯p, then limt→∞pt = ¯p. In the long run, both types of farmers receive
a surplus as follows. (i) If c ≤¯p, then limi→∞¯wn
i (c;pb∗= ¯p) = limi→∞¯ws
i (c;pb∗= ¯p) = ¯p −c. (ii) If
c > ¯p, then limi→∞¯wn
i (c;pb∗= ¯p) = limi→∞¯ws
i (c;pb∗= ¯p) = 0.
Scenario 3: Suppose pb∗< ¯p. Proposition 5 shows that the price process does not converge. We
will show the long run welfare of farmers with c ≥c is lower than that in Scenario 2. Note that the
prices in each cycle i are (p2i−1,p2i) where p2i < ¯p < p2i−1. We have two cases.
Case 1: Suppose p2i−1 ≤¯c for any i ≥1. Then p2i = Ω−b
¯cp2i−1. Hence,
p2i−1+p2i
2
=
Ω+(1−b
¯c )p2i−1
2
<
Ω+(1−b
¯c )
¯c
¯c+b Ω
2
= ¯p. The type-N farmers’ welfare is as follows. (i) If c ≤p2i−2, then ¯wn
i (c;pb∗< ¯p) =
p2i−1+p2i
2
−c < ¯p −c. (ii) If p2i−2 < c ≤p2i−1, then ¯wn
i (c;pb∗< ¯p) = 1
2(p2i −c). (iii) If c > p2i−1, then
¯wn
i (c;pb∗< ¯p) = 0. The type-S farmers’ welfare is as follows. (i) If c ≤pb∗, then ¯ws
i (c;pb∗< ¯p) =
pb∗+p2i
2
−c < ¯p −c. (ii) If pb∗< c ≤p2i−1, then ¯ws
i (c;pb∗< ¯p) = 1
2(p2i −c). (iii) If c > p2i−1, then
¯ws
i (c;pb∗< ¯p) = 0.
Comparing with farmers’ welfare in Scenario 2, we obtain
¯wn
i (c;pb∗< ¯p) ≤lim
i→∞¯wn
i (c;pb∗= ¯p) for any 0 ≤c ≤¯c
¯ws
i (c;pb∗< ¯p) ≤lim
i→∞¯ws
i (c;pb∗= ¯p) for any 0 ≤c ≤¯c.
Case 2: Suppose there exists an j ≥1 such that p2j−1 > ¯c. Then p2j = Ω−b. Hence, p2j+1 =
Ω−α b
¯cpb−(1−α) b
¯c(Ω−b) ≥Ω−α b
¯cpb−(1−α) b
¯cp2j−2 = p2j−1 > ¯c, and thus p2j+2 = Ω−b. Continuing
in this fashion, we obtain that p2i = Ω−b = c for any i ≥j. In each cycle i ≥j, the type-N farmers’
welfare is as follows. (i) If c < c ≤p2i−1, then ¯wn
i (c;pb∗< ¯p) = 1
2(p2i −c) = 1
2(c −c) < 0. (ii) If
c > p2i−1, then ¯wn
i (c;pb∗< ¯p) = 0. In each cycle i ≥j, the type-S farmers’ welfare is as follows. (i)
If c < c ≤pb∗, then ¯ws
i (c;pb∗< ¯p) = pb∗+p2i
2
−c < ¯p −c. (ii) If pb∗< c ≤p2i−1, then ¯ws
i (c;pb∗< ¯p) =
1
2(p2i −c) = 1
2(c −c) < 0. (iii) If c > p2i−1, then ¯ws
i (c;pb∗< ¯p) = 0.
Comparing with farmers’ welfare in Scenario 2, we obtain
¯wn
i (c;pb∗< ¯p) ≤lim
i→∞¯wn
i (c;pb∗= ¯p) for any c ≤c ≤¯c,
¯ws
i (c;pb∗< ¯p) ≤lim
i→∞¯ws
i (c;pb∗= ¯p) for any c ≤c ≤¯c.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

23
Taking these two cases into consideration, we see that
Z ¯c
c
lim
i→∞

¯ws
i (c;pb∗< ¯p) + ¯wn
i (c;pb∗< ¯p)
1
¯cdc ≤
Z ¯c
c
lim
i→∞

¯ws
i (c;pb∗= ¯p) + ¯wn
i (c;pb∗= ¯p)
1
¯cdc,
hence pb∗< ¯p cannot be optimal. This establishes that pb∗= ¯p is the unique optimal solution.
Part 2: We will show the SE receives a positive proﬁt in the short run and the proﬁt diminishes
to 0 in the long run.
According to the proof of Lemma G.2, the market price when pb = ¯p is as follows,
p2i−1 = ¯p +

(1 −α)b2
¯c2
i−1
(p1 −¯p) > ¯p and p2i = Ω−b
¯cp2i−1 < ¯p.
In each cycle, since p2i−2 < pb = ¯p < p2i−1, type-S farmers accept the contract in period 2i −1 and
do not accept in period 2i. Hence, π2i−1(pb;p2i−1) = (p2i−1 −¯p)qb
2i−1 > 0 and π2i(pb;p2i) = 0. Using
the fact that limi→∞p2i−1 = ¯p, we conclude that limi→∞π2i−1(pb;p2i−1) = 0.
Part 3: We will show both types of farmers with c > c receive a higher welfare in the presence of
SE.
We use pt and pn
t to denote the price in the presence of SE’s contract and in the model with naive
farmers only, respectively. If α = 0, then by Assumption (4), we have g(α) ≥1. Hence, the naive
farmers’ welfare wn
i (c) is as follows. (i) If c ≤pn
2i−2, then wn
i (c) =
pn
2i−1+pn
2i
2
−c. (ii) If pn
2i−2 < c ≤pn
2i−1,
then wn
i (c) = 1
2(pn
2i −c). (iii) If c > pn
2i−1, then wn
i (c) = 0. Next we will derive the welfare of each
type of farmers and make a comparison with wn
i (c). Note that for each i,
pn
2i−2 ≤p2i−2 < ¯p < p2i−1 ≤pn
2i−1 and pn
2i ≤p2i.
Part 3(a): We will make the welfare comparison in the short run.
The type-S farmers’ welfare is as follows. (i) If c ≤pb, then ¯ws
i (c) = pb+p2i
2
−c. (ii) If pb < c ≤p2i−1,
then ¯ws
i (c) = 1
2(p2i −c) < 0. (iii) If c > p2i−1, then ¯ws
i (c) = 0. The type-N farmers’ welfare is as
follows. (i) If c ≤p2i−2, then ¯wn
i (c) =
p2i−1+p2i
2
−c. (ii) If p2i−2 < c ≤p2i−1, then ¯wn
i (c) = 1
2(p2i−c) < 0.
(iii) If c > p2i−1, then ¯wn
i (c) = 0.
Comparing with wn
i (c) above, we have that for any c > pn
2i−2 = c,
¯ws
i (c) ≥wn
i (c) and
¯wn
i (c) ≥wn
i (c).
Part 3(b): We will make the welfare comparison in the long run.
Both types of farmers’ welfare in the long run are given by Proposition 7. Comparing with wn
i (c),
we have that for any c > pn
2i−2 = c,
lim
i→∞¯ws
i (c) = lim
i→∞¯wn
i (c) > wn
i (c).
□
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

24
Proof of Proposition 7
Lemma G.2 implies that if pb = ¯p, then limt→∞pt = ¯p. Proposition 7
follows immediately.
□
Proof of Proposition 8.
Recall that in the model with naive farmers only, if b = ¯c, then the price
alternates between Ω−p0 and p0. If b > ¯c, then there exists an i′ such that in each cycle i > i′ the
price alternates between Ω−b
¯c(Ω−b) and Ω−b. Let (pn
2i−1,pn
2i) denote the alternating prices in the
model with naive farmers only, and (p2i−1,p2i) denote the price in the presence of SE’s contract.
Note that
pn
2i−2 ≤p2i−2 < ¯p < p2i−1 ≤pn
2i−1 and pn
2i ≤p2i.
(i) Since c1 ≤pn
2i−2, Part 3 of the proof of Proposition 6 gives us that
¯ws
i (c1) = pb + p2i
2
−c1,
¯wn
i (c1) = p2i−1 + p2i
2
−c1 = p2i−1 + Ω−b
¯cp2i−1
2
−c1 = Ω−( b
¯c −1)p2i−1
2
−c1,
wn
i (c1) = pn
2i−1 + pn
2i
2
−c1 = pn
2i−1 + Ω−b
¯cpn
2i−1
2
−c1 = Ω−( b
¯c −1)pn
2i−1
2
−c1.
Since pb = ¯p < p2i−1, we have ¯ws
i (c1) < ¯wn
i (c1). Note that p2i−1 > pn
2i−1, so ¯wn
i (c1) < wn
i (c1). There-
fore,
¯ws
i (c1) < ¯wn
i (c1) < wn
i (c1).
(H.1)
(ii) If pn
2i−2 < c2 ≤¯p, then
¯ws
i (c2) = pb + p2i
2
−c2,
¯wn
i (c2) =
( p2i−1+p2i
2
−c2
if pn
2i−2 < c2 ≤p2i−2,
1
2(pn
2i −c2)
if p2i−2 < c2 ≤¯p,
wn
i (c2) = 1
2(pn
2i −c2).
If pn
2i−2 < c2 ≤p2i−2, then ¯ws
i (c1) −¯ws
i (c2) = c2 −c1, ¯wn
i (c1) −¯wn
i (c2) = c2 −c1, and wn
i (c1) −
wn
i (c2) > c2 −c1, and hence ¯ws
i (c1) −¯ws
i (c2) ≤¯wn
i (c1) −¯wn
i (c2) ≤wn
i (c1) −wn
i (c2).
If p2i−2 < c2 ≤¯p, then one can check ¯ws
i (c2) ≥¯wn
i (c2) ≥wn
i (c2). Therefore, by (H.1), we have
¯ws
i (c1) −¯ws
i (c2) ≤¯wn
i (c1) −¯wn
i (c2) ≤wn
i (c1) −wn
i (c2).
(iii) If ¯p < c2 ≤pn
2i−1, then
¯ws
i (c2) = ¯wn
i (c2) =
(
1
2(p2i −c2) < 0
if ¯p < c2 ≤p2i−1,
0
if p2i−1 < c2 ≤pn
2i−1,
wn
i (c2) = 1
2(pn
2i −c2) < 0.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

25
One can check ¯ws
i (c2) = ¯wn
i (c2) > wn
i (c2). Therefore, by (H.1), we have ¯ws
i (c1) −¯ws
i (c2) ≤¯wn
i (c1) −
¯wn
i (c2) ≤wn
i (c1) −wn
i (c2).
(iv) If c2 > pn
2i−1, then ¯ws
i (c2) = ¯wn
i (c2) = wn
i (c2) = 0. Therefore, by (H.1), we have ¯ws
i (c1) −
¯ws
i (c2) ≤¯wn
i (c1) −¯wn
i (c2) ≤wn
i (c1) −wn
i (c2).
□
I.
Proof of Propositions 10 and 11
Before the proof of Proposition 10, we ﬁrst introduce three lemmas.
Lemma I.1. Suppose Assumptions (1)-(6) hold. For any feasible solution to optimization prob-
lem (11), the contract is not eﬀective in period 2i for any i ≥1.
Proof of Lemma I.1.
Part 1: We will show if p2i−2 < ¯p, then p2i−1 > ¯p for any ﬁxed i ≥1.
If pb
2i−1 ≤p2i−2, then p2i−1 = Ω−bF(p2i−2) > Ω−bF(¯p) = ¯p and we are done. Hence, we need
only consider the case when pb
2i−1 > p2i−2. Note that ¯p =
¯c
¯c+bΩ< ¯c, since p2i−2 < ¯p, so p2i−2 < ¯c.
Consequently,
p2i−1 = Ω−bαF(pb
2i−1) −b(1 −α)p2i−2
¯c
.
(I.1)
We take a brief detour to show pb
2i−1 ≤¯c. Suppose for a contradiction that pb
2i−1 > ¯c, then
p2i−1 = Ω−bα −b(1 −α)p2i−2
¯c
< Ω−bα −b(1 −α)Ω−b
¯c
=

1 −(1 −α)b
¯c

Ω−αb + (1 −α)b2
¯c
≤

1 −(1 −α)b
¯c

(b + ¯c) −αb + (1 −α)b2
¯c = ¯c < pb
2i−1,
where the second last inequality holds because Ω≤b+ ¯c and 1−(1−α) b
¯c ≥0. Thus, π2i−1(pb
2i−1) =
(p2i−1 −pb
2i−1)qb
2i−1 < 0, violating the proﬁt constraint in Problem (11). Therefore, it must be the
case that pb
2i−1 ≤¯c as claimed.
Plugging pb
2i−1 ≤¯c back into (I.1) yields p2i−1 = Ω−α b
¯cpb
2i−1 −(1−α) b
¯cp2i−2. The proﬁt constraint
π2i−1(pb
2i−1) ≥0 requires that p2i−1 ≥pb
2i−1, by which we derive pb
2i−1 ≤
Ω−(1−α) b
¯c p2i−2
1+α b
¯c
. We have
p2i−1 = Ω−αb
¯cpb
2i−1 −(1 −α)b
¯cp2i−2 ≥Ω−αb
¯c
Ω−(1 −α) b
¯cp2i−2
1 + α b
¯c
−(1 −α)b
¯cp2i−2
=
1
1 + α b
¯c

Ω−(1 −α)b
¯cp2i−2

>
1
1 + α b
¯c

Ω−(1 −α)b
¯c ¯p

= ¯p.
Part 2: We will show that if pt−1 > ¯p, then pb
t ≤pt−1 and pt < ¯p.
Suppose for a contradiction that pb
t > pt−1, then
pt = Ω−bαF(pb
t) −b(1 −α)F(pt−1) < Ω−bF(¯p) = ¯p,
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

26
where the inequality holds because pb
t > pt−1 > ¯p. Thus, πt(pb
t) = (pt −pb
t)qb
t < 0, violating the proﬁt
constraint in problem (11). Therefore, it must be the case that pb
t ≤pt−1, which indicates that the
contract will not be eﬀective in period t. Moreover, pt = Ω−bF(pt−1) < Ω−bF(¯p) = ¯p.
Recall that p0 < ¯p. Combining Parts 1 and 2, we see that p2i < ¯p < p2i−1 and pb
2i ≤p2i−1 for any
i ≥1. Therefore, the contract is not eﬀective in period 2i for any i ≥1.
□
Lemma I.2. Suppose Assumptions (1)-(6) hold. For any ﬁxed t, suppose pt−1 < ¯p. Consider the
following one-period problem.
min
pb
t
(pt −¯p)2
(I.2)
s.t.
pt = Ω−bαF(pb
t) −b(1 −α)F(pt−1),
pt−1 < pb
t ≤pt.
(I.3)
Then pb∗
t = ¯p + (1−α)b
¯c+αb (¯p −pt−1) ≤¯c.
Proof of lemma I.2.
We ﬁrst derive the formula of pt. It follows by pt−1 < ¯p and ¯p = ¯c Ω
¯c+b ≤¯c
that pt−1 < ¯c. Next we show pb
t ≤¯c. Suppose for a contradiction that pb
t > ¯c. On one hand, πt ≥0
requires that pt ≥pb
t, hence it follows that pt > ¯c. On the other hand,
pt = Ω−bα −b(1 −α)pt−1
¯c
[by pb
t > ¯c and pt−1 ≤¯c]
≤Ω−bα −b(1 −α)Ω−b
¯c
[by pt−1 ≥Ω−b]
=

1 −(1 −α)b
¯c

Ω−αb + (1 −α)b2
¯c
≤

1 −(1 −α)b
¯c

(b + ¯c) −αb + (1 −α)b2
¯c
[by Ω≤b + ¯c and 1 −(1 −α)b
¯c ≥0]
= ¯c,
which arrives a contradiction. Hence, it must be the case that pb
t ≤¯c. Since pt−1 ≤¯c and pb
t ≤¯c, we
have
pt = Ω−αb
¯cpb
t −(1 −α)b
¯cpt−1.
(I.4)
Plugging (I.4) back into (I.3) gives pt−1 < pb
t ≤
Ω−(1−α) b
¯c pt−1
1+α b
¯c
. Hence, problem (I.2) can be written
as
min
pb
t

b
¯c + bΩ−αb
¯cpb
t −(1 −α)b
¯cpt−1
2
(I.5)
s.t.
pt−1 < pb
t ≤Ω−(1 −α) b
¯cpt−1
1 + α b
¯c
.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

27
Taking derivatives to the objective function in (I.5) yields the unconstrained optimal solution
1
α
 ¯c
¯c+bΩ−(1 −α)pt−1

. Observe that
1
α

¯c
¯c + bΩ−(1 −α)pt−1

−Ω−(1 −α) b
¯cpt−1
1 + α b
¯c
= (1 −α)¯c
α(¯c + αb)

¯c
¯c + bΩ−pt−1

> 0,
where the last inequality holds because pt−1 < ¯p =
¯c
¯c+bΩ. Therefore, the convexity indicates that
pb∗
t =
Ω−(1−α) b
¯c pt−1
1+α b
¯c
= ¯p + (1−α)b
¯c+αb (¯p −pt−1). One can verify that pb∗≤¯c.
□
Lemma I.3. Suppose Assumptions (1)-(6) hold.
1. Suppose Ω−b ≤ep2i < p2i < ¯p. If epb
2i+1 = ¯p + (1−α)b
¯c+αb (¯p −ep2i) and pb
2i+1 = ¯p + (1−α)b
¯c+αb (¯p −p2i), then
ep2i+2 < p2i+2 < ¯p. That is, implementing an optimal contract based on a lower low price in
cycle i will admit a lower low price in cycle i + 1.
2. Suppose Ω−b ≤ep2i = p2i < ¯p. If epb
2i+1 = 0 and pb
2i+1 = ¯p+ (1−α)b
¯c+αb (¯p−p2i), then ep2i+2 < p2i+2 < ¯p.
That is, oﬀering no contract will admit a lower low price than implementing the optimal
contract in odd period 2i + 1.
Proof of Lemma I.3.
Part 1: Note that ¯c ≥pb
2i+1 > p2i, so
p2i+1 = Ω−αb
¯cpb
2i+1 −(1 −α)b
¯cp2i = Ω−αb
¯c
Ω−(1 −α) b
¯cp2i
1 + α b
¯c
−(1 −α)b
¯cp2i
=
1
1 + α b
¯c

Ω−(1 −α)b
¯cp2i

>
1
1 + α b
¯c

Ω−(1 −α)b
¯c ¯p

= ¯p.
where the last inequality holds because p2i < ¯p. Lemma I.1 implies that no contract is eﬀective in
period 2i + 2. Hence, p2i+2 = Ω−bF(p2i+1). Note also that
p2i+1 −¯c =
1
1 + α b
¯c

Ω−(1 −α)b
¯cp2i

−¯c ≤
1
1 + α b
¯c

Ω−(1 −α)b
¯c(Ω−b)

−¯c
=

1 −(1 −α)b
¯c

(Ω−b −¯c) < 0,
so p2i+2 = Ω−b
¯cp2i+1. By the same process, we obtain ep2i+2 = Ω−b
¯c ep2i+1. Observe that ep2i+1 > p2i+1
by ep2i < p2i, so ep2i+2 ≤p2i+2.
Part 2: By epb
2i+1 = 0, it follows that ep2i+1 = Ω−b
c ep2i > Ω−b
¯c ¯p = ¯p. According to Lemma I.1, no
contract is eﬀective in period 2i + 2. Thus, ep2i+2 = Ω−bF(ep2i+1) ≤Ω−b
¯c ep2i+1.
On the other hand, given p2i < pb
2i+1, we have p2i+1 = Ω−α b
¯cpb
2i+1 −(1−α) b
¯cp2i. As in Part 1, we
have p2i+2 = Ω−b
¯cp2i+1.
Observe that ep2i+1 > p2i+1 by ep2i = p2i < pb
2i+1, so ep2i+2 < p2i+2.
□
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

28
Proof of Proposition 10.
Lemma I.1 implies that the inﬁnite horizon problem can be viewed as
an inﬁnite number of independent problem, each of which consists of one cycle (two periods), and
Lemma I.2 gives the optimal solution of each independent problem. Moreover, Lemma I.3 shows
that with the optimal operation, the prices will be closer to the market limiting price in the current
cycle if they are closer to the market limiting price in the last cycle. Combing the three lemmas,
we arrive the conclusion.
□
Proof of Proposition 11.
Note that pb
1 = ¯p−p0
α
+ p0 ≤¯c by α ≥¯p−p0
¯c−p0 , so
p1 = Ω−αbF(pb
1) −(1 −α)bF(p0) = Ω−αb
¯cpb
1 −(1 −α)b
¯cp0
= Ω−αb
¯c
 ¯p −p0
α
+ p0

−(1 −α)b
¯cp0 = ¯p.
□
J.
Proof of Propositions 12 and 13
Proof of Proposition 12
As shown in Proposition 6, the market price converges to ¯p and the
farmers with production cost not too low are better oﬀin both short and long run. To complete
the proof, it suﬃces to show the ﬁrm earns a higher welfare and ¯p is an optimal solution to problem
(15) if b = ¯c.
Part 1: We will show the ﬁrm earns a higher welfare, that is, incurs a lower cost, in both short
and long run.
Suppose there is no contract, i.e., pb = 0, then the price alternates between two prices pn
2i−1 and pn
2i
(we omit the short divergence periods when b > ¯c). Note that if b = ¯c, then (pn
2i−1,pn
2i) = (Ω−p0,p0).
If b > ¯c, then (pn
2i−1,pn
2i) = (Ω−b
¯c(Ω−b),Ω−b). In this case,
f2i−1(pb;pb = 0) + f2i(pb;pb = 0)
=pn
2i−1q2i−1 + pm(d −q2i−1) + pn
2id = pn
2i−1
Ω−pn
2i−1
b
+ pm d −Ω−pn
2i−1
b

+ pn
2id
>(pn
2i−1 + pn
2i)d =
(
Ωd
if b = ¯c,
 Ω−( b
¯c −1)(Ω−b)

d
if b > ¯c,
where the ﬁrst equality holds because the market supply in period 2i−1 can not satisfy the demand
by our assumption that d > limi→∞
Ω−pn
2i−1
b
, and the inequality holds because pm > pn
2i−1. Observe
that the costs in the short run and in the long run are the same when the price is alternating
forever. Next we will derive the cost when the ﬁrm oﬀers a contract with pb = ¯p and then make a
comparison with f2i−1(pb;pb = 0) + f2i(pb;pb = 0) in both short and long run.
Part 1(a): We will make the comparison in the short run.
Suppose the ﬁrm oﬀers a contract with pb = ¯p, then according to the proof of Lemma G.2, the
market price is as follows,
p2i−1 = ¯p +

(1 −α)b2
¯c2
i−1
(p1 −¯p) and p2i = Ω−b
¯cp2i−1.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

29
Note that p2i−1 is decreasing in i and limi→∞p2i−1 = ¯p, so there exists an i′ such that p2i−1 < Ω−bd
for any i ≥i′. When i ≥i′, we have
f2i−1(pb;pb = ¯p) + f2i(pb;pb = ¯p)
=qb
2i−1pb + (d −qb
2i−1)p2i−1 + dp2i < dp2i−1 + dp2i = d(p2i−1 + p2i)
=d
 p2i−1 + Ω−b
¯cp2i−1

= d
 Ω−(b
¯c −1)p2i−1

(
= Ωd
if b = ¯c,
< d

Ω−( b
¯c −1)(Ω−d)

if b > ¯c.
<f2i−1(pb;pb = 0) + f2i(pb;pb = 0).
Therefore, the ﬁrm incurs a lower cost than that without the contract in the short run.
Part 1(b): We will make the long run comparison.
Given limi→∞p2i−1 = limi→∞p2i = ¯p, it follows that
lim
i→∞f2i−1(pb;pb = ¯p) + f2i(pb;pb = ¯p) = 2¯pd =
(
Ωd
if b = ¯c,
2¯c
¯c+bΩd
if b > ¯c.
Observe that
2¯c
¯c+bΩ−

Ω−( b
¯c −1)(Ω−b)
 
=
b
¯c(¯c+b)(b −¯c)(Ω−b −¯c) < 0, so limi→∞f2i−1(pb;pb =
¯p) + f2i(pb;pb = ¯p) < f2i−1(pb;pb = 0) + f2i(pb;pb = 0). Therefore, the ﬁrm incurs a lower cost than
without the contract in the long run.
Part 2: We will show pb = ¯p is an optimal solution to problem (15) if b = ¯c. We consider two
cases.
Case 1: pb ≥¯p = Ω
2 . According to Proposition 5, limt→∞pt = ¯p−αb(pb−¯p)
¯c+(1−α)b = Ω−αpb
2−α < ¯p. Assumption
d < Ω−¯p
b
means that the market supply at price ¯p exceeds the demand d, therefore the focal market
supply at price Ω−αpb
2−α
which is lower than ¯p also exceeds the demand d. Thus,
lim
i→∞f2i−1(pb;pb ≥¯p) + f2i(pb;pb ≥¯p) = 2
n
αpb
¯c pb + (d −αpb
¯c )Ω−αpb
2 −α
o
.
Taking derivatives to pb yields that the unconstrained optimal solution pb∗= Ω+bd
4
, which is
smaller than ¯p = Ω
2 because bd < Ωby our assumption. Therefore, the convexity indicates that
limi→∞f2i−1(pb;pb = ¯p) + f2i(pb;pb = ¯p) < limi→∞f2i−1(pb;pb > ¯p) + f2i(pb;pb > ¯p).
Case 2: pb < ¯p = Ω
2 . If pb ≤p0, then the contract is not eﬀective and the price alternates between
Ω−p0 and p0. If pb > p0, then once the low price in each cycle goes above pb, the contract will not
be eﬀective anymore, and thus the price alternates between two constant prices. To summarize,
in Case 2 the price will alternate. Suppose the price alternates between p2i−1 and p2i. Note that
p2i = Ω−p2i−1. We have
lim
i→∞f2i−1(pb;pb < ¯p) + f2i(pb;pb < ¯p)
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

30
=
(
p2i−1d + p2id = Ωd
if p2i−1 < Ω−bd,
p2i−1q2i−1 + pm(d −q2i−1) + p2id > p2i−1d + p2id = Ωd
otherwise.
Note that limi→∞f2i−1(pb;pb = ¯p) + f2i(pb;pb = ¯p) = 2d¯p = Ωd, so limi→∞f2i−1(pb;pb = ¯p) +
f2i(pb;pb = ¯p) ≤limi→∞f2i−1(pb;pb < ¯p) + f2i(pb;pb < ¯p).
Combining the above two cases, we conclude that pb∗= ¯p is an optimal solution to ﬁrm’s problem
(15) if b = ¯c.
□
Proof of Proposition 13.
Part (a): We will show the market price process alternates.
Observe that
pb −¯c = p2i′ + α2
α (¯p −p2i′) −¯c = ¯c2 −(1 −α)b2
αb2
p2i′ + ¯c(b −¯c)
αb2
−¯c
< ¯c2 −(1 −α)b2
αb2
¯c
¯c + bΩ+ ¯c(b −¯c)
αb2
−¯c = ¯c
 Ω
¯c + b −1

< 0,
and pb −p2i′ = α2
α (¯p −p2i′) > 0, so
p2i′+1 = Ω−αbF(pb) −(1 −α)bF(p2i′) = Ω−αb
¯cpb −(1 −α)b
¯cp2i′
= Ω−αb
¯c
n
p2i′ + α2
α (¯p −p2i′)
o
−(1 −α)b
¯cp2i′
= ¯p + b(1 −α2)
¯c
(¯p −p2i′).
One can check
p2i′+1 −pb = ¯p + b(1 −α2)
¯c
(¯p −p2i′) −p2i′ −α2
α (¯p −p2i′) =
 1 + b(1 −α2)
¯c
−α2
α

(¯p −p2i′) > 0,
where the last inequality holds because α > α2 and ¯p > p2i′. Moreover,
p2i′+1 −¯c = ¯p + b(1 −α2)
¯c
(¯p −p2i′) −¯c
≤¯p + b(1 −α2)
¯c
(¯p −Ω+ b) −¯c
[by p2i′ ≥Ω−b]
=
¯c
¯c + bΩ+ b ¯c2
b2
¯c2

¯c
¯c + bΩ−Ω+ b

−¯c
= 0
Hence, we have
p2i′+2 = Ω−b
¯cp2i′+1 = Ω−b
¯c
n
¯p + b(1 −α2)
¯c
(¯p −p2i′)
o
= p2i′.
This completes the proof of Part (a).
Part (b): We will show under some conditions, compared with the case pb = ¯p, the ﬁrm incurs a
lower cost but the farmers are worse oﬀ.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

31
Part (b)(i): We will show if p2i′ ≥¯p −¯p−¯cd
1−α2 , then the ﬁrm incurs a lower cost than that pb = ¯p in
the long run.
Note that p2i′+1 = ¯p + b(1−α2)
¯c
(¯p −p2i′) ≤¯p + b(1−α2)
¯c
(¯p −¯p + ¯p−¯cd
1−α2 ) = Ω−bd, indicating that the
supply in period 2i′ + 1 exceeds the demand d. Let f ′
t(pb) denote the ﬁrm’s procurement cost in
period t when pb = p2i′ + α2
α (¯p −p2i′). For any i ≥1, we have
f ′
2i−1(pb) + f ′
2i(pb) = αpb
¯c pb +

d −αpb
¯c

p2i−1 + dp2i < d(p2i−1 + p2i) = d

p2i−1 + Ω−b
¯cp2i−1

= d

Ω−(b
¯c −1)p2i−1

< d

Ω−(b
¯c −1)¯p

= 2d¯p = lim
i→∞f2i−1(pb;pb = ¯p) + f2i(pb;pb = ¯p).
Part (b)(ii): We will show the farmers are worse oﬀin both short and long run.
To diﬀerentiate the prices, we use ˜pt and pt to denote the price when pb = ¯p and pb = p2i′ +
α2
α (¯p −p2i′) respectively. We ﬁrst derive farmers’ welfare when pb = ¯p. According to the proof of
Lemma G.2, the market price when pb = ¯p is as follows,
˜p2i−1 = ¯p +
 (1 −α)b2
¯c2
i−1(˜p1 −¯p) and ˜p2i = Ω−b
¯c ˜p2i−1.
Hence, in the short run, as shown in Part 3(a) of the proof of Proposition 6, type-S farmers’ welfare
is as follows,
¯ws
i (c;pb = ¯p) =





¯p+˜p2i
2
−c
if c ≤¯p,
˜p2i−c
2
if ¯p < c ≤˜p2i−1,
0
if c > ˜p2i−1,
while type-N farmers’ welfare is as follows,
¯wn
i (c;pb = ¯p) =





˜p2i−1+˜p2i
2
−c
if c ≤˜p2i−2,
˜p2i−c
2
if ˜p2i−2 < c ≤˜p2i−1,
0
if c > ˜p2i−1.
In the long run, Proposition 7 gives both types of farmers’ welfare,
lim
i→∞¯ws
i (c;pb = ¯p) = lim
i→∞¯wn
i (c;pb = ¯p) =
(
¯p −c
if c ≤¯p,
0
if c > ¯p.
Next we derive the welfare when pb = p2i′ + α2
α (¯p−p2i′). Since Part (a) shows the price alternates
between p2i−1 and p2i, the welfare in the short run and in the long run will be the same. We have
¯ws
i (c;pb = p2i′ + α2
α (¯p −p2i′)) =





pb+p2i
2
−c
if c ≤pb,
p2i−c
2
if pb < c ≤p2i−1,
0
if c > p2i−1,
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

32
and
¯wn
i (c;pb = p2i′ + α2
α (¯p −p2i′)) =





p2i−1+p2i
2
−c
if c ≤p2i−2,
p2i−c
2
if p2i−2 < c ≤p2i−1,
0
if c > p2i−1.
Note that
p2i−2 < ˜p2i−2 < ¯p < ˜p2i−1 < p2i−1 and p2i < ˜p2i.
Note also that
pb = p2i′ + α2
α (¯p −p2i′) = α2
α ¯p +
 1 −α2
α

p2i′ < ¯p,
where the last inequality holds because α2 < α and p2i′ < ¯p. One can check for any c > p2i−2,
¯ws
i (c;pb = p2i′ + α2
α (¯p −p2i′)) ≤¯ws
i (c;pb = ¯p),
and
¯ws
i (c;pb = p2i′ + α2
α (¯p −p2i′)) ≤lim
i→∞¯ws
i (c;pb = ¯p),
¯wn
i (c;pb = p2i′ + α2
α (¯p −p2i′)) ≤¯wn
i (c;pb = ¯p),
and
¯wn
i (c;pb = p2i′ + α2
α (¯p −p2i′)) ≤lim
i→∞¯wn
i (c;pb = ¯p).
□
K.
Proof of Propositions 14 and 15
Before the proof of Proposition 14, we ﬁrst have the following preparations:
qA,n
t
= (1 −α)Pr(uA,n
t
≥uB,n
t
) = (1 −α)Pr(pA
t−1 −c ≥pB
t−1 −(¯c −c))
= (1 −α)Pr(c ≤pA
t−1 −pB
t−1 + ¯c
2
) = (1 −α)F(pA
t−1 −pB
t−1 + ¯c
2
),
qB,n
t
= (1 −α)[1 −F(pA
t−1 −pB
t−1 + ¯c
2
)],
qA,s
t
= αF(pA
t −pB
t + ¯c
2
),
qB,s
t
= α[1 −F(pA
t −pB
t + ¯c
2
)].
Thus,
pA
t = Ω−b(qA,n
t
+ qA,s
t
) = Ω−b(1 −α)F(pA
t−1 −pB
t−1 + ¯c
2
) −bαF(pA
t −pB
t + ¯c
2
),
(K.1)
pB
t = Ω−b(qA,n
t
+ qA,s
t
) = Ω−b + b(1 −α)F(pA
t−1 −pB
t−1 + ¯c
2
) + bαF(pA
t −pB
t + ¯c
2
),
(K.2)
pA
t −pB
t = b
n
1 −2(1 −α)F(pA
t−1 −pB
t−1 + ¯c
2
) −2αF(pA
t −pB
t + ¯c
2
)
o
.
(K.3)
Lemma K.1. Suppose Assumptions (1)-(3) hold and g(α) ≤1. Then |pA
t −pB
t | ≤¯c for any t ≥1.
Moreover, pA
t −pB
t = −g(α)(pA
t−1 −pB
t−1) for any t ≥2.
Proof of Lemma K.1.
Note that g(α) ≤1 is equivalent to b(1 −2α) ≤¯c. To show |pA
t −pB
t | ≤¯c,
we have three cases.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

33
Case 1: Suppose pA
t−1 −pB
t−1 > ¯c. Then (K.3) reduces to pA
t −pB
t = b{1 −2(1 −α) −2αF( pA
t −pB
t +¯c
2
)}.
If pA
t −pB
t > ¯c, then pA
t −pB
t = b{1 −2(1 −α) −2α} = −b < ¯c, which arrives a contradiction. If
pA
t −pB
t < −¯c, then pA
t −pB
t = b{1 −2(1 −α)} = −b(1 −2α) ≥−¯c, which arrives a contradiction.
Hence, it must be the case that |pA
t −pB
t | ≤¯c.
Case 2: Suppose pA
t−1 −pB
t−1 < −¯c. Then (K.3) reduces to pA
t −pB
t = b{1 −2αF( pA
t −pB
t +¯c
2
)}. If pA
t −
pB
t > ¯c, then pA
t −pB
t = b(1−2α) ≤¯c, which arrives a contradiction. If pA
t −pB
t < −¯c, then pA
t −pB
t =
b > −¯c, which arrives a contradiction. Hence, it must be the case that |pA
t −pB
t | ≤¯c.
Case 3: Suppose |pA
t−1 −pB
t−1| ≤¯c. Then (K.3) reduces to
pA
t −pB
t = b
n
1 −2(1 −α)pA
t−1 −pB
t−1 + ¯c
2¯c
−2αF(pA
t −pB
t + ¯c
2
)
o
.
(K.4)
If pA
t −pB
t > ¯c, then pA
t −pB
t = b{1 −2(1 −α)
pA
t−1−pB
t−1+¯c
2¯c
−2α} ≤b(1 −2α) ≤¯c, which arrives a
contradiction. If pA
t −pB
t < −¯c, then pA
t −pB
t = b{1 −2(1 −α)
pA
t−1−pB
t−1+¯c
2¯c
} ≥b{1 −2(1 −α)} =
−b(1 −2α) ≥−¯c, which arrives a contradiction. Hence, it must be the case that |pA
t −pB
t | ≤¯c.
This establishes that |pA
t −pB
t | ≤¯c for any t ≥1. Consequently, (K.4) holds for any t ≥2 and
reduces to pA
t −pB
t = −(1−α)b
¯c+αb (pA
t−1 −pB
t−1).
□
Lemma K.2. Suppose Assumptions (1)-(3) hold and g(α) > 1. Then there exists an i ≥0 such
that pA
i+2j −pB
i+2j < −¯c and pA
i+2j+1 −pB
i+2j+1 > ¯c for any j ≥0.
Proof of Lemma K.2.
We ﬁrst show there exists an i ≥0 such that |pA
i −pB
i | > ¯c. Suppose for
a contradiction that there does not exist such an i, that is, |pA
t −pB
t | ≤¯c for any t ≥1. Thus, (K.3)
can be reduced to pA
t −pB
t = −g(α)(pA
t−1 −pB
t−1). Hence,
|pA
t −pB
t | = g(α)|pA
t−1 −pB
t−1|.
(K.5)
Given g(α) > 1, by (K.5), there must exist an i ≥0 such that |pA
i −pB
i | > ¯c.
To end the proof, it suﬃces to show (i) If pA
t−1 −pB
t−1 > ¯c, then pA
t −pB
t < −¯c. (ii) If pA
t−1 −pB
t−1 <
−¯c, then pA
t −pB
t > ¯c.
We ﬁrst show Case (i). If pA
t−1 −pB
t−1 > ¯c, then (K.3) reduces to pA
t −pB
t = b{1 −2(1 −α) −
2αF( pA
t −pB
t +¯c
2
)}. If pA
t −pB
t > ¯c, then pA
t −pB
t = b{1 −2(1 −α) −2α} = −b < ¯c, which arrives a
contradiction. If |pA
t −pB
t | ≤¯c, then pA
t −pB
t = −g(α)(pA
t−1 −pB
t−1) < −g(α)¯c < −¯c, which arrives a
contradiction. Hence, it must be the case that pA
t −pB
t < −¯c. The proof of Case (ii) follows a similar
way.
□
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

34
Proof of Proposition 14.
Part (a): If g(α) > 1, then it follows Lemma K.2 that pA
t −pB
t does
not converge. If g(α) = 1, by Lemma K.1, we have pA
t −pB
t = −(pA
t−1 −pB
t−1), and hence, pA
t −pB
t
does not converge. Therefore, pA
t and pB
t do not converge.
Part (b): If g(α) < 1, then it follows Lemma K.1 that pA
t −pB
t = −g(α)(pA
t−1 −pB
t−1) =
[−g(α)]t−1(pA
1 −pB
1 ). By (K.1) and (K.2), we have
pA
t = Ω−b
2 −1
2[−g(α)]t−1(pA
1 −pB
1 )
pB
t = Ω−b
2 + 1
2[−g(α)]t−1(pA
1 −pB
1 )
and therefore,
lim
t→∞pA
t = lim
t→∞pB
t = Ω−b
2.
□
Before we prove Proposition 15, we ﬁrst derive some expressions and demonstrate one lemma.
The random yield quantity of two crops in period t are
QA,s
t
= γtˆqA,s
t
= γtαPr(uA,s
t
≥uB,s
t
) = γtαF(E[γtP A
t ] −E[γtP B
t ] + ¯c
2
),
QB,s
t
= γtˆqB,s
t
= γtαPr(uA,s
t
< uB,s
t
) = γtα[1 −F(E[γtP A
t ] −E[γtP B
t ] + ¯c
2
)],
QA,n
t
= γtˆqA,n
t
= γt(1 −α)Pr(uA,n
t
≥uB,n
t
) = γt(1 −α)F(P A
t−1 −P B
t−1 + ¯c
2
),
QB,n
t
= γtˆqB,n
t
= γt(1 −α)Pr(uA,n
t
< uB,n
t
) = γt(1 −α)[1 −F(P A
t−1 −P B
t−1 + ¯c
2
)].
The market clearing prices of Crops A and B are
P A
t = Ω−b(QA,s
t
+ QA,n
t
) = Ω−bαγtF(E[γtP A
t ] −E[γtP B
t ] + ¯c
2
) −b(1 −α)γtF(P A
t−1 −P B
t−1 + ¯c
2
),
(K.6)
P B
t = Ω−b(QB,s
t
+ QB,n
t
) = Ω−bαγt[1 −F(E[γtP A
t ] −E[γtP B
t ] + ¯c
2
)] −b(1 −α)γt[1 −F(P A
t−1 −P B
t−1 + ¯c
2
)].
(K.7)
Thus,
P A
t −P B
t = bαγt[1 −2F(E[γtP A
t ] −E[γtP B
t ] + ¯c
2
)] + b(1 −α)γt[1 −2F(P A
t−1 −P B
t−1 + ¯c
2
)],
(K.8)
P A
t γt −P B
t γt =

α[1 −2F(E[γtP A
t ] −E[γtP B
t ] + ¯c
2
)] + (1 −α)[1 −2F(P A
t−1 −P B
t−1 + ¯c
2
)]
 
bγ2
t ,
E[P A
t γt] −E[P B
t γt] =
n
α[1 −2F(E[γtP A
t ] −E[γtP B
t ] + ¯c
2
)] + (1 −α)[1 −2F(P A
t−1 −P B
t−1 + ¯c
2
)]
o
bE[γ2
t ].
(K.9)
Lemma K.3. Suppose Assumptions (1)-(3) hold. If b(1 −2α)E[γ2] ≤¯c, then
P A
t −P B
t =







−(1−α)bγt
¯c+αbE(γ2
t )(P A
t−1 −P B
t−1)
if |P A
t−1 −P B
t−1| ≤¯c,
−(1−α)bγt
¯c+αbE(γ2
t )¯c
if P A
t−1 −P B
t−1 > ¯c,
(1−α)bγt
¯c+αbE(γ2
t )¯c
if P A
t−1 −P B
t−1 < −¯c.
(K.10)
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

35
Proof of Lemma K.3.
To complete the proof, it is essential to derive the expression of E[γtP A
t ]−
E[γtP B
t ]. For the ease of exposition, let Y = E[γtP A
t ] −E[γtP B
t ]. We have three cases.
Case 1: Suppose |P A
t−1 −P B
t−1| ≤¯c.
By this supposition, (K.9) reduces to
Y =

−(1 −α)P A
t−1 −P B
t−1
¯c
+ α[1 −2F(Y + ¯c
2
)]
 
bE[γ2
t ].
(K.11)
If Y > ¯c, then by (K.11),
Y =

−(1 −α)P A
t−1 −P B
t−1
¯c
−α
 
bE[γ2
t ] ≤(1 −α −α)bE[γ2
t ] = (1 −2α)bE[γ2
t ] ≤¯c,
contradicting the assumption that Y > ¯c. The ﬁrst inequality above holds because P A
t−1 −P B
t−1 ≥−¯c.
If Y < −¯c, then by (K.11),
Y = [−(1 −α)P A
t−1 −P B
t−1
¯c
+ α]bE[γ2
t ] ≥[−(1 −α) + α]bE[γ2
t ] = −(1 −2α)bE[γ2
t ] ≥−¯c,
contradicting the assumption that Y < −¯c. The ﬁrst inequality above holds because P A
t−1 −P B
t−1 ≤¯c.
Hence, it must be the case that |Y | ≤¯c. Then by (K.11),
Y =

−(1 −α)P A
t−1 −P B
t−1
¯c
−αY
¯c
 
bE[γ2
t ]
Y = −(1 −α)bE[γ2
t ]
¯c + αbE[γ2
t ] (P A
t−1 −P B
t−1).
Plugging back into (K.8) yields
P A
t −P B
t = −(1 −α)bγt
¯c + αbE[γ2
t ](P A
t−1 −P B
t−1).
Case 2: Suppose P A
t−1 −P B
t−1 > ¯c.
By the supposition, (K.9) reduces to
Y =

−(1 −α) + α[1 −2F(Y + ¯c
2
)]
 
bE[γ2
t ].
(K.12)
If Y > ¯c, then Y = [−(1−α)−α]bE[γ2
t ] = −bE[γ2
t ] < ¯c, contradicting the assumption that Y > ¯c.
If Y < −¯c, then Y = [−(1 −α) + α]bE[γ2
t ] = −b(1 −2α)E[γ2
t ] ≥−¯c, contradicting the assumption
that Y < −¯c.
Hence, it must be the case that |Y | ≤¯c. Then by (K.12),
Y =

−(1 −α) −αY
¯c
 
bE[γ2
t ],
Y = −(1 −α)bE[γ2
t ]
¯c + bE[γ2
t ]
¯c.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

36
Plugging back into (K.8) yields
P A
t −P B
t = −(1 −α)bγt
¯c + αbE[γ2
t ]¯c.
Case 3: Suppose P A
t−1 −P B
t−1 < −¯c. Symmetric to Case 2.
□
Proof of Proposition 15.
Observing (K.6) and (K.7), in order to see whether P A
t
and P B
t
con-
verge, it is essential to study whether P A
t −P B
t converges. Hence, in each part we will ﬁrst analyze
the convergence of P A
t −P B
t , and then come back to the convergence of prices.
Part 1: We will show if I(α,γ) < 0, then the market prices converge in probability towards ¯P.
We ﬁrst prove the convergence of P A
t −P B
t
if I(α,γ) < 0. By (K.10), we have
|P A
t −P B
t | ≤(1 −α)bγt
¯c + αbE[γ2
t ] · (1 −α)bγt−1
¯c + αbE[γ2
t−1] ··· (1 −α)bγ1
¯c + αbE[γ2
1]|P A
0 −P B
0 |,
ln|P A
t −P B
t | ≤
t
X
i=1
ln (1 −α)bγi
¯c + αbE[γ2
i ] + ln|P A
0 −P B
0 |.
Doing the same operation to both sides of the above inequality, we obtain
ln|P A
t −P B
t | −ln|P A
0 −P B
0 | −tE[ln
(1−α)bγ
¯c+αbE[γ2]]
q
t · var[ln
(1−α)bγ
¯c+αbE[γ2]]
≤
Pt
i=1[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ] −E[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]]]
q
t · var[ln
(1−α)bγ
¯c+αbE[γ2]]
.
Note that the right hand side of the above inequality converges to the standard normal distribution
N(0,1) as t →∞, according to Central Limit Theorem. Thus,
lim
t→∞Pr(|P A
t −P B
t | ≥ϵ) = lim
t→∞Pr(ln|P A
t −P B
t | ≥lnϵ)
= lim
t→∞Pr(
ln|P A
t −P B
t | −ln|P A
0 −P B
0 | −tE[ln
(1−α)bγ
¯c+αbE[γ2]]
q
t · var[ln
(1−α)bγ
¯c+αbE[γ2]]
≥
lnϵ −ln|P A
0 −P B
0 | −tE[ln
(1−α)bγ
¯c+αbE[γ2]]
q
t · var[ln
(1−α)bγ
¯c+αbE[γ2]]
)
≤lim
t→∞Pr(
Pt
i=1[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ] −E[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]]]
q
t · var[ln
(1−α)bγ
¯c+αbE[γ2]]
≥
lnϵ −ln|P A
0 −P B
0 | −tE[ln
(1−α)bγ
¯c+αbE[γ2]]
q
t · var[ln
(1−α)bγ
¯c+αbE[γ2]]
)
=Pr(N(0,1) ≥∞) = 0,
where the second last equality holds because the left hand side above is a standard normal distri-
bution and in the right hand side E[ln
(1−α)bγ
¯c+αbE[γ2]] = I(α,γ) < 0.
Given P A
t
−P B
t
converges to 0 in probability, it follows immediately by (K.8) that
limt→∞Pr(|E[P A
t γt] −E[P B
t γt]| < ϵ) = 1.
Plugging
back
into
(K.6)
and
(K.7)
yields
limt→∞Pr(|P A
t −¯P| > ϵ) = limt→∞Pr(|P B
t −¯P| > ϵ) = 0.
Part 2: We will show the convergence if I(α,γ) = 0 and non-convergence if I(α,γ) > 0.
Part 2(a): We ﬁrst prove the convergence of P A
t −P B
t
if I(α,γ) = 0 and non-convergence if
I(α,γ) > 0.
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

37
Before analyzing P A
t −P B
t , we ﬁrst prepare some useful results about eP A
t −eP B
t
which is deﬁned
as follows,
eP A
t −eP B
t = −(1 −α)bγt
¯c + αbE[γ2
t ]( eP A
t−1 −eP B
t−1),
| eP A
0 −eP B
0 | ≤¯c.
We have
| eP A
t −eP B
t | = (1 −α)bγt
¯c + αbE[γ2
t ] · (1 −α)bγt−1
¯c + αbE[γ2
t−1] ... (1 −α)bγ1
¯c + αbE[γ2
1]| eP A
0 −eP B
0 |.
Thus,
ln| eP A
t −eP B
t | =
t
X
i=1
ln (1 −α)bγi
¯c + αbE[γ2
i ] + ln| eP A
0 −eP B
0 |.
Through some algebra, we get
ln| eP A
t −eP B
t | −ln| eP A
0 −eP B
0 | −tE[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]]
q
t · var[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]]
=
Pt
i=1[lnγi −E[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]]]
q
t · var[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]]
−→N(0,1).
Then we have
lim
t→∞Pr(| eP A
t −eP B
t | < ϵ) = lim
t→∞Pr(ln| eP A
t −eP B
t | < lnϵ)
= lim
t→∞Pr(
ln| eP A
t −eP B
t | −ln| eP A
0 −eP B
0 | −tE[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]]
q
t · var[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]]
<
lnϵ −ln| eP A
0 −eP B
0 | −tE[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]]
q
t · var[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]]
)
= lim
t→∞Pr(
Pt
i=1[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ] −E[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]]]
q
t · var[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]]
<
lnϵ −ln| eP A
0 −eP B
0 | −tE[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]]
q
t · var[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]]
)
= lim
t→∞Pr(
Pt
i=1[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ] −E[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]]]
q
t · var[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]]
< lnϵ −ln| eP A
0 −eP B
0 |
q
t · var[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]]
−
s
t
var[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]]
E[ln (1 −α)bγi
¯c + αbE[γ2
i ]]).
Hence,
lim
t→∞Pr(| eP A
t −eP B
t | < ϵ) =
(
Pr(N(0,1) < −∞) = 0 if E[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]] = I(α,γ) > 0,
Pr(N(0,1) < 0) = 1/2 if E[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]] = I(α,γ) = 0.
By the same process, we could show
lim
t→∞P(| eP A
t −eP B
t | > 1) =
(
1
if E[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]] = I(α,γ) > 0,
1/2 if E[ln (1−α)bγi
¯c+αbE[γ2
i ]] = I(α,γ) = 0.
Observing that P A
t −P B
t , within the range of [−1,1], follows a similar process as eP A
t −eP B
t . Once
P A
t −P B
t
jumps out of [−1,1], it nevertheless will be pulled back into [−1,1].
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477

38
If I(α,γ) > 0, then limt→∞Pr(| eP A
t −eP B
t | < ϵ) = 0 and limt→∞P(| eP A
t −eP B
t | > 1) = 1, implying
that even if P A
t −P B
t can be pulled back, the process will inevitably keep growing out of the range
[−1,1]. Thus, P A
t −P B
t
does not converge.
If I(α,γ) = 0, then limt→∞Pr(| eP A
t −eP B
t | < ϵ) = 1/2 and limt→∞P(| eP A
t −eP B
t | > 1) = 1/2, imply-
ing that the process P A
t −P B
t
within the range of [−1,1] will end up with two possible results:
one is out of the range of [−1,1] and the other is 0, each with half probability. Since the process
will be pulled back whenever it gets out of [−1,1] and each time there is 1/2 probability that
it will converge to 0 whenever it is in [−1,1], the process will eventually converge to 0. That is,
limt→∞Pr(|P A
t −P B
t | < ϵ) = 1 for any ϵ > 0.
Part 2(b): We analyze whether P A
t and P B
t
converge.
We have if I(α,γ) = 0, then the sequence P A
t −P B
t
will converge to 0. It now follows by (K.8)
that limt→∞Pr(|E[P A
t γt] −E[P B
t γt]| < ϵ) = 1. Plugging back into (K.6) and (K.7) yields
lim
t→∞Pr(|P A
t −¯P| > ϵ) = lim
t→∞Pr(|P B
t −¯P| > ϵ) = 0.
If I(α,γ) > 0, then P A
t −P B
t does not converge. Therefore, by (K.6) and (K.7) the prices (P A
t ,P B
t )
do not converge.
□
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2847477