TITLE: Digital Privacy
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2022.4513
---

LBS Research Online
I P Fainmesser, A Galeotti and R Momot
Digital Privacy
Article
This version is available in the LBS Research Online repository: https://lbsresearch.london.edu/
id/eprint/2555/
Fainmesser, I P, Galeotti, A and Momot, R
(2023)
Digital Privacy.
Management Science, 69 (6). pp. 3157-3173. ISSN 0025-1909
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2022.4513
INFORMS (Institute for Operations Research and Management Sciences)
https://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/10.1287/mnsc.20...
Users may download and/or print one copy of any article(s) in LBS Research Online for purposes of
research and/or private study. Further distribution of the material, or use for any commercial gain, is
not permitted.

Digital Privacyú
Itay P. Fainmesser†
Andrea Galeotti‡
Ruslan Momot§
First Draft: September 2019. This Draft: April 2022.
Abstract
We study the incentives of a digital business to collect and protect users’ data. The users’ data
the business collects improve the service it provides to consumers, but they may also be accessed,
at a cost, by strategic third parties in a way that harms users, imposing endogenous users’
privacy costs. We characterize how the revenue model of the business shapes its optimal data
strategy: collection and protection of users’ data. A business with a more data-driven revenue
model will collect more users’ data and provide more data protection than a similar business
that is more usage-driven. Consequently, if users have small direct beneﬁt from data collection,
then more usage-driven businesses generate larger consumer surplus than their more data-driven
counterparts (the reverse holds if users have large direct beneﬁt from data collection). Relative
to the socially desired data strategy, the business may over- or under-collect users’ data and may
over- or under-protect it. Restoring eﬃciency requires a two-pronged regulatory policy, covering
both data collection and data protection; one such policy combines a minimal data protection
requirement with a tax proportional to the amount of collected data. We ﬁnally show that
existing regulation in the US, which focuses only on data protection, may even harm consumer
surplus and overall welfare.
“The problem with data protection laws is that it
presumes the data collection was ok.”
Eduard Snowden, NSA whistleblower
September 19, 2019
úWe thank Susan Athey, Heski Bar-Issac, Otávio Bartalotti, Roland Bénabou, Devesh Raval, Douglas S. Smith,
Long Chen, and participants of talks and seminars at the Retreat on Networks, Information, and Social Economics
(RINSE); INFORMS; MSOM; London Business School; Paris School of Economics; Toulouse School of Economics;
Privacy Workshop at Princeton University; University of Pennsylvania; Tepper School of Business, Carnegie Mellon
University; Renmin University; Hong Kong Baptist University; Nanyang Technological University; Northwestern
University, Kellogg School of Management; Microsoft Research New York; Kelley School of Business, Indiana University;
David Eccles School of Business, the University of Utah; Rady School of Management, the University of California
San Diego; Luohan Academy; Virtual Finance Theory Seminar (VFTS), École Polytechnique CREST; and the Federal
Trade Commission for helpful comments and discussions. Andrea Galeotti gratefully acknowledges ﬁnancial support
from European Research Council through the ERC-consolidator grant (award no. 724356). Ruslan Momot gratefully
acknowledges ﬁnancial support from HEC Paris Foundation and a grant of the French National Research Agency
(ANR), “Investissements d’Avenir” (LabEx Ecodec/ANR-11-LABX-0047).
†The Johns Hopkins Carey Business School and The Department of Economics, The Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD 21202 (e-mail: itay_fainmesser@jhu.edu)
‡Department of Economics, London Business School, London, NW1 4SA, United Kingdom (e-mail: agale-
otti@london.edu)
§Operations Department, Kellogg School of Management, The Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208
(e-mail: ruslan.momot@kellogg.northwestern.edu)
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

1. Introduction
The growing social and economic activity conducted online – from sharing location data on Uber to
searching for medications or diagnoses on Google – generates extensive amounts of data. These
data are used to improve products and services oﬀered to consumers, but there are also undesirable
consequences. From ﬁrms like Cambridge Analytica using Facebook data to sway election outcomes
and manipulate public opinion to health insurance companies anticipating medical needs of potential
insurees based on undisclosed personal data – opportunities for user data exploitation are rife.1
These and other numerous privacy scandals and data breaches of recent years have further raised
consumer privacy concerns and data privacy has been singled out as one of the biggest challenges
faced by the digital economy.2 Governments responded with new data privacy laws and regulations,
which, as argued by many, are only partially eﬀective at best.3
This paper addresses four fundamental questions: (1) What are the trade-oﬀs that people face
when using online services? (2) What are the determinants of harmful use of users’ data? (3) What
are the incentives of digital businesses to collect and protect users’ data? and (4) What actions
should be taken by regulatory authorities in order to protect consumer privacy and maximize social
welfare?
We develop an economic model of the creation, collection, protection, and potential misuse of
users’ data (Section 2). We focus on activity data: information on users’ interactions with the
digital business’s services such as users’ posts, messages, clicks, etc.4 A digital business chooses a
data strategy which comprises a choice of data collection and data protection. The data collection
strategy speciﬁes the proportion of users’ activity that is collected, stored, and processed by the
business. Examples include the decision by Whatsapp to encrypt users’ text messages (thus reducing
the amount of information it collects) and Facebook’s practices (at least until August 2019) of
1A few articles that illustrate these undesirable consequences are “How Trump Consultants Exploited the Facebook
Data of Millions”, New York Times, 17 March 2018 (see also Papanastasiou 2020 and Candogan and Drakopoulos
2020),and “ ‘We’ve Been Breached’: Inside the Equifax Hack”, Wall Street Journal, 18 September 2017
2“Americans and Privacy: Concerned, Confused and Feeling Lack of Control Over Their Personal Information”,
Pew Research Center, 15 November 2019.
3“Edward Snowden Thinks Even The EU’s Sweeping Privacy Law Is Too Weak”, Forbes, 5 November 2019; “What
Does California’s New Data Privacy Law Mean? Nobody Agrees”, New York Times, 29 December 2019.
4Our results carry over to when registration data is considered. Such data may include the name, age, gender,
credit card number of the user, etc. For a discussion of data types collected by digital businesses see “How Businesses
Are Collecting Data (And What They’re Doing With It)”, Business News Daily, 17 June 2020. The formal analysis of
registration data is available in Online Appendix C.4.
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

transcribing users’ audio chats (thereby increasing the amount of accessible information it stores)
as well as of retaining information from deleted accounts.5 The data protection strategy speciﬁes a
costly investment that determines how diﬃcult it is for third parties to access stored data (e.g., see
De Cornière and Taylor 2020). Examples include investment in ﬁrewall enhancements, API updates,
and hiring ethical hackers who help the business in detecting and repairing vulnerabilities.
Users choose how much time to spend using the business’s services. The more active the users
are, the more data the business can collect about them. These collected data are then used by the
business to oﬀer higher quality service, which furnishes positive externalities to users. At the same
time, data collection raises users’ privacy concerns – negative externalities – the risk that users
perceive from their data being potentially accessed and misused by the third parties – hereafter
adversaries.
We explicitly model the strategic interaction between users and adversaries. Therefore, users’
demand for the business’s services and adversaries’ demand for users’ data are both endogenous.
This provides a natural economic deﬁnition of privacy costs and reveals a new channel of negative
network eﬀects – as average users’ activity increases, more information is collected and the platform
attracts more adversarial activity, decreasing both the total and marginal utility of each user from
using the business’s services. These data-driven negative network eﬀects make the implicit marginal
costs of data collection to the business increase in the total amount of data collected. To the best of
our knowledge, this is a novel feature in the literature on data privacy.
Another important feature of our framework is that we allow for diﬀerent revenue models of the
business. We postulate that the business’s proﬁt is an increasing function of users’ demand for service
and of the data collected by the business. At the one extreme, we have purely data-driven digital
businesses whose sole source of revenue stems from selling data or data-based services to third-parties.
Examples include weather apps, most of which are free and do not display advertisements, but
rather collect user location data and sell it to data aggregators such as Acxiom and Infogroup. At
the other extreme, we distinguish purely usage-driven businesses that collect users’ payments in the
form of subscription fees or commissions. Ride-hailing platforms Uber and Lyft, and many online
5See, for example, “WhatsApp Introduces End-to-End Encryption”, New York Times, 5 April 2016., and also
“Facebook Paid Contractors to Transcribe Users’ Audio Chats”, Bloomberg, 13 August 2019 and “OK, You’ve Deleted
Facebook, but Is Your Data Still Out There?”, CBS News, 23 March 2018.
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

dating services, are some of the numerous examples of such businesses. Between these two extremes,
lie ad-driven companies like Facebook and Google, whose main source of revenue is oﬀering targeted
advertisements and, therefore, they capitalize directly on the users’ information they collects. At
the same time, these businesses also attaches a direct value to user activity because they need users
to be active for them to view and click on the ads.6
We ﬁrst characterize, in Section 3, how diﬀerent data strategies shape users’ demand for the
business’s services and the adversaries’ demand for users’ data (Proposition 1). We show that,
as the business’s data collection strategy becomes more expansive, users’ activity ﬁrst increases
and then decreases. The resulting amount of users’ data that is actually collected by the business,
follows a similar pattern. Such non-monotonicity reﬂects the endogenous reaction of adversarial
activity to the change in the data collection strategy that, in turn, shapes users’ privacy costs.
When the data collection strategy is restricted, users’ privacy costs are low because only a handful
of adversaries are active. Hence, an increase in data collection improves the service to users at a
little privacy cost. As the business collects data on a larger fraction of users’ activity, adversaries’
activity also increases, thereby imposing larger privacy costs on users, who, in turn, reduce their
activity. With respect to the data protection strategy, we show that an increase in data protection
reduces adversarial activity and, therefore, lowers privacy costs and increases both average users’
activity and total users’ data collected.
Our second set of results, in Section 4, provides a characterization of the optimal business
data strategy (Theorem 1). We show that data-collection and data-protection are complementary
instruments in generating proﬁt for the business. This implies that, all else equal, a more data-driven
digital business sets higher levels of data collection and data protection. Consequently, if users have
small direct beneﬁt from data collection, then usage-driven businesses generate larger consumer
surplus than their more data-driven counterparts. The opposite is true if users’ direct beneﬁt from
data collection are signiﬁcant (Proposition 2)
Section 5 compares the business’s data strategy with the data strategy that maximizes social
welfare (a weighted sum of consumer surplus and the business’s proﬁt). Theorem 2 shows that
6The exact way that an advertisement-driven company weighs users’ activity vs. collected data may depend, among
other things, on the life cycle of the business: at the startup phase, the objective is, generally, to maximize activity as
this is the metric that allows raising capital through investors. As the platform matures, the weight is often shifted
towards monetizing collected data.
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

a business may, relative to the social optimal policy, over-collect and over-protect users’ data,
over-collect and under-protect, or under-collect and under-protect, depending on the parameters of
the model and, in particular, the business’s revenue model. To complement this result, our numerical
analysis shows that, typically, businesses with signiﬁcant usage-driven revenue components tend to
under-collect and under-protect users’ data, whereas businesses with revenue models that include
signiﬁcant data-driven components tend to over-collect users’ data and often also over-protect it.
There are three implications of this comparison. First, a data strategy policy must take into
considerations the underlying business model.
For example, a policy that regulates only one
dimension of the data strategy, say data protection, should incentivize data protection investments
for usage-driven businesses, and may need to disincentivize such investments for data-driven
businesses. Second, it is diﬃcult to restore eﬃciency with a regulation that focuses only on one
aspect of the data policy. For example, the practice of the US Federal Trade Commission (FTC),
which has a mandate to enforce a minimum level of data protection, is not suﬃcient to restore
eﬃciency.7 In fact, Proposition 3 shows that such regulations may even decrease consumer surplus
and overall welfare, especially when a business’s revenue model is intermediate, putting similar
weights on data and usage. Third, eﬃciency can be restored by a two-pronged regulatory policy
that combines a requirement of a minimum level of data protection together with either a liability
policy or a tax on stored data (Proposition 4). The challenge of implementing this policy is how to
measure data collection in order to properly calibrate the tax/liability rate.
We discuss broader policy implications in Section 6; Section 7 oﬀers a review of related literature
and provides concluding remarks. All proofs are given in Appendix A.
2. Model
A digital business (it) chooses a data strategy that speciﬁes: a) what proportion of users’ activity the
business records and stores – a data collection strategy, and b) a costly investment in data protection
– a data protection strategy.8 Each user (she) decides how much to use the services provided by
7 See, for example, the case of FTC vs D-Link: “D-Link agrees to 10 years of security audits to settle FTC case”,
The Verge, 4 Jul 2019; https://www.ftc.gov/enforcement/cases-proceedings/132-3157/d-link.
8We focus on a monopolistic digital business. However, we note that even if the business is not in direct competition
with other platforms it still faces pressures in choosing a data policy that provides users suﬃcient value for them to
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

the business – her activity level. By analyzing the stored users’ activity data, the business learns
about relevant users’ characteristics and provides higher quality services to them. Third parties
(henceforth, adversaries) can, at a cost that is increasing in the business’s data protection investment,
attempt to access and use the data for purposes that are not in line with users’ preferences. Thus,
if successful, an adversary (he) can harm users. We next introduce formally these elements.
2.1. Users
There is a unit mass of users of a digital business. Each user i chooses activity level ai œ R+, which
can be thought of as the amount of time that the user spends using the business’s services. A
proportion › œ [0, 1] of each user’s activity is recorded and stored by the business, and therefore,
ai› is the total amount of stored data on user i’s activity (here, › is the business’s data collection
strategy, to be speciﬁed in Section 2.3). Denote by ¯a =
s
j aj dj, the average user activity. We
assume that users are homogeneous, and that the utility of user i is as follows:9
Ui(ai, ¯a) =
ai ≠1
2a2
i
¸
˚˙
˝
standalone beneﬁt and cost
+
—ai¯a
¸ ˚˙ ˝
network eﬀects
+
(ﬂ≠Ê)f(ai›).
¸
˚˙
˝
positive and negative information externalities
The ﬁrst term summarizes user i’s standalone beneﬁts and costs of using the service. The second
term introduces classical positive network eﬀects that are parameterized by — œ [0, 1).10 The
last term captures positive and negative information externalities imposed on user i due to user’s
proﬁling by the business and third parties. Informally, the data collected on user’s activity, ai›,
allow an entity in possession of these data to learn with probability f(ai›) some of user i’s traits.
Upon learning the user’s traits, the business can oﬀer her better services, as captured by the positive
externalities ﬂf(ai›), where ﬂœ [0, 1). However, proﬁling by individuals, ﬁrms, and governments
who exploit users’ data and pursue goals that are in conﬂict with users’ preferences, imposes negative
externalities on the user. These are captured by ≠Êf(ai›), where Ê Ø 0 is the expected number of
engage with the services oﬀered by the business. Adding multiple digital businesses competing for users’ attention
would allow to understand how competitive forces may discipline further the choice of the data policy and alleviate
ineﬃciencies.
9In Online Appendix C.1 we extend the analysis to allow for multiple dimensions of users’ heterogeneity. Furthermore,
the linear-quadratic speciﬁcation of users’ preferences allows us to derive closed-form solutions, but the qualitative
results generalize beyond this speciﬁcation; see the formal discussion in Online Appendix C.2.
10The speciﬁcation of network eﬀects is widely used in network economics literature (see, e.g., Bloch and Quérou
2013, Candogan et al. 2012, Fainmesser and Galeotti 2016, to name a few). The assumption that — < 1 guarantees
that there is a unique activity level in equilibrium.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

such adversarial activities and we refer to it as the demand for user information from adversaries;
we explain how it is derived in Section 2.2. In Online Appendix C.3 we provide a formal example of
proﬁling.11
Remark 1 Some digital businesses collect data about users primarily during registration. These
data often include demographic and ﬁnancial information (e.g., age, address, credit card details). In
this case, when it comes to privacy concerns, the most important choice faced by users is whether
to register to the service. That is, users’ choices, instead of reﬂecting engagement, are discrete:
users decide whether to register or not on the platform. The business, in turn, can determine what
information is required to complete registration to the service (the parameter ›). For example, the
business may require storing credit card information on ﬁle, which will facilitate seamless future
transactions and be beneﬁcial for consumers. However, storing credit card information may also
introduce concerns of credit card fraud by third party adversaries. In Online Appendix C.4 we
re-formulate the model and show that all of our results carry over to these settings with no change.
To simplify our presentation and obtain closed-form solutions, we assume for the remainder of
the paper that f(ai›) = ai› and therefore user i’s utility becomes:
Ui(ai, ¯a) = ai ≠1
2a2
i + —ai¯a + (ﬂ≠Ê)ai›.
(1)
2.2. Adversaries
There is a large number M of potential adversaries, who are heterogeneous in their cost to access
information collected by the digital business. This heterogeneity is captured by the parameter “,
which is drawn for each adversary from a uniform distribution over [0, M] (see Online Appendix C.2
for a generalization to non-uniform distributions). An adversary observes his own “ and chooses
whether to be active (action 1) or not (action 0). The gain to an inactive adversary is his outside
option, which we normalize to zero (ﬁ(0|“) = 0). An active adversary with characteristic “ incurs a
11Information is modeled as a one-dimensional variable, which means that the information about users that is
valuable to the business is the same as the one that is valuable to the adversaries. This assumption is partly justiﬁed by
the correlation across information types that are exploited by AI. However, by taking into account the multidimensional
structure of information, one could explore how diﬀerent businesses may choose to collect diﬀerent attributes and
to what extent it is possible for the business to collect data without attracting adversarial actions. This question is
related to the ﬁeld of diﬀerential privacy and additional research in computer science, operations research, and related
ﬁelds.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

ﬁxed cost “C to access the data collected by the business on all users and gains ¯a›. C describes
how well data are protected against misuse by third parties and it is a choice of the business. The
total payoﬀexpected by an active adversary with “ is then:12
ﬁ(1|“) = ¯a› ≠“C.
To simplify the presentation of the results, we let M æ Œ. This assumption does not have an eﬀect
on our qualitative insights, and the only role it plays is to ensure that the number of adversaries
who are active and the number of those who are inactive, are both strictly positive.
2.3. The Digital Business
The digital business chooses a data strategy that consists of:
(a) A data collection strategy: a proportion › œ [0, 1] of each user i’s activity ai that is collected,
stored, and processed by the business;
(b) A data protection strategy: a protection level C Ø 0 at a cost ÂC for some Â Ø 0.
The objective of the business is a function which is increasing in users’ activity, ¯a, and in the
amount of users’ activity that the business records – collected data, ›¯a. Where not stated otherwise,
we focus on a linear proﬁt function that takes the following form:
Π(›, C) = (1 ≠P) · ¯a + P · ›¯a ≠ÂC
(2)
where P œ [0, 1]. That is, 1 ≠P is the additional proﬁt to the business from a marginal increase
in users’ activity, ceteris-paribus, and P is the additional proﬁt to the business from a marginal
increase in data collected by the business. In that sense, 1 ≠P and P are, respectively, the “prices”
that the business extracts for each unit of user activity and for each unit of user data collected,
respectively.
A purely data-driven business’s sole source of revenue is the sale of data or data-based services
to third parties. For such businesses, P = 1. A purely usage-driven business’s source of revenue are
the payments made by users in the form of subscription fees or commissions. For such businesses,
12Another interpretation of this model of the adversary is that there is a mass of adversaries, who upon gaining
access to the digital business’s data, attack one user chosen uniformly at random.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

P = 0. Between these two extremes, we have advertisement-driven companies, like Facebook and
Google, who capitalize directly on users’ data that they collect by selling ads, but that also attach a
direct value to users’ activity, since users have to be active to view and click on the ads.
Remark 2 The linear formulation of the business’s proﬁt function is chosen for analytical tractabil-
ity and allows us to develop clear intuitions. However, our main results extend to a model in which
the business’s proﬁt function is much more general and takes the following form:
Π(›, C) = Φ(¯a, ›¯a) ≠K(C).
The analysis for this formulation imposes standard smoothness/concavity/convexity assumptions on
the function Φ(·, ·) and has the linear case as a special case; the details are available in Appendix C.5.
2.4. Timeline and Equilibrium Concept
We consider the following sequential game. In the ﬁrst stage, the digital business chooses its data
strategy and the choice is observed by users and adversaries. Then, users choose their activity
levels and, simultaneously, adversaries decide whether or not to be active.13
The strategy of
a digital business is its data strategy: › œ [0, 1] and C œ R+. User i’s strategy is a function
ai : [0, 1] ◊R+ æ R+ that speciﬁes user i’s activity for every possible data strategy, (›, C). The
strategy of an adversary is a function vj : [0, M] ◊[0, 1] ◊R+ æ {0, 1} that speciﬁes, for every
possible “ œ [0, M] and data strategy (›, C) whether adversary j is active and attempts to access
the business’s database. We use a and v to denote the strategy proﬁles of users and adversaries
respectively. We focus on perfect Bayesian equilibria of the game: a data strategy choice (›ú, Cú)
and a strategy proﬁle (aú, vú) such that: (a) the digital business maximizes its proﬁt given (aú, vú);
and (b) for every › and C, (aú, vú) is a Bayesian equilibrium in the ensuing subgame.14
13The assumption that users know the data strategy of the digital business can be easily relaxed. We clarify this in
Section 6.1 where we discuss policies that attempt to increase users’ awareness like the EU’s GDPR regulation.
14In each subgame, users and adversaries have a common prior that “ is uniformly distributed between 0 and M.
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

3. The Users-Adversaries Game
Our ﬁrst result clariﬁes how the equilibrium users’ and adversaries’ activities depend on the business
data strategy.
Proposition 1 Fix the business’s data strategy (›, C). The ensuing subgame has a unique equilib-
rium in which users’ and adversaries’ activities are:
¯aú(›, C) =
C(1 + ﬂ›)
C(1 ≠—) + ›2
and
Êú(›, C) = ›¯aú(›, C)
C
,
(3)
and the resulting consumer surplus is:
CS(›, C) = 1
2¯aú(›, C)2.
(4)
Furthermore, equilibrium users’ activity, ¯aú(›, C) and users’ data collected, ›¯aú(›, C) both: (a)
Increase in data protection C; (b) First increase and then decrease in data collection ›.15
Activity and Information
Average Activity, 
Average Information Collected, 
1
0
Fraction of Information Collected, ⇠ 
¯a⇤(⇠, C)
¯a⇤(⇠, C)
⇠¯a⇤(⇠, C)
⇠¯a⇤(⇠, C)
¯⇠(C)
⇠(C)
Figure 1: Users’ activity ¯aú(›, C) and data collected ›¯aú(›, C) as a function of data collection ›.
An increase in data protection decreases the adversaries’ demand for stored data, thereby
decreasing users’ privacy concerns. This, in turn, increases users’ activity in the business. More
subtle is the eﬀect of a change in the data collection strategy on users’ activity and information
collected; this is illustrated in Figure 1. By collecting larger proportions of users’ data (increasing
›), the digital business creates new beneﬁts for users since it can then oﬀer tailored services based
15In particular, there exist 0 Æ ›(C) Æ ¯›(C) such that (i) ¯aú(›, C) increases with › for › œ [0, ›(C)] and decreases
otherwise; (ii) ›¯aú(›, C) increases with › for › œ [0, ¯›(C)] and decreases otherwise.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

on users’ information. Consequently, users’ demand for the business’s service increases. At the
same time, increasing › also boosts adversaries’ demand for information. This creates a negative
externality on users’ participation and oﬀsets the increase in users’ demand for the business. Which
eﬀect dominates depends on the level of ›.
Adversaries impose small costs on users when › is small and, therefore, an increase in › will
increase users’ activity. With increasing › further, the stored dataset becomes more valuable to
adversaries and thus they have more to gain from the attack; this leads to further increase not only
in adversaries’ demand for users’ data but also in the loss that users suﬀer from each adversarial
action. At some point, these negative eﬀects outweigh the beneﬁts to users from their information
being used for tailored services. When this happens, users’ average activity starts declining in ›.
Even though users’ average activity declines in › for every › > ›(C), total information collected
by the business keeps increasing when › œ [›(C), ¯›(C)]. In this region, negative externalities imposed
by adversaries on users are suﬃciently signiﬁcant to lead to a decrease in usage, but not severe
enough to make this decrease large. It is only when › > ¯›(C) that any additional increase in ›
leads to a decrease in users’ activity that is steep enough to reduce total information collected,
notwithstanding an increase in the fraction of information stored.
4. Data Strategy
We characterize the business’s strategy, and show that a more data-driven business will collect
a higher fraction of the data generated by users’ activity and, at the same time, provide more
data protection. How this increase in data collection and data protection shapes consumer surplus
depends on the direct beneﬁt to consumer from data collection.
Theorem 1 The digital business’s data collection, ›ı and data protection, Cı are:
›ı = max
Ó
0, min
Ó
1,
1
2Pﬂ
1
≠(1 ≠P)ﬂ≠P + |P ≠(1 ≠P)ﬂ| ·
Û
Â
max{0, Â ≠Pﬂ}
2ÔÔ
,
(5)
Cı =
›ı
1 ≠— ·
1
≠›ı +
Û
1
Â(1 + ﬂ›ı)(1 ≠P(1 ≠›ı))
2
.
(6)
All else equal, a more data-driven digital business (i.e., higher P) sets weakly higher levels of data
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

collection, ›ı and data protection, Cı.
Figure 2 illustrates how equilibrium data collection and protection change with the business’s
revenue model. That a more data-driven business collects a larger fraction of the data generated by
users is intuitive. More subtle is the intuition for the diﬀerence in data protection. As a business
collects more data, it attracts more adversarial activity, and, as a result, is required to protect the
data more to prevent a signiﬁcant decrease in users’ activity. In other words, the digital business’s
data collection and data protection strategies are complements, as captured by the positive cross
partial derivative of the business’s proﬁt function with respect to › and C at the equilibrium strategy.
This complementarity between data collection and data protection is robust to a more general
speciﬁcation of the business objective (see Proposition 6 in Online Appendix C.5) and it leads to
many interesting economic insights, as we elaborate in the next sections.
Data Colelction, 
Business’s Revenue Model, P
0
0
a)
b)
Data Protection, 
Business’s Revenue Model, P
1
⇠
C
Figure 2: Equilibrium data collection and data protection strategies as a function of the business’s
revenue model, P (higher P implies a more data-driven business model).
4.1. Consumer Surplus
We next show that depending on the direct beneﬁts to consumers from data collection, consumers
may be better or worse oﬀfrom the business having a more data-driven revenue model.
Proposition 2 If P < ﬂ/(1+ﬂ), then a more data-driven digital business (i.e., higher P) generates
weakly higher consumer surplus, CS(›ı, Cı). Otherwise, CS(›ı, Cı) weakly decreases with P.
Proposition 2 tells us that there is a best revenue model from users’ prospective, that is, consumer
surplus is the highest when the business’s revenue model is set at an intermediate level P = ﬂ/(1+ﬂ).
To understand the intuition behind the result, we ﬁrst note that consumer surplus is proportional
to the square of the average users’ activity level. Hence businesses that lead to high consumer
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

surplus are those who choose a data policy that generates a lot of users’ activity. Second, as we
move on the spectrum from usage- to data-driven revenue models, both data protection and data
collection increase (see Theorem 1). This generates two conﬂicting eﬀects. On the one hand, for
a given data protection level, the increase in data collection leads to a decrease in users’ activity.
On the other hand, for a given data collection level, the increase in data protection increases users’
activity. Which eﬀect dominates depends on the the revenue model, P and on the direct utility
users have from data collection, ﬂ. When ﬂis small, average activity is very sensitive to changes in
data collection. This implies that for a large range of values of P, a shift towards a more data-driven
revenue model has an overall negative eﬀect on average activity and subsequently on consumer
surplus. The opposite intuition holds when ﬂis large.
5. Socially Optimal Strategies and Regulatory Policy
In this section we compare the business’s choice of data strategy with the choice of a benevolent
social planner. This highlights the sources of ineﬃciencies in data collection and data protection,
and allows us to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of existing regulations and to propose
eﬃcient regulations. The social planner chooses a data strategy to maximize the weighted average of
consumer surplus and the business’s proﬁt. Hence, the planner’s prescribed data strategy, ›W , CW
(here the superscript W stands for welfare) solves the following problem:
(›W , CW ) = arg max
›œ[0,1]
CØ0
–CS(›, C) + (1 ≠–)Π(›, C),
(7)
where – œ [0, 1]. Note that the business’s data strategy given by (›ı, Cı) is the solution to problem 7
under the special case of – = 0.
Theorem 2 Relative to the socially optimal strategy, the equilibrium data strategy of a purely
usage-driven business (P = 0) prescribes under-collection and under-protection of users’ data, i.e.,
›ı Æ ›W and Cı Æ CW . The equilibrium data strategy of a business with any data-driven component
in its revenue model (P > 0) never prescribes under-collection and over-protection of users’ data
i.e., it is never the case that ›ı Æ ›W and Cı Ø CW with at least one of the inequalities being strict.
Any other direction in which the optimal business’s data strategy deviates from the socially optimal
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

strategy is the outcome for some speciﬁcation of the business’s revenue model and values of other
model parameters.
Theorem 2 implies that while the business never simultaneously under-collects and over-protects
users’ data (as compared to the socially optimal strategy), any of the following relationships between
the business’s data strategy and the socially optimal strategy is possible:
1. over-collection & over-protection: ›ı > ›W and Cı > CW ;
2. over-collection & under-protection: ›ı Ø ›W and Cı Æ CW ;
3. under-collection & under-protection: ›ı < ›W and Cı < CW .
We obtain more deﬁnite characterizations for special cases.16
But we were not able to do so
generally. We can however rely on numerical analysis to get a better picture of how the business’s
revenue model, P, and the direct beneﬁt for consumers from data-collection, ﬂ, jointly determine the
misalignment between the socially optimal and the business’s data strategies. Figure 4 summarizes
this numerical analysis.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Business’s Revenue Model, P
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
A. socially optimal prot. & coll.
(no data prot. and coll.)
B. under-prot.
under-coll.
D. under-prot.
socially optimal coll.
C. over-prot.
over-coll.
E. 
under-prot.
over-coll.
User’s Marginal 
Value of Data, ⇢
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Business’s Revenue Model, P
A.
B.
D.
C.
E.
a)
b)
Figure 3: Regions of ineﬃciencies in the business’s data strategy relative to the socially optimal
strategy, as a function of the business’s revenue model, P, and users’ marginal value of data, ﬂ. The
numerical example is generated with the following parameters: – = 0.5, — = 0 and (a) Â = 0.35; (b)
Â = 0.1.
When the business is suﬃciently usage-driven and when the value of data to users is low (region
A in Figure 4) the beneﬁts from data collection are too low to justify the cost of data protection,
both from the business’s and the socially optimal perspective. In that case, the business collects no
data and this is eﬃcient. There are then three main regions.
16For example, if users do not receive beneﬁt from data collection (i.e., if ﬂ= 0), then the equilibrium data strategy
always prescribes over-collection of users’ data (i.e., ›ı Ø ›W ), see appendix C.6.
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

When the business is suﬃciently usage-driven and the value of data to users is suﬃciently high
(region B), the business under-protects the information relative to the socially optimal and, because
of the complementary in the business’s data strategy, it also under-collects data. The reverse occurs
in region C where the business is suﬃciently data-driven and the value of data to users is low. In
this case the platform over-collects data, and, to keep users active, it also over-protects the data.
In region D the value of users’ data is high enough for both the social planner and the business
to optimally collect all available information. Yet, despite the eﬃcient data collection, the digital
business under-protects the data.
These four regions are the typical regions that we have observed through numerical analysis.
The shaded region E in Figure 4 illustrates that there is another possibility, which is less prevalent.
This is when the business revenue model is suﬃciently data-driven and the users’ value of data is
moderate. In this case the platform over-collects and under-protects relative to the planner. We
stress that the intricacies of the possible misalignment of social and business incentives illustrated in
Theorem 2 and Figure 4 result from the fact that the data policy is multi-dimensional: it prescribes
both collection and protection of data.17 An important implication of these results is that regulation
that aims at reconciling the private incentives of a business with the social planner’s objective must
regulate both components of the data strategy, i.e., both data protection and data collection. We
expand on this point in the next two sections.
5.1. Existing Regulations
The US Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has a mandate to enforce a minimal level of data
protection.18 In our model, such requirement maps into guaranteeing a level of data protection
C not lower than a certain threshold. We now show that a minimal data protection requirement
is insuﬃcient to achieve social eﬃciency and it may, in fact, decrease consumer surplus, proﬁts,
and overall welfare. In particular, we show that whether a minimal data protection requirement is
beneﬁcial to consumers depends on the business’s revenue model, P, the direct beneﬁt to consumers
17Indeed, when either data-collection or data-protection are held ﬁxed we get straightforward results and these are
available in Proposition 5 in appendix C.5.
18For instance, in recent settlements with Zoom and D-Link, FTC required these companies to enhance their data
protection: “FTC Requires Zoom to Enhance its Security Practices as Part of Settlement”, 9 November 2020, https:
//www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-releases/2020/11/ftc-requires-zoom-enhance-its-security-practices-part-settlement, and
“D-Link Agrees to Make Security Enhancements to Settle FTC Litigation”, 2 July 2019, https://www.ftc.gov/
news-events/press-releases/2019/07/d-link-agrees-make-security-enhancements-settle-ftc-litigation.
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

from data collection, ﬂ, and the cost of data protection, Â.
Consider a regulatory imposed minimal data protection level Cmin such that the business is
obligated to choose a protection level C > Cmin. We focus on the relevant case for which the
regulation is binding with respect to the business’s incentives for data protection investment (i.e.,
Cmin Ø Cı). The next proposition shows that even when Cmin is only slightly larger than Cı, it
may lead to a decrease in consumer surplus. Because regulations that impose a minimum level of
data protection always reduced the business’s proﬁts, we get that whenever the regulation reduces
consumer surplus it also reduces total welfare.
Proposition 3 Consider a regulation that imposes a minimum level of data protection Cmin.
Then, there exists ˆC > Cı such that for all Cmin œ (Cı, ˆC) consumer surplus decreases as com-
pared to when no regulation is imposed if and only if the business is moderately data-driven (i.e.,
P œ [
ﬂ
1+ﬂ, 2Ô
Â(1+ﬂ)≠ﬂ
1+ﬂ
]) .19
0.8
0
0
1.0
2
 (1 + ⇢) −⇢
1 + ⇢
CS decreases 
when Cmin 2 (C , ˆC)
⇢
Business’s Revenue Model, P
User’s Marginal Value of Data, 
⇢
1 + ⇢
Figure 4: Introduction of minimal data protection regulation hurts consumer surplus in the shaded
area when Cmin is moderate. Here, Â = 0.1.
As our discussion surrounding Theorem 2 suggests, if a business is mostly usage-driven, it is
likely to be under-protecting and under-collecting user data. In this case, forcing the business to
increase it’s protection level means that the business will also collect more data and, in this case,
this increases consumer surplus. On the other hand, if a business is heavily data-driven, it is likely
to be already collecting all (or almost all) of the data generated by users’ activity. In this case,
forcing the business to provide additional protection will not come at the cost of an increase in data
collection. In between these extremes, the business may already be over-collecting users’ data and
19The interval [
ﬂ
1+ﬂ,
2Ô
Â(1+ﬂ)≠ﬂ
1+ﬂ
] is non-empty if and only if the direct beneﬁt for consumers from data collection is
small and the cost of data protection is large (i.e., Â > ﬂ2/(1 + ﬂ))
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

any regulation that forces the business to provide more data protection will lead to an undesirable
increase in data collection. Whether the latter overwhelms the beneﬁts of the added protection
depends on the cost of data protection and the direct beneﬁts to users from data collection.
5.2. Optimal Regulation
In this section, we show that to achieve the socially optimal outcome regulatory authorities could
supplement the minimal level of data protection requirement with either (i) liability ﬁnes proportional
to the damage inﬂicted on users by adversarial activity or (ii) a tax on data collected. Our prescribed
policies are not unique, and, as such, could be substituted with alternative policies, as long as such
policies address both the data collection and the data protection aspects of the business’s data
strategy. We discuss some alternative policies below. Formally,
Deﬁnition 1 Let Di(›, C) = ai›Êú(›, C) be the damage to user i that is caused by adversarial
activity; denote by D(›, C) =
s
i Di(›, C)di the average user’s damage. A liability policy is a ﬁne
¸ ◊D on the business in the event that users suﬀer average damage of D.
Deﬁnition 2 A data collection tax policy imposes a tax rate t on the business for each unit of
users’ data collected. The expected amount of tax that the business pays is therefore t ◊›¯aú(›, C)
Remark 3 In our model the amount of data collected, ›¯aú(›, C), enters directly into the users’
utility function, adversaries’ payoﬀfunction, and the business’s proﬁt function. That is, data
"quantity" is measured by the usability of the information contained within the data rather than by
physical measures related to the data itself (such as server storage units). Getting the measurement
right may be important, because distortion in taxation may aﬀect the business’s incentives to collect
one type of data versus another.
The next proposition characterizes a simple two-pronged policy that restores eﬃciency regardless
of the business’s revenue model. Let r(›, C) = ≠1
› ◊d(›¯aú(›,C))
d›
O d(¯aú(›,C))
d›
be the ratio between the
elasticity of the total amount of user’s data collected, ›¯aú(›, C) with respect to the data collection
strategy › and the elasticity of users’ activity, ¯aú(›, C) with respect to ›. At › = ›(C) this ratio of
elasticities is equal to +Œ, it then decreases in › and it equals zero at › = ¯›(C).
Proposition 4 The following two-pronged policy induces an equilibrium in which the business
chooses the socially optimal data collection and data protection strategies:
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

a) a required minimum level of data protection Cmin = CW (where CW is the socially-optimal
data protection level) combined with either
b1) a liability ﬁne proportional to the expected damage from adversarial activity with the rate
¸ı =
–
1 ≠–
CW
2r(›W , CW )(›W )2
(8)
b2) or a data collection tax policy with a tax rate
tı =
–
1 ≠–
¯aú(›W , CW )
r(›W , CW )›W ,
(9)
Furthermore, if a business is purely usage-driven (i.e., if P = 0), then imposing only a minimum
level of data protection requirement is suﬃcient.
Intuitively, imposing a liability ﬁne or a tax on information collected guarantees that the socially-
optimal data collection level ›W coincides with the business’s optimal choice of data collection under
socially-optimal data protection level CW . At the same time, by reducing the level of data collection,
a liability ﬁne or data tax also eliminate any incentive the business may have to over-protect the
data. A minimal protection level is then suﬃcient to guarantee that the business protects the
collected data appropriately from a welfare standpoint.
To establish the liability rate that leads to eﬃcient data collection, note that under an arbitrary
liability policy ¸ and an arbitrary data collection strategy ›, the average ﬁne that the business
expects to pay is
F(›, C, ¸) = ¸ ◊D(›, C) = ¸ ◊Êú(›, C) ◊›¯aú(›, C) = ¸
C [›¯aú(›, C)]2,
where the third equality follows by noticing that, from Proposition 1, Êú(›) = ›¯aú(›, C)/C. Hence,
the objective function of the business becomes
Π(›, C, ¸) = (1 ≠P)¯aú(›, C) + P›¯aú(›, C) ≠F(›, C, ¸) ≠ÂC.
The ﬁne F(›, C, ¸) is an increasing function of total information collected, and therefore it reduces
the beneﬁt that the business obtains by capitalizing on the information. The magnitude of the
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

reduction increases with the level of ¸. Because it is exactly the direct capitalization on user data
that drives the over-collection of information by the business in the ﬁrst place, the introduction of
such policy, if rightly calibrated, eliminates the misalignment with the social objective.
In practice, despite the FTC’s mandate to enforce a minimal level of data protection, the vast
majority of the FTC’s actions against ﬁrms come in response to documented data breaches. Once
such breaches have been exposed and veriﬁed, the FTC imposes heavy ﬁnes on the businesses
involved. Our analysis suggests that the FTC’s practice of imposing ﬁnes on businesses based on
the documented data breaches has the potential to be welfare enhancing if calibrated correctly. We
do note, however, that imposing liability ﬁnes requires a litigation process to establish and quantify
damages. An alternative policy that takes a more legislative and bureaucratic path is imposing a
tax on collected user information. The tax rate that aligns the incentive of the business with the
regulator’s incentives, is derived in a similar way of the liability rate. Alternative policies, such as
regulating directly the amount of data collected, subsidies for investment in data protection, etc.,
may also replace some of the suggested policies. The important practical lesson is that both aspects
of the data strategy need to be regulated in a way that acknowledges their interdependence. Whether
a tax, liability ﬁnes, or alternative policies are recommended depends on feasibility constraints, both
technological and political. For example, whether it is easier to measure damages or data collection.
6. Broader Policy Implications
We conclude by discussing broad policy issues that our framework sheds light on.20
6.1. Awareness of users about the data policy
We have assumed that users know the data collection strategy of the digital business, which captures
the common practice where users accept terms and conditions when opening an account in a digital
business. However, in reality, some users may not read those terms. This could be because they
have no privacy concerns or because they lack awareness and do not internalize the privacy costs.
The model can easily accommodate heterogeneity across users in their sophistication or awareness
20In addition to the discussion below, Online Appendix C.9 discusses how the endogenous reactions of users aﬀect the
welfare costs of adversarial activities, and Online Appendix C.10 discusses how our model can address the implications
of harmful ads.
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

levels and the qualitative results do not change. In fact, in our model, the reaction of users to the
data policy disciplines, to some extent, the incentive of the platform to collect too much information
and to protect it too little. Less sophisticated users will not react to the business’s data policy,
which implies that the presence of such users makes the business’s incentives even less aligned with
users’ preferences.
More recently, regulations in the EU, California, and to some extent China, focused on increasing
users’ awareness (and control) of the data collected by digital businesses. For example, many users
can now request their information from digital businesses under the European GDPR law (see
Art. 15 GDPR - Right of access by the data subject). The GDPR, therefore, allows users to have
accurate knowledge of what data is collected about them
Studying the consequences of the rollout of the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),
Goldberg et al. 2021 show that it increased the businesses’ costs of collecting consumer data. On
the other hand, Aridor et al. 2020 show that despite the increase in opt-outs that followed the
GDPR, the ability of ﬁrms to target consumers did not decrease, suggesting that the eﬀective
amount of information did not decrease.21 These results by Aridor et al. 2020 suggest that eﬀective
regulation of data collection may require enforcement at a collective level, addressing directly the
usable information contained in the data collected. This is in line with our analysis in Section 5.
6.2. Vertical Integration
The last two decades have seen signiﬁcant consolidation of digital businesses, with many mergers
and acquisitions led by the Big Five Tech Giants or GAFAM (Google, Amazon, Facebook, Apple,
and Microsoft).22 Many of those acquisitions were vertical. That is, the acquired business operated
in a separate market and/or provided a distinct service from the acquiring business. However, in
privacy terms, even seemingly unrelated mergers may have an important eﬀect. This is so because
data may be shared between diﬀerent subsidiaries of the same parent company.23 And, in fact,
much in-line with public discourse, database mergers often involve businesses that collect diﬀerent
21Presumably large digital platforms are at a point in which they can use rich data from past consumers to predict
many characteristics of new customers only on the basis of some basic information, e.g., Acemoglu et al. 2019 and
Bergemann et al. 2020).
22See also https://www.visualcapitalist.com/the-big-ﬁve-largest-acquisitions-by-tech-company/
23For one of many examples, see https://www.eﬀ.org/deeplinks/2020/04/google-ﬁtbit-merger-would-cement-googles-data-empire
about the Google-Fitbit merger. For a recent paper that analyzes how combining datasets could feed back into user
behavior see Liang and Madsen 2020.
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

types of information.24
In online appendix C.7 we provide a simple example that demonstrates how our model can
incorporate such considerations. We shows that if following the mergers the businesses make joint
decisions regarding data collection, consumers will be worse oﬀ. This negative eﬀect is not present
if the businesses merge their databases but keep the data collection decisions (and revenue from
data collections) separate.
6.3. Pay For Data
Whether users should be paid for their data is an interesting question that pertains to the property
rights over individual-level data and transcends the analysis in this paper.25 However, our framework
could be useful in evaluating the eﬀect that pay-for-data schemes may have on data collection and
data protection, and subsequently on consumer surplus and total welfare.
In Online Appendix C.8, we illustrate that when a regulator requires businesses to pay users
for their data, users’ direct incentives to exert activity increase (since they are now paid for their
data) while business’s marginal returns from each unit of user information decrease. The interplay
between the two deﬁnes whether the business collects a higher fraction of information or not and
whether users beneﬁt from such “pay for data” policy. We show that there exist regimes in which
the incentives of users to increase activity are so strong that the business can gain from an imposed
payment by increasing data collection, ›, despite of the lowered returns from user information.
When the price per data is suﬃciently large, we ﬁnd that consumer surplus can be higher than
without the “pay for data” policy, and it can actually reach the socially optimal level.
7. Related Literature and Conclusion
This paper contributes to an active interdisciplinary area of research that studies the consequences
for market outcomes of the ability of digital institutions to amass large data sets. The main issues
24See, e.g., https://www.propublica.org/article/google-has-quietly-dropped-ban-on-personally-identiﬁable-web-tracking
25In related work, Arrieta-Ibarra et al. 2018 make the case that users should be paid for their data as if that data
were labor, whereas Ichihashi 2020a explores a scenario in which competing data brokers compensate users for their
data, and Bergemann and Bonatti 2019 and Acemoglu et al. 2019 study a setting where a data intermediary extracts
users’ information by oﬀering monetary transfers. Emerging work in the marketing literature seeks to evaluate users’
valuation of privacy via empirical and experimental approaches (see Lin 2019 and references therein).
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

discussed in the literature are the collection and management of consumer information, consumer
privacy, and possible policy intervention.
Recent work has focused on understanding how user information is either voluntarily disclosed
(Ali et al. 2020) or inferred from users’ actions such as purchasing behavior over time (Conitzer
et al. 2012, Fudenberg and Villas-Boas 2006), ratings (Bonatti and Cisternas 2017), formation of
social links (Acemoglu et al. 2017), platform usage (Ichihashi 2020a), or gathered through monetary
transfers (Bergemann et al. 2020). We rely on this line of work and assume that there is a one-to-one
mapping between any user’s actions (usage of the platform) and the information that is revealed
about this user to the platform.26
Other work has explored how the mechanisms for extracting user information and possession
of information itself aﬀect the design of targeted/personalized pricing (e.g., Candogan et al. 2012,
Bloch and Quérou 2013, Fainmesser and Galeotti 2016, 2020, Elliott et al. 2021, Montes et al. 2018,
Ichihashi 2020b, Valletti and Wu 2020), selective selling (Momot et al. 2020), service systems (Hu
et al. 2020); what is the impact on social image visibility (Ali and Bénabou 2020), advertising
strategies (Galeotti and Goyal 2009, Shen and Miguel Villas-Boas 2017, Bimpikis et al. 2016), the
extent of competition (Casadesus-Masanell and Hervas-Drane 2015) and mergers of digital businesses
(Prat and Valletti 2019), overall consumer behavior (Goldfarb and Tucker 2011, Koh et al. 2015,
Jann and Schottmüller 2020, Gradwohl 2017).27 Jullien et al. 2020 considers a digital business that
sells data services to third-parties who may be good or bad for users. The focus of this work is on
data monetization and on the market for data services and is therefore very diﬀerent from ours.
Yet we share the intuition that the business faces a trade-oﬀbetween data exploitation and user
recruitment/retention/activity.28
More recent work investigates the impact of privacy regulation on the operations of platforms and
their users’ behavior. Argenziano and Bonatti 2021 and Bimpikis et al. 2021 study the eﬀectiveness
26The computer science literature has addressed the design of algorithmic mechanisms for anonymizing and protecting
individual-level data (for reviews of this research stream, see e.g. Dwork and Roth 2014, Cummings et al. 2015,
Ghosh and Roth 2015, Abowd and Schmutte 2019). The operations management literature has employed algorithmic
mechanisms to design privacy-preserving personalized data-driven revenue management algorithms (see, Lei et al.
2021).
27Excellent surveys are provided by Acquisti et al. 2016, Mayzlin 2016, and Bergemann and Bonatti 2019. See
also https://www.heinz.cmu.edu/~acquisti/economics-privacy.htm#Papers for a structured list of papers in this area by
Alessandro Acquisti.
28The business’s tradeoﬀis driven by users’ tradeoﬀbetween providing data (via usage) and potential privacy
infringements. Cong et al. 2020 show the implications of this tradeoﬀfor the growth of the data economy.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

of privacy regulation (such as requiring customers’ consent or prohibiting data tracking) in scenarios
in which customers interact with ﬁrms sequentially and the customers’ data can be shared among
these ﬁrms (so-called, data linkages). Markovich and Yehezkel 2021 investigate whether users or the
platform should have control over users’ data.
Notably, information generated by diﬀerent users might be interdependent, so that information
generated by one user can reveal information on another. Such considerations could be introduced
into our model by: (1) replacing ai› in user’s i utility with a function of other users’ usage levels,
and (2) replacing everywhere ¯a with a diﬀerent function aggregating the usage levels of all users. We
defer this analysis for future work and refer the interested reader to work on the topic by Acemoglu
et al. 2019, Bergemann and Bonatti 2019, Gradwohl 2017, and Ichihashi 2020c.
Our contribution is to formulate a model that captures the diﬀerent components of a business’s
data strategy and in which privacy costs are endogenous and therefore change with the data
strategy of the business. This allows us to assess positive and normative implications of data policy
design and to compare conclusions across diﬀerent domains—in particular, between data-driven and
usage-driven revenue models. We demonstrate how our framework is useful to study broader policy
issues such as the motivations and welfare eﬀect of vertical integration in digital markets and the
potential welfare beneﬁts of introducing a carefully calibrated payment to users for their data.
References
J. M. Abowd and I. M. Schmutte. An economic analysis of privacy protection and statistical
accuracy as social choices. American Economic Review, 109(1):171–202, 2019.
D. Acemoglu, A. Makhdoumi, A. Malekian, and A. Ozdaglar. Privacy-constrained network formation.
Games and Economic Behavior, 105:255–275, 2017.
D. Acemoglu, A. Makhdoumi, A. Malekian, and A. Ozdaglar. Too much data: Prices and ineﬃciencies
in data markets. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019.
A. Acquisti, C. Taylor, and L. Wagman. The economics of privacy. Journal of Economic Literature,
54(2):442–92, 2016.
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

S. N. Ali and R. Bénabou. Image versus information: Changing societal norms and optimal privacy.
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 12(3):116–64, 2020.
S. N. Ali, G. Lewis, and S. Vasserman. Voluntary disclosure and personalized pricing. In Proceedings
of the 21st ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, pages 537–538, 2020.
R. Argenziano and A. Bonatti. Data linkages and privacy regulation. Working Paper, 2021.
G. Aridor, Y.-K. Che, and T. Salz. The economic consequences of data privacy regulation: Empirical
evidence from GDPR. SSRN 3522845, 2020.
I. Arrieta-Ibarra, L. Goﬀ, D. Jiménez-Hernández, J. Lanier, and E. G. Weyl. Should we treat data
as labor? moving beyond “free”. In aea Papers and Proceedings, volume 108, pages 38–42, 2018.
D. Bergemann and A. Bonatti. Markets for information: An introduction. Annual Review of
Economics, 11:85–107, 2019.
D. Bergemann, A. Bonatti, and T. Gan. The economics of social data. SSRN 3459796, 2020.
K. Bimpikis, A. Ozdaglar, and E. Yildiz. Competitive targeted advertising over networks. Operations
Research, 64(3):705–720, 2016.
K. Bimpikis, I. Morgenstern, and D. Saban. Data tracking under competition. SSRN 3808228, 2021.
F. Bloch and N. Quérou. Pricing in social networks. Games and Economic Behavior, 80:243–261,
2013.
A. Bonatti and G. Cisternas. Ratings-based price discrimination. Working Paper, 2017.
O. Candogan and K. Drakopoulos. Optimal signaling of content accuracy: Engagement vs. misinfor-
mation. Operations Research, 68(2):497–515, 2020.
O. Candogan, K. Bimpikis, and A. Ozdaglar. Optimal pricing in networks with externalities.
Operations Research, 60(4):883–905, 2012.
R. Casadesus-Masanell and A. Hervas-Drane. Competing with privacy. Management Science, 61(1):
229–246, 2015.
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

L. W. Cong, D. Xie, and L. Zhang. Knowledge accumulation, privacy, and growth in a data
economy. Management Science, forthcoming, 2020. doi: 10.1287/mnsc.2021.3986. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2021.3986.
V. Conitzer, C. R. Taylor, and L. Wagman. Hide and seek: Costly consumer privacy in a market
with repeat purchases. Marketing Science, 31(2):277–292, 2012.
R. Cummings, K. Ligett, M. M. Pai, and A. Roth. The strange case of privacy in equilibrium
models. arXiv:1508.03080, 2015.
A. De Cornière and G. Taylor. Information security and competition. Working Paper, 2020.
C. Dwork and A. Roth. The algorithmic foundations of diﬀerential privacy. Foundations and
Trends R• in Theoretical Computer Science, 9(3–4):211–407, 2014.
M. Elliott, A. Galeotti, and L. Koh. Market segmentation through information. CWPE2105, 2021.
I. P. Fainmesser and A. Galeotti. Pricing network eﬀects. The Review of Economic Studies, 83(1):
165–198, 2016.
I. P. Fainmesser and A. Galeotti. Pricing network eﬀects: Competition. American Economic Journal:
Microeconomics, 12(3):1–32, 2020.
D. Fudenberg and J. M. Villas-Boas. Behavior-based price discrimination and customer recognition.
Handbook on economics and information systems, 1:377–436, 2006.
A. Galeotti and S. Goyal. Inﬂuencing the inﬂuencers: a theory of strategic diﬀusion. The RAND
Journal of Economics, 40(3):509–532, 2009.
A. Ghosh and A. Roth. Selling privacy at auction. Games and Economic Behavior, 91:334–346,
2015.
E. L. Glaeser and J. Scheinkman. Non-market interactions. Technical report, National Bureau of
Economic Research, 2000.
S. G. Goldberg, G. A. Johnson, and S. K. Shriver. Regulating privacy online: An economic evaluation
of the GDPR, 2021.
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

A. Goldfarb and C. E. Tucker. Privacy regulation and online advertising. Management Science, 57
(1):57–71, 2011.
R. Gradwohl. Information sharing and privacy in networks. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM
Conference on Economics and Computation, pages 349–350. ACM, 2017.
M. Hu, R. Momot, and W. Jianfu. Privacy management in service systems. SSRN 3628751, 2020.
S. Ichihashi. Dynamic privacy choices. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM Conference on Economics
and Computation, pages 539–540, 2020a.
S. Ichihashi. Online privacy and information disclosure by consumers. American Economic Review,
110(2):569–95, 2020b.
S. Ichihashi. The economics of data externalities. 2020c. URL https://shota2.github.io/research/
externality.pdf.
O. Jann and C. Schottmüller. An informational theory of privacy. The Economic Journal, 130(625):
93–124, 2020.
B. Jullien, Y. Lefouili, and M. H. Riordan. Privacy protection, security, and consumer retention.
SSRN 3655040, 2020.
B. Koh, S. Raghunathan, and B. R. Nault. Is voluntary proﬁling welfare enhancing? Management
Information Systems Quarterly, forthcoming, 2015.
M. A. Lariviere. A note on probability distributions with increasing generalized failure rates.
Operations Research, 54(3):602–604, 2006.
Y. Lei, S. Miao, and R. Momot. Privacy-preserving personalized revenue management. SSRN
3704446, 2021.
A. Liang and E. Madsen. Data and incentives. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM Conference on
Economics and Computation, pages 41–42, 2020.
T. Lin. Valuing intrinsic and instrumental preferences for privacy. SSRN 3406412, 2019.
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

J. Z. Liu, M. Sockin, and W. Xiong. Data privacy and temptation. 2020. URL http://wxiong.
mycpanel.princeton.edu/papers/Privacy.pdf.
S. Markovich and Y. Yehezkel. Data regulation: who should control our data? SSRN 3801314, 2021.
D. Mayzlin. Managing social interactions. In The Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Networks.
2016.
R. Momot, E. Belavina, and K. Girotra. The use and value of social information in selective selling
of exclusive products. Management Science, 66(6):2610–2627, 2020.
R. Montes, W. Sand-Zantman, and T. Valletti. The value of personal information in online markets
with endogenous privacy. Management Science, 65(3):1342–1362, 2018.
Y. Papanastasiou. Fake news propagation and detection: A sequential model. Management Science,
66(5):1826–1846, 2020.
A. Prat and T. M. Valletti. Attention oligopoly. SSRN 3197930, 2019.
Q. Shen and J. Miguel Villas-Boas. Behavior-based advertising. Management Science, 64(5):
2047–2064, 2017.
T. Valletti and J. Wu. Consumer proﬁling with data requirements: Structure and policy implications.
Production and Operations Management, 29(2):309–329, 2020.
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

A. Appendix: Proofs of the Main Results
A.1. Proof of Proposition 1 (Page 10)
Given users’ expectation of the adversaries’ demand for information Ê, there exists a unique
response of the users. Existense (suﬃcient condition) follows from Glaeser and Scheinkman 2000:
÷ÂaØ0’aÆÂa
ˆUi(ai,¯a)
ˆai
---
ai=Âa< 0 or ÷ÂaØ0’aÆÂa 1 + —¯a + ›[ﬂ≠Ê] ≠Âa < 0. Because ﬂ, › œ [0, 1] and Ê Ø 0
this is satisﬁed whenever ÷ÂaØ0 2 < Âa (1 ≠—), which can only be satisﬁed if — < 1. Condition for the
uniqueness of the users’ response also follows from Glaeser and Scheinkman 2000: ’i
----
ˆ2Ui
ˆaiˆ¯a/ˆ2Ui
ˆa2
i
---- < 1
which is satisﬁed if — < 1.
Next, we derive our characterization of the unique response. Denote a≠i the activity choice
that i conjecture about the other users. Then user i’s best reply is ai = 1 + —¯a ≠Ê› + ﬂ› where
¯a =
s
j ajdj. In equilibrium users’ expectation are correct and so
s
i aidi = 1 + —¯a ≠Ê› + ﬂ› = ¯a
or ¯a(Ê) = 1+ﬂ›≠Ê›
1≠—
(this expression is positive in equilibrium). Such response induces adversaries
with ¯a(Ê)› Ø “C to be active. Therefore, the induced adversaries’ demand for information is
¯a(Ê)›/C which should be consistent with the initial belief Ê, hence Ê should solve Ê = ¯a(Ê)›
C
. The
expressions for ¯aú(›, C) and Êú(›, C) then follow by substitution. Consumer surplus is derived as
follows: CS(›) =
s Ui(aú
i (›, C), ¯aú(›, C))di where aú
i (›, C) = 1 + —¯aú(›) ≠Êú(›)› + ﬂ›.
Comparative Statics of ¯aú(›, C) and ›¯aú(›, C).– Behavior of ¯aú(›, C) and ›¯aú(›, C) wrt C is trivial
and follows from showing that derivative of ¯aú(›, C) wrt C is always positive. Derivative of ¯aú(›, C)
wrt › is C(ﬂC(1≠—)≠2›≠ﬂ›2)
(C(1≠—)+›2)2
the sign of which is deﬁned by the sign of ﬂC(1 ≠—) ≠2› ≠ﬂ›2. For
any C > 0, this expression is ﬁrst positive, then negative. The change of sign happens at ›1(C)
(largest solution of ﬂC(1 ≠—) ≠2› ≠ﬂ›2 = 0). Similarly, derivative of ›¯aú(›, C) can be derived as
C(C(1≠—)≠›2+2C(1≠—)ﬂ›)
(C(1≠—)+›2)2
which has sign of ≠›2 + 2ﬂ›C(1 ≠—) + C(1 ≠—). For any C > 0, the latter
expression is ﬁrst positive, then negative. The change of sign happens at ›2(C) (largest solution to
≠›2 + 2ﬂ›C(1 ≠—) + C(1 ≠—) = 0). Finally, ›2(C) > ›1(C) holds trivially when 1 < ﬂ2C(1 ≠—),
otherwise, rewrite it as ﬂC(1 ≠—) + 1
ﬂ>
Ò
1
ﬂ2 + C(1 ≠—) ≠

(ﬂC(1 ≠—))2 + C(1 ≠—), RHS is
non-negative when 1 Ø ﬂ2C(1 ≠—), taking square of the both sides and rearranging, we can show
that this inequality holds. Finally, it always holds that ›1(C) Ø 0 and ›2(C) Ø 0. We deﬁne
›(C) = min{1, ›1(C)} and ¯›(C) = min{1, ›2(C)}.
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

A.2. Proof of Theorem 1 (Page 11)
Figure 5: Functions Cı(›) and ›ı(C) depending on Â: (a) Â < Pﬂ; (b) Â œ [Pﬂ, ÂL]; (c) Â œ [ÂL, ÂH];
(d) Â > ÂH. Points ÂL, ÂH are deﬁned in the proof of Theorem 1; functions ›ı(C) and Cı(›) are
deﬁned in Lemmas 1 and 2.
Lemma 1 (Lemma 2) characterizes the business’s data collection (data protection) strategy when
data protection (data collection) is held ﬁxed, and is used in the proof of Theorem 1. The proofs of
these lemmas are technical and deferred to Appendix B.
Lemma 1 (Optimal Data Protection Cı(›) as a Function of Data Collection) Given a data
collection level ›, the business sets data protection Cı(›) = max{Ch(›), 0}, where
Ch(›) =
1
1≠—
1
≠›2 + ›
Ò
1
Â(1 + ﬂ›)(1 ≠P + P›)
2
.29
Lemma 2 (Optimal Data Collection ›ı(C) as a Function of Data Protection) Given a data
protection level C, the business stores:
- part of the information ›ı(C) = ≠Ÿ(C) +

Ÿ(C)2 + C(1 ≠—) < 1 (increasing in C) if data
protection policy level is low C < Cl;
- all the information (›ı(C) = 1) if data protection policy level is high C > Cl.
Here Ÿ(C) = 1≠P≠PﬂC(1≠—)
P+(1≠P)ﬂ
and Cl =
1
1≠—
2+ﬂ≠P(1+ﬂ)
P+ﬂ+Pﬂ
.
We know that ≠Ÿ(C) +

Ÿ(C)2 + C(1 ≠—) is increasing and concave in C. Denote Cinv(›)
solution to ≠Ÿ(C) +

Ÿ(C)2 + C(1 ≠—) = › wrt C (here Ÿ(C) is deﬁned in Lemma 2). We have
that:
Cinv(›) =
1
1 ≠—
›[(P + (1 ≠P)ﬂ)› + 2(1 ≠P)]
P + (1 ≠P)ﬂ+ 2›Pﬂ
.
Case Â < Pﬂ: We ﬁrst show that Cinv(›) < Ch(›) (where Ch(›) is deﬁned in Lemma 1) and they
29Ch(›) > 0 if either (i) Â < Pﬂor (ii) Â > Pﬂand › < min{1,
P +ﬂ(1≠P )+Ô
(P ≠(1≠P )ﬂ)2+4(1≠P )Â
2(Â≠P ﬂ)
}.
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

only intersect at › = 0 under this condition. That is, we need to show:
› + (P + (1 ≠P)ﬂ)› + 2(1 ≠P)
P + (1 ≠P)ﬂ+ 2›Pﬂ
<
Û
1
Â(1 + ﬂ›)(1 ≠P + P›)
The LHS can be rewritten as 2(1+ﬂ›)(1≠P+P›)
P+ﬂ≠Pﬂ+2›Pﬂ. Developing, we need to show that 4Â(1 + ﬂ›)(1 ≠
P + P›) < (P + (1 ≠P)ﬂ+ 2›Pﬂ)2. The LHS of the latter inequality is the highest under Â = Pﬂ
and the RHS is the lowest under Â = Pﬂ(since we consider case Â < Pﬂ). It is easy to check
that inequality holds in this case and hence Cinv(›) < Ch(›), ’› > 0. Thus, the only two points
of intersection of best-responses Cı(›) and ›ı(C) are › = 0, C = 0 and › = 1, C = Ch(1). We
evaluate company’s proﬁt at both points. The ﬁrst point gives ﬁ0 = 1≠P
1≠— , while the second gives
ﬁ1(Â) =
1
1≠—(1 + ﬂ+ Â ≠2

Â(1 + ﬂ)) - decreasing in Â on the interval Â < Pﬂ(the derivative wrt
Â is 1 ≠

(1 + ﬂ)/Â). Since ﬁ1(0) > ﬁ0, the business is choosing ›ı = 1, Cı = Ch(1) for the case
that Â < Pﬂ(it is also easy to verify that ﬁ1(Pﬂ) > ﬁ0). Figure 5 (a) illustrates this case.
Case Â > Pﬂ: Solve Cinv(›) = Ch(›). We get two non-negative roots: › = 0 and ›i =
1
2Pﬂ(≠(1≠
P)ﬂ≠P +|P ≠(1≠P)ﬂ|
Ò
Â
Â≠Pﬂ). We will establish ﬁrst conditions when ›i œ [0, 1]. We will consider
case of P > (1 ≠P)ﬂ(case P < (1 ≠P)ﬂcan be considered similarly and leads to the same result).
›i > 0 when Â œ [Pﬂ, ÂH], where ÂH = (P+(1≠P)ﬂ)2
4(1≠P)
is a solution to ›i = 0 wrt Â. Similarly, ›i < 1
when Â > ÂL, where ÂL = (P+ﬂ+Pﬂ)2
4(1+ﬂ)
is a solution to ›i = 1 wrt Â. Both ÂL > Pﬂand ÂH > Pﬂ,
also ÂH > ÂL (›i decreases with Â).
On the interval Â œ [Pﬂ, ÂL), ›i > 1, hence on › œ [0, 1] we have Cinv(›) < Ch(›). Thus, the two
points of intersection of the best-response functions are › = 0, C = 0 and › = 1, C = Ch(1). ﬁ1(Â)
decreases with Â on [Pﬂ, ÂL) (derivative ﬁÕ
1(Â) changes sign only once and at ÂL it is negative).
Plugging ÂL into ﬁ1(Â) deﬁned above, we get ﬁ1(ÂL) > ﬁ0. We thus conclude that ﬁ1(Â) > ﬁ0 on
[Pﬂ, ÂL) and thus ›ı = 1, Cı = Ch(1). Figure 5 (b) illustrates this case.
On the interval Â > ÂH, Cinv(›) > Ch(›), ’› œ [0, 1]. Hence, the only point of intersection of
the best-responses is ›ı = 0, Cı = 0. Figure 5 (d) illustrates this case.
Finally, on the interval Â œ [ÂL, ÂH], there are two points of intersection of the best-responses:
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

› = 0, C = 0 (delivering proﬁt ﬁ0) and › = ›i œ [0, 1], C = Ch(›i) with proﬁt:
ﬁ›i(Â) =
Â
4P 2ﬂ2
5
P + (1 ≠P)ﬂ+ Pﬂ(P ≠(1 ≠P)ﬂ)z(Â)
Â
≠Pz(Â) + (1 ≠P)ﬂz(Â)
62
Where z(Â) =
Ò
Â
Â≠Pﬂ- decreasing function of Â. Taking derivative ﬁÕ
›i(Â) we obtain:
ﬁÕ
›i(Â) =
1
4ÂP 2ﬂ2
Pﬂz(Â)
z(Â)2 ≠1
Ë
(1 ≠P)2ﬂ2(z(Â) + 1)2 ≠P 2(z(Â) ≠1)2È
Where we substituted Â = z(Â)2Pﬂ
z(Â)2≠1 and also z(Â) > 1 on Â > Pﬂ. Notice that ›i =
1
2Pﬂ[P(z(Â) ≠
1) ≠(1 ≠P)ﬂ(z(Â) + 1)] and ›i > 0 on Â < ÂH. Developing ﬁÕ
›i(Â) we obtain:
ﬁÕ
›i(Â) =
1
4ÂP 2ﬂ2
Pﬂz(Â)
z(Â)2 ≠1 [(1 ≠P)ﬂ(z(Â) + 1) ≠P(z(Â) ≠1)]·[(1 ≠P)ﬂ(z(Â) + 1) + P(z(Â) ≠1)] < 0
Here, inequality follows from noticing that the expression in the second brackets is ≠›i < 0. To check
that ﬁ›i(Â) > ﬁ0 on Â œ [ÂL, ÂH] we thus need to check this inequality at ÂH. It is easy to verify
that ﬁ›i(ÂH) = 1≠P
1≠— = ﬁ0. Thus, on Â œ [ÂL, ÂH] digital business optimally chooses ›ı = ›i œ [0, 1]
and Cı = Ch(›i). Figure 5 (c) illustrates this case. Finally, second-order conditions can be veriﬁed
in the linear model as a particular case of a more general proof of Lemma 3 in Appendix C.5.
Summarizing the above, we have two thresholds Pﬂ< ÂL Æ ÂH such that: (i) if Â Æ ÂL, then
›ı = 1 and Cı = Ch(1); (ii) if Â œ (ÂL, ÂH), then ›ı = ›i =
1
2Pﬂ(≠(1 ≠P)ﬂ≠P + |P ≠(1 ≠
P)ﬂ|
Ò
Â
Â≠Pﬂ) œ (0, 1) and Cı = Ch(›i); (iii) if Â Ø ÂH, then ›ı = 0 and Cı = 0. Here function
Ch(›) is deﬁned in Lemma 1. The three cases can then be written succinctly as in the statement of
the Theorem. In particular, the expression for ›ı is just ›i bounded within [0, 1] interval and with
an additional max{0, Â ≠Pﬂ} which does not change ›i when Â > Pﬂ, but turns ›i into Œ (and,
thus guarantees that ›ı = 1 is chosen) when Â < Pﬂ< ÂL. Expression for Cı is just the one for
Ch(›) evaluated at ›ı.
Finally, in order to show that both ›ı and Cı weakly increase with P, it is necessary to consider
the behavior of ÂL, ÂH as functions of P and then analyze the behavior of ›ı, Cı in the three regions
deﬁned by these functions. We delegate this proof to the last part of the following Appendix A.3.
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

A.3. Proof of Proposition 2 (Page 12)
From Theorem 1, we know that the business sets: (a) ›ı = 1, Cı =
1
1≠—(≠1 +
Ò
1+ﬂ
Â )) if Â Æ ÂL; (b)
›ı œ (0, 1), Cı > 0 if Â œ (ÂL, ÂH); and (c) ›ı = 0, Cı = 0 if Â Ø ÂH. Substituting optimal ›ı, Cı
into the expression for ¯aú(›, C), we obtain: (a) ¯aa =
1
1≠—(1 + ﬂ≠

Â(1 + ﬂ)) when Â Æ ÂL; (b)
¯ab(P) = aú(›ı, Cı) when Â œ (ÂL, ÂH); and (c) ¯ac = lim›ı=0,Cı=0 ¯aú(›ı, Cı) =
1
1≠— when Â > ÂH.
First, notice that ¯aa and ¯ac do not depend on P and ¯aa > ¯ac when Â <
ﬂ2
1+ﬂ.
a
b
c
⇢
1 + ⇢
⇢2
1 + ⇢
 
P
 L
 H
Figure 6: Behavior of functions ÂL and ÂH with P. There are three regions: (a) Â < ÂL; (b)
Â œ (ÂL, ÂH); and (c) Â > ÂH.
It is easy to verify that both ÂL, ÂH are increasing, convex functions of P. Furthermore, ÂH Ø ÂL
and they intersect only at one point P =
ﬂ
1+ﬂfor P œ [0, 1] where ÂL = ÂH =
ﬂ2
1+ﬂ. At P = 0
we have ÂL(P = 0) =
ﬂ2
4(1+ﬂ) and ÂH(P = 0) = ﬂ2
4 . Figure 6 illustrates behavior of the functions
ÂL, ÂH with P.
Region (b) consists of two sub-regions: P <
ﬂ
1+ﬂand P >
ﬂ
1+ﬂ. Clearly, region (b) is such that
Â > Pﬂ(since Pﬂ< ÂL). Consider P <
ﬂ
1+ﬂ(the other sub-region can be analyzed similarly). Here
P ≠(1 ≠P)ﬂ< 0. Denoting z =
Ò
Â
Â≠Pﬂ(and, thus, Â = z2Pﬂ
z2≠1), one can write down d¯ab(P)
dP
as:
d¯ab(P)
dP
=
z(z ≠1)(ﬂ≠ﬂz + P(1 + z + ﬂ(≠1 ≠(P ≠(1 ≠P)ﬂ)z2≠1
zPﬂ+ z))
2P(1 ≠—)(z2 ≠1)
After algebraic simpliﬁcation we obtain: P(1+z)+(1≠P)(z≠1)ﬂ
2P(1+z)(1≠—)
. Given that z Ø 1, we conclude that this
expression is non-negative. Hence, consumer surplus weakly increases in the sub-region (b) P <
ﬂ
1+ﬂ.
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

Furthermore, one can verify that ¯ac = ¯ab(PH) where PH solves Â = ÂH and that ¯aa = ¯ab(PL) where
PL solves Â = ÂL. Taken together with the behavior of consumer surplus in regions (a) and (c), we
conclude that consumer surplus weakly increases with P when P <
ﬂ
1+ﬂ. The other case can be
derived similarly.
Finally, we can verify that ›ı, Cı weakly increase with P using the techniques from above. First,
clearly both protection and collection are higher in region (a) than in region (c). Both do not change
with P in these regions. We are left to show that in region (b) both protection and collection also
increase with P (there are no jumps on the borders of regions (c)-(b) and (b)-(a) as per Theorem 1).
Consider ﬁrst behavior of ›ı in the sub-region (b) P <
ﬂ
1+ﬂ(the other sub-region can be considered
in similar fashion). Signs of the derivative is deﬁned by the following function:
d›ı(P)
dP
≥P 2zﬂ(ﬂ(z2 + z ≠2) ≠Pz(1 + z)(1 + ﬂ))
(z ≠1)(1 + z)2
The sign of the numerator of this expression is deﬁned by z2(ﬂ≠P(1 + ﬂ)) + z(ﬂ≠P(1 + ﬂ)) ≠2ﬂ
– an increasing function for any z > 0. Given that Â œ [ÂL, ÂH] in this region, we have z œ
[
P+ﬂ≠Pﬂ
≠P+(1≠P)ﬂ, P+ﬂ(1+P)
≠P+ﬂ(1≠P)]. Evaluating this expression at the left border we obtain 2Pﬂ(≠2+P+ﬂ≠Pﬂ)
P≠ﬂ+Pﬂ
> 0
(recall that P œ [0, 1], ﬂœ [0, 1] and that P <
ﬂ
1+ﬂin the sub-region under consideration). Hence,
we conclude that on Â œ [ÂL, ÂH] and when P <
ﬂ
1+ﬂ, ›ı increases with P. The sign of dCı(P)
dP
can
be shown to be positive in sub-region P <
ﬂ
1+ﬂand the behavior of the data protection and data
collection in sub-region P >
ﬂ
1+ﬂcan be derived using techniques similar to those used above.
Finally, for a ﬁxed Â regions (a), (b), (c) can be characterized by thresholds PL and PH. One
can derive these thresholds by simply solving Â = ÂL and Â = ÂH wrt P.
Figure 7 summarizes how consumer surplus changes as a function of P, ﬂ, and Â.
A.4. Proof of Theorem 2 (Page 13)
We will ﬁrst prove that relative to the socially optimal strategy, the business’s data strategy never
prescribes a combination of higher level of data protection and lower level of data collection. That
all other combinations are possible is shown numerically with the linear example on page 16 (see
Figure 4).
Taking into account the users and adversaries’ equilibrium strategies, the social welfare function 7
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

Consumer Surplus, CS
Business’s Revenue Model, P
1.0
0
Consumer Surplus, CS
Business’s Revenue Model, P
1.0
0
1
1 −β
1
1 −β
 > ⇢2/(1 + ⇢)
a)
c)
Cost of Protection, 
User’s Marginal Value of Data, ⇢
b)
1.0
0
0.7
0
CS decreases with P
CS increases with P
PL
PH
PL
PH
 = ⇢2/(1 + ⇢)
 < ⇢2/(1 + ⇢)
Figure 7: Consumer surplus, CS(›ı, Cı), as a function of the business’s revenue model, P, and the
marginal beneﬁt for consumers from data collection and usage, ﬂ.
can be rewritten as follows in order to capture dependence on ¯aú and ¯aú›:
–CS(·|¯aú) + (1 ≠–)Π(·|C, ¯aú, ¯aú›),
(10)
where CS is increasing in ¯aú and Π is decreasing in C and increasing in ¯aú and ¯aú›.
Assume by contradiction that ›ı Æ ›W and Cı Ø CW , and let W ı = W(·|Cı, ›ı) and W W =
W(·|CW , ›W ). By deﬁnition, W ı Æ W W and Πı Ø ΠW . Consequently, it must be true that
¯aú(›W , CW ) Ø ¯aú(›ı, Cı).
(11)
Given our contradiction assumption that ›ı Æ ›W this equation implies that
¯aú(›W , CW )›W Ø ¯aú(›ı, Cı)›ı.
(12)
Then, given our contradiction assumption that Cı Ø CW this equation implies that ΠW Ø Πı. It
can never be the case that ›ı = ›W and Cı = CW (unless – = 0). Therefore, for our contradiction
assumption to hold it must be that either ›ı < ›W or Cı > CW , implying that ΠW > Πú in
contradiction to the optimality of the business’s strategy (that is, contradicting that by deﬁnition
ΠW Æ Πı.
Finally, for purely usage-driven business (P = 0): assume that the business over-collects (i.e.,
›ı > ›W ). Then, necessarily Cı > CW from the ﬁrst-order conditions on the data collection.
The argument then follows the one from above: we have by deﬁnition Πı Ø ΠW and W ı Æ W W .
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

Then, it has to be that ¯aú(›ı, Cı) Æ ¯aú(›W , CW ). But then it also has to be that Cı Æ CW ,
which is a contradiction. Therefore, purely usage-driven business under-collects and under-protects
(under-collection and over-protection is prohibited due to the argument in the ﬁrst part of the
proof).
A.5. Proof of Proposition 3 (Page 16)
Without loss of generality, we set — = 0 (— > 0 case can be considered in the same way). First, it is
easy to show that, when regulation Cmin > Cı is imposed, the ﬁrm sets C = Cmin and › = ›ı(Cmin)
(where ›ı(C) is derived from the ﬁrst-order condition on data collection and is given by technical
Lemma 2). There exists Cl = 2+ﬂ≠P(1+ﬂ)
P+ﬂ+Pﬂ
such that ›ı(Cmin) = 1 if Cmin > Cl and ›ı(Cmin) < 1
otherwise. Consider three cases:
Case A: Cı > Cl hence Cmin > Cl We have ›ı = ›ú(Cmin) = 1 hence it is obvious that CS
increases with introduction of Cmin (as users’ activity is an increasing function of data protection,
C).
Case B: Cı < Cl and Cmin < Cl Condition Cı < Cl can be rewritten as Â > ÂL, which can be
rearranged as P < 2Ô
Â(1+ﬂ)≠ﬂ
1+ﬂ
. Furthermore, we can write down users’ activity to which the ﬁrm
shifts upon introduction of the regulation: Cmin(1+ﬂ›ı(Cmin))
Cmin+›ı(Cmin)2 . Plugging the expression for ›ı(Cmin)
and taking the derivative wrt to Cmin, we obtain after simpliﬁcation:
(P ≠1)((P ≠1)ﬂ+ P)
4(P(CminP + P ≠2) + 1)
Ú
(CminPﬂ+P≠1)2
(P(≠ﬂ)+P+ﬂ)2 + Cmin
This expression is positive when
ﬂ≠Pﬂ≠P
(1≠P)2+CminP 2 > 0 which is true when P <
ﬂ
1+ﬂ. This is the
condition for CS to increase on Cı < Cmin < Cl upon introduction of Cmin. If P >
ﬂ
1+ﬂ, CS
decreases on this interval.
Case C: Cı < Cl and Cmin > Cl If P <
ﬂ
1+ﬂthen CS is increasing for Cmin < Cl as per Case
B above. For Cmin > Cl we have ›ı(Cmin) = 1 and an increase in Cmin leads to even higher CS.
Therefore, CS(Cmin > Cl) > CS(Cmin = Cl) > CS(Cmin < Cl). If P >
ﬂ
1+ﬂthen CS(Cmin > Cl, › =
1) < CS(›ı, Cı) unless Cmin is higher than ˆC such that solves CS(›ı, Cı) = CS( ˆC > Cl, › = 1).
In summary: when Cmin > Cı we have three regimes. First, if P > 2Ô
Â(1+ﬂ)≠ﬂ
1+ﬂ
then Cı > Cl
35
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

and regulation leads to higher CS. If, P <
ﬂ
1+ﬂthen Cı < Cl and regulation also leads to higher
CS. In all other cases, regulation hurts if Cmin œ (Cı, ˆC) and improves CS otherwise (here ˆC > Cl).
A.6. Proof of Proposition 4 (Page 17)
The proof is a particular case of a more general proof in Online Appendix C.5 (Page 9) which
considers business’s general proﬁt function.
36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

Online Appendices
B. Appendix: Technical Lemmas
B.1. Proof of Lemma 1
Proﬁt function is concave in C on C Ø 0 (by verifying the second-order derivative). Taking the
derivative wrt C and solving the FOC, we obtain: Ch(›) =
1
1≠—
1
≠›2 + ›
Ò
1
Â(1 + ﬂ›)(1 ≠P + P›)
2
(the only positive root). Taking the derivative of Ch(›) wrt ›, we get that it’s sign is deﬁned by:
3›ﬂ≠4›
Ò
Â(›ﬂ+ 1)((› ≠1)P + 1) + P((4› ≠3)›ﬂ+ 3› ≠2) + 2
It is non-negative at › = 0. Developing equality dCh(›)
d›
= 0, we get that it is equivalent to:
›4 · 16Pﬂ(Pﬂ≠Â) + ›3 · 8(3Pﬂ≠2Â)(ﬂ+ P(1 ≠ﬂ)) + › · 12(1 ≠P)(ﬂ+ P(1 ≠ﬂ))+
›2 · ((34Pﬂ≠16Â)(1 ≠P) + 9ﬂ2(1 ≠P) + 9P 2(1 + ﬂ2)) + 4(1 ≠P)2
Consider two cases. First, let Pﬂ> Â then also 3Pﬂ> 2Â. Note also that 34Pﬂ≠16Â > 0.
Then coeﬃcients of the polynomial don’t change sign, hence there are no positive roots and hence
dCh(›)
d›
> 0, ’› Ø 0. Since, Ch(0) = 0, then Ch(›) > 0, ’› > 0 in this case.
Now let Â > Pﬂ. In case 3Pﬂ< 2Â, irrespective of the sign of the coeﬃcient in front of ›2,
coeﬃcients of the polynomial change sign only once, hence there is one positive root and thus dCh(›)
d›
changes sign only once for › > 0. If 3Pﬂ> 2Â then 34Pﬂ> 16Â even in the worst case of Â = 3
2Pﬂ,
hence coeﬃcient in front of ›2 is positive. Thus, there is only one change of sign and hence also one
root in this case. Thus, we conclude that when Â > Pﬂ, derivative dCh(›)
d›
changes sign only once for
› > 0.
It is easy to see that Ch(0) = 0.
Also, solving Ch(›) = 0 for › > 0 we obtain:
› =
P+ﬂ(1≠P)+Ô
(P≠(1≠P)ﬂ)2+4(1≠P)Â
2(Â≠Pﬂ)
> 0 when Â > Pﬂ. Knowing that CÕ
h(›) changes sign only once if
Â > Pﬂand that it increases at › = 0, we conclude that Ch(›) > 0 for low › if Â > Pﬂ. The result
of lemma now follows.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

B.2. Proof of Lemma 2
Expression for ›ı(C) follows from solving the ﬁrst-order condition which has one positive root. Also
≠Ÿ(C) +

Ÿ(C)2 + C(1 ≠—) is increasing and concave in C. Indeed, the sign of it’s derivative wrt
C is deﬁned by:
Pﬂ
P + (1 ≠P)ﬂ+ ((1 ≠P)2ﬂ2 + P 2(1 + 2ﬂ2C(1 ≠—)))
2(P + (1 ≠P)ﬂ)2
C(1 ≠—) + Ÿ2
> 0
Second-order derivative of ≠Ÿ(C) +

Ÿ(C)2 + C(1 ≠—) is negative. We derive Cl through solving
≠Ÿ(C) +

Ÿ(C)2 + C(1 ≠—) < 1. Finally, second-order derivative of the proﬁt function wrt › has
the sign of ›3 + 3›2Ÿ(C) ≠3›C(1 ≠—) ≠C(1 ≠—)Ÿ(C). Plugging ≠Ÿ(C) +

Ÿ(C)2 + C(1 ≠—) into
this expression, we obtain ≠2(C(1 ≠—) + Ÿ(C)2)(≠Ÿ(C) +

Ÿ(C)2 + C(1 ≠—)) < 0.
C. Additional Analysis
C.1. User Heterogeneity
We can consider the following three speciﬁcations of user’s utility:
Ui(ai, ¯a) = biai ≠1
2a2
i + —ai¯a + (ﬂ≠Ê)ai›
Ui(ai, ¯a) = ai ≠1
2a2
i + —ai¯a + (ﬂi ≠Ê)ai›
Ui(ai, ¯a) = ai ≠1
2a2
i + —ai¯a + (ﬂ≠”iÊ)ai›
The three utility speciﬁcations capture (i) heterogeneity in standalone beneﬁt, as captured by bi; (ii)
heterogeneity in sensitivity to positive information externalities, as captured by ﬂi; (iii) heterogeneity
in sensitivity to negative information externalities, i.e., privacy concerns, as captured by ”i. In the
remainder of this analysis we will focus on the ﬁrst type of heterogeneity. The other two utility
speicﬁcations can be analyzed in similar fashion.
The analysis for utility speciﬁcation with heterogeneous standalone beneﬁt, bi follows the proof
of Proposition 1 and leads to ¯aú(›, C) =
C(¯b+ﬂ›)
C(1≠—)+›2 , Êú(›, C) = ›¯aú(›, C)/C, and CS(›, C) =
1
2[‡2
b + ¯aú(›, C)2], where ¯b and ‡2
b are users’ average standalone beneﬁt and its variance. The only
exception is that it has to be checked that in equilibrium best reply of the users (bi + —¯a + (ﬂ≠Ê)›)
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

and average activity in response to users’ expectation Ê of the adversaries’ demand for information
¯b+(ﬂ≠Ê)›
1≠—
) are positive. It is easy to verify that the latter is positive. Best reply is positive if:
›2(bi ≠¯b) + ﬂC› + C(¯b— + bi(1 ≠—)) > 0. This inequality holds true for all bi > ¯b, otherwise, if
bi(1 + C(1 ≠—)) ≠¯b(1 ≠C—) + ﬂC > 0 for all bi < ¯b and C > 0 then the inequality holds. Similar
conditions can be derived for the other two cases of heterogeneity in sensitivity to positive and
negative information externalities.
C.2. General User Utility and Adversary Speciﬁcation
Assume that user i’s utility is generalized to the following form: Ui(ai) = U[ai, ›(ﬂ≠Ê)].1 The
ﬁrst argument is the user’s activity, while the second argument is the user’s expectation on the
beneﬁt/downside of exerting each unit of activity. We assume that function U is concave in its two
arguments and the arguments are complements. We will denote UÕ
x, UÕ
y – partial derivatives of U
wrt the ﬁrst and the second arguments respectively. The ﬁrst-order condition for the user is thus
UÕ
x(a, ›(ﬂ≠Ê)) = 0.
We assume that adversaries’ abilities “ are distributed with cdf G and pdf g. We also assume that
distribution of “ satisﬁes increasing generalized failure rate (IGFR) property (see Lariviere 2006).
In other words, we have that xg(x)/(1 ≠G(x)) increases in x or alternatively gÕ(z) Ø ≠g(z)2
1≠G(z).
The main driving force of the results of the paper was the fact that the equilibrium average
activity was non-monotone in the level of data collection strategy ›. In particular, activity increases
with › for low › and it decreases in › when › is large. This non-monotonicity in user activity is the
result of the interplay between positive and negative externalities that information imposes on users
along with the adversaries’ endogenous demand for information. When › is low, adversaries’ demand
for information is small, hence information produces more positive than negative externality to
users – thus, an increase in › incentivises users to be more active. When › is large, the adversaries’
demand for information is strong, and so negative externalities dominate, and users decrease their
activity as › grows. We can show that the behavior of user activity inherits such traits in this more
general model.
Similar to the result of Proposition 1 we can solve for user’s equilibrium activity. In particular,
1For simplicity, we omit network eﬀects and assume that data protection strategy C is ﬁxed.
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

it is such aú(›) solves: UÕ
x(a, ›ﬂ≠›G(a›/C)) = 0. Derivative of user activity wrt ›:
daú(›)
d›
= ≠
UÕÕ
x,y(a, ›ﬂ≠›G(a›/C))[ﬂ≠G(a›/C) ≠g(a›/C)a›/C]
UÕÕx,x(a, ›ﬂ≠›G(a›/C)) ≠UÕÕx,y(a, ›ﬂ≠›G(a›/C))g(a›/C)›2/C |a=aú(›)
Thus, the sign of this expression is deﬁned by µ(›) = ﬂ≠G(aú(›)›/C) ≠g(aú(›)›/C)aú(›)›/C. At
› = 0 this expression is positive. Its derivative wrt › is µÕ(›) = (aú(›)Õ› + aú(›))(≠2g(aú(›)›/C) ≠
gÕ(aú(›)›/C)). In order to show that aú(›) ﬁrst increases and then decreases with ›, we need to
show that µ(›) either always remains positive (then aú(›) always increases) or crosses 0 only once.
Assume that there exists ˆ›, such that µ(ˆ›) = 0, then also daú(›)
d›
|ˆ› = 0. Using IGFR property of
distribution of “, we conclude that sign of µÕ(ˆ›) is deﬁned by ≠2 + 2G(aú(ˆ›)ˆ›/C) + g(aú(ˆ›)ˆ›/C)
which is negative given that we know that at ˆ›: ﬂ= G(aú(ˆ›)ˆ›/C) + g(aú(ˆ›)ˆ›/C). Clearly aú(›)›
increases with › when aú(›) increases. Behavior of aú(›)› when aú(›) decreases is deﬁned by the
sign of ›UÕÕ
x,y(. . .)(ﬂ≠G(aú(›)›/C)) ≠UÕÕ
x,x(. . .)aú(›) and depends on the higher-order derivatives of
function U. Notice that for aú(›)› to decrease, necessarily it must be that ﬂ< Ê = G(aú(›)›/C)
or aú(›)› is high enough. aú(›)› increases ﬁrst and then decreases if ›(ﬂ≠Ê)/aú(›) single-crosses
UÕÕ
x,x(aú(›), ›(ﬂ≠Ê))/UÕÕ
x,y(aú(›), ›(ﬂ≠Ê)).
C.3. Users’ proﬁling: an example
Our speciﬁcation of the users’ utility function is motivated by the following simple example. Consider
a business – a digital platform that collects information about users’ activity for the purpose of user
proﬁling. A user has a characteristic ◊i œ {0, 1} (each realized with probability 1/2) that represents,
for example, her political ideology, consumption patterns, dating preferences, etc. Ex ante, the
platform has a uniform prior about this characteristic, but can learn it by collecting, storing, and
processing what the user writes, shares, and likes. In particular, if the platform stores and analyzes
a proportion › of user’s activity ai, then it learns the true characteristic ◊i of user i with probability
f(ai›), and learns nothing about the user with probability 1 ≠f(ai›).
The business recommends services/products/matches to the user (e.g., a movie, a book, a post, or
a date). Recommendation r = ◊creates value of V to a user of type ◊and no value to a user of the
opposite type. Without learning the user’s characteristic, the platform chooses a recommendation
at random, and the expected value to the user is V/2. On the other hand, if the platform learns the
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

user’s characteristic, the user obtains a perfect recommendation of value V . Hence, in this simple
example ﬂ= V/2. The exact magnitude of ﬂdepends on the speciﬁc domain the platform operates
in. One could expect ﬂto be high in the case of dating platforms, search engines like Google, and
marketplaces similar to Amazon. At the same time, one could expect that ﬂis lower for platforms
oﬀering more impersonal services: e.g., weather forecast services.
Once a user’s activity is stored in the platform’s database, there is a risk that the very same
data will be accessed by individuals and organizations that may try to sway election outcomes,
manipulate users’ perceptions, personalize health insurance oﬀerings based on conﬁdential data, or
commit identity theft (see the introduction for speciﬁc examples and a discussion). Such adversarial
activities impose a cost on the user, which is normalized to 1. Then, the expected harm to the user
is the probability that a third party correctly infers their type, f(ai›), multiplied by the expected
number of adversarial activities, Ê.
C.4. Product adoption and registration data
Some digital businesses collect data about users primarily during their registration. These data often
include demographic and ﬁnancial information (e.g., age, address, credit card details). In this case,
when it comes to privacy concerns, the most important choice faced by users is whether to register
or not to the service. To aﬀect users’ decisions, the business can determine what and how much
information is required to complete registration to the service. The trade-oﬀs we study in previous
sections are still present: for example, the business may require storing credit card information on
ﬁle, which will facilitate seamless future transactions and be beneﬁcial for consumers. However,
storing credit card information may also introduce concerns of credit card fraud by adversaries who
may get a hold of the data.
In this section we formalize the adoption model and show that all of our results carry over to
this model with no change. The models of the adversaries and of the business carry over as-is. Our
model of users requires accounting for the binary adoption decisions and the introduction of user
heterogeneity to facilitate the study of the extensive (adoption) margins.
Let ai œ {0, 1} be the decision ({not register, register}) of user i and consider the following utility
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

function:
Ui(ai, ¯a) = aibi + —ai¯a + (ﬂ≠Ê)ai›.
(13)
where bi ≥U[0, 1] i.i.d. across users. As a result, user i registers if and only if bi + —¯a + (ﬂ≠Ê)› > 0
or bi > ≠—¯a ≠(ﬂ≠Ê)› which happens for mass min{max{0, 1 + —¯a + (ﬂ≠Ê)›}, 1} of users. That
is, as long as some users register and some do not, ¯a = 1 + —¯a + (ﬂ≠Ê)› or, substituting Ê = ¯a›/C
and rearranging, ¯aú =
C(1+›ﬂ)
C(1≠—)+›2 as before.
To conclude that all of our results above, including the welfare results, carry over unchanged,
it is therefore left to establish that consumers surplus is captured by CS = 1
2¯a2. By deﬁnition,
CS =
s 1
x (b + —¯a + (ﬂ≠Ê)›)db, where x solves x + —¯a + (ﬂ≠Ê)› = 0. Opening the integral and
simplifying we get that CS = 1
2(1 ≠x)2. It is then suﬃcient to notice that by deﬁnition 1 ≠x = ¯a
to establish that CS = 1
2¯a2 as required.
C.5. General Proﬁt Function
Assume that the proﬁt function of the business is Π(›, C) = Φ(¯a, ¯a›) ≠K(C). Here, ¯a is users’
activity as deﬁned in the model section of the paper; function Φ increases in both arguments and is
weakly concave in these two arguments; K(C) is an increasing convex function and also KÕ(0) = 0
and KÕ( ¯C) = Œ where ¯C =
1
(1≠—)(1+2ﬂ). The last two assumptions on function K(C) are technical
and they guarantee that the business’s optimal choice of data protection is always positive and
lower than ¯C, which in turn assures that › is interior.
We will show that under this general proﬁt function, our main results are structurally equivalent
to that under the linear model. In particular, business’s data strategy is ineﬃcient, in general, there
are three types of ineﬃciencies, two-pronged regulatory policy is enough to ﬁx these ineﬃciencies;
and ﬁnally, we identify conditions when data protection and data collection are complements.
First-order conditions for proﬁt maximization take the following form:
q(›ı, Cı) = ΦÕ
¯a(¯aú(›ı, Cı), ›ı¯aú(›ı, Cı))
ΦÕ
›¯a(¯aú(›ı, Cı), ›ı¯aú(›ı, Cı)),
(14)
ˆ¯aú(›ı, Cı)
ˆC
Ë
ΦÕ
¯a(¯aú(›ı, Cı), ›ú¯aú(›ı, Cı)) + ›ΦÕ
›¯a(¯aú(›ı, Cı), ›¯aú(›ı, Cı))
È
= KÕ(Cı).
(15)
Here, function q(›, C) = ≠d(›¯aú(›,C))
d›
/d¯aú(›,C)
d›
, and by ΦÕ
¯a, ΦÕ
›¯a we denote ﬁrst-order partial derivatives
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

of function Φ with respect to the ﬁrst (activity) and second (information) arguments, respectively.
We will ﬁrst verify that solution to the above system of equations is indeed maximum.
Lemma 3 Hessian of Π(›, C) is negative semi-deﬁnite when evaluated at ›ı, Cı.
Proof. First, solve ﬁrst-order condition (14) and (15) wrt ΦÕ
¯a and ΦÕ
›¯a. We get:
ΦÕ
¯a(¯aú(›, C)) = ≠KÕ(C)(›2 + ˜C)(¯b(›2 ≠˜C) ≠2ﬂ› ˜C)
›2(¯b + ﬂ›)2
ΦÕ
›¯a(¯aú(›, C)) = KÕ(C)(›2 + ˜C)(2¯b› + ﬂ›2 ≠˜Cﬂ)
›2(¯b + ﬂ›)2
where ˜C = C(1 ≠—).
As before, we will use shorthand notation ΦÕÕ
¯a,¯a, ΦÕÕ
›¯a,›¯a, ΦÕÕ
›¯a,¯a to denote
second-order derivatives of function Φ.
For the rest of the proof, all functions are evaluated
at optimal ›ı, Cı, yet we will write ›, C for simplicity. We will also use the following notation:
A © ˆ¯aú(›,C)
ˆ›
, B © ˆ(›¯aú(›,C))
ˆ›
and D © ˆ¯aú(›,C)
ˆC
, E © ˆ(›¯aú(›,C))
ˆC
. Then second-order derivatives of
the function ˜Π(›, C) = Φ(¯aú(›, C), ›¯aú(›, C)):
ˆ2 ˜Π(›, C)
ˆ›2
= ΦÕÕ
¯a,¯aA2 + 2ΦÕÕ
›¯a,¯aAB + ΦÕÕ
›¯a,›¯aB2 + ΦÕ
¯a
ˆ2¯aú(›, C)
ˆ›2
+ ΦÕ
›¯a
ˆ2(›¯aú(›, C))
ˆ›2
ˆ2 ˜Π(›, C)
ˆ›ˆC
= ΦÕÕ
¯a,¯aAD + ΦÕÕ
›¯a,¯a (AE + BD) + ΦÕÕ
›¯a,›¯aBE + ΦÕ
¯a
ˆ2¯aú(›, C)
ˆ›ˆC
+ ΦÕ
›¯a
ˆ2(›¯aú(›, C))
ˆ›ˆC
ˆ2 ˜Π(›, C)
ˆC2
= ΦÕÕ
¯a,¯aD2 + 2ΦÕÕ
›¯a,¯aDE + ΦÕÕ
›¯a,›¯aE2 + ΦÕ
¯a
ˆ2¯aú(›, C)
ˆC2
+ ΦÕ
›¯a
ˆ2(›¯aú(›, C))
ˆC2
Substituting ΦÕ
¯a, ΦÕ
›¯a found above, we get:
˜ΠÕÕ
››(›, C) = ΦÕÕ
¯a,¯aA2 + 2ΦÕÕ
›¯a,¯aAB + ΦÕÕ
›¯a,›¯aB2 + ⁄››, where ⁄›› = ≠2KÕ(C)C(¯b2 + ˜Cﬂ)
›2(¯b + ﬂ›)2 < 0
˜ΠÕÕ
›C(›, C) = ΦÕÕ
¯a,¯aAD + ΦÕÕ
›¯a,¯a (AE + BD) + ΦÕÕ
›¯a,›¯aBE + ⁄›C, where ⁄›C = 2KÕ(C)
˜C
›(›2 + ˜C) > 0
˜ΠÕÕ
››(›, C) = ΦÕÕ
¯a,¯aD2 + 2ΦÕÕ
›¯a,¯aDE + ΦÕÕ
›¯a,›¯aE2 + ⁄CC, where ⁄CC = ≠2KÕ(C)(1 ≠—)
›2 + ˜C < 0
It can be easily shown that ˜ΠÕÕ
››(›, C) Æ 0 and ˜ΠÕÕ
CC(›, C) Æ 0 using concavity of Φ (e.g., see, proof
of Proposition 6). Finally, ˜Π››(›, C)˜ΠCC(›, C) ≠˜Π2
›C(›, C) after simple algebraic manipulations can
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

be rewritten as:
1
ΦÕÕ
¯a,¯aΦÕÕ
›¯a,›¯a ≠(ΦÕÕ
›¯a,¯a)22
(BD ≠AE)2 + ⁄CC⁄›› ≠⁄2
›C + 2ΦÕÕ
›¯a,¯a(AB⁄CC ≠(BD + AE)⁄›C + DE⁄››)+
ΦÕÕ
¯a,¯a(A2⁄CC ≠2AD⁄›C + D2⁄››) + ΦÕÕ
›¯a,›¯a(B2⁄CC ≠2BE⁄›C + E2⁄››)
The ﬁrst term is non-negative due to concavity of Φ. The second and the third terms can be
combined and simpliﬁed (substitute the expressions for ⁄) to 4 ˜C(¯b›≠ﬂ˜C)2KÕ(C)2
›2(›2+ ˜C)2(¯b+ﬂ›)2 which is non-negative.
Thus, we are left to determine the sign of the last three terms. We can rewrite those as follows:
2CKÕ(C)
(›2 + ˜C)4
1
≠ΦÕÕ
¯a,¯aµ2 ≠2ΦÕÕ
›¯a,¯aµ÷ ≠ΦÕÕ
›¯a,›¯a÷2 ≠ΦÕÕ
›¯a,›¯a ˜C›2(¯b + ﬂ›)22
(16)
where µ = ¯b› ≠˜Cﬂand ÷ = ¯b(›2 ≠˜C) ≠2ﬂ› ˜C. Notice that sign of µ can be either positive or
negative, while ÷ < 0 since › < ¯›(C), where ¯› solves ÷ = 0. The multiplier of expression (16) is
positive. The last term is also positive since ΦÕÕ
›¯a,›¯a Æ 0. Finally, irrespective of the sign of µ The
ﬁrst three terms can also be shown positive using concavity of Φ (applying the same technique as in
the proof of Proposition 6). Hence, we showed that at optimal ›ı, Cı Hessian of ˜Π(›, C) is negative
semi-deﬁnite. Given that KÕÕ(C) Ø 0, we have Hessian of the proﬁt function Π(›, C) is also negative
semi-deﬁnite at ›ı, Cı.
Proposition 5
(i) Fix the level of data protection, C. The data collection strategy of a purely-
usage driven business is socially optimal. For all other types of businesses (i.e., not purely
usage-driven), their optimal data collection level as well as total users’ data collected are too
large, while users’ activity (and consequently consumer surplus) are too low, as compared to
socially optimal outcome.
(ii) Fix the level of data collection, ›. Relative to the socially optimal outcome, the business’s data
protection level, total users’ data collected and users’ activity are too low.
Proof. Fix C, the derivative of the welfare function W(›, C) (Eq. 7) wrt › and divided by 1 ≠– is
1
1 ≠–W Õ
›(›, C) =
–
1 ≠–¯aú(›, C)ˆ¯aú(›, C)
ˆ›
+ ΦÕ
¯a · ˆ¯aú(›, C)
ˆ›
+ ΦÕ
›¯a · ˆ(›¯aú(›, C))
ˆ›
(17)
For brevity here we denote ΦÕ
¯a and ΦÕ
›¯a partial derivatives of the proﬁt function wrt activity
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

and information respectively (ﬁrst and second arguments).
Both derivatives are evaluated at
(¯aú(›, C), ›¯aú(›, C)). For – œ (0, 1) and non purely usage-driven business (i.e., ΦÕ
›¯a > 0), expres-
sion (17) is positive at ›(C) and negative at ¯›(C). The ﬁrst term of Eq. (17) is negative for any
› œ (›(C), ¯›(C)). When solving the ﬁrst-order-condition W Õ
›(›, C) = 0 to obtain socially-optimal
›W (C), only solutions, which are such that W Õ
›(›, C) intersects horizontal axis from above, can be
local maxima. It is clear then that when comparing those solutions to proﬁt-maximizing ›ı(C)
(i.e., – = 0), we get ›W (C) Ø ›ı(C). The ordering of total users’ data collected and users’ activity
then follow. When the business is purely usage-driven, the last term of Eq. (17) is zero. Then
the ﬁrst-order condition for socially-optimal data collection level ›W (C) is such that ¯aú(›, C) is
maximized. This holds for any level of –, including – = 0, which implies ›ı(C) = ›W (C).
Now, ﬁx ›. The derivative of W(›, C) wrt C is:
1
1 ≠–W Õ
C(›, C) =
–
1 ≠–¯aú(›, C)ˆ¯aú(›, C)
ˆC
+ ΦÕ
¯a · ˆ¯aú(›, C)
ˆC
+ ›ΦÕ
›¯a · ˆ¯aú(›, C)
ˆC
≠KÕ(C)
(18)
The derivative is positive at C = 0 and is ≠Œ at ¯C. The ﬁrst term of Eq. 18 is positive. Any local
maximum is such that Eq. 18 intersects horizontal axis from above. Hence, an increase in – shifts
local maxima to the right. Hence Cı(›) Æ CW (›) and the result follows.
Theorem 2 and its proof are the same for the case of the general proﬁt function.
The statement of Proposition 4 is not changed. Below we provide its proof for the case of the
general proﬁt function.
Proof of Proposition 4 (Page 17) with General Proﬁt Function.
Proof. We will prove statement of the proposition for the case when liability policy ¸ı is used. The
proof when tax rate tı is used is similar. The proﬁt function of the business under liability policy is
Π(›, C, ¸) = Φ(¯aú(›, C), ›¯aú(›, C)) ≠K(C) ≠¸
C [›¯aú(›, C)]2. The ﬁrst-order conditions are:
ˆΠ(›, C, ¸)
ˆ›
= ˆΦ(¯aú(›, C), ›¯aú(›, C))
ˆ›
≠2 ¸
C ¯aú(›, C)› ˆ(›¯aú(›, C))
ˆ›
(19)
ˆΠ(›, C, ¸)
ˆC
= ˆΦ(¯aú(›, C), ›¯aú(›, C))
ˆC
+ ¸
C ¯aú(›, C)›2
3¯aú(›, C)›
C
≠2ˆ(›¯aú(›, C))
ˆC
4
(20)
Now, evaluate these conditions at socially-optimal ›W , CW . The ﬁrst-order condition for socially-
optimal data collection is ˆΦ
ˆ› (1 ≠–) + – ˆ¯aú(›,C)
ˆ›
= 0 (by derivation of Eq. 7). Substitute ˆΦ
ˆ› into
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

Eq. (19) and solve for ¸. We will get expression (8) for optimal liability rate ¸ı. After simpliﬁcation
(use ˆΦ
ˆC from the ﬁrst-order condition for socially-optimal data protection), the ﬁrst-order conditions
for business’s proﬁt at ›W , CW , ¸ı become:
ˆΠ(›, C, ¸ı)
ˆ›
---
›W ,CW = 0
ˆΠ(›, C, ¸ı)
ˆC
---
›W ,CW =
CW ﬂ›W (1 + ﬂ›W )2
2((›W )2 + CW (1 ≠—))((›W )2 ≠CW (1 ≠—) ≠2ﬂ›W CW (1 ≠—)) < 0
Where the second inequality follows from the fact that ›W , CW are such that ›W < ¯›(C) (To see
that, notice that ≠›2 + C(1 ≠—) + 2ﬂ›C(1 ≠—) deﬁnes the sign of ˆ¯a›/ˆ›. In equilibrium, both
for the business and for the social planner it must be that ˆ¯a›/ˆ› > 0 and ˆ¯a/ˆ› < 0, otherwise,
they would be able to increase their objectives by either increasing or decreasing › depending on
the signs of the derivatives). Thus, business under minimum data protection C Ø Cmin requirement
and liability policy ¸ı, sets ›W , CW . In case if ΦÕ
›¯a = 0, welfare is maximized when activity ¯aú(›, C)
is maximized, hence condition ˆΠ(›,C)
ˆ›
|›W ,CW ,¸ = 0 is satisﬁed with ¸ = 0.
Finally, we will show that under the general proﬁt function, the business sees its data collection
and data protection strategies as complements for a large and economically relevant family of
revenue models.
Proposition 6 Suppose that for any ¯a and ›, ΦÕÕ
›¯a,¯a(¯a, ›¯a) Ø ≠›ΦÕÕ
›¯a,›¯a(¯a, ›¯a), then at the busi-
ness’s equilibrium strategy, data collection › and data protection C are complements. That is,
ˆ2Π(›,C)
ˆ›ˆC
--
›ı,Cı> 0.
Intuitively, the condition of Proposition 6 guarantees that, for the business’s proﬁt, users’ activity
and users’ information are suﬃciently strong complements, relative to the second-order eﬀects of
users’ activity data. This condition is satisﬁed in many formulations often used in economics, such
as in the case that Φ is linear as well as if Φ is a Cobb-Douglas or a CES function. It is also satisﬁed
for a business that is purely usage-driven, regardless of the speciﬁc functional form of Φ.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

Proof. First-order conditions for proﬁt-maximizing ›ı, Cı can be rewritten as:
ΦÕ
¯a = ≠KÕ(C)(›2 + ˜C)(›2 ≠˜C ≠2ﬂ› ˜C)
›2(1 + ﬂ›)2
ΦÕ
›¯a = KÕ(C)(›2 + ˜C)(2› + ﬂ›2 ≠˜Cﬂ)
›2(1 + ﬂ›)2
where ˜C = C(1≠—) and as in the proofs above we use ΦÕ
¯a, ΦÕ
›¯a for brevity. We will also use shorthand
notation ΦÕÕ
¯a,¯a, ΦÕÕ
›¯a,›¯a, ΦÕÕ
›¯a,¯a to denote second-order derivatives of function Φ. For the rest of the
proof, all functions are evaluated at optimal ›ı, Cı, yet we will write ›, C for brevity. We will also
use the following notation: A © ˆ¯aú(›,C)
ˆ›
, B © ˆ(›¯aú(›,C))
ˆ›
and D © ˆ¯aú(›,C)
ˆC
, E © ˆ(›¯aú(›,C))
ˆC
. Then
the mixed derivate of the proﬁt function is:
ˆ2Π(›, C)
ˆ›ˆC
= ΦÕÕ
¯a,¯aAD + ΦÕÕ
›¯a,¯a (AE + BD) + ΦÕÕ
›¯a,›¯aBE + ΦÕ
¯a
ˆ2¯aú(›, C)
ˆ›ˆC
+ ΦÕ
›¯a
ˆ2(›¯aú(›, C))
ˆ›ˆC
(21)
Using the ﬁrst-order conditions, the last two terms can be shown to be equal to 2KÕ(C)
˜C
›(›2+ ˜C) > 0.
The ﬁrst three terms of Eq. 21 can be rearranged as follows:
ˆ¯aú(›, C)
ˆC
ˆ¯aú(›, C)
ˆ›
1
ΦÕÕ
¯a,¯a + 2ΦÕÕ
›¯a,¯a› + ›2ΦÕÕ
›¯a,›¯a
2
+ ¯aú(›, C)ˆ¯aú(›, C)
ˆC
1
ΦÕÕ
›¯a,¯a + ›ΦÕÕ
›¯a,¯a
2
(22)
The ﬁrst term is non-negative due to concavity of function Φ. Indeed, we have ΦÕÕ
¯a,¯a Æ 0, ΦÕÕ
›¯a,›¯a Æ 0
and |ΦÕÕ
›¯a,¯a| Æ
Ò
ΦÕÕ
¯a,¯aΦÕÕ
›¯a,›¯a. If at ›ı, Cı, ΦÕÕ
›¯a,¯a Æ 0 then the ﬁrst term is non-negative. Similarly, if
at ›ı, Cı, ΦÕÕ
›¯a,¯a Ø 0, then substitute ΦÕÕ
›¯a,¯a = ≠
Ò
ΦÕÕ
¯a,¯aΦÕÕ
›¯a,›¯a to the ﬁrst term to ﬁnd its lower bound
which can be shown to be non-negative. The second term of Eq. (22) is non-negative by assumption
of the Proposition, which ﬁnishes the proof.
C.6. Business Always Weakly Over-Collects Data when ﬂ= 0
Set ﬂ= 0. One can use similar techniques to those in the proof of Theorem 1 to derive welfare
maximizing ›W , CW (i.e., those that maximize Eq. (7)).
In particular, there exist ÂL(–) =
P≠PÔ
1≠2P–(1≠–)
4–
and ÂH(–) =
P 2(1≠–)
4(1≠P(1≠–)) such that ›W = 1 when Â < ÂL(–); ›W = 0 when
Â > ÂH(–); and ›W (–) = P(4Â≠P(1≠–)(P+4Â))
4Â(2–Â≠P 2(1≠–))
otherwise. Trivially, ÂL(–) < lim–æ0 ÂL(–), ’– > 0.
Also, ÂH(–) < ÂH(0), ’– > 0. Finally, ›W (–) < ›W (0) = ›ı, where ›ı is proﬁt-maximizing data
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

collection strategy. Thus, we conclude that the business always weakly over-collects data when
ﬂ= 0.
C.7. Vertical Integration Example (Section 6.2, Page 20)
Consider the linear model and two digital businesses j œ {1, 2}. The proﬁt function of business j
has now an added term ”j
merger›≠j¯aú
≠j, where ”j > 0 and
merger is the indicator function, taking
a value of 1 if the businesses allow for reciprocal access to their databases and 0 otherwise (i.e.,
merger = 1 if business 1 can access database of business 2 and vice versa). Users’ utilities and
adversaries’ cost-beneﬁt structure remain the same as before.
Now consider the following three scenarios: Scenario 0 is the pre-merger scenario, the two
businesses act independently without sharing information. In Scenario DM (Data Merger), the
businesses allow for reciprocal access to their databases but maintain autonomy over setting their
data collection policies. Finally, in Scenario SM (Strategy Merger), in addition to the reciprocal
access to data, businesses decide jointly on their data collection policies.
It is easy to see that in Scenario DM, businesses’ data collection policies, user activity, privacy
costs, and consumer surplus will remain the same as in Scenario 0, but proﬁts will increase. In
contrast, in Scenario SM the businesses will internalize the positive externalities they impose on
each other by collecting information. As a result, data collection, proﬁts, and privacy costs will
increase, whereas user activity and consumer surplus will decrease relative to Scenarios 0 and DM.
Intuitively, the move to Scenario SM is akin to a business becoming more data-driven, leading to
increased data collection and a decrease in user activity.
C.8. Paying Users for Data (Section 6.3, Page 21)
Users’ utility is modiﬁed by adding t¯a›, which, in the case of exogenous t is equivalent to setting
˜ﬂ= ﬂ+ t. Thus, ¯aú(›, C) is modiﬁed by increasing ﬂto ˜ﬂ. Denote modiﬁed users’ response as
˜aú(›, C). Then business’s proﬁt without paying for data is Π(›) = (1 ≠P)¯aú(›, C) + P›¯aú(›, C) and
when paying for data it is ˜Π = (1 ≠P)˜aú(›, C) + P›˜aú(›, C) ≠t˜aú(›, C)›. Without loss of generality
let — = 0.
Fix C. Equilibrium data collection strategy of the business which pays for data ›ı(t) has the
following form: (1 ≠P)ˆ˜aú(›,C)
ˆ›
+ (P ≠t)ˆ(›˜aú(›,C))
ˆ›
= 0. Solving for equilibrium ›ı(t, C) we obtain:
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

›ı(t, C) = ≠Ÿ(t, C) +

Ÿ(t, C)2 + C – decreasing in Ÿ(t, C), where Ÿ(t, C) = 1≠P≠(P≠t)(ﬂ+t)C
P≠t+(1≠P)(ﬂ+t) . The
sign of the derivative of Ÿ(t, C) wrt t is deﬁned by ≠CPt2 + 2tC(P + ﬂ(1 ≠P)) + (1 ≠P)P + C((1 ≠
P)ﬂ2 ≠P 2). Equilibrium data collection strategy of the business which doesn’t pay for data is
›ı = ›ı(0, C). If P(1 ≠P) + C((1 ≠P)ﬂ2 ≠P 2) < 0 then at t æ 0, we will get ›ı(t, C) > ›ı – at
least for small t business collects higher fraction of user information than with t = 0. Now, consider
t = P, then business sets ›(t = P) (s.t. d˜aú(›)
d›
= 0) – data collection strategy maximizing consumer
surplus.
C.9. The Real Cost of Adversarial Activity: Beyond Regulating Business
Even under the socially optimal data strategy, users experience negative externalities caused by
adversarial activity. In fact, it turns out that the direct disutility or damage inﬂicted on users by
adversaries capture only a small part of the loss of welfare due to adversarial activity, and that the
total welfare loss from the presence of adversaries can be arbitrarily large.
Proposition 7 Let CSno adversaries(›, C) be consumer surplus in the absence of adversaries.2 For
any data strategy (›, C), the total decrease in consumer surplus due to the presence of adversaries,
CSno adversaries(›, C) ≠CS(›, C), equals M(›, C) · D(›, C), where D(›, C) is the average damage
caused to a user as described in Deﬁnition 1 and M(›, C) is the adversarial loss multiplier. Moreover,
M(›, C) Ø
2
1≠—.
Proof. Average activity in the case with no adversaries can be obtained by setting Ê = 0 in the
proof of Proposition 1. Average damage from Deﬁnition 1 is D(›, C) = (›¯aú(›,C))2
C
. Then we have:
M(›, C) = CSno adversaries(›, C) ≠CS(›, C)
D(›, C)
= C
2›2
A31 + ﬂ›
1 ≠—
42
≠
3
C(1 + ﬂ›)
C(1 ≠—) + ›2
42B O3
C(1 + ﬂ›)
C(1 ≠—) + ›2
42
Simplifying we obtain M(›, C) = ›2+2C(1≠—)
2C(1≠—)2
=
›2
2C(1≠—)2 +
1
1≠— Ø
1
1≠—.
Proposition 7 suggests that governments may want to take a more comprehensive approach
that supplements the aforementioned policies with steps to minimize the government’s share
of adversarial activities as well as outlawing a wider range of private adversarial activities and
establishing corresponding independent enforcement authorities.
2In particular, ¯a(›, C)no adversaries = 1+ﬂ›
1≠— and CSno adversaries(›, C) = 1
2¯a(›, C)2
no adversaries.
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274

C.10. Harmful Ads
In our narrative throughout the paper, we included the targeting of ads as a positive factor in users’
utility functions. That is, users prefer relevant ads and information revealed by users through their
activity improves the match between them and the ads they observe. However, in practice, targeting
of certain ads may also lead to a reduction in users’ utility. Consider, for instance, targeting adds of
addictive products to vulnerable users (e.g., an AA member can be targeted with an ad for alcoholic
beverages), similarly some ads may be misleading or even manipulative.3
Notably, harmful targeting relies on data collected and quality targeting technology in order to
be eﬀective. Moreover, if, as digital businesses often argue, they prefer not to advertise harmful ads,
they may invest in the better screening of the advertising content that they post. Circumventing
the additional screening is costly to marketers who seek to post harmful ads, and thus the extra
screening can be thought of as a form of data protection (or protection of the ability to target using
the data). Our analysis of optimal regulation thus follows with this alternative interpretation.
3See, e.g., Liu et al. 2020 and references therein; see also "Facebook Says It Won’t Back Down From Allowing Lies
in Political Ads", The New York Times, 9 Jan 2020, on Facebook’s policy regarding misleading campaign ads.
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3459274