TITLE: Institutional Investor Attention, Agency Conflicts, and the Cost of Debt
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2022.4593
---

Institutional Investor Attention, Agency Conflicts, and the Cost of Debt 
 
Sadok El Ghoul, Omrane Guedhami, Sattar A. Mansi, and Hyo Jin Yoon♣ 
 
Abstract 
Using Kempf, Manconi, and Spalt’s (2017) measure of shareholder inattention, constructed from 
exogenous industry shocks to institutional investor portfolios, we find that firms with distracted 
shareholders are associated with a higher cost of debt. This effect is stronger for firms with more 
powerful CEOs, higher information asymmetry, and those operating in less competitive product 
markets. Further testing suggests that the inattention–cost of debt relation is driven primarily by dual 
holders directly observing shareholder distraction. Our results are robust to controlling for inattention 
at the retail investor level and to other external monitors, including credit rating agencies, financial 
analysts, and Big 4 auditors. Overall, our evidence suggests that institutional shareholder inattention 
has an incrementally negative effect on bond pricing. 
 
Key Words: Shareholder Distraction, Agency conflicts, Dual Holders, Cost of debt 
JEL Classifications: G23, G34 
 
April 25, 2022 
 
 
 
♣ Guedhami (omrane.guedhami@moore.sc.edu) is at the University of South Carolina, El Ghoul is at the University of 
Alberta (elghoul@ualberta.ca), Mansi is at Virginia Tech (smansi@vt.edu), and Yoon (hyoon@utep.edu) is at the 
University of Texas at El Paso. The authors would like to thank Brian Bushee (Editor), an associate editor, two anonymous 
reviewers, Wolfgang Drobetz, Joseph Weber, Regina Wittenberg Moerman, and seminar participants at Hamburg 
University, the University of South Carolina, and the University of Ottawa for comments and suggestions. We are also 
grateful to Yongqiang Chu for providing his 13F-DealScan correspondence table. Special thanks to Elisabeth Kempf at 
the University of Chicago for providing her shareholder distraction data and to Han Shi for providing retail attention data. 
Any remaining errors are ours. 

1 
 
Institutional Investor Attention, Agency Conflicts, and the Cost of Debt 
 
Abstract 
Using Kempf, Manconi, and Spalt’s (2017) measure of shareholder inattention, constructed from 
exogenous industry shocks to institutional investor portfolios, we find that firms with distracted 
shareholders are associated with a higher cost of debt. This effect is stronger for firms with more 
powerful CEOs, higher information asymmetry, and those operating in less competitive product 
markets. Further testing suggests that the inattention–cost of debt relation is driven primarily by dual 
holders directly observing shareholder distraction. Our results are robust to controlling for inattention 
at the retail investor level and to other external monitors, including credit rating agencies, financial 
analysts, and Big 4 auditors. Overall, our evidence suggests that institutional shareholder inattention 
has an incrementally negative effect on bond pricing. 
 
Key Words: Shareholder Distraction, Agency Conflicts, Dual Holders, Cost of Debt 
JEL Classifications: G23, G34 
 
April 25, 2022

2 
 
1. Introduction 
A large literature shows that shareholder inattention is an important determinant of asset prices.1 
Much of this work examines inattention at the retail investor level using a variety of proxies, such as 
extreme returns, trading volume, news and headlines, advertising spending, and price limits. Because 
the majority of these studies use indirect proxies to measure investor attention, such events are often 
associated with contemporaneous changes in firm fundamentals. This makes it difficult to separate 
the effect of heightened investor attention from that of changes in firm fundamentals (Madsen and 
Niessner 2019). Da et al. (2011) propose a more direct measure of investor inattention using aggregate 
search frequency in Google, and they re-examine the effect of retail investor attention on asset prices. 
In addition to endogeneity, the main limitation of this literature is that using retail investors as a proxy 
for market participants may not accurately capture attention because retail investors do not represent 
an economically significant group of shareholders: They hold a small percentage of the aggregate value 
of all traded stocks, they are not required to report their holdings to the Securities and Exchange 
Commission, and they are relatively uninformed due to their informational disadvantages and 
psychological biases (Barber and Odean 2008). 
More recently, Kempf, Manconi, and Spalt (2017, KMS hereafter) focus on institutional rather 
than retail investors to address the small-shareholder inattention problem.2 Institutional investors 
represent a special class of large shareholder that has unique incentives to monitor firm performance 
(Shleifer and Vishny 1986). These investors, however, may not have sufficient cognitive ability to 
process all of the information available in the market. KMS (2017) posit that institutional shareholders 
have only limited attention in the sense that they cannot constantly monitor all of the companies in 
their portfolios. As a result, they are likely to focus on certain firms while neglecting others. This 
argument suggests that, at a firm level, monitoring intensity is likely to vary over time. Consistent with 
such variation, KMS (2017) find that, when institutional shareholders are distracted, managers are less 
likely to be terminated for poor performance. They are also more likely to pursue privately optimal 
decisions that may be detrimental to minority shareholders, such as making value-destroying 
acquisitions, granting timely CEO stock options, and curtailing dividends. 
 
1 See, for example, Drake et al. (2012), Choi and Varian (2012), Da et al. (2011), Ginsberg et al. (2009), Teoh et al. 
(1998a, 1998b), and Hirshleifer and Teoh (2003) for evidence on investor inattention. 
2 For the purpose of this research, we use the terms inattention, investor inattention, shareholder distraction, and 
investor distraction interchangeably to mean the loosening of monitoring constraint by shareholders. 

3 
 
In this paper, we study the effect of shareholder inattention on bond pricing.3 From a bondholder 
perspective, it is theoretically unclear whether distraction has a positive or negative effect on bond 
valuation. On the one hand, distraction adversely affects bond pricing by intensifying the agency 
conflicts associated with loosening monitoring constraints, which influences the likelihood of default. 
KMS (2017) show that inattention can exacerbate managerial agency problems and information 
asymmetry, which can lead firms to deviate from value maximization. Liu et al. (2020) study the voting 
behavior of institutional investors in annual director elections, and document that distracted 
shareholders weaken board oversight. Moreover, Abramova et al. (2020) and Basu et al. (2019) find 
that investor inattention has negative consequences for firms’ disclosure decisions. On the other hand, 
inattention implies that management faces less pressure to act in the interests of shareholders. For 
example, KMS (2017) find that when institutional shareholders are distracted, managers are more likely 
to curtail dividends and make diversifying acquisitions, both of which could benefit bondholders. Chu 
(2018) further shows that mergers between shareholders and creditors of the same firms reduce 
corporate payouts. Thus, whether shareholder distraction positively or negatively affects the cost of 
debt is an open empirical question. 
We begin our analysis by examining the distraction–cost of debt relation in an institutional 
shareholder setting. To this end, we rely on KMS’s (2017) firm-level proxy for institutional investor 
distraction. Their measure assumes that shareholder attention declines if a firm’s institutional investors 
experience a shock to parts of their portfolios that are unrelated to the focal firm, i.e., large positive 
or negative returns in industries unrelated to the firm. Importantly, distraction events arising in other 
industries are, by construction, exogenous to the firm. Thus, firms within an industry are differentially 
exposed due to variations in their investor base. KMS (2017) argue that their measure captures periods 
in which shareholders are likely to direct their attention to the parts of their portfolios that are affected 
by a shock and, as a result, away from the firm. This relaxation of monitoring constraints allows 
managers to actively pursue their own private benefits. 
Using a sample of publicly traded bonds for 21,345 firm-quarter observations from 1,094 firms 
over the 1993–2015 period, we find evidence that institutional shareholder distraction adversely affects 
bondholders. More specifically, we find a persistent and positive relation between institutional 
 
3 We focus on the bond market rather than the loan market because the former is less informationally efficient in terms 
of corporate defaults and bankruptcies (Altman et al. 2004). Similarly, Dichev and Skinner (2002) find that private lenders 
use debt covenants as “trip wires” for borrowers, that private debt covenants tend to be set tightly, and that violations are 
not necessarily associated with financial distress. 

4 
 
shareholder distraction and yield spreads that is incremental to the effect of institutional ownership. 
This result holds when we re-estimate the distraction measure separately for positive and negative 
extreme industry returns and when we split the sample based on investment-grade and non-
investment-grade debt categories. Economically, a 1-standard deviation increase in the institutional 
shareholder distraction measure across all models is associated with an 11- to 26-basis point annual 
increase in yield spreads. 
To validate our institutional shareholder setting, we examine the relation between inattention and 
the cost of debt financing at the retail investor level. Da et al. (2011) argue that the demand for public 
information via Google searches captures retail investors’ attention. Drake et al. (2012), however, 
suggest that internet searches may also capture the attention of sophisticated traders. We expect retail-
level investing in the equity market to be of little consequence for bond valuations because participants 
in the bond market are mainly institutional investors (Bessembinder and Maxwell 2008). Using hand-
collected data for a large sample of search frequencies in Google, we do not find evidence of 
differences in yield spreads associated with retail investor inattention. Our findings suggest that 
institutional equity holders, not retail investors, are important monitors of management. 
Next, we investigate the possible cross-sectional heterogeneity underlying our main finding. KMS 
(2017) show that CEOs who are more powerful than their boards may find it easier to exploit 
shareholder distraction to make privately optimal decisions that destroy firm value. Following 
Abernethy et al. (2015), we use a multidimensional measure of CEO power based on four agency 
variables known to influence the cost of debt: board co-option (Sandvik 2020), CEO pay slice 
(Bebchuk et al. 2011; Chen et al. 2013), CEO tenure (Hermalin and Weisbach 1998; Harford and Li 
2007; Graham et al. 2020), and CEO duality (Aktas et al. 2019). Using the interaction between CEO 
power and distraction, we find that the effect of institutional shareholder inattention on yield spreads 
is more pronounced in firms with more powerful CEOs. 
A large theoretical literature examines how information asymmetry affects the cost of capital (e.g., 
Leland and Pyle 1977; Stiglitz and Weiss 1981; Diamond 1985). Empirically, Cohen and Lou (2012) 
show that firms with higher levels of information asymmetry are more difficult to monitor and value. 
Han and Zhou (2014) show that measures of information asymmetry capture adverse selection in 
corporate bond trading, are key determinants of yield spreads, and help forecast corporate defaults. 
More recently, Derrien et al. (2016) use exogenous increases in information asymmetry to show that 
the cost of debt increases for firms that lose an analyst due to a broker closure or a merger. Accordingly, 

5 
 
we also consider the role of several widely used proxies for information asymmetry, such as asset 
intangibility (Almeida and Campello 2007), analyst forecast dispersion (Mansi et al. 2011; Gao et al. 
2020), and organizational complexity as captured by the number of segments in which a firm operates 
(Mansi and Reeb 2002). Using interactions between the information asymmetry proxies and 
distraction, we find that the effect of institutional investor inattention on yield spreads is more 
pronounced in firms with relatively high levels of information asymmetry. 
We further investigate whether the extent of product market competition impacts the effect of 
shareholder distraction on the cost of debt. Prior research suggests that a competitive product market 
serves as a powerful corporate governance mechanism that incentivizes management not to engage in 
value-reducing expropriation (Alchian 1950; Stigler 1958; Giroud and Mueller 2010; Chhaochharia et 
al. 2017). In our context, we posit that managers are more likely to exploit institutional shareholder 
distraction under weak product market competition. Using an interaction between distraction and a 
commonly used measure of product competition (market concentration based on the four largest 
firms’ sales), we find that the effect of investor distraction on bond yield spreads is greater in firms 
that operate in less competitive product markets.4 Collectively, the cross-sectional results support our 
finding of a positive and significant relation between distracted institutional shareholders and yield 
spreads. We show that this effect is stronger in firms with a more powerful CEO, those with greater 
information asymmetry, and those operating in less competitive product markets. 
To shed light on how bond investors observe shareholder distraction, we investigate the economic 
mechanisms underlying our main prediction. We are particularly interested in whether bondholders 
observe shareholder distraction directly, or observe potentially value-destroying managerial actions 
and/or deteriorations in credit risk and adjust their valuation accordingly. To this end, we conduct 
three tests. The first focuses on the distraction of dual and non-dual holders. While the distraction of 
both types of institutional investors can affect bond pricing, we posit that dual holders, who hold 
equity positions and at the same time are creditors, are more likely to drive this relation. Because dual 
holders are part of the institutional equity ownership base, they are likely to observe extreme return 
shocks to their portfolio and, given their debt holdings, have access to superior information about the 
issuing firm (Jiang et al. 2010). In addition, given their equity holdings, dual holders are uniquely 
positioned to observe and, as debtholders, potentially price in the distraction of other institutional 
 
4 Alternatively, competition can influence the cost of debt through default risk and the loss given default. Because greater 
competition reduces future income, increases cash flow risk, and increases business risk (Bolton and Scharfstein 1990), it 
can increase firms’ default risk (Valta 2012). 

6 
 
equity holders in a firm (non-dual holders). Therefore, we expect bond yield spreads to reflect the 
distraction of dual and non-dual holders resulting from extreme return events, with this effect being 
mainly driven by distracted dual holders. 
Consistent with this expectation, we find positive and significant relations between the distraction 
of dual and non-dual holders and the cost of debt, with this relation being stronger for dual holder 
than that for non-dual holders. Economically, a 1-standard deviation increase in distraction is 
associated with 22- and 14-basis point increases in yield spreads annually for distracted dual and non-
dual holders, respectively. When we simultaneously account for the effects of distracted dual holders 
and non-overlapping distracted non-dual holders, we find that only distracted dual holders matter to 
bond pricing. These results are consistent with the monitoring role of these overlapping investors and 
their informational advantage (Jiang et al. 2010). 
The second test examines mechanisms related to managerial actions that can potentially affect 
bondholders during distraction periods: acquisitions (within-industry and diversifying) and dividend 
cuts (KMS 2017). Consistent with the notion that diversifying acquisitions increases managerial private 
benefits, KMS (2017) find that distraction has a stronger impact on these deals than on within-industry 
acquisitions. Using interactions between the distraction measure and proxies for these managerial 
actions, we find no compelling evidence that these actions moderate the effect of distraction on the 
cost of debt. Note that while these corporate actions are not necessarily value-destroying for 
bondholders, they could still provide a signal about managers acting in their own self-interest. 
The third test explores the effects of distraction on firm credit risk that result from value-
destroying managerial actions, such as credit ratings, distance to default, and firm idiosyncratic risk 
(e.g., Ashbaugh-Skaife et al. 2006; Harford et al. 2018). We posit that if yield spreads reflect the 
response of a firm’s credit risk to value-destroying managerial actions, we would expect shareholder 
distraction to have an economically meaningful impact on credit risk. Although statistically significant, 
we find that only a small fraction of the economic increases in the cost of debt can be explained by 
observed changes in a firm’s credit risk proxies. Collectively, the results of these three tests support 
the view that the documented effect of distraction on the cost of debt is primarily a reflection of dual 
holders directly observing shareholder distraction. 
Our research contributes to recent work on limited attention and asset prices. While a large strand 
of the literature explores the effect of investor inattention on stock prices and corporate outcomes, 
no study to date has examined the effects of limited shareholder attention at the retail and institutional 

7 
 
levels on bond pricing.5 The bond market thus provides an ideal laboratory to study inattention 
because the effects of shareholder distraction on the cost of debt have not yet been studied and are ex 
ante ambiguous.6 Our finding of a positive and significant relation between shareholder inattention 
and bond yield spreads suggests that distraction contains information beyond the previously identified 
determinants of debt pricing. Importantly, our results illuminate the role that distracted dual holders 
play in mitigating bondholder-shareholder conflicts. As such, this work is related to the growing 
research on the consequence of dual holders on corporate outcomes (e.g., Jiang et al. 2010; Bodnaruk 
and Rossi 2016, 2021; Chu et al. 2020). 
Our study also contributes to the literature on the importance of information flow from the stock 
market to the bond market. Existing studies examine the timing of information efficiency in the 
markets, with the majority documenting that stock prices lead bond prices. Kwan (1996), for example, 
finds that individual stocks tend to lead individual bonds when incorporating firm-specific information. 
Gebhardt et al. (2005) find no momentum spillover from corporate bonds to stocks, suggesting that 
past corporate bond return information is not useful for predicting stock returns in the cross-section. 
Downing et al. (2009) find that stock returns predict returns on non-investment-grade bonds at daily 
and hourly frequencies, which implies that information in the stock market is valuable to traders in 
the bond market. More recently, Kecskés et al. (2013) provide evidence that equity short sellers are 
skilled information processors who supply predictive information to the bond market. Our research 
builds on this work by showing that a loosening of monitoring constraints by institutional shareholders 
provides predictive information to the bond market. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly discusses our motivation. 
The data, variables, and summary statistics are described in Section 3. Section 4 presents our main 
evidence on the relation between inattention and the cost of debt, as well as the results of cross-
sectional heterogeneity tests. Section 4 also investigates the economic mechanisms underlying the 
distraction–cost of debt relation. Section 5 concludes. 
 
 
5 In a sample of non-M&A bidders, KMS (2017) find that institutional distraction is costly to shareholders because it 
reduces future stock returns. 
6 Another reason shareholder inattention may not affect the cost of debt is the illiquid nature of the bond market. Li 
(2021) documents that differences in liquidity cannot explain the relation between sophisticated investor attention 
allocation, as proxied for by trading volume, and price underreactions to information in the bond market. 

8 
 
2. Distraction, Agency Conflicts, and the Cost of Debt 
Financial institutions, such as banks, pension funds, insurance companies, and other entities that 
trade in large share quantities, own close to 70% of all equity shares invested in the U.S. market. 
Together, these institutions provide stakeholders with a valuable monitoring function by focusing on 
maximizing long-term value, as opposed to generating short-term profits, and by regularly engaging 
with management to achieve this objective (e.g., Monks and Minow 1995; Shleifer and Vishny 1997; 
Bushee 1998; Harford et al. 2018). However, recent research argues that institutional investors do not 
have the cognitive ability to monitor all firms in their portfolios (KMS 2017). As a result, they are 
likely to focus on certain firms while neglecting others. Managers that are aware of a relaxation of 
monitoring constraints may try to pursue private benefits at the expense of firms’ stakeholders. For 
example, KMS (2017) show that when shareholders are distracted, managers are more likely to make 
value-destroying acquisitions, grant timely CEO stock options, force fewer CEO turnovers for poor 
performance, and curtail dividends. Distracted shareholders are also less likely to engage with 
corporations, as evidenced by fewer conference calls and proposals in general meetings (Druz et al. 
2020). Liu et al. (2020) find that shareholder distraction weakens board oversight. Abramova et al. 
(2020) and Basu et al. (2019) similarly document that shareholder distraction negatively affects firms’ 
disclosure decisions. 
We argue that institutional shareholder distraction (or reduced monitoring) is associated with 
increased agency costs between bondholders and shareholders and between management and all 
external stakeholders. Smith and Warner (1979) identify four major sources related to the 
bondholder−shareholder conflict: dividend payout, claim dilution, asset substitution, and 
underinvestment. Dividend payout is related to the risk that existing bondholders face when issuing 
firms pay out unsustainably large dividends to existing shareholders. If those dividends are financed 
by issuing additional debt or reducing investment, it may increase the probability of future default 
(Kalay 1982). Claim dilution occurs when the value of bondholders’ claims is reduced by issuing 
additional debt, especially when the current debt is not priced to reflect this additional issuance. An 
asset substitution problem arises when issuing firms substitute high-risk projects for low-risk ones 
after selling their bonds to unsuspecting bondholders. Lastly, the underinvestment problem occurs 
whenever issuing firms forgo profitable NPV investment opportunities because bondholders would 
capture a disproportionate share of firm value resulting from such investments (Myers 1977). The 

9 
 
increase in this agency risk decreases the expected value of cash flows and increases default risk to 
bondholders, leading to a higher cost of debt. 
While the lack of shareholder monitoring allows managers to make more privately optimal 
decisions that may be detrimental to shareholders, these decisions may be advantageous to 
bondholders. As a result, they may lead to a decrease in the cost of debt. For example, KMS (2017) 
show that, when institutional shareholders are distracted, managers are more likely to cut dividends 
(i.e., increase future cash flow) and make diversifying acquisitions (co-insurance, e.g., Amihud and Lev 
1981), both of which could be valuable to bondholders.7 Therefore, from a bondholder perspective, 
it is theoretically unclear whether distraction has a positive or negative effect on debt valuation. We 
empirically address this question by examining the effect of shareholder inattention on the cost of 
debt, and exploring the mechanisms underlying the distraction−cost of debt relation. 
 
3. Data, Variables, and Summary Statistics 
3.1. Data Sources and Sample Construction 
Our data come from several sources. Our main tests are based on the intersection of the Lehman 
Brothers (LBFI) and TRACE fixed income databases, the Fixed Income Securities Database (FISD), 
the Compustat Industrial quarterly and annual databases, and the Thomson Reuters Financial (13F) 
database. Data for the institutional shareholder distraction measure are provided by Professor 
Elisabeth Kempf at the University of Chicago. 
We use the LBFI database to obtain firms’ cost of debt for the 1993−2006 period, and the TRACE 
database to obtain firms’ cost of debt in 2007 and thereafter. Both the LBFI and TRACE databases 
cover the majority of publicly traded debt in the over-the-counter market, and are representative of 
the sample of traded bonds (see, e.g., Klock et al. 2005; Kecskés et al. 2013; Billet et al. 2007). Our 
final dataset contains month-end security-specific information such as bid price, coupon, yield to 
maturity, Moody’s and S&P credit ratings, issue date, and maturity date on non-convertible bonds 
contained in the Lehman Brothers bond indices and traded on the Nasdaq exchange. Securities are 
included in the Lehman Brothers bond indices based on credit rating, liquidity, maturity, size, and 
 
7 Note, however, that these corporate actions could also be detrimental to bondholders. Dividend cuts could signal that 
managers are acting in their own self-interest, and diversifying acquisitions may reflect managerial empire building (Morck 
et al. 1990). 

10 
 
trading frequency. Because the TRACE dataset only includes pricing and yield information, we merge 
it with the FISD to obtain debt-specific characteristics. 
Balance sheet and income statement data come from Compustat, and institutional ownership data 
come from the Thomson Reuters Financial (13F) database. We exclude heavily regulated firms (SIC 
codes 4900 to 4999) and financial firms (SIC codes 6000 to 6999) because they are subject to different 
accounting rules and regulations. Our final sample consists of 21,345 firm-quarter observations from 
1,094 firms over the 1993−2015 period. 
 
3.2. Main Variables 
3.2.1. Measuring the Cost of Debt Financing 
We use the dependent variable, the log of the yield spread or the bond risk premium, to measure 
the cost of debt. Yield Spread is defined as the difference between the yield to maturity on a corporate 
bond and the yield to maturity on its equivalent duration-matched Treasury security. For firms with 
multiple observations in the sample, we compute a weighted average yield spread, where the weight is 
equal to the amount outstanding for each security, divided by the total amount outstanding for all 
available publicly traded bonds (e.g., Mansi et al. 2009). In cases where there is no corresponding 
Treasury yield available for a given maturity, we calculate the Treasury yield spread by using 
interpolation based on the Svensson (1994) exponential functional form model. 
 
3.2.2. Measuring Shareholder Inattention 
We capture institutional shareholder distraction at a firm level using KMS’s (2017) aggregate 
measure of inattention. Although we cannot directly observe distraction, KMS (2017) use an 
identification strategy based on a firm’s pool of institutional investors and its stock holdings in firms 
other than the focal firm. Specifically, to identify time-varying shifts in investor attention, KMS (2017) 
use exogenous shocks to unrelated industries held by a firm’s institutional investors. The rationale is 
that, under the constraint of bounded attention, investors tend to shift their attention away from the 
focal firm to segments of their portfolio that are subject to industry shocks. In identifying distraction 
(i.e., attention-grabbing) events, KMS (2017) use “extreme” positive and negative industry returns in 
a given quarter. Because these events typically take time to develop and be understood, they can draw 

11 
 
on limited attention capacity for an extended period, leading to a temporary relaxation of the 
monitoring constraints faced by the focal firm’s managers.8 
We obtain firm-level proxy for distraction (Distraction) by weighing the level of inattention for each 
institutional investor in a given firm and then aggregating the scores. We also separately compute firm-
level proxies for distraction for positive (Distraction Positive Shock) and negative (Distraction Negative Shock) 
events. In doing so, we weigh the level of inattention for each institutional investor in a given firm 
driven by extreme positive and negative returns in unrelated industries. We then again aggregate the 
scores across the firm’s institutional investors. Higher values for these measures indicate that a 
representative investor experiences greater distraction, and therefore temporarily relaxes monitoring 
of a given firm. 
By construction, these measures of shareholder distraction are affected by whether a shock occurs 
in an industry unrelated to the firm, whether the industry experiencing the shock is important to an 
investor’s portfolio, and whether an investor that experienced an unrelated industry shock has 
incentives to monitor the focal firm. These measures thus have two main advantages for our purposes. 
First, they avoid endogeneity problems because they distinguish between exogenous changes in 
monitoring and attention-grabbing events that occur in other industries. Second, because these 
measures are time-varying, we can examine whether the time variation in firm-level distraction explains 
variation in bond yield spreads. 
Turning to retail investor inattention, we follow Da et al. (2011) and use Google’s search volume 
index (SVI). The SVI is a relative search popularity score, defined on a scale of 0 to 100, based on the 
number of searches for a term relative to the total number of searches for a specific geography and 
for a given time period. We obtain weekly SVI information for the 2004–2014 period by using a stock’s 
ticker symbol, and then construct monthly SVI scores by averaging weekly SVI for each stock. 
Following Da et al. (2011), we exclude ambiguous ticker symbols such as A, AUTO, ALL, B, BABY, 
BED, DNA, GPS, GAS, and GOLF, as they may not be related to equity. In cases where weekly SVI 
data near the end of a calendar month include the first few days of the next month, we prorate the 
weekly SVI based on the number of days in that month. We then compute a stock’s abnormal SVI as 
the log ratio of SVI to its SVI lagged value (Retail Inattention). 
 
8 KMS (2017) provide several examples of attention-grabbing events: the recent global financial crisis (2007Q4 industry 
return: -10.1%), the tech bubble (2000Q1 industry return: +14.8%), and the Gulf of Mexico oil spill (2010Q2 industry 
return: -11.4%). 

12 
 
 
3.2.3. Control Variables 
The remaining variables are firm- and security-specific controls. Firm-specific controls include 
size, leverage, profitability, market-to-book, sales growth, and cash flow volatility. Specifically, Firm 
Size, a proxy for economies of scale and a takeover deterrent, is measured as the natural log of total 
assets. Leverage, a proxy for financial health, is measured as the ratio of long-term debt to total assets. 
Performance, a proxy for financial profitability, is measured as the ratio of earnings before interest, taxes, 
depreciation, and amortization scaled by total assets. Sales Growth is a firm’s annual growth in revenue. 
Market-to-Book, a proxy for growth opportunities, is computed as the market value of assets (measured 
as the number of shares outstanding times the share price, plus the book value of debt) scaled by the 
book value of assets. Cash Flow Volatility is the standard deviation of firm performance over the past 
10 years. We further control for shareholder monitoring using Institutional Ownership, computed as the 
ratio of common shares owned by institutions divided by the total number of common shares 
outstanding. 
Security-specific control variables include credit rating, maturity, age, callability, and a high-yield 
dummy. A firm’s credit rating is the average of its Moody’s and S&P bond ratings, and represents 
average credit rating at the date of the yield observation. Bond ratings are computed using a conversion 
process, whereby AAA-rated bonds are assigned a value of 22, and D-rated bonds a value of 1 (see 
Table A1 in the Online Appendix for the full list of bond rating numerical conversions). We follow 
the literature, and allow for the fact that the credit rating variable may incorporate part or all of the 
information from investor inattention (Klock et al. 2005). Specifically, to estimate the effect of credit 
rating excluding the effect of distracted shareholders, we regress the rating variable on the distraction 
variable. The error term from this specification, Credit Rating, incorporates credit rating information 
without the influence of distraction. This is our primary measure of credit ratings in our multivariate 
analysis. 
We control for term structure effects using debt maturity, and for liquidity effects using bond age. 
For an individual security, Bond Maturity is the number of years remaining until the bond matures, and 
Bond Age is the length of time (in years) that a bond has been outstanding. For firms with multiple 
bonds, we compute weighted average maturity, bond age, and credit rating using the sum of the 
weighted measures of all bonds for each firm. The weight is the amount outstanding for each debt 
issue divided by the total amount outstanding for all publicly traded debt for the firm (Mansi et al. 

13 
 
2009). We also control for Callability, a dummy variable that equals 1 if the issue is callable, and for 
High Yield, a dummy variable that equals 1 when the debt is non-investment-grade, to account for the 
non-linear relation between bond yield spreads and credit ratings. We winsorize all variables at the 1% 
level to mitigate the influence of outliers. Table 1 provides a description and the data sources for the 
main variables used in the analysis. 
 
3.3. Descriptive Statistics 
Panel A of Table 2 gives the sample summary statistics. Specifically, we report the mean, median, 
standard deviation, 25th percentile, and 75th percentile for the main variables used in our analyses. In 
the cost of debt analysis, the variable of interest is the yield spread, which has a mean, median, and 
standard deviation of 288, 192, and 303 basis points, respectively. Because the mean and median values 
differ substantially from each other, the yield spread is highly skewed. Therefore, we use the log of 
the yield spread in our multivariate analysis to provide a better fit and to ensure that any fitted values 
remain positive. Looking at the firm-specific control variables, sample firms have a mean, median, and 
standard deviation of total assets of $11 billion, $4.4 billion, and $18 billion, respectively. The median 
leverage ratio is 30%, with a standard deviation of 16.7%, which implies that a large portion of the 
sample firms have significant liabilities in their capital structure. Our sample firms are profitable overall, 
with a mean profitability ratio of 3.6%, a market-to-book ratio of 3.11, and cash flow volatility of 4.3%. 
On average, institutions owned 71.3% of shares outstanding, with a standard deviation of 18.8%. 
With respect to the bond-specific controls, the mean and median numerical bond ratings for the 
sample are equivalent to S&P ratings of BB+ and BBB-, respectively, which implies ratings at or 
slightly below investment-grade debt. On average, traded debt has a maturity of 9.1 years, with a 
standard deviation of 5.4 years, and has been outstanding for 3.4 years. The sample is tilted toward 
investment-grade debt at 58%, with the remaining 42% consisting of non-investment-grade debt. 
Panel B of Table 2 shows the full sample distribution across industries using the Fama–French 
12-industry classification. The firms in our sample are concentrated mainly in manufacturing (24.7%), 
wholesale and retail trade (15.1%), consumer non-durables (9.7%), business equipment (9.2%), 
chemicals and allied products (7.2%), healthcare (7%), energy (6.5%), telecommunications (4.3%), 
consumer durables (1.6%), and other industries, which includes mines, construction, building material, 
transportation, hotels, business services, and entertainment (14.8%). 

14 
 
Panel C of Table 2 provides the Pearson correlation coefficients among shareholder distraction, 
cost of debt, and select controls. In general, we note low correlations between shareholder distraction 
and the control variables, suggesting that multicollinearity is not a concern in our multivariate analysis. 
One exception is the high correlation between distracted dual and non-dual holders. This is expected 
because both entities are part of the institutional shareholder base. This issue is discussed is detail in 
Section 4.3.1. In general, yield spread is positively correlated with the distraction measure, leverage, 
cash flow volatility, high yield dummy, and callability; it is negatively correlated with size, performance, 
market-to-book, credit ratings, bond maturity, and bond age. The correlation coefficients provide 
initial evidence that firms with distracted shareholders tend to have a higher cost of debt. 
 
4. Empirical Analysis 
4.1. Distraction and the Cost of Debt 
In our main analyses, we examine the relation between the log of yield spreads and the inattention 
measures―Distraction, Distraction (Positive Shock), Distraction (Negative Shock), and Retail Inattention―while 
controlling for firm- and security-specific factors known to influence the cost of debt. We perform 
multivariate regressions using various specifications. All models include firm fixed effects to control 
for unobservable firm-specific time-invariant factors and industry × quarter fixed effects to control 
for the effect of any factors that are invariant within the industry-date. We cluster standard errors at 
the firm level. Our primary regression model is as follows: 
Log(Spreadi,t) = α + β1 Inattentioni,t-1 + β2-7 Firm Controlsi,t -1+ β8-12 Debt Controlsi,t 
 
 + Firm FE + Industry × Quarter FE + εi,t , 
(1) 
where Spread is the bond yield spread, and Inattention is one of our four measures of distraction. 
Inattention and Firm Controls are lagged with respect to yield information. A positive and significant 
coefficient on inattention, β1, would support the hypothesis that looser monitoring constraints are 
value-decreasing for bondholders. 
Firm controls include size, leverage, profitability, market-to-book, and sales growth. We expect 
firm size to be negatively related to the log of the yield spread because larger firms enjoy greater 
economies of scale and stability. Leverage should be positively related to yield spreads because higher 
level of debt is associated with a higher probability of default, while market-to-book should be 

15 
 
negatively associated with yield spreads because firms with more growth opportunities use less debt 
and hence have a lower probability of default. We further expect sales growth and firm profitability 
to be negatively related to the cost of debt because more profitable firms have a lower probability of 
default. Lastly, we control for institutional ownership to account for firm governance structure. We 
expect this variable to be associated with a lower cost of debt due to the monitoring effects of 
institutional ownership. 
Security-specific controls include credit ratings, bond maturity, and bond age. We expect credit 
ratings to be negatively associated with yield spreads because firms with better ratings have a lower 
probability of default, and therefore a lower cost of debt. We expect bond age and bond maturity to 
be positively related to yield spreads because bonds that are less liquid and those with higher maturities 
require a higher rate of return. 
Table 3 reports the results of our regressions on the effect of inattention measures on the cost of 
debt. Model 1, our primary specification, uses KMS’s (2017) institutional distraction measure. Models 
2 and 3 focus on distraction when industry returns are extreme (positive or negative). Models 4 and 5 
are similar to Model 1, but break the sample down into investment-grade (greater than or equal to 
credit ratings of BBB-) and non-investment-grade debt (below credit ratings of BBB-). Model 6 is 
similar to Model 1, but replaces institutional shareholder distraction with retail investor inattention 
based on Google’s SVI. 
In Models 1–5, we find a positive and significant relation between shareholder distraction and 
bond yield spreads. Across models, the coefficient varies from 0.159 for the extreme positive industry 
returns sample to 0.286 for the non-investment-grade sample. In terms of economic significance, a 1-
standard deviation increase in shareholder distraction is associated with an increase in yield spreads 
ranging from 11 (Model 3: 0.159 × 0.06 × 288 × 4) to 26 (Model 5: 0.286 × 0.08 × 288 × 4) basis 
points annually. Models 2 and 3 show that the observed effect of distraction on the cost of debt comes 
from both extreme positive and negative industry returns. Models 4 and 5 report that distraction is 
positively related to the cost of debt in both the investment-grade and non-investment-grade samples, 
but its effect is slightly larger for the high-yield bond sample. In Model 6, we find an insignificant 
relation between retail investor inattention and the cost of debt. This is consistent with institutional 
equity holders, rather than retail investors, as important monitors of management. Collectively, these 
results suggest that a relaxation of monitoring constraints by institutional investors is detrimental to 
bondholders. 

16 
 
The control variables take the theoretically predicted signs in all models and, in general, are 
statistically significant. More specifically, at the firm level, our proxies for firm size, performance, and 
growth opportunities are negatively related to yield spreads, while leverage and cash flow volatility are 
positively related to yield spreads. Institutional ownership is negatively related to yield spreads, which 
is consistent with the monitoring effectiveness of institutional shareholders (Bhojraj and Sengupta 
2003). At the bond level, maturity, age, and callability are all positively related to spreads, while credit 
rating is negatively related to yield spreads. 
To check the generalizability of our main results, we conduct several robustness tests. Table A2 
in the Online Appendix reports the estimation results. Model 1 controls for retail investor attention 
using Advertising Intensity, calculated as advertising expenses scaled by sales. Lou (2014) documents that 
managers adjust firm advertising to attract investor attention and influence short-term stock returns. 
The results are similar to those obtained in our primary specification (Model 1 in Table 3). Models 2 
and 3 control for analyst following and Big 4 auditor as alternative external monitors. Gao et al. (2020) 
document that analyst following can constrain managerial opportunism. Mansi et al. (2004) show that 
auditor quality provides both insurance and information roles that can be beneficial to security 
claimants. We compute Analyst Following as the log of the number of analysts following the firm, and 
Big 4 Auditor as an indicator variable that equals 1 if one of the Big 4 accounting firms is the firm’s 
auditor. In both specifications, we continue to find a positive and significant relation between 
institutional shareholder distraction and yield spreads. However, only the coefficient on analyst 
following in Model 2 is negative and significant (Mansi et al. 2011). 
We next control for two governance factors that are known to influence the cost of debt: Bebchuk 
et al.’s (2009) entrenchment index (EIndex), and CEO compensation pay mix (CEO Pay Mix). Prior 
literature documents that bondholders are interested in governance mechanisms that constrain 
managerial incentives. Klock et al. (2005), for example, find that takeover defenses that limit 
shareholders’ interests relative to those of managers are beneficial to bondholders. Bebchuk et al. 
(2009) construct an entrenchment index using a subset of six anti-takeover provisions: classified 
boards, golden parachutes, limits to amend charter, limits to amend bylaws, supermajority, and poison 
pill. They find that these provisions are associated with lower firm value. Accordingly, in Model 4 of 
Table A2, we control for managerial entrenchment using the EIndex. In addition, Ortiz-Molina (2006) 
finds a positive relation between managerial ownership and the cost of debt, albeit only for smaller 
ownership. In Model 5, we control for CEO compensation pay mix, CEO Pay Mix, which is the pay 

17 
 
of the top five managers in the form of stock and option grants (SOG), divided by the sum of SOG, 
salary, and bonus compensation. In both specifications, we continue to find a positive and significant 
relation between shareholder distraction and yield spreads. In Model 6, we also control for a firm’s 
relatedness to the shock industries using Hoberg and Phillips’s (2010) measure of 10-K text-based 25-
industry classifications. Our results continue to hold. 
For completeness, we conduct two additional but unreported tests. First, we control for two 
significant crisis events: the dot-com bubble in 2000, and the global financial crisis in 2009. Our 
rationale is that, while KMS’s (2017) distraction measure is based on “extreme” industry return periods, 
it is not necessary for the event to stretch over a longer term for it to impact monitoring capacity. The 
results corroborate our main findings, and are not sensitive to excluding either of these crisis event 
periods. Second, we investigate whether the relation between shareholder distraction and the cost of 
debt differs when we control for the different types of institutional investors. Using Bushee’s (1998) 
classification of institutional investors as transient, quasi-indexers, or dedicated investors, we find that 
our main evidence continues to hold. We also segment institutional investors based on their horizons 
(short- or long-term), following Gaspar et al. (2005), and find similar results. Overall, these results 
provide additional support for the view that distracted institutional shareholders are costly to 
bondholders. 
 
4.2. Distraction, Firm Heterogeneity, and the Cost of Debt 
The results thus far suggest that firm-level temporal variation in monitoring intensity driven by 
shareholder distraction affects bond pricing. In this section, we investigate how firm heterogeneity 
affects the association between distraction and the cost of debt. In particular, we are interested in 
whether and how certain firm characteristics, such as CEO power, information asymmetry, and 
product market competition, exacerbate the adverse consequences of distraction. We expect the costs 
of distraction to be higher under firm characteristics that are more conducive to managerial 
opportunism. For ease of exposition, we standardize the interaction variables to have a mean of 0 and 
a standard deviation of 1 in all specifications. 
We begin by examining the effect of managerial opportunism, proxied for by CEO Power, on the 
relation between institutional shareholder distraction and the cost of debt. KMS (2017) argue that, in 
the absence of shareholder monitoring, CEOs have an incentive to maximize private benefits at the 

18 
 
expense of shareholder value. KMS (2017) further show that more powerful CEOs can exploit an 
increase in shareholder distraction by engaging in privately optimal corporate actions, such as value-
destroying acquisitions. Accordingly, we expect distraction to have a stronger effect on firms with 
more powerful CEOs. We measure CEO Power as a function of four variables: co-optionality of 
independent directors, CEO pay slice, CEO tenure, and CEO-chairman duality (Coles et al. 2014; 
KMS 2017). Board Co-Option, a proxy for lax monitoring, is computed as the fraction of independent 
directors appointed after a CEO assumed office in a given year. CEO Pay Slice, a proxy for CEO 
influence, is computed as the fraction of the aggregate compensation of the top five executives that is 
captured by the CEO. CEO Tenure, a proxy for entrenchment, is computed as the number of years the 
CEO has been in office. CEO-Chairman Duality, a proxy for CEO control power, is an indicator 
variable that equals 1 if the CEO is the chair of the board in a given year. In the spirit of Abernethy 
et al. (2015), we aggregate these four variables using principal component analysis to obtain our proxy 
for CEO Power. Data on board co-option come from the website of Lalitha Naveen, CEO pay slice 
comes from ExecuComp, and CEO tenure, CEO age, and director variables come from Institutional 
Shareholder Services (ISS). 
To test our prediction, we add the proxy for CEO power and its interaction with shareholder 
distraction to our main regression. Model 1 of Table 4 reports the results. We find a positive and 
significant coefficient on distraction, a negative but insignificant coefficient on CEO power, and a 
positive and significant coefficient on the interaction between distraction and CEO power. 
Economically, moving CEO power from the first to the third quartile augments the effect of a 1-
standard deviation increase in shareholder distraction on yield spreads by about 19 basis points 
annually. This suggests that more powerful CEOs pursue private benefits when institutional investors 
are distracted. Recognizing the increased potential for expropriation, bondholders react to the 
weakened monitoring by increasing the cost of debt. 
We next examine whether the effect of shareholder distraction is heterogeneous with respect to 
various measures of information asymmetry. Recent research shows that effective governance lowers 
firms’ cost of debt by increasing monitoring and reducing information asymmetry (Derrien et al. 2016; 
Gao et al. 2020). To the extent that institutional ownership can provide effective oversight from a 
bondholder perspective, the value of monitoring should be greater for firms that are more difficult to 
monitor and price. Accordingly, we expect the positive relation between institutional investor 
distraction and yield spreads to be stronger for firms with higher information asymmetry. 

19 
 
To test this prediction, we measure information asymmetry using asset intangibility, analyst 
forecast dispersion, and organizational complexity (Kang et al. 2018). Asset Intangibility is (-1) × [(0.715 
× Receivables + 0.547 × Inventory + 0.535 × Capital) + Cash] scaled by total assets. A higher value 
indicates greater intangibility. Analyst Forecast Dispersion is the standard deviation in analysts’ quarterly 
earnings per share forecasts, deflated by stock price (Mansi et al. 2011). Organizational Complexity is the 
number of segments in which the firm operates. In Models 2–4 of Table 4, we re-run our baseline 
distraction model after including the respective measure of information asymmetry and its interaction 
with distraction. The results are in line with our prediction. Across all proxies for information 
asymmetry, the coefficients on the interaction terms are positive and significant at either the 1% or 5% 
levels. Economically, moving the information asymmetry proxies from the first to the third quartile 
augments the effect of a 1-standard deviation increase in shareholder distraction on yield spreads by 
approximately 2 to 17 basis points annually. These findings are largely consistent with our prediction 
that distraction is costlier for firms that suffer greater information asymmetry problems, and hence 
are more difficult for bondholders to value. 
We also consider firm heterogeneity with respect to industry competition. Prior research has 
argued that a high level of product market competition can induce management to avoid wasting 
corporate resources (Alchian 1950; Stigler 1958; Hart 1983; Schmidt 1997; Aghion et al. 1999). The 
idea is that, in a competitive market, inefficient use of corporate resources will render firms unable to 
compete and eventually lead to insolvency (Chhaochharia et al. 2017).9 Several empirical studies show 
that industry competition plays an important role in aligning incentives within firms (Karuna 2007). 
However, Chhaochharia et al. (2017) also find that corporate governance is more important when 
firms face weak product market competition. Accordingly, we expect managers to be more likely to 
exploit shareholder distraction, and investor inattention to have a more pronounced effect on the cost 
of debt, in firms in less competitive industries. 
Using a measure of market concentration (C4), we capture market structure by summing the 
market shares of the four largest firms in a given 3-digit SIC industry (Hou and Robinson 2006). Our 
competition proxy (High C4) is an indicator variable that equals 1 if the firm is in the top tercile of the 
C4 distribution. In Model 5 of Table 4, we re-run our main regression after controlling for industry 
 
9 Prior theoretical studies do not uniformly agree that product market competition increases efficiency. For example, 
Scharfstein (1988) argues that managers’ incentives to exert effort will be lower because profits are lower in competitive 
industries. Raith (2003) helps reconcile the conflicting results by endogenizing entry into the product market. He finds 
that, once entry is endogenized, stronger competition implies a better alignment of incentives. 

20 
 
competition and its interaction with our investor distraction measure. Consistent with the disciplinary 
role of product market competition, we find that the positive relation between distraction and the cost 
of debt is more pronounced for firms operating in a weaker product market environment. 
Economically, moving from a more competitive to a less competitive industry augments the effect of 
a 1-standard deviation increase in shareholder distraction on yield spreads by about 16 basis points 
annually. Overall, the results suggest that weaker monitoring by institutional shareholders is costly for 
bondholders when firms have more powerful CEOs, lower information asymmetry, and weaker 
product market competition. 
 
4.3. How do Bondholders Observe Shareholder Distraction? 
Although the analysis above suggests that institutional shareholder distraction affects bond pricing, 
it remains unclear how bondholders observe distraction. Bondholders can directly observe signals of 
dual and non-dual shareholder distraction, and price in the potentially value-destroying effects ex ante. 
They can also respond to value-destroying managerial actions and/or observable deteriorations in firm 
credit risk during distraction periods. We test these conjectures by focusing first on the effects of 
distraction by dual and non-dual holders. While both types of institutional investors can affect bond 
pricing, we posit that dual holders, who simultaneously own equity and debt in the same firm, are 
more likely to drive this effect. Next, we examine decisions indicative of managerial self-dealing (i.e., 
acquisitions and dividend cuts), and explore the indirect mechanism related to firms’ credit risk that 
results from value-destroying managerial actions (i.e., credit ratings, distance to default, and firm 
idiosyncratic risk).10 A priori, it is unclear which mechanism is driving our main evidence. The results 
could suggest that both direct and indirect mechanisms are at play. Alternatively, one mechanism (e.g., 
bondholders directly pricing dual and non-dual holder distraction) may be the driver, while the effects 
of the others (e.g., value-destroying managerial actions or firm credit risk) are economically trivial. 
 
4.3.1. Distracted Dual and Non-Dual Holders 
Recent research suggests that dual holders and non-dual holders have distinct information 
advantages and effects on corporate outcomes. Peyravan (2020), Auh and Bai (2020), and Bodnaruk 
and Rossi (2021) show that dual holders can obtain more information about firms and their 
 
10 We are indebted to two anonymous reviewers for suggesting this analysis. 

21 
 
stakeholders at a lower cost than pure shareholders or creditors. Consistent with dual holders acting 
as monitors on behalf of creditors, evidence also shows that firms with dual holders have better access 
to bond markets (Bodnaruk and Rossi 2021), higher investment efficiency (Antón and Lin 2020), 
lower costs of financial distress (Chu et al. 2020), lower CEO compensation sensitivity to risk (Chen 
et al. 2019), and lower payouts (Chu 2018). Therefore, we begin our analysis by exploring whether 
bondholders directly observe signals of dual and non-dual shareholders’ distraction. 
We argue that, a priori, distracted dual holders and non-dual holders could affect bond pricing, as 
both are subject to industry shocks. However, distracted dual holders may have a greater effect because 
they are likely to observe extreme return shocks to their portfolios. As debtholders, they also have 
access to superior information about the debt issuing firm (Jiang et al. 2010). Moreover, dual holders 
are sophisticated investors and are likely aware of their peers’ equity holdings (e.g., non-dual holders) 
in investee firms. Hence, we posit they will be better able to observe and potentially price in non-dual 
holders’ distraction. Accordingly, we expect the distraction of dual and non-dual holders to separately 
affect bond pricing (as both are subject to common industry shocks), with distracted dual holders 
having a stronger effect. To the extent that distracted dual holders can capture information on non-
dual holders’ distraction, we expect only distracted dual holders to matter to bond pricing when 
considered simultaneously with non-overlapping distracted non-dual holders.11 
To test whether bond yield spreads are a direct reflection of the distraction of dual and non-dual 
holders, we separately examine the inattention−cost of debt relation for distracted dual and non-dual 
holders. Following Jiang et al. (2010) and Chu (2018), we identify firms with dual holders using data 
from the Thomson Reuters Financial Institutional Ownership (13F) database and DealScan over the 
1989–2015 period. To measure distraction of dual and non-dual holders, we compute dual holder 
ownership as the fraction of a firm’s total shares outstanding held by dual holders. 
Table 5 reports the results. Model 1 examines the relation between distracted dual holders and the 
cost of debt. Model 2 is similar to Model 1 but considers distracted non-dual holders rather than 
distracted dual holders. Model 3 examines the joint effect on the cost of debt. All models include firm 
fixed effects and industry × quarter fixed effects. In Model 1, we find that dual holder distraction is 
associated with an increase in the cost of debt. The effect is similar, albeit weaker, in Model 2 for non-
dual holder distraction. A 1-standard deviation increase in the distraction of dual holders increases 
 
11 However, given that dual holders proxy for both fewer debt-equity conflicts and for bondholders who are able to 
directly observe shareholder distraction, it is difficult to draw a strong conclusion from this test. 

22 
 
yield spreads by about 22 basis points annually (Model 1: 2.533 × 0.0074 × 288 × 4), and about 14 
basis points annually for non-dual holders (Model 2: 0.159 × 0.075 × 288 × 4). Consistent with our 
expectation, we find that the effect of distracted dual holders is stronger than that for non-dual holders, 
with the difference being significant at the 5% level. 
In Model 3, we include the distraction of both dual and non-dual holders. Given the high 
correlation of 59% between the variables—reflecting similar levels of exposure to common industry 
shocks—we orthogonalize non-dual holder distraction with respect to dual holder distraction. The 
residual captures non-overlapping information about non-dual holder distraction that is not 
incorporated in dual holder distraction. When we include the residual, we find that only distracted 
dual holders significantly affect bond pricing.12 Taken together, these results suggest that distracted 
dual holders drive the relation between inattention and the cost of debt, consistent with the monitoring 
role of these overlapping investors and their informational edge. 
 
4.3.2. Managerial Actions 
Next, we examine whether bondholders respond to value-destroying managerial actions during 
distraction periods. Similar to KMS (2017), we use a set of managerial actions (i.e., acquisitions and 
dividend cuts) to study the effects of variations in the outcomes of corporate decisions on the cost of 
debt. KMS (2017) argue that, when shareholders are distracted, self-interested managers have an 
incentive to maximize their private benefits via various corporate actions, one of which is M&A 
activity. Such action is relevant to our analysis because acquisitions represent substantial discretionary 
investments, can be timed by managers, have easily observable announcement dates, and have been 
shown to have bondholder wealth effects (Billett et al. 2004). Our measure for acquisition activity is a 
dummy variable that equals 1 if the acquisition took place in a given quarter. We obtain M&A 
announcement data from SDC and Capital IQ. We consider all acquisitions, within-industry 
acquisitions, and diversifying acquisitions. Within-industry deals involve an acquirer and a target 
operating in the same industry; diversifying deals involve an acquirer and a target in different industries. 
All acquisitions are the summation of within-industry and diversifying acquisitions. Industries are 
defined according to the Fama–French 12-industry classification. 
 
12 Although the coefficient of non-dual holder distraction is statistically insignificant, we cannot infer the amount of 
non-overlapping information about non-dual holders’ distraction that is priced by dual holders. 

23 
 
Table 6 displays our results using interactions between the acquisition proxies and the shareholder 
distraction measure. The coefficient on distraction captures the effect of institutional shareholder 
inattention in the absence of an acquisition; the coefficient on the acquisition proxy captures the extent 
to which an acquisition is value-enhancing to bondholders without distraction. As discussed in Section 
2, we do not predict the sign of the acquisition proxy. The coefficient on the interaction between 
distraction and the acquisition proxy indicates whether acquisitions attenuate or magnify the effect of 
distraction on the cost of debt. A positive (negative) coefficient implies that the acquisition is value-
decreasing (-increasing) to bondholders when shareholders are distracted. 
Models 1–3 provide results for all acquisitions, within-industry acquisitions, and diversifying 
acquisitions, respectively. All models include firm fixed effects and industry × quarter fixed effects. 
We continue to find that distraction is positively and significantly related to yield spreads. However, 
the coefficients on the interactions with distraction are insignificant for all acquisitions and for 
diversifying acquisitions, but marginally significant (at the 10% level) for within-industry deals. 
Because acquisitions, especially within-industry, occur infrequently (about 6.7% of our sample), 
bondholders are less likely to observe these actions continuously. 
In Model 4, we examine another important corporate decision: dividend cuts. We measure 
dividend cuts as a dummy variable that equals 1 if the announced dividend in a given quarter is smaller 
than that announced in the previous quarter. As outlined in Section 2, we again do not predict the sign 
of the dividend cuts dummy because they may be advantageous (increase in future cash flows) or 
harmful (managers acting in their own self-interest) to bondholders. We find an insignificant 
interaction coefficient for the dividend cuts dummy in the distraction period. 
Overall, these results suggest that while corporate actions are not necessarily value-destroying for 
bondholders, they could still signal that managers are maximizing their own private benefits. Because 
the effect of distraction is economically important even in quarters without any acquisitions or 
dividend cuts, bondholders may be pricing in the effects of these value-destroying managerial actions 
ex ante (i.e., before they occur) or only after they become public information. 
 
4.3.3. Deterioration in Firm Credit Risk 
In this section, we provide further evidence about the mechanisms through which shareholder 
distraction leads to a higher cost of debt. Building on the debt pricing literature (see, e.g., Mansi et al. 

24 
 
2004; Ashbaugh-Skaife et al. 2006; El Ghoul et al. 2016; Harford et al. 2018), we focus on the effect 
of distraction on corporate outcome variables that are relevant to bondholders. Prior literature 
suggests that shareholders can expropriate creditors by increasing firm risk (Myers 1977; Smith and 
Warner 1979). Accordingly, we consider the effects of distraction on three relevant proxies: credit 
ratings, default risk, and firm-specific risk. 
Table 7 gives the results. All models include firm fixed effects and industry × quarter fixed effects. 
Panel A tests the effect of distraction on credit ratings. Rating agencies play a pivotal role in assessing 
firm credit risk and in providing information to investors (Opp et al. 2013). These agencies must 
update their forecasts using a myriad of financial information related to firm performance and 
management actions. Thus, we expect rating agencies to update their prior predictions about a firm’s 
credit ratings for those with distracted institutional shareholders. We find a negative and significant 
coefficient on distraction, indicating that shareholder inattention is associated with lower credit ratings. 
Economically, a 1-standard deviation increase in the distraction measure lowers credit ratings by about 
0.03 notches (0.336 × 0.08). These economically small effects suggest that the credit rating channel is 
less plausible because rating agencies are slow to update their ratings and a transitory distraction is 
unlikely to lead to downgrades.13 
Panel B captures firms’ default risk using Bharath and Shumway’s (2008) commonly used measure 
of distance to default. This measure provides better out-of-sample performance for forecasting 
bankruptcies. We find an inverse relation between distraction and the distance to default, suggesting 
that higher inattention is associated with a higher likelihood of financial distress. Relative to the mean, 
a 1-standard deviation increase in the distraction measure increases the distance to default by about 
1.5% (-1.019 × 0.08/5.496). 
Panel C examines the effect of distraction on firm-level risk (Mansi et al. 2011) using the standard 
deviation of residuals from the Carhart (1997) four-factor model estimated over the quarter.14 We find 
that distracted shareholders are associated with higher firm-level idiosyncratic risk. Relative to the 
mean, a 1-standard deviation increase in the distraction measure increases firm-level idiosyncratic risk 
 
13 Consistent with this view, we also test the effect of distraction on credit rating downgrades over the next four quarters 
to account for the relative timing of rating updates and the distraction quarters (Kecskés et al. 2013). We find no evidence 
that distraction is related to subsequent downgrades. We further test the impact on the cost of debt of the interaction 
between distraction and the downgrade dummy over the next four quarters. We find insignificant coefficients on these 
interactions. The results are provided in the Online Appendix. 
14 KMS (2017) find that firms with distracted shareholders are more likely to announce diversifying acquisitions. To 
mitigate the concern that these acquisitions may benefit bondholders, in unreported tests, we exclude firm-quarter 
observations with acquisitions. We continue to find that shareholder distraction increases firm idiosyncratic risk. 

25 
 
by about 3% (0.007 × 0.08/0.018). Collectively, these findings indicate that firms experience increased 
risk when shareholders are distracted, which reduces creditworthiness. They also lend support to the 
idea that bondholders price the consequences of adverse managerial decisions in response to a 
temporary relaxation of monitoring constraints due to shareholder distraction. Although distraction 
is statistically significant, we note that it explains only a small fraction of the observed changes in firms’ 
credit ratings, distance to default, and firm-level idiosyncratic risk. 
 
5. Conclusion 
In this paper, we explore how investor inattention in the equity market affects security prices in 
the bond market. Drawing on a newly constructed measure of institutional shareholder distraction 
(Kempf et al. 2017), we examine the effect of exogenous changes in monitoring intensity on the cost 
of debt. We use a large sample of publicly traded bonds and find a positive and significant relation 
between institutional shareholder distraction and yield spreads. The effect of inattention on yield 
spreads continues to hold when we measure distraction using extreme positive and negative industry 
returns. It is also pronounced in both investment-grade and non-investment-grade bond samples. The 
inattention−cost of debt relation is also robust to controlling for retail investor inattention, advertising 
intensity, analyst coverage, and Big 4 auditors. Our results extend prior findings that managers are 
more likely to engage in value-destroying activities when institutional shareholders are distracted. More 
importantly, we show that the effect of distraction is not limited to equity valuation—it can also 
significantly negatively affect bond pricing. 
In additional analyses, we examine how firm-level heterogeneity affects the relation between 
distraction and the cost of debt. We find that the effect of distraction on bond yield spreads is stronger 
for firms with more powerful CEOs, those with greater information asymmetry, and those facing 
weaker product market competition. Our results suggest that the effect of inattention on the cost of 
debt is primarily driven by dual holders directly observing shareholder distraction. Collectively, our 
findings indicate that a temporary loosening of monitoring constraints by institutional investors has a 
distinctly negative incremental effect on bondholders. 
 
 

26 
 
References 
Abernethy MA, Kuang SA, Qin B (2015) The influence of CEO power on compensation contract 
design. The Accounting Review 90(4): 1265–1306. 
Abramova I, Core JE, Sutherland A (2020) Institutional investor attention and firm disclosure. The 
Accounting Review 95(6): 1–21. 
Aghion P, Dewatripont M, Rey P (1999) Competition, financial discipline and growth. Review of 
Economic Studies 66(4): 825–852. 
Aktas N, Andreou PC, Karasamani I, Philip D (2019) CEO duality, agency costs, and internal capital 
allocation efficiency. British Journal of Management 30(2): 473–493. 
Alchian AA (1950) Uncertainty, evolution, and economic theory. Journal of Political Economy 58(3): 211–
221. 
Almeida H, Campello M (2007) Financial constraints, asset tangibility, and corporate investment. 
Review of Financial Studies 20(5): 1429–1460. 
Altman EI, Gander A, Saunders A (2004) Informational efficiency of loans versus bonds: Evidence 
from secondary market prices. Working paper, New York University. 
Amihud Y, Lev B (1981) Risk reduction as a managerial motive for conglomerate mergers. Bell Journal 
of Economics 12(2): 605–617. 
Antón M, Lin LX (2020) The mutual friend: Dual holder monitoring and firm investment efficiency. 
Review of Corporate Finance Studies 9(1): 81–115. 
Ashbaugh-Skaife H, Collins DW, LaFond R (2006) The effects of corporate governance on firms’ 
credit ratings. Journal of Accounting and Economics 42(1-2): 203–243. 
Auh JK, Bai J (2020) Cross-asset information synergy in mutual fund families. Working paper, NBER 
26626. 
Barber BM, Odean T (2008) All that glitters: The effect of attention and news on the buying behavior 
of individual and institutional investors. Review of Financial Studies 21(2): 785–818. 
Basu RS, Pierce S, Stephan A (2019) The effect of investor inattention on voluntary disclosure. 
Available at SSRN 3071399. 
Bebchuk L, Cohen A, Ferrell A (2009) What matters in corporate finance. The Review of Financial Studies 
22(2): 783–827. 
Bebchuk LA, Cremers KJM, Peyer UC (2011) The CEO pay slice. Journal of Financial Economics 102(1): 
199–221. 
Bessembinder H, Maxwell W (2008) Markets: Transparency and the corporate bond market. Journal of 
Economic Perspectives 22(2): 217–234. 

27 
 
Bharath ST, Shumway T (2008) Forecasting default with the Merton distance to default model. Review 
of Financial Studies 21(3): 1339–1369. 
Bhojraj S, Sengupta P (2003) Effect of corporate governance on bond ratings and yield: The role of 
institutional investors and outside directors. Journal of Business 76(3): 455–475. 
Billett MT, King THD, Mauer DC (2004) Bondholder wealth effects in mergers and acquisitions: New 
evidence from the 1980s and 1990s. Journal of Finance 59(1): 107–135. 
Billett MT, King THD, Mauer DC (2007) Growth opportunities and the choice of leverage, debt 
maturity, and covenants. Journal of Finance 62(2): 697–730. 
Blume ME, Lim F, MacKinlay AC (1998) The declining credit quality of US corporate debt: Myth or 
reality? Journal of Finance 53(4): 1389–1413. 
Bodnaruk A, Rossi M (2016) Dual ownership, returns, and voting in mergers. Journal of Financial 
Economics 120(1): 58–80. 
Bodnaruk A, Rossi M (2021) Shareholders as creditors of first resort. Management Science 67(3): 1737–
1757. 
Bolton P, Scharfstein DS (1990) A theory of predation based on agency problems in financial 
contracting. American Economic Review 80(1): 93–106. 
Bushee BJ (1998) The influence of institutional investors on myopic R&D investment behavior. The 
Accounting Review 73(3): 305–333. 
Carhart MM (1997) On persistence in mutual fund performance. Journal of Finance 52(1): 57–82. 
Chen T, Zhang L, Zhu Q (2019) Dual ownership and risk-taking incentives in managerial 
compensation. Available at SSRN 3427030. 
Chen Z, Huang Y, Wei KCJ (2013) Executive pay disparity and the cost of equity capital. Journal of 
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 48(3): 849–885. 
Chhaochharia V, Grinstein Y, Grullon G, Michaely R (2017) Product market competition and internal 
governance: Evidence from the Sarbanes–Oxley Act. Management Science 63(5): 1405–1424. 
Choi H, Varian H (2012) Predicting the present with Google Trends. Economic Record 88: 2–9. 
Chu Y (2018) Shareholder-creditor conflict and payout policy: Evidence from mergers between 
lenders and shareholders. Review of Financial Studies 31(8): 3098–3121. 
Chu Y, Lin LX, Saffi PA, Sturgess J (2020) Shareholder-creditor conflicts and limits to arbitrage: 
Evidence from the equity lending market. Available at SSRN 3747035. 
Cohen L, Lou D (2012) Complicated firms. Journal of Financial Economics 104(2): 383–400. 
Coles JL, Daniel ND, Naveen L (2014) Co-opted boards. Review of Financial Studies 27(6): 1751–1796. 

28 
 
Da Z, Engelberg J, Gao P (2011) In search of attention. Journal of Finance 66(5): 1461–1499. 
Derrien F, Kecskés A, Mansi SA (2016) Information asymmetry, the cost of debt, and credit events: 
Evidence from quasi-random analyst disappearances. Journal of Corporate Finance 39: 295–311. 
Diamond DW (1985) Optimal release of information by firms. Journal of Finance 40(4): 1071–1094. 
Dichev ID, Skinner DJ (2002) Large-sample evidence on the bond covenant hypothesis. Journal of 
Accounting Research 40(4): 1091–1123. 
Downing C, Underwood S, Xing Y (2009) The relative informational efficiency of stocks and bonds: 
An intraday analysis. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 44: 1081–1102. 
Drake MS, Roulstone DT, Thornock JR (2012) Investor information demand: Evidence from Google 
searches around earnings announcements. Journal of Accounting Research 50(4): 1001–1040. 
Druz M, Petzev I, Wagner AF, Zeckhauser RJ (2020) When managers change their tone, analysts and 
investors change their tune. Financial Analysts Journal 76(2): 47-69. 
El Ghoul S, Guedhami O, Pittman JA, Rizeanu S (2016) Cross‐country evidence on the importance 
of auditor choice to corporate debt maturity. Contemporary Accounting Research 33(2): 718–751. 
Ferreira MA, Laux PA (2007) Corporate governance, idiosyncratic risk, and information flow. Journal 
of Finance 62(2): 951–989. 
Gao H, Wang J, Wang Y, Wu C, Dong X (2020) Media coverage and the cost of debt. Journal of 
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 55(2): 429–471. 
Gaspar JM, Massa M, Matos P (2005) Shareholder investment horizons and the market for corporate 
control. Journal of Financial Economics 76(1): 135-165. 
Gebhardt WR, Hvidkjaer S, Swaminathan B (2005) Stock and bond market interaction: Does 
momentum spill over? Journal of Financial Economics 75: 651–690. 
Ginsberg J, Mohebbi MH, Patel RS, Brammer L, Smolinski MS, Brilliant L (2009) Detecting influenza 
epidemics using search engine query data. Nature 457(7232): 1012–1014. 
Giroud X, Mueller HM (2010) Does corporate governance matter in competitive industries? Journal of 
Financial Economics 95(3): 312–331. 
Graham JR, Kim H, Leary M (2020) CEO-board dynamics. Journal of Financial Economics 137(3): 612–
636. 
Han S, Zhou X (2014) Informed bond trading, corporate yield spreads, and corporate default 
prediction. Management Science 60(3): 675–694. 
Harford J, Kecskés A, Mansi SA (2018) Do long-term investors improve corporate decision making? 
Journal of Corporate Finance 50: 424–452. 

29 
 
Harford J, Li K (2007) Decoupling CEO wealth and firm performance: The case of acquiring CEOs. 
Journal of Finance 62(2): 917–949. 
Hart OD (1983) The market mechanism as an incentive scheme. Bell Journal of Economics 14(2): 366–
382. 
Hermalin BE, Weisbach MS (1998) Endogenously chosen boards of directors and their monitoring 
of the CEO. American Economic Review 88(1): 96–118. 
Hirshleifer D, Teoh SH (2003) Limited attention, information disclosure, and financial reporting. 
Journal of Accounting and Economics 36(1-3): 337–386. 
Hoberg G, Phillips G (2010) Product market synergies and competition in mergers and acquisitions: 
A text-based analysis. Review of Financial Studies 23(10): 3773–3811. 
Hou K, Robinson DT (2006) Industry concentration and average stock returns. Journal of Finance 61(4): 
1927–1956. 
Hsu PH, Lee HH, Liu AZ, Zhang Z (2015) Corporate innovation, default risk, and bond pricing. 
Journal of Corporate Finance 35: 329–344. 
Jiang W, Li K, Shao P (2010) When shareholders are creditors: Effects of the simultaneous holding 
of equity and debt by non-commercial banking institutions. Review of Financial Studies 23(10): 
3595–3637. 
Kalay A (1982) Stockholder-bondholder conflict and dividend constraints. Journal of Financial Economics 
10(2): 211–233. 
Kang S, Kim EH, Lu Y (2018) Does independent directors’ CEO experience matter? Review of Finance 
22(3): 905–949. 
Kaplan, RS, Urwitz G (1979) Statistical models of bond ratings: A methodological inquiry. Journal of 
Business 52(2): 231–261. 
Karuna C (2007) Industry product market competition and managerial incentives. Journal of Accounting 
and Economics 43(2-3): 275–297. 
Kecskés A, Mansi SA, Zhang AJ (2013) Are short sellers informed? Evidence from the bond market. 
The Accounting Review 88(2): 611–639. 
Kempf E, Manconi A, Spalt O (2017) Distracted shareholders and corporate actions. Review of Financial 
Studies 30(5): 1660–1695. 
Klock MS, Mansi SA, Maxwell WF (2005) Does corporate governance matter to bondholders? Journal 
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 40(4): 693–719. 
Kwan SH (1996) Firm-specific information and the correlation between individual stocks and bonds. 
Journal of Financial Economics 40: 63–80. 

30 
 
Leland H, Pyle D (1977) Informational asymmetries, financial structure, and financial intermediation. 
Journal of Finance 32(2): 371–387. 
Li J (2021) Endogenous inattention and risk-specific price underreaction in corporate bonds. Journal 
of Financial Economics, forthcoming. 
Liu C, Low A, Masulis RW, Zhang L (2020) Monitoring the monitor: Distracted institutional investors 
and board governance. Review of Financial Studies 33(10): 4489–4531. 
Lou D (2014) Attracting investor attention through advertising. Review of Financial Studies 27(6): 1797–
1829. 
Madsen J, Niessner M (2019) Is investor attention for sale? The role of advertising in financial markets. 
Journal of Accounting Research 57(3): 763–795. 
Mansi SA, Maxwell WF, Miller DP (2004) Does auditor quality and tenure matter to investors? 
Evidence from the bond market. Journal of Accounting Research 42(4): 755–793. 
Mansi SA, Maxwell WF, Miller DP (2011) Analyst forecast characteristics and the cost of debt. Review 
of Accounting Studies 16: 116–142. 
Mansi SA, Maxwell WF, Wald JK (2009) Creditor protection laws and the cost of debt. Journal of Law 
and Economics 52(4): 701–717. 
Mansi SA, Reeb DM (2002) Corporate diversification: What gets discounted? Journal of Finance 57(5): 
2167–2183. 
Monks R, Minow N (1995) Corporate Governance, 1st edition (Blackwell Publishing, Hoboken, NJ). 
Morck R, Shleifer A, Vishny R (1990) Do managerial objectives drive bad acquisitions? Journal of 
Finance 45(1): 31–48. 
Myers SC (1977) Determinants of corporate borrowing. Journal of Financial Economics 5(2): 147–175. 
Opp, CC, Opp MM, Harris, M (2013) Rating agencies in the face of regulation. Journal of Financial 
Economics 108(1): 46–61. 
Ortiz-Molina H (2006) Top management incentives and the pricing of corporate public debt. Journal 
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 41(2): 317–340. 
Peyravan L (2020) Financial reporting quality and dual-holding of debt and equity. The Accounting Review 
95(5): 351–371. 
Raith M (2003) Competition, risk, and managerial incentives. American Economic Review 93(4): 1425–
1436. 
Sandvik J (2020) Board monitoring, director connections, and credit quality. Journal of Corporate Finance 
65: 1017–1026. 

31 
 
Scharfstein D (1988) Product market competition and managerial slack. RAND Journal of Economics 
19(1): 147–155. 
Schmidt KM (1997) Managerial incentives and product market competition. Review of Economic Studies 
64(2): 191–213. 
Shleifer A, Vishny RW (1986) Large shareholders and corporate control. Journal of Political Economy 
94(3): 461–488. 
Shleifer A, Vishny RW (1997) A survey of corporate governance. Journal of Finance 52(2): 737–783. 
Smith CW, Warner JB (1979) On financial contracting: An analysis of bond covenants. Journal of 
Financial Economics 7(2): 117–161. 
Stigler GJ (1958) The economies of scale. Journal of Law and Economics 1(Oct): 54–71. 
Stiglitz JE, Weiss A (1981) Credit rationing in markets with imperfect information. American Economic 
Review 71(3): 393–410. 
Svensson L (1994) Estimation and interpreting forward interest rates: Sweden 1992–1994. Working 
paper, NBER No. w4871. 
Teoh SH, Welch I, Wong TJ (1998a) Earnings management and the long-run market performance of 
initial public offerings. Journal of Finance 53(6): 1935–1974. 
Teoh SH, Welch I, Wong TJ (1998b) Earnings management and the underperformance of seasoned 
equity offerings. Journal of Financial Economics 50(1): 63–99. 
Valta P (2012) Competition and the cost of debt. Journal of Financial Economics 105(3): 661–682. 
 

32 
 
Table 1. Variable Definitions 
 
Variable 
Description 
Data Source(s) 
Yield Spread 
Difference between weighted average yield to maturity of the firm’s outstanding publicly traded 
debt and yield to maturity on a duration-matched Treasury security. Weight is defined as the 
amount outstanding for each issue as a fraction of all outstanding traded debt for the firm. 
LBFI, FISD, 
TRACE 
Distraction 
Measure of institutional shareholder distraction. 
KMS (2017) 
Distraction (Positive Shock) 
Measure of institutional shareholder distraction using positive extreme industry returns. 
13-F, Compustat, 
CRSP 
Distraction (Negative Shock) Measure of institutional shareholder distraction using negative extreme industry returns. 
13-F, Compustat, 
CRSP 
Retail Inattention 
Measure of retail investor inattention, as per Da et al. (2011). 
Google 
 
Firm-Specific Variables 
 
Firm Size 
Natural logarithm of total assets. 
Compustat 
Leverage 
Long-term debt plus debt in current liabilities, deflated by total assets. 
Compustat 
Performance 
Operating income before depreciation deflated by total assets. 
Compustat 
Sales Growth 
Sales growth rate, defined as the ratio of change in sales to lagged sales. 
Compustat 
Cash Flow Volatility 
Standard deviation of performance over the past 10 years (t-1 to t-10). 
Compustat 
Market-to-Book 
Market value of equity, computed as the number of common stocks outstanding multiplied by 
price divided by balance sheet book equity. 
Compustat 
Asset Intangibility 
Following Almeida and Campello (2007), –(1) × [(0.715 × Receivables + 0.547 × Inventory + 
0.535 × Capital) + Cash]/Assets. 
Compustat 
Organizational Complexity 
Number of segments within a firm. 
Compustat 
 
Bond-Specific Variables 
 
Credit Rating 
Average of Moody’s and S&P bond ratings, computed using a conversion process whereby 
AAA-rated bonds are assigned a value of 22, and D-rated bonds a value of 1. 
LBFI, TRACE 
Bond Maturity 
Bond issue maturity remaining in years. 
LBFI, TRACE 
Bond Age 
Number of years a bond has been outstanding. 
LBFI, TRACE 
High Yield 
Indicator variable that equals 1 when the weighted average rating is below BBB. 
LBFI, TRACE 
Callability 
Indicator variable that equals 1 when the bond is callable. 
LBFI, TRACE 
 
Governance Variables 
 
Institutional Ownership 
Ratio of shares owned by institutions divided by the total number of shares outstanding. 
13-F 
Dual Holder Distraction 
Measure of institutional dual holder distraction. 
13-F/DealScan, 
CRSP, Compustat 
Non-DH Distraction 
Measure of institutional non-dual holder distraction. 
13-F/DealScan, 
CRSP, Compustat 

33 
 
Board Co-Option 
Fraction of independent directors appointed after a CEO has assumed office. 
Coles et al. (2014) 
CEO Duality 
Dummy variable that equals 1 if the CEO is also the chairperson of the board in a given year. 
ISS 
CEO Pay Slice 
Fraction of the aggregate compensation of the top five executives captured by the CEO. 
ExecuComp 
CEO Tenure 
Number of years the CEO has been employed by the firm. 
ISS 
CEO Power 
Principal component of CEO pay slice, CEO tenure, CEO duality, and board co-option. 
Computed 
CEO Age 
Natural logarithm of CEO age. 
ISS 
CEO Pay Mix 
Top management pay mix, or the fraction of pay for the top five managers received in the form 
of stock and option grants (SOG), divided by the sum of SOG, salary, and bonus compensation. 
ExecuComp 
EIndex 
Bebchuk, Cohen, and Ferrell (2009) entrenchment index. It varies from 1 to 6, and is constructed 
by subtracting 1 point from each anti-takeover provision in place (classified boards, golden 
parachutes, limits to amend charter, limits to amend bylaws, supermajority, and poison pill). 
ISS 
Dedicated IO 
Dedicated institutional ownership following Bushee (1998). 
13-F, Bushee (1998) 
Quasi-Indexer IO 
Quasi-indexer institutional ownership following Bushee (1998). 
13-F, Bushee (1998) 
Transient IO 
Transient institutional ownership following Bushee (1998). 
13-F, Bushee (1998) 
Long-Term IO 
Long-term institutional ownership following Gaspar et al. (2005). 
13-F 
Short-Term IO 
Short-term institutional ownership following Gaspar et al. (2005). 
13-F 
 
Other Variables 
 
Analyst Following 
Number of analysts following the firm in a given year. 
I/B/E/S 
Analyst Forecast Dispersion 
Dispersion in analysts’ quarterly earnings per share forecasts, deflated by stock price. 
I/B/E/S 
High C4 
Indicator variable that equals 1 if the firm is in the top tercile of the C4 distribution. We compute 
C4 by summing the share of sales revenue captured by the four largest firms in a given 3-digit SIC 
industry. 
Compustat 
Advertising Intensity 
Advertising expenditures scaled by sales. 
Compustat 
Big 4 Auditor 
Indicator variable that equals 1 if the firm is audited by a Big 4 auditor. 
Compustat 
All Acquisitions 
Indicator variable that equals 1 if an acquisition deal took place in a given quarter. 
SDC, Capital IQ 
Within-Industry Acquisitions Indicator variable that equals 1 if a within-industry acquisition deal involving an acquirer and a 
target operating in the same Fama–French 12-industry took place in a given quarter. 
SDC, Capital IQ 
Diversifying Acquisitions 
Indicator variable that equals 1 if a diversifying acquisition deal involving an acquirer and a target 
operating in different Fama–French 12-industries took place in a given quarter. 
SDC, Capital IQ 
Dividend Cuts 
Indicator variable that equals 1 if the announced dividend in a given quarter is smaller than the 
dividend in the previous quarter. 
Capital IQ 
Distance to Default 
Measure of market-based default risk estimated using Bharath and Shumway’s (2008) model. 
Higher values indicate lower probabilities of default. 
CRSP, Compustat 
Idiosyncratic Risk 
Standard deviation of the residuals for a given quarter using Carhart’s (1997) four-factor model. 
CRSP 
 
Notes: This table gives definitions for the variables used in the analysis, along with their data sources. LBFI is the Lehman Brothers Fixed Income database; TRACE is 
the Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine database provided by the National Association of Securities Dealers; KMS is the distraction data based on Kempf, Manconi, 
and Spalt (2017), and is provided by Elisabeth Kempf; 13-F is the Thomson Reuters Institutional Shareholder database; CRSP is the Center for Research in Security 

34 
 
Prices database; Compustat is the financial information database; FISD is the Mergent Fixed Income Securities Database; 13-F/DealScan is the correspondence table 
provided by Yongqiang Chu; Coles et al. (2014) is the co-option data based on Coles, Daniel, and Naveen (2014), and is provided by Lalitha Naveen; ISS is the Institutional 
Shareholder Services database; SDC is the Securities Data Company database; Capital IQ is the S&P Capital IQ database; ExecuComp is the executive compensation 
database; and I/B/E/S is the Institutional Brokers’ Estimate System database. 

35 
 
Table 2. Descriptive Statistics 
 
Panel A: Summary Statistics 
 
 
Mean 
Median 
Standard 
Deviation 
25th 
Percentile 
75th 
Percentile 
Yield Spread (in basis points) 
288 
192 
303 
107 
358 
Distraction 
0.157 
0.141 
0.080 
0.095 
0.216 
Retail Inattention 
3.653 
3.827 
0.638 
3.321 
4.116 
Distraction (Positive Shock) 
0.085 
0.065 
0.060 
0.035 
0.139 
Distraction (Negative Shock) 
0.076 
0.060 
0.057 
0.032 
0.105 
Dual Holder Distraction 
0.009 
0.007 
0.007 
0.003 
0.012 
Non-DH Distraction 
0.150 
0.145 
0.075 
0.093 
0.209 
 
Firm-Specific Variables 
Total Assets ($Million) 
11,006 
4,403 
18,043 
1,969 
11,323 
Leverage 
0.330 
0.300 
0.167 
0.214 
0.410 
Performance 
0.036 
0.035 
0.021 
0.024 
0.047 
Sales Growth 
0.028 
0.017 
0.161 
-0.040 
0.082 
Cash Flow Volatility 
0.043 
0.031 
0.039 
0.020 
0.051 
Market-to-Book 
3.105 
2.304 
4.865 
1.469 
3.644 
Institutional Ownership 
0.713 
0.733 
0.188 
0.608 
0.839 
High C4 
0.318 
0.000 
0.466 
0.000 
1.000 
Dividend Cuts 
0.004 
0.000 
0.061 
0.000 
0.000 
Distance to Default 
5.496 
5.268 
3.496 
3.199 
7.685 
Idiosyncratic Risk 
0.018 
0.015 
0.011 
0.011 
0.022 
All Acquisitions 
0.186 
0.000 
0.389 
0.000 
0.000 
Within-Industry Acquisitions 
0.067 
0.000 
0.249 
0.000 
0.000 
Diversifying Acquisitions 
0.119 
0.000 
0.324 
0.000 
0.000 
 
Bond-Specific Variables 
Credit Rating 
BB+ 
BBB- 
A/B- 
B+ 
A– 
Bond Maturity 
9.147 
7.750 
5.438 
5.417 
11.600 
Bond Age 
3.391 
2.888 
2.445 
1.583 
4.562 
High Yield 
0.420 
0.000 
0.494 
0.000 
1.000 
Callability 
0.726 
1.000 
0.446 
0.000 
1.000 
 
Standardized Interaction (Continuous) Variables 
CEO Power 
0.000 
-0.025 
1.000 
-0.729 
0.775 
Asset Intangibility 
0.000 
-0.104 
1.000 
-0.718 
0.636 
Organizational Complexity 
0.000 
-0.313 
1.000 
-0.989 
0.363 
Analyst Forecast Dispersion 
0.000 
-0.168 
1.000 
-0.231 
-0.007 
 
Notes: Variable definitions are provided in Table 1. Panel A provides descriptive statistics for the key variables used in our 
analyses. The overall sample contains 21,345 firm-quarter observations from 1,094 firms over the 1993–2015 period. 
 
 
 

36 
 
Panel B: Industry Classifications 
FF 12 
 
Description 
Observations 
Percentage 
(%) 
Cumulative (%) 
1 
Consumer Non-Durables 
2,066 
9.68 
9.68 
2 
Consumer Durables 
332 
1.56 
11.23 
3 
Manufacturing 
5,263 
24.66 
35.89 
4 
Energy 
1,381 
6.47 
42.36 
5 
Chemicals and Allied Products 
1,532 
7.18 
49.54 
6 
Business Equipment 
1,957 
9.17 
58.71 
7 
Telecommunications 
922 
4.32 
63.03 
9 
Wholesale, retail and Services 
3,232 
15.14 
78.17 
10 
Healthcare 
1,495 
7.00 
85.17 
12 
Other 
3,165 
14.83 
100 
Total 
 
21,345 
100 
 
Notes: Panel B reports descriptive statistics using Fama–French (FF) 12-industry classification codes. The overall sample 
contains 21,345 firm-quarter observations from 1,094 firms over the 1993–2015 period. Other industries include Mines, 
Construction, Building Material, Transportation, Hotels, Business Services, and Entertainment. 
 

37 
 
Panel C: Selected Correlations 
 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
1. Yield Spread 
1.00 
2. Distraction 
0.05 
1.00 
3. Dual Holder Distraction 
0.18 
0.51 
1.00 
4. Non-DH Distraction 
0.02 
0.74 
0.59 
1.00 
5. Firm Size 
-0.28 
-0.04 
-0.08 
-0.04 
1.00 
6. Leverage 
0.29 
0.05 
0.24 
0.04 
-0.16 
1.00 
7. Performance 
-0.28 
0.00 
-0.11 
0.00 
0.02 
-0.05 
1.00 
8. Sales Growth 
-0.01 
0.01 
0.01 
0.02 
-0.03 
0.03 
0.24 
1.00 
9. Cash Flow Volatility 
0.20 
-0.02 
-0.04 
-0.02 
-0.11 
0.13 
-0.01 
0.04 
1.00 
10. Market-to-Book 
-0.14 
0.00 
-0.05 
0.00 
0.04 
-0.02 
0.16 
0.02 
0.05 
1.00 
11. Credit Rating 
-0.59 
0.04 
-0.10 
0.06 
0.38 
-0.34 
0.32 
-0.04 
-0.35 
0.08 
1.00 
12. Bond Maturity 
-0.16 
0.06 
0.00 
0.06 
0.18 
-0.11 
0.03 
0.00 
-0.11 
-0.01 
0.24 
1.00 
13. Bond Age 
-0.05 
-0.01 
-0.04 
-0.01 
0.19 
-0.16 
0.01 
-0.05 
-0.13 
0.03 
0.19 
0.12 
1.00 
14. High Yield 
0.61 
-0.02 
0.13 
-0.03 
-0.32 
0.38 
-0.25 
0.04 
0.25 
-0.10 
-0.81 
-0.26 
-0.19 
1.00 
15. Callability 
0.23 
-0.10 
-0.03 
-0.12 
0.11 
0.09 
-0.05 
-0.01 
0.00 
-0.03 
-0.15 
-0.04 
0.07 
0.24 
1.00 
16. Inst Ownership 
0.12 
-0.04 
-0.05 
-0.08 
-0.12 
-0.14 
-0.06 
0.01 
0.06 
-0.03 
-0.22 
-0.07 
0.02 
0.12 
0.10 
1.00 
17. CEO Power 
0.04 
0.05 
0.03 
0.03 
-0.01 
-0.06 
-0.01 
0.01 
0.01 
-0.05 
-0.02 
-0.02 
-0.04 
0.04 
-0.05 
0.02 
1.00 
18. Asset Intangibility 
-0.03 
0.01 
0.11 
-0.01 
0.11 
0.10 
-0.04 
-0.03 
-0.22 
-0.03 
0.07 
-0.04 
-0.04 
-0.04 
0.08 
0.03 
-0.01 
1.00 
19. Org Complexity 
-0.13 
0.02 
0.01 
0.00 
0.23 
-0.16 
-0.07 
-0.04 
-0.19 
-0.01 
0.24 
0.06 
0.17 
-0.22 
0.00 
0.03 
0.00 
0.21 
1.00 
20. Analyst Forecast Disp. 
0.16 
0.00 
0.04 
0.00 
-0.04 
0.11 
-0.12 
-0.01 
0.10 
-0.06 
-0.16 
-0.03 
-0.01 
0.15 
-0.01 
-0.03 
-0.02 
-0.08 
-0.05 
1.00 
21. High C4 
-0.05 
-0.01 
-0.01 
-0.01 
0.08 
-0.04 
0.04 
-0.01 
-0.13 
0.01 
0.13 
0.04 
0.11 
-0.12 
0.05 
0.00 
-0.05 
0.09 
0.19 
-0.04 
Notes: Variable definitions are provided in Table 1. Panel C provides data on the correlations between select variables. The dataset consists of 21,345 quarter-year observations 
from 1,094 firms over the 1993–2015 period. Correlation coefficients in bold indicate significance at the 1% level. 
 

38 
 
Table 3. Inattention and the Cost of Debt 
 
Primary 
Specification 
Extreme 
Positive Returns 
Extreme 
Negative Returns 
Investment-
Grade 
Non-Investment-
Grade 
Retail Investor 
Inattention 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
Distraction 
0.258*** 
 
 
0.274*** 
0.286** 
 
(4.866) 
 
 
(6.612) 
(2.391) 
Distraction (Positive Shock) 
 
0.159** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2.319) 
 
 
 
 
Distraction (Negative Shock) 
 
 
0.249*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2.595) 
 
 
 
Retail Inattention 
-0.001 
(-0.607) 
Firm Size 
-0.057** 
-0.056** 
-0.055** 
-0.114*** 
0.075* 
0.068 
 
(-2.207) 
(-2.145) 
(-2.091) 
(-3.230) 
(1.775) 
(0.930) 
Leverage 
0.527*** 
0.523*** 
0.523*** 
0.247*** 
0.480*** 
0.666*** 
 
(5.353) 
(5.311) 
(5.341) 
(2.894) 
(2.995) 
(2.673) 
Performance 
-3.303*** 
-3.322*** 
-3.318*** 
-3.007*** 
-3.126*** 
-1.274 
 
(-7.685) 
(-7.650) 
(-7.608) 
(-6.139) 
(-4.736) 
(-0.901) 
Sales Growth 
0.046** 
0.045** 
0.053** 
0.039 
0.030 
-0.056 
 
(2.031) 
(1.969) 
(2.292) 
(1.567) 
(0.769) 
(-0.605) 
Cash Flow Volatility 
0.294 
0.273 
0.363 
-0.219 
1.288 
4.942** 
(0.531) 
(0.488) 
(0.646) 
(-0.367) 
(1.436) 
(2.499) 
Market-to-Book 
-0.003** 
-0.003** 
-0.003*** 
-0.002** 
-0.003* 
-0.001 
 
(-2.541) 
(-2.578) 
(-2.726) 
(-2.205) 
(-1.722) 
(-0.488) 
Credit Rating 
-0.034*** 
-0.034*** 
-0.034*** 
-0.101*** 
-0.015 
-0.006 
 
(-3.470) 
(-3.432) 
(-3.475) 
(-10.739) 
(-1.311) 
(-0.214) 
Bond Maturity 
0.009*** 
0.009*** 
0.009*** 
0.017*** 
-0.014 
0.016** 
 
(3.276) 
(3.275) 
(3.352) 
(8.502) 
(-1.615) 
(2.501) 
Bond Age 
0.031*** 
0.031*** 
0.030*** 
0.027*** 
0.030*** 
0.053*** 
 
(6.898) 
(6.947) 
(6.850) 
(5.795) 
(2.811) 
(3.771) 
High Yield 
0.367*** 
0.372*** 
0.368*** 
 
 
0.382*** 
 
(9.203) 
(9.307) 
(9.161) 
 
 
(5.046) 
Callability 
0.135*** 
0.135*** 
0.134*** 
0.143*** 
0.215*** 
0.170 
 
(4.441) 
(4.394) 
(4.402) 
(3.617) 
(2.982) 
(1.589) 
Institutional Ownership 
-0.374*** 
-0.375*** 
-0.380*** 
-0.141 
-0.550*** 
-0.220 
 
(-4.941) 
(-4.918) 
(-5.056) 
(-1.592) 
(-5.034) 
(-0.907) 
Industry × Quarter FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

39 
 
Firm FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Observations 
21,345 
20,981 
20,905 
12,329 
8,899 
3,103 
Adjusted R-squared 
0.744 
0.743 
0.746 
0.783 
0.487 
0.740 
 
Notes: Variable definitions are provided in Table 1. This table provides coefficient estimates from regressing the log of corporate yield spreads on inattention (distraction, 
distraction (positive shock), distraction (negative shock), and retail inattention) and various firm- and debt-specific controls. The data cover the 1993–2015 period. t-
statistics based on standard errors adjusted for clustering by firm are in parentheses. All specifications include firm and industry × quarter fixed effects. Industry dummies 
are based on Fama–French 12-industry classification codes. 
***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.10 
 

40 
 
Table 4. Distraction, Firm Heterogeneity, and the Cost of Debt 
 
 
CEO 
Power 
Information Asymmetry 
Product Market 
Competition 
 
 
Principal 
Component 
 
Asset 
Intangibility 
Analyst 
Forecast 
Dispersion 
 
Organizational 
Complexity 
 
 
C4 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
Distraction 
0.016*** 
0.022*** 
0.021*** 
0.018*** 
0.016*** 
 
(2.719) 
(4.987) 
(4.955) 
(3.761) 
(2.913) 
CEO Power 
-0.006 
 
 
 
 
 
(-0.506) 
 
 
 
 
Distraction × CEO Power 
0.011** 
 
 
 
 
 
(2.484) 
 
 
 
 
Asset Intangibility 
 
0.013 
 
 
 
 
(0.813) 
 
 
 
Distraction × Asset Intangibility 
 
0.011*** 
 
 
 
 
 
(2.735) 
 
 
 
Analyst Forecast Dispersion 
 
 
0.024 
 
 
 
 
 
(1.516) 
 
 
Distraction × Forecast Disp. 
 
 
0.007** 
 
 
 
 
 
(2.557) 
 
 
Organizational Complexity 
 
 
 
0.026* 
 
 
 
 
 
(1.725) 
 
Distraction × Org. Complexity 
 
 
 
0.007** 
 
 
 
 
 
(2.085) 
 
High C4 
 
 
 
 
0.027 
 
 
 
 
 
(1.257) 
Distraction × High C4 
 
 
 
 
0.014** 
 
 
 
 
 
(2.058) 
Firm Size 
-0.024 
-0.066** 
-0.055** 
-0.056* 
-0.058** 
(-0.596) 
(-2.476) 
(-2.097) 
(-1.847) 
(-2.242) 
Leverage 
0.576*** 
0.515*** 
0.514*** 
0.528*** 
0.524*** 
(4.080) 
(5.118) 
(5.096) 
(4.853) 
(5.335) 
Performance 
-3.138*** 
-3.253*** 
-3.165*** 
-3.164*** 
-3.311*** 
(-5.372) 
(-7.420) 
(-7.317) 
(-6.401) 
(-7.711) 
Sales Growth 
0.059* 
0.051** 
0.041* 
0.041 
0.047** 
(1.833) 
(2.235) 
(1.777) 
(1.624) 
(2.055) 

41 
 
Cash Flow Volatility 
0.362 
0.385 
0.320 
0.540 
0.307 
 
(0.423) 
(0.672) 
(0.570) 
(0.864) 
(0.555) 
Market-to-Book 
-0.002 
-0.003** 
-0.003*** 
-0.003** 
-0.003** 
 
(-1.334) 
(-2.350) 
(-2.753) 
(-2.567) 
(-2.520) 
Credit Rating 
-0.023* 
-0.035*** 
-0.035*** 
-0.028*** 
-0.034*** 
 
(-1.729) 
(-3.562) 
(-3.560) 
(-2.698) 
(-3.475) 
Bond Maturity 
0.013*** 
0.009*** 
0.009*** 
0.009*** 
0.009*** 
 
(3.658) 
(3.395) 
(3.384) 
(3.143) 
(3.299) 
Bond Age 
0.031*** 
0.030*** 
0.031*** 
0.031*** 
0.031*** 
 
(4.664) 
(6.759) 
(6.978) 
(6.463) 
(6.913) 
High Yield 
0.389*** 
0.361*** 
0.366*** 
0.372*** 
0.368*** 
 
(7.182) 
(9.012) 
(9.064) 
(8.328) 
(9.215) 
Callability 
0.087* 
0.131*** 
0.134*** 
0.134*** 
0.135*** 
 
(1.770) 
(4.268) 
(4.334) 
(4.075) 
(4.465) 
Institutional Ownership 
-0.038 
-0.404*** 
-0.360*** 
-0.430*** 
-0.373*** 
 
(-0.326) 
(-5.342) 
(-4.675) 
(-5.184) 
(-4.927) 
CEO Age 
-0.044* 
 
 
 
 
 
(-1.803) 
 
 
 
 
Industry × Quarter FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Firm FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Observations 
11,037 
20,746 
20,870 
18,544 
21,345 
Adjusted R-Squared 
0.717 
0.747 
0.743 
0.738 
0.744 
 
Notes: Variable definitions are provided in Table 1. This table provides coefficient estimates from regressing the log of corporate yield spreads on shareholder distraction, 
its interactions with CEO power, information asymmetry, and product market competition, and various control variables. Interaction terms are standardized to have a 
mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. The data cover the 1993–2015 period. t-statistics based on standard errors adjusted for clustering by firm are in parentheses. All 
models include firm and industry × quarter fixed effects. Industry dummies are based on Fama–French 12-industry classification codes. 
***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.10

42 
 
Table 5. Distracted Dual Holders, Distracted Non-Dual Holders, and the Cost of Debt 
 
 
Dual 
Holders 
 
Non-Dual 
Holders 
Dual and 
Non-Dual 
Holders 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
Dual Holder Distraction 
2.533*** 
 
2.554*** 
 
(2.711) 
 
(3.002) 
Non-DH Distraction 
 
0.159*** 
 
 
 
(2.768) 
 
Non-DH Distraction (Orthogonalized) 
 
 
0.016 
 
 
 
(0.161) 
Firm Size 
-0.061** 
-0.057** 
-0.061** 
(-2.262) 
(-2.205) 
(-2.255) 
Leverage 
0.619*** 
0.528*** 
0.620*** 
 
(6.613) 
(5.366) 
(6.596) 
Performance 
-3.377*** 
-3.303*** 
-3.378*** 
(-8.427) 
(-7.687) 
(-8.414) 
Sales Growth 
0.058*** 
0.047** 
0.058*** 
(2.680) 
(2.069) 
(2.681) 
Cash Flow Volatility 
-0.040 
0.297 
-0.041 
(-0.083) 
(0.535) 
(-0.084) 
Market-to-Book 
-0.002* 
-0.003** 
-0.002* 
(-1.765) 
(-2.539) 
(-1.767) 
Credit Rating 
-0.039*** 
-0.034*** 
-0.039*** 
 
(-3.795) 
(-3.484) 
(-3.791) 
Maturity 
0.009*** 
0.009*** 
0.009*** 
(3.344) 
(3.276) 
(3.343) 
Bond Age 
0.029*** 
0.031*** 
0.030*** 
(6.729) 
(6.894) 
(6.727) 
High Yield 
0.340*** 
0.367*** 
0.340*** 
(8.099) 
(9.208) 
(8.118) 
Callability 
0.113*** 
0.135*** 
0.113*** 
(4.076) 
(4.443) 
(4.082) 
Institutional Ownership 
-0.408*** 
-0.374*** 
-0.408*** 
 
(-5.220) 
(-4.930) 
(-5.221) 
Industry × Quarter FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Firm FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Observations 
19,086 
21,343 
19,086 
Adjusted R-Squared 
0.764 
0.743 
0.764 
t-test for difference between dual and non-
dual holders 
 
 
2.374** 
(2.536) 
 
 
Notes: Variable definitions are provided in Table 1. This table provides coefficient estimates from regressing the log of 
yield spreads on institutional shareholder distraction for dual and non-dual holders. The data cover the 1993–2015 period. 
t-statistics based on standard errors adjusted for clustering by firm are in parentheses. All specifications include firm and 
industry × quarter fixed effects. Industry dummies are based on Fama–French 12-industry classification codes. 
***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.10

43 
 
Table 6. Distraction and the Cost of Debt: Evidence from Corporate Actions 
 
 
All 
Acquisitions 
Within-
Industry 
Acquisitions 
Diversifying 
Acquisitions 
Dividend 
Cuts 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Distraction 
0.019*** 
0.020*** 
0.021*** 
0.023*** 
 
(4.432) 
(4.510) 
(4.892) 
(4.671) 
Acquisitions 
-0.015* 
-0.002 
-0.020* 
 
 
(-1.738) 
(-0.156) 
(-1.891) 
 
Distraction × Acquisitions 
0.006 
0.017* 
-0.002 
 
 
(0.771) 
(1.735) 
(-0.213) 
 
Dividend Cuts 
 
 
 
0.175*** 
 
 
 
 
(3.973) 
Distraction × Dividend Cuts 
 
 
 
0.037 
 
 
 
 
(1.165) 
Firm Size 
-0.057** 
-0.057** 
-0.057** 
-0.024 
(-2.192) 
(-2.212) 
(-2.211) 
(-0.756) 
Leverage 
0.525*** 
0.527*** 
0.525*** 
0.602*** 
(5.333) 
(5.353) 
(5.326) 
(4.831) 
Performance 
-3.305*** 
-3.303*** 
-3.303*** 
-2.672*** 
(-7.686) 
(-7.685) 
(-7.682) 
(-5.302) 
Sales Growth 
0.047** 
0.046** 
0.047** 
0.036 
(2.051) 
(2.036) 
(2.055) 
(1.278) 
Cash Flow Volatility 
0.291 
0.292 
0.294 
0.316 
 
(0.524) 
(0.526) 
(0.530) 
(0.451) 
Market-to-Book 
-0.003** 
-0.003** 
-0.003** 
-0.003** 
 
(-2.550) 
(-2.542) 
(-2.536) 
(-2.243) 
Credit Rating 
-0.034*** 
-0.034*** 
-0.034*** 
-0.018 
 
(-3.470) 
(-3.468) 
(-3.469) 
(-1.568) 
Bond Maturity 
0.009*** 
0.009*** 
0.009*** 
0.008** 
 
(3.269) 
(3.280) 
(3.277) 
(2.329) 
Bond Age 
0.031*** 
0.031*** 
0.031*** 
0.036*** 
 
(6.896) 
(6.898) 
(6.894) 
(6.562) 
High Yield 
0.367*** 
0.367*** 
0.367*** 
0.390*** 
 
(9.194) 
(9.203) 
(9.202) 
(8.546) 
Callability 
0.135*** 
0.135*** 
0.135*** 
0.087** 
 
(4.452) 
(4.444) 
(4.446) 
(2.160) 
Institutional Ownership 
-0.375*** 
-0.375*** 
-0.374*** 
-0.256** 
 
(-4.948) 
(-4.946) 
(-4.943) 
(-2.330) 
Industry × Quarter FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Firm FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Observations 
21,345 
21,345 
21,345 
15,780 
Adjusted R-Squared 
0.744 
0.744 
0.744 
0.703 
 
Notes: Variable definitions are provided in Table 1. This table gives the coefficient estimates from regressing the log of 
corporate yield spreads on shareholder distraction, observable corporate actions (all acquisitions, within-industry 
acquisitions, diversifying acquisitions, dividend cuts), and various control variables. Continuous variables in interaction 
terms are standardized to have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. The data cover the 1993–2015 period. t-statistics 
based on standard errors adjusted for clustering by firm are in parentheses. All specifications include firm and industry × 
quarter fixed effects. Industry dummies are based on Fama–French 12-industry classification codes. 
***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.10 

44 
 
Table 7. Distraction and the Cost of Debt: Firms’ Credit Risk 
 
Panel A: Credit Ratings 
Distraction 
-0.336** 
 
(-2.247) 
Firm Size 
1.452*** 
 
(8.501) 
Leverage 
-4.498*** 
 
(-8.041) 
Performance 
15.770*** 
 
(6.697) 
Sales Growth 
-0.718*** 
 
(-6.848) 
CF Volatility 
-5.868* 
 
(-1.819) 
Market-to-Book 
-0.001 
 
(-0.178) 
Inst. Ownership 
-0.381 
 
(-0.724) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ind.×Quarter FE 
Yes 
Firm FE 
Yes 
Observations 
21,345 
Adj. R-squared 
0.901 
Panel B: Distance to Default 
Distraction 
-1.019*** 
 
(-5.163) 
Firm Size 
-0.467*** 
 
(-4.534) 
Leverage 
-4.244*** 
 
(-11.575) 
Performance 
10.005*** 
 
(4.067) 
Market-to-Book 
0.008 
 
(1.284) 
Operating Margin 
0.225 
 
(0.550) 
Coverage Ratio 
0.027*** 
 
(6.510) 
Loss Dummy 
0.440** 
 
(2.527) 
Beta 
-0.479*** 
 
(-10.009) 
Idiosyncratic Risk 
-52.916*** 
 
(-14.485) 
Ind.×Quarter FE 
Yes 
Firm FE 
Yes 
Observations 
20,874 
Adj. R-squared 
0.787 
Panel C: Idiosyncratic Risk 
Distraction 
0.007*** 
 
(8.592) 
Firm Size 
-0.001** 
 
(-2.526) 
Leverage 
0.008*** 
 
(7.774) 
Performance 
-0.003*** 
 
(-4.505) 
ROE Volatility 
0.001** 
 
(2.382) 
Market-to-Book 
-0.000 
 
(-0.312) 
Dividend Dummy 
-0.002*** 
 
(-4.303) 
Firm Age 
-0.002** 
 
(-2.478) 
Diversification 
-0.000 
 
(-0.207) 
Tangibility 
-0.001 
 
(-0.644) 
Ind.×Quarter FE 
Yes 
Firm FE 
Yes 
Observations 
20,675 
Adj. R-squared 
0.660 
 
Notes: This table gives the coefficient estimates from regressing credit ratings, distance-to-default (higher values indicate 
lower probability of default), and idiosyncratic risk on institutional shareholder distraction and various controls motivated 
by prior research (e.g., Kaplan and Urwitz 1979; Blume, Lim, and MacKinlay 1998; Bhojraj and Sengupta 2003; Ferreira 
and Laux 2007; Hsu et al. 2015). Operating Margin is the ratio of operating income to sales; Coverage Ratio is operating 
income before depreciation divided by interest expense; Loss Dummy is an indicator that equals 1 if a firm reports a loss 
in a given quarter; Beta is the equity return beta; and Idiosyncratic Risk is the standard deviation of the residuals for a given 
quarter using Carhart’s (1997) four-factor model. ROE volatility is the variance of quarterly return-on-equity over 3 years; 
Dividend Dummy is an indicator variable that equals 1 if the firm pays a dividend in a given quarter; Firm Age is the 
number of years since the stock’s inclusion in the CRSP database; and Diversification is an indicator variable that equals 
1 if a firm operates in multiple segments in a given quarter. The data cover the 1993–2015 period. t-statistics based on 
standard errors adjusted for clustering by firm are in parentheses. All specifications include firm and industry × quarter 
fixed effects. Industry dummies are based on Fama–French 12-industry classification codes. 
***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.10