TITLE: Optimal Picking Policies in E-Commerce Warehouses
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2021.4275
---

Citation for published version:
Schiffer, M, Boysen, N, Klein, PS, Laporte, G & Pavone, M 2022, 'Optimal picking policies in e-commerce
warehouses', Management Science , vol. 68, no. 10, pp. 7497-7517. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2021.4275
DOI:
10.1287/mnsc.2021.4275
Publication date:
2022
Document Version
Peer reviewed version
Link to publication
University of Bath
Alternative formats
If you require this document in an alternative format, please contact:
openaccess@bath.ac.uk
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
Download date: 13. Jun. 2026

Submitted to Management Science
manuscript MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
Optimal picking policies in e-commerce warehouses
Maximilian Schiﬀer
TUM School of Management & Munich Data Science Institute, Technical University of Munich, 80333 Munich, Germany,
schiﬀer@tum.de
Nils Boysen
Chair of Operations Management, Friedrich Schiller Universit¨at Jena, 07743 Jena, Germany, nils.boysen@uni-jena.de
Patrick S. Klein
TUM School of Management, Technical University of Munich, 80333 Munich, Germany, patrick.s.klein@tum.de
Gilbert Laporte
HEC Montr´eal, Montr´eal H3T 2A7, Canada & School of Management, University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, United Kingdom,
gilbert.laporte@cirrelt.ca
Marco Pavone
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94035 USA, pavone@stanford.edu
In e-commerce warehouses, online retailers increase their eﬃciency by using a mixed-shelves (or scattered
storage) concept, where unit loads are purposefully broken down into single items, which are individually
stored in multiple locations. Irrespective of the stock keeping units a customer jointly orders, this storage
strategy increases the likelihood that somewhere in the warehouse the items of the requested stock keeping
units will be in close vicinity, which may signiﬁcantly reduce an order picker’s unproductive walking time.
This paper optimizes picker routing through such mixed-shelves warehouses. Speciﬁcally, we introduce a
generic exact algorithmic framework that covers a multitude of picking policies, independently of the under-
lying picking zone layout, and is suitable for real-time applications. This framework embeds a bidirectional
layered graph algorithm which provides the best known performance for the simple picking problem with a
single depot and no further attributes. We compare three diﬀerent real-world e-commerce warehouse settings
that diﬀer slightly in their application of scattered storage and in their picking policies. Based on these,
we derive additional layouts and settings that yield further managerial insights. Our results reveal that the
right combination of drop-oﬀpoints, dynamic batching, the utilization of picking carts, and the picking
zone layout can greatly improve the picking performance. In particular, some combinations of policies yield
eﬃciency increases of more than 30% compared with standard policies currently used in practice.
Key words : mixed-shelves warehouse, order picking policies, picking zone layout, dynamic programming
History :
1.
Introduction
A paradigm change in the retail business, caused by rapidly growing e-commerce (Statista 2017,
Cui et al. 2019), makes today’s warehouses the focus of eﬃcient operations in business-to-customer
(B2C) markets. While warehouses have traditionally been viewed as remote, negligible, and cost-
eﬃcient planning components, today’s warehouses have evolved into technology-enriched logistics
1

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
2
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
facilities that play a key role in retail supply chains. For companies of any signiﬁcant size, the
warehouse of today and of the future performs several of the functions that conventional stores have
previously managed. Consequently, ﬁrms’ attention to innovative concepts and eﬃcient warehouse
operations is steadily increasing, as warehouses are seen as a key success factor in the highly com-
petitive e-commerce market. In these warehouses, eﬃcient daily operations are central to running a
proﬁtable e-commerce business and to fulﬁlling customer expectations such as same-day deliveries,
such that eﬃciently routing pickers constitutes a crucial determinant of proﬁtability.
In e-commerce warehouses, two fundamentally diﬀerent concepts dominate: robotized parts-to-
picker warehouses, where (KIVA) robots bring man-high shelves to stationary pickers (Azadeh et al.
2018), and human-operated picker-to-parts warehouses, in which pickers traditionally walk through
the shelves and collect stock keeping units (SKUs). These two concepts entail a trade-oﬀbetween
investment costs, scalability, and eﬃciency. Parts-to-picker warehouses have high investment costs
that increase signiﬁcantly with the number of robots but are highly eﬃcient when operated at their
maximum throughput. They are hardly scalable to rare events during which the workload increases
signiﬁcantly, e.g., on Black Friday or for Cyber Monday sales. Picker-to-parts warehouses have
low investment costs and are less eﬃcient than robotized systems. In contrast, these warehouses
allow—by hiring additional temporary staﬀ—the necessary ﬂexibility in peak times. Hence, major
players in the industry agree that picker-to-parts warehouses should remain in parallel to robotized
warehouses to provide ﬂexibility.
With standardized third-party robotized warehouse solutions across companies, increasing the
eﬃciency of picker-to-parts warehouses becomes even more crucial for online retailers who vie to
derive a competitive advantage. In traditional picker-to-parts warehouses (with unit loads kept
together), the storage assignment plans result in excessive unproductive walking for the pickers,
corresponding to as much as 50% of their working hours (De Koster et al. 2007). Many online
retailers in the B2C segment apply the mixed-shelves or scattered storage concept (Weidinger and
Boysen 2018) to increase the eﬃciency of such warehouses. Under this storage assignment policy,
incoming loads of SKUs are purposefully broken down into single items scattered over all parts of
the warehouse, thus increasing the likelihood that, given the volatile demands of the ﬁnal customers,
items ﬁnally ordered together will be in close vicinity somewhere in the warehouse (Boysen et al.
2019a). However, competitive routing algorithms that determine picker paths to collect SKUs
remain crucial to an eﬃcient exploitation of the scattered storage in e-commerce warehouses, and
to the reduction of unproductive picker walking time. In particular, large e-commerce warehouses
subdivide their order fulﬁllment process into three stages, i.e., order picking, intermediate storing
of picked bins, and order accumulation and packing (see Section 2.1). While the latter two stages

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
3
are rather standardized and can largely be automated, order picking remains the most crucial and
labor-intensive stage and is, therefore, the focus of this paper.
Today’s e-commerce warehouses consist of picking zones, i.e., limited blocks of shelves in which
pickers operate (see Figure 1). These zones have a rectilinear layout, which means that the pickers
always move according to a Manhattan metric, with shelves placed along parallel aisles and one or
several drop-oﬀpoints at which pickers can hand over items. Online retailers apply batch picking,
i.e., they unify multiple picking orders into a single picklist (Boysen et al. 2019a) which is then
processed by a picker in a dedicated zone. The picker starts with a manual picking cart and a
picklist at a drop-oﬀpoint and returns to it once the picklist is completed. Despite the regular
rectilinear layout and the rather simple picking process, picking zones may diﬀer in the number
of cross-aisles and aisles they contain. Although most companies rely on the scattered storage
principle and agree on eﬃcient picking as a key to successful operations, there is no consensus
on which general attributes a good picking policy and a picking zone layout should possess. This
paper focuses on four main attributes which have been identiﬁed as most frequently implemented
in practice in the recent survey of Boysen et al. (2019a):
i) a variable multi-block layout which diﬀers in terms of the number of aisles and cross-aisles;
ii) multiple drop-oﬀpoints which increase the number of points in a picking zone where completed
bins can be handed over to a central conveyor system;
iii) dynamic batching policies which allow to drop a ﬁnished picklist early while processing several
picklists in parallel by equipping the picking cart with multiple bins; and
iv) cartless subtours which allow pickers to intermediately park their clumsy cart in order to pick
a few items on a subtour much faster.
Several site visits that we have made in European e-commerce warehouses have conﬁrmed that
these policies and layout options are applied in various combinations (see Section 2.2), and beneﬁts
can be achieved through optimization. However, performance gains come at the price of additional
investments, which may diﬀer for each setting. Hence, we evaluate the performance impact of
the picking policy and layout options, which allows us to quantify each measure’s improvement
potential without relating it to varying and hence hardly assessable investment costs. To set our
depot
storage position
cross-aisle
sub-aisle
aisle
picking zone
sub-cross-aisle
Figure 1
Example of the storage area of an e-commerce warehouse and a picking zone.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
4
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
study apart from recent research, we ﬁrst brieﬂy review the related literature in Section 1.1, before
further detailing the contributions of our work in Section 1.2.
1.1.
Literature review
Eﬃcient order processing in warehouses and distribution centers has been vividly discussed in recent
years. For an overview of the rich body of literature on traditional picker-to-parts warehouses,
modern robotized warehouses, and the peculiarities of warehousing in the e-commerce era, we refer
to the surveys of De Koster et al. (2007), Azadeh et al. (2018), and Boysen et al. (2019a). In the
following, we only survey the picker routing literature related to the planning tasks outlined above.
Picker routing starting and ending at a central drop-oﬀpoint corresponds to the traveling sales-
man problem (TSP). In their seminal paper, Ratliﬀand Rosenthal (1983) showed that in single-
block warehouses consisting of parallel aisles with cross-aisles at the front and back, the particular
structure of the distance matrix allows solving the resulting TSP in polynomial time by dynamic
programming. Roodbergen and De Koster (2001) extended this approach to two-block warehouses
with an additional middle aisle, and De Koster and Van der Poort (1998) considered a handover
of complete orders at the start and end of each aisle. Recently, Pansart et al. (2018) generalized
the approach of Ratliﬀand Rosenthal (1983) to multi-block warehouses using the polynomial-time
algorithm of Cambazard and Catusse (2018) for rectilinear Steiner tree problems in the plane. As
can be seen, exact algorithms for the picker routing problem are rare and limited to special cases.
Several heuristics have been proposed for the picker routing problem itself and for some of its
variants, e.g., picker routing combined with selecting pick positions or with zoning and batching
policies. For a rich overview of these heuristics, we refer the reader to De Koster et al. (2007). While
fundamental work including performance analysis was carried out by Hall (1993) and Petersen
(1997), De Koster and Van der Poort (1998) provided comparisons between exact and heuristic
algorithms for speciﬁc layouts. The more recent approximate algorithms adapt competitive TSP
heuristics to the picker routing problem (Theys et al. 2010). Gue et al. (2006), Hong et al. (2012a),
and Chen et al. (2013) have all focused on blocking aspects in narrow aisles. Given the dedi-
cated zoning policy and layout of modern e-commerce warehouses, this blocking issue is negligible
nowadays. Only one publication (Goetschalckx and Ratliﬀ1988) exists on pickers with diﬀerent
travel modes, i.e., pickers who are allowed to park their cart and perform cartless subtours on
foot. However, that paper assumes that a picker moves the vehicle along a single aisle, but starting
and stopping the vehicle to retrieve items on foot consumes additional time. As can be seen, no
heuristic exists that captures the generic nature of our problem.
Weidinger et al. (2019) showed that the integrated selection of pick positions for a speciﬁc
demand in a mixed-shelves warehouse makes the picker routing problem strongly NP-hard, even

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
5
in elementary block-shaped warehouses with parallel aisles. Algorithms for this problem class were
proposed by Daniels et al. (1998), Weidinger (2018), and Weidinger et al. (2019). These authors
decompose the problem by ﬁxing the pick positions’ selection and treating the second-stage routing
problem heuristically. Overviews of zoning and batching policies can be found in De Koster et al.
(2007) and Boysen et al. (2019a). Recent contributions to this ﬁeld by Bozer and Kile (2008), Henn
and W¨ascher (2012), Hong et al. (2012b), and Zulj et al. (2018), have focused on heuristics for a
static batching policy. In practice, the two planning tasks of selecting pick positions and batching
and zoning are decoupled from the picker routing decision. Recently, Weidinger (2018) gave proof
to this common practice and showed that solutions derived in this fashion yield optimality gaps
well below one percent compared to integrated planning. Hence, we exclude these problems from
our real-world study, and assume respective decisions to be made at an upstream decision stage.
Concluding, no exact or heuristic algorithm exists that captures the generic nature of our prob-
lem, namely i) a variable multi-block layout, ii) multiple drop-oﬀpoints, iii) dynamic batching
policies, and iv) cartless subtours. In particular, requirements ii)–iv) have not yet been incorporated
in any exact or heuristic algorithm to the best of our knowledge.
1.2.
Contributions
In this paper, we close the gap in the literature outlined in Section 1.1 by developing the ﬁrst generic
exact algorithm that can handle the four features just mentioned. Its computational requirements
must be suﬃciently low to allow for real-time application in practical settings. Given this, the
methodological and managerial contribution of this paper is threefold. First, we develop an exact
algorithm for picker routing capable of capturing the four main attributes identiﬁed by Boysen
et al. (2019a). Second, we provide additional preprocessing techniques that allow the real-time use
of this algorithm in real-world applications. Third, based on this methodological framework, we
conduct diﬀerent experiments to benchmark several picking policies and layout options on realistic
data sets extracted from three corporate case studies.
Our algorithm provides a new state of the art for picker routing problems. In particular, we
outperform the previously best known exact algorithm (Pansart et al. 2018) for single picklists in
multi-block warehouses in terms of computational time, and we obtain better scalability for large-
size instances with up to 11 cross-aisles. Besides, our algorithm is signiﬁcantly more general as it can
solve picker routing problems with multiple picklists, dynamic batching strategies, multiple drop-oﬀ
points, and cartless subtours. We use this algorithm to identify the beneﬁts of all considered picking
policy design options utilizing a full-factorial experiment. Speciﬁcally, we show that the level of
picklist dispersion, i.e., a picklist’s warehousing area which results from the selection of more or less
dispersed picking positions during upper level planning tasks, strongly inﬂuences strategic design
and operational decisions.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
6
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
1. At the strategic level, we show that increasing the number of cross-aisles can yield eﬃciency
increases of more than 20% in the case of dispersed picklists. However, for clustered picklists,
the reduction potential is much smaller, and increasing the number of cross-aisles may even
increase the total picker walking time. The deployment of multiple drop-oﬀpoints shows
decreasing marginal utilities for large numbers of drop-oﬀpoints.
2. At the operational level, we show that dynamic batching yields signiﬁcant eﬃciency improve-
ments of up to 9% for clustered picklists but has only negligible eﬀects in the case of dispersed
picklists. In contrast, cartless subtours yield eﬃciency improvements of up to 11% for dispersed
picklists but have a negligible eﬀect in the case of clustered picklists.
3. Combining the right operational and strategic design decisions can lead to eﬃciency improve-
ments of up to 31% for clustered picklists and of up to 11% for dispersed picklists.
1.3.
Organization of the paper
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 further details the fulﬁllment process
in an e-commerce warehouse, details the settings of picking policies we have observed in practice,
and provides a formal deﬁnition of the planning problems at hand. Section 3 develops our algorithm.
We present extensive computational results in Section 4. Section 5 concludes this paper and provides
several managerial insights. All proposition proofs are provided in Appendix A.
2.
Problem description
This section introduces our planning problem. We ﬁrst detail the order fulﬁllment process in e-
commerce warehouses to show the integration of our planning problem into daily operations. We
then discuss the settings of picking policies that we have observed in practice, before formally
introducing the generalized order picking problem (GOPP).
2.1.
Order fulﬁllment process
For conciseness, we exclude the ingoing ﬂow of the warehouse and focus on the outgoing ﬂow.
Once items are stored and scattered around the warehouse, the order fulﬁllment process in a
mixed-shelves warehouse consists of three basic steps.
Order picking: First, customer orders must be picked from their respective storage positions.
Human pickers, each equipped with a small picking cart that carries small bins, collect items into
these bins. A picker receives empty bins and picklists, each associated with a bin, at a drop-oﬀ
point, strides (directed by a hand-held scanner or a pick-by-voice system) through the warehouse,
collects the requested items from the shelves, and puts them into their respective bin on the cart.
Once the picker has completed one or multiple bins, she hands the bins over to the central conveyor
system at a drop-oﬀpoint and starts processing the next picklists. This process is typically executed

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
7
under a zoning and batching policy (De Koster et al. 2007). Instead of storing all items in a single
monolithic area, online retailers subdivide their vast shop ﬂoors into multiple zones to allow for
parallel processing of customer orders. A picker operates exclusively in one of these zones and only
picks the part of an order stored in her assigned zone. By parallelizing the picking process in this
fashion, order pickers traverse smaller areas of the warehouses to reduce their unproductive walking
time. A further reduction of unproductive walking time can be achieved by unifying multiple orders
into batches that are jointly retrieved on the picker’s tour through her zone. This results in bins
ﬁlled with partial orders for multiple customers.
In e-commerce, customer orders have diﬀerent priorities and varying deadlines as some customers
may participate in priority delivery programs. Directly considering these priorities leads to unre-
alistically long planning horizons of several hours that may even exceed the time needed to handle
the orders known beforehand. In practice, warehouse operators consider the priority of orders in
line with the order batching and picklist sequencing at an upstream planning stage before giving a
picklist sequence, which comprises the most urgent orders for a short planning horizon, to a picker.
This sorted list sequence comprises the picklists for the most urgent orders. The order waves that
are not yet included in this planning horizon are more likely to be timely processed if the current
set of picklists is assembled as fast as possible.
Intermediate storing of picked bins: Once handed over to the central conveying system at a
drop-oﬀpoint, these bins are intermediately stored until all those belonging to the same wave
of customer orders have arrived from all zones. Diﬀerent storage devices exist. Some operators
apply lane-based systems where bins of a wave are channeled in a conveyor queue. Others apply
automated storage and retrieval systems, where bins are stored in crane-operated aisles of high-bay
storage racks (Boysen et al. 2018). In smaller warehouses, loop-based systems where bins circle
until a wave is complete may be applied (Gallien and Weber 2010).
Order accumulation and packing: Finally, a wave of bins released from intermediate storage
arrives in the order accumulation area. Here, the incoming items are sorted according to customer
orders. Some operators apply so-called put walls for this task, where human logistics workers place
items on small shelves, each temporarily dedicated to a speciﬁc customer order (Boysen et al.
2019b). On the other side of the wall, packers receive completed orders, pack them into their
shipping cartons, and forward them via conveyors to their dedicated trailers. Other warehouses
apply automated belt sorters, e.g., tilt-tray or cross-belt sorters, where items are collected in
packing stations arranged along the belt (Boysen et al. 2018).
Both intermediate storing and packing are process steps that can easily be standardized and
organized eﬃciently. However, order picking includes unpredictable components because it depends

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
8
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
on incoming customer orders and requires the largest fraction of the workforce. Therefore, an
eﬃcient routing algorithm plays a crucial role in ensuring eﬃcient order fulﬁllment.
The inputs needed for creating route plans are the picklists, a picklist sequence, and the assign-
ment of SKUs to picklists. Integrated problems that combine order batching or sequencing with
picker routing have been discussed (Weidinger et al. 2019), but while they provide challenging
research questions, their solutions are less relevant in practice. Indeed, operators typically solve
the batching and sequencing problems at an upper level, decoupled from the picker routing, for the
following reason: both problems heavily depend on the incoming orders’ priorities. Those orders
with the closest due date of their associated outbound trucks are selected as the wave of orders
to be processed next. Therefore, all orders of the current wave are urgent, and there is no need
to further diﬀerentiate between their priorities during order picking. Recent research has corrobo-
rated this common practice. Weidinger (2018) has shown that in practice selecting the shelves from
which each item is to be picked in a scattered storage warehouse can be solved independently of the
picker routing problem. Indeed, selecting shelves such that the current picklist’s warehousing area
is minimal and handing these pick positions over to picker routing leads to near-optimal solutions
with optimality gaps well below one percent (Weidinger 2018).
2.2.
Picking policies
In this paper, we develop a generalized exact algorithm for picker routing in e-commerce ware-
houses. We create diﬀerent settings based on diﬀerent order-picking policies that we have observed
in practice in mixed-shelves warehouses.
Amazon Europe: In Amazon’s distribution centers in Bad Hersfeld (Germany) and Poznan
(Poland), we have observed the following setting. Amazon uses multiple drop-oﬀpoints to a central
conveyor system to hand over completed bins. Pickers often pass by these local drop-oﬀpoints
during a tour, which oﬀers the additional ﬂexibility of dynamic batching. Instead of picking batch
after batch with intermediate returns to a central drop-oﬀpoint in a static manner, pickers can
hand over just a subset of completed bins at a local drop-oﬀpoint and retrieve new empty bins for
subsequent orders. Thus, Amazon’s picker routing procedure additionally considers the dynamic
batching of an order set by inserting visits at diﬀerent drop-oﬀpoints in the tour where the picker
hands over subsets of completed bins and starts handling new orders.
Hermes Group: This is Germany’s second-largest postal service provider. Its distribution center
in Haldensleben (Germany) operates full-service order fulﬁllment for one of Europe’s largest online
and catalog fashion retailers. Hermes’s order picking process is as follows. Each picker is equipped
with a picking cart with up to four bins, each having a capacity of about 20 to 30 items. Pickers
operate in ﬁxed zones, each having a single drop-oﬀpoint where new bins and the next picklist

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
9
are retrieved and, ﬁnally, completed bins are handed over to the central conveyor system. Hence,
each picker tour starts and ends at a central drop-oﬀpoint, and for a given batch of (four) picking
orders, one seeks a tour through the respective zone of the warehouse, such that all items on the
picklist can be retrieved, and the length of the tour is minimal.
Zalando: The online fashion retailer Zalando uses a diﬀerent system at its distribution center
in Erfurt (Germany). It applies static batching with a single drop-oﬀpoint in each picking zone.
Since the bins are relatively large and heavy when ﬁlled, picking carts are clumsy and inﬂexible.
Hence, the pickers are much faster without the cart. Thus, a picker may park her cart, pick up to
six items from close-by shelves, and carry them back to the cart. An optimization procedure for
the Zalando case must determine whether a walk between two successive visits of a picker tour
should be executed with or without a cart. This decision has to consider the limited capacity of
items a picker can carry on her arms and the varying walking speeds with and without a cart.
Based on these observations, we classify picking policies according to three characteristics:
i) static vs. dynamic batching, ii) single vs. multiple drop-oﬀpoints, and iii) single vs. multiple travel
modes (i.e., cartless subtours). Certain combinations of these characteristics reﬂect the real-world
picking policies detailed above. In our computational studies, we aim at a full factorial design to
evaluate each degree of freedom’s potential in designing picking policies. Hence, we add missing
policies even if we have not yet observed them in practice. Table 1 shows the diﬀerent picking
policies with increasing degrees of freedom from left to right. As can be seen, the Amazon (A)
policy already covers most degrees of freedom, while the Hermes (H) and the Zalando (Z) policy
remain at the bottom line with respect to degrees of freedom.
2.3.
A generalized order picking problem
Given the multitude of picking policies described in Section 2.2, we now formally introduce the
GOPP.
Solution representation and notation: To represent a solution Π, we model positions in the pick-
ing zone (Figure 1) as vertices, such that a vertex is either a drop-oﬀpoint (c ∈D), a crossing
between an aisle and a cross-aisle (c ∈C), or a storage position (c ∈P) that contains varying
amounts of diﬀerent SKUs. We note that a solution will include only a subset of storage position
vertices P′ ⊆P, that correspond to positions where items have to be picked. Analogously, only
Table 1
Picking policies resulting from diﬀerent attributes.
Policy
i (H)
ii (Z)
iii
iv
v
vi
vii (A)
viii
static (SB) / dynamic (DB) batching
SB
SB
SB
SB
DB
DB
DB
DB
single (SD) / multiple (MD) drop-oﬀpoints
SD
SD
MD
MD
SD
SD
MD
MD
no cartless subtours (NS) / cartless subtours (CS)
NS
CS
NS
CS
NS
CS
NS
CS

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
10
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
drop-oﬀpoint vertices and cross-aisle vertices necessary to complete a tour are included in the
respective solution. At the operational level, an ordered set L of picklists l denotes which position
c ∈P must be visited to pick up SKUs. Recall that the size and pick-up position of a given SKU
is decided at a preceding planning level to eﬃciently split customer orders into picklists and avoid
double picking by competing pickers. Hence we represent a single picklist l = {c1,...,cn} as a ﬁnite
set of n storage positions that must be visited. Across multiple picklists, n can vary as, for example,
prioritized lists might be designed with fewer items on an upper planning level.
Besides, we use the set La
i to track active picklists at each position i of a route. Depending on
the picking policy, a picker processes a single picklist or multiple picklists in parallel such that |La
i |
is limited. Each picklist must be collected in a separate bin. Thus, we can measure the picking
cart capacity κ, i.e., the number of possible parallel-processed picklists, by the number of bins. In
practice, standardized bins are a prerequisite for fail-safe transport on picking carts and conveyors.
Note that our assumption remains valid even for cases with diﬀerently sized bins since the upstream
planning stage avoids conﬂicting bins while deﬁning the sequence of picklists.
A picker is accompanied by a cart equipped with standardized bins to collect orders. For certain
picking policies, the picker may temporarily leave her cart to pick a certain number of SKUs during
a cartless subtour.
Definition 1 (cartless subtour). A cartless subtour of the picker starts at the ith stop of
the tour where the picker leaves her cart and ends at stop k where she picks up her cart again at
the same position such that ci = ck. In addition, a cartless subtour is limited to a certain number
of items K, i.e., the maximum number of items a picker can carry without cart support. A picker
may start a subtour at the end of or at any position in a sub-aisle. A subtour may not span across
more than one sub-aisle.
A solution Π is an ordered set that deﬁnes the successive visits of the picker in V = D ∪C ∪P.
Each element of Π is a pair πi = (ci,La
i ). The pair π0 = (c0,La
0) at the very ﬁrst sequence position
refers to the initial position of the picker, such that c0 is ﬁxed to the picker’s starting point. This
ordered set deﬁnes a route through the picking zone such that a sequence of picklists L is completed.
Objective function: The main factor inﬂuencing the total picking time at this operational stage
is the picker walking time as most other parts of the picker’s time, e.g., the time to retrieve items
from a shelf is ﬁxed once a picklist is given. Hence, the GOPP’s objective minimizes the total picker
walking time, considering the picker’s walking time τci−1,ci between consecutive vertices in Π
Z(Π) =
X
i∈{1,...,|Π|−1}
τci−1,ci.
(1)

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
11
Constraints: To properly deﬁne all constraints for the GOPP, which diﬀer depending on the type
of batching, on the available travel modes, and on the number of drop-oﬀpoints, we introduce the
notion of active intervals.
Definition 2 (active interval). Given a solution Π, a picker starts a not yet processed pick-
list l at a drop-oﬀpoint preceding the ﬁrst storage position visit related to l. Analogously, she hands
over a completed picklist l at a drop-oﬀpoint succeeding the last storage position visit related to
l. During the time between these two drop-oﬀpoint visits, we refer to a picklist as active and to
the complete time span during which a picklist is active as its active interval.
Then, the constraints for the GOPP are as follows:
i) The cart capacity κ is limited and |La
i | ≤κ must hold for any pair πi.
ii) Once a list starts being processed by a picker, it must be ﬁnished before a new picklist can be
processed in the respective bin, i.e., each picklist has exactly one coherent active interval.
iii) A picklist l cannot be completed before all visits of l are covered in its active interval.
iv) L is processed in its given order.
iv.s) For static batching, the active intervals of picklists either completely overlap or are completely
disjoint.
iv.d) For dynamic batching, (iv.s) is relaxed. This allows handing over merely a subset of already
completed active orders when stopping at a drop-oﬀpoint.
v) Bins can only be handed over at a drop-oﬀpoint if the cart carrying them is also at the drop-oﬀ
point, i.e., no drop-oﬀs during cartless subtours are allowed.
vi) All picklists must be completed, which is fulﬁlled when each picklist has exactly one active
interval.
vii) If cartless subtours are allowed, only feasible subtours occur, such that the picker’s capacity
for carrying items is not exceeded, leaving and returning of hand-carried items refer to the
same parking position of the cart, and the subtour occurs within one sub-aisle.
Among all feasible solutions fulﬁlling these constraints, the GOPP seeks a solution Π∗that mini-
mizes the objective function (1).
3.
Methodology
In Appendix B we prove that the GOPP is strongly NP-hard. However, a special case of the GOPP
can be solved in polynomial time. Speciﬁcally, for a setting with a single picklist, a single travel
mode, and a single drop-oﬀpoint, the rectilinear layout characterizing the GOPP (Figure 1) limits
the number of possible ways to traverse a sub-aisle (see Section 3.1). Accordingly, after summarizing
the ﬁndings of previous work (Section 3.1), we ﬁrst develop a skeleton for our algorithmic framework
that eﬃciently solves the GOPP, limited to a single picklist, travel mode, and drop-oﬀpoint, by

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
12
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
using a layered graph algorithm (LGA) (Section 3.2). We present a complementary integer linear
program (ILP) based skeleton in Appendix C. We then derive a uniﬁed framework where we
incorporate this speciﬁc version of the GOPP as a subproblem such that we can incorporate the
skeletons to solve all variants of the GOPP based on branching and pruning rules (Section 3.3).
3.1.
State of the art
A reduced version of the GOPP constitutes a special case of the rectilinear TSP which allows us to
exploit some properties of this problem. Hence, for the sake of completeness, we summarize state-of-
the-art developments in two ﬁelds: exact algorithms for picking problems and recent enhancements
of exact algorithms for the rectilinear TSP.
Exact algorithms for order picking are still rare (cf. Section 1.1). To the best of our knowledge,
only three algorithms exist, all based on the work of Ratliﬀand Rosenthal (1983) who presented
a ﬁrst polynomial algorithm for a speciﬁed warehouse layout, namely a warehouse without inter-
spersed cross-aisles. In a nutshell, the NP-hardness of the general TSP is removed since it can be
proven that at most two arcs between adjacent vertices exist in a solution. This algorithm scales
linearly with the number of sub-aisles since its complexity is signiﬁcantly reduced by Proposition 1,
which introduces the concept of transitions to denote a picker’s movement through a sub-aisle (a,b).
Example 1 (Using transitions to model picker movements in sub-aisles). Given
a
sub-aisle (c,c′) that starts at c and ends at c′, a transition denotes a possible way for a picker to
travel through (c,c′) in order to collect all items that she must pick in this sub-aisle. Figure 2
shows examples of such transitions for a sub-aisle (c,c′).
Proposition 1. [adapted from Ratliﬀand Rosenthal (1983)] Let G = (V,A) be a graph repre-
sentation of a rectilinear picking zone. Then, an optimal picker tour, i.e., the shortest tour that
covers every position with an item that must be picked, can be represented by using only six diﬀerent
transitions for a sub-aisle (c,c′) and three diﬀerent transitions for a sub-cross-aisle.
Figure 3 illustrates the transitions of Proposition 1 for a general representation of (c,c′) with
two (optional) stops in the sub-aisle. Besides the transitions already detailed in Figure 2, these
transitions contain an empty transition (I), as some sub-aisles that do not contain items that must
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
c′
c
Figure 2
Examples of transitions for a sub-aisle.
(III)
(IV)
(V)
(VI)
(II)
(I)
c
c′
Figure 3
Sub-aisle transitions for optimal paths in G.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
13
be picked may not be visited in an optimal solution. Summarizing, the complete set of transitions
contains a non-traversed sub-aisle (I) and a complete traversal in one (II) or two (III) directions.
Furthermore, a sub-aisle may be partially traversed with slopes from one (IV ,V ) or both (V I)
directions. For transition (V I), the split between both slopes is always given by the longest distance
between two stops in the same sub-aisle if more than two stops are present in the sub-aisle. Although
this split criterion may not be unique, it does not aﬀect the solution’s global optimality since all
split options have the same cost. For cross-aisles in which the picker does not pick up items, only
transitions I–III, from here on referred to as standard transitions, are necessary.
Based on this rationale, Roodbergen and De Koster (2001) and Pansart et al. (2018) have
proposed exact algorithms for warehouse layouts with three or more cross-aisles. However, these
algorithms are limited in their applicability to the GOPP since multiple picklists, parallel processing
of picklists, multiple drop-oﬀpoints, and multiple travel modes are still not considered.
Cambazard and Catusse (2018) proposed an exact algorithm based on ﬁnding an optimal tour
for a rectilinear TSP with a set of customers V, by solving a Steiner variant of this problem on the
Hanan graph H(V) with terminal vertices V. Based on Proposition 2, they decompose the problem
and develop a layered graph algorithm that uses a dynamic program to explore H(V) iteratively
to ﬁnd an optimal tour.
Definition 3 (Hanan graph). Let U be a ﬁnite set of vertices in a plane. We ﬁrst construct a
grid, made up of vertical and horizontal lines through each point of U, commonly known as a Hanan
grid (Hanan 1966). The resulting intersections deﬁne a second set of vertices S which includes U.
The Hanan graph H(U) = (S,E) formally deﬁnes this grid and consists of the vertex set S and
an edge set E, which contains all edges linking two consecutive vertices of S in the horizontal or
vertical direction.
Proposition 2. [adapted from Cambazard and Catusse (2018)] Let T ∗be an optimal tour in
H(V). Then, there exists a planar separator S of H(V) that decomposes T ∗into two partial tours
T ∗
l and T ∗
r .
Definition 4 (planar separator). For a Hanan graph H(U) = (S,E), we refer to a subset
of its vertices S ⊂S as a planar separator if the removal of these vertices partitions the graph into
two disjoint subgraphs. We call S a vertical planar separator, if |S| = h and χh(S) = {1,...,h}, with
h denoting the number of diﬀerent horizontal positions {1,...,h} in H, and χh(S) being a function
that denotes the set of horizontal positions for each vertex in S.
This algorithm has a computational complexity of O(nh7h), where n represents the number of
customers and h denotes the number of horizontal lines in the Hanan graph H(V).

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
14
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
3.2.
A bidirectional layered graph algorithm for a single picklist
In the following, we develop a bidirectional layered graph algorithm for a speciﬁc case of the GOPP
with a single picklist and a single drop-oﬀpoint. We ﬁrst sketch the general idea of our algorithm
in Section 3.2.1, before we detail its main components in Section 3.2.2, and show in Section 3.2.3
how the algorithm’s performance can be further enhanced via an improved graph representation.
3.2.1.
Algorithm sketch: Our algorithmic idea is based on four fundamental steps, which
we outline in the following, before we formalize our algorithm.
i) We ﬁrst introduce a compact graph representation for our physical planning problem: Figure 4a
depicts a picking zone layout with a single drop-oﬀpoint and one picklist. Here, the drop-oﬀpoint
is the gray rectangle, and the shelves that must be visited are highlighted in orange. Figure 4b
shows its corresponding graph representation. We deﬁne a Hanan graph H(C) = (C,E) based on
the intersections C of the picking zone and note that its edges E span all storage positions.
ii) We then note that the transitions deﬁned by Ratliﬀand Rosenthal (1983) still hold in our
setting so that we can use these transitions to describe a picking tour in H(C).
iii) Then, our algorithm’s main rationale is to solve a modiﬁed Steiner TSP in H(C). This Steiner
TSP remains modiﬁed from its original deﬁnition since instead of a set of terminal vertices, a set
of terminal edges Em ⊆E and the depot vertex must be covered by the tour in its solution. These
edges represent sub-aisles that the picker has to visit to pick all items on her list. Here, we use
the transitions mentioned above to explore edge traversals and introduce the deﬁnition of a path
subgraph to describe a solution of this Steiner TSP.
iv) In this setting, we use a planar separator to split a path subgraph into partial path subgraphs.
This allows us to design a problem speciﬁc LGA algorithm to solve the modiﬁed rectilinear Steiner
TSP and thus the GOPP with a single picklist, a single travel mode, and a single drop-oﬀpoint.
Definition 5 (path subgraph). A subgraph T = (VT,AT) of G is a path subgraph if it is
connected and its degree deg v > 0, and deg v mod 2 = 0 for v ∈VT.
(a) Physical layout.
(b) Graph representation.
Figure 4
Example of a storage layout.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
15
Definition 6 (partial path subgraph). Let T = (VT,ET) be a subgraph of L = (VL,EL)
which is a subgraph of G = (VG,EG). Then, T is an L partial path subgraph of G if there exists at
least one subgraph F = (VF,EF) with EF ⊂EG \ EL so that T and F form a path subgraph in G.
Compared to a standard LGA implementation as in Cambazard and Catusse (2018), we make the
following extensions to derive an algorithm suitable to solve the GOPP with a single picklist and
depot: as indicated above, we introduce Em ⊆E as the subset of edges that must be visited, from
here on referred to as mandatory edges, to ensure that we visit all pick positions where items must
be picked. Moreover, we develop a bidirectional algorithm that splits H(C) into two subgraphs,
explores these subgraphs individually, and then merges the partial solutions to a complete solution.
Although the worst-case complexity of bidirectional algorithms often remains the same as that
of their monodirectional counterparts or even gets worse due to an additional merge procedure,
empirical evidence for various problems showed superior performance of bidirectional approaches,
e.g., in branch-and-price algorithms. Assuming a computationally eﬃcient merge procedure, a
bidirectional algorithm does not perform worse than a monodirectional algorithm. It may even be
better because exploring the solution space from diﬀerent directions in two separate searches may
reduce the number of states that must be explored, partially by detecting additional dominance
relations. As our merge procedure remains computationally eﬃcient (see Appendix E), it seems
promising to develop a bidirectional search. While this algorithm was developed for the picking
problem, it also appears to be the ﬁrst that can readily be adapted to the rectilinear Steiner TSP.
3.2.2.
Algorithmic Components: To formalize our algorithm, we ﬁrst label vertical posi-
tions v and horizontal positions h in H(C) = (C,E). Here, h ∈{1,...,h} refers to the hth horizontal
line, that is, in our speciﬁc setting, to the hth cross-aisle. We label horizontal lines from the lower
left corner (h = 1) to the upper left corner (h = h). Analogously, v ∈{1,...,v} refers to the vth
vertical line, that is, in our speciﬁc setting, to the vth aisle. We label vertical lines from the lower
left corner (v = 1) to the lower right corner (v = v). We then uniquely identify a vertex c ∈C by
its location on the hth horizontal and the vth vertical line of H(C) = (C,E). Let χh(c) denote the
horizontal position of a vertex with χh(c) ∈{1,...,h} and let χv(c) denote the vertical position of a
vertex c with χv(c) ∈{1,...,v}. We use both functions for single vertices as deﬁned above but also
for sets of vertices, then returning a set of positions.
With this notation, we deﬁne a central planar separator ˆS, which allows to deﬁne two subgraphs
B and U of H(C) as shown in Figure 5. Here, B consists of all vertices in ˆS and to the left of ˆS
and its corresponding edges, whereas U consists of all vertices in ˆS and to the right of ˆS and its
corresponding edges. In each of these subgraphs, we deﬁne additional subgraphs Bhv / Uhv, where
the edges of Bhv are induced by all vertices c ∈B for which (χv(c) < v) ∨(χv(c) = v ∧χh(c) ≤h)

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
16
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
holds, and the edges of Uhv are induced by all vertices c ∈U for which (χv(c) > v) ∨(χv(c) =
v ∧χh(c) ≥h) holds. Then, let Rhv / Lhv be the planar separators that deﬁne Bhv / Uhv in B / U.
Figure 6 shows an example of a subgraph B34 with its separator R34 in B and a subgraph U46 with
its separator L46 in U.
Definition 7 (central planar separator). We refer to a planar separator S of a Hanan
graph H(U) = (S,E) as central, if:
1. S is a vertical planar separator according to Deﬁnition 10.
2. For all ci,cj ∈S it holds that χv(cj) ≤χv(ci) if χh(cj) > χh(ci) and |χv(S)| = 2.
3. ||E′| −|E′′|| is minimal for the resulting subgraphs H′ = (S′,E′) and H′′ = (S′′,E′′), with H′
being induced by all vertices in or to the left of S and H′′ being induced by all vertices in or
to the right of S.
Recall that Proposition 2 suggests that we can explore B and U independently to ﬁnd a cost-
minimal path subgraph in H(C), i.e., a shortest tour for the Steiner TSP. Then, the main rationale
of our algorithm is to propagate partial path subgraphs in B and U in order to complete these to
a cost-minimal path subgraph. To propagate these partial path subgraphs, we use a transition set
Te which denotes all aforementioned possible transitions t ∈Te for each edge e = (c,c′) ∈E.
We develop a bidirectional LGA that iteratively explores subgraphs Bhv, Uhv in B, U to identify
partial path subgraphs. As each subgraph Bhv/Uhv can contain multiple partial path subgraphs,
we identify each partial path subgraph by a state α. Each state α = {r,u} consists of a vector
r = (r1,...,rh) which denotes the degree parity of each vertex in Rhv/Lhv, and of a vector u =
(u1,...,uh) which denotes the connected component to which each vertex in Rhv/Lhv belongs. Here,
both the ith entry ri of r and the ith entry ui of u state the degree parity, respectively the connected
component label, of the vertex that lies on the ith horizontal line in Rhv/Lhv.
Definition 8 (connected component). A partial path subgraph may contain partial paths
that are not necessarily connected with each other but may still yield a feasible solution if they are
merged with a second partial path subgraph that preserves the connectedness of the overall path.
To trace the number of diﬀerent partial paths, we use a connected component label ui given by an
integer number. Here, ui denotes the connected component label of the vertex that lies on the ith
ˆS
U
B
Figure 5
Example of ˆS and its
resulting subgraphs.
ˆS
B34
U46
R34
L46
Figure 6
Example of subgraphs
B34 and U46.
ˆS
B35
U44
R35
L44
Figure 7
Fully explored graph with
ˆS = L44 = R35.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
17
horizontal line of H(C) in the planar separator. We initialize the label of the ﬁrst explored vertex
with one and increase the label everytime a transition disconnects c′ from c when propagating
(c,c′). When a transition reconnects two vertices, both gain the lower connected component label.
Once Lhv = Rhv = ˆS it holds that Bhv = B and Uhv = U, and B and U collectively exploit
H(C) exhaustively (Figure 7). We can then identify the optimal path by merging feasible paths
from Bhv/Uhv. To specify our general algorithmic concept, we now deﬁne transitions to propagate
partial path subgraphs, a feasibility check to either discard infeasible states or to merge partial
path subgraphs, and a dominance criterion to discard dominated states.
Transitions: We use the transitions proposed by Ratliﬀand Rosenthal (1983) as vertical transi-
tions (cf. Figure 3). Doing so straightforwardly yields a transition set that is larger than needed.
To derive a minimum transition set and speed up computational times, we separate all edges of
set E of H(C) into a set of mandatory edges Em and a set of optional edges Eo. Mandatory edges
comprise edges that represent a mandatory sub-aisle while optional edges represent non-mandatory
sub-aisles or cross-aisles such that E = Em ∪Eo. Since each edge in Em must be visited, transitions
II –VI are suﬃcient to propagate mandatory edges. Non-mandatory edges will only be used as
connecting edges such that we need only transitions I –III to propagate these.
Feasibility Check: We use the information stored in the state α = {r,u} to evaluate whether a
transition leads to an infeasible state or not. Our feasibility check then bases on the degree ri ∈r
and on the connected component label ui ∈u of each vertex in Rhv/Lhv. The degree of each vertex
ri ∈{E,O} can be even (E) or odd (O). A partial path subgraph in Bhv/Uhv may contain multiple
partial paths that are not necessarily connected with each other (cf. Deﬁnition 6). To trace these, ui
denotes an integer label of the connected component of the partial path ending on the ith horizontal
line in Rhv/Lhv.
Given this information, we can check the feasibility of a transition as follows. A transition leads
to an infeasible state if any of the following statements holds:
i) After applying a transition from vertex c to vertex c′, c remains with an odd degree but is no
longer in Rhv/Lhv.
ii) After applying a transition, the drop-oﬀpoint vertex is not connected to the path.
iii) After applying a horizontal transition, a connected component is reduced without a merge.
To check the feasibility during the merge operation, a merge is feasible only if:
i) No vertex in ˆS remains with an odd degree.
ii) Only a single connected component label remains.
Dominance Criterion: We use the deﬁnition of equivalence between partial path subgraphs to
develop a dominance criterion. To keep the number of propagated partial path subgraphs as small
as possible, we withdraw each partial path subgraph that is equivalent to an already existing partial

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
18
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
path subgraph and does not improve its cost. This criterion is based on the rationale that for two
equivalent partial path subgraphs T and T ′ in Bhv it is suﬃcient to keep only the one with the lower
cost to derive an optimal path subgraph. We establish this equivalence in Proposition 3.
Definition 9 (equivalent partial path subgraphs). We consider a hanan graph H(C)
and its subgraphs B and U that collectively cover H(C) exactly. Let T and T ′ be two distinct
partial path subgraphs in B. We call T and T ′ equivalent if any partial path subgraph F in U that
completes T to a path subgraph in H(C), also completes T ′ to a path subgraph in H(C).
Proposition 3. We consider a hanan graph H(C) and its subgraphs B and U that collectively
cover H(C) exactly. Let T and T ′ be two distinct partial path subgraphs in B. Then, T and T ′ are
equivalent if their states α and α′ are equal.
Using the described transitions, feasibility check, and dominance check, we propagate partial
path subraphs until Bhv and Uhv collectively exploit H(C) when Bhv = B and Uhv = U. For the
algorithmic details, we refer the interested reader to Appendix D.
3.2.3.
Improved graph representation: With the modiﬁcations described above, we obtain
an LGA to solve a picker routing problem for a single picklist, a single drop-oﬀpoint, and an
arbitrary number of aisles and cross-aisles. We now derive an improved graph representation that
helps reduce the number of developed labels to enhance the algorithm’s computational performance.
The number of labels increases with the number of edges that must be traversed. Hence, we aim
to derive a maximal sparse graph that preserves optimality but contains as few edges as possible.
We introduce the set Cm as the set of all vertices that are either adjacent to an edge in Em or
represent a drop-oﬀpoint. Then, a graph that preserves the realization of a shortest path between
any c,c′ ∈Cm preserves optimality. In the following, we provide a reduction technique that improves
the sparsity of H(C) while preserving optimality.
Focusing on a planar separator S, we say that this separator is decreasing if ∀c,c′ ∈S, χh(c′) >
χh(c) ⇒χv(c′) ≤χv(c) and increasing if ∀c,c′ ∈S, χh(c′) > χh(c) ⇒χv(c′) ≥χv(c). With this
notation, we state Proposition 4, which allows to construct a reduced Hanan graph.
Proposition 4. Let H′ = (C′,E′) be a reduced Hanan graph with E′ ⊂E being its edge set,
induced by the vertex set C′ ⊂C. Then, H′ is sparser than H(C), i.e., |C′| < |C|, |E′| < |E| and
preserves optimality if we construct C′ as follows.
1. We consider two planar separators Sl and Sr, for which the following conditions hold:
(a) |Sl| = |Sr| = h and χh(Sl) = χh(Sr) = {1,...,h},
(b) each planar separator Sl,Sr can be split into two partial planar separators with Sl = Sl
1∪Sl
2
and Sr = Sr
1 ∪Sr
2 such that

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
19
i. ∀c ∈Sl
1, c′ ∈Sl
2 : χh(c) ≤χh(c′),
ii. ∀c ∈Sr
1, c′ ∈Sr
2 : χh(c) ≤χh(c′),
iii. Sl
1 and Sr
2 are decreasing, and Sl
2 and Sr
1 are increasing.
2. We can then construct C′ in O(hv) such that Cm ⊆C′ and
χh(c′) = χh(c) = χh(c′′)
⇒
χv(c′) ≤χv(c) ≤χv(c′′)
∀c ∈C′, c′ ∈Sl, c′′ ∈Sr.
Figure 8 shows an example of such a reduced Hanan graph.
3.3.
Extensions for the general GOPP
We now present a general framework that allows to integrate the LGA algorithm of Section 3.2 to
solve any variant of the GOPP. The main rationale of this framework leverages a branch-and-prune
algorithm to make decisions on i) which subsequent picklists should be processed in parallel, and
on ii) the drop-oﬀpoints at which ﬁnished lists should be dropped. To calculate the overall picker
walking time for a speciﬁc conﬁguration of parallel-processed picklists and drop-oﬀpoints, we need
to solve extended variants of the basic problem studied in Section 3.2. Here, our branch-and-prune
algorithm makes use of extended variants of our LGA to solve these subproblems. In the following,
we ﬁrst detail the general branching and pruning framework that embeds our LGA to solve the
resulting subproblems in Section 3.3.1. We then discuss characteristics of and extensions that are
necessary to integrate cartless subtours, a dynamic batching policy, and multiple drop-oﬀpoints
into our LGA in Section 3.3.2, and derive lower bounds in order to speed-up the branch-and-prune
algorithm in Section 3.3.3. We note that we could also use our ILP within the branch-and-prune
algorithm and refer to Appendix C for further elaboration.
3.3.1.
Branch-and-Prune Algorithm: As a prerequisite to formalize our branch-and-prune
algorithm, we ﬁrst decompose the solution of the GOPP. To this end, we refer to a solution
σ = (ϑ1,...,ϑn) as an n-tuple of subproblem solutions ϑi. Each solution is associated with a cost
C(σ) = PC(ϑi). A subproblem solution represents a single picking tour between two drop-oﬀpoint
visits and is a quadruple ϑi = (La
i ,Ti,ω−
i ,ω+
i ) consisting of a set of active picking list labels La
i ⊆L
which depends on the general set of order list labels L to be processed, a vector of transitions Ti
that comprises an explicit transition tij ∈Tij for each edge, a starting drop-oﬀpoint ω−
i , and a
ﬁnal drop-oﬀpoint ω+
i .
(a) Example instance.
Sr
Sl
(b) Feasible reduced Hanan graph.
Figure 8
Example of a feasible reduced Hanan graph.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
20
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
To solve the GOPP using this decomposition, one needs to decide on i) La*
i , i.e., which picklists
are processed in which subproblem, ii) which drop-oﬀpoints ω+∗
i ,ω−∗
i
should be used in each
subproblem, and on iii) T∗
i , i.e., which transitions form the cost optimal picking tour. To make
decision iii) and obtain T∗
i , we leverage an extended variant of our LGA, which we detail in
Section 3.3.2. We now develop a branch-and-prune algorithm that allows to make decisions i) and
ii), using our extended LGA as an oracle to determine the minimum cost of each subproblem.
We represent our branch-and-bound tree as a graph-theoretic tree, with N being the set of node
labels of the complete tree, 0 being its root node, and Zn ⊂N denoting the child nodes of node n.
Each node n in this tree represents a subproblem θn, identiﬁed by a unique triple θn = (La
n,ω+
n ,ω−
n ),
which may be part of the optimal solution that is given by the cost-minimum path from the tree’s
root node to a leaf.
Example 2 (branch-and-bound tree). We consider a set of picklists L = {1,2,3}, a picking
zone layout with two drop-oﬀpoints a,b ∈D, and a cart capacity of κ = 2. Further, the picker is
supposed to start her ﬁrst tour and to end her last tour at a. Figure 9 shows the corresponding
fully enumerated branch-and-bound tree, which contains subproblems with four diﬀerent active
picklist conﬁgurations La
i ∈{{1}, {2}, {3}, {1,2}, {2,3}}, and depot conﬁgurations (ω−
i ,ω+
i ) ∈
{(a,b), (b,a), (a,a), (b,b)}. As one can see, the leaving drop-oﬀpoint in a child subproblem
always remains the entering drop-oﬀpoint in its direct parent subproblem. This ensures that the
subproblems capture the total picker walking distance. Moreover, a path’s depth from the root
node to a leaf may vary, depending on the conﬁguration of active order lists in each subproblem,
because a path up to a leaf must always contain all picklists to represent a feasible solution.
We introduce the following additional notation to detail the algorithm that allows us to explore
such a tree eﬃciently. We associate each node n with a subproblem sequence Θn = (θi,...,θn),
deﬁned by the path from the root node 0 to node n. For example, referring to the example given in
Figure 9, the subproblem sequence deﬁned by node n = 6 reads Θ6 = (θ1,θ6), while the subproblem
sequence for node n = 16 is Θ16 = (θ2,θ9,θ16). Note that the root node is never part of such a
0
4
({3},b,a)
12
({1,2},a,b)
3
({1,2},a,a)
({3},a,a)
11
({1},a,a)
1
({2},a,b)
6
({2,3},a,a)
7
({2},a,a)
5
({3},b,a)
14
({3},a,a)
13
({1},a,b)
2
({2},b,b)
9
({2,3},b,a)
10
({2},b,a)
8
({3},b,a)
16
({3},a,a)
15
Figure 9
Branch-and-bound tree representation for |L| = 3, κ = 2, and |D| = 2 .

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
21
sequence as it is not associated with a subproblem, because the ﬁrst subproblem is not unique due
to the varying active picklist conﬁgurations.
With ϑi being the solution to subproblem θi, we can then deﬁne the cost Cn of a node n as the
sum of the subproblem costs of its corresponding subproblem sequence and note that a subproblem
sequence Θ whose subproblems cover all picklists which must be processed constitutes a complete
solution σ. We use σ∗to denote the optimal solution and C∗to denote its cost. Further, let
ψ(n) denote a function that calculates a lower bound on the cost of a solution that includes the
subproblem sequence of n. We refer to Section 3.3.3 for details on the lower bound calculation and
note that for leaves of the tree, ψ(n) = Cn. To explore the tree, we use sets N a and N s to keep
track of nodes that have not been solved (N a) and nodes that have already been solved (N s). Here,
N a remains an ordered set that can be seen as a priority queue which contains nodes hierarchically
ordered by i) the number of processed order lists, starting with the maximum, and ii) nodes with
an equal number of processed order lists in increasing order with respect to their lower bound cost.
Whenever we insert nodes into N a, we preserve this order.
Subproblem sequence dominance: Clearly, this branch-and-bound tree grows signiﬁcantly for
larger problem settings depending on the number of picklists and drop-oﬀpoints. To allow for a
tractable exploration of such a tree, we introduce the following dominance relation. We consider
two subproblem sequences Θn and Θn′. We then say that Θn dominates Θn′ (Θn ≻Θn′) if i) the
picklists processed in Θn′ have also been processed in Θn, and ii) Cn + C(ω+
n ,ω+
n′) ≤Cn′, with
C(ω+
n ,ω+
n′) being the cost to move from ω+
n to ω+
n′. This bound allows to discard a majority of
nodes of the branch-and-bound tree early and thus allows to eﬃciently solve large-size instances.
Pseudo-code: Figure 10 details the pseudo-code of our algorithm. We ﬁrst initialize N a with
the children of the root node Z0 and set C∗to inﬁnity (l.1). We then explore nodes in N a in a
branch-and-bound fashion. We explore the tree with a depth-ﬁrst strategy, deﬁned by the order
of N a; in case of a tie, we chose the node with the smaller index (l.3). We then check whether
the node is dominated (l.4) or it’s lower bound exceeds the so far best-found solution cost (l.5). If
any of these checks is true, we discard (prune) the node and continue with the next node in N a.
If none of these checks is true, we either update the optimal solution if the current node is a leaf
1: N a ←Z0,C∗←∞
2: while N a ̸= ∅do
3:
n′ ←getFirstNode(N a)
4:
if isNotDominated(n′) then
5:
if ψ(n′) < Cn∗then
6:
if isLeafNode(n′) then
7:
C∗←Cn′
8:
σ∗←Θn′
9:
else
10:
N s ←N s ∪{n′}
11:
extend(N a,Zn′)
12: return σ∗
Figure 10
Pseudo-code for our branch-and-prune algorithm.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
22
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
(l.6–8) or add n′ to N s (l.10) and add its children to N a (l.11). We note that the smallest lower
bound calculated by ψ(n) is usually not tight, i.e., we do not achieve an exact matching between
the smallest lower bound and the global upper bound. However, the lower bound often allows to
discard unfavorable unexplored subproblems early.
3.3.2.
Subproblem extensions: We recall from Section 3.3.1 that the cost of a subproblem
solution results from the cost of its transitions. Accordingly, we can determine the cost of a sub-
problem by computing a cost-optimal transition vector using the LGA presented in Section 3.2,
accounting for the following modiﬁcations in settings with cartless subtours, multiple drop-oﬀ
points, and dynamic batching. We note that all of the detailed modiﬁcations are additive, e.g.,
to solve a subproblem with cartless subtours, multiple drop-oﬀpoints, and dynamic batching, we
apply all modiﬁcations outlined below but no further interdependencies between those modiﬁca-
tions apply.
Cartless Subtours: Allowing for cartless subtours results in varying travel speeds in sub-aisles,
which aﬀect the cost of the transitions. We prove in Proposition 5 that the transitions discussed
in Section 3.2 still suﬃce to calculate an optimal solution. Thus, our algorithm can be applied to
problems with cartless subtours without changes.
Proposition 5. If a picker can switch her travel mode from picking SKUs accompanied by her
cart to picking a limited number of items of the same or diﬀerent SKUs on foot in line with the
deﬁnition of a cartless subtour, the transition set T is suﬃcient to derive an optimal solution.
Therefore, no changes to our algorithm are necessary to handle cartless subtours. We only add
a routine that considers potential cartless subtours and the corresponding travel time reductions
when calculating the cost of all transitions during preprocessing.
Multiple drop-oﬀpoints: We recall that the decision on which drop-oﬀpoints are used is made
in the branch-and-prune phase of our algorithm. This reduces the necessary modiﬁcations in our
LGA algorithm to account for settings where the starting drop-oﬀpoint and the ﬁnal drop-oﬀ
point are diﬀerent, i.e., ω+
i ̸= ω−
i . Such a setting leads to optimal subproblem solutions with tours
that contain odd-degree vertices, which are prohibited by the feasibility check of our basic LGA,
as detailed in Section 3.2. We prove that these odd degrees are always limited to the drop-oﬀpoint
vertices ω+
i and ω−
i , i.e., the start and end of a subproblem’s optimal tour.
Proposition 6. The optimal path subgraph T ∗of ϑi with ω+
i ̸= ω−
i comprises exactly two ver-
tices with an odd degree which relate to ω+
i and ω−
i .
With Proposition 6, we extend the feasibility check of our LGA to a subproblem with ω+
i ̸= ω−
i by
enforcing an odd instead of an even degree for ω+
i and ω−
i .

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
23
Dynamic Batching: Under a dynamic batching policy, a picker can pick multiple lists l ∈L at
once (as long as the cart’s bin capacity κ is not exceeded) and may return to the drop-oﬀpoint
once at least one but not necessarily all picklists are ﬁnished to empty one or several bins. As
explained in Section 3.3.1, we model such possibilities with subproblem variations: each subproblem
comprises the possible transitions to form a picker tour between two drop-oﬀpoint visits, where
the transitions result from the order lists that are active in the respective subproblem.
Speciﬁcally, this implies that subproblems exist where the number of active order lists is lower
than the bin capacity to reﬂect cases where a subset of bins is returned to a depot early, although
collecting a larger number of picklists in parallel. In these cases, we calculate the respective sub-
problem’s transitions based on the active picklists but consider items of subsequent picklists that
are processed in parallel as picked if the resulting transitions cover them. This implicit picking of
items from inactive lists reduces the number of items to be picked when their picklist becomes
active in a subsequent subproblem, without delaying the drop-oﬀof active picklists. Here, one may
achieve even shorter overall picking times by picking more items early from subsequent lists, at the
price of delayed drop-oﬀs of active lists. Accounting for this characteristic would require a mod-
iﬁed algorithm and remains an interesting future research direction. Here, the decision on which
picklists are active in parallel inﬂuences the number of consecutive subproblems in a subproblem
sequence Θ (see Example 2). We recall that order lists must be processed in chronological order
(cf. Section 2.3) and note that this limits the combinations of active picklists.
3.3.3.
Lower Bounds for a single subproblem: In the following, we detail the function
ψ(n) that we use in Section 3.3.1 to eﬃciently prune the branch-and-bound tree. Speciﬁcally, ψ(n)
calculates a lower bound on the cost of a solution that includes the subproblem sequence of n by
extending Cn with the maximum of two lower bounds Υ1 and Υ2. Here, Υ1 and Υ2 are lower bounds
for the remaining unexplored subproblems’ cost that can be added to the subproblem sequence to
get a complete solution. For each unexplored subproblem, we calcuate Υ1 and Υ2 as follows.
To calculate Υ1, we consider our original graph representation G = (V,A). We derive a minimal
spanning tree on a reduced graph Gc = (Vc,Ec), where Vc contains the drop-oﬀvertices and every
pick-up position of the subproblem, Ec = {{i,j} | i ∈Vc,j ∈Vc}, and Gc is weighted with the
walking time τij that results from the Manhattan distance of each arc. Then, a minimal spanning
tree is given by P c ⊆Ec with a minimal total weight which yields Υ1 such that Υ1 = P
(i,j)∈P c τij.
To calculate Υ2, we consider the reduced Hanan graph H′ = (E′,C′). We derive a lower bound
by summing up i) the cost-minimum transition for each mandatory edge, i.e., ζ∗
ij = mint∈Tij{ζijt},
and ii) costs ζIII for a double traversal of cross-aisles between each pair of aisles with n being the
number of aisles remaining in H′, such that Υ2 = P
(i,j)∈Em ζ∗
ij + ζIII(n −1). For cartless subtours,
we treat all transitions of type IV , V , and V I as cartless to calculate Υ2.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
24
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
If the leaving and returning depots are not equal, we adapt the calculation of these bounds
accordingly, i.e., in this case, the spanning tree for Υ1 comprises both drop-oﬀvertices, and the
minimum cost transition calculation for Υ2 considers a single transition for both depots.
4.
Computational study
The scope of our computational study is twofold. First, we benchmark the basic component of our
algorithm against the current state of the art and we also analyze the performance of our algorithmic
framework for real-world environments in Section 4.1. Second, we study various warehouse layouts
and picking policies based on three case studies from a managerial perspective in Section 4.2.
We conducted all experiments on a standard desktop computer with an Intel Core I7 3.6GHz
and 16 GB RAM. Our algorithm was implemented as a single thread code in C++. We solved the
ILP using Gurobi 8.1.
4.1.
Computational performance
Currently, no algorithm can solve all problem variants considered in this study. The most generic
algorithm proposed in parallel to this work by Pansart et al. (2018) focuses on a picker routing
problem for a multiblock warehouse limited to a single picklist, a single drop-oﬀpoint, a static
batching, and lacks cartless subtours. We compare the performance of both our monodirectional
and our bidirectional LGA, and our ILP (see Appendix C) to the algorithm of Pansart et al.
(2018). Since these authors also use dynamic programming, we reimplemented their algorithm in
our framework to allow for a fair comparison on the same desktop computer. The benchmark from
Theys et al. (2010), which we detail in Appendix G.1 forms the basis for our comparison.
Table 2 compares the performance of our monodirectional (M-LGA) and bidirectional (B-LGA)
algorithms, the algorithm of Pansart et al. (2018) (PCC), and our ILP in terms of i) the number
of solved instances and ii) the computational times. As can be seen, our LGAs perform much
better than the algorithm of Pansart et al. (2018) in terms of both computational times and
scalability on large-size instances. In particular, for large-size instances, our LGAs show much better
computational times and solve more instances. Comparing our monodirectional algorithm to our
bidirectional algorithm, one can see that the bidirectional algorithm shows the best computational
times and solves more instances with 11 cross-aisles then the monodirectional algorithm. Note that
the computational times for the monodirectional algorithm on instances with 11 cross-aisles and
ﬁve aisles only appear to be lower since less instances are solved. Accordingly, the comparison is not
complete as only solved instances are counted within the average computational times. Our ILP
shows longer computational times than all problem speciﬁc algorithms but manages to solve a large
subset of instances. For the instances with three or six cross-aisles reported as not solved, it still
ﬁnds an optimal solution but struggles to close the optimality gap within the time limit of an hour.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
25
Remarkably, the ILP solves the most instances with 11 cross-aisles out of all algorithms. While
our bidirectional LGA solves 64 instances with 11 cross-aisles, the ILP solves 110 instances with
11 cross-aisles. For most other instances with 11 cross-aisles, the ILP ﬁnds a solution but cannot
prove its optimality within the given time limit. Only 35 instances remain completely unsolved.
The diﬀerent performance of these solution approaches can be attributed to speciﬁc algorithmic
components. Our LGA-based algorithms outperform that of Pansart et al. (2018) for three reasons:
ﬁrst, we use an elaborate online graph reduction which signiﬁcantly reduces the number of states
that must be explored. Notably, the time of this reduction routine is included within the computa-
tional times of Table 2. Second, we use improved transition sets which allow for a further reduction
in the number of states that must be explored. Third, our feasibility check and equivalence criterion
allow us to discard dominated or infeasible states early. In total, the largest share of improvement is
due to the graph reduction. Our bidirectional LGA outperforms its mono-directional counterpart as
it can discard states earlier by exploring the subgraphs in two directions. While the computational
complexity of our LGAs depends on the number of cross-aisles of an instance, the computational
complexity of the ILP depends on the total number of arcs. Accordingly, it succeeds in solving a
large number of instances with 11 cross-aisles and a small number of aisles but struggles on closing
optimality gaps for instances with many aisles, independent of the number of cross-aisles.
In real-world settings, the computational performance of our algorithm can be better or worse
than in Experiment 1 due to a multitude of complexity drivers. Hence, we use a second benchmark,
detailed in Appendix G.1, to analyze the computational performance of our algorithm with respect
to i) the number of cross-aisles, ii) the number of processed picklists and the number of items
on each list, and iii) the picking zone layout. Further, we show the impact of our preprocessing
technique.
Table 3 shows computational results for a set of benchmark instances with a varying number of
cross-aisles. We created 20 instances with a single depot and 50 aisles for each cross-aisle setting,
Table 2
Number of solved instances and computational times in seconds on the Theys et al. (2010) benchmarks.
Volume based
Random
Num. of cross-aisles
3
6
11
3
6
11
Num. of aisles
5
15
60
5
15
60
5
15
60
5
15
60
5
15
60
5
15
60
Instances
solved
B-LGA
60
60
60
60
60
60
33
15
2
60
60
60
60
60
60
14
2
-
M-LGA
60
60
60
60
60
60
27
13
2
60
60
60
60
60
60
9
2
-
PCC
60
60
60
60
60
60
-
-
-
60
60
60
60
60
60
-
-
-
ILP
60
60
45
60
38
8
26
10
-
60
60
45
60
49
9
44
30
-
Time
B-LGA 0.004 0.01 0.03 0.16 6.87
45.8 337 555 1320 0.00 0.01 0.04 0.28 10.1
60.1
340
484
-
M-LGA 0.004 0.01 0.04 0.78 9.42
48.6 153 566 1803 0.00 0.01 0.04 1.39 13.8
63.1
334 1476
-
PCC 0.006 0.03 0.09 12.4
193 1062
-
-
- 0.01 0.03 0.09 12.9
193 1062
-
-
-
ILP
0.05 10.4
176 12.2
273
1.17 315 778
- 0.05 3.55
174 2.24
125
1.01 98.9
639
-
The table shows the average computational times of the solved instances on the Theys et al. (2010) benchmark for the
algorithm of Pansart et al. (2018) (PCC), our monodirectional LGA (M-LGA), our bidirectional LGA (B-LGA), and our ILP.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
26
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
Table 3
Computational results for benchmark instance sets with 50 aisles.
Number of cross-aisles
3
4
5
6
7
8
Average computational time [s]
0.02
0.13
1.54
25.6
322
-
Average speed-up factor
1.50
1.66
3.16
6.08
16.4
-
Maximum value speed-up factor
3.07
4.77
20.4
64.5
71.0
-
3rd Quartile speed-up factor
1.46
1.61
2.75
3.87
16.9
-
Median speed-up factor
1.28
1.43
2.09
2.52
6.49
-
1st Quartile speed-up factor
1.20
1.30
1.67
1.92
3.14
-
Minimum value speed-up factor
1.06
1.09
1.19
1.20
1.30
-
The table shows the average computational time and the statistical characteristics of the ratio between the computational
time without and with preprocessing for benchmark sets of 20 instances for diﬀerent numbers of cross-aisles.
generating pick positions as described in Appendix G.1. We report the average computational time
for each instance set. Further we analyze the ratio between the computational times without and
with our graph reduction technique, from here on referred to as speed-up factor. As can be seen,
the overall complexity of the instances increases exponentially with the number of cross-aisles. The
computational times remain stable for each instance set, and settings with up to ﬁve cross-aisles
which are relevant in practice can be solved in less than a few seconds. Instances with seven cross-
aisles already take a few minutes of computational time, and instances with eight cross-aisles do
no longer show stable computational times as some instances cannot be solved due to memory
limitations. Without our graph reduction technique instances with seven cross-aisles already show
unstable computational performance. The impact of the speed-up factor varies depending on the
instance characteristics. The statistical quantities in Table 3 show that in approximately 50% of the
cases our graph reduction technique reduces computational times by at least 50%. In general, the
improvement potential of this technique tends to be higher, the higher is the number of cross-aisles.
Besides the number of aisles and cross-aisles, the number of consecutively processed picklists
and the number of items on each list inﬂuence the computational tractability of our algorithm.
Furthermore, this tractability heavily depends on the chosen picking policy and on the number of
drop-oﬀpoints in a picking zone. The simplest real-world conﬁguration comprises a static batching,
a single drop-oﬀpoint, and no cartless subtours on a layout with three cross-aisles and one drop-oﬀ
point. The most complex real-world conﬁguration comprises a dynamic batching (DS), multiple
drop-oﬀpoints (MD), and cartless subtours (CS) on a layout with three cross-aisles and ﬁve
drop-oﬀpoints (cf. Figure 12). Figure 11 shows the computational times for these two extreme
conﬁgurations. Computational times remain stable below 0.1 second for the simple case. For the
complex case, computational times increase signiﬁcantly for large instances but remain rather
insensitive to the number of consecutive picklists due to the dominance criterion introduced in
Section 3.3.1. In practice, such algorithms are used in a receding-horizon fashion within a 15-minute
interval. This corresponds to a maximum number of four to ﬁve consecutive picklists with up to 35
items (see Section 4.2). For these real-world conﬁgurations shown by the orange area in Figure 11,
we achieve computational times below 90 seconds even for the worst scenario.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
27
Concluding, our algorithm yields both new best known results for existing benchmarks and a
generic framework that is amenable to a real-time implementation for a multitude of real-world
conﬁgurations with respect to picking zone layouts and picking policies. In the following, we extend
our experiments by using the bidirectional LGA as it provides the best and a robust performance
on instance sizes relevant in practice.
4.2.
Impact of diﬀerent picking policies and picking zone layouts
The three real-world applications discussed in Section 2.2 are similar with respect to the size and
throughput of the warehouse. Each comprises roughly 15,000,000 items of SKUs which is the total
storage capacity of the Zalando warehouse. This translates into 400,000 items for a single picking
zone. A picking zone has a width of 70 to 80 m; each aisle or cross-aisle has a width of 1.5 m;
a shelf has a depth of 0.75 m, each storing about 300 items. Hence, 1,400 shelves are necessary
to store 400,000 items. Whereas these characteristics are similar for all three warehouses, their
layouts vary in terms of the number of cross-aisles and drop-oﬀpoints: Zalando (Figure 12a) uses
the most conventional layout with a single drop-oﬀpoint (blue square) and three cross-aisles, at
the beginning, in the middle, and at the rear of the picking zone; Hermes (Figure 12b) works with
a layout having a single drop-oﬀpoint but uses ﬁve cross-aisles to increase the ﬂexibility of the
pickers; the Amazon layout (Figure 12c) has three cross-aisles but four additional drop-oﬀpoints in
the middle cross-aisle. In the following, we perform a numerical study based on these case studies
to derive insights into the optimal design of picking policies and the respective picking zone layouts.
2
4
6
8
20
30
40
50
60
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
# lists
# items
Comp. time [10-3s ]
(a) Layout 1, (SB/SD/NS).
2
4
6
8
20
30
40
50
60
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
# lists
# items
Comp. time [103s ]
(b) Layout 3, (DB/MD/CS).
Figure 11
Computational times dependent on the number of consecutive lists and items per list.
(a) Layout 1 (Zalando).
(b) Layout 2 (Hermes).
(c) Layout 3 (Amazon).
Figure 12
Picking zone layouts for three real-world cases, by increasing order of complexity.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
28
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
Experimental Design: To allow for an unbiased analysis, we need to work with identical picklist
sequences and picking zone sizes. Hence, we cannot use real data from our three industrial cases
but generate realistic synthetic instance data.
To ensure equal picking zone sizes that reﬂect the spacious conditions of our real-world cases, we
choose a picking zone width of 75 m that results in a layout with 25 aisles to cover 50 shelf rows,
each row having 28 shelves. The width of a shelf is 2 m, and hence we divide each shelve into two
picking positions to derive a distance granularity of 1 m. Further, we generate instances with three
and ﬁve cross-aisles and one to six drop-oﬀpoints to account for all picking zone settings from our
real-world examples and potential variations.
To ensure identical picklist sequences, we generate realistic picklist sequences as detailed in
Appendix G.2 that mimic a potential upstream batching procedure. Here, we account for varying
picklist dispersions, i.e., picklists spanning across a varying spatial area within a picking zone, to
account for varying batching eﬃciency. To characterize a picklist dispersion, we use the number
of aisles β ∈N to the left and right and the share of pick positions γ ∈[0,1] above and below a
picklist’s centroid to deﬁne the picking zone area in which the lists items are distributed. Small β,γ
values denote clustered picklists, while large β,γ values denote dispersed picklists. The former
means that the previous batching planning stage has sucessfully clustered all picking positions in
a closely conﬁned area, whereas the latter represents a less successful batch plan where picking
positions are widely scattered throughout the picking zone. Since all layouts have the same number
of aisles and shelves per aisle, this technique allows us to use the derived picklists on each layout
and hence to produce comparable unbiased results.
We perform a full factorial design with respect to the picking policy characteristics (Table 1).
To this end, we refer to a picking policy with three identiﬁers, where the ﬁrst (SB,DB) indicates
whether batching is static (SB) or dynamic (DB), the second (SD,MD) indicates whether a single
(SD) or multiple (MD) drop-oﬀpoints are used, and the third (NS,CS) indicates whether cartless
subtours are allowed (CS) or not (NS). Moreover, we consider a varying cart capacity κ between
two (Amazon, Zalando) and four (Hermes) bins on a cart that inﬂuences the number of parallel
processed picklists.
For each resulting setting, we analyze a representative set of 50 instances with ﬁve consecutive
picklists of 35 items each. This corresponds to a 15-minute planning interval in a receding-horizon
setting, which is often used in practice. To evaluate the performance of the diﬀerent picking policies
and picking zone layouts, we analyze the average total picking time reduction (TPTR) related to a
picking zone layout with a single depot and the most elementary picking policy (SB/SD/NS). We
calculated the TPTR by ﬁrst comparing the results on a per-instance basis and then computing
an average value.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
29
The remainder of this section summarizes our main ﬁndings for selected settings, while
Appendix I contains detailed results.
Two comments on this experimental design are in order. First, we note that we focus our analyses
on the impact of picking policies and the respective picking zone layouts for varying picklist disper-
sions and cart capacities. We do not analyze the beneﬁt of increasing the cart capacity explicitly as
such an analysis would require a diﬀerent experimental setup that focuses on a larger time horizon.
We refer the interested reader to Appendix H for a detailed discussion and prelimary analyses of
this impact. Second, although extensive, these studies are not exhaustive since considering layouts
with an even number of cross-aisles or further parameter studies may reveal additional beneﬁts.
However, we leave these studies for further research as they would require considerable space to
allow for rigorous elaboration and discussion.
Picking Policies: Figure 13 focuses on the improvement potential of each picking policy depend-
ing on the picklists’ dispersion. Here, Figure 13a addresses the impact of multiple drop-oﬀpoints
and shows the average TPTR when using an SB/MD/NS policy with κ = 2 on a ﬁve-cross-aisle
layout with six drop-oﬀpoints. We observe a maximum improvement of 24.3% for clustered pick-
lists with the smallest β,γ. For increasing β,γ, the TPTR may be signiﬁcantly lower, in the worst
case as little as 1%. We see similar trends but diﬀerent amplitudes for settings with κ ∈{3,4} and
layouts with three cross-aisles. The maximum TPTR for three-cross-aisle layouts remains 3%–4%
below the maximum TPTR for ﬁve-cross-aisle layouts. Settings with κ ∈{3,4} show amplitudes
that are 7%–8% below the κ = 2 setting.
Result 1. Multiple drop-oﬀpoints can yield TPTRs up to 24% on average, given clustered
picklists. For dispersed picklists, these TPTRs may become negligible.
Figure 13b explores the impact of dynamic batching and shows the average TPTR when using
an DB/SD/NS policy with κ = 4 on a three-cross-aisle layout with one drop-oﬀpoint. Here, we
observe maximum TPTRs of 9% and minimum TPTRs of 3%. Similar patterns occur for varying
2
4
6
8
12
16
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0
5
10
15
20
25
β
γ
∆[%]
(a) SB/MD/NS TPTR for κ = 2, 5
cross-aisles, and 6 drop-oﬀpoints.
2
4
6
8
12
16
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0
5
10
15
20
25
β
γ
∆[%]
(b) DB/SD/NS TPTR for κ = 4, 3
cross-aisles, and 1 drop-oﬀpoint.
2
4
6
8
12
16
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0
5
10
15
20
25
β
γ
∆[%]
(c) SB/SD/CS TPTR for κ = 2, 3
cross-aisles, and 1 drop-oﬀpoint.
Figure 13
Average TPTR (∆) for picking policy ﬂexibility levers.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
30
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
κ and three- as well as ﬁve-cross-aisle layouts, with slightly higher amplitudes on three-cross-aisle
layouts. While settings with clustered picklists still show greater improvements than settings with
dispersed picklists, we do not observe the steep systemic decrease seen for multiple drop-oﬀpoints.
In fact, we observe the highest improvement potential for γ = 0.5 and β ∈{2,4}.
Result 2. Dynamic batching can yield TPTRs up to 9.2% on average for clustered picklists.
For dispersed picklists, the TPTRs may reduce to 3%.
Figure 13c focuses on the impact of cartless subtours and shows the average TPTR when using an
SB/SD/CS policy with κ = 2 on a three-cross-aisle layout with one drop-oﬀpoint. Interestingly,
we observe an inverse pattern with the highest TPTRs being realized for dispersed picklists. Inde-
pendent of κ or the layout’s number of cross-aisles, we observe similar patterns with only slight
amplidute variations of roughly 1%.
Result 3. Cartless subtours can yield TPTRs up to 11.3% on average for dispersed picklists.
For clustered picklists, the improvement may reduce to 3%.
Figure 14 further details the impact of multiple drop-oﬀpoints by showing the TPTR for selected
levels of picklist dispersion dependent on the number of drop-oﬀpoints available. As can be seen,
the marginal utility of adding an extra drop-oﬀpoint decreases signiﬁcantly for settings beyond
three drop-oﬀpoints. This eﬀect is independent of κ or the cross-aisle layout, and we note that the
marginal utility decrease is slightly lower for clustered picklists than for dispersed picklists.
Result 4. The deployment of multiple drop-oﬀpoints shows decreasing marginal utilities for
large numbers of drop-oﬀpoints such that the positive eﬀect of additional drop-oﬀpoints quickly
diminishes the more drop-oﬀpoints are added.
Figure 15 shows the TPTR when utilizing all picking policy characteristics (DB/MD/CS) for
κ = 2 on a ﬁve-cross-aisle layout. We observe a maximum average TPTR of 31% for maximal
clustered picklists and decreasing TPTR for more dispersed picklists, yielding a minimum TPTR
of 12%. Similar patterns arise for three-cross-aisle layouts and settings with varying κ. While
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
10
20
number of drop-oﬀpoints
∆[%]
(0.25,2)
(0.25,6)
(0.5,6)
(0.75,8)
Figure 14
Average SB/MD/NS TPTR for κ = 2 with 5
cross-aisles for diﬀerent levels of picklist dispersion (β,γ)
dependent on the number of drop-oﬀpoints.
2
4
6
8
12
16
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0
10
20
30
β
γ
∆[%]
Figure 15
Average DB/MD/CS TPTR with
κ = 2 with 5 cross-aisles and 6 drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
31
minimum average improvements remain stable between 11% and 12% for all settings, maximum
TPTRs vary between 31% and 21%.
Result 5. Exploiting all picking policy ﬂexibility levers can yield TPTRs up to 31% for clus-
tered picklists. For dispersed picklists, the TPTR may reduce to 11%.
Synthesis: Our observations allow us to synthesize the following insights. First, we note that
the TPTR potential of a speciﬁc picking policy depends highly on the picklist dispersion, i.e, the
eﬃcincy of an upstream batching: the more eﬃcient the upstream batching, i.e., the more clustered
the picklists, the larger is the beneﬁt of multiple drop-oﬀpoints. This allows for a signiﬁcantly
improved routing and early dropping-oﬀof asynchronously ﬁnished picklists. For dispersed picklists,
it is less likely that the completion time of picklists hugely vary, i.e, that picklists can be dropped oﬀ
early, and the beneﬁt of multiple drop-oﬀs decreases signiﬁcantly for ineﬃcient upstream batching.
Independent of the batching eﬃciency, we observe decreasing marginal utilities when increasing
the number of deployed drop-oﬀpoints beyond three drop-oﬀpoints.
Second, we observe a reversed eﬀect for cartless subtours, which yield the greatest TPTRs in
settings with ineﬃcient batching. In these cases, the picking routes span over a large part of the
picking zone, which naturally leads to more slopes and subtours that allow for savings, whereas
clustered picklists reduce the gains of cartless subtours.
Third, the TPTR potential of dynamic batching appears to be relatively insensitive to the picklist
dispersion as changing the order of active picklists bears a TPTR potential in various settings.
Focusing on the overall TPTR potential, the impact of the diﬀerent levers is additive, i.e.,
by utilizing all three levers, we reach a TPTR potential similar to the sum of the single TPTR
potentials. We do not observe distinct reinforcing eﬀects; across all settings, the overall TPTR
potential and the sum of the single TPTR potentials show positive or negative deviations below 2%.
Picking zone layout: Besides the picking policies, changing the picking zone layout with respect
to the number of cross-aisles may impact the picking performance. Table 4 shows for all levels of
picklist dispersion the range of average TPTRs over all picking policies and cart capacities κ when
switching from a three-cross-aisle layout to a ﬁve-cross-aisle layout. We observe greater reductions
for dispersed picklists with a maximum reduction of 23.2% for β = 16 and γ = 0.75. For clustered
Table 4
TPTR between ﬁve and three-cross-aisle layouts for varying picklist distributions.
β
2
4
6
8
12
16
γ 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
max
6.3
6.4
6.3 -0.7 10.5
8.3 10.3
3.3 14.9 10.6 14.2
7.9 15.1 14.1 16.9
9.7 17.5 17.0 21.5 14.1 18.2 17.8 23.2 16.0
Q3
4.7
5.4
4.6 -2.3
8.8
6.8
8.5
1.5 12.3
9.0 12.3
6.4 12.9 11.6 15.6
8.9 14.9 14.6 19.7 12.9 15.6 15.9 20.6 14.2
Q2
4.0
4.3
3.5 -2.9
7.2
5.8
6.9
0.6 11.0
8.2 10.3
3.9 11.9 10.4 13.1
6.0 13.6 13.8 17.8 10.1 15.0 15.4 19.7 12.8
Q1
2.2
3.1
2.8 -4.1
6.1
4.7
6.2 -0.5 10.4
7.6
9.5
2.8 11.3
9.0 12.7
5.0 12.8 12.5 16.3
8.7 13.8 14.3 18.5 10.6
min
0.3
2.1
0.7 -5.1
4.5
3.2
5.0 -1.9
9.1
6.6
7.4
1.8
9.8
7.7 11.7
3.9 11.2 12.1 15.5
7.4 12.4 13.3 17.0
9.1
mean
3.6
4.2
3.6 -3.1
7.5
5.8
7.3
0.6 11.4
8.4 10.8
4.3 12.1 10.5 13.9
6.6 13.9 13.9 18.0 10.5 14.9 15.3 19.7 12.6
This table characterizes the TPTR distribution when switching from a three-cross-aisle to a ﬁve-cross-aisle layout.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
32
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
picklists, we observe signiﬁcantly lower reductions. For high γ and low β, we even observe increased
total picking times in some settings. This eﬀect highlights that additional cross-aisles increase the
ﬂexibility of the picker to shortcut into adjacent aisles, but add unused space to the warehouse and
increase the lengths of the picking aisles. Particularly for clustered picklists which require only a few
aisles to be traversed, additional cross-aisles constitute a signiﬁcant share of the overall distance,
which may worsen the picking time. Hence, there exists a general trade-oﬀbetween diﬀerent design
and operational objectives, and we cannot conclude that more cross-aisles automatically increase
picking performance. This trade-oﬀhas been explored in great detail for traditional (single-depot)
settings, e.g., by Roodbergen and De Koster (2001) as well as Roodbergen et al. (2008).
Result 6. Increasing the number of cross-aisles signiﬁcantly reduces the picking time for set-
tings with dispersed picklists. For clustered picklist the reduction is much smaller and increasing
the number of cross-aisles may even lead to a loss of picking performance.
5.
Conclusions
With the rapid growth in e-commerce, picker routing and its associated policies have become crucial
determinants of proﬁtability and competitiveness in warehouse operations. We have presented the
ﬁrst generic and exact algorithmic framework for the GOPP, which constitutes a new state of the
art for several known (sub)problem variants and for the generic case. Our algorithm is scalable and
amenable to real-time applications since it requires computational times of less than two seconds
for realistic warehouse layouts and picking policies. Using this algorithm, we have analyzed the
impact of several picking policies and warehouse layouts on the overall performance of a picker.
Although not exhaustive in all design aspects of picking zones, our results allow the derivation
of several meaningful managerial insights, identifying trends that may open the ﬁeld for further
research. We have shown that employing enhanced picking policies may reduce the average total
picker walking time by up to 20–30% depending on the picking zone layout and cart capacity used,
which provides the potential to increase overall ﬂexibility or throughput. Utilizing multiple drop-
oﬀpoints is highly beneﬁcial in case of clustered picklists that result from an eﬃcient upstream
batching procedure. Its impact becomes negligible for scattered picklists, i.e., in the absence of an
eﬃcient upstream batching. Conversely, cartless subtours appear to be particularly beneﬁcial in the
presence of scattered picklists and may partly compensate for ineﬃcient upstream batching, but
show only little impact for settings with clustered picklists. Dynamic batching allows for improve-
ments independently of the upstream batching’s eﬃciency and the resulting picklist dispersion.
Increasing the number of cross-aisles in a picking zone layout can improve or deteriorate the picking
times since deciding on the number of cross-aisles amounts to making a trade-oﬀbetween routing
ﬂexibility and walking distances. Accordingly, using layouts with larger numbers of cross-aisles

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
33
appears to be particularly beneﬁcial for dispersed picklists but may worsen picking times when an
eﬃcient upstream batching generates signiﬁcantly clustered picklists.
Three ﬁnal comments in relation with these insights are in order. First, the impact of cartless
subtours may be signiﬁcantly higher or lower, based on the ratio between a picker’s speed with
and without a cart. The picker speeds used in this work are often observed in practice, which
means that our results provide a good baseline, but they should be reexamined if achievable speeds
diﬀer signiﬁcantly. Second, explicitly analyzing the beneﬁt of varying cart capacities may reveal
additional interesting insights. Here, we want to emphasize that our results constitute only a ﬁrst
step into this ﬁeld of research. Extending our framework to provide in-depth analyses of diﬀerent
objectives or integrated batching and order picking, which has been so far mostly studied for rather
theoretical warehouse settings, may yield interesting insights for both academics and practitioners.
References
Azadeh K, De Koster RMB, Roy D (2018) Robotized and automated warehouse systems: Review and recent
developments. Transportation Science 53(4):917–940.
Boysen N, De Koster RBM, Weidinger F (2019a) Warehousing in the e-commerce era: A survey. European
Journal of Operational Research 277(2):396–411.
Boysen N, Fedtke S, Weidinger F (2018) Optimizing automated sorting in warehouses: The minimum order
spread sequencing problem. European Journal of Operational Research 270(1):386–400.
Boysen N, Stephan K, Weidinger F (2019b) Manual order consolidation with put walls: The batched order
bin sequencing problem. EURO Journal on Transportation and Logistics 8(2):169–193.
Bozer YA, Kile JW (2008) Order batching in walk-and-pick order picking systems. International Journal of
Production Research 46(7):1887–1909.
Cambazard H, Catusse N (2018) Fixed-parameter algorithms for rectilinear Steiner tree and rectilinear
traveling salesman problem in the plane. European Journal of Operational Research 270(2):419–429.
Chen F, Wang H, Qi C, Xie Y (2013) An ant colony optimization routing algorithm for two order pickers
with congestion consideration. Computers & Industrial Engineering 66(1):77–85.
Cui R, Zhang DJ, Bassamboo A (2019) Learning from inventory availability information: Evidence from ﬁeld
experiments on Amazon. Management Science. 65(3):1216–1235.
Daniels RL, Rummel JL, Schantz R (1998) A model for warehouse order picking. European Journal of
Operational Research 105(1):1–17.
De Koster RBM, Le-Duc T, Roodbergen KJ (2007) Design and control of warehouse order picking: A
literature review. European Journal of Operational Research 182(2):481–501.
De Koster RBM, Van der Poort ES (1998) Routing orderpickers in a warehouse: A comparison between
optimal and heuristic solutions. IIE Transactions 30(5):469–480.
Gallien J, Weber T (2010) To wave or not to wave? Order release policies for warehouses with an automated
sorter. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 12(4):642–662.
Goetschalckx M, RatliﬀHD (1988) An eﬃcient algorithm to cluster order picking items in a wide aisle.
Engineering Costs and Production Economics 13(4):263–271.
Gue KR, Meller RD, Skufca JD (2006) The eﬀects of pick density on order picking areas with narrow aisles.
IIE Transactions 38(10):859–868.
Hall RW (1993) Distance approximations for routing manual pickers in a warehouse. IIE Transactions
25(4):76–87.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
34
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
Hanan M (1966) On Steiner’s problem with rectilinear distance. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics
14(2):255–265.
Henn S, W¨ascher G (2012) Tabu search heuristics for the order batching problem in manual order picking
systems. European Journal of Operational Research 222(3):484–494.
Hong S, Johnson AL, Peters BA (2012a) Batch picking in narrow-aisle order picking systems with consider-
ation for picker blocking. European Journal of Operational Research 221(3):557–570.
Hong S, Johnson AL, Peters BA (2012b) Large-scale order batching in parallel-aisle picking systems. IIE
Transactions 44(2):88–106.
Pansart L, Catusse N, Cambazard H (2018) Exact algorithms for the picking problem. Computers & Oper-
ations Research. 100:117–127.
Petersen CG (1997) An evaluation of order picking routeing policies. International Journal of Operations &
Production Management 17(11):1098–1111.
RatliﬀHD, Rosenthal AS (1983) Order-picking in a rectangular warehouse: A solvable case of the traveling
salesman problem. Operations Research 31(3):507–521.
Roodbergen KJ, De Koster RBM (2001) Routing order pickers in a warehouse with a middle aisle. European
Journal of Operational Research 133(1):32–43.
Roodbergen KJ, Sharp GP, Vis IFA (2008) Designing the layout structure of manual order picking areas in
warehouses. IIE Transactions 40(11):1032–1045.
Statista
(2017)
Annual
retail
e-commerce
sales
growth
worldwide
from
2014
to
2021.
https://www.statista.com/statistics/288487/forecast-of-global-b2c-e-commerce-growt/.
Theys C, Br¨aysy O, Dullaert W, Raa B (2010) Using a TSP heuristic for routing order pickers in warehouses.
European Journal of Operational Research 200(3):755–763.
Weidinger F (2018) Picker routing in rectangular mixed shelves warehouses. Computers & Operations
Research 95:139–150.
Weidinger F, Boysen N (2018) Scattered storage: How to distribute stock keeping units all around a mixed-
shelves warehouse. Transportation Science. 52(6):1412–1427.
Weidinger F, Boysen N, Schneider M (2019) Picker routing in the mixed-shelves warehouses of e-commerce
retailers. European Journal of Operational Research 274(2):501–515.
Zulj I, Kramer S, Schneider M (2018) A hybrid of adaptive large neighborhood search and tabu search for
the order-batching problem. European Journal of Operational Research 264(2):653–664.
Acknowledgments
We like to thank three anonymous referees, an anonymous associate editor, and the department editor Chung
Piaw Teo for their valuable feedback, which helped to improve this paper signiﬁcantly.

Appendix A:
Proofs of propositions
Proof of Proposition 1
[§3.1] See Ratliﬀand Rosenthal (1983).
□
Proof of Proposition 2
[§3.2] See Cambazard and Catusse (2018).
□
Proof of Proposition 3
[§3.2] We consider a Hanan graph H and its subgraphs B and U, deﬁned by a
vertical planar separator S, that collectively exploit H. Let T and T ′ be partial path subgraphs in B and
let α and α′ be their respective states. We then show that α = α′ implies equivalence between T and T ′ by
showing that for any partial path subgraph F in U it holds that if T and F form a path subgraph P in H,
T ′ and F also form a path subgraph P ′ in H.
We note that formally, a subgraph P is a path subgraph if for every vertex c in P it holds that i) deg c
mod 2 = 0 and ii) deg c > 0, and iii) P is connected.
We now note that by construction conditions i) and ii) hold for any vertex in T and T ′ that are not
contained in S. By deﬁnition, conditions i) and ii) also hold for all nodes in F \S and for all vertices in S in
case T and F form a path subgraph P. Then, α = α′ implies that ri = r′
i ∀i ∈{1,...,h} and thus conditions
i) and ii) also hold for path subgaph P ′, which is formed by T ′ and F.
We now focus on condition iii). Here, two cases exist. If T, T ′ and F are connected, P and P ′ remain
connected and are path subgraphs. If either T and T ′ or F have more than one connected component, α = α′
implies that ui = u′
i ∀i ∈{1,...,h} such that either both P and P ′ or none of these subgraphs is a path
subgraph.
This concludes the proof.
□
Proof of Proposition 4
[§3.2] We ﬁrst show that requiring Cm ⊆C′ in combination with conditions a)
and b) of Proposition 4 preserves optimality in H′, by proving that the length of a shortest path for any
pair of (c,c′), c,c′ ∈C is the same in H′ and H. This only holds if the left and right border of H′ are convex,
which implies that Sl and Sr must have a concave shape. By construction, Sl and Sr remain concave.
We now show how a feasible C′ can be constructed from C in O(hv). We set C′ = C and proceed as follows.
1. We ﬁrst traverse H(C) starting in its lower left corner, moving horizontally from left to right along
vertices c ∈C with χh(c) = 1. We remove the inspected vertex if i) it neither belongs to a mandatory
edge, nor ii) it is a drop-oﬀpoint. The ﬁrst time we found constraints i) or ii) violated, we store the
vertex’s vertical position ˆv. We then start inspecting vertices c ∈C with χh(c) = 2 from left to right and
stop either if constraints i) or ii) are violated or if iii) χv(c) > ˆv. We then repeat this procedure until
we inspected vertices with χh(c) = h and condition i)–iii) is violated.
2. Afterwards, we repeat this procedure starting in the upper left corner of H(C), moving horizontally
from left to right and subsequently from top to bottom.
3. We then proceed analogously for the lower and upper right corners of H(C), moving horizontally from
right to left and subsequently in the respective vertical direction.
Removing vertices in this order preserves the convexity of C′, which concludes the proof.
□
Proof of Proposition 5.
[§3.4.1] Recall from Section 2.3 that a cartless subtour starts and ends at the
same position and occurs only within a sub-aisle. Accordingly, only circular subtours with a limited number
1

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
2
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
of stops may arise. We consider a sub-aisle in between vertex c ∈C and vertex c′ ∈C and diﬀerentiate between
two cases, depending on a picker’s walking time through this sub-aisle by cart τ c
c,c′ or by foot τ p
c,c′:
If τ c
c,c′ ≤τ p
c,c′, partial tours without cart become superﬂuous.
If τ c
c,c′ > τ p
c,c′, we can still use the standard transitions based on the following reasoning. We note that:
i) Transition I disconnects the path, such that it is valid independent of the travel mode.
ii) Transition II does not allow to form a slope within a sub-aisle and thus, does not model a cartless
subtour in any case.
iii) Transition III allows to go back and forth between two vertices but is always dominated by Transi-
tions IV, V, and VI, because a cartless subtour by deﬁnition is limited to a sub-aisle.
iv) Transitions IV and V capture the case that all items are collected with a slope that starts at one end
of the sub-aisle. In this case, one can reduce the cost of the transitions by the eligible cartless subtours
within the respective slope.
v) The cost of Transition VI in the case of cartless subtours can be calculated by considering the cost
reduction in eligible subtours for each potential split, identifying its minimum. This minimum may still
not be unique. Then, the same argument as for the standard transition holds.
For transitions IV to V I, a slope may contain more items than a picker may pick on a cartless subtour. In
this case, we consider only a part of the slope as cartless such that the respective capacity constraint is not
violated. Accordingly, one can recalculate the inﬂuence of cartless subtours on each transition and its eligible
slopes a-priori, such that the same transition set can still be used to run the layered graph algorithm (LGA)
or the integer linear program (ILP).
This concludes the proof.
□
Proof of Proposition 6.
[§3.4.1] With ω+
i ̸= ω−
i , T ∗remains either as a straight origin-destination path
without cycles or contains one or more cycles. In both cases T ∗must remain connected so that the only odd
degrees relate to ω+
i
and ω−
i . This holds since the traversal of each cycle must start and end in the same
vertex since T ∗remains an Eulerian cycle. In any infeasible case, additional odd degrees arise.
□
Appendix B:
NP-hardness proof for the generalized order picking problem
(GOPP) with multiple picklists and multiple drop-oﬀpoints
Here, we prove that the GOPP as deﬁned in Section 2.3 (i.e., with multiple picklists to be assembled according
to a given processing sequence, a cart with a capacity of κ orders, and multiple drop-oﬀpoints) is strongly
NP-hard even if each picklist demands just a single item. Note that a straightforward transformation from
the TSP is not available for our problem, because picker routing in parallel aisle warehouses is solvable in
polynomial time (Ratliﬀand Rosenthal 1983). Instead, our transformation is from the sorting buﬀer problem
(dubbed SBP), which is NP-hard in the strong sense (Asahiro et al. 2012). The SBP in its feasibility version
is deﬁned as follows.
Sorting Buﬀer Problem: Given a sequence η of n items, each item i is to be colored in color k(i) by a server,
which has a random access input buﬀer for up to g parallel items. According to η, items are moved
into the buﬀer. At any step, a color k is selected and all items in the buﬀer of color k are removed from

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
3
the buﬀer and processed by the server. Freed buﬀer space is ﬁlled by succeeding items of η; if some of
these new items also demand color k, they are instantaneously removed until no item in the buﬀer is
of color k. Then, a new color is selected and the process repeats, until no items remain in η. Given no
initial color, we have to decide whether a processing plan with at most K color changes exists.
We transform an instance I of SBP into an instance I′ of our GOPP in pseudo-polynomial time as follows.
For each color k of I, we introduce an aisle within a rectilinear warehouse layout. Each item i with color k(i)
of SBR corresponds to a picklist demanding just a single item to be retrieved for a picking position located
in the middle of the aisle corresponding to the respective color. Thus, if we have four items of color white in
SBP, we introduce four picklists each demanding an item stored at a picking positions in the middle of the
‘white aisle’ of GOPP. Furthermore, in the middle of each aisle we have a drop-oﬀpoint. Note that, for a
matter of convenience, we assume that all items stored in the same aisle and each aisle’s drop-oﬀpoint are
located in the middle of the aisle and have zero distance among each other. This proof can easily be extended
by (small) distances among an aisle’s picking positions and drop-oﬀpoint. Additionally, we have the picking
cart of GOPP, which resembles the input buﬀer of SBP. The capacity of the cart equals that of the input
buﬀer, so that we have κ = g. The sequence η of SBP equals the GOPP sequence of picklists. The length
of each aisle is 2λ, so that the distance towards the middle of each aisle, where the picking positions and
the drop-oﬀpoints are located is λ. The distance all along the front cross-aisle in order to reach the parallel
picking aisles is ρ. We assume λ > K · ρ. Initially, the picker is located in the cross aisle and the question
we ask is whether there exists a solution to I′ with a total picking distance Z < 2λ · K. Our transformation
scheme is depicted in Figure 18.
If I is a yes-instance, visiting the aisles within GOPP in the same sequence as switching colors within
SBP leads to a solution to I′ with Z < 2λ · K. When visiting an aisle with the picking cart all picklists with
their items stored in this aisle can be completed and handed over at the drop-oﬀpoint. Since we have no
distance among the picking positions of this aisle and the drop-oﬀpoint, all succeeding picklists put onto the
cart according to given sequence η and having their items stored in the current aisle can also be processed
without causing additional picker walking. Thus, each aisle visit causes a distance of 2λ to walk back and
Figure 18
Transformation scheme of complexity proof.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
4
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
forth the middle of the aisle, except of the last aisle where picking stops after handing over the last picklists.
Since even completely passing the front cross aisle (of length ρ) K times does not exceed λ, the resulting
solution to I′ does not exceed Z < 2λ · K.
On the other hand, any solution to I′ of GOPP with Z < 2λ · K is also a feasible solution to I of SBP.
Switching colors in the same sequence as changing aisles inevitably leads to K color changes, which completes
our complexity proof.
□
Appendix C:
An integer linear program for a single picklist
Instead of designing an LGA to solve the order picking problem for a single depot and a single picklist,
we can also develop a concise and eﬃcient ILP to solve this problem. We deﬁne this ILP on a modiﬁed,
directed graph G′ = (C′,A) which results from transforming the reduced graph H′ into a directed graph.
In addition to the set of all arcs a = (c,c′) ∈A with c,c′ ∈C′, Am denotes all mandatory arcs, i.e., arcs
corresponding to sub-aisles that must be traversed, and Ad-,Ad+ denote the subset of arcs leaving or entering
the vertex that represents the drop-oﬀpoint. Further, Ai denotes for each aisle i, the subset of cross-aisle
arcs that are located between the ith and the (i + 1)st aisle. We use the cut sets δ+(a) and δ−(a) to denote
all predecessor and successor arcs of a, and a′ to denote the inverse arc of a and deﬁne A
m = {(c,c′) ∈
Am | χv(c) < χv(c′) ∨χh(c) < χh(c′)}, which allows us to eﬃciently model slope transitions on mandatory
arcs. We use binaries xa to indicate whether an arc is traversed (xa = 1) or not (xa = 0) and binaries yat
to indicate whether an arc is sloped with a speciﬁc transition t (yat = 1) or not (yat = 0). Speciﬁcally, we
cover transitions I,II,III from Figure 3 with the binary traversal variables xa and xa′, while we use the yat
variables to model potential slopes with the limited transition set T ′ = {IV,V,V I}. The coeﬃcients ζa and
ζat denote the predeﬁned cost for each traversal or slope. Further, we use binary zab to trace if in a tour, arc
b is the direct successor of arc a. Binary oa identiﬁes the ﬁrst arc of a tour, while binary da identiﬁes the last
arc of a tour.
With this notation as summarized in Table 5, our ILP is as follows:
minimize
Z =
X
a∈A
ζaxa +
X
a∈Am,t∈T ′
ζatyat
(1)
subject to
xb ≥
X
a∈δ+(b)
zab
b ∈A
(2)
Table 5
Notation used in the ILP formulation.
A set of all arcs
ζa cost of traversing arc a
Am set of all mandatory arcs
ζat cost of sloping arc a with transition t
Ad- set of all depot leaving arcs
a′ inverted arc of a
Ad+ set of all depot entering arcs
Ai cross-aisle arcs between the ith and (i+1)st aisle
xa a is traversed (xa = 1) or not (xa = 0)
A
m mandatory arc subset
yat a is covered with slope t (yat = 1) or not (yat = 0)
T ′ limited transition set (T ′ = {IV,V,V I})
zab b is traversed after a (zab = 1) or not (zab = 0)
δ−(a) cut set yielding all successor arcs of a
oa a is the ﬁrst arc of the tour (oa = 1) or not (oa = 0)
δ+(a) cut set yielding all predecessor arcs of a
da a is the last arc of the tour (da = 1) or not (da = 0)

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
5
xa ≥
X
b∈δ−(a)
zab
a ∈A
(3)
X
b∈δ−(a)
zab ≥xa
a ∈A \ Ad+
(4)
X
b∈δ−(a)
zab + da ≥xa
a ∈Ad+
(5)
X
a∈δ+(b)
zab ≥xb
b ∈A \ Ad-
(6)
X
a∈δ+(b)
zab + ob ≥xb
b ∈Ad-
(7)
xa + xa′ +
X
t∈T ′
yat ≥1
a ∈A
m
(8)
X
a∈Ad-
oa = 1
(9)
xa ≥oa
a ∈Ad-
(10)
X
a∈Ad+
da = 1
(11)
xa ≥da
a ∈Ad+
(12)
X
t∈{IV,V I}
yat ≤
X
b∈δ+(a)
xb
a ∈A
m
(13)
X
t∈{V,V I}
yat ≤
X
b∈δ−(a)
xb
a ∈A
m
(14)
X
a∈Ai
xa ≥2
i ∈{1,...,v −1}
(15)
X
a∈B
xa ≤
X
a∈B−
xa|A|
B ⊆A \ (Ad+ ∪Ad-)
(16)
xa ∈{0,1}
a ∈A;
zab ∈{0,1}
a,b ∈A;
yat ∈{0,1}
a ∈A
m,t ∈T ′;
oa ∈{0,1}
a ∈Ad-;
da ∈{0,1}
a ∈Ad+.
(17)
Our objective minimizes the total cost, which results from traversing or sloping arcs. Constraints (2) and
(3) link arc and sequence binaries, Constraints (4) and (5) ensure that each but the last traversed arc has
a successor, and similarly Constraints (6) and (7) enforce the existence of a predecessor for all but the
ﬁrst traversed arc. Constraints (8) ensure that every sub-aisle that must be visited is traversed or sloped.
Constraints (9) and (10) uniquely identify the ﬁrst arc of a tour, while Constraints (11) and (12) uniquely
identify the last arc of a tour. Constraints (13) and (14) are connecting slopes and preceding and successive
traversals, while Constraints (15) ensure that the picker traverses cross-sub-aisles between two aisles in the
reduced graph at least twice. Constraints (16) ensure connectivity with B−being the set of all arcs that are
successor arcs of arcs in B whose end-vertex is not contained in the vertex set induced from all arcs in B.
Finally, Constraints (17) deﬁne the domains of the variables.
Since the number of Constraints (16) grows exponentially with the size of A, we add these in a lazy fashion
as feasibility cuts in the solver. By so doing, we obtain an integer problem that remains tractable for many

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
6
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
instances of small and medium size. We note that the cost coeﬃcients of the xa and yat variables can be
preprocessed from the transitions in Figure 3. Accordingly, these costs remain equal to the costs of the state
transitions used in the bidirectional LGA in Section 3.2 and thus, the bidirectional LGA and the proposed
ILP solve the same reduced version of the GOPP and obtain the same optimal value.
One comment on this ILP is in order. We note that one could simplify this ILP further for the prevalent
case of a single drop-oﬀpoint and a single picklist, i.e., one could omit the zab, oa, da variables and the
Ad+, Ad- sets. We state a more comprehensive ILP formulation as it is applicable to multiple drop-oﬀpoints
without major modiﬁcations. Accordingly, one could use the ILP instead of the LGA as an oracle in our
branch-and-prune algorithm with minor changes: for cartless subtours and dynamic batching, the changed
transition calculations as described for the LGA in Section 3.3 apply. For multiple drop-oﬀpoints it suﬃces
to consider all depots in the respective depot arc sets Ad+ and Ad-, and to drop Constraints (15) which is
a valid inequality for the special case with one depot.
Appendix D:
Pseudo-code:
In the following, we detail the pseudo-code for the LGA described in Section 3.2. We propagate partial path
subraphs as described in Section 3.2 until Bhv and Uhv collectively exploit H(C) when Bhv = B and Uhv = U.
Here, we use a layered graph structure to store the states of partial path subgraphs in sets AB
j / AU
j , which
denote the states α that correspond to partial path subgraphs in the jth Bhv / Uhv subgraph of B / U.
Then, we obtain the optimal picking path by merging the states on the last layers AB
j and AU
j that contain
the states of partial path subgraphs explored in B and U. We elaborate the merge procedure in Appendix D
and detail only the forward and backward propagation in the following.
To keep the pseudo-codes of the corresponding algorithms concise, we ﬁrst introduce the ordered sets
EB and EU, and denote the cost (i.e., the picking time) of a partial path subgraph associated with a state
α as C(α). Let EB contain all edges of B, ordered such that one traverses B starting at its lower-left
corner, processing vertical edges ﬁrst and horizontal edges second, when processing edges in the order of EB.
Analogously, EU contains all edges of U, ordered such that one traverses U starting at its upper right corner,
processing vertical edges ﬁrst and horizontal edges second.
Figure 19 provides the pseudo-code of our forward propagation. We ﬁrst initialize AB
0 with an artiﬁcial
unconnected state α0 (l.1). Then, we start at the bottom left corner of B and explore partial path subgraphs
by propagating vertical edges (i.e., sub-aisles) ﬁrst and horizontal edges (i.e., sub-cross-aisles) iteratively (l.2).
Here, each state related to a partial path subgraph on the next subgraph results from propagating a state
from its preceding subgraph and a transition (l.4–l.6). For each propagated state, we check its feasibility (l.7).
If the generated state is feasible, we check whether the current layer of states already contains an equivalent
partial path subgraph (l.8). In this case, we keep only the state with the lower cost and discard the other
one (l.9 and l.10). Otherwise, we add the generated state to the set of states AB
l of the corresponding layer
l, which refers to the lth subgraph (l.11 and l.12).
The backward propagation (Figure 20) works analogously but starts at the upper right corner of U,
propagating vertical edges ﬁrst and horizontal edges consecutively. To do so, we use the ordered set EU
instead of EB.
We show in Appendix F, that both algorithms have a worst-case complexity of O(vh7h).

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
7
1: AB
0 ←{α0}, picklist ←0
2: for e ∈EB do
3:
picklist ←picklist + 1
4:
for α ∈AB
picklist−1 do
5:
for t ∈Te do
6:
α′ ←propagate(t,α)
7:
if feasible(α′) then
8:
if ∃α′′ ∈AB
picklist : α′′ == α′ then
9:
if C(α′) < C(α′′) then
10:
α′′ ←α′
11:
else
12:
AB
picklist ←AB
picklist ∪{α′}
Figure 19
Pseudo-code of the forward propagation.
1: AU
0 ←{α0}, picklist ←0
2: for e ∈EU do
3:
picklist ←picklist + 1
4:
for α ∈AU
picklist−1 do
5:
for t ∈Te do
6:
α′ ←propagate(t,α)
7:
if feasible(α′) then
8:
if ∃α′′ ∈AU
picklist : α′′ == α′ then
9:
if C(α′) < C(α′′) then
10:
α′′ ←α′
11:
else
12:
AU
picklist ←AU
j ∪{α′}
Figure 20
Pseudo-code of the backward propagation.
Appendix E:
Merge procedure
In the following, we detail the merge procedure used in our bidirectional LGA implementation. Given the
ﬁnal-layer sets AB and AU that contain the states of partial path subgraphs explored in B and U (see
Section 3.2.3), we can identify a cost-optimal path subgraph as
arg min
α∈AB,α′∈AU C(α) + C(α′)
(18)
such that α and α′ can be merged to a feasible path subgraph. Here, we can check feasibility in O(h) by
i) iteratively merging the connected component labels of α and α′ to ensure that merging both partial
path subgraphs yields a subgraph with a single connected component, and ii) ensuring that rα = rα′. Then,
solving (18) straightforwardly via pairwise comparison results in O(|AB||AU|) necessary comparisons, such
that the overall computational complexity is O(h|AB||AU|).
Observation 1. Let µ = P
i∈{1,...,h} rα
i be the total parity in ˆS for a state α ∈AB and ξ = P
i∈{1,...,h} rα′
i
be the total parity in ˆS for a state α′ ∈AU. A merge of two partial path subgraphs can only be feasible if µ
and ξ are either both even or both odd. Moreover, the sum of parity degrees must be even for each vertex
in ˆS.
To reduce the number of necessary comparisons, we exploit Observation 1 and divide AB and AU into
subsets such that AB = S
i∈I AB
i and AU = S
i∈I AU
i . We derive |I| = 2h subsets, each containing states with
an equal rα / rα′. Then, we can limit the number of necessary comparisons to O(P
i∈I |AB
i ||AU
i |), as rα = rα′
must hold for a feasible merge, and obtain a worst-case computational complexity of O(hP
i∈I |AB
i ||AU
i |).
To further speed up our merge procedure, we sort the states in each subset in increasing order with respect
to their costs. This allows us to eﬃciently exploit potential merge moves and to exit the comparisons once
a feasible solution is found as all succeeding pairs would show a higher potential objective value.
Appendix F:
Computational complexity of the forward and backward LGA
In the following, we prove that both the forward and backward LGA as introduced in Section 3.2.3 have
a worst-case time complexity of O(vh7h), with v being the number of aisles and h being the number of
cross-aisles of the underlying instance. To keep this paper concise, we discuss the proof for the forward LGA
in the following and note that it holds analogously for the backward LGA.
We recall that our algorithm advances through the graph by exploring one arc with each iteration. Accord-
ingly, the number of invocations of its main body (see Figure 8, lines 2–12) is bounded by the total number of

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
8
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
arcs, which is in O(hv). At each iteration, the algorithm propagates all partial path subgraphs that resulted
from the previous iteration, herein discarding infeasible or dominated partial path subgraphs. We now show
that the number of feasible states is bounded by some function f ∈O(7h) to prove the proposed worst-case
time complexity bound of O(vh7h).
Let Ω(h) be the set of feasible and distinct states α = {r,u} = {(r1,...,rh),(u1,...,uh)} that result when
running our algorithm. Further, let Ω′(h) be the set of states where for each α′ = {(r′
1,...,r′
h),(u′
1,...,u′
h)} ∈
Ω′(h) the following claims hold:
1. The connected component labels of α′ form a non-crossing partition of u with respect to the ordering
induced by vertex indices [1,h].
2. Each connected component has an even number of vertices with odd degree.
Cambazard and Catusse (2018) show that |Ω′(h)| is bounded by O( (4+
√8)h+1
√
(h+1)3 ) = O(7h) for a general rectilin-
ear Steiner traveling salesman problem (TSP). Accordingly, we prove in the following that for our problem
speciﬁc transition set α ∈Ω(h) implies α ∈Ω′(h). The following two proofs verify Claims 1 and 2 for α ∈Ω(h),
which proves the existence of some f ∈O(7h) that bounds the number of feasible states in our algorithm
and thus veriﬁes O(vh7h) for the algorithm’s worst-case time complexity.
Proof of Claim 1.
We prove Claim 1 by contradiction. Let α = {r,u} be a state for which the claim does
not hold. Then there exist a,b,d,e ∈[1,h] with a < b < d < e and ua = ud ̸= ub = ue. From ua = ud and ub = ue
it follows that there exists paths πad and πbe from vertices a and b to vertices d and e, respectively in all
shortest feasible path subgraphs represented by α. From the construction of H(C), it follows that there exists
some c that is both in πad and πbe. Accordingly, there exists a path from vertex a to c and from c to b, which
implies that ua = ub.
□
Proof of Claim 2.
It is easy to see that Claim 2 holds for the initial state. For any other state, let α′ ∈Ω(h)
be a feasible state and let αt = {rt,ut} ∈Ω(h) denote its successor, such that αt results from α′ by applying
transition t ∈T on edge e = (co,cd) ∈E that can be either a horizontal edge, i.e., a sub-cross-aisle e ∈Ec, or
a vertical edge, i.e., a sub-aisle e ∈Es. We now discuss each transition separately. To keep this discussion
concise, we say that a vertex is even (odd) if it has an even (odd) degree.
t = I: If e ∈Es, then rt = r′ and ut = u′. If e ∈Ec, then rt
i = r′
i ∀i ∈[1,h] \ {χh(cd)} and r′
χh(cd) = 0.
t = II: We ﬁrst focus on horizontal edges e ∈Ec, where we note that the algorithms propagation order
always ensures that cd is unconnected in α but connected in αt, and consider two cases: i) if co is
(un-)connected and even, propagating e with transition II is infeasible as co remains odd forever; ii) if
co is connected and odd, by propagating e with transition II the overall number of odd vertices remains
unchanged and the claim holds.
We now focus on vertical edges e ∈Es. Here, we consider four cases: i) if co and cd are (un-)connected and even,
applying transition II yields an odd degree at both vertices and the claim holds. ii) if co is (un-)connected
and even, and cd is connected and odd, the overall number of vertices with an odd degree remains unchanged
and the claim holds. iii) if co is connected and cd is (un-)connected and even, the claim holds in analogy to
ii) if co is odd, and follows by induction if co is even as propagating transition II causes co to become odd
but merges an odd vertex into the connected component. iv) if co and cd are connected cd must be odd. In

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
9
case co is odd, too, transition II forces both vertices to become even and removes an even number of odd
vertices such that the overall number of odd vertices remains even. In case co is even in α′, it becomes odd
in αt while cd becomes even such that the overall number of odd vertices remains unchanged.
t = III: Transition III does not modify the vertex degree unless a new connected component is added.
In the former case the claim clearly holds. In the latter case, both vertices of the new connected component
have an even degree and the claim follows.
t = IV : rt
i = r′
i and ut
i = u′
i for i ∈[1,h] unless rt
i = 0. In this case, a new connected component comprising
only co results. As co has an even degree, the claim holds.
t = V : Analogous to t = IV .
t = V I: Follows from cases t = IV and t = V .
We conclude that the claim holds for all transitions whenever αt is feasible.
Then, Claim 2 holds in general.
□
Appendix G:
Instance generation
This appendix details our instance generation. In Section G.1, we detail the instances and benchmark sets
used in the computational performance experiments (cf. Section 4.1). In Section G.2, we detail the instance
generation for our real-world experiments (cf. Section 4.2).
G.1.
Computational performance experiments
To compare our skeleton algorithm against the algorithm of Pansart et al. (2018) for a picker routing problem
with a multiblock warehouse limited to a single picklist, a single drop-oﬀpoint, a static batching, and no
cartless subtours, we use the benchmark from Theys et al. (2010). This benchmark comprises 1,080 instances
which vary with respect to the number of aisles (5, 15, 60), the number of cross-aisles (3, 6, 11), the number
of picks (15, 60, 240), a volume-based (V) or random (R) storage policy, and central as well as decentralized
drop-oﬀpoint positions.
To generate picklists for our additional instances, we randomly choose pick positions to create a sequence of
picklists and consider 20–60 picks per picklist, which correspond to a typical bin capacity for online retailers
selling small to mid-size consumer goods. We note that the derived picklists do not allow for meaningful
managerial anaylsis as an upstream batching procedure would derive more eﬃcient picklists that are less
spatially dispersed within a picking zone. However, a randomly distributed picklist poses a bigger challenge
to our algorithm as the number of mandatory edges is higher. Accordingly, we use this picklist generation
scheme only to derive instances for conservative, pure computational studies.
G.2.
Real-world setting & optimal picking policies
Through this experiment, we aim to derive insights into the optimal design of picking policies and the
respective picking zone layouts. To this end, we perform a full factorial design with respect to the picking
policy characteristics (Table 1) and the picking zone layouts from Section 4.1.2. To complete the experiment,
we extend our analysis as follows:

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
10
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
i) Taking the real-world layouts as an envelope to our study, we design picking zone layouts with one to
six drop-oﬀpoints and three and ﬁve cross-aisles. By enlarging the number of settings for additional
drop-oﬀpoint conﬁgurations beyond the conﬁgurations observed in practice, our study allows to derive
more general insights into the beneﬁt of picking zone layouts. Figure 21 shows an example of the drop-oﬀ
point conﬁgurations for a layout with three cross-aisles.
ii) For all resulting layouts, we evaluate the impact of a) cartless subtours and b) dynamic batching. Note
that we implicitly consider multiple drop-oﬀpoints by each picking zone layout.
iii) The number of available bins, and therefore the number of parallel processed picklists in a dynamic
batching policy varies between two (Amazon, Zalando) and four (Hermes). Hence, we add an additional
parameter scan over the number of available bins κ ∈{2,3,4}, but we do not extend it to larger numbers
of bins as the cart size is limited in practice.
For cartless subtours, we assume a picker walking speed of 5 km/h, whereas this speed goes down to 4 km/h
if she is accompanied by her cart. We do not consider further variations in the picker walking speed as these
values reﬂect physical properties which are hardly alterable.
Besides these structural characteristics, the dispersion of a picklist’s pick positions, which results from
the eﬃciency of an upstream batching procedure, might signiﬁcantly impact the eﬃciency of speciﬁc picking
policies. To take this eﬀect into account, we generate picklist sequences with diﬀerent levels of dispersion.
Our instance generation scheme bases on two ideas to mimic an upstream batching procedure. First, we take
into account that in a scattered multi-depot warehouse an eﬃcient batching aims to create a picklist sequence
such that the pick positions of subsequent picklists have a maximum overlap (Weidinger et al. 2019). Second,
we consider that an eﬃcient batching aims to minimize the distance between the pick positions within each
picklist, i.e., a picklist’s level of dispersion. Note that the picklist dispersion is only one criterion for the
batch building process. For an elaboration on further criteria, e.g., the orders’ urgency and a fair division
of workload among zones, see Boysen et al. (2019). If more weight is attributed to these further criteria,
dispersed picklists need not be an indicator for a ﬂawed batch building process. Speciﬁcally, our instance
generation scheme accounts for these characteristics as follows.
(a) one drop-oﬀpoint
(b) two drop-oﬀpoints
(c) three drop-oﬀpoints
(d) four drop-oﬀpoints
(e) ﬁve drop-oﬀpoints
(f) six drop-oﬀpoints
Figure 21
Example of the diﬀerent drop-oﬀpoint conﬁgurations for a layout with three cross-aisles.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
11
We ﬁrst account for creating an eﬃcient list sequence that is still subject to some random order behavior
as follows.
1. To create a picklist sequence with n subsequent picklists, we randomly draw 3n pick positions within
the picking zone layout, each representing the center of a certain picklist.
2. We then select a cluster of n of these positions by randomly selecting one position and choosing n −1
additional positions such that the total distance between the positions in the cluster is minimal.
We then account for a picklist’s level of dispersion by limiting the pick positions of a picklist to a certain
area around its center in the picking zone. By varying this area we can then steer the level of dispersion for
each picklist.
3. To determine the pick positions of each picklist, we randomly draw pick positions within a limited area
of the picking zone, which we deﬁne based on the prior selected center of each picklist. Speciﬁcally, we
limit the area from which pick positions can be drawn by the number of aisles β ∈N to the left and
right of the center’s aisle and to the share of pick positions within an aisle γ ∈[0,1] above and below
the center’s position, cf. Figure 22. Accordingly, a picklist that has been created with a small β and γ
reﬂects an eﬃcient upstream batching, while a picklist that has been created with a large β and γ is
the result of a less eﬃcient batching where picking positions are spread over a larger area.
4. For each picklist, we randomly draw 35 positions within the respective area. By so doing, we account
for a typical bin capacity for online retailers selling small to mid-size consumer goods.
To account for diferent eﬃcient upstream batching procedures, we create instances with picklist neighbor-
hoods in the range of β ∈{2,4,6,8,12,16} and γ ∈{0.25,0.5,0.75,1.0}. We consider a full factorial design
over β and γ and create 50 instances for each setting to avoid statistical bias.
picklist center
pick position area
γ
β
Figure 22
Example of a picklist neighborhood.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
12
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
Appendix H:
Preliminary analyses of cart capacity impact
In the following, we exemplary discuss the beneﬁt of increasing the cart capacity for the most simple picking
policy with static batching, a single drop-oﬀpoint, and no cartless subtours (SB/SD/NS), which allows for
a clean analysis that is not inﬂuenced by enhanced picking policies. To this end, we generate instances as
described in Section G.2 and vary the number of consecutive picklists, considering instances with 5, 20, 35,
and 50 consecutive picklists. We create 50 instances for each consecutive picklist setting, picklist dispersion
for three- and ﬁve-cross-aisle layouts.
To analyze the impact of an increased cart capacity, we calculate the total picking time reduction (TPTR)
when increasing the cart capacity from κ = 2 to κ = 3 (∆23) or from κ = 2 to κ = 4 (∆24) related to the total
picking time with κ = 2. Additionally, we denote the improvement that can be realized by further increasing
the cart capacity from κ = 3 to κ = 4 as ∆34 = ∆24 −∆23. Analogously to Section 4.2.2, we report results
based on average relative reductions which have been calculated by ﬁrst comparing the results on a per
instance basis and then computing an average value.
Figure 23 shows the average TPTR reduction when increasing the cart capacity from κ = 2 to κ = 3 or
from κ = 3 to κ = 4 when using an SB/SD/NS policy on a three-cross-aisle layout with a single drop-oﬀpoint
for ﬁve consecutively processed picklists. As can be seen average TPTRs of up to ∆24 = 30% can be realized
by switching the cart capacity to κ = 4. However, we observe an imbalance between ∆23 and ∆34 as only up
to 8% improvement can be realized by increasing the cart capacity from κ = 3 to κ = 4. A detailed analysis
reveals that this imbalance between ∆23 and ∆34 stems from a termination eﬀect, where on the ﬁnal picking
tour, the cart cannot be loaded with bins to capacity due to the limited number of consecutive picklists.
To exclude this termination eﬀect, we analyze the resulting TPTRs for instances with a larger number
of consecutive picklists in Figure 24. Here, we observe rather stable results for settings with 20, 35, and 50
picklists, which shows that the chosen number of picklists is suﬃcient to remedy a termination eﬀect. Here,
we observe average TPTR improvements of up to ∆24 = 44% with up to ∆34 = 16% resulting from increasing
the cart capacity from κ = 3 to κ = 4. While these numbers could be interpreted as a possible improvement
potential of increasing cart capacity, two comments on these ﬁndings are in order.
2
4
6
8
12
16
0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
0
10
20
30
40
β
γ
∆[%]
∆34
∆23
Figure 23
Average TPTR for SB/SD/NS on a three-cross-aisle layout with one drop-oﬀpoint and ﬁve
consecutive picklists.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
13
2
4
6
8
12
16
0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
0
10
20
30
40
β
γ
∆[%]
∆34
∆23
(a) Average TPTR for 20 consecutive
picklists.
2
4
6
8
12
16
0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
0
10
20
30
40
β
γ
∆[%]
∆34
∆23
(b) Average TPTR for 35 consecu-
tive picklists.
2
4
6
8
12
16
0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
0
10
20
30
40
β
γ
∆[%]
∆34
∆23
(c) Average TPTR for 50 consecutive
picklists.
Figure 24
Average TPTR for SB/SD/NS on a three-cross-aisle layout with one drop-oﬀpoint dependent on
the number of consecutive picklists.
First, our results reveal that increasing cart capacity promises considerable improvements because the
picking density per tour improves with a larger cart capacity. However, in the narrow aisles of a typical
e-commerce warehouse, automated picking carts are not applicable, and handling manual carts for multiple
large batch picking bins burdens the pickers with excessive physical stress. For example, at the Hermes
warehouse (see Section 2.2), where they apply a cart capacity of κ = 4, they mainly handle light-weighed
apparel. According to our experience, for heavier and bulkier goods such a cart capacity risks the physical
health of the human workforce over the long run and considerably slows down the travel speed in the narrow
aisles. Thus, the huge improvements of larger carts promised by our experiments must be put into perspective
with these negative eﬀects on the human workforce, and more research on this trade-oﬀis necessary.
Second, to remain reactive on unforeseen change, it is our experience, that most online retailers apply
fairly short planning horizons, e.g., not exceeding planning intervals of ﬁfteen minutes, which is reﬂected
in our original experimental design with ﬁve consecutive picklists. Accordingly, a straighforward extension
of the instances’ to larger numbers of consecutive picklists allows to remedy the initial termination eﬀect
but remains a simpliﬁed approximation of analyzing the improvement potential of increased cart capacities.
In practice, retailers may apply more enhanced rolling horizon planning schemes. Analyzing the impact of
increased cart capacities in such realistic schemes in detail goes beyond the scope of this paper and would
require a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent experimental design.
Appendix I:
Detailed numerical results
This appendix shows all numerical results that have been synthesized in Section 4.2.2. We report results
based on average relative improvements, which have been calculated by ﬁrst comparing the results on a
per-instance basis and then computing an average value.
We describe each picking policy with three identiﬁers, where the ﬁrst (SB,DB) indicates whether batching
is static (SB) or dynamic (DB), the second (SD,MD) indicates whether a single (SD) or multiple (MD)
drop-oﬀpoints are used, and the third (NS,CS) indicates whether cartless subtours are allowed (CS) or
not (NS).

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
14
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
To quantify the improvement potential of each picking zone layout and policy, we show the average relative
improvement in the total picking time for each setting and κ related to the average total picking time realized
with a single depot and the most elementary picking policy (SB/SD/NS). Note that if a policy does not
allow for multiple drop-oﬀpoints, the comparison is skipped.
I.1.
Results for cart capacity κ = 2
Table 6
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 2, γ = 0.25.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-1.1
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-3.3
-
-
-
-
-
-4.0
-
-
-
-
-
-1.8
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-8.5 -18.4 -18.9 -20.1 -20.4
0.0 -11.2 -21.8 -22.7 -23.6 -24.3
-1.1 -4.3 -5.4 -6.0 -5.4 -6.1
SB/MD/CS
-3.3 -11.7 -22.3 -22.7 -24.1 -24.4
-4.0 -14.7 -25.9 -26.7 -27.6 -28.3
-1.8 -4.7 -5.8 -6.3 -5.8 -6.3
DB/SD/NS
-3.4
-
-
-
-
-
-3.1
-
-
-
-
-
-0.8
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-6.4
-
-
-
-
-
-6.9
-
-
-
-
-
-1.6
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-3.4 -12.2 -22.2 -22.9 -23.8 -24.3
-3.1 -14.6 -24.9 -25.8 -26.6 -27.4
-0.8 -4.0 -4.6 -4.9 -4.7 -5.2
DB/MD/CS
-6.4 -15.2 -25.5 -26.1 -27.2 -27.6
-6.9 -17.8 -28.7 -29.5 -30.4 -31.1
-1.6 -4.4 -5.3 -5.6 -5.4 -5.8
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference
value. Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD
- multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 7
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 4, γ = 0.25.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-3.1
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-5.5
-
-
-
-
-
-5.2
-
-
-
-
-
-2.8
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-5.1 -11.3 -12.3 -12.8 -13.6
0.0
-5.7 -14.4 -15.1 -15.8 -16.4
-3.1 -3.7 -6.4 -6.1 -6.3 -6.1
SB/MD/CS
-5.5 -10.2 -17.2 -17.9 -18.8 -19.3
-5.2
-9.8 -19.4 -19.8 -20.9 -21.2
-2.8 -2.7 -5.7 -5.4 -5.7 -5.4
DB/SD/NS
-4.5
-
-
-
-
-
-4.4
-
-
-
-
-
-3.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-9.2
-
-
-
-
-
-9.3
-
-
-
-
-
-3.2
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-4.5
-9.7 -16.0 -17.1 -17.4 -18.3
-4.4 -10.0 -18.6 -19.2 -20.0 -20.5
-3.0 -3.4 -6.1 -5.5 -6.1 -5.6
DB/MD/CS
-9.2 -14.0 -21.1 -22.0 -22.5 -23.2
-9.3 -13.7 -23.4 -23.6 -24.8 -24.9
-3.2 -2.8 -5.9 -5.2 -5.9 -5.3
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference
value. Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD
- multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 8
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 6, γ = 0.25.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-2.8
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-4.7
-
-
-
-
-
-5.5
-
-
-
-
-
-3.6
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-3.9
-7.5
-8.3
-8.6
-9.2
0.0
-4.5
-9.4 -10.2 -10.6 -11.2
-2.8 -3.5 -4.9 -4.9 -5.1 -5.0
SB/MD/CS
-4.7
-7.2 -11.9 -12.5 -13.0 -13.5
-5.5
-8.7 -14.8 -15.2 -16.1 -16.3
-3.6 -4.5 -6.1 -5.9 -6.2 -6.0
DB/SD/NS
-4.1
-
-
-
-
-
-3.3
-
-
-
-
-
-2.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-8.4
-
-
-
-
-
-8.6
-
-
-
-
-
-3.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-4.1
-8.1 -11.6 -12.7 -12.7 -13.6
-3.3
-8.3 -13.5 -14.4 -14.7 -15.4
-2.0 -3.0 -4.9 -4.7 -5.0 -4.8
DB/MD/CS
-8.4 -11.1 -15.6 -16.4 -16.8 -17.3
-8.6 -12.2 -18.5 -19.0 -19.7 -20.1
-3.0 -4.0 -6.1 -5.8 -6.3 -6.0
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference
value. Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD
- multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
15
Table 9
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 8, γ = 0.25.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
1.4
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-4.5
-
-
-
-
-
-4.6
-
-
-
-
-
1.2
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-6.0
-6.4
-8.5
-7.4
-9.0
0.0
-3.5
-5.5
-6.6
-6.3
-7.3
1.4 4.1 2.4 3.4 2.5
3.3
SB/MD/CS
-4.5
-7.5
-9.9 -10.8 -10.7 -11.5
-4.6
-6.6
-9.7 -10.2 -10.5 -10.9
1.2 2.5 1.6 2.1 1.6
2.1
DB/SD/NS
-4.5
-
-
-
-
-
-4.9
-4.9
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-8.7
-
-
-
-
-
-9.4
-9.4
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-4.5 -11.1 -11.3 -13.6 -12.3 -14.2
-4.9
-8.5 -10.6 -11.8 -11.5 -12.4
0.9 4.4 2.2 3.5 2.4
3.5
DB/MD/CS
-8.7 -12.3 -14.4 -15.6 -15.2 -16.3
-9.4 -11.3 -14.4 -15.0 -15.1 -15.6
0.7 2.7 1.4 2.1 1.5
2.2
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve
cross-aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the
deviation between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as
reference value. Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀ
point, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of
drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 10
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 12, γ = 0.25.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-6.1
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-5.0
-
-
-
-
-
-5.7
-
-
-
-
-
-6.8
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-6.1 -13.7 -14.0 -14.8 -15.0
0.0
-8.4 -16.6 -17.2 -17.8 -18.2
-6.1 -8.8
-9.5
-9.8
-9.5
-9.8
SB/MD/CS
-5.0 -11.0 -19.2 -19.4 -20.3 -20.5
-5.7 -14.0 -22.5 -23.0 -23.7 -24.1
-6.8 -9.5 -10.1 -10.5 -10.2 -10.5
DB/SD/NS
-4.6
-
-
-
-
-
-4.4
-
-
-
-
-
-6.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-8.8
-
-
-
-
-
-9.5
-
-
-
-
-
-6.8
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-4.6 -10.7 -18.6 -19.0 -19.7 -20.0
-4.4 -13.3 -21.2 -21.9 -22.3 -22.8
-6.0 -9.1
-9.2
-9.6
-9.2
-9.6
DB/MD/CS
-8.8 -15.0 -23.2 -23.6 -24.3 -24.6
-9.5 -18.1 -26.3 -26.9 -27.4 -27.8
-6.8 -9.8 -10.0 -10.3 -10.0 -10.3
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value.
Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple
drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 11
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 16, γ = 0.25.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-6.5
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-6.8
-
-
-
-
-
-5.9
-
-
-
-
-
-5.7
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-2.9
-8.0
-8.4
-8.9
-9.2
0.0
-3.5
-9.8
-9.9 -10.6 -10.7
-6.5 -7.1 -8.3 -8.1 -8.3 -8.1
SB/MD/CS
-6.8
-9.8 -15.4 -15.5 -16.3 -16.4
-5.9
-9.0 -15.8 -16.0 -16.7 -16.8
-5.7 -5.8 -7.2 -7.1 -7.1 -7.1
DB/SD/NS
-4.5
-
-
-
-
-
-4.2
-
-
-
-
-
-6.2
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-10.5
-
-
-
-
-
-9.7
-
-
-
-
-
-5.7
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-4.5
-7.4 -12.9 -13.3 -13.7 -14.0
-4.2
-7.6 -13.9 -14.1 -14.7 -14.8
-6.2 -6.7 -7.6 -7.3 -7.6 -7.4
DB/MD/CS
-10.5 -13.2 -19.1 -19.4 -20.0 -20.2
-9.7 -12.8 -19.4 -19.5 -20.3 -20.3
-5.7 -6.1 -7.0 -6.9 -6.9 -6.8
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value.
Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD -
multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
16
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
Table 12
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 2, γ = 0.5.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-8.5
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-6.2
-
-
-
-
-
-6.1
-
-
-
-
-
-8.4
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-1.3
-4.5
-4.7
-5.1
-5.3
0.0
-2.3
-6.3
-6.5
-6.9
-7.0
-8.5 -9.4 -10.2 -10.2 -10.3 -10.2
SB/MD/CS
-6.2
-7.1 -11.0 -11.1 -11.6 -11.7
-6.1
-8.2 -12.6 -12.8 -13.2 -13.3
-8.4 -9.5 -10.2 -10.2 -10.2 -10.2
DB/SD/NS
-5.9
-
-
-
-
-
-5.3
-
-
-
-
-
-7.8
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-11.1
-
-
-
-
-
-10.5
-
-
-
-
-
-7.8
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-5.9
-7.2 -10.7 -10.9 -11.2 -11.5
-5.3
-7.2 -11.6 -11.8 -12.2 -12.3
-7.8 -8.5
-9.3
-9.3
-9.4
-9.3
DB/MD/CS
-11.1 -12.2 -16.1 -16.3 -16.8 -16.9
-10.5 -12.4 -17.2 -17.3 -17.8 -17.8
-7.8 -8.6
-9.6
-9.5
-9.5
-9.4
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations
hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints,
NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 13
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 4, γ = 0.5.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-2.0
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-4.3
-
-
-
-
-
-5.1
-
-
-
-
-
-2.8
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0 -1.4
-3.8
-4.2
-4.4
-4.6
0.0 -1.2
-3.5
-3.8
-4.0
-4.2
-2.0 -1.7 -1.6 -1.6 -1.5 -1.5
SB/MD/CS
-4.3 -5.2
-7.9
-8.1
-8.4
-8.6
-5.1 -6.5
-8.9
-9.2
-9.3
-9.5
-2.8 -3.3 -3.1 -3.2 -3.0 -3.0
DB/SD/NS
-4.2
-
-
-
-
-
-3.8
-
-
-
-
-
-1.5
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-7.9
-
-
-
-
-
-8.5
-
-
-
-
-
-2.6
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-4.2 -5.8
-8.3
-8.7
-8.9
-9.2
-3.8 -5.0
-7.5
-7.8
-7.9
-8.1
-1.5 -1.1 -1.0 -0.9 -0.9 -0.8
DB/MD/CS
-7.9 -8.9 -11.9 -12.1 -12.3 -12.6
-8.5 -9.8 -12.4 -12.7 -12.8 -13.0
-2.6 -3.0 -2.6 -2.6 -2.4 -2.4
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve
cross-aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows
the deviation between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings
as reference value. Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single
drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number
of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 14
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 6, γ = 0.5.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-11.8
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-7.2
-
-
-
-
-
-6.4
-
-
-
-
-
-10.9
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-4.6 -10.5 -10.6 -11.4 -11.5
0.0
-5.8 -13.4 -13.7 -14.2 -14.4
-11.8 -13.0 -14.8 -14.9 -14.7 -14.8
SB/MD/CS
-7.2 -11.9 -18.2 -18.3 -19.1 -19.1
-6.4 -12.0 -19.9 -20.1 -20.7 -20.8
-10.9 -12.0 -13.6 -13.8 -13.6 -13.7
DB/SD/NS
-4.5
-
-
-
-
-
-2.9
-
-
-
-
-
-10.3
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-10.7
-
-
-
-
-
-8.7
-
-
-
-
-
-9.8
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-4.5
-8.8 -15.3 -15.4 -16.2 -16.2
-2.9
-8.7 -16.7 -16.9 -17.6 -17.7
-10.3 -11.7 -13.2 -13.3 -13.3 -13.3
DB/MD/CS
-10.7 -15.0 -22.0 -22.1 -22.8 -22.9
-8.7 -14.2 -22.7 -22.8 -23.4 -23.5
-9.8 -11.0 -12.5 -12.5 -12.5 -12.5
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations
hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints,
NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
17
Table 15
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 8, γ = 0.5.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-8.8
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-7.9
-
-
-
-
-
-6.5
-
-
-
-
-
-7.5
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-2.9
-6.5
-6.8
-7.3
-7.4
0.0
-3.6
-8.4
-8.5
-9.1
-9.2
-8.8 -9.6 -10.6 -10.5 -10.6 -10.5
SB/MD/CS
-7.9 -11.0 -15.1 -15.3 -16.0 -16.0
-6.5 -10.2 -15.1 -15.2 -15.9 -15.9
-7.5 -8.1
-8.9
-8.9
-8.8
-8.8
DB/SD/NS
-4.1
-
-
-
-
-
-3.8
-
-
-
-
-
-8.5
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-11.1
-
-
-
-
-
-9.8
-
-
-
-
-
-7.5
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-4.1
-7.3 -10.9 -11.2 -11.7 -11.9
-3.8
-7.6 -12.5 -12.7 -13.2 -13.3
-8.5 -9.1 -10.4 -10.3 -10.3 -10.2
DB/MD/CS
-11.1 -14.3 -18.5 -18.6 -19.3 -19.4
-9.8 -13.5 -18.8 -18.9 -19.4 -19.4
-7.5 -8.1
-9.2
-9.2
-8.9
-8.9
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations
hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints,
NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 16
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 12, γ = 0.5.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-12.3
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-7.2
-
-
-
-
-
-6.8
-
-
-
-
-
-11.9
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.7
-2.9
-3.0
-3.5
-3.5
0.0
-2.2
-4.9
-5.1
-5.3
-5.5
-12.3 -13.6 -14.1 -14.2 -14.0 -14.1
SB/MD/CS
-7.2
-8.4 -10.6 -10.8 -11.2 -11.3
-6.8
-9.3 -12.1 -12.3 -12.5 -12.6
-11.9 -13.2 -13.8 -13.8 -13.6 -13.6
DB/SD/NS
-3.8
-
-
-
-
-
-2.8
-
-
-
-
-
-11.4
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-10.1
-
-
-
-
-
-9.3
-
-
-
-
-
-11.5
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-3.8
-4.8
-7.1
-7.2
-7.6
-7.7
-2.8
-5.4
-7.9
-8.3
-8.4
-8.6
-11.4 -12.8 -13.1 -13.3 -13.0 -13.2
DB/MD/CS
-10.1 -11.4 -13.6 -13.9 -14.2 -14.4
-9.3 -11.9 -14.8 -15.1 -15.3 -15.5
-11.5 -12.9 -13.5 -13.6 -13.4 -13.3
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations
hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints,
NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 17
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 16, γ = 0.5.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-6.4
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-5.6
-
-
-
-
-
-6.4
-
-
-
-
-
-7.2
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.8
-3.0
-3.1
-3.3
-3.4
0.0
-1.3
-3.1
-3.3
-3.3
-3.5
-6.4 -6.9 -6.5 -6.6 -6.4 -6.5
SB/MD/CS
-5.6
-6.5
-8.3
-8.4
-8.6
-8.8
-6.4
-7.8
-9.7
-9.9
-9.9 -10.1
-7.2 -7.7 -7.8 -7.9 -7.7 -7.8
DB/SD/NS
-4.3
-
-
-
-
-
-3.9
-
-
-
-
-
-6.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-9.4
-
-
-
-
-
-9.9
-
-
-
-
-
-6.9
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-4.3
-5.1
-7.5
-7.7
-7.9
-8.0
-3.9
-5.2
-7.1
-7.4
-7.5
-7.7
-6.0 -6.5 -6.0 -6.1 -5.9 -6.0
DB/MD/CS
-9.4 -10.4 -12.4 -12.5 -12.8 -12.9
-9.9 -11.1 -13.2 -13.4 -13.4 -13.5
-6.9 -7.2 -7.2 -7.3 -7.0 -7.1
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference
value. Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD
- multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
18
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
Table 18
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 2, γ = 0.75.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-11.8
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-8.7
-
-
-
-
-
-7.3
-
-
-
-
-
-10.3
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-3.8
-8.9
-9.0
-9.7
-9.7
0.0
-5.3 -12.0 -12.2 -12.8 -12.9
-11.8 -13.3 -14.8 -15.0 -14.8 -15.0
SB/MD/CS
-8.7 -12.5 -18.2 -18.2 -18.9 -18.9
-7.3 -12.5 -19.5 -19.7 -20.3 -20.4
-10.3 -11.9 -13.2 -13.4 -13.2 -13.3
DB/SD/NS
-2.5
-
-
-
-
-
-2.5
-
-
-
-
-
-11.7
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-10.8
-
-
-
-
-
-9.3
-
-
-
-
-
-10.2
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-2.5
-6.3 -11.5 -11.6 -12.3 -12.3
-2.5
-7.9 -14.5 -14.8 -15.4 -15.6
-11.7 -13.3 -14.8 -15.1 -14.9 -15.1
DB/MD/CS
-10.8 -14.5 -20.3 -20.4 -21.0 -21.0
-9.3 -14.5 -21.6 -21.9 -22.4 -22.6
-10.2 -11.8 -13.1 -13.4 -13.2 -13.4
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations
hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints,
NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 19
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 4, γ = 0.75.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-12.0
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-9.3
-
-
-
-
-
-7.5
-
-
-
-
-
-10.4
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-2.3
-5.0
-5.2
-5.6
-5.7
0.0
-3.5
-7.2
-7.2
-7.7
-7.7
-12.0 -13.2 -14.1 -13.9 -14.0 -13.9
SB/MD/CS
-9.3 -11.8 -15.0 -15.0 -15.6 -15.6
-7.5 -11.0 -14.6 -14.7 -15.1 -15.1
-10.4 -11.4 -11.8 -11.8 -11.7 -11.7
DB/SD/NS
-4.0
-
-
-
-
-
-3.0
-
-
-
-
-
-11.2
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-12.4
-
-
-
-
-
-10.1
-
-
-
-
-
-9.8
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-4.0
-6.3
-9.1
-9.2
-9.6
-9.6
-3.0
-6.6 -10.4 -10.5 -11.0 -11.1
-11.2 -12.3 -13.3 -13.2 -13.3 -13.3
DB/MD/CS
-12.4 -15.0 -18.0 -18.1 -18.6 -18.7
-10.1 -13.7 -17.4 -17.5 -18.0 -18.0
-9.8 -10.9 -11.5 -11.5 -11.4 -11.4
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 20
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 6, γ = 0.75.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-15.6
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-8.6
-
-
-
-
-
-7.8
-
-
-
-
-
-15.0
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.6
-2.0
-2.2
-2.4
-2.5
0.0
-2.1
-3.4
-3.6
-3.8
-3.9
-15.6 -16.9 -16.9 -16.8 -16.9 -16.8
SB/MD/CS
-8.6
-9.6 -10.9 -11.1 -11.3 -11.4
-7.8 -10.1 -11.6 -11.8 -11.9 -12.0
-15.0 -16.1 -16.2 -16.2 -16.2 -16.2
DB/SD/NS
-3.9
-
-
-
-
-
-3.6
-
-
-
-
-
-15.3
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-11.7
-
-
-
-
-
-10.7
-
-
-
-
-
-14.7
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-3.9
-4.6
-6.1
-6.2
-6.5
-6.6
-3.6
-5.7
-7.0
-7.3
-7.5
-7.7
-15.3 -16.5 -16.4 -16.6 -16.5 -16.6
DB/MD/CS
-11.7 -12.8 -14.1 -14.3 -14.5 -14.7
-10.7 -13.1 -14.6 -14.9 -14.9 -15.1
-14.7 -15.9 -16.1 -16.2 -16.0 -16.0
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
19
Table 21
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 8, γ = 0.75.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-9.0
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-6.9
-
-
-
-
-
-7.1
-
-
-
-
-
-9.3
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.6
-1.7
-1.8
-1.9
-2.0
0.0
-0.9
-1.5
-1.7
-1.7
-1.9
-9.0 -9.4 -8.9 -8.9 -8.9 -8.9
SB/MD/CS
-6.9
-7.6
-8.2
-8.4
-8.5
-8.6
-7.1
-8.3
-8.7
-9.1
-9.0
-9.2
-9.3 -9.7 -9.5 -9.7 -9.6 -9.7
DB/SD/NS
-4.2
-
-
-
-
-
-4.2
-
-
-
-
-
-9.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-10.7
-
-
-
-
-
-10.9
-
-
-
-
-
-9.2
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-4.2
-4.9
-6.1
-6.3
-6.4
-6.6
-4.2
-5.3
-5.8
-6.2
-6.2
-6.5
-9.0 -9.4 -8.7 -8.9 -8.8 -8.9
DB/MD/CS
-10.7 -11.5 -12.1 -12.4 -12.5 -12.7
-10.9 -12.0 -12.5 -12.9 -12.8 -13.1
-9.2 -9.6 -9.4 -9.6 -9.3 -9.5
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value.
Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD -
multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 22
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 12, γ = 0.75.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-14.9
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-10.3
-
-
-
-
-
-8.2
-
-
-
-
-
-12.8
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-3.3
-7.6
-7.7
-8.4
-8.5
0.0
-4.5 -10.2 -10.3 -10.9 -11.0
-14.9 -16.0 -17.3 -17.4 -17.2 -17.3
SB/MD/CS
-10.3 -13.6 -18.5 -18.5 -19.2 -19.2
-8.2 -12.8 -18.5 -18.6 -19.2 -19.3
-12.8 -14.0 -14.8 -14.9 -14.8 -14.8
DB/SD/NS
-3.2
-
-
-
-
-
-3.3
-
-
-
-
-
-15.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-12.9
-
-
-
-
-
-11.1
-
-
-
-
-
-13.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-3.2
-6.6 -10.9 -10.9 -11.6 -11.6
-3.3
-7.9 -13.5 -13.6 -14.2 -14.3
-15.0 -16.1 -17.4 -17.4 -17.4 -17.5
DB/MD/CS
-12.9 -16.1 -21.1 -21.1 -21.8 -21.8
-11.1 -15.6 -21.3 -21.4 -22.1 -22.2
-13.0 -14.3 -14.9 -15.0 -15.0 -15.1
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 23
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 16, γ = 0.75.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-15.7
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-10.9
-
-
-
-
-
-8.9
-
-
-
-
-
-13.9
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-1.2
-3.6
-3.6
-4.1
-4.2
0.0
-2.1
-5.1
-5.1
-5.6
-5.6
-15.7 -16.5 -17.0 -17.0 -17.0 -17.0
SB/MD/CS
-10.9 -12.4 -15.0 -15.0 -15.5 -15.6
-8.9 -11.1 -13.9 -14.0 -14.4 -14.4
-13.9 -14.5 -14.7 -14.7 -14.6 -14.6
DB/SD/NS
-3.3
-
-
-
-
-
-2.8
-
-
-
-
-
-15.3
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-13.5
-
-
-
-
-
-11.2
-
-
-
-
-
-13.5
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-3.3
-4.6
-7.1
-7.2
-7.7
-7.7
-2.8
-4.9
-8.0
-8.1
-8.7
-8.7
-15.3 -16.0 -16.5 -16.4 -16.6 -16.5
DB/MD/CS
-13.5 -15.0 -17.7 -17.8 -18.3 -18.4
-11.2 -13.5 -16.4 -16.5 -16.8 -16.8
-13.5 -14.3 -14.4 -14.4 -14.1 -14.1
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
20
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
Table 24
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 2, γ = 1.0.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-20.8
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-10.6
-
-
-
-
-
-8.7
-
-
-
-
-
-19.2
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.4
-1.4
-1.5
-1.7
-1.8
0.0
-1.2
-2.2
-2.4
-2.5
-2.6
-20.8 -21.5 -21.5 -21.5 -21.4 -21.4
SB/MD/CS
-10.6 -11.3 -11.9 -12.1 -12.2 -12.3
-8.7 -10.0 -11.2 -11.4 -11.5 -11.6
-19.2 -19.7 -20.2 -20.1 -20.2 -20.1
DB/SD/NS
-3.7
-
-
-
-
-
-3.1
-
-
-
-
-
-20.3
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-13.6
-
-
-
-
-
-11.4
-
-
-
-
-
-18.8
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-3.7
-4.1
-5.2
-5.3
-5.6
-5.7
-3.1
-4.5
-5.5
-5.6
-5.7
-5.8
-20.3 -21.1 -21.0 -21.0 -20.9 -20.9
DB/MD/CS
-13.6 -14.2 -15.0 -15.1 -15.3 -15.4
-11.4 -12.7 -13.9 -14.0 -14.3 -14.3
-18.8 -19.4 -19.8 -19.7 -19.8 -19.7
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 25
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 4, γ = 1.0.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-13.6
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-8.6
-
-
-
-
-
-8.0
-
-
-
-
-
-13.0
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.1
-1.2
-1.3
0.0
-1.0
-1.0
-1.3
-1.2
-1.4
-13.6 -14.1 -13.7 -13.8 -13.7 -13.8
SB/MD/CS
-8.6
-9.4
-9.4
-9.6
-9.5
-9.7
-8.0
-9.1
-9.1
-9.4
-9.3
-9.5
-13.0 -13.4 -13.3 -13.4 -13.4 -13.5
DB/SD/NS
-3.8
-
-
-
-
-
-3.5
-
-
-
-
-
-13.4
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-12.0
-
-
-
-
-
-10.7
-
-
-
-
-
-12.4
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-3.8
-4.4
-5.0
-5.2
-5.2
-5.3
-3.5
-4.5
-4.5
-4.9
-4.7
-5.0
-13.4 -13.8 -13.2 -13.4 -13.2 -13.4
DB/MD/CS
-12.0 -12.7 -12.9 -13.1 -13.0 -13.2
-10.7 -11.9 -11.9 -12.3 -12.1 -12.4
-12.4 -12.8 -12.7 -12.9 -12.8 -12.9
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 26
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 6, γ = 1.0.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-15.9
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-11.2
-
-
-
-
-
-9.4
-
-
-
-
-
-14.1
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-2.4
-7.4
-7.4
-7.9
-7.9
0.0
-4.0
-9.8
-9.8 -10.4 -10.4
-15.9 -17.3 -18.1 -18.1 -18.2 -18.2
SB/MD/CS
-11.2 -13.5 -19.0 -19.0 -19.5 -19.5
-9.4 -13.4 -19.1 -19.1 -19.6 -19.7
-14.1 -15.7 -15.9 -15.9 -15.8 -15.9
DB/SD/NS
-2.8
-
-
-
-
-
-2.2
-
-
-
-
-
-15.4
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-13.4
-
-
-
-
-
-11.3
-
-
-
-
-
-13.6
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-2.8
-5.4 -10.3 -10.3 -10.9 -10.9
-2.2
-6.2 -12.2 -12.2 -12.9 -12.9
-15.4 -16.6 -17.7 -17.7 -17.7 -17.7
DB/MD/CS
-13.4 -16.0 -21.4 -21.4 -22.0 -22.0
-11.3 -15.3 -21.2 -21.2 -21.7 -21.8
-13.6 -15.1 -15.4 -15.5 -15.3 -15.4
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
21
Table 27
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 8, γ = 1.0.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-17.1
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-11.0
-
-
-
-
-
-9.4
-
-
-
-
-
-15.7
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-1.8
-4.6
-4.6
-5.0
-5.0
0.0
-2.5
-5.4
-5.4
-5.7
-5.7
-17.1 -17.8 -17.8 -17.8 -17.7 -17.7
SB/MD/CS
-11.0 -13.1 -15.9 -15.9 -16.3 -16.3
-9.4 -12.0 -14.6 -14.6 -14.8 -14.8
-15.7 -16.2 -15.9 -15.9 -15.7 -15.7
DB/SD/NS
-3.2
-
-
-
-
-
-2.9
-
-
-
-
-
-16.9
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-13.6
-
-
-
-
-
-11.7
-
-
-
-
-
-15.3
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-3.2
-5.0
-7.8
-7.8
-8.2
-8.2
-2.9
-5.5
-8.5
-8.5
-8.9
-8.9
-16.9 -17.6 -17.8 -17.8 -17.7 -17.8
DB/MD/CS
-13.6 -15.7 -18.5 -18.5 -19.0 -19.0
-11.7 -14.3 -16.9 -17.0 -17.4 -17.4
-15.3 -15.9 -15.6 -15.6 -15.5 -15.5
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 28
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 12, γ = 1.0.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-22.4
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-11.3
-
-
-
-
-
-8.9
-
-
-
-
-
-20.3
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.4
-1.8
-1.8
-2.0
-2.0
0.0
-1.3
-2.4
-2.5
-2.6
-2.7
-22.4 -23.2 -23.0 -23.0 -23.0 -23.0
SB/MD/CS
-11.3 -12.1 -13.1 -13.1 -13.3 -13.3
-8.9 -10.2 -11.5 -11.6 -11.7 -11.8
-20.3 -20.8 -21.0 -21.0 -21.0 -21.0
DB/SD/NS
-3.8
-
-
-
-
-
-3.1
-
-
-
-
-
-21.9
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-14.2
-
-
-
-
-
-11.3
-
-
-
-
-
-19.8
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-3.8
-4.3
-5.8
-5.8
-6.2
-6.2
-3.1
-4.5
-5.8
-5.8
-6.1
-6.1
-21.9 -22.6 -22.5 -22.5 -22.3 -22.3
DB/MD/CS
-14.2 -15.1 -16.2 -16.2 -16.5 -16.5
-11.3 -12.8 -14.1 -14.2 -14.4 -14.4
-19.8 -20.4 -20.5 -20.5 -20.4 -20.5
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 29
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 2, β = 16, γ = 1.0.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-15.8
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-9.4
-
-
-
-
-
-7.9
-
-
-
-
-
-14.4
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.4
-1.1
-1.1
-1.2
-1.3
0.0
-0.7
-0.9
-1.1
-1.1
-1.2
-15.8 -16.0 -15.7 -15.8 -15.8 -15.8
SB/MD/CS
-9.4
-9.9 -10.2 -10.3 -10.3 -10.4
-7.9
-8.7
-8.9
-9.1
-9.2
-9.3
-14.4 -14.7 -14.7 -14.7 -14.8 -14.8
DB/SD/NS
-3.9
-
-
-
-
-
-3.3
-
-
-
-
-
-15.3
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-12.8
-
-
-
-
-
-10.6
-
-
-
-
-
-13.8
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-3.9
-4.4
-5.2
-5.3
-5.5
-5.6
-3.3
-4.0
-4.3
-4.4
-4.5
-4.6
-15.3 -15.4 -15.0 -15.1 -15.0 -14.9
DB/MD/CS
-12.8 -13.3 -13.7 -13.8 -13.9 -14.0
-10.6 -11.6 -11.7 -12.0 -12.0 -12.1
-13.8 -14.1 -13.9 -14.0 -14.0 -14.0
The table shows for κ = 2 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
22
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
I.2.
Results for cart capacity κ = 3
Table 30
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 2, γ = 0.25.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-1.8
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-3.5
-
-
-
-
-
-4.0
-
-
-
-
-
-2.3
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-5.9 -12.5 -12.7 -13.5 -13.6
0.0
-7.7 -15.0 -15.2 -16.0 -16.1
-1.8 -3.7 -4.7 -4.7 -4.8 -4.7
SB/MD/CS
-3.5
-9.4 -16.3 -16.5 -17.3 -17.4
-4.0 -11.6 -19.2 -19.3 -20.2 -20.3
-2.3 -4.2 -5.2 -5.2 -5.2 -5.2
DB/SD/NS
-4.0
-
-
-
-
-
-3.1
-
-
-
-
-
-1.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-6.9
-
-
-
-
-
-6.8
-
-
-
-
-
-1.8
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-4.0 -10.2 -16.4 -16.7 -17.3 -17.5
-3.1 -11.2 -17.7 -18.3 -18.7 -19.2
-1.0 -2.9 -3.3 -3.7 -3.4 -3.8
DB/MD/CS
-6.9 -13.1 -19.8 -20.0 -20.6 -20.7
-6.8 -14.6 -21.4 -22.0 -22.5 -22.9
-1.8 -3.5 -3.9 -4.3 -4.2 -4.5
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference
value. Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD
- multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 31
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 4, γ = 0.25.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-4.0
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-4.9
-
-
-
-
-
-4.6
-
-
-
-
-
-3.7
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-2.9
-7.7
-7.8
-8.4
-8.4
0.0
-3.2
-9.3
-9.4 -10.0 -10.0
-4.0 -4.2 -5.7 -5.6 -5.6 -5.6
SB/MD/CS
-4.9
-7.7 -12.9 -13.1 -13.6 -13.7
-4.6
-7.5 -14.3 -14.4 -14.8 -14.8
-3.7 -3.9 -5.5 -5.4 -5.4 -5.4
DB/SD/NS
-5.9
-
-
-
-
-
-4.3
-
-
-
-
-
-2.2
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-9.8
-
-
-
-
-
-8.6
-
-
-
-
-
-2.7
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-5.9
-9.1 -14.0 -14.2 -14.7 -14.9
-4.3
-8.7 -14.6 -14.9 -15.3 -15.6
-2.2 -3.5 -4.5 -4.6 -4.5 -4.6
DB/MD/CS
-9.8 -12.9 -18.3 -18.5 -19.1 -19.3
-8.6 -12.1 -18.8 -18.9 -19.5 -19.6
-2.7 -3.1 -4.5 -4.4 -4.4 -4.3
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference
value. Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD
- multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 32
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 6, γ = 0.25.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-3.0
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-3.5
-
-
-
-
-
-4.8
-
-
-
-
-
-4.3
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-1.9
-4.7
-4.8
-5.3
-5.3
0.0
-2.4
-5.8
-6.0
-6.3
-6.4
-3.0 -3.6 -4.1 -4.2 -4.0 -4.2
SB/MD/CS
-3.5
-5.4
-8.7
-8.8
-9.2
-9.3
-4.8
-6.9 -10.8 -11.0 -11.4 -11.5
-4.3 -4.6 -5.3 -5.4 -5.4 -5.4
DB/SD/NS
-5.4
-
-
-
-
-
-4.0
-
-
-
-
-
-1.6
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-8.6
-
-
-
-
-
-8.6
-
-
-
-
-
-3.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-5.4
-8.7 -11.1 -11.5 -11.7 -12.0
-4.0
-8.7 -10.9 -11.6 -11.6 -12.1
-1.6 -3.0 -2.8 -3.0 -2.8 -3.0
DB/MD/CS
-8.6 -11.3 -14.2 -14.5 -14.8 -15.0
-8.6 -12.1 -15.5 -15.9 -16.2 -16.4
-3.0 -3.8 -4.5 -4.5 -4.5 -4.6
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference
value. Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD
- multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
23
Table 33
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 8, γ = 0.25.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
3.7
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-2.7
-
-
-
-
-
-4.1
-
-
-
-
-
2.3
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-4.6
-4.4
-5.6
-5.1
-6.1
0.0
-3.6
-4.1
-5.1
-4.7
-5.5
3.7 4.8 4.1 4.4 4.3
4.4
SB/MD/CS
-2.7
-5.8
-6.8
-7.5
-7.5
-8.1
-4.1
-6.4
-7.7
-8.4
-8.3
-8.8
2.3 3.2 2.7 2.8 2.9
3.0
DB/SD/NS
-2.9
-
-
-
-
-
-3.7
-
-
-
-
-
2.8
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-5.8
-
-
-
-
-
-7.7
-
-
-
-
-
1.7
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-2.9
-9.1
-8.9 -10.6
-9.6 -11.0
-3.7
-8.1
-8.4
-9.5
-9.2
-9.9
2.8 5.0 4.3 5.1 4.3
5.1
DB/MD/CS
-5.8 -10.6 -10.9 -12.2 -11.7 -12.7
-7.7 -10.3 -11.6 -12.3 -12.2 -12.7
1.7 4.2 3.0 3.8 3.2
3.8
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve
cross-aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the
deviation between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as
reference value. Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀ
point, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of
drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 34
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 12, γ = 0.25.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-6.2
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-5.0
-
-
-
-
-
-5.4
-
-
-
-
-
-6.7
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-4.0
-9.1
-9.1
-9.9
-9.9
0.0
-5.5 -11.4 -11.6 -12.0 -12.2
-6.2 -7.7 -8.5 -8.7 -8.4 -8.5
SB/MD/CS
-5.0
-9.0 -14.4 -14.4 -15.2 -15.2
-5.4 -10.8 -16.8 -17.0 -17.5 -17.6
-6.7 -8.2 -8.8 -8.9 -8.7 -8.9
DB/SD/NS
-4.5
-
-
-
-
-
-3.5
-
-
-
-
-
-5.3
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-8.3
-
-
-
-
-
-8.2
-
-
-
-
-
-6.1
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-4.5
-8.7 -13.9 -14.0 -14.8 -14.8
-3.5
-9.2 -14.7 -15.0 -15.4 -15.6
-5.3 -6.8 -7.0 -7.3 -6.9 -7.1
DB/MD/CS
-8.3 -12.6 -17.9 -18.0 -18.8 -18.8
-8.2 -13.8 -19.4 -19.6 -20.2 -20.4
-6.1 -7.7 -8.0 -8.2 -8.0 -8.1
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference
value. Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD
- multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 35
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 16, γ = 0.25.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-5.6
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-6.3
-
-
-
-
-
-5.5
-
-
-
-
-
-5.0
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-2.0
-5.3
-5.5
-5.9
-6.1
0.0
-2.2
-6.5
-6.6
-7.0
-7.0
-5.6 -5.8 -6.8 -6.6 -6.7 -6.5
SB/MD/CS
-6.3
-8.3 -12.2 -12.3 -12.7 -12.8
-5.5
-7.6 -12.3 -12.3 -12.7 -12.7
-5.0 -5.0 -5.9 -5.8 -5.8 -5.6
DB/SD/NS
-5.7
-
-
-
-
-
-4.3
-
-
-
-
-
-4.3
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-10.7
-
-
-
-
-
-9.7
-
-
-
-
-
-4.7
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-5.7
-8.0 -11.6 -12.0 -12.3 -12.6
-4.3
-6.8 -11.0 -11.1 -11.7 -11.8
-4.3 -4.4 -4.9 -4.6 -4.9 -4.6
DB/MD/CS
-10.7 -13.2 -17.0 -17.2 -17.6 -17.8
-9.7 -11.8 -16.2 -16.3 -16.8 -16.8
-4.7 -4.2 -4.8 -4.6 -4.7 -4.5
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value.
Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD -
multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
24
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
Table 36
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 2, γ = 0.5.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-5.6
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-4.5
-
-
-
-
-
-5.5
-
-
-
-
-
-6.6
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0 -0.9
-3.4
-3.5
-3.8
-3.9
0.0
-1.5
-4.2
-4.3
-4.5
-4.6
-5.6 -6.3 -6.4 -6.5 -6.4 -6.4
SB/MD/CS
-4.5 -5.4
-8.3
-8.4
-8.7
-8.7
-5.5
-6.8
-9.8 -10.0 -10.0 -10.1
-6.6 -7.1 -7.2 -7.3 -7.1 -7.1
DB/SD/NS
-3.8
-
-
-
-
-
-3.7
-
-
-
-
-
-5.5
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-8.1
-
-
-
-
-
-8.9
-
-
-
-
-
-6.5
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-3.8 -5.2
-7.4
-7.5
-7.9
-8.0
-3.7
-5.4
-7.8
-8.0
-8.3
-8.4
-5.5 -5.8 -6.0 -6.1 -6.0 -6.1
DB/MD/CS
-8.1 -9.2 -12.0 -12.2 -12.3 -12.4
-8.9 -10.1 -13.1 -13.2 -13.3 -13.4
-6.5 -6.6 -6.8 -6.8 -6.7 -6.7
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve
cross-aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the
deviation between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as
reference value. Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀ
point, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of
drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 37
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 4, γ = 0.5.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.2
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-3.6
-
-
-
-
-
-4.7
-
-
-
-
-
-1.0
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0 -1.9 -3.3 -3.6
-3.8
-4.1
0.0 -1.3
-2.7
-3.0
-3.0
-3.2
0.2
0.8
0.9
0.9
1.1
1.1
SB/MD/CS
-3.6 -4.7 -6.4 -6.6
-6.8
-6.9
-4.7 -6.0
-7.3
-7.6
-7.5
-7.8
-1.0 -1.1 -0.7 -0.8 -0.6 -0.7
DB/SD/NS
-3.6
-
-
-
-
-
-3.4
-
-
-
-
-
0.5
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-6.9
-
-
-
-
-
-7.6
-
-
-
-
-
-0.4
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-3.6 -5.4 -7.0 -7.4
-7.5
-7.8
-3.4 -4.6
-6.0
-6.3
-6.3
-6.6
0.5
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
DB/MD/CS
-6.9 -7.8 -9.7 -9.9 -10.1 -10.3
-7.6 -8.7 -10.1 -10.3 -10.4 -10.6
-0.4 -0.7 -0.2 -0.2 -0.1 -0.2
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve
cross-aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the
deviation between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings
as reference value. Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single
drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs -
number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 38
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 6, γ = 0.5.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-9.3
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-6.5
-
-
-
-
-
-6.3
-
-
-
-
-
-9.1
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-3.1
-8.0
-8.0
-8.7
-8.7
0.0
-4.0
-9.9
-9.9 -10.4 -10.5
-9.3 -10.1 -11.0 -11.0 -10.9 -10.9
SB/MD/CS
-6.5
-9.6 -14.7 -14.7 -15.3 -15.3
-6.3 -10.1 -16.1 -16.1 -16.7 -16.7
-9.1
-9.9 -10.8 -10.8 -10.7 -10.7
DB/SD/NS
-4.1
-
-
-
-
-
-4.1
-
-
-
-
-
-9.3
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-9.7
-
-
-
-
-
-9.7
-
-
-
-
-
-9.3
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-4.1
-7.2 -12.3 -12.3 -12.9 -12.9
-4.1
-7.8 -13.9 -13.9 -14.4 -14.4
-9.3 -10.0 -10.8 -10.9 -10.7 -10.8
DB/MD/CS
-9.7 -12.7 -17.9 -17.9 -18.5 -18.5
-9.7 -13.2 -19.4 -19.4 -20.0 -20.0
-9.3
-9.9 -11.0 -11.0 -10.9 -11.0
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations
hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints,
NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
25
Table 39
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 8, γ = 0.5.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-8.8
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-7.5
-
-
-
-
-
-6.2
-
-
-
-
-
-7.6
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-1.7
-4.6
-4.6
-5.2
-5.2
0.0
-2.4
-5.7
-5.7
-6.2
-6.2
-8.8 -9.4 -9.9 -9.9 -9.8 -9.7
SB/MD/CS
-7.5
-9.3 -12.5 -12.5 -13.1 -13.1
-6.2
-8.5 -12.1 -12.1 -12.5 -12.5
-7.6 -8.1 -8.4 -8.4 -8.2 -8.2
DB/SD/NS
-4.6
-
-
-
-
-
-3.6
-
-
-
-
-
-7.8
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-11.1
-
-
-
-
-
-9.1
-
-
-
-
-
-6.9
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-4.6
-6.9
-9.4
-9.6 -10.0 -10.1
-3.6
-5.9
-9.4
-9.4
-9.9
-9.9
-7.8 -7.8 -8.7 -8.5 -8.6 -8.5
DB/MD/CS
-11.1 -13.1 -16.2 -16.2 -16.9 -16.9
-9.1 -11.5 -15.1 -15.1 -15.6 -15.6
-6.9 -7.3 -7.7 -7.6 -7.5 -7.4
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value.
Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD -
multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 40
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 12, γ = 0.5.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-9.5
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-6.1
-
-
-
-
-
-6.4
-
-
-
-
-
-9.9
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0 -0.7
-2.3
-2.3
-2.8
-2.8
0.0
-1.4
-3.2
-3.3
-3.5
-3.6
-9.5 -10.2 -10.4 -10.5 -10.2 -10.2
SB/MD/CS
-6.1 -6.8
-8.6
-8.6
-9.1
-9.1
-6.4
-7.9
-9.7
-9.8 -10.0 -10.0
-9.9 -10.6 -10.6 -10.7 -10.4 -10.5
DB/SD/NS
-3.3
-
-
-
-
-
-3.3
-
-
-
-
-
-9.4
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-9.0
-
-
-
-
-
-9.2
-
-
-
-
-
-9.6
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-3.3 -4.2
-5.7
-5.7
-6.2
-6.2
-3.3
-4.8
-6.6
-6.7
-6.9
-6.9
-9.4 -10.2 -10.4 -10.5 -10.1 -10.2
DB/MD/CS
-9.0 -9.9 -11.6 -11.6 -12.1 -12.1
-9.2 -10.8 -12.4 -12.6 -12.7 -12.7
-9.6 -10.4 -10.4 -10.5 -10.1 -10.1
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value.
Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple
drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 41
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 16, γ = 0.5.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-2.4
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-4.2
-
-
-
-
-
-5.7
-
-
-
-
-
-3.9
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0 -0.7 -2.5 -2.6 -2.9 -2.9
0.0 -0.9
-2.1
-2.1
-2.3
-2.4
-2.4 -2.6 -1.9 -2.0 -1.8 -1.8
SB/MD/CS
-4.2 -4.8 -6.3 -6.4 -6.6 -6.6
-5.7 -6.8
-7.8
-7.9
-8.0
-8.0
-3.9 -4.4 -4.0 -4.0 -3.8 -3.9
DB/SD/NS
-2.9
-
-
-
-
-
-3.1
-
-
-
-
-
-2.6
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-6.9
-
-
-
-
-
-8.3
-
-
-
-
-
-3.9
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-2.9 -3.6 -5.5 -5.5 -5.8 -5.8
-3.1 -3.9
-5.2
-5.3
-5.5
-5.5
-2.6 -2.6 -2.0 -2.1 -2.0 -2.1
DB/MD/CS
-6.9 -7.6 -9.1 -9.2 -9.4 -9.4
-8.3 -9.4 -10.4 -10.6 -10.5 -10.7
-3.9 -4.3 -3.8 -3.9 -3.6 -3.7
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve
cross-aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows
the deviation between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle
settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching,
SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours,
#DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
26
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
Table 42
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 2, γ = 0.75.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-11.1
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-8.1
-
-
-
-
-
-7.1
-
-
-
-
-
-10.1
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-2.4
-7.0
-7.0
-7.6
-7.6
0.0
-3.5
-8.6
-8.7
-9.1
-9.1
-11.1 -12.1 -12.7 -12.7 -12.6 -12.6
SB/MD/CS
-8.1 -10.6 -15.4 -15.4 -16.0 -16.0
-7.1 -10.6 -15.7 -15.8 -16.2 -16.2
-10.1 -11.1 -11.4 -11.5 -11.3 -11.4
DB/SD/NS
-3.8
-
-
-
-
-
-3.8
-
-
-
-
-
-11.2
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-10.9
-
-
-
-
-
-10.1
-
-
-
-
-
-10.3
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-3.8
-6.4 -10.9 -10.9 -11.6 -11.6
-3.8
-7.4 -12.7 -12.7 -13.2 -13.2
-11.2 -12.2 -12.8 -12.9 -12.7 -12.8
DB/MD/CS
-10.9 -13.3 -18.2 -18.2 -18.8 -18.8
-10.1 -13.6 -19.0 -19.0 -19.6 -19.6
-10.3 -11.5 -11.9 -11.9 -11.9 -12.0
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 43
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 4, γ = 0.75.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-9.9
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-8.7
-
-
-
-
-
-6.8
-
-
-
-
-
-8.1
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-1.5
-3.9
-4.0
-4.3
-4.3
0.0
-2.3
-5.1
-5.1
-5.4
-5.4
-9.9 -10.6 -11.0 -11.0 -10.9 -10.9
SB/MD/CS
-8.7 -10.4 -13.1 -13.1 -13.5 -13.5
-6.8
-9.2 -11.8 -11.8 -12.0 -12.0
-8.1
-9.0
-8.7
-8.7
-8.6
-8.6
DB/SD/NS
-4.1
-
-
-
-
-
-3.2
-
-
-
-
-
-9.1
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-11.8
-
-
-
-
-
-9.5
-
-
-
-
-
-7.7
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-4.1
-5.8
-8.1
-8.2
-8.5
-8.5
-3.2
-5.5
-8.5
-8.5
-8.7
-8.8
-9.1
-9.7 -10.2 -10.2 -10.1 -10.1
DB/MD/CS
-11.8 -13.5 -16.2 -16.2 -16.6 -16.6
-9.5 -11.9 -14.6 -14.6 -14.8 -14.8
-7.7
-8.4
-8.4
-8.4
-8.2
-8.2
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations
hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints,
NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 44
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 6, γ = 0.75.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-12.6
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-7.1
-
-
-
-
-
-7.3
-
-
-
-
-
-12.9
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.4
-1.9
-1.9
-2.1
-2.1
0.0
-1.2
-2.4
-2.5
-2.6
-2.6
-12.6 -13.4 -13.1 -13.2 -13.0 -13.1
SB/MD/CS
-7.1
-7.6
-9.1
-9.1
-9.3
-9.3
-7.3
-8.7
-9.8
-9.9
-9.9
-9.9
-12.9 -13.7 -13.3 -13.4 -13.2 -13.2
DB/SD/NS
-3.6
-
-
-
-
-
-3.6
-
-
-
-
-
-12.6
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-10.2
-
-
-
-
-
-10.6
-
-
-
-
-
-13.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-3.6
-4.1
-5.6
-5.6
-5.8
-5.8
-3.6
-4.9
-5.8
-5.9
-6.1
-6.1
-12.6 -13.4 -12.9 -13.0 -12.9 -13.0
DB/MD/CS
-10.2 -10.8 -12.1 -12.1 -12.4 -12.4
-10.6 -12.0 -12.9 -13.0 -13.2 -13.2
-13.0 -13.8 -13.4 -13.5 -13.4 -13.4
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
27
Table 45
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 8, γ = 0.75.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-5.3
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-5.4
-
-
-
-
-
-6.5
-
-
-
-
-
-6.4
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0 -0.3 -1.6 -1.6 -1.9 -1.9
0.0 -0.5 -1.1
-1.1
-1.1
-1.2
-5.3 -5.4 -4.7 -4.8 -4.6 -4.6
SB/MD/CS
-5.4 -5.8 -6.5 -6.6 -6.7 -6.7
-6.5 -7.3 -7.5
-7.7
-7.6
-7.8
-6.4 -6.8 -6.3 -6.4 -6.2 -6.3
DB/SD/NS
-2.7
-
-
-
-
-
-2.7
-
-
-
-
-
-5.2
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-7.9
-
-
-
-
-
-8.6
-
-
-
-
-
-6.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-2.7 -3.2 -4.3 -4.4 -4.5 -4.6
-2.7 -3.4 -3.9
-4.0
-4.0
-4.1
-5.2 -5.4 -4.9 -4.9 -4.8 -4.8
DB/MD/CS
-7.9 -8.4 -9.0 -9.1 -9.2 -9.2
-8.6 -9.5 -9.8 -10.0 -10.1 -10.2
-6.0 -6.4 -6.1 -6.2 -6.2 -6.2
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and
ﬁve cross-aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further
it shows the deviation between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three
cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic
batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless
subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 46
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 12, γ = 0.75.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-13.3
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-9.1
-
-
-
-
-
-7.8
-
-
-
-
-
-12.1
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-2.1
-5.7
-5.7
-6.4
-6.4
0.0
-2.9
-7.4
-7.4
-8.1
-8.1
-13.3 -13.9 -14.8 -14.8 -14.7 -14.7
SB/MD/CS
-9.1 -11.2 -15.1 -15.1 -15.8 -15.8
-7.8 -10.8 -15.2 -15.2 -15.8 -15.8
-12.1 -12.8 -13.3 -13.3 -13.2 -13.2
DB/SD/NS
-2.6
-
-
-
-
-
-2.8
-
-
-
-
-
-13.5
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-11.0
-
-
-
-
-
-10.0
-
-
-
-
-
-12.3
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-2.6
-4.7
-8.3
-8.3
-9.0
-9.0
-2.8
-5.7 -10.2 -10.2 -10.9 -10.9
-13.5 -14.2 -15.0 -15.1 -15.1 -15.1
DB/MD/CS
-11.0 -13.2 -17.1 -17.1 -17.7 -17.7
-10.0 -13.1 -17.5 -17.5 -18.1 -18.1
-12.3 -13.2 -13.6 -13.6 -13.6 -13.6
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 47
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 16, γ = 0.75.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-14.0
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-10.1
-
-
-
-
-
-8.4
-
-
-
-
-
-12.5
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.7
-3.0
-3.0
-3.5
-3.5
0.0
-1.3
-3.7
-3.7
-4.0
-4.0
-14.0 -14.6 -14.6 -14.6 -14.5 -14.5
SB/MD/CS
-10.1 -11.0 -13.4 -13.4 -13.9 -13.9
-8.4
-9.7 -11.8 -11.8 -12.0 -12.0
-12.5 -12.9 -12.6 -12.6 -12.2 -12.2
DB/SD/NS
-4.2
-
-
-
-
-
-3.8
-
-
-
-
-
-13.6
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-13.3
-
-
-
-
-
-11.6
-
-
-
-
-
-12.4
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-4.2
-4.8
-7.4
-7.4
-7.9
-7.9
-3.8
-5.1
-7.2
-7.2
-7.6
-7.6
-13.6 -14.2 -13.8 -13.8 -13.7 -13.7
DB/MD/CS
-13.3 -14.1 -16.6 -16.6 -17.1 -17.1
-11.6 -12.9 -14.8 -14.9 -15.1 -15.1
-12.4 -12.9 -12.3 -12.3 -12.1 -12.1
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
28
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
Table 48
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 2, γ = 1.0.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-17.7
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-9.1
-
-
-
-
-
-8.7
-
-
-
-
-
-17.3
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.2
-1.4
-1.4
-1.7
-1.7
0.0
-0.8
-1.5
-1.6
-1.7
-1.7
-17.7 -18.2 -17.8 -17.8 -17.7 -17.7
SB/MD/CS
-9.1
-9.4 -10.3 -10.3 -10.6 -10.6
-8.7
-9.5 -10.3 -10.4 -10.5 -10.5
-17.3 -17.8 -17.7 -17.7 -17.6 -17.6
DB/SD/NS
-3.0
-
-
-
-
-
-3.3
-
-
-
-
-
-18.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-11.7
-
-
-
-
-
-11.5
-
-
-
-
-
-17.5
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-3.0
-3.4
-4.4
-4.4
-4.7
-4.7
-3.3
-4.0
-4.8
-4.8
-5.0
-5.0
-18.0 -18.2 -18.0 -18.0 -17.9 -17.9
DB/MD/CS
-11.7 -12.1 -12.9 -12.9 -13.2 -13.2
-11.5 -12.4 -13.1 -13.2 -13.2 -13.3
-17.5 -17.9 -17.8 -17.9 -17.7 -17.8
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 49
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 4, γ = 1.0.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-9.7
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-7.2
-
-
-
-
-
-7.6
-
-
-
-
-
-10.1
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.2
-1.0
-1.0
-1.2
-1.2
0.0
-0.5
-0.6
-0.7
-0.7
-0.8
-9.7
-9.9
-9.2
-9.4
-9.2
-9.3
SB/MD/CS
-7.2
-7.4
-7.7
-7.8
-7.8
-7.9
-7.6
-8.3
-8.3
-8.4
-8.4
-8.5
-10.1 -10.5 -10.2 -10.3 -10.2 -10.3
DB/SD/NS
-2.8
-
-
-
-
-
-3.2
-
-
-
-
-
-10.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-9.8
-
-
-
-
-
-10.3
-
-
-
-
-
-10.1
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-2.8
-3.1
-3.8
-3.8
-4.0
-4.0
-3.2
-3.9
-3.9
-4.1
-4.1
-4.2
-10.0 -10.4
-9.8 -10.0
-9.8
-9.9
DB/MD/CS
-9.8 -10.2 -10.4 -10.5 -10.5 -10.6
-10.3 -11.1 -11.1 -11.3 -11.3 -11.4
-10.1 -10.5 -10.4 -10.5 -10.4 -10.5
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations
hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints,
NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 50
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 6, γ = 1.0.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-14.1
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-10.3
-
-
-
-
-
-8.9
-
-
-
-
-
-12.7
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-1.4
-4.7
-4.7
-5.3
-5.3
0.0
-2.4
-6.3
-6.3
-6.8
-6.8
-14.1 -15.0 -15.5 -15.5 -15.5 -15.5
SB/MD/CS
-10.3 -11.8 -15.3 -15.3 -15.8 -15.8
-8.9 -11.4 -15.2 -15.2 -15.6 -15.6
-12.7 -13.7 -13.8 -13.8 -13.7 -13.7
DB/SD/NS
-2.3
-
-
-
-
-
-2.7
-
-
-
-
-
-14.4
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-12.4
-
-
-
-
-
-11.3
-
-
-
-
-
-12.9
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-2.3
-3.7
-7.1
-7.1
-7.6
-7.6
-2.7
-5.1
-9.1
-9.1
-9.7
-9.7
-14.4 -15.4 -16.0 -16.0 -16.0 -16.0
DB/MD/CS
-12.4 -13.8 -17.4 -17.4 -18.0 -18.0
-11.3 -13.8 -17.7 -17.7 -18.1 -18.1
-12.9 -14.0 -14.1 -14.1 -14.0 -14.0
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
29
Table 51
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 8, γ = 1.0.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-15.6
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-10.4
-
-
-
-
-
-9.1
-
-
-
-
-
-14.4
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.9
-2.9
-2.9
-3.3
-3.3
0.0
-1.5
-3.4
-3.4
-3.6
-3.6
-15.6 -16.2 -16.1 -16.1 -15.9 -15.9
SB/MD/CS
-10.4 -11.6 -13.5 -13.5 -13.9 -13.9
-9.1 -10.7 -12.2 -12.2 -12.4 -12.4
-14.4 -14.9 -14.4 -14.4 -14.3 -14.3
DB/SD/NS
-3.3
-
-
-
-
-
-3.0
-
-
-
-
-
-15.3
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-13.0
-
-
-
-
-
-11.7
-
-
-
-
-
-14.4
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-3.3
-4.2
-6.2
-6.2
-6.6
-6.6
-3.0
-4.5
-6.6
-6.6
-6.9
-6.9
-15.3 -15.9 -15.9 -15.9 -15.8 -15.8
DB/MD/CS
-13.0 -14.1 -16.2 -16.2 -16.6 -16.6
-11.7 -13.3 -14.8 -14.8 -15.1 -15.1
-14.4 -14.9 -14.3 -14.3 -14.2 -14.2
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 52
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 12, γ = 1.0.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-20.3
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-10.2
-
-
-
-
-
-9.0
-
-
-
-
-
-19.1
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.1
-1.2
-1.2
-1.4
-1.4
0.0
-0.8
-1.6
-1.6
-1.7
-1.7
-20.3 -20.8 -20.6 -20.6 -20.5 -20.5
SB/MD/CS
-10.2 -10.6 -11.5 -11.5 -11.7 -11.7
-9.0
-9.8 -10.6 -10.6 -10.8 -10.8
-19.1 -19.6 -19.5 -19.5 -19.5 -19.5
DB/SD/NS
-3.2
-
-
-
-
-
-2.8
-
-
-
-
-
-20.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-12.9
-
-
-
-
-
-11.3
-
-
-
-
-
-18.7
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-3.2
-3.5
-4.6
-4.6
-4.8
-4.8
-2.8
-3.6
-4.5
-4.5
-4.7
-4.7
-20.0 -20.4 -20.2 -20.2 -20.2 -20.2
DB/MD/CS
-12.9 -13.3 -14.3 -14.3 -14.5 -14.5
-11.3 -12.2 -13.0 -13.1 -13.2 -13.2
-18.7 -19.2 -19.1 -19.1 -19.1 -19.1
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 53
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 3, β = 16, γ = 1.0.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-13.1
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-8.5
-
-
-
-
-
-8.1
-
-
-
-
-
-12.7
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.3
-0.8
-0.8
-1.0
-1.0
0.0
-0.5
-0.6
-0.7
-0.7
-0.8
-13.1 -13.3 -12.9 -13.0 -12.9 -12.9
SB/MD/CS
-8.5
-8.8
-9.0
-9.1
-9.2
-9.2
-8.1
-8.7
-8.7
-8.8
-8.9
-8.9
-12.7 -13.0 -12.8 -12.8 -12.8 -12.8
DB/SD/NS
-3.5
-
-
-
-
-
-3.5
-
-
-
-
-
-13.1
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-11.4
-
-
-
-
-
-10.9
-
-
-
-
-
-12.6
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-3.5
-3.9
-4.5
-4.6
-4.7
-4.7
-3.5
-4.0
-4.1
-4.2
-4.3
-4.3
-13.1 -13.1 -12.7 -12.8 -12.6 -12.7
DB/MD/CS
-11.4 -11.8 -12.0 -12.1 -12.2 -12.2
-10.9 -11.4 -11.5 -11.6 -11.7 -11.7
-12.6 -12.7 -12.6 -12.6 -12.6 -12.6
The table shows for κ = 3 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
30
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
I.3.
Results for cart capacity κ = 4
Table 54
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 2, γ = 0.25.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-1.6
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-3.4
-
-
-
-
-
-4.0
-
-
-
-
-
-2.2
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-4.8 -12.2 -12.3 -13.2 -13.2
0.0
-7.2 -14.4 -14.9 -15.3 -15.7
-1.6 -4.3 -4.2 -4.7 -4.1 -4.5
SB/MD/CS
-3.4
-8.3 -16.0 -16.1 -17.0 -17.1
-4.0 -10.9 -18.5 -19.0 -19.4 -19.8
-2.2 -4.6 -4.6 -5.0 -4.5 -4.9
DB/SD/NS
-6.4
-
-
-
-
-
-5.2
-
-
-
-
-
-0.3
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-9.1
-
-
-
-
-
-8.7
-
-
-
-
-
-1.2
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-6.4 -12.1 -18.8 -18.9 -19.6 -19.6
-5.2 -13.0 -19.4 -20.0 -20.2 -20.7
-0.3 -2.8 -2.3 -2.9 -2.3 -2.9
DB/MD/CS
-9.1 -14.7 -21.9 -22.0 -22.6 -22.6
-8.7 -16.1 -23.0 -23.5 -23.7 -24.1
-1.2 -3.3 -2.9 -3.5 -3.0 -3.5
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference
value. Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD
- multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 55
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 4, γ = 0.25.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-3.3
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-5.0
-
-
-
-
-
-4.8
-
-
-
-
-
-3.1
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-4.1
-8.2
-8.7
-9.0
-9.4
0.0
-4.0
-9.7 -10.0 -10.5 -10.7
-3.3 -3.1 -4.9 -4.5 -4.8 -4.5
SB/MD/CS
-5.0
-8.5 -13.4 -13.7 -14.1 -14.3
-4.8
-7.9 -14.6 -14.8 -15.4 -15.4
-3.1 -2.7 -4.7 -4.5 -4.7 -4.6
DB/SD/NS
-8.4
-
-
-
-
-
-7.6
-
-
-
-
-
-2.3
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-12.0
-
-
-
-
-
-11.6
-
-
-
-
-
-2.8
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-8.4 -12.8 -16.6 -17.2 -17.6 -18.1
-7.6 -12.1 -17.7 -18.1 -18.2 -18.6
-2.3 -2.5 -4.3 -4.1 -3.9 -3.7
DB/MD/CS
-12.0 -15.9 -20.2 -20.9 -21.1 -21.5
-11.6 -15.0 -21.3 -21.6 -22.0 -22.2
-2.8 -2.1 -4.4 -3.9 -4.3 -3.9
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value.
Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD -
multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 56
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 6, γ = 0.25.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-1.7
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-3.8
-
-
-
-
-
-4.6
-
-
-
-
-
-2.6
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-1.8
-5.0
-5.3
-5.6
-5.8
0.0
-2.9
-6.2
-6.4
-6.8
-7.0
-1.7 -2.9 -3.0 -3.0 -3.1 -3.0
SB/MD/CS
-3.8
-5.2
-9.0
-9.1
-9.6
-9.7
-4.6
-7.0 -11.0 -11.1 -11.6 -11.7
-2.6 -3.6 -3.9 -4.0 -3.9 -4.0
DB/SD/NS
-7.6
-
-
-
-
-
-6.8
-
-
-
-
-
-0.7
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-10.0
-
-
-
-
-
-10.7
-
-
-
-
-
-2.3
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-7.6 -11.6 -13.7 -14.4 -14.2 -14.9
-6.8 -11.6 -13.6 -14.5 -14.2 -14.9
-0.7 -1.6 -1.5 -1.7 -1.5 -1.6
DB/MD/CS
-10.0 -13.5 -16.2 -16.9 -16.9 -17.5
-10.7 -14.2 -17.2 -17.8 -17.9 -18.4
-2.3 -2.4 -2.7 -2.7 -2.8 -2.7
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value.
Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD -
multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
31
Table 57
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 8, γ = 0.25.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
2.5
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-3.5
-
-
-
-
-
-3.3
-
-
-
-
-
2.7
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-3.8
-4.2
-5.4
-4.8
-5.8
0.0
-2.1
-3.6
-4.2
-4.1
-4.5
2.5 4.3 3.1 3.8 3.2
3.8
SB/MD/CS
-3.5
-5.7
-7.2
-7.8
-7.7
-8.2
-3.3
-5.3
-7.0
-7.6
-7.5
-8.0
2.7 2.9 2.6 2.7 2.6
2.6
DB/SD/NS
-7.4
-
-
-
-
-
-7.0
-
-
-
-
-
2.9
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-10.3
-
-
-
-
-
-9.8
-
-
-
-
-
3.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-7.4 -13.1 -12.6 -14.5 -13.4 -14.9
-7.0 -11.1 -11.5 -12.7 -12.1 -13.0
2.9 5.1 4.0 4.8 4.1
5.0
DB/MD/CS
-10.3 -14.5 -15.0 -16.3 -15.7 -16.7
-9.8 -12.5 -13.7 -14.5 -14.4 -14.9
3.0 5.1 4.0 4.9 4.1
4.9
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve
cross-aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the
deviation between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as
reference value. Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀ
point, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀ
points.
Table 58
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 12, γ = 0.25.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-4.9
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-4.9
-
-
-
-
-
-5.5
-
-
-
-
-
-5.4
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-3.5
-9.2
-9.3
-9.9
-9.9
0.0
-5.1 -11.0 -11.4 -11.7 -12.0
-4.9 -6.7 -6.8 -7.2 -6.8 -7.2
SB/MD/CS
-4.9
-8.5 -14.5 -14.6 -15.2 -15.2
-5.5 -10.5 -16.5 -16.9 -17.3 -17.7
-5.4 -7.1 -7.2 -7.6 -7.4 -7.7
DB/SD/NS
-7.1
-
-
-
-
-
-6.6
-
-
-
-
-
-4.5
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-10.9
-
-
-
-
-
-10.9
-
-
-
-
-
-4.9
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-7.1 -11.3 -16.8 -17.0 -17.6 -17.8
-6.6 -12.2 -17.6 -18.1 -18.4 -18.7
-4.5 -6.0 -5.8 -6.1 -5.7 -6.0
DB/MD/CS
-10.9 -14.9 -20.6 -20.7 -21.4 -21.4
-10.9 -16.2 -21.6 -22.1 -22.3 -22.7
-4.9 -6.5 -6.2 -6.6 -6.1 -6.5
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value.
Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD -
multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 59
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 16, γ = 0.25.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-6.2
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-6.1
-
-
-
-
-
-5.4
-
-
-
-
-
-5.5
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-2.1
-5.9
-6.0
-6.4
-6.4
0.0
-2.2
-7.1
-7.1
-7.5
-7.5
-6.2 -6.2 -7.3 -7.2 -7.2 -7.2
SB/MD/CS
-6.1
-8.3 -12.5 -12.5 -13.0 -13.0
-5.4
-7.5 -12.8 -12.8 -13.2 -13.2
-5.5 -5.5 -6.5 -6.5 -6.5 -6.5
DB/SD/NS
-9.2
-
-
-
-
-
-6.4
-
-
-
-
-
-3.2
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-13.1
-
-
-
-
-
-11.3
-
-
-
-
-
-4.2
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-9.2 -11.6 -14.9 -15.3 -15.5 -15.8
-6.4
-9.4 -13.6 -13.8 -14.0 -14.1
-3.2 -3.6 -4.4 -4.2 -4.2 -4.0
DB/MD/CS
-13.1 -15.5 -19.2 -19.5 -19.7 -20.0
-11.3 -13.8 -18.2 -18.3 -18.5 -18.6
-4.2 -4.2 -4.8 -4.5 -4.5 -4.3
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value.
Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD -
multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
32
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
Table 60
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 2, γ = 0.5.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-5.9
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-4.9
-
-
-
-
-
-5.4
-
-
-
-
-
-6.5
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.8
-3.5
-3.6
-3.9
-4.0
0.0
-1.8
-4.5
-4.7
-4.9
-5.0
-5.9 -6.9 -6.9 -7.0 -6.9 -7.0
SB/MD/CS
-4.9
-5.7
-8.7
-8.7
-9.1
-9.1
-5.4
-7.1 -10.3 -10.4 -10.6 -10.7
-6.5 -7.4 -7.6 -7.7 -7.5 -7.6
DB/SD/NS
-8.3
-
-
-
-
-
-7.5
-
-
-
-
-
-5.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-11.7
-
-
-
-
-
-11.6
-
-
-
-
-
-5.7
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-8.3
-9.8 -11.9 -12.1 -12.5 -12.6
-7.5
-9.1 -11.5 -11.6 -12.0 -12.1
-5.0 -5.1 -5.4 -5.3 -5.3 -5.2
DB/MD/CS
-11.7 -13.1 -15.4 -15.6 -16.0 -16.1
-11.6 -13.2 -15.9 -16.1 -16.4 -16.5
-5.7 -6.0 -6.5 -6.4 -6.4 -6.3
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value.
Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD -
multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 61
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 4, γ = 0.5.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-0.2
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-3.6
-
-
-
-
-
-4.2
-
-
-
-
-
-0.9
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-1.2
-3.0
-3.2
-3.4
-3.5
0.0
-1.5
-3.0
-3.2
-3.3
-3.5
-0.2 -0.5 -0.2 -0.2 -0.1 -0.2
SB/MD/CS
-3.6
-4.8
-6.6
-6.7
-6.9
-7.0
-4.2
-5.8
-7.3
-7.5
-7.6
-7.7
-0.9 -1.3 -1.0 -1.1 -1.0 -1.0
DB/SD/NS
-7.1
-
-
-
-
-
-5.9
-
-
-
-
-
1.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-9.4
-
-
-
-
-
-9.4
-
-
-
-
-
-0.1
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-7.1
-8.9 -10.5 -10.9 -10.8 -11.2
-5.9
-7.3
-8.9
-9.1
-9.2
-9.4
1.0
1.6
1.6
1.9
1.6
1.9
DB/MD/CS
-9.4 -11.3 -12.7 -13.1 -13.2 -13.6
-9.4 -10.8 -12.3 -12.5 -12.6 -12.7
-0.1
0.4
0.3
0.6
0.6
0.9
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference
value. Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD
- multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 62
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 6, γ = 0.5.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-11.1
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-6.7
-
-
-
-
-
-5.9
-
-
-
-
-
-10.4
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-3.4
-7.9
-7.9
-8.5
-8.5
0.0
-4.2
-9.9 -10.0 -10.5 -10.5
-11.1 -12.0 -13.1 -13.1 -13.0 -13.1
SB/MD/CS
-6.7 -10.1 -15.0 -15.0 -15.6 -15.6
-5.9 -10.0 -15.9 -16.0 -16.5 -16.6
-10.4 -11.2 -12.2 -12.3 -12.1 -12.2
DB/SD/NS
-7.0
-
-
-
-
-
-5.5
-
-
-
-
-
-9.7
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-11.8
-
-
-
-
-
-10.2
-
-
-
-
-
-9.5
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-7.0 -10.1 -15.0 -15.1 -15.7 -15.7
-5.5
-9.6 -15.5 -15.6 -16.0 -16.1
-9.7 -10.6 -11.5 -11.5 -11.3 -11.4
DB/MD/CS
-11.8 -14.9 -20.1 -20.1 -20.7 -20.7
-10.2 -14.1 -20.5 -20.5 -20.9 -21.0
-9.5 -10.3 -11.5 -11.5 -11.4 -11.4
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
33
Table 63
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 8, γ = 0.5.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-8.2
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-7.3
-
-
-
-
-
-6.2
-
-
-
-
-
-7.2
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-1.8
-4.6
-4.7
-5.1
-5.1
0.0
-2.4
-5.8
-5.8
-6.2
-6.3
-8.2 -8.8 -9.3 -9.3 -9.3 -9.3
SB/MD/CS
-7.3
-9.3 -12.5 -12.5 -13.0 -13.0
-6.2
-8.6 -12.1 -12.2 -12.5 -12.6
-7.2 -7.7 -7.8 -7.9 -7.8 -7.8
DB/SD/NS
-7.1
-
-
-
-
-
-5.8
-
-
-
-
-
-6.9
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-12.3
-
-
-
-
-
-10.8
-
-
-
-
-
-6.6
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-7.1
-9.5 -11.6 -11.7 -12.1 -12.2
-5.8
-8.4 -11.6 -11.7 -12.1 -12.1
-6.9 -7.0 -8.1 -8.0 -8.0 -8.0
DB/MD/CS
-12.3 -14.9 -17.2 -17.3 -17.9 -18.0
-10.8 -13.4 -16.5 -16.6 -17.1 -17.1
-6.6 -6.6 -7.4 -7.4 -7.2 -7.2
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value.
Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD -
multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 64
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 12, γ = 0.5.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-9.2
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-5.7
-
-
-
-
-
-6.0
-
-
-
-
-
-9.5
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.8
-2.5
-2.6
-2.8
-2.9
0.0
-1.7
-3.6
-3.7
-3.9
-3.9
-9.2
-9.9 -10.1 -10.2 -10.1 -10.1
SB/MD/CS
-5.7
-6.9
-8.6
-8.6
-8.9
-9.0
-6.0
-7.8
-9.8
-9.9 -10.0 -10.1
-9.5 -10.0 -10.4 -10.4 -10.2 -10.3
DB/SD/NS
-6.5
-
-
-
-
-
-4.8
-
-
-
-
-
-7.4
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-10.5
-
-
-
-
-
-9.7
-
-
-
-
-
-8.3
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-6.5
-7.6
-8.9
-9.2
-9.4
-9.6
-4.8
-6.5
-8.3
-8.4
-8.6
-8.6
-7.4
-8.0
-8.4
-8.2
-8.3
-8.1
DB/MD/CS
-10.5 -11.4 -13.0 -13.1 -13.6 -13.7
-9.7 -11.4 -13.1 -13.3 -13.4 -13.5
-8.3
-9.1
-9.2
-9.3
-8.9
-9.0
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations
hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints,
NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 65
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 16, γ = 0.5.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-3.1
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-4.3
-
-
-
-
-
-5.1
-
-
-
-
-
-3.9
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.8
-2.3
-2.4
-2.6
-2.7
0.0
-1.1
-2.2
-2.4
-2.4
-2.5
-3.1 -3.4 -3.0 -3.1 -2.9 -3.0
SB/MD/CS
-4.3
-5.3
-6.6
-6.7
-6.9
-6.9
-5.1
-6.5
-7.5
-7.7
-7.6
-7.8
-3.9 -4.3 -4.0 -4.2 -3.9 -4.0
DB/SD/NS
-6.4
-
-
-
-
-
-5.5
-
-
-
-
-
-2.1
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-9.6
-
-
-
-
-
-9.9
-
-
-
-
-
-3.4
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-6.4
-7.4
-8.9
-9.0
-9.1
-9.2
-5.5
-6.7
-7.8
-8.1
-8.1
-8.3
-2.1 -2.3 -1.8 -2.1 -1.9 -2.1
DB/MD/CS
-9.6 -10.5 -12.2 -12.3 -12.4 -12.5
-9.9 -11.0 -12.3 -12.5 -12.6 -12.7
-3.4 -3.6 -3.2 -3.3 -3.2 -3.2
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference
value. Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD
- multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
34
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
Table 66
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 2, γ = 0.75.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-11.2
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-8.0
-
-
-
-
-
-6.6
-
-
-
-
-
-9.8
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-2.6
-7.3
-7.3
-7.7
-7.7
0.0
-3.6
-9.1
-9.2
-9.6
-9.6
-11.2 -12.2 -13.0 -13.0 -12.9 -12.9
SB/MD/CS
-8.0 -10.6 -15.7 -15.7 -16.2 -16.2
-6.6 -10.2 -15.9 -15.9 -16.3 -16.3
-9.8 -10.8 -11.4 -11.4 -11.3 -11.3
DB/SD/NS
-4.0
-
-
-
-
-
-4.1
-
-
-
-
-
-11.3
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-10.7
-
-
-
-
-
-9.8
-
-
-
-
-
-10.3
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-4.0
-6.9 -11.5 -11.5 -12.1 -12.1
-4.1
-7.8 -13.0 -13.1 -13.6 -13.7
-11.3 -12.1 -12.7 -12.8 -12.7 -12.8
DB/MD/CS
-10.7 -13.4 -18.4 -18.4 -18.9 -18.9
-9.8 -13.4 -18.9 -19.0 -19.5 -19.5
-10.3 -11.3 -11.9 -11.9 -11.9 -11.9
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations
hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints,
NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 67
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 4, γ = 0.75.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-11.6
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-8.6
-
-
-
-
-
-6.5
-
-
-
-
-
-9.7
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-1.5
-4.0
-4.0
-4.4
-4.4
0.0
-2.4
-5.4
-5.4
-5.7
-5.7
-11.6 -12.5 -12.9 -12.9 -12.7 -12.8
SB/MD/CS
-8.6 -10.2 -13.2 -13.2 -13.6 -13.6
-6.5
-9.0 -11.9 -11.9 -12.2 -12.2
-9.7 -10.6 -10.5 -10.5 -10.3 -10.3
DB/SD/NS
-6.3
-
-
-
-
-
-4.2
-
-
-
-
-
-9.5
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-13.1
-
-
-
-
-
-9.5
-
-
-
-
-
-8.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-6.3
-8.2 -10.5 -10.5 -11.0 -11.0
-4.2
-6.9
-9.8
-9.8 -10.0 -10.0
-9.5 -10.2 -10.8 -10.8 -10.5 -10.4
DB/MD/CS
-13.1 -14.8 -17.5 -17.5 -18.1 -18.1
-9.5 -12.0 -14.8 -14.9 -15.1 -15.1
-8.0
-8.7
-8.7
-8.7
-8.4
-8.4
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations
hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints,
NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 68
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 6, γ = 0.75.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-12.3
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-6.9
-
-
-
-
-
-6.7
-
-
-
-
-
-12.1
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.6
-2.0
-2.1
-2.4
-2.4
0.0
-1.4
-2.8
-2.9
-3.2
-3.2
-12.3 -13.0 -13.0 -13.0 -13.0 -13.0
SB/MD/CS
-6.9
-7.7
-9.2
-9.2
-9.5
-9.5
-6.7
-8.4
-9.6
-9.7
-9.9
-9.9
-12.1 -12.9 -12.7 -12.8 -12.7 -12.7
DB/SD/NS
-5.9
-
-
-
-
-
-5.4
-
-
-
-
-
-11.7
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-11.3
-
-
-
-
-
-11.5
-
-
-
-
-
-12.5
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-5.9
-6.5
-7.8
-7.8
-8.2
-8.3
-5.4
-6.7
-7.9
-8.1
-8.1
-8.3
-11.7 -12.4 -12.3 -12.5 -12.2 -12.3
DB/MD/CS
-11.3 -11.9 -13.4 -13.4 -13.7 -13.8
-11.5 -13.0 -14.0 -14.1 -14.1 -14.2
-12.5 -13.3 -12.9 -12.9 -12.7 -12.7
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
35
Table 69
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 8, γ = 0.75.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-4.6
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-5.0
-
-
-
-
-
-5.8
-
-
-
-
-
-5.4
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.6
-1.6
-1.6
-1.8
-1.8
0.0
-1.0
-1.4
-1.6
-1.6
-1.7
-4.6 -5.0 -4.5 -4.6 -4.4 -4.5
SB/MD/CS
-5.0
-5.6
-6.5
-6.6
-6.7
-6.7
-5.8
-7.0
-7.2
-7.4
-7.3
-7.5
-5.4 -5.9 -5.3 -5.5 -5.2 -5.4
DB/SD/NS
-6.0
-
-
-
-
-
-6.0
-
-
-
-
-
-4.5
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-10.3
-
-
-
-
-
-11.1
-
-
-
-
-
-5.4
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-6.0
-6.8
-7.6
-7.7
-8.1
-8.2
-6.0
-7.0
-7.2
-7.5
-7.4
-7.7
-4.5 -4.7 -4.2 -4.3 -3.9 -4.1
DB/MD/CS
-10.3 -10.9 -11.4 -11.6 -11.7 -11.9
-11.1 -12.0 -12.3 -12.5 -12.5 -12.7
-5.4 -5.8 -5.5 -5.7 -5.5 -5.5
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value.
Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD -
multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 70
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 12, γ = 0.75.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-12.3
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-8.6
-
-
-
-
-
-7.6
-
-
-
-
-
-11.3
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-2.1
-6.3
-6.3
-7.0
-7.0
0.0
-2.9
-8.0
-8.0
-8.6
-8.6
-12.3 -13.1 -13.9 -13.9 -13.8 -13.8
SB/MD/CS
-8.6 -10.7 -15.2 -15.2 -15.9 -15.9
-7.6 -10.6 -15.6 -15.6 -16.2 -16.2
-11.3 -12.3 -12.6 -12.6 -12.5 -12.5
DB/SD/NS
-4.4
-
-
-
-
-
-3.6
-
-
-
-
-
-11.7
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-11.6
-
-
-
-
-
-10.5
-
-
-
-
-
-11.2
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-4.4
-6.6 -10.5 -10.5 -11.2 -11.2
-3.6
-6.9 -11.8 -11.8 -12.5 -12.5
-11.7 -12.6 -13.5 -13.6 -13.6 -13.6
DB/MD/CS
-11.6 -13.6 -18.0 -18.0 -18.7 -18.7
-10.5 -13.5 -18.6 -18.6 -19.3 -19.3
-11.2 -12.1 -12.9 -12.9 -12.9 -12.9
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 71
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 16, γ = 0.75.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-13.9
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-9.7
-
-
-
-
-
-7.8
-
-
-
-
-
-12.2
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.8
-3.2
-3.2
-3.7
-3.7
0.0
-1.4
-4.0
-4.0
-4.4
-4.4
-13.9 -14.4 -14.6 -14.6 -14.5 -14.5
SB/MD/CS
-9.7 -10.7 -13.3 -13.3 -13.8 -13.8
-7.8
-9.3 -11.7 -11.7 -12.0 -12.0
-12.2 -12.7 -12.4 -12.4 -12.1 -12.1
DB/SD/NS
-5.7
-
-
-
-
-
-4.8
-
-
-
-
-
-13.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-13.5
-
-
-
-
-
-11.8
-
-
-
-
-
-12.3
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-5.7
-6.5
-9.1
-9.1
-9.7
-9.7
-4.8
-6.3
-8.7
-8.7
-9.1
-9.1
-13.0 -13.6 -13.4 -13.4 -13.2 -13.2
DB/MD/CS
-13.5 -14.3 -16.9 -16.9 -17.5 -17.5
-11.8 -13.2 -15.5 -15.6 -15.7 -15.8
-12.3 -13.0 -12.5 -12.5 -12.1 -12.1
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
36
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
Table 72
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 2, γ = 1.0.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-15.8
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-8.2
-
-
-
-
-
-7.9
-
-
-
-
-
-15.5
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.4
-1.6
-1.6
-1.9
-1.9
0.0
-0.9
-1.9
-1.9
-2.1
-2.1
-15.8 -16.3 -16.0 -16.1 -16.0 -16.0
SB/MD/CS
-8.2
-8.8
-9.7
-9.7 -10.0 -10.0
-7.9
-8.9
-9.8
-9.8 -10.0 -10.0
-15.5 -15.9 -15.9 -15.9 -15.8 -15.8
DB/SD/NS
-5.2
-
-
-
-
-
-5.2
-
-
-
-
-
-15.8
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-12.0
-
-
-
-
-
-12.6
-
-
-
-
-
-16.4
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-5.2
-5.8
-6.9
-6.9
-7.5
-7.5
-5.2
-6.4
-7.2
-7.5
-7.4
-7.6
-15.8 -16.4 -16.2 -16.3 -15.7 -15.8
DB/MD/CS
-12.0 -12.8 -13.7 -13.8 -14.1 -14.1
-12.6 -13.7 -14.2 -14.4 -14.5 -14.6
-16.4 -16.7 -16.3 -16.3 -16.2 -16.2
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 73
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 4, γ = 1.0.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-8.5
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-6.4
-
-
-
-
-
-6.8
-
-
-
-
-
-8.8
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.5
-1.3
-1.3
-1.5
-1.5
0.0
-0.7
-0.9
-1.1
-1.0
-1.2
-8.5 -8.7 -8.1 -8.2 -8.0 -8.2
SB/MD/CS
-6.4
-7.1
-7.4
-7.5
-7.6
-7.6
-6.8
-7.6
-7.7
-7.9
-7.8
-8.0
-8.8 -9.0 -8.7 -8.9 -8.7 -8.8
DB/SD/NS
-6.3
-
-
-
-
-
-6.0
-
-
-
-
-
-8.2
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-12.2
-
-
-
-
-
-11.7
-
-
-
-
-
-8.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-6.3
-6.9
-7.9
-8.0
-8.3
-8.3
-6.0
-7.2
-7.1
-7.6
-7.3
-7.7
-8.2 -8.8 -7.7 -8.1 -7.4 -7.8
DB/MD/CS
-12.2 -12.8 -13.0 -13.3 -13.2 -13.4
-11.7 -12.7 -12.8 -13.1 -13.0 -13.2
-8.0 -8.3 -8.3 -8.2 -8.2 -8.2
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-
aisles, taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation
between the three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value.
Abbreviations hold as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD -
multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS - no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 74
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 6, γ = 1.0.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-14.0
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-9.8
-
-
-
-
-
-8.5
-
-
-
-
-
-12.7
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-1.4
-5.2
-5.2
-5.9
-5.9
0.0
-2.6
-6.9
-6.9
-7.5
-7.5
-14.0 -15.0 -15.5 -15.5 -15.4 -15.4
SB/MD/CS
-9.8 -11.2 -15.3 -15.3 -15.9 -15.9
-8.5 -11.1 -15.3 -15.3 -15.9 -15.9
-12.7 -13.8 -13.9 -13.9 -13.8 -13.8
DB/SD/NS
-3.6
-
-
-
-
-
-3.3
-
-
-
-
-
-13.7
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-12.4
-
-
-
-
-
-11.0
-
-
-
-
-
-12.4
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-3.6
-5.1
-8.9
-8.9
-9.6
-9.6
-3.3
-5.9 -10.5 -10.5 -11.0 -11.0
-13.7 -14.7 -15.4 -15.4 -15.3 -15.3
DB/MD/CS
-12.4 -14.0 -18.2 -18.2 -18.8 -18.8
-11.0 -13.5 -18.0 -18.0 -18.6 -18.6
-12.4 -13.4 -13.6 -13.6 -13.6 -13.6
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
37
Table 75
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 8, γ = 1.0.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-14.9
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-9.8
-
-
-
-
-
-8.3
-
-
-
-
-
-13.6
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-1.2
-3.4
-3.4
-3.8
-3.8
0.0
-1.7
-4.1
-4.1
-4.3
-4.3
-14.9 -15.4 -15.5 -15.5 -15.4 -15.4
SB/MD/CS
-9.8 -11.2 -13.4 -13.4 -13.9 -13.9
-8.3 -10.1 -12.2 -12.2 -12.4 -12.4
-13.6 -13.9 -13.8 -13.8 -13.6 -13.6
DB/SD/NS
-4.9
-
-
-
-
-
-4.1
-
-
-
-
-
-14.1
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-13.2
-
-
-
-
-
-11.6
-
-
-
-
-
-13.4
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-4.9
-6.0
-8.4
-8.4
-8.8
-8.8
-4.1
-5.8
-8.2
-8.2
-8.5
-8.5
-14.1 -14.8 -14.6 -14.6 -14.6 -14.6
DB/MD/CS
-13.2 -14.6 -16.9 -16.9 -17.4 -17.4
-11.6 -13.4 -15.5 -15.5 -15.7 -15.7
-13.4 -13.9 -13.5 -13.5 -13.3 -13.3
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 76
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 12, γ = 1.0.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-18.6
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-9.4
-
-
-
-
-
-8.3
-
-
-
-
-
-17.6
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.3
-1.5
-1.5
-1.7
-1.7
0.0
-0.9
-1.9
-1.9
-2.0
-2.0
-18.6 -19.1 -18.9 -18.9 -18.9 -18.9
SB/MD/CS
-9.4 -10.0 -11.0 -11.0 -11.2 -11.2
-8.3
-9.2 -10.2 -10.2 -10.3 -10.3
-17.6 -17.9 -17.8 -17.8 -17.8 -17.8
DB/SD/NS
-6.3
-
-
-
-
-
-5.4
-
-
-
-
-
-17.8
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-14.4
-
-
-
-
-
-12.7
-
-
-
-
-
-17.0
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-6.3
-6.8
-8.4
-8.4
-8.6
-8.7
-5.4
-6.2
-7.3
-7.3
-7.6
-7.6
-17.8 -18.1 -17.6 -17.6 -17.6 -17.6
DB/MD/CS
-14.4 -14.9 -16.1 -16.1 -16.4 -16.4
-12.7 -13.7 -14.6 -14.6 -14.8 -14.8
-17.0 -17.4 -17.1 -17.1 -17.0 -17.0
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.
Table 77
Average policy and layout improvement potential with κ = 4, β = 16, γ = 1.0.
Three cross-aisles
Five cross-aisles
Three vs. ﬁve cross-aisles
# DPs
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
SB/SD/NS
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
0.0
-
-
-
-
-
-10.6
-
-
-
-
-
SB/SD/CS
-7.3
-
-
-
-
-
-7.3
-
-
-
-
-
-10.6
-
-
-
-
-
SB/MD/NS
0.0
-0.5
-1.1
-1.1
-1.3
-1.3
0.0
-0.6
-0.8
-0.9
-0.9
-1.0
-10.6 -10.7 -10.4 -10.4 -10.3 -10.4
SB/MD/CS
-7.3
-7.8
-8.2
-8.2
-8.3
-8.3
-7.3
-8.1
-8.2
-8.3
-8.3
-8.4
-10.6 -10.9 -10.6 -10.7 -10.6 -10.7
DB/SD/NS
-6.8
-
-
-
-
-
-6.2
-
-
-
-
-
-9.9
-
-
-
-
-
DB/SD/CS
-13.6
-
-
-
-
-
-12.7
-
-
-
-
-
-9.7
-
-
-
-
-
DB/MD/NS
-6.8
-7.5
-8.4
-8.6
-8.8
-8.9
-6.2
-7.1
-7.1
-7.4
-7.4
-7.6
-9.9 -10.1
-9.3
-9.5
-9.1
-9.3
DB/MD/CS
-13.6 -14.1 -14.5 -14.6 -14.8 -14.8
-12.7 -13.5 -13.6 -13.8 -13.8 -14.0
-9.7 -10.0
-9.6
-9.8
-9.6
-9.7
The table shows for κ = 4 the percentage deviation in total picking time for settings with three and ﬁve cross-aisles,
taking the setting with policy (SB/SD/NS) and one depot as reference value. Further it shows the deviation between the
three and the ﬁve cross-aisle settings, taking the respective three cross-aisle settings as reference value. Abbreviations hold
as follows: SB - static batching, DB - dynamic batching, SD - single drop-oﬀpoint, MD - multiple drop-oﬀpoints, NS -
no cartless subtours, CS - cartless subtours, #DPs - number of drop-oﬀpoints.

Schiﬀer et al.: Optimal picking policies for e-commerce warehouses
38
Article submitted to Management Science; manuscript no. MS-OPT-18-01682.R4
References
Asahiro Y, Kawahara K, Miyano E (2012) NP-hardness of the sorting buﬀer problem on the uniform metric.
Discrete Applied Mathematics 160:1453–1464.
Boysen N, De Koster RBM, Weidinger F (2019) Warehousing in the e-commerce era: A survey. European
Journal of Operational Research 277(2):396–411.
Cambazard H, Catusse N (2018) Fixed-parameter algorithms for rectilinear Steiner tree and rectilinear
traveling salesman problem in the plane. European Journal of Operational Research 270(2):419–429.
Pansart L, Catusse N, Cambazard H (2018) Exact algorithms for the picking problem. Computers & Oper-
ations Research. 100:117–127.
RatliﬀHD, Rosenthal AS (1983) Order-picking in a rectangular warehouse: A solvable case of the traveling
salesman problem. Operations Research 31(3):507–521.
Theys C, Br¨aysy O, Dullaert W, Raa B (2010) Using a TSP heuristic for routing order pickers in warehouses.
European Journal of Operational Research 200(3):755–763.
Weidinger F, Boysen N, Schneider M (2019) Picker routing in the mixed-shelves warehouses of e-commerce
retailers. European Journal of Operational Research 274(2):501–515.