TITLE: Efficient Inaccuracy: User-Generated Information Sharing in a Queue
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2019.3447
---

TSpace Research Repository 
 
tspace.library.utoronto.ca 
 
 
Efficient Inaccuracy: User-Generated 
Information Sharing in a Queue 
 
Jianfu Wang & Ming Hu 
 
Version Post-print or accepted manuscript. 
 
Citation 
(published version) 
Wang, J., & Hu, M. (2020). Efficient inaccuracy: User-generated 
information sharing in a queue. Management Science, 66(10), 4648-4666. 
 
Copyright / License Copyright © 2020, INFORMS 
 
DOI https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2019.3447 
Publisher’s Statement This is an accepted manuscript of an article published by INFORMS in 
Management Science. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to cite TSpace items 
 
Always cite the published version, so the author(s) will receive recognition through services that track 
citation counts, e.g. Scopus. If you need to cite the page number of the author manuscript from TSpace 
because you cannot access the published version, then cite the TSpace version in addition to the published 
version using the permanent URI (handle) found on the record page. 
 
This article was made openly accessible by U of T Faculty. 
Please tell us how this access benefits you. Your story matters. 
 

Eﬃcient Inaccuracy:
User-Generated Information Sharing in a Queue
Jianfu Wang
Nanyang Business School, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, wangjf@ntu.edu.sg
Ming Hu
Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, Canada, ming.hu@rotman.utoronto.ca
We study a service system which does not have the capability of monitoring and disclosing its real-time
congestion level. However, the customers can observe and post their observations online, and future arrivals
can take into account such user-generated information when deciding whether to go to the service facility.
We perform pairwise comparisons of the shared, full, and no queue length information structures in terms of
social welfare. Perhaps surprisingly, we show that the shared queue length information may provide greater
social welfare than full queue length information when the hassle cost of the customers entering the service
facility falls into some ranges, and the shared and full queue length information always generate greater
social welfare than no queue length information. Therefore, the discrete disclosure of congestion through
user-generated sharing can lead to as much, or even greater, social welfare as the continuous stream of
real-time queue length information disclosure, and always generates greater social welfare than no queue
length information disclosure at all. These results imply that a little shared queue length information –
inaccurate and lagged – can go a long way and that it may be more socially beneﬁcial to encourage the
sharing of user-generated information among customers than to provide them with full real-time queue length
information.
Key words : observable queue; unobservable queue; information sharing; service operations
1.
Introduction
With the advances in information technology, people are more connected than ever. Social media
like Facebook and Twitter facilitate the creation and sharing of information via virtual commu-
nities and networks. Traﬃc-information-sharing apps such as Waze encourage drivers to share
traﬃc congestion information with one another, especially for roads that are not monitored by
government-funded agencies. Such user-generated information sharing is diﬀerent from the full
queue length information disclosure that has been intensively studied in the literature.
The literature on service operations (see, e.g., Hassin 2016, p. 59) points out that disclosing con-
gestion information in real time helps to better match a service provider’s capacity with customers’
demand and thus improves social welfare. The rationale is that, with the real-time delay informa-
tion, customers will be able to make informed decisions upon arrival, so they never join a long
queue or balk from a short one, thus leading to greater social welfare than when a queue cannot
be seen. With a diﬀerent focus, Chen and Frank (2004) suggest that real-time delay information
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

2
improves the system throughput when the arrival rate is high. Their explanation is that, with a
high arrival rate and no delay information, customers are relatively unlikely to join the queue. The
ﬁrm would then prefer to reveal the delay information to customers so that they will always join
a short queue that they would not have joined if they had no delay information. These studies
lend support to the proliferation of almost real-time information disclosure in the public service
systems. For example, a growing number of hospitals post their emergency department waiting
times online for patients to see. Border crossings between the United States and Canada update
the congestion information online in real time.
Despite those beneﬁts, a large fraction of service providers do not release congestion information.
That is probably due to the lack of applicable technology for gathering and distributing such infor-
mation. However, thanks to the thriving mobile social network apps, the congestion experienced
by one customer can be reported to others through these social platforms, as a result of customers’
spontaneous sharing of information. For example, people waiting in front of a pub may post the
queue length on a social platform. During the lunch break at a major academic conference, a par-
ticipant may post a photo of a long queue in front of a nearby food stand to fellow participants.
The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) in the US has attempted to take advantage of
the latest development in technology to establish an inexpensive information crowdsourcing and
dissemination mechanism by releasing a mobile app called MyTSA, which allows air travelers to
share with one another how congested diﬀerent security checkpoints are at an airport.
The above user-generated shared congestion information takes the form of a snapshot of the
service system with a time stamp. Future customers can see the information provided by previous
customers. At the moment the congestion information is posted, it is accurate. As time goes by, it
becomes less precise. Nevertheless, by checking the information, future customers may still obtain
some idea of the current queue length (QL) of the system. We refer to this information structure as
shared queue length information (QLI), which is diﬀerent from the full QLI previously studied in
the service operations literature (see, e.g., observable queue in Naor 1969). Unlike the full QLI that
discloses the QL to customers in continuous time, the shared QLI consists of a countable number
of discrete-time snapshots of the service system sampled when the customers arrived. The volume
of information under the shared-QLI structure is negligible compared to that under full QLI.
There are various user-generated information sharing mechanisms, with diﬀerent timing of shar-
ing (e.g., at arrival or departure) and information content (e.g., real-time QL or experienced waiting
time). For instance, in the pub and food stand examples mentioned above, the QLI is shared when
customers ﬁrst arrive at the queue. In the TSA example, customers can share the waiting time
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

3
experienced at diﬀerent checkpoints when they complete the security check. In this paper, as the
ﬁrst attempt to investigate user-generated information sharing, we focus on the QLI shared at
arrivals, which may not exactly ﬁt some of the settings mentioned above. (In Section 5.1, we discuss
an extension to investigate the model with the QLI shared at departures.) Speciﬁcally, we study
the equilibrium behavior of customers with user-generated and shared QLI to address the following
research question: how does this shared QLI aﬀect the social welfare compared with the full and
no QLI?
We model a service facility with a single-server queue. Upon arrival, a customer, without observ-
ing the real-time QL in the service facility, makes the enter-or-leave decision based on the QLI
available to her (i.e., shared, full, or no QLI). If the customer decides to enter the facility and incur
a hassle cost, she discovers the real-time QL, on the basis of which she then makes the join-or-balk
decision as in an observable queue (Naor 1969).
Under the full-QLI structure, customers can access the real-time QLI broadcast by the service
provider. It is an observable queue with one decision epoch. Customers will use a threshold policy
to decide whether to join or balk, except that the threshold here is lower than that in Naor (1969)
because the service reward is reduced by the hassle cost. Under the no-QLI structure, customers
have no QLI in the ﬁrst decision epoch. In this case, following Edelson and Hilderbrand (1975),
we assume customers use a symmetric mixed strategy to make the enter-or-leave decision, and we
can derive related service level measures accordingly.
Under the shared-QLI structure, customers are all connected through an online information-
sharing platform where the QL can be shared as public information. Regardless of whether a
customer joins or balks after accessing the real-time QL, she posts the QL she observed alongside
her arrival time on the online platform. In the base model, we assume that every customer who
enters the facility will share QLI online. This assumption is relaxed in Section 4. Under shared
QLI, due to the time lag from the previous customer who shared the QLI to the next customer
observing it, the latter perceives the real-time QL as a random variable. In other words, the shared
QLI provides customers with inaccurate QLI, which is diﬀerent from the real-time QLI in its exact
value under full QLI.
Upon observing the shared QLI online, customers may not enter the facility. If the shared QLI
implies that the queue is long and therefore the expected utility of entering the facility is lower
than that of leaving for an outside alternative, customers will choose not to enter. Then, every
time an undesirable QL is reported, arrivals to the system are eﬀectively shut down. After a while,
if no new QLI is shared, the real-time QL is expected to approach a low level, which guarantees a
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

4
positive utility for those who enter the facility. Customers will become interested in entering the
facility again. This arrival shutdown phenomenon is unique to the shared information structure,
unlike those observable and unobservable queueing models (see, e.g., Naor 1969 and Edelson and
Hilderbrand 1975, respectively). We use an approach based on the renewal theory (see, e.g., Ross
2006) to derive the social welfare analytically under the shared-QLI structure, and then compare
it with that under full/no QLI.
Here we summarize our main ﬁnding. The congestion information is a mixed blessing for social
welfare. On the one hand, a little inaccurate shared QLI is signiﬁcantly more advantageous than
no QLI at all. With shared QLI, customers are discouraged from entering the facility when the
queue is expected to be too long to generate positive utility, and they are attracted to the facility
when the queue is more likely to be short enough to provide positive utility. However, with no QLI
at all, customers can join the queue blindly. Therefore, customers under shared QLI make more
informed decisions than those under no QLI. On the other hand, much more abundant information
(i.e., full QLI) does not necessarily lead to greater social welfare and sometimes even hurts social
welfare. In comparison with full QLI, shared QLI has its advantages. Under shared QLI, during
the time when everyone expects the queue to be long, even if the real-time QL drops to a low level,
arrivals do not know that this has happened and are still not willing to enter the facility. Then
the queues that are not short enough to provide signiﬁcant utility for joining customers are ﬁlled
by customers more slowly than under full QLI. This allows long queues to diminish because the
inaccurate shared QLI turns away customers only when the queues are expected to be long; hence
on average customers under shared QLI will face a less congested system than those under full
QLI. That can cause social welfare to be greater under shared QLI than under full QLI.
2.
Literature Review
The literature on queueing systems with rational, utility-maximizing customers dates back to Naor
(1969). The author argues that, under full QLI, self-interested customers will overload the system
and the resulting joining rate deviates from the social optimal level. Hassin and Haviv (2003) and
Hassin (2016) provide comprehensive surveys for various extensions to Naor (1969).
There is a large body of literature on delay announcement to customers. Whitt (1999) shows
that customers are less likely to be blocked when the delay information is provided. Guo and Zipkin
(2007) consider an M/M/1 queue with three information structures: no information, partial queue
length information, and full, exact waiting time information. They ﬁnd that more information may
not always improve social welfare because of customers’ heterogeneous sensitivity to waiting time.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

5
This ﬁnding is further strengthened by Guo and Zipkin (2009). These papers on delay announce-
ment all implicitly assume that service providers oﬀer truthful information. However, customers are
often unable to verify the announced congestion information. Allon et al. (2011) study customers’
strategic behavior under the service provider’s unveriﬁable delay information, and they show that
cheap talk may improve the service provider’s proﬁt and customers’ expected utility. More recently,
Hu et al. (2018) study an M/M/1 queue where only a fraction of customers are informed of the
real-time QL. The authors ﬁnd that the system’s throughput and social welfare may be unimodal
in the fraction of informed customers. Cui et al. (2017) show that when customers are unaware of
the information disclosure policy, it is socially optimal to disclose the QL to customers when the
queue is suﬃciently short or suﬃciently long but not disclose when the QL is moderate. Hassin
and Koshman (2017) discover that a threshold signaling mechanism combined with a careful price
selection achieves the optimal revenue in the case of a linear waiting cost. An earlier version of this
study appears in Hassin and Koshman (2014). Using a Bayesian persuasion framework, Lingen-
brink and Iyer (2019) show a similar result for a broader class of customer waiting costs. Ibrahim
(2018) provides a comprehensive survey on this subject.
The congestion information in the papers mentioned above, regardless of its form, is commu-
nicated to customers by the service provider in real time, or, equivalently, provided to everyone
upon their arrival. In our paper, we study a lagged and user-generated information structure that
emerges as a result of customers’ spontaneous information sharing behavior, which may serve as
an inexpensive information generating and sharing mechanism for service providers.
Other forms of information and their disclosure have been studied in the service operations
literature. Hassin (2007) considers scenarios in which the service rate, service quality, or waiting
conditions are random variables that are known to the server but not to the customers, and he
investigates whether the service provider is motivated to reveal these parameters to customers.
Veeraraghavan and Debo (2009) study customers’ inferences about the service quality through
observation of the queue length, which may lead to herding in queues. Cui and Veeraraghavan
(2016) study a single-server queue with customers who may have arbitrarily diﬀerent beliefs about
the service capacity, and they show that revealing the service rate information can beneﬁt revenue
but may hurt individual or social welfare.
Our work is related to several recent papers about the inﬂuence of social networks and media
on service systems. Allon and Zhang (2017) study the optimal service-level diﬀerentiation in a
two-period model where early adopters’ experiences in the ﬁrst period will be reported on social
networks and internalized by all customers in the second period. Yang and Debo (2018) study the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

6
referral priority program that enables existing customers on a waiting list to gain priority access if
they successfully refer new customers through their social ties. Yang et al. (2019) study the eﬀect
of search cost reduction, enabled by service review websites, on service providers. The authors
ﬁnd that reducing the search cost would increase the average waiting time for high-quality service
providers and might not improve customer welfare. In contrast, we study a dynamic service system
with the transient QLI possibly shared with later arrivals, and we compare the steady-state system
performance with that under alternative information structures.
User-generated content (UGC) has been extensively studied in the marketing and information
system literature, see, e.g., Fader and Winer (2012) for a special issue of Marketing Science on why
people make UGC contributions and the impact of such contributions. A large collection of papers
study the impact of UGC on ﬁrms’ decisions, assuming users’ content generating and sharing
behavior as being exogenously given, see, e.g., Kwark and Raghunathan (2018) for the impact of
UGC on product design. Moreover, our paper is related to a large body of literature on incentives
for information sharing in supply chains. For example, more recently, Ha et al. (2017) consider the
demand information sharing in two competing supply chains where each supply chain is composed
of one retailer and one manufacturer. The authors discover that information sharing may beneﬁt
the supply chain when the manufacturer is eﬃcient in cost reduction. In our setting, we ﬁnd that
QLI sharing among fellow customers beneﬁts the social welfare.
The work most closely related to ours is Hassin and Roet-Green (2018). In their model, customers’
travel time to the service queue follows an exponential distribution. They investigate whether the
service provider should provide customers with the QLI on the service queue prior to traveling.
They show that to maximize throughput, it is better to disclose (resp., conceal) the QLI if the
congestion is high (resp., low) and that, to maximize social welfare, it is better to release the QLI.
The information structure in our model is diﬀerent. The information available to a customer at the
ﬁrst decision epoch was posted by the previous customer some time ago, and the customer obtains
accurate real-time congestion information only if she arrives at the service facility. We compare the
system performance measures under the shared QLI with those under full and no QLI.
3.
Model
Consider a service facility that is modeled as a single-server queue. Service times are distributed
exponentially with mean 1/µ. The demand for obtaining the service follows a homogeneous Poisson
process with arrival rate Λ. Both the service rate µ and arrival rate Λ are public information. We
denote by ρ = Λ/µ the oﬀered load of the system. The system uses a ﬁrst-come-ﬁrst-served (FCFS)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

7
service discipline. Customers have an identical service reward R and marginal waiting cost c per
unit of time, which are public information as well.
The service provider does not possess a mechanism for generating and sharing real-time queue
length information (QLI), but all customers have free access to an online information-sharing
platform where the QL posted by someone is shared as public information. In Section 4, we relax
this assumption and allow only a fraction of customers to have access to such a platform.
Hassle cost. We assume that if customers enter the service facility, they incur an exogenous
hassle cost h and observe the real-time QLI. The hassle cost represents the eﬀort customers exert
to access the queue and then obtain the real-time QLI (if it is not publicly disclosed). It is not a
payment transfer from customers to the service provider. Customers cannot join the queue without
incurring this cost. This is consistent with the literature. In retail operations literature, the hassle
cost has been used to capture customers’ eﬀort for traveling to the store and searching for the
product; see, e.g., Gao and Su (2017).Indeed, entering the service facility may take not only eﬀort
but also time. As the ﬁrst attempt to model user-generated information sharing, we focus on a
parsimonious model and assume the travel time to the facility is negligible. We refer the readers
to Hassin and Roet-Green (2018) for a model that captures the travel time to a service provider.
As a potential demand arises at time t, the customer makes an enter-or-leave decision on the
basis of the hassle cost h and the latest QLI ϕ that was shared on the platform δ time units ago
at time T = t −δ.
Second decision: Join-or-balk. If an “entry” decision is made, the customer enters the facility
and discovers the real-time QL, ψ, at time t (due to the assumption of negligible travel time), on
the basis of which she then makes the join-or-balk decision. At this decision epoch, the customer’s
utility from joining the queue is
Ujoin = R −cψ + 1
µ
.
(1)
If the customer chooses to balk, she obtains zero utility. Let ⌊x⌋denote the largest integer not
exceeding x. Then, there is a threshold n ≡⌊ν⌋where ν ≡Rµ/c, such that the customer joins the
queue if and only if Ujoin ≥0, i.e., ψ ≤n −1.
Information Sharing. Regardless of the join-or-balk decision, upon entering the facility, a
customer posts her observation of the QLI along with the time stamp t on the online information-
sharing platform. For convenience, we let the information posted be the total number of customers
in the system after the customer makes her join-or-balk decision. For example, suppose the customer
sees a number of ψ customers ahead of her. If ψ < n and the customer decides to join, then she
posts the QLI ϕ = ψ + 1 on the platform; if ψ ≥n and the customer balks, then she posts the QLI
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

8
as ϕ = ψ. Clearly, no customers are interested in joining a queue of length n and then post the QLI
ϕ = n + 1, so ϕ is at most n; on the other hand, any rational customer will be interested in joining
an empty queue, so ϕ is at least one.
In the base model, we assume that every customer who arrives at the facility will share infor-
mation online. At a service completion, the customer leaves the system without posting anything.
(Note that if every customer posts the QLI on the platform upon both arrival and departure, future
arrivals can infer the real-time QL accurately simply by counting, and the information structure
is essentially equivalent to an observable queue, which is not our interest here.) Furthermore, in
Section 5.1, we discuss how to handle the situation where customers post the QLI only at departure.
As a feature of our model, the information available to customers in the ﬁrst decision epoch is not
a continuous stream of real-time QL. Instead, it takes the form of a countable number of snapshots
of the service system, each with a time stamp. Though future arrivals can see the information
posted by earlier customers, the information is no longer accurate when they arrive. As mentioned,
we refer to this user-generated information structure as the shared-QLI structure.
In our model, the service quality is public knowledge among customers, e.g., obtained through
review websites. The shared QLI does not change customers’ inference of the service quality. Of
course, QL can signal service quality (see, e.g., Veeraraghavan and Debo 2009), which we do not
capture in our model.
First decision: Enter-or-leave. Let Ψ(δ,ϕ) denote the random variable representing the real-
time QL (including the one in service if there is one) that can be observed by a customer arriving at
time t, i.e., δ time units after the most recent QLI ϕ was posted at time T. Under the assumption
that all customers post information online, the realization of Ψ(δ,ϕ) ranges from zero to ϕ. Recall
that at the second decision epoch, customers join if and only if the observed QL is less than n. If
a customer enters the facility with Ψ(δ,ϕ) = k < n customers, her utility is the expected utility of
joining a queue of length k less the hassle cost h. If a customer enters the facility with Ψ(δ,ϕ) = n
customers, she will balk and her utility is −h. Thus, using the total probability theorem, we have
the customer’s expected utility of entering the facility:
Uenter (δ,ϕ) =



∑ϕ
k=0 P {Ψ(δ,ϕ) = k}
(
R −c k+1
µ
)
−h ϕ < n,
∑n−1
k=0 P {Ψ(δ,n) = k}
(
R −c k+1
µ
)
−h ϕ = n,
=
{ R −h −c E[Ψ(δ,ϕ)]+1
µ
ϕ < n,
R −h −c E[Ψ(δ,n)]+1
µ
−e−µδ (
R −c n+1
µ
)
ϕ = n,
=
{ c
µ (ω −1 −E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)])
ϕ < n,
c
µ (ω −1 −E [Ψ(δ,n)] −e−µδ (ν −n −1)) ϕ = n,
(2)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

9
where ω ≡(R−h)µ
c
. Clearly, we have ω ≤ν. From the second equation of (2), we see that the utility
of entering the facility Uenter is the service reward R less the combined hassle cost h and expected
waiting cost. This should be adjusted for the case that a customer balks after entering a facility
with n customers. If the customer chooses to leave at the ﬁrst decision epoch, she receives zero
utility. A rational customer enters the facility if and only if Uenter ≥0.
We write m = ⌊ω⌋as the threshold such that if customers know the real-time QLI at all time
(the full-QLI structure), upon arrival a customer will enter the facility and incur the hassle cost
if and only if the real-time QL is no more than m −1. To ensure that customers who know the
queue is empty are willing to enter the facility for the hassle cost, we should have ω ≥1; otherwise
no customers will enter the facility. Further, note that when ω = 1 in (2), the expected utility
of entering the facility may be negative at any time after the latest QL update. For example, if
a customer reports online that she is the only one in the queue (i.e., ϕ = 1 < n) at time T, no
customers will enter the facility after that. This is because no matter how much time has passed,
there is always a small possibility that this customer is still there; i.e., E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)] > 0. Then, from
(2) the expected utility of entering is negative. Hence, no customers will be interested in entering
the facility after the latest QL update. Thus, for the ease of exposition, we exclude the whole
interval [1,2) containing the case of ω = 1 in the following analysis and focus on ω ≥2.
In our base model, we consider homogeneous customers with identical service reward R, marginal
waiting cost c, and hassle cost h. In Section 5.2, we discuss the model with heterogeneous customers.
Under the shared-QLI structure, there are two separate decision epochs, and at the second one,
the hassle cost has been sunk. Thus, upon arrival, customers consider the utility function (2), where
the hassle cost h is a disutility. After she enters the facility, a rational customer adopts the utility
function (1) on the spot to make the join-or-balk decision, where the hassle cost is forgone as a
sunk cost.
We will compare the shared-QLI structure with (i) the full- QLI structure, under which customers
make the enter-or-leave decision based on a continuous stream of real-time QLI, and (ii) the
no-QLI structure, under which customers do not have the real-time QLI and they rely on the long-
run average QL distribution to make the enter-or-leave decision. The shared-, full-, and no-QLI
structures oﬀer diﬀerent forms of QLI to customers at the ﬁrst decision epoch. Under full QLI,
customers have the real-time QL in its exact value, which is similar to the observable queue in Naor
(1969). Under shared QLI, customers view the real-time QL as a random variable derived from
the user-generated shared information posted by other customers some time ago. The real-time
QL is overlaid with noise over the lagged, shared QLI. Under no QLI, customers do not have the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

10
real-time QLI. Once a customer enters the facility after incurring the hassle cost h, she obtains the
real-time QLI under all three information structures.
3.1.
Real-Time Queue Length
We now characterize the monotonicity of the real-time QL, Ψ(δ,ϕ), with respect to the time elapsed
since the latest QL update, δ. Because there are no arrivals but only departures during (T,t), the
expected real-time QL, E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)], should decrease over time. This is conﬁrmed by the following
lemma.
Lemma 1. Given the last customer’s QL update ϕ, the expected real-time QL, E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)], is
strictly decreasing in δ (or t = T + δ).
Customers are connected through the information-sharing platform. Upon arrival, if a customer
enters the facility and sees the queue, she shares the QLI ϕ with other customers. The utility
of entering the facility Uenter is an increasing function of δ, because the expected real-time QL,
E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)], is decreasing in δ after the latest QLI update at time T. This is conﬁrmed by the
following lemma.
Lemma 2. Given the last customer’s QL update ϕ, the utility of entering the facility (i)
Uenter (δ,ϕ) is strictly increasing in δ (or t = T +δ). (ii) At time t = T, Uenter (0,ϕ) ≥0 if 1 ≤ϕ < m;
and Uenter (0,ϕ) < 0 if m ≤ϕ ≤n. (iii) Uenter (δ,ϕ) is strictly decreasing in ϕ.
From Lemma 2, we see that if the latest QL update is less than m, i.e., ϕ < m, the customer who
arrives at any time after the latest QL update will enter the facility, i.e., Uenter ≥0, and use the
real-time QLI to make the join-or-balk decision. When the latest online QL update is m ≤ϕ ≤n,
immediately after the latest QL update, customers have no incentive to enter the facility, since
entering leads to negative utility; i.e., Uenter < 0. As time goes by, customers’ utility of entering the
facility Uenter increases (see Lemma 2(i)) and when it reaches 0, customers will want to enter the
facility again. Let τϕ denote the length of the time it takes for the utility of entering the facility
Uenter to increase to zero. Then τϕ is the unique solution of the following equation with variable δ,
Uenter (δ,ϕ) = 0.
(3)
After the utility of entering the facility Uenter increases to zero at time T + τϕ, customers become
interested in entering the facility again. Later at time t ≥T + τϕ, a customer will enter the facility
and see, say ψ, number of customers in the queue. If ψ < n, then this customer joins the queue,
and updates the online QLI as ϕ = ψ + 1 (this is true even when ψ is in the range of [m,n) – a
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

11
range of QLs for which the customer would not like to enter the facility in the ﬁrst place before
incurring the hassle cost h, because she forgoes the hassle cost in the second decision epoch as a
sunk cost that she has paid earlier in the ﬁrst decision epoch); otherwise, she balks and updates
the online QLI as ϕ = n.
The QL update ϕ may take a value greater than m. For example, when the latest update is
ϕ = m and before the next customer enters the facility at time t, there is no service completion,
the next customer will join the queue and update ϕ = m + 1. Similar situations can happen for
m < ϕ < n. Therefore, the shared QLI ϕ for all t can range from 1 to n.
Once some customer reports a QL m ≤ϕ ≤n, the arrival process to the facility is eﬀectively
shut down for a constant time period τϕ; after that, customers again become interested in making
the entry decision. If the latest QL update ϕ is no more than m −1, i.e., 1 ≤ϕ ≤m −1, arriving
customers will not stop entering the service facility. Equivalently, the facility is shut down for a
time period of length zero. Consistent with the cases of m ≤ϕ ≤n, we adopt the convention of
deﬁning the length of the arrival shutdown period for 1 ≤ϕ ≤m −1 as zero, i.e., τϕ = 0.
Lemma 3. Consider ω ≥2. The arrival shutdown period length τϕ has the following properties
for m ≤ϕ ≤n: (i) τϕ is a decreasing function of ν. (ii) τϕ is an increasing function of h and
limh↘0 τϕ = 0. (iii) τϕ is a decreasing function of ω. (iv) τϕ is an increasing function of ϕ.
To the best of our knowledge, queueing systems with arrival shutdowns have not been studied
before. The observable queue model (see, e.g., Naor 1969) contains a feature similar to the arrival
shutdown. There, once the QL rises to the joining threshold, customers stop joining the queue until
the next service completion occurs. We call it joining shutdown in the observable queue model to
diﬀerentiate it from the arrival shutdown in our model under the shared QLI. Queueing systems
with arrival shutdowns are diﬀerent from those with joining shutdowns. The joining shutdown
contingently depends on the real-time QL. The length of a joining shutdown period is exponentially
distributed with mean 1/µ. The arrival shutdown counts on the expected real-time QL. Once a
long queue is reported online, an arrival shutdown period starts and it is of a constant length for
a given posted queue length.
Moreover, queueing systems with arrival shutdowns are diﬀerent from those with service vaca-
tions that have been widely studied (see, e.g., Takagi 1991, and references therein). The literature
applies the generating function approach on the embedded Markov chain at service completions
to derive the mean queue length and customers’ waiting time. In a queueing system with service
vacations, the number of Poisson arrivals in a vacation can be arbitrarily large, whereas in a system
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

12
with arrival shutdowns, the number of service completions in an arrival shutdown period is capped
by the number of customers at the beginning of that period, which makes it diﬃcult to directly
apply and extend the generating function approach.
Remark 1. In reality, customers may not always share the QLI but share according to some
underlying rules. For example, when the queue is relatively long, customers have a higher tendency
and longer unoccupied time to share QLI in the form of complaints about long queues. The dis-
cussion of Lemma 2 shows that only the QLI of m ≤ϕ ≤n (the queue is relatively long) concerns
future customers, while the QLI of ϕ < m (the queue is short) does not aﬀect the arrival process
at the facility. Therefore it is equivalent to consider the information sharing norm in which only
the extreme QLI m ≤ϕ ≤n is posted. Under such a norm, suppose the latest QLI is m ≤ϕ ≤n.
Customers who arrive in the arrival shutdown period will leave the system due to the anticipated
negative utility of making the “entry” decision. Customers who arrive after the arrival shutdown
period will enter the facility; their rationale is: (i) If no other customers arrive after the arrival
shutdown period, then the current expected QL is less than ω −1 and the “entry decision oﬀers
a positive expected utility. (ii) If some other customers arrive after the arrival shutdown period,
given the fact that there are no QL updates greater or equal to m after the arrival shutdown period,
it is certain that these customers see less than m −1 customers after they enter the facility and
the current QL must be less than m. Thus, the “entry option is also desirable. This explains the
equivalency of the two information structures, one with every arrival at the facility sharing QLI
and the other with only the extreme QLI shared.
□
3.2.
Service Level Measures
In this section, we ﬁrst derive, for the shared-QLI structure, the entry rate to the facility ¯ΛS,
the throughput ΛS, and social welfare SS of the system. Recall that under the shared QLI, some
customers who enter the facility may ﬁnd a queue of length n, so they will not join. Thus, we have
¯ΛS ≥ΛS.
To derive these quantities, we consider a semi-Markov process (see, e.g., §7.6 of Ross 2006) that
enters states ϕ at time points when customers update QLI on the platform. Let πϕ denote its
stationary probability for ϕ ∈{1,2,...,n}. The time period between any two consecutive transitions
is a transition cycle, which is composed of two time intervals: the arrival shutdown period, from
the previous QL update (at time T) to T +τϕ, and arrival open period, from T +τϕ to the next QL
update. Recall that the ﬁrst time interval in the cycle is empty for 1 ≤ϕ < m. No arrivals in the
arrival shutdown period are interested in entering the facility. At the end of the arrival shutdown
period, customers become interested in entering the facility again. The next customer will enter the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

13
facility at time T +τϕ +exp(Λ), where exp(Λ) denotes a random variable following the exponential
distribution with parameter Λ, and discover the real-time QL ψ. Then, if the real-time QL ψ is less
than n, she joins and updates ϕ = ψ +1; otherwise, when the real-time QL is n, which can happen
if the latest QL update is ϕ = n and there is no service completion between these two QL updates,
with probability
ρ
ρ+1e−µτn, this customer balks and updates ϕ = n. Then, another transition cycle
starts with the next QL update. Clearly, the length of the arrival shutdown period is τϕ, which
depends on the updated QLI ϕ. The expected length of the arrival open period is 1/Λ.
At each transition, one customer enters the facility and updates the QLI as ϕ. The customer’s
expected utility from joining the queue is R−c
µϕ less the hassle cost h; otherwise, with probability
πn
ρ
ρ+1e−µτn, this customer will balk after entering the service facility and obtain zero utility after
incurring the hassle cost h.
Then, by applying renewal theory (see, e.g., Ross 2006) to the semi-Markov process, customers’
entry rate to the facility ¯ΛS can be computed as one divided by the expected length of a transition
cycle. The throughput ΛS is the entry rate to the facility minus the rate of balking after an
entry. Lastly, social welfare SS can be derived by the renewal theory as the expected utility of the
customer who enters the facility at the end of a transition cycle divided by the expected length of
a transition cycle. Note that since our model does not involve price as a transfer payment between
customers and the service provider, the social welfare only includes the customer surplus.
Proposition 1 (Shared QLI). Under the shared-QLI structure and with a hassle cost h, the
entry rate to the facility ¯ΛS, the throughput ΛS, and the social welfare SS are given by (OA. 7),
(OA. 8), and (OA. 9) in the Online Appendix.
If no customers share any QLI online, arrivals have no QLI whatsoever in their ﬁrst decision
epoch. In this case, following Edelson and Hilderbrand (1975), we assume customers use a sym-
metric mixed strategy to make the enter-or-leave decision. In their second decision epoch, once
customers have access to the real-time QLI, they make the join-or-balk decision as in an observable
queue (see, e.g., Naor 1969). At this decision epoch, customers forgo the hassle cost as a sunk cost,
and they will join the queue if and only if the real-time QL is less than n. We can derive related
performance measures under no QLI.
Proposition 2 (No QLI). Under the no-QLI structure, the entry rate to the facility ¯ΛN, the
throughput ΛN, and social welfare SN are
Case
¯ΛN
ΛN
SN
0 < ρ < ρN
Λ
µ ρ(1−ρn)
1−ρn+1
µρ(h(ρ) −h)
ρ ≥ρN
µρN
µ
ρN(1−ρn
N)
1−ρn+1
N
0
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

14
where ρN is the unique solution of h = H (ρ) ≡c
µ
(
ν (1−ρn)
1−ρn+1 −
1
1−ρ + (n+1)ρn
1−ρn+1
)
. We have that (i) ρN
decreases in the hassle cost h. (ii) limh→0 ρN = ∞. (iii) limh→R−c
µ ρN = 0. (iv) ρN > ρL, where ρL
is the unique solution of Ln(ρ) = ω −1 and Ln(ρ) is the expected QL under entry rate µρ.
Proposition 2 shows that there are two critical cutoﬀs ρL and ρN in the oﬀered load ρ that
are dependent on the hassle cost h, and further, ρL < ρN. If ρ > ρN, customers will join with
probability ρN/ρ so that the eﬀective arrival rate at the facility is µρN and customers expect zero
utility. If ρ ≤ρN, all customers enter the facility expecting non-negative utility. Moreover, if ρ ≤ρL,
the resulting expected QL is no more than ω −1; otherwise, if ρL < ρ ≤ρN, all customers enter
the facility while the resulting expected QL is greater than ω −1, a level at which, if a customer
knows it in the ﬁrst decision epoch, she will not enter the facility. Such behavior does not exist in
the unobservable queue, where ρL and ρN coincide. This is because in our model under no QLI,
customers can choose to balk in the second decision epoch so the cost of entering the facility with
a long queue is limited by the hassle cost, which drives up the expected QL to be greater than
ω −1.
On the other hand, under the full-QLI structure, customers essentially have only one decision
epoch. If their decision is to enter the facility, they incur the hassle cost h. This lowers customers’
service reward to R −h. Therefore, to analyze customers’ equilibrium behavior under the full QLI
in the presence of a positive hassle cost h, we only need to assume the service reward to be R −h
and the same result from Naor (1969) will follow.
Proposition 3 (Full QLI). Under the full-QLI structure, the entry rate to the facil-
ity
¯ΛF, the throughput ΛF, and social welfare SF
are
¯ΛF = ΛF = µ ρ(1−ρm)
1−ρm+1
and SF =
cρ
(
1−ρm
1−ρm+1 ω −
(
1
1−ρ −(m+1)ρm
1−ρm+1
))
.
3.3.
Asymptotic Case
In this section, we gain understanding of the service system under the shared-, full-, and no-QLI
structures by ﬁrst focusing on the asymptotic case Λ = ∞. Recall from Section 3.2 that each
transition cycle under the shared QLI is composed of two time intervals: the arrival shutdown
period of length τϕ, and the arrival open period of expected length 1/Λ. In the asymptotic case,
each transition cycle has only the arrival shutdown period, and the arrival open period in any
transition cycle is of length zero due to the inﬁnitely high arrival rate.
Recall from Section 3.1 that the shared QLI ranges from 1 to n. This conclusion holds a fortiori
for the asymptotic case, and the QL updates under the shared QLI form a semi-Markov process
with state space {1,2,...,n}. For the QL update 1 ≤ϕ ≤m −1, the arrival shutdown period is
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

15
of length zero; then, immediately after the QL update, another customer enters the facility, joins
the queue, and obtains non-negative utility R −h −c
µ (ϕ + 1). For the QL update m ≤ϕ ≤n, right
after the arrival shutdown period, a customer entering the facility expects to see ω −1 customers
and obtains zero utility. Note from Lemma 3(iii) that the length of the arrival shutdown period τϕ
increases in the online QL update ϕ, for m ≤ϕ ≤n. This means that the more customers a transition
cycle starts with, the longer the arrival shutdown period is, and the more service completions are
expected to occur during the arrival shutdown period. As a result, the next customer entering the
facility sees on average ω −1 customers in the queue.
A transition cycle starts with m + 1 ≤ϕ ≤n customers only when the previous transition cycle
starts with ϕ −1 customers and there is no service completion during the arrival shutdown period
of that cycle. Recall from Lemma 3(iv) that the length of an arrival shutdown period τϕ increases
in the online QL update ϕ, for m ≤ϕ ≤n. Then the larger number of customers a transition cycle
starts with, the less likely the next transition cycle is to start with a lot of customers. Hence, the
steady-state probability of a transition cycle starting with ϕ+1 customers should be less than that
of a transition cycle starting
with ϕ customers, for m ≤ϕ < n. When n−m is suﬃciently large (e.g., n−m ≥5), the probability
of the transition cycle starting with n customers, πn, becomes negligible.
Similarly, a transition cycle starts with one customer only when the previous transition cycle
starts with m ≤ϕ ≤n customers, and all these ϕ customers complete services during the arrival
shutdown period of length τϕ, which happens with probability ∑∞
i=ϕ e−µτϕ (µτϕ)
i /i!. When m
increases to inﬁnity, the probability of all customers completing services during an arrival shutdown
period approaches zero, as does the probability of a transition cycle starting with one customer.
When both m and n−m become large, the steady-state probability mass of the online QL update
concentrates around state m, and both π1 and πn approach zero. Note that since πn approaches
zero, almost all customers who enter the facility will join the queue. Thus, we have the expected
length of any transition cycle as ∑n
i=1 πiτi ≈1/µ. This intuition is sensible because in this limiting
case one customer is expected to enter the facility and join the queue at the end of every transition
cycle, and one service completion is expected to occur in every transition cycle.
Corollary 1 (Shared QLI – Asymptotic Case). In the asymptotic case Λ = ∞, under the
shared-QLI structure, the entry rate to the facility ¯ΛS, the throughput ΛS, and the social welfare
SS are given by (OA. 12), (OA. 13), and (OA. 14) in the Online Appendix. Moreover, we have:
(i) The social welfare under the shared QLI SS is non-negative, i.e., SS ≥0, where the equality
holds only when the hassle cost is h = R −2c/µ ≥0.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

16
(ii) The throughput under the shared QLI ΛS approaches the service rate µ when the service reward
R approaches inﬁnity; i.e., limR→∞ΛS = µ.
Under no QLI, when the arrival rate approaches inﬁnity, the oﬀered load must be greater than
ρN given in Proposition 2. In this case, only a fraction of the customers will enter the facility so
that the eﬀective entry rate at the service facility is µρN. Since customers have no QLI at their
ﬁrst decision epoch, they expect zero utility when entering the facility. The following corollary
summarizes the above results.
Corollary 2 (No QLI – Asymptotic Case). In the asymptotic case Λ = ∞, under the no-
QLI structure, the entry rate to the facility ¯ΛN, the throughput ΛN, and social welfare SN are
¯ΛN = µρN, ΛN = µ
ρN(1−ρn
N)
1−ρn+1
N
, and SN = 0.
Under full QLI, when the arrival rate approaches inﬁnity, once a service completion reduces the
QL to m −1, a customer immediately arrives and enters the service facility. The customer obtains
utility
c
µ (ω −m). This event increases the QL to m. Then, after an exponential time period with
mean 1/µ, another service completion occurs, and the same cycle repeats. The QL essentially stays
at m all the time, and the server is constantly busy with customers, so the throughput under full
QLI is identical to the service rate; i.e., ΛF = µ. The following corollary provides the asymptotic
throughput and social welfare under full QLI.
Corollary 3 (Full QLI – Asymptotic Case). In the asymptotic case Λ = ∞, under the
full-QLI structure, the throughput ΛF and social welfare SF are ΛF = µ, and SF = c(ω −m).
We see from Corollary 3 that the social welfare under full QLI SF in the asymptotic case depends
only on the fraction part of ω, i.e., ω −m. When the hassle cost h increases, ω = (R −h)µ/c
decreases linearly. When h increases in the range of
(
R −c
µ (i + 1),R −c
µi
]
, ω decreases in the
range of [i,i + 1), and SF decreases in the range of [0,c) for any integer i ≥2. Once the hassle cost
h ↘R −c
µ (i + 1), we have ω ↗i + 1 and SF ↗c. Hence, the social welfare under full QLI SF is a
cyclic function of the hassle cost h with a cycle length c/µ.
3.4.
Comparisons
We ﬁrst establish a connection between the shared-, full-, and no-QLI structures. When the hassle
cost is forgone as a sunk cost at the second decision epoch, customers’ expected future utility is
positive: if the queue is desirably short, they join and obtain positive utility; otherwise, in the
worst case, they can balk and obtain zero utility. However, customers may choose not to enter at
the ﬁrst decision epoch when their expected utility of entering is less than the hassle cost. Recall
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

17
that the hassle cost represents the eﬀort customers pay to obtain the real-time QLI. When the
hassle cost becomes zero, the QLI is essentially free for customers under the shared- and no-QLI
structures. Then, all customers under shared or no QLI will choose to enter the facility and obtain
the real-time QLI, as if the system operates under the full-QLI structure, which is equivalent to
Naor’s model. This is conﬁrmed as follows.
Proposition 4. When the hassle cost is zero, i.e., h = 0, the throughput and social welfare
under the shared- and no-QLI structures are identical to those under the full-QLI structure, i.e.,
ΛF = Λ
1−ρn
1−ρn+1 , and SF = cρ
(
1−ρn
1−ρn+1 ν −
(
1
1−ρ −(n+1)ρn
1−ρn+1
))
.
Next, we focus on the comparison of social welfare under the shared-, full-, and no-QLI structures.
Hassin (2016) suggests that the real-time QLI improves social welfare: the congestion information
helps match capacity better with customer demand, so that customers never join a long queue or
balk from a short one. The following theorem demonstrates that this intuition still holds in our
queueing model with two decision epochs.
Theorem 1. The social welfare under full QLI SF is greater than that under no QLI SN, i.e.,
SF > SN.
We next compare the social welfare under shared and no QLI. Under shared QLI, customers have
some idea of the QL from the shared QLI posted by fellow customers. Customers are discouraged
from entering the facility in the arrival shutdown period, when the queue is expected to be too
long to oﬀer positive utility, and they are attracted to the facility in the arrival open period, when
the queue is more likely to be short enough to generate positive utility. However, customers under
no QLI blindly join on the basis of a probability, without adaptations to the current state of the
queue. Therefore, in this case, the social welfare under shared QLI is greater than that under no
QLI. The following theorem conﬁrms the above intuition.
Theorem 2. The social welfare under shared QLI SS is no less than that under no QLI SN,
i.e., SS ≥SN. The equality holds only when the hassle cost is h = 0.
Theorems 1 and 2 suggest that systems with the objective of increasing social welfare would
strictly prefer the shared- and full-QLI structure over the no-QLI structure.
We then compare the social welfare under the shared- and full-QLI structures. We ﬁrst make the
comparison in an asymptotic case Λ = ∞. Recall from Section 3.3 that in this case, each transition
cycle has only the arrival shutdown period. By focusing on the asymptotic case, we zoom in on the
eﬀect of the arrival shutdown period on social welfare. Despite the fact that the derivation of the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

18
steady-state probability distribution πi under shared QLI in closed form is notoriously diﬃcult,
we manage to compare the social welfare under shared and full QLI without the expression of πi.
Then, building on the result obtained from the asymptotic case, we explore the comparison of the
shared QLI and the full QLI for the general case Λ < ∞.
Asymptotic case Λ = ∞(SS vs. SF ). Under full QLI, customers receive a continuous and
accurate ﬂow of QLI. Once a service completion occurs and reduces the QL to m −1, the arrival
shutdown period ends. A customer immediately arrives and enters the service facility. This event
increases the QL to m. That is, all customers who enter the facility join a queue of length m −1
and obtain utility c
µ (ω −m), whose value is small when ω is close to m.
Under the shared-QLI structure, since the latest QL update is lagged and conveys some idea
about the expected QL to customers, it is not as accurate as full QLI. As a result, even if the
real-time QL drops to m −1 before the end of the arrival shutdown period, no customers will
discover it and enter the facility. That creates opportunity for the queue to diminish during the
arrival shutdown period before the next arrival, so that the following several customers expect
positive utility.
In other words, customers over-join under the full-QLI structure, which generates negative exter-
nality for future customers. This hurts the social welfare, particularly when each joining customer
obtains little utility under full QLI, i.e., when ω −m is small. Thus, the social welfare under shared
QLI may be greater than that under full QLI.
Theorem 3. In the asymptotic case Λ = ∞, there exists an ϵ ∈
(
0, c
µ
)
such that the social welfare
under shared QLI SS is greater than that under full QLI SF; i.e., SS > SF, when the hassle cost h
is in the range of
(
R −c
µi −ϵ,R −c
µi
]
, for i = 3,...,n −1.
Naor (1969) proposes using tolls to improve social welfare under the full-QLI structure. A toll
imposed on customers who join the queue will reduce their expected net gain and make the joining
shutdown period more frequent, which further alleviates congestion in the observable queue model.
Theorem 3 shows that reducing the amount of congestion information available to customers may
achieve the same goal by creating arrival shutdown periods with inaccurate shared QLI. More
important, our scheme does not involve monetary payments from customers.
To illustrate the comparison of the social welfare under shared and full QLI, in Figure 1, we plot
SS and SF as functions of hassle cost h, in the asymptotic case Λ = 108. We see that as Corollary
3 describes, the social welfare under full QLI is a cyclic function that decreases from c to zero on
each band of h ∈(ic/µ,(i + 1)c/µ]. Moreover, as Corollary 1 shows, the social welfare under shared
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

19
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Hassle Cost h
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Social Welfare
Full QLI
Shared QLI
Figure 1
Social welfare as a function of hassle cost h under full and shared QLI with service reward R = 10,
service rate µ = 1, marginal waiting cost c = 1, and arrival rate Λ = 108.
QLI is positive unless the hassle cost is very large, i.e., h = R −2c/µ. Most importantly, on each
band h ∈(ic/µ,(i + 1)c/µ], for i = 0,1,...,6, there is an interval of signiﬁcant length (≈0.15c/µ)
in which the social welfare under shared QLI is greater than that under full QLI.
Theorem 3 implies that, for systems with the objective of increasing social welfare, the full-QLI
structure may not be more eﬀective than the shared-QLI structure. The relationship between the
service reward R and the hassle cost h plays a vital role. When the hassle cost h ↗R −c
µi, for
any integer i ≥3, the social welfare under the shared-QLI structure is greater than that under the
full-QLI structure. When the hassle cost h ↘R −c
µi, the social welfare under shared QLI may be
lower than that under full QLI.
General case (SS vs. SF). A ﬁnite arrival rate Λ aﬀects the social welfare under shared- and
full-QLI structures in a similar fashion to the asymptotic case. Recall from Proposition 1 that
the social welfare under shared QLI can be calculated as the diﬀerence between each customer’s
expected service reward and waiting cost divided by the average transition cycle length. Since the
arrival rate Λ is a ﬁnite value, the arrival open period within any transition cycle is of an expected
length 1/Λ. On the one hand, immediately after the arrival shutdown period (the ﬁrst interval in
a transition cycle), even if customers become interested in entering the facility again, they do not
arrive immediately due to a positive inter-arrival time. During the arrival open period, some service
completions may occur and reduce the QL seen by the next customer whose arrival marks the
end of the transition cycle. This reduces each customer’s expected waiting cost and consequently
increases the social welfare. We refer to this as the wait reduction eﬀect. On the other hand, when
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

20
0
2
4
6
8
Hassle Cost h
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Social Welfare: Λ=2
Full QLI
Shared QLI
0
2
4
6
8
Hassle Cost h
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Social Welfare: Λ=1
Full QLI
Shared QLI
0
2
4
6
8
Hassle Cost h
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Social Welfare: Λ=0.5
Full QLI
Shared QLI
Figure 2
Social welfare as a function of hassle cost h under shared and full QLI with service reward R = 10,
service rate µ = 1, marginal waiting cost c = 1, and arrival rate Λ ∈{0.5,1,2}
the arrival open period within the transition cycles grows, the average cycle length increases. This
eﬀect reduces the service reward collection rate and hurts the social welfare. We refer to this as the
cycle lengthening eﬀect. When the value of Λ is small, the cycle lengthening eﬀect is strong. For
example, the expected length of the arrival open period, 1/Λ, increases from 0 to 1 if Λ decreases
from ∞to 1, while it increases from 1 to ∞if Λ decreases from 1 to 0. The wait reduction and
cycle lengthening eﬀects also exist under the full-QLI structure.
In Figure 2, we display the social welfare under full and shared QLI, SS and SF, as a function
of hassle cost h, for R = 10 in the general cases of Λ = 0.5, 1, and 2. The ﬁgure conﬁrms that our
result from the asymptotic case in Theorem 3 holds in the general case.
The wait reduction and cycle lengthening eﬀects impact the social welfare under shared and
full QLI similarly. For example, in Figure 2, when Λ = 2, for the hassle cost h in the range on
the left of R −c
µi for i = 4,...,9, we have SS > SF. Moreover, a low arrival rate Λ leads to long
inter-arrival times. Then, the proportion that arrival shutdown periods take out of the transition
cycles diminishes, and the majority of customers arrive during the arrival open period and enter
the facility, as they would do under full QLI. For example, in Figure 2, when Λ = 0.5, the social
welfare under shared QLI is almost identical to that under full QLI.
Recall that, when the arrival rate Λ decreases, the wait reduction eﬀect tends to boost the social
welfare, while the cycle lengthening eﬀect tends to reduce it; and the interplay of the wait reduction
and cycle lengthening eﬀects determines the social welfare. When the arrival rate Λ is high, the
cycle lengthening eﬀect is weak and dominated by the wait reduction eﬀect, so the social welfare
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

21
under shared and full QLI is expected to increase when Λ decreases. This intuition is conﬁrmed
by Figure 2: the social welfare under shared and full QLI increases signiﬁcantly if the arrival rate
Λ decreases from 2 to 1. When the arrival rate Λ is low, the cycle lengthening eﬀect becomes
strong and dominates the wait reduction eﬀect, so the social welfare under shared and full QLI may
decrease as Λ decreases. For example, we see from Figure 2 that the social welfare under shared
and full QLI decreases slightly if Λ decreases from 1 to 0.5.
Combined with Theorems 1, 2, and 3, Figure 2 oﬀers the following managerial insight: to boost
social welfare, it is more beneﬁcial to have little, even inaccurate, information (i.e., shared QLI)
than no QLI at all; however, full information does not necessarily lead to greater social welfare and
may sometimes even result in less social welfare.
We also compare the throughput under these three QLI structures in Online Appendix OA1.
We discover that the throughput under shared QLI is at a level similar to that under full QLI
when the oﬀered load is small; and that the throughput under full QLI dominates that under
shared QLI when the oﬀered load is large. The shared-QLI structure conveys lagged and inaccurate
congestion information to customers compared to the full-QLI structure. This leads to two eﬀects
on the throughput. On the one hand, the arrival shutdown period under shared QLI allows a long
queue to diminish, instead of ﬁlling up quickly after a service completion as it would under the
full-QLI structure. This input reduction eﬀect results in an additional possibility for the server to
become idle; hence the throughput under shared QLI may be less than that under full QLI. On
the other hand, if a long queue does not diminish quickly enough in the arrival shutdown period,
customers under shared QLI may not be aware of the situation and they may enter the facility.
Then, due to the sunk hassle cost, customers may join some queues that they would have not
joined under full QLI. This input boost eﬀect leads to a higher probability of the server staying
busy, so the throughput under shared QLI may be greater than that under full QLI. When the
oﬀered load is low, these two eﬀects have similar strengths for diﬀerent hassle costs, so neither the
shared- or full-QLI structures dominates the other in the throughput. However, when the oﬀered
load becomes high, the server’s utilization is already close to the upper bound and the input boost
eﬀect is curbed, so the throughput under full QLI dominates that under shared information. Last,
when the oﬀered load is high enough, the throughput under shared- and full-QLI structures strictly
dominates that under no QLI.
We further compare the expected QL under shared-, full-, and no-QLI structures in Online
Appendix OA2. We note that the expected number of customers at the beginning of the arrival
shutdown and arrival open periods under shared- and full-QLI structures are expected to be close.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

22
Thus, the expected QL under shared QLI is at a level similar to that under full QLI. Furthermore,
we also compare the expected QL under shared and full QLI to that under no QLI. We note that,
when the oﬀered load is in an intermediate range, higher throughput may not come at a cost of
a longer waiting line: the shared- and full-QLI structures may lead to higher throughput and a
lower expected QL than the no-QLI structure. A little shared information from previous customers
can help to better match supply with demand, so customers enter the facility when the queue is
expected to be short. When the oﬀered load is suﬃciently small or large, higher throughput is
associated with a greater expected QL.
4.
General Model with Shared Information
In Section 3, we assume that all customers are connected through the information-sharing platform.
In this section, we extend this model by introducing a stream of unconnected customers, who do
not have access to the shared queue length information (QLI). The fraction of connected customers
in the whole population is denoted by an exogenous parameter γ ∈[0,1], which measures the
degree of social connectivity in the population. We assume that γ is common knowledge among
all customers. The arrival rates (resp., oﬀered loads) of connected and unconnected customers are
λC = γΛ and λU = (1 −γ)Λ (resp., ρC = λC/µ and ρU = λU/µ), respectively.
The connected customers behave in the same way as those under shared QLI in our model in
Section 3, and they make two decisions sequentially. Upon arrival, they make the enter-or-leave
decision according to the expected utility of entering the facility, which is based on the shared QLI;
if they enter the facility, they make the join-or-balk decision on the basis of the real-time QLI and
then post that information online.
The unconnected customers behave the same as customers under no QLI in Section 3. They
have no real-time QLI before entering the service facility. In the ﬁrst decision epoch, they use a
symmetric mixed strategy and enter the facility with a probability q ∈(0,1) (resp., q = 1) so that
the expected utility of entering the facility is zero (resp., non-negative). Then, the unconnected
customers’ eﬀective arrival rate at the facility is qλU. If unconnected customers choose to enter the
facility at the ﬁrst decision epoch, they will join the queue if the real-time QL is less than n, and
otherwise balk in the second decision epoch. They do not share their observed real-time QLI.
If the degree of social connectivity is γ = 1 (resp., 0), all customers are connected (resp., uncon-
nected), and it boils down to our base model under the shared- (resp., no-) QLI structure.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

23
4.1.
Real-Time Queue Length
We now characterize the expected real-time QL given the latest QLI shared on the platform as
ϕ. Between the last QL update time T and the current time t > T, only unconnected customers
enter the facility with rate qλU (otherwise, ϕ is not the latest QL update). We know that the
unconnected customers are not interested in joining a queue longer than n−1. Hence, the QL over
(T,t) should not exceed n, and the expected real-time QL at time t is determined by the transient
behavior of an M/M/1 queue with arrival rate qλU, service rate µ, and a waiting room of size n.
The transient behavior of an M/M/1 queue with an inﬁnite waiting room has been discussed
by Abate and Whitt (1987). To the best of our knowledge, the transient behavior of an M/M/1
queue with a ﬁnite waiting room has not been investigated in the literature. Lemma 4 in the Online
Appendix gives a computational approach to deriving E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)] – the expected real-time QL at
time t given the initial number of customers at time T, ϕ, in an M/M/1 queue with arrival rate λ,
service rate µ, and a waiting room of size n.
Unlike in our base model, here the expected real-time QL, E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)], may not be a strictly
decreasing function of t. For example, Figure 3 illustrates E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)] as a function of t for ϕ ∈
{1,...,6}, ω = 6.1, µ = 1 and λ ∈{1,2,3}. We ﬁrst look at Figure 3(b). Considering the case of
ϕ = 5, we see that when t is close to T, the expected real-time QL is below ω −1, so the connected
customers are keen to enter the facility; when t increases and the expected real-time QL increases
from ϕ = 5 to beyond ω −1, the connected customers arriving at t are not interested in entering the
facility; as t further increases and once the expected real-time QL drops below ω −1, the connected
customers will enter the facility again. For ϕ = 1,...,4, the expected real-time QL is an increasing
function of t, and for ϕ = 6, the expected real-time QL is a decreasing function of t.
In all cases in Figure 3, when t approaches inﬁnity, the expected real-time QL converges to the
expected QL of an M/M/1 queue with a ﬁnite waiting room; i.e., ∑6
i=1 i(λ/µ)
i /∑6
i=0 (λ/µ)
i . In
Figure 3(a), due to the low arrival rate λ = 1, the expected QL is lower than ω −1. For ϕ = 1,...,5,
the expected real-time QL is lower than ω −1; and for ϕ = 6, the expected real-time QL eventually
drops to below ω −1. Thus, customers who arrive long enough after the last QL update will always
be interested in entering the facility. In Figure 3 (c), due to the high arrival rate λ = 3, the expected
QL is greater than ω −1. (Recall from Proposition 2 that customers with no QLI in the ﬁrst
decision epoch, i.e., unconnected customers, may enter the facility at a high rate such that the
resulting expected QL is greater than ω −1.) Then, for ϕ = 6, the expected real-time QL decreases
with t to the expected QL, which is always above ω −1, and it never drops below ω −1. This is to
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

24
0
1
2
3
4
5
δ
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
E[Ψ(δ,φ)]: λ=1
φ(T)=1
φ(T)=2
φ(T)=3
φ(T)=4
φ(T)=5
φ(T)=6
ω-1=5.1
Expected QL
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
δ
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
E[Ψ(δ,φ)]: λ=2
φ(T)=1
φ(T)=2
φ(T)=3
φ(T)=4
φ(T)=5
φ(T)=6
ω-1=5.1
Expected QL
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
5
δ
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
E[Ψ(δ,φ)]: λ=3
φ(T)=1
φ(T)=2
φ(T)=3
φ(T)=4
φ(T)=5
φ(T)=6
ω-1=5.1
Expected QL
(c)
Figure 3
Expected real-time QL at time t given that online QLI is ϕ(T) = 1,...,6 under the setting with param-
eters ω = 6.1, µ = 1, and λ ∈{1,2,3}.
say that if any connected customer updates ϕ = 6, no connected customers will enter the facility
after that update.
Because of the complex transient behavior of an M/M/1 queue with a ﬁnite waiting room, we
next resort to simulation to derive the social welfare for 0 < γ < 1.
4.2.
Comparison
For each customer arrival rate Λ ∈{0.5,1,2}, we generate 107 customers for an M/M/1 system.
Their service time follows an exponential distribution with parameter µ = 1. Customers have an
identical service reward R = 10 and marginal waiting cost c = 1. The simulation ends when all 107
customers have their service requests satisﬁed or leave the system without being served because
they expect the waiting time to be long.
For each hassle cost h in {0.5,1,...,3}, we randomly categorize the same group of 107 cus-
tomers into connected and unconnected streams according to the degree of social connectivity
γ ∈{0,0.1,...,1}. Then we simulate the system’s social welfare with the two streams of customers.
Connected customers ﬁrst consider the expected real-time QL on the basis of the shared QLI in
Lemma 4 upon arrival, and make the enter-or-leave decision. Unconnected customers use a sym-
metric mixed strategy to determine the probability of entering so that the expected utility of
entering the facility is non-negative. We use a bisection search to identify unconnected customers’
equilibrium entering probability. If any customer enters the facility, she will then use the real-time
QL to make the join-or-balk decision.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

25
0
0.5
1
γ
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
4
Social Welfare: Λ=0.5
h=0.5
h=0.5
h=1
h=1
h=1.5
h=1.5
h=2
h=2
h=2.5
h=2.5
h=3
h=3
(a)
Shared QLI Simulation
No QLI
Shared QLI
Full QLI
0
0.5
1
γ
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
Social Welfare: Λ=1
h=0.5
h=0.5
h=1
h=1
h=1.5
h=1.5
h=2
h=2
h=2.5
h=2.5
h=3
h=3
(b)
Shared QLI Simulation
No QLI
Shared QLI
Full QLI
0
0.5
1
γ
0
0.5
1
1.5
Social Welfare: Λ=2
h=0.5
h=0.5
h=1
h=1
h=1.5
h=1.5
h=2
h=2
h=2.5
h=2.5
h=3
h=3
(c)
Shared QLI Simulation
No QLI
Shared QLI
Full QLI
Figure 4
Social welfare as a function of social connectivity γ ∈{0,0.1,...,1} under shared, no, and full QLI with
service reward R = 10, service rate µ = 1, marginal waiting cost c = 1, arrival rate Λ ∈{0.5,1,2}, and
hassle cost h ∈{0.5,1,...,3}.
Recall that the case γ = 1 (resp., 0) is equivalent to our base model under the shared- (resp.,
no-) QLI structure. Thus, we can compare the social welfare of the cases γ = 1 and γ = 0 from the
simulation to the theoretical ones from Propositions 1 and 2 to ensure that our simulation reaches
the steady state.
Following the result of Theorem 2, we expect that when more customers share the QLI and use it
to make the enter-or-leave decision, more customers will be able to avoid entering the facility with
a very long queue. This improves the social welfare. Figure 4 displays the simulation result of the
social welfare as a function of the degree of social connectivity along with the social welfare under
shared, full, and no QLI from Propositions 1, 2 and 3. It conﬁrms our expectation. We observe
from Figure 4 that the social welfare is increasing in the degree of social connectivity γ for all cases
we test. Even a small degree of social connectivity leads to an improvement beyond no QLI, and
a higher degree of social connectivity results in greater social welfare.
Recall from Section 3.2 that each transition cycle contains an arrival shutdown period and an
arrival open period in sequence. As the degree of social connectivity γ increases, the expected length
of the arrival open period 1/λC decreases. Moreover, connected customers will become interested in
entering the service facility sooner, because there are fewer undocumented arrivals of unconnected
customers. Then, the expected length of the arrival shutdown period shortens. Hence, the expected
length of transition cycles decreases with γ. Contrary to the wait reduction and cycle lengthening
eﬀects discussed in Section 3.4, as γ increases, we have the wait increment eﬀect which reduces the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

26
social welfare, and the cycle shortening eﬀect which increases the social welfare. Figure 4 shows
that, as γ increases, the cycle shortening eﬀect dominates the wait increment eﬀect, so the social
welfare under shared QLI increases.
Furthermore, we observe from Figure 4 that for some hassle costs (see, e.g., h = 1,2,3 in Figures
4(b) and 4(c)), there exists an ϵ′, such that the social welfare under shared QLI is greater than
that under full QLI for γ ∈(1 −ϵ′,1]. This observation is anticipated from the base model results
illustrated in Figures 2(b) and 2(c), where the social welfare under shared QLI (i.e., γ = 1) is
greater than that under full QLI when h = 1,2,3.
In our model, the degree of social connectivity γ is an exogenous parameter, and customers do not
decide whether to become connected through the information-sharing platform. If we endogenize
customers’ decision of becoming connected to share and obtain the latest congestion update, the
degree of social connectivity γ can be viewed as an outcome of customers’ symmetric strategic
behavior of deciding whether to be connected on the platform. In the Online Appendix OA3,
we investigate how customers’ strategic behavior evolves when an information-sharing platform is
introduced to a service facility that originally had no QLI disclosure (i.e., γ = 0). We discover that
if the total oﬀered load is not high, the platform will gain popularity over time and all customers
will prefer to join it. Moreover, the more customers are connected, the greater the social welfare.
This insight provides support for the prevalence of some information-sharing apps. For example,
the app Waze has become increasingly popular among Uber drivers. Otherwise, if the oﬀered load
is high, customers may not join the platform spontaneously. Within a certain range of degrees
of connectivity, unconnected customers may relentlessly enter the facility expecting non-negative
utility, which causes excessive congestion and drives away connected customers. In this case, the
social planner needs to intervene to get suﬃcient customers connected on the platform so that the
rest of the population will voluntarily follow, increasing the social welfare as an outcome.
We caution that the underlying assumption behind connected customers is that they come to
an agreement whereby they are obligated to share QLI in exchange for QLI shared by others.
Nevertheless, it is challenging on a practical level to enforce spontaneous sharing of information
among customers. Some customers may act as information free-riders, who use information shared
by others but do not voluntarily share information to the rest. An interesting future research
direction will be exploring endogenous information sharing without contractual sharing obligations.
5.
Discussions
5.1.
Shared Information at Departure
As the ﬁrst attempt to investigate the case of user-generated shared information online, we assume
customers share the queue length information (QLI) observed when entering the service facility.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

27
One can also investigate other forms of shared information available to customers. For example,
instead of customers sharing the QLI when they enter the facility, they may share the QLI at
departure (QLID). Another similar information structure is that customers share the sojourn time
they experienced in the system at departure. The resemblance comes from the fact that at a
customer’s departure all customers in the system arrived during the departing customer’s sojourn
time, so her experienced sojourn time and the QL at departure are stochastically linked.
We assume that all customers share the QLID. Upon arrival, a customer knows there are no
service completions since the latest QL update ϕ, so the real-time QL does not decrease. If the
shared QL is suﬃciently long, i.e., ϕ ≥m, due to the negative expected utility of entering the
facility, no customers will enter the facility after T until the next QL update. If the QL update
shared online is low, i.e., ϕ < m, the customer who arrives immediately after the update will
enter the facility, because the expected utility of entering the facility is positive, i.e., Uenter > 0. If
every customer who arrives after the last QL update enters the facility, the expected real-time QL
increases and the expected utility of entering the facility will decrease to zero over time. If Uenter
decreases to zero before the next QL update, no customers will enter the facility before the next
QL update, due to the negative expected utility of entering. Hence, only during a time interval
after a low QL update, i.e., ϕ < m, will customers enter the facility. These arrival turned-on periods
contrast with the arrival shutdown periods in our model with the QLI shared when customers enter
the facility. However, the same technique from Section 3 can be applied to obtain the throughput
and social welfare of such service systems.
From the results obtained from Sections 3.4 and 4.2, we expect the shared QLID to dominate
the no-QLI structure in social welfare. This is because customers under shared QLID only enter
the facility when the queue is expected to be short, and avoid entering the facility when the queue
is reported and perceived to be long. This behavior not only provides customers with a higher
probability of obtaining positive utility, but also reduces the negative externality they may impose
on future customers.
Similar to the result from Section 3.4, the social welfare under shared QLID is expected to
be at a level similar to that under full QLI. In the asymptotic case Λ = ∞, the shared- QLID
structure is identical to the full-QLI structure. To see this, consider a facility under the shared-
QLID structure when the latest shared QLID is m. No customers will enter the facility before
the next QLID update. Once a service completion occurs, the QLID m −1 is shared online. One
customer immediately enters the facility and this increases the real-time QL to m. Then, the same
cycle repeats. Under the full-QLI structure, in a facility with the latest QL update m, the same
events occur. Thus, these two information structures are identical in the asymptotic case Λ = ∞.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

28
5.2.
Heterogeneous Customers
In our base model, we consider homogeneous customers with identical service reward R, waiting
cost c, and hassle cost h. In this section, we discuss how heterogeneity may aﬀect those insights
derived in our base model. Here we examine the model with heterogeneous hassle costs as an
example. (Heterogeneity in service rewards or marginal waiting costs can be examined similarly.)
We assume there are high- and low-type customers in the service system, and the hassle cost of
high-type customers, hH, is higher than that of the low-type customers, hL. Clearly, due to low-
type customers’ low hassle cost, their entries to the service facility lead to higher social surplus
than high-type customers’ entries with everything else being equal.
Diﬀerent customers react diﬀerently to the shared QLI. Recall from Lemma 3(ii) that the length
of the arrival shutdown period increases with the hassle cost. There are two implications of this
monotonicity property. First, given the identical QLI shared by previous customers, since hH > hL,
high-type customers’ arrival shutdown period is longer than that of low-type customers. Then,
high-type customers enter the service facility less often than the low-type customers. Second, when
hH increases and hL decreases, high-type customers whose entries to the service facility lead to
lower social surplus enter less often. Then, if low-type customers whose entries to the service facility
lead to higher social surplus enter the facility more often, the social welfare will increase, unless the
low-type customers’ entry rate to the service facility is curbed, i.e., when the low-type customers’
total arrival rate λL is relatively low and they already enter the facility often.
We use a simulation to verify our intuition mentioned above. Let η ∈[0,1] denote the fraction of
high-type customers in the whole population, so the arrival rates of high- and low-type customers
are λH = ηΛ and λL = (1 −η)Λ, respectively. We deﬁne high- and low-type customers’ hassle costs
as hH = h + ξH and hL = h −ξL, respectively, where ξL,ξH ∈[0,min(h,R −2c/µ −h)] are the
deviations of high- and low-type customers’ hassle cost from h. We assume ξH = 1−η
η ξL, so that the
average hassle cost across all customers stays at (λHhH + λLhL)/Λ = h. Note that when ξL = 0,
we have hH = hL = h, and it boils down to our base model with homogeneous customers.
Figure 5 displays the social welfare under shared QLI as a function of ξ, with the service reward
R = 10, service rate µ = 1, marginal waiting cost c = 1, hassle cost h = 4, fraction of high-type
customers γ ∈{0.3,0.5,0.7}, and arrival rate Λ ∈{0.5,1,2}. It conﬁrms our intuition. We observe
from Figure 5 that in most cases the heterogeneity in the hassle cost improves social welfare, i.e.,
the social welfare increases with ξL, except when η = 0.7 in Figures 5(a) and 5 (b). In these two
cases, the total arrival rate Λ is not high, i.e., Λ = 0.5 and 1, so there is not much room left for
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

29
0
0.5
1
ξL
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
Social Welfare: Λ=0.5
η=0.7
η=0.5
η=0.3
(a)
Shared Info Simulation
0
0.5
1
ξL
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
Social Welfare: Λ=1
η=0.7
η=0.5
η=0.3
(b)
Shared Info Simulation
0
0.5
1
ξL
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
Social Welfare: Λ=2
η=0.7
η=0.5
η=0.3
(c)
Shared Info Simulation
Figure 5
Social welfare as a function of ξ under shared QLI with service reward R = 10, service rate µ = 1,
marginal waiting cost c = 1, hassle cost h = 4, and arrival rate Λ ∈{0.5,1,2}
the low type customers to increase their entry rate. This conﬁrms the robustness of the arrival
shutdown phenomenon analytically demonstrated for homogeneous customers.
Combined with comparative statics in Section 3.4, our observation here suggests that the shared
QLI may still dominate full QLI in the case of heterogeneous hassle costs, at least when the
heterogeneity is low enough, i.e., ξL is suﬃciently small.
5.3.
Strategic Wait
Customers in our base model have two options at the ﬁrst decision epoch: enter or leave. In reality,
customers may have other options. For example, customers may recheck the shared information
after some time, hoping to see a lower expected number of customers in the service facility. Cui et al.
(2019) investigate a model of rational retrials in queues. Furthermore, customers may strategically
wait outside the service facility until the expected real-time QL in the service facility is low enough,
and then enter (assuming that customers form a line and follow ﬁrst-come-ﬁrst-serve queueing
discipline outside the facility). Su (2007) develops a model of dynamic pricing with endogeneous
intertemporal demand, and ﬁnds that customers’ strategic waiting may sometimes beneﬁt the seller.
Lariviere and Van Mieghem (2004) consider a game in which customers who are delay sensitive
and try to avoid congestion choose arrival times strategically, and they show that the resulting
endogenous arrival pattern approaches a discrete-time Poisson process as the number of customers
and arrival points gets large. Similarly, in our model, customers’ strategic waiting behavior can
result from their rational decisions under the shared-QLI structure.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

30
If the cost of strategic waiting outside the service facility is negligible, all customers under shared
(resp., full) QLI will wait until the queue inside the facility is expected (resp., known) to be short.
However, customers’ behavior under no QLI is not aﬀected by this waiting option introduced in
the ﬁrst decision epoch, because waiting does not improve customers’ expected utility when there
is no information. When the arrival rate is no lower than the service rate, i.e., Λ ≥µ, the model
behaves as our model in the asymptotic case Λ = ∞in Section 3.3. This is because customers are
willing to wait outside the service facility for an inﬁnitely long time due to the zero waiting cost.
When the arrival rate is less than the service rate; i.e., Λ < µ, customers’ strategic waiting smooths
the entry rate to the service facility. In this case, customers under the shared or full QLI have
strategic waiting as a better option than leaving the service facility with zero utility, so the social
welfare in this case should be greater than that in our model. From the fact that the social welfare
under shared QLI is close to that under full QLI when the arrival rate is small, we anticipate a
small diﬀerence between the social welfare under shared and full QLI in the model with strategic
waiting at the ﬁrst decision epoch.
If the cost of strategic waiting outside the service facility is positive, customers under shared
or full QLI may follow a threshold policy to decide whether to wait at each time they recheck
the information. To analytically track the impact of strategic waiting on our model with shared
QLI, one may need to introduce another dimension in the Markov chain to record the number of
customers who are waiting outside the service facility for the right moment to enter.
6.
Conclusion
The proliferation of information sharing enabled by technological innovation, creates an oppor-
tunity for service providers to generate and disseminate congestion information in a cost-eﬃcient
way by taking advantage of user-generated information and its sharing. In this paper, we study
a single-server facility where customers share the congestion information with one another in the
form of a snapshot of the system. Hence future customers, before entering the facility and observing
the real-time QL with a hassle cost, can make the enter-or-leave decision by referring to shared
information.
We ﬁnd that although the shared queue length information (QLI) is most likely lagged and
inaccurate, it gives customers some idea of the congestion level so they can avoid entering the facility
with potentially long queues. Hence, for any arrival rate, the shared-QLI structure dominates the
no-QLI structure in social welfare. We verify this analytically. Moreover, the information about
long queues shared online discourages arrivals, thereby allowing long queues to diminish rather
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

31
than to start ﬁlling up soon after the next service completion as likely happens under the full-QLI
structure. Therefore, the shared-QLI structure may even result in less congestion and greater social
welfare than the full-QLI structure.
Our results imply that for service providers that do not have the capacity to generate and
disseminate the real-time QLI, investing in such capability may not be necessary. Instead, an
information-sharing platform can be a cost-eﬃcient solution, and user-generated information shar-
ing may lead to greater social welfare than full or no QLI. Moreover, for public service providers
who do have the capacity to disclose the full congestion information to all customers, it may not
be optimal to do so continuously. Our results suggest that public service providers that practice
proactive information control may also beneﬁt from periodic information release.
Acknowledgment. The authors thank the Department Editor, Terry Taylor, the anonymous
Associate Editor, and three reviewers for their constructive and insightful suggestions, which sig-
niﬁcantly improved the paper. The authors are also grateful to Shiliang Cui, Laurens Debo, Pengfei
Guo, Refael Hassin, Moshe Haviv, Rouba Ibrahim, Krishnamurthy Iyer, Ricky Roet-Green, Senthil
Veeraraghavan, Luyi Yang for their suggestions to improve the paper.
References
Abate, J., W. Whitt. 1987. Transient behavior of the M/M/1 queue: Starting at the origin. Queueing System
2(1) 41–65.
Allon, G., A. Bassamboo, I. Gurvich. 2011. “we will be right with you”: Managing customer expectations
with vague promises and cheap talk. Oper. Res. 59(6) 1382–1394.
Allon, G., D.J. Zhang. 2017. Managing service systems in the presence of social networks. https://ssrn.
com/abstract=2673137.
Chen, H., M. Frank. 2004. Monopoly pricing when customers queue. IIE Trans. 36(6) 569–581.
Cui, S., K. Li, J. Wang. 2017. On the optimal disclosure of queue length information. https://ssrn.com/
abstract=2802172.
Cui, S., X. Su, S. Veeraraghavan. 2019. Model of rational retrials in queues. Oper. Res. Forthcoming.
Cui, S., S. Veeraraghavan. 2016. Blind queues: The impact of consumer beliefs on revenues and congestion.
Management Sci. 62(12) 3656–3672.
Edelson, N., D. Hilderbrand. 1975. Congestion tolls for poisson queuing processes. Econometrica 43(1)
81–92.
Fader, P.S., R.S. Winer. 2012. Introduction to the special issue on the emergence and impact of user-generated
content. Marketing Sci. 31(3) 369–371.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

32
Gao, Fei, Xuanming Su. 2017. Omnichannel retail operations with buy-online-and-pick-up-in-store. Man-
agement Sci. 63(8) 2478–2492.
Guo, P., P. Zipkin. 2007.
Analysis and comparison of queues with diﬀerent levels of delay information.
Management Sci. 53(6) 962–970.
Guo, P., P. Zipkin. 2009. The eﬀects of the availability of waiting-time information on a balking queue. Eur.
J. Oper. Res. 198(1) 199–209.
Ha, A.Y., Q. Tian, Tong S. 2017. Information sharing in competing supply chains with production cost
reduction. Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 19(2) 246–262.
Hassin, R. 2007. Information and uncertainty in a queueing system. Probability in the Engineering and
Informational Sciences 21(03) 361–380.
Hassin, R. 2016. Rational Queueing. CRC Press.
Hassin, R., M. Haviv. 2003. To Queue or not to Queue: Equilibrium Behavior in Queueing Systems. Inter-
national Series in Operations Research and Management Science, Springer.
Hassin, R., R. Roet-Green. 2017. The impact of inspection cost on equilibrium, revenue, and social welfare
in a single-server queue. Oper. Res. 65(3) 804–820.
Hassin, R., R. Roet-Green. 2018. The armchair decision: On queue-length information when customers travel
to a queue. https://ssrn.com/abstract=3268117.
Hassin, Refael, Alexandra Koshman. 2014. Optimal control of a queue with high-low delay announcements:
The signiﬁcance of the queue. Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Performance Evalu-
ation Methodologies and Tools. VALUETOOLS ’14.
Hassin, Refael, Alexandra Koshman. 2017. Proﬁt maximization in the M/M/1 queue. Operations Research
Letters 45 436–441.
Hu, M., Y. Li, J. Wang. 2018. Eﬀcient ignorance: Information heterogeneity in a queue. Management Sci.
64(6) 2473–2972.
Ibrahim, R. 2018.
Sharing delay information in service systems: A literature survey.
Queueing System
89(1-2) 49–79.
Kwark, Y., S. Raghunathan. 2018. User-generated content and competing ﬁrms’ product design. Management
Sci. 64(10) 4471–4965.
Lariviere, M. A., J. A Van Mieghem. 2004. Strategically seeking service: How competition can generate
poisson arrivals. Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 6(1) 23–40.
Lingenbrink, D., K. Iyer. 2019. Optimal signaling mechanisms in unobservable queues. Oper. Res. Forth-
coming.
Naor, P. 1969. The regulation of queue size by levying tolls. Econometrica 37(1) 15–24.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

33
Ross, Sheldon M. 2006. Introduction to Probability Models, 9th Edition. Academic Press, Inc., Orlando, FL,
USA.
Su, X. 2007. Intertemporal pricing with strategic customer behavior. Management Sci. 53(5) 726–741.
Takagi, H. 1991. Queueing Analysis: A Foundation of Performance Evaluation. Amsterdam, North-Holland.
Veeraraghavan, S., L. G. Debo. 2009.
Joining longer queues: Information externalities in queue choice.
Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 11(4) 543–562.
Whitt, W. 1999. Improving service by informing customers about anticipated delays. Management Sci.
45(2) 192–207.
Yang, L., L.G. Debo. 2018.
Referral priority program: Leveraging social ties via operational incentives.
Management Sci. Published online, https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2018.3034.
Yang, L., L.G. Debo, V. Gupta. 2019. Search among queues under quality diﬀerentiation. Management Sci.
Published online, https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2018.3112.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

1
Online Appendix to
“Eﬃcient Inaccuracy: User-Generated Information Sharing in a Queue”
OA1.
Throughput Comparison
In this section, we compare the throughput under the shared, no, and full QL information (QLI)
structures. Similar to the comparison of shared- and full-QLI structures in social welfare in Section
3.4 , we ﬁrst generate insights by making the comparison in an asymptotic case Λ = ∞. Then,
building on the intuition obtained from the asymptotic case, we verify the comparative statics of
the throughput under shared-, no-, and full-QLI structures in the general case Λ < ∞.
Asymptotic case. Chen and Frank (2004) compare the throughput in observable and unobserv-
able queues. They show that under a high arrival rate, providing the real-time QLI to customers
improves the throughput. This is because, under no real-time QLI and a high arrival rate, cus-
tomers will join with a relatively low probability. The service provider then prefers to reveal the
real-time QLI to customers so that they will always join a short queue which they would not join
under no QLI. The following proposition conﬁrms that similar intuition holds in our model with
two decision epochs.
Proposition 5. In the asymptotic case Λ = ∞, the throughput under full QLI ΛF is greater
than that under no QLI ΛN, i.e., ΛF > ΛN.
The same intuition holds for the throughput under shared- and no-QLI structures. The somewhat
inaccurate shared snapshot information encourages customers to enter the facility when the queue
is more likely to be short, while the no-QLI structure does not provide any information regarding
the real-time QL, so customers enter the facility with a low probability. The analytical comparison
of throughput under shared- and no-QLI structures is diﬃcult for two reasons. First, the derivation
of ρN under no QLI involves solving a polynomial equation of degree n + 1, which by Abel Ruﬃni
Theorem has no algebraic solutions for n ≥4; see, e.g., Corollary 2. Second, the derivation of the
steady state probability distribution of online QL updates under shared QLI is cumbersome. We
next investigate the diﬀerence between the throughput under shared- and no-QLI structures, i.e.,
ΛS −ΛN, numerically. Without loss of generality, we normalize the service rate and waiting cost to
one; i.e., µ = 1 and c = 1, and plot ΛS −ΛN as functions of the hassle cost h under diﬀerent service
reward R ∈{4,5,...,10} in Figure 6. We observe the throughput under shared QLI is higher than
that under no QLI, i.e., ΛS > ΛN, for all values of R and h tested. (More numerical results are
available upon request.)
We next compare the throughput under shared and full QLI in the asymptotic case. Recall from
Corollary 3 that in the asymptotic case Λ = ∞under full QLI, once a customer ﬁnishes service,
another customer joins the queue immediately and brings the QL to m, so the server will be
constantly busy, and the resulting throughput is identical to the service rate µ.
Under the shared-QLI structure, the online QLI ϕ is lagged and not as accurate as under full
QLI. This leads to two eﬀects on the throughput. On the one hand, even if the real-time QL drops
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

2
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Hassle Cost h
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
ΛS −ΛN
R=4
R=5
R=6
R=7
R=8
R=9
R=10
Figure 6
Diﬀerence between the throughput under shared- and no-QLI structures, i.e., ΛS −ΛN as a function of
the hassle cost h under diﬀerent service reward R ∈{4,5,...,10}, service rate µ = 1, marginal waiting
cost c = 1, and arrival rate Λ = 108.
to n −1 during the arrival shutdown period, no customers will know about it, and neither do they
enter the facility. Thus, under the shared-QLI structure, not all desirably short queues are ﬁlled
by customers as soon as those under the full-QLI structure. This input reduction eﬀect creates
additional possibility for the server to become idle, hence resulting in less throughput. On the
other hand, if the real-time QL stays long (i.e., greater than m −1) after the arrival shutdown
period, no customers are aware of that, and they will enter the facility. Then, because of the sunk
of the hassle cost, customers may join some queues that they would have not joined under full
information. This input boost eﬀect generates higher probability for the server to stay busy, so
leads to higher throughput. When the arrival rate is high, the server’s utilization is already close to
one and the input boost eﬀect is limited, so the throughput under full QLI dominates that under
shared information.
When the service becomes more valuable, i.e., R increases, even though the inaccuracy in the
shared QLI discourages some customers from entering the facility when the most recently shared
QL ϕ reaches at least m, the probability all ϕ ≥m customers ﬁnish service during the arrival
shutdown period and the server becomes idle decreases. Therefore, the throughput gap between the
shared- and full-QLI structure diminishes. In the limiting case when the service becomes extremely
valuable, i.e., R →∞, the throughput under shared QLI is almost identical to that under full QLI.
The next theorem summarizes these results.
Theorem 4. In the asymptotic case Λ = ∞, compare the throughput under the shared- and full-
QLI structures:
(i) The throughput under shared QLI is less than that under full QLI for any ﬁnite service reward;
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

3
0
2
4
6
8
Hassle Cost h
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Throughput: Λ=2
Full QLI
Shared QLI
No QLI
0
2
4
6
8
Hassle Cost h
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Throughput: Λ=1
Full QLI
Shared QLI
No QLI
0
2
4
6
8
Hassle Cost h
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Throughput: Λ=0.5
Full QLI
Shared QLI
No QLI
Figure 7
Throughput under the shared, full, and no information structures as a function of hassle cost h, for
service reward R = 10, service rate µ = 1, marginal waiting cost c = 1, and arrival rate Λ ∈{0.5,1,2}.
i.e., ΛS < ΛF for R < ∞.
(ii) When R →∞, the throughput under shared and full QLI is asymptotically identical; i.e.,
limR→∞ΛS = ΛF.
Theorem 4 shows that a system with shared QLI has a lower throughput than one with full
QLI. However, the service reward R mitigates the throughput gap between these two information
structures. Moreover, when the service reward grows, systems are almost indiﬀerent between the
shared- and full-QLI structures with regard to the throughput measure. Thus, systems with high
service reward can be conﬁdent in employing the shared-QLI structure by encouraging information
sharing. Shared QLI generates almost identical throughput as the full QLI.
General case. Next, we adopt a numerical approach to investigate the comparative statics of
throughput under three information structures in the general case. In Figure 7, we plot throughput
under the three information structures, ΛS, ΛF, and ΛN, as functions of hassle cost h, for R = 10
and µ = c = 1 in the general cases Λ ∈{0.5,1,2}.
First, we observe from Figure 7 that throughput under shared QLI remains at similar level
as under full QLI for diﬀerent arrival rates Λ. The throughput under full QLI is a decreasing
staircase constant function of h, while that under shared QLI is a continuous decreasing function
of h. When the hassle cost h approaches R −c
µi, for integer i, from below we have ΛS < ΛF; and
when h approaches R −c
µi from above we have ΛS > ΛF. There is not an interval longer than
c
µ
such that either shared- or full-QLI structure dominates the other. This observation improves our
understanding from the asymptotic case. When the arrival rate declines, the input reduction and
input boost eﬀects have similar strength for diﬀerent hassle costs, so the throughput under shared
QLI is at a similar level to that under full QLI.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

4
Under no QLI, recall from the expressions of ΛN (Proposition 2) that throughput is a piecewise
function. When the oﬀered load is low, i.e., ρ < ρN, all customers enter the facility; and when the
oﬀered load is high, i.e., ρ ≥ρN, a fraction of customers enter. The value of the critical cutoﬀρN
decreases with the hassle cost h.
Furthermore, we observe from Figure 7 that when the arrival rate Λ is high, e.g., Λ = 2, or
the hassle cost h is large, e.g., Λ = 1 and h ≥6, the shared- and full-QLI structures continuously
dominate the no-QLI structure on throughput for diﬀerent hassle costs h. This observation is
consistent with intuitions obtained from the asymptotic case. When Λ is small, e.g., Λ = 0.5, or the
hassle cost h is small, e.g., Λ = 1 and h < 4, customers under no QLI all enter, but customers under
shared or full QLI do not always join blindly and those who arrive when the queue is expected to
be long will balk. Hence, in this case, the throughput under shared and full QLI is lower than that
under no QLI.
OA2.
Expected Queue Length Comparison
In this section, we compare the expected QL under shared-, no-, and full-QLI structures, LS, LN,
and LF, numerically.
We ﬁrst compare the expected QL under shared- and full-QLI structures. Recall from Proposi-
tions 1 and 3 that we can apply a renewal theory based approach to derive various service level
measures for the system under the shared- and full-QLI structures. The transition cycles under the
shared and full QLI have a similar structure – in each transition cycle, there is an arrival shutdown
period and an arrival open period in sequence. The expected QL at the end of the arrival shutdown
period under shared QLI is ω −1, while that under full QLI is m−1. Note that m−1 and ω −1 are
close to each other, and their diﬀerence ω −m is smaller than one. Then, after the exponentially
distributed arrival open period with parameter Λ, the QL seen by the new arrival under shared
and full information structures will be close on average. Based on the fact that the expected QLs
at the beginning of the arrival shutdown and arrival open periods under both shared and full QLI
are expected to be close, we anticipate that the expected QL under shared QLI is at a similar level
to that under full QLI. Figure 8 in which we plot LS, LN, and LF, as functions of hassle cost h,
for R = 10 and µ = c = 1 in the general cases Λ ∈{0.5,1,2,108}, conﬁrms our intuition.
Next, we compare the expected QL under shared- and full-QLI structures with that under no-
QLI structure. Comparing Figures 7 and 8, we see that higher throughput is associated with a
greater expected QL when the oﬀered load is suﬃciently small or large. For example, when Λ = 0.5,
the throughput and expected QL under no QLI are greater than those under shared or full QLI;
and when Λ = 108, the throughput and expected QL under no QLI are less than those under shared
or full QLI. However, when the oﬀered load is in an intermediate range, higher throughput may
not come at a cost of a higher waiting cost. For example, when Λ = 2, throughput under shared
and full QLI is higher than that under no QLI in Figure 7, while the expected QL under shared
and full QLI may not be higher than that under no QLI in Figure 8. This is because the QLI, even
a little shared by previous customers, helps to better match the supply with demand, so customers
enter the facility when the queue is expected to be relatively short and there is a relatively high
probability for the server to become idle.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

5
0
2
4
6
8
Hassle Cost h
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Expected QL: Λ=108
Full QLI
Shared QLI
No QLI
0
2
4
6
8
Hassle Cost h
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Expected QL: Λ=2
Full QLI
Shared QLI
No QLI
0
2
4
6
8
Hassle Cost h
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Expected QL: Λ=1
Full QLI
Shared QLI
No QLI
0
2
4
6
8
Hassle Cost h
0
0.5
1
1.5 Expected QL: Λ=0.5
Full QLI
Shared QLI
No QLI
Figure 8
Expected queue length under the shared, full, and no information structures as a function of hassle
cost h, for service reward R = 10, service rate µ = 1, marginal waiting cost c = 1, and arrival rate
Λ ∈
{
0.5,1,2,108}
.
OA3.
Individual Utility Comparison
We next look into the strategic behavior of connected and unconnected customers. We start with
unconnected customers only. This is equivalent to our model under no QLI. Recall from the discus-
sion of Proposition 2 that there are two critical cutoﬀs in the unconnected customers’ oﬀered load:
ρL and ρN for any hassle cost h. If the unconnected customers’ oﬀered load is high (i.e., ρU ≥ρL),
unconnected customers relentlessly enter the facility expecting non-negative utility, which causes
excessive congestion and drives away connected customers. In this case, the expected QL is greater
than ω −1. Then, if a long queue is updated online (i.e., of length n), the expected real-time
QL will be greater than ω −1 thereafter; see, e.g., the curve of ϕ = 6 in Figure 3(c). All future
connected customers who see this QL update will choose to leave the facility, so connected cus-
tomers’ long-run average individual utility UC is zero. Meanwhile, unconnected customers’ utility
UU is zero if ρU ≥ρN, or positive if ρL ≤ρU < ρN. In both instances, unconnected customers have
no less utility than connected customers. If the unconnected customers’ oﬀered load is low (i.e.,
ρU < ρL), some connected customers will enter the facility. In this case, the expected QL when
all unconnected customers enter the facility is below ω −1. For any QL update on the platform,
connected customers who arrive suﬃciently long after the update will expect the real-time QL to
below ω −1. They will choose to enter the facility from time to time expecting positive utility. In
this case, connected customers may have greater utility than unconnected customers.
We conﬁrm the above intuition in Figure 9(c), which illustrates the simulation result of the
diﬀerence between the connected and unconnected customers’ utility UC −UU under arrival rate
Λ = 2 and hassle cost h = 1.5, for which the two critical cutoﬀs in unconnected customers’ oﬀered
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

6
0
0.5
1
γ
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
UC-UU: Λ=0.5
(a)
0
0.5
1
γ
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
UC-UU: Λ=1
(b)
0
0.5
1
γ
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
UC-UU: Λ=2
(c)
Figure 9
Diﬀerence between connected and unconnected customers’s individual utility UC −UU as a function of
social connectivity γ ∈{0,0.1,...,1} under shared QLI with service reward R = 10, service rate µ = 1,
marginal waiting cost c = 1, arrival rate Λ ∈{0.5,1,2}, and hassle cost h = 1.5.
load ρU are ρL = 1.336 and ρN = 1.404. For γ ≤0.2, we have ρU ≥1.8 > ρN, so both connected and
unconnected customers obtain zero utility and UC −UU = 0. For γ = 0.3, we have ρU is in (ρL,ρN].
Here, unconnected customers have positive utility while connected customers have zero utility,
which leads to UC −UU < 0. This is in line with our intuition above. For γ ≥0.4, we have ρU < ρL,
so some connected customers will enter the facility. In this case, we observe from Figure 9(c)
that connected customers obtain greater utility than unconnected customers. Then, unconnected
customers have incentive to become connected for any γ ∈[0.4,1]. This is also observed in Figures
9(a) and 9(b), where the total oﬀered load ρ is smaller than ρL so ρU = γρ is smaller than ρL for
any γ ∈[0,1].
We next endogenize customers’ decision of becoming connected on this information-sharing plat-
form to share and obtain the latest congestion update. We can view the degree of social connectivity
γ as an outcome from customers’ symmetric strategic behavior of deciding on whether to be con-
nected on the platform. Imagine an information-sharing platform is established for a service facility
originally under no QLI (i.e., γ = 0). If the total oﬀered load is not high (see, e.g., Figures 9(a) and
9(b)), unconnected customers can obtain higher utility by becoming connected on the platform.
Then, all customers would prefer to use the platform to share information. Otherwise, if the oﬀered
load is high (see, e.g., Figures 9(c)), customers may not join the platform spontaneously. Within
the range of degrees of connectivity γ ∈[0,1−ρL/ρ], unconnected customers may relentlessly enter
the facility expecting non-negative utility, which causes excessive congestion and drives away con-
nected customers. In this case, the social planner needs to intervene to get suﬃcient customers
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

7
connected with γ > 1 −ρL/ρ so that the rest of the population will voluntarily follow, beneﬁting
the social welfare as an outcome.
OA4.
Proof of Lemma 1
During the time interval (T,t), no customers arrive but some customers may have their services
completed and leave the system. (This will not be true if not all customers share information. See
Section 4 for a relaxation of the all-sharing assumption.) Given ϕ customers in the queue at time
T, the number of departures in (T,t), D (δ,ϕ), has a probability mass function:
P {D (δ,ϕ) = j} =
{
e−µδ(µδ)j
j!
0 ≤j < ϕ,
∑∞
k=ϕ
e−µδ(µδ)k
k!
j = ϕ,
and the expected number of departures in the time interval (T,t) is
E [D (δ,ϕ)] =
ϕ−1
∑
k=0
ke−µδ (µδ)
k
k!
+ ϕ
∞
∑
k=ϕ
e−µδ (µδ)
k
k!
=
ϕ−1
∑
k=0
ke−µδ (µδ)
k
k!
+ ϕ
(
1 −
ϕ−1
∑
k=0
e−µδ (µδ)
k
k!
)
= ϕ +
ϕ−1
∑
k=0
e−µδ (µδ)
k
k!
(k −ϕ).
Thus, the real-time QL at time t is the diﬀerence between ϕ and the number of departures during
(T,t). Its distribution is
P {Ψ(δ,ϕ) = k} = P {D (δ,ϕ) = ϕ −k}
=
{
e−µδ(µδ)ϕ−k
(ϕ−k)!
0 < k ≤ϕ,
∑∞
k=ϕ
e−µδ(µδ)k
k!
k = 0,
and its expected value is
E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)] = ϕ −E [D (δ,ϕ)] =
ϕ−1
∑
k=0
e−µδ (µδ)
k
k!
(ϕ −k).
Note that when t = T ⇔δ = 0, we recover E [Ψ(0,ϕ)] = ϕ.
The ﬁrst derivative of E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)] with respect to δ is
∂E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)]
∂δ
= −
ϕ−1
∑
k=0
(ϕ −k)
k!
µe−µδ (µδ)
k +
ϕ−1
∑
k=1
(ϕ −k)
k!
µke−µδ (µδ)
k−1
= −µ
(ϕ−1
∑
k=0
(ϕ −k) e−µδ (µδ)
k
k!
−
ϕ−2
∑
j=0
(ϕ −j −1) e−µδ (µδ)
j
j!
)
= −µ
(
e−µδ (µδ)
ϕ−1
(ϕ −1)!
+
ϕ−2
∑
j=0
e−µδ (µδ)
j
j!
)
= −µ
ϕ−1
∑
j=0
e−µδ (µδ)
j
j!
= −µP {D (δ,ϕ) < ϕ} < 0.
Thus, E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)] is strictly decreasing in δ. Clearly, δ = t −T is an increasing function of t, so we
have that E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)] is strictly decreasing in t.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

8
OA5.
Proof of Lemma 2
(i) Recall from Lemma 1 that E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)] is strictly decreasing in δ. Thus, when ϕ < n, we have
that Uenter (δ,ϕ) is strictly increasing in δ. When ϕ = n, by using the derivation of ∂E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)]/∂δ
in the proof of Lemma 1, we get the ﬁrst derivative of Uenter (δ,ϕ) with respect to δ
∂Uenter (δ,ϕ)
∂δ
= ce−µδ
(n−1
∑
j=1
(µδ)
j
j!
+ ν −n
)
,
which is positive because ∑n−1
j=1 (µδ)
j /j! ≥0 and ν ≥n. Hence, Uenter (δ,ϕ) increases with δ.
(ii) When t = T, we have δ = 0 and E [Ψ(0,ϕ)] = ϕ; substituting these into (2) yields
Uenter (0,ϕ) =



c
µ (ω −1 −ϕ) ≥0 1 ≤ϕ ≤m −1,
c
µ (ω −1 −ϕ) < 0 m ≤ϕ < n,
−h
< 0 ϕ = n.
.
(iii) From (2), we have
Uenter (δ,ϕ) =



c
µ
(
ω −1 −∑ϕ−1
k=0
e−µδ(µδ)k
k!
(ϕ −k)
)
ϕ < n,
c
µ
(
ω −1 −∑n−1
k=0
e−µδ(µδ)k
k!
(n −k) −e−µδ (ν −n −1)
)
ϕ = n.
Then, we can derive
Uenter (δ,ϕ −1) −Uenter (δ,ϕ)
=



c
µ
(
e−µδ(µδ)(ϕ−1)
(ϕ−1)!
+ ∑ϕ−2
k=0
e−µδ(µδ)k
k!
)
0 < ϕ < n,
c
µ
(
e−µδ(µδ)n−1
(n−1)!
+ ∑n−2
k=1
e−µδ(µδ)k
k!
+ e−µδ (ν −n)
)
ϕ = n,
which is clearly positive.
□
OA6.
Proof of Lemma 3
(i) When m ≤ϕ < n, we have Uenter (δ,ϕ) = c
µ (ω −1 −E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)]). From Lemma 1, we have that
E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)] is a decreasing function of δ. According to (3), τϕ is the solution of the following equation
of δ,
E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)] =
ϕ−1
∑
k=0
e−µδ (µδ)
k
k!
(ϕ −k) = ω −1.
From Lemma 1, we have E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)] is strictly decreasing in δ. Due to the fact that the inverse of
a decreasing function is still a decreasing function, τϕ = Φ−1 (ω −1) is also a decreasing function of
ω.
When ϕ = n, we have Uenter (δ,ϕ) = c
µ (ω −1 −E [Ψ(δ,n)] −e−µδ (ν −n −1)), which is increasing
in δ from Lemma 2. Then, from (3), τn is the unique solution of the following equation,
E [Ψ(δ,n)] + e−µδ (ν −n −1) = ν −hµ
c −1.
Note that the left hand side
E [Ψ(δ,n)] + e−µδ (ν −n −1) = ω −1 −µ
c Uenter (δ,ϕ) for ϕ = n
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

9
is decreasing in δ from Lemma 2(i); its ﬁrst derivative
∂
∂δ
(
E [Ψ(δ,n)] + e−µδ (ν −n −1)
)
= −µe−µδ
(n−1
∑
j=1
(µδ)
j
j!
+ ν −n
)
is negative and decreases with ν. The right hand side ν −hµ
c −1 increases with ν. Hence, τn is
decreasing in ν.
(ii & iii) Using similar argument as in (i), we have τn increases in the hassle cost h, and τn
decreases in ω.
(iv) Recall from Lemma 2(iii) that Uenter (δ,ϕ) is strictly decreasing in ϕ. Thus, we have τϕ, as
the unique solution of Uenter (δ,ϕ) = 0, increases in ϕ for m ≤ϕ ≤n.
□
OA7.
Proof of Proposition 1
It is essential to derive the stationary distribution of the semi-Markov process with states 1 ≤
ϕ ≤n. Let Pi,j denote the probability that the next transition cycle will start with j customers
given that the current one starts with i customers, for 1 ≤i,j ≤n; and let P denote the matrix
of transition probabilities with entries Pi,j. Let ⃗π = [π1,π2,...,πn] denote a row vector of the
stationary probability that a transition cycle will start with i customers πi. Clearly, ⃗π should be
the unique solution of
⃗π · P = ⃗π,
and
⃗π ·⃗1 = 1,
(OA. 1)
where ⃗1 = [1,1,...,1]
⊤is a column vector of the same size as ⃗π. Once the probability matrix P is
known, we can derive ⃗π by solving (OA. 1).
We next discuss these two time intervals in a transition cycle separately with more details in the
next two sections. Let Bi
j denote the number of customers in the beginning of the time interval
j, given i customers in the beginning of a transition cycle, for 1 ≤i ≤n and j = 1,2. Recall that
Ii
j denotes the length of the time interval j given i customers in the beginning of a transition
cycle, for 1 ≤i ≤n and j = 1,2. Let P (1)
i,j denote the probability that there are j customers at time
Ti + τϕ given ϕ customers at time Ti for 1 ≤i,j ≤n, and P (2)
j,k denote the probability that there
are k customers at time Ti+1 given that there are j customers at time Ti + τϕ for 0 ≤j ≤n and
1 ≤j ≤n. Let P (1) and P (2) denote the matrices of one-step transition probabilities P (1)
i,j and P (2)
i,j ,
respectively.
Time Interval 1 (Ti,Ti + τϕ): The length of this time interval is a constant τϕ, i.e.,
E
[
Iϕ
1
]
= τϕ.
(OA. 2)
By the deﬁnition of the transition point Ti we have Bϕ
1 = ϕ. The number of service completions in
this time interval determines the expected total customer waiting time. Let D1 denote the number
of service completions in this time interval. Due to exponential service times with rate µ, D1 follows
Poisson distribution with parameter µτϕ:
P {D1 = k} = e−µτϕ (µτϕ)
k
k!
for k = 0,1,2,...,ϕ.
From Theorem 5.2 of Ross (2006), given D1 = k, the k service completion times have the same
distribution as the order statistics corresponding to k independent random variables uniformly
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

10
distributed on the interval (0,τϕ). Further, given D1 = k, the expected j-th service completion time
is
jτ
k+1, for j = 1,...,k.
Note that all quantities in this time interval are independent of customer arrival rate Λ. This is
because the arrival process is eﬀectively shut down in this time interval (Ti,Ti + τϕ).
Time Interval 2 [Ti + τϕ,Ti+1]: The number of customers in the beginning of this time interval,
Bϕ
2 , depends on D1:
Bϕ
2 = max(ϕ −D1,0).
Thus, Bϕ
2 follows distribution
P
{
Bϕ
2 = k
}
=



∑∞
j=ϕ
e−µτϕ(µτϕ)
j
j!
k = 0,
e−µτϕ(µτϕ)
ϕ−k
(ϕ−k)!
0 < k ≤ϕ.
The one-step transition matrix P(1) is directly determined by the distribution of Bϕ
2 :
P(1)
i,j =









∑∞
l=i
e−µτi(µτi)l
l!
if m ≤i ≤n and j = 0
e−µτi(µτi)i−j
(i−j)!
if m ≤i ≤n and 0 < j ≤i
1
if i = j ≤m −1
0
otherwise
.
(OA. 3)
Let N j
µτi = e−µτi(µτi)j
j!
, and we have
P(1) =


i⧹j
j = 0
j = 1
j = 2 ··· j = m −1
j = m
··· j = n −1 j = n
i = 0
1
0
0
···
0
0
···
0
0
i = 1
0
1
0
···
0
0
···
0
0
i = 2
0
0
1
···
0
0
···
0
0
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
i = m −1
0
0
0
···
1
0
···
0
0
i = m
∑∞
l=m N l
µτm
N m−1
µτm
N m−2
µτm
···
N 1
µτm
N 0
µτm
···
0
0
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
i = n −1 ∑∞
l=n−1 N l
µτn−1 N n−2
µτn−1 N n−3
µτn−1 ···
N n−m
µτn−1
N n−m−1
µτn−1
···
N 0
µτn−1
0
i = n
∑∞
l=n N l
µτn
N n−1
µτn
N n−2
µτn
··· N n−m+1
µτn
N n−m
µτn
···
N 1
µτn
N 0
µτn


.
The length of the second time interval is exp(Λ), so we have
E [I2] = 1
Λ.
Let Dϕ
2 denote the number of service completions in [Ti + τϕ,Ti + τϕ + exp(Λ)]. Due to the expo-
nential service time and there are Bϕ
2 customers at time Ti +τϕ, we can determine the distribution
of Dϕ
2 by considering a Poisson process with rate µ in an exponential time interval with mean 1
Λ:
P
{
Dϕ
2 = k
}
=





ρ
ρ+1
(
1
ρ+1
)k
0 ≤k < Bϕ
2 ,
(
1
ρ+1
)Bϕ
2
k = Bϕ
2 .
(OA. 4)
Further, the number of customers seen by the arrival at time Ti + τϕ + exp(Λ) is Bϕ
2 −Dϕ
2.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

11
Further, the above discussion reveals the relation between the one-step transition matrix P(2)
and the distribution of D2:
P(2)
j,k =













P {D2 = 1 or 2}
= ρ(ρ+2)
(ρ+1)2
if j = k = n
∑∞
l=j P {D2 = l}
=
(
1
ρ+1
)j
if k = 1
P {D2 = j −k + 1} =
ρ
ρ+1
(
1
ρ+1
)j−k+1
if k ≤j + 1
0
0
otherwise
.
(OA. 5)
Moreover, the one-step transition matrix of transition cycles P can be derives as
P = P(1) · P(2),
(OA. 6)
where P(1) and P(2) are from (OA. 3) and (OA. 5), respectively. Then, solving (OA. 1) gives the
stationary probability of the semi-Markov process ⃗π.
Then, by Lemma 5 in Section OA20 in the Online Appendix, we obtain
¯ΛS =
1
∑n
i=1 πiτi + 1
Λ
,
(OA. 7)
ΛS =
1 −πn
ρ
ρ+1e−µτn
∑n
i=1 πiτi + 1
Λ
,
(OA. 8)
SS =
∑n
i=1 πi
(
R −c i
µ
)
−πn
ρ
ρ+1e−µτn
(
R −c n
µ
)
−h
∑n
i=1 πiτi + 1
Λ
,
(OA. 9)
where πi can be solved from (OA. 1) with P given by (OA. 6).
□
OA8.
Proof of Proposition 2
In the ﬁrst decision epoch, customers do not have any QLI, it is an unobservable system for them.
Assume they use a mixed strategy and enter the facility with a probability q, so the eﬀective arrival
rate to the service system is λ = qΛ. In the second decision epoch, customers have access to the
real-time QLI, and they decide accordingly whether to join or balk. It is an observable queue for
them, and they will only join the queue if it is shorter than n. Thus, a customer’s utility of entering
the facility is
Uenter (δ,ϕ) =
n−1
∑
i=0
(1 −qρ)(qρ)
i
1 −(qρ)
n+1
(
R −(i + 1) c
µ
)
−h = H (qρ) −h
where H (ρ) ≡c
µ
(
ν (1−ρn)
1−ρn+1 −
1
1−ρ + (n+1)ρn
1−ρn+1
)
. Then, if all going provides positive utility, all customers
will go to the facility, i.e., q = 1. We ﬁrst notice some properties of H (ρ): (i) H (0) = R−c
µ > 0; (ii)
it limρ→∞H (ρ) = 0; and (iii) H (ρ) is a decreasing function of ρ, if
1−ρi
1−ρn+1 is a decreasing function
of ρ > 0, for ∀1 ≤i ≤n, which is true because its ﬁrst derivative
∂
(
1−ρi
1−ρn+1
)
∂ρ
= i(n + 1)(1 −ρ)
ρ(1−i) (ρn+1 −1)
2
(∑n
j=n+1−i ρj
i
−
∑n
j=0 ρj
n + 1
)
is less than zero. Hence, for 0 < h ≤R −c
µ, there is a unique root ρN of H (ρ) = h. Of course, when
h decreases to 0, ρN increases to ∞; and when h increases to R −c
µ, ρN decreases to 0.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

12
When ρ < ρN, all Λ customers go to the facility,
1−ρn
1−ρn+1 Λ will join the queue and (1−ρ)ρn
1−ρn+1 Λ will
balk at the second decision epoch. In this case, the social welfare is µρ(H (ρ) −h). When ρ ≥ρN,
not all but ρN customers will go to the facility, and social welfare is zero.
The expected QL for ρ < ρN under no QLI Ln can be derived as the expected QL of an M/M/1
queue with ﬁnish waiting room n:
Ln = ρ(1 −ρn −nρn + nρn+1)
(1 −ρ)(1 −ρn+1)
,
which is clearly an increasing function of ρ. Simplifying Ln = ω −1 gives c
µ (ν −1 −Ln) = h, where
c
µ (ν −1 −Ln) = h is a decreasing function of ρ. Hence, ρL is unique.
Moreover, we have
c
µ (ν −1 −Ln) −H (ρ) = −c
µ
(n + 1 −ν)ρn (1 −ρ)
1 −ρn+1
< 0.
Combining with the fact that both c
µ (ν −1 −Ln) and H (ρ) are decreasing functions of ρ, we have
ρL < ρN.
□
OA9.
Proof of Proposition 3
Recall from the discussion of Lemma 3 that queues under the full-QLI structure have the joining
shutdowns that are diﬀerent from the arrival shutdowns under the shared-QLI structure. However,
we can use a similar approach to Proposition 1 here to derive the entry rate, throughput, and social
welfare under full QLI, and the result is identical to Proposition 3.
We consider each arrival of customer as transition point and apply the same method as in the
proof of Proposition 1 to the two time intervals: (1) (Ti,Ti + exp(µ)), and (2) [Ti + exp(µ),Ti+1],
where Ti+1 = Ti +exp(µ)+exp(Λ). Let Bi ≤m denote the number of customers in the beginning of
the time interval i and Di denote the number of service completions in time interval i, for i = 1,2.
For the ﬁrst time interval (Ti,Ti + exp(µ)), we have
• B1 = ϕ.
• The length of this time interval is τϕ =
{
0
ϕ < m,
exp(µ) ϕ = m.
• The number of service completion in this time interval is D1 =
{ 0 ϕ < m,
1 ϕ = m.
• The one step transition matrix of this time interval is
P(1)
i,j =



1 if i < m and i = j
1 if i = m and j = m −1
0 otherwise
Further, for the second time interval [Ti + τϕ,Ti+1], we have
• B2 =
{ ϕ
ϕ < m,
m −1 ϕ = m.
• The expected length of this time interval is 1/Λ.
• We can determine the distribution of the number of service completions in this time interval
D2 by considering a Poisson process with rate µ in an exponential time interval with mean 1
Λ:
P {D2 = k} =





ρ
ρ+1
(
1
ρ+1
)k
0 ≤k < B2,
(
1
ρ+1
)B2
k = B2.
(OA. 10)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

13
• Let Pj,k denote the probability that there are k customers at time Ti+1 given that there are
j customers at time Ti + τϕ for 1 ≤j,k ≤m. Further, we have the relation between the one-step
transition matrix P(2) and the distribution of D2:
P(2)
j,k =







∑∞
l=j P {D2 = l}
=
(
1
ρ+1
)j
if k = 1
P {D2 = j −k + 1} =
ρ
ρ+1
(
1
ρ+1
)j−k+1
if 1 < k ≤j
0
= 0
otherwise
.
P = P(1) · P(2)
=


i⧹k
k = 1
k = 2
··· k = m
i = 1
1
ρ+1
ρ
ρ+1
···
0
i = 2
(
1
ρ+1
)2
ρ
ρ+1
(
1
ρ+1
)
···
0
...
...
...
...
...
i = m −1
(
1
ρ+1
)m−1
ρ
ρ+1
(
1
ρ+1
)m−2
···
ρ
ρ+1
i = m
(
1
ρ+1
)m−1
ρ
ρ+1
(
1
ρ+1
)m−2
···
ρ
ρ+1


Let πi denote the stationary probability that a transition cycle will start with i customers, and
⃗π = [π1,π2,...,πm] is a row vector. Clearly, ⃗π should be the unique solution of
⃗π · P = ⃗π,
and
⃗π ·⃗1 = 1,
(OA. 11)
where ⃗1 = [1,1,...,1]
⊤is a column vector of the same size as ⃗π. Once the probability matrix P is
known, we can derive ⃗π by solving the above equation:
πi = ρi−1 (1 −ρ)
1 −ρm
for 1 ≤i ≤m.
Then, by Lemma 5 in Section OA20 in the Online Appendix, the throughput rate is one divided
by the expected transition cycle length
ΛF =
1
∑m
i=1 πi (τi + 1/Λ) =
Λ
(
1 −ρm−1(1−ρ)
1−ρm
)
+ ρm−1(1−ρ)
1−ρm
(ρ + 1)
= µρ(1 −ρm)
1 −ρm+1 .
The social welfare is
SF =
∑m
i=1 πi
(
R −h −c i
µ
)
∑m
i=1 πi (τi + 1/Λ)
= cρ
( 1 −ρm
1 −ρm+1 ω −
(
1
1 −ρ −(m + 1)ρm
1 −ρm+1
))
.
At last, using Naor’s formula SF = (R −h)ΛF −cLF, we have
LF =
ρ
1 −ρ −(m + 1)ρm+1
1 −ρm+1
.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

14
OA10.
Proof of Corollary 1
When Λ = ∞, we have the one-step transition matrix P(1) as
P(1)
i,j =









∑∞
l=i
e−µτi(µτi)l
l!
if m ≤i ≤n and j = 0
e−µτi(µτi)i−j
(i−j)!
if m ≤i ≤n and 0 < j ≤i
1
if i = j ≤m −1
0
otherwise
The length of the second time interval is zero, and there are no service completions. Further, the
one-step transition matrix P(2) is
P(2)
j,k =



1 if j = k = n
1 if k = j + 1
0 otherwise
.
Moreover, the one-step transition matrix of transition cycles P can be derives as
P = P(1) · P(2)
=


i⧹j
j = 0
j = 1
j = 2 ··· j = m −1
j = m
··· j = n −1
j = n
i = 0
0
1
0
···
0
0
···
0
0
i = 1
0
0
1
···
0
0
···
0
0
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
i = m −1
0
0
0
···
0
1
···
0
0
i = m
0
∑∞
l=m N l
µτm
N m−1
µτm
···
N 2
µτm
N 1
µτm
···
0
0
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
i = n −2
0
∑∞
l=n−2 N l
µτn−2 N n−3
µτn−2 ···
N n−m
µτn−2
N n−m−1
µτn−2
···
N 0
µτn−2
0
i = n −1
0
∑∞
l=n−1 N l
µτn−1 N n−2
µτn−1 ··· N n−m+1
µτn−1
N n−m
µτn−1 ···
N 1
µτn−1
N 0
µτn−1
i = n
0
∑∞
l=n N l
µτn
N n−1
µτn
··· N n−m+2
µτn
N n−m+1
µτn
···
N 2
µτn
N 1
µτn + N 0
µτn


,
where N j
µτi = e−µτi(µτi)j
j!
. Then, time both sides of (OA. 1) with
[ 0 1 ··· m −1 m ··· n −1 n ]⊤
gives
⃗πP
[ 0 1 ··· m −1 m ··· n −1 n ]⊤= ⃗π
[ 0 1 ··· m −1 m ··· n −1 n ]⊤
n
∑
i=0
iπi + 1 −
n
∑
i=m
µτiπi −e−µτnπn +
n
∑
ϕ=m
πϕ
∞
∑
k=ϕ
e−µτϕ (µτϕ)
k
k!
(k −ϕ) =
n
∑
i=0
iπi
from which we obtain the expected cycle length
n
∑
i=m
πiτi = 1
µ
(
1 −πne−µτn +
n
∑
ϕ=m
πϕ
∞
∑
k=ϕ
e−µτϕ (µτϕ)
k
k!
(k −ϕ)
)
.
Substituting ∑n
i=m πiτi, Λ = ∞, and
ρ
ρ+1 = 1 into (OA. 7), (OA. 8), and (OA. 9) gives
¯ΛS = µ
/
Ξ,
(OA. 12)
ΛS = µ
(
1 −πne−µτn)/
Ξ,
(OA. 13)
SS = c
(
ω −
n
∑
i=1
iπi −πne−µτn (ν −n)
)
/
Ξ
(OA. 14)
where Ξ = 1 −πne−µτn + ∑n
ϕ=m πϕ
∑∞
k=ϕ
e−µτϕ(µτϕ)
k
k!
(k −ϕ) and πi can be solved from (OA. 1) with
P given by (OA. 6).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

15
When R →∞, we have ω and m approach ∞, so ∑n
i=m πiτi = 1
µ (1 −πne−µτn). Furthermore,
when n −m is also large, we have ∑n
i=m πiτi = 1
µ.
For any transition cycles starting with more than m −1 customers, there are arrival shutdown
periods, and the customer who joins the queue at the end of the transition cycle expects to obtain
zero utility. Of course, for other transition cycles starting with no more than m −1 customers, the
customers joining at the end of the cycle will obtain non-negative utility. By contradiction, we can
show that there are positive probabilities for any transition cycle to start with no more than m−1
customers. Thus, the social welfare SS in this situation is positive.
Moreover, it is only when the hassle cost is h = R−2c/µ, the customer joining a transition cycle
starting with m −1 = 1 customer obtains zero utility. Recall that there is at least one customer in
the beginning of any transition cycle. In this case, the social welfare is zero.
□
OA11.
Proof of Corollary 2
When ρ = Λ/µ = ∞, we should always have ρN < ρ. Using Proposition 2, we complete the proof.
□
OA12.
Proof of Corollary 3
The proof is immediate by letting ρ approach ∞in Proposition 3.
□
OA13.
Proof of Proposition 4
When the hassle cost is zero, i.e., h = 0, we have ω = ν and m = n.
(i) Under the shared-QLI structure, when m = n, we have τi = 0 for i < n. Further, τn = 0 is the
unique solution of
Uenter (δ,ϕ) = 0
n−1
∑
k=1
e−µδ (µδ)
k
k!
(n −k) + e−µδ (ν −n −1) = ν −1.
Then, there are no arrival shutdown periods, and all customers enter the facility to access the
real-time QL. This completes the proof.
(ii) Under the no-QLI structure, when h = 0, from the proof of Proposition 2 we have ρN = ∞.
Then, we must have ρ < ρN in Proposition 2. This completes the proof.
(iii) For the full QLI setting, by letting ω = ν and m = n in Proposition 3, we complete the proof.
Λ = Λ 1 −ρn
1 −ρn+1 ,
S = cρ
( 1 −ρn
1 −ρn+1 ν −
(
1
1 −ρ −(n + 1)ρn
1 −ρn+1
))
.
□
OA14.
Proof of Theorem 1
When SN = 0, we only need to prove SF > 0:
SF = cρ
( 1 −ρm
1 −ρm+1 ω −
(
1
1 −ρ −(m + 1)ρm
1 −ρm+1
))
= cρ
(
(1 −ρ)∑m−1
i=0 (1 −ρi)
(1 −ρm+1)(1 −ρ)
+ ⟨ω⟩1 −ρm
1 −ρm+1
)
> 0.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

16
When SN > 0, we can derive
SF −SN = cρ
((
ν ρn (1 −ρ)
1 −ρn+1 −(n + 1)ρn
1 −ρn+1
)
−
(
ωρm (1 −ρ)
1 −ρm+1 −(m + 1)ρm
1 −ρm+1
))
.
Then, due to the fact that ν ≥ω, to prove SF > SN is equivalent to prove that Φ(ν) = ν ρn(1−ρ)
1−ρn+1 −
(n+1)ρn
1−ρn+1 is an increasing function of ν. First, it is clear that for ν ∈[n,n + 1), it is an increasing
function of ν, because ρn(1−ρ)
1−ρn+1 > 0. Then, we only need to show that Φ(ν) has upward jumps at
integer values; i.e.,
Φ(n + 1) −lim
ν↗n+1Φ(ν)
=
(
(n + 1) ρn+1 (1 −ρ)
1 −ρn+1+1 −(n + 1 + 1)ρn+1
1 −ρn+1+1
)
−
(
(n + 1) ρn (1 −ρ)
1 −ρn+1 −(n + 1)ρn
1 −ρn+1
)
= ρn+1 (1 −ρ)∑n
i=1 (1 −ρi)
(1 −ρn+2)(1 −ρn+1)
> 0,
which completes the proof.
□
OA15.
Proof of Theorem 2
Under no information, the expected social welfare is zero if customers enter the facility with a
probability less than one. In this case, we must have the social welfare under shared QLI, which
is positive, is greater than that under no information. Next, we compare the social welfare under
shared and no information structures when all customers enter the facility under no information.
We will establish the fact that the shared-QLI structure dominates the no information structure
in social welfare using a sample path discussion. Speciﬁcally, we introduce the shared QLI to any
sample path under no information, and show that the social welfare will be improved as a result.
Note that under no information, the system operates like an M/M/1 queue with a ﬁnite waiting
room.
Note that the steady state operations of an M/M/1 queue is composed of a sequence of busy
periods. In one busy period of an M/M/1 queue, if we take away an arrival from the arrival process
while keeping everything else the same, all the following customers that arrive in this busy period
will not see a longer queue upon arrival compared to the previous sample path with this arrival.
We formally describe this result. Consider a set of customers {1,2,3,...} ordered by their arrival
times. Let ai denote the arrival time of customer i, and si denote the ith service completion time.
Since we consider a busy period of the M/M/1 queue, the server is busy all the time, each service
completion takes away one customer. Thus, si is also the departure time of customer i. Clearly,
a customer departs after her arrival time; i.e., si ≥ai. We assume that the system starts with no
customers, then the ﬁrst busy period of this M/M/1 queue ends at sB, s.t., B = min{i|si < ai+1}.
Let li denote the number of customers seen by customer i.
Then, we remove a random customer j from the previous process while letting all other customers
{1,2,3,...,B} \ j behave the same as before. Let l
′
i denote the number of customers seen by
customer i. Clearly, for those customers who arrive before customer j, their li stay the same; i.e.,
l
′
i = li if i < j. For those customers who arrive after customer j, they will not see a longer queue;
i.e., l
′
i ≤li if i > j, and they expect identical or higher utility by joining the queue.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

17
We shall obtain the same conclusion when the M/M/1 queue has a ﬁnite waiting room and
we remove several consecutive customers from the arrival process at the same time. Note that
removing customers from a busy period does not change operations of the following busy periods.
We then focus on a busy period of the system under no information. Clearly, if one can show
that the shared-QLI structure dominates the no information structure in one busy period, one can
show that the same conclusion holds for an M/M/1 queue in steady state, which is composed of
inﬁnitely many busy periods.
There are inﬁnite potential sample paths of the ﬁrst busy period. In some of these sample paths,
the QL never reaches m. Then, even if the shared QLI is introduced to the system, it will not stop
any customers from entering the system, and the service facility operates the same as under no
information. The social welfare under these two information structures is identical in this case.
We next discuss other sample paths where the QL reaches m. We categorize these sample paths
into subsets according to the path before the QL ﬁrst reaches m. For sample paths in one subset, the
system operates exactly the same under both information structures until the QL ﬁrst reaches m.
Then, under the shared QLI, an arrival shutdown period is initiated and some customers may choose
not to enter the facility, while under no information, all customers enter the facility. Introducing
shared QLI to the system is equivalent to removing arrivals during the arrival shutdown period.
If there are no arrivals during the arrival shutdown period, the shared QLI does not remove any
arrivals from the system. If there are some arrivals during the arrival shutdown period, removing
them will improve the utility of all customers that arrive after the arrival shutdown period in any
sample paths in this subset. Moreover, for those arrivals during the arrival shutdown period, on
average they obtain negative utility by entering the facility, so removing these arrivals will also
improve the social welfare. Hence, at the incidence when the QL ﬁrst reaches m, it would be socially
desirable to provide customers with the shared QLI. Then, we can apply the same discussion to all
the following incidences during the busy period when the QL becomes no less than m and show that
the shared-QLI structure improves the social welfare of one busy period under no information.
□
OA16.
Proof of Theorem 3
In the asymptotic case Λ = ∞, from Corollary 3, we have SF = c
(
(R−h)µ
c
−m
)
; and from Corollary
1, we have SS > 0 when h < R −2c/µ. Hence, there exists a range h ∈
(
R −c
µi −ϵ,R −c
µi
]
for
i = 3,...,n −1, for an ϵ > 0, in which SS > SF.
□
OA17.
Proof of Proposition 5
In the asymptotic case Λ = ∞, from Corollary 3, we have ΛF = µ; and from Corollary 2, we have
ΛN = µ
ρN(1−ρn
N)
1−ρn+1
N
. Note from the fact that
ρ(1 −ρn)
1 −ρn+1 =
∑n
i=1 ρi
∑n
i=0 ρi < 1,
we have ΛF > ΛN.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

18
OA18.
Proof of Theorem 4
(i) In the asymptotic case Λ = ∞, from Corollary 1, we have
µ
1 −πne−µτn
1 −πne−µτn + ∑n
ϕ=m πϕ
∑∞
k=ϕ
e−µτϕ(µτϕ)
k
k!
(k −ϕ)
;
and from Corollary 3, we have ΛF = µ. From the fact that ∑n
ϕ=m πϕ
∑∞
k=ϕ
e−µτϕ(µτϕ)
k
k!
(k −ϕ) > 0,
we have
1−πne−µτn
1−πne−µτn+∑n
ϕ=m πϕ
∑∞
k=ϕ
e−µτϕ(µτϕ)
k
k!
(k−ϕ)
< 1. Hence, we get ΛS < ΛF.
(ii) From Corollary 1(ii), we have limR→∞ΛS = µ = ΛF.
□
OA19.
Lemma 4
Lemma 4. In a ﬁnite capacity M/M/1 queue, the expected real-time QL at time t given the
initial state ϕ, E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)] can be derived as E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)] = ∑∞
i=0 P {N = i}E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)|N = i], where
P {N = i} = e−(λ+µ)δ ((λ + µ)δ)
i
i!
for i = 0,1,....
(OA. 15)
and E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)|N = i] can be derived iteratively using
E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)|N = i + 1]
=



λ
λ+µE [Ψ(δ,1)|N = i] +
µ
λ+µE [Ψ(δ,0)|N = i]
if ϕ = 0,
λ
λ+µE [Ψ(δ,ϕ + 1)|N = i] +
µ
λ+µE [Ψ(δ,ϕ −1)|N = i] if 0 < ϕ < n,
λ
λ+µE [Ψ(δ,n)|N = i] +
µ
λ+µE [Ψ(δ,n −1)|N = i]
if ϕ = n.
.
(OA. 16)
Proof of Lemma 4
The transient behavior of an M/M/1 queue with a ﬁnite waiting room is
governed by two stochastic processes: the Poisson arrival process with rate λ and the Poisson
service process with rate µ. Thus, at any moment, the next event will be either an arrival with
probability
λ
λ+µ or a service completion with probability
µ
λ+µ. However, due to the ﬁnite waiting
room, the arrivals or service completions do not necessarily increase or decrease the QL by one.
Let e ∈(T,t) denote the time of an event . If the QL right before e is zero, an arrival at time e
increases the QL by one, but a service completion at time e does not change the QL, which will
stay at zero. If the QL right before e is in the set {1,2,...,n −1}, an arrival at time e increases the
QL by one and a service completion at time e decreases the QL by one. And if the QL right before
e is n, an arrival at time e does not change the QL and a service completion at time e decreases
the QL by one.
Let N denote the total number of events in (T,t), including all arrivals and service completions.
Clearly, N is a Poisson process and follows the distribution in (OA. 15).Let E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)|N] denote
the conditional expected real-time QL given there are ϕ customers at time T and N events occur
in (T,t). Clearly, if no events happen during (T,t), the expected real-time QL at time t will stay
the same as the latest QL update ϕ; i.e., E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)|N = 0] = ϕ. Furthermore, E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)|N = i + 1]
can be calculated iteratively from E [Ψ(δ,ϕ)|N = i] for i ≥0 using (OA. 16). At last, using the
total probability theorem, we can derive the expected real-time QL at time t as in Lemma 4.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

19
OA20.
Renewal Theory in Semi-Markov Processes
In this section, we consider a semi-Markov process with states 1, 2, . . . , n. Each time the process
enters state i, it earns a reward ri and remains there for a random amount of time with mean
ti before the next transition. Let πi denote the steady state probability distribution of this semi-
Markov process. Then, using a similar proof as the one for (7.24) in Ross (2006) we can obtain
the average reward rate earned in this semi-Markov process. For the purpose of completeness, we
include it as a Lemma.
Lemma 5. The average reward rate earned in this semi-Markov process is
∑M
i=1 πiri
∑M
i=1 πiti .
Proof of Lemma 5 Let Ni (m) denote the number of visits to state i in the ﬁrst m transitions,
Xj
i denote the reward earned during the jth visit to state i, and T j
i denote the amount of time
during the jth visit to state i. Then, the total reward earned in state i during the ﬁrst m transitions
is ∑Ni(m)
j=1
Xj
i , and the amount of time during the ﬁrst m transitions that the process is in state i
is ∑Ni(m)
j=1
T j
i .
Furthermore, we have the total reward rate earned during the ﬁrst m transitions is
∑n
i=1
∑Ni(m)
j=1
Xj
i
∑n
i=1
∑Ni(m)
j=1
T j
i
=
∑n
i=1
∑Ni(m)
j=1
Xj
i
Ni(m)
Ni(m)
m
∑n
i=1
∑Ni(m)
j=1
T j
i
Ni(m)
Ni(m)
m
.
(OA. 17)
Since the T j
i are independent and identically distributed and have mean ti, from the strong law
of large numbers, we have
lim
m→∞
Ni(m)
∑
j=1
T j
i
Ni (m) = ti.
(OA. 18)
Similarly, we have
lim
m→∞
Ni(m)
∑
j=1
Xj
i
Ni (m) = ri.
(OA. 19)
Next, to derive limm→∞
Ni(m)
m
we temporarily consider the model under the assumption that each
transition takes one unit of time. Then Ni(m)
m
is the rate at which visits to state i occur, which, as
such visits can be viewed as renewals, converges to (E [number of transitions between visits])
−1 by
Proposition 7.1 in Ross (2006). But by Markov-chain theory, this must equal πi. As limm→∞
Ni(m)
m
is clearly unaﬀected by the actual times between transitions, we have
lim
m→∞
Ni (m)
m
= πi.
(OA. 20)
At last, by substuting (OA. 18), (OA. 19), and (OA. 20) into (OA. 17), we have
lim
m→∞
∑n
i=1
∑Ni(m)
j=1
Xj
i
∑n
i=1
∑Ni(m)
j=1
T j
i
= lim
m→∞
∑n
i=1
∑Ni(m)
j=1
Xj
i
Ni(m)
Ni(m)
m
∑n
i=1
∑Ni(m)
j=1
T j
i
Ni(m)
Ni(m)
m
=
∑n
i=1 πiri
∑n
i=1 πiti
.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905

20
OA21.
Useful Equations
Some relevant derivations with respect to τ:
∂∑i−1
j=0
e−µτi(µτi)j
j!
(i −j)
∂τi
= −µ
i−1
∑
j=0
e−µτi (µτi)
j
j!
(OA. 21)
∂∑i−1
j=0
e−µτi(µτi)j
j!
(
(ρ + 1)
i −(ρ + 1)
j)
∂τi
= −µρ
i−1
∑
j=0
e−µτi (µτi)
j
j!
(ρ + 1)
j
(OA. 22)
∂∑i−1
j=0
e−µτi(µτi)j
j!
∂τi
= −µe−µτi (µτi)
i−1
(i −1)!
(OA. 23)
Further, some relevant derivations with respect to ρ:
∂∑n−1
j=0
e−µτ (µτ)j
j!
(ρn −ρj)
∂ρ
= nρn−1
n−1
∑
j=0
e−µτ (µτ)
j
j!
−µτ
n−2
∑
j=0
e−µτ (µτ)
j
j!
ρj
(OA. 24)
∂∑n−1
j=0
e−µτ (µτ)j
j!
ρj
∂ρ
= µτ
n−2
∑
j=0
e−µτ (µτ)
j
j!
ρj
(OA. 25)
∂∑n−1
j=0
e−µτ (µτ)j
j!
ρn
∂ρ
= nρn−1
n−1
∑
j=0
e−µτ (µτ)
j
j!
(OA. 26)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3046905