TITLE: Smart Working: Work Flexibility Without Constraints
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2023.4767
---

Smart-working: Work Flexibility Without
Constraints ∗
Marta Angelici, Bicocca University and Dondena
Paola Profeta, Bocconi University and Dondena
March 2020
Abstract
Does removing the constraints of time and place of work increase the
utility of workers and ﬁrms? We design a randomized experiment on a
sample of workers in a large Italian company: workers are randomly
divided into a treated group that engages in ﬂexible space and time job
(which we call “smart-working”) one day per week for 9 months and a
control group that continues to work traditionally. By comparing the
treated and control workers, we ﬁnd causal evidence that the ﬂexibility
of smart-working increases the productivity of workers and improves
their well-being and work-life balance. We also observe that the eﬀects
are stronger for women and that there are no signiﬁcant spillover eﬀects
∗Corresponding author: paola.profeta@unibocconi.it. We thank Vittoria Dicandia, An-
narita Macchioni and Giovanna Mazzeo Ortolani for research assistance. We are grateful to
Massimo Anelli, Nicoletta Balbo, Francesco Billari, Marco Bonetti, Marina Brollo, Heejung
Chung, Marilisa D’Amico, Daniela Del Boca, Giovanni Fattore, Vincenzo Galasso, Nicola
Gennaioli, Anne-Marie Jeannet, Marco Manacorda, Monica Parrella and Joanna Rickne for
their suggestions. We also thank participants of ELENA, AisP, Alp-Pop, EGEN-Stockholm
conferences, the worhsop on gender and economics at the University of Luxembourg, sem-
inars at Bocconi University, Dondena, Discont and the University of Bologna. Part of the
data was collected under the ELENA project of Italy’s Department for Equal Opportunities
and the Dondena Center of Bocconi University, ﬁnanced by the Rights, Equality and Citi-
zenship (REC) Programme of the European Union- JUST/2014/RGEN/AG/GEND/7803.
This study is registered in the AEA RCT Registry and the unique identifying number is
AEARCTR-0002979. All errors are ours.
1

within workers of a team.
JEL codes: J16, J22, J24, L2, M54
1
Introduction
The outbreak of the 2019 novel coronavirus is threatening the growth of several
parts of the world, including China, the world’s fastest growing major economy,
and Lombardy, the most productive Italian region. To contain the spread of
the coronavirus and curb the contagion, a new organizational model of work,
called “smart-working”, is becoming increasingly important: workers can work
outside their workplace and with a ﬂexible time schedule, thanks to the use
of the technology. The ﬂexibility of where and when to work is used today to
continue the work activities and avoid the collapse of the economy.
Smart-working is a fully ﬂexible work arrangement, with the capacity to adapt
quickly and intelligently to diﬀerent situations.
Smart workers agree with
their supervisors to perform their work activities for a deﬁned period of time
outside of the company’s physical workplace and according to a personalized
time schedule. During this period, there are no speciﬁc constraints on the time
or location of work. Due to the use of technology, smart workers may perform
the same duties and activities as those of ordinary workers and achieve the
same set targets and results while choosing a workplace and time schedule that
are more convenient for both the activity to be performed and their personal
needs. Time and space ﬂexibility creates a new work organization, which is
based upon results rather than workplace presence and work during particular
hours.
Despite its massive use in recent weeks, we still know very little about the
economic eﬀects of smart-working in normal times. The available evidence,
which consists only of case studies, management surveys on speciﬁc samples
of workers and ex post descriptive analyses, does not allow us to appropriately
identify the economic eﬀects of smart-working. This paper ﬁlls this research
gap and provides causal evidence that smart working is economically desirable.
We design a randomized experiment to show that removing the constraints on
2

the time and space of work without altering the wages, for a limited period of
working activity, improves the productivity, well-being and work-life balance
of individuals.1
Work ﬂexibility is not a new concept. The majority of European employees (3
out of 4 on average) have access to some work ﬂexibility. According to a recent
survey conducted on US professionals (Dean and Auerbach, 2018), 47% of the
interviewees reported having work ﬂexibility. However, almost all the workers
in the sample (96%) said that they want ﬂexibility. A recent report by Gallup
(Gallup, 2017) based on interviews with more than 195,600 employees found
that ﬂexibility plays a major role in an employee’s decision to take or leave a
job.
Work ﬂexibility is a multidimensional concept.
The traditional practice of
working from home under the same wage conditions and control of the em-
ployer, which is known as telecommuting, is now used by approximately 17%
of workers in Europe (Eurofound, 2017) and 16% of workers in the US (US
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2019). In their experiment on Chinese employees
in a call-center (a routine job), Bloom et al. (2014) show that telecommut-
ing can be beneﬁcial for employees’ productivity and their work-life balance,
although at the cost of feeling isolated, which, in the long run, may risk re-
ducing the beneﬁts of this practice. However, telecommuting is only one way
and one dimension of work ﬂexibility, which is mainly based on replacing the
workplace with the home, but maintaining the rigid control of the employer on
the location of the work and the precise hours. Telecommuting is compatible
with a limited number of jobs, mainly routine jobs. New and more complex
forms of ﬂexibility have begun to spread, including ﬂexible location and ﬂexi-
ble work times. In the US, approximately 52% of oﬃce employees have some
choice over their work times (Gallup, 2017). Approximately one-third of the
employees in Europe can choose between several ﬁxed working schedules or
independently set their working hours. These individuals are more likely to be
employees with university degrees who are working in high-skilled jobs.
1In our experiment, we introduce one day per week of smart-working, which is the stan-
dard use in normal times. The current health emergency requires smart-working for entire
weeks, making our results not directly comparable with the current situation.
3

Both ﬂexible place and ﬂexible time are highly appreciated by workers. Ac-
cording to the Sixth European Survey on Working Conditions carried out by
the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Condi-
tions (Eurofound, 2017), workers appreciate having control and freedom over
where and when to work, i.e., the possibility of working without the control
of the employer at a place that is diﬀerent from both the oﬃce and home,
as well as a ﬂexible time schedule. More than 20% of the workers (men and
women) interviewed by the survey reported that their working hours do not ﬁt
with their family and social commitments. While working from home does not
change this perception in a statistically signiﬁcant way, having some freedom
to set one’s start and ﬁnish times and arrange breaks during the working day
increases the perception that one’s working hours ﬁt in with their family and
social commitments by approximately 20%. The report by Gallup conﬁrms
that the ﬂexibility of hours is of growing importance and suggests that one’s
home is only one possible alternative to the workplace. Approximately 37%
of the surveyed employees declared they would change their job for beneﬁts
related to a ﬂexible working location (for part of their working week), and
more than half of oﬃce workers (54%) said that they would leave their job
for one that oﬀers ﬂexible work time (Gallup, 2017). Among the millennials,
these reported percentages increased to 50% and 63%, respectively. Millen-
nials want beneﬁts that are directly related to their lives and those of their
family members, and they are willing to switch jobs to secure them. Flexible
work locations and hours are for them a priority, which is a fact that will im-
pose a re-organization of work for employers wanting to compete for a modern
workforce.
After decades of experience with telecommuting, there is a growing consensus
among major international organizations, such as the OECD and the European
Commission (OECD, 2016), that an eﬀective improvement of work-life balance
and productivity, which are the two major goals of work organizations, passes
through more complex and diﬀerent ﬂexible work arrangements, based on the
removal of the constraints on the location and scheduling of work.
Flexible work arrangements are introduced through individual or collective
4

bargaining, which, in several countries, are regulated by laws (Hegewisch et al.,
2009). Such laws give the employees the “right to request” ﬂexible working.
In some cases, this is targeted speciﬁcally at the parents of young children
(Australia, Finland, Norway and Sweden); in others, it is guaranteed to all
employees, irrespective of the reason (Belgium, France, Germany, Netherlands,
and the United Kingdom). Employees can also appeal to the courts in case
employers refuse such a request.
The “right to request” legislation in New
Zealand, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands covers ﬂexible working
rights for employees in a comprehensive manner, including the scheduling of
hours and the location of work. Recently, in 2017, Law 81 in Italy introduced
an appropriate regulatory framework for the implementation of smart-working,
deﬁned as a “new method of forming a subordinated employment relationship
without precise constraints on time or location of work and with the use of
technological tools in the workers’ duties and activities”. Italy provides an
interesting context for our analysis; while the country is characterized by a
general low ﬂexibility in work organization, ﬁrms started to show some level
of interest in smart-working as early as ten years ago, well before Law 81,
although this approach was limited to very small groups of workers (typically,
fewer than ten).
Smart-working is associated with a trade-oﬀ.
On the one hand, there are
potential gains from the ﬂexible work locations and hours, which go beyond
those associated with telecommuting. By working from home, telecommuting
allows workers to reduce their commuting costs and ﬁrms to optimize their
costs. The reduction in costs is higher with smart-working than telecommut-
ing, since the last one requires inspections and a constant monitoring of the
workers at distance.2 Moreover, home is only one possible alternative to the
oﬃce, and not necessarily the more convenient alternative; the conﬂict be-
tween work and family may even become more visible when employees work
2Firms may reduce lighting costs, summer and winter climatization costs, corporate
canteen costs, cleaning costs, etc. In some cases, the place of work itself becomes “smart”
as oﬃces become ﬂexible spaces where workers perform part of their activities and have
free access to all technologies; such spaces often have novel physical layouts, including, e.g.,
mindfulness zones and areas for team-working and communicating. The extreme, though
not common, case is the "no ﬁxed desk" oﬃce.
5

from home for caring purposes. It may also be the case that, for the same
reduction of commuting time, the double gain of improving work-life balance
and increasing productivity may be better obtained when workers work at a
library, at a park, at a diﬀerence place close to their residence, or at a location
that may change without the control of the employer, instead of home, where
their family duties may interfere with their job activity. Moreover, removing
the ﬁxed daily start and ﬁnish times gives employees the possibility of better
managing their time according to their preferences; they can enjoy long or
short breaks for personal or family reasons, and they can adapt their work
hours to life changes without altering their compensation. This increases their
satisfaction and work-life balance, which ultimately makes this arrangement
desirable to workers. In parallel, ﬁrms may optimize by rewarding these em-
ployees based on eﬀective productivity rather than on the particular hours
worked. Firms may also gain from the retention of talent and the reduction
of days of absence, thus increasing their competitiveness. Additionally, time
ﬂexibility in the labor market for all workers (men and women) contributes
to reducing the rewards of long hours, work at particular hours and inﬂexible
schedules, which are considered a major driver of gender pay gaps (Bertrand,
2018) and may thus represent a step towards the “last chapter of the grand
gender convergence” (Goldin, 2014).
On the other hand, smart working raises concerns about the organizational
process, the productivity of workers and their well-being. Some of these con-
cerns are shared with the telecommuting experience; for example, working
outside the workplace may reduce the commitment of workers, who can then
take advantage of the ﬂexibility to take part in activities diﬀerent from work.
Moreover, by reducing interactions between workers and between workers and
supervisors, there is a risk of a reduction in productivity, particularly in jobs
with high interactions. Finally, blurring the boundaries between work and
home may increase the hours of overtime, the levels of employee stress and
worsen work-life balance.
These concerns are even stronger in the case of
smart working, when the location of work can be changed by the employee
without the control of the employer. Moreover, the lack of rigid daily start
and ﬁnish times can amplify the reduction of worker commitment, reduce
6

their regular activity (in absence of strict rules on time) and increase the risk
of overworking.
How the introduction of smart work addresses this trade-oﬀis an open ques-
tion that we address empirically. We design a randomized experiment to study
the causal eﬀects of the introduction of smart working in a large traditional
company in the multi-utility sector in Italy.
The company has never used
this approach before. Following the methodology of randomized control tri-
als (RCTs), we select a sample of 310 workers (containing both white- and
blue-collar workers) and randomly divide it into two groups; the workers in
the ﬁrst group (the treated group) have the option to work “smart” (i.e., with
no constraints on the place or time) one day per week for 9 months in agree-
ment with their supervisors, while the workers in the second group (the con-
trol group) continue to work traditionally. We are interested in three major
outcomes: productivity, well-being and work-life balance. We use objective
measures of workers’ performance calculated monthly by the ﬁrm (e.g., the
number of dossiers processed during the month) and the number of days of
leave of each worker. We complement this information with questionnaires
administered to each worker and to his/her supervisor both before and after
the treatment. The questions posed in the questionnaires capture several di-
mensions of self-assessed productivity, well-being and work-life balance. Given
the randomization of the two groups, we are able to identify the causal eﬀect
of the treatment on our outcomes of interest.
Our results show that, for the same number of hours of work, workers involved
in smart working increase their productivity compared to that of workers who
continue working traditionally; this outcome is true whether productivity is
captured by an objective measure or if it is measured according to several
speciﬁc productivity traits (e.g., compliance with deadlines) reported by the
same worker or by the supervisor. Smart workers are also more satisﬁed with
their social life, free time and life in general. They claim to be more able
to focus, make decisions, appreciate their daily activities, overcome problems
and experience reduced stress and loss of sleep. Interestingly, both men and
women spend more time engaged in household and care activities. We also
7

observe that the eﬀects are stronger for women and that there are no signiﬁcant
spillover eﬀects within workers of a team.
Our results suggest that promoting smart working is an eﬀective way to in-
crease productivity and improve well-being and work-life balance. Moreover,
we provide evidence that by removing the rigidity related to particular hours
of work, smart working may contribute to the reduction of gender gaps in the
labor market (Goldin, 2014). The high ﬂexibility of smart-working—ﬂexible
time schedules, ﬂexible places of work and ﬂexible periods of ﬂexible work
to be used during the workweek—makes it a very appealing option for both
employers and employees of a large category of jobs.
Our results are consistent with the idea of smart-working representing the
removal of a constraint that is desirable for employees and useful for employers.
In the presence of rigid work hours, when workers choose their amount of work
hours, they face an implicit constraint on the hours of the day that can be
dedicated to the work activity.
This constraint may be binding for those
workers who gain utility from taking a break to adapt to their personal and
family needs; such workers have to choose whether to work part-time and hence
decrease their wages, to not meet their needs or to be absent from work. Any
option is costly. The removal of the time constraint increases the utility of these
workers such that they can still work full-time and accommodate their needs
by choosing a personalized time schedule. Their increased satisfaction and
better time management may also increase their productivity during working
hours. To the extent that employers value the output of the workers rather
than the work at speciﬁc hours, smart-working represents a net gain.
The paper is organized as follows. The next section presents a literature review,
section three describes the experiment, section four presents the data, section
ﬁve describes the empirical strategy, section six shows the results, section
seven discusses heterogeneous and spillover eﬀects within teams, section eight
presents additional analyses and considers robustness, section nine contains
the discussion and conclusion. A set of appendixes complements the analysis
of the main text.
8

2
Literature Review
Previous studied have analyzed the relationship between diﬀerent management
practices and productivity (see literature reviews in Walker (1887), Leiben-
stein (1966), Syverson (2011), Gibbons and Henderson (2013), and Bloom
and Sousa-Poza (2013)). However, few studies have performed randomized
experiments that can identify the causal eﬀects of managerial procedures on
productivity. Dutcher (2012) performs lab-based experiments exploring rou-
tine and non-routine tasks with and without remote monitoring, and observes
that the more routine ones are negatively aﬀected by mimicking a home-based
environment. The author conjectures that the eﬀect depends on the lack of
peer and manager eﬀects, which have been shown to be important in low-
level tasks in ﬁeld environments by Falk and Ichino (2006), Bandiera et al.
(2005), and Mas and Moretti (2009). Kelly et al. (2014) examines the impact
of a work-life balance training program randomized across branches of a large
ﬁrm, observing signiﬁcant reductions in employees’ work-family conﬂicts, and
improved family time and schedule control.
Bloom et al. (2014) perform a randomized experiment on a sample of call center
employees of a large Chinese travel agency, randomly assigned to two groups:
telecommuters and oﬃce workers. The researchers observe that telecommuters
have higher productivity than do the other workers but, consistent with the
prediction of previous studies of routine tasks, feel isolated.
Thus, when
telecommuters are given the opportunity to again choose between telecom-
muting or not, they prefer to come back to their workplace. This result is
consistent with the evidence provided by Mas and Pallais (2017) who observe
that the majority of workers of a call center do not value scheduling ﬂexibility.
Many of them, especially women with young children, instead value working
from home. These papers consider a very speciﬁc work environment, namely,
call centers, where all workers perform similar and routine-based tasks. How-
ever, as suggested by Dutcher (2012), work ﬂexibility may aﬀect the perfor-
mance of routine and non-routine tasks diﬀerently. Non-routine jobs may take
full advantage of ﬂexibility, as they require a higher individual concentration
than do routine tasks and are less exposed to isolation risks. However, there is
9

no previous causal evidence of this for non-routine jobs. Moreover, as we have
already emphasized, current ﬂexible work arrangements go beyond telecom-
muting, by including ﬂexible time schedule, ﬂexible place of work and a ﬂexible
period of ﬂexible work to be used during the workweek. Yet, there exists no
causal evidence on smart-workers. Similarly, randomized experiments in ﬁrms
involving a variety of job types in a developed economy are very rare.
The economic consequences of smart-working on workers’ productivity have
not been analyzed before, probably because productivity is diﬃcult to measure
and smart-working is a relatively new approach. Attempts to measure pro-
ductivity based on objective indicators such as absenteeism (Koopman et al.,
2002) and output per hour (Golden, 2012) show a positive relationship with
ﬂexible work arrangements. Self-declared productivity is also positively re-
lated to ﬂexibility (see Riedmann et al. (2006)). However these studies pro-
vide descriptive evidence on the implementation of smart-working and may
suﬀer from endogeneity concerns. The main reason is that they cannot control
for other variables aﬀecting productivity and cannot establish whether smart-
working increases productivity, or whether companies with high productivity
are more likely to introduce smart-working. The latter may also aﬀect pro-
ductivity through changes in workers’ well-being and work-life balance, which
are therefore important to analyze in parallel.
Labor sociologists (Kelly and Moen, 2007, Schieman et al., 2009) have studied
the relationship between ﬂexibility and work-life balance.
As reviewed by
Chung and Meuleman (2017), the evidence on this relationship is mixed: on
the one hand, ﬂexibility may reduce work-family conﬂicts (Chung, 2011, Kelly
et al., 2011), while, on the other hand, it can create spillovers from work to
home, blurring the boundaries between the two and increasing overtime hours
of workers with negative impact on work-life balance (Golden and Wiens-Tuers,
2006). The latter eﬀect tends to be dominant for high-skill workers in large
companies, which also oﬀer performance-related pay and other arrangements
that motivate workers to work longer and harder. A gender divide emerges:
while ﬂexibility is used by women for family-friendly purposes, it is used by
men for performance purposes. The evidence shows that women are more likely
10

to stay employed after the birth of their ﬁrst child and increase their capacity
to work when family duties multiply and thus enjoy better work-life balance.
Men instead increase their work intensity and performance-related payments
with no changes in family arrangements, and earn incremental income. Thus,
traditional gender roles risk being strengthened further by work ﬂexibility.
Chung (Chung, 2011) analyzes data for 28 European countries and shows that
ﬂexibility can have diﬀerent impacts in diﬀerent contexts: it is more beneﬁcial
for workers in job cultures with more hours worked (overtime), where men
and women use it for family-friendly purposes, and the ﬂexibility stigma is not
strong. Other related outcomes, such as health (Kelly and Moen, 2007, Moen
et al., 2013) and stress (Halbesleben and Buckley, 2004, Moen et al., 2016)
outcomes, have been investigated, with results showing a positive relationship
between schedule control and organization of work.3
There are two main
drawbacks in these studies: it is diﬃcult to claim causality, and there is no
precise measurement of productivity.
The managerial implications of ﬂexible work have also been explored in rela-
tion to performance (Leslie et al., 2012): ﬂexibility may increase performance
if workers are “happy” to control their own work schedules and work more eﬀec-
tively, with fewer days of sickness and leave. However, existing contributions
mainly entail descriptive evidence and case studies of major companies across
the world that allow smart-working, and do not provide causal evidence.
3
Experiment
We design and implement a randomized experiment to explore the eﬀects of
smart-working on productivity, well-being and work-life balance of workers.
We focus on Italy, where smart-working is regulated by Law 81/2017 that
includes speciﬁc provisions to encourage the use of smart-work as a way to
promote work-life balance and to enhance competitiveness. The law includes
protection of health and safety of workers and guarantees equal remuneration
3A large body of literature has studied nonstandard work schedules and their impact on
well-being and family conﬂicts (Liu et al., 2011). Smart-working one day per week, however,
is diﬃcult to compare to a nonstandard schedule.
11

of workers. The organizational details are left to an agreement between the
employer and the employee.4 According to the law, smart-work may be en-
gaged in over continuous periods, on some days of the week or during some
hours of the day, as agreed by the workers and the company. Personnel protec-
tion for both private- and public-sector employees is regulated by the National
Institute for Insurance against Accidents at Work (INAIL).
We approached a large Italian company in the multi-utility sector and signed
an agreement to design and implement smart-work as a pilot experiment. The
company is listed on the Italian Stock Exchange and has 4131 workers en-
gaged in various tasks. Workers are divided into blue- and white-collar types.
Workers perform non-routine tasks. Blue-collar workers perform tasks related
to technical, electrical and mechanical installations and maintenance, while
white-collar workers work at a desk and perform several types of procedures,
write and conclude contracts, perform transactions, etc. While both time and
space ﬂexibility are available to white-collar workers, for blue-collar workers
smart-work is mainly characterized by being done on a ﬂexible time sched-
ule.
We designed the experiment in agreement with the ﬁrm’s senior management,
who assented to all of our requests and recommendations. We randomized the
sample after data had been anonymized by the company. We had complete
access to the data used for the analysis and direct access to the surveys ad-
ministered for the experiment. We also had daily contacts with the managers
in charge of the experiment at the company and the management team.
Figure 1 shows the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials ﬂow (CON-
SORT) that summarizes the ﬂows of the experiment5. We adopt the intention-
4During 2017 and 2018, smart-working was also one of work-life balance measures that
gave companies rights to a tax relief.
5Randomized controlled trials can be aﬀected by two major complications: noncom-
pliance and missing outcomes (Gupta, 2011). The more suitable approach is to perform
an intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis, which includes all randomized subjects.
It ignores
noncompliance, protocol deviations, withdrawal, and anything that happens after random-
ization. The resulting estimate of the treatment eﬀect is generally conservative because of
dilution due to noncompliance. Full reporting of any deviations from random allocation
and missing responses is essential in the assessment of the ITT approach, as emphasized in
12

to-treat approach (ITT), which we now explain step by step.
First, we extract our sample of analysis from the population of 4131 workers.
We choose to oversample women, workers younger than 46, workers with chil-
dren under the age of three and workers with relatives who need special care,
which gives them the right to reduce the number of hours worked, according
to Italian Law 104/92 (Legislation on Support for the Disabled). In agree-
ment with the ﬁrm, we decided to oversample these groups because survey
evidence suggests that women and individuals with family care duties (caring
for children, disabled relatives, etc.) are expected to need and beneﬁt more
from smart-working (see Giammatteo (2009)). In fact, the ﬁrms was particu-
larly interested in improving working conditions of these categories and their
work-life balance, expecting this to reﬂect also into their productivity.
Using these criteria, we selected 345 workers and asked them about their will-
ingness to join the program. The proportion of those who did not agree was
10%, which in experiments of this type is considered a reasonable number (Ja-
cobsen et al., 2012, Jørgensen et al., 2014). As a consequence, our ﬁnal sample
consists of 310 workers. Among them, 86% are white-collar workers and 14%
are blue-collar workers. There are no seasonal workers. Table 1 summarizes
the characteristics of our workers, and compares them with those of the total
population of workers at the ﬁrm. Appendix E provides detailed information
on the job description of each worker in our sample, covering both white-collar
and blue-collar workers.6
Afterwards, we randomly split the above 310 workers into two subgroups,
consisting of 200 and 110 workers, respectively: the ﬁrst group was to engage in
smart-working (the treated group) and the second continued to work according
CONSORT (Moher et al., 2001)
6Table E.3 in Appendix E illustrates the responses of white- and blue-collar workers to
questions in the pre-experiment questionnaire related to dimensions considered crucial for
ﬂexible jobs (see Goldin (2014)): time pressure (proxied by the answer to the question “do
you comply with the predetermined deadlines of your responsibilities at work?”), contact
with others and interpersonal relationships (proxied by the answer to the question “do you
feel like having a useful role in your work life?”) and freedom to make decisions (proxied by
the answer to the question “do you feel capable of making decisions?”).
13

to the preexisting arrangements (the control group).7
Based on the experience of other companies that have already implemented
smart-working and after an assessment of the company, we choose to deﬁne the
treatment as one day of smart-working (ﬂexible place and time of work, chosen
by the worker) per week, not allowed to be subdivided, and to be planned in
agreement with the company on a weekly basis for 9 months starting on Octo-
ber 2016. Given their ﬂexibile schedule during this day, workers’ availability is
guaranteed within the working day. The day of smart-work does not need to be
the same for all workers and can change from one week to another. However,
most workers (98 %) choose Friday as a smart-work day. The total number of
smart-working days amounts to 4595 days for 200 employees involved and 130
supervisors.
Smart-workers use the same IT equipment, perform the same tasks, and are
compensated under the same pay system as are workers belonging to the con-
trol group.
The only diﬀerence between the two groups is the ﬂexible ar-
rangement of time and place for one day per week. Computer equipment was
provided for the duration of the treatment to treated group’s workers who did
not have it. The respective workers knew that they would have the computer
only for the duration of the experiment; thus, we do not expect this to aﬀect
their perceived status.
The randomization of workers, performed by us in agreement with the ﬁrm, is
based on gender (male and female), age groups (27-45 and 46-68) and type of
job (white-collar and blue-collar). The combinations of these characteristics
result in 8 strata. For each stratum, we randomly assign 65% of the individuals
to the treated group and the remaining 35% to the control group.
In Table 2, we compare treated and control groups’ workers. The table con-
ﬁrms that the two groups are not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent in any of the observable
characteristics, namely, gender, age, whether the worker beneﬁts from Law 104
or has a relative who beneﬁts from it, whether the worker has children and if
7As each treated worker had to be provided with a computer and a maximum of 200
computers were available due to budget constraints, we decided to maximize the number of
treated workers. As a consequence, treated and control groups had diﬀerent sizes.
14

he/she has children younger than 3 years old.
Within the treatment group, 191 workers received the treatment, while 9 did
not receive it: only 5 workers declined to participate after their random allo-
cation into the treatment group, 3 workers died, and 1 worker retired. Within
the control group, 2 workers left during the experiment, 1 worker was ﬁred
and 1 worker declined to participate. These very small numbers do not pose
a concern for the validity of the experiment. Instead, the attrition rate is im-
portant, i.e., the failure to follow up: 18 of treated group’s workers were not
observed after the treatment because they did not reply to the second ques-
tionnaire. The respective number increases to 43 for control group’s workers.
To ensure that the attrition rate is not problematic in our experiment8, in Ta-
ble 3 we present balance tests for observable characteristics of respondents and
non-respondents to the post-treatment questionnaire. There are no signiﬁcant
diﬀerences, apart from a small diﬀerence in gender. In Table 4, we also show
balance tests for the intention to treat, i.e. means of the same observable char-
acteristics of workers respondent after the treatment and those who did not,
separately for the treated and control groups. Again, we observe no signiﬁ-
cant diﬀerences. In the next section, we will introduce our outcome variables
and describe balance tests of pre-treatment outcomes for treated and control
workers, including a comparison between respondents and non-respondents to
the post-treatment questionnaire to exclude biases from the attrition.
Each worker is matched with his/her supervisor. There are 130 supervisors
because some of them supervise more than one worker. Ten supervisors also
participate in the experiment, of which 8 in the treated group and 2 in the
control group. Among supervisors, 75% are male, and the rest are female. For
both male and female supervisors, we have an equal split between the two age
groups: under 46 and 46 or above.
During the experiment, workers did not know whether the treatment would be
temporary; this prevents possible anticipation eﬀects. Interestingly, after the
8In a comprehensive review of methodological issues related to presence of attrition
rates, Akl et al. (2012) shows that balance tests of respondents and non respondents are
appropriate to reduce estimation biases and minimize the lack to follow-up
15

end of the experiment, given the positive results obtained, the company in-
formed us of its decision to continue and gradually expand the implementation
of smart-working. In this subsequent process, the ﬁrm gave priority to workers
who did not participate in our experiment. Only 60 workers of our sample of
310 workers had the opportunity to apply for participation in the new round
of smart-working, of which 80% belonged to our treatment group.
During the nine months, the experiment was constantly monitored through
meetings with the company, weekly reporting on the use of smart-working and
an internal meeting of the company every 3 months with the target popula-
tion.
The protocol used has been registered in the American Economic Association’s
Randomized Control Trial registry. The experiment has been approved by the
Ethics Committee at Bocconi University.
4
Data collection
Data are obtained from both the ﬁrm and questionnaires administered to work-
ers in both the treatment and control groups and their supervisors before and
after the treatment. The ﬁrm provides some baseline information for each
worker in our sample, as has already been mentioned, namely, gender, age,
number and ages of children, whether the worker or a relative needs special
care according to Law 104 and the type of work performed by the worker. We
also know whether the individual works in a team with other coworkers and
with a common supervisor.
4.1
Objective Productivity
Measuring productivity is a diﬃcult task, especially for workers who are not
physically present at the workplace. We thus decide to rely on three diﬀerent
measures: objective productivity, self-reported and reported by supervisors.
In this section, we describe our measure of objective productivity, while the
other two will be introduced in the next section.
16

The ﬁrm provides monthly days of leave (i.e., days oﬀ, sick leave, or special
leave), the number of hours worked, and a monthly numeric indicator of ob-
jective productivity for each worker, built from the results of each worker in
his/her own tasks. This is a monthly indicator collected for the entire dura-
tion of the experiment from the month prior to testing (September 2016) to
the last full trial month (June 2017).9 This indicator computed by the ﬁrm is
unavailable for only 6% of workers in our sample. For the remaining workers,
the indicator used is a speciﬁc number that represents the respective worker’s
level of performance. More speciﬁcally, for 84.5% of them, the indicator cor-
responds to an absolute number, while for the other 15.5%, it is measured
as a numeric change with respect to the measurement of the previous period.
The measurement is homogeneous over time for the same individual but varies
across individuals, as it depends on the speciﬁc job of each worker. Both the
absolute number and the change reﬂect the exact number of executed tasks
(e.g., the number of procedures completed, the number of contracts concluded,
the number of transactions performed, etc.), or the evaluation of the employee
on a scale reported by the supervisor, or the compliance with deadlines (yes
or no).
Since we are interested in the eﬀect of treatment over the entire period (which
ensures that the eﬀect does not depend on possible periods of peaks in job
duties during the year), we consider cumulative variations of the objective
indicator as follows. We consider each monthly variation; the variations can
be positive, negative or null. We sum all variations and create a dichotomous
variable that has the value of 1 if that sum is positive, thus indicating an
overall improvement of productivity over the treatment period, and is zero
otherwise. Subsequently, we perform a logistic regression for this dichotomous
variable.
For example, consider a worker who has to perform a set of procedures. His/her
9According to our knowledge of the operation of the ﬁrm and information received by
the managers, September is an ordinary month in terms of productivity of workers. As the
new working arrangements may take some time to fully stabilize, we also rerun the analysis,
considering October 2016 as the month preceding testing. This adjustment does not change
results.
17

productivity is measured on the basis of how many procedures he/she is able
to complete during a month. In the reference month of September, he/she
completed 68 procedures, while the respective number was 14 in October,
79 in November, 105 in December, etc. We calculate for each month from
October to June the diﬀerence as a percentage with respect to the value as of
September. Next, we sum all of these percentages. A positive value of this
ﬁnal sum indicates an improvement of productivity over the examined period.
If there are more tasks assigned to the same worker, we consider the overall
sum for all tasks. We proceed similarly if a task is measured by the number of
concluded contracts or that of performed transactions or another quantitative
metric. As another example, consider a worker who receives an evaluation on
the scale from 1 to 10 every month. If the evaluation in the reference month of
September is equal to 6 and in the following month is equal to 8, the change
in the latter month is positive and equal to 2. We sum the changes between
the evaluation of each month and the evaluation of September and create a
dichotomous variable that has the value of 1 if that ﬁnal sum is positive and
is 0 otherwise.
We present several ﬁgures that visually show the evidence we will analyze.
Figure 2 shows for each month of the treatment period the percentage of
treated and control groups’ workers whose productivity increased relative to
that in the previous month. In each month, the percentage for treated group’s
workers is higher than that for the control group’s workers.
This suggests
that the diﬀerence between treatment and control is not only an impact of the
introduction of ﬂexible work, probably related to the change, but continues
over time.
To understand whether the change in productivity varies over time during
the experiment, in Figure 3 we show the objective productivity of treated
and control groups’ workers after 3, 6 and 9 months. The diﬀerence is not
statistically signiﬁcant after 3 months but appears after 6 months.
Finally, Figure 4 compares the average numbers of days of leave requested
monthly by treated and control groups’ workers over the period of the exper-
iment. Interestingly, starting from the same point, after one month the total
18

amount of days of leave of the treated group is consistently lower than that of
the control group.
4.2
Questionnaires
We designed questionnaires to collect data on productivity, well-being and the
work-life balance. Workers and supervisors in both the treated and control
groups were asked to complete one questionnaire before the experiment (the
pre-treatment questionnaire) and another one afterwards (the post-treatment
questionnaire). The questionnaires include questions related to productivity,
well-being and the work-life balance. In the post-treatment questionnaire, the
treated group also answered questions related to their evaluation of the policy.
Questionnaires are shown in Appendix F.
Productivity assessed by the questionnaires includes self-reported productiv-
ity and that reported by supervisors. Self-reported productivity includes 5
outcomes: a measure of output, i.e., the capacity to attain the assigned goals,
eﬃciency at work, i.e., the capacity to attain the assigned goals within an
appropriate time, proactivity at work, i.e., the capacity to take initiative ap-
preciated by others; availability to answer emails or work outside working
hours and capacity to comply with predetermined deadlines. The respondents
are asked to evaluate each outcome on a scale from 1 to 5, where 1 corresponds
to “Very Low”, and 5 corresponds to “Very High”. Productivity reported by
the supervisor includes the same 5 outcomes. They are consistent with mea-
sures used by existing case studies, reports, and toolkits focused on ﬂexible
work and productivity (see Golden (2012), Pruchno et al. (2000), Kossek and
Michel (2011), etc.).
The well-being assessment includes standard questions drawn from the British
Household Panel Survey (Taylor et al. (1993)). These questions are widely
used in the literature on economics of happiness (see reviews in Van Praag
et al. (2003) and Luhmann et al. (2012)). Respondents are asked to indicate
the extent of their satisfaction on a scale from 1 to 7, where 1 corresponds to
“highly dissatisﬁed” and 7 corresponds to “highly satisﬁed” with the following
7 dimensions: income, health status, home, job, social life, free time, and life
19

overall. Respondents also have to report on a scale from 1 (much less than
usual) to 5 (much more than usual) their ability to deal with the following
7 aspects of their lives: staying focused (referred to as “FocusedOn” in the
tables), losing sleep due to any concerns, feeling that they play a useful role in
their work life, being able to make decisions, appreciating the daily activities in
a regular day, feeling stressed, and feeling unable to overcome diﬃculties.
The work-life balance assessment asks about satisfaction with working hours,
how working hours adapt to private life and the feeling of being able to balance
work with personal and family life. Workers are also asked to quantify the
time devoted to household activities per day (cleaning and housekeeping) in
two-hour ranges from “Less than 2 hours” up to “More than 6 hours” and to
quantify the time dedicated to taking care of others (children, elderly, or other
family members).
We provide ﬁrst insights on the well-being and work-life balance indicators
through a visual analysis. Figure 5 and Figure 6 display kernel density func-
tions for the treated and control groups before and after the treatment with
reference to two speciﬁc outcomes: satisfaction with social life and ability to
deal as usual with stress. Interestingly, while the pre-treatment kernel den-
sities of treated and control groups overlap almost completely, they diverge
after treatment, which thus suggests the emergence of an eﬀect of the inter-
vention.
The questionnaires also ask for the home-to-work distance in kilometers.
Finally, they contain questions about the commitment of workers to the com-
pany. The questions are: “How attached do you feel to the company?”, “Do
you believe your work is suﬃciently recognized?” and “Do you have a sense of
moral responsibility towards the company?”
Table 6(panel a) shows the results of the t-test for the diﬀerence between the
means of treated and control groups for each outcome variable measured be-
fore the treatment (i.e., using data from the pre-treatment questionnaire). It
conﬁrms that the starting point is the same for treated and control groups,
i.e., the two groups are balanced before the treatment, which conﬁrms the
20

validity of our randomization. The same result is obtained when we consider
only respondents (in both treated and control group) to the post-treatment
questionnaire (panel b). To further insure that the attrition rate is not prob-
lematic for our results, we also show balance tests of pre-treatment outcomes
for respondents and non respondents (to the post-treatment questionnaire)
within the treated group (panel c) and the control group (panel d).
Table 7 summarizes the outcome variables from the post-treatment question-
naires, related to the diﬀerent dimensions of productivity, well-being, work-life
balance and commitment to the company.
Additionally, we check that the diﬀerence between the number of hours worked
by treated and control groups’ workers before and after the experiment is not
statistically signiﬁcant, conﬁrming that any possible eﬀect of treatment on the
outcome variables does not depend on a change in the number of hours worked
(Table 5).
5
Empirical strategy
We estimate the eﬀect of treatment (i.e., of smart-working) on our indicators
of productivity, well-being and work-life balance.
One of the measures of productivity is the improvement of objective produc-
tivity, a dichotomous outcome that has the value of 1 if the sum of the monthly
productivity changes is positive, and is zero otherwise. We run a logistic re-
gression to estimate this outcome and report the odds ratio of improvement
for treated group’s workers compared to those of the control group.
We use an ordinary least squares (OLS) model to estimate the eﬀect of treat-
ment on the other indicators of productivity (number of days of leave, self-
reported productivity and productivity reported by the supervisor) and on the
indicators of well-being and work-life balance. For each of these indicators, we
estimate the following equation at the individual level:
yi,POST = α + βTREATMENTi + δXi + γyi,PRE + εi
(1)
21

where yi,POST is the speciﬁc measured outcome for individual i post-treatment
according to the dimensions of productivity, well-being and work-life balance,
as summarized in Table 7, TREATMENTi
is a dummy variable that has
the value of 1 if individual i has been assigned to the treatment group and
is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group, yi,PRE is the speciﬁc outcome
for individual i measured before treatment according to the three mentioned
dimensions (productivity, well-being and work-life balance), Xi are individ-
ual control variables, and ﬁnally, εi is an error term.
Given the random-
ization, there should be no need to add control variables to measure the
average treatment eﬀects.
However, control variables are included to im-
prove the accuracy of estimates. Control variables are: the age of respondent
(AGE) and its square (AGESQUARED), gender, captured by a dummy
variable MALE that has the value of 1 if the respondent is male and 0 if
the respondent is female, two dummy variables (LAW104WORKER and
LAW104RELATIV ES) that capture the use of Law 104 for the worker or
for a relative, respectively, two dummy variables related to children, namely,
CHILD that has the value of 1 if the worker has at least one child and is
0 otherwise, and Y OUNGCHILD that has the value of 1 if at least one of
the children of the worker is aged 3 or below and is 0 otherwise, a dummy
variable TEAM that is equal to one if the worker works in a team and is 0
otherwise, and the distance between the worker’s residence and the workplace
in kilometers (KM).
Since, as has already been mentioned, we oversample some characteristics
of the population (female, people under the age of 46, subjects with children
under the age of three and workers with a relative protected by Law 104), using
weighting is recommended to make the analysis of the sample representative
for the target population. We thus create a set of weights that is the inverse
of the probability of inclusion of each stratum of the oversampled categories.
In what follows, we report all analysis results using these weights.
We also use a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences model to estimate the eﬀect of treatment
on the treated group, as opposed to the control group. The model and the
results of these estimates are reported in Appendix D. They are consistent
22

with what is presented in the following sections of the main text.
6
Results
We present results according to the three dimensions we investigate: produc-
tivity, well-being and work-life balance.
6.1
Productivity
The ﬁrst dimension we consider is productivity. As explained, we consider
three measures of productivity: objective, self-reported by the worker and re-
ported by the supervisor. In each table and for each outcome, the ﬁrst column
reports the average treatment eﬀect, and the second column includes control
variables.
The coeﬃcients of the control variables are shown in Appendix
A.
Starting from the indicator of objective productivity, Table 8 panel a, columns
1 and 2 show a signiﬁcant increase of objective productivity for the treated
group after treatment. The odds ratio for treated workers is twice the odds
ratio for the control group. Second, we consider days of leave. Results of OLS
estimates of Equation 1 are reported in Table 8 in columns 3 and 4. The
treatment reduces the number of days of leave (the reduction is by 5.6 days
over the entire period of the experiment). This likely occurs because smart-
workers can better organize their time than can non-smart-workers and are
less in need of asking for leave due to sickness or other reasons (e.g., if they
need to visit a doctor or have to pick up children from daycare centers or assist
elderly parents, etc.).10
Overall, panel a of Table 8 suggests an increase of productivity associated
with smart-working. What drives this increase in productivity? It is diﬃcult
10Note that for objective measures we work with a sample size that diﬀers from that for the
other outcomes. This is due to the diﬀerent source of data, which is obtained directly from
the ﬁrm rather than from questionnaires. The percentage of missing data points is higher
because the analyzed sample has diﬀerent missing values from those in the information
supplied by the ﬁrm.
23

to test exactly what happens to smart-workers that has a positive eﬀect on
their objective productivity. It might be that smart-workers spend less time
at lunch or on coﬀee breaks or bathroom breaks, as it has also been observed
for telecommuters (see Bloom et al. (2014)). Other possible reasons that could
explain the increase of productivity of smart-workers relate to the time saved
in commuting or in taking children to and picking children up from school,
which could allow workers to start working earlier, or to be more focused on
their jobs during the smart-working day. However, we cannot appropriately
test for this.
Another interesting possibility is that, due to smart-working, workers become
more attached to the company, and thus are also more productive. Accord-
ing to the “Hawthorne eﬀect”, treated workers have a positive feeling toward
the ﬁrm, which allows them to use smart-working and reciprocate by work-
ing harder (see Falk and Kosfeld (2006)). In other words, they work more
eﬃciently because they feel an obligation to the company. To test the exis-
tence of this eﬀect, we rely on the information on workers’ commitment to
the company. Table 16 reports the results of estimating equation 1 using as
the dependent variable the answers to the following questionnaire’s questions:
“How attached do you feel to the company?”, “Do you believe your work is
suﬃciently recognized?” and “Do you have a sense of moral responsibility to-
wards the company?” Results show that treatment is associated with a greater
sense of moral responsibility. The other two dimensions of commitment are
instead not statistically signiﬁcant. These results indicate some evidence of
the existence of the “Hawthorne eﬀect”.
Additional insights into the mechanisms at work will be drawn from the analy-
sis of heterogeneous eﬀects across workers with diﬀerent characteristics, which
we explore in sections 6.4 and 7.
Next, we consider self-reported productivity that includes the ﬁve outcomes
described in section 4.2: output (“production”), eﬃciency, proactivity, avail-
ability to respond to emails, and compliance with deadlines. Panel b of Table 8
shows results of estimating equation 1 obtained by using these ﬁve measures
as the dependent variable. The average treatment eﬀect is positive and sig-
24

niﬁcant for all measures except availability to respond to emails, and remains
signiﬁcant (apart from productivity) if control variables are included.11
Finally, we estimate equation 1 using as the dependent variable the same ﬁve
outcomes while instead using the answers of the supervisor of each worker.
The respective results are shown in panel c of Table 8, which conﬁrms that
smart-workers increase their compliance with deadlines compared to results for
the control group; this ﬁnding also holds if workers are assessed by supervisors.
We note that the number of observations in this analysis is smaller because
supervisors did not always respond.
6.2
Well-being
The second dimension we consider is well-being. As anticipated, we measure
well-being in two ways. First, workers are asked to self-assess on a scale from 1
to 7 their personal satisfaction with respect to seven variables: income, health
status, home, work, social life, free time, and life in general. Second, they are
asked whether they are able to deal as usual on a scale from 1 to 5 (where
1 corresponds to “much less than usual” and 5 to “much more than usual”)
with seven aspects of their life: staying focused, losing of sleep due to any
concerns, feeling that they play a useful role in their work life, being able
to make decisions, appreciating the daily activities in a regular day, feeling
stressed, and feeling unable to overcome diﬃculties.
Panel a of Table 9 shows the results of estimating equation 1 using as the
dependent variable seven diﬀerent measures of satisfaction, while panel b shows
results for seven “satisfaction as usual” measures of well-being. Smart-working
increases the individual satisfaction with social life, free time and life in general.
When we include control variables, positive and signiﬁcant eﬀects are also
observed for satisfaction with income, health and home.
Moreover, smart-workers are more capable than usual of dealing with all as-
pects of their lives (apart from playing a useful role): in panel b of Table 9,
11Note that, consistently with most of the literature on this topic, age has a nonlinear
relationship with (self-declared) productivity: the latter increases up to a certain age and
subsequently starts to decline.
25

the coeﬃcients of treatment are positive and signiﬁcant.12
6.3
Work-life balance
The third dimension we consider is the work-life balance, measured by four
variables that correspond to satisfaction with four aspects: working hours,
balance between working life and personal/family life, the amount of house-
hold activities (cleaning and housekeeping) per day and the amount of time
dedicated to taking care of others (children, elderly, or other family mem-
bers).
Panel a of Table 9 reports estimates of equation 1, where for each column the
dependent variable is one of the above 4 measures of work-life balance. The
table shows that treatment is associated with more time being dedicated to
household and care activities.
6.4
Heterogeneous eﬀects by gender
One of the most interesting yet expected consequences of the introduction of
ﬂexible work is the reduction of gender gaps (Goldin, 2014). Smart-working
is expected to reduce gender gaps for at least two reasons. First, although
smart-working does not target women, it may be particularly promising for
women’s employment because it promotes work-family balance, which is a
major concern for employed women, who typically bear the double burden of
work and family/care responsibilities. This is particularly true in Italy, where,
according to the most recent data of the Italian National Institute of Statistics
(Istat, 2018), women spend 3 hours per day more than men in domestic and
unpaid care work, and more than 4 hours if we consider couples with children.
The country exhibits the highest asymmetry in time use within couples across
all European countries. Second, by promoting work-life balance and a more
12In Appendix A, we report the coeﬃcients of covariates. Note that being a woman is
signiﬁcant when we measure satisfaction with income.
As intuitively expected, age and
the use of Law 104 are instead negatively related to satisfaction with health. Interestingly,
workers with children are more satisﬁed with their income and health, but those with a
young child are less satisﬁed with income and health. Workers who live farther from their
workplace are more satisﬁed with their home and work.
26

eﬃcient allocation of time, smart-working may increase the participation of
men in housework and childcare.
In this section, we examine heterogeneous eﬀects for men and women in our
sample. Our balance tests for the covariates by gender, presented in Table 10,
conﬁrm that the subsamples of men and women are randomly divided, and
thus our analysis by gender is expected to be informative.
Table 11 shows that the improvement of objective productivity and a reduction
of the number of days of leave is driven by women. However, if productivity
reported by supervisors is considered, the increase in availability and improved
compliance with deadlines (the two dimensions that were overall signiﬁcant)
is more likely attributed to men. Table 12 shows that male smart-workers
show a higher satisfaction with home, social life and free time, while female
workers exhibit higher satisfaction with work and life in general. Considering
the self-assessed comparison with the usual conditions, women feel more fo-
cused, lose less sleep and feel more useful than before the treatment (table 12,
panel b). Yet men show a signiﬁcant improvement in being able to “focus
on” and appreciate daily activities, experiencing less stress and feeling more
able to overcome diﬃculties (table 12, panel b). Interestingly, considering the
indicators of work-life balance (table 12, panel c), we observe that men claim
to spend signiﬁcantly more time in household work and care activities after
the introduction of smart-working. In other words, as anticipated, and against
the stereotype that men may use job ﬂexibility for performance purposes and
women for work-family balance, we ﬁnd causal evidence that smart-working
increases participation of men in household and care activities, which is a fun-
damental step towards more gender equality. Women are more satisﬁed with
working hours and the impact of work on women’s private life. Smart-working
contributes to the reduction of gender gaps through both a better work-life
balance for women and greater participation of men in housework and care
activities.
This result suggests that smart-working should be particularly appealing to
workers with children. As the treated and control groups are balanced with
respect to the number of children (see Table C.1 in Appendix C) in addition to
27

other factors, we investigate heterogeneity between workers with and without
children. We observe no heterogeneous eﬀects in productivity. The results
seem to suggest that, as expected, while smart-working is beneﬁcial for the
well-being of all individuals, it is particularly appreciated by workers with
children who have strong work-life balance needs (see Tables C.3 and C.4 in
Appendix C).13
7
Heterogeneous and spillover eﬀects by team
Other interesting yet expected consequences of the introduction of ﬂexible
work are the diﬀerent eﬀects of smart-working for workers in teams and work-
ers not in teams and the possible spillover eﬀects from treated group’s workers
to control group’s coworkers in the same team. The literature, though limited
to low-skill jobs, suggests that workers who observe their peers increase their
eﬀorts and productivity (Mas and Moretti, 2009). Thus, smart-working, by
introducing one day of remote and ﬂexible working, may produce a negative ef-
fect on productivity of control group’s workers of the same team. This negative
spillover eﬀect characterized also telecommuting (Bloom et al. (2014)).
In this section, we ﬁrst consider working in a team as a dimension of hetero-
geneity. We know whether each worker – both in the treated group and in the
control group – works in a team and are able to identify the coworkers in the
same team. Approximately 70% of workers work in teams. The characteristics
of workers in the two subgroups – of those working in teams and of those not
working in a team – are balanced across the treated and control groups (see
Table 13).
Working in a team does not seem to be signiﬁcantly related to productivity
measures (Appendix A). However, we are interested in possible diﬀerential
eﬀects of smart-working for workers in teams and workers not in a team. In
13Our randomized experiment allows us to also analyze heterogeneous eﬀects by age and
type of job, for which, however, we do not have clear expectations. This analysis is available
upon request. Unfortunately, we are unable to analyze heterogeneous eﬀects by work-to-
home distance because there is no division in balanced subgroups according to this dimen-
sion.
28

Table 14, we add the team variable and the interaction between team and
treatment to the baseline scenario.
Smart-working increases the objective
productivity of workers but does not do so diﬀerently for workers in teams and
workers not in a team. Self-reported productivity and productivity reported
by supervisors are unaﬀected by working in a team, showing that there are no
signiﬁcant spillover eﬀects of productivity on team workers. A diﬀerent result
is obtained for the number of days of leave, which signiﬁcantly increases for
smart-workers in teams. Treated group’s workers not in a team show a decrease
by more than 18 days in the number of days of leave, which is reduced to 1.154
days (17.825-18.979=-1.154) for treated workers in teams. The latter seem to
be able to enjoy more days of leave than do those not in a team, without
altering their objective productivity.
Second, we consider the possible spillover eﬀects from treated group’s workers
to control group’s workers of the same team.
We consider workers in the
control group and compare the performance of those who had at least one
member of their team included in the treated group and that of the others. In
panel a of table 17, we do not observe a signiﬁcant diﬀerence of self-reported
productivity for these two groups. No signiﬁcant diﬀerence is detected either
if we compare workers in the control group in a team with more than 40%
of treated group’s members and the other workers (panel b). Similarly, we
consider the subsample of individuals in the control group and compare their
outcomes before and after the treatment of their colleagues (Table 18 ). Again,
we consider control workers in a team with at least one treated group’s worker
(panel a) and those in a team with more than 40% of treated group’s workers
(panel b). Both panels show that there are no signiﬁcant negative spillover
eﬀects.14
8
Additional analysis and Robustness tests
We perform several robustness checks to address potential concerns as to the
interpretation of our results.
14Overall, the absence of spillover eﬀects is a validation of our experiment because it
conﬁrms that treatment and control groups are clearly separated.
29

A typical concern in research using questionnaires relates to the reliability of
answers when questionnaires are quite long, as in our case. Scholars of survey
methods have underscored that when individuals answer a long questionnaire,
at a certain point they often start answering automatically (see Pintrich et al.
(1991)). For this reason, we introduced several questions about a similar topic
but using a reverse scale. The obtained results reassure against this concern:
respondents answered carefully, as questions with a positive meaning but asked
in a negative way were correctly answered negatively.
Since our dataset is very rich and allows us to include a large number of control
variables that could potentially inﬂuence the dependent variables, we use the
method of stepwise selection of covariates to select the best model to estimate.
Results, available upon request, are very similar to what we presented in our
main tables.
As a further analysis, we perform the same regressions without weights. Sim-
ilar results are obtained. This demonstrates stability of our results and con-
ﬁrms that the extracted sample is representative of the ﬁrm’s workers even
though we have over- or under-sampled some characteristics. Results of the
unweighted analysis are available upon request.
Another typical concern with a randomized experiment of this type is that it
is diﬃcult to identify whether the signiﬁcant eﬀects observed for the treatment
group depend on the improvement of the treated group or a worsening perfor-
mance of the control workers who are dissatisﬁed with having being excluded
from the treatment, though randomly. Since we still observe a performance
gap between treatment and control groups – in productivity, well-being and
work-life balance dimensions – our estimated treatment eﬀect is likely to be
downward-biased.
As a further test, in table 19 we consider various features of the control group
and compare for each feature its average performance before and after treat-
ment even if control group’s workers had not been subject to it. The t-tests
show that there are no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the outcomes of
the control group before and after treatment, apart from three outcomes (com-
30

pliance with deadlines, household activities and care activities). Yet, for these
three outcomes the direction of the change is positive, i.e., workers in the con-
trol group increase rather than decrease their performance after the policy’s im-
plementation. Thus, the increased productivity of the treated group’s workers
cannot be confounded by a worsening performance of the control group.
Finally, to conﬁrm our results, we produce bounds for the estimates of several
outcome variables as proposed by Lee (2009) (Appendix B). We consider the
outcomes on which smart-working has a strong signiﬁcant impact: satisfaction
with social life, free time and life in general, feeling “as usual” with respect to
staying focused and appreciating daily activities, losing less sleep and feeling
less stressed, and experiencing better work-life balance of household and care
activity. The upper and lower bounds of these estimates have the same sign,
and 95% conﬁdence intervals for the bounds only barely include zero.
9
Discussion and Conclusion
We have established a causal link between the introduction and use of smart-
working and several economic outcomes that capture workers’ productivity,
well-being and work-life balance. The three sets of outcomes together suggest
interesting insights.
First, smart-workers claim to be more satisﬁed with their free time and social
life. Does this mean that they reduce the extra paid work hours and thus their
earnings? Although we do not have data on earnings to directly test this eﬀect,
we note that smart-workers also claim to be more satisﬁed with their incomes,
suggesting that there is no negative eﬀect of smart-work on earnings.
Second, the observed increase in productivity means that, for the same pay,
smart-workers put more eﬀort into their jobs than do non smart-workers.
Smart-workers are more focused and more active.
This may be the result
of diﬀerent and more eﬀective organization of their time, including a reduc-
tion of commuting time and a better use of time within the household. This
eﬀect is captured by the work-life balance indicators that show that smart-
workers spend more time in household and care activities. We also note that
31

the corresponding increase in well-being indicators suggests that the increase
in productivity goes beyond diﬀerent and better time management. The fact
that job satisfaction increases even if workers apply more eﬀort means that
smart-workers have a positive perception of the new form of work organiza-
tion: they are ready to exchange more eﬀort for more ﬂexibility to maintain
or even increase their job satisfaction.
Our study will have substantial policy implications. Smart-working is a recent
approach that is rapidly spreading and is now regulated in several countries.
Removing the constraints of space and time of work looks a promising way for
a more eﬃcient organization of working. Moreover, our results are stronger
for women. Consistently with the view of Goldin (Goldin, 2014), our results
suggest that the ﬂexibility introduced by smart-working may contribute to
reducing gender gaps at work.
Smart-working also appears to be a promising way to promote work-life bal-
ance, which is becoming a signiﬁcant issue in modern societies. Interestingly,
this result was not obvious, as previous analyses have warned about the risk of
over-working related to ﬂexible work arrangements, with all the possible neg-
ative consequences (involving stress, well-being, health, etc.). Ex-post evalua-
tions such as those performed by previous studies are, however, unconvincing,
as they may hardly infer causality. Random assignment as in the approach we
used in our study is a way to guarantee the direction of causality and unbiased
estimates. In other words, having based our analysis on a randomized experi-
ment, we can ensure that we have established an internally valid identiﬁcation
of the eﬀects of smart-working.
The spread of coronavirus is accelerating the use of smart-working as the
only way for ﬁrms to respond to this disruptive event. This will also be an
opportunity to reimagine work organization after the crisis. In this case, our
results will have useful applications.
It is diﬃcult to assess the extent to which our results can be generalized to
other contexts. This is a common concern for all randomized ﬁeld trials in
economic and policy research. However, our experiment was performed in a
32

developed country, for a large set of jobs, and in a context quite representative
of the current conditions in many other countries. While this is the ﬁrst study
of this type, future studies will assess whether the same results apply also to
other contexts, where smart-working is indeed discussed and implemented, but
no causal evidence of its economic eﬀects exixts.
References
Akl, E. A., Briel, M., You, J. J., Sun, X., Johnston, B. C., Busse, J. W., Mulla,
S., Lamontagne, F., Bassler, D., Vera, C., et al. (2012). Potential impact on
estimated treatment eﬀects of information lost to follow-up in randomised
controlled trials (lost-it): systematic review. Bmj, 344:e2809.
Bandiera, O., Barankay, I., and Rasul, I. (2005). Social preferences and the re-
sponse to incentives: Evidence from personnel data. The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 120(3):917–962.
Bertrand, M. (2018). Coase lecture–the glass ceiling. Economica, 85(338):205–
231.
Bloom, D. E. and Sousa-Poza, A. (2013). Ageing and productivity: Introduc-
tion. IZA Discussion Paper, (No. 7205).
Bloom, N., Liang, J., Roberts, J., and Ying, Z. J. (2014). Does working from
home work? evidence from a chinese experiment. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 130(1):165–218.
Chung, H. (2011). Work-family conﬂict across 28 european countries: A multi-
level approach. In Work-Life Balance in Europe, pages 42–68. Springer.
Chung, H. and Meuleman, B. (2017). European parents attitudes towards
public childcare provision: The role of current provisions, interests and ide-
ologies. European Societies, 19(1):49–68.
Dean, A. and Auerbach, A. (2018). 96 percent of us professionals say they
need ﬂexibility, but only 47 percent have it. Harvard Business Review.
Dutcher, E. G. (2012).
The eﬀects of telecommuting on productivity: An
33

experimental examination. the role of dull and creative tasks. Journal of
Economic Behavior & Organization, 84(1):355–363.
Eurofound (2017). Working anytime, anywhere: The eﬀects on the world of
work.
Falk, A. and Ichino, A. (2006). Clean evidence on peer eﬀects. Journal of
labor economics, 24(1):39–57.
Falk, A. and Kosfeld, M. (2006).
The hidden costs of control.
American
Economic Review, 96(5):1611–1630.
Gallup, I. (2017). State of the american workplace.
Giammatteo, M. (2009).
L’indagine campionaria Isfol-PLUS: contenuti
metodologici e implementazione. Studi Isfol, 3.
Gibbons, R. and Henderson, R. (2013). Relational contracts, managerial prac-
tices, and organiza-tional capabilities.
Handbook of Organizational Eco-
nomics.
Golden, L. (2012). The eﬀects of working time on productivity and ﬁrm per-
formance, research synthesis paper. International Labor Organization (ILO)
Conditions of Work and Employment Series, (33).
Golden, L. and Wiens-Tuers, B. (2006).
To your happiness?
extra hours
of labor supply and worker well-being. The Journal of Socio-Economics,
35(2):382–397.
Goldin, C. (2014). A grand gender convergence: Its last chapter. American
Economic Review, 104(4):1091–1119.
Gupta, S. K. (2011). Intention-to-treat concept: a review. Perspectives in
clinical research, 2(3):109.
Halbesleben, J. R. and Buckley, M. R. (2004). Burnout in organizational life.
Journal of management, 30(6):859–879.
Hegewisch, A. et al. (2009). Flexible working policies: a comparative review.
Equality and Human Rights Commission Manchester.
34

Jacobsen, P. B., Wells, K. J., Meade, C. D., Quinn, G. P., Lee, J.-H., Fulp,
W. J., Gray, J. E., Baz, R. C., Springett, G. M., Levine, R. M., et al.
(2012).
Eﬀects of a brief multimedia psychoeducational intervention on
the attitudes and interest of patients with cancer regarding clinical trial
participation: a multicenter randomized controlled trial. Journal of Clinical
Oncology, 30(20):2516.
Jørgensen, R., Munk-Jørgensen, P., Lysaker, P. H., Buck, K. D., Hansson,
L., and Zoﬀmann, V. (2014).
Overcoming recruitment barriers revealed
high readiness to participate and low dropout rate among people with
schizophrenia in a randomized controlled trial testing the eﬀect of a guided
self-determination intervention. BMC psychiatry, 14(1):28.
Kelly, E. L. and Moen, P. (2007). Rethinking the clockwork of work: Why
schedule control may pay oﬀat work and at home. Advances in developing
human resources, 9(4):487–506.
Kelly, E. L., Moen, P., Oakes, J. M., Fan, W., Okechukwu, C., Davis, K. D.,
Hammer, L. B., Kossek, E. E., King, R. B., Hanson, G. C., et al. (2014).
Changing work and work-family conﬂict: Evidence from the work, family,
and health network. American Sociological Review, 79(3):485–516.
Kelly, E. L., Moen, P., and Tranby, E. (2011). Changing workplaces to re-
duce work-family conﬂict: Schedule control in a white-collar organization.
American Sociological Review, 76(2):265–290.
Koopman, C., Pelletier, K. R., Murray, J. F., Sharda, C. E., Berger, M. L.,
Turpin, R. S., Hackleman, P., Gibson, P., Holmes, D. M., and Bendel, T.
(2002). Stanford presenteeism scale: health status and employee productiv-
ity. Journal of occupational and environmental medicine, 44(1):14–20.
Kossek, E. E. and Michel, J. S. (2011). Flexible work schedules.
Lee, D. S. (2009). Training, wages, and sample selection: Estimating sharp
bounds on treatment eﬀects. The Review of Economic Studies, 76(3):1071–
1102.
35

Leibenstein, H. (1966). Allocative eﬃciency vs." x-eﬃciency". The American
Economic Review, 56(3):392–415.
Leslie, L. M., Manchester, C. F., Park, T.-Y., and Mehng, S. A. (2012). Flex-
ible work practices: A source of career premiums or penalties? Academy of
Management Journal, 55(6):1407–1428.
Luhmann, M., Hofmann, W., Eid, M., and Lucas, R. E. (2012). Subjective
well-being and adaptation to life events: a meta-analysis. Journal of per-
sonality and social psychology, 102(3):592.
Mas, A. and Moretti, E. (2009). Peers at work. American Economic Review,
99(1):112–45.
Mas, A. and Pallais, A. (2017). Valuing alternative work arrangements. Amer-
ican Economic Review, 107(12):3722–59.
Moen, P., Kelly, E. L., Fan, W., Lee, S.-R., Almeida, D., Kossek, E. E., and
Buxton, O. M. (2016). Does a ﬂexibility/support organizational initiative
improve high-tech employees’ well-being? evidence from the work, family,
and health network. American Sociological Review, 81(1):134–164.
Moen, P., Kelly, E. L., and Lam, J. (2013). Healthy work revisited: Do changes
in time strain predict well-being? Journal of occupational health psychology,
18(2):157.
Moher, D., Schulz, K. F., and Altman, D. G. (2001). The consort statement:
revised recommendations for improving the quality of reports of parallel
group randomized trials. BMC medical research methodology, 1(1):2.
OECD (2016). Be ﬂexible: background brief on how workplace ﬂexibility can
help european employees to balance work and family.
Pintrich, P. R. et al. (1991). A manual for the use of the motivated strategies
for learning questionnaire (mslq).
Pruchno, R., Litchﬁeld, L. C., and Fried, M. (2000). Measuring the impact
of workplace ﬂexibility. Boston College Center for Work & Family, Carroll
School of Management.
36

Riedmann, A., Bielenski, H., Szczurowska, T., and Wagner, A. (2006). Work-
ing time and work–life balance in european companies, establishment survey
on working time 2004–2005.
Schieman, S., Glavin, P., and Milkie, M. A. (2009). When work interferes with
life: Work-nonwork interference and the inﬂuence of work-related demands
and resources. American Sociological Review, 74(6):966–988.
Syverson, C. (2011). What determines productivity?
Journal of Economic
literature, 49(2):326–65.
Taylor, M. F., Brice, J., Buck, N., and Prentice-Lane, E. (1993).
British
household panel survey user manual. University of Essex.
Van Praag, B. M., Frijters, P., and Ferrer-i Carbonell, A. (2003). The anatomy
of subjective well-being. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization,
51(1):29–49.
Walker, F. A. (1887). The source of business proﬁts. The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 1(3):265–288.
37

10
Figures
Figure 1: Flowchart of participants’ progress through the phases of the trial
Referred
(n=4131):
Population
of workers of
the company
Excluded (n=3759):
a) Not meeting inclusion criteria
b) Declined to participate
c) Other reasons
Assessed for
eligibility (n=345)
Excluded (n=35):
a) Declined to participate
Randomized
(n=310)
Treated group
Control group
Allocated to intervention (n=200):
Received intervention (n=191)
Did not receive intervention (n=9,
5 declined to participate,
3 died, 1 retired)
Allocated to the control group (n=110):
Stayed in the control group (n=110)
Did not stay in the control group (n=0)
Post-treatment measurement:
Lost to follow-up (n=18, no reply to
the post-treatment questionnaire)
Ex-post control group measurement:
Lost to follow-up (n=43, where
n=42 did not reply to the post-
treatment questionnaire, and n=1
was ﬁred)
Analyzed (n=173)
Analyzed (n=67)
38

Figure 2: Percentage of treated and control group workers whose objective
productivity increased with respect to the previous month (for each month of
the treatment, October - June)
Figure 3: Objective productivity of treated and control group workers after 3,
6 and 9 months
Figure 4: Days of leave
39

Figure 5: Kernel density plots for work-life balance
Figure 6: Kernel density plots for satisfaction with social life and for stress
status
40

11
Tables
Table 1: Comparison between the sample and the population
Variable
Population
Sample
Gender
Male
3146
174
Female
985
136
Age group
Under 46
1686
186
46 or above
2445
124
Young Child
Yes
338
108
No
3793
202
Familiar with 104
Yes
525
88
No
3606
222
Table 2: Balance tests - Treated and Control groups (means of observable charac-
teristics)
Variable
Treated
Control
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
191
110
Age
43.27
43.51
-0.2602
0.7949
Male
0.555
0.564
-0.1453
0.8846
Law104Worker
0.0367
0.0182
0.9041
0.3667
Law104Relatives
0.283
0.264
0.3557
0.7223
Child
0.754
0.773
-0.3671
0.7138
Young Child
0.298
0.291
0.1372
0.8909
Notes: Two-sample t-test for a comparison between means. Signiﬁcance: *
indicates p<0.05.
Table 3: Balance tests for the attrition rate: means of observable characteristics of
respondents and non-respondents to the post-treatment questionnaire
Variable
Respondents
Non-Respondents
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
240
61
Age
43.3
43.59
-0.2661
0.7903
Male
0.525
0.6885
-2.309
0.02162 *
Law104Worker
0.0375
0
1.536
0.1255
Law104Relatives
0.2708
0.2951
-0.3773
0.7063
Child
0.7625
0.7541
0.1369
0.8912
Young Child
0.2708
0.3934
-1.879
0.06128
Notes: Two-sample t-test for a comparison between means. Signiﬁcance: * indicates p<0.05.
41

Table 4: Balance tests for the intention to treat: means of observable character-
istics of respondents and non-respondents to the post-treatment questionnaire
for treated and control groups
Treated Group
Variable
Respondents
Non-Respondents
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
173
18
Age
43.29
43.06
0.1241
0.9014
Male
0.5376
0.7222
-1.501
0.135
Law104Worker
0.04046
0
0.8667
0.3872
Law104Relatives
0.2775
0.3333
-0.4987
0.6186
Child
0.7514
0.7778
-0.2456
0.8063
Young Child
0.2832
0.4444
-1.423
0.1565
Control Group
Variable
Respondents
Non-Respondents
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
67
43
Age
43.31
43.81
-0.3485
0.7282
Male
0.4925
0.6744
-1.89
0.0614
Law104Worker
0.02985
0
1.14
0.2569
Law104Relatives
0.2537
0.2791
-0.2917
0.771
Child
0.791
0.7442
0.5679
0.5713
Young Child
0.2388
0.3721
-1.504
0.1356
Notes: Two-sample t-test for a comparison between means. Signiﬁcance: *
indicates p<0.05.
Table 5: Time worked (in minutes)
Variable
Treated
Control
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Minutes-Pre
190
525.911
109
521.615
0.652
0.515
Minutes-Post
173
524.087
67
526.127
-0.286
0.776
Notes: Two-sample t-test for a comparison between means. Signiﬁcance: *
indicates p<0.05.
42

Table 6: Balance tests of pre-treatment outcomes
Panel a.
Variable
Treated
Control
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Objective productivity
Improvement
169
0.249
100
0.160
1.027
0.3055
Days of leave
192
3.201
109
2.837
0.6868
0.4928
Self-reported productivity
Production
191
3.874
110
3.773
1.125
0.2615
Eﬃciency
190
3.905
110
3.727
2.066
0.03971 *
Proactivity
190
3.821
110
3.736
0.9669
0.3344
Email
190
1.995
110
1.945
0.5468
0.585
Deadlines
190
4.611
110
4.545
1.059
0.2907
Well-being
Income
188
4.117
108
4.148
-0.1797
0.8575
Health
190
4.653
110
4.818
-0.8062
0.4208
Home
190
5.121
108
5.25
-0.7047
0.4816
Work
189
4.831
108
5.037
-1.252
0.2114
SocialLife
188
4.856
107
4.738
0.5786
0.5633
FreeTime
187
3.107
109
3.174
-0.3214
0.7482
LifeInGeneral
190
4.989
109
5.009
-0.1252
0.9004
Satisfaction as usual
FocusOn
190
2.958
110
3.209
-2.398
0.01711 *
LoseLessSleep
190
2.579
110
2.682
-0.7876
0.4316
UsefulRole
190
3.047
110
3.218
-1.489
0.1376
MakeDecisions
190
3.2
110
3.327
-1.208
0.2282
AppreciateDailyActivities
190
3.011
110
3.127
-1.239
0.2162
LessStress
190
2.579
110
2.682
-0.7876
0.4316
NotOvercome
190
2.211
110
2.355
-1.326
0.1857
Work-life balance
WorkingHours
190
2.637
110
2.627
0.08019
0.9361
Balance
190
2.463
110
2.418
0.456
0.6488
HouseholdActivity
190
1.489
110
1.473
0.1977
0.8434
CareActivity
190
2.079
110
2.118
-0.3371
0.7363
43

Panel b. Respondents to the post-treatment questionnaire
Variable
Treated
Control
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Self-reported productivity
Production
173
3.879
67
3.776
0.9634
0.3363
Eﬃciency
173
3.895
67
3.687
2.05
0.04147 *
Proactivity
173
3.808
67
3.746
0.5861
0.5584
Email
173
1.983
67
1.970
0.1134
0.9098
Deadlines
173
4.610
67
4.552
0.7939
0.428
Well-being
Income
170
4.112
67
4.328
-1.083
0.2799
Health
172
4.657
67
4.836
-0.7106
0.4781
Home
172
5.116
67
5.358
-1.108
0.2691
Work
171
4.789
66
5.061
-1.367
0.1729
SocialLife
170
4.829
64
4.500
1.308
0.1921
FreeTime
170
3.071
66
2.803
1.076
0.2829
LifeInGeneral
172
4.959
66
4.833
0.6476
0.5179
Satisfaction as usual
FocusOn
172
2.988
67
3.164
-1.436
0.1522
LoseLessSleep
172
2.570
67
2.597
-0.1785
0.8585
UsefulRole
172
3.052
67
3.343
-2.159
0.03189*
MakeDecisions
172
3.233
67
3.299
-0.5273
0.5985
AppreciateDailyActivities
172
3.035
67
3.239
-1.804
0.07245
LessStress
172
2.570
67
2.597
-0.1785
0.8585
NotOvercome
172
2.186
67
2.328
-1.079
0.2817
Work-life balance
WorkingHours
172
2.640
67
2.552
0.6098
0.5426
Balance
172
2.465
67
2.418
0.3927
0.6949
HouseholdActivity
172
1.506
67
1.448
0.5724
0.5676
CareActivity
172
2.128
67
2.134
-0.04639
0.963
44

Panel c. Treated group
Variable
Respondents
Non-respondents
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Objective productivity
Improvement
154
0.253
0.200 15
0.4531
0.6511
Days of leave
173
3.312
18
2.315
0.8948
0.372
Self-reported productivity
Production
173
3.879
18
3.833
0.2344
0.8149
Eﬃciency
173
3.895
18
4.000
-0.5971
0.5512
Proactivity
172
3.808
18
3.944
-0.7272
0.468
Email
172
1.983
18
2.111
-0.6762
0.4998
Deadlines
172
4.610
18
4.611
-0.005098
0.9959
Well-being
Income
170
4.112
18
4.167
-0.1531
0.8785
Health
172
4.657
18
4.611
0.1037
0.9175
Home
172
5.116
18
5.167
-0.13065
0.8963
Work
171
4.789
18
5.222
-1.263
0.2082
SocialLife
170
4.829
18
5.111
-0.6919
0.4899
FreeTime
170
3.071
17
3.471
-0.9629
0.3369
LifeInGeneral
172
4.959
18
5.278
-0.9391
0.3489
Satisfaction as usual
FocusOn
172
2.988
18
2.667
1.494
0.1368
LoseLessSleep
172
3.430
18
3.333
0.3682
0.7131
UsefulRole
172
3.052
18
3.000
0.2144
0.8305
MakeDecisions
172
3.233
18
2.889
1.551
0.1227
AppreciateDailyActivities
172
3.035
18
2.778
1.273
0.2045
LessStress
172
2.570
18
2.667
-0.3682
0.7131
NotOvercome
172
2.186
18
2.444
-1.143
0.2544
Work-life balance
WorkingHours
172
2.640
18
2.611
0.1154
0.9083
Balance
172
2.465
18
2.444
0.1006
0.9199
HouseholdActivity
172
1.506
18
1.333
0.99
0.3235
CareActivity
172
2.128
18
1.611
2.184
0.03017 *
45

Panel d. Control group
Variable
Respondents
Non-respondents
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Objective productivity
Improvement
60
0.2
40
0.1
1.335
0.185
Days of leave
67
2.861
42
2.798
0.07408
0.9411
Self-reported productivity
Production
67
3.776
43
3.767
0.06205
0.9506
Eﬃciency
67
3.687
43
3.791
-0.7178
0.4745
Proactivity
67
3.746
43
3.721
0.1881
0.8512
Email
67
1.970
43
1.907
0.4428
0.6588
Deadlines
67
4.552
43
4.535
0.1706
0.8648
Well-being
Income
67
4.328
43
3.854
1.701
0.09182
Health
67
4.836
43
4.791
0.1444
0.8855
Home
67
5.358
43
5.073
0.9885
0.3252
Work
67
5.061
43
5.000
0.2295
0.8189
SocialLife
67
4.500
43
5.093
-1.724
0.08769
FreeTime
67
2.803
43
3.744
-2.58
0.01123 *
LifeInGeneral
67
4.833
43
5.279
-1.922
0.05725
Satisfaction as usual
FocusOn
67
3.164
43
3.279
-0.6673
0.506
LoseLessSleep
67
3.403
43
3.186
0.9729
0.3328
UsefulRole
67
3.343
43
3.023
1.814
0.07252
MakeDecisions
67
3.299
43
3.372
-0.4429
0.6587
AppreciateDailyActivities
67
3.239
43
2.953
2.026
0.04521 *
LessStress
67
2.597
43
2.814
-0.9729
0.3328
NotOvercome
67
2.328
43
2.395
-0.3819
0.7033
Work-life balance
WorkingHours
67
2.552
43
2.744
-0.9789
0.3298
Balance
67
2.418
43
2.419
-0.004328
0.9966
HouseholdActivity
67
1.448
43
1.512
-0.4567
0.6488
CareActivity
67
2.134
43
2.093
0.214
0.831
Notes: Two-sample t-test for a comparison between means. Signiﬁcance: * indicates
p<0.05.
46

Table 7: Summary statistics of outcome variables (post-experiment question-
naire)
Statistic
Obs.
Mean
St. Dev.
Min
Max
Commitment to the company
Attachment
238
4.273
0.830
2
5
Work recognized
238
1.853
0.740
1
3
Responsibility
238
1.059
0.339
1
3
Objective productivity
Improvement
240
0.399
0.491
0
1
Days of leave
240
40.930
30.459
7
151
Self-reported productivity
Production
240
3.971
0.699
2
5
Eﬃciency
240
3.942
0.718
3
5
Proactivity
240
3.892
0.752
2
5
Email
240
2.079
0.842
1
4
Deadlines
240
5.129
1.126
3
5
Productivity reported by supervisors
Productivity
231
3.623
0.840
1
5
Eﬃciency
231
3.615
0.831
1
5
Proactivity
231
3.468
0.864
1
5
Availability
231
3.606
0.878
1
5
Deadlines
231
4.351
0.765
1
5
Well-being: satisfaction with ...
Income
230
4.296
1.504
1
7
Health
233
4.970
1.604
1
7
Home
237
5.359
1.608
1
7
Work
235
5.034
1.408
1
7
SocialLife
234
5.094
1.488
1
7
FreeTime
234
3.637
1.794
1
7
LifeInGeneral
236
5.246
1.202
1
7
Well-being: satisfaction as usual
FocusOn
238
3.483
0.825
1
5
LoseSleep
238
2.950
1.005
1
5
UsefulRole
238
3.332
0.920
1
5
MakeDecisions
238
3.399
0.744
1
5
AppreciateDailyActivities
238
3.471
0.767
1
5
UnderStress
238
3.059
0.935
1
5
NotOvercome
238
2.647
0.863
1
5
Work-life balance
WorkingHours
238
2.840
0.989
1
5
Balance
238
2.584
0.795
1
4
HouseholdActivity
238
3.592
1.352
1
5
CareActivity
238
4.471
1.595
1
5
47

Table 8: Productivity
Panel a. Objective productivity
Improvement
Days of leave
Logit
OLS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Treated
2.059∗∗
2.211∗∗
−6.002∗
−5.659∗
(3.522)
(3.088)
Controls
✓
✓
Observations
195
195
202
202
R2
0.014
0.282
Notes: The table shows results of a LOGIT estimate for the dependent variable “Improvement” and an OLS estimate for the dependent variable “Days of leave”. Both are objective
measures of productivity. “Treated” is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treated group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control
group. The regression includes (the respective coeﬃcients are not shown in the table) individual controls for age, squared age, being a law 104 worker (“law 104 worker”), having
law 104 relatives (“law 104 relatives”), having a child (“child”), having a young child (“young child”), distance from home to the workplace in km (“km”), being in a team (“team”),
and dependent variable pre-treatment. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
Panel b. Self-reported productivity
Productivity
Eﬃciency
Proactivity
Email
Deadlines
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Treated
0.142
0.104
0.249∗∗
0.182∗∗
0.346∗∗∗
0.308∗∗∗
−0.009
0.014
0.204∗∗∗
0.149∗∗
(0.104)
(0.091)
(0.103)
(0.092)
(0.108)
(0.102)
(0.113)
(0.094)
(0.075)
(0.075)
Controls
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Observations
240
239
240
237
240
237
240
237
212
209
R2
0.124
0.365
0.024
0.270
0.041
0.198
0.00003
0.358
0.034
0.141
Panel c. Productivity reported by supervisors
Productivity
Eﬃciency
Proactivity
Availability
Deadlines
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Treated
0.161
0.098
0.029
−0.022
−0.218
−0.089
0.043
0.316∗∗
0.227∗
0.441∗∗∗
(0.145)
(0.138)
(0.131)
(0.138)
(0.137)
(0.140)
(0.154)
(0.159)
(0.122)
(0.126)
Controls
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Observations
173
150
173
150
173
150
173
150
173
150
R2
0.007
0.422
0.0003
0.338
0.015
0.389
0.0004
0.381
0.020
0.371
Note: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The dependent variables are 5 measures of productivity (self-reported and reported by the supervisors). “Treated”
is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treated group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group. The regression
includes (the respective coeﬃcients are not shown in the table) individual controls for: age, squared age, law 104 worker, law 104 relatives, child, young child, km, team
and dependent variable pre-treatment. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
48

Table 9: Well-being and work-life balance
Panel a. Satisfaction with...
Income
Health
Home
Work
SocialLife
FreeTime
LifeInGeneral
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
Treated
0.059
0.320∗
0.266
0.435∗∗
0.283
0.499∗∗∗
−0.144
0.181
0.624∗∗∗
0.559∗∗∗
0.759∗∗∗
0.834∗∗∗
0.404∗∗
0.356∗∗
(0.213)
(0.169)
(0.232)
(0.180)
(0.214)
(0.180)
(0.202)
(0.192)
(0.209)
(0.170)
(0.251)
(0.214)
(0.161)
(0.140)
Controls
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Observations
230
225
233
230
237
234
235
230
234
227
234
229
236
232
R2
0.0003
0.390
0.006
0.434
0.007
0.340
0.002
0.182
0.037
0.422
0.038
0.349
0.026
0.303
Note: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The dependent variables measure satisfaction with 7 dimensions of life on a scale from 1 (highly dissatisﬁed) to 7 (highly satisﬁed). “Treated” is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if
the individual has been assigned to the treated group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group. The regression includes (the respective coeﬃcients are not shown in the table) individual controls for: age, squared age, law 104 worker,
law 104 relatives, child, young child, km, team and dependent variable pre-treatment. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
Panel b. Satisfaction as usual
FocusOn
LoseLessSleep
UsefulRole
MakeDecisions
AppreciateDailyActivities
LessStress
Overcome
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
Treated
0.447∗∗∗
0.441∗∗∗
0.356∗∗
0.366∗∗
0.040
0.147
0.210∗
0.243∗∗
0.510∗∗∗
0.497∗∗∗
0.638∗∗∗
0.607∗∗∗
0.346∗∗∗
0.270∗∗
(0.122)
(0.121)
(0.142)
(0.144)
(0.138)
(0.137)
(0.109)
(0.108)
(0.107)
(0.108)
(0.128)
(0.123)
(0.130)
(0.126)
Controls
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Observations
238
235
238
234
238
235
238
235
238
235
238
234
238
234
R2
0.054
0.117
0.026
0.057
0.0004
0.133
0.016
0.089
0.088
0.132
0.095
0.202
0.029
0.095
Note: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The dependent variable indicates if respondents have been able to deal with 7 aspects of their life on the scale from 1 (much less than usual) to 5 (much more than usual). “Treated” is
a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treated group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group. The regression includes (the respective coeﬃcients are not shown in the table) individual
controls for: age, squared age, law 104 worker, law 104 relatives, child, young child, km, team and dependent variable pre-treatment. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
Panel c. Work-life balance
WorkingHours
Balance
HouseholdActivity
CareActivity
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Treated
0.112
0.203
0.138
0.250∗∗
0.784∗∗∗
0.774∗∗∗
1.865∗∗∗
1.948∗∗∗
(0.144)
(0.129)
(0.118)
(0.099)
(0.183)
(0.188)
(0.199)
(0.197)
Controls
✓
✓
✓
✓
Observations
238
235
238
235
238
235
238
235
R2
0.003
0.262
0.006
0.361
0.072
0.087
0.272
0.338
Notes: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The dependent variables are measures of work-life balance on a scale from “less than 2 hours” to “more than 6 hours”. “Treated”
is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treated group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group. The regression includes (the
respective coeﬃcients are not shown in the table) individual controls for age, squared age, law 104 worker, law 104 relatives, child, young child, km, team and dependent variable
pre-treatment. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
49

Table 10: Balance Test by gender - Treated and Control groups (means of observable characteristics)
Male
Female
Variables
Treated
Control
Test Statistic
p-value
Treated
Control
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
107
63
Obs.
85
48
Age
43.19
43.17
0.01047
0.9917
43.28
44.25
-0.6724
0.5025
Law104Worker
0.009346
0.03175
-1.069
0.2868
0.07059
0
1.895
0.06031
Law104Relatives
0.2897
0.2381
0.7286
0.4673
0.2824
0.2917
-0.1133
0.9099
Child
0.785
0.8254
-0.6322
0.5281
0.7176
0.6875
0.3642
0.7163
Young Child
0.3084
0.3333
-0.3352
0.7379
0.2824
0.2292
0.665
0.5072
Note: Two-sample t-test for a comparison between means. Signiﬁcance: * indicates p<0.05.
Table 11: Productivity (by gender)
Objective Productivity
Self-reported Productivity
Productivity reported by Supervisors
Improvement
Days of leave
Production
Eﬃciency
Proactivity
Email
Deadlines
Production
Eﬃciency
Proactivity
Availability
Deadlines
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
Treated
1.079
−2.535
0.108
0.272∗∗
0.510∗∗∗
−0.031
0.133
0.147
0.070
−0.079
0.374∗∗
0.594∗∗∗
(3.569)
(0.127)
(0.109)
(0.120)
(0.112)
(0.091)
(0.159)
(0.158)
(0.160)
(0.182)
(0.142)
Female
0.247∗∗
11.040∗
0.299
0.369∗∗
0.517∗∗∗
−0.168
−0.134
0.355
0.579∗
0.158
0.454
0.737∗∗∗
(6.063)
(0.198)
(0.169)
(0.188)
(0.175)
(0.140)
(0.297)
(0.296)
(0.301)
(0.340)
(0.266)
Treated*Female
4.424∗
−13.199∗
−0.165
−0.300
−0.685∗∗∗
0.154
0.052
−0.225
−0.414
−0.058
−0.244
−0.677∗∗
(7.168)
(0.238)
(0.203)
(0.226)
(0.210)
(0.158)
(0.330)
(0.328)
(0.334)
(0.378)
(0.295)
Constant
0.001∗
−20.651
−5.805∗∗∗
−1.163
1.380
5.057∗∗∗
2.270∗∗
2.462
3.800∗∗
−0.408
−1.783
3.083∗∗
(43.584)
(1.424)
(1.343)
(1.485)
(1.412)
(1.046)
(1.653)
(1.614)
(1.683)
(1.848)
(1.460)
Observations
243
203
239
237
237
237
209
150
150
150
150
150
R2
0.297
0.366
0.277
0.230
0.359
0.142
0.423
0.343
0.388
0.383
0.391
Note: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The dependent variables are the objective measure of productivity (columns 1-2), measures of self-reported productivity (columns 3-7) and measures of
productivity reported by supervisors (columns 8-12). “Treated” is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treated group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control
group. “Female” is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual is a female. Treated*Female is the interaction term of our interest. All regressions include (coeﬃcients are not shown in the table)
individual controls for age, squared age, law 104 worker, law 104 relatives, child, young child, km, and dependent variable pre-treatment. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
50

Table 12: Well-being (by gender)
Panel a. Satisfaction with:
Income
Health
Home
Work
SocialLife
FreeTime
LifeInGeneral
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Treated
0.205
0.344
0.529∗∗
−0.014
0.464∗∗
0.865∗∗∗
0.154
(0.199)
(0.216)
(0.213)
(0.225)
(0.198)
(0.255)
(0.166)
Female
0.101
−0.125
0.352
−0.332
−0.328
0.213
−0.436∗
(0.316)
(0.335)
(0.336)
(0.357)
(0.333)
(0.421)
(0.261)
Treated*Female
0.414
0.306
−0.106
0.713∗
0.362
−0.110
0.701∗∗
(0.382)
(0.402)
(0.404)
(0.429)
(0.392)
(0.492)
(0.313)
Constant
1.545
4.247
1.258
1.733
2.552
−1.137
−0.425
(2.537)
(2.718)
(2.662)
(2.835)
(2.520)
(3.200)
(2.099)
Observations
225
230
234
230
227
229
232
R2
0.393
0.435
0.340
0.192
0.424
0.349
0.318
Panel b. Satisfaction as usual:
FocusOn
LoseLessSleep
UsefulRole
MakeDecisions
AppreciateDailyActivities
LessStress
Overcome
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Treated
0.278∗
0.166
−0.064
0.208
0.452∗∗∗
0.665∗∗∗
0.433∗∗∗
(0.144)
(0.170)
(0.160)
(0.129)
(0.127)
(0.145)
(0.153)
Female
−0.465∗∗
−0.254
−0.514∗∗
−0.297
−0.011
0.238
0.284
(0.226)
(0.267)
(0.247)
(0.203)
(0.200)
(0.229)
(0.240)
Treated*Female
0.570∗∗
0.591∗
0.729∗∗
0.119
0.158
−0.068
−0.201
(0.272)
(0.322)
(0.298)
(0.245)
(0.241)
(0.274)
(0.288)
Constant
2.220
6.221∗∗∗
1.993
1.391
2.356
2.808
4.775∗∗
(1.867)
(2.097)
(2.017)
(1.660)
(1.598)
(1.818)
(1.901)
Observations
235
236
235
235
235
235
235
R2
0.122
0.070
0.156
0.087
0.133
0.227
0.124
Panel c. Work-life balance
WorkingHours
Balance
HouseholdActivity
CareActivity
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Treated
0.049
0.144
0.694∗∗∗
1.883∗∗∗
(0.153)
(0.119)
(0.223)
(0.239)
Female
−0.478∗
−0.311∗
−0.389
−0.090
(0.243)
(0.188)
(0.352)
(0.372)
Treated*Female
0.538∗
0.361
0.284
0.216
(0.289)
(0.223)
(0.424)
(0.457)
Constant
1.503
2.802∗
2.833
2.876
(1.931)
(1.452)
(2.779)
(2.931)
Observations
235
235
235
235
R2
0.271
0.358
0.086
0.329
Note: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The dependent variables shown in panel a
measure satisfaction with 7 dimension of life; variables in panel b indicate if respondents have been
able to deal (as usual, less or more) with 7 aspects of their life, and variables in panel c measure
work-life balance. “Treated” is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been
assigned to the treated group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group. “Female” is a dummy
variable that has the value of 1 if the individual is a female. Treated*Female is the interaction
term of our interest. All the regressions include (coeﬃcients are not shown in the table) individual
controls for age, squared age, gender, law 104 worker, law 104 relatives, child, young child, km,
and dependent variable pre-treatment. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
51

Table 13: Balance Tests by team - Treated and Control groups (means of observable characteristics)
Team
No Team
Variables
Treated
Control
Test Statistic
p-value
Treated
Control
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
135
75
Obs.
56
35
Age
43.3
42.89
0.3813
0.7034
43.2
44.83
-0.9561
0.3416
Male
0.563
0.64
-1.086
0.2789
0.5357
0.4
1.257
0.2119
Law104Worker
0.02963
0.01333
0.7397
0.4603
0.05357
0.02857
0.5607
0.5764
Law104Relatives
0.2815
0.2267
0.8631
0.3891
0.2857
0.3429
-0.5693
0.5706
Child
0.7481
0.7867
-0.6255
0.5323
0.7679
0.7429
0.2681
0.7892
Young Child
0.2889
0.3067
-0.2694
0.7879
0.3214
0.2571
0.6474
0.519
Note: Two-sample t-test for a comparison between means. Signiﬁcance: * indicates p<0.05.
Table 14: Productivity (by team)
Objective Productivity
Self-reported Productivity
Productivity reported by supervisors
Improvement
Days of leave
Production
Eﬃciency
Proactivity
Email
Deadlines
Production
Eﬃciency
Proactivity
Availability
Deadlines
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
Treated
1.347∗
−18.979∗∗∗
0.192
0.326∗
0.311
−0.193
0.202
0.327
−0.136
−0.338
0.165
0.338
(5.889)
(0.171)
(0.171)
(0.192)
(0.177)
(0.159)
(0.230)
(0.232)
(0.233)
(0.265)
(0.211)
Team
1.426∗∗
−11.062∗
0.033
0.027
−0.127
−0.238
0.044
0.208
−0.266
−0.363
−0.096
−0.227
(5.825)
(0.173)
(0.173)
(0.195)
(0.179)
(0.165)
(0.254)
(0.257)
(0.258)
(0.294)
(0.235)
Treated*Team
0.846
17.825∗∗
−0.124
−0.203
−0.005
0.290
−0.068
−0.341
0.189
0.379
0.195
0.159
(6.921)
(0.203)
(0.203)
(0.229)
(0.211)
(0.178)
(0.284)
(0.287)
(0.288)
(0.327)
(0.260)
Constant
0.237
10.841
−0.719
−1.345
1.347
5.510∗∗∗
2.187∗∗
2.073
3.732∗∗
−0.134
−1.109
3.241∗∗
(44.382)
(1.366)
(1.376)
(1.548)
(1.443)
(1.065)
(1.621)
(1.604)
(1.652)
(1.822)
(1.458)
Observations
196
203
238
237
237
237
209
158
158
158
158
158
R2
0.309
0.284
0.278
0.204
0.363
0.142
0.440
0.338
0.412
0.383
0.368
Note: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The dependent variables are the objective measure of productivity (columns 1-2), measures of self-reported productivity (columns 3-7) and measures of productivity
reported by supervisors (columns 8-12). “Treated” is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treated group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group. “Team” is a
dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual belongs to a team and is 0 if he/she works alone. Treated*Team is the interaction between the two previous variables. All the regressions include (coeﬃcients
are not shown in the table) individual controls for: age, squared age, gender, law 104 worker, law 104 relatives, child, young child, km, dependent variable pre-treatment. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
52

Table 15: Well-being (by team)
Panel a. Satisfaction with:
Income
Health
Home
Work
SocialLife
FreeTime
LifeInGeneral
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Treated
0.158
0.255
0.399
−0.527
0.532
0.861∗∗
0.317
(0.320)
(0.333)
(0.336)
(0.354)
(0.324)
(0.407)
(0.265)
Team
−0.058
−0.098
0.114
−0.705∗∗
−0.095
−0.013
−0.0004
(0.325)
(0.342)
(0.341)
(0.357)
(0.330)
(0.414)
(0.269)
Treated*Team
0.231
0.257
0.145
0.996∗∗
0.035
−0.039
0.056
(0.382)
(0.402)
(0.401)
(0.420)
(0.385)
(0.485)
(0.316)
Constant
1.713
4.666∗
1.081
3.224
2.744
−1.130
−0.214
(2.604)
(2.802)
(2.722)
(2.898)
(2.590)
(3.302)
(2.176)
Observations
225
230
234
230
227
229
232
R2
0.392
0.435
0.345
0.203
0.422
0.349
0.303
Panel b. Satisfaction as usual:
FocusOn
LoseLessSleep
UsefulRole
MakeDecisions
AppreciateDailyActivities
LessStress
Overcome
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Treated
0.315
0.830∗∗∗
−0.261
0.437∗∗
0.386∗
0.716∗∗∗
0.053
(0.231)
(0.269)
(0.251)
(0.204)
(0.202)
(0.229)
(0.239)
Team
0.092
0.474∗
−0.433∗
0.289
−0.161
0.239
−0.048
(0.232)
(0.273)
(0.254)
(0.207)
(0.205)
(0.232)
(0.242)
Treated*Team
0.176
−0.696∗∗
0.579∗
−0.273
0.157
−0.096
0.457
(0.274)
(0.320)
(0.299)
(0.243)
(0.240)
(0.272)
(0.283)
Constant
2.360
5.477∗∗
2.804
0.919
2.671
2.390
4.905∗∗
(1.927)
(2.147)
(2.076)
(1.696)
(1.639)
(1.861)
(1.926)
Observations
235
236
235
235
235
235
235
R2
0.119
0.076
0.148
0.094
0.134
0.234
0.151
Panel c. Work-life balance
WorkingHours
Balance
HouseholdActivity
CareActivity
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Treated
0.548∗∗
0.375∗∗
0.818∗∗
2.141∗∗∗
(0.242)
(0.186)
(0.355)
(0.371)
Team
0.248
−0.062
−0.108
−0.178
(0.245)
(0.188)
(0.361)
(0.379)
Treated*Team
−0.484∗
−0.176
−0.063
−0.272
(0.288)
(0.221)
(0.423)
(0.443)
Constant
1.046
2.937∗∗
3.017
3.024
(1.989)
(1.486)
(2.849)
(2.983)
Observations
235
235
235
235
R2
0.271
0.363
0.087
0.339
Note: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The dependent variables register in panel a
measures of satisfaction with 7 dimension of life, in panel b if respondents have been able to deal
as usual (or less or more) with 7 aspects of their life, in panel c measures of work-life balance.
“Treated” is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the
treated group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group. All the regressions include (coeﬃcients
are not shown in the table) individual controls for: age, squared age, gender, law 104 worker, law
104 relatives, child, young child, and km. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
53

Table 16: Commitment to the company
Dependent variable:
Attachment
Work recognized
Responsibility towards
to the company
the company
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Treated
−0.161
−0.041
0.162
0.105
0.131∗∗
0.139∗∗
(0.122)
(0.101)
(0.101)
(0.091)
(0.059)
(0.057)
Controls
✓
✓
✓
Observations
238
234
238
234
238
234
R2
0.007
0.383
0.011
0.264
0.021
0.155
Note: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The dependent variables are 3 measures of commitment to the
company. “Treated” is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treated group
and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group. The regression includes (coeﬃcients are not shown in the table) individual
controls for: age, squared age, law 104 worker, law 104 relatives, child, young child, km, team and dependent variable
pre-treatment. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
Table 17: Spillover eﬀects of self-reported productivity from treated to control
workers of the same team: comparison between control workers in a team with
treated workers and without
Panel a
At least 1 treated
None treated
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Production
40
3.9
7
3.857
0.1364
0.8921
Eﬃciency
40
3.9
7
3.714
0.6078
0.5464
Proactivity
40
3.875
7
3.429
1.489
0.1434
Deadlines
26
1.077
3
1
0.4825
0.6334
Panel b
More than 40%
40% or less
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Production
34
3.941
13
3.769
0.6912
0.493
Eﬃciency
34
3.912
13
3.769
0.5859
0.5609
Proactivity
34
3.912
13
3.538
1.569
0.1237
Email
34
2.176
13
1.846
0.9193
0.3628
Deadlines
21
1.095
8
1
0.8855
0.3837
54

Table 18: Spillover eﬀects from treated to control workers of the same team:
comparison between before and after treatment outcomes for control workers
in a team with treated workers and without.
Panel a. Subgroup of controls, working in a team with at least one treated worker
Variables
Before
After
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Self-reported productivity
Production
65
3.754
40
3.9
-0.9893
0.3248
Eﬃciency
65
3.754
40
3.9
-0.972
0.3333
Proactivity
65
3.692
40
3.875
-1.253
0.213
Email
65
2
40
2.075
-0.4214
0.6743
Deadlines
65
4.492
26
4.923
-3.907
0.0001818***
Well-being
Income
65
4.2
39
4.282
-0.2732
0.7853
Health
65
4.908
37
4.649
0.7657
0.4457
Home
63
5.19
39
5.154
0.1194
0.9052
Work
63
5.127
38
4.921
0.7749
0.4403
SocialLife
63
4.698
39
4.231
1.325
0.1883
FreeTime
65
3.092
38
3
0.2566
0.798
LifeInGeneral
64
4.984
39
4.872
0.4823
0.6306
Satisfaction as usual
FocusOn
65
3.277
39
3.256
0.1294
0.8973
LoseLessSleep
65
2.646
39
2.718
-0.3258
0.7453
UsefulRole
65
3.369
39
3.051
1.662
0.09967
MakeDecisions
65
3.4
39
3.385
0.08989
0.9286
AppreciateDailyActivities
65
3.2
39
3.103
0.6871
0.4935
LessStress
65
2.323
39
2.564
-1.399
0.1649
Overcome
65
3.015
39
3.077
-0.348
0.7286
Work-life balance
WorkingHours
65
2.692
39
2.718
-0.135
0.8929
Balance
65
2.415
39
2.513
-0.6194
0.537
HouseholdActivity
65
1.477
39
3.205
-6.637
1.573e-09***
CareActivity
65
2.2
39
3.41
-4.427
2.405e-05***
55

Panel b. Subgroup of controls, working in a team with more than 40% of treated workers
Variables
Before
After
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Self-reported productivity
Production
54
3.741
34
3.941
-1.276
0.2053
Eﬃciency
54
3.704
34
3.912
-1.3
0.1972
Proactivity
54
3.667
34
3.912
-1.552
0.1243
Email
54
1.981
34
2.176
-0.9877
0.326
Deadlines
54
4.463
21
4.905
-3.535
0.000711 ***
Well-being
Income
54
4.296
33
4.242
0.1669
0.8678
Health
54
4.963
32
4.656
0.8512
0.3971
Home
52
5.154
34
5.152
0.007092
0.9944
Work
52
5.115
32
4.844
0.9335
0.3533
SocialLife
52
4.769
33
4.212
1.458
0.1487
FreeTime
54
3.315
32
2.969
0.8707
0.3864
LifeInGeneral
53
4.962
33
4.788
0.6767
0.5004
Satisfaction as usual
FocusOn
3.315
3.303
0.06779
0.9461
LoseLessSleep
54
2.778
33
2.697
0.3401
0.7346
UsefulRole
54
3.426
33
3.182
1.183
0.24
MakeDecisions
54
3.426
33
3.545
-0.7245
0.4707
AppreciateDailyActivities
54
3.204
33
3.182
0.1382
0.8904
UnderStress
2.315
54
2.606
33
-1.525
0.131
NotOvercome
54
3
33
3.091
-0.4644
0.6436
Work-life balance
WorkingHours
54
2.685
33
2.697
-0.05618
0.9553
Balance
54
2.389
33
2.515
-0.6974
0.4875
HouseholdActivity
54
33
1.5
3.212
-5.932
6.262e-08 ***
CareActivity
54
2.185
33
3.242
-3.443
0.0008964***
56

Table 19: Diﬀerence of the means before/after Control group
Variables
Before
After
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs
Mean
Obs
Mean
Self-reported productivity
Production
108
3.769
67
3.925
-1.415
0.1587
Eﬃciency
108
3.722
67
3.91
-1.632
0.1045
Proactivity
108
3.741
67
3.806
-0.5841
0.5599
Email
108
1.944
67
2.075
-0.9431
0.3469
Deadlines
108
4.556
40
4.95
-4.657
7.138e-06***
Well-being
Income
106
4.16
65
4.154
0.02886
0.977
Health
108
4.843
63
4.635
0.7915
0.4298
Home
106
5.283
65
5.046
1.002
0.3177
Work
106
5.038
65
4.985
0.247
0.8052
SocialLife
105
4.752
64
4.422
1.203
0.2307
FreeTime
107
3.178
64
2.984
0.6749
0.5007
LifeInGeneral
107
5.019
66
4.818
1.035
0.3019
Satisfaction as usual
FocusOn
108
3.204
66
3.136
0.5264
0.5993
LoseSleep
108
2.685
66
2.682
0.02031
0.9838
UsefulRole
108
3.222
66
3.182
0.2729
0.7853
MakeDecisions
108
3.324
66
3.288
0.2694
0.7879
AppreciateDailyActivities
108
3.13
66
3.136
-0.06097
0.9515
LessStress
108
2.343
66
2.545
-1.478
0.1412
Overcome
108
3.037
66
3.227
-1.362
0.175
Work-life balance
WorkingHours
108
2.62
66
2.591
0.1959
0.8449
Balance
108
2.417
66
2.576
-1.283
0.2013
HouseholdActivity
108
1.481
66
3.136
-8.381
1.808e-14***
CareActivity
108
2.12
66
3.288
-5.522
1.218e-07***
57

For online publication.
Appendixes to the paper “Smart-working:
Work Flexibility Without Constraints”
March 2020
1. Appendix A: The covariates
2. Appendix B: Lee Bounds
3. Appendix C: Additional Heterogeneities
4. Appendix D: Diﬀerence-in-Diﬀerence estimation
5. Appendix E: Job descriptions
6. Appendix F: Survey Questionnaires
1

1
Appendix A: The covariates
Table A.1: Objective productivity
Dependent variable:
Improvement
Days of leave
Logit
OLS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Treated
2.059∗∗
2.211∗∗
−6.002∗
−5.901∗
(3.522)
(3.090)
Age
1.437
2.122
(1.956)
Age2
0.996∗
−0.018
(0.021)
Female
0.943
1.553
(3.261)
Team
3.102∗∗∗
1.679
(3.156)
Law104Worker
0.204
35.923∗∗∗
(7.657)
Law104Relatives
1.615
21.826∗∗∗
(4.664)
AnyChildren
2.657∗
−10.616∗∗
(4.275)
LessOrEqual3y
0.192∗∗∗
2.467
(4.778)
km
1.001
0.052
(0.042)
Constant
0.457∗∗
0.00∗
39.844∗∗∗
−17.545
(3.017)
(44.014)
Observations
195
195
202
202
R2
0.014
0.282
Notes: The table shows results of a LOGIT estimate for Improvement as the dependent variable and an OLS estimate
for Days of leave as the dependent variable. “Treated” is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has
been assigned to the treated group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group. All individual controls are explained
in section 4. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
2

Table A.2: Commitment to the company
Dependent variable:
Attachment
Work recognized
Responsibility towards
to the company
the company
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Treated
−0.161
−0.041
0.162
0.105
0.131∗∗
0.139∗∗
(0.122)
(0.101)
(0.101)
(0.091)
(0.059)
(0.057)
Age
0.113∗
−0.223∗∗∗
−0.057
(0.067)
(0.061)
(0.039)
Age2
−0.001
0.002∗∗∗
0.001∗
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.0004)
Female
0.002
−0.195∗∗
−0.117∗
(0.103)
(0.093)
(0.060)
Team
0.116
−0.059
−0.156∗∗∗
(0.100)
(0.092)
(0.057)
Law104Worker
0.043
−0.323
−0.014
(0.260)
(0.235)
(0.149)
Law104Relatives
−0.076
0.153
−0.052
(0.147)
(0.134)
(0.085)
AnyChildren
0.237∗
−0.064
0.069
(0.136)
(0.124)
(0.078)
LessOrEqual3y
0.121
0.254∗
−0.023
(0.150)
(0.137)
(0.087)
km
0.003∗∗
0.001
0.002∗∗
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
YPre
0.545∗∗∗
0.369∗∗∗
0.110∗
(0.053)
(0.056)
(0.064)
Constant
4.421∗∗∗
−1.272
1.718∗∗∗
6.193∗∗∗
1.004∗∗∗
1.858∗∗
(0.104)
(1.487)
(0.086)
(1.347)
(0.050)
(0.852)
Observations
238
234
238
234
238
234
R2
0.007
0.383
0.011
0.264
0.021
0.155
Notes: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The dependent variables are 3 measures of commitment to the
company. “Treated” is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treated group
and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group. All individual controls are explained in section 4. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1,
∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
3

Table A.3: Self-reported productivity
Dependent variable:
Productivity
Eﬃciency
Proactivity
Email
Deadlines
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Treated
0.142
0.104
0.249∗∗
0.182∗∗
0.346∗∗∗
0.308∗∗∗
−0.009
0.014
0.204∗∗∗
0.149∗∗
(0.104)
(0.091)
(0.103)
(0.092)
(0.108)
(0.102)
(0.113)
(0.094)
(0.075)
(0.075)
Age
0.122∗∗
0.162∗∗∗
0.031
−0.203∗∗∗
0.010
(0.062)
(0.062)
(0.069)
(0.066)
(0.046)
Age2
−0.001∗
−0.002∗∗∗
−0.0002
0.002∗∗∗
−0.0001
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Female
0.104
0.150
0.029
−0.064
−0.094
(0.093)
(0.093)
(0.105)
(0.097)
(0.068)
Team
−0.057
−0.119
−0.131
−0.028
−0.014
(0.091)
(0.091)
(0.103)
(0.095)
(0.067)
Law104Worker
−0.305
−0.388
−0.322
0.082
−0.071
(0.236)
(0.236)
(0.265)
(0.245)
(0.197)
Law104Relatives
−0.212
−0.154
−0.209
0.119
−0.006
(0.133)
(0.134)
(0.151)
(0.140)
(0.094)
AnyChildren
−0.049
0.116
0.028
0.378∗∗∗
−0.071
(0.124)
(0.124)
(0.140)
(0.129)
(0.088)
LessOrEqual3y
0.0002
−0.053
0.114
−0.147
0.028
(0.137)
(0.137)
(0.154)
(0.143)
(0.102)
km
−0.001
0.001
0.0001
−0.004∗∗∗
−0.0003
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
YPre
0.490∗∗∗
0.390∗∗∗
0.410∗∗∗
0.561∗∗∗
−0.262∗∗∗
(0.061)
(0.059)
(0.066)
(0.058)
(0.061)
Constant
3.869∗∗∗
−0.560
3.743∗∗∗
−1.072
3.659∗∗∗
1.353
2.107∗∗∗
5.119∗∗∗
1.071∗∗∗
2.259∗∗
(0.089)
(1.338)
(0.088)
(1.349)
(0.093)
(1.514)
(0.097)
(1.417)
(0.068)
(1.045)
Observations
240
238
240
237
240
237
240
237
212
209
R2
0.008
0.283
0.024
0.275
0.041
0.204
0.00003
0.358
0.034
0.142
Notes: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The dependent variables are 5 measures of self-reported productivity. “Treated” is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned
to the treated group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group. All individual controls are explained in section 4. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
4

Table A.4: Productivity reported by supervisors
Dependent variable:
Productivity
Eﬃciency
Proactivity
Availability
Deadlines
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Treated
0.161
0.098
0.029
−0.022
−0.218
−0.089
0.043
0.316∗∗
0.227∗
0.441∗∗∗
(0.145)
(0.138)
(0.131)
(0.138)
(0.137)
(0.140)
(0.154)
(0.159)
(0.122)
(0.126)
Age
−0.008
−0.056
0.140∗
0.189∗∗
−0.029
(0.073)
(0.073)
(0.074)
(0.084)
(0.066)
Age2
−0.0002
0.0004
−0.002∗∗
−0.002∗∗∗
0.0002
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Female
0.169
0.237∗
0.107
0.257∗
0.181
(0.129)
(0.129)
(0.131)
(0.148)
(0.117)
Team
−0.054
−0.090
−0.066
0.012
−0.095
(0.122)
(0.122)
(0.124)
(0.140)
(0.113)
Law104Worker
−0.154
−0.201
−0.127
−0.256
−0.412
(0.287)
(0.287)
(0.290)
(0.328)
(0.259)
Law104Relatives
−0.221
−0.057
−0.009
0.050
−0.253
(0.180)
(0.180)
(0.183)
(0.206)
(0.163)
AnyChildren
0.564∗∗∗
0.633∗∗∗
0.627∗∗∗
0.553∗∗∗
0.360∗∗
(0.171)
(0.171)
(0.178)
(0.196)
(0.155)
LessOrEqual3y
−0.621∗∗∗
−0.486∗∗∗
−0.428∗∗
−0.186
−0.075
(0.180)
(0.180)
(0.186)
(0.208)
(0.165)
km
0.001
−0.001
−0.005∗∗∗
−0.00001
0.001
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.001)
YPre
0.463∗∗∗
0.379∗∗∗
0.380∗∗∗
0.375∗∗∗
0.397∗∗∗
(0.076)
(0.082)
(0.078)
(0.072)
(0.068)
Constant
3.574∗∗∗
2.426
3.671∗∗∗
3.775∗∗
3.695∗∗∗
−0.483
3.613∗∗∗
−1.698
4.203∗∗∗
3.120∗∗
(0.120)
(1.665)
(0.109)
(1.630)
(0.114)
(1.688)
(0.128)
(1.861)
(0.101)
(1.489)
Observations
173
150
173
150
173
150
173
150
173
150
R2
0.007
0.422
0.0003
0.338
0.015
0.389
0.0004
0.381
0.020
0.371
Notes: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The dependent variables measure the productivity reported by supervisors. “Treated” is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been
assigned to the treated group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group. All individual controls are explained in section 4. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
5

Table A.5: Satisfaction with...
Dependent variable:
Income
Health
Home
Work
SocialLife
FreeTime
LifeInGeneral
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
Treated
0.059
0.323∗
0.266
0.434∗∗
0.283
0.501∗∗∗
−0.144
0.181
0.624∗∗∗
0.557∗∗∗
0.759∗∗∗
0.834∗∗∗
0.404∗∗
0.356∗∗
(0.213)
(0.169)
(0.232)
(0.180)
(0.214)
(0.179)
(0.202)
(0.193)
(0.209)
(0.170)
(0.251)
(0.215)
(0.161)
(0.141)
Age
0.005
−0.059
0.018
0.051
−0.027
0.150
0.155
(0.116)
(0.122)
(0.121)
(0.129)
(0.115)
(0.146)
(0.096)
Age2
−0.0004
0.0003
−0.0002
−0.001
0.001
−0.002
−0.002
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.001)
Female
0.396∗∗
0.097
0.299
0.167
−0.075
0.129
0.053
(0.177)
(0.181)
(0.185)
(0.197)
(0.181)
(0.232)
(0.148)
Team
0.109
0.089
0.219
0.015
−0.069
−0.041
0.040
(0.170)
(0.176)
(0.179)
(0.189)
(0.170)
(0.215)
(0.141)
Law104Worker
−0.859∗∗
−1.547∗∗∗
−0.565
−0.068
−0.887∗∗
−1.016∗
−0.793∗∗
(0.435)
(0.459)
(0.464)
(0.494)
(0.443)
(0.558)
(0.365)
Law104Relatives
0.027
−0.339
0.286
−0.177
−0.436∗
0.097
−0.470∗∗
(0.260)
(0.262)
(0.265)
(0.284)
(0.256)
(0.322)
(0.214)
AnyChildren
0.595∗∗
0.597∗∗
0.385
0.099
0.118
0.306
−0.017
(0.245)
(0.241)
(0.245)
(0.262)
(0.234)
(0.296)
(0.195)
LessOrEqual3y
−0.439∗
−0.825∗∗∗
−0.255
−0.366
−0.226
−0.450
−0.242
(0.254)
(0.267)
(0.271)
(0.285)
(0.256)
(0.326)
(0.212)
km
−0.003
0.002
0.006∗∗∗
0.005∗∗
−0.0004
−0.001
0.002
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.002)
YPre
0.678∗∗∗
0.452∗∗∗
0.553∗∗∗
0.400∗∗∗
0.487∗∗∗
0.531∗∗∗
0.383∗∗∗
(0.061)
(0.044)
(0.060)
(0.063)
(0.047)
(0.056)
(0.048)
Constant
4.339∗∗∗
1.440
4.894∗∗∗
4.257
5.195∗∗∗
0.891
5.198∗∗∗
1.829
4.959∗∗∗
2.697
3.344∗∗∗
−1.074
5.109∗∗∗
−0.289
(0.182)
(2.561)
(0.200)
(2.724)
(0.183)
(2.666)
(0.172)
(2.868)
(0.179)
(2.531)
(0.215)
(3.220)
(0.137)
(2.129)
Observations
230
225
233
230
237
234
235
230
234
227
234
229
236
232
R2
0.0003
0.391
0.006
0.434
0.007
0.344
0.002
0.182
0.037
0.422
0.038
0.349
0.026
0.303
Note: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The dependent variables measure satisfaction with 7 dimensions of life on a scale from 1 (highly dissatisﬁed) to 7 (highly satisﬁed). “Treated” is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if
the individual has been assigned to the treated group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group. All individual controls are explained in section 4. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
6

Table A.6: Satisfaction as usual
Dependent variable:
FocusOn
LoseLessSleep
UsefulRole
MakeDecisions
AppreciateDailyActivities
LessStress
Overcome
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
Treated
0.447∗∗∗
0.441∗∗∗
0.356∗∗
0.335∗∗
0.040
0.147
0.210∗
0.243∗∗
0.510∗∗∗
0.497∗∗∗
0.638∗∗∗
0.648∗∗∗
0.346∗∗∗
0.380∗∗∗
(0.122)
(0.121)
(0.142)
(0.144)
(0.138)
(0.137)
(0.109)
(0.108)
(0.107)
(0.108)
(0.128)
(0.121)
(0.130)
(0.127)
Age
0.069
−0.167∗
−0.022
0.068
0.027
−0.048
−0.107
(0.084)
(0.097)
(0.092)
(0.074)
(0.073)
(0.082)
(0.086)
Age2
−0.001
0.002∗
0.001
−0.001
−0.0001
0.001
0.001
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Female
−0.050
0.154
−0.010
−0.206∗
0.094
0.207
0.172
(0.125)
(0.148)
(0.138)
(0.112)
(0.111)
(0.126)
(0.132)
Team
0.220∗
−0.030
−0.015
0.091
−0.048
0.169
0.284∗∗
(0.122)
(0.144)
(0.135)
(0.109)
(0.107)
(0.122)
(0.127)
Law104Worker
−0.149
−0.272
−0.606∗
−0.032
−0.025
0.382
−0.059
(0.316)
(0.375)
(0.349)
(0.285)
(0.279)
(0.317)
(0.330)
Law104Relatives
−0.405∗∗
0.018
0.011
0.040
−0.286∗
−0.357∗
−0.030
(0.180)
(0.212)
(0.200)
(0.161)
(0.159)
(0.181)
(0.188)
AnyChildren
−0.263
0.059
0.218
−0.249∗
−0.244∗
−0.508∗∗∗
−0.130
(0.168)
(0.197)
(0.183)
(0.149)
(0.147)
(0.166)
(0.174)
LessOrEqual3y
−0.231
0.283
−0.004
0.092
0.134
0.269
0.492∗∗
(0.186)
(0.218)
(0.203)
(0.168)
(0.163)
(0.185)
(0.193)
km
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.004∗∗∗
0.002
0.004∗∗∗
−0.0003
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.002)
YPre
−0.096
0.257∗∗∗
0.111∗
−0.052
0.188∗∗∗
0.234∗∗∗
(0.068)
(0.067)
(0.059)
(0.062)
(0.054)
(0.062)
Constant
3.243∗∗∗
2.087
2.754∗∗∗
6.382∗∗∗
3.365∗∗∗
2.114
3.293∗∗∗
1.286
3.156∗∗∗
2.461
2.535∗∗∗
2.518
3.062∗∗∗
4.272∗∗
(0.104)
(1.877)
(0.122)
(2.123)
(0.118)
(2.058)
(0.093)
(1.665)
(0.091)
(1.605)
(0.110)
(1.821)
(0.111)
(1.893)
Observations
238
235
238
236
238
235
238
235
238
235
238
235
238
235
R2
0.054
0.117
0.026
0.057
0.0004
0.133
0.016
0.089
0.088
0.132
0.095
0.233
0.029
0.141
Notes: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The dependent variable indicates the extent to which respondents have been able to deal with 7 aspects of their life on the scale from 1 (much less than usual) to 5 (much more than
usual). “Treated” is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treated group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group. All individual controls are explained in section 4. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1,
∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
7

Table A.7: Work-life balance
Dependent variable:
WorkingHours
Balance
HouseholdActivity
CareActivity
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Treated
0.112
0.203
0.138
0.250∗∗
0.784∗∗∗
0.774∗∗∗
1.865∗∗∗
1.948∗∗∗
(0.144)
(0.129)
(0.118)
(0.099)
(0.183)
(0.188)
(0.199)
(0.197)
Age
0.002
0.035
0.006
−0.014
(0.088)
(0.067)
(0.127)
(0.133)
Age2
−0.00005
−0.0004
0.00003
0.0002
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Female
−0.112
−0.071
−0.210
0.007
(0.136)
(0.103)
(0.197)
(0.208)
Team
−0.104
−0.189∗
−0.154
−0.375∗
(0.129)
(0.099)
(0.190)
(0.202)
Law104Worker
−0.107
−0.173
0.340
0.605
(0.335)
(0.256)
(0.489)
(0.514)
Law104Relatives
−0.074
−0.113
0.045
−0.317
(0.192)
(0.146)
(0.279)
(0.294)
AnyChildren
−0.200
0.047
−0.292
−0.620∗∗
(0.178)
(0.135)
(0.261)
(0.271)
LessOrEqual3y
−0.141
−0.165
0.013
0.224
(0.197)
(0.149)
(0.285)
(0.299)
km
0.001
−0.0002
0.001
0.005∗∗
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.003)
YPre
0.480∗∗∗
−0.566∗∗∗
−0.053
0.179∗
(0.059)
(0.055)
(0.125)
(0.102)
Constant
2.783∗∗∗
1.729
2.553∗∗∗
3.169∗∗
2.981∗∗∗
3.100
2.915∗∗∗
3.384
(0.123)
(1.955)
(0.101)
(1.456)
(0.156)
(2.788)
(0.170)
(2.921)
Observations
238
235
238
235
238
235
238
235
R2
0.003
0.262
0.006
0.361
0.072
0.087
0.272
0.338
Notes: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The dependent variables are measures of work-life balance on a scale from “less than 2 hours” to “more than 6 hours”. “Treated”
is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treated group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group. All individual controls are
explained in section 4. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
8

2
Appendix B: Lee Bounds
Table B.1: Lee Bounds
Self-reported productivity
Production
Eﬃciency
Proactivity
Email
Deadlines
Lower Bound
-0.222
-0.268
-0.201
-1.616
-0.305
(0.126)
(0.135)
(0.135)
(0.199)
(0.162)
Upper Bound
0.364
0.378
0.400
-1.214
0.328
(0.117)
(0.122)
(0.134)
(0.203)
(0.169)
95% CI
(-0.429,0.557)
(-0.491,0.578)
(-0.425,0.620)
(-1.945, -0.879)
(-0.491,0.578)
Wellbeing
Income
Health
Home
Work
SocialLife
FreeTime
LifeInGeneral
Lower Bound
-0.392
-0.203
-0.239
-0.535
0.332
0.042
0.173
(0.302)
(0.349)
(0.275)
(0.271)
(.276)
(0.313)
( 0.235)
Upper Bound
0 .949
1.265
1.127
0.794
1.569
1.752
1.081
(.252)
(0.276)
(0.269)
(0.222)
(0.266)
(0.298)
(0.214)
95% CI
(-0.889,1.362)
(-0.777,1.719)
(-0.691,1.569)
(-0.979,1.159)
(-0.123,2.006)
(-0.473,2.241)
(-0.212,1.433)
Satisfaction as usual
FocusOn
LoseSleep
UsefulRole
MakeDecisions
AppreciateDailyActivities
UnderStress
NotOvercome
Lower Bound
.123
-0.959
-0.184
-0.170
0.145
-0.961
-0.514
(0.141)
(0.166)
(0.158)
(0.141)
(.134)
(0.157)
( 0.151)
Upper Bound
0.823
-0.0717
0.561
0.404
0.811
-0.191
0.230
(0.153)
(0.180)
(0.165)
(0.152)
(0.135)
(0.151)
(0.135)
95% CI
(-0.108,1.076)
(-1.233,0.225)
(-0.445,0.833)
(-0.402,0.654)
(-0.075,1.033)
(-1.219,0.058)
(-0.763,0.452)
Work-life balance
WorkingHours
Balance
HouseholdActivity
CareActivity
Lower Bound
-0.166
-0.126
0.145
1.247
(0.170)
(0.143)
(0.267)
(0.295)
Upper Bound
0.768
0.574
1.115
2.230
(0.172)
(0.141)
(0.268)
(0.266)
95% CI
(-0.446,1.050)
(-0.362,0.807)
(-0.294,1.556)
(0.761,2.668)
9

3
Appendix C: Additional Heterogeneities
Table C.1: Balance Test for having children - Treated and Control groups (means
of observable characteristics)
Workers with children
Variables
Treated
Control
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
144
85
Age
42.93
42.51
0.4423
0.6587
Male
0.5793
0.6118
-0.4814
0.6307
Law104Worker
0.03448
0.02353
0.465
0.6424
Law104Relatives
0.1793
0.1882
-0.1684
0.8664
Workers without children
Variables
Treated
Control
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
47
25
Age
44.15
47.35
-1.452
0.1508
Male
0.4894
0.4231
0.5373
0.5928
Law104Worker
0.04255
0
1.06
0.2927
Law104Relatives
0.617
0.5
0.9615
0.3396
Notes: Two-sample t-test for a comparison between means. Signiﬁcance: *
indicates p<0.05.
10

Table C.2: Productivity (by having children)
Objective productivity
Self-reported productivity
Productivity reported by supervisors
Improvement
Days of leave
Production
Eﬃciency
Proactivity
Email
Deadlines
Production
Eﬃciency
Proactivity
Availability
Deadlines
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
Treated
1.941
−5.116
−0.043
0.034
−0.100
−0.095
0.322∗
−0.316
−0.354
−0.285
−0.304
0.273
(7.659)
(0.250)
(0.212)
(0.238)
(0.220)
(0.193)
(0.424)
(0.425)
(0.430)
(0.488)
(0.383)
AnyChildren
1.595
−10.176
−0.280
−0.014
−0.332
0.282
0.098
0.163
0.312
0.437
−0.045
0.194
(7.475)
(0.251)
(0.213)
(0.238)
(0.220)
(0.195)
(0.425)
(0.426)
(0.430)
(0.486)
(0.386)
Treated*AnyChildren
0.697
−0.966
0.129
0.184
0.506∗
0.134
−0.202
0.459
0.365
0.215
0.692
0.183
(8.397)
(0.282)
(0.236)
(0.265)
(0.244)
(0.208)
(0.450)
(0.451)
(0.456)
(0.516)
(0.407)
Constant
0.001
−18.034
−5.823∗∗∗
−1.294
1.051
5.040∗∗∗
2.084∗
3.008∗
4.295∗∗
−0.158
−1.020
3.411∗∗
(44.221)
(1.425)
(1.348)
(1.503)
(1.414)
(1.057)
(1.715)
(1.680)
(1.751)
(1.908)
(1.537)
Observations
243
203
239
237
237
237
209
150
150
150
150
150
R2
0.284
0.366
0.272
0.211
0.359
0.146
0.425
0.339
0.389
0.389
0.368
Notes: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The dependent variables are the objective measures of productivity (columns 1-2), measures of self-reported productivity (columns 3-7) and measures of
productivity reported by supervisors (columns 8-12). “Treated” is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treated group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control
group. All regressions include (the respective coeﬃcients are not shown in the table) individual controls for age, squared age, gender, being a law 104 worker (“law 104 worker”), having law 104 relatives (“law
104 relatives”), distance from home to the workplace in km (“km”), and dependent variable pre-treatment. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
11

Table C.3: Wellbeing (by having children)
Panel a. Satisfaction with:
Income
Health
Home
Work
SocialLife
FreeTime
LifeInGeneral
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Treated
0.702∗
0.333
0.996∗∗
0.560
0.369
0.752
0.322
(0.409)
(0.413)
(0.422)
(0.458)
(0.399)
(0.507)
(0.343)
AnyChildren
0.912∗∗
0.500
0.823∗
0.443
−0.051
0.234
−0.050
(0.396)
(0.416)
(0.422)
(0.460)
(0.400)
(0.506)
(0.342)
Treated*AnyChildren
−0.463
0.126
−0.608
−0.459
0.233
0.101
0.042
(0.451)
(0.461)
(0.467)
(0.505)
(0.444)
(0.563)
(0.379)
Constant
1.781
4.330
1.435
2.037
2.541
−1.178
−0.251
(2.539)
(2.720)
(2.655)
(2.854)
(2.526)
(3.206)
(2.125)
Observations
225
230
234
230
227
229
232
R2
0.393
0.434
0.345
0.185
0.422
0.349
0.303
Panel b. Satisfaction as usual:
FocusOn
LoseLessSleep
UsefulRole
MakeDecisions
AppreciateDailyActivities
LessStress
Overcome
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Treated
0.585∗∗
0.293
0.301
−0.302
0.597∗∗
0.980∗∗∗
0.735∗∗
(0.289)
(0.339)
(0.317)
(0.254)
(0.254)
(0.287)
(0.302)
AnyChildren
−0.144
0.023
0.357
−0.743∗∗∗
−0.152
−0.215
0.181
(0.289)
(0.340)
(0.316)
(0.254)
(0.253)
(0.287)
(0.302)
Treated*AnyChildren
−0.178
0.051
−0.188
0.666∗∗
−0.122
−0.409
−0.440
(0.320)
(0.376)
(0.351)
(0.282)
(0.281)
(0.318)
(0.334)
Constant
2.428
6.322∗∗∗
2.163
1.140
2.433
2.926
4.880∗∗
(1.884)
(2.115)
(2.047)
(1.644)
(1.600)
(1.814)
(1.898)
Observations
235
236
235
235
235
235
235
R2
0.106
0.057
0.134
0.108
0.132
0.232
0.128
Note: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The dependent variables are measures of satisfaction with 7 dimensions of life in the ﬁrst panel.
The dependent variables indicate if respondents have been able to deal (as usual, less or more) with 7 aspects of their life in the second panel. “Treated”
is a dummy variable which assumes value 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treated group and 0 if he/she belongs to the control group. All
regressions include (coeﬃcients are not shown in the table) individual controls for age, squared age, gender, law 104 worker, law 104 relatives, km, and
dependent variable pre-treatment. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
12

Table C.4: Work-life balance (by having children)
WorkingHours
Balance
HouseholdActivity
CareActivity
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Treated
0.430
0.085
−0.478
0.704
(0.304)
(0.235)
(0.439)
(0.460)
AnyChildren
0.006
−0.094
−1.434∗∗∗
−1.729∗∗∗
(0.305)
(0.235)
(0.445)
(0.460)
Treated*AnyChildren
−0.276
0.201
1.534∗∗∗
1.523∗∗∗
(0.337)
(0.260)
(0.489)
(0.511)
Constant
1.652
2.812∗
2.439
2.340
(1.947)
(1.461)
(2.724)
(2.882)
Observations
235
235
235
235
R2
0.262
0.352
0.123
0.354
Note: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The dependent variables are measures of work-life balance. “Treated”
is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treated group and is 0 if he/she
belongs to the control group. All regressions include (coeﬃcients are not shown in the table) individual controls for age,
squared age, gender, law 104 worker, law 104 relatives, km, and dependent variable pre-treatment. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1,
∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
13

Table C.5: Balance Test by age group - Treated and Control groups (means
of observable characteristics)
Workers less than 46 years of age
Variables
Treated
Control
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
117
66
Male
0.5932
0.5909
0.03043
0.9758
Law104Worker
0.0339
0.0303
0.131
0.8959
Law104Relatives
0.2373
0.1515
1.378
0.1699
Child
0.7966
0.8788
-1.41
0.1601
Young Child
0.4661
0.4394
0.347
0.729
Workers aged 46 or above
Variables
Treated
Control
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
74
44
Male
0.5
0.5333
-0.35
0.727
Law104Worker
0.04054
0
1.367
0.1742
Law104Relatives
0.3649
0.4222
-0.6188
0.5372
Child
0.6892
0.6
0.9885
0.3249
Young Child
0.02703
0.06667
-1.041
0.3
Notes: Two-sample t-test for a comparison between means. Signiﬁcance: *
indicates p<0.05.
14

Table C.6: Productivity (by age group)
Objective Productivity
Self-reported Productivity
Productivity referred by Supervisors
Improvement
Days of leave
Production
Eﬃciency
Proactivity
Email
Deadlines
Production
Eﬃciency
Proactivity
Availability
Deadlines
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
Treated
0.932
0.092
−0.043
0.156
0.349∗∗
−0.204
0.203∗∗
0.190
0.072
−0.091
0.213
0.706∗∗∗
(4.205)
(0.166)
(0.134)
(0.145)
(0.137)
(0.097)
(0.206)
(0.204)
(0.210)
(0.245)
(0.181)
LessThan46
0.744
3.513
−0.061
0.009
−0.192
−0.449∗∗∗
0.146
0.200
0.127
0.224
0.008
0.428∗
(5.362)
(0.203)
(0.163)
(0.177)
(0.166)
(0.134)
(0.261)
(0.262)
(0.267)
(0.310)
(0.235)
Treated*LessThan46
2.959∗
−14.083∗∗
0.104
0.037
−0.114
0.390∗∗
−0.123
−0.183
−0.174
−0.071
0.120
−0.493∗
(6.167)
(0.233)
(0.187)
(0.203)
(0.191)
(0.151)
(0.284)
(0.281)
(0.290)
(0.336)
(0.249)
Constant
0.546
40.520∗∗∗
1.702∗∗∗
2.033∗∗∗
2.203∗∗∗
1.256∗∗∗
2.334∗∗∗
1.265∗∗∗
1.636∗∗∗
1.771∗∗∗
1.369∗∗∗
1.713∗∗∗
(5.345)
(0.333)
(0.265)
(0.288)
(0.199)
(0.318)
(0.368)
(0.363)
(0.353)
(0.389)
(0.342)
Observations
243
203
239
237
237
237
209
150
150
150
150
150
R2
0.298
0.244
0.240
0.219
0.349
0.146
0.389
0.307
0.339
0.294
0.371
Note: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The dependent variables are the objective measure of productivity (columns 1-2), measures of self-reported productivity (columns 3-7) and measures of
productivity reported by supervisors (columns 8-12). “Treated” is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treated group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control
group. All regressions include (coeﬃcients are not shown in the table) individual controls for gender, law 104 worker, law 104 relatives, child, young child, km, and dependent variable pre-treatment. Signiﬁcance:
∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
15

Table C.7: Wellbeing (by age group)
Panel a. Satisfaction with:
Income
Health
Home
Work
SocialLife
FreeTime
LifeInGeneral
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Treated
0.093
0.613∗∗
0.604∗∗
0.052
0.471∗
0.347
0.278
(0.246)
(0.270)
(0.257)
(0.276)
(0.242)
(0.308)
(0.205)
LessThan46
−0.054
0.656∗∗
0.264
−0.030
−0.596∗∗
−0.332
−0.231
(0.297)
(0.324)
(0.314)
(0.332)
(0.297)
(0.376)
(0.248)
Treated*LessThan46
0.450
−0.270
−0.174
0.266
0.119
0.969∗∗
0.137
(0.345)
(0.367)
(0.365)
(0.381)
(0.339)
(0.432)
(0.285)
Constant
0.922∗∗
2.007∗∗∗
1.350∗∗∗
2.817∗∗∗
2.974∗∗∗
1.581∗∗∗
3.339∗∗∗
(0.416)
(0.375)
(0.446)
(0.476)
(0.397)
(0.447)
(0.358)
Observations
225
230
234
230
227
229
232
R2
0.380
0.436
0.342
0.185
0.434
0.351
0.297
Panel b. Satisfaction as usual:
FocusOn
LoseLessSleep
UsefulRole
MakeDecisions
AppreciateDailyActivities
LessStress
Overcome
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Treated
0.068
0.036
−0.238
0.206
0.179
0.563∗∗∗
0.147
(0.173)
(0.202)
(0.195)
(0.158)
(0.153)
(0.179)
(0.184)
LessThan46
−0.436∗∗
−0.044
−0.837∗∗∗
−0.117
−0.598∗∗∗
−0.266
−0.533∗∗
(0.210)
(0.246)
(0.232)
(0.191)
(0.186)
(0.220)
(0.226)
Treated*LessThan46
0.736∗∗∗
0.650∗∗
0.728∗∗∗
0.069
0.617∗∗∗
0.179
0.433∗
(0.241)
(0.283)
(0.268)
(0.221)
(0.213)
(0.252)
(0.258)
Constant
4.090∗∗∗
2.679∗∗∗
2.684∗∗∗
3.096∗∗∗
3.680∗∗∗
2.345∗∗∗
2.858∗∗∗
(0.301)
(0.250)
(0.339)
(0.283)
(0.273)
(0.262)
(0.276)
Observations
235
236
235
235
235
235
235
R2
0.139
0.100
0.149
0.080
0.150
0.193
0.122
Note: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The dependent variables are measures of satisfaction with 7 dimensions of life in the ﬁrst panel. The
dependent variables indicate if respondents have been able to deal (as usual, less or more) with 7 aspects of their life in the second panel. “Treated” is
a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treated group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group. All
regressions include (coeﬃcients are not shown in the table) individual controls for gender, law 104 worker, law 104 relatives, child, young child, km,
and dependent variable pre-treatment. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
16

Table C.8: Work-life balance (by age group)
WorkingHours
Balance
HouseholdActivity
CareActivity
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Treated
−0.027
0.241∗
1.417∗∗∗
2.115∗∗∗
(0.185)
(0.143)
(0.265)
(0.285)
LessThan46
−0.356
−0.108
1.087∗∗∗
0.471
(0.225)
(0.173)
(0.323)
(0.346)
Treated*LessThan46
0.438∗
−0.002
−1.188∗∗∗
−0.275
(0.258)
(0.199)
(0.370)
(0.398)
Constant
1.790∗∗∗
3.858∗∗∗
2.619∗∗∗
2.584∗∗∗
(0.278)
(0.203)
(0.396)
(0.408)
Observations
235
235
235
235
R2
0.269
0.353
0.129
0.335
Note: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The dependent variables are measures of work-life balance. “Treated”
is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treated group and is 0 if he/she
belongs to the control group. All regressions include (coeﬃcients are not shown in the table) individual controls for
gender, law 104 worker, law 104 relatives, child, young child, km, and dependent variable pre-treatment. Signiﬁcance:
∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
17

Table C.9: Balance Test by job type - Treated and Control groups (means of ob-
servable characteristics)
White-collar
Variables
Treated
Control
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
117
66
Age
43.33
43.88
-0.5481
0.5841
Male
0.4848
0.4894
-0.06961
0.9446
Law104Worker
0.04242
0.02128
0.8915
0.3735
Law104Relatives
0.2606
0.2766
-0.2789
0.7806
Child
0.7515
0.7447
0.1215
0.9034
Young Child
0.2727
0.2553
0.3036
0.7617
Blue-Collar
Variables
Treated
Control
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
117
66
Age
42.88
41.31
0.7541
0.4552
Law104Relatives
0.4231
0.1875
1.582
0.1215
Child 0.7692
0.9375
-1.421
0.163
Young Child
0.4615
0.5
-0.2367
0.8141
Notes: Two-sample t-test for a comparison between means. Signiﬁcance: *
indicates p<0.05.
18

Table C.10: Productivity (by job type)
Objective Productivity
Self-reported Productivity
Productivity reported by Supervisors
Improvement
Days of leave
Production
Eﬃciency
Proactivity
Email
Deadlines
Production
Eﬃciency
Proactivity
Availability
Deadlines
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
Treated
8.989∗∗
−8.313
0.614
0.361
0.211
−0.225
0.110
−0.229
−0.335
−0.550
−0.138
0.067
(10.716)
(0.402)
(0.343)
(0.387)
(0.360)
(0.226)
(0.385)
(0.386)
(0.388)
(0.439)
(0.348)
WhiteCollar
4.536∗
−12.438
0.370
0.445
0.121
−0.283
−0.476∗∗
−0.202
−0.201
−0.222
−0.305
−0.437
(9.557)
(0.352)
(0.300)
(0.339)
(0.318)
(0.210)
(0.353)
(0.353)
(0.355)
(0.403)
(0.319)
Treated*WhiteCollar
0.122∗∗
2.739
−0.591
−0.197
0.103
0.259
0.075
0.367
0.348
0.516
0.518
0.429
(11.174)
(0.415)
(0.353)
(0.400)
(0.375)
(0.240)
(0.411)
(0.412)
(0.415)
(0.469)
(0.372)
Constant
0.00∗
1.876
−6.169∗∗∗
−1.924
0.929
5.517∗∗∗
2.935∗∗∗
2.622
4.040∗∗
−0.380
−1.525
3.673∗∗
(45.179)
(1.489)
(1.400)
(1.581)
(1.494)
(1.037)
(1.701)
(1.668)
(1.719)
(1.898)
(1.522)
Observations
243
203
239
237
237
237
209
150
150
150
150
150
R2
0.299
0.371
0.281
0.202
0.360
0.200
0.425
0.339
0.397
0.387
0.376
Note: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The interaction term allows testing the impact of being a white-collar worker separately from that of being a blue-collar worker. The dependent variables are
the objective measure of productivity (columns 1-2), measures of self-reported productivity (columns 3-7) and measures of productivity reported by supervisors (columns 8-12). “Treated” is a dummy variable
that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treated group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group. All regressions include (coeﬃcients are not shown in the table) individual controls
for age, squared age, gender, law 104 worker, law 104 relatives, child, young child, km, and dependent variable pre-treatment. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
19

Table C.11: Wellbeing (by job type)
Panel a. Satisfaction with:
Income
Health
Home
Work
SocialLife
FreeTime
LifeInGeneral
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Treated
−0.032
0.806
0.588
−0.698
0.510
0.469
0.339
(0.622)
(0.649)
(0.669)
(0.703)
(0.627)
(0.799)
(0.563)
WhiteCollar
−0.579
0.812
0.136
−0.131
0.336
0.039
0.117
(0.552)
(0.580)
(0.593)
(0.621)
(0.556)
(0.705)
(0.504)
Treated*WhiteCollar
0.383
−0.413
−0.096
0.937
0.046
0.392
0.018
(0.645)
(0.675)
(0.693)
(0.725)
(0.652)
(0.831)
(0.581)
Constant
2.484
2.946
1.030
1.808
1.985
−1.441
−0.438
(2.649)
(2.850)
(2.792)
(2.977)
(2.635)
(3.349)
(2.212)
Observations
225
230
234
230
227
229
232
R2
0.394
0.441
0.340
0.197
0.426
0.351
0.303
Panel b. Satisfaction as usual:
FocusOn
LoseLessSleep
UsefulRole
MakeDecisions
AppreciateDailyActivities
LessStress
Overcome
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Treated
−0.333
−1.640∗∗∗
−0.610
−0.746∗
−0.100
−0.191
−0.659
(0.442)
(0.521)
(0.495)
(0.395)
(0.394)
(0.455)
(0.465)
WhiteCollar
0.243
−1.473∗∗∗
−0.061
−0.193
0.035
−0.278
−0.108
(0.390)
(0.462)
(0.438)
(0.349)
(0.349)
(0.408)
(0.414)
Treated*WhiteCollar
0.814∗
2.124∗∗∗
0.796
1.051∗∗
0.631
0.895∗
1.111∗∗
(0.457)
(0.540)
(0.512)
(0.409)
(0.408)
(0.471)
(0.481)
Constant
1.971
8.094∗∗∗
2.123
1.636
2.219
2.965
4.454∗∗
(1.895)
(2.143)
(2.095)
(1.677)
(1.640)
(1.904)
(1.944)
Observations
235
236
235
235
235
235
235
R2
0.169
0.117
0.158
0.142
0.164
0.248
0.174
Note: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The interaction term allows testing the impact of being a white-collar worker separately from that
of being a blue-collar worker. The dependent variables are measures of satisfaction with 7 dimensions of life in the ﬁrst panel. The dependent variables
indicate if respondents have been able to deal (as usual, less or more) with 7 aspects of life in the second panel. “Treated” is a dummy variable that
has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treated group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group. All regressions include
(coeﬃcients are not shown in the table) individual controls for age, squared age, gender, law 104 worker, law 104 relatives, child, young child, km, and
dependent variable pre-treatment. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
20

Table C.12: Work-life balance (by job type)
WorkingHours
Balance
HouseholdActivity
CareActivity
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Treated
−0.328
−0.351
−0.828
−0.710
(0.479)
(0.368)
(0.700)
(0.709)
WhiteCollar
−0.117
−0.280
−1.506∗∗
−1.102∗
(0.425)
(0.326)
(0.616)
(0.632)
Treated*WhiteCollar
0.569
0.642∗
1.729∗∗
2.848∗∗∗
(0.497)
(0.381)
(0.726)
(0.735)
Constant
1.528
3.144∗∗
4.826∗
3.767
(2.033)
(1.518)
(2.881)
(2.942)
Observations
235
235
235
235
R2
0.269
0.362
0.110
0.388
Note: The table shows results of an OLS estimate. The interaction term allows testing the impact of being a white-collar
worker separately from that of being a blue-collar worker. The dependent variables are measures of work-life balance.
“Treated” is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treated group and
is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group. All regressions include (coeﬃcients are not shown in the table) individual
controls for age, squared age, gender, law 104 worker, law 104 relatives, child, young child, km, and dependent variable
pre-treatment. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
21

4
Appendix D: Diﬀerence-in-Diﬀerences estima-
tion
Table D.1: Commitment to the company (DID)
Dependent variable:
Attachment to the company
Work recognized
Responsibility towards the company
(1)
(2)
(3)
Treated
−0.315∗∗
0.110
−0.053
(0.124)
(0.103)
(0.059)
Post
0.121
0.057
−0.139∗
(0.148)
(0.124)
(0.071)
Treated*Post
0.128
0.044
0.181∗∗
(0.174)
(0.146)
(0.083)
Age
0.116∗∗
−0.180∗∗∗
−0.009
(0.056)
(0.047)
(0.027)
Age2
−0.001∗∗
0.002∗∗∗
0.0001
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.0003)
Female
0.208∗∗
−0.133∗
−0.124∗∗∗
(0.090)
(0.075)
(0.043)
Team
0.132
0.115
−0.060
(0.087)
(0.073)
(0.042)
Law104Worker
0.469∗∗
−0.196
−0.039
(0.229)
(0.191)
(0.109)
Law104Relatives
0.079
0.057
−0.067
(0.130)
(0.109)
(0.062)
AnyChildren
0.236∗∗
−0.105
0.003
(0.120)
(0.100)
(0.057)
LessOrEqual3y
0.060
0.222∗∗
0.002
(0.133)
(0.111)
(0.064)
km
−0.003∗∗
0.001
−0.00001
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Constant
1.475
5.474∗∗∗
1.334∗∗
(1.228)
(1.028)
(0.588)
Observations
473
473
473
R2
0.086
0.074
0.044
Note: The table shows results of a DiD estimate. The dependent variables are measures of commitment to
the company. “Treated” is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to
the treatment group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group, “post” is a dummy variable that has
the value of 1 if the outcome is observed after treatment and is 0 if it is observed before treatment, and
Treated*Post is the interaction between the two dummy variables that measures the treatment eﬀect on the
variable of our interest. All individual controls are explained in section 4. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05,
and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
22

Table D.2: Self-reported Productivity (DID)
Dependent variable:
Production
Eﬃciency
Proactivity
Email
Deadlines
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Treated
0.146
0.308∗∗∗
0.080
−0.096
0.009
(0.098)
(0.100)
(0.106)
(0.110)
(0.068)
Post
0.133
0.149
−0.046
0.053
−0.295∗∗∗
(0.118)
(0.121)
(0.127)
(0.132)
(0.094)
Treated*Post
0.046
−0.012
0.273∗
0.076
0.175∗
(0.139)
(0.142)
(0.149)
(0.155)
(0.106)
Age
0.144∗∗∗
0.097∗∗
0.096∗∗
0.179∗∗∗
−0.059∗
(0.044)
(0.045)
(0.048)
(0.050)
(0.032)
Age2
−0.002∗∗∗
−0.001∗∗
−0.001∗∗
−0.002∗∗∗
0.001∗
(0.0005)
(0.0005)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.0003)
Female
0.095
0.073
0.068
−0.116
−0.120∗∗
(0.072)
(0.073)
(0.077)
(0.080)
(0.051)
Team
0.051
−0.043
0.061
−0.086
−0.012
(0.069)
(0.071)
(0.074)
(0.078)
(0.050)
Law104Worker
−0.143
−0.169
−0.061
0.118
−0.056
(0.182)
(0.186)
(0.196)
(0.204)
(0.138)
Law104Relatives
−0.106
−0.090
−0.049
−0.028
0.042
(0.103)
(0.106)
(0.111)
(0.116)
(0.072)
AnyChildren
−0.014
−0.005
0.141
0.302∗∗∗
0.018
(0.096)
(0.098)
(0.103)
(0.107)
(0.067)
LessOrEqual3y
−0.043
−0.036
0.004
−0.021
0.137∗
(0.106)
(0.108)
(0.114)
(0.119)
(0.076)
km
0.002∗∗
0.001
−0.0001
−0.003∗∗∗
−0.001∗
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Constant
0.859
1.853∗
1.636
−1.705
2.756∗∗∗
(0.978)
(1.000)
(1.051)
(1.096)
(0.705)
Observations
476
476
476
476
448
R2
0.101
0.098
0.063
0.097
0.078
Note: The table shows results of a DiD estimate. The dependent variables are 5 measures of self-reported productivity. “Treated” is a dummy variable
that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treatment group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group, “post” is a dummy
variable that has the value of 1 if the outcome is observed after treatment and is 0 if it is observed before treatment, and Treated*Post is the interaction
between the two dummy variables that measures the treatment eﬀect on the variable of our interest. All individual controls are explained in section
4. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
23

Table D.3: Productivity reported by supervisors (DID)
Dependent variable:
Productivity
Eﬃciency
Proactivity
Availability
Deadlines
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Treated
−0.063
−0.083
0.075
−0.088
−0.161
(0.123)
(0.117)
(0.133)
(0.136)
(0.104)
Post
0.113
0.239
0.356∗
0.269
−0.050
(0.181)
(0.171)
(0.196)
(0.200)
(0.153)
Treated*Post
0.091
−0.036
−0.251
0.210
0.402∗∗
(0.205)
(0.194)
(0.222)
(0.226)
(0.174)
Age
0.073
0.065
0.053
0.248∗∗∗
0.092∗
(0.058)
(0.055)
(0.062)
(0.063)
(0.049)
Age2
−0.001∗∗
−0.001∗
−0.001
−0.003∗∗∗
−0.001∗∗
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Female
0.036
0.081
−0.006
−0.109
0.098
(0.085)
(0.080)
(0.092)
(0.093)
(0.072)
Team
−0.091
−0.101
−0.118
−0.191∗
−0.178∗∗
(0.089)
(0.084)
(0.096)
(0.098)
(0.075)
Law104Worker
−0.030
−0.261
−0.226
0.007
−0.059
(0.211)
(0.200)
(0.229)
(0.233)
(0.179)
Law104Relatives
−0.171∗
−0.153
−0.080
0.003
−0.071
(0.103)
(0.098)
(0.112)
(0.114)
(0.088)
AnyChildren
0.201∗
0.213∗
0.362∗∗∗
0.131
0.209∗∗
(0.116)
(0.110)
(0.126)
(0.128)
(0.099)
LessOrEqual3y
−0.131
−0.081
−0.227∗
−0.224∗
−0.183∗∗
(0.109)
(0.104)
(0.119)
(0.121)
(0.093)
km
0.002∗
0.002
0.0005
0.002
0.001
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Constant
2.769∗∗
2.907∗∗
2.803∗∗
−1.210
2.896∗∗∗
(1.254)
(1.189)
(1.360)
(1.384)
(1.064)
Observations
380
380
380
380
380
R2
0.172
0.192
0.124
0.186
0.168
Note: The table shows results of a DiD estimate. The dependent variables measure productivity reported by supervisors. “Treated” is a dummy
variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treatment group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group, “post” is
a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the outcome is observed after treatment and is 0 if it is observed before treatment, Treated*Post is the
interaction between the two dummy variables that measures the treatment eﬀect on the variables of our interest. All individual controls are explained
in section 4. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
24

Table D.4: Satisfaction with ... (DID)
Dependent variable:
Income
Health
Home
Work
SocialLife
FreeTime
LifeInGeneral
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Treated
−0.376∗
−0.146
−0.362∗
−0.599∗∗∗
−0.007
−0.253
0.013
(0.200)
(0.236)
(0.202)
(0.202)
(0.224)
(0.253)
(0.178)
Post
−0.236
0.157
−0.395
−0.055
0.047
−0.055
0.125
(0.241)
(0.290)
(0.243)
(0.243)
(0.270)
(0.306)
(0.214)
Treated*Post
0.433
0.484
0.632∗∗
0.496∗
0.600∗
0.956∗∗∗
0.367
(0.283)
(0.339)
(0.285)
(0.286)
(0.316)
(0.359)
(0.251)
Age
−0.019
−0.525∗∗∗
−0.050
−0.049
−0.057
−0.162
0.013
(0.091)
(0.107)
(0.091)
(0.091)
(0.100)
(0.114)
(0.080)
Age2
0.00000
0.005∗∗∗
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.002
−0.0001
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Female
0.058
−0.009
−0.086
0.019
−0.606∗∗∗
−0.822∗∗∗
−0.307∗∗
(0.148)
(0.173)
(0.148)
(0.148)
(0.164)
(0.186)
(0.130)
Team
0.023
0.171
0.036
0.073
0.265∗
−0.224
0.145
(0.142)
(0.167)
(0.142)
(0.142)
(0.157)
(0.179)
(0.125)
Law104Worker
0.128
−1.822∗∗∗
0.005
0.784∗∗
0.740∗
0.405
−0.236
(0.370)
(0.439)
(0.374)
(0.374)
(0.412)
(0.469)
(0.330)
Law104Relatives
−0.126
−0.337
−0.055
−0.170
−0.559∗∗
−0.386
−0.637∗∗∗
(0.215)
(0.251)
(0.213)
(0.214)
(0.237)
(0.269)
(0.189)
AnyChildren
0.341∗
0.552∗∗
0.477∗∗
0.056
−0.090
0.020
0.149
(0.201)
(0.231)
(0.196)
(0.198)
(0.218)
(0.248)
(0.174)
LessOrEqual3y
−0.322
−0.814∗∗∗
−0.472∗∗
−0.075
−0.225
−0.499∗
−0.079
(0.216)
(0.256)
(0.218)
(0.218)
(0.241)
(0.274)
(0.192)
km
0.001
0.001
0.005∗∗∗
0.002
−0.006∗∗∗
−0.007∗∗∗
−0.001
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
Constant
5.131∗∗
16.747∗∗∗
5.588∗∗∗
5.937∗∗∗
6.068∗∗∗
7.253∗∗∗
4.660∗∗∗
(2.001)
(2.360)
(2.008)
(2.007)
(2.212)
(2.519)
(1.771)
Observations
464
469
473
469
465
467
471
R2
0.028
0.129
0.080
0.050
0.120
0.129
0.091
Note: The table shows results of a DiD estimate. The dependent variables are measures of satisfaction with 7 dimensions of life. “Treated” is a dummy
variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treatment group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group, “post” is a
dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the outcome is observed after treatment and is 0 if it is observed before treatment, and Treated*Post is the
interaction between the two dummy variables that measures the treatment eﬀect on the variable of our interest. The individual controls are explained
in section 4. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
25

Table D.5: Satisfaction as Usual (DID)
Dependent variable:
FocusOn
LoseLessSleep
UsefulRole
MakeDecisions
AppreciateDailyActivities
LessStress
Overcome
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Treated
−0.165
−0.152
−0.490∗∗∗
−0.113
−0.204∗
−0.262∗∗
−0.023
(0.120)
(0.146)
(0.134)
(0.115)
(0.110)
(0.130)
(0.128)
Post
0.100
0.025
−0.175
−0.029
−0.062
0.074
0.038
(0.144)
(0.176)
(0.162)
(0.138)
(0.132)
(0.156)
(0.154)
Treated*Post
0.614∗∗∗
0.493∗∗
0.538∗∗∗
0.350∗∗
0.708∗∗∗
0.885∗∗∗
0.360∗∗
(0.169)
(0.207)
(0.190)
(0.162)
(0.155)
(0.183)
(0.181)
Age
−0.060
−0.149∗∗
−0.102∗
−0.045
0.001
−0.092
−0.130∗∗
(0.054)
(0.066)
(0.061)
(0.052)
(0.050)
(0.058)
(0.058)
Age2
0.001
0.002∗∗
0.001∗
0.0005
0.0002
0.001∗
0.001∗∗
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Female
0.004
−0.067
−0.011
−0.084
0.078
−0.052
0.141
(0.088)
(0.107)
(0.098)
(0.084)
(0.080)
(0.095)
(0.093)
Team
0.144∗
−0.087
−0.078
0.068
0.004
−0.015
0.058
(0.085)
(0.103)
(0.095)
(0.081)
(0.077)
(0.091)
(0.090)
Law104Worker
−0.157
−0.437
−0.515∗∗
−0.391∗
0.044
0.268
−0.027
(0.223)
(0.272)
(0.250)
(0.213)
(0.204)
(0.241)
(0.237)
Law104Relatives
−0.268∗∗
−0.208
−0.195
−0.009
−0.178
−0.321∗∗
−0.144
(0.126)
(0.154)
(0.142)
(0.121)
(0.116)
(0.137)
(0.135)
AnyChildren
0.027
0.051
0.091
−0.118
−0.060
−0.317∗∗
−0.064
(0.117)
(0.142)
(0.131)
(0.112)
(0.107)
(0.126)
(0.124)
LessOrEqual3y
−0.297∗∗
−0.078
−0.132
−0.284∗∗
−0.025
−0.041
0.033
(0.130)
(0.158)
(0.145)
(0.124)
(0.119)
(0.140)
(0.138)
km
−0.001
0.001
0.001
0.002∗∗
0.0004
0.002∗
−0.0005
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Constant
4.452∗∗∗
6.113∗∗∗
5.566∗∗∗
4.415∗∗∗
2.911∗∗∗
4.448∗∗∗
5.887∗∗∗
(1.195)
(1.457)
(1.339)
(1.144)
(1.095)
(1.291)
(1.273)
Observations
474
474
474
474
474
474
474
R2
0.156
0.069
0.068
0.068
0.143
0.211
0.064
Note: The table shows results of a DiD estimate. The dependent variables indicate if respondents have been able to deal (as usual, less or more)
with 7 aspects of their life. “Treated” is a dummy variable that has the value 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treatment group and is 0 if
he/she belongs to the control group, “post” is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the outcome is observed after the treatment and is 0 if it is
observed before treatment, and Treated*Post is the interaction between the two dummy variables that measures the treatment eﬀect on the variable
of our interest. The individual controls are explained in section 4. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
26

Table D.6: Work-life balance (DID)
Dependent variable:
WorkingHours
Balance
HouseholdActivity
CareActivity
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Treated
−0.205
−0.235∗∗
0.016
−0.108
(0.143)
(0.118)
(0.149)
(0.167)
Post
−0.001
−0.175
1.528∗∗∗
0.950∗∗∗
(0.172)
(0.142)
(0.179)
(0.201)
Treated*Post
0.301
0.345∗∗
0.749∗∗∗
2.015∗∗∗
(0.202)
(0.166)
(0.210)
(0.236)
Age
−0.145∗∗
−0.050
−0.014
0.032
(0.065)
(0.053)
(0.067)
(0.075)
Age2
0.002∗∗
0.001
0.0003
−0.0004
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Female
−0.424∗∗∗
−0.311∗∗∗
0.021
0.272∗∗
(0.105)
(0.086)
(0.109)
(0.122)
Team
−0.134
0.017
−0.016
0.068
(0.101)
(0.083)
(0.105)
(0.118)
Law104Worker
0.049
−0.140
0.130
0.484
(0.266)
(0.219)
(0.276)
(0.310)
Law104Relatives
0.223
−0.137
−0.014
0.020
(0.151)
(0.124)
(0.157)
(0.176)
AnyChildren
0.206
−0.078
−0.270∗
−0.426∗∗∗
(0.139)
(0.115)
(0.145)
(0.163)
LessOrEqual3y
−0.378∗∗
−0.159
−0.009
0.153
(0.155)
(0.127)
(0.161)
(0.181)
km
−0.003∗
−0.001
−0.0003
0.002
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.002)
Constant
6.229∗∗∗
3.873∗∗∗
1.775
1.402
(1.425)
(1.172)
(1.481)
(1.664)
Observations
474
474
474
474
R2
0.081
0.063
0.530
0.594
Note: The table shows results of a DiD estimate. The dependent variables are measures of work-life balance.
“Treated” is a dummy variable that has the value of 1 if the individual has been assigned to the treatment
group and is 0 if he/she belongs to the control group, “post” is a dummy variable that has the value of 1
if the outcome is observed after treatment and is 0 if it is observed before treatment, and Treated*Post is
the interaction between the two dummy variables that measures the treatment eﬀect on the variable of our
interest. The individual controls are explained in section 4. Signiﬁcance: ∗p<0.1, ∗∗p<0.05, and ∗∗∗p<0.01.
27

5
Appendix E: Job descriptions
Table E.1: White-collar workers: Job descriptions and frequencies
Job description
Frequency
Job description
Frequency
Acceptance and opening of estimates
1
Management of a technical sponsorship
1
Accounting & Fronting
1
Management plant transformation operations
1
Acquisition of collections from Sap-Isu system
1
Mapping and processing analysis
1
Active cycle oﬃcer: invoice registration
1
Market & Pricing Models Analyst
4
Administrative Assistant
10
Monitoring of Service Contracts
2
Billing Specialist
6
Monthly control reports
3
Budget and accounting
2
Network Optimization & Improvement Operator
1
Car management for managers
1
New Activations / Opening estimates
2
Claims Specialist
11
ODV internal cashier
1
Collection, control, compilation FIR
1
Operations & Maintenance Assistant
15
Commercial practices required by top clients
1
Operative Director
6
Communication manager
1
Passive cycle oﬃcer: payment
1
Contract Commissioning Assistant
3
Pay-roll Assistant
3
Contractual revisions
1
Planner
1
Credit & Collection Specialist
6
Preparation of accounting reporting
1
Credit Analyst
1
Procurement Supply and license management
1
Customer Facing Operator
13
QHSE Specialist
2
Data & Reporting Analyst
17
Quality Safety Environment Assistant
3
Design & Works Engineer
3
Refunds Assistant
2
Digital manager
1
Regulatory Specialist
1
Discipline Engineer
5
Reporting, performance analysis, data model, KPI measurement
1
Disconnection operator
2
Requirements analysis & carrying out case studies
1
Dispatching supervision
11
Responsible
1
Drafts Man
3
Sales Eﬀectiveness & Rep
2
Energy Balance & Transport specialist
1
Scheduling Analyst
4
Energy Metering Assistant
2
Security Oﬃcer
1
Facility & Property Assistant
1
Service Failure Assistant
1
Facility Management
1
Site inspector
1
Field Planner
23
Sorting job requests via SIMEC
2
Fire oﬃcer
1
Specialist Dispatcher Service
1
Goods receipts
2
Street Lighting and Monumental Lighting Design Activities
2
Helpdesk assistant
1
Study of puriﬁcation areas
1
Human Resources & Organization Assistant
7
Supply chain supervision and coordination
2
Information and Communications Technology Analyst
6
Tax payments and contributions
1
Legal & Corporate Aﬀair
2
Team Leader
7
Lock / unlock SC/OPS/OAL/ODA EM
1
Technical assistant
11
Logistics Assistant
2
Tenders Specialist
6
Management application and exercise procedures water companies
1
Territory Manager
1
Management Application Electric Gas
1
Treasury Oﬃcer
2
Management of funds
1
Works & Permission Specialist
3
Table E.2: Blue-collar workers: Job descriptions and frequencies
Job description
Frequency
Data & Reporting Operator
2
Operations & Maintenance Operator
12
Dispatcher Maintenance operator
3
Dispatcher Operator
20
Information and Communications Technology Operator
1
Technical Oﬀering Operator
4
28

Table E.3: Pre-treatment balance test for the answers of White- and Blue-
Collar workers to questions related to their jobs
Variables
White-Collar
Blue-Collar
Test Statistic
p-value
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Deadlines
188
1.213
24
1.542
3.501
0.0005662***
Useful Role
213
3.362
25
3.080
-1.45
0.1484
Make Decisions
213
3.408
25
3.320
-0.5618
0.5748
Notes: Two-sample t-test for a comparison between means. Signiﬁcance: *
indicates p<0.05.
The questions are the following:
• Do you comply with the predetermined deadlines of your responsibilities
at work?
Possible answers: Never=1, Rarely=2, Sometimes=3, Usu-
ally=4, and Always=5.
• In the last six months, did you feel like having a useful role in your work
life? Possible answers: Much less than usual=1, Less than usual=2, As
usual=3, More than usual=4, and Much more than usual=5.
• In the last six months, did you feel capable of making decisions? Possible
answers: Much less than usual=1, Less than usual=2, As usual=3, More
than usual=4, and Much more than usual=5.
29

6
Appendix F: Survey Questionnaires
6.1
Pre-treatment Questionnaire - Worker
6.1.1
Privacy information
The following is an informed consent statement for participation in the E.L.E.N.A.
(Experimenting with ﬂexible Labor tools for Enterprises by eNgaging men
And women) study. Before deciding if you want to participate in this study,
READ CAREFULLY the information below and, if you have any doubts, ask
the responsible researchers questions to become fully aware of the scope and
modality of the experiment. We kindly ask you to remember that this is a
research project, and your participation is entirely voluntary; you are free to
withdraw from the experiment at any time. GOAL OF THE STUDY: Es-
timate the eﬀects of introducing ﬂexible forms of labor.
INSTRUMENTS
USED: Administration of questionnaires to be anonymously ﬁlled out online
by workers; administration of questionnaires about workers to be anonymously
ﬁlled out online by workers’ supervisors; collection of administrative data and
productivity indicators. PROCEDURE: The ﬁrst group will be selected from
the sample of participants to immediately experiment with the ﬂexible work
modality. By the end of the experimental period, the remaining groups that
continued to work according to the current work modality will be asked to
ﬁll out a second questionnaire identical to that given to the ﬁrst group. The
experiment explores ﬂexibility of work in terms of place and time to enhance
the work-life balance. Flexible working conditions do not cause harm or side
eﬀects to individuals. For the possibility of participating in the experiment
to be assessed, it is necessary to ﬁll out the following questionnaire. If you
are selected, you will be requested to ﬁll out a second questionnaire by the
ﬁnal step of the experiment. PRIVACY: Collected data is anonymous and will
be treated according to privacy laws and in conformity with the Legislative
Decree No. 196 of June 30, 2003, “Code for the protection of personal data”,
guaranteeing the anonymity of participants. If you want to participate in this
research experiment, we ask you to explicitly give your consent to processing
of your data that will be collected by the questionnaire below by clicking on “I
30

agree to processing of my personal data with the ‘instruments used’ for par-
ticipation in the E.L.E.N.A. study” and by ﬁlling out the ﬁeld containing your
WORKER REGISTRATION NUMBER.
This questionnaire was developed for the E.L.E.N.A. project in which you have
agreed to participate. Please answer the following questions as accurately as
possible. You will not be able to skip questions. In order to proceed with
the questionnaire, you must answer the question posed to you. Additionally,
it is not possible to pause the questionnaire and resume it later; you must
complete all of it at once. The estimated time to complete the questionnaire
is approximately 20 minutes. Thank you for your participation!
6.1.2
Family information
1. Level of study:
• Secondary school
• High school
• Bachelor degree
• Master degree
• PhD
2. Number of family members living under the same roof: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3. Do you have a partner living with you?
• Yes
• No
4. Select the number of children you are responsible for, and indicate each
child’s respective day, month and year of birth in the adjacent space
(dd/mm/yyyy):
• Child 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
• Child 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31

• Child 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
• Child 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
• Child 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
• No children
5. If at least one of your children is under 3 years of age, select the childcare
type you use (it is possible to select more than one choice):
• Public childcare
• Private childcare
• Babysitter exclusively for childcare
• Domestic worker
• Grandparents
• None
• The child is older than 3 years.
6. Presence of other family members in charge of your children (it is possible
to select more than one choice):
• Family member 1
• Family member 2
• Family member 3
• No other family members
7. Family member 1 in charge of children (it is possible to select more than
one choice):
• Partner
• Elder (> 75 years of age)
• Disabled
32

• In need of medical attention
8. Family member 2 in charge of children (it is possible to select more than
one choice):
• Partner
• Elder (> 75 years of age)
• Disabled
• In need of medical attention
9. Family member 3 in charge of children (it is possible to select more than
one choice):
• Partner
• Elder (> 75 years of age)
• Disabled
• In need of medical attention
10. Occupation of the partner:
• Unemployed, but NOT a job-seeker
• Unemployed, and a job-seeker
• Part-time worker
• Full-time worker
6.1.3
Productivity
11. What is your regular entry time at work (without taking exceptions into
account): HH:MM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12. What is your regular exit time from work (without taking exceptions
into account): HH:MM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13. Do you answer emails or work outside your working hours?
33

• Yes, frequently
• Yes, sometimes
• No
14. Do you comply with the predetermined deadlines of your responsibilities
at work?
• Always
• Usually
• Sometimes
• Rarely
• Never
Indicate your level of ...
15. ... productivity during working hours (capacity to achieve assigned goals)
• Very low
• Low
• Average
• High
• Very high
16. ... eﬃciency at work (capacity to achieve assigned goals within an ap-
propriate time)
• Very low
• Low
• Average
• High
• Very high
34

17. ... proactivity at work (capacity to take initiative that is appreciated by
others)
• Very low
• Low
• Average
• High
• Very high
18. What percentage of your working hours is dedicated to the following
activities predicted by your role? (total must sum to 100)
• Ordinary (routine) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
• Extraordinary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
• Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19. Do you devote time to activities aimed at improving work processes?
• Yes
• No
20. If yes, what is the respective percentage of hours relative to your total
working hours?
• Less than 25%
• Between 25% and 50%
• Between 50% and 75%
• More than 75%
6.1.4
Flexibility
Do you think that ﬂexible forms of work can help ...
21. ... change your productivity (capacity to achieve assigned goals)?
35

• Very negatively
• Negatively
• Not at all
• Positively
• Very positively
22. ... change your eﬃciency (capacity to achieve assigned goals within an
appropriate time)?
• Very negatively
• Negatively
• Not at all
• Positively
• Very positively
23. ... inﬂuence the possibility of interaction in the workplace?
• Very negatively
• Negatively
• Not at all
• Positively
• Very positively
24. ... inﬂuence the probability of receiving any promotions?
• Very negatively
• Negatively
• Not at all
• Positively
• Very positively
36

6.1.5
Wellbeing
On a scale from 1 to 7, where 1 corresponds to “highly dissatisﬁed”, and
7 corresponds to “highly satisﬁed”, indicate how much you are unsatisﬁed
or satisﬁed with ...
25. ... your family income:
• Not applicable
• 1. Highly dissatisﬁed
• 2
• 3
• 4
• 5
• 6
• 7. Highly satisﬁed
26. ... your health:
• Not applicable
• 1. Highly dissatisﬁed
• 2
• 3
• 4
• 5
• 6
• 7. Highly satisﬁed
27. ... your partner:
• Not applicable
37

• 1. Highly dissatisﬁed
• 2
• 3
• 4
• 5
• 6
• 7. Highly satisﬁed
28. ... your work:
• Not applicable
• 1. Highly dissatisﬁed
• 2
• 3
• 4
• 5
• 6
• 7. Highly satisﬁed
29. ... your social life:
• Not applicable
• 1. Highly dissatisﬁed
• 2
• 3
• 4
• 5
38

• 6
• 7. Highly satisﬁed
30. ... your available free time:
• Not applicable
• 1. Highly dissatisﬁed
• 2
• 3
• 4
• 5
• 6
• 7. Highly satisﬁed
31. ... your life in general:
• Not applicable
• 1. Highly dissatisﬁed
• 2
• 3
• 4
• 5
• 6
• 7. Highly satisﬁed
In the last 6 months ...
32. ... were you able to focus on your activities (at work or elsewhere)?
• Much less than usual
39

• Less than usual
• As usual
• More than usual
• Much more than usual
33. ... did you lose sleep due to any concerns?
• Much less than usual
• Less than usual
• As usual
• More than usual
• Much more than usual
34. ... did you feel that you played a useful role in your work life?
• Much less than usual
• Less than usual
• As usual
• More than usual
• Much more than usual
35. ... were you able to appreciate the daily activities in a regular day of
yours?
• Much less than usual
• Less than usual
• As usual
• More than usual
• Much more than usual
36. ... did you feel stressed?
40

• Much less than usual
• Less than usual
• As usual
• More than usual
• Much more than usual
37. ... did you feel unable to overcome diﬃculties?
• Much less than usual
• Less than usual
• As usual
• More than usual
• Much more than usual
6.1.6
Work-life balance
38. Overall, are you satisﬁed with your working hours and with how they
match your private life?
• Highly dissatisﬁed
• Dissatisﬁed
• Neutral
• Satisﬁed
• Highly satisﬁed
39. Do you feel able to balance your work with your personal and family
life?
• Yes, very much so
• Yes, partially
• Mostly unable
41

• No at all
40. How much time do you dedicate to household activities (cleaning and
housekeeping) per day?
• Less than 2 hours
• From 2 to 4 hours
• From 4 to 6 hours
• More than 6 hours
41. How much time do you dedicate to taking care of others (children, elderly,
other family members)?
• Less than 2 hours
• From 2 to 4 hours
• From 4 to 6 hours
• More than 6 hours
42. How often do you need to work during vacations?
• Never
• Rarely
• Occasionally
• Sometimes
• Frequently
43. How often are you worried about work outside your working hours?
• Never
• Rarely
• Occasionally
• Sometimes
42

• Frequently
44. How often do you spend less time on your personal and family life because
of work concerns and duties?
• Never
• Rarely
• Occasionally
• Sometimes
• Frequently
How much do the following factors prevent you from balancing your work
life with family commitments?
45. ... overwork
• Not at all
• Slightly
• Somewhat
• Moderately
• Extremely
46. ... work from home after oﬃce hours
• Not at all
• Slightly
• Somewhat
• Moderately
• Extremely
47. . . . work during holidays
• Not at all
43

• Slightly
• Somewhat
• Moderately
• Extremely
48. ... travel away from home
• Not at all
• Slightly
• Somewhat
• Moderately
• Extremely
49. ... excessive household activities
• Not at all
• Slightly
• Somewhat
• Moderately
• Extremely
50. ... negative attitudes of your family or partner
• Not at all
• Slightly
• Somewhat
• Moderately
• Extremely
51. ... negative attitudes of your supervisor or colleagues
44

• Not at all
• Slightly
• Somewhat
• Moderately
• Extremely
52. Classify the following factors based on the importance they have in the
balance between your work and personal life on the scale from “1 = more
important” to “6 = less important”:
• . . . . . more ﬂexible work time
• . . . . . work from home
• . . . . . possibility of obtaining a leave during school holidays
• . . . . . possibility of obtaining a leave in case of emergency or special
events
• . . . . . support from family members
• . . . . . support from the supervisor and colleagues
53. Do you think that men should also be able to take parental leaves?
• Yes
• No
• I do not have an opinion about it
54. Do you think men must be given an exclusive parental leave after the
birth of a son?
• Yes
• No
• I do not have an opinion about it
45

6.1.7
Commitment
55. How attached do you feel to the company?
• Not at all attached
• Somewhat attached
• Attached
• Signiﬁcantly attached
• Very attached
56. Do you believe you will continue working at this company in the next 2
years?
• Yes
• No
• I do not know
57. Do you believe your work is suﬃciently recognized?
• Yes
• No
• I do not know
58. Do you have a sense of moral responsibility towards the company?
• Yes
• No
• I do not know
6.2
Post-treatment Questionnaire - Workers
This questionnaire includes the same questions as the pre-treatment question-
naire for workers, except questions 1-10. Additional questions only the treated
group was asked:
46

6.2.1
Flexibility
1. In the days during which you could beneﬁt from ﬂexibility, where did
you work from?
• Home
• Another company oﬃce closer to home
• Another company oﬃce
• Public place (specify) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
• Other (specify) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2. When you worked from a place other than your regular oﬃce, your work-
ing intensity ...
• Decreased
• Decreased slightly
• Remained unchanged
• Increased slightly
• Increased
3. Did a greater working ﬂexibility induce you to work more hours?
• Yes, more hours were worked than usual
• No, the hours remained as usual
• No, fewer hours were worked than usual
4. During these 9 months of the experiment, did you work with any other
individual part of the E.L.E.N.A. project?
• Yes
• No
• I do not know
47

Having greater ﬂexibility has inﬂuenced ...
5. ... your productivity (capacity to achieve assigned goals):
• Very negatively
• Negatively
• Not at all
• Positively
• Very positively
6. ... your eﬃciency (capacity to achieve assigned goals within an appro-
priate time):
• Very negatively
• Negatively
• Not at all
• Positively
• Very positively
7. ... your proactivity (capacity to take initiative appreciated by others):
• Very negatively
• Negatively
• Not at all
• Positively
• Very positively
8. ... the relationship with colleagues:
• Very negatively
• Negatively
• Not at all
48

• Positively
• Very positively
9. ... the dynamic and eﬃciency of teamwork:
• Very negatively
• Negatively
• Not at all
• Positively
• Very positively
10. ... your participation in the decision-making process at work:
• Very negatively
• Negatively
• Not at all
• Positively
• Very positively
11. ... the possibility of being promoted:
• Very negatively
• Negatively
• Not at all
• Positively
• Very positively
49

6.3
Pre-treatment Questionnaire - Supervisors
6.3.1
Privacy information
The following is an informed consent statement for participation in the E.L.E.N.A.
(Experimenting with ﬂexible Labor tools for Enterprises by eNgaging men
And women) study. Before deciding if you want to participate in this study,
READ CAREFULLY the information below and, if you have any doubts, ask
the responsible researchers questions to become fully aware of the scope and
modality of the experiment. We kindly ask you to remember that this is a
research project, and your participation is entirely voluntary; you are free to
withdraw from the experiment at any time. GOAL OF THE STUDY: Es-
timate the eﬀects of introducing ﬂexible forms of labor.
INSTRUMENTS
USED: Administration of questionnaires to be anonymously ﬁlled out online
by workers; administration of questionnaires about workers to be anonymously
ﬁlled out online by workers’ supervisors; collection of administrative data and
productivity indicators. PROCEDURE: The ﬁrst group will be selected from
the sample of participants to immediately experiment with the ﬂexible work
modality. By the end of the experimental period, the remaining groups that
continued to work according to the current work modality will be asked to
ﬁll out a second questionnaire, as will be the individuals included in the ﬁrst
group. The experiment explores ﬂexibility of work in terms of place and time
to enhance the work-life balance. Flexible working conditions do not cause
harm or side eﬀects to individuals. For the possibility of participating in the
experiment to be assessed, it is necessary to ﬁll out the following questionnaire.
If you are selected, you will be requested to ﬁll out a second questionnaire by
the ﬁnal step of the experiment. PRIVACY: Collected data is anonymous and
will be treated according to privacy laws and in conformity with the Legislative
Decree No. 196 of June 30, 2003, “Code for the protection of personal data”,
guaranteeing the anonymity of participants. If you want to participate in this
research experiment, we ask you to explicitly give your consent to processing
of your data that will be collected by the questionnaire below by clicking on
“I agree to processing of my personal data with the instruments used for par-
ticipation in the E.L.E.N.A. study” and by ﬁlling out the ﬁeld containing your
50

WORKER REGISTRATION NUMBER.
This questionnaire was developed for the E.L.E.N.A. project in which you have
agreed to participate. Please answer the following questions as accurately as
possible. You will not be able to skip questions. In order to proceed with
the questionnaire, you must answer the question posed to you. Additionally,
it is not possible to pause the questionnaire and resume it later; you must
complete all of it at once. The estimated time to complete the questionnaire
is approximately 20 minutes. Thank you for your participation!
6.3.2
General ﬂexibility
1. Do you think that introducing ﬂexible working within this organization
can generate added value?
• Yes
• No
• I do not have an opinion
Do you believe that oﬀering ﬂexible working within this organization can
. . .
2. . . . change business productivity (capacity to achieve assigned goals)
• Very negatively
• Negatively
• Not at all
• Positively
• Very positively
3. . . . change business eﬃciency (capacity to achieve assigned goals within
an appropriate time)?
• Very negatively
• Negatively
51

• Not at all
• Positively
• Very positively
4. . . . inﬂuence the possibility of having an interactive workplace?
• Very negatively
• Negatively
• Not at all
• Positively
• Very positively
5. . . . inﬂuence eventual career advancement?
• Very negatively
• Negatively
• Not at all
• Positively
• Very positively
6. . . . inﬂuence the morale of workers?
• Very negatively
• Negatively
• Not at all
• Positively
• Very positively
6.3.3
Sunk costs
7. What is the usage level of oﬃce space (desks, etc.) by employees?
52

• Less than 25%
• Between 25% and 50%
• Between 50% and 75%
• More than 75%
8. What is the number of calls made per week within the unit you supervise?
. . . . .
9. Considering these calls, please indicate the percentage corresponding to
each subcategory (the total must be 100):
• Internal . . . . .
• External, domestic . . . . .
• External, international . . . . .
• Conference calls . . . . .
• Other (specify) . . . . .
• Total . . . . .
10. How many hours per week are dedicated to face-to-face meetings within
your unit? . . . . .
6.3.4
Productivity
Input the registration numbers of workers you supervise that were se-
lected to be part of the experiment:
• Worker 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
• Worker 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
• Worker 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
• . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
• Worker 20 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53

6.3.5
Productivity worker 1
1 Proceed to answer the following questions for worker 1 under your
supervision.
For worker 1, please indicate his/her level of ...
11. productivity (capacity to achieve assigned goals)
• Very low
• Low
• Average
• High
• Very high
12. eﬃciency (capacity to achieve assigned goals within an appropriate time)
• Very low
• Low
• Average
• High
• Very high
13. proactivity (capacity to take initiative appreciated by others)
• Very low
• Low
• Average
• High
• Very high
1Answers to questions 11-20 are required separately for each worker managed by the
supervisor.
54

14. availability
• Very low
• Low
• Average
• High
• Very high
15. How often does worker 1 answer emails or work outside working hours?
• Never
• Rarely
• Occasionally
• Sometimes
• Frequently
16. How often does worker 1 comply with the predetermined deadlines of
his/her responsibilities?
• Never
• Rarely
• Occasionally
• Sometimes
• Frequently
6.3.6
Commitment 1
17. How much is worker 1 attached to the company?
• Not at all attached
• Somewhat attached
55

• Average attachment
• Signiﬁcantly attached
• Very attached
18. Do you foresee worker 1 continuing to work at this company in the next
2 years?
• Yes
• No
• I do not know
19. Do you believe that work performed by worker 1 is adequately recog-
nized?
• Yes
• No
• I do not know
20. Do you believe that worker 1 has a sense of moral responsibility towards
the company?
• Yes
• No
• I do not know
6.4
Post-treatment Questionnaire - Supervisors
This questionnaire consists of the same questions as the pre-treatment ques-
tionnaire for supervisors.
56