TITLE: Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2020.3710
---

LBS Research Online
H Puera and D W Bunn
Renewable power and electricity prices: the impact of forward markets
Article
This version is available in the LBS Research Online repository: https://lbsresearch.london.edu/
id/eprint/1432/
Puera, H and Bunn, D W
(2021)
Renewable power and electricity prices: the impact of forward markets.
Management Science, 67 (8). pp. 4772-4788. ISSN 0025-1909
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2020.3710
INFORMS (Institute for Operations Research and Management Sciences)
https://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/10.1287/mnsc.20...
Users may download and/or print one copy of any article(s) in LBS Research Online for purposes of
research and/or private study. Further distribution of the material, or use for any commercial gain, is
not permitted.

Renewable Power and Electricity Prices:
The Impact of Forward Markets
Heikki Peura
Imperial College Business School
h.peura@imperial.ac.uk
Derek W. Bunn
London Business School
dbunn@london.edu
Increasing variable renewable power generation (e.g., wind) is expected to reduce wholesale electricity prices
by virtue of its low marginal production cost. This merit-order eﬀect of renewables displacing incumbent
conventional (e.g., gas) generation forms the theoretical underpinning for investment decisions and policy
in the power industry. This paper uses a game-theoretic market model to investigate how intermittently
available wind generation aﬀects electricity prices in the presence of forward markets, which are widely
used by power companies to hedge against revenue variability ahead of near-real-time spot trading. We
ﬁnd that in addition to the established merit-order eﬀect, renewable generation also aﬀects power prices
through forward-market hedging. This “forward” eﬀect reinforces the merit-order eﬀect in reducing prices
for moderate amounts of wind generation capacity, but mitigates or even reverses it for higher capacities.
For moderate wind capacity, uncertainty over its output increases hedging, and these higher forward sales
lead to lower prices. For higher capacities, however, wind variability conversely causes power producers to
behave less aggressively in forward trading for fear of unfavorable spot-market positions. The lower sales
counteract the merit-order eﬀect, and prices may then paradoxically increase with wind capacity despite
its lower production cost. We conﬁrm the potential for such reversals in a numerical study, suggesting new
empirical questions while providing potential explanations for previously contradictory observed eﬀects of
market fundamentals. We conclude that considering the conventional merit-order eﬀect alone is insuﬃcient
for evaluating the price impacts of variable renewable generation in the presence of forward markets.
Key words : Electricity markets; Renewable energy, Forward trading, Cournot competition
1.
Introduction
The use of renewable energy sources is growing as diﬀerent countries seek to reduce their
dependence on fossil fuels. The European Union aims to source at least 32% of its energy
from renewables by 2030, China is planning for renewables to account for 35% of its power
consumption by 2030, and over 30 US states have set comparable policies.1 The most
profound impact of these policies has been on the electricity industry, where wind and
1 See European Commission (2018), Bloomberg (2018), and National Conference of State Legislatures (2018).
1

2
Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
solar power are displacing incumbent conventional coal- and gas-ﬁred combustion turbines.
In Germany, for example, wind and solar now account for more than 20% of the power
market, with a target of 50% renewable electricity by 2030.
Increasing renewable generation is expected to beneﬁt power consumers by reducing
wholesale electricity prices. Power generators sell their output in near-real-time spot mar-
kets, where renewable (e.g., wind) producers’ low short-run production costs allow them
to undercut conventional (e.g., gas) producers in the dispatch order of generation oﬀers.
The potential beneﬁts from this merit-order eﬀect are particularly pronounced in power
markets, as generation capacity is often concentrated to large conventional generators (e.g.,
Borenstein et al. 2002): Smaller renewable producers should limit incumbents’ price-setting
power, emphasizing their eﬀect in reducing prices. The merit-order eﬀect has thus been the
conventional, widely-used analytical focus to model market price movements, changes in
power-plant utilizations, and asset revaluations associated with the transition to renewable
power (Woo et al. 2011, Baldick 2012).
This purely cost-based view of renewables’ price impacts, however, overlooks their other
implication for electricity trading, namely higher variability. Due to relatively inelastic
demand and a lack of economic storage options, spot electricity prices are already highly
volatile, and renewable sources further add to this variability. Unlike consistently available
gas turbines, wind power has an average capacity availability of 30% with daily standard
deviations of up to 25% (e.g., Sinden 2007), causing the volatility of spot power prices to
further increase with renewable penetration (e.g., Ketterer 2014).
It may be thought that irregular wind production would simply result in a more volatile
merit-order eﬀect, reducing spot prices according to output. However, while price debates
have focused on this spot-market competition, most electricity is traded via ﬁnancial for-
ward contracts ahead of spot. Power producers and retailers use forwards to hedge against
spot-revenue volatility, with risk exposures signiﬁcant enough for companies to regularly
report their trading to investors.2 In the UK, for example, over 90% of electricity is traded
as forward contracts specifying a quantity to be delivered in subsequent spot markets
(Ofgem 2009). Moreover, the pricing of forward contracts diﬀers from spot-market cost
competition. Besides the underlying generation costs, forward electricity prices are deter-
mined by the market participants’ hedging of risk exposures (Bessembinder and Lemmon
2 See, e.g., Drax in the UK: http://www.drax.com/media/66455/trading-update-november-2015.pdf.

Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
3
2002), reﬂected in sustained forward premia, i.e., diﬀerences in forward and spot prices
for the same delivery period (Longstaﬀand Wang 2004, Redl and Bunn 2013, Weron and
Zator 2014). Increasing variable wind generation is changing not only cost competition but
also forward risk exposures, causing companies to adjust their trading between forward
and spot markets and hence altering the relationship between the prices. In Germany, for
example, there is evidence that trading has shifted from forward contracting towards real
time (A¨ıd et al. 2016) while the merit-order eﬀect has slowed (Ketterer 2014).
In this paper, we revisit the merit-order eﬀect of renewable power on electricity prices,
accounting for its variable output and the prevalence of forward contracting in power
markets. How will renewable generation, speciﬁcally wind power, change trading strategies
and prices as it is projected to rapidly increase in the medium term? In particular, we
seek to understand the impact of renewables in the presence of forward markets, which—
besides pivotal to power companies’ risk management—have been central to policy debate
in the industry. Regulators have long encouraged forward trading as a means to curtail
market power and reduce prices (e.g., Borenstein 2001), and more recently promoted virtual
bidding (Jha and Wolak 2013) to introduce eﬃcient forward-market arbitrage, removing
price premia between forward and spot markets. How do forward trading, and premia
arising from hedging, inﬂuence the price impacts of increasing renewable capacity?
We investigate the merit-order eﬀect using a game-theoretic market model that cap-
tures the essential factors to manifest the eﬀects of renewable power, but with suﬃcient
stylization to permit analytical results. We study power producers and retailers trading
in sequential forward and spot markets: Conventional producers represent an incumbent
reliable (gas) technology, while new entrant (wind) producers have lower production costs
but variable available capacity. In the forward market, power demand and wind supply are
uncertain, and the companies are concerned with both the mean and the variance of their
proﬁts. They hedge against revenue variability by trading forward contracts, i.e., ﬁnancial
commitments to produce/buy a corresponding amount of power in the spot stage, with the
forward price determined by matching the ﬁrms’ demands for contracts. In the real-time
spot market, conventional producers engage in quantity (Cournot) competition, while wind
producers sell their realized production competitively.
When power is traded in spot markets alone, we conﬁrm that higher wind generation
reduces prices through the merit-order eﬀect. But accounting for forward trading, we iden-
tify an additional eﬀect of wind power on the spot price. This eﬀect results from our model

4
Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
including both forward-market risk-hedging (Bessembinder and Lemmon 2002) and price-
setting power by incumbent producers. More speciﬁcally, variable wind output changes
spot-revenue risks, and hence the volume of forward contracts traded to hedge. For incum-
bents with market power, however, higher forward sales imply a commitment to generate
more power in the spot market (Allaz and Vila 1993). Thus, the more risk-hedging occurs,
the more power is generated, and hence the lower the price. Variable wind generation there-
fore aﬀects the spot price of electricity not only through direct merit-order competition
but also indirectly through altering hedging volumes in the forward market.
This additional forward eﬀect may either reinforce or mitigate, and even reverse, the
conventional merit-order eﬀect, depending on the amount of wind capacity on the market.
When capacity is moderate, its variable output leads power producers to increase their
forward trading to hedge against the associated revenue risk. The higher commitments to
produce power then reduce prices more than predicted by the conventional merit-order
eﬀect. However, with higher wind penetration, producers conversely reduce their forward
commitments for fear of an unfavorable position in the spot market in case of high wind
output. The lower commitments to produce power may then cause prices to increase with
wind capacity if its output variability is high enough. Paradoxically, combining low-cost
capacity and forward trading, both widely viewed by regulators as pro-competitive, may
thus lead spot prices to increase when we take into account the variability of the renewable
resource, with the forward price following similar patterns.
We conﬁrm these ﬁndings in a numerical study using data from Denmark and the UK.
Additional wind capacity reduces prices more than by the conventional merit-order eﬀect
at moderate capacities, but with higher capacity the impact becomes neutral or prices even
increase. Whether the forward eﬀect counteracts or reinforces the conventional merit-order
eﬀect is sensitive to the distribution of wind output and market fundamentals such as
fuel prices and demand, suggesting varying eﬀects between onshore and oﬀshore capacity
and seasonal trends. Finally, our model provides insights into wholesale electricity pricing
beyond the merit-order eﬀect. Speciﬁcally, besides supply-side variability, we propose new
fundamental demand-side price drivers similarly aﬀecting forward-market hedging, and
provide justiﬁcations for contradictory observations in the empirical literature on power
prices, such as reversals in the sign of forward premia resulting from interaction eﬀects
between market demand and fuel prices. We also investigate the price impact of introducing

Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
5
eﬃcient forward-market arbitrage and ﬁnd that it may increase prices in particular when
renewable capacity is low, implying potentially ambiguous welfare eﬀects from policies
such as virtual bidding. Together, our ﬁndings suggest that accounting for forward-market
hedging is integral to understanding the price impacts of variable renewable capacity and
market fundamentals, and call for further empirical investigation into these impacts.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. After reviewing related literature in §2, we
develop a model of spot and forward electricity trading in §3 and derive its equilibrium
in §4. In §5, we use the equilibrium to derive insights into wholesale electricity pricing,
in particular revisiting the conventional expectation that the replacement of fossil fuel
generation by renewables will simply reduce wholesale prices through the merit-order eﬀect.
We discuss these insights calibrated to real-world data in the numerical study in §6, and
conclude in §7. The derivations of all results are included in the Electronic Companion.
2.
Related Literature
The integration of variable renewable sources into electricity generation poses signiﬁcant
economic and operational challenges to energy producers, consumers and policy-makers
(Carrasco et al. 2006, DeCarolis and Keith 2006, Drake and Spinler 2013). A growing
operations-management literature has sought to address questions in this domain ranging
from the optimal operation of renewables via curtailment and storage (Wu and Kapuscinski
2013, Zhou et al. 2019) to optimal investments in these technologies and their implications
for peak pricing and utilities (Hu et al. 2015, Peura and Bunn 2015, K¨ok et al. 2016, Aﬂaki
and Netessine 2017, Sunar and Swaminathan 2018) and encouraging their adoption with
subsidy schemes (Boomsma et al. 2012, Alizamir et al. 2016).
The focus of this paper, the impact of renewables on electricity market outcomes, is
widely considered through the merit-order eﬀect of low-cost renewable capacity displacing
conventional generation (Woo et al. 2011, Baldick 2012). A string of recent papers has
added nuances to this view by including considerations of output variability. Al-Gwaiz et al.
(2016) show that ignoring such operational factors may overstate the competitiveness of a
spot market, as producers may exploit their competitors’ operational constraints in their
bidding strategies, and Sunar and Birge (2019) ﬁnd that renewables may even increase
power prices if the system-operator imposes penalties that reduce quantities of power
sold to the market in the face of intermittent output. Relatedly, Twomey and Neuhoﬀ

6
Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
(2010) show that incumbent conventional producers’ bidding in spot and forward markets
overstates the price peaks and troughs caused by intermittency and their market power
may hence reduce the proﬁtability of wind generators. Complementing this literature,
we show how the variability of renewable output changes the merit-order eﬀect through
forward-market hedging, potentially causing prices to increase with renewable capacity.
The mechanism behind these ﬁndings results from our model combining hedging in the
forward market and producer market power. More speciﬁcally, including both these features
brings together two main rationales for electricity forward trading—hedging and strategic
commitment—previously identiﬁed in largely separate streams of literature. The hedging
literature is motivated by evidence for forward premia in power markets (Longstaﬀand
Wang 2004, Hadsell 2008, Bowden et al. 2009, Redl and Bunn 2013), viewing forward trad-
ing as a risk-sharing mechanism between risk-averse market participants (Bessembinder
and Lemmon 2002, Siddiqui 2003, A¨ıd et al. 2011). By contrast, the other main body of
work follows Allaz and Vila (1993) from an economic gaming perspective (Su 2007, Ke
2008, Murphy and Smeers 2010), showing how producers with market power may strate-
gically tend towards forward contracting to gain spot market share even though it reduces
prices in a form of prisoner’s dilemma, as empirically documented in the power industry
(Borenstein et al. 2002). However, this theme presumes arbitrage between the forward and
spot markets and does not therefore permit the emergence of forward premia. Literature
combining the two views is sparse: Allaz (1992) considers how strategic producers hedge
together with speculators, but does not include demand-side market participants or study
forward premia; Powell (1993) and Green (2004) study risk-neutral strategic producers
trading with retailers under diﬀerent assumptions. Our work is innovative in synthesiz-
ing the strategic and hedging perspectives to provide insights into the price impact of
increasing variable renewable power generation.
Finally, our work also links to the broader literature on commodity trading from diﬀerent
supply-chain perspectives (e.g., Wu and Kleindorfer 2005, Spinler and Huchzermeier 2006,
Dong and Liu 2007, Mendelson and Tunca 2007, Pei et al. 2011, Secomandi and Kekre
2014). This research has studied how the operational factors of production inﬂuence both
ﬁnancial contracting (Gaur and Seshadri 2005, Caldentey and Haugh 2006, Ding et al. 2007,
Chod et al. 2010) and product market competition (Babich et al. 2007, Anupindi and Jiang
2008, Deo and Corbett 2009, Tang and Kouvelis 2011), yet in largely separate streams of

Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
7
work. We combine these perspectives in analyzing the impact of technology on competition
and trading in commodity markets. Speciﬁcally, we examine how operational factors such
as yield uncertainty change the relation between ﬁrms’ ﬁnancial hedging (forward trading)
decisions and their product-market competition.
3.
Model
We investigate the impact of renewable generation capacity on power prices with a model
of power suppliers and buyers trading electricity, a homogeneous, non-storable commodity.
There is a single production period, but the product can be traded in two stages: ﬁrst in
a forward market and then in a real-time spot market. Both demand and eﬀective supply
capacity are uncertain in the forward market, but known in the spot market. Figure 1
depicts the model timeline and Table 5 in the Appendix summarizes common notation.
Figure 1
Timeline.
Forward market
Spot market
Market clears at zero net
contract supply, price pf
Retail demand θ and renewable
supply yield ξ realized
Market clears by matching
supply and demand at price ps
Distributions of retail demand θ and
renewable supply yield ξ known.
Conventional
producers choose
production qP i, wind
producers produce
ξkW i
Retailers and
industrial consumers
procure their demand
Conventional
producers select
forward positions fP i
Retailers select
forward positions
fRi
Conventional producers
have market power
(Cournot);
other participants are
price taking
3.1.
Supply and demand
Demand. We divide electricity demand into two classes, inelastic and elastic, which we
label retailers and industrial consumers. We make this distinction to capture the increasing
heterogeneity in power consumers: While most small (e.g., residential) consumers tradi-
tionally purchase electricity from retailers at a ﬁxed unit price, an increasing number of
consumers, such as some industrial users, have the capacity to respond to real-time prices
either through retailers or by trading directly in the wholesale market. There are NR
(r)etailers who procure power from the wholesale market and sell it to ﬁnal consumers

8
Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
for a ﬁxed price pR.3 This demand is inelastic: Facing the price pR, the consumers do not
react to wholesale prices in the short term. The realized demand for retailer i is θRi and
the sum of these demands is θ. There is also an elastic demand component representing
an aggregation of consumers who are able to respond to real-time prices; the (i)ndustrial
demand is DI = a −ps, where ps is the spot price. These retail (inelastic) and industrial
(elastic) components aim to capture the diversity of power demand; we note that these
labels are simple euphemisms and do not imply that all industrial consumers in reality are
elastic, nor that all retail customers are inelastic as smart meters are adopted.
Supply. There are two generation technologies in the market, corresponding to conven-
tional thermal (gas) producers and renewable (wind) producers. The conventional produc-
ers have market power, which we capture through duopoly Cournot competition. Each of
the two conventional (p)roducers i has a linear production cost function C(qPi) = cqPi.4
The conventional technology is operationally reliable, in that there is no uncertainty over
its supply. There are NW equally sized (w)ind producers with total generation capacity
kW in the market, with kWi = kW
NW . These producers are price taking: While they could
potentially reduce their production to try to inﬂuence prices, small-scale renewables, even
if aggregated as virtual entities, are unlikely to act strategically. The technology has a neg-
ligible production cost: CW(qWi) = 0 for any qWi ≤kWi. Its eﬀective available generation
capacity is variable; typical average wind power availability is 20-40% (see the numerical
study calibration in §6 for more details).
This model simpliﬁes the structure of current electricity markets in that the ownership
of the new renewable assets is distinct from the conventional portfolio generators. In many
markets, much of the new renewable capacity is small-scale, partly due to subsidy incentives
for market entry; alternatively, some large e.g., oﬀshore wind projects are often set up as
separate joint ventures or as oﬀ-balance sheet special entities. Both sets of circumstances
would tend to lead the operators to behave as price-takers. We focus on separate price-
taking ownership in order to isolate the impact of operational factors on market outcomes.
The Cournot model has been used extensively in both theoretical and empirical studies
of electricity trading (e.g., Wolak and Patrick 2001, Bushnell 2003, Puller 2007, Sweeting
3 The retail market is competitive and we thus assume the number of retailers is larger than that of conventional
producers; speciﬁcally we require NR > 6 for some technical results.
4 An alternative speciﬁcation with increasing marginal cost does not alter our main insights. We assume that the
marginal cost does not exceed the retail price and demand, c ≤min{pR,a}, to guarantee some technical results.

Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
9
2007). It simpliﬁes the market setting in the sense that in many markets, producers may
oﬀer multiple price-quantity pairs to the market (e.g., Anderson and Philpott 2002, Sunar
and Birge 2019). Given our focus on insights on contracting, we focus on sequential quantity
choices, following the literature (e.g., Allaz and Vila 1993, Bushnell 2007).
3.2.
Uncertainty, risk reduction, and the forward market
Both demand and renewable supply are known in the spot market but uncertain in the
forward market. We consider aggregate demand and supply uncertainties to avoid the com-
plications of modelling ﬁrm-level distributions. The total available renewable capacity in
the spot market is ξkW, where the yield ξ is uncertain in the forward period, but resolved
before spot trading. The yield ξ is the same for each producer5 and is distributed according
to H(ξ) with range [ξ,ξ] ⊆[0,1], mean µξ, variance σ2
ξ, and third moment (unnormalized
skewness) τξ. Similarly, the total retail demand θ is known in the spot market, but only
up to a distribution G(θ) in the forward market; the retailers have equal market shares
with θRi =
θ
NR. The demand θ has support [θ,θ], mean µθ, variance σ2
θ, and third moment
(unnormalized skewness) τθ. There is no separate uncertainty in the industrial demand
component a; further, θ and ξ are independent.6 These simpliﬁcations regarding the distri-
butions allow us to develop a parsimonious model to capture the salient features of power
markets.
The producers and retailers use the forward market to hedge the uncertainty in their
spot revenues. They consider both expected proﬁts and proﬁt volatility when choosing
forward contract positions, acting as though they are risk averse; we specify their objective
functions later. The corporate-ﬁnance literature has identiﬁed several reasons for which
ﬁrms may act risk averse, including avoiding costly external ﬁnancing (Froot et al. 1993)
or expected costs of ﬁnancial distress (Smith and Stulz 1985), or reducing informational
asymmetry over risks (DeMarzo and Duﬃe 1995). In power markets, even large companies
are exposed to signiﬁcant risk from price volatility (Bessembinder and Lemmon 2002), and
risk-averse trading behavior is evidenced by the sustained and persistent forward premia
5 In other words, each producer’s output ξi is perfectly correlated with the total production ξ; the impact of imperfect
correlations on our insights is typically small.
6 We could alternatively consider both the industrial demand a and the retail demand θ resulting from a single demand
realization according to some market-size rule; this would not alter our main insights. The independence assumption
is reasonable for wind power, but less appropriate for solar power, the output of which is typically positively correlated
with daily demand peaks.

10
Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
observed in many markets (Longstaﬀand Wang 2004, Redl and Bunn 2013, Weron and
Zator 2014), implying the absence of full risk-neutral speculation by either power companies
or third parties. We hence follow the literature (e.g., Bessembinder and Lemmon 2002) in
modelling the forward market as a closed system between risk-averse suppliers and buyers
with no outside speculators. We contrast our results with risk-neutral trading in §5.2.
The conventional producers and retailers participate in the forward market, but renew-
able producers and industrial consumers do not. The demand from industrial consumers
represents an aggregation of relatively small consumers who do not trade forward.7 Renew-
able producers do not face the same incentive to commit forward as conventional producers.
With zero marginal costs, they can expect to run and achieve substantial inframarginal
rent, whilst trading forward is expensive for small players. Moreover, if they are ﬁnanced
through e.g., ﬁxed feed-in arrangements, their revenues do not reﬂect spot risk, and they
may be explicitly or implicitly excluded from the forward market. To isolate the impact of
technology from that of forward market participation, we consider the price impact of the
technology when they trade on the spot market only.8
4.
Equilibrium Analysis
We derive the equilibrium using backward induction, beginning from the spot market in
§4.1, followed by the forward equilibrium in §4.2.
The supply side of the market consists of conventional and renewable (wind) producers.
Let fPi and qPi denote the forward sales and production quantity of conventional producer
i. The forward contract quantities fPi are observable and enforceable and call for the
delivery of the corresponding amount of the commodity in the spot period; fPi > 0 denotes
producer i selling forwards (taking a short position). The renewable producers do not trade
forward and hence fWi = 0. In the spot market, the conventional producers decide the
production quantities qPi; the quantity sold in the spot market is the diﬀerence qPi −fPi,
which may be negative. The renewable producers are price taking and sell their entire
realized zero-cost production ξkWi to the market. The producers’ ex post proﬁts are
πPi =ps(qP,kW)[qPi −fPi] + pffPi −C(qPi),
(1)
7 Power retailers’ inelastic consumption necessitates hedging in the forward markets, whilst industrials may prefer
to avoid the trading cost of hedging (e.g., collateral calls), especially when they have some ﬂexibility to adjust
consumption in the spot markets. Allowing industrial consumers to trade forward does not alter our main insights.
8 The alternative speciﬁcation where renewable producers trade forward, acting similarly to the retailers in the forward
market, does not alter our main ﬁndings.

Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
11
πWi =ps(qP,kW)ξkWi,
(2)
where pf and ps are the forward and spot prices.
The demand side of the market consists of industrial consumers and retailers. The indus-
trial consumers’ aggregate elastic demand is DI = a −ps which is procured in total in the
spot market. The NR retailers may procure power in either the spot or the forward market.
They sell power to their customers at ﬁxed price pR immediately following spot procure-
ment. We let fRi denote the quantity purchased forward by retailer i, where fRi > 0 implies
the retailer buying forwards (taking a long position). The sum of these positions is fR. In
the spot market, the retailers procure the diﬀerence between their realized demand and
their forward purchase, θRi −fRi. The retailers’ ex post proﬁts are the diﬀerence between
sales revenues and procurement costs:
πRi = pRθRi −ps(θRi −fRi) −pffRi.
(3)
4.1.
Spot market
The conventional producers choose their production quantities qPi to maximize their prof-
its. The total spot-market sales quantity is
Qs = qP −fP + ξkW.
(4)
The demand-side participants are price taking and procure at the realized market price.
Total spot demand consists of both the industrial and retail demand components:
Ds = max{a −ps + θ −fR,0}.
(5)
The spot market clears at the price that equates supply (4) and demand (5) with Ds =
Qs. Since forward contracts must be in zero net supply (fP = fR), the inverse (residual)
spot demand facing the conventional producers is:
ps = max{a + θ −ξkW −qP,0}.
(6)
We focus on interior equilibria of the spot Cournot game where the reliable capacity
sets the price. A violation of this assumption in the electricity context would mean either
a demand blackout or curtailment of the renewable capacity. Avoiding blackouts is one
of the main objectives of regulators and policy-makers and they are hence rare in mature

12
Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
markets.9 The assumption of no curtailment ﬁts a present-day market setting where renew-
able production capacity is not dominant and curtailment is rare; research by the IEA
(2014) suggests that renewable capacities of up to 40% are feasible without signiﬁcant
curtailment. Assumption 1 formalizes this discussion.
Assumption 1 (No blackouts or curtailment). The conventional producers set the
price in the spot market: qP > 0 and qP + ξkW ≥θ.
With this assumption, the spot price is strictly positive and the equilibrium is given by
the conventional producers maximizing proﬁts in (1) under the inverse demand deﬁned
in (6). The following lemma shows the spot-market equilibrium given the conventional
producers’ committed forward positions.
Lemma 1 (Spot equilibrium). The spot-market equilibrium given forward positions
fPi is:
q∗
Pi = q0 + 2fPi −fPj
3
,
(7)
ps = p0 −(fPi + fPj)
3
,
(8)
and q∗
Wi = ξkWi. Here q0 := a−c+θ −ξkW and p0 := a+2c+θ −ξkW reﬂect the production
quantity and price in the absence of forward contracts.
The equilibrium demonstrates the conventional merit-order eﬀect: In the absence of
forward trading (fPi = fPj = 0), for any realization of wind output ξ (and demand θ), a
higher wind capacity kW reduces conventional producers’ production quantities and the
spot price, as evident in p0. However, the lemma also shows that the producers’ forward
commitments aﬀect spot-market outcomes. The more producer i has sold forward (fPi), the
more it will produce (q∗
Pi); its competitor’s forward sales conversely reduce its production.
Selling forward thus increases a producer’s market share, giving it a strategic “ﬁrst-mover
advantage” in the spot market. However, because of this increased production, forward
sales also reduce the spot price ps, making the market more competitive (Allaz and Vila
1993).
9 We further assume that it is not proﬁtable for a supplier to deviate to a lower quantity and only serve inelastic
demand. This could be achieved for instance through a price cap, which are common in electricity markets.

Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
13
4.2.
Forward market
In the forward market, the retailers and producers hedge to reduce the volatility in their
spot revenues. They choose forward positions to maximize their expected utility, which is
a linear combination of expected proﬁt and a penalty for proﬁt variance (following e.g.,
Bessembinder and Lemmon 2002):
U(π) = E[π] −λ
2V (π).
(9)
The parameter determines the participants’ degree of aversion to proﬁt volatility. We focus
on the case λ > 0 in the main analysis and discuss the risk-neutral case λ = 0 in §5.2. The
ﬁrms simultaneously choose forward positions anticipating their equilibrium proﬁts given
by Lemma 1 and (1) and (3), respectively. In line with the spot market, the producers
have market power, that is, they choose forward quantities taking into account the poten-
tial eﬀect on (spot and forward) market prices. The price-taking retailers hold unbiased
expectations on spot outcomes, but do not choose positions to inﬂuence prices.
Let us ﬁrst develop intuition into hedging through the retailers’ forward trading. They
select positions by maximizing the expected utility in (9) with proﬁts given in (3). The
following result shows that their forward positions consist of hedging and speculative com-
ponents.
Lemma 2 (Retailer hedging). The retailers’ total forward position is:
fR = NR
E[ps] −pf
λV (ps)
|
{z
}
Basis term
+
NR
X
i=1
−Cov(pRθRi −psθRi,ps)
V (ps)
|
{z
}
Hedging term
.
(10)
The basis term in the forward positions represents the retailers’ incentive to speculate
on the forward market: If the forward price is lower than the expected spot price, the
retailers will procure more forward to beneﬁt from this basis. The lower the weight λ they
place on reducing spot revenue variance, the larger the risk they are willing to take on
spot-forward price diﬀerences. The hedging term, on the other hand, reﬂects the retailers’
spot procurement risk, that is, the covariance of the spot price and revenues in the absence
of forward trading. The spot price variance V (ps) moderates both the basis and hedging
terms: A highly variable price increases the risk of committing to a large forward position.
The producers similarly maximize their expected utility, and the forward market clears
at zero net contract supply fP = fR. The following theorem characterizes the equilibrium.

14
Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
Theorem 1 (Forward-spot equilibrium). The equilibrium is as follows:10
q∗
Pi = q0
3 + ω
3ν ,
f ∗
Pi = ω
ν ,
(11)
ps = p0
3 −2ω
3ν ,
pf = af −2bfω
ν
,
(12)
where q0 = a −c + θ −ξkW, p0 = a + 2c + θ −ξkW, and
ω =9E[q0] + 2λ
 2E[q0](σ2
θ + k2
Wσ2
ξ) + (τθ −k3
Wτξ)

[Producer incentives]
+ 9λ
NR
 (E[p0] + µθ −3pR)σ2
θ + µθk2
Wσ2
ξ + τθ

[Retailer incentives]
(13)
ν =45 + 8λ
 σ2
θ + k2
Wσ2
ξ

+ 27λ
NR
 2σ2
θ + k2
Wσ2
ξ

(14)
af =E[p0]
3
+
λ
9NR
 (E[p0] + µθ −3pR)σ2
θ + µθk2
Wσ2
ξ + τθ

(15)
bf =1
3 +
λ
9NR
 2σ2
θ + k2
Wσ2
ξ

.
(16)
The equilibrium reﬁnes our understanding of how renewable capacity kW aﬀects the spot
power price ps. The current realization of available renewable capacity reduces the spot
price in the term p0 by ξkW, displacing gas production through the conventional merit-
order eﬀect. But the spot price now also depends on kW through the producers’ forward
positions f ∗
Pi. The reason is our model including both risk hedging in the forward market
and producer market power, or more speciﬁcally combining the hedging (Bessembinder
and Lemmon 2002) and strategic (Allaz and Vila 1993) rationales for forward trading. By
the hedging rationale, uncertainty over spot renewable output (its variance and skewness)
changes hedging quantities in the forward market. By the strategic rationale, the more
producers trade forward, the higher their implied spot production commitments in Lemma
1, and the lower the spot price. Uncertainty over renewable output thus feeds back to
the spot price through hedging and strategic forward commitments. More speciﬁcally,
the expression ω in f ∗
Pi captures how both producers’ and retailers’ hedging incentives
(the latter in Lemma 2) inﬂuence the spot price through this mechanism. The expression
ν conversely moderates forward trading, reﬂecting the risk of committing to a forward
position, or eﬀectively the elasticities of the participants’ hedging incentives. Besides the
10 Assumption 1 requires that production covers at least the inelastic demand. This holds when θ ≤2q∗
P i + ξkW . Let
us assume conservatively that ξ = 0. Then we need νθ ≤2(ν(a−c)+ω) = 2(a−c)ν +2ω. This constraint holds unless
θ and µθ and kW are very large compared to a. We also assume that q∗
P i ≥0 for any values of θ and ξ. This constraint
essentially requires renewable capacity to be low enough so that it never needs to be curtailed.

Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
15
conventional merit-order eﬀect based on current renewable output ξ, the spot price hence
depends on the distribution of renewable output when power is traded forward.
The forward price pf is determined by hedging incentives through the positions f ∗
Pi and
the eﬀective forward demand from the retailers, characterized by the terms af and bf.
Reﬂecting the relative hedging needs of the parties, the forward price is generally diﬀerent
from the expected spot price, giving rise to a forward premium. We next investigate the
price implications in more detail.
5.
Implications for Power Markets
In this section, we use the equilibrium to derive insights into wholesale electricity pricing.
We ﬁrst revisit the conventional expectation that replacing fossil fuel generation by renew-
ables will simply reduce wholesale prices through the merit-order eﬀect (§5.1). Besides
renewable generation, we study the price impact of risk-neutral hedging (§5.2), identify
novel demand-side drivers of power prices (§5.3), and investigate reasons behind empirical
contradictions over the inﬂuence of market fundamentals on forward premia (§5.4).
5.1.
How does renewable capacity aﬀect electricity prices?
The conventional merit-order eﬀect of increasing renewable capacity kW is to reduce the
expected spot price E[ps] by displacing conventional generation. Theorem 1 shows that
besides this eﬀect, renewables also aﬀect the spot price through forward trading. We now
investigate whether and how this forward eﬀect changes power prices. We will develop
intuition by ﬁrst studying this eﬀect separately before considering renewables’ total price
impact. The next result shows that the forward eﬀect from additional renewable capacity
may be either positive or negative, that is, it may correspondingly either mitigate or
reinforce the conventional merit-order eﬀect.
Proposition 1 (Forward eﬀect on the spot price). Denote by hf := −
∂
∂kW
2ω
3ν the
forward eﬀect of additional renewable capacity kW on the expected spot price E[ps]. There
exist thresholds kW ≥kW ≥0 such that hf ≥0 when kW ≤kW or kW ≥kW. Moreover, if the
demand distribution is not too positively skewed, τθ ≤τ θ (where τ θ > 0), then there exists
a threshold µξ > 0 such that hf < 0 for kW < kW < kW for mean renewable output µξ ≤µξ.
We ﬁrst discuss the intuition behind these results and then elaborate on their tech-
nical details. The proposition reﬂects how renewable capacity aﬀects forward trading in
three ways. First, forward trading mitigates the merit-order eﬀect: As renewables displace

16
Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
conventional producers in spot trading, the producers accordingly reduce their forward
positions in anticipation, and these lower commitments lead to higher prices. When renew-
able capacity is low (kW ≤kW), this impact dominates and the forward eﬀect from addi-
tional renewable capacity mitigates the merit-order eﬀect. Second, as renewable capacity
increases, its variable output plays a larger role in its price impact. The resulting higher
spot-market volatility ﬁrst increases hedging on the forward market. In particular, if the
mean renewable availability µξ is not too high relative to this uncertainty, forward volumes
increase for moderate values of renewable capacity (kW < kW < kW), reinforcing the price
reductions from the conventional merit-order eﬀect. However, the uncertainty over renew-
able output also increases the risk of committing to a forward position and being caught
with an unfavorably high commitment in spot trading. When renewable capacity is high
(kW ≥kW), its variability hence conversely reduces forward trading, resulting in a positive
price impact and counteracting the conventional merit-order eﬀect.
Proposition 1 thus reﬁnes our understanding of the merit-order eﬀect: It establishes the
existence of thresholds (kW,kW) such that the taking into account forward trading miti-
gates the conventional eﬀect for high enough and low enough values of renewable capacity,
as well as a suﬃcient condition for the eﬀect to be reinforced between the thresholds when
the mean renewable output µξ is not too high. The condition requires that the distribution
of demand is not highly positively skewed, which is generally true in power markets since
the distribution of demand is symmetric (see §6.1 for more discussion). While we cannot
obtain closed-form values for the thresholds, we provide closed-form approximations for
kW,kW based on model parameters in the proof of the proposition in the Electronic Com-
panion. We quantify and discuss the thresholds, as well as those derived in the next results,
in the numerical study in §6.
Renewables’ total price impact combines the conventional merit-order eﬀect from higher
expected generation and the forward eﬀect from the hedging of its output variability. The
next result shows that taking into account this hedging may overturn the conventional
expectation that additional renewable capacity always reduces power prices.
Proposition 2 (Renewables’ price impact). Denote by CVξ = σξ
µξ and τ N
ξ = τξ
σ3
ξ the
coeﬃcient of variation and (normalized) skewness of renewable output distribution. There
exists a threshold ζ > 0 such that if CVξτ N
ξ ≥ζ, then there exists a threshold k
s
W such that

Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
17
E[ps] is decreasing in kW for kW < k
s
W and increasing for kW ≥k
s
W; moreover there exists
a threshold k
f
W such that pf is increasing in kW for kW ≥k
f
W.
We ﬁrst note that if renewable output were certain, prices would always decrease with
more capacity: The forward eﬀect would simply mitigate the conventional merit-order
eﬀect through reduced forward trading, as with low capacity in Proposition 1.11 When
output is variable, the impact on the expected spot price also reﬂects the forward eﬀect.
Initially, up to moderate amounts of renewables, this eﬀect mitigates and then reinforces
the conventional merit-order eﬀect, and prices hence decrease with additional capacity.
With higher renewable capacity, however, prices may conversely increase. Speciﬁcally, if
the distribution of renewable output is positively skewed and has a high coeﬃcient of
variation, then the forward eﬀect eventually reverses the merit-order eﬀect. This is because
higher skewness and coeﬃcient of variation increase conventional producers’ risk of being
caught with an unfavorably high forward position in the spot market. As per Proposition
1, they then sharply reduce their forward trading and the lower commitments reduce power
generation and increase the spot price. For the same reason, the forward price also increases
with high enough renewable capacity.
That prices may increase with renewable capacity is particularly intriguing because it
results from the interplay of two well-known pro-competitive forces: low-cost capacity and
forward trading. Renewables are expected to reduce prices through the merit-order eﬀect,
while forward trading has been commonly encouraged by regulators for its potential in
reducing prices (as per Allaz and Vila 1993).12 However, when we take into account how
renewables’ variability aﬀects hedging, forward trading may instead lead prices to increase
with suﬃcient additional capacity.
Besides output variability, renewables’ price impact depends on interactions with other
market factors such as demand and fuel cost. The next result shows these interactions.
Proposition 3 (Market fundamentals and renewables’ spot price impact).
Table 1 displays the interactions of renewables’ spot price impact with market factors.
The proposition suggests that increasing renewable capacity may have market-speciﬁc
price eﬀects that evolve over time. Consider the expected retail power demand µθ. The
11 This scenario corresponds to increasing reliable low-cost power generation, for example nuclear power.
12 Allaz and Vila (1993) show that risk-neutral producers forward contract in equilibrium in a form of prisoner’s
dilemma, with the forward commitments leading to lower prices and hence proﬁts.

18
Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
Table 1
The impact of model parameters on the
renewable capacity’s eﬀect on the expected spot price.
a
c
µθ
σ2
θ
τθ
pR
∂E[ps]
∂kW
−+
−
+/−
+
−
+, −, and +/−indicate partial derivatives greater
than zero, less than zero, and indeterminate in sign,
respectively.
higher the demand, the more the producers will tend to increase their hedging with renew-
able capacity so as to reduce the risk in their spot sales. When demand is high, the
spot price may then decrease more with renewable capacity than when demand is low.
As expected demand may vary seasonally and exhibit time trends, this result therefore
suggests that prices would decrease more with renewables in high-demand seasons. The
opposite result holds for the marginal production cost, where prices would decrease more
under low fuel costs.
In summary, how renewable capacity aﬀects prices is more nuanced than we would
expect based on the conventional merit-order eﬀect alone when we account for forward
trading, and depends on the distribution of its output and other fundamentals. As a result,
when the amount of renewable capacity is already high, prices decrease less and may even
increase with additional capacity. This occurs in particular when the output distribution is
positively skewed: We note that positive skewness is typical for wind power output, which
ﬁts a Weibull distribution (e.g., Stevens and Smulders 1979, Yeh and Wang 2008). We
quantify and discuss these price impacts for plausible ranges of parameter values in the
numerical study in §6.
5.2.
Eﬃcient arbitrage and prices
We have so far considered a market with “ineﬃcient” arbitrage, that is, allowing a non-
zero premium between the forward and expected spot prices. While forward premia are
a common feature of present-day power markets, regulators are increasingly encouraging
trading activity through measures aimed to increase the eﬃciency of forward-market arbi-
trage, such as virtual bidding. We now study the impact of eﬃcient arbitrage on prices,
comparing the expected spot prices under risk neutrality (removing arbitrage opportuni-
ties between the forward and spot markets) and our base model.13 The following result
13 An alternative formulation could introduce additional purely speculative players acting as counter-parties to the
risk-averse producers’ and retailers’ trades. The insights from this alternative model are similar to our main results.

Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
19
shows that in the no-arbitrage equilibrium, prices always decrease with additional renew-
able capacity, but removing arbitrage opportunities has an ambiguous price impact under
increasing renewable capacity.
Proposition 4 (Price impact of eﬃcient arbitrage). Denote
by
E[ps,NA]
and
E[ps,NF] the expected spot price in the no-arbitrage equilibrium and in the equilibrium with
no forward market, respectively. Then 0 ≥
∂
∂kW E[ps,NA] ≥
∂
∂kW E[ps,NF].
Moreover, there exists a threshold k
NA
W > 0 such that
∂
∂kW (E[ps,NA]−E[ps]) ≤0 for renew-
able capacity kW ≥k
NA
W . If demand variability is low (σ2
θ ≤σ2
θ, τθ = 0), then
∂
∂kW (E[ps,NA]−
E[ps]) > 0 for kW < k
NA
W .
The ﬁrst part of the proposition shows that forward trading mitigates the conventional
merit-order eﬀect under eﬃcient arbitrage: The producers’ anticipated lower average spot
sales reduce their forward quantities, weakening the forward eﬀect on the spot price. Thus,
while prices decrease with renewable capacity, the reduction is mitigated compared to
market with no forward trading. The second part of the proposition compares renewables’
price impact under the no-arbitrage equilibrium to those in our main model (Theorem 1).
When renewable capacity is high, the price impact of additional capacity is more negative
in the no-arbitrage equilibrium. This is because in the main model, as per Propositions 1
and 2, producers’ forward-market hedging is reduced with suﬃcient additional capacity,
causing prices to decrease less or even increase. For moderate capacities, by contrast,
Proposition 1 implies that the price impact tends to be more negative in the main model, as
renewables’ variable output increases hedging. The ﬁnal part of Proposition 4 establishes a
condition for this eﬀect to be monotone below the threshold k
NA
W : When demand variability
is low, prices ﬁrst decrease less and then more in the no-arbitrage equilibrium than in the
main model. Together, these results suggest that a market with risk-neutral trading may
tend to have higher prices for low amounts of renewable capacity (as hedging over demand
uncertainty is removed too), and conversely lower prices for high amounts of renewables.
We discuss these price implications calibrated to market data in the numerical study (§6.4).
5.3.
Demand-side determinants and other price implications
Besides supply-side price impacts from the distribution of renewable capacity, our analysis
predicts new eﬀects among fundamental factors inﬂuencing power prices. The empirical

20
Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
literature on the determinants of electricity prices has focused on immediate market funda-
mentals such as production cost and realized demand and supply. Based on the equilibrium
in Theorem 1, this set of price drivers should be extended to include new factors. The fol-
lowing result summarizes these ﬁndings: In particular, our analysis predicts a new direction
of causality in the supply-chain determinants of power prices.
Proposition 5 (Market fundamentals’ price impact). The impact of market fun-
damentals on the spot price is summarized in Table 2.
Table 2
The impact of market fundamentals on the spot price.
Eﬀect
a
c
θ
µθ
σ2
θ
τθ
pR
ps – Spot eﬀect (through p0)
+
+
+
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
ps – Forward eﬀect (through ω/ν)
−
+
N/A
−
+/−
−
+
E[ps] – Total eﬀect
+
+
N/A
+
+/−
−
+
+, −, and +/−indicate partial derivatives greater than zero, less than zero, and inde-
terminate in sign, respectively.
The proposition shows that the upstream wholesale spot price increases with the down-
stream retail price pR. We would normally expect wholesale prices to feed forward into
retail prices, but here retail prices feed back to spot prices.14 A high retail price reduces
retailers’ need to hedge and hence reduces trading volumes. With lower forward sales,
producers act less competitively on the spot market and the spot price increases. A (non-
)competitive retail market therefore contributes to a (non-)competitive wholesale market.
The distribution of demand similarly moves prices through forward commitments: Positive
(un-normalized) skewness, for example, increases forward trading as participants seek to
hedge against spikes, and hence reduces the spot price. Thus, taking into account forward-
market hedging predicts new demand-side drivers of electricity spot prices: Without both
motivations, neither the retail price level nor variance and skewness of demand would aﬀect
the wholesale spot price through the forward market.
5.4.
Demand variability and forward premia
Given the prevalence of forward trading, electricity traders and regulators closely scrutinize
the determinants of forward premia, deﬁned as the diﬀerence between forward and expected
spot prices: ψ := pf −E[ps]. While forward premia are persistent and systematic, empirical
evidence on their determinants is conﬂicting (e.g., Redl and Bunn 2013). Of particular
interest is demand variability as the source of forward premia in markets with limited
14 We consider the retail price as exogenous; the former eﬀect would naturally also occur if we endogenized it.

Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
21
supply variability. Sign reversals in premia are commonly observed as day-night and winter-
summer switches (Bunn and Chen 2013), but the intuition for such reversals is not well
explained by existing theory (e.g., Bessembinder and Lemmon 2002). The equilibrium in
Theorem 1 suggests a potential reason for this controversy: The impact of determinants
such as demand variance on premia should be examined not only through their direct
eﬀects but also through interactions with other factors.
Proposition 6 (Demand variance and the forward premium). The
forward
premium ψ and the impact of demand variance on it are increasing in c. Comparative
statics on the premium are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3
The eﬀect of market fundamentals on the forward premium,
and their interaction eﬀects with demand variance on the premium.
a
c
µθ
σ2
θ
τθ
pR
kW
µξ
σ2
ξ
τξ
ψ
+/−+
+
+/−
+
−
+/−+/−+/−
+
∂ψ
∂σ2
θ
+/−+
+
+/−
−
−
+/−+/−+/−
+
The proposition suggests that demand variance tends to amplify the forward premium,
regardless of its sign. The forward premium reﬂects the balance of the forward market: A
positive (negative) premium is the result of the demand (supply) side being more willing
to pay to reduce its risk. Thus, a high marginal cost c increases retailers’ hedging needs
relative to those of producers, increasing the forward premium. Demand variance adds to
this eﬀect by magnifying the participants’ hedging incentives: The sign of the main eﬀect is
the same as that of the cross-eﬀect. These results are consistent with evidence of day-night
and winter-summer switches in forward premia (Bunn and Chen 2013), and, more broadly,
such interactions may partly explain the lack of consensus in empirical evidence on the
impact of fundamentals on forward premia. Our numerical study suggests that similar also
occur with variable renewable capacity kW.
6.
Numerical Study
In this section, we quantify the impact of increasing wind capacity on power prices using
data from Denmark and the UK. After describing parameter calibration (§6.1), we discuss
the price impact of increasing capacity (§6.2), its dependence on the nature of the wind
resource (§6.3), and its interaction with market fundamentals (§6.4).

22
Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
6.1.
Parameter calibration
We used data from Denmark and the UK to calibrate the model to a representative mar-
ket setting capturing plausible parameter ranges. We estimated the distribution of wind
power output using data from Denmark for 2016-2018 (from Energinet). We calculated the
mean, standard deviation, and third moment (unnormalized skewness) of daily wind power
output, normalized by monthly capacity, which gives baseline values of µξ = 0.296,σξ =
0.197,τξ = 0.0049. We discuss diﬀerent scenarios for wind output variability below.
We divide power demand into industrial and residential components based on data from
the UK Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) categorizing
power demand into industrial, commercial, and domestic consumption, which are roughly
equal in size (see Chart 5.5 in UK BEIS Energy Trends: Electricity, March 2019). We
assume that most domestic consumption is inelastic and industrial and commercial demand
mostly elastic, and therefore set µθ equal to one half of a. We set the baseline demand
considering a market with 400TWh yearly electricity consumption, corresponding to an
average of about 46GW. We let a = 60,µθ = 30, so that the average total conventional
production with zero renewable capacity in our model is close to qP = 46.
The variability in power demand is typically symmetric around the mean when adjusted
for seasonality, and commonly modelled using the Normal distribution (e.g., Paatero and
Lund 2006). Given this symmetry, we set τθ = 0. We estimated the coeﬃcient of variation
of daily weekday power demand from Great Britain market data (Elexon) for 2016-2018.
Quarterly values for the coeﬃcient of variation of demand ranged between [0.02,0.06] with
an average of 0.04. In our model, demand uncertainty is focused on the retail demand; here
we normalize the uncertainty over the entire demand and let σθ = 3. For fuel costs, the
UK BEIS estimates the cost of generating CCGT gas power at around c = 30 (£/MWh,
UK BEIS Electricity Generation Costs, 2016). In line with the literature (Bessembinder
and Lemmon 2002), we set the baseline value of risk aversion λ = 0.2 and the number of
retailers NR = 20 to capture a competitive market. To ensure the retail price will remain
realistic as we change the capacity mix, we let the retailers set a constant markup of 5%
over the (expected) wholesale power price, with the retail price pR varying with the amount
of wind capacity in the market.15
15 Whether the retail price is constant or varies with capacity has little eﬀect on the main numerical results.

Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
23
6.2.
Wind power variability and price impact
We ﬁrst consider the impact of increasing renewable capacity on power prices. In Proposi-
tion 2 we saw that wind power initially reduces prices, but may eventually increase them
depending on the coeﬃcient of variation and skewness of its output distribution. To assess
the potential scope of this variability, we estimated quarterly values for the distribution
parameters in the data, which ranged from mean µξ ∈[0.22,0.38], standard deviation σξ ∈
[0.15,0.25] and third moment τξ ∈[0.0013,0.0084]. To investigate the price impact of wind
capacity, we generated three scenarios of increasing coeﬃcient of variation and skewness,
the factors identiﬁed in Proposition 2. In order to show the impact of these factors, we
vary µξ and τξ of renewable output to change the coeﬃcient of variation and skewness,
respectively, while keeping its variance constant at its baseline value.
Figure 2
Equilibrium outcomes as function of wind capacity.
Note: Low: µξ = 0.35,σξ = 0.2,τξ = 0.0; Baseline: µξ = 0.3,σξ = 0.2,τξ = 0.005; High: µξ = 0.25,σξ = 0.2,τξ = 0.008.
The results in Figure 2 broadly conﬁrm the insights in Propositions 1 and 2 under the
three scenarios.16 The top left panel shows how increasing renewable capacity aﬀects the
expected spot price through forward trading; the corresponding average wind power share
of total generation depicted in the bottom left ﬁgure. The ﬁgure shows that the price
impact of accounting for forward trading is economically signiﬁcant. Moreover, it illustrates
16 We have calibrated the capacity increase such that Assumption 1 is not violated, based on estimated supply and
demand ranges ξ = 0,ξ = 0.7 and θ = µθ −3σ2
θ,θ = µθ + 3σ2
θ.

24
Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
the insights from Proposition 1: The (marginal) forward eﬀect from additional renewable
capacity—the change in the curves—is similar in all scenarios. As per the proposition,
the forward eﬀect is ﬁrst positive (the curves increase), counteracting the conventional
merit-order eﬀect. For moderate capacities, the merit-order eﬀect is conversely ampliﬁed
as hedging volumes increase, before being ﬁnally mitigated again as commitment to high
forward volumes becomes riskier. The thresholds from Proposition 1 corresponding to the
maxima and minima in the ﬁgure, kW ∈[2.7,3.8] and kW ∈[34.2,35.2], are very similar
across the scenarios. The robustness of the proposition’s insights is further demonstrated
by the threshold µξ ∈[0.6,0.7] for the forward eﬀect to be negative for midrange values of
kW, covering any plausible wind output variation.
Moving clockwise in the panels, the expected spot price initially decreases with more
wind capacity in all scenarios, but ﬂattens with higher capacities due to the positive forward
eﬀect. As predicted by Proposition 2, the conventional merit-order eﬀect is reversed in
the high-variability scenario for capacities above a threshold (kW ≥k
s
W ≈76). We note
that the condition for the expected spot price to ﬁrst decrease and then increase with
renewable capacity in Proposition 2 (CV N
ξ τ N
ξ ≥ζ ≈0.34) is satisﬁed for the high-variability
and baseline scenarios (where prices ﬂatten; they would increase above k
s
W ≈126), but not
the low-variability scenario. Also per Proposition 2, the top right panel shows that the
forward price increases for suﬃciently high capacities (kW ≥k
f
W ∈[60,70]) in all scenarios.
As a result, the average price over the two markets in the bottom right panel also ﬁrst
decreases and then increases with wind capacity. The results further reveal that the forward
price is more likely to increase with high renewable capacity: Even though the producers
seek to reduce their positions as they are displaced from the spot market, the retailers are
still willing to pay to hedge their spot revenues against wind variability, hence increasing
the forward premium in the bottom middle panel. Thus, spot-market variability caused
by higher wind capacity may lead to sign reversals in the premium, similarly to demand
variability in §5.4.
6.3.
Wind resource types
We next examine whether and how the price impact of wind power depends on the resource
being located onshore or oﬀshore. The resource type inﬂuences the variability of wind
output: Table 4 shows that the Danish wind output from oﬀshore sources is on average
higher and less uncertain (lower coeﬃcient of variation) compared to onshore. Figure 3

Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
25
shows the price impact of wind power under onshore and oﬀshore output scenarios. The
merit-order eﬀect generally leads to lower prices when wind power is generated oﬀshore due
to its higher average output. As in the previous scenarios, the hedging of wind variability
ﬁrst reinforces and then reduces or even reverses the price impact, with forward prices
in particular increasing as retailers seek to hedge against the higher spot volatility while
conventional producers’ sales are reduced. Notably, the latter eﬀect is strongest under
oﬀshore generation, where higher renewable capacity magniﬁes this mechanism, resulting
in a larger forward premium. These results thus support the preceding ﬁndings: When we
account for forward trading, renewables initially reduce power prices more than we would
expect based on the conventional merit-order eﬀect alone, but less with higher penetration,
with forward prices in particular increasing as hedging is reduced. We note that we would
observe similar trends for seasonal wind output: Danish wind output is higher in winter
compared to summer, resulting in a pattern similar to oﬀshore and onshore.
Table 4
The distribution of daily
wind power output for diﬀerent resource
types, Denmark 2016-18.
µξ
σξ
τξ
Total
0.296
0.197
0.0048
Onshore
0.256
0.187
0.0056
Oﬀshore
0.423
0.247
0.0037
Figure 3
Wind price impact for diﬀerent resource types.
6.4.
Interactions with market fundamentals
We next investigate how market fundamentals interact with renewable capacity. To illus-
trate the ﬁndings in Proposition 3, we vary a single parameter while keeping others at
their baseline levels. The ﬁrst column (a) of Figure 4 shows the impact of varying marginal
cost c on prices: As per Proposition 3, the higher the cost, the more positive the eﬀect of

26
Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
renewable capacity on prices, causing prices to diverge with higher capacity in column (a).
The impact of retail demand is the opposite: In column (b), higher demand leads to higher
prices, but renewable capacity mitigates this impact. Finally, column (c) shows the impact
of risk aversion on prices. The ﬁgure suggests that a market with no-arbitrage trading
(λ = 0) may have higher prices. With no renewables, risk aversion leads the parties to hedge
more, and the increased forward sales reduce prices. As renewable capacity increases, hedg-
ing ﬁrst increases and then decreases, bringing prices closer to the no-arbitrage benchmark,
as per Proposition 4. However, even with high renewable capacity, prices are still below the
no-arbitrage level, and eﬃcient arbitrage by the participants would lead to higher prices.
Figure 4
Wind price impact and market fundamentals.
(a) Marginal cost c
(b) Mean retail demand µθ
(c) Risk aversion λ
7.
Conclusions
Renewable power generation is expected to reduce wholesale power prices through the
merit-order eﬀect of displacing conventional capacity. However, we have seen that renew-
ables also alter pricing through the hedging of their variability in the forward market. With

Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
27
moderate renewable capacity, additional hedging reinforces the merit-order eﬀect, reduc-
ing prices further. With higher capacity—and when output variability is high—hedging is
instead reduced, and prices decrease less or may even increase with additional capacity. We
thus demonstrate an apparent paradox in power pricing: Combining two pro-competitive
forces, forward trading and low-cost competition from wind power, may cause prices to
increase when we take into account the variability of the wind resource.
The merit-order eﬀect forms the underpinning for medium-term price forecasting and
investment and policy analysis in the power industry, where power-plant investment deci-
sions typically rely on 15-20 year price forecasts based on the conventional eﬀect. Our
results show that such basis for investment valuations may be ﬂawed, and the underlying
pricing models should be updated to include forward trading and the variability of renew-
able power, calibrated to speciﬁc markets. For policy-makers and regulators, it is equally
important to update pricing models for setting long-term subsidies and monitoring the
eﬀects of market concentration. For example, the design of subsidy policies that may be
tied to either spot or forward prices (e.g., contract-for-diﬀerence reference prices) should
consider the potential divergence of these prices as renewable capacity grows.
Our ﬁndings help reconcile contradicting observed pricing phenomena while suggesting
new empirical research questions. We provide a justiﬁcation for observed reversals in for-
ward premia based on interaction eﬀects between market fundamentals. Our results predict
that the price impact from wind power may outpace the conventional merit-order eﬀect for
moderate capacity but fall behind it when capacity grows. Markets relying on oﬀshore wind
compared to onshore are likely to experience stronger variations of these eﬀects, which
may vary seasonally too. Finally, we provide predictions on how renewables’ price impact
depends on varying market characteristics such as fuel costs and demand.
Our results suggest several directions for future work. First, our model can be extended
to multiple forward-trading periods in order to contrast against Allaz and Vila’s (1993)
inﬂuential results showing that increasing the number of trading periods causes both spot
and forward prices to converge to marginal costs when players are risk neutral. Given the
nuance our ﬁndings oﬀer to the impact of forward trading in a single trading period, fur-
ther work is needed to understand the limits of pro-competitive forward trading. Another
relevant extension would be allowing curtailment of renewable power to investigate pricing

28
Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
under long-run projections of renewable generation. Modelling curtailment in an imper-
fect market would require a complementarity approach (e.g. Hobbs 2001, Bushnell et al.
2008, Shanbhag et al. 2011). We believe that our main insights—the forward adjustment of
the merit-order eﬀect and, more speciﬁcally, variability leading to higher (or less reduced)
prices—would be robust to such extensions. We have, moreover, focused solely on intermit-
tency and ignored, for example, so-called “ramping” constraints, which would also aﬀect
hedging decisions. Finally, our model could be extended to consider the potential eﬀects
of strategic forward trading on congestion in power networks with locational pricing, as
applied in many US markets. Under locational pricing, participants may make forward bids
to aﬀect congestion in the spot market, which may mitigate the pro-competitive impacts
of forward trading (Kamat and Oren 2004), as may renewable uncertainty in our model.
Overall, our results suggest that the price implications of long-term decarbonization poli-
cies should be evaluated accounting for technological factors and forward markets.
References
Aﬂaki, Sam, Serguei Netessine. 2017. Strategic investment in renewable energy sources: The eﬀect of supply
intermittency. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 19(3) 489–507.
A¨ıd, Ren´e, Gilles Chemla, Arnaud Porchet, Nizar Touzi. 2011. Hedging and vertical integration in electricity
markets. Management Science 57(8) 1438–1452.
A¨ıd, Ren´e, Pierre Gruet, Huyˆen Pham. 2016. An optimal trading problem in intraday electricity markets.
Mathematics and Financial Economics 10(1) 49–85.
Al-Gwaiz, Majid, Xiuli Chao, Owen Q Wu. 2016. Understanding how generation ﬂexibility and renewable
energy aﬀect power market competition.
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 19(1)
114–131.
Alizamir, Saed, Francis de V´ericourt, Peng Sun. 2016. Eﬃcient feed-in-tariﬀpolicies for renewable energy
technologies. Operations Research 64(1) 52–66.
Allaz, B., J. L. Vila. 1993. Cournot competition, futures markets and eﬃciency. Journal of Economic Theory
59(1) 1–16.
Allaz, Blaise. 1992.
Oligopoly, uncertainty and strategic forward transactions.
International Journal of
Industrial Organization 10(2) 297–308.
Anderson, E. J., A. B. Philpott. 2002. Using supply functions for oﬀering generation into an electricity
market. Operations Research 50(3) 477–489.
Anupindi, Ravi, Li Jiang. 2008. Capacity investment under postponement strategies, market competition,
and demand uncertainty. Management Science 54(11) 1876–1890.

Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
29
Babich, Volodymyr, Apostolos N Burnetas, Peter H Ritchken. 2007. Competition and diversiﬁcation eﬀects
in supply chains with supplier default risk. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 9(2)
123–146.
Baldick, Ross. 2012. Wind and energy markets: A case study of Texas. IEEE Systems Journal 6(1) 27–34.
Bessembinder, Hendrik, Michael L Lemmon. 2002. Equilibrium pricing and optimal hedging in electricity
forward markets. The Journal of Finance 57(3) 1347–1382.
Bloomberg. 2018. China steps up its push into clean energy.
Boomsma, Trine Krogh, Nigel Meade, Stein-Erik Fleten. 2012. Renewable energy investments under diﬀerent
support schemes: A real options approach. European Journal of Operational Research 220(1) 225–237.
Borenstein, S., J. B. Bushnell, F. A. Wolak. 2002. Measuring market ineﬃciencies in California’s restructured
wholesale electricity market. The American Economic Review 92(5) 1376–1405.
Borenstein, Severin. 2001. The trouble with electricity markets (and some solutions). University Of California
Energy Institute POWER Working Paper PWP-081.
Bowden, Nicholas, Su Hu, James Payne. 2009. Day-ahead premiums on the Midwest ISO. The Electricity
Journal 22(2) 64–73.
Bunn, Derek W, Dipeng Chen. 2013. The forward premium in electricity futures. Journal of Empirical
Finance 23 173–186.
Bushnell, J. 2003. A mixed complementarity model of hydrothermal electricity competition in the western
United States. Operations Research 51(1) 80–93.
Bushnell, J. 2007. Oligopoly equilibria in electricity contract markets. Journal of Regulatory Economics
32(3) 225–245.
Bushnell, James B, Erin T Mansur, Celeste Saravia. 2008. Vertical arrangements, market structure, and
competition: An analysis of restructured us electricity markets. American Economic Review 98(1)
237–266.
Caldentey, Ren´e, Martin Haugh. 2006. Optimal control and hedging of operations in the presence of ﬁnancial
markets. Mathematics of Operations Research 31(2) 285–304.
Carrasco, Juan Manuel, Leopoldo Garc´ıa Franquelo, Jan T et al. Bialasiewicz. 2006. Power-electronic sys-
tems for the grid integration of renewable energy sources: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics 53(4) 1002–1016.
Chod, Jiri, Nils Rudi, Jan A Van Mieghem. 2010. Operational ﬂexibility and ﬁnancial hedging: Complements
or substitutes? Management Science 56(6) 1030–1045.
DeCarolis, Joseph F, David W Keith. 2006. The economics of large-scale wind power in a carbon constrained
world. Energy Policy 34(4) 395–410.

30
Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
DeMarzo, Peter M, Darrell Duﬃe. 1995. Corporate incentives for hedging and hedge accounting. Review of
Financial Studies 8(3) 743–771.
Deo, Sarang, Charles J Corbett. 2009. Cournot competition under yield uncertainty: The case of the US
inﬂuenza vaccine market. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 11(4) 563–576.
Ding, Qing, Lingxiu Dong, Panos Kouvelis. 2007. On the integration of production and ﬁnancial hedging
decisions in global markets. Operations Research 55(3) 470–489.
Dong, Lingxiu, Hong Liu. 2007. Equilibrium forward contracts on nonstorable commodities in the presence
of market power. Operations Research 55(1) 128–145.
Drake, David F, Stefan Spinler. 2013. OM Forum – Sustainable operations management: An enduring stream
or a passing fancy? Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 15(4) 689–700.
European Commission. 2018. Renewable energy. Retrieved 11 November, 2018.
Froot, Kenneth A, David S Scharfstein, Jeremy C Stein. 1993. Risk management: Coordinating corporate
investment and ﬁnancing policies. The Journal of Finance 48(5) 1629–1658.
Gaur, Vishal, Sridhar Seshadri. 2005. Hedging inventory risk through market instruments. Manufacturing
& Service Operations Management 7(2) 103–120.
Green, Richard J. 2004. Retail competition and electricity contracts. CMI Working Paper 33, University of
Cambridge.
Hadsell, Lester. 2008. Day-ahead premiums on the new england iso. The Electricity Journal 21(4) 51–57.
Hobbs, B. F. 2001. Linear complementarity models of Nash-Cournot competition in bilateral and POOLCO
power markets. Power Systems, IEEE Transactions on 16(2) 194–202.
Hu, Shanshan, Gilvan C Souza, Mark E Ferguson, Wenbin Wang. 2015. Capacity investment in renewable
energy technology with supply intermittency: Data granularity matters!
Manufacturing & Service
Operations Management 17(4) 480–494.
IEA. 2014. The power of transformation: Wind, sun and the economics of ﬂexible power systems.
Jha, Akshaya, Frank A Wolak. 2013. Testing for market eﬃciency with transactions costs: An application
to convergence bidding in wholesale electricity markets. Working Paper, Stanford University.
Kamat, Rajnish, Shmuel S Oren. 2004. Two-settlement systems for electricity markets under network uncer-
tainty and market power. Journal of Regulatory Economics 25(1) 5–37.
Ke, Xuqing. 2008. Cost asymmetry, forward trading, and eﬃciency. Working paper, University of Texas at
Austin.
Ketterer, Janina C. 2014. The impact of wind power generation on the electricity price in germany. Energy
Economics 44 270–280.
K¨ok, A G¨urhan, Kevin Shang, S¸afak Y¨ucel. 2016. Impact of electricity pricing policies on renewable energy
investments and carbon emissions. Management Science 64(1) 131–148.

Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
31
Longstaﬀ, Francis A, Ashley W Wang. 2004. Electricity forward prices: a high-frequency empirical analysis.
The Journal of Finance 59(4) 1877–1900.
Mendelson, Haim, Tunay I Tunca. 2007. Strategic spot trading in supply chains. Management Science 53(5)
742–759.
Murphy, F., Y. Smeers. 2010. On the impact of forward markets on investments in oligopolistic markets
with reference to electricity. Operations Research 58(3) 515–528.
National Conference of State Legislatures. 2018. State renewable portfolio standards and goals. Retrieved 8
November, 2018.
Ofgem. 2009. Liquidity in the Great Britan wholesale electricity markets. Oﬃce of Gas and Electricity
Markets.
Paatero, Jukka V, Peter D Lund. 2006. A model for generating household electricity load proﬁles. Interna-
tional Journal of Energy Research 30(5) 273–290.
Pei, Pamela Pen-Erh, David Simchi-Levi, Tunay I Tunca. 2011.
Sourcing ﬂexibility, spot trading, and
procurement contract structure. Operations Research 59(3) 578–601.
Peura, Heikki, Derek W Bunn. 2015.
Dynamic pricing of peak production.
Operations Research 63(6)
1262–1279.
Powell, Andrew. 1993.
Trading forward in an imperfect market: the case of electricity in Britain.
The
Economic Journal 444–453.
Puller, S. L. 2007. Pricing and ﬁrm conduct in California’s deregulated electricity market. The Review of
Economics and Statistics 89(1) 75–87.
Redl, Christian, Derek W Bunn. 2013.
Determinants of the premium in forward contracts.
Journal of
Regulatory Economics 43(1) 90–111.
Secomandi, Nicola, Sunder Kekre. 2014. Optimal energy procurement in spot and forward markets. Manu-
facturing & Service Operations Management 16(2) 270–282.
Shanbhag, Uday V, Gerd Infanger, Peter W Glynn. 2011. A complementarity framework for forward con-
tracting under uncertainty. Operations Research 59(4) 810–834.
Siddiqui, Afzal S. 2003. Managing electricity reliability risk through the forward markets. Networks and
Spatial Economics 3(2) 225–263.
Sinden, Graham. 2007. Characteristics of the UK wind resource: Long-term patterns and relationship to
electricity demand. Energy Policy 35(1) 112–127.
Smith, Cliﬀord W, Rene M Stulz. 1985. The determinants of ﬁrms’ hedging policies. Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis 20(04) 391–405.
Spinler, Stefan, Arnd Huchzermeier. 2006.
The valuation of options on capacity with cost and demand
uncertainty. European Journal of Operational Research 171(3) 915–934.

32
Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
Stevens, MJM, PT Smulders. 1979. The estimation of the parameters of the weibull wind speed distribution
for wind energy utilization purposes. Wind Engineering 132–145.
Su, Che-Lin. 2007. Analysis on the forward market equilibrium model. Operations Research Letters 35(1)
74–82.
Sunar, Nur, John R Birge. 2019. Strategic commitment to a production schedule with uncertain supply and
demand: Renewable energy in day-ahead electricity markets. Management Science 65(2) 714–734.
Sunar, Nur, Jay Swaminathan. 2018. Net-metered distributed renewable energy: A peril for utilities? Kenan
Institute of Private Enterprise Research Paper No. 18-24.
Sweeting, A. 2007. Market power in the England and Wales wholesale electricity market 1995–2000. The
Economic Journal 117(520) 654–685.
Tang, Sammi Yu, Panos Kouvelis. 2011. Supplier diversiﬁcation strategies in the presence of yield uncertainty
and buyer competition. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 13(4) 439–451.
Twomey, Paul, Karsten Neuhoﬀ. 2010. Wind power and market power in competitive markets. Energy Policy
38(7) 3198–3210.
Weron, Rafa l, Micha l Zator. 2014. Revisiting the relationship between spot and futures prices in the nord
pool electricity market. Energy Economics 44 178–190.
Wolak, Frank A, Robert H Patrick. 2001. The impact of market rules and market structure on the price
determination process in the England and Wales electricity market.
National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 8248.
Woo, Chi-Keung, I Horowitz, J Moore, A Pacheco. 2011. The impact of wind generation on the electricity
spot-market price level and variance: The texas experience. Energy Policy 39(7) 3939–3944.
Wu, DJ, Paul R Kleindorfer. 2005. Competitive options, supply contracting, and electronic markets. Man-
agement Science 51(3) 452–466.
Wu, Owen Q, Roman Kapuscinski. 2013. Curtailing intermittent generation in electrical systems. Manufac-
turing & Service Operations Management 15(4) 578–595.
Yeh, Tai-Her, Li Wang. 2008. A study on generator capacity for wind turbines under various tower heights
and rated wind speeds using weibull distribution. IEEE Transactions on Energy Conversion 23(2)
592–602.
Zhou, Yangfang, Alan Scheller-Wolf, Nicola Secomandi, Stephen Smith. 2019. Managing wind-based elec-
tricity generation in the presence of storage and transmission capacity. Production and Operations
Management 28(4) 970–989.
Appendix A:
Notation
Table 5 summarizes frequently used notation.

Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
33
Table 5
Notation.
am
inverse (elastic) demand intercept; m ∈{f,·} denotes forward and spot market.
bf
inverse forward demand slope
c
conventional producers’ marginal production cost
fyi
forward position of participant i of type y; total position of type y is fy.
kyi
production capacity of producer i of type y.
NR
number of retailers on the market.
po
spot price; o ∈{s,f,R} denotes spot and forward markets and the exogenous retail price.
p0
un-normalized spot price in the absence of forward trading.
qyi
spot production of participant i of type y, with total production qy, and optimal quantity q∗
yi.
q0
un-normalized spot quantity in the absence of forward trading.
U
utility, U(πy) = E[πy] −λ
2V (πy), where E[·] denotes expectation and V (·) variance.
ηy
covariance term in fy.
θ
inelastic demand, with mean µθ, variance σ2
θ, (un-normalized) third moment τθ, range [θ,θ]; for
retailer i, market share is θi =
θ
NR .
λ
risk aversion parameter of participant type y.
ν
denominator of conventional producer equilibrium forward position.
ξ
the fraction of available renewable capacity, with range [ξ,ξ] ∈[0,1], mean µξ, variance σ2
ξ, and
(un-normalized) skewness τξ.
πi,s
conventional producer i’s spot proﬁt.
πyi
participant i’s ex post proﬁt; e.g., retailer i’s proﬁt: πRi = pRθRi −psθRi + psfRi −pffRi.
ψ
forward premium ψ = pf −E[ps].
ω
numerator of conventional producer equilibrium forward position.
Appendix B:
Proofs
B.1.
Proofs for Section 4
Proof of Lemma 1. The spot-market ﬁrst-order condition of conventional producer i is
dps
dqP i
(qP i −fP i) + ps −dC(qP i)
dqP i
= 0
⇐⇒qP i = a + θ −ξkW −c + fP i −qP j
2
.
(17)
The second derivative is negative, and the problem is hence concave. The equilibrium follows from simulta-
neously solving the expressions for producers i and j for the quantities qP i,qP j.
□
Proof of Lemma 2. Each retailer is price taking, and maximizes mean-variance utility UR(πRi) = E[πRi] +
λ
2V (πRi), with πRi = pRθRi −psθRi + psfRi −pffRi, without considering the price impact of its decision.
The proﬁt variance is V (πRi) = V (pRθRi −psθRi) + V (psfRi) + 2Cov(pRθRi −psθRi,psfRi). The problem is
concave, and from the ﬁrst-order condition, the optimal forward positions are
fRi = E[ps] −pf
λV (ps)
−Cov(pRθRi −psθRi,ps)
V (ps)
.
The total position is the sum of these:
fR =
X
i
fRi = NR(E[ps] −pf)
λV (ps)
−Cov(pRθR −psθR,ps)
V (ps)
.
(18)

34
Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
□
Proof of Theorem 1. We ﬁrst derive the the conventional producers’ optimal positions and then combine
them with the forward demand from retailers to ﬁnd the equilibrium.
Conventional producers. The producers’ objective functions are UP(πP i) = E[πP i] −λ
2V (πP i), with ﬁrst-
order conditions
dE[πP i]
dfP i
−λ
2
dV (πP i,s)
dfP i
= 0,
where the uncertainty is over the spot proﬁt πP i,s = ps(qP i −fP i) −cqP i. We solve these simultaneously for
the two ﬁrms. To do so, let us develop the expectation and variance expressions in turn.
Expectation. The derivative of the expected proﬁt is:
dE[πP i]
dfP i
= dpf
dfP i
fP i + pf + dE[πP i,s]
dfP i
.
We assume that as in the spot market the producers engage in Cournot competition in the forward market,
choosing positions assuming they have an impact on a linear forward price: pf = af −bffP. We will later
verify that the forward positions of the retailers can be presented in this form. After some manipulation of
the expected proﬁts, the derivative is:
dE[πP i]
dfP i
= af −2bffP i −bffP j −1
9 (2a + 2µθ + 7c −2µξkW −2(fP i + fP j)).
Variance. The variance expression is:
V (πP i) =V (ps(qP i −fP i) −cqP i)
=V (ps(qP i −fP i)) + V (cqP i) −2Cov(ps(qP i −fP i),cqP i).
We will develop the terms separately and then combine them. Only the parts of the expression depending
on forward positions are relevant. Since the spot production is qP i =
a+θ+ξkW −c+2fP i−fP j
3
, the second term
V (cqP i) does not depend on fP i, so we can disregard it. The ﬁrst term is:
V (ps(qi −fP i)) = V
a + 2c + θ −ξkW −fP
3
a + θ −c −ξkW −fP
3

.
Letting VF denote the terms of this expression that depend on the forward positions f, we have:
VF =V
uθ
9

+ V
uξkW
9

+ 2Cov
uθ
9 , θ2 + ξ2k2
W −2θξkW
9

−2Cov
uξkW
9
, θ2 + ξ2k2
W −2θξkW
9

−2Cov
uξkW
9
, uθ
9

,
u :=2a + c −2(fP i + fP j).
The last covariance term is zero since θ and ξ are uncorrelated. Hence:
VF =u2
81σ2
θ + u2k2
W
81
σ2
ξ + 2u
81
 (2µθσ2
θ + τθ) −2kWµξσ2
θ

−2ukW
81
 k2
W(2µξσ2
ξ + τξ) −2kWµθσ2
ξ

,

Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
35
where we have used Cov(x,x2) = 2µxσ2
x + τx, where τx is the (un-normalized) third moment (skewness) of
the distribution. For the third term in V (πP i), we similarly denote by CovF the terms that depend on fP:
Cov(ps(qP i −fP i),cqP i) =Cov
a + 2c + θ −ξkW −fP
3
a + θ −c −ξkW −fP
3
, c(θ −ξkW)
3

CovF = 1
27 (Cov (uθ,cθ) + Cov (uξkW,cξkW)) = cu
27
 σ2
θ + k2
Wσ2
ξ

.
We can now diﬀerentiate the variance with respect to fP i:
dV (ps(qP i −fP i))
dfP i
= −4u
81
 σ2
θ + k2
Wσ2
ξ

−4
81
 (2µθσ2
θ + τθ) −2kWµξσ2
θ
−
 k3
W(2µξσ2
ξ + τξ) −2k2
Wµθσ2
ξ

,
dCov(ps(qP i −fP i),cqP i)
dfP i
= −2c
27
 σ2
θ + k2
Wσ2
ξ

,
−λ
2
dV (πi,s)
dfP i
=4λ(a −c −fP)
81
 σ2
θ + k2
Wσ2
ξ

+ 2λ
81
 2µθσ2
θ + τθ −2kWµξσ2
θ −k3
W(2µξσ2
ξ + τξ) + 2k2
Wµθσ2
ξ

=:ZP,a −ZP,bfP.
First-order conditions. Substituting the derivatives into the ﬁrst-order condition for producer i, we have
af −2bffP i −bffP j −1
9 (2a + 2µθ + 7c −2µξkW −2(fP i + fP j)) + ZP,a −ZP,b(fP i + fP j) = 0,
which gives the reaction function
fP i = af −1
9 (2a + 2µθ + 7c −2µξkW) + ZP,a −(bf + ZP,b −2
9b)fP j)
2bf + ZP,b −2
9
Next let us derive the forward demand.
Demand. We can write the retailer positions from Lemma 2 as
fRi = E[ps] −pf
λV (ps)
−Cov(pRθRi −psθRi,ps)
V (ps)
= E[ps] −pf
λV (ps)
−ηRαRi
V (ps)
where ps = a+2c+θ−ξkW −fP
3
and θRi = αRiθ, so the covariance term above is:
Cov((pR −ps)θRi,ps) =αRipRσ2
θ
3
−αRi
9
 (a + 2c −kWµξ −fP)σ2
θ + k2
Wµθσ2
ξ + Cov(θ,θ2)

=αRi
9
 −(a + 2c −kWµξ −fP −3pR)σ2
θ −k2
Wµθσ2
ξ −Cov(θ,θ2)

=ηRαRi.
Summing the positions, we can then write out the inverse forward demand as pf = af −bffP, where:
af =a + 2c −kWµξ + µθ
3
+
λ
9NR
 (a + 2c + 2µθ −kWµξ −3pR)σ2
θ + k2
Wµθσ2
ξ + τθ

(19)
bf = 1
NR
NR
3 + λ
9
 2σ2
θ + k2
Wσ2
ξ

.
(20)
The equilibrium outcome follows from solving the reaction functions of the producers for fP i and fP j and
substituting af and bf. We omit the lengthy manipulations leading to the equilibrium expressions.
□

36
Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
B.2.
Proofs for Section 5
Proof of Proposition 1. The sign of the forward eﬀect hf = −2
3
∂f∗
P i
∂kW is the opposite of the eﬀect of renewable
capacity on the forward positions,
∂f∗
P i
∂kW . Diﬀerentiating this, we have:
∂f ∗
P i
∂kW
=ω′ν −ν′ω
ν2
;
ν′ =
27λ
NR
+ 8λ

kWσ2
ξ,
ω′ = −9µξ + 2λ
 4(a + µθ −c)kWσ2
ξ −2µξ(σ2
θ + 3k2
Wσ2
ξ) −3k2
Wτξ

+ 9λ
NR
(2µθkWσ2
ξ −µξ).
The denominator of
∂f∗
P i
∂kW is positive, so the sign is given by the numerator, which expands to a fourth-order
polynomial:
sf(kW) :=ω′ν −ν′ω = α0 + α1kW + α2k2
W + α3k3
W + α4k4
W,
α0 = −µξ(486λ2σ4
θ + 9λNRσ2
θ(99 + 32λσ2
θ) + N 2
R(405 + 252λσ2
θ + 32λ2σ4
θ)),
α1 =2λσ2
ξ(162µθNR + 108µθN 2
R + 36λµθNRσ2
θ + 729λpRσ2
θ + 216λNRpRσ2
θ
−9c(12N 2
R −27NR + 54λσ2
θ + 28λNRσ2
θ) + 9a(12N 2
R −27NR −27λσ2
θ + 4λNRσ2
θ))
−λτθ(243 + 126NR + 16N 2
R)),
α2 = −λ(µξ(−243λσ2
θ + 9NR(52λσ2
θ −27) + N 2
R(468 + 64λσ2
θ))σ2
ξ
+ 6NR(54λσ2
θ + NR(45 + 8λσ2
θ))τξ),
α3 =0,
α4 = −2λ2NR(27 + 8NR)σ2
ξ(2µξσ2
ξ + τξ).
We ﬁrst note that for our standard assumptions NR > 6 and c ≤min{a,pR}, α0,α2,α4 are all negative, and
α1 > 0 if τθ < τ θ, where τ θ > 0 solves α1(τθ) = 0. To see that there exists a threshold kW such that sf(kW)
is negative (the forward eﬀect is positive) for kW ≤kW, we note that sf(0) ≤0, with the inequality strict for
µξ > 0. By continuity, this holds kW ≤kW, where kW which is the smallest positive root of sf(kW), if one
exists. Since α4 and α2 are negative, sf(kW) is ﬁrst increasing and then decreasing in kW and has either no
positive roots or two of them. The existence of a threshold kW such that the sign is negative for kW ≥kW
follows from α4 being strictly negative for σξ > 0. The threshold is given by the higher positive root of the
polynomial, if it exists. We can ﬁnd lower and upper bounds for the roots by ignoring the fourth-order term
in sf(kW) and ﬁnding the roots of the resulting quadratic function: k±
W :=
−α1±√
α2
1−4α0α2
2α2
≥0. Thus we have
0 ≤k−
W ≤kW ≤kW ≤k+
W .
If sf(kW) has two positive roots (kW > kW), the forward eﬀect is negative for kW < kW < kW; otherwise
the eﬀect is always positive. We next show that there exists a threshold µξ such that if the mean renewable
output µξ ≤µξ, then kW > kW. To see this, let us compare the forward position f ∗
P i(kW) to the position
with zero renewable capacity f ∗
P i(0). Denote their diﬀerence by ∆f ∗
P0(kW) := f ∗
P i(kW) −f ∗
P i(0). The sign of
∆f ∗
P0(kW) is then determined by a quadratic function of kW with a negative second-order term, attaining
its maximum at
ˇkW =
α1
8λNR(54λσ2
θ + NR(45 + 8λσ2
θ))(2µξσ2
ξ + τξ).

Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
37
When µξ = 0, with α1 > 0 (such that τθ < τ θ at µξ = 0), we can check that ∆f ∗
P0(ˇkW) > 0, ˇkW > 0, and
further kW = 0. We therefore have kW > ˇkW > kW. By continuity, there exists a µξ such that kW > kW for
µξ ≤µξ. Finally, we note that sf(kW) is decreasing in µξ and ﬁrst increasing and then decreasing in kW.
Hence, letting ˆkW(µξ) = arg maxkW sf(kW,µξ), which is the unique positive root of the third-order polynomial
∂sf
∂kW , the threshold is implicitly given by sf(ˆkW(µξ)) = 0.
□
Proof of Proposition 2. We ﬁrst note that
∂E[ps]
∂kW = 1
3

2ων′−2ω′ν−µξν2
ν2

=:
sps (kW )
3ν2
. The denominator is
positive and the numerator expands to a fourth-order polynomial, similarly to the expression in the proof of
Proposition 1, with the sign given by:
sps(kW) =α0 + α1kW + α2k2
W + α3k3
W + α4k4
W,
α0 = −27µξ(216λ2(σ2
θ)2 + 3N 2
R(45 + 8λσ2
θ) + 2λNRσ2
θ(171 + 16λσ2
θ)),
α1 = −12λσ2
ξ(162µθNR + 108µθN 2
R + 36λµθNRσ2
θ + 729λpRσ2
θ + 216λNRpRσ2
θ
−9c(12N 2
R −27NR + 54λσ2
θ + 28λNRσ2
θ) + 9a(12N 2
R −27NR −27λσ2
θ + 4λNRσ2
θ))
−λτθ(243 + 126NR + 16N 2
R)),
α2 =18λ(18µξNR(2NR −27)σ2
ξ −3λµξ(189 + 20NR)σ2
θσ2
ξ + 90N 2
Rτξ + 4λNR(27 + 4NR)σ2
θτξ),
α3 =0,
α4 =3λ2(27 + 8NR)σ2
ξ(4NRτξ −27µξσ2
ξ).
We note that with no uncertainty (σξ = τξ = 0), only α0 is nonzero (negative) and hence sps(kW) ≤0. More
generally, to see when sps(kW) is positive above a threshold kW ≥k
s
W, we note that α4 > 0 if τ N
ξ CVξ > ζ :=
27
4NR , which also implies α2 > 0. Then since α0 ≤0, sps(kW) must be ﬁrst negative and then positive as kW
increases; E[ps] is correspondingly ﬁrst decreasing and then increasing in kW. The threshold is implicitly given
as the root of sps(kW): sps(k
s
W) = 0. An upper bound is given by k
s
W ≤
−α1+√
α2
1−4α0α2
2α0
. For the forward price
pf, the argument is similar so we omit the detailed expressions. We have
∂pf
∂kW =
a′
f ν2+2bf ων′−2ν(bf ω′+b′
f ω)
ν2
=:
spf (kW )
ν2
, where we can check that the highest-order term of spf (kW) is strictly positive for σξ > 0 (which
is implied by the condition on sps). By an argument similar to the one above, there exists a threshold k
f
W
such that the forward price pf is increasing in kW for kW ≥k
f
W where k
f
W is implicitly given by the (highest)
positive root of spf (kW).
□
Proof of Proposition 3. Consider the impact of τθ on renewable capacity’s impact on the expected spot
price E[ps]:
∂
∂τθ
∂E[ps]
∂kW
=
4(9λ + 2λNR)(27λ + 8λNR)kWσ2
ξ
3(27λ(2σ2
θ + k2
Wσ2
ξ) + NR(45 + 8λ(σ2
θ + k2
Wσ2
ξ)))2 ≥0.
(21)
The other results similarly follow from cross-derivatives with respect to the parameters; the results for c
require NR > 6. We omit the rest of the detailed expressions for brevity.
□
Proof of Proposition 4. The no-arbitrage equilibrium follows from setting λ = 0 in Theorem 1:
q∗
P i,NA = q0
3 + ωNA
3νNA
,
f ∗
P i,NA = ωNA
νNA
= E[q0]
5
,
ps,NA = p0
3 −2ωNA
3νNA
,
pf,NA = E[ps,NA],

38
Peura and Bunn Renewable Power and Electricity Prices: The Impact of Forward Markets
where q0 = a −c + θ −ξkW and p0 = a + 2c + θ −ξkW; the subscript NA denotes (n)o (a)arbitrage. The
ﬁrst part of the proposition follows directly from diﬀerentiating the price expressions and comparing to the
corresponding impact on the price in Lemma 1 with fP i = fP j = 0. To compare the spot-price impact of
renewables under no arbitrage and the base model, let us deﬁne ∆fP i(kW) := f ∗
P i −f ∗
P i,NA. The denominator
of this expression is positive and the numerator is a third-order polynomial in kW:
∆fP i(kW) =
α0 + α1kW + α2k2
W + α3k3
W
5(27λ(2σ2
θ + k2
Wσ2
ξ) + NR(45 + 8λ(σ2
θ + k2
Wσ2
ξ))),
α0 =3λ(12µθ −4c(NR −12) + 4µθNR + a(4NR −3) −45pR)σ2
θ + 45τθ + 10NRτθ
α1 =3λµξ(3 −4NR)σ2
θ
α2 =3λ(9c + 6µθ −4cNR + 4µθNR + a(4NR −9))σ2
ξ
α3 =λ(−3µξ(4NR −9)σ2
ξ −10NRτξ).
The sign of
∂
∂kW ∆fP i(kW) is determined by its numerator, which is a fourth-order polynomial with non-
positive second, third, and fourth-order terms. Similarly to Proposition 2, this implies the threshold existence
of a k
NA
W
such that
∂
∂kW ∆fP i(kW) ≤0 for renewable capacity kW ≥k
NA
W . Letting τθ = 0,σ2
θ = 0, the constant
and ﬁrst-order terms are non-negative. We therefore have
∂
∂kW ∆fP i(kW) ≥0 when kW ≤k
NA
W . The impact
on the expected spot price is the opposite. By continuity, this occurs for σ2
θ ≤σ2
θ.
□
Proof of Proposition 5. As in the proof of Proposition 3, the results follow from derivatives and cross-
derivatives with respect to the parameters, for example:
∂E[ps]
∂pR
=
54λσ2
θ
81λ(2σ2
θ + k2
Wσ2
ξ) + 3NR(45 + 8λ(σ2
θ + k2
Wσ2
ξ)) ≥0.
(22)
□
Proof of Proposition 6. As in the proof of Proposition 3, the results follow from derivatives and cross-
derivatives with respect to the parameters.
□