TITLE: Planning Bike Lanes with Data: Ridership, Congestion, and Path Selection
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2022.00775
---

TSpace Research Repository 
tspace.library.utoronto.ca 
Planning Bike Lanes with Data: Ridership, 
Congestion, and Path Selection 
Sheng Liu , Auyon Siddiq , Jingwei Zhang 
Version Accepted Manuscript 
Citation 
(published version) 
Sheng Liu, Auyon Siddiq, Jingwei Zhang (2024) Planning Bike Lanes 
with Data: Ridership, Congestion, and Path Selection. Management 
Science 71(9):7631-7654. 
Copyright / License Copyright © 2024, INFORMS 
DOI https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2022.00775 
Publisher’s Statement This is an accepted manuscript of an article published by INFORMS in 
Management Science: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2022.00775 
How to cite TSpace items 
Always cite the published version, so the author(s) will receive recognition through services that track 
citation counts, e.g. Scopus. If you need to cite the page number of the author manuscript from TSpace 
because you cannot access the published version, then cite the TSpace version in addition to the published 
version using the permanent URI (handle) found on the record page. 
This article was made openly accessible by U of T Faculty. 
Please tell us how this access benefits you. Your story matters. 

Planning Bike Lanes with Data:
Ridership, Congestion, and Path Selection
Sheng Liu
Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, sheng.liu@rotman.utoronto.ca.
Auyon Siddiq
Anderson School of Management, University of California, Los Angeles, auyon.siddiq@anderson.ucla.edu.
Jingwei Zhang
Anderson School of Management, University of California, Los Angeles, jingwei.zhang.phd@anderson.ucla.edu.
Urban infrastructure is vital for sustainable cities. In recent years, municipal governments have invested
heavily in the expansion of bike lane networks to meet growing demand, promote ridership, and reduce
emissions. However, re-allocating road capacity to cycling is often contentious due to the risk of amplifying
traﬃc congestion. In this paper, we develop a method for planning bike lanes that accounts for ridership
and congestion eﬀects. We ﬁrst present a procedure for estimating parameters of a traﬃc equilibrium model,
which combines an inverse optimization method for predicting driving times with an instrumental variables
method for estimating a commuter mode choice model. We then formulate a prescriptive model that selects
paths in a road network for bike lane installation while endogenizing cycling demand and driving travel
times. We conduct an empirical study on the City of Chicago that brings together several datasets that
describe the urban environment – including the road and bike lane networks, vehicle ﬂows, commuter mode
choices, bike share trips, driving and cycling routes, demographic features, and points of interest – with the
goal of estimating the impact of expanding Chicago’s bike lane network. We estimate that adding 25 miles
of bike lanes as prescribed by our model can lift cycling ridership from 3.6% to 6.1%, with at most an 9.4%
increase in driving times. We also ﬁnd that three intuitive heuristics for bike lane planning can lead to lower
ridership and worse congestion outcomes, highlighting the value of a holistic and data-driven approach to
urban infrastructure planning.
1.
Introduction
Urbanization is accelerating globally. By 2050, an estimated 68% of the world’s population is
expected to live in cities, up from 55% in 2018 (UN 2019). Urbanization brings numerous beneﬁts,
including improved access to employment opportunities, education, and social services. However,
these beneﬁts are typically accompanied by increased traﬃc congestion, which threatens the sus-
tainability of cities (Bertinelli and Black 2004, C¸olak et al. 2016). In addition to its negative eﬀects
on the environment and health, congestion is estimated to incur economic losses of $85 billion
annually across U.S. cities (US DOT 2009).
Alleviating traﬃc congestion is likely to require a multi-faceted solution, including increased
adoption of sustainable travel modes (e.g., walking, cycling, public transit) and associated invest-
ments in urban infrastructure (US DOT 2017). In alignment with these goals, in 2021 the U.S.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

2
Congress enacted the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA), a $1.2 trillion spending pack-
age that, among other priorities, allocates funding to promote sustainable transportation and invest
in the necessary infrastructure (The White House 2021, 117th Congress 2021). Urban infrastruc-
ture is also a concern globally – one of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals proposed by the
United Nations is to make cities “inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable”, which requires a robust
transportation infrastructure (UN 2015).
Increasing cycling ridership has been proposed as a solution to reducing traﬃc congestion
(Thorsten and Rudolph 2016, Hamilton and Wichman 2018). Cycling is one of the most sustainable
modes of urban transport – it causes minimal environmental damage, is cost eﬀective compared
to car ownership, and promotes health through physical activity. Widespread cycling ridership is
also associated with substantially increased road safety for all users, with fatal crash rates being
estimated to be 44% lower than the US average in cities with abundant bike lanes (Marshall and
Ferenchak 2019). Demand for cycling is also growing rapidly – from 2001 to 2017, the number of
cycling trips in the US is estimated to have doubled from 1.7 billion to 3.6 billion (National House-
hold Travel Survey 2017), and U.S. cities saw a 21% surge in cycling trips during the COVID-19
pandemic (LA Times 2020).
To meet growing demand and promote cycling adoption, municipal governments have recently
invested heavily into the installation of new bike lanes.1 For example, between 2014 to 2019,
New York City increased its total bike lane mileage from 900 to 1,240 (DOT 2019), and in 2021
Chicago announced a plan to expand their bike lane network by 100 miles over the following
two years (Chicago DOT 2021). The U.S. federal government has also committed to improving
cycling infrastructure nationwide – the Transportation Alternatives Program, which receives federal
funding for bike lanes and pedestrian paths, has seen its budget increase from $850 million to $1.44
billion annually under the IIJA (Mills 2021).
Despite the beneﬁts of boosting cycling ridership, the expansion of bike lane networks remains
contentious because it necessarily reduces road capacity for automotive vehicles.2 Intuition suggests
this re-allocation may have the undesirable eﬀect of amplifying congestion (BBC 2021), making
bike lane planning a thorny issue for city planners (Khany 2022). Despite major investments in
bike lanes and the related controversy, few previous studies have attempted to rigorously model or
estimate the eﬀect of bike lanes on congestion. Doing so is non-trivial due to the opposing forces
alluded to above: While adding bike lanes might increase the attractiveness of cycling and take
1 There is evidence that installing bike lanes increases cycling adoption (Parks et al. 2012, Strauss and Miranda-
Moreno 2013, Monsere et al. 2014, Mitra et al. 2017, Khany 2022).
2 In special cases, road capacity for automotive vehicles can be preserved by instead removing on-street parking, albeit
with negative impacts on businesses and residences (Federal Highway Administration 2006).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

3
cars oﬀthe road, they also risk exacerbating congestion by reducing capacity in critical segments
of the road network. As a result, modeling the net impact of bike lanes on congestion requires
careful accounting of these competing eﬀects.
The eﬀect of bike lanes on congestion and cycling ridership also depends on planning decisions.
Although bike lanes may not necessarily worsen congestion (Johnson and Johnson 2014), they
may only have a minimal eﬀect on cycling ridership if the locations are poorly chosen. However,
data-driven models for bike lane planning remain scarce, leading city planners to rely primarily on
ad-hoc approaches that do not rigorously account for the impacts on ridership (Khany 2022).
1.1.
Contributions
Where should bike lanes be built to promote cycling ridership while mitigating congestion eﬀects?
We address this question by developing a method for quantifying the eﬀect of bike lanes on cycling
ridership and congestion, which we extend to a prescriptive model that generates recommendations
for bike lane expansion. Our modeling approach is informed by discussions with city planners,3
and is illustrated through an extensive empirical study using data from the City of Chicago.
Our method consists of three main steps. In the ﬁrst step, we estimate a congestion (i.e., driving
travel time) function from features of the road network and observed vehicle ﬂows. While there is
a rich literature on traﬃc equilibrium models (following the celebrated work of Wardrop (1952),
Beckmann et al. (1956), and Dafermos (1980)), few previous studies attempt to estimate the con-
gestion functions that lie at the foundation of such models. Our procedure is based on the paradigm
of inverse optimization, which refers to estimation of an optimization model’s parameters from
(potentially noisy) observations of its solutions (Chan et al. 2021); accordingly, we assume traﬃc
data are observations of Wardrop equilibrium network ﬂows.4 The estimation procedure is asymp-
totically optimal in that it provably recovers the ground-truth model as the size of the network
grows large, under appropriate conditions. The main computational hurdle is that enforcing the
Wardrop equilibrium conditions makes the estimation problem a challenging non-convex optimiza-
tion problem. To obtain solutions, we consider an approximation based on Lagrangian relaxation
that admits a multi-convex structure, which allows us to generate reliable estimates through an
iterative solution procedure.
In the second step, taking the congestion parameters as input, we estimate a multinomial logit
mode choice model in which driving and cycling utilities depend on the locations of bike lanes and
predicted equilibrium travel times, among other covariates. In particular, we use an instrumental
3 Department of Transportation, City of Chicago, and Transportation Planning Division, City of Vancouver, British
Columbia.
4 In particular, our estimator takes the form of a mathematical program with equilibrium constraints (MPEC), and
thus falls into the optimization-based framework for structural estimation proposed by Su and Judd (2012).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

4
variables approach to address endogeneity in the locations of existing bike lanes and driving travel
times, closely following established methods from the literature (Berry et al. 1995, Davis 2006,
Kabra et al. 2020, He et al. 2021).
In the third step, we embed the estimated traﬃc congestion and mode choice models into a pre-
scriptive “path selection” model that identiﬁes paths in the road network for bike lane installation.
The model endogenizes the mode choice of all commuters and driving travel times, making it a
mixed-integer nonlinear program. To obtain solutions, we employ a piecewise linear approximation
technique that yields a mixed-integer linear program, and we bound the suboptimality due to the
linearization as a function of network and demand parameters.
We use our method to conduct an empirical study using data from the City of Chicago. Our study
combines multiple datasets, including Chicago’s road and bike lane network, observed traﬃc ﬂows,
commuter mode choices, bike share trips, taxi trips, driving and cycling routes, demographics, and
points of interest in the city. We estimate that adding 25 miles of bike lanes as prescribed by our
model can increase cycling ridership from 3.6% to 6.1% in downtown Chicago, without increasing
the travel time of any driving route by more than 9.4%.
To evaluate our modeling approach, we benchmark against three intuitive heuristics for bike
lane planning. In particular, we quantify the value of endogenizing congestion eﬀects by comparing
against a “traﬃc-agnostic” model, and ﬁnd that ignoring traﬃc dynamics when designing bike
lanes can needlessly worsen congestion. We also quantify the value of optimization in our setting
by evaluating two heuristics that discard the network structure of the problem, and ﬁnd that they
can lead to smaller gains in cycling ridership with worse congestion outcomes.
1.2.
Related Literature
Our paper contributes to the literature on inverse optimization, transportation network design,
and cycling infrastructure planning. Each of these topics has a large extant literature, so we focus
here on the most closely related work.
Inverse optimization on networks. Inverse optimization methods aim to learn parameters
of an optimization model from observations of its optimal solutions. Many inverse optimization
methods take a statistical learning perspective, where the model to be ﬁt to observational data is
itself a constrained optimization model (e.g., Bertsimas et al. (2015), Aswani et al. (2018), Esfahani
et al. (2018), Chan et al. (2019)). Our estimation problem takes the form of an inverse optimization
model because we interpret vehicle traﬃc data to be noisy observations of equilibrium network
ﬂows, which can be posed as the solution to a convex optimization problem (Dafermos and Sparrow
1969). Below, we focus on prior work in inverse optimization in the context of traﬃc equilibria and
network problems, and refer the reader to Chan et al. (2021) for a comprehensive review of the
broader inverse optimization literature.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

5
Given a network with a set of origin-destination (OD) demands and a known congestion function
on each edge, a traﬃc assignment model describes the ﬂow of traﬃc through the network (Patriks-
son 2015). The standard equilibrium concept in traﬃc models is Wardrop equilibrium, which states
that no user can unilaterally decrease their travel time by taking an alternative route (Wardrop
1952). While there is an extensive literature on traﬃc modeling dating back to Wardrop (1952),
the inverse problem of estimating traﬃc models from observational data has only recently been
considered (Chow et al. 2014, Bertsimas et al. 2015, Thai et al. 2015, Zhang and Paschalidis 2017,
Zhang et al. 2018, Allen et al. 2021).
Among this work, our paper is closest to Bertsimas et al. (2015) and Thai et al. (2015), who
also propose methods for estimating congestion functions on a network from observed traﬃc ﬂows.
Our method diﬀers from Bertsimas et al. (2015) primarily in the speciﬁcation of the loss function –
Bertsimas et al. (2015) assume that the observed ﬂows approximately satisfy Wardrop equilibrium,
and minimize a loss function that measures the degree to which equilibrium conditions are violated.
In contrast, we enforce the Wardrop equilibrium conditions exactly, and assume that traﬃc ﬂows are
noisy observations of true (unobserved) equilibrium ﬂows, resulting in a loss function that measures
the error between the observed and true vehicle ﬂows. The main consequence of these diﬀering
loss functions is that Bertsimas et al. (2015) obtain an estimation problem that is convex (due to
relaxing the equilibrium conditions), whereas our estimation problem is non-convex. However, we
show in this paper that our estimates are statistically consistent, which (as shown by Aswani et al.
(2018)) is not the case for the convex approach in Bertsimas et al. (2015). In other words, in the
trade-oﬀbetween computational tractability and optimality, the method of Bertsimas et al. (2015)
prioritizes tractability of the estimation problem, whereas we pursue asymptotic optimality of the
estimates.
Our estimation procedure also has similarities to Thai et al. (2015) – we highlight two key
diﬀerences. First, we estimate a congestion function that can depend on an arbitrary number of
road features (e.g., length, width, number of lanes, location), whereas Thai et al. (2015) estimate
a single road capacity parameter. Second, Thai et al. (2015) use a link-ﬂow formulation of traﬃc
assignment, whereas we use a path-ﬂow formulation, which restricts the number of possible paths
users can take between each OD pair (Patriksson 2015). Our approach yields far fewer decision
variables in the resulting inverse optimization problem, which allows it scale more gracefully to
realistically sized road networks.
Our paper also contributes to a broader literature on inverse network ﬂow problems (Burton
and Toint 1992, Xu and Zhang 1995, Zhang et al. 1995, Zhang and Ma 1996, Zhang and Cai 1998,
Ahuja and Orlin 2001, Zhao et al. 2015, Chan et al. 2022). To the best of our knowledge, ours is
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

6
the ﬁrst inverse optimization method speciﬁcally for network ﬂow problems that provably recovers
ground-truth, data-generating parameters.
Transportation network planning. The design of transportation networks is a fundamental
area of research in the transportation literature. Seminal papers include Dantzig et al. (1979),
Abdulaal and LeBlanc (1979) and Magnanti and Wong (1984); we refer the reader to Farahani et al.
(2013) for a comprehensive review. Our work is closest to the subset of literature that considers
multiple travel modes, which often introduces a discrete choice component to the traﬃc assignment
problem (Lee and Vuchic 2005, Fan and Machemehl 2006, Cipriani et al. 2006, Beltran et al. 2009,
Szeto et al. 2010, Gallo et al. 2011, Miandoabchi et al. 2012, Bertsimas et al. 2020).
Our work diﬀers from the majority of the multi-modal network design literature in two ways.
First, demand endogeneity plays a signiﬁcant role in our work – we assume the addition of bike
lanes increases cycling utility, and can either increase or decrease driving utility depending on
the net impact on congestion. In contrast, few previous papers consider a setting where a central
planner modiﬁes network topology and the modal-split depends on the constructed network (Lee
and Vuchic (2005) and Cipriani et al. (2006) are notable exceptions). A related paper in this regard
is by Wei et al. (2021), who consider the impact of adjusting transit schedules on both traﬃc
congestion and demand. The main diﬀerence is we focus on altering network structure (i.e., bike
lane locations), whereas Wei et al. (2021) address scheduling of transit times on a given network.
Second, because network design problems are usually non-convex, they are often solved using
fast heuristics that return local optimal solutions, such as genetic algorithms (Farahani et al.
2013). In contrast, our solution technique is based on a mixed-integer linear programming (MILP)
approximation of the network design problem. The advantage of our approach is that it allows us
to bound the approximation error and obtain provably near-optimal solutions.
Cycling infrastructure planning. Cycling infrastructure planning has gained attention due to
the worldwide adoption of bike-share systems and increased emphasis on sustainability by municipal
governments. In particular, operational data made available by bike-share systems enables a better
understanding of biking demand and travel patterns (Singhvi et al. 2015, Scott et al. 2021) and
improved design of bike-share station networks (Kabra et al. 2020, He et al. 2021). However, in
the area of bike lane planning, where the computational challenges are prominent and diﬀerent
heuristic methods have been explored (Mauttone et al. 2017, Liu et al. 2019), few papers integrate
real world data sets into the planning models. Bao et al. (2017) develop a bike lane planning model
built on bike trajectory data, in which an exponential scoring function is used to guide bike lane
planning. Recently, Liu et al. (2021) propose an integer optimization model to combine cycling
demand data with bike lane network design in a way that balances demand coverage and lane
continuity. However, both papers ignore the endogeneity of cycling demand and congestion eﬀects.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

7
Our work presents a systematic method for bike lane planning that brings together travel-time
estimation and network optimization to rigorously account for the interaction between vehicle
traﬃc and bike lane construction.
1.3.
Outline
We provide here a brief overview of the paper. §2 outlines model fundamentals, including our
approach for modeling the traﬃc equilibrium, congestion (i.e., driving times), and commuters’
mode choices. §3 describes the data environment and presents an estimation method for recovering
parameters of the traﬃc model from features of the road network, observed vehicle ﬂows, and
origin-destination demands. Notably, our focus is on a setting where equilibrium travel times are
unobserved; this requires endogenizing travel time within the estimator, resulting in a mathematical
program with equilibrium constraints (MPEC). §4 presents a prescriptive model for bike lane
expansion, an approximation scheme to improve computational tractability, and a corresponding
upper bound on the approximation error. §5 presents an empirical study for the City of Chicago.
§6 discusses policy implications and concludes.
2.
Model: Traﬃc Congestion and Commuters’ Mode Choices
This section outlines a traﬃc model where congestion and travel mode choice both depend on
the presence of bike lanes in the road network. Speciﬁcally, §2.1 formalizes the road network, §2.2
presents a model of traﬃc congestion, and §2.3 describes how commuters choose among alternative
travel modes (e.g., driving vs. cycling) based on driving travel times and the bike lane network.
2.1.
Road and Bike Lane Network
Let I be a set of nodes, each of which can be an origin, destination, or both. Let W index the set
of all origin-destination (OD) pairs. Each OD pair is a pair of nodes (i,j) such that i,j ∈I,i ̸= j
that commuters wish to travel between; following the literature, for conciseness we index all pairs
using w ∈W. Let S be the set of segments, where each segment s ∈S connects two nodes. Let
M = {C,D,O} be the set of travel modes, where C, D, and O represent cycling, driving, or an
outside option capturing all other modes (e.g., walking and public transit). We call a concatenation
of adjacent segments a path; let PD
w be the set of possible driving paths that connect OD pair w.
For tractability, we assume there is a single cycling path pC
w that connects OD pair w. Let SD
p be
the set of all segments that lie on driving path p ∈PD
w , w ∈W and SC
w be the segments on cycling
path p = pC
w, w ∈W. For ease of reference, we use PD = ∪w∈W {PD
w } and PC = ∪w∈W {pC
w} to
denote all possible driving and cycling paths, and SD = ∪p∈PD {SD
p } and SC = ∪w∈W {SC
w } to
denote all road segments used for driving and cycling, respectively.
Let x ∈{0,1}|S| be a binary vector denoting the existence of bike lanes on each segment of the
network, where xs = 1 if and only if segment s contains a bike lane. We let ˜x denote the status
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

8
quo bike lane. We assume each commuter is inﬁnitesimal throughout. Let dD ∈R|W|, dC ∈R|W|
and dO ∈R|W| be the demand for each mode over all OD pairs, and let d = (dC,dD,dO). Next, we
consider how a ﬁxed driving demand vector dD induces vehicle traﬃc through the network.
2.2.
Wardrop Equilibrium and Traﬃc Congestion
Commuters who travel by driving for OD pair w choose among the paths in PD
w ⊆PD. Accordingly,
let φp be the mass of commuters who choose path p ∈PD, and let vs be the mass of drivers on
segment s ∈SD. We refer to φp and vs as path and segment ﬂows, respectively. For conciseness,
let φ ∈R|PD| and v ∈R|SD| be the vectors of φp and vs, respectively. Then for ﬁxed dD, (φ,v) are
feasible ﬂows if they satisfy
X
p∈PD
w
φp = dD
w,
w ∈W,
(1a)
vs =
X
{p∈PD|s∈SD
p }
φp,
s ∈SD,
(1b)
(φ,v) ≥0.
(1c)
For convenience, we deﬁne
Ω
 dD
= {(φ,v)|(φ,v) satisﬁes (1)}
(2)
to be the set of all feasible ﬂows given driving demand dD. The equations in (1) assumes a restricted
set of candidate driving paths PD
w for each OD pair w, meaning drivers cannot travel along an
arbitrary sequence of segments. This path-ﬂow formulation is widely used in the literature to
improve tractability (e.g., Fisk (1980), Dafermos (1980, 1982)).5
Next, we describe how driving travel times depend on vehicle ﬂows, the road network, and the
presence of bike lanes. With a slight abuse of notation, let qs(x) be a vector of features on the road
segment s (e.g., the road’s length, width, number of vehicle lanes, or location), where the features
may be altered by the presence of bike lanes. We deﬁne for each segment a congestion function αs,
which depends linearly on segment features:
αs (x,θ) = θ⊤qs (x).
(3)
We refer to θ as the congestion parameter that inﬂuences travel times. The travel time on road
segment s is then given by
tD
s (x,θ,vs) = αs (x,θ) · vs + Ts,
(4)
5 An alternative approach is the link-ﬂow formulation, which requires variables for each segment and OD pair in the
network (Patriksson 2015). However, the link-ﬂow representation leads to a less tractable estimation problem in large
networks as a result of using |W| · |S| variables to represent traﬃc ﬂows, whereas the path-ﬂow formulation leads to
|P| + |S| variables.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

9
where Ts is the free-ﬂow travel time. We impose the mild assumption that αs (x,θ) > 0, which
implies driving times strictly increase in traﬃc ﬂow vs.6 The total travel time along each path
p ∈PD is then given by
tD
p (x,θ,v) =
X
s∈SD
p
tD
s (x,θ,vs).
(5)
Next, we consider how drivers on OD pair w select among the paths in PD
w . Following Wardrop’s
ﬁrst principle, we assume that drivers select paths such that no driver on any OD pair w can
reduce their travel time by unilaterally selecting an alternative path (Wardrop 1952). To capture
this equilibrium condition, let v∗(x,θ) and φ∗(x,θ) denote equilibrium segment and path ﬂows,
respectively, and let tD
w(x,θ) denote the equilibrium travel time on OD pair w. Then Wardrop’s
ﬁrst principle is equivalent to the following set of conditions:
tD
w (x,θ) −tD
p (x,θ,v∗(θ))
 = 0, if φ∗
p(x,θ) > 0
≤0, if φ∗
p(x,θ) = 0

,
p ∈PD
w , w ∈W.
(6)
For ease of exposition in the remainder of the paper, we deﬁne
Ψ(x,dD,θ) = {(φ,v)|(φ,v) ∈Ω
 dD
and (φ,v) satisﬁes (6)}
(7)
to be the set of feasible ﬂows that satisfy Wardrop’s ﬁrst principle. That is, (φ,v) are equilibrium
ﬂows if and only if (φ,v) ∈Ψ(x,dD,θ). Note that Ψ(x,dD,θ) depends on the observable road
segment features qs(x) and the parameters θ via the congestion functions αs(x,θ).
The traﬃc model outlined above rests on the strong assumption that every driver chooses the
fastest route in equilibrium and ignores all other route characteristics, which may not hold in
practice. Nonetheless, our empirical results suggest that Wardrop equilibrium provides a reasonable
approximation of network-level traﬃc dynamics (see Figure 7 in Appendix A), even if it does
not accurately reﬂect individual drivers’ route choices, which aligns with prior empirical work
(Yildirimoglu and Kahraman 2018). In Appendix G, we discuss a variation of our model based
on the stochastic user equilibrium (SUE) problem (Prashker and Bekhor 2004), in which drivers
account for route characteristics other than travel time and have idiosyncratic preferences over
routes.
6 The most well-known congestion function takes the form of tD
s (x,vs) = Ts · (1 + α(vs/ms)4), where typically α =
0.15 (United States Bureau of Public Roads 1964). Our use of a linear congestion function is primarily to improve
the tractability of the estimation problem. Linear congestion functions have appeared elsewhere in the literature
(Roughgarden and Tardos 2002, Lin et al. 2011, Swamy 2012).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

10
2.3.
Commuter Mode Choice
We now describe how commuters select among alternate travel modes. Following the literature on
mode choice (e.g., Domencich and McFadden (1975), Abdulaal and LeBlanc (1979)), we assume
the mode-speciﬁc demands dm
w are determined by a multinomial logit (MNL) choice model. Let
um
w (x,θ) be the utility of a commuter who wishes to travel by mode m on OD pair w. Then the
utility of driving, cycling and outside options on OD pair w is
uD
w(x,θ) = βD
0 + βD
1 · tD
w (x,θ) + ( ˜βD)⊤XD
w + ξD
w + ϵD
w,
(8a)
uC
w(x) = βC
0 + βC
1 · tC
w + βC
2 · ρw (x) + ( ˜βC)⊤XC
w + ξC
w + ϵD
w,
(8b)
uO
w (x) = βO
1 · tO
w + ( ˜βO)⊤XO
w + ϵO
w.
(8c)
The driving utility uD
w(x,θ) depends on the driving time tD
w (x,θ) and a vector of additional covari-
ates XD
w.7 Note that the equilibrium conditions (6) imply for each w ∈W, the driving time is the
same for all p ∈PD
w , and (8b) implies that all drivers on OD pair w share the same utility regardless
of their selected path, which depends primarily on the travel time.
The cycling utility uC
w(x) depends on the cycling time tC
w, bike lane coverage ρw (x) (i.e., the
proportion of the path that is covered by a bike lane), and additional covariates XC
w. Cycling time
and bike lane coverage have both been observed to be signiﬁcant factors in cycling adoption (Hood
et al. 2011, Broach et al. 2012).8 For tractability, we assume that for each OD pair w ∈W all
cyclists travel along the same path pC
w.
To deﬁne bike lane coverage, let ℓs be the length of segment s. Then the coverage for OD pair
w is given by
ρw (x) = 1
Lw
X
s∈SC
w
ℓs · xs,
(9)
where SC
w is the set of segments that lie on cycling path pC
w. Note that cycling utility does not
depend on the congestion parameter θ, which inﬂuences driving times only. Lastly, we assume
the utility of the outside option depends on the travel time by public transit tO
w and additional
covariates XO
w.
In the utility functions above, ξD
w and ξC
w are unobservable components of utility for driving and
cycling that are common to all users for OD pair w. For instance, ξD
w may include factors that
inﬂuence the inconvenience of driving for the OD pair w, such as the presence of traﬃc lights along
7 The covariates XD
w, XC
w, and XO
w may include attributes of each mode, socio-economic characteristics of commuters,
or other contextual information (Hensher and Greene 2003).
8 Cycling traﬃc has not yet been found to be a signiﬁcant factor in cycling utility (Hood et al. 2011, Broach et al.
2012), so we assume cycling is free from congestion eﬀects.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

11
the driving routes. Similarly, ξC
w may represent unobservables associated with the degree of bike-
friendliness, such as pavement smoothness along the cycling route. The ϵm
w ’s are idiosyncratic error
terms that are independent and identically distributed and follow an extreme value distribution.
Let ˜dw be the total demand across all travel modes for OD pair w. Based on the utilities deﬁned
in (8), the demand for mode m on OD pair w is then given by
dm
w (x,θ) = ˜dw · P m
w = ˜dw ·
eum
w (x,θ)
euC
w(x) + euD
w (x,θ) + euO
w ,
(10)
where P m
w is the share of consumers choosing mode m between w. We assume ˜dw is exogenous and
does not depend on x or θ. Note that the MNL model (10) implies ˜dw = P
m∈M dm
w (x,θ). Having
deﬁned how the equilibrium traﬃc assignment depends on x, θ and β, in §3 we address how to
estimate the parameters (θ,β) from data.
The speciﬁcation of the commuter choice model above captures the key trade-oﬀs in our study,
namely, the impact of congestion and bike lane coverage on the cycling and driving utilities.
Notably, we do not include vehicle ﬂows in the cycling utility function, which may be a signiﬁcant
variable (e.g., if traﬃc alters cyclists’ perceptions of safety). In particular, because the vehicle
ﬂows v∗are endogenous, including them in the cycling utility would introduce a large number
of non-convex, bi-linear terms into the §4 optimization model (as a result of v∗being multiplied
with other decision variables in the formulation), which would greatly undermine the computa-
tional tractability of the optimization step. As a consequence, we assume throughout that cyclists’
utilities are independent of vehicle ﬂows.
3.
Estimation
Our estimation procedure consists of two steps. In the ﬁrst step, we estimate the congestion param-
eters θ that deﬁne the Wardrop equilibrium from observed road network features and associated
traﬃc ﬂows. In the second step, we use the estimate of θ and the status quo bike lane network ˜x
as inputs for estimating the mode choice parameters β.
This section is organized as follows. In §3.1, we deﬁne an estimation problem for recovering the
congestion parameters θ from appropriate road network and vehicle ﬂow data. In §3.2, we show
that the estimation problem for θ can be posed as an inverse optimization model and present
an accompanying solution procedure. In §3.3, we address estimating the mode choice parameters
β, taking the estimated values of θ as input; in particular, we note endogeneity challenges in
estimating β, which we address through the use of instrumental variables in our empirical study.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

12
3.1.
Estimation of Wardrop Congestion Parameters
The estimation procedure for θ takes road segment-level data of the form
(qs,zs),
s = 1,...,n,
(11)
where qs are the features of segment s, zs is a noisy observation of the equilibrium vehicle ﬂow on
segment s, and n is the number of segments in the network (equivalently, |S|). Additionally, for
each OD pair w ∈W, the procedure takes as input the observed driving demand dD
w, the driving
path sets PD
w , and the free-ﬂow travel time for each path p ∈PD
w (i.e., P
s∈SD
p Ts).
Notably, our focus is on a setting where the path-level equilibrium driving times (tD
p in (5))
are not observed; instead, these variables are endogenized within the estimation procedure. If the
path-level driving times tD
p are observed, then θ can be estimated more directly by linear regression
or a generalized method of moments (GMM) estimator. We brieﬂy discuss the relative merits of
our approach compared to more standard methods at the end of §3.2.
Because our focus here is on estimating the congestion parameter θ for a given road and bike
lane network, we assume x and d are ﬁxed and suppress dependence on them throughout this
section.
We ﬁrst deﬁne the following loss function:
Ln(θ) =minimize
φ,v
∥v −z∥2
2
(12a)
subject to (φ,v) ∈Ψ(θ),
(12b)
where ∥·∥2 is the ℓ2-norm. Intuitively, the loss Ln(θ) measures the error between the observed ﬂows
z and the ﬂows v, where the constraint (φ,v) ∈Ψ(θ) forces v to satisfy Wardrop equilibrium under
θ. In other words, the loss Ln(θ) is a measure of distance between the observed traﬃc ﬂows and
the equilibrium ﬂows implied by θ. The estimate is then obtained by minimizing the loss function
over a parameter set Θ:
ˆθn ∈argmin
θ∈Θ
Ln(θ).
(13)
The estimation problem (13) can be viewed as an analog to non-linear least squares regression
(Jennrich (1969), Wu (1981)). The main distinction between (13) and traditional non-linear least
squares regression is that the response variables z are not observations of a non-linear function
in closed form, but are instead noisy observations of equilibrium segment ﬂows v∗(θ) which are
implicitly deﬁned. As a result, enforcing the equilibrium conditions (12b) makes solving (13) com-
putationally non-trivial.
To see the intuition behind how θ is identiﬁed, note that variation throughout the network in the
OD driving demands dD
w and road segment features qs induces variation over the road segments in
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

13
the observed vehicle ﬂows zs and travel times tD
s . Because all travel times are determined by the
common congestion function αs(θ) given in (3), this variation in OD driving demands and segment
features combined with the structure of the road network helps pin down θ.
Under appropriate conditions, it can be shown that the sequence of estimates ˆθn from solving
(13) are statistically consistent, in that they converge to ground-truth, data-generating parameters
as the size of the network tends to inﬁnity. In Appendix A.1, we present suﬃcient conditions for
the consistency of the estimates ˆθn, including an identiﬁability condition related to the structure
of the road network.
3.2.
Inverse Optimization Formulation and Solution Method
Next, we present an exact reformulation of the estimation problem (13) and describe a corre-
sponding solution method. Our reformulation relies on expressing (13) as an inverse optimization
problem (Chan et al. 2021). In particular, we leverage a classical result that shows the vehicle
ﬂows in Wardrop equilibrium can be attained at the solution to a convex optimization problem
(Dafermos and Sparrow 1969). As a consequence, the problem of estimating θ from data of the
form (11) amounts to solving an inverse optimization problem. In general, inverse optimization
problems are themselves mathematical programs, and are often non-convex as a consequence of
enforcing optimality or equilibrium conditions, which is the case in our setting as well.
To express (13) as an inverse optimization problem, we develop an explicit representation of the
equilibrium conditions (φ,v) ∈Ψ(θ). To that end, consider the following “Wardrop least-squares”
formulation:
minimize
θ,φ,v,b
∥v −z∥2
2
(14a)
subject to ∇φg (φ,θ)
⊤φ −
 dD⊤b = 0,
(14b)
X
{w∈W|p∈PD
w }
bw ≤∇φpg (φ,θ),
p ∈PD,
(14c)
(WLS)
X
p∈PD
w
φp = dD
w,
w ∈W,
(14d)
vs =
X
{p∈PD|s∈SD
p }
φp,
s ∈SD,
(14e)
θ ∈Θ,
(14f)
where
g(φ,θ) =
X
s∈S

1
2 · αs(x,θ) ·


X
{p∈PD|s∈SD
p }
φp


2
+ Ts ·


X
{p∈PD|s∈SD
p }
φp



.
(15)
We now present a result that establishes an equivalence between the estimation problem given in
(13) and the optimization problem WLS:
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

14
Proposition 1. Let θ∗be attained at an optimal solution to WLS. Then θ∗∈argminθ∈ΘLn(θ).
All proofs are contained in Appendix H. At a high level, Proposition 1 relies on a well-known
result which shows that equilibrium network ﬂows (φ,v) ∈Ψ(θ) correspond to the solution to a
convex optimization problem (Dafermos and Sparrow 1969). Expressing the optimality conditions
of that convex program as a variational inequality and invoking linear programming duality9 then
yields the constraints (14b) and (14c), which are together equivalent to the Wardrop equilibrium
conditions (6). This implies that a solution (θ,φ,v,b) that satisﬁes (14b)-(14e) must also satisfy
(φ,v) ∈Ψ(θ), which yields the equivalence between (13) and (14). We note here that formulation
(14) is also a mathematical program with equilibrium constraints (MPEC), and as a consequence
falls into the general MPEC-based framework for structural estimation proposed by Su and Judd
(2012).
The key challenge in obtaining solutions to (14) is that constraint (14b) is a non-linear equality
constraint, which are known to pose numerical diﬃculties with respect to ﬁnding feasible solutions
(Hearn and Ramana 1998). To overcome this, we dualize constraint (14b) by introducing a penalty
parameter λ > 0 and the auxiliary variable ϵ, which yields the following approximation of WLS:
minimize
θ,φ,v,b,ϵ
∥v −z∥2
2 + λ · ϵ
(16a)
(WLS-A)
subject to ∇φg (φ,θ)
⊤φ −
 dD⊤b ≤ϵ,
(16b)
(14c) −(14f).
In the approximation WLS-A, the loss (16a) can be interpreted as a linear combination of the “ﬂow
error” ∥v −z∥2
2 and the “Wardrop error” ϵ.10
In addition to circumventing the numerical issues of WLS, the approximation WLS-A has the
advantage of being a multi-convex optimization problem, meaning the decision variables can be
partitioned into separate blocks such that the optimization problem is convex in one block of
variables when the others are held ﬁxed (Xu and Yin 2013). Speciﬁcally, using (15), it can be shown
that ﬁxing (θ,b) in WLS-A yields a convex subproblem in (φ,v), and vice versa. As a result, locally
optimal solutions can be obtained using an iterative block coordinate descent method, which is
the standard approach to solving multi-convex optimization problems (see e.g., Bertsekas (1997),
Xu and Yin (2013), and Hong et al. (2017)). Details on our implementation of block coordinate
descent on the approximate inverse optimization problem WLS-A are provided in Appendix A.3. In
9 See Aghassi et al. (2006) for details on the on the reformulation of variational inequalities using linear programming
duality.
10 Note that multiplying both sides of (14c) by φ yields ∇φg (φ,θ)⊤φ −
 dD⊤b ≥0, which implies the Wardrop
error ϵ is always non-negative.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

15
Appendix F, we numerically evaluate the validity of the approximation using synthetic data that
mimic the empirical data distribution from our case study in §5.
As noted earlier, our method is tailored for a setting where the equilibrium path-level driving
times tD
p are unobserved, which requires endogenizing them within the estimation procedure. If
suitable data for tD
p is available, then θ can be directly estimated from (4) and (5) through linear
regression or a generalized method of moments (GMM) estimator, without the need to enforce
Wardrop equilibrium conditions during estimation. Compared to these standard econometric tech-
niques, our method has milder data requirements, but comes at the cost of a more complex esti-
mation procedure and a higher computational burden. Our method also naturally handles missing
observations for the segment-level vehicle ﬂows zs, which would need to be imputed if applying
regression or GMM, even if the path times tD
p are observed. Lastly, our MPEC-based method
does not easily allow for statistical inference (e.g., conﬁdence intervals for θ),11 which is otherwise
straightforward for linear regression and GMM under appropriate conditions.
3.3.
Estimation of Commuter Mode Choice Model
Given the congestion parameters θ, estimating the mode choice model parameters β outlined in
§2.3 follows from standard methods. Speciﬁcally, let ˜θ be the estimate from solving WLS-A. Then
the corresponding equilibrium segment ﬂows v∗(˜θ) are given by solving a convex optimization
problem (see the proof of Proposition 1 in Appendix H). Let ˜x encode the status quo bike lane
network under which the observed mode shares dm
w are generated. It follows from (6) that the
equilibrium travel time for each OD pair w ∈W is given by
tD
w(˜x, ˜θ) = min
p∈PD
w
n
tD
p

˜x, ˜θ,v∗(˜θ)
o
.
(17)
Therefore, the status quo bike lane network ˜x and the estimate ˜θ together pin down the travel times
tD
w(˜x, ˜θ), and thus the driving utilities uD
w(˜x, ˜θ). Similarly, the cycling utility under the existing
bike lane network is given by uC
w(˜x), where the coverage ρw(˜x) is determined by (9).12
Because we observe commuters’ mode choices aggregated as OD-level mode shares (i.e., P m
w ),
we estimate β following the literature of linear logit models (Theil 1969, McFadden et al. 1973,
Malhotra 1984, Cooper 1993). Speciﬁcally, by taking the logarithm of both sides of (10), we obtain
log
 P D
w

−log
 P O
w

=
 uD
w(x,θ) −uO
w(x,θ)

11 In general, obtaining conﬁdence intervals from MPEC-based estimators is both analytically and computationally
challenging, and is a relatively open question (see, e.g., Reich and Judd (2020)).
12 In practice, estimating the mode choice model requires us to specify, for each w ∈W, the set of possible driving
paths PD
w and the cycling path pC
w. This can be done by querying route planning software such as Google Maps,
which we do in §5.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

16
= βD
0 + βD
1 · tD
w (x,θ) + ( ˜βD)⊤XD
w −(βO
1 · tO
w + ( ˜βO)⊤XO
w) + ξD
w ,
(18a)
log
 P C
w

−log
 P O
w

=
 uC
w(x,θ) −uO
w(x,θ)

= βC
0 + βC
1 · tC
w (x,θ) + βC
2 · ρw (x) + ( ˜βC)⊤XC
w −(βO
1 · tO
w + ( ˜βO)⊤XO
w) + ξC
w,
(18b)
which makes the estimation of β amenable to linear regression. However, the use of ordinary least
squares (OLS) regression may lead to biased estimates of βD
1 and βC
2 due to potential endogeneity
of the driving travel time tD
w(x,θ) and bike lane coverage ρw(x), respectively. In particular, the
demand for driving inﬂuences the driving time tD
w(x,θ), leading to correlation between tD
w(x,θ)
and the error term ξD
w . Similarly, there may be correlation between the error term ξC
w and bike
lane coverage ρw(x), due to, for example, city planners selecting the locations of bike lanes based
on existing cycling demand. In our empirical study, we address these sources of endogeneity using
instrumental variables, which follows prior work on cycling infrastructure planning (Kabra et al.
2020, He et al. 2021) and is discussed further in §5.3.
4.
Bike Lane Path Selection with Ridership and Congestion Eﬀects
Equipped with estimates of θ and β, we now present a prescriptive model for planning a bike lane
network x from the perspective of a city planner. §4.1 formulates the main optimization model
for selecting bike lanes, §4.2 develops an approximation scheme, and §4.3 discusses additional
constraints that can be included to limit the impact on traﬃc congestion.
4.1.
Optimization Model for Bike Lane Path Selection
Our prescriptive model seeks to maximize cycling ridership while satisfying constraints on bike
lane continuity, budget, and the traﬃc equilibrium. Next, we describe each component of the
prescriptive model, starting with the constraints.
Continuity. Continuity of bike lanes is often a priority of city planners (Federal Highway Admin-
istration 2006, Bao et al. 2017). To that end, we consider bike lane design decisions at the path
level: let y ∈{0,1}|W| represent binary decision variables where yw = 1 if and only if a bike lane
is installed along the entirety of cycling path pC
w. For notational convenience, let SC
w be the set of
segments that lie on path pC
w. Because xs = 1 if and only if a bike lane is located on segment s, we
enforce coherence between x and y using the constraints
xs ≥yw,
s ∈SC
w, w ∈W,
(19a)
xs ≤
X
{w∈W|s∈SC
w }
yw,
s ∈S.
(19b)
Bike lane budget. Let L = P
s∈S ℓs be the total length of all road segments eligible for bike lane
construction. We assume the city planner can expand the bike lane network by at most B miles
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

17
where B ∈[0,L]. This bike lane budget may be due to ﬁnancial, scheduling, or other logistical
constraints – we abstract away from those speciﬁcs and focus on total mileage, which yields the
constraint
X
s∈S
ℓs · xs ≤B.
(20)
Note that the model can accommodate pre-existing bike lanes by adding the constraints xs = 1
for all road segments where a bike lane already exists, and dropping those segments from the
summation in (20) so they do not consume the bike lane budget B.
Traﬃc equilibrium. For ease of exposition, let d = (dC,dD,dO) represent all mode-speciﬁc
demands. To endogenize traﬃc congestion and cycling ridership within the optimization model, we
include constraints that force the network ﬂows (φ,v) to abide by Wardrop equilibrium and the
demands d to follow the MNL mode choice model. To that end, we deﬁne
Γ(x) = {(d,φ,v) | d satisﬁes (10) and (φ,v) ∈Ψ(x,dD,θ)}.
(21)
The set Γ(x) represents all equilibrium traﬃc assignments under the bike lane network x, in
addition to the parameters θ and β. We can then capture the eﬀect of a candidate bike lane plan
x on the ensuing commuter mode choice and congestion by enforcing the equilibrium condition
(d,φ,v) ∈Γ(x).
(22)
As discussed in §4.2 below, enforcing this equilibrium condition will be the main computational
challenge in solving the optimization model.
Cycling ridership. Lastly, we assume the city planner’s goal is to maximize total cycling ridership,
which is consistent with the strategic goals of several municipal transportation planning agencies.
For example, Chicago’s DOT states that “ridership is the key criterion for evaluating the success
of bicycle infrastructure” (Chicago DOT 2020), and New York City aims to have “1 out of every
10 trips in NYC be taken by bicycle by 2050” (DOT 2019). Noting that total cycling ridership is
given by P
w∈W dC
w(x), the model for the bike lane path selection problem (BL) can be written as
maximize
x,y,d,φ,v
X
w∈W
dC
w
(23a)
subject to xs ≥yw,
s ∈SC
w, w ∈W,
(23b)
xs ≤
X
{w∈W|s∈SC
w }
yw,
s ∈S,
(23c)
(BL)
X
s∈S
ℓs · xs ≤B,
(23d)
(d,φ,v) ∈Γ(x),
(23e)
x ∈{0,1}|S|,
(23f)
y ∈{0,1}|W|.
(23g)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

18
The formulation above is computationally challenging because the decision variables x,y are binary
and the traﬃc equilibrium condition (23e) is non-convex and non-linear as a result of depending on
multinomial logit choice probabilities (see (10)). In the next section, we show that BL can be approx-
imated as a mixed-integer linear program (MILP), which yields a formulation that is amenable to
commercial optimization solvers, and we characterize the approximation error explicitly.
4.2.
Linear Approximation and Suboptimality Bound
The approximation of BL consists of two steps: First, we reformulate (23) exactly by leveraging an
equivalence between the equilibrium condition (23e) and a related convex optimization problem.
Second, we present a linearization technique to approximate the remaining non-convex terms as
piecewise linear functions, which yields a MILP.
Reformulation of equilibrium conditions. To reformulate (23) exactly, we ﬁrst present a result
that shows the equilibrium traﬃc assignments Γ(x) is equivalent to the set of optimal solutions to
a convex optimization problem.
Proposition 2 (User equilibrium). For any bike lane network x, (d,φ,v) ∈Γ(x) if and only if
(d,φ,v) solves the convex optimization problem
minimize
d,φ,v
S(x,θ,d,v)
(24a)
subject to ˜dw =
X
m∈M
dm
w , w ∈W,
(24b)
(φ,v) ∈Ω
 dD
,
(24c)
where
S (x,θ,d,v) =
X
w∈W


X
m∈{O,C}
Z dm
w
0
(−um
w (x)) · dd +
Z dD
w
0
−

βD
0 + ( ˜βD)⊤XD
w

· dd

−βD
1
X
s∈S
Z vs
0
tD
s (x,θ,v) · dv

(25a)
+
X
w∈W
X
m∈M
dm
w · log (dm
w ).
(25b)
Further, the equilibrium mode demands d and traﬃc ﬂows v attained at a solution to (24) are unique.
For conciseness, we suppress the dependence of the function S (·) on θ in the remainder of
this section. Proposition 2 follows closely from Abdulaal and LeBlanc (1979), Dafermos (1982)
and Fisk (1980).13 Following the literature, we refer to formulation (24) as the user equilibrium
problem because it speciﬁes equilibrium mode choices and driving routes. The objective S (x,d,v) is
composed of two parts: a system-wide generalized cost term (25a), which is the sum of “disutilites”
(i.e., negative of utilities) of all commuters, and an entropy term (25b). Note that S (x,d,v) is
13 Our formulation diﬀers in that (1) Abdulaal and LeBlanc (1979) only considers two modes, public transit and
driving, without specifying mode-split functions, (2) Dafermos (1982) assumes consumers adopt the travel mode with
the lowest cost, and (3) Fisk (1980) focuses on the mode of driving only.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

19
related to the observable road segment features q(x) and traﬃc ﬂow v via the driving time function
tD
s (x,θ,vs). Further, because tD
s (x,θ,vs) strictly increases in vs, S (x,d,v) is strictly convex in
(d,v).
Proposition 2 allows us to replace the equilibrium condition (23e) in the bike lane path selection
model BL with the equivalent condition
(d,φ,v) ∈
argmin
d,(φ,v)∈Ω(dD)
S(x,d,v),
(26)
This substitution transforms problem (BL) into a bi-level optimization problem (Dempe 2002). At
a high level, the advantage of this substitution is that it allows us to sidestep use of the non-convex
function (10) in the path selection model and instead work with the convex problem (26), which is
more tractable with respect to linearization. Further, as discussed below, the linearization of (26)
yields a bi-level program with a linear lower level problem, which can be reformulated exactly as
a MILP (Fortuny-Amat and McCarl 1981).
The uniqueness result in Proposition 2 is important in that it ensures that the equilibrium mode
shares (i.e., cycling ridership) are identiﬁed from the bike lane network x alone. This uniqueness
allows us to address the network design problem without requiring additional assumptions on the
ensuing equilibrium.
Linearization and MILP reformulation. Next, we describe a linearization technique that
approximates BL as a MILP. Note that the upper-level objective function and constraints (23a)-
(23d), (23f), and (23g) are all linear, so we focus on approximating (23e), which by Proposition
2 is equivalent to the user equilibrium problem (24). First, note that by evaluating each term in
S (x,d,v) deﬁned in (25), it can be re-written as
S (x,d,v) =
X
w∈W
−

uO
wdO
w + uC
wdC
w +

βD
0 + ( ˜βD)⊤XD
dD
w

−βD
1
X
s∈S
(Ts · vs) −βD
1
X
s∈S
1
2αs (x) · v2
s
|
{z
}
ξs(vs)
+
X
w∈W
X
m∈M
dm
w log (dm
w )
|
{z
}
ψ(dm
w )
,
(27)
where, for ﬁxed x, the non-linearity is due to the ﬁnal two terms, labeled ξs (vs) and ψ (dm
w ). Each
of these terms is convex in v and d, respectively, which allows us to approximate them using
well-known techniques from linear programming (see, e.g., §1.3 of Bertsimas and Tsitsiklis (1997)).
To linearize S(x,d,v), we approximate ξs (vs) with a piecewise linear function, where
ξr
s (vs) = αs (x) · vr
s · vs −1
2 · αs (x) · (vr
s)
2
(28)
is the rth line segment and vr
s is the rth sample point. We choose each sample point vr
s such
that the slopes αs(x) · vr
s are equidistant in the interval αs (x) · [v, ¯v], where ¯v = maxs∈S {vs} and
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

20
v = mins∈S {vs}. Note that linearity of αs(x) implies ξr
s(vs) is also linear in x, which is important for
approximating BL as a MILP. Similarly, we approximate ψ (dm
w ) with a piecewise linear function,
where
ψr
w (dm
w ) = [1 + log (dr
w)] · dm
w −dr
w
(29)
is the rth line segment and dr is the rth sample point. We choose each sample point dr
w such that
the slopes are equidistant in the interval

1 + log (dw),1 + log
  ¯dw

, where ¯dw = maxm∈M {dm
w } and
dw = minm∈M {dm
w }. Next, let Rξ and Rψ index the linear segments used to approximate ξs(vs) and
ψ(dw
m), respectively. Then using (28) and (29), the linear approximation of the user equilibrium
problem (24) can be written as
minimize
d,φ,v,ψ,ξ SL(x,d,v,ψ,ξ)
(30a)
subject to ˜dw =
X
m∈M
dm
w ,
w ∈W,
(30b)
(φ,v) ∈Ω(dD),
(30c)
ξs ≥ξr
s(x,vs),
r ∈Rξ,s ∈S,
(30d)
ψm
w ≥ψr
w (dm
w ),
r ∈Rψ,w ∈W,m ∈M,
(30e)
where
SL(x,d,v,ψ,ξ) =
X
w∈W
−

uO
wdO
w + uC
wdC
w +

βD
0 + ( ˜βD)⊤XD
dD
w

−βD
1
X
s∈S
Ts · vs −βD
1
X
s∈S
ξs +
X
w∈W
X
m∈M
ψm
w .
(31)
The linear approximation of BL is then given by
maximize
x,y,d,φ,v,ψ,ξ
X
w∈W
dC
w
(32a)
(BL-A)
subject to (23b) −(23d),
(32b)
(d,φ,v,ψ,ξ) = argmin
d,φ,v,ψ,ξ
SL(x,d,v,ψ,ξ),
(32c)
subject to (30b) −(30e).
Theorem 1 presents our main result of this section, which characterizes the error due to the
linearization. Let C(x) = P
w∈W dC
w(x) be the cycling ridership under bike lane plan x (i.e.,
the objective of BL). Further, deﬁne α = mins∈S,x∈{0,1}|S| {αs (x)}, d = minw∈W
n
˜dw
o
, and ¯d =
maxw∈W
n
˜dw
o
.
Theorem 1 (Suboptimality bound). Let x∗and ¯x be optimal solutions to the exact bike lane
planning formulation BL and the approximation BL-A, respectively. Then
C (x∗) −C(¯x) ≤2 · µ1 ·
p
|W|
 
µ2 ·
p
|S|
|Rξ| −1 + µ3 ·
p
3 · |W|
|Rψ| −1
!
,
(33)
where µ1 = max
n
¯d,−
1
βD
1 ·α
o
, µ2 = maxs∈S {−βD
1 · αs(x) · (¯v −v)}, and µ3 = log
  ¯d

−log (d).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

21
From Theorem 1, it can be seen that the error bound depends on the size of the road network
(via |S| and |W|), variation in traﬃc ﬂows (µ2) and variation in mode demands (µ3), and that
the dependence on the number of linear segments is O

1
|Rξ| +
1
|Rψ|

. For practically-sized road
networks, the optimality gap in Theorem 1 can be made small using a modest number of linear
segments. For example, in our empirical study in §5, we use |Rψ| = |Rξ| = 15, which yields an
optimality gap in the cycling share of 3.2% (see Appendix D.1 for details).
Finally, to solve BL-A, we leverage the fact that a bi-level program with a linear lower-level
problem can be expressed exactly as a MILP (Fortuny-Amat and McCarl 1981). The complete
formulation and additional technical details are contained in Appendix D.
4.3.
Limiting Congestion
In practice, city planners are sensitive to the eﬀect of bike lanes on increasing congestion (Khany
2022). Our model can accommodate these considerations via constraints on the increase in driving
times. While there does not exist a universal measure of traﬃc congestion, we provide two possible
examples of how congestion may be limited within our framework. The ﬁrst approach is to ensure
that the total demand-weighted driving time is increased by at most a factor of τ, which can be
enforced by adding to BL-A the constraint
X
w∈W
dD
w · tD
w (x,v) ≤(1 + τ)
X
w∈W
˜dD
w · tD
w (˜x, ˜v),
(34)
where ˜dD
w, ˜x and ˜v are the status quo driving demand, bike lane network and traﬃc ﬂows, prior
to the addition of any new bike lanes.
Alternatively, we may require that the worst case increase in driving times over all possible
routes is at most a factor of τ. This can be enforced via the following constraints:
tD
p (x,v) ≤(1 + τ) · tD
p (˜x, ˜v),
p ∈PD.
(35)
The choice of congestion control depends on the priorities of city planners. In particular, constraint
(35) may be especially useful if planners wish to avoid sharp spikes in congestion in any part of
the network, which can generate backlash and erode public support for bike lanes. In our empirical
study, we adopt this latter set of constraints, which allows for more granular control of congestion
impacts. Note that Theorem 1 applies to the formulation (32), and may no longer hold if either of
the constraints (34) or (35) are added.
5.
Empirical Study: Expanding Chicago’s Cycling Infrastructure
We choose Chicago for our study because it is the one of the most congested cities in the United
States (Inrix 2020), and also because expanding cycling infrastructure is a major policy priority in
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

22
Chicago, which in 2021 announced plans to add 100 miles of bike lanes in the following two years
(Chicago DOT 2021). Chicago has experienced rapid growth in the demand for cycling – from
2000 to 2018, the share of daily commuters that cycled more than tripled from 0.5% to 1.8% (US
Census Bureau 2020).
New bike lanes are typically planned based on current ridership and population density, with
little consideration of potential congestion eﬀects (Chicago DOT 2020). Further, there are few
extant methods for estimating the eﬀect of changes to urban infrastructure on traﬃc congestion.
To that end, the goal of this empirical study is two-fold: (1) to estimate the eﬀect of expanding
Chicago’s cycling infrastructure on cycling ridership and traﬃc congestion, and (2) to compare the
performance of our recommended bike lane network with alternative methods that ignore ridership
and congestion eﬀects. More broadly, our study demonstrates how data-driven methods might
support city planners in making decisions regarding urban infrastructure.
The remainder of this section is organized as follows. §5.1 provides an overview of the data used
in the study and describes how the data enter into our modeling framework. §5.2 speciﬁes the
traﬃc congestion model and presents the estimates of the congestion parameters θ, which are val-
idated through an out-of-sample travel time prediction task. §5.3 speciﬁes the mode choice model,
describes its estimation using instrumental variables, and presents estimates of the mode choice
parameters β. §5.4 presents the results from the bike lane optimization model, which are estimates
of the change in cycling ridership and traﬃc congestion resulting from our model’s prescriptions.
Lastly, §5.5 validates our method through a comparison with three intuitive benchmark methods
for bike lane planning.
5.1.
Data Description and Sources
Our study focuses on a contiguous region of downtown Chicago, depicted as the shaded area in
Figure 1. We select this region due to the availability of detailed bike share trip data, which we
use to estimate the mode choice parameters β. When estimating the congestion parameter θ, we
make use of vehicle traﬃc ﬂow data from the entire City of Chicago (larger area in Figure 1), so
to maximize the data available to the estimation procedure. Next, we provide an overview of the
data used in our study and their sources.
1. Road network topology and features. To construct the road network, we ﬁrst retrieve
the locations of 801 census tracts within the City of Chicago from 2010 U.S. census data (Chicago
Data Portal 2010). We construct the node set I by assuming a node exists at the geometric centroid
of each census tract. We construct the set of road segments S by querying OpenStreetMap (OSM
2021), which resulted in a total of 31,815 road segments within Chicago’s city boundaries.
We also obtained data on three road features at the segment level: length (ℓs), number of lanes
(ns), and lane width (ws). These characteristics are used to construct the feature vector qs for each
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

23
Census tract centroid
Study region
Roads
Census tract
0
2.5
5
1.25
Miles
Figure 1
Study region: City of Chicago.
road segment, which is an input to the estimation procedure described in §3.1. Segment length ls
and number of lanes ns were extracted from OpenStreetMap. The lengths of the road segments are
primarily determined by the city’s well-deﬁned block pattern (City of Chicago Planning and Policy
Division 2003). Lane widths ws are imputed based on guidelines from the Illinois Department of
Transportation Bureau of Local Roads and Streets Manual (Illinois DOT 2018), which provides
recommendation of lane widths based on road classiﬁcation and traﬃc counts.
2. Bike lane network. We extract Chicago’s bike lane network as of 2018 (Chicago Data Portal
2018). We match the segments of the bike lane network with the constructed road network, which
allows us to construct the status quo bike lane network ˜x, representing a total of length of 265
miles. We assume bike lanes have a width of 1.5 meters in accordance with the Local Roads and
Streets Manual (Illinois DOT 2018).
3. Vehicle traﬃc ﬂows. We collect vehicle ﬂow data throughout the network from the Highway
Performance Monitoring System (HPMS) (FHA 2018), which correspond to the observed ﬂows z
in the estimation procedure described in §3.1. This dataset contains information on the Average
Annual Daily Traﬃc (AADT) that ﬂows through major road segments. We focus on average traﬃc
ﬂows during the morning rush hour (6am-10am) in the year 2018. We examine morning rush hours
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

24
because they represent a sizeable share of all traﬃc (24% of all vehicle ﬂows, Illinois Department
of Transportation (2018)), and commuters are the main beneﬁciaries of improvements to cycling
infrastructure (Chicago DOT 2020). We match the road segments in the HPMS dataset onto the
OpenStreetMap network using the ST-Matching algorithm proposed by Lou et al. (2009). Because
HPMS does not contain traﬃc data for low volume road segments, we obtain AADT data for a
subset of 12,447 segments in the network (out of 31,815).
We note here that the vehicle ﬂow data are annual averages for each hour of the day, and that
we do not observe day-to-day variations in traﬃc. While daily vehicle ﬂows would provide useful
variation, the use of annual average ﬂows is well-suited for our purposes because of our focus on
urban infrastructure planning, which are long-term and usually permanent decisions. Further, we
focus on traﬃc congestion during morning rush hours, which is primarily commuter traﬃc and
thus relatively stable.
4. Travel mode choices. To construct the mode-speciﬁc demands dm
w for each OD pair w ∈W,
we ﬁrst obtain commuter ﬂow data from the Origin-Destination Employment Statistics dataset
maintained by the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) (US Census Bureau 2018).
The dataset speciﬁes total commuting ﬂows between pairs of census tracts, which correspond to
the total commute demand ˜dw in the mode choice model. We only focus on OD pairs with a strictly
positive number of commuters and where the origin and destination census tracts are distinct.14
This resulted in a total of 146,847 OD pairs in our study region with strictly positive demand (out
of a possible 801×800 = 640,800 OD pairs, where 801 is the number of census tracts), denoted by
W.
We retrieve census tract-level mode shares from the 2014 - 2019 American Community Survey
(ACS) (US Census Bureau 2020), which speciﬁes mode shares of driving, cycling, and all other
options for commuters residing within each census tract. Multiplying the mode shares with the
total commuter volume provides an estimate of the total demand for each mode of transport
originating at each census tract. Because the census data only deﬁnes mode demands at the origin
of each OD pair, we determine OD demands for driving (dD
w) by imputing destinations jointly
while estimating θ. Appendix F presents experimental results using synthetic data that show this
procedure generates accurate estimates of θ.
5. Bike share trips. We computed the cycling demand dC
w for each OD pair w using cycling
trip data made available by Chicago’s bike share system Divvy (Divvy 2021). The Divvy trip data
contains information on individual bike rentals, including timestamps indicating the beginning and
14 Within-census tract trips account for approximately 7% of all commuter trips. These trips cannot be accounted for
in our model because they correspond to a distance of zero. With respect to cycling speciﬁcally, approximately 6.2%
(47,919 out of 791,034) Divvy trips are made within census tract, with the median cycling time being 4.5 minutes.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

25
end of each rental, and the addresses of the bike share stations where each rental was taken from
and returned to. We selected all trips taken in 2018 during the morning rush hour period (6am
to 10am), resulting in a total of 791,034 bike share trips. We geocoded the addresses of all Divvy
stations and matched them to Chicago’s census tracts to determine, for each origin census tract,
the share of Divvy trips that arrived at each destination tract. Then for each origin census tract,
we multiplied the destination trip-shares obtained from Divvy data with the total cycling demand
originating at each census tract (obtained from the 2014 - 2019 ACS commute data described
above) to determine the OD cycling demand dC
w. A visualization of all Divvy stations in our study
region is presented in Figure in Appendix B.15
6. Demographics and points of interest. Our mode choice model includes several covariates
corresponding to demographics and characteristics of the urban environment. In particular, for each
census tract i ∈I, we retrieved the median household income (hii), the vehicle ownership rate (i.e.,
fraction of households with at least one vehicle) (voi) and population density (pdi), all obtained
from the 2014 - 2019 ACS data. We also queried the Google Places API to identify “points of
interest” in each census tract, including parks, restaurants, shopping malls, supermarkets, bakeries,
bars, universities, hospitals, and libraries. The presence of each of these points of interest at the
origin and destination of OD pair w are included as covariates in the mode choice model using a
dummy variable, and are collectively represented by the binary vector piw. Further, we also obtain
the number of public transportation stations (subways, buses, trains, and light rails) in each census
tract by querying the Google Places API. We include the total count of transit station in the origin
census tract of each OD pair w, denoted by tsw, as a covariate in the outside option utility (see
§5.3).
7. Driving routes, cycling routes, and public transit time. For each OD pair w, we
constructed the path sets PD
w and the cycling path pC
w by querying the Google Directions API
(Google Maps 2021). Speciﬁcally, we constructed PD
w by obtaining the top three recommended
driving routes for the given OD pair, using census tract centroids for the start and end locations,
and matching the returned routes to the road network.16 In addition to providing routes, the Google
Directions API also returns the travel time along each route; we queried the API at 12am to obtain
the free-ﬂow driving time parameters tD
s , s ∈S, along with the public transit time tO
w.
15 Our computation of dC
w makes the assumption that for each origin census tract, the distribution over destination
census tracts is the same for Divvy and non-Divvy cyclists; violations of this assumption would introduce errors into
our results. However, this is less likely to be a strong assumption in our setting given that our study region contains
a high concentration of Divvy stations, as shown in Figure 8 in Appendix B.
16 Our assumption that all commuter demand begins and ends at the centroid of a census tract is an approximation
of true commute patterns. For context, the average radius of a census tract in the full area of Figure 1 is 500 meters,
and the mean and median straight-line distances between OD pairs with positive demand are 9,062 and 7,868 meters,
respectively.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

26
Similarly, for each OD pair w, we determined the cycling path pC
w and the corresponding cycling
time tC
w by retrieving the topmost recommended cycling path from the Google Directions API. We
then constructed SC
w (the set of road segments that constitute the cycling path pC
w) by matching
the recommended cycling route with the road network. This matching process also allowed us to
compute the bike lane coverage ρw(˜x) for each path pC
w.
To capture the eﬀect of elevation changes on cycling utility, we also determined the average
elevation change (aecw) along each cycling path pC
w, w ∈W, which is a measure of the total vertical
distance, either uphill or downhill, that must be traversed by cyclists on the cycling path. For
each path w, we computed elevation changes by dividing each cycling path into 99 equally-distant
segments and querying the altitude at each end point from the Google Elevation API, which
generated the elevation vector [elw,1,··· ,elw,100]. The average elevation change for path w is then
given by aecw =
P99
i=1 |elw,i+1−elw,i|
99
, given in units of meters.
8. Taxi trips. We validate our estimates of the congestion parameter θ using taxi trip data from
Chicago. These records report the origin and destination census tracts, and duration of all taxi
trips made within city boundaries (Chicago Data Portal 2021). For consistency with the traﬃc ﬂow
data described above, we selected all taxi trips taken during morning rush hours (6am to 10am)
on weekdays in 2018 between our set of OD pairs W, resulting in 1,408,833 trips between 3,698
OD pairs. The taxi trip data serves as an out-of-sample dataset for evaluating our model’s ability
to predict driving travel times in the network.
5.2.
Estimation and Validation of Congestion Parameter θ
We now describe the estimation of the congestion parameters θ, beginning by specifying the con-
gestion functions αs(x,θ). First, for each road segment s ∈S, we construct the feature vector
qs (xs) =




1,ℓs,ns · ws,
ℓs
ns·ws

,
if xs = 0,

1,ℓs,ns · ws −∆w,
ℓs
ns·ws−∆w

,
if xs = 1,
(36)
where ℓs is the segment’s length, ns is the number of lanes, and ws is the width of each lane.
Following the Illinois Local Roads and Streets Manual (Illinois DOT 2018), we assume the presence
of a bike lane (xs = 1) narrows the road segment by 1.5 meters on each side, which implies ∆w = 3
meters. For each s ∈S, the congestion function is then given by
αs(xs,θ) = θ⊤qs(xs) = θ0 + θ1 · ℓs + θ2 (ns · ws −∆w · xs) + θ3

ℓs
ns · ws −∆w · xs

.
(37)
Following the model outlined in §2.2, the segment travel time is then
tD
s (xs,θ,vs) = αs(xs,θ) · vs + Ts,
(38)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

27
where θ = (θ0,θ1,θ2,θ3) is the parameter vector to be estimated.17 As noted in §5.1, only the driving
demand at the origin of each OD pair is available from the American Community Survey data. We
therefore slightly modify WLS-A by jointly imputing the driving demand dD
w with the congestion
parameter θ (see Appendix A for details). In Appendix F, we present numerical evidence that this
modiﬁcation of WLS-A continues to produce reasonable estimates of θ.
Because AADT counts are not available for all possible road segments, we measure the ﬂow error
∥v −z∥2
2 only over the segments for which traﬃc ﬂow data is available (|Sobs| = 12,447), assuming
Wardrop equilibrium holds over the full network (|S| = 31,815). To evaluate the trade-oﬀbetween
the ﬂow error ∥v−z∥2
2 and the Wardrop error ϵ, we re-solved the estimation problem for each value
of the penalty parameter λ in {1.0,1.5,2.0,2.5,3.0} × 103. We validate the model ﬁt at each value
of λ by measuring how well it predicts the the travel time of taxi trips in Chicago (see §5.1).18 In
particular, we matched each of the 1,408,833 taxi trips that began between 6am and 10am in 2018
to an OD pair based on the trip’s start and end locations. We then selected all OD pairs for which
there was at least one trip and obtained 3,698 OD pairs. We measure predictive performance by
comparing the model’s predicted travel time with the average taxi trip duration for each of these
OD pairs.
Among the values of λ tested, we found λ = 2500 to yield the minimal prediction error in taxi
travel times, with an average absolute error of 1.34 minutes and an average relative error weighted
by number of taxi trips of 14% (see Appendix A.4 for additional details on the selection of λ).
Figure 2 depicts predictive performance on the taxi trip data. In Figure 2(a), each dot is an OD
pair, and the correlation is 2 is 0.85, suggesting a sensible model ﬁt.19 Figure 2(b) shows the
distribution of prediction errors, with and without weighting each OD pair by the number of taxi
trips for that pair.
Table 1 reports the estimates for congestion parameter θ under λ = 2500. The sign of the esti-
mates suggest that travel time increases in segment length and decreases in total segment width
(due to increased road capacity), which aligns with intuition. An important caveat to the estimates
in Table 1 is that there may exist unobserved variables (e.g., speed limits, road conditions) that
17 Although our speciﬁcation for the congestion function αs(xs,θ) in (37) depends on physical features of the road
network that are likely to inﬂuence driving times (i.e., length and width), our approach emphasizes predictive per-
formance and should not be interpreted as a structural model.
18 The penalty λ is a user-speciﬁed tuning parameter, which are typically chosen through cross validation. However,
because cross-validation assumes independent observations, it is inapplicable in our setting due to the data being
generated by a single connected network. For this reason, we use the taxi trips as our out-of-sample validation dataset.
19 Our method’s out-of-sample performance is comparable to extant methods for travel time prediction on road
networks. For example, Zhan et al. (2013) present an MNL choice model for driving route selection, which has mean
relative errors ranging from 17% to 41% in predicting the travel times of taxis in New York City. Furthermore, a naive
prediction based on free-ﬂow travel times from Google Maps yields an out-of-sample error of 27%, which suggests
traﬃc congestion has a substantial impact on travel times.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

28
1
2
3
4
log(Taxi time)
1
2
3
4
log(Predicted time)
(a) Predicted vs. actual taxi trip times.
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90%
Relative error
0
200
400
600
Count
Simple average
Weighted average
(b) Distribution of prediction errors.
Figure 2
Driving time prediction errors on out-of-sample taxi trip data.
inﬂuence travel time and are also correlated with road features. The predictions in our counterfac-
tual study should be interpreted in light of this potential bias.
Table 1
Congestion parameter estimates (×10−7).
Intercept
ℓs
ns · ws ℓs/(ns · ws)
θ0
θ1
θ2
θ3
6.51
2.53
−0.26
75.7
5.3.
Estimation of Mode Choice Parameters β
Next, we estimate the mode choice parameters β using the estimated congestion parameter θ
as input. In estimating β, we restrict attention to the sub-network for which Divvy trip data is
available (shaded region of Figure 1), which corresponds to 5,272 OD pairs, 6,101 road segments,
and 14,632 driving paths. We use the following speciﬁcation for the utility of driving, cycling and
outside options on OD pair w:
uD
w(x,θ) = βD
0 + βD
1 · tD
w (x,θ) + βD
2 · vow + βD
3 · hiw + βD
4 · piw + ξD
w + ϵD
w
(39a)
uC
w(x) = βC
0 + βC
1 · tC
w + βC
2 · ρw (x) + βC
3 · aecw + βC
4 · piw + ξC
w + ϵD
w
(39b)
uO
w = βO
1 · tO
w + βO
2 · tsw + ϵO
w
(39c)
The driving utility uD
w(x,θ) depends on the driving time tD
w (x,θ), vehicle ownership rate at the
origin vow, the average median household income over the origin and destination census tracts
hiw, and a dummy variable vector of the presence of various points of interest at the origin and
destination piw, following Kabra et al. (2020). The cycling utility uC
w(x) depends on the cycling
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

29
time tC
w, bike lane coverage ρw (x), the average elevation change aecw along the cycling route pC
w,
and the dummy vector for points of interest piw. In addition, we assume the outside option utility
depends on the travel time by public transit tO
w and the number of public transit stations (subways,
buses, trains and light rail) in the origin census tract, denoted by tsw. Table 2 presents the summary
statistics of the data used in the mode choice model.
Table 2
Summary of data for estimating mode choice parameters β.
Units
Mean
SD
Min.
25%
Median
75%
Max.
Cycling time
tC
w
minutes
21.37
10.69
0.98
13.31
20.87
28.50
59.13
Bike lane coverage
ρw
%
50.82
25.97
0.00
31.55
54.05
71.93
100.0
Average elevation change
aecw
meters
0.49
0.06
0.01
0.45
0.49
0.53
0.81
Predicted driving times
tD
w
minutes
14.14
4.62
3.64
10.86
14.15
17.30
30.78
Vehicle ownership rate
vow
%
71.08
13.55
25.99
62.10
73.71
81.66
92.22
Public transit travel time
tO
w
minutes
34.57
16.50
0.00
22.48
33.97
44.62
103.65
No. of transit stations
tsw
1
17
22
0
3
6
30
127
Median household income hiw
104 dollars
9.81
2.56
1.82
8.07
9.98
11.64
17.22
5.3.1.
Endogeneity and instruments. As discussed in §2.3, because we observe mode shares
for each OD pair w, the parameters in (39a)–(39c) can be estimated using linear regression. How-
ever, naively applying ordinary least squares (OLS) estimation may lead to biased estimates due
to two potential sources of endogeneity, namely, in the bike lane coverage ρw(x) and the driving
travel time tD
w(x,θ). Before discussing the endogeneity issues and our solution via instrumental
variables, we ﬁrst present the OLS estimates in Table 3.20 As the table shows, the bike lane coverage
estimate βC
2 is statistically insigniﬁcant and is not informative for capturing bike lanes’ value to
cyclists. Below, we brieﬂy describe this endogeneity problem and our use of instrumental variables
to address it.
Table 3
Estimates (and standard errors) of mode choice parameters using OLS.
Cycling
Driving
intercept
cycling
bike lane
average elevation
intercept
driving
vehicle
household
βC
0
time βC
1
coverage βC
2
change βC
3
βD
0
time βD
1
ownership βD
2
income βD
3
2.1559
−0.2081***
−0.1425
−2.0991***
4.3919***
−0.2452***
0.4860
0.0265
(1.71)
(0.00)
(0.15)
(0.66)
(1.69)
(0.01)
(0.31)
(0.02)
Outside option
transit
transit
Other control
Adjusted
Number of
time βO
1
stations βO
2
variables
R2
observations
−0.0231***
0.0052***
Table 12
0.57
10,544
(0.00)
(0.00)
20 Note that the number of observations in the regression model is twice of the number of OD pairs, since there are
5,272 observations for both cycling and driving.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

30
Although bike lane coverage may inﬂuence cycling demand on each OD pair, it is plausible
that city planners select locations for new bike lanes to serve unmet demand (i.e., along paths
where cycling ridership is already high but which lack bike lanes), which would lead to correlation
between the error term ξC
w and bike lane coverage ρw(x). Ignoring this potential reverse causality
in the location of existing bike lanes would lead to an overestimation of βC
1 , and thus inﬂated
counterfactual predictions of cycling ridership following the addition of new bike lanes. Conversely,
it is also plausible that planners choose locations with low ridership in order to promote cycling
adoption, which would lead to underestimation of βC
1 . Similarly, with respect to driving travel
times, there may exist unobserved factors that lead to low (high) demand for driving on a particular
OD pair, resulting in a lower (higher) driving travel time and leading to correlation between the
error terms ξD
w and driving the travel time tD
w(x,θ).
To address the aforementioned endogeneity biases, we employ BLP-like instrumental variables
(Berry et al. 1995) that are tailored for analyzing spatially diﬀerentiated products (e.g., Davis
(2006), Kabra et al. (2020), He et al. (2021)). In particular, our instruments are inspired by Kabra
et al. (2020), who use exogenous characteristics of nearby bike-share stations (e.g., points of interest)
as instruments for estimating the eﬀect of bike-share availability on usage at a focal bike-share
station.
Accordingly, for each OD pair w, we construct instruments using the exogenous characteristics
of “nearby” OD pairs. Speciﬁcally, for each w, let Zw
(a,b) to be the set of all other OD pairs whose
origin is between distance a and b from the origin of w and whose destination is within distance
between a and b of the destination of w. Note that each OD pair w is a pair of nodes (i.e., census
tracts) (i,j) on the network, and let dis(i,j) be the Euclidean distance between nodes i and j.
Formally, Z(a,b)
w
is then deﬁned as
Z(a,b)
w=(i,j) = {w′ = (i′,j′) ∈W|dis(i′,i) ∈[a,b],dis(j′,j) ∈[a,b]}.
(40)
The instruments for an OD pair w are then given by
Z(a,b)
w
=


1
Z(a,b)
w={i,j}

P
w′={i′,j′}∈Z(a,b)
w={i,j} pdi′
1
Z(a,b)
w={i,j}

P
w′={i′,j′}∈Z(a,b)
w={i,j} pdj′
1
Z(a,b)
w={i,j}

P
w′={i′,j′}∈Z(a,b)
w={i,j} npii′
1
Z(a,b)
w={i,j}

P
w′={i′,j′}∈Z(a,b)
w={i,j} npij′
1
Z(a,b)
w={i,j}

P
w′={i′,j′}∈Z(a,b)
w={i,j} (1T · npii′) × pdi′
1
Z(a,b)
w={i,j}

P
w′={i′,j′}∈Z(a,b)
w={i,j}
 1T · npij′

× pdj′
1
Z(a,b)
w={i,j}

P
w′={i′,j′}∈Z(a,b)
w={i,j} hii′
1
Z(a,b)
w={i,j}

P
w′={i′,j′}∈Z(a,b)
w={i,j} hij′


,
(41)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

31
where pdi, npii, and hii denote the population density, a vector that tracks the number of each type
of point of interest, and median household income in census tract i, respectively. Note (1T · npii)×
pdi is the interaction between the total number of points of interest of all categories and population
density.
To be valid, the instruments should be correlated with the endogenous variables, which in our
case are bike lane coverage and driving travel time (i.e., satisfy the relevance condition), and should
be uncorrelated with the unobserved components ξm
w in the utility of the corresponding mode (i.e.,
satisfy the exclusion criterion). The validity of our proposed instruments follow similarly from the
arguments in Berry et al. (1995), Davis (2006), Kabra et al. (2020), and He et al. (2021), which
we concisely summarize here for our context. In particular, relevance follows because demographic
characteristics and features of the urban environment are likely to be spatially correlated, making
it plausible for them to also be correlated with bike lane coverage and driving travel times in nearby
OD pairs. Satisfaction of the exclusion restriction follows because the instruments are relatively
static characteristics of the study region (e.g., points of interest). As a result, for a focal OD pair,
these static characteristics of nearby OD pairs are unlikely to vary in response to unexplained
realizations of cycling or driving demand in the focal OD pair. Similarly, these characteristics of
nearby OD pairs are also unlikely to directly inﬂuence demand for cycling or driving in the focal
OD pair, because commuters in the focal OD pair are presumably unexposed to them during their
commute.
Similar to He et al. (2021), as a robustness check we consider multiple distance intervals
[a,b] when constructing the instrumental set of OD pairs Z(a,b)
w
. In particular, we vary a ∈
{500,1000,1500} meters and b ∈{7000,8000} meters to obtain six diﬀerent distance intervals [a,b].
The distance 500, 1000, 1500, 7000, and 8000 correspond to the 2nd, 6th, 11th, 84th, 90th percentiles
of the between-centroid distances of the corresponding census tracts, respectively. We estimate our
model using the standard approach of generalized method of moments (GMM), and ﬁnd the results
to be robust to the choice of a and b (see Appendix C). We verify relevance of all instruments by
performing the weak-instrument test proposed by Stock and Yogo (2002).
As an additional robustness check, we estimate our model with two alternative instruments. First,
we instrument for bike lane coverage and driving travel time using the average value of these same
endogenous variables in nearby OD pairs, in the spirit of Hausman-type instruments (Hausman
1996, Nevo 2001). Second, we follow He et al. (2021) and Arora et al. (2022), who construct
instruments that are similar to the BLP-like instrument described above, but explicitly utilize the
network structure. We ﬁnd that our estimates are stable across these alternative instruments as
well (see Appendix C).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

32
5.3.2.
Results. Table 4 reports the estimation results corresponding to [a,b] = [500,8000],
which produces the most conservative (i.e., smallest) estimate of the bike lane coverage coeﬃcient
βC
2 among the distance intervals [a,b] we implemented (see Table 10). We focus on the most
conservative estimate because it is the value used in the bike lane planning problem described in
§5.4 below; Appendix C contains the estimates for the remaining values of a and b, as well as
the alternative instruments. Applying the weak instrument test by Stock and Yogo (2002) using
[a,b] = [500,8000] yields a Cragg–Donald statistic of 21.6, which exceeds the critical value of 20.7.21
The signs of the estimates shown in Table 4 agree with intuition: The negative coeﬃcients for
the travel time by cycling (βC
1 ), driving (βD
1 ) and public transit (βO
1 ) indicate shorter travel times
increase the attractiveness of each transportation mode. For cycling speciﬁcally, the the results
suggest the attractiveness of cycling increases in bike lane coverage (βC
2 > 0), and that cyclists
prefer ﬂatter paths with fewer elevation changes (βC
3 < 0). Similarly, driving demand is positively
correlated with vehicle ownership rate (βD
2 > 0). Lastly, improved accessibility to transit stations is
associated with higher demand for the outside option (βO
2 > 0). Lastly, the estimated mode choice
model yields R2 = 0.57, which suggests a reasonable ﬁt to the data.
Table 4
Estimates (and standard errors) of mode choice parameters from IV estimation.
Cycling
Driving
intercept
cycling
bike lane
average elevation
intercept
driving
vehicle
household
βC
0
time βC
1
coverage βC
2
change βC
3
βD
0
time βD
1
ownership βD
2
income βD
3
2.3614
−0.2189***
1.8817***
−2.6596***
3.9695**
−0.2088***
0.5964***
0.0291**
(2.43)
(0.01)
(0.79)
(0.64)
(1.55)
(0.04)
(0.22)
(0.01)
Outside option
transit
transit
Other control
Adjusted
Number of
time βO
1
stations βO
2
variables
R2
observations
−0.0304***
0.0040***
Table 12
0.57
10,544
(0.01)
(0.00)
5.4.
Bike Lane Expansion: Impact on Cycling Ridership and Traﬃc Congestion
Next, we use the estimates of θ and β to develop bike lane plans for downtown Chicago and estimate
the associated impacts on cycling ridership and congestion. Our study focuses on expanding the
existing bike lane network instead of redesigning the entire network, which aligns with the city’s
plan (Chicago DOT 2021). For tractability, we solve the bike lane optimization model over the
largest OD pairs that account for 80% of commute demand in the study region (shaded area of
21 The critical value of 20.7 corresponds to 24 instruments, two endogenous regressors, and a relative bias level of
0.05 – see Stock and Yogo (2002) for details.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

33
Figure 1). This resulted in 887 candidate paths for bike lane installation, which together comprise
4,127 road segments.
We consider 12 combinations of the bike lane budget B and the congestion tolerance τ: (B,τ) ∈
{10,25,50,75} × {0.05,0.1,0.15}. For each combination of (B,τ), we add the congestion tolerance
constraint (35) to the path selection model BL-A given in (32), which is solved to obtain a rec-
ommended network x∗. We then evaluate the model’s recommendation by solving the (exact) user
equilibrium problem (24) under x∗and computing the relative increase in cycling ridership over
the status quo network ˜x:
P
w∈W dC
w(x∗) −dC
w(˜x)
P
w∈W dC
w(˜x)
.
(42)
Consistent with the model BL-A, we evaluate congestion using the worst-case increase in driving
times over all driving paths:
max
p∈PD
tD
p (x∗) −tD
p (˜x)
tD
p (˜x)

.
(43)
Our choice of the congestion constraint (35) (and the corresponding performance metric (43)) is
motivated by discussions with city planners, who are sensitive to public perceptions regarding
the installation of bike lanes and their eﬀect on congestion (Khany 2022). Accordingly, to avoid
“spikes” in driving times throughout the network, we focus on limiting the worst-case increase in
driving times over all paths. As an alternative measure of congestion, we also estimate the impact
of the recommended bike lane plans on the total system-wide driving time in Appendix E.
As an illustrative example, Figure 3 visualizes the model’s recommended bike lane plan and
the predicted impacts on driving times for the case where (B,τ) = (25, 10%). Figure 3a depicts
existing and recommended bike lanes. Interestingly, we observe that the recommended bike lanes
tend to close gaps in the existing bike lane network (e.g., (1) in Figure 3a) and also bridge distant
parallel bike lanes (e.g., (2)), both of which are priorities for the Chicago DOT, even though we
do not explicitly enforce these requirements.
Figure 3b shows the change in driving time on each road segment as compared to the status
quo. We make the following observations. First, among the 25 miles for which new bike lanes are
recommended, 82.1% have longer driving times and 7.0% have shorter driving times (no change
is observed in the remaining 10.9% of segments). The intuition is as follows. Building bike lanes
reduces road width and thus increases the driving time, which we refer to as the “road capacity
eﬀect”. On the other hand, building bike lanes increases cycling utility and thus boosts cycling
adoption, which reduces driving demand and thus alleviates congestion, which we refer to as the
“demand eﬀect”. Figure 3b visualizes the segments where the road capacity eﬀect dominates the
demand eﬀect (red) and vice versa (green).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

34
0
0.8
1.6
0.4
Miles
Existing bike lanes
New bike lanes
(2)
(1)
(a) Bike lane expansion.
0
0.8
1.6
0.4
Miles
Existing bike lanes
Driving time compared to status quo
Decreased driving time
No change
Increased driving time
(b) Change in driving times.
Figure 3
Recommended bike lane expansion and congestion impacts in downtown Chicago for
(B,τ) = (25,10%).
We also observe spillover eﬀects of new bike lanes to the entire network. Speciﬁcally, among the
road segments on which no new bike lanes are built, 13.4% have longer driving times and 40.1% have
shorter driving times. Because the demand eﬀect spills over to the rest of the network, the reduction
in driving times is expected. The congestion-increasing road capacity eﬀect on some segments is
due to the fact that adding bike lanes causes drivers to adopt alternative paths in equilibrium,
which increases driving times elsewhere in the network. These spillover eﬀects are contingent on
network structure and traﬃc dynamics, which highlights the necessity of a system-wide approach
to bike lane planning.
Figure 4 summarizes model performance under each of the 12 combinations of (B,τ). In general,
we predict notable increases to cycling ridership even when the congestion tolerance and the budget
are minimal – for example, under (B,τ) = (10,5%), cycling shares increase by 1.3% (from 3.6% to
4.9%). Further, our results suggest diminishing returns on increasing the congestion tolerance τ
– increasing τ from 5% to 10% boosts cycling ridership by 0.6% to 1.2%, depending on the bike
lane mileage budget B, wheres increasing τ from 10% to 15% is associated with at most a 0.6%
absolute increase in cycling ridership. We observe a similar behavior as B increases, with most of
the gains in cycling ridership occurring within the ﬁrst 50 miles of bike lane expansion.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

35
1.00%
1.50%
2.00%
2.50%
3.00%
3.50%
Increase in cycling share
4.0%
6.0%
8.0%
10.0%
12.0%
14.0%
Worst-case increase in driving time
B = 10
B = 25
B = 50
B = 75
5%
5%
5%
5%
10%
10%
15%
10%
10%
15%
15% 15%
Figure 4
Increase in cycling ridership and worst-case driving travel times under 12 combinations
of (B,τ).
5.5.
Comparison with Alternative Bike Lane Planning Methods
To further evaluate the bike lane plans recommended by our model, we benchmark their perfor-
mance against three alternative methods for bike lane planning. We brieﬂy describe each method
below and provide their precise steps in Appendix E.
Fixed-time model. In this approach, we assume driving times are unaﬀected by the addition of
bike lanes. Speciﬁcally, we assume segment driving times remained ﬁxed at their status quo values,
tD
s (˜x), which are returned by the estimation method described in §3. We then solve a variant of
the path selection model BL-A with these ﬁxed driving times.
Greedy heuristic. We also present a greedy heuristic for solving BL-A, which is based on
selecting promising OD pairs between which the city planner should build bike lanes while satisfying
the congestion tolerance constraints. The greedy heuristic can be viewed as a congestion-aware
bike lane planning method that does not take a system-wide perspective. Intuitively, the greedy
heuristic consists of three main steps. First, we sort the OD pairs from highest to lowest based on
their potential for improving cycling ridership per unit of new bike lane built. Second, we screen
the OD pairs by their anticipated increase in travel times due to bike lane construction, and then
greedily select OD pairs such that the budget constraint is not violated. Third, the heuristic veriﬁes
whether the congestion constraint for the selected OD pairs is satisﬁed; if not, the heuristic is
repeated with a more conservative selection (with respect to travel time increase) of OD pairs in
the second step.
Demand heuristic. The last benchmark we consider is a naive planning approach that adds
bike lanes on the paths for the OD pairs with the highest current commute demand, which aligns
with one of Chicago’s stated principles for building bike lanes (Chicago DOT 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

36
0.50%
1.00%
1.50%
2.00%
2.50%
3.00%
Increase in cycling share
4.0%
6.0%
8.0%
10.0%
12.0%
14.0%
Worst-case increase in driving time
5%
5%
10%
B = 25
10%
15%
15%
Figure 5
Increase in ridership and worst-case driving time for bike lane path selection model BL-A
and three benchmark methods.
Comparison results. We again vary B ∈{10,25,50,75} and τ ∈{5%,10%,15%} to obtain 12
combinations of (B,τ) for comparing BL-A with the three benchmark methods. For brevity, we
present the detailed results for B = 25 miles in Figure 5, and defer the cases for B ∈{10,50,75}
to Appendix E.2. Note that the ﬁxed-time model and demand heuristic are not parameterized
by τ, so they each correspond to only one point in Figure 5. We interpret these results by ﬁrst
comparing our model’s prescriptions (blue ‘•’) with the demand heuristic’s bike lane plan (red
‘+’). As expected, because the demand heuristic places bike lanes between OD pairs with the most
commuters, it yields the highest increase in cycling mode share (2.5%), although the resulting
increase in congestion is relatively high (13.9% increase in worst-case driving time). In particular,
the demand heuristic is dominated by the recommendations from BL-A when τ = 10% or τ = 15%.
With respect to the ﬁxed-time model (green ‘■’), it increases the cycling mode share by 2.2%
(from 3.6% to 5.8%), yet also signiﬁcantly increases congestion (12.7%). To that end, the ﬁxed-
time model is also dominated by the bike lane expansion recommended by our model under τ =
10%. This diﬀerence underscores the importance of endogenizing congestion eﬀects in bike lane
planning, which permits city planners to modulate driving times throughout the network. Finally,
we examine the greedy approach (orange ‘×’) that considers congestion eﬀects but discards the
network structure of the problem. We ﬁnd that our model’s prescriptions achieve signiﬁcantly
higher bike demand across all values of τ ∈{5%,10%,15%}. Speciﬁcally, when τ = 15%, the increase
in the cycling mode share under our method is more than twice that of the greedy heuristic (2.9%
vs. 0.8%), while leading to comparable increases in driving times (13.5% vs 12.4%).
As an additional point of reference, we also compared our model’s prescriptions with the bike
lanes actually installed in Chicago following our study period of 2018. From November 2018 to
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

37
November 2021, the City of Chicago added additional 14.48 miles of bike lanes in the downtown
Chicago study region (Chicago Data Portal 2023). According to our model, this expansion in the
bike lane network corresponds to a predicted 0.4% increase in the cycling mode share and an
8.2% maximum increase in the driving time over all driving paths. By comparison, setting a bike
lane budget of B = 14.48 miles and a congestion tolerance of τ = 5% in our prescriptive model
results in an increase of 1.1% in the cycling mode share and a 4.3% maximum increase in the
driving time. See Appendix E.3 for details and a brief discussion. Taken together, these results
demonstrate the value of endogenizing congestion and ridership eﬀects, as well as taking a holistic
and network-based perspective to urban bike lane planning.
6.
Policy Implications and Conclusion
The expansion of cycling infrastructure has become a priority for municipal governments seeking
to promote urban sustainability. While the addition of bike lanes has generated controversy due
to their perceived eﬀects on traﬃc congestion, few previous studies have attempted to rigorously
quantify the potential impact of bike lane expansion on congestion from a system-wide perspec-
tive. Our ﬁndings suggest that adding bike lanes does not necessarily worsen congestion if done
mindfully: We estimate that adding 25 miles of bike lanes to downtown Chicago as prescribed by
our model can increase cycling ridership from 3.6% to 6.1%, while increasing driving times by at
most 9.4% over all routes. We obtain qualitatively similar results for diﬀerent bike lane budgets
and congestion tolerances. Further, our results suggest that congestion may in fact be alleviated
in many segments of the network following the addition of bike lanes. Taken together, our results
cast doubt on the notion that bike lanes dramatically increase traﬃc congestion.
We also ﬁnd that alternative planning methods that ignore congestion eﬀects can amplify con-
gestion without necessarily improving cycling ridership beyond what is attained under our model’s
prescriptions. To the extent that city planners wish to expand bike lane networks while mitigating
congestion and the associated consequences, prescriptive models like ours that take a system-wide
perspective may be useful. Our framework may be especially valuable for ﬁnancially-constrained
municipalities that wish to maximize the beneﬁts of bike lane expansion under a limited budget,
or in cities where the cycling infrastructure has matured past the point of “low hanging fruit” and
would beneﬁt from more rigorous planning methods. We also note that while sophisticated simula-
tion models for traﬃc modeling are widely adopted by city planners, there is a scarcity of models
for bike planning, which makes it challenging for city planners to systematically leverage traﬃc
data when developing bike lane plans (Khany 2022). As a result, data-driven methods like the one
presented here have the potential to improve the modeling support available to city planners.
There are many additional considerations to bike lane planning that are not captured by our
model, including safety, implementation cost, closing gaps in the existing network, meeting needs
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

38
of underserved communities, and land use. There may also be on-the-ground constraints that make
some aspects of our model’s recommendations impractical. To that end, our method should be
viewed as a complement and not a substitute to existing approaches used by city planners for bike
lane planning.
Our work has limitations. First, although our method can be applied to other cities where similar
data is available, our empirical ﬁndings may not generalize beyond Chicago due to diﬀerences in
the road networks, commuters’ preferences, and traﬃc patterns. Second, due to limitations in data
availability, our analysis relies on demand data that is aggregated at the census-tract level – future
analyses using more ﬁne-grained data may yield diﬀerent results. Our estimates of driving times are
based on observable road segment features, such as length and width, and under the assumption
of Wardrop equilibrium. In practice, traﬃc ﬂows may also be inﬂuenced by additional factors such
as traﬃc signal timing, permissibility of left and right turns, speed limits, and zone type (e.g.
commercial vs. residential), all of which are unaccounted for in our study. Although we incorporate
factors including points of interest and elevation change along the cycling routes in cycling utility,
other factors that we do not consider include safety (in particular, vehicle traﬃc near bike lanes)
and continuity of the bike lane network.
We conclude by noting potential directions for future work. First, although we focused on max-
imizing cycling ridership, our method can be extended to other considerations such as the eﬀect
of bike lanes on greenhouse gas emissions or safety. It may also be worth examining how bike
lane expansion aﬀects diﬀerent populations, such as low-income and underserved neighborhoods,
or groups for whom cycling may not feasible, including seniors or people with disabilities. Finally,
our modeling framework may also be useful in performing counterfactual analyses to support other
types of infrastructure planning where congestion impacts are a salient concern, such as the addi-
tion of dedicated bus or carpool lanes.
References
117th
Congress.
2021.
Infrastructure
Investment
and
Jobs
Act,
H.R.
3684.
URL
https:
//www.epw.senate.gov/public/ cache/files/e/a/ea1eb2e4-56bd-45f1-a260-9d6ee951bc96/
F8A7C77D69BE09151F210EB4DFE872CD.edw21a09.pdf.
Abdulaal, Mustafa, Larry J LeBlanc. 1979. Methods for combining modal split and equilibrium assignment
models. Transportation Science 13(4) 292–314.
Aghassi, Michele, Dimitris Bertsimas, Georgia Perakis. 2006. Solving asymmetric variational inequalities via
convex optimization. Operations Research Letters 34(5) 481–490.
Ahuja, Ravindra K, James B Orlin. 2001. Inverse optimization. Operations Research 49(5) 771–783.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

39
Allen, Stephanie, John P Dickerson, Steven A Gabriel. 2021.
Using inverse optimization to learn cost
functions in generalized Nash games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.12415 .
Arora, Kashish, Fanyin Zheng, Karan Girotra. 2022. Private vs. pooled transportation: Customer preference
and design of green transport policy .
Aswani, Anil, Zuo-Jun Shen, Auyon Siddiq. 2018. Inverse optimization with noisy data. Operations Research
66(3) 870–892.
Bao, Jie, Tianfu He, Sijie Ruan, Yanhua Li, Yu Zheng. 2017. Planning bike lanes based on sharing-bikes’
trajectories. Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining. 1377–1386.
BBC. 2021.
London congestion: Cycle lanes blamed as city named most congested.
URL https:
//www.bbc.com/news/uk-england-london-59559863.
Beckmann, Martin, Charles B McGuire, Christopher B Winsten. 1956. Studies in the economics of trans-
portation. Tech. rep.
Beltran, Borja, Stefano Carrese, Ernesto Cipriani, Marco Petrelli. 2009. Transit network design with allo-
cation of green vehicles: A genetic algorithm approach. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies 17(5) 475–483.
Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, Ariel Pakes. 1995. Automobile prices in market equilibrium. Econometrica:
Journal of the Econometric Society 841–890.
Bertinelli, Luisito, Duncan Black. 2004. Urbanization and growth. Journal of Urban Economics 56(1) 80–96.
Bertsekas, Dimitri P. 1997. Nonlinear programming. Journal of the Operational Research Society 48(3) 267.
Bertsimas, Dimitris, Vishal Gupta, Ioannis Paschalidis. 2015. Data-driven estimation in equilibrium using
inverse optimization. Mathematical Programming 153(2) 595–633.
Bertsimas, Dimitris, Yee Sian Ng, Julia Yan. 2020.
Joint frequency-setting and pricing optimization on
multimodal transit networks at scale. Transportation Science 54(3) 839–853.
Bertsimas, Dimitris, John N Tsitsiklis. 1997. Introduction to linear optimization, vol. 6. Athena Scientiﬁc.
Broach, Joseph, Jennifer Dill, John Gliebe. 2012. Where do cyclists ride? A route choice model developed with
revealed preference GPS data. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 46(10) 1730–1740.
Burton, Didier, Ph L Toint. 1992. On an instance of the inverse shortest paths problem. Mathematical
Programming 53(1) 45–61.
Chan, Timothy CY, Maria Eberg, Katharina Forster, Claire Holloway, Luciano Ieraci, Yusuf Shalaby, Nasrin
Youseﬁ. 2022. An inverse optimization approach to measuring clinical pathway concordance. Manage-
ment Science 68(3) 1882–1903.
Chan, Timothy CY, Taewoo Lee, Daria Terekhov. 2019. Inverse optimization: Closed-form solutions, geom-
etry, and goodness of ﬁt. Management Science 65(3) 1115–1135.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

40
Chan, Timothy CY, Raﬁd Mahmood, Ian Yihang Zhu. 2021. Inverse optimization: Theory and applications.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.03920 .
Charalambos, D, Border Aliprantis. 2013. Inﬁnite Dimensional Analysis: A Hitchhiker’s Guide. Springer.
Chicago Data Portal. 2010. Boundaries - Census tracts - 2010. URL https://data.cityofchicago.org/
Facilities-Geographic-Boundaries/Boundaries-Census-Tracts-2010/5jrd-6zik.
Chicago
Data
Portal.
2018.
Bike
Routes
(Deprecated
November
2018).
URL
https:
//data.cityofchicago.org/Transportation/Bike-Routes-Deprecated-November-2018-/pznz-
m9ui.
Chicago Data Portal. 2021. Taxi trips. URL https://data.cityofchicago.org/Transportation/Taxi-
Trips/wrvz-psew.
Chicago
Data
Portal.
2023.
Bike
routes:
City
of
chicago:
Data
portal.
URL
https://
data.cityofchicago.org/Transportation/Bike-Routes/3w5d-sru8.
Chicago DOT. 2020. Chicago streets for cycling plan 2020. URL https://www.chicago.gov/content/dam/
city/depts/cdot/bike/general/ChicagoStreetsforCycling2020.pdf.
Chicago DOT. 2021.
Chicago community cycling network update.
URL https://www.chicago.gov/
content/dam/city/depts/cdot/bike/2021/Chicago%20Community%20Cycling 2021-09-21.pdf.
Chow, Joseph YJ, Stephen G Ritchie, Kyungsoo Jeong. 2014. Nonlinear inverse optimization for param-
eter estimation of commodity-vehicle-decoupled freight assignment. Transportation Research Part E:
Logistics and Transportation Review 67 71–91.
Cipriani, Ernesto, Marco Petrelli, Gaetano Fusco. 2006. A multimodal transit network design procedure for
urban areas. Advances in Transportation Studies 10.
City
of
Chicago
Planning
and
Policy
Division.
2003.
Chicago
Central
Area
Plan:
The
Physical
and
Economic
Assessment.
URL
https://www.chicago.gov/content/
dam/city/depts/zlup/Planning and Policy/Publications/Central Area Plan DRAFT/
03 Central Area Plan Chapter2a.pdf.
C¸olak, Serdar, Antonio Lima, Marta C Gonz´alez. 2016. Understanding congested travel in urban areas.
Nature Communications 7(1) 1–8.
Cominetti, Roberto, Valerio Dose, Marco Scarsini. 2021. The price of anarchy in routing games as a function
of the demand. Mathematical Programming 1–28.
Cooper, Lee. 1993. Chapter 6 Market-share models, vol. 5. 259–314. doi:10.1016/S0927-0507(05)80029-5.
Dafermos, Stella. 1980. Traﬃc equilibrium and variational inequalities. Transportation Science 14(1) 42–54.
Dafermos, Stella. 1982. The general multimodal network equilibrium problem with elastic demand. Networks
12(1) 57–72.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

41
Dafermos, Stella C, Frederick T Sparrow. 1969.
The traﬃc assignment problem for a general network.
Journal of Research of the National Bureau of Standards B 73(2) 91–118.
Dan, Teodora, Patrice Marcotte. 2019. Competitive facility location with selﬁsh users and queues. Operations
Research 67(2) 479–497.
Dantzig, George B, Roy P Harvey, Zachary F Lansdowne, David W Robinson, Steven F Maier. 1979. For-
mulating and solving the network design problem by decomposition. Transportation Research Part B:
Methodological 13(1) 5–17.
Davis, Peter. 2006. Spatial competition in retail markets: movie theaters. The RAND Journal of Economics
37(4) 964–982.
Dempe, Stephan. 2002. Foundations of bilevel programming. Springer Science & Business Media.
Divvy. 2021.
Download divvy trip history data.
URL https://divvy-tripdata.s3.amazonaws.com/
index.html.
Domencich, Thomas A, Daniel McFadden. 1975. Urban travel demand-a behavioral analysis. Tech. rep.
DOT, NYC. 2019. Green wave: A plan for cycling in New York. URL https://www1.nyc.gov/html/dot/
downloads/pdf/bike-safety-plan.pdf.
Esfahani, Peyman Mohajerin, Soroosh Shaﬁeezadeh-Abadeh, Grani A Hanasusanto, Daniel Kuhn. 2018.
Data-driven inverse optimization with imperfect information. Mathematical Programming 167(1) 191–
234.
Fan, Wei, Randy B Machemehl. 2006. Optimal transit route network design problem with variable transit
demand: genetic algorithm approach. Journal of Transportation Engineering 132(1) 40–51.
Farahani, Reza Zanjirani, Elnaz Miandoabchi, Wai Yuen Szeto, Hannaneh Rashidi. 2013. A review of urban
transportation network design problems. European Journal of Operational Research 229(2) 281–302.
Federal Highway Administration. 2006.
Federal Highway Administration University Course on Bicycle
and Pedestrian Transportation. URL https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/research/safety/
pedbike/05085/chapt15.cfm.
FHA.
2018.
HPMS
public
release.
URL
https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/policyinformation/hpms/
shapefiles.cfm.
Fisk, Caroline. 1980. Some developments in equilibrium traﬃc assignment. Transportation Research Part
B: Methodological 14(3) 243–255.
Fortuny-Amat, Jos´e, Bruce McCarl. 1981.
A representation and economic interpretation of a two-level
programming problem. The Journal of the Operational Research Society 32(9) 783–792.
Fukushima, Masao. 1984. On the dual approach to the traﬃc assignment problem. Transportation Research
Part B: Methodological 18(3) 235–245.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

42
Gallo, Mariano, Bruno Montella, Luca D’Acierno. 2011. The transit network design problem with elastic
demand and internalisation of external costs: An application to rail frequency optimisation. Trans-
portation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 19(6) 1276–1305.
Google Maps. 2021.
The Directions API overview.
URL https://developers.google.com/maps/
documentation/directions/overview.
Hall, Michael A. 1978. Properties of the equilibrium state in transportation networks. Transportation Science
12(3) 208–216.
Hamilton, Timothy L, Casey J Wichman. 2018. Bicycle infrastructure and traﬃc congestion: Evidence from
dc’s capital bikeshare. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 87 72–93.
Hausman, Jerry A. 1996. Valuation of new goods under perfect and imperfect competition. The economics
of new goods. University of Chicago Press, 207–248.
He, Pu, Fanyin Zheng, Elena Belavina, Karan Girotra. 2021. Customer preference and station network in
the London bike-share system. Management Science 67(3) 1392–1412.
Hearn, Donald W, Motakuri V Ramana. 1998. Solving congestion toll pricing models. Equilibrium and
Advanced Transportation Modelling. Springer, 109–124.
Hensher, David A, William H Greene. 2003. The mixed logit model: the state of practice. Transportation
30 133–176.
Hong, Mingyi, Xiangfeng Wang, Meisam Razaviyayn, Zhi-Quan Luo. 2017. Iteration complexity analysis of
block coordinate descent methods. Mathematical Programming 163(1-2) 85–114.
Hood, Jeﬀrey, Elizabeth Sall, Billy Charlton. 2011. A GPS-based bicycle route choice model for San Francisco,
California. Transportation Letters 3(1) 63–75.
Illinois Department of Transportation. 2018. 2018 Illinois travel statistics.
Illinois DOT. 2018.
URL https://www.idot.illinois.gov/Assets/uploads/files/Doing-Business/
Manuals-Guides-&amp;-Handbooks/Highways/Local-Roads-and-Streets/Local%20Roads%20and%
20Streets%20Manual.pdf.
Inrix. 2020. Congestion costs each American nearly 100 hours, $1,400 a year. URL https://inrix.com/
press-releases/2019-traffic-scorecard-us/.
Jennrich, Robert I. 1969.
Asymptotic properties of non-linear least squares estimators.
The Annals of
Mathematical Statistics 40(2) 633–643.
Johnson, Gretchen, Aaron Johnson. 2014. Bike lanes don’t cause traﬃc jams if you’re smart about where
you build them. URL https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/bike-lanes-dont-cause-traffic-
jams-if-youre-smart-about-where-you-build-them/.
Kabra, Ashish, Elena Belavina, Karan Girotra. 2020.
Bike-share systems: Accessibility and availability.
Management Science 66(9) 3803–3824.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

43
Khany, Sam. 2022. Personal communication. Senior Transportation Planner, City of Vancouver .
LA Times. 2020.
Bicycles have enjoyed a boom during the pandemic. Will it last as car traﬃc
resumes? URL https://www.latimes.com/california/story/2020-06-25/bicycle-business-is-
exploding-during-covid-19-will-it-last.
Lee, Young-Jae, Vukan R Vuchic. 2005. Transit network design with variable demand. Journal of Trans-
portation Engineering 131(1) 1–10.
Lin, Henry, Tim Roughgarden, ´Eva Tardos, Asher Walkover. 2011. Stronger bounds on Braess’s paradox
and the maximum latency of selﬁsh routing. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics 25(4) 1667–1686.
Liu, Haoxiang, WY Szeto, Jiancheng Long. 2019. Bike network design problem with a path-size logit-based
equilibrium constraint: Formulation, global optimization, and matheuristic. Transportation Research
Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 127 284–307.
Liu, Sheng, Zuo-Jun Max Shen, Xiang Ji. 2021. Urban bike lane planning with bike trajectories: Models,
algorithms, and a real-world case study. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management .
Lou, Yin, Chengyang Zhang, Yu Zheng, Xing Xie, Wei Wang, Yan Huang. 2009. Map-matching for low-
sampling-rate GPS trajectories. Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference
on Advances in Geographic Information Systems. GIS ’09, Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 352–361. doi:10.1145/1653771.1653820.
Magnanti, Thomas L, Richard T Wong. 1984. Network design and transportation planning: Models and
algorithms. Transportation Science 18(1) 1–55.
Malhotra, Naresh K. 1984. The use of linear logit models in marketing research. Journal of Marketing
Research 21(1) 20–31.
Marshall, Wesley E, Nicholas N Ferenchak. 2019. Why cities with high bicycling rates are safer for all road
users. Journal of Transport & Health 13 100539.
Mauttone, Antonio, Gonzalo Mercadante, Mar´ıa Rabaza, Fernanda Toledo. 2017. Bicycle network design:
Model and solution algorithm. Transportation Research Procedia 27 969–976.
McFadden, Daniel, et al. 1973. Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior .
Miandoabchi, Elnaz, Reza Zanjirani Farahani, Wout Dullaert, Wai Yuen Szeto. 2012. Hybrid evolution-
ary metaheuristics for concurrent multi-objective design of urban road and public transit networks.
Networks and Spatial Economics 12(3) 441–480.
Mills, Kevin. 2021. Analysis: Bipartisan infrastructure bill passes with new opportunities for trails, walking
and
biking.
URL
https://www.railstotrails.org/trailblog/2021/november/06/analysis-
bipartisan-infrastructure-bill-passes-with-new-opportunities-for-trails-walking-
and-biking/.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

44
Mitra, Raktim, Raymond A Ziemba, Paul M Hess. 2017. Mode substitution eﬀect of urban cycle tracks: Case
study of a downtown street in Toronto, Canada. International Journal of Sustainable Transportation
11(4) 248–256.
Monsere, Christopher, Jennifer Dill, Nathan McNeil, Kelly J Clifton, Nick Foster, Tara Goddard, Mathew
Berkow, Joe Gilpin, Kim Voros, Drusilla van Hengel, et al. 2014. Lessons from the green lanes: Evalu-
ating protected bike lanes in the US .
National Household Travel Survey. 2017. URL https://nhts.ornl.gov/.
Nevo, Aviv. 2001. Measuring market power in the ready-to-eat cereal industry. Econometrica 69(2) 307–342.
OSM. 2021. Download OpenStreetMap data for this region: Illinois. URL https://download.geofabrik.de/
north-america/us/illinois.html.
Parks, Jamie, Paul Ryus, Alison Tanaka, Chris Monsere, Nathan McNeil, Jennifer Dill, William
Schultheiss. 2012.
District Department of Transportation bicycle facility evaluation.
URL
https://ddot.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/ddot/publication/attachments/
ddot bike evaluation summary final report part1 0.pdf.
Patriksson, Michael. 2015. The traﬃc assignment problem: models and methods. Courier Dover Publications.
Prashker, Joseph N, Shlomo Bekhor. 2000. Some observations on stochastic user equilibrium and system
optimum of traﬃc assignment. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 34(4) 277–291.
Prashker, Joseph N, Shlomo Bekhor. 2004. Route choice models used in the stochastic user equilibrium
problem: a review. Transport reviews 24(4) 437–463.
Reich, Gregor, Kenneth L Judd. 2020. Eﬃcient likelihood ratio conﬁdence intervals using constrained opti-
mization. Available at SSRN 3455484 .
Roughgarden, Tim, ´Eva Tardos. 2002. How bad is selﬁsh routing? Journal of the ACM (JACM) 49(2)
236–259.
Scott, Darren M, Wei Lu, Matthew J Brown. 2021. Route choice of bike share users: Leveraging GPS data
to derive choice sets. Journal of Transport Geography 90 102903.
Singhvi, Divya, Somya Singhvi, Peter I Frazier, Shane G Henderson, Eoin O’Mahony, David B Shmoys,
Dawn B Woodard. 2015. Predicting bike usage for new york city’s bike sharing system. Workshops at
the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Stock, James H, Motohiro Yogo. 2002. Testing for weak instruments in linear IV regression.
Strauss, Jillian, Luis F Miranda-Moreno. 2013. Spatial modeling of bicycle activity at signalized intersections.
Journal of Transport and Land Use 6(2) 47–58.
Su, Che-Lin, Kenneth L Judd. 2012. Constrained optimization approaches to estimation of structural models.
Econometrica 80(5) 2213–2230.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

45
Swamy, Chaitanya. 2012. The eﬀectiveness of Stackelberg strategies and tolls for network congestion games.
ACM Transactions on Algorithms (TALG) 8(4) 1–19.
Szeto, Wai Yuen, Xiaoqing Jaber, Margaret O’Mahony. 2010.
Time-dependent discrete network design
frameworks considering land use. Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 25(6) 411–426.
Thai, J´erˆome, Rim Hariss, Alexandre Bayen. 2015. A multi-convex approach to latency inference and control
in traﬃc equilibria from sparse data. 2015 American Control Conference (ACC). IEEE, 689–695.
The
White
House.
2021.
Fact
sheet:
The
bipartisan
infrastructure
deal.
URL
https:
//www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/11/06/fact-sheet-the-
bipartisan-infrastructure-deal/.
Theil, Henri. 1969. A multinomial extension of the linear logit model. International economic review 10(3)
251–259.
Thomas, Roy. 1991. Traﬃc assignment techniques. Avebury Publishing Company.
Thorsten,
Koska,
Frederic
Rudolph.
2016.
The
role
of
walking
and
cycling
in
reducing
congestion.
URL https://epub.wupperinst.org/frontdoor/deliver/index/docId/6597/file/
6597 Reducing Congestion.pdf.
UN. 2015. Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable. URL https://
sdgs.un.org/goals/goal11.
UN. 2019.
2018 revision of world urbanization prospects.
URL https://population.un.org/wup/
Publications/Files/WUP2018-Report.pdf.
United States Bureau of Public Roads. 1964. Traﬃc assignment manual for application with a large, high
speed computer, vol. 37. US Department of Commerce, Bureau of Public Roads, Oﬃce of Planning,
Urban Planning Division.
US Census Bureau. 2020.
American community survey 5-year data (2009-2019).
URL https://
www.census.gov/data/developers/data-sets/acs-5year.html.
US Census Bureau, Center for Economic Studies. 2018.
Us census bureau center for economic studies
publications and reports page. URL https://lehd.ces.census.gov/data/.
US DOT. 2009. Assessing the full costs of congestion on surface transportation systems and reducing them
through pricing. URL https://www.transportation.gov/office-policy/transportation-policy/
assessing-full-costs-congestion-surface-transportation-systems.
US DOT. 2017.
Traﬃc congestion and reliability: Linking solutions to problems.
URL https://
ops.fhwa.dot.gov/congestion report 04/chapter4.htm.
Wardrop, John Glen. 1952. Road paper. some theoretical aspects of road traﬃc research. Proceedings of the
Institution of Civil Engineers 1(3) 345.
Wei, Keji, Vikrant Vaze, Alexandre Jacquillat. 2021. Transit planning optimization under ride-hailing com-
petition and traﬃc congestion. Transportation Science .
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

46
Wu, Chien-Fu. 1981. Asymptotic theory of nonlinear least squares estimation. The Annals of Statistics 9(3)
501–513.
Xu, Shaoji, Jianzhong Zhang. 1995. An inverse problem of the weighted shortest path problem. Japan
Journal of Industrial and Applied Mathematics 12(1) 47–59.
Xu, Yangyang, Wotao Yin. 2013. A block coordinate descent method for regularized multiconvex optimiza-
tion with applications to nonnegative tensor factorization and completion. SIAM Journal on Imaging
Sciences 6(3) 1758–1789.
Yildirimoglu, Mehmet, Osman Kahraman. 2018. Searching for empirical evidence on traﬃc equilibrium.
PloS one 13(5) e0196997.
Zhan, Xianyuan, Samiul Hasan, Satish V Ukkusuri, Camille Kamga. 2013. Urban link travel time estima-
tion using large-scale taxi data with partial information. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies 33 37–49.
Zhang, Jianzhong, Mao-Cheng Cai. 1998.
Inverse problem of minimum cuts.
Mathematical Methods of
Operations Research 47(1) 51–58.
Zhang, Jianzhong, Zhongfan Ma. 1996.
A network ﬂow method for solving some inverse combinatorial
optimization problems. Optimization 37(1) 59–72.
Zhang, Jianzhong, Zhongfan Ma, Chao Yang. 1995. A column generation method for inverse shortest path
problems. Zeitschrift f¨ur Operations Research 41(3) 347–358.
Zhang, Jing, Ioannis Ch Paschalidis. 2017. Data-driven estimation of travel latency cost functions via inverse
optimization in multi-class transportation networks. 2017 IEEE 56th Annual Conference on Decision
and Control (CDC). IEEE, 6295–6300.
Zhang, Jing, Sepideh Pourazarm, Christos G Cassandras, Ioannis Ch Paschalidis. 2018. The price of anarchy
in transportation networks: Data-driven evaluation and reduction strategies. Proceedings of the IEEE
106(4) 538–553.
Zhao, Qi, Arion Stettner, Ed Reznik, Daniel Segr`e, Ioannis Ch Paschalidis. 2015. Learning cellular objectives
from ﬂuxes by inverse optimization. 2015 54th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC).
IEEE, 1271–1276.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

47
Appendix
A.
Additional Details on Estimation of Congestion Parameter θ
This section presents additional details on the estimation of the congestion parameter. §A.1 provides the
conditions for consistency of the estimates. §A.2 provides more details on the data used to estimate and
validate the congestion parameter. §A.3 introduces the estimation procedure described in in §5.2. In §A.4,
we tune the penalty parameter λ. Finally, we compare our method with two machine learning models in
terms of predicting OD driving time in §A.5.
A.1.
Consistency of Congestion Parameter Estimates
Here we provide conditions under which the estimation problem (13) is consistent, i.e., the sequence of
estimates ˆθn converges in probability to the true parameter θ0. The result follows closely from Theorem 2
of Wu (1981).
Theorem 2. Suppose the following conditions hold: (i) zs = v∗
s(θ0) + εs for s = 1,...,n, where the errors εs
are drawn i.i.d. from a distribution with E[ε] = 0 and unknown variance σ2 > 0, (ii) the parameter set Θ is
ﬁnite, and (iii) limn→∞Pr(Pn
s=1(v∗
s(θ) −v∗
s(θ0))2 > 0) = 1 for all θ ̸= θ0. Then ˆθn
p
−→θ0 as n −→∞.
The proof of Theorem 2 is contained in Appendix H along with the proofs of results from the main body.
At the outset, it should be noted that Theorem 2 describes an idealized setting, with conditions that are
analogous to those used in classical results regarding consistency of non-linear least squares regression (e.g.,
Jennrich (1969), Wu (1981)). Condition (i) speciﬁes a data-generating model based on a true, unknown
parameter θ0. Note that condition (i) assumes the observed vehicle ﬂows z are zero-mean, noisy observations
of the true equilibrium ﬂows, which are assumed to arise under Wardrop equilibrium. In practice, the observed
vehicle ﬂows z may depend on other factors as well, including drivers’ idiosyncratic preferences over driving
routes or unobserved characteristics of drivers or routes. Our model assumes drivers select routes exclusively
based on minimizing travel time and no other factors; violations of this assumption would lead to biased
estimates of θ0.
Condition (iii) is an identiﬁability condition, which ensures that the ground truth parameter θ0 can be
pinpointed from data. Intuitively, the condition states that as the size of the network grows large, any two
distinct values of θ should lead to two distinct equilibrium ﬂows v∗(θ). In the absence of model identiﬁability,
two diﬀerent parameters θ may induce the exact same equilibrium ﬂows over the network, in which case
consistency cannot be attained by any estimation procedure.
The intuition behind condition (iii) is as follows: For very large networks, perturbing θ should shift the
equilibrium vehicle ﬂow v∗
s(θ) in at least one road segment s. The corollary below provides a slightly stronger
but more interpretable condition under which the model is identiﬁable.
Corollary 1. Let X be the set of networks such that for each θ ̸= θ0, there exists an OD pair w ∈W with
paths p1 and p2 that have strictly positive ﬂows in equilibrium, and where
X
s∈SD
p1 \SD
p2
((θ −θ0)⊤qs)v∗
s(θ0) ̸=
X
s∈SD
p2 \SD
p1
((θ −θ0)⊤qs)v∗
s(θ0).
(44)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

48
Then condition (iii) from Theorem 2 holds under any random network process {Gn}n≥1 such that
limn→∞Pr(Gn ∈X) = 1.
The proof is also contained in Appendix H. At a high level, the intuition behind (44) in Corollary 1 is that
for each possible value of θ where θ ̸= θ0, there should exist at least one OD pair w ∈W such that changing
θ0 to θ results in a change in travel time on one path that is not exactly cancelled out by a change in travel
time on another path.
Statistical consistency in inverse optimization was ﬁrst addressed by Aswani et al. (2018). The main
diﬀerence with our setting is that Aswani et al. (2018) assume the feature and response data are independent
draws of a common joint distribution across all n observations. However, independence fails to hold in our
setting because each observation corresponds to a road segment in a network, which have correlated traﬃc
ﬂows. As a result, the suﬃcient conditions for consistency presented in Theorem 2 and Corollary 1 diﬀer
slightly from those given in Aswani et al. (2018).
Lastly, the assumption that Θ is ﬁnite (condition (ii) in Theorem 2) can be weakened to compactness of
Θ by suitably modifying the identiﬁability condition (iii).
Corollary 2. Suppose condition (i) in Theorem 2 holds and the parameter set Θ is compact. If for any
δ > 0, limn→∞Pr

inf
∥θ−θ0∥>δ
Pn
s=1(v∗
s(θ) −v∗
s(θ0))2 > 0

= 1, then ˆθn
p
−→θ0 as n −→∞.
A.2.
Data and Summary Statistics
To make full use of the available data, we estimate θ using data from the entire City of Chicago (full area in
Figure 1). Table 5 presents details on the size of the Chicago network. Table 6 presents summary statistics
for the following variables: The annual average daily traﬃc (AADT) during morning rush hours, which
serve as the observed traﬃc ﬂows zs; the driving demand originating from each census tract d(o)
i ; total road
segment width ns · ws; segment length, ℓs; and path free-ﬂow travel time P
s∈SD
p Ts. Figure 6 depicts the
empirical distribution of these variables. We note that although we cannot observe the free-ﬂow driving time
at the segment-level, path-level free-ﬂow times are suﬃcient for the purpose of estimating θ due to how these
parameters enter into the model.
Table 5
Size of Chicago network used to estimate congestion parameter θ.
Road segments
Driving paths OD pairs
|S|
|PD|
|W|
Size
31,815
399,356
146,847
To validate model ﬁt, we use detailed data on 1,408,833 taxi trips taken during weekday morning rush
hours (6am to 10am) in 2018. We match each taxi trip record to the road network to obtain average taxi
travel times. We drop records with trip times in the upper and lower 2.5% quantiles to remove extreme
observations, which result in taxi travel times in 3,698 OD pairs. A summary of taxi trip times is presented
in Table 7. Results from the taxi trip data validation are given in Figure 2 in §5.2.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

49
Table 6
Summary of data for estimating congestion parameter θ.
AADT Origin demand Road width Road length Free-ﬂow time
zs
d(o)
i
ns · ws
ℓs
P
s∈SD
p Ts
Units
1
1
meters
meters
minutes
Mean
1,730
441
10.4
141
20
SD
2,698
272
4.3
127
9
Min
54
15
3.0
0.4
1
25%
837
236
7.2
99
13
50%
1,222
386
9.0
102
19
75%
1,671
575
13.6
201
25
Max
29,220
2,919
43.2
5,006
71
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
log(road length)
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
Count
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Road width
0
200
400
600
800
Count
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Free flow travel time
0
50
100
150
200
250
Count
Figure 6
Empirical distributions of road segment lengths (ls), total segment widths (ns · ws), and
path-level free ﬂow travel times (Tp = P
s∈Sp Ts).
Table 7
Summary of OD-level taxi trip times.
Units
Mean SD Min 25% 50% 75% Max
Taxi trip durations (taxiw)
minutes
17.1
8.1
2.0
11.1 16.0 21.5
48.5
A.3.
Estimation via Block Coordinate Descent (BCD) Algorithm
To facilitate solving WLS-A, throughout this section we eliminate the variable ϵ, and focus on the equivalent
problem
minimize
θ,φ,v,b
∥v −z∥2
2 + λ ·

∇φg (φ,θ)
⊤φ −
 dD⊤b

subject to (14c) −(14f).
Let d(o)
i
be the driving demand originating from each census tract i ∈I. Then any vehicle traﬃc pattern
(dD,φ,v) should satisfy
X
j ∈I
j ̸= i
X
(i,j) ∈W
dD
w = d(o)
i ,
i ∈I.
(46)
Deﬁne Λ = {(dD,φ,v)|(dD,φ,v) satisﬁes (46) and (φ,v) ∈Ω(dD)}. We can then jointly impute the driving
demands dD by solving a variation of WLS-A that also includes the constraint (dD,φ,v) ∈Λ.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

50
To ensure that driving times are non-decreasing in segment ﬂows, we also impose the constraint θ⊤qs(˜x) ≥
δ, where δ > 0 is a small constant. Then the modiﬁed form of WLS-A for jointly estimating the driving
demands dD and the congestion parameter θ is
minimize
d,φ,v,θ,b ∥v −z∥2
2 + λ ·

∇φg (φ,θ)
⊤φ −
 dD⊤b

(47a)
subject to
X
{w∈W|p∈PD
w }
bw ≤∇φpg (φ,θ),
p ∈P,
(47b)
(dD,φ,v) ∈Λ,
(47c)
θ⊤qs(˜x) ≥δ,
s ∈S,
(47d)
θ ∈Θ.
(47e)
Formulation (47) is multi-convex in the sense that ﬁxing (dD,φ,v) yields a convex subproblem in (θ,b) and
vice versa. We obtain estimates using a block coordinate descent (BCD) method that alternately minimizes
the loss function over each block while ﬁxing the other block at their last updated values (see Xu and Yin
(2013)). Speciﬁcally, let

(dD)
k ,(φ)
k ,(v)
k
and (θk,bk) be the variable values after their kth update. The
BCD method then consists of iteratively solving the following two subproblems:


(dD)
k
(φ)
k
(v)
k

= argmin
dD,φ,v
∥v −z∥2
2 + λ ·
 ∇φg
 φ,θk−1⊤φ −
 dD⊤bk−1
+
1
2µk
1



dD
φ
v

−


(dD)
k−1
(φ)
k−1
(v)
k−1



2
(48a)
subject to
X
{w∈W|p∈PD
w }
bk−1
w
≤∇φpg
 φ,θk−1
,
p ∈P
(48b)
which is a quadratic program (QP), and

θk
bk

= argmin
θ,b
∥(v)k −z∥2
2 + λ ·

∇φg (φ,θ)|φ=(φ)k
⊤
(φ)
k −b⊤ dDk

+
1
2µk
2


θ
b

−

θk−1
bk−1

2
(49a)
subject to
X
{w∈W|p∈Pw}
bw ≤∇φpg (φ,θ)

φ=(φ)k ,
p ∈P
(49b)
θ⊤qs(˜x) ≥δ,
s ∈S,
(49c)
θ ∈Θ,
(49d)
which is a linear program (LP). The sequences {µk
1} and {µk
2} are constants that are uniformly lower bounded
from zero and uniformly upper bounded (Xu and Yin 2013). In our implementation, we simply set µk
1 =
µk
2 = 100 for all k. Let Gk = ∥v −z∥2
2 + λ · (∇φg (φ,θ)
⊤φ −(dD)
⊤b) be the loss after solving (49) in the kth
iteration. We terminate the BCD algorithm after
Gk−Gk+1
Gk
< 10−4 holds for three consecutive iterations or
when k = 50.
Because the BCD algorithm does not converge to a globally optimal solution, we aim to improve the model
ﬁt by repeating the estimation procedure multiple times with random initializations. We use 10 random
starts, where each start consists of randomly drawing the initial estimate θ0 from the uniform distribution,
and then initialize the remaining parameters by solving (47) when λ = 0 and θ0 is held ﬁxed (in which
case (47) becomes a quadratic program that is eﬃciently solved by commercial solvers). We observed that
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

51
increasing the number of random starts beyond 10 only minimally improves the loss function at termination.
For a wide range of λ values, we observed that the algorithm terminated after approximately 35 iterations,
with an average convergence time of 5 hours. The estimation procedure was implemented using Python 3
and the optimization solver Gurobi, and run on a desktop computer with an Intel Core i9-10900K 3.70GHz
processor and 128 GB of RAM.
A.4.
Selecting Wardrop Error Penalty λ
To identify a value of the Wardrop error penalty parameter λ that produces a reasonable model ﬁt, we repeat
the estimation procedure using the BCD algorithm for each λ ∈{1000,1500,2000,2500,3000}. For each value
of λ, we measure model ﬁt according to three error metrics: (1) ﬂow error, (2) Wardrop error,22 and (3)
out-of-sample error23. The reason for evaluating model ﬁt according to these three criteria is to balance the
ﬁt of the data to the underlying traﬃc equilibrium model (metrics 1 and 2) with how well the model predicts
driving travel times (metric 3). The three errors are computed as follows:
Flow error = ∥ˆv −z∥2
2
∥z∥2
2
,
(50a)
Wardrop error =
1
|W|
X
w∈W
max{p∈Pw|ˆφp>0} tD
p (˜x, ˆv) −minp∈Pw tD
p (˜x, ˆv)
minp∈Pw tD
p (˜x, ˆv)
,
(50b)
Out-of-sample error =
1
P
w∈Wtaxi |N taxi
w
|
X
w∈Wtaxi
N taxi
w
 |tD
w (˜x, ˆv) −taxiw|
taxiw
.
(50c)
In the expressions above, ( ˆφ, ˆv) represents the estimates of the equilibrium ﬂows at termination of the
estimation procedure, and ˜x is the status quo bike lane network. In the computation of the out-of-sample
error, N taxi
w
is the total number of taxi trips for OD pair w, Wtaxi ⊂W is the set of OD pairs for which
N taxi
w
> 0, and taxiw is the average duration of all taxi trips on OD pair w ∈Wtaxi. Note that the out-of-
sample error is computed only using the taxi trip data (described in §5.1 and §A.2), which is not used during
estimation.
Figure 7 visualizes the performance of each value of λ according to the three error metrics. Although there
is no value that dominates, we adopt λ = 2500 for our §5 empirical study, which is the only value of λ that
underperforms the other values on only one error metric, and also has the lowest out-of-sample error. Under
λ = 2500, the ﬂow error is 22.2%, the Wardrop error is 1.3%, and the out-of-sample error is 14.3%.
For completeness, Table 8 presents the simple average error across OD pairs as an alternative measure of
out-of-sample error, which is given by setting |N taxi
w
| = 1 in (50c), i.e.,
1
|Wtaxi|
X
w∈Wtaxi
|tD
w (˜x, ˆv) −taxiw|
taxiw
.
(51)
22 An alternative metric of evaluating how data comply with the Wardrop equilibrium is via the value of ϵ in WLS-A.
Intuitively, the closer ϵ is to 0, the better the data satisfy Wardrop equilibrium. However, for ease of interpretation,
here we measure the extent to which Wardrop equilibrium is violated as the relative diﬀerence between the maximum
and minimum driving times over the chosen paths, averaged over all OD pairs.
23 For our measure of out-of-sample error, we use the average discrepancy between the observed average taxi trip
times and predicted OD driving times, weighted by the number of taxi trips per OD pair
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

52
15.0%
20.0%
25.0%
Relative segment flow error
13.00%
14.00%
15.00%
16.00%
17.00%
Out-of-sample error
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
(a) Out-of-sample vs. ﬂow error.
1.20%
1.40%
1.60%
1.80%
2.00%
Relative Wardrop error
13.00%
14.00%
15.00%
16.00%
17.00%
Out-of-sample error
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
(b) Out-of-sample error vs. Wardrop error.
Figure 7
Estimation errors for varying values of penalty parameter λ.
The errors in Table 8 are competitive with previously proposed methods for predicting travel times in a
network using taxi trip data (cf. Table 2 in Zhan et al. (2013)). Table 8 also reports the errors if the free-ﬂow
travel time from Google Maps is naively used to predict taxi trip times. We observe that the error from
using free-ﬂow times alone is signiﬁcantly higher than our method regardless of which value of λ is selected;
in the case where λ = 2500, we obtain a weighted out-of-sample error of 14%, whereas the free-ﬂow travel
times yield an error of 27%. This improvement in prediction errors can be interpreted as the value added by
using a model of traﬃc congestion in addition to free-ﬂow travel times when making predictions.
Table 8
Weighted and simple out-of-sample errors for varying λ and free-ﬂow time.
λ
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Free-ﬂow time
Out-of-sample error (Weighted)
16.0%
15.6%
14.7%
14.3%
15.2%
27.3%
Out of sample error (Simple)
19.7%
19.6%
19.1%
18.9%
18.9%
31.6%
A.5.
Comparison with Linear Regression and Regression Trees on OD Driving Time
Predictions
In this section, we predict travel times on the taxi trip data using two alternative methods, namely, linear
regression and regression tree. The purpose of this comparison is to validate the accuracy of the predictions
generated by the traﬃc congestion model described in §2.2, which is based on the assumption of Wardrop
equilibrium.
To conduct a fair comparison, all three prediction methods use the same set of input features based on
3,698 OD pairs from 1,408,833 taxi trip records: The observed road segment lengths ls, the total road width
ns · ws, the free ﬂow driving times Ts, and the observed traﬃc ﬂows zs. We note two challenges in this
prediction task that require simplifying assumptions. First, not all road segments have observed traﬃc ﬂows;
to address this, we impute the missing values by averaging the traﬃc ﬂows of the road segments connected to
the focal road segment. Second, because the observations on driving time (i.e., taxi trip duration) are at the
OD-level, predicting the corresponding OD travel times requires specifying the driving path taken by each
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

53
taxi trip, which is unobserved in the data. For simplicity, we assume drivers take the most recommended
driving path as per the Google Directions API. Identifying the driving path (i.e., set of connected road
segments SD
p ) for each OD pair then allows us to determine which segment-level feature data correspond to
each OD pair.
For our comparison, we ﬁrst ﬁt the following linear regression model to the taxi trip data:
taxip =
X
s∈SD
p

θ0 + θ1 · Ts + θ2 · ls + θ3 · ns · ws + θ4 ·
ls
ns · ws
+

θ5 + θ6 · ls + θ7 · ns · ws + θ8 ·
ls
ns · ws

zs

(52)
On the left hand side, taxip is the average duration of taxi trips (taken during the morning rush hours of
6am to 10am on weekdays in 2018) between the OD pair for which the most recommended path is p. The
right hand side includes an intercept term and seven diﬀerent covariates constructed from the four input
features described above; note that this speciﬁcation is more general than our driving travel time function
described in (36)-(38). Fitting the model using 10-fold cross validation generates an average prediction error
(given in (51)) of 17.1%. Next, we train a ﬁne-tuned regression tree, again with 10-fold cross validation using
the same input features as in (52), which produces an average prediction error of 16.9%.
Although our prediction method produces a slightly higher prediction error of 18.9% (see Table 8), in
contrast to the linear regression and regression tree methods, it is notably not trained on the taxi trip
durations, taxip. Our model eﬀectively replaces the average trip durations taxip with the road network
structure and commuter demand data, and instead determines the driving time between OD pair w, tD
w,
endogenously in equilibrium. The comparable errors across all three methods suggests the traﬃc congestion
model produces sensible predictions of travel times on the network.
We highlight a few advantages of our method compared to standard prediction techniques like linear
regression and regression trees. Most importantly, because we explicitly model congestion in the road
network, our approach is more suitable for evaluating counterfactuals, and in particular can be used to
assess the impact of bike lane network expansion on driving travel times. Additionally, our method can
generate reasonable travel time predictions in settings where detailed OD trip data are not available, but
commuter demand and vehicle ﬂows data are. Lastly, as a result of imposing a network structure on the data
and enforcing Wardrop equilibrium, our method does not require knowledge of the driving path chosen by
commuters and can handle missing vehicle ﬂows on some road segments, which must otherwise be imputed.
However, if high-resolution mobility data is available (e.g., GPS coordinates of individual commuters), then
standard prediction methods like linear regression and regression trees may generate more accurate travel
time predictions. We also note that our approach is more computationally demanding because of the need
to solve the non-convex optimization problem WLS-A, given in (16).
B.
Map of Divvy Bike Share Stations for Mode Choice Estimation
As described in §5.1, we use Divvy bike share trip data as a proxy for total cycling demand. Because not
all census tracts have Divvy stations, in estimating the mode choice parameters β we focus on a contiguous
region within Chicago, which we identify by selecting a subset of census tracts for which a Divvy station
exists in every adjacent census tract. Figure 8 depicts locations of all Divvy stations in Chicago, as well as
the study region for estimating the mode choice parameters, which approximately corresponds to downtown
Chicago. The road network corresponding to the study region is summarized in Table 9.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

54
Divvy stations
0
2.5
5
1.25
Miles
Study region
0
2.5
5
1.25
Miles
Figure 8
Locations of Divvy stations and study region for mode choice estimation.
Table 9
Size of downtown Chicago network used to estimate mode choice parameters β.
Road segments
Driving paths OD pairs
|S|
|PD|
|W|
Size
6,101
14,632
5,272
C.
Robustness Checks: Alternative Instruments for Mode Choice Estimation
In this section, we verify robustness of our mode choice model estimates by considering alternative instru-
mental variables. First, for the BLP-like instrument described in §5.3, we implement several diﬀerent choices
of the distance interval [a,b]. Then, we consider two additional instruments: A “spatial” instrument in the
spirit of Hausman-type instruments (Hausman 1996, Nevo 2001), which uses the endogenous variables of
nearby OD pairs, and a network-based instrument in the style of He et al. (2021) and Arora et al. (2022),
which is similar to the BLP-like instrument but more explicitly leverages the underlying network structure.
For conciseness, we present the estimates for the two key parameters of interest, which are the coeﬃcients
for bike lane coverage parameter (βC
1 ) and driving travel time (βD
1 ). In summary, we ﬁnd our estimates to
be highly stable across all implemented instruments.
For the BLP-like instrument, we vary the distance interval [a,b] by combining each value of a ∈
{500,1000,1500} with each value of b ∈{7000,8000}, for a total of six diﬀerent distance intervals. The esti-
mates for βC
1 and βD
1 are shown in columns (1)-(6) in Table 10. Note that column (2) provides the most
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

55
conservative (i.e., smallest) estimate of the eﬀect of bike lane coverage, which is the value used when solving
the bike lane optimization problem in our empirical study §5.4.
The spatial instruments are the average bike lane coverage and driving time of a subset of OD pairs other
than the focal OD pair. Following our setup for the BLP-like instruments in §5.3, for each OD pair w we
deﬁne a set of other OD pairs
Z(a,b)
w={i,j} = {w′ = (i′,j′) ∈W|dis(i′,i) ∈[a,b],dis(j′,j) ∈[a,b]}.
(53)
Then for each OD pair w′, the instruments are deﬁned as
Z(a,b)
w′
=


1
Z(a,b)
w′={i′,j′}

X
w∈Z(a,b)
w′={i′,j′}
ρw,
1
Z(a,b)
w′={i′,j′}

X
w∈Z(a,b)
w′={i′,j′}
tD
w


(54)
For the distance interval [a,b], we set a = 1500 and b = 7500, which corresponds to the largest value of a and
the average value of b used in the BLP-like instrument. Choosing a to be large ensures that the instrumental
OD pairs are moderately distant from the focal OD pair, which is intended to promote the exclusion criterion.
The validity of our spatial instrument, which can be interpreted as a Hausman-type instrument if one
views each OD pair as a “market”, follows from arguments similar to those used in Nevo (2001). In our
setting, relevance follows from the fact that bike lanes and driving travel times are likely to be spatially
correlated due to neighborhood-speciﬁc factors. The exclusion criterion is satisﬁed under the assumption
that unobserved factors that inﬂuence cycling or driving demand are independent across OD pairs that are
moderately separated by distance. It is worth noting that the use of this spatial instrument is not completely
free from validity concerns – for instance, in estimating the driving travel time coeﬃcient βD
1 , there may
exist complex and high-level network eﬀects that impact traﬃc congestion, which challenges the exclusion
criterion. In employing Hausman-type instruments, Nevo (2001) recognizes potential challenges with their
validity, and those caveats extend to our study as well. Nonetheless, we ﬁnd the stability in estimates observed
in Table 10 to be encouraging.
The third instrument is a network-based instrument in the spirit of He et al. (2021) and Arora et al.
(2022), which are similar to BLP-like instruments but explicitly utilize the underlying network structure (of
bike stations and ride-hailing pick-up/drop-oﬀlocations, respectively). To explain the variations in bike lane
coverage and driving time between OD pair w = (i,j), we look for exogenous variables that are correlated
with commute demand at census tracts i and j. Analogous to He et al. (2021) and Arora et al. (2022), we
construct instrumental variables for both the origin i and destination j; below, we describe how the origin
instrumental variables are constructed and note that the destination instruments follow similarly.
To construct the origin instrumental variables, we look for a set of exogenous characteristics over cen-
sus tract h ∈Horigin,b
w=(i,j) that satisﬁes the following two criteria: (1) h is connected to the origin i of the
focal OD pair in the sense that there is strictly positive commute demand between h and i, and (2)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

56
h is suﬃciently distant from the destination j of the focal OD pair. Formally, we deﬁne Horigin,b
w=(i,j) =

h ∈I|dw=(h,i) + dw=(i,h) > 0,dis(h,j) > b
 
. Then the origin instruments are deﬁned as
Zorigin,b
w
=


1
Horigin,b
w=(i,j)

P
h∈Horigin,b
w=(i,j) pdh
1
Horigin,b
w=(i,j)

P
h∈Horigin,b
w=(i,j) npih
1
Horigin,b
w=(i,j)

P
h∈Horigin,b
w=(i,j) (1T · npih) × pdh
1
Horigin,b
w=(i,j)

P
h∈Horigin,b
w=(i,j) hih


where pdh, npih, and hih denote the population density, number of each type of point of interest, and median
household income, and (1T · npih)×pdh is the interaction between the total number of points of interest of all
categories, (1T · npih) and population density in the census tract h ∈Horigin,b
w=(i,j), respectively. The destination
instruments are then
Zdest,b
w
=


1
Hdest,b
w=(i,j)

P
h∈Hdest,b
w=(i,j) pdh
1
Hdest,b
w=(i,j)

P
h∈Hdest,b
w=(i,j) pih
1
Hdest,b
w=(i,j)

P
h∈Hdest,b
w=(i,j) (1T · pih) × pdh
1
Hdest,b
w=(i,j)

P
h∈Hdest,b
w=(i,j) hih


where the set Hdest,b
w=(i,j) =

h ∈I|dw=(h,j) + dw=(j,h) > 0,dis(h,i) > b
 
. The validity of these network-based
instruments parallel the reasoning provided in He et al. (2021) and Arora et al. (2022), where the connect-
edness and distance requirements (1) and (2) are intended to satisfy relevance and exclusion, respectively.
Table 10
Robustness results for all instrumental variable speciﬁcations.
(1)
(2, adopted)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Spatial
Network
bike lane
2.87***
1.88***
4.35***
2.91***
2.27***
1.96***
2.73*
2.74***
coverage (βC
1 )
(0.60)
(0.64)
(0.65)
(0.63)
(0.64)
(0.62)
(1.65)
(0.83)
driving
-0.29***
-0.21***
-0.28***
-0.19***
-0.26***
-0.18***
-0.36***
-0.19***
time (βD
1 )
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.01)
(0.04)
Cragg–Donald
26.04
21.63
24.45
25.27
23.41
22.78
72.51
15.40
statistic
Note: **p < 0.05; ***p < 0.01. Columns (1) ∼(6) represent the estimations using BLP-like
instruments based on diﬀerent combinations of (a,b) = (500,7000),(500,8000),(1000,7000),
(1000,8000),(1500,7000),(1500,8000). Columns “Spatial” and “Network” are the estimation
based on the spatial instruments with (a,b) = (1500,7500) and network-based
instruments with b = 8000.
As shown in Table 10, all instruments produce comparable estimates for the coeﬃcients for bike lane cover-
age (βC
1 ) and driving time (βD
1 ) in the mode choice model, and we reject the weak instrument null hypothesis,
where the relevant critical value is 20.7 (for the Network-based instrument, we reject at a relative bias of
10% under the critical value of 11.05). For completeness, we present estimates for all parameters in Table
12. Next, we conduct a sensitivity analysis to evaluate the inﬂuence of each estimate on the corresponding
optimal bike lane network as it relates to cycling ridership and traﬃc congestion. Speciﬁcally, for each IV
estimate shown in Table 10, we re-solve the corresponding BL-A problem to generate the optimal bike lane
design under a bike lane budget of B = 25 miles and congestion tolerance τ = 10%. We then assess each
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

57
bike lane design using the associated cycling mode share increase (deﬁned in (42)) and worst-case increase
in driving time (deﬁned in (43)), which is obtained by solving the exact user equilibrium problem (24).
The performance metrics of all optimal bike lane plans are presented in Table 11. Note the main set of
results presented in §5 uses the estimates in column (2), because it corresponds to the most conservative
estimate of the impact of bike lanes on cycling demand. Our sensitivity analysis reveals that all of the
instrumental variable estimates produce similar values for the impact of the optimal bike lane design on
cycling adoption and traﬃc congestion, which is unsurprising given the robustness of the estimates shown
in Table 10.
Table 11
Impact of optimal bike lane design based on diﬀerent IV estimates.
(1)
(2, adopted)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Spatial
Network
Increase in
2.81%
2.48%
2.93%
2.59%
2.69%
2.63%
2.76%
2.71%
cycling share
Worst-case increase
10.58%
9.37%
11.56%
11.50%
11.05%
7.74%
11.24%
7.14%
in driving time
See the notes for Table 10.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

58
Table 12
Estimates for all speciﬁcations of the commuter mode choice model.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Spatial
Netwrok
OLS
Cycling
intercept
0.96
2.36
2.01
2.86
3.36
3.93
1.76
2.07
2.16
(2.57)
(2.43)
(2.47)
(2.43)
(2.45)
(2.46)
(2.50)
(2.44)
(1.71)
cycling
-0.24***
-0.22***
-0.25***
-0.22***
-0.23***
-0.21***
-0.25***
-0.22***
-0.21***
time
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.00)
average elevation
-3.01***
-2.66***
-3.41***
-2.74***
-3.18***
-2.84***
-2.72***
-2.68***
-2.10***
grade
(0.80)
(0.79)
(0.82)
(0.80)
(0.79)
(0.79)
(0.81)
(0.81)
(0.66)
bike lane
2.87***
1.88***
4.35***
2.91***
2.27***
1.96***
2.74*
2.74***
-0.14
coverage
(0.60)
(0.64)
(0.65)
(0.63)
(0.64)
(0.62)
(1.65)
(0.83)
(0.15)
Driving
intercept
4.08***
3.97**
4.32***
4.11***
4.32***
4.29***
4.95***
3.87**
4.39***
(1.52)
(1.55)
(1.51)
(1.57)
(1.51)
(1.58)
(1.44)
(1.57)
(1.69)
vehicle
0.58***
0.60***
0.62***
0.57***
0.74***
0.68***
0.52**
0.62***
0.49
ownership
(0.22)
(0.22)
(0.22)
(0.22)
(0.22)
(0.22)
(0.23)
(0.22)
(0.31)
driving
-0.29***
-0.21***
-0.28***
-0.19***
-0.26***
-0.18***
-0.36***
-0.19***
-0.25***
time
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.01)
(0.04)
(0.01)
household
0.02
0.03**
0.02*
0.03**
0.03**
0.03**
0.01
0.03**
0.03
income
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
transit
-0.02***
-0.03***
-0.02***
-0.03***
-0.02***
-0.03***
-0.01***
-0.03***
-0.02***
Outside
time
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.00)
option
transit
0.004***
0.004***
0.003**
0.004***
0.004***
0.004***
0.005***
0.004***
0.005***
stations
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
movie
-0.64***
-0.59***
-0.69***
-0.62***
-0.59***
-0.57***
-0.60***
-0.62***
-0.51***
theater
(0.10)
(0.10)
(0.11)
(0.10)
(0.10)
(0.10)
(0.11)
(0.10)
(0.08)
park
-0.93
-1.01
-1.02
-1.19
-1.52
-1.65
-0.74
-0.79
-0.90
(1.04)
(1.03)
(1.06)
(1.05)
(1.05)
(1.05)
(1.04)
(1.03)
(0.62)
restaurant
-1.00
-2.01
-2.01
-2.53
-2.34
-2.66
-1.98
-1.95
-1.72
(2.36)
(2.21)
(2.24)
(2.20)
(2.22)
(2.23)
(2.29)
(2.22)
(1.59)
shopping
0.12
0.14
0.07
0.10
0.13
0.12
0.11
0.15
0.19**
mall
(0.11)
(0.11)
(0.12)
(0.11)
(0.11)
(0.11)
(0.12)
(0.11)
(0.09)
supermarket
-0.37***
-0.30***
-0.38***
-0.36***
-0.34***
-0.33***
-0.32***
-0.39***
-0.27***
Cycling
(0.11)
(0.10)
(0.11)
(0.11)
(0.10)
(0.10)
(0.11)
(0.11)
(0.09)
controls
bakery
0.08
0.19
0.02
0.17
-0.06
0.07
0.08
-0.07
0.13
(0.34)
(0.34)
(0.35)
(0.34)
(0.34)
(0.34)
(0.34)
(0.34)
(0.26)
bar
1.95***
1.78***
1.82***
1.77***
2.00***
1.81***
1.68***
1.77***
1.79***
(0.52)
(0.52)
(0.52)
(0.52)
(0.52)
(0.52)
(0.52)
(0.51)
(0.38)
university
0.70***
0.66***
0.66***
0.65***
0.70***
0.67***
0.70***
0.70***
0.73***
(0.16)
(0.16)
(0.17)
(0.16)
(0.16)
(0.16)
(0.17)
(0.16)
(0.13)
hospital
-0.39***
-0.36**
-0.44***
-0.39***
-0.39***
-0.39***
-0.34**
-0.38***
-0.26**
(0.14)
(0.14)
(0.15)
(0.14)
(0.14)
(0.14)
(0.15)
(0.14)
(0.11)
library
-0.12
-0.11
-0.05
-0.08
-0.13
-0.16
-0.14
-0.13
-0.17**
(0.11)
(0.11)
(0.11)
(0.11)
(0.11)
(0.11)
(0.11)
(0.11)
(0.09)
movie
-0.36***
-0.39***
-0.36***
-0.41***
-0.37***
-0.42***
-0.30***
-0.40***
-0.36***
theater
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.08)
park
-0.53
-0.71
-0.54
-0.77*
-0.56
-0.80*
-0.40
-0.72
-0.67
(0.47)
(0.47)
(0.47)
(0.47)
(0.47)
(0.47)
(0.46)
(0.47)
(0.62)
restaurant
0.37
0.14
0.03
-0.12
-0.17
-0.36
-0.12
-0.04
-0.12
(1.45)
(1.48)
(1.44)
(1.49)
(1.44)
(1.51)
(1.37)
(1.49)
(1.59)
shopping
-0.19***
-0.23***
-0.21***
-0.22***
-0.21***
-0.21***
-0.18***
-0.21***
-0.19**
mall
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.09)
supermarket
-0.12*
-0.08
-0.10
-0.09
-0.09
-0.09
-0.09
-0.09
-0.08
(0.07)
(0.06)
(0.06)
(0.07)
(0.06)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.09)
Driving
bakery
-0.10
-0.31*
-0.09
-0.29
-0.13
-0.27
0.05
-0.24
-0.14
controls
(0.18)
(0.19)
(0.18)
(0.18)
(0.18)
(0.19)
(0.18)
(0.18)
(0.26)
bar
0.97***
0.84***
0.89***
0.80***
0.87***
0.73***
0.99***
0.77***
0.83**
(0.28)
(0.28)
(0.28)
(0.28)
(0.28)
(0.28)
(0.29)
(0.28)
(0.38)
university
-0.36***
-0.36***
-0.36***
-0.34***
-0.34***
-0.32***
-0.37***
-0.33***
-0.34***
(0.09)
(0.09)
(0.09)
(0.09)
(0.09)
(0.09)
(0.09)
(0.09)
(0.13)
hospital
0.10
0.14*
0.11
0.15*
0.13
0.17**
0.08
0.17**
0.13
(0.08)
(0.08)
(0.08)
(0.08)
(0.08)
(0.08)
(0.08)
(0.08)
(0.11)
library
-0.40***
-0.36***
-0.39***
-0.35***
-0.39***
-0.38***
-0.39***
-0.35***
-0.35***
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.09)
See the notes for Table 10.
D.
Mixed-Integer Linear Programming Reformulation of Path Selection Model
BL-A
This section develops the mixed-integer linear programming (MILP) reformulation of the linearized bike lane
path selection model BL-A given in (32). In preparation, we ﬁrst re-write the constraints (30d) and (30e) as
ξs ≥ρr
s (xs) · vs + ϵr
s (xs),
r ∈Rξ,s ∈S,
(55a)
ψm
w ≥ar
w · dm
w + br
w,
r ∈Rψ,w ∈W,m ∈M,
(55b)
where
ρr
s (xs) = αs (xs) · vr
s
r ∈Rξ,s ∈S,
(56a)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

59
ϵr
s (xs) = −1
2 · αs (xs) · (vr
s)2 ,
r ∈Rξ,s ∈S,
(56b)
ar
w = [1 + log (dr)],
r ∈Rψ,w ∈W,m ∈M,
(56c)
br
w = −dr,
r ∈Rψ,w ∈W,m ∈M.
(56d)
The lower-level (i.e., user equilibrium) problem in in (32) is a linear program. As a result, by leveraging linear
programming duality, the bi-level optimization problem (32) can be reformulated exactly as the following
single-level mixed-integer program, where σ,π,µ,λ,γ are dual variables corresponding to each of the primal
feasibility constraints:
maximize
x, y, d, φ, v, ξ,
ψ, µ, γ, λ, π, σ
X
w∈W
dC
w
subject to (23b) −(23d),
upper level constraints
SL(x,d,v,ψ,ξ) =
X
w∈W

µwdw +
X
r∈Rψ
X
m∈M
πmr
w br
w

+
X
r∈Rξ
X
s∈S
σr
sϵr
s (xs)
strong duality
ξs ≥ρr
s (xs) · vs + ϵr
s (xs),
r ∈Rξ,s ∈S,
ψm
w ≥ar
w · dm
w + br
w,
r ∈Rψ,w ∈W,m ∈M,
dO
w + dC
w + dD
w = ¯dw,
w ∈W,
P
p∈PD
w φp = dD
w,
w ∈W,
vs = P
{p∈PD|s∈SD
p } φp,
s ∈S,
φ ≥0,























primal feasibility
µw −P
r∈Rψ ar
w · πmr
w ≤−um
w ,
w ∈W,m ∈{C,O},
µw + γw −P
r∈Rψ ar
w · πDr
w ≤−

βD
0 + ( ˜βD)⊤XD
, w ∈W,
−P
{w∈W|p∈PD
w } γw −P
s∈SD
p λs ≤0,
p ∈PD,
λs −P
r∈Rξ ρr
s (xs) · σr
s ≤−βD
1 · Ts,
s ∈S,
P
r∈Rψ σr
s = −βD
1 ,
s ∈S,
P
n∈N πmn
w
= 1,
w ∈W,m ∈M,
π,σ ≥0.































dual feasibility
The advantage of the formulation above is that it only contains linear and bi-linear terms, and can therefore
be transformed into a MILP via introduction of “big-M” constants, which permits solution by commercial
optimization software packages. Speciﬁcally, because ρr
s (xs) and ϵr
s (xs) are functions of the bike lane deci-
sion x, we rewrite the bi-linear constraints ξs ≥ρr
s (xs) · vs + ϵr
s (xs) and λs −P
r∈Rξ ρr
s (xs) · σr
s ≤−βD
1 · Ts
equivalently as
ξs ≥ρr
s (1) · vs + ϵr
s (1) −M1 · (1 −xs),
r ∈Rξ,s ∈S,
(58a)
ξs ≥ρr
s (0) · vs + ϵr
s (0) −M1 · xs,
r ∈Rξ,s ∈S,
(58b)
and
λs ≤−βD
1 · Ts +
X
r∈Rξ
ρr
s (1) · σr
s + M2 · (1 −xs),
s ∈S,
(59a)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

60
λs ≤−βD
1 · Ts +
X
r∈Rξ
ρr
s (0) · σr
s + M2 · xs,
s ∈S,
(59b)
where M1 and M2 are large constants. For computational eﬃciency in solving the bike lane path selection
model BL-A, we omit the OD pairs representing the smallest 20% of pairs by demand within the study region
(shaded area of Figure 8). This yields a sub-network that is still representative of commute patterns in the
study region, but is signiﬁcantly more tractable. The resulting network is summarized in Table 13.
Table 13
Size of downtown Chicago network used in bike lane optimization model BL-A.
Road segment set
Driving path set OD pair set
|S|
|PD|
|W|
Size
4,127
2,458
887
D.1.
Sensitivity of Approximation Error to Number of Linear Segments
In our empirical study, we set the number of piecewise linear segments in the approximation BL-A as |Rξ| =
|Rψ| = 15. In this section, we investigate numerically how the number of segments used in the linearization
technique aﬀects the approximation error between the exact formulation BL and the approximation BL-A.
To do so, we ﬁx |Rξ| = |Rψ|, vary both from 1 to 50, and compare the mode shares (dm
w / ˜dw) and driving
times (tD
p ) computed by the linearized lower-level problem (30) to the true mode shares and driving times
from the exact lower-level problem (24). We assume the status quo bike lane network (i.e., x = ˜x). Note
that the exact lower-level problem is a convex (quadratic) optimization problem and can thus be solved to
optimality.
Figure 9 shows the relative errors in mode shares and driving times between the exact and linearized user
equilibrium problems. When |Rξ| = |Rψ| = 15, the relative errors for cycling, driving and outside options
shares are 3.22%, 0.49% and 0.62%, respectively, and the average relative driving time error across all OD
pairs is 0.98%. Note that because the objective function of BL is simply the total cycling demand P
w∈W dC
w,
the relative error in cycling mode shares of 3.22% indicates a small suboptimality gap in Theorem 1 when
|Rξ| = |Rψ| = 15. In general, these results suggest that a modest number of linear segments is suﬃcient for
obtaining a good-quality MILP approximation of the exact path selection model BL.
D.2.
Optimality Gaps at Termination of MILP Formulation
In solving the MILP reformulation of BL-A with commercial solvers, we terminate solution when either the
optimality gap (MIP gap) is within 0.1% or the solution time reaches 6 hours. In Table 14, we present
the relative MIP gaps at termination for each of the 12 combinations of (β,τ) used in the empirical study.
The gaps are largest when both the budget constraint B and the tolerance τ are small, with a maximum
MIP gap of 41.33% for the instance (B,τ) = (10,5%). This magnitude of MIP gap is commonly observed
for computationally challenging bi-level programs (Dan and Marcotte 2019). Note that not solving BL-A to
optimality implies the estimated cycling ridership under the recommended bike lane network presented in
§5.4 and §5.5 are conservative estimates of the ridership under an optimal solution to BL-A.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

61
1
6
11
16
21
15
Number of segments
0%
100%
200%
300%
400%
500%
Relative share error
Cycling shares error
Driving shares error
Outside options shares error
(a) Mode share errors.
1
6
11
16
21
15
Number of segments
0.0%
10.0%
20.0%
30.0%
40.0%
Average relative driving time error
(b) Path driving time errors.
Figure 9
Approximation errors due to linearization of user equilibrium problem (24).
Table 14
Relative optimality gaps at termination when solving BL-A as a mixed-integer linear program.
B = 10
B = 25
B = 50
B = 75
τ = 5% 41.33% 41.25% 34.44% 33.63%
τ = 10% 27.48% 18.19%
6.50%
4.79%
τ = 15% 18.24%
8.69%
3.46%
0.66%
E.
Comparison with Alternative Bike Lane Planning Methods
This section provides additional technical details and numerical results for the benchmark bike lane planning
methods discussed in §5. §E.1 presents the detailed steps for each of the benchmark methods, and §E.2
summarizes results. In §E.3, we use our estimated model to evaluate the performance of the bike lanes
actually installed by Chicago after our study period (i.e., from 2018-2021).
E.1.
Description of Benchmark Methods
Fixed-time model. The ﬁxed-time model assumes that all driving times are unaﬀected by the addition of
bike lanes. The model is a variation of BL-A, where the segment travel times tD
s are ﬁxed to their values
under the status quo bike lane network ˜x. Under this assumption, the total driving utility is
X
w∈W
 Z dD
w (x)
0
uD
w(x) · dd
!
=
X
w∈W

βD
0 + ( ˜βD)⊤XD
w

· dD
w(x) + βD
1
X
s∈S
tD
s (˜x) · vs.
(60)
We then obtain the following ﬁxed-time analog of S(x,d,v):
SFT (x,d,v) =
X
w∈W
−

uO
wdO
w + uC
w(x) · dC
w + βD
0 dD
w + ( ˜βD)⊤XD
wdD
w

−βD
1
X
s∈S
tD
s (˜x) · vs +
X
w∈W
X
m∈M
dm
w · log (dm
w ).
(61)
Note that the dependence on the bike lane design variable x is now only via the cycling utility uC
w. The full
ﬁxed-time model is then given by
maximize
x,y,d,φ,v
X
w∈W
dC
w
(62a)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

62
subject to (23b) −(23d)
(62b)
(d,φ,v) =
argmin
d,(φ,v)∈Ω(dD)
SFT (x,d,v).
(62c)
As a result of the ﬁxed-time assumption, congestion tolerance constraints such as (35) are irrelevant in this
model, and (62) does not permit control over driving times. The model can be reformulated and linearized
in the same manner as described in §4.2, which leads to a MILP that can be solved using commercial
optimization software. The termination criteria are the same as in §D.2: the solver is terminated when the
optimality gap (MIP gap) is within 0.1% or the solution time reaches 6 hours. Table 15 reports the optimality
gaps at termination for diﬀerent values of B. We observe that the optimality gaps for the ﬁxed-time model
(62) are comparable to the gaps for BL-A presented in Table 14.
Table 15
Relative optimality gaps at termination when solving ﬁxed-time model as a MILP.
B
10
25
50
75
Gap 25.97% 23.23% 10.05% 8.07%
Greedy heuristic. Next, we present the steps for the greedy heuristic discussed in §5.5. With a slight abuse
of notation, let ˜dC
w be the cycling demand on OD pair w under the status quo bike lane network ˜x, and let
dC,w
w′
be the cycling demand on OD pair w′ if bike lanes are added to path pC
w. Similarly, let ˜tD
p be the driving
time on path p under ˜x, and let tw
p be the driving time on path p if a bike lane is added to path pC
w. Deﬁne
τw = max
p∈PD
(
tw
p −˜tD
p
˜tD
p
)
(63)
to be the worst-case relative increase in driving times over all paths if bike lane are added to path pC
w. Note
that dC,w
w′
and tw
p can be computed by modifying the network variable x to contain the desired bike lanes
and then solving the convex user equilibrium problem (24). Next, deﬁne
Bw =
X
s∈SC
w
ℓs(1 −˜xs),
(64)
which represents the consumption of the budget B due to the addition of bike lanes to path pC
w. Lastly, deﬁne
δw = 1
Bw
X
w′∈W

dC,w
w′ −˜dC
w′

.
(65)
Intuitively, the parameter δw represents the average increase in system-wide cycling demand per unit of bike
lane added to path pC
w. In other words, δw reﬂects the sensitivity (marginal increase) of cycling ridership to
the addition of bike lanes on path pC
w. The pseudocode for the greedy heuristic is presented below.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

63
Greedy heuristic.
Input: Budget B, existing bike lane network ˜x and ˜S, congestion tolerance τ,
step parameter γ ∈[0,1], maximum of driving time increase σ = maxw∈W τw.
Output: New bike lane network xG.
1. Let Wk ⊆W index the k largest values of δw. Let Wk
σ = {w ∈Wk|τw ≤σ} and Sk
σ =∪w∈WkσSC
w .
2. Set ¯x = ˜x. Let G be the largest index in Wk
σ such that P
s∈SG
σ ℓs (1 −˜xs) ≤B.
Set ¯xs = 1 for all s ∈SG
σ ∪˜S.
3. If maxp∈PD{tD
p (¯x)/˜tD
p } > 1 + τ, update σ ←σ −γ and go to Step 1; else, set xG = ¯x and terminate.
Demand heuristic. The demand heuristic greedily selects bike lane paths according the OD pairs with the
highest status-quo cycling demand. It diﬀers from the greedy heuristic in that it ignores both the congestion
constraints and the network structure, but is still restricted to select from the same set of candidate paths.
The pseudocode is presented below.
Demand heuristic.
Input: Budget B, existing bike lane network ˜x and ˜S.
Output: New bike lane network xH.
1. Initialize xH = ˜x. Let Wk ⊆W index the k largest demands dC
w and let Sk =∪w∈WkSC
w .
2. Let H be the largest index such that P
s∈SH ℓs (1 −˜xs) ≤B.
3. Set xH
s = 1 for all s ∈SH ∪˜S.
E.2.
Comparison with Benchmark Methods on Cycling Ridership and Congestion
Figure 10 depicts the performance of BL-A, the ﬁxed-time model, the greedy heuristic, and the demand
heuristic for the full set of cases where B = {10,25,50,75}. The results are consistent with the ﬁndings
discussed in §5.5 for the B = 25 case. First, the greedy heuristic attains the lowest increase in cycling ridership.
Second, although the ﬁxed-time model and demand heuristic both lead to substantial increases in cycling
ridership, the increase in congestion under those methods are comparable or worse than the prescriptions
from BL-A.
In addition to the worst-case increase in driving time over all routes, as an alternative measure of congestion
we also evaluate the total system-wide driving time, which is computed as
P
w∈W dD
w (x∗) · tD
w(x∗) −P
w∈W dD
w (˜x) · tD
w(˜x)
P
w∈W dD
w (˜x) · tD
w(˜x)
.
(66)
Figure 11 presents a comparison of all four methods according to the increase in cycling ridership and total
system-wide driving time. We note that the congestion-reducing demand eﬀect and congestion-increasing
road capacity eﬀect discussed in §5.4 remain in eﬀect here. Notably, under most bike lane plans, the total
system-wide driving time decreases compared to the status quo. This is the result of the demand eﬀect
dominating the road capacity eﬀect. Further, when the bike lane budget B is small (B ∈{10,25,50}), the
recommended bike lane plan from BL-A strictly dominates the greedy heuristic, and outperforms the ﬁxed-
time model and demand heuristic in at least one criterion; when the budget is large (B = 75), all methods
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

64
tend to perform similarly. This is unsurprising because the bike lane plans produced by all methods are less
likely to diﬀer under a generous budget. Overall, these results suggest that the bike lane plans recommended
by our model continue to outperform the benchmark methods using the alternative congestion metric of
total system-wide driving time, and that our prescriptive model is particularly valuable when the bike lane
mileage budget is modest.
0.00%
0.50%
1.00%
1.50%
2.00%
2.50%
Increase in cycling share
5.0%
7.5%
10.0%
12.5%
15.0%
Worst-case increase in driving time
B = 10

 2.5%
 
 
5% (10%, 15%)
5%
10%
15%
0.50%
1.00%
1.50%
2.00%
2.50%
3.00%
Increase in cycling share
4.0%
6.0%
8.0%
10.0%
12.0%
14.0%
Worst-case increase in driving time
5%
5%
10%
B = 25
10%
15%
15%
1.50%
2.00%
2.50%
3.00%
3.50%
Increase in cycling share
7.5%
10.0%
12.5%
15.0%
Worst-case increase in driving time
B = 50
 
5.0%
5%
5%
15%
15%
10%
10%
1.50%
2.00%
2.50%
3.00%
3.50%
Increase in cycling share
6.0%
8.0%
10.0%
12.0%
14.0%
Worst-case increase in driving time
B = 75
5%
5%
10%
10%
15%
15%
Figure 10
Comparison of BL-A and benchmark methods on worst-case driving time and cycling
ridership.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

65
0.00%
0.50%
1.00%
1.50%
2.00%
2.50%
Increase in cycling share
2.50%
2.00%
1.50%
1.00%
0.50%
Total driving time change
B = 10
 
 
 
 
10%
15%
5%
5% (10 %, 15%)
0.50%
1.00%
1.50%
2.00%
2.50%
3.00%
Increase in cycling share
3.00%
2.50%
2.00%
1.50%
1.00%
Total driving time change
10%
B = 25
15%
5%
10%
5%
15%
1.50%
2.00%
2.50%
3.00%
3.50%
Increase in cycling share
3.50%
3.00%
2.50%
Total driving time change
15%
B = 50
10%
15%
5%
5%
10%
1.50%
2.00%
2.50%
3.00%
3.50%
Increase in cycling share
4.00%
3.50%
3.00%
2.50%
Total driving time change
10%
B = 75
5%
5%
10%
15%
15%
Figure 11
Comparison of BL-A and benchmark methods on system-wide driving time and cycling
ridership.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

66
E.3.
Comparison with Chicago’s Bike Lane Expansion Plan
Here we evaluate the performance (as predicted by our estimated model) of the new bike lanes constructed
in Chicago following our study period of 2018. We obtained data on the bike lanes added from November
2018 to November 2021 from the Chicago Open Data Portal (Chicago Data Portal 2023). These new bike
lanes represent an additional 14.48 miles in our study region of downtown Chicago, as illustrated in Figure
12. We match these new bike lanes to our road network and pass the complete bike lane network through our
estimated model (i.e., by solving the associated user equilibrium problem (24)) to obtain predictions of the
impacts on cycling adoption and congestion. Based on our model, these new bike lanes lead to an increase
in the cycling mode share of 0.38% and a maximum driving time increase of 8.23% over all OD pairs.
For comparison purposes, we also re-solve the greedy heuristic described in §5.5 and Appendix E and
our optimization problem BL-A using a budget of B = 14.48 miles and a congestion tolerance of 10%, to
examine how the predictions from each of the three bike lane plans diﬀer. The ﬁndings are summarized in
Table 16. Remarkably, we observe that the expansion of bike lanes in Chicago yields similar results to those
achieved by the greedy heuristic: The worst-case increase in driving time between the OD pairs is 8.23%,
slightly higher than the 7.99% recorded by the greedy heuristic, with a diﬀerence in cycling shares of 0.03%.
Moreover, in line with the observations we discussed in Section 5.5, BL-A surpasses both Chicago’s actual
implementation and the greedy heuristic with respect to cycling share. In addition, our method with the
speciﬁed parameters of B = 14.48 miles and τ = 5% dominates the other two approaches.
While the results in Table 16 suggest the prescriptions from our model might stimulate higher cycling
ridership than Chicago’s current expansion plan, there are some important caveats. First, city planners may
have considered other objectives in addition to ridership and congestion, which would result in diﬀerences in
the recommended locations for bike lane installation. Similarly, city planners likely face numerous constraints
that we do not have visibility into when identifying bike lane locations, including land use considerations,
feasibility of construction, and pressure from residents. Lastly, the values in Table 16 are based on predictions
from our estimated congestion and mode choice models, and thus reﬂect the assumptions built into those
models. Nonetheless, these results suggest that data-driven methods have the potential to signiﬁcantly beneﬁt
city planners by identifying eﬀective candidate areas for the installation of bike lanes.
Table 16
Comparison between actual bike lane expansion in Chicago, greedy heuristic, and bike lane
optimization model BL-A. For greedy and BL-A, parentheses indicate bike lane budget (in miles) and congestion
tolerance.
New bike lanes
Greedy
BL-A
BL-A
(2018–2021)
(14.48, 10%) (14.48, 10%) (14.48, 5%)
Worst-case increase in driving time
8.23%
7.99%
8.57%
4.26%
Increase in cycling share
0.38%
0.41%
2.32%
1.12%
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

67
0
0.8
1.6
0.4
Miles
Existing bike lanes
New bike lanes
Figure 12
Chicago’s bike lane network up to 2018 and recently installed bike lanes between 2018–
2021.
F.
Validating Estimation Method with Synthetic Data
This section describes additional numerical experiments for validating our estimation procedure. We use
synthetic road network data designed to have similar properties to the real Chicago network studied in §5.
The purpose of these experiments is three-fold: (1) to test the estimation method’s ability to learn the true
parameter θ, (2) to empirically verify the statistical consistency of the estimates (i.e., that estimation error
decreases in network size), and (3) to empirically verify the validity of separating the estimation procedure
for θ and β into two stages.
F.1.
Data and Setup
We consider three diﬀerent sizes of networks by varying the number of edges |S| ∈{100,500,1000}, and
50 simulation trials for each network size. For each network size and simulation trial, the underlying data-
generation process is as follows.
Network structure. We ﬁrst construct an undirected road network whose node degree distribution follows
the empirical node degree distribution of the Chicago network. To force the number of edges to be |S|, we
ﬁx the total node degree in the network to be 2|S|. We then set the number of OD pairs |W| as 1
3|S|, which
approximately matches the ratio of OD pairs to road segments in the Chicago network.
Network features. We generate network features including road lengths ls, s ∈S, road widths ns · ws,
s ∈S, coverage of bike lanes ρw, w ∈W, and total commute demands dw, w ∈W by sampling from their
corresponding empirical distributions observed in the Chicago network. Between each OD pair w ∈W, we
designate the three shortest paths (in length) as the candidate driving paths set PD, and the shortest path
as the candidate cycling path pC
w. The free ﬂow driving time tD
s on each road segment is obtained by setting
the driving speed to be 40 km/h, i.e., Ts =
ls
40(km/h) for all s ∈S. Between each OD pair w ∈W, cycling time
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

68
is set as equal to double the free-ﬂow driving time on the shortest path, i.e., tC
w = 2P
s∈pC
w Ts, and the outside
option travel time is set equal to tO
w = P
s∈pC
w Ts + 2u, where u is a random variable uniformly distributed
between 0 and 1.
Driving travel times and mode choice model. Following our modeling framework from §2, we assume
commuters’ mode choice follows a multinomial logit model and drivers’ path choices satisfy Wardrop equi-
librium. Speciﬁcally, the utilities of driving, cycling, and the outside option on OD pair w are given by
uD
w(θ) = βD
0 + βD
1 · tD
w (θ) + ϵD
w,
(67a)
uC
w = βC
0 + βC
1 · tC
w + βC
2 · ρw + ϵD
w
(67b)
uO
w = βO
1 · tO
w + ϵO
w,
(67c)
where tD
w, tC
w, and tO
w are the travel time for driving, cycling and the outside option, respectively, ρw is the
bike lane coverage on the cycling path between OD pair w, and ϵD
w, ϵC
w and ϵO
w are idiosyncratic errors. The
demand for each mode m ∈{D,C,O} is then given by
dm
w = dw
eum
w
euD
w + euC
w + euO
w .
(68)
Following §2, the driving time on road segment s is assumed to take the form
tD
s (θ) =

θ0 + θ1 · ℓs + θ2ns · ws + θ3

ℓs
ns · ws

vs + Ts.
(69)
Ground truth. We ﬁrst generate random values for the parameters θ and β as ground truth. We gen-
erate a four-dimensional parameter vector θ by randomly generating each component from the uniform
distribution with support [0,10−3] to ensure positiveness of tD
s (θ). For β, we let [βD
0 ,βC
0 ,βD
1 ,βC
1 ,βO
1 ,βC
2 ] =
[u1,−2.5u2,−u3,−u4,−u5,2u6], where {ui : i = 1,2,...,6} are drawn from i.i.d. uniform distributions with
support [0,1]. This approach to randomly generating β ensures that the resulting mode shares resemble the
empirical mode shares in Chicago. We anticipate our results would be qualitatively similar under a diﬀerent
procedure for generating β. Then the corresponding equilibrium demands for driving dD∗, cycling dC∗and
outside option dO∗, as well as the path ﬂows φ∗(θ) and segment ﬂows v∗(θ) are all obtained by solving the
exact user equilibrium problem (24).
Vehicle ﬂow observations. The observed traﬃc ﬂow vector z is generated as zs = max{v∗
s(θ) + uv
s,0} for
all s ∈S, where the uv
s’s are drawn in three diﬀerent ways: (1) i.i.d. from the standard Normal distribution
N(0,1), (2) i.i.d. from normal distribution with mean 0 and standard deviation 5, denoted N(0,5), and
(3) from a multivariable Normal distribution with 0 mean, and covariance matrix Σ = HTH, where H is a
|S| × |S| matrix with each element drawn i.i.d. from the standard Normal distribution.
For illustration purposes, Table 17 presents some summary statistics from a single simulation trial for the
equilibrium traﬃc ﬂows v∗
s, road length ls, total road width ns ·ws and the binary bike lane indicator variable
xs.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

69
Table 17
Summary statistics of road segment features in experiments with synthetic data.
count variable
mean
min median
max
500
v∗
s
12.75
0.00
9.96
58.15
ls
159.24 0.05
148.34
1727.47
ns · ws
10.38
3.02
9.05
38.25
xs
0.11
0.00
0.00
1.00
1000
v∗
s
29.00
0.00
25.34
114.69
ls
158.62 0.46
144.06
1355.00
ns · ws
10.28
3.03
8.97
38.71
xs
0.09
0.00
0.00
1.00
5000
v∗
s
182.50 0.00
168.81
649.24
ls
161.57 0.01
149.52
3968.41
ns · ws
10.40
3.01
9.01
44.13
xs
0.10
0.00
0.00
1.00
F.2.
Estimation
For each of the 50 simulation trials and for each network size |S| ∈{500,1000,5000}, we randomly generated
ground-truth values of θ and β according to the procedure described above, and evaluate the accuracy of the
estimates returned by the two-step method described in §3. In particular, for each of the 50 trials, the ﬁrst
step involves estimating θ from the observe traﬃc ﬂows z, driving demand dD∗, and network features. We
denote the estimate by ˆθ and the associated vector of driving time predictions as ˆtD = [ˆtD
w]w∈W. In the second
step, the predicted driving time ˆtD is plugged into the mode choice model (67), from which we generate an
estimate of β, denoted ˆβ.
To estimate θ in each trial, we ﬁrst solve the WLS-A problem by applying the BCD algorithm described in
§A.3, starting with an initialized solution θ = [0,0,0,0] and re-solving for each value of λ in {50,100,250,500}.
The algorithm is terminated whenever the relative reduction in objective value is no more than 10−4 from
the previous iteration for three iterations in a row, or the number of iterations exceeds 50. For each trial, we
select λ as the value that minimizes a simple sum of the three errors deﬁned in (50):
∥ˆv −z∥2
2
∥z∥2
2
|
{z
}
Flow error
+
1
|W|
X
w∈W
max{p∈Pw|ˆφp>0} ˆtD
p −minp∈Pw ˆtD
p
minp∈Pw ˆtD
p
|
{z
}
Wardrop error
+
1
|W|
X
w∈W
ˆtD
w −tD∗
w

tD∗
w
|
{z
}
Out-of-sample error
.
(70)
In the expression above, the ﬂow error measures the discrepancy between predicted traﬃc ﬂows ˆv and the
observations z; Wardrop error describes the deviation of the prediction from exact Wardrop equilibrium,
and the out-of-sample error measures the diﬀerence between the predicted driving times ˆtD
w, w ∈W and the
ground truth driving times tD∗
w , w ∈W.
We evaluate the performance of the estimation of θ by computing two quantities: (1) the out-of-sample
error in predicting driving times, corresponding to the third term in (50), and (2) the errors in estimating
θ, deﬁned as
Err(θ) =
ˆθ −θ

2
∥θ∥2
.
(71)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

70
By plugging the predicted OD travel times ˆtD
w into (67) and applying the linear logarithm transformation in
(18), we can then estimate the MNL model by linear regression. We then evaluate the errors in estimating
β as
Err(β) =
 ˆβ −β

2
∥β∥2
.
(72)
F.3.
Results: Estimation and Prediction Errors for Varying Network Sizes
Table 18 reports average estimation errors for θ over 50 trials, along with the OD driving time prediction
errors. The distribution of both errors are visualized in Figure 13. We oﬀer a few remarks on the results.
First, when there is less noise in the traﬃc ﬂow observations (i.e. N(0,1) vs N(0,5)), the estimation error
on both θ and OD driving time prediction are much lower, as expected; however, the error in estimating
θ in the road network with 5000 segments is still only 7.1% in the N(0,5) case. We also observe that the
error in θ decreases from 32.1% to 0.9% when the network size grows from 500 to 5000 in the N(0,1) case;
the error in predicting OD driving time also decreases from 4.8% to 0.6%. We observe a similar tendency in
the N(0,5) and N(0,Σ) cases. These decreases in the errors align with the consistency result presented in
Theorem 2. In addition, although we assume i.i.d. error in Theorem 2, in the N(0,Σ) case where errors are
correlated, the estimation errors continue to decrease in the network size, analogous to the i.i.d. case, and
drop to below 1% for |S| = 5000.
Further, because in our §5 empirical study we only observe the driving demand originating from each
census tract, we ran another set of experiments by using (46) to impute demand at each destination census
tract jointly while estimating θ. Using N(0,1) distributed ﬂow errors and 5000 road segments, the average
errors over 50 trials in estimating θ and predicting OD driving times were 0.87% and 0.59%, respectively;
these errors were 0.86% and 0.57% in the setting where destination demands were directly observable. This
remarkable similarity in errors suggests that the vehicle ﬂow data and network structure collectively carry
signiﬁcant information about destination demands, meaning imputing them does not substantially increase
errors.
We note here that our experimental setting diﬀers from what is assumed by Theorem 2 in two ways:
1) as discussed in §3, for tractability we solve the approximate estimation problem WLS-A instead of the
exact estimation problem WLS, and 2) the BCD algorithm is not guaranteed to return a globally optimal
solution to either WLS-A or WLS because they are non-convex. Nevertheless, the numerical results in Table
18 and Figure 13 suggest that our estimation procedure is reasonably accurate at recovering the ground-truth
congestion parameters, even when the assumptions of Theorem 2 are not strictly satisﬁed. In summary, these
results suggest that solving the approximate estimation problem WLS-A using the block coordinate descent
algorithm described in §A.3 produces sound estimates on realistically sized networks.
Next, Table 19 presents the average errors in estimating β in the mode choice model, Err(β), over 50
trials. The distribution of errors is similarly depicted in Figure 14. We observe that the estimation error in
β also decreases in the network size, which is due to the OD pair driving time predictions becoming more
accurate as the network grows. In addition, we note that when traﬃc ﬂows are observed with errors that
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

71
0.1%
0.5%
5.0%
50.0%
Log error
OD driving time error
0.1%
1.0%
10.0%
100.0%
Err( )
Log errors under 
(0,1)
500
1000
5000
1.0%
10.0%
100.0%
Log error
OD driving time error
4.0%
10.0%
50.0%
100.0%
150.0%
Err( )
Log errors under 
(0,5)
500
1000
5000
0.05%
1.0%
10.0%
100.0%
Log error
OD driving time error
0.1%
1.0%
10.0%
100%
Err( )
Log errors under 
(0,
)
500
1000
5000
Figure 13
Distribution of parameter estimation and travel time prediction errors under varying
traﬃc ﬂow perturbations and network sizes (50 trials).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

72
Table 18
Average parameter estimation and travel time prediction errors under varying traﬃc ﬂow
perturbations and network sizes (50 trials).
Traﬃc ﬂow perturbation
|S|
N(0,1) N(0,5) N(0,Σ)
Err(θ)
500 32.13% 84.41%
32.28%
1000
6.75% 43.21%
4.14%
5000
0.86%
7.14%
0.65%
OD driving time
500
4.82% 38.28%
10.65%
1000
1.59% 14.73%
0.99%
5000
0.57%
5.10%
0.51%
0.0%
0.1%
1.0%
5.0%
Log error
(0,1)
0.01%
0.1%
1.0%
10.0%
400.0%
(0,5)
0.0%
0.1%
1.0%
10.0%
100.0%
(0,
)
500
1000
5000
Figure 14
Distribution of mode choice model estimation errors under varying traﬃc ﬂow pertur-
bations and network sizes (50 trials).
follow N(0,5), the estimation error Err(β) is 3.95% and 1.31% when the number of road segments is 1000
and 5000, respectively.
Lastly, we note that the behavior of the errors shown in Figures 13 and 14 also support our approach of
separating the estimation of θ and β into two steps. An important caveat when interpreting these results
is that the reported errors correspond to the speciﬁc data generation procedure described above, and that
alternative procedures may yield diﬀerent behavior in the errors.
Table 19
Average mode choice model estimation errors (Err(β)) over 50 trials.
|S|
N(0,1) N(0,5) N(0,Σ)
500
0.88% 26.33%
4.21%
1000
0.33%
3.95%
0.22%
5000
0.13%
1.31%
0.13%
G.
Stochastic User Equilibrium Model
In our model, vehicle ﬂows are assumed to abide by a deterministic user equilibrium (i.e., Wardrop equi-
librium), wherein all users choose the path with the shortest driving time. A well-known alternative is the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

73
stochastic user equilibrium (SUE), wherein users have idiosyncratic preferences over diﬀerent driving paths
(Prashker and Bekhor 2004), and path choices also follow an MNL model (i.e., in addition to mode choices).
In particular, path ﬂows in the SUE are given by
φp = dD
w
e−ζ·tcp
P
p′∈PD
w e−ζ·tcp′ ,p ∈PD
w ,w ∈W
(73)
where tcp represents a general travel cost (or disutility) of path p, which itself may depend on the driving
time tD
p (θ) in addition to other route features. The constant ζ reﬂects the relative importance of travel cost
to the random utility term. Note that the resulting traﬃc assignment, after also considering mode choices,
echoes the structure of a nested logit model. Following a parallel argument to Proposition 2, it can be shown
that the SUE traﬃc ﬂows correspond to the set of optimal solutions to the following convex program.
To estimate a SUE-based model from the same data used in our empirical study, one could consider the
following estimation problem:
min
φ,v,θ,ζ ∥v −z∥2
2
s.t. vs =
X
{p∈PD|s∈SD
p }
φp,
s ∈SD,
φp = dD
w
e−ζ·tcp
P
p′∈PD
w e−ζ·tcp′ ,
p ∈PD
w , w ∈W,
(φ,v) ≥0.
Although we do not implement the SUE-based estimator above, we comment on a few potential challenges in
doing so. The ﬁrst is the complexity of the estimation problem. The formulation above does not beneﬁt from
the multi-convex structure of the estimator in §3; as a consequence, diﬀerent computational methods may
be needed to obtain sound estimates. In addition, the identiﬁability conditions are likely to be substantially
diﬀerent than those used in our setting (see Appendix A.1). For example, if we specify tcp, in the simplest
case, as the driving time on path p, i.e., tcp = tD
p (θ) = P
s∈Sp (Ts + αs(θ) · vs), the estimator contains product
terms of the form ζ · θ, making identiﬁcation of both ζ and θ non-trivial. Lastly, embedding the SUE model
within our bike lane optimization model – where driving demand dD
w is also endogenous – may undermine
tractability due to the nested logit structure.
A key advantage of a SUE-based formulation is that one can naturally incorporate path-speciﬁc attributes
into drivers’ path choice problem (in addition to idiosyncratic preferences over paths), allowing for a
richer model of traﬃc dynamics than the classic Wardrop equilibrium. Nevertheless, the deterministic user
equilibrium and SUE have been observed to yield similar ﬂow patterns in congested networks (Thomas
1991, Prashker and Bekhor 2000), suggesting our main results are unlikely to be drastically diﬀerent under
an SUE model.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

74
H.
Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1. First, for any ﬁxed bike lane design x, driving demand dD, and congestion
parameter θ, it can be shown that (φ,v) ∈Ψ(dD,θ) if and only if (φ,v) is an optimal solution to the
following convex program:
minimize
φ,v
X
s∈S
1
2 · αs(x,θ) · v2
s + Ts · vs

(75a)
subject to
X
p∈PD
w
φp = dD
w,
w ∈W,
(75b)
vs =
X
{p∈PD|s∈SD
p }
φp,
s ∈S,
(75c)
φ,v ≥0.
(75d)
This equivalence follows from a well-known result from Dafermos and Sparrow (1969) and its proof is omitted
for conciseness. Next, we re-write formulation (75) by using a variable change based on the equality in (75c).
Substituting P
{p∈PD|s∈SD
p } φp for vs allows us to take the constraint (75c) into the objective (75a), which
yields
g(φ,θ) =
X
s∈S

1
2 · αs(x,θ) ·


X
{p∈PD|s∈SD
p }
φp


2
+ Ts ·


X
{p∈PD|s∈SD
p }
φp




(76)
It follows that (φ,v) ∈Ψ(dD,θ) if and only if φ is an optimal solution to
minimize
φ
g (φ,θ)
(77a)
subject to
X
p∈PD
w
φp = dD
w,
w ∈W,
(77b)
φ ≥0.
(77c)
Next, expressing the optimality conditions as a variational inequality, a candidate solution φ is optimal to
(77) if and only if the following inequalities hold:
∇φg (φ,θ)
⊤
˜φ −φ

≥0,
(78a)
X
p∈PD
w
˜φp = dD
w,
w ∈W,
(78b)
˜φ ≥0,
(78c)
where ∇is the gradient operator, and the pth element of ∇φg (φ,θ) is
∂g (φ,θ)
∂φp
=
X
s∈SD
p
αs(x,θ) · vs +
X
s∈SD
p
Ts.
(79)
Following Theorem 1 of Aghassi et al. (2006), it can be shown using linear programming duality that a
candidate solution φ solves (78) if and only if there exists a vector b ∈R|W| such that
X
{w∈W|p∈PD
w }
bw ≤∇φpg (φ,θ),
p ∈P,
(80a)
∇φg (φ,θ)
⊤φ −
 dD⊤b = 0.
(80b)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

75
Therefore, (φ,v) ∈Ψ(dD,θ) if and only if (φ,v,b) satisﬁes (75b), (75c), and (80). The result follows because
WLS also minimizes ∥v −z∥2
2 over Θ in addition to satisfying (φ,v) ∈Ψ(dD,θ). □
Proof of Proposition 2. We assume x and θ are ﬁxed and suppress dependence on them throughout the
proof. It is straightforward to verify that S(x,d,v) is strictly convex in (d,v). Uniqueness of (d,v) follows
from standard arguments using strict convexity of the optimization problem (24). In the remainder of the
proof, we show that (d,φ,v) ∈Γ(x) if and only if (d,φ,v) solves (24). Using vs = P
{p∈PD|s∈SD
p } φp, s ∈S
from (1), the user equilibrium problem (24) can be rewritten as
minimize
φ≥0,d
S†(d,φ)
(81a)
subject to ˜dw =
X
m∈M
dm
w ,
w ∈W,
(81b)
dD
w −
X
p∈Pw
φD
p = 0,
w ∈W,
(81c)
where
S†(d,φ) =
X
w∈W
−

uO
wdO
w + uC
wdC
w + βD
0 dD
w + ( ˜βD)⊤XD
wdD
w

−βD
1
X
s∈S
 Z P
{p∈PD|s∈SD
p }
φp
0
tD
s (v) · dv
!
(82a)
+
X
w∈W
 dD
w log
 dD
w

+ dC
w log
 dC
w

+ dO
w log
 dO
w

.
(82b)
Let λp, µw and γw be the Lagrangian multipliers for constraints φp ≥0,p ∈PD, (81b) and (81c), respectively.
We can then write the Lagrangian as
L(d,φ) = S†(d,φ) −
X
p∈PD
λpφp +
X
w∈W

µw

dO
w + dC
w + dD
w −˜dw

+ γw

dD
w −
X
p∈PD
w
φD
p



.
(83)
It is straightforward to verify that S†(d,φ) is convex in (d,φ) and that dm
w > 0 for all m ∈M. It follows
that a solution (d,φ,v) is optimal to problem (24) if and only if there exist λ,µ,γ that satisfy the Karush-
Kuhn Tucker conditions of (24), i.e., the primal feasibility constraints φp ≥0, p ∈PD, (81b) and (81c), the
dual feasibility constraints λp ≥0, p ∈PD, complementary slackness conditions λpφp = 0, p ∈PD, and the
stationarity conditions
∂L
∂dO
w
= −uO
w + log dO
w + 1 + µw = 0,
w ∈W
(84a)
∂L
∂dC
w
= −uC
w + log dC
w + 1 + µw = 0,
w ∈W,
(84b)
∂L
∂dD
w
= −

βD
0 + ( ˜βD)⊤XD
w

+ log dD
w + 1 + µw + γw = 0,
w ∈W,
(84c)
∂L
∂φp
= −βD
1
X
s∈SD
p
tD
s (vs) −
X
{w∈W|p∈PD
w }
γw = λp,
p ∈PD.
(84d)
Using the deﬁnition given in (5) that tD
p (v) = P
s∈SD
p tD
s (vs), and using the dual feasibility and complementary
slackness conditions, it is straightforward to show that (84d) is equivalent to
∂L
∂φp
= −βD
1 · tD
p (v) −
X
{w∈W|p∈PD
w }
γw
(
= 0,
if φp > 0,
≥0,
if φp = 0,
p ∈PD.
(85)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

76
Next, using (6), it can be shown that γw = −βD
1 · tD
w for all w ∈W satisﬁes (85), assuming βD
1 < 0. Then by
the deﬁnition of driving utility uD
w in (39a), it follows that uD
w = βD
0 +( ˜βD)⊤XD
w −γw. Next, note that solving
(84a)–(84c) and (81b) yields the unique solution
dm
w = ˜dw
eum
w
euC
w + e(βD
0 +( ˜
βD)⊤XD
w −γw) + euO
w
,
m ∈{C,O},w ∈W,
(86a)
dD
w = ˜dw
e(βD
0 +( ˜
βD)⊤XD
w −γw)
euC
w + e(βD
0 +( ˜
βD)⊤XD
w −γw) + euO
w
,
w ∈W
(86b)
which implies
dm
w = ˜dw
eum
w
euC
w + euD
w + euO
w ,
m ∈M,w ∈W.
(87)
Note that (d∗,φ∗) is optimal to (81) if and only if (d∗,φ∗,v∗) is optimal to (24), where v∗
s = P
{p∈PD|s∈SD
p } φ∗
p,
for all s ∈S from (1b). Then observing the equivalence between (85) and (6), and between (87) and (10),
we conclude that (d∗,φ∗,v∗) is an optimal solution to problem (24) if and only if (d,φ,v) ∈Γ(x). □
Proof of Theorem 1. We ﬁrst introduce some additional notation. Let
γ =

d
v

(88)
be the stacked vector of d and v. Further, for any x, let
γ∗(x) =

d∗(x)
v∗(x)

,
˜γ(x) =
 ˜d(x)
˜v(x)

,
(89)
where (d∗(x),v∗(x)) and (˜d(x), ˜v(x)) are the optimal solutions of the exact user equilibrium problem (24) and
the linearized user equilibrium problem (30), respectively. Let ˆS(x,γ) = S(x,d,v) and ˆC(x,γ) = C(x,d,v).
Finally, let
e = µ1
p
|W|
 
µ2
p
|S|
|Rξ| −1 + µ3
p
3|W|
|Rψ| −1
!
,
(90)
where µ1 = max
 ¯d,−1/(βD
1 · α)
 
, µ2 = −βD
1 ·αs(x)·(¯v −v), and µ3 = log
  ¯d

−log (d). The proof proceeds in
three steps. First, we show that for any x, R(x,γ) is strongly monotone of modulus µ1 = max
n
¯d,−
1
βD
1 ·α
o
in γ. Second, we show that for any x, | ˆC (x,γ∗(x)) −ˆC(x, ˜γ(x))| ≤e. Lastly, we use the results from Step 1
and Step 2 to prove the main result. Step 1. By deﬁnition of R(x,γ), we have
R(x,γ) = ∇γS (x,γ) = diag






log (dD
w) −

βD
0 + ( ˜βD)⊤XD
w

+ 1 : w ∈W
log (dC
w) −uC
w + 1 : w ∈W
log (dO
w) −uO
w + 1 : w ∈W
−βD
1 (αs(x) · vs + Ts) : s ∈S






(91)
where diag(k) is a diagonal matrix whose diagonal elements are vector k. It then follows that
∇γR(x,γ) = diag

1/dm
w : w ∈W,m ∈M
−βD
1 αs(x) : s ∈S

.
(92)
Note that for any ﬁxed x, because dm
w ≤¯d ∇γR(x,γ) is a positive deﬁnite diagonal matrix, with
smallest possible eigenvalues min{1/ ¯d,−βD
1 · α}. Therefore, R(x,γ) is strongly monotone of modulus
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

77
max
 ¯d,−1/(βD
1 · α)
 
in γ (cf. Proposition 8, Dan and Marcotte (2019)). Step 2. From (27), ˆS(x,γ) can be
written as
ˆS (x,γ) = −
 
βD
1
X
s∈S
(Ts · vs) + βD
1
X
s∈S
ξs (vs)
!
|
{z
}
S1(x,γ)
+
X
w∈W
−

uO
wdO
w + uC
wdC
w + βD
0 dD
w + ( ˜βD)⊤XD
wdD
w

+
X
w∈W
X
m∈M
ψ (dm
w )
|
{z
}
S2(x,γ)
(93)
Let R1 (x,γ) = ∇γS1 (x,γ) and R2 (x,γ) = ∇γS2 (x,γ). Let ˜S1, ˜S2, and ˜S be the piecewise linear approxi-
mations of S1, S2 and ˆS, respectively, and let ˜R1(x,γ) = ∇γ ˜S1(x,γ), ˜R2(x,γ) = ∇γ ˜S2(x,γ), and ˜R(x,γ) =
∇γ ˜S (x,γ). Because ˆS (x,γ) and ˜S (x,γ) are both convex in γ, it follows that
⟨−R(x,γ∗),γ∗−˜γ⟩≥0,
(94a)
⟨˜R(x, ˜γ),γ∗−˜γ⟩≥0,
(94b)
where ⟨·⟩is the Euclidean inner product operator. By summing the two inequalities above, we obtain
⟨˜R(x, ˜γ) −R(x,γ∗),γ∗−˜γ⟩≥0.
(95)
Next, by Step 1 and the deﬁnition of strong monotonicity, it follows that
⟨R(x,γ∗) −R(x, ˜γ),γ∗−˜γ⟩≥1
µ1
∥γ∗−˜γ∥2 .
(96)
Combining (95) and (96) yields
⟨˜R(x, ˜γ) −R(x, ˜γ),γ∗−˜γ⟩≥1
µ1
∥γ∗−˜γ∥2.
(97)
Applying the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have
µ1∥˜R(x, ˜γ) −R(x, ˜γ)∥≥∥γ∗−˜γ∥.
(98)
Next, using the deﬁnition of ˆC(x,γ) and the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, we have
 ˆC(x,γ∗) −ˆC (x, ˜γ)
 =

X
w∈W
(dC∗
w (x) −˜dC
w(x))

(99a)
≤
p
|W| · ∥γ∗−˜γ∥.
(99b)
It follows from (98) and (99b) and that
|C (x,γ∗) −C (x, ˜γ)| ≤
p
|W| · ∥γ∗−˜γ∥
(100a)
≤µ1
p
|W| · ∥˜R(x, ˜γ) −R(x, ˜γ)∥.
(100b)
Next, we bound the right hand side of (99b). We do so by ﬁrst decomposing the term ∥˜R(x, ˜γ) −R(x, ˜γ)∥
using R1, R2, ˜R1, and ˜R1. Let ˜ξ and ˜ψ be the piecewise linear approximations of ξ and ψ, respectively. Then
˜S1(x,γ) = −
 
βD
1
X
s∈S
 tD
s · vs

+ βD
1
X
s∈S
˜ξs (vs)
!
,
(101a)
˜S2(x,γ) =
X
w∈W
−

uO
wdO
w + uC
wdC
w + βD
0 dD
w + ( ˜βD)⊤XD
wdD
w

+
X
w∈W
X
m∈M
˜ψ (dm
w ).
(101b)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

78
By diﬀerentiating, we obtain
˜R1(x,γ) −R1(x,γ) = diag
 "
03|W|
−βD
1

∂˜ξs(vs)
∂vs
−αs(x) · vs

: s ∈S
#!
,
(102a)
˜R2(x,γ) −R2(x,γ) = diag
 "
∂˜
ψ(dm
w )
∂dm
w
−(log (dm
w ) + 1) : w ∈W,m ∈M
0|S|
#!
,
(102b)
where 0a is the a × 1 vector of zeros. By construction, the linear segments in the piecewise linear function
˜ξs (·) have slopes that are equidistant in the interval αs (x)·[v, ¯v], and the diﬀerence between two consecutive
slope values is −βD
1 αs(x) · (¯v −v)/(|Rξ| −1). It follows that
−βD
1
 
∂˜ξs (vs)
∂vs
−αs(x) · vs
! ≤µ2 ·
1
|Rξ| −1
(103)
holds for all s ∈S, which implies
∥˜R1(x,γ) −R1(x,γ)∥=
v
u
u
tX
s∈S
 
−βD
1
 
∂˜ξs (vs)
∂vs
−αs(x) · vs
!!2
(104a)
≤µ2 ·
p
|S|
|Rξ| −1.
(104b)
Similarly, for any w ∈W and m ∈M, because the linear segments in the piecewise linear function ˜ψ (·) have
slopes that are equidistant in the interval

1 + log(d),1 + log( ¯d)

, the diﬀerence between two consecutive
slope values is (log
  ¯d

−log (d))/(|Rψ| −1). It follows that
∂˜ψ (dm
w )
∂dm
w
−(log (dm
w ) + 1) ≤µ3 ·
1
|Rψ| −1
(105)
holds for every w ∈W and m ∈M, which implies
 ˜R2(x,γ) −R2(x,γ)
 =
v
u
u
t X
m∈M
X
w∈W
 
∂˜ψ (dm
w )
∂dm
w
−(log (dm
w ) + 1)
!2
(106a)
≤µ3 ·
p
3|W|
|Rψ| −1.
(106b)
Combining inequalities (100b), (104b) and (106b), we obtain
|C (x,γ∗) −C (x, ˜γ)| ≤µ1
p
|W|
 ˜R(x, ˜γ) −R(x, ˜γ)

(107a)
≤µ1
p
|W|
 ˜R1(x, ˜γ) −R1(x, ˜γ)
 +
 ˜R2(x, ˜γ) −R2(x, ˜γ)


(107b)
≤µ1
p
|W|
 
µ2 ·
p
|S|
|Rξ| −1 + µ3 ·
p
3|W|
|Rψ| −1
!
(107c)
= e,
(107d)
as desired. Step 2. We now show 0 ≤C (x∗,d∗(x∗),v∗(x∗))−C (˜x,d∗(˜x),v∗(˜x)) ≤2e. Note that from (107d)
and the deﬁnitions of γ∗and ˜γ, we have
C(˜x,d∗(˜x),v∗(˜x) + e ≥C(˜x, ˜d(˜x), ˜v (˜x)),
(108a)
C(x∗,d∗(x∗),v∗(x∗)) −e ≤C(x∗, ˜d(x∗), ˜v (x∗)).
(108b)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

79
Next, because x∗and ˜x are the optimal solutions to BL and BL-A and C(x,d,v) is the objective function of
both BL and BL-A, it follows that
C(x∗, ˜d(x∗), ˜v (x∗)) ≤C(˜x, ˜d(˜x), ˜v (˜x)),
(109a)
C (˜x,d∗(˜x),v∗(˜x)) ≤C (x∗,d∗(x∗),v∗(x∗)).
(109b)
Combining (108) and (109), we have
0 ≤C (x∗,d∗(x∗),v∗(x∗)) −C (˜x,d∗(˜x),v∗(˜x)) ≤2e,
(110)
which concludes the proof. □
Proof of Theorem 2. The proof proceeds in two steps. First, we show that for any x, v∗(x,θ) is a
continuous function of θ. Second, we prove the main result. For conciseness, we assume x to be ﬁxed and
suppress dependence on it throughout. Step 1. First, the equilibrium segment ﬂows v∗(θ) are unique by a
straightforward extension of a well-known result on Wardrop equilibria (Hall 1978). Thus, v∗(θ) is a vector-
valued function of θ. Next, we prove continuity of v∗(θ) by following the argument for Proposition 3.1 in
Cominetti et al. (2021). First, deﬁne τs(θ) := tD
s (v∗(θ),θ) to be the equilibrium travel time on segment s,
and let τ(θ) and t(θ) be the vectors of τs and tD
s , respectively. Next, from the proof of Proposition 1, note
that v∗(θ) is attained at an optimal solution to the convex optimization problem (75). Let the objective
function of (75) be deﬁned as:
f (·) :=
X
s∈S
1
2 · αs(x,θ) · v2
s + Ts · vs

(111)
Next, following Fukushima (1984), for any ﬁxed θ, τ (θ) is the unique solution to the following strictly convex
dual program:
min
t
f ∗(t,θ) −
X
w∈W

dD
w · min
p∈Pw
X
s∈SD
p
tD
s (θ)


(112)
where f ∗(·) is the conjugate of f(·) and is strictly convex. By Berge’s maximum theorem, because (112) is
jointly continuous in (t,θ), it follows that τ (θ) is upper hemicontinuous in θ (Charalambos and Aliprantis
2013). Because τ (θ) is unique, it is then continuous in θ. Next, because ts (v) is strictly increasing and
continuous in vs for all s ∈S, the inverse v∗(θ) = t−1 (τ (θ)) is also continuous in θ. Step 2. Note Ln(θ) =
∥v∗(θ) −z∥2
2. Then because Θ is ﬁnite, for each θ ̸= θ0 we have
Ln(θ) −Ln(θ0) = ∥v∗(θ) −z∥2
2 −∥v∗(θ0) −z∥2
2
(113a)
=
n
X
s=1
(v∗
s(θ) −v∗
s(θ0) −εs)2 −
n
X
s=1
(v∗
s(θ0) −v∗
s(θ0) −εs)2
(113b)
=
n
X
s=1
(v∗
s(θ) −v∗
s(θ0))2 −2
n
X
s=1
εs(v∗
s(θ) −v∗
s(θ0)),
(113c)
where the ﬁnal equality follows from algebraic simpliﬁcation. Because the errors εs are drawn i.i.d. from a
distribution with E[ε] = 0, and v∗
s(θ)−v∗
s(θ0) is bounded from above and below for all s = 1,...,n, it follows
from the weak law of large numbers that Pn
s=1 εs(v∗
s(θ) −v∗
s(θ0)) −→0 in probability as n −→∞. Further,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703

80
by condition (iii), limn→∞Pr(Pn
s=1(v∗
s(θ) −v∗
s(θ0))2 > 0) = 1, which implies limn→∞Pr(Ln(θ) −Ln(θ0) >
0) = 1. Note Ln(θ) is continuous in θ because v∗(θ) is continuous by Step 1. The result then follows by
Lemma 1 of Wu (1981). □
Proof of Corollary 1. We show that if Gn ∈X, then Pn
s=1 |v∗
s(θ)−v∗
s(θ0)| > 0. Let W+ ⊆W be the subset
of OD pairs such that for all θ ∈Θ, each w ∈W+ has at least two paths with positive ﬂows in equilibrium,
i.e., φ∗
p1 > 0 and φ∗
p2 > 0 for some p1,p2 ∈PD
w , where (φ∗(θ),v∗(θ)) satisfy the equilibrium conditions (7).
Note W+ is non-empty because Gn ∈X by assumption. Next, recall SD
p is the set of segments on path p. By
the equilibrium travel time conditions (6), for each w ∈W+ we have tD
p1 = tD
p2, or equivalently,
X
s∈SD
p1
(αs(θ) · v∗
s(θ) + Ts) =
X
s∈SD
p2
(αs(θ) · v∗
s(θ) + Ts).
(114)
Next, note αs(θ) = θ⊤qs, and let A(θ) be a |W+| × n matrix where the entry in (w,s) is given by
Aws(θ) =





θ⊤qs,
if
s ∈SD
p1 \ SD
p2,
−θ⊤qs,
if
s ∈SD
p2 \ SD
p1,
0,
otherwise,
(115)
where p1,p2 ∈Pw and w ∈|W+|. Deﬁne T as the vector with length |W+|, where the wth entry is tw =
P
s∈SD
p2 Ts −P
s∈SD
p1 Ts for p1,p2 ∈Pw. Following (114) and the deﬁnition of A(θ), the segment ﬂows v∗(θ)
satisfy A(θ)v∗(θ) = T for each θ ∈Θ. Next, suppose by way of contradiction that Gn ∈X and there exists
˜θ ∈Θ such that ˜θ ̸= θ0 and Pn
s=1 |v∗
s(˜θ)−v∗
s(θ0)| = 0, or equivalently, v∗(˜θ) = v∗(θ0). Because A(˜θ)v∗(˜θ) =
T, A(θ0)v∗(θ0) = T, and v∗(˜θ) = v∗(θ0), it follows that (A(˜θ) −A(θ0))v∗(θ0) = 0. Therefore, because
v∗
s(θ0) ≥0 for all s ∈S, for all w ∈W+ we have Pn
s=1(Aws(˜θ) −Aws(θ0))v∗
s(θ0) = 0. By deﬁnition of A, this
can be written equivalently as
X
s∈SD
p1 \SD
p2
((˜θ −θ0)⊤qs)v∗
s(θ0) +
X
s∈SD
p2 \SD
p1
((θ0 −˜θ)⊤qs)v∗
s(θ0) = 0.
However, because Gn ∈X, there must exist w ∈W+ such that (44) holds, which contradicts the expression
above. We conclude that Gn ∈X implies v∗(θ) ̸= v∗(θ0) and thus Pn
s=1(v∗
s(θ) −v∗
s(θ))2 > 0 for all θ ̸= θ0,
as desired. □
Proof of Corollary 2. The proof proceeds similarly to the proof of Theorem 2. For each δ > 0, we have
inf
∥θ−θ0∥>δ (Ln(θ) −Ln(θ0)) =
inf
∥θ−θ0∥>δ
 
n
X
s=1
(v∗
s(θ) −v∗
s(θ0))2 −2
n
X
s=1
εs(v∗
s(θ) −v∗
s(θ0))
!
(116a)
≥
inf
∥θ−θ0∥>δ
n
X
s=1
(v∗
s(θ) −v∗
s(θ0))2 −
sup
∥θ−θ0∥>δ
2
n
X
s=1
εs(v∗
s(θ) −v∗
s(θ0))
(116b)
Because
the
errors
εs
are
drawn
i.i.d.
from
a
distribution
with E[ε] = 0,
and
v∗
s(θ) −v∗
s(θ0)
is
bounded
from
above
and
below
for
all
s = 1,...,n,
it
follows
from
the
weak
law
of
large
numbers
that
sup∥θ−θ0∥>δ (Pn
s=1 εs(v∗
s(θ) −v∗
s(θ0))) −→0
in
probability
as
n −→∞.
Fur-
ther,
because
limn→∞Pr(inf∥θ−θ0∥>δ
Pn
s=1(v∗
s(θ) −v∗
s(θ0))2 > 0) = 1
by
assumption,
we
conclude
limn→∞Pr(inf∥θ−θ0∥>δ(Ln(θ) −Ln(θ0)) > 0) = 1. Note Ln(θ) is continuous in θ because v∗(θ) is continuous
by Step 1 of the proof of Theorem 2. The result follows by Lemma 1 of Wu (1981). □
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4055703