TITLE: Ratings, Reviews, and the Marketing of New Products
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2020.3848
---

Ratings, Reviews, and the Marketing of New Products
Itay P. Fainmesser1
Dominique Olié Lauga2
Elie Ofek34
September 8, 2020
1Johns Hopkins Carey Business School and The Economics Department, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD 21202. E-mail: Itay_Fainmesser@jhu.edu
2Cambridge Judge Business School, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1AG, UK. Email:
d.lauga@jbs.cam.ac.uk.
3Harvard Business School, Soldiers Field, Boston, MA 02163. E-mail: eofek@hbs.edu
4The authors thank participants at the SICS conference (UC Berkeley), Voya Financial Colloquium
(University of Connecticut), Zero Decade Marketing Theory Symposium, 2019 Invitational Pricing
Symposium, and University Carlos III de Madrid marketing seminar for valuable suggestions. The
authors also thank David Godes for helpful comments.

Ratings, Reviews, and the Marketing of New Products
Abstract
We study how user-generated content (UGC) about new products impacts a ﬁrm’s advertising
and pricing decisions as well as the eﬀect on proﬁts and market dynamics. We construct a two-
period model, where consumers value quality and are heterogeneous in their taste for the new
product’s positioning, and examine three information transfer structures across generations: no
information (Benchmark); average rating (AR); and the joint distribution of ratings and taste
locations (Reviews). First, we show that in the AR case the ﬁrm advertises to a smaller set
of consumers and prices higher relative to the other cases. This occurs because the ﬁrm has
an incentive to use advertising strategically to bump up the ﬁrst-generation average rating in
order to increase second-generation quality perceptions. The ﬁrm charges a higher ﬁrst-period
price as consumers who are relatively close to the product’s location are advertised to. Second,
we ﬁnd that as more information is transferred across generations there is a greater likelihood
that average ratings will exhibit an increasing pattern over time. This happens because with
Reviews second-generation consumers are able to base purchase decisions on the product’s
positioning in addition to its quality.
Interestingly, due to the ﬁrm’s narrower advertising
strategy in the AR case and the richer UGC in the Reviews case, average ratings will exhibit
a reversal over time: higher in the AR case in the ﬁrst period but higher in the Reviews case
in the second period. Third, a ﬁrm’s expected proﬁts can exhibit a non-monotonic relationship
with respect to the amount of UGC transferred: highest in the AR case if the marginal return
on advertising is high (e.g., when advertising is cheap to execute, consumers are insensitive
to product ﬁt, or consumers greatly value quality), but highest in the Reviews case when the
return on advertising is low. We then examine a setup whereby second-generation consumers
become aware of the product through social interaction with ﬁrst-generation buyers. We ﬁnd
that advertising and social contagion interact - the ﬁrm generally has a greater incentive to
advertise as homophily increases, i.e., as social interactions occur between consumers who more
likely share similar preferences. However, this pattern can reverse with Reviews. The paper
discusses several robustness checks and model extensions, and concludes by highlighting the
managerial implications of the results.
Keywords: Online Reviews, Product Ratings, Social Networks, Word-of-Mouth, Advertising,
Quality, Pricing, User-generated Content

1
Introduction
One of the hallmarks of the digital transformation witnessed over the past two decades is the
fact that people are more easily and immediately connected to each other than ever before.
While this has resulted in the rise of several social media platforms over which individuals
share various personal experiences with friends, family members and colleagues, it has also had
profound implications for businesses. In particular, consumers can use online tools to share
impressions of the products and services they purchased, often on the vendor’s website or on e-
commerce platforms, and prospective consumers can examine these impressions and incorporate
them into their own decision making. Indeed, recent data suggests that 79% of U.S. internet
users check customer ratings and up to 55% check detailed reviews to inform their purchase
decisions.1 Consumer generated content can thus impact demand and hence ﬁrm fortunes.
For instance, if a recently launched new product receives an average rating of 4.5 (out of 5)
based on the input from early buyers, we might expect later consumers to be more inclined to
buy it compared to a product in the same category that receives an average rating of 3.8. That
said, if presented with the option, buyers might also take the time to write detailed reviews
about the new product and why they liked (or disliked) it given their particular preferences. If
subsequent consumers read these reviews, they could arrive at a diﬀerent conclusion regarding
the product than had they relied solely on the average rating. Speciﬁcally, though some aspects
of the product are appreciated by all consumers and can be summarized by a ‘quality’ level
(e.g., the speed/performance of a computer, the battery life of a smartphone, the amount of
glitches in a new mobile game, or the eﬀectiveness of safety features in a car), other product
aspects may ﬁt the tastes of some consumers but not those of others (e.g., the exterior design
of a computer, the user interface of an electronic device, the characters and visuals of a mobile
game, or the plot line of a movie). As a result, several buyers might provide a low rating for a
product because it does not ﬁt their particular tastes, despite its relatively high quality. A later
arriving consumer, who only observes the average rating without more detailed information on
what drove it, might be worried that the product is of poor quality and be deterred from buying
it. But if this consumer reads the full reviews and ﬁgures out that the reason for the mediocre
average rating had to do with a product taste/ﬁt issue that does not apply to them, they
may in fact decide to make a purchase. Indeed, there is evidence, e.g., in the movie category,
1Source: Better Business Bureau and Nielsen, “BBB Trust Sentiment Index,” October 2, 2017; and Per-
formics and Northwestern University’s Intent Lab, “Digital Satisfaction Index,” August 4, 2017.
1

that average ratings impact the market performance of new products and that reviews often
contain relevant information which can further aﬀect consumer behavior (see, e.g., Chintagunta
et al., 2010; Moon et al., 2014; Rocklage and Fazio, 2020). It is further intriguing to note that,
in reality, we ﬁnd that some companies (such as Best-Buy or Chewy) require consumers who
want to provide online input to write comments in addition to indicating a rating, while other
companies (such as Wal-Mart or Target) allow forgoing comments and providing ratings only.
From the ﬁrm’s perspective, the question is whether the nature of the information transferred
across consumer generations should aﬀect any of its strategic actions.
In this paper, we examine the interplay between the type of new product assessments com-
municated by buyers and a ﬁrm’s strategic actions, namely advertising and pricing. We focus
on the following research questions.
• Does a ﬁrm have a weaker or stronger incentive to expend on advertising when consumers
have access to reviews vs. just average ratings? Does this incentive depend on the nature
of social interaction across generations?
• Does the information transferred across generations aﬀect how aggressively a ﬁrm prices
a new product and how its pricing evolves over time?
• What should we expect in terms of average rating dynamics? Speciﬁcally, under what
conditions will the pattern of average ratings increase vs. decrease across periods?
• How does the type of information transferred across generations impact ﬁrm proﬁts and
consumer welfare? Should we expect lower proﬁts and greater consumer surplus when
more information is transferred?
To address these questions, we construct a two-period model where a ﬁrm introduces a
new product in the ﬁrst period and needs to decide how extensively to advertise it to ﬁrst-
generation consumers and how much to charge for it, with the ability to change its pricing
over time. The product’s positioning (along a circle) is ex-ante known to the ﬁrm whereas
its quality is uncertain prior to market consumption. Consumers are homogeneous in their
valuation for quality, yet heterogeneous in their tastes for the product’s positioning and in their
base valuation for consuming in the category.
We examine three possible information transfer structures between ﬁrst-generation con-
sumers who purchased the product (i.e., buyers) and second-generation consumers: a Bench-
2

mark setting where no buyer evaluations are passed on; an Average Rating (AR) setting where
only the average net consumption utility of buyers is passed on; and a Reviews setting where
the joint distribution of net utilities (ratings) and taste locations of buyers is passed on (e.g., via
posted comments/pictures/videos). We ﬁrst solve a basic model where all second-generation
consumers are aware of the product and later examine a setting where second-generation aware-
ness only occurs through social interaction with previous buyers.
Our analysis of the basic model yields several interesting ﬁndings. First, we show that
demand in period 2 is the same in size regardless of whether an average rating or reviews are
transferred; yet the set of buyers is diﬀerent. In the AR case, second-generation buyers are
uniformly spread around the circle, whereas in the Reviews case they are concentrated around
the consumer location that best matches the product’s positioning. Second, we show that in
the AR case a ﬁrm targets a smaller set of consumers with advertising in period 1 compared
to the Benchmark and Reviews cases. This occurs because in the AR case second-generation
consumers infer quality based on the average rating they observe and their belief about the ﬁrm’s
advertising level. This gives the ﬁrm an incentive to use advertising strategically to increase the
period 1 average rating in an eﬀort to boost period 2 demand; resulting in a smaller advertising
interval selected in equilibrium. Furthermore, in the AR case the ﬁrm is induced to price higher
in period 1 because it expects to sell to consumers closer to the product’s position and who
therefore have higher valuations.
Third, we ﬁnd that as more information is transferred, there is a greater likelihood that
average ratings will exhibit an increasing pattern over time. This happens because with more
information, i.e., with Reviews rather than just AR as input, second-generation consumers
are able to make decisions based on product positioning as well as quality. This results in
second-generation purchases, and subsequent ratings, by consumers with higher valuations on
average. Furthermore, due to the narrower advertising strategy in the AR case, but richer user
generated content (UGC) consumers have at their disposal in the Reviews case, average ratings
will exhibit a reversal over time: they will be highest in the AR case in period 1 but highest in
the Reviews case in period 2. That said, even with Reviews average ratings can decrease across
periods and, surprisingly, such a declining pattern happens when the product is of relatively
high quality. As for period 2 pricing, while in the Benchmark case prices always decline to
accommodate the greater consumer awareness, in the AR and Reviews cases they may increase
or decrease depending on the quality revealed.
3

Finally, we show that expected proﬁts can exhibit a non-monotonic relationship with respect
to the amount of UGC information available. Speciﬁcally, if the marginal return on advertising
spending is high — which occurs if the cost to advertise is modest, consumers are insensitive
to product ﬁt, or consumers greatly value quality — expected proﬁts increase between the
Benchmark and AR settings and then decrease with Reviews, i.e., highest in the AR case. Yet
if the marginal return on advertising spending is low, expected proﬁts are highest in the Reviews
setting. The robustness of these ﬁndings to relaxing key model assumptions is discussed.
We then explore an alternative setting in which second-period awareness is contingent upon
connecting with a ﬁrst-period buyer. Speciﬁcally, each second-generation consumer interacts
with a sample of ﬁrst-generation consumers whose location along the circle is either identical
to her own, reﬂecting homophily, or randomly drawn, and becomes aware if at least one of
them purchased the product. In this setting, we ﬁnd that the ﬁrm has a greater incentive to
advertise in period 1 than in the basic model and, interestingly, casts the widest advertising
net when no information is transferred across generations (Benchmark case). Furthermore, the
degree of homophily plays a critical role: the more second-generation consumers expect to be
paired with ﬁrst-generation consumers who are like them in terms of preference location, the
more broadly the ﬁrm tends to advertise. This is true in the Benchmark and AR cases because
aware second-generation consumers do not know the product’s exact position but presume they
are close to it when homophily is strong. The ﬁrm seeks to exploit this fact by advertising
to more ﬁrst-generation consumers who can serve as social contagion agents. However, the
reverse pattern can occur in the Reviews case because aware consumers are able to learn the
exact product position from UGC and, if located far away from it, are unlikely to buy; thus
prompting the ﬁrm to target its advertising more narrowly. Lastly, we show that with social
interactions average ratings are more likely to exhibit an increasing pattern over time than in
the basic model and that expected proﬁts are highest in the AR case.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we relate our work to
pertinent literature. We then describe the basic setup and present the main ﬁndings from ana-
lyzing this model. We close this section by outlining several robustness checks and extensions.
Subsequently, we examine a setting where awareness in period 2 is a function of social inter-
actions across generations. We end with concluding remarks and managerial implications. All
proofs are relegated to the Appendix or Technical Appendix.
4

2
Literature Review
Our work contributes to the growing body of literature on the strategic implications of online
customer-generated evaluations of products and services, particularly research on how such
evaluations aﬀect a ﬁrm’s marketing mix variables. Sun (2012) studies how the average and
variance of ratings impact ﬁrm pricing and proﬁts. In her model, all consumers are aware
of a new product and its location, but are uncertain about its quality and about the common
mismatch cost parameter along the horizontal dimension. She ﬁnds that a higher average rating
results in higher prices and proﬁts (consistent with the ﬁndings of Chevalier and Mayzlin, 2006).
Yet greater variance also yields higher proﬁts when the average rating is low enough. Our work
diﬀers from Sun (2012) in that we do not assume that consumers ex-ante know the product
exists and hence the ﬁrm has to engage in costly advertising. Moreover, consumers in our model
know the mismatch cost parameter but are ex-ante uncertain about the product’s position. We
then examine how the nature of buyer evaluations (average ratings vs. full reviews) interacts
with advertising and pricing, as well as the role of WOM across generations.
Kuksov and Xie (2010) examine a setting where consumers in period 2 infer the uncertain
portion of a product’s value (quality) from the observed average rating of period 1 buyers. All
consumers are assumed to be aware of the product, and the ﬁrm can try to aﬀect ratings by
oﬀering post-purchase extras (called “frills”) and by lowering price. They ﬁnd that frills are only
oﬀered to period 1 buyers if the market exhibits suﬃcient growth, i.e., there are more consumers
in period 2 than in period 1; otherwise the ﬁrm will lower price (as compared to a single-period
ﬁrm). The intuition being that because frills occur post-purchase and are incurred for all period
1 buyers, oﬀering them makes sense only if the eﬀect this can have on the average rating will
impact many more consumers in period 2. In our model, consumers are uncertain about quality
as well as product ﬁt. Unlike frills, which directly impact the buyers’ net utility, in our setup
a key variable under the ﬁrm’s control is advertising, which determines who will become aware
of the product (and aware consumers must form beliefs about the ﬁrm’s actions). This, in
turn, aﬀects who may buy and provide UGC. Importantly, our focus is on comparing diﬀerent
UGC structures: no information (Benchmark), partial information (AR) and full information
(Reviews). We ﬁnd that, compared to the other information cases, the ﬁrm in the AR case
restricts advertising even when the market size stays ﬂat or shrinks across periods (see Section
5

3.2) and it also has a tendency to charge higher prices in period 1.2 In some sense, the ﬁrm
in our model is able to endogenize the market size of potential period 1 buyers. Moreover, the
actions taken in the AR case, intended to inﬂuence ratings, can either backﬁre or avail the ﬁrm
compared to the Reviews case; thus a non-monotonic relationship between the amount of UGC
conveyed and proﬁts is possible. We further explore average rating dynamics and characterize
a reversal: under AR the average rating is higher in period 1 but lower in period 2 compared
to the Reviews case. This result is directly linked to our modeling of horizontal uncertainty
in addition to vertical (quality) uncertainty. These proﬁt and rating dynamic issues are not
part of the analysis in Kuksov and Xie (2010). Lastly, by micro-modeling social interactions
across generations, we are able to examine how consumer expectations about who they interact
with aﬀect the ﬁrm’s incentives to advertise. In more recent work, Kuksov and Liao (2019)
examine how consumer inferences from opinion leader (expert) recommendations aﬀect optimal
product variety. An expert bases his/her recommendation on product quality (which is ex-ante
uncertain) as well as ﬁt to idiosyncratic tastes (which is privately known). While, in general,
greater variety increases the chances of a positive recommendation, this may depress consumers’
inference on quality. The authors show that it may therefore be optimal for the ﬁrm to oﬀer
a ﬁnite number of product variants. In our model, second-generation consumers in the AR
case are able to infer product quality from the average rating but remain uncertain about the
product’s location, and hence the ﬁt to their tastes. This results in lower period 2 ratings
compared to the Reviews case, yet may be more proﬁtable. Thus, although in both these
past works the ﬁrm also takes actions that aﬀect the inferences of second-generation consumers
(from UGC or expert recommendations), our setup — with a focus on comparing the type of
information transferred — and decision variables are quite diﬀerent, leading to substantively
distinct ﬁndings.
Chen and Xie (2008) examine a seller’s incentive to provide full or partial information
regarding the attributes of its product in the presence of consumer reviews.
Their model
assumes full awareness and diﬀerentiates between expert consumers, who can process the ﬁrm’s
advertising, and novices, who only use reviews from period 1 consumers to determine product
match. They show that the ﬁrm’s optimal strategy depends on marginal product costs, the
accuracy of consumer reviews, and segment sizes. In our model, second-generation consumers
2Charging higher prices in the AR case holds strictly in our model when price history is observable. If price
history is unobserved, the ﬁrm in the AR case also has an incentive to reduce price to aﬀect consumer inferences,
thus it might select a lower price than in the other cases (see Section 3.2).
6

can only glean information about the product from UGC, while production costs do not play
a role. Joshi and Musalem (2020) construct a model in which the ﬁrm knows its quality at the
outset and advertising serves a signaling role, while pricing is exogenous. They ﬁnd that in the
presence of WOM a high-quality ﬁrm may engage in more aggressive advertising in order to
signal its type. In our model, by contrast, advertising plays an awareness-generating role and its
extent is unobserved by consumers (hence it cannot serve as a signal), and we vary the amount
of information transferred from ﬁrst-generation buyers. We ﬁnd that partial information results
in less aggressive ﬁrm behavior (smaller advertising interval and higher prices). In an extension,
we examine how the nature of social interactions matters for advertising intensity.
Our work is also related to Godes (2017) who looks at how WOM aﬀects a ﬁrm’s product
quality decision. He ﬁnds that the optimal quality chosen depends on whether WOM dispro-
portionately impacts lower- or higher-valuation consumers and on whether it serves to expand
awareness or inform about quality.3 Jiang and Yang (2019) examine a setting where period 2
consumers learn the product’s quality from period 1 buyers and the ﬁrm has private informa-
tion on its marginal cost of quality provision (which it can signal through price). Their analysis
reveals that it may be optimal for a highly eﬃcient ﬁrm (low marginal cost) to reduce quality
when its eﬃciency is known compared to when it is not. In our model, quality is exogenous
(though uncertain) and the focus is on how the type of information transferred between con-
sumers aﬀects a ﬁrm’s targeted advertising and pricing decisions. Our model further includes
a horizontal ﬁt dimension that is absent in Godes (2017) and Jiang and Yang (2019).
Lastly, our work is related to research examining patterns of rating dynamics. As expressed
in Godes and Silva (2012), and references therein, some researchers have found that average
ratings tend to decrease over time while others have found the opposite.
Godes and Silva
(2012) empirically tease out temporal and sequential factors that may aﬀect average ratings.
Our theoretical exploration is sequential in nature, and reveals that the pattern of average
ratings critically depends on how much information is conveyed in UGC as well as on realized
quality; noting that higher quality products tend to generate a decreasing pattern.
To summarize, our work contributes to the literature on user-generated evaluations along
four key dimensions. First, we examine diﬀerent UGC information structures in a manner that
has not been looked at before at our level of detail in a single context, namely an average rating
vs. full reviews. Second, we explore the interaction between customer-generated evaluations and
3Godes (2017) treats advertising separately from WOM, while we examine the interaction between them.
7

the ﬁrm’s advertising and pricing decisions. Third, we shed new light on the evolution of average
ratings and delineate conditions for various patterns to emerge. Fourth, we combine product
evaluations from previous buyers with the process of social interaction across generations.
3
Basic Model
There are two generations of consumers, who live in periods = 12 respectively. We consider
a Salop model such that each generation reﬂects a new unit mass of consumers, who are spread
uniformly on a circle of length 4. We discuss the possibility of some consumers carrying over
from period 1 to period 2 and generations of unequal size in Section 3.2.
The ﬁrm has developed a new product that is positioned at location which is uniformly
drawn from [04]. The location of the new product is unobserved by consumers but known to the
ﬁrm. The product is of quality , drawn from a uniform distribution over [02] (independently
of the draw of ). The quality is initially unobservable to the ﬁrm, and becomes known to
buyers, i.e., consumers who purchase and try the product, thus reﬂecting an experience good.
We assume for simplicity that the ﬁrm produces this product at zero marginal cost.
The setting we have in mind is one where the internal new product planning process deﬁnes
the intended positioning (see, e.g., Ulrich and Eppinger, 2015; Urban and Hauser, 1993), which
is why the ﬁrm knows the consumer location the product best matches. However, the ﬁrm
is unsure prior to actual market consumption how “good” the new product will turn out to
be along the quality (vertical) dimension.4 For instance, a ﬁrm may produce a movie with
a plot and comic elements of a particular style; hence it determines the “taste” for which
the product is best suited for. The ﬁrm is uncertain, however, prior to the movie’s release
and customers experiencing it, just how favorably it will be deemed with respect to various
quality measures (acting, wardrobe, directing, special eﬀects, etc.). In other words, given the
speciﬁc sub-genre (which the ﬁrm knows), whether the movie will be regarded a “hit” or a
“dud” is ex-ante uncertain. Examples include the 2017 ﬁlm ‘Wonder Woman’ that greatly
exceeded expectations vs.
the 2011 ﬁlm ‘Green Lantern’ that disappointed (Hughes, 2017;
Barnes, 2011). Similar examples come to mind in other markets where new product activity
4It is easy to extend the model to allow the product’s expected quality to be related to some measure of
ex-ante R&D eﬀort (for example, the product’s quality will fall within a range of possible values around a mean
level that is a function of R&D). But as long as the ﬁrm remains uncertain about the exact outcome of this
R&D, in terms of the realized appreciation for the product by consumers, our results will carry through.
8

is prevalent, e.g., consumer electronics and cars. When Samsung launched its Galaxy Note 7,
the added capabilities and features delivered beneﬁts aimed mainly at people with a particular
set of preferences. However, as more batteries malfunctioned and put users at risk, quality
perceptions of the new product changed drastically (Wiggers, 2017). Similarly, the Microsoft
Surface Book 2 was designed to best serve consumers with certain use cases. Yet a hardware
bug, which led to battery draining in some situations, was revealed post launch (Warren, 2017).
The Ford Escape, on the other hand, an SUV positioned to ﬁt the tastes of small families with
particular driving habits, surprised consumers for the better with respect to quality after its
release (CarGurus, 2006). In Section 3.2, we discuss several ways to relax the assumption that
the ﬁrm knows the product’s location ex-ante while consumers don’t.
To formalize the above characterization, let the utility of consumer at location be zero
if she does not purchase the good, and if she purchases the good her utility is
= + −() −
where () ≡min {|−| 4 −|−|} is the shortest distance between the consumer’s
location and the product’s position , is the marginal disutility from consuming a product
that is diﬀerent from the ideal point (a.k.a., the mismatch cost parameter), is the marginal
valuation for quality, ∼[01] is an idiosyncratic parameter known only to consumer that
reﬂects her base valuation or attraction for products in the category, and is the price of the
good. A consumer has no utility from purchasing more than one unit (and the good is in a
non-repeat purchase category).
At the outset of the game, consumers are unaware of the new product’s existence. The ﬁrm
has the ability to engage in costly targeted advertising to reach a subset of them and make them
aware. The timeline of the game is as follows: In period = 1, the ﬁrm chooses a price 1 and
an advertising strategy consisting of a targeted interval of length 4(where ∈[01]) centered
around the product’s position .5 First-generation consumers who fall within the advertising
interval learn about the existence of the product and its price (1), yet do not observe the ﬁrm’s
targeting strategy () and must form a belief about it (denoted ) to calculate their expected
5The ability to target advertising communications based on consumer characteristics and preferences is
becoming increasingly more precise and common on digital platforms, such as Facebook and Google.
The
assumption that the advertising interval is centered around is without loss of generality. If we allow the ﬁrm
to choose the center of the interval as well as its length we ﬁnd that it will always choose the product’s position
The proof (available from the authors upon request) follows a simple revealed preference argument.
9

utility from purchasing the product. The advertising cost, (), is increasing and suﬃciently
convex in the size of the targeted group to guarantee that the solution is interior (in particular,
we assume (0) = 0; 0 () 0; 00 () 
; and 00 (1) 04). Once advertising takes place,
aware consumers make simultaneous purchasing decisions. Buyers experience the product, and
after realizing quality and ﬁt know their net utility from consumption.
At the start of period 2, a fraction of second-generation consumers become aware of
the new product. This captures scenarios where through observation, word-of-mouth (WOM),
or exposure to press coverage some second-generation consumers learn about the existence of
the product. For ease of exposition, in this section we solve for the case of = 1, i.e., all
second-generation consumers become aware (the results are qualitatively unchanged for any
0 ≤1)In Section 4, we micro-model the WOM process, which leads to only a subset of
second-generation consumers becoming aware of the product.
Let second-generation consumers observe a summary statistic of information obtained from
ﬁrst-generation buyers. We consider three options:
1. Benchmark: second-generation consumers only learn about the product’s existence.
2. Average Rating (AR): second-generation consumers learn about the product’s existence
and observe the mean net utility of ﬁrst-generation buyers.
3. Reviews: second-generation consumers learn about the product’s existence and observe
the joint distribution of the utilities and locations of ﬁrst-generation buyers.
To elaborate, we assume that, given the visible consumption of the product by at least
some ﬁrst-generation consumers, the baseline information transferred across generations is that
the product exists (Benchmark case). When ﬁrst-generation buyers also indicated a summary
of their overall assessment of the product linked to their net consumption utility, for example
through an online rating system, we assume that second-generation consumers have access to the
mean of these utilities through an average rating score (AR case).6 Lastly, if ﬁrst-generation
buyers not only provided a measure of their net utility by rating the new product but also
wrote reviews in which they discussed its ﬁt with their preference location, second-generation
consumers upon reading these comments can deduce the true quality and position of the product
6In many online systems, consumers choose from and/or observe a discrete set of rating options. Our results
extend to such environments–see Section 3.2 and the Technical Appendix for details.
10

(Reviews case).7 The ﬁrm has access to the UGC from past buyers, and can set a new price
(2) at the start of period 2. Prices are assumed to be observable, hence second-generation
consumers know (12) and make simultaneous purchase decisions. In Section 3.2 we discuss
other pricing structures, including a non-observable price history.
In making pricing and advertising decisions, the ﬁrm seeks to maximize total expected
proﬁts across periods with no discounting. To ensure interior solutions, we assume that the
location mismatch parameter, and , the marginal sensitivity to quality, are smaller than 15.
These upper bounds imply that: 1. even in the farthest location from the product’s position
there is always some consumer who, if aware of the product, buys it, and 2. even in the closest
location to the product’s position there is some consumer who does not buy it. In other words,
the product is not ex-ante restricted to a niche population along the circle nor is it appealing
to everyone at the equilibrium price (see the Technical Appendix for formal details).
3.1
Analysis
3.1.1
Demand
Given the prices and advertising level the ﬁrm chooses, we can derive closed-form solutions for
the demand in each period. In particular, period 1 demand can be written as8
1 (1) = (1 + −−1) 
(1)
where reﬂects consumers’ expectation of the advertising interval chosen by the ﬁrm. First-
generation consumers targeted with advertising use this value (as they do not observe directly)
to assess their distance to the product’s location (in equilibrium will correspond to the true
value chosen by the ﬁrm).
The mean net utility, i.e., average rating, of ﬁrst-generation buyers is, in turn,
1 () = 1 + (2−1) −(2−) −1
2

(2)
7We assume that second-generation consumers can’t perfectly observe the total number of ﬁrst generation
consumers who were made aware of the product through advertising (z). This is highly realistic, as even on
platforms such as Amazon it is not possible to ﬁgure out from a product’s sales rank nor from the number of
customers who provided feedback exactly how many people were targeted with ads.
8See the Technical Appendix for the formal derivation of expressions (1) and (2). Note that we do not incor-
porate strategic behavior on the part of ﬁrst-generation buyers meant to inﬂuence second-generation consumers.
Consequently, period 1 demand is independent of the information transmitted across generations.
11

An important observation is that 1
= −0, and therefore the average rating decreases
in the size of the advertising interval the ﬁrm chooses. This is intuitive: a larger advertising
interval (a greater ) increases the average distance between those consumers aware of the
product and its position on the circle. This leads to a decrease in the average utility of buyers
and is a function of consumers’ sensitivity to product taste mismatch (). Further note that
1
= 
2 0reﬂecting the fact that when targeted ﬁrst-generation consumers believe the ﬁrm
chooses a larger interval, they expect to be farther away from the product than they actually
are.
And the more consumers care about product ﬁt, the more this will deter those with
low idiosyncratic utility (with low ) from purchasing; thus the average rating will rise. The
dependence of 1 on price is straightforward.
To analyze the behavior of second-generation consumers, note that the three informational
cases diﬀer in the type of inferences these subsequent consumers are able to make. In the
Benchmark case, second-generation consumers only learn that the product exists and its price
history, but are unaware of and . In the AR case, given the average rating they observe,
second-generation consumers can additionally establish an estimate for quality, , based on
what they expect the size of the ad interval to have been (); but not the location of this
interval or who was targeted.9 Second-generation consumers interpret a higher average rating
(1) as, in part, reﬂecting greater quality. In particular, through the inverse function for 1 ()
in (2) we have = 1++21+−1
2
, which when substituting in 1 () yields10
= −(−)


(3)
Note from (3) that the quality inferred by second-generation consumers in the AR case is
increasing in the true quality. This is because higher quality aﬀects the net utility of ﬁrst-
generation buyers who experienced the product and learned , resulting in a higher average
rating. The dependence of on is as follows. For a given average rating observed, an
increase in suggests that many ﬁrst-generation buyers were farther away from the product’s
9Digital advertising methods today allow for very tailored messages, yet who receives these messages is only
known to the targeted consumer (i.e., unknown to second-generation consumers).
10We note that oﬀ-the-equilibrium-path −(−)

might be negative or larger than 2, especially if the actual
quality is close to 0 or 2 respectively. Such expectations for are not valid in the model. Since these are zero
probability events, we assume throughout that consumers’ oﬀ-path beliefs with respect to are captured by
= min
n
max
n
0−(−)

o
2
o
.
12

position, which should negatively impact net utility. Therefore, quality must have been high in
order to compensate for that.
Finally, in the Reviews case, second-generation consumers observe the joint distribution of
ﬁrst-generation buyers’ utilities and locations, and are thus able to accurately infer and .
We solve for the Perfect Bayesian Equilibria (PBE) of the game, requiring that relevant
consumer expectations on ﬁrm variables be fulﬁlled and that the ﬁrm not have an incentive
to deviate from its proposed equilibrium strategy given consumers’ beliefs. Hence, consumers
must have correct expectations with respect to (and infer quality correctly, = , from
UGC when relevant)We focus on pure strategy equilibria, and accordingly on deterministic
consumer beliefs over ﬁrm actions.11
We now turn to analyzing period 2 demand under the three informational cases. We denote
by 0
2
2 
2 period 2 demand in the Benchmark, Average Rating, and Reviews cases,
respectively. In the Technical Appendix, we establish that
0
2 (2) = 1 + −−2

2
(2) = 1 + −−2
and 
2 (2) = 1 + −−2(4)
As can be gleaned from (4), the demand in period 2 diﬀers across information structures. In
particular, when neither the average rating nor reviews are transmitted (Benchmark case) the
demand is independent of quality and consumers use the ex-ante expected value (() = 1).
However, when more information is transmitted, demand depends on either inferred quality 
(AR case) or on actual quality (Reviews case). In equilibrium, as expectations are fulﬁlled,
= and = , and period 2 demand in the AR case becomes

2
(2) = 1 + −−2
(5)
From (4) and (5) it is apparent that, holding price constant, realized period 2 demand (in
terms of its size) is the same in the AR and Reviews cases. However, it is important to stress
that, even if prices are identical, the set of buyers is diﬀerent. In the AR case, buyers are
uniformly spread around the circle (as they do not know the position of the product and only
its quality is inferred), whereas in the Reviews case buyers are centered around the product’s
11We assume that if consumers were to observe a ﬁrm action (e.g., price) that is inconsistent with what their
beliefs imply the ﬁrm should have selected (which is a zero probability event), they would maintain their original
belief over . See proof of Lemma TA-2 in the Technical Appendix for a discussion of how beliefs are treated in
the PBE we solve for and its robustness.
13

position. Note further that since () = 1, holding price constant, ex-ante expected demand
in period 2 is equal across the three informational cases. However, realized (ex-post) period 2
demand will be lower in the Benchmark case when 1, and the reverse is true when 1.
We point out that in the AR and Reviews cases second-generation consumers establish
correct deterministic posteriors over the product’s quality, given the information they observe
from ﬁrst-generation buyers. As a result, the ﬁrm cannot aﬀect consumers’ quality perceptions
by distorting 2. In the Benchmark case, with no UGC, neither the ﬁrm nor consumers can
infer quality, and the ﬁrm optimally selects 2 in a way that does not depend on .12
3.1.2
Marketing Decisions: Advertising and Pricing
In period 2, the ﬁrm chooses the price 2 to maximize its expected proﬁts 22 (2), taking into
account the product’s quality if known. In the Benchmark case, this amounts to solving
0
2 = arg max
2
20
2 (2) = arg max
2
2 (1 + −−2) 
A ﬁrst-order analysis yields 0
2 = 1+−
2

At the beginning of period 1, the ﬁrm considers how demand plays out and chooses the
price 1 and advertising interval to maximize its overall expected proﬁts in both periods:
Π = 11 (1) + (22 (2)) −(). In the Benchmark case, the ﬁrm solves
(00
1) = arg max
1
Π = arg max
1
1(1 + −−1) + 0
2
¡
1 + −−0
2
¢
−() 
Taking the ﬁrst-order condition with respect to 1and plugging in the value for 0
2yields
0
1 = 1 + −0
2

(6)
Taking the ﬁrst-order condition for the advertising interval and substituting in 0
1yields
µ1 + −0
2
¶2
= 0 ¡
0¢

(7)
12This conclusion holds even if the ﬁrm in the Benchmark case somehow obtains information on quality at the
end of period 1 (say by conducting market research on ﬁrst-generation buyers). Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrm could not
use this information strategically to inﬂuence consumers’ beliefs on quality as a separating equilibrium would
not exist. This is because a low quality ﬁrm could always mimic a high quality ﬁrm as they are otherwise
identical. Said diﬀerently, the high quality ﬁrm does not have an advantage it can exploit to price in a way that
signals its higher quality to consumers and deter the low quality ﬁrm from mimicking.
14

Equations (6) and (7) provide an implicit solution for (0
10). As discussed following the
derivation of period 2 demand functions (4) and (5), the expected demand size (as a function
of price) is identical across informational cases. It is therefore not surprising that (6) remains
unchanged in the diﬀerent cases. Furthermore, the ﬁrst-order conditions with respect to adver-
tising are identical for the Benchmark and Reviews settings. This is because period 2 demand
in both cases is independent of the advertising interval the ﬁrm selects. Intuitively, armed with
Reviews second-generation consumers extract all the information about the product (and )
regardless of the advertising interval size, leading to an independence between the choice of the
ad interval and period 2 demand. In the Benchmark case, the reason for independence is in some
sense opposite: regardless of the advertising interval selected, second-generation consumers do
not learn any information about the product for the selection of to matter.
However, in the AR case we have
µ1 + −
2
¶2
−(1 + −)
2
= 0 ¡
¢

(8)
Thus, the advertising ﬁrst-order condition in the AR case introduces an additional term,
−(1+−)
2
, reﬂecting the fact that the ﬁrm takes into account that second-generation con-
sumers will form an expectation of quality based on the average rating they observe 1 (per
(3)), which in turn will depend on the ﬁrm’s selection of .
The following proposition provides a comparison of the three UGC cases in terms of the
implications for advertising and pricing strategies in equilibrium.
Proposition 1 In period 1, the optimal advertising interval and price are the same in the
Benchmark and Reviews cases. In the AR case, the optimal advertising interval is smaller and
the price is higher than in the other cases. That is, = 0 and 
1 = 0
1 
1 . In
period 2, the optimal price is the same in the Reviews and AR cases and increases in realized
quality. The optimal price in the Benchmark case is independent of quality and satisﬁes 0
2 0
1.
Proposition 1 reveals that the ﬁrm advertises to a smaller set of consumers in the AR
case than in the other two information settings. The reason for this intriguing result is as
follows. Given the average rating they observe, second-generation consumers use their belief
with respect to the ad interval (i.e., ) to make an inference regarding quality (i.e., ). The
ﬁrm takes as given consumers’ beliefs when making its advertising decision (since consumers
15

can’t observe its choice of to alter their beliefs). For any value of , a decrease in means
that ﬁrst-generation consumers whose ideal point is closer to the product’s position will be the
ones to buy. This, in turn, would lead to an increase in the average rating of ﬁrst-generation
buyers, and thus to an increase in second-generation consumers’ estimate of . Said diﬀerently,
since second-generation consumers do not observe the distribution of locations and ratings but
rather only the average rating 1, they cannot fully separate out whether an increase in the
observed average rating is due to the quality turning out to be high ex-post or due to buyers
with better matching tastes rating the product. Consequently, they would attribute part of
an increase in 1 to quality, which increases their expected net utility for the product at any
consumer location and hence their propensity to buy it. This introduces an incentive for the
ﬁrm to decrease . This incentive is absent in the Benchmark and Reviews cases because, as as
explained earlier, period 2 demand is independent of the advertising interval chosen. Note that,
in equilibrium, consumers should hold correct beliefs about the advertising interval (= ) in
the AR case. Yet, as we show in the proof, the only beliefs () that can work for the ﬁrm to
not want to deviate from choosing = in equilibrium are such that = 013
As for the results on pricing, the ﬁnding that the period 1 price is higher in the AR case is
directly linked to the smaller ad interval chosen. Because the ﬁrm focuses on consumers that are
closer to the product’s position, it reaches potential buyers who, on average, value the product
more. In period 2, the ﬁrm and consumers glean the product’s quality from available buyer
generated content in both the AR and Reviews cases. As one might intuit, as the quality level
is found to be greater the ﬁrm seeks to price higher, which explains the relationship between

2 , 
2 and described in the proposition. In the Benchmark case, given that consumers do
not learn the actual quality they must use its expected value (of 1), hence the ﬁrm’s price is
independent of quality (see also footnote 12). We note that because in period 2 all consumers
are aware of the product, in all cases the ﬁrm has an incentive to lower price to maximize
proﬁts. Thus, price decreases in the Benchmark case and in expectation it decreases in the
other cases as well ((
2 ) 
1 (
2 ) 
1 ); although in the AR and Reviews cases, if 
is revealed to be suﬃciently high, the price set in period 2 can exceed that of period 1.14
13If consumers in the AR case were to hold beliefs that the ad interval is the same as in the Reviews or
Benchmark cases, then the ﬁrm would have an incentive to deviate to a smaller ad interval; hence those beliefs
would not work in a PBE. The equilibrium ad interval we ﬁnd, which is smaller than in the other two cases, is
such that taking it as reﬂecting consumer beliefs the ﬁrm has no incentive to choose a diﬀerent ad interval size.
Hence, expectations are fulﬁlled and the ﬁrm is acting in its best interest.
14The marketing literature on new product diﬀusion also ﬁnds varying dynamic pricing patterns. However,
16

3.1.3
Average Rating Dynamics
The ﬁndings regarding ﬁrm behavior in each of the informational cases yield a set of testable
empirical implications when tracking the evolution of average ratings across periods. We denote
by 0
2
2 
2 the average ratings of second-generation buyers in the Benchmark, AR, and
Reviews cases, respectively. It is straightforward to establish that:15
0
2 = 1 −0
2 −+ (2−1) 
2

2
= 1 + −−
2
2

2 =3
¡
1 + −
2 −
¢2 + 2
6
¡
1 + −
2 −
¢

Comparing these average rating expressions we establish that
Proposition 2 The average rating dynamics in the three informational cases are:
1. Benchmark: the average rating of second-generation buyers is always lower than that of
ﬁrst-generation buyers.
2. AR: there exists a cutoﬀvalue (≤1) such that the average rating of second-
generation buyers is higher than that of ﬁrst-generation buyers iﬀ.
3. Reviews: there exists a cutoﬀvalue such that the average rating of second-generation
buyers is higher than that of ﬁrst-generation buyers iﬀ. Moreover, .
Proposition 2 reveals that as more information is transferred across generations it is more
likely for average ratings to increase.
In particular, when there is no consumption-related
information passed on, per the Benchmark case, the average rating the product receives will
unequivocally go down over time. This occurs because in period 1 only consumers close to the
product’s position were made aware of the product and hence derived relatively high net utility
upon purchase. In period 2, all consumers are aware of the product and thus anyone along
the circle with non-negative expected utility purchases. This results in many consumers with
lower valuations purchasing in period 2, some of whom may actually end up deriving negative
the mechanisms therein pertain to consumers’ price sensitivity and/or discounting the future. For example, Bass
et al. (1994) ﬁnd that when consumers are highly price sensitive and/or uncertain about the future (high level
of discounting), then lowering the price over time is worthwhile as a means to accelerate diﬀusion; otherwise it
can make sense for the ﬁrm to increase price initially. Nair (2019) summarizes ﬁndings that a desire to initially
cater to high-valuation customers can prompt a price skimming strategy (high followed by low price).
15Formal derivations of these expressions can be found in the Technical Appendix. In the Benchmark case,
though no UGC is transferred, one can still compute each generation’s average net utility and thus compare
average ratings. Firms also commonly conduct satisfaction surveys, which provide a sense of this metric.
17

utility ex-post (as second-generation consumers do not know the product’s location nor can they
infer ). Hence the declining pattern for average ratings in the Benchmark case. At the other
extreme, per the Reviews case, there can be a scenario where average ratings increase across
generations and, somewhat surprisingly, this occurs when the quality of the product is actually
revealed to be low. Here, second-generation consumers know the location and quality of
the product. This information allows those consumers who would get negative utility to avoid
purchasing altogether. If the quality of the product turns out to be low enough ()many
ﬁrst-generation consumers who were made aware of the product would have purchased the good
(given their ex-ante expectation that = 1) only to be disappointed after their consumption
experience. This dynamic will be reﬂected in low ratings in period 1, but higher ratings in period
2. In the AR case, second-generation consumers correctly infer in equilibrium, therefore once
again it is possible for ratings to increase across periods. However, this occurs for a smaller
range of qualities than in the Reviews case for two reasons: (a) the smaller advertising interval
in the AR case (per Proposition 1) implies a relatively higher average rating for ﬁrst-generation
buyers, and (b) because in the AR case second-generation consumers cannot infer the product’s
position (), period 2 buyers are uniformly spread around the circle (vs. concentrated around
the product’s location in the Reviews case), which leads to a lower period 2 average rating.
An empirically relevant implication of Proposition 2 compares the average ratings in the
AR and Reviews cases in both periods, revealing an intriguing reversal.
Corollary 1 For any , the average rating in period 1 is higher in the AR case than in the
Reviews case and the reverse ordering holds in period 2.
Figure 1 depicts the evolution of average ratings across periods. As explained, the average
rating in period 1 will always be higher in the AR case given the advertising and pricing
choices (per Proposition 1). In period 2, average ratings will depend on realized quality (per
Proposition 2). Speciﬁcally, the right-most panel reﬂects the case whereby the realized quality
() is relatively high. In this setting, in both the AR and Reviews cases the period 2 average
rating will decline. Notwithstanding, because second-generation consumers make more informed
decisions in the Reviews case (with buyers concentrated around the product’s location) the net-
utilities will decline less precipitously than in the AR case. In the middle panel of Figure 1,
the realized quality is between the two cutoﬀvalues and . Thus, the average rating
will increase in the Reviews case but decrease in the AR case. In this instance, not only is
18

Figure 1: Average Rating Dynamics Across Periods as a Function of Realized Quality
Period
Average Rating
1
2
AR
Period
Average Rating
1
2
AR
Reviews
Reviews
Period
Average Rating
1
2
AR
Reviews
the ordering ﬂipped over time but also the trend diﬀers. Lastly, in the left-most panel realized
quality is low, hence average ratings increase in both the AR and Reviews cases. Yet we would
still have 
2

2 given that fully informed second-generation buyers in the Reviews case
are more concentrated around the product’s location and derive greater net utility.
3.1.4
Welfare: Firm Proﬁts and Consumer Surplus
In this section, we derive implications for ﬁrm proﬁts and consumer surplus. We show that
whether expected proﬁts are highest in the AR or Reviews case depends on how costly ad-
vertising is, as well as on consumer sensitivity to product match and quality valuation. Using
equilibrium values for the prices and advertising decisions, and recalling that Πand Π
denote expected proﬁts in the AR and Reviews cases respectively, we have
Proposition 3 Expected consumer surplus is largest in the Reviews case. Expected proﬁts can
either be highest in the Reviews case or in the AR case. In particular, ΠΠif advertising is
suﬃciently costly (0 () is large), consumers are suﬃciently sensitive to the product match (is
large), or consumers do not value quality suﬃciently (is small). On the other hand, ΠΠ
if advertising is suﬃciently cheap (0 () is small), consumers are suﬃciently insensitive to the
product match (is small), or consumers suﬃciently value quality (is large).
Both consumer surplus (CS) and expected proﬁts are higher in the Reviews than in the
Benchmark case. To see why, recall that the ﬁrm sets the same advertising interval and period
1 price in both instances (per Proposition 1). Therefore, the ﬁrm’s period 1 proﬁt and CS are
identical in these cases. In period 2, CS is higher in the Reviews case because consumers are
19

able to make purchase decisions based on the product’s revealed quality and location. The ﬁrm
is able to capture some of this additional value and translate it into greater proﬁts by adjusting
the price to reﬂect the product’s quality, which is revealed over time. In the Benchmark case, by
contrast, second-generation consumers do not know the product’s location nor do they learn its
quality, and hence act based on its expected value, i.e., as if = 1. Thus, the ﬁrm is limited in
its ability to beneﬁt from adjusting price in period 2 (only accommodating the greater awareness
level by lowering price).
That CS is higher in the Reviews than in the AR case also follows a simple logic. In period
1, the advertising interval is smaller and the price is higher in the AR case compared to the
Reviews case. As a result, period 1’s CS is the lowest in the AR scenario. In period 2, CS is
higher in the Reviews case because under AR consumers do not have information on product
location yet face the same price in both instances.
In understanding the intuition for the expected proﬁt results described in Proposition 3, one
should recognize that in all information structures ﬁrst-generation consumers must form a belief
over the ﬁrm’s advertising interval choice and this introduces a proﬁt distortion. To see why,
suppose the ﬁrm could credibly convey its choice of to consumers. In that case, the ﬁrm would
choose a level = ∗, where ∗is the solution to the FOC:
¡1+−∗
2
¢2−∗
¡1+−∗
2
¢
= 0 (∗).
This “ideal” advertising interval would lead to maximal expected proﬁts for the ﬁrm. Now
assume that consumers cannot observe the ﬁrm’s actual choice yet hold beliefs that the ﬁrm
will select this ideal ad interval, i.e., = ∗. But then, in all information settings, the ﬁrm has
an incentive to increase This is because the additionally targeted ﬁrst-generation consumers,
on average, think they are closer to the product’s location than they actually are; leading to
greater period 1 revenues for the ﬁrm. Of course, in equilibrium beliefs must be correct, but
the only beliefs that can work result in a PBE with an advertising interval that is larger than
what would have been ideal for the ﬁrm. For the Benchmark and Reviews cases, this is the only
distortion in the ﬁrm’s maximization problem. In the AR case, however, there is another force
linked to period 2 revenues. As explained in connection with Proposition 1, the ﬁrm in the AR
case has an incentive to decrease its advertising interval to bump up the average rating and
hence the second-generation quality inference, which would lead to greater period 2 revenues.
That is, in the AR case, the ﬁrm wishes to expand its ad interval to boost period 1 revenues
and to contract its ad interval to boost period 2 revenues. To summarize, the equilibrium
advertising interval in the Benchmark and Reviews cases is always too large relative to the
20

Figure 2: Expected Proﬁts in the AR and Reviews Cases: Low vs. High Advertising Costs
E x p e c ted 
P ro fits
L o w
A d vertisin g 
C o st
H igh
R e vie w s
A R
ideal interval (∗), whereas it can be too large, too small, or just about right, in the AR case —
but is always lower than in the Benchmark and Reviews cases due to the second incentive.
The relative proximity of vs. to the ideal level ∗determines in which information
setting equilibrium expected proﬁts will be greater. When advertising is costly (which occurs
if 0 () is large) or when the return on advertising in terms of generating extra demand is
low (which occurs when is large or is small), the “ideal” advertising interval is small to
begin with and forces that prompt increasing the ad interval are relatively weak whereas forces
that prompt decreasing the ad interval are relatively strong. As a result, in equilibrium the
advertising interval the ﬁrm chooses ends up being very close to the “ideal” level ∗in the
Reviews case (), and much smaller than ∗in the AR case (). The reverse holds when
advertising is either cheap (small 0 ()) or the return on it in terms of generating demand is
high (small or large ), in which case is closer than to the ideal level ∗in equilibrium.
To illustrate, Figure 2 depicts the relationship between expected proﬁts in the AR and
Reviews cases as a function of advertising costliness. As can be gleaned, expected proﬁts in the
AR case can be higher or lower than in the Reviews case (similar plots can be constructed for
the sensitivity to product match and to quality valuation).
3.2
Robustness Checks and Extensions of the Basic Model
In this section, we discuss relaxing several of the basic model’s key assumptions and present a
number of extensions. We seek to examine how the main ﬁndings, per Propositions 1-3, hold
up under these modiﬁed settings and whether new ﬁndings emerge. When relevant, detailed
proofs of these robustness checks and extensions are given in the Technical Appendix.
21

Dynamic Market Size
In the basic set up, we assumed that each generation of consumers
was of the same size, normalized to one, and lived for one period. We discuss several ways
that these assumptions can be relaxed (with full details in the Technical Appendix). First, we
analyzed an alternative setup whereby ﬁrst-generation consumers who were not made aware
of the product in period 1 (i.e., were outside of the ad interval) remain in the market. These
consumers realize in period 2 that they were not targeted in period 1, hence they can make some
inference on their expected distance to the product’s position. We ﬁnd that the main results
from the basic model continue to hold: the ad interval is smallest and period 1 price is highest
in the AR case (Proposition 1), and average ratings in the AR and Reviews cases can exhibit
the ordering reversal as in Corollary 1. One new nuanced ﬁnding emerges from this analysis:
the ad interval in the Reviews case is smaller than in the Benchmark case (so the ordering is
0 instead of = 0). This occurs because the ﬁrm in the Reviews case
has an incentive to shift some of the demand to period 2 and beneﬁt from adjusting price.
Second, while maintaining the assumption that each generation of consumers lives for only
one period, we analyzed a setting where the size of the second-generation cohort was allowed
to vary (i.e., relaxing the normalization to one in period 2). As one might expect, the ﬁrm
in the AR case has a greater incentive to reduce the ad interval and increase the period 1
price as the size of the second-generation cohort increases. Notwithstanding, all our results are
qualitatively robust to this extension. It is worth noting that robustness holds even if the size
of the second-generation cohort is much smaller than that of the ﬁrst-generation cohort.
Discrete Average Ratings
In characterizing the information second-generation consumers
have at their disposal in the AR and Reviews cases, we assumed that the exact value of the
average net utilities of ﬁrst-generation buyers was available.
This resulted in a one-to-one
invertible mapping from average rating (1) to quality (). However, on some platforms, e.g.,
Yelp!, average ratings are only displayed in discrete intervals. To examine the robustness of
our ﬁndings to this possibility, we solved a setup where second-generation consumers do not
observe 1 directly but instead receive a signal e∈M, where M is a partition of 1 into
disjoint average rating intervals with respective expected means 1112131. Here,
1is the signal received if 1 belongs to the interval with mean 1. This can capture, for
example, Yelp’s half-star system with = 9, so that 11 is 1 star, 12 is 1.5 stars, 13 is 2 stars,
etc. We show in the Technical Appendix that all aspects of Proposition 1-3 continue to hold
22

qualitatively. This suggests that, even if average ratings are only cardinally informative, the
ﬁrm has an incentive to restrict advertising and increase ﬁrst-period price in the AR case, with
corresponding implications as in the basic set up for rating dynamics and expected proﬁts.16
Manipulation, Bias, and Informativeness of User-Generated Evaluations
Our work-
ing assumption in modeling user-generated ratings and reviews was that: the ﬁrm did not ﬁlter
or inﬂuence the information presented, buyers reported truthfully, ratings/reviews constituted
a representative (unbiased) sample of buyers, and all reviews posted contained meaningful in-
formation with all second-generation consumers attending to/absorbing this information. How-
ever, one might wonder how our ﬁndings would be aﬀected if these assumptions were violated.17
Consider ﬁrst the situation of a ﬁrm trying to aﬀect subsequent consumer perceptions by
removing unfavorable UGC. Speciﬁcally, let the ﬁrm designate a rating threshold such that
all evaluations (ratings in the AR case and ratings+reviews in the Reviews case) below this
threshold are removed from the platform prior to the arrival of second-generation consumers.
For example, on a 5-star scale removing all UGC associated with 1 or 2 stars (i.e., = 3)We
can show that, as long as is not too high and consumers are rational, all our results continue
to hold qualitatively. This is because consumers can still use the distribution of ratings above
the threshold, along with their correct expectations with respect to to infer the true average
rating and hence back out quality. Moreover, in the Reviews case, assuming the ﬁrm does
not alter the actual comments, consumers can use the information contained in the remaining
reviews to infer product location. However, if the threshold is very close to the upper bound
of the rating scale, it becomes impossible for second-generation consumers to back out the true
average rating in the AR case and the ﬁrm eﬀectively behaves as in the Benchmark case.
Next, consider the case in which the UGC is biased. The extant literature (see, e.g., Schoen-
muller et al., 2020; Brandes et al., 2020, and references therein) has surfaced several reasons for
such a bias, including various forms of selectivity whereby buyers with extremely positive or
negative experiences have a greater tendency to rate/review (e.g., due to social utility gained
from posting extreme reviews and reluctance to exert eﬀort to transmit mediocre evaluations
that are perceived to be less diagnostic). Once again, if second-generation consumers under-
16One can also consider a scenario where ﬁrst-generation buyers provide ratings in discrete intervals (1 star, 2
stars, etc.), but the average of these discrete ratings is presented to second-generation consumers as a continuous
value. In that case, with a suﬃcient number of buyers, the expected value of the average rating will converge
to the expected mean of the net utilities. Hence, our analysis from the basic setup would continue to hold.
17The analyses of the extensions described below are available from the authors upon request.
23

stand the nature of the bias (e.g., the percentage of those with each experience type that are
expected to post an evaluation) and this bias is not too extreme (e.g., only those with a 5-star
rating ever post), then consumers should be able to back out the true average rating. Otherwise,
second-generation consumers in the AR case will treat the average rating as uninformative and
the analysis collapses to the Benchmark case. Notwithstanding, in the Reviews case consumers
are still able to extract product location and quality information from the comments posted
and hence the conclusions from that analysis continue to hold.
Lastly, consider the case where all buyers leave reviews in addition to ratings, but the
eﬀective information transferred across generations is only “partial” — either because a fraction
of the reviews are meaningless or because a fraction of second-generation consumers don’t
bother reading them. The former scenario could arise, for example, due to the platform’s policy
(requiring reviews to accompany ratings vs. making them optional), which could cause some
buyers to write irrelevant comments. The latter scenario could arise due to time or motivation
constraints (e.g., the statistics presented in the Introduction suggest that consumers often only
attend to ratings). One can adjust our model to accommodate partial information transfer in
the following way. In the Reviews case, let all second-generation consumers see the average
rating, but assume that only a fraction ∈[01] of them absorb relevant information from the
reviews.18 It is immediate that = 0 corresponds to the AR case and = 1 to the Reviews
case. We can thus think of second-generation consumers as divided into two circles of diﬀerent
mass (of size and 1 −respectively). Since the ﬁrm cannot identify which consumers are
informed, it sets the same price and advertising interval for both circles. Consequently, the
ﬁrm’s maximization problem in eﬀect puts a weight of on the Reviews case proﬁt function
and a weight of (1 −) on the AR case proﬁt function. The solution is smooth and monotone
in , such that any comparison of ﬁrm actions and expected proﬁts between two settings with
values 1 and 2 (1 2) will correspond to a comparison between a “relatively AR” case and
a “relatively Reviews” case, with qualitatively similar ﬁndings per Propositions 1-3.
Firm Knowledge of Product Location
The ﬁrm in the basic set-up knows the exact
location of the product (its “positioning”) at the start of the game. Although we justiﬁed this
assumption and provided several examples, one might wonder how our ﬁndings change if it is
18Thus, either captures the fraction of second-generation consumers who: 1) sampled reviews that are
informative or 2) actually read the reviews. Also assume that the realization of who gains relevant information
from reviews is independent of each consumer’s location and idiosyncratic product utility.
24

relaxed. To examine this issue, one can envisage a setup where the ﬁrm only knows a range
along the circle within which the location of a new product falls. There are two cases to analyze
depending on whether the range of uncertainty is smaller or larger than the advertising interval
the ﬁrm chooses when it knows the location precisely. In the former case, the ﬁrm would select
an ad interval that includes the suspected location range, using the mean of the distribution
as the center of this interval. It is fairly straightforward to show that all our ﬁndings per
Propositions 1-3 continue to qualitatively hold in this modiﬁed setup, as the same set of ﬁrm
incentives and consumer behavior are relevant. However, when the range of uncertainty is
large, say the entire circle, the results qualitatively follow the situation where the ﬁrm cannot
target its advertising. In that case, we might consider another form of advertising, whereby the
ﬁrm communicates to all consumers and selects the ad intensity; see the next extension for the
implications of this formulation.
Ad Intensity
The ﬁrm in the basic model selects the interval over which to advertise in period
1, with all targeted consumers in the interval becoming aware of the product. An alternative
structure would be to assume that the ﬁrm advertises to all consumers and sets ad intensity,
i.e., the probability that a consumer at a given location becomes aware of the new product.
If the ﬁrm can vary the (costly) intensity along the circle, say by choosing between two levels
— High (a consumer becomes aware with probability 1) and Low (a consumer becomes aware
with probability , 0 ≤1) — we expect all our ﬁndings to continue to hold. This is because
the ﬁrm will have an incentive to advertise High over a smaller interval around the product
location in the AR case compared to the Reviews and Benchmark cases; with all the results
on rating dynamics and expected proﬁts carrying through. This logic can be extended to any
arbitrary number of ad intensity levels (with higher levels more costly to execute).
Consider alternatively that the ad intensity the ﬁrm selects applies equally to all consumers
along the circle.
This can be due to several reasons, for example: (1) limited advertising
technology, i.e., the ﬁrm cannot single out segments that will receive greater or lower ad levels,
or (2) as suggested at the end of the previous extension, the ﬁrm has no information on the
product’s position and thus has no preference to advertise in one location vs. another. In this
restricted scenario, the results in Proposition 1 are qualiﬁed. In particular, prices and ad levels
are the same across the diﬀerent information structures in period 1. Yet rating dynamics still
exhibit some of the patterns in Proposition 2. Details are provided in the Technical Appendix.
25

Distribution Assumptions
The basic set up has three product-related quantities for which
a uniform distribution was assumed: quality ∼[02] location ∼[04] and idiosyn-
cratic consumer valuation ∼[01] Although these are fairly standard assumptions, which
have been used in prior literature (e.g., Kuksov and Xie, 2010, with respect to quality) and
simplify the analysis, the reader may wonder whether the ﬁndings presented are sensitive to
the distributional form.
With respect to quality, we analyzed the basic model using a general continuous distribution
function over [02] with mean 1. We ﬁnd that all the results reported in Propositions 1-3
are robust. With respect to the base consumer valuation , we similarly checked a general
continuous distribution over [01]Here we establish that the conclusions from Proposition
1 all continue to hold. Yet showing that the other propositions hold requires more structure on
the distribution function. These analyses are presented in the Technical Appendix.
With respect to product location, recall that the distribution of aﬀects how consumers
infer horizontal product ﬁt (absent any other information). While it is analytically intractable
to solve for a general distribution function for , we did analyze an alternative model whereby
aware consumers, i.e., those who received an ad in the ﬁrst period and all consumers in the
second period, perfectly know the product’s location (in some sense a point mass distribution
for ). We show that the results in Propositions 1-2 continue to hold under this structure.
As for Proposition 3, we ﬁnd that expected proﬁts are always highest in the Reviews case,
in contrast with the basic model where expected proﬁts could be highest in the AR case (see
the Technical Appendix for full details). By continuity, these conclusions hold for any general
distribution of over a small arc around the expected mean location.
Alternative Pricing Structures
A feature of the basic set-up is that the ﬁrm is able to
set a diﬀerent price in each period. This characteristic is reﬂective of many markets. However,
there are industries for which this structure is not well suited. For instance, when considerable
consumer backlash is triggered by a subsequent price change. There may also be costs or time
delays associated with adjusting prices, such as updating catalogs, signage, etc. (also known
as menu costs; see Mankiw, 1985), or there may be contractual rigidities that prevent frequent
price shifts (also known as staggered contracts; see Taylor, 1980). Such factors can deter ﬁrms
from adjusting prices. Moreover, in some markets the ﬁrm may not have much control in setting
prices, either because of regulation or long-term agreements (e.g., a studio is not able to aﬀect
26

theater ticket prices for a movie irrespective of its quality or production cost). On the demand
side, we assumed that second-generation consumers were able to observe the price history, i.e.,
they knew both 1 and 2in all information settings. While this is realistic in the Reviews
case, as the price paid can be backed out given the other information communicated, this may
be a strong assumption in the AR and Benchmark cases.
In the Technical Appendix, we analyze three diﬀerent pricing structures in which: (1) prices
are exogenous, (2) the ﬁrm sets one price for the entire game (i.e., the period 1 price applies
to period 2), (3) the ﬁrm sets price in each period but second-generation consumers do not
observe the period 1 price. We show that our main ﬁndings carry over to model variations (1)
and (2): the ﬁrm advertises less in the AR case than in the Benchmark and Reviews cases,
which drives much of the subsequent results on rating dynamics and welfare. One exception is
that in scenario (2) the single price set in the AR case can be lower than the Reviews’ price.
When price history is not observable (scenario (3)), the ﬁrm’s actions are unchanged in
the Benchmark and Reviews cases, yet are aﬀected in the AR case. Note that here, second-
generation consumers must form an expectation on 1, and the ﬁrm has an incentive to lower
the period 1 price in order to bump up the average rating of ﬁrst-generation buyers. Hence,
the ﬁrm not only selects a smaller ad interval but also a lower price in equilibrium compared
to the observable price history setting (and this price may even be lower than the Benchmark
and Reviews case prices). As a result of these actions, expected proﬁts in the AR case are
lower when the price history is unobserved compared to the basic model. Otherwise, similar
qualitative ﬁndings as in the main model hold when comparing the Reviews and AR cases, i.e.,
the AR ad interval will be smaller (as in Proposition 1) and the average rating dynamics will
exhibit the same patterns (as in Proposition 2).
Consumer Uncertainty about Firm Type
In the basic model, the ﬁrm’s incentive to
aﬀect ﬁrst-generation UGC is clearly linked to the fact that the ﬁrm cares about future proﬁts.
However, if some ﬁrms are forward looking (patient) while others only care about short term
proﬁts (impatient), and this information is private, second-generation consumers must try to
assess which ﬁrm they are facing in order to draw proper inferences.
To consider this situation, suppose that with probability 0.5 the ﬁrm is patient (as in
the basic model), whereas with probability 0.5 the ﬁrm is impatient and chooses 1 and to
maximize period 1 proﬁts only. An impatient ﬁrm would obviously select the same price and
27

advertising level in all information structures. Hence, if the patient ﬁrm chooses a diﬀerent
price, this reveals its type (separating equilibrium) and the analysis follows that in the basic
model. Another option for the patient ﬁrm is to mimic the price set by the impatient ﬁrm
(pooling equilibrium). In this instance, consumers do not know which ﬁrm they are facing and,
in equilibrium, their expectation of the advertising interval is an average of the intervals chosen
by the patient and impatient ﬁrms. As a result, in the AR case consumers overestimate the
quality of the patient ﬁrm (which still has an incentive to select a smaller ad interval) and
underestimate the quality of the impatient ﬁrm. This eﬀect will increase the expected proﬁts of
the patient ﬁrm and decrease those of the impatient ﬁrm. If pooling occurs in both the AR and
Reviews cases, then the comparison of the patient ﬁrm’s actions and expected proﬁts across
the two information structures is similar to that in the exogenous price case described above.19
4
Incorporating Social Interactions
In the basic model presented thus far, we assumed that all second-generation consumers are
aware of the product. This was meant to reﬂect settings whereby once a new product has been
in the marketplace for a full period, then either through WOM, observational learning, or media
coverage, consumers in period 2 are apprised of its existence.
While this is a reasonable assumption, which allowed us to focus on the implications of
various user-generated inputs available to second-generation consumers (average ratings or full
reviews), one wonders how micro-modeling the inter-generational awareness process might af-
fect our ﬁndings and whether new insights can be obtained. Furthermore, if indeed second-
generation awareness is contingent upon some form of social contagion from past buyers, then
one can expect demand in period 2 to be a direct function of the demand size in period 1.
To explore these issues in greater depth, we now relax the assumption of “automatic” second-
generation awareness and let it depend on social interactions with previous buyers.
Let second-generation consumer who is located at interact with a representative sample
of ﬁrst-generation consumers from a location chosen according to the following distribution:
with probability these consumers are located at , and with probability (1 −) their location
is drawn at random uniformly from around the circle. Consumer knows the general underlying
sampling process. If any of the sampled ﬁrst-generation consumers purchased the product, then
19Existence of these equilibria depends on model parameters; analysis available from the authors upon request.
28

consumer becomes aware of it; otherwise she remains unaware. The parameter (0 1)
thus captures to what extent a second-generation consumer is likely to be paired with a ﬁrst-
generation consumer who is exactly like her in terms of horizontal tastes— in other words the
degree of “homophily.” In particular, if →1consumer knows she is interacting with ﬁrst-
generation consumers that have the same location as she does, whereas if →0her interaction
is with people she is entirely unsure about their preference along the circle.
Once a second-generation consumer is aware of the product, we can consider two ways to
model how she gains more information about it. One option is to assume, as in the basic
setup, that she has access to UGC from ﬁrst-generation buyers, either in the form of an average
rating or full reviews. The other option is to assume that an aware second-generation consumer
learns exclusively from the ﬁrst-generation buyers she is paired with. We concentrate here on
presenting the results from the former setting, as it allows a clean comparison to the basic
model setup and bears on understanding the impact of various user-generated inputs on ﬁrm
behavior. We present results from analyzing the latter setting in the Technical Appendix and
show that most of the ﬁndings are qualitatively similar.
Recall that in Section 3.2 we explained that the pricing structure does not have a major
impact on the analysis of other variables of interest. Thus, for ease of exposition, we focus
here on a setting where prices are exogenously given. This simpliﬁes the derivations and allows
highlighting how micro-modeling awareness through cross-generational interaction aﬀects the
ﬁrm’s choice of advertising interval, welfare, and average rating patterns. We again solve for
the PBE of the game and require that consumer expectations on unobserved ﬁrm decisions be
fulﬁlled in equilibrium. All proofs for this section appear in the Technical Appendix.
4.1
Demand
It is easy to verify that the expressions for the demand and average rating of ﬁrst-generation con-
sumers carry over unchanged from the basic model of Section 3. Using superscript to denote
the setup with social network interactions, we can thus write 
1 = 1 = (1 + −−) 
with the mean net utility (i.e., average rating) of buyers 
1 () = 1 () = 1+(2−1)−(2−)−
2

The demand in period 2 depends on the inter-generation transmission of information. We
denote by −0
2
−
2
−
2
period 2 demand in the Benchmark, Average Ratings (AR),
29

and Reviews cases, respectively. In the Technical Appendix we establish that
−0
2
() = (1 −+ −+ −) −
2
() = (1 −+ −+ −) 
−
2
() = (1 −+ −+ −)
(9)
It is apparent from the expressions in (9) that the demand in period 2 diﬀers across infor-
mation structures. In particular, when no information is transmitted (Benchmark) demand is
independent of quality. However, when information is transmitted, demand depends on either
expected quality (AR) or actual quality (Reviews). Notice that with social interactions demand
in period 2 in the Benchmark and AR settings also depends on through the term −
This is because when second-generation consumers become aware of the product, their expected
utility from purchasing it depends on how close they think they are to its position, which, in
turn, depends on how likely they believe their awareness was generated by someone like them
and how close, on average, that ﬁrst-generation buyer is to the product’s location.
In equilibrium, as expectations are fulﬁlled, = and = , and we can write
−0
2
() = (1 −+ −+ −) −
2
() = (1 −+ −+ −) (10)
It is noteworthy that all the demand expressions have a multiplying factor of , the ad-
vertising interval size. This is intuitive, as only ﬁrst-generation consumers who were targeted
with advertising could have purchased the good and serve as a source of awareness for second-
generation consumers. Hence, it should not be surprising that, under all information structures,
the advertising interval the ﬁrm selects is larger in the social-interaction model studied here
than in the basic model. Put diﬀerently, because demand in period 2 directly depends on the
size of the demand from period 1, the ﬁrm has an incentive to advertise more extensively in
period 1 to generate a suﬃcient number of “social contagion agents”.
It is further noteworthy that period 2 demand in all cases depends on the homophily para-
meter . This is because greater homophily implies higher chances of becoming aware of the
product from someone whose preferences are similar, which has implications for how close to
the product’s location one expects to be and thus for assessing net utility from purchase.
30

4.2
Advertising
Solving for the optimal ad interval, we can state the following dependence on homophily.
Proposition 4 In the Benchmark and AR cases, the advertising interval the ﬁrm selects in-
creases in the homophily level. In the Reviews case, the advertising interval increases in the
homophily level if advertising is suﬃciently costly (0 () is large), consumers are suﬃciently
sensitive to the product match (is large), or consumers do not value quality suﬃciently (is
small). Otherwise, the advertising interval in the Reviews case decreases in the homophily level.
The intuition for Proposition 4 is as follows. As homophily gets stronger (increases),
probabilistically more second-generation consumers who are at a smaller than average distance
from the product are made aware of its existence. In the Benchmark and AR cases, aware
second-generation consumers do not learn the exact location of the product, but rather draw
an inference about their distance from it based on the ad interval they believe the ﬁrm selected
(). Hence, given these beliefs, from the ﬁrm’s point of view there is an incentive to increase
the advertising interval to gain additional second-generation consumers who would think they
are closer to the product than they actually are (as they don’t observe the actual chosen).
Of course, in equilibrium consumers’ beliefs have to be correct. Yet the only beliefs that work
to form a PBE and avoid deviation entail an ad interval that grows as homophily increases to
account for the ﬁrm’s incentive.
Intuition for the eﬀect of homophily in the Reviews case is as follows. When advertising is
relatively costly to execute, or when consumer sensitivity to product match/quality are such that
the return on advertising spend is low, the ad interval the ﬁrm chooses is in the range −1
2.
Consequently, expanding the advertising interval increases period 1 demand in locations that
are still relatively close to the product’s position. Greater homophily, by deﬁnition, means that
this action will increase awareness in period 2 at locations that are closer than average to the
product. This is beneﬁcial to the ﬁrm as more second-generation consumers will be willing
to buy, and justiﬁes the added advertising expenditure. The opposite occurs, however, when
advertising is relatively cheap to execute or consumer sensitivity to product match/quality are
such that the return on advertising spend is high; and the ad interval is hence in the range
−1
2In this case, many second-generation consumers who are relatively far away from
the product are made aware and may be unwilling to buy the product (since they know the
product’s exact location from reading the reviews and therefore how far it is from them). Thus,
31

as homophily increases, the ﬁrm is better oﬀcontracting the interval and focusing on consumers
in both generations who are closer to the product’s position.
We now compare the advertising interval selected in the various information structures.
Proposition 5 The advertising interval chosen is the largest in the Benchmark case, and is
larger in the Reviews than in the AR case: −−−0.
As in the basic model, the advertising interval in the AR case is smallest. However, Proposi-
tion 5 reveals a somewhat diﬀerent ordering among the other two cases. Speciﬁcally, the reason
that the advertising interval is the largest in the Benchmark case is as follows. Expanding the
ad interval results in more aware consumers in period 2 who presume they are closer to the
product than they actually are, because they rely on and not (which they do not observe)
to assess their expected distance from the product’s position. Hence, the ﬁrm has a strong
incentive to increase . Of course, in equilibrium it must be that = , but due to this
incentive the only set of beliefs that can work leads to a larger ad interval than in the other
cases. Note that although this incentive also exists in the AR case, there the ﬁrm has a strong
countervailing force pushing it to reduce the size of the ad interval in order to cause aware
second-generation consumers to bump up their assessment of quality (just as in the basic set
up, as explained in connection with Proposition 1). In the Reviews case, by contrast, because
second-generation consumers know the location and quality of the product with certainty, these
incentives to increase/decrease are absent.
4.3
Average Rating Dynamics
Turning to how the social interaction process impacts average rating dynamics, we have
Proposition 6 In the Benchmark case, the average rating decreases across periods. In the AR
and Reviews cases, the average ratings increase over time for a larger range of qualities in the
social-interaction setting compared to the basic model.
The intuition for the ﬁrst part of Proposition 6 follows a similar logic as in the basic model:
with no information transferred, second-generation buyers have, on average, lower utility from
the product than ﬁrst-generation buyers. For the second part, we begin by noting that the
period 2 average rating is higher in the social-interaction setting compared to the corresponding
32

basic model values. The reason is that, for any positive level of homophily, the aware consumers
in period 2 tend to originate from locations that are closer in proximity to the product’s
position than in the basic model. Furthermore, according to the observation made following
the derivation of the period 2 demand functions ((9) and (10)), in all informational cases the
advertising interval is larger in the social-interaction setting. This implies that in period 1
consumers who are farther away from the product’s location are made aware of it.
Thus,
period 1 ratings tend to be lower in the social-interaction setting compared to the basic model.
Taken together, the tendency with social interactions for lower ﬁrst-generation ratings and
higher second-generation ratings produce the pattern described in Proposition 6.
4.4
Welfare: Firm Proﬁts and Consumer Surplus
The following proposition presents key properties of the expected proﬁts.
Proposition 7 In the social-interaction setting, expected proﬁts in all informational cases in-
crease in homophily. Moreover, expected proﬁts are lowest in the Benchmark case and highest
in the AR case. That is, ΠΠΠ0.
In all three information settings, greater homophily implies that second-generation con-
sumers who become aware of the product are more likely to be similar in taste preferences
to ﬁrst-generation buyers (who are close to the product’s position) and hence have a greater
willingness to buy. This increases demand and thus proﬁts.
The proposition reveals that, somewhat surprisingly, with social interactions expected proﬁts
are always highest in the AR case. This is because, in all information settings, the ﬁrm has an
incentive to allow second-generation consumers to interact with more ﬁrst-generation buyers in
order to increase awareness. This is accomplished by expanding the advertising interval beyond
the “ideal” level the ﬁrm would have chosen had advertising been observable (and which would
result in maximal expected proﬁts). But in the AR case, the ﬁrm also has an incentive to shrink
the advertising interval in an eﬀort to bump up the average rating (to aﬀect second-generation
quality inferences). Hence, one can show that the equilibrium advertising interval chosen by
the ﬁrm under AR is closer to the ideal level, compared to the Benchmark and Reviews cases.
Finally, there are two forces aﬀecting CS in the social-interaction setup: 1) a larger ad-
vertising interval increases CS, and 2) for a given advertising interval, when consumers have
33

more information they make better purchase decisions and their surplus increases. From these
observations and Proposition 5, it follows that −≥−.
5
Concluding Remarks
In this paper, our primary goal has been to study how a ﬁrm’s strategic marketing decisions
depend on the nature of customer-generated content available to prospective buyers. In partic-
ular, we developed a two-period model in which a ﬁrm introduces a new product and selects its
advertising and pricing strategies. The ex-ante quality of the product is unknown, and a sub-set
of consumers become aware of the product’s existence when targeted by the ﬁrm’s advertising.
Consumers who purchased the product in the ﬁrst period might be able to share their experi-
ence with consumers in the second period. We examined three information transfer structures:
a Benchmark case where no evaluations are passed on; an Average Rating (AR) case where
second-generation consumers only observe the average net utility of those who purchased; and
a Reviews case where second-generation consumers observe the joint distribution of net utilities
and taste locations of those who purchased.
The basic model we analyzed is one where all second-generation consumers become aware
that the new product has been launched, reﬂecting settings where word of the product’s exis-
tence has spread widely (e.g., through the media or observational learning). In this context,
we ﬁrst show that while the ﬁrm selects the same advertising interval in the Reviews and the
Benchmark cases, its advertising scope in the AR case is more limited. The reason behind this
result is that if consumers expect the ﬁrm in the AR case to select the same advertising reach
as in the Reviews case, the ﬁrm has an incentive to deviate and target a smaller segment of
consumers closer to the product’s location. This deviation would increase the average rating
seen by second-generation consumers who would infer a higher quality product; thus generating
a greater proﬁt for the ﬁrm. In equilibrium, the ﬁrm indeed selects a smaller ad segment, such
that if consumers’ beliefs are consistent with this level it does not wish to deviate. As a result
of targeting consumers closer to the product’s location in the AR case, the ﬁrm charges a higher
price to take advantage of the greater willingness to pay.
We further presented results regarding the dynamics of average ratings. In particular, as
customer-generated assessments become more informative, the average rating is more likely to
increase over time. This is because when reviews are available, a second-generation consumer
34

learns not only the product’s quality but also its positioning and is able to make purchase
decisions without any uncertainty; thereby avoiding the possibility of experiencing negative
utility ex-post. In comparison, when only an average rating is available such learning of the
product’s position is not possible; hence some customers will end up being disappointed and
reﬂect this in their rating.
Combining this result with the diﬀerent advertising strategies,
whereby the ﬁrm in the AR case targets consumers closer to the product’s position, leads
to an interesting pattern: the average rating will be higher in period 1 in the AR case but
higher in period 2 in the Reviews case. In addition, we characterized conditions for average
ratings to decrease across generations. Interestingly, such a declining pattern happens when
ﬁrst-generation buyers discover that the product is of relatively high quality, and their UGC
prompts more second-generation consumers to purchase, many of whom will have very low net
utility, which will be reﬂected in their modest ratings.
We also analyzed the impact of the information structure on welfare. We ﬁnd that expected
proﬁts may have a non-monotonic dependence on the amount of UGC conveyed. Speciﬁcally,
if the marginal return on advertising spending is high — which occurs if advertising is cheap,
consumers are insensitive to product ﬁt, or consumers value quality suﬃciently — proﬁts will
be highest in the AR case. This occurs because the ﬁrm’s incentive to restrict the ad interval
to aﬀect second-generation consumer inferences counterbalances the incentive to choose a large
ad interval to increase period 1 demand, leading to an ad level that is close to “ideal” (i.e., the
level that would maximize proﬁts had consumers been able to observe the actual advertising
interval). By contrast, when the marginal return on advertising is low, the latter incentive
is weak and the distortion from limiting the ad interval dominates, leading to lower expected
proﬁts in the AR case compared to the Reviews case.
We discussed a number of possible robustness checks and extensions to the basic setup (in
Section 3.2). Moreover, we presented an alternative setting where awareness in period 2 is a
function of social interaction across generations. Speciﬁcally, a second-generation consumer
interacts with a sample of ﬁrst-generation consumers whose location along the circle is either
the same as her own, reﬂecting homophily, or randomly drawn. In this context, we ﬁnd that
the ﬁrm casts the widest advertising net when no information is transferred across generations
(Benchmark case) and that, as in the basic setup, the smallest ad interval is in the AR case.
Furthermore, as the degree of homophily increases the ﬁrm tends to advertise more extensively
in the ﬁrst period. This is primarily true in the Benchmark and AR cases because second-
35

generation consumers don’t know the product’s exact position. Hence, if the ﬁrst-generation
consumers they interact with are more likely to be similar to them, they infer greater proximity
to the product’s location. This gives the ﬁrm an incentive to target additional consumers in
period 1 to serve as social contagion agents, so that more second-generation consumers will
presume they are closer to the product than they actually are. In equilibrium, beliefs have to
be correct, hence to accommodate the ﬁrm’s incentives the ad interval (and consumers’ belief
about it) increases in homophily. Lastly, with social interactions we ﬁnd that expected proﬁts
always increase in the degree of homophily, attaining the highest level in the AR case. In other
words, limited UGC in the form of an average rating beneﬁts the ﬁrm.
5.1
Managerial Implications
Our ﬁndings have implications for ﬁrms, regulators, and platforms such as Airbnb.
First,
in terms of advertising strategy, ﬁrms that enable and require detailed comments (Reviews),
compared to ﬁrms that only feature average ratings (AR), should expand their advertising
program when launching a new product.
Second, with respect to pricing, companies that focus on soliciting and displaying only aver-
age ratings should consider initially pricing higher compared to when full reviews are available
(and read). At the same time, with any form of user-generated evaluations, a company should
be ready to adjust its price over time as market perceptions of quality are revealed.
Third, a key observation emanating from our analysis is that the amount of UGC transferred
across generations can result in diﬀerent average rating patterns over time.
In particular,
a new product should expect to have a higher average rating soon after its release in the
AR case compared to when full Reviews are available. But that gap should diminish over
time and even ﬂip. Furthermore, there can be scenarios where more information transferred
(Reviews) results in an increasing pattern for average ratings, whereas limited information
(AR) results in a decreasing pattern — despite holding quality constant. So the ﬁrm needs to
factor in how much information is transferred to draw the right conclusions about its product
from average ratings data. Some empirical evidence we collected seems consistent with these
implications. Speciﬁcally, we randomly sampled ten electronic products at Amazon, which up
until recently had required review comments in addition to ratings when posting evaluations,20
20After many years, in late 2019 Amazon modiﬁed its policy to allow customers to leave only ratings, with
review comments optional (Del Rey, 2020). Our analysis (till August 2019) spans a period where reviews were
36

and at WalMart.com, which allows inputting just ratings (comments are optional and often left
blank). We ﬁnd that the average rating for the same sampled products is signiﬁcantly higher in
the ﬁrst median of the data at Wal-Mart compared to Amazon. In addition, the average rating
exhibits a signiﬁcant declining trend at Wal-Mart but an increasing trend at Amazon (see the
Technical Appendix for details of this analysis and a discussion of its limitations, particularly
as they pertain to the quality of information transferred on these platforms).
Fourth, several ﬁrms and platforms (e.g., Open Table’s mobile app) only solicit ratings from
past customers, and present future consumers with the average rating across all respondents.21
Our analysis suggests that this strategy can make sense in environments where targeted adver-
tising is relatively inexpensive to execute or consumers don’t have strong horizontal preferences
but highly value quality. Other ﬁrms (e.g., Best-Buy) encourage and even require detailed
reviews rather than just ratings on their webpages— a strategy that can make sense when ad-
vertising is costly or when consumers care about product ﬁt. One must also bear in mind the
positive externality generated when a ﬁrm introduces a system for detailed reviews— consumer
surplus is enhanced. Thus, regulators should consider motivating companies to create outlets
for reviews and encourage prospective buyers to read them. The results also provide a rationale
for certain platforms, such as Airbnb, to invest extensively in their review system— including
highlighting informative reviews, prompting consumers to post reviews, making reviews easily
searchable, and maintaining review integrity. By doing so, they may increase third-party sellers’
proﬁts (as presumably advertising is relatively diﬃcult for them to execute) and consumers’
surplus; thereby attracting many participants on both sides of the platform.
Lastly, in market contexts where consumers rely heavily on WOM from past buyers to
become aware of innovations, the ﬁrm can beneﬁt from advertising more extensively early on in
the product lifecycle to produce social-contagion agents. This is especially true if “like-minded”
consumers with a high degree of homophily are expected to connect with each other. Therefore,
the practice of narrowly seeding only the most enthusiastic consumers for a product (in the sense
that it more closely ﬁts their tastes) may be misguided in some UGC settings. In addition,
facilitating social interactions between like-minded consumers, say through friend-bring-friend
incentives, coupled with displaying only the average rating can serve the ﬁrm well proﬁt-wise.
still required on the platform.
21In many other cases, while detailed reviews are possible to get to eventually, the ﬁrst screen a consumer is
shown only reveals the average ratings of various options. Such is the case on Google Play with respect to apps
and mobile games. So a consumer’s initial reaction to an oﬀering may only be based on the average rating.
37

Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1.
The proof follows from three lemmas (Lemmas 1-3), noting that, in
equilibrium, = .
Lemma 1 In the Benchmark case, the equilibrium price and advertising strategies solve the following
equations: 0
1=1+−0
2
0
2=1+−
2

³
1+−0
2
´2
= 0 (0).
Proof.
In period 2 the ﬁrm solves 0
2= arg max(0
2 ()) or 0
2= arg max(1 + −−),
which leads to 0
2=1+−
2
In period 1 the ﬁrm solves (00
1) = arg maxΠ = 1 () +(0
20
2 (0
2))
−() = (1 + −−) + 
¡
0
2
¡
1 + −−0
2
¢¢
−() Because 
¡
0
2
¡
1 + −−0
2
¢¢
is independent of (), 0
1 and 0 are chosen to maximize period 1 proﬁts. A ﬁrst-order analysis and
then substituting = 0 yields 0
1=1+−0
2
and 0
1
¡
1 + −0−0
1
¢
= 0 (0) Substituting in
the ﬁrst-order condition for 0
1 we get
³
1+−0
2
´2
= 0 (0).
Lemma 2 In the AR case, the equilibrium price and advertising strategies solve the following equa-
tions:

1 =1+−
2

2 =1+−
2

³
1+−
2
´2
−1+−
2
= 0 ¡
¢
. We have 0 and 
1 0
1.
Proof. In period 2, the ﬁrm solves 
2 = arg max
¡

2
()
¢
or 
2
= arg max(1 + −−) 
A ﬁrst-order analysis yields 
2 =1+−
2
In period 1, the ﬁrm solves
¡

1
¢
= arg maxΠ
= 1 () +
¡

2 
2
¡

2
¢¢
−() = ((1 + −−)) +
¡

2
¡
1 + −−
2
¢¢
−() Note that 
¡

2
¡
1 + −−
2
¢¢
is independent of 
1
. Thus, the ﬁrst-order con-
dition for 
1
yields 
1 =1+−
2
. Because is only piece-wise diﬀerentiable in , a ﬁrst-order
condition for over the entire range [01] is not well deﬁned. We deal with this in three steps. First,
we derive a ﬁrst-order condition for for each of the three ranges over which 
is well deﬁned.
Second, we argue that an equilibrium value of must solve the ﬁrst-order condition in the middle
range of the three, thus establishing a unique equilibrium candidate. Third, we show that there is
no proﬁtable deviation from the unique equilibrium candidate even outside the range covered by the
ﬁrst-order condition.
To begin, note that, 
¡

2
¡
1 + −−
2
¢¢
depends on through the eﬀect of on 1,
which is an input for and thus also for 
2
. In particular, if
(
2 (1+−−
2 ))

exists, by the
38

Leibnitz rule it equals 
(
2 (1+−−
2 ))

. Developing this expression further we get that

¡

2
¡
1 + −−
2
¢¢

= 

¡

2
¡
1 + −−
2
¢¢

=

Ã

¡

2
¡
1 + −−
2
¢¢

2

2

+ 
¡

2
¡
1 + −−
2
¢¢



!
=

µ¡
−−2
2
+ 1
¢ 
2

+ 
2


¶
= 1
2
µ
(−+ 1) 

¶

Notably, 
is well-deﬁned in all but at most 1 point, which is determined by the value of −. At
that point ∈{02} and hence (−+ 1) ∈{1 −1 −+ 2}. Thus 
¡
(−+ 1) 

¢
can be approximated to an arbitrary level of accuracy by ignoring this point. In equilibrium, = ,
implying that 
= −
anywhere outside the aforementioned point. Thus, the ﬁrst-order condition
can be solved using 
= −
and we should further analyze separately non-local deviations.
To be more speciﬁc, we can assess 
¡
(−+ 1) 

¢
by treating each of the diﬀerentiable
parts of separately. That is, 
¡
(−+ 1) 

¢
= () 
¡
(−+ 1) 
|= 0
¢
+() 
¡
(−+ 1) 
|= 2
¢
+() 
¡
(−+ 1) 
|∈(02)
¢
, where (),
(), and () capture the probabilities that is such that we are in each of the regions. Next,
we recall that, as long as −(−)

∈[02] , () =−(−)

and thus (−) = 
(−). Be-
cause ∈[01], we have that |−| ∈
h
0

i
. As a result, either () = 0 or () = 0, and
() +() = min
n
1
2

|−| 1
o
and () = 1 −min
n
1
2

|−| 1
o
.
Noting further that 
³
(−+ 1) 
|= 0−(−)

6= 0
´
=

³
(−+ 1) 
|= 2−(−)

6= 2
´
= 0we get that 
¡
(−+ 1) 

¢
=
³
1−min
n
1
2

|−| 1
o´

³³
−(−)

−+ 1
´

³
−

´
|−(−)

∈(02) ∈[02]
´
= −
³
1−min
n
1
2

|−| 1
o´ ³
1 −−(−) +
³
|−(−)

∈(02) ∈[02]
´´
= −
³
1−min
n
1
2

|−| 1
o´ ³
1 −−(−) +
³
|−(−)

∈(02) ∈[02]
´´
= −
³
1−min
n
1
2

|−| 1
o´ ³
1 −−(−) +
³
|∈
³
(−)

2+(−)

´
∩[02]
´´

We next ﬁnd the expressions for 
¡
(−+ 1) 

¢
when = , , and :

¡
(−+ 1) 
|= ¢
=−
¡
1 −+ (|∈(02))
¢
= −(1 −+ ) ;

¡
(−+ 1) 
|¢
= −
³
1−min
n
1
2

(−) 1
o´ ³
1 −−(−)
+
³
|∈
³
(−)

2
i´ ´
= −
³
1−min
n
1
2

(−) 1
o´ ³
1 −+ −(−)
2
´
;

¡
(−+ 1) 
|¢
= −
³
1 −min
n
1
2

(−) 1
o´ ³
1 −−(−)
+
³
|∈
h
02+(−)

´´ ´
=−
³
1−min
n
1
2

(−) 1
o´ ³
1 −+ −(−)
2
´

39

Put diﬀerently

µ
(−+ 1) 

¶
= −
µ
1−min
½1
2

(−) 1
¾¶ µ
1 −+ −(−)
2
¶

We now go back to analyzing the ﬁrst-order condition with respect to , that is,
((1 + −−)) +
(
2 (1+−−
2 ))

= 0 () or
((1 + −−)) +1
2
µ
(−+ 1) 

¶
= 0 () 
(11)
Noting that in equilibrium = , and denoting the equilibrium candidate value of by . The
ﬁrst-order condition must satisfy

¡
1 + −−
¢
−(1 −+ )
2
= 0 ¡
¢

Because the LHS is decreasing in and the RHS is increasing in this has a unique solution. Substi-
tuting in the ﬁrst-order condition for 
1
we get
³
1+−
2
´2
−(1+−)
2
= 0 ¡
¢
.
We have established that the ﬁrst-order condition above is a necessary equilibrium condition.
To prove that it is also a suﬃcient equilibrium condition, we are left to prove that the result-
ing survives large deviations.
There is no need to worry about a deviation to a lower level of
because having a range of values of for which a change in does not aﬀect reduces the
ﬁrm’s incentive to decrease in order to increase . This can be made apparent by noting that

¡
(−+ 1) 
|¢

¡
(−+ 1) 
|= ¢
.
Suppose next that the ﬁrm considers a large deviation to some b. Plugging as and
bas the decision variable, condition (11) becomes

¡
1 + −−
¢
−1
2
µ
1−min
½1
2


¡
b−¢
1
¾¶ Ã
1 −+ −
¡
b−¢
2
!
= 0 (b) 
Note ﬁrst that b= provides a solution to this condition.
Therefore, it is suﬃcient to show
that the second-order condition holds.
The second-order condition for the case that bis
2
4
¡
1 + 2−−
¡
b−¢¢
−00 (b) 0 if 1
2


¡
b−¢
1, and it is −00 (b) 0
if 1
2


¡
b−¢
1. The latter condition always holds because (·) is convex. To see that the for-
mer holds, note that 2
4
¡
1 + 2−−
¡
b−¢¢
−00 (b) 2
4(1 + 2−) −00 (b) Then, recall
40

that for all , 
00 () to get that
2
4(1 + 2−) −00 (b) 


4 (1 + 2−) −
=

³
4 (1 + 2−) −1
´



µ02
4 (1 + 04) −1
¶
=
(007 −1) 0
Finally, we are required to show that a deviation to bthat lies exactly on the boundary condition
1
2


¡
b−¢
= 1 is not proﬁtable. This is always the case because the ﬁrst-order condition when
1
2


¡
b−¢
= 1 prescribes that b.
Lemma 3 In the Reviews case, the equilibrium price and advertising strategies solve the following
equations: 
1 = 1+−
2

2 = 1+−
2

³
1+−
2
´2
= 0 ¡
¢
That is, 
1 = 0
1
1
and =
0 .
Proof. The derivation of 
2 is identical to the derivation of 
2
, substituting for .
In period 1 the ﬁrm solves
¡

1
¢
= arg maxΠ = 1 () + 
¡

2 
2
¡

2
¢¢
−()
or
¡

1
¢
= arg maxΠ = ((1 + −−)) + 
¡

2
¡
1 + −−
2
¢¢
−() We
note that 
¡

2
¡
1 + −−
2
¢¢
is independent of () and therefore 
1 and are chosen
to maximize period 1 proﬁts and we get 
1 =
1+−
2
and 
1
¡
1 + −−
1
¢
= 0 ¡
¢

Substituting in the ﬁrst-order condition for 
1 we get
³
1+−
2
´2
= 0 ¡
¢
. Thus, = 0 and

1 = 0
1 with the implied relationships to and 
1
.
Proof of Proposition 2. The proof follows from three lemmas (Lemmas 4-6).
Lemma 4 In the Benchmark case, 0
2 0
1.
Proof. We show that 0
2 1 (0). Recall that 0
2 = 0
1 −(1−0)
2
. Thus, denoting 0
1 = and
0 = , the condition 0
2 1 (0) becomes
1−(−(1−)
2
)−+(2−1)
2
1+(2−1)−−
2
or 1 which
always holds.
Lemma 5 Let = 1 +

3
¡
−1
¢
and note that 1 for all ∈(01). In the AR
case, 
2

1
if and only if .
Proof. In equilibrium, the condition for 
2

1
is 1+−−2
2
1+(2−1)−−1
2
. Noting that

2
= 
1
+ (−1)−(1−)
2
the condition becomes
1+−−(1+ (−1)−(1−)
2
)
2

1+(2−1)−−1
2
or
1 + 
3(−1) .
41

Lemma 6 In the Reviews case, there exists such that 
2 
1 if and only if . Moreover,
≥. That is, ratings increase for a larger range of qualities than in the AR case.
Proof. The mean utility of a second-generation purchasing consumers is

2 =3
¡

2
¢2 −6
2 + 6
2 −6
2 +322−6+ 6+ 42−6+ 3
6
¡
1 + −
2 −
¢

Recall that 
2 = 
2 and set = 
2 = 
2 , we get:

2 =32−6+ 6−6+ 322−6+ 6+ 42−6+ 3
6 (1 + −−)
1 + −−
2
= 
2 
Note that with some algebra the above inequality becomes 1
320which always holds. In addition,
we have 
1 ≥
1 .
To see why recall that and note that in both the AR and review
treatments 1=1+−
2
and therefore, 1 () =1+(2−1)−−1
2
=
1+(2−1)−−1+−
2
2
= −3
4−1
4+1
4 which is decreasing in . Subsequently, for any such that 
1 
2
it is also
true that 
1 
2 , and for any for which 
1 
2 it is also true that 
1

2
. That is, if
there exists such that in the Reviews case the average rating of second-generation buyers is lower
than the average rating of ﬁrst-generation buyers if and only if then it must be the case that
≥.
To show that there exists such a we show that 
2 −1 () is monotonically decreasing in for
any . To do that, note that for a general , 
2 = 
1 + −+−
2
We next prove that 
2 −1 ()
is monotonically decreasing in for any in two steps. First we prove the hypothetical claim that if

2 = 
1 then 
2 −1 () is monotonically decreasing in for any . Then, we show that, holding
ﬁxed 
1 , 
2 is monotonically decreasing in 
2 −
1 for any (note that 
2 −
1 is increasing in ).
Given that 1 () is independent of 
2 −
1 conditional on 
1 , this completes the proof as required.
We begin by showing that
((
2 −1())|
2 =
1 =)

= −1
6
(32−6+6−6+322−6+6+42−6+3)
(+−−1)2
and has the opposite sign of (32 −6+ 6−6+ 322 −6+ 6+ 42 −6+ 3), which,
in turn, is increasing in . Therefore, it is suﬃcient to show that (32 −6+ 6−6+ 322 −
6+6+42−6+3 0) for = 0. That is, to show that (32+6−6+42−6+3 0),
which holds because (32 +6−6+ 42 −6+ 3) is decreasing in , and when substituting = 1
we get 42 0which always holds.
Finally we show that, holding ﬁxed 
1 , 
2 is monotonically decreasing in 
2 −
1 for any ,
which is equivalent to showing that 
2 decreases in 
2 , which, in turn, holds by construction.
42

Proof of Proposition 3. We ﬁrst prove that ΠΠ0 using a revealed preference argument.
We note that if the ﬁrm were to choose in the Reviews case the same period 2 price as in the Benchmark
case, the proﬁts would have been identical in the Reviews and Benchmark cases. We then note that
in the Reviews case the ﬁrm is able to choose the same price as in the Benchmark regardless of the
quality, whereas the reverse is not true, in the Benchmark case the ﬁrm is not able to replicate the
period 2 pricing of the Reviews case. The concavity of the proﬁt function in the second period price
suggests that the ﬁrm is choosing the unique proﬁt maximizing second period price in each case. Thus,
ΠΠ0 as required.
To prove the claim for the relationship between Πand Π, note that in equilibrium, sec-
ond period revenues are always the same in the Reviews and AR cases.
Subsequently, in equi-
librium, ΠΠif and only if ﬁrst period proﬁt is higher in the Reviews case.
That is, if

1
¡
¡
1 + −−
1
¢¢
−
¡
¢

1
¡
¡
1 + −−
1
¢¢
−
¡
¢
or, substi-
tuting in 
1 and 
1
and rearranging³
1+−
2
´2
−
¡
¢
³
1+−
2
´2
−
¡
¢
Let
∗= arg max
¡1+−
2
¢2 −(). Then ∗solves
¡1+−∗
2
¢2 −∗¡1+−∗
2
¢
= 0 (∗), which
can be re-written as follows
µ1 + −∗
2
¶2
−
µ1 + −∗
2
¶
+ (1 −∗)
µ1 + −∗
2
¶
= 0 (∗) 
Recall that and satisfy
³
1+−
2
´2
= 0 ¡
¢
and
³
1+−
2
´2
−(1+−)
2
= 0 ¡
¢

respectively. Therefore, ∗. Furthermore, if ∗→1 then the conditions for ∗and 
converge and thus ∗= . And similarly, if ∗→0 then the conditions for ∗and converge
and we have that ∗= . As a result, there exist ∈(01) such that if ∗then ΠΠ
and if ∗then ΠΠ.
Next, consider again the expression
¡1+−∗
2
¢2 −∗¡1+−∗
2
¢
= 0 (∗). The LHS decreases
in ∗and the RHS increases in ∗. Therefore, any parameter change that increases the LHS leads to
an increase in ∗and any change that increases the RHS leads to a decrease in ∗. This explains the
eﬀect of the advertising cost function on when ∗→1 vs. ∗→0.
A simple derivative shows that the LHS decreases in and increases in . Therefore, ∗decreases
in and increases in . Subsequently,
1. for any 0 and , there exists [] such that if then ∗is suﬃciently large so that
ΠΠand if then ∗is suﬃciently small so that ΠΠ.
43

2. for any 0 and , there exists
£

¤
such that if then ∗is suﬃciently small so that
ΠΠand if then ∗is suﬃciently large so that ΠΠ.
Finally, we prove that 
¡
¢
(0) and 
¡
¢

¡
¢
. To see that 
¡
¢

(0), note ﬁrst that the identical period 1 price and advertising interval implies that the ﬁrst period
consumer surplus is the same in the Benchmark and Reviews cases. To prove that the expected period
2 consumer surplus is higher in the Review case, it is suﬃcient to show that: (1) 
2 |=1 0
2|=1,
and (2) 
2 is increasing and convex in . This is suﬃcient because we know that 
¡

2
¢
= 0
2 and

2 is increasing in .
(1) 
2 |=1 0
2|=1: 0
2|=1 = 1−+
4
and 
2 |=1 = 32−6+6+72−6+3
12(1−+)
therefore 
2 |=1 −
0
2|=1 = 1
3
2
−+1 0 as required.
(2) 
2 is increasing and convex in : Substituting 
2 = 1+−
2
into

2 =
3(
2 )
2−6
2 +6
2 −6
2 +322−6+6+42−6+3
6(1+−
2 −)
and taking the derivative with respect to we
get 
2
= 
12
(322−6+6−2−6+3)
(−+1)2
0where the inequality holds because 
2
has the same sign
as 322−6+ 6−2−6+ 3 = 3 + 322−2−6+ 6(1 −) 3 −2−6and 1
5. Fur-
thermore, 2
2
2 = 2
32
2
(−+1)30
To see that 
¡
¢

¡
¢
, we note that in period 1 the AR case exhibits a higher price
and lower advertising interval. In period 2 the AR and Reviews cases have the same price and the same
number of purchases, but in the Reviews case demand is more centered around the correct location and
therefore generates higher consumers utilities on average, as captured by the higher average ratings
(see proof of Lemma 6). ¥
44

References
Barnes, Brooks (2011), ‘ ‘Green Lantern’ ﬁzzles at the box oﬃce’, The New York Times . June, 19.
Bass, Frank M., Dipak C. Jain and Trichy Krishnan (1994), ‘Why the bass model ﬁts without decision
variables’, Marketing Science 13(3), 203—223.
Brandes, Leif, David Godes and Dina Mayzlin (2020), ‘What drives extremity bias in online reviews?
theory and experimental evidence’, Working Paper .
CarGurus (2006), ‘2001 Ford Escape overview’, Car Gurus . November, 2.
Chen, Yubo and Jinhong Xie (2008), ‘Online consumer review: Word-of-mouth as a new element of
marketing communication mix’, Management Science 54(3), 477—491.
Chevalier, Judith A. and Dina Mayzlin (2006), ‘The eﬀect of word of mouth on sales: Online book
reviews’, Journal of Marketing Research 43(3), 345—354.
Chintagunta, Pradeep K., Shyam Gopinath and Sriram Venkataraman (2010), ‘The eﬀects of online
user reviews on movie box oﬃce performance: Accounting for sequential rollout and aggregation
across local markets’, Marketing Science 29(5), 944—957.
Del Rey, Jason (2020), ‘Amazon can’t end fake reviews, but its new system might drown them out’,
Vox . February, 14.
Godes, David B. (2017), ‘Product policy in markets with word-of-mouth communication’, Management
Science 63(1), 267—278.
Godes, David B. and Jose C. Silva (2012), ‘Sequential and temporal dynamics of online opinion’,
Marketing Science 31(3), 448—473.
Hughes, Mark (2017), ‘ ‘Wonder Woman’ powering to $800 million this weekend’, Forbes . August, 18.
Jiang, Baojun and Bicheng Yang (2019), ‘Quality and pricing in a market with information sharing’,
Management Science 65(1), 272—285.
Joshi, Yogesh and Andres Musalem (2020), ‘When consumers learn, money burns: Signaling quality
via advertising with observational learning and word of mouth’, Marketing Science . Forthcoming.
Kuksov, Dmitri and Chenxi Liao (2019), ‘Opinion leaders and product variety’, Marketing Science
38(5), 812—834.
45

Kuksov, Dmitri and Ying Xie (2010), ‘Pricing, frills, and customer ratings’, Marketing Science
29(5), 925—943.
Mankiw, Gregory N. (1985), ‘Small menu costs and large business cycles: A macroeconomic model of
monopoly’, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 100(2), 529—538.
Moon, Sangkil, Yoonseo Park and Yong Seog Kim (2014), ‘The impact of text product reviews on
sales’, European Journal of Marketing 48(11/12), 2176—2197.
Nair, Harikesh (2019), Diﬀusion and Pricing Over the Product Life Cycle, Elsevier, chapter Handbook
of the Economics of Marketing.
Rocklage, Matthew D. and Russell H. Fazio (2020), ‘The enhancing versus backﬁring eﬀects of positive
emotion in consumer reviews’, Journal of Marketing Research 57(2), 332—352.
Schoenmuller, Verena, Oded Netzer and Florian Stahl (2020), ‘The polarity of online reviews: Preva-
lence, drivers and implications’, Journal of Marketing Research . Forthcoming.
Sun, Monic (2012), ‘How does the variance of product ratings matter?’, Management Science
58(4), 696—707.
Taylor, John B. (1980), ‘Aggregate dynamics and staggered contracts’, Journal of Political Economy
88(1), 1—23.
Ulrich, Karl and Steven Eppinger (2015), Product Design and Development, sixth edn, McGraw-Hill
Education.
Urban, Glenn L. and John R. Hauser (1993), Design and Marketing of New Products, second edn,
Prentice-Hall.
Warren, Tom (2017), ‘Microsoft conﬁrms Surface Book 2’s power problem’, The Verge . November,
21.
Wiggers, Kyle (2017), ‘Everything we know about Samsung’s Galaxy Note 7 recall’, Digital Trends .
May, 17.
46