TITLE: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-Then-Choose Choice Models
JOURNAL: Management_Science
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2020.3681
---

LBS Research Online
A Aouad, V Farias and R Levi
Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
Article
This version is available in the LBS Research Online repository: https://lbsresearch.london.edu/
id/eprint/1426/
Aouad, A, Farias, V and Levi, R
(2021)
Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models.
Management Science, 67 (6). pp. 3368-3386. ISSN 0025-1909
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2020.3681
INFORMS (Institute for Operations Research and Management Sciences)
https://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/abs/10.1287/mns...
Users may download and/or print one copy of any article(s) in LBS Research Online for purposes of
research and/or private study. Further distribution of the material, or use for any commercial gain, is
not permitted.

Assortment Optimization Under
Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
Ali Aouad
Management Science and Operations, London Business School, Regent’s Park, London, United Kingdom NW14SA,
aaouad@london.edu
Vivek Farias
Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139,
vivekf@mit.edu
Retsef Levi
Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139,
retsef@mit.edu
Consider-then-choose models, borne out by empirical literature in marketing and psychology, explain that
customers choose among alternatives in two phases, by ﬁrst screening products to decide which alternatives
to consider, before then ranking them. In this paper, we develop a dynamic programming framework to
study the computational aspects of assortment optimization under consider-then-choose premises. Although
non-parametric choice models generally lead to computationally intractable assortment optimization prob-
lems, we are able to show that for many empirically vetted assumptions on how customers consider and
choose, our resulting dynamic program is eﬃcient. Our approach uniﬁes and subsumes several specialized
settings analyzed in previous literature. Empirically, we demonstrate the predictive power of our modeling
approach on a combination of synthetic and real industry data sets, where prediction errors are signiﬁcantly
reduced against common parametric choice models. In synthetic experiments, our algorithms lead to practi-
cal computation schemes that outperform a state-of-the-art integer programming solver in terms of running
time, in several parameter regimes of interest.
Key words : Assortment Planning, choice models, dynamic programming, consider-then-choose.
1.
Introduction
What selection of products should an e-retailer display for each search query? How does a brick
and mortar retailer determine the product assortment in each store? The challenge of ﬁnding a
selection of products that maximizes revenue or customer satisfaction, in the face of heterogeneous
customer segments, who have diﬀerent preferences across products, has been recognized in several
industries as a strategic and operational driver of success.
In a highly diﬀerentiated market, choosing an optimal assortment requires to model before-
hand the customers preferences to predict accurately how the demand shares of products evolve
in response to variations in the oﬀer set, through what is called a choice model. Building an eﬀec-
tive choice model strikes a delicate balance between several desired attributes. Indeed, as choice
1

2
models become more detailed, both their estimation from data, and the resulting optimization
problems face computational barriers, due to what is known as the curse of dimensionality. In fact,
assortment optimization is combinatorial in nature and yields computationally hard problems. The
present paper demonstrates that a class of choice models, referred to in the literature as consider-
then-choose models, renders assortment optimization tractable under a broad variety of modeling
primitives. We present a unique dynamic programming formulation of the problem, and show that
a state space collapse in this problem yields the aforementioned tractability in several practical
cases. Outside of theory, we empirically demonstrate the predictive power of our modeling approach
using both synthetic and real industry data sets. We illustrate the computational practicality of
our approach through extensive comparisons with state-of-the-art integer programming solvers.
Choice modeling and assortment optimization. Generally speaking, choice models can be
divided into parametric and non-parametric models, the latter of which are eﬀectively general dis-
tributions over preference lists of products. Until recently, most of the work related to assortment
optimization has focused on parametric choice models, primarily attraction-based models, in which
customer’s utility is speciﬁed through a relatively small number of parameters. This parametric
approach has various beneﬁts, including the computational tractability of the resulting choice mod-
els and their ability to incorporate contextual product and customer features. The survey by K¨ok
et al. (2009) and book by Talluri and Van Ryzin (2006) present excellent overviews on such topics,
and our literature review in Section 1.2 will summarize the state of the art here. In a nutshell,
the literature presents us with the following dichotomy: on the one hand, for common parametric
models such as the Multinomial Logit (MNL) and variants of the Nested logit (NL) model, we
now have eﬃcient algorithms available for assortment optimization. These models posit structural
assumptions about the customers’ substitution behavior (Debreu 1960, Ben-Akiva and Lerman
1985). However, in attempting to consider further generalized models, such as a discrete mixture
of MNL models (MMNL), the assortment optimization is no longer easy with the best known algo-
rithms having a complexity that scales exponentially in the number of customer segments (Bront
et al. 2009, Rusmevichientong et al. 2014, D´esir and Goyal 2014).
In an attempt to construct a data-driven nonparametric approach to choice modeling, several
studies in operations management (Rusmevichiengtong et al. 2006, Farias et al. 2013, van Ryzin
and Vulcano 2014) have considered choice models where preferences are explicitly expressed as
distributions over ranked lists. Here, each customer type purchases the highest rank item in his
preference list made available, or leaves without making any purchase. In this context, Farias et al.
(2013) have developed a robust estimation methodology, where the sparsity of the distribution
scales with the amount of data available, allowing to attain better prediction accuracy than sev-
eral common parametric models. However, there is relatively little known on the computational

3
tractability of assortment optimization under these non-parametric models heretofore, beyond a
few special cases of interest (Honhon et al. 2012). In fact, sparsity is generally insuﬃcient to allevi-
ate the computational hardness of assortment optimization, and the problem was recently shown
to be NP-hard, even to approximate by Aouad et al. (2018).
Consider-then-choose models. As explained earlier, in its utmost generality, the nonparamet-
ric assortment optimization problem is subject to strong computational limitations. As such, this
study seeks to identify structural properties and behavioral assumptions that yield tractable assort-
ment optimization formulations. Speciﬁcally, the aforementioned parametric and non-parametric
models place a general condition on the customer’s decision making process, where customers list
all her options available and then pick her most desirable from that list (for example by speci-
fying a utility function over every and each product). In reality, one may naturally expect this
process to be diﬀerent with a customer using a set of simple rules to immediately disregard the vast
majority of choices, and then rank (and select from) the small number of options left. We refer to
such models as consider-then-choose models, wherein the consideration set is the restricted set of
products considered. The history of these consider-then-choose ideas originates in the marketing
and psychology literature. The idea of whittling down choices into a consideration set was ﬁrst
posited by Campbell (1969) and formulated into a theory of the customer’s behavior by Howard
and Sheth (1969). In his seminal study, Hauser (1978) observed that the consideration set structure
is in itself a signiﬁcant explanatory factor of choice heterogeneity in a given population. We review
the evolution of this approach to modeling choice in our literature review in Sections 1.2 and 4.
However, our objective with considering such models is twofold:
1. We believe that these models have the ability to model real-world data. This belief is motivated
by empirical observations made in the antecedent literature on whether and how consideration
sets are formed. Furthermore, our modeling approach is tested on real purchase panel data sets.
We observe that the ﬁtted consider-then-choose models achieve superior predictive accuracy
in comparison with commonly-used parametric choice models.
2. This consider-then-choose structure can be leveraged to mitigate the complexity of assortment
optimization problems. Indeed, a close examination of the reduction proof by Aouad et al.
(2018) reveals that the primary source of complexity in assortment optimization problems
stems from the structure of the customers’ consideration sets. We show that many empirically-
vetted assumptions on how customers consider and choose lead to tractable assortment opti-
mization problems.
1.1.
Our results
Our main contribution is the development of a uniﬁed algorithmic framework to study the compu-
tational tractability of assortment problems under a family of preference-list based choice models

4
that has been empirically vetted in the marketing literature, speciﬁcally, consider-then-choose mod-
els. Moreover, our framework allows a direct connection between modeling assumptions on the
customers’ choice behavior and the resulting computational complexity. Consequently, we show
that several practical assumptions regarding how customers consider and choose lead to tractable
assortment optimization models. Our dynamic programming algorithm, based on a divide-and-
conquer approach in a speciﬁc graph representation, provides computationally eﬃcient heuristics
for more general preference list distributions, and outperforms a state-of-the-art integer program-
ming solver (IP) for several classes of instances. We demonstrate the predictive power of the pro-
posed consider-then-choose modeling framework against common parametric models, using both
synthetic experiments and real-world data sets. Our industry partner operates the largest purchase
panel in the US, which provides longitudinal purchase information across retailers and product
categories. In what follows, we provide a more detailed sketch of our contributions.
Dynamic program and graph representation. Motivated by the empirical observation that
the structure of the consideration sets largely explains choice heterogeneity, we start by formulat-
ing in Section 3 a dynamic program for unique-ranking distributions, where customers consider
arbitrary subsets of products, but their relative ranking preferences are derived from a common
permutation. We introduce a bipartite graph representation of the problem, which is the key ingre-
dient of our algorithmic approach and analysis. Indeed, the connected components of this graph
capture a natural decomposition of the instance. Our dynamic program makes use of this decompo-
sition procedure in a divide-and-conquer fashion. In contrast to standard dynamic programming,
our algorithm relies upon a careful and exhaustive generation of the computational tree prior to
solving the recursive equation. This approach allows for a state space collapse, which substantially
reduces the complexity under structural assumptions regarding how customers consider and choose.
Speciﬁcally, we show that the complexity analysis generally boils down to counting the number of
connected subgraphs induced by the graph traversal. We prove that our algorithm runs in polyno-
mial time for very sparse distributions, when the number of preference-lists grows logarithmically
in the number of products. Also, we show that even in the worst case, our algorithm dominates
the brute force enumerative approach.
The extension to general preference list-distributions requires additional technicalities, which are
described in Section 5. Also, our results naturally extend to capacitated assortment optimization
subject to a cardinality constraint on the size of the assortment, using more general objective
functions (e.g. social welfare). These results are separately described in Appendix EC.3.
Tractable consider-then-choose models. In Section 4, we investigate several models of con-
sideration sets that stem from documented assumptions on the customers’ purchasing behavior.

5
Table 1
Summary of results: polynomial running time guarantees for consider-then-choose choice models.
Consideration sets
Ranking functions
Running time
Sections
Induced intervals
Neighborhood of a
ranking function
O(N 4K)
4.1
Laminar properties
O(N 2K2)
4.2
Disjunction on d features
O(N 3Kd+2)
4.3
Intervals
Quasi-convex permutations
O(N 3K)
6.1
Two-feature compensatory
Two-feature compensatory
O(N 4K3)
6.2
The parameter N describes the number of product alternatives, K denotes the number of preference lists (sparsity of the
distribution), and d is a complexity parameter corresponding to the number of features considered by customers upon forming
their consideration set in the disjunctive model. The notion of induced intervals means that there exists some arbitrary numbering
according to which the consideration sets are intervals.
We derive polynomial running time bounds for the corresponding dynamic program in the unique-
ranking setting. In Section 6, we investigate more general classes of distributions that combine
heterogeneous consideration sets along with ranking heterogeneity. Our analytical ﬁndings and the
corresponding structural assumptions are summarized in Table 1 and further discussed in Section 2.
Empirical performance. Our numerical experiments on synthetic instances, described in Sec-
tion 7.1, demonstrate that the algorithm is eﬃcient in practice. We compare its performance
against an integer programming formulation implemented using a state-of-the-art commercial solver
(GUROBI v6.5). We observe that the IP approach is intractable to solve large-scale instances of
the quasi-convex model, contrary to the proposed dynamic program approach. Even under generic
consideration set structures, our approach dominates the IP solver in several regimes of parameters.
Lastly, we demonstrate in Section 7.2 the predictive power of our modeling approach against
a benchmark formed by “small” mixtures of Multinomial Logits (MMNL). The goal is to predict
the purchase probabilities of products in various assortments. We conduct numerical experiments
on real-world data sets provided by our industry partner, in three distinct product categories.
The errors in out-of-sample predictions of the purchase probabilities are reduced under standard
metrics in all data sets. In synthetic experiments, our consider-then-choose model outperforms the
benchmarks under several realistic ground truth models.
1.2.
Related literature
Our work relates to two streams of literature, namely the operational literature on choice modeling
and assortment planning, and the marketing literature on consider-then-choose models.
Choice models and assortment optimization. In the last two decades, growing product prolifer-
ation and diﬀerentiation have motivated a paradigm shift in demand modeling from independent
demand models to choice-based models, to capture the substitution eﬀects in a given product
category (Mahajan and Van Ryzin 2001, K¨ok and Fisher 2007, Ratliﬀet al. 2008, Vulcano et al.
2010). In this context, assortment optimization has received a great deal of attention in the oper-
ations management literature. Most of the focus has been on variants of this problem under the

6
widespread attraction-based models such as the Multinomial Logit (MNL) model, the discrete
Mixture of MNLs (MMNL), etc. Under MNL preferences, the problem was shown to be poly-
nomially solvable (Talluri and van Ryzin 2004, Rusmevichientong et al. 2010), and the solution
methods were further advanced to handle more general settings, such as robust optimization formu-
lations (Rusmevichientong and Topaloglu 2012), and totally-unimodular constraints (Davis et al.
2013). However, the tractability of assortment optimization under the attraction-based models
does not carry over to heterogeneous customer segments. That is, even with two segments the
MMNL-based problem was shown to be NP-complete by Bront et al. (2009) and Rusmevichientong
et al. (2014). For a ﬁxed number of customer segments, D´esir and Goyal (2014) developed a fully
polynomial-time approximation scheme. The computationally eﬃciency is contingent on modeling
a small number of customer segments. Given these computational barriers, recent work in assort-
ment optimization attempts to identify new probabilisitic models leading to tractable assortment
optimization problems (Blanchet et al. 2013, Davis et al. 2014, Li et al. 2015).
On the other hand, there has been an emerging literature on preference list-based choice mod-
els (Rusmevichiengtong et al. 2006, Farias et al. 2013, Jagabathula and Rusmevichientong 2016).
Here, the heterogeneity in choice is explicitly encoded through a distribution over preference lists.
This approach to modeling choice is very general, e.g., all attraction-based models can be viewed as
parametrized distributions over preference lists. Farias et al. (2013) proposed an eﬃcient method-
ology to make robust revenue predictions and derived recovery guarantees under certain technical
conditions. To overcome the dimensionality of the estimation problem, van Ryzin and Vulcano
(2014) proposed the “market discovery” algorithm: starting from an initial collection of preference
lists, the support of the distribution is enlarged iteratively by generating a preference list that
increases the log-likelihood value, using dual information. While estimation methods have been
investigated in this setting, assortment optimization remains mostly untapped. On the positive side,
Honhon et al. (2012) developed tailor-made dynamic programming ideas for several special cases,
which are subsumed by our analytical results. On the other hand, Aouad et al. (2018) characterized
the approximability class under generic distributions, showing that the assortment optimization
problem is hard to approximate within any sub-linear factor in the number of products.
Consider-then-choose literature. A steady line of research in marketing and psychology has stud-
ied various aspects of the decision-making strategies employed by customers. One key idea in this
literature is that individuals apply simple decision heuristics in order to whittle down their choices
to a restricted set of alternatives (Howard and Sheth 1969), and thereby, alleviate the cognitive bur-
den in multi-alternative decision tasks (Tversky and Kahneman 1975). This idea has been justiﬁed
through various empirical ﬁndings.

7
• Explanatory power: In eﬀect, the consideration set structure conveys important information
about the customer choices in a statistical sense. The seminal work of Hauser (1978) showed
that the heterogeneity in choice decisions is largely explained by the consideration sets. Even
with a crude assumption on the ranking decisions (formed uniformly at random), the consid-
eration set structure still explains nearly 80% of the uncertainty in customer choices captured
by a richer model, which combines the consideration sets with logit-based rankings. This
observation can be explained in that the ﬁrst stage decisions eliminate a large fraction of the
alternatives, and the resulting consideration sets are comprised of a few products in most
product categories (Belonax and Mittelstaedt 1978, Reilly and Parkinson 1985).
• Predictive power: The notion of consideration sets has been popularized in data applications
through the observation that two-stage decision models (i.e., combining consideration set
formation with random utility maximization) generally yield more accurate predictions. This
observation is borne out by empirical studies in several application domains, including market
share forecasting for new product launches (Urban 1975, Silk and Urban 1978), customer
choice modeling (Roberts and Lattin 1991), and more recently, in the area of risky decision-
making (Brandstatter et al. 2006).
• Structural modeling: Another stream of literature has been focused on justifying the considera-
tion sets through rational agent models. When the consideration sets are formed endogenously,
the screening stage enables to balance search eﬀorts with potential gains; see for example the
models developed by Hauser and Wernerfelt (1990), Roberts and Lattin (1991) or Payne et al.
(1996). Furthermore, screening heuristics were shown to be rational under limited time and
knowledge (Gigerenzer and Goldstein 1996, Gigerenzer and Selten 2002).
Motivated by this line of literature, the modeling approach we develop subsequently is centered
around the notion of consideration sets. In Section 2, we review several families of consideration
set models, commonly used in marketing studies, that are considered in this paper. It is worth
mentioning that, prior to our work, the paper by Jagabathula and Rusmevichientong (2016) also
incorporates a choice model based on consideration sets. However, the optimization problem con-
sidered therein relates more closely to combinatorial pricing.
2.
Modeling Approach and Problem Formulation
In what follows, we begin by formulating the assortment optimization problem in its general form.
Next, we will summarize various modeling assumptions considered in this paper, against which
assortment optimization is shown to be tractable.

8
2.1.
Assortment Optimization Problem
Throughout the paper we use the index i ∈{1,...,N} = [N] to denote one of N products, each is
associated with a price Pi. In addition, we use the index j ∈{1,...,K} = [K] to denote one of K
customer-types, each is associated with a consideration set Cj ⊆[N] that speciﬁes the products she
is willing to buy and a ranking function σj (that is, a permutation over products) that reﬂects her
relative preferences. We let (λ1,...,λK) be the probability vector, where λj denotes the respective
fraction of customer-type j in the population. The decision maker has to choose an assortment A ⊆
[N] that maximizes the total revenue. Speciﬁcally, let Rev (j,A) denote the revenue obtained from
customer type j given that assortment A is stocked. Note that if A∩Cj = ∅then Rev (j,A) = 0 and
otherwise Rev (j,A) = Pi(A,j), where i(A,j) = arg mini∈A∩Cj{σj (i)} is the most preferred product
of customer-types within A. In other words, the no-purchase events corresponds to cases where the
assortment does not intersect with the customer’s consideration set. Therefore, the objective is to
ﬁnd an assortment A that maximizes the expected revenue: P
j∈[K] λj · Rev (j,A).
We let C = {Cj : j ∈[K]} be the collection of consideration sets and Σ = {σj : j ∈[K]} be the
set of the ranking functions. In contrast to generic preference list distributions, our approach
captures consider-then-choose purchasing behaviors by imposing constraints on the sets C and Σ,
respectively. Below, we will provide a bird-eye description of the ingredients used to model C and
Σ, while the precise mathematical deﬁnitions are stated in the corresponding parts of the paper.
2.2.
Modeling Approach
In order to model C and Σ, we turn our attention to common assumptions used in marketing studies
to describe the process by which customers whittle down the universe of products to generate their
consideration set. In their literature survey, Hauser et al. (2009) explain that a consideration set can
generally be viewed as the outcome of various screening rules. Roughly-speaking, a screening rule
is a minimal requirement relative to one given product feature. To formalize this notion, suppose
that each product i ∈[N] is represented in by a vector x(i) ∈Rd in a d-dimensional feature space.
With this notation at hand, a screening rule designates a cut-oﬀlevel te ∈R on some given feature
e ∈[d], implying that only products i ∈[N] satisfying x(i)
e ≥te are considered. An important line
of research in marketing aims at understanding how the formation of consideration sets can be
modeled as a combination of screening rules. Generally-speaking, these approaches can be classiﬁed
into conjunctive, disjunctive and compensatory models. In what follows, we introduce each model
class in turn, and provide a roadmap of the technical results obtained in the paper.
Conjunctive models. One common assumption is that customers form their consideration sets
through a conjunction of screening rules, i.e., a product is considered if each one of the speciﬁed
screening rules are all satisﬁed. (In other words, features are used to eliminate products, and

9
customers are increasingly picky as more features are presented to them.) Mathematically speaking,
we assume that for each consideration set C ∈C, there exists a vector (t1,...,td) such that
C =
\
e∈[d]
{i ∈[N] : x(i)
e ≥te} .
It is worth noting that the conjunctive models have been supported by a number of empirical studies
that benchmark the explanatory power of various consideration set models, such as the papers
by Pras and Summers (1975), Brisoux and Laroche (1981), Laroche et al. (2003) to mention a few.
More recently, through the structural estimation of a general two-stage choice model, Gilbride and
Allenby (2004) ﬁnds that the parameters associated with conjunctive screening rules are statistically
signiﬁcant, contrary to other screening rules.
It is easy to verify that, for a large enough dimension d, any arbitrary collection of consideration
sets C can be expressed through the outcomes of a conjunctive model. As such, in this paper, we
will either require that the number of features is small, or we operate under additional structural
assumptions. Speciﬁcally, in Section 4, we study the following settings (and other extensions):
• Intervals (Section 4.1). We assume that d = 2 and the features are inversely-related features.
One canonical example is when customers have price and quality cut-oﬀs. The consideration
sets C arising from the combination of the two screening rules form a collection of intervals.
• Laminar properties (Section 4.2). Here, the combinations of screening rules are described by
paths in a rooted tree, where each node represents a screening rule. This tree can be interpreted
as the decision tree describing the preferences of the customer population. In this setting,
the number of features d can be arbitrarily large, yet the tree structure imposes additional
restrictions. If we interpret the combination of screening rules as the outcome of a random
experiment, the tree structure imposes probabilistic correlations across the screening rules.
Disjunctive models. The conjunctive model has often been benchmarked against an alter-
native approach, known as disjunctive rule models. In this setting, a product is considered if at
least one of speciﬁed screening rules is satisﬁed (customers are less picky when more features are
presented to them.) In formal terms, we assume that for each consideration set C ∈C, there exists
a a vector (t1,...,td) such that
C =
[
e∈[d]
{i ∈[N] : x(i)
e ≥te} .
It is worth mentioning that the disjunctive models are far less popular than their conjunctive
counterpart; see for example the empirical studies conducted by Pras and Summers (1975), Gilbride
and Allenby (2004).
In Section 4.3, we show that assortment optimization is tractable under this model speciﬁcation
for a small number of features d. Speciﬁcally, we establish a parametric complexity bound that
grows polynomially for a ﬁxed d.

10
Compensatory models. Finally, we consider the case where the customers’ decision process
is compensatory, i.e., lower levels on certain features can be compensated by higher levels on other
features. Here, the consideration sets are formed through a linear combination of screening rules.
Speciﬁcally, for each consideration set C ∈C, there exists a utility vector u ∈Rd (i.e., each entry
of this vector is a feature weight) along with a cut-oﬀlevel t ∈R such that
C = {i ∈[N] : u · x(i) ≥t} .
This approach has received some attention in empirical studies. Interestingly, the compensatory
model was shown to be robust in explaining the customers’ decision process even when features are
uniformly weighted, i.e., u = 1; see the works of Einhorn and Hogarth (1975) and Dawes (1979).
Similar to the above models, the compensatory model can subsume any collection C when the
feature space is high dimensional. Our main result is to establish that assortment optimization is
tractable under a two-dimensional feature spaces, i.e., d = 2.
Ranking heterogeneity. The above discussion has been centered on the collection of consid-
eration sets C. We now describe the collections of rankings Σ considered in the paper. To ease
the exposition, our algorithmic framework is introduced in an incremental way. First, we focus on
the heterogeneity of the consideration sets and start our discussion assuming that the collection
of rankings Σ is a singleton. Here, we assume that there exists single ranking order common to all
customer types, i.e., σj = σ, and the heterogeneity in preferences stems only from the heterogeneity
of the consideration sets. We refer to this setting as the unique-ranking model. As shall be seen
subsequently, the unique-ranking setting already subsumes several choice models studied in pre-
vious literature, and even in this setting, assortment optimization is computationally intractable.
Speciﬁcally, it was shown by Aouad et al. (2018) that the problem under the unique-ranking model
is NP-hard to approximate within factor O (N 1−ϵ) for any ϵ > 0.
Our algorithmic approach and analysis carry over in the presence of heterogeneity in ranking
decisions. Speciﬁcally, the unique-ranking assumption is relaxed in the following cases:
• Σ is formed by similar rankings arising from the local perturbations of a central permutation
(Appendix EC.1.5). That is, the relative preference order between two products i,j can be
swapped only when |i −j| ≤O(1).
• Σ is the class of quasi-convex permutations (Section 6.1). Here, the ranking function is uni-
modal with respect to some numbering of the product.
• Σ is formed by two-dimensional linear utility functions (Section 6.1). Speciﬁcally, in the com-
pensatory setting described above, the ranking is inferred by the utility function u(i) = u·x(i)
over the products i ∈C.
We refer the reader to Section 6 for a detailed mathematical description of these settings. The
technical claims established in the paper for combinations of C and Σ are summarized in Table 1.

11
Additional remarks. It is worth mentioning that, while each model is motivated by an explicit
feature representation, the proposed algorithmic approach only makes use of the combinatorial
properties of C and Σ. Thus, we will treat the product features as latent when estimating the corre-
sponding choice models in Section 7.2. In addition, we emphasize that the above discussion focuses
on the consideration set models studied in this paper; therefore, it is far from being exhaustive.
For a broader review of the existing models, we refer the reader to the surveys by Hauser et al.
(2009), Payne et al. (1996) or Bettman et al. (1998) and to the references therein.
3.
Dynamic Program Under Unique-Ranking Distributions
In this section, we present a dynamic programming (DP) formulation under unique-ranking distri-
butions. As some obstacles must be surmounted to consummate our approach in the general case,
the algorithm for arbitrary preference list distribution is described separately in Section 5, to ease
the exposition. We formulate the dynamic program in two parallel ways, the ﬁrst corresponds to a
traditional recursive formulation and the second is an appropriate graph representation.
Preliminaries. Recall that an instance of the assortment problem is described by the set of
parameters N,K,Σ,C,σj,Cj,λj. Assuming that Σ = {σ}, without loss of generality the product
indices can be rearranged according to the σ-ordering. That is, product 1 is the most preferred one,
and N is the least preferred one – to lighten the notation, the reference to σ is omitted hereafter.
In what follows, we use [X] to denote the set {1,...,X}. For any set S ⊆[N], we use min(S) and
max(S) to denote the minimal and maximal index products in S, respectively.
State space and objective function. The state space is formed by all pairs of subsets (S,T),
where S is a subset of products in [N] and T is a subset of types in [K]. Speciﬁcally, we let J(S,T)
be the maximum expected revenue that can be obtained from choosing an assortment of products
within S to satisfy the customer-types in T. In the subproblem, we assume that only customers in
T can occur and their arrival probabilities are directly induced from the original instance without
normalization. Formally, the subproblem (S,T) is formulated as follows:
J(S,T) = max
A⊆S
X
j∈T
λj · Rev (j,A) .
Graph Representation. We next introduce a bipartite graph representation G associated
with each instance of the problem. The partite sets are formed by (i) the set of products, each of
which is represented by a node, and (ii) the set of customer-types [K]. There is an edge between
a customer-type node and a product node if the latter is included in the consideration set of the
former. That is, we deﬁne the graph G = ([N],[K],E), where E = {(i,j) ∈[N] × [K] : i ∈Cj}. This
graph induces the family of subgraphs G[S,T] associated with each subproblem (S,T), that is,
G[S,T] = (S,T,ES,T), where ES,T = {(i,j) ∈E : i ∈S and j ∈T}. The lemma below asserts that

12
1   
A   
2   
4   
3   
B   
C   
5   
D   
Customer-types 

Products 

J ([5], C) = J ({1, 3, 4}, {A, B}) + J ({2, 5}, {C, D})
C
Figure 1
Decomposition of the instance according to the connected components of the graph representation.
the partition of G[S,T] into its connected components1 captures a decomposition of the instance
(S,T) into several subproblems that can be solved independently. This decomposition scheme,
represented in Figure (1), is the key to our recursion.
Lemma 1. Assuming that the connected components of G[S,T] are described by the collection of
subgraphs (G[Su,Tu])u∈[r], where Su denotes a subset of product nodes in S and Tu is a subset of
type nodes in T, then J(S,T) = Pr
u=1 J(Su,Tu).
Proof
It is suﬃcient to prove that the expected revenue generated in (S,T) by any assortment
A ⊆S decomposes into the sum over u ∈[r] of the revenues generated in each subproblem (Su,Tu)
by the respective assortment Au = A ∩Su. Let j be a customer-type in Tu. The main observation
is that customer-type j’s most preferred product within the assortment A is the same as the one
he prefers when faced with the assortment Au. Indeed, by connectivity, any product in Cj ∩S that
is considered by customer j, necessarily belongs to Su. Since (Su)u∈[r] forms a partition of S, an
optimal assortment A for subproblem (S,T) is the union of optimal assortments Au ⊆Su for each
subproblem (Su,Tu).
□
Base case. If S = [N] and T = [K], then J(S,T) corresponds to the original problem we wish
to solve. Using Lemma 1, this problem can be broken-down into separate optimization problems
according to the connected components partition. From this point on, we may assume without loss
of generality that connectivity is an invariant of the subgraphs examined by the recursion.
Recursive step. We consider the subproblem (S,T) such that G[S,T] is a connected subgraph.
We deﬁne i as the most preferred product among product nodes S, i.e., i = min(S). The decision
(or action) made by the dynamic program for state (S,T) is whether to stock product i in the
1 A connected component in a undirected graph (V,E) is a set of nodes S which are all mutually connected (i.e.,
between every two nodes i,j ∈S, there exists a path formed by edges of E), and there does not exists a path from a
node in V \ S to a node in S.

13
assortment or not. Next, we describe graph operations on G[S,T] that correspond to each alter-
native. As these graph operations decompose G[S,T] into more reﬁned connected components, a
natural recursion consists in examining the immediate reward and reward-to-go induced by each
stocking decision.
Case 1: Product i is stocked. Let T(i) be the customer-types whose consideration sets contain
product i. The unique-ranking order implies that any product added to the assortment at some
later point of the recursion is less preferred than i by any customer-type in T(i). As a result, we
can compute the expected revenue generated by their purchase of product i. In addition, since
i is more preferred than any product that is stocked at some later point of the recursion, the
customer-types T(i) can be discarded from this point on. Thus we represent the reward-to-go as
the optimal expected revenue associated with the residual subproblem (S \ {i},T \ T(i)). In the
graph representation, the decision to include i in the assortment corresponds to removing node
i and its adjacent edges from the graph as well as deleting all nodes in T(i) and their adjacent
edges. Due to these graph operations, the residual subgraph G[S \ {i},T \ T(i)] is potentially not
connected anymore. By Lemma 1, the subproblem can be broken-down according to the connected
components partition. If (S+
u ,T +
u )u∈[r(+)] are the resulting subproblems, the expected revenue is
Pi · P
j∈T (i) λj + Pr(+)
u=1 J(S+
u ,T +
u ) .
Case 2: product i is not stocked. All the customers in T remain unsatisﬁed and the reward-
to-go is that associated with subproblem (S \ {i},T). The corresponding graph operation is the
deletion of node i and its outgoing edges, and consider the residual subgraph G[S \ {i},T]. Let
(G[S−
u ,T −
u ])u∈[r(−)] describe the connected components of the residual subgraph. Then, by Lemma 1
it follows that the expected revenue is Pr(−)
u=1 J(S−
u ,T −
u ) .
Combining the two decisions, the dynamic programming recursion is:
J(S,T) = max

Pi ·
X
j∈T (i)
λj +
r(+)
X
u=1
J(S+
u ,T +
u ) ,
r(−)
X
u=1
J(S−
u ,T −
u )

.
(1)
State space collapse. In a naive implementation of the algorithm, one could solve the problem
for all possible pair (S,T). However, this approach is inherently intractable and could be in the worst
case as bad as 2N+K. However, the dynamic program does not need to examine all corresponding
subproblems to solve the initial instance. In fact, the recursion formula provides an algorithmic
procedure to determine the precise “minimal” number of subproblems needed to be solved. In
contrast to a standard dynamic program, we will not assume that the state space is known a priori,
and carefully generate a computational tree by processing the products from 1 to N (i.e., according
to the unique order σ) adding nodes to the tree based on the recursion described above. The
algorithm requires a two-pass implementation: ﬁrst the computational tree is built by generating
all subproblems of interest, using the recursive formula (1), then an optimal assortment is obtained
by backward induction.

14
Complexity analysis. We let S denote henceforth the exact state space that proceeds from
the previous observation. Namely, S represents a collection of distinct subproblems, each of which
belongs to the computational tree generated by the recursion. We now argue that the running
time complexity is O(NK · |S|). Indeed, building each node of the computational tree requires at
most O(NK) operations. This is the number of operations required to update the graph, compute
the new connected components in O(NK) operations and check whether each new subproblem
already belongs to the computational tree in O(N +K) operations using an appropriate search data
structure, where each subproblem is encoded by an N + K-binary string. Then, the subproblems
are solved backwards using the recursive formula with a total running time complexity of O(K ·|S|),
taking O(K) operations at each step to solve Equation (1). As a result, the complexity analysis
boils down to estimating the size of the state space S. In the worst case, the number of connected
subgraphs is still exponential. However, we establish in the next theorem that the size of the state
space is at most min(2N,N · 2K), instead of the naive 2N+K. Hence, the algorithm is eﬃcient for
applications in which the distribution over preference lists has a sparse support. It is worth noting
that the running time is polynomial for K = O(log(N)). Also, for K = O(1), the running time is
quadratic in the number of products, instead of the brute force approach in time O(N K).
Theorem 1. The size of the state space is at most min(2N,N ·2K). The running time complexity
is quadratic in N for a constant number of types K, and polynomial for K = O(log(N)).
State space mapping. In order to prove Theorem 1, we introduce a fundamental characterization
of the state space. Speciﬁcally, we construct an injective mapping from any state of the recursion
(S,T) ∈S to a subset of the products {1,...,N}2. As explained below, this mapping is the central
piece of our analysis in the next sections, and considerably simpliﬁes the proof techniques used to
upper bound the running time under speciﬁc consideration set models.
Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne the projection Φ from the collection of subproblems S (i.e., subproblems
in the computational tree) onto the collection of subsets of {1...N} as follows:
Φ : S →P([N])
(S,T) 7→[min(S)]
\ [
u∈T
Cu
!
.
In other words, each subproblem (S,T) is mapped to the set of products exactly covered by the
consideration sets T in the interval [min(S)]. In the following lemma, we show that Φ is injective,
meaning that the size of the state space is equal to |Φ⟨S⟩|. Intuitively, the mapping Φ(·) provides
a transformation of the state space into a simpliﬁed form, through which we can uniquely count
the connected subgraphs generated by the recursion.
2 A function f is said to be injective when x ̸= y imply that f(x) ̸= f(y).

15
Lemma 2 (Central Lemma). The mapping Φ : S →2[N] is injective, and thus, |S| = |Φ⟨S⟩|.
In order to establish Theorem 1, it remains to observe that for every state (S,T) ∈S, the deﬁnition
of Φ(S,T) only depends on min(S) and T, for which there exists at most N ·2K unique combinations.
On the other hand, Φ⟨S⟩⊆P([N]), and thus 2N is a natural upper bound on the size of the state
space.
Proof of Lemma 2
We assume (S1,T1), (S2,T2) are two subproblems that are generated by the
recursion, such that Φ(S1,T1) = Φ(S2,T2). By construction, G1 = G[S1,T1] and G2 = G[S2,T2] are
two connected subgraphs.
Since G1 is connected, there exists u ∈T1 such that (min(S1),u) is an edge of G1, meaning that
min(S1) ∈Cu. As a result, min(S1) = max(Φ(G1)). By symmetry, we obtain:
min(S2) = max(Φ(G2)) = max(Φ(G1)) = min(S1) .
We infer from the connectivity of the subgraph G[S1,T1] that S1 ⊆∪u∈T1Cu. Since the set of
products examined at previous steps of the recursion is contained in [min(S1) −1], we infer the
equality S1 = ∪u∈T1 (Cu ∩[min(S1),N]). By a symmetric argument, S2 = ∪u∈T2 (Cu ∩[min(S2),N]).
As a result, what remains to be proven is simply that T1 = T2. Assume ad absurdum that
T2 \ T1 ̸= ∅and let u′ ∈T2 \ T1. Under this assumption, we establish the following property. The
proof is deferred to Appendix EC.1.1.
Claim 1. Cu′ ∩S1 = ∅.
The latter claim implies that there exists no edge between customer-types in T2 \T1 and product
nodes S1 ∩S2. In addition, there exist no edges between customer-type nodes T2 ∩T1 and product
nodes S2 \S1. Indeed, there would exist otherwise u ∈T1 and i ∈Cu ∩S2, such that i /∈S1. By noting
that min(S2) = min(S1), we infer that i ∈Cu ∩[min(S1),N]. By construction of our recursion, we
obtain i ∈S1, which gives a contradiction. To conclude, we observe that G[S2 \ S1,T2 \ T1] and
G[S2 ∩S1,T2 ∩T1] are distinct connected components of G[S2,T2], contradicting the connectivity
of the latter subgraph.
□
Finally, we derive a parametric bound on the state space, as a function of the consideration sets
diameter. To this end, we deﬁne Diam(C) as the maximal diameter of a consideration set in C:
Diam(C) = max{max(C)−min(C) : C ∈C}. The next claim comes as an immediate consequence of
Lemma 2, by observing that the projected sets in Φ⟨S⟩have a diameter smaller than Diam(C).
Corollary 1. The size of the state space is at most N · 2Diam(C). Hence, the running time
complexity is polynomial when Diam(C) = O(log(N)).

16
4.
Consideration Set Structures
In this section, we identify several consideration set models that stem from behavioral assumptions,
for which |S| is polynomial in the input size.
4.1.
Induced Intervals Structure
Definition 1. A collection of consideration sets C is a family of induced intervals if it forms a
collection of intervals when numbered according to some arbitrary permutation π : [N] →[N], i.e.,
π⟨Cj⟩is an interval for any customer-type j ∈[K].
Using the screening rule formalism of Section 2, it can be veriﬁed that this property arises when
the consideration sets are formed as a conjunction of two screening rules, meaning that each
consideration set in C is of the form {i ∈[N] : x(i)
1 ≥t1 ∧x(i)
2 ≥t2} for some cut-oﬀlevels t1,t2, and
the corresponding features are inversely related, i.e., for any products i1,i2 ∈[N], x(i1)
1
≥x(i2)
1
implies that x(i1)
2
≤x(i2)
2
. As a practical example, price and quality are signiﬁcant drivers of the
customers’ choices, who might use the following screening rules:
• Budget constraint: Customers would eliminate at an early stage of the purchasing process
the products that they cannot aﬀord (Fisher and Vaidyanathan 2009, Jagabathula and Rus-
mevichientong 2016).
• Perceived quality cut-oﬀ: There is empirical evidence that price is used as a cue for qual-
ity (Zeithalm 1988, Posavac et al. 2005), hence customers would eliminate all products cheaper
than the given cut-oﬀlevel.
The consideration sets emanating from a conjunction between budget constraints and perceived
quality cut-oﬀs are intervals with respect to the price order. Also, it is worth noting that induced
interval consideration sets with unique-ranking subsumes the downward substitution model pro-
posed by Pentico (1974) and Honhon et al. (2012) as the special case where the preference order
Σ = {σ} coincides with {π}. In contrast, for the induced intervals in question, the preference order
σ is generally distinct from the inducing permutation π. We now prove that the dynamic program-
ming algorithm runs in polynomial time under this class of distributions, by bounding the number
of connected subgraphs generated along the dynamic program. Intuitively, our counting argument
utilizes the observation that a union of overlapping intervals is itself an interval.
Theorem 2. Under induced intervals consideration sets, the dynamic program has a running
time of O(N 4K).
Proof
Given that the function Φ is injective according to Lemma 2, it is suﬃcient to upper
bound |Φ⟨S⟩|. To this end, we let (S,T) designate a subproblem of S. The key observation is that,
due to the connectivity of G[S,T], the union of the consideration sets in T is itself an interval
according to the ordering π. Indeed, assume ad absurdum that there exists products i,j ∈S ∩[N]

17
and a product α ∈[N] \ S such that π(i) < π(α) < π(j). Then, for any customer-type j in T, since
π⟨Cj⟩is an interval, we infer that either π⟨Cj⟩⊆[π(α) −1] or π⟨Cj⟩⊆[π(α) + 1,N]. Denoting by
T1 the customer-types that satisfy the former inclusion, and T2 the latter one, we conclude that the
subgraph G[S,T] decomposes into distinct connected components G[S1,T1] and G[S2,T2], where S1
is the subset of products whose π-indices belong to [π(α) −1] and S2 corresponds to the π-indices
in [π(α) + 1,N]. This contradicts the connectivity of G[S,T].
Since Φ(S,T) = [min(S)]∩∪j∈TCj, and we have proven that π⟨∪j∈TCj⟩is an interval, we conclude
that the image of Φ is a collection at most N 3 distinct subsets of [N]. It is worth noting that, in the
special case of downward substitution, i.e., Σ = {π}, Φ(S,T) is an interval of the form [α,min(S)],
meaning that the state space has a cardinality of O(N 2).
□
4.2.
Laminar properties
Definition 2. A collection of consideration sets C is said to be laminar if, for any two customer-
types j,j′ ∈[K] such that Cj ∩Cj′ ̸= ∅, the consideration sets are nested, i.e., Cj ⊆Cj′ or Cj′ ⊆Cj.
Such laminar structures arise in Elimination-by-Aspect (EBA) choice-making processes, which
were ﬁrst introduced by Tversky (1972a,b). To this end, we assume that the feature space is
discrete, i.e., without loss of generality x(i) ∈{0,1}d, and each screening rule on feature e ∈[d] is
expressed as a constraint of the form x(i)
e = t with a cut-oﬀlevel t ∈{0,1}. EBA models assume
that a customer picks features iteratively, entailing a random sequence e1,...,eM ∈[d]M, where
M is random. At each step k ∈[M], the customer selects a level tek, and eliminates all products
i not satisfying x(i)
ek = tek. The sequence of features could be deterministic (this is known as the
lexicographic order) or random. One probabilistic structure used to describe these processes in
related models rests on a tree structure (Tversky and Sattath 1979): the next feature chosen by an
individual in the sequence of eliminations is deterministic conditional to the preﬁx of levels that
he chose prior. That is, ek is a deterministic function of (e1,te1),...,(ek−1,tek−1). Assuming this
property, it can be veriﬁed that the corresponding distributions over consideration sets necessarily
have a laminar support (see Figure 2 for a pictorial representation).
The following theorem suggests that the induced intervals structure deﬁned in Section 4.1 is
rather general as it subsumes laminar consideration sets as a special case. In addition, to illustrate
the robustness of our algorithmic approach, the dynamic program is examined in Appendix EC.2.4
under a weaker notion of laminar consideration sets.
Theorem 3. The class of laminar consideration sets is a special case of induced intervals. The
corresponding running time is of O(N 4K).
Proof
Let C denote a laminar consideration set system. Without loss of generality, we may
assume that each consideration set corresponds to a unique customer-type (otherwise if two

18
Style
Shoes
Boots
Sandals
Heels
French
Italian
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
5
6
7
8
5
6
7
8
3
4
1
2
5
6
7
8
3
4
1
2
Type
Figure 2
An Elimination-by-Aspect screening process and the corresponding laminar tree, for the example of
purchasing ‘shoes’, with two features: ‘type’ and ‘style’.
customer-types share the same consideration set, we represent them by a single type and aggregate
their arrival probabilities) and there exists a consideration set comprised of all products [N] in
C (its arrival probability can be set to 0). We seek to prove that C is a family of intervals if the
products are numbered according to some appropriate permutation π : [N] →[N].
Laminar tree. It is known that any laminar collection of subsets admits a rooted tree repre-
sentation (Edmonds and Giles 1977). That is, we can build an directed tree (V,E), wherein each
customer-type is represented by a single node, i.e., V = [K], and there exists a directed edge (j,k) ∈
E if k is the customer-type with a maximal consideration set contained in Cj. In other terms, we
have Ck ⊂Cj and there exists no other l ∈[k] such that Ck ⊂Cl ⊂Cj. The root corresponds to the
customer-type with consideration set [N].
Depth ﬁrst order. Now, for any j ∈K, we deﬁne o(j) as the oﬀspring of node j in (V,E). Also, we
introduce the list of products s(j) formed by the diﬀerence between Cj and the products associated
with the children of j, i.e. s(j) = Cj \ ∪j′∈o(j)Cj′. Next, the permutation π is deﬁned through the
ranked list of products obtained as a concatenation of the lists s(j) in a depth-ﬁrst traversal of the
laminar tree. It can be proven inductively that π⟨Cj⟩is an interval for any j ∈[K]. Indeed, if a
node j is a leaf of the laminar tree, then s(j) = Cj, and the concatenation procedure preserves the
connectivity of s(j). The inductive argument proceeds from the following observations.
1. By deﬁnition of s, for any given customer-type j ∈[K], Cj = (∪j′∈o(j)Cj′) ∪s(j).
2. The collections of products associated with the children nodes are examined consecutively in a
depth-ﬁrst traversal. Hence, the induction hypothesis implies that π⟨∪j′∈o(j)Cj′⟩is an interval.
3. Since this interval is concatenated to s(j), observation 1 implies that π⟨Cj⟩is an interval.
□
4.3.
Disjunctive consideration sets
The consideration set models discussed in the previous sections proceed from a conjunction of
screening rules. As mentioned in Section 2, another decision-making model proposed in the mar-
keting literature posits that the consideration sets are formed in a disjunctive fashion.

19
Definition 3. For any d ∈N, a collection of consideration sets C is said to be d-disjunctive if
the feature space is d-dimensional and all consideration sets in C are generated as a disjunction of
screening rules. That is, each customer-type j ∈[K] is characterized by a cut-oﬀvector denoted by
t(j) ∈Rd, such that
Cj =

i ∈[N] :
 x
(i)
1 ≥t
(j)
1

∨··· ∨
 x
(i)
d ≥t
(j)
d
 
.
Next, we show that the size of the state space S is polynomially bounded for a ﬁxed parameter d.
Theorem 4. Under d-disjunctive consideration sets, the dynamic program has a running time
of O(N 2Kd+1).
The proof is deferred to Appendix 4. Since the d-disjunctive model can capture any arbitrary
consideration set structure C for a large enough d, this theorem expresses an explicit tradeoﬀ
between modeling power and tractability. In practice, one would expect that customers make use
of few screening rules (Hauser et al. 2009), meaning that d is relatively small.
5.
The General Dynamic Program
In this section, we relax the assumption that Σ is a singleton and describe a dynamic program
that applies to arbitrary preference list distributions. The key ingredients of the algorithm remain
unchanged. Speciﬁcally, products are processed sequentially, which entails a decomposition of the
graph representation into increasingly reﬁned connected components, in a divide-and-conquer fash-
ion. However, unlike the unique-ranking case, the processing order does not necessarily coincide
with the customer’s preference order. Thus, it is not immediate which subset of customer-types
gets allocated to a given product at the time a DP decision is made. As a result, the DP action
space needs to be enlarged to account for any feasible allocation of a product to a subset of
customer-types. At face value, there are exponentially many potential allocations, and the approach
appears to be subject to the curse of dimensionality. We work around this diﬃculty by proposing
an auxiliary algorithm, used at each step of the recursion, that can yield tractable solutions.
Processing order. We begin by deﬁning a processing order σ on the products, according
to which the dynamic program makes sequential decisions (or actions). Here, σ is chosen as an
arbitrary permutation and the products are numbered accordingly (i.e., product 1 is processed ﬁrst,
and so on) such that the reference to the processing order is made implicit throughout the present
section. The correctness of the dynamic program does not depend on σ although, as shown in next
subsections, an appropriate choice of σ may signiﬁcantly reduce the running time complexity.

20
State space and value function. The state space is described by the parameters (S,T,L),
where S is a subset of products in [N], T is a subset of customer-types in [K] and L ∈ZK
+ is a
nonnegative integer valued vector, named the truncation vector. We let J(S,T,L) be the maximum
expected revenue that can be attained from customer-types in T using an assortment within prod-
ucts in S, and assuming that, each customer-type j ∈T is willing to purchase only products of rank
at most Lj within his consideration set. That is, customer-type j will only purchase products in the
set Cj(Lj) = {i ∈Cj : σj(i) < Lj}. (Recall that each customer-type j is associated with a ranking
function σj ∈Σ.) We note that only the T-coordinates of L, i.e., the sub-vector L[T], matter in
the deﬁnition of J(S,T,L). However, to lighten the notation we use the entire vector and assume
that the unnecessary coordinates are set to 0.
Bipartite graph. Similar to the unique-ranking case, we deﬁne the bipartite graph G that
has a node, for each product i ∈[N], on one side, and a node, for each customer-type j ∈[K], on
the other side. There is an edge between a product node and customer-type node if the preference
list of the latter contains the former. Each subproblem of the state space (S,T,L) is associated
with the subgraph GL[S,T] with (i) product nodes in S; (ii) customer-type nodes in T; (iii) there
exists an edge between any i ∈S and j ∈T if i ∈Cj(Lj). Similar to the unique-ranking case, the
connected components of the subgraph capture a decomposition into independent instances. The
proof, in the same spirit as that of Lemma 1, is omitted.
Lemma 3. For each subproblem (S,T,L), assuming that the connected components of GL[S,T]
are described by the collection of subgraphs (GL[Su,Tu])u∈[r] where Su denotes a subset of product
nodes in S and Tu is a subset of type nodes in T, then J(S,T,L) = Pr
u=1 J(Su,Tu,L).
Graph operations. We consider a subproblem (S,T,L) and i is the next product to be
processed i = min(S). We deﬁne T(i) ⊆T as all customer-types whose preference list contains i,
i.e., T(i) = {j ∈T : i ∈Cj(Lj)}.
Assume we decide to allocate product i to a subset of customers V ⊆T(i), meaning that i is the
most preferred product made available to the customer-types in V . We describe below some natural
operations on the graph GL[S,T] to enforce the decision of allocating product i to customer-types
V . In particular, we make sure that the decision to satisfy V with product i is consistent with
future decisions, and that it is feasible irrespective of the subsequent decisions. Speciﬁcally, we
perform the following operations on the bipartite graph:
1. T-nodes deletion. Since they are already satisﬁed with a product, the nodes corresponding to
consumer-types V are discarded, and we denote by T (V ) = T \V the remaining customer-types.
2. S-nodes deletion. For each satisﬁed customer-type j ∈V , we should remove from S the nodes
of all items he prefers more; indeed, these products cannot be stocked in the assortment

21
otherwise they would have been chosen by customer-type j over product i. Thus we deﬁne
S(V ) as the residual set of products:
S(V ) = S \
[
j∈V
{x ∈Cj(Lj) : σj(x) ≤σj(i)} ,
(2)
3. Edges deletion. Finally, if a customer-type whose preference list contains product i, is not
allocated to this product, he can only purchase a product he prefers more at some later point
of the recursion. As a result, we need to truncate his preference list by updating the vector L:
∀j ∈T (V ),
L′
j =
(
Lj
if j ̸∈T(i)
σj(i)
otherwise .
(3)
We can easily verify the correctness of the above graph operations. That is, the expected revenue
obtained by summing the immediate reward, formed by the allocation of product i to customer-
types V , with the reward-to-go, generated by the subproblem associated with the residual subgraph
GL′[S(V ),T (V )], is feasible. We now formally describe the recursion.
Base case. If we set S = [N], T = [K] and Lj = N + 1, then J(S,T,L) reﬂects the original
problem we are interested to solve. Using the Lemma 3, an optimal assortment is obtained by
solving independently the subproblems associated with each connected component of G. From this
point on, connectivity is an invariant of the subproblems examined by the recursion.
Recursive formula. We consider the subproblem (S,T,L) such that GL[S,T] is a connected
subgraph. Recall that i denotes the next product to be processed (the minimal element of S) and
T(i) are all customer-types who consider product i. The decision made by the dynamic program
consists in the subset of customer-types V ⊆T(i) allocated to product i. Without loss of gener-
ality, we can assume that an empty allocation V = ∅means that he product i is not stocked in
the assortment. In this case, the residual subgraph is GL[S \ {i},T], which decomposes into the
connected components (GL[Su,Tu])u∈[r]. Each corresponding subproblems is solved independently
according to Lemma 3, generating a total revenue of Pr
u=1 J(Su,Tu,L).
For each choice of V ⊆T(i), where V ̸= ∅, the allocation generates an immediate reward Pi ·
P
j∈V λi. Next, we consider the residual subgraph GL′[S(V ),T (V )] after performing the operations
previously described. Namely, we remove the most preferred products according to Equation (2)
while we delete edges according to L′ deﬁned in Equation (3), where the vector L′ does not
depend on the choice of the allocation V ⊆T(i). Using Lemma 3, the subgraph GL′[S(V ),T (V )] can
be decomposed into its connected components (GL′[S(V )
u ,T (V )
u
])u∈[r(V )]. Therefore, the optimality
conditions yield the following the recursive formula:
J(S,T,L) = max
 
r
X
u=1
J(Su,Tu,L) , max
V ⊆T (i)
Pi ·
X
j∈V
λj +
r(V )
X
u=1
J
 S(V )
u ,T (V )
u
,L′
!
(4)

22
Correctness of the algorithm. At face value, the above recursion does not compute the exact
expected revenue generated by a sequence of allocation decisions. Indeed, suppose that T(i)\V ̸= ∅.
We do not enforce that all customer-types in T(i) \ V are allocated with another product i′ ̸= i at
the subsequent steps of the recursion. Therefore, the above dynamic program provides us with a
lower bound on the expected revenue. However, we argue that any optimal sequence of dynamic
programming decisions (i1,V1),...,(iT,VT) necessarily necessarily satisﬁes ∪T
t=1Vt = ∪T
t=1T(it), and
thus, the recursion computes the exact optimal expected revenue. To this end, without loss of
generality, we assume that the arrival rates λj and prices Pi are strictly positive (otherwise the
corresponding customer-types and products can be deleted). Next, suppose there exists a customer-
type j ∈∪T
t=1T(it) \ ∪T
t=1Vt and let iu be a product such that j ∈T(iu). Assuming that we only
change the allocation Vu by adding customer-type j, then it is not diﬃcult to verify that all
other product allocations remain feasible. However, since the arrival rates and prices are strictly
positive, the total value computed by the dynamic program may only increase. This contradicts
the optimality of the sequence of decisions.
The marginalized dynamic program. In a naive implementation of the algorithm, one
would solve the problem for all possible tuple (S,T,L). Similar to the dynamic program presented
in Section 3, the eﬀective computational tree is in fact comprised of a much smaller fraction of
the state space. However, unlike the unique-ranking case, the recursive formula (4) describes a
maximization problem over exponentially many allocations V ⊆T(i), each associated by a family
of descendant subproblems of the form (S(V )
u ,T (V )
u
,L′). As a result, we cannot readily leverage this
formula to build the computational tree. Even if the state space is tightly characterized, it is still
not obvious how to eﬃciently solve the optimization problem described by (4).
We address the diﬃculties raised above by proposing an eﬃcient algorithm to generate the
computational tree and solve the recursive formula (4), while avoiding an enumeration over all
allocations V ⊆T(i). At a high-level, our main idea is to marginalize the allocation decisions. That
is, the choice of the allocation V ⊆T(i) is broken-down into a sequence of binary decisions, each
of which applies to a single customer-type of T(i). Consequently, we can show that the number of
descendant subproblems is polynomial in N,K and |S|, yielding the following complexity result.
Proposition 1. The running time complexity of the marginalized dynamic program is polyno-
mial in the size of the state space |S| and the input size. In the worst case, we have |S|≤N · 2N.
To avoid lengthy technical details, the speciﬁcs of the marginalized dynamic program and the
proof of the above claim are deferred to Appendix EC.1.4.

23
6.
Consider-then-Choose Models with Ranking Heterogeneity
In this section, we study distributions over preference lists that combine consideration set hetero-
geneity along with ranking heterogeneity. One natural extension is to consider small “perturba-
tions” of the unique-ranking setting. This notion is formalized in Appendix EC.1.5; we show that
the computational bounds established in Section 4 carry over assuming that the rankings lie in
a “small neighborhood” around a given permutation. In what follows, we explore consider-then-
choose models that exhibit high levels of ranking heterogeneity.
6.1.
Quasi-convex model
We now study a class of preference list distributions that allows for high levels of heterogeneity in
the ranking decisions, but the ranking functions exhibit a quasi-convex structure.
Definition 4. Suppose that products are numbered according to a central permutation σ. A
distribution over preference lists belongs to the quasi-convex model if the consideration sets C are
intervals and the ranking functions of Σ are quasi-convex. That is, for every j ∈[K], there exists
i ∈Cj such that σj is decreasing over [1,i] ∩Cj and increasing over [i,N] ∩Cj.
The quasi-convex model substantially increases the “degrees of freedom” of the distributions up to
O(2N) - in comparison, the intervals model only has O(N 2) parameters and the locational model
only has O(N 3) parameters (see Claim EC.3 established in Appendix EC.1.6).
The quasi-convex property captures several common preference patterns. To ﬂesh out this model
with practical examples, suppose that the consideration sets are formed as a conjunction of the
screening rules relative to price and perceived quality described in Section 4.1. We further assume
that price and quality are reversed features. In this setting, the quasi-convex rankings include
price-driven purchasing behaviors (products are ranked by decreasing prices), as well as quality-
seeking purchasing behaviors (products are ranked by decreasing quality). More generally, every
customer-type j ∈[K] may have an idiosyncratic assessment of the product quality qj
1,qj
2,...,qj
N.
If quality (qj
i )i∈[N] is a concave function of price, i.e., there exists a concave function f j : R+ →R+
such that qj
i = f j(Pi) for every i ∈[N], then the quasi-convex model captures customers who rank
products by decreasing utilities, under the utility functions uj(i) = qj
i −β · Pi where β > 0, and
uj(i) = qj
i /Pi. In addition, the quasi-convex model subsumes the one-dimensional locational choice
model (Lancaster 1966, 1975). In the this model, customer-types and products are each represented
by a scalar value, and a customer-type picks the closest product to him made available in the
assortment (i.e., with minimal absolute distance between their respective scalars).
In the next theorem, we show that our dynamic program is eﬃcient under the quasi-convex
model for a suitable choice of the processing order.
Theorem 5. Under the quasi-convex model with central permutation σ, the dynamic program
with processing order σ has a state space of size O(N 2).

24
The proof is provided in Appendix EC.1.7. The main technical ideas are similar to the con-
struction of the injective mapping in Lemma 2. Speciﬁcally, each subproblem of the recursion is
uniquely characterized using only two products examined in the computational tree.
6.2.
Two-feature compensatory model
We consider a preference list-based model where the screening rules are combined in a compensatory
fashion (Einhorn and Hogarth 1975, Dawes 1979). Here, low levels on a given feature can be oﬀset
by high levels on other features as discussed in Section 2. Speciﬁcally, preference lists are formed
according to utility maximization, as illustrated by Figure 3.
x2
feature x1
feature x2
O
uj
Consideration set
Ranking decisions
Products
Assortment
Consideration set
Highest-utility 
product in the 
assortment
x1
O
uj
Figure 3
Consideration sets and ranking decisions driven by linear utility maximization with two features.
Definition 5. An distribution over preference lists belongs to the two-feature compensatory
model if every customer-type j ∈[K] can be described by a utility vector u(j) ∈R2 and a cut-
oﬀlevel tj such that (i) Cj contains all products which utility is above the cut-oﬀtj, i.e., Cj =
{i ∈[N] : u(j) · x(i) ≥tj}, and (ii) for every pair of products i,k ∈[N], σj(i) < σj(k) if and only if
u(j) · xk < u(j) · xi (we assume there are no ties between products).
By exploiting the geometric structure of linear utility models, we prove that the state space
is of polynomial size under the class of preference list distributions described by the two-feature
compensatory model, as stated by the next theorem.
Theorem 6. Under the two-feature compensatory model, for any arbitrary processing order, the
size of the state space is of O(N 3K2).
The proof, deferred to Appendix EC.1.8, is in the same vein as that of Theorem 5. By representing
each state of the recursion as a polyhedron in the feature space, we construct an injective mapping
from subproblems in S onto the preceding products examined in the computational tree.

25
7.
Empirical performance
In this section, we demonstrate that our approach yields superior predictive and computational
performance against several benchmarks. In Section 7.1, we demonstrate that the dynamic pro-
gramming approach is computationally eﬃcient, even in comparison to a state-of-the art integer
programmer solver. In Section 7.2, we show that the quasi-convex model has the ability to accu-
rately replicate and predict the choice outcomes on synthetic and real industry data sets, against
several parametric choice models.
7.1.
Computational performance
Our dynamic programming algorithm is benchmarked against a natural integer programming (IP)
formulation, implemented using a state-of-the-art commercial solve. The mathematical formulation
is provided in Appendix EC.2.1, along with further details on our implementation.
Computational set-up. The experiments are conducted using a MacBook Pro with processor 2.5
GHz Intel Core i5 (two cores). Our dynamic program is implemented using the programming lan-
guage Julia. The IP formulation is implemented using the commercial IP solver GUROBI (v.6.5).
We impose termination when the incumbent solution has an optimality gap of 1%, or after the
running time reaches 1000 seconds for computational convenience. In contrast, our algorithm pro-
vides exact solutions for all instances. We run two batches of experiments with diﬀerent generative
models. In the former, we generate random instances of the quasi-convex model described in Sec-
tion 6, arguably one of the “richest” consider-then-choose model discussed in previous sections that
admits a provable polynomial running time guarantee. In the latter, we compare the algorithms
on generic instances with unique-ranking preferences, not pertaining to any speciﬁc structure of
consideration sets. The consideration sets are generated via i.i.d Bernoulli trials with a parameter
α ∈(0,1). This approach is described in greater detail in Appendix EC.2.1.
Numerical results. The running time of the algorithms on quasi-convex instances is reported in
Table 2. Each entry is generated by sampling 50 random instances, unless the average running time
exceeds 800 seconds, in which case we sample 20 instances. Our numerical results indicate that our
algorithmic approach is very eﬃcient and outperforms the IP solver by an order of magnitude. The
IP approach scales unfavorably with the number of customer-types K and it becomes intractable
for large scale instances (e.g., with 200 products) where the dynamic program is still very eﬃcient.
Another potential shortcoming of the IP approach for practitioners resides in the large variability
of the running time across instances.
To keep the paper concise, the numerical results for our second batch of experiments, on
randomly-generated unique-ranking instances, are reported in Appendix EC.2.2. In summary, our
dynamic programming approach outperforms the IP in several settings. The IP solver scales poorly

26
Table 2
Runtime of our algorithm (DP) against the commercial solver (IP) under the quasi-convex model.
Parameters
Average runtime (s)
Coeﬀ. of var (%)
N
K
DP
IP
DP
IP
50
500
0.9
45.9
17.0
47.4
50
1000
1.2
398.5
6.2
52.4
50
2000
1.8
777.1
< 10−3
46.2
50
2500
2.4
> 103
< 10−3
-
100
2500
16.8
> 103
< 10−3
-
200
2500
138.9
> 103
< 10−3
-
with respect to the number of customer types (see Figure EC.3). That is, for a ﬁxed number of
products (N = 20), the running time of the IP is highly aﬀected by the number of customer types
K. The diﬀerence between the algorithms is more pronounced for large consideration sets (a large
Bernoulli parameter α). On the other hand, as one would expect, the dynamic program is less
eﬃcient when N >> K, since it enumerates over product stocking decisions. In general, the com-
putational eﬃciency of our dynamic program hinges on the eﬃciency of the state space collapse. As
shown by Table EC.1, in comparison to a “naive” recursion, the size of the state space is reduced
by a factor ranging between 75% to over 99% (see Table EC.1).
7.2.
Predictive performance
Practical applications of choice modeling, such as the assortment optimization problem studied
here, begin with transactional data. The standard approach is to ﬁt a speciﬁc type of choice model
to this data and then employ an assortment optimization algorithm designed for that choice model.
As such, the choice model employed must strike a balance between its ability to ﬁt the data on the
one hand, and admit eﬃcient algorithms for assortment optimization on the other. In this regard
it is well known that the MMNL model has the ability to represent any choice model satisfying the
strong axiom of revealed preferences (McFadden and Train 2000). Of course, this expressive power
comes at a price: assortment optimization under the MMNL model is diﬃcult in all but a restricted
set of cases. Speciﬁcally, D´esir and Goyal (2014) provide an algorithm for assortment optimization
under the MMNL model whose complexity scales exponentially with respect to the number of
customer segments. Consequently, optimization is practical for a mixture over a relatively “small’
number of customer segments (a notion we will make precise shortly). In summary, one may regard
MMNL models with a small number of customer segments as a valid alternative to the models (and
corresponding algorithms) we consider in this paper. The goal of this section is to ﬂesh out this
comparison. Speciﬁcally, we consider the following experiments on synthetic and industry data:
1. Synthetic data from an MMNL model: Using a synthetic data set generated from an MMNL
model with a relatively large number of customer segments, we ﬁt two types of models to

27
this data: (i) an MMNL model with a small number of customer segments and (ii) the quasi-
convex consider-then-choose model studied in Section 6.1. Surprisingly, in certain settings, the
quasi-convex model provides a better ﬁt to the data (out-of-sample) under various metrics.
2. Synthetic data from a consider-then-choose model: As a counterpart to synthetic data from an
MMNL model, we consider ﬁtting both types of model in the experiment above to synthetic
data generated this time from a simple, intervals-based consider-then-choose model. As one
would expect, the quasi-convex model provides a better ﬁt by a large margin.
3. Purchase panel data: Using transactional data across a panel of hundreds of thousands of
customers in three distinct product categories (containing tens of products) collected by an
industry partner, we again run the same experiment, and evaluate predictive power on a hold-
out data set. We show that the quasi-convex consider-then-choose model provides a signiﬁcant
improvement in predictive accuracy on the hold out set.
MMNL benchmarks. In the sequel, we designate by MMNL(c) the class of mixtures with c
customer segments. The MMNL instances (and the MNL as a special case) are parametrized by
the preference weights wi,j ∈R+ where i,j ∈[N]×[c], along with the probability vector (µ1,...,µc)
of the mixture. Here N is the number of products and c is the number of customer segments. With
this deﬁnition at hand, the purchase probability for product i in an assortment A ⊆[N] is, under
the MMNL(c) model, expressed as:
Pr(i|A) =
c
X
α=1
µα ·
wi,α
1 + P
j∈A wj,α
.
The best known algorithm for the MMNL(c) assortment optimization problem runs in time
O((log N)2c · N 2c+1/ϵ4c)), where ϵ is the chosen level of accuracy (D´esir and Goyal 2014). Hence,
assortment optimization is eﬀectively impractical for large mixtures, and as such we eventually ﬁt
MMNL models with up to c = 3 customer segments.
Data-driven estimation. In our subsequent empirical settings, the data observations take the
form of a sequence of assortments A1,...,Aτ and a purchase probability matrix (pit)i∈[N],t∈[τ], where
pit is the purchase probability of product i within the assortment At ⊆[τ]. All choice models are
estimated using the same training data sets, and they are evaluated on the same hold-out data sets.
To this end, we leverage standard estimation methods developed in the related literature. These
methods are described in detail in Appendix EC.2.3 with additional information on their imple-
mentation. In a nutshell, the MMNL choice models are ﬁtted using maximum-likelihood estimation
(MLE). The quasi-convex model is estimated by adapting the column generation ideas proposed in
the anterior literature for nonparametric choice models (van Ryzin and Vulcano 2014, Bertsimas
and Miˇsic 2015). Interestingly, we derive a new structural result showing that a critical step of

28
this estimation methodology is provably tractable under the quasi-convex model. Speciﬁcally, we
show that the column generation step, known to be NP-hard under arbitrary distributions over
preference lists, admits a polynomial time dynamic programming algorithm in our setting. This
result suggests that the quasi-convex property eases the estimation process.
Experiments on synthetic data. We ﬁrst explain how the synthetic data sets are generated, and
then describe our numerical results. The data set is constructed by randomly generating 100 assort-
ments A1,...,A100, each formed by drawing N independent Bernoulli trials with probability of
success 0.5. To generate the purchase probability data, we make use of the following ground truth
models:
• MMNL models: For our ﬁrst set of synthetic data, we generate random MMNL(5) instances.
Each customer segment occurs with probability µ1 = ··· = µ5 = 1/5. The preference weights
wi,j are drawn independently from a log-normal distribution of scale σ, where σ is varied in the
set {0,1,10,20}. Here, σ controls the heterogeneity of the ranking behavior across customer
segments; we will momentarily see that predictive performance is sensitive to this parameter.
When σ = 0, the model is equivalent to an instance of the MNL model.
• Intervals model: For our second set of synthetic data, the purchase probabilities are generated
using an instance of the intervals model introduced in Section 4.1. Indexing the set of all
possible intervals by k ∈{1,2,...,K}, the probability vector (λ1,...,λK) is drawn uniformly
at random from the unit simplex.
For each data set thus formed, we carried out a 5-fold cross-validation to estimate the out-of-
sample prediction accuracy of the diﬀerent models. This procedure is repeated over 10 randomly-
generated instances of the ground truth. The prediction errors are measured by the mean squared
error (MSE), expressed in normalized form as a percentage of the total variance of the data. Namely,
letting OS ⊆[100] designate the collection of out-of-sample assortments, we have:
MSE =
P
t∈OS
P
i∈At(ˆpit −pit)2
P
j∈OS
P
i∈At p2
it
,
where (ˆpi,t)i,t∈[N]×[τ] are the model estimates. The numerical results are reported in Table 3. We
observe that the quasi-convex model has relatively accurate predictions in all generative settings,
and outperforms the parametric models in the plurality of cases. As one might expect, when the
intervals model is posited as ground truth, the quasi-convex instances are accurately recovered
by our estimation method, and the ﬁtted models attain low out-of-sample MSEs. The prediction
errors incurred by the MMNL models are signiﬁcantly larger.
Interestingly, when the MMNL(5) model is posited as ground truth, the MMNL benchmarks
outperform the quasi-convex model in certain settings. When the scale parameter σ that controls

29
Table 3
Normalized mean squared errors (MSEs) of the ﬁtted choice models in diﬀerent ground truth settings.
Ground truth
Quasi-convex
MNL
MMNL(2)
MMNL(3)
MMNL(5), σ = 0
0.056
0.001
0.001
0.001
MMNL(5), σ = 1
0.059
0.005
0.002
0.004
MMNL(5), σ = 10
0.169
0.207
0.204
0.197
MMNL(5), σ = 20
0.197
0.224
0.217
0.216
Intervals model
0.003
0.286
0.229
0.225
Recall that σ is the scale of the log-normal distribution generating the weights of the MMNL ground truth model.
preference heterogeneity across customer segments grows, the quasi-convex model provides more
accurate out-of-sample predictions than the ﬁtted MNL, MMNL(2) and MMNL(3) instances. For
example, for σ = 10, the MSE is smaller by a factor of 14%. As such, the quasi-convex model has an
excellent ﬁt to the data when the underlying preferences of the population are highly heterogeneous.
Experiments on purchase panel data. We had access to purchase panel data describing daily
transactions made by hundreds of thousands of consumers across several retailers for three prod-
uct categories over 2-5 months, namely Bath Tissue, Shampoo and Conditioners, and Dog Food
and Treats. Transactions are aggregated at the brand level. Each assortment corresponds to the
combination of a retail chain vendor and a US state. Speciﬁcally, each assortment is the union of
all brands with at least one transaction during the time horizon. Having speciﬁed the assortments
A1,...,Aτ, the purchase probabilities pit are obtained by computing the relative market shares of
products according to the observed transactions (the no-purchase option is not observable). Since
the purchase data can be sparse for certain brands and locations, we restrict attention to the uni-
verse of brands with at least 400 transactions recorded during the period considered. Consequently,
the Bath Tissue, Shampoo and Conditioners and Dog Food and Treats data sets are formed by 17,
38 and 51 products, respectively, and comprised of 246, 171 and 220 assortments, respectively.
We implement a stratiﬁed 2-fold cross-validation, to ensure that the prediction labels (purchased
brands) are approximately equally represented in the training and test sets. To complement the
out-of-sample MSE metric, we also measure the mean absolute error (MAE), deﬁned as follows:
MAE =
X
t∈OS
1
|OS| ·
X
i∈At
|ˆpit −pit| ,
where OS is the collection of hold-out assortments. In addition, we compute the Akaike Information
Criterion (AIC). For any of ﬁtted choice model, the AIC corresponds to the quantity 2 · d −2 · L,
where d is the number of parameters of the choice model, and L is the log-likelihood of the training
data (Akaike 1998). This metric quantiﬁes a tradeoﬀbetween the number of parameters of the
model and the in-sample accuracy, and thus, this notion guards against the risk of overﬁtting
despite using an in-sample measure of the goodness-of-ﬁt.

30
Table 4
% Improvement of prediction accuracy achieved by the quasi-convex model against the benchmarks.
Data sets
MNL
MMNL(3)
MSE
MAE
AIC
MSE
MAE
AIC
Dog Food & Treats
24%
14%
2.3%
15%
7.8%
0.9%
Bath Tissue
20%
9.7%
1.3%
18%
6.0%
1.3%
Shampoo & Conditioners
21%
9.0%
1.4%
21%
7.0%
1.1%
Our numerical results are reported in Table 4 in the form of a percentage improvement of
predictive accuracy for each metric and product category. For example, denoting by MSEQ the chi-
square errors on the predictions of the quasi-convex model and MSEMNL those associated with the
MNL model, the percentage improvement relative to the MNL model is given by
MSEMNL−MSEQ
MSEMNL
.
The absolute prediction errors for various additional metrics along with the running times of the
estimation methods are reported in the online appendix (Tables EC.3 and EC.4). The quasi-convex
model outperforms the parametric benchmark models in terms of out-of-sample prediction error
in all cases. As might be expected, the accuracy gains are smaller against the ﬁtted MMNL(3)
model, but remains very signiﬁcant in absolute terms. For example, on the MSE metric, the MSE
is reduced by 18% in the Bath Tissue category against the MMNL(3) model. In summary, the
quasi-convex model provides strong predictive power in data-rich environments.
8.
Concluding Remarks
This work opens various perspectives for future research. A natural lead is to further investigate
the interplay between behavioral screening rules and the computational tractability of the resulting
assortment optimization problem. In particular, the analysis of conjunctive screening rules in more
general settings would be relevant to practice. Moreover, our current modeling approach is based
on the assumption that the distribution over preference lists is exogenous, like for the vast majority
of random-utility maximization choice models. Hence, from a modeling perspective, it would be
interesting to examine choice models whereby the customer preferences are formed endogenously
as a function of the oﬀered assortment.
Another important question is to investigate the identiﬁability of the quasi-convex model model
introduced in this paper. Indeed, the existing estimation methods for nonparametric models do not
come with provable recovery guarantees. Additionally, the number of products in online retailing
and the computational requirements of online platforms require the development of highly-scalable
algorithms. Our current algorithmic ideas need to be complemented for such large-scale applica-
tions. Lastly, when the number of choice alternatives is large, choice models are often featurized,
i.e., expressed as a function of underlying product and customer features. Incorporating contextual
features into nonparametric choice models is a fundamental challenge that conditions the adoption
of these methods by practitioners.

31
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Management Science’s review team for a host of technical and editorial comments.
In particular, we are grateful to an anonymous reviewer, who proposed an elegant way to derive Theorem 5,
substituting a more involved proof that appeared in an early version of this paper.
References
Ailon, Nir, Moses Charikar, Alantha Newman. 2008. Aggregating inconsistent information: ranking and
clustering. Journal of the ACM (JACM) 55(5) 23.
Akaike, Hirotogu. 1998. Information theory and an extension of the maximum likelihood principle. Selected
papers of hirotugu akaike. Springer, 199–213.
Anupindi, Ravi, Sachin Gupta, Munirpallam A Venkataramanan. 2009. Managing variety on the retail shelf:
using household scanner panel data to rationalize assortments.
Retail Supply Chain Management.
Springer, 155–182.
Aouad, Ali, Vivek Farias, Retsef Levi, Danny Segev. 2018. The approximability of assortment optimization
under ranking preferences. Operations Research 66(6) 1661–1669.
Belonax, JJ, Y Mittelstaedt. 1978. Evoked set size as a function of number of choice criteria and information
variability. Advances in Consumer Research 48–51.
Ben-Akiva, Moshe E, Steven R Lerman. 1985. Discrete choice analysis: Theory and application to travel
demand, vol. 9. MIT press.
Bertsimas, Dimitris, Velibor V Miˇsic. 2015. Data-driven assortment optimization. Tech. rep., Working paper,
MIT Sloan School.
Bettman, James R, Mary Frances Luce, John W Payne. 1998.
Constructive consumer choice processes.
Journal of Consumer Research 25(3) 187–217.
Bierlaire, Michel. 2003. Biogeme: a free package for the estimation of discrete choice models. Swiss Transport
Research Conference.
Blanchet, Jose, Guillermo Gallego, Vineet Goyal. 2013. A markov chain approximation to choice modeling.
Proceedings of the fourteenth ACM conference on Electronic commerce. ACM, 103–104.
Brandstatter, Eduard, Gerd Gigerenzer, Ralph Hertwig. 2006. The priority heuristic: Making choices without
trade-oﬀs. Psychological Review 113 (2) 409–432.
Brisoux, Jacques E, Michel Laroche. 1981. Evoked set formation and composition: An empirical investigation
under a routinized response behavior situation. NA-Advances in Consumer Research (8).
Bront, Juan Jos´e Miranda, Isabel M´endez-D´ıaz, Gustavo Vulcano. 2009. A column generation algorithm for
choice-based network revenue management. Operations Research 57(3) 769–784.
Campbell, Brian Milton. 1969. The existence of evoked set and determinants of its magnitude in brand
choice behavior. Ph.D. thesis, Columbia University.

32
Davis, J., G. Gallego, H. Topaloglu. 2013. Assortment planning under the Multinomial Logit model with
totally unimodular constraint structures. Work in Progress.
Davis, James M., Guillermo Gallego, Huseyin Topaloglu. 2014. Assortment optimization under variants of
the Nested Logit model. Operations Research 62(2) 250–273.
Dawes, Robyn M. 1979. The robust beauty of improper linear models in decision making. American Psy-
chologist 34 571–582.
Debreu, Gerard. 1960. Review of R. D. Luce, Individual choice behavior: A theoretical analysis 50 186–188.
D´esir, Antoine, Vineet Goyal. 2014. Near-optimal algorithms for capacity constrained assortment optimiza-
tion. Available at SSRN 2543309 .
Edmonds, Jack, Rick Giles. 1977. A min-max relation for submodular functions on graphs. Annals of Discrete
Mathematics 1 185–204.
Einhorn, Hillel J, Robin M Hogarth. 1975. Unit weighting schemes for decision making. Organizational
Behavior and Human Performance 13(2) 171–192.
Farias, Vivek, Srikanth Jagabathula, Devavrat Shah. 2013. A non-parametric approach to modeling choice
with limited data. Management Science 59 (2) 305–322.
Fisher, Marshall L., Ramnath Vaidyanathan. 2009. An algorithm and demand estimation procedure for
retail assortment optimization with results from implementation. Working paper (Philadelphia: The
Wharton School).
Gigerenzer, Gerd, Daniel G Goldstein. 1996. Reasoning the fast and frugal way: models of bounded ratio-
nality. Psychological review 103(4) 650.
Gigerenzer, Gerd, Reinhard Selten. 2002. Bounded rationality: The adaptive toolbox. MIT press.
Gilbride, T. J., G. M Allenby. 2004.
A choice model with conjunctive, disjunctive, and compensatory
screening rules. Marketing Science 23(3) 391–406.
Gurobi Optimization, Inc. 2015. Gurobi optimizer reference manual. URL http://www.gurobi.com.
Hauser, John R. 1978. Testing the accuracy, usefulness and signiﬁcance of probabilistic models: An informa-
tion theoretic approach. Operations Research 406–421.
Hauser, John R., Min Ding, Steven P. Gaskin. 2009. Non compensatory (and compensatory) models of
consideration-set decisions. Sawtooth Software Conference Proceedings .
Hauser, John R., Birger Wernerfelt. 1990.
An evaluation cost model of consideration sets.
Journal of
Consumer Research 393–408.
Hess, Stephane, Michel Bierlaire, John Polak. 2007. A systematic comparison of continuous and discrete
mixture models. European Transport (37).
Honhon, D., S. Jonnalagedda, X. A. Pan. 2012. Optimal algorithms for assortment selection under ranking-
based consumer choice models. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 14(2) 279–289.

33
Howard, J. A., J. N. Sheth. 1969. The Theory of the Buyer Behavior. John Wiley.
Jagabathula, Srikanth, Paat Rusmevichientong. 2016. A nonparametric joint assortment and price choice
model. Management Science 63(9) 3128–3145.
Katoh, Naoki, Toshihide Ibaraki. 1998. Resource allocation problems. Handbook of combinatorial optimiza-
tion 2 159–260.
K¨ok, A G¨urhan, Marshall L Fisher. 2007. Demand estimation and assortment optimization under substitu-
tion: Methodology and application. Operations Research 55(6) 1001–1021.
K¨ok, A G¨urhan, Marshall L Fisher, Ramnath Vaidyanathan. 2009. Assortment planning: Review of literature
and industry practice. Retail supply chain management. Springer, 99–153.
Lancaster, Kelvin. 1975. Socially optimal product diﬀerentiation. The American Economic Review 567–585.
Lancaster, Kelvin J. 1966. A new approach to consumer theory. The Journal of Political Economy 132–157.
Laroche, Michel, Chankon Kim, Takayoshi Matsui. 2003. Which decision heuristics are used in consideration
set formation? Journal of Consumer Marketing 20(3) 192–209.
Li, Guang, Paat Rusmevichientong, Huseyin Topaloglu. 2015. The d-level Nested Logit model: Assortment
and price optimization problems. Operations Research 63(2) 325–342.
Mahajan, Siddharth, Garrett Van Ryzin. 2001. Stocking retail assortments under dynamic consumer sub-
stitution. Operations Research 49(3) 334–351.
McBride, Richard D, Fred S Zufryden. 1988. An integer programming approach to the optimal product line
selection problem. Marketing Science 7(2) 126–140.
McFadden, Daniel. 1973. Conditional Logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior. Frontiers in Econometrics
105–142.
McFadden, Daniel, Kenneth Train. 2000.
Mixed MNL models for discrete response.
Journal of applied
Econometrics 447–470.
Payne, J. W., J. Bettman, R. James, M. F Luce. 1996.
When time is money: Decision behavior under
opportunity-cost time pressure. Organizational behavior and human decision processes 66(2) 131–152.
Pentico, David W. 1974. The assortment problem with probabilistic demands. Management Science 21(3)
286–290.
Posavac, Steven S., Tracy Meyer, Frank R. Kardes, James J. Kellaris. 2005. A selective hypothesis testing
perspective on price-quality inference and inference-based choice. Journal of Consumer Psychology 15
(2) 159–169.
Pras, Bernard, John Summers. 1975.
A comparison of linear and nonlinear evaluation process models.
Journal of Marketing Research 276–281.
Ratliﬀ, Richard M, B Venkateshwara Rao, Chittur P Narayan, Kartik Yellepeddi. 2008.
A multi-ﬂight
recapture heuristic for estimating unconstrained demand from airline bookings. Journal of Revenue
and Pricing Management 7(2) 153–171.

34
Reilly, Michael, Thomas L Parkinson. 1985. Individual and product correlates of evoked set size for consumer
package goods. Advances in Consumer Research 12.
Roberts, John H, James M Lattin. 1991. Development and testing of a model of consideration set composition.
Journal of Marketing Research 429–440.
Rusmevichiengtong, Paat, Benjamin Van Roy, Peter W. Glynn. 2006. Nonparametric approach to multi-
product pricing. Operations Research 54(1) 82–98.
Rusmevichientong, Paat, Zuo-Jun Max Shen, David B Shmoys. 2010. Dynamic assortment optimization
with a Multinomial Logit choice model and capacity constraint. Operations Research 58(6) 1666–1680.
Rusmevichientong, Paat, David Shmoys, Huseyin Topaloglu. 2014. Assortment optimization under the Multi-
nomial Logit model with random choice parameters. Production and Operations Management 23(11)
2023–2039.
Rusmevichientong, Paat, Huseyin Topaloglu. 2012. Robust assortment optimization in revenue management
under the Multinomial Logit choice model. Operations Research 60(4) 865–882.
Silk, Alvin J, Glen L Urban. 1978. Pre-test-market evaluation of new packaged goods: A model and mea-
surement methodology. Journal of marketing Research 171–191.
Talluri, Kalyan, Garrett van Ryzin. 2004. Revenue management under a general discrete choice model of
consumer behavior. Management Science 50(1) 15–33.
Talluri, Kalyan T, Garrett J Van Ryzin. 2006. The Theory and Practice of Revenue Management, vol. 68.
Springer Science & Business Media.
Tversky, A. 1972a. Choice by elimination. Journal of Mathematical Psychology 9 341–367.
Tversky, A. 1972b. Elimination by aspects : A theory of choice. Psychological Review 79 281–299.
Tversky, A., S. Sattath. 1979. Preference trees. Psychological Review 86 542–573.
Tversky, Amos, Daniel Kahneman. 1975. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Utility, prob-
ability, and human decision making, vol. 185. Springer, 141–163.
Urban, Glen L. 1975. Perceptor: A model for product positioning. Management Science 21(8) 858–871.
van Ryzin, Garrett, Gustavo Vulcano. 2014. A market discovery algorithm to estimate a general class of
nonparametric choice models. Management Science 61(2) 281–300.
Vulcano, Gustavo, Garrett van Ryzin, Wassim Chaar. 2010. Choice-based revenue management: An empirical
study of estimation and optimization. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 12(3) 371–
392.
W¨achter, Andreas, Lorenz T Biegler. 2006. On the implementation of an interior-point ﬁlter line-search
algorithm for large-scale nonlinear programming. Mathematical programming 106(1) 25–57.
Zeithalm, Valarie A. 1988. Consumer perception of price, quality and value: a means-end model and synthesis
of evidence. Journal of Marketing 52 2–22.

e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
ec1
Online Appendix
EC.1.
Additional Proofs and Results
EC.1.1.
Proof of Claim 1
We assume otherwise and prove a contradiction. Since the two subgraphs G1, G2 both contain
product node min(S1), they initially lied in the same connected component of G. As a result, by
looking at the sequence of algorithm iterations that generates G1, we can deﬁne i as the minimal
product examined by the algorithm after which u′ gets disconnected from G1. Then, product i has
necessarily been added to the assortment, while node u′ has been removed from the graph. Indeed,
otherwise u′ would still be connected to S1 by hypothesis. Therefore, we obtain that i ∈Cu′. It
follows that i ∈Φ(S2,T2) and thus i ∈Φ(S1,T1). On the other hand, it is clear that i does not
belong to ∪u∈T1Cu otherwise some customer-types in T1 would be discarded when i is selected in
the assortment. This yields the desired contradiction.
□
EC.1.2.
Weakly laminar consideration sets
To demonstrate the robustness of our algorithmic approach, we extend the analysis of Section 4.2
to a more general notion of laminar consideration sets, dubbed weakly laminar. Although this
setting is not reducible to induced intervals (contrary to the standard laminar property, as shown
by Lemma 3), we derive a polynomial running time guarantee for the corresponding dynamic
programming formulation.
Definition EC.1. A collection of consideration sets C is said to be weakly laminar if any
two consideration sets that intersect are nested up to the maximal product of their intersection.
That is, for any customer-types a,b ∈[K] such that Ca ∩Cb ̸= ∅, if i = max(Ca ∩Cb), then, either
Ca ∩[i] ⊆Cb ∩[i] or Cb ∩[i] ⊆Ca ∩[i].
This model captures the conjunction of any laminar consideration sets with any arbitrary screen-
ing rule, such as the budget and quality constraints mentioned in Section 4.1. In addition, it
subsumes (strictly) other choice models in the related literature, notably the above-mentioned
downward substitution model, as well as the out-tree model proposed by Honhon et al. (2012).
Theorem EC.1. Under weakly laminar consideration sets, the dynamic program runs in time
O(N 2K2).
Proof
To analyze the size of the state space |S| under this model, we ﬁrst exhibit a structural
property satisﬁed by the recursion, namely the existence of a ‘maximal’ consideration set with
respect to some well-chosen inclusion order, in each connected subgraph examined by the recursion.
Lemma EC.1. Assume that (S,T) ∈S is a subproblem generated by the recursion. Then, there
exists a customer-type j∗∈T such that Cj ∩[min(S)] ⊂Cj∗∩[min(S)] for any customer-type j ∈T.

ec2
e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
The proof the above property is deferred to this end of this section. Consequently, we can upper
bound |Φ⟨S⟩|. Let (S,T) be a subproblem in the state space S. By Lemma EC.1, we obtain
Φ(S,T) =
[
j∈T
(Cj ∩[min(S)]) = Cj∗∩[min(S)]
For a ﬁxed value of min(S), there are at most K subsets Φ(S,T), meaning that |Φ⟨S⟩| ≤NK.
□
Proof of Lemma EC.1
To ease the exposition, we deﬁne i as the minimal product in S, and
let v designate a customer-type in T. By deﬁnition, there exists a customer-type u ∈T such that
i ∈Cu. Also, since G[S,T] is a connected subgraph,give there exists a path between v and u. We
now deﬁne v∗∈T as the customer-type in T which satisﬁes i ∈Cv∗and has the shortest path
with v. In other terms, v∗minimizes the length of a path between v and x over all x ∈T such
that i ∈Cx. This set is not empty since it contains customer-type u. We are going to prove that
Cv ∩[i] ⊂Cv∗∩[i].
Let j1, j2,... jl be sequence of customer-type nodes in G[S,T] corresponding to the shortest path
between v and v∗:
(j1 = v∗and jl = v
∀r ∈[l −1], ∃a ∈S s.t. (jr,a,jr+1) is a path of G[S,T]
Let a1, a2...,al−1 be the corresponding sequence of maximal intersections of the consideration set
of each two subsequent customer-types along this path:
∀2 ≤r ≤l, ar = max[Cjr ∩Cjr−1]
By convention, we set a1 := i. We now prove by induction over r, 2 ≤r ≤l, that ar > ar−1 and
Cjr ∩[ar] ⊂Cjr−1 ∩[ar].
• Base case (r = 2). We ﬁrst note that a1 < a2. Indeed, since i is the minimal element of S, we
can infer that a2 ≥i. These indices can not be equal otherwise i ∈Cj2 and we would obtain
a strictly shorter path between v and j2 by considering the path (j2,a3,...,al,jl) and this
contradicts the minimality of l. We now prove the inclusion. We infer from the deﬁnition of
weakly laminar consideration sets that either Cj1 ∩[a2] ⊂Cj2 ∩[a2] or Cj2 ∩[a2] ⊂Cj1 ∩[a2].
In addition, product i is contained in Cj1 and i /∈Cj2, otherwise it would contradict the
minimality of the path. Since i /∈Cj2, we can infer that Cj2 ∩[a2] ⊂Cj1 ∩[a2], which leads to
the desired result.
• Inductive step r > 2. We begin by assuming that ar > ar−1. Again, by deﬁnition, either
Cjr ∩[ar] ⊂Cjr−1 ∩[ar] or Cjr−1 ∩[ar] ⊂Cjr ∩[ar]. We assume that the latter is satisﬁed to
prove a contradiction. Since we assume that ar > ar−1, the latter set inclusion leads to ar−1 ∈
Cjr. Therefore, Cjr−2 and Cjr both contain product ar−1 and (jr−2,ar−1,jr) is a path of

e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
ec3
G[S,T]. Thus, we can obtain a path between v∗and v of strictly smaller length using the
shortcut (jr−2,ar−1,jr) instead of (jr−2,ar−1,jr−1,ar,jr). However, this would contradict the
minimality of l. Thus: Cjr ∩[ar] ⊂Cjr−1 ∩[ar].
In order to prove the above assumption that ar > ar−1, we now assume that ar ≤ar−1 and prove that
it leads to a contradiction. By the induction hypothesis, we know that Cjr−1 ∩[ar−1] ⊂Cjr−2 ∩[ar−1].
Thus, if ar ≤ar−1, it follows that ar ∈Cjr−1 ∩[ar−1]. From the above inclusion, we obtain that
ar ∈Cjr−2. Therefore, there is an edge between jr−2 and ar and (j1,a2,j2,...,jr−2,ar,jr,...,jl)
would form a path between v∗and v of strictly smaller length, which contradicts the minimality
of l. We can thus obtain that ar > ar−1.
So far, for any given v ∈T, we have proven the existence of v∗∈T such that Cv ∩[i] ⊂Cv∗∩[i] and
i ∈Cv∗. Deﬁning T(i) as the subset of customer-types in T that consider product i, we may verify
that the collection of subsets Cj ∩[i] where j ∈T(i) is nested. As a consequence, this collection
admits a maximal element, that corresponds to a customer-type j∗∈T. Thus, we conclude that
Cv ⊆Cj∗for any v ∈T.
EC.1.3.
Proof of Theorem 4
The proof is analogous to the previously considered models. We seek to upper-bound the quantity
|Φ⟨S⟩|. To this end, we let (S,T) be a subproblem of S. We have
Φ(S,T) = [min(S)] ∩
 [
j∈T
Cj
!
= [min(S)] ∩

[
j∈T
[
e∈[d]

i ∈[N] : x(j)
e
≥t(j)
e
 


= [min(S)] ∩

[
e∈[d]
[
j∈T

i ∈[N] : x(i)
e ≥t(j)
e
 


= [min(S)] ∩

[
e∈[d]

i ∈[N] : x(i)
e ≥min
j∈T t(j)
e

,
where the second equality follows from Deﬁnition 3, and the third equality proceeds by changing
the union order. We conclude by observing that for each e ∈[d], the quantity minj∈T t(j)
e
can take
at most K distinct values. Therefore, we obtain that |Φ⟨S⟩| ≤N · Kd.
□
EC.1.4.
The marginalized dynamic program
We give here the speciﬁcs of the marginalization algorithm described in Section 5.
Informal sketch. By constructing and updating an appropriate data-structure, denoted by
D(S,T,L) ∼D, we prevent the redundant exploration of the children subproblems appearing in
equation (4). Speciﬁcally, we construct recursively a directed graph D, illustrated by Figure (EC.1).

ec4
e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
To this end, each node inserted in D is labelled by a combination of a child subproblem, and the
index of the last customer-type in T(i) that has been processed, termed the layer of the node. At
each step, we consider all unmarked nodes, and process their next customer-type in T(i) according
to the increasing index order. The dynamic program decides whether the current customer-type is
allocated to product i or not. Each decision entails a graph decomposition into children subproblems
according to Lemma 3. The corresponding nodes, with the respective customer-type layer, are
inserted in D as unmarked nodes. Also, we add directed edges connecting the father node to its
respective children nodes. The procedure terminates when it attains the maximal layer index.
Layers: `
Allocation: ` 2 V
No allocation: ` /2 V
(s, t, L0)
(s, t \ {`}, L0)
(s1, t1, L0)
(s2, t2, L0)
(s3, t3, L0)
(s, t, L0)
Decomposition of 
`1 > `
`2 > `1
`3 > `2
Figure EC.1
Recursive step of the procedure that constructs D(S,T,L).
Generation of the computational tree. More formally, we assume that the customer-types T(i)
are reindexed in an arbitrary order T(i) ∼[l] where l = |T(i)|. We introduce a directed graph data-
structure D(S,T,L), initially set empty. (In the following, unless ambiguity arises, it is simply
denoted D for ease of exposition.) Each node we add to D is uniquely labelled by a tuple (j,s,t) ∈
[l]×P(S)×P(T) where (s,t,L′) is a child subproblem appearing in equation (4) and generated by
an allocation contained in [j]. The nodes are generated by an iterative procedure described below:
• Base case. We start with an empty graph D ←∅. The ﬁrst nodes that we add correspond to
the empty allocation V = ∅. Namely, for each connected components GL′[S(∅)
u ,T (∅)
u ], we insert
a node in D labelled (S(∅)
u T (∅)
u ,0). We refer to them as the roots of D.
• Recursive step. Assume that a node with label (s,t,j) has been added to D. The next customer-
type we consider, denoted j′, is the minimum of t ∩[j + 1,l]. The decision made at this stage
is whether customer-type j′ gets allocated to product i or not. In the latter case, a node

e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
ec5
(s,t,j′) is inserted in D unless it already belongs to the data-structure. Also, we create a
directed edge between the parent node labelled (s,t,j) and its descendant (s,t,j′). Conversely,
in case j′ is allocated to product i, we derive the residual graph GL′[s,t \ {j′}] and compute
its connected components. Each connected component GL′[su,tu] leads to the insertion of a
new node (su,tu,j′) unless it already belongs to D. Also, directed edges are added between
the parent node and its descendants in D.
The graph D built via this recursive procedure is a directed forest – a cycle-free directed graph.
Indeed, the only edges are between father nodes and their oﬀspring. Since the customer-type index
in the node label is monotonic (j′ > j), there cannot be any cycle. Finally, we observe that the
leafs of D uniquely represent all subproblems generated by the allocations V ⊆T(i). Indeed, any V
corresponds to a sequence of binary decisions in [l]. This sequence of decisions deﬁnes a collection
of paths in D starting from the root nodes. By construction, the subproblems described by the
labels of the terminating leafs are exactly the subproblems generated by V .
In terms of running time, each distinct subproblem shows up in at most l nodes of D (and l is
smaller than K). Therefore, the total running time to generate the DP computational tree is upper
bounded by O(NK2 · |S|).
Solving equation (4). Once the DP computational tree has been drawn, the subproblems are
solved backwards using the recursive formula (4). By exploiting the data-structure D(S,T,L), we
show in this paragraph that the maximization problem (4) can be recast as a low dimensional
dynamic program that can be solved eﬃciently. That is, at each recursive step of the master
dynamic program, we solve a separate dynamic program, termed the marginalized dynamic pro-
gram.
We consider a ﬁxed instance (S,T,L). Suppose that all subsequent subproblems have been solved
as we move backwards over the computational tree. For ease of exposition, the reference to the
parameters (S,T,L) is omitted when introducing the marginalized dynamic program, and the
notations i,T(i),L′,l and D are consistent with the previous deﬁnitions.
By construction, we note that for each node of D, with label n = (s,t,j), the corresponding
subproblem (s,t,L′) has been generated by at least one allocation V ⊆[j], that we designate as
V (n). We deﬁne the value function F(n) as the optimal expected revenue from customer-types t in
the subproblem (S,T,L) under the constraints that (i) product i is stocked and (ii) the allocation
of this product V ⊆T(i) satisﬁes the constraint V ∩[j] = V (n), i.e., the projection of V on [j] is
V (n). Let j′ be the next customer-type for which a decision is made when examining node n, i.e.,
j′ = min([j + 1,l] ∩T). Letting N(n) denote the children nodes of n if j′ is allocated to product i
and n′ be the child node of n otherwise, we obtain:
F(n) = max

F (n′) , λj′ · Pi +
X
u∈N(n)
F (u)



ec6
e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
Indeed, if customer-type j′ is allocated to product i, it generate a revenue of λj′ · Pi and the
residual graph decomposes into the connected subgraphs described by N(n). Conversely, if j′ is
not allocated to product i, the connected subgraph is not modiﬁed further and the revenue is that
of F(n′). This is consistent with the constraint (ii) as V (n′) = V (n) when j′ is not added to the
allocation.
By applying this formula inductively from the leafs of D, we compute F(n1),...,F(nr(∅)) where
n1,...,nr(∅) are the root nodes of D. Conditional on the fact that i is stocked, we conclude that:
J(S,T,L) =
r(∅)
X
u=1
F(nu)
Therefore, equation (4) is equivalent to:
J(S,T,L) = max
 r(−)
X
u=1
J(S−
u ,T −
u ,L) , max
"r(∅)
X
u=1
F(nu)
#!
Example with the in-tree model. To ﬂesh out our marginalized algorithm through a concrete
model, we argue now that this approach allows to solve eﬃciently the in-tree model proposed
by Honhon et al. (2012). Here, each product is represented by a node in a rooted tree T . Each
consideration set in C corresponds to a path from the root to a given node – we will denote by
Cv the consideration set formed by the path from the root to node v ∈T . We further assume that
such directed paths deﬁne the increasing preference order, namely, the farther from the root, the
more preferred is a product, thus leading to some (non-unique) ranking function σ. The processing
order is chosen as the reverse permutation ¯σ, that is, products are processed from the root to the
descendant nodes. To argue that the marginalization is eﬃcient, it is suﬃcient to show that, for
any product i ∈[n], we can restrict attention to allocations V ⊆T(i) corresponding to subtrees of
product nodes (here, by abuse of language, we mix each customer-type with his corresponding con-
sideration set and product node in T ). To arrive at a contradiction, suppose we have an allocation
V ⊆T(i) with Ci,Cj ∈V , where j is a descendent of i, and k is on the path from i to j although
Ck /∈V . Since product i has been allocated to customer-type associated with Cj, who prefers prod-
uct k over i according to σ, it follows that product k is not contained in S(V ). Consequently, all
product nodes between j and k have been eliminated from the residual graph, and therefore the
customer-type node of Ck is disconnected from any (non-trivial) connected component. Thus, we
can assume without loss of generality that Ck ∈V .
Complexity Analysis. We now derive a general upper bound on the running time.
Proof of Proposition 1
The proof of the ﬁrst claim follows from our previous observations. At
each node (S,T,L) of the computational tree, the running time for generating the graph D(S,T,L)

e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
ec7
along with the running time for solving the marginalized DP is at most O(N · K2 · |S|). Summing
over all the nodes of the DP computational tree, we obtain a total running time of O(N ·K2 ·|S|2).
We now derive an upper-bound on the state space size. To this end, we construct a function
Φ that maps any subproblem generated along the recursion to a subset of products as well as
a product within this set. By deﬁnition, any subproblem (S,T,L) ∈S has been generated by a
sequence of decisions whereby some products in {1,...,min(S) −1} have been stocked. We deﬁne
A(S,T,L) as a partial assortment of products corresponding to a sequence of decisions prior to
generating subproblem (S,T,L). The mapping is described as follows:
Φ : S →P([N]) × [N]
(S,T,L) 7→(A(S,T,L) ∪S,min(S))
It is suﬃcient to show that this function is injective to obtain the desired result. Assume that two
subproblems satisfy Φ(I1) = Φ(I2) where I1 = (S1,T1,L1) and I2 = (S2,T2,L′). Then, by deﬁnition:
S1 = Φ(1) (I1) ∩[Φ(2) (I1),N]
= Φ(1) (I2) ∩[Φ(2) (I2),N]
= S2 .
This proves that the two subproblems have the same subsets of products. By similar observations,
we can claim that both I1 and I2 are generated by the same sequence of decisions, or equivalently
the same assortment A ⊆Φ(1) (I1) ∩[Φ(2) (I1) −1]. We also know that L = L′ since the truncation
vector is determined by the previous stocking decisions. As a result, the only diﬀerence between
the two subproblems could only be caused by a diﬀerent sequence of allocations. Therefore, it is
suﬃcient to prove that the set of customer-types remaining in the two connected subgraphs are
exactly the same in order to obtain that I1 = I2. Ad absurdum, assume j ∈T1 \ T2. By noting
S1 = S2, this means that customer-type j is still unsatisﬁed in I1 whereas it was allocated to a
product in the sequence of decisions that generates the subproblem I2. Since j has been satisﬁed
along the generation of the subproblem I2, there exists a product i in A that belongs to Cj. In
addition, since GL[S1,T1] is a connected subgraph, this means there exists an edge between node j
and a product node i′ ∈S1. Along the generation of subproblem I1, i has been made available to j
but it was not allocated to customer-type j - as a result its consideration set has been truncated to
only account for products more preferred than i: Lj < σj(i). Thus customer j necessarily prefers i′
over product i. On the other hand, as product i was allocated to customer-type j when generating
I2, product i′ has been deleted since it is preferred over i. Thus i′ /∈S2 and since S1 = S2, we obtain
a contradiction: i′ /∈S1.

ec8
e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
EC.1.5.
Similar rankings
In this section, we relax the unique-ranking assumption, and derive parametric computational
bounds for the consideration set models studied in Section 4 when the rankings are similar, i.e., Σ
is formed by small perturbations of a central permutation σ. Namely, assuming that SN designates
the set of all permutations of [N], we let B(σ,d) designate the L∞-ball of radius d centered on σ.
That is,
B(σ,d) = {σ′ ∈SN : ∀i ∈[N]|σ′(i) −σ(i)|≤d} .
This deﬁnition implies that for any permutations σ1,σ2 ∈B(σ,d), two products i,j ∈[N] such that
|σ(i) −σ(j)|≥2d necessarily have the same relative order in σ1 and σ2. In other terms, only local
“swaps” may occur between products at distance less than 2d. This structure is somewhat similar
to the d-sorted pricing structure proposed by Jagabathula and Rusmevichientong (2016).
The next theorem shows that, for a ﬁxed parameter d, the state space complexity associated with
unique-ranking Σ = {σ} is preserved up to a polynomial factor under Σ = B(σ,d). In particular,
the polynomial running time guarantees established in Section 4 carry over to Σ = B(σ,d). This
result permits a parametric tradeoﬀbetween modeling power and tractability. In particular, the
algorithm is expected to be eﬃcient for small values of d, i.e., d = O(log N), and it is intractable
for large values of d, i.e., d >> log N.
Theorem EC.2. Let S(C,σ) be the state space under a collection of consideration sets C and a
unique ranking Σ = {σ}. The size of the state space of the general dynamic program with processing
order σ under the consideration sets C with rankings Σ = B(σ,d) is at most 24d−2 · |S(C,σ)|.
Proof
We construct a function Ψ that maps any subproblem generated along the recursion to
a tuple that lies in a set of size 22d−2h. By showing that Ψ is injective, we obtain the upper bound
on the size of the state space. In what follows, we assume that products are numbered according
to the processing order σ.
Speciﬁcally, assuming that (S,T,L) ∈S, we deﬁne i = min(S) as the next product to be processed
in S and A corresponds to the assortment decisions in [i−1] which generate this subproblem. The
image of (S,T,L) by Ψ is deﬁned as the tuple (S0,T0,x,y) where:
• (S0,T0) is the subproblem of the unique-ranking dynamic program generated by the sequence
of stocking decisions A ∩[i −2d] over [i −1] such that i ∈S0,
• x = A ∩[i −2d + 1,i −1].
• y = S ∩[i,i + 2d −1].
We now argue that Ψ is injective. To this end, we begin by establishing two preliminary claims.
Claim EC.1. For every j ∈T, we have: Cj ∩A ∩[i −2d] = ∅.

e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
ec9
Proof
Suppose that there exists α ∈A ∩[i −2d] ∩Cj. Then, by construction, Lj ≤σj(α). In
addition, given that σj ∈B(σ,d), any product in [i −2d] is preferred over products in S (recall
that the products are numbered according to the central permutation σ, meaning that σ is the
identity). As a result, σj(α) < σj(β) for all product β ∈S, meaning that Cj(Lj) does not intersect
with S which contradicts the connectivity of the subgraph GL[S,T].
□
It immediately follows that we can express L as a function of x.
Claim EC.2. For every customer-type j ∈T, Lj = min{σj(α) : α ∈x ∩Cj}.
The remainder of the proof seeks to establish the next lemma, which implies that Ψ is injective.
Lemma EC.2. Let T1 be the set of customer-types in T0 such that x∩Cj ̸= ∅and y ∩Cj(Lj) = ∅.
Then, GL[S,T] is the connected component of GL[S0 ∩(y ∪[i + 2d,N]),T0 \ T1] containing i.
Proof
We ﬁrst establish that GL[S,T] ⊆GL[S0,T0]. To this end, we argue that the residual
graph obtained by the stocking decisions of A under the general dynamic program is a subgraph
of the residual graph generated by the decisions of stocking A ∩[i −2d] under the unique-ranking
dynamic program. To this end, we observe that all graph operations performed in the unique-
ranking case are also performed by the general dynamic program:
• Customer-type node deletions: Observe that a customer-type node j ∈[K] is deleted under
the unique-ranking dynamic program if Cj ∩A∩[i−2d] ̸= ∅. Hence, by an argument identical
to the proof of Claim EC.1, it is easy to verify that, if Cj ∩A∩[i−2d] ̸= ∅, then customer-type
j is also deleted under the general dynamic program by the stocking decisions A.
• Product node deletions: In the unique-ranking case, a product node is deleted when it is
processed. Given that the two algorithms follow the same processing order and by (2), any
product deleted in the unique-ranking case is also deleted under the general dynamic program.
Therefore, since GL[S,T] is a connected component of the residual graph under the general dynamic
program, it is also a connected subgraph of the residual graph obtained under the unique-ranking
dynamic program. Since S ∩S0 ̸= ∅, it follows that GL[S,T] ⊆G[S0,T0], which immediately yields
GL[S,T] ⊆GL[S0,T0].
We further reﬁne this set inclusion. Since S ⊆S0 ∩(y ∪[i + 2d,N]) by deﬁnition of y, it follows
that that GL[S,T] ⊆GL[S0 ∩(y ∪[i + 2d,N]),T0]. Finally, for every customer-types j ∈T1 and
product i′ ∈[i + 2d,N], we have
σj(i′) ≥i + d > Lj ,
(EC.1)
where the last inequality holds by Claim EC.2 since x ∩Cj ̸= ∅. It follows that
S ∩Cj(Lj) ⊆(y ∪[i + 2d,N]) ∩Cj(Lj) = (y ∩Cj(Lj)) ∪([i + 2d,N] ∩Cj(Lj)) = ∅,

ec10
e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
where the last equality holds by (EC.1) and the deﬁnition of T1. Thus, we infer that j /∈T. It
follows that GL[S,T] ⊆GL[S0 ∩(y ∪[i + 2d,N]),T0 \ T1].
Now, we will establish the reciprocal inclusion. Speciﬁcally, it is suﬃcient to show that none of
the nodes in GL[S0 ∩(y ∪[i + 2d,N]),T0 \ T1] are deleted under the general dynamic program by
the stocking decisions A. By equation (2), when rankings are in B(σ,d), it is clear that none of the
products in [i + 2d,N] are deleted when stocking a product in [i −1]. Indeed, for every i1 ∈[i −1],
i2 ∈[i + 2d,N] and j ∈[K], σj(i1) ≤i + d −1 < i + 2d −d ≤σj(i2). It ensues that none of the
product nodes S ∪([i+2d,N] ∩S0) = S0 ∩(y ∪[i+2d,N]) are deleted. To establish a similar claim
for the customer-type nodes, we ﬁx j ∈T0 \ T1. The customer-type node j is deleted only if it is
allocated to a product of A. Given that j ∈T0, it follows that A ∩[i −2d] ∩Cj = ∅, thus it is clear
that customer-type j is not allocated by the stocking decisions in A ∩[i −2d]. Now suppose ad
absurdum that customer-type j was allocated to a product i1 ∈x ∩Cj. It follows that there exists
i2 ∈y ∩Cj(Lj) (otherwise, y ∩Cj(Lj) = ∅, which yields the contradiction j ∈T1). Consequently, by
equation (2), node i2 was necessarily deleted from the graph following the allocation of product i1
to customer-type j, which contradicts that i2 ∈S.
□
□
EC.1.6.
Degrees of freedom of the quasi-convex model
Claim EC.3. For a ﬁxed central permutation, there exists 2N+1 −N −2 quasi-convex preference
lists.
Proof
Let Σ(N) be the set of quasi-convex preference lists over N products. The preference
lists are uniquely deﬁned by their consideration set and the quasi-convex ranking function. For
any ﬁxed interval of length ℓ∈[N], the ranking function can be viewed as a permutation over ℓ
elements: [ℓ] →[ℓ]. We now construct a mapping φ from any subset S ⊂[2,ℓ] to a quasi-convex
permutation over the interval [ℓ]. φ(S) is deﬁned as follows:
(φ(S) is decreasing over [|S|]
with φ(S)⟨|[|S|]⟩= S
φ(S) is increasing over [|S| + 1,N]
with Φ(S)⟨[|S| + 1,N]⟩= [ℓ] \ S
Indeed, the quasi-convex permutation φ(S) is uniquely deﬁned given its monotonicity on each
interval. It can be veriﬁed that this mapping is surjective (by taking S equal to the set of image
values of the quasi-convex permutation on its decreasing interval excluding the minimal value 1).
Finally, it is injective by observing that if φ(S1) and φ(S2) are equal, in particular they share the
same decreasing segments and S1 = S2. Therefore, the cardinality of quasi-convex ranking functions
over an interval of length ℓis 2ℓ−1. By remarking that there exists N −ℓ+ 1 distinct intervals of
length ℓ, we obtain:
|Σ(N)| =
N
X
ℓ=1
(N −ℓ+ 1) · 2ℓ−1

e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
ec11
= (N + 1) ·
N−1
X
ℓ=0
2ℓ−
N
X
ℓ=1
ℓ· 2ℓ−1
= (N + 1) ·
 2N −1

−(N −1) · 2N −1
= 2N+1 −N −2 .
□
EC.1.7.
Proof of Theorem 5
Throughout this section, we assume that products are numbered according to σ. We construct an
injective mapping ψ : S →[N] × [N] from any connected subgraph generated along the recursion,
i.e., belonging to the computational tree, onto pairs of products. Speciﬁcally, we have Ψ(S,T,L) =
(a,imin), where a is the last product stocked in the recursion before generating (S,T,L), and
imin = min(S) is the next product to be processed in S. Our proof proceeds from four structural
claims stated below; the objective is to express the parameters of the subproblem (S,T,L) as a
function of (a,imin). To this end, we deﬁne imax = max(S), and for every i ≥imin, we let T(i) denote
the set {j ∈[K] : Cj(Lj) ∩[imin,i] ̸= ∅}.
Claim EC.4. For every j ∈T, if a ∈Cj, then Lj = σj(a), otherwise Lj = N + 1.
Claim EC.5. S = [imin,imax].
Claim EC.6. T = T(imax).
Claim EC.7. imax is the maximum index i ∈[imin,N] for which GL[[imin,i],T(i)] is connected.
By combining Claims EC.4, EC.5, EC.6 and EC.7, we infer that the subproblem (S,T,L) is
uniquely determined with respect to (a,imin). It follows that the mapping Ψ is injective. The proof
of the above claims is provided in the remainder of this appendix.
Proof of Claim EC.4. Given a customer-type j ∈T, suppose that a /∈Cj. Since Cj is an interval
satisfying Cj ∩[a+1,N] ̸= ∅, it follows that none of the products stocked before a are contained in
the consideration set Cj. Therefore, according to the equation (3) governing the updates of L, it
follows that Lj = N + 1.
Now, suppose there exists j ∈T such that a ∈Cj and Lj < σj(a). Then, by equation (3), we have
necessarily stocked a product i′ < a such that σj(i′) < σj(a). Since the function σj is quasi-convex,
for every i ≥a, it follows that σj(i) ≥σj(a) > Lj. Thus, Cj(Lj)∩S = ∅, and there is no edge between
j ∈T and any node in S in the subgraph GL[S,T]. This contradicts that GL[S,T] is connected.
Conversely, suppose there exists j ∈T such that a ∈Cj and Lj > σj(a). Let (Sa,T a,La) be the
state corresponding to the decision of stocking product a (this state corresponds to a parent node
of (S,T,L) in the computational tree), and let T(a) be the corresponding set of customer-types
whose preference list contains a, i.e., T(a) = {j ∈T a : a ∈Cj(La
j)}. Based on equation (3), it follows
that Lj = La
j and j /∈T(a), which, by deﬁnition of T(a), implies that a /∈Cj(La
j). Hence, it follows
σj(a) > La
j = Lj, which contradicts our hypothesis.
□

ec12
e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
Proof of Claim EC.5. It is clear that S ⊆[imin,imax], and it remains to show that [imin,imax] ⊆S.
To this end, observe that, for every customer-type j ∈T, the quasi-convex property implies that
Cj(Lj) is an interval. Thus, since GL[S,T] is connected and S ⊆∪j∈TCj(Lj), it is not diﬃcult to
verify that ∪j∈TCj(Lj) is an interval satisfying [imin,imax] ⊆∪j∈TCj(Lj).
Now suppose there exists α ∈S\[imin,imax], and let j ∈T be a customer-type such that i ∈Cj(Lj).
Node α was necessarily deleted at an anterior step of the recursion, otherwise it would still be
connected to the current subgraph via customer-type j. Thus, by equation (2), at an earlier state of
the recursion (Sβ,T β,Lβ), we have stocked a product β ≤a and allocated a customer-type jβ ∈[K]
such that α ∈Iβ, where Iβ = {i ∈Cjβ(Lβ
jβ) : σjβ(i) ≤σjβ(β)}. Since σjβ is quasi-convex, it follows
that Iβ is an interval that contains products α and β. As such, we have also deleted any remaining
product contained in Iβ. In particular, we have deleted product imin, since β ≤a ≤imin ≤α. We
have obtained the desired contradiction.
□
Proof of Claim EC.6. Fix a customer-type j ∈T. Since GL[S,T] is connected, it is clear that
Cj(Lj)∩S ̸= ∅. By Claim EC.5, it immediately follows Cj(Lj)∩[imin,imax] ̸= ∅. On the other hand,
suppose that there exists a customer-type j ∈[K] such that Cj(Lj) ∩[imin,imax] ̸= ∅and j /∈T.
By Claim EC.5, this implies that Cj(Lj) ∩S ̸= ∅. Hence, node j was necessarily deleted at an
earlier step of the recursion, otherwise it would still be connected to the current subgraph. Thus,
at an earlier step of the recursion (Sβ,T β,Lβ), we stocked a product β ≤a, which was allocated to
customer-type j, and the truncation vector was updated accordingly: Lj = σj(β). Consequently, by
equation (2), we have deleted all products in {i ∈Cj(Lβ
j ) : σj(i) ≤σj(β)} ⊆Cj(Lj). In particular,
this implies that Cj(Lj)∩S = ∅, which yields a contradiction. We have just shown that T = T(imax).
□
Proof of Claim EC.7. In order to establish the claim, it is suﬃcient to show that none of the
products i ∈[imin,N] is deleted by the anterior stocking decisions. Suppose ad absurdum that
there exists a product i′ ∈[imin,N] that gets deleted by stocking a product β ∈[a] at an earlier
state of the recursion (Sβ,T β,Lβ). Then, by equation (2), there exists a customer-type j ∈[K]
allocated to product β such that σj(i′) < σj(β) and i′,β ∈Cj(Lβ
j ). Thus, since σj is quasi-convex
and imin ∈[β,i′], we infer that σj(imin) < σj(β) and imin ∈Cj(Lβ
j ), which implies that imin is also
deleted. This yields a contradiction.
□
EC.1.8.
Proof of Theorem 6
The processing order can be chosen as an arbitrary permutation; to ﬁx ideas, products are processed
by order of increasing indices. We further assume that the model is augmented by a ‘dummy’
preference list, denoted by the index 0, and associated with the utility vector u0 = ⃗0. Similarly,
we introduce a ‘dummy’ product 0 represented by the vector features x0 =⃗0. In what follows, by
abuse of language, a product may refer to the corresponding graph node, or its representation in
the feature space.

e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
ec13
Induction hypothesis. At a high-level, our proof shows that each DP subproblem is characterized
by a polytope in the feature space deﬁned by a constant number of facets, chosen among a polyno-
mial set of aﬃne constraints. Speciﬁcally, we prove the following property inductively. Suppose that
a subproblem (S,T,L) is generated along the recursion. Then, there exists (a,b,c,d) ∈[N]2 × [K]2
such that GL[S,T] is the connected component of GL[S′,T ′], where:
• The set of products S′ is deﬁned as follows:









z = Rot
π
2 ,xb −xa

,
H(a,b,c,d) =

x ∈R2 : x · uc ≤uc · xa, x · ud ≤ud · xb, x · z ≥xa · z
 
,
S′ = {s ∈[i,N] : xs ∈H(a,b,c,d) \ ∂H(a,b,c,d)} .
• The set of customer-types T ′ is formed by all the utility vectors that lie in the cone (uc,ud):
T ′ =

j ∈[K] : ∃λ1,λ2 > 0 s.t. u(j) = λ1uc + λ2ud
 
.
• The truncation vector L is deﬁned as follows:
∀j ∈T ′, Lj = min(σj(a),σj(b)) .
Before proving this structural result, we observe that the above-mentioned property implies that
there exists an injective mapping from the DP states (S,T,L) ∈S onto the 5-tuples (i,a,b,c,d) ∈
[N]3 × [K]2. As such, we conclude that |S| = O(N 3 · K2).
Base case. If (S,T,L) is one of the roots of the DP computational tree, no products has been
examined yet and GL[S,T] is a connected component of G. Then, let a = b = c = d = 0 and i =
min(S). In this case, we have H(a,b,c,d) = R2, S′ = [N] and T ′ = [K]. It is easy to verify that the
induction hypothesis is satisﬁed.
Recursive step. Now, suppose that (S,T,L) satisﬁes the induction hypothesis properties with
respect to the parameters (a,b,c,d) and (S′,T ′,L). Next, the dynamic program examines product
i = min(S).
If i is not stocked in the assortment, we only need to discard node i from the graph and compute
the connected components of GL[S \ {i},T] to obtain the children subproblems. By our induction
hypothesis, it follows that each child subproblem is a connected component of GL[S′ \ {i},T ′]),
and the induction hypothesis property is veriﬁed.
Now, suppose that product i is allocated to a subset of customer-types V ⊆T(i). We deﬁne
α,β ∈T as the indices corresponding to the extreme lines of the cone conv{uh : h ∈V }, where
uα,uβ are ordered in the anti-trigonometric order. Using our previous notation, every subproblem
generated by the allocation V is a connected component of (S(V ),T (V ),L′). In what follows, we

ec14
e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
show that our induction hypothesis is satisﬁed for each child subproblem, either with respect to
the parameters (a,i,c,α), or with respect to the parameters (i,b,β,d). Technically-speaking, this
property is established via Claims EC.8,
EC.9, EC.10, and EC.11, stated below. We refer the
reader to Figure EC.2 where we illustrate the resulting decomposition of the residual subgraph,
based on the polyhedra H(a,i,c,α) and H(i,b,β,d).
a
b
i
H(a, b, c, d)
H(a, i, c, ↵)
H(i, b, β, d)
Products
Assortment
Edges of H-
polytopes
Utility vectors
~u↵
~uβ
~uc
~ud
Figure EC.2
Recursive step: the allocation of product i to the cone (uα,uβ) gives rise to independent
subproblems, either contained in the polyhedron H(a,i,c,α), or in the polyhedron H(i,b,β,d).
Claim EC.8. Without loss of generality, T (V ) = {j ∈[K] : uj ∈(uc,uα) ∪(uβ,ud)}.
Proof
Suppose that a customer-type j ∈T ′ has a utility vector uj ∈(uα,uβ). Clearly, customer-
type j may only pick a product generating a utility larger or equal to xi ·u(j). Indeed, if i ∈Cj, then
customer-type j may only pick a product preferred over i. Conversely, if i ̸∈Cj, it may only choose
a product generating a utility larger or equal to the customer’s cut-oﬀlevel. Since the customer-
types α and β are both satisﬁed with product i, then every product i′ that satisﬁes xi′ · uα ≥xi · uα
or xi′ · uβ ≥xi · uβ has been deleted. The hypothesis u(j) ∈(uα,uβ) implies that every product i′
for which xi′ ·u(j) ≥xi ·u(j) satisﬁes x · uα ≥xi · uα or x · uβ ≥xi · uβ. Thus, customer-type j does
not prefer any product of S(V ) over product i, meaning that customer-type node j is disconnected
from S(V ). Consequently, without loss of generality, we may assume that j /∈T (V ).
□
Claim EC.9. H(a,i,c,α) \ ∂H(a,i,c,α) and H(i,b,β,d) \ ∂H(i,b,β,d) are disjoint.
Proof
Let z1 = Rot
  π
2 ,xi −xa

and z2 = Rot
  π
2 ,xb −xi

. Since xi·uα ≥xa·uα, xa·uc ≥xi·uc
and xi · z1 = xa · z1, then z1 ∈(uc,uα). Using a similar argument, we infer that z2 ∈(uβ,ud).
By combining the latter two observations, since uβ ∈(uα,ud), we infer that uα ∈(z1,z2), i.e.,
there exists λ1,λ2 ≥0 such that uα = λ1z1 + λ2z2. Then, by deﬁnition, if there exists a vector
x ∈(H(a,i,c,α) \ ∂H(a,i,c,α)) ∩(H(i,b,β,d) \ ∂H(i,b,β,d)), then x · z1 > xi · z1, x · z2 > xi · z2

e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
ec15
and x · uα < xi · uα. However, by multiplying the ﬁrst two inequalities by λ1 and λ2 respectively,
and by summing them, we obtain
x · (λ1z1 + λ2z2) > xi · (λ1z1 + λ2z2) = xi · uα .
This yields the desired contradiction.
□
Claim EC.10. S(V ) = S ∩((H(a,i,c,α) \ ∂H(a,i,c,α)) ∪(H(i,b,β,d) \ ∂H(i,b,β,d))).
Proof
By our induction hypothesis and Claim EC.8, it is suﬃcient to show that
S ∩((H (a,i,c,α) \ ∂H (a,i,c,α)) ∪(H (i,b,β,d) \ ∂H (i,b,β,d))) ⊆S(V ) .
Since product i is allocated to the cone V = {j ∈[K] : uj ∈(uα,uβ)}, we have S(V ) = S \ ¯H, where
¯H =
[
j∈V
{s ∈[N] : xs · uj ≥xi · uj} .
By Farkas lemma, we have
¯H = {s ∈[N] : xs · uα ≥xi · uα} ∪{s ∈[N] : xs · uβ ≥xi · uβ} ,
and thus, we have
S(V ) = {s ∈S : xs · uα < xi · uα} ∩{s ∈S : xs · uβ < xi · uβ} .
Consequently, it is not diﬃcult to see that the linear constraints deﬁning the vectors of S(V ) are
satisﬁed by H(a,i,c,α) \ ∂H(a,i,c,α). Using a symmetrical reasoning, we obtain H(i,b,β,d) \
∂H(i,b,β,d) ⊆S(V ).
□
Claim EC.11. For every j ∈T (V ), if uj ∈(uc,uα), then L′
j = min(σj(i),σj(a)) and Cj(L′
j) ∩
S(V ) ⊆H(a,i,c,α) \ ∂H(a,i,c,α). If uj ∈(uβ,ud), then L′
j = min(σj(i),σj(b)) and Cj(L′
j) ∩S(V ) ⊆
H(i,b,β,d) \ ∂H(i,b,β,d).
Proof
Fix a customer-type j ∈T (V ). By symmetry, the remainder of the proof focuses on the
case uj ∈(uc,uα). By the construction of H(a,b,c,d), if uj ∈(uc,uα), then customer-type j’s most
preferred product among {a,i,b} is either a or i, meaning that L′
j = min(σj(i),σj(a)). Next, we
observe that since a and i are stocked in the assortment, the products contained in the truncated
consideration set Cj(L′
j) necessarily generate a utility greater or equal the quantities xa · uj and
xi · uj. In other words, the vectors associated with products Cj(L′
j) lie in the aﬃne half-space
{x ∈R2 : x·uj > ¯u}, where ¯u = max{xa ·uj,xi ·uj}. By Claim EC.10, the intersection of S(V ) with
the half-space {x ∈R2 : x · uj > ¯u} is contained in H(a,i,c,α) \ ∂H(a,i,c,α). Therefore, we infer
that Cj(L′
j) ∩S(V ) is contained in H(a,i,c,α) \ ∂H(a,i,c,α).
□

ec16
e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
EC.2.
Empirical Performance
EC.2.1.
Additional details on the computational experiments
Computational benchmark. The assortment optimization problem can be formulated as 0 −1
binary program. We deﬁne the binary decision variables yi to decide whether a product is added
to the assortment, xi,j encodes the assignment of product i ∈Cj to customer-type j ∈[K] . The
problem is formulated as follows:
max
N
X
i=1
K
X
j=1
Pi · λj · xi,j
s.t.
xi,j ≤yi
∀(i,j) ∈[N] × [K]
(EC.2)
xi,j + yl ≤1
∀j ∈[K],l ∈Cj and i ∈{x ∈Cj : σj (l) < σj (i)}
(EC.3)
X
i∈Cj
xi,j ≤1
∀j ∈[K]
(EC.4)
xi,j,yi ∈{0,1} ,
where the coupling constraints (EC.2) enforce that a customer may only pick a product made
available in the assortment while the inequalities (EC.3) ensure that a given customer-type could
only choose the highest rank product made available to him. Finally, the constraints (EC.4) mean
that at most one product is assigned to each customer. The additional constraints (EC.4) tighten
the relaxation of the binary program. It is worth noting that that similar formulations were intro-
duced prior to this work by McBride and Zufryden (1988) and Anupindi et al. (2009). This integer
program (IP) is implemented on a commercial solver GUROBI (Gurobi Optimization 2015), which
arguably combines state-of-the-art methodologies and implementation.
Generative models. The prices of products are sampled independently and identically from a
log-normal distribution. The scale parameter is calibrated to reﬂect realistically the variability of
prices in the Shampoo product category. The probability vector is drawn uniformly at random
from the unit simplex. To generate instances of the quasi-convex model, the collection of preference
lists is formed by independent and uniformly-distributed samples over the class of quasi-convex
permutations. To construct instances with arbitrary consideration sets, we use a random Bernoulli
generator, as explained in Section 7.1. The ranking function is given by the increasing price order.
Implementation of our algorithm. We use a ‘plain’ implementation of our algorithm which follows
the two-pass approach explained in Section 3. First, we generate the computational tree using the
recursive equations. Next, we compute the value function by solving a maximum ﬂow problem. In
the quasi-convex case, each subproblem is simply encoded by the latest three dynamic programming
decisions, leading to an implementation in time O(N 3K).
EC.2.2.
Additional tables and ﬁgures

e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
ec17
Figure EC.3
Average runtime of our algorithm (DP) against the commercial solver (IP) on synthetic instances.
0   
200   
400   
600   
800   
500   
1000   
1500   
2000   
2500   
(s)   
K   
(N   =   20,   α   =   0.3)   
0   
200   
400   
600   
800   
1000   
500   
1000   
1500   
2000   
2500   
(s)   
K   
(N   =   20,   α   =   0.7)   
0   
200   
400   
600   
800   
1000   
500   
1000   
1500   
2000   
2500   
(s)   
K   
(N   =   20,   α   =   0.5)   
DP   
MIP   
0   
100   
200   
300   
400   
500   
600   
100   
150   
200   
250   
300   
350   
400   
(s)   
N   
(K   =   20,   α   =   0.7)   
DP   
MIP   
Note. Note that the asymptotic complexity of the IP is not captured here since we impose termination after 1000
seconds. The running time is averaged over 50 instances. Recall that α is the Bernoulli parameter that controls the
size of the consideration sets.
Table EC.1
Relative size of the collapsed state space in comparison to naive enumeration.
N
K
α = 0.3
α = 0.5
α = 0.7
20
1000
17.8%
4.8%
1.7%
20
2000
22.5%
8.0%
3.6%
100
20
−
< 0.1%
< 0.1%
.
Table EC.2
Summary statistics of the training data sets.
Data set
N
#
τ
Avg. |At|
Max. |At|
Dog Food & Treats
51
302557
220
19.4
39
Bath Tissue
17
262027
246
7.3
11
Shampoo & Conditioners
38
199438
171
23.7
35
# designates the number of observations. Recall that τ denotes the number of distinct assortments At.
Table EC.3
Running time of the estimation procedure (in seconds).
Data set
Quasi-convex
MNL
MMNL(3)
Dog Food & Treats
4380 s
172.5 s
7200 s
Bath Tissue
1210 s
6.33 s
900 s
Shampoo & Conditioners
2550 s
30.0 s
4960 s
We impose a running time limitation of 7200 s on each estimation procedure.

ec18
e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
Table EC.4
Prediction errors achieved by the ﬁtted choice models.
Data sets
Choice model
Accuracy metrics
MSE
MAE
χ2
AIC
BIC
Dog Food & Treats
Quasi-convex
0.17
0.42
154
1363914
1370886
MNL
0.22
0.50
194
1397034
1397429
MMNL(3)
0.20
0.46
160
1377260
1378514
Bath Tissue
Quasi-convex
0.25
0.50
236
1001216
1005606
MNL
0.31
0.55
301
1014380
1014770
MMNL(3)
0.31
0.53
261
1014356
1015595
Shampoo & Conditioners
Quasi-convex
0.14
0.38
57
1012777
1019499
MNL
0.18
0.42
72
1027823
1028204
MMNL(3)
0.18
0.41
61
1024220
1025430
We deﬁne the χ2 error as the quantity (p−ˆ
p)2
0.01+p where p is observed choice probability and ˆp is the predicted probability according
to the ﬁtted choice model. This error is summed over all the observations in the hold-out data set. Note that the quantity 0.01 is
added to the denominator to avoid over-weighting the entries corresponding to very small choice probabilities. The BIC metric
is deﬁned as 2 · d · ln(n) −2 · L, where d is the number of parameters of the ﬁtted model, n is the number of observations, and L
is the log-likelihood of the in-sample data with respect to the ﬁtted choice model. Note that the metrics MSE, MAE and χ2 are
deﬁned with respect to out-of-sample errors, while AIC and BIC are deﬁned with respect to in-sample errors.
EC.2.3.
Additional details on the estimation methods
In order to calibrate the choice models to training data, we leverage standard estimation methods
developed in earlier literature. Speciﬁcally, the parametric choice models are estimated through
standard maximum likelihood methods (McFadden 1973, Talluri and Van Ryzin 2006). We employ
a column generation algorithm to construct the quasi-convex preference lists. The approach is
in the same vein as the methodology proposed by van Ryzin and Vulcano (2014) or Bertsimas
and Miˇsic (2015). However, contrary to arbitrary nonparametric choice models, we show that the
column generation step can be solved in polynomial time under the quasi-convex model.
Additional notation. Recall that the training data takes the form of a collection of assortments
{A1,...,Aτ}, with corresponding purchase probability pit of product i in the assortment At, for
each i ∈[N] and t ∈[τ]. Let P designate the probability vector obtained by ﬂattening the matrix
(pit)i,t∈[N]×[τ] in column-major order. When the no-purchase option is not observable, the product
purchases probabilities are normalized and sum up to 1.
Estimation of MNL and MMNL. In order to estimate the MNL and MMNL parameters, we use
standard maximum likelihood estimation (McFadden 1973, Talluri and Van Ryzin 2006). This esti-
mation method is a standard approach used to calibrate discrete mixtures of MNL (Bierlaire 2003,
Hess et al. 2007). The corresponding maximum log-likelihood estimation problem is implemented
using the convex-programming optimization software Ipopt (W¨achter and Biegler 2006). Contrary
to the MNL model, the log-likelihood function associated with the MMNL model is non-concave,
and the optimization to a global optimum is not guaranteed in this setting. Thus, we use 10 random
initializations of the solver, and we ultimately select the model parameters that achieve the best
ﬁt according to the log-likelihood cost.

e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
ec19
Estimation of quasi-convex preferences. In order to calibrate the quasi-convex model with data,
we employ the column generation ideas developed in the related literature (van Ryzin and Vulcano
2014, Bertsimas and Miˇsic 2015). To this end, let L be the collection of all quasi-convex preference
lists for a given instance and let m be the number of distinct such lists (the dependency of m
on N is explicitly stated by Claim EC.3 in Appendix EC.1.6). To ease the notation, we assume
that the no-purchase option is captured by an alternative in [N]. Consequently, we introduce the
observation tensor O = (Ot,i,j) ∈{0,1}[τ]×[N]×[m], where Ot,i,j = 1 if the preference list Lj purchases
product i in the assortment At, and Ot,i,j = 0 otherwise. In what follows, by abuse of notation, O
will also designate the corresponding τ · N-by-m matrix (known as the mode-3 unfolding).
In order to estimate a probability distribution Λ = (λ1,...,λm) over the quasi-convex preference
lists, ideally we would like to solve the following convex program:
min
∥O · Λ −P∥
s.t.
∥Λ∥1≤1
Λ ≥0 .
In the special case of the ℓ1 norm, the latter problem can be cast a linear program with O(t · N)
equality constraints through standard techniques. However, the number of variables of the resulting
linear program remains exponential. Indeed, by Claim EC.3, the number of distinct quasi-convex
preference lists m grows exponentially in the number of products. Hence, since the number of
equality constraints is small, we resort to a column generation procedure. This procedure has
notably been developed in the paper by Bertsimas and Miˇsic (2015) – we refer the reader to the
latter work for a more comprehensive discussion.
The algorithm alternates between solving a master problem and a column generation subproblem.
Speciﬁcally, at step q ∈N, given an incumbent (ﬁxed) collection Lq ⊆L of quasi-convex preference
lists, the master problem solves the ℓ1-minimization program to ﬁnd a distribution over Lq that
best ﬁts the data. Next, the column generation subproblem attempts to identify a new quasi-
convex list L ∈L \ Lq with lowest reduced cost. While the master problem can be cast as a
linear program, the column generation step is generally NP-hard. Indeed, this problem subsumes
the widely-studied rank aggregation problem as a special case Ailon et al. (2008). Thus, prior
literature has investigated heuristic procedures based on integer programming, local search ideas,
and sampling-based methods.
In contrast, our next theorem shows that the column generation step can be solved in polynomial
time under the quasi-convex model. Speciﬁcally, we are given the reduced cost matrix (ht,i)t∈[τ],i∈[N].
To wit, ht,i is the reduced cost associated with the equality constraint regarding the probability of

ec20
e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
“purchasing product i in the assortment At”. For every list L ∈L, we let I(t,i,L) be the binary
function that indicates whether the preference list L picks product i in the assortment At.
Theorem EC.3. The rank aggregation problem, that consists in ﬁnding the optimal quasi-
convex list L ∈L \ Lq to minimize the reduced cost φ(L) = Pτ
t=1
PN
i=1 ht,i · I(t,i,L), can be solved
in time O(N 3).
The proof of this theorem is provided in Appendix EC.2.4. We develop an eﬃcient dynamic program
to compute the quasi-convex preference list that minimizes the reduced cost.
Parameter tuning. For simplicity, we do not attempt to optimize the central permutation of
the quasi-convex structure. The central permutation is picked uniformly at random. However,
our estimation method fully exploits the ﬂexibility of nonparametric choice models to tune all
hyper-parameters based on the predictive task at hand and the metric ultimately used to evaluate
the predictive accuracy. Speciﬁcally, to guard against the risk of over-ﬁtting, the total number
of preference lists is picked in the set {100,200,300,400,500,600} through a leave-one-out cross-
validation on the training set. Similarly, the norm used in the ﬁnal calibration step (ℓ1, ℓ2 or
KL-divergence) is determined through cross-validation.
EC.2.4.
Proof of Theorem EC.3
The optimization problem is formulated as a dynamic program. The state space is formed by the
collection of 3-tuples (a,b,c) where a,b,c ∈[N]. Let c′ = c+max{a,b}−1, and, for every preference
list L, let σL designate the corresponding ranking permutation. We deﬁne L(a,b,c) ∈L as the
optimal quasi-convex list L ∈L (i.e., with lowest reduced cost φ(L)), subject to the constraints that
the consideration set is formed by the interval [c,c′] with σL(c) = a, σL(c′) = b, and σL⟨[c,c′]⟩= [1,b]
if a ≥b, and σL⟨[c,c′]⟩= [1,a] otherwise. Lastly, we introduce the value function F(a,b,c), that
computes the reduced cost attained by L(a,b,c).
In what follows, let (a,b,c) designate a state of the recursion. To ease the exposition, suppose for
now that a −b ≥2. Since L(a,b,c) is quasi-convex, it is not diﬃcult to verify that the rank values
associated with the interval of products [c,c + a −b −1] are already determined: they form the
interval [b + 1,a]. Indeed, for every i ∈[c,c + a −b −1], we necessarily have σL(a,b,c)(i) = a −(i −c),
otherwise we would violate the quasi-convex property. Our next dynamic programming decision
is to choose the product (within the interval [c,c′]) whose rank value is exactly b −1. Due to the
quasi-convex structure, there can be at most two options: either the leftmost unassigned product or
the rightmost unassigned product in the consideration set. That is, we can assign σ−1
L(a,b,c)(b −1) =
c + a −b or σ−1
L(a,b,c)(b −1) = c′ −1 = c + a −2. Letting c1 = c + a −b, c2 = c + a −2, Ass1 ⊆[τ] be

e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
ec21
the collection of indices t ∈[τ] so that At ∩[c1,c2] = ∅while At ∩[c,c1 −1] ̸= ∅, and Ass2 ⊆[τ] be
the collection of indices t ∈[τ] so that At ∩[c,c2 −1] = ∅while c2 ∈At, we obtain the recursion:
F(a,b,c) = min
(
F(b −1,b,c1) +
X
t∈Ass1
ht,max At∩[c,c1−1],F(a,b −1,c) +
X
t∈Ass2
ht,c2
)
.
In the latter expression, the left-side terms of the min-expression compute the reduced cost associ-
ated with products [c,c1 −1] when the rank value b −1 is assigned to the leftmost product c1. The
right-side terms of the min-expression compute the reduced cost associated with product c2 when
the rank value b −1 is assigned to the rightmost product c2 −1.
In the remaining cases, it can be shown that: (i) when b −a ≥2, we formulate a symmetrical
recursion, (ii) for the boundary cases b = a + 1 or a = b + 1, there exists a single quasi-convex pref-
erence list that satisﬁes the constraints, thus the dynamic programming value can be immediately
computed.
□
EC.3.
Other Extensions
EC.3.1.
Capacitated optimization
The approach that we have described extends to the capacitated variant of the problem. Speciﬁcally,
we consider the assortment planning problem wherein at most B products can be stocked. This
constraint represents storage or display space constraints, or the limited number of spots of a web
page in the context of e-retail and online advertising.
The complexity performance for the diﬀerent model speciﬁcations analyzed in Sections 4 and 6
carries over to the constrained setting, up to a polynomial factor. Speciﬁcally, the problem is
solved by an extension of our dynamic program. We add a single state variable that encodes the
remaining “capacity” budget for each subproblem, i.e., subproblems are duplicated to account for
all possible budget values [B]. The new computational tree is inferred by adding edges between
any pair of duplicated subproblems that were previously linked by the recursive formula, as long
as the budget of the child subproblem is smaller than that of the father subproblem. The recursive
formula decides on how to spread the remaining capacity budget across the children subproblems.
We prove that, at each step of the recursion, the optimal capacity allocation is determined by
solving a shortest path problem that we explicitly describe below. For sake of clarity we will only
consider the unique-ranking case wherein (S,T,L) ∼(S,T), but the reasoning is similar for the
general algorithm.
State space. The state space is described by the 3-tuple (S,T,b) where b is a new variable that
encodes the maximal capacity budget. In this notation, J(S,T,b) designates the maximal expected
revenue garnered from customer-types T with an assortment of at most b products in S. The graph
and subproblem notations remain unchanged.

ec22
e-companion to Author: Assortment Optimization Under Consider-then-Choose Choice Models
Recursion formula. The recursion formula should be generalized to account for all potential
diﬀerent budget allocations. Hence, we introduce B(b,r) the set of all feasible allocations of a capac-
ity of b products between r classes of customers: B(b,r) = {b ∈Nr | Pr
j=1 bj = b}. The recursive
formula between subproblems becomes:
J(S,T) = max

Pi ·
X
j∈T (i)
λj +
max
b∈B(b−1,r(+))
r(+)
X
u=1
J(S+
u ,T +
u ,bu) ,
(EC.5)
max
b∈B(b,r(−))
r(−)
X
u=1
J(S−
u ,T −
u ,bu)

(EC.6)
Resource allocation problem. We observe that ﬁnding the optimal budget allocations in each
max-expression (EC.6) and (EC.5) boils down to solving a simple allocation problem of the form
max
Pk
i=1 bi≤b
k
X
i=1
f(i,bi) ,
where the integral non-negative decision variables bi are coupled by a single constraint. It is well
known that this problem can be eﬃciently solved by means of dynamic programming; see for
instance Katoh and Ibaraki (1998).
EC.3.2.
General objective function
A close examination of the algorithm reveals that our results apply to a broader class of objective
functions that we describe below. We consider pay-oﬀfunctions f : [N] × [K] →R, where f(i,j) is
the contribution to the objective due to the purchase of product i by the preference list j. Letting
i(A,j) denote the product purchased by preference list j when faced with assortment A, the total
objective generated by assortment A is given by: P
j∈[K] λj ·f(i(A,j),j). This generalization allows
us to model social welfare maximization with customer-type-speciﬁc utility functions. Here, f(i,j)
is interpreted as the utility garnered by customer j ∈[k] when purchasing product i ∈[N]. In
addition, this general model captures the case where the arrival rate of each customer-type depends
endogenously on her most preferred product in the oﬀered assortment. For example, a customer
may initially have a very restrictive consideration set, but in case none of her favorite products
are oﬀered, she relaxes some her requirements and samples a larger consideration set with some
probability p > 0, or leaves with probability 1 −p.