TITLE: Pride or Guilt? Impacts of Consumers’ Socially Influenced Recycling Behaviors on Closed-Loop Supply Chains
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2023.0721
---

Pride or Guilt? Impacts of Consumers' Socially Influenced
Recycling Behaviors on Closed-Loop Supply Chains
Author:
Huang, W; Nguyen, J; Tseng, CL; Chen, W; Kirshner, SN
Publication details:
Manufacturing and Service Operations Management
v. 26
Chapter No. 6
pp. 2067 - 2084
1523-4614 (ISSN); 1526-5498 (ISSN)
Publication Date:
2024-11-01
Publisher DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2023.0721
License:
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
Link to license to see what you are allowed to do with this resource.
Downloaded from http://hdl.handle.net/1959.4/103681 in https://
unsworks.unsw.edu.au on 2026-06-13

Pride or Guilt? Impacts of Consumers’ Socially
Influenced Recycling Behaviors on Closed-Loop
Supply Chains
Wenjie Huang
UNSW Business School, UNSW Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia, wenjie.huang1@unsw.edu.au
Jason Nguyen
Ivey Business School at Western University, 1255 Western Road, London N6G 0N1, ON, Canada,
jnguyen@ivey.ca
Chung-Li Tseng
UNSW Business School, UNSW Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia, c.tseng@unsw.edu.au
Wenlin Chen
School of Management and Economics, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 611731 Chengdu, China,
wenlinchen@uestc.edu.cn
Samuel N. Kirshner
UNSW Business School, UNSW Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia, s.kirshner@unsw.edu.au
Problem definition and Relevance: Social influenced emotions of pride and guilt have been identified
by the Environmental Psychology (EP) literature as crucial drivers impacting recycling behavior, but they
have mostly been overlooked in Operations Management (OM) research. In contrast, EP studies often ignore
firms’ operational decisions. We analyze the impacts of both social influence and firms’ operational decisions
to provide a comprehensive understanding of consumers’ recycling behaviors, which is essential for realizing
remanufacturing’s full potential.
Methodology and Results: We consider a closed-loop supply chain consisting of a manufacturer selling
a single product to a consumer community. Consumers’ recycling behavior depends on both the recycling
reward offered by the manufacturer, as well as intrinsic and socially influenced pride (guilt) from recycling
(not-recycling). We develop an evolutionary game to model consumers’ recycling behavior and characterize
the resulting equilibrium recycling rate, which is then integrated into the manufacturer’s decision problem.
We characterize the manufacturer’s optimal strategy and the equilibrium recycling rate in four distinct
regions defined by both the product’s overall difficulty of remanufacturing and the underlying strengths of
consumers’ socially influenced pride and guilt. We show that in settings where the product has a moderately
high difficulty of remanufacturing and consumers have stronger socially influenced pride than guilt, the
manufacturer optimally induces an interior recycling rate. In such scenarios, there exist win-win pathways in
using social-influence-based interventions to increase both the manufacturer’s profit and the recycling rate.
However, misalignment may occur when consumers substantially care for the product’s recyclability.
Implications: This study bridges sustainable OM and EP literature by analyzing how consumers’ socially
influenced emotions of pride and guilt affect a manufacturer’s optimal decisions, profits and the resulting
recycling rate. We provide important insights for designing effective and efficient social-influence-based inter-
ventions to improve recycling rates.
Key words : Socially influenced behaviors, pride and guilt, recycling, remanufacturing, closed-loop supply
chain
1

2
1.
Introduction
Remanufacturing, defined as the rebuilding of a product to the same specifications of the original
or a newer product using a combination of reused, repaired, and new parts (Johnson and McCarthy
2014), has emerged as an effective means for alleviating climate change and facilitating the trans-
formation towards a circular economy that minimizes emissions, as well as the consumption of
resources and energy (United Nations 2019). Despite early momentum, remanufacturing has been
hindered from its full potential by consumers’ low recycling rates, especially for household electron-
ics (International Solid Waste Association 2020). Amongst the many efforts to improve recycling
rates, it remains critical to understand the motivations driving consumers’ recycling behaviors.
Such an understanding would facilitate the design of effective consumer-targeting policies and reg-
ulations, potentially complementing those targeting manufacturers, e.g., the Extended Producer
Responsibility programs, in combating low recycling rates.
Apart from internal factors, such as knowledge (Hornik et al. 1995), habit (Boldero 1995), and
attitudes (Taylor and Todd 1995), the environmental psychology (EP) literature has identified
social influence from friends, family, neighbors (Long et al. 2014, Schwab et al. 2014) and, more
recently, contacts within wider communities and social media (Dupr´e and Meineri 2016, Han et al.
2018), as important determinants of individuals’ pro-environmental and recycling behaviors. For
instance, Long et al. (2014) and Schwab et al. (2014) find that the degree of change in a student’s
recycling behavior is predicted by their perceived social norms and friends’ prior behaviors. Two
critical mechanisms through which social influence affects an individual’s pro-environmental behav-
ior are the emotions of pride (for recycling) and guilt (for non-recycling) (Onwezen et al. 2014).
Socially influenced pride (or guilt) is self-evoked by an evaluation of oneself triggered by social
comparison (Lewis 2010, Tracy and Robins 2004). Social comparison naturally induces competition
and often makes individuals aware of their superiority or inferiority of skill, status, or position rel-
ative to others (Buunk and Gibbons 2000, Garcia et al. 2006). In the context of pro-environmental
behaviors, social comparison may trigger individuals’ feeling of guilt (pride) knowing that the
environmental impacts of their actions could be worse (better) than others (Mallett et al. 2013).
Although pride and guilt are seemingly two extremes on the same continuum, recent research pro-
vides strong evidence that socially influenced pride and guilt have significantly different impacts
on pro-environmental behaviors across various contexts (e.g., Kim et al. 2013, Onwezen et al. 2014,
Bissing-Olson et al. 2016, Adams et al. 2020 and Shipley and van Riper 2021).

3
Despite its substantial impacts on recycling behavior, social influence (through feelings of pride
and guilt) has mostly been overlooked by the operations management (OM) literature on reman-
ufacturing and closed-loop supply chains. On the other hand, EP research often ignores firms’
operational decisions, including the selling price of new products and recycling rewards, i.e., mon-
etary incentives for consumers to recycle, which can significantly affect consumers’ recycling deci-
sions. Consequently, previous recommendations on improving recycling rates from either stream
of literature could be incomplete or misguided, as they do not simultaneously consider the behav-
ioral tendencies of consumers and firms’ operational decisions. In this article, we bridge these two
streams of literature and analyze how socially influenced pride and guilt interact with a manufac-
turer’s operational decisions to affect consumers’ recycling decisions and the subsequent recycling
rate. Our main research objective is to provide useful managerial insights that support manufac-
turers, policymakers, and non-profit organizations in designing informed interventions to improve
recycling rates. Accordingly, we seek to answer the following research questions:
1. How do consumers’ socially influenced recycling behaviors and the manufacturer’s pricing
decisions jointly impact the equilibrium recycling rate?
2. What is the manufacturer’s optimal strategy in setting the new product’s selling price and
the recycling reward when accounting for consumers’ socially influenced recycling behaviors?
3. How can social-influence-based interventions be designed to improve recycling rates?
To address these questions, we develop a closed-loop supply chain model consisting of a man-
ufacturer selling a single product to a community of consumers. The product is either produced
from new materials or remanufactured materials using recycled products collected from the con-
sumers. The manufacturer chooses the selling price to influence the market demand and sets a
recycling reward to incentivize recycling. Consumers’ recycling decisions depend not only on their
(recycling) costs and rewards, but also on intrinsic and socially influenced emotions of pride and
guilt. We capture these psychological factors by introducing pairs of coefficients representing the
utility/disutility of intrinsic and socially influenced feelings of pride/guilt.
We focus on a psychologically homogeneous community and characterize how the equilibrium
recycling rate is affected by the recycling reward and socially influenced pride and guilt, using
the evolutionarily stable equilibrium concept. We then analyze the manufacturer’s optimization
problem when facing consumers’ socially influenced recycling behavior and their consideration
of the product’s recyclability. We show that the manufacturer’s optimal decisions are driven by
the difference between the consumer’s recycling costs and the manufacturer’s cost savings from
remanufacturing. This difference captures the net costs of remanufacturing from the supply chain
perspective, representing the overall Difficulty of Remanufacturing (DOR). This DOR is low for

4
products that large-scale community recycling is readily available, e.g., paper, cardboard and plas-
tic, as it is both cheap for consumers to recycle and relatively easy for manufacturers to process
the recycled materials. For many other products, including household electronics and smartphones,
the DOR could be substantially large due to consumers’ very high recycling costs.1
While our analyses apply to both cases of a negative and a positive DOR, we focus our discussion
on products with a positive DOR to avoid trivial scenarios. Our results suggest that in most
scenarios, stronger socially influenced emotions, regardless of pride or guilt, can be beneficial to
both the manufacturer’s profit and the recycling rate. However, enhancing each type of emotion can
also be detrimental under certain conditions. A stronger socially influenced emotion of pride, while
always beneficial to the manufacturer’s profit, could hurt the recycling rate when the product has a
moderately high DOR and both socially influenced emotions are sufficiently strong. In addition, a
stronger socially influenced emotion of guilt can undermine both the manufacturer’s profit and the
recycling rate when the product has a moderately high DOR and consumers experience moderate
socially influenced pride coupled with relatively weaker guilt.
These results are driven by two factors. First, socially influenced pride and guilt have different
impacts on consumers psychological utility in that one feels prouder (of recycling) when fewer peers
recycle, but more guilty (of not recycling) when there are more recyclers. Second, the manufac-
turer can exploit a stronger emotion of socially influenced pride or guilt to offer a lower recycling
reward, which in turn, affects recycling and non-recycling consumers differently. Our results also
provide important managerial insights into the application of social-influence-based interventions
to increase the recycling rate, particularly in scenarios where the product has a moderately high
DOR and socially influenced pride is stronger than guilt. We show that the manufacturer opti-
mally induces an interior recycling rate in these scenarios, and there exist win-win pathways of
social-influence-based interventions that increase both the manufacturer’s profit and the recycling
rate. However, there could be a misalignment when the underlying recycling rate is moderately
high and consumers substantially care for the product’s recyclability.
2.
Related Literature
Our work contributes to the broad OM literature on remanufacturing and closed-loop supply
chains, which we refer the reader to Atasu et al. (2008) and Guide Jr and Van Wassenhove (2009)
for a detailed overview. Research in this literature focuses on different aspects in the management
of remanufacturing and closed-loop supply chains, including inventory (e.g., Bhattacharya et al.
2006), pricing (e.g., Guide Jr et al. 2003, Ferrer and Swaminathan 2006, Zhou and Yu 2011, Yan
et al. 2017), channel design (e.g., Savaskan et al. 2004) and portfolio selection between new and
1 https://tinyurl.com/mvs6954p, Retrieved Jan 12, 2022

5
remanufactured products (e.g., Debo et al. 2006). Most research in this stream focuses on the
decisions/interactions of the upstream supply chain firms, whereas we focus on both the manufac-
turer’s operational and the downstream consumers’ recycling decisions. Consumers’ decisions to
recycle the end-of-life product for a reward in our setting is related to trade-in programs, which
have recently been the focus of an emerging body of works (see, e.g., Ray et al. 2005, Yin and
Tang 2014, Yin et al. 2015, Zhu et al. 2016, Xiao and Zhou 2020). Similar to ours, these papers
examine the manufacturer’s optimal strategies, including pricing and trade-in policies, across dif-
ferent settings. We further extend this stream of literature by considering the novel impacts of
consumers’ socially influenced emotions. In addition, we also focus on the overall recycling rate
as an important performance indicator of the supply chain, allowing us to develop new insights
into the critically important challenge of how businesses can help promote pro-social and/or pro-
environmental behaviors.
Our paper is also related to the growing literature in EP that examines the impacts of social
influence on pro-environmental behaviors (e.g., Kim et al. 2013, Onwezen et al. 2014, Long et al.
2014, Schwab et al. 2014, Bissing-Olson et al. 2016, Adams et al. 2020 and Shipley and van Riper
2021). Research within this literature establishes somewhat contradicting impacts of pride and guilt
emotions. For example, Bissing-Olson et al. (2016) find that experiences of pride, not guilt, pre-
dict pro-environmental behavior when descriptive norms are more positive, whereas Adams et al.
(2020) show that experiences of guilt, not pride, impact pro-environmental behaviors by mediating
the effect of feedback. Our research reconciles these results by establishing the conditions under
which emotions of pride or guilt could have very different impacts on recycling behavior. Further-
more, while this literature often focuses exclusively on consumer behavior, we also incorporate the
manufacturer’s optimal decisions, which allows us to also establish the conditions where promoting
emotions of pride or guilt could backfire and reduce the overall recycling rate.
Finally, our application to the community recycling behavior enriches the stream of research
in Business and Management using evolutionary game theory (EGT). Evolutionary games have
been employed to examine long-run outcomes after the population transitions toward relatively
successful strategies, which often results in a stable mix of behaviors. For example, Bendle and
Vandenbosch (2014) explore how reputation effects influence the evolution of business markets by
applying evolutionary game theory to canonical games (e.g., battle of the sexes and prisoner’s
dilemma), whereas Kopel et al. (2014) analyze the evolution of markets with firms engaged in
quantity competition that choose between acting to maximize profit and being socially conscious
by maximizing welfare. Within OM literature, Ji et al. (2015) analyze how peer comparison effects
influence the green selling and purchasing strategies of suppliers and manufacturers. They show
that green purchasing relationships among multi-stakeholders influence the payoffs of the suppliers

6
and manufacturers in a two-tier supply chain. Unlike these studies, we consider the evolution of
individual consumer’s, rather than a firm’s, behavior, which is similar to Chen et al. (2020) and
Mai and Hu (2023), who study how social comparison influences healthcare workers’ hand hygiene
compliance and premium subscriptions of computer game players, respectively.
3.
Setting and Consumers Recycling Behaviors
We consider a closed-loop supply chain consisting of a manufacturer selling a single product to
a community of consumers, as illustrated in Figure 1. The product is either produced from new
materials or remanufactured using recycled products collected from the consumers. Apart from
the production costs (which we discuss later), products built from new or recycled materials are
indistinguishable and sold in the same market, which is a common assumption in the OM literature
on closed-loop supply chain (e.g., Savaskan et al. 2004, Ray et al. 2005, and Bhattacharya et al.
2006). We assume a psychologically homogeneous community in which consumers have the same
Figure 1
The closed-loop supply chain.
psychological (dis)utility regarding recycling but may have a different intention of whether to
recycle or not. In Appendix D, we extend the model to consider a heterogeneous community
consisting of two groups of consumers, one that is pro-environmental and one that is less concerned
with the environment. We focus on products with a sufficiently long life cycle for the community to
reach a stable equilibrium (which we will discuss shortly), and consumers will turn their intention
to the real action (recycling or not) at the product’s end of life.
To capture the effect of social influence, we model each consumer as being constantly inter-
acting with random peers. This is a reasonable assumption given consumers’ increasing usage of
social media, which provides facilitating platforms for social interactions. As established in the
literature on environmental psychology (see, e.g., Macias and Williams 2016, Zhu et al. 2021),
social interactions allow consumers to better acknowledge the recycling intention of their peers and
trigger a comparison with their own intention, through which consumers evaluate their potential
utility (Buunk and Gibbons 2000, Garcia et al. 2006). We thus model an interaction between two
(randomly matched) consumers as a symmetric game with the following payoff matrix.

7
Table 1
Payoff matrix of the interaction game
Recycle
Not Recycle
Recycle
f −ce + IP,f −ce + IP
f −ce + IP + γP,−IG −γG
Not Recycle −IG −γG,f −ce + IP + γP
−IG,−IG
The utility for the two intentions, recycling and not recycling, consists of two components: eco-
nomic rewards and costs and psychological utility/disutility from pride and guilt. For ease of
exposition, we hereafter refer to a consumer with a recycling (non-recycling) intention as a recy-
cler (non-recycler). For the economic component of utility, a recycler earns a monetary reward f
offered by the manufacturer,2 while incurring a cost ce, which represents the costs of effort and
time, including those to overcome other preferences, e.g., consumers prefer to keep used devices
as backup phones, and also have concerns of leaking personal and sensitive data when returning
smartphones (Echegaray and Hansstein 2017, Dhir et al. 2021). Without loss of generality, the sal-
vage value of the used product is normalized to zero and a non-recycler does not earn any rewards
or incur any costs.
The psychological component consists of two parts, respectively representing intrinsic and socially
influenced (dis)utility of pride (guilt). We assume that a consumer would feel an intrinsic pride
(guilt) for recycling (not recycling) the product, which is captured by a constant parameter IP ≥0
(−IG ≤0). In addition, a recycler would derive a utility γP > 0 when interacting with a non-
recycler, thanks to the socially influenced pride. Similarly, a non-recycler would derive a disutility
−γG < 0 when interacting with a recycler, due to the socially influenced guilt. Note that the socially
influenced pride and guilt in our model are respectively parallel to the downward and upward
comparison effects considered by the social comparison literature (see, e.g., Wood 1989, Suls and
Wheeler 2013 and Mai and Hu 2023). Similar to this literature, we assume that consumers do
not experience any socially influenced (dis)utility when interacting with a peer having the same
intention.
Let τ ∈[0,1] denote the proportion of recyclers within the community, i.e., the recycling rate. It
follows that in a random interaction, a given consumer meets a recycler with a probability of τ,
and a non-recycler with a probability of 1−τ, and the expected utilities for a recycler (denoted by
subscript R) and non-recycler (denoted by subscript N) are respectively given by
UR = (f −ce + IP)τ + (1 −τ)(f −ce + IP + γP) = (f −ce + IP) + (1 −τ)γP,
(1)
UN = τ(−γG −IG) −(1 −τ)IG = −τγG −IG.
(2)
Note that both UR and UN depend on τ, which, in turn, may change according to the comparison
between UR and UN. When UR > (<) UN, τ increases (decreases) as consumers try to maximize
2 For example, consumers can recycle used Apple products for a gift card (Apple 2022).

8
their expected utilities (Luenberger 1979). In other words, social interactions and comparison could
induce consumers to change their recycling intentions (to earn higher expected utilities in future
interactions), affecting the overall recycling rate at the community level, which in turn influences
the future expected utilities. These entangled dynamics imply that the three terms τ, UN and
UR should satisfy certain conditions at equilibria, as established by the literature studying similar
interactions within a community (e.g., see Feylessoufi et al. 2023, Mai and Hu 2023).
In this paper, we employ the evolutionarily stable equilibrium (ESE) introduced by Smith and
Price (1973) as the equilibrium concept for analyzing the community recycling behavior. An ESE
captures an impermeable mix of a population in adaptation to a specific environment. In our
context, an ESE is represented by the proportion τ of recyclers (and correspondingly, 1 −τ of
non-recyclers), that the community will always regress back to even if any consumers may attempt
a temporary perturbation. It is noteworthy that ESE is a stronger notion than Nash equilibrium,
as an ESE is always a Nash equilibrium, but the reverse is not necessarily true (Taylor and Jonker
1978). Furthermore, unlike a Nash equilibrium, an ESE requires neither perfect information, nor
perfect rationality and coordination on the part of the players. As long as players can observe
their own payoffs through past interactions (which applies in our setting), an evolutionary dynamic
would be induced by their experiences, and strategies that have done relatively well in the past
will tend to be adopted by more people in future interactions (see, e.g. Weibull 1997, Easley et al.
2010, Friedman and Sinervo 2016). Our approach for employing this ESE concept closely follows
that in Mai and Hu (2023), starting first with the definition of the possible stable equilibria.
Definition 1. A recycling rate τ ∗∈[0,1] is a stable equilibrium if it satisfies one of the following
sets of conditions:
(i) τ ∗= 1, if UN|τ=1 < UR|τ=1;
(ii) τ ∗= 0, if UN|τ=0 > UR|τ=0;
(iii) 0 < τ ∗< 1, if UN|τ=τ∗= UR|τ=τ∗, and U ′
N|τ=τ∗> U ′
R|τ=τ∗, where U ′
N and U ′
R are the derivatives
of UN and UR with respect to τ, respectively.
In Definition 1, the conditions in (i) and (ii) correspond to boundary equilibria, where all con-
sumers become recyclers and non-recyclers, respectively. These equilibria are stable as no consumers
would attempt a deviation that yields a strictly lower utility. The conditions in (iii) define stable
interior equilibria where consumers are indifferent between recycling and not. When a small pertur-
bation raises τ beyond τ ∗, non-recyclers will be better off and so τ is pushed back down. Similarly,
τ bounces back after a perturbation makes it fall off τ ∗. Together, these dynamics imply that the
equilibria defined by (iii) are stable in the face of small perturbations. In cases of multiple possible

9
equilibria, the final stable equilibrium depends on the initial proportion τ 0 of recyclers and evolves
consistently with the evolutionary dynamic, i.e., τ increases (decreases) when UR > (<) UN.
Using Definition 1, we then identify the evolutionarily stable equilibrium of the community
recycling rate τ ∗(f) for parameters γP, γG and a given recycling reward f set by the manufacturer.
Similar to Mai and Hu (2023), we focus on cases where γP ̸= γG as the case γP = γG is degenerate
and omitted.
Lemma 1. Let cr ≡ce −IP −IG, the evolutionarily stable equilibrium of the community recycling
rate τ ∗(f) for a given recycling reward f is given by
(i) for f ≤cr −max(γP,γG): τ ∗(f) = 0;
(ii) for cr −γG < f < cr −γP: τ ∗(f) =
®
1, if τ 0 ≥τm(f)
0, if τ 0 < τm(f)
;
(iii) for f ≥cr −min(γP,γG): τ ∗(f) = 1;
(iv) for cr −γP < f < cr −γG: τ ∗(f) = τm(f),
where τ 0 ∈[0,1] denotes the initial proportion of recycling consumers and τm(f) ≡f−cr+γP
γP −γG ∈(0,1)
for cr −max(γP,γG) < f < cr −min(γP,γG).
All technical proofs are provided in Appendix A. In Lemma 1, cr captures a consumer’s net
personal cost of recycling, including the costs and efforts of recycling, ce, less all the psychological
utilities and disutilities from intrinsic feelings, IP + IG. Lemma 1 shows that when the reward f
is very low to justify the costs, f < cr −max(γP,γG), it is unsurprising that the entire community
does not recycle and τ ∗(f) = 0. In contrast, all consumers recycle when the reward f is sufficiently
high, i.e., f > cr −min(γP,γG), and so, τ ∗(f) = 1.
When the reward f takes a moderate value, an interior stable equilibrium may arise, where a
proportion τm(f) ∈[0,1] of consumers recycle. This interior outcome, interestingly, occurs only
when γP > γG such that the condition in Lemma 1 (iv) is met; namely, when the socially influenced
pride is stronger than guilt. To explain the intuition, we first note that τm(f) is the recycling
rate that makes consumers indifferent between recycling or not. In addition, the expressions of
UN and UR suggest that both types of consumers are hurt by a larger τ: non-recyclers are more
likely to suffer from the socially influenced guilt, whereas recyclers are less likely to enjoy the
socially influenced pride. When γP > γG, recyclers are hurt more by an increased τ than non-
recyclers, and so when τ exceeds τm(f), some recyclers would change their mind, pushing τ back
down. Similar dynamics apply and τ bounces back when it falls off τm(f). In short, τ ∗= τm(f) is
sufficient, and γP > γG is necessary to achieve the stable interior equilibrium. When the reward f
is moderate but the socially influenced guilt is stronger (i.e., γG > γP and cr −γG < f < cr −γP),
the interior equilibrium is not stable, and the community bandwagons toward one of the stable
boundary equilibria, depending on the initial proportion of recyclers τ 0. Following the similar

10
intuition discussed above, when τ 0 is higher (lower) than τm(f), recyclers (non-recyclers) are better
off, pushing τ further upward (downward) until reaching the stable equilibrium τ ∗(f) = 1 (0).
It is noteworthy that each of the stable equilibria characterized in Lemma 1 corresponds to an
Evolutionarily Stable Strategy (ESS) adopted by the entire community at equilibrium (Weibull
1997, Easley et al. 2010, Friedman and Sinervo 2016). More specifically, the two boundary equilibria
are established when the community adopts the corresponding Evolutionarily Stable Pure Strategy
of recycling (τ ∗(f) = 1) or non-recycling (τ ∗(f) = 0). The interior equilibrium, on the other hand,
corresponds to an Evolutionarily Stable Mixed Strategy.3 In the technical proof of Lemma 1, we
show that each of the τ ∗characterized in the lemma is indeed an ESS from the evolutionary
game-theoretical perspective.
We make a further remark that even though we derive UR and UN as the respective expected
utilities of a recycler and non-recycler in a random interaction with another consumer, one can
also interpret those as if consumers derive socially influenced pride and guilt from comparing their
intention against the prevailing social norm regarding recycling, i.e., the recycling rate τ. Under
this interpretation, our model is also consistent with the EP literature that one will feel more
guilty when deviating from a stronger social norm (Baumeister et al. 1994), i.e., the expected
disutility of socially influenced guilt −τγG is higher as τ increases, and prouder in upholding a less
influential social norm (Mascolo and Fischer 1995), i.e., the expected utility of socially influenced
pride (1 −τ)γP decreases with τ.
To further understand the impact of socially influenced emotions on the community recycling
behaviors, the following lemma characterizes the behavior of the interior equilibrium recycling rate
τm(f) as γP or γG increases.
Lemma 2. The following statements pertaining to τm(f) defined in Lemma 1 are true:
(i) ∂τm(f)/∂γP > 0 and ∂τm(f)/∂γG > 0;
(ii) ∂τm(f)/∂γP ≥∂τm(f)/∂γG when γP + γG ≤2(cr −f), which corresponds to τm(f) ≤0.5;
(iii) ∂τm(f)/∂γP < ∂τm(f)/∂γG when γP + γG > 2(cr −f), corresponding to τm(f) > 0.5.
Lemma 2 shows that the interior equilibrium recycling rate τm(f) is, unsurprisingly, increased
by a stronger sense of either socially influenced emotions. More interestingly, increasing socially
influenced pride has a stronger impact when the prevailing recycling rate is lower than the mid-
point 50%. However, when this rate exceeds 50%, increasing socially influenced guilt becomes more
3 There are two equivalent interpretations for an Evolutionarily Stable Mixed Strategy that results in an interior
equilibrium recycling rate τ ∗∈[0,1]. The first is that all consumers play the mixed strategy: recycling with a proba-
bility τ ∗and not recycling with a probability 1−τ ∗. The second interpretation is that each consumer plays only pure
strategy and the mixture takes place at the community level: a proportion τ ∗of consumers recycles and 1 −τ ∗does
not. It is established in evolutionary game theory literature (Weibull 1997, Easley et al. 2010, Friedman and Sinervo
2016) that these two interpretations lead to the same calculations of utilities, and the same observed outcome at the
community level. In our setting, we consider only pure strategies, and so adopt the second interpretation.

11
effective. These results are aligned with the social norm comparison perspective discussed earlier,
i.e., one feels more guilty when deviating from a stronger social norm but feels prouder in upholding
a less influential one (Baumeister et al. 1994, Mascolo and Fischer 1995, Miettinen and Suetens
2008).
4.
The closed-loop supply chain and the manufacturer’s decisions
In this section, we integrate consumers’ recycling behaviors established in the previous section
into the closed-loop supply chain to analyze the manufacturer’s operational decisions. Following
Savaskan et al. (2004), we assume that similar products are introduced to the market repeatedly
and so we focus on decisions and performance per cycle at the stable state. In particular, the
manufacturer sets the selling price p to influence demand and a recycling reward f to incentivize
recycling. Consistent with observed practices, we assume that p and f remain fixed during the
product’s life-cycle (e.g., Apple keeps the selling price of a new model, i.e., p, and trade-in prices
for older iPhone models, i.e., f, stable for the entire selling season).
For a recycling reward f set by the manufacturer, let U(f) denote the average utility of a
consumer regarding the recycling of the product at equilibrium. Using the equilibrium recycling
rate τ ∗(f) derived in the previous section, this average utility is given by
U(f) =





UR|τ=1
, if τ ∗(f) = 1;
UN|τ=0
, if τ ∗(f) = 0;
UR|τ=τm(f) = UN|τ=τm(f)
, if τ ∗(f) = τm(f).
The manufacturer’s demand D(p,f) for a selling price p and a recycling reward f is correspondingly
given by
D(p,f) = 1 −b0p + b1U(f),
(3)
where b0 > 0 captures the demand’s trivial inverse relationship with price, common to the literature
on closed-loop supply chain and remanufacturing. We also incorporate consumers’ consideration for
the product’s end-of-life recyclability into the demand function, represented by the term b1U(f),
where b0 ≥b1 ≥0 to reflect consumers’ tendency to discount future utility.
We assume that the manufacturer’s unit production costs for new and remanufactured products
are respectively given by cn and cu, where cn > cu, consistent with the fact that remanufacturing
is often cheaper than using new materials. Thus, taken together, the manufacturer’s problem is to
set p and f to maximize the following objective function:
Π(p,f) = D(p,f) · u(p,f),
(4)
where u(p,f) ≡p− τ ∗(f)(cu +f)+(1−τ ∗(f))cn
 captures the manufacturer’s unit profit, in which
the expected unit production costs consist of (cu + f) for the proportion τ ∗(f) of remanufactured

12
products, and cn for the remaining proportion (1 −τ ∗(f)) produced from new materials. Plugging
in the demand function D(p,f) and after some algebra, the manufacturer’s optimal profit Π∗can
be written as
Π∗= max
p,f (1 −b0p + b1U(f))(p −cn + τ ∗(f)(∆c −f)),
(5)
where ∆c ≡cn −cu captures the unit cost savings from remanufacturing. Using ∆c, we then define
cr −∆c as the difficulty-of-remanufacturing (DOR) from the supply chain’s perspective. A low
DOR implies much ease in recycling, i.e., it is both cheap for consumers to recycle and relatively
easy for manufacturers to process the recycled materials. This is applicable for products in markets
where there are platforms and mechanisms to support large-scale community recycling, e.g., the
recycling of paper, cardboard, glass and metal in developed countries. In contrast, a high DOR
implies high costs for both consumers’ recycling and the manufacturer’s processing. Consumer
electronics are an example of products with a high DOR, since, in addition to high transportation
and processing costs for manufacturers, consumers’ recycling intention is often impeded by privacy
concerns. Although our subsequent analyses apply for both positive and negative DORs, we focus
the discussion on positive DORs, i.e., cr −∆c > 0, to avoid trivial cases. At the end of this section,
we briefly discuss the qualitative change in our results for negative DORs.
We first analyze the benchmark case where the manufacturer does not remanufacture, and thus
offers no recycling reward. In this case, the manufacturer’s profit function is reduced to ˜Π(p) =
˜D(p)(p−cn), where the demand function ˜D(p) is ˜D(p) = 1−b0p−b1IG. Note that 1−b1IG captures
the reduced market size resulting from consumers who refrain from purchasing the product due to
guilt over its potential lack of recycling. It is easy to prove that the optimal selling price and the
manufacturer’s corresponding profit in the benchmark case are given by
p0 = (1 −b1IG)/(2b0) + cn/2,
(6)
Π0 = ˜Π(p0) = ˜D(p0)2/b0 = (1 −b1IG −b0cn)2/(4b0).
(7)
We make the assumption 1 −b1IG −b0cn ≥0 such that ˜D(p0) = (1 −b1IG −b0cn)/2 ≥0, ensuring
a feasible and profitable market in the benchmark case. It follows that the manufacturer pursues
remanufacturing only if the resulting profit is higher than the benchmark Π0, which happens under
the conditions characterized in the following proposition.
Proposition 1. For a given f ≤cr, let Π⋆(f) ≡max
p
Π(p,f). The following statement is true:
Π⋆(f) > Π0 iff g(f) > 0, where
g(f) ≡b1
b0
(U(f) + IG) + τ ∗(f)(∆c −f).
(8)

13
From Lemma 1, it can be seen that when f ≥cr the equilibrium recycling rate is τ ∗(f) = 1.
In other words, if the recycling reward is set sufficiently high to cover all recycling costs, all
consumers will recycle. This implies that any reward f > cr is sub-optimal as it only increases the
manufacturer’s costs while providing unnecessary added incentives to recyclers. Building on this
intuition, Proposition 1 further suggests that remanufacturing is profitable only when there exists
a recycling reward f ≤cr such that g(f) > 0. In (8), the first component captures the expected
weighted utility of consumers from recyclability and τ ∗(f)(∆c −f) represents the manufacturer’s
unit cost savings from remanufacturing. As such, g(f) represents the total benefits created by
remanufacturing, serving as a proxy to analyze the manufacturer’s decisions.
As we eventually show, the manufacturer optimally induces one of the four distinctive equilibrium
recycling behaviors characterized in Lemma 1, depending on the DOR, cr −∆c, and the underlying
strengths of socially influenced pride and guilt, i.e., γP and γG. For ease of exposition, Proposi-
tions 2–5 separately characterize the four regions in the space (γP,γG) that correspond to the four
recycling behaviors in Lemma 1 (i)–(iv). We then combine these regions and discuss the manufac-
turer’s decisions across the feasible space of (γP,γG) that ensures the rational non-negativity of
the manufacturer’s optimal price p∗≥0.4
To facilitate the characterization of the results, let fp ≡(∆c −b1cr/b0)/(1 −b1/b0) denote the
highest recycling reward the manufacturer can offer to induce a perfect recycling rate, i.e., given
that τ ∗(f) = 1, g(f) ≥0 can be ensured only when f ≤fp. In a similar fashion, fm ≡∆c −γGb1/b0
represents the highest f the manufacturer can afford to induce an interior recycling rate τm(f).
We thus define ¯f = max(fp,fm) as the highest recycling reward that the manufacturer can afford.
Proposition 2. In Ω1 ≡{(γP,γG)|cr −∆c ≥max(γP,γG) −b1γG/b0}, remanufacturing is not
profitable as ¯f is insufficient to induce any recycling. As such, the manufacturer optimally sets
p∗= p0 = (1−b1IG)/(2b0)+cn/2 without any recycling program, and the resulting ESE for recycling
rate is τ ∗= 0.
Proposition 2 shows that when the DOR, i.e., cr −∆c, is very high and dominates both socially
influenced emotions, i.e., cr −∆c ≥max(γP,γG) −b1γG/b0, even the highest affordable recycling
reward, ¯f, is insufficient to induce any recycling. This prompts the manufacturer to settle for no
remanufacturing and set the selling price as in the benchmark case p∗= p0. A manifestation of this
region could be the situation of very low recycling rate of e-waste in developing countries (Moloney
and Doolan 2016, Ferronato and Torretta 2019, Shahrasbi et al. 2021). Electronics typically have
a substantially high DOR due to consumers’ privacy concerns, as well as their wish to maintain
4 We show in Appendix B that in this (γP ,γG) space, the resulting demand D(p∗,f ∗) is always feasible when both
the price p∗and the reward f ∗are at optimality, i.e., D(p∗,f ∗) ∈[0,1] .

14
back-up devices. In developing countries, the lack of information, proper infrastructure, policies,
and formal collection mechanisms further increases DORs, eventually making it very difficult for
profitable remanufacturing. We next explore cases where the DOR is sufficiently low for potentially
facilitating remanufacturing.
Proposition 3. In Ω2 ≡{(γP,γG)|γP < γG;cr −∆c ≤γG(1 −b1/b0)}, the manufacturer’s opti-
mal decisions are given by
p∗=
ß p0 = (1 −b1IG)/(2b0) + cn/2
,if (γP,γG) ∈Ω0
2
(cu + cr)/2 + ((b0 + b1)(−γP −τ 0(γG −γP)) + 1 −b1IG)/(2b0) ,if (γP,γG) ∈Ω1
2, ;
f ∗=
ß ¯f
,if (γP,γG) ∈Ω0
2
cr −γP −τ 0(γG −γP) ,if (γP,γG) ∈Ω1
2
.
The resulting ESE for recycling rate is τ ∗= 0 in Ω0
2 and τ ∗= 1 in Ω1
2, where Ω0
2 ≡{(γP,γG)|((1 −
τ 0)γP + τ 0γG)(1 −b1/b0) < cr −∆c ≤γG(1 −b1/b0)} and Ω1
2 ≡{(γP,γG)|cr −∆c ≤((1 −τ 0)γP +
τ 0γG)(1 −b1/b0) < γG(1 −b1/b0)}.
In Ω2, socially influenced guilt is stronger than pride, prompting the manufacturer to strategi-
cally attempt fostering the bandwagoning behaviors characterized in Lemma 1 (ii). The resulting
equilibrium rate thus depends on the DOR and the initial proportion τ 0 of recyclers. When the
DOR is lower than a threshold ((1 −τ 0)γP + τ 0γG)(1 −b1/b0), i.e., in the sub-region Ω1
2, the man-
ufacturer can afford a sufficiently high recycling reward to induce the bandwagon toward perfect
recycling, τ ∗= 1. In Ω0
2 where the DOR is higher than the threshold, the highest affordable reward
is insufficient to prevent the bandwagon toward τ ∗= 0. Note that the threshold of DOR that
divides the two sub-regions Ω0
2 and Ω1
2 increases with τ 0 (since γG ≥γP). That is, it is easier for
the manufacturer to induce perfect recycling when there are more initial recyclers.
An example of Ω2 could be markets with collectivist cultures where consumers typically exhibit
stronger guilt than pride (Kitayama et al. 2006, Buchtel et al. 2018, Fang et al. 2023). The sub-
region Ω1
2 (Ω0
2) further corresponds to developed (developing) economies, where there are likely to
be more (fewer) initial recyclers and well-developed (a lack of) platforms and mechanisms that
support recycling, i.e., τ 0 is high (low) and the DOR is low (high) (Moloney and Doolan 2016,
Ferronato and Torretta 2019, Shahrasbi et al. 2021).
We next turn to Ω3 ≡{(γP,γG)|γG < γP;cr −∆c ≤(2−b1/b0)γG −γP}, in which the DOR is low,
and pride is stronger than guilt. An example of this region could be markets with individualist
cultures where consumers exhibit a stronger pride than guilt and products that are relatively easy
to recycle, e.g. paper, glass, metal. Here, the manufacturer optimally induces the perfect recycling
behavior characterized in Lemma 1 (iii), as we assert in the following proposition.

15
Proposition 4. In Ω3 ≡{(γP,γG)|γG < γP;cr −∆c ≤(2 −b1/b0)γG −γP}, the manufacturer
optimally sets p∗= (b0(cu +cr −γG)−b1γG −b1IG +1)/(2b0) and f ∗= cr −γG, that induces an ESE
for perfect recycling τ ∗= 1.
Finally, we investigate Ω4 with a moderately high DOR, and stronger pride than guilt, which
could correspond to similar markets as in Ω3 but with products that are more difficult to recycle.
In this region, it is optimal for the manufacturer to induce an interior equilibrium recycling rate
described in Lemma 1 (iv).
Proposition 5. In Ω4 ≡{(γP,γG)|(2 −b1/b0)γG −γP < cr −∆c < γP −b1γG/b0}, the manufac-
turer optimally sets p∗= (1−b1IG)/(2b0)+cn/2−((b0∆c−b0cr +b0γP +b1γG)2 −4b2
1γ2
G)/(8b2
0(γP −
γG)) and f ∗= (b0cr + b0∆c −b1γG −b0γP)/(2b0) which induces an interior ESE for recycling rate
τ ∗= τ ∗
m ≡(b0∆c −b0cr −b1γG + b0γP)/(2b0(γP −γG)).
Table 2 summarizes the characteristics and the resulting community recycling behaviors in Ω1–Ω4,
together with their potential manifestations in realistic settings, whereas Figure 2 illustrates the
partitioning of Ω1 – Ω4 and the corresponding optimal decisions, as well as the resulting equilibrium
recycling rate and profit in the (γP,γG) space.5
Table 2
A summary of the characteristics of Ω1–Ω4
Region
Ω1
Ω2
Ω3
Ω4
Ω0
2
Ω1
2
Characteristics
very high DOR
stronger guilt than pride,
stronger pride
than guilt,
stronger pride
than guilt,
sufficiently
high DOR
low/moderate
DOR
low/moderate
DOR
moderate/high
DOR
Community Recycling
non-recycling
bandwagoning toward non (Ω0
2) or
perfect recycling
partial recycling
Behavior
perfect recycling (Ω1
2)
Equilibrium Recycling Rate
τ ∗= 0
τ ∗= 0
τ ∗= 1
τ ∗= 1
τ ∗∈(0,1)
Example Setting
Market
developing
collectivist cultures/
individualist
cultures/
individualist
cultures/
economy
developing
economy
developed
economy
developed
economy
developed
economy
Product
electronics,
appliances
metal, glass, paper, etc.
metal, glass,
paper, etc.
electronics,
appliances
Note that τ ∗is a constant in Ω1,Ω2, and Ω3. Similarly, in Ω1 and Ω0
2, f ∗is not relevant and both p∗
and Π∗are constant. In the remaining regions and where it is relevant, the corresponding outcome
is represented by contour lines. More specifically, the corresponding outcome for all instances of
(γP,γG) on a particular contour line is the same and indicated by the representing contour value.
For example, let us consider two instances A ≡(γA
P ,γA
G) and B ≡(γB
P ,γB
G) on the same contour
line p∗= p1 in panel (a). Despite being on the same contour line for p∗, A and B lie on different
5 Since we omit the degenerate case γP = γG, the intersection of the four regions O = ((cr −∆c)/(1 −b1/b0),(cr −
∆c)/(1 −b1/b0)), as well as the 45o line, does not belong to any region.

16
Figure 2
The partitioning of Ω1 – Ω4 and the corresponding optimal price, recycling reward, equilibrium
recycling rate and profit in the space (γP ,γG).
ߛீ
ߛ௉
(0, 0)
ܿ௥െοܿ
O
ܿ௥െȟܿ
1 െܾଵ/ܾ଴
݌כ = ݌ଵ
݌଴> ݌ଵ> ݌ଶ> 0
݌כ = ݌଴
݌כ = ݌ଶ
݌כ = ݌଴
45௢
ષ૛
૙
ષ૛
૚
ષ૜
ષ૝
ષ૚
࡭
࡮
ߛ௉
஺
ߛ௉
஻
ߛீ
஺
ߛீ
஻
ߛீ
ߛ௉
(0, 0)
ܿ௥െοܿ
O
ܿ௥െȟܿ
1 െܾଵ/ܾ଴
݂כ = ݂ଶ
݂ଵ> ݂ଶ> ݂ଷ
݂כ = ݂ଷ
45௢
ષ૛
૙
ષ૛
૚
ષ૜
ષ૝
ષ૚
࡭
࡮
݂כ = ݂ଵ
ߛ௉
஺
ߛ௉
஻
ߛீ
஺
ߛீ
஻
(a) Price p∗
(b) Recycling Reward f ∗
ߛீ
ߛ௉
(0, 0)
ܿ௥െοܿ
O
ܿ௥െȟܿ
1 െܾଵ/ܾ଴
߬כ = ߬ଶ
߬ଵ< ߬ଶ< ߬ଷ
߬כ = 0
߬כ = ߬ଷ
45௢
ષ૛
૙
ષ૛
૚
ષ૜
ષ૝
ષ૚
ߛ௉
஺
ߛ௉
஻
ߛீ
஺
ߛீ
஻
࡭
࡮
߬כ = ߬ଵ
߬כ = 0
߬כ = 1
߬כ = 1
ߛீ
ߛ௉
(0, 0)
ܿ௥െοܿ
O
ܿ௥െȟܿ
1 െܾଵ/ܾ଴
45௢
ષ૛
૙
ષ૛
૚
ષ૜
ષ૝
ષ૚
࡭
࡮
ȫכ = ȫଵ
ȫכ = ȫଶ
ȫכ = ȫଷ
ȫ଴< ȫଵ< ȫଶ< ȫଷ
ȫכ = ȫ଴
ȫכ = ȫ଴
ߛ௉
஺
ߛ௉
஻
ߛீ
஺
ߛீ
஻
(c) Recycling Rate τ ∗(f)
(d) Profit Π∗
contours in all three other panels. This implies that the manufacturer sets the same selling price
p∗= p1 but uses different recycling rewards, f1 for A and f2 for B, as shown in panel (b). These
strategies result in different recycling rates and profits, τ1 and Π1 for A and τ2 and Π2 for B, as
respectively demonstrated in panels (c) and (d). For illustrative and comparative purposes, we also
plot several other contour lines in each panel, in addition to those concerning A and B. For price
p∗and recycling reward f ∗, the more rightward contours correspond to smaller values, whereas the
more rightward contours of τ ∗and Π∗correspond to larger values.
Using the above interpretation, Figure 2 reveals several interesting insights. First, a manifested
equilibrium recycling rate τ ∗in panel (c) could be the result of an infinite number of combinations
of underlying γP and γG levels. This, as we later discuss in Section 5.1, has an important implication
regarding the pathway for increasing the overall recycling rate. Second, a single τ ∗contour can
intersect with many different Π∗contours, especially in Ω4. That is, contrary to intuition, the
manifested recycling rate τ ∗
m is not indicative of the manufacturer’s profit. Instead, the underlying
strengths of consumers’ socially influenced emotions, i.e., γP and γG, are the actual drivers. Finally,
the contours in panel (b) also imply that in all regions where the recycling reward is relevant,
the optimal f ∗generally decreases as either γP or γG becomes stronger, i.e., the manufacturer
always exploits consumers’ stronger socially influenced emotions to extend a lower recycling reward.

17
The contours in other panels, however, suggest potentially non-monotonic impacts of the socially
influenced emotions, especially in Ω4, as we asserted in Theorems 1 and 2, starting with the impacts
on the equilibrium recycling rate τ ∗
m.
Theorem 1. The following statements hold in Ω4.
(i)
®
∂τ ∗
m/∂γP ≥0,
for γG ≤(cr −∆c)/(1 −b1/b0), i.e., τ ∗
m ≤0.5
∂τ ∗
m/∂γP < 0,
for γG > (cr −∆c)/(1 −b1/b0), i.e., τ ∗
m > 0.5 ;
(ii)
®
∂τ ∗
m/∂γG < 0,
for γP < (cr −∆c)/(1 −b1/b0), i.e., τ ∗
m < b1/(2b0)
∂τ ∗
m/∂γG ≥0,
for γP ≤(cr −∆c)/(1 −b1/b0), i.e., τ ∗
m ≥b1/(2b0) ;
(iii)
®
∂τ ∗
m/∂γP ≥∂τ ∗
m/∂γG,
for γP + γG ≤(2b0(cr −∆c))/(b0 −b1), i.e., τ ∗
m ≤1/4 + b1/(4b0)
∂τ ∗
m/∂γP < ∂τ ∗
m/∂γG,
for γP + γG > (2b0(cr −∆c))/(b0 −b1), i.e., τ ∗
m > 1/4 + b1/(4b0) .
The interior equilibrium recycling rate τ ∗
m in Ω4 is impacted by socially influenced emotions
(pride and guilt) in two contrasting ways. In particular, a strong socially influenced emotion can
directly encourage recycling, but also prompts the manufacturer to lower her recycling reward,
thereby diminishing recycling incentive. Theorem 1 (i) and (ii) show that the trade-off between
these two opposing effects, delineating how changes in γP and γG affect the equilibrium recycling
rate τ ∗
m, interestingly depends on the other emotion. For example, when γG is low and γP increases,
i.e., γG ≤(cr −∆c)/(1−b1/b0), corresponding to a low underlying recycling rate τ ∗
m ≤0.5, a recycler
is more likely to derive greater pride from confronting non-recyclers, which outweighs the reduced
incentive from a lower reward. Consequently, the resulting equilibrium recycling rate τ ∗
m increases.
Conversely, with high levels of guilt, i.e., γG > (cr −∆c)/(1−b1/b0), indicative of a high underlying
recycling rate τ ∗
m > 0.5, a recycler is less likely to face non-recyclers. It thus follows that the
decreased incentive from a lower reward dominates the modest increase in pride, resulting in a
reduction of the recycling rate as γP increases.
Theorem 1 (iii) also shows that there exists a switching spot along the line γP + γG = (2b0(cr −
∆c))/(b0 −b1) corresponding to the underlying τ ∗
m = 1/4 + b1/(4b0), beyond which increasing γG
becomes more effective (in terms of improving the recycling rate). This is because the beneficial
impact of increasing γP becomes weaker, whereas that of increasing γG gets stronger as τ ∗
m increases.
Our results in Theorem 1 complement the findings in the psychology literature that inducing
emotions of pride and guilt could yield unintended consequences. For instance, van Doorn and
Kurz (2021) show that warm glow (i.e., the feeling of pride) may lead to more waste, whereas Birau
and Faure (2018) suggest that focusing on consumers’ wrongdoings (making them feel guilty) may
worsen the outcomes as consumers feel that accepting the responsibility (for recycling) is a threat
to their self-image. Our study extends these findings by delineating the conditions under which
such backfiring effects may occur.

18
We next turn to the impacts of increasing γP or γG on the manufacturer’s profit in Ω4.6 To
facilitate our discussion, we revisit the expressions of the manufacturer’s optimal price p∗and her
resulting profit Π∗. Using results from Proposition 5, and after some algebra, these terms can be
respectively rewritten as
p∗= 1/(2b0) + (cn −τ ∗
m(∆c −f ∗))/2 −b1(IG + τ ∗
mγG)/(2b0),
(9)
Π∗= (1/4b0)[1 −b0cn −b1IG + τ ∗
m (b0(∆c −f ∗) −b1γG)]
2 .
(10)
Recall also that at the interior equilibrium in Ω4, consumers are indifferent between recycling and
not, and their average utility is given by U
∗= f ∗−ce + Ip + (1 −τ ∗)γP = −IG −τ ∗γG. Three
implications can be made from these expressions. First, consumers experience an overall negative
utility, i.e., a disutility, even when they recycle. This reflects the nature of products that have
a high DOR representative of Ω4. For these products, the recycling reward only alleviates, but
does not eliminate consumers’ significant recycling costs. Second, as the recycling disutility deters
consumers from buying the product, the manufacturer must compensate the consumers by lowering
the selling price, as captured by the third term in (9). Finally, the impact of increasing γP or γG
on Π∗depends on whether the term τ ∗
m (b0(∆c −f ∗) −b1γG) increases or decreases. Within this
term, b0(∆c −f ∗) −b1γG represents the unit benefit derived from remanufacturing one recycled
product, including the cost saving through remanufacturing b0(∆c −f ∗), net the compensation
for consumers’ disutility b1γG. Taken together, the product τ ∗
m (b0(∆c −f ∗) −b1γG) captures the
manufacturer’s total benefits of remanufacturing. Theorem 2 dissects the impacts of increasing γP
or γG on τ ∗
m (b0(∆c −f ∗) −b1γG), through which establishing the impact on Π∗.
Theorem 2. The following statements hold in Ω4.
(i)
∂Π∗/∂γP ≥0;
(ii)
®
∂Π∗/∂γG < 0,
for (b0 −2b1)γP + b1γG < b0(cr −∆c), i.e., τ ∗
m < b1/b0
∂Π∗/∂γG ≥0,
for (b0 −2b1)γP + b1γG ≥b0(cr −∆c), i.e., τ ∗
m ≥b1/b0
;
(iii)
®
∂Π∗/∂γP ≥∂Π∗/∂γG,
for b0γG −b1γP ≤b0(cr −∆c), i.e., τ ∗
m ≤(b0 + b1)/(2b0)
∂Π∗/∂γP < ∂Π∗/∂γG,
for b0γG −b1γP > b0(cr −∆c), i.e., τ ∗
m > (b0 + b1)/(2b0) .
As we detail in the proof of Theorem 2 (i), the unit benefit of remanufacturing always increases
with γP. This increase is substantial enough to offset any potential decrease in the recycling rate
τ ∗
m (e.g., when τ ∗
m is higher than 0.5, as illustrated in Theorem 1).
As a result, the manufacturer’s overall profit Π∗always increases with γP. In contrast, a higher
γG consistently reduces the unit benefit, whereas the recycling rate τ ∗
m initially decreases but
6 For ease of exposition, we relegate the impacts on p∗to Appendix C.

19
subsequently increases. Therefore, only when the underlying recycling rate is sufficiently high, i.e.,
τ ∗
m ≥b1/b0 as illustrated in Theorem 2 (ii), can the overall profit Π∗, which is the product of the
unit benefit and the recycling rate, exhibit an increasing trend with γG.
Similar to Theorem 1, there also exists a switching point at τ ∗
m = (b0 + b1)/(2b0), beyond which
increasing γG becomes more effective than increasing γP in terms of improving Π∗.
Having established the non-monotonic impacts of socially influenced pride and guilt in Ω4, we
proceed to examine their (less intricate) impacts in the remaining regions and at the boundaries,
ensuring the completeness of our findings. In Ω1
2 and Ω3, where the perfect recycling rate τ ∗= 1 is
upheld, the manufacturer can leverage cost savings from offering a lower recycling reward to also
lower the selling price p∗. This strategy enables the manufacturer to expand demand among con-
sumers committed to recycling while maintaining unit profit. Consequently, her profit Π∗increases
with increasing levels of γP and γG in these regions. In contrast, in Ω1 and Ω0
2, where both p∗and
Π∗remain constant, the manufacturer refrains from remanufacturing and earns the benchmark
profit Π0. Theorem 3 formalizes this intuition and also characterizes the behavior of Π∗at the
boundaries of the four Ωregions.
Theorem 3. The following statements hold.
(i) Π∗, as it is defined in each region, is continuous at all region boundaries. In addition, at
the boundary between Ω1
2 and Ω3, lim
∆γ↑0Π∗= lim
∆γ↓0Π∗, where ∆γ = γP −γG.
(ii) ∂Π∗/∂γP ≥0 in Ω1, Ω2 and Ω3.
(iii) ∂Π∗/∂γG ≥0 in Ω1, Ω2 and Ω3.
Theorem 3 asserts that despite the abrupt transition in the equilibrium recycling rate from 0 to
1 between Ω0
2 and Ω1
2, the manufacturer remains indifferent between the two outcomes, and her
profit function maintains continuity across the boundary. The theorem also shows that although
Π∗is technically not defined at the boundary between Ω1
2 and Ω3 (due to our omission of the
degenerate case γP = γG), its left and right-sided limits are identical. By synthesizing the results
in Theorems 1-3, we derive insights into (i) the changes in the manufacturer’s strategy and (ii)
the effects on her resulting profit and the equilibrium recycling rate as γP or γG increases across
the four regions. To facilitate our discussion, Figure 3 illustrates the pertinent outcomes when γP
increases, focusing on two distinct guilt levels γ1
G and γ2
G such that γ1
G < (cr −∆c)/(1 −b1/b0) < γ2
G.
From Figure 2, it is evident that as γP increases along the path corresponding to γG = γ2
G, the
dynamic system transitions from Ω0
2 to Ω1
2, traverses Ω3, and eventually reaches Ω4. In contrast,
along the path for γG = γ1
G, the system only crosses the border between Ω1 and Ω4 as γP increases.

20
Figure 3
The outcomes of interest when γP increases
We first discuss the changes in the manufacturer’s strategy, focusing on the nuanced scenario of
a high guilt level, i.e., when γG = γ2
G > (cr −∆c)/(1 −b1/b0).7 Initially, remanufacturing is unprof-
itable for low γP in Ω0
2 until it reaches the border with Ω1
2. At this juncture, γP becomes sufficiently
substantial to trigger bandwagoning to perfect recycling. As γP continues escalating beyond this
boundary, the manufacturer leverages the heightened sense of pride to further reduce the recycling
reward while maintaining perfect recycling, until reaching the border between Ω1
2 and Ω3. Within
Ω3, perfect recycling persists but the feasibility of reducing the recycling reward vanishes as γP
increases. This highlights the disparate mechanisms driving perfect recycling in these two regions.
In Ω1
2, the reward can be supplemented by an increasing pride in triggering the bandwagon effect.
In Ω3, pride surpasses guilt, and the bandwagon effect cannot occur, necessitating the manufacturer
to extend a significantly high reward (in a relative sense) to ensure recycling remains the preferred
choice. Furthermore, as recyclers derive no further pride, the manufacturer can no longer reduce
the recycling reward and γP has no effect on her profit within Ω3. Finally, at the border between
Ω3 and Ω4, where γP becomes sufficiently large, the manufacturer can improve her profit through
the savings from reducing f ∗, albeit at the cost of a reduction in the recycling rate. This approach
is viable within Ω4, where the savings of the reward outweigh the reduction in the recycling rate.
The synthesis of results in the three Theorems also highlights the substantially different impacts
of a heightened γP and γG on the manufacturer’s profit Π∗and the equilibrium recycling rate τ ∗.
We show that a heightened γP always augments the manufacturer’s profit, albeit potentially at
7 For ease of exposition, we omit the discussion of the more trivial case γ1
G < (cr −∆c)/(1 −b1/b0). We also skip the
illustration and discussion when γG increases, which follows similar intuition.

21
the expense of the equilibrium recycling rate τ ∗. The adverse effect on recycling rate is observed
particularly when the DOR is moderately high, and both socially influenced emotions are suffi-
ciently strong with pride exerting dominance, i.e., in Ω4 with sufficiently large γG. Conversely, a
stronger γG, in most scenarios, increases both Π∗and τ ∗. Nonetheless, an increase in guilt can also
undermine both profit and the recycling rate when the product exhibits a moderately high DOR,
and consumers experience moderate socially influenced pride coupled with relatively weaker guilt.
This scenario arises in Ω4 under the conditions outlined in Theorem 1 (ii) and Theorem 2 (ii).
Our results also provide important managerial insights regarding the implementation of social-
influence-based interventions in settings where the manufacturer aims to induce an interior recy-
cling rate, particularly when the product possesses a moderately high DOR and socially influenced
pride is stronger than guilt (i.e., in Ω4). Here, initiating a pride-based intervention (designed to
bolster γP) proves effective when the underlying recycling rate falls below 0.5. Such an intervention
not only increases the recycling rate but also boosts the manufacturer’s profit, ensuring a win-win
outcome. However, as the recycling rate surpasses 0.5, switching to a guilt-based intervention to
increase γG is the only way to induce more recycling. Nevertheless, this shift may adversely impact
the manufacturer’s profit, particularly when the underlying recycling rate is below b1/b0, as indi-
cated in Theorem 1 (ii). This implies that if b1 ≥b0/2 (i.e., if consumers substantially care for
the product’s recyclability), there exists a range of the underlying recycling rate 0.5 ≤τ ∗
m < b1/b0,
wherein a guilt-based intervention increases the recycling rate but hurts the manufacturer’s profit.
The above outcomes can be explained by examining the manufacturer’s compensation for con-
sumers’ recycling disutility in Ω4. As consumers experience heightened guilt for not recycling (i.e.,
a higher γG) and this guilt dissuades them from purchasing the product (reflected in a higher b1),
the manufacturer must offer greater compensation to maintain demand. Consequently, when b1 is
sufficiently high such that b1 ≥b0/2, and the underlying recycling rate is moderately high such
that 0.5 ≤τ ∗
m < b1/b0, the increased compensation outweighs the benefit of a higher recycling rate
(achieved through increasing γG), leading to a reduction in the manufacturer’s overall profit. Only
when τ ∗
m is sufficiently high (τ ∗
m ≥b1/b0) does the benefit derived from an increased recycling rate
adequately offset the increased compensation, thereby allowing the manufacturer to benefit from
a higher γG.
For illustrative purposes, Figure 4 zooms in Ω4 and demonstrates the potential sub-region in the
space (γP,γG) corresponding to the range 0.5 ≤τ ∗
m < b1/b0, where improving recycling rate through
increasing γG is detrimental to the manufacturer’s profit. This sub-region exists only in panel (b)
when b1 ≥b0/2. As b1 grows larger toward b0, i.e., consumers care more for the recyclability of the
product, the shaded sub-region expands toward the upper border of Ω4. This is because a higher
underlying recycling rate is required to provide sufficient benefit for the manufacturer to offset her

22
(a) When b1 < b0/2
(b) When b1 ≥b0/2
Figure 4
The potential sub-region in Ω4 (the shaded region, which exists only for b1 ≥b0/2) where increasing
γG to improve τ ∗
m is detrimental to the manufacturer’s profit
higher compensation to consumers. In addition to this change, a higher b1 also leads to different
implications on the boundaries of the Ωregions. On one hand, the more concerned consumers
require more compensation from the manufacturer, reducing her incentive to remanufacture. On
the other hand, the more concerned consumers are more likely to recycle, increasing the equilibrium
recycling rate and allowing the manufacturer to benefit more from remanufacturing. At the border
between Ω4 and Ω3, the first effect dominates, and the manufacturer reduces the recycling reward
and sacrifices a small reduction in recycling rate to save on the compensation, i.e., Ω4 expands and
Ω3 shrinks as b1 increases. At the border between Ω4 and Ω1, the second effect dominates, and
the manufacturer moves away from the non-recycling Ω1 to start inducing some recycling, i.e. Ω4
also “invades” Ω1 as b1 increases. In the extreme case where b1 = b0, i.e., consumers care for the
recyclability of the product as much as they consider price, Ω2 and Ω3 vanish and the entire (γP,γG)
space contains only Ω1 and Ω4, divided by the 45o line. In this case, the manufacturer’s strategy
depends on consumers’ stronger socially influenced emotion. In Ω1, where γG > γP, remanufacturing
is never profitable for the manufacturer, due to the very high compensation. In Ω4, γP > γG and the
manufacturer optimally induces some recycling, at which the required compensation is balanced
with the benefits from remanufacturing, depending on the prevailing γP.
We close this section with the discussion on the composition of the Ωregions when the product
has a negative DOR, i.e., when cr −∆c < 0. Note that as the DOR decreases, the intersection
O moves southwest along the 45o line, shrinking the non-recycling regions Ω1 and Ω0
2. When the
DOR becomes negative, these two regions completely vanish, and only Ω1
2, Ω3, and Ω4 remain in
the space (γP,γG). In the first two regions, the perfect recycling rate of 100% is achieved, whereas
the partial recycling rate in Ω4 is always higher than 50% in this case, reflecting scenarios with
consumers’ low recycling costs and profitable remanufacturing.

23
5.
Managerial implications
In this section, we delve into further managerial insights derived from our results, including the
importance of the consumers’ underlying emotions of pride and guilt, the bandwagoning effect,
and the effects of pride- and guilt-based interventions.
5.1.
The importance of underlying socially influenced emotions
As discussed earlier, a manifested level of the resulting recycling rate τ ∗does not entail a specific
point on the underlying behavioral space (γP,γG), but instead can be the result of an infinite
number of combinations of pride and guilt levels. This can significantly affect the pathway for
increasing the overall recycling rate, especially in Ω4. Consider, for example, a social planner or a
third-party organization considering social-influence-based interventions to improve recycling rate
in settings with a moderately high DOR, and stronger socially influenced pride than guilt (in Ω4).
Figure 5 illustrates two different pathways to improve recycling rate from the starting level τ1
to the intermediate level τ2 and subsequently τ3, each having different implications in terms of
resources and costs. Thus, social planners’ ability to first identify consumers’ underlying strengths
of socially influenced pride and guilt γP and γG is critical for designing effective and efficient
(social-influence-based) interventions.
Figure 5
The dual-level structure of recycling behaviors.
!!
!!
!"
!! " #!
$ " %"&%#
"
#
$
"" % "#
"#
'$
"" % "$
&
'(
"$
"%
"" % "%
!&
)'
!
!"#"$%&'"()(%*%(+),%-.-('#$)$/"(
0#1%&(.'#$)(%*%(+)23%)4%-3"#'54)
1&'*'#$)&%-.-('#$)6%3"*'/&5
!"( # $"% &'
&(
'
In addition, extant literature shows that the framing of a marketing campaign can either pos-
itively or negatively influence consumer emotion. Positive framing, such as appraisal information
for achieving a goal, improves the pride emotion (Salerno et al. 2015), while negative framing, such
as advertisements that inform an individual a potential breaking of standards, appeals to feeling
of guilt (Cotte et al. 2005). In a pro-environmental context, Harth et al. (2013) shows that pride
increases after exposure to positive framing, e.g., how citizens contribute to protecting the environ-
ment. In contrast, the guilt emotion was strengthened when the subjects were exposed to negative
framing, e.g., how citizens are responsible for damaging the environment. Thus, our results show
that the effectiveness of these campaigns will be moderated by the underlying (γP,γG).

24
5.2.
Guilt-motivated bandwagoning
Bandwagoning or herding behavior has been widely observed in human society. Extant analytical
papers studying herding behavior are mainly based on the assumption of a rational population.
Keynes (1930) argues that individuals follow others due to the perception that others are better
informed. A Bayesian hypothesis, which considers that individuals adjust their own decisions based
on observations of others’ decisions, is also popular in analytical studies on herding behavior
(e.g., Morone and Samanidou 2008). Such an approach explains situations where the result is
selected by the majority, e.g., most people would not vote for the candidate who is unlikely to
win. However, these analytical models can only explain the herding behavior in certain contexts.
For instance, Baddeley (2010) points out that without considering emotional factors, which do not
necessarily interfere with rationality because they cannot be chosen (Elster 1996), the insights of
these analytical papers may be limited.
In our model, there are two significant characteristics about the occurrence of the bandwagoning
or herding effect: (i) γG > γP, i.e., a strong emotion of guilt and a relatively weaker emotion of
pride; and (ii) the critical mass that triggers bandwagon does not need to be the majority. These
characteristics suggest guilt-motivated bandwagoning, consistent with the psychology literature,
which establishes that herding behavior is often linked to negative emotions. For example, Haghani
and Sarvi (2017) find that during an evacuation, when the level of ambiguity is high, people with
acute stress and fear are more likely to follow others by “jumping on the bandwagon”.
A similar relationship between herding behavior and negative emotion is also found in OM lit-
erature studying social comparison. Using the concept of Nash equilibrium, Roels and Su (2014)
show that people are more likely to herd when they are behind averse (i.e., driven by negative
emotions) than when they are ahead seeking (i.e., driven by positive emotions). Our model indi-
cates that bandwagoning is driven by not only the strength of the negative emotion (i.e., guilt),
but also the relative difference in strength between the negative and the positive emotions. The
larger the gap between guilt and pride emotions, the smaller the critical mass required to trigger
bandwagoning. Consider, for example, an instance with a very small τ 0, indicating that initially
only a small number of people intend to recycle the product. This small group of recyclers may still
be able to influence and convert the entire community to recycle under appropriate combinations
of underlying socially influenced emotions. That is, if the emotion of guilt is very strong and much
higher than cr −f, while the weaker emotion of pride is still considerably strong, i.e., lower than
but very close to cr −f. The very high degree of guilt γG significantly stresses the psychological
disutility of non-recycling, while the level of pride γP sufficiently close to cr −f helps ease the cost
pressure. These two combined effects induce increasingly more consumers to recycle, and eventually
the entire community bandwagon to perfect recycling. This example demonstrates that the critical
mass required for perfect recycling does not need to be a majority and can even be a small value.

25
5.3.
Pride or guilt to increase recycling rate?
In settings where products having a moderately high DOR, and consumers subject to stronger
socially influenced pride than guilt, corresponding to Ω4 characterized by our model, both Lemma 2
and Theorem 1 indicate that to develop a community from absolutely no recycling to 100% recy-
cling requires positively framed campaigns to first promote pride. As more people adopt recycling
behaviors, switching to negatively framed campaigns to promote guilt of non-recycling becomes
more effective. Thus far, extant psychology literature in a pro-environmental context only confirms
that encouraging either pride or guilt can lead to a higher recycling rate. Schultz (1999) shows that
more residents recycle following a positively framed notification. Alp´ızar and Gsottbauer (2015)
show that with the feedback of either positive or negative information about peer performance,
i.e., marking those who contribute higher or lower than expected, the subjects’ performance was
improved. To the best of our knowledge, research has yet to study the conditions describing when
a positively or negatively framed intervention works better.
In our social influence framework, the number of peers taking the same action is important. In
Lemma 2, 50% of the population is a turning point for appealing to consumers using a pride-based
intervention. As there are more recyclers, consumers feel less pride from recycling, causing pride-
based interventions to gradually lose their effectiveness. Another disadvantage for continuously
using positively framed interventions is the encouragement of free riding. If most peers already
recycle, consumers may feel more comfortable relying on others, and thus become self-forgiving
when they fail to recycle. Therefore, appealing to consumers using negative framing of non-recycling
(e.g., the consequential environmental damage) outcomes, to remind them more actions are still
needed becomes more effective as the overall recycling rate grows.
Another argument regarding the benefits of promoting guilt-based frames is that guilt mainly
pertains to the consequence of non-recycling, e.g., the damage of the environment, which essen-
tially cannot be repaired within a foreseeable future. This is like setting an unattainable goal (one
can always do better by recycling more); whereas, promoting pride can make people self-contented
or self-forgiving, which leads to free-riding. Unlike pride-based approaches, which often emphasize
what has been accomplished, guilt-based approaches focus on what has not been accomplished,
which can be endless. From a practical perspective, our results suggest that positively framed
campaigns, such as recycling collectors displaying in real-time how many used products have been
recycled, could work well initially when there are few recycling consumers. As the number of
recyclers grows, the positively framed campaigns could eventually lose their effectiveness, necessi-
tating potential adjustments toward guilt-based campaigns, especially in settings of products with
substantial DORs and consumers having stronger socially influenced pride than guilt.

26
6.
Concluding Remarks
Remanufacturing is an important aspect of closed-loop supply chains, as it alleviates environmental
problems by reducing natural resource depletion, decreasing our reliance on landfill, and moving
us towards a circular economy. Remanufacturing requires consumers’ recycled products as inputs;
however, consumers’ recycling rates for products vary and are often low. Despite the volume of
literature on remanufacturing in closed-loop supply chains and consumers’ recycling behavior,
these two areas have been dealt with in isolation. Thus, integrating the remanufacturing process
with consumers’ recycling behaviors is a critical and timely research topic. Indeed, Atasu et al.
(2019) note that there are limited studies addressing behavioral issues in sustainable OM, and
that environmental outcomes can be improved from a deeper understanding of consumer behavior.
Similarly, Donohue et al. (2019) identify sustainability as an emerging domain for research on
consumer behavior within the area of behavioral OM.
In this paper, we model consumers’ socially influenced recycling behavior using an evolutionary
game and embed the equilibrium recycling rate in a closed-loop supply chain model. Our analysis
characterizes how a manufacturer can adjust its pricing strategy to account for consumers’ socially
influenced recycling behaviors. We also show when and which social-influence-based intervention
should be used to improve consumer recycling rates.
Furthermore, we find that any fixed recycling rate does not entail one single recycling behav-
ior, but a linear combination of underlying pride and guilt feelings about recycling, and various
combinations reveal different potentials for improvement. As a result, how the recycling rate of a
certain product among a population can be effectively increased depends on both the product’s
overall difficulty of remanufacturing and how strong the (potentially heterogeneous) consumers’
socially influenced feelings of pride and guilt are. Contrary to existing literature which advocates
using pride-focused messages to promote recycling, our results show that strategically switching to
guilt-focused interventions when appropriate is more effective in increasing recycling rates when
considering the entire supply chain.
We close with an assessment of certain limitations and provide directions for future research.
To the best of our knowledge, our study is the first to incorporate socially influenced emotions of
pride and guilt into a game theoretical model examining individual recycling decisions. In partic-
ular, we assume a linear relationship between the strength of the social norm and a consumer’s
utility/disutility induced by the socially influenced emotion of pride/guilt. While these directional
relationships are consistent with the psychology literature that individuals tend to feel prouder
when following a less influential social norm (Mascolo and Fischer 1995) and more guilty when
deviating from a more concrete norm (Baumeister et al. 1990, Miettinen and Suetens 2008), linear-
ity is a modeling choice that facilitates our analysis and ensures tractability. We encourage further

27
studies to empirically verify these functional relationships, which could open up an interesting and
important venue for future research.
We also point out that in certain scenarios, there could be conflicts between the goals of maxi-
mizing consumers’ recycling rate and the manufacturer’s profit, especially when the product has a
moderately high DOR, and consumers are substantially concerned about its recyclability. Future
research can analyze how interventions can be implemented to align these conflicted interests and
ensure a win-win solution. We focus on products with a sufficiently long life-cycle for the community
interactions to reach a stable equilibrium, at which the proportion of recycling consumers remains
stationary. Manufacturers of these products, including smart phones, electronics and appliances,
often fix the selling price of a new unit and trade-in prices of used ones for the entire life cycle. For
instance, Apple keeps the selling price of a new model (captured by p in our model) and trade-in
prices for older iPhone models (represented by f in our model) stable during the whole selling
season. There are, however, other products for which the manufacturer could adjust the recycling
reward during the transitory time that could affect consumers’ behaviors in the evolutionary game,
and potentially open up new interesting behaviors. For example, consumers may act strategically
facing a dynamic pricing scheme (Dasu and Tong 2010), and so could hold their used product and
wait for a better recycling reward. This presents opportunities for both interesting and important
future research. Finally, our extension in Appendix D considers a specific type of heterogeneity,
allowing us to derive closed-form solutions. However, heterogeneity can manifest across consumers
in various ways. For example, consumers may have different costs for recycling due to locations or
technical savviness. Since considering full consumer heterogeneity could be technically difficult to
study using analytical modeling, we encourage future empirical or behavioral studies to examine
their impacts.
Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to Wedad J. Elmaghraby, the Associate Editor, and three anonymous
reviewers for their patience, and excellent comments, questions and suggestions that tremendously
improved this research. W. Chen was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China [Grant 71902017], and C.-L. Tseng was supported by the University of New South Wales
UNOVA Knowledge Hub.
References
Adams I, Hurst K, Sintov ND (2020) Experienced guilt, but not pride, mediates the effect of feedback on
pro-environmental behavior. Journal of Environmental Psychology 71:101476.
Alp´ızar F, Gsottbauer E (2015) Reputation and household recycling practices: field experiments in costa
rica. Ecological Economics 120:366–375.

28
Apple (2022) Apple trade in: Turn the device you have into the one you want. https://www.apple.com/
au/trade-in/, [Online; accessed 22-Jul-2022].
Atasu A, Corbett CJ, Huang X, Toktay LB (2019) Sustainable operations management through the per-
spective of manufacturing & service operations management. Manufacturing & Service Operations
Management .
Atasu A, Guide Jr VDR, Van Wassenhove LN (2008) Product reuse economics in closed-loop supply chain
research. Production and Operations Management 17(5):483–496.
Baddeley M (2010) Herding, social influence and economic decision-making: socio-psychological and neurosci-
entific analyses. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 365(1538):281–
290.
Baumeister RF, Hutton DG, Cairns KJ (1990) Negative effects of praise on skilled performance. Basic and
Applied Social Psychology 11(2):131–148.
Baumeister RF, Stillwell AM, Heatherton TF (1994) Guilt: an interpersonal approach. Psychological bulletin
115(2):243.
Bendle N, Vandenbosch M (2014) Competitor orientation and the evolution of business markets. Marketing
Science 33(6):781–795.
Bhattacharya S, Guide Jr VDR, Van Wassenhove LN (2006) Optimal order quantities with remanufacturing
across new product generations. Production and Operations Management 15(3):421–431.
Birau MM, Faure C (2018) It is easy to do the right thing: Avoiding the backfiring effects of advertisements
that blame consumers for waste. Journal of Business Research 87:102–117.
Bissing-Olson MJ, Fielding KS, Iyer A (2016) Experiences of pride, not guilt, predict pro-environmental
behavior when pro-environmental descriptive norms are more positive. Journal of Environmental Psy-
chology 45:145–153.
Boldero J (1995) The prediction of household recycling of newspapers: The role of attitudes, intentions, and
situational factors. Journal of Applied Social Psychology 25(5):440–462.
Buchtel EE, Ng LC, Norenzayan A, Heine SJ, Biesanz JC, Chen SX, Bond MH, Peng Q, Su Y (2018) A sense
of obligation: Cultural differences in the experience of obligation. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin 44(11):1545–1566.
Buunk BP, Gibbons FX (2000) Toward an enlightenment in social comparison theory: Moving beyond classic
and renaissance approaches. Handbook of social comparison: Theory and research 487–499.
Chen W, Tseng CL, Sunny Yang SJ (2020) Improving hand hygiene process compliance through process
monitoring in healthcare. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 22(4):669–682.
Cotte J, Coulter RA, Moore M (2005) Enhancing or disrupting guilt: The role of ad credibility and perceived
manipulative intent. Journal of Business Research 58(3):361–368.

29
Dasu S, Tong C (2010) Dynamic pricing when consumers are strategic: Analysis of posted and contingent
pricing schemes. European Journal of Operational Research 204(3):662–671.
Debo LG, Toktay LB, Wassenhove LNV (2006) Joint life-cycle dynamics of new and remanufactured prod-
ucts. Production and Operations Management 15(4):498–513.
Dhir A, Malodia S, Awan U, Sakashita M, Kaur P (2021) Extended valence theory perspective on consumers’
e-waste recycling intentions in Japan. Journal of Cleaner Production 312:127443.
Donohue KL, ¨Ozer ¨O, Zheng Y (2019) Behavioral operations: Past, present, and future. Present, and Future
(April 29, 2019) .
Dupr´e M, Meineri S (2016) Increasing recycling through displaying feedback and social comparative feedback.
Journal of Environmental Psychology 48:101–107.
Easley D, Kleinberg J, et al. (2010) Networks, crowds, and markets: Reasoning about a highly connected
world, volume 1 (Cambridge university press Cambridge).
Echegaray F, Hansstein FV (2017) Assessing the intention-behavior gap in electronic waste recycling: the
case of Brazil. Journal of Cleaner Production 142:180–190.
Elster J (1996) Rationality and the emotions. The Economic Journal 106(438):1386–1397.
Fang J, Brown GT, Hamilton R (2023) Changes in chinese students’ academic emotions after examinations:
Pride in success, shame in failure, and self-loathing in comparison. British Journal of Educational
Psychology 93(1):245–261.
Ferrer G, Swaminathan JM (2006) Managing new and remanufactured products. Management science
52(1):15–26.
Ferronato N, Torretta V (2019) Waste mismanagement in developing countries: A review of global issues.
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 16(6):1060.
Feylessoufi A, Kavadias S, Ralph D (2023) Behavioral microfoundations of new practice adoption: the effects
of rewards, training and population dynamics. Training and Population Dynamics (April 15, 2023) .
Friedman D, Sinervo B (2016) Evolutionary games in natural, social, and virtual worlds (Oxford University
Press).
Garcia SM, Tor A, Gonzalez R (2006) Ranks and rivals: A theory of competition. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin 32(7):970–982.
Guide Jr VDR, Teunter RH, Van Wassenhove LN (2003) Matching demand and supply to maximize profits
from remanufacturing. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 5(4):303–316.
Guide Jr VDR, Van Wassenhove LN (2009) Or forum—the evolution of closed-loop supply chain research.
Operations research 57(1):10–18.
Haghani M, Sarvi M (2017) Following the crowd or avoiding it?: Empirical investigation of imitative behaviour
in emergency escape of human crowds. Animal Behaviour 124:47–56.

30
Han W, McCabe S, Wang Y, Chong AYL (2018) Evaluating user-generated content in social media: An
effective approach to encourage greater pro-environmental behavior in tourism? Journal of Sustainable
Tourism 26(4):600–614.
Harth NS, Leach CW, Kessler T (2013) Guilt, anger, and pride about in-group environmental behaviour:
Different emotions predict distinct intentions. Journal of Environmental Psychology 34:18–26.
Hornik J, Cherian J, Madansky M, Narayana C (1995) Determinants of recycling behavior: A synthesis of
research results. The Journal of Socio-Economics 24(1):105–127.
International Solid Waste Association (2020) The global e-waste monitor 2020. https://www.iswa.org/
home/news/news-detail/article/-21c8325490/109/, [Online; accessed 10-December-2019].
Ji P, Ma X, Li G (2015) Developing green purchasing relationships for the manufacturing industry: An
evolutionary game theory perspective. International Journal of Production Economics 166:155–162.
Johnson MR, McCarthy IP (2014) Product recovery decisions within the context of extended producer
responsibility. Journal of Engineering and Technology Management 34:9–28.
Keynes JM (1930) A treatise on money in two volumes. 1.: The pure theory of money. 2.: The applied theory
of money (London: Macmillan & Co).
Kim YJ, Njite D, Hancer M (2013) Anticipated emotion in consumers’ intentions to select eco-friendly restau-
rants: Augmenting the theory of planned behavior. International Journal of Hospitality Management
34:255–262.
Kitayama S, Mesquita B, Karasawa M (2006) Cultural affordances and emotional experience: socially engag-
ing and disengaging emotions in japan and the united states. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology 91(5):890.
Kopel M, Lamantia F, Szidarovszky F (2014) Evolutionary competition in a mixed market with socially
concerned firms. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 48:394–409.
Lewis M (2010) Self-conscious emotions: Embarrassment, pride, shame, and guilt. Lewis M, Haviland-Jones
JM, Barrett LF, eds., Handbook of Emotions, 742–756 (Guilford Press).
Long J, Harr´e N, Atkinson QD (2014) Understanding change in recycling and littering behavior across a
school social network. American Journal of Community Psychology 53(3-4):462–474.
Luenberger DG (1979) Dynamic Systems (J. Wiley Sons).
Macias T, Williams K (2016) Know your neighbors, save the planet: Social capital and the widening wedge
of pro-environmental outcomes. Environment and Behavior 48(3):391–420.
Mai Y, Hu B (2023) Optimizing free-to-play multiplayer games with premium subscription. Management
Science 69(6):3437–3456.
Mallett RK, Melchiori KJ, Strickroth T (2013) Self-confrontation via a carbon footprint calculator increases
guilt and support for a proenvironmental group. Ecopsychology 5(1):9–16.

31
Mascolo MF, Fischer KW (1995) Developmental transformations in appraisals for pride, shame, and guilt.
(Guilford Press).
Miettinen T, Suetens S (2008) Communication and guilt in a prisoner’s dilemma. Journal of Conflict Reso-
lution 52(6):945–960.
Moloney B, Doolan M (2016) A comparison of obstacles in emerging and developed nation dry waste recovery.
Procedia CIRP 40:347–352.
Morone A, Samanidou E (2008) A simple note on herd behaviour. Journal of Evolutionary Economics
18(5):639–646.
Onwezen MC, Bartels J, Antonides G (2014) The self-regulatory function of anticipated pride and guilt in a
sustainable and healthy consumption context. European Journal of Social Psychology 44(1):53–68.
Ray S, Boyaci T, Aras N (2005) Optimal prices and trade-in rebates for durable, remanufacturable products.
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 7(3):208–228.
Roels G, Su X (2014) Optimal design of social comparison effects: Setting reference groups and reference
points. Management Science 60(3):606–627.
Salerno A, Laran J, Janiszewski C (2015) Pride and regulatory behavior: The influence of appraisal infor-
mation and self-regulatory goals. Journal of Consumer Research 42(3):499–514.
Savaskan RC, Bhattacharya S, Van Wassenhove LN (2004) Closed-loop supply chain models with product
remanufacturing. Management Science 50(2):239–252.
Schultz PW (1999) Changing behavior with normative feedback interventions: A field experiment on curbside
recycling. Basic and Applied Social Psychology 21(1):25–36.
Schwab N, Harton HC, Cullum JG (2014) The effects of emergent norms and attitudes on recycling behavior.
Environment and Behavior 46(4):403–422.
Shahrasbi A, Shokouhyar S, Zeidyahyaee N (2021) Consumers’ behavior towards electronic wastes from a
sustainable development point of view: An exploration of differences between developed and developing
countries. Sustainable Production and Consumption 28:1736–1756.
Shipley NJ, van Riper CJ (2021) Pride and guilt predict pro-environmental behavior: A meta-analysis of
correlational and experimental evidence. Journal of Environmental Psychology 101753.
Smith JM, Price GR (1973) The logic of animal conflict. Nature 246(5427):15.
Smith MJ (1984) The stability of a dynamic model of traffic assignment—an application of a method of
lyapunov. Transportation Science 18(3):245–252.
Suls J, Wheeler L (2013) Handbook of social comparison: Theory and research (Springer Science & Business
Media).
Taylor PD, Jonker LB (1978) Evolutionary stable strategies and game dynamics. Mathematical Biosciences
40(1-2):145–156.

32
Taylor S, Todd P (1995) An integrated model of waste management behavior: A test of household recycling
and composting intentions. Environment and Behavior 27(5):603–630.
Tracy JL, Robins RW (2004) Putting the self into self-conscious emotions: A theoretical model. Psychological
Inquiry 15(2):103–125.
United Nations (2019) Circular economy crucial for paris climate goal. https://unfccc.int/news/
circular-economy-crucial-for-paris-climate-goals, [Online; accessed 10-December-2019].
van Doorn J, Kurz T (2021) The warm glow of recycling can make us more wasteful. Journal of Environmental
Psychology 77:101672.
Weibull JW (1997) Evolutionary game theory (MIT press).
Wood JV (1989) Theory and research concerning social comparisons of personal attributes. Psychological
Bulletin 106(2):231.
Xiao Y, Zhou SX (2020) Trade-in for cash or for upgrade? dynamic pricing with customer choice. Production
and Operations Management 29(4):856–881.
Yan X, Chao X, Lu Y, Zhou SX (2017) Optimal policies for selling new and remanufactured products.
Production and Operations Management 26(9):1746–1759.
Yin R, Li H, Tang CS (2015) Optimal pricing of two successive-generation products with trade-in options
under uncertainty. Decision Sciences 46(3):565–595.
Yin R, Tang CS (2014) Optimal temporal customer purchasing decisions under trade-in programs with
up-front fees. Decision Sciences 45(3):373–400.
Zhou SX, Yu Y (2011) Optimal product acquisition, pricing, and inventory management for systems with
remanufacturing. Operations research 59(2):514–521.
Zhu X, Wang M, Chen G, Chen X (2016) The effect of implementing trade-in strategy on duopoly compe-
tition. European Journal of Operational Research 248(3):856–868.
Zhu Y, Wang Y, Liu Z (2021) How does social interaction affect pro-environmental behaviors in china? the
mediation role of conformity. Frontiers in Environmental Science 9:690361.