TITLE: Shared Mobility for Last-Mile Delivery: Design, Operational Prescriptions, and Environmental Impact
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2018
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2017.0683
---

TSpace Research Repository 
 
tspace.library.utoronto.ca 
 
 
Shared Mobility for Last-Mile Delivery: 
Design, Operational Prescriptions and 
Environmental Impact 
 
Wei Qi, Lefei Li, Sheng Liu & Zuo-Jun Max Shen 
 
Version Post-print or Accepted manuscript 
 
Citation 
(published version) 
Qi, W., Li, L., Liu, S., & Shen, Z. J. M. (2018). Shared mobility for last-
mile delivery: Design, operational prescriptions, and environmental 
impact. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 20(4), 737-751. 
 
Copyright / License Copyright © 2018, INFORMS 
 
DOI https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2017.0683 
Publisher’s Statement This is an accepted manuscript of an article published by INFORMS in 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to cite TSpace items 
 
Always cite the published version, so the author(s) will receive recognition through services that track 
citation counts, e.g. Scopus. If you need to cite the page number of the author manuscript from TSpace 
because you cannot access the published version, then cite the TSpace version in addition to the published 
version using the permanent URI (handle) found on the record page. 
 
This article was made openly accessible by U of T Faculty. 
Please tell us how this access benefits you. Your story matters. 
 

Shared Mobility for Last-Mile Delivery: Design,
Operational Prescriptions and Environmental Impact
Wei Qi
Desautels Faculty of Management, McGill University
Lefei Li
Department of Industrial Engineering, Tsinghua University
Sheng Liu
Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto
Zuo-Jun Max Shen
Department of IEOR and Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
University of California, Berkeley
Abstract. Two socioeconomic transformations, namely, the booms in the sharing econ-
omy and retail e-commerce, lead to the prospect where shared mobility of passenger cars
prevails throughout urban areas for home delivery services. Logistics service providers
as well as local governments are in need of evaluating the potentially substantial impacts
of this mode shift, given their economic objectives and environmental concerns. This
paper addresses this need by providing new logistics planning models and managerial
insights. These models characterize open-loop car routes, car drivers’ wage-response
behavior, interplay with the ride-share market and optimal sizes of service zones within
which passenger vehicles pick up goods and fulﬁll the last-mile delivery. Based on the-
oretical analysis and empirical estimates in a realistic setting, the ﬁndings suggest that
crowdsourcing shared mobility is not as scalable as the conventional truck-only system
in terms of the operating cost. However, a transition to this paradigm has the potential
for creating economic beneﬁts by reducing the truck ﬂeet size and exploiting additional
operational ﬂexibilities (e.g., avoiding high-demand areas and peak hours, adjusting ve-
hicle loading capacities, etc.). These insights are insigniﬁcantly aﬀected by the dynamic
adjustment of wages and prices of the ride-share market. If entering into this paradigm,
greenhouse gas emissions may increase due to prolonged car trip distance; on the other
hand, even exclusively minimizing operating costs incurs only slightly more emissions
than exclusively minimizing emissions.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

1. Introduction
California, along with many other regions in the world, is experiencing two socioeconomic transfor-
mations: 1) The sharing economy, in which people share access to goods and services, is prosper-
ing. The market size of the sharing economy has the potential for increasing global revenues from
roughly $15 billion today to around $335 billion by 2025 (PWC (2015)). One of the key sectors
being impacted is transportation, with leading companies (e.g., Uber, Lyft and Car2Go) disrupting
the traditional business of people-riding transit. 2) Meanwhile, retail e-commerce sales is expand-
ing rapidly worldwide, with an annual growth rate of around 20%, and is projected to reach $2.4
trillion in 2017 according to eMarketer (2014). To advance their logistics competitiveness, some
major players piloted new delivery services (e.g., Amazon Prime Now and Google Express, etc.)
over the past several years.
A question that naturally arises from these phenomena but has not been well addressed is: Is
it possible for retail e-commerce to rely on crowdsourced shared mobility for delivery services on
a large scale? Botsman (2014) anticipates that the power of such a mode is that “...it does not
require the asset-heavy infrastructure of warehouses, vehicle ﬂeets, fuel costs and employed drivers
that traditional logistics companies have to pay for and manage... it’s an asset-light model, akin to
the likes of Uber and Airbnb, with low overheads meaning it can scale relatively fast depending on
demand.” Can this marriage of the sharing economy and e-commerce really have all these claimed
merits? Until recently, this practice is still in its infancy. On the one hand, most of the existing
leading companies and promising start-ups in the courier industry primarily rely on professional
people and dedicated ﬂeets (e.g.
95% of Zipments’ couriers are professionals).
On the other
hand, some companies have begun to experiment with crowdsourced delivery (e.g. Amazon Flex,
UberEATS and start-ups including Postmates and Deliv), yet on a small scale and/or focusing on
express deliveries.
The goal of this paper is to evaluate whether and how to foster the large-scale adoption of shared
mobility for last-mile home delivery services. The evaluation is mainly from the perspective of a
logistics service provider, who minimizes the costs of both operating a ﬂeet of short-haul trucks
for bulk transportation and outsourcing shared mobility for the last-mile delivery. Also considered
is the perspective of a local government, which aims to abate greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.
This responsibility, for example, is particularly relevant to the California state government, given
its strategies to develop multi-model integrated freight systems and to create car sharing programs
(CFMP (2014)) as well as for its commitment to a 15% reduction (from 2010 levels) of GHG
emissions to achieve 1990 levels by 2020 as dictated in Assembly Bill 32 (2006).
The ﬁrst part of the paper develops planning models for this prospective mode of sharing logistics.
The models are based on a one-transshipment logistics setting: a ﬂeet of short-haul trucks are
dispatched from a depot and unload goods at terminals of service zones. Passenger cars nearby
with available mobility are attracted to each terminal, each picking up a ration of goods and
delivering them within the service zone to their destinations. Contrasting the conventional mode
where dedicated vehicles travel closed-loop and back-to-back routes, a salient feature of shared
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

mobility is its one-way and one-shot nature: a car starts an outbound trip by approaching its
ﬁrst demand destination and the service ends once it drops oﬀthe last package. To characterize
these properties, a continuous approximation (CA) model is developed, along with a lower-bound
analysis to establish the suboptimality of the approximation. Then a wage response model and a
model of synergy and competition with the ride-share market are derived to determine the wages
paid to car drivers and the level of the supply of shared mobility. Combining these models results
in service zone deployment in the form of the optimal service zone sizes as well as the associated
operating cost.
The second part of the paper presents managerial implications of this sharing
logistics paradigm, concerning its economic scalability, asset-lightness, operational prescriptions,
robustness to dynamic adjustment of wages and prices of the ride-share market, and environmental
impacts. A case study calibrates the optimal design with empirical parameter estimates in a setting
of 15 zip-code areas in the East San Francisco Bay Area, considering various operating scenarios.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:
1) To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this work is the ﬁrst attempt to design and analyze
the logistics system that features large-scale integration of shared mobility for home delivery ser-
vices, using analytical models and empirical parameter estimates. In particular, the asymmetry of
passenger cars’ one-way routes invalidates existing CA models for vehicle routing problems (VRP);
the CA model in this work and the lower-bound construction ﬁll this gap in literature. The wage
response model and the model of interplay with the ride-share market can be useful for studies of
dynamically compensating drivers for delivery services.
2) The paper ﬁnds that crowdsourcing shared mobility is not as economically scalable as the
conventional truck-only system in terms of the operating cost, unless the pool size of shared mobility
keeps pace with the increase in demand density. The diﬀerence in scalability is driven by their
diﬀerent payment structure. Unlike the conventional truck-only system where drivers are hired
and paid a ﬁxed rate, the payment to crowdsourced drivers is route-speciﬁc and accounts for the
competition with the ride-share service market.
3) A major ﬁnding is that the value of shared mobility is not direct operating cost savings, but
rather its ability to reduce the truck ﬂeet size and the additional operational ﬂexibilities it creates that
can signiﬁcantly enhance the cost-eﬃciency of the whole package distribution system. Speciﬁcally,
the paper identiﬁes four operational prescriptions: i) to pilot this business model in low-demand-
density areas since it’s not as economically scalable as the conventional truck-only system, ii) to
replace regular-size delivery vans with heavy-duty trucks to enhance inbound-trucking eﬃciency,
iii) to deliver during oﬀ-peak hours to pay lower wages to car drivers, and iv) to load more packages
in cars to exploit the economies of scale of last-mile trips and also dampen the competition with the
ride-share market. The case study shows that collectively implementing the last three prescriptions
can signiﬁcantly reduce the operating cost. Moreover, these insights are insigniﬁcantly aﬀected by
dynamically adjusting wages and prices in the ride-share market.
4) The paper identiﬁes a twofold environmental impact: i) This paradigm may incur more GHG
emissions, because the emission eﬃciency gains from cars’ open-loop routes and smaller per-km
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

emission rate are oﬀset by the demerit that the total car trip distance is much longer than that
by trucks because of cars’ smaller capacity. ii) Even exclusively minimizing operating costs does
not signiﬁcantly increase emissions relative to the minimum level of emissions, because the cost
objective function and the emission objective function share a similar transshipment structure that
is robust to the service zone sizing decisions.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the related literature;
Section 3 introduces the basic model settings; Section 4 develops routing and wage response models
of shared mobility and the model of synergy and competition eﬀects of the ride-share market;
Section 5 presents the shared-mobility logistics planning model; Section 6 discusses managerial
implications; Section 7 concludes the paper.
Additional technical proofs, empirical parameter
estimates and numeral results are provided in the appendices of this paper.
2. Literature Review
Large-scale adoption of shared mobility for retail e-commerce is an important prospect, but has
not received wide attention in literature. The vast majority of the studies concerning the impact of
the sharing economy on the transportation sector have focused on the transportation of passengers
instead of packages. One group of these studies investigates vehicle sharing, which refers to the
case where people access mobility services by temporary usage without ownership of the vehicles.
For example, Bellos et al. (2017) study the economic and environmental implications of the car
sharing business and ﬁnd that its overall environmental impact can be negative due to aggregate
vehicle usage. Shu et al. (2013) and Kabra et al. (2017) study the deployment and operations
problems arising in bike-sharing systems, employing network ﬂow models and econometric methods,
respectively. He et al. (2017) notice the recent development of one-way electric vehicle sharing (e.g.
Car2Go) and formulate a service region design problem. Another stream of literature is concerned
with ride sharing, which refers to a diﬀerent transportation mode where a passenger accesses a
vehicle for a trip with its driver already en route. See Furuhata et al. (2013) for a comprehensive
review of ride-sharing management and Agatz et al. (2012) for a review of an important operations
problem - the dynamic matching of shared rides. Recently, Cachon et al. (2016) explore surge
pricing in ride sharing and ﬁnd that all stakeholders can be better-oﬀwith surge pricing.
By contrast, studies on goods logistics with shared mobility are few and mostly qualitative. Car-
bone et al. (2015) identify diﬀerent types of logistics coexisting in the sharing economy based on
an exploratory analysis of 32 cases. Roug`es and Montreuil (2014) examine 18 businesses. They
argue that the two major obstacles to the development of crowdsourced delivery are trust building
and a “chicken-and-egg” dilemma: a critical mass of couriers is needed to insure quality delivery
and to attract customers, but a critical mass of customers is needed to attract couriers. However,
the analysis in this paper shows that a major obstacle may be that the operating costs are not
competitive without further exploitation of the operational ﬂexibilities. Recently, Li et al. (2014)
and Li et al. (2016) propose a conceptual taxi-based people-freight sharing system. They formulate
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

a routing problem as a mixed integer linear program and propose a neighborhood search heuris-
tic solution algorithm. Kaﬂe et al. (2017) design a crowdsource-enabled parcel delivery system
where cyclists and pedestrians are undertaking delivery and pick-up jobs. They assume a bidding
procedure in the crowdsourced side and model the carrier’s decision as a mixed integer non-linear
program, which is solved with a Tabu search based algorithm. By comparison, this paper develops
continuous approximation models for a home delivery logistics system, with emphasis on its overall
economic and environmental implications.
Logistics planning with environmental sustainability considerations has been studied in contexts
other than the sharing economy. Cachon (2014) models the dependence of operating costs and GHG
emissions on the density of retail stores and ﬁnds that improving consumer fuel eﬃciency can be
an eﬀective way of mitigating emissions. Carlsson et al. (2016) ﬁnd that household-level economies
of scale in transportation (i.e., a person performs many errands in a single trip) may actually
increase the overall carbon footprint relative to the case of home delivery services. The service
region deployment problem considered in this paper is based on CA models in a one-transshipment
setting. CA methods for one-transshipment logistics systems are investigated in Xie and Ouyang
(2015) with detailed discussion on the approximation error, and in Schaefer and Konur (2015)
with environmental considerations. Carlsson and Jia (2013, 2014) ﬁnd the asymptotically optimal
conﬁgurations for one-transshipment and multi-transshipment logistics systems considering both
ﬁxed costs and transportation costs. Again, the key distinction of this paper is the inclusion of
shared mobility.
3. Model Settings
Topology: Consider a one-transshipment system that a logistics service provider operates. A depot
is located in a service region Ω. At the inbound stage, a ﬂeet of short-haul trucks or vans (hereafter
referred to as trucks) are dispatched from the depot, each carrying a truck load of packages, and
ﬁnally return to the depot. A truck stops at multiple terminals, where it unloads packages to be
delivered in service zones. Each terminal is located at the center of a service zone.
Service zone
sizes and terminal locations can change from dispatch to dispatch in response to realized package
delivery demands. Figure 1 illustrates the route of a truck that visits four service zones. The zones
are tiled to cover the whole service region and are of squared diamond shape.
At the outbound stage, multiple passenger cars nearby with available mobility (hereafter referred
to as cars) are attracted to each terminal in real time to pick up all the packages. Then they deliver
them to their destinations within a service zone. Manhattan metric of distance (l-one norm) is used
throughout the paper. Such a transshipment setting captures the fundamental tradeoﬀ: To carry
a truck load of goods to travel a certain distance, a truck is more cost-eﬃcient than a cohort of
cars of equal capacity; however, to carry one kilogram of goods to travel a certain distance, a car
is more cost-eﬃcient than a truck.
Demands and mobility availability: The demand destinations constitute a non-homogenous
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

Figure 1: An illustration of a one-transshipment logistics system for home delivery services with shared
mobility of passenger cars (only one of multiple truck routes is displayed).
point process. The mean density of the destinations is n(x) at the point coordinates x = (x1, x2).
The random package weight for a destination at x is independently distributed with mean g(x). Also
assume that available cars are distributed with density m(x). Summaries of parameter notation
and estimates are available in Appendices A and E, respectively. Symbols throughout this paper
are subscripted with a vehicle type (“t” for trucks and “c” for cars) wherever necessary.
Objective: The logistics service provider wants to minimize its operating cost. The operating
cost consists of the wages paid to car drivers and the cost of dispatching its own truck ﬂeet (including
the depreciation cost as the amortized truck ﬂeet investment cost). Therefore, the logistics service
provider needs to evaluate the vehicle routing decisions and the payment scheme to attract shared
mobility from the ride-share service market. He/she also needs to determine the cost-minimizing
service zone sizes. Integrating these considerations forms the basis of understanding whether and
how to foster large-scale adoption of shared mobility for last-mile delivery. The following sections
elaborate on these aspects.
4. Shared Mobility: Routing and Wage Response
4.1. Terminal-bound Car Trips
Assume that the proﬁles of demands and shared mobility availability (i.e., n(x), g(x) and m(x))
are slow varying continuous functions of x.
That is, although n(x), g(x) and m(x) may vary
signiﬁcantly over the entire service region, their values at locations within a service zone can be
approximated by their values at the terminal of that zone. Then each service zone of area A(x)
with its terminal at x on average requires mz(x) = g(x)A(x)n(x)
vc
nearest cars to deliver packages
within the zone, since g(x)A(x)n(x) is the average weight of packages of the zone and the cars are
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

assumed to be loaded to capacity vc. These cars are approximately uniformly scattered in a local
squared diamond of area mz(x)
m(x) centering the terminal. Their mean terminal-bound distance, dTB,
is the mean distance between a point in this diamond and the center, computed by integration as
follows (location point index x is suppressed wherever the discussion holds for all locations in the
remainder of the paper):
dTB =
Z
1
2
√mz
m
0
√
2r 8r
mz
m
dr =
√
2
3
rmz
m .
(1)
4.2. Outbound Car Trips
Assume that the time window for picking up packages is short such that car drivers do not take
back-to-back delivery trips. In fact, truck drivers staying for too long at terminals can be costly,
because the wages paid to them is a considerable portion of the operating cost (see Appendix E.2).
Also implicitly assumed is that enough cars are available to pick up packages with each making
one trip, i.e., m > mz
A = gn
vc . This assumption holds for practical parameter values (see Appendix
E.3). As a result, cars’ outbound trips are open-loop: they do not return to the terminal once
ﬁnishing delivering the last package. The optimal open-loop routes are the solution to the open
vehicle routing problem (OVRP) (Li et al. (2007)). Aggregating all the open-loop trips in a zone,
an approximation of the total outbound trip distance is given as follows:
Result 1. The total outbound trip distance of shared mobility in a service zone is given by
dOV RP = (
√
2
3 −α(vc
g )β(1 −
1
γ
√
An
))gA1.5n
vc
+ λA√n,
(2)
where α = 0.055, β = 0.470, γ = 0.374 and λ = 1.005.
In (2), the ﬁrst term is associated with the line-haul portion of the car routes. That is, a car travels
the shortest path from the terminal to the ﬁrst destination of those on its route. The second term is
associated with the detour portion of the route to visit all the remaining destinations. Developing
(2) is based on solving 9, 600 numerical instances. The details are available in Appendix B.
4.3. Structural Properties of OVRP
The OVRP is a key component of the shared mobility model. The non-return property distinguishes
the OVRP from the classical VRP. In the previous subsection, the CA form of the OVRP solution
approximates an upper bound of the optimal distance.
In what follows, two lower bounds are
proposed, assuming vehicles are loaded to capacity. Although this assumption loses some generality,
it reﬂects the setting where drivers are induced to be fully engaged in delivery services. With slight
abuse of notation, let Xn denote the set of n demand points in a plane of unit area, where the
terminal is located at the center. Let TSP(Xn), V RP(Xn) and OV RP(Xn) denote the lengths of
the optimal TSP, VRP and OVRP tours traversing points in Xn, respectively. Subscript k is used
to denote the maximum number of packages loaded by each vehicle. And ⌈·⌉is the ceiling function.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

Proposition 1. If vehicles are loaded to capacity in the OVRP,
TSP(Xn) −
ln
k
m
rn
max ≤VRPk(Xn) −
ln
k
m
rn
max ≤OVRPk(Xn),
where rn
max is the maximum distance from points in Xn to the center.
Proposition 2. If vehicles are loaded to capacity in the OVRP,
TSP(Xn) −1
2TSP(X⌈n
k ⌉) −rn
max ≤VRP2k(Xn) −1
2TSP(X⌈n
k ⌉) −rn
max ≤OVRPk(Xn),
where X⌈n
k ⌉is the set of end demand points in the OVRP solution.
Proofs of these two propositions construct feasible VRP solutions from the optimal OVRP solu-
tion (see Appendix C). Numerical tests with wide range of parameter values ﬁnd that the median
relative optimality gap is 23.45%, with a 75th percentile of 24.2%. Following Proposition 2, an
asymptotic result of the OVRP is developed below when demand points in Xn are independent
and identically distributed with ﬁnite expected distance E(r) to the center.
Proposition 3. If vehicles are fully loaded in the OVRP and k is constant,
lim
n→∞
1
nOVRPk(Xn) = E(r)
k
(a.s.).
This limit is a half of its counterpart for the VRP derived by Haimovich and Kan (1985).
4.4. Wage Response
The logistics service provider crowdsources shared mobility by paying trip-speciﬁc wages to car
drivers, who bear vehicle operating costs (of fuel, maintenance, depreciation, etc.) by themselves.
A car driver is willing to participate in a delivery service only if the payment, after discounted by
considerations of faster vehicle depreciation and more physical eﬀort, is at least the amount that
he or she can otherwise expect to earn by providing shared rides to passengers. Therefore, eﬃcient
payment should be based on the expected revenue out of ride share services, as derived as follows–
Packages uploaded at each terminal are to be delivered along open-loop car routes, which are
oﬀered to nearby idling car drivers. Consider an oﬀer of payment w(do) that entails do km of
outbound trip distance. If a car driver who is r km away from the terminal decides to accept this
oﬀer, the estimated total time of fulﬁlling the delivery service is τ = r
s + do
so , where s denotes the
normal cruise speed of a car and so denotes the speed during outbound delivery services (so < s).
Alternatively, if the driver is engaged in ride sharing services during the time window (0, τ), then
the driver is either carrying passengers or waiting for a new passenger. When carrying passengers,
the driver receives payments from a ride-share company. Typically, the ride fare consists of three
parts: base fare, per-mile fare and per-minute fare. A passenger ride of duration τ0 thus generates
income of wb + wmτ0, where wb is the base fare and wm is in terms of dollars per minute but
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

incorporates both the per-minute fare and the per-mile fare, since the travel time is assumed to be
proportional to the travel distance. Also assume that the waiting time and passenger ride time are
exponentially distributed with means 1/µ and 1/ν, respectively. The driver’s expected income of
sharing rides wp(τ) over (0, τ) is given by (the proof is available in Appendix D):
wp(τ) = µ(wb + wm/ν)
µ + ν

ντ +
µ
µ + ν (1 −exp(−(µ + ν)τ))

.
(3)
A driver’s choice between delivering packages and waiting for ride requests boils down to com-
paring wp(τ) and the oﬀered wage w(do).
Since τ =
r
s + do
so , a driver will accept the oﬀer if
w(do)/η ≥wp(r
s + do
so ), where η > 1 is the discount factor that captures the additional disutility
shouldered by the driver due to faster vehicle depreciation and more physical eﬀort when engaged
in delivery services. Therefore, for each pair of (r, do), the minimum payment is ηwp(r
s + do
so ).
Consider the practical setting where the logistics service provider broadcasts oﬀers simultane-
ously to nearby drivers with a uniform pricing scheme. In other words, independent from drivers’
individual distances to the terminal, each oﬀer with outbound trip length do is with a wage
w(do) = ηwp(rc
s + do
so ), where rc is the terminal-bound trip distance such that drivers accept the
oﬀer if being within rc km from the terminal, or reject the oﬀer otherwise. To determine rc, notice
that the total number of drivers attracted to the terminal is m
R rc
√
2
0
8rdr = 2m(rc)2. To ensure
the supply of mz = gAn
vc
drivers requires 2m(rc)2 ≥mz. It follows immediately that the payment-
minimizing r∗
c = p mz
2m =
q
gAn
2mvc , when the constraint is binding.
Consequently, the following
formula speciﬁes the payment scheme to induce suﬃcient drivers for delivery services:
Result 2. For a delivery service with outbound trip length do, the wage paid to a car driver is:
w∗(do) =ηwp(r∗
c
s + do
so
) = ηµ(wbν + wm)
(µ + ν)
r
gAn
2mvc
1
s + ηµ(wbν + wm)
(µ + ν)
do
so
+ ηµ2(wbν + wm)
ν(µ + ν)2
 1 −exp(−(µ + ν)
 r
gAn
2mvc
1
s + do
so
))

.
(4)
In the above wage response model, the ﬁrst term and the third term excluding the exponential
part represent the base fare for the delivery oﬀer; the second term is proportional to the outbound
trip length do and the exponential part of the third term is a nonlinear fare as a function of do.
4.5. Synergy and Competition with the Ride-Share Market
The operations of crowdsourcing shared mobility is by no means in isolation. In fact, the ride-share
market and the logistics service provider compete for car drivers, while car drivers compete for
providing both ride-share and delivery services.
To characterize such interplay among drivers and the two service markets, two key parameters
that are thus far exogenous should instead be endogenous to the model. The ﬁrst key parameter
is m, the spacial density of available cars. m is bounded from above by the potential pool size of
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

shared mobility, i.e., the density of cars subscribed for shared use, denoted by ¯m. Meanwhile, m
is the real-time supply of shared mobility on the road, and is thus induced by a driver’s average
earning rate (which is the same across the two service markets), measured by µ(νwb+wm)
µ+ν
(since
(νwb + wm) is the mean earning rate in a ride-share service and
µ
µ+ν is the proportion of the time
that a driver is in service). Therefore, m is endogenously determined by:
m = ¯mF(µ(νwb + wm)
µ + ν
),
(5)
where F(y) is a non-decreasing continuous function and satisﬁes limy→0+ F(y) = 0 and limy→+∞F(y) =
1.
The second key parameter is µ, the ride-share service request rate that each driver faces. µ
depends on three quantities: 1) ¯µ, the total ride-share demand rate per unit area, 2) m, the density
of available cars competing for providing services, and 3) ng
vc , the density of those available cars
that delivery services cannibalize. Therefore, this relationship is modeled as:
µ =
¯µ
m −ng
vc
,
(6)
where m > ng
vc always holds under the assumption that the potential pool size of shared mobility
is suﬃcient for delivery services, i.e., ¯m > ng
vc .
Given the exogenous parameters { ¯m, ν, wb, wm, ¯µ, n, g, vc} as well as the functional form of F(·),
simultaneously solving (5) and (6) yields the values of m and µ at equilibrium, denoted by ˜m and ˜µ,
respectively. The continuity and the monotonicity of F(·) ensure the existence and the uniqueness
of ˜m and ˜µ.
As a result, the logistics service provider should use these equilibrium values to account for the
eﬀects that the ride-share service market has on the delivery service market. These eﬀects have
elements of both competition and synergy, as the following proposition formally states:
Proposition 4. If F(·) is diﬀerentiable, then i) d˜µ
d¯µ > 0 (competition eﬀect) and ii) d ˜m
d¯µ > 0 (synergy
eﬀect).
To explain, the competition eﬀect is that, as the total ride-share demand (¯µ) increases, the
equilibrium rate of ride-share service requests ˜µ will also increase, resulting in higher expected
earning rate of drivers.
It will be more expensive for the logistics service provider to compete
with ride-share companies to attract drivers for delivery services. On the other hand, the synergy
eﬀect oﬀsets the competition eﬀect: A higher expected earning rate will induce more drivers on the
road. The logistics service provider favors this increase of mobility supply, because the expected
inbound car trip (which the wage payment covers) will be shorter, and because the competition
among drivers for services partially oﬀsets the increase of ˜µ and their earning rate. The proof of
Proposition 4 as well as numerical tests of these eﬀects on the total operating cost is available in
Appendix D.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

5. The Shared-Mobility Logistics Planning Problem
The following subsections describe the cost models of the shared-mobility component (Subsection
5.1) and the trucking component (Subsection 5.2) of this transshipment logistics system. Striking
a balance between these cost components yields a closed-form expression of the optimal zone sizes
and the associated operating cost (Subsection 5.3), which can be compared with the optimal cost
of the conventional truck-only scenario (Subsection 5.4).
5.1. Cost Density of Shared Mobility
Integrating the routing and the wage response models in Section 4 leads to an approximation of
the cost of crowdsoucing shared mobility for last-mile delivery. Speciﬁcally, deﬁne the cost density
of shared mobility, denoted by Wc(x, A(x)), to be the ratio of the cost of hiring shared mobility in
the service zone that has a terminal at x and area A(x) to A(x). Mathematically,
Wc(x, A(x)) =
R
A(x) w∗(do, x)no(do, x)ddo
A(x)
,
(7)
where no(do, x) is the product of mz(x), the number of cars hired in the zone centering around
x, and the probability density function of cars’ outbound trip lengths do in the zone. Directly
estimating no(do, x) for all pairs of do and x is computationally challenging, entailing solving large
amounts of OVRP problems with randomized realizations of demand destinations. Instead, consider
linearizing the wage formula of w∗(do, x) in (4) with respect to do by dropping the exponential part
(i.e., exp(−(µ + ν)
 q
gAn
2mvc
1
s + do
so )) in the third term. This linearization increases w∗(do, x), yet by
a negligible degree (numerical justiﬁcation is available in Appendix E.4). With the linearized wage
response model, only the integral values of
R
A(x) no(do, x)ddo and
R
A(x) dono(do, x)ddo are necessary,
which the following two identities give:
Z
A(x)
no(do, x)ddo = mz(x) = g(x)A(x)n(x)
vc
,
(8a)
Z
A(x)
dono(do, x)ddo = dOV RP ,
(8b)
where the closed-form expression of dOV RP is given by Result 1. The cost density can thus be
computed in closed-form as follows:
Result 3. Based on identities (8a) and (8b) and the linearization of (4), the cost density Wc(x, A(x))
in (7) can be expressed as
Wc(x, A(x)) = Φc(x)
p
A(x) + Ψc(x),
(9)
where
Φc(x) = η
 g(x)˜µ
vc
s
g(x)n(x)
2 ˜mvc
wbν + wm
s(˜µ + ν) + ˜µ(wbν + wm)
so(˜µ + ν)
(
√
2
3 −α( vc
g(x))β)g(x)
vc

n(x),
(10a)
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

Ψc(x) = ηg(x)˜µ2(wbν + wm)n(x)
vcν(˜µ + ν)2
+ η˜µ(wbν + wm)
so(˜µ + ν)
 α( vc
g(x))β
p
n(x)g(x)
γvc
+ λ
p
n(x)

.
(10b)
5.2. Cost Density of Inbound Trucking
At the inbound stage, each truck carries a full truck load (i.e., vt kilograms) of packages, unloads
them at multiple terminals and then returns to the depot. The detour portion is thus a trip on
diamond-shape lattices. The detour trip length in a zone of area A(x) is
p
2A(x). Hence, the local
detour trip density at x is
√
2A(x)
A(x)
=
q
2
A(x), and the total detour trip length over the service region
is dt,d =
R
Ω
q
2
A(x)dx.
The line-haul portion consists of the trips both before and after the detour trip. Following a
similar discussion in Daganzo (1984) for this routing scenario, to minimize the total line-haul truck
trip length dt,l in the region, arrange zones assigned to each truck into an area such that this area
is elongated towards the depot. A truck ﬁrst visits the terminal that is the nearest to the depot,
and then moves forward to visit the rest of the ﬁrst half of the terminals. On its return trip, the
truck visits the second half of the terminals. Consequently, the average departing or returning line-
haul trip (i.e., one half of the line-haul round-trip) plus a one-way trip halfway into this elongated
area (i.e. a quarter of the detour round-trip) approximates an average distance from the depot to
a point in this area. This relationship still holds if aggregating all those elongated areas, that is,
1
2 ×(total line-haul trip length dt,l)+ 1
4 ×(total detour trip length) ≈(number of dispatched trucks)
× (package-weight-weighted mean distance from the depot to a point in the service region), or,
mathematically, 1
2dt,l + 1
4
R
Ω
q
2
A(x)dx =
R
Ωn(x)g(x)dx
vt
×
R
Ωrd(x)n(x)g(x)dx
R
Ωn(x)g(x)dx
, where rd(x) is the distance
from the depot to point x. It immediately follows that dt,l =
R
Ω
2g(x)rd(x)n(x)
vt
dx −1
2
R
Ω
q
2
A(x)dx.
Let the average per-km operating cost of trucks be ct. Deﬁne the cost density of inbound trucking,
denoted by Wt(x, A(x)), to be the ratio of inbound trucking cost in the service zone with its terminal
at x and area A(x) to A(x). Then
R
ΩWt(x, A(x))dx = ct(dt,l + dt,d). Derived from this equation,
Wt(x, A(x)) is formally given by the following result:
Result 4. The cost density of inbound trucking can be expressed as
Wt(x, A(x)) = Φt(x)/
p
A(x) + Ψt(x),
(11)
where
Φt(x) = ct
√
2,
Ψt(x) = 2g(x)rd(x)n(x)ct
vt
.
(12)
5.3. Service Zone Design
The planning of delivery service zones is represented by the decisions of zone sizes A(x) over the
service region, striking a balance between the truck mode and the shared mobility mode. The goal
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

is to minimize the total operating cost, which can be expressed in terms of cost densities of shared
mobility and inbound trucking:
C =
Z
Ω
 Wc(x, A(x)) + Wt(x, A(x))

dx
=
Z
Ω
 Φc(x)
p
A(x) + Ψc(x) + Φt(x)/
p
A(x) + Ψt(x)

dx.
(13)
Minimizing the total operating cost C is equivalent to minimizing the integrand on the right-hand-
side of (13) at each point x. Applying the ﬁrst-order necessary condition yields the optimal service
zone design stated in the following result:
Result 5. The optimal size of the service zone with its terminal at point x and the optimal total
operating cost of one dispatch are given, respectively, by
A∗(x) = Φt(x)
Φc(x),
(14a)
C∗=
Z
Ω
 2
p
Φc(x)Φt(x) + Ψc(x) + Ψt(x))

dx.
(14b)
The continuous service zone design in Result 5 needs to be discretized for real implementation
(see Ouyang and Daganzo (2006) for a discretization procedure).
Also notice that this design
does not consider the cost of package handling in the transshipment process, with three reasons:
1) First, omitting the term associated with the ﬁxed charge leads to a closed-form expression of
A∗(x). 2) This cost, which is mainly due to fuel consumption of vehicles while idling and the time
consumption of drivers while loading/unloading packages, is small relative to the en route cost. 3)
The estimate of per-km truck cost ct in Appendix E.1 already takes into account diﬀerent states
(i.e., traveling and idling).
5.4. Benchmark: a Truck-Only System
The benchmark for evaluating the logistics system with shared mobility is a conventional logistics
system where only trucks fulﬁll home delivery services from the depot to demand destinations.
Denote the average per-km operating cost of trucks during the last-mile deliveries by c′
t. c′
t > ct,
since trucks move more slowly than during bulk transport trips, incurring higher truck driver wage
payment.
Following the approach in Daganzo (2005), Result 6 states the VRP approximation
model for the benchmark:
Result 6. The total operating cost of the truck-only system is given by
Cb =
Z
Ω
 0.82
p
n(x)c′
t + Ψt(x)

dx,
(15)
C∗in Result 5 and the above Cb share the same element
R
Ψt(x)dx, which captures the bulk
trucking cost. Their expressions only diﬀer in terms that characterize the “last-mile” cost perfor-
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

mance. Therefore, benchmarking the shared-mobility system against the truck-only system enables
an exclusive evaluation of the last-mile cost competitiveness of shared-mobility paradigm. Section
6 presents managerial insights of this paradigm through this evaluation in various cases.
6. Managerial Implications
Based on the planning models in Section 5, a logistics service provider can evaluate whether and
how to carry out large-scale crowdsourcing of shared mobility.
For this purpose, this section
examines several aspects: the scalability and the asset-lightness of the business model, operational
prescriptions, dynamic wages and environmental impacts.
6.1. Scalability
A key question that drives this research is whether shared mobility is scalable (in terms of the
operating cost) to meet the increasing last-mile delivery demand for e-commerce.
One may conjecture that shared mobility for last-mile deliveries can be increasingly favorable
when the demand density increases, reasoning that cars are both more fuel-eﬃcient and more
time-eﬃcient in delivering small loads with many stops.
However, this conjecture is not true.
First notice that, given the market conditions (e.g., ¯m, F(·), wb and wm), the wage payment by the
logistics service provider to car drivers is not directly related to the fuel economy of cars, but instead
matches car drivers’ earning rate in the ride-share service market. More deeply, this question can be
addressed by directly comparing the optimal cost density of shared mobility, ρs = 2√ΦcΦt+Ψc+Ψt,
and the corresponding cost density of the benchmark truck-only system, ρt = 0.82√nc′
t + Ψt. The
following proposition presents the relative behaviors of ρs and ρt as the demand density n increases:
Proposition 5. There exists a threshold ¯n such that ρs ≤ρt for n < ¯n and ρs > ρt otherwise,
where ¯n can be negative or nonnegative.
The above result shows that shared mobility is less cost-eﬃcient than the truck-only mode as
delivery demand soars. Shared mobility may lead to cost savings for small n but can not keep the
edge over the truck-only system when n exceeds a certain threshold. This result can be explained
by the diﬀerent economies of scale of the two systems. Whereas ρt only involves a square-root
term 0.82c′
t
√n , ρs includes a linear term ηg˜µ2(wbν+wm)
vcν(˜µ+ν)2
n. Hence, when n becomes large, the linear
component of ρs will dominate ρt.
The ineﬃcient linear cost component of ρS results from the wage response behavior of shared
mobility. In the truck-only system, truck drivers are hired and paid with a ﬁxed hourly wage.
Their wage payment is proportional to the trip distance. By contrast, car drivers providing shared
mobility receive route-speciﬁc payments (Eqn.(4)), which incorporates stochastic waiting time and
ride time. The derived wage payment mainly consists of a base fare and a per-mile fare. Under
this payment structure, the payment/distance ratio is higher for short delivery routes than for long
delivery routes. The higher payment/distance ratio compensates drivers for the lower utilization
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

level when taking short routes (as measured by the expected fraction of time when a driver is in
service). If the payment/distance ratio was constant, short-distance delivery routes would be less
proﬁtable than long-distance trips from the ride-sharing market. Instead of taking the short route,
drivers would prefer to wait for a potentially longer trip from which he/she can make more money
(Janssen and Parakhonyak 2011). The (base + mile) payment structure is prevalent in the ride-
sharing market and taxi industry, and is generally used in the literature (e.g. see Yang et al. (2005,
2010) for details). For the shared mobility system, as n grows, the optimal route assigned to each
driver becomes shorter, and the resulting payment/distance ratio is higher. Therefore, the total
wage payment for the shared mobility system increases faster than the truck-only system, wherein
the per-km payment is constant for professional drivers. Proposition 5 suggests that the demand-
dense areas should be avoided when planning a shared mobility system for last-mile delivery. This
insight is further validated in the case study in Subsection 6.4. To be noted, this insight may not
hold if the ride-share market does not serve as car drivers’ outside option, or if the logistics service
provider schedules shared mobility far in advance for an extended service duration (which is the
case of Amazon Flex). In the former case, the (base + mile) payment structure is not necessarily
the least-cost payment structure. In the latter case, the delivery routes are likely to be back-to-back
VRP routes. Using shared mobility is likely to be more costly, but more scalable in the mean time.
The aforementioned discussion takes the pool size of shared mobility ¯m as ﬁxed, which is suitable
for short-run operations. In the long-run, if the demand for both ride-share and delivery services
increases, more drivers will be likely to register to provide shared mobility services, i.e., ¯m will grow.
Numerical analysis shows that growing ¯m induces more real-time supply of shared mobility, thereby
compensating for the cost ineﬃciency of the shared-mobility logistics system by reducing the wage
payment to car drivers. In other words, shared mobility may be favorable in demand-dense areas
if the pool size grows suﬃciently large. However, on-demand ride-share service platforms need to
carefully control the pool size of shared mobility to ensure that the individual car drivers’ expected
earning rate is above a certain level (Cachon et al. (2016)). See more discussion on scaling up the
delivery demand and ¯m after the proof of Proposition 5 in Appendix D.
6.2. Asset-lightness
While the preceding analysis focuses on the operating cost, an important feature and a potential
advantage of the shared mobility system over the truck-only system is asset-lightness. That is, with
shared mobility, the logistics service provider operates a smaller ﬂeet of trucks and thus needs less
capital investment. Speciﬁcally, in the designed one-transshipment logistics system, trucks only visit
terminals at the inbound stage. By contrast, trucks are dispatched to visit all demand destinations
in the truck-only system. The truck ﬂeet size can be calculated as
total truck working hours
# of working hours per driver, where
the total truck working hours is the total truck travel distance divided by the truck speed. Then
the ﬂeet size ratio for the two systems is
R
Ω
 √
Φc(x)Φt(x)+Ψt(x)
ctst

dx/
R
Ω
  0.82√
n(x)
s′
t
+ Ψt(x)
ctst

dx, where
st and s′
t are the speeds of trucks during inbound trips and last-mile deliveries, respectively. In
the case study, the asset-lightness of the shared mobility system is presented in terms of this ﬂeet
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

Table 1: Main vehicle-related parameters.
Operating cost
Vehicle capacity
Emission
c ($ · km−1)
v (kg)
ce (kg CO2 · km−1)
Trucks
1.257 (3.182)†
2, 000
0.597
Heavy-duty trucks
1.355
6, 000
1.003
Cars
–
150
0.369
† For last-mile delivery in the benchmark truck-only system.
size ratio (the infrastructure of the two systems may diﬀer in other aspects, e.g. the information
management system and communication system, but the quantiﬁcation of those diﬀerences is out
of the scope of this paper).
The shared mobility model can beneﬁt from asset lightness as it
allows quick expansion, which can help the company capture the whole market. In addition, asset-
lightness also implies less depreciation from the capital assets. In the case study presented in the
next subsection, the operating cost includes the depreciation cost.
6.3. Case Study: East San Francisco Bay Area
Service region: Consider a service region that consists of 15 zip-code areas in the East San
Francisco Bay Area in California, as Figures 2(a)-(d) depict. Choose the Fedex Ship Center in
Emeryville (Area 8) as the depot. Appendix E.1 lists their zip codes along with their population
densities (from ESRI (2013)) and mean distances to the depot. The area of the entire region is
80.8 km2. The region is representative of a non-homogenous setting, spanning densely populated
areas, such as Downtown and South Berkeley (in the center, Area 6) and Albany (northwest, Area
11), and sparsely populated areas, such as East Berkeley (northeast, hilly, Areas 5 and 13) and
West Oakland (southwest, a port, Area 14). For simplicity of exposition, the setting within each
zip-code area is assumed to be homogenous.
Parameters: Table 1 summarizes the main vehicle-related parameter values.
Detailed cali-
bration with empirical evidence is available in Appendix E.2. In addition, assume the demand
destination density n(x) to be 1% of the population density of the zip-code area that covers point x
(sensitivity analysis of n(x) is in Subsections 6.1 and 6.4). Other exogenous information pertaining
to shared-mobility supply and wages, {wb, wm, ν, ¯m, ¯µ, F(·)}, is available in Appendix E.3.
Scenarios: In addition to the baseline scenario, the following three alternative scenarios address
three key factors that inﬂuence operational performance:
• Heavy-duty scenario, where heavy-duty trucks (Freightliner M2-106) are in place of the base-
line truck model (Freightliner P70) for the inbound-stage trucking in the shared-mobility
system (the benchmark truck-only system still uses the baseline truck model). The load ca-
pacity of this heavy-duty model is 6,000 kg, about three times as large as that of the baseline
truck model.
• Oﬀ-peak scenario, where the deliveries are during oﬀ-peak hours when demands for passenger
rides are lower. The rate of total ride-share demand per unit area, ¯µ, declines by 25%.
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

Figure 2: Zip-code level comparisons of operating costs in the four scenarios: (a) baseline, (b) heavy-duty,
(c) oﬀ-peak and (d) big-car. Patches represent zip-code areas. Star marks indicate the areas
where the shared-mobility system incurs smaller cost than the truck-only system.
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

Table 2: Region-level comparisons of operating costs, ﬂeet sizes, and GHG emissions.
Cost ratio
Fleet size ratio
Emission ratio
Emission suboptimality
(shared-mobility
(shared-mobility
(shared-mobility
(cost-minimizing vs.
vs. truck-only)
vs. truck-only)
vs. truck-only)
emission-minimizing)
Baseline
1.082
0.276
1.067
1.002
Heavy-duty
0.956
0.135
0.987
1.019
Oﬀ-peak
0.980
0.273
1.067
1.001
Big-car
0.972
0.266
1.040
1.002
Combined
0.760
0.124
0.949
1.011
• Big-car scenario, where cars are assumed to have higher rated loading capacity and are thus
ﬁlled with more packages. vc
g increases from 15 to 18.
Applying Result 5 to the above four scenarios yields logistic system designs with shared mobility;
applying Result 6 yields designs for the benchmark truck-only system.
Figures 2 (a)-(d) show
whether or not shared-mobility results in lower operating cost than the benchmark in each zip-code
area in those scenarios. Detailed results for the baseline scenario, including zip-code-level zone
densities and costs, are available in Appendix E.1. On the whole-region level, Table 2 summarizes
the results of comparing operating costs, truck ﬂeet sizes and GHG emissions. Note that model
assumptions, parameter estimation errors and the fast-evolving dynamics of the ride-share industry
may bring inaccuracies to the results. Still, the case study provides a realistic setting to reasonably
infer the viability of using shared mobility for last-mile delivery with the factors considered in this
paper. The non-homogeneous setting also helps understand how the viability changes under various
conditions. The following subsections use these results to discuss more managerial implications.
6.4. Operational Prescriptions
Whether using shared mobility is favorable depends on performance metrics and operational con-
ditions.
The second column of Table 2 shows that crowdsourcing shared mobility signiﬁcantly
reduces the truck ﬂeet size. This asset-light nature is likely to represent an advantage over the
truck-only system. However, the logistic system with shared mobility incurs 8.2% more operating
cost than the truck-only system in the baseline scenario, as the ﬁrst entry of Table 2 shows. This
result indicates that the wages paid to car drivers for their mobility can exceed the savings by
reducing the ﬂeet size and keeping trucks from last-mile trips. On the other hand, adopting shared
mobility creates additional operational ﬂexibilities. In what follows, four operational prescriptions
are identiﬁed for the logistics service provider to exploit those ﬂexibilities so that crowdsourcing
shared-mobility can be more cost-eﬃcient.
1. Avoid areas with too high demand densities. Figure 2(a) shows that shared-mobility
outperforms conventional trucking only in Areas 1, 5, 13 and 14, which have the sparsest demand for
delivery services in the region. This prescription validates and is explained by the scaling behavior
of the wage-response structure of shared mobility, as Subsection 6.1 presents.
2. Use heavy-duty trucks for inbound trucking. If heavy-duty trucks replace regular-size
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

delivery vans for inbound-stage trucking, Figure 2(b) shows that ﬁve more areas favor shared-
mobility, and Table 2 shows that the total operating cost of the shared-mobility system decreases
by 12.6% from the baseline and becomes less than the total operating cost of the truck-only system.
This is because, with shared mobility, using heavy-duty trucks enhances the inbound trucking
eﬃciency without compromising the eﬃciency of last-mile delivery. In fact, trucks are signiﬁcantly
less cost-eﬃcient for last-mile delivery than during the bulk-trucking trips. The underlying reason
is that trucks move much more slowly in the last-mile trips, incurring higher per-km driver wages;
trucks also have higher per-km vehicle-related cost than cars.
3. Deliver during oﬀ-peak hours. In the oﬀ-peak scenario with 25% less ride-share demand
¯µ, Figure 2(c) shows that the shared-mobility system costs less than the truck-only benchmark in
seven out of the 15 zip-code areas, and Table 2 shows that the total operating cost of the shared-
mobility system becomes 98.0% of that of the truck-only system.
As Subsection 4.5 discusses,
reducing ride-share demand attenuates both the synergy and the competition eﬀects of the ride-
share market on the delivery service market. That is, both the mobility supply ˜m and the ride-share
service request rate ˜µ decline. The overall eﬀect is a smaller expected earning rate of car drivers
and less payment to them. Appendix D reports additional numerical experiments on the cost eﬀect
of perturbing ride-share demand ¯µ. In general, this prescription applies to normal operating hours;
in other periods (e.g. midnight), ˜µ may surge occasionally with lack of shared mobility supply and
truck drivers are costly to dispatch.
4. Fill more packages in cars. If possible, increasing the rated loading capacity of cars to
ﬁll more packages can also reduce the operating cost, as Figure 2(d) and Table 2 show. This is
because ﬁlling more packages prolongs cars’ individual outbound trips, which has two scale-economy
implications: 1) First, a longer trip dilutes the ﬁxed wage component as identiﬁed in Subsection
6.1. 2) Second, the length of an outbound trip itself increases less than linearly in the number
of destinations to visit. In addition, ﬁlling more packages reduces the number of cars for delivery
services, thus reducing wage payment by dampening the competition with the ride-share market.
Collectively, Table 2 shows that simultaneously implementing the above last three prescriptions
can reduce the total operating cost of the shared mobility system to be only 76.0% of that of
the conventional truck-only system. This is a considerable saving potential, but some other factors
should also be evaluated before real implementation. Among them, the following subsections discuss
dynamic wages and an environmental perspective.
6.5. Surge Pricing
Uber and Lyft have been dynamically adjusting prices and wages based on the real-time state of
supply and demand. How does such practice, hereafter referred to as surge pricing as Uber calls it,
aﬀect the cost performance of the delivery services with shared mobility? Designing surge pricing
contracts has been a key research eﬀort of those prominent ride-share companies. The underlying
surge pricing algorithms being implemented are evolving over time and may not be accessible by
external entities. Therefore, the logistics service provider is primarily interested in whether this new
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

delivery business model withstands surge pricing, rather than inferring the optimal surge pricing
contract (which is the focus in Cachon et al. (2016) for example). For this purpose, consider the
following equations to represent a surge pricing setting, where the wage parameters wb and wm as
well as the rate of the total ride-share demand ¯µ become endogenous:
w
w0
= 1 + ϵ1( ˜µ
µ0
−1),
(16a)
¯µ
¯µ0
= 1 −ϵ2( w
w0
−1),
(16b)
where w stands for both wb and wm. {w0, µ0} are given baseline values of w and ˜µ respectively.
(16a) characterizes how the wage parameters adjust according to the request rate ˜µ, which measures
the tension between the supply and the demand of ride-share services.
ϵ1 ≥0 represents the
aggressiveness of surge pricing, i.e. how forcefully the ride-share company leverages surge pricing
to push the supply-demand tension towards the reference level µ0. (16b) characterizes how the
wage adjustment aﬀects the total ride-share demand ¯µ to deviate from the given nominal level ¯µ0,
assuming that the ride prices change along with the wages. ϵ2 ≥0 is the demand elasticity. The
surge pricing eﬀects that (16a) and (16b) characterize are consistent with the empirical evidence of
Uber’s surge pricing eﬀects (Hall et al. (2015)).
Simultaneously solving equations (16a) and (16b) along with (5) and (6) generates surge-pricing-
adjusted parameters {w, ˜m, ˜µ, ¯µ}. Again, it can be veriﬁed that the continuity and the monotonicity
of F(·) in (5) ensure the existence and the uniqueness of the solution.
Plugging the values of
{w, ˜m, ˜µ} into (14b) generates the adjusted total operating cost of using shared mobility for last-
mile delivery. Figure 3 (a) shows this operating cost for the service region considered in Subsection
6.3. The curves represent ﬁve operating scenarios and are with respect to a wide range of surge
pricing aggressiveness ϵ1. In these numerical experiments, the demand elasticity ϵ2 is 0.57 according
to the empirical study in Cohen et al. (2016), the reference level of the ride-share request rate
µ0 = 3 hr−1, and the baseline values of wage w0 and the total ride-share demand ¯µ0 are the same
as in the preceding setting.
Figure 3 (a) shows that the operating costs are insigniﬁcantly aﬀected by surge pricing in the
considered numerical settings. In all those scenarios, perturbing surge pricing aggressiveness ϵ1 in a
wide range (up to 300%) does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the operating costs, compared with the case in
absence of surge pricing (ϵ1 = 0). This is an interesting result, considering that the operating cost
is sensitive to the drivers’ expected earning rate, which is driven by the wage parameter w and the
ride-share request rate ˜µ. In fact, although the drivers’ expected earning rate is sensitive to w and
˜µ, the values of w and ˜µ move in opposite directions in a surge pricing mechanism, counteracting
each other’s impact. In other words, surge pricing forms a negative-feedback loop between w and
˜µ. As Figure 3 (b) illustrates for the scenario with doubled nominal total ride-share demand ¯µ0,
reinforcing the surge pricing aggressiveness increases the wage parameter w in response to the high
supply-demand tension of ride-share services (Eqn. (16a)). This change in turn dampens the ride-
share demand ¯µ (Eqn. (16b)), induces more supply of self-scheduling shared mobility ˜m (Eqn.
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0.5
1
1.5
2
Surge Pricing Aggressiveness, ε1
(a)
Relative 
Cost 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Surge Pricing Aggressiveness, ε1
(b)
Ride-share request rate (˜µ)
2x nominal ride-share demand (¯µ0)
2x delivery demand (n)
Wage multiplier ( w
w 0)
Baseline
Heavy-duty
2x car capacity (vc)
Figure 3: (a) Surge-pricing-adjusted operating cost (divided by the operating cost of the truck-only system)
for the baseline and for scenarios with heavy-duty trucks, with double delivery demand density,
with double nominal total ride-share demand and with double car capacity, respectively; (b)
Endogenous ride-share request rate and wage multiplier in the scenario with double nominal
total ride-share demand.
(5)), and eases the supply-demand tension ˜µ (Eqn. (6)), which weakens the eﬀect of increased w
on the car drivers’ expected earning rate. Hence, under realistic parameter settings, the preceding
managerial implications and prescriptions remain largely valid in the presence of surge pricing.
The drivers of the cost-eﬀectiveness remain to be 1) the inherent tension between the supply and
demand for shared mobility, and 2) the vehicle capacity conﬁgurations.
6.6. Environmental Impact
Suppose that the service region adopts shared mobility for home delivery services. Does it reduce
GHG emissions? It turns out that (unless low-emission cars are assumed) neither the baseline nor
the three alternative scenarios see signiﬁcant emission reduction relative to the emission level of
the truck-only system, as the third column of Table 2 shows. In fact, the emission eﬃciency of
using cars is twofold: 1) Their open-loop routes are in general shorter than conventional closed-loop
routes for vehicles of the same capacity, and their per-km emission rate is lower than that of trucks.
2) However, these eﬃciency gains are oﬀset by a demerit: cars are of much smaller loading capacity
than trucks and consequently the share-mobility system incurs over 35% longer total trip distance
than the truck-only system in the baseline scenario. In addition, using heavy-duty trucks and ﬁlling
more packages in cars reduce emissions, but not as much as they reduce operating costs. This is
because the wage eﬀects of those measures do not aﬀect emissions.
Next, to what extent does the design that minimizes operating costs compromise the goal of
abating GHG emissions?
It turns out that this logistics system has remarkably small tension
between the economic and environmental preferences: Minimizing operating costs while ignoring
GHG emissions results in a service zone deployment that increases emissions from the minimum
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

level by a negligible percentage (e.g., 0.2% in the baseline scenario), as the fourth column of Table
2 shows; this compatibility of objectives is robust to a wide range of parameter settings.
Minimizing operating costs and minimizing emissions are compatible and robust because both
objective functions take on the same form, expressed as Φc
√
A + Ψc + Φt/
√
A + Ψt and Φe
c
√
A +
Ψe
c +Φe
t/
√
A+Ψe
t, respectively. In both functions, the terms that depend on zone size A constitute
a remarkably ﬂat function of A.
Such structure is common to transshipment systems in other
contexts (see detailed discussion in Daganzo (2005) and Cachon (2014)). The emissions ineﬃciency
in the operating cost minimizing design relative to the minimum emissions level is bounded as:
(Φe
c
√
A∗+ Φe
t/
√
A∗−2
p
ΦecΦe
t
2
p
ΦecΦe
t + Ψec + Ψe
t
< (Φe
c
√
A∗+ Φe
t/
√
A∗−2
p
ΦecΦe
t
2
p
ΦecΦe
t
= 1
2(
p
Φec/Φc
p
Φe
t/Φt
+
p
Φe
t/Φt
p
Φec/Φc
) −1,
in which A∗= Φt
Φc . This upper bound is small and robust. Signiﬁcantly enlarging the discrepancy
between Φe
c/Φc and Φe
t/Φt can only slightly increase this upper bound.
Moreover, the objectives’ compatibility is much further enhanced by the fact that A-independent
terms, {Ψc, Ψt} and {Ψe
c, Ψe
t}, are dominant.
In the baseline scenario, for example, these two
components account for 88.3% of the total operating costs and 80.7% of the total emissions. Con-
sequently, emissions ineﬃciency is even much smaller than the above upper bound, as the inequality
results from dropping Ψe
c + Ψe
t from the denominator. In fact, Ψc and Ψe
c are associated with the
detour trips of cars; Ψt and Ψe
t are associated with the mean distance from the depot to a point in
the service region times the number of trucks. These two parts account for a large share of routes
and are irrelevant to adjusting service zone deployment for diﬀerent economic/environmental pref-
erences.
7. Conclusion
This paper studies whether and how to integrate shared mobility for home delivery services, given
the rapid development of the sharing economy and retail e-commerce in recent years. The logistics
setting is a one-transshipment system: a ﬂeet of short-haul trucks are dispatched from a depot and
unload packages at terminals of service zones. Passenger cars with available mobility are attracted
to the terminals to pick up and deliver packages to demand destinations.
The paper presents
planning and operations models for this sharing logistics system. The proposed CA model based
on numerically solving OVRP instances characterizes the one-way and one-shot nature of shared-
mobility routes. The wage response model characterizes the cost of crowdsourcing shared-mobility.
The model of synergy and competition with the ride-share market determines the supply of shared
mobility. The optimal service zone design is in the form of service zone sizes and the associated
operating cost.
The models, analysis and the case study lead to several ﬁndings: 1) First, in terms of the
operating cost, crowdsourcing shared mobility is not as scalable as the conventional truck-only
system when the delivery demand increases.
2) However, this logistics business model has the
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

potential to generate economic beneﬁts, because it maintains much lighter truck ﬂeet asset and
creates additional operational ﬂexibilities. Four operational prescriptions are: i) to start with low-
demand-density areas, ii) to adopt heavy-duty trucks, iii) to deliver during oﬀ-peak hours, and iv) to
increase car loads of packages. These managerial implications also withstand dynamic adjustment
of wages and prices in the ride-share market. 3) Third, entering this sharing paradigm may not
help abate GHG emissions, due to additional trips incurred; on the other hand, even exclusively
minimizing operating costs does not signiﬁcantly increase emissions relative to the minimum level
of emissions. 4) Finally, the CA model that characterizes open-loop vehicle routes, the construction
of the lower bounds for the optimal OVRP solution, the shared mobility wage response model and
the model of interaction with the ride-share market can all be useful for logistics services providers
and governments to evaluate the routing behavior and cost-eﬀectiveness of this logistics paradigm
under various conditions.
This paper is the ﬁrst attempt to design and analyze the prospective sharing logistics system
based on analytical models and empirical parameter estimates. To further investigate the impacts
that this combination of the sharing economy and retail e-commerce can potentially bring about,
two directions can be explored. First, home delivery services can utilize shared mobility in diﬀerent
ways with additional complexity to analyze. For example, car drivers can provide ride-share services
to passengers along the trip of delivering packages. Second, whereas this paper focuses on operating
costs, truck ﬂeet sizes and GHG emissions as performance metrics, it is worth considering other
implications of sharing logistics, such as social trust building, service agility and unemployment
rate, which may or may not justify additional government regulation and incentives.
References
Agatz, N., A. Erera, M. Savelsbergh, X. Wang. 2012. Optimization for dynamic ride-sharing: A review.
European Journal of Operational Research 223(2) 295–303.
Assembly Bill 32. 2006. The California global warming solutions act of 2006.
Bellos, I., M. Ferguson, L.B. Toktay. 2017. The car sharing economy: Interaction of business model choice
and product line design. Manufacturing and Service Operations Management 19(2) 185–201.
Botsman, R. 2014. Crowdshipping: using the crowd to transform delivery. AFR Boss Magazine .
Cachon, G. P., K. M. Daniels, R. Lobel. 2016. The role of surge pricing on a service platform with self-
scheduling capacity. Manufacturing and Service Operations Management .
Cachon, G.P. 2014. Retail store density and the cost of greenhouse gas emissions. Management Science
60(8) 1907–1925.
Carbone, V., A. Rouquet, C. Roussat. 2015. “Carried away by the crowd”: what types of logistics characterise
collaborative consumption? [Online; accessed on 27-September-2015].
Carlsson, J. G., F. Jia. 2013. Euclidean hub-and-spoke networks. Operations research 61(6) 1360–1382.
Carlsson, J. G., F. Jia. 2014. Continuous facility location with backbone network costs. Transportation
Science 49(3) 433–451.
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

Carlsson, J.G, M. Behroozi, R. Devulapalli, X. Meng. 2016. Household-level economies of scale in trans-
portation. Operations Research 64(6) 1372–1387.
CFMP. 2014. California freight mobility plan. [Online; accessed on 28-September-2015].
Cohen, P., R. Hahn, J. Hall, S. Levitt, R. Metcalfe. 2016. Using big data to estimate consumer surplus: The
case of uber. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Daganzo, C.F. 1984. The distance traveled to visit n points with a maximum of c stops per vehicle: An
analytic model and an application. Transportation Science 18(4) 331–350.
Daganzo, C.F. 2005. Logistics systems analysis. Springer Science & Business Media.
eMarketer. 2014. Global B2C ecommerce sales to hit $1.5 trillion this year driven by growth in emerging
markets. [Online; accessed on 28-September-2015].
ESRI. 2013. ESRI data and maps of u.s. zip-code areas (arcgis layer).
Furuhata, M., M. Dessouky, F. Ord´o˜nez, M.E. Brunet, X. Wang, S. Koenig. 2013. Ridesharing: The state-
of-the-art and future directions. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 57 28–46.
Haimovich, M., A. R. Kan. 1985. Bounds and heuristics for capacitated routing problems. Mathematics of
operations Research 10(4) 527–542.
Hall, J., C. Kendrick, C. Nosko. 2015. The eﬀects of Uber’s surge pricing: A case study. The University of
Chicago Booth School of Business .
He, L., H.Y. Mak, Y. Rong, Z.J.M. Shen. 2017. Service region design for urban electric vehicle sharing
systems. Manufacturing and Service Operations Management Forthcoming.
Janssen, M., A. Parakhonyak. 2011. Service refusal in regulated markets for credence goods.
Kabra, A., E. Belavina, K. Girotra. 2017. Bike-share systems: Accessibility and availability. Under Review
at Management Science.
Kaﬂe, N., B. Zou, J. Lin. 2017. Design and modeling of a crowdsource-enabled system for urban parcel relay
and delivery. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 99 62–82.
Li, B., D. Krushinsky, H.A. Reijers, T. Van Woensel. 2014. The share-a-ride problem: People and parcels
sharing taxis. European Journal of Operational Research 238(1) 31–40.
Li, B., D. Krushinsky, T. Van Woensel, H.A. Reijers. 2016. An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic
for the share-a-ride problem. Computers & Operations Research 66 170–180.
Li, F., B. Golden, E. Wasil. 2007. The open vehicle routing problem: Algorithms, large-scale test problems,
and computational results. Computers & Operations Research 34(10) 2918–2930.
Ouyang, Y., C.F. Daganzo. 2006. Discretization and validation of the continuum approximation scheme for
terminal system design. Transportation Science 40(1) 89–98.
PWC. 2015. The sharing economy - consumer intelligence series. PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP. [Online;
accessed on 25-September-2015].
Roug`es, J.F., B. Montreuil. 2014. Crowdsourcing delivery: New interconnected business models to reinvent
delivery. First International Physical Internet Conference.
Schaefer, B., D. Konur. 2015. Economic and environmental considerations in a continuous review inventory
control system with integrated transportation decisions. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and
Transportation Review 80 142–165.
Shu, J., M.C. Chou, Q. Liu, C.P. Teo, I.L. Wang. 2013. Models for eﬀective deployment and redistribution
of bicycles within public bicycle-sharing systems. Operations Research 61(6) 1346–1359.
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

Xie, W., Y. Ouyang. 2015. Optimal layout of transshipment facility locations on an inﬁnite homogeneous
plane. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 75 74–88.
Yang, H., C.S. Fung, K.I. Wong, S.C. Wong. 2010. Nonlinear pricing of taxi services. Transportation Research
Part A: Policy and Practice 44(5) 337–348.
Yang, H., M. Ye, W.H. Tang, S. C. Wong. 2005. Regulating taxi services in the presence of congestion
externality. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 39(1) 17–40.
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

Online Appendix
“Shared Mobility for Last-Mile Delivery: Design, Operational Prescriptions and
Environmental Impact”
A. Notation
Table 3: Notation
Symbol
Description
x
location coordinate, or the index of the service zone with its terminal at x
n(x)
mean density of demand destinations at x
g(x)
mean package weight at destination x
¯m(x)
mean density of cars subscribed for shared use at x
m(x)
mean density of available cars at x
˜m(x)
endogenous mean density of available cars at x
A(x)
area of the service zone that has a terminal at x
mz(x)
average number of cars required to deliver packages in the service zone
that has a terminal at x
vc, vt
maximum weight of packages loaded to a car and a truck, respectively
k
maximum number of destinations visited by a car, = vc/g on average
λ
detour coeﬃcient
α, β, γ
line-haul coeﬃcients
w(do)
wage payment to a car that travels an outbound trip of distance do
wb,wm
base fare and per-minute fare of a ride-share service, respectively
wp(τ)
expected car driver’s income out of ride-share services that are requested
over a time window (0, τ)
s
normal cruise speed of a car
so
speed of a car in delivery services
¯µ(x)
rate of total ride-share demand per unit area at x
µ(x)
rate of ride-share service requests that a driver observes at x
˜µ(x)
endogenous rate of ride-share requests that a driver observes at x
ν(x)
1/(mean duration of a shared ride)
η
discount factor accounting for faster vehicle depreciation and more physical
eﬀort during delivery services
F(·)
Proportion of the registered car drivers that are available for shared use,
as a function of the expected earning rate
Wc(x, A(x)), Wt(x, A(x))
cost density of hiring shared mobility and bulk trucking, respectively,
for the service zone that has a terminal at x and area A(x)
dt,l, dt,d
total truck line-haul trip length, total truck detour trip length
rd(x)
distance from the depot to destination x
rc
terminal-bound trip distance, cars within which are suﬃcient for deliveries.
ct, c′
t
per-km truck operating cost in line-haul trips and last-mile trips, respectively
C
total operating cost
Cb
total operating cost of the truck-only system
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

B. Continuous Approximation of OVRP Routes
A car’s outbound trip consists of the following two parts:
dOV RP = dl(n, vc
g )mz + λA√n,
(17)
where the two terms on the right-hand side represent the total line-haul and detour trip lengths,
respectively. In particular, dl(n, vc
g ) is the average of individual line-haul trip lengths. dl primarily
depends on the demand density n as well as the number of destinations that each car visits, as
measured by vc
g . The detour portion is asymptotically structurally similar to a traveling salesman
problem (TSP) tour as n goes to inﬁnity. Hence, the total detour length is approximated to be
proportional to
p
A(An) = A√n with a coeﬃcient λ.
The appropriate function form of dl(n, vc
g ) and the value of λ should ﬁt with the optimal routes,
which are solutions to the open vehicle routing problems (OVRPs). In this work, a record-to-record
heuristic embedded in the open-source library VRPH (Gro¨er et al. (2010)) is applied to solve 96, 000
randomly generated OVRP instances with diﬀerent values of n, vc
g , variation coeﬃcient of package
weights and random realizations of destinations (Li et al. (2007) demonstrate the high accuracy of
this type of heuristic). Based on these numerical results, the following function form is proposed
to approximate the average individual line-haul trip length:
dl(n, vc
g ) = (
√
2
3 −α(vc
g )β(1 −
1
γ
√
An
))
√
A,
(18)
where α = 0.055, β = 0.470 and γ = 0.374 are parameters that minimize the sum of squared
approximation errors of the problem instances. Despite the certain degree of misestimation (up
to 10.7% when n = 70 and vc
g = 23), the model and the estimates capture the one-way routing
structural properties and are eﬀective for a wide range of parameter settings. Further validation
with real out-of-sample data is beyond the scope of this paper. Similarly, the minimum-squared-
error estimate of λ is 1.005, which is close to 0.97 as Jaillet (1988) estimates for TSP tour with the
Manhattan metric. Substituting mz = gAn
vc
and (18) into formula (17) yields the routing CA model
in Result 1.
C. Structure Properties of OVRP
Proof of Proposition 1
Proof. The proof is constructive. A heuristic procedure is used to construct a feasible solution
to VRPk starting from an optimal OVRP tour with vehicles making most use of their capacities.
Given such an optimal OVRP tour, there are ⌈n/k⌉routes originating from the center. To make
the open-loop routes closed, endpoint of each route is connected to the center by a line segment.
As a result, ⌈n/k⌉line segments are added and a feasible solution to VRPk(Xn) is derived with
the length that equals to P
i∈{End Points} ri + OVRPk(Xn).
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

Clearly, the optimal solution to VRPk has tour length less than or equal to the above heuristic so-
lution. Each ri is bounded by rn
max. Hence, VRPk(Xn) ≤P
i∈{End Points} ri+OVRPk(Xn) ≤
l
n
k
m
rn
max+
VRPk(Xn). By rearranging terms the second inequality does hold and the ﬁrst inequality follows
naturally from the fact that the optimal TSP solution is no greater than the optimal VRP solu-
tion.
Proof of Proposition 2
Proof. The proof is constructive. A heuristic procedure is used to construct a feasible solution
to VRP2k in which each vehicle can carry at most 2k packages. Given an optimal OVRP tour
with vehicles fully loaded, there are ⌈n/k⌉routes originating from the center. Denote the set of
endpoints of routes in OVRPk(Xn) as X⌈n
k ⌉. Consider two cases in terms of ⌈n/k⌉:
(1) If ⌈n/k⌉is even, an optimal TSP tour that connects points in X⌈n
k ⌉is ﬁrst constructed.
The number of edges in this TSP tour is also even.
Then select 1
2⌈n/k⌉edges from the TSP
tour such that each point is connected with exactly one other point in the tour.
It should be
noted that there are two diﬀerent selections and they are compliment to each other in the TSP
tour. Compare the two sets of edges and choose the one with smaller total length. Hence the
chosen 1
2⌈n/k⌉edges have a total length less than 1
2TSP(X⌈n
k ⌉). Next, add these edges to the
OVRP tour as such each route is connected to one other route in the OVRP tour.
So every
pairs of routes in the OVRP solution plus added edges constitute closed tours with each traversing
at most 2k demand points.
As a result, a feasible solution to VRP2k(Xn) is generated with
the length of
 Total Length of Selected Edges from TSP(X⌈n
k ⌉)+OVRPk(Xn)

, which is less than
1
2TSP(X⌈n
k ⌉) + OVRPk(Xn). It thus follows VRP2k(Xn) ≤
1
2TSP(X⌈n
k ⌉) + OVRPk(Xn).
(2) If ⌈n/k⌉is odd, ﬁrst randomly take out one end point in X⌈n
k ⌉and construct an optimal TSP
tour for the remaining end points, i.e. X⌈n
k ⌉−1. Then select 1
2(⌈n/k⌉−1) from the TSP tour in a
manner similar to (1). The total length of selected edges should be less than 1
2TSP(X⌈n
k ⌉−1). Add
these edges to the OVRP tour and every pairs of routes except for one route (that contains the taken-
out point) will make up closed tours with each traversing at most 2k demand points. To transform
the remaining route into a closed tour, a line segment that links the center and the end point is
added afterward. With these extra edges and line segment, a feasible VRP tour with capacity of 2k
is constructed selected from the OVRP tour. The length of the feasible VRP tour consists of three
parts: length of edges from the TSP tour, length of the line segment and OVRPk(Xn). The ﬁrst part
is less than 1
2TSP(X⌈n
k ⌉−1) ≤1
2TSP(X⌈n
k ⌉) and the second part is less than rn
max. So the total length
of the feasible solution is less than 1
2TSP(X⌈n
k ⌉)+rn
max+OVRPk(Xn). Obviously, the optimal VRP
tour is a lower bound to the feasible solution, so VRP2k(Xn) ≤
1
2TSP(X⌈n
k ⌉)+rn
max+OVRPk(Xn).
Combine the two inequalities in (1) and (2) together and the desired result follows.
Proof of Proposition 3
Proof. To prove this proposition, the following lemma is introduced ﬁrst.
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

Lemma 1. OVRP(Xn) ≤
l
n
k
m
r + (1 −⌈n/k⌉
n
)TSP(Xn), where r is the mean distance from Xn to
its center.
The proof of this lemma follows the well known heuristic, Optimal Tour Partition (OTP), as used
in Haimovich and Kan (1985). The basic idea is to construct a feasible OVRP tour by breaking a
TSP tour into several segments and repeat the construction by moving the endpoints in original
routes in a certain orientation.
By Lemma 1 and Proposition 2,
VRP2k(Xn)
n
−TSP(X⌈n
k ⌉)
2n
−rn
max
n
≤OVRPk(Xn)
n
≤1
n⌈n
k ⌉r + (1 −⌈n/k⌉
n
)TSP(Xn)
n
.
Utilize the asymptotic results for TSP and VRP derived in Haimovich and Kan (1985) that
lim
n→∞
TSP(Xn)
n
= 0
and
lim
n→∞
VRPk(Xn)
n
= 2E(r)
k
.
Also note that ¯r →E(r), 1
n⌈n/k⌉→1
k and 1
nrn
max →0 as n goes to inﬁnity (the last one follows
from the Borel-Cantelli Lemma mentioned by Haimovich and Kan (1985)). Combining these facts
gives
lim
n→∞
VRP2k(Xn)
n
−TSP(X⌈n
k ⌉)
2n
−rn
max
n
= E(r)
k
and
lim
n→∞
1
n⌈n
k ⌉r+(1−⌈n/k⌉
n
)TSP(Xn)
n
= E(r)
k
.
Hence, limn→∞1
nOVRPk(Xn) = E(r)
k
(a.s.).
D. Model Derivations and Analysis
Result 1 is derived in Appendix B. Results 2, 4 and 5 are directly derived in the main text preceding
them. Result 6 is from page 284, Appendix A of Daganzo (2005).
Proof of Result 3
Proof. With justiﬁcations for omitting the small exponential term, the wage model (4) in Result 4
becomes: w∗(do) = η µ(wbν+wm)
(µ+ν)
q
gAn
2mvc
1
s + η µ(wbν+wm)
(µ+ν)
do
so + η µ2(wbν+wm)
ν(µ+ν)2
.
Given identities (8a) and (8b) and the dOV RP formula in Result 1, the cost density of shared
mobility at x becomes:
Wc(x, A(x)) =
R
A(x) w∗(do, x)no(do, x)ddo
A(x)
=
(η µ(wbν+wm)
(µ+ν)
q
gAn
2mvc
1
s + η µ2(wbν+wm)
ν(µ+ν)2
)
A
Z
A(x)
no(do, x)ddo +
η µ(wbν+wm)
(µ+ν)so
A
Z
A(x)
dono(do, x)ddo
=
(η µ(wbν+wm)
(µ+ν)
q
gAn
2mvc
1
s + η µ2(wbν+wm)
ν(µ+ν)2
)
A
gAn
vc
+
η µ(wbν+wm)
(µ+ν)so
A
dOV RP
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

=
(η µ(wbν+wm)
(µ+ν)
q
gAn
2mvc
1
s + η µ2(wbν+wm)
ν(µ+ν)2
)
A
aAn
vc
+
η µ(wbν+wm)
(µ+ν)so
A
((
√
2
3 −α(vc
g )β(1 −
1
γ
√
An
))gA1.5n
vc
+ λA√n)
=η
 gµ
vc
r gn
2mvc
wbν + wm
s(µ + ν) + µ(wbν + wm)
so(µ + ν)
(
√
2
3 −α(vc
g )β) g
vc

n
√
A
+ ηgµ2(wbν + wm)n
vcν(µ + ν)2
+ ηµ(wbν + wm)
so(µ + ν)
 α(vc
g )β
√ng
γvc
+ λ√n

=Φc(x)
p
A(x) + Ψc(x).
Proof of formula (3)
Proof. Model the passenger riding process as an alternate renewal process, in which the on state
is waiting and the oﬀstate is riding. The driver is initially on for a time Z1 and then remains oﬀ
for a time Y1; then he/she goes on for a time Z2; then oﬀfor a time Y2; then on, and so forth. The
sequence of two random variables {Zi} and {Yi}, i ≥1, are independent and identically distributed
as exponentials with µ and ν. A renewal cycle {Vi = Zi + Yi} consists of an on period and an
oﬀperiod. The process starts over again when the driver picks up a new passenger. Let N(x)
denote the number of complete renewal cycle up to time x and Sn be the completing time of nth
renewal. They have a relationship that N(x) = max{n : Sn ≤x}. m(t) is the mean of N(x), i.e.
m(x) = E(N(x)).
During renewal cycle i, the driver receives a reward Ri = wb + wmYi. It follows that E(Ri) =
wb + wmE(Yi) = wb + wm/ν = E(R). The objective is to calculate the expected total rewards
during (0, x). In the stochastic setting, the total rewards is diﬀerentiated in two cases: (1) When
the driver is on at time x, i.e., the driver has ﬁnished N(x) rides and the expected total rewards is
E(PN(x)
i=1 Ri); (2) When the driver is oﬀat time x, the expected total rewards has two components:
the reward from the N(x) complete rides and the reward from the last incomplete ride. Since in
practice the ride is always completed, the reward for the last ride is assumed to be complete, that
is, the driver gets full rewards. Then the expected total reward is E(PN(x)+1
i=1
Ri) in this case.
Hence, combining these two cases, the expected total rewards is given by
wp(x) = E(
N(x)
X
i=1
Ri| on at x)P(on at x) + E(
N(x)+1
X
i=1
Ri| oﬀat x)P(oﬀat x)
= E(
N(x)+1
X
i=1
Ri) −E(RN(x)+1| on at x)P(on at x) = (m(x) + 1)E(R) −E(RN(x)+1| on at x)P(on at x),
where the ﬁrst two equalities use the law of total probability and the last equality utilizes the Wald’s
equation by observing that N(x) + 1 is a stopping time for {Ri}, i ≥1 (Ross (1996)). First, m(x)
is known as m(x) =
µν
µ+ν

x−
1
µ+ν (1−exp(−(µ+ν)x)

(Wolstenholme (1999)). Second, P(on at x)
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

is given by P(on at x) =
ν
µ+ν +
µ
µ+ν exp(−(µ + ν)x) (Tijms (2003)). And
E(RN(x)+1| on at x) =
Z ∞
0
E(RN(x)+1| SN(x) = y, on at x)dFSN(x)| on at x
=
Z ∞
0
E(RN(x)+1| ZN(x)+1 > x −y)dFSN(x)| on at x =
Z ∞
0
E(R)dFSN(x)| on at x = E(R).
Combing the above equations, it follows that wp(x) = µ(wb+wm/ν)
µ+ν

νx +
µ
µ+ν (1 −exp(−(µ + ν)x))

.
Proof of Proposition 4
Proof. To show
d ˜m
d¯µ > 0, let y =
˜µ(νwb+wm)
˜µ+ν
, which is the car drivers’ expected earning rate.
Substituting ˜µ =
¯µ
˜m−ng
vc from (6) yields y =
¯µ(νwb+wm)
¯µ+ν( ˜m−ng/vc). From the model (5), ˜m = ¯mF(y). Let
G( ˜m, y) = ¯mF(y) −˜m = 0. By the implicit function theorem, d ˜m
d¯µ = −∂G/∂¯µ
∂G/∂˜m = −
∂F
∂y
dy
d¯µ ¯m
∂F
∂y
dy
d ˜
m ¯m−1, in
which dy
d¯µ =
ν( ˜m−ng/vc)
(¯µ+ν( ˜m−ng/vc))2 > 0,
dy
d ˜m =
−ν
(¯µ+ν( ˜m−ng/vc))2 < 0, since ν > 0 and ˜m −ng/vc > 0 in
reality. In addition, ∂F
∂y > 0 by deﬁnition. Hence, d ˜m
d¯µ > 0.
To show d˜µ
d¯µ > 0, ﬁrst notice that ˜m is a concave function of ¯µ. This is true because, from the
above equations, d ˜m
d¯µ = −
∂F
∂y
dy
d¯µ ¯m
∂F
∂y
dy
d ˜
m ¯m−1 =
−dy
d¯µ
dy
d ˜
m−
1
∂F
∂y ¯
m
=
−
ν( ˜
m−ng/vc)
(¯µ+ν( ˜
m−ng/vc))2
−ν
(¯µ+ν( ˜
m−ng/vc))2 −
1
∂F
∂y ¯
m
=
˜m−ng/vc
1+
1
∂F
∂y ¯
mν (¯µ+ν( ˜m−ng/vc))2 .
Then, d2 ˜m
d¯µ2 =
−
2
∂F
∂y ¯
mν (¯µ+ν( ˜m−ng/vc))( ˜m−ng/vc)
(1+
1
∂F
∂y ¯
mν (¯µ+ν( ˜m−ng/vc))2)2
< 0. Therefore, ˜m is a strongly concave function of
¯µ. Immediately, the density of cars for ride-share services, denoted by H(¯µ) ≡˜m −ng/vc, is a
strongly concave function of ¯µ, too. In addition, H(0) = 0, which represents the extreme case
with neither supply nor demand for ride-share. By the deﬁnition of the diﬀerentiable and strongly
concave function, H(¯µ) satisﬁes
dH(¯µ)
d¯µ (0 −¯µ) + H(¯µ) > H(0).
Plugging H(¯µ) = ˜m −ng/vc,
dH(¯µ)
d¯µ
=
d ˜m
d¯µ and H(0) = 0 into the above inequality yields ˜m −ng/vc −d ˜m
d¯µ ¯µ > 0.
Finally,
d˜µ
d¯µ =
d(
¯µ
˜
m−ng/vc )
d¯µ
=
˜m−ng/vc−d ˜
m
d¯µ ¯µ
( ˜m−ng/vc)2
> 0.
Numerical test of the synergy and the competition eﬀects Proposition 4 identiﬁes the
synergy and the competition eﬀects that the ride-share service market exerts on the delivery service
market. The overall eﬀect of increasing ride-share demand on the total operating cost cannot be
conclusively stated, given the involved cost expression (14b). However, numerical experiments with
wide ranges of parameter values reveal that the competition eﬀect dominates the overall eﬀect. This
is expected, since the operating cost is signiﬁcantly more sensitive to the ride-share request rate
˜µ than to the mobility supply ˜m. In fact, ˜m only aﬀects cars’ inbound trip distances (as the ﬁrst
term on the righthand-side of (10a) captures), which are on average much less than the outbound
trips for delivery services.
Proof of Proposition 5
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

Proof. ρc and ρt shares a common part Ψt, so the comparison between those two cost densities boils
down to comparing 2√ΦcΦt + Ψc and 0.82c′
t
√n. First, note that ˜m < ¯m, so ˜µ =
¯µ
˜m−ng
vc ≥
¯µ
¯m−ng
vc .
It follows that
˜µ
˜µ+ν ≥
¯µ
¯µ+ν( ¯m−ng
vc ) ≥
¯µ
¯µ+ν ¯m. Then
Φc = η
 g˜µ
vc
r gn
2 ˜mvc
wbν + wm
s(˜µ + ν) + ˜µ(wbν + wm)
so(˜µ + ν)
(
√
2
3 −α(vc
g )β) g
vc

n
≥η
  g
vc
r gn
2 ¯mvc
(wbν + wm)¯µ
s(¯µ + ν ¯m)
+ ¯µ(wbν + wm)
so(¯µ + ν ¯m) (
√
2
3 −α(vc
g )β) g
vc

n
≥¯µ(wbν + wm)
so(¯µ + ν ¯m) (
√
2
3 −α(vc
g )β) g
vc

n = fΦcn.
Similarly,
Ψc = ηg˜µ2(wbν + wm)n
vcν(˜µ + ν)2
+ η˜µ(wbν + wm)
so(˜µ + ν)
 α(vc
g )β
√ng
γvc
+ λ√n

≥ηg¯µ2(wbν + wm)n
vcν(¯µ + ν ¯m)2
+ η¯µ(wbν + wm)
so(¯µ + ν ¯m)
 α(vc
g )β
√ng
γvc
+ λ√n

= fΨc,1n + fΨc,2
√n.
As a result, 2√ΦcΦt+Ψc ≥fΨc,1n+
 r
fΦcct
√
2 +fΨc,2
√n. In the case when
r
fΦcct
√
2 +fΨc,2 ≥0.82c′
t,
we have 2√ΦcΦt + Ψc ≥0.82c′
t
√n for all n ≥0. Then ρs ≥ρt for all n ≥0 (the threshold ¯n < 0).
Otherwise, 2√ΦcΦt + Ψc may be smaller than 0.82c′
t
√n for some n ≥0, but it can be easily shown
that when n ≥
0.82c′
t−
r
fΦc ct
√
2
−fΨc,2
fΨc,1
2, fΨc,1n +
 r
fΦcct
√
2 + fΨc,2
√n ≥0.82c′
t
√n and so ρs ≥ρt, in
which the threshold ¯n ≥0.
Numerical test of the short-run and the long-rum scalability Figure 4 illustrates the
short-run and the long-rum scalability of the business model of using shared mobility for last-mile
delivery for Zip-Code Area 9 in the case study. Speciﬁcally, Figure 4 (a) shows that, as the delivery
demand n scales up (with the baseline pool size of shared mobility ¯m), the truck-only system is
more economically scalable than the shared-mobility system. The shared mobility system is only
preferable for small demand densities, which corresponds to the scenario 2 discussed above. Figure 4
(b) identiﬁes the pool sizes of shared mobility that keeps the operating cost of the shared-mobility
system smaller than that of the truck-only system as the delivery demand scales up. However,
increasing the pool size of shared mobility will reduce the expected earning rate of individual car
drivers. The on-demand platforms of shared-mobility services should carefully control this pool size
to ensure that the car drivers’ expected earning rate is above a certain level. For example, Figure
4 (b) also shows the value ranges of n and ¯m that keep the car drivers’ long-run expected earning
rate to be above 16.23$/hr, which is the low end of the range of median hourly earnings of Uber
driver-partners in six major cities of the U.S. (Hall and Krueger (2016)). For the business model
of using shared mobility for last-mile delivery to be both achievable and cost-advantageous, (n, ¯m)
should fall within the area above the dashed line and below the solid line, which is small in this
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

10
30
50
70
90
0
10
20
30
40
50
Demand Destination Density n (km−2)
(a)
Cost
Density
$ ∗km−2
20
25
30
35
40
45
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
Shared Mobility Pool Size ¯m (km−2)
(b)
n km−2
Earning
> 16.23 $/hr
Shared−mobility
Truck−only
Cost ratio < 1
Figure 4: (a) Operating costs per unit area of the shared-mobility logistics system and the truck-only system
as the delivery demand scales up. (b) Value ranges of delivery demand and shared mobility pool
size that 1) keep the shared-mobility logistics system more cost-eﬃcient than the truck-only
system (right of the solid line), and 2) keep the car drivers’ earning rate higher than 16.23$/hr
(left of the dashed line).
case.
E. Parameter Settings and Estimates
E.1. Service Region Setting and Baseline Results
E.2. Vehicle-Related Parameter Estimates
E.3. Shared Mobility Supply and Wages
See the External Supplement for E.1 - E.3 (http://www.optimization-online.org/DB_HTML/
2017/10/6264.html).
E.4. Justiﬁcation for Linearizing the Wage Response Function
To justify dropping the exponential part in the third term of the wage response function (4), one
needs to show that the value of exp(−(˜µ + ν)τ) is far less than 1, where τ is the time a car driver
takes to ﬁnish the terminal-bound trip and the outbound delivery trip. In the baseline scenario of
the case study, ˜µ = 3.43 hr−1, ν = 4.07 hr−1. Given the assumptions that the car capacity vc = 15g
and the average duration of a car stop at a destination is 48.5s, and simply assuming that the time
between car stops is 48.5s, too, τ can be conservatively estimated as 15×48.5×2 = 1, 455s = 0.40hr.
With these values of ˜µ, ν and τ, exp(−(˜µ + ν)τ) = 0.049, which is far less than 1. As an even
more conservative estimate of (˜µ + ν), choose ν = 3.69 hr−1 (which is the lowest among its values
in ten major cities in the U.S. in 2015 (SherpaShare (2016)) and ˜µ = 2 hr−1 (which is likely to be
too low to be realistic according to anecdotal evidence (https://www.quora.com/What-do-Uber-
drivers-do-between-rides)). In this case, exp(−(˜µ + ν)τ) = 0.1101. Moreover, this linearization has
insigniﬁcant impact on the wage payment cost density Wc(x, A(x)) in (9). The linearized wage
term is factored into the ﬁrst term of Ψc(x) in (10b). Of all the 15 zip-code areas in the baseline
scenario, this term accounts for 17.9% −51.0% of the cost density Wc(x, A(x)), with the mean
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018

39.6%. Therefore, the overall error that this linearization causes to the wage payment estimation
is less than 4.4%.
When the demand for delivery services scales up (i.e., n increases), this approximation error is still
bounded. In fact, as n increases, the outbound delivery trip time reduces, but the time of doorstep
delivery remains unchanged as the product of the number of car stops and the duration of each
stop. Put in the above numerical example, τ is bounded from below by 15×48.5 = 727.5s = 0.20hr.
The resulting values of exp(−(˜µ + ν)τ) is bounded from above by 0.220 in the baseline scenario
and by 0.317 in the more conservative scenario. The actual values of exp(−(˜µ + ν)τ) should be
smaller in these scenarios, since increasing n intensiﬁes the competition for shared mobility with the
ride-share market and thus increases ˜µ. The overestimation of the operating cost can be corrected
by approximating 1−exp(−(˜µ+ν)τ) by a factor that is smaller than 1. Since the error is bounded
as n increases, the ﬁnding that using shared mobility for last-mile delivery is not as economically
scalable as the truck-only system is still valid.
References
Daganzo, C.F. 2005. Logistics systems analysis. Springer Science & Business Media.
Gro¨er, C., B. Golden, E. Wasil. 2010. A library of local search heuristics for the vehicle routing problem.
Mathematical Programming Computation 2(2) 79-101.
Haimovich, M., A. R. Kan. 1985. Bounds and heuristics for capacitated routing problems. Mathematics of
operations Research 10(4) 527-542.
Hall, J. V., A. B. Krueger. 2016. An analysis of the labor market for Uber’s driver-partners in the united
states. Working Paper 22843, National Bureau of Economic Research. doi:10.3386/w22843. URL
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22843.
Jaillet, P. 1988. A priori solution of a traveling salesman problem in which a random subset of the customers
are visited. Operations Research 36(6) 929-936.
Li, F., B. Golden, E. Wasil. 2007. The open vehicle routing problem: Algorithms, large-scale test problems,
and computational results. Computers & Operations Research 34(10) 2918-2930.
Ross, S.M. 1996. Stochastic processes, vol. 2. John Wiley & Sons New York.
SherpaShare.
2016.
Uber
trips
are
becoming
longer
and
faster,
but
are
they
more
prof-
itable?
URL http://www.sherpashareblog.com/2016/02/uber-trips-are-becoming-longer-and-faster-
but-are-they-more-proﬁtable/. [Online; accessed on 21-February-2017].
Tijms, H.C. 2003. A ﬁrst course in stochastic models. John Wiley and Sons New York.
Wolstenholme, L.C. 1999. Reliability modelling: a statistical approach. CRC Press.
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859018