TITLE: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2022.1080
---

Demand Learning and Pricing for
Varying Assortments
Citation
Ferreira, Kris, and Emily Mower. "Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments."
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 25, no. 4 (July–August 2023):
1227–1244.
Published version
https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2022.1080
Link
https://nrs.harvard.edu/URN-3:HUL.INSTREPOS:37377665
Terms of use
This article was downloaded from Harvard University’s DASH repository, and is made
available under the terms and conditions applicable to Open Access Policy Articles (OAP),
as set forth at
https://harvardwiki.atlassian.net/wiki/external/NGY5NDE4ZjgzNTc5NDQzMGIzZWZhMGFlOWI2M2EwYTg
Accessibility
https://accessibility.huit.harvard.edu/digital-accessibility-policy
Share Your Story
The Harvard community has made this article openly available.
Please share how this access benefits you. Submit a story

Submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
manuscript (Please, provide the mansucript number!)
Authors are encouraged to submit new papers to INFORMS journals by means of a
style ﬁle template, which includes the journal title. However, use of a template does
not certify that the paper has been accepted for publication in the named journal.
INFORMS journal templates are for the exclusive purpose of submitting to an IN-
FORMS journal and should not be used to distribute the papers in print or online or
to submit the papers to another publication.
Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying
Assortments
Kris Johnson Ferreira
Harvard Business School, Boston, MA 02163, kferreira@hbs.edu
Emily Mower
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, emower@g.harvard.edu
Problem Deﬁnition: We consider the problem of demand learning and pricing for retailers who oﬀer
assortments of substitutable products that change frequently, e.g., due to limited inventory, perishable or
time-sensitive products, or the retailer’s desire to frequently oﬀer new styles.
Academic/Practical Relevance: We are one of the ﬁrst to consider the demand learning and pricing
problem for retailers who oﬀer product assortments that change frequently, and we propose and implement
a learn-then-earn algorithm for use in this setting. Our algorithm prioritizes a short learning phase, an
important practical characteristic that is only considered by few other algorithms.
Methodology: We develop a novel demand learning and pricing algorithm that learns quickly in an
environment with varying assortments and limited price changes by adapting the commonly used marketing
technique of conjoint analysis to our setting. We partner with Zenrez, an e-commerce company that partners
with ﬁtness studios to sell excess capacity of ﬁtness classes, to implement our algorithm in a controlled ﬁeld
experiment to evaluate its eﬀectiveness in practice using the synthetic control method.
Results: Relative to a control group, our algorithm led to an expected initial dip in revenue during the
learning phase, followed by a sustained and signiﬁcant increase in average daily revenue of 14-18% throughout
the earning phase, illustrating that our algorithmic contributions can make a signiﬁcant impact in practice.
Managerial Implications: The theoretical beneﬁt of demand learning and pricing algorithms is well
understood – they allow retailers to optimally match supply and demand in the face of uncertain pre-season
demand. However, most existing demand learning and pricing algorithms require substantial sales volume
and the ability to change prices frequently for each product. Our work provides retailers who do not have
this luxury a powerful demand learning and pricing algorithm that has been proven in practice.
1

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
2 Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)
1.
Introduction
Within the last decade, demand learning and pricing has been at the forefront of academic research
in the revenue management ﬁeld, and numerous algorithms have been proposed (see Section 1.1).
Most of these algorithms consider a single product - or in rarer cases, a single assortment of
products - that is oﬀered throughout a ﬁnite selling season, and the retailer can oﬀer diﬀerent prices
for the product(s) to learn the demand at each price point and maximize total-season revenue.
Furthermore, most of these algorithms require a high frequency and volume of price changes in
order to reap the beneﬁts of demand learning. Inherent in these two modeling choices are the
assumptions that (i) the retailer has substantial sales volume of each product, and (ii) the retailer
is able and willing to frequently change the price of each product. Interestingly, despite the plethora
of demand learning and pricing algorithms in the academic literature, non-promotion based retail
price changes were estimated to have occurred only once every 3.7 months between 2014-2017
(Cavallo (2018)), signaling that, in fact, many retailers have not adopted such algorithms.
We are motivated by conversations that we have had with numerous retailers who have yet to
implement demand learning and pricing algorithms. Although these retailers understand their po-
tential beneﬁts, many of these retailers share similar sentiments. First, many products they sell
do not have substantial sales volume to reap the beneﬁts of dynamic pricing. This appears to be
particularly common for retailers who oﬀer assortments of products that change frequently, e.g.,
due to limited inventory, perishable or time-sensitive products, or simply the retailer’s desire to
frequently oﬀer new styles; such settings are becoming more and more prevalent, especially in
e-commerce (e.g., Petro (2018)). Second, many retailers are unable or unwilling to change prices
multiple times within a single assortment due to technological constraints or concerns about nega-
tive customer perception or strategic consumer behavior (e.g., Garbarino and Lee (2003) and Haws
and Bearden (2006)). Some retailers have suggested that changing prices only at the beginning
of each new assortment - rather than changing prices within an assortment - is desirable because
their technology easily supports such price changes and/or they believe that timing price changes
with assortment changes would likely be better received by the customer.
With these characteristics in mind, we model customer demand using a contextual, attribute-
based multinomial logit (MNL) choice model and develop a demand learning and pricing algorithm
for the purpose of quickly learning consumer demand with minimal price changes to maximize
revenue when product assortments may change over time. Our algorithm sets a price for each
product at the beginning of each assortment which is oﬀered to all customers who shop that
assortment. The retailer observes each customer’s purchase decision and can use this information
when choosing the prices for subsequent assortments. In these retail settings, it is necessary to
carry over any demand learning occurring from one assortment to the next assortment, and to do

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!) 3
so, we assume that products can be fully characterized by a set of attributes; thus demand learning
occurs at the attribute-level as opposed to the product-level, allowing learning to be transferred to
newly oﬀered products that share attributes with products from previous assortments.
Our algorithm follows a learn-then-earn approach, where at ﬁrst the retailer chooses prices
to learn demand as quickly as possible, and then after the retailer is suﬃciently conﬁdent in
the estimated demand model, the retailer prices to earn, with the goal of maximizing revenue
(equivalently, proﬁt). During the pricing to learn phase, we adapt techniques from conjoint analysis
- a method that is common in the marketing literature and most often used by brands to help
make product design decisions - to oﬀer prices that maximize the expected information gain in each
assortment, ultimately learning the parameters of the demand model as quickly as possible. During
the pricing to earn phase, we price in a greedy fashion by assuming that the current parameter
estimates are the true parameters and maximizing revenue under this assumption. Regardless of
the phase, at the end of each assortment our algorithm updates the demand model parameter
estimates with the current assortment’s observed purchase data.
For the development and implementation of our work, we collaborated with Zenrez, an e-
commerce company that partners with ﬁtness studios across the United States and Canada to sell
excess capacity of ﬁtness studio classes. Every night at 9:00pm, Zenrez posts classes (i.e., products)
that have remaining capacity for the following day and oﬀers them at a discounted price via a
widget located on the partner studios’ webpages or app. When a user views the widget, they see all
next-day classes oﬀered by Zenrez for that ﬁtness studio; see Figure 1 for an example. Each class
is characterized by features such as class type (e.g., yoga, spin, etc.), time of day, and duration.
The assortment of classes changes each day, and prices can vary across assortments but are ﬁxed
within each assortment in order to avoid negative customer perception. Zenrez has the ﬂexibility
to choose an integer price for each class within a studio-speciﬁed interval and earns a commission
proportional to the selling price for each class sold via their widget.
To implement our demand learning and pricing algorithm, we developed a fully-automated pric-
ing tool at Zenrez. It is run automatically every day for a given studio, setting prices for the
following day’s assortment of classes. To evaluate the eﬀectiveness of our algorithm, we conducted
a three-month controlled ﬁeld experiment where prices for studios in the treatment group were
set according to our algorithm while prices for studios in the control group were set according to
Zenrez’s baseline pricing policies, and we used synthetic controls (Abadie et al. 2010) to estimate
the treatment eﬀect: percent increase in average daily revenue between studios in the treatment
group compared to the control group. Relative to studios in the control group, our algorithm led
to an 8.5% increase in average daily revenue over the three-month experiment. The average eﬀect
on revenue balances an expected initial dip in revenue experienced when pricing to learn followed

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
4 Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)
Figure 1
Example
of
Zenrez’s
widget,
showing
the
assortment
of
classes
oﬀered
for
partner
stu-
dio
Maha
Yoga
on
Monday,
August
3rd.
Retrieved
from
More
Than
Mary,
2015,
http://www.morethanmary.com/2015/08/03/new-ﬁtness-apps/.
by a signiﬁcant increase in revenue (14-18%) when pricing to earn; it is reasonable to expect that
gains of similar magnitudes would endure over future periods if the algorithm were run for longer.
Our main contributions in this paper are three-fold. First, we contribute to the nascent rev-
enue management literature for this prevalent retail setting where product assortments change
frequently, e.g., due to limited inventory, perishable or time-sensitive products, or the desire to
frequently oﬀer new styles. To account for many retailers’ desire to not change prices multiple times
within a single assortment, we use the beginning of each assortment change as a natural time in
which to change prices. We know of only one other paper on demand learning and pricing for the
multi-product, discrete choice setting that also accounts for varying assortments (Javanmard et al.
(2020)); we compare our work with Javanmard et al. (2020) in Section 1.1 and present simulations
comparing our algorithm’s performance with theirs in Section 3.1. We hope that our work encour-
ages other researchers to consider operations and marketing problems targeted for retailers with
frequent assortment changes, limited sales volume, and/or an interest in limited price changes.
Second, we develop a novel learn-then-earn algorithm - Fast Learning and Pricing for Varying
Assortments - that learns quickly in an environment with varying assortments and limited price
changes by adapting the commonly used marketing technique of conjoint analysis to our setting.
A short learning phase is particularly important in our setting where retailers want to minimize

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!) 5
negative customer perception from volatile price experimentation, as well as for retailers who have
limited sales volume or a short selling season and thus cannot aﬀord lengthy experimentation.
Furthermore, when external factors change that may inﬂuence demand model parameters, a short
learning phase allows retailers to restart the algorithm and quickly learn the new demand model
parameters. Most demand learning and pricing algorithms proposed in the academic literature do
not consider a short learning phase as an algorithmic characteristic and instead focus on asymptotic
analyses. We are one of the ﬁrst to consider such an algorithmic characteristic in this retail setting,
as well as the ﬁrst to employ conjoint analysis in demand learning and pricing. We hope that our
work encourages other researchers to consider the length of the learning phase and/or conjoint
analysis when developing learning and decision-making algorithms.
For our third contribution, we partner with Zenrez to estimate the eﬀectiveness of our algorithm
in a controlled ﬁeld experiment, and we illustrate how to use synthetic controls to estimate the
treatment eﬀect, a popular method recently proposed to evaluate policy interventions. The results
of our ﬁeld experiment illustrate that our algorithmic contributions can make a signiﬁcant impact
in practice, and we hope that our work will inspire other retailers to implement our demand
learning and pricing algorithm. To the best of our knowledge, ours is the ﬁrst paper to present the
implementation of a multi-product demand learning and pricing algorithm in practice.
1.1.
Literature Review
Our paper contributes to the vast literature on demand learning and pricing. For a more in-
depth review of the relevant literature, we refer the reader to the extensive survey by den Boer
(2015); examples of more recent papers include Ban and Keskin (2020), Ferreira et al. (2018), and
Misra et al. (2019). The tension that motivates demand learning and pricing research is the classic
exploration-exploitation trade-oﬀ, which requires the retailer to learn customer demand in order
to identify revenue maximizing prices while minimizing revenue lost to pricing-to-learn rather than
pricing-to-earn. Our model and algorithm are diﬀerentiated from most others presented in this
literature in three critical ways: (i) we consider a multi-product, discrete choice setting with varying
product assortments, (ii) we prioritize a short learning phase so that the retailer only engages in
limited price experimentation, and (iii) we implement and evaluate our algorithm in practice.
Multi-product, Discrete Choice with Varying Assortments: First, we consider a multi-
product, discrete choice setting where the assortment of substitutable products oﬀered to customers
changes over time. This setting necessitates modeling product attributes (context) and learning
attribute-level - as opposed to product-level - demand parameters in order to transfer learning
to newly oﬀered products in each assortment. Most multi-product demand learning and pricing
algorithms are not contextual and thus cannot be applied to settings like ours where the assortment

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
6 Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)
changes frequently. Javanmard et al. (2020) is the only other work in this setting that utilizes
a parametric demand model; in fact, we use an identical utility model with heterogeneous price
sensitivities and customer demand described by a multinomial logit (MNL) model. That said, there
are some key diﬀerences in the retail setting and motivation of our works that lead to diﬀerent
algorithmic contributions. In particular, Javanmard et al. (2020) are motivated by retailers who
can change prices for every customer arrival whereas we are motivated by retailers who want to
employ minimal price changes. In addition, Javanmard et al. (2020) allows prices to be selected
from R+ (i.e., a continuous and unconstrained set), whereas we require prices to be selected from
a ﬁnite set, a common practice among many retailers.
Regarding algorithmic contributions, Javanmard et al. (2020) propose an algorithm (M3P) that
alternates between learning and earning phases, where in the learning phase it selects random
prices, and in the earning phase it selects prices that maximize revenue based on the parameter
estimates derived from the learning phases. Our algorithm diﬀers in three respects: (i) we follow
a learn-then-earn approach, which results in fewer periods where the retailer needs to engage in
price exploration, (ii) during our learning phase, we adapt techniques from conjoint analysis to
select prices that maximize the expected information gain in order to learn quickly, and (iii) during
our earning phase, we continue to passively learn by updating our parameter estimates with new
observations. Finally, Javanmard et al. (2020) evaluate their algorithm via an asymptotic analysis
where T grows very large and show strong T-period regret, whereas we implement our algorithm
in practice (small, ﬁnite T) and evaluate its performance in a controlled ﬁeld experiment. As a
comparison, we present the performance of both algorithms via numerical simulations in Section
3.1.
Miao and Chao (2020) also consider a parametric, demand learning and pricing problem for the
multi-product, discrete choice setting where the assortment of substitutable products oﬀered to
the customer can change over time, selected from a static set of N products in each period. They
also use an MNL demand model but use product-speciﬁc mean utilities and price sensitivities as
opposed to attribute-speciﬁc.
Very recently, the multinomial logit contextual bandit model was introduced in Oh and Iyengar
(2019a); Oh and Iyengar (2019a), Oh and Iyengar (2019b), and Chen et al. (2020) study a demand
learning and assortment optimization problem under the MNL contextual bandit model. Our model
can be cast as an MNL contextual bandit model; our contribution related to these recent papers
is that we study price as opposed to assortment optimization. They develop upper conﬁdence
bound and Thompson sampling based policies that utilize Fisher’s information; we also use Fisher’s
information in the learning phase of our pricing algorithm.

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!) 7
Focus on Short Learning Phase: Most demand learning and pricing papers do not consider
a short learning phase as an algorithmic characteristic and instead focus solely on asymptotic
analyses. In fact, despite the attractiveness of limited price changes in practice, we know of only
three other papers that consider such a characteristic in a demand learning and pricing algorithm–
Cheung et al. (2017), Chen and Chao (2019), and Perakis and Singhvi (2020)–each of which consider
a single product setting as opposed to our multi-product setting. Cheung et al. (2017) and Chen
and Chao (2019) constrain the number or timing of price changes, whereas Perakis and Singhvi
(2020) incorporate the desire for limited price changes when learning non-parametric demand.
Similar to Perakis and Singhvi (2020), we also do not impose a constraint on the number of
price changes and instead incorporate the desire for limited price experimentation in our algo-
rithmic design. This led us to utilize components of conjoint analysis in the learning phase of
our algorithm, and our paper is the ﬁrst to integrate conjoint analysis with demand learning and
pricing, increasing the velocity at which learning can occur. Conjoint analysis is most commonly
used to construct surveys or choice experiments that inform product design decisions. A subset
of the broader ﬁeld is devoted to choice-based conjoint analysis, often assuming MNL demand. In
choice-based conjoint analysis, products are characterized by a set of attributes and the researcher
constructs a hypothetical choice set of substitutable products with variation in their attributes.
The researcher then asks respondents to select their favorite from among the set of substitutable
(hypothetical) products. Using observed choices, the researcher can then estimate customer utility
for each of the product attributes. Refer to Raghavarao et al. (2010) for more details.
To select the hypothetical choice sets used in these choice experiments, choice-based conjoint
analysis uses principles of optimal experimental design to maximize information gain as measured
by the determinant of the Fisher information matrix. One key challenge in doing so is that the
optimal design is a function of the unknown parameters of the utility model. To address this
challenge, marketers historically initialized the parameters at zero. Huber and Zwerina (1996) were
the ﬁrst to improve design eﬃciency by introducing a pre-experiment, which can be used to initialize
parameters at more meaningful values. Sandor and Wedel (2001) built upon their work by using
a Bayesian approach that incorporates managers’ priors and accounts for their uncertainty. Later
work by Sandor and Wedel (2005) demonstrated signiﬁcant value in being able to observe choice
behavior across several distinct choice experiments. We extend these ideas to our demand learning
and pricing setting by considering each assortment to be a ‘choice set’ and allowing the algorithm
to choose only the value of the price attribute for each product in the choice set; all other attributes
are selected exogenously by the ﬁrm. Our algorithm is able to incorporate prior information when
it is available and updates utility model parameter estimates after each choice set. In this way, we
are able to sequentially observe choices across a range of choice sets and update our parameter

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
8 Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)
estimates to reﬂect observed demand. Although our algorithm is sequential in nature, it diﬀers
from what are known as “adaptive designs” in the conjoint analysis literature, which change the
designs for a single respondent based on his or her previous responses (e.g., Saur´e and Vielma
(2018)); this work would be more appropriate to use for a personalized pricing application.
Price Optimization Field Experiments: Despite the growing number of academic papers
presenting new pricing algorithms, there have been very few documenting the implementation and
validation of pricing algorithms in practice via ﬁeld experiments. Caro and Gallien (2012) develop
and implement a markdown price optimization tool at Zara. Besbes et al. (2020) develop a price
optimization tool for rotable spare parts and evaluate its eﬀectiveness at an aircraft OEM. Both
of these papers dynamically change the price of products during the season but do not consider
varying assortments, and both use a demand model where each product’s demand is independent
of the other products in the assortment. Fisher et al. (2018) address price optimization in light
of competitor pricing and conduct a ﬁeld experiment to evaluate their algorithm at Yihaodian;
they consider a discrete choice setting, as do we, but they do not consider varying assortments.
Ferreira et al. (2016) develop a price optimization tool for Rue La La that considers both varying
assortments and the multi-product demand setting, albeit not discrete choice. Most importantly,
none of these papers consider demand learning - and therefore the exploration-exploitation trade-
oﬀ- in their algorithm or implementation. Thus for each case, the objective of their algorithm is to
maximize revenue or proﬁt, whereas our algorithm balances the exploration-exploitation trade-oﬀ
by ﬁrst maximizing information gain and subsequently maximizing revenue. We are aware of only
one other paper that implements a demand learning and pricing algorithm in practice, Cheung
et al. (2017), which consider a single-product setting without varying assortments.
2.
Model
We consider a retailer who sells a varying assortment of substitutable products to customers over
a selling season of length T. We are motivated by settings where T is relatively small–O(10) or
O(100)–compared to most demand learning and pricing models in the literature which study the
asymptotic setting where T grows very large. In each time period t = 1,...,T, the retailer oﬀers a
set of Nt products; each product can be fully characterized by an observable and exogenousvector
of d features (attributes), xit ∈Rd for product i ∈{1,...,Nt}, where xit = {x1it,...,xdit}. We allow
for a no purchase (outside) option encoded as product i = 0 for each assortment with d-dimensional
vector x0t = ⃗0 ∀t. The feature vectors of products oﬀered in diﬀerent periods vary and thus we
use “period t” and “assortment t” interchangeably. For each assortment t, the retailer selects price
vector pt = {p0t,p1t,...,pit,...,pNtt} where the price pit for product i is selected from a ﬁnite, discrete
set of possible prices Pit, a common practice for many retailers; for ease of notation, we deﬁne

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!) 9
Pt to be the ﬁnite set of all possible price vectors pt which simply includes every combination of
possible prices for each product. For the outside option i = 0, we deﬁne p0t = 0 ∀t (or equivalently,
P0t = {0}) without loss of generality and for notational convenience. Note that prices change from
period to period, but not within a single period; this reﬂects many retailers’ interests of changing
prices only when assortments change as opposed to dynamically changing prices within a ﬁxed
assortment of products. Note that although our model and algorithm are motivated by the setting
where prices do not change for a given assortment, allowing for such changes could be incorporated
in our model formulation. For example, if a retailer was willing and able to change the price vector
for an assortment three times, the assortment could be allocated three periods in our model, each
oﬀering the same set of products having identical feature vectors. Such a formulation would be
particularly useful for retailers who - although they may not conduct frequent assortment changes
- prefer only changing prices within an assortment a few times, yet still want to reap the beneﬁts
of demand learning and pricing.
We assume zero cost per product without loss of generality and for ease of exposition; note that
this equates revenue to proﬁt. We also assume that demand can be met in each period. Unless
otherwise noted, consider all vectors to be column vectors. For convenience, we occasionally use
the notation (a,b) for vectors a ∈Rd and b ∈Rd to denote a column vector of length 2d where the
ﬁrst d entries are a and the second d entries are b.
For customer j arriving in period t, we model her (random) utility from purchasing product i
as a linear function of its features and price, speciﬁcally
uijt = x⊺
itβf −x⊺
itβppit + ϵijt .
(1)
Here, βf and βp are ﬁxed parameters that are unknown to the retailer at the beginning of the
season but can be learned throughout the season via observing purchase data; βf ∈Rd reﬂects
the impact of features on utility whereas βp ∈Rd incorporates feature-speciﬁc price sensitivities.
Since model parameters are deﬁned with respect to features - as opposed to products - learning
the value of these parameters from observing sales of one product can beneﬁt new products that
share some of the same features. Note that x⊺
itβp is the price sensitivity of product i and thus our
model allows for heterogeneous price sensitivities across products. We let ϵijt ∀i,j,t be a random
component of utility and assume that it is drawn independently and identically from a standard
Gumbel distribution. We assume the customer purchases the product (including outside option)
that gives her the largest utility.
We note that our utility model is one speciﬁcation of the well-known multinomial logit (MNL)
discrete choice model that has been widely used in academia and in practice (see, e.g., Talluri and

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
10Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)
van Ryzin (2005) and Elshiewy et al. (2017)) that includes product features; it is identical to the
utility model employed in Javanmard et al. (2020). The MNL model yields the following expression
for the probability of a customer purchasing product i when oﬀered assortment t for all t = 1,...,T
and i = 0,...,Nt, which we will refer to as the demand model:
qit =
exp(x⊺
itβf −x⊺
itβppit)
PNt
l=0 exp(x⊺
ltβf −x⊺
ltβpplt)
.
(2)
We deﬁne qt = {q0t,q1t,...,qit,...,qNtt}.
For each period t, let Mt be a Poisson random variable with (unknown) arrival rate λ representing
the number of customer arrivals in that period, i.e., the number of customers who shop assortment
t. We assume that Mt is independent and identically distributed across periods, and that demand
is independent across customers and periods; for many retailers such as those oﬀering perishable or
time-sensitive products, this independence assumption is naturally satisﬁed. Further deﬁne Yit as
a random variable representing the number of customers who purchase product i in assortment t,
and note that PNt
i=0 Yit = Mt. At the end of period t, the retailer observes the quantity of each item
purchased (the realizations of Yit ∀i = 0,1,...,Nt), which we denote yt = {y0t,y1t,...,yNtt} where
yit is the quantity of product i purchased in period t, and y0t is the number of customers who do
not purchase any items. We use mt = PNt
i=0 yit to be the total number of customers who arrive in
period t, i.e., the realization of random variable Mt. Note that we are assuming that the retailer can
observe the number of customers who view the assortment and choose not to purchase, which is
realistic for many online retailers like Zenrez via tracking clickstream data; although not as precise
in the oﬄine world, some brick-and-mortar retailers can estimate this using traﬃc patterns to the
store.
The problem faced by the retailer is to design a non-anticipatory algorithm that selects a price
vector pt for each assortment t = 1,...,T in order to maximize the total revenue over the season.
To be speciﬁc, “non-anticipatory” refers to the restriction that the algorithm can use only prior
periods’ price, feature, and observed sales information (pt′,xit′∀i ∈{1,...,Nt′},yt′
∀t′ < t) when
selecting a price vector for assortment t. This observed sales information enables the retailer to
learn the arrival rate λ and demand model parameters βf and βp, which in turn enables the retailer
to learn demand not only for the oﬀered price and product, but also for other prices and for other
products that share some of the same features. Given our assumptions, we can write our objective
considering only a single customer in each period and maximizing the expected revenue earned
from that customer:
max
p1∈P1,...,pT ∈PT
T
X
t=1
q⊺
tpt .
(3)

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)11
Although not explicitly included in the objective, our algorithm is inspired by many retailers’ desire
to limit price exploration, i.e., how long it takes to learn parameters βf and βp.
To summarize the sequence of events in our model, for each assortment t,
1. The retailer selects price vector pt ∈Pt and oﬀers Nt products with feature vectors xit for
i = 1,...,Nt and price vector pt to all customers arriving during period t.
2. Each customer purchases at most one item.
3. The retailer observes yt and can use this observation along with all prior sales information
(pt′,xit′∀i ∈{1,...,Nt′},yt′
∀t′ < t) when choosing the price vectors for subsequent assort-
ments.
3.
Fast Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
In this section, we propose an algorithm - Fast Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments -
to prescribe price vector pt in each period t after observing purchase behavior in the prior period.
Our algorithm follows a learn-then-earn approach, where at ﬁrst the retailer chooses prices to learn
demand as quickly as possible, and then after the retailer is suﬃciently conﬁdent in the estimated
demand model, the retailer prices to earn, with the goal of maximizing revenue. Algorithm 1
formally outlines our Fast Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments algorithm. We start by
initializing parameters ˆβf
1 and ˆβp
1 to ⃗0 and initializing ˆλ > 0 to reﬂect the retailer’s prior belief
for the arrival rate λ; note that these initializations are only relevant for pricing decisions made
in period t = 1. The parameters ˆλ, ˆβf
t and ˆβp
t ∀t = 1,...,T will be used as empirical estimates of
the true parameters λ, βf and βp; in practice, the retailer could include prior information in the
initializations if available. Using similar notation, we will let ˆqit be the purchase probability as
deﬁned in Equation (2) and using current parameter estimates ˆβf
t and ˆβp
t . We initialize our pricing
phase as pricing to learn and specify a Boolean switching criteria test that will dictate when the
pricing phase switches to pricing to earn.
During the pricing to learn phase, our algorithm oﬀers prices that maximize the expected in-
formation gain in each period in order to learn the parameters of the demand model as quickly as
possible. Speciﬁcally, in pricing to learn period t, Algorithm 1 selects the price vector pt from the
set of feasible price vectors Pt that maximizes the determinant of the Fisher information matrix,
which is the most common measure of information gain used in choice-based conjoint analysis.
In our application, Fisher information in period t is a measure of how much information we can
obtain about the unknown parameters (βf,βp) from a sample of customer purchases, yt, drawn
from random variables Yit ∀i = 0,1,...,Nt. Customer purchases are a function of the selected price
vector pt, highlighting the impact of the pricing decision on how much information one can learn.

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
12Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)
Algorithm 1: Fast Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
1 Input: Boolean switching criteria test, SWITCH ;
2 Initialize parameters: ˆβf
1 = ˆβp
1 =⃗0 and ˆλ > 0;
3 Initialize pricing phase = pricing to learn;
4 for t = 1,...,T do
5
if
pricing phase = pricing to learn then
6
Deﬁne zis = (xis,−xispis) ∀s ≤t. Oﬀer price vector
7
p∗
t = arg maxpt∈Pt det
Pt−1
s=1 ms
PNs
i=0 ˆqis

zis −PNs
l=0 ˆqlszls

zis −PNs
l=0 ˆqlszls
⊤
+
ˆλPNt
i=0 ˆqit

zit −PNt
l=0 ˆqltzlt

zit −PNt
l=0 ˆqltzlt
⊤
;
8
end
9
if pricing phase = pricing to earn then
10
Oﬀer price vector p∗
t = arg maxpt∈Pt
PNt
i=0 pit ·
exp(x⊺
it ˆ
βf
t −x⊺
it ˆ
βp
t pit)
PNt
l=0 exp(x⊺
lt ˆ
βf
t −x⊺
lt ˆ
βp
t plt) ;
11
end
12
Observe demand yt;
13
Estimate ( ˆβf
t+1, ˆβp
t+1) using data observed through period t, i.e.,
(p∗
s,xis∀i ∈{1,...,Ns},ys ∀s ≤t):
( ˆβf
t+1, ˆβp
t+1) = arg maxβf ,βp Pt
s=1
PNs
i=0 yis ln

exp(x⊺
isβf −x⊺
isβpp∗
is)
PNs
l=0 exp(x⊺
lsβf −x⊺
lsβpp∗
ls)

;
14
Estimate ˆλ using data observed through period t: ˆλ = 1
t
Pt
s=1 ms;
15
if pricing phase = pricing to learn and SWITCH = TRUE then
16
pricing phase = pricing to earn;
17
end
18 end
Proposition 1: The Fisher information matrix for (βf,βp) for the multinomial choice demand
model presented in (2) for τ periods is
I(βf,βp) =
τ
X
t=1
mt
Nt
X
i=0
"
qit
 
(xit,−xitpit) −
Nt
X
l=0
qlt(xlt,−xltplt)
! 
(xit,−xitpit) −
Nt
X
l=0
qlt(xlt,−xltplt)
!⊤#
.
(4)
The proof of Proposition 1 is presented in Appendix A. The inner summation characterizes the
Fisher information matrix for a single period t, and the outer summation considers all τ periods,
weighted by the number of customers who arrived in each period, mt. Note that calculating the
Fisher information matrix requires evaluating the demand model (2), which in turn requires knowl-
edge of parameters (βf,βp); since these are unknown, Algorithm 1 uses their current estimated
values, ( ˆβf
t , ˆβp
t ), to replace the probability that a customer purchases product i in period t, qit,

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)13
with its estimated probability, ˆqit. In addition, since the number of customers arriving in period t,
mt, is unknown at the beginning of the period, we replace mt with its expected value, E[Mt] = ˆλ,
when selecting the price for period t. We note that ˆλ is simply the sample mean of the number of
customers who arrived in previous periods, since Mt ∼Poisson(λ). Analogous to D-optimal designs
in choice-based conjoint analysis, we select prices to learn in Algorithm 1 by choosing the price
vector which maximizes the determinant of the Fisher information matrix, which has the intuitive
appeal of minimizing the volume of the conﬁdence ellipsoid for the parameter estimates ˆβf
t and
ˆβp
t ; refer to Raghavarao et al. (2010) for further discussion.
Unfortunately, there are no computationally eﬃcient methods to identify the price vector p∗
t that
maximizes the determinant of the Fisher information matrix. Therefore, when pricing to learn, one
can ﬁrst try enumerating all possible price vectors in Pt and evaluating the determinant of the
Fisher information matrix for each one, choosing the price vector with the largest determinant; for
feasible price sets and assortments that are not too large, this approach provides an optimal solution
in a reasonable amount of time. In fact, for the implementation of the Fast Learning and Pricing
for Varying Assortments algorithm at Zenrez, we found that this approach was computationally
feasible for over 95% of the assortments, enabling us to calculate and use the optimal price vector.
If complete enumeration is computationally infeasible, then we suggest pursuing one or both of the
following two heuristics.
For the ﬁrst heuristic, one can employ the methods of swapping, cycling, and re-labeling to
identify a solution; although optimality is not guaranteed, these heuristics are well-studied and
commonly used in conjoint analysis and are detailed in Sandor and Wedel (2001). For the sec-
ond heuristic, one can employ grid search by reducing the set of possible price vectors Pt to a
computationally-feasible size, evaluating the determinant of the Fisher information matrix for each
price vector in the reduced set, and choosing the one with the largest determinant. In our ﬁeld ex-
periment with Zenrez, we used grid search for the < 5% of assortments where complete enumeration
was not computationally feasible.
During the pricing to earn phase, Algorithm 1 selects the price vector p∗
t from the set of feasible
price vectors Pt in a greedy fashion by assuming that the current parameter estimates ˆβf
t and ˆβp
t
are the true parameters and maximizing current-period revenue under this assumption:
p∗
t = arg max
pt∈Pt
Nt
X
i=0
pit ·
exp(x⊺
it ˆβf
t −x⊺
it ˆβp
t pit)
PNt
l=0 exp(x⊺
lt ˆβf
t −x⊺
lt ˆβp
t plt)
.
(5)
Given our assumption that demand is independent and identically distributed across all customers
shopping assortment t, note that maximizing total revenue from assortment t is equivalent to
maximizing the expected revenue from a single customer shopping assortment t. We may also face

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
14Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)
computational challenges when pricing to earn. Thus, in order to solve (5), we recommend the
following approach. Similar to the pricing to learn phase, we ﬁrst try enumerating all possible price
vectors in Pt and evaluating the expected current-period revenue of each one, choosing the price
vector with the largest expected revenue; for feasible price sets and assortments that are not too
large, this approach can solve (5) to optimality in a reasonable amount of time. In fact, for the
implementation of the Fast Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments algorithm at Zenrez, we
found that this approach was computationally feasible for over 95% of the assortments, enabling us
to calculate and use the optimal price vector. If complete enumeration is computationally infeasible,
then we suggest pursuing one or both of the following two approaches.
For the ﬁrst approach, we recommend using the parametric linear programming methodology
recently proposed in Sumida et al. (2021) to identify the optimal price vector; refer to Section 6.3
in Sumida et al. (2021) for a description of how to apply their methodology to our setting. For the
second approach, one can employ grid search by reducing the set of possible price vectors Pt to a
computationally-feasible size, evaluating the expected current-period revenue of each price vector
in the reduced set, and choosing the one with the largest expected revenue. This is a common
heuristic used in practice; see, e.g., Kannan et al. (2009), Iyengar et al. (2011), and Hosanagar
et al. (2008). In our ﬁeld experiment with Zenrez, we used grid search for the < 5% of assortments
where complete enumeration was not computationally feasible.
Regardless of the pricing phase, at the end of each period our algorithm observes demand yt and
updates the parameter estimates ˆλ, ˆβf
t+1 and ˆβp
t+1 with their maximum likelihood estimators using
all data observed through period t, (p∗
s,xis∀i ∈{1,...,Ns},ys ∀s ≤t). Thus we note that even when
pricing to earn, Algorithm 1 continues to passively learn and improve its parameter estimates.
For retailers who do not observe the number of customer arrivals mt in each period t (e.g., many
brick-and-mortar retailers), we refer the reader to Newman et al. (2014) for an estimation routine
that jointly estimates the arrival rate and parameters of the MNL model.
Finally, before advancing to the next period, our algorithm uses SWITCH - the Boolean switch-
ing criteria test speciﬁed as an input - to decide when to transition from the pricing to learn phase
to the pricing to earn phase. A simple switching criteria would be to pre-select the switching period
τ so that the pricing phase is pricing to learn for periods t = 1,...,τ and pricing to earn for periods
t = τ + 1,...,T. This approach is commonly used in other demand learning and pricing algorithms
that follow a learn-then-earn approach, e.g., Besbes and Zeevi (2012). Alternatively, we note that
any data observed through period t, i.e., (p∗
s,xis∀i ∈{1,...,Ns},ys
∀s ≤t), could be used as an
input to SWITCH in order to help dynamically choose when to switch from the pricing to learn
phase to the pricing to earn phase.

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)15
There are a variety of practical considerations that can be incorporated into the switching criteria
test. For example, retailers may choose to incorporate a notion of stability of parameter estimates:
if the parameters estimated by the algorithm using additional data begin to converge - i.e., they
do not change much given the current period’s observed demand - then the value of learning may
no longer outweigh the value of earning, signaling a good time to transition phases. Similarly,
retailers may choose to incorporate a notion of stability of prices: if the prices recommended by the
algorithm do not change when using recent periods’ parameter estimates, there may not be much
value in learning more precise parameter estimates. An additional consideration is the length of the
time horizon T; a retailer facing a small time horizon T may want to switch phases earlier than a
retailer facing a much longer horizon. We describe our choice for SWITCH in our implementation
at Zenrez in Section 4.1. Finally, we point out that knowledge of the length of the time horizon
T is not required to run our algorithm, although it may be estimated and used as an input to
SWITCH if desired.
3.1.
Comparison with M3P Algorithm
As described in Section 1.1, only one other paper (Javanmard et al. (2020)) presents a demand
learning and pricing algorithm, M3P, for a (nearly) identical setting to ours. M3P alternates be-
tween learning and earning phases in an episodic manner, where in each learning phase it selects
a random price vector for each customer, and in each earning phase it selects a price vector that
maximizes revenue based on the parameter estimates derived from the learning phases. Episode
k requires k + l customers, where l is a constant number of customers shown random prices in
the learning phase and k is a linearly increasing number of customers shown (expected) revenue-
maximizing prices in the earning phase. In this section, we compare the performance of our Fast
Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments algorithm with the M3P algorithm for various
values of l via simulations.
For our simulations, we consider a retailer selling three products per assortment, i.e., Nt =
3 ∀t = 1,...,T, plus an outside option. The set of possible prices Pit for each product i = 1,2,3
is {12,13,14,15,16,17,18}. Each of the three products is characterized by two features that take
values in [0,1], one of which interacts with price in the utility function; we also allow for price to
enter the utility function independently of product features. To implement this using our general
notation in Section 2, we used d = 3 features, where x1it ∈[0,1], x2it ∈[0,1], and x3it = 1 ∀i = 1,2,3
and t = 1,...,T, with βf
3 = 0 and βp
2 = 0.
We conducted 200 simulations, where for each simulation, we ﬁrst independently drew utility
model parameters βf
1 ∼Uniform(10,20), βf
2 ∼Uniform(10,20), βp
1 ∼Uniform(0,1), and βp
3 ∼
Uniform(0,1). For each simulation and for each assortment t = 1,...,T, we randomly selected fea-
ture xdit ∼Uniform(0,1) for d = 1,2 and i = 1,2,3. We assume that mt = 20 customers arrive

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
16Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)
and make a purchase decision in each assortment t = 1,...,T. Finally, for each simulation, each
customer j’s random component of utility, ϵijt, is drawn independently from a standard Gumbel
distribution for all i = 0,...,3, j = 1,...,mt, and t = 1,...,T. Given the set of utility model parame-
ters, features, and realized random components of utilities (i.e., βf,βp,xit, and ϵijt ∀i,j,t) drawn
independently for each of the 200 simulations, we implemented our Fast Learning and Pricing for
Varying Assortments algorithm and the M3P algorithm with four diﬀerent values for the number
of customers in each learning phase - l = 1,5,10, and 15 - and compared their average performance
across all 200 simulations.
We implemented our Fast Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments algorithm as speciﬁed
in Algorithm 1. For the switching criteria test (SWITCH ) input to our algorithm, we used an
identical test to what we used for our ﬁeld experiment with Zenrez; please see Section 4.1 for details,
noting that we generated four hypothetical classes instead of ten for Criterion 3. We implemented
M3P as speciﬁed in Javanmard et al. (2020) with the only exception being that we required prices
to be discrete, constrained to the same set of possible price vectors Pt that our algorithm faced.
With this added constraint, the solution techniques proposed for the earning phases in Javanmard
et al. (2020) were not applicable and we instead solved for the optimal prices in both the M3P and
Fast Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments algorithms by enumerating and evaluating all
possible price vectors. It is also worth noting that one of the modeling diﬀerences between our work
and Javanmard et al. (2020) is that they allow a diﬀerent price vector to be oﬀered to each customer
shopping assortment t, whereas we require a single price vector pt to be oﬀered to all customers
shopping assortment t. Thus when implementing M3P in our simulations, we allowed each customer
to be oﬀered a diﬀerent price vector, even for customers shopping the same assortment.
As a benchmark for comparing the performance of each of the algorithms, we consider the
(unrealistic) case where the retailer knows βf and βp at the start of the selling season and for each
assortment t, uses this knowledge to oﬀer the expected revenue-maximizing price vector:
p∗
t = arg max
pt∈Pt
3
X
i=0
pit ·
exp(x⊺
itβf −x⊺
itβppit)
P3
l=0 exp(x⊺
ltβf −x⊺
ltβpplt)
.
(6)
Note that (6) is the objective of the pricing to earn phase in Algorithm 1, with parameter estimates
ˆβf
t and ˆβp
t replaced with their true values βf and βp. Denote ˆrOP T
ts
as the revenue earned in
period t and simulation s when following this benchmark pricing policy. Similarly, denote ˆrALG
ts
as the revenue earned in period t and simulation s when following one of the other implemented
algorithms, ALG, where ALG can be either our Fast Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
algorithm or M3P with l = 1,5,10, or 15. To compare each algorithm with the benchmark policy,

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)17
Figure 2
Percent of cumulative optimal revenue earned by our Fast Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
algorithm and M3P with l = 1,5,10, and 15.
we calculate the “percent of cumulative optimal revenue earned” for each period t = 1,...,T and
for each ALG, as an average over all simulations:
1
200
200
X
s=1
Pt
l=1 ˆrALG
ls
Pt
l=1 ˆrOP T
ls

.
(7)
Figure 2 plots the percent of cumulative optimal revenue earned by each of the algorithms
implemented for each t=1,...,200. We note that the simulations were conducted for T = 200 periods,
although since the value T is not used in any of the algorithm implementations, one can easily
compare algorithm performance for any value of T ≤200. Figure 2 shows that after the ﬁrst
few periods, our Fast Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments algorithm outperforms all
implementations of M3P by a considerable margin. Importantly, our algorithm is able to achieve
these results even though it allows for only a single price vector p∗
t to be oﬀered in each assortment
t, whereas M3P oﬀers multiple price vectors in a single assortment. Furthermore, by period 25,
our algorithm has attained 95% of the cumulative optimal revenue earned over those periods,
highlighting our algorithm’s ability to learn utility model parameters and set (near-)optimal prices
very quickly. For the same milestone, it takes 75 periods for M3P with l = 1 and 100 periods for
M3P with l = 5; for larger l - equating to longer learning phases - it is clear that M3P spends too
much time in the learning phases and is not able to converge to the optimal prices quickly.
We believe the key reason for these results lies in how the algorithms learn demand. Our algorithm
conducts its pricing to learn phase in the initial periods and can then capitalize on that learning for

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
18Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)
the remainder of the season, whereas M3P spreads its learning episodically over the entire season.
Furthermore, our algorithm learns by oﬀering the most informative price vectors - i.e., those that
maximize the determinant of the Fisher information matrix for (βf,βp) - whereas M3P learns by
oﬀering random price vectors.
4.
Field Experiment
For the development and implementation of our work, we collaborated with Zenrez, an e-commerce
company that partners with ﬁtness studios across the United States and Canada to sell excess
capacity of ﬁtness studio classes. Every night at 9:00pm, Zenrez posts classes (i.e., products) that
have remaining capacity for the following day and oﬀers them at a discounted price via a widget
located on the partner studios’ webpages or app. When a user views the widget, they see all next-
day classes oﬀered by Zenrez for that ﬁtness studio (see, e.g., Figure 1). Each class is characterized
by features such as class type (e.g., yoga, spin, etc.), duration, and day of week, and data supports
that it is reasonable to assume that a vast majority of consumers choose at most one class from
each daily assortment.
The assortment of classes changes each day, and prices can vary across assortments but are
ﬁxed within each assortment in order to avoid negative customer perception (e.g., once classes are
posted, their prices do not change). Zenrez has the ﬂexibility to choose an integer price for each
class within a studio-speciﬁed interval, [ﬂoor, ceiling], and earns a commission proportional to the
selling price for each class sold via their widget; note that the marginal cost to Zenrez of selling
an additional unit of capacity is negligible and thus revenue and proﬁt are equivalent. The appeal
of purchasing last-minute classes from Zenrez rather than directly from the studio is that Zenrez
sells the classes at a discount. Since studios oﬀer various types of volume discounts for frequent
customers, Zenrez’s customers are predominantly infrequent customers, supporting our assumption
that demand is independent over time.
4.1.
Algorithm Implementation
To implement our Fast Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments algorithm, we developed
a fully-automated pricing tool at Zenrez. Since assortments change every day, the length of each
period t is set to one day. The tool is run automatically every day for a given studio, setting prices
for the following day’s assortment of classes. Given the diversity across studios in terms of their
classes oﬀered, locations, etc., as well as the observation that most customers only view classes
on Zenrez’s widgets from a single studio on a given day, we ran Algorithm 1 separately for each
studio. The average number of classes oﬀered each day (Nt) varied by studio, ranging from 5 to
15. Features used in our demand model included: class type indicators, class duration, day of week
indicators, time of day indicators, and a star-instructor indicator.

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)19
To solve for the optimal price vectors in the pricing to learn and pricing to earn phases, we ﬁrst
checked if the number of possible price vectors in Pt was less than a studio-speciﬁc threshold that
we considered computationally feasible for complete enumeration and evaluation to optimality.
This threshold was determined based on extensive simulations using Zenrez’s historical data, as
well as the permissible run-time per studio (i.e., the time that prices must be set minus the time
that the assortment of classes is ﬁnalized by the studio). If the number of possible price vectors was
less than the threshold, then we enumerated all possible price vectors, and for each one, evaluated
either the determinant of the Fisher information matrix for the pricing to learn phase or the
expected current-period revenue for the pricing to earn phase; ﬁnally, we chose the price vector
which gave the maximum value. This was the approach used for over 95% of the assortments in
our ﬁeld experiment, enabling us to calculate and use the optimal price vector. For the other < 5%
of the assortments in which the number of possible price vectors in Pt surpassed the threshold,
we used grid search to evaluate only a subset of the price vectors in Pt, and chose the one with
either the largest determinant of the Fisher information matrix in the pricing to learn phase or the
largest expected revenue in the pricing to earn phase. To choose the subset of prices, for each class
i, we selected prices from feasible price set Pit that were (approximately) equally spaced between
and including min{Pit} and max{Pit}.
For the switching criteria test (SWITCH ) input to our algorithm, we used a test of price stability:
intuitively, if the revenue-maximizing prices do not change when using recent periods’ parameter
estimates, there is likely little value in learning more precise parameter estimates, and our algo-
rithm switches from the pricing to learn phase to the pricing to earn phase. Speciﬁcally, SWITCH
evaluates to TRUE (and therefore triggers our algorithm to switch from the pricing to learn phase
to the pricing to earn phase) when the following three criteria are satisﬁed:
1. Minimum time in pricing to learn phase: t ≥3.
2. Price stability for current assortment:
arg max
pt∈Pt
Nt
X
i=0
pit ·
exp(x⊺
it ˆβf
t −x⊺
it ˆβp
t pit)
PNt
l=0 exp(x⊺
lt ˆβf
t −x⊺
lt ˆβp
t plt)
= arg max
pt∈Pt
Nt
X
i=0
pit ·
exp(x⊺
it ˆβf
t−1 −x⊺
it ˆβp
t−1pit)
PNt
l=0 exp(x⊺
lt ˆβf
t−1 −x⊺
lt ˆβp
t−1plt)
= arg max
pt∈Pt
Nt
X
i=0
pit ·
exp(x⊺
it ˆβf
t−2 −x⊺
it ˆβp
t−2pit)
PNt
l=0 exp(x⊺
lt ˆβf
t−2 −x⊺
lt ˆβp
t−2plt)
.
(8)
3. Price stability for random assortment: First, generate a random assortment of i = 1,...,10
hypothetical classes, where class i has feature vector xi ∈Rd randomly selected (with equal
probability) from the set of all possible attribute values for each feature oﬀered by that studio
in its history. Set the feasible price vector P for each price p = {p1,...,p10} to be all integers

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
20Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)
between and inclusive of the minimum of all ﬂoor prices and maximum of all ceiling prices
oﬀered by that studio in its history. Finally, we check the following equalities for price stability:
arg max
p∈P
10
X
i=0
pi ·
exp(x⊺
i ˆβf
t −x⊺
i ˆβp
t pi)
P10
l=0 exp(x⊺
l ˆβf
t −x⊺
l ˆβp
t pl)
= arg max
p∈P
10
X
i=0
pi ·
exp(x⊺
i ˆβf
t−1 −x⊺
i ˆβp
t−1pi)
P10
l=0 exp(x⊺
l ˆβf
t−1 −x⊺
l ˆβp
t−1pl)
= arg max
p∈P
10
X
i=0
pi ·
exp(x⊺
i ˆβf
t−2 −x⊺
i ˆβp
t−2pi)
P10
l=0 exp(x⊺
l ˆβf
t−2 −x⊺
l ˆβp
t−2pl)
.
(9)
Criterion 1 requires that we stay in the pricing to learn phase for at least three periods, essentially
to provide diﬀerent parameter estimates for Criteria 2 and 3. Criterion 2 requires that the revenue-
maximizing price vectors from (5) are identical for the current period’s assortment when using
the last three periods’ parameter estimates. Similarly, for robustness, Criterion 3 requires that the
revenue-maximizing price vectors are identical for a random assortment when using the last three
periods’ parameter estimates. Meeting Criteria 2 and 3 signals that the parameter estimates are
likely suﬃciently stable.
We chose these criteria for SWITCH after testing many other possibilities in our simulations
presented in Section 3.1. For example, and in line with many academic papers (e.g., Besbes and
Zeevi (2012)), one possibility of SWITCH that we tested was pre-selecting a switching period τ,
independent of any studio-speciﬁc parameters. Another possibility of SWITCH we tested included
only the ﬁrst two criteria described above, omitting Criterion 3; this tended to result in the algo-
rithm prematurely switching from the pricing to learn to pricing to earn phase, particularly when
a studio only oﬀered a few classes on a given day. We also evaluated tests of parameter stability,
for example by requiring the diﬀerence between parameter estimates from the last three periods
to be less than a threshold; this tended not to work as well as our price stability SWITCH test
because for some parameters, although they still experienced changes larger than the threshold,
these changes did not impact the revenue-maximizing prices and therefore there was little value in
learning these parameters with more precision.
4.2.
Experimental Design
To evaluate the eﬀectiveness of our Fast Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments algorithm,
we conducted a three-month, controlled ﬁeld experiment where prices for studios in the treatment
group were set according to our algorithm while prices for studios in the control group were set
according to Zenrez’s existing pricing practices. For years, and like many retailers, Zenrez had been
pricing classes proportional to the historical utilization (percent of capacity sold) of near-identical
classes – those with the same instructor, class type, time of day, day of week, and duration (if
such classes existed). The most popular classes were priced at or near the ceiling of the feasible

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)21
price set, and the least popular classes were priced at or near the ﬂoor of the feasible price set. If
near-identical classes did not exist for a class - which happened often - Zenrez would typically price
the class in the middle of the feasible price set. Our objective was to identify the impact of our Fast
Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments algorithm on Zenrez’s primary metric of interest:
average daily revenue. Thus, the treatment eﬀect we measured was the percent increase in average
daily revenue between studios in the treatment group compared to the control group for each of
the three months in the experiment. It is worth noting that although the ﬁeld experiment was
pre-speciﬁed to last for three months, this length of time is independent of the length of the selling
season T that a given studio may face; instead, T is determined by things such as management’s
planning horizon, changes in the competitive landscape, and ﬁtness trends. Thus, for selling seasons
lasting longer than 3 months - as is likely the case for many of the studios - we would expect that
results achieved in the pricing to earn phase of our algorithm in month 3 would persist until the
end of the season.
We identiﬁed a set S of 52 studios whose average daily revenue exceeded a minimum threshold
over the six months prior to the ﬁeld experiment (the “pre-period”) and who had been continu-
ously operating the widget during this pre-period. Across these 52 studios, there was signiﬁcant
heterogeneity in pre-period revenue and trends, which would make a simple diﬀerence-in-means or
diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences evaluation of treatment eﬀects unreliable. Therefore, we decided to use syn-
thetic controls to estimate treatment eﬀects. The synthetic controls method combines elements of
matching and diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences techniques to account for heterogeneity in pre-period trends
by ﬁnding a weighted average of studios in the control group whose trend in the pre-period closely
matches the pre-period trend for the studios in the treatment group; the trend that we matched
on was average daily revenue during each of the six months in the pre-period.
Speciﬁcally, deﬁne T to be the set of studios in the treatment group, where prices were set using
Algorithm 1, and deﬁne C = S \T to be the set of studios in the control group, where prices were
set using Zenrez’s existing pricing practices. Let rsm be the average daily revenue of studio s ∈S
during month m. Considering pre-period months m = 1,...,6, the synthetic control, w∗
s ∀s ∈C, is
calculated as
arg min
6
X
m=1
 1
|T |
X
s∈T
rsm −
X
s∈C
wsrsm
2
s.t.
X
s∈C
ws = 1
ws ≥0 ∀s ∈C
.
(10)
Intuitively, w∗
s can be interpreted as the optimal weights assigned to control studios s ∈C which
provide a weighted average of control studios that best represents the average treatment studio with
respect to pre-period average daily revenue. If a high-quality synthetic control is obtained, then

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
22Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)
any diﬀerence in average daily revenue during the three-month experiment between the average
treatment studio and its synthetic control can be attributed to the impact of our algorithm. Refer
to Abadie et al. (2010) for a detailed description of the synthetic controls method.
To assign the 52 studios into treatment and control groups, it was important to ensure that
we would have a high-quality pre-period match between weighted average daily revenue of studios
in the control group and average daily revenue of studios in the treatment group, which would
allow us to eﬀectively evaluate the outcome of the experiment. To do so, we iteratively conducted
the following steps, initially starting with all studios being unassigned to the treatment or control
group:
(i) For each unassigned studio, ﬁnd its synthetic control using (10), where T is the unassigned
studio and C contains all of the other unassigned studios and studios already assigned to the
control group.
(ii) Choose the studio that has the best synthetic control, i.e., the studio that achieves the smallest
objective value from (10).
(iii) Assign this studio to the treatment group.
(iv) Assign studio s included in its synthetic control to the control group (if not already there)
as long as w∗
s ≥0.02. Without applying a small threshold, too many studios are assigned to
the control group which do not signiﬁcantly impact the quality of the synthetic control, and
only a few treatment studios would be identiﬁed.
We repeated these steps until all studios were assigned to the treatment or control groups. Using
this iterative approach, each of the last three unassigned studios had a poor-quality synthetic
control from the set of other unassigned studios and the control studios, so we assigned these ﬁnal
three studios to the control group. Our approach resulted in |T | = 23 studios in the treatment
group and |C| = 29 studios in the control group. It is worth noting that studios did not know that
they were included in the experiment.
Given our approach used to identify studios for the treatment and control groups, our synthetic
control, w∗
s ∀s ∈C, was a near-perfect match to the average of studios in the treatment group
with respect to our matching criteria - average daily revenue. Because of this, we can attribute
the diﬀerence in average daily revenue during the three-month experiment to the impact of our
algorithm. Furthermore, Table 1 shows that our approach resulted in balance across studios in the
treatment and control groups over the six-month pre-period on a variety of characteristics. Note
that only 1.7% of the classes oﬀered by Zenrez sell out during the pre-period, and thus we assume
that all demand can be met.

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)23
Treatment Synthetic Control
Avg. Daily Revenue
1.00
1.00
Avg. Daily Purchases
1.00
0.95
Avg. Daily Classes
1.00
0.95
Avg. Price per Class
1.00
1.06
Avg. Widget Traﬃc
1.00
1.08
Unique Cities
11
13
Sell-Out Percent
1.6%
1.7%
Table 1
Summary statistics for the studios in the treatment and control groups over the six-month pre-period.
All metrics except Unique Cities and Sell-Out Percent are normalized to the studios in the treatment group’s
average pre-period values (averaged across all studios in the treatment group and all six pre-period months).
4.3.
Results
The treatment eﬀect that we measured was the percent increase in average daily revenue for each
of the three months in the ﬁeld experiment, comparing average daily revenue across all studios in
the treatment group with its synthetic control. Speciﬁcally, our revenue treatment eﬀect, R∗
m, is
calculated for each month m as
R∗
m =
1
|T |
P
s∈T rsm −P
s∈C w∗
srsm
P
s∈C w∗
srsm
.
(11)
Figure 3
Percent increase in average daily revenue of studios in the treatment group vs. that of their synthetic
control over the six-month pre-period (P1-P6) and three-month experiment (T1-T3). The start of the
experiment is indicated by a vertical dashed line.
Figure 3 illustrates the results of our experiment. First, we can see that we were able to attain a
very strong synthetic control; there is a near perfect match in average daily revenue for each of the

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
24Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)
six pre-period months (P1-P6) between treatment and synthetic control groups. Because of this, we
attribute the diﬀerence between average daily revenue during the three-month experiment (T1-T3)
to the impact of our algorithm. Compared to the synthetic control, the studios in the treatment
group experienced a dip in average daily revenue of 6.7% in the ﬁrst month of our experiment and
an increase in average daily revenue of 14.1% and 18.2% in the second and third months of our
experiment, respectively. We note that this dip followed by gain is consistent with our expectations
that initial pricing to learn would yield a dip in revenue while subsequent pricing to earn would
lead to higher revenue in the long run. Over the three-month experiment, studios in the treatment
group experienced an 8.5% increase in average daily revenue compared to the synthetic control.
Since the revenue gains were persistent at well above 10% across the second and third months, it
is reasonable to expect that gains of a similar magnitude would endure over future periods if the
algorithm were run for longer.
To measure the signiﬁcance of our monthly revenue treatment eﬀects, we performed Random-
ization Inference with Fisher’s Exact Test to quantify the probability of observing our monthly
treatment eﬀects under the null hypotheses that our algorithm had no eﬀect on revenue each
month. Please see Appendix B for a description of the intuition behind the test and how we per-
formed the test to evaluate our ﬁeld experiment. For each month, we use Fisher’s Exact Test to
empirically calculate a one-sided p-value representing the probability that we would observe more
than an R∗
m increase in revenue in month m due to chance. The p-values for months m = 1,2,3 are
0.769, 0.062, and 0.054, respectively. Thus, we conclude that the initial dip in revenue in month
1 is unsurprising under the null hypothesis, whereas we have suﬃcient evidence to reject the null
hypotheses in months 2 and 3 at the 10% signiﬁcance level and conclude that our algorithm had
a strong positive eﬀect on revenue.
The majority of studios switched from the pricing to learn to pricing to earn phase within
20 days of the algorithm’s launch, while two studios took just over 30 days to make the switch.
Importantly, we see that our algorithm only required a very short pricing to learn phase, and was
quickly able to capitalize on that learning in the pricing to earn phase. This is a promising result
for many retailers who may not want to or may not be able to change prices multiple times within
each assortment: our results show that minimal price experimentation timed at the beginning of
each new assortment can reap huge payoﬀs as the season progresses, owed to the eﬃcient learning
that our algorithm provides. Furthermore, when external factors change that may inﬂuence demand
model parameters - such as a competitor studio opening across the street - fast learning allows
retailers to restart the algorithm and quickly learn the new demand model parameters.
To better understand the eﬀect of our Fast Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments algo-
rithm, we analyzed prices and sales for the studios in the treatment group during the three-month

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)25
experiment; results are shown in Figure 4. From Figure 4(a), we can see that the average price of an
oﬀered class decreased by approximately 3.0% during the experiment compared to the six-month
pre-period. Unsurprisingly, demand was larger for the less expensive classes, and thus we see a
decrease by approximately 3.6% in the average selling price during the experiment. From Figure
4(b), we can see that the decrease of 3.6% in average selling price resulted in an increase of approx-
imately 15.6% in units sold over the three-month experiment, and an increase of approximately
26.0% in the second and third months of the experiment when the algorithm was primarily pricing
to earn. This substantial increase in quantity sold from only a slight decrease in average selling
price led to the overall positive revenue results. It is worth noting that this increase in quantity
sold only resulted in a slight increase in the percent of classes that sold out, from 1.6% in the
pre-period to 1.9% during the experiment. Finally, Figure 4(c) shows that our algorithm increased
daily price variance, especially in the ﬁrst month of the experiment when our algorithm was pre-
dominately pricing to learn. This is because the maximally informative price set - i.e., the price
set that maximizes the determinant of the Fisher information matrix - often prices some classes at
their upper bound and others at their lower bound, leading to high price variance. This observation
is consistent with the literature on conjoint analysis, which shows that numeric features are often
set at or near their boundaries (Kanninen 2002).
4.4.
Alternative Evaluation Approach
When applying synthetic controls to multiple treatment units (studios), there are two approaches
that are commonly used in the literature. The approach that we used in Sections 4.2 and 4.3
averages (unweighted) all of the treatment units together, generates a single synthetic control for
the average treatment unit, and then estimates the treatment eﬀect on that single treatment unit
(see, e.g., Kreif et al. (2016) and Robbins et al. (2017)). The second approach that can be used to
apply the synthetic control method to multiple treatment units generates a synthetic control for
each treatment unit separately, calculates the treatment eﬀect for each treatment unit, and then
averages the treatment eﬀects across all treatment units (see, e.g., Dube and Zipperer (2015) and
Abadie (2021)). In this section, we evaluate our ﬁeld experiment using this second approach to
provide additional evidence and insights regarding how Algorithm 1 performs in practice.
For each treatment studio t ∈T , deﬁne synthetic control w∗
st ∀s ∈C as
arg min
6
X
m=1
(rtm −
X
s∈C
wstrsm)2
s.t.
X
s∈C
wst = 1
wst ≥0 ∀s ∈C
.
(12)
Note that (12) is equivalent to (10) when T contains only a single treatment unit.

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
26Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)
Figure 4
Impact of Algorithm 1 on price, quantity sold, and price variance for each of the three months in our
experiment, T1-T3. (a) Average price of classes oﬀered and average price of classes sold by studios in
the treatment group, normalized by the average price of classes oﬀered by studios in the treatment
group over the six-month pre-period. (b) Average quantity sold by studios in the treatment group,
normalized by the average quantity sold by studios in the treatment group over the six-month pre-
period. (c) Average variance in daily prices for studios in the treatment group, normalized by the
average variance in daily prices for studios in the treatment group over the six-month pre-period.
Using the synthetic controls w∗
st, we deﬁne the revenue treatment eﬀect averaged over all studios
t ∈T , RMult
m
, for each month m as
RMult
m
= 1
|T |
X
t∈T
rtm −P
s∈C w∗
strsm
P
s∈C w∗
strsm

.
(13)
Figure 5 illustrates the results and includes intervals around each value of RMult
m
which depict the
interquartile ranges for the percent increase in average daily revenue across all treatment studios.
Unsurprisingly, the quality of the synthetic controls for each treatment studio are not as strong
as the quality of the synthetic control for the average treatment studio; refer to Appendix C
for a detailed discussion. Nonetheless, we believe that the results of this approach still provide
valuable insights and support our ﬁndings in Section 4.3. Speciﬁcally, studios in the treatment
group experience a dip in average daily revenue of 10.0% in the ﬁrst month of our experiment,
followed by an increase in average daily revenue of 14.9% and 13.4% during the second and third
months of our experiment, respectively. The magnitudes of these eﬀects are in line with our ﬁndings
in Section 4.3, although we have more trust in the results in Section 4.3 due to the higher-quality
synthetic control. We cannot report on p-values for each studio in the treatment group because

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)27
Figure 5
Mean percent increase in average daily revenue of treatment studios vs. their synthetic controls, RMult
m
,
over the six-month pre-period (P1-P6) and three-month experiment (T1-T3). The intervals around
each value of RMult
m
depict the interquartile range for the percent increase in average daily revenue
across all treatment studios. The start of the experiment is indicated by a vertical dashed line.
the eﬃcacy of Randomization Inference with Fisher’s Exact Test critically depends on the quality
of the synthetic controls.
Next, we use the synthetic controls w∗
st to estimate revenue treatment eﬀects for the pricing to
learn and pricing to earn phases - as opposed to monthly revenue treatment eﬀects - which sheds
more light on the impact of our algorithm over time. With slight abuse of notation, we deﬁne rsL
and rsE to be the average daily revenue of studio s during that studio’s pricing to learn and pricing
to earn phases, respectively. We deﬁne the revenue treatment eﬀect averaged over all studios t ∈T ,
RMultLE
m
, for each of the six pre-period months m ∈{P1,P2,P3,P4,P5,P6} and pricing to learn
and pricing to earn phases m ∈{L,E}, respectively, as
RMultLE
m
= 1
|T |
X
t∈T
rtm −P
s∈C w∗
strsm
P
s∈C w∗
strsm

.
(14)
Figure 6(a) illustrates the results; note that the values of RMultLE
m
for each of the six pre-period
months m ∈{P1,P2,P3,P4,P5,P6} are identical to those in Figure 5 since the same synthetic
controls, w∗
st, are used. We see that the impact of our algorithm during the pricing to learn and
pricing to earn phases (m ∈{L,E}) supports our previous ﬁndings. Speciﬁcally, studios in the

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
28Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)
Figure 6
Mean percent increase in average daily revenue of treatment studios vs. their synthetic controls,
RMultLE
m
. The intervals around each value of RMultLE
m
depict the interquartile range for the percent
increase in average daily revenue across all treatment studios. (a) RMultLE
m
over the six-month pre-
period (P1-P6), pricing to learn phase (L), and pricing to earn phase (E); the start of the experiment is
indicated by a vertical dashed line. (b) RMultLE
m
over the pricing to learn phase (L), ﬁrst half of pricing
to earn phase (E1), and second half of pricing to earn phase (E2).
treatment group experience a substantial dip in average daily revenue of 17.4% during the short,
initial pricing to learn phase, followed by a substantial increase in average daily revenue of 10.7%
during the longer pricing to earn phase. Compared to the results in Figure 3, the 17.4% dip in
average daily revenue in the pricing to learn phase is more than the 6.7% dip in average daily
revenue of month 1 in the treatment period; this is to be expected since month 1 in the treatment
period includes both pricing to learn and pricing to earn phases for most studios. The eﬀect in the
pricing to earn phase is perhaps a bit more surprising at ﬁrst glance: compared to the results in
Figure 3 which show an increase in average daily revenue of 14.1% and 18.2% in months 2 and 3
of the treatment period, respectively, the increase in average daily revenue in our pricing to earn
phase is only 10.7%. It turns out that the reason behind this is that our algorithm still continues
to passively learn throughout the pricing to earn phase, updating parameter estimates with their
maximum likelihood estimator using all data observed up through the previous day. Thus, at the
beginning of the ﬁnal month of the experiment, our algorithm has already learned from both the
pricing to learn phase and the beginning of the pricing to earn phase (typically more than half of

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)29
this phase); in contrast, at the beginning of the pricing to earn phase, our algorithm has learned
from only the pricing to learn phase.
To illustrate this point, we ran a very similar analysis to what was presented above, except
instead of considering a single pricing to earn phase, we split the pricing to earn phase into two
phases of equal length for each studio: pricing to earn 1 (E1) and pricing to earn 2 (E2). Figure
6(b) illustrates the results, where period E from Figure 6(a) has been divided into E1 and E2.
These results indicate that indeed there is passive learning persisting beyond the initial pricing to
learn phase. Speciﬁcally, in the ﬁrst half of the pricing to earn phase, studios achieve an average
increase in average daily revenue of 5.4%, while in the second half of the pricing to earn phase,
studios achieve an average increase in average daily revenue of 15.3%; it is reasonable to expect
that gains of a similar magnitude would endure over future periods if the algorithm were run for
longer. A similar increase in the revenue treatment eﬀect can be seen between months 2 and 3
in Figure 3, although the increase is less pronounced, perhaps due to the choice of months rather
than pricing to learn, pricing to earn 1, and pricing to earn 2 phases and the fact that studios in
the treatment group have diﬀerent lengths of each phase.
5.
Conclusion
In this paper, we considered demand learning and pricing for a prevalent retail setting that has
received little attention in the literature to date - namely, that of retailers who oﬀer assortments
of substitutable products that change frequently, e.g., due to limited inventory, perishable or time-
sensitive products, or simply the retailer’s desire to frequently oﬀer new styles. Motivated by many
retailers’ desires to limit the number of price changes per assortment, we allow price changes to
occur only when assortments change. We introduced a novel algorithm - Fast Learning and Pricing
for Varying Assortments - that learns quickly in such an environment with varying assortments
and limited price changes by adapting the commonly used marketing technique of conjoint analysis
to our setting. A short learning phase is particularly important in our setting where retailers
want to minimize negative customer perception from volatile price experimentation, as well as for
retailers who have limited sales volume or a short selling season and thus cannot aﬀord lengthy
experimentation. Furthermore, when external factors change that may inﬂuence demand, a short
learning phase allows retailers to restart the algorithm and quickly learn the new demand model
parameters. Despite its importance in practice, the algorithmic characteristic of a short learning
phase is rarely considered in the demand learning and pricing literature, and conjoint analysis has
yet to be proposed for this task.
Importantly, and unlike most other demand learning and pricing papers, we implement our
algorithm in practice and evaluate its eﬀectiveness via a controlled ﬁeld experiment. We illustrate

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
30Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)
how to use synthetic controls to estimate the treatment eﬀect, a popular method recently proposed
to evaluate policy interventions. Relative to the control group, our algorithm led to an expected
initial dip in revenue during the pricing to learn phase, followed by a sustained and signiﬁcant
increase in average daily revenue of 14-18% throughout the pricing to earn phase. The results of
our ﬁeld experiment illustrate that our algorithmic contributions can make a signiﬁcant impact in
practice, and we hope that our work will inspire other retailers to implement our algorithm.
For future academic work, we believe that some of the same components of our algorithm could
be used to help develop algorithms for other, related problems. For example, a natural extension of
our model is to consider demand learning with joint price and assortment optimization, applicable
for retailers who make these decisions simultaneously. Although we use conjoint analysis to help
determine a single attribute value (price), conjoint analysis has historically been used to simulta-
neously determine multiple attribute values using a choice set that is constrained in size; thus we
believe extending conjoint analysis for use in the learning phase of a joint price and assortment
optimization problem might be possible.
More broadly, we hope that our work encourages other researchers to consider operations and
marketing problems targeted for retailers with frequent assortment changes, limited sales volume,
and/or an interest in limited price changes. Finally, we hope that our work serves as a moti-
vating example to illustrate the beneﬁt of borrowing ideas from multiple literatures - operations
management, marketing, and computer science, in our case - to make a big impact in practice.
Acknowledgments
We sincerely thank Zenrez co-founders Matt Capizzi and Arthur Hong, as well as the entire Zenrez team, for
their continuing support, sharing valuable business expertise through numerous discussions, and providing
us with a considerable amount of time and resources to ensure a successful project. This research also
beneﬁtted from discussions during and after numerous seminars and with our colleagues; we thank all of
the participants and appreciate their feedback. Finally, we thank the entire review team, whose comments
signiﬁcantly helped the presentation and analysis in this paper, and would like to speciﬁcally thank one of
the anonymous reviewers for providing very detailed suggestions of alternative approaches and literature
related to solving for the optimal price vector in the pricing to earn phase.
References
Abadie, Alberto. 2021. Using synthetic controls: Feasibility, data requirements, and methodological aspects.
Journal of Economic Literature 59(2) 391–425.
Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, Jens Hainmueller. 2010. Synthetic Control Methods for Comparative
Case Studies: Estimating the Eﬀect of California’s Tobacco Control Program. Journal of the American
Statistical Association 105(490) 493–505.

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)31
Ban, Gah-Yi, Bora Keskin. 2020. Personalized dynamic pricing with machine learning: High dimensional
features and heterogeneous elasticity. Management Science Forthcoming.
Besbes, Omar, Adam Elmachtoub, Yunjie Sun. 2020. Pricing analytics for rotable spare parts. INFORMS
Journal on Applied Analytics 50(5) 313–324.
Besbes, Omar, Assaf Zeevi. 2012. Blind Network Revenue Management. Operations Research 60(6) 1537–
1550.
Caro, Felipe, Jeremie Gallien. 2012. Clearance pricing optimization for a fast-fashion retailer. Operations
Research 60(6) 1404–1422.
Cavallo, Alberto. 2018.
More amazon eﬀects: Online competition and pricing behaviors.
Jackson Hole
Economic Symposium Conference Proceedings (Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City).
Chen, Boxiao, Xiuli Chao. 2019. Parametric demand learning with limited price explorations in a backlog
stochastic inventory system. IISE Transactions 51(6) 605–613.
Chen, Xi, Yining Wang, Yuan Zhou. 2020. Dynamic Assortment Optimization with Changing Contextual
Information. Journal of Machine Learning Research 21.
Cheung, Wang Chi, David Simchi-Levi, He Wang. 2017. Dynamic pricing and demand learning with limited
price experimentation. Operations Research 65(6) 1722–1731.
den Boer, Arnoud V. 2015. Dynamic pricing and learning: Historical origins, current research, and new
directions. Surveys in Operations Research and Management Science 20(1) 1–18.
Dube, Arindrajit, Ben Zipperer. 2015. Pooling multiple case studies using synthetic controls: An application
to minimum wage case studies. IZA Discussion Paper No. 8944.
Elshiewy, Ossama, Daniel Guhl, Yasemin Boztug. 2017. Multinomial Logit Models in Marketing - From
Fundamentals to State-of-the-Art. Marketing ZFP 39(3) 32–49.
Ferreira, Kris Johnson, Bin Hong Alex Lee, David Simchi-Levi. 2016. Analytics for an Online Retailer:
Demand Forecasting and Price Optimization. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 18(1)
69–88.
Ferreira, Kris Johnson, David Simchi-Levi, He Wang. 2018. Online Network Revenue Management Using
Thompson Sampling. Operations Research 66(6) 1586–1602.
Fisher, Marshall, Santiago Gallino, Jun Li. 2018. Competition-Based Dynamic Pricing in Online Retailing:
A Methodology Validated with Field Experiments. Management Science 64(6) 2496–2514.
Garbarino, Ellen, Olivia F. Lee. 2003. Dynamic pricing in internet retail: eﬀects on consumer trust. Psy-
chology & Marketing 20(6) 495–513.
Haws, Kelly L., William O. Bearden. 2006. Dynamic pricing and consumer fairness perceptions. Journal of
Consumer Research 33(3) 304–311.

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
32Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)
Ho, Daniel E, Kosuke Imai. 2006. Randomization Inference With Natural Experiments: An Analysis of
Ballot Eﬀects in the 2003 California Recall Election. Journal of the American Statistical Association
101(475) 888–900.
Hosanagar, Kartik, John Chuang, Ramayya Krishnan, Michael D. Smith. 2008. Service adoption and pricing
of content delivery network (cdn) services. Management Science 54(9) 1579–1593.
Huber, Joel, Klaus Zwerina. 1996. The Importance of Utility Balance in Eﬃcient Choice Designs. Journal
of Marketing Research 33(3) 307.
Iyengar, Raghuram, Kamel Jedidi, Skander Essegaier, Peter J. Danaher. 2011. The impact of tariﬀstructure
on customer retention, usage, and proﬁtability of access services. Marketing Science 30(5) 820–836.
Javanmard, Adel, Hamid Nazerzadeh, Simeng Shao. 2020.
Multi-Product Dynamic Pricing in High-
Dimensions with Heterogenous Price Sensitivity. Working paper.
Kannan, P.K., Barbara Kline Pope, Sanjay Jain. 2009. Practice prize winner: Pricing digital content product
lines: A model and application for the national academies press. Marketing Science 28(4) 620–636.
Kanninen, Barbara J. 2002. Optimal Design for Multinomial Choice Experiments. Journal of Marketing
Research 39(2) 214–227.
Kreif, Noemi, Richard Grieve, Dominik Hangartner, Alex James Turner, Silviya Nikolova, Matt Sutton. 2016.
Examination of the synthetic control method for evaluating health policies with multiple treated units.
Health Economics 25 1514–1528.
Miao, Sentao, Xiuli Chao. 2020. Dynamic joint assortment and pricing optimization with demand learning.
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management Forthcoming.
Misra, Kanishka, Eric M. Schwartz, Jacob Abernethy. 2019. Dynamic online pricing with incomplete infor-
mation using multiarmed bandit experiments. Marketing Science 38(2) 226–252.
Newman, Jeﬀrey P., Mark E. Ferguson, Laurie A. Garrow, Timothy L. Jacobs. 2014. Estimation of choice-
based models using sales data from a single ﬁrm. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
16(2) 184–197.
Oh, Min-hwan, Garud Iyengar. 2019a. Multinomial logit contextual bandits. Working paper.
Oh, Min-hwan, Garud Iyengar. 2019b. Thompson sampling for multinomial logit contextual bandits. Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 3151–3161.
Perakis, Georgia, Divya Singhvi. 2020. Dynamic pricing with unknown non-parametric demand and limited
price changes. Working paper.
Petro, G. 2018. All fashion is fast fashion. Forbes .
Raghavarao, Damaraju, James B. Wiley, Pallavi Chitturi. 2010. Choice-based conjoint analysis: models and
designs. CRC Press.

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)33
Robbins, Michael W., Jessica Saunders, Beau Kilmer. 2017. A framework for synthetic control methods with
high-dimensional, micro-level data: Evaluating a neighborhood-speciﬁc crime intervention. Journal of
the American Statistical Association 112(517) 109–126.
Sandor, Zsolt, Michel Wedel. 2001. Designing Conjoint Choice Experiments Using Managers’ Prior Beliefs.
Journal of Marketing Research 38(4) 430–444.
Sandor, Zsolt, Michel Wedel. 2005. Heterogeneous Conjoint Choice Designs. Journal of Marketing Research
42(2) 210–218.
Saur´e, Denis, Juan Pablo Vielma. 2018. Ellipsoidal methods for adaptive choice-based conjoint analysis.
Operations Research 67(2) 315–338.
Sumida, Mika, Guillermo Gallego, Paat Rusmevichientong, Huseyin Topaloglu, James David. 2021. Revenue-
utility tradeoﬀin assortment optimization under the multinomial logit model with totally unimodular
constraints. Management Science 67(5) 2845–2869.
Talluri, K. T., G. J. van Ryzin. 2005. Theory and Practice of Revenue Management. Springer-Verlag.

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
34Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)
Appendix A
Proof of Proposition 1
For any period t, deﬁne the random variable Zt ∈{0,1,...,Nt} to represent the product that a
customer shopping assortment t purchases. Its probability mass function given unknown parameters
(βf,βp) is
f(Zt = i|βf,βp) = qit =
exp(x⊺
itβf −x⊺
itβppit)
PNt
l=0 exp(x⊺
ltβf −x⊺
ltβpplt)
∀i = 0,1,...,Nt.
(15)
We will ﬁrst determine the Fisher information IZt(βf,βp) in Zt, and then extend this to multiple
customer arrivals and assortments. Note that since (βf,βp) ∈R2d, Fisher information will be
represented as a 2d-square matrix:
IZt(βf,βp) =
Nt
X
i=0
"
qit
∂lnf(Zt = i|βf,βp)
∂(βf,βp)
∂lnf(Zt = i|βf,βp)
∂(βf,βp)
⊤#
.
(16)
We have
lnf(Zt = i|βf,βp) = (xit,−xitpit)⊤(βf,βp) −ln
 Nt
X
l=0
exp(xlt,−xltplt)⊤(βf,βp)

,
(17)
and taking the derivative yields
∂lnf(Zt = i|βf,βp)
∂(βf,βp)
= (xit,−xitpit) −
Nt
X
l=0
qlt(xlt,−xltplt).
(18)
Substituting into (16) gives us
IZt(βf,βp) =
Nt
X
i=0
"
qit
 
(xit,−xitpit) −
Nt
X
l=0
qlt(xlt,−xltplt)
! 
(xit,−xitpit) −
Nt
X
l=0
qlt(xlt,−xltplt)
!⊤#
.
(19)
For period t, we observe mt random samples from Zt. Since the Fisher information in a random
sample of size n is simply n times the Fisher information of a single observation, the Fisher
information matrix for period t is It(βf,βp) = mtIZt(βf,βp). Similarly, the Fisher information
matrix over τ periods is
I(βf,βp) =
τ
X
t=1
mtIZt(βf,βp) =
τ
X
t=1
mt
Nt
X
i=0
"
qit
 
(xit,−xitpit) −
Nt
X
l=0
qlt(xlt,−xltplt)
! 
(xit,−xitpit) −
Nt
X
l=0
qlt(xlt,−xltplt)
!⊤#
.
(20)

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)35
Appendix B
Randomization Inference with Fisher’s Exact Test
To measure the signiﬁcance of our monthly revenue treatment eﬀects, we performed Randomization
Inference with Fisher’s Exact Test to quantify the probability of observing our monthly treatment
eﬀects under the null hypotheses that our algorithm had no eﬀect on revenue each month. Please
refer to Ho and Imai (2006) for details on this test. In what follows, we provide the intuition behind
the test and then explain the details for how we performed the test to evaluate our ﬁeld experiment.
If the null hypotheses that our algorithm had no impact on each month’s revenue were true,
then the percent increase in average daily revenue that we observed (-6.7% for month 1, 14.1% for
month 2, and 18.2% for month 3) would be likely to occur due to chance. In other words, if the
null hypotheses were true, it should make no diﬀerence which studios were labeled as “treatment
studios” and which studios were labeled as “control studios” since the treatment of implementing
the algorithm had no impact on revenue. Thus, we will proceed with Fisher’s Exact Test by repeat-
edly randomly labeling studios as treatment or control studios and calculating the percent increase
in average daily revenue between the two groups for each month. This will create an empirical
distribution for each of the monthly revenue treatment eﬀects under the null hypotheses, Rm for
months m = 1,2,3 in the treatment period, and we can determine where along that distribution
lies the value of our true monthly treatment eﬀect R∗
m - using the correctly labeled treatment and
control studios - providing us with p-values for the probability that the revenue treatment eﬀect
would exceed what was observed due to chance. This test is exact in the sense that it does not
depend on large sample approximation and is distribution-free because it does not depend on any
distributional assumptions.
Let j = 1,...,50,000 index the random labeling of studios to treatment vs. control groups, and
let Tj and Cj represent the sets of studios labeled as the treatment and control groups for the
random labeling j, respectively. For each random labeling j, we averaged the daily revenue across
all studios s ∈Tj for each of the six months in the pre-period, and identiﬁed a synthetic control
using studios s ∈Cj whose revenue in each of the six pre-period months closely matched that of
the average of studios in Tj. Deﬁne wj
s to be the resultant synthetic control weight calculated via
(10) assigned to each studio s ∈Cj. We can then calculate the revenue treatment eﬀect for each
random labeling j, Rj
m, for each month m = 1,2,3 in the treatment period as
Rj
m =
1
|Tj|
P
s∈Tj rsm −P
s∈Cj wj
srsm
P
s∈Cj wj
srsm
.
(21)
Note that this is the same procedure we used to estimate the monthly treatment eﬀects for the
true experiment. In order to be consistent with the true randomization process, we discarded all
random labelings j for which the synthetic control over the pre-period was poor, resulting in a loss
of less than 5% of all random labelings.

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
36Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)
Figure 7
For each month m = 1,2,3 in the treatment period, Randomization Inference results using Fisher’s
Exact Test show the empirical distributions of revenue treatment eﬀects under the null hypotheses,
Rm, with the actual treatment eﬀects, R∗
m, represented by red vertical lines. The one-sided p-value
shown for each month is empirically calculated as Pr(Rm ≥R∗
m).
Figure 7 plots a histogram of the values of Rj
m for months m = 1,2,3 in the treatment period,
which can be interpreted as the empirical distribution of Rm for each month. As we would expect
under the null hypotheses, E[Rm] = 0 for m = 1,2,3, since the random labeling of studios to treat-
ment and control groups should have no impact on average daily revenue. We can use this empirical
distribution of Rm to calculate a one-sided p-value for each month to measure the signiﬁcance of
our monthly revenue treatment eﬀects. Speciﬁcally, for month m = 1,2,3, we can empirically cal-
culate the one-sided p-value as Pr(Rm ≥R∗
m); this is the probability that we would observe more
than an R∗
m increase in revenue in month m due to chance. From the p-values presented in Figure

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)37
7, we conclude that the initial dip in revenue in month 1 is unsurprising under the null hypothesis,
whereas we have suﬃcient evidence to reject the null hypotheses in months 2 and 3 at the 10%
signiﬁcance level and conclude that our algorithm had a strong positive eﬀect on revenue.

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
38Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)
Appendix C
Studio-Speciﬁc Synthetic Controls
Figure 8 shows the synthetic control weights, w∗
st, for each treatment studio; treatment studios are
ordered by the quality of their synthetic control which goes hand-in-hand with the order in which
they were selected in the iterative approach described in Section 4.2. As the iterative approach
selects studios for the treatment group, the quality of synthetic control degrades. To illustrate this,
Figure 9 shows the percent diﬀerence in average daily revenue between the treatment studio and its
synthetic control for each of the six pre-period months for treatment studios 1-3 (the three highest-
quality matches). Similarly, Figure 10 illustrates the percent diﬀerence in average daily revenue
between the treatment studio and its synthetic control for each of the six pre-period months for
treatment studios 21-23 (the three lowest-quality matches); the quality of matches for these studios
is much worse. Speciﬁcally, for each treatment studio t = 1,2,3,21,22,23 and pre-period month m,
Figures 9 and 10 show
%Difftm = rtm −P
s∈C w∗
strsm
P
s∈C w∗
strsm
.
(22)
Note that the quality of the synthetic control is much higher when using the average daily revenue
over all treatment studios as our treatment unit, as we did in Sections 4.2 and 4.3; the last column
of Figure 8 shows the synthetic control weights w∗
s ∀s ∈C for this average treatment unit.

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)39
Figure 8
For each control studio s ∈C, synthetic control weights w∗
st for each treatment studio t; for example,
the synthetic control weight on control studio 7 for treatment studio 2 is 0.18. The last column presents
synthetic control weights w∗
s ∀s ∈C for the average treatment unit.
Figure 9
Percent diﬀerence in average daily revenue, %Difftm, over the 6-month pre-period for the ﬁrst three
assigned treatment studios, t = 1,2,3.

Ferreira and Mower: Demand Learning and Pricing for Varying Assortments
40Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. (Please, provide the mansucript number!)
Figure 10
Percent diﬀerence in average daily revenue, %Difftm, over the 6-month pre-period for the last three
assigned treatment studios, t = 21,22,23.