TITLE: Privacy Management in Service Systems
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2022.1130
---

TSpace Research Repository 
 
tspace.library.utoronto.ca 
 
 
Privacy Management in Service Systems 
 
Ming Hu, Ruslan Momot & Jianfu Wang 
 
Version Pre-print or submitted manuscript. 
 
Citation 
(published version) 
Hu, M., Momot, R., & Wang, J. (2022). Privacy management in service 
systems. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 24(5), 2761-2779. 
 
Copyright / License Copyright © 2022, INFORMS 
 
DOI https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2022.1130 
Publisher’s Statement This is a submitted manuscript of an article published by INFORMS in 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to cite TSpace items 
 
Always cite the published version, so the author(s) will receive recognition through services that track 
citation counts, e.g. Scopus. If you need to cite the page number of the author manuscript from TSpace 
because you cannot access the published version, then cite the TSpace version in addition to the published 
version using the permanent URI (handle) found on the record page. 
 
This article was made openly accessible by U of T Faculty. 
Please tell us how this access benefits you. Your story matters. 
 

Privacy Management in Service Systems
Ming Hu
Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, Canada, ming.hu@rotman.utoronto.ca
Ruslan Momot*
Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University, United States, ruslan.momot@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Jianfu Wang
City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, jf.wang@cityu.edu.hk
Problem deﬁnition: We study customer-centric privacy management in service systems and explore the
consequences of extended control over personal information by customers in such systems.
Methodology: We adopt a stylized queueing model to capture a service environment that features a service
provider and customers who are strategic in deciding whether to disclose personal information to the service
provider—that is, customers’ privacy or information disclosure strategy. A customer’s service request can be
one of two types, which aﬀects service time but is unknown when customers commit to a privacy strategy.
The service provider can discriminate among customers, based on their disclosed information, by oﬀering
diﬀerent priorities.
Results: Our analysis reveals that, when given control over their personal data, strategic customers do not
always choose to withhold it. We ﬁnd that control over information gives customers a tool they can use
to hedge against the service provider’s will, which might not be aligned with the interests of customers.
More importantly, we ﬁnd that under certain conditions, giving customers full control over information
(e.g., by introducing a privacy regulation) can not only distort already eﬃciently operating service system
but might also backﬁre by leading to inferior system performance (i.e., longer average wait time) and hurt
customers themselves. We demonstrate how a regulator can correct information disclosure ineﬃciencies
through monetary incentives to customers and show that providing such incentives makes economic sense
in some scenarios. Finally, the service provider itself can beneﬁt from customers being in control of their
personal information by enticing more customers joining the service.
Managerial implications: Our ﬁndings yield insights into how customers’ individually rational actions
concerning information disclosure (e.g., granted by a privacy regulation) can lead to market ineﬃciencies in
the form of longer wait times for services. We provide actionable prescriptions, for both service providers
and regulators, that can guide their choices of a privacy and information management approach based on
giving customers the option of controlling their personal information.
Key words : privacy, queues: priority, queuing economics, privacy management, service operations, price of
information
History : First Draft: 9 July 2020. This Draft: 12 February 2022.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

2
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
1.
Introduction
There is an ongoing debate among industry leaders, regulators, and increasingly more privacy-
aware consumers (Pew Research Center 2019), about who should be given control over con-
sumer data (New York Times, 2015). Recently introduced privacy laws and regulations such
as European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and California Consumer Privacy
Act (CCPA) have shifted control over data from ﬁrms and platforms to consumers. GDPR, for
instance, requires that a consumer gives her explicit consent to a ﬁrm to collect and process
any of consumer’s data.1 CCPA allows consumers to opt out of the sale of their information.2
While European Union and California were early adopters of the most stringent data protec-
tion regulations, many other governments remain more conservative (New York Times 2019b and
https://www.cnil.fr/en/data-protection-around-the-world).
The goal of this paper is to study the consequences of providing consumers with control over
their personal information. In particular, we study consumer privacy management as well as its
implications for ﬁrms, for the consumers themselves, and for society in general. While this question
is a pressing issue in all the industries, in this paper, we focus on service systems, which routinely
employ user data not only to oﬀer better goods and services to their customers (e.g., through
personalization), but also to proﬁle and discriminate among the latter and their requests. For
example, call centers exploit social media (and history of interactions) data when determining
customer’s call priority, wait time, and quality of service (Wall Street Journal 2017, Forbes 2017,
Hathaway et al. 2020); in retail, customers are assigned data-driven shopper scores, which determine
the level of service customers obtain, as well as priority with which they obtain this service (Wall
Street Journal 2018). Given such increasing reliance on individual-level data, GDPR and data
protection regulations alike have a direct and signiﬁcant impact on service systems by requiring the
latter to cede control of personal information to their customers (Contact Center Pipeline 2018).
In this paper, we investigate the impact that such a shift of control over information to consumers
has on diﬀerent stakeholders.
We build a stylized model of a service environment that features customers who (i) are granted
control over their data and (ii) are strategic in deciding whether to disclose these data to the
service provider—customers’ privacy or information disclosure strategy. Customer’s information
disclosure strategy can take a form of giving a service provider explicit consent for using their data
* Part of this work was done when Ruslan Momot was at HEC Paris, France. Ruslan Momot gratefully acknowl-
edges ﬁnancial support from HEC Paris Foundation and a grant of the French National Research Agency (ANR),
“Investissements d’Avenir” (LabEx Ecodec/ANR-11-LABX-0047).
1 https://gdpr.eu/what-is-gdpr/
2 https://oag.ca.gov/privacy/ccpa
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
3
(i.e., customer’s opt-in decision under GDPR regulation), conﬁguring privacy and/or information
sharing settings, or, for instance, buying and starting to use one of numerous smart-home devices
such as Alexa or Nest—hardware products of Amazon and Google, widely-known for their excessive
and intrusive data collection and processing (New York Times 2019). A customer’s request for
service can be one of two types: long or short in service time. The request type is not realized
at the time when a customer is choosing privacy strategy and is only observed later when the
need for service arises. This is aligned with the observation that customers usually choose their
privacy strategy when registering on the platform and not yet being informed about their future
service needs (e.g., customer’s opt-in choice under GDPR is made during the time of the ﬁrst
interaction of the customer with the ﬁrm before any service request). The service provider can
infer customers’ contingent request type from their latest personal data (e.g., voice recordings
done by Amazon Alexa, web-search queries, or activity on the platform; see more examples of how
such inferences can be made in Section 3) if they are disclosed. Consequently, the service provider
can discriminate among customers based on the inferred request types and can prioritize them by
giving preference to either the shortest or the longest processing time, whichever suits the service
provider’s needs. For example, the former can be preferred when a service reward is given for each
completed job regardless of its service time, and the latter can be preferred when rewards are paid
out proportionally to the service time.
We start by deriving the customer’s equilibrium information disclosure strategy and discover that
individual customers, when given control over information disclosure, are not always incentivized
to withhold their information. Instead, customers strategically choose between disclosing and with-
holding information by weighing the upsides against the downsides of service providers having their
information; in some cases, customers will choose full (or partial information) disclosure as being
in their best interest. We show that customers choose to withhold personal information only if they
believe that their service requests tend to have low priority and will likely be deprioritized by the
service provider. In all other cases, we ﬁnd that customers choose to partially or fully disclose their
personal information. Interestingly, if customers’ service requests have an intermediate probability
to be prioritized so that neither the beneﬁt nor the harm of information disclosure is high, then
customers employ either “follow the crowd” or “avoid the crowd” types of information disclosure
behavior. In other words, customers are better-oﬀeither following or reversing the information
disclosure strategies of others.
Our analysis compares equilibrium information disclosure (i.e., customers controlling their per-
sonal information) to the scenario in which all information must be involuntarily disclosed (i.e.,
no control over personal information). We ﬁnd that there exist scenarios under which full infor-
mation disclosure is already socially-optimal and granting customers control over their personal
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

4
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
information (e.g., through regulation) can actually reduce customers’ total surplus by increasing
their expected wait time in the queue. That could happen, for instance, if short service requests are
prioritized (e.g., when a ﬁxed piece rate is paid for each task completed regardless of the time spent
on it—a scenario often observed in health-care applications; e.g., see Ibanez et al. 2018)—a priority
policy that is aligned with collective incentives. In contrast, society beneﬁts from customers being
in control over their information when the incentives of the service provider are misaligned with
collective incentives, as when long service requests are prioritized (e.g., when a service provider is
paid per unit of time spent on the task and there is a ﬁxed setup cost associated with switching
tasks). These results caution against reﬂexively heeding the public outcry to give customers full
control of their information, since such control might not beneﬁt either the individual, or society
as a whole and distort already eﬃcient systems.
Overall, our analysis highlights that giving customers control over their personal information
need not result in an eﬃcient outcome from their collective perspective as a society and nor
necessarily beneﬁt customers individually; in other words, the service system does not necessarily
achieve the state of privacy self-synchronization (Popa 2012). In fact, if most customers’ service
requests are of the long type then—regardless of which priority rule is followed by the service
provider—customer control of information backﬁres in the sense of leading to inferior performance
of the service system (i.e., longer average wait times), which reduces customer surplus. We establish
that such ineﬃciencies in personal information disclosure can be remedied by providing monetary
incentives to customers to disclose (resp. withhold) information when the service provider prioritizes
short (resp. long) service requests. We also show that the increase in customer surplus due to
adopting a socially optimal information disclosure policy may outweigh the expense of inducing a
privacy self-synchronization regime; we identify the region of model primitives in which this occurs
and, consequently, in which such monetary incentives are an eﬃcient instrument to achieve socially-
optimal outcome. In addition to remedies for correcting information disclosure ineﬃciencies (from
the societal perspective), we also characterize the price of information: the payment customers are
willing to receive to fully disclose their personal information to the service provider. These two
results provide a basis for building an information market (see, e.g., Bergemann and Bonatti 2019,
Bimpikis et al. 2019, and Drakopoulos and Makhdoumi 2020) in which the service provider can
pay customers for disclosing or withholding their personal information. This concept has long been
a subject of discussion by regulators.
We further explore many variants of our base model. In particular, we examine models with more
than two types of customer service requests, heterogeneous waiting costs, customers deciding on
their information disclosure strategy after learning their request types, no information disclosure
as a benchmark scenario, alternative priority policies, and social planner’s imperfect knowledge
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
5
of the service provider’s priority discipline. Finally, we also study how providing customers with
control over their information aﬀects the service provider itself and ﬁnd that the regulation granting
customers control over their personal information beneﬁts those service providers who prioritize
long requests. Overall, our base model, as well as the analyses of the alternative model formulations
reinforce our main ﬁndings—existence of scenarios under which control over information put in
customers’ hands may distort service systems that have been already set to customer surplus
maximization.
As far as we know, our paper is the ﬁrst to explore the impact of privacy regulation, such as
GDPR or CCPA, and granting control over information to customers on service systems through
investigation of customer-centric information and privacy management in such systems. This study
extends the existing literature on service systems by considering control over information and its
disclosure by customers—that is, in lieu of the traditional provider-centric approach. We also bring
to this literature a particular “customer privacy” angle that has not been explored previously.
The analysis reported here yields actionable prescriptions for service providers operating in the
information economy and for the regulators of such markets.
2.
Related Literature
This paper contributes to three active streams of literature: (i) queueing systems with strategic
customers, which dates back to Naor (1969) (see Hassin and Haviv 2003, Hassin 2016 for compre-
hensive surveys and we omit the discussion here); (ii) information-related issues in service systems;
and (iii) information operations and economics that focus on consumer privacy.
Research into the information-related issues of service systems explores how a service provider’s
various information strategies aﬀect the strategic behavior of customers. One widely studied topic
is the eﬀect of delay announcements on customer behavior. Whitt (1999) explains why customers
are less likely to be blocked if delays are announced, yet Guo and Zipkin (2007) show that having
more information about the wait time need not improve customers’ social welfare. Allon et al.
(2011) demonstrate that “cheap talk”—in the form of unveriﬁable delay announcements—may
beneﬁt the service provider and its customers alike. Cui et al. (2017) identify conditions under
which it is socially optimal to disclose queue-length information to customers who are not aware
of the service provider’s information disclosure policy. Hu et al. (2018) establish that, if only
some customers are informed of the service system’s congestion level, then both throughput and
social welfare may be unimodal in the fraction of such customers. Wang and Hu (2020) consider
a setting in which customers observe lagged, user-generated queue length information shared by
fellow customers; these authors show that it may beneﬁt customers more than does real-time queue
length information. Yu et al. (2018) explore how providing customers with the delay information
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

6
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
can help the ﬁrm distinguish (imperfectly) their types and what is the value of this information.
Huang et al. (2013) consider a service system with boundedly rational customers who cannot
accurately estimate their expected waiting time. Interested readers are referred to Ibrahim (2018),
who comprehensively surveys this stream of work.
The service operations literature also considers disclosure of other types of information in queues.
For example, Veeraraghavan and Debo (2009) explore how customers infer service quality from
their observation of the queue length, which may lead to herding behavior. Cui and Veeraraghavan
(2016) show that customer doubts about service-rate information can increase the service provider’s
revenue but may degrade individual or social welfare.
To the best of our knowledge, most of previous research in this stream focuses on the sharing of
system information such as the queue length and service quality and assumes that such information
is shared with customers—either by the service provider or by fellow customers, or not. However,
there are exceptions. First, the literature on priority auctions (see, e.g., Hassin and Haviv 2003,
Section 4.5; Hassin 2016, Sections 5.3.1 and 6.6.3; Kittsteiner and Moldovanu 2005) and the lit-
erature on priority pricing (which is outcome-equivalent to priority auctions, see, e.g., Mendelson
and Whang 1990, and Hassin 2016, Section 6.6 and references therein) assume that customers
hold private information, which is not accessible by the service provider (a scenario becoming less
realistic without privacy regulation in today’s online environment), and they consider information
sharing of customers’ private information (e.g., delay sensitivity or service time information) indi-
rectly through, for instance, their bids for priority in the queues. Second, the stream of literature
in healthcare studies triage—a practice of obtaining information of patients’ conditions and cat-
egorizing them into diﬀerent priority levels (see, e.g., Argon and Ziya 2009, Sun et al. 2018, and
Bren and Saghaﬁan 2019). This stream of literature does not usually assume strategic information
disclosure by the patients as we do in this study. Finally, the stream of literature on mechanism
design in the queueing context considers a setting where customers report their types strategically
and not necessarily truthfully to maximize their utility (see, e.g., Su and Zenios 2006 and Rodriguez
et al. 2021).3 Our paper studies both strategic and direct information sharing by customers and
the opposite (as compared to the delay announcements literature) direction of information ﬂow:
information shared by customers directly and truthfully with the service provider (also, as opposed
to information revealed through a mechanism designed by the service provider). In particular,
our study assumes that customers could be in control of their information (e.g., through privacy
regulation) and are strategic with regard to whether to disclose it to the service provider.
3 Note that in this literature, under the revelation principle, there exist direct mechanisms such that agents are truth-
telling. However, the principal has to make (side) payments to the agents to make them incentive-compatible to tell
the truth.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
7
More broadly, our paper also relates to the work that addresses consumer privacy and infor-
mation management. Studies in the ﬁelds of operations management, marketing, and economics
examine the ways in which (i) customers voluntarily disclose their private information to ﬁrms
as a strategic choice (see, e.g., Ali et al. 2019 and Huang and Van Mieghem 2013), involuntarily
through product selection, and product reviews (Yu et al. 2016), and other types of user-generated
content; (ii) ﬁrms infer customer information from their actions—such as past purchases (Conitzer
et al. 2012, Bimpikis et al. 2021), platform usage (Fainmesser et al. 2021, Ichihashi 2019, 2020),
and social network activity (Acemoglu et al. 2017). While assuming that customers’ information
has been obtained, the second stream of literature investigates how (i) ﬁrms can exploit that infor-
mation for the purpose of personalized pricing (Candogan et al. 2012, Fainmesser and Galeotti
2016, Valletti and Wu 2020), targeted advertising (Galeotti and Goyal 2009, Shen and Miguel
Villas-Boas 2018, Kucukgul et al. 2021), selective selling (Momot et al. 2020), and quality discrim-
ination (Li 2020) as well as for public opinion and engagement manipulation (Mostagir et al. 2021,
Candogan and Drakopoulos 2020)—Acquisti et al. (2016) provide an excellent survey of this liter-
ature; (ii) ﬁrms using data-driven decision-making can protect consumer privacy through applying
privacy-preserving algorithmic mechanisms (Lei et al. 2021).
Much as in the literature on privacy and information management, we consider customers who are
strategic in their private information disclosure commitments and who know that the information
they reveal can be used by the service provider in their interests yet possibly also against their
interests. However, we focus on a service system with negative externalities among customers and,
more speciﬁcally, on investigating customers’ strategic information disclosure and its eﬀects not
only on the service provider but also on the collective surplus of all customers as a society as well
as on customers themselves individually.
3.
Base Model Set-up
3.1.
Overview
A unit mass of time-sensitive customers arrives at a single-server queue. Upon arrival, each cus-
tomer chooses her information disclosure strategy. For instance, she gives a service provider her
explicit consent for using her data or not (e.g., making an opt-in decision under European General
Data Protection Regulation, GDPR for short), conﬁgures her privacy and/or information sharing
settings, or, voluntarily signs up for one of the provider’s services, which gathers and processes
her data (e.g., Alexa of Amazon). If a customer chooses to disclose information, this information
allows the service provider to infer the type of service that the customer requires in a future inter-
action. For instance, advances in machine learning allow companies to predict their customers’
intent by leveraging both individual- and aggregate-level data (e.g., see Bloomberg 2017, 2018,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

8
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
and Hackernoon 2019). Similarly, Amazon’s Alexa can be programmed not only to map certain
spoken phrases to customer’s intent,4 but also to analyze voice recordings to predict such future
intent based on the “hunch” of the hardware (The Verge 2018). We assume that customer’s service
request can be one of two types: long or short in service time, and it is realized after information
disclosure strategy is chosen (see Section 3.4 for discussion of this assumption). If a customer chose
to disclose her information, the service provider can infer the length of her service request based
on the information collected up to the point of the interaction.
3.2.
Customers
Customers’ service requests follow a homogeneous Poisson process with rate λ. The service time of
a high-priority type-H (resp., a low-priority type-L) request follows an independent and identically
distributed exponential distribution with mean 1/µ (resp., 1/σµ for the parameter σ ∈(0,∞) \
{1}).5 We relax the assumption of two customer types in Section 6.1. Note that if σ < 1 (resp., σ > 1)
then type-H requests require a shorter (resp., longer) time, on average, to complete. A customer
faces a type-H (resp., type-L) request with an exogenous probability α (resp., 1−α), where α ∈[0,1].
The average service time of all requests is (1 + α(σ −1))/σµ, so the capacity of the service facility
is ¯µ ≡σµ/(1 + α(σ −1)) (we assume that the arrival rate λ < ¯µ; otherwise, customers have to wait
inﬁnitely long for service). Customers receive a service reward R upon completion of service, yet
they incur a linear waiting cost (with a marginal rate c) as long as they remain in the system. The
service reward is lower bounded (i.e., R ≥c/¯µ), so customers are willing to join an empty queue.
The base model also assumes that service reward is suﬃciently large (see discussion below). This
assumption is relaxed in Section 6.6.
Actions. Customers ﬁrst choose whether to disclose or rather to withhold their private informa-
tion. If a customer chooses to disclose information, then the service provider can perfectly infer the
type of customer’s future service request (and expected service time) but has no such knowledge
otherwise.
In Sections 4 and 5—where we examine the incentives of individual customers to disclose or
withhold information as well as how these incentives are aligned (or misaligned) with those of
the service provider or society as a whole—we assume that the service reward R is high enough
that all customers avail themselves of the service. This simplifying assumption helps us isolate
the eﬀect of private information disclosure on customers’ surplus without the interference of an
endogenized throughput through service joining or balking behavior. Section 6.6 extends the base
model and allows for balking decision of customers. In this section we study how customer control
of information aﬀects the service provider itself in the case of endogenized throughput.
4 https://developer.amazon.com/en-US/docs/alexa/custom-skills/create-the-interaction-model-for-your-skill.html
5 When σ = 1, the two types of requests are identical; we exclude this trivial case.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
9
Privacy and Information. As mentioned before, information disclosed to the service provider
might be the request type itself or other forms of private information—for instance, customers’
individual characteristics or activity patterns (e.g., web-search or platform activity history, voice
recordings done by Amazon Alexa, etc.) that could enable the service provider’s inferring a cus-
tomer’s request type. For simplicity, in the remainder of the paper we assume that information
disclosed by the customer is the type of her service request.
In contrast to most previous research, we consider a situation in which each customer has full
possession and control over this information and can therefore choose whether or not to share it
with the service provider. This choice of whether information is disclosed to the service provider
determines a customer’s privacy strategy.
3.3.
Service Provider
Information. We model a service facility as a single-server queue with capacity ¯µ. The single-
server queue assumption is common in the queueing economics literature to gain tractability when
studying information exchange (see, e.g., Allon et al. 2011) and priority schemes (see, e.g., Gurvich
et al. 2019) in service systems. If arriving customers disclose information, then the service provider
has perfect knowledge of the type and expected service time of their future requests. However, if
arriving customers choose to withhold their information then the provider will be unable to deduce
their service request types. So from the service provider’s perspective, the service time of these type-
neutral (type-N ) requests from customers who withhold information follows a hyperexponential
distribution with mean (1 + α(σ −1))/σµ, which lies between the average service times of type-H
and type-L requests—that is, between 1/µ and 1/σµ.
Priority Policy. Using the information provided by customers and/or its knowledge that some
customers are withholding information, the service provider implements a preemptive “priority
queue discipline” that establishes a pecking order for type-H, type-N, and type-L requests. Two
remarks are in order. First, the assumption of preemptive priority is used for technical convenience
and highlights the value of privacy management in service systems. We do not expect our main
qualitative results to change under the non-preemptive priority discipline. Second, we assume the
natural ranking order of H > N > L as given, which is usually determined exogenously by the
incentive scheme of the service provider oﬀered to the service workers (see below). While other
priority schemes may be preferred by the service provider, we discuss in Section 6.5 that all of
such alternative schemes could be linked to discrimination of customers based on their information
disclosure decision (i.e., customers who disclose information are prioritized or deprioritized over all
the customers who withhold information)—a practice prohibited by most recent data regulations
such as the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA).6 We leave the in-depth study of the choice
6 https://ccpa-info.com/1798-125-price-discrimination-based-upon-the-exercise-of-the-opt-out-right/,
California
Civil
Code 1798.125 (2018).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

10
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
of the optimal priority scheme when customers can protect their privacy to future research and
refer an interested reader to Gurvich et al. (2019) for the analysis of the optimal priority scheme
by a revenue-maximizing ﬁrm or a social planner under full knowledge about customers.7
If σ < 1, then the provider operates under the shortest-processing-time-ﬁrst (SPT) policy. This
can be the case when individual service workers are paid at a per-piece rate so they cherry-pick
shorter jobs to maximize their individual revenue. For instance, Ibanez et al. (2018) ﬁnd that
radiology doctors prioritize tasks with a shorter expected processing time. If, on the contrary, σ > 1
then the service provider operates under the longest-processing-time-ﬁrst (LPT) policy. This could
apply when individual service workers are paid according to their work time so they prioritize
longer jobs to minimize the unproductive idle time in between jobs. For example, taxi drivers could
prefer longer trips to the airport rather than shorter trips within the downtown area. In other
words, the parameter σ is linked to the service provider’s revenue model. As mentioned before,
we use the single-server approximation to model such service systems for tractability reasons.
This approximation could work very well for many of today’s online service environment with
crowdsourced service workers (rather than a ﬁxed number of agents) who arrive following a random
Poisson process, select a job out of the queue, and sign oﬀif there is no job waiting in the queue
(and may come back later).
So that it can better implement its priority policy, the service provider prefers more information
on the request types of its customers. Under full information disclosure, for example, the service
provider can accurately classify all requests into the type-H or type-L category and so can prioritize
them accordingly. Yet if all customers withhold information then the service system essentially
operates under a ﬁrst-come, ﬁrst-served policy; that is, the priority rule becomes void. This outcome
reduces the service provider’s ability to discriminate among customers based on their types, which
runs counter to its intentions.
3.4.
Sequence of Events and Equilibrium
The game consists of two stages: the disclosure and service periods. In the disclosure period, all
customers simultaneously choose their information disclosure strategy. In particular, each customer
can either disclose or withhold information. In the service period, customers’ service requests are
realized and the service provider prioritizes customers (in the order H > N > L) based on the infor-
mation in its possession (i.e., withholding customers—type-N, and disclosing customers—either
type-H or type-L priority, depending on their realized and observed service request). Formally,
customer’s expected utility takes the following form:
U =
(
Ud ≡R −c(αWH + (1 −α)WL)
if customer discloses information;
Uw ≡R −cWN
if customer withholds information,
(1)
7 We also note that there are alternative priority rules in other contexts, e.g., customers can gain ahead in the queue
by referring their friends, see, Yang and Debo (2019).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
11
where WH,WN,WL are expected waiting times in each of the corresponding priority classes.
In setting up the model, we make two assumptions. First, we assume that customers choose
disclosure strategy once and before observing the types of their requests. Such an assumption
captures the reality that while more and more companies comply with data protection regulations
(e.g., with European GDPR) and ask for their customers’ explicit consent for collecting/processing
their data (i.e., data disclosure choice) before customers start to use the service, the mechanisms for
revoking or changing such consent are typically poorly accessible. In fact, most companies’ privacy
policies describing, among other things, the ways how consent can be withdrawn by a customer
are less comprehensible and revoking consent often requires directly contacting the company (e.g.,
see New York Times 2019c as well as privacy policies of Helpware, Blue Cross Blue Shield, Airbnb,
Tinder for an illustration8). Furthermore, companies often intentionally make it more diﬃcult for
their users to access privacy settings (e.g., see The Verge 2021). For all other applications in which
the choice of information disclosure can be done on a regular basis after observing the types of
requests (e.g., app-enabled privacy settings), in Section 6.2, we investigate an alternative scenario
in which customers choose information disclosure strategy after they observe the types of their
requests. Second, we assume that in the disclosure period, all customers are aware of the priority
rule employed by the service provider. This assumption can also be relaxed and the model can
accommodate a fraction of customers who are unaware of service provider’s priority rule—our
structural results do not change.
We let γ ∈[0,1] be the probability with which customer discloses information. Note that we
can capture both mixed and pure disclosure strategies by this probability. Since all customers
are homogeneous in the disclosure stage (i.e., they have the same service rewards, probabilities
of service request types, and expect the same waiting time in each of the priority classes), it is
natural to search for a symmetric equilibrium in which all customers disclose information with the
same probability γ∗. We note that the previous literature (see, e.g., Edelson and Hilderbrand 1975,
Hassin and Haviv 2003) also focuses on a symmetric type of equilibria. Among all the arriving
customers, αγλ customers have type-H requests, while (1−α)γλ have type-L requests, and, ﬁnally,
(1 −γ)λ have type-N requests.
Naturally, information disclosure strategy γ along with the arrival rate λ aﬀect expected waiting
times WH,WN,WL and consequently any individual customer’s expected utility. With slight abuse
of notation, we denote by Ud(γ,λ) (resp., Uw(γ,λ)) an inﬁnitesimal customer’s expected utility
8 Helpware: https://www.helpware.com/privacy-policy, Blue Cross Blue Shield: https://m.bcbsm.com/home-page-links/
privacy-forms.touch.html, Airbnb: https://www.airbnb.org/legal/privacy, Tinder: https://policies.tinder.com/privacy/intl/
en.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

12
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
when disclosing (resp., withholding) information given her expectation on the information disclo-
sure strategy γ played by all other customers and their arrival rate λ. Technical Lemma 1 derives
closed-form expressions for these expected utilities.
Lemma 1. Given an inﬁnitesimal customer’s expectation of the arrival rate λ and the popula-
tion’s disclosure probability γ, this customer’s expected utility from disclosing information, Ud(γ,λ),
or from withholding information, Uw(γ,λ), is given by:
Ud(γ,λ) =R −c

α
µ −αλγ +
σ (1 −α)(µ + λα(σ −1))
(σµ −λ(1 + α(σ −1)))(σµ −λ(ασ + (1 −γ)(1 −α)))

,
Uw(γ,λ) =R −cσ (1 + α(σ −1))µ −λα(α −1)(σ −1)(σ + γ −1)
σ (µ −λαγ)(σµ −λ(ασ + (1 −γ)(1 −α)))
.
(2)
Proof.
Proofs for all results are given in Online Appendix A.
□
We deﬁne an equilibrium disclosure strategy γ∗to be such that no individual customer has
incentives to deviate from playing equilibrium strategy γ∗given that all other customers also
choose their information disclosure based on this strategy (here individual incentives are deﬁned by
Eq. 2). Formally, γ∗= 0 (full withholding) if Ud(0,λ) < Uw(0,λ). Similarly, γ∗= 1 (full disclosure)
if Ud(1,λ) > Uw(1,λ). Finally, γ∗∈(0,1) (partial disclosure) if γ∗solves Ud(γ∗,λ) = Uw(γ∗,λ) and
Ud(γ,λ) −Uw(γ,λ) is a decreasing function of γ in the neighborhood of γ = γ∗(the latter ensures
that the chosen equilibrium is stable). In case there are multiple equilibria, we select the Pareto-
dominant one for all customers. The next section derives equilibrium information disclosure strategy
γ∗.
4.
Control Over Information
In this section we explore the consequences of customers having full control over their information.
In other words, we investigate a scenario in which customers control whether or not the service
provider has access to their data (e.g., control granted by a privacy regulation such as GDPR).
After deriving customers’ equilibrium information disclosure strategy, we compare it to the full-
disclosure and socially optimal information strategies.
4.1.
Individual Incentives to Disclose Information
We start by characterizing the equilibrium information disclosure strategy of customers.
Proposition 1. When they are in control of their information, customers disclose (resp. with-
hold) information if there is a high (resp. low) probability that they can obtain top priority in the
service system. If this probability is intermediate, then customers (i) avoid the crowd and disclose
with probability ˆγ ∈(0,1) in an SPT service system that is not too busy or, alternatively, (ii) follow
the crowd and either all disclose or all withhold information in a suﬃciently busy SPT service
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
13
0
0.5
1
0
1
2
(a) SPT discipline, σ < 1.
0
0.5
1
0
1
2
(b) LPT discipline, σ > 1.
Figure 1
Customers’ equilibrium information disclosure strategy γ∗as a function of the arrival rate λ and the
probability α of a type-H request.
system or in any LPT service system. Formally, there exists a symmetric equilibrium information
disclosure strategy γ∗such that
γ∗=







0
if α ≤α(λ),
1
if α ≥¯α(λ),
ˆγ ∈(0,1) if α ∈(α(λ), ¯α(λ)), σ < 1, λ < ˜λ,
0 or 1
otherwise;
(3)
here α(λ) = min(F0(λ),F1(λ)), ¯α(λ) = max(F0(λ),F1(λ)), and ˜λ satisﬁes F0(˜λ) = F1(˜λ). (Expres-
sions for ˆγ are given in Online Appendix A, where the increasing functions F0(λ) and F1(λ) are
also characterized.)
According to this proposition, customers opt to withhold personal information only if they
believe there is otherwise a high chance of their service requests being assigned low priority by
the service provider once it learns their realized types. If this is the case, then customers prefer to
withhold information and keep the types of their requests undisclosed (i.e., keep them as a type-N
from the service provider’s standpoint). Figure 1 illustrates the equilibrium information disclosure
strategy γ∗depending on the probability α that a customer’s request is of type H as well as on the
arrival rate λ and the priority discipline (i.e., SPT or LPT) chosen by the service provider.9
There are two “extreme” cases. If α is high (i.e., α ≥¯α(λ)) in regions IV and VII in Figure 1(a)
and (b)—that is, if the customer’s request is most likely to be of type H—then all customers choose
to disclose information. Any reduction in α makes disclosing information less attractive and so, if
α is low (i.e., α ≤α(λ)) in regions I and V in Figure 1(a) and (b), then all customers withhold
information.
9 For illustration purposes and to ensure comparability, we assume the following parameter values for all ﬁgures in
the rest of the paper: (i) µ = 2 and σ = 1/2 for the SPT priority discipline; and (ii) µ = 1 and σ = 2 for the LPT
priority discipline.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

14
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
The thresholds α(λ) and ¯α(λ) are both increasing in the arrival rate λ. The reason is that, the
busier the service system becomes, the longer that deprioritized type-L requests must wait to be
served (i.e., after the type-N and type-H requests); then, for any given α, customers’ incentives to
withhold information (and thus to remain in the type-N class) increase. The result is an expansion
of the range of α for which customers prefer to withhold information (i.e., an increase in α(λ))
and a shrinkage of the α range for which customers prefer to disclose information (i.e., an increase
in ¯α(λ)).
For the intermediate range of α, or α ∈(α(λ), ¯α(λ)), the equilibrium disclosure strategy is more
intricate. Proposition 1 states that—depending on the service system’s level of congestion, as
deﬁned by the arrival rate λ and the service provider’s priority rule—customers might commit to
either follow-the-crowd or avoid-the-crowd behavior (cf. Hassin and Haviv (2003), Chap. 1).
Consider customers who withhold information. There are two eﬀects that information disclosure
by other customers brings on them: (i) the beneﬁt is that some of these disclosing customers will
be moved to the L priority class and be deprioritized as compared to withholding customers; (ii)
the downside, though, is that the rest of the disclosing customers will be moved to the H priority
class and be prioritized over the withholding customers which will lead to the longer wait times of
the withholding customers.
In the LPT system (region VI in Figure 1(b)), the second eﬀect dominates because long jobs
are moved to the H priority class. In the SPT system (region III in Figure 1(a)), the second eﬀect
dominates only if there is a large number of type-H requests (i.e., if λ is high). In both of these cases,
customers’ incentives to disclose information, thus, increase with the number of other customers
who disclose information—customers follow the crowd. Mathematically, Ud(γ,λ) −Uw(γ,λ)—is
higher when more other customers also disclose information (i.e., when γ is higher).10
Customers avoid the crowd in SPT systems that are less congested (i.e., λ < ˜λ); see region II in
Figure 1(a). In this case, the ﬁrst eﬀect of other customers’ information disclosure dominates since
the arrival rate is suﬃciently small—only a handful of requests are prioritized over the (type-N)
requests of information-withholding customers and the wait time caused by the H priority class
is therefore only slightly longer. Thus, an increase in the population’s disclosure of information
leads to a decrease in Ud(γ,λ) −Uw(γ,λ)—that is, in the individual customer’s incentive to with-
hold information. That behavior leads to a unique mixed equilibrium γ∗∈(0,1) where customers
randomize and where γ∗(resp., 1−γ∗) fraction of them disclose (resp., withhold) their information.
10 Alternatively, the utility function U(γi,γ,λ) of inﬁnitesimal customers satisﬁes increasing diﬀerences in their
respective information disclosure probabilities γi and in the population’s information disclosure probability γ, where
Ud(γ,λ) = U(1,γ,λ) and Uw(γ,λ) = U(0,γ,λ).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
15
Observe that, in all cases where customers follow the crowd, two equilibria are possible: either
all customers disclose information (γ∗= 1) or all of them withhold information (γ∗= 0). One can
always select a Pareto-dominant equilibrium γ∗
P from these two equilibria (see Online Appendix A.2
for the formal derivations). So γ∗
P = 0 (all withhold) is Pareto dominant in an LPT system whereas,
conversely, γ∗
P = 1 (all disclose) Pareto-dominates in an SPT system. For the rest of this paper we
select the Pareto-dominant equilibrium, γ∗= γ∗
P.
4.2.
Consequences for Society
Customers’ strategy concerning whether to disclose or withhold information has deﬁnite implica-
tions for all customers collectively as a society as well as for themselves individually. In particular,
an information disclosure strategy aﬀects average wait time in the service system and consequently
total customer surplus. An inquiry on the implications of an information disclosure strategy on
the customer surplus is in line with the recent literature which studies consumer surplus in service
systems (see, e.g., Feldman and Segev (2019), Cui et al. (2020)).
Having established the customer information disclosure strategy in Proposition 1, we are
now in a position to compare customers’ total surplus under full
control of their per-
sonal information (where the equilibrium information disclosure strategy is γ∗), CScontrol =
λ(γ∗Ud(γ∗,λ) + (1 −γ∗)Uw(γ∗,λ)), with the surplus under no control of information (i.e., full infor-
mation disclosure), CSdiscl = λUd(1,λ). Thus we obtain our next result as follows.
Theorem 1. Whether self-control over personal information is less or more beneﬁcial to society
than is full information disclosure depends on the priority rule adopted by the service provider. If
the provider prioritizes short jobs (SPT discipline, σ < 1), then self-control over information leads
to weakly lower total customer surplus (i.e., CScontrol ≤CSdiscl); otherwise, if the service provider
prioritizes long jobs (LPT discipline, σ > 1), then CScontrol ≥CSdiscl. The inequalities are strict if
given control over personal information some customers choose to withhold it (i.e., γ∗< 1), which
is misaligned with the service provider’s preference for full information disclosure.
When comparing the equilibrium behavior of customers who control their personal information
to the scenario in which they have no control over that information (and so it is all disclosed),
we ﬁnd that granting customers control over their personal information can in some cases reduce
their total surplus by increasing their expected wait time in the queue, which hurts customers
individually. The latter is because all homogeneous customers join the service and hence the impact
on total surplus of all customers is equivalent to that on each individual one of them.
In particular, Theorem 1 clariﬁes that customers’ control over information—and their consequent
self-interested strategic decisions—necessarily reduce total customer surplus only if the service
provider prioritizes short service requests (i.e., under the SPT priority rule). To develop intuition,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

16
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
(a) SPT discipline, σ < 1.
(b) LPT discipline, σ > 1.
Figure 2
Diﬀerence between the total customer surplus under customers’ full control of information and under
no control of information, CScontrol −CSdiscl, as a function of the arrival rate λ and the probability α of a type-H
request. In all of our colored graphs, for better contrast we plot the normalized value of x: sign(x)

1 −ex·sign(−x)
.
note ﬁrst that in this case a service provider’s SPT policy would be aligned with collective incentives
because, owing to the cµ-rule (Van Mieghem 2000), it would shorten customers’ expected wait time.
This favorable outcome would be achieved if information were fully disclosed and if customers had
no opportunity to withhold it. In contrast, a service provider’s LPT policy would be misaligned
with the interests of society because it lengthens customers’ expected wait time.
Suppose the service provider has adopted the SPT priority (e.g., is being paid at a piece rate).
In that case, if a customer’s service request is likely to be long and thus to fall into the type-L
class, then that customer will withhold personal information—thereby keeping the request in the
type-N class—rather than disclosing information and likely ending up in the lowest priority class.
Thus long requests of the type-N class might be processed before short requests of the type-N class,
which reduces overall customer surplus. Figure 2(a) illustrates that this eﬀect is more pronounced
when the service system is more congested so prioritizing short service requests (over long ones)
becomes even more important for society.
Yet if the service provider prioritizes long service requests—the LPT policy, as adopted, for
instance, by service providers paid per time spent on the task with ﬁxed setup cost—then society
beneﬁts from individual customers having control over their personal information. Here the service
provider’s prioritization scheme reduces total customer surplus because it lengthens customers’
expected wait time. In this case, if the requests of customers are likely to be short (i.e., if α is low)
then they withhold all personal information; doing so prevents long requests from being prioritized
over short ones. Therefore, self-control of information disclosure reduces the average wait time and
increases total customer surplus. Just as under an SPT policy, the magnitude of the diﬀerence in
total customer surplus with and without self-control depends on the arrival rate and is higher when
the system is more congested; see Figure 2(b).
In short, Theorem 1 oﬀers a cautionary tale about the widely held opinion that customers always
beneﬁt from having more control over their data (Financial Times 2017, New York Times 2019a).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
17
(a) SPT discipline, σ < 1.
(b) LPT discipline, σ > 1.
Figure 3
Diﬀerence between total customer surplus under the socially optimal information disclosure strategy
and that surplus when customers have full control of their information, CSsocial −CScontrol, as a function of the
arrival rate λ and the probability α of a type-H request.
Our analysis reveals that in our context, this statement holds only when service provider’s incen-
tives are misaligned with collective incentives (i.e., under the LPT policy). In that event, allowing
customers to control their information enables those who were deprioritized by the service provider
to advance in the priority rank by strategically withholding information; this development is beneﬁ-
cial from the societal perspective because it increases customer surplus. Yet if the service provider’s
incentives are aligned with collective incentives (i.e., under the SPT policy), then customers whom
the provider had deprioritized are also those who should—from the societal perspective—be treated
so. Then, control over information allows customers who are “undeserving” (from both the ser-
vice provider’s and society’s perspective) to move up in priority rank, which lengthens expected
wait times and thus reduces customer surplus and hurts customers themselves. In the latter case,
individual customers are trapped in a version of the prisoner’s dilemma competing with their peer
customers when taking control of their privacy setting.
4.3.
Privacy Self-Synchronization
When choosing an information disclosure strategy, each customer makes a rational decision by com-
paring utilities Ud(γ,λ) with Uw(γ,λ)—that is, given expectations about the level γ of information
disclosure in society. As we observed in Section 4.2, such individually rational behavior is not always
optimal from the societal perspective because it does not always lead to the eﬃcient outcome with
the highest possible total customer surplus. Our next proposition formalizes this question: Under
what conditions is each customer’s incentive to disclose information aligned with the collective
incentives? We wish to know, in other words, when the service system achieves the state of privacy
self-synchronization (Popa (2012)). Let CSsocial = maxγ [λ(γUd(γ,λ) + (1 −γ)Uw(γ,λ))], where the
socially optimal customer information disclosure strategy is denoted by γSO (which is derived in
Online Appendix A.4).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

18
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
Proposition 2. A service system reaches the state of privacy self-synchronization when a suf-
ﬁciently high fraction of its customers’ service requests are short. In all other cases, customers
choose a suboptimal information disclosure strategy from the societal standpoint; that is, privacy
self-synchronization is not achieved. Formally, there exists a threshold αp.s.(λ;σ) such that γ∗= γSO
and CScontrol = CSsocial iﬀeither (i) α > αp.s.(λ;σ) when σ < 1 or (ii) α < αp.s.(λ;σ) when σ > 1.
In all other cases, γ∗̸= γSO and CScontrol < CSsocial. Furthermore, αp.s.(λ;σ) increases with λ and
is equal to F1(λ) if σ < 1 or to F0(λ) if σ > 1.
According to this proposition, customers choose a socially suboptimal information disclosure strat-
egy when their service requests are likely to be long, regardless of which priority rule the service
provider adopts. In this case, individual incentives are misaligned with collective incentives; see
Figure 3 for an illustration of the diﬀerence CSsocial −CScontrol. Recall, on the one hand, that control
over information allows customers to manipulate their information disclosure (by either disclosing
or withholding information) in such a way that moves them up in priority, which is each customer’s
goal. On the other hand, collective incentives are such that the best requests to be prioritized
are short ones: serving those ﬁrst leads to a shorter average wait time (based on the cµ-rule) and
hence to higher total customer surplus. Yet if service requests are likely to be long then customers’
individually rational actions will push those long requests up in priority, an outcome that society
as a whole does not favor. The busier the service system (i.e., the higher the arrival rate λ), the
greater the gap between decentralized equilibrium and the socially optimal customer surplus (see
Figure 3). In the opposite case, when service requests are likely to be short, customers’ individual
incentives are synchronized with what society prefers—namely, short requests being processed ﬁrst.
Note that regions III and VI in Fig. 3 are such that both full disclosure and full withholding are
equilibria (see Proposition 1). As discussed before (see the discussion of “follow the crowd” type
of equilibria towards the end of §4.1), we adopt the Pareto-dominant equilibrium selection rule to
choose an equilibrium (i.e., γ∗= 1 in region III and γ∗= 0 in region VI). If, on the other hand,
the other equilibrium were to be chosen, control over information in these particular regions would
lead to a worse outcome for the customers.
The results presented in this section (Theorem 1 and Proposition 2) constitute a word of caution
to regulators and should enrich public discussion of the most beneﬁcial privacy and information
disclosure regulation. There are two key messages. First, individual customers do not always have
incentives to withhold information even when they have control over it. Customers choose strategi-
cally between disclosing and withholding information, and in some cases full or partial information
disclosure may be in their best interest. Thus personal information disclosure becomes a useful tool
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
19
for customers to navigate under a service provider’s priority policy. Our second and more impor-
tant message is that a regulation providing customers full control of personal information could in
some cases backﬁre by distorting the service system that is already operating eﬃciently and could
lead to inferior performance—that is, longer average wait times in the service system. We show
when this is the case and whether control over information hurts or beneﬁts the society depends
on the service provider’s priority policy, which is usually linked to its business or revenue model
and determines the alignment (or misalignment) between customer and collective incentives. In
the next section we explore what a regulator could do to align these incentives and achieve privacy
self-synchronization and whether such actions are feasible and cost-eﬀective.
5.
Inducing Information Disclosure and Privacy Self-Synchronization
In Section 4.1, we established that customers, when they have control over their personal infor-
mation, do not always choose an information disclosure strategy that is optimal either for society
or the service provider. In this section we seek to explain how customers who choose the individ-
ually optimal information disclosure can be oﬀered monetary incentives in order to achieve either
full information disclosure (the service provider’s preference) or privacy self-synchronization (the
regulator’s societal goal).
5.1.
Inducing Full Information Disclosure: The Price of Information
Paying users for their information has long been discussed by regulators and other concerned parties
(New York Times 2018). Whereas some argue that users are already paid for their information
via access to the platform’s free services (e.g., Facebook’s social network, Google’s search engine),
advocates of the “data as labor” perspective (The Economist 2018) point out the conﬂict inherent
to that perspective: users are not only the platform’s customers but also its “product” (New
Yorker 2015). Yet as far as we know, our study is the ﬁrst to pinpoint the price of users’ personal
information in a service system. Thus we advance the following proposition, which characterizes a
payment Pd that must be made to strategic users so they will switch from withholding information
to fully disclosing it. (Note that Pd is the payment to all customers per unit of time and so the
payment to an individual customer is Pd/λ.) In other words, Pd is a monetary incentive that users
are oﬀered—by the service provider or by a regulator—that induces them to disclose information.
This payment Pd could be oﬀered at the stage before customers consent to information disclosure
and could be in a form of a discount code. The payment should also ensure that full information
disclosure becomes an equilibrium and also that, if there are multiple equilibria, it is the Pareto-
dominant one.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

20
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
(a) SPT discipline, σ < 1.
(b) LPT discipline, σ > 1.
Figure 4
Monetary incentive Pd needed to induce full information disclosure as a function of the arrival rate λ
and the probability α of a type-H request.
Proposition 3. So that information-withholding customers will fully disclose their personal
data, they must be paid the price of information:
Pd =

λ(Uw(1,λ) −Ud(1,λ))
if σ < 1,
max(λ(Uw(1,λ) −Ud(1,λ)),∆S) if σ > 1;
(4)
here ∆S = CSwithhold −CSdiscl = cα(1−α)(σ−1)
σµ
λ2
Θ(λ), with Θ(λ) = (µ−αλ)(σµ−λ(1+α(σ−1)))
µ−α(1−σ)λ
, is the gap—
in total customer surplus—between full information withholding (CSwithhold = Uw(0,λ)) and full
information disclosure.
The price of information deﬁned in this section diﬀers from the value of information discussed
in the literature of operations management, economics, and marketing. The value of information
is deﬁned as the increase in a ﬁrm’s proﬁt stemming from its use of that information. In the
literature, “information” often includes customer characteristics such as product preferences and
social network position. A ﬁrm that possesses such information can boost its proﬁts by making
better operational decisions: prioritizing customers (see, e.g., Yu et al. (2018)), setting personalized
prices, and/or targeting particular customers to whom its product can be oﬀered or sold (see, e.g.,
Fainmesser and Galeotti (2016), Momot et al. (2020)). Yet such operational decisions, which ben-
eﬁt the platform, may not be favored by customers—whose surplus is naturally depleted by price
discrimination, service de-prioritization, or selective selling. Thus there is a potential discrepancy
between the ﬁrm’s gain from using customer information and customers’ evaluation of that infor-
mation. So our question now becomes: How much utility would customers be willing to forgo, when
disclosing their personal data, while knowing that the platform’s use of this information might run
counter to their own interests? As mentioned at the start of this section, that is a widely discussed
question.
To the best of our knowledge, this analysis constitutes one of the ﬁrst attempts to place a
price on the customers’ information. The customers in our model are strategic with regards to
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
21
Figure 5
Monetary incentive needed to induce a customer to adopt the socially optimal information disclosure
strategy (Ps), as a function of the arrival rate λ and the probability α of a type-H request, when σ > 1 (LPT
discipline). With a SPT discipline, the monetary incentive Ps is equivalent to Pd, the amount needed to induce
full information disclosure (see Panel (a) in Figure 4).
whether to disclose or withhold information, and they are fully aware of their actions’ upsides and
downsides. Hence the price of information characterized in Proposition 3 is exactly the evaluation
(from a strategic customer’s standpoint) of this trade-oﬀ. Therefore, the price of information could
serve as a deﬁning variable for regulators and platforms that are contemplating privacy and data
management policies.
5.2.
Inducing Privacy Self-Synchronization
It is in the social planner’s interest to induce a state of privacy self-synchronization for the service
system. Hence we are motivated to examine the use of a monetary incentive Ps oﬀered to all
customers (equivalently, Ps/λ to each customer) for the purpose of inducing customers to adopt γSO,
the socially optimal information disclosure strategy. One must bear in mind that, because all
customers are served (an assumption that we relax in Section 6.6), the strategy that maximizes
total customers surplus will also maximize individual customer surplus. Therefore, the socially
optimal strategy γSO is clearly Pareto dominant if it is an equilibrium. The payment Ps need only
ensure that γSO is an equilibrium.
Proposition 4. To induce adoption of the socially optimal information disclosure strategy γSO
and to achieve privacy self-synchronization, customers should be paid an amount of Ps: either for
(i) disclosing information when the service provider prioritizes short requests (SPT policy, σ < 1);
or for (ii) withholding information when the service provider prioritizes long requests (LPT policy,
σ > 1). Here
Ps =

λ(Uw(1,λ) −Ud(1,λ)) = Pd if σ < 1,
λ(Ud(0,λ) −Uw(0,λ))
if σ > 1.
(5)
Moreover, Ps is a concave function of λ under the LPT policy (i.e.,σ > 1).
Proposition 4 characterizes the payment that must be made to customers so that they will choose
the socially optimal information disclosure strategy and thus bring the service system to a state
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

22
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
of privacy self-synchronization. The proposition also states that customers should be rewarded
diﬀerently for diﬀerent actions—namely, withholding or disclosing information—depending on the
service provider’s priority discipline. We assume that the service provider’s priority discipline is
known to the social planner (we relax this assumption at the end of Section). By Proposition 2,
the service system does not achieve privacy self-synchronization if a suﬃciently high fraction of
its customers’ service requests are long. In that event, customers have the incentive to rise on the
priority ladder via their information disclosure strategy and so will choose either to withhold infor-
mation if the service provider prioritizes short requests (SPT discipline) or to disclose information
otherwise (LPT discipline). In both cases, such self-interested customer behavior is undesirable
from the societal perspective. Hence a social planner must pay customers so as to create opposing
incentives in each of these cases: incentivizing information disclosure in the SPT case (e.g., by
oﬀering customers a discount code if they disclose information—the action also preferred by the
service provider) and, conversely, incentivizing the withholding of information in the LPT case
(e.g., by providing monetary incentives to promote the use of the Virtual Private Network (VPN)
services; the platform that employs individual service workers and attempts to minimize average
service time could oﬀer customers a discount if the latter do not disclose their information to the
individual service workers). Figure 5 plots, for a ﬁrm’s LPT policy and as a function of our usual
system primitives, the amount of such monetary incentive required to induce customers’ socially
optimal information disclosure and thereby achieve privacy self-synchronization.
Note that, under the SPT discipline, customers who have a large proportion of long requests
(i.e., low α) usually withhold information to avoid being deprioritized in case their requests are of
the long type. As discussed before, this outcome runs counter to societal preferences. So in this
case, then, the monetary incentive Ps for inducing privacy self-synchronization coincides with the
incentive Pd (deﬁned in Proposition 3) for inducing full information disclosure; it also increases
with the arrival rate λ. A graph of Ps under the SPT discipline would be identical to Figure 4(a),
which plots Pd. It is interesting that, in the opposite case (i.e., when the service provider prioritizes
long requests; the LPT discipline), the price Ps that customers demand to withhold information is
not necessarily increasing in the arrival rate λ. Rather, if the probability α is high enough then Ps
ﬁrst increases but then decreases with λ (see Online Appendix A.6 for a formal derivation of this
result). In what follows, we give the intuition underlying price Ps’s concavity in this region with
respect to the arrival rate λ.
Consider a customer’s individual incentive to disclose or withhold information (i.e., the logic
applied when determining the price Ps) in the case where all other customers withhold information.
By withholding information, the focal customer falls into the type-N class with probability 1. By
disclosing information this customer probably (because α is high) falls into the type-H priority
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
23
rank, where wait time is a small constant equal to 1/µ; this is the upside of disclosing information.
However, there also exists a small chance 1−α that this customer falls into type-L priority rank—
that is, behind all the other customers who withhold information and are of type N—the downside
of disclosing information. When the arrival rate λ is relatively high (i.e., close to F0 (λ)), then the
consequences of falling into the type-L priority rank when disclosing information are devastating.
Hence the pros and cons of disclosing information tend to balance out and so the monetary incentive
needed to induce this customer to choose information withholding (i.e., to settle on the type-N
class) is not very high. Suppose now that the arrival rate λ is relatively low (i.e., close to zero).
Because of the service system’s under-utilization, the wait-time diﬀerence for type-N versus type-H
customers is less signiﬁcant than when intermediate or high levels of λ are involved. As before, this
customer’s incentive to disclose information is not much stronger than that to withhold it, from
which it follows that Ps is small for low levels of λ as well. When λ is in the intermediate range,
the beneﬁt of disclosing information is more signiﬁcant than the downside. As a result, the service
provider needs to pay a relatively large amount for this customer to withhold information.
Finally, the monetary incentive Ps under the LPT discipline is also increasing in α. That is
to say: the higher the proportion of long requests, the more incentive customers have to disclose
information in order to move up to the type-H priority rank (otherwise a customer withholding
information would have a higher chance of being prioritized over)– and hence the greater the
monetary incentive must be oﬀered for them to change behavior and conform to the socially optimal
policy.
Having derived the monetary incentive required to induce privacy self-synchronization, we must
now address the question that naturally arises: Is the payment worth the increase in customer
surplus to which it leads? Our next theorem posits the existence of a region where it is economically
beneﬁcial to the society to induce customers’ socially optimal information disclosure (i.e., to achieve
privacy self-synchronization).
Theorem 2. There exists a non-empty set of probabilities α and arrival rates λ for which induc-
ing privacy self-synchronization via the monetary incentive Ps (as deﬁned in Proposition 4) is
beneﬁcial for society; that is, the beneﬁt of switching to socially optimal information disclosure
outweighs its cost, Ps. Formally:
(i) if σ < 1 then, for all α > 1/(σ3/2 + 1), there exists a ξ1 > 0 such that Ps < CSsocial −CScontrol
for all λ ∈[F −1
1 (λ),F −1
1 (λ) + ξ1);
(ii) if σ > 1 then, for all α >
 σ −3 +
√
5σ2 −2σ + 1

/2(σ2 + σ −2), there exists a ξ2 > 0 such that
Ps < CSsocial −CScontrol for all λ ∈(F −1
0 (λ) −ξ2,F −1
0 (λ)].
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

24
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
(a) SPT discipline, σ < 1.
(b) LPT discipline, σ > 1.
Figure 6
Diﬀerence between the beneﬁt and cost of inducing customers to exhibit socially optimal information
disclosure behavior, CSsocial −CScontrol −Ps, as a function of the arrival rate λ and the probability α of a type-H
request.
The functions F0(λ) and F1(λ) are deﬁned in Proposition 1, and the values CSsocial and CScontrol
are deﬁned in (respectively) Sections 4.2 and 4.3.
Theorem 2 establishes that, irrespective of whether the service provider adopts an SPT or an
LPT priority discipline, there exists a set of probabilities α and arrival rates λ (see Figure 6,
which also depicts other areas where possibly Ps < CSsocial −CScontrol) for which inducing privacy
self-synchronization is worth the cost—an important result from the social planner’s perspective.
So in the regions characterized by this theorem, the increase in total customer surplus—when all
customers switch from individually optimal information disclosure to the socially optimal one—
exceeds the monetary incentive needed to induce that switch. An outcome of considerable interest is
that the beneﬁt of privacy self-synchronization most outweighs the cost of inducing socially optimal
information disclosure when α and λ are suﬃciently high, or in the region where the diﬀerence
CSsocial −CSmathrmcontrol is the greatest. Yet incentivizing individual customers to withhold their
information, when doing so is socially optimal, is relatively cheap (see the discussion following
Proposition 4).
Observe that, from a social planner’s perspective, the monetary incentive Ps amounts to a
within-society transfer payment. It serves as a tool to induce adoption of the socially optimal
information disclosure policy and is therefore not considered as part of the social outcome, which
in our model is total customer surplus. At the same time, that surplus is also an indicator of the
service provider’s proﬁtability. Indeed, since customers are homogeneous in their service valuations
and marginal waiting costs, it follows that the provider can extract all customer surplus as proﬁt
(see Hassin and Haviv (2003), Chap. 3). Theorem 2 can thus also be viewed from the service
provider’s perspective: there does exist a set of parameters such that it makes economic sense to
oﬀer customers the monetary incentive Ps in order to generate the maximum customer surplus,
which translates into maximizing the service provider’s proﬁt.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
25
Finally, recall from Proposition 4 that customers are paid to disclose information when the service
provider prioritizes short requests (under the SPT discipline) and are paid to withhold information
otherwise (under the LPT discipline). This dynamic when combined with Theorem 2 implies that,
under the SPT discipline, giving customers control of their personal information may create an
information market where (i) customers willingly sell their personal information and (ii) service
providers buy that information and then use it to render better service (shorter wait times) and
thus earn higher proﬁts. Under the LPT discipline, giving customers control over information may
lead to a self-regulating mechanism in which the service provider pays customers to withhold their
personal information in hopes of ensuring a superior service.
Finally, note that when deriving the payment Ps that the customers have to be paid to induce
them to adopt the socially optimal information disclosure strategy γSO in Proposition 4 and when
comparing the beneﬁt with the cost of switching to socially optimal information disclosure in
Theorem 2, we assumed that the priority policy implemented by the service provider is known to
the initiator of this payment. In case if this payment is performed by a regulator, it may be possible
that the latter does not have perfect information about service provider’s priority policy. We can
show that a service provider operating under the SPT policy prefers making the priority policy
visible to the regulator, because then the regulator’s interest aligns with the service provider’s—
inducing full information disclosure to implement SPT policy. With this rationale in mind, the
regulator will treat a service provider as operating under the LPT policy if the priority policy is
not visible. Thus, the regulator knows a service provider’s adoption of the LPT policy, whether the
priority policy is made visible or not.
6.
Discussion of Model Assumptions and Alternative Model
Formulations
In this section we relax and extend a number of assumptions of the base model. While most of the
considered scenarios lead to the insights structurally equivalent to those of the base model and we
ﬁnd that privacy regulation in the form of granting customers with control over their information
may backﬁre, we were able to identify two settings in which this ﬁnding does not hold and shifting
control over information to customers does not have any impact on the performance of the system.
Section 6.2 discusses one such scenario where customers choose their disclosure strategies after
observing the types of their requests. While we believe that the scenario with the ex-ante infor-
mation disclosure decision investigated in the base model is the most realistic (due to the reasons
outlined in Section 3.4), we hypothesize that ex-post information disclosure may be possible if
service providers do not comply with data protection regulations such as European GDPR (or if
such regulations are not imposed) or if service providers signiﬁcantly facilitate customers’ granting
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

26
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
and revoking consent for collection/processing of their data (e.g., through accessible app-enabled
privacy settings). Section 6.5 discusses another scenario in which service provider deprioritizes
customers who withhold information. While, as we argue, such deprioritization is prohibited by
modern privacy regulations (such as CCPA of California), such regulations are still in their infancy
in most countries and, thus, there exists a possibility that service providers are able to deprioritize
customers based on their information withholding decision.
6.1.
Multiple Request Types and Priority Classes (Online Appendix B.1)
We can generalize our model to a setting with M types of service requests. Each request type i is
being realized with an exogenous probability αi. The service time of request type i follows an i.i.d.
exponential distribution with the mean 1/(σiµ). Without loss of generality we assume that σ1 = 1
and types of requests are ordered: σ1 > ··· > σM for the SPT policy (and in reverse for the LPT
policy). There exists a threshold m (see Eq. (10) in Online Appendix) so that the service provider
puts withholding customers’ requests between types m and m +1. Relative to those who withhold
information, when choosing to disclose information, customers can expect to ﬁnd themselves in
either bucket-H with other disclosing customers with request types 1,...,m or in the bucket-L
with those with the request types m + 1,...,M. Within each bucket, requests are also prioritized
according to their service times and based on the service provider’s priority discipline. If a customer
discloses information, with probability Pm
i=1 αi (resp., PM
i=m+1 αi), her future request falls into
the bucket-H (resp., bucket-L); and if this customer withholds information, her request falls into
bucket-N. Online Appendix B.1 derives the expected wait times of the three priority buckets and all
the customer types within them. While we discuss how the rest of the analysis is expected to follow
the one of the base model, analytical expressions are cumbersome and closed-form solutions cannot
be derived (in particular, the multiple-types model cannot be converted to a two-types model with
a simple redeﬁnition of α since α1,...,αM enter the wait time expressions as well as that of the
threshold m in a non-trivial fashion). We, thus, rely on a numerical experiment which (i) conﬁrms
structural properties of the equilibrium disclosure strategies similar to that of the base model and
(ii) conﬁrms that there exist regimes in which privacy regulation such as granting customers with
control over their information can backﬁre and hurt the society. We also show that the threshold m
is higher for request type distributions for which more probability mass is allocated to the higher
request types (i.e., less desirable request types from service provider’s perspective). Bucket-H is,
thus, wider under such scenarios.
6.2.
Ex-Post Information Disclosure
Consider a scenario in which a customer observes her service request type before making a choice
of whether to disclose this information to the service provider. Customers’ ex-post information
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
27
disclosure strategy will then be such that customers with realized type-H requests will always dis-
close information, while customers with realized type-L requests will always withhold information.
This ex-post information disclosure strategy is outcome-equivalent to the full disclosure strategy
considered in the paper (i.e., γ = 1). Therefore, granting customers control over information does
not have an impact on the society or the service provider in this scenario. Similarly, in the model
with more than two request types (as introduced in Section B.1), ex-post information disclosure
is also outcome-equivalent to full disclosure strategy. However, we conjecture that such outcome-
equivalence between the ex-post information disclosure and full disclosure scenarios may not be
the case when customers engage in repeated service interactions with the service provider. Under
this scenario, customers with realized type-H requests may choose to withhold this information
out of reciprocal consideration since they may obtain type-L requests in the future. Such behavior
would be consistent with that in the setting of line cutting of Allon and Hanany (2012). There exist
system conﬁgurations (e.g., the SPT policy) under which granting customers with control over
their information may backﬁre and hurt the society, because customers’ information withholding
behavior prevents the service provider from applying the SPT policy to them and thus hurts their
own surplus as a whole.
Finally, we note that when comparing the ex-post disclosure scenario to the one where infor-
mation disclosure decision is done by the customers before they observe their request types (i.e.,
ex-ante disclosure), one can observe that the former setting can actually hurt the customers. In par-
ticular, customers’ knowledge of their request types (and consequent ex-post disclosure) can lead
to an inferior system performance when the service system operates under the longest-processing-
time-ﬁrst (LPT) policy.
6.3.
No Disclosure Benchmark (Online Appendix B.2)
Before we chose full information disclosure as a benchmark when studying an impact of customer
control over information on service systems. Such a benchmark represents a scenario under which
no personal data regulation exists and customers’ information is collected by default. One could
consider another extreme case as a benchmark—no information disclosure. This benchmark could
correspond to a case under which data regulation is so strict that data collection is prohibited,
eﬀectively shutting down the information exchange between the customers and the service provider.
Theorem 3 in Online Appendix compares customers’ total surplus under full control of information,
CScontrol with that under no information disclosure, CSwithhold = λUd(0,λ). This proposition rein-
forces our key ﬁndings—under certain scenarios (in particular, when the service provider prioritizes
short requests), it is possible that stricter privacy regulation hurts customers’ total surplus.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

28
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
6.4.
Heterogeneous Waiting Costs (Online Appendix B.3)
We studied a setting with heterogeneous marginal waiting costs ci for type-i requests, where
i ∈{H,L}. The service time of requests follows an i.i.d. exponential distribution with mean 1/µ.
Recall that α is the probability of a customer facing a type-H service request. Then, from the
service provider’s perspective, the waiting cost of the information withholding customers is cN =
αcH + (1 −α)cL, which is in between cH and cL. Similar to our base model, the service provider
prioritizes service requests in the order of H > N > L. We focus on the cH > cL case, so that the ser-
vice provider eﬀectively follows the cµ-rule, which is known to minimize customers’ total wait time
(Van Mieghem 2000). The cH < cL case is rare in practice, though theoretically possible. All other
parameters of the model stay the same as those in the base model. The setting with heterogeneous
waiting costs leads to the same results as those in the base model under the SPT policy. Propo-
sition 5 in Online Appendix characterizes customers’ equilibrium information disclosure behavior,
and Proposition 6 reaﬃrms our main ﬁndings from the base model: granting customers control
of their private information may backﬁre and hurt customer surplus. Finally, we characterize the
monetary incentive required to induce customers to fully disclose their information, which also
happens to be the socially optimal information disclosure behavior:
Pd = Ps =
λ2 
(α −1)
2 µcL −α2 (µ −λ)cH

(µ −λ)(µ −αλ)
2
.
(6)
When choosing to disclose information, customers may face de-prioritized type-L requests and
suﬀer from higher waiting cost proportional to cL, or, on the contrary, face prioritized type-H
requests and enjoy the beneﬁt of waiting cost reduction which is positively correlated with cH.
Thus, the monetary incentive, Pd which is required to compensate customers for disclosing their
information increases in cL and decreases in cH. Furthermore, when the probability α of facing a
type-H service request increases, disclosing customer’s chance of facing type-H requests and gaining
priority increases while the downside of facing type-L requests becomes more severe. One can prove
(i.e., by deriving ∂Pd/∂α) that the former eﬀect dominates the latter. Thus, the monetary incentive
Pd decreases in α.
6.5.
Alternative Priority Policies
The base model assumes that the service provider prioritizes customers in the order H > N > L.
That is, information disclosing type-H customers are treated ﬁrst, while information withholding
customers are treated second. Finally, information disclosing type-L customers are treated last. A
possible alternative to that priority policy could be to treat information withholding customers
last, that is H > L > N scheme (the N > H > L scheme could be analyzed similarly). Under
this priority scheme all customers are incentivized to disclose information. Indeed, if withholding
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
29
information, a customer will be treated after all information disclosing customers. In this case,
thus, granting customers control over information does not impact the performance of the service
system as compared to the benchmark of full information disclosure. While it follows that by
switching to the H > L > N priority policy the service provider could eliminate the eﬀect of the
privacy regulation, this priority scheme, however, is prohibited by major privacy regulations such as
California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA). In particular, CCPA prohibits providing customers with
lower quality service solely based on their information disclosure decision.11 Notice that under the
H > L > N priority scheme customers who withhold information are always provided deprioritized
(i.e., lower quality) service, in contrast to the H > N > L case in which withholding customers get
prioritized over by type-H disclosing customers only with a probability and experience prioritized
service over type-L disclosing customers in the rest of the time.
6.6.
Strategic Balking and Control over Information (Online Appendix B.4)
In Sections 4 and 5 we assume that all customers undergo service owing to a suﬃciently high
service reward R. In that case, the service system’s throughput matches its total arrival rate and
is not aﬀected by customers’ information disclosure strategy. This setup allows us to focus on
how customers’ control over information aﬀects the system’s performance through this control’s
potential to change the average wait times across customer types. In this extension, we consider
another channel through which a service provider may be aﬀected when information is controlled
by customers—namely, their join-or-balk decisions. We relax the assumption of a suﬃciently high
service reward so that customers may now choose to balk at the time when committing to an
information strategy if the expected waiting cost exceeds the service reward (we characterize the
number of joining customers in Lemma 9 in the Appendix). All the results and conclusions derived
in Sections 4 and 5 continue to hold in this extension. In addition, Theorem 4 establishes that the
service provider itself could beneﬁt from customer control over information (through an increase in
the number of customers who join) only in the case when it employs the long-processing-time-ﬁrst
priority discipline (LPT, σ > 1). In all other cases, customer control over information reduces the
maximum throughput and hurts the service provider.
7.
Conclusion
One of the key ﬁndings of this paper is that there exist service systems that operate eﬃciently
without data privacy regulation. In particular, in such systems customer surplus is already max-
imized (i.e., privacy self synchronization is achieved) even when all of the customer information
is disclosed to the service provider. Imposing a privacy regulation and grating customers control
11 https://ccpa-info.com/1798-125-price-discrimination-based-upon-the-exercise-of-the-opt-out-right/,
California
Civil
Code 1798.125 (2018).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

30
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
over their personal information (e.g., through a consumer privacy regulation such as European
GDPR or through a decision whether to buy a product such as Amazon Alexa or Google Nest) can
actually backﬁre and have a detrimental eﬀect on the performance of such service systems—which
in our setting corresponds to longer average wait times and lower utilities of individual customers.
We show that, in general, whether control over information is beneﬁcial to society or not is deter-
mined by (i) the alignment (or misalignment) between the individual and collective incentives of
customers and (ii) the service provider’s revenue model. Then we demonstrate how potential inef-
ﬁciencies in information disclosure can be corrected by oﬀering monetary incentives to customers
and establish that, under certain scenarios, providing such incentives is economically sensible. We
ﬁnally show that the service provider itself may well beneﬁt from customers being in control of
their personal information because of potentially more customers joining the service.
More generally, this study lays a theoretical foundation for an information market in the service
industry. We show that, when customers are oﬀered appropriate monetary incentives, they can be
willing to trade their personal information for a payment; at the same time, the service provider
is ready to purchase and use this information for the purpose of rendering better service (here,
a shorter wait time) and thereby extracting a higher proﬁt. From the regulator’s perspective,
customers can be similarly incentivized to disclose or withhold their personal information as needed
to achieve service system eﬃciency.
Overall, our analysis contributes to the literature on service operations management and other
ﬁelds on consumer privacy. This paper also speaks to diﬀerent stakeholders in the information-
based service economy. The ﬁndings reported here yield insights into how customers’ individually
rational actions concerning information disclosure can lead to market ineﬃciencies in the form of
longer wait times for services. We also provide actionable prescriptions, for both service providers
and regulators, that can guide their choices of a privacy and information management approach
based on giving customers the option of controlling their personal information.
The possible future research directions related to this study include, but are not limited to:
considering diﬀerent types of information (e.g., information on customers’ personal traits) and its
interdependence among customers; intermediation of such data markets by the third parties who
collect and decide which information to share with the market participants; diﬀerent information
structures of the service provider; long-term reputational eﬀects of information-based discrimina-
tion by the service providers; these and other research directions are left for future investigation.
In short: this study is a potentially fruitful starting point from which to explore customer-centric
information and privacy management in service systems and, more broadly, to consider consumer
privacy issues in operations management. We therefore hope that our analysis not only will help
inform practitioners but also could spark new research approaches and directions in the operations
community.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
31
References
Acemoglu D, Makhdoumi A, Malekian A, Ozdaglar A (2017) Privacy-constrained network formation. Games
and Econ. Behavior 105:255–275.
Acquisti A, Taylor C, Wagman L (2016) The economics of privacy. J. Econ. Lit. 54(2):442–92.
Ali SN, Lewis G, Vasserman S (2019) Voluntary disclosure and personalized pricing. Technical report, NBER.
Allon G, Bassamboo A, Gurvich I (2011) “We will be right with you”: Managing customer expectations with
vague promises and cheap talk. Oper. Res. 59(6):1382–1394.
Allon G, Hanany E (2012) Cutting in line: Social norms in queues. Management Sci. 58(3):493–506.
Argon NT, Ziya S (2009) Priority assignment under imperfect information on customer type identities.
Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 11(4):674–693.
Bergemann D, Bonatti A (2019) Markets for information: An introduction. Annual Rev. Econ. 11:85–107.
Bimpikis K, Crapis D, Tahbaz-Salehi A (2019) Information sale and competition. Management Sci.
65(6):2646–2664.
Bimpikis K, Morgenstern I, Saban D (2021) Data tracking under competition. SSRN 3808228.
Bren A, Saghaﬁan S (2019) Data-driven percentile optimization for multiclass queueing systems with model
ambiguity: Theory and application. INFORMS Journal on Optimization 1(4):267–287.
Candogan O, Bimpikis K, Ozdaglar A (2012) Optimal pricing in networks with externalities. Oper. Res.
60(4):883–905.
Candogan O, Drakopoulos K (2020) Optimal signaling of content accuracy: Engagement vs. misinformation.
Oper. Res. 68(2):497–515.
Conitzer V, Taylor CR, Wagman L (2012) Hide and seek: Costly consumer privacy in a market with repeat
purchases. Marketing Sci. 31(2):277–292.
Cui S, Li K, Wang J (2017) On the optimal disclosure of queue length information. SSRN 2802172.
Cui S, Veeraraghavan S (2016) Blind queues: The impact of consumer beliefs on revenues and congestion.
Management Sci. 62(12):3656–3672.
Cui S, Wang Z, Yang L (2020) The economics of line-sitting. Management Sci. 66(1):227–242.
Drakopoulos K, Makhdoumi A (2020) Providing data samples for free. SSRN 3611003.
Edelson NM, Hilderbrand DK (1975) Congestion tolls for poisson queuing processes. Econometrica 43(1):81–
92.
Bloomberg (2017) Acxiom and amex advance launch new data-driven oﬀering to predict consumer purchase
intent.
Bloomberg (2018) Nuance unveils prediction service, revolutionizing hyper-personalized customer experience.
Contact Center Pipeline (2018) Contact centers and the debate over personal privacy. URL https://www.
contactcenterpipeline.com/Article/contact-centers-and-the-debate-over-personal-privacy.
Financial Times (2017) Our personal data are precious we must take back control.
Forbes (2017) How companies use your social media data when taking your call.
Hackernoon (2019) Behavioral intent prediction is coming. are we ready?
New York Times (2015) Sharing data, but not happily.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

32
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
New York Times (2018) our data is crucial to a robotic age. shouldnt you be paid for it?
New York Times (2019a) Be paranoid about privacy.
New York Times (2019b) The government protects our food and cars. why not our data?
New York Times (2019c) We read 150 privacy policies. they were an incomprehensible disaster.
New York Times, Wirecutter (2019) Amazon’s alexa never stops listening to you. should you worry?
New Yorker (2015) Facebook should pay all of us.
Pew Research Center (2019) Americans and privacy: Concerned, confused and feeling lack of control over
their personal information.
The Economist (2018) If people were paid for their data: Data workers of the world, unite.
The Verge (2018) Alexa hunches can now suggest actions based on daily behavior.
The Verge (2021) Google reportedly made it diﬃcult for smartphone users to ﬁnd privacy settings.
Wall Street Journal (2017) Call centers may know a surprising amount about you.
Wall Street Journal (2018) On hold for 45 minutes? it might be your secret customer score.
Fainmesser IP, Galeotti A (2016) Pricing network eﬀects. Rev. Econ. Studies 83(1):165–198.
Fainmesser IP, Galeotti A, Momot R (2021) Digital privacy. SSRN 3459274.
Feldman P, Segev E (2019) Managing congestion when customers choose their service times: The important
role of time limits. SSRN 3424317.
Galeotti A, Goyal S (2009) Inﬂuencing the inﬂuencers: A theory of strategic diﬀusion. RAND J. Econ.
40(3):509–532.
Guo P, Zipkin P (2007) Analysis and comparison of queues with diﬀerent levels of delay information. Man-
agement Sci. 53(6):962–970.
Gurvich I, Lariviere MA, Ozkan C (2019) Coverage, coarseness, and classiﬁcation: Determinants of social
eﬃciency in priority queues. Management Sci. 65(3):1061–1075.
Hassin R (2016) Rational queueing (CRC press).
Hassin R, Haviv M (2003) To queue or not to queue: Equilibrium behavior in queueing systems, volume 59
(Springer Science & Business Media).
Hathaway B, Emadi SM, Deshpande V (2020) Personalized priority policies in call centers using past customer
interaction information. SSRN 3596178.
Hu M, Li Y, Wang J (2018) Eﬃcient ignorance: Information heterogeneity in a queue. Management Sci.
64(6):2650–2671.
Huang T, Allon G, Bassamboo A (2013) Bounded rationality in service systems. Manufacturing Service
Oper. Management 15(2):263–279.
Huang T, Van Mieghem JA (2013) The promise of strategic customer behavior: On the value of click tracking.
Prod. Oper. Management 22(3):489–502.
Ibanez MR, Clark JR, Huckman RS, Staats BR (2018) Discretionary task ordering: Queue management in
radiological services. Management Sci. 64(9):4389–4407.
Ibrahim R (2018) Sharing delay information in service systems: A literature survey. Queueing Systems 89(1-
2):49–79.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
33
Ichihashi S (2019) Dynamic privacy choices. SSRN 3472151.
Ichihashi S (2020) Online privacy and information disclosure by consumers. Amer. Econ. Rev. 110(2):569–95.
Kittsteiner T, Moldovanu B (2005) Priority auctions and queue disciplines that depend on processing time.
Management Science 51(2):236–248.
Kucukgul C, Ozer O, Wang S (2021) Advertisement policies for online platforms with consumer privacy
concerns. Working Paper.
Lei Y, Miao S, Momot R (2021) Privacy-preserving personalized revenue management. SSRN 3704446.
Li KJ (2020) Behavior-based quality discrimination. Manufacturing Service Oper. Management Forthcoming.
Mendelson H, Whang S (1990) Optimal incentive-compatible priority pricing for the m/m/1 queue. Oper.
Res. 38(5):870–883.
Momot R, Belavina E, Girotra K (2020) The use and value of social information in selective selling of
exclusive products. Management Science 66(6):2610–2627.
Mostagir M, Ozdaglar AE, Siderius J (2021) When is society susceptible to manipulation? Management Sci.
Forthcoming.
Naor P (1969) The regulation of queue size by levying tolls. Econometrica 37(1):15–24.
Popa C (2012) Managing Personal Information: Insights on Corporate Risk and Opportunity for Privacy-
Savvy Leaders (Carswell).
Rodriguez AE, Ibrahim R, Zhan D (2021) On customer (dis)honesty in priority queues: The role of lying
aversion. Working Paper.
Shen Q, Miguel Villas-Boas J (2018) Behavior-based advertising. Management Sci. 64(5):2047–2064.
Su X, Zenios SA (2006) Recipient choice can address the eﬃciency-equity trade-oﬀin kidney transplantation:
A mechanism design model. Management Sci. 52(11):1647–1660.
Sun Z, Argon NT, Ziya S (2018) Patient triage and prioritization under austere conditions. Management
Sci. 64(10):4471–4489.
Valletti T, Wu J (2020) Consumer proﬁling with data requirements: Structure and policy implications. Prod.
Oper. Management 29(2):309–329.
Van Mieghem JA (2000) Price and Service Discrimination in Queuing Systems: Incentive Compatibility of
Gcµ Scheduling. Management Sci. 46(9):1249–1267.
Veeraraghavan S, Debo L (2009) Joining longer queues: Information externalities in queue choice. Manufac-
turing Service Oper. Management 11(4):543–562.
Wang J, Hu M (2020) Eﬃcient inaccuracy: User-generated information sharing in a queue. Management Sci.
Forthcoming.
Whitt W (1999) Improving service by informing customers about anticipated delays. Management Sci.
45(2):192–207.
Yang L, Debo L (2019) Referral priority program: Leveraging social ties via operational incentives. Manage-
ment Sci. 65(5):2231–2248.
Yu M, Debo L, Kapuscinski R (2016) Strategic waiting for consumer-generated quality information: Dynamic
pricing of new experience goods. Management Sci. 62(2):410–435.
Yu Q, Allon G, Bassamboo A, Iravani S (2018) Managing customer expectations and priorities in service
systems. Management Sci. 64(8):3942–3970.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
1
Online Appendices
Appendix A:
Proofs of the Main Results
A.1.
Proof of Lemma 1 (Page 12)
Denote µH = µ, µN = ¯µ = σµ/(1 + α(σ −1)), and µL = 1/σµ the service rates of type-i requests, for i = H,
N, or L. Denote Bi = 1/µi the expected service time of type-i requests. Then, from (7.15) of Adan and
Resing (2015), the residual service time of type-N requests is
RN = E (B2
N)
2BN
=
α 1
µ2 + (1 −α)
1
(σµ)2
α 1
µ + (1 −α) 1
σµ
=
1 + α(σ2 −1)
σµ(1 + α(σ −1)).
We have three priority classes with the following characteristics:
Type Arrival Rate Exp. Service Time
Exp. Residual Service Time
Workload
H
αγλ
BH = 1
µ
RH = 1
µ
ρH = αγλ
µ
N
(1 −γ)λ
BN = 1+α(σ−1)
σµ
RN =
1+α(σ2−1)
σµ(1+α(σ−1))
ρN = (1+α(σ−1))(1−γ)λ
σµ
L
(1 −α)γλ
BL =
1
σµ
RL =
1
σµ
ρL = (1−α)γλ
σµ
From Ch. 9.2 of Adan and Resing (2015), we obtain the expected waiting time of each priority class:
Type Exp. Waiting Time
H
WH = ρHRH
1−ρH + BH =
1
µ−αλγ
N
WN =
ρHRH+ρN RN
(1−ρH−ρN )(1−ρH) +
BN
1−ρH =
σµ(1+α(σ−1))−αλ(α−1)(σ−1)(σ+γ−1)
σ(µ−αλγ)(σµ−λ(ασ+(1−γ)(1−α)))
L
WL =
ρHRH+ρN RN +ρLRL
(1−ρH−ρN −ρL)(1−ρH−ρN ) +
BL
1−ρH−ρN =
σ(µ+αλ(σ−1))
(σµ−λ(1+α(σ−1)))(σµ−λ(ασ+(1−γ)(1−α)))
A customer observes type-H request w.p. α, and type-L request w.p. 1 −α. If an inﬁnitesimal customer
discloses information, this customer falls either into type-H or type-L queue depending on the request
type. The expected utility of disclosing customer is thus Ud = R −c(αWH + (1 −α)WL). If a customer
does not disclose information, this customer’s request will be considered type-N. The expected utility of
an inﬁnitesimal customer withholding information is then Uw = R −cWN. Substituting WH, WN, and WL
in Ud and Uw, we obtain (2)—functions of γ and λ—disclosure probability and eﬀective arrival rate in the
population.
A.2.
Proof of Proposition 1 (Page 12)
When deciding whether to disclose or withhold information, inﬁnitesimal customer compares Ud(γ,λ) with
Uw(γ,λ). Hence, customer’s behavior is deﬁned by the sign of the diﬀerence:
Ud (γ,λ) −Uw (γ,λ) =
cλ
σ (σµ −(1 + α(σ −1))λ)(σµ −λ(ασ + (1 −γ)(1 −α)))(µ −αλγ) · Ξ(γ,λ),
(7)
where
Ξ(γ,λ) = α(1 −α)
 σ (σ −1)µ +
 1 −α(1 −σ)
 σ2 + 1

λ

γ+

σ
 α2σ2 + α(α −1)σ −(α −1)(2α −1)

µ −α

ασ3 + (α −1)2 σ2 −(α −1)(2α −1)σ + (α −1)2
λ

.
the denominator of the ﬁrst multiplier of Expression 7 is positive. We then have the following scenarios: (i)
if Ξ(0,λ) < 0 then γ∗= 0 can be supported as an equilibrium; (ii) if Ξ(1,λ) > 0 then γ∗= 1 can be supported
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

2
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
as an equilibrium; (iii) if ∃ˆγ ∈(0,1) s.t. Ξ(ˆγ,λ) = 0 then ˆγ can be supported as an equilibrium (only if
Ξ(1,λ) < 0). Several of those scenarios can hold true simultaneously. Deﬁne:
G0(α) ≡
µσ

α2σ2 −(α −1)2 −α(1 −α)(σ −1)

α

ασ3 + (α −1)2 σ2 −(α −1)(2α −1)σ + (α −1)2,
G1(α) ≡
µ

α2σ2 −(α −1)2
α

α2σ2 −(α −1)σ −(α −1)2.
– solutions wrt to λ to Ξ(0,λ) = 0 and Ξ(1,λ) = 0 respectively. We have the following two technical lemmas
characterizing behavior of functions Ξ(γ,λ) and G0(α),G1(α) in the points of interest:
Lemma 2. The linear function Ξ(γ,λ) satisﬁes the following properties:
1. Ξ(0,λ) < 0 ⇔λ > G0(α);
2. Ξ(1,λ) ≥0 ⇔λ ≤G1(α) if either (i) σ > 1 or (ii) σ < 1 and α >
1
σ+1; in all other regions Ξ(1,λ) < 0,∀λ.
Proof.
Proofs of all technical results are provided in Appendix A.
Notice that interior ˆγ s.t. ˆγ ∈(0,1) and Ξ(ˆγ,λ) = 0 exists only if either (i) Ξ(0,λ) < 0 and Ξ(1,λ) > 0 or
(ii) Ξ(0,λ) > 0 and Ξ(1,λ) < 0, but only the latter can be supported as an equilibrium. Next technical lemma
speciﬁes behavior of functions G0(α),G1(α).
Lemma 3. Functions G0(α),G1(α) exhibit the following behavior:
1. G0(α) > 0 iﬀα >
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
;
2. G1(α) > 0 iﬀeither (i) σ > 1 and α ≥
1
1+σ or (ii) σ < 1 and either α ≤2−σ−σ√5−4σ
2(1−σ2)
<
1
1+σ (in this case
also G1(α) ≥¯µ > 0) or α >
1
σ+1;
3. G0(α) > G1(α) if 2−σ−σ√5−4σ
2(1−σ2)
≤α <
1
σ3/2+1 and G0(α) < G1(α) if
1
σ3/2+1 ≤α.
Additionally, we have:



σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
<
1
σ+1 <
1
σ3/2+1 if σ < 1
1
σ3/2+1 <
1
σ+1 <
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
if σ > 1
(8)
Using results of the Lemmas above and condition 8, we consider the following distinct cases.
Case A: σ < 1
A1) if 0 < α ≤
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
then we have Ξ(1,λ) < 0 and G0(α) ≤0, which leads to Ξ(0,λ) < 0 because
λ > 0 ≥G0(α). Then, from the fact that Ξ(γ,λ) is linear in γ, we have γ∗= 0.
A2) if
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
< α ≤
1
σ+1, then G0(α) > 0 and G1(α) /∈[0, ¯µ] (i.e., G1(α) < 0 or G1(α) > ¯µ). If
0 < λ ≤G0(α) then Ξ(0,λ) ≥0 and Ξ(1,λ) < 0. The unique equilibrium is γ∗= ˆγ ∈(0,1), where:
ˆγ ≡
σ (α2σ2 + α(α −1)σ −(α −1)(2α −1))µ −α

ασ3 + (α −1)2 σ2 −(α −1)(2α −1)σ + (α −1)2
λ
α(1 −α)(σ (1 −σ)µ + (α(1 −σ)(σ2 + 1) −1)λ)
,
If λ > G0(α) then Ξ(0,λ) < 0 and Ξ(1,λ) < 0, hence γ∗= 0.
A3) if
1
σ+1 < α ≤
1
σ3/2+1, then 0 < G1(α) ≤G0(α). If 0 < λ ≤G1(α) then Ξ(0,λ) ≥0 and Ξ(1,λ) ≥0,
hence γ∗= 1. If G1(α) < λ ≤G0(α) then Ξ(0,λ) ≥0 and Ξ(1,λ) < 0, hence there is a unique equilibrium
γ∗= ˆγ. If λ > G0(α) then Ξ(0,λ) < 0 and Ξ(1,λ) < 0, hence γ∗= 0.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
3
A4) if α >
1
σ3/2+1, then 0 < G0(α) < G1(α). If 0 < λ ≤G0(α) then Ξ(0,λ) ≥0 and Ξ(1,λ) > 0, thus γ∗= 1.
If G0(α) < λ ≤G1(α) then Ξ(0,λ) < 0 and Ξ(1,λ) ≥0, there are two equilibria γ∗= 0 and γ∗= 1. Since the
system follows SPT rule (i.e., σ < 1), customers have higher utility at γ∗= 1. If λ > G1(α) then Ξ(0,λ) < 0
and Ξ(1,λ) < 0, hence γ∗= 0.
Case B: σ > 1
B1) if 0 < α ≤
1
σ+1, then G1(α) ≤0 < λ and hence Ξ(1,λ) < 0. Also G0(α) < 0 < λ thus Ξ(0,λ) < 0. Since
Ξ(γ,λ) is linear in γ, hence we should have Ξ(γ,λ) < 0,∀γ ∈[0,1], thus γ∗= 0.
B2) if
1
σ+1 < α ≤
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
, then G0(α) ≤0 < G1(α). Then, it must be λ > G0(α) ⇔Ξ(0,λ) < 0. If
0 < λ ≤G1(α) ⇔Ξ(1,λ) ≥0, there are two equilibria: γ∗= 0 and γ∗= 1. Since the system follows LPT rule
(i.e., σ > 1), customers have higher utility at γ∗= 0. If λ > G1(α) ⇔Ξ(1,λ) < 0, and γ∗= 0.
B3) if α >
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
, then 0 < G0(α) < G1(α). If 0 < λ ≤G0(α) ⇔Ξ(0,λ) ≥0 and Ξ(1,λ) > 0, hence
γ∗= 1. If G0(α) < λ ≤G1(α) ⇔Ξ(0,λ) < 0 and Ξ(1,λ) ≥0, there are two equilibria: γ∗= 0 and γ∗= 1. Since
the system follows LPT rule (i.e., σ > 1), customers have higher utility at γ∗= 0. If λ > G1(α) ⇔Ξ(0,λ) < 0
and Ξ(1,λ) < 0, hence γ∗= 0.
We deﬁne the inverse function of G0 (α) and G1 (α): F0 (λ) ≡G−1
0 (α) and F1 (λ) ≡G−1
1 (α). The intersection
point of F0 and F1 can be derived as
˜λ =
µ

σ
3
2 −√σ + 1 −σ2
σ
3
2 −σ + 1
,
which is positive iﬀσ < 1. Then, we obtain (3) by summarizing all the cases and deﬁning α(λ) =
min(F0(λ),F1(λ)), ¯α(λ) = max(F0(λ),F1(λ)).
A.3.
Proof of Theorem 1 (Page 15)
The expected customer surplus can be derived as the weighted average of the utility of customers who disclose
and withhold their personal information:
CS(γ) = λ(γUd (γ,λ) + (1 −γ)Uw (γ,λ)).
(9)
Hence, CScontrol = CS(γ∗), CSdiscl = CS(1), and CSwthl = CS(0). Function CS(γ) has the following property.
Lemma 4. Total customer surplus CS(γ) increases with γ ∈[0,1] if σ < 1 and decreases otherwise.
We have the equilibrium information disclosure strategy γ∗≤1 from Proposition 1. Thus, when σ < 1,
CSwthl = CS(0) ≤CScontrol = CS(γ∗) ≤CSdiscl = CS(1) because CS(γ) increases with γ. When σ > 1,
CSwthl = CS(0) ≥CScontrol = CS(γ∗) ≥CSdiscl = CS(1) because CS(γ) decreases with γ. Inequalities are
strict if γ∗< 1.
A.4.
Proof of Proposition 2 (Page 18)
From Lemma 4, one can easily prove the following result regarding the socially optimal information disclosure
strategy.
Corollary 1. Socially optimal information disclosure strategy is γSO = 1 if σ < 1, and γSO = 0 otherwise.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

4
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
Deﬁne αp.s. (λ;σ) =

F1 (λ) if σ < 1
F0 (λ) if σ > 1 . When σ < 1, we have γ∗= γSO = 1 if α > αp.s. (λ). In this case,
CScontrol = CS(γ∗) = CSsocial = CS
 γSO
. Otherwise, if α ≤αp.s. (λ), we have γ∗< γSO = 1 and CScontrol =
CS(γ∗) < CSsocial = CS
 γSO
.
When σ > 1, we have γ∗= γSO = 0 if α < αp.s. (λ). Here CScontrol = CS(γ∗) = CSsocial = CS
 γSO
. Other-
wise, if α ≥αp.s. (λ), we have γ∗< γSO = 1 and CScontrol = CS(γ∗) < CSsocial = CS
 γSO
.
A.5.
Proof of Proposition 3 (Page 20)
When all customers choose to withhold information in equilibrium, i.e., γ∗= 0, we must have Ud (0,λ) <
Uw (0,λ). To induce customers who withhold information to disclose it, the monetary incentive paid to each
customer not only needs to turn full disclosure into an equilibrium but also needs to make this equilibrium
Pareto dominant compared to withholding information. Thus, we have
Pd = max(λ(Uw (1,λ) −Ud (1,λ)),CSwithhold −CSdiscl),
where CSwithhold = CS(0) and CSdiscl = CS(1) (CS(γ) is deﬁned in expression 9). Using expressions (7) and
(9), we can derive
λ(Uw (1,λ) −Ud (1,λ)) =
cλ2 
(α −1)2 −α2σ2
µ −λα

−α2σ2 + σ (α −1) + (α −1)2
σ (µ −αλ)2 (σµ −(1 + α(σ −1))λ)
,
∆S = CSwithhold −CSdiscl = cαλ2 (1 −α)(σ −1)(µ −α(1 −σ)λ)
σµ(µ −αλ)(σµ −λ(1 + α(σ −1))) = cα(1 −α)(σ −1)
σµ
λ2
Θ(λ),
where Θ(λ) = (µ−αλ)(σµ−λ(1+α(σ−1)))
µ−α(1−σ)λ
. Then we have:
λ(Uw (1,λ) −Ud (1,λ)) −(CSwithhold −CSdiscl) =
cλ2
σµ(µ −αλ)2 (σµ −(1 + α(σ −1))λ)
· ΞPd (λ)
where:
ΞPd (λ) = α3 (1 −α)(σ −1)2 λ2+αµ
 α2(2σ2 −3σ + 1) + α(2σ −σ2) + σ −1

λ−µ2  α2σ2 −α2σ + α(σ + 1) −1

When σ > 1, from the fact that α3 (1 −α)(σ −1)2 > 0, ΞPd (¯µ) =
µ2(α−1)2(ασ2+1−α)
(ασ−α+1)2
> 0, and ΞPd (G1(α)) =
−α2σ2µ2(α−1)2(σ−1)(ασ2−α+1)
(α2σ2−α2−ασ+2α+σ−1)2
< 0, we thus conclude that ΞPd (λ) has a unique root ξPd in (G1(α), ¯µ)
and ΞPd (λ) ≤0 ⇔λ ≤ξPd. Therefore, when σ > 1, we have Pd = CSwithhold −CSdiscl if λ ≤ξPd, or
λ(Uw (1,λ) −Ud (1,λ)) if λ > ξPd.
When σ < 1, we have λ(Uw (1,λ) −Ud (1,λ)) > CSwithhold −CSdiscl for λ ∈(G1(α), ¯µ), because
Uw (1,λ) −Ud (1,λ) > 0 from Proposition 1 and CSwithhold −CSdiscl < 0 from Lemma 4. Thus, Pd =
λ(Uw (1,λ) −Ud (1,λ)).
A.6.
Proof of Proposition 4 (Page 21)
From Corollary 1, γSO = 1 if σ < 1, and γSO = 0 o/w. Monetary incentive Ps should be such that γSO
becomes equilibrium. If γSO is an equilibrium, it is Pareto dominant one. When σ < 1, thus P σ<1
s
=
λ(Uw (1,λ) −Ud (1,λ)), and when σ > 1, P σ>1
s
= λ(Ud (0,λ) −Uw (0,λ)). The exact expressions have the
following form:
P σ<1
s
=
cλ2 
(α −1)2 −α2σ2
µ −λα

−α2σ2 + σ (α −1) + (α −1)2
σ (µ −αλ)2 (σµ −(1 + α(σ −1))λ)
,
P σ>1
s
=
cλ2 
σ (α2σ2 −α(1 −α)σ −(2α2 −3α + 1))µ −αλ

ασ3 + (α −1)2 σ2 −(2α2 −3α + 1)σ + (α −1)2
σµ(σµ −(1 + α(σ −1))λ)2
.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
5
Note that Ps has only to be paid when Ps > 0, o/w when Ps < 0, γSO is already an equilibrium. Next
technical lemma characterizes properties of Ps:
Lemma 5. If σ < 1, then P σ<1
s
increases in λ ∈(0, ¯µ] and decreases in α ∈[0,1]. Furthermore, Psσ < 1 = 0,
if either (i) α ≤
1
σ+1 and λ = 0, or (ii) α >
1
σ+1 and λ = G1(α). If σ > 1, then P σ>1
s
is concave wrt λ ∈
(0,G0(α)] for ∀α ∈

σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
,1

, and also increases in α for ∀λ ∈(0, ¯µ). Finally, P σ>1
s
= 0, if either
(i) α ≤
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
and λ = 0, or (ii) α >
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
and λ = G0(α).
A.7.
Proof of Theorem 2 (Page 23)
The following technical lemma derives properties of function ∆S = CSwithhold −CSdiscl earlier deﬁned in the
Proof of Proposition 3.
Lemma 6. ∆S = CSwithhold −CSdiscl = cα(1−α)(σ−1)
σµ
λ2
Θ(λ), where Θ(λ) = (µ−αλ)(σµ−λ(1+α(σ−1)))
(µ−α(1−σ)λ)
. Further-
more,
1. if σ < 1 then ∆S ≤0 decreases in λ; limλ→¯µ ∆S = −∞; ∆S < 0 when λ = G1(α) and α >
1
σ+1; ∆S = 0
when λ = 0 and α ≤
1
σ+1;
2. if σ > 1 then ∆S > 0 increases in λ and limλ↗G0(α) ∆S > 0.
Case σ < 1: we have γSO = 1. From the proof of Proposition 4, we have Ps = 0, if α >
1
σ+1 and λ = G1(α);
also, γ∗= 0 for α >
1
σ3/2+1 >
1
σ+1. Thus, CSsocial −CScontrol = CS
 γSO
−CS(γ∗) = CS(1) −CS(0) = −∆S.
From the derived properties of ∆S above, we have −∆S increases in λ and −∆S > 0 when α >
1
σ3/2+1 and
λ = G1. Hence, there exists a ξ1 such that Ps < CSsocial −CScontrol for ∀λ ∈[G1(α),G1(α) + ξ1].
Case σ > 1: we have γSO = 0. From the proof of Proposition 4, we have Ps = 0, if α >
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
and
λ = G0(α); also, γ∗= 1 for α >
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
. Thus, CSsocial −CScontrol = CS
 γSO
−CS(γ∗) = CS(0) −
CS(1) = ∆S. From the derived properties of ∆S above, we have ∆S increasing in λ and limλ↗G0(α) ∆S > 0
when α >
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
and λ = G0(α). Hence, there exists a ξ2 such that Ps < CSsocial −CScontrol for
∀λ ∈[G0(α) −ξ2,G0(α)].
Appendix B:
Alternative Model Formulations
B.1.
Multiple Request Types and Priority Classes (Page 26)
We can generalize our model to a setting with M types of service requests. Customers face a class-i request
with an exogenous probability αi ∈[0,1], for i = 1,...,M, and PM
i=1 αi = 1. The service time of a class-i
request follows an i.i.d. exponential distribution with mean Bi = 1/(σiµ); and the service rate of type-i
request is µi = σiµ for i = 1,...,M. Without loss of generality, we let σ1 = 1 and, under the SPT (resp.,
LPT) policy, order these request classes by their mean service time from short to long, i.e., σi > σj if i < j
(resp., long to short, i.e., σi < σj if i < j). We then can derive the average service time of all requests as
PM
i=1 αi/(σiµ), the capacity of the service facility as µ =
 PM
i=1 αi/(σiµ)
−1, and the request class with
the longest (resp., shortest) average service time shorter (resp., longer) than the average service time of all
requests as
m = max


i ∈{1,...,M} | σi >
 M
X
j=1
αj
σj
!−1


(10)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

6
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
under SPT policy (resp., m = max

i | σi <
PM
j=1 αj/σj
−1
under LPT policy). The service provider
will prioritize requests in the following order: (i) “bucket”-H: 1,...,m requests, (ii) “bucket”-N: requests
from information-withholding customers, and (iii) “bucket”-L: m + 1,...,M requests. Within these three
“buckets,” service requests are treated according to the priority policy that the service provider uses.
Note that the service rate of requests from withholding customers is µ. Then, from (7.15) of Adan and
Resing (2015), the residual service time of bucket-N requests is
RN = E (B2
N)
2BN
=
PM
i=1 αi/(σ2
i µ)
PM
i=1 αi/σi
.
We have M + 1 priority classes with the characteristics as speciﬁed in Table 1.
Type
Arrival Rate Exp. Service Time
Exp. Residual Service Time Workload
1
α1γλ
B1 = 1/(σ1µ)
R1 = 1/(σ1µ)
ρ1 = α1γλ/(σ1µ)
...
m
αmγλ
Bm = 1/(σmµ)
Rm = 1/(σmµ)
ρm = αmγλ/(σmµ)
N
(1 −γ)λ
BN = PM
i=1 αi/(σiµ) RN =
PM
i=1 αi/(σ2
i µ)
PM
i=1 αi/σi
ρN = (1 −γ)λPM
i=1 αi/(σiµ)
m + 1 αm+1γλ
Bm+1 = 1/(σm+1µ)
Rm+1 = 1/(σm+1µ)
ρm+1 = αm+1γλ/(σm+1µ)
...
M
αMγλ
BM = 1/(σMµ)
RM = 1/(σMµ)
ρM = αMγλ/(σMµ)
Table 1
Summary of characteristics of diﬀerent customer classes.
Then, by Ch. 9.2 of Adan and Resing (2015), we can derive the expected wait times of all classes Wi,
for i = 1,...m,N,m + 1,...,M as speciﬁed in Table 2. A customer’s service request is class-i w.p. αi. The
Type
Exp. Waiting Time
1
W1 = ρ1R1
1−ρ1 + B1 =
1
µσ1−λγα1
...
m
Wm =
Pm
i=1 ρiRi
(1−Pm
i=1 ρi)(1−Pm−1
i=1
ρi) +
Bm
1−Pm−1
i=1
ρi
N
WN =
Pm
i=1 ρiRi+ρN RN
(1−Pm
i=1 ρi−ρN)(1−Pm
i=1 ρi) +
BN
1−Pm
i=1 ρi
m + 1 Wm+1 =
Pm+1
i=1 ρiRi+ρN RN
(1−Pm+1
i=1 ρi−ρN)(1−Pm
i=1 ρi−ρN) +
Bm+1
1−Pm
i=1 ρi−ρN
...
M
WM =
PM
i=1 ρiRi+ρN RN
(1−PM
i=1 ρi−ρN)(1−PM−1
i=1
ρi−ρN) +
BM
1−PM−1
i=1
ρi−ρN
Table 2
Expected Wait Times of Diﬀerent Customer Classes
expected utility of a disclosing customer is Ud = R−cPM
i=1 αiWi. If a customer does not disclose information,
this customer’s request will stay in bucket-N. The expected utility of a withholding customer is then Uw =
R −cWN. Disclosing customers are prioritized (over withholding customers) to bucket-H with probability
Pm
i=1 αi and deprioritized with probability PM
i=m+1 αi. The expected wait times of bucket-H, bucket-N, and
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
7
bucket-L requests are Pm
i=1 αiWi/Pm
i=1 αi, WN, and PM
i=m+1 αiWi/PM
i=m+1 αi, respectively. Overall, we
have customer’s expected utility as:
U =
(
Ud ≡R −cPM
i=1 αiWi
if customer discloses information;
Uw ≡R −cWN
if customer withholds information.
(11)
Substituting Wi and WN in Ud and Uw, we obtain Ud and Uw as functions of the disclosure probability γ
and eﬀective arrival rate λ in the population. Similar to Proposition 1, we can derive customers’ equilibrium
information disclosure strategy γ by investigating Ud(γ,λ) −Uw(γ,λ). Similarly to the base model, full
information disclosure γ = 1 is an equilibrium if Ud(1,λ) −Uw(1,λ) > 0 (γ = 0 and γ ∈(0,1) cases can be
derived similarly). Even though we expect similar insights to hold under this general model as compared
to those of the base model, the analytical analysis is prohibitive due to complexity of the expressions for
waiting times Wi (as per Table 2) and threshold m. We thus resort to the numerical analysis to verify the
main insights of the base model.
For the particular numerical experiment that we report, we assume σi = 1/i under SPT policy (resp.,
σi = i under LPT policy) and that αi follows a Binomial distribution with parameters M = 10 and p: αi =
 M−1
i−1

pi−1 (1 −p)
M−i for i = 1,...,M. Figure 7 illustrates the equilibrium information disclosure strategy γ∗
as a function of the arrival rate λ and the priority discipline (i.e., SPT or LPT). We observe that, when given
control over their information, customers may choose information disclosure strategies that deviate from the
socially optimal one (i.e., γo = 1 under SPT and γo = 0 under LPT), which will lead to inferior social welfare.
This result conﬁrms the insights from our base model: there exist regimes under which privacy regulation in
the form of giving customers full control over information may backﬁre.
0
0.05
0.1
0
0.5
1
(a) SPT discipline, p = 0.45.
0
0.5
1
1.5
0
0.5
1
(b) LPT discipline, p = 0.2.
Figure 7
Customers’ equilibrium information disclosure strategy γ∗as a function of the arrival rate λ.
Finally, Figure 8 shows that the threshold m is an increasing function of p. This is intuitive: when p
increases, the probability mass of the Binomial distribution moves to larger i, so the threshold m also
increases. More generally, the threshold naturally increases when the probability mass is shifted towards
higher request types (i.e., there is more weight on higher αi).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

8
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
0
0.5
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Figure 8
Threshold m as a function of p, M = 10.
(a) SPT discipline, σ < 1.
(b) LPT discipline, σ > 1.
Figure 9
Diﬀerence between the total customer surplus under customers’ full control of information and under
no information disclosure, CScontrol −CSwithhold, as a function of the arrival rate λ and the probability α of a
type-H request. In all of our colored graphs, for better contrast we plot the normalized value of x:
sign(x)

1 −ex·sign(−x)
.
B.2.
No Disclosure Benchmark (Page 27)
The following result is immediate from Lemma 4.
Theorem 3. Whether self-control over personal information is less or more beneﬁcial to society than is no
information disclosure depends on the priority rule adopted by the service provider. If the provider prioritizes
short jobs (SPT discipline, σ < 1), then self-control over information leads to weakly higher total customer
surplus (i.e., CScontrol ≥CSwithhold); otherwise, if the service provider prioritizes long jobs (LPT discipline,
σ > 1), then CScontrol ≤CSwithhold. The inequalities are strict if given control over personal information some
customers choose to disclose it (i.e., γ∗> 0).
When the service provider’s priority policy is aligned with collective incentives (i.e., under the SPT policy)
and it can only be implemented if the provider obtains customers’ personal information, a stricter privacy
regulation that forbids information collection hurts customers’ total surplus. On the contrary, if the service
provider’s priority policy is misaligned with the interests of society (i.e., under the LPT policy), proscribing
information collection increases total customer surplus. Figure 9 shows that the magnitude of the diﬀerence
in customers’ total surplus under self-control and no disclosure is higher when the system is more congested.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
9
B.3.
Heterogeneous Waiting Costs (Page 28)
The next lemma gives the expected individual utility of disclosed and undisclosed customers under through-
put λ.
Lemma 7. Given the arrival rate λ and the population’s disclosure probability γ, an individual customer’s
expected utility from disclosing information Ud (γ,λ), and from withholding information Uw (γ,λ) are
Ud (γ,λ) = R −

cHα
µ−γαλ +
cL(1−α)µ
(µ−λ)(µ−λ(α+(1−γ)(1−α)))

,
Uw (γ,λ) = R −
(αcH+(1−α)cL)µ
(µ−γαλ)(µ−λ(α+(1−γ)(1−α))).
(12)
Proof of Lemma 7
Due to the memoryless property of exponential distribution, the expected service
time Bi and residual service time Ri of class i requests are identical, Bi = Ri = 1/µ, for i = H, N, or L.
Then, we have eﬀectively three priority classes with type-i workload: ρH = αγλ/µ, ρN = (1 −γ)λ/µ, and
ρL = (1 −α)γλ/µ. From Chap 9.2 of Adan and Resing (2015), we obtain the expected waiting time of each
request type:
Type Exp. Waiting Time
H
WH = ρHRH
1−ρH + BH =
1
µ−γαλ
N
WN =
ρHRH+ρN RN
(1−ρH−ρN )(1−ρH) +
BN
1−ρH =
µ
(µ−γαλ)(µ−λ(α+(1−γ)(1−α)))
L
WL =
ρHRH+ρN RN +ρLRL
(1−ρH−ρN −ρL)(1−ρH−ρN ) +
BL
1−ρH−ρN =
µ
(µ−λ)(µ−λ(α+(1−γ)(1−α)))
If customers disclose information, they will have type-H request w.p. α, or type-L request w.p. 1 −α. Then,
the expected utility of disclosing customers is Ud = R −(cHαWH + cL (1 −α)WL). If customers withhold
information, they will have type-N requests. The expected utility of withholding customers is Uw = R −
(αcH + (1 −α)cL)WN. Substituting WH, WN, and WL in Ud and Uw, we obtain (12).
□
Proposition 5. There exists a symmetric equilibrium information disclosure strategy γ∗such that
γ∗=







0
if λ ≥max{H0,H1},
1
if λ ≤min{H0,H1},
(1−α)µcL−α(µ−λ)cH
α(1−α)(µcL−(µ−λ)cH) ∈(0,1) if H1 < λ < H0,
0 or 1
otherwise,
(13)
where H0 = µ

1 −(1−α)cL
αcH

and H1 = µ

1 −(1−α)2cL
α2cH

.
Proof of Proposition 5
In this case, the sign of Ud (γ,λ) −Uw (γ,λ) determines customers’ equilibrium
behavior:
Ud (γ,λ) −Uw (γ,λ) =
λ
(µ −λ)(µ −γαλ)(µ −λ(α + (1 −γ)(1 −α))) · Ξ(γ),
(14)
where
the
denominator
of
the
ﬁrst
multiplier
of
Expression
(14)
is
positive
and
Ξ(γ) ≡
α(1 −α)(µcL −(µ −λ)cH)γ + (α(µ −λ)cH −(1 −α)µcL) is a linear function of γ.
When α ≤1
2 ⇔(1−α)2
α2
≥1−α
α
≥1,
• If µcL −(µ −λ)cH < 0 ⇔cH
cL >
µ
µ−λ ⇔λ < µ

1 −cL
cH

, Ξ(γ) is a decreasing function of γ.
— If Ξ(1) ≥0 ⇔cH
cL ≥(1−α)2µ
α2(µ−λ) ⇔λ ≤µ

1 −(1−α)2cL
α2cH

, then all-share (i.e., γ∗= 1) is the only equilib-
rium.
— If Ξ(0) > 0 and Ξ(1) < 0 ⇔(1−α)2µ
α2(µ−λ) < cH
cL < (1−α)µ
α(µ−λ) ⇔µ

1 −(1−α)2cL
α2cH

< λ < µ

1 −(1−α)cL
αcH

, then
there is a non-trivial equilibrium γ∗=
(1−α)µcL−α(µ−λ)cH
α(1−α)(µcL−(µ−λ)cH) ∈(0,1).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

10
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
— If Ξ(0) ≤0 ⇔cH
cL ≤(1−α)µ
α(µ−λ) ⇔µ

1 −(1−α)cL
αcH

≤λ < µ

1 −cL
cH

, then all-hide (i.e., γ∗= 0) is the
only equilibrium.
• If µcL −(µ −λ)cH ≥0 ⇔cH
cL ≤
µ
µ−λ ⇔λ ≥µ

1 −cL
cH

, Ξ(γ) is an increasing function of γ. We have
Ξ(1) ≤0 ⇔cH
cL ≤
µ
µ−λ ≤(1−α)2µ
α2(µ−λ) ⇔λ ≥µ

1 −cL
cH

≥µ

1 −(1−α)2cL
α2cH

, then withholding (i.e., γ∗= 0) is
the only equilibrium.
When α > 1
2 ⇔(1−α)2
α2
< 1−α
α
< 1,
• If µcL −(µ −λ)cH ≤0 ⇔cH
cL ≥
µ
µ−λ ⇔λ ≤µ

1 −cL
cH

, Ξ(γ) is a decreasing function of γ. We have
Ξ(1) ≥0 ⇔cH
cL ≥
µ
µ−λ > (1−α)2µ
α2(µ−λ) ⇔λ ≤µ

1 −cL
cH

< µ

1 −(1−α)2cL
α2cH

, then all-share (i.e., γ∗= 1) is the
only equilibrium.
• µcL −(µ −λ)cH > 0 ⇔cH
cL <
µ
µ−λ ⇔λ > µ

1 −cL
cH

, Ξ(γ) is an increasing function of γ.
— If Ξ(0) ≥0 ⇔cH
cL ≥(1−α)µ
α(µ−λ) ⇔λ ≤µ

1 −(1−α)cL
αcH

, then all-share (i.e., γ∗= 1) is the only equilib-
rium.
— If Ξ(0) < 0 and Ξ(1) > 0 ⇔(1−α)2µ
α2(µ−λ) < cH
cL < (1−α)µ
α(µ−λ) ⇔µ

1 −(1−α)cL
αcH

< λ < µ

1 −(1−α)2cL
α2cH

, then
there are two stable equilibria γ∗= 0 and 1 (i.e., follow the crowd behavior).
— If Ξ(1) ≤0 ⇔cH
cL ≤(1−α)2µ
α2(µ−λ) ⇔λ ≥µ

1 −(1−α)2cL
α2cH

, then all-hide (i.e., γ∗= 0) is the only equilib-
rium.
Thus, customers’ equilibrium behavior is given in (13).
□
The customer surplus can be derived as the product of the eﬀective joining rate and the expected utility
of customers:
CS (γ) = λ(γUd (γ,λ) + (1 −γ)Uw (γ,λ))
= λ

R −
 γcHα
µ −γαλ +
γcL (1 −α)µ
(µ −λ)(µ −λ(α + (1 −γ)(1 −α))) +
(1 −γ)(αcH + (1 −α)cL)µ
(µ −γαλ)(µ −λ(α + (1 −γ)(1 −α)))

By the property of the cµ rule, it will be socially optimal for a social planner to prioritize customers with
higher waiting cost, or equivalently to not to prioritize customers with lower expected waiting cost. Thus,
we have the following proposition.
Lemma 8. Customer surplus CS (γ) is an increasing function of γ.
Proof of Lemma 8
Using (12), we can rewrite CS (γ) as
CS (γ) = λ

R −

(λ −µ)cH + µcL
λ(µ −λ)
+
µ(2α −1)2 (cH −cL)
λ

µ(1 −α)3 + α3 (µ −λ)

+ (cH −cL)Γhc (γ)




where Γhc (γ) ≡
α(1−α)(2α−1)λ2
(cH−cL)
γ +
α(1−α)(µ−αλ)2λ
γ(cH−cL)(2α−1)λ−(αcH+(1−α)cL)λ+(λ−µ)cH+µcL . We next prove that Γhc (γ)
decreases in γ by showing that its ﬁrst derivative
∂Γhc (γ)
∂γ
=
α(1 −α)(2α −1)2 λ3 (1 −γ)
(cH −cL)(µ −λ + αλ + λγ −2αλγ)2 (2µ −λ + (1 −2α)λγ) > 0.
If α ≤1/2, 2µ −λ + (1 −2α)λγ is an increasing function of γ, so 2µ −λ + (1 −2α)λγ ≥2µ −λ > 0; and if
α > 1/2, 2µ −λ + (1 −2α)λγ is a decreasing function of γ, so 2µ −λ + (1 −2α)λγ ≥2µ −2αλ > 0. In the
above cases, we have ∂Γhc (γ)/∂γ > 0. Thus, CS (γ) increases in γ.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
11
From Lemma 8, the following proposition is immediate.
Proposition 6. If the service provider prioritizes jobs with higher waiting cost, then self-control over
information leads to weakly lower total customer surplus (i.e., CScontrol ≤CSdiscl). The inequalities are strict
if given control over personal information, some customers choose to withhold it (i.e., γ∗< 1).
We have CSwithhold−CSdiscl = CS (0)−CS (1) = −
α(1−α)(cH−cL)λ2
(µ−λ)(µ−αλ)
< 0. Customers choose γ∗= 1 in equilib-
rium only when Uw (1,λ)−Ud (1,λ) ≤0. When λ(Uw (1,λ) −Ud (1,λ)) < 0 ⇔λ ≤µ

1 −(α−1)2cL
α2cH

, disclosing
is an equilibrium and is socially optimal, so no need to induce customer to do anything. Thus, we need
to use monetary incentive to induce customers to disclose information, which is also the socially optimal
information disclosure behavior, only when λ(Uw (1,λ) −Ud (1,λ)) > 0 ⇔λ > µ

1 −(α−1)2cL
α2cH

:
Pd = Ps =
λ2 
(α −1)2 µcL −α2 (µ −λ)cH

(µ −λ)(µ −αλ)2
.
(15)
B.4.
Strategic Balking and Control over Information (Page 29)
Recall from Section 3.2 that the service reward has a lower bound: R ≥c(1+α(σ −1))/σµ. Let Λ denote the
total arrival rate of customers. The eﬀective joining rate λ = qΛ, which is deﬁned by the joining probability q,
can be no higher than a join-up-to level ¯λ∗. If the total arrival rate to the service facility is below this level (i.e.,
if Λ < ¯λ∗) then customers will join with probability q = 1 (and so λ = Λ); they expect a non-negative surplus.
But if the total arrival rate is above this level (Λ > ¯λ∗), then customers will join with probability q < 1.
Hence the eﬀective joining rate remains at this join-up-to level (i.e., λ = ¯λ∗) and all customers receive zero
surplus. In other words, the join-up-to level represents the upper bound on the service provider’s throughput
when customers strategically choose to join or balk.
We emphasize that all the results and conclusions derived in Sections 4 and 5 continue to hold under this
alternative setting of lower service reward values. So here the customers’ equilibrium information disclosure
strategy, our comparison of total customer surplus under customers’ self-control over information with that
under the full or the socially optimal information disclosure strategy, and the monetary incentives needed to
induce particular information disclosure behavior, are all independent of the service reward R and remain
structurally the same. The goal of this alternative model is to develop additional insights into how customers’
control of their personal information aﬀects the service provider by changing the system’s join-up-to level
and thus its maximum throughput. The following technical lemma derives the equilibrium join-up-to level.
Lemma 9. The equilibrium join-up-to level of the service system ¯λ∗is given as follows:
¯λ∗(α) =



γ∗min
¯λd(α),F −1
1 (α)
 
+ (1 −γ∗)¯λw(α) if σ < 1 and γ∗∈{0,1},
¯λm : Ud(γ∗(¯λm), ¯λm) = 0
if σ < 1 and γ∗∈(0,1),
γ∗¯λd(α) + (1 −γ∗)¯λw(α)
if σ > 1 and γ∗∈{0,1}.
(16)
Here γ∗is the Pareto-dominant information disclosure strategy characterized in Section 4.1, and the functions
¯λm, F −1
1 (α), ¯λw(α), and ¯λd(α) are characterized in the proof.
This lemma characterizes the equilibrium join-up-to level in the service system, ¯λ∗(α) as a function of ¯λd(α)
and ¯λw(α)—join-up-to levels of customers who all disclose (d) or all withhold (w) information, correspond-
ingly. Note that ¯λd(α) and ¯λw(α) characterize join-up-to levels in hypothetical systems in which all customers
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

12
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
either disclosure or withhold information, respectively. Figure 10 plots the join-up-to levels ¯λd(α) and ¯λw(α)
as well as the equilibrium join-up-to level ¯λ∗(α). We can see that, if the service provider adopts an SPT
policy (σ < 1, Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 10) and if all customers disclose information (γ∗= 1, in regions
III and IV), then the joining rate of customers may be upper bounded not only by the join-up-to level ¯λd(α)
but also by F −1
1 (α) (the overlap region of the blue and the black curves on panel (a) of the Figure). Suppose,
for instance, that the service reward is high enough that ¯λw and ¯λd cross region III (Panel (a) of Figure 10);
then there exists an intermediate range of α for which F −1
1 (α) ∈
¯λw(α), ¯λd(α)

. Here the customers have no
incentive to join at the rate that exceeds F −1
1 (α) because then they would all prefer withholding information.
At the same time, the join-up-to level when all customers withhold information, ¯λw(α), is below F −1
1 (α).
So even if the total arrival rate Λ exceeds the system capacity ¯µ, in this case customers will join only at
rate F −1
1 (α) and each customer has a positive individual surplus. That result is driven by customers having
control over their personal information. As far as we can tell, this outcome has not been reported in “unob-
servable queue” models, where customers usually obtain zero surplus at the join-up-to level. In addition, if
the service reward is relatively small—so that ¯λw and ¯λd cross region II (Panel (b) of Figure 10)—then there
is an intermediate range of α within which ¯λ∗∈
 ¯λw(α), ¯λd(α)

. Here, at the join-up-to level ¯λ∗, customers
use a nontrivial information disclosure strategy γ∗∈(0,1) and expect zero surpluses.
An examination of Figure 10(c) reveals that, when a service provider employs the LPT priority rule (σ > 1),
there exists an interval on which customers follow a two-tier join-up-to level: (i) customers use ¯λd(α) as
their join-up-to level if the total arrival rate Λ to the system is lower than some threshold F −1
0 (α); and
(ii) the maximum throughput is ¯λw(α) if that arrival rate Λ is higher than F −1
0 (α) (this is happening in the
region where for each α we observe two levels of black line ¯λ∗). This result reﬂects customers’ use of diﬀerent
equilibrium information disclosure strategies depending on whether Λ is below or above F −1
0 (α). In all other
regions, customers’ join-up-to level is less intricate: they join at a rate no higher than ¯λd(α) (resp., ¯λw(α))
if it is in their interest for all to disclose information, γ∗= 1 (resp., to withhold information, γ∗= 0).
Next, we investigate the eﬀect of customers’ control over information on the join-up-to level, or the
service provider’s maximum throughput, which directly aﬀects its potential proﬁtability. More speciﬁcally,
we compare the equilibrium join-up-to level when customers have control over their personal information,
¯λ∗(α), with the join-up-to level in the benchmark case of full information disclosure, ¯λd(α).
Theorem 4. In comparison with full information disclosure, customer control of information can only
beneﬁt the service provider by increasing the join-up-to level, if it employs the long-processing-time-ﬁrst
priority discipline (LPT, σ > 1). In all other cases, customer control of information weakly reduces the join-
up-to level at the service facility and hence also the service provider’s maximum throughput. Formally: if
σ > 1 then ¯λ∗(α) ≥¯λd(α); otherwise, ¯λ∗(α) ≤¯λd(α).
Proof
This theorem is straightforward from Lemmas 9 and 10.
□
The join-up-to level at the service facility is closely related to the average wait time experienced by
customers. Recall from Theorem 1 that a service provider’s adoption of the LPT priority discipline lengthens
customers’ expected wait time. It follows that allowing customers to control their personal information may
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
13
0
0.5
1
0
1
2
(a) σ < 1,R = 4
0
0.5
1
0
1
2
(b) σ < 1,R = 1
0
0.5
1
0
1
2
(c) σ > 1,R = 4
Figure 10
Join-up-to level ¯λ∗as a function of the probability α of a type-H request: SPT discipline in Panels
(a) and (b); LPT discipline in Panel (c).
shorten their expected wait time under a given joining rate, which raises the join-up-to level and beneﬁts the
service provider (see also Lemma 9). In contrast, a service provider that adopts the SPT priority discipline
reduces expected wait time and so the customer control of information may lower the join-up-to level , by
increasing the expected wait time under the same throughput. A lower join-up level would, of course, reduce
the service provider’s proﬁtability.12
References
Adan I, Resing J (2015) Queueing Theory. https://www.win.tue.nl/iadan/queueing.pdf.
12 Assuming that customers make join/balk decisions after observing their request type does not change the result
of Theorem 4 structurally. First, the join-up-to level of information-withholding customers ¯λw(α) doesn’t change—
the service provider has no information to prioritize their requests, hence such customers have no reason to behave
diﬀerently. Second, the join-up-to level of information-disclosing customers ¯λd(α) will increase if σ < 1 and decrease
otherwise—customers with type-L requests when balking increase the proportion of type-H requests in the throughput,
which increases ¯λd(α) under SPT discipline and decreases it otherwise.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
1
Online Supplements
Appendix A:
Proofs of Technical Lemmas
A.1.
Proofs of Lemma 2 and Lemma 3 (Page 2)
Ξ(γ,λ) is linear in γ. After simpliﬁcation:
Ξ(0,λ) = σ

α2σ2 −(α −1)2 −α(1 −α)(σ −1)

µ −λα

ασ3 + (α −1)2 σ2 −(α −1)(2α −1)σ + (α −1)2
.
The cubic function ασ3 + (α −1)2 σ2 −(α −1)(2α −1)σ + (α −1)2 is positive for α ∈[0,1], because its
discriminant (α −1)3 (α + 3) is negative for α ∈[0,1], which means that it has only one negative real root.
Thus, we have Ξ(0,λ) ≥0 ⇔λ ≤G0(α) where G0(α) ≡
µσ(α2σ2−(α−1)2−α(1−α)(σ−1))
α(ασ3+(α−1)2σ2−(α−1)(2α−1)σ+(α−1)2). As part of the
numerator of G0(α), α2σ2 −(α −1)2 −α(1 −α)(σ −1), a quadratic polynomial of α, has only one root
α∗=
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
in (0,1); and α2σ2 −(α −1)2 −α(1 −α)(σ −1) ≤0 ⇔α ≤
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
. From the
fact that α2σ2 −(α −1)2 −α(1 −α)(σ −1)|α=1/1+σ =
σ(1−σ)
(σ+1)2 , which is positive if σ < 1 and negative if σ > 1,
we have



1
σ+1 >
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
if σ < 1
1
σ+1 <
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
if σ > 1
(17)
From simple algebra, we have:
Ξ(1,λ) = σ

α2σ2 −(α −1)2
µ −λα

α2σ2 −(α −1)σ −(α −1)2
.
Case σ > 1: we have α2σ2 −(α −1)σ −(α −1)2 > 0 for ∀α ∈[0,1], from the fact that (i) α2σ2 −(α −1)σ −
(α −1)2 increases in σ because ∂

α2σ2 −(α −1)σ −(α −1)2
/∂σ = (2σ −1/4)α2 +(α −2)2 /4 > 0, and (ii)
limσ↘1

α2σ2 −ασ + σ −(α −1)2
= α ≥0. Then, we have Ξ(1,λ) ≥0 ⇔λ ≤G1(α) ≡
µ(α2σ2−(α−1)2)
α(α2σ2−(α−1)σ−(α−1)2).
One can show that α2σ2 −(α −1)2 > 0 ⇔α >
1
σ+1. Thus, we have G1(α) ≤0 ⇔α ≤
1
σ+1.
Case σ < 1: we have α2σ2 −(α −1)σ −(α −1)2, as a quadratic function of α, has one root 2−σ−σ√5−4σ
2(1−σ2)
in [0,1], value σ −1 < 0 at α = 0, and value σ2 > 0 at α = 1. Hence, we have α2σ2 −(α −1)σ −(α −1)2 >
0 ⇔α > 2−σ−σ√5−4σ
2(1−σ2)
. One can show that 2−σ−σ√5−4σ
2(1−σ2)
<
1
σ+1 if σ < 1, and α2σ2 −(α −1)2 > 0 ⇔α >
1
σ+1. To
summarize, we have:





α2σ2 −(α −1)2 < 0 and α2σ2 −(α −1)σ −(α −1)2 < 0 if α < 2−σ−σ√5−4σ
2(1−σ2)
<
1
σ+1
α2σ2 −(α −1)2 < 0 and α2σ2 −(α −1)σ −(α −1)2 > 0 if 2−σ−σ√5−4σ
2(1−σ2)
< α ≤
1
σ+1
α2σ2 −(α −1)2 > 0 and α2σ2 −(α −1)σ −(α −1)2 > 0 if α >
1
σ+1
.
Next, we discuss the value of Ξ(1,λ) by conditioning on α.
• If α ≤2−σ−σ√5−4σ
2(1−σ2)
<
1
σ+1, we have Ξ(1,λ) < 0 ⇔λ < G1(α) ≡
µ(α2σ2−(α−1)2)
α(α2σ2−(α−1)σ−(α−1)2) and G1(α) > 0.
Recall that the arrival rate is upper bounded, i.e., λ < ¯µ. We have G1(α) is above ¯µ, because G1(α) −
µσ
1+α(σ−1) =
µ(α−1)2(1−α(1−σ2))
−α(α2σ2−(α−1)σ−(α−1)2)(1+α(σ−1)) ≥0 for α ≤2−σ−σ√5−4σ
2(1−σ2)
. Thus, we have Ξ(1,λ) < 0 for ∀λ.
• If 2−σ−σ√5−4σ
2(1−σ2)
< α ≤
1
σ+1, we have Ξ(1,λ) < 0 ⇔λ > G1(α) and G1(α) ≤0. We have Ξ(1,λ) < 0 for ∀λ,
because λ > 0.
• If α >
1
σ+1, we have Ξ(1,λ) < 0 ⇔λ > G1(α) and G1(α) > 0.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

2
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
Next, we investigate
G0(α) −G1(α) =
µ(ασ2 + 1 −α)(1 −α) ·

(1 −α)2 −α2σ3
α

ασ3 + (α −1)2 σ2 −(α −1)(2α −1)σ + (α −1)2
α2σ2 −ασ + σ −(α −1)2,
multiplier of (1 −α)2 −α2σ3 is clearly non-negative for α ∈
h
2−σ−σ√5−4σ
2(1−σ2)
,1
i
from our above results. Thus,
we have G0(α)−G1(α) ≤0 ⇔(1 −α)2 −α2σ3 ≤0 ⇔α ≥
1
σ3/2+1 and G0(α)−G1(α) > 0 ⇔2−σ−σ√5−4σ
2(1−σ2)
≤α <
1
σ3/2+1.
At last, one can verify that:

1
σ3/2+1 >
1
σ+1 if σ < 1
1
σ3/2+1 <
1
σ+1 if σ > 1 and



1
σ3/2+1 >
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
if σ < 1
1
σ3/2+1 <
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
if σ > 1
.
(18)
The last result can be derived by combining (17) and (18).
A.2.
Proof of Lemma 4 (Page 3)
Using Ud and Uw from (2), we derive expression for CS = λ(γUd (γ,λ) + (1 −γ)Uw (γ,λ)):
CS = λR−λc

σ (σ −1)µ + λ(ασ3 −ασ2 + ασ + 1 −α)
σλ(σµ −λ(ασ + 1 −α))
+
(1 −σ)(µ −λα(1 −σ))(1 −α(1 + σ))2
σλ

(µ −αλ)

α2σ2 + (α −1)2
−α(1 −α)Γ(γ)


,
where Γ(γ) ≡γλ(1 −α(1 + σ)) + (σµ −(1 −α)λ) +
σ2(µ−αλ)2
γλ(1−α−ασ)+(σµ−(1−α)λ). We next prove that Γ(γ)
decreases in γ by showing that its ﬁrst derivative
dΓ(γ)
dγ
= λ(1 −α(1 + σ))
 
1 −
σ2 (µ −αλ)2
(γλ(1 −α(1 + σ)) + (σµ −(1 −α)λ))2
!
< 0.
Case α <
1
1+σ: we have 1 −α(1 + σ) > 0. From λ < ¯µ =
σµ
1+α(σ−1), we have (σµ −(1 −α)λ) > σαλ > 0.
Thus, γλ(1 −α(1 + σ)) + (σµ −(1 −α)λ) > 0. Then, we have:
σ (µ −αλ) −(γλ(1 −α(1 + σ)) + (σµ −(1 −α)λ)) = λ(1 −γ)(1 −α(1 + σ)) > 0
Hence, 1 −
σ2(µ−αλ)2
(γλ(1−α(1+σ))+(σµ−(1−α)λ))2 < 0 ⇒Γ′(γ) < 0.
Case α >
1
1+σ: we have 1 −α(1 + σ) < 0. First, if γ <
σµ−(1−α)λ
λ(α(1+σ)−1), we have γλ(1 −α(1 + σ)) +
(σµ −(1 −α)λ) > 0. Then, we have:
σ (µ −αλ) −(γλ(1 −α(1 + σ)) + (σµ −(1 −α)λ)) = λ(1 −γ)(1 −α(1 + σ)) < 0
Hence, 1 −
σ2(µ−αλ)2
(γλ(1−α(1+σ))+(σµ−(1−α)λ))2 > 0 ⇒Γ′(γ) < 0. Next, if γ >
σµ−(1−α)λ
λ(α(1+σ)−1) then γλ(1 −α(1 + σ)) +
(σµ −(1 −α)λ) < 0 and:
σ (µ −αλ) −(−γλ(1 −α(1 + σ)) −(σµ −(1 −α)λ)) =
(1 −γ)(1 −α(1 + σ)) + 2(γλ(1 −α(1 + σ)) + (σµ −(1 −α)λ)) < 0
Hence, 1 −
σ2(µ−αλ)2
(γλ(1−α(1+σ))+(σµ−(1−α)λ))2 > 0 and Γ′(γ) < 0.
In the above cases, we have Γ′(γ) < 0. Thus, Γ(γ) decreases in γ. Furthermore, we have
(µ −αλ)

α2σ2 + (α −1)2
−α(1 −α)Γ(0) = µ(1 −α(1 + σ))2 σµ −(1 −α)λ −σαλ
σµ −(1 −α)λ
> 0,
and
(µ −αλ)

α2σ2 + (α −1)2
−α(1 −α)Γ(1) = (µ −αλ)(1 −α(1 + σ))2 > 0,
so (µ −αλ)

α2σ2 + (α −1)2
−α(1 −α)Γ(γ) > 0. Then, we have CS(γ) increases in γ when σ < 1 and
decreases otherwise.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
3
A.3.
Proof of Lemma 5 (Page 5)
We consider two cases:
Case σ < 1:analyzing
expression
of
P σ<1
s
,
we
observe
(α −1)2 −α2σ2 > 0 ⇔α <
1
σ+1,

α2σ2 −σ (α −1) −(α −1)2
> 0 ⇔α > σ−2+σ√5−4σ
2(σ2−1)
, and
σ−2+σ√5−4σ
2(σ2−1)
<
1
σ+1. When α ≥σ−2+σ√5−4σ
2(σ2−1)
and
Ps > 0, Ps is clearly an increasing function of λ. We next consider the case α < σ−2+σ√5−4σ
2(σ2−1)
. We derive
∂Ps
∂λ =
cλµ
σ(µ−αλ)3(σµ−(1+α(σ−1))λ)2 ΞPs(λ), where
ΞPs(λ) = α

(2σ −1)
 1 −σ2
α3 +
 2σ2 −6σ + 3

α2 −3(σ −1)2 α + (1 −2σ)

λ2+
µ

4α3σ3 −α
 α2 + 2α −3

σ2 −4α(α −1)2 σ + (α −1)3
λ + 2σµ2 
(α −1)2 −α2σ2
.
We have ΞPs (0) = 2σµ2 
(α −1)2 −α2σ2
> 0, because α < σ−2+σ√5−4σ
2(σ2−1)
⇒(α −1)2 −α2σ2 > 0, and
ΞPs (¯µ) =
σµ2(1−α)3(ασ2+1−α)
(ασ−α+1)2
> 0. If we can prove ΞPs (λ) decreases in λ for λ ∈[0, ¯µ], we have ΞPs (λ) > 0 for
λ ∈[0, ¯µ] and further ∂Ps
∂λ > 0. We next prove ΞPs (λ) decreases in λ for λ ∈[0, ¯µ].
d
dλΞPs(λ) = 2α

(2σ −1)
 1 −σ2
α3 +
 2σ2 −6σ + 3

α2 −3(σ −1)2 α + (1 −2σ)

λ+
µ

4α3σ3 −α
 α2 + 2α −3

σ2 −4α(α −1)2 σ + (α −1)3
.
is a linear function of λ. Thus, if we can prove (i) Ξ′
Ps(0) < 0 and (ii) Ξ′
Ps(¯µ) < 0, we have ΞPs (λ) decreases
in λ for λ ∈[0, ¯µ].
First, we prove Ξ′
Ps(0) = µ((4σ3 −σ2 −4σ + 1)α3 + (8σ −2σ2 −3)α2 + (3σ2 −4σ + 3)α −1) < 0 when
α <
σ−2+σ√5−4σ
2(σ2−1)
.
We
ﬁrst
have
that
Ξ′
Ps(0)
increases
in
α,
because
∂
∂αΞ′
Ps(0) = µΦ(α) =
µ(3(4σ −1)(σ2 −1)α2 −2(2σ2 −8σ + 3)α + (3σ2 −4σ + 3)) > 0 which we will prove next.
1. If α < 1/4, we have 3(4σ −1)(σ2 −1) > 0, Φ(0) = 3σ2 −4σ + 3 > 0, Φ

σ−2+σ√5−4σ
2(σ2−1)

=
σ2
2(1−σ2)
 (11 −8σ)√5 −4σ + 18σ2 −30σ + 9

> 0, and Φ(1) = 4σ2 (3σ −1) < 0.
2. If 1/4 < α < 1/3, we have 3(4σ −1)(σ2 −1) < 0, Φ(0) = 3σ2 −4σ + 3 > 0, Φ

σ−2+σ√5−4σ
2(σ2−1)

=
σ2
2(1−σ2)
 (11 −8σ)√5 −4σ + 18σ2 −30σ + 9

> 0, and Φ(1) = 4σ2 (3σ −1) < 0.
3. If α > 1/3, we have 3(4σ −1)(σ2 −1) < 0, Φ(0) = 3σ2 −4σ + 3 > 0, and Φ(1) = 4σ2 (3σ −1) > 0. Thus,
Φ(α) > 0 for α ∈(0,1).
Summarizing, we have
∂
∂αΞ′
Ps(0) > 0 for α ∈

0, σ−2+σ√5−4σ
2(σ2−1)

. At the upper bound of α, we have
Ξ′
Ps(0)|α= σ−2+σ√5−4σ
2(σ2−1)
= −
µσ3(1−σ)
2(σ2−1)2
 4 −5σ + (2 −σ)√5 −4σ

< 0. Thus, we have Ξ′
Ps(0) < 0 when α <
σ−2+σ√5−4σ
2(σ2−1)
. We get µ (α−1)2
ασ−α+1

−3α2σ3 −α(1 −α)σ2 −3α(1 −α)σ −(α −1)2
< 0 when evaluating Ξ′
Ps(¯µ).
Thus, we proved that Ξ′
Ps (λ) decreases in λ for λ ∈[0, ¯µ].
When σ < 1, P σ<1
s
can be rewritten as
P σ<1
s
= cλ2
σ
(σ2−1)µ−λ(σ−2)
λ2
−1−σ2
λ
α −
λ(1−σ)((λ−µ)2+σµ2)α+µ(σµ(σµ−λ)−(λ−µ)2)
λ2(µ−αλ)2
σµ + α(1 −σ)λ −λ
which is clearly a decreasing function of α. Using simple algebra, we have Ps = 0, if (i) α ≤
1
σ+1 and λ = 0,
or (ii) α >
1
σ+1 and λ = G1(α).
Case σ > 1: we have ∂Ps
∂λ =
cλ
σµ(σµ−(1+α(σ−1))λ)3 Ω(λ), where
Ω(λ) = α(α(σ −1) + 1)2  σ2 + (α −1)(σ −1)

λ2 −3ασµ

ασ3 + (α −1)2 σ2 −
 2α2 −3α + 1

σ + (α −1)2
λ
+2σ2µ2  α2σ2 + α(α −1)σ −
 2α2 −3α + 1

.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

4
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
Whether Ω(λ) > 0 determines the monotonicity of Ps regarding λ. We note that σ2 + (α −1)(σ −1) > 0
increases in α for σ > 1, and σ2 + (α −1)(σ −1)|α=0 = σ2 −σ + 1 Thus, we have σ2 + (α −1)(σ −1) > 0.
When λ = 0, we have
Ω(0) = 2σ2µ2  α2σ2 + α(α −1)σ −
 2α2 −3α + 1

= 2σ2µ2   σ2 + σ −2

α2 + (3 −σ)α −1

,
which is greater than zero for α >
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
, because (i) σ2 + σ −2 > 0 for σ > 1, (ii)
((σ2 + σ −2)α2 + (3 −σ)α −1) evaluated at α = 0 equals −1 and evaluated at α =
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
it equals
0. When λ = G0(α), we have
Ω(G0(α)) = ασ2µ2  σ2 + (α −1)(σ −1)

  (α −1)(ασ2 −α + 1)
α(σ2 + (α −1)(σ −1)) + 1
2
−
 (α −1)(ασ2 −α + 1)
α(σ2 + (α −1)(σ −1)) + 1
!
.
We next prove Ω(G0(α)) < 0 for α ∈

σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
,1

. First,
(α−1)(ασ2−α+1)
α(σ2+(α−1)(σ−1)) +1 increases in α, because
its derivative wrt α is
(σ−1)(σ3+σ2−1)α2+2(σ−1)α+(σ2−σ+1)
α2(σ2+(α−1)(σ−1))2
> 0 for σ > 1. Evaluated at α =
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
it
equals 0, and at α = 1 it equals 1. Given that x2 −x < 0,∀x ∈(0,1), we conclude that Ω(λ) decreases from a
positive value to a negative value when λ increases in (0,G0(α)). This proves that Ps is a concave function
of λ.
Considering derivative of Ps wrt α, ∂Ps
∂α =
cλ2
σµ(σµ−(1+α(σ−1))λ)3 Υ(λ) where
Υ(λ) =

(α(σ −1) + 1)3 + σ (σ −1)((σ −1)α + 1)

λ2−
σµ

3(σ −1)2 α2 +
 2σ2 + σ + 5

(σ −1)α +
 σ2 + 2

λ + σ2µ2   2σ2 + 2σ −4

α + (3 −σ)

.
Whether
Υ(λ) > 0
determines
the
monotonicity
of
Ps
regarding
α.
Clearly,
(α(σ −1) + 1)3 +
σ (σ −1)((σ −1)α + 1) > 0. Also, we have Υ(0) = σ2µ2 ((2σ2 + 2σ −4)α + (3 −σ)) which is positive
for α >
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
, because (i) 2σ2 + 2σ −4 > 0 for σ > 1, and (ii) (2σ2 + 2σ −4)α + (3 −σ)
evaluated at α =
σ−3+√
5σ2−2σ+1
2(σ2+σ−2)
equals
√
5σ2 −2σ + 1 > 0. Evaluating Υ(λ) at µG0(α), we obtain
σ2µ2(1−α)
α2(α(σ−1)+1)(σ2+(α−1)(σ−1))2 Ψ(σ) where
Ψ(σ) = −(σ −1)4  σ2 + 3σ + 2

α5 −(σ −1)3  −2σ2 + 5σ + 8

α4 + (σ −1)2  2σ4 −σ3 + 4σ2 + 2σ −13

α3
+(σ −1)
 2σ4 −σ2 + 9σ −11

α2 + (σ −1)
 σ3 + 2σ2 −2σ + 5

α +
 σ2 −σ + 1

.
Studying derivatives Ψ(n)
σ
of higher order of Ψ(σ), one can observe Ψ(6)
σ
= 720α3(2 −α2) > 0,∀α ∈(0,1).
Also, when σ = 1, ∀α ∈(0,1), all derivatives till order 5 (including) are positive. Thus, Ψ(σ) > 0 for σ > 1.
When λ = ¯µ, we have Υ(¯µ) = −
2σ2µ2(1−α)(σ−1)(α(σ2−1)+1)
α(σ−1)+1
< 0. Thus, we have Υ(λ) > 0 for λ ∈(0,G0(α)).
This proves that Ps is a increasing function of α in the region of λ ∈(0,G0(α)).
A.4.
Proof of Lemma 6 (Page 5)
Θ(λ) is positive. Thus, we have ∆S > 0 if σ > 1, and ∆S < 0 if σ < 1. Next, we show that Θ(λ) decreases in
λ. We have:
dΘ(λ)
dλ
=



1
σ−1

α(σ −1) + 1 −
σµ2(α(σ2−1)+1)
(αλ(σ−1)+µ)2

if σ > 1
1
1−σ
1
σ−1

σµ2(1−α(1−σ2))
(µ−λα(1−σ))2 −(1 −α(1 −σ))

if σ < 1
,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
5
which increases in λ. In addition, we have Θ′(¯µ) = −(1 −α)
α(σ−1)+1
α(σ2−1)+1 < 0. Thus, Θ′(λ) < 0, i.e., Θ(λ)
decreases in λ. Then, ∆S increases in λ if σ > 1, and decreases otherwise. In the σ > 1 case, when λ = G0(α),
we calculate
∆S = c(σ −1)(ασ2 −α + 1)(σ2 + (α −1)σ + (1 −α))(α2σ2 + α(α −1)σ −(2α2 −3α + 1))
2
(1 −α)(ασ3 + σ2 −α + 1)

ασ3 + (α −1)2 σ2 −(2α2 −3α + 1)σ + (α −1)22
which is positive because σ2 + (α −1)σ + (1 −α) = (σ −1 + α)σ + (1 −α) > 0. In the σ < 1 case, we have
limλ→¯µ Θ(λ) = 0 ⇒limλ→¯µ ∆S = −∞. Also, when λ = G1(α) =
µ(α2σ2−(α−1)2)
α(α2σ2−(α−1)σ−(α−1)2) and α >
1
σ+1, we have
∆S =
cα(σ−1)(α2σ2−α2+2α−1)
2
σ(α−1)2(−(1−σ2)α2+(2−σ)α−(1−σ)), in which −(1 −σ2)α2 +(2 −σ)α −(1 −σ) > 0 when α >
1
σ+1 because
−
 1 −σ2
α2 + (2 −σ)α −(1 −σ)

α=
1
σ+1 =
σ2
σ + 1 > 0
∂
∂α(−
 1 −σ2
α2 + (2 −σ)α −(1 −σ)) = 2 −σ −2α
 1 −σ2
> 0.
Thus, we have ∆S < 0 when λ = G1(α). Clearly, if λ = 0 and α ≤
1
σ+1, we have ∆S = 0.
A.5.
Proof of Lemma 9 (Page 11)
From (2), we have
Uw(0,λ) = R −c
 
α(α −1)(σ −1)2
σµ(1 + α(σ −1)) + 1 + α(σ2 −1)
1 + α(σ −1)
1
σµ −λ(1 + α(σ −1))
!
in which, 1 + α(σ2 −1) > 0 and 1 + α(σ −1) > 0 for α ∈[0,1] and σ > 0. Therefore,
α(α−1)(σ−1)2
σµ(1+α(σ−1)) +
α(σ2−1)+1
1+α(σ−1)
1
σµ−λ(1+α(σ−1)) increases in λ. Thus, Uw (0,λ) decreases in λ. This means that Uw (0,λ) = 0 has a
unique solution ¯λw =
σµ(σν−1−α(σ−1))
σν(α(σ−1)+1)−α(α−1)(σ−1)2 , where ν = Rµ/c. We also have limλ→¯µ Uw(0,λ) = −∞and
Uw(0,0) = c
µ

ν −1+α(σ−1)
σ

> 0. Hence, ¯λw ∈(0, ¯µ).
From (2), we have
Ud(1,λ) = R −c
1
µ −αλ

ασ (2α −1) −2α + 2
1 + α(σ −1)
+ µ(1 −α)(1 + α(σ2 −1))
1 + α(σ −1)
1
σµ −λ(1 + α(σ −1))

decreasing in λ. Thus, Ud (1,λ) = 0 has a unique solution ¯λd. Also, Ud (1,λ) increases in R, so ¯λd increases
in R. To solve for ¯λd, we ﬁnd the roots of Ud(1,λ) = 0 by solving:
να(ασ −α + 1)λ2 + µ(α(2ασ −2α −σ + 2) −ν (2ασ −α + 1))λ + µ2 (νσ −ασ + α −1) = 0,
here (ασ −α + 1) > 0, and evaluated at λ = 0 this expression yields µ2 (νσ −ασ + α −1) > 0 because R ≥c/¯µ;
evaluated at λ = ¯µ we have −
µ2(1−α)(ασ2−α+1)
(ασ−α+1)
< 0. Thus, there exists unique solution ¯λd ∈(0, ¯µ).
Lemma 10. ¯λw < ¯λd if σ < 1 and ¯λw > ¯λd otherwise.
Proof
The diﬀerence between Uw (0,λ) and Ud (1,λ) is
Uw (0,λ) −Ud (1,λ) =
cλα(1 −α)
σµ(σµ −λ(1 + α(σ −1)))
µ + α(σ −1)λ
µ −αλ
(σ −1).
One
can
verify
that
µ + α(σ −1)λ > 0
and
µ −αλ > 0,
by
using
λ < ¯µ.
Hence,
we
have

Uw (0,λ) −Ud (1,λ) < 0 if σ < 1
Uw (0,λ) −Ud (1,λ) > 0 if σ > 1 , which leads to
 ¯λw < ¯λd if σ < 1
¯λw > ¯λd if σ > 1 .
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

6
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
Next, we investigate how G0(α) and G1(α) intersect with ¯λw and ¯λd. Recall from the proof of Proposition
1 that G0(α) −G1(α) = 0 ⇔α =
1
σ3/2+1.
Intersection of G1(α) and ¯λw: when σ < 1, intersection point can be derived by solving
µ

α2σ2 −(α −1)2
α

α2σ2 −(α −1)σ −(α −1)2 =
σµ(σν −1 −α(σ −1))
σν (α(σ −1) + 1) −α(α −1)(σ −1)2
Which is equivalent to solving:
K1 (α) ≡(1 −σ)α3 +
 2σ −σ2 + σν −2

α2 + (1 −2σν −σ)α + σν = 0
limα→−∞K1 (α) < 0, K1 (0) = σν > 0, K1 (1) = −σ2 < 0, and limα→∞K1 (α) > 0. Hence, G1(α) and ¯λw
have a unique intersection point αs1 ∈(0,1). Moreover, we have G1(α) = µ > ¯λw = ν−1
ν µ at α = 1, which
leads to G1(α) ≤¯λw ⇔α ≤αs1 and G1(α) ≥¯λw ⇔α ≥αs1.
Then, we derive the range of ν such that ¯λw does not cross region II, where customers’ equilibrium behavior
is γ∗∈(0,1). Recall that ¯λw increases in R. Substituting α with
1
σ3/2+1 (intersection point of G0(α) and
G1(α)) into K1 (α) and equating it to zero gives the lower bound of ν such that ¯λw does not cross region II:
(σ−1)√σ+1
σ2(σ−√σ+1). Thus, ¯λw does not cross region II iﬀR ≥
c((σ−1)√σ+1)
µσ2(σ−√σ+1) .
Intersection of G1(α) and ¯λd: one has to solve
0 = Ud (1) = R −c
1
µ −α¯λd

ασ (2α −1) −2α + 2
1 + α(σ −1)
+ µ(1 −α)(1 + α(σ2 −1))
1 + α(σ −1)
1
σµ −¯λd (1 + α(σ −1))

.
To solve for the intersection point, we substitute ¯λd with G1(α) in Ud (1) to obtain R −
c
σµQ1(α) where:
Q1(α) ≡α((1 −σ)α −1)((1 −σ2)α2 −(2 −σ)α + (1 −σ))
(α −1)2
=
(1 −σ)(1 −σ2)
(α −1)2
α

α −
1
1 −σ

α −σ −2 + σ√5 −4σ
2(σ2 −1)

α −σ −2 −σ√5 −4σ
2(σ2 −1)

When σ < 1, rewrite Q1 (α) = (1 −σ)(1 −σ2) (α−α1)(α−α2)(α−α4)(α−α5)
(α−α3)2
, where α3 = 1 is the vertical asymp-
tote, and α1 = 0, α2 = σ−2−σ√5−4σ
2(σ2−1)
, α4 = σ−2+σ√5−4σ
2(σ2−1)
, and α5 =
1
1−σ are zero points. In addition, we have
α1 < α2 < α3 < α4 < α5. Simple algebraic manipulation reveals that the ﬁrst derivative Q′
1(α) > 0,∀α ∈
(α2,α3). Hence Q1 (α) increases from zero to ∞when α increases from α2 to α3. When σ > 1, rewrite
Q1 (α) = (1 −σ)((1 −σ2)α2 −(2 −σ)α + (1 −σ))

α −
1
1−σ

α
(α−1)2 , where
α
(α−1)2 > 0 is an increasing func-
tion. Derivative Q′
1(α) > 0. Thus, Q1 (α) increases. Note that Q1 (0) = 0 and limα→1 Q1 (α) = ∞. Hence,
Q1 (α) increases from zero to ∞when α increases from 0 to 1. Combining the two case for σ < 1 and σ > 1,
we have that R −
c
σµQ1 (α) has a unique root αs2 ∈(0,1), which is also the intersection point of G1(α) and
¯λd.
Since ¯λw < ¯λd when σ < 1, we should have αs1 < αs2; otherwise, if αs2 ≤αs1, from the result that G1(α) ≤
¯λw ⇔α ≤αs1, we have G1(αs2) = ¯λd|α=αs2 ≤¯λw, which conﬂicts with the result ¯λw < ¯λd.
Thus, when σ < 1 and Rµ/c ≥
(σ−1)√σ+1
σ2(σ−√σ+1), customers’ equilibrium join-up-to level is ¯λw for α ∈[0,αs1]
(see, e.g., region I in Figure 10(a)), G1(α) for α ∈(αs1,αs2] (see, e.g., region III in Figure 10(a)), and ¯λd for
α ∈[αs2,1] (see, e.g., region IV in Figure 10(a)).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
7
We next consider the case σ < 1 and Rµ/c <
(σ−1)√σ+1
σ2(σ−√σ+1), where ¯λw may cross region II. In this region II,
customers’ equilibrium information disclosure strategy γ∗∈(0,1) given in Proposition 1 is a function of α
and λ, and it fulﬁlls Uw (γ∗) = Ud (γ∗). To ﬁnd the join-up-to level in the region II, we need to ﬁx α and solve
for ¯µm from γUd (γ∗)+(1 −γ)Uw (γ∗) = 0, equivalent to Uw(γ∗) = 0, which can be rewritten as R −L(λ) = 0
with
L(λ) ≡−
cα(1 −α)(1 −α(1 −σ)(σ2 + 1))(1 −α(α(σ −1) −σ)(σ −1))
(1 −α(1 −σ))(1 −ασ)(1 −α(1 −σ))(α2 (σ −1) + α(σ2 −σ + 1))
(λ −λ4)(λ −λ5)
(λ −λ1)(λ −λ2)(λ −λ3).
Here −
µα(1−α)(1−α(1−σ)(σ2+1))(1−α(α(σ−1)−σ)(σ−1))
(1−α(1−σ))(1−ασ)(1−α(1−σ))(α2(σ−1)+α(σ2−σ+1)) < 0, ¯λd =
α(1−σ)
1−ασ
σµ
1+α(σ−1), λ2 =
σµ
1+α(σ−1), and λ3 =
µ(α−1)(σ−1)
α(σ2+(α−1)(σ−1)) are three positive vertical asymptotes of L(λ). Further, λ4 =
σµ(1−σ)
α(σ−1)(σ2+1)+1 and λ5 =
µ(1−σ)(1−α+ασ)
1−α(α(σ−1)−σ)(σ−1) are two positive zero points of L(λ). One can show that ¯λd < λi for i = 2,...,5, when
α <
1
σ3/2+1, where
1
σ3/2+1 (intersection point of G1(α) and G0(α)). We also have L(0) = (1+α(σ−1))
σ
≤Rµ
c ,
L(λ) > 0 for λ < ¯λd, and limλ↗λ1 L(λ) = ∞. Investigating derivative
∂
∂λ

(λ−λ4)(λ−λ5)
(λ−λ1)(λ−λ2)(λ−λ3)

for λ < λ1, we
have L′ (λ) > 0 for λ < λ1.
Combining the above results we have that when λ increases from zero to λ1, customers equilibrium utility
under the equilibrium information disclosure strategy γ∗increases from (1+α(σ−1))
σ
to ∞. Hence, there is a
unique solution ¯λm (see, e.g., region II in Figure 10(b)).
Intersection of G0(α) and ¯λw: when σ > 1, the intersection point can be derived by solving:
K2 (α) ≡(1 −σ)2 α3 + (1 −σ)(2σ + σν −1)α2 −σ (2ν −σν + 1)α + σν = 0
where limα→−∞K2 (α) < 0, K2 (0) = σν > 0, K2 (1) = −σ2 < 0, and limα→∞K2 (α) > 0. Hence, G0(α) and
¯λw have a unique intersection point αl2 ∈(0,1). Moreover, we have G0(α) = µ > ¯λw = ν−1
ν µ at α = 1, which
leads to G0(α) ≤¯λw ⇔α ≤αl2 and G0(α) ≥¯λw ⇔α ≥αl2.
Intersection of G0(α) and ¯λd: intersection point satisﬁes Ud (1) = 0 or
R −c
1
µ −α¯λd

ασ (2α −1) −2α + 2
1 + α(σ −1)
+ µ(1 −α)(1 + α(σ2 −1))
1 + α(σ −1)
1
σµ −¯λd (1 + α(σ −1))

= 0.
To solve for the intersection point, we substitute ¯λd with G0(α) in Ud (1) to get R −
c
µσQ2(α), where
Q2(α) = α((2σ2 −σ −1)α + σ + 1)((σ −1)α + (σ2 −σ + 1))
(1 −α)((σ3 −1)α + (σ2 + 1))
.
When σ < 1, we can rewrite
Q2 (α) = (2σ2 −σ −1)(1 −σ)
(σ3 −1)
· (α −α1)(α −α4)(α −α5)
(α −α2)(α −α3)
,
where α2 = 1 and α3 = σ2+1
1−σ3 > 1 are the vertical asymptote, and α1 = 0, α4 =
σ+1
1+σ−2σ2 , and α5 = σ2−σ+1
1−σ
are
all positive zero points. In addition, we have α1 = 0 < α2 = 1 < α3 < α4,α5. One can verify that the ﬁrst
derivative Q′
2 (α) > 0,∀α ∈(α1,α2). Hence, Q2 (α) increases from zero to ∞when α increases from 0 towards
1.
When σ > 1, we can rewrite
Q2 (α) =
α
1 −α
((2σ2 −σ −1)α + σ + 1)((σ −1)α + (σ2 −σ + 1))
((σ3 −1)α + (σ2 + 1))
,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751

8
Hu, Momot, and Wang: Privacy Management in Service Systems
in which
α
1−α increases in α, and one can easily verify that ((2σ2−σ−1)α+σ+1)((σ−1)α+(σ2−σ+1))
(σ3−1)α+(σ2+1)
also increases
in α because its ﬁrst derivative is positive when σ > 1. Note that Q2 (0) = 0 and limα→1 Q1 (α) = ∞. Hence,
Q2 (α) increases from zero to ∞when α increases from 0 towards 1. Combining the above two case, we have
that R −
c
σµQ2 (α) has a unique root αs1 ∈(0,1), which is also the intersection point of G0(α) and ¯λd.
Since ¯λd < ¯λw when σ > 1, we should have αl1 < αl2; otherwise, if αl1 ≥αl2, from the result that G0(α) ≥
¯λw ⇔α ≥αl2, we have G0(αl1) = ¯λd|α=αl1 ≥¯λw, which conﬂicts with the result ¯λd < ¯λw.
Thus, when σ > 1, the join-up-to level is ¯λw for α ∈[0,αl1] (see, e.g., region V in Figure 10(c)),
 ¯λd
if Λ ≤G0(α)
¯λw if Λ > G0(α) for α ∈(αs1,αs2] (see, e.g., region VI in Figure 10(c)), and ¯λd for α ∈[αl2,1] (see, e.g.,
region VII in Figure 10(c)).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3628751