TITLE: Pricing and Matching with Forward-Looking Buyers and Sellers
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2019
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2018.0769
---

TSpace Research Repository 
 
tspace.library.utoronto.ca 
 
 
Pricing and Matching with Forward-Looking 
Buyers and Sellers 
 
Yiwei Chen & Ming Hu 
 
Version Pre-print or submitted manuscript. 
 
Citation 
(published version) 
Chen, Y., & Hu, M. (2020). Pricing and matching with forward-looking 
buyers and sellers. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 22(4), 
717-734. 
 
Copyright / License Copyright © 2019, INFORMS 
 
DOI https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2018.0769 
Publisher’s Statement This is a submitted manuscript of an article published by INFORMS in 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to cite TSpace items 
 
Always cite the published version, so the author(s) will receive recognition through services that track 
citation counts, e.g. Scopus. If you need to cite the page number of the author manuscript from TSpace 
because you cannot access the published version, then cite the TSpace version in addition to the published 
version using the permanent URI (handle) found on the record page. 
 
This article was made openly accessible by U of T Faculty. 
Please tell us how this access benefits you. Your story matters. 
 

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
Pricing and Matching with Forward-looking Buyers and Sellers
Yiwei Chen
Engineering Systems and Design, Singapore University of Technology and Design, yiwei chen@sutd.edu.sg
Ming Hu
Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3E6, ming.hu@rotman.utoronto.ca
We study a dynamic market over a ﬁnite horizon for a single product or service in which buyers with private
valuations and sellers with private supply costs arrive following Poisson processes. A single market-making
intermediary decides dynamically on the ask and bid price that will be posted to buyers and sellers respec-
tively, and on the matching decisions after buyers and sellers agree to buy and sell. Buyers and sellers can
wait strategically for better prices after they arrive. This problem is motivated by the emerging sharing
economy and directly speaks to the core of operations management that is about matching supply with
demand. The dynamic, stochastic, and game-theoretic nature makes the problem intractable. We employ the
mechanism design methodology to establish a tractable upper bound on the optimal proﬁt, which motivates
a simple heuristic policy. Our heuristic policy is: ﬁxed ask and bid prices plus price adjustments as com-
pensation for waiting cost, in conjunction with the greedy matching policy on a ﬁrst-come-ﬁrst-served basis.
These ﬁxed base prices balance demand and supply in expectation and can be computed eﬃciently. The
waiting-compensated price processes are time-dependent and tend to have opposite trends at the beginning
and end of the horizon. Under this heuristic policy, forward-looking buyers and sellers behave myopically.
This policy is shown to be asymptotically optimal. Our results suggest the intermediary might not lose much
optimality by maintaining stable prices unless the underlying market conditions have signiﬁcantly changed,
not to mention that frequent surge pricing may antagonize riders and induce riders and drivers to behave
strategically in ways that are hard to account for with traditional pricing models.
1.
Introduction
Market makers have long existed in many marketplaces. The rise of the sharing economy has
allowed emerging marketplaces and market-making intermediaries to tap into our daily lives. They
select and publicly announce their bid and ask prices. Buyers who are willing to pay above the ask
price would want to buy from the intermediary, whereas sellers with an opportunity cost below the
bid price would want to sell to the intermediary. Unlike the traditional market makers such as used-
car dealers, the emerging market-making intermediaries do not buy and sell assets with inventory
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
2
holding. Instead, they focus on enabling the matching between sellers and buyers. For example,
luxury fashion platforms crowdsource pre-owned clothing and handbags and sell them to customers.
Uber and Lyft crowdsource freelance drivers and match them with riders by making pricing and
matching decisions. Postmates and Deliv pay travelers to deliver parcels to end consumers. In
most of those applications, the intermediary needs to decide, not only on the inter-temporal ask
and bid prices, but also on the detailed matching decisions between buyers and sellers after they
agree on the prices. For instance, Uber seems to implement a greedy matching policy that is on a
ﬁrst-come-ﬁrst-served basis along the temporal dimension.1
Buyers and sellers can time their transactions based on market prices and their expectation
of the likelihood of being matched. On the demand side, luxury fashion buyers may time their
purchases. Chen et al. (2015) observe that Uber’s customers often choose to “wait out” the price
surges. On the supply side, freelance drivers can decide when to work. Then it is desirable to design
the pricing and matching policies that take into account the forward-looking behavior of buyers
and sellers.
In some two-sided markets, such as the ride-hailing market, we observe that diﬀerent ride-hailing
platforms adopt diﬀerent pricing strategies. On one hand, Uber implements surge pricing with
likely varying price for the same trip at diﬀerent times. On the other hand, Gett, another ride-
hailing platform that operates in U.K. promises to passengers that it sticks to no surge pricing
even when demand is high.2 Therefore, we are motivated to explore whether the intermediary shall
adopt dynamic pricing vs. ﬁxed pricing strategy in the two-sided market with forward-looking
buyers and sellers. Though our motivation is the ride-hailing market, for simplicity of exposure, we
abstract away the spatial dimension of the practical context and focus on the temporal dimension.
In particular, we model a dynamic market over a ﬁnite horizon for a homogeneous product or
service in which buyers with private valuations and sellers with private supply costs arrive following
Poisson processes. A single market-making intermediary decides dynamically on the ask and bid
price that will be posted to buyers and sellers respectively, and on the matching decisions after
buyers and sellers agree to buy and sell. Buyers and sellers can wait strategically for better prices
after they arrive.
1 Uber seems to apply the match-to-the-closest greedy policy in the spatial dimension. Hu and Zhou (2016a) show
that under some special conditions, e.g., when all travelers are going in the same direction, this greedy matching
policy along the spatial dimension can be optimal.
2 http://time.com/4953495/uber-london-alternative/
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
3
1.1.
Our Results and Contributions
As far as we know, this is the ﬁrst paper that studies an intermediary’s two-sided pricing and
matching problem in which both buyers and sellers exhibit forward-looking behavior. The main
technical challenge, beyond the works on one-sided revenue management problems with forward-
looking buyers, is due to a demand-supply matching constraint that the number of buyers and
sellers who transact at any point of time must be equal along any sample path. This operational-
level constraint makes the two-sided pricing and matching problem signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the
revenue management and pricing problem with forward-looking buyers.
We obtain the following set of results, and consider the ﬁrst two results as our main contributions.
(i) We use the mechanism design approach to establish a tractable upper bound on the inter-
mediary’s optimal proﬁt. Because of the system’s stochastic nature and buyers’ and sellers’
forward-looking behavior, it is very challenging to compute the intermediary’s optimal policy
and proﬁt. Therefore, we establish a tractable upper bound on the intermediary’s optimal
proﬁt, which serves as a benchmark to evaluate the performance of any heuristic policy. This
upper bound is obtained in the following way. First, we randomly generate a sample path of
buyers’ and sellers’ arrival processes and their valuations. Second, for any of such a sample
path, we solve a deterministic assignment problem, which is a special type of 0-1 integer
programs. Third, we compute the expected optimal value of these deterministic assignment
problems. We show this procedure indeed provides an upper bound by a mechanism design
approach. We begin by proving that the platform’s optimal proﬁt is upper bounded by the
optimal value of an auxiliary two-sided dynamic mechanism design problem. We then show
that the optimal value of this auxiliary problem is upper bounded by the expected optimal
value of those assignment problems mentioned above. Unlike the counterpart in the revenue
management setting with forward-looking buyers, establishing such an upper bound for the
two-sided market is technically challenging, which is a main contribution of this paper.
(ii) We propose a simple market-making pricing and matching policy. On the pricing side, the
market maker posts ﬁxed ask and bid prices plus a (time-dependent) price adjustment as
compensation for the expected cost of waiting to be matched, and on the matching side, the
market maker implements the greedy matching policy on a ﬁrst-come-ﬁrst-served basis. Those
ﬁxed prices balance demand and supply and can be computed eﬃciently. The commitment
to the ﬁxed base prices with a price adjustment for the expected waiting cost induces the
strategic buyers and sellers to behave myopically. They will submit a request for matching
upon arrival without delay if the buyer’s valuation is no less than the ﬁxed ask price or the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
4
seller’s cost is no more than the ﬁxed bid price. The price adjustment on top of the ﬁxed
prices for a buyer or a seller arriving at a speciﬁc time is the expected cost of waiting to
be matched after submitting his or her matching request. The eﬀective prices oﬀered after
compensating for waiting are in general time-varying and tend to have opposite trends at
the beginning and the end of the horizon. But we show that when the volumes of demand
and supply are large, the compensation for waiting becomes negligible (more speciﬁcally, it
is O(1/n1/3) where n is the scaling of the arrival rates) and the eﬀective price trajectory
tends to be stationary; moreover, when customers are willing to wait for a certain length of
time without being compensated3, the heuristic price trajectory can become stationary. The
waiting compensation is due to the randomness in the buyers’ and sellers’ arrival processes
and the fact that even if buyers and sellers are willing to transact, they may not be able to
do so because of the shortage on the other side, an issue which does not exist in the revenue
management setting. Characterizing the simple market-making pricing and matching policy
including the waiting compensation is another main contribution of this paper.
(iii) We show that our proposed simple market-making policy is nearly optimal. Put diﬀerently,
we show that the gap between the proﬁt yielded under our simple market-making policy and
our established proﬁt upper bound mentioned above diminishes to zero, as the arrival rates
on both sides of the market rise. The optimality gap is O(1/n1/2) where n is the scaling of
the arrival rates. This implies that the beneﬁt from contingent pricing, i.e., making prices
dependent on the realized demand and supply, is second-order and diminishes as n grows.
We conduct a series of numerical experiments to show that our proposed policy performs
consistently well in a wide range of market environments.
(iv) We conduct comparative statics analysis for the ﬁxed base prices and other corresponding
performance measures. We show that even in a market environment with demand and supply
in large quantities, the optimal ﬁxed bid and ask prices should be updated when the mar-
ket environment changes. In particular, when buyers’ (resp. sellers’) arrival rate increases,
both the optimal ﬁxed bid and ask prices should increase (resp. decrease), and the resulting
ﬂuid matching quantity and the corresponding intermediary’s proﬁt would increase (resp.
increase). These comparative statics are intuitive and desirable, but may become ambiguous
in alternative queuing formulations (see, e.g., Tang et al. 2018 for comparative statics of prices
on the supply-side parameters).
3 For example, Uber often maintains an estimated waiting time of less than ﬁve minutes for riders (see Hall et al.
2015), and according to Uber’s latest policy, a driver will be compensated for having to wait more than ﬁve minutes
after arriving at the pickup location. This suggests that a wait of less than ﬁve minutes on both sides of demand and
supply seems to be tolerable without the need of compensation.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
5
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides literature review. Section
3 introduces our model. Section 4 presents an upper bound on the intermediary’s optimal proﬁt.
Section 5 proposes a simply heuristic policy and analyzes its performance. Section 6 conducts the
comparative statics analysis. Section 7 concludes the paper with a discussion on the managerial
insights.
2.
Literature Review
The following two papers are closely related to ours regarding managerial implications. Riquelme
et al. (2015) study a two-sided platform’s pricing problem in the ride-hailing context. The authors
assume that drivers are very likely to re-enter the market after completing a ride and make them-
selves available for another trip. However, they do not consider drivers’ and riders’ forward-looking
behavior. They show that a static pricing policy is optimal in a so-called large-market regime. In
other words, static pricing can be nearly optimal when the market is thick with large volumes of
supply and demand. There is a little beneﬁt associated with changing prices reacting to the system’s
random ﬂuctuation. However, their results also imply that with a diﬀerent market environment,
there exists a diﬀerent optimal static price. Similarly, with a diﬀerent model, Cachon et al. (2018)
also show that drivers and riders are generally better oﬀwith diﬀerent prices contingent on varying
supply and demand conditions. We further conﬁrm these managerial implications after taking into
account the forward-looking behavior of buyers and sellers.
It is extremely desirable to provide a simple solution to a complex system and yet show that
the solution can still be close to optimal. Gallego and van Ryzin (1994) show that in the classic
capacitated dynamic pricing setting, a ﬁxed pricing policy may perform nearly as well as a fully
dynamic pricing policy. Gallego and Hu (2014) extend this monopoly setting to account for com-
petition. Our model can be considered as a two-sided extension of Gallego and van Ryzin (1994)
with the additional desirable feature of taking both sides’ forward-looking behavior into account.
On the other hand, more recently, Kim and Randhawa (2018) study the value of dynamic pricing
to maximize revenues in queueing systems. They show that static pricing leads to a revenue loss
of order n1/2 while the dynamic pricing can mitigate the loss to the n1/3-scale.
In the operations literature, there is a recent stream of works on two-sided pricing decisions of
an intermediary platform. Taylor (2018) studies an intermediary, on-demand service platform that
simultaneously decides on a per-service price posted to customers and a wage posted to agents.
The author shows that the uncertainty in the delay-sensitive customers’ valuations or the agents’
opportunity costs can lead to counter-intuitive insights–delay sensitivity can raise the optimal price
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
6
or lower the optimal wage. Complementing Taylor’s work, Tang et al. (2018) focus on the impact
of the demand rate, sensitivity to waiting time, service rate, and the size of available providers on
the optimal price, wage, and payout ratio (i.e., the commission rate; see also Hu and Zhou 2016b).
The authors show that the optimal price, wage, and payout ratio increase in the potential customer
demand rate. Bimpikis et al. (2016) consider the joint price and wage optimization for a network
of locations over a ﬁnite number of periods with deterministic patterns of demand, supply and
spatial transitions among locations. More recently, Chen et al. (2016) consider a similar setting of
market making as ours. However, this paper is distinguished from ours because it does not consider
buyers’ and sellers’ forward-looking behavior and it allows the intermediary to hold inventory.
On the other hand, because of the nature of strategic interactions among the intermediary,
sellers, and buyers, our work contributes to a stream of works adopting the dynamic mechanism
design approach for revenue management problems with forward-looking customers. Vulcano et al.
(2002) consider impatient but strategic customers who arrive sequentially over a ﬁnite horizon; they
propose a modiﬁed second-price auction for each period. Gallien (2006) considers a discounted,
inﬁnite-horizon revenue management model with forward-looking customers. The author shows
that the optimal dynamic mechanism can be applied as a sequence of increasing posted prices.
More recently, Board and Skrzypacz (2016) consider a discrete-time revenue management problem
of selling an initial inventory of one product over a ﬁnite horizon. The authors characterize the
optimal dynamic mechanism, which allocates a unit of the product to the buyer with the highest
valuation if her valuation exceeds a cutoﬀ. For the classic revenue management problem with
private, possibly correlated, customer time discounting and price monitoring costs, Chen and Farias
(2018) propose a class of pricing policies and, within this class, an eﬃciently computable policy is
guaranteed to achieve 29%-optimality. Chen et al. (2018) further show that a static pricing policy is
asymptotically optimal even in the presence of forward-looking customers. One crucial distinction
between our paper and theirs is that the supply capacity in ours stochastically evolves over time,
while the supply capacity in theirs is pre-ﬁxed. Therefore, in our setting, a buyer (resp. seller) who
arrives at the system and is willing to buy (resp. sell) may not be instantly matched with a seller
(resp. buyer) because of the supply (resp. demand) shortage. This feature is crucial and brings
additional complexities in our analysis of the two-sided market. The ﬁrst complexity arises from the
upper-bound optimization problem. We have to take into account the demand-supply mismatching
cost. The presence of this cost signiﬁcantly makes the computation of the upper-bound problem
more diﬃcult. The second complexity arises from our proposed heuristic policy. To induce each
buyer to behave myopically as in Chen et al. (2018), we have to introduce a price adjustment
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
7
term on top of a static base price. This term is time-dependent and depends on both the real-time
number of outstanding buyers and sellers at present and stochastic arrivals of buyers and sellers
in future. Therefore, quantifying and computing this term is not trivial.
Beyond the papers mentioned above, a variety of algorithmic works have studied a special class
of dynamic mechanisms for a monopolistic seller who faces dynamically arriving forward-looking
buyers–anonymous posted dynamic pricing mechanisms. See, for instance, Besbes and Lobel (2015),
Borgs et al. (2014), Liu and Cooper (2015), Lobel (2017). In particular, the paper by Myerson and
Satterthwaite (1983) studies a two-sided mechanism design problem, but only in a static setting.
There is an emerging stream of research on the sharing economy in the operations literature.
First, focusing on the eﬀect of the sharing economy on welfare and consumption, Benjaafar et al.
(2017) study an equilibrium model of product sharing in which individuals make ownership deci-
sions, and non-owners can rent the goods from owners on demand. Second, a couple of papers
show that operational eﬃciency in a matching market can be detrimental to social welfare and
emphasize the moderating role of the intermediary platform. Allon et al. (2012) study a moder-
ating service platform that can gain operational eﬃciency by pooling the agents virtually; they
show that such eﬃciency may be detrimental to the overall eﬃciency of the marketplace because
of intensiﬁed competition among agents under pooling. Arnosti et al. (2015) show that reductions
in search costs in a matching market with asymmetric information may decrease social welfare.
Third, like ours, a group of papers highlights the importance of modeling individual agents on the
supply side as decision makers who also maximize their own utility. This is a unique feature in
the applications with crowdsourced freelancers. Gurvich et al. (2015) and Ibrahim (2015) study
the capacity decision of a service provider who crowdsources the supply of self-scheduling agents.
Yang et al. (2016) use the notion of mean-ﬁeld equilibrium to characterize rational agent’s strategic
behavior in a resource-sharing setting. In contrast to these papers on agent behavior, we take a
unique position by focusing on the inter-temporal behavior of sellers who can time their sales.
Fourth, in other sharing-economy settings, Shu et al. (2013), Kabra et al. (2016), and Henderson
et al. (2016) study bicycle sharing; and He et al. (2016) study electric vehicle sharing systems.
Fifth, several papers study the detailed matching decisions of an intermediary. Gurvich and Ward
(2014) study the optimal control of matching queues and propose a heuristic that asymptotically
achieves an imbalance-based lower bound. Hu and Zhou (2016a) focus on the matching policy
at the operational level for an intermediary who matches demand and supply of diﬀerent types,
such as their geographic locations. For a ride-hailing system, Ozkan and Ward (2016) establish
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
8
the asymptotic optimality of an LP-based matching policy in a large-market regime in which the
drivers are fully utilized.
Finally, under our simple heuristic, the arrivals on both sides behave myopically, and the system
eﬀectively operates as a double-ended queue with constant arrival rates on both sides. Double-ended
queues are often used to model matching markets. Kendall (1951) introduces the double-ended
queuing model, with the example of taxis and customers independently arriving at a taxi stand.
Dobbie (1961) provides further solution schemes for the double-ended queue with time-dependent
arrival rates. Zenios (1999) and Boxma et al. (2011) apply double-ended queues with abandonment
to model the organ transplant waiting list in the United States. Af`eche et al. (2014) apply a double-
ended queue with batch arrivals and abandonment to “dark pool” trading in ﬁnancial markets (see
also the literature review therein for a survey). The matching scheme in those papers is ﬁrst-come-
ﬁrst-served like our heuristic. However, our emphasis is not on performance evaluation under the
given arrival processes of two sides, as in those papers. We focus on designing proﬁt-maximizing
pricing and matching schemes for the intermediary.
3.
Model
Consider an intermediary who dynamically matches demand and supply of a single-type product
(or service). Buyers and sellers have heterogeneous valuations and supply costs, respectively, and
sequentially arrive at the market over a ﬁnite horizon [0,T]. The intermediary implements an
anonymous posted price mechanism on both demand and supply sides. That is, at each point of
time t ∈[0,T], the intermediary posts demand-side price πd
t (i.e., ask price) that she charges buyers
for each unit of the product and supply-side price πs
t (i.e., bid price) that she pays to sellers for
each unit of the product.
Buyers’ behavior. Over the horizon [0,T], buyers arrive at the intermediary according to a
Poisson process with rate λd. A buyer arriving at time t is endowed with a product valuation
v ∈[v, ¯v], as a realization from a willingness-to-pay distribution. We denote by
φ ≜(tφ,vφ),
the “type” of an arriving buyer which speciﬁes her arrival time tφ and valuation vφ. Every buyer
purchases at most one unit of the product. Buyers are forward-looking and can strategically deter-
mine when to request to buy the product. Speciﬁcally, for every buyer φ, at each point of time after
her arrival, she decides to either continue to monitor price dynamics or stop doing so by either
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
9
sending a request to the intermediary for buying the product or permanently leaving the market
without buying anything. We denote by τφ ∈[tφ,T] the time that buyer φ stops monitoring price
dynamics. We denote by aφ ∈{0,1} the indicator function of whether buyer φ requests to buy the
product at time τφ. A buyer who requests to buy the product keeps on staying in the market until
her demand is matched with a supply. As an exception, if a buyer’s demand cannot be matched
by the end of the horizon, she withdraws her demand request from the intermediary and leaves
the market. We denote by sφ ∈[τφ,T] the time when buyer φ leaves the market. We denote by
mφ ∈{0,1} the indicator function of whether buyer φ’s demand request is successfully matched
with a seller at time sφ. Buyer φ pays pφ = πd
τφmφ to the intermediary, i.e., if buyer φ’s demand
is successfully matched with a seller, she pays the demand-side price posted at the time that she
requests to buy the product, πd
τφ; otherwise, she makes no payment to the intermediary.
This business rule is consistent with the practice of the ride-hailing industry. In that setting,
riders and drivers submit matching requests and then wait to be matched. If a rider is not paired
with any driver for some reason, no payment will be made by the rider, and the rider will typically
not be compensated by the intermediary for the wait. This treatment is also consistent with
alternative queueing formulations of the matching market such as Taylor (2018) and Tang et al.
(2018) and more generally with the queueing economics literature in which the service provider does
not compensate customers for the wait and the customers need to take into account the expected
wait when they make the decision of whether to make a service request. It will be clear later that
this setup is, in fact, more complicated than other alternative settings such as the intermediary
compensates both sides out of pocket for any wait after a matching request is submitted and before
a matching is realized.
We deﬁne the tuple
yφ ≜(τφ,aφ,sφ,mφ,pφ).
Buyer φ garners utility
U d (φ,yφ) = vφmφ −pφ −b(sφ −tφ),
where b ∈R+ ≜{x : x ≥0} is buyer φ’s per unit of time disutility from staying in the system over
[tφ,sφ], hereafter referred to as the buyers’ waiting cost parameter, which is assumed to be common
knowledge.4 In this paper, we follow many papers in the literature, e.g., Besbes and Maglaras
4 In the ride-hailing industry, if rider φ starts to consider to have a ride from time tφ and is eventually matched
with a driver at time sφ, then her disutility that arises from her waiting for a car is captured by b(sφ −tφ). Over
[tφ,τφ], rider φ not only incurs waiting disutility, but exerts eﬀort to track how the ride-hailing platform dynamically
changes prices. However, a rider can easily track price dynamics by frequently refreshing the ride-hailing platform’s
app. Therefore, a rider’s disutility arising from the price monitoring activity is negligible relative to the disutility
incurred from waiting for a ride.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
10
(2009) and Chen and Frank (2001), to assume that all buyers have the same waiting cost parameter
b. We will discuss the heterogeneous waiting cost parameters in the conclusion.
As mentioned, we allow for the heterogeneity of buyer arrival times and valuations. A buyer’s
arrival time and valuation are private information and are independent of each other. We denote the
cumulative distribution function (c.d.f.) of buyer product valuation by F d(·) and the corresponding
probability density function (p.d.f.) by f d(·). We denote ¯F d(·) ≜1−F d(·). In addition to assuming
¯F d(·) has an inverse function, denoted ¯F d,−1(·) (see, e.g., Gallego and van Ryzin 1994), we make a
standard assumption on the valuation distribution:
Assumption 1 (Willingness-to-Pay). The buyer virtual value function V d(v) ≜v −
¯
F d(v)
fd(v) is
increasing5 in v ∈[v, ¯v].
This assumption is widely adopted in the literature, see, e.g., Myerson (1981), Gallien (2006),
Gallego and van Ryzin (1994). Many commonly used distributions, such as uniform, exponential
and Gumbel, satisfy this assumption. All information above is common knowledge, except for that
speciﬁed as private information.
Sellers’ behavior. Over the horizon [0,T], sellers arrive at the intermediary according to a
Poisson process with rate λs. A seller arriving at time t is endowed with c ∈[c, ¯c], a procurement,
production and delivery cost for a good, or opportunity cost for providing a service. We assume
c ≤¯v.6 We denote by
ψ ≜(tψ,cψ),
the “type” of an arriving seller. Every seller sells at most one unit of the product. All sellers are
forward-looking and can strategically determine when to request to sell her product. For every seller
ψ, at each point of time after her arrival, she decides to either continue to monitor price dynamics or
stop doing so by either sending a request to the intermediary for selling the product or permanently
leaving the market without selling anything. We denote by τψ ∈[tψ,T] the time that seller ψ stops
monitoring price dynamics. We denote by aψ ∈{0,1} the indicator function of whether seller ψ
requests to sell her product at time τψ. A seller who requests to sell her product keeps on staying
in the market until she is paired with a buyer. Consistent with the demand side, as an exception, if
a seller cannot be matched by the end of the horizon, then she withdraws her supply request from
the intermediary and leaves the market. We denote by sψ ∈[τψ,T] the time when seller ψ leaves the
5 The monotonicity in this paper is in its weaker sense unless otherwise speciﬁed.
6 If this condition is violated, i.e., c > ¯v, the intermediary cannot make a positive proﬁt given that sellers and buyers
have the incentive to participate in the business.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
11
market. We denote by mψ ∈{0,1} the indicator function of whether seller ψ’s supply is successfully
matched with a demand at sψ. The seller ψ is paid by the intermediary with pψ = πs
τψmψ, i.e., if
seller ψ’s supply is successfully matched with a demand, then the intermediary pays her the supply-
side price posted at the time that she requests to sell the product, πs
τψ; otherwise, she receives no
payment from the intermediary.
We deﬁne the tuple
yψ ≜(τψ,aψ,sψ,mψ,pψ).
Seller ψ garners utility
U s (ψ,yψ) = pψ −cψmψ −h(sψ −tψ),
where h ∈R+ is seller ψ’s per unit of time disutility from staying in the system over [tψ,sψ],
hereafter referred to as the sellers’ waiting cost parameter, which is also assumed to be common
knowledge.7 In addition, like the demand side, we assume there is no heterogeneity in sellers’
waiting cost parameter h.
As mentioned, we allow for the heterogeneity of sellers’ arrival times and supply costs. A seller’s
arrival time and supply cost are private information and are independent of each other. We denote
the c.d.f. of seller product producing and delivering cost by F s(·) and the corresponding p.d.f.
by f s(·). In addition to assuming F s(·) has an inverse function, denoted F s,−1(·), we make the
following assumption on the supply cost distribution:
Assumption 2 (Willingness-to-Sell). V s(c) ≜c + F s(c)
fs(c) is increasing in c ∈[c, ¯c].
This assumption is also widely adopted, see, e.g., Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983) and Niazadeh
et al. (2014). Many commonly used distribution functions, such as uniform, exponential and Gum-
bel, satisfy this assumption. This function can be understood as the counterpart of the buyer
virtual value function on the supply side. We hereafter refer to this function as the seller virtual
cost function. All information above is common knowledge, except for that speciﬁed as private
information. In the rest of this paper, we may put the subscript ψ on seller ψ’s arrival time, tψ,
and cost, cψ, to emphasize their heterogeneity among sellers.
As we will see in the subsequent sections, similar to the role of the buyer virtual value function in
computing the intermediary’s expected revenue collected from buyers, this function plays a key role
7 Similar to the demand side, in the ride-hailing industry, the term h(sψ −tψ) captures driver ψ’s waiting disutility
that is from the time that she is available to serve, tψ, to the time that she is matched with a rider, sψ. We assume
that over [tψ,τψ], driver ψ’s disutility arising from her price monitoring activity is negligible relative to the disutility
incurred from waiting to serve a rider.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
12
in computing the intermediary’s expected cost that she pays to sellers. A nearly optimal pricing
policy requires the intermediary to strike a delicate balance between both demand and supply
sides, captured in terms of the buyer virtual value function and the seller virtual cost function.
Game dynamics and the equilibrium. Before the start of the horizon, the intermediary deter-
mines a pricing policy on both demand and supply sides π =

(πd
t ,πs
t) : t ∈[0,T]
 
, and a demand and
supply matching policy M = {(sφ,mφ),(sψ,mψ) : (τφ ∈[0,T],aφ = 1),(τψ ∈[0,T],aψ = 1)}. The
pricing policy π and the matching policy M are in general dynamic policies depending on the
realized uncertainty up to the decision point. The intermediary commits to implement this pric-
ing policy π and matching policy M over the entire course of the horizon. The intermediary’s
pricing and matching policies are common knowledge for all buyers and sellers. We denote by
Ht ≜{φ,ψ : tφ ≤t,tψ ≤t} the set of buyers’ and sellers’ types that arrive up to time t. Deﬁne by
φt ≜{(τφ,aφ) : τφ ≤t,aφ = 1} the set of demand-side information that the intermediary collects up
to time t. Deﬁne by φt
M ≜{(sφ,mφ) : sφ ≤t} the set of matching decisions the intermediary has
made on the demand side up to time t. Similarly, deﬁne by ψt ≜{(τψ,aψ) : τψ ≤t,aψ = 1} the set of
supply-side information that the intermediary collects up to time t and by ψt
M ≜{(sψ,mψ) : sψ ≤t}
the set of matching decisions the intermediary has made on the supply side up to time t. Deﬁne
by πd,t ≜

πd
t′ : t′ ∈[0,t]
 
the historic demand-side prices posted up to time t. Deﬁne by πs,t ≜
{πs
t′ : t′ ∈[0,t]} the historic supply-side prices posted up to time t. Deﬁne a ﬁltration {Ft : t ≥0}
with Ft = σ
 φt−,φt−
M ,ψt−,ψt−
M ,πd,t−,πs,t−
. A feasible pricing policy π requires πd
t and πs
t to be
Ft-progressive.8 Denote by Π the set of all feasible pricing policies. A feasible matching policy M
requires {sφ ≤t} and mφ, and {sψ ≤t} and mψ to be Ft-progressive, and to satisfy the demand
and supply balancing condition that
X
φ∈Ht
1{sφ = t,mφ = 1} =
X
ψ∈Ht
1{sψ = t,mψ = 1}, ∀t ∈[0,T].
Denote by M the set of all feasible matching policies.
During the horizon, on the demand side, buyers are forward looking and employ (symmetric)
stopping and purchasing rules contingent on their types that constitute a symmetric Markov Perfect
Equilibrium. The following information structure is mainly motivated by the current practice of
ride-hailing apps. Our results would still hold under alternative information structures with an
8 When the intermediary makes the pricing decisions at time t, the information available to her consist of historic
times at which buyers inform the intermediary about their willingness to buy the product, φt−, historic times at
which sellers inform the intermediary about their willingness to sell the product, ψt−, the intermediary’s historic
matching decisions, φt−
M and ψt−
M , and the intermediary’s historic pricing decisions, πd,t−and πs,t−.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
13
update of the waiting time compensation. For a given buyer φ, the information available to her
at time t ∈[tφ,T] consists of demand-side price dynamics that she tracks during her stay in the
system,

πd
t′ : t′ ∈[tφ,t]
 
, and the number of unmatched supply during her stay in the system,

U s
t′−: t′ ∈[tφ,t]
 
, where U s
t′−= P
ψ∈Ht′−1{τψ < t′,aψ = 1,sψ ≥t′}.9 Therefore, at each point of
time t ∈[tφ,T], the event associated with the stopping decision {τφ ≤t} and the purchasing decision
aφ are adapted to σ
 πd
t′,U s
t′−: t′ ∈[tφ,t]

. Under the intermediary’s pricing policy π and matching
policy M, for a given buyer type φ, the optimal stopping rule τ π,M
φ
and the optimal purchasing
rule aπ,M
φ
are the optimal solution to the following optimization problem:
sup
τφ∈[tφ,T ],aφ∈{0,1}
E
h
U d (φ,yφ)
πd
tφ,U s
tφ−,φ
i
,
where the expectation assumes that other buyers use symmetric stopping and purchasing rules.10
On the supply side, sellers are forward looking and employ (symmetric) stopping and selling rules
contingent on their types that constitute a symmetric Markov Perfect Equilibrium. For a given
seller ψ, the information available to her at time t ∈[tψ,T] consists of supply-side price dynamics
that she tracks during her stay in the system, {πs
t′ : t′ ∈[tψ,t]}.11 Therefore, at each point of time
t ∈[tψ,T], the event associated with the stopping decision {τψ ≤t} and the selling decision aψ are
adapted to σ (πs
t′ : t′ ∈[tψ,t]). Under the intermediary’s pricing policy π and matching policy M,
for a given seller type ψ, the optimal stopping rule τ π,M
ψ
and the optimal selling rule aπ,M
ψ
are the
optimal solution to the following optimization problem:
sup
τψ∈[tψ,T ],aψ∈{0,1}
E

U s (ψ,yψ)
πs
tψ,ψ

,
where the expectation assumes that other sellers use symmetric stopping and selling rules.
9 When an Uber rider repeatedly refreshes her app, she can track the dynamics of the fares quoted to her. When an
Uber rider keeps the rider app open, she can also track the dynamics of available cars that are around her.
10 We do not prove the existence of the equilibrium stopping time in general. We only demonstrate the existence
of such an equilibrium stopping rule for a speciﬁc class of pricing and matching policies, i.e., static prices with
expected waiting cost adjustment and the greedy matching policy that matches a demand or supply request on a
ﬁrst-come-ﬁrst-serve basis.
11 When an Uber driver opens the driver app and sets the status to be online, she can see a heat map. In the map,
diﬀerent colors in regions represent diﬀerent surge rates. The colors (surge rates) in the heat map dynamically change
over time. Although an Uber driver is notiﬁed of the payment only after she completes a ride, before accepting a
riding request, she can still use the heat map to estimate the fare that she receives from Uber by oﬀering a ride.
Unlike an Uber rider whose app shows the available cars around her, the Uber driver app does not tell a driver any
information about the other available cars around, or how many riders in the neighboring region are requesting rides
and where they are located. An Uber driver can only passively wait for a riding request sent from Uber. Therefore,
our model does not assume sellers can observe the number of unmatched supply or demand.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
14
Our goal in this paper is to construct a price process π ∈Π and a matching policy M ∈M,
and characterize the corresponding buyer stopping rule τ π,M
φ
and purchasing rule aπ,M
φ
and seller
stopping rule τ π,M
ψ
and selling rule aπ,M
ψ
to maximize the intermediary’s expected proﬁt
J π,M = E

X
φ∈HT
pφ −
X
ψ∈HT
pψ

.
4.
Benchmark
In this section, we establish a benchmark that serves as an upper bound of all dynamic pricing
policies Π and matching policies M. Because it is diﬃcult, if not impossible, to characterize the
optimal pricing and matching policy, the upper bound provides a benchmark and enables us to
analyze the relative performance of any dynamic pricing policy π ∈Π and matching policy M ∈M.
Consider the following problem (B) that assumes that the intermediary is clairvoyant that she
knows buyers’ and sellers’ arrival processes over [0,T] at time 0, HT:
max
{xφψ:φ,ψ∈HT }
X
φ,ψ∈HT

V d (vφ) −V s (cψ) −b(tψ −tφ)
+ −h(tφ −tψ)
+
xφψ
s.t.
X
ψ∈HT
xφψ ≤1, ∀φ ∈HT,
X
φ∈HT
xφψ ≤1, ∀ψ ∈HT,
xφψ ∈{0,1}, ∀φ,ψ ∈HT.
(B)
Since all information is known, problem (B) is simply a deterministic assignment problem. The
term in the parenthesis of the objective function has the following interpretation. If buyer φ and
seller ψ are matched, then the intermediary collects revenue from buyer φ with the amount that
is equal to her virtual value, V d (vφ), subsidizes seller ψ with the amount that is equal to her
virtual cost, V s (cψ), and suﬀers from either buyer φ’s waiting for seller ψ or vise versa, depending
on whoever arrives earlier. We denote by ¯J(HT) the optimal value of problem (B) conditional on
buyers’ and sellers’ arrival processes HT. We have the following result:
Lemma 1. For any pricing policy π ∈Π and matching policy M ∈M, we have
J π,M ≤E
 ¯J(HT)

.
It is worth discussing the salient properties of the upper-bound function E
 ¯J(HT)

. First, because
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
15
HT is a stochastic process, ¯J(HT) is a random variable. Therefore, E
 ¯J(HT)

captures the ran-
domness of buyers’ and sellers’ arrival processes. Second, E
 ¯J(HT)

captures buyers and sellers
waiting disutility. Finally, because problem (B) is simply an assignment problem, for each sample
path HT, ¯J(HT) can be eﬃciently computed.
The proof of Lemma 1 consists of two steps. First, we show that the intermediary’s optimal
expected proﬁt is upper bounded by the optimal value of an auxiliary two-sided dynamic mechanism
design problem. Second, we show that the optimal value of this mechanism design problem is upper
bounded by E
 ¯J(HT)

.
The intuition behind the proof is as follows. First, following from a dynamic version of the rev-
elation principle, we can show that the intermediary’s joint pricing and matching problem can be
equivalently formulated as a two-sided dynamic mechanism design problem. Second, this mecha-
nism design problem has buyers’ and sellers’ incentive compatibility constraints. By exploiting the
structural properties of these constraints (e.g., applying the enveloped theorem to these constraints,
see Myerson 1981), we can show that the optimal value of the mechanism design problem is upper
bounded by the optimal value of the intermediary’s pure optimization problem in an idealized
setting that she knows every buyers’ valuation (resp. seller’s cost), except that she replaces every
buyer’s valuation (resp. seller’s cost) with the virtual value function (resp. virtual cost function)
that captures the intermediary’s lack of knowledge of every buyer’s valuation (resp. seller’s cost)
in our primary model. The detailed analysis is available in the online appendix.
5.
A Simple Dynamic Policy: Asymptotic Optimality
In this section, we begin by characterizing the intermediary’s optimal policy in an auxiliary setting
wherein all uncertainties are washed away, and all buyers and sellers behave myopically. We then
use this policy as a basis to develop another policy for the primary setting that takes into account
buyers’ and sellers’ waiting disutility.
5.1.
Optimal Policy in an Auxiliary Setting
In this subsection, we consider an auxiliary version of the primary stochastic model introduced in
§3. As we will see soon in the next subsection, the intermediary’s optimal policy in this auxiliary
setting can easily motivate us to propose another simple policy that can be proven to be nearly
optimal in the primary setting. In this auxiliary problem, the system is entirely deterministic,
and buyers and sellers are inﬁnitesimal and myopic. To be precise, in the auxiliary problem, the
intermediary solves the following optimization problem:
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
16
max
ˆπ∈Π
Z T
0
λdˆπd
t ¯F d  ˆπd
t

dt −
Z T
0
λsˆπs
tF s (ˆπs
t)dt
s.t.
λd ¯F d  ˆπd
t

= λsF s (ˆπs
t),
∀t ∈[0,T],
(D)
where ˆπ =

(ˆπd
t , ˆπs
t) : t ∈[0,T]
 
is an arbitrary measurable function from [0,T] to R2
+.
In problem (D), the intermediary determines the demand-side price trajectory

ˆπd
t : t ∈[0,T]
 
and the supply-side price trajectory {ˆπs
t : t ∈[0,T]} at time 0. The intermediary’s pricing policy ˆπ
is feasible if it clears the market at each point of time t, λd ¯F d (ˆπd
t ) = λsF s (ˆπs
t). Under the pricing
policy ˆπ, over the entire season [0,T], the total revenue that the intermediary collects from buyers
is
R T
0 λdˆπd
t ¯F d (ˆπd
t )dt, and the total cost that the intermediary incurs from compensating sellers is
R T
0 λsˆπs
tF s (ˆπs
t)dt. The intermediary aims at maximizing her net proﬁt over the entire horizon.
Now, we characterize the intermediary’s optimal policy and proﬁt in this auxiliary setting.
Proposition 1 (Optimal Solution to the Deterministic Problem). The optimal solu-
tion to problem (D) is that the intermediary simply posts ﬁxed prices p∗and w∗for buyers and
sellers, respectively, throughout the horizon, where prices p∗and w∗always exist and are determined
by the following conditions:
(i) (Demand-supply balancing condition)
λdT ¯F d (p∗) = λsTF s (w∗) ≜µ∗;
(1)
(ii) (Virtual value-cost balancing condition)
µ∗= max

µ ∈

0,min

λdT,λsT
 
: V (µ) ≥0
 
,
(2)
where V (µ) ≜V d   ¯F d,−1  µ
λdT

−V s  F s,−1  µ
λsT

.
Moreover, p∗≥w∗. The optimal value of program (D) is
¯J ∗= (p∗−w∗)µ∗.
(3)
We observe that the optimal price pair (p∗,w∗) is determined by Equations (1) and (2). Equation
(1) is the market-clearing condition. Under this condition, the number of buyers who purchase the
product is equal to the number of sellers who sell the product. Equation (2) entails that either
the intermediary has matched the most number of buyers and sellers under the optimal price pair
(p∗,w∗) and it is infeasible to match an additional pair of buyer and seller, µ∗= min

λdT,λsT
 
, or
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
17
although it is feasible to match more pairs of buyers and sellers, µ > µ∗, by adjusting the price pair
(p∗,w∗), the marginal revenue that the intermediary collects from enabling one additional buyer to
get the product, V d   ¯F d,−1  µ
λdT

, is less than the marginal cost that the intermediary incurs from
enabling one additional seller to sell the product, V s  F s,−1  µ
λsT

, i.e., the intermediary’s marginal
net proﬁt from matching one additional buyer with one additional seller is negative, V (µ) < 0.12
The intermediary’s optimal proﬁt in this auxiliary setting, ¯J ∗, has the following property.
Lemma 2. We have
E
 ¯J
 HT
≤¯J ∗.
That is, the benchmark bound E
 ¯J (HT)

in Lemma 1 can be further upper bounded by ¯J ∗.
The upper bound ¯J ∗has the following notable features. First, ¯J ∗is entirely determined by buyers’
and sellers’ arrival rates, the buyer virtual value function, and the seller virtual cost function. The
upper bound ¯J ∗does not depend on the buyer’s or the seller’s waiting cost, which can be avoided in
the deterministic world with perfectly matched, myopic buyers and sellers, in continuous quantity.
Second, ¯J ∗has the intuitive economic interpretation that the intermediary earns the bid-ask spread
(p∗−w∗) from each matched buyer-seller pair.
5.2.
Waiting Adjusted Fixed Pricing Policy
In this subsection, we use the optimal policy in the auxiliary setting characterized in the previous
subsection to motivate a simple dynamic pricing and matching policy and show that this policy
is nearly optimal. We begin by presenting the matching part of our policy, the greedy matching
policy, denoted by M g. Under this policy, the intermediary matches each demand (resp. supply)
request as soon as a supply (resp. demand) is available on a ﬁrst-come-ﬁrst-served basis. Therefore,
the intermediary minimizes demand and supply mismatch at each point of time.13 Deﬁne
It ≜
X
ψ∈Ht
1{τψ ≤t,aψ = 1} −
X
φ∈Ht
1{τφ ≤t,aφ = 1}.
12 Consider any price pair (p,w) that clears the market, i.e., λdT ¯F d (p) = λsTF s (w) ≜µ. Therefore, the intermediary’s
marginal revenue from enabling one additional buyer to get the product is
d(pµ)
dµ
= p + dp
duµ = p −
¯
F d(p)
fd(p) = V d (p) =
V d   ¯F d,−1  µ
λdT

, and the intermediary’s marginal cost from enabling one additional seller to sell the product is
d(wµ)
dµ
= w + dw
du µ = w + F s(w)
fs(w) = V s (w) = V s  F s,−1  µ
λsT

. Therefore, the intermediary’s marginal net proﬁt from
matching one additional pair of buyer and seller is V d   ¯F d,−1  µ
λdT

−V s  F s,−1  µ
λsT

= V (µ).
13 If there is more than one unmatched supply (resp. demand) request that simultaneously arrives at the intermediary
at the earliest time, then the intermediary randomly chooses one among them to match with the newly arriving
buyer’s demand (resp. seller’s supply).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
18
Therefore, at each point of time t, the number of unmatched supply is (It)
+ and the number of
unmatched demand is (It)
−. This matching policy is natural, practical and fair.
Along with the simple greedy matching part of our policy, we next present the pricing part, the
waiting adjusted ﬁxed pricing (FP) policy, denoted by πWFP =

πWFP,d
t
,πWFP,s
t
: t ∈[0,T]
 
. This
policy is constructed in the following way. Recall from the previous subsection that the interme-
diary’s optimal pricing policy in the auxiliary deterministic myopic buyer and seller model is to
simply post ﬁxed prices p∗and w∗on the demand and supply sides, respectively. However, in our
original stochastic system, although this policy is easy to implement, it does not lead to simple
buyers’ and sellers’ behavior. The presence of buyers’ and sellers’ arrival uncertainty in the original
model can cause them to wait to be matched with waiting disutilities, even though buyers and
sellers do not strategize their entry to the matching pooling given ﬁxed prices. Therefore, if the
intermediary posts merely prices p∗and w∗on the demand side and the supply side, respectively,
then a buyer (resp. seller) cannot make the purchasing (resp. selling) decision by merely comparing
her valuation (resp. cost) with p∗(resp. w∗). She has to take into account the joint eﬀects of the
price p∗(resp. w∗) and the waiting disutility. However, calculating the expected waiting disutility
may not be an easy job for buyers and sellers. Therefore, to alleviate buyers’ and sellers’ compu-
tational burdens and ease their decisions, we require the intermediary to adjust the ﬁxed prices
p∗and w∗by taking into account the waiting disutility that buyers and sellers incur, such that a
buyer (resp. seller) can make an easy decision by merely comparing her valuation (resp. cost) with
p∗(resp. w∗).
Formally, under policy πWFP, the prices posted at each point of time t ∈[0,T] on demand and
supply sides, respectively, are given by
πWFP,d
t
= p∗−b
EIt−
h
sφ −tφ|tφ = t,vφ ≥p∗,(It−)
+i
Pr

mφ = 1|tφ = t,vφ ≥p∗,(It−)
+ ,
πWFP,s
t
= w∗+ h E[sψ −tψ|tψ = t,cψ ≤w∗]
Pr(mψ = 1|tψ = t,cψ ≤w∗),
where p∗and w∗are determined by Equations (1) and (2), respectively, and the expectations and
the supply-demand mismatch quantity It are computed under the assumption that all buyers (resp.
sellers) behave myopically, i.e., every buyer φ (resp. seller ψ) makes her purchasing (resp. selling)
decision at her arrival time, τφ = tφ (resp. τψ = tψ), and decides to purchase (resp. sell) if and only
if her valuation (resp. cost) is no less (resp. more) than p∗(resp. w∗).14
14 In the presence of the waiting compensation terms, we cannot exclude the possibility that sometimes the demand-
side price is smaller than the supply-side price, πWFP,d
t
< πWFP,s
t
. However, as we show in our numerical analysis (see
Figure 1), for a wide range of parameters, the demand-side price is always higher than the supply-side price, which
is also guaranteed to be true in expectation.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
19
The waiting compensation terms have the following properties. First, the probability of being
matched for a buyer (resp. seller) is in the denominator of the waiting compensation, because
the monetary funds exchange hands only when a match is realized. Second, due to the diﬀerent
information structure of buyers and sellers introduced in Section 3 (see also Footnote 11), on the
demand side, each buyer φ’s expected time of staying in the system and the probability of being
matched are conditional on the number of unmatched supply,
 Itφ−
+. Since
 Itφ−
+ is a random
variable, the demand-side compensation term is random. As a result, the demand-side pricing
policy πWFP,d is a contingent policy. In contrast, on the supply side, because a seller does not have
the information of the number of unmatched supply or demand at any point of time, the seller’s
expected time of staying in the system and the probability of being matched are not conditional
on the number of unmatched supply or demand. Therefore, the supply-side compensation for each
point of time is deterministic. As a result, the supply-side pricing policy πWFP,s is a deterministic
policy.15
Now, we establish an equilibrium stopping and requesting rules for buyers and sellers when the
intermediary follows the waiting adjusted FP and the greedy matching policy.
Theorem 1 (Strategic Myopia). Assume that the intermediary adopts the waiting adjusted
FP policy πWFP and the greedy matching policy M g.
(i) If all buyers of type ˆφ ̸= φ behave myopically, i.e., they follow the stopping rule τ πWFP,Mg
ˆφ
= t ˆφ
and the purchasing rule aπWFP,Mg
ˆφ
= 1

v ˆφ ≥p∗ 
, and all sellers of type ˆψ behave myopically,
i.e., they follow the stopping rule τ πWFP,Mg
ˆ
ψ
= t ˆ
ψ and the selling rule aπWFP,Mg
ˆ
ψ
= 1

c ˆ
ψ ≤w∗ 
,
then buyer φ’s best response is to follow the stopping rule τ πWFP,Mg
φ
= tφ and the purchasing
rule aπWFP,Mg
φ
= 1{vφ ≥p∗}.
(ii) If all buyers of type ˆφ behave myopically, i.e., they follow the stopping rule τ πWFP,Mg
ˆφ
= t ˆφ and
the purchasing rule aπWFP,Mg
ˆφ
= 1

v ˆφ ≥p∗ 
, and all sellers of type ˆψ ̸= ψ behave myopically,
i.e., they follow the stopping rule τ πWFP,Mg
ˆ
ψ
= t ˆ
ψ and the selling rule aπWFP,Mg
ˆ
ψ
= 1

c ˆ
ψ ≤w∗ 
,
then seller ψ’s best response is to follow the stopping rule τ πWFP,Mg
ψ
= tψ and the selling rule
aπWFP,Mg
ψ
= 1{cψ ≤w∗}.
In our model, the stochastic nature of buyers’ and sellers’ arrival processes makes them to wait
to be matched and hence to incur waiting disutilities. Therefore, the waiting adjustment terms
play a vital role in compensating their losses and then induce them to behave myopically.
So far, we have shown with waiting compensation, the two-sided pricing policy πWFP is dynamic.
The following proposition characterizes the variability of the pricing policy in an asymptotic sense.
15 If alternative information structures are assumed, our results would not change after adjusting the waiting com-
pensation terms accordingly.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
20
Proposition 2 (Waiting Compensation). For any t ∈[0,T) and any k ∈[0,1), we have
EIt−

p∗−πWFP,d
t

≤bmin{kT,T −t} + T min{K,1}
1 −min{K,1}
,
πWFP,s
t
−w∗≤hmin{kT,T −t} + T min{K,1}
1 −min{K,1}
,
where K ≜
20
µ∗min{k2,(1−t
T )2}. In addition, we have the following results:
(i) If buyers are fully patient, i.e., b = 0, then πWFP,d
t
= p∗. If sellers are fully patient, i.e., h = 0,
then πWFP,s
t
= w∗.
(ii) Consider a sequence of systems. In the n-th system, λd,(n) = nαdλd with αd > 0 and λs,(n) =
nαsλs with αs > 0. Denote α ≜min{αd,αs}. For any t ∈[0,T), we have
limsup
n→∞EIt−
h
p∗,(n) −πWFP,d,(n)
t
i
≤O
 1
nα/3

,
limsup
n→∞πWFP,s,(n)
t
−w∗,(n) ≤O
 1
nα/3

.
We make the following observations from this proposition.
1. If buyers (resp. sellers) are fully patient, i.e., b = 0 (resp. h = 0), they do not incur any waiting
disutility, although they may spend time in waiting to be matched. Therefore, πWFP does not
need to be literally adjusted from the base ﬁxed prices (p∗,w∗).
2. In the high-volume regime in which buyers’ and sellers’ arrival rates grow large (scaled by n),
regardless of whether they grow at the same or diﬀerent speeds (measured by αd and αs),
the waiting adjusted terms on both demand and supply sides in the policy πWFP diminish to
zero, i.e., the policy πWFP tends to be the ﬁxed pricing policy (p∗,w∗). In addition, as n grows
large, the variability of πWFP decays to zero at a speed that is no slower than 1/nα/3.
Although it seems challenging to theoretically characterize the monotonicity property of the
waiting adjusted FP policy πWFP with respect to time, it is still worthwhile making some discussions
here. Let us consider the demand-side price dynamics

E[πWFP,d
t
] : t ∈[0,T]
 
. First consider the
scenario that time t is very far away from the end of the selling horizon T. On one hand, a buyer
who requests to buy the product at time t needs to wait until all buyers who request to buy at
earlier times have been matched. At time t, the remaining unmatched demand and supply are
[ND(µ∗t) −NS(µ∗t)]+ and [ND(µ∗t) −NS(µ∗t)]−, respectively, where ND(µ∗t) and NS(µ∗t) are
two independent homogeneous Poisson processes with the same rate µ∗t, representing the arrival
processes of buyers and sellers, respectively. As time goes by, the expected numbers of unmatched
buyers or sellers who have arrived are increasing.16 On the other hand, because t is much smaller
16 Note that the diﬀerence between two independent Poisson random variables with the same mean µ follows the so-
called Skellam distribution, which has mean 0 and variance 2µ. Hence, the class of random variables ND(µ∗t)−NS(µ∗t)
parameterized by t is a class of mean-preserving spreads. Thus, ND(µ∗t) −NS(µ∗t) is increasing in t in the convex
order. Since both x+ and x−are convex functions, by the deﬁnition of the convex order, E[ND(µ∗t) −NS(µ∗t)]+ and
E[ND(µ∗t) −NS(µ∗t)]−are increasing in t.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
21
than T, a buyer who requests to buy the product at time t has suﬃcient time and is very likely
to be matched before the end of the season. Therefore, as t increases, the waiting adjusted term
tends to increase and thus, the demand-side price E[πWFP,d
t
] tends to decrease.
Now consider the other end of the spectrum where time t is very close to the end of the selling
horizon T. As t increases, on one hand, for a buyer who requests to buy the product at time t,
her maximum time of staying in the system decreases as t increases. On the other hand, since
t approaches T, a buyer who requests to buy the product at time t can be eventually matched
only if the total number of supply requests up to time T exceeds the total number of demand
requests up to time t. Under policy πWFP, because the arrival rates of buyers who request to buy
the product and sellers who request to sell the product are the same, as t is getting close to T, the
probability that a buyer who requests to buy the product at time t can be eventually matched is
approaching 50%. Therefore, as t increases, the waiting adjusted term tends to decrease and thus,
the demand-side price E[πWFP,d
t
] tends to increase.
Now consider the supply-side price dynamics

πWFP,s
t
: t ∈[0,T]
 
. First consider one extreme that
time t is very far away from the end of the selling horizon T. Following the similar arguments above,
as t increases, the waiting adjusted term tends to increase and thus, the supply-side price πWFP,s
t
tends to increase. Consider the other extreme that time t is very close to the end of the selling
horizon T. Following the similar arguments above, as t increases, the waiting adjusted term tends
to decrease and thus, the supply-side price πWFP,s
t
tends to decrease. In general, the eﬀective ask
and bid price processes

E[πWFP,d
t
] : t ∈[0,T]
 
and

πWFP,s
t
: t ∈[0,T]
 
may not always demonstrate
a consistently upward or downward trend, and they tend to have opposite trends in the beginning
and in the end of the horizon.
As an illustration, Figure 1 plots the price dynamics

E[πWFP,d
t
],πWFP,s
t
: t ∈[0,T]
 
for a set of
market environments in which both buyers’ and sellers’ arrival rates are equal to λ. The results are
consistent with both Proposition 2 on that the variability of these two price dynamics diminish as
the demand and supply quantities grow up (λ increases) and our prediction above on the temporal
trends of these price dynamics.
5.3.
Performance of the Waiting Adjusted Fixed Pricing policy
In this subsection, we analyze the performance of the waiting adjusted FP and the greedy matching
policy M g. Under this simple heuristic, buyers and sellers behave myopically and as a result, the
intermediary faces a stochastic system that is eﬀectively a double-ended queue with the arrival
rates of both sides being µ∗and that starts with being empty at time t = 0.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
22
Figure 1
Price Dynamics
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
E[πWFP,d
t
]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
λ=10
λ=5
λ=2
λ=1
p∗
(a) Expected Price
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
πWFP,s
t
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
λ=10
λ=5
λ=2
λ=1
w∗
(b) Wage
Note. F d(·) ∼U[0,10], F s(·) ∼U[0,4], b = h = 0.1 and T = 50.
Theorem 2 (Performance Guarantee). Under the waiting adjusted FP policy πWFP and
the greedy matching policy M g,
J πWFP,Mg
E
 ¯J (HT)
 ≥J πWFP,Mg
¯J ∗
≥1 −

1 + 2
3
(b + h)T
p∗−w∗

1
√µ∗.
In addition, consider a sequence of systems. In the n-th system, λd,(n) = nαdλd with αd > 0 and
λs,(n) = nαsλs with αs > 0. Denote α ≜min{αd,αs}. Therefore,
J πWFP,Mg,(n)
E
 ¯J (n) (HT)
 ≥J πWFP,Mg,(n)
¯J ∗,(n)
≥1 −O

1
√nα

.
Theorem 2 has the following implications. First, as both buyers’ and sellers’ arrival rates grow
large (scaled by n), regardless of whether they grow up at the same or diﬀerent speeds (measured
by αd and αs), the simple, waiting adjusted FP policy πWFP and greedy matching policy M g,
are asymptotically optimal. Second, as n grows large, the relative proﬁt loss of implementing the
simple heuristic policy, compared to the optimal mechanism, converges to zero at a speed that is
no slower than 1/√nα, where α = min{αd,αs}. Put diﬀerently, the relative additional beneﬁt of
implementing any more sophisticated policy, than our simple heuristic, is no more than a magnitude
of 1/√nα.
To better understand the impact of diﬀerent market environment parameters on the performance
loss of our proposed simple heuristic policy, we conduct a series of numerical experiments. In
these experiments, we use the following market environment as our base: λd = λs = λ = 2, F d(·) ∼
U[0,10], F s(·) ∼U[0,4], b = h = 0.1. For each market environment, we report the performance of our
heuristic against the performance upper bound obtained by solving the clairvoyant’s problem (B).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
23
We compute the sample means of these two proﬁt functions by randomly generating K = 10,000
sample paths of buyers’ and sellers’ arrival processes.
Figure 2
Impact of Buyers’ and Sellers’ Arrival Rates λ and the Length of the Horizon T on the Performance
of Our Heuristic
T
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Performance of Our Heuristic
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
λ=10
λ=5
λ=2
λ=1
Note. F d(·) ∼U[0,10], F s(·) ∼U[0,4], b = h = 0.1.
First, we study the impact of the the identical buyers’ and sellers’ arrival rate λ and the length
of the horizon T on the performance of our heuristic. We choose λ from the set {1,2,5,10} and T
from the set {1,2,··· ,50}. The results are reported in Figure 2. We observe that for a very short
time horizon, the end-of-horizon eﬀect immediately kicks in, leading to the underperformance of
our heuristic. But the performance of our heuristic stabilizes with a not-too-short horizon. Even
for a small-scale system with λ = 1 or 2, our heuristic has a performance guarantee of more than
80% when T ≥15. Since we benchmark against the performance upper bound from problem (B),
the actual performance should be even better. For a system with λ = 10, our heuristic has a
performance guarantee of more than 90% when T ≥5.
Figure 3
Impact of Buyer (resp. Seller) Waiting Disutility Rate b (resp. h) on the Performance of Our Heuristic
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Performance of Our Heuristic
(a) Impact of b
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Performance of Our Heuristic
(b) Impact of h
Note. F d(·) ∼U[0,10], F s(·) ∼U[0,4].
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
24
Second, we study the impact of buyer (resp. seller) waiting disutility rate b (resp. h) on the
performance of our heuristic. In Figure 3(a), we ﬁx h = 1 and choose b from the set {0.02,0,1,0.2}.
In Figure 3(b), we ﬁx b = 1 and choose h from the set {0.02,0,1,0.2}. We observe that when
the length of the horizon T is not very short, the intermediary achieves a better performance
when buyers (resp. sellers) incur less waiting disutility, i.e., b (resp. h) is smaller. The intuition
is as follows. Under our heuristic policy, to induce buyers and sellers to behave myopically, the
intermediary’s pricing policy needs to include the waiting adjustment terms. When buyers (resp.
sellers) incur less waiting disutility, i.e., b (resp. h) is smaller, these waiting adjustment terms
become smaller, i.e., the intermediary can charge each buyer a higher price that is close to p∗(resp.
pay each seller a lower wage that is close to w∗). As a result, the intermediary can capture more
proﬁt.
Figure 4
Impact of the Range of the Buyer’s Valuation on the Performance of Our Heuristic
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Performance of Our Heuristic
(a) F d(·) ∼U[4,6]
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Performance of Our Heuristic
(b) F d(·) ∼U[3,7]
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Performance of Our Heuristic
(c) F d(·) ∼U[2,8]
Note. F s(·) ∼U[0,4], b = h = 0.1.
Figure 5
Impact of the Range of the Seller’s Cost on the Performance of Our Heuristic
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Performance of Our Heuristic
(a) F s(·) ∼U[1.6,2.4]
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Performance of Our Heuristic
(b) F s(·) ∼U[1.2,2.8]
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Performance of Our Heuristic
(c) F s(·) ∼U[0.8,3.2]
Note. F d(·) ∼U[0,10], b = h = 0.1.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
25
Third, we study the impact of the range of the buyer’s valuation (resp. seller’s cost) on the
performance of our heuristic. We assume that the buyer’s valuation (resp. seller’s cost) is uniformly
distributed with mean 5 (resp. 2). We choose the length of the buyer’s valuation range (resp. seller’s
cost range) from the set {2,4,6} (resp. {0.8,1.6,2.4}). The results are reported in Figures 4 and 5.
We observe that our heuristic performs consistently well regardless of whether the buyer’s valuation
(resp. seller’s cost) is dispersed or concentrated. In addition, we also observe that the performance
of our heuristic seems not quite sensitive to the degree of the dispersion of the buyer’s valuation
(resp. seller’s cost).
Figure 6
Impact of the Number of Sample Paths K on the Performance Volatility
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
Performance Volatility
Note. F d(·) ∼U[0,10], F s(·) ∼U[0,4], b = h = 0.1.
In all numerical experiments mentioned above, we randomly generate K = 10,000 sample paths
of buyers’ and sellers’ arrival processes. We compute the relative performance of our heuristic as the
ratio of the sample mean of the proﬁt under our heuristic to the sample mean of the upper-bound
proﬁt obtained by solving the clairvoyant’s problem (B), hereafter referred to as the “empirical
relative performance.” Therefore, we may get diﬀerent values of the empirical relative performance
when we generate K randomly drawn sample paths for multiple times. Hence, we can use the sample
standard deviation of these diﬀerent values to measure whether the empirical relative performance
computed from K sample paths gives us an accurate and reliable estimation of the true value
of the relative performance. In the following experiment, we study the impact of the number of
sample paths, K, on the volatility of the empirical relative performance. We choose K from the set
{30,100,300,1000} and the length of the horizon T from the set {1,··· ,50}. For each K and T,
we generate K sample paths for 30 times and thus obtain 30 data points of the empirical relative
performance. We then compute the sample standard deviation of these data points. The results
are reported in Figure 6. We observe that when the number of sample paths increases, the sample
standard deviation of the empirical relative performance decreases. When K = 1000 and T is not
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
26
too small, such sample standard deviation can be less than 1%. This result guarantees that in all
experiments above, the empirical relative performances obtained with K = 10,000 are very robust.
Also, we observe that the sample standard deviation of the empirical relative performance tends to
decrease when the length of the horizon T prolongs, which is consistent with that the performance
of our heuristic is, on expectation, more stabilized for a longer horizon (see Figure 2).
6.
Eﬀects of Market Conditions on Pricing Heuristic
The pricing policy πWFP introduced in the previous section depends on market conditions, such
as the market size (characterized by buyer arrival rate λd and seller arrival rate λs). In practice,
the market conditions may change over time. For instance, Uber’s market conditions during rush
hour and non-rush hour are quite diﬀerent. During rush hour, more people need rides and less
so in non-rush hour. Therefore, in this section, we are motivated to explore the eﬀects of market
conditions on the pricing policy πWFP, as well as the intermediary’s matched quantity and the
resulting proﬁt. We notice that in practice, an intermediary, such as Uber, is typically operating in
a high-volume regime where the demand and supply sizes are suﬃciently large. Therefore, following
from the asymptotic convergence property established in Proposition 2 that πWFP converges to
ﬁxed prices (p∗,w∗) and the asymptotic optimality result established in Theorem 2, here we focus
on the intermediary’s optimal pricing policy and her performance in the ﬂuid regime, i.e., the
intermediary’s pricing policy is given by the ﬁxed price pair (p∗,w∗), her matching quantity is given
by µ∗, and her proﬁt is given by ¯J ∗.17
In this section, we focus on exploring the eﬀects of the market sizes (measured by λd and λs) on
prices p∗and w∗, as well as on the intermediary’s matching quantity µ∗and her proﬁt ¯J ∗.18
Theorem 3 (Comparative Statics on Market Sizes).
(i) (Seller’s Market) p∗and w∗are increasing in λd, and µ∗and ¯J ∗are increasing in λd.
(ii) (Buyer’s Market) p∗and w∗are decreasing in λs, and µ∗and ¯J ∗are increasing in λs.
As the demand rate λd increases and the supply rate λs does not change, the market becomes
more tilted towards a seller’s market. The intermediary can address this demand and supply imbal-
ance by adjusting prices on both demand and supply sides. On the demand side, the intermediary
17 It is tempting to derive comparative statics results for the matching quantity and proﬁt level in the original stochas-
tic system. Since it is hard to rank Poisson random variables in usual stochastic order even though their means can be
ordered, we analytically study the performance measures in the ﬂuid regime, with which the performance measures
in the original stochastic system are directly linked. For example, the matching quantity in the stochastic system
under our simple heuristic is min(ND(µ∗T),NS(µ∗T)). We numerically study the eﬀect of the market conditions on
the compensation terms in the non-ﬂuid regime with results reported in Figure 1.
18 More studies on the eﬀects of other market conditions are reported in the Online Appendix.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
27
raises up the price for buyers (p∗increases) to target more selective fraction of buyers who are will-
ing to pay more. On the supply side, the intermediary increases payments to sellers (w∗increases)
to encourage more sellers to deliver the product. As the demand rate λd grows, the intermediary
can match more pairs of buyers and sellers (µ∗increases) and gain a higher proﬁt ( ¯J ∗increases).
As the supply rate λs increases and the demand rate λd does not change, the market becomes
more tilted towards a buyer’s market due to the existence of more excess supply. The intermediary
can also address this demand and supply imbalance by adjusting prices on both sides. On the
demand side, the intermediary cuts down the price for buyers (p∗decreases) to attract more buyers
to request the product. On the supply side, the intermediary reduces payments to sellers (w∗
decreases) to discourage more sellers to deliver the product. As the supply rate λs grows, the
intermediary can again match more pairs of buyers and sellers (µ∗increases) and gain a higher
proﬁt ( ¯J ∗increases).
In summary, the matching quantity and proﬁt implications of a more considerable demand or
supply volume are unambiguously positive to the intermediary, while the price implications can go
either way depending on whether it’s a seller’s or buyer’s market.
7.
Discussion and Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a simple heuristic pricing and matching policy that is proven to perform
well for an intermediary who operates in a two-sided market with forward-looking buyers and
sellers. We show that this simple market-making policy is nearly optimal, as the arrival rates on
both sides of the market grow. Our results help identify practical market conditions under which
a market maker may not need much a very frequent dynamic pricing and matching policy. For a
market with roughly constant rates of random arrivals of forward-looking buyers and sellers who
tend to have the same distribution of willingness to pay and to sell respectively, ﬁxed pricing with
some waiting cost adjustment and greedy matching can be good enough when the numbers of
buyers and sellers are large.
This implication of our model may remain valid for the ride-hailing industry, though it does not
directly model the additional spatial dimension and the possible re-entry of drivers to the market
after a service.19 Our ﬁxed pricing formulae can be used to compute the base fares of Uber, which
balance supply and demand at the aggregated level for a region.20 Our asymptotic optimality
19 Taylor (2018) and Tang et al. (2018) do consider the re-entry of drivers, but do not consider drivers transitioning
in a network of locations. Bimpikis et al. (2016) focus on the drivers’ spatial transitions in a deterministic setting.
20 The pricing formulae can also be used to compute the surge prices for a given region under a particular market
condition.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
28
result suggests that for a market condition with large volumes, Uber may not want to use rapidly
contingent pricing (i.e., a contingent and rapid micro-matching of supply with demand) when the
underlying market conditions, such as arrival rates or customer valuation and driver opportunity
cost distributions, have remained stable.21 Note that a fully contingent policy would respond to
any realization of the randomness in the arrivals of buyers and sellers as well as that in their
realized valuations and costs. Our results imply that when the volumes of demand and supply are
suﬃciently large, our simple pricing heuristic based on ﬁxed pricing can perform as well as the
optimal mechanism design.
There are two apparent downsides of a fully contingent pricing policy. First, contingent pric-
ing results in price ﬂuctuations that antagonize riders, regulators, and sometimes even drivers22.
Second, contingent surge prices are usually adopted without taking riders’ and drivers’ strategic
behavior into account, and may induce riders and drivers to behave strategically in ways that are
hard to account for. As one can see from our model that considers riders’ and drivers’ strategic
behavior, it is unclear what the optimal contingent pricing policy is, even in such a simpliﬁed
model.
Our asymptotic optimality result for the simple pricing and matching policy suggests that the
uncertainty in the arrivals and their valuations and costs may not alone be suﬃcient to justify
contingent pricing, in view of its downsides mentioned above. This implies that it may be safe
to update prices less often for urban areas during peak hours, because rigid pricing does not lose
much optimality for a thick market with large volumes of demand and supply, in addition to many
other beneﬁts of pricing stability, e.g., to provide consumers with clear price points. That advice is
consistent with the practice of Gett and Via, emerging competitors of Uber in New York City, which
charge ﬂat rates that never surge in Manhattan and use the practice as a competitive advantage
in the competition with Uber.23 On the other hand, if the matching platform is in its early stage
or is operated in a thin market with low volumes of demand and supply, e.g., in rural areas or
oﬀ-peak hours, contingent pricing may be of high value. Yet as we show, the additional beneﬁts
of contingent pricing are second-order whereas the simple heuristic could have captured the ﬁrst-
order beneﬁt. In the long term, with machine-learning tools to help better predict demand and
then pre-allocate drivers and with more autonomous vehicles on the road that can be dispatched,
the incentive to use surge pricing shall be diminished over time.
21 Chen et al. (2015) suggest that under normal circumstances, Uber appears to update prices every 5 minutes, which
demonstrates some level of pricing stability.
22 Drivers who pursue surge prices may ﬁnd that the surge is gone by the time they arrive.
23 Uber recently also oﬀered a ﬂat-fare price for a ride in the form of a package of multiple rides for New York City.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
29
Moreover, the simple heuristic has the advantage of deterring strategic behavior by buyers and
sellers, whereas those contingent surge prices are usually adopted without taking strategic behavior
into account. This advantage is desirable in a matching market in which it is hard to monitor
the arrivals of demand and supply.24 Strategic behavior is also hard to detect25 and account for
with pricing models. The rapidly changing demand and supply may very likely be an outcome, not
necessarily the cause, of the rapid changes in prices. Our heuristic brings in all possible supply
and demand for a homogeneous good or service to a marketplace as they arrive, something that is
appealing to the market maker, who can then make supply meet demand more eﬃciently.
Our results may be extended in the following settings in the presence of forward-looking buyers
and sellers. First, one may consider the time-varying arrival rates of buyers and sellers. Second,
one can consider the matching of buyers and sellers of multiple-type goods or services, where
types can be geographic locations. For example, in the ride-hailing market, after a driver in one
location accepts a bid price, the matching policy can be more complicated than that for buying and
selling a homogeneous (such as single-location) service, because the driver can be routed to serve
riders heading to diﬀerent places. Third, one may consider more than one intermediary platform
competing for both supply and demand. Such situations arise, e.g., in the ride-hailing industry,
where Uber and Lyft compete with each other. The mechanism design problem for these situations
in the presence of strategic buyers and sellers is challenging. It is worthwhile to explore whether
asymptotic optimality of some heuristic pricing and matching policy, similar to our results, may
be still attainable.
References
Af`eche, P, A Diamant, J Milner. 2014. Double-sided batch queues with abandonment: Modeling crossing
networks. Oper. Res. 62(5) 1179–1201.
Allon, G, A Bassamboo, EB C¸il. 2012. Large-scale service marketplaces: The role of the moderating ﬁrm.
Management Sci. 58(10) 1854–1872.
Arnosti, N, R Johari, Y Kanoria. 2015. Managing congestion in matching markets. http://ssrn.com/
abstract=2427960.
24 It may be relatively easy for Uber to monitor the arrival of riders and drivers since they all need to open the Uber
app to make a transaction. But that may not always be the case for other market makers.
25 For example, Carr (2015) reports that Uber drivers falsely trigger surge pricing by conspiring to shut down and
restart their apps.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
30
Benjaafar, S, G Kong, X Li, C Courcoubetis. 2017. Peer-to-peer product sharing: Implications for ownership,
usage and social welfare in the sharing economy. Management Sci. Forthcoming.
Besbes, O, I Lobel. 2015. Intertemporal price discrimination: Structure and computation of optimal policies.
Management Sci. 61(1) 92–110.
Besbes, O, C Maglaras. 2009.
Revenue optimization for a make-to-order queue in an uncertain market
environment. Oper. Res. 57(6) 1438–1450.
Bimpikis, K, O Candogan, D Saban. 2016. Spatial pricing in ride-sharing networks. http://ssrn.com/
abstract=2868080.
Board, S, A Skrzypacz. 2016.
Revenue management with forward-looking buyers.
Journal of Political
Economy 124(4) 1046–1087.
Borgs, C, O Candogan, J Chayes, I Lobel, H Nazerzadeh. 2014. Optimal multiperiod pricing with service
guarantees. Management Sci. 60(7) 1792–1811.
Boxma, OJ, I David, D Perry, W Stadje. 2011. A new look at organ transplantation models and double
matching queues. Probability in the Engineering and Informational Sciences 25(02) 135–155.
Cachon, GP, KM Daniels, R Lobel. 2018. The role of surge pricing on a service platform with self-scheduling
capacity. Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 19(3) 337–507.
Carr, PB. 2015. Uber driver boasts of trick to falsely trigger surge pricing. Pando https://pando.com/
2015/08/04/uber-driver-boasts-about-trick-falsely-trigger-surge-pricing.
Chen, H, MZ Frank. 2001. State dependent pricing with a queue. IIE Transactions 33(10) 847–860.
Chen, L, A Mislove, C Wilson. 2015. Peeking beneath the hood of Uber. Proceedings of the 2015 ACM
Conference on Internet Measurement Conference. ACM, 495–508.
Chen, N, G Gallego, S Kou. 2016.
Dynamic pricing in dealership markets.
2016 INFORMS Revenue
Management and Pricing Section Conference.
Chen, Y, V F Farias, NK Trichakis. 2018. On the eﬃcacy of static prices for revenue management in the
face of strategic customers. Management Sci. Forthcoming.
Chen, Y, VF Farias. 2018. Robust dynamic pricing with strategic customers. Math. Oper. Res. Forthcoming.
Dobbie, JM. 1961. A doubled-ended queuing problem of kendall. Oper. Res. 9(5) 755–757.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
31
Gallego, G, M Hu. 2014. Dynamic pricing of perishable assets under competition. Management Sci. 60(5)
1241–1259.
Gallego, G, G van Ryzin. 1994. Optimal dynamic pricing of inventories with stochastic demand over ﬁnite
horizons. Management Sci. 40(8) 999–1020.
Gallien, J. 2006. Dynamic mechanism design for online commerce. Oper. Res. 54(2) 291–310.
Gurvich, I, M Lariviere, A Moreno. 2015. Operations in the on-demand economy: Staﬃng services with
self-scheduling capacity. http://ssrn.com/abstract=2336514.
Gurvich, I, AR Ward. 2014. On the dynamic control of matching queues. Stochastic Systems 4(2) 479–523.
Hall, J, C Kendrick, C Nosko. 2015. The eﬀects of Uber’s surge pricing: A case study. https://newsroom.
uber.com/the-effects-of-ubers-surge-pricing/.
He, L, H-Y Mak, Y Rong, Z-J M Shen. 2016. Service region design for urban electric vehicle sharing systems.
Manufacturing Service Oper. Management Forthcoming. http://ssrn.com/abstract=2849400.
Henderson, SG, E O’Mahony, DB Shmoys. 2016. (Citi)Bike sharing. Working Paper, Cornell University.
Hu, M, Y Zhou. 2016a. Dynamic type matching. http://ssrn.com/abstract=2592622.
Hu, M, Y Zhou. 2016b. Price, wage and ﬁxed commission in on-demand matching. http://ssrn.com/
abstract=2949513.
Ibrahim, R. 2015. Staﬃng a service system where capacity is random. http://ssrn.com/abstract=2623502.
Kabra, A, E Belavina, K Girotra. 2016. Bike-share systems: Accessibility and availability. http://ssrn.
com/abstract=2555671.
Kendall, DG. 1951. Some problems in the theory of queues. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series
B (Methodological) 13(2) 151–185.
Kim, J, RS Randhawa. 2018. The value of dynamic pricing in large queueing systems. Oper. Res. 66(2)
409–425.
Liu, Y, WL Cooper. 2015. Optimal dynamic pricing with patient customers. Oper. Res. 63(6) 1307–1319.
Lobel, I. 2017. Dynamic pricing with heterogeneous patience levels. http://ssrn.com/abstract=2936572.
Milgrom, P, I Segal. 2002. Envelope theorems for arbitrary choice sets. Econometrica 70(2) 583–601.
Myerson, RB. 1981. Optimal auction design. Math. Oper. Res. 6(1) 58–73.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
32
Myerson, RB, MA Satterthwaite. 1983. Eﬃcient mechanisms for bilateral trading. Journal of Economic
Theory 29(2) 265–281.
Niazadeh, R, Y Yuan, R Kleinberg. 2014. Simple and near-optimal mechanisms for market intermediation.
International Conference on Web and Internet Economics. Springer, 386–399.
Ozkan, E, AR Ward. 2016.
Dynamic matching for real-time ridesharing.
http://ssrn.com/abstract=
2844451.
Riquelme, C, S Banerjee, R Johari. 2015. Pricing in ride-sharing platforms: A queueing-theoretic approach.
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2568258.
Shu, J, MC Chou, Q Liu, C-P Teo, I-L Wang. 2013. Models for eﬀective deployment and redistribution of
bicycles within public bicycle-sharing systems. Oper. Res. 61(6) 1346–1359.
Tang, CS, J Bai, KC So, X Chen, H Wang. 2018. Coordinating supply and demand on an on-demand service
platform with impatient customers. Manufacturing Service Oper. Management Forthcoming.
Taylor, T. 2018. On-demand service platforms. Manufacturing Service Oper. Management Forthcoming.
Vulcano, G, G van Ryzin, C Maglaras. 2002. Optimal dynamic auctions for revenue management. Manage-
ment Sci. 48(11) 1388–1407.
Yang, P, K Iyer, PI Frazier. 2016. Mean ﬁeld equilibria for competitive exploration in resource sharing
settings. Twenty-ﬁfth International World Wide Web Conference, Montreal Canada.
Zenios, SA. 1999. Modeling the transplant waiting list: A queueing model with reneging. Queueing Systems
31(3-4) 239–251.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
1
Online Appendix
“Pricing and Matching with Forward-looking Buyers and Sellers”
A.
Proof of Lemma 1
The proof of Lemma (B) is facilitated by an auxiliary two-sided dynamic mechanism design prob-
lem.
A.1.
An Optimal Two-sided Dynamic Mechanism Design Benchmark
In this subsection, we formally deﬁne a two-sided dynamic mechanism design problem. We restrict
ourselves to direct mechanisms. A mechanism speciﬁes a product allocation and money transfer
rule that we encode as follows.
Buyer φ is assigned with
yφ ≜(τφ,aφ,sφ,mφ,pφ),
where τφ ∈[tφ,T] is the time that the intermediary decides on whether to accept buyer φ’s demand
request, aφ ∈{0,1} is an indicator for whether buyer φ’s demand request is accepted, sφ is the
time that buyer φ is discharged from the system, mφ is an indicator for whether buyer φ’s demand
request is honored at time sφ, and pφ is the price that buyer φ pays to the intermediary at time
sφ.
Similarly, seller ψ is assigned with
yψ ≜(τψ,aψ,sψ,mψ,pψ),
where τψ ∈[tψ,T] is the time that the intermediary decides on whether to accept seller ψ’s supply
request, aψ ∈{0,1} is an indicator for whether seller ψ’s supply request is accepted, sψ is the time
that seller ψ is discharged from the system, mψ is an indicator for whether seller ψ’s supply request
is honored at time sψ, and pψ is the price that the intermediary pays to seller ψ at time sψ.
Denote by yt ≜{yφ,yψ : τφ ≤t,τψ ≤t} the set of decisions by the intermediary made up to time
t. Finally, denote the intermediary’s information set by Ht, the ﬁltration generated by the buyers’
and sellers’ arrivals up to time t and assignment decisions prior to time t, i.e., Ht = σ (Ht,yt−). A
feasible mechanism satisﬁes the following properties:
1. (Causality on the demand side) τφ and sφ are stopping times with respect to the ﬁltration Ht.
Moreover, aφ is Hτφ-measurable, and mφ and pφ are Hsφ-measurable.26
26 At each time t, when the intermediary determines whether stopping times τφ and sφ are equal to or greater than t,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
2
2. (Causality on the supply side) τψ and sψ are stopping times with respect to the ﬁltration Ht.
Moreover, aψ is Hτψ-measurable, and mψ and pψ are Hsψ-measurable.27
3. (Demand-supply balancing condition) At each point of time, the number of products buyers
receive equals the number of products sellers deliver, i.e.,
X
φ∈Ht
1{sφ = t,mφ = 1} =
X
ψ∈Ht
1{sψ = t,mψ = 1},
∀t ∈[0,T].
(1)
We denote by Y, the class of all feasible mechanisms yT. The intermediary collects proﬁt
Π
 yT
≜
X
φ∈HT
pφ −
X
ψ∈HT
pψ.
The utility garnered by buyer φ when she reports her true type as ˆφ (either truthfully or manip-
ulatively) is then given by U d(φ,y ˆφ). When buyer φ manipulates her report on her private type,
she can only reveal her arrival no earlier than her true arrival (i.e., t ˆφ ≥tφ).
Analogously, the utility garnered by seller ψ when she reports her true type as ˆψ (either truthfully
or manipulatively) is then given by U s(ψ,y ˆ
ψ). When seller ψ manipulates her report on her private
type, she can only reveal her arrival no earlier than her true arrival (i.e., t ˆ
ψ ≥tψ).
The intermediary now faces the following optimization problem that seeks an optimal two-sided
dynamic mechanism:
max
yT ∈Y
E

Π
 yT
s.t.
E−φ

U d(φ,yφ)

≥E−φ

U d(φ,y ˆφ)

, ∀φ, ˆφ, s.t. t ˆφ ∈[tφ,T],
(ICd)
E−φ

U d(φ,yφ)

≥0,
∀φ,
(IRd)
E−ψ [U s(ψ,yψ)] ≥E−ψ

U s(ψ,y ˆ
ψ)

, ∀ψ, ˆψ, s.t. t ˆ
ψ ∈[tψ,T],
(ICs)
E−ψ [U s(ψ,yψ)] ≥0,
∀ψ.
(IRs)
(B’)
While expectation E−φ[·] is taken with respect to HT\{φ}, expectation E−ψ[·] is taken with respect
the information available to her consists of the collection of the types of all buyers and sellers who arrive up to time
t and all decisions that the intermediary makes before time t. At time τφ, when the intermediary determines whether
to accept buyer φ’s demand request, aφ, the information available to the intermediary consists of the collection of the
types of all buyers and sellers who arrive up to time τφ and all decisions that the intermediary makes before time τφ.
At time sφ, when the intermediary determines whether buyer φ’s demand request is honored, mφ, and how much to
charge buyer φ, pφ, the information available to the intermediary consists of the collection of the types of all buyers
and sellers who arrive up to time sφ and all decisions that the intermediary makes before time sφ.
27 The interpretations of ﬁltrations Ht, Hτψ, Hsψ are analogous to those on the demand side.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
3
to HT\{ψ}. Denote by J ∗the optimal value obtained in problem (B’). We establish the following
result that is essentially due to the revelation principle.
Lemma 3 (Benchmark). For any pricing policy π ∈Π and matching policy M ∈M, we have
J π,M ≤J ∗.
Proof of Lemma 3.
Consider the class of pricing and matching mechanisms, ˜Y(⊂Y), each of
which, say yT, corresponds to a given pricing policy π ∈Π and a given matching policy M ∈M
such that yφ = yπ,M
φ
and yψ = yπ,M
ψ
. Now consider the optimization problem:
max
yT ∈˜
Y
E

Π
 yT
s.t.
E−φ
h
U d(φ,yφ)|πd
tφ,U s
tφ−
i
≥E−φ
h
U d(φ,y ˆφ)|πd
tφ,U s
tφ−
i
, ∀φ, ˆφ, s.t. t ˆφ ∈[tφ,T],
(IC-d)
E−φ
h
U d(φ,yφ)|πd
tφ,U s
tφ−
i
≥0,
∀φ,
(IR-d)
E−ψ
h
U s(ψ,yψ)|πs
tψ
i
≥E−ψ
h
U s(ψ,y ˆ
ψ)|πs
tψ
i
, ∀ψ, ˆψ, s.t. t ˆ
ψ ∈[tψ,T],
(IC-s)
E−ψ
h
U s(ψ,yψ)|πs
tψ
i
≥0,
∀ψ.
(IR-s)
(2)
Denote by J π∗,M∗the optimal value for problem (2). For any pricing policy π ∈Π and matching
policy M ∈M, we must have J π,M ≤J π∗,M∗. This is because, given a pricing policy π ∈Π and a
matching policy M ∈M, its corresponding mechanism in ˜Y is feasible. Consider the mechanism
yT where the intermediary commits to “simulating” each buyer’s stopping and purchasing rules
(i.e., (τφ,aφ) =
 τ π,M
φ
,aπ,M
φ

for each buyer φ) and each seller’s stopping and selling rules (i.e.,
(τψ,aψ) =
 τ π,M
ψ
,aπ,M
ψ

for each seller ψ). Since by deﬁnition
 τ π,M
φ
,aπ,M
φ

is buyer φ’s best response
to herself and the pricing policy π and the matching policy M, (IR-d) and (IC-d) are satisﬁed in
problem (2). Similarly, since by deﬁnition
 τ π,M
ψ
,aπ,M
ψ

is seller ψ’s best response to herself and the
pricing policy π and the matching policy M, (IR-s) and (IC-s) are satisﬁed in problem (2). As a
result, we verify that J π,M ≤J π∗,M∗for any π and M.
Moreover, problem (B’) is a relaxation of problem (2) in that a) problem (B’) requires the
constraints to be satisﬁed in expectation, while problem (2) requires the constraints to be satisﬁed
along every sample path; b) problem (B’) optimizes over a larger set than problem (2), since ˜Y ⊂Y.
Hence, J π∗,M∗≤J ∗. Together with J π,M ≤J π∗,M∗, we have J π,M ≤J ∗for any π and M.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
4
A.2.
Upper Bound on the Mechanism Design Benchmark
Recall that every buyer’s and seller’s type is two dimensional. Therefore, we still face the analytical
diﬃculty of computing the optimal value of the two-sided dynamic mechanism design problem
(B’). In order to use this benchmark to analyze the performance of any pricing and matching
policy, rather than precisely computing the optimal value of this benchmark, our approach is to
further establish a tractable upper bound by solving a relaxed two-sided dynamic mechanism design
problem wherein every buyer’s and seller’s arrival time is assumed to be known by the intermediary.
Hence, in the relaxed problem, every buyer’s and seller’s type is reduced to be one dimensional, i.e.,
the relaxed problem is subject to the following one-dimensional incentive compatibility constraints:
E−φ

U d(φ,yφ)

≥E−φ

U d(φ,yφv′)

with φv′ ≜(tφ,v′), ∀φ,v′,
(ICd’)
E−ψ [U s(ψ,yψ)] ≥E−ψ

U s(ψ,yψc′)

with ψc′ ≜(tψ,c′), ∀ψ,c′.
(ICs’)
By applying the Myersonion approach (Myerson 1981) to this relaxed mechanism design problem
and making further relaxations, we can complete the proof of Lemma 1.
Proof of Lemma 1.
Consider the following optimization problem with the optimal value
denoted by ¯J 1:
max
{yT ∈Y}
E

X
φ,ψ∈HT
V d (vφ) −V s (cψ) −b(sφ −tφ) −h(sψ −tψ)


s.t.
X
φ∈Ht
1{sφ = t,mφ = 1} =
X
ψ∈Ht
1{sψ = t,mψ = 1},
∀t ∈[0,T].
(B”)
Combining Lemmas S.2 and S.4, we immediately have J ∗≤¯J 1.
Now, we consider an optimization problem that has the same deﬁnition as (B”) except that we
assume that the intermediary is clairvoyant that she knows buyers’ and sellers’ arrival processes
HT at time 0, i.e., the intermediary’s every feasible mechanism yT is adapted to σ(HT). We denote
by ¯J 2 the optimal value of this new optimization problem. Hence, we have ¯J 1 ≤¯J 2.
Note that if buyer φ and seller ψ are matched, then we have sφ,sψ ≥max{tφ,tψ}. Therefore, we
have ¯J 2 ≤E
 ¯J(HT)

.
Therefore, all analyses above jointly imply
J ∗≤¯J 1 ≤¯J 2 ≤E
 ¯J(HT)

.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
5
Therefore, this result and Lemma 3 jointly complete the proof of this lemma.
□
B.
The Eﬀects of Market Conditions on Pricing Heuristic
First, we explore the eﬀects of the variation of the buyer valuation distribution and the seller cost
distribution on prices p∗and w∗, as well as the intermediary’s matching quantity µ∗and her proﬁt
¯J ∗.
Theorem 4 (Comparative Statics on Valuation/Cost Distribution). Consider
a
market wherein λdT = λsT = 1, buyers’ valuations are uniformly distributed on [V −θd,V + θd]
with θd ≥0 and sellers’ costs are uniformly distributed on [C −θs,C + θs] with θs ≥0 and C < V .
Then,
(i) p∗is decreasing in θd ∈

0,max
  V −C
3
−θs+ ,
p
(V −C)θs −θs+
and increasing in θd ≥
max
  V −C
3
−θs+ ,
p
(V −C)θs −θs+
. In addition, p∗is increasing in θs.
(ii) w∗is increasing in θs ∈

0,max
  V −C
3
−θd+ ,
p
(V −C)θd −θd+
and decreasing in
θs ≥max
  V −C
3
−θd+ ,
p
(V −C)θd −θd+
. In addition, w∗is decreasing in θd.
(iii) µ∗is decreasing in θd + θs.
(iv) ¯J ∗is decreasing in θd + θs ∈[0,V −C] and increasing in θd + θs ≥V −C.
Parameters θd and θs measure the degree of variations of buyers’ valuations and sellers’ costs,
respectively. Theorem 4(i) has the following interpretations. First, consider the scenario that buy-
ers’ valuations are concentrated (θd is small). Suppose buyers’ valuations become slightly more
dispersed (θd increases). Because buyers’ valuations are still highly concentrated, if the interme-
diary charges buyers more, then she fails to capture a large number of buyers and thus she loses
substantial revenue from buyers. However, if the intermediary slightly lowers the price for buyers,
then she can capture a vast number of buyers without losing too much revenue from each matched
buyer. Therefore, the intermediary tends to charge buyers less. Second, consider the scenario that
buyers’ valuations are dispersed (θd is large). Suppose buyers’ valuations become even more dis-
persed (θd increases). If the intermediary charges buyers less, then she both loses revenue from
each matched buyer and fails to attract substantially more buyers to purchase because of highly
dispersed buyers’ valuations. However, if the intermediary slightly raises the price for buyers, then
she can collect more revenue from each matched buyer without loosing too many buyers who decide
not to buy. Therefore, the intermediary tends to charge buyers more. Third, consider the scenario
that sellers’ costs become more dispersed (θs increases). Suppose the intermediary charges buyers
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
6
less. Then more buyers consider to purchase the product. To achieve the market clearance, the
intermediary has to incentivize more sellers to sell the product. Because sellers’ costs are more
dispersed, the intermediary has to substantially increase the compensation for sellers. As a result,
the net proﬁt from matching one buyer and one seller is too low or even negative. Therefore, the
intermediary charges buyers more when sellers’ costs are more dispersed.
We can make analogous interpretations for Theorem 4(ii) about the eﬀects of buyer valuation
variation and seller cost variation on the wage that the intermediary compensates sellers.
In Theorem 4(iii), if the sellers’ costs become more dispersed, then following from Theorem 4(i),
the intermediary raises the price for buyers. As a result, the number of buyers who are matched
reduces. An analogous interpretation can be made if buyers’ valuations become more dispersed.
Theorem 4(iv) has the following interpretations. First, consider the scenario that buyers’ val-
uations are well concentrated. Suppose buyers’ valuations become slightly more dispersed (θd
increases). Because buyers’ valuations are still well concentrated, slightly reducing the price for buy-
ers can maintain almost the same number of matches. However, the intermediary is less proﬁtable
from each match by doing so. Therefore, the intermediary’s total proﬁt decreases. Second, con-
sider the scenario that buyers’ valuations are highly dispersed. Suppose buyers’ valuations become
even more dispersed (θd increases). Although the total number of matches decreases, it allows the
intermediary to set a suﬃciently high price to attract only high-value buyers to purchase and set
a suﬃciently low compensation to attract only low-cost sellers to sell. Therefore, the beneﬁt from
a higher net proﬁt from each match outperforms the reduced number of matches. Therefore, the
intermediary’s total proﬁt increases. The analogous arguments can be made on the eﬀect of the
seller cost variation.
Second, we explore the eﬀects of the buyer valuation distribution (characterized by F d(·)) and the
seller cost distribution (characterized by F s(·)) on prices p∗and w∗, as well as the intermediary’s
matching quantity µ∗and her proﬁt ¯J ∗.
Theorem 5 (Comparative Statics on Valuation/Cost Distribution).
(i) Consider a family of buyer valuation distribution functions F d
θ (·) parameterized by θ > 0, where
F d
θ1(θ1v) = F d
θ2(θ2v) for all v ∈[0, ¯v] and θ1,θ2 > 0. Assume the generalized failure rate
vfd
θ (v)
¯
F d
θ (v)
is increasing in v. Then, p∗and w∗are increasing in θ. Moreover, µ∗and ¯J ∗are increasing
in θ.
(ii) Consider a family of seller cost distribution functions F s
θ (·) parameterized by θ > 0, where
F s
θ1(θ1c) = F s
θ2(θ2c) for all c ∈[0, ¯c] and θ1,θ2 > 0. Assume
cfs
θ (c)
F s
θ (c) is decreasing in c. Then, p∗
and w∗are increasing in θ. Moreover, µ∗and ¯J ∗are decreasing in θ.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
7
In Theorem 5(i), the condition that
vfd
θ (v)
¯
F d
θ (v) is increasing is the commonly used Increasing Gener-
alized Failure Rate (IGFR) condition. The condition F d
θ1(θ1v) = F d
θ2(θ2v) for all v ∈[0, ¯v] is satisﬁed
by many commonly used distributions, e.g., the family of uniform distributions, Uniform[0,θ],
and Weibull and Gamma distributions, Weibull,Gamma(α,θ). This condition F d
θ1(θ1v) = F d
θ2(θ2v)
implies that as θ increases, a buyer is more likely to have a higher product valuation. Therefore,
when θ increases, on the demand side, the intermediary can raise up the price for buyers, p∗, to
a certain level, such that she can both collect a higher revenue from each buyer and attract more
buyers to request the product (µ∗increases). Meanwhile, in order to match the increasing num-
ber of demand requests, on the supply side, the intermediary increases payments to sellers (w∗
increases) to encourage more sellers to deliver the product. As θ increases, since buyer product
valuations are more likely to be high and the intermediary matches more pairs of buyers and sellers
(µ∗increases), the intermediary makes a higher proﬁt ( ¯J ∗increases).
In Theorem 5(ii), the condition that
cfs
θ (c)
F s
θ (c) is non-increasing in c is an analogous condition on the
supply side to the IGFR condition assumed for the demand side. The condition F s
θ1(θ1c) = F s
θ2(θ2c)
implies that as θ decreases, a seller is more likely to incur a lower product production and delivery
cost. Therefore, when θ decreases, on the supply side, the intermediary cuts down the price for
sellers, w∗, to a certain level, such that she can both pay less to each seller and attract more
sellers to deliver the product (µ∗increases). Meanwhile, in order to match the increasing number of
supply requests, on the demand side, the intermediary reduces the price for buyers (p∗decreases) to
encourage more buyers to request the product. As θ decreases, since seller production and delivery
costs are more likely to be low and the intermediary matches more pairs of buyers and sellers (µ∗
increases), the intermediary makes a higher proﬁt ( ¯J ∗increases).
In summary, in a thick market with large volumes of demand and supply (for which the ﬂuid
approximation tends to apply), while both a stochastically larger willingness-to-pay distribution
and a smaller willingness-to-sell distribution tend to result in a higher total matching quantity
and a higher total proﬁt level for the intermediary, their implications on prices can go either way
depending on whether the change is more favorable to the buy or the sell side.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
1
Supplemental Note
“Pricing and Matching with Forward-looking Buyers and Sellers”
A.
Auxiliary Properties
This section discusses some useful auxiliary properties that will be used for the analysis in this
paper.
Lemma S.1. If (ICd’) and (IRd) hold, then for any φ,
E−φ [pφ] ≤vφE−φ [mφ] −
Z vφ
v′=v
E−φ

mφv′

dv′ −bE−φ [(sφ −tφ)].
Proof of Lemma S.1.
Deﬁne ud(φ,yφ) ≜
∂
∂vφ U d(φ,yφ). Applying the envelope theorem, we have:
E−φ

U d (φ,yφ)

=
Z vφ
v′=v
E−φ

ud  φv′,yφv′

dv′ + E−φ

U d  φv,yφv

=
Z vφ
v′=v
E−φ

mφv′

dv′ + E−φ

U d  φv,yφv

≥
Z vφ
v′=v
E−φ

mφv′

dv′,
(S.1)
where the ﬁrst equality follows from Fubini’s theorem and the envelope theorem (speciﬁcally,
Theorem 2 of Milgrom, P, I Segal. 2002. Envelope theorems for arbitrary choice sets. Econometrica
70(2) 583–601), the second equality follows from the deﬁnition of ud(·) and U d(φ,yφ) = vφmφ −
pφ −b(sφ −tφ), and the inequality follows from (IRd) for φv. Consequently,
E−φ [pφ] = vφE−φ [mφ] −E−φ

U d(φ,yφ)

−bE−φ [(sφ −tφ)]
≤vφE−φ [mφ] −
Z vφ
v′=v
E−φ

mφv′

dv′ −bE−φ [(sφ −tφ)],
where the ﬁrst equality follows from the deﬁnition of U d(·), the ﬁrst inequality follows from
(S.1).
□
Lemma S.2. If (ICd’) and (IRd) hold, then
E

X
φ∈HT
pφ

≤E

X
φ∈HT
V d (vφ)mφ −b(sφ −tφ)

.
Proof of Lemma S.2.
We have that
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
2
E

X
φ∈HT
pφ

= E

X
φ∈HT
E−φ [pφ]


≤E

X
φ∈HT
vφE−φ [mφ] −
Z vφ
v′=v
E−φ

mφv′

dv′ −bE−φ [(sφ −tφ)]

,
where the inequality follows from Lemma S.1. We now prove that the right hand side of the above
is the desired quantity by changing the order of integration:
E

X
φ∈HT
vφE−φ [mφ] −
Z vφ
v′=v
E−φ

mφv′

dv′ −bE−φ [(sφ −tφ)]


= E

X
φ∈HT
Evφ

vφE−φ [mφ] −
Z vφ
v′=v
E−φ

mφv′

dv′

−bE−φ [(sφ −tφ)]


= E

X
φ∈HT
Z ¯v
vφ=v

vφE−φ [mφ] −
Z vφ
v′=v
E−φ

mφv′

dv′

f d(vφ)dvφ −bE−φ [(sφ −tφ)]


= E

X
φ∈HT
Z ¯v
vφ=v

vφ −
¯F d(vφ)
f d(vφ)

E−φ [mφ]f d(vφ)dvφ −bE−φ [(sφ −tφ)]


= E

X
φ∈HT
Evφ

vφ −
¯F d(vφ)
f d(vφ)

E−φ [mφ]

−bE−φ [(sφ −tφ)]


= E

X
φ∈HT

vφ −
¯F d(vφ)
f d(vφ)

mφ −b(sφ −tφ)


= E

X
φ∈HT
V d (vφ)mφ −b(sφ −tφ)

,
where the second and the fourth equalities follow from the fact that vφ is independent of tφ, and
the third equality follows from an exchange in the order of integration that
Z ¯v
vφ=v
Z vφ
v′=v
E−φ

mφv′

dv′f d(vφ)dvφ =
Z ¯v
v′=v
Z ¯v
vφ=v′ f d(vφ)dvφE−φ

mφv′

dv′
=
Z ¯v
v′=v
¯F d(v′)E−φ

mφv′

dv′
=
Z ¯v
v′=v
¯F d(v′)
f d(v′) E−φ

mφv′

f d(v′)dv′
=
Z ¯v
vφ=v
¯F d(vφ)
f d(vφ) E−φ [mφ]f d(vφ)dvφ.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
3
Lemma S.3. If (ICs’) and (IRs) hold, for any ψ,
E−ψ [pψ] ≥cψE−ψ [mψ] +
Z ¯c
c′=cψ
E−ψ

mψc′

dc′ + hE−ψ [(sψ −tψ)].
Proof of Lemma S.3.
Deﬁne us(ψ,y) ≜
∂
∂cψ U s(ψ,y). Applying the envelope theorem, we have:
E−ψ [U s (ψ,yψ)] =
Z ¯c
c′=cψ
E−ψ

us  ψc′,yψc′

dc′ + E−ψ [U s (ψ¯c,yψ¯c)]
=
Z ¯c
c′=cψ
E−ψ

mψc′

dc′ + E−ψ [U s (ψ¯c,yψ¯c)]
≥
Z ¯c
c′=cψ
E−ψ

mψc′

dc′,
(S.2)
where the ﬁrst equality follows from Fubini’s theorem and the envelope theorem (speciﬁcally,
Milgrom and Segal 2002, Theorem 2), the second equality follows from the deﬁnition of us(·) and
U s(·), and the inequality follows from (IRs) for ψ¯c. Consequently,
E−ψ [pψ] = cψE−ψ [mψ] + E−ψ [U s(ψ,yψ)] + hE−ψ [(sψ −tψ)]
≥cψE−ψ [mψ] +
Z ¯c
c′=cψ
E−ψ

mψc′

dc′ + hE−ψ [(sψ −tψ)],
where the ﬁrst equality follows from the deﬁnition of U s(·), the ﬁrst inequality follows from
(S.2).
□
Lemma S.4. If (ICs’) and (IRs) hold, then
E

X
ψ∈HT
pψ

≥E

X
ψ∈HT
V s (cψ)mψ + h(sψ −tψ)

.
Proof of Lemma S.4.
We have that
E

X
ψ∈HT
pψ

= E

X
ψ∈HT
E−ψ [pψ]


≥E

X
ψ∈HT
cψE−ψ [mψ] +
Z ¯c
c′=cψ
E−ψ

mψc′

dc′ + hE−ψ [(sψ −tψ)]

,
where the inequality follows from Lemma S.3. We now prove that the right hand side of the above
is the desired quantity by changing the order of integration:
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
4
E

X
ψ∈HT
cψE−ψ [mψ] +
Z ¯c
c′=cψ
E−ψ

mψc′

dc′ + hE−ψ [(sψ −tψ)]


= E

X
ψ∈HT
Ecψ
"
cψE−ψ [mψ] +
Z ¯c
c′=cψ
E−ψ

mψc′

dc′
#
+ hE−ψ [(sψ −tψ)]


= E

X
ψ∈HT
Z ¯c
cψ=c
 
cψE−ψ [mψ] +
Z ¯c
c′=cψ
E−ψ

mψc′

dc′
!
f s(cψ)dcψ + hE−ψ [(sψ −tψ)]


= E

X
ψ∈HT
Z ¯c
cψ=c

cψ + F s(cψ)
f s(cψ)

E−ψ [mψ]f s(cψ)dcψ + hE−ψ [(sψ −tψ)]


= E

X
ψ∈HT
Ecψ

cψ + F s(cψ)
f s(cψ)

E−ψ [mψ]

+ hE−ψ [(sψ −tψ)]


= E

X
ψ∈HT

cψ + F s(cψ)
f s(cψ)

mψ + h(sψ −tψ)


= E

X
ψ∈HT
V s (cψ)mψ + h(sψ −tψ)

,
where the second and the fourth equalities follow from the fact that cψ is independent of tψ, and
the third equality follows from an exchange in the order of integration that
Z ¯c
cψ=c
Z ¯c
c′=cψ
E−ψ

mψc′

dc′f s(cψ)dcψ =
Z ¯c
c′=c
Z cψ
cψ=0
f s(cψ)dcψE−ψ

mψc′

dc′
=
Z ¯c
c′=c
F s(c′)E−ψ

mψc′

dc′
=
Z ¯c
c′=c
F s(c′)
f s(c′) E−ψ

mψc′

f s(c′)dc′
=
Z ¯c
cψ=c
F s(cψ)
f s(cψ) E−ψ [mψ]f s(cψ)dcψ.
□
Lemma S.5. µ∗and ¯J ∗are increasing in λd and λs, respectively.
Proof of Lemma S.5.
(1) In this part, we prove that µ∗and ¯J ∗are increasing in λd.
Consider any two market conditions with λd
1 and λd
2, where λd
1 < λd
2. The subscript (1 or 2) in
all following notation denotes the index of the market environment that the intermediary operates
at. Therefore, we need to show µ∗
2 ≥µ∗
1 and J ∗
2 ≥J ∗
1 .
The proof of µ∗
2 ≥µ∗
1 is as follows.
For µ ∈

0,min

λd
1,λs 
∩

0,min

λd
2,λs 
=

0,min

λd
1,λs 
, we have
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
5
V2 (µ) −V1 (µ) = V d

¯F d,−1
 µ
λd
2T

−V d

¯F d,−1
 µ
λd
1T

≥0,
where the inequality follows from Assumption 1. In addition, Assumptions 1 and 2 imply that
Vi (µ) is decreasing in µ. Therefore, µ∗
2 ≥µ∗
1.
The proof of J ∗
2 ≥J ∗
1 is as follows.
Given the optimal prices p∗
1 and w∗
1 in market environment 1 with λd
1, we construct prices p2 and
w2 for market environment 2 with λd
2, where λd
2 ¯F d (p2) = λd
1 ¯F d (p∗
1) and w2 = w∗
1.
Therefore, ¯J ∗
2 ≥λd
2Tp2 ¯F d (p2) −λsTw2F s (w2) = λd
1Tp2 ¯F d (p∗
1) −λsTw∗
1F s (w∗
1) ≥λd
1Tp∗
1 ¯F d (p∗
1) −
λsTw∗
1F s (w∗
1) = ¯J ∗
1 . The ﬁrst inequality follows from the property that p2 and w2 are feasible but
not necessarily optimal solutions to the optimization problem (D). The ﬁrst equality follows from
the deﬁnitions of p2 and w2. The second inequality holds since the condition that λd
1 < λd
2 implies
p∗
1 ≤p2.
(2) In this part, we prove that µ∗and ¯J ∗are increasing in λs.
Consider any two market conditions with λs
1 and λs
2, where λs
1 < λs
2. The subscript (1 or 2) in
all following notation denotes the index of the market environment that the intermediary operates
at. Therefore, we need to show µ∗
2 ≥µ∗
1 and J ∗
2 ≥J ∗
1 .
The proof of µ∗
2 ≥µ∗
1 is as follows.
For µ ∈

0,min

λd,λs
1
 
∩

0,min

λd,λs
2
 
=

0,min

λd,λs
1
 
, we have
V2 (µ) −V1 (µ) = −V s

F s,−1
 µ
λs
2T

+ V s

F s,−1
 µ
λs
1T

≥0,
where the inequality follows from Assumption 2. In addition, Assumptions 1 and 2 imply that
Vi (µ) is decreasing in µ. Therefore, µ∗
2 ≥µ∗
1.
The proof of J ∗
2 ≥J ∗
1 is as follows.
Given the optimal prices p∗
1 and w∗
1 in market environment 1 with λs
1, we construct prices p2 and
w2 for market environment 2 with λs
2, where p2 = p∗
1 and λs
2F s (w2) = λs
1F s (w∗
1).
Therefore, ¯J ∗
2 ≥λdTp2 ¯F d (p2) −λs
2Tw2F s (w2) = λdT ¯p1 ¯F d (p∗
1) −λs
1Tw∗
2F s (w∗
1) ≥λdTp∗
1 ¯F d (p∗
1) −
λs
1Tw∗
1F s (w∗
1) = ¯J ∗
1 . The ﬁrst inequality follows from the property that p2 and w2 are feasible but
not necessarily optimal solutions to the optimization problem (D). The ﬁrst equality follows from
the deﬁnitions of p2 and w2. The second inequality holds since the condition that λd
1 > λd
2 implies
w∗
1 ≤w2. Therefore, ¯J ∗is increasing in λs.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
6
B.
Proofs for §5
Proof of Proposition 1.
Note that ¯F d(·) has the inverse ¯F d,−1(·) and F s(·) has the inverse
F s,−1(·). Then we can prove the result in the quantile space. Deﬁne qd
t ≜¯F d (ˆπd
t ) and R(qd
t ) ≜
ˆπd
t ¯F d (ˆπd
t ). Then
R′  qd
t

= dˆπd
t
dqd
t
¯F d  ˆπd
t

−ˆπd
t f d  ˆπd
t
 dˆπd
t
dqd
t
= −

ˆπd
t −
¯F d (ˆπd
t )
f d (ˆπd
t )

f d  ˆπd
t
 dˆπd
t
dqd
t
=

ˆπd
t −
¯F d (ˆπd
t )
f d (ˆπd
t )
 d ¯F d (ˆπd
t )
dqd
t
= ˆπd
t −
¯F d (ˆπd
t )
f d (ˆπd
t ) .
(S.3)
Hence, Assumption 1 implies that R(q) is concave in q, since ˆπd
t decreases in qd
t . Similarly, deﬁne
qs
t ≜F s (ˆπs
t) and C(qs
t) ≜ˆπs
tF s (ˆπs
t). Analogously, we can show that Assumption 2 implies that C(q)
is convex in q.
Optimization problem (D) is equivalent to the following optimization problem:
max{qd
t ,qs
t ∈[0,1]:∀t∈[0,T ]}
Z T
0
λdR(qd
t )dt −
Z T
0
λsC(qs
t)dt
s.t.
λdqd
t = λsqs
t,
∀t ∈[0,T].
The optimization problem above is equivalent to the following optimization problem
max{qd,qs∈[0,1]} T
 λdR(qd) −λsC(qs)

(S.4)
s.t.
λdTqd = λsTqs.
To compute the optimal solution to the optimization problem (S.4), denoted as (q∗,d,q∗,s), we
deﬁne a new variable µ ≜λdTqd. Now, we can write the optimization problem (S.4) in the following
tractable form with respect to µt:
max T

λdR
 µ
λdT

−λsC
 µ
λsT

(S.5)
s.t.
µ ∈

0,min

λdT,λsT
 
.
In the optimization problem (S.5), for the objective function, we have
d
dµT

λdR
 µ
λdT

−λsC
 µ
λsT

= R′  µ
λdT

−C′  µ
λsT

= V (µ).
Recall that R(q) is concave in q and C(q) is convex in q. Hence,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
7
d2
dµ2 T

λdR
 µ
λdT

−λsC
 µ
λsT

≤0.
In addition, we notice that
d
dµT

λdR
 µ
λdT

−λsC
 µ
λsT

µ=0
= R′ (0) −C′ (0) = ¯v −c ≥0.
Therefore, the optimal solution to the optimization problem (S.5), denoted as µ∗, is given by the
following equation:
µ∗= max

µ ∈

0,min

λdT,λsT
 
: d
dµT

λdR
 µ
λdT

−λsC
 µ
λsT

≥0

= max

µ ∈

0,min

λdT,λsT
 
: V (µ) ≥0
 
.
Therefore, the optimal value of the optimization problems (D) and (S.4) is ¯J ∗= (p∗−w∗)µ∗.
Next, we prove p∗≥w∗. This result immediately follows from properties that
p∗≥p∗−
¯F d(p∗)
f d(p∗) ≥w∗+ F s(w∗)
f s(w∗) ≥w∗,
where the second inequality follows from Equation (2).
□
Proof of Lemma 2.
Consider
the
optimal
solution
of
optimization
problem
(B),

x∗
φ,ψ : φ,ψ ∈HT 
. Deﬁne m∗
φ ≜P
ψ∈HT x∗
φ,ψ and m∗
ψ ≜P
φ∈HT x∗
φ,ψ. Hence, m∗
φ,m∗
ψ ∈{0,1}. We
have
E
 ¯J
 HT
= E

X
φ,ψ∈HT

V d (vφ) −V s (cψ) −b(tψ −tφ)
+ −h(tφ −tψ)
+
x∗
φψ


≤E

X
φ,ψ∈HT
 V d (vφ) −V s (cψ)

x∗
φψ


= E

X
φ,ψ∈HT
 V d (vφ) −η −V s (cψ) + η

x∗
φψ


= E

X
φ∈HT
 V d (vφ) −η

m∗
φ −
X
ψ∈HT
(V s (cψ) −η)m∗
ψ


= E

X
φ∈HT

vφ −
¯F d(vφ)
f d(vφ) −η

m∗
φ −
X
ψ∈HT

cψ + F s(cψ)
f s(cψ) −η

m∗
ψ


Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
8
≤E

X
φ∈HT

vφ −
¯F d(vφ)
f d(vφ) −η
+
+
X
ψ∈HT

η −cψ −F s(cψ)
f s(cψ)
+

≜¯J ∗,η.
The ﬁrst inequality follows from the property that b,h ≥0. The second equality holds for any
η ∈R. The fourth equality follows from the deﬁnitions of V d (vφ) and V s (cψ). The second inequality
follows from the property that m∗
φ,m∗
ψ ∈{0,1}.
Deﬁne
gd(η) ≜max

v ∈[v, ¯v] : v −
¯F d(v)
f d(v) ≤η

.
Following from the property that
d
dv
  ¯F d(v)(v −η)

= −f d(v)

v −
¯
F d(v)
fd(v) −η

and Assumption 1,
we have
gd(η) ∈arg max
v∈[v,¯v]
¯F d(v)(v −η).
Deﬁne
gs(η) ≜max

c ∈[c, ¯c] : c + F s(c)
f s(v) ≤η

.
Following from the property that
d
dv (F s(c)(c −η)) = f s(c)

c + F s(c)
fs(c) −η

and Assumption 2, we
have
gs(η) ∈arg min
c∈[c,¯c]
F s(c)(c −η).
We have
¯J ∗,η = λdT E
"
vφ −
¯F d(vφ)
f d(vφ) −η
+#
+ λsT E
"
η −cψ −F s(cψ)
f s(cψ)
+#
= λdT
Z ¯v
v=gd(η)

v −
¯F d(v)
f d(v) −η

f d(v)dv −λsT
Z gs(η)
c=c

c + F s(c)
f s(c) −η

f s(c)dc
= λdT ¯F d  gd(η)
 gd(η) −η

−λsTF s (gs(η))(gs(η) −η)
(S.6)
=
max
v∈[v,¯v],c∈[c,¯c]T
 λd ¯F d(v)(v −η) −λsF s(c)(c −η)

.
(S.7)
The ﬁrst equality is due to Wald’s identity. The second equality follows from the deﬁnitions of gd(η)
and gs(η). The third equality is due to
R ¯v
v=gd(η)(v −
¯
F d(v)
fd(v) )f d(v)dv =
R ¯v
v=gd(η)(vf d(v) −¯F d(v))dv =
R ¯v
v=gd(η) vf d(v)dv−v ¯F d(v))|¯v
v=gd(η) −
R ¯v
v=gd(η) vf d(v)dv = gd(η) ¯F d(gd(η)) by integration by parts, and
analogously,
R gs(η)
c=c (c + F s(c)
fs(c) )f s(c)dc = gs(η)F s(gs(η)). The ﬁfth equality follows from properties
that gd(η) ∈arg maxv∈[v,¯v] ¯F d(v)(v −η) and gs(η) ∈arg minc∈[c,¯c] F s(c)(c −η).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
9
By setting qd ≜¯F d(v), R(qd) ≜v ¯F d(v), qs ≜F s(c), and C(qs) ≜cF s(c), Equation (S.7) can be
written in the following way:
max
qd,qs∈[0,1]T
 λd  R(qd) −ηqd
−λs (C(qs) −ηqs)

.
(S.8)
Optimization problem (S.8) is a Lagrangian relaxation of the optimization problem (S.4). Recall
from the proof of Proposition 1 that the objective function in (S.8) is concave in (qd,qs). In addition,
the solution (qd,qs) =

λs
λd+λs ,
λd
λd+λs

satisﬁes conditions that qd,qs ∈(0,1) and λdTqd = λsTqs.
Therefore, Slater’s theorem (strong duality theorem) implies
min
η∈R
¯J ∗,η = ¯J ∗.
Therefore,
E
 ¯J
 HT
≤¯J ∗.
□
Proof of Theorem 1.
(i) Under policy πWFP, given that all other buyers ˆφ ̸= φ and all sellers
behave myopically, buyer φ’s best response stopping rule τ πWFP,Mg
φ
and purchasing rule aπWFP,Mg
φ
can be calculated by solving the following optimization problem:
sup
τφ∈[tφ,T ]
aφ∈{0,1}
E

U d (φ,yφ)
πWFP,d
tφ
,
 Itφ−
+ ,φ

.
Denote by ym
φ buyer φ’s myopic policy, where τ m
φ = tφ and am
φ = 1{vφ ≥p∗}. Consider any yφ with
τφ ∈[tφ,T] and aφ ∈{0,1}. We have
E

U d (φ,yφ)
πWFP,d
tφ
,
 Itφ−
+ ,φ

= E

vφmφ −pφ −b(sφ −tφ)
πWFP,d
tφ
,
 Itφ−
+ ,φ

= E

vφ −πWFP,d
τφ

mφ −b(sφ −tφ)
πWFP,d
tφ
,
 Itφ−
+ ,φ

= E

(vφ −p∗)mφ −b(τφ −tφ)
πWFP,d
tφ
,
 Itφ−
+ ,φ

≤E

(vφ −p∗)
+ mφ −b(τφ −tφ)
πWFP,d
tφ
,
 Itφ−
+ ,φ

≤E

(vφ −p∗)
+ mφ
πWFP,d
tφ
,
 Itφ−
+ ,φ

= E

U d  φ,ym
φ
πWFP,d
tφ
,
 Itφ−
+ ,φ

,
where the second inequality follows from the greedy matching policy that if τ ˆφ > τφ and a ˆφ = aφ = 1,
then m ˆφ ≤mφ, and the property that τφ ≥tφ.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
10
Therefore, buyer φ’s best response is τ πWFP,Mg
φ
= tφ and aπWFP,Mg
φ
= 1{vφ ≥p∗}.
(ii) The proof is analogous to part (i), expect that the expectations are not conditional on
(It−)
+.
□
Proof of Proposition 2.
(a) We denote N d
t ≜P
φ∈Ht 1{vφ ≥p∗} and N s
t ≜P
ψ∈Ht 1{cψ ≤w∗}.
Hence, N d
t is a Poisson random variable with parameter λdt ¯F d (p∗) = µ∗t
T , and N s
t is a Poisson
random variable with parameter λstF s (w∗) = µ∗t
T .
First, we analyze the price process on the demand side. For the unmatched supply-demand
quantity It−= N s
t−−N d
t−, we have E[It−] = E

N s
t−

−E

N d
t−

= 0 and Var[It−] = Var

N s
t−

+
Var

N d
t−

= 2µ∗t
T . Therefore, for any k ∈[0,1), we have
Pr

It−> −1
2µ∗min

k,1 −t
T
It−≤0

= 1 −Pr

It−≤−1
2µ∗min

k,1 −t
T
It−≤0

= 1 −Pr
 It−≤−1
2µ∗min

k,1 −t
T
 
Pr(It−≤0)
≥1 −2Pr

It−≤−1
2µ∗min

k,1 −t
T

≥1 −
16t
µ∗min
n
k2,
 1 −t
T
2o
T
≥1 −
16
µ∗min
n
k2,
 1 −t
T
2o.
The ﬁrst inequality follows from the symmetry property that for any n ∈N, P(It−= n) =
P(It−= −n). Thus, P(It−≤0) ≥1
2. The second inequality follows from Chebyshev’s inequality.
The third inequality follows from the property that t ≤T.
Consider any k ∈[0,1). Deﬁne ∆N s
t ≜N s
min{t+kT,T } −N s
t−. Hence, E[∆N s
t ] = Var[∆N s
t ] =
µ∗min

k,1 −t
T
 
. Therefore, we have
Pr

∆N s
t ≥1
2µ∗min

k,1 −t
T

≥1 −
µ∗min

k,1 −t
T
 
 µ∗min

k,1 −t
T
 
−1
2µ∗min

k,1 −t
T
 2
≥1 −
µ∗
 µ∗min

k,1 −t
T
 
−1
2µ∗min

k,1 −t
T
 2
= 1 −
4
µ∗min
n
k2,
 1 −t
T
2o.
The ﬁrst inequality follows from Chebyshev’s inequality. The second inequality follows from the
property that min

k,1 −t
T
 
≤1.
For any t ∈[0,T), deﬁne At ≜

It−∈
 −1
2µ∗min

k,1 −t
T
 
,0

and ∆N s
t ≥1
2µ∗min

k,1 −t
T
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
11
and Ac
t ≜

It−≤−1
2µ∗min

k,1 −t
T
 
or ∆N s
t < 1
2µ∗min

k,1 −t
T
 
. Hence,
Pr(Ac
t|tφ = t,vφ ≥p∗,It−≤0) = 1 −Pr(At|tφ = t,vφ ≥p∗,It−≤0)
= 1 −Pr

It−> −1
2µ∗min

k,1 −t
T
It−≤0

·Pr

∆N s
t ≥1
2µ∗min

k,1 −t
T

≤1 −

1 −
16
µ∗min
n
k2,
 1 −t
T
2o



1 −
4
µ∗min
n
k2,
 1 −t
T
2o


≤
20
µ∗min
n
k2,
 1 −t
T
2o.
In
addition,
we
notice
that
Pr(Ac|tφ = t,vφ ≥p∗,It−≤0)
≤
1.
Therefore,
Pr(Ac|tφ = t,vφ ≥p∗,It−≤0) ≤min

20
µ∗min
n
k2,(1−t
T )
2o,1

.
Therefore, for any t ∈[0,T), we have
E[sφ −tφ|tφ = t,vφ ≥p∗,It−≤0]
= E[sφ −tφ|tφ = t,vφ ≥p∗,It−≤0,At] · Pr(At|tφ = t,vφ ≥p∗,It−≤0)
+E[sφ −tφ|tφ = t,vφ ≥p∗,It−≤0,Ac
t] · Pr(Ac
t|tφ = t,vφ ≥p∗,It−≤0)
≤min{kT,T −t} · 1 + T · Pr(Ac|tφ = t,vφ ≥p∗,It−≤0)
≤min{kT,T −t} + T min



20
µ∗min
n
k2,
 1 −t
T
2o,1


.
For any t ∈[0,T), we have
Pr(mφ = 1|tφ = t,vφ ≥p∗,It−≤0) ≥Pr(At|tφ = t,vφ ≥p∗,It−≤0)
= 1 −Pr(Ac
t|tφ = t,vφ ≥p∗,It−≤0)
≥1 −min



20
µ∗min
n
k2,
 1 −t
T
2o,1


.
Therefore,
E[sφ −tφ|tφ = t,vφ ≥p∗,It−≤0]
Pr(mφ = 1|tφ = t,vφ ≥p∗,It−≤0) ≤
min{kT,T −t} + T min
n
20
µ∗min{k2,(1−t
T )2},1
o
1 −min
n
20
µ∗min{k2,(1−t
T )2},1
o
.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
12
In addition, for any It−> 0 and buyer φ with tφ = t and vφ ≥p∗, we have sφ = tφ and mφ = 1.
Hence, for any It−> 0,
E[sφ −tφ|tφ = t,vφ ≥p∗,It−]
Pr(mφ = 1|tφ = t,vφ ≥p∗,It−) = 0
1 = 0.
Therefore, for any t ∈[0,T),
EIt−

p∗−πWFP,d
t

= EIt−

p∗−πWFP,d
t
|It−≤0

· P(It−≤0)
+EIt−

p∗−πWFP,d
t
|It−> 0

· P(It−> 0)
≤b
min{kT,T −t} + T min
n
20
µ∗min{k2,(1−t
T )2},1
o
1 −min
n
20
µ∗min{k2,(1−t
T )2},1
o
.
As a special case, when b = 0, we immediately have πWFP,d
t
= p∗.
By doing the similar analysis for the price dynamics on the supply side, {πWFP,s}, except that
the probability and expectation are no loner conditional on It−, for any t ∈[0,T), we have
πWFP,s
t
−w∗≤h
min{kT,T −t} + T min
n
20
µ∗min{k2,(1−t
T )2},1
o
1 −min
n
20
µ∗min{k2,(1−t
T )2},1
o
.
As a special case, when h = 0, we immediately have πWFP,s
t
= w∗.
(b) Now, we prove the asymptotic result. Following from Equations (1) and (2) and Lemma S.5
that µ∗is increasing in λd and λs, respectively, we have µ∗,(n) ≥nαµ∗. By setting k(n) =
k
nα/3 , we
have that for any t ∈[0,T),
limsup
n→∞EIt−
h
p∗,(n) −πWFP,d,(n)
t
i
≤bT
nα/3

k + 20
µ∗k2

= O
 1
nα/3

,
limsup
n→∞w∗,(n) −πWFP,s,(n)
t
≤hT
nα/3

k + 20
µ∗k2

= O
 1
nα/3

.
□
Proof of Theorem 2.
The ﬁrst inequality immediately follows from Lemma 2. Now, we prove
the second inequality. Under the waiting adjusted FP policy πWFP, we denote by N d
t ≜
P
φ∈Ht 1{vφ ≥p∗} the number of buyers who arrive no later than time t and request to buy the
product, and N s
t ≜P
ψ∈Ht 1{cψ ≤w∗} the number of sellers who arrive no later than time t and
request to sell the product. Hence, N d
t is a Poisson random variable with parameter λdt ¯F d (p∗) =
µ∗t
T , and N s
t is a Poisson random variable with parameter λstF s (w∗) = µ∗t
T . We denote by Nt the
Poisson random variable with parameter µ∗t
T .
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
13
Therefore, under the waiting adjusted FP policy πWFP and the greedy policy M g, we have
J πWFP,Mg = E

X
φ∈HT
πWFP,d
tφ
1{vφ ≥p∗}1{mφ = 1} −
X
ψ∈HT
πWFP,s
tψ
1{cψ ≤w∗}1{mψ = 1}


= (p∗−w∗)E

min

N d
T,N s
T
 
−E

b
X
φ∈HT
E
h
sφ −tφ|tφ,vφ ≥p∗,
 Itφ−
+i
Pr

mφ = 1|tφ,vφ ≥p∗,
 Itφ−
+1{vφ ≥p∗}1{mφ = 1}
+h
X
ψ∈HT
E[sψ −tψ|tψ,cψ ≤w∗]
Pr(mψ = 1|tψ,cψ ≤w∗)1{cψ ≤w∗}1{mψ = 1}

= (p∗−w∗)E

min

N d
T,N s
T
 
−E

b
X
φ∈HT
E
h
sφ −tφ|tφ,vφ ≥p∗,
 Itφ−
+i
Pr

mφ = 1|tφ,vφ ≥p∗,
 Itφ−
+1{vφ ≥p∗}E
h
1{mφ = 1}|tφ,vφ ≥p∗,
 Itφ−
+i
+h
X
ψ∈HT
E[sψ −tψ|tψ,cψ ≤w∗]
Pr(mψ = 1|tψ,cψ ≤w∗)1{cψ ≤w∗}E[1{mψ = 1}|tψ,cψ ≤w∗]

= (p∗−w∗)E

min

N d
T,N s
T
 
−E

b
X
φ∈HT
E
h
sφ −tφ|tφ,vφ ≥p∗,
 Itφ−
+i
1{vφ ≥p∗}
+h
X
ψ∈HT
E[sψ −tψ|tψ,cψ ≤w∗]1{cψ ≤w∗}

= (p∗−w∗)E

min

N d
T,N s
T
 
−E

b
X
φ:vφ≥p∗
(sφ −tφ) + h
X
ψ:cψ≤w∗
(sψ −tψ)

= (p∗−w∗)E

min

N d
T,N s
T
 
−E
Z T
t=0
b
X
φ:vφ≥p∗
1{t ∈[tφ,sφ]} + h
X
ψ:cψ≤w∗
1{t ∈[tψ,sψ]}dt

= (p∗−w∗)E

min

N d
T,N s
T
 
−E
Z T
t=0
b
 N d
t −N s
t
+ + h
 N s
t −N d
t
+ dt

= (p∗−w∗)E

min

N d
T,N s
T
 
−
Z T
t=0
E
h
b
 N d
t −N s
t
+ + h
 N s
t −N d
t
+i
dt
≥(p∗−w∗)E
h
µ∗−
 µ∗−N d
T
+ −(µ∗−N s
T)
+i
−
Z T
t=0
E
"
b

N d
t −µ∗t
T
+
+ b

µ∗t
T −N s
t
+
+ h

N s
t −µ∗t
T
+
+ h

µ∗t
T −N d
t
+#
dt
= (p∗−w∗)E
h
µ∗−2(µ∗−NT)
+i
−(b + h)
Z T
t=0
E
"
Nt −µ∗t
T
+
+

µ∗t
T −Nt
+#
dt
= (p∗−w∗)E
h
µ∗−2(NT −µ∗)
+ + 2(NT −µ∗)
i
−(b + h)
Z T
t=0
E
"
2

Nt −µ∗t
T
+
−

Nt −µ∗t
T
#
dt
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
14
= (p∗−w∗)E
h
µ∗−2(NT −µ∗)
+i
−(b + h)
Z T
t=0
E
"
2

Nt −µ∗t
T
+#
dt
≥(p∗−w∗)µ∗−(p∗−w∗)√µ∗−(b + h)
Z T
t=0
r
µ∗t
T dt
= (p∗−w∗)µ∗−

p∗−w∗+ 2
3 (b + h)T
√µ∗.
Here the second equality follows from the deﬁnition of the waiting adjusted FP policy. The seventh
equality follows from the deﬁnition of the greedy matching policy. The ﬁrst inequality follows from
the property that min{X,Y } ≥a−(a−X)+−(a−Y )+ and the property that (X +Y )+ ≤X++Y +.
The ninth and tenth equalities follow from the property that X+ = X + (−X)+. The eleventh
equality is due to E[Nt] = µ∗t
T . The second inequality follows from Gallego and van Ryzin (1994)
Equation (18) that if X is a random variable with mean µ and standard deviation σ, then
E
h
(X −a)
+i
≤
p
σ2 + (a −µ)2 −(a −µ)
2
.
Therefore,
J πWFP,Mg
¯J ∗
≥(p∗−w∗)µ∗−
 p∗−w∗+ 2
3 (b + h)T
√µ∗
(p∗−w∗)µ∗
= 1 −

1 + 2
3
(b + h)T
p∗−w∗

1
√µ∗.
□
Next, we do the asymptotic analysis. First, following from Equations (1) and (2) and Lemma
S.5 that µ∗is increasing in λd and λs, respectively, we have µ∗,(n) ≥nαµ∗.
Second, we have µ∗,(n) ≤min

λd,(n)T,λs,(n)T
 
= min

λdnαdT,λsnαsT
 
≤nα max

λd,λs 
T.
Third, following from Equations (1), (2), and (3) and Lemma S.5 that ¯J ∗is increasing in λd and
λs, respectively, we have ¯J ∗,(n) ≥nα ¯J ∗.
Therefore,

1 + 2
3
(b + h)T
p∗,(n) −w∗,(n)

1
p
µ∗,(n) =

1 + 2
3 (b + h)T µ∗,(n)
¯J ∗,(n)

1
p
µ∗,(n)
≤
 
1 + 2
3 (b + h)T nα max

λd,λs 
T
nα ¯J ∗
!
1
√nαµ∗
= O

1
√nα

,
where the ﬁrst equality follows from Equation (3), the ﬁrst inequality follows from three properties
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
15
that we prove in this corollary above.
□
C.
Proofs for §6
Proof of Theorem 3.
(1) First, we prove that p∗is increasing in λd.
Consider any two market conditions with λd
1 and λd
2, where λd
1 < λd
2. The subscript (1 or 2) in all
following notation denotes the index of the market environment that the intermediary operates at.
First, we prove that p∗
2 ≥p∗
1.
For i ∈{1,2}, deﬁne Wi (ν) ≜Vi (νλd
i T) and ν∗
i ≜µ∗
i /λd
i T.
For ν ∈
h
0,min
n
1, λs
λd
1
oi
∩
h
0,min
n
1, λs
λd
2
oi
=
h
0,min
n
1, λs
λd
2
oi
, we have
W2 (ν) −W1 (ν) = −V s

F s,−1

ν λd
2
λs

+ V s

F s,−1

ν λd
1
λs

≤0,
where the inequality follows from Assumption 2. In addition, Assumptions 1 and 2 imply that
Wi (ν) is decreasing in ν. Therefore, ν∗
2 ≤ν∗
1. Therefore, the demand-supply balancing condition
(1) implies that p∗
2 = ¯F d,−1 (ν∗
2) ≥¯F d,−1 (ν∗
1) = p∗
1.
Second, the property that µ∗
2 ≥µ∗
1 directly follows from Lemma S.5.
Third, we prove that w∗
2 ≥w∗
1.
The demand-supply balancing condition (1) and the above property that µ∗
2 ≥µ∗
1 jointly imply
that w∗
2 = F s,−1 
µ∗
2
λsT

≥F s,−1 
µ∗
1
λsT

= w∗
1.
Finally, the property that ¯J ∗
2 ≥¯J ∗
1 directly follows from Lemma S.5.
(2) Consider any two market conditions with λs
1 and λs
2, where λs
1 < λs
2. The subscript (1 or 2) in
all following notation denotes the index of the market environment that the intermediary operates
at.
First, we prove that w∗
2 ≤w∗
1.
For i ∈{1,2}, deﬁne Wi (ν) ≜Vi (νλs
iT) and ν∗
i ≜µ∗
i /λs
iT.
For ν ∈
h
0,min
n
1, λd
λs
1
oi
∩
h
0,min
n
1, λd
λs
2
oi
=
h
0,min
n
1, λd
λs
2
oi
, we have
W2 (ν) −W1 (ν) = V d

¯F d,−1

ν λs
2
λd

−V d

¯F d,−1

ν λs
1
λd

≤0,
where the inequality follows from Assumption 1. In addition, Assumptions 1 and 2 imply that
Wi (ν) is decreasing in ν. Therefore, ν∗
2 ≤ν∗
1. Therefore, the demand-supply balancing condition
(1) implies that w∗
2 = F s,−1 (ν∗
2) ≤F s,−1 (ν∗
1) = w∗
1.
Second, the property that µ∗
2 ≥µ∗
1 directly follows from Lemma S.5.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
16
Third, we prove that p∗
2 ≤p∗
1.
The demand-supply balancing condition (1) and the above property that µ∗
2 ≥µ∗
1 jointly imply
that p∗
2 = ¯F d,−1 
µ∗
2
λdT

≤¯F d,−1 
µ∗
1
λdT

= p∗
1.
Finally, the property that ¯J ∗
2 ≥¯J ∗
1 directly follows from Lemma S.5.
□
D.
Proofs for Appendix B
Proof of Theorem 4.
Following from Equation 1, we have µ∗= V +θd−p∗
2θd
= w∗−(C−θs)
2θs
. Hence,
p∗= V + θd −2θdµ∗and w∗= C −θs + 2θsµ∗.
Because buyer valuation and seller cost are uniformly distributed, for µ ≤[0,1], we have
V (µ) = V d   ¯F d,−1 (µ)

−V s (F s,−1 (µ)) = V d (V + θd −2θdµ) −V s (C −θs + 2θsµ)
= (V + θd −2θdµ −2θdµ) −(C −θs + 2θsµ + 2θsµ) = V −C −(4µ −1)(θd + θs).
Hence, following from Equation (2), we have
µ∗= min
1
4
 V −C
θd + θs + 1

,1

.
Therefore, µ∗is decreasing in θd + θs.
Next, we analyze the eﬀects of θd and θs on p∗. We have
p∗= V + θd −2θdµ∗=



V −θd
if θd + θs ≤V −C
3
V −θd
2

V −C
θd+θs −1

if θd + θs > V −C
3
.
Now,
we
analyze
the
monotonicity
property
of
θd 
V −C
θd+θs −1

w.r.t.
θd.
We
have
∂
∂θd θd 
V −C
θd+θs −1

= (V −C)θs
(θd+θs)
2 −1. Hence,
∂
∂θd θd 
V −C
θd+θs −1

≥0 if θd <
p
(V −C)θs −θs+
and
∂
∂θd θd 
V −C
θd+θs −1

≤0 if θd ≥
p
(V −C)θs −θs+
. Hence, θd 
V −C
θd+θs −1

is increasing in θd ∈

0,
p
(V −C)θs −θs+
and decreasing in θd ≥
p
(V −C)θs −θs+
.
Therefore, p∗is decreasing in θd ∈

0,max
  V −C
3
−θs+ ,
p
(V −C)θs −θs+
and increasing
in θd ≥max
  V −C
3
−θs+ ,
p
(V −C)θs −θs+
.
In addition, because µ∗is decreasing in θs, p∗is increasing in θs.
Next, we analyze the eﬀects of θd and θs on w∗. We have
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
17
w∗= C −θs + 2θsµ∗=



C + θs
if θd + θs ≤V −C
3
C + θs
2

V −C
θd+θs −1

if θd + θs > V −C
3
.
Analogous
to
the
analysis
for
p∗,
we
have
that
w∗
is
increasing
in
θs
∈

0,max
  V −C
3
−θd+ ,
p
(V −C)θd −θd+
and
decreasing
in
θs
≥
max
  V −C
3
−θd+ ,
p
(V −C)θd −θd+
.
In addition, because µ∗is decreasing in θd, w∗is decreasing in θd.
Next, we analyze the eﬀects of θd and θs on ¯J ∗. We have
¯J ∗= (p∗−w∗)µ∗=
 V −C −(2µ∗−1)
 θd + θs
µ∗
=





V −C −θd −θs if θd + θs ≤V −C
3
(V −C+θd+θs)
2
8(θd+θs)
if θd + θs > V −C
3
.
Now, we analyze the monotonicity property of the function
(V −C+x)2
x
w.r.t. x ∈R+. We have
d
dx
(V −C+x)2
x
= −(V −C)2
x2
+1. Hence,
d
dx
(V −C+x)2
x
≤0 if x ∈[0,V −C] and
d
dx
(V −C+x)2
x
≥0 if x ≥V −C.
Hence, (V −C+x)2
x
is decreasing in x ∈[0,V −C] and increasing in x ≥V −C.
Therefore, ¯J ∗is decreasing in θd + θs ∈[0,V −C] and increasing in θd + θs ≥V −C.
□
Proof of Theorem 5.
Consider any two market conditions with θ1 and θ2, where θ1 < θ2. The
subscript (1 or 2) in all following notation denotes the index of the market environment that the
intermediary operates at.
(1) First, we prove that p∗
2 ≥p∗
1.
For i ∈{1,2}, deﬁne Wi (p) ≜Vi
 λdT ¯F d
i (p)

and p∗
i ≜¯F d,−1
i

µ∗
i
λdT

.
For p ∈
 ¯F d,−1
1
 min
 λs
λd ,1
 
, ¯v

∩
 ¯F d,−1
2
 min
 λs
λd ,1
 
, ¯v

=
 ¯F d,−1
2
 min
 λs
λd ,1
 
, ¯v

, we have
fd
2 (p)
¯
F d
2 (p) = θ1
θ2
fd
1 (θ1p/θ2)
¯
F d
1 (θ1p/θ2) ≤
fd
1 (p)
¯
F d
1 (p), where the inequality follows from the condition θ1 < θ2 and the property
that
pfd
1 (p)
¯
F d
1 (p) is increasing in p. In addition, we have ¯F d
2 (p) = ¯F d
1

θ1
θ2 p

≥¯F d
1 (p), where the inequality
follows from the condition θ1 < θ2 and the property that ¯F d
1 (p) is decreasing in p.
Therefore, we have
W2 (p) −W1 (p) =
 V d
2 (p) −V d
1 (p)

−

V s

F s,−1
λd
λs ¯F d
2 (p)

−V s

F s,−1
λd
λs ¯F d
1 (p)

≤0,
where the inequality follows from the above two properties and Assumption 2. In addition, Assump-
tions 1 and 2 imply that Wi (p) is increasing in p. Therefore, p∗
2 ≥p∗
1.
Second, we prove that µ∗
2 ≥µ∗
1.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
18
The property that Assumptions 1 and 2 imply that Vi (µ) is decreasing in µ, and the deﬁnition
of µ∗
i jointly imply that V1 (µ∗
1) ≥0. Hence, V d
1

¯F d,−1
1

µ∗
1
λdT

≥0. Thus, for µ ∈[0,µ∗
1], we have
V d
1
  ¯F d,−1
1
 µ
λdT

≥0, which follows from the property that Vi (µ) is decreasing in µ.
Therefore, for µ ∈[0,µ∗
1], we have
V2 (µ) −V1 (µ) = V d
2

¯F d,−1
2
 µ
λdT

−V d
1

¯F d,−1
1
 µ
λdT

=

¯F d,−1
2
 µ
λdT

−
µ/λdT
f d
2 ( ¯F d,−1
2
(µ/λdT))

−

¯F d,−1
1
 µ
λdT

−
µ/λdT
f d
1 ( ¯F d,−1
1
(µ/λdT))

= θ2
θ1

¯F d,−1
1
 µ
λdT

−
µ/λdT
f d
1 ( ¯F d,−1
1
(µ/λdT))

−

¯F d,−1
1
 µ
λdT

−
µ/λdT
f d
1 ( ¯F d,−1
1
(µ/λdT))

=
θ2
θ1
−1

¯F d,−1
1
 µ
λdT

−
µ/λdT
f d
1 ( ¯F d,−1
1
(µ/λdT))

=
θ2
θ1
−1

V d
1

¯F d,−1
1
 µ
λdT

≥0,
where the inequality follows from the condition that θ1 < θ2, and the property established above
that V d
1
  ¯F d,−1
1
 µ
λdT

≥0. Therefore, µ∗
2 ≥µ∗
1.
Third, we prove that w∗
2 ≥w∗
1.
The demand-supply balancing condition (1) and the property above that µ∗
2 ≥µ∗
1 jointly imply
that w∗
2 = F s,−1 
µ∗
2
λsT

≥F s,−1 
µ∗
1
λsT

= w∗
1.
Finally, we prove that ¯J ∗
2 ≥¯J ∗
1 .
Given the optimal prices p∗
1 and w∗
1 in market environment 1 with θ1, we construct prices p2 and
w2 for market environment 2 with θ2, where p2 = p∗
1
θ2
θ1 and w2 = w∗
1. Hence, ¯F d
2 (p2) = ¯F d
1 (p∗
1).
Therefore,
¯J ∗
2
≥λdTp2 ¯F d
2 (p2) −λsTw2F s (w2) = λdTp∗
1
θ2
θ1 ¯F d
1 (p∗
1) −λsTw∗
1F s (w∗
1) ≥
λdTp∗
1 ¯F d
1 (p∗
1) −λsTw∗
1F s (w∗
1) = ¯J ∗
1 . The ﬁrst inequality follows from the property that p2 and
w2 are feasible but not necessarily optimal solutions to the optimization problem (D). The ﬁrst
equality follows from the deﬁnitions of p2 and w2. The second inequality follows from the condition
that θ1 < θ2. Therefore, ¯J ∗
2 ≥¯J ∗
1 .
(2) First, we prove that w∗
2 ≥w∗
1.
For i ∈{1,2}, deﬁne Wi (w) ≜Vi (λdTF s
i (w)) and w∗
i ≜F s,−1
i

µ∗
i
λsT

.
For w ∈
h
0,F s,−1
1

min
n
λd
λs
oi
∩
h
0,F s,−1
2

min
n
λd
λs
oi
=
h
0,F s,−1
2

min
n
λd
λs
oi
, we have
fs
2 (w)
F s
2 (w) = θ1
θ2
fs
1 (θ1w/θ2)
F s
1 (θ1w/θ2) ≥
fs
1 (w)
F s
1 (w), where the inequality follows from the condition θ1 < θ2 and the prop-
erty that
wfs
1 (w)
F s
1 (w) is decreasing in w. In addition, we have F s
2 (w) = F s
1

θ1
θ2 w

≤F s
1 (w), where the
inequality follows from the condition θ1 < θ2 and the property that F s
1 (w) is increasing in w.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864 
19
Therefore, we have
W2 (p) −W1 (p) =

V d

¯F d,−1
λd
λs F s
2 (w)

−V d

¯F d,−1
λd
λs F s
1 (w)

−(V s
2 (w) −V s
1 (w)) ≥0,
where the inequality follows from the two properties above and Assumption 1. In addition, Assump-
tions 1 and 2 imply that Wi (w) is decreasing in w. Therefore, w∗
2 ≥w∗
1.
Second, we prove that µ∗
2 ≤µ∗
1.
For µ ∈

0,min

λdT,λsT
 
, we have
V2 (µ) −V1 (µ) = −V s
2

F s,−1
2
 µ
λsT

+ V s
1

F s,−1
1
 µ
λsT

= −

F s,−1
2
 µ
λsT

+
µ/λsT
f s
2(F s,−1
2
(µ/λsT))

+

F s,−1
1
 µ
λsT

+
µ/λsT
f s
1(F s,−1
1
(µ/λsT))

= −θ2
θ1

F s,−1
1
 µ
λsT

+
µ/λsT
f s
1(F s,−1
1
(µ/λsT))

+

F s,−1
1
 µ
λsT

+
µ/λsT
f s
1(F s,−1
1
(µ/λsT))

= −
θ2
θ1
−1

F s,−1
1
 µ
λsT

+
µ/λsT
f s
1(F s,−1
1
(µ/λsT))

= −
θ2
θ1
−1

V s
1

F s,−1
1
 µ
λsT

≤0,
where the inequality follows from the condition that θ1 < θ2. Therefore, µ∗
2 ≤µ∗
1.
Third, we prove that p∗
2 ≥p∗
1.
The demand-supply balancing condition (1) and the property above that µ∗
2 ≤µ∗
1 jointly imply
that p∗
2 = ¯F d,−1 
µ∗
2
λdT

≥¯F d,−1 
µ∗
1
λdT

= p∗
1.
Finally, we prove that ¯J ∗
2 ≤¯J ∗
1 .
Given the optimal prices p∗
2 and w∗
2 in market environment 2 with θ2, we construct prices p1 and
w1 for market environment 1 with θ1, where p1 = p∗
2 and w1 = w∗
2
θ1
θ2 . Hence, F s
2 (w2) = F s
1 (w∗
1).
Therefore,
¯J ∗
1
≥λdTp1 ¯F d (p1) −λsTw1F s
1 (w1) = λdTp∗
2 ¯F d (p∗
2) −λsTw∗
2
θ1
θ2 F s
2 (w∗
2) ≤
λdTp∗
2 ¯F d (p∗
2) −λsTw∗
2F s
2 (w∗
2) = ¯J ∗
2 . The ﬁrst inequality follows from the property that p1 and
w1 are feasible but not necessarily optimal solutions to the optimization problem (D). The ﬁrst
equality follows from the deﬁnitions of p1 and w1. The second inequality follows from the condition
that θ1 < θ2. Therefore, ¯J ∗
2 ≤¯J ∗
1 .
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2859864