TITLE: MSD: Continuous Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data for the 2024 MSOM Data-Driven Research Challenge
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2024.0860
---

MSD : Continuous Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data for the
2024 MSOM Data-Driven Research Challenge
Citation for published version (APA):
Martagan, T., Baaijens, M., Dirckx, C., Holman, J., Meyer, R., Repping, O., & van Ravenstein, B. (2024). MSD :
Continuous Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data for the 2024 MSOM Data-Driven Research Challenge.
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 26(5), 1587-1604. https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2024.0860
Document license:
CC BY
DOI:
10.1287/msom.2024.0860
Document status and date:
Published: 01/09/2024
Document Version:
Publisher’s PDF, also known as Version of Record (includes final page, issue and volume numbers)
Please check the document version of this publication:
• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can be
important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record. People
interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication, or visit the
DOI to the publisher's website.
• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page
numbers.
Link to publication
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
 • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
 • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
 • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:
www.tue.nl/taverne
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:
openaccess@tue.nl
providing details and we will investigate your claim.
Download date: 13. Jun. 2026

This article was downloaded by: [131.155.153.63] On: 01 October 2024, At: 02:46
Publisher: Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS)
INFORMS is located in Maryland, USA
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://pubsonline.informs.org
MSD: Continuous Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data
for the 2024 MSOM Data-Driven Research Challenge
Tugce Martagan, Marc Baaijens, Coen Dirckx, James Holman, Robert Meyer, Oscar
Repping, Bram van Ravenstein
To cite this article:
Tugce Martagan, Marc Baaijens, Coen Dirckx, James Holman, Robert Meyer, Oscar Repping, Bram van Ravenstein
(2024) MSD: Continuous Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data for the 2024 MSOM Data-Driven Research Challenge.
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 26(5):1587-1604. https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2024.0860
Full terms and conditions of use: https://pubsonline.informs.org/Publications/Librarians-Portal/PubsOnLine-
Terms-and-Conditions
This article may be used only for the purposes of research, teaching, and/or private study. Commercial use or
systematic downloading (by robots or other automatic processes) is prohibited without explicit Publisher approval,
unless otherwise noted. For more information, contact permissions@informs.org.
The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy, completeness, merchantability, fitness
for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Descriptions of, or references to, products or publications, or
inclusion of an advertisement in this article, neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee, endorsement, or support
of claims made of that product, publication, or service.
Copyright © 2024 The Author(s)
Please scroll down for article—it is on subsequent pages
With 12,500 members from nearly 90 countries, INFORMS is the largest international association of operations
research (O.R.) and analytics professionals and students. INFORMS provides unique networking and learning
opportunities for individual professionals, and organizations of all types and sizes, to better understand and use
O.R. and analytics tools and methods to transform strategic visions and achieve better outcomes.
For more information on INFORMS, its publications, membership, or meetings visit http://www.informs.org

Data-Driven Challenge
MSD: Continuous Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data for the 
2024 MSOM Data-Driven Research Challenge
Tugce Martagan,a,* Marc Baaijens,b Coen Dirckx,a,c James Holman,d Robert Meyer,e Oscar Repping,b 
Bram van Ravensteinc 
aDepartment of Industrial Engineering and Innovation Sciences, Eindhoven University of Technology, 5612 AZ Eindhoven, Netherlands; 
bCeva Sant´e Animale, 33500 Libourne, France; cMSD, 5831 AN Boxmeer, Netherlands; dTechnology Management, GEA Group, Eastleigh 
SO53 4DG, United Kingdom; eMerck & Co., Inc., Rahway, New Jersey 07065 
*Corresponding author 
Contact: T.G.Martagan@tue.nl, 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4396-7102 (TM); marc.baaijens@ceva.com (MB); coen.dirckx@merck.com (CD); 
james.holman@gea.com (JH); robert_meyer2@merck.com (RM); oscar.repping@ceva.com (OR); bram.van.ravenstein@merck.com (BvR) 
Received: February 23, 2024 
Accepted: March 5, 2024 
Published Online in Articles in Advance: 
April 29, 2024 
https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2024.0860 
Copyright: © 2024 The Author(s)
Abstract. To support the 2024 MSOM Data-Driven Research Challenge, Merck & Co., Inc., 
Rahway, New Jersey (hereafter “MSD”), provides pharmaceutical manufacturing data 
from a continuous tablet production setting. The data set contains approximately 300 mil­
lion data points related to around 75 process parameters monitored over 120 hours. In this 
paper, we present the data set and share our vision to inspire and facilitate new applica­
tions of operations management (OM) methodologies in pharmaceutical manufacturing. 
We begin with an introduction to pharmaceutical manufacturing for OM researchers and 
then elaborate on emerging technologies, common industry challenges, and research 
opportunities. We explain the data set and propose a roadmap for future research direc­
tions. Researchers are welcome to examine the proposed research questions or analyze 
other research questions using the data set.
History: This paper has been accepted as part of the 2024 MSOM Data-Driven Research Challenge. 
Open Access Statement: This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 
International License. You are free to download this work and share with others for any purpose, 
except commercially, and you must attribute this work as “Manufacturing and Service Operations Man­
agement. Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2024.0860, used under a 
Creative Commons Attribution License: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.” 
Funding: This work was supported by The Dutch Research Council - NWO VIDI Grant. 
Supplemental Material: The online appendix is available at https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2024.0860 
Keywords:
OM practice • data challenge • pharmaceutical industry • biomanufacturing
1. Introduction
This 2024 MSOM data-driven research challenge is a 
joint effort of MSD’s Human Health and Animal Health 
divisions, in collaboration with one of their equipment 
manufacturers, GEA. Our main objective in this initia­
tive is to inspire and stimulate new research on the 
applications of data analytics and operations manage­
ment (OM) methodologies to complement our exper­
tise in life sciences.
Until recently, the competitive advantage in the (bio)­
pharmaceutical industry has been driven primarily by 
life sciences (i.e., our knowledge of the biological and 
chemical processes to produce medicines). However, 
with increasing demand and competition, the industry 
is becoming more sensitive to costs and production 
footprints. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has 
highlighted the importance of rapid response and resil­
ience in (bio)pharmaceutical manufacturing and supply 
chains. The competitive advantage in the industry is 
currently shifting toward cost efficiency and resilience. 
We are under constant pressure to make our manu­
facturing operations smarter and reduce costs and lead 
times to produce critical medicines for our patients.
The industry’s transition from “science labs” to 
“smart operations” is not an easy process, and it re­
quires a vision and a transformation toward a proactive 
use of data analytics and OM to inform daily decisions. 
As Oscar Repping, Executive Director at MSD Animal 
Health, states, “The first thing I was taught was the belief 
that biological processes are highly unpredictable, and guess 
what, I believed it. Over time, I learned a ‘tribal’ knowledge 
of how to set up and influence these processes. These pro­
cesses remained highly variable, and during my development 
within the biotechnology field, I came to the conclusion 
that we should use our data differently than we ever did 
before. Working towards a data-driven decision-making 
model instead of the best guess [ … ].” (Repping et al. 
2023). To facilitate this transition, the industry would 
1587 
MANUFACTURING & SERVICE OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT 
Vol. 26, No. 5, September–October 2024, pp. 1587–1604 
ISSN 1523-4614 (print), ISSN 1526-5498 (online) 
https://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/msom 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.153.63] on 01 October 2024, at 02:46 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

benefit from an interdisciplinary approach, working in 
close collaboration with the INFORMS community, to 
harness the power of cutting-edge OM with data ana­
lytics and life sciences.
Our scope includes two emerging technologies, also 
referred to as key enabling technologies: continuous manu­
facturing and real-time release testing. These techno­
logies are relevant to both the pharmaceutical and 
biopharmaceutical industries. The use of these technolo­
gies in commercial-scale production is relatively new in 
the industry, but it also represents a significant opportu­
nity to transform manufacturing practices in the near 
future. The data we are sharing with the MSOM com­
munity come from a continuous tablet-manufacturing 
process. It captures around 300 million data points col­
lected over 120hours of commercial-scale production. 
Although the data set is related to pharmaceutical tablet 
manufacturing (e.g., small molecules), we believe the 
models and insights generated from this initiative can be 
generalized to more complex settings in the biopharma­
ceutical industry (e.g., large molecules) and pave the 
way for successful implementations in the future.
At MSD Animal Health in The Netherlands, we have 
been on a long journey of OM implementations in col­
laboration with the Eindhoven University of Technol­
ogy. Through our work presented in the 2022 Franz 
Edelman competition, we have demonstrated that link­
ing OM to pharmaceutical manufacturing drives sus­
tainable and substantial improvements (Martagan et al. 
2023). To share our experience with a broader commu­
nity, we have also participated in the seminar series 
organized by the MSOM practice platform (Repping 
et al. 2023). In this 2024 MSOM data-driven research 
challenge initiative, we aim to share our vision and 
future research directions with the OM community. For 
this purpose, we begin with an introduction of products 
and production processes in Section 2. We then intro­
duce the concept of continuous manufacturing and real- 
time release testing in Section 3. We present the data in 
Section 4 and propose future research directions in Sec­
tion 5. We finish with concluding remarks in Section 6.
2. Introduction to (Bio)pharmaceutical 
Manufacturing
We provide a short introduction to drug manufac­
turing for OM researchers. Our scope includes both 
pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical drugs. We begin 
with an overview of the products (Section 2.1) and pro­
duction processes (Section 2.2). We also elaborate on the 
human and animal health industries (Section 2.3) and 
discuss common industry challenges (Section 2.4).
2.1. Overview of Products
Drugs produced using biomanufacturing technologies 
are called biopharmaceuticals (or biologics). One of the 
most well-known examples of biopharmaceuticals is 
COVID-19 vaccines produced via mRNA technology 
(see Online Appendix A.1 for an overview of different 
types of biopharmaceuticals).
Biopharmaceuticals are fundamentally different from 
pharmaceutical drugs. We summarize the main differ­
ences in Table 1. The primary difference is related to the 
method of synthesis. More specifically, pharmaceuticals 
are obtained from chemical reactions, whereas bio­
pharmaceuticals are biologically synthesized by using 
genetically engineered living organisms (e.g., bacteria). 
In addition, the molecular structure of biopharmaceuti­
cals is larger and more complex compared with pharma­
ceuticals. For example, an aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) 
molecule consists of only 21 atoms, whereas an immu­
noglobulin molecule (also known as IgG1, a common 
example of biopharmaceuticals) includes more than 
20,000 atoms (Globerman 2016). The bonds between the 
atoms of biopharmaceuticals are also more complex. 
Their complex structure allows us to equip biopharma­
ceuticals with smart capabilities; that is, these drugs can 
search for a tumor inside the body without damaging 
healthy cells. On the other hand, biopharmaceuticals are 
more susceptible to handling and storage conditions. 
For example, most biopharmaceuticals require cold stor­
age during production and supply chain logistics to pre­
serve their molecular integrity and quality.
Biopharmaceuticals and pharmaceuticals are com­
monly referred to as large and small molecules, respec­
tively. However, we note that not all “small” molecules 
are chemically synthesized. For example, antibiotics 
are known as small molecules, although they are bio­
logically synthesized from fungi. In this paper, we 
broadly use the term biopharmaceutical to refer to large 
or small molecules that are biologically synthesized 
from living organisms.
2.2. Overview of Production Processes
All (bio)pharmaceutical operations are under the heavy 
influence of regulations and targeted expectations on 
Table 1. Main Differences Between Pharmaceuticals and Biopharmaceuticals
Pharmaceuticals
Biopharmaceuticals
Method of synthesis
Chemical
Biological
Molecular size and structure
Small and relatively simple
Large and highly complex
Sensitivity to handling and storage
Low
High
Martagan et al.: Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data-Driven Research Challenge 
1588 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2024, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1587–1604, © 2024 The Author(s) 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.153.63] on 01 October 2024, at 02:46 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

both the quality and safety of the drugs produced. 
These expectations are described in the international 
prerequisites, such as the current Good Manufacturing 
Practice guidelines (cGMP) of the European Medicines 
Agency (EMA) and the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), as well as the product-specific dossiers and Pro­
cess Analytical Technologies (PAT) guidelines. To pro­
vide contextual information on the 2024 MSOM data- 
driven research challenge, we present a brief overview 
of the production process of biopharmaceuticals (Sec­
tion 2.2.1) and pharmaceuticals (Section 2.2.2).
2.2.1. Production of Biopharmaceuticals. Biomanu- 
facturing operations can be roughly categorized into 
two steps: upstream and downstream operations. 
Upstream operations focus on the production of the 
desired active ingredients via fermentation. The fer­
mentation process is typically conducted in a stainless- 
steel vessel called a bioreactor and makes use of living 
organisms (e.g., bacteria) to produce the desired active 
ingredients. The output of fermentation is a liquid mix­
ture consisting of the desired active ingredients along 
with unwanted impurities. These impurities consist of 
various types of metabolic byproducts such as dead 
cells, ammonia, and lactate. The accumulation of the 
desired active ingredients along with unwanted impu­
rities during fermentation also leads to an interesting 
trade-off in harvesting decisions (see, e.g., Martagan 
et al. 2020, Koca et al. 2023). Subsequent downstream 
operations focus on eliminating unwanted impurities 
through a series of purification steps (e.g., centrifuga­
tion, chromatography, filtration) in order to achieve 
certain prespecified standards on drug quality and 
safety. Downstream operations also include fill-and- 
finish operations where the products are packaged and 
labeled into their final form. We refer to Online Appen­
dix A.3 for more information on biomanufacturing pro­
cesses and technologies.
2.2.2. Production of Pharmaceuticals. The data pro­
vided for the 2024 MSOM data-driven research chal­
lenge is related to the continuous manufacturing of a 
(small molecule) pharmaceutical drug in the form of a 
tablet. Therefore, we focus on this particular pharma­
ceutical production process to introduce our problem 
setting. Our production setting consists of four major 
steps: (1) formulation, (2) blending, (3) compression, 
and (4) coating. During the formulation step, active 
pharmaceutical ingredients are chemically synthesized, 
and other required raw materials are prepared. Next, 
all the individual raw materials (also including active 
ingredients) are mixed into a uniform blend. The out­
put of the blending process is typically a powder mix­
ture. Next, a tablet press is used to compress the 
powder mixture coming from the blender into tablets 
of uniform size and weight. As a final step, the tablets 
are coated with a thin polymer-based film. In a tradi­
tional pharmaceutical manufacturing setting, each of 
these production steps is a separate batch process with 
relatively long setups and manual interventions. How­
ever, our problem setting adopts an emerging technol­
ogy for continuous blending, compression, and coating 
operations (we elaborate on the concept of continuous 
manufacturing in Section 3).
2.3. Human vs. Animal Health Industries
The data challenge is a collaborative effort of MSD’s 
human and animal health divisions. Therefore, we 
briefly elaborate on the similarities and differences 
between these two industries. The drug development 
processes (e.g., clinical trials and regulatory approvals 
for market entry) may be different between the human 
and animal health industries because they target differ­
ent species. However, the manufacturing operations 
are similar in both human and animal health applica­
tions; that is, both of these industries use the same 
equipment technologies and production processes and 
adopt similar cGMPs. Moreover, both industries are 
subject to stringent regulatory requirements. There­
fore, they share similar manufacturing and operational 
challenges.
The animal health industry faces additional pres­
sures that make it critical to improve manufacturing 
efficiency. First, most regulatory requirements between 
human and animal health are equally stringent, but 
animal health products may require additional studies 
to ensure food safety for human consumption. Second, 
unlike human drugs that are often subsidized, animal 
owners are responsible for paying full price for these 
drugs. For the manufacturers, this leads to smaller 
margins to cover the risks and costs associated with 
research, development, and production. Lastly, the ani­
mal health industry serves several different species as 
opposed to only one species in human health. The large 
portfolio of products with different manufacturing 
protocols leads to additional operational complexities.
2.4. Common Industry Challenges
We briefly discuss common industry challenges related 
to production processes, factory dynamics, and market 
needs, as summarized in Table 2.
2.4.1. Production Processes. A common industry 
challenge in both biopharmaceutical and pharmaceuti­
cal manufacturing is process uncertainty (e.g., batch- 
to-batch variability in quality, yield, processing times, 
and costs). In biopharmaceutical manufacturing, the 
process uncertainty can be attributed mostly to the use 
of living organisms and biologically synthesized mate­
rials during production. In both biopharmaceutical and 
pharmaceutical manufacturing, variability in raw mate­
rials is another common factor leading to variability in 
Martagan et al.: Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data-Driven Research Challenge 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2024, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1587–1604, © 2024 The Author(s) 
1589 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.153.63] on 01 October 2024, at 02:46 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

process outcomes. Other factors include the inherent 
complexity of the biological and chemical processes 
and the limitations in our scientific understanding of 
these processes. Moreover, it may be difficult to opti­
mally control these processes in real-time because of 
limitations in sensors or data analytics platforms. Fur­
thermore, the production system includes a high num­
ber of exogenous input parameters that cannot be 
controlled, such as media composition (or other raw 
materials), which is often made by the suppliers.
The manufacturing of (bio)pharmaceuticals follows 
a predefined “recipe” describing the production proto­
cols. For example, the recipe of fermentation describes 
the critical process parameters (CPP), quality attri­
butes (CQA), and their control limits. In (bio)phar­
maceutical manufacturing, we use the term “golden 
profile” to represent the desired trajectory of CPPs and 
CQAs over time. Therefore, the golden profile repre­
sents the “ideal” process profile and the boundaries 
(e.g., statistical control limits) within which the CPPs 
and CQAs mimic an optimum outcome for a particular 
production process. A critical challenge is to define an 
optimal course of action to bring the process back to its 
golden profile when it starts to deviate from it. Current 
industry practices typically define these control poli­
cies based on domain knowledge (i.e., based on the 
underlying biological and chemical dynamics). How­
ever, we believe that an interdisciplinary approach 
combining life sciences, data sciences, and OM is 
needed to achieve robustness and cost-effectiveness. 
In Section 5, we elaborate on a portfolio of optimal con­
trol problems to improve the performance of these 
production systems.
Another common challenge concerns how to make 
the best use of process data to achieve robustness. The 
industry is encouraged to measure, analyze, and con­
trol the CPP and CQAs over time. Often, these para­
meters and their respective boundaries in relation to 
efficacy and safety are known. However, the cross- 
functional interactions between the process parameters 
(i.e., how they influence each other in a positive and 
negative correlation toward the golden profile) are not 
fully understood at all times. A large number of pro­
cess data can already be collected on, in, and at line. In 
addition, recent developments provide an impressive 
number of new sensors (e.g., Raman probes) that might 
generate additional important data. However, the in­
dustry currently has a limited understanding of which 
additional data need to be collected to achieve the best 
performance from these manufacturing systems. We 
need to close the gap between process measurements, 
data analysis, and optimal control to achieve robustness.
2.4.2. Factory Dynamics. The dynamics of a (bio)phar­
maceutical manufacturing factory can be very complex. 
For example, when we performed an end-to-end map­
ping of all production activities in our Boxmeer facility 
in The Netherlands, we found that our manufacturing 
system involved more than 8,000 interdependent pro­
duction steps (e.g., inspections, documentation, prepa­
ration of raw materials, setup of equipment, etc.). In 
addition, we have several production constraints that 
add additional complexity to planning and scheduling 
(see Martagan et al. (2023) for an extended list): 
• Zero wait-time constraints. Active ingredients of 
biopharmaceuticals are fragile, and their properties 
can easily deteriorate if they wait in between produc­
tion steps. Hence, each batch needs to smoothly flow 
throughout our 8,000 production steps with zero wait­
ing time in between steps. There are only a few points 
during production where the batch can be frozen to 
wait for a subsequent step (e.g., after fermentation 
and hence, before starting purification).
• Coordination of multiple interdependent activi­
ties under uncertainty. (Bio)pharmaceutical processes 
involve variability in processing times, costs, produc­
tion yields, and quality. Moreover, variability propa­
gates, resources are limited, and operational decisions 
made at an earlier step have a magnifying impact on 
subsequent processes.
2.4.3. Market Needs. The market demand for both 
human and animal health products is increasing. It is 
anticipated that the global animal health market will 
grow at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 
8.8% during the forecast period 2023  2030, whereas 
the global pharmaceutical market size for human health 
will grow at a CAGR of 5.9% in the same period (Grand 
View Research 2022, Skyquest 2023). With increasing 
demand and competition, the industry is experiencing 
higher pressures to reduce costs and lead times. There 
is an increasing need for innovative applications of data 
Table 2. Common Industry Challenges in (Bio)pharmaceutical Manufacturing
Category
Manufacturing challenge
Production processes
Process uncertainty and batch-to-batch variability 
Optimal control and data analytics to achieve robustness
Factory dynamics
Coordination of multiple interdependent tasks under process uncertainty and production constraints
Market needs
Increasing market demand 
Increasing pressure to reduce costs and improve process efficiencies
Martagan et al.: Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data-Driven Research Challenge 
1590 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2024, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1587–1604, © 2024 The Author(s) 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.153.63] on 01 October 2024, at 02:46 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

sciences and OM to facilitate data-driven, automated 
decisions to improve manufacturing efficiency.
3. Key Enabling Technologies 
and Trends
Several technology roadmaps have been developed 
by the industry, regulators, and public-private partner­
ships (see, e.g., BioPhorum Operations Group 2022, ICH 
Q13 2023, NIIMBL 2023). In this section, we highlight 
two emerging technologies: continuous manufacturing 
(Section 3.1) and real-time release testing (Section 3.2). 
We reflect on common industry challenges and opportu­
nities in these technologies (Section 3.3) and elaborate on 
the scope of the data challenge (Section 3.4).
3.1. Continuous Manufacturing
In contrast to batch manufacturing with multiple dis­
crete steps and long setup times in between steps, con­
tinuous manufacturing (CM) relies on a continuous 
(e.g., nonstop) flow of materials during production. 
Consider the fermentation process described in Sec­
tion 2. In classical batch fermentation, the medium is 
added only at the start of fermentation, and the pro­
duced active ingredients are collected only at the har­
vest. In contrast, raw materials are continuously fed in 
a continuous fermentation system while the produced 
solution (containing the active ingredients) is continu­
ously discharged. This way, the fermentation process 
maintains a steady state of control with continuous 
feeding and discharge of materials and runs for a lon­
ger period compared with batch processes. CM is a key 
enabling technology for both pharmaceutical and bio­
pharmaceutical manufacturing and can be implemen­
ted at various degrees, for example, only at selected 
unit operations or the entire end-to-end manufacturing 
system.
CM offers several advantages, including smaller 
manufacturing footprints, reduced challenges with 
scale-ups, shorter lead times, and higher productivity 
with process intensification. It is an emerging technol­
ogy to produce larger volumes of high-quality pro­
ducts at lower costs (Balfour 2021). Despite its benefits, 
the use of CM remains limited in the industry for several 
reasons. First, transitioning to CM may require high 
investment costs on equipment and infrastructure, and 
hence, the business case with risk-benefit trade-offs may 
not always be clear for new technologies (Lee 2017). 
Moreover, CM implementation requires advanced ap­
proaches to automation, data analytics, real-time moni­
toring, and optimal control. In some specific application 
settings, sensors or equipment technologies may not be 
mature enough to support the commercial use of CM. 
There are also regulatory uncertainties related to all new 
technologies. Nevertheless, we believe that the future of 
CM is highly promising, as supported by two recent 
initiatives. First, the U.S. Congress passed a bill in 2021 
supporting advanced and continuous pharmaceutical 
manufacturing (Giaquinto and Auchincloss 2022). This 
bill supports the development, review, and approval 
of products manufactured using CM. Second, the Inter­
national Council for Harmonisation of Technical Re­
quirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) 
published a new guideline, ICH Q13, on the continuous 
manufacturing of drugs substances and drug products. 
The ICH Q13 guideline is an important step forward in 
describing “scientific and regulatory considerations for 
the development, implementation, operation, and life­
cycle management of continuous manufacturing” (ICH 
Q13 2023).
We highlight a few scientific and regulatory consid­
erations from ICH Q13, with a particular focus on 
OM-driven aspects. 
• Input materials. Variability in raw materials can 
occur for several reasons in practice, for example, aging 
of materials, batch-to-batch variability, and changes 
made by suppliers. Therefore, it is important to under­
stand how the attributes of raw materials affect CM 
and the resulting product quality and also incorporate 
these input-output relationships into control strategies.
• State of control. ICH guidelines define the con­
cept of state of control as “a condition that provides 
assurance of continued process performance and prod­
uct quality” (ICH Q10 2015, and ICH Q13 2023). Creat­
ing control strategies that meet the specific needs of 
CM is essential. The right combination of descriptive, 
predictive, and prescriptive analytics can help identify 
the target set points and control limits, detect process 
disturbances in real time, and define optimal control 
policies to bring the process back to its golden profile 
when there are drifts. Other aspects related to the state 
of control include model maintenance (e.g., regular 
validation and improvement of the models used), data 
collection and monitoring strategy (e.g., identification 
of the critical process parameters and their monitoring 
frequency), and sampling strategy (e.g., the amount, 
location, and frequency of samples to be collected).
• System dynamics. CM systems should be flexible 
to handle disturbances while maintaining product qual­
ity. Therefore, it is important to define control strategies 
from a system perspective to ensure a continuous flow 
of materials and achieve resilience (e.g., consider inter­
dependencies between production steps, and plan for 
lead time and capacity buffers). It is also crucial to have 
well-defined contingency plans. These include deter­
mining how far to trace back in case of quality issues or 
disturbances (traceability strategy), and when to divert 
products to scrap or other unit operations for rework 
(diversion strategy).
We further elaborate on the scientific and regulatory 
aspects described above when we propose future re­
search directions in Section 5.
Martagan et al.: Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data-Driven Research Challenge 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2024, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1587–1604, © 2024 The Author(s) 
1591 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.153.63] on 01 October 2024, at 02:46 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

3.2. Real-Time Release Testing
Medical drugs must comply with stringent regula­
tory requirements on safety, efficacy, and quality. To 
ensure compliance with these requirements, the indus­
try conducts various types of end-product release tests. 
However, these tests are typically offline (or at line), 
expensive, labor intensive, and time consuming. As a 
main premise, the concept of real-time release testing 
(RTRT) offers a significant opportunity for reducing 
these tests by replacing them with advanced analytics 
and process control. The ICH guidelines define the 
concept of real-time release testing as “the ability to 
evaluate and ensure the quality of in-process and/or 
final product based on process data, which typically 
includes a valid combination of measured material 
attributes and process controls.” (ICH Q8 2017). Other 
advantages of RTRT include an enhanced understand­
ing of processes based on a large set of data, real-time 
control and optimization, and timely interventions to 
ensure quality. The concept of RTRT is relevant to a 
wide range of settings in (bio)pharmaceutical manu­
facturing, for example, chemical or biological synthe­
sis, batch processing, and CM. Although RTRT is not a 
regulatory requirement for CM, both RTRT and CM 
require similar initiatives on analytics and automation.
RTRT focuses on the monitoring and control of the 
process parameters to predict quality attributes. RTRT 
recognizes that a systematic combination of descrip­
tive, predictive, and prescriptive analytics, together 
with the PAT tools, may provide a greater assurance of 
product quality to replace end-product release tests 
(European Medicines Agency 2012). In this setting, it is 
critical to have a firm understanding of the processes 
and the relations between the process parameters, 
in-process material properties, and product attributes. 
When communicating with regulatory authorities, it is 
important to clearly explain and justify the connection 
between end-product testing, material attributes, pro­
cess monitoring, and acceptance criteria. Moreover, 
predictive models should be explained, justified, and 
verified at the commercial site (European Medicines 
Agency 2012). Depending on the application context, 
these models can be based on simple mechanistic rela­
tionships from life sciences, multivariate statistical 
models, or more complex machine-learning models. 
Most often, RTRT aims to develop real-time surrogate 
methods for replacing product release tests. The right 
selection of sensors and their locations are also impor­
tant for RTRT. The decision-makers should consider 
the risks and trade-offs related to measurement speed, 
accuracy, robustness, repeatability, and costs. More­
over, contingency plans (e.g., when there is missing 
data or equipment failure) should be specified on alter­
native testing and monitoring strategies. Technology 
infrastructure is another key element for RTRT to facil­
itate automated sampling and systematic data storage.
In summary, successful RTRT implementations 
require a collaboration of multiple disciplines, including 
life sciences (e.g., mechanistic models), process technol­
ogies (e.g., sensors, cyber-physical systems), data sci­
ence (e.g., machine learning, predictive analytics), and 
operations management (e.g., stochastic optimization, 
new regulatory outlooks). Currently, there are only 
a few documented examples of industry-scale RTRT 
implementations in the pharmaceutical industry (see, 
e.g., Markl et al. 2020). To the best of our knowledge, 
RTRT has not been implemented in commercial-scale 
biologics production yet. Nevertheless, we believe that 
the data and insights obtained from relatively simpler 
systems (e.g., small molecules) will pave the way for 
successful results in more complex systems (e.g., large 
molecules).
3.3. Challenges and Opportunities in CM 
and RTRT
We discuss the current industry challenges and oppor­
tunities related to CM and RTRT. We elaborate on three 
main aspects: (1) technology, (2) operations, and (3) 
regulations. Our discussion is relevant to both pharma­
ceutical and biopharmaceutical production.
3.3.1. Technology. Moving from batch-based to con­
tinuous systems and/or from offline tests to real-time 
control requires a substantial shift in technology and 
mindsets. Many of the gold-standard techniques, which 
were demonstrated to be robust and widely accepted, 
may not necessarily be suitable for CM or RTRT. For 
example, in vitro cell culture is a gold-standard test to 
detect contaminants, yet it is an offline test with 28 days 
of incubation time (Jiang et al. 2017). Nevertheless, sev­
eral sensors and other promising technologies are cur­
rently being developed to attain new gold standards for 
CM and RTRT. On the other hand, new technology 
adoption decisions may be challenging because of re­
source limitations, potential risks with scaleups, and 
regulatory uncertainties. New collaborative approaches 
between regulators, equipment manufacturers, and 
(bio)pharmaceutical manufacturers may facilitate the 
development and adoption of new technologies.
3.3.2. Operations. A successful implementation of CM 
and RTRT requires knowledge from multiple disci­
plines (e.g., artificial intelligence, OM, life sciences). As 
a common challenge, the industry needs more experts 
with multidisciplinary proficiency to develop and im­
plement these models in practice. This may also lead to 
difficulties when transferring knowledge from one fac­
tory to another.
The industry has a regulatory commitment to keep 
the models accurate and valid. In a CM and RTRT set­
ting, it is critical to establish effective approaches for 
model maintenance, validation, and verification. When 
Martagan et al.: Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data-Driven Research Challenge 
1592 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2024, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1587–1604, © 2024 The Author(s) 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.153.63] on 01 October 2024, at 02:46 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

necessary, models should be revised, reevaluated, and 
compared with their previous versions, and the regula­
tory authorities should be informed. However, the 
overall process of model maintenance and validation 
has its own challenges. For example, frequent updates 
may be needed because of the inherent variability of 
chemical and biological systems, fluctuations in raw 
materials, changes made by the suppliers, changes in 
the hardware, etc. In this setting, it is also important to 
establish mechanisms for timely and efficient commu­
nication with the regulators.
Another operational challenge is to maintain the pro­
cesses in a continuous state of control and also to demon­
strate (and validate) this state of control with data and 
models. Especially in the earlier phases of CM and 
RTRT implementations, there may be high levels of 
uncertainties because of the limited number of process 
data collected. However, as the system generates more 
data over time, there will be significant opportunities for 
exploiting data-driven decision-making approaches. For 
example, Bayesian statistics or other machine-learning 
approaches could help train and improve these models 
and control algorithms over time. Moreover, we may 
need to collect less data or sample less frequently to 
maintain the state of control over time. If we can demon­
strate a consistent and successful use of data- and 
OM-driven approaches in CM and RTRT, this may help 
reduce the amount of data required by regulators.
3.3.3. Regulations. The adoption of CM and RTRT 
may come with some regulatory uncertainties and 
changes to established standards. For example, stan­
dard concepts such as the definition of a “batch” have 
been questioned and revisited for CM. Another imple­
mentation challenge could be a lack of precedence in 
the industry. For example, companies may hesitate to 
be the first when approaching regulators. Neverthe­
less, regulatory authorities have been taking initiatives 
to encourage open dialogue with the industry. For 
example, the FDA’s Emerging Technology Program 
provides access to written guidance, meetings, and 
preoperational visits. Finally, we note that implemen­
tations of AI and OM methodologies in (bio)pharma­
ceutical manufacturing are still very limited compared 
with other industries. However, the industry and reg­
ulators are showing increasing interest and a more 
open mindset, as demonstrated by new guidelines and 
discussion papers on this domain (see, e.g., Center for 
Drug Evaluation and Research 2023 and Food and 
Drug Administration 2019, 2023).
3.4. Scope of the MSOM Data-Driven 
Research Challenge
We provide production data related to the continuous 
manufacturing of tablets. These data are collected in col­
laboration with GEA, one of the world’s largest systems 
suppliers for the food, beverage, and pharmaceutical 
sectors. The data set can help generate insights to sup­
port the broader use of CM and RTRT in the pharma­
ceutical and biopharmaceutical industries. Our data 
set can be used to support data-driven approaches, but 
we also welcome model-driven approaches, such as 
stylized models that use the data set to support model­
ing assumptions. We believe that new approaches and 
insights generated by the OM community will pave 
the way for successful CM and RTRT implementations 
in the industry.
4. Description of Data
The data set presented in this section is based on our 
previous work (Holman et al. 2021), in which MSD and 
GEA demonstrated the robustness of a CM line for 
direct compression and coating of a pharmaceutical 
drug. We first describe the problem setting (Section 4.1) 
and then present a high-level overview of our data set 
(Section 4.2). The data set can be divided into two cate­
gories: machine data consisting of inline process para­
meters (Section 4.3) and contextual quality data on raw 
materials, tablet specifications, and content uniformity 
(Section 4.4). We propose research questions that can 
be addressed using the data set (Section 4.5).
4.1. Problem Setting
Figure 1 shows a schematic overview of our problem 
setting with continuous blending, compression, and 
coating operations (see Holman et al. 2021 for details). 
In this setting, raw materials are fed into benders via a 
so-called loss-in-weight (LiW) feeder. The LiW feeders 
are designed to feed the blender with a predetermined 
amount of raw materials at the correct ratio and the 
right pace. It is a gravimetric feeder that directly mea­
sures the raw materials’ weight to maintain their flow 
at a predetermined rate (i.e., see GEA Pharma and 
Healthcare 2021 for a video on LiW feeders). At the start 
of the process, we have five LiW feeders (PD1–PD5 in 
Figure 1) to deliver a controlled flow of individual raw 
materials to the first continuous blender (Blender 1). 
Then, Blender 1 is used to create a homogeneous mix­
ture using a high level of holdup and shear. Next, 
LiW feeder PD7 adds a lubricant to the mixture at the 
second continuous Blender 2 (note that LiW feeder PD6 
does not exist because of internal naming conventions). 
Finally, a rotary tablet press is used to press the final 
blend into core tablets. After the tablet press operation, 
three possible routes exist. Depending on whether the 
tablet meets the required quality checks, it is either 
accepted and sent to the coater or diverted (rejected) 
based on prespecified quality attributes. As part of 
routine offline samples, tablets can be also sampled 
and sent to the tablet analyzer for additional checks 
on tablet specifications such as weight, thickness, and 
Martagan et al.: Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data-Driven Research Challenge 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2024, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1587–1604, © 2024 The Author(s) 
1593 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.153.63] on 01 October 2024, at 02:46 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

hardness. In addition, the quality attributes include 
blend potency (i.e., a measure of the concentration of 
the active ingredients contained in a tablet), and the 
portion of the tablets that have been subjected to an out- 
of-specification (OOS) alarm.
Common industry practices in CM work with the res­
idence time distribution (RTD), a probability distribu­
tion function describing the amount of time a single 
particle spends in the system (herein, the term “system” 
could represent a unit operation such as blending or the 
entire end-to-end CM system). In our previous work, 
we used mathematical models to capture the RTD at 
the continuous Blenders 1 and 2 and the continuous 
tablet press operation (Holman et al. 2021). RTD is an 
important measure to facilitate potency predictions and 
traceability decisions. For example, we used the RTD 
information to predict potency after continuous Blender 
1 and 2. In case of quality failures, the RTD information 
is used to support decisions on how far to trace back 
and scrap the produced (defective) materials.
Our CM system is equipped with several control 
mechanisms as depicted in Figure 1: 
• Local feedback controls at the LiW feeders. The 
LiW feeders collect data related to the input materials 
(e.g., net weight of materials flowing per unit time) 
and the LiW feeder-related operating parameters (e.g., 
screw speed, feed factor, and motor speed of LiW 
feeders). Control mechanisms, indicated by orange 
dashed lines in Figure 1, are built into LiW feeders to 
adjust operating parameters (e.g., adjust screw speed as 
a function of the mass of materials flowing per unit 
time) and provide a target flow rate of materials. More­
over, the LiW feeder data can be used to generate a 
better understanding of raw material variability and the 
impact of raw material properties on product quality.
• Local feedback controls at the tablet press. A tab­
let press control mechanism (indicated by the blue 
dashed line in Figure 1) adjusts the compression force 
and fill depth to meet the predetermined tablet specifi­
cations on weight, thickness, and hardness. Moreover, 
the tablet compression system is capable of rejecting 
tablets that do not meet these predetermined tablet 
specifications.
• Alarms and process traceability. Alarm limits 
are set throughout the process based on predefined 
requirements (see Holman et al. 2021 for details on 
alarm triggers and the associated specification limits). 
When an alarm is triggered at a unit operation, 100% of 
the materials in that unit operation are considered to 
be OOS for the duration of the alarm. Subsequently, 
the RTD model can be used to track the OOS material 
throughout the system. In this case, all produced 
tablets are rejected until the OOS signal switches off 
and the process is back within the specified limits.
• Potency prediction and rejection. Information col­
lected at each LiW feeder is used in the RTD models to 
predict potency. The potency estimations at the blen­
ders and tablet press are used to decide whether to 
accept or reject tablets based on their estimated potency. 
The LiW data are not directly used to make rejection 
decisions but can trigger OOS alarms. The control 
mechanism used for tracking OOS and predicting blend 
potency by the RTD model is indicated by the green 
dashed lines in Figure 1.
• Routine offline samples. Tablets were sampled 
from the output of the table press for additional checks 
Figure 1 (Color online) Schematic Overview of the Problem Setting (Solid Arrows Represent Product Routings, Dashed Arrows 
Denote Feedback Controls) 
Martagan et al.: Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data-Driven Research Challenge 
1594 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2024, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1587–1604, © 2024 The Author(s) 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.153.63] on 01 October 2024, at 02:46 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

on their weight, thickness, and hardness. Additional 
tablet samples were taken every 30 minutes to check 
their specifications and measure their pharmaceutical 
ingredient concentration at line. Moreover, powder 
samples were taken from each raw material lot to mea­
sure their properties.
4.2. Overview of Data Set
The data set consists of several CSV files and Excel 
spreadsheets. Table 3 presents a high-level summary of 
the different files to help navigate the reader.
4.3. Machine Data
For 121 hours and 18 minutes at time intervals of one 
second, inline process parameters corresponding to the 
LiW feeders, blenders, and tablet press are collected. 
Table 4 provides an overview of the process parameters 
measured for the LiW feeders. We refer to Online 
Appendix 3.3 for background information on LiW fee­
ders and their operating mechanisms.
First, for each of the feeders, the feed factor is deter­
mined (Feed Factor PD1PD7). The feed factor is the 
theoretical maximum amount of powder that the feeder 
Table 3. High-Level Overview of the Data Set
File name
Type of data
Additional information
LiW Feeders 1.csv
Machine data (Section 4.3)
Measured every second
LiW Feeders 2.csv
Machine data (Section 4.3)
Measured every second
Blenders.csv
Machine data (Section 4.3)
Measured every second
Tablet Press.csv
Machine data (Section 4.3)
Measured every second
Humidity.csv
Machine data (Section 4.3)
Measured as relative humidity percentage 
every 15 minutes
Temperature.csv
Machine data (Section 4.3)
Measured in degrees Celsius every 
15 minutes
RM Tablet Properties and 
Drum Change.xlsx
Contextual quality data (Section 4.4)
Averaged over ten results
RM Content Uniformity.xlsx
Contextual quality data (Section 4.4)
Measured every 30 minutes and averaged 
over 10 results
RM Material Properties.xlsx
Contextual quality data (Section 4.4)
Triplicate measurements for each material 
sample tested
Logbook Long Run Days.xlsx
Event logbook (optional file as an appendix)
Events are recorded in 30-minute intervals
Table 4. Inline Process Parameters, File ‘LiW Feeders 1.csv’ and ‘LiW Feeders 2.csv’
Column name
Corresponding columns (file 
name)
Description
Unit of measure
Feed Factor PD1PD7
B-G (LiW Feeders 1.csv)
Theoretical maximum amount per 
screw rotation LiW feeders
Gram/screw revolution
Screw RPM PD1PD7
H-M (LiW Feeders 1.csv)
LiW feeder screw speed
Rotations per minute
VolMode PD1PD7
N-S (LiW Feeders 1.csv)
Binary variable indicating whether the 
LiW feeders are operating on 
volumetric (1) or gravitational 
mode (0)
{0,1}
Massflow PD1PD7
T-Y (LiW Feeders 1.csv)
Mass flow rate LiW feeders
Kilogram/hour
%PD1 to %PD3
Z-AB (LiW Feeders 1.csv)
Compositional mass flow rate LiW 
feeders PD1PD3
Percentage
%PD4 to %PD7
A-C (LiW Feeders 2.csv)
Compositional mass flow rate LiW 
feeders PD4PD5 and PD7
Estimated weight IBC PS1PS7
D-I (LiW Feeders 2.csv)
Estimated weight intermediate bulk 
containers LiW feeders PD1PD5 
and PD7
Kilogram
RefAct PD1PD7
J-O (LiW Feeders 2.csv)
Binary variable indicating whether 
refill IBC is in progress at the 
current moment (1) or not (0)
{0,1}
Net Weight PD1PD7
P-U (LiW Feeders 2.csv)
Weight of the material inside the LiW 
feeder
Kilogram
Totalizer PD1PD7
V-AA (LiW Feeders 2.csv)
Cumulative amount of material fed 
over time
Kilogram
Martagan et al.: Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data-Driven Research Challenge 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2024, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1587–1604, © 2024 The Author(s) 
1595 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.153.63] on 01 October 2024, at 02:46 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

could deliver per screw rotation. Combined with the 
actual screw speed (Screw RPM PD1PD7), it enables 
the system to calculate the theoretical mass flow of the 
component delivered to the system for each of the 
feeders1.
We note that LiW feeders can operate in either gravi­
tational or volumetric mode. The default in our setting 
is gravitational mode; that is, the LiW feeder is placed 
on a scale (see Online Appendix 3.3), and hence, the 
mass flow is determined by measuring the decrease in 
material weight over time. However, sometimes, the 
scale could be thrown off because of physical distur­
bances such as vibrations or external circumstances. In 
this case, the feeder switches from gravitational mode 
to volumetric mode, indicated by VolMode PD1–PD7 
in Table 4. When switched to the volumetric mode, the 
theoretical feed rate is calculated using the feed factor 
multiplied by the screw speed.
The actual mass flow rate of materials at the individ­
ual LiW feeders is measured as the loss in weight over 
time (Massflow PD1–PD7). The percentage composi­
tional mass flow (%PD1 to %PD7) is calculated by 
dividing the actual mass flow of each feeder by the total 
mass flow from all feeders. If this value falls outside the 
specified maximum compositional deviation, an alarm 
is triggered. See Table 5 for the target composition and 
corresponding alarm limits (i.e., allowed relative devia­
tions from the target) for each feeder. Recall that any 
critical process alarm triggered in the system results in 
a 100% OOS for the duration of the alarm.
The estimated weight IBC represents the estimated 
weight of the intermediate bulk containers (IBC). These 
are containers placed on top of the feeders containing 
the bulk amount of the raw materials to be dispensed 
by the LiW feeders. They act as a buffer, and their esti­
mated weight is measured to ensure that the bulk of 
the raw materials is replenished in time. During a refill 
sequence, the corresponding binary variable RefAct 
for PD1–PD7 changes from zero to one. Net Weight 
PD1–PD7 represents the weight of the material in the 
hopper and the screw itself (i.e., the total mass of the 
system minus the mass of the equipment). The cumula­
tive amount being fed over time is recorded for each 
feeder as the Totalizer PD1–PD7.
Table 6 shows the parameters for the blending opera­
tions at Blender 1 and 2. Massflow Blender 1 and 2 
describes the amount of material passing through the 
blender per time unit. In steady-state operation (i.e., 
after start-up and before shutdown), the mass flow of 
Blender 1 should be equal to the total input of LiW fee­
ders PD1–PD5, and the mass flow of Blender 2 should 
be equal to the mass outflow of Blender 1 plus the 
inflow of feeder PD7. In addition, the blend potency 
and the OOS concentration for both blenders are mea­
sured. The blend potency is measured as the relative 
percentage of the target concentration of the active 
component in the blend. Therefore, a value of 100% 
means that the amount of active components in the 
blend is exactly at the desired setpoint concentration, as 
specified in Table 5.
The process parameters corresponding to the rotary 
tablet press are presented in Table 7. Online Appendix 
3.4 provides additional information on the tablet press 
principles and naming conventions. The tablet press 
machine data consist mainly of parameters related to 
precompression and main compression. During pre­
compression, the bottom punch moves while the upper 
punch remains in a fixed position to compress the 
incoming powder mixture into a tablet. Therefore, the 
parameter “precompression height bottom” (and “main 
compression height bottom”) measures the height of the 
bottom punch during the precompression (and main 
compression, respectively). The top dwell time (i.e., see 
precompression and main compression top dwell times 
Table 5. Target Composition and Alarm Limits of Feeders
Feeder
PD1
PD2
PD3
PD4
PD5
PD7
Target composition (%)
28.50
29.00
10.00
28.50
3.00
1.00
Allowed relative deviation (+/ %)
10.00
10.00
15.00
10.00
5.00
5.00
Table 6. Inline Process Parameters of Continuous Blenders B1 and B2, File ‘Blenders.csv’
Column name
Corresponding 
columns
Description
Unit of measure
Massflow Blender 1 and 
Blender 2
B-C
Mass flow rate through the blender
Kilogram/hour
Blend Potency Blender 1 and 
Blender 2
D-E
Blend potency measured by RTD
Relative percentage
OOS Concentration at Blender 
1 and Blender 2 inlet
F-G
Fraction of the blend containing material 
that has been subjected to an OOS
Percentage
Martagan et al.: Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data-Driven Research Challenge 
1596 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2024, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1587–1604, © 2024 The Author(s) 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.153.63] on 01 October 2024, at 02:46 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

in Table 7) denotes the time the powder mixture is 
under the compression force while being transformed 
into a tablet. The parameter “precompression force” 
(and “main compression force”) denotes the average 
force applied to the tablet during precompression 
(and main compression, respectively). The parameter 
“precompression displacement top sigma” represents 
the variability in precompression displacement (i.e., 
precompression compared with its starting position) 
and relates to the variability of tablet weight via the 
height of the compression roll.
The remaining parameters in Table 7 are related to 
the materials entering and leaving the rotary tablet 
press. The parameter named “compression cycle fill 
depth” measures the fill depth of the punch when 
powder enters the dies. A feeder paddle evenly distri­
butes the powder into the die cavities to form tablets. 
It is located in the feed frame section and consists of a 
rotating paddle to uniformly distribute the material 
from the hopper to the feed frame. Hence, the speed 
of the feeder paddles 1 and 2 is captured by “Filling 
Shoe M20M13” and “Filling Shoe M20M23” speed. 
The fill depth and paddle speed influence the weight 
and weight variability of the tablets. To ensure that 
enough material is available for tablet compression, 
the fill level of the tablet press hopper is measured by 
“Material Inlet: Hopper Level Detection.” After being 
compressed, tablets are freed from the die by applying 
an ejection force. Hereafter, tablets are either sent to 
coating, the tablet analyzer, or rejected based on the 
critical quality attributes.
In addition to the inline parameters described above, 
the relative humidity and the temperature were mea­
sured at the feeders’ section and the tablet press (see 
the files Humidity.csv and Temperature.csv).
4.4. Contextual Quality Data
As part of the original 120-hour run study, we collected 
contextual quality data to assess the effects of raw 
material changes during the run. The contextual quality 
data consist of several Excel files, as summarized in 
Table 3. We first provide some background information 
(Section 4.4.1) and then describe the data (Section 4.4.2).
4.4.1. Background Information on Contextual Quality 
Data. The contextual quality data can be used to under­
stand the impact of raw materials on production. In 
this context, we use the term “lot” to represent a large- 
scale production run (e.g., it could represent a certain 
amount of tablet production, such as one ton, or a cer­
tain amount of raw material usage, such as 10 tons of 
Avicel). We use the terms “bag” and “drum” inter­
changeably, which represent a smaller unit of a particu­
lar lot. Thus, a lot may be divided into several smaller 
bags/drums for material handling or other purposes. 
In our setting, the effects of raw materials occurred in 
two ways: 
1. Intra-lot changes in raw materials: Changes between 
individual drums/bags of raw materials produced in the 
same batch by the material supplier.
2. Inter-lot changes in raw materials: Changes be­
tween different batches of the same raw material.
Table 7. Inline Process Parameter Tablet Press, File ‘Tablet Press.csv’
Column name
Corresponding 
columns
Description
Unit of measure
Precompression height bottom
B
Height of bottom punch during 
precompressions
Millimeter
Precompression top dwell time
C
Time powder/tablet is held under 
compression
Millisecond
Precompression force
D
Average force tablet is under during 
precompression
Kilonewton
Precompression displacement 
top sigma
E
Variability in precompression 
displacement
Percentage
Main compression height 
bottom
F
Height of bottom punch during 
compressions
Millimeter
Main compression top dwell 
time
G
Time powder/tablet is held under 
compression.
Millisecond
Main compression force
H
Average force tablet is under during 
the main compression
Kilonewton
Compression cycle fill depth
I
Fill depth of the punch when 
allowing powder into the dies of 
the tablet press
Millimeter
Filling Shoe M20M13 speed
J
Feeder paddle 1 speed
Rotations per minute
Filling Shoe M20M23 speed
K
Feeder paddle 2 speed
Rotations per minute
Material inlet: Hopper level 
detection
L
Height of powder in level sensor 
assembly above tablet press
Percentage
Ejection force tablet
M
Ejection force of tablet from the die 
after compression
Kilonewton
Martagan et al.: Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data-Driven Research Challenge 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2024, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1587–1604, © 2024 The Author(s) 
1597 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.153.63] on 01 October 2024, at 02:46 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

Powder-grade acetaminophen (‘APAP_P’; Mallinck­
rodt, St. Louis, MO) was selected as the model active 
pharmaceutical ingredient (API). Microcrystalline cellu­
lose (Avicel PH102; FMC Biopolymer, Cork, Ireland), 
spray dried lactose (Fast Flo 316, Kerry, Naas, Ireland), 
sodium croscarmellose (Ac-di-sol SD-711; FMC Biopoly­
mer, Cork, Ireland), and magnesium stearate (Ligamed 
MF-2-V; Peter Greven, Venlo, The Netherlands) made 
up the rest of the formulation used during the study.
To study the inter-lot effects of material variation, two 
different lots of Avicel PH102 were supplied, whereas 
for all other materials a single lot/batch of the material 
was used. This would allow for a detailed study of the 
intra-lot variation for all materials, whereas the inter-lot 
variation would be assessed using the Avicel PH102. 
The details of the individual materials used in the study 
are summarized in Table 8.
4.4.2. Description of the Contextual Quality Data. The 
file named “RM Content Uniformity” reports the drug 
content (i.e., the percentage of API per tablet) for each 
tablet sampled. We sampled 10 tablets every 30minutes 
(unless there was a pause in the process). The data were 
collected at line upon the completion of the tablet press 
operation. The upper and lower control limits for the 
drug content can be found in Table 5 (column PD3).
The file named “RM Tablet Properties and Drum 
Changes” consists of two spreadsheets. The first spread­
sheet (named “tablet properties”) reports the average 
weight (milligrams), average thickness (millimeters), 
average hardness (kiloponds), and the corresponding 
standard deviations (SD) based on 10 tablets collected 
per sample. These samples were collected at the tablet 
press and represent the same samples as those reported 
in the RM Content Uniformity file. See Holman et al. 
(2021) for the corresponding control limits. The informa­
tion on tablet weight, thickness, and hardness is used to 
make a control response in the system (i.e., see the illus­
tration of the feedback loop between the tablet analyzer 
and tablet press in Figure 1). For example, if the tablet is 
too hard, then the system will lower the compression 
force.2 The column labeled “entered into the system” 
denotes the time when the tablet information was en­
tered into the system to generate a control response.
The second spreadsheet (named “raw material drum 
change”) provides refill information associated with 
each raw material. The file considers six raw materials 
(e.g., API, magnesium stearate; see Section 4.4.1 for more 
information on raw materials). Each of these raw materi­
als was fed into a specific LiW feeder (see Table 8). For 
each raw material, the column “date/time” denotes the 
specific time when the raw material was refilled at 
the LiW feeder, whereas the column “amount” indicates 
the specific refill quantity in kilograms. The estimated 
refill times of each raw material are also reported (see 
Holman et al. 2021 for details).
Table 9 provides an overview and description of the 
data presented in the file named “RM Material Proper­
ties.” Where required, materials have been characterized 
using an FT4 powder rheometer (Freeman Technology 
2023). The following standard experiments were run 
according to the standard operating procedures of the 
FT4: stability and variable flow rate and compressibility 
and shear cell at 6kPa. Further details on the description 
of material characterization are recorded in the literature 
(Freeman Technology 2023).
Lastly, we provide an optional Excel file (named 
“Logbook Long Run Days”) as an Online Appendix. 
This file consists of six spreadsheets, where each 
spreadsheet represents a production day starting from 
January 12, 2018, until January 17, 2018. For each day, 
the file contains the notes of the operators on impor­
tant events for each of the operations (feeding, blend­
ing, compression, etc.). For example, on January 12 at 
10 a.m., an alarm resulted in a system shutdown. For 
brevity, we omit the details because the notes are self- 
explanatory. This additional information may help 
contextualize some unexpected events or patterns that 
may be observed in the data.
4.5. Research Questions
In this section, we propose specific research questions 
that can be answered using the data set. In Section 5, 
we present additional research questions to support 
generic applications of CM and RTRT in both pharma­
ceutical and biopharmaceutical manufacturing. 
• What real-time data/information can be gained 
from the LiW feeder signals that relate to changes in 
powder properties beyond mass flow?
• Can the system be used to monitor changes in raw 
materials (i.e., change of drum or lot) using the LiW 
feeder signals?
Table 8. Materials Used in the Study
Material identifier
Formal name
Lot no.
LiW feeder
pAPAP
Acetaminophen powder, APAP_P
85170761
PD3
L316
Spray dried lactose, Fast Flo ‘316’
637517L052
PD2
A102
Microcrystalline cellulose, Avicel PH102
71734C
71732C
PD1 and PD4
Ac-di-sol
Sodium Croscarmellose, Ac-di-sol SD-711
T1726C
PD5
Mag St
Magnesium stearate, Ligamed MF-2-V
31400041
PD7
Martagan et al.: Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data-Driven Research Challenge 
1598 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2024, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1587–1604, © 2024 The Author(s) 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.153.63] on 01 October 2024, at 02:46 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

• How do changes in the raw material attributes 
(i.e., change of Avicel PH102 lot) impact the down­
stream process (i.e., compression), and can the change 
be predicted?
• How can the mass of data be simplified to have an 
easy measure of process performance during feeding 
with respect to top-up size, powder density, and feed­
ing performance?
• What is the effect of a temporary disturbance (e.g., 
shutdowns, OOS) on the system? How to predict the 
disturbances in advance and take preventive actions 
accordingly?
• How to adjust loss-in-weight feeders to control 
quality and throughput? What are the optimal raw 
material feeding strategies to increase throughput and 
quality?
• What are optimal mixing and blending decisions 
based on our data? How fast can we run a CM system 
to maximize throughput while maintaining quality?
• How to develop good prediction models for RTD 
and use these prediction models for real-time optimal 
control of CM or RTRT systems?
5. Future Research Directions for OM
In this section, we propose several research questions 
for the OM community, with a specific focus on CM 
and RTRT. We present research questions that apply 
to both pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical manu­
facturing. For ease of exposition, we develop a roadmap 
that systematically categorizes future research direc­
tions in Figure 2. Our roadmap begins with process 
analytics (Section 5.1). We then focus on operational 
aspects related to optimal control (Section 5.2) and opti­
mal learning (Section 5.3). We consider the dynamics of 
manufacturing systems for resilient and sustainable 
production (Section 5.4). Lastly, we elaborate on regula­
tory aspects (Section 5.5) and new technology adoption 
(Section 5.6). We conclude each topic with open re­
search questions.
5.1. Process Analytics
The OM community can help the industry develop a 
better understanding of biological and chemical pro­
cesses based on production data. In life sciences, some 
process dynamics are intuitive and well-understood 
(e.g., cells start to die if they are underfed during fer­
mentation). However, it is more challenging to under­
stand the cross-functional relationships between 
multiple process parameters and quality attributes 
because these relationships cannot always be explained 
by domain knowledge or intuition. On the other hand, 
recent advances in sensors, such as Raman spectros­
copy, have enabled the collection of new process data 
that were previously difficult to collect. When com­
bined with data analytics and OM, these new measure­
ments can help us develop a better understanding of 
the production processes. Another critical challenge for 
the industry is identifying the right type and amount of 
data to collect and translating the data into explainable 
models. Motivated by these industry needs, the OM 
community can help address several open questions on 
process analytics: 
• What data do we need to collect to better under­
stand and control these processes? How can we iden­
tify the key process parameters from a given data set? 
How can we develop new data- and model-driven 
approaches to determine the golden profile?
Table 9. Material Property Data, File ‘RM Material Properties.xlsx’
Name
Units
Description
Conditioned bulk density (CBD)
g/ml
The bulk density of the material after standard 
preconditioning
Basic flow energy (BFE)
MJ
A measure of the powder’s flowability when forced to flow, 
that is, through a feeder
Compressibility (CPS) % at stated pressure
%
Change in volume of a powder form under zero pressure to 
the defined test pressure
Cohesion
kPa
The force between particles that hold the powder together
Unconfined yield stress (UYS)
kPa
The stress necessary to cause a material unsupported in two 
directions to fail in shear
Major principal stress (MPS)
kPa
The stress necessary to cause a material unsupported in two 
directions to fail in shear under a pre-consolidated state
Flow function (FF)
—
The ratio of MPS to UYS and is used to rank flowability. 
Flow Function is a parameter commonly used to rank 
flowability, with values below 4 denoting poor flow and 
above 10, good flow.
Angle of internal friction (AIF)
o
A measurement of a powder unit’s resistance to shear stress 
is known as the internal angle of friction. When failure 
happens only in response to a shearing stress, the angle 
measured between the normal force and resultant force is 
the angle.
Martagan et al.: Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data-Driven Research Challenge 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2024, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1587–1604, © 2024 The Author(s) 
1599 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.153.63] on 01 October 2024, at 02:46 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

• What data are sufficient for regulators to evaluate 
the golden profile? What data, model, or analysis is 
needed to statistically demonstrate the (robustness of 
the) golden profile?
Another line of research is related to predictive ana­
lytics. State-of-the-art approaches in life sciences typi­
cally use mechanistic models (also known as kinetic 
models) to model and predict process dynamics. Exam­
ples of mechanistic models include Monod equations 
and ordinary differential equations (McNeil and Harvey 
2008, Putra and Abasaeed 2018). As a major advantage, 
mechanistic models are well-established in the field 
and are easy to explain. However, mechanistic models 
have limitations because they are typically deterministic 
and require prespecified input parameters. Therefore, 
they cannot fully capture the inherent stochasticity of 
these processes, nor can they learn from real-time data. 
Although general-purpose approaches such as rein­
forcement learning can partially alleviate this problem, 
these black-box models do not incorporate domain 
knowledge from the life sciences and may require sig­
nificant amounts of training data that may not be avail­
able. As a result, black-box models may be difficult to 
explain to regulators and may also contain model uncer­
tainty. Therefore, we propose the following scientific 
challenges to the OM community: 
• How can we combine data-driven methods with 
mechanistic models from life sciences in such a way 
that the resulting predictive models are explainable 
yet adequately equipped to represent these complex 
systems?
• How can the stochastic input/output relation­
ships between the key process parameters and quality 
attributes be established? What is the impact of input 
material attributes and their variability on continuous 
processing and quality? How can we discover new 
patterns in our data to identify parameters (or soft 
sensors) needed to control quality and yield?
5.2. Operations: Optimal Control
R & D studies tend to focus on the underlying biologi­
cal and chemical aspects but often overlook opera­
tional risks and trade-offs. In daily manufacturing 
practice, however, the industry faces multiple opera­
tional risks, such as failure risks, and variability in pro­
cesses and raw materials. Therefore, “R & D optimal” 
(defined based on biology and chemistry) may not 
always align with “manufacturing optimal” (defined 
based on operational risks and trade-offs) in practice. 
To bridge this gap, the OM community can help 
develop new approaches for optimal control mecha­
nisms by linking the underlying process dynamics 
(i.e., predictive models) with operational aspects (i.e., 
prescriptive analytics). We believe that a systematic 
approach combining life sciences, data sciences, and 
OM is necessary to support the industry’s transition 
toward “smart” manufacturing to reduce costs and 
lead times. Our Franz Edelman work provides one of 
the first attempts at OM applications in biomanufac­
turing (Martagan et al. 2023). Nevertheless, the indus­
try offers a wide range of optimal control problems, as 
described below.
5.2.1. Maintain the State of Control. Real-time mea­
surements can already help identify when processes 
start to deviate from their golden profile or exceed 
their predefined specification limits. However, there is 
still a need for optimal control mechanisms to bring 
processes back to their golden profile in real time and 
to maintain a state of control over long periods of 
time. These optimal control mechanisms can be based 
on data- and model-driven approaches, as described 
Figure 2. (Color online) An OM Research Roadmap to Support CM and RTRT Applications 
Martagan et al.: Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data-Driven Research Challenge 
1600 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2024, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1587–1604, © 2024 The Author(s) 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.153.63] on 01 October 2024, at 02:46 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

earlier, and should be equipped to capture risk-benefit 
trade-offs under process uncertainty. In addition, the OM 
community can help identify what process data should 
be presented to the regulators to demonstrate and vali­
date the state of control over lime. To summarize: 
• What data need to be collected and analyzed to 
ensure the state of control? Where to put sensors and 
how to eliminate data redundancies?
• How do the lapses in data collection (e.g., recali­
brating sensors) affect product quality and related 
decisions?
• How to maintain a state of control over long peri­
ods of time in CM and RTRT? How to bring the process 
back to its golden profile when it deviates from it? 
What are the most effective methods for real-time pro­
cess monitoring and control in CM and RTRT to main­
tain quality and prevent deviations from the golden 
profile?
• How to develop new models based on data- and 
OM-driven approaches to detect disturbances and/or 
variability in the system and make real-time preven­
tive (or corrective) interventions accordingly? How 
can advanced data analytics and machine-learning 
techniques be used to improve process robustness and 
reduce variability in CM and RTRT systems?
5.2.2. Optimal Release Policies. The industry aims to 
transition from performing time-consuming release tests 
to autonomous RTRT in the future. To facilitate this tran­
sition, we can work with the concept of “release by 
exception.” This concept implies a mixed strategy where 
either an RTRT or an offline release test is performed 
based on certain prespecified process conditions (as 
opposed to an all-or-nothing approach to release testing). 
However, the concept of release by exception is relatively 
new, and we need a better understanding of the associ­
ated risks and operational aspects. This line of research 
could be built on condition-based manufacturing and 
maintenance optimization (De Jonge and Scarf 2020) and 
address the following questions: 
• Which conditions should a system meet to move 
toward fully autonomous RTRT?
• How can predictive maintenance strategies be 
applied in CM and RTRT systems to minimize down­
time and increase system reliability? Under which con­
ditions (on parameters, prediction errors, costs, etc.) it 
is optimal to release in real-time instead of at-line/off­
line inspections?
5.2.3. Optimal Stopping Problems. Our previous work 
presents some examples of optimal stopping problems 
in a batch and semicontinuous biomanufacturing setting 
(see, e.g., Martagan et al. 2020, Koca et al. 2023, Wang 
et al. 2023). Future research can develop stochastic opti­
mization models specifically tailored to the needs of CM 
and RTRT systems: 
• What is the longest duration we can run a CM sys­
tem while maintaining quality?
• When to stop and restart a specific unit operation 
(e.g., continuous blending) based on operational risks, 
trade-offs, and the stochastic evolution of the process 
parameters and quality attributes over time?
• What is an optimal campaign duration (e.g., when 
to stop a campaign in real-time) based on raw material 
properties, quality, cost, and risk considerations?
5.2.4. Modeling and Optimization of Continuous Fermen­
tation Systems. Although there are a few successful 
implementations of continuous fermentation technolo­
gies in practice (e.g., continuous stir tank reactors), 
there is still significant room to optimize the perfor­
mance of continuous fermentation systems. Because 
our data set does not involve fermentation, we do not 
list specific research questions on this topic to prevent 
confusion. However, future OM research on continu­
ous fermentation systems can address decisions related 
to feeding rates (i.e., feeding “too much” or “too little” 
has an impact on yield and quality), medium exchange 
rates (i.e., the amount of fresh medium supplied to the 
system and the amount of medium extracted from the 
system have an impact on yield and quality), starting 
conditions (i.e., the amount of seed culture and the 
properties of the media used affect the yield and qual­
ity), and bleeding decisions (i.e., when to remove cells 
from the bioreactor).
5.2.5. Traceability Strategies. Future research can 
develop new approaches to facilitate process traceabil­
ity in case of unforeseen disturbances and quality 
issues. These traceability strategies should be based 
on a combination of sensor measurements, prediction 
models such as RTD, and risk-benefit trade-offs. In 
addition, sampling strategies should be defined to 
ensure product quality and safety in CM and RTRT. 
In summary: 
• How to capture the impact of a disturbance as it 
propagates in a CM/RTRT system? What is the impact 
of changes made at a unit operation on subsequent 
operations and output quality?
• How far to trace back (and scrap the produced 
materials) based on potential risks and costs?
• What is an optimal sampling strategy (e.g., sample 
location, sample size, frequency, statistical approach 
and criteria, and their relevance to the intended use) to 
ensure safety and quality in CM and RTRT?
5.2.6. Model Maintenance and Validation. The role of 
model maintenance and validation becomes increasingly 
important as the industry moves toward automated deci­
sions. The OM community can help the industry improve, 
train, and validate models using real-time data, advanced 
analytics, and PAT tools. New OM-based approaches can 
Martagan et al.: Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data-Driven Research Challenge 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2024, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1587–1604, © 2024 The Author(s) 
1601 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.153.63] on 01 October 2024, at 02:46 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

enable timely and efficient communication between the 
industry and the regulators: 
• When and how often should the models be revised 
and improved based on real-time data? What is the 
best approach to the maintenance and validation of 
models?
• How to demonstrate the appropriateness and robust­
ness of the developed models and control strategies to the 
regulatory authorities?
5.3. Operations: Optimal Learning
Despite advances in sensor technologies, decision mak­
ing with “small” (limited) data continues to be an 
industry concern. In commercial production settings, 
challenges related to small data arise every time there is 
a change in equipment or raw materials. For instance, if 
the raw material supplier changes their formulation or 
new equipment is installed, the process output is signif­
icantly affected, making historical process data unreli­
able or obsolete. Small data can also be a concern in 
small-scale research and development projects. There­
fore, all research questions described in this paper can 
be revisited to support decision-making with small 
data. The OM community has already developed meth­
odologies to support decision making with small data 
(see, e.g., Miˇsi´c and Perakis 2020). These methodologies 
can be applied in CM and RTRT settings.
Bayesian learning or other machine-learning techni­
ques can be used to help the industry make better use of 
newly collected data over time. The concept of learning 
by doing is particularly important in CM, because these 
systems may start with small amounts of data (because 
of variations in campaigns, raw materials, and lots) but 
can generate large data sets in a relatively short time. 
Furthermore, Bayesian learning can help the industry 
identify the best operating conditions within a certain 
predefined operating range (so-called design space de­
fined by R & D). For instance, in our previous work, we 
employed a Bayesian design of experiment approach to 
effectively search for the best bioreactor operating con­
figuration using a limited number of industry-scale 
experiments (Martagan et al. 2023). This project helped 
us identify a better bioreactor operating condition with 
a 50% increase in our bioreactor yield. Similar to these 
initiatives, future research on optimal learning applica­
tions can help the industry bridge the gap between 
“optimal” operating policies defined by R & D (based 
on biology and chemistry) and manufacturing (based 
on risk-benefit trade-offs) by effectively searching the 
feasible design space. Additionally, optimal learning 
methodologies can assist in identifying OOS signals or 
hidden failures (such as worsening spectroscopy mea­
surements) to support preventive and corrective infer­
ences. In summary, we propose the following research 
questions: 
• How to make better CM decisions with small 
data? How to develop good prediction models to sup­
port scaleups (i.e., transition from laboratory scale to 
commercial scale) using small data? What are the key 
factors influencing the technology transfer and scalabil­
ity of CM processes from laboratory to commercial 
scale production?
• By using Bayesian learning or other machine- 
learning approaches, how can we reduce the amount 
of data needed to maintain the state of control? How 
can we reduce the amount of data provided to the reg­
ulators to ensure the state of control?
• How to define a new “optimal” for manufacturing 
operations by effectively searching (and even expand­
ing) the feasible design space defined by R & D?
5.4. Manufacturing Systems
Many industries such as automotive and high-tech 
have benefited from Industry 4.0 and 5.0 initiatives on 
automation, digital twins, and the Internet of Things 
(IoT). However, the (bio)pharmaceutical industry still 
presents a significant opportunity for Industry 4.0 and 
5.0 initiatives to support cost-effectiveness and resil­
ience. For a successful implementation of CM and 
RTRT, it is essential to ensure the system’s ability to 
maintain an integrated flow under uncertainty. More­
over, these systems should be resilient to disruptions to 
ensure safety and quality. The industry also seeks to 
effectively integrate automated process technologies 
with human expertise and real-time data to achieve 
resilience. There is also a growing emphasis on flexibil­
ity and sustainability with the development of new and 
modular equipment (e.g., single-use reactors). There­
fore, we foresee several opportunities to learn from 
other industries and implement Industry 4.0 and 5.0 
initiatives in CM and RTRT settings: 
• How can digital twin, IoT, and virtual reality tech­
nologies be utilized to optimize process design and 
operator training in continuous manufacturing?
• How can risk assessments and quality risk man­
agement tools be effectively integrated into CM and 
RTRT processes to ensure product safety and efficacy?
• What are the environmental sustainability benefits 
and challenges associated with CM/RTRT, and how 
can these be quantified and optimized?
• What are the economic implications of transition­
ing from batch manufacturing to CM in terms of capital 
investment, operational costs, and overall profitability?
• How much buffer on lead time and capacity is 
needed in CM/RTRT systems to ensure flexibility and 
robustness to unforeseen disturbances?
• How to develop smart scheduling and production 
planning approaches tailored to the specific needs of 
CM and RTRT (e.g., staffing decisions, multi-products, 
limited shelf life, changeovers, and inventory aspects)? 
How to move from reactive to proactive actions (i.e., 
Martagan et al.: Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data-Driven Research Challenge 
1602 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2024, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1587–1604, © 2024 The Author(s) 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.153.63] on 01 October 2024, at 02:46 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

prevent OOS signal and, consequently, diversion of 
products)?
5.5. Regulatory Aspects
The use of data analytics and AI is becoming increas­
ingly important to regulatory authorities and the indus­
try (Wuest et al. 2020, FDA 2023, Garguilo 2023). To 
encourage further discussion on the use of AI in drug 
manufacturing, regulators have recently published sev­
eral white papers and requested public feedback. For 
example, the Food and Drug Administration published 
an exploratory paper and proposed a regulatory frame­
work for AI-based software as a medical device (FDA 
2019). The European Medicines Agency explored similar 
AI-driven initiatives (EMA 2020). More recently, in 2023, 
the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research published 
a discussion paper seeking public feedback on the use of 
AI in drug manufacturing (Center for Drug Evaluation 
and Research 2023). We believe that the input of the OM 
community can also play an important role in shaping 
new regulatory frameworks and policy developments. 
Another line of research can investigate new governance 
mechanisms to ensure the ethical use of AI in drug 
manufacturing. Moreover, future research can explore 
new approaches to facilitate compliance monitoring and 
collaboration between regulators and the industry. In 
summary, we propose the following questions: 
• What are the regulatory challenges and considera­
tions for implementing CM and RTRT in different 
countries and regions?
• How can quality assurance systems and validation 
approaches be adapted to meet the unique require­
ments of CM and RTRT?
• What data are sufficient for regulators to evaluate 
CM and RTRT systems? What data need to be pro­
vided for timely and effective communication? How 
can the regulators increase their efficiency by using AI 
and automation to analyze large volumes of data?
• How to define a “batch” in a CM setting?
• How to develop new regulatory frameworks to 
address the specific needs of CM and RTRT? What is 
the potential impact of new regulatory policies on the 
industry and social welfare?
5.6. New Technology Adoption
The industry is undergoing a digital transformation 
with the development of new sensors, manufacturing 
technologies, and advanced IT infrastructures. To stay 
ahead of the competition, manufacturers should be 
able to collect, analyze, and systematically store large 
amounts of (real-time) data and also effectively share 
data across different functions in their value chain. In 
addition, organizational leadership plays an important 
role in the adoption of new technologies. In current 
practice, flowsheet models are generally used to assess 
the performance of new CM technologies (see, e.g., 
Wang et al. 2017). As a future research direction, 
OM-driven approaches and new analytical models 
could be developed to support new technology adop­
tion decisions under market, regulatory, and tech­
nology uncertainties. Another future line of research 
could focus on data collection and management strate­
gies tailored to the needs of CM and RTRT systems: 
• How can the business case be made for different 
levels of CM or RTRT technologies? What are the requi­
site conditions (i.e., market, technology, regulatory con­
siderations) to deploy CM or RTRT technologies?
• Where should we place the sensors? How do we 
ensure that we are collecting the right data at the right 
time and location to support CM and RTRT? How to 
set up the right control system to make real-time 
adjustments based on data? Where should real-time 
data be stored? How should on- or inline data be evalu­
ated during CM and RTRT?
6. Conclusions
The 2024 MSOM data-driven research challenge is a col­
laborative effort of MSD’s Human and Animal Health 
divisions and GEA. We provide 120hours of production 
data on a continuous pharmaceutical tablet manufactur­
ing process. We also propose several research questions 
and future research directions based on common indus­
try challenges and opportunities. The data set can be 
used to develop data- or model-driven approaches to 
support successful implementations of CM and RTRT 
technologies. The data can also be used to generate new 
teaching materials.
The applications of OM methodologies created a sig­
nificant impact on industries such as automotive, retail, 
and semiconductor manufacturing. However, there are 
still a limited number of papers and written accounts of 
success related to OM applications in (bio)pharmaceu­
tical manufacturing. With this data-driven research 
challenge initiative, we believe that new knowledge 
generated by the OM community will facilitate the 
industry’s transition toward data- and OM-driven deci­
sion making.
Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful for the support of the editors of the 
MSOM practice platform, J´er´emie Gallien, Pavithra Harsha 
and Ananth Raman, and the editor-in-chief, Georgia Perakis. 
The authors also thank our extended team at MSD (Sebastian 
Escotet, Stephen Ma, and Annick Nusselder) for their contri­
butions and valuable comments. This work was also sup­
ported by the Dutch Science Foundation, NWO-VIDI grant.
Endnotes
1 Note that theoretical mass flow (kg/h) feed factor (g/revolu­
tions)× screw speed (revolutions/min)× 60 (min/h) × 1/1,000 (kg/g).
2 The specific control algorithm used in our system is proprietary and 
not disclosed.
Martagan et al.: Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data-Driven Research Challenge 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2024, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1587–1604, © 2024 The Author(s) 
1603 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.153.63] on 01 October 2024, at 02:46 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

References
Balfour H (2021) Continuous biomanufacturing – Where are we 
now? European Pharmaceutical Review. Accessed November 
23, 2023, https://www.europeanpharmaceuticalreview.com/ 
article/164036/continuous-biomanufacturing-where-are-we-now/.
BioPhorum Operations Group (2022) Biomanufacturing technology 
roadmap. Accessed November 21, 2023, https://www.biophorum. 
com/wp-content/uploads/bp_downloads/Overview-1.pdf.
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, The U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (2023) Artificial intelligence in drug manufactur­
ing. Accessed September 29, 2023, https://www.fda.gov/media/ 
165743/download?attachment.
European Medicines Agency (2012) Guideline on real time release test­
ing (formerly Guideline on parametric release). Accessed Novem­
ber 22, 2023, https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/ 
scientific-guideline/guideline-real-time-release-testing-formerly- 
guideline-parametric-release-revision-1_en.pdf.
De Jonge B, Scarf PA (2020) A review on maintenance optimization. 
European J. Oper. Res. 285(3):805–824.
European Medicines Agency (2020) EMA regulatory science to 2025 
strategic reflection. Accessed October 1, 2023, https://www.ema. 
europa.eu/en/documents/regulatory-procedural-guideline/ema- 
regulatory-science-2025-strategic-reflection_en.pdf.
Food and Drug Administration (2019) Proposed regulatory framework 
for modifications to artificial intelligence/machine learning (AI/ 
ML) based software as a medical device (SaMD) – Discussion paper 
and request for feedback. Accessed September 30, 2023, https:// 
www.regulations.gov/document/FDA-2019-N-1185-0001.
Food and Drug Administration (2023) Artificial intelligence and 
machine learning (AI/ML) for drug development. Accessed 
October 1, 2023, https://www.fda.gov/science-research/science- 
and-research-special-topics/artificial-intelligence-and-machine- 
learning-aiml-drug-development.
Freeman Technology (2023) Powder flow testing with the FT4 powder 
rheometer. Accessed December 1, 2023, https://www.freemantech. 
co.uk/powder-testing/ft4-powder-rheometer-powder-flow-tester.
Garguilo L (2023) AI beats back bad batches. Outsource pharma. 
Accessed October 1, 2023, https://www.outsourcedpharma.com/ 
doc/ai-beats-back-bad-batches-0001.
GEA Pharma and Healthcare (2021) ConsiGmaV
R CDC-LB Line, contin­
uous direct compression with linear blending. Accessed November 
28, 2023, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nOLwUhQlAGc.
Giaquinto M, Auchincloss K (2022) US Congress passes bill supporting 
new era of biopharma advanced & continuous manufacturing. 
Bioprocess online. Accessed November 23, 2023, https://www. 
bioprocessonline.com/doc/us-congress-passes-bill-supporting- 
new-era-of-biopharma-advanced-continuous-manufacturing-0001.
Globerman S, ed. (2016) Intellectual property rights and the promotion of 
biologics, medical devices, and trade in pharmaceuticals. Fraser Insti­
tute. Accessed November 21, 2023, http://www.fraserinstitute.org.
Grand View Research (2022) Animal health market size, share & trends 
analysis report by animal type (companion), by product (biologics), 
by distribution channel, by end-use, by region, and segment 
forecasts, 2023–2030. Accessed November 22,2023, https://www. 
grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/animal-health-market.
Holman J, Tantuccio A, Palmer J, van Doninck T, Meyer R (2021) A 
very boring 120 h: 15 million tablets under a continuous state of 
control. Powder Technol. 382:208–231.
ICH Q8, International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Require­
ments for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (2017) ICH guideline 
Q8 (R2) on pharmaceutical development. Accessed November 23, 
2023, https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific- 
guideline/international-conference-harmonisation-technical- 
requirements-registration-pharmaceuticals-human-use_en- 
11.pdf.
ICH Q10, International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Require­
ments for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (2015) ICH guideline 
Q10 on pharmaceutical quality system. Accessed November 23, 
2023, https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-guide 
line/international-conference-harmonisation-technical-requirements- 
registration-pharmaceuticals-human_en.pdf.
ICH Q13, International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Require­
ments for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (2023) ICH guideline 
Q13 on continuous manufacturing of drug substances and drug pro­
ducts. Accessed November 21, 2023, https://www.ema.europa.eu/ 
en/documents/scientific-guideline/ich-guideline-q13-continuous- 
manufacturing-drug-substances-drug-products-step-5_en.pdf.
Jiang M, Severson KA, Love JC, Madden H, Swann P, Zang L, Braatz RD 
(2017) Opportunities and challenges of real-time release testing in bio­
pharmaceutical manufacturing. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 114(11):2445–2456.
Koca Y, Martagan T, Adan I, Maillart L, van Ravenstein B (2023) Increas­
ing biomanufacturing yield with bleed–feed: Optimal policies and 
insights. Manufacturing. Service Oper. Management 25(1):108–125.
Lee S (2017) Modernizing the way drugs are made: A transition to 
continuous manufacturing. The U.S. Food and Drug Adminis­
tration. Accessed November 23, 2023, https://www.fda.gov/ 
drugs/news-events-human-drugs/modernizing-way-drugs-are- 
made-transition-continuous-manufacturing.
Markl D, Warman M, Dumarey M, Bergman EL, Folestad S, Shi Z, 
Manley LF, Goodwin DJ, Zeitler JA (2020) Review of real-time 
release testing of pharmaceutical tablets: State-of-the art, chal­
lenges and future perspective. Internat. J. Pharm. 582:119353.
Martagan T, Krishnamurthy A, Leland PA (2020) Managing trade-offs 
in protein manufacturing: How much to waste? Manufacturing 
Service Oper. Management 22(2):330–345.
Martagan T, Adan I, Baaijens M, Dirckx C, Repping O, van Ravenstein 
B, Yegneswaran PK (2023) Merck animal health uses operations 
research methods to transform biomanufacturing productivity 
for lifesaving medicines. INFORMS J. Appl. Analytics 53(1):85–95.
McNeil B, Harvey L, eds. (2008) Practical Fermentation Technology (John 
Wiley & Sons, West Sussex, UK).
Miˇsi´c VV, Perakis G (2020) Data analytics in operations management: 
A review. Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 22(1):158–169.
NIIMBL, The National Institute for Innovation in Manufacturing 
Biopharmaceuticals (2023) NIIMBL-led programs and projects. 
Accessed November 22, 2023, https://niimbl.my.site.com/s/ 
niimbl-led-programs.
Putra MD, Abasaeed AE (2018) A more generalized kinetic model for 
binary substrate fermentations. Process Biochem. 75:31–38.
Repping O, Martagan T, van Ravenstein B, Dirckx C, Nusselder A, Baai­
jens M (2023) Applications of OR/MS methodologies in biomanu­
facturing: Our vision and future research directions. M&SOM 
Practice Platform Seminar Series. Accessed November 21, 2023, 
https://pubsonline.informs.org/page/msom/biomanufacturing- 
2-3-2023.
Skyquest (2023) Global pharmaceuticals market. Accessed November 
22, 2023, https://www.skyquestt.com/report/pharmaceuticals- 
market#:~:text=Pharmaceuticals%20Market%20size%20was%20 
valued,is%20used% 20for%20medical%20purposes.
Wang Z, Escotet-Espinoza MS, Ierapetritou M (2017) Process analysis 
and optimization of continuous pharmaceutical manufacturing 
using flowsheet models. Comput. Chem. Eng. 107:77–91.
Wang B, Xie W, Martagan T, Akcay A, van Ravenstein B (2023) Opti­
mizing biomanufacturing harvesting decisions under limited his­
torical data. Preprint, submitted January 11, 2021, https://arxiv. 
org/abs/2101.03735.
Wuest T, Kusiak A, Dai T, Tayur SR (2020) Impact of COVID-19 on 
manufacturing and supply networks—The case for AI-inspired 
digital transformation. Preprint, submitted May 5, http://dx.doi. 
org/10.2139/ssrn.3593540.
Martagan et al.: Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Data-Driven Research Challenge 
1604 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2024, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1587–1604, © 2024 The Author(s) 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.153.63] on 01 October 2024, at 02:46 . For personal use only, all rights reserved.