TITLE: Surge Pricing and Two-Sided Temporal Responses in Ride Hailing
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2020.0960
---

TSpace Research Repository 
 
tspace.library.utoronto.ca 
 
 
Surge Pricing and Two-Sided Temporal 
Responses in Ride Hailing 
 
Bin Hu, Ming Hu & Han Zhu 
 
Version Pre-print or submitted manuscript. 
 
Citation 
(published version) 
Hu, B., Hu, M., & Zhu, H. (2022). Surge pricing and two-sided 
temporal responses in ride hailing. Manufacturing & Service Operations 
Management, 24(1), 91-109. 
 
Copyright / License Copyright © 2021, INFORMS 
 
DOI https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2020.0960 
Publisher’s Statement This is a submitted manuscript of an article published by INFORMS in 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to cite TSpace items 
 
Always cite the published version, so the author(s) will receive recognition through services that track 
citation counts, e.g. Scopus. If you need to cite the page number of the author manuscript from TSpace 
because you cannot access the published version, then cite the TSpace version in addition to the published 
version using the permanent URI (handle) found on the record page. 
 
This article was made openly accessible by U of T Faculty. 
Please tell us how this access benefits you. Your story matters. 
 

Surge Pricing and Two-Sided Temporal Responses in Ride Hailing
Bin Hu
Naveen Jindal School of Management, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX 75080, USA
bin.hu@utdallas.edu
Ming Hu
Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3E6, Canada
ming.hu@rotman.utoronto.ca
Han Zhu
School of Management Science and Engineering, Dongbei University of Finance and Economics, Dalian, Liaoning 116025,
China
hanzhu@dufe.edu.cn
• Problem Deﬁnition: We investigate surge pricing in ride-hailing platforms from a temporal perspective,
highlighting strategic behavior by riders and drivers and that drivers respond to surge pricing much more
slowly than riders do.
• Academic/Practical Relevance: Surge pricing in ride-hailing platforms is a pivotal and controversial
subject. Despite abundant anecdotal evidence, strategic behavior by riders and drivers has not been formally
studied in the literature.
• Methodology: We adopt and analyze a classic two-period game-theoretical model as in the strategic-
consumer literature.
• Results: We identify two types of equilibrium pricing strategies. The ﬁrst consists of a short-lived sharp
price surge followed by a lower price, which we refer to as skimming surge pricing (SSP). The second consists
of a low initial price followed by a higher price, which we refer to as penetration surge pricing (PSP). We
ﬁnd that PSP equilibria are generally superior to SSP equilibria when both exist but require platforms to
share demand-supply information with drivers.
• Managerial Implications: The SSP equilibrium rationalizes the controversial sharp surge pricing practice:
the short-lived sharp price surge causes many high-value riders to voluntarily wait out the initial surge period,
which attracts additional drivers to the region to serve riders at a much lower price than the initial surge
price. The theoretically superior PSP equilibrium suggests that a vastly diﬀerent approach may improve surge
pricing and highlights the potential value and importance for platforms to share demand-supply information
with drivers.
1.
Introduction
One of the most prominent marketplace innovations in the past decade has been the advent of shar-
ing (or gig) economies, deﬁned by online platforms helping matching individual service providers
1

2
to individual customers. Some sharing economy platforms, such as TaskRabbit and Airbnb, serve
as online marketplaces where service providers and customers engage in their own matching pro-
cesses. Other platforms, most notably ride-hailing platforms such as Uber and Lyft, completely
control the matching process, dictating in real time which driver serves which rider and how much
the rider is charged, while keeping a percentage of the rider’s payment (e.g., roughly one quarter
for both Uber and Lyft according to Business Insider 2017) and transferring the rest to the driver.
For these ride-hailing platforms, pricing is their primary lever to manage demand and supply and
is thus of utmost importance.
Dynamic demand and supply on ride-hailing platforms necessitate dynamic pricing. To this end,
Uber implements an instrument called surge pricing, and Lyft implements a similar instrument
called prime time pricing. In this paper, we generally refer to such instruments as surge pricing.
The basic principle of surge pricing is that a platform sets a regular price and dynamically adjusts
the price by a multiplier based on the current demand and supply, eﬀectively adjusting the price in
real time. Although the platforms claim that surge pricing is designed to improve experience (Uber
2018), it has been one of the most controversial aspects of ride hailing. Riders have accused Uber
of price gouging (New York Times 2014). Drivers complain that surge pricing is too unpredictable
and short lived (CNET 2015, New York Times 2018). Proponents, on the other hand, claim that
surge pricing is consistent with basic economic principles of supply and demand (Economist 2016).
Despite the controversies, Uber and Lyft appear to be committed to this instrument.
Surge pricing, as such a pivotal and controversial subject, deserves careful inspection. The devel-
oping literature on surge pricing primarily takes a spatial perspective and investigates how prices
at diﬀerent locations inﬂuence driver distributions; see Bimpikis et al. (2019) and Besbes et al.
(2020). However, we are primarily drawn to an important temporal characteristic unique to ride
hailing, namely, that riders and drivers on a ride-hailing platform respond to surge pricing on
diﬀerent timescales. A rider seeing a price surge can decide to leave the platform by putting away
their phone in mere seconds. By contrast, when a driver wants to take advantage of surge pricing in
a particular region, s/he may need to ﬁnish the current ride or leave home or travel from a diﬀerent
region, which can take ten minutes or more. More crucially, drivers’ and riders’ diﬀerent response
timescales lead to strategic behavior that is supported by abundant anecdotes. For example, CNET
(2015) suggests that drivers are well aware of the time it takes them to drive to a surge region
and take it into consideration in their decisions. New York Times (2018) states that “[s]ome Uber
drivers say they feel misled when they travel to a surge area in high demand only to ﬁnd that it
has disappeared. The consensus in driver forums is, ‘Don’t chase the surge.’” On the other hand,

3
Washington Post (2015) suggests that riders can anticipate that a surge may not last and wait out
the surge in just a few minutes. The diﬀerent response timescales and strategic rider and driver
behavior can have profound implications on the design and eﬀectiveness of surge pricing.
In this paper, we emphasize the temporal perspective and adopt a two-period model that cap-
tures riders’ and drivers’ diﬀerent response timescales to pricing and their corresponding strategic
behavior. We also test the model’s robustness when incorporating spatial elements. We use this
model to attempt to answer the following questions: accounting for salient temporal elements of
ride hailing, what is a platform’s optimal/equilibrium surge pricing policy? Can the ride-hailing
platforms’ current pricing practices be explained? How may such platforms improve their surge
pricing policies? And what impact would there be if a platform neglects riders’ and drivers’ strategic
behavior in their surge pricing practice?
To answer these questions, we adopt the following two-period model. At the beginning of Period
1, a total volume of 1 (continuous, normalized) drivers are available in a small region, and a total
volume of r > 1 riders with heterogeneous valuations appear in the same region, constituting a
demand surge. The platform sets price p1 for Period 1. Given the initial price p1, some riders will
request rides in this period, some may strategically wait out Period 1 at a cost and request rides
only in Period 2, and the rest do not request rides in either period. Currently unavailable drivers
may decide to “chase the surge” and make themselves available in the region (i.e., drive toward the
region) at a cost, but they will only become available in Period 2. The riders requesting rides in
Period 1 and currently available drivers are randomly matched. If drivers outnumber riders, all rider
requests are satisﬁed. If riders outnumber drivers, unserved riders may wait at a cost. In Period 2,
new drivers who decided in Period 1 to chase the surge become available and join any remaining
drivers, and the platform sets the second-period price p2. Given the price p2, the remaining riders
from Period 1 decide whether to request rides, and those who do are again randomly matched with
available drivers.
We adopt the notion of rational expectations to characterize the equilibrium behavior over the
two periods. Through various analyses, we recover the commonly seen surge-pricing pattern of
a short-lived sharp price surge followed by a lower price as an equilibrium, which we refer to as
Skimming Surge Pricing (SSP) for its resemblance to price skimming. The SSP equilibrium matches
current pricing practices and reveals a more nuanced mechanism of surge pricing beyond simply
setting prices to make supply meet demand, as the platform may strategically inﬂate the price
above the level that micro-matches supply and demand in the surge region. The short-lived sharp
price surge causes many high-value riders to voluntarily wait out the initial price surge, which

4
serves to attract additional drivers to the region despite their slow responses. After the initial
period, new drivers arrive and the market clears at a price point lower than the initial surge price.
In practice, SSP’s sharp price surge can robustly signal that a region has many unserved riders
when drivers have no other information. Additional drivers may then make themselves available in
the surge region, not to chase the surge but to pursue riders.
Interestingly, another distinct and somewhat counterintuitive equilibrium can also occur where
upon observing a demand surge, the platform sets a low price followed by a higher price, which
we refer to as Penetration Surge Pricing (PSP) for its resemblance to penetration pricing. The
rationale behind the PSP equilibrium is that the platform sets a low price to entice many riders
into requesting rides. This, alongside random matching, forces many high-value (as well as low-
value) riders to wait out the initial surge period, which serves to attract additional drivers to the
region. After the initial period, new drivers arrive and the market clears at a price point higher
than the initial price. We ﬁnd that when PSP and SSP equilibria coexist, PSP can be superior to
SSP in generating a higher platform proﬁt and matching volume and reducing price variability, in
addition to avoiding the initial sharp price surge. Both PSP and SSP operate on the fundamental
principle of keeping high-value riders around to attract drivers to the current region. The diﬀerence
is that PSP does so with lower prices, which increases the matching volume and platform proﬁt.
One possible reason the PSP strategy is not widely observed is that it requires the platform to
share demand-supply information with drivers, which is not yet common practice. To this end, our
ﬁndings suggest that platforms may consider strategies such as sharing demand-supply information
with drivers or committing to future price surges to enable PSP policies to improve proﬁt and
eﬃciency and mitigate controversies surrounding sharp price surges.
We study several extensions. First, we conﬁrm the above insights by accounting for the spatial
perspective that additional drivers may come to the surge region with diﬀerent costs by traveling
diﬀerent distances. We ﬁnd that given the same total amount of drivers in a disc with the surge spot
in the center, a more clustered distribution of drivers generally leads to larger matching volumes
and higher platform proﬁts than a uniform driver distribution. Second, we show that if the platform
fails to account for riders’ and drivers’ diﬀerent response timescales and strategic behavior and
instead sets prices myopically to match demand and supply, all parties may be worse oﬀ, which
speaks to the importance of the temporal perspective in ride-hailing pricing. Finally, we show that
our key insights remain valid when not all riders are strategic and when there are incoming riders
in Period 2 to conﬁrm the robustness of these insights.

5
In the rest of this paper, we survey the related literature in Section 2 and introduce our model
in Section 3. The main analysis is conducted in Section 4. We then analyze four model extensions
in Section 5 before concluding the paper in Section 6. The Appendix contains additional technical
results. All proofs are relegated to the Online Appendix.
2.
Literature Review
As sharing economies become more prevalent and prominent, a growing body of literature has pro-
vide insights into various aspects of two-sided market platforms. Examples of issues investigated
include how platforms inﬂuence potential customers’ purchase decisions (Jiang and Tian 2016,
Benjaafar et al. 2018, Feng et al. 2020, Chen et al. 2019), how platforms manage self-scheduling
service providers (Gurvich et al. 2019) and incentivize them (Sun et al. 2019), how platform oper-
ations are aﬀected by online reviews (Yang and Zhang 2018) and information provision (Chu et al.
2018), how ride-hailing platforms route drivers (Su 2018) and compete/cooperate with each other
(Cohen and Zhang 2019), and how supply and demand are matched on platforms (Allon et al.
2012, Hu and Zhou 2019a, ¨Ozkan and Ward 2020). Narasimhan et al. (2018) provide a review
of the sharing economy literature from the marketing perspective, and Hu (2018) considers the
operations perspective.
Our paper ﬁts in the literature examining pricing strategies on ride-hailing platforms, especially
the surge-pricing strategy (see Banerjee and Johari 2018 for a framework of modeling, optimizing,
and reasoning about ride-hailing platforms). In the domain of empirical and experimental studies,
Chen (2016) empirically ﬁnds that Uber drivers adjust their schedule to work more during surge
times. Cohen et al. (2018) use ﬁeld experiments to investigate how diﬀerent subsidy schemes aﬀect
the engagement of riders who experienced a frustration of long waiting or travel times. Jiang et al.
(2020) conduct lab experiments to study drivers’ relocation decisions with ﬁnancial incentives such
as surge pricing and subsidy. The authors observe that ﬁnancial incentives must be combined with
demand information sharing to be the most eﬀective in incentivizing drivers to relocate to a demand
surge region.
In the sphere of analytical works on pricing decisions for ride-hailing markets, there are at least
three research streams. The ﬁrst stream includes stationary single-location models that capture
the ﬁrst-order eﬀects of ride-hailing markets. The platform, as an intermediary, optimizes the price
oﬀered to riders and the wage paid to drivers. Unlike a traditional supply chain, the platform
indirectly manages independent self-scheduling contractors through wages. Taylor (2018) studies
an on-demand service platform and shows that uncertainty in delay-sensitive customers’ valuations

6
or the agents’ opportunity costs can lead to counterintuitive insights—delay sensitivity can increase
the optimal price or lower the optimal wage. Complementing Taylor’s work, Bai et al. (2019) focus
on the impact of the demand rate, sensitivity to waiting time, service rate, and the size of available
providers on the optimal price, wage, and payout ratio. The authors show that the optimal price,
wage, and payout ratio increase in the potential customer demand rate. These two papers use a
queueing model that takes into account the interaction of drivers and delay-sensitive riders. More
recently, Benjaafar et al. (2020) and Nikzad (2019) focus on labor welfare in on-demand service
platforms with two-sided pricing decisions by showing that in equilibrium, labor supply may have
a nonmonotonic eﬀect on labor welfare. In all these papers, pricing decisions such as price and
wage are determined and committed to for a relatively long term.
Among this stream of single-location models with stationary system parameters but demand
uncertainty, there is a set of papers focusing on the debate of whether the platform should adopt
short-run surge pricing (i.e., dynamic pricing based on realized demand) or static pricing. Cachon
et al. (2017) show that drivers and riders are generally better oﬀwith diﬀerent prices contingent on
varying supply and demand conditions. Banerjee et al. (2016) adopt a queueing approach to show,
on one hand, static pricing can be nearly optimal when the market is thick with large volumes
of supply and demand. Chen and Hu (2020) further conﬁrm the asymptotic optimality of static
pricing in a thick market, even when buyers and sellers exhibit forward-looking behavior. On the
other hand, Banerjee et al. (2016) show that dynamic pricing is much more robust than static
pricing to variations or information in system parameters. When the time a driver takes to pick
up a rider is considered (which is ignored in most models), Castillo et al. (2018) show that there
could be multiple equilibria for a given price, and surge pricing can help the system adjust itself,
based on market conditions, to avoid the less eﬃcient wild-goose-chase equilibrium. Hu and Zhou
(2019b) show that in a market with demand and supply uncertainty, a ﬁxed payout ratio can be
optimal or near optimal for the platform, though the price and wage would change depending on
the market conditions.
The second stream of developing literature on the ride-hailing market involves static models
with spatial considerations. Bimpikis et al. (2019) explore the equilibrium spatial price distribution
when allowing drivers to decide whether to work and where to position themselves in a network
of interconnected locations. Under the assumption that potential supply is inﬁnite, their ﬁndings
highlight the impact of the demand balancedness across locations on the platform’s prices, proﬁts
and consumer surpluses. Af`eche et al. (2018a) consider a queueing network model and focus on
the performance impact of operational controls, demand-side admission control and supply-side

7
repositioning from the perspectives of the platform, drivers and riders. They show under what
conditions it is optimal to strategically reject demand at a low-demand location to induce drivers to
reposition themselves to a high-demand location. Besbes et al. (2020) consider a linear city where
the drivers can reposition themselves. The platform sets location-speciﬁc prices along the linear
city, and then riders’ requests along the city are realized. The drivers then relocate themselves with
zero travel time in a simultaneous-move game based on prices, demands and driving costs.
In all the aforementioned papers, either drivers and riders make decisions within the same
timescale (see, e.g., Cachon et al. 2017, Hu and Zhou 2019b) or drivers decide on whether to join
the platform in the long run based on the expected payoﬀs over a set of short-run demand scenarios
with prices for riders committed or determined contingently (see, e.g., Banerjee et al. 2016). By
contrast, we are among the ﬁrst to focus on the unique temporal characteristics of the ride-hailing
market and consider riders’ and drivers’ diﬀerent decision-making timescales and resulting strategic
reactions to short-run contingent surge pricing.
Our paper and two other closely related papers belong to a third research stream that considers
nonstationary models. Guda and Subramanian (2019) show that surge pricing can be used strate-
gically to move drivers from a price-surge area into a neighboring area where higher demand is
predicted, which is the exact opposite to what is commonly perceived as the eﬀect of surge pricing.
Similar to our model, they also consider consecutive periods and strategic driver behavior. The
most important distinction is that they consider predictable demand surges in the future and show
how surge pricing can be used in a counterintuitive way to manage anticipated demand surges. By
contrast, we consider unpredictable demand surges and study optimal/equilibrium pricing strate-
gies after the surges have already occurred. Their main ﬁnding is that surge pricing can be used in
a region with excess supply to throttle demand and force drivers to move to another region with
less supply. By contrast, in our paper, we show that surge pricing can be used in a region with
insuﬃcient supply to attract drivers from neighboring regions.
Af`eche et al. (2018b) consider the transient behavior of a ride-hailing network after an unex-
pected demand shock of uncertain duration occurs at a hotspot location. Drivers are geographically
dispersed and forward-looking in deciding whether to reposition toward the hotspot, given their
location-dependent repositioning delay and payoﬀrisk. Their paper compares the performance of
various dynamic platform policies for setting rider prices and driver wages, considering the inter-
play of three timescales, rider patience, demand shock duration, and drivers’ repositioning delays.
Whereas we focus on the interplay of forward-looking riders and strategic drivers in one location,

8
Af`eche et al. (2018b) focus on geographically dispersed myopic riders and strategic drivers. There-
fore, their model of surge pricing lacks the intertemporal demand response to surge pricing, which
is a pivotal element in our model.
One critical diﬀerence between our paper and the above two papers is that we model forward-
looking riders and investigate the interplay of strategic riders and drivers. Speciﬁcally, we focus
on the intertemporal eﬀects of surge pricing; that is, pricing in one period can aﬀect the supply
of drivers as well as the demand of riders in the next period. The adopted two-period model is
commonly seen in the literature of strategic (forward-looking) customer behavior; see, e.g., Shen
and Su (2007), Cachon and Swinney (2009), Cachon and Feldman (2015), Papanastasiou and Savva
(2016). In summary, our paper complements the growing literature on ride-hailing markets by
taking a temporal perspective and makes the unique contribution of capturing riders’ and drivers’
two-sided strategic responses to surge pricing on diﬀerent timescales.
3.
Model
We adopt a two-period model to capture riders’ and drivers’ diﬀerent response timescales to surge
pricing and the resulting strategic behavior, with each period representing roughly 5-10 minutes
of real time. At the beginning of Period 1, a total volume of 1 (continuous, normalized) drivers
are available in a small region and a total volume of r > 1 (continuous) riders appear in the same
region, constituting a demand surge. Hence, we model unpredictable demand surges for which
surge pricing is implemented reactively. The riders’ incremental valuations of getting rides from the
platform, net of their next best options (taking a bus, asking a friend for a ride, forgoing the trip,
etc.), are assumed to be distributed uniformly between 0 and 1. Each unit of riders requires one
unit of drivers to provide service. For simplicity, we assume that the destinations are outside of the
demand-surge region; thus, once matched, both rider and driver leave the region permanently. For
tractability and following conventions of the strategic behavior literature, we assume all information
to be public. Although this is clearly a simpliﬁcation of reality, throughout the paper, we will show
that in some cases, the full-information assumption is a reasonable approximation, and in other
cases, it has meaningful managerial implications.
In Period 1, the platform sets price p1 for the period. Given the price p1, some riders will request
rides in this period, some may strategically wait out Period 1 and request rides only in Period 2,
and the rest will never request rides. The riders requesting rides in Period 1 and currently available
drivers are randomly matched. (Random matching is a direct consequence of the fact that the
platform does not know each individual rider’s exact valuation.) Based on prevalent ride-hailing

9
pricing practices, we assume that out of each matched rider’s paid price p1, γp1 goes to the driver
and (1−γ)p1 goes to the platform, where γ ∈(0,1) is an exogenous pay-out rate. We do not model
drivers strategically turning down matched riders because ride-hailing platforms generally strongly
discourage drivers from rejecting matched rides. For example, Uber drivers who reject requests risk
being locked out of the system for up to 15 minutes (CNN 2016); hence, it is extremely unlikely
for drivers to strategically decline matched rides.
If riders who request rides outnumber currently available drivers, each rider, regardless of their
valuation, has the same likelihood of not getting a ride. This mechanism is the so-called “propor-
tional rationing” (see, e.g., Tirole 1988, pp. 213-214). If drivers outnumber riders, all riders will
receive rides, and excess drivers will remain in the surge region for the next period. We denote
by ρr
i, i = 1,2 the likelihood that a rider in Period i will be matched with a driver in the current
period. On the other hand, drivers currently not in the region, or in the region but unavailable to
provide service in Period 1, can decide to chase the surge and make themselves available at cost c,
with a key assumption that they will only become available in Period 2. This assumption captures
drivers’ relatively slower responses to surge pricing. We denote by d the volume of incoming drivers
in Period 2 and by ρd
2 the resulting likelihood that a driver in Period 2 will be matched with a rider.
(The drivers’ likelihood of being matched in Period 1 is easy to express with other parameters;
thus, we do not dedicate a symbol to it.) We focus the base model on the temporal perspective and
ignore the spatial perspective by assuming a ﬁxed c for all drivers. In Section 5.1, we incorporate
spatial elements into the model by allowing c to depend on the distance a driver must travel to
the surge region, which in turn, depends on the driver distribution around the surge region.
In Period 2, new drivers who decided in Period 1 to react to the initial price p1 arrive in the
surge region to join any remaining drivers, and the platform sets the second-period price p2. The
remaining riders from Period 1 then decide whether to request rides, and those who do are again
randomly matched with available drivers. (In the base model, we assume that no new riders other
than those who arrived in Period 1 but decided to wait out the surge appear in Period 2. This
assumption is relaxed in Section 5.4.) Riders’ valuations of getting rides in Period 2 are discounted
by a factor of α ∈(0,1) to capture the disutility of waiting. However, riders, drivers and the platform
do not discount payments made in Period 2 because 5-10 minutes is too short to generate any
meaningful ﬁnancial discounting. Riders failing to receive rides in Period 2 take their next best
options and gain zero utility.
All decision makers are assumed to be risk-neutral expected-proﬁt/utility maximizers. Consistent
with the strategic behavior literature, we adopt the concept of rational-expectation equilibria; that

10
is, we assume a Period-1 outcome, solve for the subsequent Period-2 outcome, and in turn require
the assumed Period-1 outcome to be optimal given the subsequent Period-2 outcome. The exact
deﬁnition is as follows.
Definition 1 (Rational-expectations equilibria). A subgame perfect Nash equilibrium
with rational expectations (p∗
1,p∗
2,d,ρr
1,ρr
2,ρd
2) to the game among the ﬁrm, riders and drivers
satisﬁes:
1. The ﬁrm in Period 1 sets the price p∗
1 to maximize the expected total proﬁts over two peri-
ods subject to its belief about the number of new drivers arriving at Period 2, ˆd. That is, p∗
1 =
arg maxp1[min{(1 −v)r,1}p1 + π∗
2(v, ˆd)], where v is the valuation of those customers who would be
indiﬀerent between making a request in Period 1 or not, π∗
2(v, ˆd) is the optimal proﬁt of Period 2,
see Equation (2), and p∗
2 is the optimal price of Period 2 that achieves the optimal proﬁt.
2. Riders in Period 1 make their request decision given the observed price p∗
1 and subject to their
beliefs about the price of Period 2, ˜p2, and their matching probabilities in Periods 1 and 2, ˜ρr
1 and
˜ρr
2. Speciﬁcally, a rider with valuation v will make a request if ˜ρr
1(v −p∗
1) + (1 −˜ρr
1)˜ρr
2(αv −˜p2) ≥
˜ρr
2(αv −˜p2) in the scenario αv ≥˜p2 or v ≥p∗
1 in the scenario αv ≤˜p2.
3. Drivers who may be available in Period 2 make their joining decisions subject to their beliefs
about the price of Period 2, ˘p2, and their matching probability in Period 2, ˘ρd
2. Speciﬁcally, they
make themselves available in the surge region if γ˘p2˘ρd
2 ≥c.
4. Beliefs are consistent with equilibrium outcomes, i.e., ˜p2 = ˘p2 = p∗
2, ˆd = d, ˜ρr
1 = ρr
1, ˜ρr
2 = ρr
2, and
˘ρd
2 = ρd
2.
4.
Surge-Pricing Equilibria
To solve the model, we ﬁrst take the riders’ perspective. In an equilibrium, riders form rational
expectations about ρr
1 and ρr
2—matching probabilities in Periods 1 and 2 for all riders requesting
rides (ρr
i = 1 if available drivers outnumber riders requesting rides in Period i, i = 1,2, otherwise
ρr
i < 1)—and about p2 in Period 2. Given the expectations, the following lemma characterizes
riders’ requesting decisions based on their valuations and is illustrated in Figure 1. Recall that α
is the valuation discount factor for riders taking rides in Period 2.
Lemma 1. Suppose the platform sets prices p1 and p2 in Periods 1 and 2, respectively, and
riders form rational expectations ρr
1 and ρr
2 about their matching probabilities in Periods 1 and 2,
respectively.
(a) Suppose p1 ≥p2/α. Riders with high valuations v ≥v .= (p1 −ρr
2p2)/(1 −αρr
2) request rides
in Period 1 and, if not matched, wait and continue to request rides in Period 2. Riders with

11
0
1
𝑝2
𝛼
𝑝1 −𝜌2
𝑟𝑝2
1 −𝛼𝜌2
𝑟
𝑣
Request in 
Period 1, if not 
matched, 
request in 
Period 2
Wait out Period 
1 and only 
request in 
Period 2
Do not request in 
either period
(a) p1 ≥p2/α
0
1
𝑝2
𝛼
𝑝1
𝑣
Request in 
Period 1, if not 
matched, leave 
flatform
Do not 
request in 
either period
Request in Period 1, if 
not matched, request 
in Period 2
(b) p1 < p2/α
Figure 1
Riders’ requesting decisions based on their valuations
medium valuations v ∈[p2/α,v) wait through Period 1 and only request rides in Period 2. The
remaining low-valuation riders never request rides and leave the platform immediately.
(b) Suppose p1 < p2/α. Riders with high valuations v ≥v .= p1 request rides in Period 1. Of riders
requesting rides but not matched in Period 1, those with valuations v ≥p2/α remain on the
platform and continue to request rides in Period 2, while those with valuations v ∈[v,p2/α)
leave the platform and do not request rides in Period 2. Riders with low valuations v < v never
request rides and leave the platform immediately.
Based on the above lemma, we next consider the platform’s pricing strategies and identify equi-
libria of the model. A simple case is when incoming drivers’ cost c is suﬃciently high. In this case,
the platform sets a “greedy” optimal price in Period 1 disregarding Period 2, and any remaining
riders and drivers leave the platform after Period 1. The following proposition describes this case.
All proofs are relegated to the Online Appendix.
Proposition 1 (Greedy Surge Pricing (GSP)). In the equilibrium characterized in Table 1 in
the Appendix, riders and drivers not matched in Period 1 leave the platform, matching does not
occur in Period 2, and the platform sets the optimal price myopically for Period 1.
The Greedy Surge Pricing equilibrium is intuitive: when drivers’ outside opportunities are suﬃ-
ciently appealing (i.e., c is suﬃciently high), the platform will give up attracting drivers in Period
2 and focus on maximizing the proﬁt in Period 1 only. Such an equilibrium captures the scenarios
of extreme and large-scale demand surges, where attracting new drivers is infeasible, although this
scenario is neither highly representative nor very interesting.
Next, we consider cases where c is not excessively high and matching may occur in Period 2.
Recall from Lemma 1 that only riders with valuations above a threshold v request rides in Period
1. Therefore, two types of riders may request rides in Period 2: those with valuations above v who
requested but did not get rides in Period 1 and those with valuations below v who did not request

12
rides in Period 1. The latter type exists only when the second-period price is suﬃciently attractive.
Recall that ρr
1 is the riders’ matching probability in Period 1. Given the second-period price p2,
the total volume of riders requesting rides in Period 2 is given by
q(p2) .=



(1 −p2
α )(1 −ρr
1)r,
if p2 ≥αv,
(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1)r + (v −p2
α )r,
if p2 ≤αv.
(1)
We denote the volume of remaining drivers at the end of Period 1 by y .= [1 −(1 −v)r]+ and the
volume of drivers arriving in the surge region in Period 2 by d. Given v, y and d, the platform sets
the optimal Period-2 price to maximize the second-period proﬁt, i.e.,
π∗
2
.= max
p2 [(1 −γ)min{q(p2),y + d}p2].
(2)
As previously mentioned, p∗
2 denotes the optimal solution to (2). The resulting riders’ and drivers’
matching probabilities in Period 2, respectively, denoted by ρr
2 and ρd
2, are given by
ρr
2 = min
y + d
q(p∗
2),1

,
ρd
2 = min
q(p∗
2)
y + d,1

.
The following lemmas characterize the equilibrium in Period 2.
Lemma 2. Assume c is suﬃciently low such that there is matching in Period 2. (i) q(p2) is
decreasing in p2; (ii) ρr
2 = 1 in any equilibrium.
Lemma 2(i) is intuitive. Lemma 2(ii) states that in any equilibrium, when there is matching in
Period 2, since everything can be correctly anticipated, additional drivers will arrive such that all
those riders who want to make a request in Period 2 can be served.
Lemma 3. The conditions and equilibrium outcomes in Period 2 are provided in Table 2 in the
Appendix.
Based on Period 2’s equilibrium outcomes, we characterize two types of equilibrium in the next
two propositions, in addition to GSP, which is presented in Proposition 1.
Proposition 2 (Skimming Surge Pricing (SSP)). In the equilibrium characterized in Table 3
in the Appendix, matching occurs in both periods, and the platform’s prices are such that p∗
1 >
p∗
2/α(> p∗
2), namely, a high price followed by a (waiting-adjusted) low price.
The Skimming Surge Pricing (SSP) equilibrium is named for its resemblance to the price skim-
ming strategy in marketing, where the price of a product or a service is initially set high and
lowered over time to maximize revenue. The SSP equilibrium is consistent with ride-hailing plat-
forms’ current surge pricing practices, which often exhibit a short-lived sharp price surge followed

13
by lower prices. The fundamental logic of the SSP equilibrium is that the platform sets a high
price in Period 1 and lowers it in Period 2 so that a group of relatively high-value riders are will-
ing to forgo immediately requesting rides and wait until Period 2 in anticipation of the arrival of
additional drivers. The presence of these riders in Period 2 in turn attracts drivers to come to the
surge region in Period 2, thus completing the circle and forming a rational expectations equilib-
rium. Since this equilibrium is simply meant to attract incoming drivers, it occurs when incoming
drivers’ opportunity costs c is small.
The SSP equilibrium matches very well the observation that ride-hailing platforms frequently
set short-lived sharp surge prices followed by lower prices. This surge-pricing practice often draws
public outcry that the platform gouges riders during demand surges. The classic economic explana-
tion argues that due to the mismatch in demand and supply, the platform should charge a higher
price to direct the limited supply to those who are willing to pay more, resulting in more eﬃcient
resource allocation (measured in terms of total social welfare). By contrast, we identify a more
nuanced mechanism of surge pricing and show that the platform may want to set an initial surge
price much higher than what is justiﬁed to make supply meet demand. The initial sharp surge
price causes many high-value riders to voluntarily wait out the initial surge period, which serves
to attract additional drivers to come to the region despite their slow responses. In addition, recall
that we adopt a full-information model and assume that drivers are aware of the demand surge.
In practice, drivers do not directly observe the demand surge. However, the sharp surge price
sends a strong signal about the surge region having many riders awaiting drivers. Therefore, even
though the SSP equilibrium is derived from a full-information model, it still helps us understand
the platform’s pricing strategies and the riders’ and drivers’ responses in practice.
To summarize, despite the controversies surrounding sharp surge prices, our analysis justiﬁes
such practices by revealing the nuanced mechanism pertaining to temporal structures of surge
pricing and strategic behavior of riders and drivers. We recommend that platforms more explicitly
explain the nuance behind surge pricing to ease public concerns over sharp surge prices. To their
credit, platforms are already doing so to some extent; for example, Uber advises riders to “wait a
few minutes to see if the rates go back down to normal” (Uber 2018). Such arguments may be much
more convincing if supported by an in-depth explanation of the mechanism, as revealed earlier.
Interestingly, our analysis also uncovers another surge pricing strategy that attracts drivers
through a completely diﬀerent mechanism.
Proposition 3 (Penetration Surge Pricing (PSP)). In the equilibrium characterized in Table 4
in the Appendix, matching occurs in both periods, and the platform’s prices are such that p∗
1 < p∗
2/α,
namely, a low price followed by a high (waiting-adjusted) price.

14
The Penetration Surge Pricing (PSP) equilibrium is named for its resemblance to the penetration
pricing strategy in marketing, where the price of a product or a service is initially set low to
quickly grow its market share and later increased to a normal level. A PSP equilibrium presents a
drastically diﬀerent approach to surge pricing with a moderate and delayed price increase. Notably,
the initial Period-1 price is below the minimum price to attract drivers, c/γ (which turns out
to be the Period-2 price in PSP); in other words, the platform strategically deﬂates the Period-1
price despite the driver shortage. This observation is in stark contrast with the SSP equilibrium,
where the platform strategically inﬂates the Period-1 price beyond the level that micro-matches
supply and demand. The fundamental logic of the PSP equilibrium is that the platform sets a
low price in Period 1 to entice many riders into requesting rides. This leads to random matching
and, consequently, many high-value (alongside low-value) riders are forced to wait out the initial
surge period; they do not leave the platform in anticipation of additional drivers arriving soon. The
presence of these riders in Period 2 in turn attracts drivers to come to the surge region in Period 2,
thus completing the circle and forming a rational expectations equilibrium. Unlike the SSP policy,
the PSP policy maximizes Period-1 rider-driver matching and is more eﬃcient. The downside is
that there may not be suﬃcient riders left to attract drivers in Period 2. Therefore, the policy is
most suitable for heavy demand surges with high values of r.
Notably, the PSP equilibrium may coexist with the GSP or SSP equilibria in certain parameter
regions, providing an opportunity to compare these diﬀerent approaches to surge pricing. We use
the superscript to indicate the equilibrium type.
Proposition 4 (PSP versus GSP/SSP). In parameter regions where PSP equilibrium coexists
with GSP or SSP equilibria:
(i) The platform proﬁt is always higher under PSP than GSP and can be higher than SSP:
πPSP ≥πGSP and πPSP can be higher than πSSP;
(ii) The matching volume is always higher under PSP than GSP or SSP: V PSP ≥V GSP or V SSP;
(iii) The Period-2 price is always lower under PSP than SSP (which implies the same for the
Period-1 price): (pPSP
1
<)pPSP
2
≤pSSP
2
(< pSSP
1
); the Period-1 price is always lower under PSP
than GSP: pPSP
1
≤pGSP
1
;
(iv) The price gap between the two periods is always lower under PSP than SSP: 0 ≤pPSP
2
−pPSP
1
≤
pSSP
1
−pSSP
2
.
Proposition 4 shows that PSP is superior in several ways to GSP or SSP whenever these equilibria
coexist. Parts (i) and (ii) state that PSP policies are preferable in terms of matching volumes and,

15
hence, social eﬃciency, and can often be superior in terms of platform proﬁtability (see Figure
7 in the Appendix for numerical comparison of GSP, SSP and PSP). Note that while we model
a proﬁt-maximizing platform, in practice, a platform may also consider other objectives, such as
user experience and the platform’s growth. The matching volume is a useful performance metric
related to such nonproﬁt objectives, and it is notable that PSP policies outperform GSP or SSP
policies in terms of the matching volume.
Although both PSP and SSP operate on the fundamental principle of keeping high-value riders
around to attract drivers to the current region, PSP does so with lower prices, which increases the
matching volume and often boosts the platform proﬁt as well. Part (iii) states that PSP policies
lead to lower prices across both periods than SSP. In the meantime, PSP policies incorporate
gradual price increases in lieu of the short-lived sharp price surges under SSP, which have caused
controversies. Part (iv) complements part (iii) and shows that not only do prices under PSP move
in the opposite direction of those under SSP but the price variability is also lower under PSP
than SSP. These advantages speak volumes to the potential advantages of adopting PSP to replace
the current SSP policies. However, unlike under the SSP policy, where some riders in Period 1
voluntarily choose to wait for the price to go down, under the PSP policy, riders not matched in
Period 1 are forced to wait while the price goes up. Psychologically speaking, the same amount of
wait under PSP may feel longer for riders than that under SSP. While we make such an informal
observation, we do not model this aspect and leave it to future potential behavioral studies.
Despite the theoretical advantages, PSP is not commonly observed in practice. We believe that
a key factor may be the information structure. Recall that we adopt a full-information model,
which assumes drivers are aware of the demand surge, even without a sharp price surge. Currently,
drivers on most ride-hailing platforms have no access to such information. This discrepancy may
explain why the PSP equilibrium is not common. It however does not mean that our discovery has
no practical value. On the contrary, our ﬁndings suggest that the theoretical advantages of PSP
policies may be unleashed if platforms inform drivers of demand-supply information. One approach
is to display a real-time map of request-to-driver ratios. Incidentally, the Land Transport Authority
of Singapore implements such a system called the Driver Guidance System for local GrabTaxi
drivers to highlight regions of adjacent demand surges on a map (DGS 2018). An alternative
approach is to commit to future (i.e., Period-2 in our model) price surges. For example, if a
platform commits to a driver that in 15 minutes the price in an adjacent region will surge to
a certain level for at least 10 minutes (while keeping the current price at a normal level), it is
a clear signal that the platform is experiencing a demand surge in that region and intends to

16
adopt a PSP policy. Therefore, our ﬁndings from the full-information model provide meaningful
managerial implications. At a high level, informing drivers of demand-supply information would
mark a departure from the prevalent ride-hailing practice of managing demand and supply with
the sole lever of pricing. Incidentally, practitioners have also argued that ride-hailing platforms
should utilize additional tools to manage demand surges rather than depending solely on pricing
(Economist 2016). Adopting such strategies requires fundamental changes to current practices and
will inevitably meet hurdles. Our theoretically predicted improvements in eﬃciency and mitigation
of controversies surrounding sharp price surges may provide a justiﬁcation for overcoming these
hurdles.
Suppose the platform informs drivers of demand-supply information and, thus, the PSP equilib-
rium exists. In cases of multiple equilibria of diﬀerent types, we assume that the platform selects
the one that maximizes its expected proﬁt. The resulting equilibrium regions are illustrated in
Figure 2. To understand the intuitions behind the regions, note that when incoming drivers’ costs
are suﬃciently high, the platform cannot attract drivers to the surge region and has to resort to
GSP. With moderate incoming drivers’ costs, the platform can attract drivers to the surge region
using two drastically diﬀerent approaches. SSP uses a short-lived sharp price surge to strategically
keep high-value riders waiting to attract drivers, which is a targeted approach and works with any
level of demand surge; however, due to the high initial price, it is less eﬃcient and the ineﬃciency
rises with incoming drivers’ costs. Therefore, SSP is suitable for relatively low incoming drivers’
costs. By comparison, PSP uses a low initial price to keep riders waiting to attract drivers, which
is more eﬃcient, especially with high incoming drivers’ costs, but works only for heavy demand
surges.
Figure 2
GSP, SSP, and PSP equilibrium regions (α = 0.8)

17
Next, we consider the impact of α, which measures the riders’ patience. Intuitively, when riders
are more patient, they are more likely to wait until Period 2; therefore, the GSP region should
shrink. Furthermore, we know that the PSP policy is more suitable for heavier demand surges,
and we may expect that for larger values of r, the PSP region grows and that for smaller values
of r, the SSP region grows, when riders are more patient. These intuitions are conﬁrmed in the
following proposition and illustrated in Figure 3.
Proposition 5. As α increases, the GSP region deﬁned for Figure 2 shrinks. Furthermore, for
r ≤2/√α, the SSP region grows; otherwise, the PSP region grows.
(a) α=0.5
(b) α=0.7
(c) α=0.9
Figure 3
Equilibrium regions under various α
To summarize, we fully characterize the equilibria of the game and identify three types of equi-
librium. The SSP equilibrium matches the observed practices of platforms setting sharp and short-
lived surge prices and reveals a nuanced mechanism behind such practices. The PSP equilibrium,
characterized by gradual and moderate price increases, is superior to the SSP equilibrium in eﬃ-
ciency when they co-exist but requires platforms to share demand-supply information with drivers.
The GSP is a less interesting extreme case that completes the analysis.
5.
Extensions
5.1.
Temporal-Spatial Model
Our base model focuses on the temporal dimension, while spatial aspects of surge pricing are
ignored for clean insights. The lack of spatial consideration is captured by the assumption that all
incoming drivers incur the same cost c. In this extension, we consider that additional drivers are
distributed around the surge region; as such, when more drivers come to the surge region, they
need to travel longer distances at higher costs.

18
Speciﬁcally, we assume that by attracting a total of d drivers in Period 2, the cost of the marginal
(last increment of) incoming driver is c0 +c1f(d). The term c0 represents ﬁxed costs, such as getting
oﬀthe couch. The term c1 represents per-travel-distance costs, such as the fuel cost. The increasing
function f(d) represents the marginal incoming driver’s travel distance as a function of d and is
determined by the driver distribution around the surge region. Our general observation is that the
same types of equilibria still exist. Therefore, the structural insights derived from our base model
continue to hold when accounting for spatial aspects of surge pricing.
Proposition 6. When incoming drivers’ costs are in the form of c0 + c1f(d), the equilibrium
can only be in the form of the GSP, SSP and PSP equilibrium. In particular, for f(d) = d, all
equilibria are fully characterized in Tables 5-7 in the Appendix.
We next investigate the quantitative impacts of diﬀerent driver distributions. In particular, we
consider two speciﬁc scenarios with equal total numbers of drivers in the same region with the
surge point in the center. In the ﬁrst scenario, we suppose drivers are uniformly distributed around
the point of a demand surge at unit density; the uniformly distributed drivers are representative
of large metropolitan areas. It would be reasonable to assume that surge pricing always attracts
drivers from a disc of a particular radius l. It thus follows that d = πl2 ⇒l =
p
d/π. Therefore, the
cost of the marginal incoming driver is c0 + c1
p
d/π. We assume that there are a total of ¯d drivers
distributed in a disc of a radius ¯l =
p ¯d/π with the surge point in the center.
In the second scenario, we suppose the driver distribution to be denser closer to the surge region,
which is typical for smaller towns. In particular, we assume that the driver density at distance
l from the demand surge point is ¯l/(2l). The scale factor ¯l/2 is chosen such that a total of ¯d
drivers are located within a radius of ¯l, identical to the ﬁrst scenario. One can derive that when
attracting d drivers, the marginal driver travels d/
√
π ¯d, and the cost of the marginal incoming
driver is c0 + c1d/
√
π ¯d, which increases faster in d than that in the ﬁrst scenario.
Figure 4 compares the platform proﬁt π, matching volume V , and both periods’ prices p∗
1 and p∗
2
against varying per-travel-distance cost c1 for the aforementioned uniform and concentrated driver
distribution scenarios. It can be observed that the clustered driver distribution generally yields
lower equilibrium prices (except at jumps between equilibria) and higher platform proﬁts π and
matching volumes V than the uniform driver distribution. This observation is intuitive given that
it is easier to attract drivers when they are concentrated around the surge area, improving system
eﬃciency and platform proﬁtability.

19
0
1
2
3
4
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
V
c1
 
 
Uniform
Clustered
(a) Mathcing volume
0
1
2
3
4
0.15
0.16
0.17
0.18
0.19
0.2
π
c1
 
 
Uniform
Clustered
(b) Platform proﬁt
0
1
2
3
4
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
p∗
1
c1
 
 
Uniform
Clustered
(c) Period-1 price
0
1
2
3
4
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
p∗
2
c1
 
 
Uniform
Clustered
(d) Period-2 price
Figure 4
Equilibrium outcomes under diﬀerent incoming drivers’ costs (¯l = 4, α = 0.8, γ = 0.8 c0 = 0.35, ¯d = 2)
5.2.
Myopic Surge Pricing
Thus far, we have assumed that the platform is aware of and accounts for drivers’ and riders’
strategic behavior in setting surge prices. What would be the impact if the platform neglects such
strategic behavior? In this extension, we consider a myopic platform that sets prices to maximize
its proﬁt in each period assuming all riders with values above the prices will request rides, whereas
the riders and drivers actually still behave strategically (i.e., anticipating future outcomes and
making current decisions accordingly). We refer to such a policy as Myopic Surge Pricing (MSP).
The following proposition presents the MSP policy.
Proposition 7 (Myopic Surge Pricing (MSP)). The MSP policy is fully characterized in Table
8 in the Appendix. Under such a policy, matching can occur only in Period 1, only in Period 2, or in
both periods. When the matching occurs in Period 2, the platform’s prices are such that p1 > p2/α,
namely, a high price followed by a low (waiting-adjusted) price.

20
(a) Matching volume
(b) Platform proﬁt
(c) Rider surplus
(d) Driver surplus
(e) Social welfare
Figure 5
Diﬀerences between strategic and myopic policies (strategic – myopic; α = 0.8 and γ = 0.72)
Given that the platform neglects riders’ and drivers’ strategic behavior, the pricing may be
unbalanced, leading to no matching in either period. One may expect that in all important metrics,
MSP policy should be mostly worse than the strategic equilibria in Section 4, where the platform
accounts for drivers’ and riders’ strategic behavior. Analytically, we can only partially characterize
the comparison due to the complexity (see Proposition 11 in the Appendix), and we focus on
numerically comparing strategic and myopic policies in Figure 5. The myopic policies are indeed
largely outperformed or at least matched by strategic equilibria in terms of the platform proﬁt,
matching volume, and driver/rider surplus. These ﬁndings point to potentially dire consequences
of a platform’s myopic pricing aimed at micro-matching currently available riders and drivers.
Therefore, it is important for ride-hailing platforms to recognize and account for riders’ and drivers’
diﬀerent response timescales and corresponding strategic behavior when setting prices.
5.3.
Mixed Strategic and Myopic Riders
While the base model assumes that all riders are strategic for simplicity, in reality, only a proportion
of consumers may be strategic (Li et al. 2014). In fact, mixed strategic and myopic customers

21
may even be an endogenized outcome (Aﬂaki et al. 2020). In this extension, we assume only a θ
proportion of riders are strategic. The remaining 1 −θ proportion of myopic riders always request
rides in Period 1 as long as the price is below their valuation and leave if they are not matched.
Proposition 8. When a θ proportion of all r riders are strategic and the remaining 1 −θ
proportion are myopic, the GSP equilibria remain the same as in Table 1, and the SSP and PSP
equilibria are fully characterized in Table 9 in the Appendix. In addition, Proposition 4 continues
to hold.
Proposition 8 shows that PSP policies are still superior to SSP and GSP policies, even in the
presence of myopic riders. The next proposition introduces how mixed strategic and myopic riders
impact the equilibrium structure.
Proposition 9. As more riders are strategic (i.e., θ increases), the PSP region grows and
the SSP and GSP regions (including that overlapped with PSP) remain unchanged, as with all
strategic customers. In addition, as θ increases, p∗
1 under the PSP equilibrium decreases, p∗
2 remains
unchanged, and V PSP and πPSP increase.
When more riders are strategic, there are generally more available riders in Period 2 because
strategic riders may wait out Period 1. Therefore, the PSP policy is more likely to arise to capitalize
on Period-2 riders and lead to higher matching volume and proﬁt for the platform. For the same
reason, as shown in Proposition 9, with more strategic riders, the platform sets a lower price in
Period 1 to force more riders into Period 2 and improve its proﬁt. Notably, when θ = 1, the model
is reduced to the base model without myopic riders. When θ = 0, i.e., all riders are myopic, no
matching occurs in Period 2; thus, only GSP equilibria can arise.
Finally, we note that while Section 5.2 addresses the impact of a myopic platform and Section
5.3 addresses the impact of myopic riders, we have not addressed the impact of myopic drivers. In
fact, when some drivers are myopic, the impact is similar to all drivers being strategic but having
a higher cost c to come to the surge region (because in both cases, fewer drivers in the neighboring
region respond to the anticipated price in Period 2). Therefore, the impact of myopic drivers would
be similar to having an increased cost c, which has been thoroughly studied in Section 4.
5.4.
Incoming Riders in Period 2
Our base model assumes that all riders arrive in Period 1, and no riders arrive in Period 2. In this
extension, we assume an additional rn riders with the same valuation distribution U[0,1] arrive
at the beginning of Period 2. Note that with the incoming riders in Period 2, the GSP policy,

22
under which matching occurs only in Period 1, becomes irrelevant. With a given rn, Equation (1)
becomes
q(p2) .=



(1 −p2
α )(1 −ρr
1)r + (1 −p2)rn,
if p2 ≥αv,
(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1)r + (v −p2
α )r + (1 −p2)rn,
if p2 ≤αv.
(3)
Similar to Lemma 2 in the base model analysis, the following lemma characterizes the platform’s
optimal pricing decision in Period 2 with incoming riders.
Lemma 4. The conditions and equilibrium outcomes with the incoming riders in Period 2 are
provided in Table 10.
Lemma 4 allows us to derive the following proposition.
Proposition 10. With incoming riders in Period 2, GSP equilibria do not exist. SSP and PSP
equilibria are, respectively, characterized in Tables 11 and 12 in the Appendix.
In Figure 6, we plot the equilibrium outcomes with incoming riders in Period 2. Compared with
Figure 2, the most prominent diﬀerence is the lack of the GSP region: as we noted earlier, the GSP
policy is irrelevant in this case. The original GSP region with large values of c is absorbed by the
PSP region. The intuition is that when there are guaranteed Period-2 riders, drivers are willing to
come to the region, even if their costs of doing so are high.
Figure 6
Equilibrium regions with new arrivals in Period 2 (α = 0.8, rn = 3)
Finally, we note that this model can be extended to allow random incoming riders in Period 2;
i.e., rn is a random variable. Certain results that depend on the realized rn remain unchanged, such
as those in Table 10 in the Appendix. Other results that require taking expectations with respect
to rn, unfortunately, cannot be analytically obtained. Nevertheless, since our key intuitions are not
aﬀected by a random rn, we expect the observations about Figure 6 to generally hold.

23
6.
Concluding Remarks
Ride hailing is a vital and fast-growing industry in the sharing economy. The business model
pioneered by Uber and adopted by most players in the industry is one where the platform almost
entirely dictates the matching process. Surge pricing is the primary lever to manage demand and
supply in this scenario. Furthermore, surge pricing is one of the most controversial aspects of
ride hailing and has been accused as price gouging, although major platforms remain committed
to the practice. Most of the literature takes the spatial perspective and treats surge pricing at
a location as a simple tool for rebalancing demand and supply, not unlike the methods used in
other marketplaces. In this paper, we investigate surge pricing with an emphasis on its temporal
characteristics unique to ride hailing. That is, drivers respond to surge pricing slower than riders,
which results in strategic driver and rider behavior.
We ﬁnd that the commonly observed pattern of a short-lived sharp price surge followed by a
lower price occurs in an equilibrium, which we refer to as Skimming Surge Pricing (SSP). This
ﬁnding, to some extent, justiﬁes the controversial sharp price surges by establishing a more nuanced
mechanism of how surge pricing works beyond simply setting prices to make supply meet demand.
We recommend that platforms more explicitly explain the nuance behind surge pricing to ease
public concerns over sharp surge prices.
Interestingly, we also identify another equilibrium surge pricing strategy, where the platform sets
a low initial price followed by a higher price. We refer to this strategy as Penetration Surge Pricing
(PSP). We ﬁnd that when co-existing, the PSP equilibrium is superior to the SSP equilibrium in
several essential metrics. Although theoretically attractive, practical uses of such a pricing strategy
are hindered by drivers’ lack of demand-supply information (since it is not signaled by a sharp price
surge). We recommend that platforms either directly communicate demand-supply information to
drivers or commit to future price surges to be able to adopt the PSP strategy to potentially improve
proﬁt and eﬃciency and mitigate controversies surrounding sharp price surges.
In terms of potential future research directions, we note that our work (as well as most existing
literature on ride hailing) models a single platform. Generally, competition to a platform leads to
increased costs to attract drivers and reduced rider valuation (relative to alternative options) on
the platform. Insights obtained from this work (e.g., Figure 2) suggest that in these cases, the PSP
policy is more likely to outperform the currently prevalent SSP policy. Therefore, our recommen-
dation for adopting the PSP policy is even more relevant when the platform faces competition.
A competing platform may further employ sophisticated pricing strategies to counter strategies
studied in this paper; see, e.g., a recent paper by Bernstein et al. (2020). On the other hand, we

24
have noted that forced waiting under the PSP policy may feel longer for riders than voluntary
waiting under the SSP policy. Similarly, price changes over time may induce behavioral responses
from riders; see, e.g., a survey by Zheng and ¨Ozer (2012). Our study of a single platform with
rational players can potentially serve as a basis for future studies of platform competition and the
behavioral aspects of ride hailing.
Acknowledgments
The third author (Han Zhu) serves as the corresponding author of this paper. The authors gratefully
acknowledge Hau Lee (the department editor), the associate editor, and two anonymous referees
for their valuable comments, which helped signiﬁcantly improve this paper.
References
Af`eche P, Liu Z, Maglaras C (2018a) Ride-hailing networks with strategic drivers: The impact of platform
control capabilities on performance. ssrn.com/abstract=3120544.
Af`eche P, Liu Z, Maglaras C (2018b) A tale of timescales: Surge pricing and dynamic matching for hotspot
demand shock in rideHailing networks. Presented at 2018 INFORMS Revenue Management and Pricing
Section Conference.
Aﬂaki A, Feldman P, Swinney R (2020) Becoming strategic: Endogenous consumer time preferences and
multiperiod pricing. Operations Research 68(4):1116–1131.
Allon G, Bassamboo A, Cil EB (2012) Large-scale service marketplaces: The role of the moderating ﬁrm.
Management Science 58(10):1854–1872.
Bai J, So KC, Tang CS, Chen X, Wang H (2019) Coordinating supply and demand on an on-demand service
platform with impatient customers. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 21(3):556–570.
Banerjee S, Johari R (2018) Ride Sharing.
In M Hu (editor), Sharing Economy: Making Supply Meet
Demand, pages 73–97. Springer.
Banerjee S, Johari R, Riquelme C (2016) Pricing in ride-sharing platforms: A queueing-theoretic approach.
ssrn.com/abstract=2568258.
Benjaafar S, Ding JY, Kong G, Taylor T (2020) Labor welfare in on-demand service platforms. Manufacturing
& Service Operations Management Forthcoming.
Benjaafar S, Kong G, Li X, Courcoubetis C (2018) Peer-to-peer product sharing: Implications for ownership,
usage, and social welfare in the sharing economy. Management Science 65(2):477–493.

25
Bernstein F, DeCroix G, Keskin NB (2020) Competition between two-sided platforms under demand and
supply congestion eﬀects. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management Forthcoming.
Besbes O, Castro F, Lobel I (2020) Surge pricing and its spatial supply response. Management Science
Forthcoming.
Bimpikis K, Candogan O, Saban D (2019) Spatial pricing in ride-sharing networks. Operations Research
67(3):744–769.
Business Insider (2017) Uber drivers are growing angrier over price cuts.
businessinsider.com/
uber-drivers-are-growing-angrier-over-price-cuts-2017-3. Accessed June 4, 2018.
Cachon GP, Daniels KM, Lobel R (2017) The role of surge pricing on a service platform with self-scheduling
capacity. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 19(3):368–384.
Cachon GP, Feldman P (2015) Price commitments with strategic consumers: Why it can be optimal to
discount more frequently... than optimal. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 17(3):399–
410.
Cachon GP, Swinney R (2009) Purchasing, pricing, and quick response in the presence of strategic consumers.
Management Science 55(3):497–511.
Castillo JC, Knoepﬂe D, Weyl G (2018) Surge pricing solves the wild goose chase. ssrn.com/abstract=
2890666.
Chen MK (2016) Dynamic pricing in a labor market: Surge pricing and ﬂexible work on the Uber platform.
In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, pages 455–455. ACM.
Chen Y, Hu M (2020) Pricing and matching with forward-looking buyers and sellers. Manufacturing &
Service Operations Management 22(4):717–734.
Chen YJ, Maglaras C, Vulcano G (2019) Design of an aggregated marketplace under congestion eﬀects:
Asymptotic analysis and equilibrium characterization. In Sharing Economy, pages 217–248. Springer.
Chu LY, Wan Z, Zhan D (2018) Harnessing the double-edged sword via routing: Information provision on
ride-hailing platforms. ssrn.com/abstract=3266250.
CNET (2015) Detest Uber’s surge pricing? Some drivers don’t like it either.
cnet.com/news/
detest-ubers-surge-pricing-some-drivers-dont-like-it-either/. Accessed June 4, 2018.

26
CNN (2016) How Uber punishes drivers who refuse to use UberPool.
money.cnn.com/2016/07/28/
technology/uber-uberpool-timeouts/index.html. Accessed June 4, 2018.
Cohen M, Fiszer MD, Kim BJ (2018) Frustration-based promotions: Field experiments in ride-sharing.
ssrn.com/abstract=3129717.
Cohen M, Zhang R (2019) Competition and coopetition for two-sided platforms. www.nyu.edu/projects/
rzhang/TwoSided_Competition.pdf.
DGS (2018) Driver Guidance System (DGS) trial. unicen.smu.edu.sg/research/dmm/fieldtrial/dgs_
trial.
Economist (2016) A fare shake.
economist.com/finance-and-economics/2016/05/14/a-fare-shake.
Accessed June 4, 2018.
Feng G, Kong G, Wang Z (2020) We are on the way: Analysis of on-demand ride-hailing systems. Manufac-
turing & Service Operations Management Forthcoming.
Guda H, Subramanian U (2019) Your Uber is arriving: Managing on-demand workers through surge pricing,
forecast communication, and worker incentives. Management Science 65(5):1995–2014.
Gurvich I, Lariviere M, Moreno A (2019) Operations in the on-demand economy: Staﬃng services with
self-scheduling capacity. In Sharing Economy, pages 249–278. Springer.
Hu M (editor) (2018) Sharing Economy: Making Supply Meet Demand. Springer Series in Supply Chain
Management, C. Tang (Series Ed.). Springer.
Hu M, Zhou Y (2019a) Dynamic type matching. ssrn.com/abstract=2592622.
Hu M, Zhou Y (2019b) Price, wage and ﬁxed commission in on-demand matching. ssrn.com/abstract=
2949513.
Jiang B, Tian L (2016) Collaborative consumption: Strategic and economic implications of product sharing.
Management Science 64(3):1171–1188.
Jiang Z, Kong G, Zhang Y (2020) Making the most of your regret: A behavioral investigation of workers’
relocation in on-demand platforms. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management Forthcoming.
Li J, Granados N, Netessine S (2014) Are consumers strategic? Structural estimation from the air-travel
industry. Management Science 60(9):2114–2137.

27
Narasimhan C, Papatla P, Jiang B, Kopalle PK, Messinger PR, Moorthy S, Proserpio D, et al. (2018)
Sharing economy: Review of current research and future directions. Customer Needs and Solutions
5(1-2):93–106.
New York Times (2014) Is Uber’s surge-pricing an example of high-tech gouging? nytimes.com/2014/01/
12/magazine/is-ubers-surge-pricing-an-example-of-high-tech-gouging.html. Accessed June
4, 2018.
New York Times (2018) When your boss is an algorithm. www.nytimes.com/2018/10/12/opinion/sunday/
uber-driver-life.html. Accessed October 25, 2018.
Nikzad
A
(2019)
Thickness
and
competition
in
ride-sharing
markets.
stanford.edu/~nikzad/
thickness-competition.pdf.
¨Ozkan E, Ward AR (2020) Dynamic matching for real-time ride sharing. Stochastic Systems 10(1):29–70.
Papanastasiou Y, Savva N (2016) Dynamic pricing in the presence of social learning and strategic consumers.
Management Science 63(4):919–939.
Shen ZJM, Su X (2007) Customer behavior modeling in revenue management and auctions: A review and
new research opportunities. Production and Operations Management 16(6):713–728.
Su X (2018) Centralized routing in ride-hailing networks. Working paper.
Sun H, Wang H, Wan Z (2019) Model and analysis of labor supply for ride-sharing platforms in the presence
of sample self-selection and endogeneity. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 125:76–93.
Taylor TA (2018) On-demand service platforms.
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
20(4):704–720.
Tirole J (1988) The Theory of Industrial Organization. MIT press.
Uber (2018) How surge pricing works. uber.com/drive/partner-app/how-surge-works/. Accessed June
4, 2018.
Washington Post (2015) How Uber surge pricing really works. washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/
04/17/how-uber-surge-pricing-really-works/. Accessed June 4, 2018.
Yang N, Zhang RP (2018) Dynamic pricing and inventory management in the presence of online reviews.
ssrn.com/abstract=2571705.

28
Zheng YK, ¨Ozer ¨O (2012) Behavioral issues in pricing management. In ¨O ¨Ozer, R Phillips (editors), The
Oxford Handbook of Pricing Management, pages 415–460. Oxford University Press.
Appendix
Table 1
Greedy Surge Pricing (GSP) equilibria
Equilibrium
GSP1
GSP2
Condition
c
γ ≥α
2 , r ≤2
c
γ ≥α(1 −1
r), r > 2
Period-1 price p∗
1
1
2
1 −1/r
Table 2
Conditions and outcomes in Period 2
Condition
Solution
(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1)r
≥d + y
1
2(1 −ρr
1)r
≥d + y
—
—
—
1
1
2(1 −ρr
1)r
≤d + y
—
—
—
2
(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1)r
≤d + y
v ≥1
2
—
d + y ≥1
2·
[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v]r
—
3
—
d + y ≤1
2·
[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v]r
—
4
v ≤1
2
(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1)
≥v
—
—
2
(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1)
≤v
d + y ≥1
2·
[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v]r
[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v]2
≥(1 −ρr
1)
3
[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v]2
≤(1 −ρr
1)
2
d + y ≤1
2·
[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v]r
(d + y)[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) −d+y
r
+v] ≥1
4(1 −ρr
1)r
4
(d + y)[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) −d+y
r
+v] ≤1
4(1 −ρr
1)r
2
Solution
Price p∗
2
Platform proﬁt π2
% driver matched ρd
2
1
[1 −
d+y
(1−ρr
1)r]α
(1 −γ)(d + y)[1 −
d+y
(1−ρr
1)r]α
1
2
α
2
1
4(1 −γ)(1 −ρr
1)αr
(1−ρr
1)r
2(d+y)
3
1
2[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v]α
1
4(1 −γ)·
[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v]2αr
[(1−v)(1−ρr
1)+v]r
2(d+y)
4
[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v −d+y
r ]α
(1 −γ)(d + y)·
[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v −d+y
r ]α
1
Proposition 11 (MSP versus SSP). With suﬃciently large r and small
c
γ (see the proof for speciﬁc con-
ditions), comparing the MSP and SSP equilibria, the prices of both periods under the MSP equilibrium are
respectively higher than those under the SSP equilibrium, and the social welfare under the SSP equilibrium
is also larger than that under the MSP equilibrium.

29
Table 3
Skimming Surge Pricing (SSP) equilibria
Equilibrium
SSP1
SSP2
Condition
c
γ ≤α(2−α)
2(4−3α)
c
γ ≤α
2 (1 −1
r)
r ≤
4−3α
2(1−α)
r ≥
4−3α
2(1−α)
Period-1 price p∗
1
(2−α)2
2(4−3α)
(1 −1
r)(1 −α
2 )
Period-2 price p∗
2
α(2−α)
2(4−3α)
α
2 (1 −1
r)
Equilibrium
SSP3
SSP4
Condition
α
4 ≤c
γ ≤α
2
α
2 (1 −1
r) ≤c
γ ≤α(1 −1
r)
r ≤2
r ≥2
Period-1 price p∗
1
1−α
2 + c
γ
(1 −1
r)(1 −α) + c
γ
Period-2 price p∗
2
c
γ
c
γ
Table 4
Penetration Surge Pricing (PSP) equilibrium
Equilibrium
PSP
Condition
α
1+α ≤c
γ ≤α
2 +
q
α2
4 −α
r2 , r ≥
2
√α
Period-1 price p∗
1
1 −
q
c
γ(1 −
c
αγ)
Period-2 price p∗
2
c
γ
2
4
6
8
10
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
SSP
PSP>GSP
PSP>SSP
GSP
PSP<SSP
Figure 7
Comparison of platform proﬁt under GSP, SSP, and PSP equilibria (α = 0.8)
Table 5
Greedy Surge Pricing (GSP) equilibria in the temporal-spatial model
Equilibrium
GSP1
GSP2
Condition
c0
γ ≥α
2 , r ≤2
c0
γ ≥α(1 −1
r), r > 2
Period-1 price p∗
1
1
2
1 −1/r

30
Table 6
Skimming Surge Pricing (SSP) equilibria in the temporal-spatial model
Equilibrium
SSP1
SSP2
Condition
c0 + c1[ (6−5α)r
2(4−3α) −1] ≤(2−α)αγ
2(4−3α)
r−1
2 c1 + c0 ≤1
2(1 −1
r)αγ
r ≤
4−3α
2(1−α)
r ≥
4−3α
2(1−α)
Period-1 price p∗
1
(2−α)2
2(4−3α)
(1 −1
r)(1 −α
2 )
Period-2 price p∗
2
α(2−α)
2(4−3α)
α
2 (1 −1
r)
Equilibrium
SSP3
SSP4
Condition
αγ ≤(3r −4)c1 + 4c0,r ≤2
c0 ≤(1 −1
r)αγ,r ≥2
αγ ≥(r −2)c1 + 2c0
r−1
2 c1 + c0 ≥1
2(1 −1
r)αγ
Period-1 price p∗
1
1−α
2 + p∗
2
(1 −1
r)(1 −α) + p∗
2
Period-2 price p∗
2
(1 −αγ+c1−c0
αγ+c1r )α
(1 −αγ+c1−c0
αγ+c1r )α
Note. ρd,SSP 1
2
= 2(c0+c1d)
αγv
, dSSP 1 =
−(c0+c1y)+√
(c0+c1y)2−4c1[c0y−( 1
2 v)2αγr]
2c1
, where y = 1 −(1 −v)r.
Table 7
Penetration Surge Pricing (PSP) equilibria in the temporal-spatial model
Equilibrium
PSP
Condition
(1 −v)(r −
1
1−pP SP
1
) > d,0.5(r −
1
1−pP SP
1
) > d,pP SP
1
< 1 −1
r
Period-1 price p∗
1
pP SP
1
Period-2 price p∗
2
c0+c1d
γ
Table 8
Myopic Surge Pricing (MSP) equilibria
Equilibrium
MSP1
MSP2
MSP3 (GSP2)
Condition
c
γ ≤
α
2−α(1 −1
r)
α
2−α(1 −1
r) ≤c
γ ≤α(1 −1
r)
c
γ ≥α(1 −1
r)
α ≤2
r
α ≤1
r + c
γ
Period-1 price p∗
1
1 −1
r
1 −1
r
1 −1
r
Period-2 price p∗
2
α
2−α(1 −1
r)
c
γ
-
Equilibrium
MSP4
MSP5
Condition
c
γ ≤α
2
c
γ ≥α
2
{ c
γ ≤
α
2−α(1 −1
r),α ≥2
r} or {
α
2−α(1 −1
r) ≤c
γ ≤α(1 −1
r),α ≥1
r + c
γ}
Period-1 price p∗
1
1 −1
r
1 −1
r
Period-2 price p∗
2
α
2
c
γ

31
Table 9
Skimming and Penetration Surge Pricing (SSP/PSP) equilibria with mixed strategic and myopic riders
Equilibrium
SSP1
SSP2
Condition
c
γ ≤
α(2−α)
2[(2−α)2+αθ(1−α)]
c
γ ≤
α(r−1)
2r−(1−θ)αr
r ≤2[(2−α)2+αθ(1−α)]
(2−α)2−θα2
r ≥2[(2−α)2+αθ(1−α)]
(2−α)2−θα2
Period-1 price p∗
1
(2−α)2
2[4θ−3αθ+(1−θ)(2−α)2]
(r−1)(2−α)
r[2−α(1−θ)]
Period-2 price p∗
2
α(2−α)
2[(2−α)2+αθ(1−α)]
α(r−1)
2r−(1−θ)αr
Equilibrium
SSP3
SSP4
Condition
α
2[2−(1−θ)α] ≤c
γ ≤α
2 ,r ≤2
α(1−1
r )
2−α(1−θ) ≤c
γ ≤α(1 −1
r),r ≥2
Period-1 price p∗
1
1−α+2θ c
γ
2[1−(1−θ)α]
(1−1
r )(1−α)+θ c
γ
1−α(1−θ)
Period-2 price p∗
2
c
γ
c
γ
Equilibrium
PSP
Condition
α
1+αθ ≤c
γ ≤α
2 +
q
α2
4 −
α
θr2 , r ≥
2
√
αθ
Period-1,2 prices p∗
1,p∗
2
1 −
q
θ c
γ(1 −
c
αγ), c
γ
Table 10
Conditions and outcomes with incoming riders in Period 2
Condition
Solution
(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1)r+
(1 −αv)rn ≥d + y
(1 −ρr
1)r+
rn ≥2(d + y)
—
—
—
1
(1 −ρr
1)r+
rn ≤2(d + y)
—
—
—
2
(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1)r+
(1 −αv)rn ≤d + y
(1 −2v)(1 −ρr
1)r
≤(2αv −1)rn
—
d + y ≥1
2[(1 −v)
(1 −ρr
1)r + vr + rn]
—
3
—
d + y ≤1
2[(1 −v)
(1 −ρr
1)r + vr + rn]
—
4
(1 −2v)(1 −ρr
1)r
≥(2αv −1)rn
[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) −v]r
≥(2α −1)rn
—
—
2
[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) −v]r
≤(2α −1)rn
d + y ≥1
2[(1 −v)
(1 −ρr
1)r + vr + rn]
π1,1
2
≥π2,1
2
3
π1,1
2
≤π2,1
2
2
d + y ≤1
2[(1 −v)
(1 −ρr
1)r + vr + rn]
π1,2
2
≥π2,1
2
4
π1,2
2
≤π2,1
2
2
π1,1
2
= [(1−v)(1−ρr
1)r+vr+rn]2
4( r
α +rn)
, π1,2
2
= (d + y) (1−v)(1−ρr
1)r+vr+rn−(d+y)
r
α +rn
, π2,1
2
= [(1−ρr
1)r+rn]2
4(
(1−ρr
1)r
α
+rn),
Solution
Price p∗
2
Platform proﬁt π2
% driver matched ρd
2
1
(1−ρr
1)r+rn−(d+y)
(1−ρr
1)r
α
+rn
(1 −γ)π2,2
2
1
2
(1−ρr
1)r+rn
2[
(1−ρr
1)r
α
+rn]
(1 −γ)π2,1
2
(1−ρr
1)r+rn
2(d+y)
3
(1−v)(1−ρr
1)r+vr+rn
2( r
α +rn)
(1 −γ)π1,1
2
(1−v)(1−ρr
1)r+vr+rn
2(d+y)
4
(1−v)(1−ρr
1)r+vr+rn−(d+y)
r
α +rn
(1 −γ)π1,2
2
1
π2,2
2
= (d + y) (1−ρr
1)r+rn−(d+y)
(1−ρr
1)r
α
+rn

32
Table 11
Skimming Surge Pricing (SSP) equilibria with incoming riders in Period 2
Equilibrium
SSP1
SSP2
Condition
c
γ ≤
vr+rn
2( r
α +rn)
c
γ ≤
vr+rn
2( r
α +rn)
r ≤2 +
r
2( r
α +rn)(1−α)
r ≥2 +
r
2( r
α +rn)(1−α)
Period-1 price p∗
1
[1 −α +
r
2( r
α +rn)]v +
rn
2( r
α +rn)
Period-2 price p∗
2
vr+rn
2( r
α +rn)
Equilibrium
SSP3
SSP4
Condition
vr+rn
2( r
α +rn) ≤c
γ ≤α
2
vr+rn
2( r
α +rn) ≤c
γ ≤α(1 −1
r)
r ≤2
r ≥2
Period-1 price p∗
1
1−α
2 + c
γ
(1 −1
r)(1 −α) + c
γ
Period-2 price p∗
2
c
γ
c
γ
Table 12
Penetration Surge Pricing (PSP) equilibria with incoming riders in Period 2
Equilibrium
PSP1
PSP2
PSP3
PSP4
Condition
c
γ ≥1
2
c
γ ≥α(1 −1
r)
c
γ ≤1
2
c
γ ≤1
2,r > 2
r ≤2
r > 2, c
γ ≥1
2
r ≤2
α(1 −1
r) ≤1
2
Period-1 price p∗
1
1
2
1 −1/r
1
2
1 −1/r
Period-2 price p∗
2
c
γ
c
γ
1
2
1
2
Equilibrium
PSP5
Condition
α
1+α ≤c
γ ≤α
2 +
q
α2
4 −α
r2 , r ≥
2
√α, ( 2c
αγ −1)(r −
1
√c
γ (1−c
αγ )) ≥(1 −2c
γ )rn
Period-1 price p∗
1
1 −
q
c
γ(1 −
c
αγ)
Period-2 price p∗
2
c
γ
Equilibrium
PSP6
Condition
2 c
γ(
r−
1
1−v
α
+ rn) ≤r −
1
1−v + rn,(2v −1)(r −
1
1−v) ≤(1 −2αv)rn
Period-1 price p∗
1
v0
Period-2 price p∗
2
(1−v)r−1+(1−v)rn
2[ (1−v)r−1
α
+rn]
v0 is the solution to (r −
1
1−x + rn)(
r−
1
1−x
α
+ (2 −1
α)rn) = 4( (1−x)r−1
α
+ (1 −x)rn)2.

ec1
Online Appendix to
“Surge Pricing and Two-Sided Temporal Responses in
Ride-Hailing”
Bin Hu, Ming Hu, Han Zhu
Proof of Lemma 1. We consider two cases: p1 ≥p2
α and p1 ≤p2
α .
Case 1: p1 ≥p2
α . For the riders with a valuation v ≤p2
α , they do not try to take a ride in both
periods. We next study the riders with a valuation v ≥p2
α . Note that these customers, if left in
Period 2, always try to take a ride in Period 2. Let UR denote his utility of trying to take a ride
immediately and UW denote the utility of waiting for Period 2. It is easy to see UR = ρr
1(v −p1) +
(1 −ρr
1)ρr
2(αv −p2) and UW = ρr
2(αv −p2). It follows that UR ≥UW, if and only if v ≥
p1−ρr
2p2
1−αρr
2 . By
p1 ≥p2
α , we have
p1−ρr
2p2
1−αρr
2 ≥p1.
Case 2: p1 ≤p2
α . We consider two separate scenarios.
• v ≥p2
α . Similar to Case 1, we have UR ≥UW, if and only if v ≥
p1−ρr
2p2
1−αρr
2 . Moreover, by p1 ≤p2
α ,
it follows that
p1−ρr
2p2
1−αρr
2 ≤p1 ≤p2
α . Therefore, customers with v ≥p2
α try to take a ride immediately
in period 1, and if they are not matched, they will continue trying to take a ride in Period 2.
• v < p2
α . These riders will never try to take a ride in Period 2. If v ≥p1, they will try to take a
ride in period 1; otherwise if v < p1 < p2
α , the riders will not take a ride in both periods.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 1. If no transaction takes place in Period 2, then the platform’s proﬁt
can be expressed as π = min{(1 −p)r,1}p. It is easy to check that the optimal solution is p∗= 1/2
with π∗= r/4 if r ≤2; otherwise, p∗= 1 −1/r with π∗= 1 −1/r. In addition, if r ≤2 and p∗= 1/2,
the highest valuation for the left riders is 1/2. Therefore, to guarantee no transaction in Period 2,
we need the condition c/γ ≥1/2α. Similarly, when r ≥2 and p∗= 1 −1/r, we need the condition
c/γ ≥α(1 −1/r).
Q.E.D.
Proof of Lemma 2. (i) q(p2) is decreasing in p2 when p2 ≥αv and p2 ≤αv. Moreover, q(p2) is
continuous at p2 = αv. Therefore, the desired result directly follows. (ii) We consider two separate
cases. If q(p2) ≤y +d, then obviously we have ρr
2 = 1 for any p2. If q(p2) ≥y +d, then (2) is reduced
to π∗
2 = max
p2 (1 −γ)(y + d)p2, subject to q(p2) ≥y + d. It is easy to see that p∗
2 must satisfy that
q(p∗
2) = y + d, which also implies ρr
2 = 1. Therefore, in both cases, we have ρr
2 = 1.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Lemma 3. As shown in Lemma 2, it suﬃces to only consider the scenario q(p2) ≤d+y.
By (1), we need to consider two cases:
p2
α ≤v and v ≤p2
α ≤1. For each case, we compute the
corresponding optimal proﬁt, and then we compare the proﬁts and ﬁnd the optimal solutions.

ec2
Case 1: p2
α ≤v, i.e., p2 ≤αv. In this case, we have q(p2) = (1−v)(1−ρr
1)r +(v −p2
α )r. By Lemma
2(ii), the problem of the platform in Period 2 in this case can be described as
π1∗
2 =max
p2 (1 −γ)[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + (v −p2
α )]rp2
(EC.1)
s.t.
(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v −d + y
r
≤p2
α ≤v.
(EC.2)
where π1∗
2 is the optimal proﬁt of Case 1 in Period 2.
We next focus on the scenario (1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v −d+y
r
≤v, i.e., (1 −v)(1 −ρr
1)r ≤d + y. Note
that if (1−v)(1−ρr
1)r ≥d+y, which implies that the total number of available drivers is no larger
than that of high-valuation riders who tried to buy in period 1, then the platform has no incentive
to set a price lower than αv. Deﬁne m1(p2) ≡(1 −γ)[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + (v −p2
α )]p2r. Let m′
1(p2) = 0.
We have p2 = α
2 [(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v] ≡p1
2. Therefore,
• if
p1
2
α ≥v, i.e., (1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) ≥v, then p∗
2 = αv. Because the optimal decision is taken at the
boundary point p1∗
2 = αv, the proﬁt in this subcase must be no more than that in Case 2.
• If (1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v −d+y
r
≤
p1
2
α ≤v, i.e., (1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) ≤v and 1
2[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v]r ≤d + y,
then p1∗
2 = p1
2 and π1∗
2 = 1
4(1 −γ)[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v]2αr.
• If (1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v −d+y
r
≥
p1
2
α , i.e., 1
2[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v]r ≥d + y, then p1∗
2 = [(1 −v)(1 −
ρr
1) + v −d+y
r ]α and π1∗
2 = (1 −γ)(d + y)[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v −d+y
r ]α.
Case 2: v ≤p2
α ≤1. In this case, we have q(p2) = (1 −p2
α )(1 −ρr
1)r. Then the problem of the
platform in Period 2 in this case can be described as
π2∗
2 = max
p2 (1 −γ)(1 −p2
α )(1 −ρr
1)rp2
(EC.3)
s.t.
max{1 −
d + y
(1 −ρr
1)r,v} ≤p2
α ≤1
(EC.4)
where π2∗
2 is the optimal proﬁt in Case 2. Deﬁne m2(p2) ≡(1−γ)(1−p2
α )(1−ρr
1)rp2. Let m′
2(p2) = 0.
We have p2 = α
2 . Therefore, the optimal solution to (EC.3), denoted as p2∗
2 , can be expressed as
p∗
2 = max{1 −
d+y
(1−ρr
1)r,v, 1
2}α. Speciﬁcally,
• when v ≥1−d+y
r , i.e., (1−v)(1−ρr
1)r ≤d+y: if v ≤1
2, we have p2∗
2 = α
2 and π2∗
2 = 1
4(1−γ)(1−
ρr
1)rα; otherwise, we have p2∗
2 = vα and π2∗
2 = (1 −v)(1 −ρr
1)αvr.
• when v ≤1 −d+y
r : if
1
2 ≥1 −
d+y
(1−ρr
1)r, i.e.,
1
2(1 −ρr
1)r ≤d + y, we have p2∗
2 = α
2 and π2∗
2 =
1
4(1 −γ)(1 −ρr
1)αr; otherwise, we have p2∗
2 = [1 −
d+y
(1−ρr
1)r]α and π2∗
2 = (1 −γ)(d + y)[1 −
d+y
(1−ρr
1)r]α.
By comparing the two proﬁts in Case 1 and Case 2, we can ﬁnd the optimal solutions, i.e.,
π∗
2 = max{π1∗
2 ,π2∗
2 }. The desired results directly follow.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 2. As shown in Lemma 3, there are four possible solutions in Period
2. Since we focus on the scenario v ≥p1 ≥p2
α , only Solutions 3 and 4 can arise in equilibrium. To

ec3
see this, note that in Solutions 1 and 2,
p∗
2
α ≥v. Moreover, the platform could set a price p1, such
that (1 −v)r ≥1 or (1 −v)r ≤1. We ﬁrst study the case (1 −v)r ≥1, and then we show that the
optimal solution under this case must satisfy (1−v)r = 1, which implies it suﬃces to consider only
the case (1 −v)r ≤1.
Suppose (1 −v)r ≥1. It follows that ρr
1 =
1
(1−v)r, and (1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v = 1 −1
r. If Solution 3 is
the optimal solution in Period 2, then p∗
2 = 1
2(1 −1
r)α and ρd
2 = 1
2(1 −1
r)r/(d + y). Moreover, due
to γp∗
2ρd
2 = c, we also have ρd
2 =
c
γp∗
2 . Then it follows d + y = 1
4(1 −1
r)2αr γ
c and π∗
2 = 1
4(1 −γ)(1 −
1
r)2αr. Then the platform’s proﬁt over two periods is given by π = (1 −γ)p1 + 1
4(1 −γ)(1 −1
r)2αr.
Moreover, since we have v =
p1−p∗
2
1−α , it is easy to see the optimal p1 takes the value such that
(1 −v)r = 1. If Solution 4 is the optimal solution in Period 2, by γp∗
2ρd
2 = c, we have p∗
2 = c
γ. Then
by (1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v = 1 −1
r and
p∗
2
α = (1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v −d+y
r
, we have d + y = (1 −1
r −
c
αγ)r,
and π∗
2 = (1 −γ)(1 −1
r −
c
αγ)r c
γ. It follows that π = (1 −γ)p1 + (1 −γ)(1 −1
r −
c
αγ)r c
γ. Again, since
v =
p1−p∗
2
1−α , it is easy to see the optimal p1 takes the value such that (1 −v)r = 1. Therefore, it
suﬃces to consider only the case (1 −v)r ≤1.
Suppose (1 −v)r ≤1 and Solution 3 is the optimal solution in Period 2. It follows that ρr
1 = 1,
ρd
2 =
vr
2(d+y), p∗
2 = 1
2vα, π∗
2 = 1
4(1−γ)αv2r and d = αγr
4c (v)2 +(1−v)r −1. Then by v =
p1−p∗
2
1−α , we have
p1 = (1 −α
2 )v. Taking this and π2 = 1
4(1 −γ)v2αr into π, we have π = (1 −γ)(1 −
p1
1−α
2 )rp1 + (1 −
γ)( p1
2−α)2αr. Let
dπ
dp1 = 0, we have p1 = (2−α)2
2(4−3α). In addition, recall that (1 −v)r ≤1, i.e., p1 ≥(1 −
1
r)(1 −α
2 ). Then p∗
1 = max{ (2−α)2
2(4−3α),(1 −1
r)(1 −α
2 )}. Speciﬁcally, if
(2−α)2
2(4−3α) ≥(1 −1
r)(1 −α
2 ), i.e., r ≤
4−3α
2(1−α), we have p∗
1 = (2−α)2
2(4−3α), v = 2−α
4−3α and p∗
2 =
(2−α)
2(4−3α). To guarantee d + y ≥1
2[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v]r
in Period 2, we need the condition c
γ ≤α(2−α)
2(4−3α). Otherwise, if r ≥
4−3α
2(1−α), we have p∗
1 = (1−1
r)(1−α
2 ),
v = 1 −1
r and p∗
2 = α
2 (1 −1
r). To guarantee d + y ≥1
2[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v]r in Period 2, we need the
condition c
γ ≤α
2 (1 −1
r).
Next suppose (1 −v)r ≤1 and Solution 4 is the optimal solution in Period 2. Since ρd
2 = 1, we
always have p∗
2 = c
γ. In addition, because p∗
2 = (v −d+y
r )α in Solution 4, we have d + y = (v −
c
αγ)r
and thus π∗
2 = (1 −γ)(v −
c
αγ)r c
γ. Taking this and v =
p1−c
γ
1−α
into π, it follows π∗= (1 −γ)(1 −
p1−c
γ
1−α )rp1 + (1 −γ)(
p1−c
γ
1−α −
c
αγ)r c
γ. Let
dπ
dp1 = 0, we have p1 = 1−α
2
+ c
γ. In addition, recall that
(1 −v)r ≤1, i.e., p1 ≥(1 −1
r)(1 −α) + c
γ in this case. Then p∗
1 = max{ 1−α
2 + c
γ,(1 −1
r)(1 −α) + c
γ}.
Speciﬁcally, if
1−α
2
+ c
γ ≥(1 −1
r)(1 −α) + c
γ, i.e. r ≤2, then p∗
1 = 1−α
2
+ c
γ, v = 1
2 and p∗
2 = c
γ. To
guarantee d + y ≤1
2[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v]r, we need the condition
c
γ ≥α
4 . To guarantee v ≥p1, we
need the condition c
γ ≤α
2 . If r ≥2, then p∗
1 = (1−1
r)(1−α)+ c
γ, v = 1−1
r and p∗
2 = c
γ. To guarantee
d + y ≤1
2[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v]r, we need the condition
c
γ ≥α
2 (1 −1
r). To guarantee v ≥p1, we need
the condition c
γ ≤α(1 −1
r).

ec4
The drivers’ surplus is given by SD = γ(p1V1 + p2V2) −dc, where Vi is transaction volume in
period i and d is the number of new drivers arrived in Period 2. Then the total social welfare is
given by W = S + SD + π, where S = ( 1+v
2 −p1)(1 −v)r + αv−p2
2
(v −p2
α )r is the riders’ surplus and
π = (1 −γ)(p1(1 −v)r + p2(v −p2
α )r) is the platform’s proﬁt. In addition, W can also be expressed
as W = 1+v
2 (1 −v)r + αv+p2
2
(v −p2
α )r −dc.
Finally, we next study the overlaps regions. First, there is no overlap between SSP and GSP.
The boundary is c
γ = α
2 when r ≤2 (for SSP3 and GSP1) and c
γ = α(1 −1
r) (for SSP4 and GSP2).
Second, there is no overlap between the SSP2 and SSP4. Third, there are indeed overlaps between
SSP1 and SSP3, i.e., α
4 ≤c
γ ≤α(2−α)
2(4−3α) and r ≤2. Fourth, there are overlaps between SSP1 and SSP4,
i.e., α
2 (1 −1
r) ≤c
γ ≤α(2−α)
2(4−3α) and 2 ≤r ≤
4−3α
2(1−α). Obviously, for the overlapped regions, the platform
will set the price such that the maximized proﬁt is obtained. We ﬁrst provide the results on proﬁt
comparison for the overlap between SSP1 and SSP3 ( α
4 ≤c
γ ≤α(2−α)
2(4−3α) and r ≤2).
Lemma EC.1. There always exists β0 ≡α
2 −
q
α2
4 −α[ (2−α)2
4(4−3α) −1−α
4 ] such that SSP1 dominates
SSP3 when α
4 ≤c
γ ≤β0; otherwise when β0 ≤c
γ ≤α(2−α)
2(4−3α), SSP3 dominates SSP1.
Proof of Lemma EC.1. The gap between the proﬁts in two equilibria is given by r[ (2−α)2
4(4−3α) −
1−α
4 −c
γ + 1
α( c
γ)2]. Let f(β) ≡1
αβ2 −β + (2−α)2
4(4−3α) −1−α
4 . Note that f(β) is convex and decreasing when
α
4 ≤β ≤α(2−α)
2(4−3α). Therefore, it suﬃces to show f(β = α
4 ) ≥0 and f(β = α(2−α)
2(4−3α)) ≤0. Moreover, it is
easy to check that f(β = α
4 ) =
α2
16(4−3α) ≥0 andf(β = α(2−α)
2(4−3α)) = −(1−α)α2
4(4−3α)2 ≤0. The desired result
follows from that β0 is the solution to f(β = 0) when α
4 ≤β ≤α(2−α)
2(4−3α).
Q.E.D.
For the overlap between SSP1 and SSP4 ( α
2 (1−1
r) ≤c
γ ≤α(2−α)
2(4−3α) and 2 ≤r ≤
4−3α
2(1−α)), we have the
following results.
Lemma EC.2. There always exists β1(r) such that SSP1 dominates SSP4 when α
2 (1 −1
r) ≤c
γ ≤
β1(r); otherwise when β1(r) ≤c
γ ≤α(2−α)
2(4−3α), SSP4 dominates SSP1.
It is possible that β1(r) takes the value of
α(2−α)
2(4−3α), then SSP1 always dominates SSP4. The proof
is similar that for Lemma EC.1 and thus omitted. The only diﬀerence is that the threshold β1
depends on r.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 3. Recall that v = p1, if p1 ≤p2
α . Suppose (1 −v)r ≤1. The remaining
riders at the beginning of Period 2 are those with a valuation v ≤v, and thus no transaction incurs
in Period 2. It is easy to see the optimal solution is p∗
1 = 1
2 with π∗
1 = 1
2 if r ≤2; otherwise, p∗
1 = 1−1
r
with π∗
1 = 1 −1
r. We next study the case (1 −v)r ≥1, where we have ρr
1 =
1
(1−v)r and y = 0. Since
we have p2
α ≤v in Solutions 3 and 4 of Period 2, it suﬃces to consider Solutions 1 and 2.

ec5
Suppose Solution 1 is the optimal solution in Period 2. Since ρd
2 = 1, by γp∗
2ρd
2 = c, we have p∗
2 = c
γ.
Moreover, since p∗
2 = [1 −
d+y
(1−ρr
1)r]α, it follows that d + y = (1 −
c
αγ)(1 −ρr
1)r = (1 −
c
αγ)(r −
1
1−v),
and thus π∗
2 = (1 −γ) c
γ(1 −
c
αγ)(r −
1
1−v). Then the total proﬁt over two periods is given by π =
(1 −γ)[p1 + c
γ(1 −
c
αγ)(r −
1
1−v)]. Let
dπ
dp1 = 0, we have p1 = 1 −
q
c
γ(1 −
c
αγ). In addition, recall that
(1 −v)r ≥1, i.e., p1 ≤1 −1
r. Then p∗
1 = min{1 −
q
c
γ(1 −
c
αγ),1 −1
r}.
Speciﬁcally, if 1 −
q
c
γ(1 −
c
αγ) ≤1 −1
r, i.e., r ≥
2
√α and
α
2 −
q
α2
4 −α
r2 ≤c
γ ≤α
2 +
q
α2
4 −α
r2 ,
then p∗
1 = v = 1 −
q
c
γ(1 −
c
αγ) and π∗= (1 −γ)[1 −2
q
c
γ(1 −
c
αγ) + c
γ(1 −
c
αγ)r]. In addition, we
have d = (1 −p2
α )(1 −ρr
1)r = (1 −
c
αγ)(r −
1
√c
γ (1−c
αγ )). To guarantee (1 −v)(1 −ρr
1)r ≥d + y, and
1
2(1−ρr
1)r ≥d+y, we need the condition c
γ ≥
α
1+α and c
γ ≥α
2 , respectively. By α
2 −
q
α2
4 −α
r2 ≤α
2 ≤
α
1+α ≤c
γ ≤α
2 +
q
α2
4 −α
r2 ≤α , the equilibrium with p∗
1 = 1 −
q
c
γ(1 −
c
αγ) exists when
α
1+α ≤c
γ ≤
α
2 +
q
α2
4 −α
r2 and r ≥
2
√α. If 1 −
q
c
γ(1 −
c
αγ) ≥1 −1
r, i.e., c
γ ≤α
2 −
q
α2
4 −α
r2 or c
γ ≥α
2 +
q
α2
4 −α
r2
or r <
2
√α, then p∗
1 = v = 1 −1
r and π∗= 1 −1
r. Note that it follows that (1 −v)r = 1, which implies
d + y = 0 and no transaction Period 2.
Suppose Solution 2 is the optimal solution in Period 2. Since ρr
1 =
1
(1−v)r, π∗
2 = 1−γ
4 (r −
1
1−v)α.
Then the platform’s proﬁt over two periods is given by π = (1−γ)[p1 + α
4 (r −
1
1−v)]. Let
dπ
dp1 = 0, we
have p1 = 1−
√α
2 . In addition, recall that (1−v)r ≥1, i.e., p1 ≤1−1
r. Then p∗
1 = min{1−
√α
2 ,1−1
r}.
Speciﬁcally, if 1 −
√α
2 ≤1 −1
r, i.e., r ≥
2
√α, it follows that p∗
1 = 1 −
√α
2 . However, since we have
p1 ≤p2
α in this case, there is no equilibrium with p1 ≤p2
α . If 1 −
√α
2 ≥1 −1
r, i.e., r ≤
2
√α, we have
p∗
1 = v = 1 −1
r. Again, no transaction takes place in the second period.
When p1 ≤p2
α , riders’ total surplus and total transaction volume are given by S = 1−p1
2
+ (1 −
p2
α )(1 −ρr
1)r × α−p2
2
= 1
2
q
c
γ(1 −
c
αγ) +
1
2α(α −c
γ)2(r −
1
√c
γ (1−c
αγ )) and V = 1 + (1 −p2
α )(1 −ρr
1)r =
1 + (1 −p2
α )r −1−p2/α
1−p1 , where (1 −p2
α )(1 −ρr
1)r and
α−p2
2
are the number and average surplus
of the riders in Period 2, respectively. Drivers’ surplus is given by SD = γ(p1V1 + p2V2) −dc =
γ(p1 +(1−p2
α )(1−ρr
1)r ·p2)−dc, where Vi is transaction volume in period i and d is the number of
new drivers arrived in Period 2. Then the total social welfare is given by W = S + SD + π, where
S is the riders’ surplus and π = (1 −γ)(p1V1 + p2V2) is the platform’s proﬁt.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 4. PSP equilibrium has overlap regions with GSP2 and SSP4 separately.
First, we compare PSP and GSP2. The overlap regions between the two equilibria can be expressed
as α(1−1
r) ≤c
γ ≤α
2 +
q
α2
4 −α
r2 and r ≥
2
√α. It is easy to see the proﬁt gap between PSP and GSP2
is given by ∆π = (1 −γ)( 1
r −2
q
c
γ(1 −
c
αγ) + c
γ(1 −
c
αγ)r) = (1 −γ) 1
r[
q
c
γ(1 −
c
αγ)r −1]2 ≥0. The
volume gap between PSP and GSP2 is given by ∆V = 1
r[(1 −
c
αγ)r2 +
q
γ
c −1
αr + 1] ≥0.
Second, we compare Equilibria PSP and SSP4. The overlap regions are given by
α
1+α ≤c
γ ≤
α(1−1
r) and r ≥
2
√α. It can be easily checked that the gap of the proﬁts (SSP4-PSP) is (1−1
r)(1−

ec6
α) −(1 −2
q
c
γ(1 −
c
αγ)). Then, when r ≤
1−α
α−2√c
γ (1−c
γ ), the proﬁt under PSP is larger than that
under SSP4; otherwise the proﬁt under SSP4 is larger.
It can be easily checked that the there are more new drivers attracted (d) in PSP than that in
SSP4, if c
γ ≥
α
1+α, which is also part of the conditions for PSP. Therefore, more drivers are attracted
to the current region in PSP than in SSP4. Since in PSP and SSP4, no drivers are left to Period
2 and ρd = 1, then the total transaction volume can be expressed as 1 + d, and thus the matching
volume in PSP is larger.
We next show |p∗
1 −p∗
2| in SSP4 is larger than that PSP, i.e., (1−1
r)(1−α) ≥c
γ −1+
q
c
γ(1 −
c
αγ).
Recall that in the conditions of SSP4, we have 1 −1
r ≥
c
αγ. Therefore, it suﬃces to show for for
c
γ ≥
α
1+α, [(1 −α) c
αγ −c
γ + 1]2 ≥c
γ(1 −
c
αγ), which can be further simpliﬁed as g( c
γ) ≡(4α2 −3α +
1)( c
γ)2 +(2−5α)α c
γ +α2 ≥0. One can verify that discriminant for the quadratic function g( c
γ) = 0,
δ = [(2−5α)α]2 −4α2(4α2 −3α+1) ≥0 when α ≤8
9. Therefore, we next show g( c
γ) ≥0 for c
γ ≥
α
1+α
when α ≥8
9. It can be checked that g( c
γ) is increasing for
c
γ ≥
α
1+α when α ≥8
9. Moreover, g( c
γ =
α
1+α) =
α2
(1+α)2 (4 −4α) ≥0. This completes the proof.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 5. When r is relatively small, r ≤
2
√α, the boundary line between GSP
and SSP is c
γ = α
2 for r ≤2 and c
γ = α(1 −1
r) for r ≥2, both of which are increasing in α. It follows
that the boundary line between GSP and SSP is raised. For r ≥
2
√α, the boundary line between
PSP and GSP is
c
γ = α
2 +
q
α2
4 −α
r2 , which is increasing α; and thus the boundary line between
GSP and PSP is raised. Similarly, it can be checked that the boundary line between PSP and SSP
r =
1−α
α−2√c
γ (1−c
γ ) goes down.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 6. It is easy to check that the GSP equilibria remain the same as previous.
We next study the SSP and PSP equilibria. Speciﬁcally, for SSP1 and SSP2, most outcomes remain
the same, including p1, π, S v, p2. The only diﬀerences are d, ρd
2 and the conditions. d is the solution
to γ 1
2vα
1
2 vr
d+y = c0 +c1f(d), and ρd
2 = 1
2vr/(d+y), where y is the same as before, i.e., y = 1−(1−v)r.
In addition, the conditions for SSP1 and SSP2, d + y ≥1
2[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1) + v]r can be expressed as
d ≥r−3
2 + (1 −v)r.
For SSP3 and SSP4, since Solution 4 is the optimal solution in Period 2, we still have 1) ρd
2 = 1,
and p∗
2 = c0+c1f(d)
γ
; and 2) d + y = (v −
p∗
2
α )r and p∗
2 = (1 −d+1
r )α. Then it follows that d is the
solution to c0+c1f(d)
γ
= (1−d+1
r )α. Plugging d into p∗
2 = (1−d+1
r )α, we can obtain p∗
2. The rest proof
resembles that of Proposition 2. We have p∗
1 = max{ 1−α
2
+ p∗
2,(1 −1
r)(1 −α) + p∗
2}. The conditions
for SSP3 are given by r ≤2 and
α
4 ≤p∗
2 ≤α
2 . The conditions for SSP4 are given by r ≥2 and
α
2 (1 −1
r) ≤p∗
2 ≤α(1 −1
r). In both equilibria, the matching volume is given by V = (1 −
p∗
2
α )r.

ec7
For PSP, similar to the proof in Proposition 3, it suﬃces to consider Solutions 1 as the optimal
solution in Period2. Since ρd
2 = 1, by γp∗
2ρd
2 = c0 + c1f(d), we have p∗
2 = c0+c1f(d)
γ
. Moreover, since
p∗
2 = [1 −
d+y
(1−ρr
1)r]α in Solution 1, it follows that d is the solution to c0+c1f(d)
γ
= [1 −
d+y
(1−ρr
1)r]α. Note
that the solution is in terms of v. Plugging d into p∗
2 = c0+c1f(d)
γ
, one can easily obtain p∗
2 (also
in terms of v). Recall that π = (1 −γ)(v + dp∗
2) and p1 = v in PSP. Let pP SP
1
be the real solution
to dπ
dv = 0 such that pP SP
1
maximizes π and 0 < pP SP
1
< 1. By (1 −v)r ≥1, we need the condition
pP SP
1
≤1 −1
r. In addition, as Solution 1 is the optimal solution, we also need the conditions
(1 −v)(1 −ρr
1)r > d + y and 0.5(1 −ρr
1)r > d + y.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 7. Since the ﬁrm is myopic to maximize the revenue in period 1 when
setting p1, it is easy to see that p∗
1 = 1 −1
r. When setting p2, Lemma 3 still holds with a myopic
ﬁrm. In addition, by p∗
1 = 1 −1
r, we have (1 −v)r ≤1. Thus, we only need to consider the scenario
v ≥p1 ≥p2
α , i.e., only Solutions 3 and 4 in Lemma 3 can arise. Suppose Solution 3 is the optimal
solution in Period 2. It follows that ρr
1 = 1, ρd
2 =
vr
2(d+y), π∗
2 = 1
4(1 −γ)αv2r and p∗
2 = 1
2vα. By
v = p1−p2
1−α , we have v = (1 −1/r)/(1 −α/2) and p∗
2 =
α
2−α(1 −1
r). By γp∗
2
(v−p∗
2/α)r
d+y
= c, we have
d + y = αγr
4c (v)2. To guarantee d + y ≥1
2[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
r) + v]r and v ≤1, we need the conditions
c
γ ≤
α
2−α(1 −1
r) and α ≤2
r. Suppose Solution 4 is the optimal solution in Period 2. Since ρd
2 = 1,
we always have p∗
2 = c
γ. It follows that v = p1−p2
1−α = (1 −1/r −c/γ)/(1 −α) and d + y = (v −
c
αγ)r.
To guarantee d + y ≤1
2[(1 −v)(1 −ρr
r) + v]r, we need the condition c
γ ≥
α
2−α(1 −1
r). In addition, by
p1 ≥p2
α and v ≤1, we have the conditions c
γ ≤α(1−1
r) and α ≤1
r + c
γ. For the above two scenarios,
the ﬁrm’s total revenue over two periods is expressed as π = (1 −γ)[p1(1 −v)r + p2(v −p2
α )r], and
the riders’ surplus is given by S = ( 1+v
2
−p1)(1 −v)r + ( αv−p2
2
)(v −p2
α )r. As the drivers’ surplus
is SD = γ[p1(1 −v)r + p2(v −p2
α )r] −dc, the total social welfare is given by W = SD + S + π =
1+v
2 (1 −v)r + αv+p2
2
(v −p2
α )r −dc.
It is also possible that v ≥1, then no transaction takes place in period 1, i.e., when 1)
c
γ ≤
α
2−α(1 −1
r) and α ≥2
r; or 2)
α
2−α(1 −1
r) ≤c
γ ≤α(1 −1
r). In these scenarios, at the beginning of
period 2, the ﬁrm sets the price p2 to maximize its revenue min{(1 −p2
α r,1 + d)}p2. It is easy to
check the optimal solution is p∗
2 = α
2 with d = αγr
4c −1 when c
γ ≤α
2 and p∗
2 = c
γ with d = (1−
c
αγ)r −1
when
c
γ ≥α
2 . In these scenarios, the transaction volume, platform proﬁt, rider surplus, driver
surplus and social welfare are given by V = (1 −p2
α )r, π = (1 −γ)(1 −p2
α )rp2, S = (1 −p2
α )r α−p2
2
,
SD = γ(1 −p2
α )rp2 −dc and W = α+p2
2
(1 −p2
α )r −dc.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 8. The proof of this lemma resembles that of Propositions 2 and 3.
Q.E.D.

ec8
Proof of Proposition 9. Note that GSP has overlaps with SSP4 in which (1 −v)θr + (1 −
p∗
1)(1−θ)r = 1. Therefore, the proﬁt in SSP4 can be expressed as πSSP 4 = (1−γ)[p∗
1+(v−c
αγ)θr c
γ] =
(1 −γ)
(1−1
r )(1−α)+θ c
γ (1−c
αγ )r
1−α+αθ
. It can be checked that 1)when r ≥3 −α(1 −θ), πSSP 4 is increasing in
θ; and when r ≥3 −α(1 −θ), πSSP 4 is decreasing in θ for
1−1
r
2−α+αθ ≤
c
αγ ≤1
r, and increasing in θ for
1
r ≤
c
αγ ≤1 −1
r.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Lemma 4. The proof of this lemma resembles that of Lemma 3.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 10. The proof of this proposition resembles that of Proposition 2.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 11. We consider the scenario where SSP2 and MSP4 are the outcomes
of SSP and MSP, respectively. Note that the conditions for SSP2 is a subset of those for MSP4.
Therefore, the conditions for this scenario are the same as those for SSP2, i.e., r ≥
4−3α
2(1−α) and
c
γ ≤α
2 (1−1
r). The ﬁrst period prices p∗
1 in MSP4 and SSP2 are 1−1
r and (1−1
r)(1−α
2 ), respectively.
The second period prices p∗
2 in MSP4 and SSP2 are α
2 and α
2 (1 −1
r), respectively. In MSP4, the
social welfare is given by WMSP 4 = α+p2
2
(1−p2
α )r −dc = αr( 3
8 −γ
4)+c. The social welfare in SSP2 is
given by WSSP 2 = 1−1
2r +( 3
8 −γ
4)αr(1−1
r)2. Hence, the social welfare gap can be expressed as ∆=
WSSP 2 −WMSP 4 = [1 −( 3
4 −γ
2)α](1 −1
2r) −c. Recall that the conditions for SSP2 are c
γ ≤α
2 (1 −1
r)
and r ≥
4−3α
2(1−α) ≥2. Therefore, ∆≥[1 −( 3
4 −γ
2)α](1 −1
2r) −αγ
2 (1 −1
r) = (1 −3α
4 )(1 −2
r) + αγ
4r ≥0.
Q.E.D.