TITLE: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2022.1106
---

TSpace Research Repository 
 
tspace.library.utoronto.ca 
 
 
Operational Strategies for Distributing 
Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid 
 
Andre P. Calmon, Diana Jue-Rajasingh, Gonzalo Romero & Jackie 
Stenson 
 
Version Accepted Manuscript 
 
Citation 
(published version) 
Calmon, A. P., Jue-Rajasingh, D., Romero, G., & Stenson, J. (2022). 
Operational strategies for distributing durable goods in the base of the 
pyramid. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 24(4), 1887-1905. 
 
Copyright / License Copyright © 2022, INFORMS 
 
 
DOI https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2022.1106 
Publisher’s Statement This is an accepted manuscript of an article published by INFORMS in 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to cite TSpace items 
 
Always cite the published version, so the author(s) will receive recognition through services that track 
citation counts, e.g. Scopus. If you need to cite the page number of the author manuscript from TSpace 
because you cannot access the published version, then cite the TSpace version in addition to the published 
version using the permanent URI (handle) found on the record page. 
 
This article was made openly accessible by U of T Faculty. 
Please tell us how this access benefits you. Your story matters. 
 

Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable
Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
Andre P. Calmon
Scheller College of Business, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, andre.calmon@gatech.edu
Diana Jue-Rajasingh
Essmart, Bangalore, India and Ross School of Business, University of Michigan, USA, diana@essmart-global.com
Gonzalo Romero
Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada, gonzalo.romero@rotman.utoronto.ca
Jackie Stenson
Essmart, Bangalore, India, jackie@essmart-global.com
Problem definition: Novel life-improving products such as solar lanterns and energy-efficient cookstoves
address essential needs of consumers in the Base of the Pyramid (BOP). However, their profitable distri-
bution is often difficult since BOP customers are risk-averse, their ability to pay (ATP) is lower than their
willingness to pay (WTP), and they face uncertainty regarding these products’ value.
Academic/Practical Relevance: We examine two practical strategies from distributors in the BOP: (1)
improving the product’s affordability through a discount, and (2) increasing awareness of the product’s value.
Our results identify BOP-specific operational trade-offs in implementing these strategies. We also propose
strategies to manage these trade-offs that can increase consumer surplus in the BOP.
Methodology: We introduce a supply chain model for the BOP and analyze the distributor’s pricing prob-
lem with refunds, as well as the distributor’s optimal budget allocation between strategies (1) and (2).
Results: We find that, in the BOP, the distributor’s profit-maximizing budget allocation often yields the
lowest consumer surplus. This misalignment between profits and consumer surplus disappears if customers’
ATP is high. Moreover, the misalignment can be resolved if the distributor offers free product returns and
commits to a maximum retail price. We confirm the robustness of our results through numerical simulations.
Implications: Best operations strategy practices in the BOP can differ significantly from developed markets.
Furthermore, BOP customers’ limited ATP and high risk-aversion generate a BOP-specific misalignment
between profits and consumer surplus. Operational commitments such as free returns reduce this misalign-
ment and can serve as a signal to investors of a social enterprise’s focus on consumer surplus.
Key words : Social entrepreneurship, base of the pyramid, sustainability, supply chain management.
1.
Introduction
Since the early 2000s, there has been an increasing academic and corporate interest in the creation
and distribution of innovative life-improving durable goods that address the unmet needs of Base of
the Pyramid (BOP) customers, i.e. the 800 million people that earn less than $2 a day in purchasing
power parity (PPP) (World Bank 2016). Examples of life-improving durable goods are affordable
solar lanterns, non-electric water purifiers, and smoke-reducing cooking stoves (for a sample of
these technologies see Essmart 2020). The profitable distribution of these is the goal of hundreds
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

2
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
of social enterprises1 and billions of dollars of investment2. However, businesses have struggled to
create and implement profitable BOP-specific distribution strategies (Simanis 2012).
Although the need for research on BOP-specific distribution strategies has been widely discussed
in the management literature over the last few decades (see Prahalad 2006), there are few operations
management papers that model and examine BOP supply chains. To address this gap, we model
and analyze the operations strategy of a BOP distributor that allocates an investment budget to
profitably distribute a new life-improving durable good. Consistent with the goal of most social
enterprises, the distributor maximizes a mix of its profits and consumer surplus. We consider a
model where a distributor sells a product to a profit-maximizing retailer that, in turn, sells to BOP
customers, modeling the main components of most BOP markets (Bellman et al. 2018).
BOP customers’ ability to pay (ATP) for the life-improving good is often lower than their will-
ingness to pay (WTP). Customers with ATP lower than their WTP is a context-defining feature
of the BOP (Banerjee et al. 2012) and is a key feature of our model. Furthermore, we model BOP
customers as being risk averse. The connection between risk aversion and poverty is well estab-
lished in the literature (Haushofer and Fehr 2014). In practice, BOP customers are frequently not
informed of the benefits that a new life-improving product might provide. As a result, customers
might not buy the product due to uncertainty about the product’s value and fear of regretting
their purchase. Thus, we assume customers have two possible informational states: uninformed,
where a customer has a high degree of uncertainty about the product’s value, and informed, where
the customer is aware of the product’s value (Shugan and Xie 2000).
Recent field experiments suggest that allowing for product returns can be an effective tool
for promoting product adoption in developing countries, see Dupas (2014b) and Levine et al.
(2018). In practice, although a few BOP-focused organizations allow customers to return products,3
product returns have been an underutilized option in the BOP. This is surprising, considering that
many life-improving products are experience goods where customers have difficulty appraising the
product’s benefits before purchase. Hence, our model assumes that the retailer, incentivized by the
distributor, can offer customers the option to return a product for a refund.
We use our model to study two decision-making problems. The first is the Pricing Problem
where the distributor chooses the product’s wholesale price and the refund it gives the retailer for
1 Social enterprises are organizations whose objective combines social and economic value creation. This mixed objec-
tive differentiates social enterprises from both for-profit businesses and from charities (Miller et al. 2012).
2 The Global Investment Impact Network estimates that the impact investment market surpassed $500 billion in
2019. See https://thegiin.org/research/publication/impinv-survey-2019
3 Companies such as Burro, a solar product distributor in Ghana, EcoZoom, a cookstove manufacturer in Kenya, and
Pollinate Energy, a distributor in India, are a few examples of social enterprises that offer customers the option to
return products after purchase.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
3
returned products. The retailer, in turn, decides the customer price and the refund (if any) it offers
to customers that regret their purchase and choose to return the product.
The second problem we examine is the distributor’s Allocation Problem where the distributor,
based on the prices and refunds set in the Pricing Problem, allocates an investment budget to
increase profits and consumer welfare. We assume the distributor allocates the budget between
two common types of investments:
1) Invest in improving product affordability through discount coupons or vouchers. Many of the
life-improving technologies are well-established, e.g. induction cooktops, water purifiers, and solar
lamps. However, these technologies are rarely offered at a price point that BOP customers can
afford. With the goal of managing this affordability issue, many BOP organizations address cus-
tomers’ low ATP with discount coupons, subsidies, or financing options.
2) Invest in customer education to increase awareness of the product’s value. Some benefits of
innovative durable goods are not immediately understood by customers.4 To address information
gaps, many social enterprises invest in educational campaigns to increase the number of BOP
customers that are informed of a life-improving product’s existence and benefits.5
We analyze (i) how the BOP distributor should allocate its investment budget between improv-
ing affordability and customer education (1 and 2 above), (ii) how the the distributor’s optimal
investment strategy changes depending on consumers’ ATP and risk aversion, and (iii) the inter-
play between the distributor’s optimal investment strategy and consumer surplus. We first analyze
a setting where all customers have the same ATP. We then leverage this analysis to examine the
case where customers have heterogeneous ATP.
We find that, in equilibrium, investments in affordability always improve the distributor’s objec-
tive. However, investments in consumer education might worsen the distributor’s objective if cus-
tomers have low ATP and low to moderate risk aversion. Thus, the value of information (Shulman
et al. 2009) can be negative in BOP contexts and depends on customer ATP and risk aversion.
Moreover, we characterize the optimal allocation and pricing strategies as a function of cus-
tomers’ ATP and risk aversion level. We prove that if customers’ ATP is low and risk aversion
is high (which is typical of a BOP context), then the distributor’s profit-maximizing allocation
is to increase product affordability, not allow product returns, and skim the market by target-
ing customers with high ATP. This pricing and allocation strategy induces the lowest average
4 For example, smoke-reducing, fuel-efficient, clean cooking stoves could reduce the 4.3 million annual deaths that are
linked to households cooking over coal, wood, and biomass stoves (World Health Organization 2016). However, BOP
customers are usually uninformed of the negative long-term health repercussions associated with using inefficient
stoves, or of the existence of cleaner cooking solutions. As a result, potential customers may be unwilling to pay for
unfamiliar products that may not meet their immediate perceived needs (Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves 2016).
5 Besides Essmart, social enterprises such as Burro (BOP distributor in Ghana) and Bidhaa Sasa (BOP distributor
in Kenya) rely on teams of sales executives to perform product demonstrations and promote their products
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

4
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
consumer surplus. Conversely, if customers’ ATP is high (typical of a non-BOP context), the profit-
maximizing allocation strategy is to increase customer education, accept product returns, and
price the product so that all customers purchase. This pricing and allocation strategy induces the
highest average consumer surplus. Hence, our analysis illustrates a tension between profits and
consumer surplus that is BOP-specific. This result has practical implications: profit-maximizing
operations strategies might have adverse implications on consumer surplus when implemented in
a BOP context. Finally, we show that the distributor can mitigate this tension by committing to
offer free returns to customers and by setting a maximum retail price.
Our results shed light on the trade-offs and challenges that emerge when designing an organi-
zation’s operations strategy in the BOP. They provide theoretical support for novel distribution
strategies and operational commitments that are being implemented by social enterprises aiming
at profitably distributing life-improving products and improving consumer welfare in this context.
Several of our modeling assumptions are drawn from the experience of Essmart, an Indian social
enterprise that is the main motivating case study for this paper. Essmart has several distribution
centers that serve a network of over one thousand small retail shops in southern India. See Appendix
A for a discussion of Essmart’s operations strategy.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we present a literature review. In
Section 3 we introduce our model. Section 4 examines the setting all where customers have the
same ATP, while Section 5 adresses customers with heterogeneous ATP. In Section 6, we consider
a continuous model and examine the robustness of our results. Finally, Section 7 concludes.
2.
Literature review
Our results contribute to the literature on social entrepreneurship, product returns, sustainable
operations, and the intersection of marketing and operations management. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first study of an equilibrium model that describes the challenges BOP
distributors face when attempting to profitably reach consumers with low ATP and risk aversion.
We position our paper with respect to this literature next.
2.1.
Social entrepreneurship and development
Mair and Marti (2006) describe social entrepreneurship as “a process involving the innovative use
and combination of resources to pursue opportunities to catalyze social change and/or address social
needs.” Social entrepreneurship emerges in contexts where goods and services are not adequately
provided by public agencies or private markets (Dees 1994) and where market and government
failures are perceived (McMullen 2011). Through our model, we can address the particular problems
confronted by social enterprises operating in the BOP.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
5
Recent BOP field experiments motivate the inclusion of product returns in our model. Dupas
(2014b) finds through a field experiment in Kenya that short-term subsidies for bednets can boost
long-term-adoptions because consumers, by trying out the bednet, learn its value. Dupas (2014b)
also speculates that “free trials” could be an effective tool for promoting product adoption in the
BOP. Similarly, Levine et al. (2018) observed in Uganda that giving customers the right to return a
cookstove dramatically increased their adoption. Our results provide a game-theoretic foundation
for these observations.
2.2.
Socially responsible supply chains
Our paper is inscribed within the recent research trend in operations management that studies
socially and environmentally responsible value chain innovations; see Lee and Tang (2018) for a
motivation and literature review. Sodhi and Tang (2017) challenge the supply chain community to
develop frameworks for supply chains that seek to have social impact and be financially sustainable.
Given the BOP context we consider, our model is one answer to this challenge.
Recently, Uppari et al. (2017) analyze strategies for off-grid energy business models that rely
on rechargeable lightbulbs in low-income markets. Similar to our paper, they assume that BOP
consumers face financial distress. Zhang et al. (2017) and Gui et al. (2018) consider replenishment
strategies that can help retailers in low-income markets manage costs. Since Essmart, who motivates
this paper, uses a “deliver-to-order” replenishment strategy to retailers, we focus instead on the
trade-off between consumer education and product discounts, modulated by product returns.
A popular research stream is the study of practical mechanisms to incentivize suppliers to comply
with social and environmental standards, e.g. Plambeck and Taylor (2015), Chen and Lee (2016),
and Huang et al. (2017). Our paper relates to this prior work in that we also characterize the
equilibrium behavior of a three-tier supply chain, and quantify the incremental value of different
strategies. However, the focus of this literature is usually on a buyer trying to incentivize a supplier
that is difficult to monitor. In contrast, we focus on a distributor trying to incentivize a local
retailer to carry life-improving products in a low-income market with risk-averse BOP consumers.
A paper related to ours in this area is Taylor and Xiao (2019). They compare distributing socially-
desirable products through non-commercial and commercial channels, where the latter includes a
for-profit intermediary, in a model that incorporates consumer awareness. Taylor and Xiao (2019)
study the optimal subsidy by an international donor. Our model is different in several aspects,
including the presence of product returns and locally-provided product financing.
2.3.
Product returns, valuation uncertainty, and marketing
We build upon the literature on operations of reverse logistics systems that support product returns.
In particular, Su (2009) proposes a model where consumers face valuation uncertainty before
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

6
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
Figure 1
Summary of model parameters and decision variables.
purchasing and proposes contracts that coordinate the supply chain including product returns. In
contrast, we incorporate information control to the consumer and increasing product affordability,
while we ignore aggregate demand uncertainty and do not address the inventory management
component of the problem, which were not significant concerns for Essmart, our industry partner.
Our customer education model and the Pricing Problem’s outcomes are related to the marketing
literature on advance-selling (Shugan and Xie 2000, Xie and Shugan 2001). However, these papers
assume two pricing opportunities before the service is provided: the advance price and the spot
price, where customers’ valuation uncertainty is revealed before the latter. Instead, our model has
one pricing opportunity and the valuation uncertainty is revealed after buying the product.
Shulman et al. (2009) consider a model with risk-neutral consumers and two horizontally differ-
entiated products. They consider a binary decision of providing either full product fit information
or no information to consumers, and identify conditions where it is optimal to provide full informa-
tion. In contrast, we consider a richer information control model and incorporate consumers’ risk
aversion and ATP, which are key characteristics of the BOP (see Shukla and Bairiganjan 2011).
While Shulman et al. (2009) shows that improving information availability might reduce a retailer’s
profits, we describe how the value of information changes with customer ATP and risk-aversion.
3.
Model
We introduce a game-theoretic model of a supply chain that distributes a life-improving durable
good designed for BOP customers in a low-income market. The supply chain has three echelons:
the distributor, the retailer, and the customers. As is standard in the literature, we assume that the
distributor anticipates the retailer and customer actions. The model parameters, which we explain
in detail in the remainder of this section, are depicted schematically in Figure 1.
We assume that the market has a constant number of customers. To simplify our notation, we
normalize the total demand to 1, and we work on a per-unit accounting basis. We focus on the
case where there are only two possible customer valuations and two levels of customer financial
distress. This setup provides novel managerial insights and is analytically tractable. In Section 6,
we verify their robustness in a more sophisticated customer model through numerical simulations.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
7
We introduce the supply chain model in three steps. First, we model customer purchasing behav-
ior in the BOP. Next, we model the retailer’s behavior as well as the distributor’s Pricing and
Allocation Problems. Finally, we describe the sequence of events in the game.
3.1.
Base of the Pyramid customers
We assume customers face product uncertainty: they might not know the exact product’s value
before their purchase. Specifically, customers have a valuation vh or vl for the product, where
vh > vl. A fraction β of customers has a high valuation vh, while a fraction 1−β has a low valuation
vl.
Prior to their purchasing decision, the customers may receive a marketing signal from the distrib-
utor (the signal models a marketing campaign). The random variable S ∈{0,1} indicates whether
a customer received this signal and is informed (S = 1) or uninformed (S = 0). Thus, P(S = 1) = θ
models the reach of the marketing campaign and, ultimately, the customer education level in the
market. We model θ as a strategic decision made by the distributor,6 and we assume θ to be inde-
pendent of customer valuations. For simplicity, we assume that the marketing signal carries perfect
information about the product. If S = 1 the customer learns their true valuation (either vl or vh),
while if S = 0 the customer receives no further information and estimates their valuation based on
the distribution of valuations across the population. This customer education model is similar to
the literature on advance-selling of services (Shugan and Xie 2000, Xie and Shugan 2001).
The retailer chooses the product price p and might offer customers a refund r ≤p if they return
the product. A customer returns the product if, after purchase and use, they find that their val-
uation for the product is less than the refund r. Thus, returns are a real option that guarantees
customers a minimum level of satisfaction from their purchase — Essmart has found that over 30%
of their retailers offer refunds, usually over a two-week return period.
The relationship between poverty and risk aversion, in particular in the BOP, is well established
in the literature (see Haushofer and Fehr 2014). For tractability’s sake, we model BOP customers’
utility function as exhibiting constant absolute risk aversion. Namely, if the customer has a value
v for a product with price p and is offered a refund r, their utility function u is
u(v,p,r) = 1 −e−α(max(v,r)−p)
α
,
where α is the risk aversion parameter: the higher α the more risk averse customers are. Hence,
customers explicitly take into account the option value of returning the product in their utility.
A customer’s willingness to pay (WTP) for the product is the maximum price for which the
customer’s expected utility is non-negative. A customer that receives the perfectly informative
6 In practice, companies such as Essmart, Solar Sisters (also a distributor in India), and Bidhaa Sasa (a BOP distrib-
utor in Ghana) invest in developing sales executive teams to promote and run product demonstrations in villages.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

8
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
1
0
1 −✓
✓
Signal: S
Value: V
vh
vl
1
0
1 −✓
✓
β
1 −β
Exp. Utility
vh −p
31s9avqkcvwSJUKGVXRD1JQSPFewHbJeSTbNtaDZkqxQlv4MLx4U8eqv8ea/MW3oK0PBh7vzTAzL0w408Z1v52V1bX1jc3CVnF7Z3dv3Rw2NIyVYQ2ieRSdUKsKWeCNg0znHYSR
XEctoOR7dTv/1ElWZSPJpxQoMYDwSLGMHGSv6dn1Za1aSqzoJeqezW3BnQMvFyUoYcjV7pq9uXJI2pMIRjrX3PTUyQYWUY4XRS7KaJpiM8ID6lgocUx1ks5Mn6NQqfRJZUsYNFN/
T2Q41noch7YzxmaoF72p+J/npya6DjImktRQeaLopQjI9H0f9RnihLDx5Zgopi9FZEhVpgYm1LRhuAtvrxMWuc17LmPVyU6zd5HAU4hOogAdXUId7aEATCEh4hld4c4z4rw7H/P
WFSefOYI/cD5/AL1bkD0=</latexit>E[u(V, p, r)]
vl −p
E[u(V, p, r)]
Figure 2
Customer utility. A fraction λ of customers have ATP mh and a fraction 1 −λ have ATP ml.
marketing signal (S = 1) has a WTP vh or vl, depending on their (known) product valuation.
Conversely, a customer that is uninformed (S = 0) has a WTP that depends on their expected
utility, which we describe next. Let V be a random variable that describes the valuation of a
customer chosen at random. Then, the expected utility of an uninformed customer is
E[u(V,p,r)] = β
α
 1 −e−α(max(vh,r)−p)
+ 1 −β
α
 1 −e−α(max(vl,r)−p)
.
(1)
As a result, the WTP of uninformed customers, pα(r), solves E[u(V,pα(r),r)] = 0. Since E[u(V,p,r)]
is strictly decreasing in p, pα(r) exists and is unique – see Appendix B.1 for a derivation of pα(r).
We model the significant credit and liquidity constraints BOP customers face by assuming that
their ability to pay (ATP) for life-improving products is potentially lower than their WTP. This
assumption is consistent with recent empirical research (see Tarozzi et al. 2014, Dupas 2014a).
We assume a fraction λ of customers have ATP mh and a fraction 1 −λ have ATP ml, where
mh ≥ml. If p > ml then no customer with ATP ml will purchase the good, even if their WTP
is larger than p (if p > mh then no customer purchases the product). As a result, a customer
only purchases the product if both her WTP and ATP are larger than p. We model mh and ml as
exogenous parameters and we assume vl ≤ml ≤mh ≤vh. This assumption is commonly found in
the development economics literature, e.g. Banerjee (1997) and Banerjee et al. (2012). Assuming
other orderings of vl, vh, ml and mh does not lead to additional insights.
We now describe the probability of a customer purchasing and returning the product, as well as
their expected surplus. Let W and M be random variables that represent, respectively, the WTP
and ATP of a randomly chosen customer. The distribution of W and M are
P(W = ω) =





θ · β
if ω = vh,
θ · (1 −β)
if ω = vl,
1 −θ
if ω = pα(r).
,
P(M = m) =
(
λ
if m = mh,
1 −λ
if m = ml.
Figure 2 depicts the distribution of customer utility. Let 1{e} denote the indicator function of the
event e. Then, given a price p, refund r, and subsidy x, the fractions of customers that purchase
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
9
and return the product are B(p,r,θ) := E[1{W ≥p,M≥p}|θ] and R(p,r,θ) := E[1{W ≥p,M≥p,V <r}|θ],
respectively. The expected customer surplus, CS(p,r,θ), is
CS(p,r,θ) := E[(V −p)1{W ≥p,M≥p,V ≥r}|θ] −(p −r)E[1{W ≥p,M≥p,V <r}|θ].
(2)
To summarize, θ describes the customer education level; mh and ml characterize BOP customers’
financial distress and the product’s affordability; the probability β and the valuations vl and vh
capture characteristics of the product’s design; α describes customers’ risk aversion; and the equi-
librium price p and refund r determine BOP customers’ access to the product. Together, these
parameters provide a tractable model of BOP customers’ behavior.
3.2.
Retailer
We consider a profit-maximizing retailer that buys the product from the distributor at a cost c and
sells it to the customers at a price p, while offering a refund r for returns. Moreover, the distributor
offers a salvage value z per unit returned by customers to the retailer. The retailer’s profit is
ΠR(p,r) = (p −c) · B(p,r,θ) −(r −z) · R(p,r,θ).
The retailer can choose an outside option instead of selling the distributor’s product, which we
normalize to zero. The outside option could be an alternative product or competing technology.
Since most BOP retailers have limited shelf space, distributors often ensure frequent product
replenishment. In fact, most of Essmart’s retailers sell its products delivered-to-order: whenever a
sale occurs, the item is delivered to the retailer, and the customer collects the product there. For
these reasons, we do not explicitly model the retailer’s inventory management problem.
3.3.
Distributor
The distributor purchases products from the manufacturer at a wholesale cost w and sells them to
retailers in the BOP market. To rule out trivial outcomes, we assume throughout that the product
has a potentially profitably market, i.e., the customers’ lowest ATP is larger than the wholesale
cost, w ≤ml. Any product returned by the retailer is salvaged for a unit value y. We assume
that the distributor, as a social enterprise, values consumer surplus. Specifically, the distributor’s
objective function is a linear mix of profits and consumer surplus.
The distributor makes four decisions. The first two are pricing decisions, where the distributor
chooses the retailer’s price c and refund z. The distributor also makes two strategic decisions: a
potential discount or subsidy to the customer, which we denote by x per item, and the proportion
of “informed” customers θ. A subsidy of x makes the effective price that customers face p−x. The
subsidy x is usually operationalized in the form of a discount coupon, voucher, rebate, or agreement
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

10
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
with a microfinance institution.7 In practice, companies like Essmart increase θ by investing in
marketing campaigns and product demonstrations in BOP communities.
As discussed in Section 1, we consider two optimization problems that many BOP distributors
face. The first is the Pricing Problem where the distributor chooses c and z. For a given subsidy x
and customer education level θ this problem is
Π∗
D(x,θ) = max
c,z
(c −w) · B(p∗−x,r∗,θ) −(z −y) · R(p∗−x,r∗,θ) + γ · CS(p∗−x,r∗,θ)
s.t. {p∗,r∗} ∈arg max
p,r (p −c) · B(p −x,r,θ) −(r −z) · R(p −x,r,θ)
(IC)
(p∗−c) · B(p∗−x,r∗,θ) −(r∗−z) · R(p∗−x,r∗,θ) ≥0.
(IR)
(Pricing Problem)
The first two terms in the objective function correspond to the distributor’s expected profit minus
the expected cost of returns, and the parameter γ ≥0 models the distributor’s relative value for
consumer surplus. The first constraint corresponds to the retailer’s incentive compatibility, i.e., the
retailer chooses the profit-maximizing customer price and refund. Note that the subsidy x changes
the customer purchase and return probabilities. The second constraint corresponds to the retailer’s
individual rationality, i.e., the retailer’s profit should be at least its outside option.
The second problem the distributor faces is the Allocation Problem. The distributor allocates an
investment budget between (1) increasing the subsidy x (a financial lever); and (2) an investment
in increasing the customer education level θ (an information lever). The investment budget could
represent, for example, a grant from a foundation or aid agency to improve the distributor’s oper-
ations. We assume that the budget is earmarked to be spent exclusively between options (1) and
(2), i.e. the distributor does not simply keep the investment budget for itself.
In more detail, the distributor allocates a budget b per customer between increasing customers’
ATP and improving customer education. We denote the marginal cost of the former by cθ and
assume that only customers that purchase the product receive the subsidy. Thus, given some initial
customer educational level θ0 and customers’ ATP m, the distributor chooses θ and x that solve
maximize
x,θ
Π∗
D(x,θ)
subject to
cθ(θ −θ0) + xB(p∗−x,r∗,θ) ≤b,
θ0 ≤θ ≤1,0 ≤x ≤vh −p∗.
(Allocation Problem)
The objective function of the Allocation Problem is the optimal objective value of the Pricing
Problem, while p∗and r∗are functions of x and θ. We assume a natural upper bound on the
subsidy x ≤vh −p∗, i.e., the distributor never increases the customers’ ATP above their maximum
WTP. This constraint is equivalent to assuming that the maximum non-discounted price for the
7 For various case studies on the implementation of leasing models and product financing for the distribution of
life-improving good, see Clean Cooking Alliance (2015, 2019).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
11
product will be at most the largest possible customer WTP (which is vh). This constraint has a
practical motivation since unbounded discounts are unrealistic. Relaxing the constraint x ≤vh −p∗
does not affect our main insights, although it does slightly simplify our analysis.
In addition, we assume that the distributor’s budget can at most fully maximize the ATP of all
customers (i.e. set p∗+ x = vh for everyone) and maximize customer education (i.e. set θ = 1).
Assumption 1 Assume that the distributor’s budget is at most enough for both the customers’
ATP and the customer education to reach their upper bounds, i.e., b ≤cθ(1 −θ0) + λβ(vh −mh).
The term cθ(1−θ0)+λβ(vh −mh) above comes from the fact that when θ = 1 and p∗= mh only the
customers with a high valuation and high ATP buy and B(mh−x,r∗,θ) ≤λβ. Relaxing Assumption
1 does not change our insights.
3.4.
Sequence of events and model discussion
We model the distributor as a Stackelberg leader. The dynamics of the game are as follows:
1. Given θ0, ml, mh, λ, and α , as well as w, y, β, vh, and vl, the distributor solves the Allocation
Problem and chooses its strategic investments. This results in x and θ.
2. Given x and θ, the distributor then chooses c and z by solving the Pricing Problem, antici-
pating the reaction from the retailer and customers;
3. The retailer chooses p and r after observing x, θ, c, and z, with knowledge of β, vh, vl, ml,
mh, λ, and α. The retailer then sells the product if its expected profit is non-negative;
4. Customers p, r, x, and their individual information signal S. Each customer purchases the
product if their WTP and ATP are both larger than the effective price p −x;
5. If a purchase occurs, the product is delivered to the retailer and picked by the customer;
6. An uninformed customer (S = 0) that makes a purchase learns their true valuation (vh or vl)
from using the product, and returns it if the valuation is less than r;
7. The retailer salvages the returns for z per unit while distributor salvages them for y per unit.
Our model blends elements from the operations and development economics literature (Shulman
et al. 2009, Banerjee et al. 2012). Consistent with operations management literature (Su 2009,
Shulman et al. 2009), full refunds are suboptimal in our model even if ATP is lower than WTP.
We examine the Pricing and Allocation Problems in three steps. First, in Section 4, we assume
that all customers have the same ATP, i.e., ml = mh. This assumption is common in the develop-
ment economics literature, e.g., Banerjee (1997). This simplified setup already provides insight into
the effects of limited customer ATP on the customer welfare and on the distributor’s investment
strategy. Second, in Section 5, we extend Section 4’s results to the case where ml < mh, and show
that this feature creates an additional incentive for the retailer to skim the market. Finally, in
Section 6, we replicate our main insights in a model with continuous customers ATP and WTP.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

12
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
4.
Pricing and Resource Allocation Problems with Homogeneous ATP
We now solve the Pricing Problem and the Allocation Problem when mh = ml = m, and examine
how the distributor’s optimal strategy critically depends on customers’ ATP and risk aversion.
Section 4.1 examines the Pricing Problem while Section 4.2 examines the Allocation Problem.
Section 4.3 considers the setup where the distributor commits to offering free returns to customers,
i.e., customers can purchase the product and return it for a full refund if their valuation is low.
4.1.
Pricing Problem with Homogeneous ATP
We first introduce notation to characterize the Pricing Problem’s optimal solution when mh =
ml = m. Let rα(p) denote the minimum retailer’s refund for uninformed customers to purchase the
product at price p. Thus, rα(p) satisfies E[u(V,p,rα(p))] = 0 and from Equation 1 we have
rα(p) =

p −1
α ln
1 −βe−α(vh−p)
1 −β
+
, where (·)+ = max(·,0).
(3)
Proposition B.1 in Appendix B.1 states the Pricing Problem’s optimal solution and describes
the distributor’s two possible non-dominated pricing strategies, which we denote strategies (a)
and (b). In strategy (a), the distributor induces the retailer to target only informed customers
without accepting product returns. Thus, for a discount x, the product’s effective retail price is
p −x = m, r = 0 and a fraction θβ of customers purchase the product. Conversely, strategy (b) is
more nuanced: the distributor induces the retailer to expand sales by accepting product returns and
offering refunds if necessary. In this case, p −x = m and r = rα(m). Under strategy (b), informed
customers with high valuation as well as all uninformed customers purchase the product, i.e., a
fraction θβ +(1−θ) of customers buy the product. Uninformed customers with low valuation return
the product, i.e., a fraction (1−θ)(1−β) of customers purchase and then return the product. The
optimal outcomes of the Pricing Problem are similar to the outcomes in Shugan and Xie (2000).
The Pricing Problem’s optimal solution provides a few insights into how the equilibrium price and
refund interact with model parameters. First, the function rα(p) sheds light into how the customers’
risk aversion level affects the optimal refund offered by the retailer under strategy (b). Namely,
consider the effective price, p −x = m, perceived by customers in their utility function. From
Equation 3, if customers are risk neutral, then offering partial refunds is sufficient for uninformed
customers to purchase the product, i.e., limα→0 rα(m) =

m−βvh
1−β
+
< m. Conversely, if customers
are extremely risk averse (in the limit max-min utility optimizers) then the retailer must refund
the full (post-discount) price to induce uninformed customers to buy, i.e., limα→∞rα(m) = m.
Second, as stated in Proposition B.1, the distributor only induces the retailer to target unin-
formed customers when the expected value from selling to an uninformed customer is higher than
the expected cost of processing a return, independent of the consumer education level θ.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
13
Third, the dependence of the distributor’s optimal pricing strategy on market parameters
becomes intuitive once we focus on the marginal contribution of uninformed customers to the dis-
tributor’s objective. Increasing salvage value, decreasing risk aversion, or decreasing price, all make
it “easier” to target uninformed customers and increases the attractiveness of pricing strategy (b).
Finally, the effect of the distributor’s value for consumer surplus γ on the optimal pricing strategy
is less straightforward. On the one hand, as γ increases, strategy (b) might become more attractive
relative to strategy (a) since it delivers positive surplus to some uninformed customers. On the other
hand, if the refund that the retailer offers to customers rα(m) is too low, uninformed customers that
purchase and return the product might end-up with negative surplus. Hence, depending on market
and product parameters, increasing γ might make strategy (b) either more or less attractive.
The consumer surplus induced by both strategies (a) or (b) in Proposition B.1 decreases in
the customers’ ATP m and is independent of the distributor’s subsidy for consumers x. These
effects happens because any increase in customer ATP is recaptured by the supply chain through
a price increase — these features follow from customers’ homogeneous ATP, the Stackelberg game
structure of the model, and are standard in the development economics literature from where we
borrow the ATP formulation, e.g. Banerjee (1997). When ml < mh, the consumer surplus might
increase with the average ATP as we discuss in the next section.
Proposition 1 provides comparative statics on the effects of θ and x on the distributor’s objective.
Proposition 1 Providing a subsidy x ≥0 can only improve the distributor’s objective value.
Namely, let Π∗
D be the distributor’s optimal objective value, then
∂Π∗
D
∂x ≥0. In contrast, increasing
the consumer education level θ might worsen the distributor’s objective value. Specifically,
∂Π∗
D
∂θ ≤0 if and only if m + x −w −(rα(m) −y) −γ(m −rα(m)) ≥0.
(4)
Additionally, for the distributor, x and θ are strategic complements under strategy (a) in Propo-
sition B.1, while they are strategic substitutes under strategy (b) in Proposition B.1.
Proposition 1 states that if customers’ ATP is low, or if the product’s salvage value is high, then
increasing the consumer education level might actually be prejudicial to the distributor. Indeed, the
left hand side of Equation 4 is the total contribution of a returned unit to the distributor’s objective.
Specifically, m + x −w is the distributor’s margin on each sale, rα(m) −y is the distributor’s cost
for each returned product, and γ(m −rα(m)) is the cost perceived by the distributor due to the
negative consumer surplus attained by customers who return the product. If the total contribution
is positive, then returned products are valuable to the distributor and, as a result, increasing the
consumer education level can reduce the distributor’s objective.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

14
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
6
7
8
9
10
m
Π∗
D
θ
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9
(a) α = 0.1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
6
7
8
9
10
m
Π∗
D
θ
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9
(b) α = 0.5
Figure 3
Distributor’s profits for different ATP m and consumer education level θ. We assume vh = $10, vl = 0,
w = $6, y = $4, x = 0, β = 0.6, and γ = 0.
In particular, if the distributor’s relative value for consumer surplus is moderate (γ < 1), a
lower customer ATP m results in the inequality in Equation 4 being violated by a larger subset of
possible market and customer parameters. Thus, for a lower customer ATP, improving consumer
education has a negative impact on the distributor’s objective for a larger set of market and
customer parameters. Figure 3(a) illustrates this result for a set of problem parameters — note
how for m > $8.4 increasing θ decreases the distributor’s objective.
As the risk aversion parameter α increases, pricing strategy (a) becomes relatively more attractive
since rα(m) is increasing in α. In strategy (b), as α increases, the marginal cost of returned products
increases, and the set model parameters that violate the inequality in Equation 4 also increases.
Hence, as α increases, increasing θ benefits the distributor for a larger set of market and customer
parameters — contrasting Figure 3(a) and Figure 3(b) illustrates this observation.
Finally, Proposition 1 states that the interaction between improving consumer education and
improving affordability is not the same under different pricing strategies. In strategy (a), they are
complements. Namely, if the distributor only targets informed consumers, increasing θ increases the
effective market size and the marginal value of x. Conversely, in strategy (b), they are substitutes.
The cost of returned products drives this substitution effect. As x increases, the cost associated
to product returns decreases. Moreover, increasing θ reduces the volume of returns. Hence, if θ is
large then less financing is needed to reduce the costs of returns, reducing the marginal value of x.
With the solution of the Pricing Problem in hand, we now examine the Allocation Problem.
4.2.
Allocation Problem
In this section, we characterize the solution to the Allocation Problem, where the distributor
allocates a budget between consumer education and increasing customers’ ATP. We examine how
ATP and risk aversion, as well as the distributor’s relative value for consumer surplus affects the
distributor’s investment strategy and, ultimately, value creation in the BOP context. Theorem 1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
15
below characterizes the four possible distributor’s non-dominated investment allocation strategies: a
finance-based strategy (F) where the distributor increases x; a marketing-based strategy (M) where
the distributor increases θ; a finance-based strategy including returns (FR) where the distributor
increases x and also offers customers a return option; and a marketing strategy including returns
(MR) where the distributor increases θ and also offers customers a return option.
Theorem 1 The distributor has four non-dominated strategies in the Allocation Problem, which
we denote by F, M, FR, and MR:
• F: invest the budget in improving product affordability by increasing x. If there is enough
budget to set x = vh −m, invest the remaining budget in increasing θ. The distributor follows
pricing strategy (a) from Proposition B.1, targeting only informed customers.
• M: invest the budget in increasing the consumer education level θ. If there is enough budget to
set θ = 1, invest the remaining budget in increasing x. The distributor follows pricing strategy
(a) from Proposition B.1, targeting only informed customers.
• FR: invest the budget in improving product affordability by increasing x. If there is enough
budget to set x = vh −m, the remaining budget is invested in increasing θ if vh −w −(rα(m)−
y)−γ(m−rα(m)) < 0, and not invested otherwise. The distributor follows pricing strategy (b)
from Proposition B.1, targeting all customers by accepting product returns.
• MR: invest the budget as in strategy M. However, the distributor follows pricing strategy (b)
from Proposition B.1, targeting all customers by accepting product returns.
In practice, strategy F could represent an investment by the distributor in discount coupons,
vouchers or micro-financing for customers. Strategy M could be an investment in marketing cam-
paigns or village demonstrations. In strategies FR and MR, the distributor complements the
previous strategies by inducing the retailer to offer product returns. Offering returns, or even free
trials, are relatively novel strategies to profitably distribute life-improving products in the BOP
and are being used by companies like Essmart and a select number of other distributors.8
Strategy FR is more nuanced than the other strategies. In FR, the distributor allocates as much
budget as possible to increasing x. If the distributor has enough budget to set customers’ ATP to
vh, i.e. x = vh −m, then it allocates the remaining budget in one of two possible ways: if Equation 4
does not hold and, as a result, increasing θ improves the distributor’s objective, then the remaining
budget is allocated to increasing θ; if Equation 4 holds, then the remaining budget is not invested.
If we relax the constraint x ≤vh −m, i.e. if we allow customers’ ATP to be larger than vh, then
the structure of strategy FR simplifies, in that all the budget is spent on x. However, this does
not change our main results and insights, which are detailed next.
8 For example, Burro (a distributor in Ghana), EcoZoom (Kenya), and Pollinate Energy (India).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

16
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
Propositions B.2, B.3 and B.4 in the Appendix fully characterize the optimal investment strategy
map for the Allocation Problem as a function of the two parameters that define customer behavior
in the BOP: the (homogeneous) ATP m and the risk aversion parameter α, see Figure 4 for an
illustration. The propositions specify necessary and sufficient conditions for each of the four non-
dominated allocation strategies in Theorem 1 to be optimal. To facilitate discussion, we introduce
a corollary to summarize the propositions’ main insights.
To simplify the notation, we define ¯w = βvh + (1 −β)y and ¯cθ = (1 −β)(w −y). We provide an
interpretation of ¯w and ¯cθ in the discussion of the following corollary.
Corollary 1 Recall the allocation strategies from Theorem 1. Then, if w ≤¯w and cθ ≤¯cθ, there
exist ATPs mF, mMR, and ¯mMR where mF ≤mMR, ¯mMR ≤vh, and a function aF(m) such that:
• Strategy F is optimal if and only if m ≤mF and α ≥aF(m).
• Strategy MR is optimal if m ≥max(mMR, ¯mMR) for all α ≥0.
If w > ¯w then only strategies F and M can be optimal. In this case, there exists an ATP mF
such that F is optimal if and only if m ≤mF.
If cθ > ¯cθ then only strategies F and FR can be optimal. In this case, there exists a function
aF(m) such that F is optimal if and only if α ≥aF(m).
Corollary 1 differentiates between two types of products: Products that, in expectation, can be
profitably distributed to uninformed customers, i.e., products where β(vh −w)+(1−β)(y −w) ≥0
(equivalently, where w ≤¯w) and products that cannot be profitably distributed to uninformed
customers (where w > ¯w). When products can be profitably distributed to uninformed customers,
all four strategies can be optimal. When products cannot be profitably distributed to uninformed
customers, only strategies F and M can be optimal.
Similarly, Corollary 1 differentiates between two possible setups. The first are setups where
the cost of informing consumers about the product is not excessively large, i.e., setups where
cθ ≤(1 −β)(w −y) = ¯cθ. The second are setups where the cost of informing consumers about the
product is larger than the expected cost incurred by letting uninformed consumers simply try the
product out, i.e., such that cθ > (1 −β)(w −y) = ¯cθ. When the cost of informing consumers about
the product is moderate, all four strategies can be optimal. When the cost of informing consumers
about the product is excessively large, then only strategies F and FR can be optimal.
Figure 4 depicts the strategy map for a set of problem parameters and illustrates Proposition B.2
and Corollary 1. If customers’ ATP is low, then it is optimal for the distributor to invest in offering
customers a discount x to improve affordability (strategies F and FR in Figure 4). Conversely, if
customers’ ATP is high, the distributor should invest in customer education θ (strategies M and
MR in Figure 4). Additionally, for any ATP, if customers’ risk aversion level is low enough, then
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
17
(a) γ = 0
(b) γ = 0.4
Figure 4
Strategy map for the Allocation Problem as a function of m and α for different values of γ. We assume
vh = $10, w = $7, θ = 0.2, b = $0.5, y = $3.25, β = 0.6, cθ = 1.
it is optimal for the distributor to induce the retailer to target uninformed customers, by accepting
product returns and possibly offering refunds (note strategies FR and MR in Figure 4).
This relationship between customers’ risk aversion and strategy choice occurs because, when
customer risk aversion is high, the refund necessary to attract uninformed customers is overly large,
making this customer segment unprofitable due to the high cost of returns. In contrast, when risk
aversion is moderate or low, uninformed customers might be valuable if the distributor’s budget is
sufficient to increase customers’ ATP above a certain threshold.
In particular, Corollary 1 and Figure 4 show that the most profitable investment strategy in a
BOP context (where α is high and m is low) might not be the same as in the non-BOP context
(where α is low and m is high). For example, in Figure 4 strategy F is the most profitable in a BOP
context while MR is the most profitable in a non-BOP context. A natural question that follows is
whether a similar difference occurs if the distributor were to maximize consumer surplus instead of
profits. This question is answered in the next proposition. We denote the consumer surplus under
strategies F, M, FR, and MR by CSF, CSM, CSF R, and CSMR, respectively.
Proposition 2 Recall the allocation strategies from Theorem 1, and the ATP mF and the function
aF(m) from Corollary 1. There exists a function acs
F (m) such that, for any customers’ risk aversion
level α ≥0 and customers’ ATP m w ≤m ≤vh,
• Strategy MR induces the largest consumer surplus among all strategies from Theorem 1. More-
over, CSMR ≥CSM ≥CSF;
• Strategy F induces the smallest consumer surplus among all strategies from Theorem 1 if and
only if α ≥acs
F (m).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

18
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
The intuition behind Proposition 2 is as follows. On the one hand, strategies that involve accept-
ing product returns (FR and MR) can induce a higher total consumer surplus than their counter-
part strategies that do not accept product returns (F and M) since, when the distributor offers a
product return option, all consumers with high valuation adopt the product and extract positive
surplus. On the other hand, customers with a low valuation that buy the product (because of lack
of information) will have negative surplus, since they receive a partial refund that is smaller than
their payment, thus reducing total consumer surplus.
Furthermore, strategies that invest primarily in consumer education (M and MR) can lead to
higher total consumer surplus than finance-based strategies (F and FR). This holds because the
subsidies offered by the distributor to customers in strategies F and FR are ultimately recaptured
by the supply chain through higher prices and, as a result, are ineffective in increasing consumer
surplus. Conversely, the information provided through consumer education in strategies M and
MR cannot be fully recaptured by the supply chain and hence increases consumer surplus.
Proposition 2 shows that strategy MR attains the largest consumer surplus, i.e., the distributor
increases the total consumer surplus by inducing the retailer to accept product returns and by
educating consumers about the product’s benefits. In particular, Proposition 2 implies that as the
distributor’s relative value for consumer surplus γ increases, then strategy MR becomes optimal
for larger set of all admissible model parameters, while strategy F becomes optimal for a smaller
set. This insight is illustrated in Figure 4b — note how strategy MR occupies a larger portion of
the strategy map while strategy F a smaller portion compared to Figure 4a — and is particularly
relevant for social enterprises operating in the BOP context.
The combination of Proposition 2 and Corollary 1 indicates that there is tension between max-
imizing profits and consumer surplus in the BOP, which does not necessarily occur in non-BOP
contexts. Namely, in a BOP context with high risk aversion (α ≥max(aF(m),acs
F (m))) and small
ATP (m ≤mF), strategy F is the most profitable. However, in this regime the profit maximizing
allocation strategy F also leads to the lowest total consumer surplus. Hence, in the BOP the most
profitable allocation strategy and the total consumer surplus maximizing strategy are not the same.
Conversely, in a non-BOP context with large ATP (m ≥max(mMR, ¯mMR)) the most profitable
strategy is MR, which also leads to the largest consumer surplus.
We emphasize that this insight applies to the simplified setups in Corollary 1 where only two
strategies can be optimal. Both simplified setups in Corollary 1 include strategy F which, from
Proposition 2, induces the lowest consumer surplus in the BOP. Thus the tension between maxi-
mizing profits and consumer surplus in the BOP is preserved in these setups.
In the next subsection we explore a practical strategy that the distributor can commit to when
operating in the BOP, which resolves the tension between profits and consumer surplus.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
19
4.3.
Decoupling profits and consumer surplus by offering free returns
Corollary 1 and Proposition 2 show that, in the BOP context, the most profitable allocation
strategy (strategy F) is the strategy that leads to lowest consumer surplus. Furthermore, even
the strategy that leads to the highest consumer surplus (strategy MR) has the downside that
uninformed customers with low valuation will have negative surplus if they purchase and then
return the product. To resolve these issues we examine a free returns strategy (which is equivalent
to offering free product trials in our model). Specifically, we assume that the distributor commits
to offering customers the option of returning the product for a full refund. This commitment
occurs at the start of the game, before the allocation of the investment budget. We remark that
there is recent field evidence that free trials are an effective strategy for increasing adoption of
life-improving products, such as cookstoves (Levine et al. 2018).
Although a free-returns commitment can only reduce the distributor’s maximum profits, it has
two main advantages. First, it guarantees that no customer ends up with negative surplus by trying
out the product. Hence, in effect, free returns transfer the product’s “fit risk” from the customer to
the distributor (Che 1996). Second, we will show that the distributor’s commitment to free returns
ensures that the total consumer surplus is maximized independently of the allocation strategy. In
other words, this commitment decouples the effects of distributor’s profit-maximizing actions from
worst-case consumer surplus. Thus, offering free returns can serve as a signal from the distributor
to its social investors and other stakeholders that it is indeed valuing consumer surplus, satisfying
an important ethical consideration when doing business in the BOP (Davidson 2009).
In this setting, we assume a wholesale contract that forces the retailer to set r = p −x. Recall
that p−x is the effective customer price after a distributor’s subsidy x. The model details and the
resulting distributor’s pricing strategy are given in Proposition B.5 in the Appendix.
Proposition B.5 shows that, when the distributor commits to full refunds, the total consumer
surplus is constant and equal to (vh−m)β, independently of the values of x and θ. We note that this
consumer surplus value is larger than the one induced by strategy MR in the allocation problem
and, from Proposition 2, is larger than any non-dominated distributor’s budget allocation strategy.
The Allocation Problem under a free-returns commitment has only two non-dominated strategies:
FR and MR. The next proposition describes the optimal allocation strategy. The same outcomes
for each strategy are achieved by assuming that customers are extremely risk averse, i.e., taking
the limit as α →∞making customers max-min utility optimizers.
Proposition 3 Assume that the distributor commits to a free returns policy, then the distributor
has two non-dominated strategies for the Allocation Problem, which we denote by FRf, and MRf.
In both strategies the distributor follows the pricing strategy from Proposition B.5.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

20
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
• FRf: invest the budget in improving product affordability by increasing x. If there is enough
budget to set x = vh −m, the remaining budget is invested in increasing θ if vh −m < w −y
and not invested otherwise.
• MRf: invest the budget in increasing the consumer education level. If there is enough budget
to set θ = 1, the remaining budget is invested in increasing x.
Moreover, strategy MRf is preferred by the distributor if and only if (1 −β)(w −y) ≥cθ.
The allocation strategies in Proposition 3 follow the same intuition as the strategies in Theorem
1. However, in the free-returns case, the condition for choosing between investing in θ and x is
simpler: if the expected cost of a returned product, given by (1 −β)(w −y), is higher than the
marginal cost of investing in consumer education, given by cθ, then the distributor should choose
strategy MRf. Conversely, if (1 −β)(w −y) < cθ the distributor chooses strategy FRf.
5.
Pricing and Resource Allocation Problems with Heterogeneous
ATP
This section extends the previous results to the case where mh > ml. In this case, the retailer and
distributor have the option to “skim” the market and choose a price such that only customers with
high ATP mh are able to afford the product. While the results from the previous section still hold
in this setup, the supply chain equilibrium is more nuanced due to price skimming. Specifically,
more non-dominated strategies for the pricing and allocation problem exist.
When mh > ml, there are four possible non-dominated pricing strategies for the distributor:
• A: Target all informed customers without product returns. The equilibrium price is pA = ml+x
and rA = 0. All customers that receive information signal S = 1 purchase the product.
• AR: Target all customers and offer product returns, pAR = ml + x and rAR = rα(ml). All
customers purchase the product and a fraction 1−β (with valuation vl) return it for a refund.
• S: Skim the market and target informed customers with ATP mh without product returns.
The equilibrium price is pS = mh + x and rS = 0. The fraction λθ of customers that have
valuation mh and receive information signal S = 1 purchase the product.
• SR: Skim the market targeting customers with ATP mh and offer product returns, pSR =
mh + x and rSR = rα(mh). The fraction λ of customers with ATP mh purchase the product
and a fraction 1 −β of those who purchased with valuation vl return it for a refund.
Proposition C.1 in the Appendix fully characterizes these equilibrium pricing strategies, including
the profits of the distributor and retailer. Strategies S and SR are “skimming” strategies where
customers with low ATP ml cannot afford the product.
In the remainder of our analysis we make the following two assumptions that allow for an
analytical treatment of the Allocation Problem with heterogeneous ATP.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
21
Assumption 2 Assume that:
1. When there is no risk aversion (α = 0), the purchasing decision of uninformed customers with
high ATP mh only depends on their expected valuation, i.e., mh > βvh;
2. For any risk aversion level, offering a refund of rα(ml) to all customers is more expensive than
offering a refund rα(mh) only to customers with high ATP mh, i.e., rα(ml) ≥λrα(mh) for all α.
Since limα→0 rα(p) =

p−βvh
1−β
+
, this assumption is equivalent to (ml −βvh)+ ≥λ(mh −βvh)+.
The first part of the assumption above states that when customers are risk neutral at least some
of the uninformed customers — those with high ATP mh — base their purchasing decision on their
expected valuation instead of their ATP. When this condition is not met, risk neutral uninformed
customers with high ATP mh always purchase the product as long as the price is lower than mh.
The second part of the assumption is consistent with the context in which BOP distributors
operate. The life-improving products these distributors sell are designed for low-income customers
with limited ATP such that, in practice, λ is small and mh is close to ml. Thus, the refund cost in
strategy AR is likely higher than in strategy SR. This assumption also simplifies the description
of the distributor’s strategy map as a function of α, mh, and ml since it eliminates the edge case
where small changes in the values of α, mh and ml can make the distributor’s optimal pricing
strategy shift directly from A to SR, without first becoming AR or S.
With Assumption 2 in hand, we extend the result from Proposition 1 to heterogeneous ATPs.
Proposition 4 Under Assumption 2, providing a subsidy x ≥0 can only improve the distributor’s
objective value, i.e.,
∂Π∗
D
∂x ≥0. In contrast, increasing the consumer education level θ might worsen
the distributor’s objective value, i.e.,
∂Π∗
D
∂θ ≤0 if
mh + x −w −(rα(mh) −y) −γ(mh −rα(mh)) ≥0.
(5)
Additionally, for the distributor, x and θ are strategic complements under strategies A and S,
while they are strategic substitutes under strategies AR and SR.
Proposition 4 states a sufficient condition for an increase in information availability to reduce
the distributor’s objective. The condition is analogous to the one in Proposition 1: when the
contribution of a returned unit priced at mh to the distributor’s objective is high enough, increasing
information level’s might be prejudicial for the distributor. Proposition 4 also extends Proposition
1 by stating that strategies x and θ are strategic complements under pricing strategies that do not
offer refunds (A and S), while being substitutes when refunds are offered (AR and SR).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

22
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
5.1.
Allocation Problem and Free Returns with Heterogeneous ATP
When ml < mh, there are eight possible non-dominated allocation strategies in the Allocation
Problem which extend the strategies in Theorem 1 and can be split into two sets. In the first
set of strategies, the distributor uses pricing strategies A or AR, which target all customers. We
denote these allocation strategies by FA, MA, FAR, and MAR — the notation mirrors F,M,FR,
and MR from Theorem 1. In the second set of strategies, the distributor uses pricing strategies
S or SR, which skim the market and target only customers with high ATP mh. We denote these
allocation strategies by FS, MS, FSR, and MSR.
Theorem 2 Under Assumption 2, the distributor has eight non-dominated strategies in the Allo-
cation Problem:
• FS: invest the budget in improving product affordability by increasing x. If there is enough
budget to set x = vh −mh, invest the remaining budget in increasing θ. The distributor follows
pricing strategy S, targeting only informed customers with high ATP.
• MS: invest the budget in increasing the consumer education level θ. If there is enough budget to
set θ = 1, invest the remaining budget in increasing x. The distributor follows pricing strategy
S, targeting only informed customers with high ATP.
• FSR: invest the budget in improving product affordability by increasing x. If there is enough
budget to set x = vh−mh, the remaining budget is invested in increasing θ if vh−w−(rα(mh)−
y) −γ(mh −rα(mh)) < 0, and not invested otherwise. The distributor follows pricing strategy
SR, targeting all customers with high ATP by accepting product returns.
• MSR: invest the budget as in strategy MS. However, the distributor follows pricing strategy
SR, targeting all customers with high ATP by accepting product returns.
• FA: invest the budget in improving product affordability by increasing x. If there is enough
budget to set x = vh −ml, the remaining budget is invested in increasing θ if ml −(1−γ)(vh −
ml) −λ/(1 −λ)(mh −ml) −w > 0, and not invested otherwise. The distributor follows pricing
strategy A, targeting all informed customers.
• MA: invest the budget in increasing the consumer education level θ. If there is enough budget to
set θ = 1, invest the remaining budget in increasing x. The distributor follows pricing strategy
A, targeting all informed customers.
• FAR: invest the budget in improving product affordability by increasing x. If there is enough
budget to set x = vh −ml, the remaining budget is invested in increasing θ if vh −w−(rα(ml)−
y) −γ(ml −rα(ml)) < 0, and not invested otherwise. The distributor follows pricing strategy
AR, targeting all customers by accepting product returns.
• MAR: invest the budget as in strategy MA. However, the distributor follows pricing strategy
AR, targeting all customers by accepting product returns.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
23
If the distributor “constrains” itself to follow either only skimming allocation strategies (FS,
MS, FSR or MSR) or non-skimming allocation strategies (FA, MA, FAR or MAR) then the
restricted strategy map as a function of mh and α (alternatively, ml and α) has an analogous
structure to the homogeneous ATP case where mh = ml.
We follow the analysis for the homogeneous ATP case and we define ¯wS = βvh + (1 −β)y,
¯wA = βvh + (1 −β)y −λ/(1 −λ)((mh −ml)β −(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh)))(1 −β)), ¯cS
θ = (1 −
β)λ(w −y), and ¯cA
θ = (1 −β)(w −y) −λ/(1 −λ)(1 −β)(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh))).
The strategy maps for the case where the distributor constrains itself to either skimming alloca-
tion strategies or non-skimming strategies are derived in Proposition C.2 in the Appendix. Propo-
sition C.2 assumes w ≤¯wS and cθ ≤¯cS
θ (resp. w ≤¯wA and cθ ≤¯cA
θ ), when the distributor constrains
itself to skimming (resp. non-skimming) allocation strategies. Analogous to Propositions B.3 and
B.4, fewer strategies can be optimal when w > ¯wS or cθ > ¯cS
θ (resp. w > ¯wA or cθ > ¯cA
θ ) and we omit
the analysis of these cases since they are a special case of the analysis for Proposition C.2. Figure
7 in the Appendix illustrates Proposition C.2 by depicting the “constrained” strategy maps that
underlie the strategy map of Figure 5.
When w ≤min( ¯wS, ¯wA) and cθ ≤min(¯cS
θ , ¯cA
θ ) the distributor’s full strategy map is a combination
of the constrained strategy maps from Proposition C.2, and shares many similar features with the
strategy map when mh = ml, recall Proposition B.2 and Figure 4. Namely, if α is high and mh and
ml are low, then either strategy FA or strategy FS dominate. Conversely, if α is low and mh and
ml are high, then either strategy MAR or MSR dominate.
A sample strategy map with heterogeneous ATP is depicted in Figure 5. The horizontal axis of
Figure 5 increases both ml and mh by setting the ATPs to ml +∆m and mh +∆m. Note the similar
disposition of the strategies in Figure 5 compared to the strategy map in Figure 4: an increase in
α can induce the distributor to choose strategies without refunds, while an increase in ∆m induces
the distributor to invest in increasing information instead of subsidies.
We now build on Proposition C.2 to extend Corollary 1 to the case where ml < mh and γ is
small, i.e., the distributor prioritizes profits (if γ = 0 the distributor is profit-maximizing).
Corollary 2 Under Assumption 2, if w ≤min( ¯wS, ¯wA), cθ ≤min(¯cS
θ , ¯cA
θ ) and γcθ ≤(λ/(1 −
λ))2β(mh −ml), then there exists ATPs mF AS, mF S, ˆmMAR, and ˆmMSR where mF S,mF AS ≤
ˆmMAR, ˆmMSR ≤vh, and functions aF S(ml,mh) and aMAR(ml) such that:
• Strategy FS is optimal if and only if ml ≤mF AS, mh ≤mF S and α ≥aF S(ml,mh).
• Strategy MAR is optimal if ml ≥ˆmMAR, mh ≥ˆmMSR and α ≤aMAR(ml).
Corollary 2 strengthens the intuition on how the optimal investment and pricing strategy in a
BOP context (where ml and mh are low and α is high) might differ from a non-BOP context (where
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

24
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
Figure 5
Strategy map for the Allocation Problem as a function of ∆m and α. We assume vh = $10, w = $6,
θ0 = 0.2, mh = $7, ml = $6, λ = 0.4, b = $0.2, y = $3.25, β = 0.5, cθ = 0.33, and γ = 0. The horizontal
axis sets the ATPs to ml +∆m and mh +∆mh. Strategy FA is dominated by other strategies and does
not appear.
ml and mh are higher and α is low). In the BOP context, a profit-maximizing distributor invests
in improving affordability and skims the market (strategy FS). Conversely, in a non-BOP context,
a profit-maximizing distributor invests in increasing customer education level, offers returns, and
prices the product to target all customers (strategy MAR). Thus, in the BOP context, the het-
erogeneous ATP of customers might create an additional incentive for the distributor to skim the
market which does not occur in the non-BOP context.
We now characterize the consumer surplus attained in a BOP and non-BOP setting.
Proposition 5 Under Assumption 2, there exists a function acs
F S(mh,ml) such that, for any cus-
tomers’ risk aversion level α ≥0 and customers’ ATPs ml, mh, w ≤ml ≤mh ≤vh,
• Strategy MAR induces the largest consumer surplus among all strategies from Theorem 2;
• Strategy FS induces the smallest consumer surplus among all strategies from Theorem 2 if
α ≥acs
F S(mh,ml) and strategy FA is individually rational for the distributor.
Proposition 5 highlights that the misalignment between consumer surplus and the distributor’s
profits in the BOP persists under heterogeneous ATPs. Given the market characteristics in the
BOP, where customers’ ATP is low and risk aversion is high, the most profitable allocation strategy
is FS, where the distributor must skim the market and invest in increasing x to have a positive
objective function. This strategy is also the strategy that leads to the lowest consumer surplus if
α is high enough since only a small fraction of the market purchases the product (the market size
is λβθF S, where θF S is the information level under strategy FS) and receive surplus vh −mh.
The total misalignment between the customer-surplus-maximizing strategy and the distributor’s
profit-maximizing strategy does not occur in a non-BOP context. From Corollary 2, when α is low
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
25
and customer ATPs are high then strategy MAR, which from Proposition 5 induces the largest
consumer surplus, is the most profitable (despite the fact that some customers that return the
product might have negative surplus). Thus, Corollary 2 and Proposition 5 strengthen and extend
the main insight from Section 4.
Corollary 2 and Proposition 5 further indicate that, unlike the case where mh = ml, consumer
surplus can increase as ATP increases. If both mh and ml increase, the distributor can shift from a
skimming pricing strategy to a pricing strategy that targets all customers (for example from FS to
MAR) which can lead to a price reduction for customers and a net increase in consumer surplus.
Finally, we revisit Section 4.3 and examine the value of an operational commitment by the
distributor to offer free returns in resolving the misalignment between customer surplus and dis-
tributor profits in a BOP setting with heterogeneous ATPs. Recall that free returns eliminate the
downside of pricing strategies AR and SR where customers that purchase and return the product
for a partial refund have negative consumer surplus. The proposition below extends Proposition 3.
Proposition 6 Assume that the distributor commits to a free-returns policy, then the distributor
has four non-dominated strategies in the Allocation Problem:
• FSRf: invest the budget in improving product affordability by increasing x. If there is enough
budget to set x = vh −mh, the remaining budget is invested in increasing θ if vh −mh < w −y,
and not invested otherwise. The distributor follows pricing strategy FSR.
• MSRf: invest the budget in increasing the consumer education level. If there is enough budget
to set θ = 1, the remaining budget increases x. The distributor follows pricing strategy MSR.
• FARf: invest the budget in improving product affordability by increasing x. If there is enough
budget to set x = vh −ml, the remaining budget is invested in increasing θ if vh −ml < w −y,
and not invested otherwise. The distributor follows pricing strategy FAR.
• MARf: invest the budget as in strategy MSRf. The distributor follows pricing strategy MAR.
Moreover, the consumer surplus induced by strategies FSRf and MSRf is λβ(vh −mh), which
is larger than the consumer surplus induced by the allocation strategies FS, FSR, MS and MSR
from Theorem 2. The consumer surplus induced by strategies FARf and MARf is β(vh −ml),
which is larger than the consumer surplus induced by any allocation strategy from Theorem 2.
Thus, a commitment to free returns guarantees that no customers that purchase the product
have negative surplus in the BOP. Free returns also eliminate strategies FS and FA, which induce
a low consumer surplus. However, free returns do not remove the incentive for the distributor and
retailer to skim the market and target only customers with high ATP.
To mitigate price skimming, the distributor can commit to a maximum retail price (MRP).
A MRP is required in a few developing countries such as India — the Indian parliament passed
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

26
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
the Consumer Goods Act in 2006 (The Indian Express 2017), which requires consumer goods
distributed and sold in India to have a MRP printed on good’s package. A distributor can use
such policy to print a price on the box that mitigates skimming, ensuring that low ATP customers
can afford the product. Such MRP commitment coupled with free returns can ensure that the
optimal strategies for the distributor are either FARf or MARf, and that there is no misalignment
between consumer surplus and the optimal allocation and pricing strategies.
6.
Robustness Check: Model with Continuous Customer Types
We now illustrate that our main results and insights hold for a more sophisticated customer model
with continuous types. This model is analytically intractable and we study its equilibrium outcomes
through numerical simulations. We briefly describe each component of the continuous model.
There is a continuum of customer types defined by their product valuation. We assume valua-
tions are normally distributed as V ∼N(µ,σ2). As in the discrete model from Section 3, without
perfect information customers only learn their valuation if they purchase the product. Customers’
ATP are also normally distributed as M ∼N(µm,σ2
m). Customers’ ATP and valuations can be
correlated, where κ is the correlation between V and M. While we could assume other distribu-
tions of V and M, a normal distribution allows for a tractable model of information disclosure. For
a discussion on the microfoundations of information disclosure models with normally-distributed
customer valuations see Chu and Zhang (2011) and Johnson and Myatt (2006).
Customers do not know their true valuation before purchasing the product and form an estimate
of the product’s utility. Customers of type v receive a noisy signal v + η, where η ∼N(0,σ2
η) is
random noise that models the quality of the information customers have about the product. The
distribution of signals is S = V + η, and we assume V and η to be independent. Customers form
a valuation estimate which has the distribution of the random variable bV = E[V |S]. Then, as in
Chu and Zhang (2011), it follows that
bV = E[V |S] = ρ2S + (1 −ρ2)µ,
where ρ2 =
σ2
σ2+σ2η ∈[0,1] is the correlation coefficient of V and S, and models the quality of the
information a customer receives. Note that bV is normally distributed and bV ∼N(µ,ρ2σ2). More-
over, V −bV ∼N(0,(1 −ρ2)σ2). Hence, if ρ = 0 customers have no information about their own
valuation, while if ρ = 1 they have perfect information.
All customers receive a baseline “low-quality” information signal Sl where the correlation coef-
ficient of V and Sl is ρ2
l . The distributor can then invest in customer education campaigns that
provide a “high-quality” information signal Sh with correlation coefficient ρ2
h (where ρh ≥ρl) to a
fraction of the potential customers. The probability of a customer being reached by a customer
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
27
education campaign is θ. Thus, a customer receives signal Sh with probability θ and signal Sl with
probability 1 −θ. In short, as in the model of Section 3.1, θ models the campaign’s reach, while ρl
and ρh model the quality of the education campaign. We emphasize that allowing 0 < ρl < ρh < 1,
generalizes the consumer education model from Section 3.1.
As in the discrete-valuation model, customers are risk averse and have the utility function
described in Section 3.1. We denote the utility estimate of a customer chosen at random by U.
Note that the expected utility and ATP are correlated if V and M are correlated. Given p, r, and
θ, the fractions of customers that purchase and return the product are
B(p,r,θ,ρh,ρl) :=E[1{U≥0,M≥p}|θ,ρh,ρl]
(Prob. of buying the product),
R(p,r,θ,ρh,ρl) :=E[1{U≥0,M≥p,V <r}|θ,ρh,ρl]
(Prob. of returning the product),
and the consumer surplus is
CS(p,r,θ,ρh,ρl) := E[(V −p)1{U≥0,M≥p,V ≥r}|θ,ρh,ρl] −(p −r)E[1{U≥0,M≥p,V <r}|θ,ρh,ρl].
(6)
The distributor’s Pricing Problem in the continuous model is the same as in Section 3. The
Allocation Problem in the continuous model is nearly identical to the problem stated in Section 3.
We again interpret x as an investment in product affordability, while an investment in increasing θ
represents an increase in the fraction of customers with a high-quality information signal. However,
we assume an upper bound x ≤¯x where ¯x is an exogenous parameter (mirroring x ≤vh −p∗, which
does not directly translate to the continuous model due to the customers’ continuous valuation).
The bound on the subsidy x rules out edge cases where, in equilibrium, the distributor offers a
very steep discount and a very small fraction of customers purchase the product.
6.1.
Numerical analysis
We now show that our main analytical results from Section 4 hold in the continuous model. In the
latter, µm, σm, and κ determine the distribution of customers’ ATP. We assume κ ≤0 since we
model products that would most benefit BOP customers, who might be under financial distress
and, as a result, have low ATP. We evaluate the probabilities of buying and returning the product
explicitly through numerical integration.
Pricing Problem. Figure 8 in Appendix D replicates the insight that increasing information
might decrease distributor profits if consumers have low ATP and low risk aversion (a similar effect
was observed in Figure 3). As before, when customers have low average ATP and risk aversion
(α = 0.01 in Figure 8a) increasing θ decreases distributor profits. Conversely, when customers are
very risk averse (α = 1 in Figure 8b), increasing θ always increases distributor profits. This behavior
is robust to different model parameters.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

28
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
Parameter
Values
Parameter
Values
w
1
ρl
Uniform(0.1, 0.45)
y
Uniform(0,1)
ρh
Uniform(0.7, 0.95)
µ
Uniform(0.7,1)
θ0
Uniform(0.01, 0.5)
σ
Uniform(0.5,1)
cθ
Uniform(0,2)
σm
Uniform(0.1,1)
b
Uniform(0,1)
κ
Uniform(-0.8,-0.2)
¯x
µ −µm + σ + σm
Table 1
Distribution of parameters used for the Allocation Problem.
Avg. % of budget allocated to θ
µm = 0.75 µm = 1.25 µm = 1.75
α = 0.01
0.5%
4.5%
26%
α =1
1%
4.7%
28%
α =2
1.8%
4.9%
30%
Table 2
Avg. % of budget allocated to θ
Allocation Problem. We now examine how the optimal distributor’s budget allocation strat-
egy changes as a function of the customers’ average ATP µm and risk aversion level α, and discuss
their connection to the main results of Section 4.2, which are illustrated in Figure 4.
The simulation sets w = $1 and samples a set of initial market, product, and information param-
eters (µ,σ,σm,κ,y,cθ,ρl,ρh) drawn from the distributions described in Table 1. The values in Table
1 were chosen to generate problem instances that draw from a wide range of problem parameter
values relative to the value of w and from a wide variety of valuation and ATP distributions. We
assume that γ = 0, i.e. a profit-maximizing distributor. For each sample of parameters we solve
the allocation problem for different values of µm and α. When solving the allocation problem, we
calculate the fraction of consumers that purchase and return the product through Monte Carlo
integration. We sampled 10,000 sets of problem parameters and, for each set, we considered nine
combinations of µm and α. We solved a total of 90,000 instances of the allocation problem.
We first discuss the relative investment in θ and x. Table 2 describes the average fraction of the
budget invested in θ (the remainder budget is allocated to x) for different values of α and µm. The
results are consistent with Section 4.2: when comparing Figure 4 and Table 2 along their horizontal
axis, the relative investment in θ (resp. x) decreases (resp. increases) with the average ATP in both
of them. The distributor invests more in consumer education θ if the customers’ ATP is high.
Second, we discuss the prevalence of strategies that target uninformed customers via product
returns. Tables 3 and 4 describe, respectively, the average fraction of customers that receive the low-
information or high-information signal and purchase the product for different values of α and µm.
As before, the results are consistent with Section 4.2. When comparing Figure 4 and Tables 3 and 4
along their vertical axis, the fraction of purchases from customers that receive the low-information
(resp. high-information) signal decreases (resp. increases) with α. That is, the distributor should
induce the retailer to target uninformed consumers if the customers’ risk aversion level is low.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
29
Avg. % of low-info
customers that buy
µm = 0.75 µm = 1.25 µm = 1.75
α = 0.01
11%
16.5%
20.3%
α =1
10.6%
14.7%
17.8%
α =2
9.7%
13.5%
16.5%
Table 3
Avg. % of purchases from customers that
received the low-information signal
Avg. % of high-info
customers that buy
µm = 0.75 µm = 1.25 µm = 1.75
α = 0.01
5.4%
11.4%
18.3%
α =1
6.2%
13.4%
18.6%
α =2
7.1%
15.1%
18.8%
Table 4
Avg. % of purchases from customers that
received the high-information signal
% of instances where θCS ≥θ∗
µm = 0.75 µm = 1.25 µm = 1.75
α = 0.01
98%
92%
75%
α =1
96%
86%
68%
α =2
93%
82%
61%
Table 5
% of sampled instances where maximizing
consumer surplus requires a higher θ
% of simulations where xCS ≥x∗
µm = 0.75 µm = 1.25 µm = 1.75
α = 0.01
0.6%
2.4%
21%
α =1
0.5%
0.8%
17%
α =2
0.5%
0.6%
16%
Table 6
% of sampled instances where maximizing
consumer surplus requires a higher x
We now examine the resource allocation strategy that maximizes consumer surplus. For each
sample of instance parameters from the previous simulations, we solve the allocation problem with
consumer surplus as the distributor’s objective for different values of µm and α. Tables 5 and 6
summarize the fraction of consumer-surplus-maximizing allocations where the budget allocation
to x and θ is larger than in the profit-maximizing allocation. Specifically, let xCS and θCS be the
optimal solution to the allocation problem when the distributor maximizes consumer surplus, and
let x∗and θ∗be the profit-maximizing optimal allocation. Table 5 lists the fraction of instances
where θCS ≥θ∗, while Table 6 lists the fraction of instances where xCS ≥x∗.
Consistent with the discrete model, Tables 5 and 6 illustrate that strategies that invest more
in consumer education generally lead to a higher consumer surplus than finance-based strategies.
Additionally, Tables 5 and 6 confirm a strong tension between consumer surplus and profits in
the BOP, where α is high and µm is medium or low. That is, in the BOP the consumer-surplus
maximizing allocation almost always involves a higher investment in θ and a lower investment in
x than in the profit-maximizing allocation. Moreover, the tension between consumer surplus and
profits dissipates in non-BOP contexts with a higher average ATP.
7.
Conclusions
We introduce a game-theoretic model to analyze the operations strategy of distributors of innova-
tive, life-improving, durable goods in supply chains that serve BOP customers. Our model incor-
porates two key features of BOP customers: risk aversion and customers with a lower ATP than
WTP. We use our model to analyze two operational optimization problems faced by BOP distribu-
tors. The first is a Pricing Problem, where the distributor decides the price and refund for returned
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

30
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
Risk Aversion
ATP
Lower
Higher
Higher
Lower
Increase 
Affordability
with no Returns
Increase
Customer Education
and/or
Accept Returns
(Market skimming 
more valuable)
(Market skimming 
less valuable)
Figure 6
Depiction of the distributor’s profit-maximizing allocation strategy as a function of customer ATP and
risk aversion. The green solid box highlights the strategy with highest consumer surplus and the red
dotted box highlights the strategy with lowest consumer surplus.
products it offers a retailer which, in turn, chooses a customer price and refund. The second is a
resource Allocation Problem, where the distributor allocates a given budget to (1) improve product
affordability (a financial lever), and (2) improve consumer education (an informational lever).
The distinction between risk-averse customers’ ATP and WTP has profound effects on the solu-
tions of these two problems and on supply chain equilibrium behavior. Figure 6 summarizes these
effects. The green solid box in Figure 6 highlights the equilibrium allocation strategy that induces
the highest consumer surplus, while the red dotted box highlights the strategy where consumer
surplus is lowest. Specifically, when customer risk aversion is high and customers’ ATPs are low
(which is common in the BOP), the distributor’s profit-maximizing allocation leads to the lowest
consumer surplus among non-dominated strategies. Conversely, when customers’ ATPs are high,
this tension between profits and consumer surplus disappears. Namely, we find a BOP-specific
misalignment between consumer surplus and profits.
We propose an operational commitment from the distributor to offering free returns as a poten-
tial solution to this misalignment. Such commitment ensures that no customer obtains a negative
surplus by trying out the product. We show that, when all customers have the same ATP, the
resulting consumer surplus is independent of profit maximization decisions and larger than any
equilibrium strategy without free returns, even in a BOP context. When customers have hetero-
geneous ATP, a commitment to free returns increases customer surplus but does not address the
incentives for the retailer to skim the market. Nevertheless, market skimming can be addressed by
a distributor’s commitment to charging a maximum retail price (which has become a legal require-
ment in India, for example). More generally, a commitment to free returns and a maximum retail
price can signal to socially-conscious investors that the distributor cares about consumer surplus.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
31
Many social enterprises spend significant resources measuring the social impact of their opera-
tions to provide “proof” that they are achieving their social goals. Our results indicate that, beyond
measuring impact, certain operational commitments (such as guaranteeing free returns and a max-
imum retail price) can also serve as “proof” of social-mindedness. These commitments constrain
the distributor’s decisions in a way that forces an alignment between social and financial objectives
throughout the supply chain. Exploring other operational commitments that force such alignment
can be valuable future research direction.
Finally, there is a pressing need for more empirical
research and field experiments to validate stylized models of BOP supply chains. For example, a
field experiment to test the value of offering free returns on the adoption of durable goods in the
BOP could lead to new managerial practices and research questions.
References
Banerjee A, Hanna R, Mullainathan S (2012) Gibbons R, Roberts J, eds., The Handbook of Organizational
Economics, chapter Corruption (Princeton: Princeton University Press), ISBN 978-0-691-13279-2.
Banerjee AV (1997) A Theory of Misgovernance. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4):1289–1332.
Bellman E, Agarwal V, Sharma S (2018) India’s Biggest Competitors to Walmart and Amazon?
Mom and Pop. Wall Street Journal
ISSN 0099-9660, URL https://www.wsj.com/articles/
indias-biggest-competitors-to-walmart-and-amazon-mom-and-pop-1527512400.
Che YK (1996) Customer return policies for experience goods. The Journal of Industrial Economics 17–24.
Chen L, Lee HL (2016) Sourcing under supplier responsibility risk: The effects of certification, audit, and
contingency payment. Management Science 63(9):2795–2812.
Chu LY, Zhang H (2011) Optimal preorder strategy with endogenous information control. Management
Science 57(6):1055–1077.
Clean Cooking Alliance (2015) Consumer finance models for clean cookstoves: Global mapping. Technical
report, Clean Cooking Alliance.
Clean Cooking Alliance (2019) 2019 clean cooking industry snapshot. Technical report, Clean Cooking
Alliance, URL https://www.cleancookingalliance.org/resources/566.html.
Costello
A
(2010)
Troubled
Water.
URL
http://www.pbs.org/frontlineworld/stories/
southernafrica904/video_index.html.
Davidson K (2009) Ethical concerns at the bottom of the pyramid: Where csr meets bop. Journal of Inter-
national Business Ethics 2(1).
Dees JG (1994) Social enterprise: Private initiatives for the common good (Harvard Business School).
Dupas P (2014a) Getting essential health products to their end users: Subsidize, but how much? Science
345(6202):1279–1281.
Dupas P (2014b) Short-run subsidies and long-run adoption of new health products: Evidence from a field
experiment. Econometrica 82(1):197–228.
Essmart (2020) Life improving technologies catalogue URL http://www.essmart-global.com/.
Garrette B, Karnani A (2010) Challenges in marketing socially useful goods to the poor. California Man-
agement Review 52(4):29–47.
Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves (2016) Demand creation. URL http://cleancookstoves.org/
market-development/demand-creation/.
Gui L, Tang CS, Yin S (2018) Improving Microretailer and Consumer Welfare in Developing Economies:
Replenishment Strategies and Market Entries. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management .
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

32
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
Haushofer J, Fehr E (2014) On the psychology of poverty. Science 344(6186):862–867.
Huang L, Song JSJ, Swinney R (2017) Managing Social Responsibility in Multitier Supply Chains. SSRN
Scholarly Paper ID 2837332, Social Science Research Network.
Johnson JP, Myatt DP (2006) On the Simple Economics of Advertising, Marketing, and Product Design.
American Economic Review 96(3):756–784.
Jue DM (2012) From the lab to the land: social impact technology dissemination in rural southern India.
Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Kohli R, Bhagwati J (2011) Organized retailing in india: Issues and outlook. CBS Research Paper (12/25).
Lee HL, Tang CS (2018) Socially and environmentally responsible value chain innovations: New operations
management research opportunities. Management Science 64(3):983–996.
Levine DI, Beltramo T, Blalock G, Cotterman C, Simons AM (2018) What impedes efficient adoption of
products? evidence from randomized sales offers for fuel-efficient cookstoves in uganda. Journal of the
European Economic Association 16(6):1850–1880.
Mair J, Marti I (2006) Social entrepreneurship research: A source of explanation, prediction, and delight.
Journal of world business 41(1):36–44.
McMullen JS (2011) Delineating the domain of development entrepreneurship: a market-based approach to
facilitating inclusive economic growth. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 35(1):185–193.
Miller TL, Grimes MG, McMullen JS, Vogus TJ (2012) Venturing for others with heart and head: How
compassion encourages social entrepreneurship. Academy of management review 37(4):616–640.
Plambeck EL, Taylor TA (2015) Supplier evasion of a buyer’s audit: Implications for motivating supplier
social and environmental responsibility. M&SOM 18(2):184–197.
Prahalad CK (2006) The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid (Pearson Prentice Hall).
Shugan SM, Xie J (2000) Advance pricing of services and other implications of separating purchase and
consumption. Journal of Service Research 2(3):227–239.
Shukla S, Bairiganjan S (2011) The base of pyramid distribution challenge: evaluating alternate distribution
models of energy products for rural base of pyramid in india. XIFMR Research, Centre for Dev. Fin. .
Shulman JD, Coughlan AT, Savaskan RC (2009) Optimal restocking fees and information provision in an
integrated demand-supply model of product returns. M&SOM 11(4):577–594.
Simanis E (2012) Reality Check at the Bottom of the Pyramid. Harvard Business Review ISSN 0017-8012.
Sodhi MS, Tang CS (2017) Social responsibility in supply chains. Sustainable Supply Chains, 465–483
(Springer International Publishing).
Su X (2009) Consumer returns policies and supply chain performance. M&SOM 11(4):595–612.
Swaminathan JM (2007) Managing supply chain operations in india. Building supply chain excellence in
emerging economies, 137–154 (Springer).
Tarozzi A, Mahajan A, Blackburn B, Kopf D, Krishnan L, Yoong J (2014) Micro-loans, Insecticide-Treated
Bednets, and Malaria: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Orissa, India. American Eco-
nomic Review 104(7):1909–1941.
Taylor TA, Xiao W (2019) Donor product-subsidies to increase consumption: Implications of consumer
awareness and profit-maximizing intermediaries. Prod. and Operations Management 28(7):1757–1772.
The
Indian
Express
(2017)
From
2018,
mrp
labels
on
products
sold
online
mandatory.
URL
https://indianexpress.com/article/business/
from-2018-mrp-labels-on-products-sold-online-mandatory-4729215/.
Uppari BS, Popescu I, Netessine S (2017) SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2782302, Social Science Research Net-
work, Rochester, NY, URL https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2782302.
Vidal J (2013) India’s villagers reap visible benefits from solar electricity scheme. The Guardian .
World Bank (2016) Poverty and shared prosperity 2016: taking on inequality (World Bank Publications).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
33
World Health Organization (2016) Burning opportunity: clean household energy for health, sustainable
development, and well-being of women and children. Technical report, World Health Organization.
Xie J, Shugan SM (2001) Electronic tickets, smart cards, and online prepayments: When and how to advance
sell. Marketing Science 20(3):219–243.
Zhang K, Tang CS, Zhou S (2017) Replenishment strategies for micro-retailers in developing countries. Prod.
and Operations Management 26(12):2207–2225.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

34
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
Appendix A:
Challenges faced by BOP distributors: the case of Essmart
Profitably scaling the distribution of life-improving durable goods designed for BOP consumers is challenging
(Swaminathan 2007, Garrette and Karnani 2010). Although non-profit organizations, multinational compa-
nies, and start-ups have attempted to distribute these technologies at scale, no strategy has been completely
successful (Jue 2012). Non-profit organizations that have traditionally distributed technologies on a project-
by-project basis are limited in scale and financial independence. Multinational companies and start-ups alike
have tried increasing consumer awareness and access through massive door-to-door campaigns that combine
education and subsidized direct-sales to consumers (for an example, see Vidal 2013). However, managing
these massive campaigns with their large networks of sales agents is expensive and labor-intensive, and scal-
ing them is difficult due to high personnel turnover and the limited reach of the sales agents. Finally, all
types of distributors struggle with inappropriate product design, lack of long-term maintenance, and lack of
proper incentives, leading to commercial failures (see examples in Costello 2010, Simanis 2012).
Given this context, the motivation for our research and the main case study for this paper comes from
our collaboration with Essmart, a social enterprise that distributes innovative life-improving technologies to
BOP consumers in India. For a distributor like Essmart, the mixed objective includes both consumer surplus
and profitability.
Essmart was founded in 2012 and operates a hub-and-spoke distribution model that leverages India’s
extensive network of local retail shops. Each modular Essmart office, located in tier 3 towns in India, has four
Sales Executives who drive on routes of up to 100 kilometers per day via motorbike to build relationships
with peri-urban and rural retail shops, turning these shop owners into extensions of Essmart’s sales force
but with an established local presence and existing trusted buying relationships with customers. Essmart
currently operates 18 offices in Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, and Andhra Pradesh, India that have collectively
built a network of over 2,700 local retail shops.
Essmart’s innovative operations strategy, which allowed the company to achieve the unit economic prof-
itability of their offices in 2016, has three main components:
1. Distribution: Essmart partners with small “mom-and-pop” retail shops as points of sale and offers them
expedited product delivery, leveraging the fact that 85% of the annual retail spending in India occurs
through more than 12 million local retailers (Kohli and Bhagwati 2011). Essmart gives retailers a few
sample items and a catalogue that lists all of its products. With Essmart’s help, retailers select the
products from Essmart’s catalogue of 350+ SKUs that best fit their needs and shop profile, enabling a
diverse set of shop types to start selling Essmart products. When the retailer has a sale opportunity,
Essmart delivers the product within a few days. This “deliver-to-order” strategy effectively removes
the inventory risk and shelf space requirement from the retailer.
2. Consumer Education (marketing): Essmart Sales Executives run product demonstrations at local shops
and markets to educate consumers on product features and the needs they address, as well as refer
consumers to local retailers if they are interested in purchasing a product. Although the demonstra-
tions have less reach than door-to-door campaigns, they are significantly less labour intensive. The
demonstrations create awareness of Essmart’s products and seek to build trust between Essmart and
consumers, as well as between Essmart and their retailers, who are involved in the demonstrations.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
35
3. Consumer Guarantees: Essmart offers consumers a range of guarantees, including the opportunity to
return products and facilitating the service of faulty products that have manufacturer warranties. This
is the most innovative component of their operations strategy, since most companies and organizations
that distribute life-improving technologies in the BOP do not offer customers or retailers any form of
protection or recourse.
Appendix B:
Proofs and Additional Results from Section 4
B.1.
Additional Results from Section 4.1
Recall that rα(p) is the minimum refund the retailer must offer to uninformed consumers such that they
purchase the product at an effective price p, and pα(r) is the WTP of uninformed consumers given a refund
r offered by the retailer.
We now argue that rα(p), given in Equation 3, is invertible for any p such that rα(p) > 0, thus pα(r) = r−1
α (r)
is well-defined. Indeed, the derivative r′
α(p) for any p such that rα(p) > 0 is
r′
α(p) = 1 +
β
eα(vh−p+x) −β > 0,
(7)
where the inequality follows since eα(vh−p+x) ≥1 for p ∈[0,vh + x] and 0 < β < 1. Then, rα(p) is invertible.
We are now ready to characterize the optimal solution to the Pricing Problem.
Proposition B.1 Consider any consumer education level θ ∈[0,1), ATP m ∈[w,vh], and subsidy x ∈[0,vh−
m]. Then, the distributor’s optimal objective is
Π∗
D(x,θ) = max

Πa
D(x,θ),Πb
D(x,θ)
 
.
(8)
Where Πa
D(x,θ) and Πb
D(x,θ) each correspond to the distributor’s profits in a non-dominated strategy.
Specifically, strategies (a) and (b) are characterized by:
(a) Target only informed customers without product returns. The customer price is pa = m + x and refund
is ra = 0. The retailer’s price and refund are ca = m + x and za = 0, respectively. The customer surplus
is CSa = (vh −m)θβ. The retailer’s profit is Πa
R = 0 while the distributor’s profit is Πa
D(x,θ) = (m +
x −w)θβ + γCSa.
(b) Target both informed and uninformed customers with product returns. The customer price is pb = m+x
and the refund is rb = rα(m) = max

0,m −1
α ln

1−βe−α(vh−m)
1−β

. The equilibrium retailer refund is
zb = rα(m) and the retailer price cb is
cb = m + x + (1 −θ)(1 −β)θβ
θβ + (1 −θ)
(zb −¯z).
(9)
The consumer surplus is
CSb = (vh −m)β −(m −rα(m))(1 −θ)(1 −β),
the retailer’s profit is Πb
R = 0, and the distributor’s profit is
Πb
D(x,θ) = (m + x −w)β + (1 −β)(m + x −rα(m) −w + y)(1 −θ) + γCSb.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

36
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
Strategy (b) is preferred by the distributor over strategy (a) if and only if
m + x −w −(1 −β)(rα(m) −y) + γ(β(vh −m) −(1 −β)(m −rα(m))) ≥0.
(10)
Proof. First, we analyze the retailer’s pricing problem and show that the optimal nominal price to
consumers is p∗= m+x and the optimal refund is such that r∗∈{0,rα(m)}. Note that the expected fraction of
customers who purchase the product is B(p,r,θ) =

θβ + (1 −θ)1{r≥rα(p−x)}

1{p−x≤m}. Since both indicator
functions are decreasing in p (cf. Equation 7), it follows that, for a given r, the optimal retailer’s price p∗is
such that p∗∈{m + x,pα(r) + x}.
Then, if p∗= m + x the retailer’s profit function is
ΠR (m + x,r) = (m + x −c)

θβ + (1 −θ)1{r≥rα(m)}

−(r −z)(1 −θ)(1 −β)1{r≥rα(m)}.
The profit function above is constant for r < rα(m), has an increasing or decreasing step at r = rα(m), and
is linear decreasing for r > rα(m). Therefore, r∗∈{0,rα(m)} when p∗= m + x.
Conversely, if p∗= pα(r) + x the retailer’s profit function is
ΠR (pα(r) + x,r) = (pα(r) + x −c)(θβ + (1 −θ))1{pα(r)≤m} −(r −z)(1 −θ)(1 −β)1{pα(r)≤m}.
The profit function above is zero if pα(r) > m since customers cannot afford the product. When pα(r) ≤m
(equivalently when r ≤rα(m)) the profit function is increasing in r. To show this, first note that when
r ≤rα(m) we have
∂ΠR (pα(r) + x,r)
∂r
= p′
α(r)(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(1 −θ)(1 −β) = θβ + (1 −θ)
r′
α(pα(r))
−(1 −θ)(1 −β).
where the second equality comes from the fact that pα = r−1
α . Then, from Equation 7, for any p ∈[0,vh +x],
we have that
r′
α(p) ≤1 +
β
1 −β ≤1 +
β
(1 −θ)(1 −β) = θβ + (1 −θ)
(1 −θ)(1 −β).
The first inequality comes from noting that r′
α(p), given in Equation 7, is decreasing in p for p ∈[0,vh + x]
and that r′
α(vh + x) = 1 +
β
1−β . It follows that
∂ΠR(pα(r)+x,r)
∂r
≥0, thus r∗= rα(m) when p∗= pα(r) + x, and
p∗= m + x in this case as well.
Hence, we conclude that p∗= m + x and r∗∈{0,rα(m)}, fully characterizing the potential equilibrium
behaviors of the retailer. With the retailer’s equilibrium behavior in hand, we now characterize the distrib-
utor’s equilibrium pricing and refund strategies.
Assume first that the distributor is interested in inducing the retailer to target informed consumers with
high valuation, i.e. set p∗= m + x and r∗= 0. In this case, the distributor’s problem can be written as
max
c,z≥0 (c −w)θβ + γ(vh −m)θβ
s.t. (m + x −c)θβ ≥(m + x −c)(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(rα(m) −z)(1 −θ)(1 −β)
(IC)
(m + x −c)θβ ≥0.
(IR)
Note that the (IC) constraint above implies that the retailer sets p∗= m + x and r∗= 0. The objective is
increasing in c and independent of z, with an upper bound c ≤m + x given by the (IR) constraint as long
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
37
as z ≤rα(m), otherwise the problem is infeasible. Hence, in particular c∗= m + x and z∗= 0, leading to
strategy (a) in the statement of the proposition.
Now assume that the distributor is interested in inducing the retailer to target uninformed consumers too,
i.e. set p∗= m + x and r∗= rα(m). In this case, the distributor’s problem can be written as
max
c,z≥0 (c −w)(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(z −y)(1 −θ)(1 −β) + γ((vh −m)β −(m −rα(m))(1 −θ)(1 −β))
s.t. (m + x −c)(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(rα(m) −z)(1 −θ)(1 −β) ≥(m + x −c)θβ
(IC)
(m + x −c)(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(rα(m) −z)(1 −θ)(1 −β) ≥0.
(IR)
The objective is increasing in c and decreasing in z, leading to c∗= m + x and z∗= rα(m) where both the
(IR) and (IC) constraints are tight. This corresponds to strategy (b) in the statement of the proposition. A
direct comparison between Πb
D and Πa
D shows that Πb
D(x,θ) ≥Πa
D(x,θ) if and only if
m + x −w −(1 −β)(rα(m) −y) + γ(β(vh −m) −(1 −β)(m −rα(m))) ≥0,
completing the proof.
□
Note that in Equation 10 the term m + x −w is the expected distributor’s margin on each sale, (1 −
β)(rα(m)−y) is the expected cost of a product return, and β(vh −m)−(1−β)(m−rα(m)) is the uninformed
consumer’s expected surplus.
B.2.
Proof of Proposition 1
Proof. We first show that the distributor’s objective function is increasing in x. Note that
∂Πa
D
∂x = θβ > 0, and ∂Πb
D
∂x = β + (1 −θ)(1 −β) > 0.
Hence,
∂Π∗
D
∂x > 0.
In contrast, the distributor’s objective function is not always increasing in θ. To prove this, first note that
∂Πa
D
∂θ = (γvh + (1 −γ)m + x −w)β > 0 and
∂Πb
D
∂θ
= −(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

+ (1 −β)(w −y −x).
Hence,
∂Πb
D
∂θ ≤0 if and only if
y + (1 −γ) 1
α ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

+ x −w ≥0.
Moreover, recall from Proposition B.1 that Π∗
D = Πb
D if and only if
m + x −w −(1 −β)(rα(m) −y) + γ(β(vh −m) −(1 −β)(m −rα(m))) ≥0,
or equivalently
y + (1 −γ) 1
α ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

+ x −w +
β
1 −β (γ(vh −m) + m + x −w) ≥0.
(11)
By noting that (γ(vh −m) + m + x −w) ≥0 we conclude that
∂Πb
D
∂θ
≤0 implies Π∗
D = Πb
D. Therefore,
∂Π∗
D
∂θ < 0 if and only if the inequality (11) holds.
Finally,
∂2Πa
D
∂θ∂x = β > 0, and
∂2Πb
D
∂θ∂x = −(1 −β) < 0. This concludes the proof.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

38
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
B.3.
Proof of Theorem 1
Proof. Let (x∗,θ∗) be the optimal solution of the distributor’s allocation problem. We analyze strategies
(a) and (b) from Proposition B.1 separately.
F and M: Assume first that Π∗
D(x∗,θ∗) = Πa
D(x∗,θ∗).
Since
∂Πa
D
∂x = θβ > 0 and
∂Πa
D
∂θ
= (γvh + (1 −γ)m + x −w)β > 0 then from Assumption 1 it follows that
the optimal solution to the resource allocation problem exhausts the budget, i.e., cθ(θ∗−θ0) + θ∗βx∗= b,
or equivalently x∗(θ) = b−cθ(θ−θ0)
θβ
. By replacing x∗(θ) in the resource allocation problem, it simplifies to the
following one-variable optimization problem
max
θ
Πa
D(θ) = (γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)θβ + b −cθ(θ −θ0)
s.t.
θ ∈[θ0,1], b −cθ(θ −θ0)
θβ
∈[0,vh −m].
(12)
Let θa be the optimal solution of problem (12), and xa = b−cθ(θa−θ0)
θaβ
. The objective function of problem (12),
Πa
D(θ), is linear. Moreover,
dΠa
D(θ)
dθ
= (γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)β −cθ.
(13)
Hence, θa must be equal to one of its upper or lower bound, i.e.,
θa ∈

θ0 + (b −θ0β(vh −m))+
cθ + β(vh −m)
,min

1,θ0 + b
cθ

,
and thus
xa ∈


min

vh −m,
b
θ0β

, (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+
min

1,θ0 +
b
cθ

β


.
Namely, when following strategy (a) in Proposition B.1 the distributor either invests the budget in increasing
the consumers’ maximum ability to pay first, and then the consumer education level only if there is budget
available (strategy F), or invests the budget in increasing the consumer education level first, and then the
consumers’ maximum ability to pay only if there is budget available (strategy M).
Specifically,
θF = θ0 + (b −θ0β(vh −m))+
cθ + β(vh −m)
, xF = min

vh −m,
b
θ0β

,
and
ΠF
D =

γvh + (1 −γ)m + min

vh −m,
b
θ0β

−w

θ0 + (b −θ0β(vh −m))+
cθ + β(vh −m)

β
Similarly,
θM = min

1,θ0 + b
cθ

, xM = (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+
β
,
and
ΠM
D = (γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)min

1,θ0 + b
cθ

β + (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+
FR and MR: Assume now that Π∗
D(x∗,θ∗) = Πb
D(x∗,θ∗).
Since
∂Πb
D
∂x = β +(1−θ)(1−β) > 0, then from Assumption 1 it follows that the optimal subsidy must either
be equal to its upper bound or the budget constraint must be tight, i.e., x∗(θ) = min

vh −m,
b−cθ(θ−θ0)
β+(1−θ)(1−β)

.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
39
By replacing x∗(θ) in the resource allocation problem, it simplifies to the following one-variable optimization
problem
max
θ
Πb
D(θ) = (γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)β + min
 (vh −m)(β + (1 −θ)(1 −β)),b −cθ(θ −θ0)

+

(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

−(1 −β)(w −y)

(1 −θ)
s.t.
θ ∈[θ0,1], cθ(θ −θ0) ≤b.
(14)
Let θb be the optimal solution of problem (14) and xb = x∗(θb). Since the minimum of two linear functions
is concave, then the objective function of problem (14), Πb
D(θ), is piece-wise linear concave with at most two
pieces. Moreover, note that
dΠb
D(θ)
dθ
= −

(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

−(1 −β)(w −y)

−cθ −((vh −m)(1 −β) −cθ)1{cθ(θ−θ0)+(vh−m)(β+(1−θ)(1−β))≤b}.
(15)
Hence, we conclude that either θb is equal to its upper bound, i.e., θb = min

1,θ0 +
b
cθ

, or alterna-
tively θb must be equal to one of its lower bound or the kink between the linear pieces of Πb
D(θ), i.e., θb ∈
n
θ0, b+cθθ0−(vh−m)
cθ−(vh−m)(1−β)
o
. Namely, when following strategy (b) in Proposition B.1 the distributor either invests
the budget in increasing the consumer education level first, and then the consumers’ maximum ability to pay
only if there is budget available (strategy MR), or invests the budget in increasing the consumers’ maximum
ability to pay first, and then in increasing the consumer education level only if it is beneficial and there is
budget available (strategy FR).
Specifically,
θMR = min

1,θ0 + b
cθ

, xMR = (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+
β
,
and
ΠMR
D
=
(γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)β + (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+
+

(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

−(1 −β)(w −y)

1 −θ0 −b
cθ
+
.
(16)
In order to write θF R in closed form there are two possible cases depending on whether Πb
D(θ) has a kink
in the feasible interval of problem (14),
h
θ0,min

1,θ0 +
b
cθ
i
. We analyze these cases next.
First assume cθ ≤(vh −m)(1 −β), then from Assumption 1 it follows that Πb
D(θ) does not have a kink
in the feasible interval of problem (14). Specifically, if cθ < (vh −m)(1 −β) then
b+cθθ0−(vh−m)
cθ−(vh−m)(1−β) ≥1, and if
cθ = (vh −m)(1 −β) then b −cθ(θ −θ0) ≤(vh −m)(β + (1 −θ)(1 −β)) for all θ. Namely, at θ = θ0 there is no
leftover budget after investing in x and θF R = θ0 in this sub-case.
Now assume cθ > (vh −m)(1−β), then from Assumption 1 it follows that Πb
D(θ) has a kink in the feasible
interval of problem (14) if and only if
b+cθθ0−(vh−m)
cθ−(vh−m)(1−β) ≥θ0, or equivalently (vh −m)(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β)) ≤b.
Moreover, from Equation 15 it follows that the kink will attain an objective value at least as large as the
solution θ = θ0 if and only if y ≤yθ, where
yθ ≡w −(1 −γ) 1
α ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

−(vh −m).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

40
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
To simplify the notation, we define the function
1
x++ :=
(
0
if x ≤0
1
x
if x > 0. Then,
θF R = θ0 +
 b −(vh −m)(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β))
+
 cθ −(vh −m)(1 −β)
++
1{y≤yθ},
xF R = min

vh −m,
b
β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β)

,
and
ΠF R
D =
(γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)β + min((vh −m)(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β)),b)
+

(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

−(1 −β)(w −y)

(1 −θ0)
+

w −y −1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

−(vh −m)
+
(1 −β)
 b −(vh −m)(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β))
+
 cθ −(vh −m)(1 −β)
++
.
(17)
To conclude, note that the optimal objective value of the resource allocation problem is
ΠOP T
D
= max(ΠF
D,ΠM
D ,ΠF R
D ,ΠMR
D ).
□
B.4.
Strategy Map with Homogeneous ATP
To characterize the strategy map of the Allocation Problem in Proposition B.2 we use three auxiliary
functions a1(m), a2(m), and a3(m), as well as three auxiliary thresholds on the consumers ATP mF, mMR
and ¯mMR, which are defined in its proof.
Proposition B.2 Assume w ≤βvh+(1−β)y and cθ ≤(1−β)(w−y). Let F, M, FR, and MR be the invest-
ment strategies from Theorem 1. Then, there exist ATPs mF, mMR, and ¯mMR where w ≤mF ≤mMR, ¯mMR ≤
vh and functions a1(m), a2(m), and a3(m), such that for a given customer risk aversion parameter α and
base ATP m,
• Strategy F is optimal if α is large enough and m is smaller than mF. Specifically,
ΠF
D ≥max(ΠM
D ,ΠF R
D ,ΠMR
D ) if and only if m ≤mF and α ≥a3(m).
• Strategy M is optimal if α is large enough and m is larger than mF and smaller than ¯mMR. Specifically,
ΠM
D ≥max(ΠF
D,ΠF R
D ,ΠMR
D ) if and only if mF ≤m≤¯mMR and α ≥a2(m).
• Strategy FR is optimal if α and m are small enough. Specifically,
ΠF R
D ≥max(ΠF
D,ΠM
D ,ΠMR
D ) if and only if m ≤mMR and α ≤min(a1(m),a3(m)).
• Strategy MR is optimal if m is larger than mF and α is larger than a1(m) and smaller than a2(m).
Specifically,
ΠMR
D
≥max(ΠF
D,ΠMF
D ,ΠF R
D ) if and only if mF ≤m and a1(m) ≤α ≤a2(m),
where a1(m) ≤a2(m) if and only if m ≥mF. Also, a1(m) = 0 for all mMR ≤m and a2(m) = ∞for all
¯mMR ≤m.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
41
Before stating the proof of Proposition B.2, we provide intuition on the proof’s structure and define
auxiliary functions.
Our goal is to describe the optimal allocation strategy as a function of (α,m). For such, we write the profit
of each strategy as a function of (α,m). The profits under strategies F,M,FR, and MR are, respectively
ΠF
D(α,m),ΠM
D (α,m),ΠF R
D (α,m), and ΠMR
D (α,m).
We will define a threshold, mF, and functions a1(m),a2(m), and a3(m) where a1(mF) = a2(mF) = a3(mF).
We will then establish the following properties:
• Property 1: ΠF
D(α,m) ≥ΠM
D (α,m) if and only if m ≤mF;
• Property 2: ΠMR
D (α,m) ≥ΠF R
D (α,m) if and only if α ≥a1(m);
• Property 3: ΠM
D (α,m) ≥ΠMR
D (α,m) if and only if α ≥a2(m);
• Property 4: ΠF
D(α,m) ≥ΠF R
D (α,m) if and only if α ≥a3(m);
• Property 5: a1(m) ≤a2(m) if and only if m ≥mF. Moreover, a2(m) = ∞for all m ≥¯mMR and a1(m) = 0
for all m ≥mMR, where w ≤mF ≤mMR, ¯mMR ≤vh
Note that Property 5 combined with the first four properties establishes the following additional properties:
• Property 6: when m ≤mF then ΠMR
D (α,m) ≤max(ΠF R
D (α,m),ΠM
D (α,m));
• Property 7: when m ≥mF then α ≥a2(m) implies ΠF R
D (α,m) ≤ΠM
D (α,m);
• Property 8: when m ≤mF then α ≤α3(m) implies ΠF R
D (α,m) ≥ΠM
D (α,m);
• Property 9: when m ≥mF then α ≤α1(m) implies ΠF R
D (α,m) ≥ΠM
D (α,m).
The nine properties above completely characterize the strategy map in the statement of Proposition B.2.
Namely,
• F is optimal if and only if m ≤mF and α ≥a3(m) (combine Properties 1, 4, and 6);
• M is optimal if and only if mF ≤m ≤¯mMR and α ≥α2(m) (combine Properties 1, 3, 5, and 7);
• FR is optimal if and only if m ≤mMR and α ≤min(a1(m),a3(m)) (combine Properties 2, 4, 5, 8, 9);
• MR is optimal if and only if mF ≤m and a1(m) ≤α ≤a2(m), where a1(m) ≤a2(m) if and only if
m ≥mF, a1(m) = 0 for all mMR ≤m, and a1(m) = ∞for all ¯mMR ≤m. (combine Properties 1, 2, 3, 5).
We now prove each property.
Proof of Property 1. Recall the Linear Program in (12) for deciding between strategies M and F. From
Equation 13, we have that ΠF
D ≥ΠM
D if and only if (γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)β ≤cθ. Thus, mF =
cθ
β +w−γvh
(1−γ)
.
Proof of Property 2. Recall the optimization problem in (14). From the concavity of Πb
D(θ) it follows that
it is sufficient to check the derivative
dΠb
D(θ)
dθ
at θ = 1, i.e.,
ΠMR
D
≥ΠF R
D
⇐⇒dΠb
D(1)
dθ
≥0.
We have
dΠb
D(1)
dθ
= −

(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

−(1 −β)(w −y)

−cθ −((vh −m)(1 −β) −cθ)1{cθ(1−θ0)+(vh−m)β≤b}
= −(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

+ (1 −β)(w −y) −cθ,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

42
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
where the second equality follows from Assumption 1. Thus,
dΠb
D(1)
dθ
≥0 ⇐⇒1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

≤g1(m),
where g1(m) = w −y −
cθ
(1−β). First assume that γ ≤1, note that then the term
1−γ
α ln

1−βe−α(vh−m)
1−β

is
monotonically decreasing in α and has range
h
0, (1−γ)β(vh−m)
1−β
i
. If 0 ≤g1(m) ≤(1−γ)β(vh−m)
1−β
, then there exists
ˆα1 that satisfies
1 −γ
ˆα1
ln
1 −βe−ˆα1(vh−m)
1 −β

= g1(m).
Then, we define a1(m) as
a1(m) =





∞,
if g1(m) < 0
ˆα1,
if 0 ≤g1(m) ≤(1−γ)β(vh−m)
1−β
0,
if (1−γ)β(vh−m)
1−β
< g1(m).
Since cθ ≤(1 −β)(w −y) by assumption, then g1(m) ≥0 thus a1(m) < ∞. The definition of a1(m) when
γ > 1 is analogous and is skipped for the sake of brevity. This establishes Property 2.
Proof of Property 3. To compare strategy M and MR, we directly compare their distributor’s value. From
the proof of Theorem 1:
ΠMR
D (α,m) =(γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)β + (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+
+

(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

−(1 −β)(w −y)

1 −θ0 −b
cθ
+
,
and
ΠM
D (α,m) = (γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)min

1,θ0 + b
cθ

β + (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+.
Thus, ΠM
D (α,m) ≥ΠMR
D (α,m) if and only if
−(γvh+(1−γ)m−w)β

1 −θ0 −b
cθ
+
≥

(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

−(1 −β)(w −y)

1 −θ0 −b
cθ
+
.
If

1 −θ0 −
b
cθ
+
= 0, then the budget is sufficient to set θ = 1 and the profits of policy M and MR are
the same since all customers are informed and there are no returns. Thus we consider the case where

1 −θ0 −
b
cθ
+
> 0. In such case, the inequality above becomes
−(γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)β ≥(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

−(1 −β)(w −y).
Rearranging the terms yields the relationship,
ΠM
D (α,m) ≥ΠMR
D (α,m) ⇐⇒1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

≤g2(m).
where g2(m) = w −y −(γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)
β
1−β . As in Property 2, first assume that γ ≤1, note that
then the term
1−γ
α ln

1−βe−α(vh−m)
1−β

is monotonically decreasing in α and has range
h
0, (1−γ)β(vh−m)
1−β
i
. If
0 ≤g2(m) ≤(1−γ)β(vh−m)
1−β
, then there exists a ˆα2 that satisfies
1 −γ
ˆα2
ln
1 −βe−ˆα2(vh−m)
1 −β

= g2(m).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
43
Then, we define a2(m) as
a2(m) =





∞,
if g2(m) < 0
ˆα2,
if 0 ≤g2(m) ≤(1−γ)β(vh−m)
1−β
0,
if (1−γ)β(vh−m)
1−β
< g2(m).
Since w ≤βvh + (1 −β)y by assumption, then g2(m) ≤(1 −γ)β(vh −m)/(1 −β) thus a2(m) > 0. As before,
the definition of a2(m) when γ > 1 is analogous and is skipped for the sake of brevity. This establishes
Property 3.
Proof of Property 4. The proof of this property is analogous to the proof of Properties 2 and 3. We denote
the information level in strategy F and FR by θF and θF R, respectively. We directly compare the distributor’s
value in F and FR. Hence,
ΠF
D(α,m) ≥ΠF R
D (α,m)
⇐⇒(γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)θFβ + b −cθ(θF −θ0) ≥
(γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)β + min
 (vh −m)(β + (1 −θF R)(1 −β)),b −cθ(θF R −θ0)

+

(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

−(1 −β)(w −y)

(1 −θF R)
⇐⇒(γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)θFβ + b −cθ(θF −θ0) ≥
(γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)θF Rβ + b −cθ(θF R −θ0) −
 b −cθ(θF R −θ0) −(vh −m)(β + (1 −θF R)(1 −β))
+
+

(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

−(1 −β)(w −y) + (γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)β

(1 −θF R)
⇐⇒((γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)β −cθ)(θF −θF R)
+
 b −(vh −m)(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β)) −(cθ −(vh −m)(1 −β))(θF R −θ0)
+ ≥

(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

−(1 −β)(w −y) + (γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)β

(1 −θF R)
⇐⇒((γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)β −cθ)(θF −θF R)
+
 b −(vh −m)(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β)) −
 b −(vh −m)(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β))
+1{cθ≥(vh−m)(1−β)}1{y≤yθ}
+ ≥

(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

−(1 −β)(w −y) + (γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)β

(1 −θF R)
⇐⇒1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

≤g3(m),
where the first equivalence is by definition of ΠF
D and ΠF R
D , the second and third equivalences follow by
rearranging terms, the fourth equivalence follows from the definition of θF R, and the last equivalence follows
by defining g3(m) as
g3(m) =
1
(1 −β)

(1 −β)(w −y) −(γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)β +
 (γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)β −cθ
θF −θF R
1 −θF R

+
 b −(vh −m)(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β))
+ 1 −1{y≤yθ,cθ≥(vh−m)(1−β)}
1 −θF R
#
,
where yθ = w −1−γ
α ln

1−βe−α(vh−m)
1−β

−(vh −m). Similar to the previous two properties, assume first that
γ ≤1, if 0 ≤g3(m) ≤(1−γ)β(vh−m)
1−β
, then there exists a ˆα3 that satisfies
1 −γ
ˆα3
ln
1 −βe−ˆα3(vh−m)
1 −β

= g3(m).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

44
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
We then define a3 as
a3(m) =





∞,
if g3(m) ≤0
ˆα3,
if 0 ≤g3(m) ≤(1−γ)β(vh−m)
1−β
0,
if (1−γ)β(vh−m)
1−β
≤g3(m).
Again, the definition of a3(m) when γ > 1 is analogous and is skipped for the sake of brevity. This establishes
Property 4.
Proof of Property 5. We first show that a1(mF) = a2(mF). By definition mF satisfies (γvh + (1 −γ)mF −
w)β = cθ. Therefore,
g2(mF) = w −y −(γvh + (1 −γ)mF −w)
β
1 −β = w −y −
cθ
(1 −β) = g1(mF).
We now show that a1(m) ≥a2(m) if and only if m ≤mF . Since (γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)β ≥cθ if and only if
m ≥mF, then g1(m) ≥g2(m) if and only if m ≥mF, hence a1(m) ≤a2(m) if and only if m ≥mF.
We now prove the second statement in Property 5. Let mMR = vh −(1−β)(w−y)−cθ
(1−γ)β
. Then, from the definition
of a1(m) in Property 2 we have that if m ≥mMR then a1(m) = 0, i.e., strategy MR dominates strategy
FR for all α ≥a1(m) = 0. Moreover, the first statement in Property 5 then implies mMR ≥mF while cθ ≤
(1 −β)(w −y) implies mMR ≤vh. Furthermore, Property 1 then also implies that strategy MR dominates
strategy F for all α ≥a1(m) = 0 and m ≥mF.
Similarly, let ¯mMR = vh −βvh+(1−β)y−w
(1−γ)β
. Then, from the definition of a2(m) in Property 3 we have that if
m ≥¯mMR then a2(m) = ∞, i.e., strategy MR dominates strategy M for all α ≤a2(m) = ∞. Moreover, the
first statement in Property 5 implies ¯mMR ≥mF, while w ≤βvh + (1 −β)y implies ¯mMR ≤vh, establishing
Property 5.
Hence, we have shown Properties 1 to 5, completing the proof of Proposition B.2.
□
B.5.
Strategy Map when w > βvh + (1 −β)y with Homogeneous ATP
The strategy map when β(vh −w) + (1 −β)(y −w) < 0 is simpler since only strategies F and M can be
optimal, as shown in the following proposition.
Proposition B.3 Assume β(vh −w) + (1 −β)(y −w) < 0 then the distributor’s optimal strategy in the
resource allocation problem can be characterized as follows. Strategies MR and FR in Theorem 1 are always
dominated. Moreover, consider the threshold mF on the customers’ base ability to pay from Proposition B.2,
then:
• Strategy F in Theorem 1 is optimal if and only if the customers’ base ability to pay m is smaller than
the threshold mF. Specifically,
max(ΠM
D ,ΠF R
D ,ΠMR
D ) ≤ΠF
D if and only if m ≤mF.
• Strategy M in Theorem 1 is optimal if the customers’ base ability to pay m is larger than the threshold
mF. Specifically,
max(ΠF
D,ΠF R
D ,ΠMR
D ) ≤ΠM
D if and only if m ≥mF.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
45
Proof. We build on the proof of Proposition B.2. Specifically, recall the threshold mF and the functions
a1(m),a2(m), and a3(m). Moreover, recall Properties 1 to 5.
We show that β(vh −w) + (1 −β)(y −w) < 0, or equivalently w > βvh + (1 −β)y, implies that strategies
MR and FR are dominated for any m and α ≥0.
First, we show that w > βvh + (1 −β)y implies ΠM
D (α,m) ≥ΠMR
D (α,m) for any m and α ≥0. We have
0 > βvh + (1 −β)y −w
= (γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)β + (1 −γ)β(vh −m) −(1 −β)(w −y)
= (1 −γ)β(vh −m) −(1 −β)g2(m).
Hence, g2(m) > (1 −γ)β(vh −m)/(1 −β). Thus, by definition a2(m) = 0 for any m and Property 3 implies
ΠM
D (α,m) ≥ΠMR
D (α,m) for any m and α ≥0.
Second, we show that w > βvh + (1 −β)y implies ΠMR
D (α,m) ≥ΠF R
D (α,m) for any m ≥mF and α ≥0.
Indeed, we have already shown that w > βvh +(1−β)y implies a2(m) = 0 for any m, then Property 5 implies
a1(m) = 0 for any m ≥mF, and from Property 2 we conclude ΠMR
D (α,m) ≥ΠF R
D (α,m) for any m ≥mF and
α ≥0.
Third, we show that w > βvh +(1−β)y implies ΠF
D(α,m) ≥ΠF R
D (α,m) for any m ≤mF and α ≥0. Indeed,
ΠF R
D (α,m) =(γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)β + min
 (vh −m)(β + (1 −θF R)(1 −β)),b −cθ(θF R −θ0)

+

(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

−(1 −β)(w −y)

(1 −θF R)
=(γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)θF Rβ + min
 (vh −m)(β + (1 −θF R)(1 −β)),b −cθ(θF R −θ0)

+

(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

−(1 −β)(w −y) + β(γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)

(1 −θF R)
≤(γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)θF Rβ + b −cθ(θF R −θ0) + (β(vh −w) −(1 −β)(w −y))(1 −θF R)
≤(γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)θF Rβ + b −cθ(θF R −θ0)
≤(γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)θFβ + b −cθ(θF −θ0)
=ΠF
D(α,m),
where the first inequality follows from min
 (vh−m)(β +(1−θF R)(1−β)),b−cθ(θF R −θ0)

≤b−cθ(θF R −θ0),
and since
1−β
α ln

1−βe−α(vh−m)
1−β

is decreasing in α > 0 and taking the limit α →0. The second inequality
follows from the assumption w > βvh +(1−β)y. The last inequality follows since θF ≥θF R from Lemma B.1
below, and (γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)β −cθ ≥0 for any m ≤mF. Hence, we conclude that w > βvh + (1 −β)y
implies ΠF
D(α,m) ≥ΠF R
D (α,m) for any m ≤mF and α ≥0.
Last, Properties 2, 3, and 5 imply ΠMR
D
≤max(ΠF
D,ΠF R
D ) for any m ≤mF and α ≥0.
Putting
all
these
observations
together,
we
conclude
that
w > βvh + (1 −β)y
implies
max(ΠF
D(α,m),ΠM
D (α,m)) ≥max(ΠF R
D (α,m),ΠMR
D (α,m)) for any m and α ≥0.
Namely, strategies MR and FR are dominated for any m and α ≥0, and it is enough to compare between
strategies F and M. Finally, Property 1 states ΠF
D(α,m) ≥ΠM
D (α,m) if and only if m ≥mF, concluding the
proof.
□
Proposition B.3 shows that for products that are socially efficient to try by high valuation consumers only
the distributor generally implements strategy M or F in Theorem 1, depending on whether the consumers’
base ability to pay m is high or low, respectively.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

46
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
B.6.
Strategy Map when cθ > (1 −β)(w −y) with Homogeneous ATP
The strategy map when cθ > (1 −β)(w −y) is simpler since only strategies F and FR can be optimal, as
shown in the following proposition.
Proposition B.4 Assume cθ > (1 −β)(w −y) then the distributor’s optimal strategy in the resource alloca-
tion problem can be characterized as follows. Strategies M and MR in Theorem 1 are always dominated for
any m ≤vh. Moreover, consider the function a3(m) from Proposition B.2, then:
• Strategy F in Theorem 1 is optimal if and only if the customers’ risk aversion parameter is large enough.
Specifically,
max(ΠM
D ,ΠF R
D ,ΠMR
D ) ≤ΠF
D if and only if α ≥a3(m).
• Strategy FR in Theorem 1 is optimal if the customers’ the customers’ risk aversion parameter is small
enough. Specifically,
max(ΠF
D,ΠM
D ,ΠMR
D ) ≤ΠF R
D
if and only if α ≤a3(m).
Proof. We build on the proof of Proposition B.2. Specifically, recall the threshold mF and the functions
a1(m),a2(m), and a3(m). Moreover, recall Properties 1 to 5.
We show that cθ > (1 −β)(w −y) implies that M and MR are dominated for any m ≤vh and α ≥0.
First, we show that cθ > (1 −β)(w −y) implies ΠF R
D (α,m) ≥ΠMR
D (α,m) for any m and α ≥0. Indeed,
cθ > (1 −β)(w −y) implies g1(m) < 0. Thus, by definition a1(m) = 0 for any m and Property 2 implies
ΠF R
D (α,m) ≥ΠMR
D (α,m) for any m and α ≥0.
Second, we show that cθ > (1 −β)(w −y) implies max(ΠF
D(α,m),ΠF R
D (α,m)) ≥ΠM
D (α,m) for any m ≤vh
and α ≥0. We consider two cases. Indeed, first assume β(vh −w) ≤cθ which is equivalent to mF ≥vh. Thus,
Property 1 implies ΠF
D(α,m) ≥ΠM
D (α,m) for any m ≤vh, completing the proof in the first case. Now assume
β(vh −w) > cθ, since by assumption cθ > (1 −β)(w −y) we conclude (1 −β)(w −y) < β(vh −w), which
implies g2(m) < 0 for all m ≤vh. Thus, by definition a2(m) = ∞for any m ≤vh and Property 3 implies
ΠMR
D (α,m) ≥ΠM
D (α,m) for any m ≤vh and α ≤∞. Since we have already shown ΠF R
D (α,m) ≥ΠMR
D (α,m)
for any m and α ≥0, we conclude that β(vh −w) > cθ and cθ > (1 −β)(w −y) imply ΠF R
D (α,m) ≥ΠM
D (α,m)
for any m ≤vh and α ≥0, completing the proof of the second case.
Putting
all
these
observations
together,
we
conclude
that
cθ > (1 −β)(w −y)
implies
max(ΠF
D(α,m),ΠF R
D (α,m)) ≥max(ΠM
D (α,m),ΠMR
D (α,m)) for any m ≤vh and α ≥0.
Namely, strategies M and MR are dominated for any m and α ≥0, and it is enough to compare between
strategies F and FR. Finally, Property 4 states ΠF
D(α,m) ≥ΠF R
D (α,m) if and only if α ≥a3(m), concluding
the proof.
□
B.7.
Proof of Corollary 1
Proof. The first statement in the corollary is the same as the first statement in Proposition B.2 taking
aF(m) = a3(m), while the second statement in the corollary follows directly from the last statement in
Proposition B.2.
The third statement in the corollary is the same as Proposition B.3, while the last statement in the
corollary is the same as Proposition B.4, completing the proof.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
47
B.8.
Consumer Surplus Analysis with Homogeneous ATP
We now state and prove a useful auxiliary lemma.
Lemma B.1 Let θi, i ∈{F,M,FR,MR} be the education level of each strategy from Theorem 1. Then,
under Assumption 1,
θM = θMR ≥θF ≥θF R.
(18)
Proof. From their definition, in the proof of Theorem 1, we have θM = θMR, where they are equal to the
natural upper bound on θ. Moreover, from Assumption 1 it follows that θM = θMR ≥θF. We now argue that
θF ≥θF R. In fact, if θF R = θ0 then θF ≥θF R follows trivially from their definition, in the proof of Theorem
1. If θF R > θ0 then by definition again we must have cθ > (vh −m)(1 −β) > 0, cθ(θF R −θ0) + (vh −m)(β +
(1 −θF R)(1 −β)) = b, and cθ(θF −θ0) + (vh −m)θF(1 −β) = b, hence we conclude θF ≥θF R in this case as
well, completing the proof.
□
B.9.
Proof of Proposition 2
Proof. Recall, from Proposition B.1, that
CSi = (vh −m)θiβ,
i ∈{F,M},
and
CSi = (vh −m)β −1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β
 1 −θi
,
i ∈{FR,MR}.
We now show that CSMR is the largest consumer surplus of the non-dominated distributor’s strategies
from Theorem 1. In particular, since θMR ≥θF R from Lemma B.1 then CSMR ≥CSF R.
Moreover,
CSMR ≥(vh −m)θMRβ = (vh −m)θMβ = CSM ≥(vh −m)θFβ = CSF,
where the first inequality follows since
1−β
α ln

1−βe−α(vh−m)
1−β

is decreasing in α > 0 and taking the limit
α →0. The second inequality follows since, from Lemma B.1, θM = θMR ≥θF. Hence, we conclude CSMR ≥
max(CSF,CSM,CSF R).
Finally, we show that there exists acs
F (m) such that CSF is the smallest consumer surplus of the non-
dominated distributor’s strategies from Theorem 1 if and only if α ≥acs
F (m). We have already shown CSMR ≥
CSM ≥CSF. We now show CSF R ≥CSF if and only if α ≥a4(m). Then, together with the first statement
in Proposition B.2, we will conclude ΠF
D ≥max(ΠM
D ,ΠF R
D ,ΠMR
D ) and CSF ≤min(CSMR,CSM,CSF R) if and
only if m ≤¯m and α ≥max(aF(m),acs
F (m)), where aF(m) = a3(m). In fact, we have
CSF R ≥CSF ⇐⇒1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

≤β(vh −m) (1 −θF)
(1 −θF R),
where the term 1−β
α ln

1−βe−α(vh−m)
1−β

is monotonically decreasing in α and has range [0,β(vh −m)]. Since
from Lemma B.1 we have θF ≥θF R, then 0 ≤β(vh −m) (1−θF )
(1−θF R) ≤β(vh −m). Moreover, since θF is indepen-
dent of α and θF R is non-decreasing in α it follows that there exists acs
F (m) such that
1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

≤β(vh −m) (1 −θF)
(1 −θF R) ⇐⇒α ≥acs
F (m),
completing the proof.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

48
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
B.10.
Results from Section 4.3 on Free Returns with Homogeneous ATP
We first specify the model under the assumption that the distributor commits to a free return policy.
With free returns, the distributor’s pricing problem then becomes
Π∗
D(x,θ) = max
c,z
(c −w) · B(p∗−x,p∗−x,θ) −(z −y) · R(p∗−x,p∗−x,θ) + γ · CS(p∗−x,p∗−x,θ)
s.t. {p∗} ∈arg max
p (p −c) · B(p −x,p −x,θ) −(p −x −z) · R(p −x,p −x,θ)
(IC)
B(p∗−x,p∗−x,θ) −(p∗−x −z) · R(p∗−x,p∗−x,θ) ≥0.
(IR)
(19)
and the distributor’s resource allocation problem remains unchanged.
Note that the same outcomes can be achieved in the original model by assuming that customers are
extremely risk averse, by taking the limit as α →∞, making customers max-min utility optimizers.
With the formulation at hand, we adapt Proposition B.1 to characterize the distributor’s pricing strategy
in this restricted setup, in the next proposition.
Proposition B.5 Consider any customer education level θ ∈[0,1), ATP m ∈[w,vh], and subsidy x ∈[0,vh −
m]. Assume the distributor commits to a free returns policy. Then, the equilibrium customer price is pf =
m + x and the refund is rf = m. The equilibrium retailer refund is zf = m and the retailer price cf is
cf = m + x + (1 −θ)(1 −β)θβ
θβ + (1 −θ)
(zf −¯zf).
The consumer surplus is CSf = (vh −m)β, retailer’s profit is 0, and the distributor’s profit is
Πf
D(x,θ) = (m + x −w)β + (1 −β)(x −w + y)(1 −θ) + γCSf.
Proposition B.5 is a special case of Proposition B.1 when α →∞. Therefore, we omit the proof.
Proof of Proposition 3. The proof of the first part of the proposition is the same as the proof of Theorem
1 for the special case when α →∞. Therefore, we only focus on the expressions that change. Specifically,
ΠMRf
D
=
(γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)β + (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+ −(1 −β)(w −y)

1 −θ0 −b
cθ
+
.
(20)
To simplify the notation, recall the function
1
x++ :=
(
0
if x ≤0
1
x
if x > 0. Then,
θF Rf = θ0 +
 b −(vh −m)(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β))
+
 cθ −(vh −m)(1 −β)
++
1{(vh−m)≤(w−y)},
and
ΠF Rf
D
=
(γvh + (1 −γ)m −w)β + min((vh −m)(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β)),b)
−(1 −β)(w −y)(1 −θ0) + (w −y −(vh −m))+ (1 −β)
 b −(vh −m)(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β))
+
 cθ −(vh −m)(1 −β)
++
.
(21)
The proof of the second part of the proposition is the same as the proof of Property 2 in the proof of
Proposition B.2 for the special case when α →∞. Namely,
ΠMRf
D
≥ΠF Rf
D
⇐⇒dΠf
D(1)
dθ
= (1 −β)(w −y) −cθ ≥0,
completing the proof.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
49
Appendix C:
Results from Section 5 on Heterogeneous ATP
Proposition C.1 Consider any consumer education level θ ∈[0,1), ATPs ml,mh ∈[w,vh], ml < mh, and
subsidy x ∈[0,vh −ml]. Then, the distributor’s optimal objective is
Π∗
D(x,θ) = max

ΠA
D(x,θ),ΠAR
D (x,θ),ΠS
D(x,θ),ΠSR
D (x,θ)
 
.
(22)
Where Πi
D(x,θ) i ∈{A,AR,S,SR} each correspond to the distributor’s profits in a non-dominated strategy.
Specifically, these strategies are characterized by:
(A) Target all informed customers without product returns. The customer price is pA = ml + x and refund
is rA = 0. The retailer’s price and refund are cA = ml + x −
ˆ
OA
R
θβ and zA = 0, respectively. The customer
surplus is CSA = (vh −ml)θβ. The retailer’s profit is ΠA
R = ˆOA
R while the distributor’s profit is
ΠA
D(x,θ) = (ml + x −w)θβ −ˆOA
R + γCSA,
where
ˆOA
R =
( λθβ(mh−ml)
1−λ
if θβ ≤λ(θβ + (1 −θ))
max
n
λθβ(mh−ml)
1−λ
,λθβ rα(mh)(1−θ)(1−β)−(mh−ml)(θβ+(1−θ))
λ(θβ+(1−θ))−θβ
o
if θβ > λ(θβ + (1 −θ)).
This strategy can be sustained in equilibrium if and only if ˆOA
R ≤UBA, where
UBA =
(
min
n
rα(ml)θβ(1 −β),λθβ (rα(mh)(1−θ)(1−β)−(mh−ml)(θβ+(1−θ)))
λ(θβ+(1−θ))−θβ
o
if θβ ≤λ(θβ + (1 −θ))
rα(ml)θβ(1 −β)
if θβ > λ(θβ + (1 −θ)).
(AR) Target all informed and uninformed customers with product returns. The customer price is pAR = ml +
x and the refund is rAR = rα(ml) = max

0,ml −1
α ln

1−βe−α(vh−ml)
1−β

. Let ¯zAR = rα(ml) −
ˆ
OAR
R
(1−β)θβ .
Then, without loss of generality, the equilibrium retailer refund is zAR = max(0, ¯zAR) and the retailer
price is cAR = ml + x −
ˆ
OAR
R
θβ + (1−θ)(1−β)
θβ+(1−θ) (zAR −¯zAR). The consumer surplus is CSAR = (vh −ml)β −
(ml −rα(ml))(1 −θ)(1 −β), the retailer’s profit is ΠAR
R
= ˆOAR
R , and the distributor’s profit is
ΠAR
D (x,θ) = (ml + x −w)β + (ml + x −rα(ml) −w + y)(1 −β)(1 −θ) −ˆOAR
R
+ γCSAR,
where
ˆOAR
R
=
λ
1 −λ((mh −ml)β −(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh)))(1 −θ)(1 −β))+.
This strategy can be sustained in equilibrium if and only if
ˆOAR
R
≤(ml + x)β + (ml + x −rα(ml))(1 −θ)(1 −β).
(S) Target only informed customers with high ATP without product returns. The customer price is pS =
mh+x and refund is rS = 0. The retailer’s price and refund are cS = mh+x and zS = 0, respectively. The
customer surplus is CSS = (vh −mh)λθβ. The retailer attains no profit, ΠS
R = 0, while the distributor’s
profit is
ΠS
D(x,θ) = (mh + x −w)λθβ + γCSS.
This strategy can always be sustained in equilibrium.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

50
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
(SR) Target both informed and uninformed customers with product returns. The customer price is pSR =
mh +x and the refund is rSR = rα(mh) = max

0,mh −1
α ln

1−βe−α(vh−mh)
1−β

. The equilibrium retailer
price is cSR = mh + x, and the retailer refund is zSR = rα(mh). The consumer surplus is CSSR =
(vh −mh)λβ −(mh −rα(mh))λ(1−θ)(1−β), the retailer attains no profit, ΠSR
R = 0, and the distributor’s
profit is
ΠSR
D (x,θ) = (mh + x −w)λβ + (mh + x −rα(mh) −w + y)λ(1 −β)(1 −θ) + γCSSR.
This strategy can always be sustained in equilibrium.
Proof. First, we analyze the retailer’s pricing problem and show that the optimal nominal price to
consumers and refund are such that (p∗,r∗) ∈{(ml + x,0),(ml + x,rα(ml)),(mh + x,0)(mh + x,rα(mh))}.
Note that the expected fraction of customers who purchase the product is B(p,r,θ) = (λ1{p−x≤mh} + (1 −
λ)1{p−x≤ml})

θβ + (1 −θ)1{r≥rα(p−x)}

. Since all indicator functions are decreasing in p (cf. Equation 7),
it follows that, for a given r, the optimal retailer’s price p∗is such that p∗∈{ml + x,mh + x,pα(r) + x}.
Then, if p∗= ml + x the retailer’s profit function is
ΠR (ml + x,r) = (ml + x −c)

θβ + (1 −θ)1{r≥rα(ml)}

−(r −z)(1 −θ)(1 −β)1{r≥rα(ml)}.
The profit function above is constant for r < rα(ml), has an increasing or decreasing step at r = rα(ml), and
is linear decreasing for r > rα(ml). Therefore, r∗∈{0,rα(ml)} when p∗= ml + x.
Similarly, if p∗= mh + x the retailer’s profit function is
ΠR (mh + x,r) = (mh + x −c)λ

θβ + (1 −θ)1{r≥rα(mh)}

−(r −z)λ(1 −θ)(1 −β)1{r≥rα(mh)}.
As before, the profit function above is constant for r < rα(mh), has an increasing or decreasing step at
r = rα(mh), and is linear decreasing for r > rα(mh). Therefore, r∗∈{0,rα(mh)} when p∗= mh + x.
Conversely, if p∗= pα(r) + x the retailer’s profit function is
ΠR (pα(r) + x,r) =(pα(r) + x −c)

λ1{pα(r)≤mh} + (1 −λ)1{pα(r)≤ml}

(θβ + (1 −θ))
−(r −z)

λ1{pα(r)≤mh} + (1 −λ)1{pα(r)≤ml}

(1 −θ)(1 −β).
The profit function above is zero if pα(r) > mh since customers cannot afford the product. When pα(r) ≤ml
or ml < pα(r) ≤mh (equivalently when r ≤rα(ml) or rα(ml) < r ≤rα(mh)) the profit function is increasing
in r. To show this, first note that when r ≤rα(ml) we have
∂ΠR (pα(r) + x,r)
∂r
= p′
α(r)(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(1 −θ)(1 −β) = θβ + (1 −θ)
r′
α(pα(r))
−(1 −θ)(1 −β),
where the second equality comes from the fact that pα = r−1
α . Then, from Equation 7, for any p ∈[0,vh + x],
we have that
r′
α(p) ≤1 +
β
1 −β ≤1 +
β
(1 −θ)(1 −β) = θβ + (1 −θ)
(1 −θ)(1 −β).
The first inequality comes from noting that r′
α(p), given in Equation 7, is increasing in p for p ∈[0,vh +x] and
that r′
α(vh + x) = 1 +
β
1−β . The analysis for the case when rα(ml) < r ≤rα(mh) is analogous. It follows that
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
51
∂ΠR(pα(r)+x,r)
∂r
≥0 when r ≤rα(ml) or rα(ml) < r ≤rα(mh), thus r∗∈{rα(ml),rα(mh)} when p∗= pα(r) + x,
hence p∗∈{ml + x,mh + x} in this case as well.
Hence, we conclude that (p∗,r∗) ∈{(ml + x,0),(ml + x,rα(ml)),(mh + x,0),(mh + x,rα(mh))}, fully char-
acterizing the equilibrium behavior of the retailer. With the retailer’s equilibrium behavior in hand, we now
characterize the distributor’s equilibrium pricing and refund strategies.
Strategy (S): First assume that the distributor is interested in inducing the retailer to target informed
consumers with high valuation and high ATP, i.e. set p∗= mh + x and r∗= 0. In this case, the distributor’s
problem can be written as
max
c,z≥0 (c −w)λθβ + γ(vh −mh)λθβ
s.t. (mh + x −c)λθβ ≥(ml + x −c)θβ
(ICSA)
(mh + x −c)λθβ ≥(ml + x −c)(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(rα(ml) −z)(1 −θ)(1 −β)
(ICSAR)
(mh + x −c)λθβ ≥(mh + x −c)λ(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(rα(mh) −z)(1 −θ)λ(1 −β)
(ICSSR)
(mh + x −c)λθβ ≥0.
(IRS)
The (ICSA), (ICSAR), (ICSSR) constraints above imply that the retailer sets p∗= mh + x and r∗= 0.
Moreover, note that (ICSAR) is redundant since it is implied by (ICSA) and (ICSSR) combined. Indeed,
(ICSSR) implies (ICAAR), the latter combined with (ICSA) implies (ICSAR).
The objective function is increasing in c and independent of z, with an upper bound c ≤mh + x given by
the (IRS) constraint (note that the (ICSA) and (ICSSR) are trivially satisfied for any ml ≤mh). Hence, in
particular c∗= mh + x and z∗= 0, and strategy (S) can always be induced by the distributor.
Strategy (SR): Now assume that the distributor is interested in inducing the retailer to target all informed
and uninformed consumers with high ATP, i.e. set p∗= mh +x and r∗= rα(mh). In this case, the distributor’s
problem can be written as
max
c,z≥0 (c −w)λ(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(z −y)λ(1 −θ)(1 −β) + γ((vh −mh)β −(mh −rα(mh))λ(1 −θ)(1 −β))
s.t. (mh + x −c)λ(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(rα(mh) −z)λ(1 −θ)(1 −β) ≥(ml + x −c)θβ
(ICSRA)
(mh + x −c)λ(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(rα(mh) −z)λ(1 −θ)(1 −β) ≥
(ml + x −c)(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(rα(ml) −z)(1 −θ)(1 −β)
(ICSRAR)
(mh + x −c)λ(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(rα(mh) −z)λ(1 −θ)(1 −β) ≥(mh + x −c)λθβ
(ICSRS)
(mh + x −c)λ(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(rα(mh) −z)λ(1 −θ)(1 −β) ≥0.
(IRSR)
The (ICSRA), (ICSRAR), (ICSRS) constraints above imply that the retailer sets p∗= mh +x and r∗= rα(mh).
Note that the objective is increasing in c and decreasing in z, leading to c∗= mh + x and z∗= rα(mh),
i.e., the constraints (ICSRS) and (IRSR) are tight. Note that constraint (ICSRA) is trivially satisfied for any
ml ≤mh, while constraint (ICSRAR) becomes redundant in this solution since it is implied by the combi-
nation of (ICSRA), and (ICSRS) being tight. Specifically, since (ICSRS) is tight it is equivalent to (ICSSR),
while (ICSRA) is equivalent to (ICSA) and (ICSRAR) is equivalent to (ICSAR). Thus, since (ICSSR) implies
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

52
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
(ICAAR), and the latter combined with (ICSA) imply (ICSAR) we conclude that (ICSRAR) is guaranteed to
be satisfied in this solution. Thus, strategy (SR) can always be induced by the distributor.
Strategy (AR): Assume that the distributor is interested in inducing the retailer to target all informed
and uninformed consumers, i.e. set p∗= ml + x and r∗= rα(ml). In this case, the distributor’s problem can
be written as
max
c,z≥0 (c −w)(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(z −y)(1 −θ)(1 −β) + γ((vh −ml)β −(ml −rα(ml))(1 −θ)(1 −β))
s.t. (ml + x −c)(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(rα(ml) −z)(1 −θ)(1 −β) ≥(ml + x −c)θβ
(ICARA)
(ml + x −c)(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(rα(ml) −z)(1 −θ)(1 −β) ≥(mh + x −c)λθβ
(ICARS)
(ml + x −c)(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(rα(ml) −z)(1 −θ)(1 −β) ≥
(mh + x −c)λ(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(rα(mh) −z)λ(1 −θ)(1 −β)
(ICARSR)
(ml + x −c)(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(rα(ml) −z)(1 −θ)(1 −β) ≥0.
(IRAR)
The (ICARA), (ICARS), (ICARSR) constraints above imply that the retailer sets p∗= ml +x and r∗= rα(ml).
Moreover, note that (ICARS) is redundant, implied by (ICARA) and (ICARSR) combined. Indeed, (ICARA)
implies (ICSRS), the latter combined with (ICARSR) implies (ICARS).
Let ˆOAR
R
= λ/(1−λ)((mh−ml)β−(ml−rα(ml)−(mh−rα(mh)))(1−θ)(1−β))+. Note that the objective is
increasing in c and decreasing in z, leading to c∗= ml +x−
ˆ
OAR
R
θβ + (1−θ)(1−β)
θβ+(1−θ) (z∗−¯zAR) and z∗= max(0, ¯zAR),
where ¯zAR = rα(ml) −
ˆ
OAR
R
(1−β)θβ , i.e., the constraints (ICARA) and one of (IRAR) or (ICARSR) are tight when
¯zAR ≥0, or the constraint (ICARA) is redundant and one of (IRAR) or (ICARSR) is tight when ¯zAR < 0, as
long as
ˆOAR
R
≤(ml + x)β + (ml + x −rα(ml))(1 −θ)(1 −β),
(23)
that is, as long as c∗≥0. Alternatively, if Equation 23 is not satisfied then the problem is infeasible, i.e.,
strategy (AR) cannot be induced by the distributor.
Strategy (A): Finally, assume that the distributor is interested in inducing the retailer to target all informed
consumers, i.e. set p∗= ml + x and r∗= 0. In this case, the distributor’s problem can be written as
max
c,z≥0 (c −w)θβ + γ(vh −ml)θβ
s.t. (ml + x −c)θβ ≥(ml + x −c)(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(rα(ml) −z)(1 −θ)(1 −β)
(ICAAR)
(ml + x −c)θβ ≥(mh + x −c)λθβ
(ICAS)
(ml + x −c)θβ ≥(mh + x −c)λ(θβ + (1 −θ)) −(rα(mh) −z)λ(1 −θ)(1 −β)
(ICASR)
(ml + x −c)θβ ≥0.
(IRA)
The (ICASR), (ICAS), (ICAAR) constraints above imply that the retailer sets p∗= ml + x and r∗= 0.
Assume first that θβ ≤λ(θβ + (1 −θ)). Let ˆOA1
R = λθβ
1−λ(mh −ml). The objective is increasing in c and
independent of z, with an upper bound c ≤ml +x−
ˆ
OA1
R
θβ given by the (IRA) and (ICAS) constraints as long
as
ˆOA1
R ≤min

rα(ml)θβ(1 −β),λθβ (rα(mh)(1 −θ)(1 −β) −(mh −ml)(θβ + (1 −θ)))
λ(θβ + (1 −θ)) −θβ

,
(24)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
53
i.e., as long as constraints (ICAAR) and (ICASR) are satisfied. Hence, in particular c∗= ml + x −
ˆ
OA1
R
θβ
and
z∗= 0, leading to strategy (A) in the statement of the proposition. Alternatively, if Equation 24 is not
satisfied then the problem is infeasible, i.e., strategy (A) cannot be induced by the distributor when θβ ≤
λ(θβ + (1 −θ)).
Now assume that θβ > λ(θβ + (1 −θ)). Let
ˆOA2
R = max
 λθβ
1 −λ(mh −ml),λθβ rα(mh)(1 −θ)(1 −β) −(mh −ml)(θβ + (1 −θ))
λ(θβ + (1 −θ)) −θβ

.
The objective is increasing in c and independent of z, with an upper bound c ≤ml + x −
ˆ
OA2
R
θβ
given by the
(IRA), (ICAS), and (ICASR) constraints as long as
ˆOA2
R ≤rα(ml)θβ(1 −β),
(25)
i.e., as long as constraint (ICAAR) is satisfied. Hence, in particular c∗= mh+x−
ˆ
OA2
R
θβ and z∗= 0. Alternatively,
if Equation 25 is not satisfied then the problem is infeasible, i.e., strategy (A) cannot be induced by the
distributor when θβ > λ(θβ + (1 −θ)).
□
C.1.
Proof of Proposition 4
Proof. We first show that the distributor’s objective function is increasing in x. Note that
∂ΠA
D
∂x = θβ > 0, ∂ΠAR
D
∂x
= β + (1 −θ)(1 −β) > 0, ∂ΠS
D
∂x = λθβ > 0, and ∂ΠSR
D
∂x
= λ(β + (1 −θ)(1 −β)) > 0.
Hence,
∂Π∗
D
∂x > 0.
In contrast, the distributor’s objective function is not always increasing in θ. To prove this, we show that
Equation 5 in the statement of the proposition is equivalent to
∂ΠSR
D
∂θ
≤0, and it implies ΠS
D ≤ΠSR
D ,
∂ΠAR
D
∂θ
≤0,
and
∂ΠA
D
∂θ ≤0 or ΠA
D ≤ΠAR
D . Hence, Equation 5 implies
∂Π∗
D
∂θ ≤0.
First, we show that Equation 5 is equivalent to
∂ΠSR
D
∂θ
≤0. Note that,
∂ΠSR
D
∂θ
= −(1 −γ)λ1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

+ λ(1 −β)(w −y −x).
Then,
∂ΠSR
D
∂θ
≤0 ⇐⇒y + (1 −γ) 1
α ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

+ x −w ≥0
⇐⇒mh + x −w −(rα(mh) −y) −γ(m −rα(mh)) ≥0.
Second, we now show that Equation 5 implies ΠS
D ≤ΠSR
D . Indeed, from Proposition C.1 it follows that
ΠS
D ≤ΠSR
D
⇐⇒mh + x −w −(1 −β)(rα(mh) −y) + γ(β(vh −mh) −(1 −β)(mh −rα(mh))) ≥0,
or equivalently
ΠS
D ≤ΠSR
D
⇐⇒y + (1 −γ) 1
α ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

+ x −w +
β
1 −β (γvh + (1 −γ)mh + x −w) ≥0.
By noting that (γvh + (1 −γ)mh + x −w) ≥0 we conclude that Equation 5 implies ΠS
D ≤ΠSR
D .
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

54
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
Third, we show that Equation 5 also implies
∂ΠAR
D
∂θ
≤0. Note that,
∂ΠAR
D
∂θ
= −(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

+ (1 −β)(w −y −x)
−
λ
1 −λ(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh)))(1 −β),
Then,
∂ΠAR
D
∂θ
≤0 ⇐⇒y + (1 −γ) 1
α ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

+ x −w +
λ
1 −λ(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh))) ≥0.
Since m −rα(m) is decreasing in m, then Equation 5 also implies
∂ΠAR
D
∂θ
≤0.
Fourth, we show that Equation 5 implies
∂ΠA
D
∂θ ≤0 or ΠA
D ≤ΠAR
D . On the one hand, from Proposition C.1
it follows that
ΠA
D ≤ΠAR
D
⇐⇒ml + x −w −(1 −β)(rα(ml) −y) + γ(β(vh −ml) −(1 −β)(ml −rα(ml)))
−
λ
1 −λ(β(mh −ml) −(1 −β)(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh)))) ≥0,
or equivalently
ΠA
D ≤ΠAR
D
⇐⇒y + (1 −γ) 1
α ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

+ x −w +
λ
1 −λ(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh)))
+
β
1 −β

γvh + (1 −γ)ml + x −w −
λ
1 −λ(mh −ml)

≥0.
On the other hand, Lemma C.1 below implies
∂ΠA
D
∂θ
= (γvh + (1 −γ)ml + x −w)β −λβ
1 −λ(mh −ml).
Hence, we conclude that if Equation 5 holds, then ΠA
D > ΠAR
D
implies
∂ΠA
D
∂θ ≤0, i.e., ΠA
D ≤ΠAR
D
or
∂ΠA
D
∂θ ≤0
must hold.
Thus, we have shown Equation 5 is equivalent to
∂ΠSR
D
∂θ
≤0, and it implies ΠS
D ≤ΠSR
D ,
∂ΠAR
D
∂θ
≤0, and
∂ΠA
D
∂θ ≤0 or ΠA
D ≤ΠAR
D . Hence, Equation 5 implies
∂Π∗
D
∂θ ≤0.
Finally,
∂2ΠA
D
∂θ∂x = β > 0,
∂2ΠAR
D
∂θ∂x = −(1 −β) < 0,
∂2ΠS
D
∂θ∂x = λβ > 0, and
∂2ΠSR
D
∂θ∂x = −λ(1 −β) < 0. This concludes
the proof.
□
Lemma C.1 Under Assumption 2, if θβ > λ(θβ + (1 −θ)) then
λθβ rα(mh)(1 −θ)(1 −β) −(mh −ml)(θβ + (1 −θ))
λ(θβ + (1 −θ)) −θβ
≤λθβ(mh −ml)
1 −λ
.
Thus, by its definition in Proposition C.1 it follows that under Assumption 2 we have ˆOa
R = λθβ(mh−ml)
1−λ
.
Proof. The assumptions in the lemma imply rα(mh)(1 −β)(1 −λ) ≥(mh −βvh)(1 −λ) ≥(mh −ml),
since the first inequality follows from rα(mh) being increasing in α > 0 and taking the limit as α →0, and
the second inequality is equivalent to the assumption λ ≤ml−βvh
mh−βvh when mh > βvh.
This inequality implies the result in the lemma. Indeed,
λθβ rα(mh)(1 −θ)(1 −β) −(mh −ml)(θβ + (1 −θ))
λ(θβ + (1 −θ)) −θβ
≤λθβ(mh −ml)
1 −λ
⇐⇒(rα(mh)(1 −θ)(1 −β) −(mh −ml)(θβ + (1 −θ)))(1 −λ) ≥(mh −ml)(λ(θβ + (1 −θ)) −θβ)
⇐⇒rα(mh)(1 −θ)(1 −β)(1 −λ) ≥(mh −ml)(1 −θ)
⇐⇒rα(mh)(1 −β)(1 −λ) ≥(mh −ml),
where the first equivalence follows from the assumption θβ > λ(θβ + (1 −θ)), completing the proof.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
55
C.2.
Proof of Theorem 2
Proof. Let (x∗,θ∗) be the optimal solution of the distributor’s allocation problem with heterogeneous
ATPs. We analyze strategies A, AR, S, and SR from Proposition C.1 separately.
FS and MS: Assume first that Π∗
D(x∗,θ∗) = ΠS
D(x∗,θ∗).
Since
∂ΠS
D
∂x = λθβ > 0 and
∂ΠS
D
∂θ = λ(γvh + (1 −γ)m + x −w)β > 0 then from Assumption 1 it follows that
the optimal solution to the resource allocation problem exhausts the budget, i.e., cθ(θ∗−θ0) + λθ∗βx∗= b,
or equivalently x∗(θ) = b−cθ(θ−θ0)
λθβ
. By replacing x∗(θ) in the resource allocation problem, it simplifies to the
following one-variable optimization problem
max
θ
ΠS
D(θ) = (γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)λθβ + b −cθ(θ −θ0)
s.t.
θ ∈[θ0,1], b −cθ(θ −θ0)
λθβ
∈[0,vh −mh].
(26)
Let θS be the optimal solution of problem (26), and xS = b−cθ(θS−θ0)
λθSβ
. The objective function of problem
(26), ΠS
D(θ), is linear. Moreover,
dΠS
D(θ)
dθ
= (γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)λβ −cθ.
(27)
Hence, θS must be equal to one of its upper or lower bound, i.e.,
θS ∈

θ0 + (b −λθ0β(vh −mh))+
cθ + λβ(vh −mh)
,min

1,θ0 + b
cθ

,
and thus
xS ∈

min

vh −mh,
b
λθ0β

, (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+
λβ

.
Namely, when following strategy S in Proposition C.1 the distributor either invests the budget in increasing
the consumers’ maximum ability to pay first, and then the consumer education level only if there is budget
available (strategy FS), or invests the budget in increasing the consumer education level first, and then the
consumers’ maximum ability to pay only if there is budget available (strategy MS). Specifically,
θF S = θ0 + (b −λθ0β(vh −mh))+
cθ + λβ(vh −mh)
, xF S = min

vh −mh,
b
λθ0β

,
and
ΠF S
D =

γvh + (1 −γ)mh + min

vh −mh,
b
λθ0β

−w

θ0 + (b −λθ0β(vh −mh))+
cθ + λβ(vh −mh)

λβ.
Similarly,
θMS = min

1,θ0 + b
cθ

, xMS = (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+
λβ
,
and
ΠMS
D
= (γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)min

1,θ0 + b
cθ

λβ + (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+.
FSR and MSR: Assume now that Π∗
D(x∗,θ∗) = ΠSR
D (x∗,θ∗).
Since
∂ΠSR
D
∂x
= λ(β + (1 −θ)(1 −β)) > 0, then from Assumption 1 it follows that the optimal sub-
sidy must either be equal to its upper bound or the budget constraint must be tight, i.e., x∗(θ) =
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

56
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
min

vh −mh,
b−cθ(θ−θ0)
λ(β+(1−θ)(1−β))

. By replacing x∗(θ) in the resource allocation problem, it simplifies to the
following one-variable optimization problem
max
θ
ΠSR
D (θ) = (γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)λβ + min
 (vh −mh)λ(β + (1 −θ)(1 −β)),b −cθ(θ −θ0)

+
1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

−(w −y)

λ(1 −β)(1 −θ)
s.t.
θ ∈[θ0,1], cθ(θ −θ0) ≤b.
(28)
Let θSR be the optimal solution of problem (28) and xSR = x∗(θSR). Since the minimum of two linear
functions is concave, then the objective function of problem (28), ΠSR
D (θ), is piece-wise linear concave with
at most two pieces. Moreover, note that
dΠSR
D (θ)
dθ
= −
1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

−(w −y)

λ(1 −β)
−cθ −((vh −mh)λ(1 −β) −cθ)1{cθ(θ−θ0)+(vh−mh)λ(β+(1−θ)(1−β))≤b}.
(29)
Hence, we conclude that either θSR is equal to its upper bound, i.e., θSR = min

1,θ0 +
b
cθ

, or alternatively
θSR must be equal to one of its lower bound or the kink between the linear pieces of ΠSR
D (θ), i.e., θSR ∈
n
θ0, b+cθθ0−λ(vh−m)
cθ−(vh−m)λ(1−β)
o
. Namely, when following strategy SR in Proposition C.1 the distributor either invests
the budget in increasing the consumer education level first, and then the consumers’ maximum ability to
pay only if there is budget available (strategy MSR), or invests the budget in increasing the consumers’
maximum ability to pay first, and then in increasing the consumer education level only if it is beneficial and
there is budget available (strategy FSR). Specifically,
θMSR = min

1,θ0 + b
cθ

, xMSR = (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+
λβ
,
and
ΠMSR
D
=
(γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)λβ + (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+
+
1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

−(w −y)

(1 −β)λ

1 −θ0 −b
cθ
+
.
(30)
In order to write θF SR in closed form there are two possible cases depending on whether ΠSR
D (θ) has a
kink in the feasible interval of problem (28),
h
θ0,min

1,θ0 +
b
cθ
i
. We analyze these cases next.
First assume cθ ≤(vh −mh)λ(1 −β), then from Assumption 1 it follows that ΠSR
D (θ) does not have a kink
in the feasible interval of problem (28). Specifically, if cθ < (vh −mh)λ(1−β) then
b+cθθ0−λ(vh−mh)
cθ−(vh−mh)λ(1−β) ≥1, and
if cθ = (vh −mh)λ(1 −β) then b −cθ(θ −θ0) ≤(vh −mh)λ(β + (1 −θ)(1 −β)) for all θ. Namely, at θ = θ0
there is no leftover budget after investing in x and θF SR = θ0 in this sub-case.
Now assume cθ > (vh−mh)λ(1−β), then from Assumption 1 it follows that ΠSR
D (θ) has a kink in the feasible
interval of problem (28) if and only if
b+cθθ0−λ(vh−mh)
cθ−(vh−mh)λ(1−β) ≥θ0, or equivalently (vh −mh)λ(β +(1−θ0)(1−β)) ≤
b. Moreover, from Equation 29 it follows that the kink will attain an objective value at least as large as the
solution θ = θ0 if and only if y ≤ySR
θ , where
ySR
θ
≡w −(1 −γ) 1
α ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

−(vh −mh).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
57
To simplify the notation, we define the function
1
x++ :=
(
0
if x ≤0
1
x
if x > 0. Then,
θF SR = θ0+
 b −(vh −mh)λ(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β))
+
 cθ −(vh −mh)λ(1 −β)
++
1{y≤ySR
θ }, xF SR = min

vh −mh,
b
λ(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β))

,
and
ΠF SR
D
=
(γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)λβ + min((vh −mh)λ(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β)),b)
+
1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

−(w −y)

(1 −β)λ(1 −θ0)
+

w −y −1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

−(vh −mh)
+
(1 −β)λ
 b −(vh −mh)λ(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β))
+
 cθ −(vh −mh)λ(1 −β)
++
.
(31)
FA and MA: Assume now that Π∗
D(x∗,θ∗) = ΠA
D(x∗,θ∗).
Since
∂ΠA
D
∂x = θβ > 0 then from Assumption 1 it follows that the optimal subsidy must either be equal to
its upper bound or the budget constraint must be tight, i.e., x∗(θ) = min

vh −ml, b−cθ(θ−θ0)
θβ

. By replacing
x∗(θ) in the resource allocation problem, it simplifies to the following one-variable optimization problem
max
θ
ΠA
D(θ) = (γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w)θβ + min((vh −ml)θβ,b −cθ(θ −θ0)) −λθβ
1 −λ(mh −ml)
s.t.
θ ∈[θ0,1], cθ(θ −θ0) ≤b,
(32)
where ˆOA
R = λθβ
1−λ(mh −ml) follows from Assumption 2 and Lemma C.1.
Let θA be the optimal solution of problem (32), and xA = x∗(θA). Since the minimum of two linear functions
is concave, then the objective function of problem (32), ΠA
D(θ), is piece-wise linear concave with at most two
pieces. Moreover, note that
dΠA
D(θ)
dθ
= (γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w)β −cθ + ((vh −ml)β + cθ)1{cθ(θ−θ0)+(vh−ml)θβ≤b} −λβ
1 −λ(mh −ml).
(33)
Hence, we conclude that either θa is equal to its upper bound, i.e., θa = min

1,θ0 +
b
cθ

, or alternatively
θa must be equal to one of its lower bound or the kink between the linear pieces of ΠA
D(θ), i.e., θa ∈
n
θ0,
b+cθθ0
cθ+(vh−ml)β
o
.
Namely, when following strategy A in Proposition C.1 the distributor either invests the budget in increasing
the consumer education level first, and then the consumers’ maximum ability to pay only if there is budget
available (strategy MA), or invests the budget in increasing the consumers’ maximum ability to pay first,
and then in increasing the consumer education level only if it is beneficial and there is budget available
(strategy FA). Specifically,
θMA = min

1,θ0 + b
cθ

, xMA = (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+
β
,
and
ΠMA
D
=

γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w −
λ
1 −λ(mh −ml)

min

1,θ0 + b
cθ

β + (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+.
In order to write θF A in closed form there are two possible cases depending on whether ΠA
D(θ) has a kink
in the feasible interval of problem (32),
h
θ0,min

1,θ0 +
b
cθ
i
. From Assumption 1, ΠD(θ) has a kink in the
feasible interval of problem (32) if and only if
b+cθθ0
cθ+(vh−ml)β ≥θ0, or equivalently (vh −m)θ0β ≤b. Moreover,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

58
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
from Equation 33 it follows that the kink will attain an objective value at least as large as the solution θ = θ0
if and only if w ≤wA
θ where
wA
θ ≡vh + γ(vh −ml) −
λ
1 −λ(mh −ml).
Then,
θF A = θ0 +
 b −θ0β(vh −ml)
+
cθ + (vh −ml)β
1{w≤wA
θ }, xF A = min

vh −ml,
b
θ0β

,
and
ΠF A
D =

γvh + (1 −γ)ml + min

vh −ml,
b
θ0β

−w −
λ
1 −λ(mh −ml)

θ0 + (b −θ0β(vh −ml))+
cθ + β(vh −ml)
1{w≤wA
θ }

β.
FAR and MAR: Finally, assume that Π∗
D(x∗,θ∗) = ΠAR
D (x∗,θ∗).
Since
∂ΠAR
D
∂x
= β +(1−θ)(1−β) > 0, then from Assumption 1 it follows that the optimal subsidy must either
be equal to its upper bound or the budget constraint must be tight, i.e., x∗(θ) = min

vh −ml,
b−cθ(θ−θ0)
β+(1−θ)(1−β)

.
By replacing x∗(θ) in the resource allocation problem, it simplifies to the following one-variable optimization
problem
max
θ
ΠAR
D (θ) = (γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w)β + min
 (vh −ml)(β + (1 −θ)(1 −β)),b −cθ(θ −θ0)

−
λ
1 −λ((mh −ml)β −(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh)))(1 −θ)(1 −β))
+
1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

−(w −y)

(1 −β)(1 −θ)
s.t.
θ ∈[θ0,1], cθ(θ −θ0) ≤b.
(34)
Let θAR be the optimal solution of problem (34) and xAR = x∗(θAR). Since the minimum of two linear
functions is concave, then the objective function of problem (34), ΠAR
D (θ), is piece-wise linear concave with
at most two pieces. Moreover, note that
dΠAR
D (θ)
dθ
= −
1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

−(w −y)

(1 −β)
−cθ −((vh −ml)(1 −β) −cθ)1{cθ(θ−θ0)+(vh−ml)(β+(1−θ)(1−β))≤b}
−
λ
1 −λ(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh)))(1 −β).
(35)
Hence, we conclude that either θb is equal to its upper bound, i.e., θb = min

1,θ0 +
b
cθ

, or alternatively
θb must be equal to one of its lower bound or the kink between the linear pieces of ΠAR
D (θ), i.e., θb ∈
n
θ0, b+cθθ0−(vh−ml)
cθ−(vh−ml)(1−β)
o
. Namely, when following strategy (b) in Proposition C.1 the distributor either invests
the budget in increasing the consumer education level first, and then the consumers’ maximum ability to
pay only if there is budget available (strategy MAR), or invests the budget in increasing the consumers’
maximum ability to pay first, and then in increasing the consumer education level only if it is beneficial and
there is budget available (strategy FAR).
Specifically,
θMAR = min

1,θ0 + b
cθ

, xMAR = (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+
β
,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
59
and
ΠMAR
D
=
(γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w)β + (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+
−
λ
1 −λ
 
(mh −ml)β −(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh)))(1 −β)

1 −θ0 −b
cθ
+!
+
1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

−(w −y)

(1 −β)

1 −θ0 −b
cθ
+
.
(36)
In order to write θF AR in closed form there are two possible cases depending on whether ΠAR
D (θ) has a
kink in the feasible interval of problem (34),
h
θ0,min

1,θ0 +
b
cθ
i
. We analyze these cases next.
First assume cθ ≤(vh −ml)(1 −β), then from Assumption 1 it follows that ΠAR
D (θ) does not have a kink
in the feasible interval of problem (34). Specifically, if cθ < (vh −ml)(1 −β) then
b+cθθ0−(vh−ml)
cθ−(vh−ml)(1−β) ≥1, and if
cθ = (vh −ml)(1 −β) then b −cθ(θ −θ0) ≤(vh −ml)(β + (1 −θ)(1 −β)) for all θ. Namely, at θ = θ0 there is
no leftover budget after investing in x and θF AR = θ0 in this sub-case.
Now assume cθ > (vh −ml)(1−β), then from Assumption 1 it follows that ΠAR
D (θ) has a kink in the feasible
interval of problem (34) if and only if
b+cθθ0−(vh−ml)
cθ−(vh−ml)(1−β) ≥θ0, or equivalently (vh −ml)(β +(1−θ0)(1−β)) ≤b.
Moreover, from Equation 35 it follows that the kink will attain an objective value at least as large as the
solution θ = θ0 if and only if y ≤yAR
θ
, where
yAR
θ
≡w −(1 −γ) 1
α ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

−(vh −ml) −
λ
1 −λ(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh))).
Then,
θF AR = θ0 +
 b −(vh −ml)(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β))
+
 cθ −(vh −ml)(1 −β)
++
1{y≤yAR
θ }, xF AR = min

vh −ml,
b
β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β)

,
and
ΠF AR
D
=
(γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w)β + min((vh −ml)(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β)),b)
−
λ
1 −λ((mh −ml)β −(ml −rα(ml) + (mh −rα(mh)))(1 −θ0)(1 −β))
+
1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

−(w −y)

(1 −β)(1 −θ0)
+

w −y −1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

−(vh −ml) −
λ
1 −λ(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh)))
+
· (1 −β)
 b −(vh −ml)(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β))
+
 cθ −(vh −ml)(1 −β)
++
.
(37)
To conclude, note that the optimal objective value of the resource allocation problem is
ΠOP T
D
= max(ΠF S
D ,ΠMS
D ,ΠF SR
D
,ΠMSR
D
,ΠF A
D ,ΠMA
D ,ΠF AR
D
,ΠMAR
D
).
□
C.3.
Restricted Strategy Maps with Heterogeneous ATPs
In this section, we provide a generalization of Proposition B.2 that holds for heterogeneous ATPs. Propo-
sition C.2 below shows that the structure of the strategy map from Proposition B.2 is preserved when the
distributor constrains itself to using either only skimming or non-skimming strategies from Theorem 2. Fig-
ure 7 illustrates the motivating intuition for Proposition C.2 by depicting the “constrained” strategy maps
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

60
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
(a)
Strategy
map
constrained
to
strategies
FS,MS,FSR and MSR.
(b)
Strategy map constrained to strategies
FA,MA,FAR and MAR.
Figure 7
Strategy map for the Allocation Problem as a function of ∆m and α when the distributor is constrained
to either (a) skimming strategies or (b) strategies that target all customers. We assume vh = $10,
w = $6, θ0 = 0.2, mh = $7, ml = $6, λ = 0.4, b = $0.2, y = $3.25, β = 0.5, cθ = 0.33, and γ = 0. The
horizontal axis sets the ATPs to ml + ∆m and mh + ∆mh.
that form the strategy map of Figure 5. Figure 7a depicts the strategy map when the distributor constrains
itself to “skimming” strategies FS, MS, FSR and MSR, while Figure 7b depicts the strategy map when
the distributor constrains itself to strategies that target all customers FA, MA, FAR and MAR.
Generalizations of Propositions B.3 and B.4 –which describe simpler settings where a smaller number of
strategies can be optimal– follow exactly the same logic, and are thus omitted for the sake of brevity.
Proposition C.2 Under Assumption 2, assume w ≤βvh +(1−β)y and cθ ≤(1−β)λ(w −y). Let FS, MS,
FSR, and MSR be the investment strategies from Theorem 2. Then, there exist ATPs mF S, mMSR, and
¯mMSR where w ≤mF S ≤mMSR, ¯mMSR and functions aS1(m), aS2(m), and aS3(m) such that for a given
customer risk aversion parameter α and base ATPs ml, mh, ml ≤mh,
• ΠF S
D ≥max(ΠMS
D ,ΠF SR
D
,ΠMSR
D
) if and only if mh ≤mF S and α ≥aS3(mh)
• ΠMS
D
≥max(ΠF S
D ,ΠF SR
D
,ΠMSR
D
) if and only if mF S ≤mh ≤¯mMSR and α ≥αS2(mh)
• ΠF SR
D
≥max(ΠF S
D ,ΠMS
D ,ΠMSR
D
) if and only if mh ≤mMSR and α ≤min(aS1(mh),aS3(mh))
• ΠMSR
D
≥max(ΠF S
D ,ΠMS
D ,ΠF SR
D
) if and only if mF S ≤mh and aS1(mh) ≤α ≤aS2(mh), where aS1(mh) ≤
aS2(mh) if and only if mh ≥mF S. Also, aS1(mh) = 0 for all mMSR ≤mh and aS1(mh) = ∞for all
¯mMSR ≤mh.
Further, assume w ≤βvh + (1 −β)y −λ/(1 −λ)((mh −ml)β −(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh)))(1 −β)) and
cθ ≤(1 −β)(w −y) −λ/(1 −λ)(1 −β)(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh))). Let FA, MA, FAR, and MAR be the
investment strategies from Theorem 2. Then, there exist ATPs mF A, mMAR, and ¯mMAR where w ≤mF A ≤
mMAR, ¯mMAR, and functions aA1(m), aA2(m), and aA3(m) such that for a given customer risk aversion
parameter α and base ATPs ml, mh, ml ≤mh,
• ΠF A
D ≥max(ΠMA
D ,ΠF AR
D
,ΠMAR
D
) if and only if ml ≤mF A and α ≥aA3(ml)
• ΠMA
D
≥max(ΠF A
D ,ΠF AR
D
,ΠMAR
D
) if and only if mF A ≤ml ≤¯mMAR and α ≥αA2(ml)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
61
• ΠF AR
D
≥max(ΠF A
D ,ΠMA
D ,ΠMAR
D
) if and only if ml ≤mMAR and α ≤min(aA1(ml),aA3(ml))
• ΠMAR
D
≥max(ΠF A
D ,ΠMA
D ,ΠF AR
D
) if and only if mF A ≤ml and aA1(ml) ≤α ≤aA2(ml), where aA1(ml) ≤
aA2(ml) if and only if ml ≥mF A. Also, aA1(ml) = 0 for all mMAR ≤ml and aA1(ml) = ∞for all
¯mMAR ≤ml.
The proof of Proposition C.2 follows the same logic as the proof of Proposition B.2. Namely, we establish
the following properties:
• Property 1’: ΠF S
D ≥ΠMS
D
if and only if mh ≤mF S, and ΠF A
D ≥ΠMA
D
if and only if ml ≤mF A;
• Property 2’: ΠMSR
D
≥ΠF SR
D
if and only if α ≥aS1(mh), and ΠMAR
D
≥ΠF AR
D
if and only if α ≥aA1(ml);
• Property 3’: ΠMS
D
≥ΠMSR
D
if and only if α ≥aS2(mh), and ΠMA
D
≥ΠMAR
D
if and only if α ≥aA2(ml);
• Property 4’: ΠF S
D ≥ΠF SR
D
if and only if α ≥aS3(mh), and ΠF A
D ≥ΠF AR
D
if and only if α ≥aA3(ml);
• Property 5’: aS1(mh) ≤aS2(mh) if and only if mh ≥mF S, aS2(mh) = ∞for all mh ≥¯mMSR and
aS1(mh) = 0 for all mh ≥mMSR, where w ≤mF S ≤mMSR, ¯mMSR, and aA1(ml) ≤aA2(ml) if and only
if ml ≥mF A, aA2(ml) = ∞for all ml ≥¯mMAR and aA1(ml) = 0 for all ml ≥mMAR, where w ≤mF A ≤
mMAR, ¯mMAR.
Note that the first five properties combined establish the following additional properties:
• Property 6’: when m ≤mF S then ΠMSR
D
≤max(ΠF SR
D
,ΠMS
D ); and when m ≤mF A then ΠMAR
D
≤
max(ΠF AR
D
,ΠMA
D );
• Property 7’: when m ≥mF S then α ≥aS2(mh) implies ΠF SR
D
≤ΠMS
D ; and when m ≥mF A then α ≥
aA2(ml) implies ΠF AR
D
≤ΠMA
D ;
• Property 8’: when m ≤mF S then α ≤αS3(mh) implies ΠF SR
D
≥ΠMS
D ; and when m ≤mF A then α ≤
αA3(ml) implies ΠF AR
D
≥ΠMA
D ;
• Property 9’: when m ≥mF S then α ≤αS1(mh) implies ΠF SR
D
≥ΠMS
D ; and when m ≥mF A then α ≤
αA1(ml) implies ΠF AR
D
≥ΠMA
D .
Properties 1’-9’ above completely characterize the restricted strategy maps given in Proposition C.2. Namely,
• ΠF S
D
≥max(ΠMS
D ,ΠF SR
D
,ΠMSR
D
)
if
and
only
if
m ≤mF S
and
α ≥aS3(mh);
and
ΠF A
D
≥
max(ΠMA
D ,ΠF AR
D
,ΠMAR
D
) if and only if m ≤mF A and α ≥aA3(ml) (combine Properties 1’, 4’, and 6’);
• ΠMS
D
≥max(ΠF S
D ,ΠF SR
D
,ΠMSR
D
)
if
and
only
if
m ≥mF S
and
α ≥αS2(mh);
and
ΠMA
D
≥
max(ΠF A
D ,ΠF AR
D
,ΠMAR
D
) if and only if m ≥mF A and α ≥αA2(ml) (combine Properties 1’, 3’, and 7’);
• ΠF SR
D
≥max(ΠF S
D ,ΠMS
D ,ΠMSR
D
)
if
and
only
if
α ≤min(aS1(mh),aS3(mh));
and
ΠF AR
D
≥
max(ΠF A
D ,ΠMA
D ,ΠMAR
D
) if and only if α ≤min(aA1(ml),aA3(ml)) (combine Properties 2’, 4’, 8’ and 9’);
• ΠMSR
D
≥max(ΠF S
D ,ΠMS
D ,ΠF SR
D
) if and only if mF S ≤mh and aS1(mh) ≤α ≤aS2(mh), where aS1(mh) ≤
aS2(mh) if and only if mh ≥mF S, aS1(mh) = 0 for all mMSR ≤mh, and aS1(mh) = ∞for all ¯mMSR ≤
mh; and ΠMAR
D
≥max(ΠF A
D ,ΠMA
D ,ΠF AR
D
) if and only if mF A ≤ml and aA1(ml) ≤α ≤aA2(ml), where
aA1(ml) ≤aA2(ml) if and only if ml ≥mF A, aA1(ml) = 0 for all mMAR ≤ml, and aA1(ml) = ∞for all
¯mMAR ≤ml (combine Properties 1’, 2’, 3’, and 5’).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

62
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
We now prove each property.
Proof of Property 1’. Recall the Linear Program in (26) for deciding between strategies MS and FS. From
Equation 27, we have that ΠF S
D ≥ΠMS
D
if and only if (γvh +(1−γ)mh −w)λβ ≤cθ. Thus, mF S =
cθ
λβ +w−γvh
(1−γ)
=
cθ
β +w−γvh
(1−γ)
+ 1−λ
λ
cθ
(1−γ)β .
Similarly, recall the optimization problem in (32). From the concavity of ΠA
D(θ) it follows that it is sufficient
to check the derivative
dΠA
D(θ)
dθ
at θ = 1, i.e.,
ΠMA
D
≥ΠF A
D
⇐⇒dΠA
D(1)
dθ
≥0.
We have
dΠA
D(1)
dθ
= (γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w)β −cθ + ((vh −ml)β + cθ)1{cθ(1−θ0)+(vh−ml)β≤b} −λβ
1 −λ(mh −ml)
= (γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w)β −cθ −λβ
1 −λ(mh −ml).
where the second equality follows from Assumption 1. Thus, ΠF A
D ≥ΠMA
D
if and only if (γvh + (1 −γ)ml −
w)β ≤cθ +
λβ
1−λ(mh −ml). Thus, mF A =
cθ
β +w−γvh
(1−γ)
+
λ
1−λ

mh−mF A
1−γ

, completing the proof of Property 1’.
Proof of Property 2’. Recall the optimization problem in (28). From the concavity of ΠSR
D (θ) it follows
that it is sufficient to check the derivative
dΠSR
D (θ)
dθ
at θ = 1, i.e.,
ΠMSR
D
≥ΠF SR
D
⇐⇒dΠSR
D (1)
dθ
≥0.
We have
dΠSR
D (1)
dθ
= −

(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

−(1 −β)(w −y)

λ
−cθ −((vh −mh)λ(1 −β) −cθ)1{cθ(1−θ0)+(vh−mh)λβ≤b}
= −(1 −γ)(1 −β)λ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

+ (1 −β)λ(w −y) −cθ,
where the second equality follows from Assumption 1. Thus,
dΠSR
D (1)
dθ
≥0 ⇐⇒1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

≤w −y −
cθ
λ(1 −β),
First assume that γ ≤1, note that then the term 1−γ
α ln

1−βe−α(vh−mh)
1−β

is monotonically decreasing in α
and has range
h
0, (1−γ)β(vh−mh)
1−β
i
. If 0 ≤w −y −
cθ
λ(1−β) ≤(1−γ)β(vh−mh)
1−β
, then there exists ˆαS1 that satisfies
1 −γ
ˆαS1
ln
1 −βe−ˆαS1(vh−mh)
1 −β

= w −y −
cθ
λ(1 −β).
Then, we define aS1(mh) as
aS1(mh) =





∞,
if w −y −
cθ
λ(1−β) < 0
ˆαS1,
if 0 ≤w −y −
cθ
λ(1−β) ≤(1−γ)β(vh−m)
1−β
0,
if (1−γ)β(vh−mh)
1−β
< w −y −
cθ
λ(1−β).
Since cθ ≤(1 −β)λ(w −y) by assumption, then aS1(mh) < ∞. The definition of aS1(mh) when γ > 1 is
analogous and is skipped for the sake of brevity.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
63
Similarly, recall the optimization problem in (34). From the concavity of ΠAR
D (θ) it follows that it is
sufficient to check the derivative
dΠAR
D
(θ)
dθ
at θ = 1, i.e.,
ΠMAR
D
≥ΠF AR
D
⇐⇒dΠAR
D (1)
dθ
≥0.
We have
dΠAR
D (1)
dθ
= −

(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

−(1 −β)(w −y)

−cθ −((vh −ml)(1 −β) −cθ)1{cθ(1−θ0)+(vh−ml)β≤b}
−
λ
1 −λ(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh)))(1 −β)
= −(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

+ (1 −β)(w −y) −cθ
−
λ
1 −λ(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh)))(1 −β)
where the second equality follows from Assumption 1. Thus,
dΠAR
D (1)
dθ
≥0 ⇐⇒1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

≤gA1(ml),
where gA1(ml) = w −y −
cθ
1−β −
λ
1−λ(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh))). First assume that γ ≤1, note that
then the term 1−γ
α ln

1−βe−α(vh−ml)
1−β

is monotonically decreasing in α and has range
h
0, (1−γ)β(vh−ml)
1−β
i
. If
0 ≤gA1(ml) ≤(1−γ)β(vh−ml)
1−β
, then there exists ˆαA1 that satisfies
1 −γ
ˆαA1
ln
1 −βe−ˆαA1(vh−ml)
1 −β

= gA1(ml).
Then, we define aA1(ml) as
aA1(ml) =





∞,
if gA1(ml) < 0
ˆαA1,
if 0 ≤gA1(ml) ≤(1−γ)β(vh−ml)
1−β
0,
if (1−γ)β(vh−ml)
1−β
< gA1(ml).
Since cθ ≤(1 −β)(w −y) −λ/(1 −λ)(1 −β)(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh))) by assumption, then gA1(ml) ≥0
thus aA1(ml) < ∞. The definition of aA1(ml) when γ > 1 is analogous and is skipped for the sake of brevity.
This establishes Property 2’.
Proof of Property 3’. To compare strategy MS and MSR, we directly compare their distributor’s value.
From the proof of Theorem 2:
ΠMSR
D
=(γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)λβ + (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+
+
1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

−(w −y)

(1 −β)λ

1 −θ0 −b
cθ
+
.
and
ΠMS
D
= (γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)min

1,θ0 + b
cθ

λβ + (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+
Thus, ΠMS
D
≥ΠMSR
D
if and only if
−(γvh+(1−γ)mh−w)β

1 −θ0 −b
cθ
+
≥
1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

−(w −y)

(1−β)

1 −θ0 −b
cθ
+
.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

64
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
If

1 −θ0 −
b
cθ
+
= 0, then the budget is sufficient to set θ = 1 and the profits of policy M and MR are
the same since all customers are informed and there are no returns. Thus we consider the case where

1 −θ0 −
b
cθ
+
> 0. In such case, the inequality above becomes
−(γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)β ≥
1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

−(w −y)

(1 −β).
Rearranging the terms yields the relationship,
ΠMS
D
≥ΠMSR
D
⇐⇒1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

≤gS2(mh).
where gS2(mh) = w −y −(γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)
β
1−β .
As in the proof of Property 2’, first assume that γ ≤1, note that then the term 1−γ
α ln

1−βe−α(vh−mh)
1−β

is
monotonically decreasing in α and has range
h
0, (1−γ)β(vh−mh)
1−β
i
. If 0 ≤gS2(mh) ≤(1−γ)β(vh−mh)
1−β
, then there
exists a ˆαS2 that satisfies
1 −γ
ˆαS2
ln
1 −βe−ˆαS2(vh−mh)
1 −β

= gS2(mh).
Then, we define aS2(mh) as
aS2(mh) =





∞,
if gS2(mh) < 0
ˆαS2,
if 0 ≤gS2(mh) ≤(1−γ)β(vh−mh)
1−β
0,
if (1−γ)β(vh−mh)
1−β
< gS2(mh).
Since w ≤βvh + (1 −β)y by assumption, then gS2(mh) ≤(1 −γ)β(vh −mh)/(1 −β) thus aS2(mh) > 0. As
before, the definition of aS2(mh) when γ > 1 is analogous and is skipped for the sake of brevity.
Similarly, to compare strategy MA and MAR, we directly compare their distributor’s value. From the
proof of Theorem 1:
ΠMAR
D
=(γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w)β + (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+
−
λ
1 −λ
 
(mh −ml)β −(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh)))(1 −β)

1 −θ0 −b
cθ
+!
+
1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

−(w −y)

(1 −β)

1 −θ0 −b
cθ
+
.
and
ΠMA
D
= (γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w)min

1,θ0 + b
cθ

β + (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+ −λβ
1 −λ min

1,θ0 + b
cθ

(mh −ml)
Thus, ΠMA
D
≥ΠMAR
D
(α,ml) if and only if
−(γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w)β

1 −θ0 −b
cθ
+
≥
1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−m)
1 −β

−(w −y)

(1 −β)

1 −θ0 −b
cθ
+
.
−
λ
1 −λ ((mh −ml) −(rα(mh) −rα(ml))(1 −β))

1 −θ0 −b
cθ
+
If

1 −θ0 −
b
cθ
+
= 0, then the budget is sufficient to set θ = 1 and the profits of policy MA and MAR
are the same since all customers are informed and there are no returns. Thus we consider the case where

1 −θ0 −
b
cθ
+
> 0. In such case, the inequality above becomes
λ
1 −λ ((mh −ml) −(rα(mh) −rα(ml))(1 −β)) −(γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w)β
≥
1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

−(w −y)

(1 −β).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
65
Rearranging the terms yields the relationship,
ΠMA
D (α,m) ≥ΠMAR
D
(α,m) ⇐⇒1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

≤gA2(ml).
where gA2(ml) = w −y +
λ
1−λ

mh−ml
1−β
−(rα(mh) −rα(ml))

−(γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w)
β
1−β .
As before, first assume that γ ≤1, note that then the term 1−γ
α ln

1−βe−α(vh−ml)
1−β

is monotonically decreas-
ing in α and has range
h
0, (1−γ)β(vh−ml)
1−β
i
. If 0 ≤gA2(ml) ≤(1−γ)β(vh−ml)
1−β
, then there exists a ˆαA2 that satisfies
1 −γ
ˆαA2
ln
1 −βe−ˆαA2(vh−ml)
1 −β

= gA2(ml).
Then, we define aA2(ml) as
aA2(ml) =





∞,
if gA2(ml) < 0
ˆαA2,
if 0 ≤gA2(ml) ≤(1−γ)β(vh−ml)
1−β
0,
if (1−γ)β(vh−ml)
1−β
< gA2(ml).
Since cθ ≤(1 −β)(w −y) −λ/(1 −λ)(1 −β)(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh))) by assumption, then gA2(ml) ≤
(1−γ)β(vh −ml)/(1−β) thus aA2(ml) > 0. As before, the definition of aA2(ml) when γ > 1 is analogous and
is skipped for the sake of brevity. This establishes Property 3’.
Proof of Property 4’. The proof of this property is analogous to the proof of Properties 2’ and 3’. We
denote the information level in strategy FS and FSR by θF S and θF SR, respectively. We directly compare
the distributor’s value in FS and FSR. Hence,
ΠF S
D ≥ΠF SR
D
⇐⇒(γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)θF Sλβ + b −cθ(θF S −θ0) ≥
(γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)λβ + min
 (vh −mh)λ(β + (1 −θF SR)(1 −β)),b −cθ(θF SR −θ0)

+
1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

−(w −y)

(1 −β)λ(1 −θF SR)
⇐⇒(γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)θF Sλβ + b −cθ(θF S −θ0) ≥
(γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)θF SRλβ + b −cθ(θF SR −θ0) −
 b −cθ(θF SR −θ0) −(vh −mh)λ(β + (1 −θF SR)(1 −β))
+
+

(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

−(1 −β)(w −y) + (γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)β

λ(1 −θF SR)
⇐⇒((γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)λβ −cθ)(θF S −θF SR)
+
 b −(vh −mh)λ(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β)) −(cθ −(vh −mh)λ(1 −β))(θF SR −θ0)
+ ≥

(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

−(1 −β)(w −y) + (γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)β

λ(1 −θF SR)
⇐⇒((γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)λβ −cθ)(θF S −θF SR)
+
 b −(vh −mh)λ(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β)) −
 b −(vh −mh)λ(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β))
+1{cθ≥(vh−mh)λ(1−β)}1{y≤yS
θ }
+ ≥

(1 −γ)1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

−(1 −β)(w −y) + (γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)β

λ(1 −θF SR)
⇐⇒1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

≤gS3(mh),
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

66
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
where the first equivalence is by definition of ΠF S
D
and ΠF SR
D
, the second and third equivalences follow by
rearranging terms, the fourth equivalence follows from the definition of θF SR, and the last equivalence follows
by defining gS3(mh) as
gS3(mh) =
1
(1 −β)

(1 −β)(w −y) −(γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)β +
 (γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)λβ −cθ
 θF S −θF SR
λ(1 −θF SR)

+
 b −(vh −mh)λ(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β))
+ 1 −1{y≤yd
θ ,cθ≥(vh−mh)λ(1−β)}
λ(1 −θF SR)
#
,
where yS
θ = w −1−γ
α ln

1−βe−α(vh−mh)
1−β

−(vh −mh). Similar to the previous two properties, assume first that
γ ≤1, if 0 ≤gS3(mh) ≤(1−γ)β(vh−mh)
1−β
, then there exists a ˆαS3 that satisfies
1 −γ
ˆαS3
ln
1 −βe−ˆαS3(vh−m)
1 −β

= gS3(mh).
We then define aS3(mh) as
aS3(mh) =





∞,
if gS3(mh) ≤0
ˆαS3,
if 0 ≤gS3(m) ≤(1−γ)β(vh−mh)
1−β
0,
if (1−γ)β(vh−mh)
1−β
≤gS3(mh).
Again, the definition of aS3(mh) when γ > 1 is analogous and is skipped for the sake of brevity.
Similarly, we denote the information level in strategy FA and FAR by θF A and θF AR, respectively. We
directly compare the distributor’s value in FA and FAR. Hence,
ΠA
D(θ) = (γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w)θβ + min((vh −ml)θβ,b −cθ(θ −θ0)) −λθβ
1 −λ(mh −ml)
ΠF A
D ≥ΠF AR
D
(α,ml)
⇐⇒

γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w −
λ
1 −λ(mh −ml)

θF Aβ + min((vh −ml)θF Aβ,b −cθ(θF A −θ0)) ≥
(γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w)β + min
 (vh −ml)(β + (1 −β)(1 −θF AR)),b −cθ(θF AR −θ0)

−
λ
1 −λ((mh −ml)β −(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh)))(1 −β)(1 −θF AR))
+
1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

−(w −y)

(1 −β)(1 −θF AR)
⇐⇒

γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w −
λ
1 −λ(mh −ml)

θF Aβ + b −cθ(θF A −θ0) −(b −cθ(θF A −θ0) −(vh −ml)θF Aβ)+ ≥

γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w −
λ
1 −λ(mh −ml)

θF ARβ + b −cθ(θF AR −θ0)
−
 b −cθ(θF AR −θ0) −(vh −ml)(β + (1 −θF AR)(1 −β))
+
−
λ
1 −λ ((mh −ml)β −(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh)))(1 −β))(1 −θF AR)
+
1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

−(w −y) + (γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w)
β
1 −β

(1 −β)(1 −θF AR)
⇐⇒

γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w −
λ
1 −λ(mh −ml)

β −cθ

(θF A −θF AR)
−(b −(vh −ml)θ0β −(cθ + (vh −ml)β)(θF A −θ0))+
+
 b −(vh −ml)(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β)) −(cθ −(vh −ml)(1 −β))(θF AR −θ0)
+
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
67
+
λ
1 −λ ((mh −ml)β −(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh)))(1 −β))(1 −θF AR) ≥
1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

−(w −y) + (γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w)
β
1 −β

(1 −β)(1 −θF AR)
⇐⇒

γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w −
λ
1 −λ(mh −ml)

β −cθ

(θF A −θF AR)
−

b −(vh −ml)θ0β −(b −θ0β(vh −ml))+1{w≤wA
θ }
+
+
 b −(vh −ml)(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β)) −
 b −(vh −ml)(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β))
+1{cθ≥(vh−ml)(1−β)}1{y≤yb
θ}
+
+
λ
1 −λ ((mh −ml)β −(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh)))(1 −β))(1 −θF AR) ≥
1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

−(w −y) + (γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w)
β
1 −β

(1 −β)(1 −θF AR)
⇐⇒1 −γ
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

≤gA3(ml),
where the first equivalence is by definition of ΠF A
D
and ΠF AR
D
, the second and third equivalences follow
by rearranging terms, the fourth equivalence follows from the definition of θF A and θF AR, and the last
equivalence follows by defining gA3(ml) as
gA3(ml) =
1
1 −β [(w −y)(1 −β) −(γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w)β
+

γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w −
λ
1 −λ(mh −ml)

β −cθ
θF A −θF AR
1 −θF AR

−(b −θ0β(vh −ml)+ 1{w>wA
θ }
1 −θF AR
+
 b −(vh −ml)(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β))
+ 1 −1{y≤yb
θ,cθ≥(vh−ml)(1−β)}
1 −θF AR
+
λ
1 −λ ((mh −ml)β −(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh)))(1 −β))

,
where wA
θ = vh +γ(vh −ml)−
λ
1−λ(mh −ml) and yb
θ = w −(1−γ) 1
α ln

1−βe−α(vh−ml)
1−β

−(vh −ml)−
λ
1−λ(ml −
rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh))). Similar to the previous two properties, assume first that γ ≤1, if 0 ≤gA3(ml) ≤
(1−γ)β(vh−ml)
1−β
, then there exists a ˆαA3 that satisfies
1 −γ
ˆαA3
ln
1 −βe−ˆαA3(vh−ml)
1 −β

= gA3(ml).
We then define aA3(ml) as
aA3(ml) =





∞,
if gA3(ml) ≤0
ˆαA3,
if 0 ≤gA3(ml) ≤(1−γ)β(vh−ml)
1−β
0,
if (1−γ)β(vh−ml)
1−β
≤gA3(ml).
Again, the definition of aA3(ml) when γ > 1 is analogous and is skipped for the sake of brevity. This establishes
Property 4’.
Proof of Property 5’. We show the first sentence in the first statement in Property 5’. We first show that
aS1(mF S) = aS2(mF S). By definition mF S satisfies (γvh + (1 −γ)mF S −w)λβ = cθ. Therefore,
gS2(mF S) = w −y −(γvh + (1 −γ)mF S −w)
β
1 −β = w −y −
cθ
λ(1 −β).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

68
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
We now show that aS1(mh) ≥aS2(mh) if and only if mh ≤mF S . Since (γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)λβ ≥cθ if
and only if mh ≥mF S, then w −y −
cθ
λ(1−β) ≥gS2(mh) if and only if mh ≥mF S, hence aS1(mh) ≤aS2(mh) if
and only if mh ≥mF S.
We now prove the second sentence in the first statement in Property 5. Let mMSR = vh −(1−β)λ(w−y)−cθ
(1−γ)λβ
.
Then, from the definition of aS1(mh) in Property 2’ we have that if mh ≥mMSR then aS1(mh) = 0, i.e.,
strategy MSR dominates strategy FSR for all α ≥aS1(mh) = 0. Moreover, the first sentence in the first
statement in Property 5’ then implies mMSR ≥mF S while cθ ≤(1 −β)λ(w −y) implies mMSR ≤vh. Further-
more, Property 1’ then also implies that strategy MSR dominates strategy FS for all α ≥aS1(mh) = 0 and
mh ≥mF S.
Analogously, let ¯mMSR = vh −βvh+(1−β)y−w
(1−γ)β
. Then, from the definition of aS2(mh) in Property 3’ we have
that if mh ≥¯mMSR then aS2(mh) = ∞, i.e., strategy MSR dominates strategy MS for all α ≤aS2(mh) = ∞.
Moreover, the first sentence in the first statement in Property 5’ implies ¯mMSR ≥mF S, while w ≤βvh +(1−
β)y implies ¯mMSR ≤vh, establishing the first statement in Property 5’.
Similarly, we now show the first sentence in the second statement in Property 5’. Namely, we first show
that aA1(mF A) = aA2(mF A). By definition mF A satisfies (γvh + (1 −γ)mF A −w)β = cθ +
λβ
1−λ(mh −mF A).
Therefore,
gA2(mF A) = w −y +
λ
1 −λ
mh −mF A
1 −β
−(rα(mh) −rα(mF A))

−(γvh + (1 −γ)mF A −w)
β
1 −β
= w −y −
λ
1 −λ
 mF A −rα(mF A) −(mh −rα(mh))

−
cθ
1 −β = gA1(mF A)
We now show that aA1(ml) ≥aA2(ml) if and only if m ≤mF A . Since (γvh+(1−γ)ml−w)β ≥cθ + λβ
1−λ(mh−
ml) if and only if ml ≥mF A, then gA1(ml) ≥gA2(ml) if and only if ml ≥mF A, hence aA1(ml) ≤aA2(ml) if
and only if ml ≥¯
ml.
To conclude, we now prove the second sentence in the second statement in Property 5. Let mMAR =
vh −(1−β)λ(w−y)−cθ
(1−γ)λβ
+
λ
1−λ(1−β)(mMAR −rα(mMAR)−(mh −rα(mh))). Then, from the definition of aA1(ml)
in Property 2’ we have that if ml ≥mMAR then aA1(ml) = 0, i.e., strategy MAR dominates strategy FAR
for all α ≥aA1(ml) = 0. Moreover, the first sentence in the first statement in Property 5’ then implies
mMAR ≥mF A while cθ ≤(1−β)(w −y)−λ/(1−λ)(1−β)(ml −rα(ml)−(mh −rα(mh))) implies mMAR ≤vh.
Furthermore, Property 1’ then also implies that strategy MAR dominates strategy FA for all α ≥aA1(ml) = 0
and ml ≥mF A.
Analogously, let ¯mMAR = vh −βvh+(1−β)y−w
(1−γ)β
+
λ
1−λ
(mh−ml)β−(ml−rα(ml)−(mh−rα(mh)))(1−β)
(1−γ)β
. Then, from
the definition of aA2(ml) in Property 3’ we have that if ml ≥¯mMAR
then aA2(ml) = ∞, i.e.,
strategy MAR dominates strategy MA for all α ≤aA2(ml) = ∞. Moreover, the first sentence in
the first statement in Property 5’ implies
¯mMAR ≥mF A, while w ≤βvh + (1 −β)y −λ/(1 −
λ)((mh −ml)β −(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh)))(1 −β)) implies ¯mMAR ≤vh, establishing Property 5’.
Hence, we have shown Properties 1’ to 5’, completing the proof of Proposition C.2.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
69
C.4.
Proof of Corollary 2
Proof. To prove the corollary we build on Properties 1’-9’ from the proof of Proposition C.2, and show
the following additional properties at the end of this proof.
• Property 10’: if γcθ ≤(λ/(1−λ))2β(mh −ml) and ΠF S
D ≥ΠMS
D
then ΠF S
D ≥ΠF A
D
if and only if ml ≤mS;
• Property 11’: ΠMAR
D
≥ΠMSR
D
if and only if α ≤aMAR(ml).
Properties 1’-11’ prove the corollary. Namely,
• If γcθ ≤(λ/(1 −λ))2β(mh −ml) then
ΠF S
D ≥max(ΠMS
D ,ΠF SR
D
,ΠMSR
D
,ΠF A
D ,ΠMA
D ,ΠF AR
D
,ΠMAR
D
)
if and only if ml ≤mF AS = min(mF A,mS), mh ≤mF S and α ≥aF S(ml,mh) = max(aA3(ml),aS3(mh))
(combine Properties 1’, 4’, 5’, 6’ and 10’);
• If ml ≥ˆmMAR = max(mMAR, ¯mMAR), mh ≥ˆmMSR = max(mMSR, ¯mMSR) and α ≤aMAR(ml), then
ΠMAR
D
≥max(ΠMS
D ,ΠF SR
D
,ΠMSR
D
,ΠMA
D ,ΠF AR
D
,ΠF S
D ),
(combine Properties 1’, 2’, 3’, 5’, and 11’).
We now complete the proof of the corollary by proving Properties 10’ and 11’.
Proof of Property 10. Let mS be the unique value of ml that satisfies
ml = w −γvh
1 −γ
+
λ
1 −λ(mh −ml)

1 +
1
(1 −λ)(1 −γ)

−(cθ −(γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)
(1 −γ)(1 −λ)β
θF S −θF A
θF A
.
(38)
We analyze three exhaustive cases.
First, assume b < λθ0β(vh −mh) ≤θ0β(vh −ml) then θF S = θF S = θ0 and after some algebra we conclude
that in this case
ΠF S
D ≥ΠF A
D
⇐⇒ml ≤w −γvh
1 −γ
+
λ
1 −λ(mh −ml)

1 +
1
(1 −λ)(1 −γ)

≡mS,
concluding the proof of Property 10 in this case.
Second, if λθ0β(vh −mh) ≤b < θ0β(vh −ml) then θF S > θF A = θ0 and after some algebra we conclude
ΠF S
D ≥ΠF A
D
⇐⇒(cθ −(γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)λβ)(cθθ0 + b)
≤

cθ −

γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w −
λ
1 −λ(mh −ml)

β

θ0(cθ + λβ(vh −mh)).
(39)
We show that if γcθ ≤(λ/(1 −λ))2β(mh −ml) and ΠF S
D ≥ΠSR
D (θ) then the left hand side of (39) increases
strictly faster in mh than the right hand side in mh, ml. Indeed, after some algebra the latter statement
holds if and only if
(1 −γ)λ(θ0β(vh −ml) −b) + θ0(1 −λ)
 
λ
1 −λ
2
β(mh −ml) −γcθ
!
+ θ0(cθ −(γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w) > 0,
where the first term is strictly positive in this case, and the second and third term are positive by assumption
(the third term being positive is equivalent to ΠF S
D ≥ΠSR
D (θ)). Hence, (38) follows directly from (39).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

70
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
Finally, if λθ0β(vh −mh) ≤θ0β(vh −ml) ≥b then θF S ≥θF A > θ0 then
ΠF S
D ≥ΠF A
D
⇐⇒(cθ −(γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)λβ)(cθ + β(vh −ml))
≤

cθ −

γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w −
λ
1 −λ(mh −ml)

β

(cθ + λβ(vh −mh)).
(40)
After some algebra, it is not hard to see that the left hand side of (40) increases strictly faster in mh, ml,
than the right hand side in mh, ml if and only if γcθ ≤(λ/(1 −λ))2β(mh −ml), which holds by assumption.
Hence, (38) follows directly from (39) completing the proof of Property 10’.
Proof of Property 11’. We now show that ΠMAR
D
≥ΠMSR
D
if and only if α ≤aMAR(ml). From equations
(30) and (36) we conclude, after some algebra, that
ΠMAR
D
≥ΠMSR
D
⇐⇒

(1 −γ)(ml −rα(ml)) +
λ
1 −λ

(1 −γ) +
1
1 −λ

(ml −rα(ml) −(mh −rα(mh)))

(1 −β)

1 −θ0 −b
cθ
+
≥
λβ
1 −λ(mh −ml)

(1 −γ) +
1
1 −λ

+ (w −y)(1 −β)

1 −θ0 −b
cθ
+
−(γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w)β (41)
To simplify the notation, let lhs(41) and rhs(41) denote the left and right hand side of (41), respectively.
As before, first assume that γ ≤1, note that then lhs(41) is monotonically decreasing in α and has range

0,

(1 −γ)β(vh −ml) +
λ
1−λ

(1 −γ) +
1
1−λ

β(mh −ml)

1 −θ0 −
b
cθ
+
. If rhs(41) falls in this range then
there exists ˆαMAR that satisfies (41) with equality. Then, we define aMAR(ml) as
aMAR(ml) =









∞,
if lhs(41) ≤0
ˆαbd,
if 0 ≤lhs(41) ≤

(1 −γ)β(vh −ml) +
λ
1−λ

(1 −γ) +
1
1−λ

β(mh −ml)

1 −θ0 −
b
cθ
+
0,
if

(1 −γ)β(vh −ml) +
λ
1−λ

(1 −γ) +
1
1−λ

β(mh −ml)

1 −θ0 −
b
cθ
+
≤lhs(41).
The definition of aMAR(ml) when γ > 1 is analogous and is skipped for the sake of brevity. This completes
the proof of Property 11’, thus the proof of the corollary.
□
C.5.
Consumer Surplus Analysis with Heterogeneous ATPs
We start by extending Lemma B.1 to hold for heterogeneous ATPs.
Lemma C.2 Let θi, i ∈{FA,MA,FAR,MAR,FS,MS,FSR,MSR} be the education level of each strategy
from Theorem 2. Then, under Assumption 1,
θMS = θMSR ≥θF S ≥θF SR,
θMA = θMAR ≥θF A ≥θF AR.
(42)
Proof. From their definition, in the proof of Theorem 2, we have θMA = θMS = θMAR = θMSR, where they
are equal to the natural upper bound on θ. Moreover, from Assumption 1 it follows that θMS = θMSR ≥θF S
and θMA = θMAR ≥θF A.
We now argue that θF S ≥θF SR. If θF SR = θ0 then θF S ≥θF SR follows trivially from their definition, in
the proof of Theorem 2. If θF SR > θ0 then by definition again we must have cθ > (vh −mh)λ(1 −β) > 0,
cθ(θF SR −θ0) + (vh −mh)λ(θF SRβ + (1 −θF SR)) = b, and cθ(θF S −θ0) + (vh −mh)θF Sλβ = b, hence we
conclude θF S ≥θF SR.
We now argue that θF A ≥θF AR. If θF AR = θ0 then θF A ≥θF AR follows trivially from their definition, in
the proof of Theorem 2. If θF AR > θ0 then by definition again we must have cθ > (vh −ml)(1 −β) > 0,
cθ(θF AR −θ0)+(vh −ml)(θF ARβ +(1−θF AR)) = b, and cθ(θF A −θ0)+(vh −ml)θF Aβ = b, hence we conclude
θF A ≥θF AR, completing the proof.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
71
C.6.
Proof of Proposition 5
Proof. Recall, from Proposition C.1, that
CSi = (vh −ml)θiβ,
i ∈{FA,MA},
CSi = (vh −mh)λθiβ,
i ∈{FS,MS},
and
CSi = (vh −ml)β −1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β
 1 −θi
,
i ∈{FAR,MAR},
CSi = (vh −mh)λβ −1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

λ
 1 −θi
,
i ∈{FSR,MSR}.
We prove the proposition by showing the following results,
(i) CSMSR ≥max(CSMS,CSF S,CSF SR); and CSMAR ≥max(CSMA,CSF A,CSF AR).
(ii) CSMSR ≤CSMAR;
(iii) CSF S
≤
min(CSMS,CSF SR,CSMSR)
if
and
only
if
α
≥
aS4(mh);
and
CSF A
≤
min(CSMA,CSF AR,CSMAR) if and only if α ≥aA4(ml);
(iv) If ΠF A
D ≥0 then CSF S ≤CSF A.
Then, the first statement in the proposition follows from (i) and (ii). While the second statement in the
proposition follows from (iii) and (iv) by taking acs
F S(mh,ml) = max(aS4(mh),aA4(ml)).
We first prove (i). We start by showing that CSMSR ≥max(CSMS,CSF SR,CSF S). In particular, since
θMSR ≥θF SR from Lemma C.2 then CSMSR ≥CSF SR. Moreover,
CSMSR ≥(vh −mh)λθMSRβ = (vh −mh)λθMSβ = CSMS ≥(vh −mh)λθF Sβ = CSF S,
where the first inequality follows since
1−β
α ln

1−βe−α(vh−mh)
1−β

is decreasing in α > 0 and taking the limit
α →0. The second inequality follows since, from Lemma C.2, θMS = θMSR ≥θF S. Hence, we conclude
CSMSR ≥max(CSF S,CSMS,CSF SR).
Similarly, we now show that CSMAR ≥max(CSMA,CSF AR,CSF A). In particular, since θMAR ≥θF AR from
Lemma C.2 then CSMAR ≥CSF AR. Moreover,
CSMAR ≥(vh −ml)θMARβ = (vh −ml)θMAβ = CSMA ≥(vh −ml)θF Aβ = CSF A,
where the first inequality follows since
1−β
α ln

1−βe−α(vh−ml)
1−β

is decreasing in α > 0 and taking the limit
α →0. The second inequality follows since, from Lemma C.2, θMA = θMAR ≥θF A. Hence, we conclude
CSMAR ≥max(CSF A,CSMA,CSF AR), completing the proof of (i).
We now show (ii), i.e., CSMSR ≤CSMAR. Indeed, note that
β(mh −ml) + 1 −β
α

ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

−ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β
 1 −θMSR
≥θMSRβ(mh −ml) ≥0,
(43)
where the first inequality follows from noticing that the right hand side is monotonically increasing in α and
taking the limit as α →0. Thus, we conclude that the first term in (43) is non-negative, which is equivalent
to the second inequality in the following chain of inequalities
λ ≤1 ≤
(vh −ml)β −1−β
α ln

1−βe−α(vh−ml)
1−β

(1 −θMAR)
(vh −mh)β −1−β
α ln

1−βe−α(vh−mh)
1−β

(1 −θMSR)
,
(44)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

72
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
which completes the proof by noticing that (44) is equivalent to CSMSR ≤CSMAR.
We
now
prove
(iii).
We
start
by
showing
that
there
exists
aS4(mh)
such
that
min(CSMS,CSF SR,CSMSR) ≥CSF S if and only if α ≥aS4(mh). We have already shown CSMSR ≥CSMS ≥
CSF S. We now show that CSF SR ≥CSF S if and only if α ≥aS4(mh). In fact, we have
CSF SR ≥CSF S ⇐⇒1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

≤β(vh −mh) (1 −θF S)
(1 −θF SR),
where the term 1−β
α ln

1−βe−α(vh−mh)
1−β

is monotonically decreasing in α and has range [0,β(vh −mh)]. Since
from Lemma C.2 we have θF S ≥θF SR, then 0 ≤β(vh −mh) (1−θF S)
(1−θF SR) ≤β(vh −mh). Moreover, since θF S is
independent of α and θF SR is non-decreasing in α it follows that there exists aS4(mh) such that
1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−mh)
1 −β

≤β(vh −mh) (1 −θF S)
(1 −θF SR) ⇐⇒α ≥aS4(mh).
Hence, we conclude min(CSMS,CSF SR,CSMSR) ≥CSF S if and only if α ≥aS4(mh).
Similarly, we now show that there exists aA4(ml) such that min(CSMA,CSF AR,CSMAR) ≥CSF A if and
only if α ≥aA4(ml). We have already shown CSMAR ≥CSMA ≥CSF A. We now show that CSF AR ≥CSF A
if and only if α ≥aA4(ml). In fact, we have
CSF AR ≥CSF A ⇐⇒1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

≤β(vh −ml) (1 −θF A)
(1 −θF AR),
where the term 1−β
α ln

1−βe−α(vh−ml)
1−β

is monotonically decreasing in α and has range [0,β(vh −ml)]. Hence,
if θF A ≤θF AR we conclude CSF AR ≥CSF A and thus we set aS4(mh) = 0. Alternatively, if θF A > θF AR then
0 ≤β(vh −ml) (1−θF A)
(1−θF AR) ≤β(vh −ml). Moreover, since θF A is independent of α and θF AR is non-decreasing
in α it follows that there exists aA4(ml) such that
1 −β
α
ln
1 −βe−α(vh−ml)
1 −β

≤β(vh −ml) (1 −θF A)
(1 −θF AR) ⇐⇒α ≥aA4(ml).
Hence, we conclude min(CSMS,CSF SR,CSMSR) ≥CSF S if and only if α ≥aA4(mh), completing the proof
of (iii).
Finally, we conclude by proving (iv), i.e., that ΠF A
D ≥0 implies CSF S ≤CSF A. Note that ΠF A
D ≥0 implies
λ ≤(vh −ml)(cθ + λβ(vh −mh))
(vh −mh)(cθ + β(vh −ml)) ≤(vh −ml)θF A
(vh −mh)θF S ,
(45)
where the first inequality is equivalent to λ ≤(vh −ml)/(vh −mh), which holds for any λ satisfying the
assumption λ ≤ml/mh. We now verify the second inequality holds in three exhaustive cases. First, if b ≤
λθ0β(vh −mh) ≤θ0β(vh −ml) then θF S = θF A = θ0 and the second inequality holds since (cθ + λβ(vh −
mh))/(cθ +β(vh −ml)) ≤1 = θF A/θF S. Second, if λθ0β(vh −mh) ≤b ≤θ0β(vh −ml) then θF S > θF A = θ0 and
the second inequality holds since (cθ + λβ(vh −mh))/(cθ + β(vh −ml)) ≤θ0(cθ + λβ(vh −mh))/(cθθ0 + b) =
θF A/θF S, where the latter inequality follows from b ≤θ0β(vh−ml). Third, if λθ0β(vh−mh) ≤θ0β(vh−ml) ≤b
then ΠF A
D ≥0 implies θF S ≥θF A > θ0 and the second inequality becomes tight. To conclude, note that the
extremes of the chain of inequalities (45) are equivalent to CSF S ≤CSF A, completing the proof.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
73
C.7.
Free Refunds Analysis with Heterogeneous ATP
The problem formulation is the same, see Problem (19), and the analysis is analogous to the case with
homogeneous ATP in Section B.10. Namely, we first adapt Proposition C.1 to characterize the distributor’s
pricing strategy in this restricted setup, in the next proposition.
Proposition C.3 Consider any consumer education level θ ∈[0,1), ATPs ml, mh, w ≤ml < mh ≤vh, and
subsidy x ∈[0,vh −mh]. Then, the distributor’s optimal objective is
Π∗
D(x,θ) = max

ΠARf
D
(x,θ),ΠSRf
D
(x,θ)
 
.
(46)
Where Πi
D(x,θ) i ∈{ARf,SRf} each correspond to the distributor’s profits in a non-dominated strategy.
Specifically, they are characterized by:
(ARf) Target all informed and uninformed customers with product returns. The customer price is pARf = ml +
x and the refund is rARf = ml. Let ¯zARf = ml −
ˆ
OARf
R
(1−β)θβ . Then, without loss of generality, the equilibrium
retailer refund is zARf = max(0, ¯z) and the retailer price is cARf = ml + x −
ˆ
OARf
R
θβ
+ (1−θ)(1−β)
θβ+(1−θ) (zARf −
¯zARf). The consumer surplus is CSARf = (vh −ml)β, the retailer’s profit is ΠARf
R
= ˆOARf
R
, and the
distributor’s profit is
ΠARf
D
(x,θ) = (ml + x −w)β + (x −w + y)(1 −β)(1 −θ) −ˆOARf
R
+ γCSARf,
where
ˆOARf
R
= λβ(mh −ml)
1 −λ
.
Moreover, this strategy can be sustained in equilibrium if and only if
ˆOARf
R
≤mlβ + x(β + (1 −θ)(1 −β)).
(SRf) Target both informed and uninformed customers with product returns. The customer price is pSRf =
mh + x and the refund is rSRf = mh. The equilibrium retailer price is cSRf = mh + x, and the retailer
refund is zSRf = mh. The consumer surplus is CSSRf = (vh −mh)λβ, the retailer attains no profit,
ΠSRf
R
= 0, and the distributor’s profit is
ΠSRf
D
(x,θ) = (mh + x −w)λβ + (x −w + y)λ(1 −β)(1 −θ) + γCSSRf.
Moreover, this strategy can always be sustained in equilibrium.
Proposition C.3 is a special case of Proposition C.1 when α →∞. Therefore, we omit the proof.
C.8.
Proof of Proposition 6
Proof. The proof of the first part of the proposition is the same as the proof of Theorem 2 for the special
case when α →∞. Therefore, we only focus on the expressions that change. Specifically,
ΠMSRf
D
=
(γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)λβ + (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+ −(1 −β)(w −y)λ

1 −θ0 −b
cθ
+
.
(47)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402

74
Calmon et al.: Operational Strategies for Distributing Durable Goods in the Base of the Pyramid
To simplify the notation, recall the function
1
x++ :=
(
0
if x ≤0
1
x
if x > 0. Then,
θF SRf = θ0 +
 b −(vh −mh)λ(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β))
+
 cθ −(vh −mh)λ(1 −β)
++
1{vh−mh≤w−y},
and
ΠF SRf
D
=
(γvh + (1 −γ)mh −w)λβ + min((vh −mh)λ(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β)),b)
−(w −y)(1 −β)λ(1 −θ0) + (w −y −(vh −mh))+ (1 −β)λ
 b −(vh −mh)λ(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β))
+
 cθ −(vh −mh)λ(1 −β)
++
.
(48)
Similarly,
ΠMARf
D
=
(γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w)β + (b −cθ(1 −θ0))+ −(1 −β)(w −y)

1 −θ0 −b
cθ
+
−λβ(mh −ml)
1 −λ
,
(49)
θF ARf = θ0 +
 b −(vh −ml)(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β))
+
 cθ −(vh −ml)(1 −β)
++
1{vh−ml≤w−y},
and
ΠF ARf
D
=
(γvh + (1 −γ)ml −w)β + min((vh −ml)(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β)),b) −λβ(mh −ml)
1 −λ
−(w −y)(1 −β)(1 −θ0) + (w −y −(vh −ml))+ (1 −β)
 b −(vh −ml)(β + (1 −θ0)(1 −β))
+
 cθ −(vh −ml)(1 −β)
++
.
(50)
The proof of the second part in the Proposition follows directly from Propositions B.5 and C.3
□
Appendix D:
Figure from Section 6
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
1.0
1.5
2.0
µm
Π∗
D
θ
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(a) α = 0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
1.0
1.5
2.0
µm
Π∗
D
θ
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(b) α = 1.0
Figure 8
Distributor’s profits for different average ATP µm and consumer education level θ. We assume w = $1.0,
y = $0.7, µ = $0.95, σ = $1.0, σm = $0.5, κ = −0.5, ρl = 0.1, ρh = 0.9, x = 0, and γ = 0.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2882402