TITLE: Strategic Cross-Subsidization in Healthcare Capitation Programs: Evidence from Medicare Advantage
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2023.0637
---

Strategic Cross Subsidization in Healthcare
Capitation Programs: Evidence from Medicare
Advantage
Zhaowei She
Lee Kong Chian School of Business, Singapore Management University, Singapore
Turgay Ayer
H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial & Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA
Bilal Gokpinar
UCL School of Management, University College London, London, United Kingdom
Danny Hughes
College of Health Solutions, Arizona State University, AZ
Problem definition: This study identifies a resource misallocation problem in Medicare Advantage (MA),
the U.S.’s largest healthcare capitation program, which may result in discrepancies between patients’ health
status and the healthcare resources allocated to them.
Methodology/results: Utilizing a large commercial insurance database with claims from over 2 million
MA enrollees, this research investigates the allocation of MA capitation payments. By exploiting an exoge-
nous policy shock on MA capitation payments through a Difference-in-Difference (DID) design, we find
empirical evidence of an illegal practice known as “cross subsidization”. This practice involves MA health
plans strategically reallocating portions of the capitation payments intended for one group of patients to
spend on another group of patients. Additionally, we show that this cross subsidization practice is associated
with the risk selection problem in MA, where low-risk patients are more likely to enroll in MA compared to
high-risk patients.
Managerial implications: This research unveils a previously undocumented healthcare resource misallo-
cation problem, i.e., strategic cross subsidization. This practice is explicitly prohibited by law in the US
due to its heightened effect on the undesired risk selection within capitation programs, where health plans
cherry-pick profitable enrollees through strategic benefit designs. Our study has direct practical implications
as it underscores the need for greater transparency in MA claims data to enable CMS to more effectively
administer the MA program.
1.
Introduction
Capitation has been highlighted as one of the most promising healthcare payment models and is
increasingly adopted by healthcare payers around the world (James and Poulsen 2016, Lai 2022).
In particular, over the last decade, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), the
largest healthcare payer in the U.S., has regarded capitation as one of its targeted payment models
1

2
(Rajkumar et al. 2014, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 2015). CMS oversees the largest
healthcare insurance program in the U.S., i.e., Medicare. The current Medicare program consists
of two components: 1) Traditional Medicare (TM), which operates under traditional volume-based
payment models, and 2) Medicare Advantage (MA), which is a capitation program. Over the past
10 years, the size of MA has more than doubled, from 13 million enrollees in 2012 to 28 million in
2022, corresponding to 48% of the total Medicare population (Freed et al. 2022).
The allocation of capitation payments and healthcare resources in MA is determined by MA
health plans, instead of CMS. By design, CMS pays MA health plans a risk-adjusted capitation
rate for each Medicare beneficiary enrolled, and authorizes the health plans to use the capitation
payments to manage the overall health of their enrollees. Therefore, MA health plans have flexibil-
ity in operations management decisions, such as which providers to contract with or at what level
to offer various direct or non-direct healthcare services. For example, some MA health plans offer
free or discounted gym memberships, which are not offered in TM (Cooper and Trivedi 2012). Fur-
thermore, as MA health plans are not required to submit their claims data to CMS, the operations
of these MA health plans remain a black box to the public. This lack of transparency in MA health
plans’ operations, as argued in a recent paper published by the flagship journal of the American
Medical Association, raises questions about “the relative value Medicare Advantage provides to
beneficiaries” (Brennan et al. 2018).
This paper aims to open the black box of MA health plans’ operations by empirically studying
their allocation of capitation payments among Medicare beneficiaries. Leveraging a large com-
mercial insurance database containing claims from more than 2 million MA enrollees, our goal is
to delineate the alignment, or lack thereof, between the intended and actual healthcare resource
allocations in MA health plans. This investigation was partly inspired by a statement made by a
representative of the American Medical Association (AMA):
“If your health is good, maybe these plans represent value for some patients, like providing gym
memberships ... But that can change in the blink of an eye ... with a stroke or an accident or
some acute medical condition and they need a rehabilitation stay. Then, services are restricted
so much that they can’t recover adequately from the stroke ...” (MedPage Today 2020).
This statement is consistent with an extensive body of medical literature, highlighting that MA
health plans tend to overspend on low-risk patients and underspend on high-risk patients (Cooper
and Trivedi 2012, Hung et al. 2016, Meyers et al. 2018, Rahman et al. 2015).
In this paper, we explore a potential mechanism driving the spending disparities between low-
risk and high-risk patients within MA health plans. Specifically, we posit that a significant factor

3
contributing to this discrepancy is the strategic cross subsidization behavior of MA health plans,
where the health plans deliberately redistribute a portion of the capitation payment originally des-
ignated for one group of patients to spend on another group of patients. This hypothesis reflects the
possibility that MA health plans, in order to offer additional benefits such as fitness memberships
to some members, might need to curtail certain benefits from others to “free up funds”. Moreover,
when faced with a trade-off between investing in different benefits, MA health plans tend to opt for
“lower-cost benefits that may broadly attract more enrollees” at the expense of “benefits targeted
to high-cost patients” (Skopec et al. 2019b).
To empirically identify the strategic cross subsidization mechanism, we leverage a payment
shock from the Affordable Care Act (ACA). This shock incrementally reduced MA capitation
payments over time, imposing deeper cuts for high-risk patients compared to their low-risk coun-
terparts. In the absence of cross subsidization, one would expect this shock to result in deeper
spending cuts for high-risk patients. However, through a difference-in-differences (DID) design, we
demonstrate that this shock led to deeper spending cuts for low-risk patients instead. This finding
suggests that spending patterns in MA are not entirely driven by payment patterns, supporting
our cross-subsidization hypothesis. Importantly, this result challenges the prevailing explanation
in the literature that observed spending trends might directly stem from payment inaccuracies,
where the MA risk adjustment formula tends to overpay low-risk patients and underpay high-risk
patients (Glazer and McGuire 2000, Brown et al. 2014). Our identification strategy (detailed in
§6.3.1) enables us to differentiate the proposed cross-subsidization hypothesis from the competing
argument of payment inaccuracy, demonstrating that the observed spending trends within MA,
i.e., overspending on low-risk patients and underspending on high-risk patients, cannot be solely
attributed to overpayment for the former group and underpayment for the latter.
In addition, this paper explores the implications of strategic cross subsidization, investigating
its possible link to the risk selection problem in MA. While direct patient selection is prohibited
in MA, MA health plans may subtly skew the provision of certain services to attract healthier
patients and under-provide other services to deter sicker patients. In fact, despite the rapid increase
in overall enrollment in MA, a growing number of sicker Medicare beneficiaries are observed to
switch from MA to TM (Li et al. 2018, Rahman et al. 2015, Meyers et al. 2018, 2019, Morrisey
et al. 2013, Jacobson et al. 2019b, 2015). This patient self-selection phenomenon, widely referred
to as risk selection, is considered a major obstacle inhibiting the smooth functioning of individual
health insurance markets such as MA (Geruso and Layton 2017). We propose that MA plans may
engage in risk selection through strategic cross-subsidization, redistributing funds from high-risk to
low-risk patients, thus discouraging the enrollment of the former and encouraging the latter. This

4
form of cross subsidization differs from that in group health insurance markets. In group health
insurance, a plan covers a predefined group of people, such as all employees within a company,
and must cross subsidize unprofitable patients with funds from profitable ones to pool revenue
effectively. In contrast, MA health plans have the flexibility to use cross subsidization to influence
the risk level of patient enrollment, rather than to solely focus on revenue pooling within a given
patient population. To empirically establish the link between strategic cross subsidization and risk
selection, we evaluate the impact of the ACA cuts in MA capitation payments on risk selection.
Specifically, if MA plans conduct risk selection through strategic cross subsidization, the ACA cuts
should alleviate risk selection within MA, as fewer capitation payments can be cross subsidized
from the high-risk to the low-risk after the ACA cuts. Conversely, if MA plans do not employ
this strategy, the ACA cuts could exacerbate risk selection within MA, as plans have stronger
incentives to discourage high risk patient enrollment due to reduced capitation payments. Our
second hypothesis scrutinizes the impact of the ACA policy shock on risk selection within MA and
finds additional support for our proposed cross subsidization mechanism.
Overall, our paper makes two important contributions to healthcare operations management
literature with significant implications for health policy and practice. First, we provide, to our
knowledge, the first empirical evidence of a previously unknown resource misallocation problem in
MA, and identify strategic cross subsidization as the underlying mechanism. While previous oper-
ations management literature has examined various resource misallocation problems in healthcare
operations, these tend to focus on local settings such as certain emergency departments, nurs-
ing homes, or hospitals (Ibanez et al. 2018, Lu and Lu 2017, Kc and Terwiesch 2011). Our work
investigates a broad but unrecognized resource misallocation problem in health plans. Second, our
paper underscores a contentious practice in MA, thereby drawing attention to the necessity for
CMS to demand greater transparency in MA claims data. The U.S. Code of Federal Regulations
explicitly states that “Payments from any rate cell must not cross-subsidize or be cross-subsidized
by payments for any other rate cell” (U.S. Congress 2016). Consequently, CMS is legally obligated
to confront cross subsidization practices in MA. However, owing to the fact that most MA health
plans are not mandated to submit their claims data to CMS, the agency often lacks comprehensive
insight into MA health plans’ operations, which creates a barrier to overseeing this market properly.
Therefore, we argue that an increase in transparency in MA claims data is imperative to enable
CMS to more effectively administer the MA program. Indeed, the Health Subcommittee of the
U.S. House Committee on Energy and Commerce has recently proposed legislation with the aim
of enhancing transparency within MA, striving to ensure that policymakers have a lucid compre-
hension of “how these private plans are utilizing taxpayer dollars” (Committee for a Responsible
Federal Budget 2022).

5
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. We review the relevant literature in §2 and
develop our research hypotheses in §3. In §4, we present the institutional background for MA
with an emphasis on relevant ACA policy changes regarding MA capitation payments. In §5, we
introduce our data sources and construct the variables used in our econometric models. In §6, we
develop the econometric model to test our main hypothesis. In §7, we empirically assess the impact
of MA health plans’ strategic cross subsidization practice on the risk selection problem in MA. We
conduct various robustness checks in §8 to examine our main findings. We summarize our findings
and conclude in §9.
2.
Literature Review
Capitation payment models have long been among the most debated issues in healthcare payment
reforms. On the one hand, healthcare payers (e.g., CMS) have been among the main advocates
for them (James and Poulsen 2016, Rajkumar et al. 2014). It is believed that capitation models
would improve the efficiency and value of healthcare delivery “by linking the financial incentives for
providers to the total cost and/or quality of care they provide” (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services 2015). On the other hand, there has been a discrepancy between the expectations and the
actual performance of capitation programs in practice. Specifically, several studies noted that MA,
the largest capitation program in the U.S., has lower accessibility to long-term and post-acute care
compared to the standard Medicare coverage (Meyers et al. 2018, Schwartz et al. 2019, Figueroa
et al. 2020, Huesch 2010). While this low service accessibility in MA may not translate into worse
healthcare outcomes, e.g., 30-day readmission rate (c.f. Agarwal et al. (2021)), evidence exists that
high-risk patients have a worse experience of care in MA compared to other Medicare programs
(Keenan et al. 2009, Halpern et al. 2017, Martino et al. 2016). Furthermore, when getting sicker,
MA patients tend to switch back to Traditional Medicare (Li et al. 2018, Ankuda et al. 2020,
Meyers et al. 2019). Healthcare inequality is a main concern of capitation programs as it is in direct
contradiction with the purpose of capitation payment models (Rice et al. 1999).
Past literature mostly attributes the healthcare inequality in capitation programs to the misspec-
ification of risk adjustment formulas. Specifically, Glazer and McGuire (2000) theoretically showed
that when risk adjustment is imperfect, healthier patients tend to be overcompensated in MA
while sicker patients tend to be undercompensated in MA. As such, MA health plans would have
incentives to attract the overcompensated patients and to deter the undercompensated patients,
which results in a disparity of service provisions. In fact, Brown et al. (2014) estimated that the
annual healthcare costs of each MA enrollee were on average $317 lower than their capitation rates
after risk selection, and further empirically demonstrated that imperfect risk adjustment can lead
to risk selection in MA.

6
Findings in this literature, however, have not been corroborated by subsequent empirical studies
on MA. In particular, Newhouse et al. (2013) found that MA health plans did not over-provide high-
profit healthcare services and under-provide low-profit healthcare services in practice. Therefore,
they argued that even if the current MA risk adjustment formula is misspecified and provides
incentives for MA health plans to risk select patients, “there is no evidence here that plans act on
this incentive”. In other words, it is empirically not clear whether MA health plans always act on
the incentives to “cherry pick” patients with high profitability.
The presence of strategic cross subsidization practices helps reconcile the discrepancy between
Brown et al. (2014) and Newhouse et al. (2013) by demonstrating that risk selection is not solely
driven by the profitability difference between patients with high-risk and low-risk conditions. Specif-
ically, if MA health plans can cross subsidize capitation payments across patients, they would
“cherry-pick” patients not only according to how profitable these patients are but also how costly it
is to attract these patients (She et al. 2022). In fact, since it is easier and less costly for MA health
plans to attract low-risk patients compared to high-risk patients (c.f. Aizawa and Kim (2018),
Cooper and Trivedi (2012), Meyers et al. (2018), Han and Lavetti (2017)), MA health plans often
reallocate capitation payments to offer benefits that appeal more to low-risk patients, even at the
expense of those benefits valued by high-risk patients (Skopec et al. 2019b). Therefore, a widening
of profitability differences between high-risk and low-risk patients, where high-risk patients receive
deeper capitation payment cuts compared to low-risk patients, may not necessarily worsen risk
selection in MA. Our empirical findings in §7 provide evidence that supports this implication.
This study also sheds light on recent debates regarding overpayment in MA (c.f. Ginsburg and
Lieberman (2022)). A recent report to Congress delivered by the Medicare Payment Advisory
Commission (2022) shows that CMS has consistently overpaid MA plans during the past 20 years
compared to the amount TM would have spent on the same beneficiaries. To reduce this over-
payment, ACA required CMS to start removing the statutory overpayment in MA from 2012. As
a result, the overpayment in MA as a percentage of TM spending has dropped more than 50%,
or $68 billion, in the past decade (Medicare Payment Advisory Commission 2022, Weiner 2020).
Nevertheless, a recent study shows that MA enrollees’ access to or affordability of care was not
significantly affected by this ACA payment cut (Skopec et al. 2019a). Our paper further analyzes
this policy shock by examining MA plans’ changes in spending patterns after the payment reduc-
tion and explains why accessibility and affordability of care in MA were not significantly affected.
Particularly, we find that deeper capitation payment cuts for high-risk patients unexpectedly lead
to more substantial spending reductions for low-risk, rather than high-risk, MA enrollees due to
the presence of the strategic cross subsidization practices.

7
Our paper has important implications for the operations management literature on healthcare
payment reforms. Specifically, the existing literature on population-based payment models shows
that failure to accurately estimate the certainty equivalent healthcare costs when determining
capitation payments can lead to patient selection (Adida et al. 2016, Ata et al. 2013). Our findings
complement and extend this line of research by empirically demonstrating that cross subsidization
incentives can also lead to patient selection in population-based payment models such as capitation.
Furthermore, by empirically identifying the cross subsidization practice, our work helps provide
a more complete understanding of healthcare payment models based on past cost estimates (e.g.,
Erhun et al. (2015), Savva et al. (2019)) and shows that healthcare costs can be endogenous to
healthcare payment models.
Our work also contributes to the empirical operations management literature on cherry-picking
behavior in healthcare settings. Patterson et al. (2016) studied patient waiting time in emergency
departments, and found that resident physicians tended to pick up patients with less complex
complaints and avoid patients with more complex complaints. Similarly, Ibanez et al. (2018) empir-
ically showed that physicians preferred to prioritize tasks with shorter expected processing time,
albeit it leads to slower completion time on average. In addition, Kc et al. (2020) demonstrated
that physicians cherry-pick tasks “because of both fatigue and the sense of progress individuals
get from task completion”. Furthermore, Kc and Terwiesch (2011) provided evidence showing that
these cherry-picking behavior were also found at the hospital level. Recently, an emerging litera-
ture in OM focuses on analyzing the cherry-picking behavior, or risk selection, at the health plan
level (Hwang et al. 2023, Tezcan 2023). In particular, Hwang et al. (2023) analytically demon-
strates why MA health plans are incentivized to strategically design their supplementary services
to attract profitable Medicare beneficiaries rather than to reduce future treatment costs. Building
upon this growing body of work, our research presents empirical evidence that suggests strategic
cross subsidization as a potential mechanism through which MA health plans could finance these
supplementary services.
Finally, our paper is broadly related to the empirical operations literature that focuses on iden-
tifying strategic behaviors in healthcare operations. Bastani et al. (2019) found that hospitals
strategically respond to quality improvement regulations by “upcoding” their patients. Chen and
Savva (2018) empirically documented that hospitals strategically utilized observation beds to avoid
penalties from the Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program. Lu and Lu (2017) found that regu-
lations limiting nurse overtime unintentionally reduce service quality as nursing homes strategically
replace permanent nurses with contracted nurses to circumvent regulations. Our study enhances
this literature and identifies the cross subsidization behaviors of MA health plans as a strategic
response to the MA capitation payment model.

8
3.
Hypotheses Development
The main hypothesis of this paper aims to investigate whether MA health plans engage in strategic
cross subsidization of capitation payments among different groups of patients. Specifically, when
forced to make trade-offs between various benefits, MA health plans might need to curtail some
benefits to “free up funds” for other benefits. Additionally, MA health plans tend to prioritize lower-
cost benefits over those targeting high-cost patients (Skopec et al. 2019b). As such, we hypothesize
that strategic cross subsidization is a potential mechanism through which MA health plans finance
some of their supplementary or ancillary services, which disproportionately benefit low risk patients
with funds intended for high risk patients. Notably, the cross subsidization direction is hypothesized
to be from high-risk to low-risk. This is consistent with the theoretical literature, which suggests
that it is unlikely for the opposite direction to be an equilibrium outcome in an individual health
insurance market like MA (Azevedo and Gottlieb 2017, Geruso et al. 2021). Formally, the following
hypothesis is proposed and tested.
Main Hypothesis (Hypothesis 1): MA health plans conduct strategic cross subsidization by
reallocating the capitation payments from one group of MA enrollees (e.g., with high expected costs)
to another (e.g., with low expected costs).
It is worth noting that the cost-saving potential of supplemental benefits may offset their expenses.
For instance, by investing in fitness membership benefits, MA health plans may assist enrollees in
maintaining regular exercise routines, leading to potential long-term cost reductions. However, the
lack of transparency in MA claim data grants MA health plans substantial flexibility in resource
reallocation (c.f. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector General (2022)),
presenting multiple avenues to finance benefits. Indeed, our study examines whether and to what
extent such benefits may be funded through possibly illegal mechanisms such as strategic cross
subsidization.
To provide a further understanding of the strategic cross subsidization hypothesis, we conducted
a detailed investigation into its effects on risk selection within MA. As outlined in the introduction,
the ACA policy change resulted in more significant capitation payment reductions for high-risk
patients compared to their low-risk counterparts. In the presence of cross subsidization practices,
these more substantial capitation payment cuts for high-risk patients would lead to greater spend-
ing reductions for low-risk rather than high-risk MA enrollees. Consequently, the ACA policy
change would alleviate the risk selection issue within MA. This potential influence of strategic cross
subsidization on MA is encapsulated in the following hypothesis.
Hypothesis 2: The ACA capitation payment reductions mitigated risk selection in MA.
Notably, the prevailing risk selection theory, which ignores the cross subsidization practices (e.g.,

9
Brown et al. (2014)), predicts the opposite outcome. That is, in the absence of cross subsidization,
the reductions in MA capitation payments induced by ACA would exacerbate the risk selection
problem in MA, as it further intensifies the underpayment problem for high-risk patients. Therefore,
if Hypothesis 2 holds true, it would also substantiate the existence of strategic cross subsidization
in MA.
4.
Institutional Background of Medicare Advantage (MA)
The first part of this section provides a general introduction to the Medicare Advantage program,
with emphasis on its capitation payment model (§4.1). The second part discusses the Affordable
Care Act (ACA) as a shock to this capitation payment model in MA (§4.2).
4.1.
Medicare Advantage and Its Capitation Payment Model
Medicare Advantage (MA) is an insurance program that provides coverage to Medicare benefi-
ciaries, i.e., disabled or senior Americans (at least aged 65), for their healthcare services. It was
formally established by the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 as an option for Medicare beneficiaries to
receive Traditional Medicare (TM) benefits through private health plans. More specifically, CMS
outsources the inpatient hospital and outpatient services to health plans in MA, and reimburses
these services through risk-adjusted capitation payments. By 2019, 34% or 22 million Medicare
beneficiaries have enrolled in Medicare Advantage, which makes MA the largest capitation program
in the U.S. (Jacobson et al. 2019a).
As a payer in MA, CMS’s main responsibility is to use capitation payments to incentivize MA
health plans to deliver similar healthcare services to MA enrollees as those in Traditional Medicare.
Specifically, the Social Security Act requires CMS to set the MA capitation rates so that the benefits
delivered in MA are actuarially equivalent to those in TM. To this aim, CMS first estimates the
risk scores (RiskScorei,t) of each Medicare beneficiary i based on individual risk factors such as
age, gender, and pre-existing conditions at time t using the CMS hierarchical condition categories
(CMS-HCC) risk adjustment formula (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 2017). In addition,
CMS calculates the benchmark payments (Benchmarkc,t) for each average (standard risk) enrollee
of MA health plans in county c. As such, to provide equivalent healthcare services as those in TM
to an MA enrollee i living in county c in year t, the capitation payment an MA health plan receives
from CMS is
CapitationRatei,t = RiskScorei,t × Benchmarkc,t,
(1)
which is adjusted yearly.

10
4.2.
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) Reform of MA Capitation Payments
The Affordable Care Act (ACA), which was signed into law in 2010, required CMS to reduce
the benchmark payment (Benchmarkc,t) in MA capitation rates (1). The main motivation for
this reduction was to reduce the overpayment MA health plans received for providing healthcare
services to MA beneficiaries before the 2010 ACA reform.
These benchmark payment reductions were not uniform across U.S. counties. Specifically, coun-
ties with lower per capita costs of Traditional Medicare compared to the national per capita costs
of Traditional Medicare would have larger projected benchmark reductions. Figure 3 in Appendix
A provides a heatmap to visualize the projected benchmark reductions for each U.S. county. These
benchmark payment reductions range from around $0 per beneficiary per month (PBPM) in some
counties to around $300 PBPM in other counties. In other words, some counties have dispropor-
tionately large benchmark payment reductions compared to other counties. The ACA recognized
these differential impacts of the benchmark payment reductions on different counties, and designed
a phase-in scheme to smooth out the transition process, which is explained in detail in §6.3.2. This
phase-in scheme forms the basis of the identification strategy used in this paper.
5.
Data Sources and Variables’ Construction
Data used in this study are mainly from two sources. To test the main hypothesis (Hypothesis 1),
we use individual patient-level data from Optum’s de-identified Clinformatics® Data Mart (CDM)
between 2009-2015. This study period contains years before (2009-2011) and after (2012-2015) the
ACA capitation payment cuts in which the same CMS-HCC risk adjustment formula was used in
MA. Therefore, this is a suitable time frame for employing our DID identification strategy. To test
Hypothesis 2, we use county-level data from the public use files on CMS websites in the same study
period. §5.1 and §5.2 introduce these two data sources and explain the construction of relevant
variables from these datasets.
5.1.
Individual-level Data
The individual-level data used in this study comes from CDM, a commercial insurance claims
database that contains medical claims from more than 150 million people in the U.S. (Wallace et al.
2014). In this study, we focus on a subsample of this database consisting of Medicare beneficiaries
who enrolled in MA for at least one year from 2009 to 2015 and were at least age 65 during
the time of enrollment. We excluded approximately 8% of the Medicare beneficiaries in our study
sample who moved to another county during the study period. As the healthcare cost estimate
of an MA enrollee depends on the county in which this enrollee lived, i.e., Estimated Costi,t :=

11
RiskScorei,t × FFS Ratec,t, it is not possible to make a reliable estimation of this variable if a
patient lived in more than one county in year t. Furthermore, we exclude MA enrollees with risk
scores above 7.5, i.e., the top 0.1 percentile sickest patient in MA, because these patients typically
experienced medical complications that were not representative of the MA population.
The final sample contains MA claims data from 3,882,330 distinct Medicare beneficiaries living
in 2,787 counties or county equivalent in 50 states and DC in the U.S. across 7 years (2009-2015).
The individual-level dataset is used to construct variables to test the main hypothesis. These
variables are illustrated as follows. RiskScorei,t is the risk score of Medicare beneficiary i in MA
at the beginning of year t. We calculate this score using the established CMS-HCC risk adjustment
formula, which requires inputs of this Medicare beneficiary’s age, gender, and preexisting conditions
at the end of year t−1. (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 2017). The CDM provides these
individual characteristics of Medicare beneficiary i to calculate his/her risk score. MA Spendingi,t
is the total amount an MA health plan spent on an MA beneficiary i in year t. Specifically, we
calculate this variable by summing up all MA medical claims generated by patient i and paid by
her MA health plan in year t.1 FFS Ratec,t is the estimated Traditional Medicare spending on an
average (standard risk) MA beneficiary in county c during year t. We calculate this variable using on
the 2009-2015 county-level Traditional Medicare data publicly available on the CMS’s website (c.f.
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2019)). Estimated Costi,t is the estimated amount CMS
would spend on patient i in year t if this patient was in TM during year t. Specifically, we calculate
this variable as Estimated Costi,t = RiskScorei,t × FFS Ratec,t based on the capitation payment
formula (1), with the MA benchmark payment Benchmarkc,t replaced by the TM benchmark
spending FFS Ratec,t. Agei,t is the age of MA enrollee i in year t. Treatmenti,t is a binary variable
indicating whether the county in which Medicare beneficiary i lived was in the treatment group
(=1) or the control group (=0) in year t. The assignment rule for treatment and control groups is
discussed in §6.3.2.
In Appendix A, we present tables (See Tables 6 and 7) summarizing county-level characteris-
tics (e.g., enrollment size and quality star ratings of different MA health plan types) as well as
individual-level characteristics (e.g., risk scores and healthcare spending) of CDM throughout our
study period (2009-2015).
1 Optum does not provide the actual price paid by MA health plans for each service, and only has the amount charged
by physicians and hospitals for each service. Nevertheless, it offers a standardized algorithm to convert these charged
prices to actual paid prices. For example, the professional service (e.g., physician visits, surgery, lab tests, imaging)
charges are standardized using the resource-based relative value scale (RBRVS) approach, a method applied by CMS
to price services provided in Traditional Medicare. We use these standardized charged prices to create a consistent
proxy for the actual expense.

12
5.2.
County-level Data
All data used to conduct the county-level analysis in this study are publicly available on the CMS
website. Specifically, we use county-level MA data, Traditional Medicare data and health-plan-
level MA data from Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2019). We focus on the analysis
of non-special needs Health Maintenance Organizations (HMOs) in the main text as they are the
dominant health plan type in this market (Song et al. 2013). We also present an analysis for both
HMOs and Preferred Provider Organizations (PPOs) in Appendix B.5. The final sample in this
dataset contains observations from 2,968 counties or county equivalent in 50 states and DC in the
U.S. across 7 years (2009-2015).
The county-level dataset is used to construct variables to test Hypothesis 2. Specifically,
RiskScorec,t is the average risk score of MA beneficiaries in county c of year t. Treatmentc,t is a
binary variable indicating whether county c was in the treatment group (=1) or the control group
(=0) in year t, as discussed in §6.3.2. Starc,t is the average star rating of health plans in county c
in year t. McPopc,t is the population size of Medicare beneficiaries, including both TM and MA, in
county c of year t. Rebatec,t is the average rebate amount for MA health plans to provide supple-
mentary benefits in county c of year t. RUCCc,2010 is the Rural-Urban Continuum Code (ranging
from 1-9), which classifies the rural status of each U.S. county in 2010 (United States Department
of Agriculture 2013). Here, the higher the RUCCc,2010, the more rural county c is. Incomec,2010 is
the median household income of county c in year 2010.
6.
Empirical Evidence of Strategic Cross Subsidization
This section provides empirical evidence of strategic cross subsidization in MA. Specifically, §6.1
introduces the primary outcome variable of this analysis. Subsequently, §6.2 leverages this variable
to offer descriptive evidence of existing healthcare disparities in MA. Finally, §6.3 empirically
identifies strategic cross subsidization as a cause of these healthcare disparities in MA.
6.1.
Spending-cost Difference
This paper’s primary outcome variable, termed spending-cost difference, represents the difference
between the actual healthcare spending by MA plans on their enrollees (“spending”) and the
expected healthcare costs for these enrollees as estimated by CMS (“cost”). We calculate this vari-
able by subtracting an MA enrollee’s annual healthcare cost estimate from their actual annual
healthcare spending for each calendar year in our study period (2009-2015). The spending compo-
nent reflects the actual allocation of healthcare resources by MA plans during a given year, while
the cost component represents the expected amount of annual healthcare spending CMS would

13
have spent on an MA enrollee under TM, adjusted for the enrollee’s age, gender, and preexisting
conditions (Pope et al. 2011).
The spending-cost difference is a critical metric for analyzing MA health plans’ operations.
When this measure is positive, indicating spending surpasses the estimated cost for certain MA
enrollees, it implies that MA health plans may be overspending on these individuals, or CMS
might be underestimating their healthcare costs. Conversely, a negative spending-cost difference,
where spending is lower than the estimated costs, points to potential underspending by MA health
plans or an overestimation of costs by CMS. This key outcome variable is instrumental in assessing
whether there’s a systematic disparity between the actual healthcare spending by MA plans and
the estimated costs for their enrollees.
6.2.
Healthcare Disparities in MA
It is well-documented in the literature that spending-cost differences vary among different MA
enrollees. On the one hand, it has been documented that MA health plans tend to offer better cov-
erage in terms of preventive care accessibility (e.g., mammographic screening) and supplementary
benefits (e.g., gym memberships) that are mainly appealing to healthier Medicare beneficiaries
(Cooper and Trivedi 2012, Hung et al. 2016). On the other hand, compared to Medicare beneficia-
ries in TM, MA enrollees have lower accessibility to high-quality long-term and specialized care,
e.g., nursing homes (c.f. Meyers et al. (2018)), home health services (c.f. Schwartz et al. (2019)),
post-acute care facilities (c.f. Figueroa et al. (2020)) and cardiologists (c.f. Huesch (2010)). Clearly,
as an MA patient became sicker, they would utilize less preventive care but more nursing home
care or post-acute care. This skewed provision of services essentially results in overspending on
patients with low risk and underspending on high-risk patients. Consequently, we expect to observe
an inverse relationship between the sickness levels of patients and the spending-cost differences of
such patients, serving as a key descriptive indicator of potential healthcare disparities in MA.
To examine this potential disparity, we analyze the association between Medicare beneficiaries’
risk scores (RiskScorei,t) and their spending-cost differences (MA Spendingi,t−Estimated Costi,t).
CMS assigns a risk score, RiskScorei,t, to each Medicare beneficiary i in MA at the beginning of
each year t. Following the existing literature on risk selection (c.f. Brown et al. (2014), Newhouse
et al. (2013)), we use a patient’s risk score as a proxy for the sickness level of this patient. We
defined the spending-cost difference of an MA health plan enrollee i in year t as the difference
between MA health plans’ spending on patient i in year t and the estimated healthcare cost of
this patient in year t, i.e., MA Spendingi,t −Estimated Costi,t. As detailed in §5.1, MA Spendingi,t
represents the aggregate expenditure by an MA health plan on its enrollee i in year t, while

14
Estimated Costi,t is the expected amount CMS would have expended on patient i in year t had
the patient been enrolled in TM during year t. CMS estimated this cost using the CMS-HCC risk
adjustment formula, taking into account factors such as the patient’s county of residence, age,
gender, and pre-existing conditions.
The corresponding econometric model is thus specified as:
MA Spendingi,t −Estimated Costi,t = β0 + βRSRiskScorei,t + αi + γt + ϵi,t,
(2)
where αi and γt are the individual and time fixed effects, respectively. Individual fixed effects
control for the service utilization patterns of different Medicare beneficiaries, whereas the time
fixed effect takes into account any pure temporal changes in the study period.
A negative coefficient for βRS would indicate an inverse relationship, where sicker patients (higher
risk scores) experience a smaller increase in MA spending compared to the increase in their esti-
mated healthcare costs. This would be consistent with potential under-spending on higher-risk
patients, a key concern regarding healthcare disparities in MA.
Spending-cost Difference
βRS
-9.97∗∗∗
Observations
12,937,959
R2
0.533
Adjusted R2
0.330
Note:
Dependent variable is in $1,000 per year unit.
All standard errors are clustered at county level.
∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 1
Estimation Results of Econometric Model (2):
Association between MA Enrollees’ Spending-cost Differences and their Risk Scores
We estimate the model using two-way fixed effects and present the results in Table 1. The
estimated coefficient for βRS is negative and statistically significant, confirming the expected inverse
relationship. This implies that a one-unit increase in a patient’s risk score is associated with a more
than $9,000 decrease in the relative annual MA health plan spending on this patient compared
to her estimated healthcare cost, i.e., spending-cost difference. This finding suggests that sicker
patients experience a larger discrepancy between their actual spending and their expected cost,
indicating potential healthcare disparities within the MA program.

15
6.3.
Main Hypothesis (Hypothesis 1)
This section aims to identify strategic cross subsidization as a cause of the inverse relationship
between the sickness of MA beneficiaries and their spending-cost differences. Specifically, the inverse
relationship can be explained by two plausible mechanisms: (1) MA health plans’ strategic realloca-
tion of capitation payments from one group of MA enrollees (e.g., those with high expected costs) to
another (e.g., those with low expected costs), as hypothesized in our main hypothesis (Hypothesis
1). (2) CMS’s overestimation of the cost for low-risk patients and the underestimation of the cost
for high-risk patients. In what follows, by making use of an external shock (ACA payment cuts),
we provide strong evidence for the first mechanism. Specifically, our external shock shifts spending
on MA patients (MA Spendingi,t) without affecting how their healthcare costs (Estimated Costi,t)
were estimated, thereby ruling out the alternative overestimation explanation.
In this section, §6.3.1 discusses that the ACA capitation rate cuts provided such an exogenous
shock and thus can serve as our source of identification. §6.3.2 discusses the assignment of treatment
and control groups in this quasi-natural experiment. Finally, we develop the econometric model in
§6.3.3 and present the estimation results in §6.3.4.
6.3.1.
Identifying Strategic Cross Subsidization through ACA Capitation Rate
Cuts
As discussed in §4.2, the ACA reform changed MA capitation payments by reducing their bench-
mark payments. Specifically, we note that the ACA capitation rate cuts have an asymmetric
impact on MA patients in different risk groups in that patients with higher risk scores experienced
deeper cuts in their capitation payments (CapitationRatei,t). The reason is that the ACA cap-
itation rate cuts only affect CapitationRatei,t := RiskScorei,t × Benchmarkc,t (c.f. (1)) through
the benchmark payments (Benchmarkc,t). As such, the same benchmark payment cuts would
result in deeper capitation payment cuts for MA patients with higher risk scores (RiskScorei,t).
Therefore, the ACA capitation rate cuts essentially exogenously reduce a greater amount of cap-
itation payments from high-risk patients than from low-risk patients. Notably, the ACA cuts do
not affect the healthcare cost estimates of MA enrollees, which are defined as Estimated Costi,t :=
RiskScorei,t × FFS Ratec,t in §5.1.
Based on these observations, we can empirically identify the strategic cross subsidization practice
of MA health plans by examining how the observed inverse relationship between risk scores and
spending-cost differences would change after the ACA shock. As illustrated in Figure 1a, if there
were no strategic cross subsidization, the ACA shock, with its deeper payment cut for high-risk
patients, would simply amplify the inverse relationship between risk scores and spending-cost

16
Figure 1a
Identification Strategy Based on ACA Cut (No Cross Subsidization): In the absence of strategic cross
subsidization, the ACA shock would not mitigate the inverse relationship between risk scores and spending-
cost differences. Here, the inverse relationships in the Pre-ACA and Post-ACA figures correspond to βRS and
βRS + δDID in (3), respectively.
Figure 1b
Identification Strategy Based on ACA Cut (Cross Subsidization): In the presence of strategic cross
subsidization, the ACA shock would mitigate the inverse relationship between risk scores and spending-cost
differences. Here, the inverse relationships in the Pre-ACA and Post-ACA figures correspond to βRS and βRS +
δDID in (3), respectively.
differences. In contrast, in the presence of strategic cross subsidization, a deeper payment cut for
high-risk patients can result in a deeper spending cut for low-risk patients, as shown in Figure 1b.
Hence, to test the main hypothesis (i.e., Hypothesis 1), it suffices to check whether the inverse
relationship between risk scores and spending-cost differences was alleviated by the ACA shock.
If further underpayment for high-risk patients indeed results in amplified underspending on these
patients, we would anticipate an intensified inverse relationship following the ACA shock, as illus-
trated in Figure 1a. Alternatively, if we observe a pattern akin to Figure 1b, it suggests that
exacerbated underpayment for high-risk patients does not instigate further underspending on these
patients, but instead mitigates overspending on their low-risk counterparts. Consequently, the

17
heightened spending-cost differences among low-risk patients and diminished spending-cost dif-
ferences among high-risk patients cannot be solely ascribed to overpayment for the former and
underpayment for the latter. A cross subsidization mechanism, therefore, becomes essential to
explain the inverse relationship between risk scores and spending-cost differences.
6.3.2.
Treatment Assignment
To effectively isolate the impact of ACA capitation rate cuts on the inverse relationship between
risk scores and spending-cost differences from other confounding factors, we need a near-random
assignment of capitation rate cuts across U.S. counties. In this section, we first illustrate the
staggered roll-out of ACA capitation rate cuts across the U.S. introduced in §4.2 and subsequently
explain how this staggered roll-out provides a quasi-natural experiment to establish treatment and
control groups.
To smooth the transition from pre-ACA to ACA benchmark payments, ACA specified a 6-year
transition period (2012-2017) to gradually phase in these payment reductions. Specifically, ACA
divided counties across the U.S. into three groups, namely the Two, Four, and Six Year Phase-in
Groups. In the transition period (2012-2017), ACA benchmark payments were phased into differ-
ent Phase-in Groups in a staggered manner, according to the phase-in factor (PhaseInFactorc,t)
listed in Table 2. More precisely, the benchmark payments for each MA health plan in county
c during years t ∈{2012,...,2017} were calculated as Benchmarkc,t = ACA Benchmarkc,t ×
PhaseInFactorc,t +PreACA Benchmarkc,t ×(1−PhaseInFactorc,t), where PhaseInFactorc,t ∈
[0,1] as specified in Table 2. In other words, the actual MA benchmark payments in the transition
period were a weighted average of the ACA benchmark payments (ACA Benchmarkc,t) and the
pre-ACA benchmark payments (PreACA Benchmarkc,t), where counties c with higher “weight”
(PhaseInFactorc,t) would phase into the ACA benchmark earlier.
To see how this phase-in group assignment smooths the transition from the pre-ACA benchmark
to the ACA benchmark, we shall explain how the PhaseInFactorc,t presented in Table 2 was deter-
mined. Specifically, PhaseInFactorc,t was calculated based on its projected difference between
the ACA and Pre-ACA benchmark payments, i.e., PreACA Benchmarkc,t −ACA Benchmarkc,t.
The idea is that counties with larger projected benchmark cuts would have lower phase-in fac-
tors (PhaseInFactorc,t) and thus longer phase-in periods. More precisely, counties with projected
benchmark payment cuts less than $30 PBPM were assigned to the two-year phase-in group, while
counties with at least $30 PBPM projected benchmark cuts were assigned to groups with longer,
i.e., four or six-year, phase-in periods. This phase-in group assignment rule ensures that no counties
would experience disproportionately large annual benchmark cuts during the transition period and
thus smooths the transition process. For example, a county with $40 PBPM projected benchmark

18
Two Year Phase-in Group Four Year Phase-in Group Six Year Phase-in Group
Year Pre-ACA
ACA
Pre-ACA
ACA
Pre-ACA
ACA
2012
1/2
1/2
3/4
1/4
5/6
1/6
2013
0
1
1/2
1/2
2/3
1/3
2014
0
1
1/4
3/4
1/2
1/2
2015
0
1
0
1
1/3
2/3
2016
0
1
0
1
1/6
5/6
2017
0
1
0
1
0
1
Table 2
The Phase-in Factor of ACA capitation Rates of County c in Year t (PhaseInFactorc,t):
Counties across the U.S. phased into the ACA benchmark in three groups. The Two Year Phase-in Group: These counties
phased in 1
2 of the ACA capitation rates in 2012, and fully phased in afterwards. The Four Year Phase-in Group: These
counties phased in 1
4 of the ACA capitation rates in 2012, phased in 1
2 of the ACA capitation rates in 2013, phased in 3
4 of
the ACA capitation rates in 2014, and fully phased in afterwards. The Six Year Phase-in Group: These counties phased in 1
6
of the ACA capitation rates in 2012, phased in 1
3 of the ACA capitation rates in 2013, phased in 1
2 of the ACA capitation
rates in 2014, phased in 2
3 of the ACA capitation rates in 2015, phased in 5
6 of the ACA capitation rates in 2016, and fully
phased in afterwards (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 2011).
cut would be assigned to the four-year phase-in group, and thus only had $40× 1
4 =$10 PBPM
benchmark cut in 2012. In contrast, a county with $20 PBPM projected benchmark cut would also
have $20× 1
2 =$10 PBPM benchmark cut in 2012, because it is in the two-year phase-in group. In
§6.3.2, we describe in detail how we exploit this Phase-in Group assignment rule to implement our
DID design.
As such, each U.S. county was assigned to different phase-in groups in our study period. Fur-
thermore, these group assignments were based on the projected difference between the Pre-ACA
benchmarks and ACA benchmarks of each county. These two institutional details provide us with
the quasi-random regional variations of ACA capitation rate cuts for treatment assignment.
First, the phase-in group assignment of each U.S. county (c.f. Table 2) enables us to implement
the DID design. Specifically, during the transition period, counties with shorter phase-in time
had higher percentage capitation rate cuts compared to counties with longer phase-in time. For
example, 50% of the ACA capitation payment cuts became effective in 2012 for counties in the Two
Year Phase-in Group. In contrast, for counties in the Four Year and Six Year Phase-in Groups,
only 25% and 17% of the ACA capitation payment cuts became effective in 2012. Therefore, in
principle, counties with shorter phase-in time should be assigned to the treatment group, while
counties with longer phase-in time should be assigned to the control group.
Second, phase-in time for counties was determined based on their projected difference between
the Pre-ACA benchmarks and ACA benchmarks, and whether this value fell above or below an
arbitrary cut-off point. In particular, counties with projected benchmark differences below $30
PBPM were assigned to the Two Year Phase-in Group, while counties with projected benchmark

19
differences of at least $30 PBPM were assigned to the Four Year and Six Year Phase-in Groups. As
such, this $30 PBPM provides a clean cut-off value to implement a “local randomized experiment”
as defined by Lee and Lemieux (2010). Specifically, for counties with projected benchmark difference
slightly below $30 PBPM, they experienced 50%−25% = 25% deeper capitation payment cuts than
counties with projected benchmark difference slightly above $30 PBPM. Therefore, by focusing on
the counties with benchmark differences just above or just below the $30 cut-off value, we have a
study sample where the ACA capitation payment cuts were assigned independent of other temporal
changes. As such, we use this $30 cut-off value to create a quasi-random assignment of the ACA
capitation payment cuts across otherwise similar U.S. counties.
In our DID analysis, counties with projected benchmark differences slightly below the $30 cut-off
value are assigned to the treatment group, while counties with projected benchmark differences
slightly above the $30 cut-off value are assigned to the control group. Specifically, we test our main
hypothesis in three different neighborhood specifications around the $30 cut-off value (i.e., [$29,$31],
[$28,$32], [$27,$33]), and assess whether they provide consistent treatment effect estimates. Lastly,
we remark that the phase-in group assignment and phase-in time were announced in February 2011
based on the projected benchmark difference from the 2010 data (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services 2011). Therefore, the treatment path was predetermined before 2012.
6.3.3.
The Econometric Model to Test the Main Hypothesis
The econometric model to test our main hypothesis is specified as:
MA Spendingi,t −Estimated Costi,t
=β0 + δDIDRiskScorei,t × Treatmenti,t + β1Treatmenti,t
+βRSRiskScorei,t + αi + γt + ϵi,t,
(3)
where the treatment Treatmenti,t is assigned as described in §6.3.2. In particular, since treatment
and control groups are assigned at the county-level, the individual identifiers i become county-
patient specific. In this specification, if our main hypothesis was true, then δDID > 0. The reason
is, as explained in §6.3.1, that the cross subsidization mechanism would translate the capitation
payment cut for high-risk patients into a spending cut for low-risk patients. As such, the spending-
cost difference for low-risk patients would experience a more significant reduction compared to the
spending-cost difference for high-risk patients, which would be captured by a mitigated negative
slope, as illustrated in Figure 1b. As such, the inverse relationship between risk scores and spending-
cost differences (βRS) estimated in (2) would be mitigated by the ACA capitation rate cuts, i.e.,
βRS < βRS + δDID, in the presence of cross subsidization.

20
Consistent with prior research employing similar identification strategies (c.f. Verhoogen (2008),
Flach (2016), Irarrazabal et al. (2015)), the econometric model (3) can be systematically formulated
in three steps. First, we identify the inverse relationship between risk scores and spending-cost
differences in the control, i.e., βRS(Control). That is, for patients i in the control counties or in the
control period (t before the ACA shock), we estimate
MA Spendingi,t −Estimated Costi,t
=β0(Control) + βRS(Control)RiskScorei,t + αi + γt + ϵi,t.
Second, we identify the inverse relationship between risk scores and spending-cost differences in the
treatment, i.e., βRS(T reatment). That is, for patients i in the treatment counties and in the treatment
period (t after the ACA shock), we estimate
MA Spendingi,t −Estimated Costi,t
=β0(T reatment) + βRS(T reatment)RiskScorei,t + αi + γt + ϵi,t.
Third, we identify the change in the inverse relationships between control and treatment, i.e.,
δDID := βRS(T reatment) −βRS(Control).
(4)
Mathematically, it is clear that the parameter of interest in (3), i.e., δDID, can be identified as
(4). Econometrically, Verhoogen (2008) noted that this identification strategy “would amount to a
familiar triple-differences strategy” if RiskScorei,t was a binary variable. As such, the econometric
model (3) can be structured as a triple-difference design with continuous heterogeneous treatment
effects, as summarized in Table 5 of Appendix A.
6.3.4.
Results for the Main Hypothesis
The econometric model (3) is estimated using two-way fixed effect estimators. Table 3 presents
the estimation results from different neighborhood specifications around the $30 cut-off value, i.e.,
[$29,$31], [$28,$32], [$27,$33]. These different neighborhood specifications provide consistent results
supporting our main hypothesis, i.e., δDID > 0. In other words, the inverse relationship between
the sickness levels of MA beneficiaries and their spending-cost differences was mitigated by the
ACA capitation rate cuts, i.e., |βRS| > |βRS + δDID|. As such, we confirm the main hypothesis and
empirically identify the strategic cross subsidization practice in MA.
Next, we discuss the effect size of the ACA capitation rate cuts on MA health plans’ spending
patterns. Specifically, the strategic cross subsidization amount was decreased by around δDID =
$1640 (according to the [$28,$32] neighborhood) per patient per year for one unit risk score increase

21
Spending-cost Difference
[$29,$31]
[$28,$32]
[$27,$33]
βRS
-10.15∗∗∗
-9.74∗∗∗
-9.65∗∗∗
δDID
2.02∗∗∗
1.64∗∗∗
1.51∗∗∗
β1
-1.88∗∗
-1.98∗∗∗
-1.92∗∗∗
Observations
588,946
779,436
984,339
R2
0.500
0.508
0.528
Adjusted R2
0.311
0.309
0.323
Note:
Dependent variable is in $1,000 per year unit.
All standard errors are clustered at county level.
∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 3
Estimation Results of Econometric Model (3):
Impact of the ACA Cuts on MA Enrollees’ Spending-cost Differences
after the ACA capitation rate cuts. In other words, the ACA shock mitigated around 17% of
the strategic cross subsidization amount, as measured by | δDID
βRS |. We note that this effect size is
economically significant when taking into account the scale of the MA population. For example,
there were around 15 million MA enrollees in 2014 (c.f. Jacobson et al. (2016)), where the mean
annual change in individual risk score was 0.14 (c.f. Tables 6). Therefore, the mitigated strategic
cross subsidization in 2014 was around 0.14 × $1640 = $229.6 per patient or 15 million × 0.14 ×
$1640 = $3,444 million ≈$3 billion in total. Alternatively, we also make use of quartile statistics
of the individual risk score change in 2014 to provide a lower bound for this estimate. Specifically,
25% of our studied population had at least a 0.3 unit increase in risk score during 2014. In this
case, the mitigated strategic cross subsidization in 2014 was at least 0.25 × 0.3 × $1640 = $123 per
patient or 15 million × 0.25 × 0.3 × $1640 = $1,845 million ≈$2 billion in total.
7.
Assessing the Impact of Strategic Cross Subsidization Practice on
Risk Selection
In the presence of strategic cross subsidization, Hypothesis 2 posits that the ACA policy change,
which imposed more substantial capitation payment reductions for high-risk patients, would mit-
igate risk selection in MA, as detailed in §3. To empirically assess this hypothesis, we rely on
county-level data as described in §5.2 rather than individual-level data from CDM. The reason
is that OPTUM does not publish the design weights, i.e., the inverse of sampling probability, for
users to recover population estimates. In the rest of this section, §7.1 develops a generalized triple-
difference model to examine this association. §7.2 presents and discusses the estimation results.

22
7.1.
The Econometric Model to Test Hypothesis 2
One way to evaluate Hypothesis 2 is to analyze whether counties phased into the ACA benchmarks
earlier had higher county average MA risk scores in comparison to other counties. Here, a higher
average risk score indicates a higher risk enrolled population, suggesting a mitigated risk selection
or cherry-picking behaviors in MA. In other words, the ACA capitation payment reductions should
alleviate risk selection in a staggered manner. This means that counties that phased in earlier are
expected to show a trend of enrolling a higher risk population.
However, since the ACA shock affects risk selection through multiple channels, it is difficult
to isolate the impact of strategic cross subsidization practice on risk selection in this shock. For
example, along with the capitation payment cuts, the ACA also created a Quality Bonus Payments
(QBPs) program to incentivize better quality provision in MA through bonus payments Centers
for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2020). It is shown that the QBPs program enabled high-quality
health plans to select healthier Medicare beneficiaries (c.f. Fioretti and Wang (2023)). As such, MA
health plans with more quality bonus payments might have more severe risk selection problems.
Therefore, the existence of alternative channels through which the ACA shocks can affect risk
selection might confound the estimation of the association between strategic cross subsidization
and risk selection.
To control for these alternative channels, we use a generalized triple-difference model to isolate
the impact of strategic cross subsidization on risk selection, i.e.,
RiskScorec,t =β0 + δDIDTreatmentc,t + βStar(DID)Treatmentc,t × Starc,12
+βStar(P ost)Starc,12 × I{PostACA} + βStarStarc,t
+βMcP oplog(McPopc,t) + βRebateRebatec,t + αc + γt + ϵc,t.
(5)
That is, in addition to assigning counties to the treatment/control groups, we also group counties
by the county-average initial star ratings at the beginning of the QBPs program, i.e., Starc,12,
which determines the county-average additional quality bonus payments from ACA. Notably, these
initial star ratings in 2012 were mainly determined by MA health plans’ performance in the year
2010, and thus are not affected by the phase-in group assignment published in 2011 (c.f. Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services (2011)). As such, the treatment effect is moderated by the additional
quality bonus payments from ACA. In addition, we also control for the population size of Medicare
beneficiaries, i.e., McPopc,t, and the county-average funds available for MA health plans to provide
supplementary benefits, i.e., Rebatec,t. Both factors affect the flexibility for MA health plans to
conduct strategic cross subsidization as well as risk selection.

23
Risk Score
[$29,$31]
[$28,$32]
[$27,$33]
δDID
0.185∗∗
0.139∗∗
0.109∗∗
βStar(DID)
-0.050∗∗
-0.045∗∗∗
-0.036∗∗∗
βStar(P ost)
-0.028∗∗
-0.014
-0.020∗∗
βStar
-0.035∗∗∗
-0.009
-0.008
βMcP op
-0.011∗
-0.011∗∗
-0.011∗∗∗
βRebate
2 × 10−5
1 × 10−5
2 × 10−5∗∗
Observations
226
384
580
R2
0.860
0.870
0.860
Adjusted R2
0.825
0.841
0.831
Note:
∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 4
Estimation Results of Econometric Model (5):
Impact of the ACA Cuts on County-average Risk Scores of MA Enrollees in HMO Plans
7.2.
Results for Hypothesis 2
Table 4 displays the estimation results of the econometric model (5) for HMO plans. The results,
estimated using two-way fixed effect estimators, confirm Hypothesis 2. Specifically, the parameter
of interest, δDID, is statistically significant and positive in all three neighborhood specifications.
This finding indicates that health plans in the treatment group enrolled a higher proportion of
high-risk Medicare beneficiaries relative to those in the control group counties. Consequently, this
pattern implies that health plans in the treatment group are less involved in risk selection practices
than their counterparts in the control group. In this context, risk selection refers to the tendency of
health plans to preferentially enroll lower-risk individuals, and a reduction in this practice suggests
a more equitable and inclusive approach to beneficiary enrollment. Furthermore, the treatment
effect is moderated by QBP star ratings, with βStar(DID) < 0. Additional results for both HMO and
PPO plans are presented in Appendix B.5.
The estimation results of the other parameters also have the expected signs. Specifically, we
find that MA health plans with higher star ratings tend to have worse risk selection, βStar < 0.
Besides, risk selection is more pronounced in counties with a higher percentage of Medicare-eligible
populations, i.e., βMcP op < 0. The reason is that MA plans have more flexibility in conducting risk
selection in these counties. Lastly, the amount of rebate available for MA health plans to provide
supplementary benefits did not significantly impact risk selection during our study period, i.e.,
βRebate ≈0. One reason is that the rebate amount in MA had stayed relatively the same throughout
our study period (c.f. Guterman et al. (2018)).
As for the overall impact of the ACA shock on risk selection, we find that risk selection was
mitigated in counties with low initial star ratings, but worsened in counties with high initial star

24
ratings. Specifically, for counties with low initial star ratings (e.g., Starc,12 = 3), risk scores in the
treatment group increase after the ACA shock, i.e., δDID + βStar(DID)Starc,12 > 0. However, for
counties with high initial star ratings (e.g., Starc,12 = 4), risk scores in the treatment group may
even decrease after the ACA shock, i.e., δDID + βStar(DID)Starc,12 < 0. A possible explanation is
that the additional capitation payments from the QBPs program after the ACA shock may help
MA health plans conduct more risk selection. Therefore, for these high-quality plans, the negative
impact of ACA on risk scores through the channel of QBPs outweighs the positive impact of ACA
on risk scores through the channel of reduced strategic cross subsidization. These results highlight
the necessity to examine the heterogeneous treatment effect, instead of the population average
treatment effect, when studying the impact of the ACA shock on risk selection in MA.
8.
Robustness Checks
This section checks the robustness of our findings. Specifically, §8.1 conducts a matching analysis.
§8.2 examines the parallel trend assumption of our DID analysis. Additional robustness checks are
presented in Appendix B.
8.1.
A Matching analysis
To check whether the discontinuity in ACA capitation cuts discussed in §6.3.2 indeed provides such
randomization, this section conducts a coarsened exact matching (CEM) on relevant county- and
individual-level characteristics and re-estimate our main econometric model (3) using the matched
sample.
First, we conduct a CEM using relevant county- and individual-level characteristics introduced in
§5 and present the results in Tables 8 and 9 of Appendix A. Specifically, FFS Ratec,2010, RUCCc,2010
and Incomec,2010 may affect treatment assignments through MA benchmark payments. Here we
focus on 2010 because the treatment and control groups were assigned based on the county-level
benchmark difference in 2010. Starc,2012 measures the balance between treatment and control groups
in health plan quality and QBPs in 2012. We focus on the year 2012 because the star ratings in
2012 were mainly determined based on MA health plans’ performance in 2010, the last year before
the treatment and control assignments were announced. Agei,t is a proxy for the balance of the
patient population’s health in our study period. In addition, we re-estimate our main econometric
model using the matched data and present the estimation results (Table 10 of Appendix A). The
results based on matched data are consistent with our main results (Table 3).

25
8.2.
Parallel Trend Assumption
A key assumption of our DID empirical strategy is that counties in treatment and control groups
were otherwise similar except for their ACA capitation payment cuts. In other words, in a counter-
factual world where the ACA capitation payment cuts were not introduced, counties in treatment
and control groups would follow the same “parallel trends” so that the treatment effect estimate
would not be statistically different between the treatment and control groups. In this section tests,
we test this assumption using an event-study design, i.e.,
MA Spendingi,t −Estimated Costi,t
=β0 +
2010
X
s=2009
 δDID(s)RiskScorei,t × Treatmenti,s−2011 + βsTreatmenti,s−2011

+
2015
X
s=2012
 δDID(s)RiskScorei,t × Treatmenti,s−2011 + βsTreatmenti,s−2011

+βRSRiskScorei,t + αi + γt + ϵi,t.
(6)
Specifically, if the parallel trend assumption holds, the parameter of interest δDID(s) should stay
close to 0 in the pre-treatment period (s = 2009,2010), which implies that the degree of strategic
cross subsidization was similar between treatment and control groups before the ACA cut. Notably,
we set 2011 as the base year because the phase-in group assignment was announced in February
2011 (c.f. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2011)).
Estimation results of the event-study model (6) are presented in Table 11 of Appendix A. Con-
sistent with the identification assumption, we do not find a statistically significant difference in
strategic cross subsidization practice between the treatment and control groups before the imple-
mentation of ACA cuts, i.e., δDID(2009) = δDID(2009) = 0. That is, MA health plans in both treatment
and control groups have followed parallel trends in terms of their strategic cross subsidization prac-
tice. Their trends started diverging when the staggered rollout of ACA cuts began in 2012, i.e.,
0 < δDID(2012) < δDID(2013) < δDID(2014). When the staggered rollout was completed in 2015 for the
local neighborhood studied in this paper, we find that the trends of treatment and control groups
started converging again, i.e., δDID(2015) < δDID(2014). We can also visually verify this implication
of the parallel trend assumption through an event study plot of δDID(s) as in Figure 2.
9.
Conclusion
Healthcare capitation payment models, particularly the Medicare capitation program, have been
extensively studied in recent decades. However, due to the limited access to MA health plan claims
data, little is known about how MA health plans allocate capitation payments across various patient

26
Figure 2
Event Study Plots of δDID(s) in Econometric Model (6):
Impact of the ACA Cuts on MA Enrollees’ Spending-cost Differences
risk groups. More importantly, there is a limited understanding of whether and to what extent
there may be perverse incentives at play in MA health plans’ operations leading to a systematic
mismatch between a patient’s health status and the healthcare resources she gets from MA. Our
paper made use of a large commercial insurance database containing medical claims from more
than 2 million MA enrollees to open up the black box of MA health plans’ operations and to study
the allocation problem of MA capitation payments. Our findings shed new light on how MA health
plans operate in serving different patient risk groups and how their operations can affect the risk
selection problem in MA.
By scrutinizing the capitation payment allocations within Medicare Advantage (MA) health
plans, this study not only highlights the existence of cross subsidization, but also emphasizes its
far-reaching consequences on risk selection within the MA market. Irrespective of the direction
in which cross subsidization occurs, whether from high-risk patients to low-risk patients or vice
versa, it has profound implications. In cases where MA health plans utilize capitation payments
from high-risk patients to subsidize low-risk patients, a typical risk selection problem emerges.
This scenario incentivizes only low-risk patients to enroll in MA plans, leaving sicker patients
predominantly to TM. Such a trend can lead to a phenomenon known as market unraveling. In

27
this context, market unraveling refers to the possibility that the CMS may find it increasingly
challenging to sustain TM if it becomes disproportionately populated by the sickest beneficiaries
of Medicare. This imbalance could pose significant financial and operational challenges for CMS in
maintaining TM as a viable option (Medicare Payment Advisory Commission 2023). Conversely, if
MA health plans resort to using capitation payments from low-risk patients to subsidize high-risk
patients, the issue of adverse selection comes into play. This situation could favor plans targeting
low-risk patients, once again resulting in risk selection (Azevedo and Gottlieb 2017, Geruso et al.
2021).
Our findings have direct practical implications. First, it underscores the urgent need for Medicare
to enhance its requirements for data reporting and promote improved data transparency when it
comes to managing Medicare Advantage plans. Particularly, our study offers compelling rationale
and empirical evidence in favor of federal laws pertaining to cross subsidization practices within
the MA landscape, as outlined in the Code of Federal Regulations: “Payments from any rate cell
must not cross-subsidize or be cross-subsidized by payments for any other rate cell” (U.S. Congress
2016). Second, regulations on cross subsidization practices must be upheld to address the potential
risk selection problem in MA, where the low-risk population benefits at the expense of the more
vulnerable high-risk population. Critically, given the correlation between healthcare risk factors and
socioeconomic status, the strategic cross-subsidization tactics adopted by MA plans could worsen
socio-economic inequalities within the system, potentially leading to a reallocation of capitation
payments away from historically disadvantaged groups (Irvin et al. 2020, Tran 2020, McWilliams
et al. 2023).
Our study emphasizes the need for further research in this area. Firstly, with the growing adop-
tion of population-based payment models by healthcare payers, it is likely that strategic cross-
subsidization practices extend beyond the MA capitation program. Additional investigations are
essential to comprehend the role of strategic cross-subsidization practices in other population-
based payment models. Secondly, due to the absence of linked clinical data, we are unable to
analyze the effects of strategic cross-subsidization on patient outcomes. We anticipate that our
initial exploration of strategic cross-subsidization will catalyze future research aimed at assessing
its implications for health outcomes.
References
Adida, E., Mamani, H., and Nassiri, S. (2016). Bundled payment vs. fee-for-service: Impact of payment
scheme on performance. Management Science, 63(5):1606–1624.

28
Agarwal, R., Connolly, J., Gupta, S., and Navathe, A. S. (2021).
Comparing medicare advantage and
traditional medicare: A systematic review: A systematic review compares medicare advantage and
traditional medicare on key metrics including preventive care visits, hospital admissions, and emergency
room visits. Health Affairs, 40(6):937–944.
Aizawa, N. and Kim, Y. S. (2018). Advertising and risk selection in health insurance markets. American
Economic Review, 108(3):828–67.
Ankuda, C. K., Ornstein, K. A., Covinsky, K. E., Bollens-Lund, E., Meier, D. E., and Kelley, A. S. (2020).
Switching between medicare advantage and traditional medicare before and after the onset of func-
tional disability: Measuring and characterizing enrollees who switch between medicare advantage and
traditional medicare in the twelve months before and after onset of a functional disability. Health
Affairs, 39(5):809–818.
Ata, B., Killaly, B. L., Olsen, T. L., and Parker, R. P. (2013).
On hospice operations under medicare
reimbursement policies. Management Science, 59(5):1027–1044.
Azevedo, E. M. and Gottlieb, D. (2017). Perfect competition in markets with adverse selection. Econometrica,
85(1):67–105.
Bastani, H., Goh, J., and Bayati, M. (2019). Evidence of upcoding in pay-for-performance programs. Man-
agement Science, 65(3):1042–1060.
Brennan, N., Ornstein, C., and Frakt, A. B. (2018). Time to release medicare advantage claims data. JAMA,
319(10):975–976.
Brown, J., Duggan, M., Kuziemko, I., and Woolston, W. (2014).
How does risk selection respond to
risk adjustment? New evidence from the Medicare Advantage Program. American Economic Review,
104(10):3335–64.
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2011).
Advance Notice of Methodological Changes for Cal-
endar Year (CY) 2012 for Medicare Advantage (MA) Capitation Rates, Part C and Part D Pay-
ment Policies and 2012 Call Letter. Available at https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Health-Plans/
MedicareAdvtgSpecRateStats/Downloads/Advance2012.pdf (Accessed May 2, 2020).
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2015). Report to congress: Alternative payment models & medi-
care advantage. Available at https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Advantage/Plan-Payment/
Downloads/Report-to-Congress-APMs-and-Medicare-Advantage.pdf (Accessed January, 9, 2020).
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2017). Risk Adjustment. Available at https://www.cms.gov/
Medicare/Health-Plans/MedicareAdvtgSpecRateStats/Risk-Adjustors.html (Accessed June 10,
2018).
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2019). Medicare Data. Available at https://www.cms.gov/
medicare/medicare (Accessed May, 22, 2019).

29
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2020).
Part C and D Performance Data.
Available at
https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Prescription-Drug-Coverage/PrescriptionDrugCovGenIn/
PerformanceData (Accessed May 22, 2108).
Chen, C. and Savva, N. (2018). Unintended consequences of hospital regulation: The case of the hospital
readmissions reduction program. Available at SSRN 3236983.
Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget (2022). Legislation to bring transparency to MA introduced.
Available
at
https://www.crfb.org/blogs/legislation-bring-transparency-ma-introduced
(Accessed May 8, 2023).
Cooper, A. L. and Trivedi, A. N. (2012). Fitness memberships and favorable selection in medicare advantage
plans. New England Journal of Medicine, 366(2):150–157.
Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector General (2022). Some medicare advantage
organization denials of prior authorization requests raise concerns about beneficiary access to medically
necessary care. Available at https://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/OEI-09-18-00260.asp (Accessed
November, 28, 2022).
Erhun, F., Mistry, B., Platchek, T., Milstein, A., Narayanan, V., and Kaplan, R. (2015).
Time-driven
activity-based costing of multivessel coronary artery bypass grafting across national boundaries to
identify improvement opportunities: study protocol. BMJ open, 5(8):e008765.
Figueroa, J. F., Wadhera, R. K., Frakt, A. B., Fonarow, G. C., Heidenreich, P. A., Xu, H., Lytle, B.,
DeVore, A. D., Matsouaka, R., Yancy, C. W., et al. (2020). Quality of care and outcomes among medi-
care advantage vs fee-for-service medicare patients hospitalized with heart failure. JAMA Cardiology,
5(12):1349–1357.
Fioretti, M. and Wang, H. (2023). Performance pay in insurance markets: Evidence from medicare. Review
of Economics and Statistics, 105(5):1128–1144.
Flach, L. (2016). Quality upgrading and price heterogeneity: Evidence from brazilian exporters. Journal of
International Economics, 102:282–290.
Freed, M., Biniek, J. F., Damico, A., and Neuman, T. (2022).
Medicare advantage in 2022:
Enrollment update and key trends.
Available at https://www.kff.org/medicare/issue-brief/
medicare-advantage-in-2022-enrollment-update-and-key-trends/
(Accessed
September,
5,
2022).
Geruso, M. and Layton, T. J. (2017). Selection in health insurance markets and its policy remedies. Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 31(4):23–50.
Geruso, M., Layton, T. J., McCormack, G., and Shepard, M. (2021). The two margin problem in insurance
markets. Review of Economics and Statistics, pages 1–46.
Ginsburg, P. B. and Lieberman, S. M. (2022). The debate on overpayment in medicare advantage: Pulling
it together.
Health Affairs Forefront Available at https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/
forefront.20220223.736815/full/ (Accessed August, 4, 2022).

30
Glazer, J. and McGuire, T. G. (2000).
Optimal risk adjustment in markets with adverse selection: an
application to managed care. The American Economic Review, 90(4):1055–1071.
Guterman, S., Skopec, L., and Zuckerman, S. (2018). Do medicare advantage plans respond to payment
changes? A look at the data from 2009 to 2014. Available at https://aca.issuelab.org/resources/
30000/30000.pdf (Accessed May, 23, 2024).
Halpern, M. T., Urato, M. P., and Kent, E. E. (2017). The health care experience of patients with cancer
during the last year of life: analysis of the seer-cahps data set. Cancer, 123(2):336–344.
Han, T. and Lavetti, K. (2017). Does Part D abet advantageous selection in Medicare Advantage? Journal
of Health Economics, 56:368–382.
Huesch, M. D. (2010). Managing care? medicare managed care and patient use of cardiologists. Health
Services Research, 45(2):329–354.
Hung, A., Stuart, B., and Harris, I. (2016). The effect of medicare advantage enrollment on mammographic
screening. The American Journal of Managed Care, 22(2):e53–9.
Hwang, W., J´onasson, J. O., and Peura, H. (2023). Favorable risk selection in medicare advantage: The
effect of allowing non-medical services. Available at SSRN.
Ibanez, M. R., Clark, J. R., Huckman, R. S., and Staats, B. R. (2018). Discretionary task ordering: Queue
management in radiological services. Management Science, 64(9):4389–4407.
Irarrazabal, A., Moxnes, A., and Opromolla, L. D. (2015). The tip of the iceberg: a quantitative framework
for estimating trade costs. Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(4):777–792.
Irvin, J. A., Kondrich, A. A., Ko, M., Rajpurkar, P., Haghgoo, B., Landon, B. E., Phillips, R. L., Petterson,
S., Ng, A. Y., and Basu, S. (2020). Incorporating machine learning and social determinants of health
indicators into prospective risk adjustment for health plan payments. BMC Public Health, 20:1–10.
Jacobson, G., Casillas, G., Damico, A., Neuman, T., and Gold, M. (2016).
Medicare advantage
2016 spotlight: Enrollment market update. Available at http://kff.org/medicare/issue-brief/
medicare-advantage-2016-spotlight-enrollment-market-update/ (Accessed March, 4, 2017).
Jacobson,
G.,
Freed,
M.,
Damico,
A.,
and
Neuman,
T.
(2019a).
A
dozen
facts
about
medicare
advantage
in
2019.
Available
at
https://www.kff.org/medicare/issue-brief/
a-dozen-facts-about-medicare-advantage-in-2019/ (Accessed January, 9, 2020).
Jacobson, G., Neuman, T., and Damico, A. (2019b).
Do people who sign up for medicare advan-
tage plans have lower medicare spending?
Available at http://files.kff.org/attachment/
Issue-Brief-Do-People-Who-Sign-Up-for-Medicare-Advantage-Plans-Have-Lower-Medicare-Spending
(Accessed December, 15, 2019).
Jacobson, G. A., Neuman, P., and Damico, A. (2015). At least half of new medicare advantage enrollees had
switched from traditional medicare during 2006–11. Health Affairs, 34(1):48–55.

31
James, B. C. and Poulsen, G. P. (2016). The case for capitation. Harvard business review, 94(7):19.
Kc, D. S., Staats, B. R., Kouchaki, M., and Gino, F. (2020).
Task selection and workload: A focus on
completing easy tasks hurts performance. Management Science, 66(10):4397–4416.
Kc, D. S. and Terwiesch, C. (2011). The effects of focus on performance: Evidence from california hospitals.
Management Science, 57(11):1897–1912.
Keenan, P. S., Elliott, M. N., Cleary, P. D., Zaslavsky, A. M., and Landon, B. E. (2009). Quality assessments
by sick and healthy beneficiaries in traditional medicare and medicare managed care. Medical Care,
pages 882–888.
Lai, L. (2022).
Budget debate: Healthcare clusters to get fixed sum for patients under care, instead of
getting paid per visit. The Straits Times Available at
https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/politics/budget-debate-healthcare-clusters-to-get-fixed-sum
(Accessed August 2, 2022).
Lee, D. S. and Lemieux, T. (2010). Regression discontinuity designs in economics. Journal of economic
literature, 48(2):281–355.
Li, Q., Trivedi, A. N., Galarraga, O., Chernew, M. E., Weiner, D. E., and Mor, V. (2018).
Medicare
advantage ratings and voluntary disenrollment among patients with end-stage renal disease. Health
Affairs, 37(1):70–77.
Lu, S. F. and Lu, L. X. (2017).
Do mandatory overtime laws improve quality? Staffing decisions and
operational flexibility of nursing homes. Management Science, 63(11):3566–3585.
Martino, S. C., Elliott, M. N., Haviland, A. M., Saliba, D., Burkhart, Q., and Kanouse, D. E. (2016).
Comparing the health care experiences of medicare beneficiaries with and without depressive symptoms
in medicare managed care versus fee-for-service. Health Services Research, 51(3):1002–1020.
McWilliams, J. M., Weinreb, G., Ding, L., Ndumele, C. D., and Wallace, J. (2023). Risk adjustment and pro-
moting health equity in population-based payment: Concepts and evidence: Study examines accuracy
of risk adjustment and payments in promoting health equity. Health Affairs, 42(1):105–114.
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (2022). Report to congress: Medicare payment policy. Available
at
https://www.medpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/Mar22_MedPAC_ReportToCongress_
SEC.pdf (Accessed August, 5, 2022).
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (2023). Favorable selection and future directions for Medicare
Advantage payment policy. Available at https://www.medpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/06/
Jun23_Ch4_MedPAC_Report_To_Congress_SEC.pdf (Accessed January, 15, 2024).
MedPage Today (2020). Medicare advantage enrollees discover dirty little secret — getting out is a lot harder
than getting in. Available at https://www.medpagetoday.com/special-reports/exclusives/83661
(Accessed May 31, 2023).

32
Meyers, D. J., Belanger, E., Joyce, N., McHugh, J., Rahman, M., and Mor, V. (2019). Analysis of drivers of
disenrollment and plan switching among medicare advantage beneficiaries. JAMA Internal Medicine,
179(4):524–532.
Meyers, D. J., Mor, V., and Rahman, M. (2018). Medicare advantage enrollees more likely to enter lower-
quality nursing homes compared to fee-for-service enrollees. Health Affairs, 37(1):78–85.
Morrisey, M. A., Kilgore, M. L., Becker, D. J., Smith, W., and Delzell, E. (2013). Favorable selection, risk
adjustment, and the medicare advantage program. Health Services Research, 48(3):1039–1056.
Newhouse, J. P., McWilliams, J. M., Price, M., Huang, J., Fireman, B., and Hsu, J. (2013). Do medicare
advantage plans select enrollees in higher margin clinical categories? Journal of Health Economics,
32(6):1278–1288.
Patterson, B. W., Batt, R. J., Wilbanks, M. D., Otles, E., Westergaard, M. C., and Shah, M. N. (2016).
Cherry picking patients: examining the interval between patient rooming and resident self-assignment.
Academic Emergency Medicine, 23(6):679–684.
Pope, G. C., Kautter, J., Melvin J. Ingber, P. S. F., Sekar, R., and Newhart, C. (2011). Evaluation of the
CMS-HCC risk adjustment model. Technical report, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Rahman, M., Keohane, L., Trivedi, A. N., and Mor, V. (2015). High-cost patients had substantial rates of
leaving medicare advantage and joining traditional medicare. Health Affairs, 34(10):1675–1681.
Rajkumar, R., Conway, P. H., and Tavenner, M. (2014). CMS engaging multiple payers in payment reform.
JAMA, 311(19):1967–1968.
Rice, N., Smith, P., et al. (1999). Approaches to capitation and risk adjustment in health care: An interna-
tional survey. University of York The Centre for Health Economics.
Savva, N., Tezcan, T., and Yıldız, ¨O. (2019). Can yardstick competition reduce waiting times? Management
Science, 65(7):3196–3215.
Schwartz, M. L., Kosar, C. M., Mroz, T. M., Kumar, A., and Rahman, M. (2019). Quality of home health
agencies serving traditional medicare vs medicare advantage beneficiaries.
JAMA Network Open,
2(9):e1910622–e1910622.
She, Z., Ayer, T., and Montanera, D. (2022).
Can big data cure risk selection in healthcare capitation
program? A game theoretical analysis. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 24(6):3117–
3134.
Skopec, L., Aarons, J., and Zuckerman, S. (2019a). Did medicare advantage payment cuts affect beneficiary
access and affordability. The American Journal of Managed Care, 25(9):e261–e266.
Skopec, L., Ramos, C., and Aarons, J. (2019b). Are medicare advantage plans using new supplemental
benefit flexibility to address enrollees’ health-related social needs? Available at https://www.urban.
org/sites/default/files/publication/101067/sdh_medicare_advantage_1.pdf (Accessed May
31, 2023).

33
Song, Z., Landrum, M. B., and Chernew, M. E. (2013). Competitive bidding in medicare advantage: Effect
of benchmark changes on plan bids. Journal of Health Economics, 32(6):1301–1312.
Tezcan, T. (2023). Navigating incentive challenges in capitation payment models: A novel retrospective
payment model. Available at SSRN 4615485.
Tran, L. D. (2020). Social risk adjustment in health care performance measures. JAMA Network Open,
3(6):e208020–e208020.
United States Department of Agriculture (2013). 2013 Rural-Urban Continuum Codes. Available at https:
//www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/rural-urban-continuum-codes/ (Accessed June 10, 2018).
U.S. Congress (2016). 42 CFR § 438.4 - Actuarial soundness. Available at https://www.law.cornell.edu/
cfr/text/42/438.4 (Accessed September, 8, 2022).
Verhoogen, E. A. (2008). Trade, quality upgrading, and wage inequality in the mexican manufacturing sector.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2):489–530.
Wallace, P. J., Shah, N. D., Dennen, T., Bleicher, P. A., and Crown, W. H. (2014). Optum labs: Building a
novel node in the learning health care system. Health Affairs, 33(7):1187–1194.
Weiner, J. (2020).
Did the affordable care act contain costs?
Available at https://ldi.upenn.edu/
wp-content/uploads/2021/06/LDI-Issue-Brief-2020-Vol.-23-No.-2.pdf?_ga=2.259058186.
1663264394.1695927477-282008354.1695927477 (Accessed May, 23, 2024).