TITLE: Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2022.1117
---

Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing
Citation for published version (APA):
Zhang, Y., Westerweel, B., Basten, R., & Song, J.-S. (2022). Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP
Licensing. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 24(5), 2685–2702.
https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2022.1117
Document license:
TAVERNE
DOI:
10.1287/msom.2022.1117
Document status and date:
Published: 01/09/2022
Document Version:
Publisher’s PDF, also known as Version of Record (includes final page, issue and volume numbers)
Please check the document version of this publication:
• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can be
important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record. People
interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication, or visit the
DOI to the publisher's website.
• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page
numbers.
Link to publication
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
 • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
 • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
 • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:
www.tue.nl/taverne
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:
openaccess@tue.nl
providing details and we will investigate your claim.
Download date: 13. Jun. 2026

This article was downloaded by: [131.155.93.6] On: 31 October 2022, At: 04:42
Publisher: Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS)
INFORMS is located in Maryland, USA
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://pubsonline.informs.org
Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing
Yue Zhang, Bram Westerweel, Rob Basten, Jing-Sheng Song
To cite this article:
Yue Zhang, Bram Westerweel, Rob Basten, Jing-Sheng Song (2022) Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing.
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 24(5):2685-2702. https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2022.1117
Full terms and conditions of use: https://pubsonline.informs.org/Publications/Librarians-Portal/PubsOnLine-Terms-and-
Conditions
This article may be used only for the purposes of research, teaching, and/or private study. Commercial use
or systematic downloading (by robots or other automatic processes) is prohibited without explicit Publisher
approval, unless otherwise noted. For more information, contact permissions@informs.org.
The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy, completeness, merchantability, fitness
for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Descriptions of, or references to, products or publications, or
inclusion of an advertisement in this article, neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee, endorsement, or
support of claims made of that product, publication, or service.
Copyright © 2022, INFORMS
Please scroll down for article—it is on subsequent pages
With 12,500 members from nearly 90 countries, INFORMS is the largest international association of operations research (O.R.)
and analytics professionals and students. INFORMS provides unique networking and learning opportunities for individual
professionals, and organizations of all types and sizes, to better understand and use O.R. and analytics tools and methods to
transform strategic visions and achieve better outcomes.
For more information on INFORMS, its publications, membership, or meetings visit http://www.informs.org

Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing
Yue Zhang,a Bram Westerweel,b Rob Basten,c Jing-Sheng Songd,*
aSmeal College of Business, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802; bRoyal Netherlands Air Force, 4822 ZB
Breda, Netherlands; cSchool of Industrial Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, 5612 AZ Eindhoven, Netherlands; dFuqua
School of Business, Duke University, Durham, North Carolinia 27708
*Corresponding author
Contact: yue.zhang@psu.edu,
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9110-8740 (YZ); bramwesterweel@gmail.com (BW); r.j.i.basten@tue.nl,
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4562-9681 (RB); jssong@duke.edu,
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8908-2302 (J-SS)
Received: June 7, 2021
Revised: November 10, 2021; April 5, 2022
Accepted: April 28, 2022
Published Online in Articles in Advance:
June 27, 2022
https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2022.1117
Copyright: © 2022 INFORMS
Abstract. Problem deﬁnition: We consider an OEM supplying a single part to multiple
buyers over an inﬁnite horizon. We study how the OEM can digitize the spare parts supply
chain by leveraging 3D printing via intellectual property (IP) licensing. Academic/practical
relevance: Additive manufacturing, also known as 3D printing, has the potential to shift
supply chains from global networks that rely on centralized production with traditional
manufacturing technologies to mainly digital networks with distributed, local printing.
Particularly well positioned to drive this transition are original equipment manufacturers
(OEMs) who design and produce capital goods. Methodology: We ﬁrst set up a benchmark
model of the traditional physical supply chain with centralized production by the OEM.
We then propose the OEM to act as an IP licensor by selling spare parts designs, rather
than physical parts. With the license agreement, a buyer can print parts locally through a
third-party printing service provider, enjoying a shorter lead time and lower setup cost.
Given a license, each buyer chooses whether to switch to the IP licensing channel or stay in
the traditional channel. The OEM selects the license terms to maximize the total proﬁt
across both channels. Results: We characterize the OEM’s optimal license and the resulting
supply chain conﬁguration. We show that 3D printing’s competency in price plays a domi-
nant role in production decentral- ization. The conventional wisdom that 3D printing is
suitable for slow moving parts holds only when it is competent along several dimensions.
In a numerical experiment with realistic parameter settings, decentralized production
occurs in a surprisingly large number of cases, and the proposed new business model can
signiﬁcantly increase the OEM’s proﬁt. Managerial implications: Our results indicate that
IP licensing by OEMs can become a major enabler in the transition to digital supply net-
works with distributed 3D printing, beneﬁting all parties involved.
Funding: The research of the second and third authors has been supported by The Netherlands Organi-
sation for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO) under project number 438-13-207.
Supplemental Material: The online appendix is available at https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2022.1117.
Keywords:
3D printing • decentralized manufacturing • spare parts inventory management • digital spare parts • intellectual property licensing
1. Introduction
1.1. Digitization and Industry 4.0
Digitization enabled by the invention of the Internet
has substantially transformed many major industries.
Among the most disrupted are industries where copy-
right protected material is the central value of the
product, resulting in digital distribution of products,
such as books, music, and movies. For instance, CD
album sales in the United States have dropped from
943 million copies in 2000 to just 47 million in 2019
(Statistica.com 2020), and Blockbuster at one point fea-
tured more than 9,000 stores but was down to a single
store in 2018 (Business Insider 2018). At the same
time, we see the rise of new household names, such as
Spotify, Netﬂix, and Amazon, the latter of which orig-
inally started out as an online bookstore.
Similar changes occur in the manufacturing indus-
try. We observe the industrial revolution toward
Industry 4.0, where three-dimensional (3D) printing,
artiﬁcial intelligence and the Internet of things are
digitizing production, replacing physical inventory by
digital inventory, and enabling a switch from central-
ized mass-manufacturing to distributed, customized,
small series production (Forbes.com 2017, Yin et al.
2018, Olsen and Tomlin 2020, Sertoglu 2021a). In this
paper, we focus on the disruption caused by 3D print-
ing. This technology, more formally known as addi-
tive manufacturing (AM), makes small quantity pro-
duction economically feasible since it requires little
tooling and features very low setup costs compared
with
traditional manufacturing such
as injection
molding or die casting. Some believe that AM will
2685
MANUFACTURING & SERVICE OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT
Vol. 24, No. 5, September–October 2022, pp. 2685–2702
ISSN 1523-4614 (print), ISSN 1526-5498 (online)
http://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/msom
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.93.6] on 31 October 2022, at 04:42 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

reverse globalization, with the long supply chains of
large multinational companies being replaced by, or
evolving into, local 3D printing networks (Ben-Ner
and Siemsen 2017). AM may further give rise to
so-called pan-industrialists: giant industrial networks
or platform services, built around an AM core, linking
and coordinating hundreds of business processes
from a multitude of industries with unprecedented
efﬁciency (D’Aveni 2018).
1.1.1. Challenges with Spare Parts. Among the enti-
ties that will be greatly affected by digitization and the
rise of 3D printing are original equipment manufac-
turers (OEMs) that sell advanced capital goods (such
as heavy construction equipment, military equipment,
trains, aircrafts, and elevators) or durable consumer
goods (such as automobiles and home appliances).
These manufacturers need to provide spare parts to
their business buyers over the course of the equipment
lifetime. The business buyers include the users of capi-
tal goods (such as construction, train, and airline com-
panies), retailers of durable consumer goods (such as
auto dealers), or appliance service companies and part
distributors, who have geographically dispersed oper-
ations and stock spare parts locally to ensure high sys-
tem uptime or off-the-shelf availability.
Providing high level after-sales service throughout
the life cycle of product ownership has proven to be
an important competitive strategy in promoting cus-
tomer loyalty (Cohen et al. 2000). Selling spare parts is
typically a very proﬁtable business, with global
annual sales in 2015 of more than 400 billion U.S. dol-
lars in the automotive industry alone (Breitschwerdt
et al. 2017); this is mostly so for parts with relatively
high margins and volumes. When the price is market
driven or the demand for a part later in its life cycle
has gone down, supplying spare parts is far less
attractive (Ambadipudi et al. 2017); this inevitably
happens to most parts at some point in their life
cycles. For such parts, although OEMs’ production
and sales have typically reached a mature status, their
willingness to carry out regular production runs is
low: producing them complicates OEMs’ schedules
and distracts from the more proﬁtable activities. At
the same time, maintaining inventories of these parts
is expensive. For these reasons, OEMs may decide to
stop offering these parts altogether (Geissbauer et al.
2017). In any case, OEMs have no incentive to hold
inventory for them.
If a buyer still needs these parts, it may be possible
to acquire them at high costs. According to a manager
in the airline industry (private communication via
email on February 24, 2021), an OEM in such case typ-
ically chooses from three options: (i) specify a mini-
mum order quantity (MOQ), so that the cost per part
is not too high while setup costs are covered; (ii) offer
so-called price breaks so that setup costs are always
covered while no MOQ is speciﬁed, for example, buy
1 part at a high unit price or 10 parts at a low unit
price; and (iii) specify separately the setup and varia-
ble costs. In all cases, the setup costs are covered by
the buyer. This is also conﬁrmed by a case study of a
material handling equipment manufacturer: “Now,
the supplier lets the machine run for 10 min, and then,
you have to take 100” (Heinen and Hoberg 2019,
p. 812). The setup costs imposed by traditional manu-
facturing, such as injection molding, are typically very
high. This, combined with the long order lead times
(resulting from the OEM’s lack of inventory and low
priority to start a production run) leads to high inven-
tory holding by the buyers (Chen et al. 2019). Given
that a buyer typically needs to stock many different
parts (think of 300,000 different types; Ambadipudi
et al. 2017), this means a signiﬁcant inventory invest-
ment, especially when accounting for high scrapping
rates (Cattani and Souza 2003, Heinen and Hoberg
2019). Consequently, buyers are tempted by alterna-
tive sources with shorter lead times. Because of the
lack of original designs, parts procured from those
sources can be inferior in functionality and hamper
the remaining lifetime of equipment. All in all, the
OEM and its aftermarket value will be affected nega-
tively (Ambadipudi et al. 2017).
1.1.2. 3D Printing as a Solution. 3D printing may help
alleviate the aforementioned challenges, although it
does require OEMs to provide design ﬁles. In this
regard, the manufacturing industry should learn from
the experiences of the copyright industry. Rather than
mimicking its futile attempts to curb digital distribu-
tion, OEMs should consider embracing 3D printing by
providing buyers the convenience to print parts for
their own use (Desai and Magliocca 2014). This
becomes feasible with the emergence of 3D printing
platform services, for example, Dassault Syst`emes,
SAP, Siemens (SCM World 2018), Digital Parts Trans-
fer (Digital Parts Transfer 2020), and Fieldmade Digital
Inventory (Fieldmade 2020). This trend is also sup-
ported by a survey of 38 German industrial companies
by Geissbauer et al. (2017), who ﬁnd that 85% of spare
parts suppliers believe to incorporate 3D printing into
their business in ﬁve years. Indeed, there are already
companies printing spare parts, such as Deutsche Bahn
(Zasiadko 2019), Wilhelmsen (Supercharge3d 2019),
and military organizations (Wibu-Systems 2019).
Such transitions require the development of a sup-
porting infrastructure for uniform 3D CAD model
database management, software development, print-
ing service provider (PSP) audits, guaranteed repeat-
ability of prints, and so on (Mellor et al. 2014, Chekurov
et al. 2018). To prevent IP infringement and sort out
liability issues, transparency of network transactions
Zhang et al.: Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing
2686
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2022, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2685–2702, © 2022 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.93.6] on 31 October 2022, at 04:42 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

can be guaranteed through blockchain ledgers (Sertoglu
2021a). Another solution may be to trust PSPs and
other third parties, such as UPS, SAP, and Siemens, with
the design ﬁles. Companies such as Wibu-Systems
(Wibu-Systems 2019) offer technical solutions that can
also help prevent IP infringement.
1.1.3. IP Licensing as a Facilitator. At the core of any
type of solution is the digital ﬁle, which enables a
buyer to locally print parts. Selling designs rather
than physical parts creates a cost saving potential,
printing locally shortens order lead times and slashes
set up costs of production runs, from which both
OEMs and buyers may beneﬁt. It allows buyers to
enjoy the originally designed parts with less required
inventory, and at the same time it enables OEMs to
focus their traditional manufacturing lines on high
margin and high-volume products. Conversely, it
does require OEMs to relinquish some of the existing
revenue stream from the physical production and dis-
tribution of parts. Therefore, to motivate OEMs to
embrace the digital transition, a mechanism must be
in place through which OEMs can continue to proﬁt.
To this end, we propose that OEMs act as IP licen-
sors, which is a well-established method in many
industries for marketing and protecting a ﬁrm’s inno-
vation,
such
as
the
telecommunication
industry.
Drawing from the literature and practice of IP protec-
tion, we adopt a commonly used license featuring a
ﬁxed licensing fee (e.g., paid annually), and a per unit
royalty fee. This license form is similar to the patent
fee proposed by Ivan and Yin (2017) in their case
study in the automotive industry. We study how to
optimally design the license terms to maximize an
OEM’s total proﬁt across both the physical and digital
channels and how effective the license form is in reap-
ing the digitization beneﬁt. Such licensing becomes
possible with the recent advancements that allow the
auto-licensing of CAD designs and traceable 3D
printed parts (Hanaphy 2021, Sertoglu 2021b). Organi-
zations are indeed looking into this possibility, for
example, a U.S. Army directive states: “When negoti-
ating with industry for license rights to IP, consider
alternative license models that beneﬁt both the Gov-
ernment and industry, such as a fee-based agreement
under which a negotiated price is paid to the entity
that created the IP each time a part is 3D-printed”
(U.S. Department of Defense 2018, Everett 2020).
1.1.4. Our Framework. We consider the spare parts
service for a single type of part in the later stage of the
product life cycle, and an OEM who does not carry
inventory for it (in Section 6.1, we examine the case of
a general part for which the OEM holds inventory).
The OEM serves multiple buyers and operates a tradi-
tional centralized production and sales channel of the
part, featuring a ﬁxed ordering cost and a per unit
wholesale price. By offering a license of the aforemen-
tioned form, the OEM introduces an IP licensing chan-
nel through which a digital part design ﬁle is sold
along with the right to 3D print the part. Given the
license, the cost-minimizing buyers choose to remain
in the traditional channel or switch to the IP licensing
channel and print parts from a local PSP. The OEM
optimally designs the license terms and the wholesale
price to maximize the total expected proﬁt across
both channels.
1.1.5. Main Findings. First, we establish how 3D print-
ing inﬂuences a buyer’s surplus, deﬁned as the buyer’s
cost reduction by switching to the IP licensing channel.
We ﬁnd that the maximum buyer’s surplus increases
as 3D printing’s competency improves in cost, ﬂexibil-
ity, and speed. However, the rates of increase decay,
demonstrating a diminishing effect as the technology
advances. Among the three aspects, we show that the
cost competency is the most prominent. Therefore, we
expect the printing costs to be a key determinant for
the viability of distributed 3D printing via IP licensing,
noting that they are predicted to drop signiﬁcantly
over the next decade (Section 4.1).
Second, we characterize the optimal IP license that
the OEM should offer and the implied supply chain
conﬁguration. For multiple identical buyers, the optimal
license consists of a ﬁxed fee only, and the resulting
production mode is either centralized with all buyers
remaining in the traditional channel or decentralized
with all buyers switching to IP licensing. Although the
printing’s cost competency is the main driver for pro-
duction decentralization, the impact of its ﬂexibility
competency hinges on the technology’s overall compe-
tency: printing’s ﬂexibility is valuable only when its
cost and speed competencies are at a sufﬁcient level.
Therefore, caution is needed when executing the con-
ventional wisdom that 3D printing should be adopted
for infrequent demand (Section 4.3.1). For multiple non-
identical buyers who differ in installed base size (i.e.,
the number of spare parts demand-generating systems
they own), we demonstrate that the results for identical
buyers all carry over when the OEM offers customized
licenses (Section 4.3.2). When a standard license is
offered, we show that the optimal license can take sev-
eral forms, resulting in different supply chain conﬁgu-
rations: centralized, decentralized, and hybrid with
some buyers opting for IP licensing, whereas the others
do not. The optimal license that results in a decentral-
ized conﬁguration can be ﬁxed fee only, royalty fee
only, or mixed (Section 4.3.3).
Third, we assess the efﬁcacy of the IP license form
considered here in extracting buyers’ surplus, deﬁned
as the percentage of the maximum total surplus that
can be extracted via a license of this form (Section 4.2).
Zhang et al.: Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2022, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2685–2702, © 2022 INFORMS
2687
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.93.6] on 31 October 2022, at 04:42 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

Through numerical experiments (Section 5) with real-
istic parameter settings, we observe the efﬁcacy of the
optimal IP license to be consistently high in convert-
ing buyers’ surplus into OEM’s proﬁt (on average
85% over all cases), demonstrating that this simple
license form offers sufﬁcient ﬂexibility for the OEM.
Moreover, the numerical results indicate favorable
conditions for production decentralization through IP
licensing: 47% of all cases result in full decentraliza-
tion, and a further 14% show partial decentralization.
Overall, this leads to a 162% increase in proﬁt and
39% reduction in total supply chain inventory compared
with the centralized conﬁguration without IP licensing.
All these results support the potential of the evolution of
large-scale supply chains with long lead times into
decentralized, fast-response 3D printing networks.
Last, we discuss in Section 6 how our model can be
applied to a different context than the one we focus
on in the paper and provide various extensions of the
main model.
2. Literature Review
In
technology
licensing,
two
standard
payment
schemes for extracting value from IP are ﬁxed: licens-
ing fees and royalty fees, which differ in being volume
independent or not. Early work on IP licensing shows
that ﬁxed fee licensing outperforms royalty fee licens-
ing when there is information symmetry between the
licensor and licensee (Katz and Shapiro 1986, Kamien
et al. 1992). This is because output-based royalty fees
have a value-destroying effect; they persistently nega-
tively inﬂuence operational decisions taken by the
licensee. Despite this effect, royalty payments are
prevalent in practice (Lee et al. 2020), which can be
explained by different types of information asymme-
try (Sen 2005, Wang et al. 2018) and whether the licen-
sor is an industry incumbent (Wang 1998, Sen and
Tauman 2018), among others.
Some authors consider auctioning off a certain
number of licenses as a means of controlling for possi-
ble imitation of the IP (Gallini and Wright 1990) or
competition (Kamien and Tauman 2002). This feature,
however, is not suitable in our spare parts setting,
where the buyer continues to depend on the OEM for
complex nonprintable spare parts and services, and
imitation may severely harm this relationship. Fur-
thermore, licensing does not lead to any competitive
advantage between buyers, as the traditional and
printed components are assumed to be identical in
quality. Equity-based payments (i.e., company shares)
are another potential mechanism for value extraction
(Jensen and Thursby 2001, Savva and Taneri 2015),
which are useful for negating information asymmetry
when technology is licensed to a start-up ﬁrm, but not
so in our setting where the OEM and the buyers are
typically well established. Milestone payments, which
are often encountered in product research and devel-
opment (R&D)-related licensing models (Crama et al.
2008, 2017; Savva and Scholtes 2014; Bhattacharya et al.
2015), are also not suitable in our setting, as the IP
concerns a component that is dedicated to a machine
developed by the OEM.
The aforementioned literature typically attempts to
establish an equilibrium contract for a Cournot compe-
tition in the case of multiple competing ﬁrms. We dis-
regard this type of competition, as we are interested in
the effect of IP licensing on the supply chain conﬁgura-
tion, which is not an element of direct competition
between the ﬁrms. We also do not consider demand
elasticity as a function of the IP royalty costs, as Wang
et al. (2018) do, because spare parts demand is mainly
governed by the number of failures that occur over
time. Our model includes several features speciﬁc to
spare parts inventory control models in the form of
order lead times, ﬁxed setup costs, and inventory hold-
ing costs, which are new to IP licensing problems. Fur-
thermore, we are unaware of any IP licensing literature
that considers multiple nonidentical buyers. This ele-
ment of our model leads to optimality of a license with
positive unit royalties in a symmetric information set-
ting. We thus add a new aspect to IP licensing literature
that explains the prevalence of these types of payment
schemes in practice.
The type of production decentralization in our
model is new to the decentralized supply chain litera-
ture (see Cachon 2003 and Cachon and K¨ok 2010 for
an overview). We can roughly divide this literature by
the direction an OEM takes to disintegrate its opera-
tions. One direction is downstream disintegration,
that is, separating the inventory-holding and selling
activities from the OEM, by which the OEM transfers
the inventory risk to the retailer while the material
ﬂow still originates from the OEM. The other direction
is upstream disintegration, separating the production
activity from the OEM to a contracted manufacturer,
so that the OEM can focus on product design and
sales, although the material ﬂow still goes through the
OEM to the end users. By contrast, in our IP licensing
channel, although the PSPs produce (print) the prod-
uct, which is similar to the upstream disintegration,
the OEMs do not contract with the PSPs, and the
physical ﬂow only starts from the PSPs and goes
directly to the end users.
Under the conventional supply chain decentraliza-
tion where the retailer holds inventory and sells to the
end users, the existence of the wholesale price
between the OEM and the retailer induces double
marginalization, resulting in a supply chain subopti-
mal inventory level at the retailer. It has been shown
in this literature that in general a two-part tariff would
eliminate this inefﬁciency by setting the wholesale price
Zhang et al.: Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing
2688
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2022, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2685–2702, © 2022 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.93.6] on 31 October 2022, at 04:42 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

equal to the unit production cost and setting the ﬁxed
fee high enough to extract all the surplus of the retailer
(Cachon and K¨ok 2010 and Krishnan and Winter 2012
and references therein). Our result for the case of identi-
cal buyers bears similar intuition. However, for noni-
dentical buyers, this intuition breaks down, and the
optimal IP licensing terms can take several different
forms. Our analyses also reveal several new insights on
production decentralization and supply chain digitiza-
tion enabled by 3D printing and IP licensing that have
not been discussed in this literature.
Recent years have seen an increase in literature at
the interface of 3D printing and operations manage-
ment, for example, in manufacturing (Dong et al.
2021), consumer retail (Hedenstierna et al. 2019, Chen
et al. 2021, Sethuraman et al. 2021), and spare parts
inventory management (Heinen and Hoberg 2019,
Song and Zhang 2020, Westerweel et al. 2021). The
only work that includes any IP licensing related ele-
ments is that by Sethuraman et al. (2021), who investi-
gate a personal fabrication (PF) strategy by which a
ﬁrm sells a product design directly to individual con-
sumers, who may subsequently alter the design and
print the product according to their personal preferen-
ces. The ﬁrm thus technically transfers the IP to the
customer, but the transaction is only valid for the pro-
duction of a single item. Unlike our study, these
authors do not consider a full IP license nor inventory
control.
3. Main Model
We consider a single type of part required for the
maintenance of equipment sold to n buyers, for which
the OEM does not have an incentive to carry out regu-
lar production or hold inventory (in Section 6.1, we
examine the case of a general part for which the OEM
holds inventory). In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the
traditional channel, and then the IP licensing channel.
For channel speciﬁc notation, we use subscript T to
indicate the traditional channel and A to indicate the
IP licensing channel using AM technology. A depic-
tion of the model is provided in Figure 1.
3.1. Traditional Channel
The traditional channel has been well established by the
OEM, who owns traditional manufacturing capability
with molds and tools developed already to produce the
part. The production occurs at a central location (e.g., the
OEM’s factory) and takes place only when an order from
a buyer is received. The manufacturer produces the part
at per unit variable cost c. As part of the after-sales serv-
ice, the OEM offers a spare part service contract to the
buyers with a ﬁxed ordering cost kT and per unit whole-
sale price w, which is exogenously determined by the
market-driven price or a certain cap implied from with-
holding buyers from considering outside options/
piracy. kT is set to cover the setup cost of production and
shipping fees, and the OEM does not proﬁt from it.
Figure 1. Model Description
Zhang et al.: Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2022, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2685–2702, © 2022 INFORMS
2689
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.93.6] on 31 October 2022, at 04:42 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

Remark 1. In Online Appendix E, we show that all our
results extend to the case when w is endogenous and
bounded by an exogenous cap.
By accepting the contract, the buyers place orders from
the OEM to replenish their spare parts inventory. We
assume that each order takes a deterministic lead time ℓT
that includes both production and transportation lead
times. However, most of our results can be generalized to
exogenous and sequential stochastic lead times.
For buyer i (i ∈N : {1,2,:::,n}), spare part replace-
ment demands arrive according to a Poisson process
with annual rate λi, which is satisﬁed from the buyer’s
on-hand inventory. Any unsatisﬁed demand is back-
logged, and there is a prespeciﬁed service level (ﬁll
rate) β that is the same across buyers. The buyers incur
inventory holding costs at an annual rate of h per unit
value of part inventory.
Each buyer follows a continuous review (R, Q) policy,
which is optimal among all policies in our model setting
(Zipkin 2000). Let Di denote buyer i’s lead time demand.
To facilitate the analysis, we approximate buyer i’s lead
time demand to be normally distributed with mean λiℓT
and standard deviation

λiℓT
√
, which is a common
approach to enable tractability in spare parts inventory
control literature (Kim et al. 2007, Driessen et al. 2017).
This allows us to adopt a closed form heuristic for buyer
i’s optimal reorder point, which is given by the newsven-
dor solution for buyer i’s lead time demand:
RT,i : λiℓT + z

λiℓT

,
(1)
where z  Φ(β), with Φ being the standard-normal
cumulative distribution function. With RT,i, the achieved
ﬁll rate is higher than β. With this approximation, it can
be shown (see Online Appendix B) that it is optimal for
buyer i to place each order according to the economic
order quantity (EOQ):
QT,i :

2kTλi
hw

:
(2)
This leads to a closed form approximation of buyer i’s
optimal expected annual total cost in the traditional
channel:
CT,i : hw λiℓT + z

λiℓT



+

2hwλikT

+ wλi:
(3)
The cost terms in (3) represent the annual pipeline
and local inventory holding cost, annual ﬁxed order-
ing cost, and annual procurement cost, respectively.
Thus, the OEM’s expected annual proﬁt from buyer
i in the traditional channel is given by
ΠT,i : (w −c)λi:
3.2. IP Licensing Channel
In addition to the traditional channel, the OEM can
introduce a new IP licensing channel by offering a
license to the buyers, who then 3D print spare parts
locally. With the original design ﬁle, the printed parts
are assumed to be identical in quality to those manufac-
tured by the OEM. The license is speciﬁed by a ﬁxed
annual licensing fee f (other time units would also
work) and a per unit royalty fee r for each printed part.
With the IP license, a buyer is able to 3D print spare
parts locally from a third-party PSP at a unit printing
price p, which is market driven and thus exogenous.
We assume the printing price to be equal across buyers
noting that most printing costs consist of machine hours
and raw material costs, which are standard across
regions (Atzeni et al. 2010). For each printing order, a
ﬁxed ordering cost kA needs to be paid to cover order
processing and shipping. Because of the proximity of
the local PSPs to the buyers, we assume kA < kT. With
such setup, it is again optimal for the buyers to adopt
an (R, Q) policy to replenish their spare parts inventory
with prespeciﬁed service level β. We assume the order
lead time from the local PSPs to be a quoted constant ℓA
with ℓA < ℓT, that is, the printing lead time is shorter
than the order lead time in the traditional channel.
A constant quoted lead time is simple and easy to
communicate and is also often used as a competitive
strategy for make-to-order manufacturers (So and
Song 1998). This assumption is reasonable in our con-
text because most PSPs use multiple printers and
serve many customers, so the order from a particular
buyer (typically small in size because of the low ﬁxed
cost) do not contribute to the PSP’s workload signiﬁ-
cantly. Hence, the lead time for a particular order can
be considered exogenous. It is also consistent with
common practice and is conﬁrmed through our com-
munications with practitioners. For example, the lead
time quotes for 1, 10, and 100 parts from various sup-
pliers on the Marketplace of 3DEXPERIENCE (3DEX-
PERIENCE 2020) are identical.
Remark 2. Our results can be extended to exogenous and
sequential stochastic lead times straightforwardly, and we
discuss the case of quantity dependent printing lead time in
Section 6.2.
We again assume the lead time demand to be nor-
mally distributed and adopt the newsvendor heuristic
for reorder point RA,i ≡λiℓA + z 
λiℓA
√
. Then buyer i’s
expected annual cost under an IP license with reorder
point
RA,i
is given
by CA,i(Q) ≡f + h(r + p)

λiℓA +
z

λiℓA
√

+ λi
Q kA + h(r + p) Q
2 + (r + p)λi: With similar anal-
ysis as in Section 3.1, buyer i’s optimal order quantity is
QA,i :

2kAλi
h(r + p)

:
(4)
Remark 3. Note that RA,i increases in ℓA, and QA,i
increases in kA. Hence, the buyer’s reorder point will
Zhang et al.: Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing
2690
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2022, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2685–2702, © 2022 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.93.6] on 31 October 2022, at 04:42 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

decrease as 3D printing becomes more efﬁcient with
reduced lead time, and the buyer’s order size will decrease
as the ﬁxed ordering cost shrinks. As a result, if both ℓA
and kA continue to decrease, the buyer’s inventory policy
will eventually converge to one-for-one replenishment with
the reorder point being zero.
When ordering QA,i, buyer i’s expected annual costs
under the license ( f, r) is
CA,i( f,r) : CA,i(QA,i)  f + h(r + p) λiℓA + z

λiℓA



+

2h(r + p)λikA

+ (r + p)λi:
(5)
Thus, the OEM’s expected annual proﬁt from buyer i
in the IP licensing channel is
ΠA,i( f, r) : f + rλi:
(6)
3.3. Buyers’ Channel Selection
We refer to the difference between buyer i’s expected
annual costs in the traditional channel versus IP
licensing channel as buyer i’s surplus, denoted as
Si( f, r) : CT,i −CA,i( f, r):
(7)
Assume that buyers are rational, and buyer i will opt
for IP licensing only if not worse off, that is, Si( f,r) ≥0,
and otherwise stay in the traditional channel. Therefore,
for a given wholesale price w and license (f, r), the
buyers’ channel selection is given by N A( f,r) :
{i ∈N | Si( f,r) ≥0}, which is the set of buyers who opt
for IP licensing, and N T( f,r) : N \ N A( f,r), which is
the set of buyers who choose to remain in the tradi-
tional channel.
3.4. Optimization of IP License Terms
The OEM’s expected annual total proﬁt across both
channels is given by
Π( f, r) ≡

i∈N T( f, r)
ΠT,i +

i∈N A( f, r)
ΠA,i( f, r),
(8)
and the OEM’s objective is to identify the optimal IP
license that maximizes his annual total proﬁt:
Max
f, r
Π( f, r):
(9)
Let ( fA, rA) denote the optimal solution to (9). If
N T( fA,rA)  N , it is optimal for the OEM to not offer IP
licensing; if N T( fA,rA)  ∅, it is optimal for the OEM to
abandon the traditional channel and embrace IP licens-
ing; otherwise, it is optimal to operate both channels.
4. Analysis
Our main goal is to ﬁnd the optimal IP license. To that
end, we ﬁrst characterize the buyers’ channel selection
in Section 4.1 and deﬁne the efﬁcacy of an IP license in
Section 4.2. We then study multiple identical buyers
in Section 4.3.1 and multiple nonidentical buyers in
Section 4.3.2.
4.1. Buyer i’s Surplus
To analyze buyer i’s channel selection, we examine
her surplus Si and show the following properties.
Lemma 1. Buyer i’s surplus Si( f,r) is (i) nonnegative if
w ≥r + p; (ii) linearly decreasing in f; (iii) strictly decreas-
ing and strictly convex in both r and p, with equal sensitiv-
ity to both parameters; (iv) decreasing more rapidly in r for
larger buyers, that is, (∂2=∂λi∂r)Si( f,r) < 0; (v) increasing
and concave in λi if w ≥r + p; (vi) increasing and concave
in w; (vii) increasing concave in ℓT and kT; and (viii)
decreasing convex in ℓA and kA.
4.1.1. Buyer i’s Maximum Surplus. For buyer i, deﬁne
¯Si : Si(0, 0),
(10)
where Si(0,0) is the surplus under free IP licensing. By
Lemma 1, for any license (f, r), there is Si( f,r) ≤¯Si,
thus ¯Si is buyer i’s maximum surplus. When ¯Si < 0,
buyer i always stays in the traditional channel as 3D
printing the parts is too expensive even with free IP
licensing. When ¯Si ≥0, buyer i opts for IP licensing
when it is free, but this would not be attractive for the
OEM. However, it is possible for the OEM to exploit
some of the buyer’s surplus by charging f and r such
that the buyer is retained in the IP licensing channel,
that is, Si( f,r) ≥0.
4.1.2. Maximum Royalty Fee and Fixed Fee. We now
specify the maximum royalty fee ¯ri( f) that buyer i is
willing to pay given a certain ﬁxed fee f, and the maxi-
mum ﬁxed fee ¯f i(r) that she is willing to pay given a
certain royalty fee r.
Corollary 1. The following holds for any buyer i: (i) for any
ﬁxed licensing fee f s.t. Si( f,0) ≥0, there exists a unique unit
royalty fee ¯ri( f) s.t. Si( f, ¯ri( f))  0. (ii) For any unit royalty
fee r s.t. Si(0,r) ≥0, there exists a unique ﬁxed licensing fee
¯f i(r) s.t. Si(¯f i(r),r)  0. Speciﬁcally, ¯f i(r)  Si(0,r); (iii)
¯ri( f) decreases in f, and ¯f i(r) decreases in r.
By Corollary 1, for a given royalty fee r, the maxi-
mum ﬁxed licensing fee can be simply set as the
buyer’s surplus under zero ﬁxed fee: Si(0,r). The max-
imum royalty fee for a given f is more complex: if r
increases, the buyer’s order quantity shrinks, and thus
the surplus under a free royalty fee, Si( f,0), cannot be
fully extracted by an increased royalty fee.
4.1.3. Impact of 3D Printing’s Competency. From the
previous discussions, we note that buyer i’s maximum
surplus deﬁnes the room for the OEM to extract proﬁt
via IP licensing.
Zhang et al.: Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2022, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2685–2702, © 2022 INFORMS
2691
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.93.6] on 31 October 2022, at 04:42 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

Definition 1. We adopt the following three operational
measures of 3D printing’s competency relative to tradi-
tional manufacturing: (i) Cost Competency αp : p=w, the
ratio of per unit printing price to the traditional unit price;
(ii) Flexibility Competency αk : kA=kT, the ratio between
the printing and traditional ﬁxed ordering costs; and (iii)
Speed Competency αℓ: ℓA=ℓT, the ratio between the print-
ing and traditional order lead times.
The smaller the measures in Deﬁnition 1 are, the
more competent 3D printing is compared with tradi-
tional manufacturing. The following results character-
ize the dependence of buyer i’s maximum surplus on
the competency measures and provide the sufﬁcient
and necessary condition for a buyer with infrequent
demand to favor IP licensing.
Proposition 1. Under free IP licensing, (i) buyer i’s sur-
plus ¯Si is decreasing convex in αp, αk, and αℓ; (ii) αp is
substitutable to both αk and αℓin determining buyer i’s sur-
plus, whereas this does not hold for αk and αℓ. Speciﬁcally,
(∂2=∂αk∂αp)¯Si < 0, (∂2=∂αℓ∂αp)¯Si < 0, (∂2=∂αℓ∂αk)¯Si  0.
(iii) limλ→0 ¯Si > 0 if and only if z

hwℓT
√
(1 −αp

αℓ
√
)+

2kT
√
(1 −

αpαk
√
) > 0.
From Proposition 1(i), the maximum buyer surplus
increases as 3D printing technology becomes more com-
petent compared with traditional technology along any
of the operational measures deﬁned previously. How-
ever, the rates of increase decay, demonstrating a
diminishing effect as the technology advances.
By Proposition 1(ii), the three measures are not sym-
metric in their impacts. Speciﬁcally, αp is the only one that
is substitutable to both the other two measures, which
implies that a reduction of unit printing price leads to the
most prominent improvement on buyer’s surplus com-
pared with the reduction of ﬁxed ordering cost or printing
lead time. We therefore expect that the unit printing costs
will mostly determine the viability of IP licensing and dis-
tributed 3D printing, especially given that they are pre-
dicted to drop signiﬁcantly over the next decade. This
insight is also conﬁrmed in our numerical study, where
the unit printing price exhibits a predominant impact in
driving production decentralization (see Section 5.2).
Proposition 1(iii) indicates that a buyer does not nec-
essarily favor 3D printing even if the part is extremely
slow moving and IP licensing is free. Therefore, caution
is needed when executing the conventional wisdom
that parts with infrequent demand are ideal for 3D
printing. In particular, 3D printing’s competency in
cost, ﬂexibility, and speed should all be taken into
consideration.
4.2. Efficacy of IP Licensing in Extracting
Buyers’ Surplus
When buyers are nonidentical, their sensitivities to
different fees vary, which requires a certain ﬂexibility
on the part of IP licensing. At the same time, a surplus
extraction mechanism should not be overly complex.
The mechanism we propose, with two well-known
types of fees, is relatively simple. We therefore want
to investigate whether it is ﬂexible enough in extract-
ing buyer’s surplus. From the previous analysis for
individual buyer’s surplus, we can show the follow-
ing result.
Corollary 2. For any IP license (f, r), it holds that
ΠA,i( f,r) + Si( f,r) ≤¯Si.
By Corollary 2, the total of the OEM’s proﬁt from
buyer i in the IP licensing channel plus that buyer’s
surplus cannot be larger than that buyer’s maximum
surplus. This motivates us to deﬁne the efﬁcacy of an
IP license that measures the extent to which it helps
the OEM in reaping buyers’ surplus. When the buyers
opting for free IP licensing all have zero surplus, the
OEM would not be able to extract any proﬁt from the
IP channel. When there is at least one buyer with posi-
tive surplus, that is, {i ∈N | ¯Si > 0} ≠∅, we deﬁne the
maximum total surplus from the buyers in the IP chan-
nel as Smax : 
i∈N A(0,0) ¯Si > 0, where N A(0,0) is the set
of buyers who opt for IP licensing when it is free of
charge. We can now deﬁne the efﬁcacy of an IP license
(f, r) in extracting buyers’ surplus as
η( f,r) :
 
i∈N A( f,r) ΠA,i( f,r)
Smax
:
(11)
By Corollary 2, we have 0 ≤η( f,r)
≤
 
i∈N A( f,r)

¯Si −Si( f,r)

Smax
≤
 
i∈N A( f,r) ¯Si
Smax
≤1,
where the last inequality is because N A( f,r) ⊆N A
(0,0). Therefore, the efﬁcacy deﬁned in (11) is boun-
ded by the interval [0,1]. Zero efﬁcacy can be trivially
achieved by any expensive f or r. As we show in
Section 4.3.1, 100% efﬁcacy is also possible.
4.3. Optimal IP License and Supply Chain
Configurations
We now analyze the optimal IP license and the result-
ing supply chain conﬁgurations. The optimal license
can take three possible forms: F, ﬁxed licensing fee
only ( f ∗,0); R, royalty fee only (0,r∗); M, mixed with
both ﬁxed licensing and royalty fees ( f ∗,r∗). There are
also three possible supply chain conﬁgurations: Cen-
tralized, all buyers remain in the traditional channel;
Decentralized, all buyers opt for IP licensing; Hybrid, a
portion of buyers opt for IP licensing, whereas the rest
remain in the traditional channel.
4.3.1. Identical Buyers. In this section, we consider
the special case of identical buyers, that is, λi ≡λ for
all i ∈N . We also simplify the other notations by
Zhang et al.: Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing
2692
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2022, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2685–2702, © 2022 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.93.6] on 31 October 2022, at 04:42 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

removing subscript i. We ﬁnd that, for identical buyers,
a ﬁxed fee is more effective for surplus extraction than
a royalty fee. Formally, we have the following.
Corollary 3. For identical buyers with positive surplus
under free IP licensing, that is, ¯S > 0, we have the follow-
ing: (i) η( f,r) increases in r for 0 ≤r ≤¯r( f); (ii) η( f,r)
increases in f for 0 ≤f ≤¯f (r)  S(0,r); (iii) maxrη( f,r)
strictly increases in f for 0 ≤f ≤¯f (0) with η(¯f (0),0)  1;
and (iv) maxfη( f,r) strictly decreases in r for 0 ≤r ≤¯r(0)
with η(0, ¯r(0)) < 1.
Corollary 3, (i) and (ii), states that, for identical
buyers, the IP license should always be such that each
buyers’ surplus is driven to zero to maximize its efﬁ-
cacy in surplus extraction. Corollary 3, (iii) and (iv),
implies that a license with royalty fee only is strictly
inferior to that with a ﬁxed fee only. Moreover, the
higher the royalty fee, the lower the efﬁcacy that an IP
license can achieve with the optimal choice of ﬁxed
fee. On the contrary, the higher the ﬁxed fee, the
higher the efﬁcacy that can be achieved with the opti-
mal choice of royalty fee. This distinction between
royalty fee and ﬁxed fee in their impacts on the efﬁ-
cacy in extracting buyers’ surplus is because of the
value-destroying effect inherent to an output-based
royalty fee, which persistently inﬂuences buyers’ deci-
sions (Kamien and Tauman 1986). With a royalty fee
only, the per unit value of inventory is p + r for the
buyers, whereas with a ﬁxed fee only, the per unit
value of inventory is merely p. Thus, the existence of a
royalty fee results in smaller and more frequent orders
from the buyers, which translates into higher costs for
the buyers and lower proﬁt extracted from them.
In the next proposition, we obtain a full character-
ization of the optimal IP license.
Proposition 2. For identical buyers, we have the follow-
ing: (i) If ¯S ≥(w −c)λ, the optimal IP license is ﬁxed fee
only with ( f ∗,r∗)  (¯S,0), resulting in a decentralized con-
ﬁguration, and the OEM extracts all buyers’ maximum
surplus, with Π( f ∗,r∗)  n¯S
and η( f ∗,r∗)  1; (ii) if
¯S < (w −c)λ, the optimal IP license is (∞,∞) or any other
license such that S( f ∗,r∗) < 0, resulting in a centralized
conﬁguration, and Π( f ∗,r∗)  (w −c)nλ; and (iii) Π( f ∗,r∗)
increases in w.
By Proposition 2, the OEM’s optimal proﬁt from n
identical buyers is n max{(w −c)λ, ¯S}, and the optimal
supply chain conﬁguration is either centralized or
decentralized, with the key determinant being the
comparison between ¯S and (w −c)λ. Moreover, if the
production is decentralized under the optimal license,
the properties of buyers’ maximum surplus stated in
Lemma 1 all pass onto the OEM’s proﬁt because of the
full surplus extraction by the optimal license. In par-
ticular, by Lemma 1(viii), f ∗will be decreasing convex
in ℓA and kA; that is, the optimal ﬁxed licensing fee
will increase concavely as 3D printing’s lead time and
ﬁxed cost reduce.
4.3.1.1. Drivers of Production Decentralization. The
decentralization condition ¯S ≥(w −c)λ can be shown
to be equivalent to
(1 −αpαℓ)hwℓT + (1 −αp

αℓ
√
)hwz

ℓT
λ

+ (1 −

αpαk
√
)

2hwkT
λ

≥αpw −c,
(12)
which further implies the following results.
Corollary 4. For identical buyers, (i) there exists a thresh-
old printing price ˜p and a threshold wholesale price ˜w such
that the production is decentralized under the optimal
license for any p ≤˜p or w ≥˜w; and (ii) if αp

αℓ
√
≤1 and
αpαk ≤1, there exists a threshold demand rate ˜λ such that
the production is decentralized under the optimal license for
any λ ≤˜λ.
From (12) and Corollary 4, we make the following
observations on how system parameters drive pro-
duction decentralization.
First, an improvement of 3D printing’s cost compe-
tency will facilitate the transition of buyers to the new
channel. This can be seen by noting that as αp approaches
zero, (12) holds naturally. Therefore, a reduction of 3D
printing price p can shift the production toward decen-
tralization, especially for parts that have relatively high
w. The previous observation for αp does not necessarily
carry over to αℓor αk, although a reduction in ℓA or kA
does help increase the attractiveness of the IP licensing
channel. If both ℓA and kA continue to decrease,
(RA,i,QA,i) will eventually converge to a one-for-one
replenishment with little inventory. However, by (12)
and Corollary 4, the impact of 3D printing’s speed and
ﬂexibility competency on driving production decentral-
ization is smaller compared with that of cost competency.
This insight is driven from the well-known square-root
growth rate of inventory costs that relates to speed and
ﬂexibility competency, as opposed to the linear growth
rate of revenues that relates to cost competency.
Second, although conventional wisdom tells us that
3D printing is particularly suitable for slow moving
parts, this is so only when the 3D printing technology
is competent along several dimensions. That is, small
λ does not necessarily drive production decentraliza-
tion. From Section 5.1, a reasonable set of ranges for
3D printing’s competency in speed and ﬂexibility can
be αℓ,αk ∈[0:05,0:2]. By Corollary 4(ii), only when 3D
printing’s cost competency αp ≤2:23, the ﬂexibility of
3D printing in small batch production will be appreci-
ated. Last, the impact of c is trivial and intuitive: as c
only appears in the right-hand side of (12), an increase
in c makes the IP licensing channel more attractive.
Zhang et al.: Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2022, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2685–2702, © 2022 INFORMS
2693
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.93.6] on 31 October 2022, at 04:42 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

4.3.2. Multiple Nonidentical Buyers Under Separating
Strategy. When buyers are nonidentical with different
installed base size (i.e., the number of spare parts
demand-generating systems they have in the ﬁeld),
there are two strategies for the OEM to implement IP
licensing: the separating strategy, that is, to offer a sepa-
rate license to each buyer; and the pooling strategy, that
is, to offer an identical license to all buyers (Wang et al.
2018). If the OEM adopts the separating strategy and
can
discriminate
buyers
by
offering
customized
licenses to nonidentical buyers, all the results for iden-
tical buyers in Section 4.3.1 carry over to multiple noni-
dentical buyers. This is because the licensing problem
for the OEM can be decoupled into n subproblems in
this case, each involving a single buyer, and therefore
he will be able to extract all buyers’ surplus via the cus-
tomized optimal licenses. In reality, however, offering
a standard license across buyers is more often observed
(Kamien and Tauman 2002). Therefore, in Section 4.3.3,
we assume that the OEM adopts a pooling strategy
and offers an identical license to all buyers.
4.3.3. Multiple Nonidentical Buyers Under Pooling
Strategy. We ﬁrst consider the setting of two nonident-
ical buyers with different demand rates. Without loss
of generality, we assume λ1 < λ2. If one of the two
buyers does not have a positive surplus under free IP
licensing, then the problem of identifying the optimal
license reduces to a single buyer problem, for which all
previous results for identical buyers carry over. There-
fore, we consider the case when ¯Si > 0, for i  1, 2. The
following lemma characterizes a special royalty fee
that makes the two buyers’ surpluses identical.
Lemma 2. For n  2 with λ1 < λ2, there exists a unique
nonnegative solution ˆr to S1(0, ˆr)  S2(0, ˆr) if and only if
¯S1 ≤¯S2. Furthermore, Si(0, ˆr) ≥0,i  1,2 if and only if
¯r2(0) ≤¯r1(0).
By Lemma 2, when ˆr exists, we can deﬁne ˆf :
Si(0, ˆr). Then the license (ˆf , ˆr) leaves both buyers zero
surplus. However, it is not a valid license when
¯r1(0) < ¯r2(0), as by Lemma 2, ˆf < 0 in this case. More-
over, even if ˆf ≥0, the license (ˆf , ˆr) is not necessarily
optimal noting the presence of a positive value-
destroying royalty fee ˆr.
Remark 4. When w ≥p, by Lemma 1(v), we have ¯S1 ≤¯S2.
Therefore, by Lemma 2, the scenario that ˆr does not exist
may occur only when w < p; that is, the unit printing price
is higher than the wholesale price in the traditional channel.
In the following proposition, we provide a complete
characterization of the various forms that the optimal
license may have and the resulting proﬁt for the
OEM. Figure 2 provides a visualization of these
results.
Proposition 3. For n  2 with λ1 < λ2, the optimal IP
license and the resulting OEM’s proﬁt and buyers’ channel
selections are summarized in Table 1, where T and A refer
to the traditional channel and the IP licensing channel,
respectively, and the license (∞,∞) can be replaced by any
other license ( f ∗,r∗) such that Si( f ∗,r∗) < 0 for i  1, 2.
Moreover, Π( f ∗,r∗) increases in w.
We now examine the license forms identiﬁed in
Proposition 3 and the resulting supply chain conﬁgu-
rations. With two buyers, the hybrid conﬁguration
occurs with either Buyer 1 or Buyer 2 opting for IP
licensing while the other one remains in the tradi-
tional channel. Although Corollary 4(ii) shows that a
smaller demand rate encourages switching to the IP
licensing channel for identical buyers, in the nonident-
ical buyers case, the small buyer (Buyer 1) may stay in
the traditional channel because of the ﬁxed IP license
fee charged by the OEM in order to fully reap the
higher surplus from the large buyer (Buyer 2). We
note that Buyer 2 may stay in the traditional channel
for two reasons: either because Buyer 2 has negative
maximum surplus because of high printing costs
(Case III(ii)) or because both buyers have positive
maximum surplus, but Buyer 2 brings the OEM a
larger proﬁt by staying in the traditional channel
(Case I(iv)). In the latter case, although the manufac-
turer could have earned more from Buyer 1 by
Figure 2. Illustration of Proposition 3
Zhang et al.: Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing
2694
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2022, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2685–2702, © 2022 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.93.6] on 31 October 2022, at 04:42 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

charging a ﬁxed fee only, he has to deviate to the
license with both ﬁxed fee and royalty fee to deter
Buyer 2 from opting for IP licensing.
With nonidentical buyers, a positive royalty fee
could thus appear in the optimal license (Case I, (iii)
and (iv), and Case II(iii)). This is another salient differ-
ence from results for identical buyers in Section 4.3.1,
where we have established that a ﬁxed fee is more
effective for the OEM in extracting the buyers’ surplus.
The rationale behind this is that, when buyers are of
different sizes, their surpluses differ too. As a result, it
is no longer possible to leverage a common ﬁxed fee to
extract them. On the contrary, a royalty fee can extract
surplus in proportion to the buyers’ sizes, and it can
also be used to retain the large buyer in the traditional
channel when needed, both of which compensate for
its disadvantage in reducing buyers’ order quantities.
Finally, we can generalize the results for two noni-
dentical buyers to multiple buyers with two levels of
demand size. Without loss of generality, assume that
λ1  :::  λns < λns+1  :::  λn,
and
let
nl : n −ns.
Then there are ns small buyers with demand size λ1,
and nl large buyers with demand size λn. Lemma 2
continues to hold by replacing λ2 with λn. It can be
shown that all the potential optimal licenses identiﬁed
in Proposition 3 carry over here, although with multi-
ple buyers, the number of buyers for each demand
size plays a role in determining the form of the opti-
mal license. The detailed results are omitted for brev-
ity but are available upon request.
5. Numerical Study
Although we have fully characterized the potential
forms of the optimal IP license ( f ∗,r∗), the complex
expressions make it unclear how the resulting form is
inﬂuenced by system parameters. This also deters us
from quantifying the impact of launching an IP licensing
channel on the OEM’s and the supply chain’s perform-
ance. Therefore, in this section, we conduct a full factorial
numerical experiment that complements our analytical
results, with the goal of obtaining a comprehensive
understanding of the aforementioned issues.
We conduct a numerical experiment with two
buyers (we also consider four buyers in Online
Appendix A). In our experiment, we solve for ( f ∗,r∗)
and use the supply chain with the traditional channel
only as the benchmark. We observe which one of the
three supply chain conﬁgurations occur under the
optimal license. For the Decentralized and Hybrid
conﬁgurations, we further observe the form of the
optimal license. We calculate the percentage of occur-
rence for each combination of the aforementioned
supply chain conﬁguration and license form.
To quantify the impact of launching an IP licensing
channel, we examine how the OEM’s proﬁtability as
well as the entire supply chain’s inventory change if
the OEM would implement the optimal license. In
particular, we calculate the relative increase of the
OEM’s proﬁt compared with the benchmark π 
(Π( f ∗,r∗)=Π(∞,∞)) −1, and the supply chain’s rela-
tive inventory reduction (including pipeline stock,
safety stock, and cycle stock) compared with the
benchmark:
ν : 1
−
 
i∈N T λiℓT + z 
λiℓT
√
+ QT,i=2


+ 
i∈N A λiℓA + z 
λiℓA
√
+ QA,i=2


 
i∈N λiℓT + z 
λiℓT
√
+ QT,i


=2)
:
To quantify the effectiveness of the IP license considered
here, we calculate the efﬁcacy of ( f ∗,r∗) in extracting
buyers’ surplus, η, as deﬁned in (11). In the following,
we ﬁrst explain our numerical design in Section 5.1 and
then discuss the results and insights in Section 5.2.
5.1. Numerical Design
A summary of the parameters varied in our full facto-
rial experiment is presented in Table 2. There are a
total of 3,888 instances.
Table 1. Summary of Results for Proposition 3
Case
(f ∗,r∗)
Π(f ∗,r∗)
Channel selection
Buyer 1
Buyer 2
I.
i
(¯S2,0)
(w −c)λ1 + ¯S2
T
A
ii
(¯S1,0)
2¯S1
A
A
¯S1 ≤¯S2 & ¯r2(0) ≤¯r1(0)
iii
(S1(0, ˆr), ˆr)
2S1(0, ˆr) + ˆr(λ1 + λ2)
A
A
iv
limϵ↓0(S1(0, ˆr + ϵ), ˆr + ϵ)
(w −c)λ2 + S1(0, ˆr) + ˆrλ1
A
T
v
(∞,∞)
(w −c)(λ1 + λ2)
T
T
II.
i
(¯S2,0)
(w −c)λ1 + ¯S2
T
A
ii
(¯S1,0)
2¯S1
A
A
¯S1 ≤¯S2 & ¯r2(0) > ¯r1(0)
iii
(0, ¯r1(0))
¯r1(0)(λ1 + λ2)
A
A
iv
(∞,∞)
(w −c)(λ1 + λ2)
T
T
III.
i
(¯S2,0)
2¯S2
A
A
ii
(¯S1,0)
(w −c)λ2 + ¯S1
A
T
¯S1 > ¯S2
iii
(∞,∞)
(w −c)(λ1 + λ2)
T
T
Zhang et al.: Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2022, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2685–2702, © 2022 INFORMS
2695
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.93.6] on 31 October 2022, at 04:42 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

We consider three variations for the aggregate annual
demand rate λ1 + λ2, 6, 12, and 24, representing low,
median, and high aggregate demand rates, respectively.
Three values are considered for the ratio between two
buyers’ demand rates λ1=λ2, 0.25, 0.5, and 1, accounting
for both nonidentical and identical buyers. We consider
two values for the holding cost rate h, 0.15 and 0.25, as
these vary around the commonly adopted 20% in prac-
tice. For example, Heinen and Hoberg (2019) consider
20%, whereas Lamghari-Idrissi et al. (2019) consider
17%. We consider two values for the target ﬁll rate β,
95% and 99%, which is common in spare part contexts
(see for example, section 6.1 in Ivan and Yin 2017 and
Lamghari-Idrissi et al. 2019). The lead time in the tradi-
tional channel ℓT is set to 0.33 years, that is, 4 months,
which is realistic for spare parts that need to be made to
order. We scale ℓA by setting the ratio ℓA=ℓT to 0.05 and
0.1, meaning that ℓA varies between one and two weeks.
The choice of lead times is consistent with those in the
literature (see for example table 3 in Salmi et al. (2018)
and section 6.1 in Ivan and Yin (2017).
The unit production cost in the traditional channel c
is set as $125; we consider only one number for c as all
other costs can be scaled relatively. The traditional
purchasing prices for the 14 parts considered in the
case study of Westerweel et al. (2021) vary between
e1.15 and e548.61. We vary the gross margin in the
traditional channel w/c between 1.1 and 1.3, repre-
senting low to medium margin parts. The cost compe-
tency p/w is varied between one and two, which is
equivalent to the ratio p/c varying between 1.1 and
2.6. If p=c < 1, the supplier should clearly consider
using AM centrally. Moreover, Westerweel et al.
(2018) provide two case studies with the latter ratio p/c
being 1.84 and 2.22, respectively, whereas Heinen and
Hoberg (2019) consider p/c varying between 1 and 4
(AM cost premiums vary between zero and three in
their terminology). Two levels are considered for the
Table 2. Parameters for the Full Factorial Experiment (n  2)
λ1 + λ2(/year)
λ1=λ2
c($/unit)
w/c
p/w
β
6, 12, 24
0.25, 0.5, 1
125
1.1, 1.2, 1.3
1, 1.5, 2
95%, 99%
h($/unit· year)
kT($/order)
kA=kT
ℓT(year)
ℓA=ℓT
0.15, 0.25
1250, 2500
0.05, 0.1, 0.2
0.33
0.05, 0.1
Table 3. Full Factorial Experiment Results (n  2)
Instance subset
Value
Centralized
Decentralized
Performance measures
Fully
Hybrid
π
η
ν
F
M
F
M
λ1 + λ2
6
250.83%
87.85%
48.55%
23.69%
26.85%
31.94%
12.58%
4.94%
12
146.75%
84.08%
38.32%
37.96%
21.30%
24.46%
14.89%
1.39%
24
88.66%
80.43%
30.53%
53.16%
15.66%
22.22%
8.95%
0.00%
λ1=λ2
0.25
154.93%
79.49%
37.24%
31.87%
0.85%
39.81%
21.53%
5.94%
0.5
158.59%
76.75%
36.71%
42.13%
3.78%
38.81%
14.89%
0.39%
1
172.71%
100.00%
43.45%
40.82%
59.18%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
w/c
1.1
288.43%
90.41%
41.59%
33.49%
22.92%
26.93%
14.51%
2.16%
1.2
125.73%
83.77%
38.77%
39.04%
20.99%
26.23%
11.42%
2.31%
1.3
72.08%
79.36%
37.04%
42.28%
19.91%
25.46%
10.49%
1.85%
p/w
1
399.82%
94.23%
73.22%
0.00%
33.41%
66.59%
0.00%
0.00%
1.5
80.52%
77.24%
39.44%
27.70%
28.24%
12.04%
28.24%
3.78%
2
5.90%
66.12%
4.75%
87.11%
2.16%
0.00%
8.18%
2.55%
kT
1250
124.36%
83.27%
35.16%
44.70%
18.88%
24.02%
9.72%
2.67%
2500
199.80%
85.67%
43.11%
31.84%
23.66%
28.40%
14.56%
1.54%
kA=kT
0.05
206.28%
85.77%
48.27%
29.32%
24.00%
29.63%
13.81%
3.24%
0.1
165.09%
85.39%
39.72%
37.27%
22.15%
25.69%
12.96%
1.93%
0.2
114.87%
82.02%
29.40%
48.23%
17.67%
23.30%
9.65%
1.16%
β
95%
158.39%
84.01%
38.62%
39.15%
20.94%
25.93%
11.57%
2.42%
99%
165.77%
85.13%
39.65%
37.40%
21.60%
26.49%
12.71%
1.80%
ℓA=ℓT
0.05
165.03%
85.20%
40.11%
37.40%
21.35%
26.59%
12.60%
2.06%
0.1
159.13%
83.94%
38.16%
39.15%
21.19%
25.82%
11.68%
2.16%
h
0.15
123.76%
83.25%
34.66%
44.96%
18.72%
23.71%
10.13%
2.47%
0.25
200.39%
85.68%
43.61%
31.58%
23.82%
28.70%
14.15%
1.75%
All instances
162.08%
84.57%
39.13%
38.27%
21.27%
26.21%
12.14%
2.11%
Zhang et al.: Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing
2696
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2022, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2685–2702, © 2022 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.93.6] on 31 October 2022, at 04:42 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

setup cost in the traditional channel kT, $1,250 and
$2,500. There are also three variations for the ﬂexibility
competency kA=kT, 0.05, 0.1, and 0.2, accounting for
different levels of cost premium of AM compared with
traditional manufacturing.
5.2. Results and Discussions
Table 3 presents the results from the full factorial
experiment, where average values are obtained both
for instance subsets (based on individual parameter
values) and for all instances. Overall, the introduction
of IP licensing brings the OEM an average of 162%
increase in proﬁt and 39% of average inventory reduc-
tion in the supply chain. We further highlight key
observations and insights from the numerical results.
5.2.1. Supply Chain Configuration. IP licensing channel
is used heavily. In more than 61% of the instances, the
OEM would make use of the IP licensing channel; in
more than 47% of the instances, the traditional channel
would not be used at all. Only if the per unit printing
costs p are relatively high (p=w  2), the IP licensing
channel gets less relevant: It is used in about 13% of the
cases and the proﬁt of the OEM increases on average
by only 6%. In all other cases, the OEM makes high use
of the IP licensing channel. In particular, the OEM only
uses the IP licensing channel in 100% of the instances if
per unit printing costs p are relatively low (p=w  1).
Hybrid conﬁguration is not very common but exists.
The hybrid conﬁguration accounts for 14% of all
instances, and it disappears only in the subgroups
with identical buyers (consistent with Section 4.3.1),
and if p=w  1. We observe that it is most common if
the difference between the two buyers is large
(λ1=λ2  0:25) and if per unit printing costs p are rela-
tively moderate (p=w  1:5).
5.2.1. System Parameters.
5.2.1.1. Unit
Printing
Price
Has
a
Predominant
Impact. Among all parameters, the unit printing price p
(i.e., p/w) exhibits a predominant impact, which we
expected based on Proposition 1(ii) in Section 4.1. If the
unit printing price is relatively low (p=w ∈{1,1:5}), the IP
licensing channel is used a lot. In fact, in all instances
with p=w  1, that is, if 3D printing is comparable in unit
price to the traditional channel, the fully decentralized
conﬁguration is optimal and impact on the supply chain
is huge: The average proﬁt improvement is 400%, the
average efﬁcacy is 94%, and the average inventory reduc-
tion is 73%.
5.2.1.2. Gross Margin in the Traditional Channel
Has Large Impact. The ratio w/c is the parameter
with the second highest impact on the proﬁt. This is
rather intuitive as the proﬁt from the traditional chan-
nel scales almost linearly in this margin.
5.2.1.3. Huge Profit Improvement for Lower Aggre-
gate Demand. The proﬁt improvement brought by IP
licensing is high no matter the aggregate demand size,
but it is huge, 251%, if the aggregate demand size is rela-
tively low (λ1 + λ2  6). With higher aggregate demand,
the beneﬁt of a low wholesale price from the traditional
channel is ampliﬁed, resulting in relatively less surplus
to extract.
Relative size of the two buyers is not decisive. Surpris-
ingly, the proﬁt improvement for the OEM does not
depend much on the relative size of the two buyers: It
varies from 155% when λ1=λ2  0:25 to 173% when
λ1=λ2  1. This is surprising, noting that the efﬁcacy
of the optimal license to extract buyer surplus is 100%
for identical buyers (as we have shown analytically in
Section 4.3.1), whereas it is lower for nonidentical
buyers (around 78% in our numerical study). There-
fore, the ability of IP licensing in improving the
OEM’s proﬁtability is rather robust to the variation of
buyers’ composition in demand sizes.
5.2.2. Forms of the Optimal License. The average efﬁ-
cacy in extracting buyers’ surplus is 85%, and this
number is relatively stable among subgroup results.
For the speciﬁc forms of the optimal license, we fur-
ther observe the following:
M is favored in a fully decentralized conﬁguration with
imbalanced demand. This is because of the ﬂexibility of
having a royalty fee to proportionally extract buyers’
surplus when they are nonidentical.
No R. The license (0,r∗) or R never arises as optimal in
any of our 3,888 instances. According to Proposition 3, it
is a potential candidate for the optimal license in Case
(II) when ¯S1 ≤¯S2 and ¯r2(0) > ¯r1(0). Indeed, we ﬁnd the
following numerical example when R is optimal:
(λ1,λ2)  (6,12)= year,c  $125= unit,w  $125:1= unit,
p  $120= unit, β  95%, h  $0:15= year, kT  $1250=
order,kA  $83= order,ℓT  500 years,ℓA  0:033 years:
Under this setup, the optimal license is ( f ∗,r∗) 
(0, 9340) with both buyers opting for IP licensing, exactly
as indicated in Proposition 3. However, such parameters
are far from realistic. Thus, we conjecture that R is never
optimal in practical settings.
5.2.3. Four Buyers Case. To validate our numerical
insights, we extend our experiment to the four buyers
case. We ﬁnd the results to be very similar to those for
two buyers. We therefore include the numerical
design and results in Online Appendix A. We antici-
pate the results and insights to be also similar for even
more buyers. However, in practice they are likely to
be clustered in groups of similar demand volumes.
6. Extensions and Discussions
We have presented an IP licensing framework to ena-
ble an OEM to decentralize the production of spare
Zhang et al.: Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2022, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2685–2702, © 2022 INFORMS
2697
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.93.6] on 31 October 2022, at 04:42 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

parts via 3D printing. The proposed model can be a key
building block for a proﬁtable transition to a digital
supply chain of the future. Although the motivating
context in Section 1 considers business buyers who
service their own equipment and procure spare parts
from the OEM, in some cases, OEMs service their
equipment but source spare parts from original part
suppliers. Our model also applies to this latter context,
with an original part supplier taking the role of the OEM,
and OEMs taking the roles of the buyers. In the rest of this
section, we discuss several extensions of the main model
and future research directions.
6.1. General Parts with OEM Holding Inventory
Our main model focuses on analyzing the spare part
category where the OEM does not have the incentive
to hold inventory or conduct regular production.
However, the beneﬁts of 3D printing and IP licensing
are by no means limited to such contexts, and we
envision that IP licensing can also enable distributed
3D printing networks for general parts, for which the
OEM may want to retain the major portion of pro-
duction. In such case, we consider the following alter-
native model, where the OEM carries out regular
production runs and stocks inventory in the tradi-
tional channel.
Let kO and ℓO be the ﬁxed cost and lead time of a pro-
duction run for the OEM. Assume that the OEM can
expedite production at a unit cost of b to clear any short-
age in negligible amount of time (relative to the regular
lead time ℓO) when there is insufﬁcient inventory to sat-
isfy orders from the traditional channel. Under such
setup, buyers’ cost structures and channel selections in
(3), (5), and Section 3.3, and the analysis in Sections 4.1
and 4.2 continue to hold. Now kT includes only the costs
of order processing and shipping for the buyers, because
the OEM bears the ﬁxed production cost.
Assume that the OEM also follows a continuous
review (R, Q) policy. Let λN T : 
i∈N T( f,r)λi, which is
the aggregate demand rate from buyers who opt for
the traditional channel. Following the notations and
analysis in Online Appendix B, the annual inventory
holding and shortage cost for the OEM can be ob-
tained as follows: CO(R,Q) : hcλN TℓO + (λN TkO)=Q

+
hc

(Q=2) + R −λN TℓO

+ (hc + b)¯BO(R,Q), where ¯BO(R,
Q) is the OEM’s expected annual shortage covered
through expedited production. Again we adopt the
newsvendor approximation of the reorder point, RO :
 λN TℓO + z

λN TℓO

, and the EOQ for the ordering
quantity, QO :

(2kOλN T)=hc

: Under (RO, QO), the ex-
pected annual inventory holding and shortage cost for
the OEM is CO(λN T( f,r)) : CO(RO,QO)  hc(λN TℓO +
z

λN TℓO

) +

2hcλN TkO

+(hc + b)¯B(RO,QO): As a result,
the OEM’s expected annual total proﬁt across both
channels under this alternative model is
ΠO( f,r) :


i∈N T( f,r)
ΠT,i +

i∈N A( f,r)
ΠA,i( f,r)
−CO(λN T( f,r)):
(13)
Note that CO(λN T( f,r)) depends on (f, r) only through
λN T and is increasing in it. Because λN T increases in f
and r, we thus have CO(λN T( f,r)) increases in f and r.
Again, the OEM’s objective is to determine the opti-
mal IP license terms:
(f ∗
O,r∗
O) : argmax{ΠO( f,r) | f,r ≥0}:
(14)
Under this alternative model, following the notations
in Section 4.3.1, we have the following.
Proposition 4. For identical buyers, (i) if n¯S ≥n(w−
c)λ −CO(nλ), the optimal IP license is ﬁxed fee only with
(f ∗
O,r∗
O)  (¯S,0), resulting in a decentralized conﬁguration,
and the OEM extracts all buyers’ maximum surplus, with
Π(f ∗
O,r∗
O)  n¯S; (ii) if n¯S < (w −c)λ−CO(nλ), the optimal
IP license is (∞,∞) or any other license leading to a nega-
tive buyer surplus, resulting in a centralized conﬁguration,
and Π(f ∗
O,r∗
O)  (w −c)nλ−CO(nλ); and (iii) Π(f ∗
O,r∗
O)
increases in w.
By Proposition 4, the optimal IP license terms resem-
ble the structure of those in Proposition 2. With OEM’s
inventory holding in the traditional channel, there is
an extra inventory-related cost term CO(nλ) in the con-
dition to determine the optimal supply chain conﬁgu-
ration to be decentralized versus centralized, making
the IP licensing channel more preferable than before.
When expediting is not possible, the traditional channel
can be formulated following the one-warehouse, multi-
ple-retailer (r,q) model (Axs¨ater 1993). Conversely, the IP
licensing channel can be modeled as a dual-sourcing
option for the buyers. Speciﬁcally, the OEM can offer to
cover a constant portion of demand and IP license the
buyers to cover the overﬂowed portion using 3D printing
via local PSPs. This different model setting is beyond the
scope of our paper and hence left for future research,
although our model can be viewed as focusing on the
decision for the overﬂowed portion of demand as of
whether to source from the OEM or local PSPs.
6.2. Other Extensions
6.2.1. Quantity
Dependent
Printing
Lead
Time.
Although the quoted lead time assumed in the main
model is considered more reasonable in reﬂecting
common practice, we also examine an endogenous,
quantity-dependent lead time from the local PSPs in
Online Appendix C and establish analytical results for
Zhang et al.: Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing
2698
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2022, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2685–2702, © 2022 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.93.6] on 31 October 2022, at 04:42 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

both identical buyers and nonidentical buyers under
the separating strategy. We show that most insights
from the main model carry over.
6.2.2. Heterogeneous Services Levels. Our model can
also be generalized to accommodate heterogeneous
service levels across buyers by replacing β with βi and
z with zi to reﬂect a buyer-dependent service level. It
can be veriﬁed that all the results from Sections 4.1
through 4.3.2 continue to hold.
6.2.3. Annual Service Subscription Fee in the Tradi-
tional Channel. Although such a fee is not common in
practice, all the results in this paper can be general-
ized to include it, which makes the OEM’s proﬁt from
the traditional channel a two-part tariff type. The dis-
cussions on quantity dependent printing lead time
and heterogeneous service levels also carry over here.
6.2.4. Different
Demand
Rates
Across
Channels.
When 3D printing yields different quality than the tra-
ditional channel, our model can be modiﬁed by intro-
ducing a quality factor κ such that buyer i’s demand
rate becomes κλi when opting for IP licensing. Then
the model setup in Section 3 still holds. However, this
additional tradeoff will alter all analyses and can blur
the operational tradeoffs between the two channels,
which is the main focus of this paper. Therefore, we
leave this extension for future work; simpliﬁcations
on other aspects of the model will likely be needed for
tractability.
6.2.5. Future Research. The buyers’ inventory policy
in our model converges to one-for-one replenishment
with zero reorder point as the ﬁxed ordering cost and
lead time decrease. As the 3D printing technology
continues to develop, an alternative consideration is
to allow buyers to make-to-order in the IP licensing
channel. We leave this for future research.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank the department editor Hau Lee, the
anonymous associate editor and reviewers for their con-
structive comments on the paper. The authors also thank
the seminar attendees at Pennsylvania State University
Smeal College of Business Sustainability Research Semi-
nar, the University of Illinois at Chicago College of Busi-
ness Administration, the University of Chicago Booth
School of Business, Beijing Institute of Technology School
of Management and Economics, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences School of Economics and Manage-
ment, Fudan University School of Management, Xiamen
University School of Management, Cornell University
Johnson College of Business, Northeastern University,
INSEAD, Nanjing University, the University of Pennsylva-
nia Wharton School of Business, Boston College Carroll
School of Management, Georgia Institute of Technology
Scheller College of Business, Arizona State University,
W. P. Carey School of Business for their helpful discus-
sions on the subject.
Appendix. Proofs of Analytical Results
Proof of Lemma 1. To simplify notations, we remove the
subscript i for λi without causing ambiguity in this proof.
Also, let ˆp : r + p, which is the overall variable cost paid
by a buyer for each part. Part (i): By (3), (5), and (7),
S( f,r)  −f + hλ(wℓT −ˆpℓA) + zh

λ
√
(w

ℓT
√
−ˆp

ℓA
√
)
+

2λh
√
(

wkT
√
−

ˆpkA

) + λ(w −ˆp) ≥0,
(A1)
when w ≥ˆp  r + p, ℓT ≥ℓA and kT ≥kA. Part (ii): Note that
CA( f,r) increases linearly in f, whereas CT is insensitive to
f. Therefore, S(f, r) decreases linearly in f. Part (iii): The
result is obvious by taking the ﬁrst- and second-order par-
tial derivative of S(f, r) with respect to r and also noting
that r and p appears in the form of ˆp  r + p. Part (iv): The
result is straightforward by noting that
∂2
∂λ∂rS( f,r) < 0. Part
(v): When w ≥r + p, as we also have ℓT ≥ℓA and kT ≥kA,
there are
∂S( f,r)
∂λ
≥0,
∂2S( f,r)
∂λ2
≤0: Part (vi):
∂S( f,r)
∂w
 hλℓT +
zh 
λℓT
√
+

λhkT
2w

+ λ > 0, and ∂2S( f,r)
∂w2
 −w−3
2 
λhkT=8

< 0: Part
(vii) and Part (viii) are obvious by (A.1).
w
Proof of Corollary 1. The existence results are implied
immediately from Lemma 1, (ii) and (iii), and thus we
omit the proof for brevity. The expression for ¯f i(r) is
straightforward by noting the ﬁxed fee appears in a sepa-
rate linear form in the surplus function. Last, we derive
the expression for ¯ri( f): By (7) and letting Si( f,r)  0, we
have (λi(hℓA + 1) + zh 
λiℓA
√
)ˆp+

2λihkA
√
ˆp

+ f −wλi(hℓT+1)−
wzh 
λiℓT
√
−

2λihwkT
√
 0: Deﬁne H(y,x) : hyx + zh 
yx
√
+ y,
we have
H(λi,ℓA)ˆp +

2λihkA


ˆp

+ f −wHi(ℓT) −

2λihwkT

 0:
(A.2)
Therefore,
we
can
solve
for
¯ri( f) 
−
2λihkA
√
+

2λihkA+4H(λi,ℓA)[−f+wHi(ℓT)+ 
2λihwkT
√
]
1
2
2H(λi,ℓA)
⎛
⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎝
⎞
⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎠
2
−p:
w
Proof of Proposition 1. The results are straightforward by
examining the ﬁrst and cross second derivatives (with
simple algebra), and we omit the details for brevity.
w
Proof of Corollary 2. By (3), (5), and (7), we have ¯Si −
Si( f,r)  CA,i( f,r) −CA,i(0,0)  f + λir + hr(λiℓA + z 
λiℓA
√
) +

2h
√
(r + p)λikA −

2hpλikA

≥f + λir  ΠA,i( f,r):
w
Proof of Proposition 2. We ﬁrst prove that Π(¯f (r),r)
decreases in r. By the proof of Lemma 1(iii), we have
∂
∂rΠ(¯f (r),r)  n ∂
∂rS(0,r) + nλ  −hλℓA −zh 
λℓA
√
−ˆp−1
2

hλkA
2



·
n < 0: We next prove parts (i) and (ii). With identical buyers,
by (8), we have Π( f,r)  
i∈N T( f,r)ΠT,i + 
i∈N A( f,r)ΠA,i ( f,r) 
(w −c)nλ 1{S( f,r)<0} + (nf + rnλ)1{S( f,r)≥0}: By Corollary 1(ii),
Zhang et al.: Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2022, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2685–2702, © 2022 INFORMS
2699
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.93.6] on 31 October 2022, at 04:42 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

for any r such that S(0,r) ≥0, the optimal ﬁxed licensing
fee, denoted as f(r), must fall into two cases: (a) ¯f (r) or (b)
¯f (r) + δ, where ¯f (r)  S(0,r) and δ is any positive constant.
Case (a) corresponds to the scenario when all buyers
opt
for
IP
licensing,
that
is,
Π(¯f (r),r)  n¯f (r) + rnλ 
nS(0,r) + rnλ, whereas case (b) corresponds to the scenario
when all buyers choose to remain in the traditional channel,
that is, Π(¯f (r) + δ,r)  (w −c)nλ. By part (i), we must have
Π(¯f (r),r) ≤Π(¯f (0),0)  n¯S, where the latter is also all buyers’
surplus under free IP licensing. As a result, the optimal IP
license is determined by a comparison between n¯S and
(w −c)nλ, both increase in w by Lemma 1(vi). Speciﬁcally, if
n¯S ≥(w −c)nλ, or equivalently ¯S ≥(w −c)λ, then the optimal
IP license is given by ( f ∗,r∗)  (¯S,0). By (11), we have
η( f ∗,r∗) 
 
i∈N A( f ∗,r∗)ΠA,i( f ∗,r∗)
 
i∈N (¯Si)+
 n¯S
n¯S  1: Otherwise, it is optimal
to retain all the buyers in the traditional channel.
w
Proof of Corollary 4. The results are implied by Lemma 1
and Proposition 1(iii).
w
Proof of Corollary 3. Part (i) and (ii) are implied by the
deﬁnition of (11), from which we have
η( f, r) 
 
i∈N A( f, r) ΠA,i( f, r)
 
i∈N (¯Si)+
 nf + rnλ
n¯S
 f + rλ
¯S
,
(A.3)
as long as (f, r) fall into the range as speciﬁed in (i) and (ii).
Therefore, we immediately have the monotonicity results in
parts (i) and (ii). Proof of parts (iii) and (iv): note that by
parts (i) and (ii), we have maxrη( f,r)  η( f, ¯r( f)) and
maxfη( f,r)  η(¯f (r),r).
Moreover,
by
(A.3),
we
have
η( f, ¯r( f))  f+¯r( f)λ
¯S
and η(¯f (r),r) 
¯f (r)+rλ
¯S
:
As
S( f, ¯r( f))  0 
S(¯f (r),r), by (7), there is CA( f, ¯r( f))  CT  CA(¯f (r),r). By (5),
we know that CA( f,r) strictly increases in f and r. Combined
with (5), we immediately have f + ¯r( f)λ increases in f and
¯f (r) + rλ decreases in r. Hence, we have completed the proof
for the monotonicity results in parts (iii) and (iv). Last, we
have η(¯f (0),0) 
 
i∈N A(¯f (0),0)ΠA,i(¯f (0),0)
 
i∈N (¯Si)+
 n¯S
n¯S  1, where the sec-
ond to last equality is implied by the proof of Proposition 2.
w
Proof of Lemma 2. By Lemma 1, (iii) and (iv), Si( f,r)
is decreasing convex in r, and there is also
∂
∂rS2(0,
r) < ∂
∂rS1(0,r) < 0. As a result, when ¯S1 ≤¯S2, S1(0,r) and ¯S2
must intersect for some r unless they become asymptoti-
cally parallel (with same slope) as r →∞. However,
the
latter
is
impossible
noting
that
limr→∞
∂
∂rS1(0,r)
∂
∂rS2(0,r) 
limr→∞
−hλ1ℓA−zh 
λ1ℓA
√
−

hλ1kA
2(r+p)

−λ1
−hλ2ℓA−zh 
λ2ℓA
√
−

hλ2kA
2(r+p)

−λ2

−hλ1ℓA−zh 
λ1ℓA
√
−λ1
−hλ2ℓA−zh 
λ2ℓA
√
−λ2 ≠1 when
λ1 ≠λ2: Therefore, there must exist a unique intersection
point ˆr such that S1(0, ˆr)  S2(0, ˆr). Deﬁne ˆf : S1(0, ˆr), there
is S1(ˆf , ˆr)  S2(ˆf , ˆr)  0. Similarly, if ¯S1 > ¯S2, no such inter-
section will occur. The sign of Si(0, ˆr) is immediately
implied by the aforementioned properties of Si( f,r) and
the deﬁnition of ¯ri( f). Last, we derive the expression for ˆr.
Let S1(0, ˆr)  S2(0, ˆr), by (A.1), we have h( 
λ1
√
+

λ2
√
)(wℓT −
ˆpℓA) + zh(w

ℓT
√
−ˆp

ℓA
√
) +

2h
√
(

wkT
√
−

ˆpkA

) + ( 
λ1
√
+

λ2
√
)(w −ˆp)  0,
which is equivalent to [(hℓA + 1)( 
λ1
√
+

λ2
√
) + zh

ℓA
√
]ˆp +

2hkA
√
ˆp

−(hℓT + 1)( 
λ1
√
+

λ2
√
)w −
zhw 
ℓT
√
−

2hwkT
√
 0: Therefore, we can solve for ˆr as
ˆr 
−

2hkA
√
+ 2hkA + 4 · H(λ1,ℓA)−H(λ2,ℓA)

λ1
√
−
λ2
√
H(λ1,ℓT)−H(λ2,ℓT)

λ1
√
−
λ2
√
· w +

2hwkT
√



1
2
2 H(λ1,ℓA)−H(λ2,ℓA)

λ1
√
−
λ2
√
⎛
⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎝
⎞
⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎠
2
−p:
w
w
Proof of Proposition 3. First of all, a license cannot be
optimal under which both buyers have positive surplus,
as the OEM can be better off by increasing the ﬁxed
licensing fee at the amount of the smaller surplus among
the two buyers without causing anyone of them switching
channels. Next, we examine the OEM’s total proﬁt in
details. Depending on problem parameters, there are three
cases to consider. We will illustrate the details for the
most complex Case (I), and Cases (II) and (III) can be ana-
lyzed similarly, and we omit those details for brevity. In
Case (I), when ¯S1 ≤¯S2 and ¯r2(0) ≤¯r1(0), by Lemma 2(i),
there is Si(0, ˆr) ≥0, that is, ˆr ≤¯r2(0).
For 0 ≤r ≤ˆr, by deﬁnition of ˆr, there is S1(0,r) ≤S2(0,r).
Therefore, for any S1(0,r) < f ≤S2(0,r), only Buyer 2 opts
for IP licensing, and from the results in Section 4.3.1, we
know that the license (f, r) must be dominated by the
license (¯S2,0), which exploits all free IP licensing surplus
from
Buyer
2
with
OEM’s
total
proﬁt
as
Π(¯S2,0) 
(w −c)λ1 + ¯S2, which increases in w by Lemma 1(vi). For
any f ≤S1(0,r), both buyers choose IP licensing, and the
license (f, r) is dominated by (S1(0,r),r), which charges the
highest possible ﬁxed licensing fee without causing Buyer
1 to switch channel. Under license (S1(0,r),r), the OEM’s
total proﬁt is Π(S1(0,r),r)  2S1(0,r) + r(λ1 + λ2): Note that
∂2S1(0,r)+r(λ1+λ2)
(
)
∂r
 −2hλ1ℓA −2zh

λ1ℓA
√
−

2hλ1kA
r+p

+ λ2 −λ1, 
−2H(λ1,ℓA) −

2hλ1kA
r+p

+ λ2 + λ1, so Π(S1(0,r),r) is convex in
r, and thus must be maximized at either r0, with OEM’s
total proﬁt as Π(¯S1,0)  2¯S1 or r  ˆr with OEM’s total
proﬁt as Π(S1(0, ˆr), ˆr)  2S1(0, ˆr) + ˆr(λ1 + λ2), both of which
increase in w by Lemma 1(vi) and that ˆr increases in w.
For ˆr < r ≤¯r2(0), by deﬁnition of ˆr, there is S1(0,r) ≥
S2(0,r). Therefore, for any S2(0,r) < f ≤S1(0,r), only Buyer
1 opts for IP licensing, and the license (f, r) must be domi-
nated by the license (S1(0,r),r) with OEM’s total proﬁt as
Π(S1(0,r),r)  (w −c)λ2 + S1(0,r) + rλ1, which decreases in
r. Therefore, the license (S1(0,r),r) is dominated by the
license (S1(0, ˆr + ϵ), ˆr + ϵ) with Π(S1(0, ˆr + ϵ), ˆr + ϵ)  (w −c)
λ2+ S1(0, ˆr + ϵ) + (ˆr + ϵ)λ1, where ϵ is a small enough posi-
tive
number.
Note
that
limϵ→0+Π(S1(0, ˆr + ϵ),
ˆr + ϵ) 
(w −c)λ2+ S1(0, ˆr) + ˆrλ1. For any f ≤S2(0,r), both buyers
choose IP licensing, and the license (f, r) is dominated by
(S2(0,r),r), which charges the highest possible ﬁxed licens-
ing fee without causing Buyer 2 to switch channel. Under
license (S2(0,r),r), the OEM’s total proﬁt is Π(S2(0,r),r) 
Zhang et al.: Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing
2700
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2022, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2685–2702, © 2022 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.93.6] on 31 October 2022, at 04:42 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

2S2(0,r) + r(λ1 + λ2): Note that
∂

2S2(0,r)+r(λ1+λ2)

∂r
 −2hλ2ℓA−
2zh

λ2ℓA
√
−

2hλ2kA
r+p

+ λ1 −λ2 < 0, so Π(S2(0,r),r) is decreas-
ing in r, and thus must be dominated by (S2(0, ˆr + ϵ), ˆr + ϵ),
where ϵ is small enough positive number, and the OEM’s
total
proﬁt
Π(S2(0,
ˆr + ϵ), ˆr+
ϵ)  2S2(0, ˆr + ϵ) + (ˆr + ϵ)
(λ1 + λ2). Note that limϵ→0+Π(S2(0, ˆr + ϵ), ˆr + ϵ)  2S2(0, ˆr)+
ˆr(λ1 + λ2), which increases in w by Lemma 1(vi) and that ˆr
increases in w. Therefore, all the licenses on ˆr < r ≤¯r2(0) and
f ≤S2(0,r) are dominated by (S2(0, ˆr), ˆr)  (S1(0, ˆr), ˆr), where
the equality is by the deﬁnition of ˆr.
For ¯r2(0) < r ≤¯r1(0), Buyer 2 will remain in the tradi-
tional channel, and any license with f < S1(0,r) will be
dominated
by
(S1(0,r),r)
with
OEM’s
total
proﬁt
Π(S1(0,r),r)  (w −c)λ2 + S1(0,r) + rλ1, which is decreasing
in r. Therefore, (S1(0,r),r) is dominated by the aforemen-
tioned license (S1(0, ˆr + ϵ), ˆr + ϵ). For all other cases, both
buyers will remain in the traditional channel with OEM’s
total proﬁt (w −c)(λ1 + λ2). To summarize, there are a total
of ﬁve candidates for the optimal license: (i) (¯S2,0), (ii)
(¯S1,0), (iii) (S1(0, ˆr), ˆr), (iv) limϵ→0+(S1(0, ˆr + ϵ), ˆr + ϵ), and (v)
any high enough (f, r). The corresponding OEM’s total prof-
its are (i) (w −c)λ1 + ¯S2, (ii) 2¯S1, (iii) 2S1(0, ˆr) + ˆr(λ1 + λ2),
(iv) (w −c)λ2 + S1(0, ˆr) + ˆrλ1 and (v) (w −c)(λ1 + λ2). The
one with the highest total proﬁt will be the optimal license
depending on problem parameters.
w
Proof of Proposition 4. The proof follows the same logic
as that for Proposition 2.
w
References
Ambadipudi A, Brotschi A, Forsgren M, Kervazo F, Lavandier H,
Xing J (2017) Industrial aftermarket services: Growing the core.
Accessed August 8, 2020, https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/
advanced-electronics/our-insights/industrial-aftermarket-
services-growing-the-core.
Atzeni E, Iuliano L, Minetola P, Salmi A (2010) Redesign and cost
estimation of rapid manufactured plastic parts. Rapid Prototyp-
ing J. 16(5):308–317.
Axs¨ater S (1993) Exact and approximate evaluation of batch-
ordering policies for two-level inventory systems. Oper. Res.
41(4):777–785.
Ben-Ner A, Siemsen E (2017) Decentralization and localization of
production: The organizational and economic consequences of
additive manufacturing (3D printing). California Management
Rev. 59(2):5–23.
Bhattacharya S, Gaba V, Hasija S (2015) A comparison of milestone-
based and buyout options contracts for coordinating R&D part-
nerships. Management Sci. 61(5):963–978.
Breitschwerdt D, Cornet A, Kempf S, Michor L, Schmidt M (2017)
The Changing Aftermarket Game and How Automotive Suppliers
Can Beneﬁt from Arising Opportunities (McKinsey & Company).
Business Insider (2018) Blockbuster is closing its ﬁnal remaining stores
in alaska. Accessed January 16 2019, https://www.businessinsider.
nl/ blockbuster-still-exists-in-a-couple-of-places-2017-4.
Cachon G (2003) Supply chain coordination with contracts. Hand-
book Oper. Res. Management Sci. 11:227–339.
Cachon G, K¨ok AG (2010) Competing manufacturers in a retail sup-
ply chain: On contractual form and coordination. Management
Sci. 56(3):571–589.
Cattani KD, Souza GC (2003) Good buy? Delaying end-of-life pur-
chases. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 146(1):216–228.
Chekurov S, Mets-Kortelainen S, Salmi M, Roda I, Jussila A (2018)
The perceived value of additively manufactured digital spare
parts in industry: An empirical investigation. Internat. J. Produc-
tion Econom. 205:87–97.
Chen J, Gusikhin O, Finkenstaedt W, Liu Y-N (2019) Maintenance,
repair, and operations parts inventory management in the era
of industry 4.0. IFAC Papers OnLine 52(13):171–176.
Chen L, Cui Y, Lee HL (2021) Retailing with 3D printing. Production
and Oper. Management 30(7):1986–2007.
Cohen MA, Cull C, Lee HL, Willen D (2000) Saturn’s supply
chain innovation: High value in after-sales service. MIT Sloan
Management Rev., https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/saturns-
supplychain-innovation-high-value-in-aftersales-service/.
Crama P, De Reyck B, Taneri N (2017) Licensing contracts: Control
rights, options, and timing. Management Sci. 63(4):1131–1149.
Crama P, Reyck BD, Degraeve Z (2008) Milestone payments or
royalties? Contract design for R&D licensing. Oper. Res. 56(6):
1539–1552.
D’Aveni R (2018) The Pan-Industrial Revolution: How New Manufactur-
ing Titans Will Transform the World (Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt,
New York).
Department of Defense (2019) Army Directive 2019-29 (Enabling
Readiness and Modernization Through Advanced Manufactur-
ing). Accessed July 30, 2020, https://armypubs.army.mil/epubs/
DR_pubs/DR_a/pdf/web/ARN19451_AD2019-29_Web_Final.
pdf.
Desai D, Magliocca G (2014) Patents, meet Napster: 3D printing and
the digitization of things. Georgetown Law J. 102(1):1691–1720.
Digital Parts Transfer (2020) Digital parts transfer. Accessed July 30,
2020, http://www.digitalpartstransfer.com.
Dong L, Shi D, Zhang F (2021) 3D printing and product assortment
strategy. Management Sci., ePub ahead of print December 9,
https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2021.4178.
Driessen J, Arts J, van Houtum G (2017) Optimal commonality and
reliability: A life cycle costs perspective, BETA publicatie: Working
papers 524, Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, Netherlands.
Everett, H (2020) U.S. Air Force 3D prints spare parts to solve main-
tenance issues. 3D Printing Industry. Accessed June 21, 2022,
https://3dprintingindustry.com/news/us-air-force-3d-prints-
spare-parts-to-solve-maintenance-issues-208906/.
Fieldmade (2020) Fieldmade digital inventory. Accessed August 4,
2020, https://ﬁeldmade.no/digital-inventory.
Forbes.com (2017) Top 5 digital transformation trends in manufac-
turing. Accessed January 16, 2019, https://www.forbes.com/
sites/danielnewman/2017/08/08/top-5-digital-transformation-
trends-in-manufacturing.
Gallini NT, Wright BD (1990) Technology transfer under asymmet-
ric information. RAND J. Econom. 21(1):147–160.
Geissbauer R, Wunderlin J, Lehr J (2017) The Future of Spare Parts is 3D:
A Look at the Challenges and Opportunities of 3D Printing (Strategy).
Hanaphy P (2021) CADChain’s new Boris plug-in protects users’
designs during product R&D. 3D Printing Industry, https://
3dprintingindustry.com/news/cadchains-new-boris-plug-in-
protects-users-designs-during-product-rd-197876/.
Hedenstierna C, Disney S, Eyers D, Holmstr¨om J, Syntetos A, Wang
X (2019) Economies of collaboration in build-to-model opera-
tions. J. Oper. Management 65(8):753–773.
Heinen J, Hoberg K (2019) Assessing the potential of additive manu-
facturing for the provision of spare parts. J. Oper. Management
65(8):810–826.
Ivan S, Yin Y (2017) The beneﬁts of 3D printing for supply chains in
the context of industry 4.0: Cases from automotive industry.
Working paper, Doshisha University, Kyoto, Japan.
Zhang et al.: Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2022, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2685–2702, © 2022 INFORMS
2701
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.93.6] on 31 October 2022, at 04:42 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

Jensen R, Thursby M (2001) Proofs and prototypes for sale: The licens-
ing of university inventions. Amer. Econom. Rev. 91(1):240–259.
Kamien MI, Tauman Y (1986) Fees vs. royalties and the private
value of a patent. Quart. J. Econom. 101(3):471–491.
Kamien MI, Tauman Y (2002) Patent licensing: The inside story. The
Manchester School 70(1):7–15.
Kamien MI, Oren SS, Tauman Y (1992) Optimal licensing of cost-
reducing innovation. J. Math. Econom. 21(5):483–508.
Katz ML, Shapiro C (1986) How to license intangible property.
Quart. J. Econom. 101(3):567–589.
Kim S-H, Cohen MA, Netessine S (2007) Performance contracting in
after-sales service supply chains. Management Sci. 53(12):1843–1858.
Krishnan H, Winter R (2012) The economic foundations of supply
chain contracting. Foundations Trends Tech. Inform. Oper. Manage-
ment 5:147–309.
Lamghari-Idrissi D, Soellaart D, Basten R, Dellaert N (2019) Inﬂu-
ence of spare parts service measures on the performance of
front-end wafer production process. Proc. IEEE Winter Simula-
tion Conf. (IEEE, New York), 2269–2280.
Lee J, Krishnan V, Shin H (2020) Business models for technology-
intensive supply chains. Management Sci. 66(5):2120–2139.
Mellor S, Hao L, Zhang D (2014) Additive manufacturing: A frame-
work for implementation. Internat. J. Production Econom. 149:
194–201.
Olsen T, Tomlin B (2020) Industry 4.0: Opportunities and challenges
for operations management. Manufacturing Service Oper. Man-
agement 22(1):113–122.
Salmi M, Partanen J, Tuomi J, Chekurov S, Bj¨orkstrand R, Huotilainen
E, Kukko K, et al. (2018) Digital Spare Parts (Aalto University,
Espoo, Finland).
Savva N, Scholtes S (2014) Opt-out options in new product
co-development partnerships. Production Oper. Management 23(8):
1370–1386.
Savva N, Taneri N (2015) The role of equity, royalty, and ﬁxed fees
in technology licensing to university spin-offs. Management Sci.
61(6):1323–1343.
SCM World (2018) From CD to 3D: Why ship atoms when you can
transmit bits? Accessed January 23, 2018, https://blogs.gartner.
com/beyond-supply-chain-blog/cd-3d-ship-atoms-can-transmit-
bits/.
Sen D (2005) On the coexistence of different licensing schemes. Inter-
nat. Rev. Econom. Finance 14(4):393–413.
Sen D, Tauman Y (2018) Patent licensing in a Cournot oligopoly:
General results. Math. Social Sci. 96:37–48.
Sertoglu K (2021a) 3YOURMIND joins project DIAMOnD to advance
distributes 3D printing technology. 3D Printing Industry, https://
3dprintingindustry.com/news/3yourmind-joins-project-diamond-
to-advance-distributed-3d-printing-technology-189374/.
Sertoglu K (2021b) PrintParts ships its ﬁrst set of traceable 3D printed
smartparts. 3D Printing Industry, https://3dprintingindustry.
com/news/printparts-ships-its-ﬁrst-set-of-traceable-3d-printed-
smartparts-198782/.
Sethuraman N, Parlakturk AK, Swaminathan JM (2021). Personal
fabrication as an operational strategy: Value of delegating
production to customer. Kenan Institute of Private Enterprise
Research Paper, 18–5, University of North Carolina–Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC.
So KC, Song JS (1998) Price, delivery time guarantees and capacity
selection. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 111(1):28–49.
Song JS, Zhang Y (2020) Stock or print? Impact of 3D printing on
spare parts logistics. Management Sci. 66(9):3860–3878.
Statistica.com (2020) Physical CD shipments in the United States
from 1999 to 2019. Accessed November 27, 2020, https://www.
statista.com/statistics/186772/album-shipments-in-the-us-music-
industry-since-1999/.
Supercharge3d (2019) Strategic maritime customers beneﬁt from
Wilhelmsen
and Ivaldi
3D printing
on demand, https://
supercharg3d.com/6-strategic-maritime-customers-beneﬁt-from-
wilhelmsen-and-ivaldi-3d-printing-on-demand/.
U.S. Department of Defense (2018) Marines use 3D printer to make
replacement part for F-35 ﬁghter. Accessed June 20, 2022,
http://www.defense.gov/News/Article/Article/1498121/.
Wang X (1998) Fee vs. royalty licensing in a Cournot duopoly
model. Econom. Lett. 60(1):55–62.
Wang J, Wu X, Krishnan V (2018) Decision structure and perform-
ance of networked technology supply chains. Manufacturing
Service Oper. Management 20(2):199–216.
Westerweel B, Basten R, Van Houtum G-J (2018) Traditional
or additive manufacturing? Assessing component design
options through lifecycle cost analysis. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 270(2):
570–585.
Westerweel B, Basten R, den Boer J, Van Houtum G-J (2021) Printing
spare parts at remote locations: Fulﬁlling the promise of
additive manufacturing. Production Oper. Management 30(6):
1615–1632.
Wibu-Systems (2019) IP protection in additive manufacturing.
Accessed June 20, 2022, https://www.wibu.com/us/magazine/
keynote-articles/article/detail/ip-protection-in-additive-
manufacturing.html.
Yin Y, Stecke KE, Li D (2018) The evolution of production systems
from industry 2.0 through industry 4.0. Internat. J. Production
Res. 56(1-2):848–861.
Zasiadko M (2019) Deutsche Bahn produces heavy spare parts on
3D printer. Accessed July 23, 2020, https://www.railtech.com/
digitalisation/2019/07/16/deutsche-bahn-produces-heavy-spare-
parts-on-3d-printer/.
3DEXPERIENCE (2020) Accessed April 14, 2020, http://make.
3dexperience.3ds.com.
Zipkin PH (2000) Foundations of Inventory Management (McGraw-
Hill, New York).
Zhang et al.: Distributed 3D Printing of Spare Parts via IP Licensing
2702
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2022, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2685–2702, © 2022 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.93.6] on 31 October 2022, at 04:42 . For personal use only, all rights reserved.