TITLE: Distribution-Free Pricing
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2021.1055
---

TSpace Research Repository 
 
tspace.library.utoronto.ca 
 
 
Distribution-Free Pricing 
 
Hongqiao Chen, Ming Hu & Georgia Perakis 
 
Version Post-print or accepted manuscript. 
 
Citation 
(published version) 
Chen, H., Hu, M., & Perakis, G. (2022). Distribution-free pricing. 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 24(4), 1939-1958. 
Copyright / License Copyright © 2022, INFORMS 
 
DOI https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2021.1055 
Publisher’s Statement This is an accepted manuscript of an article published by INFORMS in 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to cite TSpace items 
 
Always cite the published version, so the author(s) will receive recognition through services that track 
citation counts, e.g. Scopus. If you need to cite the page number of the author manuscript from TSpace 
because you cannot access the published version, then cite the TSpace version in addition to the published 
version using the permanent URI (handle) found on the record page. 
 
This article was made openly accessible by U of T Faculty. 
Please tell us how this access benefits you. Your story matters. 
 

Distribution-Free Pricing
Hongqiao Chen
School of Management & Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 210008, chq@nju.edu.cn
Ming Hu
Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3E6, ming.hu@rotman.utoronto.ca
Georgia Perakis
Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, georgiap@mit.edu
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, forthcoming
Problem deﬁnition: We study a monopolistic robust pricing problem in which the seller does not know the
customers’ valuation distribution for a product but knows its mean and variance. This minimal requirement
for information means that the pricing managers only need to be able to answer two questions: How much
will your targeted customers pay on average? And, to measure your conﬁdence in the previous answer, what
is the standard deviation of customer valuations? Methodology/results: We ﬁrst focus on the maximin
proﬁt criterion and derive distribution-free upper and lower bounds on the proﬁt function. By maximizing
the tight proﬁt lower bound, we obtain the optimal robust price in closed form as well as its distribution-
free, worst-case performance bound. We then extend the single-product result to study the robust pure
bundle pricing problem where the seller only knows the mean and variance of each product, and provide
easily veriﬁable, distribution-free, suﬃcient conditions that guarantee the pure bundle to be more robustly
proﬁtable than `a la carte (i.e., separate) sales. We further derive a distribution-free, worst-case performance
guarantee for a heuristic scheme in which customers choose between buying either a single product or a
pure bundle. Moreover, we generalize separate sales and pure bundling to a scheme called clustered bundling
that imposes a price for each mutually exclusive subset of products and allows customers to choose one or
multiple subsets, and provide various algorithms to compute clustered bundling heuristics. In parallel, most
of our results hold for the minimax relative regret criterion as well. Managerial implications: The robust
price for a single product is in closed form under the maximin proﬁt or minimax relative regret criterion and
hence is easily computable. Its interpretation can be easily explained to pricing managers. We also provide
eﬃcient algorithms to compute various mixed bundling heuristics for the multi-product problem.
1.
Introduction
We study a monopoly pricing problem in which a seller has to decide on and commit to a price
with only limited knowledge of the customer valuation distribution. This problem arises when the
seller launches an innovative product with limited market information, or when the seller needs to
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

2
oﬀer a personalized price to a new customer about whom the seller knows little. Similar problems
also occur when a ﬁrm launches a new subscription service, with a bundle of goods and services,
for which detailed information about customer valuations may be hard to obtain. Such pricing
problems with limited information about customers are extremely challenging, yet crucial for the
seller’s proﬁtability. Despite the lack of detailed information, the seller is likely to know how to
answer two questions: First, how much will the targeted customers pay on average? Second, to
measure the conﬁdence level of the previous answer, what is the standard deviation of customer
valuations? More speciﬁcally, these two questions can tease out information about the ﬁrst and
second moments of the customer valuation distribution. With answers to those two questions about
the demand, as well as the known cost information on the supply side, we solve for the robust
pricing problem under various criteria. Under the focal criterion referred to as the maximin proﬁt
criterion, the seller sets a price to maximize its proﬁt in the worst scenario among all customer
valuation distributions that share the same mean and standard deviation. Under an alternative
criterion referred to as the minimax relative (or absolute) regret criterion, the seller minimizes
the maximum relative (or absolute) regret due to not knowing the true distribution as opposed to
possessing this information. In any case, we search for the most robust pricing solution.
Under the maximin proﬁt criterion, we provide a robust price that is conservative in protecting
the seller against the worst possible proﬁt. The lower bound on the proﬁt for the robust price is
(asymptotically) achievable; hence it is the best against all odds. Furthermore, the robust price is
in closed form and hence easily computable. It depends only on the mean and standard deviation of
the customer valuation distribution, teased out from the two questions, and the product’s marginal
cost. (Hereafter, we refer to “limited information” about the valuation distribution as the knowledge
of just its mean and variance.) We show that the smaller the ratio of the standard deviation to the
mean of the customer valuation distribution, i.e., the coeﬃcient of variation (CV), the higher the
optimal robust price and the better its performance guarantee. The higher the marginal cost, the
higher the optimal robust price, and the worse its performance guarantee. That is, on the demand
side, the CV of the valuation distribution provides a relative measure of the concentration of the
customer valuations. The seller needs to set a lower robust price if the valuation distribution is more
dispersed. On the supply side, the marginal cost plays a critical role in determining how aggressive
the seller should be when uncertain about customer valuation. With only limited information about
the demand side, there is less room for a seller to make a mistake (i.e., in the range of proﬁtable
feasible prices) when the production cost is higher. As a result, the performance guarantee of the
robust price becomes worse. The optimal robust price under the minimax relative regret criterion
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

3
has a similar closed form and hence it has the same monotonicity properties as that under the
focal maximin proﬁt criterion, though the latter is shown to be lower than the former.
We further investigate the beneﬁt of having less or more information than the mean and standard
deviation of the valuation distribution. If the seller knows only the mean and range of the valuation
distribution, the worst case that results in the largest standard deviation is a two-point valuation
distribution with the two ends of the range as the possible realizations. Then the robust pricing
problem can be reduced to the one studied in our base model. Moreover, we can obtain an optimal
robust price with a sharper performance guarantee if we also know that the optimal price is below
the mean valuation, the valuation distribution is symmetric or unimodal, or the third moment
is known. However, having such additional information may be of limited marginal beneﬁt. The
intuition is that it may not help eliminate the worst case of a bipolar valuation distribution.
A seller may encounter the same robust pricing problem in selling multiple products. In this
situation, the seller knows only the mean and standard deviation of the customer valuation dis-
tribution for each product. The seller may sell the products separately (as “separate sales”) or
may choose to sell all products in a pure bundle (referred to as “pure bundling”) by setting a
bundle price. Under the focal maximin proﬁt criterion, we apply the optimal robust price from
the single product problem and compare the performance of pure bundling with that of separate
sales in the limited-information setting. The idea that “bundling reduces dispersion” and improves
proﬁtability is not new (see, e.g., Adams and Yellen 1976). However, previous formal statements
of the idea rely on speciﬁc assumptions about valuation distributions. In contrast, we provide eas-
ily veriﬁable suﬃcient conditions under which a bundle is guaranteed to be more proﬁtable than
separate sales without making any distributional assumption. In particular, we show that as long
as the cost structure in terms of proﬁt margins and the demand characteristics in terms of CVs
are the same for all products, the bundle is more robustly proﬁtable than separate sales, regardless
of the detailed valuation distributions and how they are correlated. We prove that optimal robust
bundle price performs better if the CV of the bundle valuation is smaller. This can be achieved
when the bundle is reasonably large in spite of having nonzero marginal costs. We illustrate the
performance of our robust bundle price with three practical examples: the streaming subscription
service, Spotify, for selling digital goods; a leading IT company oﬀering a personalized bundle
of hardware and software to commercial customers; and a theater company selling season tickets
to patrons who have correlated valuations for plays. Furthermore, we derive a distribution-free,
worst-case performance guarantee for pricing under a heuristic scheme in which customers choose
between buying either a single product or a pure bundle. Lastly, we generalize separate sales and
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

4
pure bundling to a novel scheme which we refer to as clustered bundling that imposes a price for
each mutually exclusive subset of products and allows customers to choose one or multiple subsets,
and provide various algorithms to compute such clustered bundling heuristics. In parallel, all of
our results except those of Section 4.2, in the multi-product problem, hold for the minimax relative
regret criterion as well.
Contributions. We make the following contributions. First, we provide a performance guar-
antee under the focal maximin proﬁt criterion for a practical robust pricing problem with limited
information and a general marginal cost. The optimal robust price is in closed form, hence easily
computable, and achieves a tight performance lower bound. We also show that having additional
information beyond the ﬁrst and second moments of the valuation distribution may be of little
additional value in protecting the seller from the worst-case scenario. Second, we fully characterize
the optimal robust price that minimizes the maximum relative or absolute regret, which is shown
to be higher than that under the maximin proﬁt criterion, while the optimal robust price under
the minimax relative regret criterion has a closed form similar to that under the focal maximin
proﬁt criterion. This result demonstrates how various distribution-free objectives may result in
diﬀerent optimal robust pricing decisions even with the same information. Third, for the multi-
product problem, we give theoretical support to the proﬁtability of the pure bundle over separate
sales without making any detailed distributional assumptions. That serves as a formalization of
the idea that “bundling reduces dispersion” in a distribution-free sense, without the need to resort
to any limiting argument on the bundle size. Finally, we provide various heuristics for the mixed
bundling problem. In particular, we derive a distribution-free, worst-case performance guarantee
for a heuristic scheme in which customers choose between buying either a single product or a pure
bundle. We also generalize separate sales and pure bundling to clustered bundling and provide
various algorithms to compute clustered bundling heuristics. Due to the similarity between the
closed forms of the optimal robust price under the maximin proﬁt and minimax relative regret
criteria, our results on comparing pure bundling and separate sales derived for the former criterion
hold for the latter one as well.
2.
Literature Review
Our work belongs to the stream of research on robust pricing. This stream studies a one-shot
pricing decision with limited market information. This problem is more appropriate in practice
when the ﬁrm has to commit to a price before the selling season starts or has to quote a personalized
price to a new customer. In those situations, the ﬁrm has no opportunity to learn the market and
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

5
update the price but has to make a decision with the limited information it has about customers.
Thiele (2008) studies a monopolistic pricing problem in which the seller knows the number of
potential buyers and their random valuation support. Cohen et al. (2021) study a robust pricing
model without knowing the speciﬁc form of the demand function. The authors derive analytical
performance bounds for a variety of demand functions with only information about the marginal
cost and the maximum price (i.e., choke price) at which no customers would want to buy. In
contrast, we impose limited-information assumptions directly on the customer valuation instead of
on the demand function.1 In similar fashion to our paper, Bergemann and Schlag (2011) consider
a customer valuation distribution that is unknown but is assumed to be in the neighborhood of
a given distribution. In contrast, we assume that the pricing managers only know the mean and
standard deviation and have no further detailed information about the valuation distribution.
In the operations literature, this information structure is often referred to as “distribution-free.”
Similarly, Bergemann and Schlag (2008) consider the pricing problem in which the seller only knows
the support of the possible valuations and has no further distributional information. However, the
authors do not give a performance guarantee of the optimal robust price as we do. We show that the
robust pricing problem with information about the valuation mean and support can be transformed
into our problem. Azar and Micali (2013) study revenue maximization for auctions of digital goods
with zero marginal costs and give a posted price mechanism that maximizes revenue in the worst
case under the knowledge of the mean and variance of each bidder’s marginal distribution. In
contrast, we study a robust pricing problem with nonnegative marginal costs.
More recently, Carroll (2017) studies a robust mechanism design problem in which a principal
wants to screen an agent along several dimensions of private information. With the application
of his results to the monopoly pricing of multiple products with private customer valuations, the
author shows that, if the principal knows the marginal valuation distribution of each product but
does not know the joint distribution, separate sales is the most robust solution even when mixed
bundling is allowed, in the sense of achieving the highest worst-case expected proﬁt among all
joint distributions consistent with the known marginals. If the seller knows only the mean and
variance of the marginal distribution of each product, for a given correlation structure, we show
that selling a bundle is robustly more proﬁtable than separate sales under some mild conditions.
If the correlation structure turns out to be the worst for bundling, in which case all products are
positively correlated, bundling is as eﬀective as separate sales, which is consistent with Carroll
1 If the random customer valuation V is known, the demand function may be obtained as d(p) = M · P(V ≥p), where
M is the potential market size.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

6
(2017). However, bundling is robustly more proﬁtable than separate sales for correlation structures
other than the worst case, which restores the robust proﬁtability of bundling over separate sales in
a more general sense. Ko¸cyi˘git et al. (2021) study a robust multi-product pricing problem with a
rectangular uncertainty set for customer valuations by minimizing the maximum absolute regret,
and show that the optimal robust selling mechanism is to sell goods separately. In contrast, we
consider such a problem with moments information under the maximin proﬁt and minimax relative
regret criteria and show when pure bundling is more robust than separate sales.
The papers most closely related to our work are Kos and Messner (2015) and Carrasco et al.
(2018). Both papers study revenue maximization of a single product with the product cost assumed
away and adopt the maximin revenue criterion, similar to our maximin proﬁt criterion. Kos and
Messner (2015) assume the information structure of knowing the range of the mean valuation and
the upper bound of the valuation support. The authors provide the optimal robust deterministic
price and randomized price distribution. Our work assumes that the seller knows precisely the
ﬁrst two (or three) moments of the valuation distribution and focuses on a deterministic posted
pricing policy for a nonnegative product cost. In a more general setting than ours, Carrasco et al.
(2018) study the optimal mechanism design problem of a seller who is partially informed about the
distribution of the buyer’s valuations by only knowing its ﬁrst N moments. The authors characterize
the optimal mechanism for N = 2 that contains an allocation rule and a transfer function, and
also obtain an optimal robust price with the product cost being zero.2 We complement Carrasco
et al. (2018) by focusing on the optimal robust (simple-to-implement posted) price with a nonzero
product cost and obtain a tight lower proﬁt bound. We also solve the robust pricing problem under
alternative criteria, and compare various optimal robust prices. We then extend the single-product
result to study the robust pricing problems of selling multiple products, through separate sales,
pure bundling, or mixed bundling heuristic schemes.
We apply our optimal robust price to the (mixed) bundle pricing problem. In the economics
literature, it is well known that bundling can be an eﬀective way for a multi-product monopolist
to increase proﬁts. The early economics papers focus on a two-product monopoly problem because
of the diﬃculty of analyzing cases of multiple products. The work on bundling with more than
two products emerges in the literature on information goods which have small or even no marginal
costs. In particular, Bakos and Brynjolfsson (1999) consider a monopolist selling a large number
of information goods with zero marginal cost where the consumer valuations of those goods are
2 Unfortunately, the optimal robust price expression on page 257 in Carrasco et al. (2018), which corresponds to the
problem with c = 0, is incorrect.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

7
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.). By the weak law of large numbers, they show
that “bundling very large numbers of unrelated information goods can be surprisingly proﬁtable.”
We calculate a closed-form robust price for pure bundling of a ﬁxed bundle size with an easily
computable performance guarantee. Our approach and results go beyond zero marginal costs and
the i.i.d. valuation assumption. We also do not require any limiting argument on the bundle size
(see, e.g., Abdallah 2019, Abdallah et al. 2021).
Since it is diﬃcult to compute the optimal mixed bundling prices with a number of, say n,
products (with 2n −1 prices to be decided), it is desirable to oﬀer a simple scheme with a small
number of prices to determine, yet one that still captures most of the optimal proﬁt of the mixed
bundling. Babaioﬀet al. (2014) consider a monopolist seller who sells n heterogeneous products
to a buyer; they show that selling each product separately or all products together as a bundle
can achieve at least a fraction of 1/6 of the optimal mixed bundling pricing. Chu et al. (2011)
propose a pricing scheme called bundle-size pricing (BSP), where the price for a bundle option
depends only on the size of the bundle; they show it tends to yield proﬁts close to the optimal proﬁt
of mixed bundling as calculated by numerical experiments. Li et al. (2019) show that the BSP
problem can be approximated by a convex optimization problem, using only the ﬁrst and second
moments of customer valuations; then they numerically solve the convex optimization problem for
bundle pricing heuristics. In contrast, we provide provable performance guarantees for our pricing
heuristics. Ma and Simchi-Levi (2015) introduce a bundling mechanism called “pure bundling
with disposal for cost” (PBDC). Their main purpose is to provide a theoretical guarantee for the
performance of PBDC that holds for arbitrary independent distributions, by using techniques from
the mechanism design literature. In particular, it is shown that either PBDC or individual sales
will obtain at least 1/5.2 of the optimal proﬁt among all incentive-compatible and individually
rational mechanisms.
In economics, there are papers that compare pure bundling and separate sales; see, e.g.,
Chakraborty (1999) and Fang and Norman (2006). These papers make restrictive assumptions
either about the number of products or about the detailed valuation distributions. For example,
Fang and Norman (2006) show that bundling is more proﬁtable than separate sales with a given
ﬁnite number of goods, provided that the distributions of valuations are i.i.d. and follow a sym-
metric and log-concave distribution. Furthermore, they assume that all products have the same
marginal cost and that the optimal separate-sales price is no more than the mean valuation for any
product. In contrast, without making any detailed distributional assumptions, we impose easily
veriﬁable suﬃcient conditions on the means and variances of valuation distributions, under which
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

8
selling a bundle is guaranteed to generate higher proﬁts than selling products separately in a robust
sense. One can view our results as formalizing the idea that “bundling reduces dispersion” in a
robust sense, because essentially our suﬃcient conditions amount to requiring the CV of the bundle
valuation to be less than those of individual products.
Finally, our work is related to robust decision making in operations, such as the optimal pricing
or inventory decision under three robust criteria: one is to maximize the seller’s worst-case utility,
and the other two are to minimize the seller’s worst-case relative/absolute regret. In the newsvendor
context, Gallego and Moon (1993) consider the maximin proﬁt criterion, while Perakis and Roels
(2008) adopt the minimax absolute regret criterion. In the pricing context, Cohen et al. (2021)
use the maximin proﬁt criterion, while Allouah et al. (2021) study a robust pricing problem with
sample valuations under the minimax relative regret criterion. In our work, we analyze and compare
all three criteria.
3.
The Model
Consider a monopoly pricing problem. The seller sells a product to a market of customers with
heterogenous valuations. The valuation (or willingness to pay) V of a randomly selected customer
in the targeted market follows a distribution with cumulative distribution function (c.d.f.) F(v)
over a nonnegative support, its probability density function f(v), mean µ, and standard deviation
σ. The seller incurs a constant marginal cost c. For any price p, the corresponding proﬁt is
π(p;F) = (p −c)P(V ≥p) = (p −c)(1 −lim
v→p−F(v)).
In the case of a continuous distribution F, π(p;F) = (p −c)(1 −F(p)). Our results are generic to
accommodate continuous and discrete distributions F(·).
Our model setup is the same as in the classical monopoly pricing problem, except that the seller
does not know the customers’ exact valuation distribution F(v) when it sets the price. When an
innovative product or service is being sold, though the exact valuation distribution may be hard to
obtain, the mean and standard deviation information can be much easier to estimate. It essentially
amounts to asking the pricing managers the following two questions:
(i) How much will your targeted customers pay on average? (information about µ)
(ii) How sure are you? (information about σ)
Thus, we assume that the seller has an idea about the ﬁnite ﬁrst and second moments of the
valuation distribution, i.e., µ and σ > 0.3 (If σ = 0, the demand is completely deterministic and the
3 Sometime the seller may only be sure about the range of the mean and standard deviation of the valuation distribu-
tion. By Corollary 1(a) below, it is conservative to let µ be the lower bound of the mean and σ be the upper bound
of the standard deviation.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

9
optimal price is simply µ.)
We denote by δ ≡σ/µ the coeﬃcient of variation (CV) of the valuation distribution and by
γ ≡c/µ the ratio of the marginal cost to the mean valuation. Since the term (1/γ −1) relates to the
potential proﬁt margin of the product, a low (resp., high) value of γ corresponds to a high (resp.,
low) potential proﬁt margin. The unit-free measure δ is on the demand side, and the unit-free
measure γ is on the supply side. We further deﬁne another unit-free measure that combines the
measures on both the demand and supply sides: for σ > 0, denote
τ ≡1 −γ
δ
= µ −c
σ
.
The following assumption is the only one we need for our results.
Assumption (P). µ ≥c (i.e., γ ≤1).
This assumption is satisﬁed for digital goods whose reproduction/distribution may incur almost
zero cost, i.e., c ≈0. In general, this assumption is innocuous since µ is the average valuation of the
targeted market. Suppose it does not hold. Then even if the seller can perfectly price-discriminate
every customer within the targeted valuation range such that each one pays at their own valuation,
the expected proﬁt is negative. This suggests that it is beneﬁcial for the seller to exclude some very
low-valuation customers from its targeted market. Assumption (P) results in τ ≥0.
3.1.
The Focal Maximin Proﬁt Criterion
Let F be the class of all (continuous or discrete) distributions that share the same mean µ ≥c
and standard deviation σ > 0, and are supported on a nonnegative real line. In particular, F ≡
{F(v),v ≥0 | E[V ] = µ,E[V 2] = µ2 + σ2}. Armed with this set, our goal is to solve for an optimal
robust price
p∗= arg max
p
{min
F ∈F π(p;F)}
and provide a worst-case performance guarantee for this optimal robust price p∗, under the focal
maximin proﬁt criterion (see, e.g., Bergemann and Schlag 2011, Kos and Messner 2015, Carrasco
et al. 2018 and Cohen et al. 2021). This criterion protects the seller against the worst-case scenario
in terms of the absolute proﬁt value, which could be a survival measure for the seller. We focus on
this maximin proﬁt criterion and consider two alternative criteria in Section 5. We will show that
the results obtained under the maximin proﬁt criterion carry over to the minimax relative regret
criterion, since their optimal robust prices have similar closed-form expressions.
To provide a distribution-free performance guarantee (in terms of the primitives c, µ and σ),
we ﬁrst derive a distribution-free upper bound on the optimal proﬁt. Then we provide a tight
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

10
distribution-free lower bound for any given price p, based on which we obtain an optimal robust
price p∗by maximizing the lower bound as a function of p. As a result, the performance lower bound
of the optimal robust price p∗can be again expressed in terms of the system primitives. Lastly, we
show the performance guarantee of this optimal robust price by comparing the distribution-free
lower and upper bounds.
Theorem 1 (Distribution-Free Bounds). We have the following bounds:
(a) (Upper bound) For all F ∈F, maxp π(p;F) ≤µ −
τ2
1+τ2 c ≡U.
(b) (Lower bound) For all F ∈F, maxp π(p;F) ≥π(p∗= µ −k∗σ;F) ≥(µ −c)(1 −
3
2τ k∗) ≡L,
where k∗≡
3p
τ +
√
τ 2 + 1 +
3p
τ −
√
τ 2 + 1 ≥0. Moreover, the lower bound is asymptotically
achievable by a series of two-point distributions: V =
(
µ −kϵσ with prob.
1
1+k2ϵ ,
µ + 1
kϵ σ with prob. 1 −
1
1+k2ϵ , with kϵ =
k∗+ ϵ, as ϵ ↘0.
Theorem 1(b) shows the lower bound is “tight” in an asymptotic sense. This tightness notion
follows from Bertsimas and Popescu (2005, Deﬁnition 1.2). Speciﬁcally, the lower bound can be
asymptotically achievable by a series of two-point distributions. In a diﬀerent setting, Gallego
and Moon (1993) model the robust newsvendor problem as that of ﬁnding the size of order that
maximizes the expected proﬁt against the worst possible demand distribution. In their paper, only
the mean µ and the variance σ2 of the demand are known without any further assumptions about
the form of the distribution. The authors show that the worst possible distribution is a two-point
distribution (see their Remark 2). Theorem 1(b) suggests that the worst possible distribution for
our model is also a two-point distribution, analogous to the robust newsvendor problem. In the
worst case, the seller faces two distinct customer segments, one with a valuation below µ and the
other with a valuation above µ.
Taking the ratio of the distribution-free lower bound L to the upper bound U, we have the
following distribution-free performance guarantee in closed form. From the sketch of the proof of
Theorem 1, we can see that U is, in fact, also an upper bound on the total proﬁt when every
proﬁtable customer (whose valuation is more than c) pays their own valuation. Hence, this upper
bound U is also an upper bound on the total proﬁt of fully personalized pricing. As a result,
the following performance guarantee is also one on the optimality of using a single price bench-
marked against fully personalized pricing. (Elmachtoub et al. 2018 study such a problem with the
seller knowing the customer valuation distribution, while Cohen et al. 2019 study the problem of
customized pricing for diﬀerent groups under fairness constraints.)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

11
Theorem 2 (Robust Price and Performance Guarantee). The optimal robust price is
p∗(c,µ,σ) = µ −k∗σ with the safety factor k∗=
3p
τ +
√
τ 2 + 1 +
3p
τ −
√
τ 2 + 1 ≥0, which achieves
the following performance guarantee: for all F ∈F,
π(p∗;F)
maxp π(p;F) ≥
1 −3
2τ k∗
1 +
γ
(1−γ)(1+τ2)
≡ρ.
The form of the optimal robust price is analogous to the optimal order quantity for a newsven-
dor facing a normally distributed demand distribution N(µ,σ): Q∗= µ + z∗σ, where z∗=
Φ−1(critical fractile) and Φ−1(x) is the inverse function of the c.d.f. of the standard normal distri-
bution N(0,1). The safety factor z∗determines the additional amount of inventory the newsvendor
needs to hold beyond the expected demand to cope with demand uncertainty. Analogously, in our
robust pricing setting, k∗, as a safety factor, determines the discount the seller needs to oﬀer below
the expected valuation to cope with valuation uncertainty. In the newsvendor setting, being con-
servative means having an order quantity beyond the mean demand, whereas in the robust pricing
setting, being conservative means charging a price below the mean valuation. It is easy to see that
the safety factor k∗, only depending on τ, is increasing in τ. That is, the higher the τ value (i.e.,
the lower the potential proﬁt margin or the larger the variability in the valuation distribution), the
larger the safety factor in robust pricing should be and hence the lower the optimal robust price.
Corollary 1 (Monotonicity Properties). The following monotonicity properties hold.
(a) The performance guarantee ρ(c,µ,σ) = ρ(γ,δ) is strictly decreasing in γ and δ.
(b) The optimal robust price p∗(c,µ,σ) = µ −k∗σ is strictly increasing in c and µ and is strictly
decreasing in σ.
Corollary 1(a) ﬁrst says that the performance guarantee ρ is determined by the two unit-free
measures γ and δ. The measure γ captures the potential proﬁtability of making a sale, and the
measure δ quantiﬁes the variability in the valuation distribution of the targeted market. Corollary
1(a) further says that the proposed optimal robust price is guaranteed to perform better when the
marginal cost is lower or the valuation distribution has lower variability. The former statement
suggests that the optimal robust price is more likely to perform well for digital goods than physical
products, because digital goods tend to have lower reproduction and distribution costs. The latter
statement, which is intuitive, suggests that the more accurate market information the seller has,
the higher proﬁts can be guaranteed. Figure 1 shows the guaranteed performance as a function
of γ and δ, with γ ranging from 0 to 1, and δ ranging from 0 to 2. As the upper bound U may
not be tight, the actual performance of the optimal robust price can be better than the displayed
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

12
value. From Figure 1, we see that the provable performance is good when γ and δ are relatively
small. For example, to the left of the curve deﬁned by the equation 5.19δ + γ = 1, the provable
performance guarantee is more than 50%. In Section 4, we will apply the single-product optimal
robust price to the bundling pricing problem and show that the performance of a robust heuristic
for the pure bundle can be very good for even large values of δ of individual products when the
bundle is medium-sized.
Corollary 1(b) implies that if there is more uncertainty in the valuation distribution (measured
by its CV = δ = σ/µ), the optimal robust price is more aggressive (i.e., lower). Bergemann and
Schlag (2011) obtain similar insights under a diﬀerent formulation of the uncertainty set.
Figure 1
Base Model
performance
Figure 2
Performance of Five Distributions
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
γ
ρ
exponential
uniform
normal
lognormal
logit
Our optimal robust price is designed against the worst possible situation selected by the nature.
Next we will demonstrate its performance for ﬁve commonly used distributions: exponential, uni-
form, truncated normal, truncated logit, and lognormal distributions. These distributions are the
same distributions adopted by Chu et al. (2011) to represent various valuation distributions when
the performance of a heuristic bundle pricing policy was tested. Since we know that the true valua-
tion distribution is an exponential or uniform distribution, the optimal price can be easily expressed
in closed form. Then we can compare the proﬁt of our optimal robust price without knowing the
true distribution to the optimal proﬁt under the knowledge of the true distribution. In particular,
we can obtain tighter bounds on the performance of the optimal robust price as follows:
Proposition 1. (a) For an exponential distribution with parameter λ as the underlying distri-
bution, the proﬁt performance of the optimal robust price is (1 −(ke(γ) + γ))e(ke(γ)+γ), where
ke(γ) is the unique real solution to k3 + 3k = 2(1 −γ). In particular, if γ = 0, the proﬁt of our
heuristic captures at least 73.31% of the optimal.
(b) For a uniform distribution on [0,a] as the underlying distribution, the proﬁt performance of
the optimal robust price is (1 −ku(γ)
√
3 −γ)(1 + ku(γ)
√
3 )/(1 −γ
2)2, where ku(γ) is the unique real
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

13
solution to k3 + 3k = 2
√
3(1 −γ). In particular, if γ = 0, the proﬁt of our heuristic captures at
least 72.61% of the optimal.
See Proposition S.1 in the Online Appendix for analogous results of Proposition 1 for normal,
logit, and lognormal valuation distributions which do not have a closed-form characterization of
the optimal price. Figure 2 shows the performance of the optimal robust price for 5 distributions:
exponential distribution (δ = 1), uniform distribution (δ =
1
√
3), truncated normal distribution with
mean 0 and standard deviation 0.5 for the original distribution before truncation, truncated logit
distribution with mean 0.125 and scale parameter 0.25 for the original distribution, and lognormal
distribution with mean 1 and standard deviation 0.5. The latter three distributions serve as a
benchmark for the following numerical studies that adopt parameters of magnitude similar to
Chu et al. (2011, Table 2). Figure 3(a) shows the performance for truncated normal distributions
with σ = 0.5 and µ ranging from −1 to 2.5 for the original distribution. Figure 3(b) shows the
performance for truncated logit distributions with σ = 0.25 and µ ranging from 0 to 2.5. Figure
3(c) shows the performance for lognormal distributions with µ = 1 and σ ranging from 0.5 to 2.
From these examples, we see that the optimal robust price performs decently for commonly used
distributions when γ and δ are not too large.
Figure 3
Commonly Used Distributions
performance
(a) Truncated Normal
performance
(b) Truncated Logit
performance
(c) Lognormal
Note. (a) µ is the mean of the normal distribution before truncation; (b) µ is the mean of the logit distribution before
truncation; (c) σ is the standard deviation of log(V ).
3.2.
Alternative Information Structures
We study the situation where the seller may have less or more information than the mean and
variance of the valuation distribution that we assumed in the base model. The general approach is
similar to that in the base model. That is, we obtain a price heuristic by maximizing a distribution-
free lower bound. As the lower bound may not be tight for these alternative information structures,
in this subsection we no longer refer to the price heuristic as the optimal robust price.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

14
Valuation Support. Suppose the seller only knows the mean µ and the support [vL,vU] of the
customer valuation. The latter is a form of information commonly seen in the robust optimization
literature. With these two pieces of information, we can ﬁnd the scenario that has the largest
standard deviation. Since the larger the standard deviation, the worse the performance guarantee
for that standard deviation, we can then apply our robust-price formula from the base model to
the largest standard deviation to get a performance guarantee against the worst-case scenario.
Proposition 2. Denote by Fr the class of valuation distributions that share the same mean µ
and range [vL,vU]. For all F ∈Fr, the price heuristic p∗
r = p∗
c,µ,σ =
p
µ(vL + vU) −vLvU −µ2

achieves the performance guarantee ρ

γ,δ =
p
µ(vL + vU) −vLvU −µ2/µ

, where p∗(c,µ,σ) is
speciﬁed in Theorem 2 and ρ(γ,δ) is speciﬁed in Corollary 1.
In practice, the pricing managers may often have more information, or a hunch, about the
valuation distribution than we assumed in the base model. In the rest of this subsection, we focus
on how much beneﬁt these additional pieces of information might bring.
Optimal Price Lower Than Mean. So far, we have obtained a performance guarantee under
the robust price p∗= µ −k∗σ that is no more than the mean valuation µ. For those valuation
distributions whose optimal price is known to be also no more than µ (which is assumed in Fang and
Norman 2006), our robust price heuristic can achieve a provably sharper performance guarantee.
Proposition 3. Denote Fl = {F ∈F | min{arg maxp π(p;F)} ≤µ}. For all F ∈Fl, the price
heuristic p∗= µ −k∗σ achieves a strictly sharper performance guarantee min{1 −k∗
τ ,1 −
1
(k∗)2+1},
of which the relative improvement beyond the performance guarantee in Theorem 2 is no less than
γ
(1−γ)(1+τ2).
Figure 4
Performance Improvement If the Optimal Price Is Known to Be Lower Than µ
performance 
improvement
Proposition 3 shows that there is a beneﬁt in knowing that one of the optimal prices is no more
than the mean valuation.4 The relative improvement in performance guarantee with the same price
4 When c = 0, if the valuation distribution is realized as some common distributions, such as truncated normal,
truncated logit, or lognormal, for the realized distributions, the optimal price is indeed less than the mean valuation
µ.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

15
heuristic p∗is at least
γ
(1−γ)(1+τ2), which is increasing in γ and δ. Thus the beneﬁt of such additional
information to improving the performance guarantee tends to be higher if the potential proﬁt
margin is lower or the variability of the valuation distribution is higher. This is because in those
situations, the original performance guarantee can be poor and there is much room for improvement
with extra information. Figure 4 displays the relative improvement lower bound
γ
(1−γ)(1+τ2). From
this ﬁgure, we observe that for a large part of the parameter space, e.g., when τ is large enough or
γ is small enough, the performance improvement tends to be less than 10%.
Distribution Symmetry or Unimodality. In Online Appendix A, we impose two restric-
tions on the valuation distributions, symmetry or unimodality (i.e, there is one primary market
segment), and show that within these special classes of distributions, we can obtain a strictly
sharper performance guarantee. However, we also show that such a performance improvement is
not signiﬁcant. Moreover, when we impose a restrictive assumption of symmetry on the valuation
distribution, the beneﬁt of doing so can be little beyond knowing the value of the median.
Third Moment. In the base model, we obtain a performance guarantee with the knowledge of
the ﬁrst and second moments of the valuation distribution (see Theorem 2). Now, we investigate
the beneﬁt of knowing in addition the third moment of the valuation distribution. Recall that
the seller knows the ﬁrst moment M1 = µ and the second moment M2 = E(V 2) = µ2 + σ2 of the
valuation distribution. Now suppose the seller also knows the third moment M3 = E(V 3).
Bertsimas and Popescu (2005, Theorem 3.3) show that the following bound on the distribution
involving the third moment is tight:
P(V < (1 −k)M1) ≤1 −
(δ2 + k)3
(η + (δ2 + 1)(δ2 + k))(η + (δ2 + k)2),
(1)
where η =
M1M3−M2
2
M4
1
. Select a price heuristic in the form of p = (1 −k)M1. Then the proﬁt can be
written as:
π(p;F) = (p −c)P(V ≥p) = ((1 −k)M1 −c)P(V ≥(1 −k)M1)
≥(µ −c)(1 −
k
1 −γ )
(δ2 + k)3
(η + (δ2 + 1)(δ2 + k))(η + (δ2 + k)2) ≡(µ −c)φ(k),
where the inequality is due to (1). With the additional third moment information, the seller could
maximize φ(k) to obtain a price heuristic. As a result, the beneﬁt of knowing M3 can be measured
by the relative performance gap (µ −c)max
k
φ(k)/L −1, where L is the guaranteed proﬁt with the
information about the ﬁrst and second moments only (see Theorem 1(b)). The relative performance
improvement (µ −c)max
k
φ(k)/L −1 depends on the system primitives through γ, δ and M3.
The maximizer of φ(k), as a root to a quartic equation, has a closed-form expression, but is
very unwieldy. For simplicity, we illustrate the beneﬁt of knowing the third moment numerically.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

16
Figure 5
Comparison of Third Moment Model and Base Model
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
5
10
15
20
25
δ
η
relative performance gap
γ=0.25
γ=0
γ=0.5
(a) The Relative Gap
0
1
2
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
η
δ
absolute performance gap
γ=0.25
γ=0.5
γ=0
(b) The Absolute Gap
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
b
l
 
 
a=0
a=0.25
a=0.5
(c) Benchmark: Base Model
In particular, we ﬁx γ = 0,0.25,0.5 and display the relative and absolute gap as a function of δ
and η: see Figures 5(a) and 5(b). As a benchmark, Figure 5(c) shows the performance of the base
model with only the ﬁrst and second moment information. We make the following observations
from the comparisons. First, the majority of the absolute gaps is no more than 20%. Second, the
beneﬁt of knowing M3 is decreasing in η. That is, if η is higher and hence the skewness is larger,
the beneﬁt of knowing M3 is lower. This is because, within the class of distributions that have
a larger skewness, the mass of the valuation distribution is more concentrated on the left and as
a result, the price heuristic p∗= µ −k∗σ without knowing M3 tends to have already performed
well. Third, when the valuation distribution is more variable, knowing the third moment provides
more beneﬁt by pinning down a subclass of distributions. Lastly, as γ increases, the beneﬁt of
knowing M3 increases signiﬁcantly. This is consistent with the understanding that the performance
guarantee in Theorem 2 decreases in γ (see Corollary 1(a)). Hence with a larger value of γ, there
is more room for improvement by knowing M3.
4.
Multi-Product Robust Pricing
In this section, we generalize the single-product base model to consider the distribution-free pricing
problem in selling multiple products. The seller knows only the mean and standard deviation for
each product but does not know the customers’ exact valuation distribution for each product.
Suppose customer valuations for n products follow n distributions: for each product i = 1,2,...,n,
and its valuation distribution has the mean µi and standard deviation σi. We deﬁne the CV of
product i as δi = σi/µi. The marginal cost for product i is ci. As in Assumption (P), we assume
µi ≥ci for all i. We assume the valuation distributions across products are independent and consider
the correlated valuation distributions in Section 4.1.2. Moreover, customer valuation for a set of
products is additive, i.e., a customer’s valuation for any subset of the products is the sum of its
valuations for all products in the subset.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

17
For any S ⊆[n] ≡{1,2,...,n}, denote by pS, cS, and VS the price, cost and customers’ random
valuation of the combination of products in subset S, respectively. Then cS = P
i∈S
ci and VS = P
i∈S
Vi,
where Vi is the (random) customer valuation for each product i ∈[n] with c.d.f. Fi(·). Let pM =
(pS,S ∈M ) be the price vector of (bundling) assortment M that is a subset of the power set of
[n], i.e., M ⊆P([n]). For example, if M = {[n]}, the only product oﬀering is a pure bundle. The
ﬁrm sets pM and each customer chooses subsets of M such that any product is purchased at most
once and its total surplus is maximized. For a given bundling scheme M , the proﬁt function is
P
S∈M
(pS −cS)qS(pM), where qS(pM) is the market share for S ∈M and a given price vector pM.
In a fashion similar to the single-product problem, for a given bundling scheme M , we focus on
the robust pricing problem under the maximin proﬁt criterion:
max
pM {
min
Fi∈Fi,∀i∈[n]
X
S∈M
(pS −cS)qS(pM)},
where Fi ≡{Fi(v),v ≥0 | E[Vi] = µi,E[V 2
i ] = µ2
i + σ2
i }. By Theorem 1(a), an upper bound of the
proﬁt for a single product i is µi −
τ2
i
1+τ2
i ci. Thus, an upper bound of the proﬁt for the multi-product
problem is
nP
i=1
µi −
τ2
i
1+τ2
i ci.5 If we can derive a lower bound of the proﬁt for a bundling policy M ,
we can obtain its performance guarantee by taking the ratio of the lower and upper bounds. As
the upper bound of the multi-product problem is likely loose, the true performance guarantee can
be much better than the displayed value. Again, as the derived proﬁt lower bound of a bundling
policy tends not to be tight, in this section we only deal with robust bundle pricing heuristics.
4.1.
`A La Carte vs. Pure Bundle
There are two typical ways to sell multiple products: `a la carte (i.e., separate sales) with M = P([n])
and pS = P
i∈S
pi for any S ∈M for which the seller decides on each individual product’s price pi,
i ∈[n], or a pure bundle with M = {[n]} for which the seller decides on the bundle price pb. That
is, either to set a price for each individual product so customers can buy each one separately6, or
to set a price for the bundle of all products so customers buy either a pure bundle or nothing. The
latter practice is becoming common as consumer buying habits trend toward simpler and more
trouble-free experiences. For both selling mechanisms, we can adopt the performance guarantee
result obtained for a single product to study the multiple-product problems. In particular, since the
5 Abdallah et al. (2021) show that a proﬁt upper bound for the multi-product pricing problem is the expected proﬁt
under perfect price discrimination, i.e.,
nP
i=1
E[(Vi −ci)+], where E[(Vi −ci)+] is the expected proﬁt under perfect price
discrimination for single product i.
6 Given that the price for each product is set separately, there is no discount for buying a set of products. Hence the
optimal strategy for a customer is to buy every product that generates a nonnegative surplus.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

18
seller only knows the ﬁrst and second moments of the valuation distribution for each product, it can
apply our robust price for each and obtain a performance guarantee. The seller can also compute
the ﬁrst and second moments of the valuation distribution for the pure bundle of all products,
assuming their valuations are independent or there is some known correlation among them, and
obtain the performance guarantee for a robust bundle pricing heuristic. Then we can compare the
performance guarantees of selling separately and as a pure bundle. It is often unclear whether it is
more proﬁtable to sell separately or as a bundle for given known valuation distributions.
Example 1 (`A La Carte vs. Bundle with Known Distributions). Consider two prod-
ucts. Consumers’ valuations for the two products are known and independently distributed uniform
random variables on [0,1] and [0,θ], respectively, where θ > 0. Assume the marginal cost is 0. Figure
6 shows the optimal proﬁts of `a la carte sales and pure bundle for various values of θ ranging from
0 to 2. Though the bundle tends to outperform `a la carte sales, that is not always true. In other
words, `a la carte sales can perform better for speciﬁc valuation distributions.
□
Figure 6
`A La Carte Sales vs.
Pure Bundle
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
θ
optimal profit
a la carte
pure bundle
Figure 7
Beneﬁt of Large-Bundle
Pricing
performance
Figure 8
Minimum Bundle Size for
ϵ-Optimality
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
τ
n*
ε=0.07
ε=0.08
ε=0.09
ε=0.10
From the robust pricing perspective, when the seller knows only the ﬁrst and second moments,
µi and σi of the valuation distributions Vi, we can make more general statements about when it is
more proﬁtable to sell a bundle. To be isolated from the supply-side eﬀects, we make the following
assumption throughout subsection 4.1:
Assumption (S) (Equal Margin). c1
µ1 = c2
µ2 = ··· = cn
µn = γ.
Assumption (S) allows products to have distinct valuation distributions on the demand side but
requires them to have the same proﬁt margin on the supply side. This may not be restrictive for
some product lines in which proﬁt margins tend not to vary much for diﬀerent products.
4.1.1.
Bundling as a Robust Device. For `a la carte sales, the robust price heuristic for
product i is p∗(ci,µi,σi), where the mapping p∗(c,µ,σ) is speciﬁed in Theorem 2. By Theorem
1(b), the lower bound on each individual product’s proﬁt achieved by our robust price is tight. For
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

19
pure bundling, the robust bundle price heuristic is p∗(P
i ci,P
i µi,
pP
i σ2
i ) and the lower bound
on the bundle’s proﬁt may not be tight, because this lower bound comes from treating the total
valuation of all products as a single random variable and then applying Chebyshev’s inequality.
Nevertheless, if the proﬁt lower bound of the bundle (which may not be achievable) is higher than
that of separate sales (which is tight), the pure bundle generates higher proﬁts than separate sales,
at least for some scenarios.
Proposition 4. If
√P
i σ2
i
P
i µi
≤mini δi, selling a bundle is guaranteed to generate higher proﬁts
than selling products separately.
Proposition 4 says that to guarantee that the bundle is more robustly proﬁtable, it is enough
to require that the CV of the bundle,
√P
i σ2
i
P
i µi , be less than the CVs of all products. In general,
it could be computationally cumbersome to verify whether a bundle is more proﬁtable than `a la
carte sales even for given distributions. Proposition 4 provides easily veriﬁable conditions under
which the bundle is guaranteed to be more proﬁtable when the detailed distribution information,
other than the means and variances, is not available. We now present some special cases of this
proposition.
Corollary 2. For the following cases, selling a bundle is guaranteed to generate higher prof-
its than selling products separately: (a)
σ1
µ1 = σ2
µ2 = ··· = σn
µn = δ; (b) µ1 = µ2 = ··· = µn = µ, and
pP
i σ2
i ≤nmini σi (in particular,
maxi σi
mini σi ≤√n); (c) σ1 = σ2 = ··· = σn = σ, and √nmaxi µi ≤
P
i µi (in particular, maxi µi
mini µi ≤√n).
Corollary 2 part (a) says that as long as valuation distributions for diﬀerent products have the
same CV (a ﬁrst-order measure of variability), it is more robust to sell them in a bundle. This is
not trivial as it appears. In Example 1, all uniform random variables on [0,θ] for θ > 0 do share
the same CV=
1
√
3. However, given that their speciﬁc forms of distributions are uniform, it is not
always more proﬁtable to sell a bundle. Nevertheless, lacking the detailed information about the
distributions, one would ﬁnd it more robustly proﬁtable to oﬀer a bundle instead of `a la carte
sales. The beneﬁt comes from a reduced CV=δ/√n in the valuation for the bundle. In part (b),
one suﬃcient condition for
pP
i σ2
i ≤nmini σi is maxi σi
mini σi ≤√n. Similarly, in part (c), one suﬃcient
condition for √nmaxi µi ≤P
i µi is maxi µi
mini µi ≤√n. Thus, parts (b) and (c) imply that if the valuation
distributions have the same mean (standard deviation, resp.) and the ratio of the maximum and
minimum of standard deviations (means, resp.) is bounded by the square root of the number of
products, it is more robustly proﬁtable to sell a bundle. Corollary 2, can be generalized as follows,
without requiring characteristics of valuation distributions across products to be the same.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

20
Corollary 3. For the following cases, selling a bundle is guaranteed to generate higher proﬁts
than selling products separately: (a) maxi δi
mini δi ≤
P
i µi
√P
i µ2
i
; (b) maxi µi
mini µi ≤n mini σi
√P
i σ2
i
; (c) maxi σi
mini σi ≤
P
i µi
√n maxi µi .
Corollary 3 implies that the insights obtained from Corollary 2 for equal system primitives still
hold, as long as those primitives do not vary much. Next, we study the beneﬁt of a large bundle.
Proposition 5 (Large Bundle: Asymptotic Optimality). Suppose all n products have
the same mean µ, standard deviation σ, and marginal cost c but can have diﬀerent distributions.
For any ϵ ∈(0,1], there exists a threshold n∗(if γ = 0, n∗= ( 3
ϵ)2( 3
ϵ −3) δ2
4 ) such that for a bundle
whose size is more than n∗, the robust bundle price p∗
b = p∗(nc,nµ,√nσ) achieves an ϵ-optimality.7
Moreover, n∗is decreasing in ϵ.
The standard argument for the beneﬁts of bundling a large number of products, such as Bakos
and Brynjolfsson (1999), resorts to the law of large numbers, which requires all random valua-
tions for products to be independent and identically distributed. See Abdallah (2019) for recent
development along this line. In fact, without this restrictive limiting argument, it is diﬃcult, if
not impossible, to extend the result to heterogeneously distributed valuations (which may be cor-
related; see Proposition 6 below). From a robust perspective, Proposition 5 indeed conﬁrms the
beneﬁts of a large bundle regardless of the detailed valuation distributions, as long as they have
the same ﬁrst- and second-order statistical characteristics.
With n products all sharing the same mean and standard deviation (hence, the same CV=δ,
but not the same distribution), when n is large enough, the standard deviation of the bundle
√P
i σ2
i
P
i µi
=
δ
√n will be suﬃciently small. In Figure 7, we ﬁx δ = 1, a relatively large variability in
customers’ valuation, and let the bundle size range from 100 to 850, and γ from 0.5 to 0.8. We
see that the bundle performance increases in the bundle size n and decreases in the proﬁt margin
measure γ. Moreover, by Proposition 5, when γ = 0, the minimum near-optimal bundle size is
n∗= ( 3
ϵ)2( 3
ϵ −3) 1
4τ2 . Figure 8 displays n∗as a function of τ by ﬁxing ϵ = 7%,8%,9%,10%. For
any given τ, the minimum near-optimal bundle size decreases in ϵ. In addition, the marginal value
of a larger bundle size decreases. When τ = 3, the minimum near-optimal bundle size is 675 for
0.1-optimality. However, in order to achieve 0.07-optimality, the minimum near-optimal bundle size
has to be more than 2,000.
7 That is, the ratio of the guaranteed proﬁt achieved by our robust bundle price p∗
b to the optimal proﬁt achieved
by the optimal mixed bundling prices with M = P([n]), for any given valuation distributions of n products, is more
than 1 −ϵ.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

21
4.1.2.
Correlated Values. So far, we assume that customer valuations for all products are
independent. Our results continue to hold for non-positive correlated values and, to some extent,
even for positive correlated values.
Proposition 6 (Non-Positive Correlation). If the correlation between valuations of any
two products is non-positive, Proposition 4, Corollaries 2 and 3, and Proposition 5 still hold.
Recall from Corollary 1(a) that the performance guarantee decreases in the CV of the valuation
distribution. Thus, non-positive valuation correlations among products boost the performance of
the bundle because they reduce the CV of the bundle valuation, whereas the performance of selling
separately is unaﬀected by valuation correlations. By Corollary 1(b), the robust bundle price is
higher under non-positive valuation correlations than under independent valuations.
Proposition 7. If
σ1
µ1 = σ2
µ2 = ··· = σn
µn = δ, selling a bundle is guaranteed to generate higher
proﬁts than selling products separately, regardless of valuation correlations across products.
In the bundling literature, it is well known that if product valuations are known, independent, and
identically distributed, proﬁts are higher under pure bundling than under separate sales. Moreover,
when the known valuation distributions are correlated, proﬁts are higher under pure bundling than
under separate sales if and only if the correlation between the values for the products is negative
or is suﬃciently weak if positive (see, e.g., Belleﬂamme 2006). In other words, if the correlations
are suﬃciently positive, separate sales can be more proﬁtable for given and known correlated
valuation distributions. However, Proposition 7 conﬁrms the beneﬁt of bundling in a robust sense:
as long as the cost structure in terms of proﬁt margins and the demand characteristics in terms of
CVs are the same across all products, the bundle is more robustly proﬁtable than separate sales,
regardless of the detailed valuation distributions and whether they are negatively or positively
correlated. This is because, to protect against the worst case of valuation distributions, the robust
bundle price heuristic and its performance guarantee depend only on the means, variances, and
covariances of the valuation distributions which determine the CV of the bundle valuation and,
moreover, because this bundle valuation’s CV under correlations is weakly smaller than those of
the individual products. If the correlation structure turns out to be the worst for bundling, in
which case all products are positively correlated, bundling is as eﬀective as separate sales, which
is consistent with Carroll (2017). However, bundling is robustly more proﬁtable than separate
sales for correlation structures other than the worst case, which restores the robust proﬁtability of
bundling over separate sales in a more general sense.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

22
4.1.3.
Practical Examples. In the following discussion, we will illustrate the beneﬁt of our
robust bundle price with three practical examples, each with its own distinctive features. In the ﬁrst
example, the bundle contains only digital goods that can be considered as having zero marginal
costs, and the bundle is large. Both features contribute to the very good performance of our robust
bundle price. In the second example, the bundle contains a mix of goods with zero and nonzero
marginal costs and the bundle is medium-sized. In the last example, the bundle is small and
customer valuations are notably correlated.
Spotify. Spotify is a music streaming service provider. Its premium-tier service gives users
unlimited music streaming at a cost of $9.99 per month. Spotify pays royalties for all of the
listening that takes place through its service by distributing nearly 70% of its revenues to the
copyright holders. A single play on Spotify Premium was worth on average about 0.68 cents in
royalties (Smith 2015). The subscription service of Spotify is in fact a bundle of zero-marginal-
cost digital goods; i.e., c ≈0. We can estimate the average number of songs a subscriber listens
to per month:
9.99×70%
0.0068
≈1028. In general, it would be very hard to price such bundles, which
allow customers to choose the songs they want. The subscribers on average choose and listen to
about 1,000 songs a month, according to their own heterogeneous preferences. Fortunately, our
distribution-free performance guarantee for a bundle only requires estimates of three primitives,
i.e., the valuation heterogeneity in a song δ, the proﬁt margin measure γ, and the bundle size n. We
assume all songs have roughly the same δ, which may be close to reality, since customers choose to
play their favorite songs. In Figure 9, we illustrate the performance guarantee of the robust bundle
price by having δ range from 0.1 to 2, γ range from 0 to 0.5, and n equal 1,000. We see that for
Spotify, which has γ ≈0, a bundle of size 1,000 would guarantee a performance of about 83% for
valuation δ = 1, which is typically considered as “random,” and about 75% for valuation δ = 2,
which is typically considered to be far more than “random.” Moreover, even for the extreme case
where γ = 0.5, which typically corresponds to a proﬁt margin for physical goods and δ = 2, the
performance guarantee exceeds 60%.
IT Service Provider. In Xue et al. (2015), the authors study the pricing problem for person-
alized bundles of goods and services. They test their model by using empirical data from a leading
information technology (IT) service provider. We adopt the parameters from this paper and use
them as inputs to test our robust bundle price. A typical bundle from this IT company consists of
100 components, which are a mix of software and hardware. The marginal cost of noncustomized
commercial software can be considered as 0; i.e., γ1 = 0 for software. Following a working paper
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

23
Figure 9
Performance of Spotify
performance
Figure 10
Performance of IT Service Provider
performance
version of Xue et al. (2015), we choose γ2 = 55.7% for hardware. In general, 70% of the compo-
nents of a personalized bundle is software. The average CV of customer valuation for a component
varies from 15% to 30%. Since the authors do not diﬀerentiate the CVs between software and
hardware, we can consider the CVs of valuations for software and hardware to be the same, but
they have diﬀerent means and standard deviations. That is, if we denote means and standard devi-
ations of software and hardware by µ1, µ2, σ1, and σ2, respectively, σ1
µ1 = σ2
µ2 = δ. Then assuming
independence across valuations for diﬀerent products, the CV of valuations for the whole bundle
is at δ =
√
0.7σ2
1+0.3σ2
2
0.7µ1+0.3µ2
=
δ√
0.7µ2
1+0.3µ2
2
0.7µ1+0.3µ2
=
δ
q
0.7( µ1
µ2 )2+0.3
0.7 µ1
µ2 +0.3
≤
δ
√
0.3. By Corollary 1(b), the performance
guarantee is decreasing in γ and δ. Hence, to be conservative, we set the CV for the whole bundle
δ =
δ
√
0.3, where δ ∈[15%,30%]. Moreover, because the bundle is a mix of software with γ1 = 0 and
hardware with γ2 = 55.7%, the ratio of the average cost and mean for the bundle, γ, should be
between 0 and 55.7%. To be conservative, we choose γ = 55.7%. With the primitives estimated as
above, Figure 10 shows the results of applying our robust bundle price to a personalized bundle
that may have about 100 to 200 components. We observe that in all the instances tested with those
very conservative inputs, our robust bundle price has a performance guarantee of more than 60%.
TheatreWorks. TheatreWorks is a theater company based in Palo Alto, California. It oﬀers
a full eight-play season subscription package. Chu et al. (2011) use the data of eight diﬀerent
plays or musicals from TheatreWorks to estimate consumer valuations. Unlike the previous two
examples, consumer valuations of eight plays or musicals are correlated. The authors assume that
the joint distribution of consumer valuations is an eight-dimensional bimodal normal distribution,
with the estimated values listed in Chu et al. (2011, Table 8A). Rather than assuming a speciﬁc
joint distribution, we apply our robust bundle price with µ = 164.7568 and σ = 210.5679, imputed
from the data. As a result, δ = 1.2780. Our heuristic guarantees a proﬁt of $33.47. With Chu
et al. (2011) obtaining the optimal proﬁt of $63.67 under the knowledge of the true valuation
distribution, our bundle price guarantees a 0.5257-optimality without our knowing any detailed
distribution information.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

24
4.2.
Heuristic Mixed Bundling: A Single Product or Pure Bundle
The mixed bundling problem with all the combinations of subsets of products priced and available
for purchase is generally challenging. We consider a heuristic bundling scheme which allows cus-
tomers to choose from buying only one of the products or a pure bundle, i.e., the purchase option
for any customer is chosen from the set M = {{1},{2},...,{n},[n]}. Thus the seller has n + 1
number of prices to set. When n = 2, such a bundling scheme boils down to mixed bundling.
We follow the same idea as the single-product robust pricing problem to derive a performance
guarantee for this heuristic bundling scheme. We ﬁrst derive a lower bound by using the Olkin and
Pratt’s inequality (i.e., the multivariate case of Chebyshev’s inequality, see Marshall and Olkin
19608). Then we derive a distribution-free heuristic pricing policy by maximizing the lower bound.
With the proﬁt upper bound
nP
i=1
 µi −
τ2
i
1+τ2
i ci

, we can obtain a performance guarantee for the
heuristic policy.
Proposition 8. Let i∗= arg maxi{Li}, where Li is the optimal value of problem (2):
max
k1>0,...,kn>0,kb>0
(µi −ci −kiσi)

1 −
n
Y
i=1
1
1 + k2
i

+
X
j̸=i
(µj −cj) −¯ki
sX
j̸=i
σ2
j

T,
s.t.
µi −ci −kiσi ≤µj −cj −kjσj,
∀j ̸= i,
kiσi + ¯ki
sX
j̸=i
σ2
j = kb
v
u
u
t
n
X
i=1
σ2
i ,
¯ki > 0,
(2)
with T = 1 −
1
(n+1)2
√u + √n
s
(n + 1)
 nP
i=1
1
¯k2
i + 1
k2
b

−u
2
, u =
nP
i=1
1
¯k2
i +
1
k2
b + 2
 nP
i=1
P
j<i
ρij
¯ki¯kj +
nP
i=1
ρn+1,i
kb¯ki

, ρn+1,i =
rP
j̸=i
σ2
j
r nP
i=1
σ2
i , and ρij =
P
k̸=i,j
σ2
k
rP
k̸=i
σ2
k
rP
k̸=j
σ2
k

. The heuristic
bundling scheme, given by p∗
i = µi −k∗
i σi, ∀i, and p∗
b =
nP
i=1
µi −k∗
b
r nP
i=1
σ2
i , where k∗
i , ∀i, and k∗
b are
the optimal solutions to problem (2) for i = i∗, achieves a distribution-free lower bound Li∗.
When all products have the same parameters, they are “symmetric” in a robust sense; i.e., the
robust pricing heuristic derived in Proposition 8 degenerates to a pricing policy that charges the
same price for any single product, which simpliﬁes the problem.
Corollary 4. Suppose µ1 = µ2 = ··· = µn, σ1 = σ2 = ··· = σn, and c1 = c2 = ··· = cn. Derive
a pricing policy for the heuristic bundling scheme as: p∗
i = µi −k∗
i σi and p∗
b =
nP
i=1
µi −k∗
b
r nP
i=1
σ2
i ,
where k∗
i and k∗
b are the optimal solutions to the following optimization problem:
max
√nkb>ki>0
(µi −ci −kiσi)

1 −
1
(1 + k2
i )n

+

(n −1)(µi −ci) −(√nkb −ki)σi

T,
(3)
8 Rujeerapaiboon et al. (2018) provide multivariate Chebyshev inequalities for products of symmetric nonnegative
random variables.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

25
where T = 1 −
1
(n+1)2
√
n(n−1)
¯ki
+
1
kb + √n
r
2n
¯k2
i + n
k2
b −
2√
n(n−1)
kb¯ki
2
and ki + √n −1¯ki = √nkb. The
optimal value of (3) is a distribution-free lower bound for the heuristic bundling scheme.
Figure 11
Performance of Heuristic Mixed Bundling Pricing
0
50%
25%
 ratio of cost to mean
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
performance
Uniform
0
50%
25%
 ratio of cost to mean
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
performance
Normal
0
50%
25%
 ratio of cost to mean
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
performance
Exponential
0
50%
25%
 ratio of cost to mean
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
performance
Normal(v)
0
50%
25%
 ratio of cost to mean
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
performance
Logit
0
50%
25%
 ratio of cost to mean
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
performance
Lognormal
To show the performance of the heuristic in Proposition 8, we assume that n = 2 (for which our
heuristic bundling scheme is mixed bundling) and that both products have the same parameters,
and use the taste distributions from Chu et al. (2011, Table 2). Figure 11 displays the box plots of
various percentiles of the heuristic’s performances benchmarked against the optimal proﬁt under
full information. As expected, when the marginal cost increases, the performance decreases. Even
though the performance may not be stellar, at least Proposition 8 provides a way to compute a
heuristic that performs reasonably and has a provable performance guarantee.
4.3.
Clustered Bundling
In this subsection, we partition n products into k disjoint clusters, i.e., [n] = ∪lSl, and charge a
bundle price for each cluster Sl. We refer to this as the scheme of clustered bundling with M =
P({Sl,∀l}) as a special case of mixed bundling, which imposes a price for each mutually exclusive
subset of products and allows customers to choose one or multiple subsets. The idea behind this is
that within a cluster that we could leverage CS clustering algorithms to identify, products tend to
be similar in nature, and our robust bundle heuristic for that cluster of products should perform
well.
Mean-Ranked Clustered Bundling. We ﬁrst propose a naive clustered bundling heuristic,
which places the products with similar means into the same cluster. Without loss of generality,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

26
let µ1 ≤µ2 ≤··· ≤µn. We propose the following heuristic: all products are grouped into k clusters
by order, i.e., any product in the i-th cluster has a smaller index than that of any product in the
(i+1)-th cluster. We call this heuristic mean-ranked clustered bundling. To ﬁnd the optimal mean-
ranked clustered bundling, we develop Algorithm OA.1 of the Online Appendix. For a suﬃciently
large number of products, searching for the optimal mean-ranked clustered bundling may require
signiﬁcant computational eﬀorts, as we show in Proposition OA.5 of the Online Appendix that the
computational complexity of Algorithm OA.1 is exponential. Then we develop two polynomial-time
algorithms to generate a heuristic mean-ranked clustered bundling: Fixed Radius Clustering (FRC)
and Top-down/Bottom-up Clustering (TBC) algorithms. We show that both heuristics are more
proﬁtable than separate sales and the pure bundle, or reduce to one of them (see Online Appendix
for more details).
General Clustered Bundling. We next treat (ci,µi,σi) as the features of product i. It is
natural to place those products with a similar feature vector into the same cluster. Thus, we propose
a practical heuristic of General Clustered Bundling (GCB): ﬁrst, for any given k = 1,2,...,n,
we divide all products into k clusters by a commonly used clustering algorithm, e.g., k-means
clustering; then calculate the lower bound on the proﬁt of each bundle in the form of Theorem
1(b); and lastly, ﬁnd the optimal k∗such that the total proﬁt lower bound is maximized. It is easy
to see this GCB heuristic reduces to separate sales when k∗= n and the pure bundle when k∗= 1.
Thus, this GCB heuristic has a weakly better performance guarantee than separate sales and the
pure bundle. The pseudo-code for the algorithm is given in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 General Clustered Bundling (GCB)
1: Input: xi = (ci,µi,σi), where i = 1,2,...,n
2: for k = 1,2,...,n do
3:
Using a clustering algorithm to divide {1,2,...,n} into k clusters
4:
Lk
m ←the lower bound on the proﬁt of the m-th cluster, m = 1,2,...,k
5:
Lk ←P
m Lk
m
6: end for
7: Let k∗= arg maxk Lk
8: Output: The total proﬁt lower bound Lk∗, and the clustered bundling heuristic corresponding to the k∗clusters
Comparison of Various Policies. To compare the performance guarantees of separate sales,
the pure bundle, FRC, TBC and GCB, we ﬁx the ratio of cost to mean as γ = 0 or γ = 0.25 for
each product. For n = 10, 30 or 50, we generate 1,000 scenarios, and each scenario contains n
products with µi independently generated from the uniform distribution U[0,10], and σi indepen-
dently generated from the uniform distribution U[0.1,5]. Figure 12 displays the box plots of the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

27
performance guarantees (i.e., the sum of the proﬁt lower bounds of each cluster divided by the
sum of the proﬁt upper bounds of each cluster) across ﬁve policies, where step 3 of Algorithm 1
adopts the celebrated k-means clustering. It is observed from Figure 12 that the gap in the perfor-
mance guarantees between separate sales and the other four bundling policies becomes larger when
n increases. And the gap in the performance guarantees between the pure bundle and our three
heuristics becomes smaller when n increases, which implies the pure bundle performs well for large
values of n. Furthermore, Figure 13 plots the empirical distributions of the gap of performance
guarantees between FRC and GCB, and between TBC and GCB across 1,000 scenarios. On one
hand, when n is relatively small, GCB may be better or worse than FRC and TBC. If GCB does
better, the gap can be as large as 0.3; however, the gap is no more than 0.1 if FRC or TBC is
better. On the other hand, TBC dominates the other two heuristics when n is relatively large.
Figure 12
Performance Guarantees of Five Policies
separate sales pure bundle
FRC
TBC
GCB(k-means)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
performance guarantee
n=10, =0
separate sales pure bundle
FRC
TBC
GCB(k-means)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
performance guarantee
n=10, =0.25
separate sales pure bundle
FRC
TBC
GCB(k-means)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
performance guarantee
n=30, =0
separate sales pure bundle
FRC
TBC
GCB(k-means)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
performance guarantee
n=30, =0.25
separate sales pure bundle
FRC
TBC
GCB(k-means)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
performance guarantee
n=50, =0
separate sales pure bundle
FRC
TBC
GCB(k-means)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
performance guarantee
n=50, =0.25
5.
Alternative Robust Criteria
Previously, we have focused on the maximin proﬁt criterion. In this section, we consider two
alternative performance criteria and then compare the optimal robust prices under all three criteria.
Given a price p, if the true customer valuation distribution is F, then the relative regret due to
not knowing the true distribution can be measured by 1 −
π(p;F )
max
z
{π(z;F )}. Denote by ¯p the optimal
price that minimizes the worst relative regret, referred to as the minimax relative regret criterion,
i.e., ¯p = arg minp

max
F ∈F 1 −
π(p;F )
max
z
{π(z;F )}

. The regret in its absolute term due to not knowing the
true distribution can be measured by max
z
π(z;F) −π(p;F). Denote by ˜p the optimal price that
minimizes the worst absolute regret, referred to as the minimax absolute regret criterion, i.e.,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

28
Figure 13
Gap of Performance Guarantee between FRC and GCB, TBC and GCB
-0.35
-0.3
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
gap of performance guarantee
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
counts
n=10, =0
FRC
TBC
-0.3
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
gap of performance guarantee
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
counts
n=10, =0.25
FRC
TBC
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
gap of performance guarantee
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
counts
n=30, =0
FRC
TBC
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
gap of performance guarantee
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
counts
n=30, =0.25
FRC
TBC
-0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
gap of performance guarantee
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
counts
n=50, =0
FRC
TBC
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
gap of performance guarantee
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
counts
n=50, =0.25
FRC
TBC
˜p = arg minp{max
F ∈F[max
z
π(z;F)−π(p;F)]}. Under the minimax relative regret criterion, the optimal
robust price and the corresponding worst relative regret can be characterized as follows.
Theorem 3 (Minimax Relative Regret Criterion). The
optimal
price
that
min-
imizes
the
worst
relative
regret
is
¯p = µ −¯kσ,
where
¯k =
3q
τ/2 +
p
(τ/2)2 + (2/3)3 +
3q
τ/2 −
p
(τ/2)2 + (2/3)3 ≥0, and the corresponding worst relative regret is
1
1+¯k2 . Moreover,
the worst relative regret is asymptotically achievable by a series of two-point distributions:
V =
(
µ −kησ with prob.
1
1+k2η ,
µ + 1
kη σ with prob. 1 −
1
1+k2η , with kη = ¯k + η, as η ↘0.
Theorem 3 shows that the optimal robust price ¯p under the minimax relative regret criterion has
a closed form similar to the optimal price p∗under the maximin proﬁt criterion. Moreover, the worst
relative regret for ¯p can also be asymptotically achievable by a series of two-point distributions.
Next we compare the optimal prices under the three robust criteria.
Theorem 4 (Three Robust Criteria). The optimal robust prices under the three criteria
are ordered as p∗< ¯p < ˜p, where the characterization of ˜p is given in the proof.
The optimal robust price p∗achieves the highest proﬁt for the seller against the worst possible
distribution, ¯p minimizes the maximum relative regret (i.e., one minus the relative proﬁt gap due
to not knowing the true distribution), and ˜p minimizes the maximum absolute regret (i.e., the
absolute proﬁt gap due to not knowing the true distribution). Theorem 4 shows that of the three
criteria, the maximin proﬁt criterion leads to the most aggressive (i.e., lowest) price. This is because
the optimal prices under the two alternative criteria aim at a proﬁt gap, and are tolerant of less
aggressive behavior since the optimal proﬁts max
z
π(z;F) under the knowledge of the true extreme
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

29
Figure 14
Performance of Alternative Robust Prices for the Absolute Proﬁt Measure
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
relative profit gap
(a)
(b)
Note. (a) The performance of ¯p that is optimal under the minimax relative regret criterion. (b) The performance of
˜p that is optimal under the minimax absolute regret criterion.
distributions are also low. In contrast, as a survival measure aimed at the absolute proﬁt value, the
optimal price under the maximin proﬁt criterion has to be more aggressive. The comparison above
demonstrates the importance of identifying an appropriate objective in robust price optimization, as
diﬀerent criteria result in distinct optimal robust prices even under the same information structure.
Moreover, with the maximin proﬁt criterion resulting in a lower optimal robust price, it leads to a
higher market penetration level and higher social welfare than the two alternative criteria.9 Higher
market penetration can be preferred by a for-proﬁt ﬁrm, and higher social welfare can be appealing
to a socially responsible seller.
The alternative optimal robust prices ¯p and ˜p may not perform well for the absolute proﬁt
measure. For example, consider the two-point distribution F o deﬁned in Theorem 3 with kη =
¯k + η, where η is suﬃciently small. Figure 14(a) displays the relative proﬁt gap between p∗and
¯p, [π(p∗;F o)−π(¯p;F o)]/π(¯p;F o), under the two-point distribution F o, and shows that the relative
gap is always more than 1 when τ ranges from 0.5 to 2. Moreover, this relative gap is decreasing
in τ. Figure 14(b) illustrates the relative proﬁt gap between p∗and ˜p under F o, [π(p∗;F o) −
π(˜p;F o)]/π(˜p;F o), and shows this relative gap is increasing in δ and γ, always more than 0, and
more than 1 for most cases.
In a fashion similar to the multi-product robust pricing problem under the maximin proﬁt
criterion, we can deﬁne the multi-product robust pricing problem under the minimax relative regret
criterion as
min
¯pM

max
Fi∈Fi,∀i∈[n]1 −
P
S∈M
(¯pS −cS)qS(¯pM)
max
pS
P
S∈M
(pS −cS)qS(pM)

.
(4)
9 For any given random valuation V , the market penetration level P(V ≥p) and the social welfare E[V −c | V ≥
p]P(V ≥p) are decreasing in p.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

30
In view of the similarity between the closed forms of the optimal robust price under the maximin
proﬁt and minimax relative regret criteria, we will compare separate sales and the pure bundle
under the minimax relative regret criterion. For separate sales, M = P([n]) and ¯pS = P
i∈S
¯pi for any
S ∈M and the seller decides on each individual product’s price ¯pi, i ∈[n]. For the pure bundle,
M = {[n]} and the seller decides on the bundle price ¯pb. Under the minimax relative regret criterion,
we say pure bundling is guaranteed to perform better than separate sales if the optimal objective
value of (4) under pure bundling is smaller than that under separate sales. All the results in the
comparison of pure bundling and separate sales under the maximin proﬁt criterion in Section 4.1
carry over to the minimax relative regret criterion, which we summarize as follows.
Proposition 9 (Bundling as a Robust Device). Consider the minimax relative regret cri-
terion. If any condition in Propositions 4, 6, 7, or Corollaries 2, 3 is satisﬁed, selling a bundle is
guaranteed to perform better than selling products separately. Moreover, the asymptotic optimality
of a large bundle in Proposition 5 holds.
As results in Section 4.2 rely on the multivariate case of Chebyshev’s inequality, they cannot be
extended to the minimax relative regret criterion. Nevertheless, the idea of clustered bundling and
the proposed heuristics in Section 4.3 are suﬃciently generic to account for the minimax relative
regret criterion.
6.
Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we provide a robust price for the distribution-free pricing problems of a single product
and multiple products under two robust criteria. The robust prices (see Theorems 2 and 3) are in
closed form and hence are eﬃciently computable. Their interpretation can be easily explained to
pricing managers and has a natural connection with the newsvendor ordering decision that is widely
taught in the MBA classrooms. Both robust prices also have a provable performance guarantee
and are indeed the optimal robust price for a single product under the associated robust criterion.
We extend the single-product result to the multiple-product setting by studying separate sales,
a pure bundle, and other bundling heuristics such as clustered bundling. Given their simplicity
and practical values, we expect the results to provide a tool in situations where prices need to be
determined frequently for diﬀerent customers of whom the seller has little knowledge.
References
Abdallah, T. 2019. On the beneﬁt (or cost) of large-scale bundling. Prod. Oper. Management 28(4) 955–969.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

31
Abdallah, T, A Asadpour, J Reed. 2021. Large-scale bundle size pricing: A theoretical analysis. Oper. Res.
https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2020.2097.
Adams, WJ, JL Yellen. 1976. Commodity bundling and the burden of monopoly. Quart. J. Econom. 90(3)
475–498.
Allouah, A, A Bahamou, O Besbes. 2021. Pricing with samples. https://ssrn.com/abstract=3334650.
Azar, PD, S Micali. 2013. Parametric digital auctions. Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Innovations in
Theoretical Computer Science. 231–232.
Babaioﬀ, M, N Immorlica, B Lucier, SM Weinberg. 2014. A simple and approximately optimal mechanism
for an additive buyer. Proceedings of the 55th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer
Science .
Bakos, Y, E Brynjolfsson. 1999. Bundling information goods: Pricing, proﬁts, and eﬃciency. Management
Sci. 45(12) 1613–1630.
Belleﬂamme, P. 2006. Versioning information goods. G Illing, M Peitz, eds., Industrial Organization and the
Digital Economy, chap. 6. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 175–206.
Bergemann, D, K Schlag. 2008. Pricing without priors. J. Eur. Econom. Assoc. 6(2-3) 560–569.
Bergemann, D, K Schlag. 2011. Robust monopoly pricing. J. Econom. Theory 146(6) 2527–2543.
Bertsimas, D, I Popescu. 2005. Optimal inequalities in probability theory: A convex optimization approach.
SIAM J. Optim. 15(3) 780–804.
Carrasco, V, VF Luz, N Kos, M Messner, PK Monteiro, H Moreira. 2018. Optimal selling mechanisms under
moment conditions. J. Econom. Theory 177 245–279.
Carroll, G. 2017. Robustness and separation in multidimensional screening. Econometrica 85(2) 453–488.
Chakraborty, I. 1999. Bundling decisions for selling multiple objects. Econom. Theory 13(3) 723–733.
Chu, CS, P Leslie, A Sorensen. 2011. Bundle-size pricing as an approximation to mixed bundling. Amer.
Econom. Rev. 101(1) 263–303.
Cohen, MC, AN Elmachtoub, X Lei. 2019. Price discrimination with fairness constraints. https://ssrn.
com/abstract=3459289.
Cohen, MC, G Perakis, RS Pindyck. 2021. A simple rule for pricing with limited knowledge of demand.
Management Sci. 67(3) 1608–1621.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

32
Elmachtoub, AN, V Gupta, ML Hamilton. 2018. The value of personalized pricing. https://ssrn.com/
abstract=3127719.
Fang, H, P Norman. 2006. To bundle or not to bundle. RAND J. Econom. 37(4) 946–963.
Gallego, G, K Katircioglu, B Ramachandran. 2007. Inventory management under highly uncertain demand.
Oper. Res. Lett. 35(3) 281–289.
Gallego, G, I Moon. 1993. The distribution free newsboy problem: Review and extensions. J. Oper. Res.
Soc. 44(8) 825–834.
Hettich, R, KO Kortanek. 1993. Semi-inﬁnite programming: Theory, methods, and applications. SIAM Rev.
35(3) 380–429.
Isii, K. 1962. On sharpness of tchebycheﬀ-type inequalities. Ann. Institute Statist. Math. 14(1) 185–197.
Ko¸cyi˘git, C¸, N Rujeerapaiboon, D Kuhn. 2021. Robust multidimensional pricing: Separation without regret.
Math. Programming Forthcoming.
Kos, N, M Messner. 2015. Selling to the mean. https://ssrn.com/abstract=2632014.
Li, X, H Sun, C-P Teo. 2019. Convex optimization for bundle size pricing problem. https://ssrn.com/
abstract=3426933.
Ma, W, D Simchi-Levi. 2015. Reaping the beneﬁts of bundling under high production costs. Working paper,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Marshall, A, I Olkin. 1960. Multivariate chebyshev inequalities. Ann. Math. Statist. 31(4) 1001–1014.
Natarajan, K, M Sim, J Uichanco. 2018. Asymmetry and ambiguity in the newsvendor models. Management
Sci. 64(7) 2973–3468.
Perakis, G, G Roels. 2008. Regret in the newsvendor model with partial information. Oper. Res. 56(1)
188–203.
Rujeerapaiboon, N, D Kuhn, W Wiesemann. 2018. Chebyshev inequalities for products of random variables.
Math. Oper. Res. 43(3) 887–918.
Smith, E. 2015. How the cash ﬂows in spotify streams. Wall Street Journal June 3, The Upshot column.
Thiele, A. 2008. Pricing with uncertain customer valuations. J. Revenue Pricing Management 7(2) 196–206.
Xue, Z, Z Wang, M Ettl. 2015.
Pricing personalized bundles: A new approach and an empirical study.
Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 18(1) 51–68.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

1
Online Appendix to “Distribution-Free Pricing”
A.
Alternative Information Structure
A.1.
Distribution Symmetry
In this subsection, we consider symmetric distributions. In particular, we consider a class of val-
uation distributions that are symmetric and share the same mean µ and standard deviation σ,
denoted by Fs ⊂F. We will comment on the purpose of this consideration after presenting our
results.
Proposition OA.1. Assume F ∈Fs. The price heuristic
p∗
s =
(
µ −k∗
sσ
if τ ≥
2(
q
5+
√
17
4
)3+
q
5+
√
17
4
2
≈4.2,
µ
otherwise,
where k∗
s =
3
r
1
2τ +
q
1
4τ 2 + ( 1
6)3 +
3
r
1
2τ −
q
1
4τ 2 + ( 1
6)3, achieves a sharper performance guarantee.
Moreover, p∗≤p∗
s.
Proposition OA.1 shows that the knowledge of the valuation distribution is symmetric results
in less aggressive pricing (i.e., p∗
s ≥p∗) and indeed provides more value. The beneﬁts come from
two sources. First, technically speaking, instead of applying the one-sided Chebyshev’s inequality,
we can resort to the two-sided Chebyshev’s inequality and obtain sharper lower and upper bounds
with the price heuristic p = µ−k∗
sσ. Second, by setting the price at the mean valuation, i.e., p = µ,
the seller earns a guaranteed proﬁt of 1
2(µ −c), regardless of the valuation distribution as long as
it is symmetric. Next, we show the ﬁrst beneﬁt is limited in the parameter space where the price
heuristic is not equal to the mean valuation (i.e., τ ≥4.2).
Proposition OA.2. For all F ∈Fs, if τ ≥
2(
q
5+
√
17
4
)3+
q
5+
√
17
4
2
≈4.2, then Π(p∗;F )
Π(p∗s;F ) ≥95%.
Proposition OA.2 shows that the ﬁrst beneﬁt that comes from using the two-sided Chebyshev’s
inequality is not very signiﬁcant. That is because symmetry cannot eliminate the extreme case of a
symmetric two-point distribution. Moreover, the second beneﬁt is not more valuable than knowing
the median of the valuation distribution. In other words, except that the area below the mean is
equal to the area above the mean in a distribution, detailed symmetry at other points (other than
the mean) is not helpful. One may argue that the symmetric valuation distribution is impractical,
even though some theoretical work speciﬁcally requires such a distributional assumption in order
to derive insights (see, e.g., Fang and Norman 2006). The gain from this somewhat hypothetical
exercise is that even though we impose a very restrictive property such as symmetry on the valuation
distribution, the beneﬁt can be little beyond knowing the median. This insight is further conﬁrmed
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

2
Figure OA.1
Symmetric or Unimodal Distribution
performance
(a)
performance
(b)
performance
(c)
Note. (a) Symmetric distribution with both beneﬁts (b) Symmetric distribution with one beneﬁt (not using the
median information) (c) Unimodal distribution
when we compare the performance guarantees with and without the knowledge of the unimodality
of the valuation distribution. Nevertheless, the percentile information such as the median can be
very valuable. By pricing at the z-th percentile, vz, of the valuation, the seller can guarantee a
proﬁt of z(vz −c).
Figure OA.1(a) shows the performance of symmetric distributions. It is obviously better than
the base model in comparison with Figure 1. By Proposition OA.1, if τ = 1−γ
δ
≤4.2, i.e., to the
right of the line 4.2δ +γ = 1, the price heuristic is µ. Thus we can see that the improvement beyond
the base model is due to setting the price to the median µ, namely, the second beneﬁt. Moreover,
by Proposition OA.1, if τ = 1−γ
δ
≤1, i.e., to the right of the line δ + γ = 1, with the price heuristic
being µ, the performance guarantee becomes 1−γ
2−γ, independent of δ. To isolate those two beneﬁts,
Figure OA.1(b) shows the performance guarantee without letting the price heuristic be equal to
the mean. In other words, we display only the ﬁrst beneﬁt. Comparing Figures 1 and OA.1(b),
we see that applying the two-sided Chebyshev’s inequality aﬀords little or even no beneﬁt beyond
applying the one-sided Chebyshev’s inequality. In particular, when τ = 1−γ
δ
≤1.5, i.e., to the right
of the line 3δ + 2γ = 2, k∗
s given by equation (S.18) is less than 1, for which case we have no more
beneﬁt from applying the two-sided Chebyshev’s inequality than the one-sided one.
A.2.
Distribution Unimodality
In this subsection, we consider the situation where the seller has the additional information that
the valuation distribution is unimodal, which can be understood as there being one primary market
segment. In particular, we consider a class of valuation distributions that are unimodal and share
the same mean µ and standard deviation σ, denoted by Fu ⊂F.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

3
Proposition OA.3. Assume F ∈Fu. There exists the price heuristic p∗
u that achieves a sharper
performance guarantee. Moreover, p∗
u ≥p∗if τ ≥17
√
2
3
√
3 ≈4.63, otherwise, p∗
u ≤p∗.
From Proposition OA.3, we can see that if τ ≥4.63, p∗
u ≥p∗, otherwise, p∗
u ≤p∗. That is because
the class of unimodal distributions is more concentrated around the mean for smaller standard
deviation σ than the class of general distributions that share the same mean and standard deviation.
Hence, when the standard deviation decreases, the price heuristic increases faster towards the mean
for the unimodal distributions than for the general class of distributions.
The unimodality may reduce the (two-sided) Chebyshev’s bound by a factor of at least 4/9.
However, by Proposition OA.3, this occurs when τ = 1−γ
δ
is large enough (i.e. τ ≥5.72), in other
words, when γ or δ is small enough. By Corollary 1(a), the performance guarantee given by the base
model is decreasing in γ and δ, and thus there is little room to improve the performance guarantee
with small values of γ and δ by knowing more information of unimodality. More importantly,
knowing the unimodality does not technically eliminate the possibility of the extreme case of two-
point distributions. In the following proposition, we conﬁrm that the beneﬁt of knowing unimodality
is not very signiﬁcant.
Proposition OA.4. For all F ∈Fu, if τ ≥17
√
2
3
√
3 ≈4.63,
Π(p∗;F )
Π(p∗u;F ) ≥95%. If 2.65 ≤τ ≤17
√
2
3
√
3 ≈
4.63,
L
Lu ≥87%, where L and Lu are the achievable lower bounds for the model without and with
unimodality, respectively.
Whereas a region with a large middle-class base has a unimodal wealth distribution, another
region with a high Gini index may have a bipolar wealth distribution. Analogously, the targeted
consumer market may also have a valuation distribution that is not unimodal. For example, there
could be many vertically separated segments of customers whose valuations are clustered in their
segment. Although marketing research, which may be expensive, can be used to investigate whether
the customer valuation distribution is unimodal, Proposition OA.4 implies that the additional
beneﬁt of having such information is no more than 15%(≈
1
87% −1).
Figure OA.1(c) shows the performance guarantee for unimodal distributions, with δ ranging
from 0 to 2, and γ ranging from 0 to 1. In comparison with Figure 1, the gap between knowing
the unimodality information and not knowing is not much, as is analytically demonstrated by
Proposition OA.4.
B.
Mean-Ranked Clustered Bundling
Algorithm OA.1 Mean-Ranked Clustered Bundling
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

4
1: Input: ci, µi, σi, where i = 1,2,...,n
2: Initialize a binary-matrix M with 2n−1 rows and n −1 columns
3: for j = 1,2,...,2n−1 do
4:
Find the index of 0 in j-th row vector of M and store them in an array Kj, update Kj ←[0 Kj n]
5:
for m = 1,2,...,length(Kj) −1 do
6:
Lj
m ←the total proﬁt lower bound of a bundle with products i ∈{Kj
m + 1,Kj
m + 2,...,Kj
m+1}
7:
end for
8:
πj ←
length(Kj)−1
P
m=1
Lj
m
9: end for
10: Let j∗= arg maxj πj
11: Output: The total proﬁt lower bound πj∗, and the corresponding clustered bundling for j∗
Proposition OA.5. Algorithm OA.1 can ﬁnd the optimal mean-ranked clustered bundling, and
its computational complexity is at least O(2n).
Proof of Proposition OA.5.
First, we prove that there are 2n−1 cases for mean-ranked clustered
bundling by induction. Consider n = 2, there are two cases: products 1 and 2 are bundled as a
cluster, or products 1 and 2 are divided as two clusters. Suppose n = m, there are 2m−1 cases, then
we prove it is true for n = m + 1. Consider products 1,2,...,m, there are 2m−1 cases. And for any
case, the product m + 1 can be put into the last cluster or to be a single cluster. Hence, there
are 2m−1 × 2 = 2m cases. Second, Algorithm OA.1 considers 2n−1 cases for mean-ranked clustered
bundling. Thus it contains all cases of for mean-ranked clustered bundling. In other words, it
outputs the optimal mean-ranked clustered bundling. Lastly, it is easy to see the computational
complexity of Algorithm OA.1 is at least O(2n) since there are 2n−1 circles in the outer loop.
□
B.1.
Fixed Radius Clustering
In this subsection, we consider the heuristic which we called Fixed Radius Clustering (FRC): for
a given radius r, the diﬀerence of means of any two products is no more than r in a cluster. We
consider 10000 diﬀerent radii, and let rj = (µn −µ1)j/9999, where j = 0,1,...,9999. It is easy to see
the heuristic reduces to separate sales when j = 0 and the pure bundle when j = 9999. Thus, this
heuristic is more general with the optimized j∗, and would have a better performance guarantee
than separates sales and the pure bundle. The pseudo-code for the algorithm is given in Algorithm
OA.2. There are two interior loops: steps 5-9 and steps 11-13. The ﬁrst loop is to produce an array
Kj to store the bundles, where the m-th bundle contains products i ∈{Kj
m +1,Kj
m +2,...,Kj
m+1}
and Kj
m is the m-th element of Kj. The second loop applies Theorem 1(b) to calculate Lj
m, which
is the lower bound on the proﬁt of the m-th bundle.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

5
Algorithm OA.2 Fixed Radius Clustering (FRC)
1: Input: ci, µi, σi, where i = 1,2,...,n
2: Initialize rj = (µn −µ1)j/9999
3: for j = 1,2,...,10000 do
4:
Let m = 1, x = µ1
5:
for i = 1,2,...,n do
6:
if µi > x + rj then
7:
Let x = µi, Kj
m = i −1, m = m + 1
8:
end if
9:
end for
10:
Update Kj ←[0 Kj n]
11:
for m = 1,2,...,length(Kj) −1 do
12:
Lj
m ←the total proﬁt lower bound of a bundle with products i ∈{Kj
m + 1,Kj
m + 2,...,Kj
m+1}
13:
end for
14:
πj ←
length(Kj)−1
P
m=1
Lj
m
15: end for
16: Let j∗= arg maxj πj
17: Output: The total proﬁt lower bound πj∗, and the corresponding clustered bundling for j∗
Proposition OA.6. The computational complexity of Algorithm OA.2 is O(n).
Proof of Proposition OA.6.
Note that steps 5-9 will run no more than n times. And there can
be no more n bundles, i.e., m ≤n. Thus steps 11-13 also run no more than n times. Hence, the
computational complexity of Algorithm OA.2 is O(n) since it runs the two interior loops “for” no
more than n times.
□
B.2.
Top-down/Bottom-up Clustering
In this subsection, we consider the Top-down/Bottom-up Clustering algorithm which contains two
processes: “Top-down” and “Bottom-up”. This is why we call it Top-down/Bottom-up Clustering.
If the pure bundle is better than separate sales, we execute the algorithm from the pure bundle
(Top-down). We want to split each bundle into two sub-bundles with better total proﬁt lower
bounds. If a bundle cannot be split into two sub-bundles with a better performance guarantee, i.e.,
the bundle has a larger lower bound than the total lower bounds of any two sub-bundles, we keep
the bundle unchanged. When all bundles cannot be split into two sub-bundles, the “Top-down”
process terminates. If the pure bundle is worse than separate sales, we execute the algorithm from
n separate products (Bottom-up). We want to cluster two adjacent bundles into one if it is better
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

6
to do so. When any two adjacent bundles cannot be bundled with a better performance guarantee,
the “Bottom-up” process terminates. The pseudo-code is given in Algorithm OA.3.
For the “Top-down” process, there are two arrays K and I, where the former one stores the
bundles with the m-th bundle containing products i ∈{Km + 1,Km + 2,...,Km+1} and Km is the
m-th element of K, and the latter one stores the index of each bundle. Since it starts from the pure
bundle, we initialize K = [0 n] and I = [1] in step 3. The steps 5-9 investigate whether the current
bundles can be split if it is better to do so. If a bundle cannot be split into two sub-bundles, let
its index be 0, otherwise, let the two new bundles’ indices be 1. When all indices are 0, the loop
“while” terminates, i.e., we cannot get a better performance guarantee by “Top-down”. For the
“Bottom-up” process, K stores the bundles. The steps 17-22 investigate whether any two adjacent
bundles can be bundled with a better total proﬁt lower bound for the current bundles. If the ﬁrst
two adjacent bundles can be bundled, i.e., f = 1, we let the two bundles as the ﬁrst bundle and the
third one as the second. If the ﬁrst two adjacent bundles cannot be bundled, i.e., f = 0, we let the
second bundle as the ﬁrst bundle and the third one as the second (step 19). After doing this for
all bundles, we check whether there exists a case in which two bundles can be bundled (step 23).
If any two adjacent bundles cannot be bundled, let I = 0 and the loop “while” terminates, i.e., we
cannot get a better total proﬁt lower bound by “Bottom-up”. Figure OA.2 illustrates Algorithm
OA.3.
Algorithm OA.3 Top-down/Bottom-up Clustering (TBC)
1: Input: ci, µi, σi, where i = 1,2,...,n
2: if the pure bundle is better than separate sales (Top-down) then
3:
Initialize two arrays K = [0 n] and I = [1]
4:
while I ̸= 0 do
5:
for m = 1,2,...,length(K) −1 do
6:
Let cm = [cKm+1 cKm+2 ···cKm+1], µm = [µKm+1 µKm+2 ···µKm+1], σm = [σKm+1 σKm+2 ···σKm+1]
7:
If Im = 1, compute fm = split(cm,µm,σm), otherwise, fm = length(µm) (Function split outputs the
optimal size of the ﬁrst bundle that splits a bundle into two sub-bundles, where the bundles’ parameters
are cm,µm,σm, respectively. The pseudo-code for function split is given in Algorithm OA.4.)
8:
If fm = length(µm), let Im = 0, otherwise, let Im = 1; K′
2m−1 = Km and K′
2m = Km + fm
9:
end for
10:
Update K′ ←[K′ n] and K ←remove the repeated elements in K′, I ←add one element 1 after each
element 1 in array I
11:
end while
12: end if
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

7
13: if the pure bundle is worse than separate sales (Bottom-up) then
14:
Initialize an array K = [1 2···n] and I = 1
15:
while I = 1 do
16:
Initialize
m = 1,
t = 1,
c1 = [c1
c2 ···cK1],
µ1 = [µ1
µ2 ···µK1],
σ1 = [σ1
σ2 ···σK1],
c2 =
[cK1+1 cK1+2 ···cK2], µ2 = [µK1+1 µK1+2 ···µK2], σ2 = [σK1+1 σK1+2 ···σK2]
17:
for m = 1,2...,length(K) −1 do
18:
Compute f = cluster(c1,µ1,σ1,c2,µ2,σ2) (Function cluster outputs 1 if bundling two sub-bundles is
better, otherwise 0, where the two sub-bundles’ parameters are c1,µ1,σ1, and c2,µ2,σ2, respectively.
The pseudo-code for function cluster is given in Algorithm OA.5.)
19:
If f = 1, update c1 ←[c1 c2],µ1 ←[µ1 µ2],σ1 ←[σ1 σ2]; otherwise, update c1 ←c2,µ1 ←µ2,σ1 ←σ2,
let K′
t = Km and update t ←t + 1
20:
Update m ←m + 1, if m = length(K), break
21:
Update c2 ←[cKm+1 cKm+2 ···cKm+1], µ2 ←[µKm+1 µKm+2 ···µKm+1], σ2 ←[σKm+1 σKm+2 ···σKm+1]
22:
end for
23:
Update K′ ←[K′ n], if length(K)=length(K′), I = 0; otherwise, I = 1 and K ←K′
24:
end while
25:
Update K ←[0 K]
26: end if
27: Compute the total proﬁt lower bound of each bundle and store it in L∗, let K∗←K
28: Output: The total proﬁt lower bound L∗, and m-th bundle contains products i ∈{K∗
m + 1,K∗
m + 2,...,K∗
m+1}
Algorithm OA.4 function split
1: function f = split(c,µ,σ)
2: for i = 1,2,...,length(µ) do
3:
Let t1 =
iP
j=1
(µj −cj)
s
iP
j=1
σ2
j and t2 =
length(µ)
P
j=i+1
(µj −cj)
s
length(µ)
P
j=i+1
σ2
j (t2 = 0 for i = length(µ))
4:
Compute k′
1 =
3q
t1 +
p
t2
1 + 1 +
3q
t1 −
p
t2
1 + 1 and k′
2 =
3q
t2 +
p
t2
2 + 1 +
3q
t2 −
p
t2
2 + 1
5:
Compute L1 =
iP
j=1
(µj −cj)(1 −
3
2t1 k
′3
1 ) and L2 =
length(µ)
P
j=i+1
(µj −cj)(1 −
3
2t2 k
′3
2 ) (L2 = 0 for i = length(µ))
6:
πi = L1 + L2
7: end for
8: f=index of the maximum in array π = [π1 π2 ···πlength(µ)]
9: end
Algorithm OA.5 function cluster
1: function f = cluster(c,µ,σ,c′,µ′,σ′)
2: Let t1 =
length(µ)
P
j=1
(µj −cj)
s
length(µ)
P
j=1
σ2
j and t2 =
length(µ′)
P
j=1
(µ′
j −c′
j)
s
length(µ′)
P
j=1
σ
′2
j
3: Compute k′
1 =
3q
t1 +
p
t2
1 + 1 +
3q
t1 −
p
t2
1 + 1 and k′
2 =
3q
t2 +
p
t2
2 + 1 +
3q
t2 −
p
t2
2 + 1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

8
4: Compute L1 =
length(µ)
P
j=1
(µj −cj)(1 −
3
2t1 k
′3
1 ) and L2 =
length(µ′)
P
j=1
(µ′
j −c′
j)(1 −
3
2t2 k
′3
2 )
5: Let c
′′ = [c c′],µ
′′ = [µ µ′],σ
′′ = [σ σ′] and t =
length(µ
′′ )
P
j=1
(µ
′′
j −c
′′
j )
s
length(µ′′ )
P
j=1
σ
′′2
j
6: Compute k =
3p
t +
√
t2 + 1 +
3p
t −
√
t2 + 1 and L =
length(µ
′′ )
P
j=1
(µ
′′
j −c
′′
j )(1 −3
2tk3)
7: If L1 + L2 < L, f = 1; otherwise, f = 0
8: end
Figure OA.2
Illustration of Algorithm OA.3
(a)
(b)
Note. (a) ”Top-down” process. (b) ”Bottom-up” process.
Proposition OA.7. The heuristic out of Algorithm OA.3 has a better performance guarantee
than separates sales and the pure bundle, and its computational complexity is O(n2).
Proof of Proposition OA.7.
First, consider the pure bundle is better than separate sales. By
Algorithm OA.3, it executes the “Top-down” process. Note that the “Top-down” process will be
executed if and only if there exists a bundle that can be split into two sub-bundles with a better
performance guarantee. Then the output of the “Top-down” process is better than the pure bundle.
On the one hand, for each interior loop “for”, the algorithm runs length(K) −1 times and the
function split contains a loop “for” with length(cm) = Km+1 −Km circles due to Algorithm OA.4.
Thus, step 7 is executed
length(K)−1
P
m=1
Km+1 −Km = n times for each loop “for”. On the other hand,
for the outer loop “while”, at least one bundle is split. There are n products, and then it runs at
most n −1 times. Consequently, its computational complexity is O(n2).
Second, consider the pure bundle is worse than separate sales. By Algorithm OA.3, it executes the
“Bottom-up” process. Note that the “Bottom-up” process will be executed if and only if there exists
two adjacent bundles that can be bundled with a better performance guarantee. Then the output
of the “Bottom-up” process is better than separate sales. On the one hand, for each interior loop
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

9
“for”, the algorithm runs length(K) −1 ≤n times and the computational complexity of function
cluster is O(1) due to Algorithm OA.5. On the other hand, for the outer loop “while”, at least
one product is bundled. There are n products, and then it runs at most n−1 times. Consequently,
its computational complexity is O(n2).
□
C.
Proofs
To show Theorem 1, we ﬁrst prove a version of a one-sided Chebyshev’s inequality (on the left
tail), also known as Cantelli’s inequality, which is often stated in a diﬀerent form (on the right tail,
for example, see Gallego et al. 2007).
Lemma OA.1 (Cantelli’s Inequality). For a random variable X that has mean µ and stan-
dard deviation σ and all a ≥0,
P(X < µ −a) ≤P(X ≤µ −a) ≤
σ2
σ2 + a2 .
Equivalently, P(V < µ −kσ) ≤P(V ≤µ −kσ) ≤
1
1+k2 for any k ≥0.
Figure OA.3
Valuation Distribution
sales
unprofitable
customers
x
f(x)
Note. p(k) = µ −kσ, k ≥0
Proof of Lemma OA.1.
If a = 0, the inequalities trivially hold. Now consider a > 0. Let Y =
X −µ, then E[Y ] = E[−Y ] = 0 and var[Y ] = var[−Y ] = σ2. Let t = σ2/a ≥0. We have
P(Y < −a) ≤P(Y ≤−a) = P(−Y ≥a) = P(−Y + t ≥a + t) = P
−Y + t
a + t
≥1

≤P
 −Y + t
a + t
2
≥1
!
≤E
"−Y + t
a + t
2#
= σ2 + t2
(a + t)2 =
σ2
σ2 + a2 ,
where the last inequality follows from Markov’s inequality.
□
A sketch of the proof of Theorem 1.
We ﬁrst give a sketch of the proof here. The upper bound
U in Theorem 1(a) is no less than µ −c, i.e., U ≥µ −c, where µ −c is the expected proﬁt earned
from all customers under perfect price discrimination (i.e., everyone pays at their own valuation).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

10
Theorem 1(a) implies that the seller may be able to earn more than µ −c by serving only those
customers whose valuations are no less than the marginal cost c. Hence, the upper bound of the
optimal proﬁt should be no more than µ −c plus the cost of serving unproﬁtable customers. The
unproﬁtable sales volume is P(V < c) (to the left of x = c in Figure OA.3). By Lemma OA.1,
we can obtain an upper bound of P(V < c) as
1
1+τ2 ; thus an upper bound of the expected proﬁt
is µ −c + cP(V < c) ≤µ −c +
c
1+τ2 = µ −
τ2
1+τ2 c. In the extreme case σ = 0, when the valuation
distribution is deterministic, the seller can earn the optimal proﬁt µ −c ≥0 by charging price
p = µ. By Theorem 1(a), when σ = 0, τ = ∞, then U = µ −c; thus we can see the upper bound U
is achievable.
Next we apply Lemma OA.1 again to ﬁnd a lower bound on the seller’s proﬁts. Theorem 1(b)
suggests that the proﬁt earned by the seller has a lower bound L, which comes from charging a price
p∗= µ−k∗σ, below the mean valuation µ. When the seller sets a price in the form of p(k) = µ−kσ
that is less than µ, the sales volumes correspond to the right of x = p(k) in Figure OA.3. By Lemma
OA.1, the complement of that area has an upper bound
1
1+k2 ; hence, that area has a lower bound
1 −
1
1+k2 . Then we obtain a lower bound of the proﬁt when charging p(k) = µ −kσ:
(p(k) −c)P(V ≥p(k)) ≥(µ −kσ −c)(1 −
1
1 + k2 ) = (µ −c)(1 −k
τ )(1 −
1
1 + k2 ).
The lower bound is maximized by k∗=
3p
τ +
√
τ 2 + 1 +
3p
τ −
√
τ 2 + 1.
□
Proof of Theorem 1(a).
Deﬁne a random variable X such that its density function g(x) = f(x−
c). Hence the distribution of X is a horizontal shift of that of V towards the left by c units. Thus,
the mean and standard deviation of X are µ −c and σ, respectively.
Since any p ≥c is better oﬀthan p < c which yields negative proﬁt, we only need to consider
p ≥c for the proﬁt maximization problem maxp π(p;F). For any p ≥c,
π(p;F) = (p −c)P(V ≥p) = (p −c)P(X ≥p −c)
≤E[X|X ≥p −c] ≤E[X|X ≥0] = µ −c −E[X|X < 0],
(OA.1)
where the last equality is due to that µ −c = E[X|X < 0] + E[X|X ≥0].
Since g(x + c) = f(x), then
−E[X|X < 0] = E[c −V |V < c] ≤E[c|V < c] ≤cP(V < c) ≤
c
1 + ((µ −c)/σ)2 =
c
1 + τ 2 ,
(OA.2)
where the ﬁrst inequality is due to valuation V ≥0 and the last inequality is due to Lemma OA.1
with k = (µ −c)/σ (where k ≥0 due to Assumption (P)). Combining (OA.1) and (OA.2), we have
the desired upper bound.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

11
When σ = 0, we have τ = ∞and U = µ −c which is the exact optimal proﬁt the seller earns
when facing the deterministic valuation µ.
□
Proof of Theorem 1(b).
Write a price heuristic in the form of p = µ −kσ ≥c for some k ≥0. In
other words, 0 ≤k ≤µ−c
σ . Then, for all F ∈F,
max
p>c π(p;F) ≥π(p = µ −kσ;F) = (µ −kσ −c)P(V ≥µ −kσ) ≥(µ −c)(1 −kσ
µ −c)(1 −
1
1 + k2 ),
(OA.3)
where the inequality is due to P(V < µ −kσ) ≤
1
1+k2 for k ≥0 from Lemma OA.1. For notation
convenience, denote ϕ(k) ≡(1 −
kσ
µ−c)(1 −
1
1+k2 ).
Now we want to maximize the lower bound, (µ−c)ϕ(k), in (OA.3) to obtain the optimal robust
price. It can be veriﬁed that ϕ′(k) = −k4−3k2+2kτ
τ(1+k2)2
= −
k
τ(1+k2)2 (k3 +3k−2τ). The non-zero stationary
points of ϕ(k) are characterized by ϕ′(k) = 0 which is equivalent to
k3 + 3k = 2τ.
(OA.4)
(The function ϕ(k) is minimized at k = 0 or k = µ−c
σ .) By Cardano’s solution for a cubic function,
the unique real root of (OA.4) is k∗=
3p
τ +
√
τ 2 + 1 +
3p
τ −
√
τ 2 + 1. It is easy to see that indeed,
k∗≥0 because k∗=
2τ
(k∗)2+3 ≥0. Moreover, since −k3 −3k is decreasing in k, thus for k ≤k∗,
ϕ′(k) ≥0 and when k ≥k∗, ϕ′(k) ≤0. This demonstrates the function ϕ(k) is maximized at k = k∗
with the optimal value
ϕ(k∗) =

1 −k∗
τ

1 −
1
1 + (k∗)2

=
(k∗)2
(k∗)2 + 3 = (k∗)3
2τ
= 1 −3
2τ k∗,
(OA.5)
where the ﬁrst equality is by deﬁnition of ϕ(k) and the rest of identities are all due to (OA.4).
By (OA.4) and k∗≥0, we have k∗3 + 3k∗= 2τ ≥3k∗, i.e., k∗≤2τ/3 ≤τ = (µ −c)/σ. Thus, p∗=
µ −k∗σ ≥c. In view of (OA.3), we immediately have the desired lower bound.
It is easily veriﬁable that any distribution within the stipulated class of two-point distributions
for any ϵ indeed has mean µ and standard deviation σ. With the optimal robust price p∗= µ−k∗σ,
for a given two point distribution with kϵ = k∗+ ϵ, only those customers who have the valuation
at the high end of the two points would choose to purchase the product. Thus the resulting proﬁt
is (1 −
1
1+k2ϵ )(µ −k∗σ −c) = (µ −c)(1 −k∗
τ )(1 −
1
1+k2ϵ ), which is asymptotically approximated to the
lower bound (µ −c)ϕ(k∗) = (µ −c)(1 −k∗
τ )(1 −
1
1+(k∗)2 ), in view of (OA.3), as ϵ ↘0.
□
Proof of Theorem 2.
For all F ∈F,
π(p∗= µ −k∗σ;F)
maxp>c π(p;F)
≥µ(1 −γ)(1 −3
2τ k∗)
maxp>c π(p;F)
≥µ(1 −γ)(1 −3
2τ k∗)
µ −
τ2
1+τ2 c
=
1 −3
2τ k∗
1
1−γ −
τ2γ
(1+τ2)(1−γ)
=
1 −3
2τ k∗
1 +
γ
(1−γ)(1+τ2)
,
where the ﬁrst inequality is due to Theorem 1(b) and the second inequality is due to Theorem
1(a).
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

12
Proof of Corollary 1.
(a) It is trivial to see that ρ depends on the system primitives c,µ,σ only
through the ratios γ and δ. By (OA.4), (k∗)3 + 3k∗= 2τ = 2 1−γ
δ . Since the right-hand-side of this
equation is strictly decreasing in γ and δ, its unique real root k∗must also be strictly decreasing
in γ and δ. Moreover, 1 −
3
2τ k∗=
(k∗)2
(k∗)2+3 is strictly increasing in k∗and 1 +
γ
(1−γ)(1+τ2) is strictly
increasing in γ and δ. As a result, ρ =
1−3
2τ k∗
1+
γ
(1−γ)(1+τ2) is strictly decreasing in γ and δ.
(b) By (OA.4), (k∗)3 + 3k∗= 2τ = 2(µ−c)
σ
. Since the right-hand-side of this equation is strictly
decreasing in c, k∗is strictly decreasing in c and p∗(c,µ,σ) = µ −k∗σ is strictly increasing in c.
By (OA.4), (k∗)3+3k∗= 2τ = 2(µ−c)
σ
. Since the right-hand-side of this equation is strictly decreas-
ing in σ, k∗is strictly decreasing in σ. Again by (OA.4), k∗σ = 2(µ−c)
(k∗)2+3, thus k∗σ = 2(µ−c)
(k∗)2+3 is strictly
increasing in σ and p∗= µ −k∗σ is strictly decreasing in σ.
By (OA.4), (k∗)3 + 3k∗= 2τ = 2(µ−c)
σ
. Taking derivatives with respect to µ on both sides of this
equation, we obtain (3(k∗)2 +3) ∂k∗
∂µ = 2
σ, then ∂k∗
∂µ σ =
2
3(k∗)2+3. Since p∗= µ−k∗σ, ∂p∗
∂µ = 1−∂k∗
∂µ σ =
1 −
2
3(k∗)2+3 = 3(k∗)2+1
3(k∗)2+3 > 0, which shows p∗= µ −k∗σ is strictly increasing in µ.
□
Proof of Proposition 1.
(a) Because both the mean and standard deviation of the exponential
distribution are 1
λ, δ = 1. Thus the optimal robust price is p∗= 1
λ(1−ke(γ)), under which the proﬁt
is Π(p∗;F ∼exp(λ)) = ( 1
λ(1 −ke(γ)) −c)e−1+ke(γ). Solve the ﬁrst order condition Π′ = (1 −λ(p −
c))e−λp = 0, we have p∗= 1
λ + c and Π
′′|p=p∗= −λe−λp −λ(1 −λ(p −c))e−λp = −λe−λp∗< 0. Thus
the optimal proﬁt is 1
λe−1−cλ, which is achieved by p∗= 1
λ + c. With γ = c
µ = cλ, the performance
should be
( 1
λ (1−ke(γ))−c)e−1+ke(γ)
1
λ e−1−cλ
= (1 −(ke(γ) + γ))e(ke(γ)+γ). When γ = 0, we have ke(γ) ≈0.5961,
and then the performance is (1 −0.5961)e0.5961 ≈0.7331.
(b) The mean of the uniform distribution is
a
2, and the standard deviation is
a
2
√
3, so the
CV δ is
1
√
3. Thus the optimal robust price is
a
2 −ku(γ)
a
2
√
3, under which the proﬁt is ( a
2 −
ku(γ)
a
2
√
3 −c)
a
2 +ku(γ)
a
2
√
3
a
. With the uniform valuation, the proﬁt function is (p −c) a−p
a , then the
optimal price is
a+c
2 , and the optimal proﬁt is
( a−c
2
)2
a
. With γ = c
µ = 2c
a , the performance should
be
(1−ku(γ)
√
3
−γ)(1+ ku(γ)
√
3
)
(1−γ
2 )2
. When γ = 0, we have ku(γ) ≈0.9064, and then the performance is (1 −
0.9064
√
3 )(1 + 0.9064
√
3 ) ≈0.7261.
□
Proof of Proposition 4.
We will apply the optimal robust price in Theorem 1(b). It is suﬃcient
to compare the lower bounds on proﬁtability of selling separately and selling a bundle, because the
lower bounds obtained in Theorem 1(b) is asymptotically tight.
Denote τi = µi−ci
σi
= (1−γ)µi
σi
= 1−γ
δi
for all i, and τ¯n =
(1−γ) P
i µi
√P
i σ2
i
. Moreover, let ki and k¯n be the
unique real root to
k3
i + 3ki = 2τi = 2
σi
µi(1 −γ),
k3
¯n + 3k¯n = 2τ¯n = 2P
i µi
pP
i σ2
i
(1 −γ),
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

13
respectively. By (OA.3) and (OA.5), the proﬁt lower bound for selling n products separately, LSn,
is:
LSn = (1 −γ)
X
i
µi
k2
i
k2
i + 3 = (1 −γ)
X
i
µi
1
2τi
k3
i =
X
i
1
2σik3
i .
The proﬁt lower bound for selling a bundle of n products, LBn, is:
LBn = (1 −γ)
X
i
µi
k2
¯n
k2
¯n + 3 = (1 −γ)
X
i
µi
1
2τ¯n
k3
¯n =
pP
i σ2
i
2
k3
¯n.
Since
√P
i σ2
i
P
i µi
≤mini δi, i.e., τ¯n ≥τi, and then k¯n ≥ki for all i. We have: for all i,
k3
i
k3
¯n
≤k3
i + 3ki
k3
¯n + 3k¯n
= τi
τ¯n
=
pP
i σ2
i
nσi
.
(OA.6)
Then
LSn
LBn
=
X
i
σi
qP
j σ2
j
k3
i
k3
¯n
≤
X
i
1
n = 1,
where the inequality is due to (OA.6). Now we can conclude that under the condition
√P
i σ2
i
P
i µi
≤
mini δi, selling a bundle is guaranteed to generate higher proﬁts than selling separately.
□
Proof of Corollaries 2 and 3.
It is easy to see that the conditions in Corollary 2 are special
cases of those in Corollary 3. And for Corollaries 2(b), if maxi σi
mini σi ≤√n, then √nmini σi ≥maxi σi ≥
1
√n
pP
i σ2
i , i.e.,
pP
i σ2
i ≤nmini σi. Similarly, for Corollaries 2(c), maxi µi
mini µi ≤√n is one suﬃcient
condition for √nmaxi µi ≤P
i µi. To prove Corollary 3, it is suﬃcient to verify that the condition
in Proposition 4 is satisﬁed.
(a) We have
pP
i σ2
i
P
i µi
=
pP
i δ2
i µ2
i
P
i µi
≤max
i
δi
pP
i µ2
i
P
i µi
≤min
i
δi,
where the last inequality is due to maxi δi
mini δi ≤
P
i µi
√P
i µ2
i
.
(b) We have
pP
i σ2
i
P
i µi
≤
pP
i σ2
i
nmini µi
≤mini σi
maxi µi
≤σl
µl
= min
i
δi,
where the second inequality is due to maxi µi
mini µi ≤n mini σi
√P
i σ2
i
and l = arg mini δi.
(c) We have
pP
i σ2
i
P
i µi
≤
√nmaxi σi
P
i µi
≤mini σi
maxi µi
≤min
i
δi,
where the second inequality is due to maxi σi
mini σi ≤
P
i µi
√n maxi µi .
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

14
Proof of Proposition 5.
The CV of the bundle is
δ
√n. Deﬁne τb = 1−γ
δ
√n = √nτ. Let n∗be the
unique root of
(µ −c)(1 −
3
2√nτ k∗
b)
µ −
τ2
1+τ2 c
= 1 −ϵ,
(OA.7)
where k∗
b is the unique root of (k∗
b)3 + 3k∗
b = 2√nτ. It is easy to see that n∗is decreasing in ϵ,
because the left hand side of (OA.7) is increasing in n.
By Theorem 1 (b), the lower bound of the robust bundle price p∗
b = p∗(nc,nµ,√nσ) = nµ−k∗
b
√nσ
is n(µ −c)(1 −
3
2√nτ k∗
b), and the upper bound is n
 µ −
τ2
1+τ2 c

. The performance guarantee of the
robust bundle price p∗
b is
(µ−c)(1−
3
2√nτ k∗
b )
µ−
τ2
1+τ2 c
, which is increasing in n. Thus if n > n∗, the performance
guarantee should be more than 1 −ϵ.
If γ = 0, (OA.7) becomes 1 −
3
2√nτ k∗
b =
(k∗
b )2
(k∗
b )2+3 = 1 −ϵ where the ﬁrst equality is due to (OA.5).
Then k∗
b =
q
3
ϵ −3. In view of (OA.4), we have (k∗
b)3 + 3k∗
b = 3
ϵ
q
3
ϵ −3 = 2τb = 2√nτ = 2√n
δ . Hence,
n∗= ( 3
ϵ)2( 3
ϵ −3) δ2
4 .
□
Proof of Proposition 6.
Denote the correlation coeﬃcient between valuations for products i and
j by ρij, which is non-positive. Then the standard deviation of the bundle of n products under
non-positive correlations is
v
u
u
t
n
X
i=1
σ2
i + 2
n
X
i=1
n
X
j=i+1
σiσjρij ≤
v
u
u
t
n
X
i=1
σ2
i .
The latter is the standard deviation of the bundle of n independent products. Then τ ′′ =
Pn
i=1(µi−ci)
√Pn
i=1 σ2
i +2 Pn
i=1
Pn
j=i+1 σiσjρij ≥
Pn
i=1(µi−ci)
√Pn
i=1 σ2
i
= τ ′. Let k′ and k′′ be the unique root of (k′)3 +3k′ = 2τ ′
and (k′′)3 + 3k′′ = 2τ ′′, respectively. Because k3 + 3k is increasing in k, then k′′ ≥k′. Hence the
guaranteed performance lower bound of the bundle under non-positive correlations is even higher
than that under independent valuations, i.e.,
n
X
i=1
(µi −ci)
(k′′)2
(k′′)2 + 3 ≥
n
X
i=1
(µi −ci)
(k′)2
(k′)2 + 3.
Hence under conditions of Proposition 4 or its Corollaries 2 and 3 or Proposition 5, the bundle is
guaranteed to generate even higher proﬁts than selling separately whose performance is unaﬀected
by valuation correlations.
□
Proof of Proposition 7.
Since the absolute value of correlation coeﬃcient is less than 1, i.e.,
−1 ≤ρij ≤1,
τ ′′ =
Pn
i=1(µi −ci)
qPn
i=1 σ2
i + 2Pn
i=1
Pn
j=i+1 σiσjρij
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

15
≥
Pn
i=1(µi −ci)
qPn
i=1 σ2
i + 2Pn
i=1
Pn
j=i+1 σiσj
=
Pn
i=1(µi −ci)
Pn
i=1 σi
= τ = 1 −γ
δ
= µi −ci
σi
,
where the inequality is due to ρij ≤1 and the last three identities are due to Assumption (S) and
σ1
µ1 = σ2
µ2 = ··· = σn
µn = δ. Following the same logic as the proof of Proposition 6, we have the desired
conclusion.
□
Proof of Proposition 8.
Let pi and pb be the prices for product i and the bundle, respectively.
Moreover, pb <
nP
i=1
pi, otherwise, no customer will buy the bundle. Then if the customer buy product
i or the pure bundle, we have
Vi ≥pi,
or
n
X
i=1
Vi ≥pb.
In other words, the fraction of customers who will buy nothing is
P
 n\
i=1
(Vi < pi)
\
n
X
i=1
Vi < pb

.
If the customer buy the pure bundle, we have
n
X
i=1
Vi −pb ≥Vi −pi
∀i,
n
X
i=1
Vi ≥pb,
which is equivalent to
n
X
j̸=i
Vj ≥pb −pi
∀i,
n
X
i=1
Vi ≥pb.
Therefore, we can write the proﬁt function as follows:
π(pi,pb;Fi ∈Fi)
≥min
i {pi −ci}

1 −P
 n\
i=1
(Vi < pi)
\
n
X
i=1
Vi < pb

+

pb −
n
X
i=1
ci −min
i {pi −ci}

P
 n\
i=1
X
j̸=i
Vj ≥pb −pi
\
n
X
i=1
Vi ≥pb

≥min
i {pi −ci}

1 −P
 n\
i=1
(Vi < pi)

+

pb −
n
X
i=1
ci −min
i {pi −ci}

P
 n\
i=1
X
j̸=i
Vj ≥pb −pi
\
n
X
i=1
Vi ≥pb

,
(OA.8)
where the ﬁrst inequality is due to pj −cj ≥min{pi −ci}, and the second inequality is due to
1 −P
 n\
i=1
(Vi < pi)
\
n
X
i=1
Vi ≥pb

≥1 −P
 n\
i=1
(Vi < pi)

.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

16
Next, we will give a lower bound of the last term of (OA.8). We denote pi = µi −kiσi and
pb =
nP
i=1
µi −kb
r nP
i=1
σ2
i , where ki > 0 and kb > 0. Let pb −pi = P
j̸=i
µj −¯ki
rP
j̸=i
σ2
j, where ¯ki > 0. Thus,
kiσi + ¯ki
rP
j̸=i
σ2
j = kb
r nP
i=1
σ2
i . By Cantelli’s inequality, we have
1 −P
 n\
i=1
(Vi < pi)

= 1 −
n
Y
i=1
P(Vi < pi = µi −kiσi) ≥1 −
n
Y
i=1
1
1 + k2
i
.
(OA.9)
Denote Xi = P
j̸=i
Vj ≥pb −pi for i ≤n and Xn+1 =
nP
i=1
Vi. We can easily obtain that the correlation
between Xn+1 and Xi is ρn+1,i =
rP
j̸=i
σ2
j
r nP
i=1
σ2
i , and the correlation between Xi and Xj is
ρij = P
k̸=i,j
σ2
k
rP
k̸=i
σ2
k
rP
k̸=j
σ2
k

. By Olkin and Pratt’s inequality:
P
 n\
i=1
|Xi −µi|
σi
< ki

≥1 −1
n2
√u +
√
n −1
v
u
u
tn
n
X
i=1
1
k2
i
−u
2
,
where u =
nP
i=1
1
k2
i + 2
nP
i=1
P
j<i
ρij
kikj and ρij is the correlation between Xi and Xj. We have
P
 n\
i=1
X
j̸=i
Vj ≥pb −pi
\
n
X
i=1
Vi ≥pb

=P
 n\
i=1
X
j̸=i
(Vj −µj)
sX
j̸=i
σ2
j ≥−¯ki
\
n
X
i=1
(Vi −µi)
v
u
u
t
n
X
i=1
σ2
i ≥−kb

≥P
 n\
i=1

X
j̸=i
(Vj −µj)

sX
j̸=i
σ2
j ≤¯ki
\
n
X
i=1
(Vi −µi)

v
u
u
t
n
X
i=1
σ2
i ≤kb

≥1 −
1
(n + 1)2
√u + √n
v
u
u
t(n + 1)

n
X
i=1
1
¯k2
i
+ 1
k2
b

−u
2
≡T,
(OA.10)
where u =
nP
i=1
1
¯k2
i + 1
k2
b + 2
 nP
i=1
P
j<i
ρij
¯ki¯kj +
nP
i=1
ρn+1,i
kb¯ki

.
If pi −ci = min
j {pj −cj}, i.e., µi −ci −kiσi ≤µj −cj −kjσj for j ̸= i. Combining Equations (OA.8),
(OA.9) and (OA.10), we have
π(pi,pb;Fi ∈Fi) ≥(µi −ci −kiσi)

1 −
n
Y
i=1
1
1 + k2
i

+
X
j̸=i
(µj −cj) −¯ki
sX
j̸=i
σ2
j

T.
Hence, we can solve the optimization problems (2), and select the largest value of the n problems
(one for each i), as the lower bound of π(pi,pb;Fi ∈Fi). Moreover, the distribution-free pricing
heuristic can be given by the corresponding optimal solutions.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

1
Supplement to
“Distribution-Free Pricing”
A.
The Rest of Proofs
Proof of Proposition 2.
We can ﬁnd the worst-case scenario that results in the largest stan-
dard deviation for all distributions that share the same mean µ and support [vL,vH]. It is easy
to show that such a worst-case scenario is achieved by the following two-point distribution V =
 vL with prob. w,
vU with prob. 1 −w, where w = (vU −µ)/(vU −vL). As a result, the worst possible CV is ¯δ =
p
µ(vL + vU) −vLvU −µ2/µ among all distributions that share the same mean µ and support
[vL,vU]. By Corollary 1(a), the performance guarantee is decreasing in the CV. Hence, the maximin
price heuristic is the one corresponding to the largest possible CV and we obtain the desired result
by applying Theorem 2.
□
Proof of Proposition 3.
For any F ∈Fl, write one of its optimal prices as p′ = µ−k′σ for some
k′ ≥0. Consider two cases: (a) k∗≥k′; (b) k∗≤k′.
Case (a): p∗≤p′, then ¯F(p∗−) ≥¯F(p′−), and thus
π(p∗;F)
π(p′;F) = (p∗−c) ¯F(p∗−)
(p′ −c) ¯F(p′−) ≥p∗−c
p′ −c ≥µ −k∗σ −c
µ −c
= 1 −k∗
δ
1 −γ = 1 −k∗
τ ,
where the ﬁrst inequality is due to ¯F(p∗−) ≥¯F(p′−), and the second inequality is due to p′ ≤µ.
Case (b): p∗≥p′, then ¯F(p∗−) ≤¯F(p′−), and thus
π(p∗;F)
π(p′;F) = (p∗−c) ¯F(p∗−)
(p′ −c) ¯F(p′−) ≥
¯F(p∗−)
¯F(p′−) ≥¯F(p∗−) ≥1 −
1
(k∗)2 + 1,
where the ﬁrst inequality is due to p∗≥p′, the second inequality is due to ¯F(p′−) ≤1 and the last
inequality is due to Lemma OA.1.
By (OA.4), 1−k∗
τ = 1−
2
(k∗)2+3 ∈[ 1
3,1). Moreover, 1−
1
(k∗)2+1 ∈[0,1). As a result, for all F ∈F o,
˜ρ = π(p∗;F)
π(p′;F) ≥min{1 −k∗
τ ,1 −
1
(k∗)2 + 1} > (1 −k∗
τ )(1 −
1
(k∗)2 + 1) ≥
(1 −k∗
τ )(1 −
1
(k∗)2+1)
1 +
γ
(1−γ)(1+τ2)
= ρ,
(S.1)
where the ﬁrst inequality is obtained by combining cases (a) and (b), and the last equality is due
to (OA.5).
Moreover,
˜ρ−ρ
ρ = ˜ρ
ρ −1 ≥1 +
γ
(1−γ)(1+τ2) −1 =
γ
(1−γ)(1+τ2), where the inequality is due to the last
inequality in (S.1). Thus the relative improvement of ˜ρ beyond ρ is no less than
γ
(1−γ)(1+τ2).
□
Proof of Corollary 4.
It is easy to verify that the objective functions of problem (2) are sym-
metrical with respect to ki if µ1 = µ2 = ··· = µn, σ1 = σ2 = ··· = σn, c1 = c2 = ··· = cn, we thus have
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

2
k∗
1 = k∗
2 = ··· = k∗
n. Moreover, the values of problems (2) are equal. Let k1 = k2 = ··· = kn, we can
reduce u, T, ¯ki deﬁned in Proposition 8 into: u =
√
n(n−1)
¯ki
+ 1
kb
2
, T = 1 −
1
(n+1)2
√
n(n−1)
¯ki
+ 1
kb +
√n
r
2n
¯k2
i + n
k2
b −
2√
n(n−1)
kb¯ki
2
, and ki + √n −1¯ki = √nkb. Hence, we obtain the desired result.
□
Proof of Theorem 3.
We
ﬁrst
characterize
¯p.
Note
min
p max
F ∈F

1 −
π(p;F )
max
z
{π(z;F )}

= 1 −
max
p
min
F ∈F
π(p;F )
max
z
{π(z;F )}. Then the minimax relative regret criterion is equal to maximize ρ(p) =
min
F ∈F
π(p;F )
max
z
{π(z;F )}. Then we should solve the following optimization problem to obtain ¯p,
ρ∗= max
p
ρ(p) = max
p
min
F ∈F
π(p;F)
max
z {π(z;F)} = max
p
min
F ∈F min
z
EF[g(V,p)]
(z −c)P(V ≥z).
(S.2)
Thus, the worst relative regret for ¯p is equal to 1 −ρ(¯p). We deﬁne
g(x,t) =
(
0,
x < t,
t −c,
x ≥t.
Since π(z;F) = (z −c)P(V ≥z) and π(p;F) = (p −c)P(V ≥p), by inverting the order of minimiza-
tion, we can rewrite (S.2) into:
max
p
ρ(p) = max
p
min
z
min
F ∈F
EF[g(V,p)]
(z −c)P(V ≥z).
Since π(p;F) < 0 for p < c, and π(z;F) < 0 for z < c, then we just need to consider p ≥c and z ≥c.
When p and z are given, we consider the following optimization problem:
min
F
EF[g(V,p)]
(z −c)P(V ≥z)
s.t.
EF[1] = 1,
EF[V ] = µ,
EF[V 2] = µ2 + σ2,
V ≥0.
(S.3)
First, if F is a discrete distribution, suppose its support S = {v1,v2,...,vm}. We denote x =
1
P(V ≥z) and yi = P(V =vi)
P(V ≥z) , where i = 1,2,...,m. Then we can rewrite (S.3) into:
min
x,yi
m
X
i=1
g(vi,p)yi
z −c
s.t.
m
X
i=1
yi −x = 0,
m
X
i=1
viyi −µx = 0,
m
X
i=1
v2
i yi −(µ2 + σ2)x = 0,
m
X
i=inf{j|vj≥z}
yi = 1,
vi ≥0,
(S.4)
whose dual problem is:
max
α0,α1,α2,α3
−α3
s.t.
α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) ≤0,
α0 + α1v + α2v2 + g(v,p)
z −c ≥0,
if 0 ≤v < z,
α0 + α1v + α2v2 + α3 + g(v,p)
z −c ≥0,
if v ≥z.
(S.5)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

3
It is easy to see problems (S.4) and (S.5) are ﬁnite linear programming (since v ∈S =
{v1,v2,...,vm}, there are ﬁnite constraints in problem (S.5)), then the strong duality holds.
Next, we consider F is not a discrete distribution. Denote B = {−1}∪[0,∞), following the nota-
tions in Hettich and Kortanek (1993), we let M +(B) be the space of nonnegative Borel measures
on B, and
R(B)
+
= {η ∈M +(B)|supp(η) is finite}.
Let
η(v) =



1
P(V ≥z),
if v = −1,
f(v)
P(V ≥z),
if v ≥0,
and η ∈R(B)
+ . We rewrite problem (S.3) in the space of generalized ﬁnite sequences (GFS) by (the
same formulation on page 398 of Hettich and Kortanek 1993)
v(D) = min
η
X
v∈B
b(v)η(v)
s.t.
X
v∈B
a(v)η(v) = C,
η ∈R(B)
+ ,
(S.6)
and problem (S.5) is equal to
v(P) = max
Z
CTZ
s.t.
aT(v)Z ≤b(v),
∀v ∈B,
(S.7)
where C = (0,0,0,−1)T, Z = (α0,α1,α2,α3)T,
a(v) =











(1,µ,µ2 + σ2,0)T,
if v = −1,
(−1,−v,−v2,0)T,
if 0 ≤v < z,
(−1,−v,−v2,−1)T,
if v ≥z,
and
b(v) =



0,
if V = −1,
g(v,p)
z−c ,
if v ≥0.
According to Theorem 6.5(ii) of Hettich and Kortanek (1993), if v(P) is ﬁnite and Mn+1 is closed,
v(P) = v(D), where
Mn+1 = co

a(v)
b(v)
v ∈B

=


ω =


P
v∈B
a(v)η(v)
P
v∈B
b(v)η(v)



η ∈R(B)
+



=













η(−1) −
P
v∈[0,∞)
η(v)
µη(−1) −
P
v∈[0,∞)
vη(v)
(µ2 + σ2)η(−1) −
P
v∈[0,∞)
v2η(v)
−
P
v∈[z,∞)
η(v)
P
v∈[0,∞)
g(v,p)
z−c η(v)













.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

4
Let ¯η = supp(η), which is ﬁnite since η ∈R(B)
+ , and then η ∈[0, ¯η]. We have η(−1) −
P
v∈[0,∞)
η(v) ∈
(−∞, ¯η], µη(−1) −
P
v∈[0,∞)
vη(v) ∈(−∞, ¯ηµ], (µ2 + σ2)η(−1) −
P
v∈[0,∞)
v2η(v) ∈(−∞, ¯η(µ2 + σ2)],
−
P
v∈[z,∞)
η(v) ∈(−∞,−¯ηµ],
P
v∈[0,∞)
g(v,p)
z−c η(v) ∈[0,∞). Therefore, Mn+1 is closed. Next, we will solve
problem (S.5) and verify its optimal value is ﬁnite, i.e., v(P) is ﬁnite. Consequently, the optimal
value of problem (S.3) is equal to that of problem (S.5).
We consider problem (S.5) with two cases: z ≥p and z ≤p. Let G+(p) = min
z≥p min
F ∈F
EF [g(V,p)]
(z−c)P(V ≥z) and
G−(p) = min
z≤p min
F ∈F
EF [g(V,p)]
(z−c)P(V ≥z).
Case 1: z ≥p. The right hand side of the second and third constraints in problem (S.5) is
piecewise linear. A feasible function is any function h(v) = α0 + α1v + α2v2 that lies above 0 for
for 0 ≤v < p, above −(p −c)/(z −c) for p ≤v < z, and above −α3 −(p −c)/(z −c) for v ≥z.
We consider h(v) is a straight line (α2 = 0) or quadratic function (α2 > 0 due to h(v) needs to lie
above 0 for 0 ≤v < p, above −(p −c)/(z −c) for p ≤v < z, and above −α3 −(p −c)/(z −c) for
v ≥z). Denote x0 = −α1/(2α2) as the minimum of the quadratic function h(v) for α2 > 0. Note
that h(z) ≥−α3 −(p −c)/(z −c) due to h(v) needs to lie above −α3 −(p −c)/(z −c), i.e., h(v)
passes through (z,−α3 −(p−c)/(z −c)). If h(z) > −α3 −(p−c)/(z −c), we can ﬁx α0, α1, α2, then
decrease α3 (increase −α3). Hence problem (S.5) is maximized with h(z) = −α3 −(p −c)/(z −c).
If x0 > z, then h(z) > h(x0) ≥−α3 −(p −c)/(z −c), where the ﬁrst inequality is due to h(v) is
minimized at x0. Thus, we just need to consider x0 ≤z for α2 > 0. There are four possible cases
that we will analyze as follows.
Figure S.1
Graphical illustration of functions satisfying feasibility conditions of the dual problem (Case 1)
(a) Case 1.1
(b) Case 1.2
Case 1.1: h(v) is a straight line. Since the straight line h(v) = α0 + α1v has to stay above 0
for 0 ≤v < p, above −(p −c)/(z −c) for p ≤v < z, and above −α3 −(p −c)/(z −c) for v ≥z,
as illustrated in Figure S.1(a), all feasible straight lines should satisfy h(0) = α0 ≥0, α1 ≥0 and
h(z) = −α3 −(p −c)/(z −c).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

5
Figure S.2
Graphical illustration of functions satisfying feasibility conditions of the dual problem (Case 1
cont’d)
(a) Case 1.3
(b) Case 1.4
If α1 = 0, i.e., h(v) is a horizontal line, then h(z) = α0 = −α3 −(p −c)/(z −c). Since the ﬁrst
constraint in problem (S.5) that α0 +α1µ+α2(µ2 +σ2) ≤0, then α0 ≤0 due to α1 = α2 = 0. Recall
α0 ≥0, then we must have α0 = 0. The dual objective value −α3 is equal to α0 + (p −c)/(z −c) =
(p−c)/(z −c). If α1 > 0, h(z) = α0 +α1z = −α3 −(p−c)/(z −c). Recall α0 +α1µ+α2(µ2 +σ2) ≤0,
then α0 +α1µ ≤0 due to α2 = 0. However, α0 +α1µ > 0 due to α0 ≥0 and α1 > 0. Thus any straight
line with α1 > 0 is not a feasible function.
Case 1.2: x0 = −α1/(2α2) ≤0. Since h(v) has to stay above 0 for 0 ≤v < p, as illustrated in
Figure S.2(b), all feasible function should satisfy h(0) = α0 ≥0. Note that the ﬁrst constraint in
problem (S.5) that α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) ≤0, which implies α1 < 0, i.e., x0 = −α1/(2α2) > 0 due
to α0 ≥0 and α2 > 0. Thus this case is not feasible.
Case 1.3: 0 < x0 = −α1/(2α2) ≤p. Since h(v) has to stay above 0 for 0 ≤v < p, as illustrated in
Figure S.2(a), the minimum value of the quadratic function h(x0) ≥0. Note that the ﬁrst constraint
in problem (S.5) that α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) ≤0, which shows h(µ) = α0 + α1µ + α2µ2 < 0. This
contradicts to h(v) has a minimum value that is greater than zero. Thus this case is not feasible.
Case 1.4: p < x0 = −α1/(2α2) ≤z. Since h(v) has to stay above 0 for for 0 ≤v < p, above
−(p −c)/(z −c) for p ≤v < z, and above −α3 −(p −c)/(z −c) for v ≥z, as illustrated in Figure
S.2(b), we have the value of h(v) at x0 satisﬁes h(x0) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) ≥−(p −c)/(z −c) and
h(p) = α0 + α1p + α2p2 ≥0. We ﬁrst show this case is not feasible for p ≥µ by contradiction. We
suppose p ≥µ, and recall α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) ≤0, then h(µ) = α0 + α1µ + α2µ2 < 0 due to
σ > 0. Note that h(v) is decreasing in v ≤x0, and thus h(p) ≤h(µ) < 0 due to x0 > p ≥µ, which
contradicts to h(p) ≥0. Next we consider p < µ.
Note that α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) + α2[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2] is increasing in
α0 −α2
1/(4α2) and α2 by ﬁxing α1/(2α2). Recall h(z) = α0 + α1z + α2z2 = −α3 −(p −c)/(z −c).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

6
The dual objective value −α3 = α0 + α1z + α2z2 + (p −c)/(z −c) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) + α2[α1/(2α2) +
z]2 + (p −c)/(z −c), which is increasing in α0 −α2
1/(4α2) and α2 by ﬁxing α1/(2α2). If α0 + α1µ +
α2(µ2 + σ2) < 0, we can always ﬁx α1/(2α2) and increase α0 −α2
1/(4α2) or α2 to increase the dual
objective value −α3. Hence, the dual objective value is maximized with α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) =
0. Therefore, α0 −α2
1/(4α2) = −α2[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2] due to α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) = α0 −
α2
1/(4α2) + α2[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2].
Consequently, we have −α2[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2] ≥−(p −c)/(z −c), i.e., α2[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 +
σ2] ≤(p −c)/(z −c) due to α0 −α2
1/(4α2) ≥−(p −c)/(z −c). The dual objective value −α3 =
α0+α1z+α2z2+(p−c)/(z−c) = α0−α2
1/(4α2)+α2[α1/(2α2)+z]2+(p−c)/(z−c) = α2[α1/(2α2)+
z]2 −α2[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2] + (p −c)/(z −c) = α2[(z −µ)(α1/α2 + z + µ) −σ2] + (p −c)/(z −c).
When z ≤µ, α2[(z −µ)(z + µ −2x0) −σ2] < 0 due to x0 ≤z ≤µ and σ > 0. When z > µ, α2[(z −
µ)(z+µ−2x0)−σ2] > 0 is increasing in α2 and decreasing in x0. If α2[(x0−µ)2+σ2] < (p−c)/(z−c),
we can always increase α2 to increase −α3 = α2[(z −µ)(z +µ−2x0)−σ2]. Hence, the dual objective
value is maximized with α0 −α2
1/(4α2) = −α2[(α1/(2α2) −µ)2 + σ2] = −(p −c)/(z −c). Thus the
dual objective value −α3 = α0 −α2
1/(4α2)+α2[α1/(2α2)+z]2 +(p−c)/(z −c) = α2[α1/(2α2)+z]2 =
(p −c)[α1/(2α2) + z]2/[(z −c)((α1/(2α2) −µ)2 + σ2)] = (p −c)(z −x0)2/[(z −c)((x0 −µ)2 + σ2)].
Moreover, h(p) = α0 + α1p + α2p2 = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) + α2[(α1/(2α2)) + p]2 = α2[(α1/(2α2)) + p]2 −
α2[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2] = α2[(p −µ)(α1/α2 + p + µ) −σ2] = α2[(µ −p)(2x0 −p −µ) −σ2] ≥0,
where the second equality is due to α0 −α2
1/(4α2) = −α2[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2], and the inequality
is due to h(p) ≥0. Since α2 > 0 and µ > p, α2[(µ −p)(2x0 −p −µ) −σ2] ≥0 implies that x0 ≥
(µ2 + σ2 −p2)/2(µ −p).
We denote L(x0) = (z −x0)2/[(x0 −µ)2 + σ2], consider the following FOC condition,
∂L(x0)
∂x0
= −2(z −x0)[(x0 −µ)(z −µ) + σ2]
[(x0 −µ)2 + σ2]4
= 0.
Then we have x∗
0 = µ −
σ2
z−µ, and
∂L(x0)
∂x0
≥0 for x ≤x∗
0,
∂L(x0)
∂x0
≤0 for x ≥x∗
0. Recall we should
maximize −α3 = (p−c)(z −x0)2/[(z −c)((x0 −µ)2 +σ2)] = (p−c)/(z −c)L(x0) under the constraint
x0 ≥(µ2 + σ2 −p2)/2(µ −p). Thus, the dual objective value −α3 is maximized at x∗
0 = µ −
σ2
z−µ
and the corresponding dual objective value is [(p −c)((z −µ)2 + σ2)]/[(z −c)σ2] > (p −c)/(z −c) if
(µ2 + σ2 −p2)/2(µ −p) ≤x∗
0 = µ −
σ2
z−µ, i.e., z ≥µ + 2σ2(µ −p)/[(µ −p)2 −σ2]; the dual objective
value −α3 is maximized at x0 = (µ2 +σ2 −p2)/2(µ−p) and the corresponding dual objective value
is [(p−c)(2z(µ−p)−(µ2+σ2−p2))]/[(z−c)((µ−p)2+σ2)] if (µ2+σ2−p2)/2(µ−p) ≥x∗
0 = µ−σ2
z−µ,
i.e., z ≤µ + 2σ2(µ −p)/[(µ −p)2 −σ2].
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

7
Now we will compare the four cases above to derive the optimal value of problem (S.5). If p ≥µ,
only Case 1.1 is feasible, thus the optimal dual objective value is (p −c)/(z −c). If p ≤z ≤µ,
the dual objective value in Case 1.4 is less than zero, thus the optimal dual objective value is
(p −c)/(z −c). Consider p < µ < z. We denote H1(z) = [(p −c)((z −µ)2 + σ2)]/[(z −c)σ2] and
H2(z) = [(p−c)(2z(µ−p)−(µ2 +σ2 −p2))]/[(z −c)((µ−p)2 +σ2)], and take the derivative of H2(z)
with respect to z,
∂H2(z)
∂z
= (p −c)[(µ + p)(µ + p −2c) + σ2]
(z −c)2((µ −p)2 + σ2)
> 0,
where the inequality is due to µ > p ≥c and σ > 0. Solving (p −c)/(z −c) = H2(z), we obtain
z = (µ2+σ2−µp)/(µ−p) ≡¯z > µ. Note that (p−c)/(z−c) is decreasing in z and H2(z) is increasing
in z, and thus if z ≤¯z, (p −c)/(z −c) ≥H2(z), and otherwise, (p −c)/(z −c) ≤H2(z). In sum, if
p < µ, and ¯z ≤z ≤µ+2σ2(µ−p)/[(µ−p)2 −σ2], the optimal dual objective value is equal to H2(z);
if p < µ, and z ≥µ + 2σ2(µ −p)/[(µ −p)2 −σ2], the optimal dual objective value is equal to H1(z);
otherwise, it is equal to (p −c)/(z −c). Thus, the optimal value of problem (S.5) is ﬁnite in this
case.
Recall G+(p) = min
z≥p min
F ∈F
EF [g(V,p)]
(z−c)P(V ≥z) and min
F ∈F
EF [g(V,p)]
(z−c)P(V ≥z) is the primal problem of (S.5). Now we
will minimize the optimal value of problem (S.5) for z ≥p to obtain G+(p). Because H1(z) is
equal to L(x∗
0) and H2(z) is equal to L((µ2 + σ2 −p2)/2(µ −p)), H1(z) ≥H2(z) for any z. Recall
(p −c)/(z −c) is decreasing in z and H2(z) is increasing in z, and (p −c)/(¯z −c) = H2(¯z). Hence,
(p −c)/(z −c) ≥(p −c)/(¯z −c) for z ≤¯z, H2(z) ≥H2(¯z) = (p −c)/(¯z −c) for ¯z ≤z ≤µ + 2σ2(µ −
p)/[(µ −p)2 −σ2], H1(z) ≥H2(z) ≥H2(¯z) = (p −c)/(¯z −c) for z ≥µ + 2σ2(µ −p)/[(µ −p)2 −σ2].
Therefore, if p < µ, the minimum of the optimal value of problem (S.5) is (p−c)/(¯z −c). From the
analysis above, we obtain:
G+(p) =



(p −c)/(¯z −c) = [(p −c)(µ −p)]/[(µ −c)(µ −p) + σ2],
if
p < µ,
min
z≥p>c(p −c)/(z −c) = 0,
if
p ≥µ.
(S.8)
Case 2: z ≤p. The right hand side of the second and third constraints in problem (S.5) is
piecewise linear. A feasible function is any function h(v) = α0 +α1v +α2v2 that lies above 0 for for
0 ≤v < z, above −α3 for z ≤v < p, and above −α3 −(p−c)/(z −c) for v ≥z. We consider h(v) is a
straight line (α2 = 0) or quadratic function (α2 > 0 due to h(v) needs to lie above 0 for 0 ≤v < z,
above −α3 for p ≤v < z, and above −α3 −(p −c)/(z −c) for v ≥z). Denote x0 = −α1/(2α2) as
the minimum of the quadratic function h(v) for α2 > 0. There are ﬁve possible cases that we will
analyze as follows.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

8
Figure S.3
Graphical illustration of functions satisfying feasibility conditions of the dual problem (Case 2)
(a) Case 2.1
(b) Case 2.2
(c) Case 2.3
Figure S.4
Graphical illustration of functions satisfying feasibility conditions of the dual problem(Case 2 cont’d)
(a) Case 2.4
(b) Case 2.5
Case 2.1: h(v) is a straight line. Since the straight line h(v) = α0 + α1v has to stay above 0 for
0 ≤v < z, above −α3 for z ≤v < p, and above −α3 −(p−c)/(z −c) for v ≥z, as illustrated in Figure
S.3(a), all feasible straight lines should satisfy h(0) = α0 ≥0, α1 ≥0 and h(z) ≥−α3. If h(z) > −α3,
then we can always decrease α3 (increase −α3). Thus, the dual objective value is maximized with
h(z) = α0 + α1z = −α3.
If α1 = 0, i.e., h(v) is a horizontal line. Then −α3 = h(z) = α0+α1z = α0. Since the ﬁrst constraint
in problem (S.5) that α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) ≤0, then α0 ≤0 due to α1 = α2 = 0. Recall α0 ≥0,
then we must have α0 = 0. The dual objective value −α3 is equal to α0 = 0. If α1 > 0, h(z) =
α0 + α1z = −α3. Recall α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) ≤0, then α0 + α1µ ≤0 due to α2 = 0. However,
α0 +α1µ > 0 due to α0 ≥0 and α1 > 0. Thus any straight line with α1 > 0 is not a feasible function.
Case 2.2: x0 = −α1/(2α2) ≤0. Since h(v) has to stay above 0 for 0 ≤v < z, as illustrated in
Figure S.3(b), all feasible function should satisfy h(0) = α0 ≥0. Note that the ﬁrst constraint in
problem (S.5) that α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) ≤0, which implies α1 < 0, i.e., x0 = −α1/(2α2) > 0 due
to α0 ≥0 and α2 > 0. Thus this case is not feasible.
Case 2.3: 0 < x0 = −α1/(2α2) ≤z. Since h(v) has to stay above 0 for 0 ≤v < z, as illustrated in
Figure S.3(c), the minimum value of the quadratic function h(x0) ≥0. Note that the ﬁrst constraint
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

9
in problem (S.5) that α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) ≤0, which shows h(µ) = α0 + α1µ + α2µ2 < 0. This
contradicts to that h(v) has a minimum value that is greater than zero. Thus this case is not
feasible.
Case 2.4: z < x0 = −α1/(2α2) ≤p. Since h(v) has to stay above −α3 for 0 ≤v < z, as illustrated
in Figure S.4(a), then h(x0) ≥−α3. Note that the ﬁrst constraint in problem (S.5) that α0 +α1µ+
α2(µ2 + σ2) ≤0, which shows h(µ) = α0 + α1µ + α2µ2 < 0. Since h(v) is minimized at x0, then
−α3 ≤h(x0) ≤h(µ) < 0.
Case 2.5: x0 = −α1/(2α2) > p. Since h(v) has to stay above 0 for for 0 ≤v < z, above −α3 for z ≤
v < p, and above −α3 −(p−c)/(z −c) for v ≥p, as illustrated in Figure S.4(b), we have the value of
h(v) at x0 satisﬁes h(x0) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) ≥−α3 −(p−c)/(z −c) and h(p) = α0 +α1p+α2p2 ≥−α3.
We ﬁrst show the dual objective value −α3 is less than 0 for p ≥µ. We suppose p ≥µ, and recall
α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) ≤0, and then h(µ) = α0 + α1µ + α2µ2 < 0 due to σ > 0. Note that h(v) is
decreasing in v ≤x0, and thus −α3 ≤h(p) ≤h(µ) < 0 due to x0 > p ≥µ. Next we consider p < µ.
If h(x0) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) > −α3 −(p−c)/(z −c) and h(p) = α0 +α1p+α2p2 > −α3, we can always
increase −α3 by ﬁxing α0, α1 and α2. Then we have the dual objective value −α3 is maximized
with h(x0) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) = −α3 −(p −c)/(z −c) or h(p) = α0 + α1p + α2p2 = −α3. First, we
consider h(x0) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) = −α3 −(p −c)/(z −c), i.e., −α3 = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) + (p −c)/(z −c).
Then h(p) = α0 + α1p + α2p2 = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) + α2[α1/(2α2) + p)]2 ≥−α3 = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) + (p −
c)/(z −c), which implies α2[α1/(2α2) + p)]2 ≥(p −c)/(z −c). Recall α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) ≤0. If
α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) < 0, we can always increase α0 and ﬁx α1 and α2 to increase −α3. Hence,
the dual objective value −α3 is maximized with α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) = 0. Note that α0 + α1µ +
α2(µ2 + σ2) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) + α2[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2] = 0, and then −α3 = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) + (p −
c)/(z −c) = −α2[(α1/(2α2)+µ)2 +σ2]+(p−c)/(z −c) is decreasing in α2 by ﬁxing α1/(2α2). Recall
α2[α1/(2α2) + p)]2 ≥(p −c)/(z −c), so if α2[α1/(2α2) + p)]2 > (p −c)/(z −c), we can always ﬁx
α1/(2α2) and decrease α2 to increase the dual objective value −α3. Thus, the dual objective value
is maximized with α2[α1/(2α2) + p]2 = (p −c)/(z −c), i.e., α2 = (p −c)/[(z −c)[α1/(2α2) + p)]2].
Therefore, −α3 = −α2[(α1/(2α2)+µ)2 +σ2]+(p−c)/(z −c) = (p −c)/(z −c)−(p −c)[(α1/(2α2)+
µ)2 +σ2]/[(z −c)[α1/(2α2)+p)]2] = (p−c)/(z −c)−(p−c)[(x0 −µ)2 +σ2]/[(z −c)(x0 −p)2]. Second,
we consider h(p) = α0 +α1p+α2p2 = −α3. If α0 +α1µ+α2(µ2 +σ2) < 0, we can always increase α0
and ﬁx α1 and α2 to increase −α3. Hence, the dual objective value −α3 is maximized with α0+α1µ+
α2(µ2+σ2) = 0. Note that α0+α1µ+α2(µ2+σ2) = α0−α2
1/(4α2)+α2[(α1/(2α2)+µ)2+σ2] = 0, and
then α0 −α2
1/(4α2) = −α2[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2]. Hence, h(x0) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) = −α2[(α1/(2α2) +
µ)2 +σ2] ≥−α3 −(p−c)/(z −c) = α0 +α1p+α2p2 −(p−c)/(z −c) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2)+α2[α1/(2α2)+
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

10
p]2 −(p −c)/(z −c), which implies α2[α1/(2α2) + p]2 ≤(p −c)/(z −c). Note that −α3 = α0 +
α1p + α2p2 = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) + α2[α1/(2α2) + p]2 = α2[α1/(2α2) + p]2 −α2[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2]. If
[α1/(2α2) + p]2 ≤[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2], −α3 ≤0, and otherwise, −α3 is increasing in α3 by ﬁxing
α1/(2α2). Consider [α1/(2α2)+p]2 > [(α1/(2α2)+µ)2 +σ2], and if α2[α1/(2α2)+p]2 < (p−c)/(z −
c), we can always ﬁx α1/(2α2) and increase α2 to increase −α3. Thus, the dual objective value is
maximized with α2[α1/(2α2) + p]2 = (p −c)/(z −c), i.e., α2 = (p −c)/[(z −c)[α1/(2α2) + p)]2]. We
plug α2 = (p −c)/[(z −c)[α1/(2α2) + p)]2] into −α3 = α2[α1/(2α2) + p]2 −α2[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2],
and then obtain −α3 = (p −c)/(z −c) −(p −c)[(x0 −µ)2 + σ2]/[(z −c)(x0 −p)2], which is equal to
the last scenario.
We denote H(x0) = [(x0 −µ)2 + σ2]/(x0 −p)2 and take derivative of it with respect to x0,
∂H(x0)
∂x0
= 2(x0 −p)[(µ −p)(x0 −µ) −σ2]
(x0 −p)4
,
which is less than zero for x0 ≤µ + σ2/(µ −p) and greater than zero for x0 ≥µ + σ2/(µ −p) due
to x0 > p. Therefore, −α3 = (p−c)/(z −c)(1−H(x0)) is maximized at x0 = µ+σ2/(µ−p) and the
corresponding value equals to (p −c)(µ −p)2/[(z −c)((µ −p)2 + σ2)], which is decreasing in z.
In sum, if p < µ, the optimal value of problem (S.5) is equal to p−c
z−c
(µ−p)2
(µ−p)2+σ2 , and otherwise, it is
equal to 0. Thus, the optimal value of problem (S.5) is ﬁnite in this case.
Recall G−(p) = min
z≤p min
F ∈F
EF [g(V,p)]
(z−c)P(V ≥z) and min
F ∈F
EF [g(V,p)]
(z−c)P(V ≥z) is the primal problem of (S.5). Now we
will minimize the optimal value of problem (S.5) for z ≤p to obtain G−(p). From the analysis
above, we obtain:
G−(p) =
((µ −p)2/[(µ −p)2 + σ2],
if
p < µ,
0,
if
p ≥µ.
(S.9)
We will prove that ¯p maximizes ρ(p) = min{G+(p),G−(p)} by the following three steps.
Firstly, we show [(p −c)(µ −p)]/[(µ −c)(µ −p) + σ2] ﬁrst increases and then decreases in p.
Taking derivative of [(p −c)(µ −p)]/[(µ −c)(µ −p) + σ2] with respect to p,
∂[(p −c)(µ −p)]/[(µ −c)(µ −p) + σ2]
∂p
= (µ −c)(µ −p)2 + (µ + c −2p)σ2
[(µ −c)(µ −p) + σ2]2
.
Note that (µ−c)(µ−p)2 +(µ+c−2p)σ2 is decreasing in p, and it is greater than zero for p = c and
less than zero for p = µ. Then there exists c < p′ < µ satisﬁes (µ −c)(µ −p)2 + (µ + c −2p)σ2 = 0,
if p ≤p′, [(p −c)(µ −p)]/[(µ −c)(µ −p) + σ2] is increasing in p, and otherwise, is decreasing in p.
Secondly, we show [(p −c)(µ −p)]/[(µ −c)(µ −p) + σ2] > (µ −p)2/[(µ −p)2 + σ2] for p ≥p′.
[(p −c)(µ −p)]/[(µ −c)(µ −p) + σ2] > (µ −p)2/[(µ −p)2 + σ2] is equivalent to (p −c)(µ −p)2 + (p −
c)σ2 > (µ −c)(µ −p)2 + (µ −p)σ2, i.e., (p −c)(µ −p)2 > (µ −c)(µ −p)2 + (µ + c −2p)σ2. Noting
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

11
that p ≥p′ > c and (µ −c)(µ −p)2 + (µ + c −2p)σ2 ≤0 for p > p′, we obtain (p −c)(µ −p)2 >
(µ −c)(µ −p)2 + (µ + c −2p)σ2 for p ≥p′. Consequently, [(p −c)(µ −p)]/[(µ −c)(µ −p) + σ2] >
(µ −p)2/[(µ −p)2 + σ2] for p ≥p′.
Thirdly, we will show G+(¯p) = G−(¯p); moreover, if c < p ≤¯p, G+(p) is increasing in p and
G+(p) ≤G−(p), and if p ≥¯p, G+(p) ≥G−(p). Consequently, ρ(p) = min{G+(p),G−(p)} is increasing
for c < p ≤¯p and decreasing for p ≥¯p since G−(p) is decreasing in p. Thus, ¯p maximizes ρ(p) =
min{G+(p),G−(p)}. Let [(p −c)(µ −p)]/[(µ −c)(µ −p) + σ2] = (µ −p)2/[(µ −p)2 + σ2], which is
equivalent to (2p −µ −c)σ2 = (µ −p)3. Denote p = µ −kσ, we have (µ −c −2kσ)σ2 = k3σ3, i.e.,
k3 + 2k = (µ −c)/σ = τ. By Cardano’s solution for a cubic function, the unique real root of it is
k =
3q
τ/2 +
p
(τ/2)2 + (2/3)3+
3q
τ/2 −
p
(τ/2)2 + (2/3)3. It is easy to see that G−(p) is decreasing
in p. Note that G+(p) is increasing in p for p ≤p′ due to the ﬁrst step, and G+(p) ≥G−(p) for
p ≥p′ due to the second step. With G+(¯p) = G−(¯p), we have that if c < p ≤¯p, G+(p) is increasing
in p and G+(p) ≤G−(p), and if p ≥¯p, G+(p) ≥G−(p).
Now we will show the worst relative regret for ¯p is 1/(1+ ¯k2) and it is asymptotically achievable
by 1 −
π(¯p;Fη)
max
z
{π(z;Fη)} as η ↘0. Since the worst relative regret for ¯p is 1 −ρ(¯p), then it is equivalent
to show ρ(¯p) = ¯k2/(1 + ¯k2) and ρ(¯p) is asymptotically achievable by
π(¯p;Fη)
max
z
{π(z;Fη)} as η ↘0. From
the above analysis, we have ρ(¯p) = G+(¯p) = G−(¯p). Recall G−(¯p) = (µ −¯p)2/[(µ −¯p)2 + σ2] =
(¯k2σ2)/(¯k2σ2+σ2) = ¯k2/(1+¯k2). On the one hand, note that π(µ−kησ;Fη) = µ−kησ−c = σ(τ −kη)
and π(µ +
1
kη σ;Fη) = (µ +
1
kη σ −c)
k2
η
1+k2η = σ(τ +
1
kη )
k2
η
1+k2η . Recall kη = ¯k + η and ¯k3 + 2¯k = τ, then
k3
η + 2kη > τ. Thus τ −kη −(τ + 1
kη )
k2
η
1+k2η =
τ
1+k2η −
k3
η+2kη
1+k2η < 0, which implies π(µ −kησ;Fη) < π(µ +
1
kη σ;Fη). Hence, max
z {π(z;Fη)} = π(µ +
1
kη σ;Fη) = σ(τ +
1
kη )
k2
η
1+k2η . On the other hand, π(¯p;Fη) =
(µ −¯kσ −c)
k2
η
1+k2η = σ(τ −¯k)
k2
η
1+k2η . Therefore, lim
η↘0
π(¯p;Fη)
max
z
{π(z;Fη)} = lim
η↘0
τ−¯k
τ+ 1
kη = τ−¯k
τ+ 1
¯k =
¯k3+2¯k−¯k
¯k3+2¯k+ 1
¯k =
¯k2
1+¯k2 ,
where the second equality is due to kη = ¯k + η. Thus, we obtain the announced results.
□
Proof of Theorem 4.
First, we show that the full characterization of ˜p is as follows:
(a) If (σ2 + µ2)/(2µ) ≤µ and c ≤(σ2 + µ2)/(2µ) −(σ2 + µ2)2/(8µσ2), or (σ2 + µ2)/(2µ) ≥µ and
c ≤µ3/(σ2 + µ2), then ˜p satisﬁes:
((σ2 + µ2)/µ −p)/(1 + σ2/µ2) = σ2(p −c)/(σ2 + (p −µ)2)
(S.10)
and ˜p ≤min{µ,(σ2 + µ2)/(2µ)}.
(b) If (σ2 + µ2)/(2µ) ≥µ and µ3/(σ2 + µ2) ≤c ≤min{(σ2 + µ2)/(4µ),µ}, then ˜p satisﬁes:
((σ2 + µ2)/µ −p)/(1 + σ2/µ2) = (p −c)µ/p
(S.11)
and ˜p ∈[µ,(σ2 + µ2)/(2µ)].
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

12
(c) If (σ2 + µ2)/(2µ) ≤µ and (σ2 + µ2)/(2µ) −(σ2 + µ2)2/(8µσ2) ≤c ≤µ −σ/2, then ˜p satisﬁes:
[
p
σ2 + (p −µ)2 −(p −µ)]/2 = σ2(p −c)/(σ2 + (p −µ)2)
(S.12)
and ˜p ∈[(σ2 + µ2)/(2µ),µ].
(d) If (σ2 + µ2)/(2µ) ≤µ and µ −σ/2 ≤c < µ, or (σ2 + µ2)/(2µ) ≥µ and min{(σ2 + µ2)/(4µ),µ} ≤
c ≤µ, then ˜p satisﬁes:
[
p
σ2 + (p −µ)2 −(p −µ)]/2 = (p −c)µ/p
(S.13)
and ˜p ∈[max{(σ2 + µ2)/(4µ),µ},(σ2 + µ2)/µ).
The minimax absolute regret criterion consists of minimizing ρ(p) = max
F ∈F max
z {π(z;F)}−π(p;F),
i.e.,
ρ∗= min
p ρ(p) = min
p max
F ∈F max
z {π(z;F)} −π(p;F).
(S.14)
We deﬁne
g(x,t) =
(
0,
x < t,
t −c,
x ≥t.
Since π(z;F) = (z −c)P(V ≥z) and π(p;F) = (p−c)P(V ≥p), by inverting the order of maximiza-
tion, we can change (S.14) into:
min
p ρ(p) = min
p max
z
max
F ∈F {EF[g(V,z) −g(V,p)]}.
Since π(p;F) < 0 for p < c, and π(z;F) < 0 for z < c, then we just need to consider p ≥c and z ≥c.
When p and z are given, we consider the following optimization problem:
max
F
EF[g(V,z) −g(V,p)]
s.t.
EF[1] = 1,
EF[V ] = µ,
EF[V 2] = µ2 + σ2,
V ≥0,
(S.15)
whose dual problem is:
min
α0,α1,α2
α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2)
s.t.
α0 + α1v + α2v2 ≥g(v,z) −g(v,p),
∀v ≥0.
(S.16)
Theorem 1 of Isii (1962) shows that if the moment vector is an interior point of the set of feasible
moment vectors, then strong duality holds in a moment problem. This is true here due to µ > 0
and σ > 0 (a similar application of Isii 1962’s result can be found in Natarajan et al. 2018). Thus,
the optimal value of problem (S.15) is equal to that of problem (S.16).
We consider problem (S.16) with two cases: z ≥p and z ≤p. Let G+(p) = max
z≥p max
F ∈F EF[g(V,z) −
g(V,p)] and G−(p) = max
z≤p max
F ∈F EF[g(V,z) −g(V,p)].
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

13
Case 1: z ≥p. The right hand side of the constraints of problem (S.16) is piecewise linear. A
feasible function is any function h(v) = α0 + α1v + α2v2 that lies above 0 for 0 ≤v < p, above
−(p −c) for p ≤v < z, and above z −p for v ≥z. We consider h(v) is a straight line (α2 = 0)
or quadratic function (α2 > 0 due to h(v) needs to lie above 0 for 0 ≤v < p, above −(p −c) for
p ≤v < z, and above z −p for v ≥z. Denote x0 = −α1/(2α2) as the minimum of the quadratic
function h(v) for α2 > 0. There are ﬁve possible cases that we will analyze as follows.
Figure S.5
Graphical illustration of functions satisfying feasibility conditions of the dual problem(Case 1)
(a) Case 1.1
(b) Case 1.2
(c) Case 1.3
Figure S.6
Graphical illustration of functions satisfying feasibility conditions of the dual problem(Case 1 cont’d)
(a) Case 1.4
(b) Case 1.5
Case 1.1: h(v) is a straight line. Since the line h(v) = α0 + α1v has to stay above 0 for 0 ≤v < p,
above −(p −c) for p ≤v < z, and above z −p for v ≥z, as illustrated in Figure S.5(a), all feasible
straight lines should satisfy h(0) = α0 ≥0, α1 ≥0 and h(z) = α0 + α1z ≥z −p.
If α1 = 0, i.e., h(v) is a horizontal line, then the dual objective value α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) =
α0 ≥z −p due to h(v) needs to lie above z −p for v ≥z. Hence, the optimal dual objective
equals to z −p, which is achieved by α0 = z −p. If α1 > 0 and z ≤µ, the dual objective value
α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) = α0 + α1µ ≥α0 + α1z ≥z −p. If α1 > 0 and z ≥µ, the dual objective value
α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) = α0 + α1 ≥α0 + (z −p −α0)µ/z = (z −p)µ/z + (1 −µ/z)α0 ≥(z −p)µ/z,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

14
where the ﬁrst inequality is due to α0 + α1z ≥z −p and α1 > 0, the second inequality is due to
z ≥µ and α0 ≥0.
In sum, if z ≤µ, the straight line with α0, α1, α2 that maximize the dual problem must be
a horizontal line which corresponds to α0 = α1 = α2 = 0 with the associated dual objective value
being equal to z −p; if z ≥µ, the one that minimize the dual problem must pass through (0,0) and
(z,z −p), which corresponds to α0 = α2 = 0 and α1 = (z −p)/z with the associated dual objective
value being equal to (z −p)µ/z.
Case 1.2: x0 = −α1/(2α2) ≤0. Since h(v) has to stay above 0 for 0 ≤v < p, above −(p −c)
for p ≤v < z, and above z −p for v ≥z, as illustrated in Figure S.5(b), all feasible quadratic
functions should satisfy h(0) = α0 ≥0, and h(z) = α0 + α1z + α2z2 ≥z −p. Since −α1/(2α2) ≤0,
then α1 ≥0 due to α2 > 0. The dual objective value α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) is increasing in α0,
α1, α2. If α0 + α1z + α2z2 > z −p, we can always decrease α1 or α2 to decrease the dual objective
value. Thus the dual objective value is minimized with α0 + α1z + α2z2 = z −p. When z ≤µ,
the dual objective value α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) ≥α0 + α1z + α2(z2 + σ2) > z −p, where the last
inequality is due to α0 +α1z +α2z2 = z −p and σ > 0. When µ ≤z ≤(µ2 +σ2)/µ, the dual objective
value α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) ≥α0 + α1µ + α2µz = α0 + µ(α1 + α2z) = α0 + (z −p −α0)µ/z =
(z −p)µ/z + (1 −µ/z)α0 ≥(z −p)µ/z, where the second equality is due to α0 + α1z + α2z2 = z −p,
the last inequality is due to µ ≤z and α0 ≥0. When z ≥(µ2 + σ2)/µ, the dual objective value
α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) = α0 + α1µ + (z −p −α0 −α1z)(µ2 + σ2)/z2 = α0(1 −(µ2 + σ2)/z2) + α1(µ −
(µ2 + σ2)/z) + (z −p)(µ2 + σ2)/z2 is increasing in α1 due to z ≥(µ2 + σ2)/µ, then the minimum is
attained at α1 = 0, i.e., x0 = 0, which can be included in the next case.
Case 1.3: 0 ≤x0 = −α1/(2α2) ≤p. Since h(v) has to stay above 0 for 0 ≤v < p, above −(p−c) for
p ≤v < z, and above z −p for v ≥z, as illustrated in Figure S.5(c), we have the value of h(v) at x0
satisﬁes h(x0) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) ≥0 and h(z) = α0 +α1z +α2z2 ≥z −p. Note that α0 +α1z +α2z2 =
α0 −α2
1/(4α2) + α2[α1/(2α2) + z]2 is increasing in α0 −α2
1/(4α2) and α2 by ﬁxing α1/(2α2). The
dual objective value α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) + α2[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2], which is
increasing in α0 −α2
1/(4α2) and α2. If α0 + α1z + α2z2 > z −p, then we can always ﬁx α1/(2α2)
and α0 −α2
1/(4α2), and decrease α2 to decrease the dual objective value. Thus the dual problem is
maximized with α0 + α1z + α2z2 = z −p, which implies α0 −α2
1/(4α2) = z −p −α2(α1/(2α2) + z)2.
Hence, α0 +α1µ+α2(µ2 +σ2) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2)+α2[((α1/(2α2))+µ)2 +σ2] = z −p−α2(α1/(2α2)+
z)2+α2[((α1/(2α2))+µ)2+σ2] = z−p−α2[(α1/(2α2)+z)2−[(α1/(2α2)+µ)2+σ2]], which is greater
than z −p when [(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2] > (α1/(2α2) + z)2. Now consider [(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2] ≤
(α1/(2α2)+z)2, which implies the dual objective value is decreasing in α2 by ﬁxing α1/(2α2). Note
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

15
h(x0) = α0−α2
1/(4α2) = z−p−α2(α1/(2α2)+z)2 ≥0, if α0−α2
1/(4α2) = z−p−α2(α1/(2α2)+z)2 >
0, we can ﬁx α1/(2α2) and increase α2 to decrease the dual objective value. Hence, the dual
objective value is minimized with α0 −α2
1/(4α2) = 0 and α0 + α1z + α2z2 = z −p.
Thus the dual objective value α0 +α1µ+α2(µ2 +σ2) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2)+α2[(α1/(2α2)+µ)2 +σ2] =
(z −p)[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2]/[α1/(2α2) + z]2 = (z −p)[(µ −x0)2 + σ2]/(z −x0)2, where the second
equality is due to α0 −α2
1/(4α2) = 0 and α0 +α1z+α2z2 = α0 −α2
1/(4α2)+α2[α1/(2α2)+z]2 = z−p.
We denote L(x0) = [(µ −x0)2 + σ2]/(z −x0)2, consider the following FOC condition,
∂L(x0)
∂x0
= 2(z −x0)[(µ −x0)(µ −z) + σ2]
(z −x0)4
= 0.
Then we have x∗
0 = µ +
σ2
µ−z. When z ≤µ, 2(z −x0)[(µ −x0)(µ −z) + σ2] > 0 due to x0 ≤p ≤z ≤µ
and σ > 0, then L(x0) is increasing in [0,p] and minimized at x0 = 0. We next consider z > µ, and
have
∂L(x0)
∂x0
≤0 if x0 ≤x∗
0, and
∂L(x0)
∂x0
≥0 if x0 ≥x∗
0. When µ < z ≤(σ2 + µ2)/µ, x∗
0 = µ +
σ2
µ−z ≤
µ+
σ2
µ−(σ2+µ2)/µ = 0, then L(x0) is increasing in [0,p] and minimized at x0 = 0, and the corresponding
dual objective value is equals to (µ2 + σ2)(z −p)/z2, which is greater than (z −p)µ/z due to
z ≤(σ2 + µ2)/µ. When z ≥(σ2 + µ2)/µ and (z −µ)(µ −p) ≥σ2, x∗
0 = µ +
σ2
µ−z ≥µ + (z−µ)(µ−p)
µ−z
= p
due to z ≥(σ2 + µ2)/µ > µ, then L(x0) is decreasing in [0,p] and minimized at x0 = p, and the
corresponding dual objective value is equals to ((p −µ)2 + σ2)/(z −p). When z ≥(σ2 + µ2)/µ
and (z −µ)(µ −p) ≤σ2, we have 0 ≤x∗
0 ≤p. Then L(x0) is minimized at x0 = x∗
0 and L(x∗
0) =
σ2/((z −µ)2 + σ2). Thus the corresponding dual objective value is equals to (z −p)L(x∗
0) = (z −
p)σ2/((z −µ)2 + σ2).
Case 1.4: p ≤x0 = −α1/(2α2) ≤z. Since h(v) has to stay above 0 for 0 ≤v < p, above −(p −c)
for p ≤v < z, and above z −p for v ≥z, as illustrated in Figure S.6(a), we have the value of h(v)
at x0 satisﬁes h(x0) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) ≥−(p −c), h(p) = α0 + α1p + α2p2 ≥0 and h(z) = α0 + α1z +
α2z2 ≥z −p. When z ≤µ, the dual objective value α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) +
α2[(α1/(2α2)+µ)2 +σ2] = α0 −α2
1/(4α2)+α2[(µ−x0)2 +σ2] ≥α0 −α2
1/(4α2)+α2[(z −x0)2 +σ2] =
α0 −α2
1/(4α2)+α2[(α1/(2α2)+z)2 +σ2] = α0 +α1z +α2z2 +α2σ2 > z −p, where the ﬁrst inequality
is due to x0 ≤z ≤µ, and the last inequality is due to α0 + α1z + α2z2 ≥z −p and α2 > 0. When
z ≥µ, the dual objective value α0 +α1µ+α2(µ2 +σ2) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2)+α2[(α1/(2α2)+µ)2 +σ2] ≥
z −p −α2[α1/(2α2) + z]2 + α2[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2] = z −p + α2[(z −µ)(−α1/α2 −µ −z) + σ2],
where the inequality is due to α0 + α1z + α2z2 = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) + α2[α1/(2α2) + z]2 ≥z −p. Since
z −p+α2[(z −µ)(−α1/α2 −µ−z)+σ2] is increasing in −α1/(2α2) due to z ≥µ, then the minimum
of the dual problem is attained at x0 = −α1/(2α2) = p, which can be included in the last case.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

16
Case 1.5: x0 = −α1/(2α2) ≥z. Since h(v) has to stay above 0 for 0 ≤v < p, above −(p −c) for
p ≤v < z, and above z −p for v ≥z, as illustrated in Figure S.6(b), we have the value of h(v) at x0
satisﬁes h(x0) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) ≥z −p. Then the the dual objective value α0 +α1µ+α2(µ2 +σ2) =
α0 −α2
1/(4α2) + α2[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2] > z −p due to α2 > 0.
In sum, from the analysis of the ﬁve cases above, we have the optimal value of problem (S.16)
is equal to: z −p when z ≤µ, (z −p)µ/z when µ ≤z ≤(σ2 + µ2)/µ, σ2(z −p)/((z −µ)2 + σ2)
when z ≥(σ2 + µ2)/µ and (z −µ)(µ −p) ≤σ2, ((p −µ)2 + σ2)/(z −p) when z ≥(σ2 + µ2)/µ and
(z −µ)(µ −p) ≥σ2. Recall G+(p) = max
z≥p max
F ∈F EF[g(V,z) −g(V,p)] and max
F ∈F EF[g(V,z) −g(V,p)] is
the primal problem of (S.16). Now we will maximize the optimal value of problem (S.16) for z ≥p
to obtain G+(p).
Note that z −p and (z −p)µ/z are increasing in z, and ((p−µ)2 +σ2)/(z −p) is decreasing in z.
We take the derivative of σ2(z −p)/((z −µ)2 + σ2) with respect to z:
∂σ2(z −p)/(σ2 + (z −µ)2)
∂z
= σ2(σ2 + µ2 −z2 + 2pz −2pµ)
(σ2 + (z −µ)2)2
= −σ2(z −p −
p
σ2 + (p −µ)2)(z −p +
p
σ2 + (p −µ)2)
(σ2 + (z −µ)2)2
,
which is nonnegative if p ≤z ≤p +
p
σ2 + (p −µ)2 and nonpositive if z ≥p +
p
σ2 + (p −µ)2. It
is easy to verify that p +
p
σ2 + (p −µ)2 is increasing in p. Let p +
p
σ2 + (p −µ)2 = (σ2 + µ2)/µ,
we obtain p = (σ2 + µ2)/(2µ). If p ≤(σ2 + µ2)/(2µ), then z ≥(σ2 + µ2)/µ ≥p +
p
σ2 + (p −µ)2
and σ2(z −p)/((z −µ)2 + σ2) is decreasing in z. If p ≥(σ2 + µ2)/(2µ), then (σ2 + µ2)/µ ≤
p +
p
σ2 + (p −µ)2, and σ2(z −p)/((z −µ)2 + σ2) is increasing in z for (σ2 + µ2)/µ ≤z ≤p +
p
σ2 + (p −µ)2, σ2(z −p)/((z −µ)2 + σ2) is decreasing in z for z ≥p +
p
σ2 + (p −µ)2. Hence, if
p ≤(σ2 + µ2)/(2µ), the optimal value of problem (S.16) is increasing in z for z ≤(σ2 + µ2)/µ and
decreasing in z for z ≥(σ2 + µ2)/µ; otherwise, the optimal value of problem (S.16) is increasing in
z for z ≤p +
p
σ2 + (p −µ)2 and decreasing in z for z ≥p +
p
σ2 + (p −µ)2.
From the analysis above, we obtain:
G+(p) =
(((σ2 + µ2)/µ −p)/(1 + σ2/µ2),
if
p ≤(σ2 + µ2)/(2µ),
[
p
σ2 + (p −µ)2 −(p −µ)]/2,
if
p ≥(σ2 + µ2)/(2µ).
Case 2: z ≤p. The right hand side of the constraints of problem (S.16) is piecewise linear. A
feasible function is quadratic function h(v) = α0 +α1v +α2v2 that lies above above 0 for 0 ≤v < z,
above z −c for z ≤v < p, and above z −p for v ≥p. Similarly with Case 1, we consider h(v) is a
straight line (α2 = 0) or quadratic function (α2 > 0). There are three possible cases that we will
analyze next.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

17
Figure S.7
Graphical illustration of functions satisfying feasibility conditions of the dual problem(Case 2)
(a) Case 2.1
(b) Case 2.2
(c) Case 2.3
Figure S.8
Graphical illustration of functions satisfying feasibility conditions of the dual problem(Case 2 cont’d)
(a) Case 2.4
(b) Case 2.5
Case 2.1: h(v) is a straight line. When z ≤µ the optimal solution is a horizontal line. The
associated dual objective value is equal to z −c. Since h(v) has to stay above 0 for 0 ≤v < z, above
z −c for z ≤v < p, and above z −p for v ≥p, as illustrated in Figure S.7(a), all feasible straight
lines should satisfy h(0) = α0 ≥0, α1 ≥0 and h(z) = α0 + α1z ≥z −c.
If α1 = 0, i.e., h(v) is a horizontal line, then the dual objective value α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) =
α0 ≥z −c due to h(v) needs to lie above z −c for v ≥z. Hence, the optimal dual objective equals
to z −p, which is achieved by α0 = z −c.
If α1 > 0 and z ≤µ, the dual objective value α0 +α1µ+α2(µ2 +σ2) = α0 +α1µ ≥α0 +α1z ≥z −c.
If α1 > 0 and z ≥µ, the dual objective value α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) = α0 + α1 ≥α0 + (z −c −
α0)µ/z = (z −c)µ/z +(1−µ/z)α0 ≥(z −c)µ/z, where the ﬁrst inequality is due to α0 +α1z ≥z −c
and α1 > 0, the second inequality is due to z ≥µ and α0 ≥0.
In sum, if z ≤µ, the straight line with α0, α1, α2 that maximize the dual problem must be
a horizontal line which corresponds to α0 = α1 = α2 = 0 with the associated dual objective value
being equal to z −c; if z ≥µ, the one that minimize the dual problem must pass through (0,0) and
(z,z −c), which corresponds to α0 = α2 = 0 and α1 = (z −c)/z with the associated dual objective
value being equal to (z −c)µ/z.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

18
Case 2.2: x0 = −α1/(2α2) ≤0. Since h(v) has to stay above 0 for 0 ≤v < z, above z −c for
z ≤v < p, and above z −p for v ≥p, as illustrated in Figure S.7(b), all feasible quadratic functions
should satisfy h(0) = α0 ≥0, and h(z) = α0 + α1z + α2z2 ≥z −c. Since −α1/(2α2) ≤0, then α1 ≥0
due to α2 > 0. The dual objective value α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) is increasing in α0, α1, α2. If
α0 +α1z +α2z2 > z −c, we can always decrease α1 or α2 to decrease the dual objective value. Thus
the dual objective value is minimized with α0 +α1z +α2z2 = z −c. When z ≤µ, the dual objective
value α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) ≥α0 + α1z + α2(z2 + σ2) > z −c, where the last inequality is due to
α0 + α1z + α2z2 = z −c and σ > 0. When µ ≤z ≤(µ2 + σ2)/µ, the dual objective value α0 + α1µ +
α2(µ2+σ2) ≥α0+α1µ+α2µz = α0+µ(α1+α2z) = α0+(z−c−α0)µ/z = (z−c)µ/z+(1−µ/z)α0 ≥
(z −c)µ/z, where the second equality is due to α0 + α1z + α2z2 = z −c, the last inequality is due
to µ ≤z and α0 ≥0. When z ≥(µ2 +σ2)/µ, the dual objective value α0 +α1µ+α2(µ2 +σ2) = α0 +
α1µ+(z−c−α0−α1z)(µ2+σ2)/z2 = α0(1−(µ2+σ2)/z2)+α1(µ−(µ2+σ2)/z)+(z−c)(µ2+σ2)/z2
is increasing in α1 due to z ≥(µ2 + σ2)/µ, then the minimum is attained at α1 = 0, i.e., x0 = 0,
which can be included in the next case.
Case 2.3: 0 ≤x0 = −α1/(2α2) ≤z. Since h(v) has to stay above 0 for 0 ≤v < z, above z −c
for z ≤v < p, and above z −p for v ≥p, as illustrated in Figure S.7(c), we have the value of
h(v) at x0 satisﬁes h(x0) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) ≥0 and h(z) = α0 + α1z + α2z2 ≥z −c. Note that
α0 + α1z + α2z2 = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) + α2[α1/(2α2) + z]2, and the dual objective value α0 + α1µ +
α2(µ2 + σ2) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) + α2[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2], are increasing in α0 −α2
1/(4α2) and α2.
With the similar analysis in Case 1.3, we can obtain that the dual objective value is minimized
with α0 −α2
1/(4α2) = 0 and α0 + α1z + α2z2 = z −c. Thus the dual objective value α0 + α1µ +
α2(µ2 + σ2) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) + α2[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2] = (z −c)[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2]/[α1/(2α2) +
z]2 = (z −c)[(µ −x0)2 + σ2]/(z −x0)2, where the second equality is due to α0 −α2
1/(4α2) = 0 and
α0 + α1z + α2z2 = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) + α2[α1/(2α2) + z]2 = α2[α1/(2α2) + z]2 = z −c.
Recall the analysis about L(x0) = [(µ −x0)2 + σ2]/(z −x0)2 in Case 1.3, we have that when
z ≤(σ2 + µ2)/µ, L(x0) is increasing in [0,z] and minimized at x0 = 0, and the corresponding
dual objective value is equals to (µ2 + σ2)(z −c)/z2, which is greater than (z −c)µ/z due to z ≤
(σ2 + µ2)/µ. When z ≥(σ2 + µ2)/µ, 0 ≤x∗
0 = µ +
σ2
µ−z < z. Then L(x0) is minimized at x0 = x∗
0 and
L(x∗
0) = σ2/[(µ−z)2 +σ2]. Thus the corresponding dual objective value is equals to (z −c)L(x∗
0) =
(z −c)σ2/((µ −z)2 + σ2).
Case 2.4: z ≤x0 = −α1/(2α2) ≤p. Since h(v) has to stay above 0 for 0 ≤v < z, above z −c for
z ≤v < p, and above z −p for v ≥p, as illustrated in Figure S.8(a), we have the value of h(v) at x0
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

19
satisﬁes h(x0) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) ≥z −c. Then the the dual objective value α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) =
α0 −α2
1/(4α2) + α2[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2] > z −c due to α2 > 0.
Case 2.5: x0 = −α1/(2α2) ≥p. Since h(v) has to stay above 0 for 0 ≤v < z, above z −c for
z ≤v < p, and above z −p for v ≥p, as illustrated in Figure S.8(b), we have the value of h(v) at
x0 satisﬁes h(x0) = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) ≥z −p, h(p) = α0 + α1p + α2p2 ≥z −c. Note that α0 + α1p +
α2p2 = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) + α2[α1/(2α2) + p]2, and the dual objective value α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) =
α0 −α2
1/(4α2) + α2[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2], are increasing in α0 −α2
1/(4α2) and α2. With the similar
analysis in Case 1.3, we can obtain that the dual objective value is minimized with α0 −α2
1/(4α2) =
z −p and α0 + α1p + α2p2 = z −c. Thus the dual objective value α0 + α1µ + α2(µ2 + σ2) = α0 −
α2
1/(4α2) + α2[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2] = z −p + (p −c)[(α1/(2α2) + µ)2 + σ2]/[α1/(2α2) + p]2 = z −
p + (p −c)[(x0 −µ)2 + σ2]/(x0 −p)2, where the second equality is due to α0 −α2
1/(4α2) = z −p and
α0 + α1p + α2p2 = α0 −α2
1/(4α2) + α2[α1/(2α2) + p]2 = z −p + α2[α1/(2α2) + p]2 = z −c. If p ≥µ,
z−p+(p−c)[(x0−µ)2+σ2]/(x0−p)2 > z−p+(p−c)[(x0−p)2+σ2]/(x0−p)2 > z−p+p−c = z−c,
where the ﬁrst inequality is due to x0 ≥p ≥µ, and the second inequality is due to σ > 0 and p > c.
If p < µ, we denote H(x0) = [(x0 −µ)2 + σ2]/(x0 −p)2, consider the following FOC condition,
∂H(x0)
∂x0
= 2(p −x0)[(µ −x0)(µ −p) + σ2]
(x0 −p)4
= 0.
Then we have x∗
0 = µ +
σ2
µ−p > p, and H(x0) is decreasing for x0 ≤x∗
0 and increasing for x0 ≥x∗
0.
Then H(x0) minimized at x0 = x∗
0 and H(x∗
0) = σ2/[(µ −p)2 + σ2]. Thus the corresponding dual
objective value is equals to z −p + (p −c)H(x∗
0) = z −p + (p −c)σ2/(σ2 + (p −µ)2).
In sum, from the analysis in the ﬁve cases, the optimal value of problem (S.16) is equal to:
z −p + (p −c)σ2/(σ2 + (p −µ)2) when z ≤p < µ, z −c when z ≤µ ≤p, (z −c)µ/z when p ≥µ and
µ ≤z ≤(σ2 + µ2)/µ, σ2(z −c)/(σ2 + (z −µ)2) when p ≥µ and z ≥(σ2 + µ2)/µ. Recall G−(p) =
max
z≤p max
F ∈F EF[g(V,z)−g(V,p)] and max
F ∈F EF[g(V,z)−g(V,p)] is the primal problem of problem (S.16).
Now we will maximize the optimal value of problem (S.16) for z ≤p to obtain G−(p).
Note that z −c −(p −µ)2(p −c)/(σ2 + (p −µ)2), z −c and (z −c)µ/z are increasing in z, and
σ2(z −c)/(σ2 + (z −µ)2)(≤(z −c)µ/z) is decreasing in z when z ≥(σ2 + µ2)/µ. Thus,
G−(p) =









σ2(p −c)/(σ2 + (p −µ)2),
if
p < µ,
(p −c)µ/p,
if
µ ≤p ≤(σ2 + µ2)/µ,
µ −cµ2/(σ2 + µ2),
if
p ≥(σ2 + µ2)/µ.
Note that G(p)+ is decreasing and G−(p) is increasing in p. Therefore, there exists some ˜p such
that G(p)+ = G−(p), and ˜p minimizes ρ(p) = max{G(p)+,G−(p)}. Now we will verify the optimal
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

20
price ˜p is as described. It is easy to see the parameter space can de divided into the following four
cases. We will verify them one by one.
(a) First we consider (σ2 + µ2)/(2µ) ≤µ. Then G+((σ2 + µ2)/(2µ)) = µ/2 and G−((σ2 +
µ2)/(2µ)) = (2σ2µ)/(σ2 + µ2) −(4σ2µ2c)/(σ2 + µ2)2. It is easy to verify G+((σ2 + µ2)/(2µ)) ≤
G−((σ2 + µ2)/(2µ)) if and only if c ≤(σ2 + µ2)/(2µ) −(σ2 + µ2)2/(8µσ2). Next consider (σ2 +
µ2)/(2µ) ≥µ. Then G+(µ) = (σ2µ)/(σ2 +µ2) and G−(µ) = µ−c. It is easy to verify G+(µ) ≤G−(µ)
if and only if c ≤µ3/(σ2 + µ2). Noting that G+(p) is decreasing and G−(p) is increasing, we thus
get ˜p ≤min{µ,(σ2 + µ2)/(2µ)} and ˜p is given by Equation (S.10).
(b) If (σ2 +µ2)/(2µ) ≥µ, we know G+(µ) ≥G−(µ) when c ≥µ3/(σ2 +µ2) from the previous case
(a). Note that G+((σ2 +µ2)/(2µ)) = µ/2 and G−((σ2 +µ2)/(2µ)) = µ−(2µ2c)/(σ2 +µ2). It is easy
to verify G+((σ2 + µ2)/(2µ)) ≤G−((σ2 + µ2)/(2µ)) if and only if c ≤(σ2 + µ2)/(4µ). Recall c ≤µ
by Assumption (P), then µ ≤˜p ≤(σ2 + µ2)/(2µ) and ˜p is given by Equation (S.11).
(c) If (σ2 + µ2)/(2µ) ≤µ, then G+((σ2 + µ2)/(2µ)) ≥G−((σ2 + µ2)/(2µ)) when c ≥(σ2 +
µ2)/(2µ) −(σ2 + µ2)2/(8µσ2) by the analysis in case (a). Moreover, G+(µ) = σ/2 ≤G−(µ) = µ −c
when c ≤µ −σ/2. Note that G+(p) is decreasing and G−(p) is increasing. Thus we obtain (σ2 +
µ2)/(2µ) ≤˜p ≤µ and ˜p is given by Equation (S.12).
(d) If (σ2 + µ2)/(2µ) ≤µ, then G+(µ) = σ/2 ≥G−(µ) = µ −c when c ≥µ −σ/2 by the previous
case (c). If (σ2 + µ2)/(2µ) ≥µ, then G+((σ2 + µ2)/(2µ)) ≥G−((σ2 + µ2)/(2µ)) when c ≥(σ2 +
µ2)/(4µ) by the analysis in case (b). We can verify G+(c) ≤µ−cµ2/(σ2 +µ2) and note that G+(p)
is decreasing. Thus G+((σ2 + µ2)/µ) < G+(c) ≤µ −cµ2/(σ2 + µ2) = G−((σ2 + µ2)/µ). We thus get
max{(σ2 + µ2)/(4µ),µ} ≤˜p < (σ2 + µ2)/µ and ˜p is given by Equation (S.13).
Lastly, we show p∗< ¯p < ˜p to complete this proof. p∗< ¯p is equivalent to k∗> ¯k. Recalling that
k∗3 + 3k∗= 2τ and ¯k3 + 2¯k = τ, we have k∗3 + 3k∗= 2τ = 2¯k3 + 4¯k > ¯k3 + 3¯k, i.e., k∗> ¯k. We will
prove ˜p > ¯p. Recall ¯p = µ −¯kσ < µ, and then it is true for cases (b) and (d). Note that ¯k3 + 2¯k = τ,
which is equivalent to ¯k = (τ −¯k)/(¯k2 + 1). Let ˜p = µ −k′σ, and then it is equivalent to verify
k′ < ¯k. We ﬁrst consider case (a). Since τ = (µ −c)/σ, Equation (S.10) can be simpliﬁed into:
(k′ + σ/µ)/(1 + σ2/µ2) = (τ −k′)/(k
′2 + 1), where the left hand side is increasing in k′ and the
right hand side is decreasing in k′. We can verify (k′ +σ/µ)/(1+σ2/µ2) > k′. Suppose k′ ≥¯k, then
(τ −k′)/(k
′2 + 1) ≤(τ −¯k)/(¯k2 + 1). On the other hand, (k′ + σ/µ)/(1 + σ2/µ2) > k′ ≥¯k, which
contradicts with (k′ +σ/µ)/(1+σ2/µ2) = (τ −k′)/(k
′2 +1) ≤(τ −¯k)/(¯k2 +1) = ¯k. We next consider
case (c). Equation (S.12) can be simpliﬁed into: (
√
k
′2 + 1 + k′)/2 = (τ −k′)/(k
′2 + 1). It is easy to
see (
√
k
′2 + 1 + k′)/2 ≥k′, and then we can prove k′ < ¯k by contradiction with a similar argument
as in case (a).
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

21
Proof of Proposition 9.
We deﬁne r and rb as follows:
r = max
¯pi,∀i∈[n]

min
Fi∈Fi,∀i∈[n]
nP
i=1
(¯pi −ci)P(Vi ≥¯pi)
nP
i=1
max
pi (pi −ci)P(Vi ≥pi)

,
rb = max
¯pb

min
Fi∈Fi,∀i∈[n]
(¯pb −
nP
i=1
ci)P(
nP
i=1
Vi ≥¯pb)
max
pb (pb −
nP
i=1
ci)P(
nP
i=1
Vi ≥pb)

.
For separate sales, M = P([n]) and ¯pS = P
i∈S
¯pi for any S ∈M and the seller decides on each
individual product’s price ¯pi, i ∈[n]. For the pure bundle, M = {[n]} and the seller decides on
the bundle price ¯pb. Thus we can see that 1 −r and 1 −rb are the optimal objective values for
(4) under separate sales and pure bundling, respectively. Hence, the pure bundle is guaranteed
to perform better than separate sales if 1 −r ≥1 −rb, i.e., r ≤rb. Similar to Proposition 5, the
asymptotic optimality of the pure bundle is that, for any ϵ ∈(0,1], there exists a threshold n∗such
that 1 −rb < ϵ, i.e., rb > 1 −ϵ for n > n∗. Furthermore, we deﬁne
ri = max
¯pi

min
Fi∈Fi
(¯pi −ci)P(Vi ≥¯pi)
max
pi (pi −ci)P(Vi ≥pi)

.
We ﬁrst show r ≤max
i
{ri}. By the deﬁnitions of ri and r, we have
r = max
¯pi,∀i∈[n]

min
Fi∈Fi,∀i∈[n]
nP
i=1
(¯pi −ci)P(Vi ≥¯pi)
nP
i=1
max
pi (pi −ci)P(Vi ≥pi)

≤max
¯pi,∀i∈[n]

min
Fi∈Fi,∀i∈[n]max
i
(¯pi −ci)P(Vi ≥¯pi)
max
pi (pi −ci)P(Vi ≥pi)

= max
i
max
¯pi

min
Fi∈Fi
(¯pi −ci)P(Vi ≥¯pi)
max
pi (pi −ci)P(Vi ≥pi)

= max
i
{ri},
where the inequality is due to the fact that
n
P
i=1
ai
n
P
i=1
bi
≤max
i
ai
bi for ai ≥0 and bi ≥0, the second equality
is due to that inverting the order of maximization or minimization does not change the optimal
value.
Second, we will show that rb ≥max
i
{ri} under any condition in Propositions 4, 6, 7, Corollaries
2, 3. We consider the independent case, and denote τi = µi−ci
σi
= (1−γ)µi
σi
= 1−γ
δi
for all i, and τ¯n =
(1−γ) P
i µi
√P
i σ2
i
. Moreover, let ¯ki and ¯k¯n be the unique real root to
¯k3
i + 2¯ki = τi = 1
σi
µi(1 −γ),
¯k3
¯n + 2¯k¯n = τ¯n =
P
i µi
pP
i σ2
i
(1 −γ),
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

22
respectively. By Theorem 3, we have 1−ri =
1
1+¯k2
i and 1−rb =
1
1+¯k2
¯n . Then rb ≥max
i
{ri} is equivalent
to ¯k¯n ≥max
i
¯ki. Since k3 +2k is increasing in k, then ¯k¯n ≥max
i
¯ki implies τ¯n ≥max
i
τi, i.e.,
√P
i σ2
i
P
i µi
≤
mini δi, which is indeed the condition in Proposition 4. Moreover, we have shown that Corollaries 2
and 3 are special cases of Proposition 4. Hence, we have veriﬁed rb ≥max
i
{ri} under any condition
in Proposition 4, Corollaries 2, 3. Following the same logic in proofs of Propositions 6 and 7, we
can verify rb ≥max
i
{ri} under their conditions.
Lastly, we show the asymptotic optimality. Consider n products have the same mean µ, standard
deviation σ, and marginal cost c. Then,
¯k3
¯n + 2¯k¯n = τ¯n =
P
i µi
pP
i σ2
i
(1 −γ) = √n1 −γ
δ
.
Let n∗be the unique root of
¯k2
¯n
1+¯k2
¯n = 1−ϵ. It is easy to see n∗is decreasing in ϵ. Therefore, if n > n∗,
we have rb = 1 −
1
1+¯k2
¯n =
¯k2
¯n
1+¯k2
¯n > 1 −ϵ.
□
Proof of Proposition OA.1.
We will show the price heuristic p∗
s achieves the following perfor-
mance guarantee:
max

ρs ≡2(1 −k∗
s
τ )2
2 −k∗s
τ
/(1 +
γ
2(1 −γ)β ),
1
2 +
γ
(1−γ)β

(≥ρ),
where β ≡τ 21{τ>1} + 1{τ≤1} ≥1 and 1{·} is the indicator function.
By the two-sided Chebyshev’s inequality, P(|V −µ| ≥kσ) ≤
1
k2 . If V has a symmetric distribution,
we have
P(V −µ ≤−kσ) ≤1
2k2 .
(S.17)
The bound in (S.17) is not very meaningful if k ≤1. We can establish a distribution-free upper
bound by following the same approach as the proof of Theorem 1(a) (see (OA.1) and (OA.2))
to provide an upper bound on cF(c). Since cF(c) = cP(V ≤c) = cP( V −µ
σ
≤−µ−c
σ ) ≤
c
2( µ−c
σ
)2 =
c
2τ2 ,
where the inequality is due to (S.17). Moreover, since the valuation distribution is symmetric,
F(c) ≤1
2. Thus cF(c) ≤
1
2βc, where β ≡τ 21{τ>1} +1{τ≤1}. Then we can obtain an upper bound: for
all F ∈Fs, maxp π(p;F) ≤µ −c +
c
2β ≡Us in view of (OA.2).
Now we establish a lower bound. Write p = µ −kσ, then
π(p;F) = (p −c) ¯F(p−) = (µ −kσ −c) ¯F((µ −kσ)−) ≥(µ −c)(1 −k
τ )(1 −1
2k2 ),
where the inequality is due to (S.17). Denote ϕs(k) = (1−k
τ )(1−
1
2k2 ). Then ϕ′
s(k) = −1
τ −
1
2k2τ + 1
k3 =
−2k3−k+2τ
2k3τ
. The roots of ϕ′
s(k) = 0 are characterized by:
2k3 + k = 2τ.
(S.18)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

23
By Cardano’s solution for a cubic function, the unique real root of (S.18), denoted by k∗
s, is in the
form as in Proposition OA.1. If k ≤k∗
s, ϕ′
s(k) ≥0 and if k ≥k∗
s, ϕ′
s(k) ≤0, thus k∗
s is the unique
maximizer of ϕs(k). By (S.18),
ϕs(k∗
s) =
(2(k∗
s)2 −1)2
2(k∗
s)2(2(k∗
s)2 + 1) = 2(1 −k∗
s
τ )2
2 −k∗s
τ
.
Thus a distribution-free lower bound is Ls = (µ−c)ϕs(k∗
s). Therefore, we can obtain a distribution-
free performance guarantee: ρs = Ls
Us = (
2(1−k∗s
τ )2
2−k∗s
τ
)/(1 +
γ
2(1−γ)β).
We may improve the performance bound ρs with another price. Because inequality (S.17) is
loose when k ≤1, we can improve the lower bound Ls and hence the performance guarantee. Note
that when we set p = µ, the proﬁt is 1
2(µ −c). This is because due to the valuation distribution
symmetry, with one half of chances, customers will make a purchase. Hence, if ϕs(k∗
s) ≤1
2, the
lower bound can be improved to 1
2(µ −c), otherwise, we use the lower bound Ls. Since ϕs(k) is
increasing in k, then we have that when k∗
s ≤
q
5+
√
17
4
≈1.5102 (where the latter constant is solved
from ϕs(k) = 1
2), ϕs(k∗
s) ≤1
2. Combining the two heuristics p = µ −k∗
sσ and p = µ, we can obtain
the following improved performance guarantee:
ρ′
s =





ρs
if τ ≥
2(
q
5+
√
17
4
)3+
q
5+
√
17
4
2
≈4.1996,
1
2+
γ
(1−γ)β
otherwise.
Lastly, we verify that with more information that the valuation distribution is symmetric, our
heuristic is guaranteed to perform better than without this additional information (as a by-product,
we show p∗≤p∗
s). It is suﬃcient to show that ρs > ρ, in particular, Us ≤U and Ls > L. Compare
upper bounds. If τ > 1, Us = µ −c +
c
2τ2 < µ −
τ2
τ2+1c = U; if τ ≤1, Us = µ −1
2c ≤µ −
τ2
τ2+1c =
U. Thus Us ≤U. Compare price heuristics. If τ ≥
2(
q
5+
√
17
4
)3+
q
5+
√
17
4
2
, then k∗
s ≥
q
5+
√
17
4
, hence,
(k∗
s)2 > 2. Since (2k3 +k)−(k3 +3k) = k3 −2k > 0 holds if k2 > 2, thus by (OA.4) and (S.18), 2τ =
(k∗)3 + 3(k∗) = 2(k∗
s)3 + (k∗
s) > (k∗
s)3 + 3(k∗
s). Since k3 + 3k is increasing in k, we have k∗> k∗
s. As
a result, p∗≤p∗
s. Recall the deﬁnition of Ls and L, Ls = (µ −c)
(2(k∗
s)2−1)2
2(k∗s)2(2(k∗s)2+1) = (µ −c) (2(k∗
s)2−1)2
4k∗sτ
=
(µ −c)( (k∗
s)3
τ
−k∗
s
τ +
1
4τk∗s ) = (µ −c)(
τ−1
2 k∗
s
τ
−k∗
s
τ +
1
4τk∗s ) = (µ −c)(1 −3k∗
s
2τ +
1
4τk∗s ), and L = (µ −c)(1 −
3k∗
2τ ) < (µ −c)(1 −3k∗
s
2τ ) < Ls, where the ﬁrst inequality is due to k∗> k∗
s.
□
Proof of Proposition OA.2.
By Proposition OA.1, p∗≤p∗
s, then ¯F(p∗−) ≥¯F(p∗
s
−), and we have
π(p∗;F)
π(p∗
s;F) = (p∗−c) ¯F(p∗−)
(p∗
s −c) ¯F(p∗
s
−) = (µ −c)(1 −k∗(τ)
τ
) ¯F(p∗−)
(µ −c)(1 −k∗s(τ)
τ
) ¯F(p∗
s
−)
≥1 −k∗(τ)
τ
1 −k∗s(τ)
τ
.
By (OA.4) and (S.18), then 1 −k∗(τ)
τ
= 1 −
2
(k∗(τ))2+3 and 1 −k∗
s(τ)
τ
= 1 −
2
2(k∗s(τ))2+1, which are
increasing in k∗(τ) and k∗
s(τ), respectively. Because k∗(τ) and k∗
s(τ) are increasing in τ, thus
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

24
1 −k∗(τ)
τ
and 1 −k∗
s(τ)
τ
are increasing in τ. When τ = 130, we compute 1 −k∗(τ)
τ
= 0.9521. Then if
τ ≥130,
1 −k∗(τ)
τ
1 −k∗s(τ)
τ
≥1 −k∗(τ)
τ
≥1 −k∗(130)
130
> 95%,
where the ﬁrst inequality is due to 1 −k∗
s(τ)
τ
≤1 and the second inequality is due to that 1 −k∗(τ)
τ
is increasing in τ.
Now divide [4.2,130] into 19 segments as follows: [4.2,4.7], [4.7,5.2], [5.2,5.7], [5.7,6.2], [6.2,6.7],
[6.7,7.2], [7.2,7.7], [7.7,8.3], [8.3,9.1], [9.1,10.0], [10.0,11.1], [11.1,12.5], [12.5,14.3], [14.3,16.8],
[16.8,20.6], [20.6,27.0], [27.0,39.9], [39.9,76.9], [76.9,130]. We evaluate 1−k∗(τ)
τ
at every endpoint of
the segments. The values are 0.6303, 0.6497, 0.6668, 0.6819, 0.6954, 0.7076, 0.7186, 0.7286, 0.7395,
0.7524, 0.7651, 0.7787, 0.7933, 0.8089, 0.8263, 0.8464, 0.8698, 0.8979, 0.9328, 0.9521, respectively.
Similarly, we evaluate 1 −k∗
s(τ)
τ
at those endpoints. The values are 0.6404, 0.6647, 0.6853, 0.7030,
0.7183, 0.7318, 0.7438, 0.7545, 0.7660, 0.7793, 0.7923, 0.8058, 0.8201, 0.8351, 0.8514, 0.8699, 0.8909,
0.9156, 0.9452, 0.9613, respectively. We want to verify that
1−k∗(τ)
τ
1−k∗s (τ)
τ
≥95% for each segment. The
idea is: for a segment [a,b], if τ ∈[a,b], since 1 −k∗(τ)
τ
and 1 −k∗
s(τ)
τ
are increasing in τ,
1−k∗(τ)
τ
1−k∗s (τ)
τ
≥
1−k∗(a)
a
1−k∗s (b)
b
. With the values of endpoints computed, we can easily verify for each segment [a,b], it is
indeed that
1−k∗(a)
a
1−k∗s (b)
b
≥95%.
□
Proof of Proposition OA.3.
With the additional information of unimodality, we can resort to
the Vysochanskij-Petunin inequality
P(|X −µ| ≥kσ) ≤







4
9k2
if k ≥
r
8
3 ≈1.633,
4
3k2 −1
3
otherwise,
to derive an improved performance guarantee. In particular, we show that the price heuristic
p∗
u =





















µ −k∗
u1σ
if τ ≥7
√
6
3
≈5.72,
µ −
q
8
3σ
if 11
6
r
8
3 ≤τ ≤7
√
6
3 ,
µ −k∗
u2σ
if 2.65 ≤τ ≤11
6
r
8
3 ≈2.99,
µ −k∗σ = p∗
if τ ≤2.65,
where
k∗
u1 =
3
r
4
9τ +
q
( 4
9)2τ 2 + ( 4
27)3 +
3
r
4
9τ −
q
( 4
9)2τ 2 + ( 4
27)3,
k∗
u2 =
3
r
τ +
q
τ 2 + ( 1
3)3 +
3
r
τ −
q
τ 2 + ( 1
3)3,
(S.19)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

25
achieves a sharper performance guarantee as follows:
(ρ ≤)ρu = Lu
Uu
=











































(1−
k∗u1
τ
)(1−
4
9k∗2
u1
)
1+
4
9τ2
γ
1−γ
if τ ≥7
√
6
3 ,
(1−√8
3
1
τ ) 5
6
1+
4
9τ2
γ
1−γ
if 11
6
r
8
3 ≤τ ≤7
√
6
3 ,
(1−
k∗u2
τ
)( 4
3 −
4
3k∗2
u2
)
1+
4
9τ2
γ
1−γ
if 2.65 ≤τ ≤11
6
r
8
3,
L
µ−c+
4
9τ2 c
if
r
8
3 ≤τ ≤2.65,
L
µ−c+(
4
3τ2 −1
3 )c
if
√
2 ≤τ ≤
r
8
3,
ρ
if τ ≤
√
2,
where L is speciﬁed in Theorem 1(b) and ρ is speciﬁed in Theorem 2.
First consider the upper bound. If τ ≥
q
8
3, cF(c) ≤
4
9τ2 c , if
√
2 ≤τ ≤
q
8
3, cF(c) ≤c( 4
3τ2 −1
3)
by the Vysochanskij-Petunin inequality, otherwise, cF(c) ≤c
1
τ2+1 by the one-sided Chebyshev’s
inequality. This is because when τ ≤
√
2, c
1
τ2+1 ≤c( 4
3τ2 −1
3), one-sided Chebyshev’s inequality gives
a smaller upper bound. In view of (OA.1) and (OA.2), we can obtain a sharper upper bound:
Uu =













µ −c +
4
9τ2 c
if τ ≥
r
8
3,
µ −c + ( 4
3τ2 −1
3)c
if
√
2 ≤τ ≤
r
8
3,
U
otherwise.
Now consider the lower bound. Denote ϕu1(k) = (1 −k
τ )(1 −
4
9k2 ) and ϕu2(k) = (1 −k
τ )( 4
3 −
4
3k2 ),
then ϕ′
u1(k) = −1
τ −4
9
1
k2τ + 8
9
1
k3 = −9k3−4k+8τ
9k3τ
, ϕ′
u2(k) = 4
3
−k3−k+2τ
τk3
. The roots of ϕ′
u1(k) = 0 and
ϕ′
u2(k) = 0 are characterized by
k3 + 4
9k = 8
9τ,
(S.20)
and
k3 + k = 2τ,
(S.21)
respectively. By Cardano’s solution for a cubic function, the unique real root to (S.20) is in the
form of S.19. If k ≤k∗
u1, ϕ′
u1(k) ≥0 and if k ≥k∗
u1, ϕ′
u1(k) ≤0, thus k∗
u1 is the unique maximizer of
ϕu1(k). Similarity, if k ≤k∗
u2, ϕ′
u2(k) ≥0 and if k ≥k∗
u2, ϕ′
u2(k) ≤0, thus k∗
u2 is the unique maximizer
of ϕu2(k).
If τ = 7
√
6
3 , k∗
u1(τ) =
q
8
3; τ = 11
6
q
8
3, k∗
u2(τ) =
q
8
3; τ = 3
2
√
2, k∗
u2(τ) =
√
2. Because k3 + 4
9k and
k3 +k is increasing in k, if τ ≥7
√
6
3 , then k∗
u1(τ) ≥
q
8
3, in which case we can apply the Vysochanskij-
Petunin inequality for k ≥
q
8
3. If 11
6
q
8
3 ≤τ ≤7
√
6
3 , k∗
u1(τ) ≤
q
8
3 and k∗
u2(τ) ≥
q
8
3, no matter using
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

26
Vysochanskij-Petunin inequality for k ≥
q
8
3 or k ≤
q
8
3, the optimal choice is letting k∗
u1(τ) =
q
8
3 or k∗
u2(τ) =
q
8
3. If τ ≤11
6
q
8
3, k∗
u2(τ) ≤
q
8
3, in which case we can apply the Vysochanskij-
Petunin inequality for k ≤
q
8
3. But if τ ≤3
2
√
2 ≈2.12, k∗
u2(τ) ≤
√
2, (1 −
k∗
u2(τ)
τ
)( 4
3 −
4
3(k∗u2)2 ) ≤(1 −
k∗
u2(τ)
τ
)
(k∗
u2)2
(k∗u2)2+1 ≤(1−k∗(τ)
τ
)
(k∗)2
(k∗)2+1, where the ﬁrst inequality is due to 4
3 −
4
3(k∗u2)2 ≤
(k∗
u2)2
(k∗u2)2+1, and the
second inequality is due to k∗is the maximum point of ϕ(k), in which case we can resort to the one-
sided Chebyshev’s inequality and obtain a better lower bound L (see Theorem 1(b)). Now consider
2.12 ≤τ ≤11
6
q
8
3. Since k∗(2.65) = 1.20, k∗
u2(2.65) = 1.55, then we can verify, ϕ(k∗(2.65)) = (1 −
k∗(2.65)
2.65 )(
(k∗(2.65))2
(k∗(2.65))2+1) = (1 −
k∗
u2(2.65)
2.65
)( 4
3 −
4
3(k∗u2(2.65))2 ) = ϕu2(k∗
u2(2.65)), which shows when τ = 2.65,
the lower bound given by Vysochanskij-Petunin inequality and one-sided Chebyshev’s inequality
are the same. We will show if 2.12 ≈3
2
√
2 ≤τ ≤2.65, ϕ(k∗(τ)) ≥ϕu2(k∗
u2(τ)), if 2.65 ≤τ ≤11
6
q
8
3 ≈
2.99, ϕ(k∗(τ)) ≤ϕu2(k∗
u2(τ)). Thus it is better to use one-sided Chebyshev’s inequality if τ ≤2.65.
By (OA.4) and (S.21), ϕ(k∗(τ)) = (1 −k∗(τ)
τ
)(
(k∗(τ))2
(k∗(τ))2+1) =
(k∗(τ))2
(k∗(τ))2+3, ϕu2(k∗
u2(τ)) = (1 −
k∗
u2(τ)
τ
)( 4
3 −
4
3(k∗u2(τ))2 ) = 4
3
((k∗
u2(τ))2−1)2
(k∗u2(τ))2((k∗u2(τ))2+1), because k∗(τ) and k∗
u2(τ) are increasing in τ, then ϕ(k∗(τ))
and ϕu2(k∗
u2(τ)) are increasing in τ. Dividing [2.12,2.99] into 8 segments: [2.12,2.33], [2.33,2.49],
[2.29,2.60], [2.60,2.65], [2.65,2.67], [2.67,2.77], [2.77,2.87], [2.87,2.99], by computing, we obtain
the values of every endpoints for ϕ(k∗(τ)) are 0.26,0.29,0.31,0.32,0.32,0.32,0.33,0.34,0.35, and
0.22,0.26,0.29,0.31,0.32,0.33,0.34,0.36,0.38 for ϕu2(k∗
u2(τ)). We want to verify that
ϕ(k∗(τ))
ϕu2(k∗u2(τ)) ≥1
for the ﬁrst 4 segments and
ϕ(k∗(τ))
ϕu2(k∗u2(τ)) ≤1 for the last 4 segments. The idea of proof is: for a segment
[a,b], if τ ∈[a,b], since ϕ(k∗(τ)) and ϕu2(k∗
u2(τ)) are increasing in τ, thus
ϕ(k∗(b))
ϕu2(k∗u2(a)) ≥
ϕ(k∗(τ))
ϕu2(k∗u2(τ)) ≥
ϕ(k∗(a))
ϕu2(k∗u2(b)). With the values of endpoints, we can easily verify it.
From the above analysis, we obtain a lower bound with 4 segments:
Lu =





















(µ −c)ϕu1(k∗
u1)
if τ ≥7
√
6
3 ,
(µ −c)(1 −
r
8
3
1
τ )5
6
if 11
6
r
8
3 ≤τ ≤7
√
6
3 ,
(µ −c)ϕu2(k∗
u2)
if 2.65 ≤τ ≤11
6
r
8
3,
L
if τ ≤2.65.
Then we can obtain the desired distribution-free performance guarantee by taking the ratio of Lu
and Uu.
Lastly, we show that with more information that the valuation distribution is unimodal, we can
verify that our heuristic is guaranteed to perform better than without this additional information.
It is suﬃcient to show that ρu > ρ, in particular, Uu ≤U and Lu > L. Compare upper bounds. If τ ≥
q
8
3, Uu = µ −c +
4
9τ2 c ≤µ −
τ2
τ2+1c = µ −c +
c
τ2+1 = U, which is due to
4
9τ2 ≤
1
τ2+1; if
√
2 ≤τ ≤
q
8
3,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

27
Uu = µ −c + ( 4
3τ2 −1
3)c ≤µ −
τ2
τ2+1c = µ −c +
c
τ2+1 = U, which is due to
4
3τ2 −1
3 ≤
1
τ2+1; otherwise,
Uu = U. Thus Uu ≤U. Compare price heuristics and their lower bounds. If τ ≥7
√
6
3 , k∗
u1 ≥
q
8
3,
hence, (k∗
u1)2 ≥8
5. Since ( 9
4k3 + k) −(k3 + 3k) = 5
4k3 −2k > 0 holds if k2 > 8
5, thus by (OA.4) and
(S.20), 2τ = (k∗)3 + 3k∗= 9
4(k∗
u1)3 + k∗
u1 > (k∗
u1)3 + 3k∗
u1. Since k3 + 3k is increasing in k, we have
k∗> k∗
u1. As a result, p∗≤p∗
u. Lu = (µ −c)ϕu1(k∗
u1) = (µ −c)
(9(k∗
u1)2−4)2
9(k∗u1)2(9(k∗u1)2+4) = (µ −c)
(9(k∗
u1)2−4)2
(9k∗u1)(8τ) =
(µ −c)(
9(k∗
u1)3
8τ
−
k∗
u1
τ
+
2
9τk∗u1 ) = (µ −c)(
8τ−4k∗
u1
8τ
−
k∗
u1
τ
+
2
9τk∗u1 ) = (µ −c)(1 −
3k∗
u1
2τ
+
2
9τk∗u1 ). Then
L = (µ −c)(1 −3k∗
2τ ) < (µ −c)(1 −
3k∗
2
2τ +
2
9τ ) = Lu, which is due to k∗> k∗
u1. If
11
6
q
8
3 ≤τ ≤7
√
6
3 ,
Lu = (µ−c)(1−
q
8
3
1
τ ) 5
6, p∗
u = µ−
q
8
3σ. Since k∗=
q
8
3, τ = 17
√
2
3
√
3 ≈4.63 > 11
6
q
8
3 ≈2.99, hence, when
11
6
q
8
3 ≤τ ≤17
√
2
3
√
3 , k∗≤
q
8
3, p∗= µ −k∗σ ≥p∗
u; when 17
√
2
3
√
3 ≤τ ≤7
√
6
3 , k∗≥
q
8
3, p∗= µ −k∗σ ≤p∗
u.
Now we compare Lu and L. If k∗≤
q
8
3, L = (µ −c)(1 −k∗
τ )
k∗
(k∗)2+1 < (µ −c)ϕu2(k∗) = (µ −c)(1 −
k∗
τ )( 4
3 −
4
3(k∗)2 ) ≤(µ−c)ϕu2(
q
8
3) = Lu, which the ﬁrst inequality is due to
k∗
(k∗)2+1 ≤4
3 −
4
3(k∗)2 when
k∗≥
√
2, and the last inequality is due to k∗
u2 ≥
q
8
3, thus ϕu2(k) is increasing when k ≤
q
8
3. If
k∗≥
q
8
3, L = (µ −c)(1 −k∗
τ )
k∗
(k∗)2+1 < (µ −c)ϕu1(k∗) = (µ −c)(1 −k∗
τ )(1 −
4
9(k∗)2 ) ≤ϕu1(
q
8
3) = Lu,
which the ﬁrst inequality is due to
k∗
(k∗)2+1 ≤1−
4
9(k∗)2 when k∗≥
q
4
5, and the last inequality is due
to k∗
u1 ≤
q
8
3, thus ϕu1(k) is decreasing when k ≥
q
8
3. If 2.65 ≤τ ≤11
6
q
8
3, by (OA.4) and (S.21),
we have 2τ = (k∗
u2)3 + k∗
u2 = (k∗)3 + 3k∗> (k∗)3 + k∗, since k3 + k is increasing in k, then k∗
u2 > k∗.
As a result, p∗= µ−k∗σ > p∗
u = µ−k∗
u2σ. Lu = ϕu2(k∗
u2(τ)) ≥L = ϕ(k∗(τ)). If τ ≤2.65, Lu = L and
p∗
u = p∗. By summary, Lu > L, if τ ≥17
√
2
3
√
3 , p∗
u ≥p∗, otherwise, p∗
u ≤p∗.
□
Proof of Proposition OA.4.
If τ ≥17
√
2
3
√
3 ≈4.63, ﬁrst consider τ ≥7
√
6
3
≈5.72. By Proposition
OA.3, p∗≤p∗
u, then ¯F(p∗−) ≥¯F(p∗
u
−), and we have
π(p∗;F)
π(p∗
u;F) = (p∗−c) ¯F(p∗−)
(p∗
u −c) ¯F(p∗
u
−) = (µ −c)(1 −k∗(τ)
τ
) ¯F(p∗−)
(µ −c)(1 −
k∗u1(τ)
τ
) ¯F(p∗
u
−)
≥1 −k∗(τ)
τ
1 −
k∗u1(τ)
τ
.
By (OA.4) and (S.19), note that k∗
u1 is the unique root of k3 + 4
9k = 8
9τ, then 1−k∗(τ)
τ
= 1−
2
(k∗(τ))2+3
and 1 −
k∗
u1(τ)
τ
= 1 −
2
2(k∗u1(τ))2+1, which are increasing in k∗(τ) and k∗
u1(τ), respectively. Because
k∗(τ) and k∗
u1(τ) are increasing in τ, 1 −k∗(τ)
τ
and 1 −
k∗
u1(τ)
τ
are increasing in τ. When τ = 130,
we compute 1 −k∗(τ)
τ
= 0.9521. If τ ≥130,
1−k∗(τ)
τ
1−
k∗u1 (τ)
τ
≥1 −k∗(τ)
τ
≥95.21% > 95%, where the ﬁrst
inequality is due to 1 −
k∗
u1(τ)
τ
≤1 and the second inequality is due to that 1 −k∗(τ)
τ
is increasing in
τ(≥130).
Now divide [5.72,130] into 43 segments as follows: [5.72,5.82], [5.82,5.92], [5.92,6.02], [6.02,6.12],
[6.12,6.22], [6.22,6.32], [6.32,6.42], [6.42,6.52], [6.52,6.62], [6.62,6.72], [6.72,6.82], [6.82,6.92],
[6.92,7.02], [7.02,7.12], [7.12,7.22], [7.22,7.32], [7.32,7.42], [7.42,7.52], [7.52,7.62], [7.62,7.72],
[7.72,7.82], [7.82,7.92], [7.92,8.12], [8.12,8.32], [8.32,8.52], [8.52,8.82], [8.82,9.12], [9.12,9.42],
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

28
[9.42,9.72], [9.72,10.12], [10.12,10.52], [10.52,11.02], [11.02,11.52], [11.52,12.22], [12.22,13.12],
[13.12,14.32], [14.32,15.92], [15.92,18.12], [18.12,21.42], [21.42,26.82], [26.82,37.22], [37.22,63.82],
[63.82,130]. We evaluate 1−k∗(τ)
τ
at every endpoint of the segments. The values are: 0.6825, 0.6853,
0.6880, 0.6907, 0.6933, 0.6959, 0.6984, 0.7009, 0.7033, 0.7057, 0.7080, 0.7103, 0.7125, 0.7147, 0.7169,
0.7190, 0.7210, 0.7231, 0.7251, 0.7270, 0.7289, 0.7308, 0.7327, 0.7363, 0.7398, 0.7432, 0.7481, 0.7527,
0.7571, 0.7614, 0.7676, 0.7718, 0.7777, 0.7833, 0.7906, 0.7990, 0.8091, 0.8207, 0.8340, 0.8500, 0.8693,
0.8934, 0.9242, 0.9521, respectively. Similarly, we evaluate 1−
k∗
u1(τ)
τ
at those endpoints. The values
are: 0.7144, 0.7175, 0.7206, 0.7235, 0.7271, 0.7292, 0.7325, 0.7346, 0.7371, 0.7397, 0.7421, 0.7445,
0.7649, 0.7492, 0.7514, 0.7536, 0.7558, 0.7519, 0.7600, 0.7620, 0.7639, 0.7659, 0.7678, 0.7714, 0.7750,
0.7784, 0.7878, 0.7922, 0.7963, 0.8015, 0.8064, 0.8121, 0.8174, 0.8242, 0.8321, 0.8414, 0.8519, 0.8639,
0.8779, 0.8946, 0.9150, 0.9404, 0.9628, respectively. We want to verify that
1−k∗(τ)
τ
1−
k∗u1 (τ)
τ
≥95% for each
segment. The idea is: for a segment [a,b], if τ ∈[a,b], since 1−k∗(τ)
τ
and 1−
k∗
u1(τ)
τ
are increasing in
τ, thus
1−k∗(τ)
τ
1−
k∗u1 (τ)
τ
≥
1−k∗(a)
a
1−
k∗u1 (b)
b
. With the values of endpoints computed, we can easily verify for each
segment [a,b], it is indeed that
1−k∗(a)
a
1−
k∗u1 (b)
b
≥95%.
Now consider 4.63 ≈17
√
2
3
√
3 ≤τ ≤7
√
6
3 ≈5.72. By Proposition OA.3,
π(p∗;F)
π(p∗
u;F) = (p∗−c) ¯F(p∗−)
(p∗
u −c) ¯F(p∗
u
−) = (µ −c)(1 −k∗(τ)
τ
) ¯F(p∗−)
(µ −c)(1 −
√8
3
τ ) ¯F(p∗
u
−)
≥1 −k∗(τ)
τ
1 −
√8
3
τ
,
where the inequality is due to that p∗≤p∗
u and ¯F(p∗−) ≥¯F(p∗
u
−).
Divide [4.63,5.72] into 4 segments as follows: [4.63,5.12], [5.12,5.43], [5.43,5.62], [5.62,5.72]. We
evaluate 1−k∗(τ)
τ
at every endpoint of the segments. The values are: 0.6472, 0.6642, 0.6740, 0.6796,
0.6825, respectively. Similarly, we evaluate 1 −
√8
3
τ
at those endpoints. The values are: 0.6473,
0.6813, 0.6993, 0.7094, 0.7145, respectively. Using the same idea as before and noting that 1−
√8
3
τ
is increasing in τ, it is suﬃcient to verify that for each of the above 4 segments [a,b],
1−k∗(a)
a
1−
√8
3
b
≥95%,
which is indeed the case.
If 2.65 ≤τ ≤17
√
2
3
√
3 ≈4.63, ﬁrst consider 2.99 ≤τ ≤4.63. By Proposition OA.3, Lu(τ) = (µ −
q
8
3σ −c) 5
6 = (µ −c)(1 −
q
8
3
1
τ ) 5
6, obviously (1 −
q
8
3
1
τ ) 5
6 is increasing in τ, by Theorem 1(b),
L(τ) = (µ −c)(1 −3
2τ k∗(τ)), by (OA.4), k∗(τ) is increasing by increasing τ, then k∗(τ)
τ
=
2
k∗2(τ)+3 is
decreasing by increasing τ, thus 1 −3
2τ k∗(τ) is increasing in τ,
L(τ)
Lu(τ) =
(1−3
2τ k∗(τ))
(1−√8
3
1
τ ) 5
6
.
Now divide [2.99,4.63] into 29 segments as follows: [2.99,3.19], [3.19,3.35], [3.35,3.48], [3.48,3.59],
[3.59,3.69], [3.69,3.77], [3.77,3.84], [3.84,3.90], [3.90,3.96], [3.96,4.01], [4.01,4.06], [4.06,4.10],
[4.10,4.14], [4.14,4.18], [4.18,4.22], [4.22,4.25], [4.25,4.28], [4.28,4.31], [4.31,4.34], [4.34,4.37],
[4.37,4.40], [4.40,4.43], [4.43,4.46], [4.46,4.49], [4.49,4.52], [4.52,4.55], [4.55,4.58], [4.58,4.61],
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

29
[4.61,4.63]. We evaluate 1 −
3
2τ k∗(τ) at every endpoint of the segments. The values are: 0.3543,
0.3725, 0.3856, 0.3958, 0.4041, 0.4114, 0.4171, 0.4219, 0.4260, 0.4301, 0.4334, 0.4366, 0.4392, 0.4418,
0.4443, 0.4468, 0.4486, 0.4504, 0.4523, 0.4541, 0.4558, 0.4576, 0.4594, 0.4611, 0.4629, 0.4646, 0.4663,
0.4680, 0.4697, respectively. Similarly, we evaluate (1−
q
8
3
1
τ ) 5
6 at those endpoints. The values are:
0.4067, 0.4271, 0.4423, 0.4543, 0.4645, 0.4724, 0.4790, 0.4844, 0.4897, 0.4940, 0.4982, 0.5014, 0.5046,
0.5078, 0.5109, 0.5131,0.5154, 0.5176, 0.5198, 0.5219, 0.5241, 0.5261, 0.5282, 0.5303, 0.5323, 0.5343,
0.5362, 0.5381,0.5394, respectively. Using the same idea of the proof of the situation τ ≥4.63, it is
suﬃcient to verify that for each of the above 29 segments [a,b],
1−3
2a k∗(a)
(1−√8
3
1
b ) 5
6
≥87%, which is indeed
the case.
Now consider 2.65 ≤τ ≤2.99, By Proposition OA.3, Lu(τ) = (µ −k∗
u2(τ)σ −c)( 4
3 −4
3k∗2
u2(τ)) =
(µ−c)(1−
k∗
u2(τ)
τ
)( 4
3 −4
3k∗2
u2(τ)), then
L(τ)
Lu(τ) =
(1−3
2τ k∗(τ))
(1−
k∗u2 (τ)
τ
)( 4
3 −4
3 k∗2
u2(τ)). By (S.19), note that k∗
u2(τ) is the
unique root of k3 + k = 2τ, k∗
u2(τ) is increasing in τ, then 1 −
k∗
u2(τ)
τ
= 1 −
2
k∗2
u2(τ)+1 and 4
3 −4
3k∗2
u2(τ)
are increasing in τ, thus (1 −
k∗
u2(τ)
τ
)( 4
3 −4
3k∗2
u2(τ)) is increasing in τ.
Divide [2.65,2.99] into two segments: [2.65,2.94], [2.94,2.99], we evaluate 1 −
3
2τ k∗(τ) at every
endpoint of the segments. The values are: 0.3229 and 0.3506. Similarly, we evaluate (1−
k∗
u2(τ)
τ
)( 4
3 −
4
3k∗2
u2(τ)) at those endpoints. The values are: 0.3705 and 0.3782. It is suﬃcient to verify that for
each of the above 2 segments [a,b],
1−3
2a k∗(a)
(1−
k∗u2 (b)
b
)( 4
3 −4
3 k∗2
u2(b)) ≥87%, which is indeed the case.
□
B.
Ancillary Results
Proposition S.1. (a) For a truncated distribution on [0,∞) of the normal distribution with
mean µ and standard deviation σ, the performance of the optimal robust price is given
by:
( µ−k∗σ
σ
−β)¯Φ( µ−k∗σ
σ
−α)
maxp(p−(β−α))¯Φ(p)
, where Φ(x) is the c.d.f. of standard normal distribution, k∗=
3p
τ +
√
τ 2 + 1 +
3p
τ −
√
τ 2 + 1, µ and σ are the mean and standard deviation of the truncated
normal distribution on [0,∞), α = µ
σ and β = c
σ. Moreover, the performance only depends on
α and β.
(b) For a truncated distribution on [0,∞) of the logit distribution with mean µ and scale param-
eter σ, the performance of the optimal robust price is given by:
( µ−k∗σ
σ
−β)¯L( µ−k∗σ
σ
−α)
maxp(p−(β−α))¯L(p)
, where
L(x) =
1
1+e−x is the c.d.f. of logit distribution with mean 0 and scale parameter 1, k∗=
3p
τ +
√
τ 2 + 1 +
3p
τ −
√
τ 2 + 1, µ and σ are the mean and standard deviation of the truncated
logit distribution on [0,∞), α = µ
σ and β = c
σ. Moreover, the performance only depends on α
and β.
(c) For a lognormal distribution f(x) =
1
√
2πσxe−(ln x−µ)2
2σ2
, the performance of the optimal robust
price is given by:
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

30
(1 −k∗δ −γ)¯Φ(
ln(δ2+1)
2
+ln(1−k∗δ)
√
ln(δ2+1)
)
maxp(p −γ)¯Φ(
ln p+ ln(δ2+1)
2
√
ln(δ2+1) )
,
where Φ(x) is the c.d.f. of standard normal distribution, k∗=
3p
τ +
√
τ 2 + 1 +
3p
τ −
√
τ 2 + 1,
and δ =
p
eσ2 −1.
Proof of Proposition S.1.
(a) For a given normal distribution x ∼N(µ,σ), we ﬁrst compute the
mean µ and standard deviation σ of its truncated version on [0,∞), which are:
µ =
R ∞
0 x
1
√
2πσe−(x−µ)2
2σ2 dx
R ∞
0
1
√
2πσe−(x−µ)2
2σ2 dx
=
R ∞
−µ
σ (yσ + µ)
1
√
2πσe−y2
2 dy
R ∞
−µ
σ
1
√
2πσe−y2
2 dy
= σ
R ∞
−µ
σ y
1
√
2πσe−y2
2 dy
R ∞
−µ
σ
1
√
2πσe−y2
2 dy
+ µ,
σ =
v
u
u
u
t
R ∞
0 x2
1
√
2πσe−(x−µ)2
2σ2 dx
R ∞
0
1
√
2πσe−(x−µ)2
2σ2 dx
−µ2 = σ
v
u
u
u
t
R ∞
−µ
σ y2
1
√
2πσe−y2
2 dy
R ∞
−µ
σ
1
√
2πσe−y2
2 dy
−


R ∞
−µ
σ y
1
√
2πσe−y2
2 dy
R ∞
−µ
σ
1
√
2πσe−y2
2 dy


2
.
Given the truncated normal distribution F, the proﬁt function is
π(p;F) =
(p −c) ¯F(p)
R ∞
0
1
√
2πσe−(x−µ)2
2σ2 dx
= (p −c)¯Φ( p−µ
σ )
¯Φ(−µ
σ)
.
Denote p1 = p−µ
σ
and c1 = c−µ
σ
= β −α. Then the proﬁt function can be written as Π(p;F) =
(p−c)¯Φ( p∗−µ
σ
)
¯Φ(−µ
σ )
= (p1−c1)¯Φ(p1)
¯Φ(−µ
σ )
= σ(p1−(β−α))¯Φ(p1)
¯Φ(−α)
.
The optimal robust price is µ −k∗σ. Thus the proﬁt given by the optimal robust price is:
(µ −k∗σ −c) ¯F(µ −k∗σ)
R ∞
0
1
√
2πσe−(x−µ)2
2σ2 dx
= (µ −k∗σ −c)¯Φ( µ−k∗σ−µ
σ
)
¯Φ(−µ
σ)
= σ( µ−k∗σ
σ
−β)¯Φ( µ−k∗σ
σ
−α)
¯Φ(−α)
.
Thus the performance is
( µ−k∗σ
σ
−β)¯Φ( µ−k∗σ
σ
−α)
maxp(p−(β−α))¯Φ(p)
, With the deﬁnition of µ and σ, we know µ
σ and σ
σ
only depend on α. Moreover, k∗only depends on τ and hence only depends on α and β. Therefore,
µ−k∗σ
σ
and the performance only depend on α and β.
(b) For a given logit distribution F(x) =
1
1+e−x−µ
σ , we ﬁrst compute the mean µ and standard
deviation σ of its truncated version on [0,∞), which are:
µ =
R ∞
0 xd
1
1+e−x−µ
σ
R ∞
0 d
1
1+e−x−µ
σ
=
R ∞
−µ
σ (σy + µ)d
1
1+e−y
1
1+e
µ
σ
= σ
R ∞
−µ
σ yd
1
1+e−y
1
1+e
µ
σ
+ µ,
σ =
v
u
u
u
t
R ∞
0 x2d
1
1+e−x−µ
σ
R ∞
0 d
1
1+e−x−µ
σ
−µ2 =
v
u
u
u
t
R ∞
−µ
σ (σy + µ)2d
1
1+e−y
1
1+e
µ
σ
−µ2 = σ
v
u
u
u
t
R ∞
−µ
σ y2d
1
1+e−y
1
1+e
µ
σ
−
 R ∞
−µ
σ yd
1
1+e−y
1 + e
µ
σ
!2
.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002

31
The remaining analysis is similar to part (a), with Φ(x) replaced by L(x).
(c) For a lognormal distribution with pdf f(x) =
1
√
2πσxe−(lnx−µ)2
2σ2
, the mean and stan-
dard deviation are µ = eµ+ σ2
2
and σ = eµ+ σ2
2
p
eσ2 −1, then δ =
p
eσ2 −1, k∗
depends
on
γ
and
σ.
The
optimal
robust
price
is
µ −k∗σ = eµ+ σ2
2 (1 −k∗p
eσ2 −1),
thus
the
proﬁt
is
eµ+ σ2
2 (1 −k∗p
eσ2 −1 −γ)
R ∞
eµ+ σ2
2 (1−k∗√
eσ2−1)
1
√
2πσxe−(lnx−µ)2
2σ2
dx = eµ+ σ2
2 (1 −
k∗p
eσ2 −1 −γ)
R ∞
σ2
2 +ln(1−k∗√
eσ2 −1)
σ
1
√
2πe−y2
2 dy = eµ+ σ2
2 (1 −k∗p
eσ2 −1 −γ)Φ(
σ2
2 +ln(1−k∗√
eσ2−1)
σ
).
The proﬁt function Π(p;F) = (p −c)
R ∞
p
1
√
2πσxe−(lnx−µ)2
2σ2
dx = (p −c)
R ∞
lnp−µ
σ
1
√
2πe−y2
2 dp, let
p = eµ+ σ2
2 p1 = µp1,
then
Π(p;F) = eµ+ σ2
2 (p1 −γ)¯Φ(
lnp+ σ2
2
σ
).
Thus
we
have
the
per-
formance
is
(1−k∗√
eσ2−1−γ)¯Φ(
σ2
2 +ln(1−k∗√
eσ2 −1)
σ
)
maxp(p−γ)¯Φ(
lnp+ σ2
2
σ
)
.
With
δ =
p
eσ2 −1,
it
is
translated
to
(1−k∗δ−γ)¯Φ(
ln(δ2+1)
2
+ln(1−k∗δ)
√
ln(δ2+1)
)
maxp(p−γ)¯Φ(
lnp+ ln(δ2+1)
2
√
ln(δ2+1)
)
.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3090002