TITLE: Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed: Optimal Policies and Insights
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2022.1163
---

Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed-Feed: Optimal
Policies and Insights
Citation for published version (APA):
Koca, Y., Martagan, T. G., Adan, I. J. B. F., Maillart, L., & van Ravenstein, B. (2023). Increasing
Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed-Feed: Optimal Policies and Insights. Manufacturing & Service Operations
Management, 25(1), 108-125. https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2022.1163
DOI:
10.1287/msom.2022.1163
Document status and date:
Published: 01/01/2023
Document Version:
Accepted manuscript including changes made at the peer-review stage
Please check the document version of this publication:
• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can be
important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record. People
interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication, or visit the
DOI to the publisher's website.
• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page
numbers.
Link to publication
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
 • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
 • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
 • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:
www.tue.nl/taverne
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:
openaccess@tue.nl
providing details and we will investigate your claim.
Download date: 13. Jun. 2026

Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed:
Optimal Policies and Insights
Yesim Koca, Tugce Martagan, Ivo Adan
Eindhoven University of Technology, y.koca@tue.nl, t.g.martagan@tue.nl, i.adan@tue.nl,
Lisa Maillart
University of Pittsburgh, maillart@pitt.edu,
Bram van Ravenstein
MSD Animal Health, bram.van.ravenstein@merck.com
Problem deﬁnition: Bleed–feed is a novel technology that allows biomanufacturers to skip intermediary
bioreactor setups. However, the speciﬁc time at which bleed–feed is performed is critical for success. The
process is stringently regulated, and its implementation involves unique trade-oﬀs in operational decision-
making. Our analysis formalizes the operational challenges related to bleed–feed decisions, and our results
inform biomanufacturers and policy-makers on the potential impact of this technology on current practice.
Academic/Practical Relevance: Operations Management (OM) methodologies have not yet been widely
adopted in the biomanufacturing industry. This research presents one of the ﬁrst attempts to demonstrate
how OM can complement biomanufacturing to improve operational decisions. We present a practically-
relevant problem and a rigorous solution approach that is relevant to both OM and biomanufacturing.
Methodology: We develop a ﬁnite-horizon, discrete-time Markov decision processes model, and analyze
the structural characteristics of optimal bleed–feed policies. Moreover, we characterize the behavior of the
value function as a function of regulatory restrictions. As a salient feature, the MDP model captures both
the biological dynamics of fermentation and the operational trade-oﬀs in biomanufacturing.
Results: We show that optimal bleed–feed policies have a three-way control-limit structure under mild
conditions that were validated with industry data. Our analysis reveals that the marginal beneﬁts of an
additional bleed–feed are decreasing and converge to a certain value called critical biomass.As a practically-
relevant benchmark, we consider a risk-averse heuristic and identify suﬃcient conditions for its optimality.
Managerial Implications: Our analysis (supported with an industry case study) shows that bleed–feed
implementation can provide beneﬁts. Real-world implementation at MSD resulted in an 82.5% improvement
in the batch yield per setup (using one bleed–feed). We ﬁnd that low-risk fermentation systems beneﬁt the
most from bleed–feed implementation. We also ﬁnd that the performance gap between optimal policies and
the risk-averse heuristic is higher when the failure risks or the critical biomass levels are lower.
Key words : Biomanufacturing; fermentation; bleed–feed; Markov decision processes; control-limit policy.
1

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
2
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
Time
Exponential
growth
phase
Stationary
phase
Harvest
(a) Biomass growth without bleed–feed
(b) Biomass growth with bleed–feed
Figure 1
Biomass growth over time in current practice (a) and with bleed–feed (b).
1.
Introduction
The biomanufacturing industry has developed several novel drugs (known as biopharmaceuticals)
for improving the health and well-being of humans as well as animals. To date, over 345 mil-
lion patients worldwide have beneﬁted from biopharmaceuticals in surviving cancer, diabetes, and
many other diseases (The European Biopharmaceutical Enterprises, 2015). With regard to animal
health, the industry serves over 640 million food animals and 383 million companion animals in the
United States alone (The Animal Health Institute, 2020). However, the growing global demand is
stretching production footprints, and markets are becoming increasingly sensitive to costs (McK-
insey&Company, 2014). To keep pace, the competitive advantage is shifting from “science” to
“operations” (McKinsey&Company, 2019); and this may require a fundamental reassessment and
redesign of some of the operations and technologies used in current practice.
Biomanufacturing operations can be broadly classiﬁed into two main steps: upstream and down-
stream operations. Upstream operations include activities related to fermentation (i.e., preparation
of seed culture and media, bioreactor setup, fermentation process, and harvesting). Downstream
operations generally focus on puriﬁcation and ﬁnishing (i.e., centrifugation, chromatography, and
ﬁll-and-ﬁnish). In this paper, we focus on upstream fermentation operations.
Fermentation is generally conducted in a bioreactor, which is a stainless steel vessel equipped
with several sensors. The fermentation process starts with a seed culture (i.e., living organisms such
as bacteria or virus) and a special medium. We refer to the seed culture as initial biomass. The
bioreactor provides a controlled environment in which the initial biomass grows and reproduces
during fermentation. This growth pattern is shown in Figure 1(a). More speciﬁcally, in Figure 1(a),
industry data is used to plot the biomass production (in grams) over time (hours) during a batch
fermentation process. Figure 1(a) shows that the fermentation process starts with a small amount

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
3
of initial biomass. Then, the biomass follows an exponential growth pattern, which is known as
exponential growth phase of fermentation. In a batch fermentation process, a special medium is
added only at the beginning of the process (before fermentation starts). This medium supports the
exponential growth of the biomass. However, the medium depletes as more biomass accumulates
inside the batch, and the fermentation process enters the stationary phase. In this phase, the cells
lose viability, and the bioreactor needs to be harvested. In our speciﬁc problem setting, the end-
product obtained from fermentation is measured in terms of the total amount of biomass produced
from the batch. This is because each of these biological cells (biomass) is essentially an active
ingredient for a biopharmaceutical drug. Hence, the subsequent production steps process these
active ingredients further into their ﬁnal forms (e.g., vaccines, pills, etc.).
The bioreactor needs to be set up before a fermentation process is started. The setup activities
include preparation of the seed culture and media; cleaning and sterilization of the bioreactor; and
setup of other necessary equipment such as sensors. In practice, bioreactor setups require highly-
specialized labor and materials, and are well-known to be costly. For example, the consumables and
reagents alone (e.g., acid, caustic, water-for-injection, and steam used for cleaning and sterilization
in each setup) constitute around 16% of the total fermentation costs (Oyebolu et al. 2019, Mahal
et al. 2021). Such high setup costs motivate the industry to obtain as much biomass as possible
from each bioreactor setup. The increasing adoption of single-use bioreactor technologies presents
another motivation for maximizing the bioreactor yield in the industry (Low 2020). The problem
of increasing the total biomass production per setup (also known as the problem of increasing
upstream titer) has been a popular research topic in the life sciences. As such, ﬁnding new ways of
addressing this problem is recognized as one of the critical requirements for succeeding in future
markets (McKinsey&Company, 2014). To address this problem, we consider a novel technique for
batch fermentation: “bleed–feed.”
Bleed–Feed: Concept and Challenges
Figure 1(b) illustrates the basic dynamics of a bleed–feed operation using industry data. In simple
terms, bleed–feed prolongs the exponential growth phase (Eppendorf 2017, Muldowney 2018). To
perform bleed–feed, the bioreactor operator ﬁrst extracts the biomass that has accumulated inside
the bioreactor (“bleed”). This is carried out such that only a small amount of biomass remains
inside the bioreactor. Then, a specially-designed medium is added to the bioreactor to help the
remaining biomass grow and reproduce (“feed”). The bleed–feed operation is performed almost
instantaneously and can be perceived as starting a new cultivation without a new setup. For
example, Figure 1(b) shows that the remaining biomass functions as a seed culture after bleed–feed
and continues to grow in the exponential growth phase. This is evidently a breakthrough technology
with a high potential for improving biomanufacturing eﬃciency.

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
4
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
However, the speciﬁc timing of bleed–feed plays a critical role for success: bleed–feed needs to
be performed during the exponential growth phase. When the cell culture enters the stationary
phase, bleed–feed cannot be conducted, and the batch needs to be harvested.1 The identiﬁcation
of the correct timing is not a trivial decision. The complex and uncertain nature of the biological
systems introduce three critical challenges in decision-making:
(i) Uncertain duration of the exponential growth phase. The duration of the exponential growth
phase (i.e., the time to enter the stationary phase) of most batch fermentation processes exhibits
uncertainty. This is mainly owing to the complex biological nature of living cells. However, the
process generally does not incur any risk of entering the stationary phase when the biomass amount
is below a certain threshold value called “critical biomass.”
(ii) Uncertain cell growth rate after bleed–feed. The response of living cells to bleed–feed is
uncertain. Although it is established that they continue to grow in the exponential growth phase,
their growth rate could be higher or lower compared to that of the original cell culture (the one
used before the ﬁrst bleed–feed).
(iii) Regulatory requirements on the number of bleed–feeds. According to regulatory requirements,
only a limited number of bleed–feeds per bioreactor setup may be performed. These regulations
are generally pre-speciﬁed, and biomanufacturers provide scientiﬁc evidence that substantiates the
process’ safety and reliability within these limits. However, these regulations are often known to be
conservative to ensure safety in a wide range of settings. For example, in our speciﬁc case study,
regulations permit only two bleed–feeds per setup.
From a practical perspective, challenge (i) described above creates a trade-oﬀbetween performing
the bleed–feed technique “too soon” and “too late.” When performed too soon, we would not
achieve the maximum biomass yield. When performed too late, we will miss the opportunity for
performing bleed–feed. This motivates our ﬁrst research question: (1) what is an optimal bleed–feed
policy that maximizes the total amount of biomass obtained from a bioreactor setup?
As a consequence of the three challenges described above, there are conﬂicting opinions on the
added value of bleed–feed to current practice, and biomanufacturers need a deeper understanding
of their managerial choice before adopting such policies. In addition, the impact of regulations as
described in (iii) is not fully understood in our context. Such exogenous policies aﬀect operational
decisions, yet their impact on the industry may in turn create the need for alternative regulatory
policies. Moreover, challenges (i) and (ii) imply that bleed–feed may not improve the biomanu-
facturing eﬃciency if performed suboptimally. These observations motivate our second and third
research questions: (2) how are the potential beneﬁts of bleed–feed aﬀected by regulatory limitations;
and (3) what is the added value of implementing bleed–feed to current industry practice?

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
5
To address these research questions, we develop a Markov decision process (MDP) model, and
analyze the structural characteristics of the value function and optimal bleed–feed policies. In
addition, we present an industry case study to illustrate the use of the developed model and assess
the potential room for improvement in practice. We develop answers to our aforementioned research
questions, which yield the following insights for biomanufacturers:
1. Optimal bleed–feed policies have a control-limit structure. We show that optimal
bleed–feed policies have a control-limit structure (i.e., a three-way control limit on the cultivation
age, the cell growth rate, and the number of bleed–feeds performed) wherein it is optimal to perform
bleed–feed above this control limit and not to do so below it. To generate broader insights, we
also present a risk-averse heuristic (which performs bleed–feed at the critical biomass level) and
identify suﬃcient conditions for its optimality. We ﬁnd that the performance gap between optimal
policies and the risk-averse heuristic is higher when the critical biomass or the risk of transitioning
to the stationary phase is lower.
2. The marginal beneﬁts of bleed–feed diminish as additional bleed–feeds are per-
formed. Our analysis reveals that the marginal beneﬁts of an additional bleed–feed are decreasing
and converge to a certain value. More speciﬁcally, we show that the marginal beneﬁts are only equal
to the critical biomass if the regulators would permit more bleed–feeds. This result implies that
the impact of regulations is more prominent when only a small number of bleed–feeds is permitted.
This ﬁnding is particularly relevant because the current regulations permit only a few bleed-feeds.
3. Bleed–feed can provide signiﬁcant beneﬁts. Our model has been validated and imple-
mented in practice (at two diﬀerent facilities) and resulted in an 82.5% improvement on batch yield
per setup, on average. We also present an industry case study and quantify the potential impact
of bleed–feed on a wide range of practically-relevant settings. We ﬁnd that low-risk fermentation
systems (i.e., when the critical biomass is high or the risk of entering the stationary phase is low)
beneﬁt the most from bleed–feed. Moreover, our numerical analysis indicates that implementing the
risk-averse heuristic instead of optimal policies would lead to around 6.7% losses in the expected
biomass production per setup (under the base case scenario of the case study).
In summary, our model formalizes our understanding of the challenges and trade-oﬀs associ-
ated with bleed–feed. In addition, our results inform biomanufacturers and policy makers on the
potential impact of this novel technology on current practice.
The concept of “bleeding” and “feeding” has been used in continuous fermentation systems
(Doran 1995, Pollock et al. 2013, Muldowney 2018). However, the use of bleed–feed in batch fermen-
tation is novel and involves unique challenges, as described above.To the best of our knowledge, this
paper presents the ﬁrst successful industry-scale implementation in our context. We believe that
our model can serve as a building block to support the industry’s gradual transition from batch to

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
6
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
(semi-)continuous processing in the near future. Owing to its impact on the industry, the research
outcomes have been recognized by professional societies and government agencies (IMPACT 2020,
European Commission 2020, INFORMS 2021). Moreover, the project was recognized as a ﬁnalist
of the 2022 INFORMS Franz Edelman Prize for achievement in the practice of operations research
and management science (INFORMS 2022).
This research has been conducted in close collaboration with MSD Animal Health, Boxmeer, the
Netherlands.2 MSD’s facility in Boxmeer is a leading biomanufacturing hub of Europe. It specializes
in both R&D and large-scale biomanufacturing to improve animal health. Hereafter, we use the
term “MSD” to represent the Bacteriological Processing Department in Boxmeer. Although our
work originates from MSD, this research addresses a common industry problem, and the resulting
analytical models and insights can be generalized to other biomanufacturing companies. We also
believe that our models can ﬁnd future applications in other industries. In particular, certain
applications in the food industry involve batch fermentation operations (e.g., yogurt, beer, and
wine production) and may beneﬁt from the use of the bleed–feed technology.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We review the relevant literature in Section 2.
We present the optimization model in Section 3, and study the analytical results in Section 4. We
present a model extension in Section 5 where failure risks depend on the bleed–feed count. We
present an industry case study from MSD in Section 6, and the concluding remarks in Section 7.
2.
Literature Review
Our work is closely related to two main streams of research: Section 2.1 elaborates on the relevant
work in the life sciences, and Section 2.2 reviews relevant studies in Operations Management.
2.1.
Relevant Literature in Life Sciences
Several studies in the life sciences address the problem of increasing upstream titer (i.e., total
biomass obtained per setup). In particular, a large body of work focuses on the modeling and
control of biological systems using mass-balance equations or kinetic models (Chang et al. 2011,
Mutturi and Lid´en 2014, Villaverde et al. 2016). In addition, predictive models have been developed
to estimate and control the biological dynamics of fermentation processes. These models generally
focus on establishing a relationship between the media composition, physicochemical parameters,
and biomass production (Patel et al. 2016, Wang et al. 2019). Although deterministic models are
the most commonly used models in the life sciences, a few studies have also developed stochastic
optimization models to increase fermentation titer. In particular, stochastic models are often used
to control critical process parameters for supporting cell growth during fermentation. For example,
an MDP model was built by Saucedo and Karim (1997) to determine an optimal feed rate that
maximizes ethanol production in fed-batch fermentation. Subsequently, Peroni et al. (2005) used

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
7
approximate dynamic programming to control feed rates and maximize the biomass formation
in fed-batch fermentation. Similarly, Li et al. (2011) adopted a Q-learning approach to model
fed-batch yeast fermentation and determined an optimal feed rate to increase biomass formation.
Cheema et al. (2002) used the genetic algorithm to optimize operating conditions and improve
gluconic acid production. Jabarivelisdeh and Waldherr (2018) also used the genetic algorithm and
determined dynamic metabolic engineering strategies to maximize ethanol production in batch
fermentation. We complement life science research with a rigorous theoretical analysis of optimal
policies. While most studies in life science focus on controlling the dynamics of fermentation, we
provide a theoretical analysis of optimal policies based on operational trade-oﬀs and biological
dynamics under uncertainty.
2.2.
Relevant Literature in Operations Management
Although several industries have beneﬁted from the use of Operations Management (OM) method-
ologies, OM applications in the context of biomanufacturing have not been widely studied. We refer
to Kaminsky and Wang (2015) for a survey of analytical models for biopharmaceutical operations
and supply chains.
Many of the existing OM studies focus on strategic or tactical decisions in biopharmaceutical
supply chains, such as licensing contracts and R&D alliances (Crama et al. 2008, Xiao and Xu 2012,
Bhattacharya et al. 2015, Allain et al. 2016, Taneri and De Meyer 2017), supply uncertainty and
demand forecasting (Tomlin 2009, Stonebraker and Keefer 2009). A few OM studies considered the
impact of regulations on licensing and innovation (Hermosilla 2020, Moreira et al. 2020), and R&D
investments (Arora et al. 2009, Rao 2020) in the pharmaceutical industry. A limited number of OM
studies considered operational decisions in biomanufacturing. For example, Martagan et al. (2019)
built an MDP framework to jointly optimize upstream batch sizing and downstream puriﬁcation
decisions. In a similar context, Xie et al. (2022) provided a Bayesian Network to capture the relation
between process parameters and quality attributes. However, none of the aforementioned studies
considered the problem of bleed–feed optimization.
Another relevant stream of OM research focuses on the problem of machine maintenance with a
limited number of spare parts. The ﬁeld of machine maintenance and spare part optimization has
a rich history. For a comprehensive overview of the state-of-the-art, we refer to the review paper
by De Jonge and Scarf (2019). Earlier work on machine maintenance with a ﬁnite number of spare
parts dates back to Derman et al. (1984). Therein, the authors assumed a continuous distribution
for the lifetime of a machine, and determined age-dependent replacement policies. In a more recent
study, Icten et al. (2013) extended this framework to build a discrete-time, condition-based MDP
model. They optimized the lifetime of a system under a limited number of maintenance actions,

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
8
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
and showed that optimal policies have a control-limit structure. However, our problem setting has
several key diﬀerences. First, Icten et al. (2013) assume that more deteriorated components are
more likely to fail and yield less reward. In contrast, in our problem setting, both the probability
of entering the stationary phase and the immediate rewards are nondecreasing in cultivation age.
Hence, diﬀerent from Icten et al. (2013), our model captures the tension between increasing the
bioreactor yield and increasing the failure risk by delaying the bleed-feed time. Moreover, the
replacement components are identical in Icten et al. (2013), whereas each bleed–feed results in a
new value of cell growth rate in our setting. In summary, our rewards and state transitions are
diﬀerent from the machine maintenance setting of Icten et al. (2013).
Our work has several contributions to both life sciences and OM. Bleed–feed is a novel technology
for increasing bioreactor yield per setup. However, the industry needs a rigorous understanding
of optimal bleed–feed policies and the underlying trade–oﬀs to be able to successfully use this
technology. Hence, we study a new and relevant problem in the biomanufacturing industry, which
is also an understudied area by the OM community. To the best of our knowledge, our work is one
of the ﬁrst attempts to provide a stochastic modeling and optimization of bleed–feed decisions. We
characterize the structural properties of optimal policies, and generate insights on the potential
beneﬁts of adopting this new technology with respect to current practice (no bleed–feed) and a
risk-averse heuristic. Our model has been validated with a real-world implementation at MSD and
directly improved their business metrics.
3.
Model Formulation
Our objective is to identify an optimal bleed–feed policy that maximizes the expected total biomass
obtained per batch (subject to regulatory requirements). We formulate the bleed–feed problem
as a discrete-time Markov decision process (MDP). All modeling assumptions presented in this
section have been cross-validated with one year of implementation data. We present the details of
the MDP model as follows.
Decision epochs: The fermentation process is monitored at discrete decision epochs k = 0,1,2,...,
corresponding to the time points t = kτ. Here, τ represents a period (a constant time interval
between two consecutive decision epochs). In practice, the length τ of a period can range from
minutes to days depending on the cell characteristics (e.g., type of cells used, cell lifetime, cell
growth rates, etc.) and process characteristics (e.g., type of bioreactor, etc.).
States: The state of the batch is denoted by (i,µ,n). The state i ∈I = {0,1,...,I} is the cultiva-
tion age, and represents the time elapsed (in terms of decision epochs) from the start of the current
cultivation. Each time a bleed–feed is performed, a special medium is added, and a new cultivation
starts. Therefore, the cultivation age is i = 0 at the beginning of a fermentation process, and resets

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
9
to i = 0 when a bleed–feed is performed. We assume that the maximum achievable cultivation age
is I considering the limitations in the cell viability during fermentation and the bioreactor capacity.
The state µ ∈M = [µℓ,µu] indicates the cell growth rate of a culture (i.e., the rate at which
biomass accumulates during fermentation). In alignment with current practice, we assume that
the cell growth rate µ is known at the beginning of the initial fermentation. In contrast, the cell
growth rate after bleed–feed is uncertain and follows a general distribution G(µ) with ﬁnite support
[µℓ,µu]. In practice, the bounds µu ≥µℓ> 0, as well as the distribution of the growth rate can
be determined based on historical data and R&D studies (see Figure 6(b) in Appendix B for an
example of production data). We let the random variable M denote the uncertain cell growth rate,
and µ′ its realization after bleed–feed. This uncertainty in growth rate is typically exogenous and
mainly associated with the inherent uncertainty of biological dynamics. We can provide an intuitive
explanation for this behavior from a biological perspective. When a bleed–feed is performed, a
fresh medium is added and only a small amount of biomass remains inside the bioreactor as a
seed culture. With the extraction of biomass and the addition of fresh medium, the fermentation
process naturally “resets” itself without costly setups.
In theory, it is possible to impact the distribution G(µ) of the cell growth rate by changing the
critical process parameters of fermentation (e.g., temperature, pH, acidity, etc.). However, most
industry-scale fermentation processes have a prespeciﬁed recipe which dictates these critical process
parameters. The recipe is approved by regulatory authorities and cannot be changed during large-
scale production. Therefore, we assume that the bioreactor operator can only interfere with the
timing of bleed–feed decisions in our problem setting.
The state n ∈N = {0,1,...,N} represents the total number of bleed–feed operations performed
since the setting up of the bioreactor (i.e., this state can be considered as a bleed–feed count). The
parameter N denotes the regulatory limit with regard to the maximum number of bleed–feeds that
can be performed on a batch. In our problem context, N is typically limited to only one or two
bleed–feeds per setup to ensure batch safety and quality.
Let us elaborate on the regulator’s problem of setting the bleed–feed limit N. The regulator often
aims to ensure the safety and quality of the products and the production processes. For example,
biomanufacturers need to provide evidence to regulatory authorities on the batch safety and quality
under N bleed–feeds (i.e., no issues should arise because of mutation, impurities, contamination,
etc.). This empirical evidence is often speciﬁc to a product and process, and depends on several
factors such as the characteristics of cells, equipment and media used in fermentation (e.g., virus
cells are typically more diﬃcult to control compared to bacteria). In addition, it might be more
diﬃcult to generate this empirical evidence when the number of bleed–feeds increases (i.e., some
fermentation processes might become more vulnerable and unstable as the number of bleed–feeds

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
10
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
increases). In this paper, we shall assume that the regulatory limit N is an “exogenous” parameter
which is prespeciﬁed by the regulator; and defer the regulator’s problem of setting N to future
research.3 Instead, we capture the impact of regulations by incorporating the bleed–feed count n
and the regulatory limit N into the state space of the MDP model. This way, we intend to help
biomanufacturers understand how optimal policies and the potential beneﬁts of this new technology
are aﬀected by the parameters n and N. Moreover, our state space does not include components
related to batch safety and quality, as the fermentation process is assumed to be established as
safe and stable up to N bleed–feeds.
The state ∆denotes the stationary phase of fermentation, where the biomass growth stops
and the batch is immediately harvested. The state ∆is an absorbing state with no rewards and
represents the end of the decision-making process.
Actions: The action space includes two actions, {b,c} ∈A. Here, b denotes the bleed–feed, and c
represents the continuation of fermentation until the next decision epoch. The only feasible action
in states (i,µ,N) is c because no further bleed–feed is permitted.
State Transitions: As the fermentation evolves and the cultivation age i increases, additional
biomass accumulates inside the bioreactor (see Figure 1). Therefore, we ﬁrst provide relevant
background on the underlying dynamics of fermentation. Let miµ denote the total amount of
biomass produced by cultivation age i ∈I when the cell growth rate is µ ∈M. Biomass accumulates
exponentially during the exponential growth phase. We use the well-known exponential cell growth
function applied in chemical engineering to capture the amount of biomass accumulated miµ over
the cultivation age i during the exponential growth phase (based on the cell growth rate µ):
miµ = m0(1 + µτ)i,
(1)
where m0 denotes the initial amount of biomass (i.e., seed culture) (Monod 1949, Doran 1995). In
common practice, the initial amount m0 is pre-determined. The biomass amount is bounded due
to the limitations in the fermentation dynamics and bioreactor capacity.
Let 1 −piµ denote the probability of transitioning to the stationary phase ∆from state (i,µ,n).
We observed from industry data that the transition probabilities 1 −piµ are independent of the
bleed–feed count n but dependent on the cultivation age i and cell growth rate µ. In particular,
we observed that 1 −piµ ≤1 −pi+1 µ, i.e., the probability that the cell culture transitions to the
stationary phase increases as the cultivation age i increases (under a speciﬁed growth rate µ). We
can provide an intuitive explanation for these observations, i.e., the limited amount of medium
depletes faster when the biomass amount m increases. As the medium inside the bioreactor is
depleted, growth inhibition occurs and the cells lose viability. Subsequently, the cell culture becomes

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
11
. . .
i −1,µ,n
i,µ,n
. . .
∆
1,µ′,n + 1
pi−1µ
piµ
dG(µ′) p0µ′
dG(µ′) p0µ′
Figure 2
State transition diagram (solid arrows for the continue action, dashed arrows for the bleed–feed action)
more likely to transition to the stationary phase. Moreover, it is intuitive that 1−piµ is independent
of n, as the fermentation is “reset” at each bleed–feed with the addition of fresh medium and the
extraction of biomass. To represent this behavior analytically, we let ν(m) denote the exponential
rate at which the process transitions to the stationary phase when the biomass amount is m. Then,
1 −piµ = ν(miµ)τ. Appendix B describes a procedure for estimating the rate function ν(m).
Next, we elaborate on the state transitions associated with each action. The fermentation process
starts in state (i = 0,µ,n = 0), where µ ∈M is known for the initial culture. The cell growth rate
continues to be µ until a bleed–feed operation is performed. However, under the continue action c
at state (i,µ,n), a critical risk for the decision-maker is the probability 1 −piµ of transitioning to
the stationary phase ∆. At the stationary phase ∆, the batch is harvested and the decision-making
process terminates. This implies a lost opportunity for bleed–feed when n < N.
The solid arrows in Figure 2 show the state transitions under the continue action c. At a decision
epoch, when we perform action c in state (i,µ,n), the biomass grows based on the dynamics shown
in Equation (1) during that period. By the end of that period, (i) the culture continues to be in the
exponential growth phase (with probability piµ), which implies that the cultivation age increases
from i to i + 1; or (ii) the culture transitions to the stationary phase ∆otherwise. The system
immediately transitions to the stationary phase ∆at the maximum cultivation age I.
The dashed arrows in Figure 2 illustrate the state transitions under the bleed–feed action b.
When we take action b in state (i,µ,n) at a decision epoch, the bleed–feed operation is performed
instantaneously (i.e., we keep the pre-speciﬁed amount m0 inside the bioreactor as seed culture and

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
12
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
add a special medium) and the cultivation age is reset to i = 0. Then, the cell culture adopts a new
growth rate M. The realization of M is µ′ with probability dG(µ′). Hence, when we perform action
b in state (i,µ,n) at a decision epoch, the system immediately transitions from state (i,µ,n) to
(0,µ′,n + 1) with probability dG(µ′). Then, during period τ, the biomass grows with rate µ′, and
by the end of that period, (i) the culture stays in the exponential growth phase and the cultivation
age increases from 0 to 1 (with probability p0µ′); or (ii) the culture transitions to the stationary
phase ∆otherwise.
The cell culture does not transition to the stationary phase before a certain biomass amount
is reached (see Figure 4 in Section 6 for a real-world example). We call this biomass amount the
critical biomass, ˜m. Hence, the rate ν(m) is zero when the actual biomass amount is below this
critical biomass ˜m. However, ν(m) is increasing in m when the actual biomass amount exceeds
the critical biomass ˜m. This behavior implies that the likelihood of entering the stationary phase
increases as more biomass accumulates. This trend is intuitive because the limited medium depletes
and the cells lose viability faster at higher levels of biomass. In practice, the value of critical biomass
˜m depends on the cell culture and the application context (e.g., medium and bioreactor type). For
example, we observed from industry data that the critical biomass could be as small as zero for
several cell cultures while others were more robust (e.g., the cell culture considered in our case
study has a critical biomass ˜m = 13 grams). Lastly, we let ˜ıµ be the cultivation age corresponding
to the critical biomass level ˜m. Hence, piµ = 1 for i <˜ıµ, and pi−1 µ > piµ for i ≥˜ıµ. Clearly, by (1),
the critical age ˜ıµ is nonincreasing in µ.
Rewards: The immediate reward is deﬁned as riµ = mi+1µ −miµ under the continue action c, and
r0µ′ = m1µ′ −m0 under the bleed–feed action b. This indicates that our reward function collects
the incremental biomass amount produced during a period.4 In our problem setting, the biomass
amount miµ determines the rewards. Hence, we use Equation (1) to obtain the rewards associated
with state (i,µ,n).
Next, we elaborate on the sequence of events associated with the reward collection process.
Consider the case in which we perform the continue action c in state (i,µ,n). Here, we receive
an immediate reward riµ = mi+1µ −miµ (i.e., incremental biomass production during that period),
and the system transitions either to state (i+1,µ,n) or the stationary phase ∆by the end of that
period. Similarly, if we decide to perform a bleed–feed b in state (i,µ,n), the cultivation age is
instantaneously reset to i = 0, we collect the reward r0µ′ = m1µ′ −m0 based on the realized growth
rate µ′ during that period, and the system transitions either to state (1,µ′,n + 1) or ∆by the end
of that period (see Figure 2 for an illustration on the system’s dynamics).
Evidently, piµ > pi+1 µ, and riµ < ri+1 µ. That is, both risk of entering the stationary phase 1−piµ
and immediate reward riµ increase in i for a given µ. This results in a challenging trade-oﬀ: as the

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
13
cultivation age i increases, the biomass amount miµ also increases (from a practical perspective,
this represents an opportunity for collecting higher rewards throughout the exponential cell growth
phase). However, the risk of entering the stationary phase also increases as the cultivation age i
increases (whereby, the chances of missing the bleed–feed opportunity increase). The decision-maker
needs to balance this trade-oﬀto maximize the expected total biomass yield.
Value function: We deﬁne v(i,µ,n) as the expected biomass production to go given that the
current state is (i,µ,n). The objective is to identify optimal bleed–feed policies to maximize the
value function v(i,µ,n). Let C(i,µ,n) and B(n) be the expected biomass production under the
actions continue c and bleed–feed b in state (i,µ,n), respectively. Then, the value function v(i,µ,n)
satisﬁes the following optimality equations:
v(i,µ,n) = max
 C(i,µ,n) ≡riµ + piµv(i + 1,µ,n),
B(n)
≡E

C(0,M,n + 1)

(2)
valid for all i < I, µ ∈M and n < N, and
v(i,µ,N) = C(i,µ,N)
(3)
for all i < I and µ ∈M. Note that v(I,µ,n) = 0 for all µ and n, and v(∆) = 0. For convenience, we
set B(N) = 0, so (2) is also valid for n = N.
Observe from Equations (2) and (3) that our aim is to maximize the expected total biomass
obtained from a batch, v(0,µ,0), where µ is the cell growth rate at the beginning of fermentation.
This objective function aligns with both existing studies in the life sciences and current industry
practice that aim to obtain as much biomass as possible before harvest. This is because the activities
associated with cleaning, sterilization and setup are cost-intensive (Mahal et al. 2021). In addition,
discussions with MSD revealed that the costs associated with bleed–feed are rather small compared
to the setup and harvest costs and therefore, negligible in practice.
4.
Structural Analysis
In this section, we investigate the structural characteristics of the value function and optimal
bleed–feed policies. These results provide a deeper understanding of the problem and insights on
how optimal bleed–feed decisions should be made. In particular, we present suﬃcient conditions
under which optimal bleed–feed policies have a control-limit structure in the cultivation age i
(Section 4.1), cell growth rate µ (Section 4.2), and bleed–feed count n (Section 4.3). We also perform
a sensitivity analysis on the value function (Section 4.4). All proofs are presented in Appendix A.

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
14
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
4.1.
Structural Analysis in the Cultivation Age
We ﬁrst characterize the structural properties of the value function and optimal bleed–feed poli-
cies based on the cultivation age i. We start with Remark 1 and analyze the value function in
Proposition 1.
Remark 1. The batch has no risk of entering the stationary phase before the critical age ˜ıµ.
Hence, for i <˜ıµ, it is optimal to continue fermentation and the value function is nonincreasing in
i, i.e., v(i + 1,µ,n) ≤v(i,µ,n). However, for the value function to be nonincreasing also for i ≥˜ıµ,
we need to impose a condition.
Proposition 1. The value function v(i,µ,n) is nonincreasing in i for ﬁxed µ ∈M,n ∈N,
provided the following condition holds:
riµ −ri−1µ
riµ
≤pi−1µ −piµ,
for all ˜ıµ ≤i < I,µ ∈M.
(4)
Proposition 1 provides a suﬃcient condition for the value function v(i,µ,n) to be nonincreasing
in i. The left-hand side of (4) captures the (relative) increase in the immediate reward riµ, and
the right-hand side captures the decrease in the probability of successful batch growth piµ, as the
cultivation age transitions from i −1 to i. Thus, Condition (4) indicates that the value function is
nonincreasing in i if the increase in the reward is less than the decrease in the probability.
Observe that the left-hand side of (4) is a constant and hence the condition can be simpliﬁed
to
µτ
1+µτ ≤min˜ıµ≤i<I{pi−1µ −piµ}. To better understand the right-hand side of (4), we focus on
the special case when ν(miµ) = eαmiµ (where α ≥0 is a ﬁtting parameter).5 the cell growth rates
are generally small fractions (e.g., µ = 0.06 in our case study). Based on our industry case study
(Section 6), we conclude that (4) realistic for most practical settings.
In Proposition 2, we analyze the diﬀerence C(i,µ,n) −B(n) in the value function under actions
c and b. This establishes a preliminary result for analyzing the structural characteristics of optimal
bleed–feed policies.
Proposition 2. If Condition (4) holds, C(i,µ,n)−B(n) ≤C(i−1,µ,n)−B(n) for all ˜ıµ ≤i <
I, µ ∈M,n ∈N.
Proposition 2 states that C(i,µ,n) −B(n) is nonincreasing in i, i.e., the diﬀerence in the value
function under actions c and b does not increase as the cultivation age i increases. This implies that
when the diﬀerence drops below zero for a certain cultivation age i and ﬁxed µ and n, bleed–feed
will be optimal for all cultivation ages greater or equal to i. This is summarized in Theorem 1.
Theorem 1. If Condition (4) holds, for ﬁxed µ ∈M and n ∈N, there exists a threshold i∗(µ,n),
such that, for i > i∗(µ,n) it is optimal to bleed–feed in state (i,µ,n), and for i ≤i∗(µ,n) it is optimal
to continue fermentation, where i∗(µ,n) is a cultivation-age-based control limit.

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
15
Theorem 1 establishes the existence of an optimal control-limit policy in cultivation age i. That
is, for a given cell growth rate µ and bleed–feed count n, it is optimal to bleed–feed if the cultivation
age i exceeds a certain threshold value i∗(µ,n), and to continue otherwise. An intuitive explanation
of this result is that the decision-maker becomes more willing to bleed–feed when the cultivation
age i increases (i.e., as i increases, the risk of transitioning to the stationary phase increases and
results in higher chances of missing the bleed–feed opportunity). From a practical perspective,
Theorem 1 provides a simple and practical guideline to support bleed–feed decisions based on the
cultivation age i. For example, at MSD, such cultivation-age-based optimal control-limits can be
easily incorporated into production plans to support daily practice.
4.2.
Structural Analysis in the Cell Growth Rate
Next, we analyze the structural characteristics of the value function in cell growth rate µ. We
ﬁrst present two monotonicty properties in Propositions 3 and 4, and establish our main result
in Theorem 2. To establish these properties we impose the (mild) assumption that when the last
cultivation age I −1 is reached, the optimal action is to bleed–feed. The assumption is valid
throughout this section.
Assumption 1. In all states (I −1,µ,n) with µ ∈M,n < N, bleed-feed action b is optimal.
Proposition 3. For ﬁxed µ ∈M, n < N, v(i,µ+,n) ≤v(i,µ,n) for all i ≥˜ıµ+ and µ+ ≥µ,
provided the following condition holds:
ri−1µ+ −ri−1µ
riµ+
≤pi−1µ −pi−1µ+,
for all ˜ıµ+ ≤i < I,µ ≤µ+ ∈M.
(5)
Proposition 3 provides a suﬃcient condition under which the value function v(i,µ,n) is nonin-
creasing in µ. The left-hand side of (5) captures the (relative) increase in the immediate reward,
and the right-hand side captures the decrease in the probability of successful growth when the cell
growth rate increases from µ to µ+. Hence, the condition ensures that the increase in immediate
reward is lower than the decrease in the probability of successful growth when the growth rate
increases. Condition (5) holds for the industry case study presented in Section 6.
In Proposition 4, we analyze the diﬀerence C(i,µ,n) −B(n). This is a preliminary result for
analyzing the structure of optimal bleed–feed policies in µ.
Proposition 4. If Condition (5) holds, C(i,µ+,n) −B(n) ≤C(i,µ,n) −B(n) for ˜ıµ+ ≤i <
I −1,µ ≤µ+ ∈M,n < N.
Proposition 4 shows that C(i,µ,n) −B(n) is nonincreasing in µ, i.e., the diﬀerence in the value
function under actions c and b does not increase as the cell growth rate µ increases. This implies
that if it is optimal to bleed–feed in state (i,µ,n), then it is also optimal to bleed–feed in state
(i,µ+,n) with µ+ ≥µ.

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
16
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
Theorem 2. If Condition (5) holds, for ﬁxed i < I and n ∈N, there exists a threshold µ∗(i,n),
such that, for µ > µ∗(i,n) it is optimal to bleed–feed, and for µ ≤µ∗(i,n) it is optimal to continue
fermentation, where µ∗(i,n) is a cell growth rate-based control limit.
For a given cultivation age i and bleed–feed count n, Theorem 2 shows that it is optimal to bleed–
feed if the cell growth rate µ exceeds a certain threshold value µ∗(i,n), and continue otherwise.
This result also implies that the decision-maker becomes more willing to bleed–feed when the cell
growth rate µ is higher (i.e., as µ increases, the risk of entering the stationary phase and hence the
chances of missing the bleed–feed opportunity increase). From a practical perspective, Theorem 2
provides a simple guideline to support bleed–feed decisions based on the cell growth rate µ.
Remark 2. If the growth rate M is not random, but constant, M = µ say, then Assumption
1 immediately follows from Condition 4, since, by Proposition 2, we have B(n) = C(0,µ,n + 1) ≥
C(I −1,µ,n + 1) = rI−1,µ = C(I −1,µ,n).
4.3.
Structural Analysis in the Number of Bleed–feeds
In this section, we establish the structural characteristics in the number of bleed–feeds performed,
n. Moreover, we analyze the behavior of the value function as a function of the regulatory limit N.
We start our analysis with two monotonicity properties in Propositions 5 and 6.
Proposition 5. The value function v(i,µ,n) is nonincreasing in n for ﬁxed i ∈I,µ ∈M.
In Proposition 5, we show that the value function v(i,µ,n) is nonincreasing in n, i.e., the total
biomass to be obtained from a batch does not increase as we perform more bleed–feeds (and
approach the limit N). This result, together with Proposition 6, is used to establish the structural
characteristics of optimal policies.
Proposition 6. C(i,µ,n) −B(n) ≤C(i,µ,n + 1) −B(n + 1) for all i < I,µ ∈M,n < N.
Proposition 6 states that C(i,µ,n) −B(n) is nondecreasing in n, i.e., the diﬀerence in the value
function under actions c and b does not decrease as the number of bleed–feeds increases. This
implies that for ﬁxed i and µ, if it is optimal to continue at n, then it is also optimal to continue
at n + 1.
Theorem 3. For ﬁxed i < I and µ ∈M, there exists a threshold n∗(i,µ) such that for n ≤n∗(i,µ)
it is optimal to bleed–feed, and for n > n∗(i,n) it is optimal to continue fermentation, where n∗(i,n)
is the control limit in bleed–feed counter.
Theorem 3 shows that optimal bleed–feed polices have a control-limit structure in the bleed–
feed counter n. That is, for a given cultivation age i and cell growth rate µ, it is optimal to
bleed–feed when the bleed–feed count is below a certain threshold value n∗(i,µ), and to continue

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
17
Continue
Number of Bleed-feeds (n)
 Cell Growth Rate (μ)
Cultivation Age (i)
Bleed-feed
Figure 3
An illustration of the three-way control limit policy.
otherwise. From a practical perspective, this result implies that the decision-maker is more willing
to bleed–feed when only a few bleed–feeds have been performed. That is, one would take less
risks of transitioning to the stationary phase at lower levels of n, because the opportunity for
producing higher amounts of biomass through bleed–feed is lost when the process transitions to the
stationary phase. On the other hand, Theorem 3 shows that, when the bleed–feed count approaches
its maximum N, the decision-maker is willing to take higher risks of hitting the stationary phase
and tends to continue the fermentation.
We can now conclude that the structure of the optimal policy is a three-way control limit. This
is summarized in Corollary 1 and illustrated in Figure 3.
Corollary 1. If Conditions (4) and (5) hold, there exists a three-way control limit policy, i.e.,
• for ﬁxed µ ∈M,n ∈N, there is a threshold i∗(µ,n) above which it is optimal to bleed–feed,
• for ﬁxed i < I,n ∈N, there is a threshold µ∗(i,n) above which it is optimal to bleed–feed,
• for ﬁxed i < I,µ ∈M, there is a threshold n∗(i,µ) above which it is optimal to continue.
An immediate implication of the three-way control limit is that the thresholds are monotone in
the parameters. This can be seen in Figure 3. Monotonicity of i∗(µ,n) is formalized in Corollary
2. The other two thresholds have similar properties.
Corollary 2. If Conditions (4) and (5) hold, then:
• for ﬁxed µ ∈M, the threshold i∗(µ,n) is non-decreasing in n, i.e.,
i∗(µ,n + 1) ≥i∗(µ,n),
n < N,
• for ﬁxed n ∈N, the threshold i∗(µ,n) is non-increasing in µ, i.e.,
i∗(µ+,n) ≤i∗(µ,n),
µ+ ≥µ ∈M.

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
18
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
Next, we focus on understanding the impact of regulations on bleed–feed operations. In industry,
stringent regulations on the maximum bleed–feed count N can be perceived as a barrier towards
bleed–feed implementation. Practitioners are concerned that regulatory requirements on bleed–feed
count N may restrict the potential beneﬁts of bleed–feed. To examine this issue, we analyze the
behavior of the value function E[v(0,M,0)] as a function of the maximum bleed–feed count N,
where E[v(0,M,0)] can be interpreted as the maximum expected total biomass produced by an
arbitrary batch.
Theorem 4. The expected total biomass E[v(0,M,0)] obtained from an arbitrary batch increases
in the maximum bleed–feed count N, where the marginal increments are decreasing and converge
to the critical biomass ˜m if the critical age ˜ıM > 0 with positive probability, and to 0 otherwise.
Remark 3. More precisely, we prove that, if the critical age ˜ıM > 0 with positive probability,
then for suﬃciently large N, the marginal increments are equal to
E[
X
i<˜ıM
riM].
This quantity is close, but not identical to the critical biomass ˜m, due to discretization of time.
Further, if ˜ıM = 0 with probability 1, then the marginal increments converge to 0 geometrically
fast.
Theorem 4 provides a deeper understanding of the impact of the regulatory limit N. First,
Theorem 4 indicates that the expected total biomass obtained from a batch exhibits diminishing
returns in N. This result is interesting because the regulatory limit N is often restricted to a small
number (e.g., one or two bleed–feeds per setup). However, as a result of the diminishing return
structure, the value of an additional bleed–feed becomes particularly important at small values of
N. Subsequently, it is relevant for practitioners to understand “how much is potentially lost” (in
terms of the expected total biomass per setup) because of the regulatory restrictions to small N.
We address this question numerically in Section 6.4 (by increasing N from its current value of one
or two bleed–feeds).
Second, Theorem 4 shows that the marginal increments converge to the critical biomass ˜m for
suﬃciently large N. However, the critical biomass ˜m could be relatively small in practice. Hence,
this result did not match with the industry’s expectations, because it indicates that the marginal
beneﬁts of an additional bleed–feed may be quite small (and may even be zero) when the number
of bleed–feeds is suﬃciently large. In summary, we ﬁnd that the added value of an additional
bleed–feed can be prominent at small N (as a result of diminishing returns) but converges only to
the critical biomass level at suﬃciently large N.

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
19
As a future research direction, insights obtained from Theorem 4 lead to an interesting problem
of setting N from the perspective of regulators and manufacturers (see Section 6.4 for details).
Moreover, other performance metrics (e.g., biomass generated per unit time, quality-yield trade–
oﬀs) would also become relevant for the problem of setting the regulatory limit N.
4.4.
Sensitivity Analysis
To generate further analytical insights, we provide a sensitivity analysis on risks 1 −piµ and cell
growth rate µ, and analyze a risk-averse heuristic as a practically-relevant benchmark.
Analysis on risks. Recall that 1 −piµ denotes the probability of entering the stationary phase
at state (i,µ,n). Consider two batches with transition probabilities p1
iµ and p2
iµ, respectively. We
assume that these two batches are identical, except that the second batch has a higher risk of
entering the stationary phase, i.e., 1 −p1
iµ ≤1 −p2
iµ for all i ∈I,µ ∈M. This means that the rate
function of the second batch stochastically dominates the ﬁrst one. Let v1(i,µ,n) and v2(i,µ,n)
denote the value function of the ﬁrst and second batch, respectively. We compare these two batches
in terms of their expected total biomass production in Proposition 7.
Proposition 7. Consider two identical batches, except that 1 −p1
iµ ≤1 −p2
iµ for i ∈I,µ ∈M,
and assume Condition (4) holds, so the optimal policy has a control-limit in i. Then,
(i) v1(i,µ,n) ≥v2(i,µ,n) for all i ∈I,µ ∈M,n ∈N,
(ii) if it is optimal to bleed–feed the ﬁrst batch at state (i,µ,n), it is also optimal to bleed–feed the
second batch at the same state, provided the following condition holds6
rI−1µ(p1
iµ −p2
iµ) ≥E

p1
0M
r0M
1 −p1
0M
−p2
0MrI−1M

,
for ˜ıµ ≤i < I.
(6)
Proposition 7 (i) shows that a batch with a lower risk produces higher total biomass, and (ii)
presents a suﬃcient condition under which bleed–feed is implemented earlier to a batch with higher
risk. Condition (6) sets a lower bound on the diﬀerence between the successful growth probabilities,
p1
iµ −p2
iµ. When this diﬀerence is suﬃciently large, bleed–feed is performed earlier for the high-
risk batch. For small values of p1
0µ and p2
0µ, the right-hand side of (6) becomes negative, and the
condition holds as the left-hand side is positive. However, Condition (6) becomes more restrictive
for large values of p1
0µ. In such cases, the term p2
0µrI−1µ should be high or r0µ should be small for
the condition to hold.
Analysis on growth rate. Consider two batches with constant cell growth rates µ1 and µ2,
respectively. We shall assume that these two batches are identical, except that, the cell growth
rate of the ﬁrst batch is lower than that of second, i.e., µ1 ≤µ2. Proposition 8 compares the total
biomass produced from these two batches.

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
20
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
Proposition 8. Consider two batches with constant cell growth rates µ1 and µ2, respectively,
that are identical, except that µ1 ≤µ2. Then, v1(i,µ1,n) ≥v2(i,µ2,n) for all i ∈I,n ∈N provided
the following condition holds:
riµ2 −riµ1
ri+1µ2
≤piµ1 −piµ2,
for all i ∈I.
(7)
Proposition 8 provides a suﬃcient condition under which the slow-growing batch produces more
biomass than the fast-growing one. This result might seem counter-intuitive at ﬁrst, i.e., one might
expect that the total biomass obtained from a fast-growing batch should be higher. However, Propo-
sition 8 indicates that this is not necessarily true, because of the relationship between increased
risks and rewards for fast-growing batches. Observe that Condition (7) is consistent with Condi-
tion (5). The left-hand side of (7) captures the increase in reward due to an increase in growth
rate. The right-hand side represents the decrease in the probability of successful growth due to an
increase in growth rate. Hence, Proposition 8 indicates that when the increase in reward is less
than the decrease in success probability, the value function is lower for fast-growing batches.
Risk-averse heuristic: a benchmark. As a practically-relevant benchmark, we consider a risk-
averse heuristic and evaluate its performance. Recall that the bleed–feed opportunity is lost when
fermentation enters the stationary phase. We also know that there is no risk of entering the station-
ary phase before the critical age (i.e., piµ = 1 for i <˜ıµ, and pi−1 µ > piµ for i ≥˜ıµ). In addition, we
know from Remark 1 that implementing bleed–feed before the critical age is suboptimal. Therefore,
we consider a risk-averse heuristic which implements bleed–feed at the critical age ˜ıµ. Theorem 5
presents a suﬃcient condition under which this risk-averse heuristic is optimal.
Theorem 5. It is optimal to bleed–feed in state (i,µ,n) for ˜ıµ ≤i ≤I −1,µ ∈M,n < N, if the
following condition holds:
riµ
r0µ + r1µ + ... + r˜ıµµ + E[p˜ıM MrI−1M] ≤1 −piµ,
for ˜ıµ ≤i < I,µ ∈M.
(8)
When Condition (8) holds, Theorem 5 indicates that the risk-averse heuristic is optimal. In
other words, the critical age ˜ıµ corresponds to the optimal cultivation-age-based control limit i∗
presented in Theorem 1. To elaborate on the practical relevance of Theorem 5, we note that the
term r0µ + r1µ + ... + r˜ıµµ in Condition (8) is close to the critical biomass amount ˜m. Hence, (8)
indicates that if the reward at age i (where ˜ıµ ≤i) divided by the critical biomass amount is less
than the failure probability at age i, then it is optimal to bleed–feed at the critical age.
We observe that Condition (8) may not hold when the critical biomass amount is small or the
probability of batch failure at age ˜ıµ is low and thus, implementing bleed–feed at the critical age
may not be optimal. Hence, our analysis indicates that the risk-averse heuristic may not perform

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
21
optimally for a wide range of practically-relevant scenarios. Yet, it can serve as a na¨ıve heuristic
for practitioners who aim to avoid failure risks. In Section 6, we provide a numerical analysis to
assess the performance of this risk-averse heuristic compared to optimal policies.
5.
Model Extension
The base model in Section 3 assumes that the probability of entering the stationary phase is
independent of the bleed–feed count n.7 However, this assumption might not necessarily hold for all
fermentation processes (including cross-industry applications). To ensure generalizability and wider
impact, we now relax this assumption and assume that the probability of entering the stationary
phase 1 −piµn depends on the bleed–feed count n. In particular, we focus on the case when the
fermentation encounters higher risks of entering the stationary phase as the bleed–feed count n
increases, i.e., 1 −piµn ≤1 −piµn+1 for a given cultivation age i. In this extension, we shall assume
that the cell growth behavior in Equation (1) and the reward structure are identical to the base
model in Section 3. Hence, the value function v(i,µ,n) of the extended model satisﬁes the following
optimality equations:
v(i,µ,n) = max
 C(i,µ,n) ≡riµ + piµnv(i + 1,µ,n),
B(n)
≡E

C(0,M,n + 1)

(9)
valid for all i < I, µ ∈M and n < N, and
v(i,µ,N) = C(i,µ,N)
for all i < I and µ ∈M. Note that v(I,µ,n) = 0 for all µ and n, and v(∆) = 0. Observe from (9)
that the probabilities piµn depend on the bleed–feed count n. We now revisit the structural results
obtained from Section 4 to characterize the optimal bleed–feed policies for the extended model.
We ﬁrst focus on the structural properties in the cultivation age i and the cell growth rate µ. In
the extended model, structural properties described in Proposition 1, Proposition 2 and Theorem 1
continue to hold when the suﬃcient condition (4) is revised as
riµ−ri−1µ
riµ
≤pi−1µn −piµn. This implies
that the extended model continues to have an optimal threshold-type policy in cultivation age i (for
a given µ and n). Furthermore, Proposition 3, Proposition 4 and Theorem 2 also continue to hold for
the extended model when the suﬃcient condition (5) is revised as
ri−1µ+−ri−1µ
riµ+
≤pi−1µn −pi−1µ+n.
Therefore, the extended model has an optimal threshold-type policy in µ (for a given i and n).
We now focus on the structural characteristics in the number of bleed–feeds n. It is easy to
see that Proposition 5 and Theorem 4 continue to hold. However, Proposition 6 does not hold in
the extended model. As a counterpart, Proposition 9 provides a suﬃcient condition under which
C(i,µ,n) −B(n) is nonincreasing in n.

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
22
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
Proposition 9. C(i,µ,n)−B(n) ≥C(i,µ,n+1)−B(n+1) for all i < I,µ ∈M,n < N provided
the following condition holds:
rI−1µ(piµn −piµn+1) ≥E

p0Mn+1
r0M
1 −p0Mn+1
−p0Mn+2rI−1M

for i < I,µ ∈M,n < N.
(10)
Proposition 9 presents a suﬃcient condition under which the diﬀerence in value function under
the actions continue c and bleed–feed b does not increase in the bleed–feed count n. This implies
that the extended model continues to have an optimal threshold-type policy in n (for ﬁxed i and
µ), such that, it is optimal to continue below this threshold, and bleed–feed otherwise. Hence,
the three-way control limit structure described in Corollary 1 continues to hold in the extended
model, except that it is now optimal to bleed–feed (instead of continue) above threshold n∗. This
diﬀerence is attributed to the increasing failure risk under the extended model. Because the failure
probabilities increase in the bleed–feed count n in the extended model, optimal policies tend to
bleed–feed earlier than in the base model.
6.
Numerical Analysis: An Industry Case Study
We present a numerical case study motivated by MSD Animal Health, Boxmeer, the Netherlands.
We use the case study to demonstrate the potential impact of the bleed–feed optimization model in
practice, and to provide a deeper understanding of the problem instances that have high potential
for bleed-feed implementation. We ﬁrst introduce the problem setting (Section 6.1), and present
sensitivity analysis on the impact of the risk of transitioning to the stationary phase (Section 6.2),
and critical biomass level (Section 6.3). Appendix C provides additional numerical experiments on
the variance of cell growth rate. We refer to insights obtained from Appendix C when necessary.
6.1.
Problem Setting
This case study is generated based on three-years of fermentation data for a speciﬁc biopharma-
ceutical drug used in animal health. To protect conﬁdentiality, we have disguised MSD’s original
data and used representative values in this case study.
Problem parameters. The fermentation starts with an initial biomass amount m0 = 1 gram.
The critical biomass amount is ˜m = 13 grams, and the critical age is ˜ı = 45 hours. The maximum
biomass amount that can be produced from a cell culture is 24 grams. In the ﬁrst fermentation
run (i.e., before the ﬁrst bleed–feed), the cell growth rate is 0.06 cell divisions per hour. In the
second fermentation (i.e., after the bleed–feed), the cell growth rate follows a (discrete) uniform
distribution in the interval [0.045,0.075] (see Figure 6(b) in Appendix B). Hence, the mean cell
growth rate after a bleed–feed is E[M] = 0.06 cell divisions per hour. The maximum fermentation
time is 60 hours because of the limitations in cell viability.

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
23
The rates of transitioning to the stationary phase ν(m) (for all possible values of biomass amount
m) and the corresponding probabilities of successful batch growth piµ are estimated from industry
data. We refer to Appendix B for a detailed discussion on a procedure to estimate the transition
rates. Figure 4 (on page 23) presents the transition probabilities used in the case study. In addition,
we note that the industry data satisﬁed the monotonicity conditions described in Section 4.
In our case study, regulatory requirements limit the number of bleed–feeds to a maximum of two
bleed–feeds per setup, i.e., N = 2. Note that N = 2 implies three cultivations per setup (i.e., no
bleed–feed can be performed after the second one). The time between two decision epochs is set
as τ = 1 hour based on the feedback received from MSD. Nevertheless, we conducted a sensitivity
analysis on smaller values of τ (i.e., τ ∈{0.25,0.5}) and observed that the managerial insights were
robust to ﬁner levels of discretization. Hereafter, we refer to this setting as base case. We solved
for the optimal policy using backward induction.
Analysis Overview. The main objective of this case study is to provide a deeper understanding
of the potential impact (in terms of the expected biomass production per setup) of bleed–feed on
current practice. For this purpose, we consider three practically-relevant strategies:
• Current practice (CP) harvests the batch as soon as it enters the stationary phase and does
not use bleed–feed (this can also be interpreted as N = 0 for the model in Section 3). The strategy
CP is our main benchmark because it represents the current practice.
• Risk-averse heuristic (RA) implements bleed–feed at the critical age ˜ı. This strategy represents
a conservative approach that implements bleed–feed at no risk (see Section 4.4).
• Bleed–feed optimization (BF) maximizes the expected total biomass per setup and ﬁnds the
optimal bleed–feed policies.
We identiﬁed a wide range of practically-relevant instances for our numerical analysis based on
the input received from our industry partners.A key performance metric used in this section is
the percentage loss LBF
CP (resp., LRA
CP) in the expected total biomass per setup because of using CP
instead of BF (resp., RA). Similarly, the measure LBF
RA denotes the percentage loss in the expected
total biomass per setup because of using RA instead of BF.
Risk-reward Trade–oﬀs. Before we present the numerical analysis, let us elaborate on the risk-
reward trade–oﬀs involved in the base case. Figure 4(a) plots the rate function ν(m) based on the
biomass amount m. Figure 4(b) shows the risk of entering the stationary phase 1−piµ as a function
of cultivation age i. Recall that the probability 1 −piµ is determined from the transition rates by
using the relationship 1 −piµ = ν(miµ)τ. Figure 4(c) plots the immediate reward riµ at cultivation
age i, and Figure 4(d) shows the coeﬃcient of variation (CV) of total biomass production under
optimal policies (when µ = 0.06 and n = 0).

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
24
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
0
20
40
60
Cultivation age i
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1-pi
(b) Risk of entering stationary phase
Critical age
0
5
10
15
20
25
Biomass m
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(m)
(a) Rate function
0
20
40
60
Cultivation age i
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
ri
(c) Immediate reward
Critical biomass
45
46
47
48
Cultivation age i
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
Coefficient of variation
(d) Coefficient of variation
Figure 4
Risk-reward trade–oﬀs in the base case
Observe from Figure 4 that both the risks and the immediate rewards are increasing exponentially
in age i. Hence, there a clear tension between increasing the bioreactor yield and increasing the
failure risk. This tension leads to a challenging game between bleed-feeding or not bleed-feeding at
each decision epoch. In contrast, the risk-averse heuristic does not exploit this trade–oﬀbecause it
bleed–feeds at the critical age ˜ı = 45 (critical biomass ˜m = 13). However, Figure 4 shows that there
is a signiﬁcant opportunity for increasing the bioreactor yield (via exponential growth) after the
critical age ˜ı = 45. The optimal policy exploits this risk–reward trade–oﬀand performs bleed–feed
at cultivation age i∗
0 = 48. To provide a better understanding of the risks taken by the optimal
policy, Figure 4(d) shows how the CV of total biomass production changes between time ˜ı = 45 and
i∗
0 = 48 (under optimal policies). We see that the CV of total biomass is around 1.4, which indicates
a moderate/high variability. Because of these risk-reward trade–oﬀs, industry can beneﬁt from
production guidance speciﬁc to each bioreactor and product, that indicates when to bleed–feed.
6.2.
Insights on the Risk of Entering the Stationary Phase
Although certain cell cultures are more reliable and stable (e.g., bacteria cells), others exhibit
high risks of entering the stationary phase (e.g., viruses). To understand the impact of the tran-
sition probabilities, we performed sensitivity analysis on the rate of entering the stationary phase

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
25
Table 1
Impact of transition risks on CP, RA and BF.
f
CP
RA
BF
LRA
CP
LBF
CP
LBF
RA
i∗
0
i∗
1
˜ı
1.5
20.1
45.5
47.9
55.8%
58.0%
5.0%
47
48
45
1.25
20.4
45.8
48.6
55.5%
58.0%
5.8%
47
48
45
1.1
20.7
46.1
49.1
55.1%
57.8%
6.1%
47
48
45
1.0 20.8 46.2 49.5 55.0% 58.0%
6.7%
48 49 45
0.9
21.0
46.4
49.9
54.7%
57.9%
7.0%
48
49
45
0.75
21.3
46.7
50.6
54.4%
57.9%
7.7%
48
50
45
0.5
21.8
47.2
52.5
53.8%
58.5%
10.1%
49
51
45
0.25
22.4
47.8
56.1
53.1%
60.1%
14.8%
51
52
45
0.1
22.7
48.2
60.5
52.9%
62.5%
20.3%
52
54
45
ν(m). In this section, we multiply the base case’s rate function ν(m) by a factor f to represent
the following scenarios: (i) base case (f = 1), (ii) higher risk of transitioning to the station-
ary phase (f = 1.1,1.25,1.5), and (iii) lower risk of transitioning to the stationary phase (f =
{0.9,0.75,0.5,0.25,0.1}). These scenarios are presented in Table 1.
Table 1 reports the value function v(0,0.06,0) for each scenario under the strategies CP, RA
and BF. The analysis is based on two bleed–feed opportunities (N = 2). Columns i∗
0 and i∗
1 denote
the optimal cultivation-aged-based threshold for the ﬁrst and second bleed–feeds, respectively (i.e.,
at n = 0 and n = 1). For ease of exposition, Table 1 reports the optimal thresholds i∗
0 and i∗
1 at
selected states (when µ′ = 0.06 and n ∈{0,1}). The bold entries represent the base case.
First, we compare the performance of BF, RA and CP. In the base case setting, Table 1 shows
that the potential loss of not implementing BF compared to CP is 58% (and RA compared to CP
is 55%) in terms of the total biomass production per setup (with two bleed–feeds). This result
substantiates the potential impact of the bleed–feed technology on biomanufacturing practice.
Although two bleed–feeds may be perceived as two additional batches of biomass production, we
observe that it does not triple the total biomass production (compared to CP) in any of the
scenarios. This is mainly because BF and RA stop the cultivation earlier than CP (to avoid the
risk of entering the stationary phase and losing the bleed–feed opportunity).
Table 1 shows that the potential loss of implementing RA instead of BF (the measure LBF
RA) is
higher for low-risk batches. The underlying intuition of this behavior can be explained as follows.
Low-risk batches can accumulate more biomass at lower failure risks under each strategy. Hence,
bleed–feed decisions can be postponed without high risks of entering the stationary phase. Recall
that RA implements bleed–feed at the critical biomass amount.On the other hand, BF collects
higher amount of biomass with each bleed–feed by delaying the bleed–feed time as much as possible.
This diﬀerence leads to higher losses LBF
RA for low-risk batches. Compared to CP, the potential loss
of not implementing BF (the measure LBF
CP ) is also higher for low-risk batches. Hence, we conclude
that the business case for BF is stronger for low-risk batches.

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
26
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
Table 2
Impact of the critical biomass level in CP, RA and BF.
˜m
CP
RA
BF
LRA
CP
LBF
CP
LBF
RA
i∗
0
i∗
1
˜ı
19
22.9
59.9
64.6
61.8%
64.6%
7.3%
54
54
51
17
22.7
55.8
59.8
59.3%
62.0%
6.7%
52
53
49
15
22.1
51.2
54.7
56.8%
59.6%
6.4%
50
51
47
13 20.8 46.2 49.5 55.0% 58.0%
6.7%
48 49 45
11
18.6
39.7
43.2
53.1%
56.9%
8.1%
46
47
42
9
16.2
32.6
36.4
50.3%
55.5%
10.4%
43
45
38
7
13.8
26.3
29.5
47.5%
53.2%
10.8%
40
42
34
5
11.2
19.6
22.8
42.9%
50.9%
14.0%
36
38
28
3
8.5
12.7
15.8
33.1%
46.2%
19.6%
31
34
19
1
4.1
4.2
5.6
2.4%
26.8%
25.0%
24
28
0
We now consider the optimal bleed–feed thresholds i∗
0 and i∗
1. Table 1 shows that optimal policies
tend to bleed–feed at higher cultivation ages i∗
0 and i∗
1, as the risk of transitioning to the stationary
phase decreases. This result is intuitive because the biomass is more likely to continue accumulating
at lower risks. In addition, when we compare i∗
0 and i∗
1 of a given scenario, we observe that optimal
bleed–feed thresholds increase in n. This indicates that the optimal bleed–feed policy becomes less
conservative after the ﬁrst bleed–feed and thus enables the growth of additional biomass for the
second cultivation.
6.3.
Insights on the Critical Biomass Level
The critical biomass level depends on the speciﬁc characteristics of the cell culture and the fermen-
tation process. To capture a wide range of practically-relevant settings, we considered the following
scenarios for the critical biomass: (i) base case, ˜m = 13 grams, (ii) lower levels, ˜m = {1,3,5,7,9,11},
and (iii) higher levels, ˜m = {15,17,19}. In each scenario, we shifted our base rate function to the
left (for lower ˜m) or right (for higher ˜m). We shall note that the critical biomass could be as small
as ˜m = 1 in some production settings. Hence, the cases with low ˜m are particularly relevant for
modern fermentation processes. Table 2 reports the value function v(0,0.06,0) for each scenario
under CP, RA and BF.
Observe from Table 2 that both LRA
CP and LBF
CP increase as the critical biomass ˜m increases. This
trend is obtained because the process becomes more robust as the critical biomass increases (i.e., no
risk of entering the stationary phase before ˜m). The expected total biomass production increases in
˜m, and thus the potential loss of not implementing bleed–feed also gets higher. This result implies
that bleed–feed has a stronger business case when the critical biomass is high.
Table 2 indicates that the potential loss LBF
RA is particularly high at low levels of critical biomass
˜m. Recall that the process is more vulnerable (i.e., it has higher risks of entering the stationary
phase) at low levels of ˜m. Subsequently, RA underperforms BF because it tends to bleed–feed sooner
than optimal to avoid failure risks at low values of ˜m. In contrast, BF exploits the risk-reward
trade-oﬀs, leading to a higher expected biomass production compared to RA.

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
27
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
N
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
v(0,0.06,0)
Low risk (m̃ =0,f=0.5) 
Base risk (m̃ =0,f=1) 
High risk (m̃ =0,f=1.5)
(a) ˜m = 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
N
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
v(0,0.06,0)
Low risk (m̃ =13,f=0.5) 
Base case (m̃=13,f=1) 
High risk (m̃=13,f=1.5)
(b) ˜m = 13
Figure 5
Analysis on the number of bleed–feeds permitted N for (a) ˜m = 0 and (b) ˜m = 13 grams.
We now focus on the optimal bleed–feed thresholds i∗
0 and i∗
1. Optimal bleed–feed times i∗
0 and
i∗
1 decrease as the critical biomass ˜m decreases. This trend is intuitive because the risk of entering
the stationary phase is higher at lower critical biomass levels. Moreover, the diﬀerence between
the optimal bleed–feed times i∗
0 and i∗
1 (used by BF) and the critical age ˜ı (used by RA) increases
as ˜m decreases. This ﬁnding aligns with the structural insights presented in Section 4.4. When
˜m = 1, we note that bleed–feed implementation under RA (at ˜ı = 0) is not practically feasible,
whereas optimal policies i∗
0 = 24 and i∗
1 = 28 exploit the risk-reward trade–oﬀthrough bleed–feed
implementation and avoid 26.8% losses compared to CP.
6.4.
Insights on Regulatory Requirements
The regulatory limit N is often restricted to a small number (e.g., only one or two bleed–feeds per
setup). However, these restrictions may raise a general concern on the potential beneﬁts of adopting
the bleed–feed technology. To generate insights for practitioners, we now conduct numerical analysis
on the maximum number of bleed–feeds permitted, N. In particular, we intend to understand
how much is potentially lost (in terms of expected biomass generated per setup) because of the
regulatory constraints. For this purpose, we consider hypothetical cases where N ∈{1,2,...,10},
and analyze the behavior of the value function in N.
From a practical perspective, the batch is expected to become more vulnerable when the number
of bleed–feeds is suﬃciently high (i.e., the critical biomass would tend to zero and the batch would
become more likely to enter the stationary phase). To capture this behavior in a realistic manner,
our numerical analysis focuses on two cases: when ˜m = 0, and ˜m = 13 (base case). Moreover, we
consider three risk levels: base-risk (f = 1), high-risk (f = 1.5), and low-risk (f = 0.5) for both

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
28
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
˜m = 0 and ˜m = 13, to capture practically-relevant settings. Figure 5 depicts the value function
v(0,0.06,0) under BF for N = {0,1,. . . ,10} when ˜m = 0 (Figure 5a), and ˜m = 13 (Figure 5b).
We observe from Figure 5 that marginal increments in the expected total biomass are decreasing
in N and converge to the critical biomass ˜m. This result aligns with Theorem 4. Moreover, Figure 5
shows that the marginal beneﬁt of an additional bleed–feed is higher for low-risk batches. Even
when ˜m = 0, we observe from Figure 5(a) that there is a high value of increasing N from the current
limit of 2 bleed–feeds. Based on these insights, future research may investigate the problem of
setting N from the perspective of biomanufacturers and regulators. For biomanufacturers, a cost-
beneﬁt analysis can reveal an optimum number of bleed–feeds given the regulatory limit.8 For policy
makers, future research may explore new regulatory policies based on our insights. One example
of such alternative policies is “the shift from one-ﬁts-all regulation to a data-driven, segmented
approach” (Deloitte 2018). Unlike the common practice which adopts one or two bleed–feeds across
diﬀerent biologicals (one-ﬁts-all), our numerical insights support a more ﬂexible approach which
adjusts N based on the process risks and trade-oﬀs.
To conclude, we summarize the key managerial insights (also including Appendix C) as follows:
• There is a strong business case for BF implementation in all scenarios evaluated. Nevertheless,
the business case for BF is stronger when (i) the risk of transitioning to stationary phase is low,
(ii) the critical biomass is high.
• In the base case, RA performs relatively well compared to BF. However, the diﬀerence between
RA and BF is more signiﬁcant when (i) the critical biomass is low, (ii) the risk of transitioning to
the stationary phase is low. These insights align with suﬃcient conditions derived in Theorem 5.
• The marginal beneﬁts of an additional beneﬁt is higher (for a given N) when (i) the critical
biomass is high, (ii) the risk of transitioning to the stationary phase is low.
• The expected total biomass production increases as the variability of the cell growth rate
decreases. However, our numerical analysis shows that the variability of the cell growth rate does
not have a signiﬁcant impact on the business case for BF (Appendix C).
6.5.
Impact
MSD tested the bleed–feed technique in 2015 before the bleed–feed optimization model was devel-
oped. However, the ﬁrst attempt on bleed–feed implementation did not succeed. In particular, they
concluded from test runs that the bleed–feed was performed either too soon or too late. Based on
this experience, a multi-disciplinary team of researchers collaborated over four years to develop an
optimization model to support bleed–feed decisions. In 2020, the bleed–feed policies recommended
by the MDP model were validated through several test runs. These results provided a strong
foundation for validating our model and created a business case for large-scale implementation.

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
29
Since July 2020, the developed model has been successfully implemented at the Boxmeer facility
of MSD and created signiﬁcant impact on daily operations. On average, the implementation (based
on one bleed–feed) resulted in an 82.5% improvement in batch yield per setup. In 2022, we have
successfully implemented bleed–feed at another facility in the United States, demonstrating the
scalability of the model. The implementations adopted optimal policies instead of the risk-averse
heuristic, as optimal policies were already intuitive and easy to implement. We note that the actual
improvement obtained at MSD is higher than the one anticipated in Section 6 (base case). This
diﬀerence is attributed to two main factors. First, we disguised the real-world data to protect
conﬁdentiality. Second, we report the average improvement obtained from multiple products.
7.
Conclusions
Bioreactor setups involve high cost of cleaning, sterilization, seed culture, labor, and materials
(Oyebolu et al. 2019, Mahal et al. 2021). In this context, the problem of increasing upstream titer
has been gaining importance for improving biomanufacturing eﬃciency. To address this problem,
we consider a new technology for batch fermentation: bleed–feed.
The bleed–feed technology allows biomanufacturers to “skip” a few of the bioreactor setups by
extending the duration of the exponential growth phase in batch fermentation. Therefore, this
technology presents an innovative approach for reducing costs and improving eﬃciency in batch-
based biomanufacturing. However, the successful use of bleed–feed involves challenges and trade-oﬀs
that are unlike those in any other applications. For example, bleed–feed can be performed only in
the exponential growth phase. As the duration of the exponential growth phase is random, there
is a critical trade-oﬀbetween performing bleed–feed too soon or too late. In addition, regulatory
requirements restrict the number of bleed–feeds (per setup) to a pre-speciﬁed limit. All these factors
obstruct the potential beneﬁts of bleed–feed technology.
To address these challenges, we built an analytical framework to optimize bleed–feed decisions. In
particular, we developed an MDP model and analyzed the structural properties of optimal bleed–
feed policies. Moreover, we characterized the behavior of the value function as a function of the
regulatory limit N. Counter-intuitive to the generally-held opinion in industry, we showed that the
marginal beneﬁts of an additional bleed–feed are decreasing and converge to the critical biomass,
as the regulatory limit N increases. Our model is validated through a real-world implementation
at MSD, leading to an 82.5% improvement in bioreactor yield per setup based on one bleed–feed.
To date, several industries have beneﬁted from OM in terms of improved eﬃciencies and reduced
costs. However, the applications of OM methodologies are not widely adopted in the biomanu-
facturing industry yet. Real-world implementation of bleed–feed policies has shown that linking
OM with life sciences drives substantial and scalable productivity improvements. We hope that

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
30
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
our results will inspire the global biomanufacturing industry and stimulate new research at the
intersection of OM and life sciences to advance the ﬁeld.
Future work could explore the regulator’s problem of setting the maximum number of bleed–
feeds. Moreover, the scope of our model could be expanded to maximize annual production quantity
(or throughput) and reduce production costs. It will be interesting to expand our model to other
end-users or cross-industry applications (e.g., the food processing industry).
Endnotes
1. We use the term “batch” to represent the production from when a bioreactor is set up until it
is harvested, including multiple bleed–feeds.
2. Their oﬃcial name is “Merck” in the United States and Canada, and “MSD” elsewhere.
3. The regulator’s problem of setting N is a rich problem with several layers, including compliance
management, public safety and health, global coordination and consistency, cost eﬀectiveness, and
regulatory schemes (e.g., one-ﬁts-all versus outcome-based regulatory approach) (Deloitte 2018).
4. An alternative reward structure is possible, where the cumulative biomass is collected only by
the end of the cultivation. These two modeling approaches are essentially equivalent.
5. Our numerical experiments used a step function ν(miµ) which was empirically generated from
industry data. It is also possible to ﬁt an exponential curve for the rate function as shown in
Figure 6 in Appendix B. Additional numerical experiments conﬁrm that our results are robust
when this exponential function is used to approximate the empirical distribution. By using (1)
and the relation 1 −piµ = ν(miµ)τ, we rewrite the right-hand side of (4) as pi−1µ −piµ =
τeαm0(1+µτ)i−1(eαm0(1+µτ) −1), which is increasing in i. Hence, (4) can be further reduced to
µτ
1+µτ ≤
p˜ıµ−1µ −p˜ıµµ = τeαm0(1+µτ)˜ıµ−1(eαm0(1+µτ) −1). This inequality holds when the cell growth rate µ is
suﬃciently small or the critical age ˜ıµ is suﬃciently high. In our setting,
6. When p1
0µ = 1, by using (25) of Lemma 1, we can replace the term E

p1
0M
r0M
1−p1
0M

in Condition (6)
by E

p1
0M
r0M +r1M +...+r˜ıM M
1−p1
˜ıM M

.
7. We validated this assumption with one-year of bleed–feed implementation data. However, our
data involved only one bleed–feed per batch, N = 1.
8. Relevant costs in this setting include the cost of raw materials and reagents (e.g., cells, media
and buﬀer), labor cost, overhead (e.g., process monitoring and documentation), bioreactor operat-
ing cost (e.g., daily clean room expenses) and setup cost (e.g., cleaning and sterilization).
References
Allain ML, Henry E, Kyle M (2016) Competition and the eﬃciency of markets for technology.
Management Science 62(4):1000–1019.
Arora A, Gambardella A, Magazzini L, Pammolli F (2009) A breath of fresh air? Firm type, scale,
scope, and selection eﬀects in drug development. Management Science 55(10):1638–1653.

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
31
Bhattacharya S, Gaba V, Hasija S (2015) A comparison of milestone-based and buyout options
contracts for coordinating R&D partnerships. Management Science 61(5):963–978.
Chang HN, Kim NJ, Kang J, Jeong CM, Fei Q, Kim BJ, Kwon S, Lee SY, Kim J, et al. (2011)
Multi-stage high cell continuous fermentation for high productivity and titer. Bioprocess and
Biosystems Engineering 34(4):419–431.
Cheema JJS, Sankpal NV, Tambe SS, Kulkarni BD (2002) Genetic programming assisted stochastic
optimization strategies for optimization of glucose to gluconic acid fermentation. Biotechnology
Progress 18(6):1356–1365.
Crama P, Reyck BD, Degraeve Z (2008) Milestone payments or royalties? Contract design for R&D
licensing. Operations Research 56(6):1539–1552.
De Jonge B, Scarf PA (2019) A review on maintenance optimization. European Journal of Opera-
tional Research 285(3):805–824.
Deloitte (2018) A bold future for life sciences regulation: predictions 2025.
Derman C, Lieberman GJ, Ross SM (1984) On the use of replacements to extend system life.
Operations Research 32(3):616–627.
Doran PM (1995) Bioprocess engineering principles (Elsevier).
Eppendorf
(2017)
Perfusion-
making
the
most
out
of
your
work-
ing
volume.
URL
https://handling-solutions.eppendorf.com/
cell-handling/bioprocess/processes-and-applications/detailview/news/
perfusion-making-the-most-out-of-your-working-volume/.
European Commission (2020) The research project was one of the three ﬁnalists of 2020
MSCA2020.HR Awards. The competition was among all disciplines to acknowledge the most
inﬂuential projects under Horizon 2020 program of European Commission. URL https:
//msca2020.hr/msca-awards/.
Hermosilla M (2020) Rushed innovation: Evidence from drug licensing. Management Science Arti-
cles in Advance:1–22.
Icten ZG, Shechter SM, Maillart LM, Nagarajan M (2013) Optimal management of a limited
number of replacements under Markovian deterioration. IIE Transactions 45(2):206–214.
IMPACT (2020) Operational research improves biomanufacturing eﬃciency. URL https://www.
theorsociety.com/publications/magazines/impact-magazine/.
INFORMS (2021) The research project received the second prize in 2021 INFORMS Innovative
Applications of Analytics Award.
INFORMS
(2022)
2022
Franz
Edelman
Competition:
Merck
Ani-
mal
Health.
URL
https://resoundinglyhuman.com/episodes/
2022-franz-edelman-competition-merck-animal-health/.
Jabarivelisdeh B, Waldherr S (2018) Optimization of bioprocess productivity based on metabolic-
genetic network models with bilevel dynamic programming. Biotechnology and Bioengineering
115(7):1829–1841.
Kaminsky P, Wang Y (2015) Analytical models for biopharmaceutical operations and supply chain
management: a survey of research literature. Pharmaceutical Bioprocessing 3(1):61–73.
Li D, Qian L, Jin Q, Tan T (2011) Reinforcement learning control with adaptive gain for a sac-
charomyces cerevisiae fermentation process. Applied Soft Computing 11(8):4488–4495.
Low A (2020) Single-use versus stainless-steel bioreactors. URL https://www.pall.com/en/
biotech/blog/single-use-stainless-steel-bioreactor.html.

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
32
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
Mahal H, Branton H, Farid S (2021) End-to-end continuous bioprocessing: Impact on facility
design, cost of goods, and cost of development for monoclonal antibodies. Biotechnology and
Bioengineering .
Martagan T, Krishnamurthy A, Leland PA (2019) Managing trade-oﬀs in protein manufacturing:
How much to waste? Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 22(2):330–345.
McKinsey&Company, (2014) From sciences to operations. URL https://www.mckinsey.com/
~/media/mckinsey/dotcom/client_service/pharma\%20and\%20medical\%20products/
pmp\%20new/pdfs/from_science_to_operations-intro.ashx.
McKinsey&Company, (2019) Operations as a competitive advantage in biotechnology. URL
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/pharmaceuticals-and-medical-products/
our-insights/operations-as-a-competitive-advantage-in-biotechnology.
Monod J (1949) The growth of bacterial cultures. Annual Review of Microbiology 3(1):371–394.
Moreira S, Klueter TM, Tasselli S (2020) Competition, technology licensing-in, and innovation.
Organization Science Articles in Advance:1–25.
Muldowney M (2018) Continuous vs. batch production. URL https://www.contractpharma.com/
issues/2018-04-01/view_features/continuous-vs-batch-production/.
Mutturi S, Lid´en G (2014) Model-based estimation of optimal temperature proﬁle during simulta-
neous sacchariﬁcation and fermentation of Arundo donax. Biotechnology and Bioengineering
111(5):866–875.
Oyebolu FB, Allmendinger R, Farid SS, Branke J (2019) Dynamic scheduling of multi-product
continuous biopharmaceutical facilities: A hyper-heuristic framework. Computers & Chemical
Engineering 125:71–88.
Patel G, Patil MD, Soni S, Khobragade TP, Chisti Y, Banerjee UC (2016) Production of mycophe-
nolic acid by Penicillium brevicompactum—a comparison of two methods of optimization.
Biotechnology Reports 11:77–85.
Peroni CV, Kaisare NS, Lee JH (2005) Optimal control of a fed-batch bioreactor using simulation-
based approximate dynamic programming. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology
13(5):786–790.
Pollock J, Ho SV, Farid SS (2013) Fed-batch and perfusion culture processes: economic, envi-
ronmental, and operational feasibility under uncertainty. Biotechnology and Bioengineering
110(1):206–219.
Rao A (2020) Strategic research and development investment decisions in the pharmaceutical
industry. Marketing Science 39(3):564–586.
Saucedo VM, Karim MN (1997) Experimental optimization of a real time fed-batch fermentation
process using Markov decision process. Biotechnology and Bioengineering 55(2):317–327.
Stonebraker JS, Keefer DL (2009) OR practice—modeling potential demand for supply-constrained
drugs: A new hemophilia drug at Bayer biological products. Operations Research 57(1):19–31.
Taneri N, De Meyer A (2017) Contract theory: impact on biopharmaceutical alliance structure and
performance. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 19(3):453–471.
The Animal Health Institute, (2020) The animal health industry. URL https://ahi.org/
the-animal-health-industry/.
The European Biopharmaceutical Enterprises, (2015) Medical innovation that helps millions of
patients around the world. URL https://www.ebe-biopharma.eu/wp-content/uploads/
2014/11/EBE-Little-Book-FINAL.pdf.

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
33
Tomlin B (2009) Impact of supply learning when suppliers are unreliable. Manufacturing & Service
Operations Management 11(2):192–209.
Villaverde AF, Bongard S, Mauch K, Balsa-Canto E, Banga JR (2016) Metabolic engineering with
multi-objective optimization of kinetic models. Journal of Biotechnology 222:1–8.
Wang Y, Sun W, Zheng S, Zhang Y, Bao Y (2019) Genetic engineering of bacillus sp. and fermen-
tation process optimizing for diacetyl production. Journal of Biotechnology 301:2–10.
Xiao W, Xu Y (2012) The impact of royalty contract revision in a multistage strategic R&D
alliance. Management Science 58(12):2251–2271.
Xie W, Wang B, Li C, Xie D, Auclair J (2022) Interpretable biomanufacturing process risk
and sensitivity analyses for quality-by-design and stability control. Naval Research Logistics
69(3):461–483.

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
34
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
Appendix A:
Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1.
Fix µ ∈M and n ∈N. By induction in i we show
v(i,µ,n) ≤v(i −1,µ,n),
i > 0.
(11)
For i = I, we have v(I,µ,n) = 0 ≤v(I −1,µ,n). Hence, (11) is valid for i = I. Now we assume that (11) is valid
for i where i >˜ıµ. Then we show that (11) also holds for i−1. From (4) we have (note that pi−2µ −pi−1µ > 0)
ri−1µ −ri−2µ
pi−2µ −pi−1µ
≤ri−1µ
≤ri−1µ + pi−1µv(i,µ,n)
= C(i −1,µ,n)
≤v(i −1,µ,n).
(12)
Rearranging (12), we obtain
ri−1µ −ri−2µ ≤(pi−2µ −pi−1µ)v(i −1,µ,n)
= pi−2µv(i −1,µ,n) −pi−1µv(i −1,µ,n)
≤pi−2µv(i −1,µ,n) −pi−1µv(i,µ,n),
(13)
where (13) follows from the induction hypothesis. Rearranging terms yields
C(i −1,µ,n) = ri−1µ + pi−1µv(i,µ,n) ≤ri−2µ + pi−2µv(i −1,µ,n) = C(i −2,µ,n).
(14)
Hence,
v(i −1,µ,n) = max{C(i −1,µ,n),B(n)} ≤max{C(i −2,µ,n),B(n)} = v(i −2,µ,n).
Finally, for 0 < i <˜ıµ we have pi−1µ = 1, so v(i −1,µ,n) = max{ri−1µ + v(i,µ,n),B(n)} ≥v(i,µ,n).
□
Proof of Proposition 2.
The inequality C(i,µ,n) −B(n) ≤C(i −1,µ,n) −B(n) reduces to C(i,µ,n) ≤
C(i −1,µ,n). The latter inequality follows from the proof of Proposition 1.
□
Proof of Theorem 1.
The proof is an immediate consequence of Proposition 2.
□
Proof of Proposition 3.
Fix µ < µ+ ∈M and n < N. By induction in i we show
v(i,µ+,n) ≤v(i,µ,n),
i ≥˜ıµ+.
(15)
Assumption 1 is required for the ﬁrst induction step: For i = I −1 we have v(I −1,µ+,n) = v(I −1,µ,n) =
B(n). Hence, (15) is valid for i = I −1. Now we assume that (15) is valid for i where i >˜ıµ+. We show that
(15) also holds for i −1. From (5) we have (note that pi−1µ −pi−1µ+ > 0):
ri−1µ+ −ri−1µ
pi−1µ −pi−1µ+ ≤riµ+
≤riµ+ + piµ+v(i + 1,µ+,n)
= C(i,µ+,n)
≤v(i,µ+,n).
(16)

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
35
Rearranging (16), we obtain:
ri−1µ+ −ri−1µ ≤(pi−1µ −pi−1µ+)v(i,µ+,n)
= pi−1µv(i,µ+,n) −pi−1µ+v(i,µ+,n)
≤pi−1µv(i,µ,n) −pi−1µ+v(i,µ+,n),
(17)
where (17) follows from the induction hypothesis. Rearranging terms we get:
C(i −1,µ+,n) = ri−1µ+ + pi−1µ+v(i,µ+,n) ≤ri−1µ + pi−1µv(i,µ,n) = C(i −1,µ,n).
(18)
Hence,
v(i −1,µ+,n) = max{C(i −1,µ+,n),B(n)} ≤max{C(i −1,µ,n),B(n)} = v(i −1,µ,n),
which completes the proof.
□
Proof of Proposition 4.
The inequality C(i,µ+,n) −B(n) ≤C(i,µ,n) −B(n) reduces to C(i,µ+,n) ≤
C(i,µ,n). The latter inequality follows from the proof of Proposition 3.
□
Proof of Theorem 2.
The proof is an immediate consequence of Proposition 4.
□
Proof of Proposition 5.
Suppose that in each state (i,µ,n) with n < N, we apply the optimal action for
state (i,µ,n+1) (note that the only feasible action in states (i,µ,N) is c). Let v′(i,µ,n) denote the expected
biomass production under this policy. Then,
v(i,µ,n) ≥v′(i,µ,n) = v(i,µ,n + 1).
□
Proof of Proposition 6.
Proposition 5 implies that B(n) ≥B(n + 1). By induction in i, we show
C(i,µ,n) −B(n) ≤C(i,µ,n + 1) −B(n + 1).
(19)
For i = I −1 we have C(i,µ,n) = C(i,µ,n + 1) = rI−1µ. Therefore,
C(i,µ,n) −B(n) = C(i,µ,n + 1) −B(n) ≤C(i,µ,n + 1) −B(n + 1).
Hence, (19) is valid for i = I −1. Now assume that (19) is valid for i. Then, we show that it also holds for
i −1. By (19), we have C(i,µ,n) ≤C(i,µ,n + 1) + B(n) −B(n + 1). Therefore,
v(i,µ,n) −v(i,µ,n + 1) = max{C(i,µ,n),B(n)} −max{C(i,µ,n + 1),B(n + 1)}
≤max{C(i,µ,n + 1) + B(n) −B(n + 1),B(n)}
−max{C(i,µ,n + 1),B(n + 1)}
= B(n) −B(n + 1)
and thus
C(i −1,µ,n) −C(i −1,µ,n + 1) = pi−1µ(v(i,µ,n) −v(i,µ,n + 1))
≤pi−1µ(B(n) −B(n + 1)) ≤B(n) −B(n + 1).
□

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
36
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
Proof of Theorem 3.
The proof is an immediate consequence of Proposition 6.
□
Proof of Lemma 1.
If Condition (4) holds, then the value function is nonincreasing in i:
v(i,µ,n) = max{C(i,µ,n),B(n)} ≥v(i + 1,µ,n).
(20)
If v(i,µ,n) = B(n), then v(i + 1,µ,n) = B(n) from Theorem 1, and (20) holds. If v(i,µ,n) = C(i,µ,n) for
0 ≤i <˜ıµ we have:
v(i,µ,n) = C(i,µ,n) = riµ + v(i + 1,µ,n)
= riµ + ri+1µ + ... + r˜ıµµ + p˜ıµµv(˜ıµ + 1,µ,n) ≥v(i + 1,µ,n).
Then, from Proposition 1,
riµ + ri+1µ + ... + r˜ıµµ + p˜ıµµv(i + 1,µ,n) ≥v(i + 1,µ,n),
so
riµ + ri+1µ + ... + r˜ıµµ
1 −p˜ıµµ
≥v(i + 1,µ,n).
If v(i,µ,n) = C(i,µ,n) for ˜ıµ ≤i ≤I −1 we have:
v(i,µ,n) = C(i,µ,n) = riµ + piµv(i + 1,µ,n) ≥v(i + 1,µ,n),
thus
riµ
1 −piµ
≥v(i + 1,µ,n).
□
Proof of Theorem 4.
From Equation (2) we have for n = 0,...,N:
v(0,µ,n) = max{B(n),r0µ + p0µv(1,µ,n)}
= max{B(n),r0µ + p0µB(n),r0µ + p0µr1µ + p0µp1µv(2,µ,n)}
= ···
= max{B(n),r0µ + p0µB(n),r0µ + p0µr1µ + p0µp1µB(n),··· ,
r0µ + p0µr1µ + ··· + p0µ ···pI−3µrI−2µ + p0µ ···pI−2µB(n),
r0µ + p0µr1µ + ··· + p0µ ···pI−3µrI−2µ + p0µ ···pI−2µrI−1µ}.
This can be written as
v(0,µ,n) = max
0≤i≤I{aiµ + biµB(n)},
where
biµ =
i−1
Y
j=0
pjµ,
0 ≤i < I,
bI = 0,
and
aiµ =
i−1
X
j=0
bjµrjµ,
0 ≤i ≤I.

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
37
Note that bi+1µ = biµpiµ ≤biµ and ai+1µ = aiµ +biµriµ ≥ai. We ﬁrst consider the special case that the growth
rate M is not random, but constant, M = µ say. Then B(n) = v(0,µ,n + 1), so the above equation can be
written as
v(0,µ,n) = max
0≤i≤I{aiµ + biµv(0,µ,n + 1)},
n = 0,1,...N,
where v(0,µ,N + 1) = 0. Since we want to investigate the behavior of v(0,µ,0) as N tends to inﬁnity, it
is convenient to write w(µ,n) = v(0,µ,N −n), where n denotes the remaining number of bleed-feeds. For
w(µ,n) we get the recursion
w(µ,n) = fµ(w(µ,n −1)),
n = 0,1,...,N,
starting with w(µ,−1) = v(0,µ,N + 1) = 0, where
fµ(x) = max
0≤i≤I{aiµ + biµx}.
Then the maximum total expected biomass from a batch is v(0,µ,0) = w(µ,N).
Since a0µ = 0 and b0µ = 1 we immediately have
w(µ,n) ≥a0µ + b0µw(µ,n −1) = w(µ,n −1),
n ≥0.
(21)
So the beneﬁt of bleed-feed increases. The function fµ(x) is the maximum of convex, non-decreasing linear
functions, and hence, fµ(x) is convex, non-decreasing and piece-wise linear. Then we have
w(µ,n + 1) −w(µ,n) = fµ(w(µ,n)) −fµ(w(µ,n −1))
(22)
≤f ′
µ(w(µ,n))(w(µ,n) −w(µ,n −1))
≤w(µ,n) −w(µ,n −1),
where f ′
µ is the (left) derivative. Hence, the marginal beneﬁt is decreasing.
For i >˜ıµ, let w∗
iµ be the intersection point of aiµ + biµx and a˜ıµµ + b˜ıµµx, so (note that b˜ıµµ = 1 > biµ)
w∗
iµ = aiµ −aiµµ
1 −biµ
,
i >˜ıµ,
and let w∗
µ = maxi>˜ıµ w∗
iµ. Then, clearly,
fµ(x) = a˜ıµµ + x,
x ≥w∗
µ.
(23)
If the critical age ˜ıµ > 0, we have
w(µ,n) ≥a˜ıµµ + b˜ıµµw(µ,n −1) = a˜ıµµ + w(µ,n −1),
so the beneﬁt w(µ,n) grows to inﬁnity as n tends to inﬁnity. By (23), we have, for suﬃciently large n,
w(µ,n) = a˜ıµµ + w(µ,n −1).
Hence, the marginal beneﬁt decreases to and, at some point, coincides with a˜ıµµ. Now we consider the case
˜ıµ = 0. Then a˜ıµµ = a0µ = 0, so we have, by (23),
fµ(x) = x,
x ≥w∗
µ.
(24)

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
38
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
Since w(µ,−1) = 0 ≤w∗
µ and fµ(x) is non-decreasing, w(µ,n) ≤w∗
µ implies that w(µ,n + 1) = fµ(w(µ,n)) ≤
fµ(w∗
µ) = w∗
µ. Hence, by induction, w(µ,n) ≤w∗
µ for all n. So w(µ,n) is an increasing, bounded sequence.
Therefore, its limit exists and it is equal to w∗
µ, since for all n ≥0,
w∗
µ −w(µ,n) = fµ(w∗
µ) −fµ(w(µ,n −1)) ≤b1µ(w∗
µ −w(µ,n −1)) ≤··· ≤bn+1
1µ (w∗
µ −w(µ,−1)) = bn+1
1µ w∗
µ.
Hence, if the critical age ˜ıµ = 0, the beneﬁt converges geometrically fast to w∗
µ.
The above holds when the growth rate is not random. For random growth rate M we have the recursion
w(n) = E[fM(w(n −1))],
n = 0,1,...,N,
starting with w(−1) = 0. Then the maximum expected total biomass from an arbitrary batch is
E[v(0,M,0)] = w(N). Similar to (21) and (22) we have
w(n) = E[fM(w(n −1))] ≥E[w(n −1)] = w(n −1)
and
w(n + 1) −w(n) = E[fM(w(n)) −fM(w(n −1))] ≤E[w(n) −w(n −1)] = w(n) −w(n −1).
Hence, w(n) is increasing, and the marginal beneﬁts decrease.
Since piµ and riµ are continuous in µ, we have that aiµ, biµ and w∗
µ are also continuous in µ. So w∗=
maxµ∈M w∗
µ exists. Further,
w(n) = E[fM(w(n −1)] ≥E[a˜ıM M + w(M,n −1)] = E[a˜ıM M] + w(n −1).
If the critical age ˜ıM > 0 with probability greater than 0, then E[a˜ıM M] > 0, so the beneﬁt w(n) grows to
inﬁnity as n tends to inﬁnity. Since (23) is valid for x ≥w∗and µ ∈M, we have, for suﬃciently large n,
w(n) = E[fM(w(n −1)] = E[a˜ıM M] + w(n −1)
Hence, the marginal beneﬁt decreases to and, at some point, coincides with E[a˜ıM M]. This quantity is close
to the critical biomass ˜m, but not exactly equal to ˜m, due to discretization of time.
In case the critical age ˜ıµ = 0 with probability 1, we have that (24) is valid for x > w∗with probabil-
ity 1. Since w(−1) = 0 ≤w∗and fµ(x) is non-decreasing for µ ∈M, w(n) ≤w∗implies that w(n + 1) =
E[fM(w(n))] ≤E[fM(w∗)] = w∗. Hence, by induction, w(n) ≤w∗for all n. So w(n) is an increasing, bounded
sequence and thus, its limit exists. This limit is equal to w∗, since for all n ≥0,
w∗−w(n) = E[fM(w∗)−fM(w(n−1))] ≤E[b1M(w∗−w(n−1))] = E[b1M](w∗−w(n−1)) ≤b∗
1(w∗−w(n−1)),
where b∗
1 = maxµ∈M b1µ < 1. So, if ˜ıµ = 0 with probability 1, the beneﬁt converges geometrically fast to w∗.
□
Lemma 1. If Condition (4) holds, then
riµ + ri+1µ + ... + r˜ıµµ
1 −p˜ıµµ
≥v(i + 1,µ,n)
for 0 ≤i <˜ıµ,µ ∈M,n ∈N
(25)
riµ
1 −piµ
≥v(i + 1,µ,n)
for ˜ıµ ≤i ≤I −1,µ ∈M,n ∈N.
(26)

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
39
Proof of Proposition 7.
By induction in i and n we show (i):
v1(i,µ,n) ≥v2(i,µ,n).
(27)
For states (I,µ,n) and (i,µ,N + 1) we have v1(I,µ,n) = v2(I,µ,n) = v1(i,µ,N + 1) = v2(i,µ,N + 1) = 0,
hence (27) holds. Assume (27) holds for (i,µ,n) and (1,µ,n+1). We now show (27) also holds for (i−1,µ,n).
Then, from the induction assumption and p1
iµ ≥p2
iµ we have:
C1(i −1,µ,n) = ri−1µ + p1
i−1µv1(i,µ,n) ≥ri−1µ + p2
i−1µv2(i,µ,n) = C2(i −1,µ,n),
and
r0µ + p1
0µv1(1,µ,n + 1) ≥r0µ + p2
0µv2(1,µ,n + 1),
Thus,
B1(n) = E

C1(0,M,n + 1)

≥E

C2(0,M,n + 1)

= B2(n),
Hence,
v1(i −1,µ,n) = max{C1(i −1,µ,n),B1(n)} ≥max{C2(i −1,µ,n),B2(n)} = v2(i −1,µ,n).
This completes the proof of (i). We prove (ii) by showing that C1(i,µ,n) −B1(n) ≥C2(i,µ,n) −B2(n).
From Condition (6):
rI−1µ(p1
iµ −p2
iµ) ≥E

p1
0M
r0M
1 −p1
0M
−p2
0MrI−1M

≥E

p1
0Mv1(1,M,n + 1)

−E

p2
0MC2(I −1,M,n + 1)

(28)
≥E

p1
0Mv1(1,M,n + 1)

−E

p2
0Mv2(I −1,M,n + 1)

(29)
≥E

p1
0Mv1(1,M,n + 1)

−E

p2
0Mv2(1,M,n + 1)

(30)
= B1(n) −B2(n),
(31)
where (28) follows from (26) of Lemma 1 and the fact that C(I −1,µ,n + 1) = rI−1µ, (29) follows from the
fact that v2(I −1,µ,n) ≥C2(I −1,µ,n) and (30) from Proposition 1. Rearranging (31):
B2(n) −B1(n) ≥−rI−1µ(p1
iµ −p2
iµ)
= −C1(I −1,µ,n)(p1
iµ −p2
iµ)
≥−v1(I −1,µ,n)(p1
iµ −p2
iµ)
(32)
≥−p1
iµv1(i + 1,µ,n) + p2
iµv1(i + 1,µ,n)
(33)
≥−p1
iµv1(i + 1,µ,n) + p2
iµv2(i + 1,µ,n) = −C1(i,µ,n) + C2(i,µ,n),
(34)
where (32) follows from the fact that C1(I −1,µ,n) ≤v1(I −1,µ,n), (33) follows from Proposition 1, and
(34) from Proposition 7 (i). Rearranging (34) we obtain C1(i,µ,n) −B1(n) ≥C2(i,µ,n) −B2(n).
For i <˜ıµ, the diﬀerence C1(i,µ,n)−C2(i,µ,n) remains constant (since riµ is the same for the two batches,
and p1
iµ = p2
iµ = 1). Thus, C1(i,µ,n) −B1(n) ≥C2(i,µ,n) −B2(n).
□

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
40
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
Proof of Proposition 8.
By induction in i and n we show:
v1(i,µ1,n) ≥v2(i,µ2,n).
(35)
For i = I and n = N + 1 the value function is equal to 0, hence (35) holds. Assume v1(i + 1,µ1,n) ≥v2(i +
1,µ2,n) and v1(1,µ1,n + 1) ≥v2(1,µ2,n + 1). We ﬁrst show C1(i,µ1,n) ≥C2(i,µ2,n). From Condition (7):
riµ2 −riµ1 ≤(piµ1 −piµ2)ri+1µ2
≤(piµ1 −piµ2)[ri+1µ2 + pi+1µ2v2(i + 2,µ2,n)] = (piµ1 −piµ2)C2(i + 1,µ2,n)
≤piµ1v2(i + 1,µ2,n) −piµ2v2(i + 1,µ2,n)
(36)
≤piµ1v1(i + 1,µ1,n) −piµ2v2(i + 1,µ2,n),
(37)
where (36) follows from the fact that C2(i + 1,µ2,n) ≤v2(i + 1,µ2,n), and (37) follows from the induction
assumption. Rearranging the terms we obtain:
C2(i,µ2,n) = riµ2 + piµ2v2(i + 1,µ2,n) ≤riµ1 + piµ1v1(i + 1,µ1,n) = C1(i,µ1,n).
Now, we show B1(n) ≥B2(n). From Condition (7) with i = 0:
r0µ2 −r0µ1 ≤(p0µ1 −p0µ2)r1µ2
≤(p0µ1 −p0µ2)[r1µ2 + p1µ2v2(2,µ2,n + 1)] = (p0µ1 −p0µ2)C2(1,µ2,n + 1)
≤p0µ1v2(1,µ2,n + 1) −p0µ2v2(1,µ2,n + 1)
(38)
≤p0µ1v1(1,µ1,n + 1) −p0µ2v2(1,µ2,n + 1),
(39)
where (38) follows from the fact that C2(i + 1,µ2,n) ≤v2(i + 1,µ2,n), and (39) follows from the induction
assumption. Rearranging the terms we obtain:
B2(n) = r0µ2 + p0µ2v2(1,µ2,n + 1) ≤r0µ1 + p0µ1v1(1,µ1,n + 1) = B1(n).
(40)
Hence, v1(i,µ1,n) = max{C1(i,µ1,n),B1(n)} ≥max{C2(i,µ2,n),B2(n)} = v2(i,µ2,n).
□
Proof of Theorem 5.
By induction in i, we show that the following holds for ˜ıµ ≤i ≤I −1,µ ∈M and
n < N:
C(i,µ,n) ≤B(n).
(41)
For i = I −1, from Condition (8) we have:
C(I −1,µ,n) = rI−1µ ≤(1 −pI−1µ)(r0µ + r1µ + ... + r˜ıµµ + E[p˜ıM MrI−1M])
≤r0µ + r1µ + ... + r˜ıµµ + E[p˜ıM MrI−1M]
= r0µ + r1µ + ... + r˜ıµµ + E[p˜ıM MC(I −1,M,n + 1)]
≤r0µ + r1µ + ... + r˜ıµµ + E[p˜ıM Mv(I −1,M,n + 1)]
(42)
≤r0µ + r1µ + ... + r˜ıµµ + E[p˜ıM Mv(˜ıM + 1,M,n + 1)]
(43)
= E[r0µ + v(1,M,n + 1)] = E[C(0,M,n + 1] = B(n),

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
41
where (42) follows from the fact that C(I −1,µ,n) ≤v(I −1,µ,n) and (43) from Proposition 1. Hence,
(41) is true for i = I −1. Now, assume (41) holds for ˜ıµ + 1. We show that it also holds for ˜ıµ. Rearranging
Condition (8) for i =˜ıµ we have:
r˜ıµµ
1 −p˜ıµµ
≤r0µ + r1µ + ... + r˜ıµµ + E[p˜ıM MrI−1M]
= r0µ + r1µ + ... + r˜ıµµ + E[p˜ıM MC(I −1,M,n + 1)]
≤r0µ + r1µ + ... + r˜ıµµ + E[p˜ıM Mv(I −1,M,n + 1)]
(44)
≤r0µ + r1µ + ... + r˜ıµµ + E[p˜ıM Mv(˜ıM + 1,M,n + 1)]
(45)
= E[r0µ + v(1,M,n + 1)] = E[C(0,M,n + 1] = B(n),
where (44) follows from the fact that C(I −1,µ,n) ≤v(I −1,µ,n) and (45) from Proposition 1. Rearranging:
C(˜ıµ,µ,n) = r˜ıµµ + p˜ıµµv(˜ıµ + 1,µ,n) = r˜ıµµ + p˜ıµµB(n) ≤B(n)
(46)
where (46) follows from the induction assumption.
□
Proof of Proposition 9.
The proof is similar to that of Proposition 7(ii), hence it is omitted.
□
Appendix B:
Estimation of the transition rate function
We only sketch the approach adopted to estimate the rate function (and omit the details) because
of conﬁdentiality concerns. Let Fµ(m) denote the (long-run) fraction of batches that transition to
the stationary phase at a biomass amount of at most m, and fµ(m) be the corresponding density,
i.e., fµ(m) = F ′
µ(m), for batches that grow at the rate M = µ. Let ∆be a small time interval. Then,
given that the biomass is m at time t, the probability that a batch will transition to the stationary
phase at a biomass amount between m and m(1 + µ∆) (recall that the growth is exponential)
satisﬁes fµ(m)µm∆= ν(m)∆(1 −Fµ(m)). Hence,
fµ(m)
1−Fµ(m) = ν(m)
µm .
Note that the rate of transitioning ν(m) depends only on the biomass m, and not on the
growth rate µ. Solving the above diﬀerential equations yields 1 −Fµ(m) = e
−
R m
m0
ν(x)
µx dx,
m ≥m0,
where m0 is the initial biomass. The function Fµ(m) can be estimated directly from data, and
discretized at points m = 1,2,...,H. If we then approximate fµ(m) ≈Fµ(m + 1) −Fµ(m), we
obtain an estimate for the transition rate function Fµ(m+1)−Fµ(m)
1−Fµ(m)
= ν(m)
µm , which can be rewritten as
ν(m) = µm Fµ(m+1)−Fµ(m)
1−Fµ(m)
for m = 1,2,...,H −1. The growth rate M is random. Therefore, by tak-
ing the expectation, we obtain the (more robust) estimate ν(m) =
R µu
µl µm Fµ(m+1)−Fµ(m)
1−Fµ(m)
dP(M =
µ). By discretizing M with the possible values µ1,µ2,..., this equation reduces to ν(m) =
P
µi µim
Fµi(m+1)−Fµi(m)
1−Fµi(m)
P(M = µi) for m = 1,2,...,H −1.
Figure 6(a) illustrates an exponential ﬁt for the rate function. Figure 6(b) plots the realized
growth rates for diﬀerent batches. We used representative values considering conﬁdentiality.

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
42
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
0
5
10
15
20
25
m
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
 (m)
Industry Data
Exponential Fit
(a) The rate function ν(m).
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Realized growth rate
Batch 
(b) Growth rate of batches.
Figure 6
Base case parameters used in the case study.
Appendix C:
Additional Numerical Experiments
We present additional numerical experiments on the variability of the cell growth rate. In the base
case setting, the cell growth rate after bleed–feed follows a uniform distribution between µ−ϵ and
µ + ϵ, where µ = 0.06 is the mean and ϵ = 0.015 denotes the halfwidth. To assess the impact of
variability on the value function, we now ﬁx the mean at µ = 0.06 and change the halfwidth in the
range {0.5ϵ,1ϵ,2ϵ,3ϵ} where ϵ = 0.015. We also consider the deterministic case when the halfwidth
is zero. Hence, we analyze ﬁves scenarios for the halfwidth, i.e., {0,0.075,0.015,0.03,0.045} with a
mean ﬁxed at µ = 0.06. Observe that the cases when the halfwidth is 4ϵ or larger are not feasible
(when µ = 0.06 and ϵ = 0.015) because of the boundary conditions.
Table 3 presents the value function v(0,0.06,0) under diﬀerent levels of risk (i.e., high risk f = 1.5,
base case f = 1, and low risk f = 0.5) and halfwidth. Moreover, Table 4 shows the value function
v(0,0.06,0) under diﬀerent levels of critical biomass (i.e., high ˜m = 19, base case ˜m = 13, and
low ˜m = 7) and halfwidth. We observe from Table 3 and 4 that the value function gets higher
as the variability reduces. However, we see that the variability of the cell growth rate does not
have much signiﬁcant impact on the value function. We believe that this is because the coeﬃcient
of variation of the cell growth rate is relatively low in our problem setting. Consider the highest
(feasible) variability scenario with the halfwidth of 0.045. The coeﬃcient of variation of the cell
growth rate in this scenario is 0.43, which is still relatively low. We also conducted other additional
numerical experiments where we hypothetically increased the mean (i.e., µ ≥1 instead of 0.06)
and the halfwidth (so that the coeﬃcient of variation gets larger than one). In these experiments,
the variability of cell growth rate had a relatively higher impact. However, we did not report these
additional numerical experiments because those scenarios (with very high mean and variance) were
not realistic based on the current good manufacturing practices.

Koca et al. Increasing Biomanufacturing Yield with Bleed–Feed
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
43
Table 3
Risk and variability
Halfwidth
f
0
0.0075 0.015
0.03
0.045
1.5 48.30
47.94
47.91 47.67 47.30
BF
1
49.74
49.47
49.45 49.11 48.71
0.5 52.80
52.63
52.48 52.17 51.80
1.5 45.97
45.55
45.48 45.01 44.81
RA
1
46.73
46.31
46.23 45.73 45.45
0.5 47.68
47.29
47.20 46.72 46.37
1.5 20.08
20.08
20.08 20.08 20.08
CP
1
20.84
20.84
20.84 20.84 20.84
0.5 21.79
21.79
21.79 21.79 21.79
Table 4: Critical biomass and variability
Halfwidth
˜m
0
0.0075 0.015
0.03
0.045
19 65.08
64.67
64.57 64.19 63.88
BF
13 49.74
49.46
49.47 49.11 48.71
7
29.81
29.61
29.54 29.38 29.19
19 60.45
60.02
59.92 59.61 59.58
RA
13 46.70
46.28
46.21 45.70 45.42
7
26.53
26.38
26.30 25.90 25.02
19 22.95
22.95
22.95 22.95 22.95
CP
13 20.84
20.84
20.84 20.84 20.84
7
13.81
13.81
13.81 13.81 13.81