TITLE: Urban Bike Lane Planning with Bike Trajectories: Models, Algorithms, and a Real-World Case Study
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2021.1023
---

TSpace Research Repository 
 
tspace.library.utoronto.ca 
 
 
Urban Bike Lane Planning with Bike 
Trajectories: Models, Algorithms, and a Real-
World Case Study 
 
Sheng Liu, Zuo-Jun Max Shen & Xiang Ji 
 
Version Post-print or Accepted manuscript 
 
Citation 
(published version) 
Liu, S., Shen, Z. J. M., & Ji, X. (2022). Urban bike lane planning with 
bike trajectories: Models, algorithms, and a real-world case study. 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 24(5), 2500-2515. 
 
Copyright / License Copyright © 2021, INFORMS 
 
DOI https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2021.1023 
Publisher’s Statement This is an accepted manuscript of an article published by INFORMS in 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to cite TSpace items 
 
Always cite the published version, so the author(s) will receive recognition through services that track 
citation counts, e.g. Scopus. If you need to cite the page number of the author manuscript from TSpace 
because you cannot access the published version, then cite the TSpace version in addition to the published 
version using the permanent URI (handle) found on the record page. 
 
This article was made openly accessible by U of T Faculty. 
Please tell us how this access benefits you. Your story matters. 
 

Urban Bike Lane Planning with Bike Trajectories:
Models, Algorithms, and a Real-World Case Study
Sheng Liu
Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E6, Canada, sheng.liu@rotman.utoronto.ca
Zuo-Jun Max Shen
College of Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, USA;
Faculty of Engineering, Faculty of Business and Economics, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China,
maxshen@berkeley.edu
Xiang Ji
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544,
xiangj@princeton.edu
We study an urban bike lane planning problem based on the ﬁne-grained bike trajectory data, which is
made available by smart city infrastructure such as bike-sharing systems. The key decision is where to build
bike lanes in the existing road network. As bike-sharing systems become widespread in the metropolitan
areas over the world, bike lanes are being planned and constructed by many municipal governments to
promote cycling and protect cyclists. Traditional bike lane planning approaches often rely on surveys and
heuristics. We develop a general and novel optimization framework to guide the bike lane planning from bike
trajectories. We formalize the bike lane planning problem in view of the cyclists’ utility functions and derive
an integer optimization model to maximize the utility. To capture cyclists’ route choices, we develop a bilevel
program based on the Multinomial Logit model. We derive structural properties about the base model and
prove that the Lagrangian dual of the bike lane planning model is polynomial-time solvable. Furthermore,
we reformulate the route choice based planning model as a mixed integer linear program using a linear
approximation scheme. We develop tractable formulations and eﬃcient algorithms to solve the large-scale
optimization problem. Via a real-world case study with a city government, we demonstrate the eﬃciency
of the proposed algorithms and quantify the trade-oﬀbetween the coverage of bike trips and continuity of
bike lanes. We show how the network topology evolves according to the utility functions and highlight the
importance of understanding cyclists’ route choices. The proposed framework drives the data-driven urban
planning scheme in smart city operations management.
Key words : Smart city, Urban planning, Facility location, Optimization, Integer programming
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

2
Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
1.
Introduction
Urbanization is a global trend. More than half of the world’s population now lives in towns and
cities. It is projected that about 56% of the developing world and 82% of the developed world
will be urbanized by 2030, which equals to 5 billion people (The Economist 2012). Much of this
urbanization will unfold in Africa and Asia, bringing huge social, economic and environmental
transformations (United Nations Population Fund 2018). The main challenges brought by the fast
urbanization include traﬃc congestion and air pollution. The growing number of cars exceeds the
city’s traﬃc carrying capacity and thus causes severe traﬃc congestion around the city. In the
meanwhile, the vast amount of emissions generated by moving cars worsens the air quality and
poses serious public health problems. For Beijing, cars accounted for 30% of city’s self-generated
pollutants contributing to air pollution (South China Morning Post 2018).
In addition to driving cars, cycling is a popular urban transit mode for daily commute. For
instance, 30% of people go to work by riding bikes in Cambridge, UK (Department for Transport,
UK 2015). According to U.S. Census Bureau (2012), 864,883 people cycled to work in the United
States. Cycling is promoted by many countries as it beneﬁts city residents in many diﬀerent aspects.
First, cycling is free of pollution and the large-scale adoption of cycling can beneﬁt the urban
environment. Second, the popularity of cycling could alleviate the traﬃc congestion and improves
the overall traﬃc condition. Third, cycling is also a more aﬀordable and healthy transit mode than
driving. As shown by the City of Copenhagen (2010), mortality is reduced by 30% in adults who
cycle to and from their workplace on a daily basis, which can translate to enormous savings of
health care cost.
To promote cycling and reduce bike crashes, bike lanes have been planned and constructed by
city planners. In Amsterdam, for example, there are 250 miles of dedicated bike lanes in use. In
the U.S., city governments are rolling out better bike lanes on a large scale. For instance, Chicago
has planned to build 50 miles of bike lanes by 2019 (Chicago Tribune 2015). Cities from developing
countries, such as China and India, are also investing heavily in protected bike lanes (The Seattle
Times 2016). To accommodate the booming cycling demand during the 2020 pandemic, municipal
governments across Canada such as the Toronto City Council have fast-tracked their bike lane
expansion plans (CBC 2020). The construction of bike lanes improves the safety for cyclists, car
drivers as well as pedestrians. It is reported that fatality rate is less than a tenth as high in the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
3
countries with well designed cycling road networks as in the countries without cycling friendly
infrastructures (Pucker 2001).
Traditionally, bike lanes are planned based on experience and surveys. As smart phones are
widely used, the GPS mobility data becomes more available and makes it possible to utilize this
ﬁne-grained data in bike lane planning. Most recently, smart city infrastructure such as station-
based and dock-less bike-sharing systems are expanding across the world. Some examples include
Citi Bike (New York, USA), Santander Cycles (London, UK) for station-based systems and Lime
Bike (USA), Mobike (China) for dock-less systems. Bay Wheels, the bike-sharing system operated
in San Francisco Bay Area, has maintained a mixed ﬂeet of station-based and dock-less bikes
(mainly electric models). In these systems, people can use smart phones to pick up and drop oﬀ
bikes at docking stations or arbitrary locations with a built-in smart lock. Bikes in the dock-less
system are often embedded with GPS devices (thus often called ”smart bikes”, e.g., see The New
York Times 2017) so the spatial bike trajectories can be tracked. These bike trajectories record
the detailed travel pattern of bike riders, which can then be used to understand the route choices
made by the cyclists. Compared to the survey statistics and conventional origin-destination data,
the trajectory data generated from the smart city infrastructure reveals cyclists’ footprints on the
road network, which are otherwise diﬃcult to collect and unknown to policymakers.
The bike trajectory data is becoming increasingly accessible to city planning agencies and
researchers as bike-sharing system operators are pursuing open data policies. For instance, Mobike
is fully collaborating with municipal governments to facilitate urban management (Xinhuanet 2017,
Mobike 2018). The Los Angeles Department of Transportation has created an open-source software
platform called Mobility Data Speciﬁcation (MDS) that allows authorities to collect data directly
from mobility service providers (including dock-less bikes and scooters) in real time1. MDS is now
used by more than 50 American cities and dozens more around the globe (The New York Times
2020). How to analyze and utilize this high-volume trajectory information to accomplish the smart
city vision will be a critical challenge to city planners.
This paper presents and solves the bike lane planning problem using the detailed bike trajectory
data. The bike lane planning problem decides on which road segments of the existing road network
1 The
detailed
description
about
MDS
can
be
found
at
https://ladot.io/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/
What-is-MDS-Cities.pdf
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

4
Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
to construct bike lanes, aiming to balance two main objectives: 1) coverage: cover as many bike
trips as possible and 2) continuity: build more continuous bike lanes to minimize interruptions. We
summarize our main results and contributions as follows.
1. We present the bike lane planning model in view of the cyclist’s utility functions based on the
trajectory data. We start from a simple adjacency-continuity utility function and then discuss the
general class of utility functions. The choice of the utility functions is ﬂexible to characterize the
trade-oﬀbetween the coverage and continuity objectives. To the best of our knowledge, our work
is the ﬁrst to formalize the general bike lane planning model built upon the bike trajectory data.
2. For the simple adjacency-continuity utility function, we show that the resulting bike lane
planning model has a supermodular objective function and admits an eﬃcient mixed integer linear
program (MILP) formulation. For the general utility functions, we show that under reasonable con-
ditions, the objective function is also supermodular and the resulting problem yields a polynomial-
time solvable Lagrangian dual. Furthermore, we provide a linear programming approach to the
Lagrangian relaxation subproblem and propose an eﬃcient algorithm.
3. To capture the interaction between cyclists’ route choices and bike lane design, we propose a
route choice based bike lane planning model and formulate it as a bilevel program. By exploiting
the structure of the lower-level problem, we reformulate the bilevel program as a single-level MILP,
which is asymptotically exact and computationally tractable.
4. We present a real-word case study based on the collaboration with an urban planning institu-
tion and a dock-less bike-sharing company. We collect and preprocess a large bike trajectory data
set, and test our models and algorithms via extensive numerical experiments. The numerical exper-
iments validate the eﬃciency of the proposed algorithms and deliver insightful comparison results
between diﬀerent models. We show how the topology of bike lane network would change according
to the utility functions and provide quantitative measures to analyze the trade-oﬀbetween coverage
and continuity. We also highlight the importance of understanding cyclists’ route choice behaviors
in the bike lane planning.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related literature.
Section 3 develops the bike lane planning model and presents tractable formulations and structural
results, which motivates eﬃcient algorithms. Section 4 is devoted to the real-world case study and
numerical experiments that deliver managerial insights for policymakers. Section 5 concludes the
paper and presents several future research directions.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
5
2.
Related Literature
Smart city operations have received growing attention from the operations management commu-
nity. Diﬀerent aspects of the smart city movement have been studied, including smart grid, smart
transportation, and smart retail. The “smart” parts of these aspects lie in the innovative tech-
nologies that disrupt the present urban environment and city operations, or new data collection
and data analytics tools to inform better understanding and decisions for city management. For
instance, Zhang et al. (2021) study a promising scheme where vehicle-to-grid (V2G) electricity sell-
ing is integrated in electric vehicle sharing systems. Shared mobility, where shared passenger cars
are deployed to provide ride and logistics services, has been examined from various perspectives
such as pricing (Taylor 2018, Bai et al. 2019, Guda and Subramanian 2019), admission control
(Afeche et al. 2018), repositioning (He et al. 2020), and last-mile delivery (Qi et al. 2018), among
others. In retailing, recent development of IT and big data tools have enabled innovative omni-
channel strategies (Gao and Su 2016, Harsha et al. 2019) and data-driven pricing and logistics
policies (Perakis et al. 2018, Glaeser et al. 2019, Liu et al. 2020). We refer readers to Mak (2020)
and Qi and Shen (2019) for thorough reviews of papers in smart city operations. Our paper is
among the ﬁrst to develop rigorous analytical models to tackle an urgent city planning problem
built upon new mobility data sources, and thus promotes the smart city vision.
There has been an increasing focus on the planning and control of bike facilities, in particular,
the optimization of bike-sharing systems. The majority of the existing literature tackles the oper-
ational problems of bike-sharing systems, such as balancing bike stock levels among bike stations
to satisfy imbalanced biking demand. For example, Shu et al. (2013) address the bike deployment
and redistribution problems with network ﬂow formulations. O’Mahony and Shmoys (2015) study
similar rebalancing problems as well as routing and clustering problems with diﬀerent integer pro-
gramming techniques. In addition, empirical approaches have been applied to shed light on the
optimal conﬁguration of bike share systems (Kabra et al. 2020). However, few papers consider the
road infrastructure that paves the way for a successful ride share program. Noticeably, the above
three papers only utilize the origin-destination information of bike rides. In contrast, our paper
leverages a ﬁne-grained bike trajectory data set to capture detailed travel patterns of bike riders.
Traditionally, bike lane planning is not built upon reliable real-world data. A prominent approach
of traditional bike-lane planning is to select road segments (on which to construct bike lanes) by
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

6
Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
evaluating them with respect to a set of predetermined guidelines and criteria. Dondi et al. (2011)
propose a context sensitive approach and make the selection based on the analysis of the visual
eﬀects, environmental contexts, and traﬃc considerations of road segments. Rybarczyk and Wu
(2010) propose to select road segments with a modiﬁed simple additive weighting method. Since
the guidelines and criteria from these papers are decided based on expertise or speciﬁc needs, there
is a potential risk of subjective bias.
Another classical approach is to select road segments based on cyclists survey results. One such
approach is built on stated preference surveys, in which respondents are asked to imagine their
preferences in some hypothetical cases (Hunt and Abraham 2007, Sener et al. 2009). However,
results from the stated preference surveys could be inaccurate as they do not represent cyclists’
actual choices. Researchers also adopted revealed preference surveys, which may suﬀer from small
sample biases (Howard and Burns 2001). By contrast, the trajectory data collected by bike sensors
captures cyclists’ actual route choices on a large scale, which tends to be more accurate and
representative. Nevertheless, special attention should be paid to infrastructure and bike availability
biases when handling data from bike-sharing systems.
In addition to subjective and survey based methods, there are a few papers that develop analyti-
cal methods for the bike lane planning problem. Lin and Yang (2011) consider a strategic designing
problem for bike sharing, in which the location of bike stations and bike lanes are decided to min-
imize the system-wide operating cost. Their model only accounts for the origins and destinations
while ignoring the road network. As a result, their model can not be directly used to guide the
practical bike lane construction. Most recently, Bao et al. (2017) propose several heuristics to decide
the bike lane locations by maximizing a speciﬁc score function under budget and connectivity con-
straints. Our paper, on the other hand, proposes a general and tractable modeling framework for
the bike lane planning, and derives structural results about the resulting planning problem. The
structural results motivate eﬃcient algorithms with empirically validated performance.
Bike lane planning based on bike trajectories echoes the idea of desire paths (or desire links) in
urban planning. Essentially, bike trajectories reﬂect riders’ most desirable paths and demonstrate
the potential mismatch between rider behaviors and the existing infrastructure. However, unlike
traditional desire paths formed by erosion, many bike paths are along the existing road network
and are diﬃcult to record accurately. Enabled by smart bike-sharing systems, the ﬁne-grained bike
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
7
trajectory data becomes more accessible and helps researchers identify ways to improve the urban
infrastructure for cyclists, e.g., road intersections (Lind et al. 2020). In this work, we incorporate
the idea of desire paths in bike lane planning through a mathematical program.
From a modeling perspective, our paper is related to the general class of facility loca-
tion problems. While many traditional facility location models are focused on locating ware-
houses/distribution centers/retailing stores to maximize proﬁts or minimize operational costs (Sny-
der and Shen 2019), we consider locating bike lanes on the existing road network to maximize
riders’ utility. Hence our paper shares a similar rationale with the emerging location models in
nonproﬁtable operations and healthcare operations (see, e.g., Chan et al. 2017).
3.
Bike Lane Planning Model
We ﬁrst introduce the bike lane planning model based on bike trajectory data with a specialized
utility function in Section 3.1. We then analyze the structural properties of the model and discuss
a class of general utility functions in Section 3.2. Lastly, we extend the model to consider cyclists’
route choices in Section 3.3.
3.1.
Adjacency-Continuity Utility Maximization
Let V be the set of all road segments that have been visited by bike riders in our data set and
M be the set of cyclists. We say two road segments i and j are neighbors, (i,j) ∈N, if they are
connected. We can also interpret (i,j) ∈N as road intersections. For each road segment i ∈V ,
we use di to denote the associated number of bike trips. Similarly, each pair of connected road
segment (i,j) ∈N is also associated with the number of trips that go through the corresponding
intersection, dij.
We consider two main objectives of designing bike lanes inspired by the literature and our
communication with the biking community:
1. Constructed bike lanes should be able to cover as many bike trips as possible. (coverage
objective)
2. Constructed bike lane network should enable continuous and smooth riding experience for
cyclists. (continuity objective)
Continuity is preferred for both cyclists and urban planning institutions. Krizek and Roland (2005)
show that the discontinuity of bike lanes can cause great discomfort to cyclists. The discontinuity at
intersections also generates potentially higher crash risks. For the government, discontinuous bike
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

8
Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
lanes can pose management challenges as well as construction diﬃculties. The coverage objective
and the continuity objective are often conﬂicting with each other, as shown in Bao et al. (2017).
Maximizing only the coverage may lead to very dispersed bike lanes while maximizing only the
continuity can leave many cyclists uncovered. So we need to ﬁnd the ideal trade-oﬀbetween the
two objectives.
Now we formalize the two objectives from the cyclist’s perspective. For a cyclist m, we use
rm = {i1
m,...,inm
m } to denote the ordered set of road segments (i.e. trajectory) she traveled through,
where i1
m,...,inm
m ∈V and nm is the number of road segments traveled by m (|rm|). The cyclist
receives a positive utility if there is a bike lane on the road segment, i.e. xi = 1. Also, she gets
an additional λ utility if the bike lanes are continuous along an intersection, i.e. xi = xi+1. So her
gained utility of traveling through rm from the bike lane construction plan x is
vx(rm) =
nm
X
k=1
xikm + λ
nm−1
X
k=1
xikmxik+1
m .
Summing over the utility functions of all cyclists gives
X
m∈M
vx(rm) =
X
i∈V
dixi + λ
X
(i,j)∈N
dijxixj,
where di is the number of trajectories going through road segment i and dij is the number of
trajectories going through the intersection (i,j). So P
i∈V dixi stands for the total number of
covered road segments (with bike lanes) weighted by the travel demand, and P
(i,j)∈N dijxixj is the
additional continuity utility for two adjacent bike lanes weighted by the travel demand. Since the
above utility function measures the continuity utility along two adjacent road segments, we call
this utility function the adjacency-continuity (AC) utility function. Note that in our discussion, we
treat each road segment equally regardless of the length for the ease of exposition, and the analysis
extends straightforwardly to consider the impact of road length on the utility.
Based on the AC utility function, we propose a bike lane planning model that takes into account
both the coverage and the continuity requirement. Let xi ∈{0,1} denote the bike lane construction
decision variable: xi = 1 if a bike lane is planned on road segment i and xi = 0 otherwise. We use ci
to denote the construction cost of building a bike lane on road segment i. The bike lane planning
model (BL) can be formulated as an integer program (IP):
max
x
X
i∈V
dixi + λ
X
(i,j)∈N
dijxixj
(BL-AC)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
9
s.t.
X
ei∈V
cixi ≤B,
(1)
xi ∈{0,1},
∀i ∈V.
(2)
The objective function measures the cyclists’ welfare from bike lanes. The parameter λ ≥0 deter-
mines the relative continuity beneﬁt to the cyclist. A higher value of λ indicates a more continuous
bike lane network would be planned. Constraint (1) is the budget constraint that ensures the total
construction cost does not exceed the allowable government budget B. In practice, there may be
other constraints that limit the construction of bike lanes, which can be incorporated as needed.
Furthermore, it is possible that building bike lanes along certain roads may reduce the capacity for
vehicle ﬂows, resulting in worsened traﬃc conditions. To account for this, we can add additional
penalty terms to our objective function. The detailed traﬃc equilibrium modeling is out of the
scope of this paper, and we leave it for future research.
The above model is set up for the scenario when a city is planning bike lanes from scratch.
For cities that already have bike lane networks (such as New York City), the proposed model can
help guide the network expansion: we can ﬁx the decision variables xi = 1 and set ci = 0 for road
segments that already have bike lanes in use, and B is equal to the expansion budget. The obtained
solution will then identify road segments to build new bike lanes.
3.1.1.
Analysis When λ = 0, the problem reduces to the classical Knapsack problem, which is
NP-hard. Otherwise, the problem is a special case of the 0-1 quadratic knapsack problem (QKP),
where the coeﬃcient matrix for the quadratic terms have a sparse structure. If dij is separable
and can be decomposed as dij = ˜di ˜dj, then the objective function is referred to as the half-product
function. The maximization of the half-product function over a knapsack polytope is known to
admit a Fully Polynomial-Time Approximation Scheme (FPTAS). However, no FPTAS is available
for the general non-separable objective function.
Nevertheless, similar to the general QKP, it can be shown that the objective function with dij ≥0
is supermodular.
Lemma 1. When λ ≥0 and dij ≥0 for all (i,j) ∈N, the objective function of BL-AC is super-
modular.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

10
Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
The proofs of Lemma 1 and other results in this section are presented in the online appendix.
The supermodularity result implies that the problem can be solved eﬃciently without the budget
constraint. So we can adopt the Lagrangian relaxation methodology to relax the budget constraint.
The resulting Lagrangian dual is given as
min
u≥0 Φ(u),
(3)
where
Φ(u) = max
xi∈{0,1}
X
i∈V
dixi + λ
X
(i,j)∈N
dijxixj −u(
X
i∈V
cixi −B).
(4)
Here Φ(u) is the Lagrangian relaxation of BL-AC for dual variable u ≥0. Based on the result of
Gallo and Simeone (1989) and Chaillou et al. (1989), Φ(u) can be solved in polynomial time.
Proposition 1. When λ ≥0 and dij ≥0 for all (i,j) ∈N, the Lagrangian dual of BL-AC can
be solved in polynomial time.
More speciﬁcally, one can show that the Lagrangian dual is a piece-wise linear convex function
with at most |V | break points, and each Φ(u) is equivalent to a maximum ﬂow problem (Chaillou
et al. 1989). There are other Lagrangian relaxation methods for QKP that rely on relaxing diﬀerent
sets of constraints, we refer readers to Pisinger (2007) for an extensive review. Since the Lagrangian
dual only provides an upper bound, we may still need to perform branch and bound to get an
exact solution. Alternatively, we can get an equivalent mixed integer linear programming (MILP)
formulation to BL-AC.
3.1.2.
MILP Formulation Although the objective function of BL-AC is nonlinear, we can
linearize the product terms in BL-AC by replacing xixj with yij, and derive the following MILP
formulation for bike lane planning:
max
x
X
i∈V
dixi + λ
X
(i,j)∈N
dijyij
(BL-AC-MILP)
s.t.
yij ≥xi + xj −1,
∀(i,j) ∈N,
(5)
yij ≤xi,
∀(i,j) ∈N,
(6)
yij ≤xj,
∀(i,j) ∈N,
(7)
X
i∈V
cixi ≤B,
(8)
0 ≤yij ≤1,
∀(i,j) ∈N,
(9)
xi ∈{0,1},
∀i ∈V.
(10)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
11
Constraints (5)-(7) ensure that yij = 1 if xi = xj = 1 and 0 otherwise. Constraints (5) are redundant
when dij’s are nonnegative. BL-AC-MILP is ready to be solved using oﬀ-the-shelf solvers such as
Gurobi and CPLEX.
3.2.
General Utility Functions
The AC utility function assumes the continuity utility only applies to two adjacent road segments.
However, to the cyclists, their utility may depend on the size (length) of continuous bike lanes,
which the AC utility function can not capture. It is often the case that a longer continuous bike
lane is preferable to a few shorter continuous bike lanes. On the other hand, the bike lane network
obtained using the AC utility function may consist of many relatively short bike lanes since only
pair-wise continuity is rewarded. The following example illustrates the case where the AC utility
may fail to reﬂect the actual utility from cyclists.
Example 1. Consider a cyclist riding through r = {1,2,3,4,5} and two bike lane construction
plans, namely A and B: plan A builds bike lanes on {1,2,4,5} and plan B builds on {1,2,3,5}.
Under the AC utility function, the cyclist’s utility from both plans are the same: 4 + 2λ. However,
plan B may be more preferable to the cyclist if the marginal beneﬁt from the continuity is increasing
in the size of continuous bike lanes.
Hence, in this section, we discuss a more general class of cyclist utility functions with the con-
sideration of continuity beyond adjacency. Given a trajectory r and a bike lane construction plan
x, let Sx(r) denote the set of subsets of maximal continuous road segments with bike lanes on r.
For instance, if r = {1,2,3,4,5} and bike lanes are constructed on {1,3,4,5} (x1 = x3 = x4 = x5 = 1
and x2 = 0), then Sx(r) = {{1},{3,4,5}}. We deﬁne a general utility function as
vx(r) =
X
s∈Sx(r)
f(|s|),
(11)
where f(·) is an increasing function. Under the adjacency-continuity utility function, f(|s|) =
|s| + λ(|s| −1) = (λ + 1)|s| −λ, which is an aﬃne function of |s|. Our deﬁnition also includes the
score function used by Bao et al. (2017) as a special case, in which f(|s|) = |s|α|s| with α ≥1. We
will refer to the bike lane planning model with the general utility function as BL-GU. Although
maximizing the general utility function is often challenging due to the nonlinear structure, we how
that the utility function (11) has a desirable structure when f(·) is further assumed to be convex.
Theorem 1. If f(·) is an increasing convex function, vx(r) deﬁned in (11) is supermodular.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

12
Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
The convexity assumption about f(·) is consistent with the notion that cyclists receive addition-
ally more beneﬁts by riding through more continuous bike lanes. For example, utility functions such
as the ones with f(|s|) = |s|α|s| (α > 1) are supermodular. With supermodular utility functions,
the general utility maximization problem over the budget constraint has a polynomial-time solv-
able Lagrangian dual problem (as formalized in the online appendix). However, diﬀerent from the
adjacency-continuity utility function, each iteration of the Lagrangian relaxation under the general
utility function is not equivalent to a maximum ﬂow problem. Instead, we can use a general super-
modular maximization oracle such as Fujishige’s minimum-norm-point algorithm (Fujishige 2005).
Then the computational performance of solving the Lagrangian dual problem heavily depends
on the eﬃciency of the supermodular maximization oracle. In our case, the minimum-norm-point
algorithm is not computationally eﬃcient.
Nevertheless, the bike lane planning problem with the general utility function (11) can be formu-
lated as an MILP. The MILP formulation is attainable without assuming f(·) is convex. Speciﬁcally,
the general utility function can be represented as
vx(r) =
X
l∈L(r)
βl
Y
i∈l
xi
(12)
with properly chosen coeﬃcients βl, where L(r) is deﬁned to include all the possible subsets of con-
tinuous road segments on r. Each element l ∈L is a subset of continuous road segments. Here L(r) is
diﬀerent from Sx(r) in the sense that L(r) is independent of x. For instance, given r = {1,2,3}, then
L(r) = {{1},{2},{3},{1,2},{2,3},{1,2,3}} and vx(r) = β1x1 + β2x2 + β3x3 + β1,2x1x2 + β2,3x2x3 +
β1,2,3x1x2x3, where coeﬃcients β’s can be calculated as
β1 = β2 = β3 = f(1)),
β1,2 = β2,3 = f(2) −2f(1),
β1,2,3 = f(3) −2(f(2) −2f(1)) −3f(1) = f(3) −2f(2) + f(1).
More generally, βl = f(|l|) −2f(|l| −1) + f(|l| −2) for a nonempty l (the proper deﬁnition requires
f(−1) = 0). When f(·) is an increasing convex function, all β’s are nonnegative. We can further
extend the analysis to account for heterogeneous road lengths. If the utility depends on the riding
distance, the | · | function in (11) can be interpreted as the total length function for a given subset
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
13
of continuous road segments. The corresponding representation of vx(r) can be found in the online
appendix.
Because function (12) only involves product terms with binary variables, we can linearize them
to get an MILP in a similar manner to BL-AC-MILP. We call this formulation BL-GU-MILP.
max
x
X
m∈M
X
l∈L(rm)
βlyl
(BL-GU-MILP)
s.t.
yl ≥
X
i∈l
xi −(|l| −1),
∀l ∈L(rm),m ∈M,
(13)
yl ≤xi,
∀i ∈l,l ∈L(rm),m ∈M,
(14)
X
i∈V
cixi ≤B,
(15)
0 ≤yl ≤1,
∀l ∈L(rm),m ∈M,
(16)
xi ∈{0,1},
∀i ∈V.
(17)
Again, constraints (13) are not necessary if β’s are nonnegative. The number of constraints (14)
may be intimidating, but we can get a simple reduction by utilizing the nested structure of l.
For l ∈L(r) with |l| > 2, two subsets, l−and l−, can be obtained by removing the ﬁrst and the
last road segment of l, respectively. Since l−,l−∈L(r), we can apply two constraints yl ≤yl−and
yl ≤yl−instead of constraints (14). For example, given l = {1,2,3,4}, we can use l−= {2,3,4} and
l−= {1,2,3}. After the reduction, the constraint matrix of BL-GU-MILP boils down to a totally
unimodular matrix along with a budget constraint. Consequently, BL-GU-MILP with the relaxed
budget constraint can be solved as a linear program (LP). We provide a detailed proof in the online
appendix.
Regarding the size of BL-GU-MILP, both the number of continuous variables and the number
of constraints in BL-GU-MILP are O(min{|M|N 2
e ,|L(V )|}), where Ne is the size of the longest
trajectory (in terms of the number of road segments). Although |M| can be arbitrarily large, L(V ),
the set of all possible continuous road segments on the entire road network, is limited. In practice,
many trajectories are similar so the actual number of variables and constraints is limited.
3.2.1.
A Lagrangian Relaxation Based Algorithm. Solving BL-GU-MILP directly via
commercial MILP solvers can be challenging due to the large number of variables and constraints
involved in practical applications. Given that the Lagrangian relaxation subproblem of BL-GU-
MILP by relaxing the budget constraint can be solved as an LP, we propose a simple and eﬃcient
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

14
Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
Lagrangian relaxation based algorithm (Algorithm 1) to solve the large-scale bike lane planning
problem under the general supermodular utility functions. Following the notations in Section 3.1,
u is the dual variable of the budget constraint and Φ(u) is the dual objective function. For the
ease of exposition, we use S(x) to denote the objective function of BL-GU-MILP, c(x) for the
construction cost (= P
i∈V cixi), x(u) for the maximizer of the Lagrangian relaxation at u, and
g(u) = −(c(x) −B) for the subgradient. Furthermore, let e = (1,...,1) ∈R|V | denote the vector of
all ones, which corresponds to the decision of constructing bike lanes on all road segments.
Algorithm 1 GU-Lag: Lagrangian Relaxation Heuristic for BL-GU-MILP
Input: tolerance level ϵ > 0.
1: Initialize u′ = 0 and u′′ = maxi
S(e)
ci . Correspondingly, x(u′) = e, x(u′′) = 0, and so g(u′) =
−(c(e) −B) and g(u′′) = B.
2: Calculate u∗= S(x(u′′))−S(x(u′))
c(x(u′′))−c(x(u′)) , and solve for x(u∗) with LP.
3: while |Φ(u∗) −(Φ(u′′) + (u∗−u′′)g(u′′))|/Φ(u∗) > ϵ do
4:
Set u′′ = u∗if c(x(u∗)) > B and u′ = u∗otherwise;
5:
Update u∗= S(x(u′′))−S(x(u′))
c(x(u′′))−c(x(u′)) , and solve for x(u∗) with LP.
6: end while
7: if c(x(u∗)) = B then
8:
return x(u∗);
9: else
10:
Set up a new BL-GU-MILP by removing variables xi for i ∈{j ∈V : xj(u∗) = 0} and yl for
l ∈{l′ ∈{L(rm)}m∈M : ∃i ∈l′,xi(u∗) = 0}; solve this BL-GU-MILP and return the solution.
11: end if
Algorithm 1 consists of two main parts. In the ﬁrst part (steps 2-6), we solve the Lagrangian dual
of BL-GU-MILP (after relaxing the budget constraint) with an outer approximation algorithm.
The outer approximation algorithm maintains a lower limit u′ and an upper limit u′′ for the optimal
dual solution such that g(u′) < 0 and g(u′′) ≥0. Then the function Ψu′,u′′(u) = max{Φ(u′) + (u −
u′)g(u′),Φ(u′′) + (u −u′′)g(u′′)} is an outer approximation of Φ(u) (note that Φ(·) is a convex
piecewise linear function). Observe that Ψu′,u′′(u) has a minimizer of u∗= [(Φ(u′′) −u′′g(u′′)) −
(Φ(u′) −u′′g(u′))]/(g(u′) −g(u′′)) = [S(x(u′′)) −S(x(u′))]/(c(x(u′′)) −c(x(u′))), and we use it to
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
15
update the lower/upper limit. Because Φ(u) has at most |V | break points, this outer approximation
algorithm terminates with at most |V | + 1 iterations (Gallo and Simeone 1989). At termination,
we obtain u∗and x(u∗), which are the optimal dual solution and its corresponding primal solution,
respectively. If the solution x(u∗) satisﬁes the budget constraint at equality, then it is also optimal
to BL-GU-MILP; otherwise we select road segments from the subset V (u∗) = {i ∈V : xi(u∗) = 1}
by solving a new MILP, as presented in step 10 of the algorithm. Because V (u∗) is smaller than V
(especially when B is not so large), the new MILP involves much fewer variables and can be solved
more eﬃciently (in our numerical tests the number of binary variables and continuous variables can
be reduced by 81.5% and 82.8% on average, respectively). We provide more detailed computational
results of this algorithm in Section 4.
3.3.
Bike Lane Planning with Route Choices
Up till now our model makes no assumptions about cyclists’ responsive behaviors to the bike
lane construction plan. The aforementioned models maximize the cyclists’ utility assuming their
route choices are ﬁxed (their trajectories will not be impacted by the constructed bike lanes). This
assumption may not be valid if cyclists update their route choices based on the constructed bike
lanes. Because the utility from riding through a route is inﬂuenced by the constructed bike lanes,
cyclists may choose to take a diﬀerent route than the observed trajectory if more bike lanes are
constructed along that route.
To account for cyclists’ route choices, we assume for a cyclist m riding from i ∈V to j ∈V ,
she can choose from a set of candidate routes/trajectories Cm = {r1
m,...,rtm
m }, where each route
starts with i and ends with j. In addition to the bike lane utility, cyclists’ evaluation of a route
also depends on the travel time, slope, and other physical characteristics. So we add to the utility
function an exogenous disutility term ¯v(r) that mainly captures the travel time cost of route r.
Given a bike lane construction plan x, cyclist m chooses the route r ∈Cm with probability pmr
according to some choice model. Then the objective of the bike lane planning problem is
max
x
X
m∈M
X
r∈Cm
Dmpmr(vx(r) −¯v(r)),
(18)
where Dm is the aggregated demand of cyclist m (after aggregating over origin-destinations). Note
that the above model does not require bike trajectories as direct inputs. Instead, only origin-
destination demand data is required to set up the model. However, the trajectory data is essential
to correctly calibrating the utility functions vx(r) and ¯v(r) with a choice model (Khatri et al. 2016).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

16
Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
The bike route choice is often modeled using the Multinomial Logit model (MNL) (Hood et al.
2011, Khatri et al. 2016). Under the MNL model, the choice probability pmr is given by
pmr =
exp(vx(r) −¯v(r))
P
r′∈Cm exp(vx(r′) −¯v(r′)).
(19)
Because many alternative routes have overlapping road segments, the assumption of irrelevant
alternatives may not be satisﬁed. To relieve this concern, a correction term called Path Size factor
(PS) can be added, e.g., see Broach et al. (2012). This correction term can be calculated beforehand
and is independent of the bike lane decision, thus the structure of pmr remains the same.
The consequent bike planning problem is similar to an assortment optimization problem as
decisions in both problems shape the choice probabilities. However, while the assortment decision
inﬂuences the choice probabilities by altering the choice set, the bike lane construction decision
transforms the choice probabilities by changing the utility values. That being said, the choice set in
our problem is invariant to the decision variables, which is a critical diﬀerence between our problem
and the assortment optimization problem. Furthermore, unlike the assortment optimization where
the marginal proﬁt of each product is exogenously given, the “proﬁt” from bike lanes vx(r) depends
on the decision variables. Hence problem (18) also shares a similar structure to the joint assortment-
pricing optimization problem. However, the decisions here are binary and the analysis in the pricing
literature can not carry on.
To tackle the above challenges, we propose to solve the bike lane planning problem with cyclists’
route choices as a bilevel program, where cyclists are viewed as followers who make route choices
after observing the bike lane decisions. Equation (19) can be viewed as the solution to a lower-level
(follower) equilibrium problem. Speciﬁcally, this equation can be derived by solving the following
convex optimization problem:
min
p
X
m∈M
X
r∈Cm

pmr lnpmr + pmr (¯v(r) −vx(r))

(LL)
s.t.
X
r∈Cm
pmr = 1, ∀m ∈M,
(20)
pmr ≥0, ∀m ∈M,r ∈Cm.
(21)
To see this, ﬁrst note that the optimal solution to (LL) must be positive, then let γ denote the
dual variable of constraint (20). The optimality condition is
lnpmr + 1 + ¯v(r) −vx(r) = γm, ∀r ∈Cm,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
17
which leads to pmr = exp(vx(r)−¯v(r))/exp(1−γm). Combining with Equation (20), we obtain that
pmr =
exp(vx(r) −¯v(r))
P
r′∈Cm exp(vx(r′) −¯v(r′)).
Therefore, the original bike lane planning model can be reformulated as a bilevel program with
the lower-level problem (LL). Because (LL) is convex, we can borrow the ideas from convex bilevel
programming to solve the resulting bike lane planning model.
Motivated by Dan and Marcotte (2019), we devise a linear approximation approach that approx-
imates the convex parts in the objective function of (LL) by piecewise linear functions. Speciﬁcally,
we sample from [0,1] K points {p1,p2,...,pK} such that pi < pj for all i < j. Then the piecewise
linear approximation of pmr lnpmr takes the form of
p(lnpk + 1) −pk,
∀k = 1,...,K.
Therefore, we obtain the linear approximation of (LL) as
min
p,ω
X
m∈M
X
r∈Cm

ωmr + pmr (¯v(r) −vx(r))

(LL-Lin)
s.t.
X
r∈Cm
pmr = 1, ∀m ∈M,
(22)
ωmr ≥pmr(lnpk + 1) −pk,
∀m ∈M,r ∈Cm,k = 1,...,K,
(23)
pmr ≥0, ∀m ∈M,r ∈Cm,
(24)
where variables ωmr are introduced to represent the linear approximation.
Next, we can replace (LL) in the bike lane planning problem by optimality condition constraints
associated with (LL-Lin), i.e., primal/dual feasibility and complementary slackness constraints.
The resulting single-level bike lane planning model with route choices is given as follows:
max
x,p,ω,γ,ϱ
X
m∈M
X
r∈Cm
Dmpmr(vx(r) −¯v(r))
s.t.
(22) −(24)
γm −
K
X
k=1
ϱmrk ≤¯v(r) −vx(r), ∀m ∈M,r ∈Cm,
(25)
K
X
k=1
ϱmrk = 1, ∀m ∈M,r ∈Cm,
(26)
ϱmrk ≥0, ∀m ∈M,r ∈Cm,k = 1,...K,
(27)
X
m∈M
X
r∈Cm

ωmr + pmr (¯v(r) −vx(r))

=
X
m∈M
γm −
X
m∈M
X
r∈Cm
K
X
k=1
pk,ϱmrk
(28)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

18
Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
where γm, ϱmrk are the dual variables of constraints (22) and (23), respectively. Constraints (25)-
(27) are the dual feasible constraints. Constraint (28) enforces the equivalence between the primal
objective value and the dual objective value, which replaces the complementary slackness con-
straints. This replacement leads to better empirical computational performance as it avoids the
use of big M and additional binary variables, which would otherwise be required in linearizing
the complementary slackness constraints. Observing that vx(r) is a sum of binary variables, we
introduce ϕmr = pmrvx(r) with ζmrl and
ϕmr =
X
l∈L(r)
βlζmrl, ∀m ∈M,r ∈Cm,
(29)
ζmrl ≤pmr,
∀m ∈M,r ∈Cm,l ∈L(r),
(30)
ζmrl ≤yl,
∀m ∈M,r ∈Cm,l ∈L(r).
(31)
Because the objective is maximizing cyclists’ utility, the above constraints will make sure ζmrl =
pmryl. Therefore, the bike lane planning model with route choices has been formulated as an MILP.
The performance of our linear approximation approach depends on the linear approximation
accuracy. We prove that this approach is asymptotically exact when K increases, as indicated in
the following result.
Proposition 2. The approximation error of the objective function (18) with (LL-Lin) is O( 1
K ).
4.
A Real-World Case Study
We apply the proposed models and algorithms to a real-world trajectory data set. First, we describe
the data set and present its summary statistics. Then we discuss the computational performance
and solution quality of the proposed algorithms. Lastly, we compare the bike lane construction plans
generated by diﬀerent models, with and without consideration of cyclists’ route choice models.
4.1.
Data Description
We obtain a GPS bike trajectory data set via our collaboration with a major bike-sharing company
operating in Zhuhai. Zhuhai is a medium-size city of China with a population of 1.67 million,
where both station-based and dock-less bike-sharing systems have been deployed. We collected bike
trajectories in the central urban area of Zhuhai from our partner bike-sharing company from March
2017 until February 2018. Between Aug 2017 and Feb 2018, the ridership shrank signiﬁcantly as the
company shifted its operational focus. Therefore, we decided to only keep the data from March-July
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
19
2017. Note that there were two other dock-less bike-sharing platforms operating in Zhuhai during
the collection period, and the demand was split between these platforms. Although the competing
platforms had similar business models and bike designs, it is possible that diﬀerent operators split
up the market regionally. Without access to other operators’ data, we can not identify the potential
bias, and our case study is based solely on the data from our partner company. The city planners
are advised to collect data from all operators to reduce the bias from the regional competition.
The data set is also subject to bike availability and infrastructure biases. The observed demand is
censored as potential ride demand may be lost due to the lack of available bikes or safe bike infras-
tructure in the neighborhood. To alleviate the availability bias, we apply a decensoring approach
to reconstruct the true demand. To uncover the lost demand due to missing infrastructure, we can
potentially combine the observed demand data with user click data (on mobile apps) and survey
data to understand the riders’ behaviors and preferences (on safe infrastructure). We will leave
this as a future research direction.
The obtained trajectories are mapped to the road network extracted from OpenStreetMap (Geo-
fabrik 2018)2. Each trajectory contains a timestamp that indicates the start time of a trip and a
series of GPS coordinates that were recorded every 5 seconds. After removing trajectories that are
shorter than one minute, there are 109,640 bike trajectories in total.
Data Decensoring Our original trajectory data is subject to the censoring bias from stock-
out events, e.g., potential riders can not fulﬁll their demand if the neighborhood area has no
bikes available. To address this issue, we follow the idea from O’Mahony and Shmoys (2015) to
decensor the trip demand and the corresponding trajectory data. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst identify the
stock-out events from the observed stock evolution in each neighborhood, and then compute the
average demand conditional on that there are no stock-outs for each neighborhood. Afterward,
the trajectory data is reweighted to be aligned with the conditional average demand. We provide
additional details about the decensoring procedure in the online appendix.
Summary Statistics and Spatial Distribution The average trajectory (trip) duration is
903.6 seconds (15.1 minutes), and the majority of trajectories have a duration shorter than 20
minutes (the detailed distribution of duration is presented in the online appendix). We identify
2 To map the GPS coordinates to the road network, we generate a near table in ArcGIS that ﬁnds the nearest road
segment to a coordinate point. Then each coordinate is associated with a road segment ID.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

20
Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
3,735 road segments from the trajectories in total. The average road segment length is 195.3 m,
and more than 60% of road segments have lengths under 200 meters. Most roads are constructed
in the densely populated areas of Zhuhai, wherein intersections are close to each other.
Figure 1 presents the spatial distribution of the road segment usage frequency (the number of
trajectories passing through the road segment). We observe that the high-usage road segments are
located in a few areas of Zhuhai, which include the major business districts and residential districts
of the city. We also ﬁnd that many popular road segments are spread out over the city, which
implies that merely maximizing the coverage of bike trips would result in a highly discontinuous
bike lane system. More details about the data set can be found in the online appendix.
Figure 1
Road segment usage spatial distribution.
4.2.
Computational Result
We evaluate the computational performance of the proposed models and algorithms on the practical
road network and trajectory data set. For BL-GU, the utility function takes the form of vx(r) =
P
s∈Sx(r) |s|α|s|. We vary the choices of λ, α, B, and the number of sampled trajectories (cyclists) m.
The experiments were conducted with Gurobi (Gurobi Optimization 2018) and ran on a Windows
10 64-bit machine with a Intel Xeon 4114 2.20 GHz processor and 32.0 GB RAM.
BL-AC can be solved by the MILP solver eﬃciently (BL-AC-MILP), and the solution time is
within a minute for the studied road network. Diﬀerent from BL-AC, the general model BL-GU
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
21
often involves a much greater number of variables and solving the corresponding MILP formulation
can be time consuming. We compare here the eﬃciency of the proposed Lagrangian relaxation
based algorithm (denoted as GU-Lag) versus a benchmark greedy heuristic adapted from Bao
et al. (2017), which selects road segments to increase the utility function greedily. The detailed
comparison results are presented in Table 1, in which we test the two algorithms on diﬀerent sets
of trajectories (e.g., m = 2,000 indicates a random sample of 2,000 trajectories). The reported
optimality gap is (ZUB −Z)/ZUB, where ZUB is the upper bound derived from the Lagrangian
dual Φ(u∗) and Z is the objective value of the feasible solution found by the algorithm. The
reported performance is averaged across ﬁve diﬀerent runs. We observe that GU-Lag delivers
superior performance measured by both the running time and solution quality. In particular, the
greedy algorithm does not scale well to the cases with large values of B or α. For example, when
α = 1.1, the greedy algorithm yields poor solutions with huge optimality gaps. By contrast, GU-Lag
admits reliable computational performance across diﬀerent combinations of parameters.
Table 1
Computational performance of GU-Lag and the greedy algorithm (time in seconds)
m = 2,000
m = 4,000
all trajectories
B
α
GU-Lag
Greedy
GU-Lag
Greedy
GU-Lag
Greedy
(km)
Time
Gap
Time
Gap
Time
Gap
Time
Gap
Time
Gap
Time
Gap
30
1.02
28.3
0.03%
156
17.26%
63.2
0.03%
382
17.96%
111
0.02%
767
14.47%
1.05
44.1
0.64%
130
17.98%
216
0.70%
317
21.00%
1,046
0.67%
664
14.06%
1.1
35.4
1.64%
106
58.57%
277
1.59%
257
74.51%
243
2.63%
440
70.93%
50
1.02
28.5
0.02%
437
13.69%
65.5
0.03%
1,007
13.08%
118
0.02%
1,893
12.72%
1.05
48.7
0.24%
360
19.16%
249
0.62%
782
21.19%
361
0.69%
1,545
11.01%
1.1
58.7
0.86%
247
45.30%
146
0.93%
602
59.64%
2,449
2.01%
945
50.28%
100
1.02
35.0
0.03%
1,810
8.15%
78.6
0.02%
4,560
5.13%
164
0.03%
8,626
2.97%
1.05
106
0.05%
1,462
15.14%
207
0.04%
3,318
16.90%
412
0.02%
7,167
14.40%
1.1
112
0.20%
973
26.49%
462
0.13%
2,046
43.85%
202
0.03%
3,852
38.15%
Regarding the bike lane planning model with route choices, we implement the linear approxima-
tion scheme and code the reformulated MILP as the solution approach. We set the approximation
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

22
Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
sample size K = 20, and the termination criteria to be: 1) the optimality gap (MIP gap) is below
0.1%; or 2) the solution time exceeds 6 hours. The computational performance is summarized in
Table 4 of the online appendix. We observe that for practical size problems, a high-quality solution
to the linear approximation model can be found within a few hours. The optimality gap is less
than 0.1% for most instances and is 0.2% in the worst case.
4.3.
Bike Lane Planning Result and Discussion
We compare the bike lane planning solutions generated from BL-AC and BL-GU in terms of
quantitative topological measures as well as visualization results. The setup is the same as in
Section 4.2, and we use the decensored (weighted) trajectories as the model input. We ﬁrst focus
on the case with ﬁxed trajectories and then discuss the route choice model.
4.3.1.
Topological Comparisons. We consider ﬁve relevant topological features: the number
of selected bike lanes (road segments), the number of continuous bike lane pairs, the mean number
of connections per bike lane, the mean size of continuous bike lanes (along trajectories), and the max
size of continuous bike lanes (along trajectories). All the features except the number of selected bike
lanes measure the continuity of bike lanes on the road network. Table 2 presents the comparison
results based on these features for BL-AC and BL-GU for diﬀerent parameter values. Note that
BL-GU with α = 1 is equivalent to GL-AC with λ = 0.
Table 2
Topological comparison of BL-AC and BL-GU with B = 50 km.
# of selected
bike lanes
# of continuous
bike lane pairs
mean # of
connections per
bike lane
mean size of
continuous bike
lanes
max size of
continuous bike
lanes
BL-AC
λ = 0
549
1,716
3.7
3.3
16
λ = 2
472
2,257
5.8
4.7
21
λ = 10
458
2,314
6.1
5.1
26
BL-GU
α = 1.02
515
1,896
4.4
4.4
30
α = 1.05
419
1,916
5.6
5.9
53
α = 1.1
327
1,728
6.6
6.5
65
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
23
We have several observations. First, in BL-AC (and BL-GU), increasing the value of λ (and α)
leads to fewer selected bike lanes. Because when the continuity is assigned a smaller weight, the
planning model tends to build bike lanes on more road segments to boost coverage. However, if
continuity is more preferred and given a higher weight, the model will build bike lanes in a few
areas to make sure the bike lanes are connected to each other. Second, as λ grows in BL-AC, the
number of continuous bike lane pairs increases, which is consistent with the objective function of
BL-AC that maximizes the adjacency continuity. In the meanwhile, the mean size of continuous
bike lanes, the maximum size of continuous bike lanes, and the mean number of connections per
bike lane also increase. By contrast, we observe that the number of continuous bike lane pairs ﬁrst
increases and then decreases while other continuity measures increase with α in BL-GU. This is
because, given a larger value of λ, BL-GU tends to value the size of continuous bike lanes more than
the adjacency continuity. Consequently, longer trajectories will play a bigger role in the planning
decision, and the maximum size of continuous bike lanes grows accordingly. Furthermore, the mean
size of continuous bike lanes from BL-AC is often smaller than that from BL-GU. Even when λ
is very large, BL-AC can not get the same continuity level as BL-GU (in terms of the mean size
of continuous bike lanes). This highlights the limitation of BL-AC, of which the objective function
only considers the pair-wise continuity. BL-GU, however, measures the size of continuous bike lanes
explicitly.
We visualize the bike lane planning results of BL-AC and BL-GU on the road network in Figure
2 and Figure 3, respectively. It can be shown that when λ = 0 (α = 1), the selected bike lanes are
spread out over the city. Consistent with our topological ﬁndings, a large value of λ in BL-AC
induces fewer and more continuous bike lanes. Increasing the value of α in BL-GU has a similar
eﬀect that yields a more continuous bike lane network, as shown in Figure 3a. Diﬀerent from BL-
AC, as indicated by our previous discussion, having a large value of α in BL-GU also tends to select
continuous road segments on the long trajectories, which leads to a diﬀerent bike lane system in
Figure 3b. Interestingly, the selected bike lanes from Figure 3b are mostly aligned with the main
roads of the city road network connecting diﬀerent districts, while the selected bike lanes from
Figure 2b are more along with the secondary roads.
4.3.2.
Coverage-Continuity Trade-Oﬀ. Both BL-AC and BL-GU balance the coverage
objective versus the continuity objective, as reﬂected in their utility functions. When increasing the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

24
Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
(a) λ = 0
(b) λ = 2
Figure 2
Selected bike lanes (in red color) from BL-AC with B = 50 km.
(a) α = 1.02
(b) α = 1.05
Figure 3
Selected bike lanes (in red color) from BL-GU with B = 50 km.
value of λ or α, the bike lane planning model puts more weight on the continuity than the coverage
objective. Table 3 presents the percentage changes of the coverage and continuity measures with
BL-AC (λ = 0) as the baseline. The coverage ratio is calculated as the percentage of trajectories
(sets of road segments) that are covered by bike lanes. Indeed, we observe that both the mean
number of connections per bike lane and mean size of continuous bike lanes grow at the expense
of the coverage ratio. Notably, the BL-GU with α = 1.02 improves the continuity of bike lanes
substantially while only lowering the coverage ratio by 2%.
4.3.3.
Varying the Budget, B. Increasing the budget in BL-AC and BL-GU will improve
both coverage and continuity. Figure 4 illustrates how the coverage ratio and the mean size of
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
25
Table 3
Percentage change in coverage and continuity measures with varying λ and α.
% change in the
coverage ratio
% change in the mean # of
connections per bike lane
% change in the mean size of
continuous bike lanes
BL-AC
λ = 2
-7.15%
56.76%
42.42%
λ = 10
-10.16%
64.86%
54.55%
BL-GU
α = 1.02
-2.26%
18.92%
33.33%
α = 1.05
-20.46%
51.35%
78.79%
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
30
50
100
B
Coverage ratio
Model
BL−AC (λ=0)
BL−AC (λ=2)
BL−GU (α=1.05)
(a) Coverage ratio versus B (km)
3
4
5
6
7
30
50
100
B
Mean size of continuous bike lanes
Model
BL−AC (λ=0)
BL−AC (λ=2)
BL−GU (α=1.05)
(b) Mean size of continuous bike lanes versus B (km)
Figure 4
The impact of B on the coverage ratio and mean size of continuous bike lanes.
continuous bike lanes evolve with the budget value. As B grows, the two measures increase and the
gap between diﬀerent models remains non-negligible. This implies that even when a large budget
is allowed, making a good bike lane planning decision is still critical. Since bike lane construction
is often costly, the city government can perform a comprehensive cost-beneﬁt analysis using the
quantiﬁed measures proposed in this paper.
4.3.4.
Route choice model considerations. The previous discussion ignores the interaction
between bike lane planning and cyclists’ route choices. Here we investigate how the planning result
would change when cyclists update their route choices following the discussion in Section 3.3.
To better illustrate and compare the result, we focus on a subarea of the city (Jida Residential
District), which corresponds to the bottom right area (of Figures 2-3). We call the Google Map
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

26
Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
Directions API (https://developers.google.com/maps/documentation/directions/start) to
generate the candidate routes for each origin-destination pair in the subarea. Hence the choice set
Cm includes both the observed route as well as the routes returned by Google.
The utility function is assumed to take the form of vx(r) −ηLr for a route r, where Lr is the
riding distance (in km) of route r (since travel time is an important factor in cyclists’ choices, see,
e.g., Khatri et al. 2016, Datner et al. 2019). The parameter η measures the disutility per km of
riding distance, which can be estimated following the MNL model. Here we set η = 20 such that
vx(r) is comparable with ηLr
3.
Figure 5 presents the bike lane planning results for BL-GU with route choices (B = 30 and α =
1.02,1.05). We observe that accounting for route choices has a signiﬁcant impact on the resulting
bike lane network. Speciﬁcally, after incorporating the route choice model, the optimal bike lane
network tends to spread out to cover more routes other than the observed ones, which compromises
continuity to some extent. This is because our observed trajectories are very similar for a given
origin-destination pair, and the created choice sets include many alternative routes that are diﬀerent
from the observed ones. Consequently, there are many road segments that belong to multiple
alternative routes (of diﬀerent origin-destination pairs). In the choice based model, these road
segments are likely to be selected against the road segments that only lie on one observed trajectory,
resulting in a more dispersed network. This highlights the importance of understanding cyclists’
routing choices when bike lanes are present (including both coverage and continuity considerations).
Policymakers can employ empirical approaches to understand the behaviors and integrate them
with the analytical models proposed in this paper.
5.
Conclusion
This paper develops a set of novel formulations and algorithms to the bike lane planning problem.
Unlike the previous work that mainly builds on surveys and heuristics, we present a modeling
framework that directly utilizes the GPS bike trajectory data from emerging dock-less bike-sharing
systems. Our model formalizes the main objectives of bike lane planning in view of the cyclists’
utility functions. Depending on the utility function structure, we propose eﬃcient algorithms to
solve the corresponding bike lane planning model. In addition, we develop a route choice based bike
3 It is hard to identify vx(r) from the current data set so we plan to revisit the estimation problem once we collect
new data sets.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
27
(a) Without route choices (α = 1.02)
(b) Route choice based model (α = 1.02)
(c) Without route choices (α = 1.05)
(d) Route choice based model (α = 1.05)
Figure 5
Selected bike lanes from BL-GU with diﬀerent responsive behaviors of cyclists (B = 50 km).
lane planning model that considers the interaction between bike lane network and cyclists’ routing
behaviors. Based on the bilevel program reformulation, we obtain a tractable MILP reformulation.
We demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed models and algorithms on a large-scale real-world
data set. We show how the topology of the bike lane network would change according to the choices
of the utility functions. Last but not least, our results reveal the importance of understanding
cyclists’ route choices to bike lane planning, which is often ignored in the existing literature.
The proposed modeling framework can be generalized to other network planning problems in
smart city operations. For example, as electric vehicles (EVs) become more reliable, charging is
often considered a pain point to EV drivers. In addition to traditional charging stations, charging
lanes have been designed by auto makers and utilities to achieve “charging while driving” in cities
(The Wall Street Journal 2021). Special transmission pads are installed under the roads to realize
wireless charging for moving cars. Our method can be applied to the charging lane deployment
problem given the EV traﬃc data. Another potential application is the regulation of autonomous
vehicles (AVs). Allocating designated lanes to AVs has been proposed to improve throughput in
heavily congested areas (e.g., Mirzaeian et al. 2021). With the help of new data sets collected
from AVs (equipped with advanced sensors), our model can provide guidance on AV lane network
design. In both applications, the tradeoﬀbetween coverage and continuity is prominent.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

28
Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
There are several promising future research directions in bike lane design. First, it would be
interesting to consider the width of bike lanes as another decision dimension in the model. The
width of the bike lanes can impact the interaction between car ﬂows and bike ﬂows, and eventually
change the traﬃc equilibrium of the whole urban environment. Second, since cyclists’ responsive
behaviors are often hard to predict before any bike lane is deployed, the city planning agencies may
dynamically construct bike lanes in the city, e.g., ﬁrst build a few bike lanes to learn the behaviors
and then add more bike lanes. Then the problem becomes a dynamic planning model with behavior
learning. Third, jointly designing bike lanes with other bike facilities such as bike-sharing stations
and parking areas can be of interest to the municipal governments.
References
Afeche, Philipp, Zhe Liu, Costis Maglaras. 2018. Ride-hailing networks with strategic drivers: The impact of
platform control capabilities on performance. Columbia Business School Research Paper (18-19) 18–19.
Bai, Jiaru, Kut C So, Christopher S Tang, Xiqun Chen, Hai Wang. 2019. Coordinating supply and demand
on an on-demand service platform with impatient customers. Manufacturing & Service Operations
Management 21(3) 556–570.
Bao, Jie, Tianfu He, Sijie Ruan, Yanhua Li, Yu Zheng. 2017. Planning bike lanes based on sharing-bikes’
trajectories. Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery
and data mining. ACM, 1377–1386.
Broach, Joseph, Jennifer Dill, John Gliebe. 2012. Where do cyclists ride? a route choice model developed with
revealed preference gps data. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 46(10) 1730–1740.
CBC. 2020. Bike lanes installed on urgent basis across canada during covid-19 pandemic. URL https:
//www.cbc.ca/news/business/bike-lanes-covid-pandemic-canada-1.5598164.
Chaillou, Paul, Pierre Hansen, Yvon Mahieu. 1989. Best network ﬂow bounds for the quadratic knapsack
problem. Combinatorial Optimization. Springer, 225–235.
Chan, Timothy CY, Zuo-Jun Max Shen, Auyon Siddiq. 2017. Robust deﬁbrillator deployment under cardiac
arrest location uncertainty via row-and-column generation. Operations Research 66(2) 358–379.
Chicago
Tribune.
2015.
Build
more
and
better
bike
lanes,
cycling
advo-
cates
urge
chicago.
URL
http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/columnists/
ct-bike-lane-network-getting-around-met-1012-20151011-column.html.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
29
City
of
Copenhagen.
2010.
Copenhagen
city
of
cyclists.
URL
https://web.
archive.org/web/20120929230131/http://www.kk.dk/sitecore/content/Subsites/
CityOfCopenhagen/SubsiteFrontpage/LivingInCopenhagen/CityAndTraffic/~/media/
439FAEB2B21F40D3A0C4B174941E72D3.ashx.
Dan, Teodora, Patrice Marcotte. 2019. Competitive facility location with selﬁsh users and queues. Operations
Research 67(2) 479–497.
Datner, Sharon, Tal Raviv, Michal Tzur, Daniel Chemla. 2019. Setting inventory levels in a bike sharing
network. Transportation Science 53(1) 62–76.
Department
for
Transport,
UK.
2015.
Transport
minister
encourages
people
to
get
on
their
bike
for
cycle
to
work
day.
URL
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/
transport-minister-encourages-people-to-get-on-their-bike-for-cycle-to-work-day.
Dondi, Giulio, Andrea Simone, Claudio Lantieri, Valeria Vignali. 2011. Bike lane design: the context sensitive
approach. Procedia engineering 21 897–906.
Fujishige, Satoru. 2005. Submodular functions and optimization, vol. 58. Elsevier.
Gallo, Giorgio, Bruno Simeone. 1989. On the supermodular knapsack problem. Mathematical Programming
45(1-3) 295–309.
Gao, Fei, Xuanming Su. 2016. Omnichannel retail operations with buy-online-and-pick-up-in-store. Man-
agement Science 63(8) 2478–2492.
Geofabrik. 2018. Openstreetmap china. URL http://download.geofabrik.de/asia/china.html.
Glaeser, Chloe Kim, Marshall Fisher, Xuanming Su. 2019. Optimal retail location: Empirical methodology
and application to practice: Finalist–2017 m&som practice-based research competition. Manufacturing
& Service Operations Management 21(1) 86–102.
Guda, Harish, Upender Subramanian. 2019. Your uber is arriving: Managing on-demand workers through
surge pricing, forecast communication, and worker incentives. Management Science 65(5) 1995–2014.
Harsha, Pavithra, Shivaram Subramanian, Joline Uichanco. 2019. Dynamic pricing of omnichannel invento-
ries: honorable mention—2017 m&som practice-based research competition. Manufacturing & Service
Operations Management 21(1) 47–65.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

30
Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
He, Long, Zhenyu Hu, Meilin Zhang. 2020.
Robust repositioning for vehicle sharing.
Manufacturing &
Service Operations Management 22(2) 241–256.
Hood, Jeﬀrey, Elizabeth Sall, Billy Charlton. 2011. A gps-based bicycle route choice model for san francisco,
california. Transportation letters 3(1) 63–75.
Howard, Charlene, Elizabeth Burns. 2001. Cycling to work in phoenix: route choice, travel behavior, and
commuter characteristics.
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research
Board (1773) 39–46.
Hunt, John Douglas, John E Abraham. 2007. Inﬂuences on bicycle use. Transportation 34(4) 453–470.
Kabra, Ashish, Elena Belavina, Karan Girotra. 2020.
Bike-share systems: Accessibility and availability.
Management Science 66(9) 3803–3824.
Khatri, Ranjit, Christopher R Cherry, Shashi S Nambisan, Lee D Han. 2016.
Modeling route choice of
utilitarian bikeshare users with gps data. Transportation research record 2587(1) 141–149.
Krizek, Kevin J, Rio W Roland. 2005. What is at the end of the road? understanding discontinuities of
on-street bicycle lanes in urban settings. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment
10(1) 55–68.
Lin, Jenn-Rong, Ta-Hui Yang. 2011. Strategic design of public bicycle sharing systems with service level
constraints. Transportation research part E: logistics and transportation review 47(2) 284–294.
Lind, Adam, Jordi Honey-Ros´es, Esteve Corbera. 2020. Rule compliance and desire lines in barcelona’s
cycling network. Transportation Letters 1–10.
Liu, Sheng, Long He, Zuo-Jun Max Shen. 2020. On-time last-mile delivery: Order assignment with travel-time
predictors. Management Science Articles In Advance.
Mak, Ho-Yin. 2020. Enabling smarter cities with operations management. Manufacturing & Service Opera-
tions Management Articles In Advance.
Mirzaeian, Neda, Soo-Haeng Cho, Alan Scheller-Wolf. 2021. A queueing model and analysis for autonomous
vehicles on highways. Management Science 67(5) 2904–2923.
Mobike. 2018. How cycling changes cities. URL https://mobike.com/global/public/Cycling_Changes_
Cities_Mobike.pdf.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
31
O’Mahony, Eoin, David B Shmoys. 2015. Data analysis and optimization for (citi) bike sharing. AAAI .
687–694.
Perakis, Georgia, Melvyn Sim, Qinshen Tang, Peng Xiong. 2018. Joint pricing and production: A fusion of
machine learning and robust optimization. Available at SSRN 3305039.
Pisinger, David. 2007. The quadratic knapsack problem—a survey. Discrete applied mathematics 155(5)
623–648.
Pucker, J. 2001. Cycling safety on bikeways vs. roads. Transportation Quarterly 55(4) 9–11.
Qi, Wei, Lefei Li, Sheng Liu, Zuo-Jun Max Shen. 2018.
Shared mobility for last-mile delivery: design,
operational prescriptions, and environmental impact. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
20(4) 737–751.
Qi, Wei, Zuo-Jun Max Shen. 2019. A smart-city scope of operations management. Production and Operations
Management 28(2) 393–406.
Rybarczyk, Greg, Changshan Wu. 2010. Bicycle facility planning using gis and multi-criteria decision anal-
ysis. Applied Geography 30(2) 282–293.
Sener, Ipek N, Naveen Eluru, Chandra R Bhat. 2009. An analysis of bicycle route choice preferences in
texas, us. Transportation 36(5) 511–539.
Shu, Jia, Mabel C Chou, Qizhang Liu, Chung-Piaw Teo, I-Lin Wang. 2013. Models for eﬀective deployment
and redistribution of bicycles within public bicycle-sharing systems. Operations Research 61(6) 1346–
1359.
Snyder, Lawrence V, Zuo-Jun Max Shen. 2019. Fundamentals of supply chain theory. John Wiley & Sons.
South China Morning Post. 2018.
From coal to cars: Beijing moves up a gear in the war
against
air
pollution.
URL
https://www.scmp.com/news/china/society/article/2131862/
coal-cars-beijing-moves-gear-war-against-air-pollution.
Taylor, Terry A. 2018. On-demand service platforms. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
20(4) 704–720.
The Economist. 2012. Open-air computers. URL https://www.economist.com/special-report/2012/
10/27/open-air-computers.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

32
Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
The New York Times. 2017. No room on a bike rack? not a problem for these smart bikes. URL https:
//www.nytimes.com/2017/08/28/nyregion/bike-sharing-spin-gps-dockless-citi-bike.html.
The New York Times. 2020. Data driving new approaches to transportation. URL https://www.nytimes.
com/2020/02/05/technology/data-micromobility-electric-scooters-mds.html.
The Seattle Times. 2016.
How bicycle lanes are evolving around the world.
URL https://www.
seattletimes.com/life/outdoors/how-bicycle-lanes-are-evolving-around-the-world/.
The
Wall
Street
Journal.
2021.
These
companies
want
to
charge
your
electric
vehicle
as
you
drive.
URL
https://www.wsj.com/articles/
these-companies-want-to-charge-your-electric-vehicle-as-you-drive-11610965800.
United Nations Population Fund. 2018. Urbanization. URL https://www.unfpa.org/urbanization.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2012. American community survey. URL https://factfinder.census.gov/faces/
tableservices/jsf/pages/productview.xhtml?pid=ACS_12_1YR_B08301&prodType=table.
Xinhuanet. 2017. Gov’t platform to monitor bike sharing in hangzhou. URL http://www.xinhuanet.com/
english/2017-12/08/c_136810878.htm.
Zhang, Yiling, Mengshi Lu, Siqian Shen. 2021. On the values of vehicle-to-grid electricity selling in electric
vehicle sharing. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 23(2) 488–507.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
33
Online Appendix
In this online appendix we present the proofs, additional technical results, and details about the data set
and decensoring steps.
Appendix A:
Main proofs
Proof of Lemma 1
Let two sets of road segments A and B satisfy A ⊆B. Consider adding a road segment
k /∈B to the two sets. In terms of the ﬁrst part of the objective function, the change caused by adding k
is the same for A and B because of linearity. For the second part, as λ ≥0 and dij ≥0 for all (i,j) ∈N,
the value of the second part can only increase with the newly added k. Since B can only contain more road
segments than A, there are potentially more neighbors of k that are included in B. As a result, the increase
of objective value caused by adding k is greater for B than A.
□
Proof of Proposition 1
Directly from Lemma 1, BL-AC is essentially a supermodular knapsack problem,
which admits a polynomial-time solvable Lagrangian dual, as shown in Theorem 16 of Gallo and Simeone
(1989).
□
Proof of Theorem 1
Consider two bike lane construction plans, i.e. sets of road segments A and B to build
bike lanes satisfying A ⊆B, and a road segment i /∈B. We prove the supermularity of vx(r) by conditioning
on i: 1) If i /∈r, then building a bike lane on i does not impact the value of vx(r), so vA∪{i}(r) = vA(r) and
vB∪{i}(r) = vB(r). 2) If i ∈r, let i −1 and i + 1 denote the road segment visited before and after i on the
trajectory r, respectively (when i is at the head or the tail of the trajectory, either i −1 or i + 1 is empty
and our analysis can be easily extended). We further consider the following three scenarios:
• If neither i−1 nor i+1 belongs to A, then vA∪{i}(r)−vA(r) = f(1). Next, if either i−1 or i+1 belongs
to B, we have vB∪{i}(r) −vB(r) = f(|s| + 1) −f(|s|) for some s ∈SB(r) (note that s must include either i −1
or i + 1, thus |s| ≥1). By the assumption that f(·) is increasing convex, we have f(|s| + 1) −f(|s|) ≥f(1).
If both i −1 and i + 1 belong to B, then vB∪{i}(r) −vB(r) = f(|s−1| + |s+1| + 1) −f(|s−1|) −f(|s+1|), where
s−1,s+1 ∈SB(r) and i−1 ∈s−1, i+1 ∈s+1. Because f(·) is increasing convex, f(|s−1|+|s+1|+1)−f(|s−1|)−
f(|s+1|) ≥f(|s−1| +|s+1| +1)−f(|s−1| +|s+1|) ≥f(1). Otherwise, when neither i−1 nor i+1 belongs to B,
vB∪{i}(r) −vB(r) = f(1) = vA∪{i}(r) −vA(r). Hence vB∪{i}(r) −vB(r) ≥vA∪{i}(r) −vA(r).
• If either i −1 or i + 1 belongs to A, then vA∪{i}(r) −vA(r) = f(|s| + 1) −f(|s|) for some s ∈SA(r).
Similarly, for B, as A ⊆B we have: i) when either i−1 or i+1 belongs to B, vB∪{i}(r)−vB(r) = f(|s′|+1)−
f(|s′|) for some s′ ∈SB(r); ii) when both i −1 and i + 1 belong to B, vB∪{i}(r) −vB(r) = f(|s′
−1| + |s′
+1| +
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

34
Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
1) −f(|s′
−1|) −f(|s′
+1|), where s′
−1,s′
+1 ∈SB(r) and i −1 ∈s′
−1, i + 1 ∈s′
+1. Because A ⊆B, we can verify
that |s′| ≥|s| and |s′
−1| + |s′
+1| > |s|. As f(·) is increasing convex, vB∪{i}(r) −vB(r) ≥vA∪{i}(r) −vA(r) .
• If both i −1 and i + 1 belong to A, vA∪{i}(r) −vA(r) = f(|s−1| + |s+1| + 1) −f(|s−1|) −f(|s+1|), where
s−1,s+1 ∈SA(r) and i −1 ∈s−1, i + 1 ∈s+1. Similarly, both i −1 and i + 1 must belong to B as well,
hence vB∪{i}(r) −vB(r) = f(|s′
−1| + |s′
+1| + 1) −f(|s′
−1|) −f(|s′
+1|), where s′
−1,s′
+1 ∈SB(r) and i −1 ∈s′
−1,
i + 1 ∈s′
+1. Because A ⊆B, |s′
−1| ≥|s−1| and |s′
+1| ≥|s+1|. It follows that |s′
−1| + |s′
+1| ≥|s−1| + |s+1| and
vB∪{i}(r) −vB(r) ≥vA∪{i}(r) −vA(r).
In all the cases we have shown that vB∪{i}(r) −vB(r) ≥vA∪{i}(r) −vA(r) so vx(r) is indeed supermodular.
□
Proof of Proposition 2
Note that the approximation error only comes from the piecewise linear approxi-
mation of function plnp in the lower-level problem (LL). Let p be the solution to (LL) and p′ be the solution
to (LL-Lin) (given decision x). We further use h(·) and h′(·) to denote the objective function of (LL) and
(LL-Lin), respectively. It follows that
∇h(p) = (lnpmr + 1 + vx(r) −¯v(r))mr.
It can be easily veriﬁed that ∇h(p) is strongly monotone with modulus 1 for 0 < p ≤1 (the Jacobian matrix
is positive deﬁnite diagonal, and the smallest possible eigenvalue is 1, see also Dan and Marcotte 2019). From
the deﬁnitions of p and p′, we have
⟨∇h(p),p′ −p⟩≥0, ⟨∇h′(p′),p −p′⟩≥0
⇒⟨∇h′(p′) −∇h(p),p −p′⟩≥0.
By the properties of ∇h(·), it holds that ⟨∇h(p) −∇h(p′),p −p′⟩≥||p −p′||2 (from the Jacobian matrix),
hence
⟨∇h′(p′) −∇h(p′),p −p′⟩≥||p −p′||2.
(32)
Furthermore, the incurred diﬀerence in the objective function of the upper-level problem (18) is
X
m∈M
X
r∈Cm
Dm |(pmr −p′
mr)(vx(r) −¯v(r))| ≤D · V
X
m∈M
X
r∈Cm
|pmr −p′
mr|
≤D · V
p
|M| · |C∗| ||p −p′||
≤D · V
p
|M| · |C∗| ||∇h′(p′) −∇h(p′)||,
(33)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
35
where D = maxm Dm, V = maxx,r |vx(r) −¯v(r)|, and C∗= arg maxm |Cm|. The second inequality fol-
lows directly from the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, and the third inequality is derived by applying the
Cauchy–Schwarz inequality to (32). Next, we bound the gap between ∇h′(p′) and ∇h(p′).
By the construction of h′(·), each component of ∇h′(p′), ∇h′(p′)mr, serves as a piecewise constant approx-
imation of log(pmr). Let the K sampling points {p1,p2,...,pK} satisfy: 1) the samples start from pmin to 1;
and 2) the sample points are chosen such that the constant approximations are vertically equidistant. Then
we have
|∇h′(p′)mr −∇h(p′)mr| ≤
log
1
pmin
K
.
Therefore,
||∇h′(p′) −∇h(p′)|| =
s X
m∈M
X
r∈Cm
|∇h′(p′)mr −∇h(p′)mr|2 ≤
log
1
pmin
p
|M| · |C∗|
K
.
(34)
Combining inequalities (33) and (34) leads to
X
m∈M
X
r∈Cm
Dm |(pmr −p′
mr)(vx(r) −¯v(r))| ≤
D · V · |M| · |C∗|log
1
pmin
K
.
Thus the approximation error of the upper-level objective function (18) is O( 1
K ).
□
Appendix B:
Additional technical results for Section 3
Corollary 1. If f(·) is an increasing convex function, maximizing the utility function vx(r) deﬁned in
(11) over a budget constraint yields a polynomial-time solvable Lagrangian dual.
Proof of Corollary 1
Based on Theorem 1, the utility function vx(r) is supermodular and maximization
of this utility function over a budget constraint is a supermodular knapsack problem, which has a polynomial-
time solvable Lagrangian dual (see Theorem 16 from Gallo and Simeone 1989).
□
Proposition 3. If f(·) is an increasing convex function, BL-GU-MILP with the relaxed budget constraint
has a totally unimodular constraint matrix. Then the corresponding Lagrangian relaxation can be solved as
a linear program (LP).
Proof of Proposition 3
When f(·) is an increasing convex function, the coeﬃcients βl in BL-GU-MILP
are all nonnegative: βl = f(|l|) −2f(|l| −1) + f(|l| −2) = f(|l|) −f(|l| −1) −(f(|l| −1) −f(|l| −2)) ≥0.
Then we can remove constraints (13) from the formulation. The remaining constraints are constraints (14)
and constraints (16) in addition to the budget constraints. Our goal is to prove that the constraint matrix
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

36
Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
consisting of these two types of constraints is totally unimodular. Note that constraints (16) correspond to
an identity matrix and do not aﬀect the totally unimodularity property. Therefore we focus on the matrix of
constraints (14), which we denote by P. With or without using the reduction techniques, each row of P only
includes one 1 and one −1. Then we prove that P T is totally unimodular because it satisﬁes: 1) Each entry
of P T must be -1, 0, or +1, i.e., P T
ij ∈{−1,0,+1}; 2) Each column contains at most two non-zero entries; 3)
There exists a partition (M1,M2) of the set M of the set of rows of P T such that each column j containing
two non-zero entries satisﬁes P
i∈M1 P T
ij −P
i∈M2 P T
ij = 0. It is obvious that conditions 1) and 2) hold for P T,
and the third condition is satisﬁed by using the partition (P T,∅). It follows that P is totally unimodular
because the transpose of a totally unimodular matrix is also totally unimodular. As a result, the Lagrangian
relaxation of BL-GU-MILP with relaxed budget constraint can be solved as an LP.
□
Proposition 3 has several important implications. First, it presents an alternative way to prove the
polynomial-time solvability result of the Lagrangian dual in Corollary 1. Since LP is polynomial-time solvable
and the Lagrangial dual has a limited number of break points, the Lagrangian dual can be solved in polyno-
mial time. Second, instead of resorting to a general supermodular maximization oracle, the Lagrangian dual
can now be solved with a linear programming solver, which tends to deliver signiﬁcantly better computational
performance.
The calculation of β’s in the representation (12). Let denote the trajectory r as {i1,...,in},
the coeﬃcients βl in Equation (12) can be calculated as follows: (i) When l = {i}, βl = f(|l|) = f(|{i}|);
(ii) When l = {ij,ij+1}, βl = f(|l|) −f(|{ij}|) −f(|{ij+1}|) = f(|{ij,ij+1}|) −f(|{ij}|) −f(|{ij+1}|); (iii)
When l = {ij,ij+1,...,ij+k} (k ≥2), βl = f(|l|) −f(|{ij,ij+1,...,ij+k−1}|) −f(|{ij+1,ij+2,...,ij+k}|) +
f(|{ij+1,...,ij+k−1}|). Hence, in the example where r = {1,2,3}, we would have
β1 = f(|{1}|), β2 = f(|{2}|), β3 = f(|{3}|),
β1,2 = f(|{1,2}|) −f(|{1}|) −f(|{2}|), β2,3 = f(|{2,3}|) −f(|{2}|) −f(|{3}|),
β1,2,3 = f(|{1,2,3}|) −f(|{1,2}|) −f(|{2,3}|) + f(|{2}|).
Now we show the above choices of β’s are valid. For any trajectory r = {i1,...,in} (n ∈N+), the chosen β’s
will need to satisfy
f(|r|) = βr +
2
X
j=1
βij,...,in+j−2 +
3
X
j=1
βij,...,in+j−3 + ··· +
n
X
j=1
βij.
(35)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
37
We will prove this by induction. It is easy to verify that the calculation presented in Section (3.2) satisfy
the above equations for trajectories with cardinality less or equal to three. Now we assume equations (35)
are satisﬁed with βl = f(|l|) −f(|{ij,ij+1,...,ij+k−1}|) −f(|{ij+1,ij+2,...,ij+k}|) + f(|{ij+1,...,ij+k−1}|)
for trajectories with cardinality less or equal to n −1. Then for a trajectory r = {i1,...,in}, we have
βr +
2
X
j=1
βij,...,in+j−2 +
3
X
j=1
βij,...,in+j−3 + ··· +
n
X
j=1
βij
=βr +
"
βi2,...,in +
3
X
j=2
βij,...,in+j−3 + ··· +
n
X
j=2
βij
#
+ βi1,...,in−1 + βi1,...,in−2 + ··· + βi1
=βr + f(|{i2,...,in}|) + βi1,...,in−1 + βi1,...,in−2 + ··· + βi1,
(36)
where the last equality follows by our inductive assumption. Furthermore, note that
βi1 + βi1,i2 + ··· + βi1,...,in−2 + βi1,...,in−1 =f(|{i1,i2}|) −f(|{i2}|) + βi1,i2,i3 + ··· + βi1,...,in−1
=f(|{i1,i2,i3}|) −f(|{i2,i3}|) + ··· + βi1,...,in−1
...
=f(|{i1,...,in−1}) −f(|{i2,...,in−1}),
(37)
where the equalities hold by our choices of β’s. Combining the equations (36) and (37) gives
βr +
2
X
j=1
βij,...,in+j−2 +
3
X
j=1
βij,...,in+j−3 +···+
n
X
j=1
βij = βr +f(|{i2,...,in}|)+f(|{i1,...,in−1})−f(|{i2,...,in−1}) = f(|r|).
Hence equations (35) hold for trajectories with cardinality equals to n.
□
Appendix C:
More details about the trajectory Data
Figure 1 presents the distribution of bike trajectory (trip) duration from our data set. Figure 7a depicts the
distribution of bike trips across diﬀerent hours of a day. It can be observed that there are two demand peaks:
one occurs in the morning (7:00 to 9:00 am) and the other occurs in the evening (5:00 to 8:00 pm). These
two peaks correspond to the commute rush hours. We also note that the bike trip demand falls gradually
after the evening peak and still remains substantial until midnight, which can be attributed to people who
engage in leisure activities after work. Figure 7b shows the distribution of bike trajectories across diﬀerent
days of a week. We observe that the bike trip demand is almost stable throughout the week while there are
two small peaks on Mondays and Saturdays.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

38
Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
Figure 6
Bike trajectory duration distribution.
(a) Hour distribution
(b) Weekday distribution
Figure 7
Bike trajectory temporal distribution.
Appendix D:
The detailed decensoring procedure for bike trajectory data
To minimize the seasonality eﬀect and mitigate the risk of demand pattern shifts, we pick a two-week period
with stable and high ride demand to perform decensoring operations. Because there are no docked stations
and riders can ﬁnd available bikes in their neighborhood with smart phones, we split the urban area into
small neighborhoods using the geohash script, which is a widely used geocode system4. Each neighborhood
is about 153 meters by 153 meters according to geohash of length 7. Given a day, we track the evolution of
4 For
more
information
about
the
geohash
system,
see
https://www.movable-type.co.uk/scripts/
geohash.html.
It
is
used
by
mobility
service
providers
such
as
Lyft:
https://eng.lyft.com/
matchmaking-in-lyft-line-691a1a32a008
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262

Liu, Shen, and Ji: Bike Lane Planning
39
available bikes (e.g., the stock level) every 10 minutes in each neighborhood. Then we identify the stock-out
events from the stock evolution. A trajectory originating from neighborhood i in period j would be assigned
a weight equals to 1/(# of days with no stock-outs in period j from neighborhood i). After aggregation the
weighted trajectory data essentially represents the average ride demand conditional on there are no stock-
outs, which shares a similar rationale of O’Mahony and Shmoys (2015). The observations in the selected
two-week period cover 49% of the (neighborhood, period) pairs recorded in the focal operations period. We
highlight that when the data is relatively stable across months, more observations should be used to recover
the true demand distribution.
Appendix E:
Computational results for BL-GU
We only present the result for BL-GU as it is more diﬃcult to solve than BL-AC in general.
Table 4
Computational performance of the MILP reformulation of BL-GU with route choices (time in seconds)
m = 2,000
m = 4,000
all od-pairs
B (km)
α
Time
Gap
Time
Gap
Time
Gap
30
1.02
2,060
0.09%
5,437
0.09%
8,299
0.09%
1.05
2,658
0.09%
4,664
0.09%
6,657
0.09%
1.1
6,834
0.07%
16,761
0.10%
21,600
0.12%
50
1.02
1,597
0.09%
5,233
0.09%
21,600
0.11%
1.05
2,708
0.09%
4,182
0.08%
14,651
0.07%
1.1
5,428
0.09%
16,806
0.10%
21,600
0.20%
100
1.02
586
0.07%
3,970
0.08%
8,328
0.07%
1.05
1,683
0.08%
2,245
0.08%
6,622
0.06%
1.1
3,055
0.08%
12,970
0.08%
19,110
0.09%
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3453262