TITLE: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care with Application to Diabetes Mellitus Type II
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2021.0251
---

Accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
manuscript MSOM-21-251
Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
With Application to Diabetes Mellitus Type II
Mathias Kraus
FAU Erlangen-N¨urnberg, Lange Gasse 20, 90403 N¨urnberg, Germany, mathias.kraus@fau.de,
Stefan Feuerriegel
Munich Center for Machine Learning & LMU Munich, Geschwister-Scholl-Platz 1, 80539 Munich, Germany, feuerriegel@lmu.de,
Maytal Saar-Tsechansky
Department of Information, Risk and Operations Management, McCombs School of Business, University of Texas at Austin, 2110
Speedway, B6000 Austin, TX 78712, USA, maytal@mail.utexas.edu,
Problem Definition. Increasing costs of healthcare highlight the importance of effective disease prevention.
However, decision models for allocating preventive care are lacking.
Methodology/Results. In this paper, we develop a data-driven decision model for determining a cost-
effective allocation of preventive treatments to patients at risk. Specifically, we combine counterfactual
inference, machine learning, and optimization techniques to build a scalable decision model that can exploit
high-dimensional medical data, such as the data found in modern electronic health records. Our decision
model is evaluated based on electronic health records from 89,191 prediabetic patients. We compare the
allocation of preventive treatments (metformin) prescribed by our data-driven decision model with that of
current practice. We find that if our approach is applied to the U. S. population, it can yield annual savings
of $1.1 billion. Finally, we analyze the cost-effectiveness under varying budget levels.
Managerial Implications. Our work supports decision-making in health management, with the goal of
achieving effective disease prevention at lower costs. Importantly, our decision model is generic and can thus
be used for effective allocation of preventive care for other preventable diseases.
Key words : preventive care; disease prevention; healthcare analytics; machine learning
History :
1.
Introduction
Millions of people die each year of diseases that could have been prevented. Common examples of
preventable diseases include certain infectious diseases, such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV);
respiratory diseases, such as pneumonia; and cardiovascular diseases, such as diabetes mellitus. Over
one quarter of all deaths in OECD countries are premature and could have been avoided through better
preventive efforts (OECD 2019). Furthermore, the prevalence of preventable diseases is likely to rise
1
arXiv:2308.06959v1 [cs.LG] 14 Aug 2023

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
2
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
as a result of current lifestyle choices (World Health Organization 2018c). Preventable diseases reduce
individuals’ quality of life and also entail substantial costs. The cost of treating preventable diseases in
the United States now totals $730.4 billion annually, which corresponds to 27.0 % of total healthcare
spending (Bolnick et al. 2020).
Preventive care aims at managing risk factors before the onset of a disease (World Health Orga-
nization 2018b). A prominent example of preventive care for diabetes mellitus type II is metformin,
which is a preventive drug aimed at controlling impaired glucose tolerance (Knowler et al. 2002). How-
ever, many effective preventive treatments are often costly, and the effectiveness varies by risk factors
(Zhou et al. 2020). Consequently, healthcare managers face the challenge of cost-effective allocation of
potentially limited or costly preventive treatments to patients. Indeed, with the growing importance
of preventive care, effective allocation is essential in improving the quality of lives of billions of people
worldwide. However, decision models for informing allocations in preventive care are lacking.
Prior research has considered decision support for health management with the goal of achieving
effective healthcare at lower costs. For instance, research has proposed optimizing periodic checkups
(e. g., Ayvaci et al. 2012, 2017, Kamalzadeh et al. 2021, Liu et al. 2018), as well as the selection
of treatment designs (e. g., Ibrahim et al. 2016). However, these works use generative models that
are computationally prohibitive in the analysis of high-dimensional data to accurately predict future
disease onsets. In contrast, discriminative machine learning models effectively scale to large datasets
involving millions of observations and thousands of variables (e. g., Choi et al. 2017), which is common
in modern healthcare settings. However, these models have not been adapted for allocation problems
among patient populations in preventive care; this adaption is the objective of our work.
Our work contributes to health management by proposing a data-driven decision model that provides
decision support for allocation problems in preventive care. For this aim, we combine counterfactual
inference, machine learning, and optimization techniques to exploit high-dimensional medical data
from electronic health records (EHRs). To our knowledge, this work contributes along three paths:
(i) we propose a data-driven decision model for allocating preventive treatments; (ii) we demonstrate
the value of scalable machine learning from rich, high-dimensional data in electronic health records for
preventive care; and (iii) we establish the (cost-)effectiveness of data-driven allocations.
We evaluate our decision model for allocating preventive treatments for the case of diabetes mellitus
type II. Diabetes is a chronic disease that can significantly reduce patients’ quality of life and that
comes with substantial long-term costs to treat its many complications (Lee et al. 2018). For our
evaluation, we use EHRs from 89,191 patients with a prediabetic condition and analyze the allocation
of preventive care in a dynamic setting spanning a period of 10 years. A simple, yet effective preventive

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
3
treatment for diabetes type II is metformin. However, applying metformin comes at a cost, thus raising
the question of what a cost-effective allocation is in practice. We compare our decision model for
preventive care allocation against a clinical baseline that stratifies preventive care according to the
Framingham diabetes risk score. We find that our decision model prevents over 25 % more cases of
diabetes mellitus type II. Further, we find that, if our approach is applied to the U. S. population, it
can yield annual savings of $1.1 billion because of a more effective allocation.
Our decision model is directly relevant for healthcare organizations aimed at allocating preven-
tive care under resource constraints. This is the case for vertically integrated healthcare organiza-
tions (IHOs) worldwide, where hospitals and health insurances exchange patient data with the aim of
achieving better coordination, efficiency, and quality of care for patients (World Health Organization
2016). Examples of countries with IHOs are Israel, Singapore, many European countries, and partially
the U. S. through health maintenance organizations (World Health Organization 2016).
Our work promises to have a direct effect on both practice and research. For healthcare practice,
our research demonstrates that using a data-driven decision model based on scalable machine learning
and EHRs can substantially improve the performance of preventive care programs and reduce the risk
of disease onset. As such, our decision model supports health management in primary preventive care
by offering a cost-effective path toward reduced health-related spending while improving patients’ out-
comes and quality of life. For research, our new decision model, incorporating counterfactual inference,
offers a widely applicable solution for allocation problems in preventive care and for other allocation
problems that require data-driven approaches in management science.
The remainder of our paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of preventive
care, revealing a scarcity of decision models for this purpose. Section 3 details our research setting,
which focuses on allocating preventive treatments to patients at risk of developing diabetes mellitus
type II. In Section 4, we develop our data-driven decision model, combining counterfactual inference,
machine learning, and optimization techniques to determine a cost-effective allocation of preventive
care to patients at risk. We report our empirical results in Section 5. Finally, we discuss implications
of our work for health management in Section 6.
2.
Background
Our work builds on literature in the fields of preventive care, machine learning, counterfactual inference,
and resource allocation in health management. We review this work in the following sections.
2.1.
Preventive Care
Preventive care refers to measures taken to reduce people’s risk of developing a disease or suffering
from a severe course of illness. Preventive care can be divided into three categories: primary prevention,

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
4
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
secondary prevention, and tertiary prevention (Goetzel 2009). Primary prevention aims at averting
the onset of a disease altogether. Examples include vaccines, smoking cessation, weight loss, and other
measures that address risk factors through the promotion of good health (World Health Organization
2018c). Secondary prevention focuses on the early stages of a disease after its onset. Here, the objective
is to prevent a disease from developing into a critical or acute condition. Such approaches include
screening (e. g., mammography) and other forms of early diagnosis. Tertiary prevention targets the
progression associated with the disease. Here, the aim is to reduce the severity of symptoms. Examples
include mental, physical, and social rehabilitation, such as in cardiac rehabilitation programs. In this
work, we focus on primary prevention—specifically, on preventing patients from developing diabetes
mellitus type II.
Preventive care can be a valuable economic investment; when it is provided early to patients, it can
reduce the need for more expensive treatment after the onset of an illness (World Health Organization
2018b). Of note, the main aim in preventive care is to improve the health benefit for patients. Hence,
optimization is measured against the overall health outcomes relative to costs, rather than against
cost minimization alone, for ethical and legal reasons (see Gold et al. (1996), National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence (2015), and World Health Organization (2018b)). However, not all patients
provided with preventive care would necessarily have developed the disease in question. Given this
premise, the cost-effectiveness of preventive care depends on two factors: (1) the expected number
of people for whom diseases could be prevented relative to the population at risk and (2) the cost
of providing preventive treatments. Preventive treatments, such as metformin, can have low cost-
effectiveness in cases where only a very small proportion of the population would have become ill
without preventive care (Cohen et al. 2008). In this case, targeting patients who are at high risk of
developing a disease and for whom there is a large differential effectiveness of preventive efforts could
potentially improve the overall cost-effectiveness.
Previous research has assessed the cost-effectiveness of preventive care by comparing different pre-
ventive treatments or by comparing a preventive treatment against a placebo group (e. g., Breeze
et al. 2017, Cohen et al. 2008, Zhou et al. 2020); but in these cases, the allocation rule was ex ante
given and thus not the focus of the study. For instance, in the context of prediabetic patients, the
cost-effectiveness of preventive care (here, lifestyle coaching) was studied by allocating the preventive
treatment to patients aged 40–65, with a body mass index (BMI) higher than 35 and with blood
glucose higher than 6 % (Breeze et al. 2017). However, the allocation rule used to determine when a
prediabetic patient would receive the preventive care was devised by expert assessments and was not
optimized through rigorous modeling. To fill this void, our work proposes a data-driven decision model.

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
5
2.2.
Machine Learning in Health Management
Machine learning is widely used to predict health outcomes and to adapt the decision-making in health
management accordingly. Given the extensive body of research, we provide only a short summary in
the following paragraphs and point toward Keskinocak and Savva (2020) for a detailed overview. In
health operations, predictions make widespread use of EHRs as input. EHRs have emerged as part
of the recent digitalization of healthcare operations (KC et al. 2020); they encode a digital version of
a patient’s health trajectory, including a variety of risk variables, such as socio-demographics, body
measurements (e. g., blood pressure), lab measurements, disease codes, and drug prescriptions. As
a result, EHRs allow researchers to describe between-patient heterogeneity in health outcomes and,
thereby, also enable a personalized view of a patient’s individualized risk profile. Based on EHRs,
health management can then predict different health outcomes. Examples of outcomes include the
30-day readmission risk as a performance indicator in hospital operations (e. g., Bardhan et al. 2015),
mortality (e. g., Bjarnadottir et al. 2018), the onset of a disease (Choi et al. 2017), or complications
(e. g., Schallmoser et al. 2023). In this work, we use machine learning for predicting a patient’s risk of
developing diabetes mellitus type II.
To predict the onset of diseases, research has used a variety of machine learning methods (e. g., Allam
et al. 2021, Bertsimas et al. 2016, Zueger et al. 2022). Examples include lasso (Tibshirani 1996), ridge
regression (Hoerl and Kennard 1970), random forests (Breiman 2001), neural networks (LeCun et al.
2015), and gradient boosted decision trees (Friedman 2001). Throughout this work, we use gradient
boosted decision trees as our main model because this machine learning model has shown promising
results in other management applications (e. g., Glaeser et al. 2019, Senoner et al. 2022). We later
assess other machine learning methods as part of a sensitivity analysis.
2.3.
Counterfactual Inference in Health Management
In health management, counterfactual inference is used to estimate the effects of different treatment
options on health outcomes. Such estimates, in turn, inform the treatment choice, so that the treatment
with the best expected effect on a patient’s trajectory is chosen (Bica et al. 2021). The gold standard for
estimating treatment effects is a randomized controlled trial, although it also has several shortcomings
(Imbens and Rubin 2015). First, treatment effects may vary across patient populations, meaning that
randomized controlled trials must be tailored to the patient population of interest. Second, randomized
controlled trials are costly. Because of the immense upfront costs, performing such trials was not a viable
course of action for our partnering IHO. Third, randomized controlled trials typically build on only two
(or very few) treatment arms. As such, the estimated treatment effects typically are population-wide
averages, with little personalization. Recent works (e. g., Bica et al. 2021) offer a remedy for these

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
6
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
shortcomings by using machine learning for estimating treatment effects from observational data, such
as EHRs.
Previous works in counterfactual inference have pursued varying objectives (Guo et al. 2020). On
the one hand are studies that make inferences at the group level and thus estimate average treatment
effects (e.g., Frauen et al. 2023a, van der Laan and Rubin 2006, Shi et al. 2019). On the other hand are
studies that estimate heterogeneous treatment effects based on a patient’s risk score (Bica et al. 2021).
Here, the assumption is that there is no global treatment effect of similar size for all patients but a
differential treatment effectiveness—that is a heterogeneous treatment effect that varies across patients.
As such, these studies may consider heterogeneous treatment effects related to, for instance, age, sex,
or other risk scores. In the case of diabetes, preventive treatments such as metformin are known to have
a differential effectiveness (Knowler et al. 2002). Thus, in our work, we use counterfactual inference to
estimate heterogeneous treatment effects of metformin from EHRs.
We build on a recent method called causal forest (Wager and Athey 2018). The causal forest is a
non-parametric method that extends the widely used random forest algorithm, by Breiman (2001),
for estimating heterogeneous treatment effects. Causal forests inherit several favorable properties from
random forests in that they are expressive, require little tuning, and have a low risk of overfitting,
thus offering a robust performance in practice. Further, under common mathematical assumptions,
causal forests have been shown to be pointwise consistent for the true treatment effect and thus lead
to provably valid inferences (Wager and Athey 2018).
2.4.
Resource Allocation in Health Management
Research on health management examines allocation problems related to various resources. For an
overview, we refer to Dai and Tayur (2020) and Keskinocak and Savva (2020). Examples include
beds (e. g., Helm et al. 2011), drugs (Khademi et al. 2015), aid (Jakubik and Feuerriegel 2022), and
medical devices (Deo and Sohoni 2015). Other studies have used data-driven modeling for scheduling
the admission of patients, so that available resources are used effectively but without exceeding surge
capacities (e. g., May et al. 2011). Importantly, such problems generally optimize allocations according
to patient needs (rather than focusing only on monetary aspects), so that providing (cost-)effective
care is intended to improve patient health and not only to minimize costs. Analogously, we also focus
on (cost-)effective care.
Allocation decisions have been extensively modeled in the context of secondary prevention, with the
goal of optimizing screening or check-up policies. Examples include biopsy referral (Ayvaci et al. 2017),
colonoscopy screening (Erenay et al. 2014), mammography (Cevik et al. 2018), and post-discharge
monitoring (Helm et al. 2016, Liu et al. 2018). In this work, the main question is the optimal timing

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
7
for patient examinations (Kamalzadeh et al. 2021). Therefore, Markov decision processes or variants
thereof typically are used in which (i) decisions for an individual patient are made and (ii) where states
represent the patient’s current health status. However, our problem setup for primary preventive care
is different in both aspects: (i) decisions are made for a cross-sectional sample (i.e., determining which
patients out of a cohort should be selected for treatment), and (ii) the future health trajectory should
be used for decision-making, which requires machine learning models for prediction.
Ethical and legal frameworks around the world mandate whom to allocate treatments, including
preventive treatments, given scarce resources (e. g., National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
2015). Accordingly, the core principle for health management is to focus on the best health benefit
for patients, relative to the estimated costs, as opposed to prioritizing cost minimization alone. Hence,
decisions in medicine are mainly benchmarked according to their cost-effectiveness (Gold et al. 1996):
Decision models should optimize against the largest improvement in health outcomes, given budget
constraints (typically set by policymakers or healthcare organizations).
3.
Research Setting
3.1.
The Case of Diabetes Prevention
Our research aims at allocation of preventive care to patients at risk of developing diabetes mellitus
type II. Diabetes mellitus is a chronic condition and, although widespread, is often preventable. In
the United States, 88 million adults, or 34.5 % of the adult population, are classified as prediabetic
and thus at risk of developing diabetes if it is not prevented (U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention 2020). According to the World Health Organization (2018a), diabetes mellitus not only is
among the top 10 leading causes of death, but also can seriously imped the quality of life for patients
in the long run. However, the risk of diabetes mellitus can be effectively mitigated with preventive
treatments, including the drug metformin (Knowler et al. 2002). Once metformin has been prescribed
and then taken for diabetes prevention, patients generally must remain on the medication for the rest
of their lives.
In this research, we partnered with a national health insurer from Israel serving more than 1.1 million
patients. In Israel, health insurers are vertically integrated healthcare organizations, which enables
our partnering health insurer to have direct access to a wealth of medical data from EHRs, as well
as to work collaboratively with healthcare providers to deliver care to patients. We later discuss the
applicability of our model to vertically integrated healthcare organizations from other countries (see
Section 6) and, for that reason, refer to our partner company simply as IHO.
Our IHO has set a goal of improving primary preventive care for patients at risk of developing
diabetes mellitus type II to mitigate individuals’ risk of onset. For this, we develop and evaluate
a data-driven allocation of preventive care using metformin. Formally, the IHO is confronted by a

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
8
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
decision-making problem: which of its patients i = 1,...,N should be enrolled in preventive treatment
(ti = 1) and which ones should not (ti = 0)? If patient i is enrolled in preventive care, her risk of
developing diabetes is reduced by a treatment effect, which we later estimate from historical EHRs.
However, the IHO has limited the overall budget available for preventive care to k ≤N treatments.
For primary prevention, the objective is to find a cost-effective allocation—that is, to maximize the
number of prevented disease onsets, given a particular budget (World Health Organization 2018b).
As with other research in health management (e. g., Ayvaci et al. 2012, Helm et al. 2011, 2016), the
question is how to offer effective care at lower costs and thus to allocate resources for improving patient
outcomes (as opposed to a goal of pure cost minimization, without considering health outcomes).
Therefore, the objective in our work is to identify an allocation of preventive treatments to patients
that maximizes the expected number of prevented onsets. To support the IHO in this task, we develop
a data-driven decision model.
In addition to looking at the number of prevented disease onsets, we also report costs, thus allowing
us to study cost-effectiveness. Note that we intentionally refrain from having only a cost minimization
focus because of ethical and legal principles (National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 2015)
and, as is common in medicine (Gold et al. 1996), we focus on cost-effectiveness. Depending on the
success of preventive treatments, the IHO incurs different costs. A preventive treatment incurs an
annual cost of Cprevent per patient. By enrolling all N patients in the preventive program, the IHO
would experience a total cost of N ×Cprevent, which generally would exceed available financial resources.
If the disease is not prevented, the IHO faces annual costs of treating a patient with diabetes, Cdiab,
which depends both on the age of the patient and on any concomitant diseases caused by the developed
diabetes. The cost for treatment usually is substantially larger than the cost for prevention—that is,
Cdiab ≫Cprevent. However, not all prediabetic patients actually develop diabetes; hence, the cost Cdiab
occurs only for a subset of the overall study population.
3.2.
Electronic Health Records
Our work builds on an extensive longitudinal dataset. Specifically, our partnering IHO provided us
with the EHRs of all patients classified as prediabetic and thus at risk of developing diabetes mellitus
type II. Our sample comprises 89,191 patients and exhibits considerable between-patient heterogeneity
in risk profiles. For purposes of this research, access to the EHRs was granted for the time period of
2003 through 2012.
For each patient, the EHRs comprise variables from the following categories: (i) socio-demographics;
(ii) body measurements; (iii) lab tests; (iv) disease codes; and (v) drug prescriptions. Disease codes
provide data on other co-occurring conditions and are encoded based on the International Classification

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
9
of Diseases (ICD) system of diagnostic codes. Table 1 shows examples for each category (i)–(v). These
variables present potential risk factors that describe heterogeneity in disease onsets among patients,
and we thus leverage them later for machine learning.
Table 1
Variables in our dataset.
Category
Number of variables
Examples
Socio-demographics
2
Age, sex
Body measurements
5
Height, weight, body mass index,
systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure
Lab tests
100
HbA1c, HDL-cholesterol, fasting glucose, . . .
Disease codes
100
Hypertensive diseases, disorders of metabolism, . . .
Drug prescriptions
100
Metformin, tritace, cardiloc, . . .
Overall (=input for our decision model)
307
Patients were classified into (a) prediabetic or (b) diabetic as follows: (a) Prediabetic is the pre-
cursor stage before the onset of diabetes mellitus type II. Following established criteria, patients are
considered prediabetic when the fasting glucose level is between 6.1 mmol/L and 6.9 mmol/L (World
Health Organization 2006). The IHO used this inclusion criterion when compiling our patient data.
(b) Diabetic corresponds to a fasting glucose level above 6.9 mmol/L (World Health Organization
2006). Later, during machine learning, our target variable denotes whether a patient has transitioned
from prediabetic to diabetic (= 1) or not (= 0).
3.3.
Summary Statistics
Our dataset comprises 89,191 prediabetic patients. Of these patients, 77,036 remain prediabetic
throughout the study period, whereas 12,155 develop diabetes mellitus. Hence, only 13.62 % of patients
transition from prediabetes to diabetes during the study period. Table 2 lists summary statistics for
key variables for the first record of each patient in our dataset. In our study population, the average
age is 47.07, and the average body mass index (BMI) is 29.05. These observations are in line with ear-
lier findings from medical research, according to which (pre-)diabetes is especially prevalent in elderly
patients and patients with high BMI (U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2020).
Further differences arise when comparing patients who developed diabetes vs. patients who stayed
prediabetic. We find that the average age is lower among patients who did not experience onset (46.84
years), compared to patients who developed diabetes (50.62 years). Similarly, the average BMI is larger
for patients who developed diabetes (30.52 kg/m2) compared to patients who stayed prediabetic (28.95
kg/m2). Both observations are in line with medical research, which has identified age and BMI as
important risk factors for the onset of diabetes (U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2020).

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
10
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
Table 2
Summary statistics of example variables (for the first record of each patient in
our dataset).
Variable
Overall
Without onset
With onset
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Age (in years)
47.07
17.93
46.84
18.32
50.62
9.28
Sex (0=male; 1=female)
0.51
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.54
0.50
Systolic blood pressure (in mm Hg)
122.84
17.11
122.54
16.51
127.43
24.01
Diastolic blood pressure (in mm Hg)
77.26
12.78
77.16
12.93
78.80
10.12
Body mass index (in kg/m2)
29.05
5.64
28.95
5.62
30.52
5.73
HbA1c (in %)
5.56
0.36
5.51
0.34
5.87
0.34
SD = standard deviation
3.4.
Current Practice in Diabetes Prevention
In clinical practice, preventive care for diabetes is allocated as follows (Breeze et al. 2017): First, a
health practitioner determines the patient’s risk profile ri and then calculates a risk scoring to assess
her risk of developing diabetes. In practice, the risk score is computed using a simple charting tool
(e. g., the Framingham diabetes risk score). Such charting tools have an obvious limitation in that only
a few variables from the risk profile are considered; a holistic assessment with complete EHRs is absent.
Afterward, the patient is enrolled in preventive care if the risk score exceeds a certain threshold ψ, i. e.,
ti =

1,
if
ri ≥ψ,
0,
otherwise.
(1)
The threshold ψ is typically determined by experts in the field. To this end, we compute the threshold
ψ for enrolling patients in preventive care, such that the number of patients enrolled is set to k per
year—that is, the k patients with the highest risk scores are eligible for the preventive care program.
In our evaluation, the Framingham diabetes risk score typically is used to assess diabetes risk. The
Framingham diabetes risk score was developed by the U. S. National Institutes of Health (Wilson
et al. 2007) and represents the quasi-standard in clinical practice (Long and Fox 2016). The score is
calculated using the charting tool shown in Table 3. Note that only a few risk factors are considered
(i. e., fasting glucose level, BMI, cholesterol, parental history of diabetes mellitus, triglycerides, and
blood pressure); all other variables from a patient’s EHR are ignored. The failure to account for other
variables thereby points toward opportunities for more effective risk assessment and prevention.
Table 3
Calculation of the Framingham diabetes risk score.
Risk factor
Score
If fasting glucose level between 100 and 126mg/dL
+10
If body mass index between 25.0 and 29.9
+2
If body mass index ≥30.0
+5
If cholesterol level < 40 mg/dL in men or < +50 mg/dL in women
+5
If parental history of diabetes mellitus
+3
If triglyceride level ≥150 mg/dL
+3
If blood pressure ≥130/85 mm Hg or receiving treatment
+2
Framingham diabetes risk score ri
P

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
11
3.5.
Performance Metrics
We measure the operational performance of preventive care in such a way that the measure captures
current practice at our IHO. Recall that preventive care aims to maximize the success of its preventive
efforts (World Health Organization 2018b). In other words, given a certain budget, the expected number
of disease onsets should be minimized. In medical decision-making, this measure is the quasi-standard
in which outcome optimization is prioritized over cost minimization alone because of ethical and legal
principles (National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 2015). In accordance with this standard,
the expected number of prevented onsets represents our primary evaluation metric. Because health
management also is interested in the economic value of implementing preventive care programs, we
further report the projected cost savings but emphasize their secondary role.
We evaluate the performance of our decision model in a dynamic setting. Formally, we apply our
decision model over a horizon of l = 1,...,L time steps (here, years 2003 through 2012). Each year
allows access only to historical data to assign patients to preventive care. We denote that patient i was
treated in year l by ti,l = 1. The preventive treatment of patient i reduces the risk of developing diabetes
in the future—that is, the treatment effect is γi,l. However, the outcomes of preventive treatment are
not observable until months after the treatment. Let yi,l+1 = 1 denote the presence of diabetes for
patient i in the following year, whereas yi,l+1 = 0 describes the absence of diabetes. To be realistic, we
consider censoring analogously to how it occurs in practice. On the one hand, we account for patients
who have died and exclude them from being targeted for preventive treatment. On the other hand,
we do not discount patients where a follow-up was missed (and also do not exclude them from being
targeted for a preventive treatment) because these patients can incur a cost in subsequent years. To
this end, our performance metrics are as follows:
Prevented onsets. We evaluate our decision model by computing the expected number of prevented
onsets, which directly corresponds to the objective of our decision model and of preventive care in
practice. Hence, it is our prime metric of interest. The expected number of prevented onsets in the
patient cohort amounts to
PreventedOnsets = 1
L
L
X
l=1
N
X
i=1
γi,l ti,l yi,l+1,
(2)
where γi,l ti,l yi,l+1 gives the expected reduction in the risk of a diabetes onset for patient i in year l,
which is then averaged over the complete study horizon 1,...,L.
Cost savings. We calculate the expected cost savings of our allocation for our IHO as follows.
The cost savings depend on the cost of enrolling patients in preventive care and the cost of treating
diabetes. A preventive treatment (here: metformin) incurs an annual cost of Cprevent = $1,380 per
patient (Gu et al. 2015). After a potential onset, the annual cost of treating diabetes depends on the

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
12
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
age of the patient, as well as additional comorbid conditions—that is, Cdiab = C0 +C1 +...+C5, where
C0 describes base costs that depend on the age of the patient, and C1,...,C5 describe costs that can
arise from comorbid conditions. In our case, we use C0 =
$15,000
1+exp(−age/10) for base costs and consider
five common comorbid conditions of diabetes: acute myocardial infarction (C1 = $5,000), intracerebral
hemorrhage (C2 = $5,000), acquired hypothyroidism (C3 = $5,000), angina pectoris (C4 = $15,000),
and heart failure (C5 = $15,000).
We then calculate the expected cost for patient i in year l when being treated using
C(t)
i,l = yi,l+1 (1 −γi,l)Cdiab + Cprevent,
(3)
and when not being treated using
C(nt)
i,l
= yi,l+1 Cdiab.
(4)
By summing over the patients and the study horizon, we compute the cost savings as
CostSavings =
L
X
l=1
N
X
i=1
C(nt)
i,l
|
{z
}
Cost for no
preventive treatments
−
L
X
l=1
N
X
i=1
ti,l C(t)
i,l + (1 −ti,l)C(nt)
i,l
|
{z
}
Cost when allocating
patients to preventive program
.
(5)
Of note, some costs are ongoing and thus are incurred beyond the study horizon covered by our dataset.
To account for this extension, we calculate the expected costs using an expected lifetime of 75 (Tachkov
et al. 2020). For older patients, we take into account a minimum of three additional years of life, and
for younger patients, we consider a maximum of ten years. In doing so, we reflect that the longer
remaining lifetime of younger patients means that diabetes is likely to lead to larger overall costs for
treatment.
4.
Model Development
4.1.
Problem Formulation
The objective of our partnering IHO is to dynamically allocate preventive care to patients so as to
maximize the number of prevented cases of diabetes mellitus, given the available budget. Let i =
1,...,N+ refer to the customers of the IHO—that is, to the patients in our dataset. The plus symbol
indicates that some of the patients have already received preventive treatments, whereas the majority
has not been treated. Let the first N < N+ customers denote patients who have not been treated yet
and therefore potentially benefit from being enrolled in the preventive care program. Simply enrolling
all patients in preventive care is not economically feasible because of budget constraints. Instead, in
each year l = 1,...,L, a decision must be made as to whether preventive care is warranted to patient
i (ti,l = 1) or is not warranted (ti,l = 0).
For the purpose of decision-making, our IHO has access to additional information on patients’ risk
profiles through their EHR. EHR systems, similar to the one providing data for our evaluations, are

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
13
used worldwide, thus ensuring the broad applicability of our model. For simplicity, we refer to the
variables in the EHR by xi,l ∈Rn, i = 1,...,N+, l = 1,...,L. These variables encode the heterogeneity
among patients and are used as predictors in our data-driven approach. Specifically, we use the EHRs
for identifying patients at risk of developing diabetes, which is relevant in clinical practice because
only a small subset of prediabetic patients actually develop diabetes. Hence, by accurately identifying
patients who will experience an onset, preventive treatments can be allocated to patients who would
most benefit from them.
The objective is to maximize the expected effect of the preventive treatments. In other words, the
expected number of disease onsets should be minimized within our time frame. As such, the decision
of whether to enroll a specific patient in preventive care is driven only by the expected risk reduction
of the preventive treatment for the patient (Paulweber et al. 2010). IHOs also might have to consider
additional budget restrictions—not at the patient level, but at the population level. Hence, the decision
problem is given by
min
t1,1,...,t1,L
...
tN,1,...,tN,L
L
X
l=1
 N
X
i=1
ti,l E[y |xi,l,ti,l = 1] +
N
X
i=1
(1 −ti,l)E[y |xi,l,ti,l = 0]
!
(6a)
s.t.
N
X
i=1
ti,l ≤k,
∀l ∈{1,...,L},
(6b)
ti,l ∈{0,1},
∀i ∈{1,...,N}∀l ∈{1,...,L}.
(6c)
Equation (6a) encodes the objective whereby the expected number of disease onsets is minimized.
Here, the expectation E[y |xi,l,ti,l = 1] denotes the probability of developing diabetes, conditional on
the EHR of patient i in year l and in the presence of preventive treatment (ti,l = 1). The expectation
E[y |xi,l,ti,l = 0] denotes the probability of an onset, conditional on the EHR of patient i in absence of
a preventive treatment (ti,l = 0). Neither expectation is known, implying that the treatment effect must
be estimated from data—for example, from electronic health records or, alternatively, by conducting
randomized controlled trials. Equation (6b) introduces a budget constraint on the number of patients
that can be enrolled in preventive care, thus allowing the treatment of k patients per year. Equation (6c)
makes this problem an integer problem.
Our decision problem focuses on the expected number of diabetes onsets, similar to clinical practice;
therefore, the cost of preventive treatments is not considered. Nevertheless, we can show that mini-
mizing onsets also minimizes the overall cost of treatment (comprising both preventive treatments and
treatments after a possible onset of the disease), given mild assumptions. This mathematical property
is of direct relevance for health management because it underscores that improving the effectiveness of
preventive care through better allocations also has financial value for healthcare organizations.

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
14
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
Proposition 1 (Link of prevented diseases to cost minimization).
Let t1,l,...,t1,L,...,tN,1,...,tN,L be a solution to the decision problem in Equation (6), let Cprevent
denote the costs for prescribing preventive treatments, and let Cdiab denote the costs for treating the
disease after onset. Then, if
ti,l (Cdiab E[y |xi,l,ti,l = 1] + Cprevent) ≤ti,l (Cdiab E[y |xi,l,ti,l = 0]),
∀i ∈{1,...,N}∀l ∈{1,...,L},
(7)
it follows that the solution t1,l,...,t1,L,...,tN,1,...,tN,L also minimizes costs for the health insurer.
Proof
See Appendix A.
4.2.
Proposed Decision Model
We develop a data-driven decision model for allocating preventive care—that is, a decision model
that receives EHRs from patients as input and for which the output is a cost-effective allocation
of preventive care resources (Figure 1). Our decision model uses a combination of causal inference,
machine learning, and optimization, structured in three consecutive stages: (1) The first stage uses
counterfactual inference to estimate the effectiveness of preventive treatments using EHRs (i. e., the
heterogeneous treatment effect). Thus, we quantify how the personalized diabetes risk of a patient
with a specific risk profile changes when a preventive treatment is prescribed. Here, we serve needs in
practice, where the treatment effectiveness is often unknown but must be estimated from EHRs. Later,
we also discuss an alternative approach that can be used when the treatment effect is known (e. g.,
from a randomized controlled trial). (2) The second stage estimates the personalized risk of a diabetes
onset for an individual patient. Specifically, we apply machine learning to a patient’s EHR to predict
the probability of an onset. (3) The third stage uses the predicted risk together with the treatment
effect to optimize the allocation of preventive care to patients under the given budget constraint.
Figure 1
Decision model for data-driven allocations of preventive care.
4.2.1.
Stage 1: Estimating the Treatment Effect. In the first stage, we estimate the hetero-
geneous treatment effect of metformin—that is, the expected reduction in the probability of a diabetes
onset when prescribing metformin to patients, given a specific patient risk profile. To account for het-
erogeneity in the treatment effectiveness across different patients, we introduce the following notation:

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
15
Let {1,...,N+} be the set of patients in our sample, including patients who already received preventive
treatment through metformin, as well as patients who have not received preventive treatments. Let
I = {(i,l) : i ∈{1,...,N+},l ∈{1,...,L}} be the set of 2-tuples for indexing patient-level observations
throughout our study period.
We then estimate the treatment effect for each patient i in year l via
γi,l = E[y |xi,l,ti,l = 0] −E[y |xi,l,ti,l = 1].
(8)
As a result, we allow the treatment effect to vary across patients who have different risk profiles.
Building on the potential outcomes framework, it can further be shown that the treatment effects are
identifiable from observational data (Rubin 2005).
To estimate the heterogeneous treatment effects, we use an established method: the causal for-
est (Wager and Athey 2018). The causal forest is a non-parametric method that extends the widely
used random forest algorithm by Breiman (2001) for estimating heterogeneous treatment effects. This
approach comes with many benefits. First, the causal forest is an ensemble method, which means it
combines the predictions of multiple simpler models to improve its performance. As a result, the causal
forest works well in settings where the treatment effect is subject to complex, nonlinear relationships.
Second, under common mathematical assumptions, the causal forest has been shown to be pointwise
consistent for the true treatment effect and thus leads to provably valid inferences. Third, the causal
forest is capable of handling high-dimensional and mixed data types with little risk of overfitting,
making it a robust choice that requires minimal preprocessing. Mathematically, one of these charac-
teristics is its honesty property, where the trees in the causal forest are grown using one subsample of
the dataset, while the predictions at the leaves of the tree are estimated using a different subsample
(Wager and Athey 2018). By ensuring that each tree is only fit to a portion of the data, the honesty
property helps to mitigate the risk of overfitting and to produce accurate and reliable treatment effect
estimates. We report details on our implementation in Section G.
As part of our robustness checks, we perform a causal sensitivity analysis (Cinelli and Hazlett 2020)
in which we study the effect of potential unobserved confounding variables on the estimated treatment
effects. We find that, for unobserved confounding variables that are even strongly associated with our
treatment, the treatment effects remain robust (see Supplement D). Furthermore, we study how errors
in the treatment effect estimation influence the overall performance of our decision model, and we find
that the results remain largely robust. Finally, we provide an extension to settings where the treatment
effect is not estimated from historical data but is given ex ante (e. g., where treatment effect is obtained
through a randomized controlled trial instead), and we show how our decision model is applicable to
such cases (see Supplement H).

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
16
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
4.2.2.
Stage 2: Estimating the Patient Risk of Diabetes Onset. In the second stage, we rely
on machine learning to estimate the heterogeneous risk of diabetes onset (in the absence of preventive
treatment). For this purpose, we first filter out patients who already received preventive treatment.
Let the first N < N+ customers be patients who have not already been enrolled in a preventive care
program. We then train a machine learning model hθ
0 with parameters θ ∈Θ as follows. The machine
learning model uses EHRs, xi,l, to predict the risk of the individuals’ developing the disease. Formally,
this is given by E[y |xi,l,ti,l = 0], i ∈{1,...,N}, l ∈{1,...,L}. Hence, we have hθ
0(xi,l) = 1 if there is an
onset in the following year, and hθ
0(xi,l) = 0 if the condition for patient i is absent in the following year.
Given hθ
0 and the estimated treatment effect γi,l from stage 1, we can then compute the probability
of onset, conditional on a preventive treatment. Then, the risk of a diabetes onset under preventive
treatment amounts to (1 −γi,l)hθ
0(xi,l).
Mathematically, hθ
0 is estimated as follows. Let θ ∈Θ refer to a set of parameters in the machine
learning model hθ
0. For estimation, we minimize the empirical risk; that is,
h∗
0 = arg min
θ∈Θ
L
X
l=1
N
X
i=1
L(hθ
0(xi,l),yi,l+1),
(9)
where L denotes a loss function that measures the error of hθ
0 in forecasting the onset of a disease. We
further calibrate the output probabilities of hθ
0 using Platt scaling (see Supplement F).
We later report results from our decision model using gradient-boosted decision trees. Gradient-
boosted decision trees (Friedman 2001) belong to the category of ensemble methods, which are known
to perform well on complex datasets and have been used in other operational applications (e. g., Glaeser
et al. 2019). Nevertheless, we also perform an extensive series of robustness checks, repeating the
analysis with other machine learning methods (e. g., lasso, ridge regression, random forest, and deep
neural network). For all machine learning models, hyperparameters were tuned using 10-fold cross-
validation. The tuning procedure is reported in Supplement G.
4.2.3.
Stage 3: Selecting Patients for Preventive Care. To accommodate budgetary con-
straints, we model the maximum number of preventive treatments as k patients per year. Our objective
is to identify a cost-effective allocation that minimizes the expected number of onsets of the disease.
Hence, we formulate our optimization problem as
min
t1,1,...,t1,L
...
tN,1,...,tN,L
L
X
l=1
 N
X
i=1
ti,l (1 −γi,l) h∗
0(xi,l) +
N
X
i=1
(1 −ti,l)h∗
0(xi,l)
!
(10a)
s.t.
N
X
i=1
ti,l ≤k,
∀l ∈{1,...,L},
(10b)
ti,l ∈{0,1},
∀i ∈{1,...,N}∀l ∈{1,...,L}.
(10c)

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
17
This optimization problem extends Equations (6a) to (6c), in that we replace the (unknown) expected
values with their corresponding predictions from the machine learning methods.
In the case of metformin, the solution to the previous optimization problem is the subset of k patients
per year for which the estimated reduction in expected onset is higher than the reduction for patients
not in the subset. We show this property in the following proposition.
Proposition 2 (Optimal allocation). Let h∗
0 be an oracle for the risk of an onset, and let γi,l
be the true heterogeneous treatment effect of patient i in year l. The allocation that minimizes the
expected number of onsets in the population {1,...,N} provides preventive treatments in year l to
patients {1,...,k}, where
(1 −γi,l)h∗
0(xi,l) ≥(1 −γj,l)h∗
0(xj,l),
∀i ∈{1,...,k}∀j ∈{k + 1,...,N}.
(11)
Proof
See Supplement B.
In our implementation, we follow best practices and assess uncertainty in our model using a bootstrap
procedure (Hastie et al. 2009). Specifically, we use 100 samples with replacement and then report both
the mean and the standard deviation.
5.
Empirical Results
5.1.
Performance of Data-Driven Allocation
In this section, we evaluate our decision model and compare its performance against the clinical base-
line, which we use to mimic healthcare practitioners who base their decision-making on the Framingham
diabetes risk score (see Section 3.4). In addition, we report a na¨ıve baseline, in which the allocation of
preventive treatments is not optimized but, instead, a subset of k patients from the population is ran-
domly chosen for each year. By comparing the na¨ıve baseline with our decision model, we can directly
quantify the relative gain from stratifying the allocation to high-risk patients through a data-driven
approach. The results are in Table 4.
The na¨ıve baseline (i. e., random allocation) is estimated to prevent 489 onsets when treating
k=10,000 patients per year. For the same budget allowing for k=10,000 preventive treatments, the
clinical baseline is estimated to prevent 701 onsets. Meanwhile, our decision model would prevent 882
onsets—an improvement of more than 25 percent. The results for other budgets lead to similar con-
clusions. In sum, our decision model is considerably more effective than current practice in disease
prevention.
The use of our decision model offers considerable cost savings. A random allocation of preventive
treatments leads to cost savings of $6.319 million at k=1,000 and $11.988 million at k=10,000. This

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
18
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
outcome shows that preventive care can be economical, in that the cost for treating a diabetes onset is
substantially larger than the cost for preventive treatments. The clinical baseline improves cost savings
further: to $7.340 million at k=1,000 and to $15.350 million at k=10,000. In comparison, our decision
model demonstrates consistent cost savings over both the na¨ıve baseline and the clinical baseline across
all budgets k. For k=1,000 and k=10,000, our IHO could generate additional savings, beyond that of the
clinical baseline, of $0.710 million and $2.987 million, respectively. As a result, the cost savings in our
decision model are substantially larger than those of the clinical baseline and, based on a comparison
with t-tests, are statistically significant at common significance thresholds.
Table 4
Performance of our data-driven decision model.
k=1,000
k=5,000
k=10,000
Prevented
Cost
Prevented
Cost
Prevented
Cost
diseases
savings
diseases
savings
diseases
savings
Na¨ıve baseline
53.438
6.319
250.422
8.889
489.331
11.988
(0.330)
(0.235)
(1.698)
(0.258)
(2.162)
(0.249)
Clinical baseline
134.798
7.340
446.948
11.996
701.942
15.350
(1.025)
(0.245)
(3.373)
(0.258)
(3.837)
(0.265)
Our decision model
162.913
8.050
567.710
13.979
882.004
18.337
(0.902)
(0.239)
(2.612)
(0.253)
(3.934)
(0.284)
Stated: mean performance (standard deviation in parentheses)
Note. Performance metrics for allocating preventive care given a varying budget for
enrolling k patients per year into preventive treatments. Cost savings over no preventive
care allocation are reported in USD millions.
5.2.
Comparison of Patient Characteristics
In this section, we provide a quantitative assessment of the difference between the allocations from the
clinical baseline and from our decision model. For this work, we report descriptive statistics for patients
who were enrolled in preventive care (see Table 5). The clinical baseline based on the Framingham
diabetes risk score allocates preventive care to patients who, on average, are 41.36 years old, whereas
our decision model allocates preventive care to patients who are, on average, 53.60 years old and thus
substantially older. This increase is in line with medical research (Knowler et al. 2002), which shows
that a larger treatment effect from metformin is observed in people above age 45. Here, we note that the
clinical baseline based on the Framingham diabetes risk score does not consider age to be a predictor
of diabetes onset (Wilson et al. 2007), and for this reason, following current practice does not explicitly
stratify the allocation of preventive care to older age groups. Furthermore, the clinical baseline based
on the Framingham diabetes risk score selects patients with an average BMI of 31.31, while our decision
model gives preference to patients with a larger BMI (average: 34.55). We discussed our observations
with medical professionals specializing in diabetes care, who explained that the stratification from our
decision model is beneficial because, in their experience, metformin leads to reduction in body weight;

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
19
they noted that such preventive efforts are especially effective when offered to overweight patients. In
terms of gender, both allocations exhibit a similar distribution among men and women.
Table 5
Descriptive statistics of patients enrolled in preventive care for different allocations.
Variable
Overall population
Clinical baseline
Our decision model
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Age (in years)
47.07
17.93
41.36
7.69
53.60
27.03
Sex (0=male; 1=female)
0.51
0.50
0.53
0.50
0.55
0.50
Systolic blood pressure (mm Hg)
122.84
17.11
124.86
14.19
125.65
17.13
Diastolic blood pressure (mm Hg)
77.26
12.78
78.72
9.76
78.98
11.90
Body mass index (kg/m2)
29.05
5.64
31.31
6.16
34.55
6.10
HbA1c (in %)
5.56
0.36
5.74
0.28
5.83
0.34
SD = standard deviation; k=5,000
5.3.
Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
In our cost-effectiveness analysis (similar to Ayvaci et al. 2012), we estimate the number of prevented
disease onsets and cost savings across varying budgets—that is, for a varying number of patients being
enrolled in preventive care.
With increasing budgets, the relative proportion of prevented disease onsets also increases (see
Figure 2). However, the improvement is more pronounced for our decision model, compared to both
the na¨ıve baseline and the clinical baseline. Hence, for the same budget increase, our decision model
is estimated to be more effective in preventing disease onsets. For instance, when enrolling 10 % of the
prediabetic population in preventive care, we estimate that the clinical baseline can prevent 2.21 % of
diabetes onsets. Using our decision model, this proportion increases to 2.89 %.
Figure 2
Prevented onsets when providing preventive care under different budget constraints.
0
10
20
30
40
Budget k as the proportion of the patient population (in %)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Prevented disease onsets (in %)
Our decision model
Clinical baseline
Naïve baseline
The cost savings over no preventive care are shown in Figure 3. As expected, the na¨ıve baseline and
the clinical baseline based on the Framingham diabetes risk score achieve lower cost savings than our
decision model, confirming again the superiority of our decision model. This finding is consistent across
different budgets (i. e., different numbers of patients enrolled in preventive treatments). Our decision

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
20
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
model leads to annual cost savings of up to $20.31 per prediabetic patient. The cost savings per patient
reach a maximum when 47.58 % of the population is enrolled in preventive treatments.
Figure 3
Cost savings when providing preventive care under different budget constraints.
0
10
20
30
40
Budget k as the proportion of the patient population (in %)
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Cost savings per patient per year (in USD)
Our decision model
Clinical baseline
Naïve baseline
5.4.
Application to a U. S.-Wide Population
For better comparability, we now repeat the previous analysis for a population-wide setting, where we
estimate the results of applying our decision model to the entire U. S. population. The U. S. population
includes about 300 million adults, of whom 88 million are considered prediabetic. As previously noted,
we assume that costs for preventive treatment are $1,380 per patient and that model costs are dependent
on age and potential comorbid conditions of a patient (see Section 3.5). We further assume the same
machine learning performance in identifying high-risk patients as in the previous analyses.
On the basis of this setting, we obtain the following findings: Using the clinical baseline, allocating
preventive treatments to 10 % of patients (equal to 8.8 million people) leads to cost savings of $913
million annually. This outcome corresponds to annual cost savings of $10.38 per prediabetic patient. In
comparison, our decision model offers larger benefits. When providing 10 % of patients with preventive
treatments, our decision model allows for annual cost savings of $1.1 billion, equivalent to $12.50 per
prediabetic patient. Because the prevalence of diabetes in the United States is increasing (Chen et al.
2011), the cost savings are likely to continue to grow in the coming years.
5.5.
Robustness Checks
5.5.1.
Sensitivity analyses. We performed an extensive series of additional empirical analyses
that add to the robustness of our findings: (1) We tested our decision model with varying machine
learning models (e.g., random forest, deep neural network). Details are in Supplement C.1. We find that
all machine learning models perform well, and furthermore, the results favor our choice of gradient-
boosted decision trees. (2) We tested alternative risk scores (see Supplement C.2). Here, we find that
our proposed decision model consistently leads to a larger number of prevented diseases and larger cost

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
21
savings. (3) We evaluated the robustness of the decision model to estimation errors in the treatment
effect (see Supplement C.3). We again find that our decision model shows robust results—in particular,
when there is a larger number of patients in the treatment group. (4) We demonstrate the applicability
of our approach to personalized coaching as another form of preventive care (Supplement H).
5.5.2.
Explainability. We further build on explanation methods to analyze how our machine
learning model arrives at predictions of diabetes onsets. To identify the most important predictors
in our prediction model, we calculated SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) values (Lundberg and
Lee 2017). We find that the variables of age, BMI, and HbA1c are the most important predictors
for our machine learning model when assessing the risk of a diabetes onset. Larger values for these
variables result in the machine learning model’s calculating a larger probability of diabetes onset. We
discussed the results with medical professionals, who confirmed that our findings not only match their
own experience but also are in line with medical research. Details are in Supplement E.
5.5.3.
Alternative Model Specifications. We further benchmark different variations of our
decision model to confirm the effectiveness of our model specification:
1. Main model. We report the decision model from the main analysis. Here, the machine learning
stage uses 307 input variables (see Table 1), and the optimization stage stratifies the allocation
on the basis of risk reduction.
2. Sparse model I/II. For Sparse Model I, we vary the input as follows: The model uses only
a subset of input variables—namely, those from the Framingham diabetes risk score (see
Table 3). For Sparse Model II, we also use the risk factors of age and the current glycated
hemoglobin level (HbA1c). This addition allows us to quantify the performance gain from
using modern, high-dimensional EHRs.
3. Linear model. Here, we vary the machine learning stage by using only a linear model (with lasso
regularization). By comparing this model against our main decision model (with gradient-
boosted decision trees), we can assess the gains from modeling complex, nonlinear relationships
(e. g., from comorbidities and other co-occurring conditions).
4. Risk-stratified model. For the risk-stratified model, we vary the optimization stage, stratifying
the allocation only by patient risk. That is, we select the patients for preventive care based
on the highest risk of an onset, without considering heterogeneous treatment effects.
Table 6 presents the results for the five different model specifications. (1) We find that the decision
model from the main analysis performs best. (2) We find that using high-dimensional patient data from
modern EHRs is beneficial, but only to a relatively small degree. Replacing the 307 input variables
with the variables from the Framingham diabetes risk score, together with age and HbA1c, can still

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
22
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
lead to large improvements over the clinical baseline. In particular, the sparse model II is ranked second
overall, even though it has only seven input variables. Hence, the use of advanced machine learning,
together with an optimization stage that accounts for heterogeneous treatment effects of preventive
care, is more important than having access to rich EHR data. (3) We find that nonlinear machine
learning outperforms a linear model. The finding confirms the value of modeling complex, nonlinear
relationships through nonlinear machine learning models. (4) We obtain large benefits from including
heterogeneous treatment effects in the objective. Hence, the optimization stage is more effective when
allocation decisions take into account risk reduction, rather than only patient risk.
Table 6
Results for different model specifications.
k=1,000
k=5,000
k=10,000
Prevented
Cost
Prevented
Cost
Prevented
Cost
diseases
savings
diseases
savings
diseases
savings
Clinical baseline
134.798
7.340
446.948
11.996
701.942
15.350
(1.025)
(0.245)
(3.373)
(0.258)
(3.837)
(0.265)
Main model
162.913
8.050
567.710
13.979
882.004
18.337
(0.902)
(0.239)
(2.612)
(0.253)
(3.934)
(0.284)
Sparse model I
137.209
6.745
466.106
11.364
728.151
15.041
(0.757)
(0.195)
(2.152)
(0.210)
(3.326)
(0.234)
Sparse model II
159.148
7.850
549.777
13.492
855.743
17.752
(0.880)
(0.231)
(2.532)
(0.246)
(3.848)
(0.276)
Linear model
152.124
7.489
520.490
12.726
811.841
16.800
(0.840)
(0.218)
(2.401)
(0.234)
(3.684)
(0.261)
Risk-only model
145.354
7.148
494.492
12.063
772.251
15.958
(0.802)
(0.207)
(2.282)
(0.222)
(3.523)
(0.249)
Stated: mean performance (standard deviation in parentheses)
Note. Performance metrics for allocating preventive care given a varying budget
for enrolling k patients per year into preventive treatments. Cost savings over no
preventive care allocation are reported in USD millions.
6.
Discussion
6.1.
Implications for Research
Our novel decision model for data-driven allocation of preventive care integrates counterfactual infer-
ence, machine learning, and optimization. Specifically, the model allocates a given budget toward
primary preventive care for patients at risk of developing a disease, so as to maximize the expected
number of patients whose disease onset is prevented. We evaluate our decision model in a dynamic
setting using a large, longitudinal dataset of 89,191 patients at risk of developing diabetes mellitus
type II, thereby confirming its effectiveness.
We study the operational value of incorporating high-dimensional health data, machine learning,
and optimization toward preventive treatment allocation decision-making. Through our experiments
using a large, longitudinal dataset, we examined the performance gap between our proposed decision
model and alternative model specifications (see Section 5.5.3). Overall, the largest performance gain
in prevented diseases and cost savings comes from targeting patients based on risk reduction rather
than only on risk. Hence, a crucial implication of our work is the importance of a rigorous modeling
framework for decision-making. Also crucial is the use of advanced machine learning to accommodate

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
23
complex, nonlinear relationships. A comparatively smaller gain comes for the use of high-dimensional
EHRs. In fact, a decision model that uses machine learning and targets patients on the basis of risk
reduction, but that has access only to a small subset of patient variables (sparse model II), can even
achieve a performance that is close to that of our main model. Our findings imply that using data-
driven decision models to inform resource allocation in healthcare may be practical, even in cases where
relatively little information is available about a patient.
Proactively reducing individuals’ risk of developing preventable diseases is a top priority in healthcare
not only because it can improve patients’ quality of life but also because it reduces healthcare costs.
Our analysis shows that a large number of onsets can be prevented by using a data-driven decision
model. In practice, allocation of patients to preventive care programs is often solely based on the
risk of disease onset for the patients—that is, patients with the highest risk of onset are assigned to
preventive treatments. However, prior medical literature has shown that preventive treatments can
have a differential effectiveness (Knowler et al. 2002). By exploiting this differential effectiveness, our
method allocates preventive treatments in a more cost-effective manner, including prioritizing patients
who have a lower risk of onset but who can benefit from preventive care more than patients who have a
higher risk of onset. Similar observations have been made for targeting customers in marketing, where
interventions can benefit when they consider not only the risk that a customer is about to churn, but
also the incremental effectiveness of marketing interventions (Ascarza 2018).
In our decision model, we also address the problem of unobserved confounders using a powerful
statistical framework (Cinelli and Hazlett 2020). Unobserved confounders simultaneously influence both
the probability of being assigned to preventive treatment and the likelihood of developing diabetes.
Thus, if unobserved confounders are not accounted for, the estimates of the treatment effect can be
biased (Frauen et al. 2023b). Such confounders are common in medicine and can include such variables
as patients’ socioeconomic status, healthcare coverage, and race. Often, these variables either cannot
be directly observed or cannot be collected and used because of anti-discrimination laws. In light of
this limitation, statistical frameworks that can address the potential effects of unobserved confounders
can offer significant practical value in operations management.
6.2.
Implications for Health Management
Healthcare managers have had to confront rising costs for care in recent years (KC et al. 2020). To
counteract these costs, regulatory initiatives, such as the Affordable Care Act (§4001(f)(3)), dictate a
greater focus on disease prevention (Koh and Sebelius 2010). Health management research has long
studied the efficient provision of care for patients after they develop a medical condition (e. g., Garg
et al. 2020, Zhang et al. 2016); in contrast, our work charts a different path, where care is allocated

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
24
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
prior to any disease onset, with the goal of preventing it. To support health management in this task,
we develop a novel data-driven decision model.
Current practice in allocating preventive care is based on risk scores and has several significant
shortcomings. First, traditional risk scores (e. g., charting tools) are limited to a small subset of rel-
evant patient variables that are commonly available in contemporary EHRs. Here, leveraging a few
key variables from modern EHRs can offer better predictive power in identifying patients at risk of
developing diabetes. Second, traditional risk scores also are limited to simplified linear models thus
neglecting complex, nonlinear relationships between risk factors. Yet, such nonlinear relationships are
particularly common in the presence of comorbidities and other co-occurring conditions. Third, tradi-
tional risk scores allocate preventive care according to a patient’s risk level but without considering
the heterogeneous treatment effects of preventive treatments across patients—that is, the differential
effectiveness in reducing the risk of onset for a patient. Our work’s contributions address these three
key limitations.
6.3.
Practical Considerations
Our decision model can be readily developed and integrated into existing health management practices.
Specifically, the approach we develop here is a general-purpose framework that can produce cost-
effective intervention programs by healthcare systems that have access to EHRs; our approach can be
applied to maximize prevention of any preventable disease for which preventive treatment exists, such
as cardiovascular diseases or respiratory diseases, and for a given preventive care budget. As such, our
approach is neither limited to a particular preventable disease nor does it rely on having access to a
specific kind of information. In this work, we present empirical evaluations when using real healthcare
data commonly recorded in practice by standard EHR systems worldwide. Therefore, our decision
model is applicable to other IHOs in which similar standard EHR systems are used.
In recent years, there has been a transition in healthcare from reactive to proactive care, underscor-
ing the importance of preventive practices. Proactive care is a comprehensive approach that focuses
on identifying and mitigating risk factors to prevent the onset of diseases, in contrast to only treating
diseases and conditions once they arise. By proactively reducing individuals’ risks of developing pre-
ventable diseases, health management can improve patient outcomes and reduce the long-term cost and
resource burden on the healthcare system (Zhou et al. 2020). This approach aligns with the objectives
of IHOs in many countries, including several European countries, Israel, Singapore, and others. (World
Health Organization 2016). In the U. S., some healthcare systems have goals that are consistent with
cost-effective interventions to benefit the long-term well-being of patients; they include health main-
tenance organizations (e.g., the Kaiser group, with over 12 million members (e.g., Kaiser Permanente

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
25
2021)) and Accountable Care Organizations, which merge patient data from different providers, with
the goal of promoting cost-effective care. Generally, IHOs aim to improve coordination and efficiency
among healthcare services and typically prioritize preventive care and patients’ long-term well-being
more broadly. By having access to comprehensive patient information from different health providers,
IHOs can make informed decisions to optimize the allocation of resources for preventive care. Our
decision model is directly applicable in such contexts and thus facilitates proactive care in two ways:
(1) by providing a data-driven, cost-effective allocation of limited preventive care resources, and (2) by
supporting health managers with the goal of improving patient outcomes and mitigating the burden
of preventable debilitating diseases. Worldwide, evidence on the value of care and the use of data-
driven care have led to an increasing trend toward integration in the healthcare sector (e.g., World
Health Organization 2016, Cuesta et al. 2019). In contrast, in countries where IHOs are not available,
our decision model can motivate and promote collaboration among providers and insurers to enable
cost-effective preventive care.
Operationally, the frequency of risk assessment and subsequent (re)allocation of a preventive treat-
ment to patients ought to reflect the particular context. For instance, the onset risk of many preventable
chronic diseases, including metabolic diseases such as diabetes mellitus type II, can vary over time,
and a periodic estimation of risks and allocation of treatments, as we have done in this work, would
be prudent. We have demonstrated how annual reallocation of preventive treatments can meaningfully
reduce the number of patients affected by diabetes mellitus. In other contexts, the updating frequency
ought to reflect the rate at which patients’ risk is likely to change. As we have demonstrated here, our
decision model can be applied to yield updated risk updates and to reallocate the preventive treatments
accordingly.
Primary prevention considers all patients and prioritizes offering intervention treatments to patients
based on their respective expected risk reduction. Thus, preventive care can yield the greatest benefits
when it is not limited to considering only a subset of patients who initiate a physician’s visit; instead,
it could be proactively offered to patients for whom preventive care can be most effective, including
patients who may be unaware of their own risk and thus do not seek treatment. In particular, given
that nine in ten U. S. adults are unaware of their high-risk status (Geiss et al. 2010), proactive efforts
are paramount for effective diabetes prevention.
Implementing a decision model for the allocation of preventive care is subject to several practice
challenges. One challenge is to ensure the availability of EHRs, which is a crucial requirement for
identifying patients at risk of disease onset and for estimating heterogeneous treatment effects. Another
challenge is the quality of EHR data, especially with respect to completeness and accuracy, both of

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
26
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
which can affect the performance of the decision model. Finally, there may be regulatory challenges in
implementing the decision model, such as privacy and data protection regulations that restrict access
to patient data. As in any data-driven approach, establishing that the use of information to allocate
disease prevention is consistent with local privacy and regulatory frameworks is important. Future
work may also extend our analysis through the use of algorithmic fairness (De-Arteaga et al. 2022).
6.4.
Concluding Remarks
In an effort to reduce costs and improve quality of life, health management places an increasing focus on
disease prevention. However, healthcare organizations lack the decision support necessary to facilitate
effective allocation of preventive treatments to patients, given that population-wide access of preventive
care is often prohibitively costly. To aid health management in this task, we have developed in this
work a data-driven decision model for the cost-effective allocation of preventive care.
Acknowledgments
Stefan Feuerriegel acknowledges funding from the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) via Grant 186932.
Mathias Kraus acknowledges funding from the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) on ”White-
Box-AI” (Grant 01IS22080).
References
Abbasi A, Sahlqvist AS, Lotta L, Brosnan JM, Vollenweider P, Giabbanelli P, Nunez DJ, et al. (2016) A systematic
review of biomarkers and risk of incident type 2 diabetes: An overview of epidemiological, prediction and
aetiological research literature. PLOS ONE 11(10):e0163721.
Allam A, Feuerriegel S, Rebhan M, Krauthammer M (2021) Analyzing patient trajectories with artificial intelli-
gence. Journal of Medical Internet Research 23(12):e29812.
American Diabetes Association (2022) 2. Classification and diagnosis of diabetes: Standards of medical care in
diabetes. Diabetes Care 45(Supplement1):S17–S38.
Ascarza E (2018) Retention futility: Targeting high-risk customers might be ineffective. Journal of Marketing
Research 55(1):80–98.
Ayvaci MUS, Ahsen ME, Raghunathan S, Gharibi Z (2017) Timing the use of breast cancer risk information in
biopsy decision-making. Production and Operations Management 26(7):1333–1358.
Ayvaci MUS, Alagoz O, Burnside ES (2012) The effect of budgetary restrictions on breast cancer diagnostic
decisions. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 14(4):600–617.

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
27
Azelton KR, Crowley AP, Vence N, Underwood K, Morris G, Kelly J, Landry MJ (2021) Digital health coaching
for type 2 diabetes: Randomized controlled trial of healthy at home. Frontiers in Digital Health 3.
Bardhan I, Oh JH, Zheng Z, Kirksey K (2015) Predictive analytics for readmission of patients with congestive
heart failure. Information Systems Research 26(1):19–39.
Bertsimas D, O’Hair A, Relyea S, Silberholz J (2016) An analytics approach to designing combination chemother-
apy regimens for cancer. Management Science 62(5):1511–1531.
Bica I, Alaa AM, Lambert C, van der Schaar M (2021) From real-world patient data to individualized treatment
effects using machine learning: Current and future methods to address underlying challenges. Clinical
Pharmacology & Therapeutics 109(1):87–100.
Bjarnadottir M, Anderson D, Zia L, Rhoads K (2018) Predicting colorectal cancer mortality: Models to facil-
itate patient-physician conversations and inform operational decision making. Production and Operations
Management 15(4):2162–2183.
Bolnick HJ, Bui AL, Bulchis A, Chen C, Chapin A, Lomsadze L, Mokdad AH, et al. (2020) Health-care spending
attributable to modifiable risk factors in the USA: An economic attribution analysis. The Lancet Public
Health 5(10):525–535.
Breeze PR, Thomas C, Squires H, Brennan A, Greaves C, Diggle PJ, Brunner E, et al. (2017) The impact of type
2 diabetes prevention programmes based on risk-identification and lifestyle intervention intensity strategies:
A cost-effectiveness analysis. Diabetic Medicine 34(5):632–640.
Breiman L (2001) Random forests. Machine Learning 45(1):5–32.
Cevik M, Ayer T, Alagoz O, Sprague BL (2018) Analysis of mammography screening policies under resource
constraints. Production and Operations Management 27(5):949–972.
Chaker L, Ligthart S, Korevaar TI, Hofman A, Franco OH, Peeters RP, Dehghan A (2016) Thyroid function and
risk of type 2 diabetes: A population-based prospective cohort study. BMC Medicine 14(150).
Chawla NV, Bowyer KW, Hall LO, Kegelmeyer WP (2002) SMOTE: Synthetic minority over-sampling technique.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 16:321–357.
Chen L, Magliano DJ, Zimmet PZ (2011) The worldwide epidemiology of type 2 diabetes mellitus–present and
future perspectives. Nature Reviews Endocrinology 8(4):228–236.
Choi E, Schuetz A, Stewart WF, Sun J (2017) Using recurrent neural network models for early detection of heart
failure onset. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 24(2):361–370.

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
28
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
Cinelli C, Hazlett C (2020) Making sense of sensitivity: Extending omitted variable bias. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 82(1):39–67.
Cohen JT, Neumann PJ, Weinstein MC (2008) Does preventive care save money? Health economics and the
presidential candidates. The New England Journal of Medicine 358(7):661–663.
Cuesta JI, Noton C, Vatter B (2019) Vertical integration between hospitals and insurers. Available at SSRN
3309218 .
Dai T, Tayur S (2020) Healthcare operations management: A snapshot of emerging research. Manufacturing &
Service Operations Management 22(5):869–887.
De-Arteaga M, Feuerriegel S, Saar-Tsechansky M (2022) Algorithmic fairness in business analytics: Directions
for research and practice. Production and Operations Management 31(10):3749–3770.
Deo S, Sohoni M (2015) Optimal decentralization of early infant diagnosis of HIV in resource-limited settings.
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 17(2):191–207.
Erenay FS, Alagoz O, Said A (2014) Optimizing colonoscopy screening for colorectal cancer prevention and
surveillance. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 16(3):381–400.
Frauen D, Hatt T, Melnychuk V, Feuerriegel S (2023a) Estimating average causal effects from patient trajectories.
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 7586–7594.
Frauen D, Melnychuk V, Feuerriegel S (2023b) Sharp bounds for generalized causal sensitivity analysis. arXiv
2305.16988 .
Friedman JH (2001) Greedy function approximation: a gradient boosting machine. Annals of Statistics 1189–
1232.
Garg T, Bhardwaj M, Deo S (2020) Role of community health workers in improving cost efficiency in an active
case finding tuberculosis programme: An operational research study from rural Bihar, India. BMJ Open
10(10):e036625.
Geiss LS, James C, Gregg EW, Albright A, Williamson DF, Cowie CC (2010) Diabetes risk reduction behaviors
among U.S. adults with prediabetes. American Journal of Preventive Medicine 38(4):403–409.
Glaeser CK, Fisher M, Su X (2019) Optimal retail location: Empirical methodology and application to practice.
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 21(1):86–102.
Goetzel RZ (2009) Do prevention or treatment services save money? The wrong debate. Health Affairs 28(1):37–
41.

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
29
Gold MR, Siegel JE, Weinstein MC, Russell LB (1996) Cost-effectiveness in health and medicine (New York,
NY: Oxford University Press).
Gu S, Tang Z, Shi L, Sawhney M, Hu H, Dong H (2015) Cost-minimization analysis of metformin and acarbose
in treatment of type 2 diabetes. Value in Health Regional Issues 6:84–88.
Guo R, Cheng L, Li J, Hahn PR, Liu H (2020) A survey of learning causality with data: Problems and methods.
ACM Computing Surveys 53(4):1–37.
Hastie T, Tibshirani R, Friedman JH (2009) The elements of statistical learning: Data mining, inference, and
prediction (New York NY: Springer), 2nd edition.
Helm JE, AhmadBeygi S, van Oyen MP (2011) Design and analysis of hospital admission control for operational
effectiveness. Production and Operations Management 20(3):359–374.
Helm JE, Alaeddini A, Stauffer JM, Bretthauer KM, Skolarus TA (2016) Reducing hospital readmissions by inte-
grating empirical prediction with resource optimization. Production and Operations Management 25(2):233–
257.
Hoerl AE, Kennard RW (1970) Ridge regression: Biased estimation for nonorthogonal problems. Technometrics
12(1):55–67.
Ibrahim R, Kucukyazici B, Verter V, Gendreau M, Blostein M (2016) Designing personalized treatment: An
application to anticoagulation therapy. Production and Operations Management 25(5):902–918.
Imbens GW, Rubin DB (2015) Causal inference in statistics, social, and biomedical sciences (New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press).
Jakubik J, Feuerriegel S (2022) Data-driven allocation of development aid toward Sustainable Development
Goals: Evidence from HIV/AIDS. Production and Operations Management 31(6):2739–2756.
Kahn HS, Cheng YJ, Thompson TJ, Imperatore G, Gregg EW (2009) Two risk-scoring systems for predicting
incident diabetes mellitus in U.S. adults age 45 to 64 years. Annals of Internal Medicine 150(11):741–751.
Kaiser
Permanente
(2021)
Annual
report.
URL
https://about.kaiserpermanente.org/who-we-are/
annual-reports/2021-annual-report.
Kamalzadeh H, Ahuja V, Hahsler M, Bowen ME (2021) An analytics-driven approach for optimal individualized
diabetes screening. Production and Operations Management 30(9):3161–3191.
KC DS, Scholtes S, Terwiesch C (2020) Empirical research in healthcare operations: Past research, present
understanding, and future opportunities. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 22(1):73–83.

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
30
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
Keskinocak P, Savva N (2020) A review of the healthcare-management (modeling) literature published in Manu-
facturing & Service Operations Management. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 22(1):59–
72.
Khademi A, Saure DR, Schaefer AJ, Braithwaite RS, Roberts MS (2015) The price of nonabandonment: HIV in
resource-limited settings. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 17(4):554–570.
Knowler WC, Barrett-Connor E, Fowler SE, Hamman RF, Lachin JM, Walker EA, Nathan DM (2002) Reduction
in the incidence of type 2 diabetes with lifestyle intervention or metformin. The New England Journal of
Medicine 346(6):393–403.
Koh HK, Sebelius KG (2010) Promoting prevention through the affordable care act. The New England Journal
of Medicine 363(14):1296–1299.
LeCun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton G (2015) Deep learning. Nature 521(7553):436–444.
Lee EK, Wei X, Baker-Witt F, Wright MD, Quarshie A (2018) Outcome-driven personalized treatment design
for managing diabetes. Interfaces 48(5):422–435.
Lindstroem J, Tuomilehto J (2003) The diabetes risk score: A practical tool to predict type 2 diabetes risk.
Diabetes Care 26(3):725–731.
Liu X, Hu M, Helm JE, Lavieri MS, Skolarus TA (2018) Missed opportunities in preventing hospital readmissions:
Redesigning post-discharge checkup policies. Production and Operations Management 60(5):1019.
Long MT, Fox CS (2016) The framingham heart study: 67 years of discovery in metabolic disease. Nature Reviews
Endocrinology 12(3):177–183.
Lundberg SM, Lee SI (2017) A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems .
May JH, Spangler WE, Strum DP, Vargas LG (2011) The surgical scheduling problem: Current research and
future opportunities. Production and Operations Management 20(3):392–405.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2015) Medicines optimisation .
Niculescu-Mizil A, Caruana R (2005) Predicting good probabilities with supervised learning. International Con-
ference on Machine Learning.
OECD (2019) Health at a glance 2019. URL https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/content/publication/
4dd50c09-en.

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
31
Paulweber B, Valensi P, Lindstr¨om J, Lalic NM, Greaves CJ, McKee M, Kissimova-Skarbek K, et al. (2010) A
European evidence-based guideline for the prevention of type 2 diabetes. Hormone and Metabolic Research
42:3–36.
Rosella LC, Manuel DG, Burchill C, Stukel TA (2011) A population-based risk algorithm for the development of
diabetes: Development and validation of the diabetes population risk tool DPoRT. Journal of Epidemiology
and Community Health 65(7):613–620.
Rubin DB (2005) Causal inference using potential outcomes: Design, modeling, decisions. Journal of the American
Statistical Association 100(469):322–331.
Schallmoser S, Zueger T, Kraus M, Saar-Tsechansky M, Stettler C, Feuerriegel S (2023) Machine learning for
predicting micro-and macrovascular complications in individuals with prediabetes or diabetes: Retrospective
cohort study. Journal of Medical Internet Research 25:e42181.
Senoner J, Netland T, Feuerriegel S (2022) Using explainable artificial intelligence to improve process quality:
Evidence from semiconductor manufacturing. Management Science 68(8):5557–6354.
Shi C, Blei D, Veitch V (2019) Adapting neural networks for the estimation of treatment effects. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems .
Tachkov K, Mitov K, Koleva Y, Mitkova Z, Kamusheva M, Dimitrova M, Petkova V, et al. (2020) Life expectancy
and survival analysis of patients with diabetes compared to the non diabetic population in Bulgaria. PLOS
ONE 15(5):e0232815.
Tibshirani R (1996) Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society
58(1):267–288.
US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2020) National diabetes statistics report. URL https://www.
cdc.gov/diabetes/data/statistics/statistics-report.html.
van der Laan MJ, Rubin D (2006) Targeted maximum likelihood learning. The International Journal of Bio-
statistics 2(1):Article 11.
Wager S, Athey S (2018) Estimation and inference of heterogeneous treatment effects using random forests.
Journal of the American Statistical Association 113(523):1228–1242.
Wilson PWF, Meigs JB, Sullivan L, Fox CS, Nathan DM, D’Agostino RB (2007) Prediction of incident dia-
betes mellitus in middle-aged adults: The Framingham offspring study. Archives of Internal Medicine
167(10):1068–1074.

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
32
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
World Health Organization (2006) Definition and diagnosis of diabetes mellitus and intermediate hyperglycaemia:
Report of a WHO/IDF consultation.
World Health Organization (2016) Voluntary health insurance in europe: role and regulation .
World Health Organization (2018a) Global health estimates 2016: Disease burden by cause, age, sex, by country
and by region, 2000-2016.
World Health Organization (2018b) Noncommunicable diseases. URL http://www.who.int/news-room/
fact-sheets/detail/noncommunicable-diseases.
World Health Organization (2018c) The top 10 causes of death. URL https://www.who.int/news-room/
fact-sheets/detail/the-top-10-causes-of-death.
Zhang DJ, Gurvich I, Van Mieghem JA, Park E, Young RS, Williams MV (2016) Hospital readmissions reduction
program: An economic and operational analysis. Management Science 62(11):3351–3371.
Zhou X, Siegel KR, Ng BP, Jawanda S, Proia KK, Zhang X, Albright AL, et al. (2020) Cost-effectiveness
of diabetes prevention interventions targeting high-risk individuals and whole populations: A systematic
review. Diabetes Care 43(7):1593–1616.
Zueger T, Schallmoser S, Kraus M, Saar-Tsechansky M, Feuerriegel S, Stettler C (2022) Machine learning for pre-
dicting the risk of transition from prediabetes to diabetes. Diabetes Technology & Therapeutics 24(11):842–
847.

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
1
Online Supplement
Appendix A:
Link of Prevented Diseases to Cost Minimization
Proof of Proposition 1.
Without loss of generality, we study year l within our study period, and let
{1,...,k} ⊂{1,...,N} denote the patients that were enrolled for preventive treatment according to our decision
model, i.e., which describe a solution to the decision problem (Equation (6)). For simplicity, we neglect the
index denoting the year. Then, the first part of this proof shows that the solution {1,...,k} minimizes costs
among all subsets containing k patients. The second part proves that there is no subset with fewer patients
({1,...,k −1} ⊂{1,...,N}) that yields lower costs.
1st Part. Because {1,...,k} ⊂{1,...,N} is a solution to the decision problem, we can assume that
E[y |xi,ti = 0] −E[y |xi,ti = 1] ≥E[y |xj,tj = 0] −E[y |xj,tj = 1],
∀i ∈{1,...,k}∀j ∈{k + 1,...,N}.
(12)
We take a random patient i∗∈{1,...,k} and a random patient j∗∈{k +1,...,N} and exchange the treatment
(i. e., we provide preventive treatment to patient j∗but not to patient i∗). We compute the expected costs Cafter
after this exchange and compare it to the expected costs Cbefore before the exchange. The computation yields
the following:
Cafter −Cbefore
(13)
= Cdiab




k
X
i=1
i̸=i∗
E[y |xi,ti = 1] +
N
X
j=k+1
j̸=j∗
E[y |xj,tj = 0] + E[y |xj∗,tj∗= 1] + E[y |xi∗,ti∗= 0]




+ k Cprevent −Cdiab
 k
X
i=1
E[y |xi,ti = 1] +
N
X
j=k+1
E[y |xj,tj = 0]
!
−k Cprevent
(14)
= Cdiab




k
X
i=1
i̸=i∗
E[y |xi,ti = 1] +
N
X
j=k+1
j̸=j∗
E[y |xj,tj = 0] + E[y |xj∗,tj∗= 1] + E[y |xi∗,ti∗= 0]
−
k
X
i=1
E[y |xi,ti = 1] −
N
X
j=k+1
E[y |xj,tj = 0]



(15)
= Cdiab

E[y |xi∗,ti∗= 0] −E[y |xi∗,ti∗= 1] + E[y |xj∗,tj∗= 1] −E[y |xj∗,tj∗= 0]

(16)
≥0
(17)

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
2
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
2nd Part. We now show that no subset comprising fewer patients ({1,...,k −1} ⊂{1,...,N}) yields lower
costs. For this computation, we assume that:
Cdiab E[y |xi,ti = 1] + Cprevent ≤Cdiab E[y |xi,ti = 0]
∀i ∈{1,...,k}.
(18)
That an exchange of patients between the treatment group and the non-treatment group leads to increased costs
directly follows from part 1. Thus, without loss of generality, we consider subgroups {1,...,k −1} of our original
solution {1,...,k} to the decision problem. We compute costs Ck−1 when providing preventive care to k −1
patients and compare Ck−1 to the original costs Ck:
Ck−1 −Ck
(19)
= Cdiab
 k−1
X
i=1
E[y |xi,ti = 1] +
N
X
j=k
E[y |xj,tj = 0]
!
+ (k −1)Cprevent
−Cdiab
 k
X
i=1
E[y |xi,ti = 1] +
N
X
j=k+1
E[y |xj,tj = 0]
!
−k Cprevent
(20)
= Cdiab
 k−1
X
i=1
E[y |xi,ti = 1] +
N
X
j=k
E[y |xj,tj = 0] −
k
X
i=1
E[y |xi,ti = 1] −
N
X
j=k+1
E[y |xj,tj = 0]
!
−Cprevent
(21)
= Cdiab

E[y |xk,tk = 0] −E[y |xk,tk = 1]

−Cprevent
(22)
= Cdiab

E[y |xk,tk = 0]

−Cdiab (E[y |xk,tk = 1]) −Cprevent
(23)
≥0
(24)
□

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
3
Appendix B:
Proof for Optimal Allocation
Proof of Proposition 2.
Let nonsets denote the number of expected onsets. Assume h∗
0(xi,l) to be a perfect
model for E[y |xi,l,ti,l = 0] and assume γi,l to be the true treatment effect for i ∈{1,...,N}. Let {1,...,k} be
the subset of patients who are prescribed preventive care, and let {k +1,...,N} be the subset of patients who are
not prescribed preventive care in year l. Let this allocation follow our described approach to allocating patients;
thus,
(1 −γi,l)h∗
0(xi,l) ≥(1 −γj,l)h∗
0(xj,l),
∀i ∈{1,...,k}∀j ∈{k + 1,...,N},
(25)
which is equal to
h∗
0(xi,l) + γj,l h∗
0(xj,l) ≥h∗
0(xj,l) + γi,l h∗
0(xi,l),
∀i ∈{1,...,k}∀j ∈{k + 1,...,N}.
(26)
In the following computation, we take a random patient i∗∈{1,...,k} and a random patient j∗∈{k+1,...,N}
and exchange the treatment—that is, we provide preventive treatment to patient j∗but not to patient i∗. From
this exchange, we arrive at the following:
nonsets =
k
X
i=1
i̸=i∗
E[y |xi,l,ti,l = 1] +
N
X
j=k+1
j̸=j∗
E[y |xj,l,tj,l = 0] + E[y |xj∗,l∗,tj∗,l∗= 1] + E[y |xi∗,l∗,ti∗,l∗= 0]
(27)
=
k
X
i=1
i̸=i∗
(1 −γi,l) h∗
0(xi,l) +
N
X
j=k+1
j̸=j∗
h∗
0(xj,l) + (1 −γj∗,l∗) h∗
0(xj∗,l∗) + h∗
0(xi∗,l∗)
(28)
≥
k
X
i=1
i̸=i∗
(1 −γi,l) h∗
0(xi,l) +
N
X
j=k+1
j̸=j∗
h∗
0(xj,l) + (1 −γi∗,l∗)h∗
0(xi∗,l∗) + h∗
0(xj∗,l∗)
(29)
=
k
X
i=1
(1 −γi,l) h∗
0(xi,l) +
N
X
j=k+1
h∗
0(xj,l)
(30)
=
k
X
i=1
E[y |xi,l,ti,l = 1] +
N
X
j=k+1
E[y |xj,l,tj,l = 0]
(31)
Thus, exchanging the treatments of patients i∗and j∗leads to the same or a larger number of expected onsets.
Consequently, our original allocation minimizes the number of expected onsets.
□

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
4
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
Appendix C:
Robustness Checks
C.1.
Choice of Machine Learning Model
For the analysis in the main paper, the machine learning in stage 2 of the decision model was set to gradient
boosted decision trees (Friedman 2001). Gradient boosted decision trees belong to the category of tree ensem-
ble methods, which have been applied successfully in other operational applications (e. g., Glaeser et al. 2019,
Senoner et al. 2022). We now provide empirical evidence supporting this choice. For this purpose, we compare
the performance of our decision model under different machine learning models in stage 2 while the rest of the
decision model remains the same. Our comparison includes linear (lasso and ridge regression) and nonlinear
(random forest and deep neural network) models. All estimation details are provided in Supplement G.
Results are shown in Table 7. While the lasso performs well among the linear models, nonlinear machine
learning models consistently outperform linear models. This may be because nonlinear models are better able
to exploit complex patterns in the data, particularly with regard to between-patient heterogeneity. However,
nonlinear models can also be prone to overfitting, which may explain why the deep neural network underperformed
compared to the gradient boosted decision trees. Overall, the decision model using gradient boosted decision
trees achieves the best performance.
Table 7
Performance comparison among different machine learning models.
k=1,000
k=5,000
k=10,000
Prevented
Cost
Prevented
Cost
Prevented
Cost
diseases
savings
diseases
savings
diseases
savings
Na¨ıve baseline
53.438
6.319
250.422
8.889
489.331
11.988
(0.330)
(0.235)
(1.698)
(0.258)
(2.162)
(0.249)
Lasso
152.124
7.489
520.490
12.726
811.841
16.800
(0.840)
(0.218)
(2.401)
(0.234)
(3.684)
(0.261)
Ridge regression
150.495
7.409
514.812
12.586
803.021
16.617
(0.831)
(0.216)
(2.374)
(0.231)
(3.644)
(0.258)
Random forest
160.270
7.892
548.875
13.425
855.942
17.717
(0.885)
(0.230)
(2.531)
(0.246)
(3.880)
(0.276)
Deep neural network
155.636
7.670
535.133
13.109
833.792
17.276
(0.860)
(0.224)
(2.467)
(0.240)
(3.766)
(0.268)
Gradient boosted
162.913
8.050
567.710
13.979
882.004
18.337
decision trees
(0.902)
(0.239)
(2.612)
(0.253)
(3.934)
(0.284)
Stated: mean performance (standard deviation in parentheses)
Note. Performance metrics for allocation of preventive care when using the respective
machine learning model in stage 2 of our decision model. Budget constraints allow for the
treatment of k patients per year. Cost savings are reported in USD millions.
C.2.
Comparison with Alternative Risk Scores
The Framingham diabetes risk score represents the quasi-standard in clinical practice for assessing diabetes risk
(Long and Fox 2016). Nevertheless, Table 8 shows the comparison between our decision model and other diabetes

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
5
risk scores from clinical practice—namely, Lindstroem and Tuomilehto (2003), Wilson et al. (2007), Kahn et al.
(2009), and Rosella et al. (2011). Consistent with our previous findings, our proposed decision model outperforms
all alternative risk scores.
Table 8
Performance comparison between our decision model and other risk scores.
k=1,000
k=5,000
k=10,000
Prevented
Cost
Prevented
Cost
Prevented
Cost
diseases
savings
diseases
savings
diseases
savings
Na¨ıve baseline
53.438
6.319
250.422
8.889
489.331
11.988
(0.330)
(0.235)
(1.698)
(0.258)
(2.162)
(0.249)
Lindstroem and Tuomilehto (2003)
128.810
6.323
434.431
10.562
679.740
14.015
(0.710)
(0.181)
(2.008)
(0.196)
(3.126)
(0.219)
Wilson et al. (2007)
121.424
5.979
415.914
10.173
648.571
13.425
(0.671)
(0.174)
(1.918)
(0.187)
(2.940)
(0.209)
Kahn et al. (2009)
119.542
5.879
406.948
9.930
635.441
13.133
(0.660)
(0.170)
(1.878)
(0.183)
(2.897)
(0.205)
Rosella et al. (2011)
120.917
5.940
409.335
9.966
639.950
13.207
(0.667)
(0.171)
(1.891)
(0.184)
(2.932)
(0.206)
Our decision model
162.913
8.050
567.710
13.979
882.004
18.337
(0.902)
(0.239)
(2.612)
(0.253)
(3.934)
(0.284)
Stated: mean performance (standard deviation in parentheses)
Note. Performance metrics for allocation of preventive care with the respective decision model. Budget
constraints allow for the treatment of k patients per year. Cost savings over no preventive care allocation
are reported in USD millions.
C.3.
Robustness to Estimation Errors in the Treatment Effect
We now analyze the robustness of our decision model to potential errors in the estimation of the treatment effect.
For this, we run the same analysis as before, but introduce additional Gaussian noise to the estimated treatment
effect γi,l, i. e.,
˜γi,l = γi,l + ϵ
with
ϵ ∼N(0, σ2),
(32)
where σ denotes the level of noise. The latter thus represents the estimation error. We further know that the
effectiveness of preventive care such as metformin is bounded and, therefore, ensure the noisy treatment effect
˜γi,l to lie in the interval [0,1] through clipping.
Table 9 lists the results for this analysis. Here, we compare different noise levels σ ∈{0,0.1,0.5}. Of note,
a noise level of σ = 0.5 introduces a large estimation error, especially when considering that the effectiveness
of preventive treatments should lie in the interval [0,1] for real-world clinical settings. As expected, we find a
slightly more dominant role of estimation errors for small k, which, in light of the small set of patients allocated
to preventive care, results in slightly reduced cost savings. This can be expected due to the small sample size.
However, and more importantly, we find that the impact of estimation errors is overall fairly small: we still achieve
a large number of prevented disease onsets as well as large cost savings over current practice. For example, even

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
6
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
for noise of σ = 0.1, our decision model still outperforms current practice for k = 10,000 and is only slightly
outperformed by current practice for noise of σ = 0.5.
Table 9
Robustness of our decision model to estimation errors in the treatment effect.
k=1,000
k=5,000
k=10,000
Prevented
Cost
Prevented
Cost
Prevented
Cost
diseases
savings
diseases
savings
diseases
savings
Clinical baseline
134.798
7.340
446.948
11.996
701.942
15.350
(1.025)
(0.245)
(3.373)
(0.258)
(3.837)
(0.265)
σ = 0
162.913
8.050
567.710
13.979
882.004
18.337
(0.902)
(0.239)
(2.612)
(0.253)
(3.934)
(0.284)
σ = 0.1
149.481
7.331
501.655
12.172
785.779
16.180
(0.823)
(0.209)
(2.320)
(0.227)
(3.630)
(0.253)
σ = 0.5
131.199
6.462
449.977
11.012
701.492
14.526
(0.725)
(0.189)
(2.075)
(0.202)
(3.176)
(0.226)
Stated: mean performance (standard deviation in parentheses)
Note. Budget constraints allow for the treatment of k patients per year. Cost savings
over no preventive care allocation are reported in USD millions.
C.4.
Robustness to Number of Training Samples
In machine learning, the size of the training set is known to affect the prediction performance, which, in turn,
affects the operational performance. We thus study the convergence of our decision model against the optimal
decision for an increasing number of observations. We use a static setting with observations x ∈R3, for which
the three components represent different patient variables (age, height, body mass index). We simulate these as
follows:
x ∼N(µ, Σ),
(33)
µ = (50,170,27)T,
(34)
Σ =
"20 0 5
0 50 5
5
5 5
#
(35)
The true but unobservable risk of an onset is given by
y = σ
0.5x1 + 0.1x2 + 0.2x3
100

,
(36)
with σ denoting the sigmoid function. We assume that we observe the actual outcomes only for Ntrain patients.
That is, for each patient i, we assume that we observe the realization of Y given by
yi =

1,
if
y + ϵ ≥0.7,
0,
otherwise,
with
ϵ ∼N(0, 1).
(37)
In the simulation, we further set the true treatment effect to γ = 0.31.

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
7
Our population comprises N = 100,000 patients. The budget constraint allows us to enroll k = 10,000 patients
into preventive care. Figure 4 shows the number of prevented diseases for varying training sample sizes Ntrain.
It confirms that our decision model converges to the optimal allocation. Moreover, we already yield a close-to-
optimum performance for a relatively small number of training samples (i. e., fewer than 3,000).
Figure 4
Performance of our decision model for varying number of training samples.
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Training sample size Ntrain
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Prevented diseases
Our decision model
Random allocation
Optimum allocation

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
8
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
Appendix D:
Causal Sensitivity Analysis
In the following, we analyze how potential unobserved confounders would affect the estimated treatment effects.
Unobserved confounders refer to unmeasured variables that affect both treatment assignment and the health
outcome (Cinelli and Hazlett 2020). A prominent example is the socioeconomic status of patients, as wealthier
patients are often more likely to enroll in preventive care and, furthermore, can afford a healthier lifestyle that
is responsible for a lower diabetes risk, which thus may underestimate the treatment effect of metformin. Since
these confounders are unobserved, we cannot control for them when estimating the effect of a treatment. As a
remedy, we follow the so-called causal sensitivity analysis from Cinelli and Hazlett (2020) and analyze the effect
that an unobserved confounder would have on the treatment effect estimation, if it existed. More precisely, we
select an observed variable which affects both treatment assignment and the health outcome and now assume
that an unobserved confounder exists with the same strength as the observed one. Then, we check that the
treatment effect cannot be explained away and thus remains robust.
The age of a patient is generally associated with the likelihood of being prescribed with metformin (e.g., Rosella
et al. 2011) and has also been shown to be strongly associated with the risk of diabetes onset (e.g., Knowler et al.
2002). Thus, we use the strength of the variable “age” in the following as our reference to make comparisons of
whether the treatment effect can be explained away.
We follow Cinelli and Hazlett (2020) and use a linear regression. Informed by clinical research (e.g., the
Framingham risk score), we use a linear regression with the following patient variables, i.e.,
y = treatment + age + sex + weight + body mass index + systolic bp + diastolic bp + height.
(38)
We then perform causal sensitivity analysis for all patients and first test for the sensitivity of the main effect.
Afterward, to account for heterogeneity in the treatment effect, we repeat the causal sensitivity analysis for
different patient subgroups. For this, we segment the patients by their estimated treatment effects into four
groups – A, B, C, D – using a decision tree regressor, and then perform the causal sensitivity analysis for each
subgroup.
Table 10 shows the results of our causal sensitivity analysis. The results confirm that the estimated treatment
effect is robust to unobserved confounders. The results are also consistent across all subgroups. Note that the
patient’s age is considered to be one of the strongest predictors for diabetes (American Diabetes Association
2022), and, thus, it is very unlikely to have an unobserved confounder of a similar strength. In other words,

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
9
the treatment effect cannot be explained away by unobserved confounding. In sum, we do not see evidence that
unobserved confounders may undermine our estimates of treatment effectiveness, which is in line with many
existing works using randomized control trials that have already confirmed the effectiveness of metformin (e.g.,
Knowler et al. 2002).
Table 10
Results of robustness check for unobserved confounders.
Strength
All patients
Subgroups
A
B
C
D
0.2 × age
0.066
0.066
0.142
0.048
0.058
[0.052, 0.088]
[0.045, 0.096]
[0.103, 0.188]
[0.026, 0.074]
[0.027, 0.097]
0.5 × age
0.053
0.052
0.127
0.037
0.046
[0.039, 0.074]
[0.029, 0.078]
[0.084, 0.177]
[0.015, 0.060]
[0.019, 0.075]
0.8 × age
0.043
0.040
0.117
0.029
0.039
[0.031, 0.058]
[0.013, 0.072]
[0.075, 0.132]
[0.009, 0.052]
[0.014, 0.071]
Stated: mean estimation (95% confidence intervals in parentheses)
Note. Estimated treatment effects when assuming the existence of an unob-
served confounder with the strength 0.2 × age, 0.5 × age, and 1.0 × age.

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
10
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
Appendix E:
Machine Learning Explainability
To determine the most influential predictors, we calculated SHAP values. SHAP values are a unified method for
measuring how much a predictor contributes to the overall model output and, therefore, rank the importance of
the features. Moreover, they indicate whether higher (lower) values of a predictor are associated with an increased
risk of diabetes onset.
Figure 5 shows the ten most important predictors for the gradient boosted decision tree when predicting dia-
betes onset. The most important predictors are age, body mass index (BMI), and the current glycated hemoglobin
level (HbA1c). Age and BMI are well known risk factors for diabetes, and both were accordingly among the
most important predictors for our gradient boosted decision tree (Abbasi et al. 2016). Also among the ten most
important predictors are the red cell distribution width and thyroid stimulating hormone tests, which have both
been found in the medical literature to be predictors for diabetes (e. g., Chaker et al. 2016). The height and
weight of the patient are also among the ten most important predictors, yet with less importance. This is likely
due to the fact that the predictive power of these variables as individual predictors is limited, and only their
combination (as in the BMI) leads to an important predictor.
We discussed our results with medical experts from diabetes care, who confirmed to us that these predictors
are well-established risk factor for diabetes.

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
11
Figure 5
SHAP values for the ten most important predictors for the prediction model. The dots represent observation
for which the x-axis denotes the SHAP value. Observations with a positive (negative) SHAP value denote
a higher (lower) risk for a diabetes onset. The color of each dot indicates the corresponding value of the
predictor for a given observation.
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
SHAP value (impact on model output)
Weight
Diastolic blood pressure
Height
Nonspecific findings
on examination of blood
Systolic blood pressure
Red cell distribution width
Thyroid stimulating hormone test
HbA1c(%)
BMI
Age
Low
High
Feature value

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
12
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
Appendix F:
Calibration of Machine Learning Model
We use two techniques to improve the calibration of our machine learning model. Here, the aim is that the
distribution of the predicted probability is similar to the distribution of the observed probability in the training
data. First, we use the synthetic minority over-sampling technique (SMOTE) (Chawla et al. 2002) to oversample
observations from patients who develop diabetes. Second, we use Platt scaling to calibrate the predicted class
probabilities (Niculescu-Mizil and Caruana 2005). Figure 6 shows the calibration plot for our gradient boosted
decision trees after resampling. The calibration plot shows a good calibration.
Figure 6
Calibration of our machine learning model. The gray area shows the standard deviation due to resampling.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Average probability
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Fraction of positive
Our model
Perfect calibration

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
13
Appendix G:
Hyperparameter Tuning
We determined the hyperparameters using Bayesian optimization with 100 iterations of optimization. Table 11
lists the tuning ranges for each parameter. In the Bayesian optimization, the initial parameters are sampled
from a uniform distribution. We implemented and evaluated all decision models in Python. The lasso, ridge
regression, and random forest machine learning models are implemented using scikit-learn. The deep neural
network is implemented using Pytorch. We train the deep neural network using the Adam optimizer. We use
ReLU activation in the hidden layers and sigmoid in the output layer. The objective of the optimizer is to
minimize the binary cross-entropy. The gradient boosted decision trees are implemented using LightGBM. For
the causal forest, we keep all parameters at their default values. That is, we set the number of estimators to 10,
the number of features to consider when looking for the best split to 10, the maximum depth of the trees to 5,
the minimum number of samples required to be split at a leaf node to 100, and the minimum number of samples
required of the experiment group to be split at a leaf node to 10.
Table 11
Hyperparameter tuning.
Model
Tuning parameters
Tuning range
Lasso
Regularization strength α
(0.001,10000)
Ridge regression
Regularization strength
(0.001,10000)
Random forest
Number of trees
(20,200)
Min samples for split
(2,150)
Number of features to consider for split
{sqrt, log2, all}
Criterion for split
{gini, entropy}
Class weight
{none, balanced}
Deep neural network
Number of neurons
(5,128)
Number of hidden layers
(1,5)
Regularization strength
(0.0,5.0)
Learning rate
(0.0001,0.1)
Batch size
(10,1024)
Gradient boosted decision trees
Number of trees
(20,200)
Number of leaves
(20,150)
Learning rate
(0.01,0.5)
Number of samples for constructing bins
(20000,300000)
Minimum number of data needed in a child
(20,500)
L1 regularization term on weights
(0,1)
L2 regularization term on weights
(0,1)
Class weight
{none, balanced}

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
14
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
Appendix H:
Applicability for Settings with Known Treatment Effects
Here, we aim to demonstrate the applicability of our model in settings where the treatment effect of preventive
care is known. In such a case, there is no need for healthcare organizations to perform counterfactual inference
for treatment effect estimation, as the treatment effect can the be directly entered in the decision model.
To show the applicability of our decision model, we build upon a different setting. Recall that we examined
metformin in the main paper. The reason was that it represents the quasi-standard for preventive care aimed at
individuals at risk of developing diabetes in current medical practice (Long and Fox 2016). Several studies also
suggest a risk reduction if patients are enrolled in personalized coaching toward a healthier lifestyle; however, such
personalized coaching is currently not covered by health insurers in many countries (e. g., Germany, Switzerland,
and Medicare in the United States). Nevertheless, it may be interesting to study the cost-effectiveness of lifestyle
coaching for diabetes prevention.
In the case of personalized coaching, the goal of preventive treatment is to achieve lifestyle changes of the
patients. Lifestyle changes have not been prescribed to the customers of our partnering health insurer. Thus, the
treatment effect cannot be estimated through stage 1 of our decision model. Instead, we rely on prior literature
that has estimated the treatment effect of personalized coaching through randomized controlled trials (Knowler
et al. 2002).
We assume a treatment effect due to personalized coaching of γi,l∗= 0.58 (Knowler et al. 2002) that is expo-
nentially decreasing over time, i. e.,
γi,l = γi,l∗+1 exp(l∗−l),
for l ≥l∗.
(39)
We set the annual cost of personalized coaching to Cprevent = 1,600 (Azelton et al. 2021).
Table 12 shows the empirical results. Here, we again compare the data-driven allocations from our decision
model against that from current practice. Our findings are line with the results from the main paper: our decision
model outperforms current practice across all metrics.
To sum up, there are different benefits of whether the treatment effect is (a) known or (b) estimated through
stage 1 of our decision model. A benefit of (a) is that healthcare organizations can leverage known treatment
effects from randomized controlled trials, which represent the gold standard for measuring treatment effects.
In particular, there is no bias due to unobserved confounders. A benefit of (b) is that randomized controlled
trials are not always available or otherwise costly, because of which our estimation may be preferred in prac-
tice. Moreover, using counterfactual inference in our decision model offers a mathematical approach to directly

Author: Data-Driven Allocation of Preventive Care
Article accepted by Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-21-251
15
learn heterogeneous treatment effects and thus account for the differential effectiveness of preventive care across
patients.
Table 12
Comparison of current practice vs. our data-driven decision model for the case of
personalized coaching.
k=1,000
k=5,000
k=10,000
Prevented
Cost
Prevented
Cost
Prevented
Cost
diseases
savings
diseases
savings
diseases
savings
Na¨ıve baseline
728.378
16.457
1423.607
26.651
2736.326
45.807
(5.606)
(0.141)
(10.761)
(0.249)
(16.553)
(0.323)
Current practice
1318.303
25.786
2083.693
37.088
3184.516
51.263
(9.893)
(0.223)
(12.719)
(0.287)
(14.837)
(0.310)
Our decision model
1555.792
29.544
2143.867
38.036
3349.127
53.767
(10.960)
(0.223)
(14.553)
(0.295)
(15.103)
(0.276)
Stated: mean performance (standard deviation in parentheses)
Note. Performance metrics for allocating preventive care given a varying budget for
enrolling k patients per year into preventive treatments. Cost savings over no preventive
care allocation are reported in USD millions.