TITLE: Managing Trade-offs in Protein Manufacturing: How Much to Waste?
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2019
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2018.0740
---

Managing trade-offs in protein manufacturing
Citation for published version (APA):
Martagan, T. G., Krishnamurthy, A., & Leland, P. (2020). Managing trade-offs in protein manufacturing: how
much to waste? Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 22(2), 330-345.
https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2018.0740
DOI:
10.1287/msom.2018.0740
Document status and date:
Published: 01/03/2020
Document Version:
Accepted manuscript including changes made at the peer-review stage
Please check the document version of this publication:
• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can be
important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record. People
interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication, or visit the
DOI to the publisher's website.
• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page
numbers.
Link to publication
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
 • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
 • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
 • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:
www.tue.nl/taverne
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:
openaccess@tue.nl
providing details and we will investigate your claim.
Download date: 13. Jun. 2026

Submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
manuscript MSOM-16-014.R3
Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing:
How Much to Waste?
Tugce Martagan
School of Industrial Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, t.g.martagan@tue.nl,
Ananth Krishnamurthy
Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, ananth.krishnamurthy@wisc.edu,
Peter A. Leland
Aldevron, leland@aldevron.com,
We consider the challenges and trade-oﬀs involved in the manufacturing of engineered proteins. Manufac-
turing these proteins involves high risk of ﬁnancial losses due to the purity and yield trade-oﬀs, uncertainty
in the process outcomes, and high operating costs. In this setting, the biomanufacturer must determine how
much protein to manufacture in the upstream fermentation operations, and then how much of it to waste in
each subsequent puriﬁcation operation because of the purity–yield trade-oﬀs. We develop a Markov decision
model to optimize three layers of interdependent decisions in protein manufacturing: the optimal amount
of protein to be produced in upstream operations, the optimal choice of chromatography technique to be
used in downstream operations, and the optimal choice of pooling windows during chromatography. The
proposed stochastic model dynamically optimizes these three layers of interdependent decisions to maximize
the expected proﬁt. The structural analysis derives functional relationships between the purity–yield trade-
oﬀs and operating costs, and characterizes the optimal operating policies. The optimal policy also suggests
when the biomanufacturer is better oﬀfailing early and cutting losses. We use a state aggregation scheme to
reduce the computational eﬀorts, and quantify the savings obtained from the use of the optimization model
in industry practice at Aldevron.
Key words : Stochastic optimization, protein manufacturing, quality requirement, random yield.
1.
Introduction
More than 8,000 therapeutics are in the global pharmaceutical research and development
pipeline to treat cancer, diabetes, and many other diseases (Long and Works 2013). These
therapeutics are the “next-generation” drugs produced by biomanufacturing technologies.
Unlike traditional pharmaceuticals that are chemically synthesized, biopharmaceuticals
are manufactured through live systems (e.g., bacteria, viruses, mammalian cells, etc.). The
use of live systems introduces unique manufacturing challenges and trade-oﬀs due to the
uncertainty in production outcomes. In this paper, we focus on the biomanufacturing of
1

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
2
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
engineered proteins. These proteins are uniquely designed and manufactured as part of
pharmaceutical research and development (R&D).
Protein manufacturing operations consist of two main steps: upstream fermentation and
downstream puriﬁcation processes. The upstream fermentation process results in a batch
mixture containing the protein of interest along with several unwanted impurities. The
downstream puriﬁcation process consists of a series of chromatographic steps to eliminate
the unwanted impurities. To satisfy the customer order, the biomanufacturer must meet
the yield requirement (i.e., the desired amount of protein) and purity requirement (i.e., the
minimum acceptable quality). However, meeting both of these requirements is challenging
because of the purity–yield trade-oﬀs. For example, the biomanufacturer needs to waste
some amount of the protein at each chromatography step to improve the batch purity. If
too much protein is wasted, then the yield requirement might not be achieved. In con-
trast, if too little protein is wasted, then the purity requirement might not be achieved.
High purity requirements impose another layer of challenge. For example, the batch often
needs to be free of impurities if the potential end users are humans. To achieve such high
purity targets, biomanufacturers need to successfully manage the purity–yield trade-oﬀs
at multiple interdependent chromatography steps.
Although the purity–yield trade-oﬀis inevitable, it is possible to control it by simul-
taneously optimizing the choice of chromatography technique and pooling window (i.e.,
the chromatography operating policy). In the presence of multiple impurities, simultane-
ously optimizing these two chromatography decisions is challenging because each impurity
exhibits a distinct separation performance in diﬀerent chromatography techniques. There-
fore, it is important to choose the right chromatography technique and pooling window to
simultaneously eliminate multiple impurities based on their purity–yield trade-oﬀs.
An expensive but feasible way of addressing these challenges is to deliberately increase
the amount of protein obtained from fermentation. Producing higher amounts of protein
during fermentation might alleviate the failure risks and the purity–yield trade-oﬀs involved
in chromatography operations. However, it also leads to higher operating costs. In addition,
each production order involves a predetermined yield requirement, and producing proteins
in excess of this requirement does not guarantee additional revenue.
Therefore, a protein manufacturing project is required to successfully manage three lay-
ers of operating decisions: (1) optimizing the protein mass obtained from fermentation

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
3
(see Section 2.2), (2) optimizing the pooling window used at a chromatography technique
(see Section 2.3), and (3) optimizing the choice of chromatography technique used in each
puriﬁcation step (see Section 2.4). In practice, these three layers of operating decisions are
interdependent, and need to be optimized through a unifying framework. In this paper,
we develop a stochastic optimization model that simultaneously addresses these three lev-
els of interdependent decisions, and answer the following questions: When is it optimal
to fail early and avoid future losses? What is the best protein amount to be manufac-
tured during fermentation? What are the best choices of chromatography techniques and
pooling windows? How much protein should be sacriﬁced at each chromatography step to
improve the purity? How can biomanufacturers overcome challenges in conforming to high
purity requirements? Answering these questions will shed light on the practical concern of
biomanufacturers regarding how much to waste. The waste in this setting corresponds to
(i) the amount of protein produced in excess of the yield requirement, and (ii) the amount
of protein sacriﬁced at each chromatography step to improve the batch purity.
Main contributions and organization of the paper. Our contributions are summarized
as follows: (i) We build a stochastic optimization model that simultaneously addresses
the upstream protein mass decisions, the chromatography technique selection decisions,
and the pooling window decisions in the presence of multiple impurities. (ii) We analyze
the structural properties of the upstream protein mass problem, and characterize three
critical protein threshold values. These thresholds provide formal guidelines to reduce the
production costs of biomanufacturing operations. The structural results provide a rigorous
framework to analyze the ﬁnancial trade-oﬀs in practice. (iii) We characterize functional
relationships between the purity–yield trade-oﬀs and operating costs, and determine the
structural properties of the optimal policies. Such structural characteristics of the optimal
policies have not been analyzed in the literature. (iv) The resulting model is complex to
analyze analytically and computationally. We develop an aggregation scheme based on the
structural results, and successfully simplify the problem by transforming its continuous
state space into a binary state space for each impurity. The proposed approach provides
a new perspective to handle industry-scale problems at a 100% purity requirement. (v)
We quantify the potential impact of the optimization model with an industry case study.
The case study shows that substantial improvement in the expected proﬁt can be achieved
using the optimization framework. This research has been conducted in collaboration with

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
4
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
Aldevron, a biomanufacturer specializing in protein manufacturing. The research outcomes
have been shared and validated with a larger biotechnology community through industry
working group sessions (BioWGS 2016).
To the best of our knowledge, Martagan et al. (2017) was the ﬁrst to develop a Markov
decision model for protein puriﬁcation operations. However, they assume that the upstream
protein mass problem and the downstream chromatography technique selection problem
have been solved, and mainly focus on the pooling window selection problem. This aligns
with the current practice where process improvements are limited to one of the decision
layers in isolation. In contrast, this paper demonstrates the value obtained when these
three decision layers are optimized simultaneously. The case study in Section 7 shows that
the improvements achieved by the simultaneous optimization framework are almost double
of that achieved by optimizing an individual decision layer alone.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The problem setting is introduced in
Section 2 and the relevant literature is discussed in Section 3. The optimization model is
developed in Section 4, and the structural properties are analyzed in Section 5. Section 6
presents a state aggregation scheme. A case study from Aldevron is presented in Section 7,
and concluding remarks are provided in Section 8.
2.
Background on Protein Manufacturing
The ﬁrst stage in biomanufacturing is the upstream fermentation operations, where the cells
grow and produce the protein of interest. The batch obtained from fermentation consists
of a mixture of the protein of interest along with several impurities. These impurities
are unwanted byproducts, such as contaminants, dead cells, ammonia, lactate, and other
metabolic residues. The batch proceeds with downstream puriﬁcation operations, where
these impurities are eliminated through a series of chromatography operations.
Chromatography operations are carried out in columns packed with special resins bind-
ing to either proteins or impurities. A chromatography technique uses the diﬀerence in the
physical and chemical properties as a separation principle. For example, a chromatogra-
phy technique could exploit the diﬀerence in molecular size, charge, hydrophobicity, etc. A
typical puriﬁcation process consists of 2 to 6 chromatography steps. In practice, the scien-
tist ﬁrst collects data on the performance of diﬀerent chromatography techniques through
scouting experiments, and then uses this data during the production runs.

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
5
2.1.
Yield and Purity Requirements
Purity is a typical measure of batch quality, and it represents the ratio of the amount
of the protein to the total amount of the protein and impurities available in the batch.
Depending on the application, the ﬁnal purity requirement speciﬁed by the client could be
up to 99% or even 100%. For example, if the users are humans, then the batch often needs
to be free of unwanted impurities to satisfy regulatory requirements. In this paper, we are
speciﬁcally interested in proteins whose potential end users are humans, and hence the
ﬁnal batch should conform to high purity requirements (i.e., ≥99.9% purity). The yield
requirement represents the amount (mass) of the protein that needs to be produced. We
use the terms “amount” and “mass” interchangeably hereinafter. The yield requirement is
speciﬁed by the client along with the purity requirement. When the yield requirement is
not achieved, the biomanufacturer incurs penalty costs per unit of protein in shortage.
2.2.
The Upstream Protein Mass Problem
The scientist operating the fermentation process does not have the ability to prevent or
limit the formation of impurities, as they are natural metabolites. Several studies have doc-
umented evidence related to the impurities obtained during the fermentation process based
on the physicochemical conditions (Tsao et al. 2004, Xing et al. 2010). The scientist has
the ability to selectively increase the amount of the protein obtained from the fermentation
using several controls, e.g., adjusting the harvesting times or increasing the productivity
of the cell lines. The objective of this study is not to develop fermentation control policies
to increase the protein amount. Instead, we focus on identifying the optimal amount of
protein that should be obtained at the end of the fermentation process.
Increasing the protein amount obtained from a batch is an important research topic, and
it is referred to as the problem of increasing the titer. Although increasing the protein mass
obtained from a batch is possible, it may signiﬁcantly boost the upstream operating costs,
because these costs are nondecreasing in the amount of protein. Increasing the protein mass
to more than is required could hurt the proﬁtability of a batch, as the customers may not
purchase the proteins manufactured in excess of their yield requirement. Identifying the
best amount of protein to be obtained from the upstream batch is a challenging problem
because of the random yield losses and uncertain purity outcomes in the downstream
puriﬁcation operations. Although higher protein mass increases the upstream costs, it
alleviates the downstream puriﬁcation risks. Due to these trade-oﬀs, a formal decision-
making framework is required in practice.

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
6
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
(a) Chromatography Outcome
(b) Fraction per Lane
Fraction per lane
Lanes
Figure 1
An example of chromatography outcome with multiple impurities (Industry data from Aldevron)
2.3.
The Pooling Window Selection Problem
Figure 1 (a) shows an example of the outcome obtained from a chromatography operation.
Each column in Figure 1 (a) is called a lane, and represents the volume ﬂowing through
the chromatography equipment during a speciﬁed time interval (e.g., one minute). The
y-axis in Figure 1 (a) describes the composition of the volume collected as a function of
the molecular size of the protein and impurity constituents. Each lane is comprised of some
fraction of the total amount of the protein of interest, and some fraction of diﬀerent types
of impurities. For example, consider lane 8 in Figure 1 (a). In this lane, there are 8 diﬀerent
types of molecules; one of them is the protein of interest, and the remaining ones are
diﬀerent types of impurities (as shown by the arrows). We translate the chromatography
outcome in Figure 1 (a) into the diagram in Figure 1(b). Figure 1(b) plots the fraction of
total protein mass per lane and two representative impurities.
The scientist decides which chromatography technique and pooling window to use simul-
taneously. First, we introduce the pooling window decision for a given chromatography
technique. For simplicity, we plot only two diﬀerent impurity types in Figure 1(b), namely
Impurity A and B, and use this example to discuss the purity–yield trade-oﬀin pooling
decisions. If the scientist pools lanes 3–15 in Figure 1(b), then she collects all protein
along with Impurity A and B. On the other hand, if she pools lanes 9–15, she compro-
mises on the yield (i.e., collects a smaller fraction of the protein) but completely eliminates
Impurity A and some fraction of Impurity B. Alternatively, the scientist might decide to
signiﬁcantly compromise on the yield (i.e., lose ≈55% of the protein) by pooling lanes

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
 Chromatography Technique 1 
Lanes
Fraction per Lane
 
Protein
Impurity A
Impurity B
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1112131415 16
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
 Chromatography Technique 2 
Lanes
Fraction per Lane
 
Protein
Impurity A
Impurity B
Figure 2
Diﬀerence in the separation capability of two chromatography techniques (Industry data from Aldevron)
12–15, but this decision helps to achieve 100% purity because all unwanted impurities
are eliminated. This example illustrates the purity–yield trade-oﬀtypically encountered in
chromatography operations.
Note that Figure 1 illustrates only one sample outcome of a chromatography step.
However, in practice, the amount of protein and impurities associated with each pooling
window is random. This randomness adds another layer of challenge in decision-making.
In addition, pooling window decisions can become more complex when a chromatography
technique demonstrates a distinct aﬃnity toward diﬀerent types of impurities. In practice,
depending on the outcome of a chromatography step, the scientist makes decisions regard-
ing the chromatography technique and the pooling window for the subsequent step. This
leads to the related problem of chromatography technique selection.
2.4.
The Chromatography Technique Selection Problem
Figure 2 shows the output of two diﬀerent chromatography techniques based on industry
data. Both outputs shown in Figure 2 use the same starting material but diﬀerent tech-
niques to separate the protein from unwanted impurities. The starting material contains
the protein along with Impurity A and B. The x-axis in Figure 2 represents the lanes, and
the y-axis denotes the fraction of the molecules corresponding to each lane. The solid curve
in Figure 2 represents the protein, and the other two curves represent the impurities.
Note that the choice of chromatography technique inﬂuences the relative positions of the
molecules and their corresponding amount in each lane. For example, Impurity A is located

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
8
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
on the left of the protein under the ﬁrst chromatography technique in Figure 2. However,
the same impurity overlaps completely with the protein under the second chromatography
technique in Figure 2. It is clear that the second technique is not capable of separating
Impurity A from the protein of interest. However, it provides a better separation outcome
for Impurity B than ﬁrst chromatography technique. The relative locations of the protein
and impurities and their corresponding amounts in each lane are complex functions of
the physical and chemical properties, and vary for each chromatography technique. Note
that the choice of chromatography technique directly inﬂuences the underlying purity–
yield trade-oﬀs, as the relative locations of protein and impurities are diﬀerent for each
chromatography technique.
2.5.
Interdependency between Chromatography Technique and Pooling Window
The pooling window decision is strongly inﬂuenced by the choice of chromatography tech-
nique. For example, if the scientist needs to completely eliminate Impurity B in Figure 2,
then she could pool lanes 12–15 on the ﬁrst chromatography technique (wasting ≈55%
of the protein of interest), or she could pool lanes 2–11 on the second chromatography
technique without compromising the protein. This illustrates the complex interdependency
between the choice of chromatography technique, pooling windows, and purity–yield trade-
oﬀs. In practice, a starting material could contain up to 100 diﬀerent impurities to be
separated using 5 to 10 available chromatography techniques. The combinatorial complex-
ity arising from multiple impurities, chromatography techniques, pooling windows, and
purity–yield trade-oﬀs makes the puriﬁcation decisions complex in practice.
2.6.
Decision Making in Practice
We organized a series of working group sessions, and interviewed several small- and
medium-sized biomanufacturers to understand the industry-wide practice. We learned that
operating decisions are often made based on a combination of the industry guidelines and
scientists’ experience. For example, a standard puriﬁcation protocol suggests a three-step
strategy with (1) a capture step to remove critical contaminants, (2) intermediate step(s)
to remove bulk impurities, and (3) a polishing step to eliminate remaining impurities. The
handbook of GE Healthcare provides an excellent summary of the common guidelines for
puriﬁcation processes (GE Healthcare 2010). These protocols often match an impurity type
with a chromatography technique, e.g., if the impurity is aﬃnity-tagged, then use the anion

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
9
exchange chromatography (GE Healthcare 2010). Popular heuristics also use the highest
resolution criteria (i.e., the chromatography technique that has the least overlap between
the protein and impurities) or the highest selectivity criteria (i.e., the chromatography
technique that has the highest distance between the protein and impurity peaks) as a
heuristic for decision-making. On a given chromatography technique, the scientist identiﬁes
the speciﬁc type of impurities to be eliminated, and selects the pooling window accordingly.
Note that these guidelines and heuristics are deﬁned based on the biological and chemical
dynamics, but do not incorporate the ﬁnancial trade-oﬀs into decision-making.
For the upstream protein mass decisions, companies often plan for excess production to
buﬀer against uncertainties in subsequent operations. Company-speciﬁc guidelines are often
used to constrain a minimum and maximum limit on the production quantities, e.g., “do not
produce more than threefold of the yield requirement,” “only buﬀer against the expected
yield losses in downstream,” or “always run the bioreactor at maximum capacity.” Based
on the working group sessions, we observed that Operations Research (OR) applications in
the biomanufacturing industry are still in infancy. However, biomanufacturers across the
world are realizing that they need to undergo a data-driven OR-based transformation to
fully realize the societal beneﬁts of bioscience research.
3.
Literature Review
The relevant literature can be classiﬁed into two categories: fermentation optimization and
chromatography optimization. In the ﬁeld of fermentation optimization, several studies
focus on developing models for cell growth and product formation (Patel et al. 2000, Tsao
et al. 2004, Xing et al. 2010). These cell growth models are also incorporated into optimiza-
tion models to determine the optimal control policies that increase the titer (Saucedo and
Karim 1997, Yang et al. 2000, Peroni et al. 2005, Gnoth et al. 2007, Martagan et al. 2016).
However, the literature typically focuses on the underlying biology of the fermentation
process, and often does not account for the uncertainties, ﬁnancial trade-oﬀs, and interac-
tions between the fermentation and chromatography decisions. There are limited number
of simulation studies that model the manufacturing uncertainties (Saraph 2003, Petrides
and Siletti 2004), but these simulation models do not yield insights on the structural char-
acteristics of the optimal policies. To address this gap, we develop a stochastic optimization
model and provide analytic results on the optimal policies and ﬁnancial trade-oﬀs.

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
10
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
The literature on chromatography operations includes several studies on the chromatog-
raphy technique selection problem. For example, Vasquez-Alvarez and Pinto (2004) pre-
sented two mixed-integer linear programming (MILP) models to optimize the choice of
chromatography techniques. One of the MILP models minimizes the number of steps to
achieve the desired purity, whereas the other MILP model maximizes the purity. The
authors of Lienqueo et al. (2009) developed a mixed integer nonlinear programming
(MINLP) model to optimize the choice of polypeptide tag and chromatography steps
to maximize proﬁt. A ﬂowsheet optimization mechanism was developed by Nfor et al.
(2013) to eliminate multiple impurities with the minimum number of steps. However, the
aforementioned studies do not account for the interaction between the chromatography
technique and pooling window decisions. There are only a few studies that consider the
interdependency between these two operating decisions. For example, Polykarpou et al.
(2011) developed an MINLP model that determines the best chromatography technique
and pooling window to minimize the number of steps. Then, Polykarpou et al. (2012)
extended this work by developing an MILP model that overcomes the drawbacks of the
nonlinear model. The proposed MILP model helps to achieve a predetermined purity level
with the minimum number of steps. However, existing studies often focus on deterministic
models, and aim to minimize the number of steps. In contrast, we develop a stochastic opti-
mization model that captures the process uncertainties and ﬁnancial trade-oﬀs involved in
both the fermentation and puriﬁcation operations.
In the context of stochastic optimization, Martagan et al. (2017) was the ﬁrst to build
a Markov decision model to optimize the pooling windows. However, the authors assume
that the upstream production quantity and the choice of chromatography technique are
predetermined, and only focus on optimizing the pooling windows. The authors character-
ize new performance guarantees for meeting the production requirements, and propose a
zone-based decision-making approach. In contrast, this paper captures a broader scope, as
it addresses the upstream protein mass problem, the chromatography technique selection
problem, and the pooling window selection problem simultaneously.
4.
Model Formulation
In this section, we provide a Markov decision model that maximizes the total expected
proﬁt obtained from a speciﬁc order. We decompose the optimization problem into two
sub-problems: the upstream protein mass problem and the downstream puriﬁcation problem.

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
11
Decision Epochs: We consider a discrete-time, ﬁnite-horizon Markov decision model.
The set T = {t : 1,...,T −1} denotes the decision epochs for the downstream puriﬁcation
problem, where each decision epoch t ∈T represents the beginning of a chromatography
step. The maximum number of chromatography steps required to achieve the desired purity
level is T −1 because of the limitations in the number of available chromatography tech-
niques. Next, we let t = 0 denote the decision epoch for the upstream protein mass problem,
where the scientists determine the amount of protein to be obtained from fermentation.
Hence, the set T ∪{0} denotes all the decision epochs of the optimization problem. The
end of the planning horizon is captured by T, such that the batch is either shipped to the
customer or scrapped at a penalty cost at the ﬁnal time t = T.
State Space: First, we focus on the state space for the downstream puriﬁcation prob-
lem. Let pt ∈P represent the amount (mass) of the protein available in the batch at the
beginning of the chromatography step t ∈T . Note that pt ∈[0,p1] for all chromatography
steps t ∈T , because the amount of protein pt available at the beginning of each step t is
bounded by the starting material p1. Next, we deﬁne the diﬀerent types of impurities and
their corresponding amounts available in the batch. Let K = {k : 1,2,...,K} be the set of
K distinct types of impurities, where K < ∞. Let ik,t ∈Ik denote the amount of impurity
type k ∈K available in the batch at the beginning of chromatography step t ∈T . The
impurity state (i1,t,...,iK,t) ∈I1 ×...×IK represents the set of all distinct types of impu-
rities k ∈K and their corresponding amounts ik,t available in the batch at the beginning
of the chromatography step t ∈T . Note that ik,t ∈[0,ik,1] for each impurity type k ∈K at
chromatography step t ∈T . The amount of protein p1 and the amount of impurities ik,1 for
each impurity type k ∈K at the beginning of the ﬁrst chromatography step is determined
by the upstream fermentation process. We deﬁne the state ∆as the stopping state, i.e.,
an absorbing state with zero cost representing the end of the optimization problem, where
the batch is either shipped or scrapped. Therefore, (pt,i1,t,...,iK,t) ∪∆is the state of the
downstream puriﬁcation problem for all chromatography steps t ∈T .
Next, we consider the state space for the upstream protein mass problem. The amount of
protein p0 and impurity ik,0 for all impurity types k ∈K at the beginning of the upstream
fermentation operation is represented by the state (p0,i1,0,...,iK,0). It is assumed that there
are no proteins or impurities available in the batch at the beginning of the fermentation

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
12
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
process. Therefore, the starting state of the upstream protein mass problem is p0 = 0 and
ik,0 = 0 for all impurity types k ∈K.
Action Space: We ﬁrst present the set of actions for the downstream puriﬁcation
problem. Let C = {c : 1,2,...,C} be the set of available chromatography techniques, where
the action c ∈C denotes the choice of the chromatography technique c to be used at a given
puriﬁcation step t ∈T . The action space C is ﬁnite and countable, as there is limited number
of chromatography techniques available in a given biomanufacturing facility. Next, let Lc =
{1,2,...,Lc} denote an ordered set of lanes available at each chromatography technique
c ∈C. Note that the maximum number of lanes Lc on a chromatography technique c could
be diﬀerent for each technique c ∈C. A pooling window wc ∈Wc on the chromatography
technique c represents a subset of consecutive lanes from the set Lc. More speciﬁcally, the
set of all possible pooling windows for a chromatography technique c is Wc = {(i,...,j) ⊆
Lc : j = i + m,i = {1,...,Lc},m = {0,1,...,Lc −i}} = {wc : w1,w2,...,wNc}, where Nc is
the maximum number of pooling windows available on a chromatography technique c. Let
at(pt,i1,t,...,iK,t) represent the action taken at the beginning of the puriﬁcation step t ∈T
and state (pt,i1,t,...,iK,t). In the downstream puriﬁcation problem, the scientist makes
the joint decision (c,wc) ∈C × Wc on the chromatography technique c ∈C and pooling
window wc ∈Wc used at the puriﬁcation step t ∈T . Additionally, the scientist has the
possibility for taking the stopping action S by either scrapping the batch or shipping it to
the customer. Note that at(∆) = S for t ∈T ∪{T}.
In the upstream operations, the scientist has the ability to selectively increase the protein
mass p1 in the range [0,pmax] through a set of controls. In practice, these controls correspond
to manufacturing protocols related to the choice of buﬀers, adjustment of physical and
biological parameters, feeding strategies, etc. Determining these controls itself is a process
design problem (see Saucedo and Karim 1997, Yang et al. 2000, Xing et al. 2010, Martagan
et al. 2016), and is outside our scope. Instead, we are interested in determining the protein
amount p1 to be produced in the upstream fermentation operation. Therefore, p1 ∈P is the
decision variable in the upstream operation, and this production amount serves as starting
material for the downstream puriﬁcation operations.
Transitions: In the downstream puriﬁcation problem, the state transitions deﬁne the
amount of the protein of interest pt and the amount ik,t of each impurity type k ∈K that
remains in the batch after the chromatography technique c ∈C is performed using the

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
13
pooling window wc ∈Wc at puriﬁcation step t ∈T . First, we model the changes in ik,t after
the completion of the chromatography step t ∈T . For a given impurity type k ∈K, we let
the random variable (Ψk|c,wc) denote the fraction of impurity amount that remains in the
batch after using the chromatography technique c and the pooling window wc. Therefore,
ik,t+1 = (ψk|c,wc)ik,t,
(1)
where (ψk|c,wc) is the realization of (Ψk|c,wc). The random variable (Ψk|c,wc) has the
density function gk(·|c,wc) with support [0,1] for (c,wc) ∈C × Wc and k ∈K. This density
function is characterized based on the physicochemical properties of the impurity k ∈K
and its response to the chromatography technique c ∈C (See Vasquez-Alvarez et al. (2001)
and Polykarpou et al. (2011) for details). Because a chromatography technique exploits the
physicochemical properties of the protein and impurities to separate one from the other,
the density function gk(·|c,wc) is unique for each impurity type k ∈K, and is independent of
time t ∈T and impurity amount ik,t for all k ∈K. The density function gk(·|c,wc) is deﬁned
by the choice of chromatography technique c, pooling window wc, and physicochemical
characteristics of impurity type k ∈K.
Similarly, we let the random variable (Θ|c,wc) denote the fraction of protein pt that
remains in the batch at the beginning of chromatography step t + 1, given that there are
pt units of protein at the beginning of the chromatography step t, and the action (c,wc)
is performed. This implies that the remaining amount of the protein is wasted during the
chromatography step t. Therefore,
pt+1 = (θ|c,wc)pt,
(2)
where (θ|c,wc) is the realization of (Θ|c,wc). The random variable (Θ|c,wc) has the density
function f(·|c,wc) with support [0,1] for all (c,wc) ∈C ×Wc and k ∈K. Note that f(·|c,wc)
is a function of the chromatography technique c ∈C and pooling window wc ∈Wc, but is
independent of step t ∈T and impurities ik,t for all k ∈K. The state transitions as a result
of the action (c,wc) ∈C × Wc are therefore captured by

pt+1,i1,t+1,...,iK,t+1

=

θpt,ψ1i1,t,...,ψKiK,t|c,wc

.
(3)
The realizations (θ,ψ1,...,ψK|c,wc) in Equations (1)–(3) are independent of protein mass
pt, impurity mass it and chromatography step t, but are dependent on the chromatography

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
14
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
technique c, pooling window wc and impurity type k. This is because a chromatography
technique separates a speciﬁc protein from an impurity by exploiting the physicochemical
properties, such as molecular weight, electric charge, and hydrophobicity. These physico-
chemical characteristics are speciﬁc to each molecule, and independent of other impurities
(Vasquez-Alvarez et al. 2001, Polykarpou et al. 2011). The system transitions to the stop-
ping state ∆when at(pt,i1,t,...,iK,t) = S at t ∈T ∪{0}. At the ﬁnal time T, the only
available action is to stop, i.e., aT(pT,i1,T,...,iK,T) = S for all pT ∈P, ik,T ∈Ik,k ∈K.
In the upstream protein mass problem, let (i1,1,...,ik,1) denote the impurities that result
from the fermentation process. Thus, if the scientist decides to produce p1 units through a
set of predetermined manufacturing protocols, then the system transitions from the initial
state (p0,i1,0,...,iK,0) to the state (p1,i1,1,...,iK,1).
Purity Requirement and Puriﬁcation Costs: The cost of running a puriﬁcation step
using chromatography technique c ∈C is denoted by rc, and consists of setup costs (e.g.,
calibration, column preparation, and washing), material costs (e.g., resins and buﬀers), and
equipment and labor costs. The biomanufacturing company also incurs high penalty costs
when the purity and yield requirements speciﬁed by the end user are not met. Let γd and pd
denote the purity requirement and the yield requirement, respectively. The batch purity γt
at state (pt,i1,t,...,iK,t) is a quality measure deﬁned by γt =
pt
pt+P
k ik,t for any t ∈T ∪{T}.
In practice, if the drug is in the ﬁnal phase of clinical trials or if the end users are humans,
then the purity requirement is often very high, with γd ≥99.9%. The biomanufacturing
company incurs high penalty costs cf when the batch fails to meet the predeﬁned purity
requirement γd. The customers are typically large pharmaceutical companies conducting
clinical trials; if a batch does not meet the purity requirement, it cannot be used in the
R&D eﬀorts by the customer. Therefore, the customers often do not purchase the batch
if it fails to meet the purity requirement. The penalty cost of quality failure cf could vary
from company to company, as it includes penalty costs associated with lost sales, project
delays, loss of reputation, cost of disappointing the customers, its impact on future orders,
etc. Note that cf does not include the chromatography operating cost rc.
Yield Requirement and Revenue: At manufacturing step t ∈T ∪{0,T}, the revenue
obtained from stopping the batch at state (pt,i1,t,...,iK,t) is deﬁned as follows:

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
15
rs(pt,i1,t,...,iK,t) =







r(pd)
if pt ≥pd and γt ≥γd,
r(pt) −cℓ(pd −pt)
if pt < pd and γt ≥γd,
−cf
otherwise.
(4)
If the batch meets the purity and yield requirements (i.e, pt ≥pd and γt ≥γd in Equa-
tion 4) then the biomanufacturer obtains revenue r(pd). In this case, the customer only
purchases the amount ordered pd, and does not pay for proteins produced in excess. On
the other hand, if the batch satisﬁes the purity requirement but not the yield require-
ment (i.e., γt ≥γd and pt < pd in Equation 4), then the biomanufacturer obtains revenue
r(pt) which is a function of the protein amount pt produced. However, the biomanufac-
turer also incurs a yield penalty cost cℓ(pd −pt), which is a function of the yield shortage
(pd −pt)+. We assume that r(pt) is increasing in pt when pd ≥pt ≥0, and cℓ(pd −pt) is
decreasing in pt when pd ≥pt ≥0. If the batch does not conform to the purity requirement
(i.e., γt < γd in Equation 4) then no revenue is obtained, and the biomanufacturer incurs
a large penalty cost of failure cf. Note that cf > r(pd), and the yield penalty cost could be
very large depending on the shortage amount (pd −pt)+. Note that cf > cℓ(pd −pt) for all
pd > pd −pt ≥0 and cf ≥cℓ(pd).
Upstream Costs: The cost of upstream fermentation operations is captured by cu(p1),
and represents the operating costs (e.g., labor, equipment, and raw materials such as buﬀers
and cell lines) required to obtain p1 ∈P units of protein at the end of the fermentation
given that p0 = 0 and ik,0 = 0 for all k ∈K. We assume that cu(p1) is nondecreasing in p1,
as additional resources are required to increase the protein mass during fermentation.
The Value Function: We develop a ﬁnite-horizon Markov decision model that identi-
ﬁes the best choice of chromatography technique and pooling window for the downstream
puriﬁcation problem, and the best choice of protein amount p1 ∈P for the upstream pro-
tein mass problem. The objective is to maximize the total expected proﬁt obtained from
a batch. Let Vt(pt,i1,t,...,iK,t) denote the value function for the downstream puriﬁcation
problem when there are pt units of the protein of interest and (i1,t,...,iK,t) units of impu-
rity type k ∈K in the batch at the beginning of the tth chromatography step, t ∈T . At the
end of the planning horizon t = T, the value function is
VT(pT,i1,T,...,iK,T) = rs(pT,i1,T ...,iK,T).
(5)

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
16
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
For all t ≥1, the value function of the downstream puriﬁcation problem is
Vt(pt,i1,t,...,iK,t) =
max
(c,wc)∈C×W
n
−rc + E

Vt+1(Θpt,Ψ1i1,t,...,ΨKiK,t)|c,wc

,
rs(pt,i1,t ...,iK,t)
o
,
(6)
where the expected value function at t + 1 is
E

Vt+1(Θpt,Ψ1i1,t,...,ΨKiK,t)|c,wc

=
Z
θ
Z
ψ1
...
Z
ψK
Vt+1
 θpt,ψ1i1,t,...,ψKiK,t

×
f(θ|c,wc) × g1(ψ1|c,wc) × ... × gK(ψK|c,wc)dψK ...dψ1dθ.
(7)
We combine the upstream protein mass problem at t = 0 with the downstream puriﬁca-
tion problem at t = 1, and obtain the objective function V0(p1) of the biomanufacturer:
V0(p1) = −cu(p1) + V1(p1,i1,1,...,iK,1).
(8)
We let V∗
0 denote the optimal expected proﬁt of the optimization problem in Equa-
tion (8), i.e., V∗
0 = maxp1∈P V0(p1). The model is a non-discounted ﬁnite-horizon model
because it represents a short-term planning horizon (each chromatography step takes less
than 6 hours) compared to the overall protein R&D timeline (often more than 3 months).
Therefore, discounting the value function could lead to a bias in this setting.
5.
Structural Analysis
We investigate the structural properties of the downstream puriﬁcation problem at t ≥1
(Section 5.1), and then use these insights to analyze the upstream protein mass problem at
t = 0 (Section 5.2). In the remainder of the paper, we use a discretization scheme to analyze
the structural properties of the optimal value function and policies. All proofs are available
in the electronic companion. For notational convenience, we suppress the subscript t when
possible in the remainder of the paper.
5.1.
Analysis of the Downstream Puriﬁcation Problem
First, we present the modeling assumptions on the downstream puriﬁcation operations.
Assumption 1. Let wn
c ∈Wc be the nth pooling window on a chromatography tech-
nique c ∈C at any step t ∈T . For each technique c, the pooling windows wn
c ∈Wc
can be ordered such that
R 1
j f(θ|c,wn
c )dθ ≤
R 1
j f(θ|c,wn+1
c
)dθ and
R 1
m gk(ψk|c,wn
c )dψk ≤
R 1
m gk(ψk|c,wn+1
c
)dψk for all k ∈K on a given technique c ∈C, 0 ≤j ≤1, 0 ≤m ≤1.

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
17
Assumption 2. Let p+,p ∈P with p+ > p, and i+
k ,ik ∈I with i+
k > ik for k ∈K. Then,
rs(p,i1,...,iK) −rs(p,i1,...,i+
k ,...iK) ≥rs(p+,i1,...,ik,...,iK) −rs(p+,i1,...,i+
k ,...,iK).
Using the index n, Assumption 1 presents an ordering scheme for the pooling windows
wn
c ∈Wc for a given chromatography technique c ∈C. This assumption is a broader version
of the increasing failure rate property used in Markovian deterioration models. In prac-
tice, Assumption 1 reﬂects the purity–yield trade-oﬀdiscussed in Section 2, and makes the
downstream puriﬁcation problem practically relevant and challenging. This assumption is
validated with industry data, and holds in practice because of the principles of chromato-
graphic separation described in Section 2. Note that Assumption 1 does not guarantee a
stochastic ordering in chromatography techniques. In practice, diﬀerent chromatography
techniques have diﬀerent aﬃnities to each impurity type, and therefore a stochastic order-
ing across chromatography techniques does not often exist. Assumption 2 is validated with
industry data, and indicates that the penalty associated with an incremental increase in
impurity is higher at lower levels of protein than higher levels of protein.
Proposition 1. The value function Vt(pt,i1,t,...,iK,t) is nondecreasing in pt for all ik,t,
k ∈K, and nonincreasing in ik,t for all pt ∈P, k ∈K at the chromatography step t ≥1.
Proposition 1 indicates that the value function associated with the downstream puriﬁ-
cation problem never decreases as the protein amount pt increases, and never increases as
the impurity amount ik,t increases for all impurity types k ∈K at chromatography step
t ∈T . The monotonicity of the value function is used in Theorems 1–3 to characterize the
structural properties of the optimal puriﬁcation policies.
Theorem 1. At a given impurity level (i1,t,...,iK,t) and chromatography step t ∈T ,
there exist three protein threshold values, ˇpt, ¯pt, and ˆpt, such that Vt(pt,i1,t,...,iK,t) = −cf
for all pt ≤ˇpt, Vt(¯pt,i1,t,...,iK,t) = 0, and Vt(pt,i1,t,...,iK,t) = a > 0 for all pt ≥ˆpt, where
a is a constant. Note that ˆpt ≥¯pt ≥ˇpt for all chromatography steps t ∈T .
Theorem 1 shows that there exist three protein threshold values, ˇpt, ¯pt, and ˆpt, for a given
impurity level (i1,t,...,iK,t) at chromatography step t ∈T . The threshold values associated
with the ﬁrst chromatography step have important managerial implications. For example,
p1 ≤ˇp1 corresponds to a deﬁcient starting material that eventually leads to failure. If the
upstream protein mass is ˇp1 < p1 < ¯p1, then it means that the amount of protein obtained

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
18
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
from the fermentation is too little, and the biomanufacturing company is expected to incur a
ﬁnancial loss rather than proﬁt. The threshold value ¯p1 represents the break-even point for
the downstream operations. Finally, the threshold value ˆp1 helps to prevent overproduction,
as manufacturing more than ˆp1 units of protein does not improve the expected proﬁt. Using
these insights, Theorem 2 identiﬁes the batch states (ˇpt,i′
1,t,...,i′
K,t) that would lead to
failure at t ∈T .
Theorem 2. There exists (ˇpt,i′
1,t,...,i′
K,t) such that: (i)
ˇpt
ˇpt+P
k i′
k,t < γd, and (ii) for any
state (pt,i1,t,...,iK,t) where pt ≤ˇpt and ik,t ≥i′
k,t for k = 1,2,...,K, it is optimal to stop
the puriﬁcation, i.e., a∗
t(pt,i1,t,...,iK,t) = S.
Theorem 2 shows that there exists a set of states, Σt = {pt ≤ˇpt and ik,t ≥i′
k,t, ∀k ∈K} at
t ∈T , such that the biomanufacturing company has no ﬁnancial incentive for conducting
the puriﬁcation operations when the starting batch state is in Σt. From a practical per-
spective, if failure is inevitable in the downstream, it is better to fail earlier rather than
later to avoid operating costs.
Theorem 3. If Assumption 1 and Assumption 2 hold and the technique c ∈C is used
at t ∈T , then the optimal pooling policy a∗
t(pt,i1,t,...,iK,t|c) = wn∗
c
is nondecreasing in pt
for pt > ˇpt at a given impurity level (i1,t,...,iK,t) for all ik,t < i′
k,t, k ∈K.
Theorem 3 indicates that the optimal pooling policy wn∗
c
using a particular chromatogra-
phy technique c ∈C has a threshold-type structure when the pooling windows are ordered
based on the ordering scheme described in Assumption 1. More speciﬁcally, Theorem 3
suggests that the optimal pooling policy at each step preserves at least some predetermined
fraction θ∗of the protein, and the scientist tends to be less concerned in terms of yield
losses and impurities that are carried along with the protein, as pt increases. These optimal
pooling threshold values provide guidelines that are easy to implement in practice, and
have not been previously characterized in the literature.
5.2.
Analysis of the Upstream Protein Mass Problem
Next, we provide insights related to the upstream protein mass decisions at t = 0. Theo-
rem 4 presents the structural characteristics of the objective function V0(p1).
Theorem 4. Let cu(p1) = cu1 × p1 + cu2, where cu1 > 0 and cu2 is a constant. Under the
stopping cost structure in Equation (4), V0(p1) is decreasing in p1 for p1 ≥ˆp1. For p1 < ˆp1,
V0(p1) is not necessarily monotonic in p1 and its rate of decrease is bounded by cu1.

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
19
Theorem 4 indicates that producing higher amounts of protein does not necessarily
improve the expected proﬁt until the production amount p1 reaches a threshold value ˆp1,
after which point the expected proﬁt decreases in p1. Theorem 4 also characterizes the
bounds on its rate of decrease based on the upstream operating costs. This behavior is due
to the complex interaction between the fermentation and chromatography operations, and
demonstrates the challenges in optimizing the protein mass decisions in practice.
Next, Proposition 2 compares the performance of popular policies for the upstream pro-
tein mass decisions, and identiﬁes the conditions under which a particular policy dominates
its alternatives. The operating policies considered in Proposition 2 are identiﬁed based on
the industry feedback (BioWGS 2016). To generate managerial insights, we use a discretiza-
tion scheme δ in Proposition 2, where pϵ = ⌈pd/δ⌉represents the speciﬁc yield requirement
based on this discretization scheme. In practice, the discretization unit δ corresponds to
the least count measured (often one milligram, depending on the application).
Proposition 2. Let Π1 and Π2 be two diﬀerent upstream operating policies with the
corresponding value functions VΠ1
0
and VΠ2
0 , respectively.
(1) Let Π1 be the upstream policy a0 = p1, such that p1 > ˆp1, p1 ∈P. Let Π2 be the upstream
policy a0 = ˆp1. Then, VΠ2
0
> VΠ1
0 .
(2.a) Let Π1 be the upstream policy a0 = p1, such that ¯p1 ≤p1 < ˆp1, p1 ∈P. Let Π2 be the
policy a0 = ˆp1. Then, VΠ1
0
> VΠ2
0
if the following condition holds: cu(ˆp1) −cu(p1) > r(pd).
(2.b) Let Π1 and Π2 be the upstream policies identical to part (2.a). Then, VΠ2
0
> VΠ1
0
if
the following condition holds: cu(ˆp1) −cu(p1) < r(pd) −r
 (pϵ −1)δ

+ cℓ(δ).
(3) Let Π1 be the upstream policy a0 = p1, such that ˇp1 ≤p1 < ¯p1, p1 ∈P. Let Π2 be the
upstream policy a0 = ¯p1. Then, VΠ1
0
> VΠ2
0
if cu(¯p1) −cu(p1) > cf.
(4) Let Π1 be the upstream policy a0 = p1, such that p1 ≤ˇp1, p1 ∈P. Let Π2 be the upstream
policy a0 = S. Then, VΠ2
0
> VΠ1
0 .
Proposition 2 assumes that the optimal puriﬁcation actions are taken. Then, part (1) in
Proposition 2 compares two upstream operating policies: Π1 produces more than ˆp1 units,
and Π2 produces only ˆp1 units. Part (1) shows that Π2 is always better than Π1. Part (2)
compares the policy Π1, which produces ¯p1 ≤p1 < ˆp1 units, against Π2, which creates ˆp1
units. Part (2.a) states that Π1 is better than Π2 if the cost of increasing the upstream
protein mass is expensive. For example, increasing the protein mass might require excessive

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
20
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
re-engineering in practice. The condition in Part (2.b) compares the incremental change in
the revenue and yield penalty cost associated with protein mass ¯p1 ≤p1 < ˆp1 against the
incremental increase in the upstream operating costs associated with the protein mass ˆp1.
In a practical context, part (3) represents a setting where the failure cost is less critical
than the additional cost needed to improve the protein mass. Part (4) shows that it is
always better to abandon the project if the starting material has less than ˇp1 units of
protein.
6.
The Reduced-Dimension MDP Model
A typical industry setting could contain hundreds of diﬀerent impurities with 5-10 candi-
date chromatography techniques, each having 50-100 candidate pooling windows. Although
the action space is manageable, the size of the state space increases exponentially in the
number of impurities. The state space could easily explode in most industry settings,
making the optimization problem challenging to solve. To address this issue, we use an
aggregation scheme to revise the state space, transitions and the value function of the opti-
mization model, and refer to this revised version as the reduced-dimension model. Then,
we use the structural insights obtained in Section 5 to identify the conditions under which
the reduced-dimension model is exact. The state space, transitions, rewards and the value
function of the reduced-dimension model are as follows.
State Space:
Each impurity state ik,t ∈Ik is a binary variable ik,t ∈{0,1} for all
k ∈K at time t ∈T ∪{T}, such that, the state ik,t indicates whether the speciﬁc impurity
type k ∈K is present in the batch (ik,t = 1) or has been completely eliminated (ik,t = 0)
by the time t ∈T ∪{T}. Therefore, the impurity state (i1,t,...,iK,t) is a 2K dimensional
vector representing which impurities are present in the batch and which ones have been
completely removed. The state pt ∈P representing the amount of the protein available in
the batch at time t ∈T ∪{T} remains the same as Section 4.
State Transitions:
Transitions in the protein state pt ∈P remain the same as the
ones described in Section 3. However, the transitions associated with the impurity states
(i1,t,...,iK,t) are simpliﬁed using the probability distribution function Pk(ik,t+1|ik,t,c,wc)
for each impurity type k ∈K at time t ∈T ∪{T}. Pk(ik,t+1|ik,t,c,wc) represents the proba-
bility of achieving the impurity state ik,t+1 ∈{0,1} as a result of the chromatography tech-
nique c and the pooling window wc, given that the state of the impurity type k ∈K before

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
21
that chromatography step is ik,t ∈{0,1}. The transition probabilities for the upstream
protein mass problem at time t = 0 remain the same as the ones described on Section 3.
Since a chromatography technique exploits the diﬀerence in the physicochemical prop-
erties of each impurity type k as a separation principle, the probability distributions
Pk(ik,t+1|ik,t,c,wc) are independently distributed for each impurity type k under the
action (c,wc) ∈C × Wc. Therefore, the state transitions associated with all impurities
(i1,t+1,...,iK,t+1) ∈I1 × ... × IK are captured by a joint probability distribution that can
be written as product of marginals, i.e., Pk(i1,t+1|i1,t,c,wc) × ... × P(iK,t+1|iK,t,c,wc).
Rewards and the Value Function:
The costs and rewards remain the same as
Section 4. We note that the revenue rs(p,i1,...,iK) obtained from stopping the batch at
state (p,i1,...,iK) is a special case of Equation (4) where γd = 100%. Therefore, the value
function of the downstream puriﬁcation problem and the upstream protein mass problem
remain the same as Equations (5)-(8). The expectation operation in this model is
E

Vt+1
 pt+1,i1,t+1 ...,iK,t+1

| c,wc

=
Z
θ
1
X
i1,t+1=0
...
1
X
iK,t+1=0
f(θ|c,wc) × P1(i1,t+1|i1,t,c,wc) × ... × PK(iK,t+1|iK,t,c,wc)
×Vt+1
 θpt,i1,t+1,...,iK,t+1

dθ.
Proposition 3 summarizes the state aggregation scheme used in the reduced-dimension
model, and identiﬁes the conditions under which this aggregation scheme is exact.
Proposition 3. For each impurity type k ∈K, the values of the impurity state ik,t ∈Ik
can be aggregated and viewed as a binary variable, ik,t ∈{0,1}, such that, ik,t = 0 represents
the case where the impurity type k has been removed from the batch by the time t ∈T ∪{T},
and ik,t = 1 denotes the case where a positive amount ik,t ∈(0,ik,1] of impurity type k is
present in the batch at time t ∈T ∪{T}. This aggregation scheme is exact when the purity
requirement is equal to 100%.
Proposition 3 indicates that the state aggregation scheme is exact for a special instance
of the optimization problem where the ﬁnal purity requirement is γd = 100%. Proposition 3
uses the speciﬁc characteristics of the transition probabilities and stopping costs under the
100% purity requirement, and indicates that it is suﬃcient to keep track of which impurity
types are present in the batch rather than capturing their corresponding amounts. The idea

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
22
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
with the aggregation scheme is intuitive. It relies on the fact that the transition probabilities
depend on the type of impurities but not their amounts (i.e., chromatography performs
the separation based on the physical and chemical properties) and that all impurity types
need to be removed under the 100% purity requirement.
Proposition 3 provides a way to address the curse of dimentionality for a special instance
of the optimization problem which is frequently encountered in practice. For example, if
the potential end users are humans, these drugs should abide by very high purity standards
(i.e., ≥99.9%). Such high standards are also required to conduct Phase I-III clinical trials.
Because of high penalty costs, process uncertainties, and manufacturing trade-oﬀs, dealing
with the 100% purity requirement could be a signiﬁcant challenge in practice.
All structural results discussed in Section 5 are valid for the reduced-dimension model.
For example, the monotonicity in Proposition 1, the threshold values in Theorem 1, the
structural characteristics in Theorem 3 and Theorem 4, and the operating policies in
Proposition 2 are not impacted by the aggregation scheme. Theorem 2 can be interpreted
such that it is optimal to stop the puriﬁcation operations when pt ≤ˇpt for a given impurity
state (i1,t,...,ik,t), ik,t = {0,1} for all k ∈K at t ∈T .
7.
Insights from an Industry Case Study
7.1.
Problem Setting
The puriﬁcation data used in this case study is obtained from Aldevron, a biomanufacturer
specializing in the production of proteins. The production requirement is 8 mg of protein
at a 100% purity. The target protein is manufactured for in-vitro studies. Scouting runs
indicate that the puriﬁcation process involves 6 candidate chromatography techniques with
an average of 170 possible pooling windows per chromatography technique. The starting
material consists of a mixture of 6 impurities along with the protein of interest. Statistical
analysis of the scouting data indicates that the protein and impurity fractions per lane are
uniformly distributed, and the expected outcome of each technique is shown in Figure 3.
The solid line in Figure 3 represents the expected fraction of the protein of interest corre-
sponding to each lane using a speciﬁc chromatography technique. The dotted lines repre-
sent the diﬀerent types of impurities contained in the starting material. Figure 3 explicitly
plots one speciﬁc impurity type (Impurity A) on diﬀerent chromatography techniques, and
masks the information on remaining impurities to protect client conﬁdentiality.

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
23
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718
Lanes
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Fraction per Lane
 Chromatography Technique 1 
Protein of interest
Impurities
Impurity A
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718
Lanes
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Fraction per Lane
 Chromatography Technique 2 
Protein of interest
Impurities
Impurity A
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718
Lanes
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Fraction per Lane
 Chromatography Technique 3 
Protein of interest
Impurities
Impurity A
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718
Lanes
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Fraction per Lane
 Chromatography Technique 4 
Protein of interest
Impurities
Impurity A
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718
Lanes
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Fraction per Lane
 Chromatography Technique 5 
Protein of interest
Impurities
Impurity A
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718
Lanes
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Fraction per Lane
 Chromatography Technique 6 
Protein of interest
Impurities
Impurity A
Figure 3
Expected separation outcomes of the candidate chromatography techniques
Figure 3 illustrates the complex interdependency between the choice of chromatogra-
phy technique and pooling window. For example, the relative position of the protein and
Impurity A is diﬀerent at each chromatography technique. In this setting, simultaneously
determining the right chromatography technique and pooling window could be challenging
in practice due to the complexity arising from the diﬀerences in the separation outcomes.
The cost and revenue information used in this case study represent typical industry
values obtained from a cross section of several local biomanufacturing companies (BioWGS
2016), and is normalized for conﬁdentiality purposes. The normalized values of costs and

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
24
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
revenue are as follow: chromatography operating costs are rc = $3 for each chromatography
technique, as they use similar types of resins and buﬀers in this case study, revenue r = $2
per milligram of protein produced at 100% purity, yield penalty cost cℓ= $2 per milligram
of protein short, and failure cost cf = cℓ×pd = $16. The upstream operating cost is cu(p) =
0.1 + p × 0.05. We refer to these cost and revenue values as the base case.
7.2.
Overview of Analysis
We use the case study to demonstrate the potential impact of the optimization framework
in practice, and to provide an understanding of the problem conﬁgurations that have high
potential for improvement. We compare the performance of the following ﬁve strategies:
1. Current Practice (CP): Upstream protein mass, downstream chromatography tech-
nique and pooling window selection decisions are made based on standard practice.
2. Fermentation Optimization (FO): Downstream chromatography technique and
pooling window selection decisions are made based on the current practice, and only the
upstream protein mass decisions are optimized.
3. Pooling Window Optimization (PO): Upstream protein mass and downstream
chromatography technique selection decisions are made based on the current practice, and
only the pooling window selection decisions are optimized.
4. Fermentation and Pooling Window Optimization (FO+PO): Downstream
chromatography technique selection decisions are made based on the current practice, and
only the upstream protein mass and the pooling window selection decisions are optimized.
5. Joint Optimization (JO): Upstream protein mass, downstream chromatography
technique and pooling window selection decisions are optimized simultaneously.
Feedback received from industry working group sessions indicate that current process
improvement activities only focus on a single layer, e.g., the pooling window optimization
problem. Therefore, this section focuses on (1) helping operations managers understand
how going beyond CP, FO, and PO makes a diﬀerence, and (2) quantifying the potential
gains in the expected proﬁt and operational eﬃciency through the use of the JO frame-
work. For this purpose, a key performance metric used in this section is the percentage
improvement (IMP%) that could have been achieved in practice by adopting one of the
FO, PO, FO+PO, or JO strategies instead of CP.
Because companies like Aldevron incur strict penalties on yield shortages and quality
failures, we focus on a sensitivity analysis to revenue and penalty costs. For this pur-
pose, we evaluate an extensive set of conﬁgurations with r ∈{1,1.5,2,2.5,3} and
cℓ
r ∈

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
25
{0,0.25,0.5,0.75,1,1.25,1.5,1.75,2}. These conﬁgurations are identiﬁed based on the input
received from our industry partners. For brevity, we only report the results for low-revenue,
low-penalty projects
 r = 1.5 and
cℓ
r ∈{0,0.5,1}

, base-case variations
 r = 2 and
cℓ
r ∈
{0.5,1,1.5,2}

, and high-revenue, high-penalty projects
 r = 3 and cℓ
r ∈{1,1.5,2}

. Scenar-
ios with cℓ= 0 are also reported as a benchmark.
Decision Making in Practice. In this case study, the scientist adopts the three-step
puriﬁcation approach described in Section 2.6. The chromatography technique selection
decisions are made based on the highest resolution criteria. Numerical experiments also
conﬁrm that the highest resolution criteria outperforms the highest selectivity criteria in
this speciﬁc case study. Therefore, chromatography techniques (3), (5) and (1), shown
in Figure 3, are used in the ﬁrst, second, and third steps, respectively. In the ﬁrst step,
the scientist pools lanes 1-8. As a result, she aims to eliminate impurity types 2, 3, 5,
and 6 with an expected yield loss of 35%. In the second step, she aims to eliminate the
remaining impurities. Therefore, she pools lanes 1-10 with an expected yield loss of 35%. If
trace amounts of impurities remain, then the scientist tends towards a yield-conservative
strategy with 10% yield loss in the last step (lanes 7-18). In the upstream operations, 75%
excess is typically planned as a buﬀer (BioWGS 2016). This leads to 28 mg of protein
production (i.e., 8 × 1.35 × 1.35 × 1.1 × 1.75 ≈28) in the upstream process.
Optimal Policies. Operating policies corresponding to other strategies are as follows.
Table 1 shows the optimal upstream production quantities under JO. These production
quantities are further analyzed in Section 7.3. Under JO, chromatography technique 5 with
30% yield loss is expected to be used (lanes 1-11), followed by chromatography technique 2
with 20% yield loss (lanes 1-12). The optimal chromatography techniques recommended by
JO are robust to the scenarios. This is mainly because all techniques have the same oper-
ating cost. Optimal pooling windows under PO are state dependent, but chromatography
technique 3 with 30% yield loss is expected to be used (lanes 1-9), followed by chromatog-
raphy technique 5 with 30% yield loss (lanes 1-11). If trace amounts of impurities remain,
then it is expected that chromatography technique 1 with 15% yield loss will be used (lanes
8-18). PO produces 27 mg protein in the upstream (i.e., 8 × 1.3 × 1.3 × 1.15 × 1.75 ≈27).
The optimal upstream production quantities p∗
1 under FO are reported in Table 1.

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
26
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
Table 1
Potential beneﬁts of the joint optimization framework in practice
CP
FO
PO
FO+PO
JO
r
cℓ/r V0(p1 = 28)
p∗
1
V0(p∗
1) IMP% V0(p∗
1 = 27) IMP%
p∗
1
V0(p∗
1) IMP%
p∗
1
ˆp1
¯p1
V0(p∗
1) IMP%
1.5
0
2.3
30
2.4
3%
2.6
15%
25
2.7
17%
21
25
10
3.0
33%
1.5
0.5
1.6
30
1.8
9%
2.1
29%
25
2.1
31%
23
26
12
2.7
68%
1.5
1
1.2
32
1.3
8%
1.6
33%
28
1.7
40%
25
27
14
2.5
105%
2
0
5.9
30
6.0
2%
6.3
7%
25
6.3
8%
21
26
6
6.8
17%
2
0.5
5.0
32
5.3
6%
5.6
12%
28
5.7
14%
25
27
10
6.5
30%
2
1
4.1
35
4.7
14%
4.9
19%
30
5.1
24%
25 30
12
6.1
48%
2
1.5
3.3
37
4.1
27%
4.2
30%
31
4.5
40%
25
30
13
5.7
76%
2
2
2.4
38
3.5
49%
3.6
49%
33
4.0
68%
25
30
14
5.3
124%
3
0
13.0
32
13.3
2%
13.6
5%
28
13.7
5%
25
27
4
14.5
11%
3
1
10.4
38
11.5
11%
11.6
11%
33
12.0
16%
25
30
11
13.3
28%
3
1.5
9.1
40
10.7
18%
10.5
16%
34
11.2
23%
25
31
12
12.8
41%
3
2
7.8
40
9.8
26%
9.5
22%
34
10.4
34%
27
31
14
12.3
58%
7.3.
Potential Impact in Practice
Table 1 presents the upstream protein production amount p1 and the expected proﬁt V0(p1)
under diﬀerent settings. The columns labelled “IMP%” in Table 1 quantify the percentage
improvement in the expected proﬁt that could be achieved in practice by using the FO,
PO, FO+PO, or JO strategies instead of CP. The bold entries in Table 1 represent the
base case.
In the base case, we observe that optimizing the pooling windows alone provides consid-
erable savings compared to CP, with 19% improvement in the expected proﬁt. This result
aligns with Martagan et al. (2017). In addition, it is important to note that optimizing the
fermentation operations alone yields notable savings of 14% improvement in practice. How-
ever, the percentage improvement obtained by the JO framework signiﬁcantly outperforms
other strategies. For example, the JO framework yields 48% improvement in the base case,
which is the double the 24% improvement achieved by the combined strategy FO+PO.
Even if cℓ= 0 at r = 2, JO continues to outperform other strategies, with 17% improve-
ment while other strategies achieve at most 8% improvement. This indicates that there is
signiﬁcant room for improvement in current practice through the use of JO. This is mainly
because JO provides a comprehensive framework that incorporates the ﬁnancial trade-oﬀs,
process uncertainties and the underlying chemical dynamics into decision-making.

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
27
We observe that FO does not provide signiﬁcant savings for low-revenue, low-penalty
projects (e.g., IMP% ≤9%). In such projects, puriﬁcation optimization mostly dominates
the potential savings in Table 1. The intuition behind this behavior is that at lower levels
of revenue, the cost of producing higher amounts of protein in the upstream does not
necessarily outweigh the resulting beneﬁts in the downstream. This is mainly why the
production quantities and expected proﬁt of FO and CP are very close for low-revenue,
low-penalty projects in Table 1. In contrast, we observe that JO enables a large room for
improvement on CP, and its magnitude increases as margins become lower. For example,
at a ﬁxed cℓ/r in Table 1, the potential savings through JO increase as revenue decreases.
Even in case of no penalty costs at r = 1.5, JO achieves a 33% improvement over CP.
The intuitive explanation is that it becomes more critical to meet client requirements with
minimal waste as margins decrease. Therefore, projects with lower margins receive higher
beneﬁts from the use of JO.
For high-revenue, high-penalty projects, the improvements using FO and PO are compa-
rable, but FO outperforms PO as cℓincreases. This indicates that, if penalties and revenues
are high, it can be eﬀective to deliberately increase the upstream production to alleviate
downstream purity–yield trade-oﬀs. Note that FO can reduce the expected yield shortages
only by producing higher amounts of protein; whereas PO can reduce it only by managing
the purity–yield trade-oﬀs. Therefore, FO increases the production amount at high cℓin
order to reduce shortage penalties, and the corresponding upstream costs pay oﬀdue to
high revenues and reduced penalties. On the other hand, JO outperforms all strategies in
Table 1. Even compared to the combined strategy FO+PO, JO provides an addition of
6%–24% improvement at r = 3. Moreover, Table 1 indicates that the percentage improve-
ments increase as cℓincreases at a ﬁxed value of r. This is because it becomes critical to
reduce the expected yield shortages as cℓincreases. At high penalty levels, Table 1 reports
very high improvements on CP. This clearly indicates that CP can be very ineﬃcient at
high penalties because it does not consider the ﬁnancial trade-oﬀs of each decision layer.
Next, we compare the production quantities p∗
1 under the ﬁve manufacturing strategies
to obtain insights related to how much to waste in the upstream. In Table 1, we observe
that FO produces higher amounts of protein compared to FO+PO and JO. This is mainly
because FO tends to buﬀer against the possible ineﬃciencies in downstream operations.
The results in Table 1 indicate that expanding the scope of the optimization model from

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
28
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
FO to JO helps to reduce the upstream production quantities. For example, in the base
case, FO recommends the production of 35 mg of protein, whereas FO+PO recommends 30
mg, and JO enables savings of an additional 5 mg by producing 25 mg. In addition, Table 1
presents the break-even points ¯p1 and the maximum threshold values ˆp1 under JO. Note
that the values of ¯p1, p∗
1 and ˆp1 are nondecreasing in cℓto buﬀer against yield shortages.
The diﬀerence between ˆp1 and ¯p1 ranges between 13-27 mg in Table 1. This shows that
there is a large amount of room for proﬁt in this case study. The optimal production
quantities are closer to ˆp1 than ¯p1 in Table 1. Results from additional experiments indicate
that p∗
1 approaches ˆp1 as the upstream costs reduce. In Table 1, we observe that p∗
1 and
ˆp1 values do not change signiﬁcantly in r and cℓunder JO. We believe this is mainly
due to the robustness of the optimal downstream policies at high protein levels (i.e., the
optimal policy uses the same chromatography techniques in all scenarios, and the pooling
window selections are not sensitive at high protein levels). Note that the optimal production
amount of the base case (p∗
1 = 25 mg) is almost three times greater than the demand
requirement (pd = 8 mg). This illustrates how complex and challenging it is to satisfy
production requirements in the biomanufacturing industry.
Table 1 shows that the percentage improvement using JO can be more than the double
the amount achieved by FO or PO. This is mainly because JO helps to better address the
practical concern of “how much to waste” in the upstream and downstream operations. For
example, JO enables the reduction of upstream production quantities by 3 mg compared to
CP (in the base case, on average), and is still able to meet the demand. In the downstream
operations, the total expected yield loss under JO is 6.35 mg less than that under CP (in
the base case). Overall, JO produces less, wastes less, and achieves the highest expected
proﬁt compared to other strategies. This underscores the importance of JO.
7.4.
Beneﬁts to Downstream Puriﬁcation Operations
Figure 4 considers four representative scenarios from Table 1, and plots the value function
of JO, PO, and CP in the ﬁrst chromatography step. Note that JO optimizes the chro-
matography technique and pooling window selection decisions at t = 1, and the behavior
of V1 in p1 impacts the upstream protein mass decisions. To quantify the potential beneﬁts
to the downstream operations, we analyze (1) the diﬀerence between the value functions
of PO and CP at t = 1, and (2) the diﬀerence between the value functions of JO and PO

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
29
10
20
30
40
Protein Amount (mg)
0
5
10
15
Expected Profit ($)
JO
PO
CP
10
20
30
40
Protein Amount (mg)
0
5
10
15
Expected Profit ($)
10
20
30
40
Protein Amount (mg)
0
5
10
15
Expected Profit ($)
10
20
30
40
Protein Amount (mg)
0
5
10
15
Expected Profit ($)
Figure 4
The value function of JO, PO, and CP in the ﬁrst chromatography step.
at t = 1. The former quantiﬁes the impact of pooling window optimization, and the latter
represents the added value of optimizing the chromatography technique selection.
The value function of JO, PO, and CP converge to a constant value at higher levels
of protein in Figure 4 (see Theorem 1). As an extreme case, consider p1 = 40. In Fig-
ure 4, adopting PO instead of CP results in 2%–6% improvement in the value function
at state p1 = 40. However, using JO instead of PO yields another 7%–15% improvement.
This implies that choosing the right chromatography technique drives the potential room
for improvement at high levels of protein. Similar to Section 7.3, we see that projects with
higher penalties or lower margins encounter the most beneﬁt from JO. In addition, Fig-
ure 4 shows that the gap among the value functions of JO, PO, and CP is higher when
the starting material is in the range ¯p1 ≤p1 ≤p∗
1. This corresponds to a risky business
case where the biomanufacturer is likely to incur yield shortages. In such cases, Figure 4
shows that smartly managing the purity–yield trade-oﬀs through the optimal selection of
chromatography techniques and pooling windows plays a critical role in reducing penalties.
Figure 4 shows that JO reaches the break-even point ¯p1 and the maximum proﬁt thresh-
old ˆp1 by using less protein than PO. For example, in the base case (Figure 4c), JO uses 2

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
30
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
mg less protein than PO to break even, and needs 7 mg less than PO to reach the threshold
ˆp1. The average of all scenarios considered in the numerical analysis indicates that JO can
break even by using 2 mg less protein than PO, and 4 mg less than CP. We observe that
scenarios with higher penalties or lower margins achieve higher reduction in the break-
even points. These diﬀerences are one of the key indicators of the improved operational
eﬃciency under JO.
In the downstream operations, the expected proﬁt depends on the starting amount p1. To
quantify the potential impact, we focus on the average improvement in the range 21 ≤p1 ≤
35. This range includes the optimal production quantities of JO and FO+PO. In the base
case (Figure 4c), optimizing the pooling windows enables an average of 22% improvement
in practice. Optimizing the chromatography techniques together with the pooling windows
provides another 18% improvement in the value function of PO, on average. In other
scenarios, the average percentage improvement achieved by using the JO framework instead
of PO are 29% (Figure 4a), 14% (Figure 4b), and 40% (Figure 4d). These improvements
underscore that an OR-based decision-making approach would make a signiﬁcant diﬀerence
in the survival and competitiveness of SMEs.
8.
Conclusions
We focus on biomanufacturing decisions for engineered proteins. In this setting, research
and development are often conducted by a large pharmaceutical company, but the bioman-
ufacturing operations are performed by a contract biomanufacturer due to high failure
risks and speciﬁc domain knowledge. Manufacturing challenges for engineered proteins can
be associated with several factors, such as limitations in chromatography operations, ran-
domness in process outcomes, yield losses, stringent quality requirements, and failure risks.
There are excellent studies that contribute to the knowledge behind the biology and chem-
istry of these operations, but there is a signiﬁcant need for an optimization framework that
links the underlying biology and chemistry with the ﬁnancial trade-oﬀs and manufacturing
challenges encountered in practice.
In this study, we build a stochastic optimization model that addresses three layers of
interdependent decisions: (1) the amount of protein to be produced in fermentation, (2)
the chromatography techniques to be used in puriﬁcation, and (3) the choice of pooling
windows based on the purity–yield trade-oﬀs. We characterize the structure of the optimal

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
31
policies, and derive functional relationships related to costs and purity–yield trade-oﬀs. We
use a state-aggregation mechanism to reduce the computational eﬀorts to solve complex
problems at 100% purity. Studies in the literature and feedback received from industry
partners indicate that most process improvement activities focus on one of these decision
layers in isolation. However, the case study example in Section 7 shows that the percentage
improvement under the joint optimization framework is almost double that which can be
achieved by optimizing a single decision level. This is mainly because the joint optimiza-
tion model better addresses the practical concern of minimizing waste in upstream and
downstream operations. The results obtained from the case study are encouraging to sup-
port the survival and competitiveness of SMEs. Nevertheless, the potential impact of this
framework extends beyond SMEs. As Tom Foti, the vice president of Aldevron states “We
are producing 50-liter cultures here, but our clients [large pharmaceutical companies] are
dealing with 5,000-liter cultures. If we can build optimization models here, and demon-
strate the feasibility of how it works, our clients could also do that. If they can reduce
health care costs, that could be directly passed oﬀto the patients” (Aldevron 2017).
Insights obtained from this framework can lead to several future research directions.
First, one can extend the model to make decisions with limited data. Second, pricing deci-
sions and renegotiation schemes can be analyzed under the joint optimization framework.
References
Aldevron. 2017. A new tool for biomanufacturing. URL https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CWoQ5ofTZfY.
BioWGS. 2016. Biomanufacturing Working Group Sessions: Aldevron collaborates with University of Wis-
consin to develop decision support tools for biomanufacturing. URL http://www.bioforward.org/
past-events-aldevron-collaboration/.
GE Healthcare. 2010. Strategies for protein puriﬁcation: Handbook by GE Healthcare. Tech. rep.
Gnoth, S., M. Jenzsch, R. Simutis, A. Lubbert. 2007. Process Analytical Technology: Batch-to-batch repro-
ducibility of fermentation process by robust process operational design and control. Journal of Biotech-
nology 132 180–186.
Lienqueo, M.E., J.C. Salgado, O. Giaverini, J.A. Asenjo. 2009. Computer-aided design to select optimal
polypeptide tags to assist the puriﬁcation of recombinant proteins. Separation and Puriﬁcation Tech-
nology 65(1) 86–94.
Long, G., J. Works. 2013. Innovation in the biopharmaceutical pipeline: A multidimensional view. Analysis
Group Industry Report.

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
32
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
Martagan, T., A. Krishnamurthy, P. A. Leland, C. T. Maravelias. 2017. Performance guarantees and optimal
puriﬁcation decisions for engineered proteins. Operations Research 0(0). doi:10.1287/opre.2017.1661.
URL https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2017.1661.
Martagan, T., A. Krishnamurthy, C. Maravelias. 2016.
Optimal condition-based harvesting policies for
biomanufacturing operations with failure risks. IIE Transactions (48:5) 440–461.
Nfor, B. K., T. Ahamed, G. W. K. van Dedem, P. D. E. M. Verhaert, L. A. M. van der Wielen, M. H. M.
Eppink, E. J.A.X. van de Sandt, M. Ottens. 2013.
Model-based rational methodology for protein
puriﬁcation process synthesis. Chemical Engineering Science 89 185–195.
Patel, S. D., E. T. Papoutsakis, J. N. Winter, W. M. Miller. 2000.
The lactate issue revisited: Novel
feeding protocols to examine inhibition of cell proliferation and glucose metabolism in hematopoietic
cell cultures. Biotechnology Progress 16 885–892.
Peroni, C. V., N. S. Kaisare, J. H. Lee. 2005. Optimal control of fed-batch bioreactor using simulation based
approximate dynamic programming. IEEE Transactions 13 786–790.
Petrides, D., C. A. Siletti. 2004. The role of process simulation and scheduling tools in the development and
manufacturing of biopharmaceuticals. Proceedings of the Winter Simulation Conference, 2046–2051.
Polykarpou, E. M., P. A. Dalby, L. G. Papageorgiou. 2011. Optimal synthesis of chromatographic trains for
downstream protein processing. Biotechnology Progress 27 (6) 1653–1660.
Polykarpou, E. M., P. A. Dalby, L. G. Papageorgiou. 2012. An MILP formulation for the synthesis of protein
puriﬁcation processes. Chemical Engineering Research and Design 90(9) 1262–1270.
Saraph, P. V. 2003. Shared resource capacity analysis in biotech manufacturing. Proceedings of the Winter
Simulation Conference, 1247–1250.
Saucedo, V. M., M. N. Karim. 1997. Experimental optimization of a real time fed-batch fermentation process
using Markov decision process. Biotechnology and Bioengineering 55 317–327.
Tsao, Y. S., A. G. Cardoso, R. G. G. Condon, M. Voloch, P. Lio, J. C. Lagos, B. G. Kearns, Z. Liu.
2004. Monitoring chinese hamster overy cell culture by the analysis of glucose and lactate metabolism.
Journal of Biotechnology 118 316–327.
Vasquez-Alvarez, E., M. E. Lienqueo, J. M. Pinto. 2001. Optimal synthesis of protein puriﬁcation processes.
Biotechnology Progress 17 685–696.
Vasquez-Alvarez, E., J.M. Pinto. 2004. Eﬃcient MILP formulations for the optimal synthesis of chromato-
graphic protein puriﬁcation processes. Journal of Biotechnology 110(3) 295–311.
Xing, Z., N. Bishop, K. Leister, Z. J. Li. 2010. Modeling kinetics of a large-scale fed-batch CHO cell culture
by Markov chain monte carlo method. Biotechnology Progress 26 208–219.
Yang, J. D., Y. Angelillo, M. Chaudhry, C. Goldenberg. 2000. Achievement of high cell density and high
antibody productivity by controlled-fed perfusion bioreactor process. Biotechnology and Bioengineering
69 74–82.

Martagan et al.: Managing Trade-oﬀs in Protein Manufacturing
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no. MSOM-16-014.R3
33
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the editor, associate editor, and two anonymous referees for the many
helpful comments that greatly improved the paper. This research was conducted due to the generous support
provided by the National Science Foundation under grant CMMI 1334933, and the Marie S. Curie Fellowship
provided by the European Commission under Horizon 2020 program.