TITLE: Linking Multisite Sex Ad Data at the Individual Level to Aid Counter-Trafficking Efforts
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2024.0816
---

http://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/msom
Submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
MANUFACTURING & SERVICE OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT
Vol. 00, No. 0, Xxxxx 0000, pp. 000–000
ISSN 1523-4614, EISSN 1526-5498
Linking Multi-Site Sex Ad Data at the Individual
Level to Aid Counter-Trafficking Efforts
Nickolas K. Freeman, Gregory J. Bott, Burcu B. Keskin, Jason M. Parton, James J. Cochran
Department of Information Systems, Statistics, and Management Science,
The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL 35478
freem028@ua.edu
Abstract. Problem definition: The Internet facilitates sex trafficking through adult service websites (ASWs) that host online
advertisements for sexual services (sex ads). Since the closure of the popular site Backpage.com, the ecosystem of ASWs has
expanded to include multiple competing sites that are hosted outside US jurisdiction. Gaining intelligence for counter-trafficking
efforts requires collecting, linking, and cleaning the data from multiple sites. However, high ad volumes, disparate data types, and
the existence of generic and misappropriated data make this process challenging. Academic/practical relevance: We present an
end-to-end process for linking sex ad data and filtering potentially erroneous links. Outputs of the developed process have been
used to inform counter-trafficking operations that have helped identify more than 60 potential victims of sex trafficking, some of
whom are getting help to transition out of the life. Methodology: Our process leverages concepts and techniques from network
science, information systems, and artificial intelligence to link ads across sites at the level of an individual or unique posting entity.
Our approach is computationally efficient, allowing millions of ads to be processed in under an hour. Results: A key component
of our process is an edge filtering procedure that identifies and removes potentially erroneous links in a graph representation of sex
ad data. A comparison of the proposed process to an existing approach shows that our process is typically more computationally
efficient and yields substantial increases in the number of individuals for which we can derive actionable intelligence. Managerial
implications: The proposed process is an efficient and effective approach for transforming the high volumes of disparate data
from sex ads into intelligence that can save lives. It has been refined over years of collaboration with practitioners and represents
a strong foundation upon which further counter-trafficking tools can be built.
Key words: sex trafficking; network science; anomaly detection; artificial intelligence
1.
Introduction
Sex trafficking refers to the use of force, fraud, or coercion to compel an individual to perform commercial
sex services. The Internet has and continues to facilitate sex trafficking in the US via adult service web-
sites (ASWs) that host commercial sexual advertisements (sex ads). Recent news references highlight the
ongoing role of the Internet in facilitating sex trafficking via ASWs:
• U.S. Attorney’s Office, Middle District of North Carolina (2023) describes the sentencing of a Durham
man to six life terms in prison for sex trafficking. The trafficker targeted women who were homeless or
suffering from substance abuse problems. Five victims testified that they were photographed and advertised
1
arXiv:2507.13477v1 [cs.SI] 17 Jul 2025

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
2
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
on two ASWs. They also testified that the sentenced individual and a co-defendant arranged commercial
sex encounters and that the trafficker used violence and coercion to “maintain order.”
• FOX6 News Milwaukee (2022) describes the sentencing of a Milwaukee man for sex trafficking of
two minors in Chicago and Wisconsin. The trafficker advertised the victims on two ASWs and arranged
encounters to occur in hotel rooms.
• Ellis (2023) describes a man pleading guilty to charges of sex trafficking of a minor. The trafficker
posted ads for the victim on several ASWs, interacted with potential clients, and scheduled encounters
between the trafficked individual and clients.
In recent years, government agencies have engaged in a game of whack-a-mole, shuttering ASWs linked
to sex trafficking activities only to have new sites quickly emerge to fill the resulting void. Zeng et al.
(2022) discuss the futility of these efforts, finding no causal impact that is attributable to the shutdown of
two prominent sites in 2018. Instead, they found that users quickly moved to other sites hosted in locations
outside of US jurisdiction. The persistence of the online commercial sex ecosystem, demonstrated by anec-
dotal evidence and empirical analyses, suggests it is here to stay. Consequently, organizations dedicated to
combating sex trafficking will continue to need methods that transform the data available on these platforms
into actionable intelligence.
Not all ads posted on ASWs are associated with victims of sex trafficking, and distinguishing adver-
tisements featuring trafficking victims from those posted voluntarily or created as scams is a significant
challenge. A large body of research is devoted to detecting sex trafficking victims based solely on the
attributes of sex ads, i.e., keywords, emojis, and image attributes. However, a critical issue is the absence of
large-scale, verifiable ground truth data. Even when law enforcement organizations can identify and isolate
victims, establishing definitive evidence of trafficking requires significant time and resources, and victims
often deny their victimization due to trauma or fear.
In addition to the challenge of identifying trafficking victims, the process of transforming sex ad data
into actionable insights requires addressing several technical obstacles. First, sex ads use various types of
data, including text, images, and numbers. Thus, data transformation pipelines must handle and link this
multimodal data. Second, although ASWs typically convey the same core information, the ASW ecosystem
includes many sites with different formats that provide data with slight variations from others. Third, the
high volume of ads created daily exceeds the ability of most law enforcement organizations (LEOs) and
non-profit organizations (NPOs) to harvest, store, and transform this data into meaningful data products.
Fourth, since providing and consuming commercial sex are illegal in most of the continental US, scammers
target ASWs extensively, adding significant noise to the data. Finally, even legitimate ads may contribute
noise in the form of erroneous connections that arise from the use of generic or misappropriated data.
Since 2019, our research has focused on developing a systematic process for collecting and analyzing
sex ads to support anti-trafficking efforts. Our ad-linking process (i) uses a graph representation to link

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
3
the diverse data included in ads, (ii) filters a giant component that emerges during graph construction
and includes erroneous links between a large proportion of the data; and (iii) and transforms the filtered
graph representation into actionable data products to inform the efforts of LEO and NPO partners. These
data products provide quantitative analyses of advertisement frequency within specific geographic regions,
such as cities or counties, along with associated ad URLs and phone numbers. Images are available on
request, which may be blurred to avoid traumatizing NPO volunteers, some of whom are survivors of sexual
exploitation. These data products have supported LEO and NPO operations, resulting in the identification of
more than 60 potential sex trafficking victims. We refer to these individuals as “potential victims” because
convictions are difficult due to the common requirement of victim testimony. Given the emotional, physical,
and psychological trauma associated with exploitation, it is often difficult to secure such testimony, even if
trafficking has occurred.
Our ad-linking process builds on that described in Freeman et al. (2022), addressing several limitations
and incorporating significant enhancements. Specifically, our process (i) incorporates recent advances in
language modeling for AWS data, (ii) leverages connected components from a graph representation of the
data in a novel fashion to generate training examples for a same user classifier, and (iii) implements a
novel approach for filtering erroneous data links without data loss. Moreover, we disclose as much detail
as possible regarding our methods and computational setup to aid reproducibility. Using a large open ASW
dataset, we show that the proposed approach typically offers substantial improvements in terms of output
quality and computational time.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes related research on linking data
from ASWs. Section 3 summarizes key concepts and techniques from graph theory/network science, image
processing, and machine learning/artificial intelligence that we incorporate in our methodology. Section 4
provides a detailed description of the various components of our ad-linking process. Section 5 discusses
our approach to detecting and removing erroneous links in the giant component that arises in the graph
representation of the data and presents experimental results demonstrating its efficacy. Section 6 concludes
the work, acknowledges limitations, and suggests directions for future research.
2.
Related Work
This paper presents an end-to-end process to help identify victims of sex trafficking by linking sex ad data at
the level of an individual or unique posting entity (e.g., escort agency, massage parlor, pimp). A significant
component of our approach is a procedure for filtering the giant component that arises in graph representa-
tions of the data due to generic posts, generic images, and misappropriated images in these datasets. In this
section, we provide an overview of related works that use analytical methods to link and derive insights from
sex ad data. We also discuss some related research on filtering giant components in graphs. We conclude
the section by discussing specific contributions of this research.

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
4
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
2.1.
Analytical Methods for Deriving Insights from Sex Ads
Li et al. (2018) presents one of the earliest studies on linking sex ad data. The authors propose an unsuper-
vised template matching algorithm that detects organizations operating on ASWs, where the term organi-
zation refers to “a single individual or a network of individuals who are trafficking a specific set of victims.”
Analogously, our ad-linking process extracts connected components of a graph representation of ad data
corresponding to an individual or unique posting entity. Their matching algorithm generates embeddings for
sex ad texts, clusters the embeddings using Hierarchical Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications
with Noise (HDBSCAN) (McInnes et al. 2017), and extracts word groups or templates that exhibit a high
degree of collocation in the clustered documents. Applying their algorithm to a dataset of nearly 40 million
ads collected from the (now defunct) site Backpage.com demonstrates it generates (i) linkages similar to
those deduced from a graph representation based on posted phone numbers and (ii) additional linkages that
cannot be constructed using only phone numbers. This research represents an important first step in showing
how sex ad features can be leveraged to detect similarity.
Zhu et al. (2019) use machine learning to detect phrases indicative of sex trafficking in sex ad data.
Specifically, they apply support vector machines on normalized ad text from the Trafficking10k dataset
(see Tong et al. (2017) for more information) to classify ads into various risk categories. Lee et al. (2021)
describes INFOSHIELD, which detects patterns in sex ad text. The procedure uses term frequency-inverse
document frequency (TF-IDF) to extract distinguishing keywords from posts and then constructs a bipartite
graph that captures document-phrase relationships. The connected components of this graph represent a
coarse clustering, which is refined in a fine clustering phase. The authors test the approach using open
Twitter bot data (see Cresci et al. (2017) for more details) and the Trafficking10k dataset.
Similar to the previously described research, we use a graph representation for the sex ad data. However,
we use a transformer-based neural network model to capture and compare the semantic meanings of posts
instead of TF-IDF. We also use perceptual hashes (pHashes) to incorporate images into our ad-linking pro-
cedure. Keskin et al. (2021) are the first researchers to demonstrate the use of perceptual hashing techniques
for linking sex ads using text and images. They extract spatiotemporal patterns from linked ad groups and
use them to simulate future movements. Freeman et al. (2022) extends the work of Keskin et al. (2021) by
describing an end-to-end process for collecting and grouping sex data. They also use a graph representation
of sex ad data and observe that generic text, generic images, and misappropriated images can create erro-
neous links, leading to the formation of large connected components in the graph. They propose a method
for filtering these large components based on betweenness centrality, but note that sampling techniques are
required to overcome computational challenges. Although the authors are correct that erroneous links can
form in the graph representation, they fail to recognize that this leads to a well-studied phenomenon in
network science: the emergence of a giant component.

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
5
2.2.
Filtering the Giant Component in Graphs
A significant issue we encounter when constructing the graph representation of ASW data is the presence of
a giant component. In network science, a giant component is a connected component of a graph whose size
scales proportional to the number of vertices in the graph (Sood and Ya˘gan 2023). Although the existence
of a giant component is often considered a useful feature of a network, there are cases where decomposing
it offers important insights into the network. Dianati (2016) discusses techniques and applications for such
decomposition methods, which the authors refer to as graph pruning methods. One use case, which also
applies to illicit activities, is presented in Husain et al. (2020). Specifically, the authors use a graph represen-
tation to study spatiotemporal patterns in data related to terrorism. They use the Global Terrorism Database,
which contains news articles on terrorism events from around the world, to construct a graph connecting
terrorists and their targets. They find that the constructed graph representation includes a giant component
that links approximately 92% of all vertices. They use a disparity filtering method to filter edges and extract
the backbone of the graph.
2.3.
Contribution
The closest research to ours is Freeman et al. (2022). Although their goal is similar, there are several limita-
tions with their proposed pipeline. First, the authors fail to recognize the emergence of a giant component in
the graph representation of ASW data, which leads them to devise filtering methods that apply to other com-
ponents unnecessarily. Second, the procedure proposed for identifying and filtering potentially erroneous
links in Freeman et al. (2022) (i) does not leverage the data associated with vertices, (ii) can lead to data
loss, and (iii) requires approximation to overcome computational challenges. Specifically, the authors use
estimates of betweenness centrality (BC) to identify and remove vertices that exceed a selected percentile
threshold in the graph representation. BC computation is very expensive. Thus, the authors are required
to approximate the BC values for all vertices in a particular component based on shortest-path computa-
tions among a subset of nodes. Regarding data loss, filtering graph vertices based on extreme BC percentile
should result in the removal of only a few vertices with high connectivity. However, as we will show in our
experimentation, different site structures or approximation issues can lead to much more substantial data
loss. A final limitation of Freeman et al. (2022) is that it lacks several details that would be necessary for
replication.
Our ad-linking process makes several contributions and addresses limitations of the process presented in
Freeman et al. (2022). First, we identify the emergence of a giant component, connecting the challenges of
working with sex ad data to a broader phenomenon in the network science literature. Second, our approach
to filtering potentially erroneous edges in the giant component is data-driven, leveraging recent advances
in language modeling for AWS data to identify and remove such connections based on classifying the
similarity of ad text pairs. Unlike prior methods, the present filtering procedure does not result in data loss.

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
6
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
A major challenge of training such a classifier is the lack of ground truth. We present a novel approach to
generate reliable training data for the task in a dynamic fashion that is robust to changes in the underlying
data used to construct the graph representation. This approach is not specific to our application and can be
applied in other contexts where filtering the giant component provides insights into its underlying structure.
Finally, this research takes major steps towards reproducibility, including detailed descriptions for all steps
and leveraging a large and open ASW dataset Freeman et al. (2025b) in experiments that demonstrate
its efficacy in terms of output quality and computational time. Ultimately, the outlined process opens the
door for new research directions by providing a thorough, rigorous, and well-documented procedure for
extracting data corresponding to posting entities represented in ASW data.
3.
Background
This section briefly describes concepts and techniques we employ from graph theory/network science,
image processing, and machine learning/artificial intelligence. Our intent is not to provide an overarch-
ing review of any area, concept, or technique, but to highlight aspects that will aid in understanding our
description of the developed ad-linking process.
3.1.
Graph Theory and Network Science Fundamentals
Network science refers to the application of mathematical graph theory to problems across various disci-
plines, where graph theory focuses on mathematical approaches for modeling relationships between objects
(Lewis 2011). A graph G(V,E) is defined by a set of vertices V that are connected by edges that form a set
E. These edges can be directed or undirected, depending on the context. For example, vertices in a family
tree graph may represent individuals, and directed edges can indicate who is a descendant of whom. Edges
can also have weights that represent meaningful attributes of the relationship between the two connected
vertices, such as distance or capacity. A path, Puv, refers to an ordered collection of vertices connecting an
origin, or source, vertex u ∈V to a destination, or target, vertex v ∈V . The path’s length is the number of
edges the path includes. A vertex is said to be reachable from another if a path connecting the two vertices
exists (B¨orner et al. 2007).
Our ad-linking process represents sex ad data as a graph and extracts groups of vertices that are reachable
from one another. The groups are called components in graph theory and network science terminology.
A common phenomenon in the study of real-world graphs is the emergence of a giant component, which
is a component whose size scales with the number of vertices in the graph (Janson et al. 1993). When a
giant component exists, a significant proportion of the graph vertices will belong to this component (B¨orner
et al. 2007). In our application, the presence of generic and misappropriated data leads to the emergence
of the giant component. Our ad-linking process includes an edge filtering procedure that specifically seeks
to identify and filter such erroneous edges in the giant component. Filtering the giant component allows us
to decompose it into additional components, each likely to correspond to an individual or unique posting
entity for which we can derive actionable intelligence from.

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
7
3.2.
Hashing Techniques - Cryptographic and Perceptual
Sex ads include text, contact information (often represented as strings), and images. Individuals or posting
entities tend to reuse each of these data elements. Thus, we need efficient ways to represent and match them
across ads and ASWs. Achieving this is most complicated for images.
In computer science, a hashing function maps data records to a lower-dimensional space such that two
pieces of identical data generate the same hash value. Ideally, these functions create simple encodings that
can verify more complex data or programs. Various hashing functions have been developed for different
applications (Chi and Zhu 2017), with cybersecurity being one of the most well-known applications.
Cryptographic hashing refers to security-oriented methods designed to be one-way and difficult or infea-
sible to reverse. They are also designed to ensure that small content changes result in different hash values.
A common application of cryptographic hashes is verifying downloaded software. Software providers com-
pute and publish hash values using specific algorithms, such as Message Digest (e.g., MD5) or Secure Hash
Algorithm (e.g., SHA-256). Users who download the software can apply the same algorithm to verify that
their hash matches the one published, with different values potentially indicating corrupt software.
Perceptual hashing techniques have a similar goal of representing complex data in a simpler format, but
are designed to work with images. Specifically, digital images are represented as arrays of pixel values,
and perceptual hashing techniques determine whether two images are fundamentally the same based on
their content, rather than making strict pixel-to-pixel comparisons. This is crucial because slight image
variations can arise from cropping, applying filters, compression, or other modifications. Perceptual hashing
techniques are commonly used to help identify instances of copyright infringement or online child sexual
abuse materials (CSAM). We refer readers interested in learning more about perceptual hashing techniques
and their applications to Farid (2021).
3.3.
Transformer Models and Sentence Embeddings
As noted earlier, our graph representation for sex ad data is prone to the emergence of a giant component
that arises from generic and misappropriated data. Our ad-linking process includes a procedure to identify
and remove erroneous edges within the giant component. This filtering procedure leverages transformer
neural network models tailored for ASW applications for these comparisons.
The transformer neural network architecture, introduced by Vaswani et al. (2017), utilizes an attention
mechanism that allows the model to focus on important contextual elements during training. Before trans-
formers, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) were the dominant architecture for text processing. RNNs
process text sequences serially, making them slow and computationally challenging for large context win-
dows. The transformer architecture and its attention mechanism have removed significant barriers, enabling
rapid advances in neural network applications for natural language and other areas (Incitti et al. 2023).
One area where transformers have been successfully applied is developing sentence embedding and
classification models. These models transform sentences into numerical vector representations that can be

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
8
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
compared to identify sentences with similar contexts. The open-source community has emerged as a pri-
mary host of pre-trained transformer models. Platforms like Hugging Face host repositories of models and
publish libraries that enable easy Python integration. On Hugging Face, contributors ranging from large
technology companies to individuals share models and documentation that allow users to use pre-trained
models directly or fine-tune them for specific applications.
Several key concepts are important when applying transformer models to natural language problems:
- Foundation Models: The term foundation model refers to a model trained on broad, diverse datasets to
provide a foundation for more specialized models Bommasani et al. (2022). Some well-known foundation
model families are BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019), GPT (Radford et al. 2018),
and LLaMa (Touvron et al. 2023). Foundation models learn vector representations for tokens, which are
basic units of text that can correspond to words, subwords, characters, or bytes. Different models employ
different tokenization approaches. For example, BERT uses WordPiece tokenization, while GPT uses
Byte-Pair Encoding tokenization. It is important to note that the vocabulary of tokens that a particular
language model utilizes is fixed. If a foundation model encounters a token that is not in its vocabulary, it
is mapped to special tokens that represent it as unknown, e.g., the [UNK] token in BERT. Understanding
how unknown tokens are handled is crucial when considering ASW data, which uses emojis and slang
that may not be part of the general-purpose vocabulary of mainstream foundation models.
- Transformer Components: The transformer consists of encoder and a decoder components (Vaswani
et al. 2017). The encoder learns how to represent input text as vector embeddings that capture context
from other tokens in an input sequence. The decoder learns to generate tokens autoregressively based
on preceding tokens. Foundation models differ in the transformer components used. For example, BERT
is an encoder-only model that can generate contextualized token embeddings based on all other tokens
in an input sequence (Qorib et al. 2024). BERT variants are commonly fine-tuned for tasks that require
understanding an entire text sequence, such as text classification and named entity recognition. GPT
variants are decoder-only models that are typically fine-tuned for tasks that rely on text generation. T5
utilizes both the encoder and decoder components, and is commonly fine-tuned for tasks where text
understanding and generation are important, such as question answering and text summarization.
- Fine-Tuning: Foundation models are designed to exhibit broad text understanding for assessing text
similarity or generating text. Using foundation models for a specific task, such as classification or named
entity recognition, requires fine-tuning on a labeled dataset Ding et al. (2023). Some tasks require an
additional step of training a model that learns to aggregate token representations for a text sequence into
a single embedding that can then be used to generate features for a classifier or clustering algorithm. An
example of such a model is a sentence transformer model (Reimers and Gurevych 2019).
Our research utilizes a sentence transformer model specifically fine-tuned for computing similarities
between post texts found in sex ads. Freeman et al. (2025a) describes the training process, which includes

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
9
custom pre-training of a BERT variant on a dataset of more than 19 million ASW posts and fine-tuning a
sentence transformer on a dataset of 4 million ASW post triplets using a contrastive learning task. We use
this fine-tuned sentence transformer to generate numerical vector representations for post texts. We compute
the similarity between post text pairs using cosine similarity, a standard method for comparing sentence
embeddings (Reimers and Gurevych 2019). We employ a simple binary classification model to translate the
similarity scores into predictions about whether the same individual created both posts.
4.
Ad-Linking Process
This section describes our process for linking ads at the level of an individual or unique posting entity. The
process performs five distinct tasks: (i) data collection, (ii) data cleaning and standardization, (iii) location
cleaning and standardization, (iv) ad grouping, and v) output generation. Figure 1 provides a flowchart
depicting the complete process. Each task is described in detail in the following subsections.
Figure 1
Ad-Linking Pipeline
4.1.
Data Collection
We use custom web scraping applications to collect data from ASWs. Because the ecosystem of ASWs
is constantly evolving and the structure and format of each site differ, we develop specific data collection

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
10
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
applications for each one. We add new applications for emerging sites, discontinue applications for inactive
sites, and modify existing applications as sites change.
Each application collects all text and image information for newly posted ads. We use unique identifiers,
such as ad IDs or unique combinations of extracted features (like text and post date), to ensure ads are only
collected once. We also utilize caching to ensure that we only collect each unique image once. All text
information is stored in a JSON format, and we use cryptographic and perceptual hashing techniques to
represent associated images in the JSON data. Copies of each unique image encountered are downloaded to
a dedicated image store.
4.2.
Data Cleaning and Standardization
The data cleaning and standardization task serves two purposes: (i) to extract a consistent subset of informa-
tion from all sites for ad linking and (ii) to map all data to a set of standardized labels, allowing comparisons
between sites. We refer to the data extracted in (i) as core data, which is stored in a relational database
(Core DB). The data mapped in (ii) is referred to as detail data and stored in a separate relational database
(Details DB).
The core data includes the following data fields for each ad, which are collected from all sites:
• Unique ID - unique identifier for ad,
• Post - heading text displayed with ad,
• Site - the ASW from which the ad was collected,
• Post Date - the date the ad was posted or first observed,
• Target City - the city the ad targeted,
• Target State - the state the ad targeted,
• Location Details - any freeform text providing additional information regarding the location,
• Phash-16 Values - a list of 16-bit pHash values for images posted with the ad and
• Contact Information - contact information provided with the ad.
The detail data varies significantly among sites and includes additional information about the provider, such
as hair and eye color, rates, touring schedules, and even client reviews.
4.3.
Location Cleaning and Standardization
The next phase of our ad-linking process focuses on cleaning and standardizing cities and states represented
in the core data. Most ASWs allow posters to select from a limited set of cities and states when specifying
the target location for their ad. This creates two significant challenges. First, the set of locations varies
among sites. Second, the available locations may differ in their granularity and spelling of location names.
Examples of these issues are one site allowing ad creators to select “Dallas, Texas” or “Fort Worth, Texas”
whereas another only allows “Dallas/Fort Worth, Texas.” Moreover, “Fort Worth” can be represented as
“Fort Worth,” “Ft Worth,” or “Ft. Worth,” each interpreted as a different string by a computer.

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
11
To address these issues, our process maps the city/state pairs associated with ads to locations specified
in Version 1.6 of the Pro US cities database made available by simplemaps (simplemaps 2022). We begin
by first querying the Core DB to retrieve a dataset showing the number of URLs collected for each unique
city-state pair. We then combine the city and state strings and attempt to match the combined string to an
entry in the US cities database. In cases where we successfully match the city-state string to an entry in
the US cities database, we join the county name and Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) code
from the US cities database to the ad data. FIPS codes are standardized numeric or alphanumeric codes
issued by the US government to uniquely identify geographic entities, such as states, counties, cities, and
other administrative divisions. For cases where no match is made, we sort the data by the number of affected
URLs and manually specify appropriate matches, prioritizing locations that will affect the most URLs.
Our matching process is imperfect because we cannot specify appropriate matches for all cases. However,
our efforts reduce the number of URLs affected by unmatched city/state pairs from approximately 15%
to less than 1%. Figure 2 provides additional details on the impacts of our manual location cleaning and
standardization process. The left subplot shows the top 20 unmatched locations as a percentage of affected
URLs before cleaning and standardization, while the right subplot shows the top 20 unmatched locations
after cleaning and standardization. The output of the location cleaning and standardization process is a
dataset that maps the observed city/state strings to cleaned representations with county details.
Figure 2
County Mapping Examples
4.4.
Ad Grouping
Ad grouping begins by querying recent core data, which is saved to disk as a Parquet file. Parquet is an
open-source file format designed to handle flat, columnar data. It is known for efficient data compression
and its ability to handle various encoding types. Typically, we work with core data corresponding to ads

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
12
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
posted or observed within 90 days of execution. This timeframe is based on feedback from our partners and
can be adjusted as needed.
After querying, we construct an unweighted and undirected graph representation of the data where ver-
tices correspond to unique artifacts, such as post text or pHash values. Graph edges identify links between
artifacts that appear together in an ad. A typical ad consists of a single post, multiple images, and can contain
no contact information (some sites include a “Message Me” capability), one piece of contact information
(e.g., a phone number), or multiple pieces of contact information. When constructing the graph represen-
tation, we represent each ad using the post text value as the central vertex connected to various pHash and
contact information vertices. When multiple ads use the same artifact, links among ads create a larger graph
structure.
Figure 3 shows a graph representation for a simple example with four ads, where ads 1, 2, and 3 are
linked because they share common artifacts. Specifically, ads 1 and 2 share a common contact information
vertex, e.g., the two ads used the same phone number. Also, ads 2 and 3 share two images. Ellipses are used
to identify the shared artifacts. Due to the described overlaps, the artifacts associated with ads 1, 2, and 3
form a single connected component. Ad 4 has no artifacts that overlap with other ads; thus, the artifacts
associated with ad 4 form another connected component. Note that we also know the post date and target
location for all ads. When an individual posts the same ad multiple times, i.e., with identical post text,
contact information, and images, we also have records of all post dates and target locations in the data
extracted from the core DB.
Figure 3
Graph Representation Example
Note. The Post Text vertices correspond to the raw post text harvested from an ad.

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
13
Once the graph is constructed, we extract all connected components, each corresponding to a set of arti-
facts that can be linked via their usage across all ads. A significant issue we encounter at this point is the
emergence of a giant component, which can largely be attributed to: (i) generic post texts and images (e.g.,
“Available Now” or the OnlyFans logo) and (ii) misappropriated images where a provider creates an ad
using an image found elsewhere. The giant component poses a significant problem as it links artifacts asso-
ciated with many providers. Without filtering the edges in the giant component and eliminating erroneous
connections, the data it links is too noisy for actionable insights and must be disregarded.
Our ad-linking process includes a giant component filtering procedure that leverages a prediction model
to detect and remove likely erroneous edges from the giant component. Section 5 provides a detailed expla-
nation of the procedure. For now, we provide a high-level overview of how the procedure breaks down the
giant component into smaller components likely to be associated with an individual or a unique posting
entity. The first step is to extract the giant component from the graph representation of the data and project it
so that it only includes vertices associated with posts. Edges in the projection exist between pairs of vertices
corresponding to post text values that were connected by pHash or contact information vertices in the orig-
inal graph representation. Figure 4 depicts this graph projection step, where images correspond to pHash
values and phones correspond to contact information values.
Figure 4
Giant Component Filtering - Graph Projection
Next, we iterate over all edges in the graph projection and use a binary classification model to assess the
probability that the two posts connected by an edge were created by the same user or posting entity. We
refer to this probability as the same user probability. A user-specified threshold is used to identify edges
to remove from the graph projection. Specifically, if the same user probability value for two linked posts is

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
14
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
less than the threshold, the edge is flagged for removal. Flagged edges are removed after iterating over all
edges in the projection, leaving components corresponding to connected posts. Figure 5 illustrates how this
procedure filters the graph projection from Figure 4 into two distinct components of connected posts when
a threshold of 0.5 is applied.
Figure 5
Giant Component Filtering - Edge Removal
Components extracted from the filtered projection of the giant component allow us to map each post text
value associated with a vertex in the giant component to a unique component identifier. Additionally, each
component not included in the giant component can also be mapped to unique component identifiers. These
unique identifiers are mapped back to the original data, along with county names and FIPS codes from the
location cleaning/standardization phase. This data is written to a clean component data file for use in the
next phase. A key thing to note about the described filtering procedure is that it results in no data loss.
Instead, we are simply removing associations between post text values.

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
15
4.5.
Output Generation
The final phase of our ad-linking process generates outputs for our LEO and NPO partners engaged in
counter-trafficking operations. We generate two types of outputs that are tailored to the region where our
partners operate. The first, summary output, provides a tabular listing of individuals or unique posting
entities (corresponding to connected components in the graph representation) that have targeted the selected
region in recent days. This output contains basic statistics such as the number of observed ads, the proportion
of times the individual targeted the chosen region, and recently used contact information for each individual.
This allows users to quickly browse the list and attempt to make contact with individuals without visiting
the sites hosting ads, minimizing exposure to explicit content. This is an important consideration for our
NPO partners who rely on volunteers for outreach efforts, including volunteers who are former victims of
sex trafficking. The second, detail output, provides additional details for each individual in the summary
output, including recently posted images and post texts, recent URLs, and a choropleth plot showing recent
movement across states by month. Our process allows specific details of the outputs to be specified on
a per-partner basis, including the blur applied to images, the locations considered, and a minimum target
ad frequency for the selected locations. Figure 6 provides an example of both outputs and shows how the
summary and detail outputs are linked by the unique identifier associated with connected components of
the graph representation.
We do not discuss the specifics of how our partners operationalize these data products because they vary
greatly depending on the type of organization (LEO vs. NPO) and the resources available. However, the
key observation is that these data products distill data collected from large volumes of ads posted on one
or more sites into interpretable information that can be used directly to initiate contact with a potential
victim. Without these products, organization employees must try to establish links between ads by visiting
sites and manually linking the information. Just the process of linking ads, excluding attempts to eliminate
erroneous connections, is daunting. For example, if we observe 100 ads targeting a specific location, does
that correspond to 100 individuals each posting a single ad, one individual posting 100 times, or some
combination in between?
4.6.
Technologies
We implement the ad-linking process using the Python programming language. Table 1 specifies essential
libraries, the tasks performed by each library, and any available citations. We use the following abbreviations
for the tasks: DC - Data Collection, DCS - Data Cleaning and Standardization, LCS - Location Cleaning
and Standardization, AG - Ad Grouping, and OG - Output Generation.
5.
Giant Component Filtering
This section provides additional details regarding our procedure for detecting and removing potentially erro-
neous links in the graph representation of the giant component. As described in Section 4.4, the procedure

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
16
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
Figure 6
Outputs Example
Summary Output
Detail Output (Page 1)
Detail Output (Page 2)
Library
DC
DCS
LCS
AG
OG
Citation(s)
beautifulsoup
X
bokeh
X
igraph
X
Csardi and Nepusz (2006)
matplotlib
X
Hunter (2007)
numpy
X
X
X
X
X
Harris et al. (2020)
pandas
X
X
X
X
pandas development team (2020), Wes McKinney (2010)
pillow
X
X
polars
X
X
X
X
python-docx
X
requests
X
scikit-learn
X
Pedregosa et al. (2011)
scipy
X
Virtanen et al. (2020)
seaborn
X
Waskom (2021)
selenium
X
sentence-transformers
X
Wolf et al. (2020)
Table 1
Python Libraries Used by Task
iterates over all edges in a projection of the giant component’s graph representation, where the projection
includes edges between posts that were initially connected by vertices corresponding to pHash or contact
information values. During each iteration, a binary classification model assesses the probability that the
same user created the posts associated with the connected vertices. Algorithm 5 provides pseudocode for
the filtering procedure.

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
17
Algorithm 1 Giant Component Filtering
- Define same user probability threshold, δ.
- Extract connected components from graph representation of ASW data.
- Use sentence transformer (see Section 5.3) and non-giant components to train a binary classifier for the same user
classification task (see Section 5.4).
- Define GC graph as the giant component from the original graph representation.
- Create post projection of GC graph and store as GC post graph. Let E denote the set of edges in
GC post graph
- Define SU(x,y) as a procedure that computes the same user probability for a set of texts, x and y, i.e., our binary
classification model.
- Define an empty list, edges to remove.
for e ∈E do
Let source and target represent the vertices connected by edge e in GC post graph.
Let ˜s represent the post text associated with the source vertex.
˜t represent the post text associated with the target vertex.
if SU(˜s, ˜t) < δ then
Add edge e to edges to remove.
end if
end for
- Remove edges in edges to remove from GC post graph.
- Extract connected components from GC post graph. Each connected component contains a set of vertices
corresponding to posts that are reachable to one another in GC post graph.
- Create a unique identifier for all extracted components and use these identifiers to label posts in the data.
The remainder of this section focuses on the developed classification procedure, including how it is
trained and deployed. We also present experimental results demonstrating the efficacy of the edge removal
procedure on an open dataset that includes data from multiple ASWs. We begin with a description of the
ASW dataset used throughout this section and a brief overview of the computational setup.
5.1.
Data
We utilize the open dataset described in Freeman et al. (2025b) to demonstrate relevant aspects of our giant
component filtering approach. The dataset provides a sample of more than 10 million ads collected from
nine ASWs between May 1, 2022, and August 1, 2022. The authors obfuscate numerical data included in
post texts, anonymize URLs and site names, and provide pHash values instead of images. These measures
prevent the direct identification of individuals while preserving as much data structure as possible. Table 2
lists the specific data fields we use and describes each field exactly as provided in the original paper. We

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
18
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
refer readers seeking an in-depth discussion of the data collection methodology and structure to the original
publication.
Data Field
Description
url
An integer representing the URL associated with the ad.
site
An integer representing the site the data was collected from.
post masked The raw heading text associated with the ad. Note: Numbers that appear in the text are
obfuscated by replacing them with the character ‘*’.
post int
An integer representing the raw heading text associated with the ad. Note: All occur-
rences of a specific text are assigned to the same integer value.
phone int
An integer representing the phone number associated with the ad. Missing values are
represented as None.
phash16
The pHash for a single image associated with the ad, computed using the imagehash
library.
Table 2
Relevant Data Columns
Table 3 summarizes the data for each of the nine sites included in the dataset. We also include an overall
summary (“All”) corresponding to the case where all data is used. Even though the data was collected from
May 1, 2022, to August 1, 2022, we note substantial differences in the number of URLs and unique post,
pHash, and phone number values across the sites. Moreover, the summary statistics indicate substantial
variation across sites concerning data duplication. For example, notice that although site 1 has less than 10%
of the number of URLs as site 9, site 1 has more unique post, pHash, and phone number values. Ultimately,
the summary statistics highlight the degree of variation in data available from ASWs.
Site
URLs Unique Posts Unique pHashes Unique Phones
Site 1
461,234
283,845
1,986,408
143,226
Site 2
257,252
105,400
625,396
257,250
Site 3
1,794,625
263,084
978,388
265,552
Site 4
121,199
13,909
148,812
6,383
Site 5
27,818
16,049
65,533
5,139
Site 6
1,592,738
215,664
1,371,934
154,126
Site 7
1,070,044
320,347
1,117,073
305,370
Site 8
169,114
146,022
2,000,931
3,688
Site 9
4,784,510
273,264
501,156
17,586
All
10,278,534
1,036,868
6,219,151
497,104
Table 3
Dataset Summary
5.2.
Computational Setup
The experimental results that follow show that our ad-linking process is computationally efficient and can
handle practical data volumes in a time that allows for daily updates. However, processing large volumes of
ad data and running neural network inference on hundreds of thousands of posts requires high-performance
computational infrastructure. We run the ad-linking pipeline on a Dell Precision 7865 workstation with a

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
19
64-core AMD Ryzen Threadripper CPU, 512 GB of RAM, and an NVIDIA RTX 6000 Ada GPU with 48
GB of memory. We use the Pop! OS Linux distribution and the Pixi package manager to build and manage
reproducible Python environments with GPU support. All experimentation presented in this section was run
on the described workstation.
5.3.
Language Modeling
We use a binary classification model to filter edges in the giant component. Specifically, the binary classifier
is trained to predict whether a pair of posts can be attributed to the same individual or posting entity.
Constructing an effective classifier requires a high-quality means of assessing the similarity of ASW post
texts. We leverage a sentence transformer model designed explicitly for ASW data that is proposed in
Freeman et al. (2025a) for our classification task. Specifically, we use the sentence transformer fine-tuned
from the BERT-New30522-MLM variant trained for 20 epochs.
Figure 7 demonstrates the benefit of using the ASW-tailored models in terms of tokenization. The figure
shows five example posts from the dataset described in Section 5.1 and how they would be tokenized by
the base variant of BERT (BERT-base) and the ASW-specific model from Freeman et al. (2025a) (Custom).
The key observations are that the BERT-base tokenization approach: (i) ignores emojis altogether, and ii) is
more likely to be missing tokens in its vocabulary, which results in more occurrences of the [UNK] token.
Figure 7
Tokenization Examples
The previous figure demonstrates that the custom foundation models introduced in Freeman et al. (2025a)
are much better at retaining information from ASW post text values when tokenizing. We now demonstrate

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
20
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
the sentence transformer model’s ability to capture the semantic similarity of posts. Specifically, we use the
trained sentence transformer model to generate embeddings for each unique post text value in our dataset.
We then use the recently developed LocalMAP dimensionality reduction technique (Wang et al. 2024) to
reduce the 512-dimensional embeddings for each post text to a two-dimensional vector. We use the default
values for LocalMAP when performing the dimensionality reduction. We then use HDBSCAN (McInnes
et al. 2017) to cluster the reduced-dimensional representations. Figure 8 shows examples of posts associated
with three resulting clusters, demonstrating the model’s ability to generate embeddings that map similar
texts nearby in the vector space.
Figure 8
Embedding Cluster Examples
5.4.
Binary Classification
This section describes our approach to classifying whether pairs of post texts can be attributed to the
same individual or posting entity. The classification task involves: (i) using the sentence transformer model
described in the previous section to generate embeddings for pairs of connected posts in the projected giant
component representation, (ii) computing the cosine similarity of the embeddings for linked posts to mea-
sure their proximity to the embedding space, and (iii) using a simple logistic regression model to learn the
classification boundary that best distinguishes posts made by the same individual or entity.
The key challenge in training such a classifier is obtaining training data. Even though some sites may
provide a profile identifier with ads, it is not common, and there is no way to guarantee that an individual or
posting entity does not have multiple profiles. In short, ASWs generally do not provide a means to obtain

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
21
ground truth labels for individuals posting ads. We overcome this challenge by assuming that non-giant
components in the initial graph representations provide a proxy for assessing the expected similarity of posts
for unique posting entities. Thus, we use the non-giant components from the original graph representation
to construct the training dataset for the binary classification task. In particular, we: (i) extract the non-giant
components each time the ad-linking process executes, (ii) use components with more than one linked post
to generate examples of posts associated with the same individual or unique posting entity, i.e., positive
class examples, and (iii) use post pairs selected from different components to create examples of posts
associated with different posting entities, i.e., negative class examples. For all pairs in the training data, we
generate text embeddings using the sentence transformer model and compute the cosine similarity between
the embeddings. Since we know whether the post pairs in each row were selected from the same non-giant
component, a binary label is added. We then train the logistic regression model to use the cosine similarity
values to predict the label. In the giant component filtering procedure, we use the trained logistic regression
model to generate the probability that a post pair can be attributed to the same posting entity, rather than
simply predicting a class label. This allows us to control the tradeoff between false positives and false
negatives. Figure 9 shows an example of the training dataset, along with computed cosine similarity and
same user probability values.
Figure 9
Training Data Example
When generating the training dataset, we typically create 10,000 training examples, with 1,000 positive
instances and 9,000 negative instances. Figure 10 provides additional insight regarding how the selection
of the same user probability threshold affects the rate of false positives and false negatives. The figure
includes subplots that depict the tradeoffs between the false positive rate (FP), the false negative rate (FN),
and the total error rate (Total) as the threshold for the same user probability varies from 0.0 to 1.0 along the
horizontal axes. The left subplot shows the tradeoffs for site 5 (the smallest site by unique URLs), and the
right subplot shows the tradeoffs for site 9 (i.e., the largest site by unique URLs).
Note in Figure 10 that the errors are biased towards false negatives for probability thresholds greater than
0.25. In the context of our prediction task, a false negative (positive) corresponds to incorrectly leaving
(removing) an edge in the giant component projection that should be removed (retained). Regardless, the

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
22
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
Figure 10
Prediction Threshold Examples
same user probability threshold provides an easy-to-interpret mechanism that allows for tailoring potential
errors made by the classification model based on user preferences. In practice, we use a threshold value of
0.7, which reduces false positives but increases the number of false negatives. However, the overall accuracy
is comparable to that achieved with a threshold of 0.5, and the threshold can be easily adjusted based on
partner preference.
5.5.
Impacts on Giant Component Size
This section demonstrates the efficacy of our giant component filtering approach. We run the procedure for
each site included in our dataset independently, as well as for all sites combined (“All”). We use a same user
probability threshold of 0.7 when determining edges to remove in the giant component projection. Table 4
provides relevant statistics for this experiment, including:
• |V | - the number of vertices in the original graph representation of the data,
• |E| - the number of edges in the original graph representation of the data,
• |C| - the number of components in the original graph representation of the data, including the giant
component,
• GC Proportion - the size of the giant component as a proportion of the number of vertices (|V |),
• Filtered |C| - the number of components after applying the giant component filtering procedure,
• Filtered GC Proportion - the size of the giant component as a proportion of the number of vertices (|V |)
after applying the giant component filtering procedure,
• |C| increase - the increase in the number of components due to the application of the giant component
filtering procedure, expressed as a proportion of the number of components in the original graph repre-
sentation (|C|).
The results show that our approach reduces the size of the giant component substantially for all cases.
More importantly, the filtering approach results in the extraction of significant numbers of new components
that can be used to generate actionable intelligence for potential victims of sexual exploitation. For the case

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
23
Filtered
Filtered
Site
|V |
|E|
|C|
GC Proportion
|C|
GC Proportion |C| Increase
Site 1 2,413,478
3,740,639
69,990
0.23
93,370
0.02
0.33
Site 2
988,045
1,158,752
61,061
0.47
79,009
0.25
0.29
Site 3 1,507,023
2,329,791
56,715
0.50
100,682
0.21
0.78
Site 4
169,103
320,596
1,833
0.73
5,854
0.10
2.19
Site 5
86,720
194,188
3,738
0.31
6,294
0.02
0.68
Site 6 1,741,723
4,744,453
44,914
0.45
79,385
0.16
0.77
Site 7 1,742,789
2,708,611
62,769
0.53
119,987
0.22
0.91
Site 8 2,150,640
2,736,256
78,225
0.05
81,867
0.00
0.05
Site 9
792,005
1,007,027
82,841
0.08
95,751
0.02
0.16
All
7,753,122 15,667,074 143,489
0.57
291,530
0.18
1.03
Table 4
Giant Component Filtering Performance Summary
where data from all sites is used to construct the initial graph representation, the giant component is reduced
from a size corresponding to approximately 57% of the data artifacts to 18%, and the number of components
is increased by more than 100%. Without an effective means to decompose the giant component, all of the
linked data would be disregarded because the high degree of noise prohibits actionable intelligence. Thus,
the proposed approach is highly effective for increasing the amount of this important and hard-to-obtain
data that can be acted upon.
5.6.
Benchmark Experiment
We conclude this section with a benchmarking experiment that compares our giant component filtering to
that described by Freeman et al. (2022). Specifically, we compare the two approaches in terms of reducing
giant component size, elapsed time, and overall component increase.
Freeman et al. (2022) use betweenness centrality (BC) to identify and remove nodes with unusually high
connectivity. The BC value for a vertex v captures the number of times v lies on the shortest path between
all other pairs of nodes. Thus, determining BC requires computing the shortest paths between all pairs of
vertices in a graph. Noting this significant computational challenge, Freeman et al. (2022) use a random
sample of approximately 40% of the vertices in a component to approximate the BC values for all vertices.
They do not provide an exact BC threshold value that they use to identify vertices for deletion. Instead, they
discuss how they represent BC values relative to the maximum observed value for different artifacts and
examine changes in component structure at various relative cutoff thresholds to determine the appropriate
settings.
Our benchmark experiment applies the giant component filtering approaches to our dataset. We apply
the two approaches to each site individually and to all sites simultaneously (“All”). When implementing
the approach from Freeman et al. (2022), which we refer to as the BC-based method, we: (i) construct the
graph representation of the data, (ii) extract the giant component, (iii) approximate the BC values for all
vertices in the giant component using a random sample of approximately 40% of the giant component’s
vertices, (iv) express the BC values relative to the maximum value observed by artifact type, and (v) apply

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
24
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
a percentile threshold to identify vertices for removal. For example, applying a threshold of 0.90 removes
all vertices with a relative BC value that equals or exceeds the 90th percentile for all artifact types. Noting
that BC computation is expensive, we limit the time allowed to one day (86,400 seconds). Also, we use
the nx-cugraph library for Python to accelerate BC computation using the GPU available on the testing
workstation (see Section 5.2).
Table 5 presents the benchmark experiment results for giant component size reduction and elapsed time.
We consider four different threshold values of 0.75, 0.9, 0.95, and 0.99 for the BC-based filtering procedure.
The results associated with these thresholds are given in the columns BC - 0.75, BC - 0.9, BC - 0.95, and
BC - 0.99, respectively. The reduction in giant component size is expressed as a percentage of the number of
vertices in the original graph representation. The elapsed time is expressed in seconds. Bold font indicates
the best performance for each site, with larger reductions in giant component size and shorter elapsed time
values being preferred.
Giant Component Size Reduction
Elapsed Time (Seconds)
Site
Proposed BC - 0.75 BC - 0.90 BC - 0.95 BC - 0.99 Proposed
BC
Site 1
20.90%
0.21%
0.20%
0.20%
0.20%
402
6,773
Site 2
22.90%
16.77%
16.65%
16.65%
16.65%
275
5,802
Site 3
29.55%
50.39%
50.36%
50.29%
49.62%
1,070
38,326
Site 4
62.55%
10.51%
10.35%
10.35%
10.35%
82
3,257
Site 5
28.65%
5.05%
5.03%
4.40%
4.40%
249
141
Site 6
28.83%
0.08%
0.08%
0.08%
0.08%
1,039
7,863
Site 7
30.33%
0.34%
0.16%
0.16%
0.16%
1,374
10,829
Site 8
4.85%
0.04%
0.03%
0.03%
0.03%
74
803
Site 9
5.60%
0.63%
0.63%
0.63%
0.63%
215
242
All
39.16%
-
-
-
-
9,300
-
Table 5
Benchmark Experiment Results - Giant Component Reduction and Elapsed Time
Table 5 shows that our giant component filtering procedure results in significantly larger size reductions
when compared to that of Freeman et al. (2022). Moreover, our procedure tends to outperform in terms
of elapsed time, with the BC-based procedure failing to complete within the one-day time limit for the
“All” case. There are two exceptions: the BC-based method (i) yields a larger reduction in giant component
size for Site 3, and ii) requires less computational time to filter the giant component for Site 5. We will
see that the larger giant component reduction for Site 3 does not necessarily translate into a more effective
decomposition. Regarding the elapsed time result for Site 5, this site has the smallest graph representation
(see Table 4), suggesting that the computational overhead associated with computing post embeddings in our
process can result in it being outperformed on small graphs. Table 6 compares the increase in components
associated with the two approaches. Bold text to indicate the method that yields the largest increase in the
number of components.

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
25
Component Increase
Site
Proposed BC - 0.75
BC - 0.9
BC - 0.95 BC - 0.99
Site 1
33.41%
2.95%
2.94%
2.94%
2.89%
Site 2
29.40%
3.19%
1.70%
1.70%
1.70%
Site 3
77.52%
0.08%
0.44%
1.35%
7.07%
Site 4
219.42%
602.45% 602.40%
602.40%
602.40%
Site 5
68.41%
1.69%
1.55%
1.47%
1.44%
Site 6
76.75%
0.94%
0.94%
0.94%
0.94%
Site 7
91.16%
5.63%
2.09%
2.09%
2.09%
Site 8
4.66%
0.10%
0.05%
0.04%
0.01%
Site 9
15.59%
0.67%
0.67%
0.67%
0.66%
All
103.17%
-
-
-
-
Table 6
Benchmark Experiment Results - Component Increase
Table 6 shows that our procedure typically results in substantial increases in the number of components.
Recall that each component represents data associated with an individual or unique posting entity. Thus,
the increase in components directly translates into a greater potential to identify potential victims of sexual
exploitation. One exception is Site 4, where both methods yield substantial increases in components, but the
BC-based approach increases the number of components by more than 600%. Table 4 shows that the giant
component in the graph representation for Site 4 includes approximately 75% of all vertices, explaining the
high potential for additional components. Moreover, the performance of the BC-based approach suggests it
may be better for some site characteristics.
Another interesting case is Site 3. While Table 5 showed that the BC-based method provides a larger
reduction in giant component size for this site, our procedure is more effective at increasing the number
of components. This observation highlights the potential for the BC-based approach to result in significant
data loss. In other words, the substantial reduction in giant component size seems to be a result of deleting
a significant proportion of vertices, which limits the increase in components. Our procedure does not delete
data; instead, it removes data associations. Together, the results presented in Tables 5 and 6 show that our
approach generally improves upon the performance of that described in Freeman et al. (2022) in terms of
giant component size reduction, computational time, and the degree of component increase. Moreover, it
provides these benefits without data loss.
6.
Conclusion
We present an end-to-end process for collecting and linking sex ad data, identifying and removing erroneous
links, and transforming this data into intelligence for counter-trafficking operations. Our methodology has
been refined through ongoing collaborations with LEO and NPO partners, directly supporting operations
that have identified and connected with more than 60 potential sex trafficking victims. Our ad-linking pro-
cess addresses significant limitations in previous approaches, particularly that described by Freeman et al.
(2022). A critical contribution is recognizing the emergence of a giant component in the graph representa-
tion of sex ad data, establishing an important connection between counter-trafficking efforts and network

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
26
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
science. This recognition enables us to develop a tailored approach for detecting and removing potentially
erroneous edges in the giant component. This procedure:
• is data-driven, leveraging recent advances in language models specifically tailored for ASW data,
• results in no data loss, preserving all collected information while removing potentially erroneous associ-
ations, and
• includes a novel approach to create training data based on observations from components not connected
in the giant component, which allows our approach to evolve based on the available data.
To aid reproducibility and validate our approach, we demonstrate its efficacy using an open dataset that
contains a diverse sample of data collected from nine different ASWs. Our experimental results show sub-
stantial improvements over previous methods in terms of giant component size reduction, computational
efficiency, and component increase, with our approach yielding an increase in the number of components
exceeding 100% when applied to the combined dataset. Moreover, we have taken care to explicitly describe
our tools, techniques, and the reasoning behind the design choices embedded in the process.
Regarding limitations, first and foremost, we want to emphasize that not all ads posted on ASWs are
associated with victims of sex trafficking, and our process does not attempt to predict whether or not an
individual is being trafficked. Based on our fieldwork experience, we believe such a determination is impos-
sible based solely on ASW data. Instead, our ultimate goal is to develop techniques that transform the large
volumes of ASW data created daily into data products that enhance the efforts of subject matter experts in
the field.
Second, ASWs are only one area of the Internet that facilitates sex trafficking. Others include social
media and sites on the Dark Web. However, given the well-documented history of sex trafficking being
facilitated by ASWs and the general availability of these sites, we believe this work represents a significant
advance in the fight against sexual exploitation.
Third, a key feature of our process is that it results in no data loss. However, we know that some proportion
of ads posted on ASWs are scams (Freeman et al. 2022). Instead of trying to detect them explicitly in
our process, we allow them to remain. Table 4 shows that even though our procedure is very effective at
extracting components from a giant component, it is often the case that some residual (but much smaller)
giant component remains. It may be that the majority of scam ad data is contained in this residual giant
component, or it may not. However, instead of making assumptions about how scam ads will manifest in
the graph representation, we chose to allow them to persist. A better understanding of this manifestation
is a fruitful area for future research. Note that when working with partners in the field, we apply filters to
limit the components that are used to construct data products. One filter we commonly apply only includes
components that have posted ads targeting the partner’s location at a specified targeting rate or higher.
Our experience suggests that scammers tend to target many locations simultaneously with their ads, which

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
27
makes the targeting rate for any specific location rather low. Thus, our experience suggests the risk of scam
ads making it to data products is low.
In addition to a better understanding of how scam ads manifest in the graph representation of ad data, two
additional research directions come to mind. The first is a better understanding of the online commercial
sex ecosystem and tools to quickly identify new sites and shifts in volume. As noted in the introduction,
this ecosystem is highly fluid and subject to significant disruptions in response to policy changes. During
our years working in this area, we have observed dramatic shifts in site usage following changes such
as the implementation of more stringent account creation guidelines or the introduction of posting fees.
We have also identified cases where posting entities in certain regions use specific sites or boards that are
not widely used in other areas. Improving discovery mechanisms for these emerging patterns remains a
challenge. Second, while we use images for linking advertisements, we do not currently use them to detect
erroneous links. Although we have experimented with tools to utilize data embedded in images (such as
facial recognition), many of these tools perform poorly with the low-resolution images prevalent on ASWs.
Given the volume of advertisements hosted by these sites, the majority of images are of low resolution,
necessitating the development of specialized tools and techniques that can accommodate this reality.
In conclusion, our ad-linking process represents a significant methodological advancement in the fight
against sex trafficking, providing LEO and NPO partners with actionable intelligence derived from the
vast amount of data available on ASWs. By connecting network science principles with counter-trafficking
efforts and developing specialized tools for this domain, we have established a process that supports the
efficient and effective identification of potential victims and provides a foundation for future research in this
critical area.
Acknowledgments
This work is partially supported by the National Science Foundation.
References
Bommasani R, Hudson DA, Adeli E, Altman R, Arora S, von Arx S, Bernstein MS, Bohg J, Bosselut A, Brunskill E,
Brynjolfsson E, Buch S, Card D, Castellon R, Chatterji N, Chen A, Creel K, Davis JQ, Demszky D, Donahue C,
Doumbouya M, Durmus E, Ermon S, Etchemendy J, Ethayarajh K, Fei-Fei L, Finn C, Gale T, Gillespie L, Goel
K, Goodman N, Grossman S, Guha N, Hashimoto T, Henderson P, Hewitt J, Ho DE, Hong J, Hsu K, Huang J,
Icard T, Jain S, Jurafsky D, Kalluri P, Karamcheti S, Keeling G, Khani F, Khattab O, Koh PW, Krass M, Krishna
R, Kuditipudi R, Kumar A, Ladhak F, Lee M, Lee T, Leskovec J, Levent I, Li XL, Li X, Ma T, Malik A, Manning
CD, Mirchandani S, Mitchell E, Munyikwa Z, Nair S, Narayan A, Narayanan D, Newman B, Nie A, Niebles JC,
Nilforoshan H, Nyarko J, Ogut G, Orr L, Papadimitriou I, Park JS, Piech C, Portelance E, Potts C, Raghunathan
A, Reich R, Ren H, Rong F, Roohani Y, Ruiz C, Ryan J, R´e C, Sadigh D, Sagawa S, Santhanam K, Shih A,
Srinivasan K, Tamkin A, Taori R, Thomas AW, Tram`er F, Wang RE, Wang W, Wu B, Wu J, Wu Y, Xie SM,
Yasunaga M, You J, Zaharia M, Zhang M, Zhang T, Zhang X, Zhang Y, Zheng L, Zhou K, Liang P (2022) On
the opportunities and risks of foundation models. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07258.

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
28
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
B¨orner K, Sanyal S, Vespignani A (2007) Network science. Annual Review of Information Science & Technology
41(1):537–607.
Chi L, Zhu X (2017) Hashing techniques: A survey and taxonomy. ACM Computing Surveys 50(1):1–36.
Cresci S, Di Pietro R, Petrocchi M, Spognardi A, Tesconi M (2017) The paradigm-shift of social spambots: Evidence,
theories, and tools for the arms race. Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web
Companion, 963–972.
Csardi G, Nepusz T (2006) The igraph software package for complex network research. InterJournal Complex Sys-
tems:1695, URL https://igraph.org.
Devlin J, Chang MW, Lee K, Toutanova K (2019) Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language
understanding. Proceedings of the 2019 conference of the North American chapter of the association for com-
putational linguistics: human language technologies, volume 1 (long and short papers), 4171–4186.
Dianati N (2016) Unwinding the hairball graph: Pruning algorithms for weighted complex networks. Phys. Rev. E
93:012304, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.93.012304.
Ding N, Qin Y, Yang G, Wei F, Yang Z, Su Y, Hu S, Chen Y, Chan CM, Chen W, et al. (2023) Parameter-efficient
fine-tuning of large-scale pre-trained language models. Nature Machine Intelligence 5(3):220–235.
Ellis D (2023) Pulaski county man pleads guilty in federal court to sex trafficking of a minor. Northwest Arkansas
Democrat Gazette URL https://www.nwaonline.com/news/2023/mar/29/pulaski-count
y-man-pleads-guilty-in-federal-court/.
Farid H (2021) An overview of perceptual hashing. Journal of Online Trust and Safety 1(1).
FOX6 News Milwaukee (2022) Child sex trafficking case: Milwaukee man gets 25 years in federal prison. URL
https://www.fox6now.com/news/child-sex-trafficking-case-milwaukee-man-fed
eral-prison.
Freeman N, Nguyen T, Bott G, Parton J, Francel C (2025a) Language models for adult service website text analysis.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.10743.
Freeman NK, Bott GJ, Keskin BB, Marcantonio TL (2025b) A multi-site data sample for analyzing the online com-
mercial sex ecosystem. Scientific Data 12(243), URL http://dx.doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1
038/s41597-025-04442-w.
Freeman NK, Keskin BB, Bott GJ (2022) Collaborating with local and federal law enforcement for disrupting sex
trafficking networks. INFORMS Journal on Applied Analytics 52(5):446–459.
Harris CR, Millman KJ, van der Walt SJ, Gommers R, Virtanen P, Cournapeau D, Wieser E, Taylor J, Berg S, Smith
NJ, Kern R, Picus M, Hoyer S, van Kerkwijk MH, Brett M, Haldane A, del R´ıo JF, Wiebe M, Peterson P, G´erard-
Marchant P, Sheppard K, Reddy T, Weckesser W, Abbasi H, Gohlke C, Oliphant TE (2020) Array programming
with NumPy. Nature 585(7825):357–362, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-264
9-2.

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
29
Hunter JD (2007) Matplotlib: A 2D graphics environment. Computing in Science & Engineering 9(3):90–95, URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCSE.2007.55.
Husain SS, Sharma K, Kukreti V, Chakraborti A (2020) Identifying the global terror hubs and vulnerable motifs using
complex network dynamics. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 540:123113, ISSN 0378-
4371, URL http://dx.doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2019.123113.
Incitti F, Urli F, Snidaro L (2023) Beyond word embeddings: A survey. Information Fusion 89:418–436.
Janson S, Knuth DE, Łuczak T, Pittel B (1993) The birth of the giant component. Random Structures & Algorithms
4(3):233–358.
Keskin BB, Bott GJ, Freeman NK (2021) Cracking sex trafficking: Data analysis, pattern recognition, and path pre-
diction. Production and Operations Management 30(4):1110–1135.
Lee MC, Vajiac C, Kulshrestha A, Levy S, Park N, Jones C, Rabbany R, Faloutsos C (2021) Infoshield: General-
izable information-theoretic human-trafficking detection. 2021 IEEE 37th International Conference on Data
Engineering (ICDE), 1116–1127 (IEEE).
Lewis TG (2011) Network science: Theory and applications (John Wiley & Sons).
Li L, Simek O, Lai A, Daggett M, Dagli CK, Jones C (2018) Detection and characterization of human trafficking
networks using unsupervised scalable text template matching. 2018 IEEE International Conference on Big Data
(Big Data), 3111–3120 (IEEE).
Liu Y, Ott M, Goyal N, Du J, Joshi M, Chen D, Levy O, Lewis M, Zettlemoyer L, Stoyanov V (2019) Roberta: A
robustly optimized bert pretraining approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 .
McInnes L, Healy J, Astels S (2017) hdbscan: Hierarchical density based clustering. Journal of Open Source Software
2(11):205.
pandas development team T (2020) pandas-dev/pandas: Pandas. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenod
o.3509134.
Pedregosa F, Varoquaux G, Gramfort A, Michel V, Thirion B, Grisel O, Blondel M, Prettenhofer P, Weiss R, Dubourg
V, Vanderplas J, Passos A, Cournapeau D, Brucher M, Perrot M, Duchesnay E (2011) Scikit-learn: Machine
learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research 12:2825–2830.
Qorib M, Moon G, Ng HT (2024) Are decoder-only language models better than encoder-only language models in
understanding word meaning? Ku LW, Martins A, Srikumar V, eds., Findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: ACL 2024, 16339–16347 (Bangkok, Thailand: Association for Computational Linguistics),
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.967.
Radford A, Narasimhan K, Salimans T, Sutskever I, et al. (2018) Improving language understanding by generative
pre-training.
Reimers N, Gurevych I (2019) Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.10084 .

Freeman et al.: Linking Multi-Site Ad Data to Aid Counter-Trafficking
30
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
simplemaps (2022) https://simplemaps.com/data/us-cities, version 1.6.
Sood M, Ya˘gan O (2023) Existence and size of the giant component in inhomogeneous random k-out graphs. IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory 69(12):8081–8096.
Tong E, Zadeh A, Jones C, Morency LP (2017) Combating human trafficking with deep multimodal models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1705.02735 .
Touvron H, Lavril T, Izacard G, Martinet X, Lachaux MA, Lacroix T, Rozi`ere B, Goyal N, Hambro E, Azhar F, et al.
(2023) Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 .
US Attorney’s Office, Middle District of North Carolina (2023) Durham man sentenced to six life terms in prison for
sex trafficking. URL https://www.justice.gov/usao-mdnc/pr/durham-man-sentenced-s
ix-life-terms-prison-sex-trafficking.
Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, Uszkoreit J, Jones L, Gomez AN, Kaiser Ł, Polosukhin I (2017) Attention is all you
need. Advances in neural information processing systems 30.
Virtanen P, Gommers R, Oliphant TE, Haberland M, Reddy T, Cournapeau D, Burovski E, Peterson P, Weckesser
W, Bright J, van der Walt SJ, Brett M, Wilson J, Millman KJ, Mayorov N, Nelson ARJ, Jones E, Kern R,
Larson E, Carey CJ, Polat ˙I, Feng Y, Moore EW, VanderPlas J, Laxalde D, Perktold J, Cimrman R, Henriksen
I, Quintero EA, Harris CR, Archibald AM, Ribeiro AH, Pedregosa F, van Mulbregt P, SciPy 10 Contributors
(2020) SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in Python. Nature Methods 17:261–272,
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2.
Wang Y, Sun Y, Huang H, Rudin C (2024) Dimension reduction with locally adjusted graphs. URL https://arxi
v.org/abs/2412.15426.
Waskom ML (2021) Seaborn: Statistical data visualization. Journal of Open Source Software 6(60):3021, URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.21105/joss.03021.
Wes McKinney (2010) Data Structures for Statistical Computing in Python. St´efan van der Walt, Jarrod Millman, eds.,
Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference, 56 – 61, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.25080/
Majora-92bf1922-00a.
Wolf T, Debut L, Sanh V, Chaumond J, Delangue C, Moi A, Cistac P, Rault T, Louf R, Funtowicz M, Davison J,
Shleifer S, von Platen P, Ma C, Jernite Y, Plu J, Xu C, Scao TL, Gugger S, Drame M, Lhoest Q, Rush AM (2020)
Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing.
Zeng HS, Danaher B, Smith MD (2022) Internet governance through site shutdowns: The impact of shutting down
two major commercial sex advertising sites. Management Science 68(11):8234–8248.
Zhu J, Li L, Jones C (2019) Identification and detection of human trafficking using language models. 2019 European
Intelligence and Security Informatics Conference (EISIC), 24–31 (IEEE).