TITLE: Management and Effects of In-Store Promotional Displays
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2019
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2018.0749
---

Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
O˘guz C¸etin, Adam J. Mersereau, and Ali K. Parlakt¨urk
Kenan-Flagler Business School, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA,
Oguz Cetin@kenan-ﬂagler.unc.edu, ajm@unc.edu, Ali Parlakturk@kenan-ﬂagler.unc.edu
Problem deﬁnition: We examine a brick-and-mortar retailer’s choice of which product to include in a
promotional display (e.g., an “endcap” display). The display provides a visibility advantage to both the
featured product and its category, but it also has consequences for customer traﬃc and substitution.
Academic / practical relevance: While there has been considerable academic interest in the assortment
planning problem (which products to oﬀer?) and in the shelf-space allocation problem (how much space
to devote to each product?), little attention has been paid to the problem of where to place products in
the store. Promotional display choice can serve as a powerful demand-shaping lever for retailers. A good
understanding of this problem can also facilitate a retailer’s negotiations with manufacturers.
Methodology: We develop analytical insights using a problem formulation based on a nested multinomial
logit (NMNL) model of customer choice.
Results: When choosing a promotional product from a ﬁxed category, the only possible optimal choices
for promotional display lie along an “eﬃcient set” drawn in terms of product popularities and margins.
The optimal choice along the frontier depends on a quantity we call “aisle attractiveness” that depends on
several category-level parameters. The value of the display to a category pivots on whether the display’s role
is primarily to expand demand for the category or to shape substitution within the category.
Managerial implications: Our work provides guidance for how retailers can use and value promotional
displays eﬀectively. We highlight the importance of considering externalities of a display decision on store
traﬃc and demand for other products.
Key words : retail; assortment planning; promotional displays; choice modeling; nested multinomial logit
model
1.
Introduction
There has been considerable research in the operations management literature on the topic of
assortment planning (i.e., which products to oﬀer?) and to a lesser extent on shelf-space allocation
(i.e., how much space to devote to each product?). However, little attention has been paid to the
1

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
2
problem of where to place products in the store. This latter problem is both important and complex,
as the placement of products in the store is a lever by which the retailer can impact customer
traﬃc patterns and thereby shape demand across products. Retailers’ merchandising decisions have
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on demand because many customer purchases involve some degree of in-store
decision (i.e., whether to buy, or which product to buy). For instance, POPAI (2012) reports that
76% of purchases in supermarkets are either unplanned or planned only up to (but not including)
a speciﬁc product choice prior to the shopping trip.
In this project we examine an important special case of the product location problem, namely
the choice of product to feature in a promotional display. Examples motivating our work include
endcap displays in supermarkets and beverage displays near cashier stations in convenience stores.
While there is work in the marketing literature seeking to understand customer behavior in stores
and to measure the impact of product placement decisions and price and advertising promotions,
we are not aware of existing research providing prescriptive insights for the complex decision of
which product to feature in a promotional display. Our work seeks to ﬁll this gap.
A display provides a visibility advantage to the featured product over products stocked only in
the regular shelf space. We can decompose the impact on demand for products in the category into
two eﬀects: (1) the display expands the overall category demand by capturing the attention of some
customers who would not otherwise have purchased from the category (the “demand expansion
eﬀect”) and (2) it may induce some customers to substitute the promoted product for their original
preference (the “substitution eﬀect”). We model both eﬀects. We note that both eﬀects can be
present in the more traditional assortment planning problem, but the promotional display decision
gives the retailer an additional degree of freedom. That is, the promotional display decision allows
the manager to modulate the category’s visibility and to shape substitution patterns even given a
ﬁxed assortment. Furthermore, it can be changed more easily and therefore made more dynamically
than the assortment decision.
We assume that the set of products in the category assortment is exogenously given, as are
the proﬁt margins and mean utility (or popularity) of each product. This permits us to focus

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
3
speciﬁcally on the eﬀect of the display. All products in a category are co-located in a native “aisle”
location, and at most one is selected also to be featured in the promotional display. We assume
ample stock of all products.
We employ the nested multinomial logit (NMNL) framework to model customer choice within
a category, which we interpret as a two-stage choice process. The customer ﬁrst encounters the
promotional display (if present) and chooses whether to purchase the featured product, visit the
category’s aisle location, or leave without purchasing from the category. A customer who visits the
aisle may choose among the full assortment of products or may choose not to purchase. We assume
that a customer who visits the aisle incurs a constant disutility representing the transit cost. The
retailer collects the proﬁt margin associated with any purchased product plus a bonus margin from
any customer who visits the aisle. This bonus margin captures the expected margin of any impulse
buys or complementary products the customer encounters upon visiting the aisle.
Following a review of relevant literature (Section 2) and the introduction of our model (Section
3), we present our analysis in three parts. In Section 4, we examine the choice of product to promote
from a given category. We show that the retailer can immediately eliminate some products from
consideration based only on margin and popularity characteristics. The remaining products form
an “eﬃcient set” within which higher popularity implies lower margin and vice versa. Intuitively,
featuring a popular product in the display minimizes the chances of customers leaving empty-
handed, while keeping popular, low margin products in the aisle maximizes both margins at the
display and additional impulse spending in the aisle. We prove that the latter strategy is optimal
when an aisle visit is inherently attractive to customers, which is the case when the aisle assortment
is relatively large, when customers are heterogeneous in their preferences, and when the transit
cost is low. An example implication is that popular products are good choices for endcap displays
in large store footprints where customers incur high transit costs to visit an aisle. Moreover, high
margin products, though at a potential popularity disadvantage, work better in a display when the
category demand is spread out across multiple products in a large assortment.

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
4
In Section 5 we analyze the value of the promotional display across categories, assuming that the
optimal product from each category would be promoted as described in Section 4. A key factor is
the strength of the demand expansion eﬀect for a category. We assume that the degree to which the
promotional display can increase potential demand diﬀers across categories, as some categories have
an impulsive nature while others are more utilitarian. Clearly, the value of the promotional display
is greatest when the demand expansion eﬀect is strongest. Moreover, when the demand expansion
eﬀect is strong, the value of the display increases in the attractiveness of the aisle (determined
by the assortment size, customer heterogeneity, and transit cost); the opposite is true when the
demand expansion eﬀect is weak. This implies that the display should be reserved for two classes
of product categories: those with high demand expansion upside and an attractive aisle option,
and those with stable category-level demand but a less appealing aisle option.
The analyses described so far assume that all products from a category are equally eﬀective at
generating awareness for the category when placed in the promotional display; i.e., the demand
expansion eﬀect is category-speciﬁc but not product-speciﬁc. (We note that even under this assump-
tion, products will diﬀer in their ability to generate sales from the display due to the substitution
eﬀect.) We believe this assumption is natural, though we are not aware of empirical evidence estab-
lishing whether or not demand expansion eﬀects are product-speciﬁc. For completeness, in Section
6 we consider product-speciﬁc demand expansion eﬀects and revisit our results on the choice of
product to promote from a category. We require additional assumptions that we specify for our
eﬃcient set result to hold. We also demonstrate that the core directional forces identiﬁed in Section
4 remain in eﬀect, but the forces operate in the directions of new product indices that depend on
products’ demand expansion abilities.
Throughout the paper, we take the retailer’s perspective and we assume that the retailer behaves
myopically, focusing on optimizing proﬁts in the current period. However, we recognize that the
retailer does not manage promotional displays in a vacuum. In practice there are negotiations over
promotional displays between retailers and manufacturers, often resulting in manufacturers oﬀering

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
5
incentives to retailers to feature certain products. Product popularities may also depend on past
promotions due to saturation and stockpiling eﬀects. While we do not model these coordination
activities and dynamics directly, we believe that understanding the retailer’s incentives with respect
to product margins (which can be dynamically inﬂuenced by manufacturer discounts) and product
popularities (which can be inﬂuenced by other types of promotional activities) is an important
building block for understanding these coordinations and dynamics.
Proofs of all analytical results are presented in the e-companion.
2.
Related Literature
Our study is related to a large literature on assortment planning, where the typical goal is to
specify the set of products carried in a store (or in a sales channel) to maximize sales or gross
margin under constraints on shelf space or on purchasing budget. A driving factor in this literature
is customers’ potential to substitute an available product when their original preference is not
oﬀered in the assortment, called assortment-based substitution (K¨ok et al. 2008). Substitution in
our paper arises from the visibility advantage of a product featured in a promotional display.
We employ the nested multinomial logit (NMNL) model to capture the aforementioned substi-
tution eﬀect. The NMNL model is commonly used in empirical choice models as a more ﬂexible
extension of the classical multinomial logit model (Train 2009). It is also commonly used to model
two-stage choice scenarios (Manrai and Andrews 1998). An early use of it in the literature on
demand for consumer packaged goods is Guadagni and Little (1998), who use it to capture con-
sumers’ intertemporal preferences for buying now versus later. K¨ok and Xu (2011) use it to capture
customers’ choices among brands then product types, or among product types then brands. Davis
et al. (2014) and Gallego and Topaloglu (2014) consider nests as diﬀerent sales channels or diﬀerent
stores. Aouad and Segev (2015) and Feldman and Topaloglu (2015) model nested consideration
sets formed by online search rankings or cutoﬀs on attributes like quality or price. Our two-stage
choice scenario has a spatial interpretation as discussed in Section 3. The nests in our setting rep-
resent diﬀerent locations (display or aisle) in the store. Davis et al. (2013) also consider location

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
6
speciﬁc preference weights in a multinomial logit model. They assume exogenously given preference
weights, whereas we explicitly model the factors that determine the relative attractiveness of a
product in diﬀerent locations.
A natural constraint in assortment planning is on shelf space. Early research on shelf space
allocation develops algorithms for large scale problems (Corstjens and Doyle 1981, Bultez and Naert
1988). More recent studies (Bai et al. 2013, Geismar et al. 2015) incorporate the vertical alignment
of products on the shelf which impacts product visibility. Our research does not consider shelf space
or vertical alignment, though we consider the visibility diﬀerence between the regular shelf space
and the promotional display, which arguably provides a more profound visibility advantage to the
focal product. Wilkinson et al. (1982) report that the percentage increase in unit sales is between
16% and 39% with expanded shelf space, but between 77% and 243% with secondary displays for
the four products they examine.
Customers’ impulse spending ﬁgures prominently in our problem. Conventional wisdom suggests
that exposure to in-store stimuli leads to impulse spending (Inman and Winer 1998, Hui et al.
2013). In our case, the promotional display triggers impulse spending on the featured product, but
it also diverts some customers from the aisle due to substitution. Our model penalizes the loss in
aisle traﬃc by explicitly capturing the potential impulse spending of customers in the aisle.
A stream of papers in the marketing literature empirically studies how the impact of a promo-
tional display depends on factors such as the demand dispersion within the category (Chevalier
1975), display’s distance to the product’s own aisle location (Nordf¨alt and Lange 2013, Phillips
et al. 2015), and to a complementary category’s aisle location (Bezawada et al. 2009). Moreover,
Dhar et al. (2001) study how demand expansion of promotional displays can vary across categories.
Zhang (2006) models how customers form consideration sets via displays. We incorporate all of
these factors in our model. These papers do not consider the optimal product choice for promotional
display, and they tend to focus on the impact of external factors (e.g., day of the week, whether the
display is assisted by a personnel or a feature ad) on the eﬀectiveness of promotional display. In
contrast, we characterize the optimal product and category choice based on their characteristics.

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
7
Van Heerde and Neslin (2017) provides a recent review of the marketing literature that empiri-
cally studies the eﬀect of price promotions. These papers focus on understanding the sales lift of the
promoted product resulting from demand expansion (primary) and the substitution (secondary)
eﬀects by studying household-level (Gupta 1988, Chintagunta 1993, Bell et al. 1999, Pauwels et al.
2002, Van Heerde et al. 2003) and store-level (Van Heerde et al. 2004, Nair et al. 2005) data. Our
model considers both primary and secondary eﬀects of display promotions. However, diﬀerent from
these studies, we take the retailer’s perspective and consider the eﬀects of these promotions on the
retailer’s proﬁt and hence consider the impact of these promotions on all other products as well.
In addition, we take into account the impact of a promotion on customer traﬃc within the store.
The value of driving customers to a particular aisle is a core component of our model.
Cross-category eﬀects of price promotions (Ailawadi et al. 2006, Leeﬂang et al. 2008, Leeﬂang
and Parre˜no-Selva 2012) and displays (Bezawada et al. 2009) are well established in the literature.
While we do not explicitly model a cross-category eﬀect of promotions, we capture complementarity
between categories by accounting for average impulse spending on other categories when a customer
visits the aisle.
3.
Model Setup
We consider a category consisting of n ≥2 products, and we indicate this set of products by
S = {1,..,n}. Each product is characterized by its associated mean utility Yj and its proﬁt margin
mj. To simplify our exposition, we assume that no pair of products have the same mean utility
and proﬁt margin. The retailer has the option of promoting one of the products by featuring it in
an in-store promotional display (“display” hereafter) in addition to its regular shelf space in the
aisle. We use “aisle” to refer the location in the store permanently allocated to the category. Each
product in the category has its own shelf space in the aisle and we do not model any diﬀerences
in the shelf space allocated to products. We assume that prices are exogenous and are reﬂected in
the margin and popularity parameters.
We employ the NMNL choice framework for two main reasons. First, it is a random utility model
of customer choice that is consistent with utility maximizing behavior, that extends the classical

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
8
MNL model, and that yields closed form choice probabilities (McFadden 1978). Second, the choice
probabilities in the NMNL model can be decomposed into two stages whereby individuals ﬁrst
choose a nest and then choose an alternative within the chosen nest to maximize their utility
(Train 2009). This ﬁts nicely with a natural interpretation of customer choice in our problem as a
two-stage decision process as shown in Figure 1. (Some of the notations in Figure 1 will be deﬁned
later in this section, and are included in the ﬁgure for completeness.)
In the NMNL model, the utility Uj associated with alternative j in nest k has the following form:
Uj = Yj + Wk + ϵj,
(1)
where Yj and Wk are alternative-speciﬁc and nest-speciﬁc deterministic components of the utility,
respectively. The random component, ϵj, captures the idiosyncratic utility of a customer and enables
heterogeneity in customers’ choices. The ϵj’s are assumed to follow a generalized extreme value
distribution with the joint c.d.f.
Φ(ϵ) = exp


−
K
X
k=1
 X
j∈Bk
e−ϵj/λk
!λk

,
(2)
where Bk is the set of alternatives in nest k. The diﬀerence between the MNL and the NMNL
models is that the latter allows correlation between (ϵi,ϵj) pairs corresponding to alternatives i
and j within the same nest, and the parameter λk ∈(0,1] of the joint c.d.f. Φ(ϵ) speciﬁes this
correlation structure for nest k. In particular, (1 −λk) is a measure of the correlation between
(ϵi,ϵj) corresponding to any two alternatives (i,j) within nest k (Train 2009).
In our choice scenario, each customer makes a decision among three options in stage 1: to
purchase from the display, to visit the aisle to see all available products, or to neither purchase nor
visit the aisle. These options represent the nests in our NMNL model, and we index these nests by
“D” (display), “A” (aisle), and “0” (no-purchase), respectively. We assume that customers incur a
“transit cost” if they visit the aisle, which we model as a nest-speciﬁc disutility, c, associated with
the nest corresponding to the aisle; that is, WA = −c. Note that the nests 0 and D include only one
alternative each, implying that λ0 and λD are irrelevant and only λA has an impact on the choice

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
9
probabilities. Hence, we drop the subscript in λA and consider λ as the parameter determining
the level of correlation among the utilities associated with the alternatives in the aisle. There are
n + 1 alternatives in nest A, corresponding to n product variants and a no-purchase alternative.
Therefore, our model assumes that the product being featured in the display is also available in the
aisle (matching the grocery and convenience store cases that motivated our study), and it allows
for customers not to purchase even after visiting the aisle (which is consistent with customers
learning their value realizations for individual aisle products upon reaching the aisle). We note that
certain promotional display settings in practice, such as prominent tables in apparel stores, diﬀer
from grocery and convenience store settings in that the same product may not be simultaneously
available in two locations.
1st Stage
2nd Stage
Y0
Yi
(Y0 −c)
(Yn −c)
∅
mi
r
mn + r
No-purchase (0)
Display (D)
Aisle (A)
Customer’s Utility:
Retailer’s Proﬁt:
Figure 1
Customer choice modeled as a two-stage decision process.
We note that an assumption of the NMNL model is that ϵj’s corresponding to alternatives in
diﬀerent nests are independent. This may not strictly be the case in our setup because the featured
product appears in both the nests D and A, and we would expect a correlation among the utilities
for the same product in two locations. We nevertheless use the standard NMNL assumption as
an approximation with the beneﬁt of yielding closed form choice probabilities, noting that this
approximation may underestimate the demand generated by the display (see Guadagni and Little
1998 for a similar assumption).
We measured the impact of this independence assumption in a numerical simulation in which
customers’ utilities for the featured products in nests D and A are correlated. Our simulation

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
10
model relies on a decomposition of the random error term ϵj into nest-speciﬁc (νk) and product-
speciﬁc (ξj) components such that ϵj = νk + λξj (see Besanko et al. 1998, Berry 1994 for the same
decomposition, and Cardell 1997 for the distributional properties of νk and ξj). We capture the
aforementioned correlation by ﬁxing a customer’s realization of the random term ξ(·) corresponding
to the featured product in the two locations (display and aisle). We similarly model correlation
between the no purchase option in the display and aisle. To generate random utilities requires
sampling from complicated probability distributions. We present some of the technical details and
results of the simulation in Appendix B. In short, we ﬁnd that assuming independence degrades
optimal proﬁts by just 0.5% on average in our simulations and that the directional insights of
Section 4 continue to hold for most instances when we model these correlations.
Throughout the paper, superscripts denote the product featured in the promotional display.
When product i ∈S is in the promotional display, the associated ﬁrst stage probabilities, denoted
by P i
0, P i
D, and P i
A are as follows:
P i
0 = P{no purchase from display and no aisle visit} =
eY0
eY0 + eYi + e−c+λ·I ,
(3)
P i
D = P{purchase from the display} =
eYi
eY0 + eYi + e−c+λ·I ,
(4)
P i
A = P{visit the aisle} =
e−c+λ·I
eY0 + eYi + e−c+λ·I ,
(5)
where Y0 is the utility associated with the no-purchase alternative and I = ln
 
P
j∈S∪{0}
eYj/λ
!
. The
quantity I is often called the “inclusive value” of a nest in NMNL models. It links the ﬁrst and
second stages of the decision making process by conveying information about the expected value
of the aisle as viewed from the ﬁrst stage. The expected maximum utility obtained from nest k is
Eϵ

max
j∈Bk {Yj + ϵj}

= λkIk + γ, where γ ≈0.5772 is Euler’s constant (McFadden 1978). Therefore,
the expected utility of choosing the aisle option in the ﬁrst stage is the sum of the expected utility
obtained by choosing the best alternative in the aisle (λ · I) and the transit cost (−c). Note that
parameter γ is irrelevant in the ﬁrst stage probabilities because it is common across all nests.
We denote the second stage probability of product j, i.e., the conditional probability of choosing
product j given that the customer visits the aisle, by pj|A. We have pj|A = eYj/λ
P
q∈S∪{0}
eYq/λ for

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
11
j ∈S ∪{0}. When product i is in the display, the unconditional probability of choosing product
j in the aisle is P i
A · pj|A for j ∈S ∪{0}. Notice that the probability of choosing product j in the
aisle is proportional to eYj/λ. Since λ is the same for all products in the aisle, we refer to eYj as the
“popularity” of product j.
We can interpret the parameter λ as a measure of “customer heterogeneity.” In Figure 2, we
illustrate the second stage choice probabilities in the two extremes, when λ = 10−3 and λ = 1,
for a set of ﬁve ﬁctitious alternatives with ﬁxed mean utilities Y. When λ = 10−3, the random
components of the associated utilities are almost fully correlated, so the alternative associated
with the highest mean utility (alternative 1) is chosen with probability close to 1. On the other
hand, the random components of the associated utilities are independent when λ = 1, so the choice
probabilities spread out across alternatives in this case.
λ = 10−3
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
Alternative (i)
pi|A
λ = 1
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
Alternative (i)
pi|A
Figure 2
Second stage choice probabilities (pi|A) when λ = 10−3 and λ = 1 for Y = ⟨0.5,0.4,0.3,0.2,0.1⟩.
In order to express the retailer’s expected proﬁt per customer, we must consider the two sources
of the retailer’s proﬁt: (1) the customer’s potential purchase of one of the products in the focal
category, and (2) the impulse spending in case the customer visits the aisle. The impulse spending
in the aisle contributes to a key aspect of our model, which is the value of driving customers to the
aisle. Indeed, customer aisle visits can result in additional complementary purchases, therefore we
assume that the retailer expects to earn r per customer as a result of this unplanned spending. In
practice, retailers try to attract customers to the aisles by strategically deciding product locations
(Rupp 2015). Moreover, Hui et al. (2013) point out that “encouraging customers to travel more

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
12
of the store may increase unplanned spending by exposing them to more product stimuli”. Lastly,
POPAI (2012) reports that the percent of basket purchases on impulse increases in the number of
aisles visited by a customer.
Let πi denote the expected proﬁt per customer when the retailer chooses product i to promote
in the display. For brevity, we deﬁne ¯m(Y,m,λ) = P
j∈S
pj|A ·mj, which is an average of the margins
of all products in the category weighted by the second stage probabilities. We can express πi as:
πi = P i
D · mi + P i
A ·
 ¯m(Y,m,λ) + r

, i ∈S.
(6)
The ﬁrst term of equation (6) arises because if product i ∈S is featured on the display, an average
customer purchases the featured product from the display with probability P i
D, in which case the
retailer collects the proﬁt margin mi of the focal product. Alternatively, the average customer
visits the aisle with probability P i
A, where she is expected to spend an amount of
 ¯m(Y,m,λ)+r

.
Finally, the average customer chooses not to purchase from the category with probability P i
0, in
which case the retailer’s proﬁt is 0.
We discussed in the introduction that a promotional display has two primary impacts on demand:
it expands the potential overall category demand by evoking the category in customers’ minds
(the demand expansion eﬀect), and it boosts demand for the focal product at the expense of
competitor products and of the no-purchase option (the substitution eﬀect). The model developed
so far represents our core model of baseline demand, accounting for the substitution eﬀect only. We
will later extend it to reﬂect the demand expansion eﬀect. Under the assumption that all products
from a category are uniformly good at generating demand expansion for the category, the model
presented here is suﬃcient for our study of the choice of product from a category (Section 4).
Demand expansion eﬀects will become relevant when we consider the value of promotional displays
across categories (Section 5) and product-speciﬁc demand expansion eﬀects (Section 6).
Throughout Sections 4 and 5 we will make the following assumption that the expected impulse
spending in the aisle (r) is not too high.

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
13
Assumption 1. max
i∈S {mi} > P 0
A ·
 ¯m(Y,m,λ) + r

where P 0
A =
e−c+λ·I
eY0 + e−c+λ·I .
This assumption ensures that promoting some product in S is more proﬁtable than promoting a
hypothetical product j with preference weight eYj = 0 (equivalently, Yj = −∞.) We will motivate
and present a modiﬁcation to this assumption in Section 6.
4.
Product Choice
As discussed previously, in this section we examine the retailer’s choice of which product from a
given category to feature in a promotional display. We leave the valuation of the display across
categories to Section 5.
This section is organized as follows. In Section 4.1, we eliminate some of the products from
consideration based solely on their product characteristics (speciﬁcally, margin and popularity)
irrespective of the category parameters r,c, and λ, thereby reducing the full category of products
to an “eﬃcient subset” of products that are candidates for the promotional display. In Section
4.2, we consider how the retailer’s optimal choice of product to promote within the eﬃcient subset
changes with respect to the category parameters.
4.1.
Characterization of the Eﬃcient Set of Products
The problem of characterizing the product that maximizes the overall expected proﬁt per customer
when featured in a promotional display is diﬃcult due to its discrete nature. Nevertheless, we can
eliminate some products from consideration and identify structure around the retailer’s optimal
choice.
Table 1
The classiﬁcation of products
lower margin
higher margin
more popular
traﬃc builder
winner
less popular
loser
sleeper
We will use the two-by-two classiﬁcation of products according to their popularities and margins
shown in Table 1, which is similar to a classiﬁcation used by Stoops et al. (1988). For any two

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
14
products 1 and 2 in a category, we either have a “winner” and a “loser” if Y1 ≥Y2 and m1 ≥m2,
or a “traﬃc builder” and a “sleeper” if Y1 > Y2 and m1 < m2. A “traﬃc builder” is a relatively
popular product that tends to drive traﬃc to its location. A “sleeper” product is less popular (i.e.,
it “sleeps”), but it generates higher returns when sold. We cannot unequivocally say that traﬃc
builders are more attractive to promote than sleepers (or vice versa) in general, but we can make
a general comparison between a winner product and a loser product. We generalize the notion of
“loser” to the case of n ≥2 products by saying that product j is a “dominated product” if there
exists another product i in the category such that Yi ≥Yj and mi ≥mj.
Proposition 1. A dominated product is never optimal to promote.
After eliminating dominated products from consideration, we call the remaining set of products
the “eﬃcient set,” and denote it by E. More formally, E can be deﬁned as follows:
E = {i ∈S | ∄j ∈S s.t. Yj ≥Yi and mj ≥mi}
(7)
For any two products in E, one can be considered a traﬃc builder (higher popularity, lower margin)
and the other a sleeper (lower popularity, higher margin) relative to each other.
To reﬁne the eﬃcient set further, we deﬁne a product-speciﬁc index θi = eYi · mi
eY0 + eYi . We call θi the
“proﬁtability index” of product i as it is the expected proﬁt in an MNL model with only product i
and the no-purchase alternative in the choice set. As formally stated in Assumption 2, we assume
hereafter that the proﬁtability index of any product in the category is less than or equal to the
expected proﬁt obtained from the aisle, conditional on the customer visiting the aisle.
Assumption 2. Product characteristics Y and m are such that θi ≤
 ¯m(Y,m,λ) + r

∀i ∈S.
When this assumption is violated the problem becomes trivial and the retailer would be better oﬀ
oﬀering product i alone in the display and removing all the other products from the aisle. By using
the proﬁtability index, we can further reﬁne the eﬃcient set as stated in Proposition 2.
Proposition 2. Consider two products, i and j, such that Yi < Yj. It is never optimal to pro-
mote product j if θi ≥θj.

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
15
Proposition 2 says that any promoted product should have a higher proﬁtability index than all the
other less popular products in the eﬃcient set. Let E′ denote the set of products remaining in the
eﬃcient set after reﬁning according to Proposition 2, or more formally,
E′ = {i ∈E | ∄j ∈E s.t. Yi > Yj and θj ≥θi}
(8)
Hereafter we order products in E′ such that Y1 > .. > Y|E′| and m1 < .. < m|E′| w.l.o.g. Therefore,
products with low indices can be considered traﬃc builders relative to products with higher indices
(sleepers). Note that we also have θ1 > .. > θ|E′| by Proposition 2.
In order to highlight the importance of the retailer’s product choice, we compared in a numerical
study the optimal expected proﬁt to those of three natural heuristic policies; in particular, policies
choosing the most popular product (Y -Policy), the highest margin product (m-Policy), and the
product with the highest proﬁtability index (θ-Policy). In Table 2, we report the average and
maximum optimality gaps over 100 synthetically generated product category instances, each of
which includes 15 products. Each product is characterized by its mean utility Y and the proﬁt
margin m that are randomly chosen from two uniform distributions with a certain correlation. We
considered four diﬀerent combinations of the impulse spending parameter r and the transit cost
parameter c. (The details of the parameter settings are presented in Appendix A.)
Table 2
Percentage optimality gaps corresponding to three heuristic policies
Y -Policy
m-Policy
θ-Policy
r
c
Avg.
Max
Avg.
Max
Avg.
Max
Low
Low
7.73
12.16
2.42
5.99
0.50
3.80
Low
High
13.29
22.02
8.06
17.71
0.40
4.05
High
Low
8.07
11.39
0.58
2.29
1.21
5.90
High High
13.36
20.58
4.34
10.57
0.98
6.99
Note that the Y -Policy performs remarkably worse than the other two policies on average,
because it often chooses a product from outside the set E′. The θ-Policy performs the best of the
three heuristics on average. This makes sense in light of Proposition 2, which suggests that products

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
16
with higher proﬁtability index θi tend to be favored within the set E′. Although performing well
on average, the m-Policy and θ-Policy may still lead to losses as large as 18% and 7%, respectively.
The m-Policy’s worst average performance (8%) is when r is low and c is high, while the θ-Policy’s
best average performance (0.4%) is achieved in that scenario. In addition, θ-Policy’s worst average
performance (1.21%) is when r is high and c is low, while the m-Policy’s best average performance
(0.58%) is achieved in that scenario. This reinforces the importance of understanding the optimal
policy as a function of the problem parameters.
4.2.
Sensitivity Analysis on Retailer’s Optimal Decision
The reﬁned eﬃcient set E′ is deﬁned only in terms of product popularities and margins, and is
independent of values of the category parameters r,c, and λ. However, the optimal choice of product
from E′ depends on the category parameters, and here we seek to understand these dependencies.
We use i∗(·) = arg max
i∈S
{πi(·)} to refer to the retailer’s optimal choice of product to promote.
The ordering of products in E′ implies that promoting a lower indexed product (traﬃc builder)
yields higher expected proﬁt from the display (P i
D · mi), but lower expected proﬁt from the aisle
(P i
A ·( ¯m+r)) compared to a higher indexed product (sleeper). Hence, the retailer’s decision among
products in E′ trades oﬀthe display and the aisle proﬁts.
Intuitively, this decision depends on two factors: the aisle’s attractiveness for customers, and its
proﬁtability for the retailer. As mentioned in Section 3, the quantity λ·I(Y,λ) shows a customer’s
expected utility obtained by choosing her best alternative in the aisle. Hence, we call the quantity
e−c+λ·I(Y,λ) the “aisle’s attractiveness”. Likewise, we call the quantity
 ¯m + r

the “aisle proﬁt”.
4.2.1.
Parameters r and c
The transit cost c incurred by customers to reach a category’s aisle space varies with several store-
and category-speciﬁc factors. First, large store footprints are associated with higher search costs
because the store size has a direct impact on customers’ walking distance within the store to ﬁnd
the products they are looking for (Trivedi et al. 2016, Baumol and Ide 1956). Second, Larson et al.
(2005) provide empirical evidence that grocery store customers tend to walk along the perimeter

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
17
of the store, visiting a particular aisle only if a product they are looking for appears in that aisle.
Hence, the proximity of the product category to the perimeter of the store is a determinant of how
much customers need to deviate from their base trajectory within the store. Third, c may also vary
with customers’ expectation for convenience; e.g., in a “convenience” store setting c will reﬂect
customers’ high disutility to spending extra time in the store.
Similarly, the impulse parameter r is a category-speciﬁc parameter that depends on the com-
plementarity of the category with other categories placed in the same aisle. Practitioners consider
cross-category sales when deciding ﬂoor space allocation, and empirical researchers often consider
speciﬁc pairs of co-located categories to tease out cross-category eﬀects: e.g., cola and potato chip
categories (Bezawada et al. 2009), detergent and fabric softener categories (Manchanda et al. 1999).
Proposition 3 shows the ceteris paribus impact of the parameters r and c on i∗(·).
Proposition 3. The following statements hold:
1. i∗(r) is non-decreasing in the expected impulse spending r.
2. i∗(c) is non-increasing in the transit cost c.
The proposition states that as expected impulse spending r increases, the optimal product to
promote moves towards sleeper products. Increasing r increases the aisle proﬁtability, driving the
retailer towards featuring sleeper products in the display to keep aisle traﬃc high. On the other
hand, when transit cost c increases, the aisle becomes unattractive to customers and the retailer
seeks to emphasize display proﬁts, captured by the immediate proﬁtability θi. Recall that by
Proposition 2, immediate proﬁtability increases with the popularity of the featured product. These
intuitions—that high aisle proﬁts drive the retailer to keep traﬃc builders in the aisle, and that
unattractive aisles tend to favor featuring proﬁt-driving products—underly all of the results on
product choice to follow.
4.2.2.
Assortment Size
Next, we consider the eﬀect of assortment size on the retailer’s promotion choice. Assortment sizes
vary across categories for a given retailer, and retailers vary in their assortment sizes for a given

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
18
category. A larger assortment implies a more attractive aisle for customers, consistent with the
conventional wisdom that customers value variety. In our model, a larger assortment translates
to a higher inclusive value I(Y,λ) and hence a more attractive aisle. Speciﬁcally, it holds that
I(YS,λ) < I(YS+,λ) for two assortments S and S+ such that S ⊂S+.
Proposition 4. Consider
two
assortments
S
and
S+
such
that
S
⊂S+
and
¯m(YS,mS) = ¯m(YS+,mS+). Then, we have arg max
i∈S
{πi(S)} ≤arg max
i∈S
{πi(S+)}.
We restrict the choice to the set S and assume equal average margins ¯m to focus our insight on
the impact of assortment breadth.
A recent examination of Target.com reveals that a speciﬁc Target store carries 14 brands of liquid
laundry detergent and 102 brands of hair shampoo, implying that categories can vary signiﬁcantly
in assortment size. Assuming all else ﬁxed, Proposition 4 implies that a relatively higher-margin
and lower-popularity product (i.e., a sleeper) will tend to be preferred for the shampoo category
due to its large assortment, whereas the opposite is true for laundry detergents.
4.2.3.
Customer Heterogeneity Parameter λ
The last factor we consider to have an impact on the aisle’s attractiveness is the customer het-
erogeneity parameter λ. As mentioned in Section 3, λ speciﬁes the correlation among the random
components of the utilities associated with the alternatives in the aisle. In particular, as λ increases
in the interval (0,1], the random utility components become less dependent. This has implications
on both the ﬁrst and the second stage choice probabilities. Since ¯m(Y,m,λ) and I(Y,λ) are func-
tions of λ, both the aisle proﬁt for the retailer and the aisle’s attractiveness for the customers
depend on the customer heterogeneity.
Lemma 1. The aisle’s attractiveness, e−c+λ·I(Y,λ), is increasing in λ in the interval (0,1].
Lemma 1 implies that the aisle is more attractive for customers when their preferences are more
heterogeneous. In other words, the same assortment in the aisle is appreciated more and attracts
more customers when customers are more heterogeneous in their choices. Given Lemma 1, we can
state the following result on the impact of λ on the retailer’s optimal promotional display choice.

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
19
Proposition 5. Assume that the average proﬁt margin ¯m(Y,m,λ) is non-decreasing in λ.
Then, i∗(λ) is non-decreasing in λ.
The intuition here is similar to that of Proposition 3 part 2: Promoting a sleeper product makes
sense when the aisle is attractive. By Lemma 1, the aisle is most attractive for large λ. The
assumption on the average proﬁt margin holds if products’ proﬁt margins and popularities generally
have an inverse relationship within a category. This is likely to be the case in practice because higher
proﬁt margin is needed to compensate for lower sales volume, and Vilcassim and Chintagunta
(1995) show that optimal retailer proﬁt margins are consistent with this intuition.
Considering its impact on the second stage choice probabilities as shown in Figure 2, the customer
heterogeneity parameter λ can be considered a proxy for market structure. That is, a small λ leads
to a concentrated market in which most customers choose the same product, whereas larger λ leads
to a diversiﬁed marked in which the customer choice is spread out across multiple product variants.
For instance, one might argue that the demand for laundry care products concentrates around a
few brands, while demand for hair care products is dispersed, leading to a more attractive aisle
relative to the product in the display. In 2016, US market shares of the leading brands in laundry
and hair care categories are 27% and 6.5%, respectively (Euromonitor Int. 2017). This suggests
that sleeper products may be appealing to promote for the hair care category, while traﬃc builders
may be good candidates for display in the laundry care category.
5.
The Value of a Promotional Display to a Category
Section 4 considered the choice of product to display from a given category of products. There,
the promotional display’s primary impact was to shape demand among a set of products. In this
section, we look at the value of a promotional display across categories, where a key driver will
be the ability of a promotional display to expand the potential demand for a category (i.e., the
“demand expansion eﬀect”). We will continue for now to assume that the magnitude of the demand
expansion eﬀect is category-speciﬁc but not product-speciﬁc. We will consider product-speciﬁc
demand expansion eﬀects in Section 6.

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
20
Our goal in this section is to understand how the value of assigning a promotional display to a
category depends on category characteristics, including the transit cost c, the customer preference
heterogeneity as measured by the parameter λ, and the assortment size. A fourth category charac-
teristic that will play a pivotal role is category “expandability,” or the extent to which the potential
market for a category can be increased by the promotional display. We argue that expandability
varies across product groups, as demand for a product type may have an impulsive or utilitarian
nature, implying that the demand expandability is large or small, respectively.
We measured demand expandability with the parameter β ≥0, which represents the percentage
increase in market size when the category is featured on a promotional display. Normalizing the
baseline population to 1, we can then write the expected proﬁt from the category when product i
is promoted as
Πi =







(1 + β)πi
if i ∈S
P 0
A · ( ¯m + r)
if i = 0 (no-promotion)
(9)
Observe that when the category is featured in the promotional display, we achieve the same
expected proﬁt πi as in Section 4, scaled by (1+β) to reﬂect the expanded market brought by the
display. An implicit assumption is that customers in the expanded market behave according to the
same choice model as the baseline market. When the category is not displayed, the expected proﬁt
is based on the baseline (non-expanded) market size, which we normalize to 1.
We can interpret (9) as representing the proﬁts from a set of “aware” customers whose knowl-
edge of the category is not swayed by the promotional display, plus proﬁts from a set (of size β)
of “impressionable” customers who consider purchasing from the category only if a promotional
display is present. We note that the promotional display still shapes the choices of an “aware”
customer in the ways considered in Section 4, including enhancing her purchase probability by
lowering the transit cost for the displayed product.
Let ∆i denote the additional expected proﬁt per customer due to featuring product i in a display.
More formally,
∆i = Πi −Π0
(10)

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
21
Clearly, all else being equal, the value of the display is larger when the demand expansion, or
equivalently β, is large. This justiﬁes retailers promoting categories that are mostly purchased
impulsively. However, there are other category features that also have impacts on the value of the
display. Speciﬁcally, the aisle’s attractivenes, which was critical in our analysis in Section 4.2, will
also turn out to have a signiﬁcant role in determining the value of the display to a category.
Our analysis reveals that β plays a pivotal role determining the net impact of the aisle attrac-
tiveness on the value of the display to a category. To clarify, consider for a moment the case with
no demand expansion (β = 0). In this case, we can view the role of the display primarily as shaping
substitution among products in the category. If the aisle is highly attractive, the eﬀectiveness of
the display in switching customers to the focal product will be limited. Hence, the aisle attrac-
tiveness decreases the value of the display. Next, consider the case where the demand expansion is
signiﬁcantly large. Here, a primary role of the display is to advertise the category. An attractive
aisle converts more of this awareness into purchases. Hence, aisle attractiveness increases the value
of the display in this case.
Similar to the approach we followed in Section 4.2, we will now consider the determinants of the
aisle attractiveness for customers – namely the assortment size, customer heterogeneity, and the
associated transit cost – and investigate each of their impacts on ∆i in isolation; that is, holding
other dimensions constant. In our online supplement, we discuss a numerical study that shows
these results continue to hold even when compared categories diﬀer in more than one dimension,
as long as the compared categories are roughly similar.
5.1.
Assortment Size
We ﬁrst investigate the impact of assortment size on the value of the display. To this end, in this
subsection we will consider ∆i = ∆i(S), Πi = Πi(S), and Π0 = Π0(S) to be functions of the aisle
assortments. In Proposition 6, we compare the value of the display for two assortments having
diﬀerent sizes:
Proposition 6. Consider
two
assortments
S
and
S+
such
that
S
⊂S+
and
¯m(YS,mS) ≤¯m(YS+,mS+). Let j = arg max
i∈S
{Πi(S)} and k = arg max
i∈S
{Πi(S+)}. There exists a
threshold β′ ≥0 such that:

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
22
1. ∆j(S) < ∆k(S+) for β > β′ and
2. ∆j(S) > ∆k(S+) for β < β′.
We note that the threshold β′ depends on the problem parameters, including S and S+, nontrivially.
The quantity ∆i is a function of the probabilities P 0
A, P i
A, and P i
D, each of which is a function
of the assortment, and it also depends on the average aisle margin ¯m which in turn depends on
the assortment through the second stage probabilities. In short, ∆i is a complex function of the
assortment S (and of other category parameters, too). The proof of Proposition 6 follows from
some monotonicity properties of the underlying probabilities, and a more intricate argument using
an intermediate quantity in which we ﬁx the average margin. We use related arguments to prove
Propositions 7 and 8 as well.
Proposition 6 reveals that the impact of the assortment size pivots on the parameter β. When
the demand expansion (β) is large, the value of the display is higher for the larger assortment S+
because it encourages more customers to make a purchase from the category by oﬀering them a
larger variety. In contrast, when the demand expansion is small, the display is a means of controlling
brand choice of the baseline population of customers, and a larger assortment makes the aisle more
attractive and blunts the power of the display. We can extend Proposition 6 to three assortments
as follows:
Corollary 1. Consider S ⊂S+ ⊂S++ such that ¯m(YS,mS) ≤¯m(YS+,mS+) ≤¯m(YS++,mS++).
Let j = arg max
i∈S
{Πi(S)}, k = arg max
i∈S
{Πi(S+)}, and l = arg max
i∈S
{Πi(S++)}. There exist 0 ≤β1 ≤β2
such that
1. max{∆j(S),∆k(S+)} < ∆l(S++) for β > β2
2. max{∆j(S),∆l(S++)} < ∆k(S+) for β1 < β < β2
3. max{∆k(S+),∆l(S++)} < ∆j(S) for β < β1
The corollary shows that the retailer is more likely to pick a product from the larger assortment
when demand expansion eﬀect gets stronger. It is straightforward to generalize this result to an

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
23
arbitrary number of assortments. Similarly, it is straightforward to extend comparisons in Propo-
sitions 7 and 8 to more than two assortments as well.
These results have implications on the retailer’s choice of category to promote. Consider, for
example, the choice of endcap display between the chips category and the meat jerkies category,
both part of the snacks product group in grocery stores. These two product categories are often
located in the same aisle in a grocery store, and they can both be expected to have a large category
demand expansion. Assuming the chips category has a larger assortment than jerkies, the ﬁrst
statement in Proposition 6 suggests that all else being equal, the display should be reserved for
the chips category, which is more likely to generate a sale from a customer who is swayed by the
display to consider the category.
5.2.
Customer Heterogeneity
Recall that heterogeneity in preferences implies a more attractive aisle (Lemma 1), and a more
attractive aisle in turn reduces both the probabilities of no purchase and of purchasing the displayed
product. When β is high and the demand expansion eﬀect dominates, it is to the retailer’s advantage
to increase the proportion of customers making a purchase. When beta is low and the substitution
eﬀect dominates, the retailer beneﬁts from promoting a category which generates high proﬁts from
the display.
Proposition 7. Let 0 < λ < ¯λ ≤1 and assume that
¯m(λ) is non-decreasing in λ for
λ ∈[λ, ¯λ].Then, there exists a threshold ¯β ≥0 such that:
1. ∆i∗(λ)(λ) < ∆i∗(¯λ)(¯λ) for β > ¯β and
2. ∆i∗(λ)(λ) > ∆i∗(¯λ)(¯λ) for β < ¯β.
Similar to Proposition 5, we study what happens when ¯m is non-decreasing in λ. Section 4
explains why this is a plausible assumption. Proposition 7 suggests that all else being equal, a
category for which the demand is spread out across multiple products should be featured in the
display when considering product groups with large demand expansions (e.g., snacks, beverages,
condiments, etc.). In contrast, displaying a category with a concentrated market structure may be
better for product groups with smaller demand expansion relative to the baseline demand (e.g.,
personal care, household cleaners, paper products, etc.).

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
24
5.3.
Transit Cost
Retailers carefully determine the speciﬁc locations of the aisle storage for each category, e.g.,
popular items are routinely located in the middle of aisles (Rupp 2015). This implies that customers
incur diﬀerent transit costs to reach the aisle storage of diﬀerent categories. When the substitution
eﬀect dominates, a category that is easy for customers to reach will beneﬁt least from a promotional
display because the display will have limited ability to shape customer demand. When the demand
expansion eﬀect dominates, an easy-to-reach category will be best positioned to monetize the
increased customer interest arising from demand expansion. These results are formalized as follows:
Proposition 8. Let 0 ≤c ≤¯c. There exists a threshold ˜β ≥0 such that:
1. ∆i∗(c)(c) > ∆i∗(¯c)(¯c) for β > ˜β and
2. ∆i∗(c)(c) < ∆i∗(¯c)(¯c) for β < ˜β.
This result is closely related to the speciﬁc store layout and the aisle arrangement under consid-
eration. For instance, consider a pallet display reserved for categories belonging to personal care
products. Assuming that the baseline demand of personal care products is large relative to the
demand expansion, the second part of Proposition 8 suggests that the display is more valuable to a
category with a less visible shelf storage (e.g., mid-aisle) compared to another category positioned
in a more prominent location in the store (e.g., end-aisle).
6.
Product Choice Under Product-Speciﬁc Demand Expansion
We have assumed so far that all the products from a category are equally good at expanding the
demand for a category; i.e., the demand expansion eﬀect is constant across products in the same
category. In this section we relax this assumption and revisit the choice of product to display from a
given category. To that end, deﬁne the modiﬁed proﬁt function ˜Πi for the expected proﬁt obtained
when product i is promoted:
˜Πi =







(1 + βφi)πi
if i ∈S
Π0
if i = 0 (no-promotion)
(11)

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
25
where πi is the original proﬁt function deﬁned in (9) when product i is promoted, and φi ∈[0,1]
is the product-speciﬁc demand expansion parameter. Note that the expected proﬁt functions Πi
and ˜Πi are the same when φi = 1 for all i ∈S, yielding the case we analyzed in Section 4. We make
the intuitive assumption that φi ≥φj if and only if Yi ≥Yj, meaning that a more popular product
leads to a larger demand expansion when promoted.
The addition of product-speciﬁc demand expansion eﬀects complicates our earlier analysis. As
the following example shows, Assumption 1 is no longer suﬃcient for Proposition 1 to hold.
Example 1. Y = [ln(2.5),ln(1),ln(0.1)], m = [0.015,0.01,1], φ = [1,0.99,.01], β = 4, r = 0, c = 0,
λ = 1.
Although the second product is dominated by the ﬁrst product in the above example, it is the
optimal product to promote. Since only m3 is larger than the expected aisle proﬁt ( ¯m + r), it is
better to promote product 3 in the original model. On the other hand, it has a very small demand
expansion eﬀect (φ3) in the modiﬁed model. This example suggests that a stronger assumption is
needed for the dominated product result to hold.
Assumption 3. Let φmax = max
i∈S {φi}. There exists a product k such that ˜Πk/(1 + βφmax) > ˜Π0.
Recall that Assumption 1 requires that promoting some product from the category is more prof-
itable than promoting a vanishingly unpopular product. For a product-independent category expan-
sion eﬀect 1 + β, this would imply the existence of a product k such that Πk/(1 + β) > Π0, i.e.,
promoting product k is more proﬁtable than no-promotion even without the advantage of the
demand expansion eﬀect. Assumption 3 resembles Assumption 1 and implies that displaying prod-
uct k is more proﬁtable than a hypothetical scenario with no-promotion and the largest possible
customer base of size (1 + βφmax).
Proposition 9. Under Assumption 3, a dominated product is never optimal to promote in the
case of product-speciﬁc demand expansion.
Proposition 9 implies that the main trade-oﬀbetween popularities and margins of the products in
the eﬃcient set is maintained in product-speciﬁc demand expansion case.

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
26
Our sensitivity results (Propositions 3-5) also require some modiﬁcation under product-speciﬁc
category expansion eﬀects, but our core insights from Section 4.2 remain intact. Proposition 3,
part 1, supported the intuition that as the aisle becomes more proﬁtable to the retailer, the
retailer should increase the fraction of customers visiting the aisle, thereby featuring products with
lower popularities and (equivalently) higher aisle probabilities P i
A’s. Under product-speciﬁc demand
expansion eﬀects, as r increases the retailer again seeks to drive more customers to the aisle, but
the total quantity of customers visiting the aisle is P i
A(1+βφi) when product i is promoted. There-
fore, as r increases it will become increasingly favorable to feature products with higher value of
P i
A(1 + βφi).
Proposition 10. Under product-speciﬁc capacity expansion eﬀects, for r1 > r2 we have
P i∗(r1)
A
(1 + βφi∗(r1)) ≥P i∗(r2)
A
(1 + βφi∗(r2)).
Because P A
i
is decreasing in product popularity Yi and φi is non-decreasing in Yi, how P i
A(1 + φi)
index depends on product popularity depends on the relation between Yi and φi. Given this relation
(e.g., φi =
eYi
eYmax , or φi =
eYi
P
j∈S eYj , ∀i ∈S), we can characterize a threshold for the demand
expansion β such that a higher r leads to promoting a more popular product and vice versa.
The remaining sensitivities analyzed in Section 4.2—to c, λ, and assortment size—are consistent
with the intuition that as the aisle becomes less attractive to customers, the retailer prioritizes
the proﬁtability of the display, there represented by the index θi. This intuition remains intact
with product-speciﬁc demand expansion eﬀects, but the index ηi = θi(1 + βφi) becomes a more
accurate representation of the display proﬁt. Literally, θi gives the retailer’s proﬁt when product
i is featured in the promotional display assuming the aisle is prohibitively unattractive. Though
we are not able to prove direct analogs of Propositions 3 (part 2), 4, and 5, it is straightforward
to show that as aisle attractiveness vanishes (i.e., e−c+λI →0) it becomes optimal to promote the
product arg max
i∈S
{θi} (Recall that the aisle attractiveness e−c+λI increases with λ and assortment
size and decreases with c). We note that as e−c+λI →+∞, it becomes optimal to promote the
product arg max
i∈S
{φi}. That is, when the aisle is very attractive to customers, the display’s primary
role is to advertise the category, and the retailer should promote the product which provides the
most eﬀective advertisement.

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
27
7.
Concluding Remarks
We have focused on the eﬀects of promotional displays, and we leave the integration of other
promotional activities such as price discounts and advertising as a future research direction. A given
set of price discounts and advertising activities determine an instance of our problem; therefore, our
model yields insights into the impact of a promotional display given other promotional activities.
However, we have not considered the simultaneous optimization of various promotional activities.
There is a rich empirical literature on the eﬀects and interactions of diﬀerent promotional activities,
suggesting broader mechanisms such as increased store traﬃc, brand switching, store-switching,
and stockpiling that could be captured by future analytical models.
Another future research opportunity would be to look at how manufacturers and retailers nego-
tiate and contract on which products to feature in promotional displays. Our model suggests that
the true value of a promotional display slot is not one-size-ﬁts-all. This value depends on the char-
acteristics of the product and the store. Furthermore, it must reﬂect externalities on demands for
other products and on other product categories through customer traﬃc patterns. Understanding
this value, which we have studied in this paper, is important for a retailer evaluating manufacturers’
bids for space in promotional displays.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Department Editor Brian Tomlin, an anonymous associate editor, and two anonymous
reviewers for feedback that resulted in several improvements to the paper. The second author thanks the
Sion A. Boney, Jr. Endowment Fund for support. The third author thanks the Benjamin Cone Research
Fund for support.
Appendix
A.
Parameters of the Numerical Study Reported in Table 2
Without loss of generality, we normalized Y0 = 0 in all 100 category instances. For each category instance, we
generated 15 products – each of which is characterized by a mean utility (Y ) and a proﬁt margin (m). The
proﬁt margins are generated randomly following a uniform distribution U(0.5,1) implying that the highest

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
28
margin can be at most two times the lowest margin. The mean utilities are generated randomly by following a
uniform distribution U(Ymin,Ymax) so that eYmax −eYmin
2
= eY0, and the most popular product has a market
share that is at most eight times larger than the least popular product (or equivalently, eYmin
eYmax = 0.125). We
further assumed that (Y,m) pairs are negatively correlated (ρ = −0.75) because we expect the manufacturers
to compensate for lower popularity by higher retail margin considering retailer’s scarce shelf space.
We considered diﬀerent levels of customer heterogeneity (λ = 0.01,0.25,0.5,0.75,1). We observed that
average performances of Y -Policy and m-Policy improve whereas θ-Policy’s average performance worsens as
λ increases. This is because θ-Policy maximizes the display proﬁt whose relative contribution to the overall
proﬁt (display + aisle) is smaller when λ is bigger. For ease of exposition, we reported only the results for
the customer heterogeneity parameter λ = 0.75 in Table 2.
The low and high values of the expected impulse spending parameter r are set to 0.1 and 0.3, respectively.
This implies that an average customer’s expected impulse spending in the aisle is at most 10% and 30% of
the highest margin. (Multiplying all product margins and the expected impulse spending parameter r by a
constant does not change the optimal product.) The transit cost parameter c is set relative to the expected
maximum utility obtained from the aisle, which is λ·I(Y,λ). In particular, we set clow = 0.25·λ·I(Y,λ) and
chigh = 0.75 · λ · I(Y,λ). Note that all category instances satisfy Assumptions 1 and 2 under these settings.
B.
Incorporating Correlated Utilities
B.1.
Methodology and Technical Background
An assumption of the NMNL model is that the random component of the utilities (ϵj’s) corresponding to
alternatives in diﬀerent nests are independent. This may not strictly be the case in our setup because the
featured product appears in both the nests D and A, and we would expect a correlation among the utilities
for the same product in two locations. However, the utility of the product in the aisle may not perfectly match
the utility of the same product in the display, as the opportunity to compare a product with competitor
products may impact a customer’s utility for the product.
This implies the need for decomposing the random utility components (ϵj’s) into nest-speciﬁc and
alternative-speciﬁc components, where the location-speciﬁc component captures the heterogeneity in cus-
tomers’ perceived opportunity to compare all available products in the assortment and the product-speciﬁc
component captures the heterogeneity in customers’ preferences over diﬀerent product attributes. Notice
that the NMNL model requires the marginal distribution of ϵj’s to be Type 1 extreme value distribution.

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
29
Moreover, ϵj’s within the same nest are assumed to have a certain correlation speciﬁed by the parameter λ.
Hence, it is not a straightforward task to decompose ϵj’s while maintaining the distributional assumptions
of NMNL model. Cardell (1997) establishes this decomposition as follows:
Theorem 1 (Cardell 1997). For 0 < λ < 1 and ξ, a random variable distributed as Type 1 extreme value,
there exists a unique distribution, denoted C(λ), such that for ν, a random variable, ν and ξ independent,
then ν + λξ is a random variable distributed as Type 1 extreme value, iﬀν is distributed as C(λ) where the
probability density function of C(λ) is fλ(ν) = (1/λ)
∞
P
n=0
(−1)ne−nν
n!Γ(−λn) . The cumulative distribution function of
the C(λ) does not have a closed-form representation.
Now consider the following utilities for each alternative in our model:
U0 = Y0 + ν0 + λξ0
|
{z
}
=ϵ0
(no-purchase alternative),
(12)
Ui = Yi + νD + λξi
|
{z
}
=ϵi
(display alternative when product i is displayed),
(13)
Uj = Yj −c + νA + λξj
|
{z
}
=ϵj
(alternative corresp. to prod. j in the aisle).
(14)
This decomposition allows us to explicitly model location-speciﬁc (ν) and product-speciﬁc (ξ) random com-
ponents of the utility. Note that when λ = 0, C(0) is the Type 1 extreme value distribution and ϵj’s corre-
sponding to the alternatives in the aisle nest is fully correlated whereas they are independent when λ = 1.
In our simulations, each customer is represented by two randomly drawn vectors: ⟨ν0,νA,νD⟩and
⟨ξ0,..,ξ15⟩. A customer associates the same realization of the product-speciﬁc random utility component (ξj)
for a product located both in the display and in the aisle. This is how we incorporate correlated utilities for
these two alternatives in diﬀerent nests. We similarly model correlation between the no purchase option in
the display and aisle. Note that the nest-speciﬁc random components corresponding to these two alternatives
(νD and νA) are diﬀerent, implying that a customer may still choose purchasing the displayed product upon
visiting the aisle.
B.2.
Simulation Parameters
We perform a simulation study to measure the error caused by our approximation. We use the same 100
category instances randomly generated as described in Appendix A, and we choose the remaining parameters
(r,c,λ) to cover a large range of scenarios conforming to our Assumption 1. In particular, we set three levels

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
30
(low, med, high) for each parameter, with the low values set to the minimum value in their deﬁned range
(rmin = 0,cmin = 0,λmin = 0.01). We set rhigh to the maximum value the expected impulse spending in the
aisle can take without violating Assumption 1, and chigh is calibrated so that 25% of customers visit the
aisle in case of no-promotion. Finally, we set the medium values of the parameters to the average of the low
and high values. For each category instance and parameter setting, we randomly generate 10,000 customers.
B.3.
Evaluating the Independence Assumption
Table 3 shows the impact on expected proﬁts (evaluated with correlation assumption) of promoting the
product recommended given the independence assumption compared with promoting the product recom-
mended given the correlation assumption. We note that the average impacts are smaller than 0.5% in all
the cells, with the largest average impacts occuring for large λ and large c. This is expected because the
product-speciﬁc random components (ξj’s), which cause the deviation between correlated and independent
cases, are ampliﬁed by larger λ as shown in Equation (12)-(14). We conclude that the typical impact of our
independence assumption is small. We note that we occasionally see relatively large impacts for individual
instances up to 9%, but these are rare and tend to be largest for large λ and c.
λlow
λmed
λhigh
clow
cmed
chigh
clow
cmed
chigh
clow
cmed
chigh
rlow
0.002% 0.003% 0.013%
0.114% 0.132% 0.253%
0.077% 0.328% 0.359%
rmed
0.005% 0.012% 0.005%
0.164% 0.286% 0.264%
0.196% 0.334% 0.432%
rhigh
0.006% 0.012% 0.012%
0.054% 0.318% 0.371%
0.093% 0.487% 0.474%
Table 3
Average percent loss from promoting the product recommended using the independence assumption
compared with the product recommended using the correlation assumption.
We also numerically re-examined our directional insights from Section 4 (Proposition 3-5) under the
correlation assumption, ﬁnding that all of the results are preserved for the vast majority of instances we
tried. We omit the details due to space considerations.
References
Ailawadi, K. L., Harlam, B. A., Cesar, J., and Trounce, D. (2006). Promotion proﬁtability for a retailer: the
role of promotion, brand, category, and store characteristics. Journal of Marketing Research, 43(4):518–
535.
Aouad, A. and Segev, D. (2015). Display optimization for vertically diﬀerentiated locations under multinomial
logit choice preferences.

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
31
Bai, R., Van Woensel, T., Kendall, G., and Burke, E. K. (2013). A new model and a hyper-heuristic approach
for two-dimensional shelf space allocation. 4OR, 11(1):31–55.
Baumol, W. J. and Ide, E. A. (1956). Variety in retailing. Management Science, 3(1):93–101.
Bell, D. R., Chiang, J., and Padmanabhan, V. (1999). The decomposition of promotional response: An
empirical generalization. Marketing Science, 18(4):504–526.
Berry, S. T. (1994). Estimating discrete-choice models of product diﬀerentiation. The RAND Journal of
Economics, pages 242–262.
Besanko, D., Gupta, S., and Jain, D. (1998). Logit demand estimation under competitive pricing behavior:
An equilibrium framework. Management Science, 44(11-part-1):1533–1547.
Bezawada, R., Balachander, S., Kannan, P., and Shankar, V. (2009). Cross-category eﬀects of aisle and
display placements: a spatial modeling approach and insights. Journal of Marketing, 73(3):99–117.
Bultez, A. and Naert, P. (1988). Sh. a.r.p.: Shelf allocation for retailers’ proﬁt. Marketing Science, 7(3):211–
231.
Cardell, N. S. (1997). Variance components structures for the extreme-value and logistic distributions with
application to models of heterogeneity. Econometric Theory, 13(2):185–213.
Chevalier, M. (1975). Increase in sales due to in-store display. Journal of Marketing Research, pages 426–431.
Chintagunta, P. K. (1993). Investigating purchase incidence, brand choice and purchase quantity decisions
of households. Marketing Science, 12(2):184–208.
Corstjens, M. and Doyle, P. (1981). A model for optimizing retail space allocations. Management Science,
27(7):822–833.
Davis, J., Gallego, G., and Topaloglu, H. (2013). Assortment planning under the multinomial logit model
with totally unimodular constraint structures. Department of IEOR, Columbia University. Available
at http://www.columbia.edu/~gmg2/logit_const.pdf.
Davis, J. M., Gallego, G., and Topaloglu, H. (2014). Assortment optimization under variants of the nested
logit model. Operations Research, 62(2):250–273.
Dhar, S. K., Hoch, S. J., and Kumar, N. (2001). Eﬀective category management depends on the role of the
category. Journal of Retailing, 77(2):165–184.
Euromonitor Int. (2017). Brand shares. Data retrieved from Passport GMID, Available at http://go.
euromonitor.com/passport.html.
Feldman, J. and Topaloglu, H. (2015). Assortment optimization under the multinomial logit model with
nested consideration sets. Technical report, Tech. rep., Working Paper.
Gallego, G. and Topaloglu, H. (2014).
Constrained assortment optimization for the nested logit model.
Management Science, 60(10):2583–2601.
Geismar, H. N., Dawande, M., Murthi, B., and Sriskandarajah, C. (2015). Maximizing revenue through
two-dimensional shelf-space allocation. Production and Operations Management, 24(7):1148–1163.
Guadagni, P. M. and Little, J. D. (1998). When and what to buy: A nested logit model of coﬀee purchase.
Journal of Forecasting, 17(3-4):303–326.
Gupta, S. (1988). Impact of sales promotions on when, what, and how much to buy. Journal of Marketing
research, pages 342–355.
Hui, S. K., Inman, J. J., Huang, Y., and Suher, J. (2013). The eﬀect of in-store travel distance on unplanned
spending: Applications to mobile promotion strategies. Journal of Marketing, 77(2):1–16.

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
32
Inman, J. J. and Winer, R. S. (1998). Where the rubber meets the road: A model of in-store consumer
decision making. Number Tech. Rep. 98–122. Marketing Science Institute Cambridge, MA.
K¨ok, A. G., Fisher, M. L., and Vaidyanathan, R. (2008). Assortment planning: Review of literature and
industry practice. In Retail supply chain management, pages 99–153. Springer.
K¨ok, A. G. and Xu, Y. (2011). Optimal and competitive assortments with endogenous pricing under hierar-
chical consumer choice models. Management Science, 57(9):1546–1563.
Larson, J. S., Bradlow, E. T., and Fader, P. S. (2005). An exploratory look at supermarket shopping paths.
International Journal of Research in Marketing, 22(4):395–414.
Leeﬂang, P. S., Selva, J. P., Dijk, A. V., and Wittink, D. R. (2008). Decomposing the sales promotion bump
accounting for cross-category eﬀects. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 25(3):201 – 214.
Leeﬂang, P. S. H. and Parre˜no-Selva, J. (2012). Cross-category demand eﬀects of price promotions. Journal
of the Academy of Marketing Science, 40(4):572–586.
Manchanda, P., Ansari, A., and Gupta, S. (1999).
The “shopping basket”: A model for multicategory
purchase incidence decisions. Marketing science, 18(2):95–114.
Manrai, A. K. and Andrews, R. L. (1998). Two-stage discrete choice models for scanner panel data: An
assessment of process and assumptions. European Journal of Operational Research, 111(2):193–215.
McFadden, D. (1978). Modeling the choice of residential location. Transportation Research Record, (673).
Nair, H., Dub´e, J.-P., and Chintagunta, P. (2005). Accounting for primary and secondary demand eﬀects
with aggregate data. Marketing Science, 24(3):444–460.
Nordf¨alt, J. and Lange, F. (2013). In-store demonstrations as a promotion tool. Journal of Retailing and
Consumer Services, 20(1):20–25.
Pauwels, K., Hanssens, D. M., and Siddarth, S. (2002). The long-term eﬀects of price promotions on category
incidence, brand choice, and purchase quantity. Journal of marketing research, 39(4):421–439.
Phillips, M., Parsons, A. G., Wilkinson, H. J., and Ballantine, P. W. (2015). Competing for attention with
in-store promotions. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 26:141–146.
POPAI (2012). 2012 shopper engagement study. Technical report, Point of Purchase Advertising Institute.
Rupp, R. (2015).
Surviving the sneaky psychology of supermarkets.
Available at http://theplate.
nationalgeographic.com/2015/06/15/surviving-the-sneaky-psychology-of-supermarkets/.
Stoops, G. T., Pearson, M. M., et al. (1988). Direct product proﬁt: A view from the supermarket industry.
Journal of Food Distribution Research, 19(2).
Train, K. E. (2009). Discrete choice methods with simulation. Cambridge University Press.
Trivedi, M., Gauri, D. K., and Ma, Y. (2016). Measuring the eﬃciency of category-level sales response to
promotions. Management Science, 63(10):3473–3488.
Van Heerde, H. J., Gupta, S., and Wittink, D. R. (2003). Is 75% of the sales promotion bump due to brand
switching? no, only 33% is. Journal of Marketing Research, 40(4):481–491.
Van Heerde, H. J., Leeﬂang, P. S., and Wittink, D. R. (2004). Decomposing the sales promotion bump with
store data. Marketing Science, 23(3):317–334.
Van Heerde, H. J. and Neslin, S. A. (2017). Sales promotion models. In Handbook of Marketing Decision
Models, pages 13–77. Springer.

C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
33
Vilcassim, N. J. and Chintagunta, P. K. (1995). Investigating retailer product category pricing from household
scanner panel data. Journal of Retailing, 71(2):103–128.
Wilkinson, J. B., Mason, J. B., and Paksoy, C. H. (1982). Assessing the impact of short-term supermarket
strategy variables. Journal of Marketing Research, pages 72–86.
Zhang, J. (2006). An integrated choice model incorporating alternative mechanisms for consumers’ reactions
to in-store display and feature advertising. Marketing Science, 25(3):278–290.

e-companion to C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
ec1
Electronic Companion to “Management and Eﬀects of In-Store
Promotional Displays”
EC.1.
Proofs of Analytical Results
Proof of Proposition 1.
Suppose we have two products, i and j, such that Yi ≥Yj and
mi ≥mj, or equivalently, product i dominates product j. Our aim is to show that product j is
never optimal to promote.
Let K = arg max
i∈S
{mi}. Note that K is not necessarily a singleton. Hence, let k = arg max
i∈K
{Yi}. In
words, k is the most popular product among the products having the highest margin. The product
k is well deﬁned because by assumption no pair of products have the same popularity and the proﬁt
margin. We can assume w.l.o.g. that products i,j, and k are distinct. By deﬁnition of product
k, the dominated product (j) is diﬀerent from product k. If products i and k are the same, the
following arguments still hold.
We argue that max{πi,πk} ≥πj. This implies that there is always a more proﬁtable option (either
promoting product i or product k) than promoting product j. Let M = P 0
A ·
 ¯m(Y,m,λ) + r

. We
can write πx as a convex combination of mx and M for all x ∈S as follows:
πx = P x
D · mx + (1 −P x
D) · M
(EC.1)
We consider two cases separately: (mi > M) and (mi ≤M). If (mi > M), we have
πj = P j
D · mj + (1 −P j
D) · M ≤P j
D · mi + (1 −P j
D) · M ≤P i
D · mi + (1 −P i
D) · M = πi
(EC.2)
The ﬁrst inequality follows because mi ≥mj and the second follows because P i
D ≥P j
D and mi > M.
Note also that at least one of the above inequalities is strict because we have assumed no two
products i and j have mi = mj and Yi = Yj. Therefore we either have mi > mj or P i
D > P j
D, or
both. Hence, πi > πj if mi > M. Next, consider the case where (mi ≤M). By Assumption 1, we
have mk > M. Since mj ≤mi ≤M < mk, it follows from (EC.1) that πk > πj.
□
Proof of Proposition 2.
We can write πx as follows:
πx = (1 −P x
A) · θx + P x
A ·
 ¯m(Y,m,λ) + r

(EC.3)
Consider two products, i and j, such that Yi < Yj and θi ≥θj. We have
πj = (1 −P j
A) · θj + P j
A ·
 ¯m(Y,m,λ) + r

< (1 −P i
A) · θj + P i
A ·
 ¯m(Y,m,λ) + r

(EC.4)
≤(1 −P i
A) · θi + P i
A ·
 ¯m(Y,m,λ) + r

= πi
(EC.5)
The ﬁrst inequality follows by Assumption 2 and the fact that P i
A > P j
A. The second inequality
follows since θi ≥θj.
□

ec2
e-companion to C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
Proof of Proposition 3.
Consider two products, j ∈E′ and k ∈E′, such that Yj > Yk.
Part 1: We consider πj(r) and πk(r) as functions of r. Notice that they are linearly increasing
in r. Since P j
A < P k
A, πk(r) increases at a faster rate than πj(r). This implies that πj(r) and πk(r)
intersect at a unique value of r above which πk(r) > πj(r). Hence, the optimal choice of product
to promote, i∗(r), always switches from a more popular product to a less popular one within the
set E′ (or stays the same) as r increases. Since the products in E′ are indexed in decreasing order
of their popularities, i∗(r) is non-decreasing in r.
Part 2: We consider πj(c) and πk(c) as functions of c. We ﬁrst solve the equation πj(c) = πk(c)
for c and argue that the solution is unique, implying that πj(c) and πk(c) intersect at a unique
value of c. Some manipulation of the equation πj(c) = πk(c) yields the following:
e−c+λI =
eY0(eYj · mj −eYk · mk) + eYj+Yk · (mj −mk)
eYk · mk −eYj · mj + (eYj −eYk)
 ¯m(Y,m,λ) + r

(EC.6)
By continuity and monotonicity of the LHS in c, there exists a unique value of c that satisﬁes
πi(c) = πj(c). Hence, πj(c) and πk(c) intersect only once. Next, we show that πj(c) > πk(c) for
suﬃciently large c. Since j and k are picked arbitrarily, this is suﬃcient to show that the the
optimal choice of product to promote, i∗(c), always switches from a less popular product to a more
popular one within the set E′ (or stays the same) as c increases.
In order to show that πj(c) > πk(c) for suﬃciently large c, we write πx as a convex combination
of θx and
 ¯m(Y,m,λ) + r

for x ∈S as in EC.3. It is straightforward to show that lim
c→∞P x
A = 0 for
all x ∈S. Then, in the limit, πj(c) > πk(c), because θj > θk by Proposition 2.
□
Proof of Proposition 4.
Assume without loss of generality that arg max
i∈S
{πi(S)} = j and
arg max
i∈S
{πi(S+)} = k where j ̸= k. (Otherwise, the optimal product is the same for both assort-
ments, and the proposition statement is satisﬁed with equality.) By Proposition 2, both of these
products are in the set E′ corresponding to assortment S. Our aim is to show that θj > θk, which
implies that j < k due to the order of products in the set E′.
Fix M = ¯m(YS,mS,λ) = ¯m(YS+,mS+,λ). Deﬁne the following functions of x:
˜πj(x) = P j
D(x) · mj + P j
A(x) · (M + r),
(EC.7)
˜πk(x) = P k
D(x) · mk + P k
A(x) · (M + r),
(EC.8)
where P j
D(x), P j
A(x), P k
D(x), P k
A(x) are the choice probabilities obtained by replacing λ · I(Y,λ)
with x. After solving ˜πj(x) −˜πk(x) = 0, we get
e−c+x = eY0(eYj · mj −eYk · mk) + eYj+Yk · (mj −mk)
eYk · mk −eYj · mj + (eYj −eYk) · (M + r)
(EC.9)
Since
the
LHS
of
the
above
equation
is
continuous
and
monotonically
increasing
in
x,
˜πi(x)
and
˜πj(x)
intersect
at
a
unique
value
of
x,
say
x′.
Furthermore,

e-companion to C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
ec3
x′ ∈[λ · I(YS,λ),λ · I(YS+,λ)] because ˜πj λ · I(YS,λ)

= πj(S) > πk(S) = ˜πk λ · I(YS,λ)

, and
˜πk λ·I(YS+,λ)

= πk(S+) > πj(S+) = ˜πj λ·I(YS+,λ)

by deﬁnitions of j and k. This implies that
we have ˜πj(x) > ˜πk(x) for all x < x′, and ˜πj(x) < ˜πk(x) for all x > x′. As x →−∞, we know that
˜πj(x) > ˜πk(x) iﬀθj > θk because
lim
x→−∞˜πi(x) = θi for all i ∈S. Hence, we conclude that θj > θk.
□
Proof of Lemma 1.
It suﬃces to prove that λ·I(Y,λ) is increasing in λ in the interval (0,1].
To that end, we calculate the ﬁrst derivative of λ · I(Y,λ) with respect to λ as follows:
d(λ · I(Y,λ))
dλ
= ln

X
k∈S∪{0}
eYk/λ

−
P
q∈S∪{0}
Yq
λ · eYq/λ
P
q∈S∪{0}
eYq/λ
=
P
q∈S∪{0}
eYq/λ
 
ln
 
P
k∈S∪{0}
eYk/λ
!
−Yq
λ
!
P
q∈S∪{0}
eYq/λ
The denominator is clearly positive. Since
 
ln
 
P
k∈S∪{0}
eYk/λ
!
−Yq
λ
!
> 0 for all q ∈S ∪{0}
and for all λ ∈(0,1], the numerator in the above expression is also positive. Hence, we have
d(λ · I(Y,λ))
dλ
> 0, implying that λ · I(Y,λ) is strictly increasing in λ ∈(0,1].
□
Proof of Proposition 5.
Assume without loss of generality that there exists λ′ ∈(0,1] at
which the optimal choice of product switches from one product to another. (If λ′ does not exist, then
the optimal product is the same for all λ ∈(0,1], and thus we are done.) Suppose these two products
are indexed by j and k, or more formally, arg max
i∈S
{πi(λ′ −ϵ)} = j and arg max
i∈S
{πi(λ′ + ϵ)} = k for
suﬃciently small ϵ > 0. By Proposition 2, both of these products are in the set E′. Our aim is to
show that θj > θk, which implies that j < k due to the order of products in the set E′.
Fix M = ¯m(Y,m,λ′). Deﬁne ˜πj(x) and ˜πk(x) as in EC.7 and EC.8. Following similar arguments
as in EC.9, we can show that ˜πj(x) and ˜πk(x) intersect at a unique value of x. This intersection
occurs at x = λ′ · I(Y,λ′) because
˜πj λ′ · I(Y,λ′)

= πj(λ′) = πk(λ′) = ˜πk λ′ · I(Y,λ′)

.
(EC.10)
We have
lim
x→−∞˜πi(x) = θi for all i ∈S. Hence, we have either one of the following cases:
1. θj > θk and therefore ˜πj(x) > ˜πk(x) ∀x < λ′ · I(Y,λ′) and ˜πj(x) < ˜πk(x) ∀x > λ′ · I(Y,λ′).
2. θj < θk and therefore ˜πj(x) < ˜πk(x) ∀x < λ′ · I(Y,λ′) and ˜πj(x) > ˜πk(x) ∀x > λ′ · I(Y,λ′).
We claim that case 2 cannot be true, and we show it by contradiction. Suppose that θj < θk and
therefore ˜πj(x) > ˜πk(x) for all x > λ′ · I(Y,λ′). Then, consider the following equalities:
πj(λ) = ˜πj λ · I(Y,λ)

+ P j
A
 λ · I(Y,λ) ·
 ¯m(Y,m,λ) −M

(EC.11)
πk(λ) = ˜πk λ · I(Y,λ) + P k
A
 λ · I(Y,λ) ·
 ¯m(Y,m,λ) −M

(EC.12)
Since
¯m(Y,m,λ) is non-decreasing in λ by the proposition assumption, the expression
 ¯m(Y,m,λ)−M

in the above equations are non-negative for any λ > λ′. Moreover, θj < θk implies

ec4
e-companion to C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
that Yj < Yk by deﬁnition of E′, and therefore P j
A
 λ · I(Y,λ)

> P k
A
 λ · I(Y,λ)

for any λ ∈(0,1].
Finally, case 2 implies that ˜πj (λ′ + ϵ) · I(Y,(λ′ + ϵ))

> ˜πk (λ′ + ϵ) · I(Y,(λ′ + ϵ))

. As a result,
plugging λ = (λ′ +ϵ) in (EC.11) and (EC.12) reveals that πj(λ′ +ϵ) > πk(λ′ +ϵ), which contradicts
with the deﬁnition of j and k. Hence, case 2 cannot be true, implying that θj > θk.
□
Proof of Proposition 6.
We prove in two steps. First, we show that ∆j(S) −∆k(S+) is
decreasing linearly in β ≥0, which implies that ∆j(S) < ∆k(S+) for some large enough β ≥0.
Second, we show that ∆j(S) > ∆k(S+) when β = 0. These together imply the existence of the
threshold β′ ≥0 and completes the proof.
1. ∆j(S) −∆k(S+) is decreasing linearly in β ≥0.
We express ∆j(S) −∆k(S+) as follows:
∆j(S) −∆k(S+) = Πj(S) −Π0(S) −
 Πk(S+) −Π0(S+)

= (1 + β)
 πj(S) −πk(S+)

−
 P 0
A(S) · ¯m(YS,mS,λ) −P 0
A(S+) · ¯m(YS+,mS+,λ)

.
We must show that πj(S) < πk(S+). To that end, consider the following inequalities:
πk(S+) ≥πj(S+) =
 1 −P j
A(S+)

· θj + P j
A(S+) ·
 ¯m(YS+,mS+,λ) + r

(EC.13)
>
 1 −P j
A(S)

· θj + P j
A(S) ·
 ¯m(YS+,mS+,λ) + r

(EC.14)
≥
 1 −P j
A(S)

· θj + P j
A(S) ·
 ¯m(YS,mS,λ) + r

= πj(S)
(EC.15)
where (EC.14) follows from Assumption 2 and the fact that P i
A(S+) > P i
A(S) for all i ∈S, and
(EC.15) follows because ¯m(YS+,mS+,λ) ≥¯m(YS,mS,λ).
2. ∆j(S) > ∆k(S+) when β = 0.
Let β = 0. By Assumption 1, we know that ∆j(S) > 0, i.e., promoting the optimal product in S
is more proﬁtable than no-promotion. If ∆k(S+) < 0, then ∆j(S) > 0 > ∆k(S+) and we are done.
Hence, we consider the case when ∆k(S+) > 0.
Since ∆j(S) ≥∆k(S) by the optimality of product j when the assortment is S, showing
∆k(S) > ∆k(S+) will be suﬃcient to prove that ∆j(S) > ∆k(S+). To that end, we write ∆k(S) as
∆k(S) =
eYk
eY0 + eYk + e−c+λ·I(S) · mk −

e−c+λ·I(S)
eY0 + e−c+λ·I(S) −
e−c+λ·I(S)
eY0 + eYk + e−c+λ·I(S)

· ( ¯m(YS,mS,λ) + r)
= eY0 · eYk · mk + eYk · (mk −¯m(YS,mS,λ) −r) · e−c+λI(S)
(eY0 + eYk + e−c+λ·I(S)) · (eY0 + e−c+λ·I(S))
Fix M = ¯m(YS,mS,λ). Deﬁne the function ¯∆(S) as follows:
¯∆(S) := eY0 · eYk · mk + eYk · (mk −M −r) · e−c+λ·I(S)
(eY0 + eYk + e−c+λ·I(S)) · (eY0 + e−c+λ·I(S))
(EC.16)

e-companion to C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
ec5
We will show that ¯∆(S) decreases as the assortment S expands. To that end, consider the func-
tion f : [I(YS),I(YS+)] →[eY0 + e−c+λ·I(S),eY0 + e−c+λ·I(S+)] such that x = f(I) = eY0 + e−c+λ·I(·).
Notice that x increases monotonically as I(·) increases, or equivalently as the assortment
expands. Hence, f(·) is a one-to-one correspondence between the sets [I(YS),I(YS+)] and
[eY0 + e−c+λ·I(S),eY0 + e−c+λ·I(S+)]. By plugging x in the RHS of (EC.16) we get:
eY0 · eYk · mk + eYk · (mk −M −r) · (x −eY0)
(eYk + x) · x
(EC.17)
In order to show that ¯∆(S) decreases as I(·) increases in the interval [I(YS),I(YS+)], we will show
that (EC.17) is decreasing in x in the interval [eY0 + e−c+λ·I(S),eY0 + e−c+λ·I(S+)]. To that end, we
compute the ﬁrst derivative of (EC.17) with respect to x as:
−eYkx[x(mk −M −r) + 2eY0(M + r)] + e2Yk+Y0(M + r)
(eYk + x)2 · x2
(EC.18)
The denominator is clearly positive. We will argue that the numerator is also positive for all
x ∈[eY0 + e−c+λ·I(S),eY0 + e−c+λ·I(S+)]. To that end, it suﬃces to show that

x(mk −M −r) + 2eY0(M + r)

> 0 for all x ∈[eY0 + e−c+λ·I(S),eY0 + e−c+λ·I(S+)]
(EC.19)
Since we consider the case when ∆k(S+) > 0 we have the following:
∆k(S+) =
eYk
eY0 + eYk + e−c+λ·I(S+) · mk
−
 
e−c+λ·I(S+)
eY0 + e−c+λ·I(S+) −
e−c+λ·I(S+)
eY0 + eYk + e−c+λ·I(S+)
!
· ( ¯m(YS+,mS+,λ) + r) > 0
Since ¯m(YS+,mS+,λ) ≥M, by replacing ¯m(YS+,mS+,λ) by M in the above inequality, we get
eYk
eY0 + eYk + e−c+λ·I(S+) · mk −
 
e−c+λ·I(S+)
eY0 + e−c+λ·I(S+) −
e−c+λ·I(S+)
eY0 + eYk + e−c+λ·I(S+)
!
· (M + r) > 0
By plugging ¯x = eY0 + e−c+λ·I(S+) in the above inequality and some algebraic manipulation, we get
mk > (¯x −eY0)
¯x
· (M + r). This implies that ¯x · mk −(¯x −eY0) · (M + r) > 0. Then, we can write
¯x · (mk −M −r) + eY0 (M + r) > 0
(EC.20)
Inequality (EC.20) implies that (EC.19) holds for all x ≤¯x. To clarify, note that (EC.19) holds for
all x if (mk −M −r) ≥0. Otherwise, it holds for all x ≤¯x because (EC.20) guarantees it for x = ¯x,
and the LHS of (EC.19) is decreasing in x. As a result, we showed that the expression in (EC.17)
is decreasing in x ∈[eY0 + e−c+λ·I(S),eY0 + e−c+λ·I(S+)], which in turn implies that ¯∆(·) decreases as
I(·) increases in the interval [I(YS),I(YS+)] (i.e., as the assortment S expands).
Thus we have ∆j(S) ≥∆k(S) = ¯∆(S) > ¯∆(S+) ≥∆k(S+) when β = 0.
□

ec6
e-companion to C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
Proof of Corollary 1
Let β′(·) denote the threshold β′ in Proposition 6 as a func-
tion of the two assortments being compared. Choose β1 = min{β′(S,S+),β′(S,S++)} and
β2 = max{β′(S,S++),β′(S+,S++)}. Part 1 and 3 follow by deﬁnitions of β1 and β2. For β > β1,
max{∆k(S+),∆l(S++)} > ∆j(S). For β < β2, max{∆j(S),∆k(S+)} > ∆l(S++). Combining two, we
have max{∆j(S),∆k(S+),∆l(S++)} = ∆k(S+) for β1 < β < β2, so part 2 holds.
Proof of Proposition 7.
Let i∗(λ) = j and i∗(¯λ) = k for ease of exposition. We will follow a
similar procedure to the proof of Proposition 6 and prove in two steps.
1. ∆j(λ) −∆k(¯λ) is decreasing linearly in β ≥0. It follows the same arguments as the ﬁrst part
of the proof of Proposition 6 by replacing S and S+ with λ and ¯λ, respectively.
2. ∆j(λ) > ∆k(¯λ) when β = 0.
Assume w.l.o.g. that ∃λ′ ∈[λ, ¯λ] such that arg max
i∈S
{πi(λ)} = j for all λ ∈[λ,λ′], i.e., the optimal
product to promote is j within the sub-interval [λ,λ′], and it switches to another product at
λ = λ′, denoted by i∗(λ′). We will show that ∆j(λ) > ∆j(λ′) = ∆i∗(λ′)(λ′), where the equality holds
because πj(λ′) = πi∗(λ′)(λ′). (i∗(λ′) and k are not necessarily the same product.) Since the same
argument holds for any sub-interval in [λ, ¯λ] and because ∆(·)(λ) is continuous, we conclude that
∆j(λ) > ∆k(¯λ). Deﬁne the following functions:
∆(λ) := eY0 · eYj · mj + eYj · (mj −¯m(λ′) −r) · e−c+λ·I(λ)
(eY0 + eYj + e−c+λ·I(λ)) · (eY0 + e−c+λ·I(λ))
(EC.21)
¯∆(λ) := eY0 · eYj · mj + eYj · (mj −¯m(λ) −r) · e−c+λ·I(λ)
(eY0 + eYj + e−c+λ·I(λ)) · (eY0 + e−c+λ·I(λ))
(EC.22)
Note that ∆(λ) ≤¯∆(λ) for any λ ∈[λ, ¯λ], because ¯m(λ) is non-decreasing in λ for λ ∈[λ, ¯λ] by
the assumption given in the proposition. We will now show that ¯∆(λ) is decreasing in λ for
λ ∈[λ,λ′]. To that end, consider the function f : [λ,λ′] →[eY0 + e−c+λ·I(λ),eY0 + e−c+λ′·I(λ′)] such
that x = f(λ) = eY0 +e−c+λ·I(λ). Notice that x increases monotonically in λ due to Lemma 1. Hence,
f(λ) is a one-to-one correspondence between the sets [λ,λ′] and [eY0 + e−c+λ·I(λ),eY0 + e−c+λ′·I(λ′)].
By plugging x in (EC.22) we get:
¯∆(x) = eY0 · eYj · mj + eYj · (mj −¯m(λ) −r) · (x −eY0)
(eYj + x) · x
(EC.23)
In order to show that ¯∆(λ) decreases in λ for λ ∈[λ,λ′], we will show that ¯∆(x) decreases in x for
x ∈[eY0 + e−c+λ·I(λ),eY0 + e−c+λ′·I(λ′)]. The ﬁrst derivative of (EC.23) with respect to x is:
d ¯∆(x)
dx
= −eYjx[x(mj −¯m(λ) −r) + 2eY0( ¯m(λ) + r)] + e2Yj+Y0( ¯m(λ) + r)
(eYj + x)2 · x2
(EC.24)
The denominator is clearly positive. We will argue that the numerator is also positive and so
d ¯∆(x)
dx
< 0 because of the negative sign in front. To that end, it suﬃces to show that

x(mj −¯m(λ) −r) + 2eY0( ¯m(λ) + r)

> 0 for all x ∈[eY0 + e−c+λ·I(λ),eY0 + e−c+λ′·I(λ′)]
(EC.25)

e-companion to C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
ec7
By Assumption 1, we know that ∆j(λ) > 0 for λ ∈[λ,λ′], i.e., promoting the optimal product is
more proﬁtable than no-promotion. It implies the following:
∆j(λ)
=
eYj · mj
eY0 + eYj + e−c+λ·I(λ) −
eYj · e−c+λ·I(λ)
(eY0 + e−c+λ·I(λ)) · (eY0 + eYj + e−c+λ·I(λ)) · ( ¯m(λ) + r) > 0 for all λ ∈[λ,λ′]
By some algebraic manipulation, we get
mj >
e−c+λ·I(λ)
eY0 + e−c+λ·I(λ) · ( ¯m(λ) + r) for all λ ∈[λ,λ′]
(EC.26)
Since ¯m(λ) ≤¯m(λ) for all λ ∈[λ,λ′], inequality (EC.26) implies
mj >
e−c+λ·I(λ)
eY0 + e−c+λ·I(λ) · ( ¯m(λ) + r) for all λ ∈[λ,λ′]
(EC.27)
By plugging x in (EC.27) and some algebraic manipulation, we get
x ·
 mj −¯m(λ) −r

+ eY0 ¯m(λ) + r

> 0 for all x ∈[eY0 + e−c+λ·I(λ),eY0 + e−c+λ′·I(λ′)]
(EC.28)
Inequality (EC.28) implies that (EC.25) holds for all x ∈[eY0 + e−c+λ·I(λ),eY0 + e−c+λ′·I(λ′)]. Hence,
¯∆(x) is decreasing in x in that interval. Then we have the following sequence of inequalities:
∆j(λ) = ¯∆
 eY0 + e−c+λ·I(λ)
> ¯∆
 eY0 + e−c+λ′·I(λ′)
≥∆
 eY0 + e−c+λ′·I(λ′)
= ∆j(λ′) = ∆i∗(λ′)(λ′).
The ﬁrst inequality follows as ¯∆(x) is decreasing in x and
 eY0 + e−c+λ·I(λ)
<
 eY0 + e−c+λ′·I(λ′)
.
The second inequality follows by the deﬁnition of ¯∆(·) and ∆(·). Since the same arguments can be
made for all such sub-intervals in [λ, ¯λ], we conclude that ∆j(λ) > ∆k(¯λ) when β = 1.
□
Proof of Proposition 8.
Let i∗(c) = j, i∗(¯c) = k, and ¯m(Y,m,λ) = M for ease of exposition.
We will follow a similar procedure to the proof of Proposition 6 and prove in two steps.
1. ∆j(c) −∆k(¯c) is increasing linearly in β ≥0. It follows the same arguments as the ﬁrst part
of the proof of Proposition 6 by replacing S and S+ with c and ¯c, respectively.
2. ∆j(c) < ∆k(¯c) when β = 0.
Assume
w.l.o.g.
that
∃
c′ ∈[c, ¯c]
such
that
arg max
i∈S
{πi(c)} = j
∀c ∈[c,c′]
and
arg max
i∈S
{πi(c)} = i∗(c) ̸= j for c ∈[c′,c′ + ϵ] for some (small) ϵ > 0. We will show that
∆j(c) < ∆j(c′) = ∆i∗(c′)(c′), where the equality holds because πj(c′) = πi∗(c′)(c′). (Notice that i∗(c′)
and k are not necessarily the same product.) Since the same argument holds for any sub-interval in
[c, ¯c] and ∆(·)(c) is continuous, we can conclude that ∆j(c) < ∆k(¯c). Deﬁne the following function:
¯∆(c) := eY0 · eYj · mj + eYj · (mj −M −r) · e−c+λ·I
(eY0 + eYj + e−c+λ·I) · (eY0 + e−c+λ·I)
,
(EC.29)

ec8
e-companion to C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
which equals ∆j(c) for β = 1. We will show that ¯∆(c) is increasing in c for c ∈[c,c′]. To that end,
consider the function f : [c,c′] →[eY0 + e−c′+λ·I,eY0 + e−c+λ·I] such that x = f(c) = eY0 + e−c+λ·I.
Notice that x decreases monotonically in c. Hence, f(c) is a one-to-one correspondence between
the sets [c,c′] and [eY0 + e−c′+λ·I,eY0 + e−c+λ·I]. By plugging x in (EC.29) we get:
¯∆(x) = eY0 · eYj · mj + eYj · (mj −M −r) · (x −eY0)
(eYj + x) · x
(EC.30)
In order to show that ¯∆(c) increases in c for c ∈[c,c′], we will show that ¯∆(x) decreases in x for
x ∈[eY0 + e−c′+λ·I,eY0 + e−c+λ·I]. To that end, we compute the ﬁrst derivative of (EC.30) as:
d ¯∆(x)
dx
= −eYjx[x(mj −M −r) + 2eY0(M + r)] + e2Yj+Y0(M + r)
(eYj + x)2 · x2
(EC.31)
The denominator is clearly positive. We will argue that the numerator is also positive and so
d ¯∆(x)
dx
< 0 because of the negative sign in front. To that end, it suﬃces to show that

x(mj −M −r) + 2eY0(M + r)

> 0 for all x ∈[eY0 + e−c′+λ·I,eY0 + e−c+λ·I]
(EC.32)
It follows from Assumption 1 that mj ≥
e−c+λ·I
eY0 + e−c+λ·I · (M + r) for all c ∈[c,c′]. By plugging
x in and some algebraic manipulation, we get x ·
 mj −M −r

+ eY0 M + r

≥0 for all
x ∈[eY0 + e−c′+λ·I,eY0 + e−c+λ·I]. This implies that (EC.32) holds for all x in the interval
[eY0 + e−c′+λ·I,eY0 + e−c+λ·I]. Hence, ¯∆(x) is decreasing in x in that interval. Then, we can write
∆j(c) = ¯∆
 eY0 + e−c+λ·I
< ¯∆
 eY0 + e−c′+λ·I
= ∆j(c′) = ∆i∗(c′)(c′). The inequality follows because
¯∆(x) is decreasing in x, and (eY0 + e−c′+λ·I) < (eY0 + e−c+λ·I). Since the same arguments can be
made for all such sub-intervals in [c, ¯c], we conclude that ∆j(c) < ∆k(¯c) when β = 1.
□
Proof of Proposition 9.
Suppose we have two products, i and j, such that Yi ≥Yj and
mi ≥mj, or equivalently, product i dominates product j. Our aim is to show that product j is
never optimal to promote.
Let Π0 = P 0
A ·
 ¯m(Y,m,λ) + r

. We have ˜Πx = (1 + βφx)(P x
D · mx + (1 −P x
D) · Π0) ∀x ∈S.
We consider two cases separately: (mi > Π0) and (mi ≤Π0). If (mi > Π0), we have
˜Πj = (1 + βφj)
 P j
D · mj + (1 −P j
D) · Π0
≤(1 + βφi)
 P i
D · mi + (1 −P i
D) · Π0
= ˜Πi
(EC.33)
The inequality holds because mi ≥mj, P i
D ≥P j
D, mi > Π0, and φi ≥φj, and the inequality is strict
because we have assumed no two products i and j have mi = mj and Yi = Yj. Therefore we either
have mi > mj or P i
D > P j
D, or both.
Next consider the case where (mi ≤Π0). Since mj ≤mi ≤Π0, we have πj ≤Π0. This also implies
that ˜Πj = (1+βφj)πj ≤(1+βφmax)Π0 < ˜Πk where product k is as deﬁned in Assumption 3. Hence,
it is never optimal to promote the dominated product j.
□

e-companion to C¸ etin, Mersereau, and Parlakt¨urk: Management and Eﬀects of In-Store Promotional Displays
ec9
Proof of Proposition 10.
Because of the optimality of i∗(r1) for r = r1 and of i∗(r2) for
r = r2, we have ˜Πi∗(r1)(r1) −˜Πi∗(r2)(r1) ≥0 and ˜Πi∗(r2)(r2) −˜Πi∗(r1)(r2) ≥0. Adding these inequali-
ties, we get ˜Πi∗(r1)(r1)−˜Πi∗(r2)(r1)+ ˜Πi∗(r2)(r2)−˜Πi∗(r1)(r2) ≥0. By substituting using the deﬁnition
of ˜Π and simplifying, we ﬁnd that the following is an equivalent inequality:
r1
h
P i∗(r1)
A
(1 + βφi∗(r1)) −P i∗(r2)
A
(1 + βφi∗(r2))
i
+ r2
h
P i∗(r2)
A
(1 + βφi∗(r2)) −P i∗(r1)
A
(1 + βφi∗(r1))
i
≥0.
This implies that (r1 −r2)P i∗(r1)
A
(1 + βφi∗(r1)) ≥(r1 −r2)P i∗(r2)
A
(1 + βφi∗(r2)) and therefore that
P i∗(r1)
A
(1 + βφi∗(r1)) ≥P i∗(r2)
A
(1 + βφi∗(r2)) because r1 > r2.
□
EC.2.
Simulation Support for the Results in Section 5
We ran simulations to verify the results in Section 5 (Propositions 6,7,8) when comparing categories
that are roughly similar but not identical. In particular, we considered all pairs of the categories
we used in our earlier numerical analysis in Section 4 and Appendix B. Speciﬁcally, we obtained
 100
2

= 4950 pairs of categories. Then, we considered diﬀerence in one parameter (namely assortment
size |S|, customer heterogeneity λ, and transit cost c) at a time in the following way: For each pair,
we set the value of the parameter under consideration high for one of the categories and low for
the other one. All the other parameters are set to the medium level as described in Appendix B.2.
Proposition 6 holds for more than 95% of the instances, whereas Propositions 7 and 8 hold for all
instances. Hence, the choice of category to promote pivots on the demand expansion parameter β
as suggested by these results even if the categories are roughly similar.