TITLE: That’s Not Fair: Tariff Structures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2020.0930
---

That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric
Utilities with Rooftop Solar
Siddharth Prakash Singh
UCL School of Management; siddharth.singh@ucl.ac.uk
Alan Scheller-Wolf
Tepper School of Business, Carnegie Mellon University; awolf@andrew.cmu.edu
(1) Problem deﬁnition: Utility regulators are grappling to devise compensation schemes for customers who
sell rooftop solar generation back to the grid, balancing environmental interests and the ﬁnancial interests of
utilities, solar system installers, and retail customers. This is diﬃcult: Regulatory changes made in Nevada
in 2015 to protect Nevada’s utility induced SolarCity, the market leader in solar systems, to suspend local
operations. We show that the choice of tariﬀstructure is crucial to achieving socially desirable objectives.
(2) Academic/Practical Relevance: It is important for regulators to understand how tariﬀstructure
interacts with social objectives. This has implications for consumers, regulators and industry.
(3) Methodology: We use a sequential game to analyze the regulator’s social welfare maximization problem
in a market with a regulated utility, an unregulated, price-setting, proﬁt-maximizing solar system installer,
and customers who endogenously determine whether to adopt solar or not, based on utility tariﬀs, solar
prices and their heterogeneous usage proﬁles and generation potentials.
(4) Results: We illustrate that the eﬀectiveness of tariﬀstructures is not governed simply by the number
of free tariﬀparameters, but by the functions these parameters serve. In particular, an eﬀective tariﬀmust
discriminate among customer usage tiers and between customers with and without rooftop solar to achieve
socially desirable outcomes. We present a tariﬀstructure with these two characteristics and show how it can
be implemented as a simple buy-all, sell-all tariﬀwhile retaining its favorable properties. We illustrate our
ﬁndings numerically using data from Nevada and New Mexico, two states grappling with this issue.
(5) Managerial Implications: Many utilities in the U.S. operate tariﬀstructures that are missing at least
one of the two identiﬁed features. Regulators must overhaul these tariﬀstructures to adequately safeguard
all stake-holders.
Key words : rooftop solar, net-metering, energy policy, game theory
1.
Introduction
Rooftop solar has seen a boom in recent years, with residential rooftop solar installations consis-
tently growing at over 20% year-on-year (Mike Munsell, 2017). One of the main catalysts for this
growth has been the practice of utility companies oﬀering “retail net-metering” to customers with
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
2
SSRN Version
solar panels: Under this scheme, these customers can sell any excess electricity they generate to
their utility for full retail credit. Eﬀectively, such customers pay only for their “net” usage.
While this incentive is useful because a move to rooftop solar is environmentally desirable, retail
net-metering threatens the proﬁtability of utility companies, who are forced to buy excess energy
from customers at retail rates which are signiﬁcantly higher than their prevailing procurement
costs. A utility might commonly combat this by raising retail electricity rates for all users, or by
reducing the rate at which utilities repurchase excess generation from solar households. However,
both these solutions are problematic: If the utility company raises rates, (typically) poorer non-solar
households would bear some part of the burden imposed by (typically) wealthier solar households
(Krysti Shallenberger, 2017a), resulting in cross-subsidization, a phenomenon under which one set
of customers beneﬁts at the cost of another set of customers. Alternately, if the repurchase rate is
reduced, customers may no longer be install solar, and solar installers could be put out of business.
Below we discuss how this latter dynamic played out recently in Nevada (Buhayar, 2016).
In each of the thirty-three U.S. states with regulated electricity markets (Electricity Local, 2019),
a body called the Public Utilities Commission (PUC) has the charge of solving this complex prob-
lem: The PUC balances the welfare of the various stake-holders by regulating the rates and services
of public utilities. The PUCs can therefore be thought of as social welfare maximizers; in the con-
text of rooftop solar, this means protecting utility company proﬁtability and ensuring fair rates for
customers, while also providing a nourishing environment for rooftop solar in order to protect envi-
ronmental interests. (PUCs’ stated objectives often explicitly include environmental stewardship;
see California Public Utilities Commission (2020).) The PUC’s task is further complicated by the
fact that solar system installers (henceforth solar companies) are typically unregulated; therefore,
regulatory interventions must account for such solar companies making self-interested decisions.
As might be expected, increased rooftop solar adoption and its eﬀects on utility companies’
proﬁts has resulted in considerable regulatory ﬂux: In the U.S. 42 of the 50 states took some action
related to net-metering, rate design or solar ownership during the third quarter of 2019 alone (NC
Clean Energy Technology Center and Meister Consultants Group, 2019). The PUC’s regulatory
tight-rope walk of balancing customer, societal and utility welfare is a tricky aﬀair that has, on
occasion, gone awry. NV Energy, the utility in Nevada, imposes a simple two-part tariﬀ: a monthly
ﬁxed charge and a variable “energy” charge per kWh of energy consumed. After being negatively
impacted by increased rooftop solar adoption, NV Energy initiated a prolonged dialogue with their
PUC, in which they explicitly raised the specter of cross-subsidization (Chediak and Buhayar,
2015). The outcome of this dialogue was a ruling that solar customers would eventually pay thrice
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
SSRN Version
3
as high a ﬁxed charge as non-solar customers, and would be credited for excess generation at
procurement cost (signiﬁcantly lower than the existing retail rate). This announcement prompted
SolarCity, the market leader in solar systems, to suspend operations in Nevada and cut over 500
jobs (Buhayar, 2016). In December 2016, a year after this ruling was made, the PUC reversed itself,
voting to restore retail net-metering and the original rate schedule in the Sierra Paciﬁc territory
(Pyper, 2016). Meanwhile, in February 2017 in Maine, the PUC passed a bill to phase down
compensation paid to customers for their excess generation. In July 2017, a new bill that aimed
to roll back this decision in order to boost solar growth was vetoed by the Governor, who cited
cross-subsidization as the reason for his decision: He said that net-metering subsidizes the cost of
solar panels “at the expense of the elderly and poor who can least aﬀord it” (Krysti Shallenberger,
2017b). In April 2019, Maine voted to restore net-metering (State of Maine, 2019).
Despite the apparent pressing need, there is no evident consensus on the structural properties a
tariﬀshould have in order to be eﬀective in a solar market. For instance, NV Energy (Nevada) and
Duke Energy (North Carolina) have only a single tier in their tariﬀstructures, i.e., all customers
are charged the same variable rate and the same ﬁxed cost regardless of how much they consume,
whereas PNM Energy (New Mexico) and Idaho Power (Idaho) have three tiers. Tariﬀs also vary in
whether they discriminate between solar and non-solar customers: Nevada permits NV Energy to
have solar and non-solar customers on diﬀerent rate schedules, but states such as New Mexico and
Washington explicitly disallow this. Meanwhile, Arizona Public Service (APS) has a tiered tariﬀ
structure that pays solar customers less than the retail rate for excess energy sold back, eﬀectively
putting them on diﬀerent rate schedules from non-solar customers.
Motivated by this current regulatory ﬂux, we explore the delicate problem faced by the PUCs,
focusing on how eﬀective diﬀerent tariﬀstructures are in enabling the PUC to induce socially
optimal welfare outcomes in the presence of residential rooftop solar. We do so by explicitly model-
ing the regulator’s social welfare optimization problem, and demonstrate that some common tariﬀ
forms are potentially inadequate to the task. We consider a monopolistic, vertically integrated
utility company (like NV Energy–such utilities operate in regulated electricity markets where cus-
tomers cannot freely choose a retail utility to supply them) whose tariﬀs are set by the PUC; a
monopolistic, price-setting solar company (similar to SolarCity); and residential customers who
are heterogeneous in their demands and generation capability (available roof space)1. First, the
PUC ﬁxes a tariﬀ(possibly upon negotiation with the utility company). The PUC’s choice of tariﬀ
then inﬂuences the solar company’s pricing decision, (and hence its proﬁtability), which in turn
1 We ignore commercial customers for tractability.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
4
SSRN Version
inﬂuences customers’ adoption decisions. (In Nevada, the tariﬀchoice caused SolarCity to exit the
state because they anticipated not being able to set a price that would keep them proﬁtable.) We
model the response of the solar company and the customers using a sequential game: The solar
company responds to the tariﬀby setting a price of solar systems to maximize its proﬁt, anticipat-
ing customers’ endogenous decisions to install solar or not. Customers make their self-interested
installation decision based on the tariﬀset by the PUC, the solar company’s chosen price, and
their demand, rooftop solar generation potential, and excess generation that they expect to sell
back to the grid (together, these determine a customer’s usage “tier” or “proﬁle”).
The solar company’s endogenous pricing decision creates incentive compatibility and participa-
tion constraints that the regulator must account for, failing which the solar company may exit
the market (as they did in Nevada). Our base model considers a monopolistic solar marketplace:
In the U.S. SolarCity (now Tesla) was the market leader with a 34% market share in 2014 and
2015 (Meyers, 2015), and lower costs (Shahan, 2016), thereby giving it price-setting power. In fact,
although SolarCity’s market share has since dropped, its price is still 16% lower than the market
average (Reisinger, 2019). We extend our model to an oligopoly with Cournot competition and
endogenously determined price.
We ﬁnd that a tariﬀstructure’s eﬀectiveness is driven not just by the number of free parameters,
but by the speciﬁc function that they serve. In particular, we ﬁnd that a tariﬀstructure must have
two attributes in order to guarantee eﬀectiveness: the ability to discriminate between customers
based on their usage tier, and the ability to discriminate between customers with and without
rooftop solar. While APS’s tariﬀstructure has both these features, at least one of them is absent
in the tariﬀstructures of many other utilities, for example, NV Energy and PNM Energy. In the
absence of either one of these attributes, the regulator might not be able to induce a socially optimal
outcome, often yielding an outcome that includes cross-subsidization. We then show that a simple
two-part tariﬀwith these two attributes, featuring full retail price repurchasing from residential
solar customers, always guarantees feasibility of the regulator’s social welfare optimization problem.
If solar adoption generates an overall customer surplus (possibly at the expense of the utility), this
tariﬀstructure also guarantees an outcome with no cross-subsidization. We then suggest a buy-all,
sell-all tariﬀsuch as the one proposed in Indiana (Kari Lyderson, 2017) as a simple implementation
of our suggested tariﬀ, and show that this tariﬀretains desirable properties.
Complementary to our analysis, using household consumer survey data (U.S. Energy Information
Administration, 2009), we estimate customer usage proﬁle parameters and numerically illustrate
how our suggested tariﬀstructure compares to the tariﬀstructures currently in use in Nevada and
New Mexico, two states wrestling with this issue. We ﬁnd that both states’ tariﬀs perform poorly
compared to our suggested tariﬀ: while our tariﬀis able to avoid cross-subsidization in all test
cases, the current tariﬀs in both states cannot.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
SSRN Version
5
2.
Literature Review
There is a substantial body of Operations Management literature exploring various aspects related
to managing renewable energy resources. Aﬂaki and Netessine (2016) and Hu et al. (2015) study
capacity investment decisions for renewable resources such as wind and solar. The eﬀect of tariﬀ
structures on such investments has been studied in Alizamir et al. (2016), Ritzenhofen et al. (2016),
and Kok et al. (2015). The operational aspects of managing such resources are studied in Zhou
et al. (2014), Wu and Kapuscinski (2013), Sunar and Birge (2018) and Al-Gwaiz et al. (2016). We
contribute to this literature by analyzing the structural requirements for a utility tariﬀto induce
welfare optimal and fair outcomes for the utility, the solar industry, and customers.
The energy policy literature contains a stream of work investigating regulatory considerations
arising from the increase in distributed generation. Some of these papers, such as Keyes and
R´abago (2013) and Lehr (2013) provide frameworks for regulation. Linvill et al. (2013) qualitatively
discuss the challenges a regulator might face when implementing net-metering or feed-in tariﬀs
for compensating distributed generation. Some studies such as Blackburn et al. (2014), Borlick
and Wood (2014), Brown and Bunyan (2014) and Moore et al. (2016) ﬁnd that current subsidy
levels in tandem with net-metering tend to overcompensate customers for excess generation. Aznar
and Zinaman (2017), Flores-Espino (2015) and Lowder et al. (2017) provide a detailed discussion
of various tariﬀoptions for managing distributed solar generation. NC Clean Energy Technology
Center and Meister Consultants Group (2019) provides a comprehensive view of recent solar-related
regulatory changes that have been made in the 50 states in the U.S. We contribute to this policy
discussion by formulating and solving an analytical model to study various compensation schemes.
Bird et al. (2013) describe the role of the regulator in a changing electricity landscape as: (1)
keeping the utility company viable, resulting in relatively stable cash ﬂows and revenues from
year to year; (2) fairly apportioning the utility’s cost of service among customers, without undue
discrimination; and (3) promotion of economic eﬃciency in the use of energy as well as competing
products and services, without compromising on reliability. We formulate and solve an analytical
model to explore which tariﬀstructures enable the regulator to induce market outcomes in keeping
with these criteria.
Another stream of literature studies the diﬀusion of solar among customers. Simulation
approaches are common (Denholm et al., 2009), and are used as a building block for research such
as Gagnon and Sigrin (2015) and Drury et al. (2013). There is also a large body of empirical lit-
erature in this stream; see Ong et al. (2010), Lobel and Perakis (2011), Bauner and Crago (2015),
Darghouth et al. (2011), Cai et al. (2013), Bollinger and Gillingham (2012), Rai and Sigrin (2013),
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
6
SSRN Version
and Agarwal et al. (2015) for examples. One possible response to solar adoption eroding their
proﬁts is for utilities to raise electricity rates, making solar energy even more attractive, further
undermining utility proﬁtability. This so-called “death spiral” behavior is studied in Satchwell et al.
(2015), Costello and Hemphill (2014), Denholm et al. (2009) and Darghouth et al. (2016).
Sunar and Swaminathan (2018) study the impact of net metering policies on utility proﬁts by
quantifying the impact of net-metered distributed generation on the wholesale market, and hence
on utility proﬁt. In contrast to our approach, they treat the adoption level of distributed generation
as exogenous and customers as identical. On the other hand, we do not model the wholesale market
and the eﬀect of distributed generation on it.
Closer to our work, Babich et al. (2020) model a government entity deciding between oﬀering a
feed-in-tariﬀand a tax-rebate policy for rooftop solar. They study how the chosen policy aﬀects the
solar panel investment decisions of a representative household in the presence of exogenous shocks
that aﬀect generation eﬃciency, variability in electricity price and solar panel investment cost (i.e.,
they have a dynamic model, but with exogenously given solar prices). Our work also deals with
aspects of renewable energy that involve decisions by a principal (the PUC) and customers; however,
our paper presents a static (rather than dynamic) model of solar adoption among heterogeneous
customers who make potentially heterogeneous investment decisions, with a solar company that
makes an endogenous pricing decision. Our model’s static setting allows us to study the question
of what the regulator’s welfare-optimal choice of tariﬀshould be, and our heterogeneous customer
model allows us to study the customer equity implications of solar adoption. In a similar static
setting, Agrawal et al. (2019) study the eﬀect of government generation and investment subsidies on
a monopolistic solar company’s optimal business model decisions, i.e., whether the solar company
should oﬀer outright sales, a Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) model and/or a leasing model. As
with Babich et al. (2020), this work considers a setting with a homogeneous customer base; they
focus on the solar company rather than customer equity.
Similar to our work, Brown et al. (2017) also present a static model of adoption. They take
the perspective of a regulator who seeks to induce a welfare-optimal level of solar adoption by
setting tariﬀparameters under a speciﬁc tariﬀfunction that chooses a payment for distributed
generation, a retail rate, and a ﬁxed price for customers. They consider an exogenously deﬁned set
of (homogeneous) solar customers and a set of (homogeneous) non-solar customers. In a setting
where solar customers install panels to an endogenously determined level to maximize their utility,
they demonstrate that the retail net-metering scheme is typically not optimal. Unlike our model,
they study only one type of tariﬀ, they treat the price of solar as being exogenously determined
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
SSRN Version
7
and all their customers as identical, rendering them unable to examine customer equity. Indeed,
Brown et al. suggest customer heterogeneity in generation as a potential research direction.
Goodarzi et al. (2019) take the perspective of a regulator who seeks to minimize utility costs by
choosing an appropriate feed-in-tariﬀ(FIT) rate paid to customers who sell all their generation to
the utility at the FIT rate. In their model, customers are homogeneous in their demand characteris-
tics but heterogeneous in their discount rates, and make a solar adoption decision based on the FIT
rate. Similar to our model, their solar system price is chosen endogenously by a proﬁt maximizing
solar company. However, in contrast to their paper, we model customers who are heterogeneous
in their demands and generation capabilities, and who sell only excess generation back to the
grid, enabling us to study customer equity implications. Further, our regulator chooses the tariﬀ
structure and parameters, generalizing the FIT rate that Goodarzi et al.’s analysis is restricted to.
Our work also relates to the extensive literature on uniform versus non-linear pricing: We study
what features a tariﬀstructure must have in order for a regulator to be able to induce a socially
optimal outcome. Varian (1989) and the references therein provide a comprehensive discussion
on various issues related to price discrimination: Tiered tariﬀs are a tool for second-degree price
discrimination. While other papers such as Sundararajan (2004) and Choudhary et al. (2005)
discuss non-linear pricing for certain speciﬁc situations, their ﬁndings are not directly applicable
to our setting because of our model’s unique characteristics: The tariﬀchosen by the regulator
interacts with customers’ strategic behavior through the price of solar (which customers use to
decide whether to adopt solar or not). This tariﬀmust be chosen so as to induce the solar company
to set a price of solar that will induce a socially optimal outcome.
3.
Model
Our base model considers residential customers who are heterogeneous in their usage proﬁles, a
monopolistic solar company S, and a regulator R (the PUC). We also model a vertically integrated
utility company U that is subject to regulation by R (which makes decisions on behalf of U).
Our base case scenario is one with no solar systems: all customers depend on U to satisfy their
electricity demand. Customers are subject to ﬂat-rate (rather than time-of-use, for tractability rea-
sons) pricing. After S makes its product available, customers may continue to depend solely on U
for their electricity or can install solar systems, thereby reducing their dependence on U. We study
how R’s regulatory actions inﬂuence social welfare moving from the base case to the with-solar
scenario. R’s social welfare measure accounts for ﬁnancial and environmental considerations. How-
ever, customers and S are self-interested, maximizing their own ﬁnancial objectives. Speciﬁcally:
Customers are heterogeneous, with diﬀerent demands and potentials to generate solar electricity
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
8
SSRN Version
(e.g. because of heterogeneous roof space). We consider I tiers of customers indexed by i ∈{1...,I}.
Customer tier i has annual demand di kWh. If a tier i customer installs a solar system, this system
would generate gi kWh of electricity annually; a customer can estimate this using tools such as
Google’s Project Sunroof (Google, 2020). This customer has an excess generation (the amount of
her generation that she does not consume) ei ≤gi; this excess generation is sold back to the utility
grid. Modeling ei as a separate parameter allows us to capture any potential temporal relationship
between generation and demand; a customer’s demand and generation do not necessarily follow the
same proﬁle, and their temporal relationship, whatever it is, determines ei. Thus, a tier i customer
depends on the utility for an amount of energy d′
i = di −(gi −ei) (her grid usage) and sells back
an amount of energy ei, yielding a net usage of d′
i −ei = di −gi. At an individual level, we do not
restrict a customer’s excess ei to be less than her grid usage d′
i. Indeed, numerous large utilities (for
example Florida Power & Light and Georgia Power) do not place caps on how much electricity a
customer can supply to the grid. An alternative model is followed by utilities such as Duke Energy
Carolinas, that do not allow customers to supply more excess in a year than their annual grid
usage. We discuss how our model can accommodate this alternative case in Section 4.4. We arrange
customer tiers in order of increasing generation, so that gi ≤gi+1 (ties may be broken using the di
values). We let hi denote the number of tier i households. A type i household has an adopt/do not
adopt decision si; si takes the value of 1 if the customer chooses to adopt solar and 0 otherwise.
We use ⃗z to denote an adoption outcome, i.e., ⃗z is an ordered tuple of si values, ∀i ∈{1,...,I}. In
Section 4.4, we extend our base formulation of customers in several ways. In our base model:
- All customer parameters are assumed to be ﬁxed and known with certainty by all decision
making entities. Our model may be extended to accommodate uncertainty in d,g, and e.
- We model a customer’s demand di as being insensitive to price. This assumption is driven by
ﬁndings that electricity demand is fairly inelastic: A 1% change in price causes about -0.39%
change in electricity demand and 44% of households exhibit no short-run demand sensitivity
to changes in the marginal price of electricity (Reiss and White, 2005). Our model can be
extended to accommodate price-sensitive demand.
- All households in a tier make the same adoption decision. This assumption may be relaxed.
The Solar Company is a self-interested, monopolistic entity that sets prices for its solar systems.
We show in Section 4.4 that our main results extend to a solar industry with Cournot competition.
We assume that solar panels are inﬁnitely divisible (i.e., we ignore roof topography). S’s decision
variable is ps, the price that a customer who adopts solar must pay to the solar company per unit
of electricity she generates using the installed solar system. Solar companies oﬀer such a contract
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
SSRN Version
9
(this is called a Power Purchase Agreement, or PPA), under which customers are only assessed a
variable charge per kWh of generation, rather than having to pay a lump-sum amount for system
purchase and installation (SunRun, 2019). Once set, ps is assumed to remain ﬁxed. Customers in
the U.S. can avail themselves of an investment tax credit of 30% on solar system purchases (Oﬃce
of Energy Eﬃciency & Renewable Energy, 2020). This credit has begun to ramp down starting
in 2019 (Oﬃce of Energy Eﬃciency & Renewable Energy, 2020); we therefore ignore it in our
base model. In Section 4.4, we show how our model may easily be adjusted to accommodate this.
Corresponding to this per-unit price ps, S incurs a cost of c(y)
s
per kWh of generation that it sells,
where y is the total annual amount of generation sold to customers. This cost takes into account
the manufacturing and sales costs that S incurs. We assume that c(y)
s
is non-increasing in y, to
reﬂect the economies of scale enjoyed by S.
As an alternative to the PPA model, customers could purchase solar panels outright, paying a
ﬁxed cost for adoption and a variable cost that depends on the number of panels she purchases.
Capturing this alternative requires considerable modiﬁcations to our model and analysis. We discuss
these modiﬁcations and show how our main results continue to hold in Appendix A.2.
The Regulator is a socially interested party, R, whose decision is a tariﬀfunction T(d′,e,s) that
governs the amount of money that the utility company charges a customer who draws an amount
of energy d′ kWh/year from the grid, sells back e kWh/year to the grid and either adopts solar
(s = 1), or does not adopt solar (s = 0). Note that both d′ and e are measurable by U with an
appropriate metering system. Also observe that if s = 0, d′ = d and e = 0.
The Utility Company, U, operates in a regulated electricity market; it has a designated service
territory in which it operates as a monopoly. It faces a ﬁxed maintenance cost fu and an average
per unit cost of electricity c(x)
u /kWh, where x is the amount of electricity supplied by the utility
company’s sources (as opposed to rooftop solar). We impose no dependency of c(x)
u
on x; therefore,
this framework allows us to capture (i) the non-linear cost functions that utility companies typically
face as the amount and timing of electricity they supply alters the mix of generation sources they
use; and (ii) the dependence of the utility’s generation economics on the speciﬁc temporal load
proﬁles of their customers. The utility company uses its existing architecture to redistribute excess
generation that it purchases from customers.
Let Period 0 be the base case scenario, when no households have rooftop solar. Under the
Period 0 tariﬀstructure, customers pay a per unit energy cost of pr0 and an annual ﬁxed cost
that we normalize to 0, without loss of generality. We use this particular base case tariﬀstructure
for simplicity, but our approach readily extends to other common base case tariﬀstructures; we
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
10
SSRN Version
demonstrate this using the example of New Mexico, where customers face tiered rates in Period
0) in Section 5. In Period 1, R imposes tariﬀstructure T(·). In response to tariﬀT(·), S sets a per
unit solar rate ps in Period 2. In Period 3 individual customers, with knowledge of their demand
di, generation capability gi, and potential excess ei observe the tariﬀT(·) and the solar price ps
and then endogenously decide to adopt solar (s∗
i = 1) or not (s∗
i = 0). Each agent’s decision is taken
anticipating other agents’ responses in future periods.
For notational convenience, we use z in the superscript of a parameter, without parentheses, to
denote the value the parameter takes under adoption outcome ⃗z. For instance, the utility unit cost
corresponding to adoption outcome z is denoted cz
u. Similarly, let the superscript 0 represent the
no-adoption scenario, i.e., the base case. Thus E0 = PI
i=1 hidi is the total amount of energy that
customers demand from the utility in the base case, and Ez = E0 −PI
i=1 sihigi as the corresponding
quantity under adoption outcome ⃗z = (s1,s2,...,sI). We assume that all excess rooftop electricity
can be redistributed to other customers, i.e., that the total grid usage is no less than the total excess
supplied to the grid. Formally, we assume that PI
i=1 hi (si(di −gi + ei) + (1 −si)di) ≥PI
i=1 hisiei ⇔
PI
i=1 hidi ≥PI
i=1 hisigi. We restrict our attention to adoption outcomes ⃗z that satisfy this property.
We deﬁne ∆z
E = PI
i=1 sihigi as the amount of rooftop solar adoption under outcome ⃗z.
The decision-making entities in our model have the following objectives:
Customers wish to minimize their spend on electricity. Therefore, a tier i customer solves:
min
si∈{0,1}
(1 −si)T(di,0,0) + si(T(d′
i,ei,1) + psgi).
(1)
The Solar Company wishes to maximize proﬁt by choosing solar price ps:
max
ps
(ps −cz
s)∆z
E,
(2)
where z is the adoption decision consistent with solar price ps and the given tariﬀT(·).
The Regulator wishes to maximize social welfare improvement, subject to considerations on
solar company proﬁtability, utility viability, and customer equity, that we discuss in Section 4. We
will consider two components of this social welfare improvement: Financial and Environmental.
(1) Financial: Since all cash ﬂows except the purchase of electricity at costs cz
u and cz
s occur between
parties, they can be ignored. The net decrease in cash ﬂows out of the system (the ﬁnancial welfare
improvement of the system) is therefore c0
uE0 −cz
uEz −cz
s∆z
E = (c0
u −cz
u)E0 + (cz
u −cz
s)∆z
E.
(2) Environmental: The regulator considers the environmental beneﬁt accrued by sourcing ∆z
E kWh
of energy from rooftop solar rather than from the utility. Let m(x)
u
be the (monetized) average
environmental cost of the utility generating one kWh of electricity when the total amount it
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
SSRN Version
11
generates is x, and ms be the (monetized) environmental cost of a rooftop solar panel generating
one kWh of electricity (this does not depend on the total amount of electricity generated by
rooftop solar). Using x to parametrize m(x)
u
allows us to capture the non-linear relationship between
environmental cost and amount of electricity supplied by the utility. This environmental cost can,
for instance, be estimated using the social cost of carbon and other particulate matter emissions.
We include both these considerations and write R’s objective function as:
Problem P1:
max
⃗z
c0
uE0 −cz
uEz −cz
s∆z
E
|
{z
}
∆W F =Financial Welfare Improvement
+
m0
uE0 −mz
uEz −ms∆z
E
|
{z
}
∆W E=Environmental Welfare Improvement
.
(3)
The ﬁnancial beneﬁt from solar adoption crucially depends on the values of cz
u and c0
u relative
to cz
s. Solar production typically peaks around mid-day, creating the so-called duck curve (Jeﬀ,
St. John, 2016), and thus does not generally shave oﬀpeak load (which typically occurs in the
early evening) or displace the base load generators during low load periods (early in the morning).
We estimate levels of cz
u and cz
s in Section 5 and ﬁnd that cz
s is typically higher than cz
u unless
rooftop solar exclusively displaces the most expensive electricity sources. Therefore, we expect
∆W F to be negative. Inducing an outcome with negative improvement in ﬁnancial welfare ∆W F
implicitly acknowledges that there is a ﬁnancial cost that society must bear in order to achieve
stronger improvements in environmental welfare, represented in our model as ∆W E. As technological
improvements cause cz
s to drop, the sign of ∆W F could ﬂip. Our model is robust to either case.
It is worth pointing out that although we do not explicitly model the decisions of the utility
company, we implicitly capture any capacity changes that the utility company would need to make
in response to solar adoption through the parameters cz
u and mz
u: since these depend on ⃗z, the
impact of these capacity decisions on utility and system welfare are captured. Note also that the
regulator’s social welfare optimization problem P1 depends on the tariﬀfunction only through the
adoption outcome ⃗z that it induces. Therefore, we can break the regulator’s problem into two
steps. In the ﬁrst step, the regulator ﬁnds the adoption outcome ⃗z that maximizes social welfare
improvement by solving optimization problem P1. In the second step, the regulator seeks a tariﬀ
function to induce this optimal adoption outcome. Finding the optimal adoption outcome of P1,
⃗z∗, requires estimating the values of mz
u and cz
u for all feasible adoption outcomes ⃗z, unless mz
u and
cz
u have some special structure that can be used. Let ⃗z∗be the resulting optimal adoption outcome.
The remainder of our analysis tackles how (and whether) the regulator can induce adoption
outcome ⃗z∗by appropriately choosing tariﬀT(·), taking into account customer equity, solar company
proﬁtability, and utility company viability. We focus on the case where ⃗z∗speciﬁes that at least
one tier of customer adopts solar, as otherwise the inducement problem is trivial.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
12
SSRN Version
4.
Inducing the Optimal Adoption Outcome
We ﬁrst discuss the considerations that R must take into account when inducing adoption outcome
⃗z∗and then use these to formulate the regulator’s inducement problem. For notational convenience
we use s∗
i as shorthand for the value of si under outcome ⃗z∗.
1. Utility viability: The regulator must ensure a speciﬁed rate-of-return to the utility company.
We denote the target (possibly negative) change in utility proﬁt going from the base case to
the with-solar case as ∆U. We represent this as a constraint in R’s inducement problem:
I
X
i=1
hi
 s∗
i T(d′
i,ei,1) + (1 −s∗
i )T(di,0,0) −cz∗
u Ez∗
−(pr0 −c0
u)E0 = ∆U
(4)
2. Solar company proﬁtability: R must ensure that S earns suﬃcient proﬁt ∆S; we assume
∆S > 0. We model this as an equality constraint in R’s inducement problem: for a ﬁxed ⃗z∗and
∆U, allowing S to earn more than the target ∆S negatively impacts customers.
(ps −cz∗
s )∆z∗
E = ∆S
(5)
3. Customer equity: Since R is also responsible for customer equity she would like to minimize
the maximum increase in cash outﬂow seen by any tier of customer. This is a common fairness
criterion used in game theory and ethics credited to Rawls (Rawls, 1974). If this objective
is non-positive, then all tiers of customers (weakly) beneﬁt from the introduction of solar
and there is no cross-subsidization. We treat this as the objective function of R’s inducement
problem; R seeks the tariﬀT(·) that will induce the optimal ⃗z∗that satisﬁes:
min
T(·)
max
i
s∗
i (T(d′
i,ei,1) + psgi) + (1 −s∗
i )T(di,0,0) −pr0di.
(6)
Deﬁne ∆C = PI
i=1 pr0di −s∗
i (T(d′
i,ei,1) + psgi) −(1 −s∗
i )T(di,0,0) as the total improvement in ﬁnan-
cial welfare of the customer base. Observe that the total change in ﬁnancial welfare ∆W F = ∆S +
∆U + ∆C. Therefore, if ∆W F is negative, our imposition that ∆S be positive requires that either
(i) the utility company makes a lower proﬁt (leading to ∆U < 0); or (ii) ∆C < 0, implying that at
least one tier of customer is worse oﬀ. Note, however, that the ∆W F < 0 solution will only emerge
if it is optimal to sacriﬁce ﬁnancial welfare in favor of environmental welfare. Furthermore, as
mentioned above, technological developments leading to lower-cost rooftop solar could eventually
cause ∆W F > 0. This will allow us to achieve an outcome where all parties (the utility company,
the solar company, and customers as a whole) can be made ﬁnancially better oﬀ.
In order to formally write out the regulator’s inducement problem, we ﬁrst examine the opti-
mization problem of a tier i customer, as speciﬁed in (1). Such a customer favors adopting solar
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
SSRN Version
13
if and only if ps ≤T(di,0,0) −T(d′
i,ei,1)
gi
≜t(i) (we break ties in favor of adoption). Thus specifying
T(·) determines the t(i) values and also induces an ordering among them. For a given solar price
ps the set of tiers that adopt is {i : t(i) ≥ps}.
Now consider S’s pricing decision. The optimal choice of ps for S must be t(i) for some i ∈{1,...,I}:
If S chose some price ps between t(i) and t(j) for some i and j such that t(j) = min
k
t(k) : t(k) > ps,
then choosing price t(j) increases S’s margin and does not alter her volume (see equation (2)).
Therefore, S’s optimization problem reduces to choosing an i∗such that the proﬁt obtained by
setting ps = t(i∗) is larger than the proﬁt obtained from all other choices j ̸= i∗or choosing ps >
max
i
t(i). Note that all adopting customers pay ps; t(i) is simply a threshold value of ps up to which
a tier i customer is induced to adopt solar.
Deﬁne the adoption set A∗= {i : s∗
i = 1}. In order to induce adoption outcome ⃗z∗, ps must be
chosen so that t(i) ≥ps iﬀi ∈A∗. Deﬁne a tier i to be ‘marginal’ if ps = t(i). Let M be the set of
indices of the marginal adopting tiers. We focus on the case of |M| = 1 for expositional convenience,
although our analysis will easily generalize; let m be the index of the marginal tier. We can now
pose R’s inducement problem, folding in the household and solar company decisions as follows:
min
T(·)
max
i
s∗
i (T(d′
i,ei,1) + t(m)gi) + (1 −s∗
i )T(di,0,0) −pr0di
(7)
Subject to constraints:
t(i) = T(di,0,0) −T(d′
i,ei,1)
gi
,
∀i
(8)
I
X
i=1
hi
 s∗
i T(d′
i,ei,1) + (1 −s∗
i )T(di,0,0) −cz∗
u Ez∗
−(pr0 −c0
u)E0 = ∆U
(9)
(t(m) −cz∗
s )∆z∗
E = ∆S
(10)
(t(i) −czi
s )
I
X
j=1
It(j)≥t(i)hjgj < ∆S,
∀i : t(i) ̸= t(m)
(11)
t(i) ≥t(m),
∀i ∈A∗
(12)
t(i) < t(m),
∀i ̸∈A∗
(13)
Here, (8) deﬁnes t(i) in terms of the regulator’s decision variables, (9) ensures that U receives
the speciﬁed rate of return implied by ∆U and (10) ensures that S achieves the speciﬁed proﬁt ∆S
by choosing solar price t(m). With some abuse of notation, we let czi
s denote S’s unit cost when
the price ps is set to t(i) and the adopting tiers are j : t(j) ≥t(i). Then, (11) forms a set of incentive
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
14
SSRN Version
compatibility (IC) constraints, which ensure that S cannot make a higher proﬁt than ∆S by setting
ps = t(i) for t(i) ̸= t(m)2. Constraints (12)-(13) induce only customers in A∗to adopt solar.
This formulation is not immediately amenable to analysis because (11) has an indicator function.
Therefore, as discussed in Section 3, we solve the problem in two steps. As our ﬁrst step, we ﬁnd
the optimal solution ⃗z∗of P1. For our second step, we:
1. Enumerate all underlying orderings over the t(i) values that would result in adoption outcome
⃗z∗. These can be obtained by permuting the ordering of adopters (which we can do in exactly
|A∗|! diﬀerent ways), and for each of these orderings, permuting the non-adopters (which we
can do in (I −|A∗|)! diﬀerent ways). For example, if I = 4, and ⃗z∗speciﬁes that tiers 1 and 3
adopt, the possible orderings are: (i) t(2) ≤t(4) < t(1) ≤t(3), (ii) t(2) ≤t(4) < t(3) ≤t(1), (iii)
t(4) ≤t(2) < t(1) ≤t(3), and (iv) t(4) ≤t(2) < t(3) ≤t(1). The threshold in bold corresponds to
the marginal adopter and a strict inequality separates the adopters and non-adopters. Let O∗
be the set of these orderings and let o refer to a speciﬁc ordering in O∗. Let o(j) denote the
position of tier j in ordering o,j ∈{1,2,...,I} and m(o) denote the marginal adopter under o.
2. Solve |O∗| diﬀerent optimization problems, one to induce each possible ordering. We call this
problem P2. We then choose an ordering with the best objective value.
We can now formally write the inducement problem P2 as follows:
Problem P2:
min
T(·)
max
i
s∗
i (T(d′
i,ei,1) + t(m(o))gi) + (1 −s∗
i )T(di,0,0) −pr0di
(14)
Subject to constraints:
t(i) = T(di,0,0) −T(d′
i,ei,1)
gi
,∀i
(15)
I
X
i=1
hi
 s∗
i T(d′
i,ei,1) + (1 −s∗
i )T(di,0,0) −cz∗
u Ez∗
−(pr0 −c0
u)E0 = ∆U
(16)
t(i) ordering consistent with o
(17)
(t(m(o)) −cz∗
s )∆z∗
E = ∆S
(18)
(t(i) −czi
s )
I
X
j=1
Io(j)>o(i) in ordering o · hjgj < ∆S,∀i ̸= m(o)
(19)
Here, the set of inequalities referred to by (17) is t(i) ≤t(j),∀i,j : o(j) = o(i) + 1,i ̸= m(o);t(i) <
t(j), for i = m(o),o(j) = o(i) + 1. We discuss this formulation further in Appendix B.1.
2 We model these IC constraints as being strict rather than weak, because if S deviates to a price ps ̸= t(m), the
outcome induced is diﬀerent from the desired z. We will show in Sections 4.2-4.3 that if the tariﬀstructure is
appropriately chosen, this strict inequality does not impair the feasibility of the problem.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
SSRN Version
15
P1 always has a solution because it is unconstrained. However, whether P2 is feasible is unclear:
the tariﬀmust ensure that all constraints including the set of IC constraints (19) and the ordering
constraints (17) can hold together. This motivates our central question: Let T be the set of allowable
tariﬀfunctions from which T(·) must be chosen. How does the choice of T aﬀect the feasibility of
P2? Further, if T yields a feasible P2, can it induce an outcome free from cross-subsidization?
Definition 1. Cross-subsidization (CS): An outcome features CS if the objective value of
P2 is positive; i.e., at least one tier of customer is ﬁnancially worse oﬀin the with-solar case.
For an outcome to be free from CS requires that ∆C = ∆W F −∆S −∆U ≥0. We examine how
diﬀerent choices of T aﬀect the regulator’s ability to induce outcomes free from CS when ∆C ≥0;
speciﬁcally, is ∆C ≥0 suﬃcient to induce such a CS-free outcome?
4.1.
Non-tiered tariﬀs that discriminate between adopters and non-adopters
Many states in the U.S. (including Nevada, which we examine more closely in Section 5) have
utility companies that administer non-tiered rate schedules for residential customers. Non-tiered
tariﬀstructures have the beneﬁt of being simple to administer and therefore simple to modify in the
rate case proceedings, the process by which utility companies petition for rate changes to the PUC.
These non-tiered structures can, however, discriminate between solar adopters and non-adopters,
i.e., these two types of customers may be subject to diﬀerent rate schedules, as is the case with
NV Energy’s 2016 tariﬀin Nevada. We study such rate structures in this section.
Let T1 be the set of linear, non-tiered tariﬀstructures that discriminate between adopters and
non-adopters, i.e., they are on diﬀerent rate schedules. T1 has the following general speciﬁcation:
T(d,0,0) = rdd + r0;T(d′,e,1) = sdd′ + see + s0
(20)
We prove the following propositions. All proofs appear in Appendix A.1.
Proposition 1. Tariﬀstructure T1 cannot guarantee the feasibility of P2: There exist parame-
ters and outcomes {⃗z∗,∆S,∆U} for which P2 is not feasible for any ordering o.
Proposition 1 implies that P2 does not always have a solution under tariﬀstructure T1. While
this is discouraging, the following proposition shows that under a restriction on ⃗z∗there does exist
a feasible solution to P2, if we drop the IC constraints.
Proposition 2. In the absence of the IC constraints (11), there exists an ordering o for which
tariﬀstructure T1 guarantees the feasibility of P2 if Az∗= {i∗,i∗+ 1,...,I} for some i∗.
Proposition 2 has an important practical implication: if the solar price ps were also controlled by
the regulator R, and ⃗z∗prescribes that a contiguous block of high-generation customer tiers adopts,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
16
SSRN Version
a linear tariﬀstructure with non-tiered rates would suﬃce to satisfy the constraints of P2, as the
regulator would not have to contend with IC constraints (11). Alternatively, if the utility company
itself oﬀered rooftop solar rather than an outside ﬁrm, the IC constraints could be ignored (as the
solar price set by U would now be subject to regulation) with equation (9) suitably modiﬁed.
The intuition for this tariﬀ’s failure to achieve feasible outcomes in general is its limited ability
to transfer welfare among customers in diﬀerent tiers. In particular, its ability to make solar
attractive to some tiers and not to others while retaining IC for S is impaired by not having
tier-dependent parameters. While dropping the IC constraints leads to a special feasible case, the
current environment in the U.S. is one with unregulated solar companies. Therefore, a richer class
of tariﬀstructures is in general required. Furthermore, as we shall see in Section 5, even in cases
when P2 is feasible, T1 achieves poor CS outcomes.
4.2.
Tiered tariﬀs that discriminate between adopters and non-adopters
In states such as New Mexico (which we study in detail in Section 5) and Washington, the PUCs
have mandated that solar customers may not be assessed any additional standby, capacity, inter-
connection, or other fee or charge by the utility (NC Clean Energy Technology Center, 2017, 2019).
This implies that tariﬀs in these states may be tiered, but must operate under a single rate schedule
and feature retail net-metering: If the utility repurchased electricity at less than their retail rate
this would be considered a fee to solar adopters. Let T2 be the set of such tariﬀs.
Under such a tariﬀstructure, the appropriate rate class (not to be confused with usage tier
i ∈{1,2,...,I}) in the rate schedule is applied based on a household’s net demand (this net demand
is d −g, where g > 0 iﬀthey adopt solar). For instance, if a tier 1 household does not adopt solar,
demands an amount of electricity d1, and is placed in rate class 1, a tier 2 household who adopts
solar and has a net demand of d2 −g2 = d1 also falls into rate class 1, and is billed as such.
Let C = {1,2,...,|C|} be the set of indices corresponding to rate classes in U’s rate schedule.
Arrange this set in order of increasing (net) demand, i.e., rate class 1 corresponds to the lowest net
demand and rate class |C| corresponds to the highest net demand. In order to support customers
making endogenous solar adoption decisions, this rate schedule must contain enough rate classes
to support any possible adoption/non-adoption decision by customers. Therefore, |C| ≥I + 1.
It suﬃces to consider the tariﬀfunction T(d′,e,s) = T(c) = rcnc, where c is the index of the rate
class associated with net demand nc; nc = d for a non-adopter and nc = d′ −e = d −g for an adopter.
This tariﬀfunction is fully deﬁned by choosing rc,∀c ∈C. Having a ﬁxed cost fc that also depends
on class c reduces to our function by modifying rc to oﬀset fc,∀c.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
SSRN Version
17
Proposition 3. Corresponding to every ordering o and outcome ⃗z∗, there exists a feasible rate
schedule (rc), i.e., a tariﬀof type T2, that satisﬁes the constraints of P2.
While this tariﬀstructure can always feasibly induce an outcome characterized by {⃗z∗,∆S,∆U},
unfortunately, it cannot guarantee a CS-free outcome when ∆C ≥0.
Proposition 4. A tariﬀof type T2 cannot guarantee CS-free outcomes: there exist parameters
and outcomes {⃗z∗,∆S,∆U} for which no CS-free outcome can be generated even when ∆C ≥0.
While tariﬀstructure T2 is simple and guarantees feasibility, it cannot guarantee desirable prop-
erties with respect to customer equity. Intuitively, this tariﬀfares better than tariﬀstructure T1
because its tiered nature allows welfare transfer among tiers. However, its ability to shield cus-
tomers from cross-subsidization is limited by the fact that adopters and non-adopters may be
grouped into the same tier. Therefore, a tariﬀstructure that can guarantee CS-free outcomes must
(at least) be able to discriminate between solar adopters and non-adopters by placing them in
diﬀerent rate schedules.
4.3.
Tiered tariﬀs that diﬀerentiate between adopters and non-adopters
We now consider a tiered tariﬀstructure that presents diﬀerent rate schedules to solar and non-solar
customers. Both these attributes are present in the tariﬀstructure operated by Arizona’s APS,
where all customers face tiered rates and solar customers pay a grid access charge in proportion
to the size of their solar installation (APS Energy, 2019). We propose and study a slightly simpler
tariﬀstructure T3: one that is non-tiered for non-adopters3 and tiered for adopters. Under our
structure, solar and non-solar customers are charged the same uniform variable energy charge
based on their net energy consumption (we implicitly prescribe retail net-metering), but a solar
customer is also assessed a ﬁxed annual charge that depends on her tier i. This is equivalent, but
easier to analyze than the more common practice of the energy charge (rather than the ﬁxed cost)
depending on the customer’s tier. Thus T3 has the following general speciﬁcation:
T(di,0,0) = prdi;T(d′
i,ei,1) = pr(d′
i) −pr(ei) + fi = pr(di −gi) + fi.
(21)
Note that U can infer a solar customer’s tier by observing the value of d′
i, the energy drawn from
the grid, and contract on a ﬁxed cost based on this amount.
Because this tariﬀstructure has more parameters than T1, it might at ﬁrst seem intuitive (and
trivial) that this structure guarantees the feasibility of P2: one could correctly observe that the
3 If the Period 0 tariﬀstructure is tiered rather than having the same rate pr0 apply to all customers, our proposed
tariﬀstructure would require that non-adopters also face tiered rates.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
18
SSRN Version
ﬁxed costs for adopting tiers i can be chosen arbitrarily to adjust ∆U appropriately. However, it
is not so simple. The ﬁxed costs must also result in the prescribed solar price of ps = t(m) being
incentive compatible for S: picking ps ̸= t(m) must result in a smaller proﬁt (see (19)) than the
proﬁt from picking ps = t(m). This deviation can be made suﬃciently unattractive by ensuring that
t(i) for i ̸= m are low enough; R can achieve this by manipulating the values of fi, i ̸= m (under
T3, t(i) = pr −fi/gi). But this imposes restrictions on the ﬁxed costs fi. Nevertheless, our proposed
two-part tariﬀ, like T2, guarantees the feasibility of P2. Furthermore, it can also guarantee no CS
if ∆C ≥0.
We prove these properties using a speciﬁc version of our tariﬀ, T ∗, constructed as follows:
1. Reorder the indices such that tiers 1...m −1 do not adopt, and tiers m,...I adopt.
2. Let czAll
s
be the lowest possible value of czi
s , corresponding to all tiers adopting.
3. Set t(m) = cz∗
s +∆S/∆z∗
E , t(i) = czAll
s
,∀i < m, and t(i) = t(m),∀i > m. Express the fi values accord-
ing to the relationship t(i) = pr −fi/gi ⇔fi = gi(pr −t(i)),∀i.
4. Using these expressions for fi, observe that (16) reduces to a single linear equation in pr. Solve
this equation to obtain pr.
Proposition 5. (a) Corresponding to every ordering o and outcome {⃗z∗,∆S,∆U}, there exists
a feasible tariﬀfunction of the form T3, namely T ∗that satisﬁes the constraints of P2.
(b) When ∆C ≥0, tariﬀT ∗induces an outcome that is CS-free. Furthermore, if ⃗z∗prescribes
that the lowest demand tier does not adopt solar, T ∗is the optimal solution to P2.
TariﬀT ∗can easily be computed in closed form, and Proposition 5 shows that it is feasible for P2,
and can guarantee no CS if ∆C ≥0. Furthermore when the tier with the smallest demand does not
adopt, T ∗provides the optimal solution to P2. Therefore, we restrict our attention to T ∗.
It is natural to ask whether this tariﬀstructure’s superior performance is solely attributable to
the number of degrees of freedom it oﬀers to the regulator. The answer is no: While the non-tiered
tariﬀstructure T1 has only 5 parameters, the tiered-tariﬀstructure T2 has |C| parameters, where
|C| ≥I + 1. TariﬀT ∗has exactly I + 1 parameters, i.e., weakly fewer than T2.
Implementation as a buy-all, sell-all or feed-in-tariﬀ: Another advantage of T ∗is apparent
after some algebraic manipulation. Observe that under T ∗the ﬁxed cost for adopting tiers i ≥m,
is given by fi = fm
gm gi, that is, the ﬁxed cost is proportional to the amount of generation. For non-
adopting tiers i < m, the ﬁxed cost is gi(pr −czAll
s
), which again, is proportional to the amount of
(potential) generation. We can therefore rewrite the tariﬀfunction as follows:
T(di,0,0) = prdi
(22)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
SSRN Version
19
Table 1
Comparison of TariﬀStructures
T1
T2
T3
T ∗
Social Welfare:
Can induce target adoption
outcome to balance ∆W F and ∆W E
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Cross-Subsidization:
Positive ∆W F allows
every tier to beneﬁt
No
No
Yes
Yes
Easy to implement:
Does not require
many free parameters
Yes
5 params.
No
|C| ≥I + 1 params.
Moderate
I + 1 params.
Yes
3 params.
T(d′
i,ei,1) = pr(di −gi) + fm
gm
gi = prdi −(pr −fm
gm
)gi = prdi −psgi for i ≥m
(23)
T(d′
i,ei,1) = pr(di −gi) + (pr −czAll
s
)gi = prdi −czAll
s
gi for i < m
(24)
Therefore, this tariﬀcan be implemented as a simple buy-all, sell-all tariﬀwith two diﬀerent buy-
back rates; under such a tariﬀ, a customer sells back all their generation to the grid and receives
a speciﬁed rate for it. T ∗sets this rate at ps for adopting tiers and cAll
s
for non-adopting tiers
(note that these non-adopting customers do not end up actually selling electricity back). This
implementation is characterized by only three parameters: pr, the buyback rate ps for adopting
customers, and the buyback rate czAll
s
for non-adopting customers.
Buy-all, sell-all tariﬀs (sometimes also called feed-in tariﬀs) have been proposed in Connecticut,
Maine, and Indiana (State of Connecticut Public Utilities Commission, 2018, Kari Lyderson, 2017,
State of Maine Public Utilities Commission, 2017). While the proposal is still on the table in
Indiana, it has been repealed in Connecticut and Maine. Buy-all, sell-all tariﬀs are generally viewed
as unfavorable to the solar industry because they represent a loss of autonomy of customers, i.e.,
all energy generated by them has to be sold back to the grid. However, such tariﬀs have signiﬁcant
international acceptance, particularly in Europe and the Asia-Paciﬁc region: It is forecast that 38%
of global growth in the residential solar sector between 2019 and 2024 will come from customers on
a buy-all, sell-all tariﬀscheme (IEA, 2019). Furthermore, we have seen that T ∗has an equivalent
net-metering implementation. Finally, under this tariﬀ, any net customer surplus (when ∆C ≥0) is
distributed to customers through a decrease in retail rate pr, beneﬁting all customers.
Table 1 summarizes the comparison of tariﬀstructures T1,T2, T3, and its special case T ∗.
4.4.
Extensions
Prohibiting net suppliers: If a utility caps a customer’s annual excess to their grid usage,
adopting customers supplied by such a utility would simply install fewer solar panels and thereby
supply less excess. For instance, a customer with di = 8000, gi = 9000 and ei = 4000 would simply
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
20
SSRN Version
install fewer solar panels, making gi = 8000 and ei = 3000, so that d′
i = ei = 3000. Our numerical
results are qualitatively unaltered if we disallow net suppliers.
Investment tax credit: Interpret ps as the discounted rate that customers pay for solar power;
S obtains revenue at a rate
ps
70% per kWh. All our results continue to hold under this modiﬁcation.
Competition in the solar marketplace: Our model and analysis can be extended to compe-
tition in the solar marketplace by making suitable modiﬁcations to the solar proﬁt equation (18)
and IC constraints (19) in Problem P2. We model a marketplace where Γ solar ﬁrms (indexed by
γ) engage in symmetric Cournot competition, as in related literature (Goodarzi et al., 2019). Each
ﬁrm γ decides a quantity qγ to bring to market, and the market clears at price P(P
γ qγ), where
P(Q) is the usual inverse demand function.
For a given outcome z∗and ordering o, the regulator requires that the market clears at price t(m)
with quantity ∆z∗
E and that the solar proﬁt (in this case, the total industry proﬁt) is ∆S. Since the
solar ﬁrms are symmetric, each ﬁrm brings a quantity of ∆z∗
E /Γ to market under this equilibrium.
We can restrict our attention to total quantities Q that are consistent with the outcome z∗and
ordering o, i.e., total quantities Q for which the market clears at price t(i) for some i. In order to
realize the required equilibrium, each ﬁrm must ﬁnd it optimal to bring quantity ∆z∗
E /Γ to market,
given that all other ﬁrms do so. Deﬁne b(i) = PI
j=i hjgj −∆z∗
E
Γ−1
Γ as the amount of additional quantity
that one solar ﬁrm needs to bring to the market so that the market clears at price t(i). We replace
solar proﬁt equation (18) and IC constraints (19) by (25) and (26) respectively:
(t(m) −cz∗
s )∆z∗
E
Γ
= ∆S
Γ
(25)
(t(i) −czi
s )b(i) < ∆S
Γ ,∀i ̸= m,b(i) > 0.
(26)
Under this extension, tariﬀstructure T ∗continues to be feasible, and satisﬁes Proposition 5.
(The proof is identical.) We provide an illustrative numerical example in Appendix B.2.
Customer demand elasticity: We can adapt our model to a situation where demand is elastic
to price. We let ˜di(µi) denote the amount of electricity demanded by a tier i customer, where µi is the
average price she pays for consumed electricity (this includes payments to U and S, which depend
on T(·)). Because the tariﬀchosen by the regulator aﬀects the amount of electricity demanded by
customers, the ﬁnancial and environmental objectives in P1 are, in turn, aﬀected. In particular,
choosing adoption outcome z no longer speciﬁes cz
u because the amount of electricity that a tier
i customer demands (and hence the total demand supplied by the utility) now depends on the
speciﬁc tariﬀimplementation that realizes outcome z. Therefore, accommodating elastic demand
requires us to revisit the decoupling of P1 and P2. Under some simple regularity conditions on
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
SSRN Version
21
the function ˜di(µi), we show that T ∗continues to satisfy Proposition 5. We present all details in
Appendix A.9.
Customer parameter uncertainty: In practice, households’ usage and generation parameters
are random variables. We can relax our deterministic assumption by allowing individual households
to draw d, g, and e from a discrete distribution with I points in its support. We deﬁne a joint
probability mass function φ(d,g,e) over the space of possible values of d,g, and e and index the
support of φ(·) by i. Now, hi = H ∗φ(di,gi,ei), where H is the total number of households. In
expectation hi customers will have demand di, generation gi and excess ei. We can now reformulate
problems P1 and P2 in terms of expectations.
Heterogeneous adoption decisions within a tier: For various reasons including capital
liquidity and inertia to change, some customers belonging to a tier induced to adopt solar might
not actually adopt. Let πi be an exogenously given expected fraction of households in tier i that
would adopt solar if economically viable (endogenous determination of πi is beyond the scope of
this model). The remaining 1 −πi fraction of households in tiers i : s∗
i = 1 continue to fulﬁll their
demand from the utility directly. We then reformulate our model by replacing hi by πihi in the
solar proﬁt equations, adjusting the utility company’s rate-of-return equation appropriately, and
modifying the objective of P2 to include non-adopters in tiers induced to adopt. All results related
to T ∗continue to hold.
Strategic customer demand exaggeration to generate bill savings: It is undesirable for
a tariﬀstructure to incentivize a type i customer to “spoof” a type j customer by exaggerating her
demand in order to generate bill savings, that is, having her total outﬂow (to U and S) be reduced
by spooﬁng another tier. Therefore, we must consider the four possible ways a customer type may
spoof another customer type. We show how P2 can be modiﬁed to prevent this in Appendix A.3.
Strategic customer panel installation decisions to generate bill savings: It is undesirable
to induce solar customers to install solar capacity smaller than gi. Observe that if a tier i customer’s
generation is reduced to ˜gi < gi, her excess also is (weakly) reduced to some ˜ei ≤ei. This might
or might not alter her tier (which, recall, is measured by measuring her grid usage d −(g −e)).
Suppose it does not result in a tier alteration. In this case we can impose the constraint ps < pr so
that installing less than capacity gi will increase a customer’s bill. We shall see in Section 5 that
for realistic parameter values ps < pr holds because the prescribed ﬁxed cost fm for the marginal
tier m is positive. If the customer was able to change her tier, and therefore, the applied ﬁxed
cost by installing panels to less than capacity, we need a treatment similar to the treatment for
demand exaggeration. We describe the details in Appendix A.4. We shall see in Section 5 that for
realistic parameter values, moving to a higher tier causes customers to incur higher ﬁxed costs,
and therefore, reducing gi—even to eﬀect a change in tier—is not beneﬁcial.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
22
SSRN Version
5.
Numerical Analysis
Using data from the states of Nevada and New Mexico—where regulatory changes threaten the
rooftop solar industry—we study how the tariﬀstructures in operation perform compared to T3.
Our approach to estimating the parameters d,g,e, and h is based on household micro-data from
the U.S. Energy Information Administration’s Residential Energy Consumption 2009 Survey (U.S.
Energy Information Administration, 2009)4. We divide the set of households into four tiers in each
state. In order to estimate cs, ms, czi
u , and mzi
u we use various sources of data: (i) the existing energy
mix for each state; (ii) levelized ﬁnancial cost estimates for each energy source; (iii) greenhouse-
gas emissions estimates for each energy source; (iv) estimates of the social cost of carbon; and
(v) estimates of the monetized impact of other environmental externalities, such as health costs
associated with emissions like SOx, NOx and particulate matter. A detailed discussion of all these
estimation procedures is presented in Appendix A.5.
In Section 5.1, we use these parameters to run numerical experiments under a wide range of
settings obtained by: (i) varying the energy source displaced by rooftop solar, thereby altering
the solution to P1; (ii) changing how the ﬁnancial surplus (or deﬁcit) ∆W F implied by P1 is split
among ∆C, ∆S, and ∆U thereby altering the solution to P2; and (iii) considering two solar market
structures — monopolistic (Γ = 1) and competitive (Γ = 3, standing for the three main players –
Vivint, SunRun and SolarCity), thereby altering the solution to P2. Our experiments compare
the performance of the tariﬀstructures utilized in the states of Nevada and New Mexico to the
performance of our tariﬀT3, and to a theoretical ﬁrst-best solution to P2. As we will see, while
both states’ tariﬀs are able to feasibly generate the outcome ⃗z∗speciﬁed by P1, they induce poor
customer equity outcomes in problem P2. In contrast, our tariﬀachieves close to the ﬁrst-best
outcome. Our numerical results are qualitatively unaltered if we disallow net suppliers.
These solutions are based on the four tier customer model, which is estimated in Appendix A.5
by grouping households in the data set. As a robustness check, we compare the performance of
these solutions on the full data set with 112 discrete household types. In all our experiments we
ﬁnd that our tariﬀproduces a P1 objective and environmental welfare ∆W E much closer to the
target value than T1 and T2. Our tariﬀalso leads to a better than targeted objective value for P2.
In our experiments, T3 favors customers in preference to the utility, whereas T1 and T2 tend to favor
the utility.
4 We use the 2009 edition of the survey because the 2015 edition groups Nevada, New Mexico and Arizona together.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
SSRN Version
23
5.1.
Comparison of tariﬀstructures
As noted in Section 4, not all customers who are ﬁnancially incentivized to install solar do so; we
attempt to capture this inertia by letting πi be the proportion of tier i households that adopt solar
if ﬁnancially prudent. We estimate a reference level of πi for each tier using data from the U.S.
Energy Information Administration’s Residential Energy Consumption 2015 Survey (U.S. Energy
Information Administration, 2015). Speciﬁcally, we use data from the Paciﬁc Census Region, where
households have had signiﬁcant federal and state incentives to adopt solar (Borlick and Wood,
2014). We scale these πi values to reﬂect a target adoption scenario that we peg to Hawaii’s,
where 31% of single-family households were estimated to have installed rooftop solar as of 2018
(Feldman et al., 2018). Appendix A.8 shows the resulting πi levels. To study this situation with
partial adoption within a tier, we reformulate P1 so that the ∆z
E values accurately reﬂect the change
in energy demanded from U given adoption levels πi. An analogous reformulated version of P2 is
presented in Appendix A.6.
We now individually consider the cases of Nevada and New Mexico. Since the outcome of P1
critically depends on czi
u , which in turn depends on which electricity sources are displaced by rooftop
solar, we consider three diﬀerent scenarios: (A) Rooftop solar displaces the most widely used source
in the state; (B) Rooftop solar displaces all sources in proportion to the current energy mix in the
state; and (C) Rooftop solar displaces sources in order of their levelized cost, i.e., ﬁrst displaces
the most expensive source, and then the next most expensive source and so on. For conciseness,
we only present numerical results related to scenario (A). Our insights from scenarios (B) and (C)
are similar, and we therefore relegate their results to Appendix B.5.
We solve problem P1 for each of these three scenarios. For each solution, we then evaluate eight
sub-scenarios for P2 by choosing combinations of (i) Γ, the number of solar companies, from set
{1,3}; (ii) ∆S, the solar industry proﬁt, from the set {1,106}; and (iii) ∆C, the total ﬁnancial welfare
improvement of customers, from the set {1,106}. (Fixing ∆C and ∆S automatically ﬁxes ∆U.) For
each of these sub-scenarios, we solve P2 using the tariﬀstructure in the state, and then using our
suggested two-part tariﬀT3. We report the objective value of P2 that results from each of these
experiments, and also report the theoretical ﬁrst-best solution to P2. Since P2’s objective is to
minimize the maximum adverse ﬁnancial impact to customers, the ﬁrst-best tariﬀsolution would
divide ∆C equally over all the households.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
24
SSRN Version
Table 3
Nevada’s Experiments for Scenario (A) – Rooftop Solar Replaces Natural Gas
P1
P2
Adopting Tiers
1, 2, 3, 4
Sub-Scenario Setting
P2 Objective Value ($)
Γ
($ MM)
∆C
($ MM)
∆S
($ MM)
∆U
($ MM)
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
First-Best
Tariﬀ
Objective Value ($MM)
1
0.00
0.00
-41.30
10.9
0.0
0.0
27.82
1
0.00
1.00
-42.30
2.1
0.0
0.0
1
1.00
0.00
-42.30
9.7
-1.0
-1.2
∆W F ($ MM)
1
1.00
1.00
-43.30
0.9
-0.9
-1.2
-41.30
3
0.00
0.00
-41.30
1.8
0.0
0.0
3
0.00
1.00
-42.30
1.8
0.0
0.0
∆W E ($ MM)
3
1.00
0.00
-42.30
0.6
-0.9
-1.2
69.12
3
1.00
1.00
-43.30
0.6
-0.9
-1.2
Table 2
NV’s Base-case Supply Mix
Supply %
Natural Gas
67.43
Utility-Scale Solar
11.90
Biomass
0.13
Wind
0.79
Coal
6.27
Hydroelectric
4.75
Geothermal
8.73
5.1.1.
Nevada Table 2 shows Nevada’s electricity
mix in the base case. The most widely used electricity
source is natural gas; therefore this is the source that
rooftop solar displaces under scenario (A). The opti-
mal solution to P1 in this scenario is to induce all 4
tiers to adopt, resulting in an environmental welfare
improvement of $69.12 MM and a ﬁnancial welfare loss
of $41.30 MM.
The results of our experiments for scenario (A) are presented in Table 3. Recall that the objective
value of P2 is the impact on the most adversely aﬀected customer. As all the P2 values corresponding
to T3 are non-positive, there is no cross-subsidization. Furthermore, these values are very close to
the ﬁrst-best solution. On the other hand, under Nevada’s existing tariﬀ:
- The objective is worse under the monopolistic solar case (Γ = 1) than the corresponding objec-
tive in the competitive solar case (Γ = 3), implying that Nevada’s existing tariﬀis helped by
competition in the solar marketplace.
- An increase of either ∆C or ∆S improves the objective: the objective is at its worst value
when ∆C and ∆S are low (and all the ﬁnancial surplus goes to the utility company). This also
implies that taking ∆S = 0 does not have the same eﬀect as adding Cournot competition to
the solar market (as Cournot competition improves the objective).
5.1.2.
New Mexico New Mexico’s net-metering regulations have also seen some recent oppo-
sition (Robert Walton, 2016). As it stands, New Mexico operates a tiered retail net-metering tariﬀ
that does not allow discrimination between solar and non-solar households (NC Clean Energy
Technology Center, 2017), i.e., the tariﬀstructure treated in Section 4.2. Recall that our estimates
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
SSRN Version
25
in Table 3 categorized customers in New Mexico into four tiers. We use pr0 = $0.08822, $0.09003,
$0.09705, and $0.09858 for the rates for tiers 1, 2, 3, and 4 respectively (PNM Energy, 2018). For
the base case, we choose rate class boundaries in between the tier demand values di: rate class 1
applies to customers who demand up to 9309 kWh, rate class 2 applies to customers who consume
between 9309 and 11555.5 kWh, rate class 3 applies to customers who demand between 11555.5
and 13756.5 kWh, and rate class 4 applies to customers who demand more than 13756.5 kWh.
Now, we consider the modiﬁcations required to the tariﬀstructure in the with-solar case. Recall
that customer falling in rate class c would, under this tariﬀstructure have a utility bill of rcn + f,
where n is the net demand of the customer. From the estimates of d and g in Table 3, we compute
the net demand (d−g) values for all tiers, if they were to adopt. A tier 1 customer who adopts has
a net demand of 3031 kWh, a tier 2 customer who adopts has a net demand of 1482 kWh, a tier 3
customer who adopts has a net demand of 2356 kWh, and a tier 4 customer who adopts has a net
demand of -2001 kWh (tier 4 customers are net suppliers). In order to give additional ﬂexibility
to New Mexico’s tariﬀ, we add a ﬁfth rate class that applies to net demands of up to 5921 kWh.
This ﬁfth rate class will then apply to all households that adopt solar. 5 The table in Appendix
A.7 summarizes the rate classes under consideration.
We compare New Mexico’s tiered tariﬀstructure to a variant of our tariﬀstructure T3, featuring
a uniform ﬁxed cost f for all customers (adopters and non-adopters) across all tiers, and tier-
dependent variable costs pri that apply to tier i adopters. A tier i non-adopter faces the same
variable cost pr0 that she would face in the base-case; we do this to accommodate the fact that
pr0 varies by tier (see footnote 3 in Section 4.3). We also impose constraints to make rates pri,∀i
positive.
Table 4
NM’s Base-case Supply Mix
Supply %
Natural Gas
35.65
Utility-Scale Solar
4.13
Biomass
0.06
Wind
18.64
Coal
41.02
Hydroelectric
0.46
Geothermal
0.04
Table 4 shows New Mexico’s electricity mix in the
base case. The most widely used electricity source is
coal; therefore this is the source that rooftop solar
displaces under scenario (A). The optimal solution to
P1 in this scenario is to induce all 4 tiers to adopt,
resulting in an environmental welfare improvement of
$157.51 MM and a ﬁnancial welfare loss of $-4.15 MM.
This solution to P1 has a much lower adverse ﬁnancial
impact than the corresponding solution for Nevada, because coal is both ﬁnancially and environ-
mentally more expensive than natural gas.
5 Adding a new rate class for each net-demand usage level will implicitly enable the New Mexico tariﬀto distinguish
between solar and non-solar customers, making it equivalent to our tariﬀ.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
26
SSRN Version
Table 5
New Mexico’s Experiments for Scenario (A) – Rooftop Solar Replaces Coal
P1
P2
Adopting Tiers
1, 2, 3, 4
Sub-Scenario Setting
P2 Objective Value ($)
Γ
($ MM)
∆C
($ MM)
∆S
($ MM)
∆U
($ MM)
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
First-Best
Tariﬀ
Objective Value ($MM)
1
0.00
0.00
-4.15
83.0
0.0
0.0
153.26
1
0.00
1.00
-5.15
76.8
0.0
0.0
1
1.00
0.00
-5.15
81.4
-1.6
-1.6
∆W F ($ MM)
1
1.00
1.00
-6.15
75.1
-1.6
-1.6
-4.15
3
0.00
0.00
-4.15
55.4
0.0
0.0
3
0.00
1.00
-5.15
39.4
0.0
0.0
∆W E ($ MM)
3
1.00
0.00
-5.15
36.6
-1.6
-1.6
157.51
3
1.00
1.00
-6.15
48.3
-1.6
-1.6
The results of our experiments for scenario (A) are presented in Table 5. The observations made
for Nevada largely carry over to New Mexico’s case. However, the speciﬁc objective values are
signiﬁcantly worse under New Mexico’s tariﬀthan under Nevada’s tariﬀ, suggesting that although
the cross-subsidization eﬀect is present in both cases, it is worse when the regulator is unable to
discriminate between solar and non-solar customers.
In summary, although Proposition 1 showed that P2 might not be feasible under the non-tiered
tariﬀstructure (20), we did not encounter infeasibility in our experiments. However, while feasible,
the non-tiered linear tariﬀstructures in Nevada and the non-diﬀerentiating tariﬀin New Mexico
performed poorly compared to our tiered tariﬀstructure with respect to their ability to avoid CS.
5.1.3.
Performance on 112 tier data set In Sections 5.1.1-5.1.2, we evaluated the perfor-
mance of the tariﬀstructures on a four tier simpliﬁcation of household heterogeneity (most tiered
tariﬀstructures in the US have fewer than ﬁve tiers). We now evaluate how these tariﬀs perform,
relative to their projected performance, when the actual number of distinct household types exceeds
the number of tiers modeled. To do so, we compute the actual adoption outcomes and bill savings
induced by these computed solutions on the full set of 112 distinct household types in our data,
and present the results for Scenario (A) in Tables 6-7. The results for Scenarios (B) and (C) are
in Appendix B.5, and closely mirror the results presented in Tables 6-7.
We ﬁrst discuss the performance with respect to Problem P1. In all 48 experiments, all tariﬀs fall
slightly short of the target objective, but our tariﬀcomes closer to achieving P1’s targeted objective
than NV ’s and NM’s tariﬀs. The extent of adoption under our tariﬀ, and hence the environmental
welfare, as implied by ∆W E, is also closer to the target adoption level than the states’ tariﬀs in
most experiments (with the exception of the eight Scenario (C) experiments for Nevada).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
SSRN Version
27
Table 6
Nevada – 112-tier Performance for Scenario (A)
P1
P2
Γ
P1 Objective
($ MM)
∆W E
($ MM)
∆W F
($ MM)
∆C
($ MM)
∆S
($ MM)
∆U
($ MM)
P2 Objective
($)
Tar-
get
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
1
27.82
7.32
20.37
69.12
19.70
51.16
-41.30
-12.38
-30.79
0.00
9.05
24.62
0.00
-0.61
-0.22
-41.30 -20.82
-55.19
0.00
59.08
0.00
1
9.48
20.37
24.89
51.16
-15.41
-30.79
0.00
6.68
24.36
1.00
-0.18
0.52
-42.30 -21.91
-55.67
0.00
3.22
0.00
1
8.04
20.37
21.45
51.16
-13.41
-30.79
1.00
9.22
25.56
0.00
-0.59
-0.22
-42.30 -22.04
-56.13
-1.20
38.69
-0.21
1
9.48
20.37
24.89
51.16
-15.41
-30.79
1.00
7.73
25.30
1.00
-0.18
0.52
-43.30 -22.96
-56.61
-1.20
7.46
-0.21
3
9.48
20.37
24.89
51.16
-15.41
-30.79
0.00
6.70
24.62
0.00
-0.54
-0.22
-41.30 -21.57
-55.19
0.00
1.81
0.00
3
9.48
20.37
24.89
51.16
-15.41
-30.79
0.00
6.63
24.36
1.00
-0.18
0.52
-42.30 -21.86
-55.67
0.00
1.79
0.00
3
9.48
20.37
24.89
51.16
-15.41
-30.79
1.00
7.70
25.56
0.00
-0.54
-0.22
-42.30 -22.57
-56.13
-1.20
0.61
-0.21
3
9.48
20.37
24.89
51.16
-15.41
-30.79
1.00
7.63
25.30
1.00
-0.18
0.52
-43.30 -22.86
-56.61
-1.20
0.59
-0.21
Table 7
New Mexico – 112-tier Performance for Scenario (A)
P1
P2
Γ
P1 Objective
($ MM)
∆W E
($ MM)
∆W F
($ MM)
∆C
($ MM)
∆S
($ MM)
∆U
($ MM)
P2 Objective
($)
Tar-
get
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
1
153.26
44.83
137.99
157.41
46.47
141.79
-4.15
-1.64
-3.80
0.00
15.69
211.33
0.00
-0.41
-0.06
-4.15 -16.92 -215.07
0.00
263.92
0.00
1
44.83
137.99
46.47
141.79
-1.64
-3.80
0.00
15.24
208.13
1.00
-0.12
0.84
-5.15 -16.76 -212.77
0.00
253.46
0.00
1
44.83
137.99
46.47
141.79
-1.64
-3.80
1.00
16.69
212.33
0.00
-0.41
-0.06
-5.15 -17.92 -216.07 -1.60 262.28
-1.63
1
44.83
137.99
46.47
141.79
-1.64
-3.80
1.00
16.24
209.13
1.00
-0.12
0.84
-6.15 -17.76 -213.77 -1.60 251.83
-1.63
3
53.24
137.99
55.08
141.79
-1.84
-3.80
0.00
27.41
211.33
0.00
-0.38
-0.06
-4.15 -28.87 -215.07
0.00
217.40
0.00
3
53.25
137.99
55.08
141.79
-1.83
-3.80
0.00
24.74
208.13
1.00
-0.03
0.84
-5.15 -26.54 -212.77
0.00
217.55
0.00
3
62.61
137.99
64.67
141.79
-2.06
-3.80
1.00
15.66
212.33
0.00
-0.35
-0.06
-5.15 -17.37 -216.07 -1.60 223.77
-1.63
3
62.61
137.99
64.67
141.79
-2.06
-3.80
1.00
9.57
209.13
1.00
0.06
0.84
-6.15 -11.69 -213.77 -1.60 223.96
-1.63
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
28
SSRN Version
The performance on P2 is more nuanced: First, all tariﬀs fall slightly short of the target solar
proﬁt ∆S, but our tariﬀcomes closer to the target in all 48 experiments. Second, the value of ∆C,
under both the states’ tariﬀs and our tariﬀs, is higher than the target for all experiments. However,
this does not translate to beneﬁt for all customers under NV ’s and NM’s tariﬀs (while it does
under our tariﬀ): P2’s objective value is signiﬁcantly higher (implying a higher worst-case loss)
under the states’ tariﬀs than under ours in all experiments. Our experiments show that there may
be situations (like in New Mexico) when a four-tier tariﬀexperiences some diﬃculty with respect
to utility outcomes when applied to the entire set of 112 tiers. In this case our experiments show
both NM’s tariﬀand our tariﬀmaking a choice to sacriﬁce the utility’s proﬁt to the consumers.
(This eﬀect is more pronounced in the case of our tariﬀ.) It is conceivable that to strike a better
balance one might need a tariﬀwith a greater number of tiers. We defer this exploration of the
trade-oﬀbetween ﬁdelity (more tiers) and ease of application (fewer tiers) to future work.
6.
Conclusions and Future Work
We show analytically that a tariﬀstructure must be able to discriminate between customer tiers
and between solar and non-solar customers to achieve societal objectives while also safeguarding
customer equity. We present a simple implementation of such a tariﬀthat corresponds to a buy-all,
sell-all tariﬀ; this implementation requires the regulator to set only three parameters: one retail rate
and two buy-back rates. Thus regulators must migrate to tiered tariﬀstructures and put solar and
non-solar customers on diﬀerent rate schedules in order to induce socially optimal outcomes, and
furthermore, this migration is not necessarily diﬃcult to implement. While states such as Arizona
already have such tariﬀs, most utility tariﬀs in the U.S. do not have both these features.
Our recommended tariﬀstructure addresses our chosen objective of minimizing cross-
subsidization. For states that have fairness concerns around diﬀerentiating between customer tiers
or between solar and non-solar customers, a diﬀerent objective, and hence tariﬀstructure, may be
appropriate. This is a potential avenue for future research.
Our ﬁndings are robust to various extensions, including a competitive solar market-place and
customers’ electricity demand being elastic to price. Our work lays the foundation for several
additional extensions. For instance, our model considers a ﬂat-rate pricing scheme, rather than a
time-of-use (TOU) pricing scheme such as the one being rolled out in California. Our model also
assumes that any excess exported to the grid is compensated at the same rate. Some utilities (for
example, PG&E and Southern California Edison) compensate annual excess beyond the customer’s
annual grid usage at a lower rate. This is also a possible avenue for future work. Additionally, our
model implicitly captures the impact of utility capacity investments in response to solar adoption
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
SSRN Version
29
through cz
u and mz
u; an extension could treat these decisions as explicit outputs of the model. On
the customer side, one could modify the assumption that all customers (or an exogenously deﬁned
proportion) who are incentivized to adopt solar do so. An interesting extension would be to endoge-
nously determine the proportion of customers in a tier that would adopt as a function of savings
generated. It would also be interesting to explore the trade-oﬀbetween tariﬀimplementability (few
tiers) and accuracy (many tiers).
While this work explores a static setting, related questions can be explored in a dynamic setting,
complementing literature such as Babich et al. (2020) and Lobel and Perakis (2011). Such work
would require a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent model that captures the diﬀusion of solar among customers,
the interaction between solar adoption penetration and solar cost, and utility capacity investment
decisions. If such work also continued to capture heterogeneity in the customer base, this would
necessitate more nuanced modeling of the regulator’s optimization problem.
References
Aﬂaki S, Netessine S (2016) Strategic Investment in Renewable Energy Sources: The Eﬀect of Supply Intermittency.
Agarwal A, Cai D, Shah S, Chandy M, Sherick R (2015) A Model for Residential Adoption of Photovoltaic Systems.
2015 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting, 1–5 (IEEE).
Agrawal V, Toktay LB, Yucel S (2019) Non-Ownership Business Models for Solar Energy. Available at SSRN.
Al-Gwaiz M, Chao X, Wu OQ (2016) Understanding How Generation Flexibility and Renewable Energy Aﬀect Power
Market Competition. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management.
Alizamir S, de V´ericourt F, Sun P (2016) Eﬃcient Feed-in-TariﬀPolicies for Renewable Energy Technologies. Oper-
ations Research, 64(1):52–66.
APS
Energy
(2019)
Available
Service
Plans
(APS
Energy),
URL
https://www.aps.com/en/Residential/
Service-Plans/Compare-Service-Plans.
Aznar AY, Zinaman OR (2017) Grid-Connected Distributed Generation: Compensation Mechanism Basics. Technical
report, National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), Golden, CO (United States) OSTI Releasing Oﬃcial.
Babich V, Lobel R, Y¨ucel S¸ (2020) Promoting solar panel investments: Feed-in-tariﬀvs. tax-rebate policies. Manu-
facturing & Service Operations Management.
Bauner C, Crago CL (2015) Adoption of Residential Solar Power Under Uncertainty: Implications for Renewable
Energy Incentives. Energy Policy, 86:27–35.
Bird L, McLaren J, Heeter J, Linvill C, Shenot J, Sedano R, Migden-Ostrander J (2013) Regulatory Considerations
Associated with the Expanded Adoption of Distributed Solar.
Blackburn G, Magee C, Rai V (2014) Solar Valuation and the Modern Utility’s Expansion into Distributed Generation.
The Electricity Journal, 27(1):18–32.
Bollinger B, Gillingham K (2012) Peer Eﬀects in the Diﬀusion of Solar Photovoltaic Panels. Marketing Science,
31(6):900–912.
Borlick R, Wood L (2014) Net Energy Metering: Subsidy Issues and Regulatory Solutions. Issue Brief September.
Brown A, Bunyan J (2014) Valuation of Distributed Solar: A Qualitative View. The Electricity Journal, 27(10):27–48.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
30
SSRN Version
Brown DP, Sappington D, et al. (2017) Designing Compensation for Distributed Solar Generation: Is Net Metering
Ever Optimal? Energy Journal, 38(3):1–32.
Buhayar N (2016) Who Owns The Sun? (Bloomberg Business), URL http://www.bloomberg.com/features/
2016-solar-power-buffett-vs-musk/.
Cai DW, Adlakha S, Low SH, De Martini P, Chandy KM (2013) Impact of Residential PV Adoption on Retail
Electricity Rates. Energy Policy, 62:830–843.
California Public Utilities Commission (2020) California Public Utilities Commission (California Public Utilities
Commission), URL http://www.cpuc.ca.gov/.
Chediak
M,
Buhayar
N
(2015)
Buﬀett’s
Utility
Wins
as
Sun
Sets
on
Nevada
Home
Solar
Sub-
sidy
(Bloomberg
Business),
URL
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-12-21/
buffett-s-utility-wins-as-sun-sets-on-nevada-home-solar-subsidy.
Choudhary V, Ghose A, Mukhopadhyay T, Rajan U (2005) Personalized Pricing and Quality Diﬀerentiation. Man-
agement Science, 51(7):1120–1130.
Costello KW, Hemphill RC (2014) Electric Utilities Death Spiral: Hyperbole or Reality? The Electricity Journal,
27(10):7–26.
Darghouth NR, Barbose G, Wiser R (2011) The Impact of Rate Design and Net Metering on the Bill Savings from
Distributed PV for Residential Customers in California. Energy Policy, 39(9):5243–5253.
Darghouth NR, Wiser RH, Barbose G, Mills AD (2016) Net Metering and Market Feedback Loops: Exploring the
Impact of Retail Rate Design on Distributed PV Deployment. Applied Energy, 162:713–722.
Denholm P, Margolis RM, Drury E (2009) The Solar Deployment System (SolarDS) Model: Documentation and
Sample Results (National Renewable Energy Laboratory).
Drury E, Denholm P, Margolis R (2013) Sensitivity of Rooftop PV Projections in the SunShot Vision Study to Market
Assumptions. Contract, 303:275–3000.
Electricity Local (2019) United States Map of Electricity Deregulation (Electricity Local), URL https://www.
electricitylocal.com/resources/deregulation/.
Feldman DJ, Margolis RM, Hoskins J (2018) Q4 2017/Q1 2018 Solar Industry Update. Technical report, National
Renewable Energy Lab. (NREL), Golden, CO (United States).
Flores-Espino F (2015) Compensation for Distributed Solar: A Survey of Options to Preserve Stakeholder Value.
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Tech. Rep. NREL/TP-6A20, 62371.
Gagnon P, Sigrin B (2015) Distributed PV Adoption in Maine through 2021. Technical report, National Renewable
Energy Laboratory (NREL), Golden, CO (United States).
Goodarzi S, Aﬂaki S, Masini A (2019) Optimal Feed-In TariﬀPolicies: The Impact of Market Structure and Technology
Characteristics. Production and Operations Management, 28(5):1108–1128.
Google (2020) Google Project Sunroof (Google), URL https://www.google.com/get/sunroof#p=0.
Hu S, Souza GC, Ferguson ME, Wang W (2015) Capacity Investment in Renewable Energy Technology with Supply
Intermittency: Data Granularity Matters! Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 17(4):480–494.
IEA
(2019)
Distributed
PV
Remuneration
for
Forecast
Growth
by
Segment,
2019-
2024
(IEA,
Paris),
URL
https://www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/charts/
distributed-pv-remuneration-for-forecast-growth-by-segment-2019-2024.
Jeﬀ,
St
John
(2016)
The
California
Duck
Curve
Is
Real,
and
Bigger
Than
Expected
(GTM
Research),
URL
https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/
the-california-duck-curve-is-real-and-bigger-than-expected#gs.jkJRpq0.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
SSRN Version
31
Kari
Lyderson
(2017)
Indiana
Energy
Bill
Would
Eliminate
Net
Metering,
Move
To
Buy-All,
Sell-
All
Solar
Model
(Midwest
Energy
News),
URL
http://midwestenergynews.com/2017/01/24/
indiana-energy-bill-would-eliminate-net-metering-move-to-buy-all-sell-all-solar-model/.
Keyes J, R´abago K (2013) A Regulators Guidebook: Calculating the Beneﬁts and Costs of Distributed Solar Gener-
ation. Latham, NY: Interstate Renewable Energy Council.
Kok G, Shang K, Yucel S (2015) Impact of Electricity Pricing Policies on Renewable Energy Investments and Carbon
Emissions.
Krysti Shallenberger (2017a) Is Rooftop Solar Just a Toy for the Wealthy? (Utility Dive), URL https://www.
utilitydive.com/news/is-rooftop-solar-just-a-toy-for-the-wealthy/441373/.
Krysti
Shallenberger
(2017b)
Maine
Lawmakers
Fail
to
Override
Governor’s
Veto
of
Solar
Bill
(Utility
Dive),
URL
https://www.utilitydive.com/news/
maine-lawmakers-fail-to-override-governors-veto-of-solar-bill/448550/.
Lehr RL (2013) New Utility Business Models: Utility and Regulatory Models for the Modern Era. The Electricity
Journal, 26(8):35–53.
Linvill C, Shenot J, Lazar J (2013) Designing Distributed Generation Tariﬀs Well. Montpelier, VT: Regulatory
Assistance Project.
Lobel R, Perakis G (2011) Consumer Choice Model for Forecasting Demand and Designing Incentives for Solar
Technology.
Lowder T, Zhou E, Tian T (2017) Evolving Distributed Generation Support Mechanisms: Case Studies from United
States, Germany, United Kingdom, and Australia. Technical report, National Renewable Energy Lab.(NREL),
Golden, CO (United States).
Meyers
G
(2015)
SolarCity
Accounts
for
1/3
of
U.S.
Residential
Rooftop
Instal-
lations
in
2015
(CleanTechnica),
URL
https://cleantechnica.com/2015/12/29/
solarcity-accounts-for-13-of-us-residential-rooftop-installations-in-2015/.
Mike Munsell (2017) US Solar Market Grows 95% in 2016, Smashes Records (GTM Research), URL https://www.
greentechmedia.com/articles/read/us-solar-market-grows-95-in-2016-smashes-records#gs.qK=_kE4.
Moore J, Keen J, Apt J (2016) The Sustainability of Net Metering. Electric Markets Research Foundation.
NC Clean Energy Technology Center (2017) Net Metering Program Overview (NC Clean Energy Technology Center),
URL http://programs.dsireusa.org/system/program/detail/284.
NC Clean Energy Technology Center (2019) Net Metering Program Overview (NC Clean Energy Technology Center),
URL http://programs.dsireusa.org/system/program/detail/42.
NC Clean Energy Technology Center, Meister Consultants Group (2019) The 50 States of Solar.
Oﬃce of Energy Eﬃciency & Renewable Energy (2020) Residential and Commercial ITC Factsheets (Oﬃce
of
Energy
Eﬃciency
&
Renewable
Energy),
URL
https://www.energy.gov/eere/solar/downloads/
residential-and-commercial-itc-factsheets.
Ong S, Denholm P, Doris E (2010) The Impacts of Commercial Electric Utility Rate Structure Elements on the
Economics of Photovoltaic Systems (National Renewable Energy Laboratory).
PNM Energy (2018) Rates (PNM Energy), URL https://www.pnm.com/rates.
Pyper
J
(2016)
Nevada
Regulators
Restore
Retail-Rate
Net
Metering
in
Sierra
Paciﬁc
Territory
(Greentech
Media),
URL
https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/
nevada-regulators-retore-retail-rate-net-metering-in-sierra-pacific-territo.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Singh, Scheller-Wolf: That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities with Rooftop Solar
32
SSRN Version
Rai V, Sigrin B (2013) Diﬀusion of Environmentally-Friendly Energy Technologies: Buy Versus Lease Diﬀerences in
Residential PV Markets. Environmental Research Letters, 8(1):014022.
Rawls J (1974) Some reasons for the maximin criterion. The American Economic Review, 64(2):141–146.
Reisinger D (2019) Why Tesla Slashed Its Solar Panel Prices (Fortune), URL https://fortune.com/2019/05/02/
tesla-solar-panels-price-cut/.
Reiss PC, White MW (2005) Household Electricity Demand, Revisited. The Review of Economic Studies, 72(3):853–
883.
Ritzenhofen I, Birge JR, Spinler S (2016) The Structural Impact of Renewable Portfolio Standards and Feed-in Tariﬀs
on Electricity Markets. European Journal of Operational Research, 255(1):224–242.
Robert Walton (2016) New Mexico Settlement Blocks Solar Fees Proposed by Xcel Energy (Utility Dive), URL https:
//www.utilitydive.com/news/new-mexico-settlement-blocks-solar-fees-proposed-by-xcel-energy/
424357/.
Satchwell A, Mills A, Barbose G (2015) Quantifying the Financial Impacts of Net-Metered PV on Utilities and
Ratepayers. Energy Policy, 80:133–144.
Shahan
Z
(2016)
Cost
Of
Solar
Systems
From
SolarCity
vs
Sunrun
&
Vivint
Solar,
and
Cost
Per
Watt
Of
Solar
Sales/Acquisition
(Clean
Technica),
URL
https://cleantechnica.com/2016/07/19/
cost-solarcity-solar-systems-vs-sunrun-vivint-solar-cost-per-watt-solar-salesacquisition/.
State of Connecticut Public Utilities Commission (2018) Substitute Senate Bill No. 9 (State of Connecticut Pub-
lic Utilities Commission), URL https://www.cga.ct.gov/2018/act/pa/pdf/2018PA-00050-R00SB-00009-PA.
pdf.
State
of
Maine
(2019)
Governor
Mills
Signs
Legislation
to
Restore
Net
Meter-
ing
&
Incentivize
Growth
of
Solar
Power
in
Maine
(State
of
Maine
Oﬃce
of
Governor
Janet
T.
Mills),
URL
https://www.maine.gov/governor/mills/news/
governor-mills-signs-legislation-restore-net-metering-incentivize-growth-solar-power-maine.
State
of
Maine
Public
Utilities
Commission
(2017)
Amendments
to
Net
Energy
Billing
Rule
(State
of
Maine Public Utilities Commission), URL https://www.insourcerenewables.com/sites/default/files/
993e4acc-029b-4ea4-a38a-885dec26e0cc-1.pdf.
Sunar N, Birge JR (2018) Strategic Commitment to a Production Schedule with Uncertain Supply and Demand:
Renewable Energy in Day-Ahead Electricity Markets. Management Science.
Sunar N, Swaminathan JM (2018) Net-Metered Distributed Renewable Energy: A Peril for Utilities? Kenan Institute
of Private Enterprise Research Paper, (18-24).
Sundararajan A (2004) Nonlinear Pricing of Information Goods. Management Science, 50(12):1660–1673.
SunRun (2019) Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) (SunRun), URL https://www.sunrun.com/go-solar-center/
solar-terms/definition/power-purchase-agreement.
US Energy Information Administration (2009) 2009 RECS Survey Data (EIA), URL https://www.eia.gov/
consumption/residential/data/2009/.
US Energy Information Administration (2015) 2015 RECS Survey Data (EIA), URL https://www.eia.gov/
consumption/residential/data/2015/.
Varian HR (1989) Price discrimination. Handbook of Industrial Organization, 1:597–654.
Wu OQ, Kapuscinski R (2013) Curtailing Intermittent Generation in Electrical Systems. Manufacturing & Service
Operations Management, 15(4):578–595.
Zhou Y, Scheller-Wolf AA, Secomandi N, Smith S (2014) Managing Wind-Based Electricity Generation in the Presence
of Storage and Transmission Capacity.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities
with Rooftop Solar
Supporting Material
A.1
Proofs
A.1.1
Proof by Counter-Example for Proposition 1
We prove Proposition 1 by showing the following counter-example with three tierses of customers. Under
this tariﬀstructure, we have t(i) = dird+r0−((di+ei−gi)sd+eise+s0)
gi
. Let ⃗z∗specify that tiers 2 and 3 adopt and
class 1 does not adopt. Let h1 = 4000, h2 = 250, h3 = 1000, d1 = 1000, d2 = 2000, d3 = 3000, g1 = 500, g2 =
1000, g3 = 1500, e1 = 200, e2 = 400, e3 = 600. Let cz
s = cs, ∀⃗z. R can choose between two possible orderings:
Under ordering o1, t(1) < t(2) ≤t(3), and m(o1) is 2, while under ordering o2, t(1) < t(3) ≤t(2), and m(o2)
is 3. It is straightforward to show infeasibility under both these orderings. Interested readers may refer to
the details presented in Appendix B.3.
A.1.2
Proof of Proposition 2
To prove this property, we choose a number ϵ > 0 and consider a net-metering tariﬀsystem (where customers
pay a variable charge proportional to their net energy usage). We choose the ordering t(i) ≤t(j), ∀i < j, j ̸=
m and t(m −1) < t(m), which is consistent with tiers m, m + 1, . . . , I being adopters. Setting rd = sd,
se = −sd, and r0 = s0 −ϵ, the ordering constraints t(i) ≤t(j) simplify to sd −ϵ
gi < sd −
ϵ
gj , which is true,
because gi < gj. This leaves us with a linear system of the form Ax = b with ﬁve unknowns: rd, sd, se, r0,
and s0. Since the rows of A are linearly independent, P2 is feasible under this ordering.
A.1.3
Proof of Proposition 3
This proof proceeds in two parts. In the ﬁrst part, we will show that ignoring the set of equations (15) and
(16), we can always ﬁnd a set of t(i) values that satisfy (17)-(19). In the second part, we will show that
corresponding to the set of t(i) values found, we can ﬁnd rc, ∀c ∈C that satisfy (15) and (16) .
Part 1: First, re-index the usage tiers so the index matches the ordering o. Note that after re-ordering,
we no longer have that gi ≤gi+1∀i ∈{1, 2, . . . , I −1}. Now, observe that (17) can be rewritten as t(i) ≤
t(i + 1), ∀i ∈{1, 2, . . . , I −1} −m(o) and t(m(o) −1) < t(m(o)).
Equation (18) can be rewritten as
(t(m(o))−cs) PI
i=m(o) higi = ∆S and constraints (19) can be rewritten as (t(m(o))−cz∗
s ) PI
i=m(o) higi = ∆S
and constraints (19) can be rewritten as (t(i)−czi
s ) PI
j=i hjgj < ∆S∀t(i) ̸= t(m(o)). With some manipulation,
we obtain:
t(i) < t(i + 1)∀i ∈{1, 2, . . . , I −1}
(27)
t(m(o)) = cz∗
s +
∆S
PI
i=m(o) higi
(28)
t(i) < czi
s +
∆S
PI
j=i hjgj
, ∀t(i) ̸= t(m(o))
(29)
Inequalities (29) provide upper bounds on all the t(i) values, and (28) pins down the value of t(m(o)). Notice
that these upper bounds are increasing in i, because ∆S > 0, PI
j=i hjgj is decreasing in i and czi
s is increasing
in i. Therefore, ∃t(i)∀i ∈{1, 2, . . . , I −1} that respect (27) and the speciﬁed upper bounds.
S.1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Part 2: Once a set of values t(i) is found, we need to map them to rate class tariﬀs rc. We begin by
transforming the tariﬀstructure T2 to include a ﬁxed cost f, i.e., T(d′, e, s) = r′
c(d′ −e) + f, where c is the
rate class corresponding to net demand level d′ −e. Note that the original rc values can be recovered from
the transformed r′
c values such that the tariﬀT(d′, e, s) is unchanged: rc = r′
c +
f
d′−e. Next, we examine the
set of equations (15) under this transformed tariﬀ. Each of these I equations takes the form:
t(i) = r′
mdi + f −(r′
n(di −gi) + f)
gi
= r′
m(di
gi
) + r′
n(di −gi
gi
),
(30)
where m is the rate class corresponding to net usage level di, and n is the rate class corresponding to net
usage level di −gi. Taken together, these I equations constitute an under-determined linear system of the
form A⃗r′ = ⃗t, where r′ is a |C| dimensional vector of rc values, ⃗t is an I dimensional vector of t(i) values, and
A is a matrix with I rows and |C| > I columns. If the rows of A are linearly independent, then the system has
an inﬁnite number of solutions. For the sake of contradiction, assume that the rows are linearly dependent.
Then, there must exist an I dimensional vector ⃗λ ̸= ⃗0I×1 such that ⃗λT A = ⃗01×|C|. Let m1 = argmax
i
di.
Let c1 be the column in A corresponding to the rate class into which a tier m1 customer would fall if they did
not adopt solar. This column has exactly one non-zero entry because no other household can fall into this
rate class, whether they adopt solar or not. Let w1 be the index of the row in A that contains this non-zero
entry. Then, it must be that the wth
1 entry of ⃗λ is 0 in order for the cth
1 entry of ⃗λT A to be 0. Therefore, the
vector ⃗λT A is unaltered if we replace all entries in the wth
1 row of A by zero. Now, this same argument can
be applied repeatedly to assert that all other entries of ⃗λ must also be zero: choose m2 = argmax
i̸=m1
di, ﬁnd
the index c2 of the column corresponding to the rate class to which a tier m2 customer would belong if it did
not adopt solar, and observe that exactly one row corresponding to this column now has a non-zero entry
(recall that we changed all entries in row w1 to 0). Let w2 be the index of this row. We can assert that the
wth
2 entry of ⃗λ = 0. By repeating this procedure, we can assert that all entries of ⃗λ are 0. This contradicts
our assumption, and therefore, the rows of A are linearly independent. Therefore, we can obtain values of r′
c
consistent with the equations (30). These values can then be substituted in (16) to ﬁnd a feasible f. Now,
we use the transformation rc = r′
c +
f
d′−e to ﬁnd the equivalent un-transformed tariﬀparameters rc. Note
that since (30) is independent of f, it continues to hold when we replace r′
c by rc. Further, since the tariﬀs
T(d′, e, f) are invariant under this transformation, the utility payments, and hence (16), are unchanged.
A.1.4
Proof by Counter-Example for Proposition 4
We prove Proposition 4 by showing the following counter-example with three tiers of customers. Let h1 =
445, h2 = 218, h3 = 1000, d1 = 500, d2 = 681, d3 = 1024, g1 = 100, g2 = 181, g3 = 343, pr0 = 0.1, ∆S = 1, cz
s =
3/40, ∀z. With these parameters, there are four possible values of net demand for a household:
1. Tier 1 household adopts: Net demand = d1 −g1 = 400.
2. Tier 1 household does not adopt, or tier 2 household adopts: Net Demand = d1 = d2 −g2 = 500.
3. Tier 2 household does not adopt, or tier 3 household adopts: Net Demand = d2 = d3 −g3 = 681.
4. Tier 3 household does not adopt: Net Demand = d3 = 1024.
Therefore, U’s rate schedule must specify 4 diﬀerent rate classes that apply at each of these net demand
levels. Let the rates corresponding to these rate class levels be r1, r2, r3, and r4 respectively. To make this
concrete, let rate r1 apply to net-demand levels 0-450 kWh, r2 apply to net-demand levels 450-550 kWh, r3
apply to net-demand levels 550-850 kWh and r4 apply to net-demand levels larger than 850 kWh.
t(1) = r1 + (r2 −r1)d1
g1
; t(2) = r2 + (r3 −r2)d2
g2
; t(3) = r3 + (r4 −r3)d3
g3
Let ∆U be chosen so that ∆C = 0. Therefore, customers as a whole gain exactly 0. It is now straightforward
to show that customer tiers 1, 2, and 3 cannot all be ﬁnancially worse oﬀby an amount arbitrarily close
to 0 after solar adoption. Interested readers may refer to Appendix B.4 for details. Therefore, this tariﬀ
structure does not allow R to induce a CS-free outcome.
S.2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

A.1.5
Proof of Proposition 5
Part (a): We show this constructively. First, observe that under this tariﬀstructure, equation (15) simpliﬁes
to t(i) = pr −fi/gi, ∀i.
Now, observe that this schedule of ﬁxed costs respects the ordering that the
t(i) values are required to have, because czAll
s
≤cz∗
s
< t(m). Further, the IC constraints are respected:
setting a solar price of t(i) = czAll
s
, i < m brings S non-positive proﬁt (because czAll
s
≤czi
s , ∀i), and since
t(i) = t(j), ∀i, j ≥m, the IC constraints naturally hold.
Part (b): We begin by proving Lemma 1, which is useful in examining the properties of T ∗.
Lemma 1. Consider an adopting tier i under tariﬀstructure (21). We have gipr −gips −fi ≥0.
Proof: We have that ps = t(m) = pr −fm
gm . For all adopting tiers i, t(m) ≤t(i) ⇔fm
gm ≥fi
gi (from (15)).
Therefore, gipr −gips −fi = gipr −gi(pr −fm
gm ) −fi = gi
fm
gm −fi ≥0.
Now, to demonstrate the ability of tariﬀT ∗to induce CS-free outcomes, let us examine what happens
to the cash outﬂow of every tier under this schedule of rates. For a non-adopting tier i < m, the decrease
in cash outﬂow (and therefore beneﬁt to a customer in the tier) is (pr0 −pr)di. For an adopting tier, the
decrease in cash outﬂow is pr0di −(pr(di −gi) + fi + psgi) = (pr0 −pr)di + prgi −fi −psgi ≥(pr0 −pr)di
from Lemma 1.
Accordingly, it is suﬃcient for us to now show that pr ≤pr0 under this schedule when ∆C ≥0. We have
∆C = PI
1 hi(pr0 −pr)di ⇔pr = pr0 −
∆C
PI
1 hidi . Therefore, when ∆C ≥0, pr ≤pr0.
Now, we show that T ∗is the optimal solution to P2 if ∆C ≥0 and the lowest demand tier does not
adopt. Recall that for tiers i that do not adopt, the beneﬁt is (pr0 −pr)di. For tiers that do adopt, the
beneﬁt is (pr0 −pr)di + prgi −fi −psgi. From Lemma 1, prgi −fi −psgi ≥0. Therefore, the smallest
beneﬁt accrues to the tier with the lowest di if it does not adopt (from the (pr0 −pr)di term; since under T ∗,
pr ≤pr0). A household of this tier is best oﬀif pr is as low as possible. Note that the total customer surplus
∆C is ﬁxed, and how it is distributed among the tiers is controlled by pr and the fi values for adopting
tiers. By setting fi values in order to make the prgi −fi −psgi values 0 for adopting tiers, we can ensure
that ∆C is constituted of the (pr0 −pr)di terms. TariﬀT ∗does exactly this: adopting tiers face ﬁxed costs
fi = fm
gm gi = (pr −ps)gi. Therefore, T ∗ensures that ∆C is entirely constituted of the (pr0 −pr)di terms.
A.2
Modeling purchase as an alternative to PPA
As an alternative to a PPA model, S could sell solar to customers using an outright sales model. We now
describe how our model and analytical results can be extended to accommodate this alternative approach.
First, we require a richer characterization of customers. Deﬁne the rooftop area available to a tier i
customer as ρi (measured, for example in ft2). Based on the amount of available sunlight she receives,
unit area of installed rooftop solar panels generates an amount of electricity ηi per year. Therefore, a tier
i customer has an annual generation of gi = ρiηi if she installs solar (of which we continue to assume ei is
excess). In this setting, S sets an annualized purchase price β per unit area of solar, so that an adopting
tier i customer pays S $βρi annually. Similarly, redeﬁne cz
s to be measured on the basis of the area of panels
that S sells.
The proofs of Propositions 2, 3, and importantly, 5 continue to hold under this model. They follow a
similar structure, with some minor modiﬁcations First, under this alternative model, a tier i customer now
adopts if and only if β ≤T (di,0,0)−T (d′
i,ei,1)
ρi
= t(i). Therefore t(i) is now the maximal annualized price of
solar (per unit area) that S can charge to induce customer i to adopt. As with the original model, S will
set a price β equal to t(i) for some i. The solar proﬁt given by equation (10) should now be replaced by the
equation (t(m) −cz
s) PI
i=1 sz
i hiρi = ∆S. Similarly, the IC constraints should be replaced by the constraints
(t(i) −czi
s ) PI
i=1 It(j)≥t(i)hiρi < ∆S, ∀t(i) ̸= t(m). Now, we make the following modiﬁcations to our proofs:
- Proposition 2: Instead of ordering tiers by increasing gi, we order them by increasing ρi. The t(i)
ordering constraints now simplify to sdηi −ϵ
ρi < sdηj −
ϵ
ρj , ∀i < j. The rest of the proof is unaltered.
- Proposition 3: In Part 1, equation (28) is suitably rewritten, and inequalities (29) are rewritten
as t(i) < czi
s +
∆S
PI
j=i hjρj . These upper bounds are increasing in i because czi
s is increasing in i and
S.3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

PI
j=i hjρj is decreasing in i. In Part 2, (30) takes the form t(i) = rm( di
ρi ) + rn( di−gi
ρi
) + β
ρi . The
additional terms
β
ρi do not depend on n and m and hence do not aﬀect the rest of the proof.
- Proposition 5: Set t(m) = cz∗
s +
∆S
PI
j=m hjρj , t(i) = t(m), ∀i > m, and t(i) = czAll
s
, ∀i < m. This clearly
satisﬁes the IC constraints and the ordering constraints. For part (b), ﬁrst, rewrite the statement of
Lemma 1 as prgi −fi −βρi ≥0 for every adopting tier i. For these tiers, the t(i) ordering constraints
require that t(i) = prgi−fi
ρi
≥t(m) = β, which proves the lemma. Under T ∗, the decrease in the cash
outﬂow of every non-adopting tier is the same as in the PPA system, while the decrease in the cash
outﬂow of every adopting tier is pr0di −prdi + prgi −fi −βρi ≥(pr0 −pr)di from Lemma 1. Since
∆C = PI
i hi(pr0 −pr)di > 0, it is immediate that pr is smaller than pr0.
A.3
Preventing customers from exaggerating demand
(i) Non-Solar to Non-Solar:
Non-solar customer i can appear to be non-solar customer j by exagger-
ating her demand to ˜di = dj > di. However, doing so increases her bill from prdi to prdj > prdi, so
she will not do so.
(ii) Non-Solar to Solar:
Non-solar customer i can appear to belong to a tier j that adopts solar by
installing solar that generates gi and appearing to have a grid usage of d′
j = dj −gj + ej. To do so, she
must alter her demand to ˜di = (dj −gj + ej) + gi −ei. This is undesirable if ˜di > di ⇒(dj −gj + ej) >
(di −gi + ei). To prevent this from happening, we must ensure that prdi < pr( ˜di −gi) + fj + psgi =
pr(dj −gj + ej −ei) + fj + psgi. But we have that prdi < pr(di −gi) + fi + psgi. Therefore, it is
suﬃcient for us to choose tariﬀparameters such that:
pr(di −gi) + fi < pr(dj −gj + ej −ei) + fj.
(31)
(iii) Solar to Non-Solar:
Solar customer i can appear to be a non-solar customer j by altering her
demand di to ˜di = dj. This is undesirable if dj > di. To prevent this from happening, we must ensure
that pr(di −gi) + fi + psgi < prdj. Since tier i adopts, we have that pr(di −gi) + fi + psgi ≤prdi.
Since dj > di, prdi < prdj; therefore, an adopter i will not spoof a non-adopter j.
(iv) Solar to Solar:
Solar customer i can appear to be another solar customer j by appearing to have a
grid usage of d′
j = dj −gj + ej. To do so, she must alter her demand to ˜di = (dj −gj + ej) + gi −ei.
This is undesirable if ˜di > di ⇒(dj −gj + ej) > (di −gi + ei). To prevent this, we must ensure that
pr(di −gi) + fi + psgi < pr( ˜di −gi) + fj + psgi, which is identical to (31).
Such spooﬁng behaviors can be eliminated in various ways. For example, constraint (31) could be added to
P2 for tiers falling into (ii) and (iv) above, that is, for all tiers i, j such that dj −gj + ej > di −gi + ei and
either i is a non-adopter and j is an adopter, or both i and j are adopters. Whether P2 remains feasible
under these constraints depends on the speciﬁc parameters under consideration. We show in Section 5 that
P2’s feasibility and CS outcome are unaﬀected by including these constraints for realistic parameter values.
If R does not enforce this constraint in P2, she can use it to check if the solution obtained is exposed to
such spooﬁng behavior. Alternatively, U could assign a tier not just by measuring grid usage, but also by
measuring net demand di −gi. Except under pathological parameter values, simply exaggerating demand
will not allow a type i customer to mimic a type j customer on both these dimensions.
A.4
Preventing customers from installing inadequate solar
Let us assume that for every possible ˜gi < gi, R can infer the resulting excess ˜ei based on the customer’s
usage proﬁle over the day. Such a customer can spoof a tier j customer by choosing capacity ˜gi such that
di −˜gi + ˜ei = dj −gj + ej. For all such pairs of ˜gi, ˜ei values, impose constraint (32), in addition to fm > 0.
pr(di −gi) + fi + psgi < pr(di −˜gi) + fj + ps ˜gi
(32)
S.4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Note that we need not consider the possibility of a customer altering both di and gi to exaggerate her grid
usage d′
i: Decreasing gi by one unit increases her cash outﬂow by pr −ps, while increasing di by one unit
increases her cash outﬂow by pr, which is larger than pr −ps.
A.5
Estimation of Parameters for Numerical Study
Customer parameters: We estimate customer parameters using household micro-data from the U.S. En-
ergy Information Administration’s Residential Energy Consumption 2009 Survey (U.S. Energy Information
Administration, 2009). This survey contains responses from 112 single-family housing units in the states
of Nevada and New Mexico (that appear as a single group in the data). The 2009 data-set pre-dates the
solar market uptake, and our resulting estimates are therefore not aﬀected by household adoption decisions.
For each housing unit, we estimate the value gi: we take the total area of each house in square feet, as
reported in the data set, and divide by the number of stories to obtain an estimate of the total roof area.
Then, we assume that each square foot of panel area can generate 9 Watts of electricity when the sun is
shining (Solar-Estimate, 2017) to obtain the rated power output of solar panel installations. This estimate
is an approximation of installed capacity, because total household area reported in the survey also includes
basements and attics, where they are present. Moreover, not all available roof space is typically usable for
solar panels. Accordingly, we correct this estimate (as a ﬁrst approximation) by a single multiplicative factor
(24/90) such that installation sizes so obtained are roughly in the 3 kW - 10 kW range (Fu et al., 2018). We
multiply this installation capacity by the estimated annual number of hours of sun (2190 for Nevada and 2471
hours for New Mexico) to estimate gi (SolarDirect, 2016). We group these households into 4 roughly equally
sized buckets (i = 1 . . . 4) based on their generation capacity. Within each bucket i, we compute the average
energy demanded, di and the average generation capacity gi. We compute bucket size hi as the proportion
of these households belonging to generation bucket i (we normalize the total number of households to 1).
Using the U.S. Department of Energy data on hourly residential load in a typical meteorological year
for cities in Nevada and New Mexico (US Department of Energy, 2013), we ﬁnd that residences in Nevada
typically consume about µ = 29% of their demand between the hours of 11 a.m. and 6 p.m., typical hours
for solar reliance. This ﬁgure is about µ = 34% for New Mexico. Since we do not have this data broken
down by household tier, we assume that all houses consume this proportion of their demand when the sun
is shining, and use this to estimate ei as max (0, gi −µdi). The results of this exercise are in Tables 2-3.
Table 2: Estimated parameters for the state of Nevada
Generation
Tier (kWh)
Average Generation
gi (kWh)
Average Demand
di (kWh)
Average Excess
ei (kWh)
% households
hi
0-6500
5272
8896
2636
24.11%
6500-8700
7653
10383
4577
25.00%
8700-11000
9907
13204
5995
24.11%
>11000
14483
14282
10252
26.78%
Table 3: Estimated parameters for the state of New Mexico
Generation
Tier (kWh)
Average Generation
gi (kWh)
Average Demand
di (kWh)
Average Excess
ei (kWh)
% households
hi
0-7250
5778
8810
2765
21.42%
7250-9500
8326
9808
4971
24.11%
9500-12250
10947
13303
6397
26.78%
>12250
16212
14210
11352
27.68%
Cost parameters:
czi
u : For this, we use the low-end levelized cost estimates of various sources of electricity from Lazard (2017),
weighted by the energy mix in each state (U.S. Energy Information Administration, 2019a,b). The obtained
cost parameters are shown Table 4.
czi
s : First, we estimate the lifetime production of every Watt of installed capacity. We use a 30 year lifetime
(SolarCity, 2017) for solar systems, with output degrading at a rate of 0.5% per year (Jordan et al., 2010)
S.5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

and an average of 1754 hours of sun in the U.S. (SolarDirect, 2016). This gives us an lifetime production of
of 39200 kWh of output per kW of installed capacity. Next, we use Sunrun’s ﬁnancial declarations from the
third quarter (Q3) of 2019 (Sunrun, 2019). Sunrun deployed 107 MW in Q3, 2019 at a creation cost $3.28
per Watt, and 100 MW in Q3, 2018 at a creation cost of $3.34 per Watt. Therefore, the total creation cost
incurred for deployments in Q3, 2019 is $350.96 million and for deployments in Q3, 2019 is $334 million.
These deployments correspond to a lifetime output of 4194,407,643 kWh in Q3, 2019 and 3920,007,143 kWh
in Q3, 2018. Assuming the total creation cost function is linear in the number of kWh of solar deployed (Fu
et al., 2018), we obtain that the total cost function is given by TotalCost(x) = 91714285.71 + 0.061807468x.
Now, if outcome zi corresponds to a total solar deployment of x kWh in a given state (say Nevada), we
assume, for simplicity, that this corresponds to a total nationwide deployment of 50x (i.e., that Nevada
represents 1/50th of the total market). The average cost czi
s is then given by czi
s = 91714285.71
50x
+ 0.061807468
50
.
This yields czi
s estimates in the range of $0.0621 to $0.0643 for various zi combinations.
Table 4: Levelized cost/kWh
Financial
Environmental
Natural Gas
$0.045
$0.032
Utility-Scale Solar
$0.046
$0.003
Biomass
$0.055
$0.014
Wind
$0.056
$0.001
Coal
$0.060
$0.083
Hydroelectric
$0.070
$0.001
Geothermal
$0.111
$0.004
mzi
u , ms : We consider two components
that contribute to the environmental
costs: the monetized value of greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions and the monetized
value of other environmental externalities
such as the social health costs arising out
of NOx, SOx and other particulate mat-
ter emissions. We use the GHG emissions
of diﬀerent energy sources published in
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2014) and a social cost of Carbon of $62.06 per metric ton of
CO2, which we obtain by correcting the 2030 social-cost-of-Carbon estimate of $50 2007 dollars per metric
ton of CO2 (Environmental Protection Agency, 2017) for inﬂation. (Of the years for which estimates are
available, 2030 falls closest to the middle of the typical 30 year useable lifetime of a solar panel.) We obtain
the monetized value of other externalities directly from National Research Council (2010).
A.6
Reformulation of P2 for Partial Adoption within tiers
min
T (·)
max
i

s∗
i
 T(d′
i, ei, 1) + psgi −pr0di

, T(di, 0, 0) −pr0di
 
Subject to constraints:
t(i) = T(di, 0, 0) −T(d′
i, ei, 1)
gi
, ∀i
I
X
i=1
hi

s∗
i
 πiT(d′
i, ei, 1) + (1 −πi))T(di, 0, 0)

+ (1 −s∗
i )T(di, 0, 0) −cz∗
u (s∗
i (πi(di −gi) + (1 −πi)di) + (1 −s∗
i )di)

−E0 = ∆U
t(i) ordering consistent with o
(t(m) −cz∗
s )
I
X
i=1
s∗
i πihigi = ∆S
(t(i) −czi
s )
I
X
j=1
Io(j)>o(i)in ordering o · πjhjgj < ∆S, ∀i ̸= m
A.7
Rate Classes used for New Mexico
Table 5: Rate Classes - New Mexico
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Class 4
Class 5
Net demand (kWh)
0-5921
5921-9309
9309-11555.5
11555.5-13756.5
>13756.5
Rate
r1
r2
r3
r4
r5
S.6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

A.8
Values of πi used in Analysis
Table 6: Estimated π values
Generation Tier (i)
Nevada πi
New Mexico πi
1
32.72%
32.06%
2
33.56%
34.77%
3
30.95%
30.42%
4
27.10%
27.45%
A.9
Modeling Customer Demand Elasticity
Our extension requires the following conditions on ˜di(µi):
- ˜di(µi) is continuous in µi.
-
lim
µi→0
˜di(µi) = Li, for some very large Li: When electricity becomes free, customers consume a very
large, but ﬁnite amount of electricity.
-
lim
µi→∞
˜di(µi)µi = ∞: As electricity becomes more expensive, the rate of increase in average price
outpaces the rate of decrease in customers’ consumption.
To solve the problem with elastic demand, we solve an optimization problem for each compatible adoption
outcome and ordering pair, denoted by (z, o). For each such pair, we solve P3, whose objective function is a
linear combination of the original objectives of P1 and P2. Let θ(z, o) be the associated objective value. We
choose the tariﬀcorresponding to the outcome z and ordering o that result in the lowest θ(z, o).
Problem P3:
θ(z, o) = min
T (·)
h
max
i

s∗
i

T( ˜d′
i, ei, 1) + t(m)gi

+ (1 −s∗
i )T( ˜di, 0, 0) −pr0di

−λ






c0
uE0 −c(x)
u (
I
X
i=m
hi ˜di) −cz
s∆z,o
E
|
{z
}
Financial
+ m0
uE0 −m(x)
u (
I
X
i=m
hi ˜di) −ms∆z,o
E
|
{z
}
Environmental








(33)
t(i) = pr −fi
gi
,
∀i
(34)
m−1
X
i=1
hi(pr −c(x)
u ) ˜di +
I
X
i=m
hi(pr( ˜di −gi) −c(x)
u ( ˜di −gi) + fi) −
I
X
i=1
hi(pr0 −c0
u)di = ∆U
(35)
t(i) ordering consistent with o
(36)
(t(m) −cz
s)
I
X
i=m
higi = ∆S
(37)
(t(i) −czi
s )
I
X
j=i
hjgj < ∆S, ∀t(i) ̸= t(m)
(38)
First, we show that P3 remains feasible for every z and o, even when demand is elastic. This is immediate
from using schedule T ∗: the ordering constraints (36) and IC constraints (38) remain valid, as do the
constraints (34) linking fi and t(i) and the solar proﬁt constraint (37). Therefore, the feasibility of P3 depends
on the feasibility of equation (35). Note that under T ∗, a non-adopter’s total cash outﬂow is pr ˜di. Similarly,
an adopter’s total cash outﬂow is pr( ˜di −gi)+psgi +fi = pr( ˜di −gi)+(pr −fm
gm )gi +gi(pr −pr + fm
gm ) = pr ˜di,
which again, depends only on pr. In both these cases, the average price µi of consuming electricity is pr.
In T ∗, we have fi = gi(pr −t(m)), ∀i > m. Substituting this in (35) and simplfying, we obtain:
(pr −c(x)
u )
M
X
i=1
hi ˜di −c(x)
u
I
X
i=m
higi −∆U = (pr0 −c0
u)
I
X
i=1
hidi + t(m)
I
X
i=m
hi
S.7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Note that the right-hand-side of the equation is positive and independent of pr because t(m) = cz∗
s +
∆S/∆(z,o)
E
> 0. Now, consider the left-hand-side (LHS). Observe that:
-
lim
pr→0LHS = −cu(PM
i=1 hiLi) PM
i=1 hiLi + PI
i=m higi

−∆U < 0 for large enough Li.
-
lim
pr→∞LHS = ∞, because the LHS is dominated by the pr ˜di terms; all other terms are ﬁnite.
From continuity, there must exist some intermediate value of pr such that the LHS is equal to the RHS.
Therefore, P3 is feasible. It is easy to verify that Proposition 5 continues to hold with demand elasticity, as
it relies on the speciﬁc tariﬀimplementation T ∗.
References
Environmental
Protection
Agency
(2017)
The
Social
Cost
of
Carbon
(EPA),
URL
https://
19january2017snapshot.epa.gov/climatechange/social-cost-carbon_.html.
Fu R, Feldman DJ, Margolis RM (2018) US Solar Photovoltaic System Cost Benchmark: Q1 2018. Technical
report, National Renewable Energy Lab. (NREL), Golden, CO (United States).
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2014) Technology-speciﬁc Cost and Performance Parameters
(IPCC), URL https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5/wg3/ipcc_wg3_ar5_annex-iii.
pdf.
Jordan DC, Smith R, Osterwald C, Gelak E, Kurtz SR (2010) Outdoor PV Degradation Comparison. 2010
35th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 002694–002697 (IEEE).
Lazard (2017) Lazard’s Levelized Cost of Energy Analysis.
National Research Council (2010) Hidden Costs of Energy: Unpriced Consequences of Energy Production
and Use (National Academies Press).
Solar-Estimate (2017) Solar and Wind Calculations:
The Basics (Solar-Estimate),
URL https:
//web.archive.org/web/20170312080146/http://www.solar-estimate.org/?page=solar-
calculations.
SolarCity (2017) Solar Panel Lifespan (SolarCity), URL https://web.archive.org/web/20171219181848/
http://www.solarcity.com/residential/solar-energy-faqs/how-long-do-solar-panels-
last.
SolarDirect (2016) Solar Electric System Sizing - Determine the Sun Hours Available Per Day (SolarDirect),
URL http://www.solardirect.com/pv/systems/gts/gts-sizing-sun-hours.html.
Sunrun
(2019)
Sunrun
Reports
Third
Quarter
2019
Financial
Results
(Sunrun),
URL
https:
//investors.sunrun.com/news-events/press-releases/detail/192/sunrun-reports-third-
quarter-2019-financial-results.
US Department of Energy (2013) Commercial and Residential Hourly Load Proﬁles for all TMY3 Locations
in the United States (US Department of Energy), URL http://en.openei.org/doe-opendata/
dataset/commercial-and-residential-hourly-load-profiles-for-all-tmy3-locations-in-
the-united-states.
US Energy Information Administration (2009) 2009 RECS Survey Data (EIA), URL https://www.eia.
gov/consumption/residential/data/2009/.
US Energy Information Administration (2019a) Nevada State Proﬁle and Energy Estimates (EIA), URL
https://www.eia.gov/state/?sid=NV.
US Energy Information Administration (2019b) New Mexico State Proﬁle and Energy Estimates (EIA),
URL https://www.eia.gov/state/?sid=NM.
S.8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

That’s Not Fair: TariﬀStructures for Electric Utilities
with Rooftop Solar
E-Companion
B.1
Discussion of IC constraints in Problem P2
This short note establishes that the required IC constraints based on the ordering o match the formulated IC
constraints (19). First, it is easy to verify that if all the inequalities in (17) hold strictly, then the required
IC constraints (19) are identical to the formulated ones. Suppose instead that the ordering constraints do
not all hold strictly, i.e., ∃a1, a2 : o(a2) > o(a1) and t(a1) = t(a2). First, suppose a1 ̸= m(o) and a2 ̸= m(o).
Then, the required IC constraint must specify that setting ps = t(a1) = t(a2) is not in S’s favor. This is
identical to the formulated IC constraint in (19) corresponding to i = a1. The formulated IC constraint in (19)
corresponding to i = a2 is dominated by this constraint because t(a2)−c
za2
s
= t(a1)−c
za1
s
, but the summation
term corresponding to i = a2 is smaller. Therefore, the formulated IC constraint corresponding to i = a2
remains valid. Suppose instead that a1 = m(o) and a2 ̸= m(o). Then, since t(a1) = t(a2), the formulated
constraint (19) corresponding to i = a2 is not required (because choosing ps = t(a2) = t(a1) = t(m) yields
proﬁt ∆S), but is still valid because the proﬁt constraint (18) dominates it. Note that it cannot be the case
that a1 ̸= m(o) and a2 = m(o), because then we would require that t(a1) < t(a2).
B.2
Illustrative example – Solar Competition
We now illustrate the development of (25)-(26) with an example. Consider a situation with four tiers of
customers, with h1 = h2 = h3 = h4 = 1 and gi = i, ∀i. Let Γ = 2, and the outcome of P1 determine that
tiers 2, 3 and 4 adopt. Now, consider an ordering t(1) < t(4) < t(2) < t(3). Consistent with this ordering,
P(Q) is given by: (i) P(3) = t(3); (ii) P(3 + 2) = P(5) = t(2); (iii) P(3 + 2 + 4) = P(9) = t(4); and (iv)
P(3 + 2 + 4 + 1) = P(10) = t(1).
Given the outcome of P1, we want the quantity brought to market to be 9 (the market clears at price
t(4)). Therefore, each of the ﬁrms γ = 1, 2 must bring a quantity of 9/2 to market. Fixing ﬁrm γ = 1’s
quantity q1 = 9/2, ﬁrm γ = 2 can choose: (i) q2 = 1/2, clearing the market at t(2); or (ii) q2 = 9/2, clearing
the market at t(4); or (iii)q2 = 11/2, clearing the market at t(1). For ﬁrm γ = 2’s equilibrium action to be
(ii), we require:
(t(4) −c
z{4,3,2}
s
)9
2 = ∆S
2 ;
(t(2) −c
z{2,3}
s
)1
2 < ∆S
2 ;
(t(1) −c
z{1,4,2,3}
s
)11
2 < ∆S
2
EC.1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

B.3
Further details to Appendix A.1.1
We show that P2 is infeasible under orderings o1 and o2.
System of constraints under o1:
1000rd −700sd −200se + r0 −s0
500
< 2000rd −1400sd −400se + r0 −s0
1000
≤3000rd −2100sd −600se + r0 −s0
1500
(39)
1750000
2000rd −1400sd −400se + r0 −s0
1000
−cs

= ∆S
(40)
3750000
1000rd −700sd −200se + r0 −s0
500
−cs

< ∆S
(41)
1500000
3000rd −2100sd −600se + r0 −s0
1500
−cs

< ∆S
(42)
Solving for r0−s0 using equation (40), and substituting in (41) and (42), we obtain 5250000 (5cs −10rd + 7sd + 2se)+
23∆S < 0 and 700000 (5cs −10rd + 7sd + 2se) + 3∆S > 0. Let (5cs−10rd+7sd)
2
= v The above inequalities
simplify to se + v <
−23
2(5250000)∆S = −2.19048 · 10−6∆S and se + v >
−3
2(700000) = −2.14286 · 10−6∆S, which
is not possible, because ∆S > 0. Therefore, P2 is infeasible under o1.
System of constraints under o2:
1000rd −700sd −200se + r0 −s0
500
< 3000rd −2100sd −600se + r0 −s0
1500
≤2000rd −1400sd −400se + r0 −s0
1000
(43)
1750000
3000rd −2100sd −600se + r0 −s0
1500
−cs

= ∆S
(44)
3750000
1000rd −700sd −200se + r0 −s0
500
−cs

< ∆S
(45)
250000
2000rd −1400sd −400se + r0 −s0
1000
−cs

< ∆S
(46)
Solving for r0 −s0 using equation (44), and substituting in (43), we obtain:
3cs −4rd + 14sd
5
+ 4se
5 +
3∆S
1750000 < cs +
∆S
1750000 ≤3cs
2 −rd + 7sd
10 + se
5 +
3∆S
3500000
Rewriting cs +
∆S
1750000 ≤3cs
2 −rd + 7sd
10 + se
5 +
3∆S
3500000, we obtain 350000 (5cs −10rd + 7sd + 2se) + ∆S ≥0
and rewriting 3cs −4rd + 14sd
5
+ 4se
5 +
3∆S
1750000 < 3cs
2 −rd + 7sd
10 + se
5 +
3∆S
3500000, we obtain the opposite, i.e.,
350000 (5cs −10rd + 7sd + 2se) + ∆S < 0.. Therefore, P2 is also infeasible under ordering o2.
B.4
Further details to Appendix A.1.4
Let every individual household in class 1 be worse oﬀby an amount a1, and every individual household in
class 2 be worse oﬀby an amount a2. Because ∆C = 0, we have that every household in class 3 is worse oﬀ
by exactly −a1h1+a2h2
h3
. Let ⃗z∗specify that class 1 adopts, while classes 2 and 3 do not adopt. Since class
1 is the marginal customer, r2d1 + f = r1(d1 −g1) + f + t(1)g1: the class 1 customer is equally worse oﬀ
whether they adopt solar or not. Accordingly, we can write the following system of equations:
r2d1 + f = pr0d1 + a1
(47)
r3d2 + f = pr0d2 + a2
(48)
r4d3 + f = pr0d3 −a1h1 + a2h2
h3
(49)
EC.2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

We solve these equations for r2, r3, and r4. Next, we use the following proﬁt equation to obtain r1:
∆S = h1g1

r1 + (r2 −r1)d1
g1
−cs

(50)
Substituting r2 from equation (47) into equation (50), we obtain an equation for r1. Using these expressions
for r1, r2, r3, and r4, we obtain the following expressions for the t(i) values.
t(1) = 6677
89000; t(2) = −10a1 + 10a2 + 181
1810
; t(3) = −89a1
68600 −87a2
24500 + 1
10
Now, consider the two possible orderings that R could induce.
1. t(3) < t(2) ≤t(1): t(2) ≤t(1) simpliﬁes to the inequality a1 ≥a2 + 402363
89000 . Therefore, a and b cannot
both be made arbitrarily close to 0.
2. t(2) < t(3) ≤t(1): Since this ordering requires that t(2) ≤t(1), this ordering also does not allow R to
induce a CS-free outcome.
B.5
Results of Numerical Experiments for Scenarios (B) and (C)
Table 6: Nevada’s Experiments for Scenario (B) Rooftop Solar Replaces All Existing Sources, in Proportion
to Current Mix
P1
P2
Adopting Tiers
1, 2, 3, 4
Sub-Scenario Setting
P2 Objective Value ($)
Γ
($ MM)
∆C
($ MM)
∆S
($ MM)
∆U
($ MM)
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
First-Best
Tariﬀ
Objective Value ($MM)
1
0.00
0.00
-21.85
10.9
0.0
0.0
36.71
1
0.00
1.00
-22.85
2.1
0.0
0.0
1
1.00
0.00
-22.85
9.7
-1.0
-1.2
∆W F ($ MM)
1
1.00
1.00
-23.85
0.9
-0.9
-1.2
-21.85
3
0.00
0.00
-21.85
1.8
0.0
0.0
3
0.00
1.00
-22.85
1.8
0.0
0.0
∆W E ($ MM)
3
1.00
0.00
-22.85
0.6
-0.9
-1.2
58.56
3
1.00
1.00
-23.85
0.6
-0.9
-1.2
Table 7: Nevada’s Experiments for Scenario (C) Rooftop Solar Replaces Sources in Descending Order of
Levelized Financial Cost
P1
P2
Adopting Tiers
2, 3, 4
Sub-Scenario Setting
P2 Objective Value ($)
Γ
($ MM)
∆C
($ MM)
∆S
($ MM)
∆U
($ MM)
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
First-Best
Tariﬀ
Objective Value ($MM)
1
0.00
0.00
43.45
60.6
0.0
0.0
92.77
1
0.00
1.00
42.45
2.8
0.0
0.0
1
1.00
0.00
42.45
59.4
-0.9
-1.2
∆W F ($ MM)
1
1.00
1.00
41.45
1.6
-0.9
-1.2
43.45
3
0.00
0.00
43.45
1.6
0.0
0.0
3
0.00
1.00
42.45
1.6
0.0
0.0
∆W E ($ MM)
3
1.00
0.00
42.45
0.4
-0.9
-1.2
49.32
3
1.00
1.00
41.45
0.4
-0.9
-1.2
EC.3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Table 8: New Mexico’s Experiments for Scenario (B)
Rooftop Solar Replaces All Existing Sources, in
Proportion to Current Mix
P1
P2
Adopting Tiers
1, 2, 3, 4
Sub-Scenario Setting
P2 Objective Value ($)
Γ
($ MM)
∆C
($ MM)
∆S
($ MM)
∆U
($ MM)
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
First-Best
Tariﬀ
Objective Value ($MM)
1
0.00
0.00
-17.29
83.0
0.0
0.0
66.84
1
0.00
1.00
-18.29
76.8
0.0
0.0
1
1.00
0.00
-18.29
81.4
-1.6
-1.6
∆W F ($ MM)
1
1.00
1.00
-19.29
75.1
-1.6
-1.6
-17.29
3
0.00
0.00
-17.29
55.4
0.0
0.0
3
0.00
1.00
-18.29
28.5
0.0
0.0
∆W E ($ MM)
3
1.00
0.00
-18.29
38.7
-1.6
-1.6
84.13
3
1.00
1.00
-19.29
37.8
-1.6
-1.6
Table 9: New Mexico’s Experiments for Scenario (C) Rooftop Solar Replaces Sources in Descending Order
of Levelized Financial Cost
P1
P2
Adopting Tiers
1, 2, 3, 4
Sub-Scenario Setting
P2 Objective Value ($)
Γ
($ MM)
∆C
($ MM)
∆S
($ MM)
∆U
($ MM)
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
First-Best
Tariﬀ
Objective Value ($MM)
1
0.00
0.00
-3.67
83.0
0.0
0.0
150.83
1
0.00
1.00
-4.67
76.8
0.0
0.0
1
1.00
0.00
-4.67
81.4
-1.6
-1.6
∆W F ($ MM)
1
1.00
1.00
-5.67
75.1
-1.6
-1.6
-3.67
3
0.00
0.00
-3.67
41.8
0.0
0.0
3
0.00
1.00
-4.67
28.6
0.0
0.0
∆W E ($ MM)
3
1.00
0.00
-4.67
32.9
-1.6
-1.6
154.51
3
1.00
1.00
-5.67
38.4
-1.6
-1.6
EC.4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Table 10: Nevada – 112-tier Performance for Scenario (B)
P1
P2
Γ
P1 Objective
($ MM)
∆W E
($ MM)
∆W F
($ MM)
∆C
($ MM)
∆S
($ MM)
∆U
($ MM)
P2 Objective
($)
Tar-
get
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
1
36.71
10.81
26.96
58.56
18.18
43.35
-21.85
-7.37
-16.39
0.00
8.22
24.62
0.00
-0.59
-0.22
-21.85
-15.00
-40.79
0.00
39.94
0.00
1
12.68
26.96
21.09
43.35
-8.41
-16.39
0.00
6.68
24.36
1.00
-0.18
0.52
-22.85
-14.91
-41.27
0.00
3.22
0.00
1
10.81
26.96
18.18
43.35
-7.37
-16.39
1.00
9.22
25.56
0.00
-0.59
-0.22
-22.85
-16.00
-41.73
-1.20
38.69
-0.21
1
12.68
26.96
21.09
43.35
-8.41
-16.39
1.00
7.73
25.30
1.00
-0.18
0.52
-23.85
-15.96
-42.21
-1.20
7.46
-0.21
3
12.68
26.96
21.09
43.35
-8.41
-16.39
0.00
6.70
24.62
0.00
-0.54
-0.22
-21.85
-14.57
-40.79
0.00
1.81
0.00
3
12.68
26.96
21.09
43.35
-8.41
-16.39
0.00
6.63
24.36
1.00
-0.18
0.52
-22.85
-14.86
-41.27
0.00
1.79
0.00
3
12.68
26.96
21.09
43.35
-8.41
-16.39
1.00
7.70
25.56
0.00
-0.54
-0.22
-22.85
-15.57
-41.73
-1.20
0.61
-0.21
3
12.68
26.96
21.09
43.35
-8.41
-16.39
1.00
7.63
25.30
1.00
-0.18
0.52
-23.85
-15.86
-42.21
-1.20
0.59
-0.21
Table 11: Nevada – 112-tier Performance for Scenario (C)
P1
P2
Γ
P1 Objective
($ MM)
∆W E
($ MM)
∆W F
($ MM)
∆C
($ MM)
∆S
($ MM)
∆U
($ MM)
P2 Objective
($)
Tar-
get
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NV
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
1
92.77
41.51
44.18
49.32
0.83
0.39
43.45
40.68
43.79
0.00
3.15
11.55
0.00
-0.50
-0.37
43.45
38.03
32.61
0.00
203.45
0.00
1
42.16
44.18
0.84
0.39
41.32
43.79
0.00
6.54
11.37
1.00
-0.07
0.20
42.45
34.85
32.22
0.00
5.57
0.00
1
41.50
44.17
0.83
0.39
40.67
43.78
1.00
4.15
12.51
0.00
-0.50
-0.37
42.45
37.02
31.64
-1.20
202.24
-0.21
1
42.16
44.18
0.84
0.39
41.32
43.79
1.00
7.54
12.33
1.00
-0.07
0.20
41.45
33.85
31.26
-1.20
4.37
-0.21
3
42.17
44.18
0.84
0.39
41.33
43.79
0.00
6.70
11.55
0.00
-0.49
-0.37
43.45
35.12
32.61
0.00
1.61
0.00
3
42.16
44.18
0.84
0.39
41.32
43.79
0.00
6.61
11.37
1.00
-0.07
0.20
42.45
34.78
32.22
0.00
1.59
0.00
3
42.17
44.17
0.84
0.39
41.33
43.78
1.00
7.70
12.51
0.00
-0.49
-0.37
42.45
34.12
31.64
-1.20
0.42
-0.21
3
42.16
44.18
0.84
0.39
41.32
43.79
1.00
7.61
12.33
1.00
-0.07
0.20
41.45
33.78
31.26
-1.20
0.40
-0.21
EC.5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676

Table 12: New Mexico – 112-tier Performance for Scenario (B)
P1
P2
Γ
P1 Objective
($ MM)
∆W E
($ MM)
∆W F
($ MM)
∆C
($ MM)
∆S
($ MM)
∆U
($ MM)
P2 Objective
($)
Tar-
get
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
1
66.84
19.32
60.14
84.13
24.84
75.78
-17.29
-5.52
-15.64
0.00
15.69
211.33
0.00
-0.41
-0.06
-17.29
-20.80
-226.91
0.00
263.92
0.00
1
19.32
60.14
24.84
75.78
-5.52
-15.64
0.00
15.24
208.13
1.00
-0.12
0.84
-18.29
-20.64
-224.61
0.00
253.46
0.00
1
19.32
60.14
24.84
75.78
-5.52
-15.64
1.00
16.69
212.33
0.00
-0.41
-0.06
-18.29
-21.80
-227.91
-1.60
262.28
-1.63
1
19.32
60.14
24.84
75.78
-5.52
-15.64
1.00
16.24
209.13
1.00
-0.12
0.84
-19.29
-21.64
-225.61
-1.60
251.83
-1.63
3
23.00
60.14
29.44
75.78
-6.44
-15.64
0.00
27.41
211.33
0.00
-0.38
-0.06
-17.29
-33.47
-226.91
0.00
217.40
0.00
3
23.01
60.14
29.44
75.78
-6.43
-15.64
0.00
26.94
208.13
1.00
-0.03
0.84
-18.29
-33.34
-224.61
0.00
205.17
0.00
3
27.10
60.14
34.56
75.78
-7.46
-15.64
1.00
15.66
212.33
0.00
-0.35
-0.06
-18.29
-22.77
-227.91
-1.60
223.77
-1.63
3
25.71
60.14
32.81
75.78
-7.10
-15.64
1.00
19.24
209.13
1.00
0.03
0.84
-19.29
-26.37
-225.61
-1.60
215.61
-1.63
Table 13: New Mexico – 112-tier Performance for Scenario (C)
P1
P2
Γ
P1 Objective
($ MM)
∆W E
($ MM)
∆W F
($ MM)
∆C
($ MM)
∆S
($ MM)
∆U
($ MM)
P2 Objective
($)
Tar-
get
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
Tar-
get
NM
Tariﬀ
Our
Tariﬀ
1
150.84
42.40
135.56
154.51
43.56
138.88
-3.67
-1.16
-3.32
0.00
15.69
211.33
0.00
-0.41
-0.06
-3.67
-16.44
-214.59
0.00
263.92
0.00
1
42.40
135.56
43.56
138.88
-1.16
-3.32
0.00
15.24
208.13
1.00
-0.12
0.84
-4.67
-16.28
-212.29
0.00
253.46
0.00
1
42.40
135.56
43.56
138.88
-1.16
-3.32
1.00
16.69
212.33
0.00
-0.41
-0.06
-4.67
-17.44
-215.59
-1.60
262.28
-1.63
1
42.40
135.56
43.56
138.88
-1.16
-3.32
1.00
16.24
209.13
1.00
-0.12
0.84
-5.67
-17.28
-213.29
-1.60
251.83
-1.63
3
57.97
135.56
59.48
138.88
-1.51
-3.32
0.00
15.32
211.33
0.00
-0.35
-0.06
-3.67
-16.48
-214.59
0.00
224.84
0.00
3
50.82
135.56
52.17
138.88
-1.35
-3.32
0.00
26.94
208.13
1.00
-0.03
0.84
-4.67
-28.26
-212.29
0.00
205.17
0.00
3
60.18
135.56
61.76
138.88
-1.58
-3.32
1.00
10.94
212.33
0.00
-0.35
-0.06
-4.67
-12.17
-215.59
-1.60
228.04
-1.63
3
50.82
135.56
52.17
138.88
-1.35
-3.32
1.00
27.94
209.13
1.00
-0.03
0.84
-5.67
-29.26
-213.29
-1.60
203.53
-1.63
EC.6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2926676