TITLE: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio: Estimating Price Sensitivity for Unbought Items
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2022.1118
---

Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio:
Estimating Price Sensitivity for Unbought Items
Jean Pauphilet
London Business School, London, UK, jpauphilet@london.edu
Problem deﬁnition: Mining for heterogeneous responses to an intervention is a crucial step for data-driven
operations, for instance to personalize treatment or pricing. We investigate how to estimate price sensitivity
from transaction-level data. In causal inference terms, we estimate heterogeneous treatment eﬀects when (a)
the response to treatment (here, whether a customer buys a product) is binary, and (b) treatment assignments
are partially observed (here, full information is only available for purchased items). Methodology/Results:
We propose a recursive partitioning procedure to estimate heterogeneous odds ratio, a widely used measure
of treatment eﬀect in medicine and social sciences. We integrate an adversarial imputation step to allow for
robust estimation even in presence of partially observed treatment assignments. We validate our methodology
on synthetic data and apply it to three case studies from political science, medicine, and revenue management.
Managerial Implications: Our robust heterogeneous odds ratio estimation method is a simple and intuitive
tool to quantify heterogeneity in patients or customers and personalize interventions, while lifting a central
limitation in many revenue management data.
Key words : Prescriptive analytics; Pricing; Customer segmentation; Causal inference; Missing data
1.
Introduction
Pricing and discount strategies are one of the most crucial decisions faced by (r)etailers.
Given the amount of information available on every customer and shopping experience,
merchants have a growing opportunity to personalize both of them. In particular, granular
data at a customer or product level enables quantitative analysis of the impact of pricing
and discounts on purchase. Motivated by transaction-level data made available as part of
the M&SOM 2020 data-driven challenge (Shen et al. 2020), we propose a new methodology
to conduct such an analysis. In doing so, we lift two methodological barriers: First, we
propose a new partitioning procedure to estimate heterogeneous odds ratio, a popular
metric to measure treatment eﬀect in presence of binary responses. Secondly, we propose
an adversarial data imputation method to derive robust ﬁndings despite the absence of full
1
arXiv:2106.11389v2 [stat.ME] 13 May 2022

2
information on unpurchased items, a major limitation in revenue management applications
involving transaction data (e.g., purchase panel, receipt, or loyalty data).
1.1.
A causal inference framework
We adopt terminology and notations from the potential outcome framework (Imbens and
Rubin 2015, Chapter 2) and characterize observations by three quantities: T ∈{0,1} is the
treatment assignment variable, such that T = 1 (resp. T = 0) for the treated (resp. control)
individuals. Y (T) captures the response to treatment T. Finally, X denotes a vector of
side information or any observed covariates (e.g., gender or age). In this work, we focus
on binary treatments T ∈{0,1} (we will relax this assumption in Section 2.5) and binary
response to treatment Y ∈{0,1}. The latter assumption holds in medicine application for
instance, where “response to treatment” is deﬁned as the occurence of adverse events such
as death. Binary responses to treatment are also common in pricing applications (purchase
decision), economics, and social sciences.
Diﬀerent measures for the eﬀect of treatment T on outcome Y have been proposed. For
instance, one can estimate the average response to treatment (resp. control) E[Y (1)] (resp.
E[Y (0)]), or the average treatment eﬀect deﬁned as ATE = E[Y (1) −Y (0)]. Conceptually,
these quantities summarize and compare the distributions of the two random variables
Y (1) and Y (0). Unfortunately, for each patient, one does not observe Y (1) and Y (0)
simultaneously, but only the response to the assigned treatment, i.e., Y (T)|T = t where t ∈
{0,1}. This constitutes a major selection bias and the central problem of causal inference.
This selection bias is usually addressed by assuming unconfoundedness, i.e., independence
of potential outcomes and treatment assignment conditionally on the observed covariates
(Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983) and conducting a sensitivity analysis to assess the robustness
of the ﬁndings to confounding factors (Rosenbaum 2014).
With the widespread availability of patient-level data in the past decade, the interest of
the community and industry shifted from average to conditional/personalized treatment
eﬀect estimation. Indeed, treatments can now be assigned at a ﬁne-grained scale. Hence,
the eﬀect of the treatment on a particular patient category is more relevant than its
average on the total population. Mathematically, interest shifted from the population-wide
random variables Y (0) and Y (1) to their conditional versions, Y (0)|X = x and Y (1)|X =
x. Mining for patterns of individual-level diﬀerences in treatment eﬀect is also referred to as
heterogeneous treatment eﬀect (HTE) estimation. In particular and relevant to our work,

Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
3
tree-based methods from supervised machine learning have been adapted to the problem
of heterogeneous treatment eﬀect using decision trees (Zeileis et al. 2008, Su et al. 2009,
Laber and Zhao 2015, Athey and Imbens 2016, Tran and Zheleva 2019, Bertsimas et al.
2019, Lee et al. 2020a) and random forests (Wager and Athey 2018, Athey et al. 2019, Lee
et al. 2020b). While estimation of heterogeneous treatment eﬀects can inform personalized
treatment, Lakkaraju and Rudin (2017), Kallus (2017) propose a one-step approach to
learn personalized policies directly, without an intermediate estimation step. Kallus and
Zhou (2018) investigate the question of policy learning in presence of confounding factors.
Recursive partitioning approaches proceed by iteratively dividing the observations into
subgroups so as to minimize some splitting criterion. Various splitting criteria have been
investigated, ranging from impurity measures (Chan and Loh 2004, Landwehr et al. 2005)
to coeﬃcient instability (Zeileis et al. 2008), variance of the estimates (Athey and Imbens
2016), prediction accuracy (Bertsimas et al. 2019, Aouad et al. 2019), t-statistics (Su et al.
2009), and treatment eﬀectiveness (Bertsimas et al. 2019, Kallus 2017). Despite using
diﬀerent splitting criteria, these approaches unanimously accept the conditional average
treatment eﬀect CATE = E[Y (1)−Y (0)|X = x] as the metric to assess the eﬀect of a treat-
ment. When dealing with binary outcomes Y ∈{0,1}, however, odds ratio are a common
and intuitive measure of a treatment eﬀect as well. The odds ratio R compares the odds
of responding when treated, P(Y = 1|T = 1)/P(Y = 0|T = 1), with the odds of responding
when not treated, P(Y = 1|T = 0)/P(Y = 0|T = 0), i.e.,
R := P(Y = 1|T = 1)
P(Y = 0|T = 1) × P(Y = 0|T = 0)
P(Y = 1|T = 0).
(1)
Deﬁned as such, the odds ratio is simply a measure of association between Y and T but
can be interpreted as a measure of causal eﬀect under unconfoundedness. If R > 1 (resp.
R < 1), the treatment increases (resp. decreases) the likelihood of responding positively. On
the contrary, R = 1 indicates that treatment and response to treatment are independent.
Because it captures a treatment eﬀect relative to the baseline risk, odds ratio are a widely
used measure for treatment eﬀect estimation in both randomized and observational studies,
especially in meta-analysis that compare results from disparate studies (Engels et al. 2000).
The odds ratio relates with (but diﬀers from) the relative risk or risk ratio (see Davies
et al. 1998, for a discussion on the relative merits of each metric). Compared to diﬀerence
in responses, ratio of responses does not only capture the magnitude of the eﬀect but

4
also its robustness to unmeasured confounding (see Cornﬁeld et al. 1959, for a notorious
discussion regarding tobacco and lung cancer). In our opinion, two reasons can explain the
lack of interest in estimating heterogeneous odds ratio. First, odds ratios suﬀer from non-
collapsibility, a generalization of Simpson’s paradox, which can hinder their interpretability
(Hern´an and Robins 2010, Section 4.3)– note, however, that risk ratios are collapsible
if there is no confounding. We refer to Greenland et al. (1999) for a discussion on non-
collapsibility and its relation to confounding. Second, because ratios are relative measures,
some authors expect them to be less heterogeneous than risk diﬀerences, while others have
suggested that they can be equally heterogeneous but that tests for their heterogeneity
has lower power (Poole et al. 2015). This question remains unanswered.
In this paper, we propose a recursive partitioning procedure to evaluate heterogeneous
odds ratio. Our procedure relies on Cochran’s Q-test for heterogeneity and could be applied
to a wide variety of treatment eﬀect deﬁnitions, including odds ratios, risk ratios and
CATE. To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to consider the heterogeneous odds
ratio estimation task, which is surprising given the popularity of odds ratio in medicine
and social sciences, and the profusion of research on HTE estimation.
1.2.
Challenges arising from real-world revenue management data
In the realm of the 2020 M&SOM data-driven challenge (Shen et al. 2020), researchers
were given access to transaction-level data from the JD.com’s e-tailing activity. This data
comprises information about millions of transactions that occured on the platform over the
month of March 2018. For instance, demographic information about the customer, product
attributes, pricing, and discount data are available. To estimate the impact of discount
(the treatment) on the purchase decision (the response to treatment), our heterogeneous
odds ratio estimation method would be a perfect candidate.
Unfortunately, data collection is triggered by a transaction and, by deﬁnition, a transac-
tion corresponds to a customer buying an item. Consequently, the set of observations only
includes customers and products that responded positively, rendering treatment eﬀect esti-
mation impossible. Note that this issue is present in many real-world revenue management
settings. To alleviate this problem, we enrich our data set with information about user
sessions: for each user, we know the pages this user visited and the products they consid-
ered but did not buy. Since these products have not been purchased, we only have partial
information about the potential transaction. In particular, we do not know whether these

Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
5
products were oﬀered to the customer with a discount. In other words, their treatment
assignment is unknown. To summarize, the initial data set suﬀers from strong selection
bias since all observations (xi,ti,yi(ti)) satisfy yi(ti) = 1. As an answer, we enrich the data
set with partial observations of products that have been seen by the user but not bought,
(xi,NA,0), hence converting a selection bias problem into a missing data problem.
Missing data is a long-experienced problem in applied statistics. In the context of statis-
tical inference, Rubin (1976) introduced the Missing At Random (MAR) assumption and
proved that inference was possible under this assumption. However, MAR is not a viable
assumption in our case. Indeed, MAR requires that the missingness indicator (here, Y ) is
independent from the missing value (here, T), conditioned on the other covariates (here,
X). In our case, assuming MAR would negate the existence of an individual treatment
eﬀect and is not an acceptable assumption. An alternative is needed. Hence, we develop a
robust imputation method integrated within the heterogeneous odds ratio procedure to ﬁnd
robust estimates of the odds ratio in presence of partially observed treatment assignments,
without relying on the MAR assumption. In other revenue management applications, out-
of-stocks can also be considered as partially observed treatment assignment (Musalem
et al. 2010), where the treatment is the assortment oﬀered to the customer. Among others,
Vulcano et al. (2012) developed an EM algorithm to properly estimate a demand model
under some structural assumptions.
1.3.
Contributions and structure
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We develop a recursive partitioning procedure to detect heterogeneous eﬀect of treat-
ment. Based on Cochran’s Q-statistics, we propose a splitting criterion that explicitly aims
at maximizing heterogenity across the subgroups in our partition, while accounting for
statistical signiﬁcance and sample size. Our criterion requires minimal assumptions on the
estimator used to quantify the eﬀect of treatment, namely asymptotic normality.
• We implement this procedure in the case of binary treatments and binary responses,
using odds ratio as a measure of treatment eﬀect. Our approach, that we refer to as Hetero-
geneous Odds Ratio (HOR) estimation, provides an interpretable partition of the feature
space together with asymptotically valid conﬁdence intervals. Compared to approaches
based on conditional average treatment eﬀect, HOR estimation readily applies to random-
ized control trials as well as observational studies, and naturally informs confounding-
robust policy improvement. From HOR estimation, we derive personalized treatment

6
assignment strategies that maximize the odds of responding positively (Y = 1). Under this
prescriptive lens, we extend our framework to multiple treatments.
• We propose a robust optimization approach integrated in our recursive partitioning
scheme to address the issue of partially observed treatment assignment. In practice, this
situation emerged for instance when the original data set suﬀers from a strong selection bias
and additional data with unknown treatment assignment is collected. Our approach relies
on deﬁning a set of plausible set of treatment assignments and considering adversarially
assigned treatments.
• We validate our methodology on synthetic data and apply it to case studies from
political science, medicine, and revenue management. In particular, we apply our method-
ology to evaluate the eﬀect of discount on purchase using JD.com transaction-level data,
and identify that the original price and the product type reveal strong heterogeneity in
the eﬀectiveness of discounts.
Structure:
We present the HOR estimation procedure and its implication for policy
recommendation in Section 2. Section 3 derives adaptive concentration bounds for our HOR
estimates and discusses extensions to random forest estimation. Section 4 addresses the
missing treatment assignment problem using random sampling and robust optimization.
We validate our approach on synthetic data in Section 5 and then apply it to a collection
of examples from social science and medicine (§6), and revenue management (§7).
Notations:
Nonbold lowercase characters (x) denote scalars and bold lowercase charac-
ters (x) vectors. Uppercase letters designate random variables, e.g., X and X respectively
denote a random scalar and vector. The symbol ⊥⊥designates independent random vari-
ables.
2.
Policy Learning via Heterogeneous Odds Ratio
In this section, we propose a recursive partitioning procedure for estimating heterogeneous
treatment eﬀects in presence of binary response to treatment. We measure the eﬀect of
treatment in terms of odds ratio (§2.1) and use Cochran’s Q-statistics as a splitting criterion
(§2.2). The ﬁnal procedure is described in Section 2.3. We discuss policy implications of
odds ratio in Section 2.4 and the extension to multiple treatments in Section 2.5.
2.1.
Odds ratio: Estimation and conﬁdence intervals
From n observations of pairs (ti,yi), construct a 2 × 2 contingency table (Table 1). The
odds ratio compares the odds of responding positively when treated, N1,1/N0,1, with the

Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
7
Table 1
Sample 2 × 2 contingency table, where Nt,y = P
i 1(Ti = t)1(Yi = y).
Y = 0
Y = 1
T = 0
N0,0
N0,1
T = 1
N1,0
N1,1
odds of responding positively without treatment, N1,0/N0,0. An estimate for the log-odds
ratio log R and its variance are given by
log ˆr = log(N1,1) −log(N1,0) + log(N0,0) −log(N0,1),
(2)
ˆv = ˆσ2(log ˆr) =
1
N1,1
+
1
N1,0
+
1
N0,1
+
1
N0,0
.
(3)
By the large-sample normality of log ˆr (Breslow 1981), log ˆr ± zα/2 ˆσ(log ˆr), with zα/2
the α/2 quantile of the standard distribution, is a Wald conﬁdence interval for logR .
Exponentiating its endpoints provides a conﬁdence interval for R. This interval was ﬁrst
propsed by Woolf et al. (1955) and performs quite well compared to subsequent proposals
(see Lawson 2004, for a comparison). Its robustness for small samples can be improved by
adding a +1/2 bias term to each cell value Nt,y,y ∈{0,1},t ∈{0,1} (Haldane 1956, Gart
and Zweifel 1967, Gart 1966). We use this small-sample correction in our implementation.
2.2.
Testing for heterogeneity
We now consider K disjoint subgroups and estimate the sample log-odds ratio log ˆr(k) and
its standard error ˆv(k) on each subgroup separately. Borrowing concepts from hypothesis
testing, we deﬁne a criterion to measure heterogeneity between subgroups.
Let us illustrate the case with two subgroups, K = 2. Since the observations are indepen-
dent and the subgroups are disjoint, log ˆr(1) and log ˆr(2) are independent. Hence, log ˆr(1) −
log ˆr(2) is asymptotically normal with mean log r(1) −log r(2) and variance ˆv(1) + ˆv(2). We
want to test whether r(1) = r(2) (H0). Under (H0), Z := (log ˜r(1)−log ˜r(2))
2
ˆv(1)+ˆv(2)
follows a chi-square
distribution with one degree of freedom. In this case, Z corresponds to McNemar’s test
statistics. Maximizing heterogeneity between subgroups can be achieved by maximizing
the probability of (H0) being rejected, i.e., minimizing
P
 
Z ≥

log ˆr(1) −log ˆr(2)2
ˆv(1) + ˆv(2)
!
= 1 −χ2
1
 
log ˆr(1) −log ˆr(2)2
ˆv(1) + ˆv(2)
!
,
where χ2
1 denotes the cumulative distribution function of a chi-square random variable with
one degree of freedom.

8
This procedure extends to the case with K subgroups and is referred to as Cochran’s
Q-test (Cochran 1954). We construct K diﬀerences ˆθ(k) −¯θ. Here, we denote ˆθ(k) := log ˆr(k)
for concision and deﬁne ¯θ as a weighted average of all ˆθ(k)’s:
¯θ =
1
PK
k=1 ˆw(k)
K
X
k=1
ˆw(k)ˆθ(k),
with ˆw(k) = 1/ˆv(k).
Then, Cochran’s Q statistic is the weighted sum of the squared deviations of the individual
eﬀects from their average; that is
Q :=
K
X
k=1
ˆw(k)(ˆθ(k) −¯θ)2.
(4)
Under mild assumptions and under the null hypothesis that θ(1) = ··· = θ(K), Q asymp-
totically follows a chi-square distribution with K −1 degrees of freedom. Hence, miminiz-
ing 1 −χ2
K−1 (Q), or equivalently maximizing Q, yields greater heterogeneity. We refer to
Huedo-Medina et al. (2006), Kulinskaya and Dollinger (2015) for recent discussions on the
use of the Q-test in comparing odds ratio.
In the following section, we will use the Q-statistics as a measure of heterogeneity and
construct a partition of the feature space to maximize it. Related to our work, Su et al.
(2009) use the t-statistics to measure heterogeneity in CATE within subgroups and build
their partition. However, Student’s t-test can only be applied to test homogeneity in sample
means and cannot be used for comparing (odds) ratios. On this regard, using Cochran’s
Q-test is more general and can be used to assess homogeneity of any estimator, provided
that the estimator’s distribution is asymptotically normal with computable variance.
2.3.
A recursive partitioning procedure
Let Π be a partition of the covariate space into |Π| disjoint subgroups. Write ℓk, k =
1,...,|Π|, an element of Π. ℓk will equivalently be referred to as a leaf or a subgroup. By
deﬁnition, for any x, there exists a unique subgroup of Π containing x, denoted ℓ(x,Π).
Consider a dataset of n observations Dn = {(xi,ti,yi), i = 1,...,n} and a partition Π. In
each subgroup, one can estimate the log-odds ratio (2), its variance (3) and compute the
Q-statistics (4). Let us denote Q(Π;Dn) its value. The objective is to construct a partition
that maximizes the Q-statistics, i.e., solve
max
Πpartition Q(Π;Dn).

Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
9
Instead of solving the above maximization problem exactly over the entire set of partitions,
we solve it recursively. The beneﬁts of recursive partitioning are fourfold: First, the resulting
partition has a natural tree structure, which is highly interpretable and easy to understand
for the practitioner. Interpretability of models and explainability of decisions are indeed a
growing concern of consumers and regulators (Goodman and Flaxman 2017). In addition,
trees constructed in a greedy fashion can be explained sequentially: the ﬁrst split of the
tree explains most of the heterogeneity, followed by the second split, and so on. In other
words, depth orders the splits by decreasing importance. This is not the case of globally
optimal trees. Secondly, despite a vibrant corpus of works on formulating decision trees as
mixed-integer optimization problems and solving them as such to provable optimality (see,
e.g., Bertsimas and Dunn 2017, G¨unl¨uk et al. 2018, Zantedeschi et al. 2020, Aglin et al.
2020, Demirovi´c et al. 2020, Lin et al. 2020), greedy procedures remain the gold-standard
for balancing accuracy, interpretability, and scalability. Thirdly, recursive procedures can
handle complex non-convex criteria like the Q-statistics. Finally, while controlling the p-
value of Cochran’s Q-test ensures that the odds ratio is not constant across all leaves, our
recursive procedure will satisfy a stronger property, namely that no leaf can be further
divided so as to detect heterogeneity in odds ratio (at a given signiﬁcance level). From a
hypothesis testing perspective, a greedy procedure will control for pairwise heterogeneity
between sibling leaves (see Proposition 1 for a formal statement).
We now describe our recursive partitioning procedure. Consider a partition Π and a leaf
ℓof this partition. We investigate whether ℓcan be further divided. A split is deﬁned as a
coordinate j and a threshold t. The split (j,t) divides ℓinto two subgroups ℓ−= ℓ∩{x :
xj < t} and ℓ+ = ℓ∩{x : xj ≥t}. There are ﬁnitely many splits, so by explicit enumeration,
one can ﬁnd the one that maximizes the Q-statistics Q({ℓ−,ℓ+},Dn), denoted (j⋆,t⋆). If
the resulting p-value, 1 −χ2
1(Q({ℓ⋆
−,ℓ⋆
+},Dn)), exceeds a given threshold pmax, then we do
not split ℓ. Otherwise, we remove ℓfrom the partition, and add ℓ⋆
+ and ℓ⋆
−instead. The
algorithm terminates when no leaf in the current partition can be divided any further.
Pseudo-code is given in the online appendix, Algorithm A.1.
The recursive procedure described in Algorithm A.1 generates a partition Π of the feature
space that has a natural tree structure. The internal nodes of the tree correspond to the
all the sub-groups ℓconsidered and split by the algorithm (e.g., its root node is the entire
space Rp) , while its leaves or terminal nodes are exactly the elements of Π. With a slight

10
abuse of notation, we will also denote Π the tree associated with the construction of the
partition Π. We deﬁne siblings as two nodes in the tree Π that share the same parent.
Partitions produced by our algorithm (Algorithm A.1) satisfy the following property:
Proposition 1. Let Π be the tree resulting from applying Algorithm A.1 on the train-
ing data Dn. For any siblings node1 and node2, the hypothesis that node1 and node2 are
homogeneous in terms of odds ratio is rejected by Cochran’s Q-test on Dn, at a level pmax.
2.4.
Odds ratio as a treatment recommendation
As mentioned in introduction, comparing the odds ratio to 1 provides an indication on
whether the treatment is eﬀective or not. The main advantages of odds ratio as a measure
of causal eﬀect are its simplicity, its symmetry with respect to outcome deﬁnition, and the
fact that it is insensitive to the treatment propensity and baseline eﬀect, P(T = 1) and
P(Y = 1|T = 0) respectively. If we assume that Y = 1 is a positive outcome (e.g., survival
or purchase), R > 1 implies that the treatment increases the odds of Y being positive,
hence is beneﬁcial. Odds ratio are prominently used in situations where assigning a reward
or value to each outcome is impossible (e.g., in medicine when the outcome is death).
Due to their non-collapsibility, odds ratios usually lack any interpretation either as the
change in average odds or the average change in odds, contrary to risk ratios (Cummings
2009). For instance, in revenue management, the risk ratio bounds the allowable dis-
count: Assume p1 (resp. p0) is the discounted (resp. original) price. Then, from a retailer’s
perspective, discounting makes sense as long as the expected revenue under discount,
p1P(Y = 1|T = 1), exceeds the baseline revenue p0P(Y = 1|T = 0), i.e., as long as the risk
ratio P(Y = 1|T = 1)/P(Y = 1|T = 0) is greater than p0/p1.
The interpretation of odds ratio is not as straightforward. Deﬁne odds(z) := z/(1 −
z) for any z ∈[0,1). The function z 7→odds(z) is a non-linear, increasing, and convex
transformation of z. From the deﬁnition of the odds ratio R in (1), we have
P(Y = 1|T = 1) = odds−1 (R × odds(P(Y = 1|T = 0))),
a non-linear transformation of P(Y = 1|T = 0). Nonetheless, for rare events, i.e., P(Y =
1) →0, since odds(z) ∼z→0 z, odds ratios are equivalent to risk ratios and share the same
interpretation.
Odds ratio also have a natural interpretation in the context of repeated experiments. For
instance, consider a situation when a customer comes multiple times to a (virtual) store.

Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
11
Assume that visits are independent and identical. Then, the number of times a customer
will come to the store before making a ﬁrst purchase follows a geometric distribution over
{0,1,...} and is equal to P(Y = 0)/P(Y = 1) on average. In this setting, the odds ratio
compares times to purchase with and without treatment. For example, if R = 2, then
treatment (e.g., discount) halves time to purchase. Maximizing the odds ratio is equivalent
to minimizing time to purchase. Further assume that the decision-maker incurs a cost c per
visit and receives a reward r as soon as Y = 1. For example, if the decision-maker decides
to treat, c can correspond to the marginal cost of treatment. Then, the average reward is
positive as long as odds(P(Y = 1)) >
c
r −c. In other words, for a ﬁxed reward r, the odds
bound the cost per visit c that the decision maker can aﬀord.
Note that our splitting criterion only requires asymptotic normality of the estimates
of the treatment eﬀect, so Algorithm A.1 can be applied to other deﬁnitions of the
treatment eﬀect. For instance, it can be applied to the relative risk discussed earlier,
P(Y = 1|T = 1)/P(Y = 1|T = 0), which can be empirically estimated as (notations from
Table 1):
N1,1
N1,1 + N1,0
× N0,0 + N0,1
N0,0
.
As for odds ratio, unconfoundedness is needed to interpret risk ratios as a measure of
causal eﬀect and not association only. Furthermore, in observational studies, techniques like
inverse propensity score weighting are needed for unbiased estimation. In these settings,
the risk ratio between the responses to treatment, P(Y (1) = 1)/P(Y (0) = 1) is equal to the
risk ratio between the responses to assigned treatment, P(Y = 1|T = 1)/P(Y = 1|T = 0), up
to a multiplicative factor, P(T = 1)/P(T = 0). Our recursive partitioning procedure can be
used as a non-parametric estimation of these “propensity odds”. Note that, for odds ratio,
similar corrections are needed in observational studies. However, using inverse propensity
weighting and our partition as a non-parametric model for propensity, the corrective terms
would appear both on the numerator and denominator and Equations (2)-(3) would remain
valid as is.
2.5.
Extension to multiple treatments
So far, we restricted our attention to a single treatment. We now consider the situa-
tion when one can chose between multiple treatments, i.e., T can take values 0 (control),

12
1,...,m. For each treatment T = t, one can compute the odds ratio associated with this
particular treatment:
R(t) := P(Y = 1|T = t)
P(Y = 0|T = t) × P(Y = 0|T = 0)
P(Y = 1|T = 0).
Consequently, each leaf is characterized by an m-dimensional vector of odds ratios for the
m possible treatments. A naive way to extend our approach to multiple treatments would
be to consider a vector extension of Cochran’s Q-statistics to test the heterogeneity in
the multi-variate response (R(t))t=1,...,m when running Algorithm A.1. Unfortunately, these
tests would have little power and might be of little relevance in practice.
Instead, we adopt a more prescriptive and pragmatic approach: we associate each leaf
with a scalar value corresponding to the best odds ratio among all treatments, namely
maxt=0,...,m R(t). By doing so, a leaf in Algorithm A.1 will be further divided in two if it
identiﬁes two subgroups that have signiﬁcantly diﬀerent responses to the best treatment -
but what the “best” treatment is might be diﬀerent for each subgroup. Observe that we
consider control (t = 0) as a candidate treatment with R(0) = 1, so the tree can recom-
mend not to treat if no treatment exhibits a positive eﬀect. Kallus (2017) adopt a similar
strategy for learning personalized policies for observational studies, when treatment eﬀects
are evaluated in terms of conditional average treatment eﬀect.
3.
Convergence Analysis and Application to Random Forests
In this section, we study the convergence of our recursive partitioning procedure for odds
ratio estimation. We prove an adaptive concentration bound that states that, with high
probability and simultaneously for any leaf ℓ, the gap between the estimated odds ratio in
leaf ℓand the population-average odds ratio scales as
p
log(n)log(p)/k. The main result is
presented in Section 3.2, after preliminary assumptions and notations (Section 3.1). Section
A.2 in the online appendix discusses implications for random forest estimation.
3.1.
Notations and assumptions
First, we impose that Algorithm A.1 generates (α,k)-valid partitions:
Definition 1. A partition Π is (α,k)-valid if it can be generated by a recursive parti-
tioning scheme in which each child node contains at least a fraction α ∈(0,0.5] of the data
points in its parent node and each terminal node contains at least k ∈N training examples.
Given a dataset Dn, we denote its set of (α,k)-valid partitions by Vα,k(Dn) (or simply Vα,k
when clear from the context).

Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
13
This assumption can easily be enforced in practice by considering splits that leave child
nodes with a minimum number of training samples.
Our analysis relies on adaptive concentration inequalities for regression trees (Wager
and Walther 2015) and require a similar set of assumptions. First, a condition on the
dependence of the individual coordinates:
Assumption 1. (Weakly dependent features) The features X ∈[0,1]p are distributed
according to a density f satisfying ζ−1 ≤f(x) ≤ζ, ∀x ∈[0,1], for some constant ζ ≥1.
Second, we require that the minimum leaf size k grows reasonably fast as n,p →∞, i.e.,
Assumption 2. (Minimum leaf size) The minimum leaf-size k grows with n at a rate
bounded from below by
lim
n→∞
log(n)max{log(p),log log(n)}
k
= 0.
For any subgroup ℓ⊆Rd, we consider the 2 × 2 contingency tables (Table 1) for this
particular leaf and analyze the convergence of cell counts towards their population-average.
In particular, for each cell (t,y) ∈{0,1}2, we compare
ˆπn
t,y(ℓ) =
1
|{i : xi ∈ℓ}|
X
i:xi∈ℓ
1(ti = t,yi = y),
πt,y(ℓ) = P(Y = y,T = t|X ∈ℓ),
and we deﬁne the corresponding log odds ratio: log(ˆrn(ℓ)) = log(ˆπn
1,1(ℓ)) −log(ˆπn
1,0(ℓ)) −
log(ˆπn
0,1(ℓ)) + log(ˆπn
0,0(ℓ)); and similarly for log(r(ℓ)).
3.2.
Adaptive concentration bounds
Consider one tree Π ∈Vα,k. For any leaf ℓ∈Π, Hoeﬀding’s inequality shows that ˆπn
t,y(ℓ)
concentrates around πt,y(ℓ) at a rate 1/
√
k. Then, a standard Chernoﬀbound technique
enables to bound the worst case deviation over all ℓ∈Π by
P

sup
ℓ∈Π
ˆπn
t,y(ℓ) −πt,y(ℓ)
 ≥δ

≤2exp
 log
  n
k

−2kδ2
,
where we bound the total number of leaves in Π by n/k. In particular, it yields
lim
n→∞P
 
sup
ℓ∈Π
ˆπn
t,y(ℓ) −πt,y(ℓ)
 ≥
r
1.1
2k log
n
k
!
= 0.
(5)

14
However, this bound is not adaptive in the sense that it is uniform over all leaves ℓbut for a
particular partition Π. Our goal is to derive a bound that is also uniform over all potential
partitions Π ∈Vα,k, to bound the performance of any tree generated by Algorithm A.1.
For the CART algorithm, Breiman et al. (1984) derived a uniform convergence result for
regression and classiﬁcation trees. They ﬁrst prove the uniform convergence of the empirical
leaf distributions (Breiman et al. 1984, Theorem 12.2). Then, under the assumption that
the diameter of each leaf shrinks as n →∞and under some regularity conditions, they
conclude on the uniform converge of the empirical prediction error. Despite its prevalence
(Gordon and Olshen 1978, 1980), the vanishing leaf diameter assumption is admittedly
strong. Our analysis relies on the recent work of Wager and Walther (2015), who provide
adaptive concentration bound for regression trees. As in Breiman et al. (1984), the key
idea is to replace the supremum over all Π ∈Vα,k,ℓ∈Π by a supremum over a ﬁnite set of
regions of Rd whose size moderately increases with the dimension of the problem. Instead
of relying on generic ε-nets from VC theory (Vapnik and Chervonenkis 1971) like Breiman
et al. (1984), Wager and Walther (2015) exhibit a tailored set of approximating rectangles
and leverage the fact that partitions are (α,k)-valid together with Assumption 1. Applied
to our context, their result states as follows:
Lemma 1. (Wager and Walther 2015, Theorem 1) Suppose that we have a sequence of
problems with parameters (n,p,k) satisfying Assumptions 1-2. Then, sample averages of
cell counts over all possible valid partitions concentrate around their expectations with high
probability, i.e., for all (t,y) ∈{0,1}2:
lim
n,p,k→∞P
 
sup
Π∈Vα,k,ℓ∈Π
ˆπn
t,y(ℓ) −πt,y(ℓ)
 ≥f(n,p,k)
√
k
!
= 0,
with f(n,p,k) := 9
2
s
log(n/k)(log(pk) + 3log log(n))
log ((1 −α)−1)
.
Notice that under Assumption 2, f(n,p,k)/
√
k →0, as n,p,k →∞. Moreover, in a mod-
erately high-dimensional regime with liminf p/n > 0, f(n,p,k) scales as
p
log(n)log(p).
Compared to the bound (5), Lemma 1 is surprisingly strong. The “cost” of adaptively
searching over all valid trees in high dimensions only scales logarithmically with pk.
Based on this lemma, we derive a concentration bound for our odds ratio estimates:

Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
15
Theorem 1. Suppose that we have a sequence of problems with parameters (n,p,k)
satisfying Assumptions 1-2. Furthermore, assume that for all (t,y) ∈{0,1}2, there exists
π0 > 0 such that πy,t(ℓ) ≥π0, for all Π ∈Vα,k, ℓ∈Π. Then,
lim
n,p,k→∞P
 
sup
Π∈Vα,k,ℓ∈Π
|log(ˆrn(ℓ)) −log(r(ℓ))| ≥8f(n,p,k)
π0
√
k
!
= 0,
with f(n,p,k) := 9
2
s
log(n/k)(log(pk) + 3log log(n))
log ((1 −α)−1)
.
Proof
Denote An the event
An :=

∀(t,y) ∈{0,1}2, sup
ℓ∈Ln
ˆπn
y,t(ℓ) ≥π0/2

.
According to Lemma 1, P(An) −−−→
n→∞1. Moreover, by concavity of the logarithm, for any
x,y ≥π0/2 we have |log(x)−log(y)| ≤(2/π0)|x−y|. Hence, on An, for any ℓ∈Ln, we have
|log ˆrn(ℓ) −log r(ℓ)| ≤
X
(t,y)∈{0,1}2
log
 ˆπn
t,y(ℓ)

−log (πt,y(ℓ))

≤2
π0
X
(t,y)∈{0,1}2
ˆπn
t,y(ℓ) −πt,y(ℓ)
.
Taking the supremum over ℓon both sides yields, for any δ > 0,
P

sup
Π,ℓ
|log(ˆrn(ℓ)) −log(r(ℓ))| ≥δ

≤
X
(t,y)∈{0,1}2
P

sup
Π,ℓ
ˆπn
t,y(ℓ) −πt,y(ℓ)
 ≥π0δ
8

+ P(Ac
n).
Setting δ = 8f(n,p,k)/π0 concludes the proof.
□
Due to the discrete nature of the splits, decision trees can be notoriously unstable to
perturbations in the data. To improve stability, Breiman (2001) originally proposed to
introduce randomization in the training process of each tree, train a collection of random
trees, and aggregate them in a random forest. Wager and Walther (2015) leveraged their
adaptive concentration bounds over trees to derive similar results for random forests. While
a thorough analysis of heterogeneous odds ratio estimation via random forest is out of the
scope of the present paper, we discuss the diﬀerent alternatives available to extend our
methodology to random forests in Appendix A.2.
4.
Adversarial Treatment Assignment Imputation
In this section, we develop a methodology to handle missing treatment assignment, which
is a major concern in many pricing and revenue management applications.

16
4.1.
Problem formulation
From a high-level perspective, our HTE estimation problem involves quantities of the
form E[θ(T,Y (T))|X = x] for some function θ (e.g., cell counts in Table 1) that we esti-
mate empirically within each leaf. However, with transaction-level data, we do not observe
the treatment T whenever Y = 0. In other words, we cannot estimate the distribution of
T,Y (T)|X = x, rendering the estimation of cell counts, odds ratio, and Q-statistics impos-
sible. As discussed in introduction, the Missing At Random assumption (Rubin 1976) is
not suited here for it implies that P(T = 1|X = x) = P(T = 1|X = x,Y = 1) and that the
treatment has no eﬀect.
This issue of unobserved treatment assignment is connected with imperfect compliance,
i.e., situations when the treatment eﬀectively delivered to each patient, D, diﬀers from
the assigned one, T. Even in randomized control trials where treatment assignment is ran-
dom, imperfect compliance can bias estimation of the treatment eﬀect. Efron and Feldman
(1991) assume that compliance can be captured by an intensity of treatment delivered
(between 0 and 1) and estimate the ATE after making some structural assumptions on
how the response depends on treatment intensity. For all-or-nothing compliance, Manski
(1990), Balke and Pearl (1997) derive valid upper and lower bounds on the ATE under
imperfect compliance. Angrist et al. (1996) propose to use an instrumental variable (e.g.,
the assigned treatment T) to properly estimate the eﬀect of the received treatment D (see
Siddique 2013, for an application). Bargagli-Stoﬃet al. (2019), Bargagli-Stoﬃand Gnecco
(2020) incorporated this IV methodology into a recursive partitioning procedure for HTE
estimation. However, these works assume that we observe the imperfect compliance, that is
that we observe the assigned and the delivered treatment. On the contrary, in transaction-
level data, there is no discrepancy between treatment assigned and delivered, but we do
not observe the treatment for any observations that respond negatively (Y = 0).
To circumvent this issue, we ﬁrst make mild distributional assumptions on the distribu-
tion of T,Y = 0|X = x. These assumptions deﬁne a set of feasible distributions for T,Y =
0|X = x and of feasible treatment assignments T (Section 4.2). To incorporate uncertainty
in treatment assignment into the estimation procedure, we adopt a conservative approach
and replace all Q-statistics by their worst-case value over T (Section 4.3). Since ﬁnding
the worst-case value over T is hard, we replace T by N samples drawn uniformly from T
and provide performance guarantee for this ﬁnite sample approximation (Section 4.4).

Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
17
4.2.
Ambiguous treatment assignments
In the case of binary treatment, the distribution of T,Y = 0|X = x is fully parametrized
by P(T = 1|X = x,Y = 0). However, in the JD.com data as in many revenue manage-
ment data, only purchased items are observed. As a result, only the propensity score for
purchased products, P(T = 1|X = x,Y = 1), can be estimated. We need to make some
structural assumption to relate P(T = 1|X = x,Y = 1) and P(T = 1|X = x,Y = 0).
Assumption 3. There exists a non-decreasing transformation ϕ : [0,1] →[0,1] such that
P(T = 1|X = x,Y = 0) = ϕ(P(T = 1|X = x,Y = 1)), ∀x.
Given two contexts x1,x2 such that P(T = 1|X = x1,Y = 1) < P(T = 1|X = x2,Y = 1),
Assumption 3 implies that P(T = 1|X = x1,Y = 0) ≤P(T = 1|X = x2,Y = 0), i.e., the
pairwise comparison between x1 and x2 remains unchanged. Hence, although P(T = 1|X =
x,Y = 1) does not properly estimate the probability of treatment when Y = 0, it can be
used as a relevant ranking score among items. In short, we assume that discount assign-
ments are diﬀerent between the two groups but that the drivers of discount are similar.
We believe this assumption is fairly general and is broadly applicable beyond revenue
management applications.
Assumption 3 alone does not impose any constraint on the resulting odds ratio, which
can still take any value between 0 and ∞(with ϕ(z) = 0 or 1). Problem-speciﬁc knowledge
can then suggest furthers restrictions on the transformation ϕ, such as convexity, bounded
Lipschitz constant, or decomposability over a given basis. For example, with our targeted
discount application in mind, we can reasonably assume that discount does not negatively
impact the probability of purchase, or equivalently:
Assumption 4. For any context x, P(T = 1|X = x,Y = 0) ≤P(T = 1|X = x,Y = 1).
Assumption 4 is equivalent to the monotonous treatment response assumption (Manski
1997). Recall that, by symmetry, the odds ratio at x is equal to odds(z)/odds(ϕ(z)),
with z = P(T = 1|Y = 1,X = x). Consequently, since odds(·) is an increasing function,
Assumption 3 implies that the odds ratio is at least equal to 1. The MAR mechanism (which
corresponds ϕ(z) = z) satisﬁes Assumptions 3-4 and leads to an odds ratio of precisely 1.
Alternatively, the odds ratio can be arbitrarily large by taking ϕ(z) →0.

18
Together, Assumptions 3-4 enforces that the quantities P(T = 1|X = xi,Y = 0) on our
training data belong to the set:
T :=

t ∈[0,1]n : tσ(i) ≤tσ(i+1), ti ≤P(T = 1|X = xi,Y = 1),∀i
 
,
where σ is a permutation ordering the P(T = 1|X = xi,Y = 1)’s in increasing order. Each
group of constraints correspond to Assumption 3 and 4 respectively. To construct the set
T in practice, we ﬁt a machine learning model to predict the propensity score on purchased
items, ˆt(x) := ˆP(T = 1|X = x). By applying the function ˆt to unbought items, we estimate
ˆti := P(T = 1|X = xi,Y = 1) and construct T .
4.3.
Robust recursive partitioning
A feasible treatment vector is obtained by sampling n Bernouilli random variables with
parameter ti for some t ∈T . As far as odds ratio estimation is concerned, the quantities Nt,y
need to measure the expected number of counts in each cell of the contingency Table 1 so,
in the remainder of the section, we assume that treatment assignments can be fuzzy/non-
binary for the unbought items and equal to ti. Accordingly, T should now be interpreted
as the set of possible treatment assignments for non-purchased items.
We adapt the HOR estimation procedure (Algorithm A.1) to be robust against uncer-
tainty in treatment assignments. The algorithm is described in pseudo-code in Algorithm
1. We start by computing the treatment assignment vector that minimizes the overall eﬀect
of the treatment, i.e., we solve mint∈T |1−ˆr(t,y)| where ˆr(t,y) denotes the empirical odds
ratio evaluated on the entire data as in Section 2.1. We then apply our recursive partitioning
procedure depth-wise: we ﬁrst split the root node (depth 0) and then its left and right chil-
dren (depth 1), and so on. At the end each step, before growing the tree deeper, we update
the treatment assignments so as minimize the global heterogeneity Q(Π,{(xi,ti,yi)}). All
splits made during this step are then re-assessed: any split that no longer satisﬁes the
splitting condition, 1−χ2
1(Q({ℓ⋆
−,ℓ⋆
+},Dn)) ≤pmax, is undone. In other words, at each step,
we compute the most homogeneous data set according to the Q-statistics and the strati-
ﬁcation from the current partition, and keep only the splits whose validity are robust to
this adversarial treatment assignment. We denote this procedure Robust HOR, R-HOR in
short.
The main shortcoming of our approach is that, whenever the set of feasible assignment
T is large, the adversarial can generate treatment assignments that negate the revealed

Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
19
Algorithm 1: Robust recursive partitioning algorithm for HOR (R-HOR)
Input: {(xi,yi, ˆti), i = 1,...,n}
Result: Partition Π.
initialization: Π ←{Rp}, t ∈arg minT |1 −ˆr(y,t)|, Dn ←{(xi,ti,yi),i = 1,...,n};
for d ∈{1,...,max depth} do
Ld ←{ℓ∈Π : depth(ℓ) = d} // Note: potentially empty
for ℓ∈Ld do
(j⋆,t⋆) ←arg max(j,t) Q({ℓ−,ℓ+},Dn) ;
if 1 −χ2
1(Q({ℓ⋆
−,ℓ⋆
+},Dn)) ≤pmax and other criterion then
split ℓ: Π ←(Π\{ℓ}) ∪{ℓ−,ℓ+}
end
end
t ∈arg min
t∈T
Q(Π,{(xi,ti,yi)});
for ℓ∈Ld do
if 1 −χ2
1(Q({ℓ⋆
−,ℓ⋆
+},Dn)) > pmax then
unsplit ℓ: Π ←(Π\{ℓ−,ℓ+}) ∪{ℓ}
end
end
end
splits. Especially at the ﬁrst step of the algorithm, when there is only one split to validate.
In particular, we previously observed that Assumptions 3-4 are not restrictive and allow
the odds ratio to take any value between 1 and +∞. We propose two solutions to mitigate
this issue. First, we can introduce a reference vector t0 and solve instead
min
t∈T Q(Π,{(xi,ti,yi)})
s.t. ∥t −t0∥1 ≤nΓ,
(6)
where Γ is a parameter controlling the similarity between the treatment assignment t
and the reference assignment t0. The vector t0 can capture prior beliefs on treatment
assignments and ensures that the vectors t generated at each step of the algorithm remain
similar. In our experiments, we take t0 equal to the treatment assignment vector obtained
at the initialization step. In the robust optimization literature, Γ is referred to as the
budget of uncertainty (Bertsimas and Sim 2004) and controls the amount of uncertainty the
decision maker wishes to be protected against. We will explore the numerical impact of Γ in
Section 7. Second, in our implementation, we replace T by a ﬁnite-sample approximation.
Doing so not only simpliﬁes the minimization problem in (6) but also excludes pathological
cases while preserving theoretical guarantees, as described in the following section.

20
4.4.
Finite sample approximation
Algorithm 1 requires ﬁnding the worst case treatment assignment t ∈T , when worst case is
deﬁned in terms of worst odds ratio (initialization) or minimal Q-statistics. Solving these
optimization problems is intractable given the non-convexity of the objectives. Instead, we
generate uniformly at random N potential vectors t(j) ∈T and take the worst case over
the ﬁnite set T N = {t(j),j = 1,...,N}. Naturally, for any criterion f, we have max
t∈T N f(t) ≤
max
t∈T f(t), and the larger the N, the better the approximation, as formalized in the following
proposition:
Proposition 2. Denote zN := maxt∈T N f(t). Given a violation probability ε ∈(0,1) and
a conﬁdence parameter β ∈(0,1), if N ≥2
ε (1 −lnβ), then, with probability at least 1 −β
(on the samples t(j)), we have
PT (f(T ) ≤zN) ≤ε,
where the probability PT (·) corresponds to the sampling probability over T
Proof
We consider a scalar decision variable z and the robust constraint max
t∈T f(t) ≤z.
Under this lens, our ﬁnite sampling approach relates to the scenario approach in robust
design optimization and follows immediately from Theorem 1 in Campi et al. (2009).
□
Proposition 2 states that, with probability 1 −β over the samples used to construct
T N, the inequality f(T ) ≤max
t∈T N f(t) holds with high probability. Intuitively, β corresponds
to the probability of sampling a “bad” set T N and ε bounds the probability of T falling
outside of the convex hull of T N. Note that the distribution of T ∈T in Proposition
2 needs to be the same one as the sampling distribution. In our numerical analysis, we
sample uniformly from T . Accordingly, if pathological cases (e.g., ϕ(z) = 0 or z) are of
probability zero, sampling N scenarios from T will exclude these pathological cases with
high probability. Regarding the sampling of treatment assignment vectors t(j) ∈T , the
hit-and-run algorithm (Smith 1984) provides a generic method to sample uniformly from
any polyhedron. Given the simplicity of the constraints involved in the deﬁnition of T ,
however, we implemented a simple constructive procedure described in Appendix A.3.
5.
Validation on Synthetic Data
In this section, we assess the validity of our approach on synthetic data. We should acknowl-
edge the fact that whether heterogeneity between patients’ is better captured by the ratio

Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
21
of responses instead of their diﬀerence depends on the problem at hand. As a result, syn-
thetic examples where our procedure outperforms other methods from the HTE literature
could be easily constructed, and vice versa. To provide a fair comparison, we focus our
analysis on the quality of the Q-statistics as a splitting criterion. We apply Algorithm A.1
in a setting where responses are continuous and eﬀect of treatment is evaluated in terms
of average treatment eﬀect. In this setting, methods from the HTE literature apply and
we can compare the methods in their ability to detect heterogeneity.
Data generation We adopt a similar methodology as Lee et al. (2020b). For j = 1,...,p,
Xj is sampled according to a Bernouilli distribution with parameter pj, with pj ∼U(0,1).
We generate the response to treatment and control according to
Y (0) = X1 + 1
2X2 + X3 + κ(X1,X2,X3) + ε,
ε ∼N(0,1),
Y (1) = Y (0) + τk(X1,X2),
where κ(x1,x2,x3) = exp(x1 −x2x3) creates non-linear heterogeneity in responses (both to
treatment and control) while τk(x1,x2) captures the heterogeneous treatment eﬀect and is
one of the following:
• 2-rule case: τk(x1,x2) = k if x1 = 0 and x2 = 0, −k if x1 = 1 and x2 = 1, and 0 otherwise.
• 4-rule case: τk(x1,x2) = k if x1 = 0 and x2 = 1, 2k if x1 = 0 and x2 = 0, −k if x1 = 1
and x2 = 0, −2k if x1 = 1 and x2 = 0, and 1 otherwise.
The parameter k controls the magnitude of the treatment eﬀect. Finally, the treatment
assignment variable T is distributed according to the logit model P(T = 1|X = x) =
logit(−1 + x1 −x2 + x3).
Our method Since responses are continuous, we apply our recursive partitioning proce-
dure (Algorithm A.1) to the case where the eﬀect of treatment is measured in terms of
conditional average treatment eﬀect (CATE). In-sample estimates of the CATE and its
variance are obtained within each leaf and used in the computation of the Q-statistics for
each split. We ﬁx a maximal depth of 10 and pmax = 0.1.
Metrics We sample N = 1,000 observations, for diﬀerent values of k ranging between
0 and 4. Consider a partition Π of the feature space. Each rule in the deﬁnition of κ
(e.g., x1 = 1 and x2 = 1) is associated with a set of leaves of Π, {ℓr ∈Π : r ∈R}, such
that for any r ∈R, there is at least one observation xi from the training data such that
ℓ(xi,Π) = ℓr and xi satisfy the rule. Intuitively, {ℓr ∈Π : r ∈R} should be understood

22
as the smallest subset of leaves needed to cover all the observations satisfying the rule.
With this deﬁnition, we measure the quality of rule detection in terms of two metrics:
complexity, i.e., the cardinality of R, and purity, i.e., the proportion of observations in
{ℓr ∈Π : r ∈R} that indeed satisfy the rule. We say that Π perfectly detects a rule if
it achieves a complexity as low as 1 and a purity of 100%. For each partition, we report
complexity and purity, averaged over all rules deﬁning κ.
Benchmark We compare our splitting criterion (Q-stat) to alternatives: the t-statistics
of Su et al. (2009) (t-stat), and the causal tree of Athey and Imbens (2016) (CT), as
implemented in the R package causalTree (Athey and Imbens 2016). Following best prac-
tices, we prune the trees obtained in this fashion using a cross-validation criterion that
can be diﬀerent from the splitting one. We consider three cross-validation criteria, denoted
TOT, fit and CT in the causalTree documentation. When reporting the complexity or
the purity of t-stat/CT, we report the value obtained with the cross-validation criterion
achieving the best performance, thus leading to optimistic performance of the benchmarks.
Results Figure 1a and 1b report the results for the case where κ comprises 2 and 4 rules
respectively. From these results, we make the following observations: First, our procedure
is a sound procedure to detect heterogeneous treatment eﬀects. It returns partitions with
low complexity and a purity comparable with what other methods from the literature
achieve. As the strength of the treatment eﬀect k increases, purity of the leaves increases as
well. Compared to the t-test and CT procedures, our Q-statistics criterion achieves better
complexity, i.e., lower and less variable. This improvement is mostly due to fact that our
hypothesis testing-based criterion softly penalizes the number of samples in each leaves,
leading to relatively shallow trees. On the contrary, the two alternatives grow substan-
tially deeper trees and require a pruning step which is a known source of instability (see
Appendix A.4 for results obtained without pruning). Regarding purity, the performance
of t-test and CT are remarkably similar. For low values of k, they dominate our approach
by a substantial margin. This is not surprising since these methods were developed specif-
ically for CATE estimation and leverage the fact that treatment eﬀect can be expressed
as a sample average. Our approach is more general, hence, less powerful in this setting,
yet remarkably competitive. In particular, the edge of t-test and CT shrinks as the eﬀect
strength or the number of rules increases. Figure A.2 in appendix also suggests that Algo-
rithm A.1 might be more robust to confounding variables. Together, our results suggest

Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
23
(a) 2-rule heterogeneous treatment eﬀect
(b) 4-rule heterogeneous treatment eﬀect
Figure 1
Complexity (left panel) and purity (right panel) as the eﬀect strength k increases on synthetic examples
with 2-rule (top) and 4-rule (bottom) heterogeneous treatment eﬀect. Metrics are averaged over 20
random datasets, containing N = 1,000 observations each.
that our method is a viable and competitive alternative to the existing methods for HTE,
in particular since it can accommodate for various measures of eﬀect, such as odds ratios,
unlike CT and t-test.
6.
Applications in Social Science and Medicine
In this section, we apply Algorithm A.1 to two data sets from social science and medicine.
6.1.
Social pressure and voting
Gerber et al. (2008) conducted a large experiment to assess the eﬀect of social pressure
on voter turnout, by randomly sending mailings to 200,000 registered voters in the United
States. We apply our HOR estimation procedure to mine for response heterogeneity, and
compare our optimal treatment recommendations with prior analysis (Zhou et al. 2018).
Data description The dataset consists of n = 180,002 voters from the state of Michigan.
There are 10 voter characteristics: year of birth, sex, household size, city, and 6 voting

24
Voted at the 2000 primary?
Civic Duty
1.09 (1.06 - 1.13)
Monitored
1.12 (1.09 - 1.16)
Self
1.27 (1.24 - 1.31)
Neighbors
1.49 (1.45 - 1.53)
Civic Duty
1.07 (1.03 - 1.12)
Monitored
1.15 (1.10 - 1.20)
Self
1.20 (1.15 - 1.26)
Neighbors
1.36 (1.30 - 1.42)
Yes
No
Figure 2
Best partition of depth at most 3 obtained for measuring heterogeneity in response to social pressure
for the voting dataset.
indicator variables for the past three general and primary elections (2000, 2002, and 2004).
Gerber et al. (2008) randomly mailed a letter to the households before the 2006 primary
election, with one of the four following messages (treatments):
• Civic Duty: “Do your civic duty”.
• Monitored : “You are being studied”.
• Self History: The letter contains the household’s past voting records. The letter also
indicates that, once the election is over, a follow-up letter on whether the voter has voted
will be sent to the household.
• Neighbors: The letter contains the voting records of the household and their neighbors,
and also indicates that “all your neighbors will be able to see your past voting records”.
A ﬁfth group of households were not mailed anything (control group). The response to
treatment is whether a voter has voted to the 2006 primary election (binary).
Results and insights We apply our recursive procedure for HOR estimation, in particular
its multi-treatment extension developed in Section 2.5. We set pmax to 0.001 and a maximal
depth of 3. The resulting tree is displayed in Figure 2. Consistent with the analysis of
Gerber et al. (2008), Zhou et al. (2018), we ﬁnd that voters display relatively homogeneous
responses to mailings and that assigning “Neighbors” to everyone is the best policy.
6.2.
Application on a medicine example
We also illustrate our approach on medical data from a large clinical trial conducted in
the United States starting in 2006.
Data description The Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer Screening
Trial is a large randomized trial designed and sponsored by the National Cancer Institute
to determine the eﬀects of screening on cancer-related mortality. We restrict our attention
to colorectal cancer and conduct two analyses, namely evaluate the impact of treatment

Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
25
Gender?
OR: 0.68 - 0.83
OR: 0.77 - 0.98
Male
Female
(a) Impact of screening on incidence
Age ≤60?
OR: 0.64 - 1.24
OR: 1.03 - 1.53
Yes
No
(b) Impact of screening on cancer stage
Figure 3
Outcome of the heterogenous odds ratio estimation procedure on the PLCO data set. Algorithm A.1
is set with a maximal depth of 3 and a pmax value of 0.1.
(i.e., screening) on the incidence of colorectal cancer and the corresponding cancer stage.
The trial comprises 154,887 individuals, 50.5% female, aged between 42 and 78 years old
at randomization. Out of them, 2,299 contracted and/or died of colorectal cancer. The
covariates we use for heterogeneity detection correspond to data available at the beginning
of the trial, namely age, gender, prior history of colorectal or any cancer, and eligibility to
colorectal analysis based on the Baseline Questionnaire.
Results and insights We ﬁrst consider the entirety of the cohort and evaluate the impact
of screening on overall cancer incidence. At a population level, we do observe that interven-
tion leads to lower incidence of colorectal cancer, with odds ratio 0.7984 (95% CI: 0.7387 -
0.8630), with a stronger eﬀect on men than women (see Figure 3a). For the 2,299 patients
who contracted a colorectal cancer, we study whether the screening impacted the cancer
stage at detection. Indeed, an earlier stage cancer is associated with higher survival (Ban-
nister and Broggio 2016). Accordingly, we consider a stage I or II cancer as a “positive”
outcome. Screening does have an overall positive impact on cancer stage (OR: 0.98 - 1.36).
Yet, it is important to notice that we observe no signiﬁcant eﬀect on patients aged less than
60 years old (Figure 3b). From a policy perspective, this analysis suggests that enforcing
mandatory screening before 60 years old would be ineﬃcient in improving cancer screening
and that screening eﬀorts should focus on 60+ year-old individuals.
7.
Application on a Revenue Management Example
We apply the proposed R-HOR method to data from the e-tailer JD.com (Shen et al. 2020)
in order to study the eﬀect of discounts on the purchase probability.
7.1.
Data description and processing
We aggregated data from diﬀerent parts of the dataset, which we describe in Appendix
A.5.1. We refer to Shen et al. (2020) for a more detailed presentation of the data and

26
Table 2
Out-of-sample performance of machine learning algorithms for predicting discount assignment
Model
Hyper-parameters
Out-of-sample AUC
Decision tree
maximal depth, criterion
0.7163
Random forest
maximal depth, criterion, number of trees
0.7295
Nearest neighbors
neighborhood size, norm
0.6914
summary statistics. The ﬁnal dataset consists of 566,004 customer-product interactions,
described with 9 variables concerning the user (number of past purchase, time since ﬁrst
purchase, “Plus” membership indicator, age, gender, education, marital status, purchase
power category, city level), 4 variables concerning the product (product type, original price,
attribute 1 and 2 missingness indicator), and 2 variables regarding the interaction (day of
the week, hour of the day). For each interaction, we know whether the customer eventually
purchased the product. If so, we know whether they were oﬀered a discounted price.
7.2.
Predicting discount assignment
Out of all 566,004 customer-product interactions, 42,184 of them constitute a transaction.
61% of these transactions were oﬀered a discount. We use this data to train a machine
learning model to predict the probability of being treated, i.e., discounted, given the 15
observed covariates, P(T = 1|X = x,Y = 1). We randomly split the data into a training
(70%) and a test set (30%). We calibrate all models on the training data, using 3-fold
cross validation for tuning hyper-parameters. We compare a single decision tree (Breiman
et al. 1984), random forest (Breiman 2001) and nearest neighbor classiﬁcation (Cover and
Hart 1967) and report their out-of-sample AUC in Table 2. We acknowledge that this
comparison is purely illustrative and not exhaustive.
As summarized in Table 2, all machine learning models can predict discount assignment
with an AUC in the low 0.70s. Out of the three, random forest is the most accurate model
and the one we use in the remaining analysis. Among others, machine learning models
such as these ones can be used to identify the drivers of discounts in the platform’s current
promotion targeting strategy (see, e.g., Table A.1 in the online appendix).
7.3.
Imputing discount assignments
We now apply the previously-trained random forest model to all observations in our data
set corresponding to unbought items, thus obtaining a score ˆti ∈[0,1] for each item.
Under the MAR assumption, ˆti estimates the probability P(T = 1|X = xi). Accordingly,
for unbought items, we can either consider a single data set where unbought items are softly

Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
27
Table 3
Comparison of the diﬀerent imputation methods in terms of fraction of discounted items and overall
odds ratio. For methods producing multiple imputed data sets, we report average values (and standard deviation)
MAR
MAR - sampled
MICE
T
Fraction of discounts
62.9%
62.9% (0.1%)
63.7% (0.4%)
34.9% (12.6%)
Odds ratio
0.929
0.929 (0.003)
0.895 (0.015)
4.072 (3.994)
assigned to treatment, i.e., (xi, ˆti,yi = 0), or consider Ns potential treatment assignments
sampled according to ˆt, i.e., (xi,t(j)
i ,yi = 0), j = 1,...,Ns, with t(j)
i
∼Bernoulli(ˆti). We will
refer to these options as “MAR” and “MAR sampled” respectively. We can also impute the
missing treatment assignments using chained equations (Buuren and Groothuis-Oudshoorn
2010), a widely recognized technique for missing data imputation, implemented in the R
package mice. We perform 5 iterations of the algorithm to generate 5 diﬀerent imputed
data set (default conﬁguration) and refer to this method as “MICE”. Finally, we compare
these approaches with the methodology presented in Section 4.4, where we consider Ns
potential treatment assignments ˆt(j) ∈T . We ﬁx Ns = 160, which, according to Proposition
2, will lead to a violation probability ϵ and a conﬁdence parameter β of 5%.
We compare the four imputation methods in Table 3. First, we observe that “MAR”
and “MAR-sampled” lead to similar results, which is justiﬁed by the fact that odds ratio
can account for fractional treatment assignment. Second, methods relying on the MAR
assumption, namely “MAR”, “MAR-sampled” and “MICE”, provide similar results: they
replicate the treatment assignment mechanism observed on the purchased items. As a
result, the proportion of discounted items is similar to the one observed on the bought items
(61.1%) and the overall odds ratio is close to 1. In addition, multiple imputation methods
(“MAR-sampled” and “MICE”) produce data sets which tend to be very similar. On the
contrary, our less restrictive set of assumptions lead to a greater diversity of scenarios, which
is both a blessing and a curse. On the bright side, it allows for cases where discounts can
have a (strong) eﬀect. However, scenarios will be generated adversarially within the HOR
estimation algorithm so a larger set of treatment assignments also provides the adversarial
with more power to revoke our ﬁndings.
7.4.
Heterogeneous odds ratio estimation
We ﬁrst consider the vector of treatment assignments t leading to the worst odds ratio,
i.e., the closest to 1. By doing so, we estimate that oﬀering a discount slightly increases the
likelihood of purchase, with an odds ratio of 1.12 (95% CI: 1.10-1.14)–see the contingency
table, Table A.2, in the online appendix.

28
Product type?
OR: 2.78 - 3.92
OR: 1.09 - 1.14
1P
3P
(a) Best tree found of depth 1
(b) Impact of Γ on the resulting p-value
Figure 4
Outcome of the heterogenous odds ratio estimation procedure on the JD.com data set. Algorithm A.1
is set with a maximal depth of 1 and a pmax value of 0.01.
This treatment assignment serves as the starting point for our robust heterogeneous
assignment. Figure 4a displays the best tree of depth 1 found with this treatment assign-
ment. In particular, we observe that discounts are more eﬀective on cheap products, i.e.,
product that cost less than 36 (currency unknown). Following the robust estimation proce-
dure (Algorithm 1), this split has to be validated on a range of possible treatment assign-
ment values by solving Problem (6). Figure 4b displays the worst p-value for Cochran’Q
test applied on this split for diﬀerent budgets of uncertainty Γ. The higher the Γ, the
larger the range of potential treatment assignments T ∩{t : ∥t−t0∥1 ≤nΓ}, the higher the
p-value can be. In the remaining of the analysis, we ﬁx pmax = 0.01 and Γ = 0.15.
Figure 5 displays the best robust partition obtained of depth at most 3. From this parti-
tion, we can make the following observations: First, discount has a overall positive impact
on purchase probability. Second, product-related variables lead to more heterogeneity in
discount eﬀectiveness than customer-related information, suggesting that customers can be
relatively homogeneous in their response to discounts. However, their behavior is strongly
dependent on the product being discounted. Finally, Two categories of products beneﬁt
the most from promotions: cheap products and products from a “1P” supplier.
8.
Conclusion
Motivated by transaction-level data from a major e-tailer, we propose a recursive partition-
ing procedure for estimating heterogeneous odds ratio, a widely used measure in medicine,
economics, and social sciences. Our procedure can be applied to any deﬁnition of the treat-
ment eﬀect for which an asymptotically normal estimator exists. In addition, we develop

Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
29
Product type?
Original price?
1P
11.08 (7.56 - 16.26)
≤90.5
3.13 (2.57 - 3.81)
> 90.5
2.08 (2.03 - 2.12)
3P
Figure 5
Best partition of depth at most 3 obtained for measuring heterogeneity in response to discount on
JD.com data.
an adversarial imputation procedure to allow for robust estimation in presence of partially
observed treatment assignment, a central problem in data-driven revenue management.
We believe that the integration of problem-speciﬁc imputation methods directly into sta-
tistical estimation, and their theoretical analysis, constitutes a promising future direction
for analytics in operations management.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank JD.com and the M&SOM 2020 Data Driven Research Challenge committee
for oﬀering access to transaction-level data and administering this research challenge, which motivated this
work. The authors also thank the National Cancer Institute for access to NCI’s data collected by the Prostate,
Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer Screening Trial analyzed in Section 6.2. The statements
contained herein are solely those of the authors and do not represent or imply concurrence or endorsement
by NCI. Thanks to Ali Aouad, Colin Fogarty, and Nicos Savva for providing early feedback on the work and
suggesting relevant references, and to two anonymous referees for their constructive comments.
References
Aglin G, Nijssen S, Schaus P (2020) Learning optimal decision trees using caching branch-and-bound search.
AAAI, 3146–3153.
Angrist JD, Imbens GW, Rubin DB (1996) Identiﬁcation of causal eﬀects using instrumental variables.
Journal of the American Statistical Association 91(434):444–455.
Aouad A, Elmachtoub AN, Ferreira KJ, McNellis R (2019) Market segmentation trees. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.01174 .
Athey S, Imbens G (2016) Recursive partitioning for heterogeneous causal eﬀects. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 113(27):7353–7360.
Athey S, Tibshirani J, Wager S, et al. (2019) Generalized random forests. The Annals of Statistics 47(2):1148–
1178.

30
Balke A, Pearl J (1997) Bounds on treatment eﬀects from studies with imperfect compliance. Journal of the
American Statistical Association 92(439):1171–1176.
Bannister N, Broggio J (2016) Cancer survival by stage at diagnosis for england (experimental statistics):
adults diagnosed 2012, 2013 and 2014 and followed up to 2015. Produced in collaboration with Public
Health England .
Bargagli-StoﬃFJ, De Witte K, Gnecco G (2019) Heterogeneous causal eﬀects with imperfect compliance: a
novel bayesian machine learning approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.12707 .
Bargagli-StoﬃFJ, Gnecco G (2020) Causal tree with instrumental variable: an extension of the causal tree
framework to irregular assignment mechanisms. International Journal of Data Science and Analytics
9(3):315–337.
B´enard C, Biau G, Da Veiga S, Scornet E (2019) Sirus: making random forests interpretable. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.06852 .
Bertsimas D, Dunn J (2017) Optimal classiﬁcation trees. Machine Learning 106(7):1039–1082.
Bertsimas D, Dunn J, Mundru N (2019) Optimal prescriptive trees. INFORMS Journal on Optimization
1(2):164–183.
Bertsimas D, Sim M (2004) The price of robustness. Operations Research 52(1):35–53.
Breiman L (2001) Random forests. Machine Learning 45(1):5–32.
Breiman L, Friedman J, Stone CJ, Olshen RA (1984) Classiﬁcation and regression trees (CRC press).
Breslow N (1981) Odds ratio estimators when the data are sparse. Biometrika 68(1):73–84.
Breslow N, Liang K (1982) The variance of the Mantel-Haenszel estimator. Biometrics 943–952.
Buuren Sv, Groothuis-Oudshoorn K (2010) mice: Multivariate imputation by chained equations in r. Journal
of Statistical Software 1–68.
Campi MC, Garatti S, Prandini M (2009) The scenario approach for systems and control design. Annual
Reviews in Control 33(2):149–157.
Chan KY, Loh WY (2004) Lotus: An algorithm for building accurate and comprehensible logistic regression
trees. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics 13(4):826–852.
Cochran WG (1954) The combination of estimates from diﬀerent experiments. Biometrics 10(1):101–129.
Cornﬁeld J, Haenszel W, Hammond EC, Lilienfeld AM, Shimkin MB, Wynder EL (1959) Smoking and lung
cancer: recent evidence and a discussion of some questions. Journal of the National Cancer institute
22(1):173–203.
Cover T, Hart P (1967) Nearest neighbor pattern classiﬁcation. IEEE transactions on information theory
13(1):21–27.
Cummings P (2009) The relative merits of risk ratios and odds ratios. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent
Medicine 163(5):438–445.

Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
31
Davies HTO, Crombie IK, Tavakoli M (1998) When can odds ratios mislead? British Medical Journal
316(7136):989–991.
Demirovi´c E, Lukina A, Hebrard E, Chan J, Bailey J, Leckie C, Ramamohanarao K, Stuckey PJ
(2020) Murtree: Optimal classiﬁcation trees via dynamic programming and search. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2007.12652 .
Efron B, Feldman D (1991) Compliance as an explanatory variable in clinical trials. Journal of the American
Statistical Association 86(413):9–17.
Engels EA, Schmid CH, Terrin N, Olkin I, Lau J (2000) Heterogeneity and statistical signiﬁcance in meta-
analysis: an empirical study of 125 meta-analyses. Statistics in Medicine 19(13):1707–1728.
Gart JJ (1966) Alternative analyses of contingency tables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
(Methodological) 28(1):164–179.
Gart JJ, Zweifel JR (1967) On the bias of various estimators of the logit and its variance with application
to quantal bioassay. Biometrika 181–187.
Gerber AS, Green DP, Larimer CW (2008) Social pressure and voter turnout: Evidence from a large-scale
ﬁeld experiment. American Political Science Review 33–48.
Goodman B, Flaxman S (2017) European union regulations on algorithmic decision-making and a “right to
explanation”. AI Magazine 38(3):50–57.
Gordon L, Olshen RA (1978) Asymptotically eﬃcient solutions to the classiﬁcation problem. The Annals of
Statistics 515–533.
Gordon L, Olshen RA (1980) Consistent nonparametric regression from recursive partitioning schemes.
Journal of Multivariate Analysis 10(4):611–627.
Greenland S, Robins JM, Pearl J (1999) Confounding and collapsibility in causal inference. Statistical Science
29–46.
G¨unl¨uk O, Kalagnanam J, Menickelly M, Scheinberg K (2018) Optimal decision trees for categorical data
via integer programming. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.03225 .
Haldane JB (1956) The estimation and signiﬁcance of the logarithm of a ratio of frequencies. Annals of
Human Genetics 20(4):309–311.
Hern´an MA, Robins JM (2010) Causal inference: What if (Boca Raton: Chapman & Hill/CRC).
Huedo-Medina TB, S´anchez-Meca J, Mar´ın-Mart´ınez F, Botella J (2006) Assessing heterogeneity in meta-
analysis: Q statistic or I2 index? Psychological Methods 11(2):193.
Imbens GW, Rubin DB (2015) Causal inference in statistics, social, and biomedical sciences (Cambridge
University Press).
Kallus N (2017) Recursive partitioning for personalization using observational data. International Conference
on Machine Learning, 1789–1798 (PMLR).

32
Kallus N, Zhou A (2018) Confounding-robust policy improvement. Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, 9269–9279.
Kulinskaya E, Dollinger MB (2015) An accurate test for homogeneity of odds ratios based on Cochran’s
Q-statistic. BMC Medical Research Methodology 15(1):1–19.
Laber EB, Zhao YQ (2015) Tree-based methods for individualized treatment regimes. Biometrika 102(3):501–
514.
Lakkaraju H, Rudin C (2017) Learning cost-eﬀective and interpretable treatment regimes. Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence and Statistics, 166–175.
Landwehr N, Hall M, Frank E (2005) Logistic model trees. Machine Learning 59(1-2):161–205.
Last M, Maimon O, Minkov E (2002) Improving stability of decision trees. International Journal of Pattern
Recognition and Artiﬁcial Intelligence 16(02):145–159.
Lawson R (2004) Small sample conﬁdence intervals for the odds ratio. Communications in Statistics-
Simulation and Computation 33(4):1095–1113.
Lee HS, Zhang Y, Zame W, Shen C, Lee JW, van der Schaar M (2020a) Robust recursive partitioning for
heterogeneous treatment eﬀects with uncertainty quantiﬁcation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.07917 .
Lee K, Bargagli-StoﬃFJ, Dominici F (2020b) Causal rule ensemble: Interpretable inference of heterogeneous
treatment eﬀects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09036 .
Lin J, Zhong C, Hu D, Rudin C, Seltzer M (2020) Generalized and scalable optimal sparse decision trees.
arXiv e-prints arXiv–2006.
Manski C (1997) Monotone treatment response. Econometrica 65(6):1311–1334, ISSN 0012-9682, URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.2307/2171738.
Manski CF (1990) Nonparametric bounds on treatment eﬀects. The American Economic Review 80(2):319–
323.
Mantel N, Haenszel W (1959) Statistical aspects of the analysis of data from retrospective studies of disease.
Journal of the National Cancer Institute 22(4):719–748.
Meinshausen N, Ridgeway G (2006) Quantile regression forests. Journal of Machine Learning Research 7(6).
Musalem A, Olivares M, Bradlow ET, Terwiesch C, Corsten D (2010) Structural estimation of the eﬀect of
out-of-stocks. Management Science 56(7):1180–1197.
Oprescu M, Syrgkanis V, Wu ZS (2019) Orthogonal random forest for causal inference. International Con-
ference on Machine Learning, 4932–4941 (PMLR).
Perakis G, Singhvi D, Skali-Lami O (2019) Xstrees: A tree sampling framework for interpretable tree ensem-
bles. Available at SSRN 3505431 .
Poole C, Shrier I, VanderWeele TJ (2015) Is the risk diﬀerence really a more heterogeneous measure? Epi-
demiology 26(5):714–718.

Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
33
Rosenbaum PR (2014) Sensitivity analysis in observational studies. Wiley StatsRef: Statistics Reference
Online .
Rosenbaum PR, Rubin DB (1983) The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for causal
eﬀects. Biometrika 70(1):41–55.
Rubin DB (1976) Inference and missing data. Biometrika 63(3):581–592.
Shen M, Tang CS, Wu D, Yuan R, Zhou W (2020) JD.com: Transaction-level data for the 2020 MSOM data
driven research challenge. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management .
Siddique Z (2013) Partially identiﬁed treatment eﬀects under imperfect compliance: the case of domestic
violence. Journal of the American Statistical Association 108(502):504–513.
Smith RL (1984) Eﬃcient monte carlo procedures for generating points uniformly distributed over bounded
regions. Operations Research 32(6):1296–1308.
Su X, Tsai CL, Wang H, Nickerson DM, Li B (2009) Subgroup analysis via recursive partitioning. Journal
of Machine Learning Research 10(2).
Tran C, Zheleva E (2019) Learning triggers for heterogeneous treatment eﬀects. Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 33, 5183–5190.
Vapnik VN, Chervonenkis AY (1971) On the uniform convergence of relative frequencies of events to their
probabilities. Measures of Complexity, 11–30 (Springer).
Vulcano G, Van Ryzin G, RatliﬀR (2012) Estimating primary demand for substitutable products from sales
transaction data. Operations Research 60(2):313–334.
Wager S, Athey S (2018) Estimation and inference of heterogeneous treatment eﬀects using random forests.
Journal of the American Statistical Association 113(523):1228–1242.
Wager S, Walther G (2015) Adaptive concentration of regression trees, with application to random forests.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.06388 .
Woolf B, et al. (1955) On estimating the relation between blood group and disease. Annals of Human
Genetics 19(4):251–253.
Yuan Y, Shaw MJ (1995) Induction of fuzzy decision trees. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 69(2):125–139.
Zantedeschi V, Kusner MJ, Niculae V (2020) Learning binary trees via sparse relaxation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.04627 .
Zeileis A, Hothorn T, Hornik K (2008) Model-based recursive partitioning. Journal of Computational and
Graphical Statistics 17(2):492–514.
Zhou Z, Athey S, Wager S (2018) Oﬄine multi-action policy learning: Generalization and optimization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.04778 .

e-companion to Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
a1
Online Appendix
Pauphilet, Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio: Estimating Price
Sensitivity for Unbought Items
A.1.
Recursive procedure for Heterogeneous Odds Ratio estimation
We provide in this section the pseudo-code of the recursive partitioning procedure for
heterogeneous odds ratio estimation described in Section 2.3.
The algorithm is initialized with the entire space as the initial partition, Π = {Rp}. At
each step, the best split is found by exploring the p features and all the potential values
for t. For continuous variables, this search can be accelerated by searching threshold values
among a predeﬁned list of quantiles as in Aouad et al. (2019). Finally, depth of the leaf or
number of training samples in the leaf (total or by treatment regime) can be used as extra
criteria to declare a leaf unsplittable, although they are already indirectly captured in the
Q-statistics threshold. To account for multiple hypothesis testing, the threshold value pmax
could be reduced throughout the algorithm.
Algorithm A.1: Recursive partitioning algorithm for heterogeneous odds ratio
estimation
Input: Dn = {(xi,ti,yi), i = 1,...,n}
Result: Partition Π.
initialization: Π ←{Rp};
for ℓ∈Π do
(j⋆,t⋆) ←arg max(j,t) Q({ℓ−,ℓ+},Dn) ;
if 1 −χ2
1(Q({ℓ⋆
−,ℓ⋆
+},Dn)) ≤pmax and other criterion then
split ℓ: Π ←(Π\{ℓ}) ∪{ℓ−,ℓ+}
end
end
A.2.
Discussion: From trees to forest
Due to the discrete nature of the splits, decision trees can be notoriously unstable to pertur-
bations in the data. To improve stability, Breiman (2001) originally proposed to introduce
randomization in the training process of each tree, train a collection of random trees, and
aggregate them in a random forest. Wager and Athey (2018) later extended this idea for
HTE estimation. Wager and Walther (2015) leveraged their adaptive concentration bounds

a2
e-companion to Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
over trees to derive similar results for random forests. While a thorough analysis of hetero-
geneous odds ratio estimation via random forest is out of the scope of the present paper,
we discuss in this section the diﬀerent alternatives available to extend our methodology to
random forests.
Source of randomness: Following Breiman (2001), randomness can be introduced by
calibrating each tree on a bootstrap sample of the training data Dn. Randomness can also
be introduced in the split selection process, for instance by searching the best split among
a random subset of covariates (typically, of size √p), or by imposing that at each iteration
all variables can be selected with probability at least π/p for some π ∈(0,1]. The later
assumption was proposed by Meinshausen and Ridgeway (2006) to ensure that the size
of the leaves shrinks as n →∞and guarantee consistency. Note that stability of decision
trees can also be improved by introducing randomness in the nature of the splits directly
instead of the training process (see Yuan and Shaw 1995, Last et al. 2002, B´enard et al.
2019, Perakis et al. 2019).
Aggregation: Typically, the output of a random forest is obtained by averaging. How-
ever, given the non-collapsibility of odds ratios, the outputs of each tree in a forest cannot
be simply averaged. Consider an observation x and a random forest consisting of ntrees
trees. Each tree τ places x in a leaf ℓ(x,τ). Let us denote π(τ)
t,y (x) the value of ˆπn
t,y(ℓ(x,τ)),
and N (τ)(x) the number of training samples in that leaf. By generalizing Lemma 1 to ran-
dom forests as in Wager and Walther (2015), we can show that
1
ntree
P
τ π(τ)
t,y (x) provides
consistent estimates of πt,y(x). Hence, under the assumptions of Theorem 1,
P
τ π(τ)
1,1(x)
P
τ π(τ)
0,0(x)

P
τ π(τ)
1,0(x)
P
τ π(τ)
0,1(x)

is a consistent estimate of the odds ratio at x. Note that this aggregation rule diﬀers from
the Mantel-Haenszel estimator (Mantel and Haenszel 1959):
P
τ π(τ)
1,1(x)π(τ)
0,0(x)N (τ)(x)
P
τ π(τ)
1,0(x)π(τ)
0,1(x)N (τ)(x)
.
We refer to Breslow (1981), Breslow and Liang (1982) for a discussion on the estimation
of its variance. However, the Mantel-Haenszel estimator is only valid if leaves of diﬀerent
trees can be interpreted as independent strata, which is not the case if they are obtained

e-companion to Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
a3
via bootstrapped sample of the same training data. Finally, under the assumption that the
response follows a logistic model,
log P(Y = 1|X = x,T = t)
P(Y = 0|X = x,T = t) = r(x)t + ν(x)⊤x,
the odds ratio corresponds to the coeﬃcient associated with the treatment variable,
r(x). Athey et al. (2019) extended the random forest methodology to estimate such non-
parametric generalized linear model (here, the functions r and ν are non parametrized):
For each x, r(x) can be estimated by solving a weighted maximum likelihood estimation
problem, where each training sample is weighted according to membership in the leaves
of the random forest x belongs to. Oprescu et al. (2019) later proposed an orthogonalized
version of the procedure that is robust to the estimation error in the nuisance component
ν(x). Besides positing a logistic model, the main limitation of these approaches, however,
is that the odds ratio is not explicitly provided by the random forest but rather as the
solution of an optimization problem that depends on the random forest output.
A.3.
Uniform sampling procedure for treatment assignments
Given scores ˆt ∈[0,1]n, we randomly sample from T following Algorithm A.2.
Algorithm A.2: Uniform sampling procedure
Input: ˆt ∈[0,1]n
Result: random sample t ∈T .
initialization: ti ←NA, σ ←sortperm(ˆt);
while {i : ti = NA} ̸= ∅do
i ←random({i : ti = NA}) ;
I−←{j : σ(j) < σ(i), tj ̸= NA}, I+ ←{j : σ(j) > σ(i), tj ̸= NA}
LB ←max(tj,j ∈I−), UB ←min(tj,j ∈I+) // Note: if I−(resp. I+) empty, 0 (resp. 1).
UB ←min(UB, ˆti); ti ←U([LB,UB]);
end
A.4.
Additional numerical experiments on synthetic data
Figures A.1a and A.1b replicate Figures 1a and 1b from Section 5, except that trees
obtained by “t-test” and “CT” are not pruned. These results clearly demonstrate the
importance of pruning in reducing the size of the trees, hence achieving lower complexity,
without compromise on their quality (purity almost unchanged). Yet, it is also clear from
these pictures that pruning introduces instability.

a4
e-companion to Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
(a) 2-rule heterogeneous treatment eﬀect.
(b) 4-rule heterogeneous treatment eﬀect.
Figure A.1
Replication of Figure 1 when trees obtained by “t-test” and “CT” are not pruned. The left and right
panel respectively display the complexity and purity as the eﬀect strength k increases, on synthetic
examples with 2-rule (top) 4-rule (bottom) heterogeneous treatment eﬀect. Metrics are averaged
over 20 random datasets, containing N = 1,000 observations each.
To evaluate the robustness of our recursive partitioning procedure to the confounding
factors, we conduct a similar set of experiments except that the treatment eﬀect is now
deﬁned as τk(X4,X5). In other words, X1,X2,X3 impact the baseline eﬀect Y (0) and the
propensity score P(T = 1|X = x), while X4,X5 drive the treatment eﬀect heterogeneity. If
S denotes the set of features the tree splits on, we evaluate the accuracy A = |S ∩{4,5}|/2
and false detection rate F = |S \ {4,5}|/|S|. With these notations, a good HTE algorithm
should split on X4 and X5, i.e., A = 1, and X4,X5 only, i.e., F = 0. Figure A.2 compares
the accuracy (left panel) and false detection rate (right panel) of all three methods as the
eﬀect strength k increases, for the 2-rule treatment. Causal trees and t-test based trees are
pruned. For each metric, the cross-validation criterion for these two methods is chosen so
as to optimize this particular metric. Figure A.2 suggests that our recursive partitioning
procedure is more robust to confounding than either causal trees or t-test based tests.

e-companion to Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
a5
Figure A.2
Accuracy (left panel) and False detection rate (right panel) as the eﬀect strength k increases, to
measure the ability of each HTE method to isolate features aﬀecting treatment heterogeneity. Trees
obtained by “t-test” and “CT” are pruned. Metrics are averaged over 20 random synthetic datasets
with 2-rule, containing N = 1,000 observations each.
A.5.
Supporting material for the revenue management example
This section provides details on the analysis of the JD.com data (Shen et al. 2020).
A.5.1.
Data processing
We aggregated data from diﬀerent sources, which we brieﬂy present in this section. We
emphasize the data characteristics that are relevant to our analysis but refer to Shen et al.
(2020) for a more detailed presentation of the data.
Clicks data:
This data contains the list of pages/products visited by each user, the
channel they used (e.g., desktop, mobile, app), and the corresponding time-stamp. We say
that two pages are part of the same session if they are visited by the same user, on the
same platform, within 10 minutes. If a user visited the same page multiple times within
the same session, we only retain her last visit.
Users data:
Each user is described by a unique identiﬁer, some statistics on her pur-
chase history (number of past purchases, time of ﬁrst purchase, loyalty program), and
demographics (e.g., gender, education).
Products data: We characterize each product by its type and two attributes. Given the
large proportion of products with missing attributes, we only use the presence of each
attribute as a covariate, not its value (when available). With deanonymized data, product
category-speciﬁc imputations could be considered as well.
Orders data: For each order, we have access to the initial and ﬁnal price, the diﬀerence
indicating whether a discount was applied. In our analysis, we do not discriminate between
the diﬀerent types of discounts (direct, quantity, bundle,...). For unbought items, we do

a6
e-companion to Pauphilet: Robust and Heterogenous Odds Ratio
know neither the original price nor whether the price was discounted. For the original
price, we impute it using the closest (in time) price for the same product in the training
data - the “original price” listed in the data is product-speciﬁc and the same for all users.
For the discount indicator, we apply our robust estimation strategy from Section 4. We
exclude from our analysis products that have never been purchased, products whose price
changed more than 62 times (twice a day) over the month of March 2018, and transactions
consisting of free products.
All together, the ﬁnal dataset consists of 566,004 customer-product interactions,
described with 9 variables concerning the user (number of past purchase, time since ﬁrst
purchase, “Plus” membership indicator, age, gender, education, marital status, purchase
power category, city level), 4 variables concerning the product (product type, original price,
attribute 1 and 2 missingness indicator), and 2 variables regarding the interaction (day of
the week, hour of the day).
A.5.2.
Predicting discount assignment
A predictive model to predict discount assignment can be used to understand the drivers
of discounts (or back-engineer the promotion targeting strategy). Table A.1 reports the
most important features for the decision tree and random forest models. In both cases,
original price is the most important feature, with a clear edge over the second best one.
Table A.1
Key parameters driving the application of a promotion on bought items. For each variable, we also
report the importance value, according to each model.
Variable rank
Decision tree
Random forest
1
Original price (0.59)
Original price (0.25)
2
Product type (0.08)
Time since 1st purchase (0.15)
3
Time since 1st purchase (0.06)
Hour of the day (0.14)
4
Attribute 2 missing (0.03)
City type (0.06)
5
Hour of the day (0.03)
Number of past purchases (0.05)
A.5.3.
Heterogeneous odds ratio estimation
We ﬁrst consider the vector of treatment assignments t leading to the worst odds ratio,
i.e., the closest to 1. By doing so, we obtain the following the 2 × 2 contingency table:
Table A.2
2 × 2 contingency table on JD.com’s data with adversarial treatment assignments.
Y = 0
Y = 1
T = 0
218,069
16,399
T = 1
305,751
25,785