TITLE: Invite Your Friend and You’ll Move Up in Line: Optimal Design of Referral Priority Programs
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2020.0868
---

UC Berkeley
UC Berkeley Previously Published Works
Title
Invite Your Friend and You’ll Move Up in Line: Optimal Design of Referral Priority Programs
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2528d4dx
Journal
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 23(5)
ISSN
1523-4614
Author
Yang, Luyi
Publication Date
2021-09-01
DOI
10.1287/msom.2020.0868
 
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org
Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Invite Your Friend and You’ll Move up in Line:
Optimal Design of Referral Priority Programs
Luyi Yang
University of California, Berkeley, Haas School of Business, luyiyang@berkeley.edu
This paper studies the optimal design of referral priority programs, in which customers on a waitlist
can jump the line by inviting their friends to also join the waitlist. Recent years have witnessed a growing
presence of referral priority programs as a novel customer acquisition strategy for ﬁrms that maintain a
waitlist. Diﬀerent variations of this scheme are seen in practice, raising the question of what should be the
optimal referral priority mechanism. We build an analytical model that integrates queueing theory into a
mechanism design framework, where the objective of the ﬁrm is to maximize the system throughput, i.e., to
accelerate customer acquisition as much as possible. Our analysis shows that the optimal mechanism has one
of the following structures: full priority, partial priority, ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out (FIFO), and strategic delay. A full-
priority (partial-priority) scheme enables referring customers to get ahead of all (only some) non-referring
ones. A FIFO scheme does not provide any priority-based referral incentive. A strategic-delay scheme grants
full priority to referring customers, but artiﬁcially inﬂates the delay of non-referring ones. We show that
FIFO is optimal if either the base market size or the referral cost is large. Otherwise, partial priority is
optimal if the base market size is above a certain threshold; full priority is optimal at the threshold base
market size; strategic delay is optimal if the base market size is below the threshold. We also ﬁnd that
referrals motivate the ﬁrm to maintain a larger capacity and therefore, can surprisingly shorten the average
delay even though more customers sign up and strategic delay is sometimes inserted. Our paper provides
prescriptive guidance for launching the optimal referral priority program and rationalizes common referral
schemes seen in practice.
Key words : queueing; referrals; priority; customer acquisition; system throughput; mechanism design
1.
Introduction
The referral priority program has gained traction as a customer acquisition strategy in recent years,
particularly in the technology sector. The increasing shift of mobile and software services to the
cloud often puts a strain on the capacity of technology ﬁrms providing these services, and, as a
consequence, waitlists emerge as a natural means to buﬀer customer demand (The Verge 2013).
Customers sign up on a waitlist and will not be granted access to the service until it is their turn
for account activation. A long wait, however, can be bypassed if a referral priority program is put
1

2
in place. In such a program, if a customer wishes to get activated sooner, she can jump the line by
inviting her friends to also join the waitlist.
Referral programs in practice vary in how much a referring customer can jump, if at all. For exam-
ple, Robinhood, a ﬁnancial-service company providing commission-free stock and cryptocurrency
trading (Fortune 2015), presents its referral program as follows: “Interested in priority access? Get
early access by referring your friends. The more friends that join, the sooner you will get access.”
Our conversations with Robinhood conﬁrm that they use a full-priority referral scheme, in which
a customer, by bringing in one friend, can skip over all the non-referring customers.
However, other companies run their referral programs diﬀerently. For instance, x.ai, which oﬀers
artiﬁcial-intelligence-powered email scheduling services (Financial Times 2018), gives the following
account of its referral program: “Hang Tight. We appreciate your patience. Want to jump the
line? Share below and move on up.” They specify that a customer can move up by two spots for
each successful referral. In essence, x.ai’s referral program is one of partial priority, i.e., a referring
customer can overtake some of the non-referring customers but not all of them.
Still, other twists exist. Some companies simply run a ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out (FIFO) waitlist without
a referral priority program; examples include Dropbox, a ﬁle-hosting service (TechCrunch 2011),
and Mailbox, an email inbox-management application (Business Insider 2013). On the other hand,
Waitlisted.co, a third-party waitlist-management tool that enables customization of referral priority
programs, supports a function to artiﬁcially augment the queue size, which could be a means to
implement strategic delay.
The presence of all these variations begs the question of what should be the optimal referral
priority program for customer acquisition. Our conversations with Waitlisted.co suggest that many
ﬁrms are eager to launch a referral priority program, but often lack guidance on whether they
should do it and if so, how. Nevertheless, the academic literature on this topic is tenuous, and to the
best of our knowledge, the only existing paper is Yang and Debo (2019), who consider two speciﬁc
mechanisms, FIFO and full priority, but are silent on the broader mechanism design question.
In contrast to traditional referral reward programs in a non-queueing setting, referral priority
programs face several unique design challenges. In the former, customers refer for money, the
amount of which can be freely set by the ﬁrm. In the latter, customers refer for priority, which
cannot be arbitrarily promised without regard to its operational feasibility. For instance, a ﬁrm
that guarantees an extraordinarily short delay for referring customers may ﬁnd it diﬃcult to deliver
it if too many referring customers qualify. Hence, operational achievability governs how referral
incentives should be provided. Moreover, in designing a referral priority program, a subtle trade-oﬀ
exists between customers’ joining and referral incentives. While the launch of a traditional referral
reward program reinforces customers’ willingness to join (because they can get paid for referrals

3
on top of obtaining the desired service), the launch of a referral priority program may weaken
customers’ willingness to join, because referrals can exacerbate congestion, making it less favorable
for customers to sign up on the waitlist. To the extent that referred customers cannibalize the
demand of base customers who would sign up organically otherwise, the referral incentive can be
at odds with the joining incentive, and a delicate balance between the two is warranted.
To ﬁnd the optimal referral priority program, we build an analytical model that combines mech-
anism design and queueing theory. The sign-up waitlist is modeled as a single-server Markovian
queue with homogeneous delay-sensitive customers. The ﬁrm’s objective is to acquire as many
customers as possible, i.e., to maximize the system throughput, by specifying customers’ expected
delays as a function of how many converted referrals they have. These expected delays reﬂect how
the ﬁrm schedules customers in the sign-up queue. To ﬁnd viable scheduling policies, we employ
the achievable region method (Coﬀman and Mitrani 1980) to ensure the expected delays speciﬁed
by the ﬁrm are operationally achievable. In our base model, each customer has one potential friend
to refer; we later demonstrate the robustness of our results in an extension that accommodates
multiple friends. Base customers arrive organically (not through referrals) according to a Poisson
process with a rate referred to as the base market size. Given the expected delays posted by the
ﬁrm, each arriving customer decides on her joining (i.e., sign-up) probability and also how much
(costly) referral eﬀort to exert if she joins. The more referral eﬀort one exerts, the more likely a
friend is to arrive. Upon arrival, a referred customer goes through the same joining and referral
decision process. A referral converts if the friend being referred joins the queue. One key feature
of referrals is that they make the sign-up process more bursty because once a base customer joins,
a random succession of referred ones follow.
We ﬁnd that in the ﬁrst-best problem that ignores customers’ referral incentives, the ﬁrm should
always adopt a work-conserving policy; in particular, when the base market size is large, the non-
referral FIFO scheme is the optimal mechanism. Despite the ability to compel customers to refer,
the ﬁrm in the ﬁrst best still prefers not to under a large base market size because the system is
already congested even without referrals and inviting referrals would inevitably further increase
congestion, thus crowding out base customers. The gain of referred customers would not make up
for the loss of base ones in this case because it would create a more bursty arrival process that
prolongs delay and jeopardizes the system throughput. This result immediately implies that in
the second-best problem (which acknowledges customers’ referral incentives), the ﬁrm should turn
oﬀthe referral program and run a plain FIFO waitlist when the base market size is large. When
it is not too large, though, the ﬁrst best always encourages some referrals, yet the second best
cannot generate any when the referral cost is too prohibitive. Therefore, FIFO is again the optimal
mechanism (in fact, the only feasible one) in this case.

4
Under a small referral cost and an intermediate base market size, it is optimal to employ a partial-
priority referral scheme, which achieves the ﬁrst-best solution. Partial priority stimulates referrals,
but also prevents customers from referring too much (so that referrals do not dampen the joining
incentive). As the base market size gets smaller, the optimal mechanism injects a stronger referral
incentive by allocating more priority to referring customers until the base market size reaches a
certain cutoﬀvalue, at which point, referring customers receive full priority. When the base market
size falls below this cutoﬀvalue, then any work-conserving policies fail to generate referrals in the
second best because under such light congestion, delay is short anyway and customers lack the
incentive to refer. As a remedy, the optimal mechanism resorts to strategic delay—a non-work-
conserving policy that gives full priority to referring customers but artiﬁcially inﬂates the delay
of those who do not refer—in order to make the priority reserved for those who refer look more
attractive. In this manner, the optimal mechanism produces referrals, but still not as many as what
would be produced in the ﬁrst best.
We also explore how transfers can restore eﬃciency and close the gap between the ﬁrst best
and the second best, and how discriminating between base and referred customers by providing
them with diﬀerent waiting-time quotations can further increase the throughput. Furthermore, we
study extensions of multiple friends and endogenous capacity to demonstrate the robustness of
our insights. In terms of the capacity implications of referrals, we ﬁnd that referrals prompt the
ﬁrm to build more capacity, but in order to incentivize referrals, the ﬁrm in the second best may
refrain from serving customers as fast as it would in the ﬁrst best. Interestingly, when capacity
is endogenous, the introduction of the referral priority program shortens the average delay of the
waitlist despite the fact that more customers join the waitlist as a result of referrals and the fact
that customers may be strategically delayed.
In short, our unifying framework rationalizes various referral priority programs observed in prac-
tice and provides prescriptive guidance for how to tailor the referral program to a ﬁrm’s business
environment. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. §2 reviews the relevant literature.
§3 formulates the model. §4 begins the analysis by examining the ﬁrst-best problem. §5 continues
the analysis and characterizes the structure of the optimal mechanism in the second-best problem.
§6 studies several extensions. §7 concludes the paper and discusses future research directions. All
the technical proofs are relegated to Appendix A.
2.
Related Literature
Our research bridges the marketing literature on customer referrals, and the operations literature
on rational queueing.
The marketing literature on customers referrals focuses on the design of referral reward programs
that compensate customers with monetary rewards for successful referrals. The stream of literature

5
stems from Biyalogorsky et al. (2001), who examine how the ﬁrm should jointly set the purchase
price and referral reward. They ﬁnd the referral reward program “pays for performance” and thus
mitigates the free-riding problem that would arise if the ﬁrm were to attract customers with a
low price only. Kornish and Li (2010) design the optimal referral bonuses by capturing referrals’
quality-signaling role in addition to its informational role. Xiao et al. (2011) investigate how to
provide two-way incentives to both referring and referred customers. Lobel et al. (2017) study the
impact of the social network structure on the referral-payment design when ﬁrms value referrals
but can only compensate conversions. Jing and Xie (2011) contrast the referral reward program
with group buying, and ﬁnd group buying to be more favorable if interpersonal communication
is highly eﬃcient. Our model builds on this strand of literature and further contributes to it by
studying the referral priority program where customers are incentivized not by pecuniary payment
but by priority access on a waitlist. As such, the incentives cannot be speciﬁed without regard to
their operational achievability.
The operations literature on rational queueing often studies how delay and pricing in the queue
impact customer behavior. Hassin and Haviv (2003) and Hassin (2016) present comprehensive
reviews of the literature. Early works such as Naor (1969) and Edelson and Hildebrand (1975)
examine how to price a service facility to regulate customers’ queue-joining incentives. The works
on rational customer behavior in priority queues are particularly relevant for our paper. Kleinrock
(1967) opens up a body of literature on priority auctions in which customers who bid more receive
a strictly higher priority than those who bid less (Lui 1985, Glazer and Hassin 1986, Hassin 1995,
Af`eche and Mendelson 2004). Another branch of this literature investigates the optimal pricing of
priorities, such as Mendelson and Whang (1990), Gavirneni and Kulkarni (2016), Gurvich et al.
(2019), Wang et al. (2019), or compares priority pricing with other mechanisms such as line-sitting
(Cui et al. 2019) and queue-scalping (Yang et al. 2019). All of these papers focus on work-conserving
full-priority policies, in which the ﬁrm charges a higher price for higher priority, and customers
decide whether to join the queue and if so, self-select into their priority class.
Our paper builds on the growing literature that identiﬁes the optimal priority-pricing structure
by integrating mechanism design (Myerson 1981) and the achievable region method (Coﬀman and
Mitrani 1980). The seminal work of Af`eche (2013) studies the priority-pricing problem from a
revenue-maximizing perspective by allowing for non-work-conserving policies and shows inserting
strategic delay may be optimal. Katta and Sethuraman (2005) show that the optimal pricing scheme
might pool customers of diﬀerent types into the same priority class if the virtual delay cost is not
monotone increasing. Af`eche and Pavlin (2016) ﬁnd lead-time-dependent customer types can drive
the appearance of strategic delay, pooling, or pricing out the middle as the optimal scheduling
structure. Yang et al. (2017) consider auction mechanisms for customers to trade their waiting

6
positions and show that partial pooling is the optimal mechanism for an intermediary in charge
of the trading platform. While the above papers employ exact analysis that captures stochasticity
of the queue (which is also the approach we take), others resort to ﬂuid approximations to model
kidney allocation (Su and Zenios 2006) or deterministic relaxations to characterize the behavior of
large-scale systems (Maglaras et al. 2018).
One major diﬀerence between priority purchasing and referral priority programs is that in the
former, whether one purchases priority does not directly aﬀect how congested the queue is, whereas
in the latter, referrals bring new customers to the system, thereby directly changing the congestion
level. Moreover, in our framework of referral priority programs, not only can full priority and
strategic delay emerge as the optimal scheme (as identiﬁed by the literature for priority pricing),
but FIFO and partial priority can do as well (diﬀerent from the literature). Note that partial
priority in our setting bears a resemblance to pooling in the literature but the underlying structure
is quite diﬀerent. Partial priority still gives some preferential treatment (i.e., a shorter delay) to
referring customers, whereas pooling in those papers do not diﬀerentiate at all the delay of diﬀerent
types of customers being pooled.
Unlike the above queueing literature which typically involves mechanisms design problems with
“hidden information” (customers privately informed of their type), the incentive problem in our
model stems from “hidden action”: the ﬁrm does not observe and thus cannot contract directly on
customers’ referral eﬀort; rather, it contracts on the veriﬁable referral outcome (whether a referred
customer joins), which is a probabilistic function of the referral eﬀort. To that end, our paper is
related to the principle-agent theory (Ross 1973, Holmstr¨om 1979). The unique setting of a referral
program introduces an interaction among the agents (i.e., customers): the conversion rate of a
referral depends on whether a friend joins, or the expected utility of joining, which, in turn, is a
function of how likely a referral converts. Moreover, the queueing setting links a customer’ joining
decision with those of others. Therefore, the novel features of our problem distinguish it from those
in the literature on principle-agent theory.
Finally, to the best of our knowledge, the only other paper that studies referral priority programs
is Yang and Debo (2019), who restrict attention to the full-priority referral scheme under ﬁxed
capacity. While we build on their model, we also take one step further by endogenizing both
the scheduling policies (in the main model) and the capacity (in an extension). In particular, we
complement Yang and Debo (2019) by showing that even when the referral program based on full
priority backﬁres or fails to work, the ﬁrm may still generate referrals and acquire more customers
by launching a carefully designed referral program based on partial priority or strategic delay.

7
3.
Model
We model a sign-up waitlist for a ﬁrm’s service as a single-server queueing system that has i.i.d.
exponential service times with mean 1/µ. Parameter µ is the capacity of the ﬁrm, the rate at which
the ﬁrm takes customers (if any) oﬀthe waitlist for access to the service. The base model focuses on
the case of exogenous capacity; §6.3 extends the analysis to endogenous capacity. Base customers
arrive to the system according to a Poisson process with rate or base market size Λ. These base
customers are aware of the service themselves and arrive spontaneously (i.e., not through referrals).
When we say a customer arrives, it means that a customer becomes aware of the service and may
potentially sign up on the waitlist (i.e., join the queue). An arrival does not necessarily translate
to a sign-up, as we shall see next.
For each arriving customer, her (gross) valuation of the service is V , and her waiting cost per
unit time spent in the queueing system (including the time at the server1) is c. The waiting cost
captures time preference: ceteris paribus, customers would rather receive the service earlier than
later. Thus, a long wait would diminish a customer’s net valuation of the service, thereby reducing
her willingness to join the queue. Upon arrival, each customer decides whether to join the queue or
balk. If a customer balks, her utility is normalized to zero. If a customer joins, she next determines,
upon joining, her eﬀort level r ∈[0,1] for making a referral, i.e., for inviting a friend to also join
the queue. A customer who exerts eﬀort r incurs total referral cost kr, where k is the cost of eﬀort,
or (marginal) referral cost; and with probability r, her friend, a referred customer responds, i.e.,
arrives (instantaneously) upon receiving the referral invitation (but does not necessarily join). If
a customer does not exert any eﬀort, i.e., r = 0, then her friend will deﬁnitely not arrive. At the
other extreme, if a customer exerts full eﬀort, i.e., r = 1, then her friend will arrive with certainty.
The referral eﬀort can be interpreted as the eﬀort expended to reach out to a potentially interested
friend and educate the friend on the service provided by the ﬁrm. This formulation captures in a
stylized way the idea that more referral eﬀort on the part of the referring customer translates to
a higher response rate, i.e., the friend she approaches is more likely to be convinced to check out
the service (i.e., arrive).
A referred customer has the same valuation and waiting cost primitives as a base customer and
also decides on joining and referring. The same process continues for a friend’s friend and so on.
Once a customer joins, she does not renege. We assume V > c/µ to rule out the trivial case in
which no customers join. All model primitives, V,c,k,Λ,µ, are known to the ﬁrm, yet customers
only know their valuation and cost parameters V,c,k, but not system parameters Λ or µ.
1 In our context, if a customer is at the server, it means that she will tentatively be the next one to get oﬀthe waitlist
and access the service unless she is overtaken.

8
A referral converts, or is successful, if the invited friend joins the queue. Once a referred customer
signs up via the unique referral link she receives from the referring customer, the ﬁrm identiﬁes
the referring customer and credits her with a successful referral. The ﬁrm posts expected delays
W1 for customers who make a successful referral, and expected delay W0 for those who do not
refer or make an unsuccessful referral attempt. Customers do not know the real-time queue length
or underlying scheduling policy, and cannot reliably estimate their own delays (because, in part,
they are uninformed of system parameters Λ or µ); therefore, they act on the expected delays
W ≜(W1,W0) posted by the ﬁrm. A customer’s strategy is a pair (α,r), where α ∈[0,1] is the
joining probability and and r ∈[0,1], the referral eﬀort. By allowing α to be either from {0,1} or
a fractional number between 0 and 1, we accommodate both pure and mixed strategies of joining.
Figure 1 illustrate the model setup.
Figure 1
Illustration of the Model
Joining 
Customer
Expected 
Delay 𝑊𝑊0
Arriving 
customer
Join
Balk
Waiting cost rate 𝑐𝑐
Valuation 𝑉𝑉
Expected 
delay 𝑊𝑊1
Base customer
Referred customer
Friend joins
Poisson Process PP(Λ)
Λ: Base market size
Referral effort 𝑟𝑟
Total referral cost
𝑘𝑘𝑘𝑘
Joining probability 𝛼𝛼
with prob. 𝛼𝛼
Given the posted expected delays W , if all other customers play (α,r), the expected utility for
a customer who plays (α′,r′) is
U(α′,r′|α,r,W ) = α′[V −kr′ −c(r′αW1 + (1 −r′α)W0)].
That is, a focal joining customer’s expected utility is her valuation of the service, less the referral
cost, less the expected waiting cost, which is calculated by accounting for the likelihood of referral
conversion. A referral converts if (1) the invited friend arrives, which occurs with probability r′
(given the focal customer’s strategy (α′,r′)), and (2) the friend joins, which occurs with probability
α (given all other customers’ strategy (α,r), which represents the focal customer’s friend’s strategy).
Therefore, with probability r′α (1−r′α), the original customer’s expected delay is W1 (W0). Given
W , a symmetric Nash equilibrium (α,r) satisﬁes
(α,r) ∈arg max
α′,r′ U(α′,r′|α,r,W ).
(1)

9
That is, in equilibrium, a customer’s joining and referral strategy is the best response to itself. To
explicate the equilibrium condition in (1), note that the expected utility U(α′,r′|α,r,W ) is linear
in r′ with slope α′[−k + cα(W0 −W1)]. Thus, in a nontrivial equilibrium with α > 0, the referral
eﬀort r has the following equilibrium properties:
(i) if −k + cα(W0 −W1) > 0, r = 1;
(ii) if −k + cα(W0 −W1) < 0, r = 0;
(iii) if −k + cα(W0 −W1) = 0, r ∈[0,1].
In Case (i): the marginal beneﬁt of a referral, cα(W0 −W1), exceeds the marginal referral cost k, so
customers always gain from exerting more referral eﬀort, and thus they end up exerting full eﬀort;
in Case (ii), the marginal beneﬁt of a referral is less than the marginal cost, so customers exert zero
referral eﬀort; in Case (iii), the marginal beneﬁt of a referral is equal to the marginal cost, so any
possible referral eﬀort would give the same expected utility and thus constitute an equilibrium.
Queueing Dynamics. Since, referred customers in our model arrive as soon as they receive an
invitation, the joining process of customers is a compound Poisson process. In other words, the
queueing system has batch arrivals. Each arrival batch is initiated by a base customer, followed
by a succession of referred customers who sign up one after another until a customer either stops
making a referral or does not refer successfully. For any equilibrium (α,r) that results in a stable
queueing system, the eﬀective arrival rate (joining rate) is Λα; the batch size N is a random variable
following a geometric distribution with
Pr(N = k) = (1 −rα)(rα)k−1,
k = 1,2,...,
E[N] =
1
1 −rα.
The system throughput is Λα/(1 −rα). Out of a batch of size N, the ﬁrst N −1 customers in the
batch refer successfully, and the last customer does not. Thus, the throughput of customers with
one successful referral is Λrα2/(1 −rα), which is rα fraction of the joining customers, whereas
the throughput of non-referring customers (including those who do not refer and those who refer
in vain alike) is Λα, which is (1 −rα) fraction of the joining customers. A key feature of the
batch arrival process (i.e., compound Poisson process) is that it is more bursty than the original
unit arrival process (i.e., Poisson process). Referrals exacerbate the variability of customer arrivals
because in the absence of referrals, the only source of variability is when a customer arrives, but
in the presence of referrals, there is also variability in how many referred customers an initial base
customer can bring in (i.e., the batch size itself is random), making the customer arrival process
even more unpredictable. Such burstiness is at the heart of our subsequent analysis.

10
Operationally Achievable Delays. Thus far, we have taken the posted expected delays W as given.
However, these two quantities cannot be arbitrary, but instead should be operationally achievable.
Speciﬁcally, we require that W agree with the realized average steady-state delays given capacity
µ, a particular (nonanticipative and regenerative) scheduling policy, and customers’ joining and
referral decisions (α,r) induced by W . This consistency requirement is standard in the literature
(Af`eche 2013, Af`eche and Pavlin 2016, Yang et al. 2017) and is typically captured by constraints
imposed on W ensuring that it must lie within the achievable region (Coﬀman and Mitrani 1980).
The strength of this achievable region method is that it focuses on the scheduling outcome, the
expected delays, rather than speciﬁc, potentially complex scheduling policies that implement this
outcome. We apply this achievable region method. Consistent with the literature (Af`eche 2013,
Af`eche and Pavlin 2016), we allow for non-work-conserving policies for comprehensiveness and
preemptive policies for simplicity. Lemma 1 speciﬁes the operationally achievable region for W ,
accounting for the queueing dynamics (e.g., batch arrivals) described above.
Lemma 1. For any (α,r) pair that satisﬁes µ > Λα/(1 −rα), expected delays W = (W1,W0) is
operationally achievable if and only if
rαW1 + (1 −rα)W0 ≥
1
µ(1 −rα) −Λα,
(2a)
W1 ≥
1
µ(1 −rα) −Λrα2 ,
(2b)
W0 ≥
1
µ −Λα.
(2c)
The right-hand side of Constraint (2a), 1/(µ(1 −rα) −Λα) is the mean delay of a batch-arrival
queue with capacity µ, arrival rate Λα and mean batch size 1/(1 −rα) (see the description of the
queueing dynamics). Thus, Constraint (2a) ensures that any scheduling policy cannot reduce the
total workload. The right-hand side of Constraint (2b), 1/(µ(1 −rα) −Λrα2), is the mean delay of
a batch-arrival queue with capacity µ, arrival rate Λrα2 and mean batch size 1/(1−rα). The mean-
delay expressions on the right hand sides of Constraints (2a) and (2b) follow from Yang and Debo
(2019). The right-hand side of Constraint (2c) is the mean delay of an M/M/1 queue with capacity
µ and arrival rate Λα. Constraints (2b) and (2c) essentially require that the posted expected delay
for customers in each group (for both the referring and non-referring groups) cannot be shorter
than what they would get if their group were fully prioritized over the other group. Intuitively,
Constraints (2a)-(2b) prevent the ﬁrm from over-promising delays too short to be achievable.
If Constraint (2a) is binding, then we have work-conserving scheduling policies. If Constraint (2b)
is also binding, then W corresponds to a full-priority (work-conserving) scheme in which those with
a successful referral can jump over all the non-referring customers. If Constraint (2a) is binding but

11
Constraint (2b) is not, and W1 < W0, then W implies a partial-priority (work-conserving) scheme
in which those with a successful referral can jump over some of the non-referring customers but
not all of them. If Constraint (2a) is non-binding, then W must be operationalized by a non-work-
conserving scheme, which we refer to as strategic delay. Finally, if W1 = W0 = 1/(µ(1 −rα) −Λα),
i.e., a customer who makes a successful referral does not receive any delay reduction, then such W
eﬀectively reduces to a FIFO scheme.
3.1.
The Mechanism Design Formulation
We now formalize the ﬁrm’s mechanism design problem. The ﬁrm’s objective is to acquire as many
customers as possible. Hence, it aims to maximize the system throughput Λα/(1−rα), the average
number of sign-ups per unit time. It chooses expected delays W to induce the optimal joining
and referral strategies (α,r) from customers. The ﬁrm is subject to the individual rationality
(IR) constraint, the incentive compatibility (IC) constraint, the operational achievability (OA)
constraints, and the stability constraint, as speciﬁed below.
Problem 1.
max
W1≥0,W0≥0,r∈[0,1],α∈[0,1]
Λα
1 −rα,
(3)
s.t.
V −kr −c[rαW1 + (1 −rα)W0] ≥0,
(4)
r ∈arg max
r′
V −kr′ −c[r′αW1 + (1 −r′α)W0],
(5)
rαW1 + (1 −rα)W0 ≥
1
µ(1 −rα) −Λα,
(6a)
W1 ≥
1
µ(1 −rα) −Λrα2 ,
(6b)
W0 ≥
1
µ −Λα.
(6c)
Λα
1 −rα < µ.
(7)
The objective of Problem 1 is to maximize the system throughput in (3) through the referral
program. Constraint (4) is the IR constraint enforcing that the expected utility from joining should
be nonnegative. Constraint (5) is the IC constraint which ensures that choosing eﬀort level r indeed
maximizes a joining customer’s expected utility, given the expected delays W1,W0 and joining
probability α of other (referred) customers. To operationalize Constraint (5), see the discussion
following the equilibrium condition (1). While the IR and IC constraints explained above specify
customer strategies (α,r) for given expected delays W , Constraints (6a)-(6c) are OA constraints
(as introduced in Lemma 1) that, in turn, guarantee the operational achievability of expected delays
W given customer strategies (α,r). Together, Constraints (4) through (6c) close the feedback loop

12
between the posted delays and customers’ joining and referral strategies. Finally, Constraint (7)
guarantees the stability of the queueing system.
To avoid triviality, we henceforth impose Assumption 1.
Assumption 1. V > c/µ.
3.2.
Remarks on the Model
Customers in our model are ex-ante homogeneous; their valuation and cost parameters do not
vary across individuals. However, referrals create ex-post heterogeneity among customers since
referral response and conversion can both be probabilistic. To that end, assuming customers are
homogeneous ex-ante presents the simplest setup to cleanly deliver our results.
While we frame the referral strategy r as how much eﬀort to exert, one can alternatively interpret
it as the probability of making a referral. As such, any r between 0 and 1 would essentially be
a mixed referral strategy (whereas α ∈(0,1) represents a mixed joining strategy). That is, if a
customer were to refer, her friend would arrive for sure, but a customer may not always refer when
r ∈(0,1). Both interpretations (referral eﬀort or probability) are valid in our model.
We draw on Yang and Debo (2019) (which ﬁxes the scheduling policy to full priority) for some
key modeling choices of our model, one of which is the implicit assumption that each customer has
a single friend she can potentially refer. The single-referral assumption is in line with the marketing
literature on customer referrals (e.g., Biyalogorsky et al. 2001, Kornish and Li 2010), and, due to
variations in referral outcomes, a single referral can eﬀectively create two priority classes ex post,
a common focus of the operations literature on priority queues (e.g., Af`eche 2013, Gavirneni and
Kulkarni 2016). In §6.1, we demonstrate the robustness of our results in a model of multiple friends.
4.
The First-Best Problem
In this section, we study the ﬁrst-best problem as if customers would exert exactly the amount of
referral eﬀort dictated by the ﬁrm. Technically, the ﬁrst-best problem relaxes IC constraint (5) in
Problem 1. Proposition 1 characterizes the optimal solution to the ﬁrst-best problem.
Proposition 1. The ﬁrst-best problem solution is always work-conserving. In the ﬁrst best,
(i) if Λ < µ−c/V , it is optimal to generate referrals; the joining probability αFB and referral eﬀort
rFB are
αFB = 1,
rFB = −
p
4kµ(c + ΛV −µV ) + (−kΛ + kµ + µV )2 −kΛ + kµ + µV
2kµ
> 0;
(ii) if Λ ≥µ −c/V , it is optimal to generate no referrals; the joining probability αFB and referral
eﬀort rFB are
αFB = µ −c/V
Λ
,
rFB = 0.

13
In the ﬁrst best, the ﬁrm follows work-conserving policies; in other words, Constraint (6a) should
be binding. Note that aside from work conservation, the ﬁrst best does not specify values of W ,
which implies that any admissible scheduling policy (which would induce operationally achievable
W ) is optimal in the ﬁrst best. This is because the ﬁrst best can dictate the referral eﬀort without
worrying about customers’ referral incentives. In our model with homogeneous customers, given
(α,r), any work-conserving scheduling policy yields the same mean delay, 1/(µ(1−rα)−Λα), and
thus the IR constraints (joining incentives) would not be aﬀected by the change of scheduling
policies.
When the base market size is small (Λ < µ −c/V ), the system throughput without referrals is
small, and it is intuitive that the ﬁrm in the ﬁrst best wants to generate referrals (rFB > 0) to
increase system throughput. Moreover, it can be shown (see the proof of Proposition 1) that rFB is
decreasing in Λ, suggesting that a ﬁrm facing a smaller base market size would encourage a higher
referral intensity. Note that in this case of relatively light congestion, customers’ joining probability
without referrals is one because the waiting cost, c/(µ −Λ) is less than service value V , leaving
customers with positive surplus. Hence, introducing referrals can beneﬁt the system throughput
without aﬀecting the joining probability (which is still equal to one). The optimal ﬁrst-best referral
strategy adds just enough congestion to the system that customers no longer keep any positive
surplus but are still willing to join the queue with certainty.
Nevertheless, when the base market size is large (Λ ≥µ −c/V ), the ﬁrst best prescribes a
shutdown of the referral program. This is an intriguing result given that the ﬁrm in the ﬁrst best can
always compel customers to refer without confronting any pushback. Also note that the cutoﬀvalue
µ−c/V does not depend on cost of eﬀort k, so even when referrals are free, the ﬁrm would still forbid
them in the ﬁrst best. The crux is that the ﬁrm must provide enough joining incentives and ensure
individual rationality. When the base market size is large, the system is already somewhat congested
without referrals (such that only a fraction of customers join, manifested by joining probability
αFB < 1), introducing referred customers (making r positive) to the system would further increase
congestion, diminishing customers’ joining probability (decreasing α), and, in particular, turning
away some base customers who would otherwise join. However, when referred customers cannibalize
the demand of base customers, it does not beneﬁt the overall system throughput, and therefore, the
ﬁrm would prefer banning referrals altogether. The burstiness of the batch-arrival process driven by
referrals plays a crucial role here. Burstiness would prolong delay, making the loss of base customers
outweigh the addition of referred customers in this case, and the overall system throughput would
suﬀer. In sum, Proposition 1 shows that the ﬁrst-best problem welcomes referrals only to the extent
that they do not crowd out base customers.

14
5.
The Second-Best Problem
In this section, we study the second-best problem by bringing back IC constraint (5) to Problem
1. Recall that a unique feature of the ﬁrst best is that it only speciﬁes joining probability α
and referral eﬀort r but does not uniquely pin down expected delays (W1,W0). We will show in
this section when and how the ﬁrst-best solution can be achieved in the second-best problem by
properly setting (W1,W0) so as to satisfy the IC constraints. We will also show the structure of
the scheduling policy in terms of (W1,W0) when the ﬁrst best cannot be achieved.
5.1.
The Optimal Mechanism
When the market size is large, i.e., Λ > µ−c/V , the ﬁrst best requires that no referrals be generated.
This outcome can be readily achieved in the second best by shutting down the referral priority
program, i.e, setting W1 = W0 to give zero referral incentives. Hence, the ﬁrm should run a plain
FIFO waitlist. This result is summarized in Proposition 2.
Proposition 2. If Λ ≥µ −c/V , the ﬁrst best can be achieved by a non-referral FIFO mecha-
nism.
The following Proposition 3 pins down the second-best problem under a large referral cost.
Proposition 3. If k ≥V −c/µ, there does not exist any (second-best) mechanism that can
generate referrals. Hence, non-referral FIFO is the only equilibrium.
When the referral cost is large, i.e., k ≥V −c/µ, then generating referrals would be infeasible
in the second-best problem, let alone optimal. To see why this result holds, ﬁrst consider the case
of full referral eﬀort r = 1. This case cannot arise under such a large referral cost because it would
violate the IR constraint (V −k −c/µ ≤0 and customers’ expected delay must be larger than c/µ).
Next, consider partial referral eﬀort r ∈(0,1). If we use the mixed-referral-strategy interpretation,
customers in this case must be indiﬀerent to referrals, which implies their expected utility would
be equal to V −cW0, what they would get should they choose not to refer. Moreover, the marginal
cost of a referral should be equal to its marginal beneﬁt, i.e., k = cα(W0 −W1) ≤cW0 −cW1. Thus,
V −cW0 ≤V −k −cW1; since cW1 > c/µ for r > 0, the IR constraint is again violated under a large
enough referral cost k ≥V −c/µ. Intuitively, Proposition 3 suggests that if the cost of referrals is
too prohibitive, then there is no way for the beneﬁt of delay cost reduction to cover the referral
cost. Therefore, no referrals can be generated; the system is again back to FIFO.
Combining Propositions 2 and 3 yields two scenarios: (1) if the base market size is large, i.e.,
Λ ≥µ−c/V , then regardless of the referral cost, the ﬁrst best can indeed be achieved in the second
best by non-referral FIFO; (2) when the base market size is small and the referral cost is large,
i.e., Λ < µ−c/V and k ≥V −c/µ, then the second best delivers the non-referral FIFO scheme, but

15
it falls short of the throughput in the ﬁrst best which would instead require referrals be generated
to acquire more customers than a FIFO scheme would. Propositions 2 and 3 together rationalize
the use of FIFO under either a large base market size or a large referral cost.
Next, we characterize the optimal mechanism when neither the base market size nor the referral
cost is too large, i.e., Λ < µ −c/V and k < V −c/µ.
Proposition 4. If k < V −c/µ, then there exists a unique cutoﬀvalue Λ∗∈(0,µ −c/V ) such
that
(i) if Λ ∈(Λ∗,µ−c/V ), the ﬁrst best can be achieved by partial priority with the following expected
delays (W1,W0):
W1 =
1
µ(1 −rFB) −Λ −k(1 −rFB)
c
,
W0 =
1
µ(1 −rFB) −Λ + krFB
c
;
(ii) if Λ = Λ∗, the ﬁrst best can be achieved by full priority;
(iii) if Λ < Λ∗, the ﬁrst best cannot be achieved; strategic delay is optimal in the second best; the
joining probability αSB, referral eﬀort rSB, and expected delays (W1,W0) are
αSB = 1,
rSB =
µ(V −k) −c
(V −k)(µ + Λ),
W1 =
1
µ(1 −rSB) −ΛrSB ,
W0 = W1 + k/c.
Proposition 4-(i) shows that when the base market size is intermediate, i.e., Λ ∈(Λ∗,µ −c/V ),
and the referral cost is small, i.e., k < V −c/µ, a partial-priority scheme should be adopted to
achieve the ﬁrst best. We give the closed-form expression of the cutoﬀvalue Λ∗in the proof of
Proposition 4 in Appendix A. Recall from Proposition 1 that under such an intermediate base
market size, the ﬁrst best would generate referrals to the extent that the extra congestion created
does not cannibalize the demand of base customers. As a consequence, a partial-priority scheme is
in order because it provides customers with a bit of an incentive to refer (they can jump over some
non-referring customers if their referral is successful), but not too strong of an incentive (a customer
with a successful referral cannot overtake all of the non-referring customers) to let a crowd-out eﬀect
kick in. Partial priority is implementable in this case because the referral cost is relatively small,
which ensures that the amount of delay-cost reduction oﬀered by the partial-priority scheme can
be suﬃcient to spur voluntary customer referrals. Therefore, a carefully calibrated partial-priority
referral scheme can recover the ﬁrst-best outcome in equilibrium.
Recall from Proposition 1 that the ﬁrm in the ﬁrst best would encourage more referrals with
a smaller base market size (rFB is decreasing in Λ), which must be accomplished in the second
best by providing a larger referral incentive, i.e., rewarding customers who refer successfully with
a greater amount of priority. As the base market size keeps decreasing, it will eventually hit a
critical point at which the optimal mechanism must oﬀer full priority to achieve the ﬁrst best. That

16
critical point is Λ = Λ∗, as indicated by Proposition 4-(ii). Based on this result, the applicability
of a full-priority referral scheme may seem restrictive because it is optimal only under knife-edge
events. However, full priority may still hold some practical appeal because it spares the ﬁrm the
onus to parameterize the referral priority program, which would be necessary should the optimal
mechanism (for instance, partial priority) be adopted. To the extent that the full-priority referral
scheme improves the system throughout, the ﬁrm may ﬁnd it good enough and thus prefer this
simple, parameter-free mechanism.
Proposition 4-(iii) shows that when the base market size is small, i.e., Λ < Λ∗, the ﬁrm in the
second best should insert strategic delay to the queue in order to motivate referrals. This second-
best solution will not achieve the ﬁrst best because the latter requires work conservation. However,
the second best does preserve one feature from the ﬁrst best: all arriving customers join the queue
(i.e., α = 1), which shows once again that the optimal referral program should attract referred
customers without losing base customers. The distinction between the ﬁrst best and second best
consists in the lack of suﬃcient referral eﬀort induced by the second best as compared to that
imposed by the ﬁrst best, i.e., rSB < rF B. Hence, the ﬁrm implementing the optimal mechanism
will still not lure as many referred customers in the second best as it would hope for.
A small base market size implies light congestion in the queue, and even customers who are not
entitled to any priority can get served quickly. Therefore, any work-conserving scheduling policy will
simply not create enough of a delay diﬀerential to incentivize referrals. Thus, the ﬁrm must resort
to strategic delay to acquire more customers. Speciﬁcally, the delay of non-referring customers
should be artiﬁcially inﬂated to make the delay for those who refer successfully look shorter and
more enticing by comparison. While the idea of intensifying competition (in our context, customers
compete to access the service) by making a resource look more scarce than it actually is sounds a
reasonable tactic, a common misconception about deploying such a tactic is that the ﬁrm should
decrease capacity. It turns out that doing so is suboptimal, as indicated by Proposition 4-(iii), which
shows that the optimal mechanism only elongates the expected delay for non-referring customers,
W0, while keeping the expected delay for those who refer successfully, W1, as short as possible by
giving them full priority (the OA constraint (6a) is non-binding but (6b) is binding). By contrast,
decreasing capacity would increase the expected delays (both W1 and W0) across the board. Since
the goal of strategic delay is to create a large enough delay diﬀerential to incentivize referrals, the
ﬁrm should slow down in a discriminatory fashion instead of just adopting a lower capacity. Still,
one caveat for strategic delay to work is the referral cost not being too large. Otherwise, the ﬁrm
would face an insurmountable dilemma of creating a delay diﬀerential large enough to motivate
referrals while keeping the amount of delay small enough to ensure joining. In sum, Proposition 4
rationalizes the use of partial priority, full priorities and strategic delay.
The following Proposition 5 characterizes how the referral cost impacts the cutoﬀvalue Λ∗.

17
Proposition 5. The cutoﬀvalue on the base market size Λ∗is increasing in referral cost k,
i.e., ∂Λ∗/∂k > 0.
Proposition 5 implies that with a larger referral cost, the ﬁrm will resort to strategic delay (partial
priority) more often (less often), i.e., for a wider range of base market sizes (for a narrower range of
base market sizes). If the referral cost is very small, the ﬁrm can easily motivate referrals without
violating work conservation, and therefore, strategic delay would be rarely used. If the referral cost
gets relatively large, approaching V −c/µ, then generating referrals would be progressively diﬃcult,
and the ﬁrm would almost invariably turn to strategic delay. Proposition 5 also implies that for a
given base market size that is not too large (Λ < µ −c/V ), the ﬁrm should adopt strategic delay
when the referral cost is relatively large (but still smaller than V −c/µ), and should use partial
priority when the referral cost is small.
5.2.
Numerical Illustrations
To further explain our results, we present three numerical examples that compare the optimal
mechanism, the FIFO scheme, and the full-priority referral scheme. The equilibrium conditions for
the full-priority case are provided in Appendix B.
Example 1. µ = 1,c = 1,V = 10,k = 2,Λ = 0.85. See Table 1.
Table 1
The Comparison of Diﬀerent Schemes in Example 1
Throughput
r
α
W1
W0
FIFO
0.85
0
1
6.667
6.667
Full Priority
0.763
1
0.473
2.968
12.516
Optimal (Partial Priority)
0.8938
0.049
1
8
10
The optimal mechanism is partial priority; it achieves the ﬁrst best. The full-priority
referral scheme leads to a system throughput even lower than FIFO.
In Example 1, under the optimal mechanism, customers expend only a slight referral eﬀort (r =
0.049); and all arriving customers join (α = 1), as in the FIFO case. Referrals strictly improve the
system throughput over FIFO. The optimal mechanism is a partial priority scheme as customers
who refer successfully enjoy a modest delay reduction relative to their non-referring counterparts
(W1 = 8 versus W0 = 10). By contrast, the improvement in delay is more drastic in the full priority
scheme if one makes a successful referral (W1 = 2.968 versus W0 = 12.516). Such a sharp diﬀerence
in expected delays prompts a strong referral incentive: customers in the full-priority scheme exert
the maximum referral eﬀort (r = 1). Nevertheless, the strong referral incentive undermines the
joining incentive: only a fraction of arriving customers choose to join (α = 0.473 < 1). This leads
to an unintended consequence: the full-priority scheme in this example is not only suboptimal, but
even falls short of the FIFO throughput.

18
It has been previously identiﬁed in Yang and Debo (2019) that a referral program which grants
full priority to customers with a successful referral can backﬁre in the sense that launching such
a program may harm the system throughput. Since Yang and Debo (2019) only compare the
full-priority scheme with the non-referral FIFO case, their recommendation in this situation is
simply to forsake referrals altogether. By contrast, our paper takes one step further by identifying
a carefully calibrated partial-priority referral scheme—as a middle ground between FIFO and full
priority—that can improve the FIFO system throughput and achieve the ﬁrst best, despite the
undesirable performance of the full-priority referral scheme.
Example 2. µ = 1,c = 1,V = 10,k = 2,Λ = 0.7. See Table 2.
Table 2
The Comparison of Diﬀerent Schemes in Example 2
Throughput
r
α
W1
W0
FIFO
0.7
0
1
3.33
3.33
Full Priority
0.742
1
0.515
3.335
12.948
Optimal (Partial Priority)
0.871
0.196
1
8
10
The optimal mechanism is partial priority; it achieves the ﬁrst best. The full-priority
referral scheme leads to a system throughput higher than FIFO.
However, the full priority scheme may also improve the FIFO throughput under other circum-
stances. Example 2 is one such example. Similar to Example 1, the optimal mechanism in Example
2 also calls for a partial-priority scheme which achieves the ﬁrst best, but diﬀerent from Example
1, both the (optimal) partial-priority and full-priority schemes induce a higher system through-
put than FIFO in Example 2. The full-priority scheme here acquires referred customers also at
the expense of some base customers (i.e., α < 1), but the gain in referred customers outweighs
the loss of base customers, so the overall throughput is still enhanced. By comparison, the opti-
mal partial-priority scheme seizes referred customers without sacriﬁcing base customers, and the
resulting system throughput is even higher.
Example 3. µ = 1,c = 1,V = 10,k = 2,Λ = 0.01. See Table 3.
Table 3
The Comparison of Diﬀerent Schemes in Example 3
Throughput
r
α
W1
W0
First-Best
0.0763
0.869
1
-
-
FIFO
0.01
0
1
1.01
1.01
Full Priority
0.01
0
1
1.01
1.01
Optimal (Strategic Delay)
0.0748
0.866
1
8
10
The optimal mechanism is strategic delay. It does not achieve the ﬁrst best
but results in a higher throughput than FIFO. The full-priority scheme cannot
generate referrals and thus reduces to FIFO.

19
In Example 3, the optimal mechanism of strategic delay exhibits a huge throughput improvement
over FIFO (by a factor of 7). It still falls short of the ﬁrst best, albeit only marginally in this case.
By contrast, the full-priority scheme cannot stimulate referrals and results in the same equilibrium
outcomes as FIFO. Note that the full-priority referral scheme’s failure to generate referrals when
the base market size is too small has also been established in Yang and Debo (2019). However,
instead of concluding referrals are out of the question, we show that under those circumstances, a
carefully-designed referral program that involves strategic delay can still “save the day.”
5.3.
Summary
Based on the analytical results developed in this section, we summarize the structure of the optimal
mechanism (illustrated by Figure 2). The ﬁrm should turn oﬀany referral program and run a FIFO
queue if the base market size is large (Proposition 2) or if the referral cost is large (Proposition
3); in the former case, the ﬁrst best is achieved, but not necessarily in the latter. If the referral
cost is small and the base market size is intermediate, a partial-priority referral scheme is optimal
(Proposition 4) and achieves the ﬁrst best. If both the referral cost and the base market size are
small, then the ﬁrm should insert strategic delay to the queue to motivate referrals, but it does
not achieve the ﬁrst best (Proposition 4). At the boundary base market size that demarcates the
previous two cases, a full-priority referral scheme is the most desirable (Proposition 4). Moreover,
this boundary base market size is increasing in the referral cost (Proposition 5), suggesting that
strategic delay should be more widely adopted as the optimal mechanism and partial priority less
so as the referral cost increases.
Figure 2
The Structure of the Optimal Mechanism
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
k
Λ
Partial Priority
Strategic
Delay
FIFO
FIFO
Full Priority
Note.
µ = 1, c = 1, V = 10. In the shaded (unshaded) area, the second best achieves (does not achieve) the ﬁrst best.

20
Note that the base market size measures the popularity of the service within the organic customer
base in the absence of the referral program. When we comment on the magnitude of the base
market size, we are essentially evaluating it against capacity. For example, some web-based services
may not be particularly capacity-constrained, and thus the organic demand can be regarded as
low by comparison; as a consequence, strategic delay can be employed to boost referrals and jump-
start customer acquisition. Some other services may be heavily cloud-based and not easily scalable
initially, then the base market size may loom large relative to capacity.
As partial priority and strategic delay can be optimal under certain circumstances, the imple-
mentation issues come to the fore. Coﬀman and Mitrani (1980) and Af`eche (2013) propose various
approaches to implementing partial priority and strategic delay, respectively. Coﬀman and Mitrani
(1980) primarily comment on two approaches to partial priority, one being probabilistic priority
assignment and the other being alternate priorities. In our context, the ﬁrst approach would assign
a referring customer to a priority class only with a certain probability. Thus, even with a suc-
cessful referral, there is no guarantee of jumping ahead of all non-referring customers. The second
approach would shift back and forth between full priority assigned to referring customers and no
priority assigned. The period of priority lasts t1 amount of time, before switching to a period of no
priority, which lasts t2 amount of time, before switching back to a t1-period of priority, and so on.
In practice, however, one commonly used approach to implementing partial priority, as exempliﬁed
by the referral program adopted by x.ai, is to let a referring customer move up by a ﬁxed number of
spots in the queue. Note that probabilities and time durations are continuous and can be calibrated
with ease, making the two approaches proposed by Coﬀman and Mitrani (1980) ﬂexible enough to
match any partial-priority outcome (as speciﬁed by the expected delays). The x.ai approach, on
the other hand, suﬀers from the limitation that the number of people to skip over is discrete, and
thus such a mechanism cannot always exactly match a given partial-priority outcome.
Af`eche (2013) provides a detailed discussion of how strategic delay can be implemented by “idling
the server before, reducing its speed during, and delaying the delivery after processing.” In our
model, if a customer is at the server, it means that she will tentatively be the next candidate to
get oﬀthe waitlist and access the service. Thus, one approach to implementing strategic delay is
to postpone activating the account of any non-referring customer at the top of the waitlist even if
the ﬁrm is ready to take her oﬀthe list. We emphasize that since the optimal strategic-delay policy
does not slow down referring customers, they should jump over all the non-referring customers
on the list and be taken oﬀthe list as soon as possible. Another approach, which is in the spirit
of Waitlisted.co’s current practice, is to insert a ﬁxed number of artiﬁcial customers to the non-
priority class, or the class of non-referring customers. Doing so augments the size of the non-priority
class and the expected delay therein. Whenever an artiﬁcial customer advances to the server, the

21
ﬁrm allocates a certain amount of (random) service time to her just as if she were a real customer,
then removes her from the top of the waitlist, and immediately tacks her back onto the bottom of
the waitlist. This ensures that there is always a ﬁxed number of artiﬁcial customers perpetually
circulating in the non-priority class of the queue. Similar to the x.ai approach, the discrete nature
of this approach may prevent it from perfectly matching a given strategic-delay scheme.
6.
Extensions
This section studies four extensions, namely, multiple friends, achieving the ﬁrst best through
transfers, endogenous capacity, and discriminating between base and referred customers. Each
extension relaxes one assumption of the base model at a time while keeping the rest unchanged.
6.1.
Multiple Friends
In the base model, each customer has only one friend they can potentially invite; in this subsection,
we extend our analysis to multiple friends. Assume that each customer has D friends, where
D ∈N+. A joining customer expends eﬀort ri on referring friend i of hers, i = 1,...,D. Denote
r ≜(r1,r2,...,rD). Hence, the possible numbers of successful referrals are 0,1,...,D. Let Wi be the
expected delay posted by the ﬁrm for a customer who successfully refers i friends, i = 0,1,...,D.
Denote W = (W0,W1,...,WD). The ﬁrm’s objective is to maximize the system throughput by
setting W that induces the optimal referral eﬀort r and joining probability α from customers. Note
that our base model of a single friend is a special case of this more general model of D friends: This
D-friend model reduces to the single-friend model if we set W1 = W2 = ... = WD, which will induce
r2 = r3 = ... = rD = 0. Given customer strategy (r,α), let X(r,α) denote the number of successful
referrals. Then X(r,α) is a random variable following the Poisson binomial distribution (Wang
1993, Chen et al. 1994, Harremoes 2001) with parameters (r1α,r2α,...,rDα). The mean of X(r,α)
is m(r,α) ≜αPD
i=1 ri. The variance of X(r,α) is σ2(r,α) ≜PD
i=1 riα(1 −riα). The probability
mass function of X(r,α) is
fi(r,α) ≜Pr(X(r,α) = i) =
X
A∈Gi
Y
k∈A
(rkα)
Y
j∈Ac
(1 −rjα),
where Gi is the set of all subsets of i integers that can be selected from {1,2,...,D} and Ac =
{1,2,...,D} \ A.
Queueing Dynamics. As in the single-friend model, referrals lead to batch arrivals in the D-friend
model. Initiated by the arrival of a base customer, each batch itself is generated according to a
Galton-Watson branching process (Athreya and Ney 1972) whose progeny distribution is Poisson
binomial, i.e., the number of progenies (successful referrals) each individual (joining customer)
has is X(r,α). The total batch size is the total number of individuals ever born in the branching

22
process before the population becomes extinct. Thus, by the standard theory of branching processes,
the expected number of the batch size is 1/(1 −m(r,α)), and thus, the system throughput is
Λα/(1 −m(r,α)). Next, we formulate the ﬁrm’s ﬁrst-best problem.
Problem 2.
max
W ≥0,r∈[0,1]D,α∈[0,1]
Λα
1 −m(r,α)
(8)
s.t.
V −k
D
X
i=1
ri −c
D
X
i=0
fi(r,α)Wi ≥0,
(9)
D
X
i=0
fi(r,α)Wi ≥σ2(r,α) + (2 −m(r,α))(1 −m(r,α))
2(1 −m(r,α))[µ(1 −m(r,α)) −Λα]
(10)
Λα
1 −m(r,α) < µ.
(11)
The objective of Problem 2 is to maximize the system throughput in (8). Constraint (9) is the
IR constraint. Constraint (10) is the OA constraint that limits how small the average of the posted
expected delays can be. The right-hand side of Constraint (10) follows from Lemma E.1 of Yang
and Debo (2019). Constraint (11) is the stability constraint. Note that since W is a (D + 1)-
dimensional vector, in principle, we need 2D+1 −1 inequalities (exponential in D) to specify the
operationally achievable region for W (see Coﬀman and Mitrani 1980). However, for the purpose
of the ﬁrst-best problem, Constraint (10) suﬃces because the summation PD
i=0 fi(r,α)Wi shows
up as a whole in the IR constraint. Proposition 6 below characterizes the ﬁrst-best problem.
Proposition 6. The ﬁrst-best problem for D > 1 yields the same solution as that for D = 1.
Proposition 6 reveals a somewhat surprising result that even if customers have multiple friends,
the ﬁrm in the ﬁrst-best world would still only want them to refer at most one friend. That is,
the ﬁrst best of Problem 2 coincides with that of Problem 1 despite the fact that the former is a
generalization of the latter. Why does having more referrals from a single customer fail to accelerate
customer acquisition (i.e., improve the system throughput)? The crux again lies in how referrals
impact the burstiness of the arrival process. If a referring customer reaches out to multiple friends
(i.e., ri > 0 for multiple i), then it is not as desirable from the ﬁrm’s perspective as if she exerts all
the referral eﬀorts combined on referring one friend, because the former will lead to a more bursty
arrival process, which lengthens the delay, making the queue less appealing for customers to join.
Such burstiness ultimately works against customer acquisition. Intuitively, if one spreads out her
referral eﬀorts across friends, the referral outcome (in terms of the number of referral successes)
will be more uncertain (which adds burstiness to the queue) than if one “puts all the eggs in one
basket” by focusing on one friend.

23
While Proposition 6 characterizes the ﬁrst-best problem, it has signiﬁcant implications for the
second-best problem: whenever the ﬁrst best can be achieved by the second best in the single-friend
model (correspond to the shaded area of Figure 2), then it can be achieved through exactly the same
mechanism in the multi-friend model. Propositions 2 and 4, which establish the optimality of FIFO
and partial/full priority under their respective conditions, readily carry over. Proposition 6 also
implies that whenever the ﬁrst best cannot be achieved in the single-friend model (corresponding
to the unshaded area of Figure 2), neither can it be in the multi-friend model. This is because any
mechanism that achieves the ﬁrst best in the multi-friend model must match its ﬁrst-best outcome
of each customer referring at most one friend; letting customers have more friends will not help
close the gap between the ﬁrst best and second best. Overall, our insights from the base model of
a single friend largely extend to the more general case of multiple friends.
6.2.
Achieving the First Best Through Transfers
Our base model implicitly focuses on a setting that prohibits transfers between the ﬁrm and
customers. This is a very reasonable assumption for the applications we model. Many of these
waitlists oﬀer products that are “freemiums” in nature and do not charge customers any fees when
they sign up. For example, zero-commission trading is Robinhood’s primary value proposition,
which would be ruined if customers were asked to pay. Further, partially because it is often free
to sign up, many waitlists employ a pure priority-based referral scheme without monetary referral
incentives. However, to the extent that transfers are permitted, we can ﬁx the ineﬃciency of the
second best and achieve the ﬁrst best. Proposition 7 below proposes one such scheme.
Proposition 7. The ﬁrst best (αF B,rF B) deﬁned in Proposition 1, when not achieved in the
base model (which prohibits transfers), can be achieved by rewarding a successful referral with full
priority plus a cash bonus P, and charging each joining customer an admission fee rF BP, where
P = k −c
Λ
[µ(1 −rF B) −Λ][µ(1 −rF B) −ΛrF B] > 0.
In Proposition 7, our proposed mechanism to achieve the ﬁrst best taxes joining by charging
an admission fee and subsidizes referrals by oﬀering a cash bonus in addition to the operational
incentive of full-priority access. Moreover, the expected referral bonus each customer receives is
equal to rF BP, the admission fee each customer pays, which implies that for the ﬁrm, the total
amount of admission fees collected oﬀsets the total amount of referral bonuses paid out in the long
run. Thus, the mechanism is budget-balanced. The cash bonus compensates for the insuﬃciency of
operational incentives and prompts referrals from customers who would otherwise not refer. The
admission fee funds the cash bonus, ensuring the ﬁrm does not operate at a loss for the sake of
growth. Note that mechanisms to achieve the ﬁrst best through the integration of transfers and

24
priority access are not unique. An alternative mechanism, for instance, can combine a larger referral
bonus with a smaller operational incentive (e.g., partial priority), but the full-priority scheme
proposed in Proposition 7 makes the most of the operational leverage of a waitlist; also, keeping
the transactional amount to the minimum may be palatable to both the ﬁrm and customers.
6.3.
Endogenous Capacity
Our base model assumes an exogenous capacity constraint; this subsection endogenizes capacity. We
assume that the cost of maintaining capacity µ is ωµ2/2 per unit time, where parameter ω measures
the ease with which the ﬁrm is able to scale capacity (e.g., by purchasing more cloud services).
The ﬁrm determines capacity µ and the referral mechanism to maximize the objective function
Λα/(1 −rα) −ωµ2/2, i.e., the gain from the system throughput (with the gain from each unit of
the throughput normalized to one) less the capacity cost. Since capacity µ is now endogenous, we
drop Assumption 1 (which involves µ) and, for ease of exposition, replace it with V > c/Λ, i.e.,
customers’ valuation of the service is suﬃciently high. Let ¯ω ≜ΛV 2/{[ΛV 2 + c(V + k)](Λ + c/V )}.
Let µF IF O denote the ﬁrm’s optimal capacity choice in a FIFO queue without referrals. Proposition
8 below characterizes the ﬁrm’s optimal capacity in the ﬁrst best.
Proposition 8. In the ﬁrst best, the optimal capacity µF B is
µF B =









µ0,
if w < ¯ω;
Λ + c/V,
if w ∈[¯ω,
V
ΛV +c);
1/ω,
if w ∈[
V
ΛV +c, V
2c);
0,
if w ≥V
2c;
where µ0 ∈(Λ + c/V,1/ω) is the unique solution to λ′(µ0) −ωµ0 = 0, where λ(µ) = Λ/(1 −
−√
4kµ(c+ΛV −µV )+(−kΛ+kµ+µV )2−kΛ+kµ+µV
2kµ
). Moreover, µF B ≥µF IF O and the inequality is strict if
and only if ω < ¯ω.
In the ﬁrst best, as scaling capacity gets easier, the ﬁrm builds more capacity. When it is diﬃcult
to scale capacity (i.e., ω ≥V/(2c)), the ﬁrm should not launch the waitlist at all since the cost of
serving customers would not justify the beneﬁt of doing so. When it is moderately diﬃcult to scale
capacity (i.e., ω ∈[¯ω,V/(2c))), the ﬁrm should launch the waitlist but not the referral program.
When it is easy to scale capacity (i.e., w < ¯ω), it is in the ﬁrm’s best interest to launch a referral
program in conjunction with the waitlist. In this case, the ﬁrm maintains more capacity in the
ﬁrst best than it would with a non-referral FIFO queue. Intuitively, as referrals can increase the
throughput for a given capacity, investing in capacity has more “bang for the buck” than doing
so in a non-referral queue. Consequently, referrals prompt the ﬁrm to serve customers faster. Let
Λ ≜
ck
(V −k)V and ¯Λ ≜
ck
(V −k)2 . Proposition 9 below characterizes the optimal structure of the referral
program and the optimal capacity in the second best.

25
Proposition 9. If ω ∈[¯ω,V/(2c)), the ﬁrst best is achieved by non-referral FIFO. If ω < ¯ω:
(i) If Λ ≥¯Λ and k < V , the ﬁrst best is achieved by partial priority;
(ii) If Λ ∈(Λ, ¯Λ) and k < V , then there exists a unique ω such that the ﬁrst best is achieved by
partial priority if and only if ω ∈(ω, ¯ω); the ﬁrst best is achieved by full priority if ω = ω; if
ω < ω, the ﬁrst-best cannot be achieved and strategic delay is optimal in the second best;
(iii) If Λ ≤Λ and k < V , the ﬁrst best cannot be achieved and there exists a unique ˆω such that
strategic delay is optimal if ω < ˆω and non-referral FIFO is optimal if ω ∈[ˆω, ¯ω);
(iv) If k ≥V , the ﬁrst best cannot be achieved and non-referral FIFO is optimal.
When the second best achieves the ﬁrst best, the optimal second-best capacity, µSB, must statisfy
µSB = µF B. When the second best does not achieve the ﬁrst best, if the optimal structure in the sec-
ond best is non-referral FIFO, then µSB = µF IF O; if it is strategic delay, then µSB =
Λ(V −k)
ω[Λ(V −k)+c] ∈
(µF IF O,µF B). In general, µF IF O ≤µSB ≤µF B. Further, whenever the second best generates refer-
rals, the average delay in the second best is less than that in a non-referral FIFO queue.
Proposition 9 demonstrates the robustness of our insights from the second-best analysis when
capacity is endogenously determined. If the ﬁrst-best is achieved in the second best, the optimal
structure of the mechanism is either partial/full priority or non-referral FIFO. If the ﬁrst-best
cannot be achieved (which generally occurs when it is easy for the ﬁrm to scale capacity but the
market size is small), then either strategic delay or non-referral FIFO is optimal. In general, the
second-best capacity is larger than the FIFO capacity, but smaller than ﬁrst-best capacity. Similar
to the argument for the ﬁrst best, referrals accelerate customer acquisition also in the second best,
and therefore the ﬁrm is willing to maintain a larger capacity than it would in a non-referral queue.
However, the second best is not as eﬃcient in generating referrals as the ﬁrst best, and therefore
the ﬁrm can be reluctant to build as much capacity as it would otherwise.
Interestingly, because the ﬁrm maintains more capacity when it launches a referral priority
program, customers will experience less delay on average even though the referral program brings
in more customers and potentially inserts strategic delay. Without the referral program, customers’
expected delay cost is equal to their valuation of the service; with the referral program, however,
their expected delay cost is reduced, equal to their valuation of the service less the expected
referral cost. While the referral priority program leverages queueing delays as referral incentives,
it surprisingly shortens how much customers wait once the ﬁrm optimally adjusts its speed. This
result may give some reassurances to skeptics of the referral priority program.
6.4.
Discriminating Between Base and Referred Customers
In our base model, the same expected-delay information W is provided to all customers impartially,
regardless of their source (base or referred). As a result, base and referred customers adopt the

26
same joining and referral strategies. In practice, it may be cumbersome to quote diﬀerent expected
waiting time for diﬀerent customers based on their source, and subsequently design scheduling
policies to achieve those quoted expected delays. However, if the ﬁrm can employ a referral program
that discriminates between base and referred customers, then there is a potential to further improve
the throughput. We consider such an extension in this subsection.
Here is the description of the extended model. For each base customer who arrives, the ﬁrm
announces expected delays (W B
1 ,W B
0 ), where W B
1 is the expected delay if that base customer makes
a successful referral, and W B
0 is her expected delay if she does not. Likewise, for each referred cus-
tomer who arrives, the ﬁrm announces expected delays (W R
1 ,W R
0 ), where W R
1 is the expected delay
if that referred customer makes a successful referral, and W R
0 is her expected delay if she does not.
Since base and referred customers are provided with potentially diﬀerent expected-delay informa-
tion, their joining and referral strategies can also diﬀer. Let (αB,αR,rB,rR) be a base customer’s
joining probability, a referred customer’s joining probability, a base customer’s referral eﬀort and a
referred customer’s referral eﬀort, respectively. The ﬁrm sets (W B
1 ,W B
0 ,W R
1 ,W R
0 ) to maximize the
system throughput2, ΛαB(1 + rBαR −rBαR)/(1 −rBαR), subject to the IR, IC, OA and stability
constraints. For the interest of space, we relegate the detailed mechanism design formulation to
Appendix C. Note that in the base model, the expected-delay vector (W1,W0) is two-dimensional,
and thus, we need 22 −1 = 3 (three) constraints to specify the operationally achievable region.
By comparison, in the extended model, the expected-delay vector (W B
1 ,W B
0 ,W R
1 ,W R
0 ) is four-
dimensional, and thus, we need 24 −1 = 15 (ﬁfteen) constraints to fully specify the operationally
achievable region. Our base model is a special case of this extended model; setting W B
1 = W R
1 ,
W B
0 = W R
0 , αB = αR and rB = rR would reduce the extended model to the base one.
Table 4
The Optimal Mechanism That Discriminates Between Base and
Referred Customers
Λ
0.85
0.7
0.01
Throughput
0.894
0.875
0.0841
αB
1
1
1
αR
1
1
1
rB
0.0518
0.25
1
rR
0
0
0.865
Structure
partial priority
partial priority
strategic delay
V = 10,c = 1,k = 2,µ = 1.
Table 4 presents the outcome and structure of the optimal (discriminatory) mechanism for the
model parameters used in Examples 1 through 3. Comparing the numerical results reported in
2 The expression of the system throughput follows from Yang and Debo (2019).

27
Table 4 with those for the non-discriminatory case in Tables 1 through 3, we make the following
observations. First, the structure of the optimal mechanism is preserved in these instances regard-
less of whether the ﬁrm discriminates. Speciﬁcally, when Λ = 0.85 or Λ = 0.7, the optimal structure
is consistently partial priority, whereas the optimal structure is consistently strategic delay when
Λ = 0.01. Second, similar to the non-discriminatory case, the optimal mechanism does not let the
referral incentive crowd out the joining incentive (i.e., αB = αR = 1 for all three instances). Third,
practicing discrimination further improves the ﬁrm’s throughput across all three instances, although
the improvement is marginal for the case of Λ = 0.85. Fourth, when Λ = 0.85 or Λ = 0.7 (corre-
sponding to an intermediate base market size), the optimal mechanism only has base customers
make referrals, but not the referred customers (i.e., rB > 0 and rR = 0). Finally, when Λ = 0.01
(corresponding to a small base market size), both base and referred customers refer in the optimal
mechanism, but base customers exert more referral eﬀort than referred ones (i.e., rB > rR > 0).
Overall, these observations demonstrate the robustness of our insights and also suggest how a dis-
criminatory policy, to the extent that it is feasible and easy to implement, can further accelerate
customer acquisition.
7.
Concluding Remarks
Using priorities on a waitlist as referral incentives, the referral priority program has emerged as an
innovative business tool for customer acquisition. Despite its growing presence in the technology
sector, design guidance is lacking as to how to conﬁgure the optimal referral mechanism. This
paper proposes a unifying framework that rationalizes various referral schemes observed in prac-
tice, including non-referral FIFO, partial priority, full priority and strategic delay. Our results lend
theoretical underpinnings to these practices and provide prescriptive insights that can advise wait-
list managers on how to build the optimal referral priority program. While we have identiﬁed the
ideal conditions for each type of referral programs to work, we caution that it may be precipitous
to assume existing ﬁrms in practice have “ﬁgured it out” and are operating under optimality. If
anything, our conversations with practitioners usually suggest otherwise: ﬁrms tend to have lit-
tle clue as to what mechanism would best ﬁt them, and they either indiscriminately experiment
with diﬀerent schemes, or rely on the default settings of a third-party waitlist tool (such as Wait-
listed.co). The former can be unfruitful, whereas the latter can even be detrimental because as our
results indicate, one size usually does not ﬁt all; a referral program must be geared toward the
speciﬁc business environment in which the ﬁrm is situated. In that regard, our paper would be
instrumental in guiding ﬁrms’ decisions.
Next, we discuss some modeling choices of the paper and future research directions. Our model
makes the simplifying assumption that referrals convert instantly, whereas in reality, there could be

28
a time lag between the arrival of the referrer and that of the referred. Such a time lag would make the
arrival process less bursty. Consequently, customers may have a stronger joining incentive (because
of shorter delay induced by less burstiness) but a weaker referral incentive, because (1) shorter
delay diminishes the value of gaining priority; and (2) referring customers may be served before
her referred friend converts. As a result, we conjecture that the ﬁrm would be less concerned about
the crowd-out eﬀect of referrals, and would launch a referral program (as opposed to implementing
FIFO) under a broader range of the base market size. However, motivating referrals would become
harder, and therefore, the ﬁrm would increasingly gravitate toward the use of strategic delay.
While we assume for simplicity customers are taken oﬀthe waitlist one at a time, ﬁrms in
practice often use batch processing, which would increase the burstiness of the service process (see,
e.g., §4.6, Kleinrock 1975). Since burstiness lengthens delay and deters customers from joining, we
conjecture that the ﬁrst-best throughput found in our model would be an upper bound on the
ﬁrst-best throughput in a batch-service model with the same amount of capacity. On the other
hand, as explained earlier, burstiness may strengthen referral incentives, and the optimal second-
best mechanism may increasingly shift toward the use of partial priority and away from strategic
delay. The above reasoning suggests that incorporating batch processing may partially oﬀset the
eﬀect of incorporating a referral time lag.
In terms of whom to serve ﬁrst, ﬁrms might be tempted to cherry-pick customers and release
their services (or beta versions) ﬁrst to those with high valuation or big inﬂuence (i.e., inﬂuencers).
The referral priority program may help identify such customers as those who are more anxious
about using the service or more inﬂuential in their social network may be more likely to refer
friends and jump ahead in the queue. However, if cherry-picking degenerates into arbitrary service
rules that no longer honor the expected delays posted as part of the referral program, then it can
cause customer confusion and loss of goodwill.
As in most queueing-game papers, our model does not consider reneging. However, it is possible
that a competing service is launched in the middle of a customer’s wait and causes her to lose
interest in the original service. One distinct feature of this setting is that “reneging” customers
will not be removed from the waitlist even if they have technically abandoned the queue. The ﬁrm
is generally uninformed of how many customers on the waitlist are still interested and how many
are “phantoms.” This raises an interesting question of how to retain customers while they are still
on the waitlist, which nicely complements the current paper’s focus on customer acquisition.
Our work focuses on the setting where customers are informed of the expected delay posted by
the ﬁrm, but not the real-time queue length. As a result, our mechanism design problem restricts
attention to static scheduling policies (typical in the queueing-game literature). In practice, cus-
tomers’ information structure varies from waitlist to waitlist. Some waitlists provide customers with

29
a wait-time estimate and some do not. Still, other waitlists further show the real-time queue length
and inform each customer of their own positions. If the real-time queue length is disclosed, then
one can consider ﬁnding the optimal dynamic, state-dependent scheduling policies for the referral
program, which can be a daunting challenge. While the optimal dynamic mechanism in such an
observable-queue is beyond the scope of the current study, the high-level trade-oﬀs identiﬁed in
this paper (such as the one between joining and referral incentives) still seem relevant and some of
the structural properties we ﬁnd about the static optimal referral program may still retain. Given
the recent interest in information provision in queues (e.g., Allon et al. 2011, Hu et al. 2018, Lin-
genbrink and Iyer 2019, Wang and Hu 2019), an even more ambitious question for future research
is how to jointly design dynamic information provision and scheduling policies. Note that in the
era of social media, the amount of information a customer has may psychologically aﬀect whether
she signs up on a waitlist as many customers sign up presumably due to the fear of missing out,
otherwise known as FOMO (McGinnis 2004). A long queue might be a social proof that prompts
FOMO customers to sign up.
Finally, consistent with the literature, we assume that the ﬁrm has perfect knowledge of the
demand (e.g., the base market size), whereas in practice (especially in our context), the ﬁrm may
face demand uncertainty and only know the demand up to a certain precision, which would expose
the ﬁrm to the risk of misspeciﬁcation if it sets its referral program according to a demand scenario
diﬀerent from the true one. In light of such uncertainty, parameter-free mechanisms such as FIFO
and full priority, may be viewed as more robust, and thus might be more practically appealing
(as we pointed out earlier). Further adding to the complexity of the problem is that the business
environment in practice may not always be stationary (as assumed in our model) but constantly
evolving. For example, the base market size may grow as the ﬁrm’s product or service trends
upward. As a response, the ﬁrm may want to increase its capacity to keep up with the demand
and adjust its referral program accordingly. In light of our current results, we conjecture that as
the base market size grows, it may be in the ﬁrm’s best interest to initially use strategic delay,
later switch to partial priority, and eventually turn oﬀthe referral program. On a related note,
our model implicitly assumes that the pool of potential customers to be referred is inﬁnite. If the
pool is ﬁnite, then an early user may easily identify a friend to refer while a latecomer may ﬁnd
it progressively more diﬃcult to do so. One way to capture this eﬀect is to assume the referral
cost increases over time. Our current results suggest that as the referral cost increases, the ﬁrm
should move from partial priority, to strategic delay and eventually to non-referral FIFO. A formal
inquiry of referral priority programs in a non-stationary environment is left for future research.

30
Acknowledgments
The author thanks the department editor Morris Cohen, an anonymous associate editor, and three anonymous
reviewers for their constructive feedback that has signiﬁcantly improved the paper. The author is grateful
to Laurens Debo, Justin McNally and Miles Wellesley for helpful discussion.
References
Af`eche P (2013) Incentive-compatible revenue management in queueing systems: Optimal strategic delay.
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 15(3):423–443.
Af`eche P, Mendelson H (2004) Pricing and priority auctions in queueing systems with a generalized delay
cost structure. Management Science 50(7):869–882.
Af`eche P, Pavlin M (2016) Optimal price-lead time menus for queues with customer choice: Priorities, pooling
and strategic delay. Management Science 62(8):2412–2436.
Allon G, Bassamboo A, Gurvich I (2011) “We will be right with you”: Managing customer expectations with
vague promises and cheap talk. Operations Research 59(6):1382–1394.
Athreya KB, Ney PE (1972) Branching Processes (Berlin: Springer-Verlag).
Biyalogorsky E, Gerstner E, Libai B (2001) Customer referral management: Optimal reward programs.
Marketing Science 20(1):82–95.
Business Insider (2013) There is a 260,000-person wait list for a new email app. Business Insider (Febru-
ary 7), URL http://www.businessinsider.com/there-is-a-260000-person-wait-list-for-an-
app-that-promises-to-fix-your-inbox-2013-2.
Chen XH, Dempster AP, Liu JS (1994) Weighted ﬁnite population sampling to maximize entropy. Biometrika
81(3):457–469.
Coﬀman EJ, Mitrani I (1980) A characterization of waiting time performance realizable by single-server
queues. Operations Research 28(3):810–821.
Cui S, Wang Z, Yang L (2019) The economics of line-sitting. Management Science URL http://dx.doi.
org/10.1287/mnsc.2018.3212, article in advance.
Edelson N, Hildebrand D (1975) Congestion tolls for Poisson queuing processes. Econometrica 43(1):81–92.
Financial Times (2018) The rise of AI and remote assistants. Financial Times (January 28), URL https:
//www.ft.com/content/6591a6fc-f7cf-11e7-a4c9-bbdefa4f210b.
Fortune (2015) How Robinhood, an investing app, is luring stock-market newbies. Fortune (March 12), URL
http://fortune.com/2015/03/12/robinhood-investing-app/.
Gavirneni S, Kulkarni VG (2016) Self-selecting priority queues with Burr distributed waiting costs. Produc-
tion and Operations Management 25(6):979–992.
Glazer A, Hassin R (1986) Stable priority purchasing in queues. Operations Research Letter 4(6):285–288.

31
Gurvich I, Lariviere M, Ozkan C (2019) Coverage, coarseness and classiﬁcation: Determinants of social
eﬃciency in priority queues. Management Science 65(3):1061–1075.
Harremoes P (2001) Binomial and Poisson distributions as maximum entropy distributions. IEEE Transac-
tions on Information Theory 47(5):2039–2041.
Hassin R (1995) Decentralized regulation of a queue. Management Science 41(1):163–173.
Hassin R (2016) Rational Queueing (Boca Raton: CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group).
Hassin R, Haviv M (2003) To Queue Or Not to Queue: Equilibrium Behavior in Queueing Systems (Boston:
Kluwer Academic Publishers).
Holmstr¨om B (1979) Moral hazard and observability. Bell Journal of Economics 10(1):74–91.
Hu M, Li Y, Wang J (2018) Eﬃcient ignorance: Information heterogeneity in a queue. Management Science
64(6):2650–2671.
Jing X, Xie J (2011) Group buying: A new mechanism for selling through social interactions. Management
Science 57(8):1354–1372.
Katta A, Sethuraman J (2005) Pricing strategies and service diﬀerentiation in queues: a proﬁt maximization
perspective. Working paper, Columbia University.
Kleinrock L (1967) Optimum bribing for queue position. Operations Research 15(2):304–318.
Kleinrock L (1975) Queueing Systems. Volume 1: Theory (New York: Wiley-Interscience).
Kornish LJ, Li Q (2010) Optimal referral bonuses with asymmetric information: Firm-oﬀered and interper-
sonal incentives. Marketing Science 29(1):108–121.
Lingenbrink D, Iyer K (2019) Optimal signaling mechanisms in unobservable queues. Operations Research
67(5):1397–1416.
Lobel I, Sadler E, Varshney LR (2017) Customer referral incentives and social media. Management Science
63(10):3514–3529.
Lui FT (1985) An equilibrium queueing model of bribery. Journal of Political Economy 93(4):760–781.
Maglaras C, Yao J, Zeevi A (2018) Optimal price and delay diﬀerentiation in large-scale queueing systems.
Management Science 64(5):2427–2444.
McGinnis PJ (2004) Social theory at HBS: McGinnis’ Two FOs. The Harbus (May 10), URL http://
harbus.org/2004/social-theory-at-hbs-2749/.
Mendelson H, Whang S (1990) Optimal incentive-compatible priority pricing for the M/M/1 queue. Opera-
tions Research 38(5):870–883.
Myerson RB (1981) Optimal auction design. Mathematics of Operations Research 6(1):58–73.
Naor P (1969) The regulation of queue size by levying tolls. Econometrica 37(1):15–24.

32
Ross SA (1973) The economic theory of agency: The principal’s problem. American Economic Review
62(2):134–139.
Su X, Zenios SA (2006) Recipient choice can address the eﬃciency-equity trade-oﬀin kidney transplantation:
A mechanism design model. Management Science 52(11):1647–1660.
TechCrunch (2011) How DropBox started as a minimal viable product. TechCrunch (October 19), URL
https://techcrunch.com/2011/10/19/dropbox-minimal-viable-product/.
The Verge (2013) Expect delays: why today’s top apps are putting you on a wait list. The Verge (July 30),
URL http://www.theverge.com/2013/7/30/4567794/mailbox-loom-cloud-app-wait-lists.
Wang J, Cui S, Wang Z (2019) Equilibrium strategies in M/M/1 priority queues with balking. Production
and Operations Management 28(1):43–62.
Wang J, Hu M (2019) Eﬃcient inaccuracy: User-generated information sharing in a queue. Management
Science Forthcoming.
Wang YH (1993) On the number of successes in independent trials. Statistica Sinica 3(2):295–312.
Xiao P, Tang CS, Wirtz J (2011) Optimizing referral reward programs under impression management con-
siderations. European Journal of Operational Research 215(3):730–739.
Yang L, Debo L (2019) Referral priority program: Leveraging social ties via operational incentives. Manage-
ment Science 65(5):2231–2248.
Yang L, Debo L, Gupta V (2017) Trading time in a congested environment. Management Science 63(7):2377–
2395.
Yang L, Wang Z, Cui S (2019) A model of queue-scalping. Working paper, Johns Hopkins University.

1
Online Appendix to “Invite Your Friend and You’ll Move up in
Line: Optimal Design of Referral Priority Programs”
Luyi Yang
Appendix A:
Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1
The ﬁrst-best problem relaxes IC constraint (5) in Problem 1 and eﬀectively
reduces to: maxα,r
Λα
1−rα, s.t. V −rk −
c
µ(1−rα)−Λα ≥0. Let γ ≥0, be the Lagrangian multiplier for the
constraint. Thus, the Lagrangian becomes L =
Λα
1−rα + γ

V −rk −
c
µ(1−rα)−Λα

. From the KKT conditions
∂L
∂r =
Λα2
(1−rα)2 + γ

−k −c
µα
[µ(1−rα)−Λα]2

= 0 and
∂L
∂α =
Λ
(1−rα)2 + γ

−c
µr+Λ
[µ(1−rα)−Λα]2

= 0, we have γ > 0. By
complementary slackness, V −rk −
c
µ(1−rα)−Λα = 0. This implies that rαW1 + (1 −rα)W0 =
1
µ(1−rα)−Λα.
Hence, the optimal scheduling policy must always be work-conserving in the ﬁrst-best problem. From
U ≡V −rk −
c
µ(1−rα)−Λα = 0, α(r) ≜
µ(V −rk)−c
(V −rk)(Λ+µr) ≤1. Also, ∂U/∂α < 0 and ∂U/∂r < 0. Thus, dα/dr =
−(∂U/∂r)/(∂U/∂α) < 0; α is decreasing in r. The objective function can be expressed as a function of r:
Λα
1−rα =
Λ
µ(V −rk)−c
(V −rk)(Λ+µr)
1−r
µ(V −rk)−c
(V −rk)(Λ+µr) = Λ µ(V −rk)−c
Λ(V −rk)+cr. We shall show this function is decreasing in r by showing its recip-
rocal is increasing in r. It suﬃces to show Λ(V −rk)+cr
µ(V −rk)−c = Λ
µ +
cr+Λc/µ
µ(V −rk)−c is increasing in r, which is obvious.
Therefore, the objective function is decreasing in r. Note that α(0) = µV −c
V Λ . Thus, α(0) ≤1 if and only if
Λ ≥µ −c/V . Thus, when Λ ≥µ −c/V , r = 0 and α = µV −c
V Λ . When Λ < µ −c/V , α = 1 and r ∈(0,1) solves
α(r) = 1, or
µ(V −rk)−c
(V −rk)(Λ+µr) = 1. Collecting terms gives µ −
c
V −rk −µr = Λ. It is easy to see ∂r/∂Λ < 0. Solving
for r gives r =
−√
4kµ(c+ΛV −µV )+(−kΛ+kµ+µV )2−kΛ+kµ+µV
2kµ
.
□
Proof of Proposition 3
Any mechanism that generate referrals must have k ≤cα(W0 −W1), or equiv-
alently, W0 ≥k/(cα) + W1. Moreover, the OA constraint requires W1 ≥1/(µ(1 −rα) −Λrα2) and the IR
constraint requires V −rk −c[rαW1 +(1−rα)W0] ≥0. Thus, by substitution, any mechanism that generates
referrals must have
V −k
α −
c
µ(1 −rα) −Λrα2 ≥0.
(A.1)
Since
c
µ(1−rα)−Λrα2 > c
µ and
k
α ≥k, thus to generate referrals, we must have V −k −c
µ > 0. Therefore, if
V −c/µ ≤k, no referrals can be generated.
□
Proof of Proposition 4
In the ﬁrst-best problem, when Λ < µ −c/V , αF B = 1 and rF B solves
V −rF Bk −
c
µ(1 −rF B) −Λ = 0.
(A.2)
It is achievable by the second best if and only if W1 and W0 satisfy rF BW1 +(1−rF B)W0 =
1
µ(1−rF B)−Λ, k =
c[W0−W1], W1 ≥
1
µ(1−rF B)−ΛrF B . The ﬁrst equation is due to work-conservation of the ﬁrst-best solution. The
second equation is due to rF B ∈(0,1), i.e., customers should be indiﬀerent to referrals. The inequality is from
the OA constraint. Solving the ﬁrst two equations gives W1 =
1
µ(1−rF B)−Λ −k(1−rF B)
c
,
W0 =
1
µ(1−rF B)−Λ +
krF B
c
; Thus, we need to show
1
µ(1 −rF B) −Λ −k(1 −rF B)
c
≥
1
µ(1 −rF B) −ΛrF B
(A.3)

2
if and only if Λ ≥Λ∗(subject to Λ ≥µ −c/V ), where Λ∗∈(0,µ −c/V ) is uniquely determined. Combining
(A.2) and (A.3), it follows that (A.3) holds if and only if
V −k −
c
µ(1 −rF B) −ΛrF B ≥0.
(A.4)
From (A.2), Λ = µ(1 −rF B) −
c
V −rF Bk. Note that Λ is decreasing in rF B. Plugging it into (A.4) gives
V −k −
c
µ(1−rF B)−ΛrF B = V −k −
c
µ(1−rF B)−µ(1−rF B)rF B+rF B
c
V −rF Bk = V −k −
c
µ(1−rF B)2+
rF Bc
V −rF Bk
≜f(rF B).
Thus, proving the proposition is equivalent to showing that when V −c/µ > k, there exists a unique r∗∈(0,1)
such that f(r∗) = 0. Moreover, f(r) > 0 if r ∈(0,r∗) and f(r) < 0 if r ∈(r∗,1). By inspection, f(1) = 0;
f(0) = V −k −c/µ > 0. f(r) = V −k −
c(V −rk)
µ(1−r)2(V −rk)+rc. Since µ(1 −r)2(V −rk) + rc > 0 for r ∈(0,1),
it suﬃces to show g(r) ≜f(r)(µ(1 −r)2(V −rk) + rc) has this property. Plugging f(r) into g(r) gives
g(r) = (µ(1 −r)2(V −rk) + rc)(V −k) −c(V −rk). Note that g(r) is a third-degree polynomial function,
which has at most three roots. We already know one root r = 1. The coeﬃcient for r3 is −kµ(V −k) < 0.
Therefore, g(r) < 0 for suﬃciently large r. The derivative of g(r) evaluated at r = 1 is g′(1) = cV > 0. This
implies there exists ε > 0 such that g(1 + ε) > 0 and g(1 −ε) < 0. Since g(0) > 0 and g(1 −ε) < 0, there
exists r∗∈(0,1) such that g(r∗) = 0 by the intermediate value theorem. Likewise, since g(1 + ε) > 0 and
g(r) < 0 for suﬃciently large r, there also exists an r∗′ > 1 such that g(r∗′) = 0. Since g(r) has at most three
roots and one root is 1, we conclude that r∗and r∗′ must be unique. Moreover, g(r) > 0 if r ∈(0,r∗) and
g(r) < 0 if r ∈(r∗,1). Therefore, f also has this property. We also need to show Λ∗= µ(1 −r∗) −
c
V −r∗k > 0.
Since Λ is decreasing in r, It suﬃces to show f(r0) < 0, where r0 solves µ(1 −r0) −
c
V −r0k = 0. By deﬁnition,
f(r0) = V −k −
c
µ(1−r0) = V −k −
c
c
V −r0k = −(1−r0)k < 0. Therefore, Λ∗> 0. Finally, solving g(r∗) = 0 for r∗
gives r∗=
√
(µV 2−k2µ)2−4(k2µ−kµV )(cV +kµV −µV 2)+k2µ−µV 2
2(k2µ−kµV )
and Λ∗=
h
µ(1 −r∗) −
c
V −r∗k
i
.
Next, we identify the optimal second-best mechanism for Λ < Λ∗and k < V −c/µ. Either r = 0 (FIFO) or
r > 0 (referrals generated). Now, we compare these two candidate mechanisms.
Case 1: r = 0. Since Λ < Λ∗< µ −c/V , V −c/(µ −Λ) > 0; thus, α = 1, and the system throughput is Λ.
Case 2: r > 0. From the proof of Proposition 3, any mechanism that generates referrals must satisfy (A.1).
Thus, the optimal value to the following relaxation problem is an upper bound of the system throughput
with r > 0: maxα,r
Λα
1−rα s.t. V −k
α −
c
µ(1−rα)−Λrα2 ≥0. Note that at this point, we have not shown that the
solution of this problem is implementable. We will show this later. In this relaxation problem, the constraint
must be binding because otherwise one can always increase r to increase the objective function while still
satisfying the constraint. Therefore, V −k/α −
c
µ(1−rα)−Λrα2 = 0, which gives r =
−αc+αµV −kµ
α(αV −k)(αΛ+µ). Plugging
it into the objective function gives Λ
α
1−rα = Λ (αV −k)(αΛ+µ)
αΛV +c−kΛ
= Λ
αΛ+µ
Λ+
c
αV −k From r =
−αc+αµV −kµ
α(αV −k)(αΛ+µ), αV −k =
cα
µ(1−rα)−Λrα2 > 0. Therefore, Λα/(1−rα) = Λ
αΛ+µ
Λ+
c
αV −k is increasing in α. Hence, the optimal αSB = 1. Plugging
α = 1 into r =
−αc+αµV −kµ
α(αV −k)(αΛ+µ) gives rSB =
µ(V −k)−c
(V −k)(µ+Λ). Note that the throughput in this relaxation problem is
obviously higher than the FIFO throughput Λ in Case 1. Since V −k/α −
c
µ(1−rα)−Λrα2 = 0, it follows from
the logic of the proof of Proposition 3 that W1 =
1
µ(1−r)−Λr,
W0 = W1 + k/c. It remains to be shown that
the solution to this relaxation problem is implementable. We check if all the constraints in the mechanism
design problem are satisﬁed. The IC constraint is satisﬁed by construction since cα(W0 −W1) = k. The IR
constraint is satisﬁed because
V −rk −c[rαW1 −(1 −rα)W0] = V −k −
c
µ(1 −r) −Λr = 0.
(A.5)

3
The OA constraint W1 ≥1/(µ(1 −rα) −Λrα2) is obviously satisﬁed. We check the other OA constraint:
rαW1 + (1 −rα)W0 ≥1/(µ(1 −rα) −Λα). From (A.5), it is equivalent to checking
V −rk −
c
µ(1 −r) −Λ ≥0.
(A.6)
We shall show that this is true and the inequality is strict if Λ < Λ∗, which would prove the optimality
of strategic delay. First note that by deﬁnition of Λ∗, at Λ∗, V −r∗k −
c
µ(1−r∗α)−Λ∗α = 0, where r∗solves
V −k −
c
µ(1−r∗)−Λr∗= 0. From (A.5), Λ = µ(1 −r)/r −
c
(V −k)r. Moreover, decreasing Λ increases r, which
implies that for Λ < Λ∗, r > r∗. Plugging this into the LHS of (A.6) gives V −rk −
c
µ(1−r)−Λ = V −rk −
c
µ(1−r)−µ(1−r)/r+
c
(V −k)r = V −rk −
c(V −k)r
c−(V −k)µ(1−r)2 ≜φ(r). To prove (A.6), it suﬃces to show φ(r) > 0 for r ∈
(r∗,1). Note that c −(V −k)µ(1 −r)2 > 0 since
c(V −k)r
c−(V −k)µ(1−r)2 =
c
µ(1−r)−Λ > 0 and c(V −k)r > 0. Therefore,
it is equivalent to showing (V −rk)(c −(V −k)µ(1 −r)2) −c(V −k)r > 0 for r ∈(r∗,1). Recognize that the
LHS is equal to −g(r), where g(r) is deﬁned in the proof of Proposition 4, in which we show g(r) < 0 for
r > r ∈(r∗,1). Therefore, −g(r) > 0 for r > r ∈(r∗,1). This shows that the solution to the relaxation problem
is implementable, and since it achieves a higher throughput than FIFO in Case 1. This (strategic-delay)
solution is optimal.
□
Proof of Proposition 5
The pair (Λ∗,r∗) solves the following joint equations:
V −r∗k −
c
µ(1 −r∗) −Λ∗= 0,
V −k −
c
µ(1 −r∗) −Λr∗= 0.
(A.7)
Expressing Λ∗as a function of Λ from the ﬁrst equation of (A.7) and plugging it into the second equation
of (A.7) gives g(r∗) = [µ(1 −r∗)2(V −r∗k) + r∗c](V −k) −cV + cr∗k = 0. Note that g(·) is the same g
function deﬁned in the proof of Proposition 4. Simplifying g(·) yields g(r) = (1 −r)[µ(1 −r)(V −rk)(V −
k) −cV ] = 0. Since r∗∈(0,1), h(r∗) = µ(1 −r∗)(V −r∗k)(V −k) −cV = 0. By inspection,
∂h(r)
∂r
< 0,
∂h
∂k <
0. Therefore, ∂r∗
∂k = −∂h/∂k
∂h/∂r < 0. Next, we shall show ∂Λ∗/∂r∗< 0, which would prove ∂Λ∗/∂k > 0. From
the second equation of (A.7), k = V −c/(µ(1 −r∗) −Λr∗). Plugging it into the ﬁrst equation of (A.7) gives
V −r∗
V −
c
µ(1−r∗)−Λr∗)

−
c
µ(1−r∗)−Λ∗= 0. Collecting terms gives V (1 −r∗) −
c
µ(1−r∗)−Λ∗+
cr∗
µ(1−r∗)−Λ∗r∗=
0. V (1 −r∗) −
cµ(1−r∗)2
(µ(1−r∗)−Λ∗)(µ(1−r∗)−Λ∗r∗) = 0. τ(Λ∗,r∗) = V (1 −r∗) −
cµ
(µ−Λ∗/(1−r∗))(µ−Λ∗r∗/(1−r∗)) = 0. By
inspection,
∂τ
∂r∗< 0,
∂τ
∂Λ∗< 0. Therefore,
∂Λ∗
∂r∗= −∂τ/∂r∗
∂τ/∂Λ∗< 0. Since
∂Λ∗
∂r∗< 0 and
∂r∗
∂k < 0, by the chain rule,
∂Λ∗
∂k = ∂Λ∗
∂r∗
∂r∗
∂k > 0.
□
Proof of Proposition 6
The
ﬁrst-best
problem
can
simplify
to
maxr∈[0,1]D,α∈[0,1] Π(r,α)
=
Λα
1−m(r,α),
s.t.
U(r,α) = V
−k PD
i=1 ri −c σ2(r,α)+(2−m(r,α))(1−m(r,α))
2(1−m(r,α))[µ(1−m(r,α))−Λα]
≥0,
where
m(r,α) =
PD
i=1 riα, and σ2(r,α) = PD
i=1 riα(1 −riα). To prove Proposition 6, we need to prove that any feasible
solution to the ﬁrst-best problem (r∗,α∗) with two or more positive r∗
i ’s can be strictly dominated
by a feasible solution with at most one positive ri > 0. Let m∗= PD
i=1 r∗
i α∗. Then, U(r∗,α∗) =
V −k PD
i=1 r∗
i −c
PD
i=1 r∗
i α∗(1−r∗
i α∗)+(2−m∗)(1−m∗)
2(1−m∗)[µ(1−m∗)−Λα∗]
≥0. We ﬁrst prove the following lemma:
Lemma A.1. For any K ∈(0,1), the minimization problem minx1,...,xD∈[0,1],x1≥x2≥...≥xD
PD
i=1 xi(1 −
xi) s.t. PD
i=1 xi = m has the optimal value m(1−m) with the unique optimal solution x1 = m and x2 = x3 =
... = xD = 0.

4
Proof of Lemma A.1
To see this, note PD
i=1 xi(1 −xi) = PD
i=1 xi −PD
i=1 x2
i = m −
 PD
i=1 xi
2 +
2P
i,j:i̸=j xixj = m −m2 +2P
i,j:i̸=j xixj ≥m(1 −m). On the other hand, x1 = m and x2 = x3 = ... = xD = 0
gives PD
i=1 xi(1 −xi) = m(1 −m). Moreover, 2P
i,j:i̸=j xixj > 0 if there are two positive xi’s, which implies
any solution with two positive xi’s cannot achieve the objective value m(m −1). Hence, x1 = m and x2 =
x3 = ... = xD = 0 is the unique optimal solution and m(1 −m), the optimal value.
□
Lemma A.1 implies that for any (r∗,α∗) with two or more positive r∗
i ’s,
PD
i=1 r∗
i α∗(1−r∗
i α∗)+(2−m∗)(1−m∗)
2(1−m∗)[µ(1−m∗)−Λα∗]
>
m∗(1−m∗)+(2−m∗)(1−m∗)
2(1−m∗)[µ(1−m∗)−Λα∗]
=
1
µ(1−m∗)−Λα∗. Moreover, since U(r∗,α∗) ≥0, we have
V −k m∗
α∗−
c
µ(1 −m∗) −Λα∗> 0.
(A.8)
Now, we discuss two cases.
Case 1: α∗/(1 −m∗) < 1. Let α′ = α∗/(1 −m∗). Thus, U1(α′) ≡V −
c
µ−Λα′ = V −
c(1−m∗)
µ(1−m∗)−Λα∗> V −
c
µ(1−m∗)−Λα∗> 0, where the last inequality follows from (A.8). Since U1(α′) is decreasing in α′, there must
exist a unique solution α′′ > α′ such that U1(α′′) = 0. Let α′′′ = min{α′′,1}. Thus, Λα′′′ > Λα∗/(1−m∗). This
implies that a non-referral solution (r,α) = (0,α′′′) can strictly dominate (r∗,α∗) with two or more positive
r∗
i ’s, and therefore, the latter is not an optimal solution to the ﬁrst-best problem.
Case 2: α∗/(1 −m∗) ≥1. Let r′
1 = 1 −(1 −m∗)/α∗∈[0,1). U2(r′
1) = V −kr′
1 −
c
µ(1−r′
1)−Λ = V −
k
 1 −
1
α∗+ m∗
α∗

−
cα∗
µ(1−m∗)−Λα∗> V −k m∗
α∗−
c
µ(1−m∗)−Λα∗> 0, where the last inequality follows from (A.8).
Since U2(r′
1) is decreasing in r′
1, there must exist a unique solution r′′
1 ∈(r′
1,1) such that U2(r′′
1) = 0. Note
that Λ/(1 −r′′
1) > Λ/(1 −r′
1) = Λα∗/(1 −m∗). This implies that a new solution (r,α) with r1 = r′′
1, r2 = r3 =
...rD = 0 and α = 1 can strictly dominate (r∗,α∗) with two or more positive r∗
i ’s, and therefore, the latter is
not an optimal solution to the ﬁrst-best problem. Combining the two cases shows that the ﬁrst-best problem
can have at most one positive ri in the optimal solution.
□
Proof of Proposition 7
Under the transfer mechanism proposed, we show that (αF B,rF B) satisﬁes both
IR and IC and thus is an equilibrium outcome. If customers adopt strategy (α,r), then each customer’
expected utility is U(r,α) = α{V −rk + rαP −c[rαW1(r,α) + (1 −rα)W0(r,α)] −rF BP}, where W1(r,α) =
1/[µ(1 −rα) −Λrα2] and rαW1(r,α)+(1−rα)W0(r,α) = 1/(µ(1−rα)−Λα). Thus, U(rF B,αF B = 1) = V −
rF Bk −
c
µ(1−rF B)−Λ = 0. Hence, the IR constraint is satisﬁed by (αF B,rF B). To satisfy the IC constraint, we
must have k = cα[W0(rF B,αF B)−W1(rF B,αF B)]+P, which is satisﬁed by construction. Thus, the proposed
transfer mechanism can induce the ﬁrst-best customer outcome. Also, note that it is budget-balanced and
therefore, it achieves the ﬁrst-best system throughput without any (long-run) ﬁnancial cost/gain for the ﬁrm.
Note that when the ﬁrst-best is not achieved in the base model, we must have V −k−c/[µ(1−rF B)−ΛrF B] <
0; since V −rF Bk −
c
µ(1−rF B)−Λ = 0, we must have P = k −c
Λ
[µ(1−rF B)−Λ][µ(1−rF B)−ΛrF B] > 0.
□
Proof of Proposition 8
We ﬁrst solve for the optimal FIFO capacity. Given capacity µ, the expected utility
from joining a FIFO queue is V −c/(µ−Λα). Thus, the system throughput λF IF O(µ) is: λF IF O(µ) = 0,if µ <
c/V ;λF IF O(µ) = µ −c/V,if c/V ≤µ ≤Λ + c/V ;λF IF O(µ) = Λ,if µ > Λ + c/V. The optimal objective value is
ΠF IF O = [maxµ λF IF O(µ) −ωµ2/2]+. Since V > c/Λ, we have ΠF IF O = Λ −1
2ω(Λ + c/V )2, if ω < V/(ΛV +
c);ΠF IF O = −c/V +
1
2ω, if ω ∈[V/(ΛV + c),V/(2c));ΠF IF O = 0, if ω ≥V/(2c). The corresponding optimal

5
FIFO capacity µF IF O is µF IF O = Λ + c/V,if w <
V
ΛV +c;µF IF O = 1/ω,if w ∈[
V
ΛV +c, V
2c);µF IF O = 0,if w ≥V
2c.
Next, we characterize the ﬁrst best of the referral program. By Proposition 1, in the ﬁrst best, the system
throughput as a function of capacity µ, λF B(µ), is λF B(µ) = 0,if µ < c/V ;λF B(µ) = µ −c/V,if c/V ≤µ ≤
Λ + c/V ;λF B(µ) = Λ/(1 −rF B(µ)),if µ > Λ + c/V ; where rF B(µ) solves V −krF B(µ) −
c
µ(1−rF B(µ))−Λ = 0.
Note that rF B(µ) is increasing in µ. Thus, λF B(µ) = Λ/[1 −rF B(µ)] is increasing in µ. Next, we show that
λF B(µ) is concave in µ for µ > Λ+c/V . Plugging rF B(µ) = 1−Λ/λF B into V −krF B(µ)−
c
µ(1−rF B(µ))−Λ = 0
gives V −k + k
Λ
λF B −
cλF B
Λ(µ−λF B) = 0. Writing µ as a function of λF B gives µ =
cλF B
Λ[V −k+k
Λ
λF B ] + λF B. Note that
V −k + k
Λ
λF B > 0, which is equivalent to λF BV −λF Bk + kΛ > 0.
dµ
dλF B = 1 + cλF B(λF BV −kλF B + 2kΛ)
Λ(k(−λF B + Λ) + λF BV )2 > 1;
d2µ
d(λF B)2 =
2ck2Λ
(λF BV −kλF B + kΛ)3 > 0.
(A.9)
Therefore, µ is convex increasing in λF B. From Mrˇsevi´c (2008), the inverse of a convex increasing function is
a concave increasing function, i.e., λF B is concave increasing in µ. Since the capacity cost is ωµ2/2 per unit
time, the ﬁrst order condition of the objective function is Π′(µ) = dλF B(µ)/dµ−ωµ. Since λF B is concave in µ
for µ > Λ+c/V , Π′(µ) is decreasing in µ for µ > Λ+c/V . It follows from the equation µ =
cλF B
Λ[V −k+k
Λ
λF B ] +λF B
that when µ = Λ+c/V , λF B = Λ. From (A.9),
dµ
dλF B

λF B=Λ = 1+ c(V +k)
ΛV 2 . Hence,
dλF B
dµ

µ=Λ+c/V =
1
1+ c(V +k)
ΛV 2
=
ΛV 2
ΛV 2+c(V +k). Therefore, Π′(Λ + c/V ) =
ΛV 2
ΛV 2+c(V +k) −ω(Λ + c/V ). If
ΛV 2
ΛV 2+c(V +k) −ω(Λ + c/V ) > 0, i.e., ω <
ΛV 2
[ΛV 2+c(V +k)](Λ+c/V ) ≜¯ω, then there exists a unique µ0 > Λ + c/V such that Π′(µ0) = 0. Also, From (A.9),
dµ/dλF B > 1 implies dλF B/dµ < 1. It follows from dλF B/dµ |µ=µ0 −ωµ0 = 0 that µ0 < 1/ω. If ω ≥¯ω, then
µ ≤Λ+c/V and the optimal capacity follows from the FIFO case. Thus, µF B = µ0 > Λ+c/V (with µF IF O =
Λ + c/V ) if ω < ¯ω and µF B = µF F IO otherwise. This completes the proof.
□
Proof of Proposition 9
If ω ∈[¯ω,V/(2c)), the ﬁrst best is trivially achieved by non-referral FIFO. Next,
consider ω < ¯ω. If k ≥V −c/µ0, then under µ0, referrals cannot be generated (by Proposition 3). Thus,
the ﬁrm runs a FIFO queue with µSB = Λ + c/V < µ0. If k ≥V , then obviously k ≥V −c/µ0 and then
non-referral FIFO is optimal. This proves Case (iv) of the Proposition.
Next, we consider k < V . By Proposition 4, a referral mechanism must satisfy: maxµ,r
Λ
1−r −1
2ωµ2,
s.t.
V −rk −
c
µ(1 −r) −Λ ≥0,
(A.10)
V −k −
c
µ(1 −r) −Λr ≥0,
(A.11)
whereas a FIFO mechanism (with all customers joining) has the optimal objective function value ΠF IF O =
Λ −1
2ω(Λ + c/V )2. Note that since ω < ¯ω, the optimal FIFO mechanism must have all customers join the
queue. Also note that in the referral mechanism formulation, both Constraints (A.10) and (A.11) being non-
binding is not optimal because one can always increase r (without changing µ) to satisfy both constraints
to strictly increase the objective function value. Thus, the referral mechanism can have three possibilities
at optimality. (1) Both Constraints (A.10) and (A.11) are binding (which corresponds to full priority and
it achieves the ﬁrst best, which dominates the FIFO mechanism); (2) Constraint (A.10) is binding, but
not Constraint (A.11) (which corresponds to partial priority and it achieves the ﬁrst best, which dominates
the FIFO mechanism); (3) Constraint (A.11) is binding, but not Constraint (A.10) (which corresponds to

6
strategic delay; it does not achieve the ﬁrst best and we must also compare the optimal objective value with
the FIFO mechanism to decide which one is better). In the ﬁrst best (µF B,rF B), since w < ¯ω, rF B > 0 and
V −rF Bk −
c
µF B(1−rF B)−Λ = 0. We examine conditions under which (µF B,rF B) satisﬁes (A.11) with µ = µF B
and r = rF B. Note that as ω decreases, µF B increases and so does rF B. From V −rF Bk −
c
µF B(1−rF B)−Λ = 0
we have µF B(1 −rF B) = Λ +
c
V −krF B . Plugging it into the following gives: V −k −
c
µF B(1−rF B)−ΛrF B =
V −k −
c
Λ+c/(V −krF B)−ΛrF B ≜ℏ(rF B). Recognize that ℏ(1) = 0. Also, let h(r) ≜c/(V −kr) −Λr . Thus,
ℏ(r) = V −k −
c
Λ+h(r). h′(r) =
ck
(V −kr)2 −Λ. By inspection, h′(r) is increasing in r. Therefore, h(r) is convex
in r ∈(0,1), and since ℏ(r) is increasing in h(r), ℏ(r) is quasi-convex in r ∈(0,1). Since ℏ(r) is quasi-convex
and ℏ(1) = 0, we have the following three possibilities regarding the signs of ℏ(0) and ℏ′(1): Case 1: ℏ(0) ≥0
and ℏ′(1) ≤0. Case 2: ℏ(0) ≤0 and ℏ′(1) ≥0. Case 3: ℏ(0) > 0 and ℏ′(1) > 0.
Case 1: ℏ(0) ≥0 and ℏ′(1) ≤0. In this case, ℏ(r) ≥0,∀r ∈(0,1). Further, ℏ′(1) ≤0 is equivalent to
h′(1) ≤0. Thus, ℏ(0) = V −k −
c
Λ+c/V ≥0, and ℏ′(1) =
ck
(V −k)2 −Λ ≤0. These conditions are equivalent to
Λ ≥
ck
(V −k)2 ≜¯Λ. Hence, if Λ ≥¯Λ, ℏ(r) > 0 for all any r ∈(0,1), which implies the ﬁrst best can be achieved
by partial priority for all ω < ¯ω. This proves Case (i) of the Proposition.
Case 2: ℏ(0) ≤0 and ℏ′(1) ≥0. In this case, ℏ(r) < 0,∀r ∈(0,1). Conditions ℏ(0) ≤0 and ℏ′(1) ≥0 is
equivalent to
V −k −
c
Λ + c/V ≤0.
(A.12)
That is, Λ ≤
ck
(V −k)V ≜Λ. In this case, the ﬁrst best cannot be achieved for any w < ¯w. Thus, the second
best (µSB,rSB) is either FIFO, or a referral mechanism with strategic delay that satisﬁes χ(µSB,rSB) ≜
V −k −
c
µ(1−rSB)−ΛrSB = 0, V −rSBk −
c
µ(1−rSB)−Λ > 0. Note that when µ = Λ + c/V and r = 0, χ(µ,r) =
V −k −
c
Λ+c/V < 0. Also, χ(µ,r) is increasing in µ and decreasing in r. Hence, any (µ,r) that satisﬁes
χ(µ,r) = 0 must have µ > Λ + c/V = µF IF O. This implies that in this case, µSB > µF IF O. From χ(µ,r) = 0,
we have
µ = Λr + c/(V −k)
1 −r
= Λ + Λ(r −1) + c/(V −k)
1 −r
= −Λ + Λ + c/(V −k)
1 −r
.
(A.13)
Let x =
Λ
1−r.
Λ
1−r −1
2ωµ2 = x −ω
2
h
−Λ + x

1 +
c
Λ(V −k)
i2
≜Π(x). Π(x) is a concave quadratic function.
The ﬁrst-order condition is Π′(x) = 1 + Λω

1 +
c
Λ(V −k)

−ωx

1 +
c
Λ(V −k)
2
, x ≥Λ. Π′(x) is decreas-
ing in x and Π′(∞) = −∞. Thus, if Π′(Λ) > 0 then Π is maximized at x∗, where x∗is the unique
solution to Π′(x∗) = 0; Otherwise, Π(x) is decreasing in x, and the maximizer x∗= Λ (i.e., no refer-
rals). Also, Π(Λ) = Λ −ω
2

c
V −k
2
< Λ −ω
2
 Λ + c
V
2 = ΠF IF O, where the inequality follows from (A.12).
This implies that when x∗= Λ, the optimal second-best mechanism is non-referral FIFO. Π′(Λ) = 1 −
ω

1 +
c
Λ(V −k)

c
(V −k). Π′(Λ) is decreasing in ω; thus, when ω is small enough, Π′(Λ) > 0 and there exists
a unique x∗> 0 such that Π′(x∗) = 0. We next show that when ω = ¯ω, Π′(Λ) < 0. Π′(Λ) |ω=¯ω= 1 −
¯ω

1 +
c
Λ(V −k)

c
(V −k) = 1 −
ΛV 2
[ΛV 2+c(V +k)](Λ+c/V )

1 +
c
Λ(V −k)

c
(V −k). From (A.12), c/(V −k) > Λ + c/V .
Hence, 1 −
ΛV 2
[ΛV 2+c(V +k)](Λ+c/V )

1 +
c
Λ(V −k)

c
(V −k) < 1 −
ΛV 2
[ΛV 2+c(V +k)](Λ+c/V )

1 +
c
Λ(V −k)

(Λ + c/V ) = 1 −
V 2[Λ(V −k)+c]
[ΛV 2+c(V +k)](V −k) = 1 −
ΛV 2(V −k)+cV 2
ΛV 2(V −k)+c(V 2−k2) < 0. Letting Π′(Λ) = 0 gives w =
Λ(V −k)2
c[Λ(V −k)+c] ≜˜ω. Therefore, for
ω ∈[˜ω, ¯ω), the optimal second-best mechanism is non-referral FIFO. When ω < ˜ω, the referral mechanism

7
with strategic delay (SD) is feasible. Its system throughput is λSD =
1+Λω(1+
c
Λ(V −k))
ω(1+
c
Λ(V −k))
2 . The optimal capac-
ity of the referral mechanism is µSD ≜
Λ(V −k)
ω[Λ(V −k)+c]. The optimal proﬁt under that mechanism is ΠSD =
Λ2(V −k)(V −k+2(c+Λ(V −k))ω)
2(c+Λ(V −k))2ω
=
Λ2(V −k)2
2(c+Λ(V −k))2ω +
Λ2(V −k)
(c+Λ(V −k)). The diﬀerence between the referral proﬁt and the
FIFO proﬁt ΠF IF O = Λ −1
2ω(Λ + c/V )2 is
ΠSD −ΠF IF O =
Λ2(V −k)2
2(c + Λ(V −k))2ω + (Λ + c/V )2
2
ω +
Λ2(V −k)
(c + Λ(V −k)) −Λ.
(A.14)
Next, we prove that ΠSD −ΠF IF O is monotone decreasing in ω for ω < ˜ω. Diﬀerentiating ΠSD −ΠF IF O with
respect to ω gives Ω(ω) ≜−
Λ2(V −k)2
2(c+Λ(V −k))2ω2 + (Λ+c/V )2
2
, which is increasing in ω. Hence, it suﬃces to show
Ω(˜ω) < 0. Ω(˜ω) = −
c2
2(V −k)2 + (Λ+c/V )2
2
< 0, where the last inequality is due to (A.12). Since ΠSD −ΠF IF O
is monotone decreasing in ω for ω < ˜ω and ΠSD −ΠF IF O > 0 as ω →0 and ΠSD −ΠF IF O < 0 when ω = ˜ω,
there exists a unique ˆω such that ΠSD −ΠF IF O > 0 if and only if ω < ˆω. Therefore, the optimal mechanism
is strategic delay for ω < ˆω, and non-referral FIFO for ω ≥ˆω. This proves Case (iii) in the Proposition.
Next, we show that the optimal capacity under strategic delay in the second best, µSD, is lower than the
optimal capacity in the ﬁrst best, µF B. Let λF B(µ) and λSD(µ) be the throughput as a function of capacity µ
in the ﬁrst best and the second best (with strategic delay), respectively. Thus, µF B solves λF B
′(µF B)−ωµF B =
0 and µSD solves λ′
SD(µSD) −ωµSD = 0. Note that both λ′
F B(µ) and λ′
SD(µ) are decreasing in µ. Therefore,
to show µSD < µF B, it suﬃces to show λ′
F B(µ) > λ′
SD(µ). From (A.9),
dµ
dλF B = 1 + cλF B[λF B(V −k)+2kΛ]
Λ[λF B(V −k)+kΛ]2
. From
(A.13),
dµ
dλSD = 1 +
c
Λ(V −k). Since dy/dx = 1/(dx/dy), to show λ′
F B(µ) > λ′
SD(µ), it suﬃces to show
dµ
dλF B <
dµ
dλSD , i.e.,
cλF B[λF B(V −k)+2kΛ]
Λ[λF B(V −k)+kΛ]2
<
c
Λ(V −k). This is equivalent to showing (V −k)λF B[λF B(V −k) + 2kΛ] <
[λF B(V −k) + kΛ]2, which is equivalently showing (kΛ)2 > 0, which is trivially true. Hence, µSD < µF B.
Case 3: ℏ(0) > 0 and ℏ′(1) > 0. This gives the condition Λ ∈(Λ, ¯Λ). In this case, there exists a unique
r′ ∈(0,1) such that ℏ(r) > 0 for r < r′; ℏ(r) = 0 for r = r′; and ℏ(r) < 0 for r > r′. Since rF B decreases in ω, it
follows that there exists a unique ω such that the ﬁrst best is achieved by partial priority if ω ∈(ω, ¯ω), by full
priority if ω = ω, and cannot be achieved in the second best if ω < ω. Next, we show that strategic delay dom-
inates FIFO for ω < ω. First, at ω = ω, ΠSD(ω) = ΠF B(ω) > ΠF IF O(ω) and µSD(ω) = µF B(ω) > µF IF O(ω) =
Λ + c/V . Second, from (A.14), ΠSD(ω) −ΠF IF O(ω) is decreasing in ω if ω <
Λ(V −k)
[Λ(V −k)+c](Λ+c/V ). From the
expression of µSD, we have µSD(ω) =
Λ(V −k)
ω[Λ(V −k)+c]. Since µSD(ω) > Λ + c/V , we have ω <
Λ(V −k)
[Λ(V −k)+c](Λ+c/V ).
Therefore, ΠSD(ω) −ΠF IF O(ω) is decreasing in ω if ω < ω. Since ΠSD(ω) > ΠF IF O(ω), we have ΠSD(ω) >
ΠF IF O(ω) for all ω < ω. Thus, strategic delay dominates FIFO and is optimal for ω < ω. This proves Case
(ii) of the Proposition. Note that µSD ∈(µF IF O,µF B) can be similarly shown as before.
Finally, when referrals are generated, the average delay rW1 + (1 −r)W0 is equal to (V −rk)/c because
V −rk −c[rW1 + (1 −r)W0] = 0. In a FIFO queue, the average delay W F IF O is equal to V/c. Therefore,
rW1 + (1 −r)W0 < W F IF O. This completes the proof.
□
References
Mrˇsevi´c, M (2008) Convexity of the inverse function. The Teaching of Mathematics XI(1):21–24.

8
Appendix B:
Equilibrium Conditions for the Full-Priority Referral Scheme
Under the full-priority referral scheme, if a customer makes a successful referral, she gains full priority over
all the others who do not make a successful referral. Those with a successful referral (without a successful
referral) expect a delay of W1 (W0). An equilibrium is speciﬁed by customers’ joining probability α ∈[0,1]
and referral eﬀort r ∈[0,1]. In equilibrium, (W1,W2) is determined from (α,r) from the following equations:
W1(r,α) =
1
µ(1−rα)−Λrα2 , W0(r,α) =
µ(1−rα)
[µ(1−rα)−Λrα2][µ(1−rα)−Λα].
Case 1: (α < 1,r = 0) is an equilibrium if V −
1
µ−Λα = 0, cα

1
µ−Λα −1
µ

< k.
Case 2: (α = 1,r = 0) is an equilibrium if V −
1
µ−Λ ≥0, c

1
µ−Λ −1
µ

< k.
Case 3: (α < 1,r ∈(0,1)) is an equilibrium if V −kr −
1
µ(1−rα)−Λα = 0, cα[W0(r,α) −W1(r,α)] = k.
Case 4: (α = 1,r ∈(0,1)) is an equilibrium if V −kr −
1
µ(1−r)−Λ ≥0, c[W0(r,1) −W1(r,1)] = k.
Case 5: (α < 1,r = 1) is an equilibrium if V −k −
1
µ(1−α)−Λα = 0, cα[W0(1,α) −W1(1,α)] ≥k.
Appendix C:
Mechanism Design Formulation that Discriminates Between Base and
Referred Customers
The mechanism design problem chooses expected delays W = (W B
1 ,W B
0 ,W R
1 ,W R
0 ) to induce customer strate-
gies σ ≜(αB,αR,rB,rR) that maximize the system throughput, subject to the IR, IC, OA and stability
constraints. For ease of exposition, let q = rBαR, p = rRαR,λ = ΛαB. The mechanism design formulation
is as follows. The objective function maximizes the system throughput: maxσ,W
λ(1+q−p)
1−p
. IR constraint 1:
V −krB −c[rBαRW B
1 +(1−rBαR)W B
0 ] ≥0. IR constraint 2: V −krR −c[rRαRW R
1 +(1−rRαR)W R
0 ] ≥0. IC
constraints: rB ∈arg maxr′ V −kr′ −c[r′αRW B
1 + (1 −r′αR)W B
0 ], rR ∈arg maxr′ V −kr′ −c[r′αRW R
1 + (1 −
r′αR)W R
0 ]. Stability constraint:
λ(1+q−p)
1−p
< µ. Next, we list ﬁfteen (15) OA constraints. We invoke Lemma
B.1 of Yang and Debo (2019): In a batch-arrival queue with exponential service rate µ, Poisson arrival rate
λ, and random batch size N with ﬁnite ﬁrst moment E[N] and second moment E[N 2], the expected delay
W in the system is W =
E[N]+E[N2]
2E[N](µ−λE[N]). OA constraint 1: W B
1 ≥
1
µ−λq. OA constraint 2: W B
0 ≥
1
µ−λ(1−q). OA
constraint 3: W R
1 ≥
1
µ(1−p)−λqp. OA constraint 4: W R
0 ≥
1
µ−λq. OA constraint 5: qW B
1 +(1−q)W B
0 ≥
1
µ−λ. OA
constraint 6:
λqW B
1 + λqp
1 −pW R
1 ≥
λq
1 −p
1
µ(1 −p) −λq .
(C.1)
OA
constraint
7:
λqW B
1
+ λqW R
0
≥2λq
3
2[µ−2λq].
OA
constraint
8:
λqp
1−pW R
1
+ λ(1 −q)W B
0
≥
λ(1−p−q+2pq)
1−p
pq+(1−q)(1−p)2
(1−p−q+2pq)(µ(1−p)−λ(1−p−q+2pq)). OA constraint 9:
λqp
1−pW R
1 + λqW R
0 ≥
λq
1−p
1
µ(1−p)−λq. OA con-
straint
10:
λ(1 −q)W B
0
+ λqW R
0
≥
λ
µ−λ.
OA
constraint
11:
λqW B
1
+
λqp
1−pW R
1
+ λ(1 −q)W B
0
≥
λ(1−p+pq)
1−p
(1−q)(1−p)2+q
(1−p+pq)[µ(1−p)−λ(1−p+pq)]. OA constraint 12: λqW B
1 + λqp
1−pW R
1 +λqW R
0 ≥λq(2−p)
1−p
(1−p)2+2
2(2−p)[µ(1−p)−λ(2−p)].
OA constraint 13:
λqp
1−pW R
1 + λ(1 −q)W B
0 + λqW R
0 ≥λ(1−p+pq)
1−p
(1−q)(1−p)2+q
(1−p+pq)[µ(1−p)−λ(1−p+pq)]. OA constraint 14:
λqW B
1 + λ(1 −q)W B
0 + λqW R
0 ≥λ(1 + q)
1+2q
(1+q)(µ−λ(1+q)). OA constraint 15:
λqW B
1 + λqp
1 −pW R
1 + λ(1 −q)W B
0 + λqW R
0 ≥λ(1 + q −p)
1 −p
1 + q −p + (1 −p)(q −p)
(1 + q −p)[µ(1 −p) −λ(1 + q −p)].
(C.2)
In terms of the structure of the optimal referral mechanism, partial priority (subject to work conservation)
corresponds to (C.1) being non-binding and (C.2) being binding; strategic delay (with full priority assigned
to referring customers) corresponds to (C.1) being binding and (C.2) being non-binding; full priority (subject
to work conservation) corresponds to both (C.1) and (C.2) being binding; non-referral FIFO corresponds to
rB = rR = 0.