TITLE: Frontiers in Operations: News Event-Driven Forecasting of Commodity Prices
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2022.0641
---

News event-driven forecasting of commodity prices
Sunandan Chakraborty
Luddy School of Informatics, Computing and Engineering, Indiana University, sunchak@iu.edu
Srikanth Jagabathula
Stern School of Business, New York University, sjagabat@stern.nyu.edu
Lakshminarayanan Subramanian
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, lakshmi@cs.nyu.edu
Ashwin Venkataraman
Naveen Jindal School of Management, University of Texas at Dallas, axv190029@utdallas.edu
Problem definition. Commodity prices have exhibited significant volatility in recent times, which poses
an exogenous risk factor for commodity-processing and commodity-trading firms. Accurate commodity price
forecasts can help firms leverage data-driven procurement policies that incorporate the underlying price
volatility for financial and operational hedging decisions. However, historical prices alone are insufficient to
obtain reasonable forecasts because of the extreme volatility.
Methodology/results. Building on the hypothesis that commodity prices are driven by real-world
events, we propose a method that automatically extracts events from news articles and combines them
with price data using a neural network-based predictive model to forecast prices. In addition to achieving
a high prediction accuracy that outperforms several benchmarks (by up to 13%), our proposed model is
also interpretable, which allows us to identify meaningful events driving the price fluctuations. We found
that the events frequently associated with major fluctuations in the price include “natural” (floods, cold
waves, poor rainfall, etc.), “hike” (hikes in fuel prices, fares, highway tolls, etc.), “policy” (govt. actions
curbing/promoting imports and/or exports, etc.), and “elections”, all of which are known drivers of price
change. We used a corpus containing about 1.6 million news articles of a major Indian newspaper spanning
15 years and daily prices of four crops (onion, potato, rice and wheat) in India to perform this study. Our
proposed approach is flexible and can be used to predict other time series data such as disease incidence
levels or macroeconomic indicators that are also influenced by real-world events.
Managerial implications. Firms can leverage price forecasts from our system to design inventory and
procurement policies in the face of uncertain commodity prices. Commodity merchants can also use the
forecasts to design optimal storage policies for physical trading of commodities when prices are volatile. Our
findings can also significantly impact policymakers, who can leverage the information of impending price
changes and associated events to mitigate the negative effects of price shocks.
Key words : forecasting, price volatility, food supply chain, textual data, procurement
This is the author's manuscript of the article published in final edited form as:
Chakraborty, S., Jagabathula, S., Subramanian, L., & Venkataraman, A. (2024). Frontiers in Operations: News Event-Driven Forecasting of Commodity 
Prices. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 26(4), 1286–1305. https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2022.0641

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
2
1.
Introduction
With the rise of supply chain analytics, classic operational decisions within supply chains, such as
sourcing and procurement, are increasingly becoming data-driven (Mandl 2019). These decisions
critically rely on accurate forecasts of not just the downstream demand, but also upstream costs.
For example, a significant fraction of the total costs of various firms is comprised of commodity
costs: 27% in the mechanical and plant engineering industries, 47% in the automotive supply
industry, 56% in the packaging industry, and 66% in the agri-food industry (Mandl 2019). Therefore,
volatility in commodity prices significantly affects the procurement costs of these firms and poses
an exogenous risk factor in practice. Accurate commodity price forecasts allow firms to use data-
driven procurement policies that incorporate the underlying price volatility to hedge against price
risk (Mandl and Minner 2023) and effectively control inventory (Berling and Mart´ınez-de Alb´eniz
2011, Goel and Gutierrez 2011, Xiao et al. 2015), which can be viewed as a form of operational
hedging. Extant literature in operations has mostly focused on downstream demand forecasting,
see, e.g, Kurawarwala and Matsuo (1996), Carbonneau et al. (2008), Boone et al. (2018), but
despite its significance, there is a dearth of OM literature on forecasting purchasing costs or other
supply-side factors (Haks¨oz and Seshadri 2007, Syntetos et al. 2016).
In this paper, we consider the problem of forecasting agricultural commodity prices in India, one
of the largest economies in the world. In addition to its relevance to procurement decisions men-
tioned above, this is a hugely important problem since India is still primarily an agrarian economy,
where agriculture-related sectors (such as forestry and fisheries) are responsible for over 50% of its
labor force and account for 20% of the country’s GDP (International Trade Administration 2022).
Indeed, prior studies have shown that rising food prices can reduce household welfare (Weber 2015,
Mahajan et al. 2015), affect livelihoods of farmers and rural populations (Pons 2011, De Janvry
and Sadoulet 2009), increase food insecurity and human development vulnerabilities of women and
children (Dev 2010), indirectly increase crime rates (Times 2013, India.com 2019) and increase ille-
gal hoarding (Sharma et al. 2011, Levi et al. 2022), and even influence election outcomes (McLain
2013, Virk 2015, Agarwal 2019, CNBC-TV18 2019, Deuskar 2020). Mitigating these negative effects
requires effective policy design that relies on not just anticipating the price fluctuations but also
understanding the drivers behind sudden shocks (Saha et al. 2020, Saxena et al. 2020).
Predicting the fluctuations, however, often requires more than just the past price data. These
data are inherently volatile without discernible patterns. For example, the national average onion
price in India increased more than 400% within a span of 7 days in December 2012; such abrupt
changes are surprisingly frequent and generally do not follow any seasonal trends as seen in Figure
1. Such extreme volatility is not restricted to the Indian context. For instance, Figure 2.1 in Mandl
(2019) shows that a wide array of commodities including metals (silver, lead, etc.), agricultural
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
3
products (corn, wheat, coffee, etc.), and energy (gas, oil, etc.) have been significantly more volatile
than exchange rates and corporate stocks over the past two decades.
More importantly, historical price data lack information on several other exogenous factors, such
as the economic climate, temperature, inventories, interest and/or exchange rates, which impact
prices, see, e.g., Pindyck (2004). In the context of India, numerous prior studies, see, e.g., Headey
and Fan (2008), Raka and Ramesh (2017), Birthal et al. (2019), have identified a number of causal
factors for food price rise, including nonseasonal rainfall in the production belt, lack of rainfall
during cultivation, and natural disasters such as floods that affect both production and supply.
Prices are also routinely affected by local transport strikes, fluctuations in fuel prices, and festivals.
To account for these drivers, existing methods, see, e.g., Madaan et al. (2019), have mostly relied on
structured data sources and manual selection of a predetermined set of driving factors for predicting
food price fluctuations. Such structured approaches improve prediction accuracy, but manual pre-
selection can easily miss out several key factors. Prices may rise now because of floods but later
because of a sudden tax hike, both of which may not be captured together in a single structured
data source. To meaningfully improve our prediction accuracy, we need an automatic and scalable
way to identify and account for the many factors, which tend to evolve, merge, and disappear
over time.
Our approach to price prediction relies on moving away from structured data sources to automat-
ically extracting the relevant factors from a rich source of unstructured data—online news articles.
News streams provide us with high frequency data on events or factors that tend to affect food
prices. For example, the top panel of Figure 2 shows the price fluctuations on the daily average
onion price in India during a one-year window from Nov 2008 to Oct 2009 associated with a small
sample set of news article headlines reporting the fluctuation itself or the cause behind the fluctu-
ation. Examples of events responsible for onion price variations captured in Figure 2 include crop
infection at the end of 2008 (TOI 2008), further worsened by transport strikes and an oil crisis at
the beginning of 2009 (TOI 2009a), followed by a price decrease triggered by influx of supply (TOI
2009b) and the latter half of 2009 exhibiting a sudden price hike triggered by excessive rains and
floods (TOI 2009c,d). The bottom panel of Figure 2 shows a similar plot for potato prices.
1.1.
Contributions and Positioning in OM Literature
We propose an event-based methodology, which relies on historical prices and text of news articles,
to forecast future commodity prices. Our method involves two key steps: (a) automatically extract-
ing meaningful “events” from a corpus of millions of news articles and (b) relating past changes in
the event intensities to past fluctuations in commodity prices to effectively forecast future prices
using observed events. For the first step, we propose a scalable method that transforms each news
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
4
Figure 1
Daily national average onion (top) and potato (bottom) prices in India from 2006 to 2015
50
Onion price (₹/kg)
31-Dec-05
31-Dec-07
31-Dec-09
31-Dec-11
31-Dec-13
31-Dec-15
Potato price (₹/kg)
40
30
20
10
0
20
15
10
 5
0
article into what we call its “event representation,” which is a low-dimensional vector with each
element indicating the intensity of the corresponding event in the article. For the second step, we
design what we call a recurrent event network (REN), a unified deep learning architecture which
jointly models the event representations and past values of commodity prices to forecast future
prices. We note that a preliminary version of this work appeared in Chakraborty et al. (2016).
An important contribution of our work is a customized method to automatically extract the key
events reported in a news article. It is critical for us to extract meaningful and relevant events
from the text of a news article. Because a news article mentions many facts beyond just the
events, such as location, entities involved, etc., general-purpose representation schemes, such as
LDA, word2vec, or doc2vec, might identify “topics” or themes that are not directly related to the
events being reported. As a result, these representations can and do indeed worsen the prediction
performance (see Section 4.2). Instead, our approach relies on exploiting the specific structure of
the news articles by (a) restricting the vocabulary to only consider “event triggers”, which are
words/phrases that indicate the type and occurrence of an event, and (2) inferring the events
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
5
Figure 2
News headlines correlated with fluctuations in crop prices. We see evidence of factors (e.g. rainfall,
floods, strike, etc.) influencing crop price fluctuations reported in news articles, which motivates our
approach of leveraging news articles to improve crop price forecasting.
1-Nov-08
1-Jan-09
1-Mar-09
1-May-09
1-Jul-09
1-Sep-09
1-Nov-09
Tomatoes soften, but 
pricey onions bring tears
Rising onion price 
has govt in tears
Transport strike, oil 
crisis push up prices
Onion floods 
Bhavnagar market
The great Indian 
veggie price hike
Andhra floods and strike fuel 
vegetable price rise in state
Veggie prices spike 
on watery wave
Infected crop shoots 
up onion prices
12
14
16
8
10
(a) Daily onion prices (|/kg) between Nov 2008 and Nov 2009
1-Oct-13
1-Dec-13
1-Feb-14
1-Apr-14
1-Jun-14
1-Aug-14
1-Oct-14
22
Mamata seals 
Bengal to rein 
in veggie prices
Potato prices to ease 
as supply starts
Dry monsoon fires 
veggie prices
Onion, potato prices in 
Delhi go down
Veggie prices tumble, 
to fall more
Vegetable prices shoot 
up on rains, hartal
Onion and potato get 
dearer due to short supply
Unseasonal rainfall 
to hit production
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
(b) Daily potato prices (|/kg) between Oct 2013 and Oct 2014
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
6
reported by leveraging the unique discourse structure in news articles. Using two crowdsourcing
studies, we demonstrate that our method scales to millions of news articles and automatically
identifies meaningful events. See Section 3.2 for the precise description of the embedding scheme
and details of the crowdsourcing studies.
The second key contribution of our work is the REN model, which uses the event embeddings as
exogenous features to make a more informed prediction of the outcome variable. Unlike traditional
time-series forecasting models like ARIMA (Brockwell and Davis 2002), RENs are designed to
capture non-linear dependencies between the input and output variables. They employ a recurrent
neural network (RNN) architecture to model the sequential dependence of past prices and events
on future prices (that is, today’s price depends on a history of past prices and events) using hidden
states that propagate this dependence. However, the standard RNN architectures (sometimes called
a “vanilla RNN”) cannot effectively capture long-term dependencies, such as, the impact of price
and events a week ago on today’s price. Since many real-world events can exhibit a delayed and
long-term impact on commodity prices, we have designed RENs to employ an RNN with long
short-term memory (LSTM) hidden states, which have been shown to better capture long-term
dependencies. Due to these design choices, an REN also acts as a unique data integration model,
where it can seamlessly integrate structured (e.g., time-series data) and unstructured (e.g., news
text) data; see Section 3.3 for the precise description of RENs.
We leverage the REN framework to forecast prices of four essential staple crops—onion, potato,
rice, and wheat—in the Indian context using real-world events extracted from online news streams.
Rice and wheat are consumed on a daily basis by a large fraction of the Indian population (Mittal
et al. 2018). Onion and potato are among the most used vegetables in a large number of Indian
dishes, and the high volatility of their prices has had a widespread and profound impact across the
society (Paul et al. 2015)(Intelligence 2016). Our evaluation spanning a 15-year period comprising
around 1.6 million news articles shows that RENs outperform several benchmark methods by up to
7% for onion and potato, 13% for rice, and 5% for wheat in one day-ahead forecast accuracy. The
improved accuracy can benefit farmers and traders in India, who typically rely on price forecasts
for their buying and selling decisions (Green 2020). The results also showcase the value of extract-
ing the “right” set of features from text data, since our custom event embeddings that leverage
the special structure of news articles outperform general-purpose embedding techniques such as
word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013), doc2vec (Le and Mikolov 2014) and LDA topics (Blei et al. 2003)
by up to 20%. See Section 4 for more details on the numerical evaluation.
While firms and policymakers can incorporate the knowledge of impending price fluctuations in
their decision making, they are often also interested in understanding the key drivers behind the
fluctuations. Because they are trained on news events, RENs naturally provide interpretability to
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
7
the price forecasts. Specifically, a REN is capable of determining the relative importance of each
event in influencing the price of a crop during a specific time interval. Using these event importance
scores, RENs can provide a fine-grained estimate of the most important events behind specific
episodes of large price fluctuations; see Section 5 for the precise details. We find that our method
automatically extracts event classes, such as “natural” (floods, cold waves, poor rainfall, etc.),
“hike” (hikes in fuel prices, fares, highway tolls, etc.), “policy” (govt. actions curbing/promoting
imports and/or exports, etc.), and “elections,” all of which are known drivers of price changes. We
also find that the key events driving price fluctuations for a particular crop change over time, and
different events may drive the fluctuations in different crops, even during the same time. These
findings highlight the limitations of a structured approach relying on a predefined set of events
which might miss out on relevant factors or incorrectly attribute certain events to the changing
prices. Instead, our automated method relying on unstructured data casts a wide net and is less
likely to miss out on key factors.
While this paper focuses on forecasting prices of agricultural commodities, our methodology can
be readily used to forecast prices of other commodities such as metals (e.g. aluminium, copper, etc.)
and energy (e.g., electricity, natural gas, etc.). As discussed earlier, such price forecasts can then
be leveraged to design inventory and procurement policies that are aware of the underlying price
volatility. In addition, they can be used to design optimal storage policies for physical trading of
commodities under volatile prices (Secomandi 2015, Mandl et al. 2022). In fact, the REN framework
proposed in this paper is very flexible and can be applied to a variety of other domains as well.
As a concrete illustration, we leverage our method to forecast number of reported cases of three
infectious diseases prevalent in India. This was a critical problem during the recent COVID-19
pandemic, since accurate prediction of future cases is extremely valuable for decision-making at
multiple levels: from healthcare providers (staffing, hospital bed allocation, etc.) to governments
(awareness campaigns, resource allocation, etc.) to pharmaceutical companies (production schedule
of vaccines and drugs). Our results show that RENs outperform the benchmark models, achieving
MAPE values of 33.9%, 3.2%, and 13.6% for forecasting monthly reported cases of malaria, dengue,
and influenza, respectively. Please refer to Appendix F for the details.
Our work adds to the literature on developing data-driven methodologies to improve forecasting
in the operations literature. However, unlike existing works that assume access to structured data
sources (Ban and Rudin 2019, Cortazar et al. 2019, Mandl and Minner 2023, Zhu et al. 2021), our
work makes use of unstructured text data. To the best of our knowledge, there is a paucity of liter-
ature on utilizing text data in the OM literature—see Cui et al. (2018) and Wu (2023) for notable
exceptions—and we believe our paper helps to demonstrate the rich potential of unstructured data
to improve operational decisions.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
8
2.
Related Literature
We discuss the most relevant streams of literature from a methodological standpoint.
Text mining on news articles and social media. Advances in text mining techniques over
the past two decades have made it possible to extract knowledge from vast unstructured text
corpora in an automated manner. In particular, there has been a lot of interest in extracting
structure from news articles and social media platforms using text mining techniques. Shahaf and
Guestrin (2010) developed a principled approach to connect news articles related to a common
event or topic, to enable better understanding of news stories. Bagozzi and Schrodt (2012) apply
LDA on a vast corpus of political news reports, and study the overlap between the recovered
topics and those represented in existing event ontologies. The authors show that the topic modeling
approach is able to uncover events that were not captured by the ontologies, suggesting the need
for more automated event encoding mechanisms. Trend analysis model (TAM) (Kawamae 2011)
and Temporal-LDA (TM-LDA) (Wang et al. 2012) model the temporal aspect of topics in social
media streams like Twitter. Vaca et al. (2014) used a collective matrix factorization method to
track emerging, fading and evolving topics in news streams. In most of these works, events and/or
topics have just been used as a tool for knowledge acquisition or information extraction, whereas
our goal is to use the extracted events to predict fluctuations in commodity prices.
Event extraction in NLP. The natural language processing (NLP) literature has focused
extensively on defining and extracting events from text data such as news articles and Twitter
streams, see Hogenboom et al. (2011) and Atefeh and Khreich (2015) for detailed surveys. It will
be impossible to summarize all of this work, we only discuss a few papers here that are closest
to our work in terms of methodology. Chambers and Jurafsky (2011) use LDA and hierarchical
clustering to group event templates, defined as consisting of a role (typically the participants) and
an event pattern (the set of words/phrases that describe the event). However, they specifically
focused on events relating to terrorism and evaluated their approach on the MUC-4 terrorism
corpus. Chambers (2013) propose a similar generative model as ours, but focus on named entities
and co-reference resolution of the different mentions of the same entity. Cheung et al. (2013) propose
a probabilistic model for identifying semantic frames, which are a group of related events. This is
similar to the notion of an event class, but Cheung et al. (2013) also model the entities involved,
whereas we only focus on the events. In particular, the above works focus on identifying events
at a sentence level, and therefore exploit very local structure such as extracting the verb clauses
in each sentence. Our work, on the other hand, is focused on identifying the most salient events
that are reported anywhere in a news article. More recently, Caselli and Vossen (2017) introduce
The Event StoryLine corpus as a benchmark for research aimed at identifying causal or temporal
relations between events. Balashankar et al. (2019) aims to uncover causal relationships between
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
9
events spread across time in a corpus of news articles using the notion of Granger causality. We do
not aim to identify temporal or causal links between events in different time periods, rather, the
focus is on minimizing the forecast error and any dependence between events is learnt implicitly
by the neural network in our REN framework.
Predicting real-world indicators using text data. There is significant research on leveraging
text data to predict real-world indicators, and our works falls into this literature. Much of this
work has focused on forecasting stock prices and financial indicators (see Nassirtoussi et al. (2014)
and Xing et al. (2018) for detailed surveys), but other applications include forecasting economic
trends and macroeconomic variables such as GDP (Larsen and Thorsrud 2019, Bybee et al. 2021)
or disease outbreaks (Chakraborty and Subramanian 2016). To keep the discussion focused, we
only review literature that leverages news text.
Existing work has proposed different ways to extract information from news text. The earliest
work in this stream was by Gidofalvi (2001), who model individual words in financial news articles
using a naive Bayes text classifier to predict the movement of stock prices. Schumaker and Chen
(2009) compared the performance of different representation schemes such as bag-of-words, noun
phrases, and named entities for improving stock price forecasting. Hagenau et al. (2013) demon-
strate the value of capturing word combinations, instead of single words, and market feedback to
select relevant features to better forecast stock prices. Other work has explored the use of NLP
techniques such as sentiment analysis (Tetlock 2007, Zhang and Skiena 2010, Li et al. 2014) and
semantic frames (Xie et al. 2013) to extract relevant features from news text. More recently, ML
approaches such as matrix factorization (Ming et al. 2014) and neural network embeddings (Hu
et al. 2018, Liu et al. 2018) have been utilized to further improve the quality of the extracted text
representations. The aforementioned works apply or extend representation schemes developed in
the NLP/ML literature to extract information from generic documents, not accounting for the par-
ticular structure of a news article (title, lead paragraph, etc.). In contrast, our proposed approach
exploits the typical discourse structure of news articles to define a customized embedding that
outperforms general-purpose embeddings.
There is also some work that explicitly relies on extracting some notion of events from news
articles. For instance, Ding et al. (2014) extract event representations as a tuple of actor, object, and
action and show that it outperforms baselines approaches that do not capture structured entity-
relation information. Ding et al. (2015) leverage the structured event representations of Ding et al.
(2014) and learn event embeddings via a neural network designed to output similar embeddings for
similar events. The event embeddings enable generalization to unseen events and are used as inputs
in deep learning models that forecast individual stock prices. The authors further improve the
quality of the event embeddings by using a knowledge graph that provides background knowledge
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
10
on different entities as well as their relations, and show that it leads to more accurate prediction
of stock market volatilities (Ding et al. 2016). Our definition of events differs as it captures only
the action word(s) of an event, termed event trigger, and we group similar event triggers into an
“event class” which allows us to effectively share information across different occurrences of the
same event and address sparsity issues arising from the presence of infrequent or rare events.
3.
News event-driven forecasting model
In this section, we describe our proposed methodology in detail. As mentioned above, our method
combines event representations extracted from news articles with historical price data using a
neural net architecture to forecast future prices. Before we describe each of these components, we
formally introduce the problem and the associated notation.
3.1.
Problem definition
Our objective is to build a predictive model that can forecast commodity prices using real-world
event occurrences reported in news articles. We assume access to a corpus of news articles indexed
by time t, with Dt denoting the collection of news articles published at time t. The granularity of
the time index t depends on the particular prediction task—it can be a day, a week, a month, or an
year, and our formulation is agnostic to the actual granularity. The news articles report different
real-world events, and we suppose that the reported events come from a fixed but unknown universe
of size K. We discuss how to identify these events from a corpus of news articles in Section 3.2. For
now, suppose that there exists a function ϕt : Dt →[0,1]K that maps a collection of news articles
published at certain time t to a vector ϕt(Dt) = (ϕt,1,ϕt,2,...,ϕt,K) that specifies the “intensity”
of each of the K events at time instant t. We call ϕt(Dt) the event embedding at time t and refer
to it as ϕt in the remainder of the paper, with the news corpus Dt being implicit.
Next, let y denote the price time-series of any commodity of interest, with yt representing the
price at time t. Our goal is to design a predictive model G that takes as inputs the event embeddings
ϕt,ϕt−1,...,ϕt−δ+1 and the past prices yt,yt−1,...,yt−δ+1, and outputs the price at time t+1. Here
δ ≥1 is a time lag parameter that captures how far in the future a real-world event can influence
the price of the commodity. In Section 3.3, we present a neural network-based predictive model for
forecasting commodity prices.
Note that in the above formulation, we can use any function ϕt(·) that maps a collection of news
articles into a representation of real-world events. Indeed, our evaluation in Section 4 compares the
predictive performance of different representation schemes for the mapping ϕt.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
11
3.2.
Generating event embeddings from news articles
In this section, we formally describe how we generate event embeddings, our custom embedding for
news articles. The success of our approach critically depends on how well we are able to extract
relevant events from the text of a news article. Meaningless “events” could hurt rather than help
the prediction accuracy. Because a news article mentions many facts beyond just the events, such
as location, entities involved, etc., general-purpose representation schemes, such as LDA, word2vec,
or doc2vec, might identify “topics” or themes that are not directly related to the events being
reported. These representations do indeed worsen the prediction performance (see Section 4.2).
We address this challenge by constructing event emebeddings that exploit the specific structure
of news articles. Specifically, our embedding scheme (1) restricts the vocabulary to only consider
“event triggers”, defined below, and (2) infers events reported by leveraging the unique discourse
structure in news articles. We elaborate on the sequence of steps employed to obtain the event
embeddings from the news corpus next.
3.2.1.
Automated and scalable event trigger extraction. While the notion of an event is
intuitive, algorithmic extraction requires a more precise way to operationalize it. Several approaches
have been proposed in the NLP literature for this purpose. Of these, we focus on identifying events
using the corresponding event triggers. An event trigger is a word or a phrase appearing in the
news article that specifies the occurrence and the type of a specific event (Doddington et al. 2004).
For example, from the headline “FIFA Officials Arrested in Corruption Case” of a news article,
one may infer that the article is reporting an arrest event. The essence of this event can be captured
using the word arrested, which is the event trigger for this headline. Usually, event triggers are
verbs or nouns present in the sentence that describe some notion of “action” or “incident”. Event
triggers can occur in various forms—verbs (Traders protest over FDI in retail), nouns (Burglary
in police station leaves cops red-faced) or a combined phrase (Number of AIDS patients go up
in MP). Ultimately, determining which words or phrases in a sentence are event triggers requires
human input. One approach then is to manually label each word of each sentence in a news article
as a trigger or a non-trigger. The manual approach of course does not scale to the large size of our
news corpus (consisting of ∼1.6M articles).
To deal with the above labeling challenge, we need an algorithm that can mimic human anno-
tators in accomplishing the sequence labeling task, where given an input sentence, the algorithm
labels each word in the sentence as a trigger or non-trigger. For this purpose, we propose a super-
vised learning method using a conditional random field (CRF) model (Lafferty et al. 2001) to
automatically extract event triggers from any news article. The CRF model leverages features
such as part-of-speech and named entity tags, word position, etc. to predict the label (trigger or
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
12
non-trigger) of each word in an input sentence; we defer the precise details to Appendix A.1. To
generate data for training the CRF, we conduct an Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) study,
described in Appendix A.1.1, to annotate a “small” random sample of article headlines with event
triggers. The evaluation of our CRF model reveals a high F-1 score of 0.837 in identifying the event
triggers, despite being trained with a small amount of labeled data. Our proposed methodology
is also versatile as the CRF can easily be trained using different kinds of labeled data in order to
extract meaningful representations in alternate contexts.
3.2.2.
Clustering event triggers to form event classes. To enable information sharing
across different occurrences of the same event as well as address data sparsity issues due to rare
events, in the second step, we group the event triggers into what we call event classes, where each
event class represents a type of event. In particular, we first leverage the trained CRF model above
to extract event triggers from all news articles in the corpus. Then, we cluster the universe of event
triggers obtained using the standard k-means algorithm into K (non-overlapping) groups, with
the distance measure defined as the cosine similarity (Manning et al. 2008) between the word2vec
representations of the the triggers. The optimal number of clusters was determined according to
the “elbow” method (Sugar et al. 2003), resulting in K = 250 event classes for our corpus.
3.2.3.
Generative event model exploiting news discourse structure. With the tools
described above in place, we can identify the numbers of event triggers and event classes mentioned
in each news article. But what is/are the main event(s) mentioned in the news article? To infer
these main events, we next propose a probabilistic generative model for real-world events reported
in any news article. Unlike the widely used LDA topic model (Blei et al. 2003) that models each
document as a mixture of topics and treats all the words reported in the document equally, our
proposed model exploits the unique structure of a news article, as outlined below.
Although a given news article references multiple events in practice, Choubey et al. (2018) found
that there is usually one dominant or central event reported in any article. Moreover, the news
discourse literature prescribes that the title/headline and the lead paragraph of the article typically
summarize the central event being reported; see for instance, Van Dijk (2013), Bell (1991), and
Yarlott et al. (2018). Motivated by these observations, our generative model posits that each news
article reports one central (or main) event, which is drawn from a finite set of event classes. The
event class of a news article, instantiated in the central event, is identified through the event
triggers mentioned in the headline and first paragraph of the article. The events referenced in the
remainder of the news article are termed subsidiary events, where again each event corresponds to
some underlying event class that is closely associated with the central event class. For example, we
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
13
expect that the event class {“blasts”, “explosion”, “bombing”, ...}) is frequently accompanied by
the event class {“kill”, “injure”, “die”, ...}) in any news article.
We train our generative event model on the entire news corpus using the procedure outlined
in Appendix A.2. The trained model outputs a probability distribution over the event classes for
each news article, ideally assigning largest probability to the central event reported in the article.
To ensure that our model is identifying meaningful events, we conduct a second MTurk study in
which we asked a different set of human annotators to identify the central event reported in news
articles. This labeled dataset is used to evaluate the generative event model which predicts the most
likely central event reported in each news article. Our evaluation, presented in Appendix A.2.1,
shows that the event model achieves an accuracy of 93.5% and a macro average F-1 score of 0.917,
indicating its success in correctly determining the central event in news articles identified by human
annotators.
3.2.4.
Computing the embeddings. Finally, the trained generative model from above is
used to infer the most likely central event in each news article. We then aggregate the central event
predictions across all articles in Dt to obtain the event embedding ϕt at time t according to (EC.3)
in Appendix A.2.
3.3.
Recurrent event network (REN): a neural network model for price forecasting
We now describe our framework for forecasting commodity prices. Specifically, we introduce the
concept of a recurrent event network (REN)—a recurrent neural network (RNN) (Bengio et al.
2017) based event-driven predictive model. Neural networks parameterize the input-output rela-
tionship using a series of (highly) non-linear transformations (captured by “artificial neurons”)
and aim to learn the parameters using large amounts of training data. RNNs are used to capture
temporal or sequential dynamics in the data and therefore are well suited for time-series forecast-
ing (Malhotra et al. 2015, Che et al. 2018). A REN leverages the RNN framework to forecast a time
series by capturing non-linear dependencies on past prices as well as exogenous event information.
Formally, the REN has a sequence of δ hidden states, where the ith hidden state (1 ≤i ≤δ)
encodes aggregated event and price information from time t −δ + 1 to t −δ + i. Each hidden state
takes as inputs the event embedding and the commodity price at the corresponding time point,
as well as the output from the previous hidden state. It then applies a state-to-state transition
function F to combine all of its inputs into an output vector hi ∈RH as follows:
hi = F (ϕt−δ+i,yt−δ+i,hi−1),
(1)
where for all 1 ≤i ≤δ, ϕt−δ+i ∈RK is the event embedding, and yt−δ+i is the commodity price at
time t−δ +i. We let h0 = 0 to be the all-zeros vector in RH. It is customary to think of each hidden
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
14
state as comprising of H units or neurons, with the values in hi representing the “activation” of
each unit in hidden state i. The state-to-state transition function F is chosen as the composition of
an element-wise nonlinearity f : R 7→R such as the logistic sigmoid, hyperbolic tangent function,
or rectified linear unit (ReLU) (Bengio et al. 2017), with an affine transformation of the inputs
and the previous hidden state output:
hi = f (W · [ϕt−δ+i,yt−δ+i] + U · hi−1),
(2)
where W ∈RH×(K+1) is the input-to-hidden state parameter matrix, and U ∈RH×H is the state-
to-state recurrent parameter matrix. Note that the parameters W and U are shared across all the
hidden states.
The final hidden state outputs the predicted price at time t + 1, which we denote as ˆyt+1:
ˆyt+1 = v⊤hδ,
where v ∈RH represents the hidden state-to-output parameter vector. Note that the predicted price
is (implicitly) computed as a function of all the previous event embeddings ϕt,ϕt−1,...,ϕt−δ+1,
and all of the past prices yt,yt−1,...,yt−δ+1 because of the sequential dependence in (1).
Summarizing the above steps, the end-to-end predictive model for the REN can be written as:
ˆyt+1 = G (ϕt,ϕt−1,...,ϕt−δ+1,yt,yt−1,...,yt−δ+1)
(3)
where G is the composite function that maps the time series of event embeddings and past prices
to the predicted price. The parameters of the REN model are then estimated by minimizing the
mean squared error between the actual and predicted prices on historical data, referred to as the
training dataset. The learnt parameters are then used to forecast future prices.
Finally, we note that RNNs have been found to suffer from the vanishing gradient problem,
as a result of which they are unable to model longer-term dependencies (Pascanu et al. 2013).
For example, some news events might have a “delayed effect” on the price, which the standard
RNN model may not be able to capture. The issue was addressed by introducing memory to
the hidden states. We experimented with both long short-term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997) and gated recurrent units (GRUs) (Cho et al. 2014), and observed that LSTM
units performed better. Therefore, we implement RENs with LSTM units in the hidden states in
our numerical evaluation, described next.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
15
4.
Evaluation using a corpus of news articles and price data
Our data is comprised of two different sources over a 15 year period (Jan ’06 to Dec ’20)—a corpus of
news articles and a set of time-series data for the different commodities. The price data was collected
from the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Government of India’s AgMarknet por-
tal: https://agmarknet.gov.in. The Directorate of Marketing and Inspection under the ministry
publishes the minimum, maximum and modal (the price at which maximum sales were recorded)
prices of crops across many different wholesale markets in the country. In this work, we focused on
onion, potato, rice, and wheat, which are among the most consumed agricultural products in India.
We consider the daily modal prices of each commodity and compute the average across all markets
in the country between January 1, 2006 to December 31, 2020. This gives us the actual commodity
price yt for each day t. To obtain the event embeddings, we use a corpus of news articles published
by the Times of India (TOI) between 2006 and 2020, which is a leading national daily in India. We
collected all the articles published during this time period from the online archives, available at
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/archive.cms. Our corpus consists of 1,684,322 articles
from both the national as well as different regional TOI editions. From each article, we extracted
the headline, main text, and publishing time.
4.1.
Methods compared
To isolate the benefits of leveraging event information for improved prediction as opposed to
employing a more sophisticated (non-linear) model, we compare the performance of the following
different methods for forecasting commodity prices:
1. Linear models. We implement the following models that capture linear dependence on past
prices and event information:
(a) Naive forecast: As a simple baseline, we consider the naive forecast that predicts tomor-
row’s price is the same as today’s price, that is,
ˆyt+1 = yt.
(b) Autoregressive (AR) process: We implement an autoregressive (AR) process of order p,
which predicts prices according to the following equation:
ˆyt+1 = α0 +
p
X
ℓ=1
αℓ· yt+1−ℓ,
(4)
where α = (α0,α1,...,αp) is a vector of parameters that is learned from the data. We experimented
with different values for p and the results were qualitatively similar. We report the results for p = 2
and use OLS to estimate α.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
16
(c) AR process with event embeddings (AR+events): We update (4) to incorporate event
information into the AR(p) model as follows:
ˆyt+1 = α0 +
p
X
ℓ=1
αℓ· yt+1−i +
K
X
k=1
ωk ·
 
δ
X
ℓ=1
ϕt+1−ℓ,k
!
,
(5)
where ω = (ω1,ω2,...,ωK) is a vector of parameters capturing the impact of the different events,
and recall that ϕt′,k is the event embedding for event k ∈[K] for day t′. Similar to RENs, we
incorporate the impact of events up to δ days in the past. An alternate specification would be to
allow events at different lags to impact the predicted price differently, in other words, estimate a
separate coefficient ωk,ℓfor each k ∈[K] and ℓ∈[δ]. Since K = 250 in our context, the number
of parameters to estimate quickly grows as the event lag δ becomes larger, increasing the risk of
overfitting. Consequently, we estimate the parsimonious form of the model outlined in (5). However,
we still encountered overfitting in certain scenarios and applied ridge regularization to improve the
prediction performance, where the penalty term was chosen using a validation set. Finally, because
events can have disparate impacts for different crops, we treat δ as a hyperparameter and rely on
cross-validation to tune its value amongst {1,7,14,21,28}, which correspond to one day, one week,
two week, three week, and four week lags, respectively.
(d) AR process with alternate embeddings (AR+X): We consider three additional models
obtained by replacing the event embeddings in equation (5) with LDA topics (Blei et al. 2003),
word2vec embeddings (Mikolov et al. 2013), and doc2vec embeddings (Le and Mikolov 2014). Refer
to Appendix C for details on how each of these embeddings are computed.
2. Non-linear models. The following models capture non-linear dependence on past prices and
event information:
(a) LSTM model using only past prices: We consider a LSTM prediction model similar to
RENs, but which uses only the past prices yt,yt−1,...,yt−δ+1 to forecast the price on day t+1. Since
training LSTM models is computationally intensive, we set the lag δ = 7 days, which provided a
reasonable balance between prediction accuracy and model training time. Neural network models,
including LSTM, require careful tuning of many hyperparameters as well as appropriate normal-
ization of input features to achieve good performance; we describe these details in Appendix B.
(b) REN model: We fix δ = 7 days to analyze the impact of incorporating event embeddings
into the pure LSTM model. The training procedure is identical to that used for LSTM.
(c) LSTM model using past prices and alternate embeddings (LSTM+X). Similar to the AR
process above, we consider alternate models obtained by replacing the event embeddings in RENs
with LDA topics, word2vec and doc2vec embeddings.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
17
Table 1
Root mean square error (RMSE) in units of |/quintal for one day-ahead price forecasts during the test period (Jan
2013–Dec 2020)
Forecasting methods
Crop
Onion
Potato
Rice
Wheat
Linear models
Naive
188.22
107.00
178.81
65.56
AR
178.05
96.72
161.86
59.11
AR+LDA topics
169.34
96.33
161.60
59.73
AR+word2vec embeddings
171.38
96.50
167.23
62.01
AR+doc2vec embeddings
171.12
98.89
188.50
66.60
AR+events
169.59
96.67
161.78
59.04
Non-linear models
LSTM
167.72
91.78
156.99
66.01
LSTM+LDA topics
188.34
107.00
165.10
65.55
LSTM+word2vec embeddings
189.53
107.21
178.94
70.08
LSTM+doc2vec embeddings
189.56
107.08
179.51
66.30
Our method (REN)
155.56
86.08
135.62
55.96
Incorporating event embeddings helps improve the performance of both linear and non-linear models, whereas general-purpose
embeddings can worsen the forecast accuracy due to overfitting. Non-linear models outperform linear models implying that
the underlying price fluctuations are complex. Our proposed method, highlighted in bold, reduces the forecast error by about
|12/quintal for onion (7% lower), |6/quintal for potato (7% lower), |21/quintal for rice (13% lower), and |3/quintal for wheat
(5% lower), over the best benchmark.
4.2.
Results and Discussion
We first generate the event embeddings for the entire news corpus using the procedure described in
Section 3.2 above. Next, we train the different forecasting methods using data from Jan 2006 to Dec
2012. Specifically, we divide this period into overlapping intervals of δ days, so that each training
instance involves predicting the price yt+1 using the event embeddings and historical prices from
day t−δ up to day t. The LSTM and REN models were trained using the TensorFlow (Abadi et al.
2015) library, while the AR models were trained using Python’s scikit-learn library (Pedregosa
et al. 2011). We leverage the trained models to forecast prices for each day in the test period,
lasting from Jan 2013 to Dec 2020.
Table 1 summarizes the predictive performance by reporting the root mean square error (RMSE)
in predicting the one day-ahead crop price under all competing methods. We make the following
observations from the table:
1. RENs outperform all competing methods. Our proposed method outperforms the benchmarks
for all the four crops. In particular, RENs achieve a RMSE reduction of about 7% for onion and
potato, 13% for rice, and 5% for wheat, over the best benchmark, as reported in Table 1. In fact,
the absolute performance of RENs is also impressive: the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE),
reported in Table EC.7 in Appendix E, for onion, potato, rice, and wheat are 5.2%, 5.3%, 3.4%,
and 2.3% respectively. The high prediction accuracy for onion is particularly promising since onion
prices are susceptible to even minor shocks.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
18
Figure 3
Daily forecast error during the test period (Jan 2013–Dec 2020)
Note. Forecast error is computed as the difference between the predicted price and the actual price, so values close to
zero are preferred. The LSTM model exhibits large errors during multiple days in the test period. By incorporating
event information, our proposed method is able to significantly reduce the spread of the daily forecast errors.
2. Events help improve accuracy and the “right” events even more so. Both linear and non-
linear models benefit from adding event information, indicating that events contain early warning
signals on price changes. In particular, the AR+events method achieves a 5% reduction in RMSE
compared to AR for onion price prediction. Similarly, the REN model achieves an average 10%
reduction in RMSE over the LSTM benchmark across the four crops. The improvement is also
apparent from Figure 3, which plots the daily forecast errors—difference between the predicted and
actual price—for the LSTM and REN models during the test period. It can be seen that the LSTM
model exhibits large deviations from zero, indicating significant forecast errors. The signal from
event embeddings in the REN model helps to significantly reduce the spread of the daily forecast
errors. A similar comparison between AR+events and AR is shown in Figure EC.4 in Appendix E.
However, it is important to note that the improvements depend on the specific type of event rep-
resentation used. Table 1 shows that widely used general-purpose text representations such as LDA
topics (Blei et al. 2003), word embeddings (Mikolov et al. 2013), and document embeddings (Le
and Mikolov 2014) can in fact worsen the forecast accuracy due to overfitting. In contrast, event
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
19
embeddings always improve the performance and provide significant reductions in RMSE compared
to alternate embeddings for the non-linear models: 18% and 20% for potato and rice, respectively.
3. Non-linear models can generate more accurate forecasts. This suggests that the underlying
price fluctuations are complex so that linear forecasting models are insufficient in explaining them.
For instance, the LSTM model achieves |11/quintal lower RMSE than AR for onion price predic-
tion, while the event-driven REN model obtains |21/quintal reduction in RMSE over the event-
based linear model (AR+events) for predicting the price of rice. In fact, from Table 1 we observe
that the LSTM model outperforms the AR+events method for 3 of the crops, which further high-
lights the benefit of using sophisticated models for predicting commodity prices. At the same time,
we observe that the LSTM model performs worse than the AR models and comparable to the naive
forecast when predicting wheat prices. This also showcases the need for appropriate regularization
of such neural network models when forecasting commodity prices. Including our proposed event
embeddings as inputs to the LSTM model provides valuable signals about the factors influencing
price changes, serving as a form of regularization.
The above findings validate our original hypothesis of leveraging real-world event occurrences for
predicting commodity price fluctuations, showing that using only historical prices may not provide
the most accurate predictions. They also showcase the value of extracting the “right” set of features
from text data, since our proposed event embeddings that leverage the special structure of news
articles outperform general-purpose embedding techniques.
5.
Which events are driving the price fluctuations?
The evaluation above shows the efficacy of using our proposed REN model for forecasting agri-
cultural commodity prices. However, it does not reveal which events (if any) are responsible for
the price fluctuations at any particular time. Beyond lending interpretability to our model, which
can help build confidence into the model’s predictions (Burkart and Huber 2021), knowledge of
such events can assist managers in being better prepared for future occurrences of the same or
related events. For instance, if managers know that elections or festivals are typically associated
with rising prices, they can influence the procurement strategy before an upcoming election or
major holiday. Similarly, it can help investment managers with commodity futures in their portfo-
lios take precautionary actions to hedge against potential losses due to upcoming events. It can also
aid governments and policymakers in reducing the negative impacts of impending price shocks by
informing key decisions such as budget allocation and spending, design of subsidies and incentives,
etc. prior to such events and ensuring that vulnerable populations have access to affordable food.
To identify the key drivers of price fluctuations at each time, we first compute event importance
scores from the trained REN model as described next. Events with the largest importance scores
at each time point are then deemed to be the biggest drivers of price fluctuations at that time.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
20
5.1.
Computing event importance scores
RNNs leverage the temporal sequence of input values to infer the most likely value of the output
variable. As information from the previous inputs flows in the forward direction (via the hidden
states), it undergoes several complex transformations and therefore it becomes difficult to interpret
the importance of the input at a specific time point in predicting the output variable. To address
this issue, there have been different proposals in the literature to “interpret” a sequential model
(such as RNN) and determine the relative importance of a particular input for the prediction
outcome. As we move to investigate the important events that drive fluctuations in commodity
prices, we surveyed some of these methods and determined the most suitable approach for our
case. We specifically concentrated on methods that are applicable to a model post-training and no
information is required from the training phase. Based on applicability of these methods in our
context and the computational complexity, we chose the gradient-based explanation method (Denil
et al. 2015, Li et al. 2016) to interpret the relative importance of input features in our REN model.
In the gradient-based explanation method, a relevance score is computed to represent the impor-
tance of each input variable for predicting the outcome of a single data point. Before we can
formally define the relevance score, we need to introduce some notation. For any time t′, let xt′ =
[ϕt′,yt′] denote the input vector to the REN model, where recall from Section 3.3 that ϕt′ ∈RK
is the K-dimensional event embedding and yt′ is the commodity price at time t′. Therefore, the
vector xt′ ∈RK+1. In our context, a data point is of the form (Xt,yt) where yt is the commod-
ity price at time t and Xt = {xt−1,...,xt−1−δ} is the set of input vectors in the interval Tt,δ :=
[t −1 −δ,t −1]. An input variable thus corresponds to any of the features xt′,i where t′ ∈Tt,δ and
1 ≤i ≤K + 1. For any input variable xt′,i, we denote by R(t)
t′,i as its relevance score, defined as
R(t)
t′,i =

∂G(Xt)
∂xt′,i
 × |xt′,i −E[xt′,i]|, where E[xt′,i] denotes the expected value of feature xt′,i and G is
the composite mapping from (3) that computes the predicted price. Note that the relevance score
is non-negative and is defined as the product of two terms: the derivative which captures how much
the predicted price changes with a small change in the input feature—larger the change in the
predicted price, the more relevant it is—and the relative intensity of the input feature—measured
by its deviation from the average value.
Given the above, the relevance score R(t)
i
of feature i for the data point (Xt,yt) is com-
puted by summing up the relevance scores for that feature across all the input units to the
REN, that is, we compute R(t)
i
:= P
t′∈Tt,δ R(t)
t′,i. Then, for each 1 ≤i ≤K, the score R(t)
i
captures
the relevance or importance of event i in predicting the price at time t. In a similar fashion,
R(t)
K+1 captures the importance of the historical price. Finally, for each feature i, we compute its
importance in any month M, say R(M)
i
, as the average of the daily importance scores, R(M)
i
=
P
t∈M R(t)
i /num days(M), where num days(M) is the number of days in month M. We choose
monthly (instead of daily) intervals to avoid focusing on noisy local fluctuations in the prices.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
21
Figure 4
Variation in the importance of different events in driving the underlying price fluctuations between Jan
2013 and Dec 2015.
Note. We compute the importance of an event using a gradient-based method that measures the sensitivity of the
predicted price to its intensity. The importance scores are normalized to lie between 0 (LOW) and 1 (HIGH). For each
crop, the scores are displayed in a heatmap with the row corresponding to an event and the column corresponding to
a month. Our analysis identifies events known to impact price fluctuations such as elections, festivals, govt. policies,
and natural calamities. For each crop, we see that the importance of any event varies over time, indicating that
different events are driving the price fluctuations during different times. Moreover, even during the same time period,
different events may be responsible for driving the price fluctuations of different crops.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
22
5.2.
Observations and Insights
In Figure 4, we present a heatmap for each crop showing the relative importance of different events
in predicting price fluctuations in each month during a subset of the test period (Jan 2013–Dec
2015); we only show the subset of events that were identified to be among the 5 most important
events in at least one month. Each event is manually labeled with a single word that best describes
the event, see Appendix D for the collection of event triggers associated with each label. For onion,
potato, wheat, and rice, our analysis identifies 11, 12, 12, and 11 unique events, respectively, as
the key drivers of price fluctuations in the three year period. We make the following observations:
1. Events driving price fluctuations for a particular crop vary over time. We find that for all
the four crops, the importance of any particular event varies across the test period and therefore,
different events drive fluctuations in crop prices at different times. For instance, while the natural
event is found to be among the most important factors behind rice price fluctuations (TOI 2013a,
2014a, Economist 2015) during the summer months of 2013-2015, the event scam was the main
driver of rice prices during late 2013 and early 2014 (TOI 2013b, 2014b,c).
2. Different events drive price fluctuations for different crops during the same time period. Our
analysis finds that even during the same time period, the events driving price fluctuations differ
across different crops. For instance, in contrast to the natural event for rice mentioned above,
wheat prices were mostly influenced by the policy event during the summers of 2013 and 2015
(TOI 2013c, 2015a, Standard 2015). Similarly, during November 2013, wheat price changes were
attributed to the festivals prevalent during that period. On the other hand, the event hike, which
refers to hike in prices of other commodities such as fuel and electricity, or transportation-related
factors (e.g. fare hike or hike in highway tolls), was deemed to be the most important driver of rice
prices in the same month. Although we did not find any direct evidence of such hikes influencing
the crop prices, there are news articles reporting fuel and transportation price hike in the months
leading up to Nov 2013 (TOI 2013d,e, Bagri 2013) which may have impacted the supply chain by
increasing transportation costs, thereby driving prices up.
3. Our analysis identifies well-known factors driving commodity prices. Past studies have shown
that oil prices, climatic conditions, and government policies (e.g. subsidies) lead to major changes
in food prices (Amadeo 2021, Bogmans et al. 2021). These correspond to the event classes hike,
natural, and policy, respectively. Existing studies have also identified the availability of resources,
such as water, as one of the key factors in ensuring long-term food security (Grafton et al. 2015).
Although our coarse-grained event classes do not identify specific events, the class labeled as natural
(which encompasses events such as poor monsoon/rainfall, floods, drought, etc.) broadly explains
the impact of water availability on commodity prices. Similarly, the event classes strike, protest,
and damage highlight social unrest as a plausible cause for increased commodity prices, a finding
corroborated by several prior studies (Bellemare 2015, Raleigh et al. 2015, Li et al. 2022).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
23
The above findings show that our proposed REN model is able to associate real-world event
occurrences with fluctuations in the commodity prices and is not merely detecting spurious cor-
relations. However, it is worth noting that our method provides only a coarse-grained picture by
identifying a candidate set of factors that are most predictive of the crop prices, after which a more
fine-grained analysis can be conducted to understand the precise impact of different events on the
prices. For instance, one could examine news articles published in the corresponding time interval
and look for mentions of the events identified by our analysis. We performed such an exercise for
a subset of events identified in Figure 4, which revealed some interesting insights:
• Natural events were found to be among the most important factors driving price fluctuations
for rice and wheat. Examples include floods (IndiaToday 2015) and excessive or poor rainfall (Dutta
2014, Bera 2015, WorldGrain 2015, TOI 2015b). Such events can damage the crop harvest and
adversely impact supply and production, subsequently driving the prices up.
• Similarly, food prices were uniformly found to be impacted by various policy measures taken
by the government—denoted by the event policy—to better match supply and demand. We notice
that such policies seem to take effect when the prices have been steadily increasing for a few months
and the government is under pressure to take action to alleviate the issue. For instance, potato
prices soared during the first half of 2014 and 2015. As a result, the government took some steps to
control the price rise, such as curbing exports and providing subsidies to lower transport costs (TOI
2015c, 2014d, KNN 2014, Acharya 2015, Frontline 2015, EconomicTimes 2015).
• We also found some novel events responsible for the price fluctuations in many months, such
as scam. Upon further investigation, we found that numerous illicit practices have caused food
prices to increase (TheHindu 2015, TOI 2013b, Today 2015a). A similar practice is hoarding of
onion stock by traders, which is often highlighted in the media as a means to artificially raise the
prices (TOI 2014e, Mukherjee 2014, Businessline 2020). In fact, even legally hoarding can affect the
prices (Jagannathan 2014). On the contrary, the event raid counters this effect and is found to be
one of the important factors driving the prices, backed by several news reports of law enforcement
agencies raiding storage units across India to take action against hoarders (TOI 2015d,e,f). Another
example is the event purchase identified for wheat, which refers to various steps taken for more
systematic procurement of the produce (EconomicTimes 2014, Nibber 2021).
• Finally, some events were consistently found to be key drivers throughout the duration con-
sidered, such as arrest for onion and strike for potato. Transportation strikes directly impact food
prices, including for potato (TOI 2015g, Today 2015b, TOI 2018), and are likely to be an important
driver. On the other hand, an event such as arrest may not seem to have a direct impact, but
due to its ubiquitous nature it can act as a confounding or mediating driver of food prices. This
suggests the potential of studying the cascading impact of persistent events in driving commodity
prices in future work.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
24
6.
Conclusions, Limitations, and Future Directions
Based on the premise that prices of many commodities are sensitive to real-world events, this paper
presents a data-driven framework to extract events reported in news articles and incorporate them
as exogenous features to improve the forecasting accuracy. We introduce the notion of recurrent
event networks (RENs), a neural network-based framework for building event-driven non-linear
predictive models for forecasting commodity prices, and evaluate their performance in forecasting
one-day ahead prices of four staple agricultural commodities in India. Our method achieved up
to 16% improvement in forecast accuracy when compared to baseline methods that employ linear
predictive models, and 20% improvement compared to using general-purpose event representations.
These results show the benefits of using non-linear models as well as the “right” event representa-
tion scheme for predicting commodity prices. Our framework also provides interpretability to the
generated forecasts by identifying the most important events driving the price changes during each
time period.
Accurate commodity price forecasts can benefit individuals, businesses, governments, and the
society as a whole (Assefa et al. 2015). Agribusinesses can use precise forecasts to make informed
decisions about when and how much to procure, enabling them to optimize inventory and storage
costs effectively. The same applies to other players in the food industry, including restaurants
and hotels, who can proactively manage their costs, negotiate better contracts with suppliers, and
make strategic decisions to reduce financial risk associated with the volatile prices. For farmers,
access to reliable price predictions can serve as an invaluable tool to time their harvests effectively,
choosing to sell when prices are high to maximize profits. Additionally, if market-level forecasts
are available, farmers can further boost their income by strategically choosing markets to sell their
current harvest by factoring in transportation and other expenses. It can also empower them with
better negotiating power with buyers, processors, and distributors and avoid selling their produce
at disadvantageous prices. Accurate forecasts can also help in reducing wastage and ensuring more
sustainable farming practices. Finally, forecasts of food prices can inform consumers about market
trends and enable them to budget for food-related expenses effectively.
Our paper adds to the growing literature on leveraging news articles to improve the forecasting of
other important indicators such as infectious disease spread (Kim and Ahn 2021, Bhatia et al. 2021),
macroeconomic variables like GDP, unemployment, industrial production, inflation, etc. (Feuer-
riegel and Gordon 2019, Kalamara et al. 2022, Barbaglia et al. 2023), and food (in)security (Ba
et al. 2022, Balashankar et al. 2023). Moreover, our work can lay the foundation for a new research
area on developing novel methods for leveraging other kinds of unstructured data such as social
media posts, images, videos, etc., to improve operational decisions.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
25
Although our proposed method is largely flexible and can be applied across various domains,
it does suffer from a few limitations. Currently, we use news data from a single albeit reputed
source, which might raise questions about the accuracy or potential systemic bias of the information
reported in the news articles. Aggregating news across multiple sources can help mitigate such
concerns. Further, our framework only leverages English-language articles, possibly missing some
local or regional events. By including texts from local language publications, the breadth of reported
events could be enhanced. Finally, our approach is best suited for forecasting variables that are
directly impacted by real-world events. For instance, we would expect it to perform better in
predicting the prevalence of seasonal and non-chronic diseases (e.g., flu, malaria, etc.), for which
news media often has extensive coverage, thus providing early warning signs of an outbreak. This
is in contrast to non-chronic diseases like cancer or diabetes, where the number of cases tend to be
more uniform over time.
In addition to addressing the above limitations, there are numerous other avenues for future
work. First, we note that in general, our method only finds associations between events and price
fluctuations, not necessarily causal links. These associations improve recall by allowing us to con-
struct a small set of candidate events from a large corpus of possible events. Subsequent studies can
then be performed to find causal links between the candidate events and price fluctuations using
methods similar to Kang et al. (2017) and Balashankar et al. (2019). Second, in our generative
event model, the subsidiary events in an article are assumed to be generated independently of the
central event. This helps to keep our event model simple, though in practice there might be some
inherent dependencies between the central and subsidiary events mentioned in news articles. For
example, if the central event in the article is about a natural calamity, the subsidiary events typi-
cally will be related to its impact (e.g. deaths, injuries, rescue etc.). Hence, one of the goals in future
work could be to redesign the generative model to incorporate a dependency between the central
event and the subsidiary events in news articles. On a related note, our current embedding scheme
does not capture the sequence of the event triggers present in an article. Potential improvements
include incorporating the context—event triggers surrounding a particular trigger—and modeling
the dependence between specific triggers using an attention mechanism, which allows the model to
focus on specific parts of the input (Vaswani et al. 2017). Third, in this paper, we considered each
commodity in isolation and trained a separate predictive model. A promising avenue for future
research is leveraging multi-task learning techniques to capture dependencies between different
commodities to further improve the prediction performance. Fourth, there is an opportunity to
combine our event-driven forecasting approach with other forecasting models. For instance, experts
can leverage the knowledge of events impacting commodity prices to improve their own forecasts,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
26
which are often included in prediction models, e.g., Cortazar et al. (2019). In particular, incorpo-
rating events can help reduce the volatility that is often observed in expert forecasts. Similarly,
while we focused on single-regime forecasting models in this work, our event-driven approach can
also be applied in conjunction with regime-switching models that are employed when dealing with
external shocks. Finally, our current event model ignores the role of specific entities such as people,
organizations, political parties, etc. in driving the commodity prices; incorporating them could lead
to further improvements in the forecasting accuracy.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the DE, AE, and two anonymous referees for their valuable comments
which helped greatly improve the manuscript. They are also grateful to Profs. Rohit Deo and Andrew Wu
for insightful discussions and feedback that helped shape the final manuscript. The work also benefited from
enriching conversations with participants of the 2023 MSOM iFORM SIG meeting.
References
Abadi M, Agarwal A, Barham P, et al (2015) TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous
systems. URL https://www.tensorflow.org/.
Amadeo
K
(2021)
Why
food
prices
are
rising,
recent
trends,
and
2021
forecast.
https://
www.thebalance.com/why-are-food-prices-rising-causes-of-food-price-inflation-3306099.
Assefa TT, Meuwissen MP, Oude Lansink AG (2015) Price volatility transmission in food supply chains: a
literature review. Agribusiness 31(1):3–13.
Atefeh F, Khreich W (2015) A survey of techniques for event detection in twitter. Computational Intelligence
31(1):132–164.
Ba CT, Choquet C, Interdonato R, Roche M (2022) Explaining food security warning signals with youtube
transcriptions and local news articles. Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Information Tech-
nology for Social Good, 315–322.
Bagozzi BE, Schrodt PA (2012) The dimensionality of political news reports. Proceedings of the European
Political Science Association Meetings.
Balashankar A, Chakraborty S, Fraiberger S, Subramanian L (2019) Identifying predictive causal factors from
news streams. Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), 2338–
2348.
Balashankar A, Subramanian L, Fraiberger SP (2023) Predicting food crises using news streams. Science
Advances 9(9):eabm3449.
Ban GY, Rudin C (2019) The big data newsvendor: Practical insights from machine learning. Operations
Research 67(1):90–108.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
27
Barbaglia L, Consoli S, Manzan S (2023) Forecasting with economic news. Journal of Business & Economic
Statistics 41(3):708–719.
Bell A (1991) The language of news media (Blackwell Oxford).
Bellemare MF (2015) Rising food prices, food price volatility, and social unrest. American Journal of Agri-
cultural Economics 97(1):1–21.
Bengio Y, Goodfellow I, Courville A (2017) Deep learning, volume 1 (MIT press Cambridge, MA, USA).
Berling P, Mart´ınez-de Alb´eniz V (2011) Optimal inventory policies when purchase price and demand are
stochastic. Operations research 59(1):109–124.
Bhatia S, Lassmann B, Cohn E, Desai AN, Carrion M, Kraemer MU, Herringer M, Brownstein J, Madoff L,
Cori A, et al. (2021) Using digital surveillance tools for near real-time mapping of the risk of infectious
disease spread. NPJ digital medicine 4(1):73.
Birthal P, Negi A, Joshi P (2019) Understanding causes of volatility in onion prices in india. Journal of
Agribusiness in Developing and Emerging Economies 9(3):255–275.
Blei DM, Ng AY, Jordan MI (2003) Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Research
3:993–1022.
Bogmans C, Pescatori A, Prifti E (2021) Four facts about soaring consumer food prices. IMF Blog URL
https://blogs.imf.org/2021/06/24/four-facts-about-soaring-consumer-food-prices/.
Boone T, Ganeshan R, Hicks RL, Sanders NR (2018) Can google trends improve your sales forecast? Pro-
duction and Operations Management 27(10):1770–1774.
Brockwell PJ, Davis RA (2002) Introduction to Time Series and Forecasting (Springer), 2nd edition, ISBN
0387953515.
Burkart N, Huber MF (2021) A survey on the explainability of supervised machine learning. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research 70:245–317.
Bybee L, Kelly BT, Manela A, Xiu D (2021) Business news and business cycles. Technical report, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Carbonneau R, Laframboise K, Vahidov R (2008) Application of machine learning techniques for supply
chain demand forecasting. European Journal of Operational Research 184(3):1140–1154.
Caselli T, Vossen P (2017) The event storyline corpus: A new benchmark for causal and temporal relation
extraction. Proceedings of the Events and Stories in the News Workshop, 77–86.
Chakraborty S, Subramanian L (2016) Extracting signals from news streams for disease outbreak prediction.
2016 IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information Processing (GlobalSIP), 1300–1304 (IEEE).
Chakraborty S, Venkataraman A, Jagabathula S, Subramanian L (2016) Predicting socio-economic indicators
using news events. KDD, 1455–1464 (ACM).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
28
Chambers N (2013) Event schema induction with a probabilistic entity-driven model. Proceedings of the 2013
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 1797–1807.
Chambers N, Jurafsky D (2011) Template-based information extraction without the templates. Proceed-
ings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies-Volume 1, 976–986 (Association for Computational Linguistics).
Che Z, Purushotham S, Cho K, Sontag D, Liu Y (2018) Recurrent neural networks for multivariate time
series with missing values. Scientific reports 8(1):1–12.
Cheung JCK, Poon H, Vanderwende L (2013) Probabilistic frame induction. NAACL HLT 2013 837–846.
Cho K, van Merri¨enboer B, Gulcehre C, Bahdanau D, Bougares F, Schwenk H, Bengio Y (2014) Learning
phrase representations using RNN encoder–decoder for statistical machine translation. Moschitti A,
Pang B, Daelemans W, eds., Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), 1724–1734 (Association for Computational Linguistics).
Choubey PK, Raju K, Huang R (2018) Identifying the most dominant event in a news article by mining
event coreference relations. Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers),
volume 2, 340–345.
Cortazar G, Millard C, Ortega H, Schwartz ES (2019) Commodity price forecasts, futures prices, and pricing
models. Management Science 65(9):4141–4155.
Cui R, Gallino S, Moreno A, Zhang DJ (2018) The operational value of social media information. Production
and Operations Management 27(10):1749–1769.
De Janvry A, Sadoulet E (2009) The impact of rising food prices on household welfare in india. Institute for
Research on Labor and Employment .
Denil M, Demiraj A, De Freitas N (2015) Extraction of salient sentences from labelled documents. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1412.6815 .
Dev SM (2010) Rising Food Prices and Financial Crisis in India: Impact on Women and Children and Ways
of Tackling the Problem (UNICEF).
Ding X, Zhang Y, Liu T, Duan J (2014) Using structured events to predict stock price movement: An
empirical investigation. Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language
processing (EMNLP), 1415–1425.
Ding X, Zhang Y, Liu T, Duan J (2015) Deep learning for event-driven stock prediction. Proceedings of the
24th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2327–2333 (AAAI Press).
Ding X, Zhang Y, Liu T, Duan J (2016) Knowledge-driven event embedding for stock prediction. COLING,
2133–2142.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
29
Doddington G, Mitchell A, Przybocki M, Ramshaw L, Strassel S, Weischedel R (2004) The automatic
content extraction (ace) program tasks, data, and evaluation. Proceedings of the Fourth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’04).
Feuerriegel S, Gordon J (2019) News-based forecasts of macroeconomic indicators: A semantic path model
for interpretable predictions. European Journal of Operational Research 272(1):162–175.
Gidofalvi G (2001) Using news articles to predict stock price movements. Technical report, Department of
Computer Science and Engineering University of California, San Diego.
Goel A, Gutierrez GJ (2011) Multiechelon procurement and distribution policies for traded commodities.
Management Science 57(12):2228–2244.
Grafton RQ, Daugbjerg C, Qureshi ME (2015) Towards food security by 2050. Food Security 7(2):179–183.
Hagenau M, Liebmann M, Neumann D (2013) Automated news reading: Stock price prediction based on
financial news using context-capturing features. Decision Support Systems 55(3):685 – 697.
Haks¨oz C¸, Seshadri S (2007) Supply chain operations in the presence of a spot market: a review with
discussion. Journal of the Operational Research Society 58(11):1412–1429.
Headey D, Fan S (2008) Anatomy of a crisis: the causes and consequences of surging food prices. Agricultural
Economics 39(s1):375–391.
Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J (1997) Long short-term memory. Neural computation 9(8):1735–1780.
Hogenboom F, Frasincar F, Kaymak U, De Jong F (2011) An overview of event extraction from text.
DeRiVE@ ISWC 48–57.
Hu Z, Liu W, Bian J, Liu X, Liu TY (2018) Listening to chaotic whispers: A deep learning framework for
news-oriented stock trend prediction. Proceedings of the eleventh ACM international conference on web
search and data mining, 261–269.
International Trade Administration UDoC (2022) Food and agriculture value chain. URL https://
www.trade.gov/country-commercial-guides/india-food-and-agriculture-value-chain.
Kalamara E, Turrell A, Redl C, Kapetanios G, Kapadia S (2022) Making text count: economic forecasting
using newspaper text. Journal of Applied Econometrics 37(5):896–919.
Kang D, Gangal V, Lu A, Chen Z, Hovy E (2017) Detecting and explaining causes from text for a time series
event. Palmer M, Hwa R, Riedel S, eds., Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, 2758–2767 (Association for Computational Linguistics).
Kawamae N (2011) Trend analysis model: trend consists of temporal words, topics, and timestamps. Pro-
ceedings of the fourth ACM international conference on Web search and data mining, 317–326.
Kim J, Ahn I (2021) Infectious disease outbreak prediction using media articles with machine learning
models. Scientific reports 11(1):1–13.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
30
Kurawarwala AA, Matsuo H (1996) Forecasting and inventory management of short life-cycle products.
Operations Research 44(1):131–150.
Lafferty JD, McCallum A, Pereira FC (2001) Conditional random fields: Probabilistic models for segment-
ing and labeling sequence data. Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Conference on Machine
Learning, 282–289.
Larsen VH, Thorsrud LA (2019) The value of news for economic developments. Journal of Econometrics
210(1):203–218.
Le Q, Mikolov T (2014) Distributed representations of sentences and documents. International conference
on machine learning, 1188–1196 (PMLR).
Levi R, Singhvi S, Zheng Y (2022) Artificial shortage in agricultural supply chains. Manufacturing & Service
Operations Management 24(2):746–765.
Li J, Chen X, Hovy E, Jurafsky D (2016) Visualizing and understanding neural models in NLP. Proceedings of
the 2016 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, 681–691 (Association for Computational Linguistics).
Li X, Xie H, Chen L, Wang J, Deng X (2014) News impact on stock price return via sentiment analysis.
Knowledge-Based Systems 69:14–23.
Li XY, Li X, Fan Z, Mi L, Kandakji T, Song Z, Li D, Song XP (2022) Civil war hinders crop production
and threatens food security in syria. Nature Food 3(1):38–46.
Liu Q, Cheng X, Su S, Zhu S (2018) Hierarchical complementary attention network for predicting stock
price movements with news. Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Information
and Knowledge Management, 1603–1606.
Madaan L, Sharma A, Khandelwal P, Goel S, Singla P, Seth A (2019) Price forecasting & anomaly detection
for agricultural commodities in india. Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGCAS Conference on Computing
and Sustainable Societies, 52–64.
Mahajan S, Sousa-Poza A, Datta K (2015) Differential effects of rising food prices on indian households
differing in income. Food Security 7(5):1043–1053.
Malhotra P, Vig L, Shroff G, Agarwal P (2015) Long short term memory networks for anomaly detection in
time series. ESANN, 89—94.
Mandl C (2019) Optimal Procurement and Inventory Control in Volatile Commodity Markets. Ph.D. thesis,
Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen.
Mandl C, Minner S (2023) Data-driven optimization for commodity procurement under price uncertainty.
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 25(2):371–390.
Mandl C, Nadarajah S, Minner S, Gavirneni S (2022) Data-driven storage operations: Cross-commodity
backtest and structured policies. Production and Operations Management 31(6):2438–2456.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
31
Manning CD, Raghavan P, Sch¨utze H (2008) Introduction to Information Retrieval (Cambridge University
Press), ISBN 0521865719, 9780521865715.
Mikolov T, Sutskever I, Chen K, Corrado GS, Dean J (2013) Distributed representations of words and
phrases and their compositionality. NIPS, 3111–3119.
Ming F, Wong F, Liu Z, Chiang M (2014) Stock market prediction from wsj: text mining via sparse matrix
factorization. 2014 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining, 430–439 (IEEE).
Mittal S, Hariharan VK, Subash S (2018) Price volatility trends and price transmission for major staples in
india. Agricultural Economics Research Review 31(347-2018-3190):65–74.
Nassirtoussi AK, Aghabozorgi S, Wah TY, Ngo DCL (2014) Text mining for market prediction: A systematic
review. Expert Systems with Applications 41(16):7653–7670.
Pascanu R, Mikolov T, Bengio Y (2013) On the difficulty of training recurrent neural networks. International
conference on machine learning, 1310–1318.
Paul RK, Saxena R, Chaurasia S, et al. (2015) Examining export volatility, structural breaks in price volatility
and linkages between domestic and export prices of onion in india. Agricultural Economics Research
Review 28:101–116.
Pedregosa F, Varoquaux G, Gramfort A, et al (2011) Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of
Machine Learning Research 12:2825–2830.
Pindyck RS (2004) Volatility and commodity price dynamics. Journal of Futures Markets: Futures, Options,
and Other Derivative Products 24(11):1029–1047.
Pons N (2011) Food and prices in india: Impact of rising food prices on welfare. Centre De Sciences Humaines,
Delhi, India .
Raka S, Ramesh C (2017) Understanding the recurring onion price shocks: revelations from production-
trade-price linkages. Policy Paper-National Centre for Agricultural Economics and Policy Research
.
Raleigh C, Choi HJ, Kniveton D (2015) The devil is in the details: An investigation of the relationships
between conflict, food price and climate across africa. Global Environmental Change 32:187–199.
Saha N, Kar A, Kumar P (2020) An investigation on performance of onion price and market arrivals in
major indian markets. Journal of Agriculture and Ecology 9:78–82.
Saxena R, Paul RK, Kumar R, et al. (2020) Transmission of price shocks and volatility spillovers across
major onion markets in india. Agricultural Economics Research Review 33(1).
Schumaker RP, Chen H (2009) Textual analysis of stock market prediction using breaking financial news:
The azfin text system. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS) 27(2):12.
Secomandi N (2015) Merchant commodity storage practice revisited. Operations Research 63(5):1131–1143.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
32
Shahaf D, Guestrin C (2010) Connecting the dots between news articles. Proceedings of the 16th ACM
SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, 623–632.
Sharma P, Gummagolmath K, Sharma R (2011) Prices of onions: An analysis. Economic and Political Weekly
22–25.
Sugar CA, Gareth, James M (2003) Finding the number of clusters in a data set: An information theoretic
approach. Journal of the American Statistical Association 98:750–763.
Syntetos AA, Babai Z, Boylan JE, Kolassa S, Nikolopoulos K (2016) Supply chain forecasting: Theory,
practice, their gap and the future. European Journal of Operational Research 252(1):1–26.
Tetlock PC (2007) Giving content to investor sentiment: The role of media in the stock market. The Journal
of Finance 62(3):1139–1168.
Vaca CK, Mantrach A, Jaimes A, Saerens M (2014) A time-based collective factorization for topic discovery
and monitoring in news. Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on World wide web, 527–538.
Van Dijk TA (2013) News as discourse (Routledge).
Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, Uszkoreit J, Jones L, Gomez AN, Kaiser L, Polosukhin I (2017) Attention
is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems 30.
Wang Y, Agichtein E, Benzi M (2012) Tm-lda: efficient online modeling of latent topic transitions in social
media. Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and
data mining, 123–131.
Weber R (2015) Welfare impacts of rising food prices: Evidence from india. Technical report, International
Association of Agricultural Economists.
Wu D (2023) Text-based measure of supply chain risk exposure. Management Science .
Xiao G, Yang N, Zhang R (2015) Dynamic pricing and inventory management under fluctuating procurement
costs. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 17(3):321–334.
Xie B, Passonneau R, Wu L, Creamer GG (2013) Semantic frames to predict stock price movement. Pro-
ceedings of the 51st annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics, 873–883.
Xing FZ, Cambria E, Welsch RE (2018) Natural language based financial forecasting: a survey. Artificial
Intelligence Review 50(1):49–73.
Yarlott WV, Cornelio C, Gao T, Finlayson M (2018) Identifying the discourse function of news article
paragraphs. Proceedings of the Workshop Events and Stories in the News 2018, 25–33 (Association for
Computational Linguistics).
Zhang W, Skiena S (2010) Trading strategies to exploit blog and news sentiment. Proceedings of the Inter-
national AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media 4(1):375–378.
Zhu X, Ninh A, Zhao H, Liu Z (2021) Demand forecasting with supply-chain information and machine
learning: Evidence in the pharmaceutical industry. Production and Operations Management 30(9):3231–
3252.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

e-companion to Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
ec1
News article References
New York Times. Rising onion prices tempt highway robbers in india. https://india.blogs.nytimes.com/
2013/08/21/rising-onion-prices-tempt-highway-robbers-in-india/, 2013.
India.com.
As onion price rise to all-time high, people resort to robbery of kitchen staple in up, west
bengal.
https://www.india.com/news/india/as-onion-price-rise-to-all-time-high-people-
resort-to-robbery-of-kitchen-staple-in-up-west-bengal-3873597/, 2019.
Sean McLain. India’s onion prices play pivotal role in election. https://www.wsj.com/articles/indias-
onion-prices-play-pivotal-role-in-election-1377627369, 2013.
Aviral Virk. History shows why no politician wants to mess with the onion. https://www.thequint.com/
news/india/history-shows-why-no-politician-wants-to-mess-with-the-onion, 2015.
Kabir Agarwal. Will anger over low potato prices harm bjp in up? https://thewire.in/agriculture/
bjp-up-elections-2019-potato-prices, 2019.
CNBC-TV18.
Onion
prices,
the
slayer
of
many
governments,
on
the
boil
again
as
elec-
tions approach.
https://www.cnbctv18.com/agriculture/onion-prices-the-slayer-of-many-
governments-on-the-boil-again-as-elections-approach-4412221.htm, 2019.
Nachiket Deuskar. Delhi election: How onion prices led to swaraj govt’s defeat in 1998 — the last time bjp
held reigns in national capital. https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/politics/delhi-election-
how-onion-prices-led-to-swaraj-govts-defeat-in-1998-the-last-time-bjp-held-reigns-
in-national-capital-4897921.html, 2020.
TOI. Infected crop shoots up onion prices. https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/pune/Infected-
crop-shoots-up-onion-prices/articleshow/3910670.cms, 2008.
TOI. Transport strike, oil crisis push up prices. https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kolkata/
Transport-strike-oil-crisis-push-up-prices/articleshow/3958998.cms, 2009a.
TOI.
Onion floods bhavnagar market.
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/rajkot/Onion-
floods-Bhavnagar-market/articleshow/4030814.cms, 2009b.
TOI. Andhra floods and strike fuel vegetable price rise in state. https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/
city/bhubaneswar/Andhra-floods-and-strike-fuel-vegetable-price-rise-in-state/
articleshow/5091545.cms, 2009c.
TOI.
Veggie prices spike on watery wave.
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/bengaluru/
Veggie-prices-spike-on-watery-wave/articleshow/5091855.cms, 2009d.
Gro Intelligence. When onion prices bring indians to tears. https://gro-intelligence.com/insights/
articles/onion-prices-in-india, 2016.
Digital Green. Personal communication, August 2020. URL https://www.digitalgreen.org/.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

ec2
e-companion to Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
TOI.
Rice price plunges by 24 https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/bengaluru/rice-price-
plunges-by-24-on-bountiful-rain/articleshow/21770742.cms, 2013a.
TOI.
Monsoon delay fails to affect rice procurement.
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/
monsoon-delay-fails-to-affect-rice-procurement/articleshow/39651919.cms, 2014a.
Economist. Of rainfall and price rises. https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2015/06/
25/of-rainfall-and-price-rises, 2015.
TOI.
Rice
export
scam:
Govt
blocks
cbi
probe,
20
babus
go
scot-free.
https://
timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/rice-export-scam-govt-blocks-cbi-probe-20-babus-
go-scot-free/articleshow/27811928.cms, 2013b.
TOI.
Paddy
procurement
scam
probe
yet
to
reach
logical
conclusion.
https://
timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/patna/paddy-procurement-scam-probe-yet-to-reach-
logical-conclusion/articleshow/29833580.cms, 2014b.
TOI. Hc asks state to explain rice ’scam’. https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/patna/hc-asks-
state-to-explain-rice-scam/articleshow/30238593.cms, 2014c.
TOI.
Wheat exports from india to plummet as farmers hoard harvest.
https://www.livemint.com/
Politics/5Ect1st9e2OqQVr4pvAArO/Wheat-exports-from-India-to-plummet-as-farmers-
hoard-harvest.html, 2013c.
TOI.
Fci stuck with 24m tonnes of poor wheat.
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/fci-
stuck-with-24m-tonnes-of-poor-wheat/articleshow/47857533.cms, 2015a.
Business Standard.
Maggi ban: Flour millers recall maida supplied to nestle.
https://www.business-
standard.com/article/companies/maggi-ban-flour-millers-recall-maida-supplied-to-
nestle-115061600725 1.html, 2015.
TOI.
Railways
to
increase
passenger
fare,
freight
tariff
by
2
per
cent.
https://
timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/railways-to-increase-passenger-
fare-freight-tariff-by-2-per-cent/articleshow/23533196.cms, 2013d.
TOI. Protest against fuel price hike. https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/varanasi/protest-
against-fuel-price-hike/articleshow/22619843.cms, 2013e.
Neha Thirani Bagri. Food and fuel prices push indian inflation higher. https://www.nytimes.com/2013/
11/15/business/food-and-fuel-prices-push-indian-inflation-higher.html, 2013.
IndiaToday. Farmers face heavy losses due to untimely rainfall. https://www.indiatoday.in/mail-today/
story/farmers-face-heavy-losses-due-to-untimely-rainfall-242737-2015-02-13, 2015.
Ratnajyoti Dutta.
Late monsoon starts indian farmer’s ’journey to hell’.
https://www.reuters.com/
article/us-india-monsoon-farmers/late-monsoon-starts-indian-farmers-journey-to-
hell-idUKKBN0FP03720140720, 2014.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

e-companion to Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
ec3
Sayantan Bera.
Wheat output may decline by up to 5
https://www.livemint.com/Politics/
XoPy0NSXUgfByctqESAQAM/Indias-2015-wheat-output-could-fall-by-45-says-farm-
mini.html, 2015.
WorldGrain.
Weather issues drop india’s 2014-15 grain production.
https://www.world-grain.com/
articles/5900-weather-issues-drop-india-s-2014-15-grain-production, 2015.
TOI.
Poor monsoon results in lower rabi cultivation.
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/
nagpur/Poor-monsoon-results-in-lower-rabi-cultivation/articleshow/50303803.cms, 2015b.
TOI. Government to give subsidy to traders to export potatoes. https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/
city/kolkata/government-to-give-subsidy-to-traders-to-export-potatoes/articleshow/
46476011.cms, 2015c.
TOI.
Mamata banerjee urges to check potato export.
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/
kolkata/mamata-banerjee-urges-to-check-potato-export/articleshow/39897577.cms, 2014d.
KNN. Curbs on potato shipments; minimum export price fixed at usd 450. https://knnindia.co.in/news/
newsdetails/economy/curbs-on-potato-shipments-minimum-export-price-fixed-at-usd-450,
2014.
Namrata Acharya.
West bengal plans freight subsidy for potato export.
https://www.business-
standard.com/article/markets/west-bengal-plans-freight-subsidy-for-potato-export-
115031400437 1.html, 2015.
Frontline.
Harvest of tragedy.
https://frontline.thehindu.com/the-nation/harvest-of-tragedy/
article7150453.ece, 2015.
EconomicTimes.
West
bengal’s
potato
farmers
in
trouble
as
other
states
grow
their
own.
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/markets/commodities/west-bengals-potato-farmers-
in-trouble-as-other-states-grow-their-own/articleshow/46628935.cms, 2015.
TheHindu. Rice mill ‘scam’ triggers cag audit. https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/Rice-mill-
%E2%80%98scam%E2%80%99-triggers-CAG-audit/article60330346.ece, 2015.
India Today. ”the great indian dal scam revealed”. https://www.indiatoday.in/india/story/the-great-
indian-dal-scam-revealed-273540-2015-11-23, 2015a.
TOI. Wholesale onion price dips to 5 per kg in mumbai. https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/
india-business/wholesale-onion-price-dips-to-5-per-kg-in-mumbai/articleshow/
30082568.cms, 2014e.
Sanjeeb
Mukherjee.
Middlemen
responsible
for
food
inflation:
Ram
vilas
paswan.
https:
//www.business-standard.com/article/economy-policy/middlemen-responsible-for-food-
inflation-ram-vilas-paswan-114081100014 1.html, 2014.
The
Hindu
Businessline.
Onion
price
falls
due
to
govt
action
against
hoarding.
https:
//www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/onion-price-falls-due-to-govt-
action-against-hoarding/article32940468.ece, 2020.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

ec4
e-companion to Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
R Jagannathan.
How to turn FCI from food hoarder to food manager - and save tonnes of
money.
https://www.firstpost.com/business/economy/how-to-turn-fci-from-food-hoarder-
to-food-manager-and-save-tonnes-of-money-1985065.html, 2014.
TOI. 5 godowns raided, foodgrains worth over Rs 120cr seized. https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/
city/thane/5-godowns-raided-foodgrains-worth-over-Rs-120cr-seized/articleshow/
49500914.cms, 2015d.
TOI.
Raids continue, 930 quintals illegal dal stock seized.
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/
city/bhubaneswar/Raids-continue-930-quintals-illegal-dal-stock-seized/articleshow/
49562079.cms, 2015e.
TOI. Raids on dal mills, godowns continue. https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/bhubaneswar/
Raids-on-dal-mills-godowns-continue/articleshow/49533170.cms, 2015f.
EconomicTimes.
Itc, cargill and other private companies increase wheat procurement.
https:
//economictimes.indiatimes.com/markets/commodities/itc-cargill-and-other-private-
companies-increase-wheat-procurement/articleshow/34709003.cms, 2014.
Gurpreet
Singh
Nibber.
Punjab
to
put
a
cap
on
per
acre
yield
of
paddy.
https://
www.hindustantimes.com/cities/chandigarh-news/punjab-to-put-a-cap-on-per-acre-yield-
of-paddy-101633464079686.html, 2021.
TOI.
Truckers strike soar vegetable prices in allahabad.
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/
city/allahabad/truckers-strike-soar-vegetable-prices-in-allahabad/articleshow/
49237710.cms, 2015g.
India Today. Telangana: Trucks go off road, goods movement hit. https://www.indiatoday.in/india/
story/telangana-trucks-go-off-the-road-indefinite-strike-259348-2015-06-24, 2015b.
TOI.
Day
4
of
transporters’
strike:
Potato
prices
climb
as
supply
falls
by
40%.
http://
timesofindia.indiatimes.com/articleshow/65111423.cms, 2018.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

e-companion to Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
ec5
Appendix A:
Details of event extraction from news articles
A.1.
CRF-based method for extracting event triggers
We implemented a conditional random field (CRF)-based supervised method to extract the event triggers
from the news articles. CRFs are probabilistic models for labeling sequence data and have been used in a
variety of tasks such as POS tagging, speech detection etc. We consider a linear-chain CRF, which models
the probability of observing a particular (output) label sequence o = (o1,o2,...) given an (input) observation
sequence x = (x1,x2,...) as a normalized product of real-valued potential functions Fi(o,x) of the form
Fi(o,x) = exp
 X
j
λjTj(oi−1,oi,x,i) +
X
k
µkSk(oi,x,i)
!
(EC.1)
where Tj(oi−1,oi,x,i) is a transition feature function that depends on the labels at consecutive positions
i−1 and i in the output sequence; Sk(oi,x,i) is a state feature function that depends on the output label at
position i and the observation sequence x; and λj and µk are parameters to be estimated from training data.
These feature functions can encode prior beliefs and intuitions about the possible label at some position,
given the label at the previous position or the observed words in the vicinity. For instance, in the context of
POS tagging, one of the feature functions could measure how much we suspect that the current word should
be labeled as an adjective given that the previous word is “very”.
The conditional probability of the label sequence o given the observation sequence x is then modeled as
Pr
h
o | x;λ,µ
i
=
1
Z(x) exp
 
n
X
i=1
log Fi(o,x)
!
(EC.2)
where Z(x) is a normalizing constant, the input sequence x = (x1,x2,...,xn) and the output label sequence
o = (o1,o2,...,on). The parameters λ,µ can be estimated, given a training dataset of input and output
sequence pairs, using maximum likelihood estimation technique. Once the parameters are estimated, we use
the MAP estimates as the output label assignments for new observation sequences.
In our setting, the training data is in the form of labeled sentences in news articles, where each word in
the sentence has a label T if it is a trigger word or NT otherwise. For example, the article title “Blasts at
Boston Marathon Kill 3 and Injure 100” would be labeled as,
(Blasts-T) (at-NT) (Boston-NT) (Marathon-NT) (Kill-T) (3-NT) (and-NT) (Injure-T) (100-NT)
where, each (word-label) pair represents (xi,oi) where the input sentence x = (x1,x2,...,xn) and the trigger
label sequence o = (o1,o2,...,on) and n is the number of words in the input sentence. The triggers were
labeled through the MTurk study described in Section A.1.1 below. We used a variety of features—both
linguistic and non-linguistic—to build the CRF model for detecting triggers. Some examples include—POS
tags, named-entity tags, position of the word, etc.
A.1.1.
Evaluation of CRF-based approach
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

ec6
e-companion to Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
Description: The intent of this project is to identify specific words in news headlines that
best depicts an event. We call this words “event triggers”.
Instruction:
1. Read the news headline carefully
2. Select the word or words (event triggers) in the headlines that best describes
an event and the main story of the news article.
Example 1:
“Ghaziabad school owner shot over property dispute”
Explanation: Here “shot” is the main action that describes the event
presented in this news article. Select the word “shot” as an event trigger
Example 2:
“Boiler explodes in chemical factory”
Explanation: Here “explodes” explains the main event that is covered in
article. Hence, the event trigger is “explodes”.
Table EC.1
An overview of the task description used to instruct the workers to label event triggers from news
headlines. The workers selected the event triggers from the text and the actual labeling was done later, where the
workers’ selected words were labeled as T and the rest as NT
Figure EC.1
Screenshots of the MTurk instruction and task pages to annotate event triggers present in news
headlines
Dataset and Annotation: We randomly selected 2,000 article headlines from the training corpus, and
used MTurk to annotate these headlines with event triggers. The participants were asked to identify the
words and phrases in headline that best described the event mentioned in the article’s story as shown in
Figure EC.1. To help the participants in making the correct annotation, we also supplied them with the
lead paragraph of the news article. However, the annotation was done only for the headline. We provided
two examples to make them fully understand the process as shown in Table EC.1. We designed the study to
make sure that every headline was annotated by 2 different participants. We measured the reliability of the
annotation process by computing the Cohen’s κ statistic.1 The κ statistic was 0.787, with standard error of
1 Cohen’s κ ranges between −1 and +1, where +1 represents perfect agreement. We used the R package psych to
compute the κ value, and the corresponding confidence intervals.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

e-companion to Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
ec7
COR PAR
SPU
MIS
Precision Recall F-1 Score
0.318 0.402 0.031 0.249 0.959
0.743
0.837
Table EC.2
MUC-5 evaluation metrics for the event trigger extraction task, refer to the text for the definition
of each metric.
0.02 and 95% CI between 0.748 to 0.827, indicating high inter-annotator agreement. Overall, the annotators
agreed on the event triggers for 1,780 article headlines, which we used for our evaluation below.
Evaluation methodology: We divided the above 1,780 labeled headlines into training and test sets using
a random 80-20 split. We trained the CRF model described in Section A.1 on the training set and tested its
performance on the test set. We measured the performance using the MUC-5 evaluation metrics proposed
for information extraction tasks (Sundheim 1993). To compute these metrics in our context, we note that
there are two possible labels (or tags) – T to represent event triggers, and NT for non-triggers. For each
article headline, the true labeling is the one provided by the MTurk annotators. Let Td be the set of true
event triggers in the headline corresponding to article d. The CRF model outputs a label for each word in
the article headline, and let Pd be the set of event triggers predicted by the CRF model for article headline
d. Then, the performance of the CRF is evaluated according to the following cases:
• correct: the set of event triggers predicted exactly matches the true set of event triggers, i.e. Pd = Td.
• partial: the set of event triggers predicted has a non-empty overlap with the true set of event triggers,
i.e. Pd ∩Td ̸= ∅, but Pd ̸= Td.
• missing: the set of event triggers predicted is empty, i.e. Pd = ∅.
• spurious: the set of event triggers predicted and the true set of event triggers are disjoint, i.e. Pd ̸= ∅
and Pd ∩Td = ∅.
The MUC-5 metrics have two additional cases, incorrect and noncommittal, which we do not consider since
the incorrect cases can be covered by either the missing or spurious cases, and no examples in our labeled
dataset were eligible for the noncommittal case. Note that each article headline will belong to exactly one
of the cases listed above.
We let COR, PAR, MIS, and SPU, denote respectively the fraction of article headlines in the test set
that belong to the correct, partial, missing and spurious cases defined above. Table EC.2 reports these
numbers. To compute precision and recall according to the MUC-5 evaluation metrics, the true positives
(TP), false positives (FP), and false negatives (FN) are computed as TP = COR + PAR, FP = SPU, and
FN = MIS. Though we did not compare against any other baseline method, our accuracy (F-1 scores) is
comparable to similar sequential labeling tasks using CRF (Ekbal et al. 2008, Krishnan and Manning 2006).
Thus, we considered our results to be acceptable and used the CRF-based methodology for extracting the
event triggers.
A.2.
Generative model of news articles
Our generative model is inspired by the LDA topic model (Blei et al. 2003), but with a few key differences.
Consider a corpus of news articles D and let the total number of articles be D := |D|. Suppose the set of all
event triggers extracted from the news corpus is given by U = {u1,u2,...,uM} and let C = {C1,C2,...,CK}
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

ec8
e-companion to Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
denote the event classes, where each Ck ⊂U is a collection of event triggers and any two event classes are
disjoint, i.e. Ci ∩Cj = ∅∀i ̸= j. As stated previously, we assume that each news article reports one central
event and consequently we associate each news article with a single underlying event class. Suppose zd ∈[K]
denotes the (latent) event class (corresponding to the central event) of any news article d ∈D. Next, suppose
that each d ∈D contains a (disjoint) union of two sets of words: Ud ∪Wd where, each ud,i ∈Ud represents an
event trigger present in article d. The remaining non-trigger words are represented by the set Wd. The set
of trigger words is further divided into two types: Ud = U (e)
d
∪U (s)
d , where U (e)
d
represents the trigger words
occurring in the title and the lead paragraph of article d (viz. the triggers belonging to event class Czd) and
U (s)
d
is the set of subsidiary event triggers occurring in the body of article d. The words in Wd represent other
features of the news article such as topics, entities, locations, etc. They can be considered as a description
of the event, like where it happened, when it happened, people, organizations involved etc., but we assume
that they are independent of the events mentioned in the news article, a similar assumption was made by Li
et al. (2005). Given the above, the generative process of the articles given a set of event classes is as follows
(also shown in Figure EC.2):
1. For each article d ∈D, its event class zd is sampled from a multinomial distribution with parameter p:
zd ∼Multinomial(p)
where p = (p1,p2,...,pK) denotes the prior probability distribution of the event classes C in the corpus D.
2. For each event class trigger ud,i ∈U (e)
d
in article d, sample an event trigger uniformly at random from
the triggers belonging to the event class sampled in Step 1:
ud,i ∼Uniform(Czd)
where Uniform(Czd) is the uniform distribution over the event triggers in the set Czd ∈C.
3. After the event class zd along with its event triggers are generated, the subsidiary events are sampled.
The subsidiary events generation is similar to topic generation in LDA (Blei et al. 2003). First, sample a
distribution θd ∈[0,1]K of subsidiary events according to a Dirichlet distribution using an assumed Dirichlet
prior α ∈RK
+:
θd ∼Dirichlet(α)
Then for each subsidiary event trigger ud,j ∈U (s)
d , first sample its event class:
sd,j ∼Multinomial(θd)
and then sample an event trigger uniformly at random from the sampled event class:
ud,j ∼Uniform(Csd,j)
A summary of the parameters and variables in the model is shown in Table EC.3.
Note that the above process differs from topic models in two respects: (1) each article has a single latent
event class, whereas standard topic models like LDA assume that each document is represented using a
mixture of different topics, and (2) only the event triggers present in each article are modeled as opposed to
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

e-companion to Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
ec9
Figure EC.2
Generative model of news articles. Event classes (boxes) are represented as collection of event
triggers (small circles)
all the words. However, one limitation in our proposed model is that the subsidiary events are assumed to
be generated independent of the central event. This was done to keep the model tractable; relaxing it is an
interesting future direction.
In our model, we can observe the set Ud corresponding to (all) the event triggers in article d. We further
assume that the prior proportions p and dirichlet prior α parameters are also known. We chose the prior
proportions p to be uniform across all the event classes, i.e. pk = 1
K for each event class k ∈[K], and chose
α = (0.1,0.1,...,0.1) to make the distribution of subsidiary events for a given event class sparse. Then,
the posterior distribution, Pr
h
z1:D,θ1:D | p,α,{U1,U2,...,UD}
i
is used to infer the latent variables. We
used Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) approximation technique with Gibbs sampling to compute the
posterior and infer the central event class zd as well as the subsidiary event classes {sd,j} for each article
d ∈D. After running the MCMC inference, we obtain a posterior distribution, say, Pos(·), for the latent
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

ec10
e-companion to Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
Table EC.3
Variables and parameters in the generative event model
Variables/
Description
Parameters
D
Number of news articles
K
Number of event classes
Ck
Event class k represented as a set of event triggers
pk
Prior probability of event class Ck, specifies which event classes are
more frequent in the corpus
Ud
Event triggers present in article d
zd
Event class from which the central event in article d is sampled
α
Dirichlet prior parameter to generate subsidiary events
θd
Proportion of event classes as subsidiary events in article d
sd,j
Event class from which jth subsidiary event trigger in article d is sampled
event class zd of each news article d ∈D satisfying PK
k=1 Pos(zd = k) = 1. Then, we define the intensity or
importance of event class k at time t as:
ϕt,k =
P
d∈Dt Pos(zd = k)
|Dt|
(EC.3)
A.2.1.
Evaluation of generative event model
Data annotation: To evaluate our generative event model, we chose a random collection of 1,000 articles
from the test corpus and annotated them using another MTurk study. Each participant was given a set of
100 news articles—they were provided with the entire article—and was asked to select the best describing
event from a list of 250 events for each news article; see Figure EC.3. To ease the annotation task, one of
the authors manually summarized for the annotators each event class using a single word or phrase that
describes the corresponding event class triggers. Care was taken to ensure that the assigned words/phrases
succinctly represented the event class they described. For example, the event class with triggers like, ‘crashed’,
‘rammed’, ‘overturn’, ‘collided’, etc. was described using the word accident. Moreover, similar to the event
trigger identification task earlier, the participants were provided two examples of the annotation task as
shown in Table EC.4. The participants chose exactly one event per article and we used that information
to label the articles using a 250-length one hot encoded vector. In this vector, the position for the selected
event had a value of 1 and 0 everywhere else. Each article was annotated by two participants, and the
inter-coder agreement had Cohen’s κ 0.938, with standard error 0.012 and 95% CI between 0.915 to 0.961,
again showing high inter-annotator agreement. Amongst the 1,000 articles, 970 had agreement between the
two participants, and the quality of event embeddings was evaluated using this labeled subset of articles.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

e-companion to Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
ec11
Description: The intent of this project is to identify the best event describing a news article.
Instruction:
1. Read the news headline carefully
2. Choose the event label from the list that best describes this headline
Example 1:
Headline: “Docs on strike at Safdarjung Hospital”
Text: “NEW DELHI: Healthcare services were disrupted at the Safdarjung
Hospital in the city today when resident doctors went on an indefinite strike
demanding security after a medic was thrashed by the relatives of a patient....”
Event label: protest
Example 2:
Headline: “Truck rams into motorcycle, teacher killed”
Text: “PUNE: A school teacher was killed and his wife was injured when the
motorcycle they were riding was knocked down by a truck loaded with iron bars near
Yadav petrol pump on the Pune-Ahmednagar highway on Saturday...”
Event label: accident
Table EC.4
An overview of the task description used to instruct the MTurk workers to label news article
headlines with event labels
Figure EC.3
Screenshot of the MTurk instruction and task page to identify central event reported in a news
article
Evaluation methodology: Our objective is to measure how closely our semi-supervised event generative
model matches human annotators in determining the central events of news articles. Note that the afore-
mentioned 970 articles were not part of the training set used to train the generative event model or to train
the CRF model for event trigger extraction. For each of the 970 articles, we compared the predicted central
event class ˆzd with the one chosen by the human annotators. Treating this as a multi-class classification
problem, in which the number of classes is 250 and the true class corresponds to the central event labeled
by the human annotators, we obtained an accuracy of 93.5% and a macro average F-1 score of 0.917. This
shows that our event model is successful in matching the central events chosen by human annotators.
Appendix B:
Details of training LSTM and REN models
As mentioned in the main text, input feature normalization can enhance the stability and speed of the
training procedure for neural networks. In particular, it helps gradient-based optimization algorithms to
converge faster and more reliably and ultimately improve generalization performance. Indeed, we observed
that the LSTM models were overfitting when the inputs were supplied in the original price domain. To
address this issue, we transformed the data into the returns domain, a standard practice when dealing with
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

ec12
e-companion to Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
Table EC.5
Hyperparameter values chosen for training LSTM-based forecasting models
Hyperparameter
Value
Hidden units
10
Activation
tanh
Kernel regularizer
L2
Dropout
0.1
Unroll
True
Epochs
70
Optimizer
Adam
Loss
Mean squared error
Learning rate
0.001
financial time-series data. Formally, we define the returns time-series as rt :=
yt−yt−1
yt−1
and train the LSTM
models to predict at+1 := log(1 + rt+1) = log(yt+1/yt) given the historical values at,at−1,...,at+1−δ. The
forecasted price ˆyt+1 is then computed as
ˆyt+1 = yt · eˆat+1
Table EC.5 lists the hyperparameter values used for training the non-linear LSTM-based models, which
were obtained by tuning the forecast accuracy on a validation set. For all remaining hyperparameters, we used
the default values provided by the Keras implementation of the LSTM model: https://www.tensorflow.org/
api docs/python/tf/keras/layers/LSTM.
Appendix C:
Alternate event representations
In this section, we describe how the general-purpose embeddings were computed from our news corpus.
Before training the different models, we performed a few pre-processing and data cleaning steps. We first
tokenized the news article text using the Python NLTK (Bird et al. 2009) library’s wordpunct tokenize
function and removed all stopwords. Then, we used the Python Gensim (ˇReh˚uˇrek and Sojka 2010) library’s
filter extremes function to remove frequently occurring and rare words, by which we filtered out all words
that appeared in less than 100 news articles (out of 700,683 articles in the training period) or more than
70% of the articles.
C.1.
Topic-based embeddings
We train an LDA topic model (Blei et al. 2003) on the news corpus in the training period, which assumes
that each article is a mixture of different topics with each topic appearing with a different proportion. The
LDA model outputs for each news article d, the predicted proportion of any topic k as ˆθd,k ∈[0,1]. We chose
K = 250 topics, the same as the number of event classes in our event model. Given the predicted proportions,
for each time t, we compute the LDA topics-based embedding as:
ϕLDA
t
= (θ(1)
t
,θ(2)
t
,...,θ(K)
t
),
where θ(k)
t
:= max
d∈Dt
ˆθd,k
for all k ∈[K].
Note that we use the maximum proportion of a topic appearing in any news article during each time period
to be representative of the time period’s topic proportion. We also experimented with the average proportion
P
d∈Dt ˆθd,k/|Dt| and observed similar performance.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

e-companion to Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
ec13
C.2.
Word embeddings
Recall that word2vec takes every word in a large corpus and embeds it into a low-dimensional space by
generating unique vectors for each word. Given vw ∈RL as the vector representation of word w (we choose
L = 250 to provide the same degrees of freedom as the event and topic embeddings), we compute the
word2vec-based embedding as:
ϕW2V
t
=
1
P
d∈Dt |words(d)|
X
d∈Dt
X
w∈words(d)
vw.
C.3.
Document embeddings
Similar to word2vec, the Doc2Vec algorithm converts each document in a corpus into a dense vector, where
the representation is learned by trying to predict words present in the document. The Doc2Vec embedding
is computed as ϕD2V
t
=
1
|Dt|
P
d∈Dt vd, where vd ∈RL represents the Doc2Vec vector for document d, and we
chose L = 250 to maintain consistency with the other embeddings.
Appendix D:
Examples of event classes
Recall that in our generative event model, each event corresponds to an event class, which is a collection
of event triggers. In Figure 4 of the main text, we label a subset of the events (from the universe of 250
events) using a manually chosen word that best describes the event triggers associated with the event class.
Table EC.6 lists the top eight event triggers associated with each of these events, where the triggers are
ordered based on how frequently they appear in the news corpus.
Table EC.6
Top-eight most frequent event triggers for the subset of event classes shown in the main text
Event class
Most frequent event triggers
ELECTION
elect, vote, poll, select, designate, appoint, campaign, rally
PROTEST
protest,object, demonstrate,demand,agitate,complaint, dissent, outcry
SCAM
scam, fraud, swindle, scandal, trick, shakedown, extort, bribe
NATURAL
drought, flood, tsunami, cyclone, heatwave, monsoon, rainfall, landslide
HIKE
hike, lift, increase, inflate, surcharge, bump, push, raise
POLICY
export, import, control, subsidize, waive, consign, ban, regularise
DAMAGE
damage, ruin, devastate, desecrate, destroy, trash, deface, impair
STRIKE
strike, walkout, assault, dharna, picked, beat, hit, inflict
FESTIVAL
diwali, pongal, christmas, eid, dusshera, bihu, onam, janmashtami
TAX
tax, pay, fee, charge, assess, rebate, duty, levy
RAID
raid, intercept, bust, takedown, search, nakabandi, inspect, picket
PURCHASE
purchase, acquire, obtain, procure, buy, score, incentivise, allot
FUNDING
funding, granting, budget, allocate, sanction, stimulus, augment, capitalise
CUT
cut, reduce, decrease, slash, discount, deduct, liberalise, rollback
HOARD
hoard, stock, store, smuggle, conceal, stow, pile, accumulate
CONSTRUCT construct,erect,renovate,build,install,develop,reconstruct, demolish
COLLECT
collect, procure, obtain, retrieve, borrow, arrange, donate, deliver
ARREST
arrest,detain, nab, surrender, interrogate, remand,acquit, prosecute
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

ec14
e-companion to Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
Figure EC.4
Daily forecast error during the test period (Jan 2013–Dec 2020)
Note. Forecast error is computed as the difference between the predicted price and the actual price, so values close to
zero are preferred. The AR+events model reduces the spread of the daily forecast errors for onion by incorporating
events; the improvement is marginal for the other crops.
Appendix E:
Additional numerical comparisons
Table EC.7
Mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) for one day-ahead price forecasts during the test period (Jan 2013–Dec
2020)
Forecasting methods
Crop
Onion
Potato
Rice
Wheat
Linear models
Naive
6.22%
6.35%
4.29%
2.57%
AR
5.97%
5.97%
3.95%
2.45%
AR+LDA topics
5.88%
5.97%
3.95%
2.49%
AR+word2vec embeddings
5.88%
6.00%
4.15%
2.64%
AR+doc2vec embeddings
6.07%
6.32%
4.50%
2.83%
AR+events
5.85%
5.98%
3.95%
2.44%
Non-linear models
LSTM
5.68%
5.59%
3.84%
2.69%
LSTM+LDA topics
6.22%
6.35%
4.06%
2.58%
LSTM+word2vec embeddings
6.32%
6.37%
4.29%
2.94%
LSTM+doc2vec embeddings
6.32%
6.36%
4.32%
2.63%
Our method (REN)
5.20%
5.32%
3.37%
2.25%
Incorporating event embeddings helps improve the performance of both linear and non-linear models, whereas general-purpose
embeddings can worsen the forecast accuracy due to overfitting. Non-linear models outperform linear models implying that the
underlying price fluctuations are complex. Our proposed method, highlighted in bold, achieves the lowest MAPE across all crops.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

e-companion to Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
ec15
Appendix F:
Application to infectious disease prediction
While the main focus of the paper was forecasting commodity prices, our proposed framework is very
flexible and can be applied to various domains. As a concrete illustration, we leverage our method for
predicting number of cases of three infectious diseases prevalent in India—dengue, malaria, and influenza-like
illness (ILI). Prior work has shown that real-world events contain early warning signals to forecast potential
outbreaks of infectious diseases, see, e.g., Freifeld et al. (2008), Ginsberg et al. (2009). The disease data
was collected from a variety of sources, such as the World Health Organization (WHO), Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC), Public Health Foundation of India, and Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare, Government of India. For malaria and dengue, the time-series yt represents the national average of
the monthly number of reported cases across India, and for ILI the data contains the monthly average of cases
per 100,000 population. Consequently, for predicting disease prevalence, we aggregate the articles by month
to compute the event embeddings. The historical lag was set to δ = 3 months, which means that a news event
can impact newly reported cases up to three months from its occurrence. For illustration purposes, we only
focus on the non-linear forecasting models and train them on data from Jan 2006 to Dec 2012. When training
the models, we set the number of epochs to 250 and the learning rate to 0.01; all other hyperparameters are
the same as reported in Table EC.5.
Table EC.8 reports the RMSE achieved by the different non-linear models in predicting monthly cases
during the test period, lasting from Jan 2013 to Dec 2015. Similar to the commodity price forecasting
scenario, we observe that adding events improves the forecast accuracy for all 3 diseases. For malaria, the
RMSE achieved by REN is slightly worse than the LSTM+LDA topics benchmark, but it outperforms all
competing embedding approaches for dengue and ILI. The absolute RMSE values for disease prediction
are a lot higher compared to commodity price forecasting, but the number of monthly reported cases for
these diseases is also in the order of tens or hundreds of thousands. To get a better sense of the relative
performance, we compute the MAPE metric, which for REN is 33.9%, 3.2%, and 13.6% for malaria, dengue,
and ILI, respectively. Apart from dengue, these numbers are larger compared to those reported in Table EC.7
earlier. One reason for this could be the limited size of the training dataset; since we use monthly data, the
total number of data points comprising the seven years of the training period is just 84 months compared
to 2,557 days in the case of commodity prices. As a result, it is possible that the models are overfitting.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473

ec16
e-companion to Chakraborty et al.: News event-driven forecasting
Table EC.8
Root mean square error (RMSE) in predicting monthly cases during the test period (Jan 2013 – Dec 2015)
Forecasting methods
Disease
Malaria
Dengue
Influenza-like
(×102)
(×102)
illness (ILI)
Non-linear models
LSTM
323.86
44.24
5.41
LSTM+LDA topics
303.24
53.62
5.89
LSTM+word2vec embeddings
374.72
90.32
7.01
LSTM+doc2vec embeddings
378.53
141.38
6.00
Our method (REN)
306.50
42.54
5.05
The RMSE for malaria and dengue corresponds to total cases whereas for ILI, it is cases per 100,000 population. Incor-
porating event embeddings helps improve the performance, whereas general-purpose embeddings can worsen the forecast
accuracy due to overfitting. Our proposed method reduces the forecast error by about 200 cases for dengue, and 0.36 cases
per 100,000 population for ILI, which corresponds to 3600 cases assuming a population size of 1 billion, over the best
benchmark.
Supplementary References
Bird S, Klein E, Loper E (2009) Natural language processing with Python: analyzing text with the natural
language toolkit (” O’Reilly Media, Inc.”).
Blei DM, Ng AY, Jordan MI (2003) Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Research
3:993–1022.
Ekbal A, Haque R, Bandyopadhyay S (2008) Named entity recognition in bengali: A conditional random field
approach. Proceedings of the Third International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing:
Volume-II.
Freifeld CC, Mandl KD, Reis BY, Brownstein JS (2008) Healthmap: global infectious disease monitor-
ing through automated classification and visualization of internet media reports. Journal of AMIA
15(2):150–157.
Ginsberg J, Mohebbi MH, Patel RS, Brammer L, Smolinski MS, Brilliant L (2009) Detecting influenza
epidemics using search engine query data. Nature 457(7232):1012–1014.
Krishnan V, Manning CD (2006) An effective two-stage model for exploiting non-local dependencies in
named entity recognition. Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics and the 44th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 1121–1128, ACL-44
(Association for Computational Linguistics).
Li Z, Wang B, Li M, Ma WY (2005) A probabilistic model for retrospective news event detection. Proceedings
of the 28th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information
retrieval, 106–113.
ˇReh˚uˇrek R, Sojka P (2010) Software Framework for Topic Modelling with Large Corpora. Proceedings of the
LREC 2010 Workshop on New Challenges for NLP Frameworks, 45–50 (ELRA).
Sundheim BM (1993) Tipster/muc-5: information extraction system evaluation. Proceedings of the 5th Con-
ference on Message Understanding, 27–44 (Association for Computational Linguistics).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4716473