TITLE: Should We All Work in Sprints? How Agile Project Management Improves Performance
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2022.1091
---

Should We All Work in Sprints? How Agile Project
Management Improves Performance
Working Paper, Technical University Munich, July 15th 2020
Tobias Lieberum,a Sebastian Schiﬀels,a Rainer Kolischa
aTUM School of Management, Technical University Munich, 80333 Munich, Germany, Tobias.Lieberum@tum.de,
Sebastian.Schiﬀels@tum.de, Rainer.Kolisch@tum.de
Abstract. Problem deﬁnition: This article explores how agile project management impacts project per-
formance and execution. We compare the eﬀects of agile sprints—short-term project phases characterized
by time-boxed progression from one sprint to the next and self-imposed, phase-speciﬁc output goals—with
those of traditional project management. Academic/practical relevance: Agile project management, in
particular Scrum, is ﬁnding increasing use in practice, despite scant scientiﬁc validation. Methodology: We
decompose the two sprint elements of time-boxed progression and self-imposed, phase-speciﬁc output goals
as factors in a 2×2 experimental design. We then conceptualize project execution as a simple real-eﬀort
task and conduct a controlled laboratory study. Results: We show that for a given duration, participants
perform better with time-boxed progression, as without it, i.e. with ﬂexible progression, they spend too
much time on early project phases at the expense of later ones. We refer to this eﬀect as “Progression
Fallacy” and show how it diﬀers from other well-known behavioral eﬀects that cause project delays. Intro-
ducing self-imposed, phase-speciﬁc output goals in combination with time-boxed progression, as proposed
by Scrum, does not signiﬁcantly improve performance compared to time-boxed progression alone. However,
the combination of self-imposed, phase-speciﬁc output goals and ﬂexible progression, as is common in tradi-
tional project management, ampliﬁes the Progression Fallacy, with the result that goal-setting has a negative
performance eﬀect. Managerial implications: This study contributes strong scientiﬁc evidence of higher
project performance when working in agile sprints, which mitigate behavioral ﬂaws present in traditional
project management. Not only do these behavioral insights apply to project management, but they are also
relevant in the broader context of task completion.
Key words : agile project management; Scrum; sprints; goal-setting; behavioral operations
1
Please contact the authors to receive a copy of the working paper