TITLE: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2021.1016
---

Citation for published version:
KeshvariFard, M, Ljubic, I & Papier, F 2021, 'Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations',
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, vol. 24, no. 3. https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2021.1016
DOI:
10.1287/msom.2021.1016
Publication date:
2021
Document Version
Peer reviewed version
Link to publication
University of Bath
Alternative formats
If you require this document in an alternative format, please contact:
openaccess@bath.ac.uk
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
Download date: 13. Jun. 2026

MANUFACTURING & SERVICE OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT
Vol. 00, No. 0, Xxxxx 0000, pp. 000–000
issn 1523-4614|eissn 1526-5498|00|0000|0001
INFORMS
doi 10.1287/xxxx.0000.0000
© 0000 INFORMS
Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Milad Keshvari Fard
Newcastle University Business School, NE1-4SE Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. milad.keshvarifard@newcastle.ac.uk
Ivana Ljubi´c
Decision Science, ESSEC Business School, 95021 Cergy, France. ivana.ljubic@essec.edu
Felix Papier
Operations Management, ESSEC Business School, 95021 Cergy, France. papier@essec.edu
Problem deﬁnition: International humanitarian organizations (IHOs) prepare a detailed annual allocation
plan for operations that will be conducted in the countries they serve. The annual plan is strongly a↵ected
by the available ﬁnancial budget. The budget of IHOs is derived from donations, which are typically limited,
uncertain, and to a large extent earmarked for speciﬁc countries or programs. These factors, together with
the speciﬁc utility function of IHOs, render budgeting for IHOs a challenging managerial problem. In this
paper, we develop an approach to optimize budget allocation plans for each country of operations.
Academic relevance: The current research provides a better understanding of the budgeting problem in
IHOs, given the increasing interest of the operations management community for nonproﬁt operations.
Methodology: We model the problem as a two-stage stochastic optimization model with a concave utility
function, and identify a number of analytical properties for the problem. We develop an eﬃcient generalized
Benders decomposition algorithm as well as a fast heuristic.
Results: Using data from the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), our results indicate 21.3%
improvement in the IHO’s utility by adopting stochastic programming instead of the expected value solution.
Moreover, our solution approach is computationally more eﬃcient than other approaches.
Managerial insights: Our analysis highlights the importance of nonearmarked donations for the overall
performance of IHOs. We also ﬁnd that putting pressure on IHOs to fulﬁll the targeted missions (e.g.,
by donors or media) results in a lower beneﬁciaries’ welfare. Moreover, the IHOs beneﬁt from negative
correlation among donations. Finally, our ﬁndings indicate that if donors allow the IHO to allocate unused
earmarked donations to other delegations, the performance of IHO improves signiﬁcantly.
Keywords: International humanitarian organization; Earmarked donations; Budgeting; Nonlinear stochastic
programming; Generalized Benders decomposition.
1

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
2
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
1.
Introduction
International humanitarian organizations (IHOs) operate worldwide to run relief operations and
development programs. Typically, IHOs have headquarters (HQ) that are responsible for strategic
planning and budgeting decisions as well as a number of national delegations that coordinate
activities within each country of operation.
In this paper, we study the problem of budgeting in an IHO that is prepared at the HQ level, given
the speciﬁc characteristics of budget and operations in the humanitarian sector. At the beginning
of each year, an IHO typically makes annual plans regarding its operations in each country based
on factors such as the humanitarian needs, the ability of the organization to deliver aid, and a
realistic assessment of what can actually be implemented. The result is a detailed plan breaking
down the required budget based on the country, operations, targeted population, and other factors.
However, unlike corporate supply chains (which are ﬁnanced by revenues from ongoing operations)
and entrepreneurial ventures (which are ﬁnanced from private and corporate venture capital), IHOs
typically ﬁnance their operations from donations. Relying on donations is challenging, because
of the typical lack of suﬃcient donations, the uncertainties in both the amount and timing of
donations, and the fact that part of the ﬁnancial donations are typically earmarked to speciﬁc
regions or programs (Van Wassenhove 2006). For example, the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) allows its donors to earmark their donations to a speciﬁc country, region, or
operation of their choice.
Budget earmarking is one of the main sources of complexity in IHOs. According to Eichenauer
and Reinsberg (2017), the amount of bilateral and earmarked aid (both to the NGOs and mul-
tilateral agencies) that was donated by OECD members from 1990 to 2012 has increased from
USD 50 billion to almost USD 120 billion, while their nonearmarked donations to the multilateral
agencies remained almost unchanged in the same period (USD 20 billion). The share of nonear-
marked donations received by ICRC has decreased from 29% to 22% between 2012 and 2017. Such
an increasing trend in the amount of earmarked donations can be a serious challenge to IHOs and
has negative impact on humanitarian operations. However, since it reduces the fundraising costs
of the IHO (Toyasaki and Wakolbinger 2014) and provides a higher control over the donations

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
3
by donors, budget earmarking has become inevitable and is pursued by both sides. But donors’
preferences over the aid recipient destinations may not always match with the IHO’s priorities. For
instance, none of the ﬁve poorest countries in terms of GDP per capita were among the top ten
recipients of bilateral aid from the US or the UK. The same situation holds with the multilateral
aid (Malik 2018). Collier and Dollar (2002) estimate that an eﬃcient reallocation of current aid
among recipient countries would have a similar impact on poverty reduction as tripling aid budgets
under the existing aid allocation. These ﬁndings highlight that the nonearmarked budget plays a
vital role, as it allows decision makers to ﬁnance underfunded delegations.
The main objective of an IHO is to minimize humanitarian su↵ering and to bring welfare to
the a↵ected communities (Holgu´ın-Veras et al. 2013). On the other hand, the range of activities
undertaken by the IHOs in one country can consist of a diverse set of missions. For example, the
World Health Organization (WHO) performs operations in di↵erent areas, such as HIV, maternal
and child health, water sanitation hygiene, mental health, and vaccination in the same country.
Each of these programs represents di↵erent impacts on the welfare of the beneﬁciaries, and investing
one dollar of budget in some programs leads to a higher impact on the beneﬁciaries’ welfare than
the others (Keshvari Fard et al. 2019). Given a limited budget, IHOs try to fulﬁll the missions with
the highest impact on the welfare of the society. Therefore, the marginal value of each dollar of
donations spent in a country decreases in terms of the resulting beneﬁciaries’ welfare.
Looking at the problem from a larger scale, di↵erent delegations may not pose the same level of
priority to an IHO. The overall population, ongoing civil wars, higher possibility of natural disasters
or outbreaks of contagious diseases, the availability of the infrastructure, the education level and
the overall welfare of the society, and media coverage are factors that can result in the greater focus
of the IHO’s leadership on speciﬁc countries and regions. The average cost of operations in di↵erent
countries, i.e., landed cost, is also not the same. Several factors such as the logistics performance
index (LPI), the geographical situation of the country, the distance from warehouses and suppliers,
the work conditions, the purchasing power parity, and the availability of skills among the local
population also determine the impact of one dollar of donations.
Last but not the least, the amount of future donations depends on the IHO’s performance (Hyn-
dman and McDonnell 2009); thus, the budget plans and targeted programs should not be overly

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
4
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
ambitious such that they cannot be met. Having a low implementation rate (the ratio of the expen-
ditures to the initial budget plans) could have a negative impact on the reputation and credibility
of the IHO and subsequently direct donors to other organizations in the future. Therefore, IHOs
try to be realistic and precise in their targets. For example, the average implementation rate of the
ICRC from 2012 to 2016 exceeded 91%.
Our contribution We model the budgeting problem as a two-stage nonlinear stochastic program
with recourse. We develop an eﬃcient generalized Benders decomposition (GBD) algorithm that
outperforms other alternative solutions, namely, the extensive form, and the GBD algorithm where
its subproblems are solved by a general-purpose nonlinear solver. We also develop a simple heuristic
approach that provides budgeting solutions with small optimality gaps in a short computing time.
Both approaches outperform the expected value solution by a large margin, highlighting the need
for a stochastic formulation of the problem. We also develop two extensions of the main model; in
Section 6, we consider the situation in which the distribution of donations depends on the budget
targets, and in Appendix B, we study the possibility of budget adjustments during the year. To
evaluate our model, we conduct numerical experiments based on data provided by the International
Committee of the Red Cross between 2012 and 2017.
We present several interesting results that could help decision makers in humanitarian orga-
nizations. We show that the contribution of nonearmarked donations in the utility of the IHO
and welfare of beneﬁciaries is higher than that of the earmarked donations, and this contribution
disparity is more signiﬁcant for larger IHOs. In our experiments, increasing the 22% share of non-
earmarked donations to 50% of total donations leads to an increases of 19.9% of the welfare of
beneﬁciaries.
We also ﬁnd that the more pressure the public and donors put on the IHO to meet its speciﬁed
objectives or the more diverse operations in a delegation are, the smaller are the optimal targets
and the more the welfare of the beneﬁciaries is reduced. In our experiments, a 50% increase of the
penalty factor on unmet targets leads to a 3.3% reduction in budget targets.
Finally, we propose a donation scheme in which donors can earmark their donations for a delega-
tion of their choice; however, they approve that their donation can be allocated to other countries

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
5
if all the planned operations in their chosen country are fulﬁlled. Our results indicate that such
scheme can signiﬁcantly enhance the utility of IHOs.
Our work contributes to the current literature in three di↵erent ways. First, our paper extends
existing research on budgeting in IHOs, because our model combines in a new way donation
uncertainty with earmarking and with the concave utility functions of delegations. Second, we
develop a model of budget allocation for which we derive managerial insights that help decision
makers in IHOs to better plan for the operations to implement. Third, from a technical point of
view, we develop an eﬃcient GBD algorithm based on a problem-tailored procedure for derivation
of Benders cuts as well as a fast heuristic to derive IHO’s budgeting decisions.
2.
Literature review
Financial donations to nonproﬁt organizations (NPOs) have been subject of several studies from
various disciplines (in this section, we use for precision the general term NPO). Several topics, such
as determinants of the amount of donations collected by an NPO (Okten and Weisbrod 2000) or the
timing of receiving donations (Petrovits 2006), or the so-called crowding-out mechanism between
donations of the government and private sector (Ribar and Wilhelm 2002), have received consider-
able attention in the literature. In the following, we focus on studies that consider the problem from
an operational perspective. For a comprehensive review on challenges faced by NPOs, including
budget management, please refer to Anheier and Ben-Ner (2003), Tomasini and Van Wassenhove
(2009), Berenguer and Shen (2019), and Besiou and Van Wassenhove (2020).
Several research have considered the impact of budget uncertainty on the performance of an
NPO. Natarajan and Swaminathan (2014) analyze the impact of uncertainty in the timing of
receiving the pledged donations and conclude that the front-loading has a considerable impact on
the performance of the NPO. They also show that the beneﬁts of front-loading are signiﬁcantly
lower for products with a low critical ratio. Aﬂaki and Pedraza-Martinez (2016) show that increas-
ing nonearmarked donations can mitigate the impact of donation uncertainty and improve the
NPO’s operational eﬃciency. Devalkar et al. (2017) argues that when a proportion of donors only
contribute after the delivery of results, the NPO can use an ex-post funding scheme to reduce
the impact of budget uncertainty. Keshvari Fard et al. (2019) show that under a higher budget
uncertainty, the deprivation cost increases, while the ﬂeet utilization rate decreases.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
6
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
Considering the impact of earmarking, Jahre and Heigh (2008) ﬁnd that earmarked funding could
impair postponement strategies, which are vital for relief operations. Wakolbinger et al. (2011) state
that not only the total amount of funds but also speed and timing, ﬂexibility, predictability and
ﬂuctuation of funds impact the value of funds from the perspective of an NPO. Pedraza-Martinez
and Van Wassenhove (2013) ﬁnd that incentive issues resulting from earmarked funding increase the
operating cost of vehicles in humanitarian operations, because earmarked funding creates incentive
misalignment between the NPO’s headquarters and the ﬁeld oﬃces. Besiou et al. (2014) show
that earmarked funding decreases the performance of NPOs during disasters, especially if decision
making on the vehicle procurement is decentralized. Toyasaki and Wakolbinger (2014) ﬁnd that
although allowing for earmarked donations decreases the fundraising costs and usually results in
higher total donations collected, it restricts the eﬃciency of the NPOs. Bhattacharya et al. (2014)
show that even collaboration of di↵erent programs in sharing their resources does not necessarily
eliminate the ineﬃciencies associated with earmarked funding.
Accepting earmarked funding as inevitable, a number of studies have designed mechanisms to
improve the operations when donors can earmark their donations. Toyasaki and Wakolbinger (2014)
consider the reputation of the NPO as well as the media coverage on a disaster the determining
factors for the NPOs when deciding upon their fundraising strategies. They conclude that well-
known NPOs should be careful about accepting earmarked donations. Bhattacharya et al. (2014)
study the reallocation of earmarked funding between the NPO’s programs and show that allowing
aid programs the ﬂexibility of transferring primary resources improves the eﬃciency of the system.
Other studies have shown that lack of coordination among donors, and higher fragmentation of
donations, donors and aid channels lead to higher transaction costs and lower operational eﬃciency
of an NPO (Buse and Walt 1996, Acharya et al. 2006, Berenguer et al. 2016).
Finally, several research contributions propose measures to increase the amount of donations,
e.g., announcing the past contributions of other donors (Varian 1994), using a publicized and
tiered fundraising scheme (McCardle et al. 2009), dynamically allocating assets between revenue
generating activities and nonproﬁt operations (De Vericourt and Lobo 2009), allowing donors to
audit and penalize NPOs (Privett and Erhun 2011), and using ex-post funding scheme which allows
donors to contribute only after the delivery of NPO’s projects (Devalkar et al. 2017).

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
7
Simpler variants of our model have been studied in the literature. If the utility functions of the
delegations were strictly linear, the model would be equivalent to the multiproduct newsvendor
problem with uncertain budget and could be solved by the method proposed in Bansal and Dyer
(2017). If the budget constraint were also deterministic, the model would further simplify to the
well-known multiple newsvendor problem (see, e.g., Erlebacher (2000)). Finally, nonlinear utility
functions for a single newsvendor have been studied by Halman et al. (2012).
3.
Model Description and Analytical Results
In this section, we describe the model and provide some analytical insights into the optimal solution.
3.1.
Model Description
Consider an IHO that runs operations in n delegations. Let I = {1,...,n} be the index set of
all delegations. At the beginning of the year, the HQ decides upon the level of operations to be
done in each delegation i 2 I, and consequently the required budget target for this delegation,
denoted by xi. To ﬁnance this target, the HQ ﬁrst relies on the donations earmarked for that
delegation, which are referred to as ⇠i ≥0, for each i 2 I. The value of ⇠i is not known at the
time of planning; however, the IHO knows its distribution. We denote the marginal probability
distribution function of ⇠i by Bi(⇠i) and the marginal cumulative distribution function by Bi(⇠i).
The donation distributions Bi(⇠i) are independent of targets xi. In Section 6 we also investigate a
setting in which the distribution Bi(⇠i) depends on xi. Note that we do not make any assumption
about the correlation among the donation distributions.
If the amount of earmarked donations received for the delegation i is not suﬃcient to cover all
the planned missions, the HQ may allocate part of the nonearmarked budget to the delegation,
denoted by yi. We denote the part of the nonearmarked donations that can be distributed among
delegations, e.g., after deducting the HQ’s budget, by ⇠ne ≥0 and its density function by Bne(⇠ne).
For simplicity, we assume that the decision regarding the allocation of nonearmarked budget
among the delegations is taken at the end of the year, although technically, the money could be
transferred to the delegations in one or more payments at any time of the year, based on the needs
of the delegations. For example if the earmarked donations for delegation i are mainly back-loaded,
the HQ may allocate some nonearmarked budget to the delegation and receive it back in the future

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
8
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
when the earmarked donations for that delegation arrive. Such an assumption especially ﬁts with
the reality when the arrival of the donations mainly follows a front-loaded pattern, i.e., the majority
of the donations arrive early in the period (Natarajan and Swaminathan 2014).
At the beginning of the period, the IHO decides on the budget targets, with the knowledge of
the distribution of donations. During the period, the delegations receive the earmarked donations,
which are usually immediately available to be allocated to di↵erent missions. At the end of the
period, given the declared budget targets and the donations received during the period, the IHO
ﬁnalizes the allocation of the nonearmarked donations, such that the utility is maximized. In
Appendix B, we also develop a model in which the IHO can revise its targets during the year.
Note that we only consider two types of donations in this research: earmarked for a delegation,
or nonearmarked at all. In reality, however, donors may be given more options to earmark their
donations (e.g., earmarking the donation for a program or for a program in a speciﬁc country).
Nonetheless, reducing the donation patterns to these two schemes is not conﬁning, since most of
the donations usually belong to one of the two categories considered in this paper. For example,
according to ICRC, from 2015 to 2016, on average 79% of the donations were either earmarked for
a country or not earmarked at all. Other earmarking schemes can be ﬁtted in the current model
with a good approximation.
We assume that even if ⇠i exceeds xi, the e↵ective budget that will be spent by delegation i is
xi. This assumption matches the practice of operations in IHOs because fulﬁlling extra missions
usually requires advance planning, extra skills, operational assets, coordination, human resources,
and other acticities, and receiving extra budget late in the year usually does not trigger additional
operations; instead, the additional budget can be saved for the next year. Therefore, the total
e↵ective budget that contributes to the welfare of the beneﬁciaries in delegation i is identiﬁed as
↵i = min{xi,⇠i + yi}.
We consider fi(↵i) to be the resulting beneﬁciaries’ welfare from spending a budget of ↵i in
delegation i. We assume fi,i 2 I to be strictly increasing, concave, and twice di↵erentiable, i.e.,
allocating extra budget results in fulﬁlling additional missions and therefore higher welfare for the
beneﬁciaries; however, the marginal impact of these additional missions on the beneﬁciaries’ welfare

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
9
is decreasing. If the allocated budget to delegation i, ⇠i+yi, is less than xi, the IHO fails to fulﬁll the
planned missions, which brings disutility for the IHO. This disutility can be modeled as a function
of the budget shortage for delegation i 2 I, deﬁned as [xi −⇠i −yi]+, where [x]+ = max{0,x}. We
refer to this disutility as gi([xi −⇠i −yi]+), which can be simpliﬁed to gi(xi −↵i). Since gi is a
loss function, it should be increasing and convex in its argument. For simplicity, in this paper we
assume that gi is linear for all i 2 I, i.e., gi(.) = ag
i [.]+, ag
i ≥0, even though our GBD method and
most of our analytical ﬁndings also apply to convex, nonlinear gi functions. Finally, we refer to the
net utility for delegation i, given xi, yi and ⇠i as the following:
ui(xi,⇠i,yi) = fi(min{xi,⇠i + yi}) −gi([xi −⇠i −yi]+),
i 2 I.
Hence, the overall goal of the IHO is to decide the target values of xi ≥0, i 2 I, so that the sum
of the expected net utilities over all delegations is maximized. Referring to the budget targets as
x = [x1,x2,...,xn], the donations received by the IHO as ⇠= [⇠1,⇠2,...,⇠n,⇠ne] and the allocation
of the nonearmarked budget to di↵erent delegations as y = [y1,y2,...,yn], we can formulate the
budget allocation problem as the following two-stage stochastic problem:
Stage 1:
max
x≥0 Q(x) = E ˜⇠[Q(x,⇠)]
(1)
Stage 2:
Q(x,⇠) = max
y≥0 U(x,⇠,y)
s.t.
n
X
i=1
yi ⇠ne,
where ⇠refers to the vector of random variables modeling uncertain donations, and U(x,⇠,y) =
Pn
i=1 ui(xi,⇠i,yi) calculates the overall utility under budget targets of x, observed donations of ⇠,
and allocation of nonearmarked donations of y. Q(x,⇠) is called the recourse function and refers
to the maximum possible utility for a given x and ⇠, and ﬁnally Q(x) is the expected overall utility
that the IHO can obtain under a given x.
Lemma 1 identiﬁes the behavior of the allocation decisions in optimality. All proofs and additional
technical results are contained in the Supplementary Appendix, which is available online at https:
//papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3464619.
Lemma 1. Given x and ⇠, for the optimal allocation decisions, y⇤, we have y⇤
i [xi −⇠i]+, for
all i 2 I.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
10
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
Given Lemma 1, we propose a simpliﬁed formulation of the recourse function Q(x,⇠), by adding
the constraints yi [xi −⇠i]+, i = {1,...,n} to the model which leads to the following:
Q(x,⇠) = max
y≥0 U(x,⇠,y) =max
y≥0
X
i2C(x,⇠)
[fi(⇠i + yi) −gi(xi −⇠i −yi)] +
X
i/2C(x,⇠)
fi(xi),
(2)
s.t.
yi xi −⇠i,
i 2 C(x,⇠)
X
i2C(x,⇠)
yi ⇠ne,
where C(x,⇠) = {i 2 I : xi ≥⇠i} refers to the set of delegations that can beneﬁt from the nonear-
marked donations, i.e., for which yi ≥0.
3.2.
Analytical insights into the optimal solution
We begin by analyzing the role of earmarked donations. Proposition 1 compares the importance of
these donations to nonearmarked donations for the IHOs’ utility and the welfare of beneﬁciaries.
Proposition 1. Regarding the earmarked and nonearmarked donations, we have the following:
1.
@Q
@⇠ne
(x,⇠) ≥@Q
@⇠i
(x,⇠), for all i 2 I, and at any given point (x,⇠) ≥0.
2.
@Q
@⇠ne
is non decreasing in n.
3. With fi(↵i) = af
i (↵i)bf
i , af
i ≥0, and 0 < bf
i 1, @Q/@⇠i
@Q/@⇠ne
is non decreasing in af
i , bf
i and ag
i
for all i 2 I.
4. The contribution of nonearmarked donations to the IHO’s overall utility are higher than that
of earmarked donations.
Part 1 of the proposition states that the contribution of one dollar of nonearmarked donations to
the IHOs’ utility in the recourse function is higher than that of the earmarked donations, which is
intuitive because nonearmarked donations have less constraints on their use. Part 2 states that by
expanding the operations to a larger number of delegations, it becomes more important for the IHO
to receive more nonearmarked donations. Part 3 implies that while nonearmarked donations are
always preferred, for delegations with higher importance (larger af
i , e.g., higher urgency of missions,
larger population of beneﬁciaries), higher concentration of operations (larger bf
i ), or larger media
attention (larger ag
i ), earmarked donations have higher contributions than those for delegations
that do not meet these conditions. Part 4 extends the results to the overall IHO utility, Q(x⇤).

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
11
It is straightforward to show that Proposition 1 holds true if the IHO’s utility Pn
i=1 ui(xi,⇠i,yi)
is replaced with the overall beneﬁciaries’ welfare, Pn
i=1 fi(↵i). In other words, the aforementioned
advantages of earmarked donations are still valid even if the IHO focuses exclusively on the max-
imization of the beneﬁciaries’ welfare. Note that in such a case, there would be no ﬁnite solution
to the problem, and the IHO would set x = 1.
Next, we show how di↵erent schemes of implementing a more ﬂexible budget allocation a↵ect
the IHO utility. We deﬁne a partially relaxed earmarking scheme as the setting that allows the
IHO to re-allocate the surplus of funds for a delegation i, [⇠i −xi]+. In other words, donations
earmarked for i that exceed the target of delegation i can be allocated to other delegations. Let us
deﬁne Q0 as the recourse function of this scheme, which can be modeled by replacing the constraint
of the second stage in Model (1) with Pn
i=1 yi ⇠ne + Pn
i=1[⇠i −xi]+. We compare this scheme
against a full relaxation of the earmarking constraints, which we refer to as fully relaxed earmarking
scheme. Let us denote its recourse function by Q00. The scheme can be modeled by replacing the
non-negativity of yi with yi ≥−⇠i for all i, in Model (1). Corollary 1 shows the order of the IHO
utility under the di↵erent schemes.
Corollary 1.
Q(x⇤) max
x≥0 E˜⇠[Q0(x,⇠)] max
x≥0 E˜⇠[Q00(x,⇠)].
(3)
This ﬁnding highlights the importance of a partial earmarking scheme for an IHO, which we
analyze in detail in Section 6.
Proposition 2 analyzes the sensitivity of the budget target with respect to the model parameters.
Proposition 2. With fi(↵i) = af
i (↵i)bf
i , x⇤
i is non decreasing in af
i and bf
i and non increasing in
ag
i .
Proposition 2 implies that for delegations with higher importance and urgency of missions or
delegations with a less diverse (e.g., type, location, target groups) set of operations, a higher
budget target should be set. This is interesting, because it implies that delegations with more
diverse operations receive lower targets. On the other hand, if the penalty of target fulﬁllment for
a delegation is large, the IHO should act conservatively and set a lower budget target.
It is also straightforward to infer that in optimality, the overall beneﬁciaries’ welfare Pn
i=1 fi(↵i)
is decreasing in ag = [ag
1,...,ag
n]. In other words, with a lower pressure on the IHO to meet its
targets (e.g., by media), the contribution of the IHO to the society is higher.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
12
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
Even though the current research focuses on IHOs, the budgeting problem may exist in local
humanitarian organizations as well. Proposition 3 determines the budget target for a single dele-
gation (in which case all donations can be considered as earmarked).
Proposition 3. If n = 1 the optimal budget target x⇤is given by the following:
x⇤= B−1
✓
f 0(x)
f 0(x) + ag
◆
,
(4)
where f 0(x) is the derivative of f(x), B(.) is the cumulative distribution function of the earmarked
donations received by the humanitarian organization, and B−1(.) its inverse function.
Note that if function f is linear in its argument, then the solution of Proposition 3 reduces to
the well-known newsvendor solution.
4.
Solution Methods
In this section we propose three ways to approach the problem from a computational perspective.
The ﬁrst two methods are based on sampling a ﬁnite number of possible scenario realizations
and solving the underlying problem approximation. They provide exact solutions for the given
subset of scenarios. The ﬁrst one (cf. Section 4.1) is based on a deterministic reformulation of
the problem as a nonlinear program. Due to the size of the model and the nonlinearity of the
objective function, its application is limited to small problem inputs. However, this deterministic
reformulation provides theoretical foundation for deriving a much eﬃcient exact method, called the
generalized Benders decomposition approach, which we present in Section 4.2. The third method
(cf. Section 4.3) is a fast and eﬃcient heuristic procedure that exploits the cumulative distribution
function of earmarked donations and does not require scenario sampling. This heuristic can be
applied (complementary or alternatively to GBD) to large problem inputs to ﬁnd a high-quality
solution in short computing time.
4.1.
Deterministic Equivalent
In the Model (1), we assume that the donations can be modeled as a random vector ˜⇠with a
known probability distribution. To solve Model (1) using optimization techniques, we can assume
that ˜⇠has a ﬁnite number of possible realizations, called scenarios. In that case, the expectation
function can be written as the weighted sum of the recourse values over all possible realizations
for the value of ˜⇠. In case ˜⇠follows a continuous distribution, we have to discretize its elements.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
13
Consider a ﬁnite set K of di↵erent scenarios, with ⇠k being the kth realization of donations vector
⇠, with respective probability mass pk, for all k 2 K. In this case, Model (1) can be expressed by
its deterministic equivalent, which is a large nonlinear programming problem. The optimal value
of the deterministic equivalent is calculated as follows:
¯Q⇤= max
x≥0
X
k2K
pkQ(x,⇠k).
(5)
It is well-known that ¯Q⇤and the associated optimal solution, ¯x⇤, converge to the optimal value
Q(x⇤) and the optimal solution x⇤of the true problem maxx≥0 E˜⇠[Q(x,⇠)], respectively, as |K|!
1. Hereinafter, we refer to ¯x⇤and ¯Q⇤as the optimal solution and the optimal value of the
discretized problem, respectively.
For small n and |K|, we can write the deterministic equivalent of the problem and use one of
the o↵-the-shelf nonlinear programming solvers to obtain its optimal solution. Model (6) identiﬁes
the extensive form of the deterministic equivalent, in which, for each scenario k 2 K, we introduce
a second-stage variable yk. Furthermore, we also introduce variables ↵k
i to linearize the expression
min{xi,⇠k
i + yi}, for all i 2 I, k 2 K:
max
x,↵,y
¯Q(x,↵,y) =
X
k2K
pk
n
X
i=1
[fi(↵k
i ) −gi(xi −↵k
i )]
(6)
s.t.
↵k
i xi
k 2 K, i 2 I
↵k
i ⇠k
i + yk
i
k 2 K, i 2 I
n
X
i=1
yk
i ⇠k
ne
k 2 K
xi,yk
i ,↵k
i 2 R+
k 2 K, i 2 I
In this model, ¯Q(x,↵,y) denotes the objective function of the discretized problem, ⇠k
i represents
the kth realizations of ˜⇠i, yk
i is the allocation of ⇠k
ne to delegation i for realization k, and ↵k
i is the
e↵ective budget for delegation i under ⇠k.
Lemma 2. In Model (6), ¯Q(x,↵,y) is jointly concave in (x,↵,y).
Given Lemma 2, the global optimum can be found for Model (6). We note that the total number
of variables and constraints is O(n · |K|); hence, by increasing the number of delegations or the
number of scenarios, Model (6) easily becomes numerically intractable.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
14
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
4.2.
Generalized Benders Decomposition
To solve larger instances of the deterministic equivalent, we propose an eﬃcient decomposition
method, namely, a generalization of the L-Shaped technique for nonlinear problems, also known
as generalized Benders decomposition. In this paper, we design a problem-tailored GBD approach
that in contrast to the standard recipes from the literature, does not require a general-purpose
nonlinear solver for derivation of Benders cuts and uses a combinatorial procedure instead. For a
general introduction to the L-shaped method and (generalized) Benders decomposition, see, e.g.,
Benders (1962). Recent advances in Benders decomposition for solving mixed-integer (stochastic)
optimization problems are presented in Carøe and Tind (1998), Liu et al. (2009), Fischetti et al.
(2016, 2017). The concept has been extended to robust optimization (Takriti and Ahmed 2004).
For a given set of scenarios K, we project out second-stage decision variables (namely, y and
↵), and formulate the whole problem in the natural space of ﬁrst-stage variables x ≥0. Thereby,
we reduce the number of decision variables from O(n · |K|) to O(n + |K|). To this end, instead
of solving a compact but nonlinear optimization problem with a large number of variables and
constraints given by Model (6), we ﬁrst reformulate the deterministic equivalent using the value
function reformulation as follows:
max
X
k2K
pk✓k
(7)
✓k Q(x,⇠k),
k 2 K
(8)
x ≥0, ✓2 R|K|,
where ✓k refers to the underestimation of the overall utility under ⇠k. Due to the maximization of
the objective function, at optimality, equality is attained.
Since we are dealing with a problem with a complete recourse, the problem Q(x,⇠k) is well
deﬁned for any x ≥0 and any ⇠k. To obtain the Benders reformulation, we will replace constraints
(8) with a family of linear Benders optimality constraints. These cuts are separated on the ﬂy, in a
cutting plane fashion. The relaxed Benders master problem contains only a small fraction of these
cuts (at the beginning, it can be empty), and whenever an optimal solution (ˇx, ˇ✓) of the relaxed
master problem is found, its feasibility is validated by solving the Benders subproblem. The latter

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
15
consists of checking whether ✓k Q(ˇx,⇠k), for all k 2 K. If this is not the case, a violated Benders
cut is detected, inserted into the master problem, and the process is repeated until ✏-convergence
is achieved. We observe that in this process, we need to solve Benders subproblems for all |K|
realizations of ⇠. Given that the subproblems are nonlinear and require considerable computational
e↵orts, it is better to extract as much information as possible at each iteration by adding multiple
cuts each time the Benders subproblem is called. This leads to the multicut approach (see, e.g.,
Birge and Louveaux (2011), You and Grossmann (2013), Leitner et al. (2018)).
In the following, we provide a closed-form formula to calculate Benders optimality cuts for
any given solution of the master problem (ˇx, ˇ✓). We ﬁrst observe that the function Q(ˇx,⇠k) is
concave in x, that the Slater conditions hold and that the maximum is attained (cf. Lemma 3 in
the supplementary appendix). Let Q(ˇx,⇠k) denote the optimal solution value of the k-th Benders
subproblem, and let ˇyk be the corresponding optimal solution. If ˜✓k > Q(ˇx,⇠k), a violated Benders
cut for the k-th subproblem can be obtained by overestimating the value of Q(x,⇠k) by a supporting
hyperplane in ˇx as follows:
✓k Q(ˇx,⇠k) + λk(x −ˇx),
(9)
where λk denotes a supergradient of the concave function Q(x,⇠k) at point ˇx. Rather than hav-
ing these supergradients computed from a black-box nonlinear solver (using the tools of convex
optimization), Theorem 1 shows how to obtain the subgradients in a combinatorial fashion.
Deriving a Benders cut (9) requires solving a deterministic convex allocation problem, for which
there is a vast literature on solution methods (see, e.g., Patriksson (2008) for an overview). In our
implementation, due to the simplicity of our allocation model, we use a modiﬁed version of Zipkin
(1980)’s algorithm to ﬁnd the optimal solution for Q(ˇx,⇠k). Once this solution is attained, the
Benders cut can be derived according to the result shown below.
Theorem 1. Let ˇy denote the optimal solution of the convex allocation problem Q(ˇx,⇠k). Coeﬃ-
cients of the supergradient λk in the Benders optimality cut (9) can be calculated as follows:
λk
i =
8
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
:
−g0
i(ˇxi −⇠k
i −ˇyk
i ) + ˇµk
i ,
if
ˇxi ≥⇠k
i + ˇyk
i ,
f 0
i(ˇxi),
otherwise,
i 2 I,k 2 K
(10)

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
16
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
and ˇµk
i is computed as follows:
ˇµk
i =
8
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
:
@ui
@yi (ˇxi,⇠k
i , ˇyk
i ) −ˇµk
ne,
if ˇyk
i = ˇxi −⇠k
i ,
0,
otherwise,
i 2 I,k 2 K
(11)
and
ˇµk
ne =
8
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
:
@uj
@yj (ˇxi,⇠k
i , ˇyk
i ),
if 9 j such that 0 < ˇyk
j < ˇxj −⇠k
j ,
0,
otherwise.
k 2 K.
(12)
In short, we apply Lagrangian duality to derive formula (10), and then apply KKT conditions on
the kth recourse subproblem to calculate the optimal dual multipliers provided in (11)-(12). What
makes our result particularly interesting is the fact that Theorem 1 allows computing the values of
λk only using the optimal solutions of the subproblems, ˇyk. Using the concavity of U(x,⇠,y) in y
for any given x and ⇠(see Part 1 of Lemma 3 in the supplementary appendix), the subproblem of
Model (2) can be solved eﬃciently using the current literature on concave allocation problems. In
this way, we signiﬁcantly decrease the computational e↵ort by avoiding the use of generic nonlinear
solvers to obtain the values of ˇy and the associated dual multipliers. Our results in Section 5
provide computational evidence for this claim.
Initial upper bounds for ✓. To initialize the cutting plane procedure, it is crucial to start with
strong upper bounds for ✓k, k 2 K. Let UBk
✓denote this initial bound, which is added to the master
problem before any separation of cutting planes. For UBk
✓, we consider the utility obtained given
the perfect information under scenario k by solving the following optimization model. Note that
in case of perfect information, we would have xi = ⇠i + yi and therefore, gi(xi −↵i) = 0.
UBk
✓= max
y≥0
( n
X
i=1
fi(⇠k
i + yk
i ) :
n
X
i=1
yk
i = ⇠k
ne
)
.
(13)
Algorithmic details. To accelerate the convergence of the algorithm, we generate several
optimality cuts before starting the GBD method. To that purpose, we ﬁrst compute ¯xk =
arg maxx≥0 Q(x,⇠k) for each k, as the optimal solution under ⇠k and generate Benders cuts that
potentially cut o↵these points.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
17
Since a cut can be generated for any pair ¯xk and ⇠k0, for each k, k0 2 K, a total of |K|2 initial
cuts can be generated at this stage. However, to avoid overloading of the master problem with
a large number of cuts, for each ¯xk, we randomly select n possible realizations of ⇠and solve
the associated subproblem to obtain n · |K| initial optimality cuts. Given these cuts, we start the
Benders decomposition algorithm and continue until we reach ✏convergence, i.e., until we obtain
a solution (ˇx, ˇ✓) such that ˇ✓k −Q(ˇx, ˇ⇠k) ✏holds, for all k 2 K.
4.3.
Developing a fast heuristic
Although performing the generalized Benders decomposition under a well-designed SAA scheme
provides an optimal (or near-optimal) solution for Model (1), it may require considerable computa-
tional e↵ort, especially for larger values of n and |K|. Therefore, it is necessary to have an eﬃcient
heuristic that can ﬁnd high-quality solutions in a short amount of time.
To that purpose, we decompose the budget target for delegation i, xi, into two parts: x0
i, which
refers to the budget target solely from the earmarked donations for delegation i; and x00
i , which is
an additional budget target from taking the nonearmarked donations into account. If all elements
of ⇠are independent (i.e., there exists no correlation in the donors’ decision on earmarking for a
certain delegation or not earmarking at all), then according to Proposition 3, we can ﬁnd x0
i by
solving the following equation for each i:
Bi(x0
i) =
f 0
i(x0
i)
f 0
i(x0
i) + ag
i
.
(14)
To ﬁnd x00, we maximize the overall beneﬁciaries’ welfare, P
i fi(↵i), by optimally allocating the
expected value of nonearmarked donations, E(˜⇠ne), among n delegations, considering a previously
allocated vector of x0:
x00 = arg max
x00≥0
n
X
i=1
fi(x00
i + x0
i),
s.t.
n
X
i=1
x00
i = E(˜⇠ne).
(15)
The above function is concave in x00 and therefore can be solved easily. Given Equations (14) and
(15), one can compute the heuristic solution as xh = x0 + x00.
5.
Numerical experiments
In this section, we describe the data set and report on the results of the numerical computations.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
18
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
5.1.
Description of Data Set from ICRC
To evaluate our model under a valid range of parameters, we use ICRC’s annual reports to extract
required data. These are comprehensive reports from the activities of ICRC on di↵erent delegations
and are publicly available from its website. By the beginning of year 2018, ICRC operated on 57
main delegations (we skipped the New York delegation since it is ICRC’s delegation to the UN).
We focus on the data of the last six years, from 2012 to 2017, and interpolate missing values.
We used the same ratio of earmarked donations to total expenditure for estimating the donation
distributions of the delegations; this implies that for the year 2012, 29% of total expenditure was
from nonearmarked donations, while the rest is ﬁnanced from earmarked donations. This ratio
is 28%, 27%, 26%, 23% and 22% for years 2013 to 2017. We consequently compute the mean
and standard deviation for all earmarked and nonearmarked donations. We assume the mean
nonearmarked budget to be 22% of the total expected donations (the ratio of 2017). The standard
deviation is then easily computed using the coeﬃcient of variation, which we already found for
the nonearmarked donations. As in Okten and Weisbrod (2000), we assume that all donations,
whether earmarked or not, follow log-normal distributions. All budget values are given in million
Swiss franc (MCHF).
We assume that fi(.) = af
i (.)bf
i . To compute af
i , we assume that a delegation with more critical
missions accomplished in the last year would be of higher priority for the ICRC in the current
year. Therefore, we consider key performance metrics on 2017 that are reported by the ICRC for
each delegation. After rescaling the values of each metric, an expert from a Canadian foundation
assigned weight to each metric. The weighted sum of these values provides af
i for each country.
To compute bf
i , we look at the expenditure break down for each delegation in 2017 in ﬁve main
categories, protection, assistance, prevention, cooperation with national societies and general. We
assume that the more evenly the expenditures are divided among these areas, the more diverse
are the operations on that delegation, and therefore, bf
i should be smaller. Thus, we compute
maximum of the 5 expenditures
average of the 5 expenditures
for each country, followed by rescaling them between 0 and 1
by setting the largest value to 0.95. This will guarantee that all welfare functions are concave.
Alternatively, factor bf
i of each delegation i can be computed using the Herﬁndahl-Hirschman Index
(HHI) (Rhoades 1993) on the ﬁve main expenditures mentioned above and by rescaling the values.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
19
Finally, for ag
i , we consider the logarithm of the total population who live in the domain of the
delegation (using data from World Population Prospects 2017), as an indicator of awareness to
penalize the unsatisﬁed targets. We then rescale ag such that maxi ag
i = maxi af
i to make a balance
between the two factors.
The parameters for all 57 delegations are presented in Appendix A. For problems with n < 57
we use the ﬁrst n delegations with the highest targeted budget for 2018. In our data, the ﬁrst 30
delegations represent approx. 85-90% of the total spending; since n = 30 is a better representative
of an average IHO compared to n = 57, we use it for the majority of our numerical experiments.
5.2.
Computational Performance
To conduct our computations, we use MATLAB R2019a as well as Gurobi 9.0.2. We run the
computations in a system that consists of a 2.7 GHz Intel Core i7 processor with 16 GB of RAM
and a MacOS Catalina.
Computational eﬃciency and sample stability: To evaluate the computational eﬃciency
of the proposed new generalized Benders decomposition method presented in Section 4.2 and our
analytical ﬁndings in Theorem 1, we compare it with a GBD algorithm in which an o↵-the-shelf
nonlinear solver (MATLAB’s fmincon) is used to solve the subproblems and calculate dual variables.
We refer to the latter as GBD-g. We also report the computational performance of the extensive
form method (cf. Section 4.1) in Appendix E of the supplementary document; the latter scales very
poorly with the increasing size of n and |K|, and is up to three orders of magnitude slower than
GBD and up to two orders of magnitude slower than GBD-g.
Our results in Figure 1 indicate that for any n and |K|, the CPU time for GBD is several times
less than that of GBD-g. Therefore, using GBD (instead of GBD-g) allows for signiﬁcant savings
in computing time.
To evaluate the underlying scenario generating scheme and estimate the required sample size
for achieving good and stable solutions, we use two related quality measures, namely, in-sample
stability and out-of-sample stability (see, e.g., King and Wallace (2012), Ljubi´c et al. (2017)). We
refer to the supplementary appendix for more details. We also show the adequacy of samples of
size |K|= 500 for our computation, and thus, we use |K|= 500 for the following computations.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
20
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
20
30
40
50
57
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Computational time (s)
Figure 1
Comparison between GBD and GBD-g in terms of required CPU time.
Value of stochastic solution and other performance measures: We aim to answer the
following questions: (1) why the IHO should not simplify the budgeting problem by assuming a
deterministic (rather than a stochastic) model, (2) why the IHO should not simplify the budgeting
problem by assuming a linear (rather than a non-linear concave) objective function?, and (3) what
is the quality of solutions obtained by the heuristic proposed in Subsection 4.3?
To address these questions, we compare the IHO’s utility under di↵erent budgeting plans, where
each plan is obtained using a di↵erent modeling assumption. While the GBD method provides
IHO’s utility under our default setting (stochastic with non-linear objective), to achieve the maxi-
mum precision we replicate several iterations of GBD under Sample Average Approximation (SAA)
framework. Please refer to Appendix F in the online supplementary material for more informa-
tion about our SAA approach. |K0|= 4000 scenarios were used as the reference set in the SAA
approach. For a fair comparison, we also used the same K0 scenarios to evaluate the utilities of the
solutions obtained with other methods. The next proposition (whose results can be derived from,
e.g., Mangasarian and Rosen (1964)) helps to explore the ﬁrst question.
Proposition 4. Let ¯⇠= E(⇠) and ¯x be the optimal solution for maxx≥0 Q(x, ¯⇠). We have the
following:
E˜⇠[Q(¯x,⇠)]
|
{z
}
EEV
Q(x⇤) E˜⇠[max
x≥0 Q(x,⇠)]
|
{z
}
WS
Q(¯x, ¯⇠).
(16)
The value ¯x in Proposition 4 is usually referred to as the Expected Value (EV) solution. The ﬁrst
term in Equation (16) identiﬁes the Expected value of the EV solution (EEV). This is the maximum

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
21
Table 1
The expected utility obtained by GBD embedded in the SAA framework, its lower and upper bounds
(EV and WS respectively), the heuristic solution, and the expected value for a linear utility function.
EV
GBD
WS
Heuristic
Linear UF
n
utility
VSS
gap
utility
utility
EVPI [%]
utility
gap
utility
gap
10
14079
1745
12.4%
15824
18040
12.3%
15431
2.5%
14077
12.4%
20
15772
2576
16.3%
18347
20902
12.2%
17910
2.4%
15681
17.0%
30
16080
3200
19.9%
19280
21944
12.1%
18825
2.4%
16295
18.3%
40
16377
3433
21.0%
19810
22574
12.2%
19397
2.1%
16719
18.5%
50
16556
3592
21.7%
20148
22916
12.1%
19703
2.3%
16896
19.2%
57
16768
3567
21.3%
20335
23148
12.2%
19891
2.2%
16967
19.9%
utility that can be achieved by solving a deterministic instead of a stochastic problem, in which
the uncertain donations are replaced by their expected values. The larger the gap between EEV
and Q(x⇤), the more important it is to solve the stochastic problem. The value of the stochastic
solution (VSS) is deﬁned as V SS = Q(x⇤) −EEV , and is reported in Table 1 in its absolute and
relative terms. We observe that there is a signiﬁcant beneﬁt from considering donation uncertainty
in our model: the stochastic solution outperforms the EV solution by a large margin (i.e., the IHO
could loose up to 21.7% of its utility, on average, if the decision maker adopts a simpliﬁed modeling
by replacing the uncertain donations by their expected values).
If it was possible to predict in advance all uncertainties, one would achieve the maximum possible
utility, which provides a theoretical upper bound to Q(x⇤). Such obtained Wait and See (WS)
solution value corresponds to the third term in Equation (16), WS = E˜⇠[maxx≥0 Q(x,⇠)]. In Table
1 we report the utility of the WS solution, and we also compute the Expected Value of Perfect
Information (EVPI) [%], which is the relative loss of utility with respect to the value of WS due
to the lack of access to the perfect information, i.e., EV PI[%] = (WS −Q(x⇤))/WS ⇤100. As we
can observe from Table 1, the IHO looses around 12% of its utility, on average, due to the inability
to perfectly predict the donations.
To answer the second question regarding the impact of simplifying the concave utility function
with a linear function, we calculate the optimal solution, xL, for bf
i = 1 for all i, and its expected
utility E˜⇠[Q(xL,⇠)]. The latter value is reported in Table 1 in the column denoted by Linear
UF. Our results demonstrate that considering linear utility functions for the delegations results in
signiﬁcantly sub-optimal outcomes, with potential utility losses ranging between 12.4% and 19.9%
in our experiments, which are nearly as high as the losses incurred by the EV solution. We conclude

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
22
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
that it is important for the IHO to use a modeling approach that takes the concavity of the utility
function into account.
Finally, to answer the third question, Table 1 also reports the expected utility of the heuristic
solution, together with the relative gap between this value and the value of Q(x⇤). The obtained
results indicate that our heuristic approach provides solutions with small optimality gaps (ranging
between 2.1% and 2.5%) in a short time (0.22 seconds for n = 57). The required computational
time for GBD is about 16 minutes, and for GBD under the SAA framework is nearly 3 hours (with
n = 57 and |K|= 500). These results indicate that the heuristic can be successfully used for IHOs
with a large number of delegations without a signiﬁcant loss of the expected utility, when the exact
methods cannot handle the problem.
From Table 1, we can also see that the overall utility of the IHO does not increase signiﬁcantly
by expanding the operations into more countries (with less urgent missions). For example, by
accomplishing the operations in the ﬁrst 10 countries of the list in Table A.1, ICRC can achieve
78% of the utility that it can obtain by conducting operations in all of its delegations. Note that
while these 10 countries only represent 7.1% of the world’s population, they are engaged in the
worst humanitarian crises. Considering the costs of operating in new countries, this ﬁnding may
explain why the majority of the IHOs focus on a small number of countries.
5.3.
Sensitivity Analyses and Managerial Insights
In this subsection we present two sensitivity analyses concerning the impact of the degree of
earmarking and the impact of correlation among donations. For additional analyses of the impact
of the parameters of the utility functions and the impact of budget uncertainty please see the
supplementary appendix. The GBD method has been used to derive these sensitivity analyses.
Note that our numerical ﬁndings are speciﬁc to the data set that we used.
Impact of the degree of earmarking: To study the performance of the IHO under di↵erent
shares of the earmarked budget, we vary
E(⇠ne)
E(⇠ne) + P
i E(⇠i) from 5% to 80%.
In each scenario, we keep P
i E(⇠i)+ E(⇠ne) the same. We then proportionally change the means
and standard deviations of all elements of ⇠.
Figure 2 demonstrates the importance of nonearmarked donations on the performance of the
IHOs under di↵erent values of n. Figure 2a shows that by convincing more donors not to earmark

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
23
5 10
22
50
80
% Share of nonearmarked donations
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
Total budget targets (MCHF)
(a) Sum of budget targets
5 10
22
50
80
% Share of nonearmarked donations
1.5
2
2.5
Overall welfare of beneficiaries
104
(b) Overall welfare of beneﬁciaries
5 10
22
50
80
% Share of nonearmarked donations
1.5
2
2.5
Overall utility of the ICRC
104
(c) Overall utility of the IHO
Figure 2
The impact of the share of the nonearmarked donations on (a) budget targets, (b) beneﬁciaries’ welfare,
and (c) IHO’s utility.
their donations, the IHO would target signiﬁcantly larger plans, since the managers are now less
worried about fulﬁlling the targets. The improvement is especially sharp under smaller shares
of the nonearmarked budget. Higher budget targets would in turn lead to higher welfare of the
beneﬁciaries (Figure 2b). The latter, combined with a higher fulﬁllment of initial plans (due to
having more ﬂexibility in budget allocation), results in a higher overall utility for the IHO (Figure
2c). We can also see that larger IHOs beneﬁt more from a higher share of nonearmarked funding,
which is in line with our ﬁndings of Proposition 1.
We can observe a 15.7% increase in the total budget targets as well as a 65.3% improvement in
the overall welfare of beneﬁciaries when moving from a 5% share of the nonearmarked budget to
80% (for n = 30), indicating the beneﬁt of nonearmarked donations.
Impact of correlation among donations:
In some settings, donors for the n delegations
and the nonearmarked donations may be overlapping, and the delegations may be in competition
for donations, depending on the ongoing crises in the di↵erent countries. Some donors may also
hesitate between donating earmarked funds and nonearmarked funds to the IHO. These settings
lead to correlation in the donations.
We test the e↵ect of correlation in a numerical experiment, assuming correlation between the
delegations’ earmarked donations, ⇠i, and the nonearmarked donations, ⇠ne, and with di↵erent
earmarked donations being independent with respect to each other. For simplicity, we assume the
same correlation coeﬃcient ⇢for all i. The maximum possible correlation ⇢for n + 1 distributions
is ±|1/pn|.
The results of our experiments are shown in Figure 3 and indicate that the IHO beneﬁts from
negative correlation between earmarked and nonearmarked distributions, which is in line with

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
24
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
-0.3 
-0.21 -0.17
0 
0.17 0.21 
0.3 
1.55
1.6
1.65
1.7
1.75
1.8
1.85
1.9
1.95
2
2.05
Overall utility of the ICRC
104
(a) Overall utility of the IHO
-0.3 
-0.21 -0.17
0 
0.17 0.21 
0.3 
800
850
900
950
1000
1050
1100
1150
1200
1250
Total budget targets (MCHF)
(b) Sum of budget targets
Figure 3
The impact of negative and positive correlation between earmarked and nonearmarked donations on
(a) IHO’s utility and (b) the expected sum of budget targets.
expectations and prior research on allocation problems; see, for example, Netessine et al. (2002).
The e↵ect is the opposite in case of positive correlations. The results also relate to the ﬁndings
of Acharya et al. (2006) which emphasizes the necessity of coordination among donors to enhance
the aid eﬃciency.
We also observe from Figure 3 that negative correlation leads to higher targets and vice versa.
For example, for n = 30 delegations, the sum of targets increases by 1.9% when moving from zero
to the maximum negative correlation, while it decreases by 1.1% when moving to the maximum
positive correlation. In fact, negative correlation implies that whenever delegation i receives few
earmarked donations, the IHO is more likely to receive more nonearmarked donations and vice
versa. Consequently, the IHO is able to set a higher target and to fulﬁll the target either with
earmarked or with nonearmarked donations depending on the distributional outcome. An opposite
mechanism applies to settings with positive correlations. We also observed in our experiments
that correlation among donations does not signiﬁcantly a↵ect the optimality gap of our heuristic
solution.
6.
Extension to Target-Dependent Donations
In this section, we extend our model to a setting where the distribution of earmarked donations for
each delegation i depends on the target for that delegation, xi. This extension models situations in
which the IHO’s fundraising e↵orts are a↵ected by the target it has set and in which a high target

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
25
motivates donors to give more. The objective function of the extended model can be written as
follows:
max
x≥0 Q(x) = E ˜⇠|x[Q(x,⇠)].
(17)
This extension can be considered a Stackelberg game, in which the IHO decides ﬁrst about the
budget targets, anticipating the reaction of the donors, and the donors decide in a second step on
the donations as a function of the targets. In its generic form as presented in Equation (17), the
distribution of donations depends on the decision variables, and thus the resulting problem belongs
to the class of stochastic programming with decision-dependent uncertainty, which is fairly new in
the stochastic programming literature (Hellemo et al. 2018). In this model, Q(x) is not concave
in x, and thus, we cannot use standard convex optimization techniques to derive the optimal x. A
full investigation of this generic model would require a new research paper. Consequently, in this
paper, we propose a simple model and heuristic solution approach using the Nelder-Mead Simplex
algorithm to address the new problem. Details of the model and solution approach can be found
in Appendix C.
Next, we run numerical experiments to analyse the extended model. To that purpose, we assume
a linear relationship between the mean of the earmarked donations and the budget target for a
given delegation i, E(⇠i) = d ¯wi + exi, where ¯wi is the default mean of earmarked donations that
was extracted from ICRC data (cf. Table A.1), d ¯wi is the line’s intercept, and e represents the
slope. The slope can be interpreted as the donors’ sensitivity to budget targets, while the intercept
represents the minimum expected budget that the IHO can expect even with a zero target. For
simplicity, we assume common parameters d and e for all delegations. The coeﬃcient of variation
of each distribution remains the same as the one implied by Table A.1, and similar to Section 5,
we assume a Lognormal distribution for all donations. We also assume that ⇠ne is independent of
x. We use the heuristic approach presented in Appendix C for the computations.
Furthermore, we analyze the impact of partially and fully relaxed earmarking schemes that we
introduced in Section 3.2. The partially relaxed earmarking scheme is especially relevant under the
assumption of target-dependent donations, because it a↵ects the Stackelberg game between the
IHO and the donors. Note that Corollary 1 is still valid under the assumption of target dependent
donations, i.e., Q(x) maxx≥0 E˜⇠|˜x[Q0(x,⇠)] maxx≥0 E˜⇠|˜x[Q00(x,⇠)].

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
26
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Overall utility of the ICRC
104
(a) d = 0.25
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Overall utility of the ICRC
104
(b) d = 0.5
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Total Budget Targets (MCHF)
(c) d = 0.25
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Total Budget Targets (MCHF)
(d) d = 0.5
Figure 4
IHO utility and total budget targets as a function of slope e for di↵erent values of intercept d and for
di↵erent relaxation schemes (none, partial, full) with n = 30.
Figure 4 demonstrates the results. Concerning the relationship between the distribution of dona-
tions and budget targets, our results indicate that as the slope e, i.e., the donor sensitivity to call
for donations, increases, the IHO sets higher targets at a more aggressive rate (Figure 4c and 4d).
This implies a faster increase in the IHO’s utility (see Figures 4a and 4b). Our insights highlight
the importance of measures to increase the slope e, such as with the IHO’s fundraising e↵orts,
the visibility of the IHO and its missions to potential donors, and by obtaining donors’ trust in
the IHO’s credibility and capabilities. On the other hand, comparing Figure 4a with Figure 4b,
shows that increasing the intercept multiplier d may not be as beneﬁcial as increasing slope e for
the IHOs. In other words, investing on factors that impact the awareness of donors about IHO’s
missions could be more beneﬁcial than securing donations from additional sources.
Figures 4a and 4b also indicate that by using the partial earmarking scheme, the IHO can
obtain a utility close to the scheme with no earmarking constraints, performing signiﬁcantly (33%
in average over the test problems) better than under the original scheme with full earmarking
constraints. This e↵ect increases with increasing slope e, i.e., it becomes more important with
stronger dependency of donations on the targets, and also with increasing intercept d. The partially

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
27
relaxed earmarking scheme also leads the IHO to set targets that are signiﬁcantly higher than
those under the original scheme (see Figures 4c and 4d). This important ﬁnding implies that IHOs
should ask (and incentivize) donors to give permission to reallocate donations after targets are
fulﬁlled.
Indeed, many IHOs such as ICRC ask donors at the end of the year to allow for the reallocation or
return of earmarked donations that have not been spent. What we propose is to ask the permission
at the beginning of the year, which gives the IHO more ﬂexibility in setting targets and spending the
budget. Donations under this scheme have an eﬃciency close to that of non-earmarked donations,
and compared to earmarked donations, our scheme could be more attractive for donors, because
the IHO commits to fully meeting the targets of the speciﬁed use.
7.
Discussion and Conclusion
In this research, we study budgeting in international humanitarian organizations, which is primor-
dial to improve beneﬁciaries’ welfare. We model the problem as a nonlinear two-stage stochastic
program with recourse and develop an eﬃcient generalized Benders decomposition algorithm for
the problem that outperforms other alternatives in terms of computational eﬃciency. Our results
indicate a signiﬁcant improvement over the expected value solution (21.3% optimality gap for the
largest problem in our tests), which highlights the importance of taking the stochastic nature of
the problem into account. We also propose a heuristic approach that can ﬁnd close-to-optimal
solutions (2.2% optimality gap when considering all delegations), and can be easily adapted to
IHOs that run numerous delegations. We also developed two model extensions to consider budget
adjustments during the year and budgeting under target-dependent donations.
We derived a number of interesting managerial insights, both analytically and numerically. Our
study conﬁrms existing research that nonearmarked donations have a higher contribution on bene-
ﬁciaries’ welfare and IHOs’ performance, compared to the earmarked donations. The current trend
that donors earmark their donations forces the IHOs to set lower targets, resulting in beneﬁciaries
being worse o↵, ceteris paribus. With the analysis of our data set, we ﬁnd for example that if the
share of nonearmarked donations decreases from 22% to 5%, ICRC should set its budget targets
6.5% lower for the main 30 delegations (leading to a decrease of 16.0% of welfare).

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
28
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
We observed that large IHOs gain more from nonearmarked donations than smaller IHOs, for
which earmarked donations create more ineﬃciency. For example, an IHO with 30 delegations,
compared to one with 10 delegations, will experience a 7.9% greater increase in beneﬁciaries’ welfare
(19.9% vs 12%) from moving from 22% share of nonearmarked donations to a 50% share.
We showed that the more the donors are concerned about the fulﬁllment of targets for a given
delegation or the more diverse the operations in a delegation are, the lower the target that IHO
sets for that delegation, which in turn leads to less welfare for the beneﬁciaries. In our experiments,
a 50% increase of the penalty factor on unmet targets leads to a 3.3% reduction of budget targets
for the main 30 delegations. Therefore, interestingly, it is better for the donors not to be strict on
getting the IHO responsive for the targets it sets.
We also proposed a donation scheme that can signiﬁcantly improve IHO performance, by 33%
in our numerical experiments. Under this scheme, donations earmarked to a delegation can be
allocated to other delegations if the declared budget target for the delegation is met. Note that
the IHO can still beneﬁt from this scheme if only a fraction of the donors of earmarking donations
adopt it. Knowing the distribution of ﬂexible and nonﬂexible earmarked donations, our model can
be applied with few modiﬁcations to calculate the optimal targets.
We extended our model to the possibility to update budget targets during the year. We found
that this extension leads to, on average, higher targets than under the standard model. In addition,
an IHO may face unpredictable events during the year for some delegations, e.g., in case of disasters
or disease outbreaks. In such a case, when the situation arises, the IHO can use our model and
reoptimize the budget targets based on updated utility functions and donation distributions and
also taking into account the donations already received by the time of event. The solutions methods
that we proposed in this paper can be adapted to derive optimal solutions for the updated model
which are then implemented from the time of the event.
Our research can be further developed in a number of directions. First, empirical and analytical
studies are required to better understand the beneﬁciaries’ welfare function in the context of
humanitarian programs. Second, the concave utility function can be replaced with an S-shaped
scheme, given the marginal welfare resulting from initial investments. Third, the problem can be
extended to consider a dynamic setting with multiple time periods in which the distribution of
donations in future periods is a function of the IHO’s performance in previous years.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
29
Acknowledgement
We would like to thank Linda Romano from Development and Peace- Caritas Canada for her contribution
in the estimation of model parameters. We are also grateful to Prof. Luk Van Wassenhove, as well as the
anonymous associate editor and two referees whose many suggestions helped improve this study signiﬁcantly.
References
Acharya, A., De Lima, A. T. F., and Moore, M. (2006). Proliferation and fragmentation: Transactions costs
and the value of aid. The journal of development studies, 42(1):1–21.
Aﬂaki, A. and Pedraza-Martinez, A. J. (2016). Humanitarian funding in a multi-donor market with donation
uncertainty. Production and Operations Management, 25(7):1274–1291.
Anheier, H. K. and Ben-Ner, A. (2003). The study of nonproﬁt enterprise: Theories and approaches. Springer
Science & Business Media.
Bansal, S. and Dyer, J. S. (2017). Multivariate partial-expectation results for exact solutions of two-stage
problems. Operations Research, 65(6):1526–1534.
Benders, J. F. (1962).
Partitioning procedures for solving mixed-variables programming problems.
Numerische Mathematik, 4(1):238–252.
Berenguer, G., Iyer, A. V., and Yadav, P. (2016). Disentangling the eﬃciency drivers in country-level global
health programs: An empirical study. Journal of Operations Management, 45:30–43.
Berenguer, G. and Shen, Z.-J. (2019).
Challenges and strategies in managing nonproﬁt operations: An
operations management perspective. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 22(5):869–
1106.
Besiou, M., Pedraza-Martinez, A. J., and Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2014). Vehicle supply chains in humanitar-
ian operations: Decentralization, operational mix, and earmarked funding. Production and Operations
Management, 23(11):1950–1965.
Besiou, M. and Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2020). Humanitarian operations: A world of opportunity for relevant
and impactful research. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 22(1):135–145.
Bhattacharya, S., Hasija, S., and Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2014). Designing eﬃcient infrastructural investment
and asset transfer mechanisms in humanitarian supply chains. Production and Operations Management,
23(9):1511–1521.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
30
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
Birge, J. R. and Louveaux, F. (2011). Introduction to stochastic programming. Springer Science & Business
Media.
Buse, K. and Walt, G. (1996). Aid coordination for health sector reform: a conceptual framework for analysis
and assessment. Health Policy, 38(3):173–187.
Carøe, C. C. and Tind, J. (1998). L-shaped decomposition of two-stage stochastic programs with integer
recourse. Mathematical Programming, 83:451–464.
Collier, P. and Dollar, D. (2002).
Aid allocation and poverty reduction.
European economic review,
46(8):1475–1500.
De Vericourt, F. and Lobo, M. S. (2009).
Resource and revenue management in nonproﬁt operations.
Operations research, 57(5):1114–1128.
Devalkar, S. K., Sohoni, M. G., and Arora, P. (2017). Ex-post funding: How should a resource-constrained
non-proﬁt organization allocate its funds? Production and Operations Management, 26(6):1035–1055.
Eichenauer, V. Z. and Reinsberg, B. (2017). What determines earmarked funding to international develop-
ment organizations? Evidence from the new multi-bi aid data. Review of International Organizations,
12(2):171–197.
Erlebacher, S. J. (2000). Optimal and heuristic solutions for the multi-item newsvendor problem with a
single capacity constraint. Production and Operations Management, 9(3):303–318.
Fischetti, M., Ljubi´c, I., and Sinnl, M. (2016). Benders decomposition without separability: A computational
study for capacitated facility location problems. European Journal of Op. Research, 253(3):557–569.
Fischetti, M., Ljubi´c, I., and Sinnl, M. (2017). Redesigning Benders decomposition for large-scale facility
location. Management Science, 63(7):2146–2162.
Halman, N., Orlin, J. B., and Simchi-Levi, D. (2012). Approximating the nonlinear newsvendor and single-
item stochastic lot-sizing problems when data is given by an oracle. Operations Research, 60(2):429–446.
Hellemo, L., Barton, P. I., and Tomasgard, A. (2018). Decision-dependent probabilities in stochastic programs
with recourse. Computational Management Science, 15(3-4):369–395.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
31
Holgu´ın-Veras, J., P´erez, N., Jaller, M., Van Wassenhove, L. N., and Aros-Vera, F. (2013). On the appropriate
objective function for post-disaster humanitarian logistics models. Journal of Operations Management,
31(5):262–280.
Hyndman, N. and McDonnell, P. (2009). Governance and charities: An exploration of key themes and the
development of a research agenda. Financial Accountability & Management, 25(1):5–31.
Jahre, M. and Heigh, I. (2008). Does the current constraints in funding promote failure in humanitarian
supply chains? In Supply Chain Forum: An Intnl Journal, volume 9, pages 44–54. Taylor & Francis.
Keshvari Fard, M., Eftekhar, M., and Papier, F. (2019). A policy for managing operational assets to minimize
deprivation costs. Production and Operations Management, 28(8):2132–2151.
King, A. J. and Wallace, S. W. (2012). Modeling with Stochastic Programming. Springer.
Leitner, M., Ljubi´c, I., Luipersbeck, M., and Sinnl, M. (2018). Decomposition methods for the two-stage
stochastic Steiner tree problem. Computational Optimization and Applications, 69(3):713–752.
Liu, C., Fan, Y., and Ord´o˜nez, F. (2009). A two-stage stochastic programming model for transportation
network protection. Computers & Operations Research, 36(5):1582 – 1590.
Ljubi´c, I., Mutzel, P., and Zey, B. (2017).
Stochastic survivable network design problems: Theory and
practice. European Journal of Operational Research, 256(2):333–348.
Malik, K. (2018). As a system, foreign aid is a fraud and does nothing for inequality. The Guardian.
Mangasarian, O. and Rosen, J. (1964). Inequalities for stochastic nonlinear programming problems. Opera-
tions Research, 12(1):143–154.
McCardle, K. F., Rajaram, K., and Tang, C. S. (2009). A decision analysis tool for evaluating fundraising
tiers. Decision Analysis, 6(1):4–13.
Natarajan, K. V. and Swaminathan, J. M. (2014). Inventory Management in Humanitarian Operations:
Impact of Amount, Schedule, and Uncertainty in Funding. Manufacturing & Service Operations Man-
agement, pages 595–603.
Netessine, S., Dobson, G., and Shumsky, R. A. (2002). Flexible service capacity: Optimal investment and
the impact of demand correlation. Operations Research, 50(2):375–388.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
32
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
Okten, C. and Weisbrod, B. A. (2000). Determinants of donations in private nonproﬁt markets. Journal of
Public Economics, 75(2):255–272.
Patriksson, M. (2008). A survey on the continuous nonlinear resource allocation problem. European Journal
of Operational Research, 185(1):1–46.
Pedraza-Martinez, A. J. and Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2013).
Vehicle Replacement in the International
Committee of the Red Cross. Production and Operations Management, 22(2):365–376.
Petrovits, C. M. (2006). Corporate-sponsored foundations and earnings management. Journal of Accounting
and Economics, 41(3):335–362.
Privett, N. and Erhun, F. (2011). Eﬃcient funding: Auditing in the nonproﬁt sector. Manufacturing &
Service Operations Management, 13(4):471–488.
Rhoades, S. A. (1993). The herﬁndahl-hirschman index. Fed. Res. Bull., 79:188.
Ribar, D. C. and Wilhelm, M. O. (2002). Altruistic and joy-of-giving motivations in charitable behavior.
Journal of political Economy, 110(2):425–457.
Takriti, S. and Ahmed, S. (2004). On robust optimization of two-stage systems. Mathematical Programming,
99(1):109–126.
Tomasini, R. and Van Wassenhove, L. (2009). Humanitarian logistics. Springer.
Toyasaki, F. and Wakolbinger, T. (2014). Impacts of earmarked private donations for disaster fundraising.
Annals of Operations Research, 221(1):427–447.
Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2006). Humanitarian aid logistics: supply chain management in high gear. Journal
of the Operational research Society, 57(5):475–489.
Varian, H. R. (1994). Sequential contributions to public goods. Journal of Public Economics, 53(2):165–186.
Wakolbinger, T., Toyasaki, F., Christopher, M., and Tatham, P. (2011). Impacts of funding systems on
humanitarian operations. In Humanitarian logistics: meeting the challenge of preparing for and respond-
ing to disasters, pages 33–46. Kogan Page Limited London.
You, F. and Grossmann, I. E. (2013). Multicut benders decomposition algorithm for process supply chain
planning under uncertainty. Annals of Operations Research, 210(1):191–211.
Zipkin, P. H. (1980). Simple ranking methods for allocation of one resource. Mgmt Science, 26(1):34–43.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
1
Online appendix for Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Appendix A:
Parameters used for computations
Table A.1
Parameters used for computations
No Delegation
mean
std. dev.
earmarked earmarked
af
i
bf
i
ag
i
(MCHF)
(MCHF)
1
Syrian Arab Republic
138.651
41.447
30.592 0.950 51.509
2
Iraq
99.863
23.961
60.688 0.781 53.787
3
South Sudan
90.580
32.590
20.497 0.815 50.359
4
Yemen
60.760
16.679
60.794 0.809 52.852
5
Nigeria
74.427
30.195
36.592 0.828 58.738
6
Somalia
72.458
11.533
36.975 0.918 50.848
7
Congo, Democratic Republic of the 52.099
3.353
31.787 0.679 56.110
8
Afghanistan
58.580
4.168
65.066 0.742 53.558
9
Ukraine
41.389
20.574
13.826 0.790 54.232
10
Myanmar
30.796
9.744
21.976 0.682 54.812
11
Israel and the Occupied Territories
38.640
5.413
28.240 0.478 50.518
12
Central African Republic
33.697
9.374
4.971
0.815 47.300
13
Mali
31.270
4.648
14.881 0.792 51.555
14
Lebanon
34.189
11.518
13.492 0.784 48.121
15
Libya
26.176
6.373
12.667 0.774 48.266
16
Niger
24.317
6.995
11.601 0.839 52.008
17
Jordan
23.304
10.228
3.838
0.758 49.560
18
Colombia
22.298
1.287
10.716 0.494 54.553
19
Yaound´e (regional)
18.705
6.710
6.433
0.671 53.313
20
Mexico City (regional)
17.365
3.916
7.132
0.501 58.869
21
Bangladesh
10.892
3.368
12.650 0.693 58.282
22
Ethiopia
14.681
2.340
17.784 0.577 56.895
23
Philippines
13.527
11.718
10.506 0.536 56.894
24
Pakistan
12.932
3.352
29.959 0.573 58.835
25
Abidjan (regional)
8.086
1.280
6.573
0.375 56.465
26
Beijing (regional)
10.677
1.897
3.972
0.507 65.066
27
Sudan
6.869
8.980
10.448 0.337 53.964
28
Bangkok (regional)
10.233
0.557
6.050
0.401 58.680
29
Pretoria (regional)
6.452
2.002
0.971
0.509 57.360
30
Moscow (regional)
11.840
3.798
0.300
0.471 58.146
31
New Delhi (regional)
9.985
0.609
10.833 0.398 64.808
32
Chad
8.594
3.274
3.387
0.549 50.881
33
Burundi
7.772
2.222
10.716 0.543 49.908
34
Nairobi (regional)
9.876
1.925
10.616 0.347 56.982
35
Paris (regional)
8.169
2.252
2.397
0.583 59.543
36
Tashkent (regional)
9.864
0.617
2.494
0.463 55.684
37
Suva (regional)
6.937
1.239
2.094
0.329 53.916
38
Azerbaijan
7.620
1.178
1.257
0.578 49.599
39
Dakar (regional)
6.320
0.854
0.928
0.423 51.843
40
Brasilia (regional)
7.709
1.048
1.223
0.312 59.938
41
Sri Lanka
6.819
1.503
3.604
0.456 51.920
42
Washington (regional)
5.561
0.412
0.033
0.588 60.701
43
Georgia
5.747
0.777
5.643
0.534 46.762
44
Caracas (regional)
3.336
0.767
0.038
0.425 53.866
45
Kuala Lumpur (regional)
5.071
0.855
1.587
0.509 58.293
46
Kuwait (regional)
5.042
1.121
1.077
0.386 54.767
47
Tunis (regional)
4.430
0.568
2.645
0.462 50.236
48
Balkans (regional)
4.475
0.780
1.664
0.722 54.670
49
Iran
3.757
0.440
0.550
0.381 56.103
50
Rwanda
4.225
0.365
11.176 0.493 50.267
51
Lima (regional)
4.297
0.356
7.380
0.372 55.164
52
Uganda
3.186
0.433
7.348
0.516 54.136
53
Egypt
3.271
1.124
2.357
0.323 56.670
54
London
3.069
0.689
0.306
0.437 55.688
55
Armenia
2.588
0.470
0.265
0.408 45.872
56
Jakarta (regional)
3.473
0.336
3.980
0.626 59.718
57
Brussels
2.671
0.340
0.306
0.722 50.064

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
2
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
Appendix B:
Mid-Year adjustments of budget targets
In this subsection, we allow for an adjustment of targets during the planning period. This extension models
the situation in practice in which targets are updated during the year. For example, the ICRC annual report
2017 shows that 12 delegations out of 57 had budget amendments.
To study the impact of this ﬂexibility, we assume that the IHO has the possibility to modify the initial
plan once during the year, e.g., after 6 months, for some or all delegations. In other words, at the beginning
of the year the IHO determines the initial budget targets, x. Then, depending on donations received until
then, the IHO may decide to update the initial targets and we denote the updated targets by vector x. We
allow a maximum deviation of the updated targets from the initial targets of (1 −γi)xi xi (1 + γi)xi,
where 0 γi < 1 is a parameter of the maximum allowed deviation from the initial target of delegation i.
Note that we allow updating in both directions, that is, increasing and decreasing targets.
Let us denote the donations received in the ﬁrst and in the second half of the year by vectors ˙⇠and ¨⇠,
respectively. The problem can be written as a three-stage stochastic program as follows:
Stage 1:
max
x≥0 Q(x) = E˜˙⇠[Q1(x, ˙⇠)]
(B.1)
Stage 2:
Q1(x, ˙⇠) = max
x≥0 E˜¨⇠| ˙⇠[Q2(x, ˙⇠+ ¨⇠)]
s.t.
xi(1 −γi) xi xi(1 + γi),
8 i 2 I
Stage 3:
Q2(x, ˙⇠+ ¨⇠) = max
y≥0 U(x, ˙⇠+ ¨⇠,y)
s.t.
n
X
i=1
yi ˙⇠ne + ¨⇠ne
In the above model, the IHO ﬁrst decides upon x, knowing the distribution of donations in the ﬁrst and
second half of the year (Stage 1). Then, in the middle of the year, based on the observed donations from the
ﬁrst period, x is chosen to optimize Q1(x, ˙⇠, ¨⇠) (Stage 2). Finally, at the end of the year, the nonearmarked
donations are allocated to the di↵erent delegations in order to maximize the IHO’s overall utility, U(x, ˙⇠+ ¨⇠,y)
(Stage 3). A similar logic could be applied to further extend the model to multiple adjustments of the budget
targets.
In Model (B.1), if γi = 0 for all i and B(⇠) = B( ˙⇠+ ¨⇠), xi = xi, and the results will be the same as the
model that we presented in Section 3. As γi increases, the feasible space does not decrease, and thus, the
maximum IHO utility is non decreasing in γi.
Developing an eﬃcient solution method for this 3-stage model is out of the scope of this paper. We therefore
solve it using its extensive form. By discretizing the uncertainty into a limited number of scenarios, the model
can be written as follows:
max
x,x,↵,y
¯Q(x,x,↵,y) =
X
˙k2 ˙K
X
¨k2 ¨
K( ˙k)
p ˙kp¨k
n
X
i=1
[fi(↵
˙k¨k
i ) −gi(x
˙k
i −↵
˙k¨k
i )]
(B.2)
s.t.
x
˙k
i xi(1 + γi)
˙k 2 ˙K, i 2 I
xi(1 −γi) x
˙k
i
˙k 2 ˙K, i 2 I
↵
˙k¨k
i
x
˙k
i
˙k 2 ˙K, ¨k 2 ¨K(˙k), i 2 I

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
3
↵
˙k¨k
i
⇠
˙k
i + ⇠
¨k
i + y
˙k¨k
i
˙k 2 ˙K, ¨k 2 ¨K(˙k), i 2 I
n
X
i=1
y
˙k¨k
i
⇠
˙k
ne + ⇠
¨k
ne
˙k 2 ˙K, ¨k 2 ¨K(˙k)
xi,x
˙k
i ,y
˙k¨k
i ,↵
˙k¨k
i
2 R+
˙k 2 ˙K, ¨k 2 ¨K(˙k), i 2 I
In this model, ˙K represents the set of potential scenarios for donations in the ﬁrst period, while ¨K(˙k) is
the set of donation scenarios for the second period if donation ˙k is received in the ﬁrst period. This would
allow to model scenarios where donations in the two periods are dependent. p ˙k and p¨k are the probabilities
of ˙kth and ¨kth scenarios in ˙K and ¨K(˙k), x
˙k
i is the revised target for delegation i after observing ⇠
˙k, ↵
˙k¨k
i
and y
˙k¨k
i
are the budget spent by delegation i, and the nonearmarked budget allocated to delegation i under
realizations ˙k and ¨k, respectively. The objective function is concave, so the optimal value for x,↵and y can
be found.
Solving the above model is computationally intensive; hence, we can only compute the optimal solution
for the case of n = 2 and n = 3 delegations and with | ˙K|= | ¨K|= 25 (equivalent to 625 scenario combinations).
We assume that the deviation threshold is the same for all delegations, i.e., γi = γ for all i and that B( ˙⇠)
and B(¨⇠) are i.i.d. normal distributions such that E( ˙⇠) = E(¨⇠) = 0.5 E(⇠) and σ2( ˙⇠) = σ2(¨⇠) = 0.5 σ2(⇠).
Figure B.1 shows the numerical results for di↵erent values of γ. For n = 2 delegations, our ﬁndings indicate
that by increasing deviation threshold γ from 0 to 0.2, IHO utility increases by 8.9%, beneﬁciaries’ welfare
by 4.3%, with 2.8% higher ﬁnal budget targets x. For n = 3 delegations, we obtain 5.8% more IHO utility,
3.2% higher welfare with 3.2% greater ﬁnal targets.
It is interesting to note that the ﬂexibility to adjust leads to on average higher targets in our numerical
experiments. A possible explanation may be that the reduced variability at the time of adjustment requires
less protection against the penalty for unmet targets and hence allows for updating the targets upwards;
similar e↵ects have been observed before in the literature on allocation problems; see, e.g., Papier (2016).
0 
0.05
0.1 
0.15
0.2 
5500
6000
6500
7000
7500
Overall utility of the ICRC
(a) Overall utility of the IHO
0 
0.05
0.1 
0.15
0.2 
6000
6500
7000
7500
Overall welfare of beneficiaries
(b) Overall welfare of beneﬁciaries
0 
0.05
0.1 
0.15
0.2 
250
300
350
400
Expected sum revised targets
(c) Sum of budget targets
Figure B.1
The IHO utility, beneﬁciaries’ welfare, and ﬁnal targets when allowing updating budget targets in
the middle of the year for two di↵erent sets of delegations.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
4
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
Appendix C:
Numerical procedure for the target-dependent distribution of
donations
In this appendix we propose a simple procedure based on Nelder-Mead Simplex algorithm to solve generic
Model (17) presented in Section 6. By discretizing the donations, for any given x, Q(x) can be written as
follows:
¯
Q(x) = max
↵,y
X
k2Kx
"
P(⇠k|x)
n
X
i=1
[fi(↵k
i ) −gi(xi −↵k
i )]
#
(C.1)
↵k
i xi
k 2 Kx, i 2 I
↵k
i ⇠k
i + yk
i
k 2 Kx, i 2 I
n
X
i=1
yk
i ⇠k
ne,
k 2 Kx
where Kx is the discretized set of scenarios under budget target x. The model is feasible for any x ≥0, and
the feasible space is a convex set. The objective function is jointly concave in ↵and y; therefore, Model (C.1)
can be easily solved for any given x and Kx. However, because the probability distribution of donations
depends upon the target decisions,
¯
Q(x) is not concave in x (see, for example, Hellemo et al. (2018)), and
thus, we cannot use standard convex optimization techniques, such as the interior point method, to ﬁnd the
optimal value of x.
A strong optimization heuristic that is frequently used for nonconvex optimization is the Nelder-Mead
simplex algorithm (Nelder and Mead 1965), although this method does not guarantee ﬁnding the global
optimum. We implemented the Nelder-Mead simplex algorithm by using the standard parameter values. For
each new set of budget targets x, we identiﬁed the distribution of all ⇠i and generated |Kx| realizations
accordingly. Model (C.1) was then solved to ﬁnd
¯
Q(x). The Nelder-Mead simplex algorithm continued to
ﬁnd new x and updated the basis, until the terminating condition was met.
Appendix D:
Systematic identiﬁcation of utility function parameters
In this section, we present a systematic estimation tool for the three parameters of the utility function that
capture a delegation’s characteristic in our model, af
i , bf
i , and ag
i .
To derive the welfare gains of each delegation, the decision maker ﬁrst has to identify the di↵erent oper-
ations that a delegation can perform as well as their impact on the beneﬁciaries’ welfare. This impact may
comprise factors such as the nature of the operation, the number of people a↵ected, localities, and target
groups (Mullen 1995).
Consequently, multicriteria optimization models have been developed for resource allocation in healthcare
and humanitarian operations. These models require the relative weights of each criteria as a basis for deter-
mining the relative impact or importance of each operation. Methods to elicit these weights using the stated
preferences of the IHO managers and other ﬁeld experts include conjoint analysis (Orme 2010), contingent
valuation (Holgu´ın-Veras et al. 2016), and discrete choice experiments (de Bekker-Grob et al. 2012). One can
refer to Mullen and Spurgeon (2018) for an overview of additional techniques as well as a detailed discussion
of priority evaluation.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
5
For each operation of a delegation, the IHO estimates the impact on the welfare of beneﬁciaries and
the cost of the operation. The operations are sorted by decreasing welfare per cost unit and plotted in a
cumulative welfare chart. A power function is ﬁtted to the plotted welfare function to estimate parameters
af
i and bf
i of the delegation.
We illustrate the above steps with an example, which is based on data of the countries of South Sudan
and Somalia from the ICRC Annual Report 2017 where possible. In our example, an IHO performs two
operations, food commodities and water and habitat activities by two delegations in two di↵erent countries,
A and B. The IHO prioritizes operations based on three factors: the number of beneﬁciaries being served
(N), the importance of an operation (W f
j ), and the criticality of a location (W f
i ).
Using conjoint analysis, the IHO managers conclude that the importance of food commodities is twice
as high as the importance of water and habitat activities for an average beneﬁciary, and thus, W f
j 2 {2,1},
where j = 1 and j = 2 refer to food commodities and water and habitat activities, respectively. Similarly,
due to civil war in the territory of delegation A, the IHO puts a higher weight on the operations in this
delegation and thus W f
i 2 {2,1.5}, with i = 1 and i = 2 refer to delegation A and B, respectively.
Finally, the IHO uses a utility function where the utility of performing operation j for N beneﬁciaries in
delegation i is computed as u(i,j,N) = NW f
j W f
i . In other cases, the prioritization can be more complex; for
example, ICRC distinguishes the beneﬁciaries into men, women, and children.
Next, delegations and the top IHO management estimate the costs of each operation. Similar to Gralla
et al. (2014), Jana et al. (2019), the IHO considers di↵erent levels of demand fulﬁllment, e.g., 40%, 60% and
80% coverage of all potential beneﬁciaries in the territory of each delegation. The territory of delegation B
has a long coastal line with functioning ports and lower dispersion of demand points. The currency exchange
rate and purchasing power parity of B is low as well, which reduces the costs of operations. On the other
hand, the logistics costs of operations of delegation A are higher due to lack of access to the sea, destruction of
roads during the civil war, geographical dispersion of demand points, and higher risks involved in conducting
missions. Figure D.1 shows the map of these countries.
In general, one can expect that the densely populated areas near the IHO centers are served ﬁrst, as they
pose less logistical needs with faster and more eﬃcient demand fulﬁlment. The more distant and dispersed
locations lead to higher cost to serve per beneﬁciary, given the larger number of trips, longer travel times,
and higher risks involved. Therefore, the cost per beneﬁciary rises as the coverage level increases. In this
example, large, medium and small demand points are served at 40%, 60% and 80% coverage, respectively.
Table D.1 summarizes the required data to determine the beneﬁciaries’ welfare function for delegations A
and B. The last column contains the additional impact per unit cost spent on each operation. To achieve
eﬃciency and e↵ectiveness, the IHO prioritizes the operations w.r.t. this ratio.
Figure D.2 shows the cumulative utility for each country as a function of the budget spent. We use a trust-
region algorithm (see Helfrich and Zwick (1996)), to ﬁt a power function ui(↵i) = af
i ↵
bf
i
i
to each delegation.
The ﬁtted functions are shown in Figure D.2. We obtain af
1 = 458.76 and af
2 = 1007.73, and bf
1 = 0.55 and
bf
2 = 0.51.
The IHO also uses stated preference techniques to determine the demand mismatch penalty factor ag
i for
each delegation i. The factors that can contribute to the preferences and a↵ect the penalty factor may include

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
6
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
National Delegation
Sub-Delegation/ ICRC presence
Major demand points
Medium demand points
Small demand points
Water and Habitat services only
Food commodities and Water and Habitat services
Country A
Country B
Figure D.1
Dispersion of demand points in the territories of delegations A and B.
Table D.1
Information about operations for delegations A and B
Country
Operation
code
Operation Name
Cumulative
coverage
Population
served
Operation
Weight
Location
Weight
Impact
Cost
(KCHF)
Impact/
cost ratio
A
AF40
Food Commodities
40%
132,000
2
2
528,000
588600
0.897
AF60
Food Commodities
60%
66,000
2
2
264,000
501400
0.527
AF80
Food Commodities
80%
66,000
2
2
264,000
1090000
0.242
AW40
Water and habitat activities
40%
156,000
1
2
312,000
264500
1.180
AW60
Water and habitat activities
60%
78,000
1
2
156,000
264500
0.590
AW80
Water and habitat activities
80%
78,000
1
2
156,000
621000
0.251
B
BF40
Food Commodities
40%
180,000
2
1.5
540,000
940500
0.574
BF60
Food Commodities
60%
90,000
2
1.5
270,000
855000
0.316
BF80
Food Commodities
80%
90,000
2
1.5
270,000
1054500
0.256
BW40
Water and habitat activities
40%
444,000
1
1.5
666,000
347500
1.917
BW60
Water and habitat activities
60%
222,000
1
1.5
333,000
417000
0.799
BW80
Water and habitat activities
80%
222,000
1
1.5
333,000
625500
0.532
0 
0.5
1 
1.5
2 
2.5
3 
3.5
Budget (MCHF)
0
5
10
15
Welfare of delegation
105
AW40
AF40
AW60
AF60
AW80
AF80
(a) Delegation A
0
1
2
3
4
Budget (MCHF)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Welfare of delegation
106
BW40
BW60
BF40
BW80
BF60
BF80
(b) Delegation B
Figure D.2
Estimated data and ﬁtted function for utility as a function of budget.
but are not limited to the delegation’s population, population in need of aid, number of donors, their type
(e.g., governments or corporations), their importance and size of their donations, geopolitical importance
of the country, media coverage, and the presence of other NGOs in the region. These factors a↵ect the
IHO’s reputation and visibility as well as its access to future fundraising for that region. The penalty scores

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
7
Table D.2
Summary of the systematic estimation approach.
No.
Step
Description
Potential methods
1
Identiﬁcation of mis-
sions of each delega-
tion
Identiﬁcation of all relevant missions
that a delegation could perform
Interviews/requests from local and
regional managers, local authorities,
etc.
2
Estimation
of
the
impact of each mission
Identiﬁcation of impact criteria, elicita-
tion of criteria weights, estimation of
impact for each mission on each criterion
Stated preferences technique with
conjoint analysis, contingent valua-
tion, or discrete choice experiments
3
Estimation of the cost
of each mission
Calculation of the expected cost of each
operation, given the population covered,
logistical expenses, personnel cost, etc.
Expert interviews, historical data,
statistical methods
4
Derivation of welfare
function of each dele-
gation
Sorting missions by decreasing welfare
per unit cost, ﬁtting power function to
the data
Curve ﬁtting approaches such as
Trust region algorithm
5
Estimation
of
mis-
match
penalty
cost
factor
Identiﬁcation of relative weight of mis-
match penalty for di↵erent delegations,
normalization of the factors to same scale
as welfare function
Expert interviews, Stated prefer-
ences technique
allocated to each delegation are then normalized to the scale of the beneﬁciaries’ welfare function to make
them comparable.
For our example, we assume that the IHO considers three main factors: number of active IHOs in the
country (W g
1 ), overall population (W g
2 ) and the number of followers of the countries’ WHO twitter account
(W g
3 ). For delegation A, these numbers are 37, 10.98M and 6.1K, while for delegation B, these numbers are
74, 15.1M and 41K. Assuming the IHO computes the penalty factors using 3ln(W g
1 )+2ln(W g
2 )+1ln(W g
3 ),
the unnormalized penalty factors are obtained as 52.0 for delegation A and 56.6 for delegation B. Using an
approach similar to that in Section 5.1 to normalize the penalty function w.r.t. the welfare function (setting
maxi af
i = maxi ag
i ), we obtain ag
1 = 925.4 and ag
2 = 1007.7.
The approach that we have illustrated above with an example can be used for systematic estimation of
the function parameters. Table D.2 summarizes the key steps of this approach.
References
de Bekker-Grob, E. W., Ryan, M., and Gerard, K. (2012). Discrete choice experiments in health economics:
a review of the literature. Health economics, 21(2):145–172.
Gralla, E., Goentzel, J., and Fine, C. (2014). Assessing trade-o↵s among multiple objectives for humanitarian
aid delivery using expert preferences. Production and Operations Management, 23(6):978–989.
Helfrich, H.-P. and Zwick, D. (1996). A trust region algorithm for parametric curve and surface ﬁtting.
Journal of computational and applied mathematics, 73(1-2):119–134.
Hellemo, L., Barton, P. I., and Tomasgard, A. (2018). Decision-dependent probabilities in stochastic programs
with recourse. Computational Management Science, 15(3-4):369–395.
Holgu´ın-Veras, J., Amaya-Leal, J., Cantillo, V., Van Wassenhove, L. N., Aros-Vera, F., and Jaller, M. (2016).
Econometric estimation of deprivation cost functions: A contingent valuation experiment. Journal of
Operations Management, 45:44–56.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
8
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
Jana, R. K., Chandra, C. P., and Tiwari, A. K. (2019). Humanitarian aid delivery decisions during the early
recovery phase of disaster using a discrete choice multi-attribute value method. Annals of Operations
Research, 283(1):1211–1225.
Mullen, P. (1995). Priority setting in health care: Techniques and pitfalls. Managing health care under
resource constraints, page 105.
Mullen, P. and Spurgeon, P. (2018). Priority setting and the public. CRC Press.
Nelder, J. A. and Mead, R. (1965). A simplex method for function minimization. The computer journal,
7(4):308–313.
Orme, B. (2010). Getting started with conjoint analysis: strategies for product design and pricing research
second edition. Madison: Research Publishers LLC.
Papier, F. (2016). Supply allocation under sequential advance demand information. Operations Research,
64(2):341–361.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
1
Supplementary Appendix for Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Appendix E:
Additional numerical experiments
In this section, we ﬁrst present comparison of computational time for GBD, GBD-g and extensive-form
formulations for small size problems. We then present two additional numerical experiments: the sensitivity
of the model with respect to changes in the parameters of the utility functions and the impact of budget
uncertainty.
Comparison of computational time: As we can see in Table E.1, the proposed GBD algorithm signiﬁ-
cantly outperforms the other two alternatives. We focus on smaller instances (n 15) that can be addressed
by all three methods. We observe that the extensive form scales very poorly with the increasing size of n
and |K|.
Table E.1
Comparison of the required computational time (in seconds) by the new proposed GBD algorithm, a
GBD algorithm using general-purpose nonlinear solver (GBD-g), and the extensive form (Ex-form).
n = 5
n = 10
n = 15
Sample size GBD GBD-g Ex-form GBD GBD-g Ex-form GBD GBD-g Ex-form
|K|= 25
0.5
1.0
2.2
1.0
4.9
13.3
1.9
9.2
55.0
|K|= 50
0.9
2.0
28.0
1.8
6.2
154.1
2.6
10.4
396.5
|K|= 75
1.4
3.5
88.1
2.8
9.0
837.6
4.7
23.6
1997.7
|K|= 100
1.8
4.4
169.2
4.2
18.5
1864.8
5.0
17.1
7486.9
Sensitivity analysis of the parameters of the utility functions: In addition to Proposition 2, which
describes the behavior of budget targets with respect to variations in af, bf and ag, we performed numerical
experiments of these changes to quantify the magnitude of the impact.
Figure E.1 shows the case where all af
i are changed by ±50%, while other parameters are held ﬁxed at
their default values. For n = 30, a 50% increase in af results in a 1.9% increase in total budget targets, while
a 50% decrease leads to a 2.7% decrease in the targets.
 af 
 0.5
af
af 
 1.5 
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Overall utility of the ICRC
104
(a) Overall utility of the IHO
 af 
 0.5
af
af 
 1.5 
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
Total budget targets (MCHF)
(b) Sum of Budget targets
Figure E.1
The impact of variation in af: (a) IHO’s utility, (b) budget targets.
Increasing and decreasing ag by 50% while keeping all other parameters ﬁxed results in a 3.3% decrease
and a 2.2% increase in budget targets, respectively (n = 30), which can be observed in Figure E.2.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
2
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
 ag 
 0.5
ag
ag 
 1.5 
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2
Overall utility of the ICRC
104
(a) Overall utility of the IHO
 ag 
 0.5
ag
ag 
 1.5 
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
Total budget targets (MCHF)
(b) Sum of Budget targets
Figure E.2
The impact of variation in ag: (a) IHO’s utility, (b) budget targets.
 bf= 0.5
bf=0.75
bf=1 
1
2
3
4
Overall utility of the ICRC
104
(a) Overall utility of the IHO
 bf = 0.5
bf = 0.75
bf = 1 
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
Total budget targets (MCHF)
(b) Sum of Budget targets
Figure E.3
The impact of variation in bf: (a) IHO’s utility, (b) budget targets.
To investigate the impact of variation in bf, we slightly changed our experiments, since increasing bf by
50% would result in convex beneﬁciaries’ welfare functions for some delegations. Therefore, we ﬁx all bf
at three di↵erent values, 0.5, 0.75 and 1.0. Note that the latter value leads to linear beneﬁciaries’ welfare
functions. From Figure E.3, we can see that by decreasing bf
i from 0.75 to 0.5 for all i (n = 30), targets
decrease by 2.5%, while increasing all bf
i to 1 (linear functions) leads to a 5.5% increase in budget targets.
Impact of budget uncertainty: We investigate the impact of budget uncertainty on the IHO’s perfor-
mance by changing the standard deviation of ⇠. We consider three settings for the change in all donations
(earmarked and nonearmarked), namely, 50% decrease, no change, and 50% increase in the standard devia-
tions. We solve the problem using our proposed GBD algorithm.
As we can see in Figure E.4a, high degrees of uncertainty force the IHO to set lower budget targets because
decision makers are less certain about receiving donations in the future to fulﬁll their initial plans, which
leads to a lower overall welfare for beneﬁciaries (Figure E.4b). The risk of failing to meet planned targets
due to the additional uncertainty in the budget leads to a comparably sharp decrease in the IHO’s utility.
Moreover, we can observe that such an impact is independent of the number of delegations that the IHO
serves.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
3
 std 
 0.5
std 
std 
 1.5 
Variation in donations
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
Total budget targets (MCHF)
(a) Sum of budget targets
 std 
 0.5
std 
std 
 1.5 
Variation in donations
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
Overall welfare of beneficiaries
104
(b) Overall welfare of beneﬁciaries
 std 
 0.5
std
std 
 1.5 
Variation in donations
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
Overall utility of the ICRC
104
(c) Overall utility of the IHO
Figure E.4
The impact of uncertainty in donations on (a) budget targets, (b) beneﬁciaries’ welfare, and (c)
IHO’s utility.
Our results show an average increase of 7.1% in the average targets when reducing the uncertainty by 50%
compared to an average decrease of 6.3% when increasing uncertainty by 50%. The IHO’s utility increases
by 5.4% and welfare by 7.1% when reducing uncertainty, while utility decreases by 6.4% and welfare by 4.9%
when uncertainty increases.
Given the above results, measures to reduce uncertainty in donations, such as proposing incentives for
donating regularly rather than sporadically, or building online communities could be e↵ective; see, for exam-
ple, Hart et al. (2005).
Appendix F:
Sample Average Approximation algorithm
We consider replicating the GBD method for M times, with each replication of a size of |K| scenarios. We
denote by ˆQm
K and ˆxm
K the optimal value and optimal solution of the mth SAA replication, m 2 {1,...,M}.
An estimator of Q(x⇤) is given by
¯QM
K = 1
M
M
X
m=1
ˆQm
K.
(F.1)
In order to choose among M di↵erent solutions of SAA replications, we consider a large sample of size
|K0|> |K|, and evaluate the expected utility of each solution ˆxm
K under this new sample. Let us deﬁne ˆx as
the solution that provides the highest utility under the sample of size |K0|.
ˆx = arg maxQ⌦K0 (x),
x 2 {ˆx1
K,..., ˆxM
K },
(F.2)
where ⌦K0 refers to the set of scenarios in the sample of size |K0|, and Q⌦K0 (ˆx) is the expected utility of the
IHO under ⌦K0 and ˆx. Note that Q⌦K0 (ˆx) is a stronger estimator of Q(x⇤) than ¯QM
K . Here, ˆx would serve
as the optimal solution of the SAA algorithm. We further compute
qm
K(ˆx) = Q⌦m
K(ˆx),
m 2 1,...,M.
(F.3)
which refers to the utility of ˆx under the scenarios of the mth replication of the SAA, ⌦m
K. We deﬁne
¯qM
K (ˆx) =
1
M
PM
m=1 qm
K(ˆx). Now, ¯QM
K −¯qM
K (ˆx) is an estimator of the optimality gap, Q(x⇤) −Q⌦K0 (ˆx), and
its variance, which we refer to as ˇS2 is estimated as
ˇS2 =
1
M(M −1)
M
X
m=1
[(qm
K(ˆx) −ˆQm
K) −(¯qM
K (ˆx) −¯QM
K )]2.
(F.4)

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
4
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
50 
100
150
300
500
Number of sampled scenarios
1.86
1.88
1.9
1.92
1.94
Solution value
104
Figure G.1
In- and out-of-sample stability.
To determine the number of required replications, M, we start with M = 2 and continue the process
until the (1 −↵)% optimality gap (one-sided) is less than the 1% of the optimal solution, i.e., ˇS ⇥tM−1,↵
0.01 Q⌦K0 (ˆx). If this condition is not satisﬁed until M is reached to a given upper bound, M max, we increase
|K| and repeat the process.
Appendix G:
Sample stability
Let QS(x) = ESQ(x,⇠), and maxx QS(x) denote the stochastic program restricted to a sampled scenario
set S. Moreover, let ¯S and ˆS denote two sets of scenarios of the same size, with ¯x and ˆx optimal solutions
to maxx Q ¯
S(x) and maxx Q ˆ
S(x). A scenario generation method is called in-sample stable if the optimal
solution values of two independently sampled scenario sets are similar, i.e., if Q ¯
S(¯x) ⇡Q ˆ
S(ˆx). On the other
hand, if Q ˇ
S(¯x) ⇡Q ˇ
S(ˆx) holds for a separate set of scenarios ˇS, the method is called out-of-sample stable.
For an in-depth discussion of these concepts, one can refer to King and Wallace (2012).
In order to check for sample stability, we consider the problem with the main n = 25 ICRC delegations,
and ﬁnd its pseudo-optimal solution using a sample K0 of size |K0|= 1500. We then compute in- and out-
of-sample stability values by sampling subsets of size |K| from K0. We let this sample size vary between 50
and 500, where for each given size, we sample M = 20 instances K1,...,KM, from K0. Figure G.1 shows the
results of our analysis. The solid horizontal line represents the value of the pseudo-optimal solution i.e., the
solution obtained by taking all scenarios in K0 into account, and the dashed horizontal lines indicate the
99% conﬁdence interval, i.e., [0.99opt, 1.01opt].
As we can see in Figure G.1, out-of-sample stability can be reached under |K|= 50 scenarios (i.e., optimal
ﬁrst-stage solutions, evaluated on the whole set of 1500 scenarios, fall within a 99% of the optimal solution).
However, in-sample stability is not reached until |K|≥500.
Appendix H:
Proofs and technical results
Lemma 3. Following are a number of properties of the problem:
1. For a given budget target x and realization of donations ⇠, U(x,⇠,y) is concave and non decreasing in
y.
2. Model (1) is a stochastic program with complete recourse.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
5
3. Q(x,⇠) is non decreasing in ⇠ne and ⇠i, for all i 2 I.
4. Q(x,⇠) is jointly concave in (x,⇠), and is an upper semicontinuous function in x for all ⇠.
5. Q(x) is concave and upper semicontinuous in x.
6. Model (1) has a ﬁnite optimal solution and the maximum is attained.
Proof of Lemma 1
For each i that yi > [xi −⇠i]+, min{xi,⇠i + yi} = xi, and fi(min{xi,⇠i + yi}) = fi(xi).
Also, yi > [xi −⇠i]+ =) [xi −⇠i −yi]+ = 0 =) gi([xi −⇠i −yi]+) = gi(0) = 0 =) ui(xi,⇠i,yi) = fi(xi); in
other words, for yi > [xi −⇠i]+, fi(.) and gi(.) would be equal to the case that yi = [xi −⇠i]+, and thus in
optimality, yi [xi −⇠i]+.
Proof of Proposition 1
Using linearization ↵i min{xi,⇠i + yi}, the recourse problem for any given pair
(ˇx,⇠) can be written as follows.
Q(ˇx,⇠) = max
y,↵
X
i2I
[fi(↵i) −gi(ˇxi −↵i)],
(H.1a)
s.t.
↵i ˇxi,
i 2 I
(H.1b)
↵i ⇠i + yi,
i 2 I
(H.1c)
n
X
i=1
yi ⇠ne,
(H.1d)
yi ≥0,
i 2 I
(H.1e)
Let ⌘i, µi, and µne and ⇢i refer to the dual variables associated with Constraint sets (H.1b), (H.1c), (H.1d)
and (H.1e) respectively. The associated Lagrangian function reads as:
L(ˇx,⌘,µ,⇢) =
X
i2I
[fi(↵i) −gi(ˇxi −↵i) + ⌘i(ˇxi −↵i) + µi(⇠i + yi −↵i) + ⇢iyi] + µne(⇠ne −
X
i2I
yi).
(H.2)
Note that since the constraints in the above optimization model are aﬃne, the Slater’s condition always hold
(Boyd and Vandenberghe 2004). Let ˇy and ˇ↵denote the optimal solution to Model (H.1), while ˇ⌘, ˇµ and ˇ⇢
are the optimal Lagrangian dual multipliers associated with the point (ˇy, ˇ↵). Using the Langrangian duality
we have:
@Q
@⇠i
(ˇx,⇠, ˇy, ˇ↵) = @L
@⇠i
(ˇx,⇠, ˇy, ˇ↵) = ˇµi,
and
@Q
@⇠ne
(ˇx,⇠, ˇy, ˇ↵) = @L
@⇠ne
(ˇx,⇠, ˇy, ˇ↵) = ˇµne.
(H.3)
On the other hand, from the KKT conditions we have
@L
@yi
(ˇx,⇠, ˇy, ˇ↵) = 0 =) ˇµi + ˇ⇢i −ˇµne = 0 =) ˇµne = ˇµi + ˇ⇢i
=) since ⇢i ≥0 and consequently ˇ⇢i ≥0 for all i =) ˇµne ≥ˇµi for all i.
(H.4)
From Equations (H.3) and (H.4), we can conclude that @Q
@⇠ne
(ˇx,⇠, ˇy, ˇ↵) ≥@Q
@⇠i
(ˇx,⇠, ˇy, ˇ↵) for all i 2 I.
For Part 2, Equation (H.2) implies
@Q
@↵i
(ˇx,⇠, ˇy, ˇ↵) = 0 =) f 0
i(ˇ↵i) + g0
i(ˇxi −ˇ↵i) −ˇ⌘i −ˇµi = 0.
(H.5)
Consequently, from Equations (H.4) and (H.5) we have
ˇµne = f 0
i(ˇ↵i) + g0
i(ˇxi −ˇ↵i) −ˇ⌘i + ˇ⇢i,
for all i 2 I.
(H.6)

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
6
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
Now, depending on the value of ↵i at optimality, each delegation i falls into one of the following sets.
i 2
8
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
:
V0, if ˇ↵i = ˇxi ⇠i, ˇyi = 0,
V1, if ˇ↵i = ˇyi + ⇠i = ˇxi & ˇyi > 0 =) ˇ⇢i = 0 & ˇ⌘i > 0 =) ˇµne < f 0
i(ˇ↵i) + g0
i(ˇxi −ˇ↵i),
V2, if ˇ↵i = ˇyi + ⇠i < ˇxi & ˇyi > 0 =) ˇ⇢i = 0 & ˇ⌘i = 0 =) ˇµne = f 0
i(ˇ↵i) + g0
i(ˇxi −ˇ↵i),
V3, if ˇ↵i = ˇyi + ⇠i < ˇxi & ˇyi = 0 =) ˇ⇢i > 0 & ˇ⌘i = 0 =) ˇµne > f 0
i(ˇ↵i) + g0
i(ˇxi −ˇ↵i).
(H.7)
According to Zipkin (1980) if we sort all i in V1 [ V2 [ V3, in terms of f 0
i(⇠i) + g0
i(ˇxi −⇠i) from highest to
lowest, there will be an optimal separation level k⇤= |V1 [ V2| such that ˇyi > 0 for i = 1,...,k⇤and ˇyi = 0
for i = k⇤+ 1,...,k⇤+ |V3|.
Now consider a problem with an additional delegation j, with ˇxj and ⇠j, though the available resource,
⇠ne, stays the same. Denoting the optimal separation level of the new problem as k⇤⇤, from Theorem 2
of Zipkin (1980), it can be deduced that k⇤⇤≥k⇤. Moreover, from Theorem 1 of the same reference, we
know that ˇµne is increasing in the separation level. Therefore, adding a new delegation does not decrease
@Q
@⇠ne
(ˇx,⇠, ˇy, ˇ↵) = ˇµne. Note that if for the new delegation j, ˇxj < ⇠j, we will have ˇyj = 0; consequently, the
optimal allocation problem and @Q
@⇠ne
(ˇx,⇠, ˇy, ˇ↵) = ˇµne remain unchanged. This ends the proof of Part 2.
For Part 3, from Equations (H.3), (H.5) and (H.6) we have
@Q
@⇠i
(ˇx,⇠, ˇy, ˇ↵)
@Q
@⇠ne
(ˇx,⇠, ˇy, ˇ↵)
= ˇµi
ˇµne
=
f 0
i(ˇ↵i) + g0
i(ˇxi −ˇ↵i) −ˇ⌘i
f 0
i(ˇ↵i) + g0
i(ˇxi −ˇ↵i) −ˇ⌘i + ˇ⇢i
= 1 −
ˇ⇢i
f 0
i(ˇ↵i) + g0
i(ˇxi −ˇ↵i) −ˇ⌘i + ˇ⇢i
(H.8)
Let us refer to the value speciﬁed by Equation (H.8) as A. We have
@A
@af
i
=
@f 0
i(ˇ↵i)/@af
i
[f 0
i(ˇ↵i) + g0
i(ˇxi −ˇ↵i) −ˇ⌘i + ˇ⇢i]2 > 0.
(H.9)
The same holds true for bf
i and ag
i . This ends the proof of Part 3.
Finally, for Part 4, we know from Part 1 that for every x and every possible realization of ⇠=
[˜⇠1,..., ˜⇠i,..., ˜⇠ne], we have
Q(x,[⇠1,...,⇠i + δ,...,⇠ne]) Q(x,[⇠1,...,⇠i,...,⇠ne + δ]).
Therefore,
E[˜⇠1,...,˜⇠i+δ,...,˜⇠ne][Q(x,⇠)] E[˜⇠1,...,˜⇠i,...,˜⇠ne+δ][Q(x,⇠)],
for all i.
Since the above equation holds true for every x, we have
Q(x⇤)|˜⇠i+δ Q⇤(x⇤)|˜⇠ne+δ,
for all i.
Proof of Proposition 2
To prove that x⇤is increasing in af, we ﬁrst show that Q(x) is supermodular
in x and af. For our discussions on supermodularity we refer to Simchi-Levi et al. (2014). First, it is
straightforward to show that U(x,⇠,y) is supermodular in x and af, since
@2U
@x @af ≥0. On the other hand,
since Q(x,⇠) = supy U(x,⇠,y) and U(x,⇠,y) is supermodular in x and af, Q(x,⇠) is supermodular in x
and af too. Finally, as Q(x) = E˜⇠[Q(x,⇠)] is a linear combination of a supermodular function, Q(x) is
supermodular as well.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
7
Next, we show that Q(x) is increasing in af > 0. To that purpose, ﬁrst note that U(x,⇠,y) =
P
i ui(xi,⇠i,yi) is increasing in af for each y. This implies that Q(x,⇠) is increasing in af. Consequently,
Q(x) is increasing in af.
Since Q(x) is supermodular in x and af, and the domain of x, Rn
+ is a lattice, according to Topkis’s
theorem (Topkis 2011), x⇤= arg maxx2Rn
+ Q(x) is non-decreasing in af. Similarly, one can prove the behavior
of x⇤in ag.
Proof of Proposition 3
We have ↵= min{⇠,x}. Therefore, Model (1) can be simpliﬁed to
Q(x) = max
x
Z x
⇠=0
[f(⇠) −ag(x −⇠)]B(⇠)d⇠+
Z 1
⇠=x
f(x)B(⇠)d⇠.
Taking derivative of the above equation w.r.t. x results in
@Q(x)
@x
= −ag
Z x
⇠=0
B(⇠)d⇠+ f(x)B(x) +
Z 1
⇠=x
f 0(x)B(⇠)d⇠−f(x)B(x) = 0
=) f 0[1 −B(x)] = agB(x) =) B(x) =
f 0(x)
f 0(x) + ag .
Proof of Proposition 4
The proof for the ﬁrst inequality is straightforward. For the second inequality,
let x⇤be the solution that maximizes Q(x); moreover, for a given ⇠, let ¯x(⇠) denote the solution which
maximizes Q(x,⇠) for a given ⇠. That is
Q(x⇤) = max
x≥0 Q(x) = max
x≥0 E˜⇠[Q(x,⇠)],
and
E˜⇠[max
x≥0 Q(x,⇠)] = E˜⇠[Q(¯x(⇠),⇠)].
We have,
Q(x⇤,⇠) Q(¯x(⇠),⇠) =) E˜⇠[Q(x⇤,⇠)] E˜⇠[Q(¯x(⇠),⇠)],
8 ⇠2 R+
n+1,
=) Q(x⇤) = max
x≥0 E˜⇠[Q(x,⇠)] E˜⇠[max
x≥0 Q(x,⇠)].
For the last inequality, from Part 4 of Lemma 3, we know that Q(x,⇠) is jointly concave in (x,⇠). Now, we
show that maxx Q(x,⇠) is a concave function of ⇠. Assume T(⇠) = maxx Q(x,⇠). Moreover, let x1 and x2
represent the optimal solutions of T(⇠1) and T(⇠2). We have
λT(⇠1) + (1 −λ)T(⇠2) = λQ(x1,⇠1) + (1 −λ)Q(x2,⇠2) Q(λ(x1,⇠1) + (1 −λ)(x2,⇠2))
max
x≥0 Q(x,λ⇠1 + (1 −λ)⇠2) = T(λ⇠1 + (1 −λ)⇠2).
Therefore maxx≥0 Q(x,⇠) is concave in ⇠. Using Jensen’s inequality, it follows that E˜⇠[maxx≥0 Q(x,⇠)] 
maxx≥0 Q(x, ¯⇠) = Q(¯x, ¯⇠), which is the desired third inequality.
Proof of Lemma 2
The objective function is concave and separable on each variable. Moreover, the con-
straints are linear and form a convex set; therefore, ¯Q is jointly concave in (x,↵,y).
Proof of Theorem 1
For a given ˇx, we can rewrite the k-th Benders subproblem Q(ˇx,⇠k) as follows,
assuming ui(ˇxi,⇠k
i ,yk
i ) = fi(⇠k
i + yk
i ) −gi(ˇxi −⇠k
i + yk
i ), and ¯yk
i = ˇxi −⇠k
i .
max
yk
X
i2C(ˇx,⇠k)
ui(ˇxi,⇠k
i ,yk
i ) +
X
i/2C(ˇx,⇠k)
fi(xi),
s.t.
X
i2C(ˇx,⇠k)
yk
i ⇠ne,
yk
i ¯yk
i ,
i 2 C(ˇx,⇠k)
yk
i ≥0,
i 2 I

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
8
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
Let µk
ne, µk
i , and ⇢k
i refer to the dual variables associated with the ﬁrst, second and third constraints,
respectively. The associated Lagrangian function reads as:
Lk(ˇx,µ,⇢) =
X
i2C(ˇx,⇠k)
⇥
ui(ˇxi,⇠k
i ,yk
i ) + µk
i (ˇxi −⇠k
i −yk
i )
⇤
+ µk
ne(⇠k
ne −
X
i2C(ˇx,⇠k)
yk
i )
+
X
i/2C(ˇx,⇠k)
fi(ˇxi) +
X
i2I
⇢k
i yk
i .
It is not diﬃcult to see that for λk given in (10) we have:
λk
i 2 @Lk
@xi
(ˇx, ˇµ, ˇ⇢),
i 2 I,k 2 K
where ˇµ, ˇ⇢are the optimal Lagrangian dual multipliers associated with the point ˇy. Hence, λk calculated
as in (10) gives a valid supergradient vector for Q(x,⇠k). It remains to show that the values of µ given in
(11)-(12) are properly calculated. Using the KKT conditions for the Lagrangian function, we have:
@Lk
@yk
i
= @ui
@yi
(ˇxi,⇠k
i , ˇyk
i ) −µk
ne −µk
i + ⇢k
i = 0,
i 2 C(ˇx,⇠k),
⇢k
i yk
i = 0,
i 2 I,
µk
ne ≥0, ⇢k
i ,µk
i ≥0,
i 2 I.
Hence, we have
if ˇyk
i > 0 =) ˇ⇢k
i = 0 , ˇµk
i = @ui
@yi
(ˇxi,⇠k
i , ˇyk
i ) −ˇµk
ne.
(H.10)
From complementary slackness we also have ˇµk
i (¯yk
i −ˇyk
i ) = 0; therefore
0 ˇyk
i < ¯yk
i =) ˇµk
i = 0.
(H.11)
Moreover, from Equations (H.10) and (H.11) it follows:
if 0 < ˇyk
i < ¯yk
i =) ˇµk
i = @ui
@yi
(ˇxi,⇠k
i , ˇyk
i ) −ˇµk
ne = 0 , ˇµk
ne = @ui
@yi
(ˇxi,⇠k
i , ˇyk
i ).
(H.12)
Note that the latter result implies that the values of @ui
@yi (ˇxi,⇠k
i , ˇyk
i ) are the same for all i such that 0 < ˇyk
i < ¯yk
i ,
which is why any such j 2 I can be used to obtain ˇµk
ne in (12). This ends the proof.
Proof of Corollary ??
Let us refer to the space of feasible solutions of Q, Q0 and Q00 as C, C0 and C00
respectively. C ⇢C0, since the di↵erence between the two is the right hand side of the budget allocation
constraint, and ⇠ne ⇠ne + P
i[⇠i −xi]+. On the other hand:
C0 =
(X
i
yi ⇠ne +
X
i
[⇠i −xi]+;y ≥0
)
,
C00 =
(X
i
yi ⇠ne;yi ≥−⇠i 8i
)
⌘
(X
i
yi ⇠ne +
X
i
⇠i;y ≥0
)
,
=) 8 y 2 C0 ! y 2 C00 =) C0 ⇢C00
As the objective function remains the same in all three problems, we can conclude that Q(x⇤) 
maxx E˜⇠[Q0(x,⇠)] maxx E˜⇠[Q00(x,⇠)].
The proof also holds for the model with target-dependent donations. Any feasible x for Q(x), including
arg maxQ(x) is also feasible for E˜⇠|x[Q0(x,⇠)]. On the other hand, for any given x and ⇠, the space of feasible
solutions, i.e., y for Q(x,⇠) is a subset of that for Q0(x,⇠). Thus, Q(x⇤) maxx≥0 E˜⇠|x[Q0(x,⇠)]. The same
reasoning applies to the second inequality.

Keshvari Fard, Ljubi´c, and Papier: Budgeting in International Humanitarian Organizations
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
9
Proof of Lemma 3
First, note that the linearity constraint qualiﬁcation holds for Q(x,⇠).
Part 1: The function min{xi,⇠i+yi} is concave in yi. Since fi is concave in its argument, fi(min{xi,⇠i+yi})
is also concave in yi. Similarly, [xi −⇠i −yi]+ = max{0,xi −⇠i −yi} is convex in yi. Since gi is convex in its
argument, gi([xi −⇠i −yi]+) is also convex in yi, and therefore ui(xi,⇠i,yi) = fi(min{xi,⇠i + yi}) −gi([xi −
⇠i −yi]+) is concave in yi. As a result, P
i2C(x,⇠) [fi(⇠i + yi) −gi([xi −⇠i −yi]+)] is concave in y. Note that
P
i/2C(x,⇠) fi(xi) is a constant. Since the constraints form a convex set, Pn
i=1 ui(xi,⇠i,yi) is concave in y.
Moreover, it is easy to show that for all i 2 C(x,⇠), ui(xi,⇠i,yi) = fi(⇠i +yi)−gi(xi −⇠i −yi) is non-decreasing
in yi and therefore, Pn
i=1 ui(xi,⇠i,yi) is non-decreasing in y.
Part 2: Similar to Birge and Louveaux (2011), we deﬁne
K1 = {x 2 Rn : x ≥0}
K2(⇠) = {x 2 Rn : 9 y(⇠)| y ≥0 and
n
X
i=1
yi ⇠ne}
and
K2 = {x 2 Rn : Q(x) > −1}
where K1 refers to the feasible set of Stage 1 of Model (1), K2 refers to the values of x for which the recourse
problem is feasible (independently of the realization of random elements in the second stage), and K2(⇠)
refers to the values of x for which the recourse problem is feasible for a given realization of ⇠. Since x does
not appear in the constraints of the recourse problem, every feasible value of x in Model (1) is also feasible
in Model (2), i.e., K1 ⇢K2 (indeed K1 = K2), and therefore, the stochastic program has relatively complete
recourse. On the other hand, regardless of choice of x and realization of ⇠2 Rn+1
≥0 , there exist a recourse
action y = 0, thus, the problem has a complete recourse as well.
Part 3: ui(xi,⇠i,yi) is non-decreasing in ⇠i for all i; moreover, y is non-decreasing in ⇠ne, i.e., yi is non-
decreasing in ⇠ne for all i 2 I. Therefore, U(x,⇠,y) is non-decreasing in ⇠for any given x. Consequently,
Q(x,⇠) = maxy≥0 U(x,⇠,y) is non-decreasing in ⇠.
The proofs of Parts 4 to 6 are similar to (Birge and Louveaux 2011). Thus we skip these proofs for
conciseness.
References
Birge, J. R. and Louveaux, F. (2011). Introduction to stochastic programming. Springer Science & Business
Media.
Boyd, S. and Vandenberghe, L. (2004). Convex optimization. Cambridge university press.
Hart, T., Greenﬁeld, J. M., and Johnston, M. (2005). Nonproﬁt internet strategies: best practices for mar-
keting, communications, and fundraising success. John Wiley & Sons.
King, A. J. and Wallace, S. W. (2012). Modeling with Stochastic Programming. Springer.
Simchi-Levi, D., Chen, X., and Bramel, J. (2014). Convexity and supermodularity. In The Logic of Logistics,
pages 15–44. Springer.
Topkis, D. M. (2011). Supermodularity and complementarity. Princeton university press.
Zipkin, P. H. (1980). Simple ranking methods for allocation of one resource. Mgmt Science, 26(1):34–43.