TITLE: Resource Allocation with Sigmoidal Demands: Mobile Healthcare Units and Service Adoption
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2021.1020
---

EUR Research Information Portal
Resource Allocation with Sigmoidal Demands: Mobile Healthcare Units and Service
Adoption
Published in:
Manufacturing and Service Operations Management
Publication status and date:
Published: 28/10/2021
DOI (link to publisher):
10.1287/msom.2021.1020
Document Version
Peer reviewed version
Document License/Available under:
Article 25fa Dutch Copyright Act
Citation for the published version (APA):
Alban, A., Blaettchen, P., de Vries, H., & Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2021). Resource Allocation with Sigmoidal Demands:
Mobile Healthcare Units and Service Adoption. Manufacturing and Service Operations Management.
https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2021.1020
Link to publication on the EUR Research Information Portal
Terms and Conditions of Use
Except as permitted by the applicable copyright law, you may not reproduce or make this material available to any third party
without the prior written permission from the copyright holder(s). Copyright law allows the following uses of this material
without prior permission:
 • you may download, save and print a copy of this material for your personal use only;
 • you may share the EUR portal link to this material.
In case the material is published with an open access license (e.g. a Creative Commons (CC) license), other uses may be
allowed. Please check the terms and conditions of the specific license.
Take-down policy
If you believe that this material infringes your copyright and/or any other intellectual property rights, you may request its
removal by contacting us at the following email address: openaccess.library@eur.nl. Please provide us with all the relevant
information, including the reasons why you believe any of your rights have been infringed. In case of a legitimate complaint,
we will make the material inaccessible and/or remove it from the website.

Resource Allocation with Sigmoidal Demands:
Mobile Healthcare Units and Service Adoption
Andres Alban, Philippe Blaettchen, Luk N. Van Wassenhove
Technology and Operations Management area, INSEAD, Fontainebleau, France 77305
Harwin de Vries
Department of Technology and Operations Management, Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands 3062PA
Achieving broad access to health services (a target within the sustainable development goals) requires
reaching rural populations. Mobile healthcare units (MHUs) visit remote sites to oﬀer health services to
these populations. However, limited exposure, health literacy, and trust can lead to sigmoidal (S-shaped)
adoption dynamics, presenting a diﬃcult obstacle in allocating limited MHU resources. It is tempting to
allocate resources in line with current demand, as seen in practice. However, to maximize access in the long
term, this may be far from optimal, and insights into allocation decisions are limited.
We present a formal model of the allocation of MHU resources, i.e., the frequency of visits to each site, to
maximize long-term uptake of preventative health services. We formulate the problem as the optimization of
a sum of sigmoidal functions. While the problem is NP-hard, we provide closed-form solutions to particular
cases of the model that elucidate insights into the optimal allocation. For example, more visits should
generally be allocated to sites where the cumulative demand potential is higher and, counterintuitively,
often those where demand is currently lower. To apply our insights in practice, we propose a practical
method for estimating our model’s parameters from pre-existing data. Our estimation approach achieves
better predictions than standard methods. Finally, we demonstrate the potential of our approach by applying
our methods to family planning MHUs in Uganda. In particular, we show that operationalizable heuristic
allocations, grounded in our insights, outperform allocations based on current demand.
Key words : humanitarian logistics; diﬀusion of innovations; sigmoidal programming; gradient boosting
History : This paper has been accepted for publication by Manufacturing & Service Operations
Management on May 11, 2021.
1.
Introduction
Achieving broad and aﬀordable access to health services is necessary to fulﬁll the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) (Keskinocak and Savva 2020). Currently, half the world’s population
lacks access to essential services (WHO and The World Bank 2017), even though universal health
coverage is a target of SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being. This inaccessibility can have important
negative consequences for other SDGs by reducing productivity (Stenberg et al. 2014) and educa-
tional attainment (Jukes et al. 2007). Broadening access to health services requires strengthening
delivery to rural areas, where approximately half of humanity lives (The World Bank 2018), but
rural populations’ access tends to be signiﬁcantly worse than urban populations’, leading to stark
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

2
diﬀerences in health outcomes, especially in developing countries (Strasser et al. 2016). Aside from
physical barriers—geographical isolation (Crouse et al. 2010), a lack of aﬀordable transportation
(Hodgson et al. 1998), the concentration of resources within cities (Strasser 2003)—lower educa-
tional levels (van Maarseveen 2020) and health literacy (Aljassim and Ostini 2020), and a lack of
exposure to and trust in services and providers (Wickstrom et al. 2013) eﬀectively reduce rural
populations’ access to health services. We summarize the latter as informational barriers to access.
In this paper, we analyze the resource allocation problem faced by humanitarian organizations
attempting to broaden access of rural populations to health services with the help of mobile health-
care units (MHUs). Also referred to as outreach teams, MHUs establish temporary service delivery
sites near rural populations. They can provide a resource-eﬃcient alternative to stationary clinics
and hospitals that may be prohibitively costly due to low population density (Doerner et al. 2007).
However, even if MHUs can overcome physical barriers to access, infrequent contact with health
services and service providers does not necessarily alleviate the informational barriers. This is par-
ticularly true in the case of health services for which the need is not immediately obvious, such
as preventative care, as opposed to evident needs such as emergency care (Berkman et al. 2011).
Nonetheless, in the absence of stationary providers, MHUs play an active role also in delivering ser-
vices with high informational barriers, such as vaccination (Vaahtera et al. 2000), cancer screening
(Mauad et al. 2011), HIV counseling (Mabuto et al. 2014) and family planning (Wickstrom et al.
2013). The gradual spread of information through word-of-mouth within rural communities driven
by previous adopters can overcome informational barriers and enhance adoption (Neke et al. 2018).
MHUs may support it by actively building trust (Aung et al. 2015).
Humanitarian organizations that allocate MHU resources to improve access to such services face
two interrelated challenges: (i) understanding the complex adoption dynamics driven by word-of-
mouth eﬀects, often in an environment with limited data and poor computational infrastructure
(Ergun et al. 2014, Besiou and Van Wassenhove 2020), and (ii) strategically allocating scarce
resources, taking into account slow build-up for adoption demand and eventual saturation. More-
over, in the humanitarian context, planning solutions need to be interpretable to verify adherence
to standards of practice and improve trust and applicability (Gralla and Goentzel 2018).
Our work aims at helping humanitarian organizations overcome these challenges. We provide a
formal model for allocating available MHU resources for organizations aiming to broaden access
to health services whose adoption is hindered by informational barriers. We adapt the Bass (1969)
model to reﬂect the resulting adoption dynamics and predict the adoption levels engendered by
potential allocations. We choose this model for its ﬂexibility, interpretability, and established per-
formance in practice. Our allocation model maximizes adoption as derived from the Bass model,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

3
rather than incorporating also returning clients. This choice is appropriate when informational bar-
riers have a distinct impact on initial adoption, and intervals between subsequent service demands
are long enough that repeat clients can be served eﬀectively with a baseline visit frequency, as in
the examples above. Moreover, we abstract from the shorter-term scheduling of MHUs to focus on
the complexities introduced by long-term changes in adoption patterns. We identify solutions that
enable organizations to improve resource allocations in two ways. First, we derive operationalizable
insights that can help guide long-term decision-making, especially in environments with little data.
For example, counter to intuition, more resources should be devoted to those sites within a priori-
tized group with lower current adopter demand to anticipate saturation eﬀects. Second, we provide
interpretable and implementable procedures to predict adopter demands and to allocate MHU
resources by relying on an approach with low requirements for data collection and computation.
Through a collaboration with MSI Reproductive Choices (henceforth MSI), we have had access
to data, documentation, and interactions with experts on the operations of family planning MHUs.
MSI is a non-governmental organization that provides family planning services in 37 countries
across the world. We consider the problem of planning 25 MHUs that MSI employs to serve rural
populations in Uganda. We apply our model to this setting and evaluate the beneﬁts of our insights
compared to current practice. MSI is an ideal testing ground for our research because family
planning services are a prime example of the use of MHUs and play a central role in the sustainable
development agenda. In particular, unwanted pregnancies negatively impact the health of mothers
and children (Conde-Agudelo et al. 2012), making family planning essential to achieve SDG 3:
Good Health and Well-Being. It is estimated that each dollar spent on improving access to modern
contraceptive services saves $1.4 in maternal and child health care (Singh and Darroch 2012).
Family planning services are also essential for progress towards other SDGs (Starbird et al. 2016).
For example, adolescent pregnancies have large lifetime opportunity costs in the form of foregone
work and education opportunities (Narita and Diaz 2016). Hence, they can form an obstacle to
achieving SDG 1: No Poverty and SDG 4: Quality Education. The ability to freely choose whether
and at what age to be pregnant is essential to empower women (Plambeck and Ramdas 2020). Thus,
SDG 5: Gender Equality explicitly requires universal access to sexual and reproductive health.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we discuss how our work
contributes to the operations management literature. In Section 3, we develop a model to optimally
allocate MHU resources to sites, given complex adoption dynamics at each site. We analyze this
model in Section 4 before developing a procedure to predict demand in Section 5. We exemplify
our approach in Section 6 with the case of MSI Uganda before concluding in Section 7.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

4
2.
Literature review
We contribute to three streams of literature: (i) team deployment in the humanitarian sector, (ii)
diﬀusion of innovations, and (iii) resource allocation with sigmoidal objectives.
2.1.
Team deployment in the humanitarian sector
The routing and scheduling of MHU visits in developing countries have been studied as part of
the vast literature on vehicle routing and covering tour problems (see, e.g., Laporte 1992), but
with modiﬁed objectives for the humanitarian context (Hodgson et al. 1998, Doerner et al. 2007).
A similar problem also arises in the disaster relief literature (de la Torre et al. 2012, Ferrer et al.
2018). These works are concerned with ﬁnding the shortest path over a network of sites while
satisfying constraints on the visited sites. While such decisions are relevant for planning visits in
the short-term, we focus on the long-term resource allocation to a large number of sites.
In this vein, McCoy and Lee (2014) describe a problem in which resources, in the form of visit
capacities, are allocated to sites with the objective of providing equitable and eﬃcient service, using
the concept of α-fairness. Our objective function allows us to incorporate a measure of fairness by
weighing sites diﬀerently. We also include lower bounds on the allocated resources to guarantee a
certain level of service. de Vries et al. (2021b) proposes a model for epidemic control where limited
resources are allocated to screening the populations at diﬀerent sites. Their goal is to minimize
disease transmission, which means that demand follows diﬀerent dynamics than the adoption of
health services we consider. Most closely related to our work, de Vries et al. (2021a) propose a
model for the resource allocation problem of family planning MHUs. Their objective is to maximize
the number of clients reached during visits, including new adopters and existing clients, assuming
that demand depends on visit frequencies. They observe in their data set that demand has a
concave (logarithmic or square root) relationship with the time between two visits. As in de Vries
et al. (2021a), we build simpliﬁed policies based on our model’s optimal solution, considering that
a limited number of diﬀerent frequency choices is more practical. Unlike the authors, however, we
focus on the longer-term objective of broadly enabling health service adoption, taking into account
that adoption follows complex dynamics driven by word-of-mouth and saturation eﬀects. Based on
our model, we are able to derive novel managerial insights into the resource allocation problem for
organizations that are concerned foremost with broadening access. While health service access for
existing clients is important, we ensure a suﬃcient level of service through a constraint. We do not
consider the eﬀects of visit frequencies on demand, as we observe that these are weaker for adopters
than existing clients—existing client demand may accumulate when team visits are infrequent.
Also in the context of family planning services, Van Rijn et al. (2020) consider assigning MHUs
to sets of sites. In particular, they analyze the performance of decentralized approaches to this
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

5
assignment problem. In this paper, we focus on allocating resources in the form of visits to sites.
This planning task can occur either globally, before sites are assigned to mobile units, or locally,
to plan individual MHUs’ resource allocations.
2.2.
Diﬀusion of innovations
Diﬀusion of innovations is a large area of research within the behavioral sciences (Rogers 2010). The
Bass (1969) model was developed to quantify the behavioral concepts in the diﬀusion of durable
goods. It relies on three parameters with a clear interpretation: innovation coeﬃcient, imitation
coeﬃcient, and market potential. The result is a sigmoidal (S-shaped) function of the cumulative
number of adopters of an innovation over time, henceforth termed Bass function. In addition to
simplicity and interpretability, the Bass model has been shown to perform well in forecasting sales
of innovations (cf. Bass 1980). Therefore, we implement the Bass model to capture the demand for
MHU services, where each visit to a site corresponds to a step forward in the Bass function.
To estimate the model’s parameters, Bass (1969) proposed ordinary least squares. The resulting
estimates may be biased and unstable, so several other procedures have been proposed, including
non-linear least-squares and maximum likelihood methods (Meade and Islam 2006). These tech-
niques also tend to suﬀer from estimation issues, mainly when the inﬂection point of cumulative
demand has not yet been observed (Boswijk and Franses 2005). This problem comes up, e.g.,
when sales in new markets or new products need to be estimated with little data. Data from old
markets is only an imperfect proxy because the diﬀusion dynamics vary due to diﬀering product
characteristics, economic and cultural conditions, and marketing measures (Peres et al. 2010).
Three general approaches use data from previous markets to predict adoption dynamics in new
markets: (i) a hierarchical Bayesian approach implements priors based on previous markets and
updates as sales data is observed (e.g., Lenk and Rao 1990); (ii) a comparative approach estimates
coeﬃcients for markets with a long history and then makes predictions based on market charac-
teristics (e.g., Lee et al. 2014); and (iii) a regression approach replaces coeﬃcients with functions
of product, market, and marketing characteristics within the estimation process and can make
predictions for new markets solely based on characteristics observed early on (e.g., Gatignon et al.
1989). We estimate demands at geographically isolated sites, which relates to estimating demand
for the same product in independent markets with similar characteristics. Both the ﬁrst and second
approaches require some sites with a long demand history. In our case, we have many sites with
few observations that can, nonetheless, provide valuable information, rendering the third approach
ideal. We extend this approach with machine learning tools.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

6
2.3.
Resource allocation with sigmoidal objective
We formulate the resource allocation problem as a knapsack problem with a sum of Bass functions
as the objective, each representing the demand for health service adoption at a site. We analyze the
more general case where the objective is a sum of sigmoidal functions. Several solution procedures
have been proposed in the literature. Aˇgrali and Geunes (2009) present a dynamic programming
approach that ﬁnds an approximate solution in pseudo-polynomial time. Srivastava and Bullo
(2014) propose an algorithm that uses Lagrangian relaxation to ﬁnd a solution in polynomial time
within a constant factor of the optimal solution. Udell and Boyd (2014) propose a branch and
bound algorithm that is guaranteed to converge to the optimal solution, albeit in exponential time.
We do not aim at improving algorithmic solutions but rather at providing structural results and
insights that help organizations allocate their MHU resources. In doing so, we consider simpliﬁed
versions of the general model by adding additional assumptions. Ginsberg (1974) provides results
for the case when all sigmoidal functions are the same. We provide stronger results by making
the additional assumption that the sigmoidal functions are point-symmetric around the inﬂection
point (an assumption satisﬁed by the Bass function and many other functions used in practice).
Moreover, we provide results when the demand functions are all shifted forms of the same sigmoidal
function and derive insight into more complicated settings using comparative statics.
3.
A model of resource allocation under sigmoidal demands
We now formalize the resource allocation problem of an organization that provides well-deﬁned
health services and deploys mobile healthcare units to reach clients in remote areas. Let u denote
the number of MHUs that visit the set of sites N = {1,...,n}. The organization decides how many
visits each site receives during a planning horizon of H units of time, denoted with π = (πi)i∈N. To
generate insights with our model, in line with McCoy and Lee (2014) and de Vries et al. (2021b),
we do not constrain πi to integer values, nor do we prescribe the exact scheduling and routing.
As outlined in the introduction, we assume that the organization’s ultimate objective is to
broaden access to its health services, expressed by the number of new service adopters during a
visit. To capture the total demand of new adopters during all visits to a site i ∈N during the
planning horizon, we use the function ψi(πi). We will discuss the dynamics underlying this function
in the next subsection. Because the impact of providing access may diﬀer between sites, we use
βi ∈[0,1] to weight adopter demands. For example, MSI generates more impact when serving
younger and poorer populations. Thus, the objective is to maximize eﬀective adopter demand
Ψ(π) = P
i∈N βiψi(πi), subject to a number of constraints, which we outline next.
First, the total number of visits is limited by available MHU capacity. We assume the total visit
time, including travel, is constant across sites and normalize this to one unit of time. For example,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

7
in the context of the application we discuss in Section 6, MHUs usually visit one site per day.
With this normalization, Π
Def.
= uH is the total capacity. The organization may also have a limited
budget for performing its services. We assume such a constraint is not binding because the costs
of running an MHU (e.g., labor, vehicles) are comparatively high. Hence, budget constraints aﬀect
the number of teams rather than the number of clients served by each team and are reﬂected in Π.
Our discussions with MSI support this assumption. Second, a site can only be visited eﬀectively
by one MHU at any given time, meaning that the planning horizon H limits the number of visits.
Other constraints arise due to the need to prepare and announce visits. An upper bound on the
number of visits T, with T ≤H, allows us to combine these considerations. Finally, the organization
may impose a minimum number of visits to each site F to fulﬁll ethical and medical requirements
regarding the repetition or discontinuation of its services. The organization solves
max
π
X
i∈N
βiψi(πi)
(1a)
s.t.
X
i∈N
πi ≤Π
(1b)
F ≤πi ≤T, ∀i ∈N.
(1c)
In practice, sites may be assigned to speciﬁc MHUs. This can be captured by optimizing each
mobile unit’s allocation individually, deﬁning N as the set of sites served by the MHU.
3.1.
Specifying the adoption dynamics—the Bass diﬀusion model
The adoption of health services provided by MHUs follows complex dynamics. Potential clients
may be unaware of a service, unconvinced of its beneﬁts, or mistrust the provider. The community
can then be an important driver of adoption by showcasing the service’s beneﬁts and safety.
The Bass (1969) model captures exactly such dynamics while being suﬃciently ﬂexible to rep-
resent demand in many practical applications. The model has three parameters: (i) the innovation
coeﬃcient reﬂects the share of innovators in the population who demand a product or service even
when nobody else uses it; (ii) the imitation coeﬃcient reﬂects the share of imitators who demand
a product or service only if they observe others using it (when the innovation coeﬃcient is low,
but the imitation coeﬃcient is high, word-of-mouth eﬀects play a major role in building demand);
(iii) the market potential signiﬁes the level at which demand saturates.
We assume that adopter demand faced by MHUs at site i follows the diﬀusion process deﬁned
by the Bass model. Speciﬁcally, after πi visits to the site, the cumulative number of clients is
Yi(πi) = mi
1 −θie−(pi+qi)πi
1 + qi
pi θie−(pi+qi)πi .
(2)
Here, pi ≥0 and qi ≥0 are the innovation and imitation coeﬃcients, respectively, in units of 1/visit.
The market potential, the maximum cumulative number of clients, is denoted by mi > 0, i.e.,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

8
limπi→∞Yi(πi) = mi. The parameter θi = pi(mi −ci)/(pimi + qici) is used to simplify notation,
where ci = Yi(0) ≥0 denotes the cumulative number of clients at the start of the planning horizon.
If ci = 0, then θi = 1 so that (2) simpliﬁes to the exact expression in Bass (1969). The cumulative
number of clients in the Bass diﬀusion model is exempliﬁed in Figure 1.
Figure 1
The Bass diﬀusion model
Concave region
Convex region
Number of visits
Cumulative number
of clients Y
πinﬂ
m
(a) No existing clients
Saturated market
Number of visits
πinﬂ
c
m
(b) Existing clients, higher q
While the Bass model was derived for the adoption of durable goods in continuous time, clients
in the present context can only receive services when an MHU visits. Thus, we discretize time into
intervals of unit length. Taking a long-term view on allocating resources, we do not prescribe an
exact visit schedule. Hence, we assume that a site’s adopters are given by the next step in the
discretized Bass function whenever a team visits. Implicit here is that inter-arrival times do not
aﬀect adopter demand. de Vries et al. (2021a) indicate that client demand is an increasing and
concave function of inter-arrival time. However, the need to prepare visits lower-bounds the inter-
arrival time and limits this eﬀect. As a result, adopter demand during visit k ∈N is Yi(k)−Yi(k−1),
and total demand during the planning horizon (the objective function) can be rewritten as ψi(πi) =
Yi(πi) −ci. Alternatively, one can think of πi as the cumulative marketing eﬀort in a generalized
Bass model (Bass et al. 1994), which would lead to the same expression for the demand function.
The above model assumes a ﬁxed market potential mi. In practice, however, the long-run market
potential may be aﬀected by population growth. If the population growth rates are similar for all
sites, the eﬀect on the allocation is negligible. Appendix E provides evidence that MSI’s sites in
Uganda have similar growth rates.
Finally, we point out that the Bass (1969) model assumes no repeated services and captures only
the demand generated by new adopters of the service. Existing clients may require service again
from time to time. While this impacts the number of clients served, it does not aﬀect the percentage
of the population that serves as a driver for word-of-mouth eﬀects and, thus, the adoption by new
clients. Constraint (1c) ensures that sites receive a minimum number of visits. If this is suﬃcient
for existing clients to obtain services at a reasonable frequency, removing their demands from
consideration is in line with the stated objective of broadening access to health services.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

9
With the above considerations, we can reformulate the organization’s problem as follows:
max
π
X
i∈N
βi(Yi(πi) −ci)
s.t.
(1b) and (1c).
(3)
4.
Optimal allocation of visits to sites
In this section, we analyze Problem (1) to characterize the optimal allocation. We consider special
cases in Sections 4.1 and 4.2 that allow us to gain intuition about the optimal allocation and provide
actionable insights for the decision-maker. Section 4.3 provides an algorithm to approximate the
solution to (1) in the general case. In Section 4.4, we present comparative statics results that yield
further understanding of how the optimal allocation depends on the adoption dynamics and site
composition. We summarize our insights in Section 4.5. All proofs are found in Appendix B.
While our focus is on the Bass function, we present results for a more general set of demand
functions that includes the Bass function as a special case. Namely, we assume throughout the
analysis that adopter demand fulﬁlls Assumption 1:
Assumption 1 (Sigmoidal demand function). The demand function ψi : R≥0 →R≥0 for any
site is twice continuously diﬀerentiable, strictly increasing, and there is a unique inﬂection point
πinﬂ
i
≥0, such that ψ′′
i (πi) > 0 for πi < πinﬂ
i
, and ψ′′
i (πi) < 0 for πi > πinﬂ
i
.
Before moving to the main results, we show in Proposition 1 that the Bass function in (2) satisﬁes
Assumption 1. The proposition further shows that the Bass function is point-symmetric around
the inﬂection point, a property that we will assume for certain results.
Proposition 1. The function ˜ψi(πi)
Def.
= Yi(πi) −ci is twice continuously diﬀerentiable, strictly
increasing, and has the unique inﬂection point πinﬂ
i
= max{log(θiqi/pi)/(pi + qi), 0} such that
˜ψ′′
i (πi) > 0 if πi < πinﬂ
i
and ˜ψ′′
i (πi) < 0 if πi > πinﬂ
i
. In addition, ˜ψi(πi) is point-symmetric around
πinﬂ
i
, that is ˜ψi(πinﬂ
i
+ ϵ) −˜ψi(πinﬂ
i
) = ˜ψi(πinﬂ
i
) −˜ψi(πinﬂ
i
−ϵ) ∀ϵ ∈

0,πinﬂ
i

.
With the assumptions of our model in hand, we state Proposition 2, which formalizes a guarantee
that all capacity is used in (1):
Proposition 2. A maximizer π∗= (π∗
i )i∈N of (1) exists and either satisﬁes the capacity con-
straint with equality, P
i∈N π∗
i = Π, or all the upper bounds with equality, π∗
i = T, ∀i ∈N.
If the allocation πi = T, ∀i ∈N, is feasible, this also trivially constitutes the optimum. This is
the case if and only if nT ≤Π. In the remainder, we assume nT > Π and that (1b) is replaced by
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

10
an equality constraint in (1), which is without loss of generality according to Proposition 2. Any
optimal solution must then fulﬁll the following set of Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions:
(πi −T)(πi −F)(βiψ′
i(πi) −λ) = 0, ∀i ∈N,
(πi −T)(βiψ′
i(πi) −λ) ≥0, ∀i ∈N,
(πi −F)(βiψ′
i(πi) −λ) ≥0, ∀i ∈N,
(4)
where λ is the Lagrange multiplier of the equality constraint. The KKT conditions imply that
either πi = T, πi = F, or πi satisﬁes
βiψ′
i(πi) = λ.
(5)
For a given λ, there are at most two solutions to (5): one in the concave region (πi ≥πinﬂ
i
) and one
in the convex region (πi ≤πinﬂ
i
). We use ˆπi(λ) ≥πinﬂand ˜πi(λ) ≤πinﬂto denote the two potential
solutions to (5) for a site i. If no solution exists, we deﬁne ˆπi(λ) = πinﬂand ˜πi(λ) = πinﬂ, respectively.
For any π and λ, we thus denote four mutually exclusive sets, L, G, E1, and E2:
L(π,λ) = {i ∈N : πi = F},
G(π,λ) = {i ∈N : πi = T},
E1(π,λ) = {i ∈N\(L ∪G) : πi = ˆπi(λ)}, and
E2(π,λ) = {i ∈N\(L ∪G ∪E1) : πi = ˜πi(λ)}.
(6)
The sets L(π,λ) and G(π,λ) are the sites for which the inequality constraints (lower and upper
bound, respectively) are tight. The sets E1(π,λ) and E2(π,λ) are the sites for which equation (5)
is satisﬁed. For all sites i ∈E1(π,λ), ψ′′(πi) ≤0, and we say that i is in the concave region (see
Figure 1a). Similarly, for all sites i ∈E2(π,λ), ψ′′(πi) > 0, and we say that i is in the convex region.
Using the above ﬁrst-order necessary conditions, as well as second-order necessary conditions
introduced in the proof, we show that any optimal solution can be partitioned into these four sets,
with some additional properties:
Proposition 3. Let π∗be an optimal solution to (1). Then there exists a λ∗, as well as mutually
exclusive sets L∗= L(π∗,λ∗), G∗= G(π∗,λ∗), E∗
1 = E1(π∗,λ∗), and E∗
2 = E2(π∗,λ∗), such that
(a) N = L∗∪G∗∪E∗
1 ∪E∗
2 (the sets are also exhaustive);
(b) if i ∈L∗, then βiψ′
i(F) ≤λ∗;
(c) if i ∈G∗, then βiψ′
i(T) ≥λ∗;
(d) |E∗
2| ≤1 and, if i ∈E∗
2 and j ∈E∗
1, then βiψ′′
i (π∗
i ) ≤−βjψ′′
j (π∗
j ).
We provide a complete proof in Appendix B. Parts (a)-(c) follow from the ﬁrst-order conditions,
which require that the derivatives of all sites in the interior (in E∗
1 or E∗
2) are the same and equal
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

11
to the Lagrange multiplier. The intuition for this result is the following. Assume, to the contrary,
that two sites i and j are in the interior of the solution and have diﬀerent derivatives. Say, for
example, that the derivative is smaller for site i. Then one can obtain an improved feasible solution
by adding a small enough ε to πj and subtracting ε from πi. Thus, the problem can be reduced to
ﬁnding the optimal λ∗and deciding which sites belong to which set in (6). Figure 2 illustrates the
four possible visit numbers of an optimal allocation for a ﬁxed λ.
Figure 2
The allocation of visits to sites for a given λ and the corresponding set memberships
λ
λ
E1
E2
L
G
Number of visits
Demand ψ
πinﬂ
ˆπ
˜π
T
F
The assumption that ψi is continuously diﬀerentiable allows us to show that part (d) is a neces-
sary condition, compared to Theorem 3 of Aˇgrali and Geunes (2009) that shows the existence of a
solution with such a property when assuming Lipschitz continuity. Interestingly, the second-order
conditions do not guarantee that E∗
2 is empty, but instead that it contains at most one site. In
Sections 4.1 and 4.2, we show that, under some additional conditions, there exists a solution where
E∗
2 is empty unless E∗
1 is empty, and we use this fact to derive solutions to simpliﬁed models.
4.1.
Optimal allocation for homogeneous sites
In this subsection, we assume that sites are homogeneous: ψi = ψ and βi = β ∀i ∈N. This is a
useful assumption when there is little historical data to go by, and populations around the diﬀerent
sites are not too varied in terms of their size, as well as economic and social conditions.
Ginsberg (1974) provides an analysis of this case. We additionally assume that the cumulative
demand function ψ is point-symmetric, as applies to the Bass function (cf. Proposition 1). The
additional assumption allows us to show stronger results:
Proposition 4. Assume a homogeneous set of sites N with ψi = ψ for all i ∈N, and let ψ
be point-symmetric around the inﬂection point πinﬂ. Moreover, assume a homogeneous weighting
βi = β. Then, it is optimal to either
(i) select any x∗sites that are visited equally often with πi = F +(Π−Fn)/x∗, while the remaining
n−x∗sites are visited with πi = F, where x∗= arg maxx∈{1,...,n} x

ψ
 F + Π−F n
x

−ψ(F)

; or
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

12
(ii) select x∗∗= ⌊(Π−nF)/(T −F)⌋sites that are visited equally often with πi = T, while the rest
is visited with πi = F, except for one site that is visited with πi = Π −x∗∗T −(n −x∗∗−1)F.
Under these conditions, the problem is reduced to optimizing a single variable: x∗, the number of
sites to be visited equally often with a relatively high frequency. We refer to such sites as prioritized.
The remaining sites are visited only the minimum number of times (π∗
i = F).
This result uncovers a problem of equity even for identical sites. Some sites receive the bare
minimum of resources, while other sites receive a large fraction. Therefore, it is critical to set the
lower bound F appropriately such that every site receives a satisfactory level of service.
Before turning to the analysis of other cases, we brieﬂy discuss the eﬀect that the underlying
adoption dynamics have on the number of prioritized sites x∗. For this purpose, we assume that
T is suﬃciently large such that Case (i) above applies, that ψ follows the Bass function, and that
x∗can take non-integer values. The eﬀect of a small change in a parameter of the Bass function
can then be identiﬁed easily through implicit derivation. An increase in c can be interpreted as
shortening the convex part of the Bass function. This means that the number of adopters per visit
begins to saturate more quickly, and, thus, it is beneﬁcial to choose a larger set of sites. When m
increases, assuming c > 0, the opposite happens—the convex part is lengthened, and x∗decreases.
An increase in p implies that innovation is more prominent and that adopter demand grows more
quickly but saturates faster. Early on, it may thus be optimal to visit a smaller number of prioritized
sites x∗more frequently. However, if cumulative demand is already close to the inﬂection point, an
increase in p leads to an increase in x∗. An increase in q has more complex eﬀects tied to c: the
beneﬁts of increasing q scale with the number of existing clients because they enable imitation, but
saturation eﬀects act as a counterweight and also scale with existing clients.
4.2.
Optimal allocation for homogeneous sites with diﬀerent starting points
Next, we assume a set of sites with the same impact multipliers and point-symmetric demand
functions but a diﬀerent number of existing clients. This is a useful assumption when populations
around sites are not too diﬀerent, but sites have previously been served with varying frequencies.
Let ψ be the demand function that all of the sites follow and let π0
i be the number of previous
visits to the site, that is, ψ(π0
i ) = ci. Then, ψi(πi) = ψ(π0
i + πi) −ψ(π0
i ). Moreover, let πinﬂbe the
inﬂection point of ψ and ˆπ(λ) the point that satisﬁes the KKT condition in (5) within the concave
region of ψ. Let C1 = {i ∈N : π0
i + F ≥πinﬂ} (resp. C2 = {i ∈N : π0
i + F < πinﬂ}) be the set of
sites for which the starting point, i.e., previous visits plus minimum number of visits F, is strictly
greater (resp. lower) than the inﬂection point in ψ.
Proposition 5. Assume ψi(πi) = ψ(π0
i +πi)−ψ(π0
i ) for all i ∈N, and let ψ be point-symmetric
around the inﬂection point πinﬂ. There exists an optimal solution π∗to (1) such that
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

13
(a) E∗
2 = ∅or E∗
1 = ∅;
(b) if i,j ∈C2, i ∈L∗, and π0
i > π0
j, then j ∈L∗;
(c) if i,j ∈C1, i ∈L∗, and π0
i < π0
j, then j ∈L∗; and
(d) if i ∈E∗
1 and j /∈L∗, then π0
j + π∗
j ≤π0
i + π∗
i .
Proposition 5 allows us to ﬁnd the optimal allocation through a greedy search by sequentially
taking sites out of the set L. This idea is formalized in Corollary 1:
Corollary 1. Assume a set of sites as in Proposition 5. Wlog, reorder the sites such that
(a) if j ∈C1,i ∈C2, then i < j;
(b) if i,j ∈C2, π0
i ≥π0
j, then i < j; and
(c) if i,j ∈C1, π0
i ≤π0
j, then i < j.
There exists l∗∈{0,...,|C2|} and λ∗such that an optimal allocation π∗exists that satisﬁes either
π∗
i =



min{(ˆπ(λ∗) −π0
i ),T},
if i ≤l∗
F,
if i ∈C2 and i > l∗
min{max{ˆπ(λ∗) −π0
i ,F},T}, if i ∈C1
for all i ∈N, or
(7)
π∗
i =

Π, if i = 1
F, if i > 1
for all i ∈N.
(8)
We propose an algorithm in Appendix A that ﬁnds an optimal allocation through a search for
l∗and λ∗, requiring a constant number of line searches only. Here, we provide an overview. For
any l sites with a starting point in the convex part (sites in C2), the procedure computes the best
allocation when those sites are prioritized. The prioritized sites are those with the highest current
demand (adopters per visit). For each choice of l, some sites are also prioritized with a starting
point in the concave part. However, this is limited by all prioritized sites having the same number
of adopters per visit at the end of the planning horizon. As a result, the prioritized sites from C1 are
those with the lowest current demand. Finally, we note that prioritized sites receive more resources
the lower their cumulative demand level and other sites receive only the minimum number of visits.
4.3.
Optimal allocation for heterogeneous sites
When sites are heterogeneous, the allocation problem is NP-hard (Aˇgrali and Geunes 2009, Theo-
rem 1). The algorithm of Srivastava and Bullo (2014) is a heuristic approach for solving the general
allocation problem that links to the intuitive development we have done here. The algorithm uses
a relaxation of (1) to search for the Lagrange multiplier and then allocate resources given this
multiplier. We apply this algorithm in Section 6.3 to obtain a proxy of the optimal allocation.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

14
4.4.
The impact of adoption dynamics on the optimal allocation
Without a closed-form solution, it is diﬃcult to intuit how diﬀerences in the underlying adoption
dynamics aﬀect the optimal allocation: should a site with more imitators be visited more often, or
one with more innovators? What does it mean for the visit frequency at one site when the number
of existing clients at another site is large? We can provide intuition into how an optimal allocation
is aﬀected by small diﬀerences between the adoption dynamics at sites. This can also be useful
when an organization aims to aﬀect a site’s parameters, for example, through marketing.
We analyze the eﬀects of a small change in a parameter s that aﬀects one site’s demand function.
Suppose that π∗is an optimal allocation and, without loss of generality, assume that the inequality
constraints are not binding for sites i = 1,..., ˆn, that is F < π∗
i < T, but binding for all other sites.
Assume further that the change in s does not impact whether any inequality constraints are binding.
Recall the ﬁrst-order conditions βiψ′
i(π∗
i ) = λ∗∀i = 1,..., ˆn, and the equality constraint Pˆn
i=1 π∗
i =
Π −Pn
i=ˆn+1 π∗
i . By taking derivatives with respect to s on both sides, we obtain βi
∂ψ′
i
∂s (π∗
i ) +
βiψ′′
i (π∗
i )
∂π∗
i
∂s = ∂λ∗
∂s
and Pˆn
i=1
∂π∗
i
∂s = 0 (because of our assumptions, the derivatives for sites i =
ˆn + 1,...,n are zero). Solving the system of equations for ∂π∗
i /∂s and ∂λ∗/∂s, we have
∂π∗
i
∂s =
−
1
ψ′′
i (π∗
i )
∂ψ′
i
∂s (π∗
i )P
j̸=i,j≤ˆn
1
βjψ′′
j (π∗
j ) + P
j̸=i,j≤ˆn
1
βiψ′′
i (π∗
i )ψ′′
j (π∗
j )
∂ψ′
j
∂s (π∗
j )
P
j≤ˆn
1
βiψ′′
j (π∗
j )
, and
(9)
∂λ∗
∂s =
P
j≤ˆn
1
ψ′′
j (π∗
j )
∂ψ′
j
∂s (π∗
j )
P
j≤ˆn
1
βjψ′′
j (π∗
j )
.
(10)
Suppose that s only aﬀects Site 1 and all sites i < ˆn are in E∗
1, i.e., ψ′′
i (π∗
i ) < 0 (this is not a
strong condition as at most one site is in E∗
2, see Proposition 3). Then, (9) and (10) simplify to
∂π∗
1
∂s = −
P
j̸=1,j≤ˆn
1
βjψ′′
j (π∗
j )
P
j≤ˆn
1
βjψ′′
j (π∗
j )
1
ψ′′
1(π∗
1)
|
{z
}
>0
∂ψ′
1
∂s (π∗
1),
∂π∗
i
∂s =
1
βiψ′′
i (π∗
i )ψ′′
1 (π∗
1)
P
j≤ˆn
1
βjψ′′
j (π∗
j )
|
{z
}
<0
∂ψ′
1
∂s (π∗
1), ∀i = 2,..., ˆn, and
∂λ∗
∂s =
1
ψ′′
1 (π∗
1)
P
j≤ˆn
1
βjψ′′
j (π∗
j )
|
{z
}
>0
∂ψ′
1
∂s (π∗
1).
Thus, the sign of the ﬁrst-order change is fully determined by ∂ψ′
1(π∗
1)/∂s. If ∂ψ′
1(π∗
1)/∂s > 0, then
π∗
1 increases, while π∗
i decreases for i = 2,..., ˆn. Interestingly, the shadow price of the capacity
constraint, λ∗, increases if and only if π∗
1 increases.
Suppose now that ψ1(π1) is given by the Bass function Y1(π1) −c1. We can easily compute
derivatives with respect to the relevant parameters p1, q1, m1, and c1 to obtain the direction of
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

15
change. For reasons of space, we provide the formal results in Appendix C. We show that an
increase in the market potential of Site 1 always increases the optimal number of visits to that site
while decreasing the optimal number of visits to other sites. This is intuitive because a larger pool
of potential clients results in more adopters per visit. An increase in the number of existing clients
reduces the optimal number of visits to Site 1 while increasing the number of visits to other sites.
This is because, with more existing clients, there are fewer potential ones.
The results for p1 and q1 are more nuanced. Intuitively, p1 and q1 represent rates of diﬀusion:
p1 for innovators and q1 for imitators. Larger values imply faster diﬀusion. It may be optimal to
increase the number of visits to take advantage of this, or to decrease the number of visits because
the same number of adopters can be reached with fewer visits. In fact, if π∗
1 is small, ∂Y ′
1(π∗
1)/∂s > 0
for s ∈{p1,q1}. For larger values of π∗
1, when adopter demand at the site is close to saturation,
∂Y ′
1(π∗
1)/∂s < 0. The point where the sign of ∂Y ′
1(π∗
1)/∂p1 changes is always in the concave region,
within the assumed range of π∗
1. The point where the sign of ∂Y ′
1(π∗
1)/∂q1 changes is in the concave
region if and only if q1 > p1, which is commonly observed in practice (see, e.g., Bass 1969).
4.5.
Summary of managerial insights from the analysis
We summarize here the key insights for decision-makers, derived through the analyses in the preced-
ing sections. These insights may be used to develop a heuristic approach to the allocation problem,
especially in settings with poor historical data. We provide examples of heuristic approaches in
Section 6.3 and compare them to both myopic and optimal allocations.
There are three intuitively appealing approaches to allocating MHU resources that can be
observed, at least anecdotally, in practice. One is to allocate resources equally. The second is to
reserve most resources for a small group of sites with very high current (i.e., per-visit) adopter
demand. The third is to allocate resources in proportion to the current adopter demand. The opti-
mal allocation runs counter to these intuitive approaches but incorporates some of their elements.
As opposed to spreading resources equally, it is optimal to prioritize a subset of sites. Rather than
prioritizing only the top demand sites, this subset should be large enough to anticipate saturation
eﬀects. While sites are more likely to be prioritized in the optimal allocation when current adopter
demand is high, this holds only for less developed sites, i.e., where the pool of existing clients is
relatively small compared to the potential. Prioritization amongst more developed sites may, in
fact, follow a reverse order. A more general yardstick for prioritization is the level of cumulative
adopter demand. When allocating resources between prioritized sites, as opposed to apportion-
ing them proportional to current demand, resources should be allocated such that the number of
adopters per visit at the end of the planning horizon is equal across sites. Therefore, sites with
higher adoption potential, which generally have lower current demand, should receive more visits.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

16
These two interlinked decisions—which sites to prioritize and how to allocate resources between
prioritized sites—are inﬂuenced by the underlying adoption dynamics. In particular, more sites
should be prioritized when market potentials are smaller, there are more existing clients, or diﬀusion
rates are higher (both in the form of innovation and imitation). In terms of the allocated resources,
a particular site should be favored if it has higher market potential or fewer existing clients, ceteris
paribus. Similarly, higher diﬀusion rates at a site should mean that more resources are allocated
to that site unless saturation eﬀects are already noticeable.
5.
A procedure for predicting adopter demands
In order to allocate resources optimally, we need to be able to predict demand at all sites. Here,
we outline a method that combines the Bass diﬀusion model’s predictive power and machine
learning. We assume that the adoption dynamics at each site follow a Bass function and use
a combination of data gathered in the ﬁeld (visits) and publicly available data about the sites
(location, demographics, economy, . . . ) to estimate the parameters with machine learning methods.
In the context of MHUs, there are many concurrent markets for the same health services, and
adoption proceeds at each site largely independently because potential clients interact mostly
with people served at the same site. At the same time, while sites vary in the composition of
their population, there are many economic and cultural commonalities between populations, which
means that the underlying dynamics (speciﬁcally, the imitation and innovation coeﬃcients) are
likely to be linked. Therefore, we take the approach of estimating the Bass parameters as a function
of site characteristics, thus pooling the demand data from all sites to get better estimates of the
Bass model for each site, especially for sites with little demand data available.
We address two additional issues relevant to the context of MHUs. First, there may be existing
clients that are not registered but contribute to the diﬀusion of health services through word-of-
mouth eﬀects. Such a discrepancy may be due to a lack of quality data gathered in the ﬁeld, e.g.,
many NGOs have only started gathering data at scale in recent years to increase eﬃciency and
accountability, leading to missing data on existing clients. Moreover, while the sites visited by
MHUs are typically isolated, some migration may occur and provide a baseline of clients that have
already obtained the service. Therefore, our approach is able to estimate existing clients at each
site, ci, from incomplete data on existing clients as well as site characteristics.
Second, while data gathered in the ﬁeld may be limited, many data sources are becoming publicly
available that allow us to enhance predictions. In particular, we can estimate the market potential
from the population in proximity to a site. Our approach estimates mi as a fraction of the popula-
tion living in the catchment area of site i, where the fraction of potential clients in the population
is based on the experience from related settings and the demographic composition around the site.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

17
The catchment area varies across sites, speciﬁcally between rural and urban areas (Doerner et al.
2007). However, it is likely that at sites with similar characteristics, people are willing to walk
similar distances, even if the population residing within that distance varies. Hence, we obtain
population data at diﬀerent distances from a site, using the WorldPop project (Lloyd et al. 2019).
We represent the population in the catchment area as a function of the radius ri that people living
close to site i are willing to travel to obtain service. The parameter ri is then estimated as part
of the suggested procedure. The market potential mi is obtained by multiplying the population in
the catchment area by the fraction of the population that are potential clients.
We use gradient boosting, a state-of-the-art machine learning method (Natekin 2020), to estimate
each site’s Bass parameters. With gradient boosting, a function of the diﬀerence between actual and
predicted outcomes (the loss function) is minimized iteratively. In each iteration, pseudo-residuals
of the predicted outcomes are regressed on observables using a weak learner, often a regression tree
model. The prediction model is then a weighted combination of the previous iteration’s model and
the model generated by the weak learner. We modify the standard approach in two ways: while
adopter demand for health services is the outcome of interest and the basis of the loss function, we
simultaneously use four regression trees in order to estimate pi, qi, ri, and ci as a function of site
characteristics, instead of estimating demand directly. We further add a penalty term to constrain
the model parameters within the relevant space of the Bass model.
Combining these aspects, we propose the following procedure for predicting the functions Yi(πi):
1. Determine the market potential of a site as a function of the site-speciﬁc radius, say mi(ri),
using the population density around the site multiplied by the fraction of potential clients.
2. Deﬁne a functional form of the innovation and imitation coeﬃcients, the site-speciﬁc radius,
as well as the number of existing clients as functions of the site characteristics Xi, say p(Xi),
q(Xi), r(Xi), and c(Xi), to be learned from the data. We use a sum of weighted regression
trees. We also explore a linear form in Section 6.2.
3. Deﬁne a loss function. We use the mean squared error or quadratic loss function:
Pn
i=1
Pvi
j=1 [yi,j −Y (j;p(Xi),q(Xi),mi (r(Xi)),c(Xi))]
2, where Y is the number of adopters
according to the Bass model at the j-th visit, given the model parameters at site i, yi,j is the
number of adopters observed, and vi is the total number of visits.
4. Estimate ˆp(Xi), ˆq(Xi), ˆr(Xi), and ˆc(Xi) with a modiﬁed gradient boosting algorithm, in which
each iteration simultaneously updates the four models. If we use a linear functional form,
we can estimate the parameters directly by minimizing the quadratic loss function over the
coeﬃcients, i.e., we obtain a non-linear least-squares estimator.
5. Predict Yi(πi) based on Equation (2) with Yi(πi) = Y (πi; ˆp(Xi), ˆq(Xi),mi (ˆr(Xi)), ˆc(Xi)).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

18
The predictive power of our approach far outperforms that of a non-linear least-squares approach
(the mean squared error is approximately than a third). In fact, the approach has nearly the same
predictive power as a pure “black-box” gradient boosting approach. We implement this procedure
in the R programming language and make it available together with synthetic data at blinded
for peer review.
Experiments with synthetic data allow us to investigate the procedure’s accuracy. We observe
that predictions are highly accurate and that parameter estimates predict the inﬂection point of
the cumulative demand curve correctly. Estimates of qi, ri, and mi are accurate. Small inaccuracies
are possible in pi and ci estimates because nearly equivalent demand curves can be generated by
compensating lower (higher) values of pi with higher (lower) values of ci.
6.
Application to MSI Uganda
In this section, we apply our model to MSI Uganda, an organization that faces the resource allo-
cation problem discussed throughout this paper. We give some background on the organization in
Section 6.1 before applying our demand prediction techniques in Section 6.2. We use the model
parameters estimated to illustrate the impact of an optimal resource allocation in Section 6.3 and
compare the optimal allocation to current implementations, a myopic policy, as well as heuristics
that make use of our analytical insights.
6.1.
MSI Uganda’s family planning MHUs
Context. Family planning services are an important contributor to SDG 3: Good Health and
Well-Being. Reasons include the mental (Groupo M´edico and Global Doctors for Choice Network
2011) and physical (Conde-Agudelo et al. 2012) adverse eﬀects of unwanted pregnancies and quick
successions of childbearing, as well as the 25 million unsafe abortions yearly caused by undesired
pregnancies and resulting in 14–40 thousand deaths (WHO 2019b,a). Apart from adversely impact-
ing health, a lack of family planning is a major barrier to SDG 1: No Poverty, SDG 4: Quality
Education, and SDG 5: Gender Equality.
Organization. MSI Reproductive Choices (MSI) tries to address the need for family planning
services of underserved populations worldwide. In Uganda, MSI has been active for over 30 years.
Today, it is one of the largest providers of sexual and reproductive healthcare in the country. MSI
focuses on reaching predominantly young and poor clients within hard-to-reach rural locations and
in urban slums. To serve remote areas, the organization employs 31 MHUs in this country (MSI
Reproductive Choices 2021b).
We focus on visits by the 25 standard MHUs (in contrast to specialized teams, which we exclude
for consistency). Each unit operates with a driver and two to four family planning providers (doc-
tors, nurses) and is responsible for visiting a mostly exclusive set of villages. When visiting a village,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

19
MHUs usually set themselves up at local health centers, where potential clients can approach them
for services. Such a visit is commonly announced multiple weeks in advance.
Currently, resource allocation decisions do not systematically consider the trade-oﬀs arising from
adoption dynamics and the need to develop demand at sites. In fact, MSI’s guidelines state explicitly
that the frequency of visits should be based on current demand (MSI Reproductive Choices 2016).
Visit data. Between May 2015 and November 2019, standard teams provided contraceptive ser-
vices to 542,845 clients at 1,237 sites with known geolocations. We observe the acting team, basic
demographics and previous contraceptive status of the clients, and the services performed. In some
cases, we observe additional information, for example, about the perception of marketing tools. We
focus exclusively on client interactions regarding long-term contraceptive methods, i.e., intrauter-
ine devices and implants. There are two main reasons for this. First, MSI shows an increasing
focus on expanding choice of contraceptive methods to include long-term methods, due to their
eﬀectiveness and convenience (Duvall et al. 2014), and three-quarters of MSI clients worldwide now
use long-term methods (MSI Reproductive Choices 2020). In Uganda, long-term methods account
for 90% of client interactions and complement the short-term methods predominantly provided in
the public health sector. MHUs are usually deployed to a site only when there is no other provider
of long-term methods. Second, beyond MSI, long-term methods are seen as a cornerstone in scaling
up access to family planning in the developing world (WHO 2012, Shoupe 2016).
Client interactions concerning long-term methods fall into one of two categories: the client may
already be using such a method and require removal with or without replacement (existing clients),
or seek usage for the ﬁrst time (adopters—MSI uses the term also for clients who are not using a
contraceptive method at the time of visit but may have used one in the past. If a client previously
used a long-term method, we consider them an existing client for this paper). We focus our attention
on adopter demand to reﬂect MSI’s ambition of broadening access to modern contraceptive methods
(MSI Reproductive Choices 2021a). Existing clients are signiﬁcantly less hampered by informational
barriers to access. Their physical barriers to access can be overcome if their demands, e.g., for
removals or replacements, can realistically be met with a baseline visit frequency.
Demographic data. Uganda is subdivided administratively into districts, counties, sub-counties,
parishes, and villages. As of 2014, the time of the most recent publicly available census, there
were 7,557 parishes with an average population of 4,583. The census data is available at the
level of parishes and contains statistics on both individuals and households, which we use as site
characteristics, in addition to the data provided by MSI. There are other inﬂuences on demand,
e.g., religious and ethnic diversity in diﬀerent regions that inﬂuence social norms around family
planning or variations in exposure to public promotional activities. While the census does not
capture these directly, it provides a wealth of information.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

20
In order to estimate the population in the catchment area of a site, we rely on the Uganda 2020
dataset from the WorldPop project (WorldPop et al. 2018), which provides population estimates at
a resolution of 3 arc (approximately 100 × 100 meters at the equator). Such a granular breakdown
allows us to deﬁne a site’s population (i.e., the population in the catchment area) as a function of
the radius that potential clients are willing to travel. To speed up computation, we deﬁne mi(ri)
as third-degree polynomials that ﬁt the WorldPop data with an adjusted R2 ≥0.97. To derive the
market potential as a fraction of the site’s population, we make two calculations. First, we note that
among all observed MSI clients, 98.86% are female, and 99.59% are within the reproductive age
(15–49 years old, see UN 2019). Hence, we multiply the total population with the fraction of females
within reproductive age in the area around the site, as found from the census data. Second, based
on Track20’s classiﬁcation of the stages of adoption of modern contraceptive methods (reported
in Feyisetan et al. 2017), we assume that the prevalence of such methods reaches saturation at
approximately 80%, the highest contraceptive prevalence rate among developed countries. We thus
multiply the number from the previous step by 80%.
Impact of service delivery at a site. MSI’s impact from providing contraceptive methods depends
on the age and economic condition of clients. We compute poverty and age scores for each site and
multiply those to derive the impact of serving clients at a speciﬁc site. For the poverty score, we
use district-level GDP per capita data that we regress on the district-level census information. We
then use the parish-level census information to predict GDP per capita around the sites. The scores
are normalized, such that the site with the lowest predicted GDP per capita has a score of 1. To
compute the age score, we calculate the fraction of young persons (15–24 years old, see UN 2020)
out of the population in reproductive age. Again, the score is normalized so that the site with the
highest fraction of young persons has a score of 1. In summary, βi = (age score)i(poverty score)i.
In Appendix D, we describe in detail the process of cleaning and matching between the diﬀerent
data sets and the auxiliary data sets used for this purpose.
6.2.
Adopter demand prediction results
We aim to obtain accurate predictions of how demand evolves in the long term to incorporate
demand build-up and saturation eﬀects into the planning procedure. For this purpose, we assume
that contraceptive service adoption by MSI’s target population follows a Bass model. Multiple
considerations drive the choice of this model. First, social interactions have been established widely
as a key driver for the adoption of contraceptive methods (see, e.g., Bongaarts and Watkins 1996).
Second, we are interested in long-term demand trends of entire sites rather than short-term eﬀects
or individual behaviors. Given these two requirements, the healthcare modeling literature suggests
a system dynamics approach (Barton et al. 2004). The Bass model is likely the most used system
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

21
dynamics model to tackle questions of adoption. It is supported by well-established diﬀusion theory
and can represent a wide range of adoption dynamics.
Based on the assumed Bass dynamics, we predict adopter demands at diﬀerent sites with the
estimation procedure outlined in Section 5. The observation period is limited, making it necessary
to evaluate our approach’s predictive performance in the short term. For this purpose, we split the
visit data into a training (May 11, 2015, until November 29, 2018; 12,876 visits) and a test period
(November 30, 2018, until November 29, 2019; 3,518 visits). This means that we use the last full
year of observations from MSI (21.46% of visits) as test data. We choose a date-speciﬁc cut-oﬀto
simulate the prediction problem faced by MSI when planning its resource allocation based on the
information obtained from previous visits. In Figure 3a, we present a histogram of the deviation
between predicted and actual adopter demands in the test period. Figure 3b contains a histogram
of the absolute diﬀerence as a percentage of actual demands.
Figure 3
Diﬀerence between predicted and actual demands
0
100
200
300
-60
-30
0
30
60
ˆd −d
Frequency
(a) Predicted minus actual adopter demand
0
100
200
300
0
1
2
3
| ˆd−d|
d
Frequency
(b) Absolute diﬀerence over actual adopter demand
Note. Actual and predicted demands are denoted with d and ˆd. The red lines represent 10%, 50%, and 90% percentiles,
from left to right. Panel (a) (resp. Panel (b)) trims 2.0% (resp. 2.9%) of observations from the test data for clarity.
We can use a model-independent state-of-the-art approach to derive an upper bound for predic-
tion accuracy in the short term. In particular, we implement a standard gradient boosting approach,
using the R-package gbm (Ridgeway 2019). The mean squared error in the test data using this
approach is 16% less than in our model-based approach. This indicates that the Bass model may
not capture some demand drivers. However, we point out that the limited test period puts more
emphasis on short-term variations in demand levels compared to the long-term variations captured
by the Bass model. To see this, note that the Bass estimates indicate that the adopters observed in
our data correspond only to 8% (resp. 6%) of the market potential of the mean (resp. median) site.
This reduces to 3% (resp. 2%) when considering only the test period. That our approach achieves
comparable predictive accuracy to a state-of-the-art approach without model constraints provides
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

22
important evidence for our assumption. At the same time, it is unlikely that a model-independent
approach will appropriately capture longer-term trends in the adopter demand.
Our model-based estimation approach further provides us with insights into the drivers of adop-
tion, as the procedure outputs ˆpi, ˆqi, ˆmi, and ˆci for each site. Interestingly, we ﬁnd that ˆpi is
consistently estimated very low (median[IQR] = 1.23 · 10−9[9.97 · 10−10–1.76 · 10−9]) compared to ˆqi
(median[IQR] = 3.59 · 10−2[2.99 · 10−2–4.57 · 10−2]). In comparison, the meta-analysis of Van den
Bulte and Stremersch (2004) ﬁnds that the imitation coeﬃcient is on average two orders of mag-
nitude larger than the innovation coeﬃcient. Thus, the data suggests that most adoption activity
is driven by imitation, in line with MHU experiences about the value of community spread (Wick-
strom et al. 2013). While there is little variance in ˆpi between diﬀerent sites, ˆqi varies strongly (see
Figure 4a) and dominates the diﬀusion process. We also present the estimated market potential ˆmi
in Figure 4b. Our estimation procedure adds a penalty term that ensures the radius is not estimated
much higher than 7km, a reasonable walking distance for health services (see Doerner et al. 2007),
and the radius is consistently estimated close to this bound. However, ˆmi has signiﬁcant variance
due to the variation in population density at the sites. The estimates of ˆci are 8.2%[5.2%–13.9%]
of ˆmi for the median[IQR] site. This suggests that a majority of sites are well below saturation.
Figure 4
Coeﬃcient estimates
0
50
100
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
ˆqi
Frequency
(a) Imitation coeﬃcient
0
20
40
60
0
5000
10000
15000
ˆmi
Frequency
(b) Market potential
Note. The red lines represent the 10%, 50%, and 90% percentiles, from left to right. Panel (b) trims 1.9% for clarity.
As the procedure uses regression trees within the gradient boosting framework, it allows us
to infer the importance of regressors in estimating diﬀerent parameters. We highlight that these
connections are not causal. However, they may be useful by providing a sanity check and giving
a starting point for better understanding the impact that visits and marketing activities have on
sites. For example, the estimate ˆci is determined largely by the number of existing clients observed
during each visit, but also the average number of children of adopters has some inﬂuence. The
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

23
estimate ˆpi, indicating the strength of innovation, is inﬂuenced by the number of MSI clients for
other services than the ones considered here, i.e., shorter-term methods. This gives some credence
to the assumption that experience with modern contraceptive methods aﬀects the willingness to
adopt long-term methods, even if there is no prior community experience with the latter. Finally,
we highlight that the percentage of young people with work has a strong eﬀect on the radius of the
catchment area and, thus, ˆmi, lending further conﬁdence in the method and potentially providing
insights into the optimal spacing between sites.
6.3.
Resource allocation to MSI’s sites
We study the performance of an optimal allocation based on the estimated model parameters.
To identify an optimal allocation, we employ the algorithm of Srivastava and Bullo (2014) with
a subsequent local search. We ﬁrst compare it against the allocation implemented by MSI. We
then develop operationalizable heuristics based on our managerial insights and compare those to
the optimal allocation. As a measure of comparison, we use eﬀective adopters, i.e., the number of
adopters weighted by the impact generated at the site where they demand service. We implement
computations in the Julia programming language and make them available together with synthetic
data at blinded for peer review.
6.3.1.
Optimal vs. implemented allocation. Aside from the Bass model parameters esti-
mated in Section 6.2, the optimal allocation is based on four parameters: the planning horizon H,
the total visit capacity ΠH during the planning horizon, as well as the minimum and the maximum
number of visits to each site, FH and TH. We derive these from the test period, i.e., the last full
year of observations in the data. In particular, there are 1229 sites and 3509 visits, so for a planning
horizon of H = 1 year, we specify that Π1 = 3509. MSI requires several weeks to prepare a visit, so
we constrain the maximum number of visits to T1 = 12 per year. Moreover, to ensure a certain level
of service, we constrain the minimum number of visits to F1 = 1 per year. For any other planning
horizon, H, we scale the constraints accordingly: ΠH = Π1H, TH = T1H, and FH = F1H.
A key characteristic of the optimal allocation, compared to current practice, is that it recognizes
saturation eﬀects and the resulting need to build up adopter demand at otherwise low-demand
sites. Hence, when the planning horizon is long enough, current demand is sacriﬁced to achieve high
demand in the future. We show this in Figure 5. Here, we assume a planning horizon H = 1,...,12,
but measure the eﬀective adopter numbers during the ﬁrst year. For this purpose, we take the actual
observations from the test period whenever a visit occurred, or we impute the numbers based on our
estimated demand model. As a counterfactual, we use the allocation implemented in practice and,
thus, the actual adopters observed during the test period. With a planning horizon of H = 1 year
and the same total number of visits, the optimal allocation outperforms the implemented allocation.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

24
As the planning horizon increases, however, current adopter demand is strategically sacriﬁced for
the beneﬁt of future adopter demand, and the optimal allocation’s ﬁrst-year performance decreases.
Figure 5
Eﬀective adopters during the ﬁrst year in the optimal compared to the actual allocation
0
3
6
9
12
50
60
70
80
Planning horizon of optimal [years]
Eﬀective adopters during
ﬁrst year [103]
Optimal
Implemented
6.3.2.
Optimal vs. heuristic allocations. The beneﬁts of our approach become apparent
only when we also consider eﬀective adopters in later years. Unfortunately, we do not observe a
counterfactual in the data because the test period is only one year. Thus, we simulate allocations
based on the estimated demand functions. We compare our approach to several heuristic alloca-
tions and display the results in Figure 6a. A myopic allocation assigns the maximum number of
visits to the sites for which the number of eﬀective adopters is currently highest and the minimum
number of visits to all other sites. It is comparable to the optimal allocation for short planning
horizons. However, as the planning horizon increases, we also observe what we would expect from
the implemented allocation in the longer term: saturation of adopter demand. The myopic allo-
cation has to be adapted dynamically to counter this eﬀect partially—we say “Myopic x” if the
allocation is adapted to current demand every x years. However, even with yearly adaptations, it
does not match the performance of the optimal allocation in the long term.
The remaining heuristics make use of the insights summarized in Section 4.5 to develop practical
allocations that avoid saturation without dynamic adjustments. Noting that E∗
2 has at most one
member, we split the sites into the three sets L∗, G∗, and E∗
1, deﬁned in (6). We ignore heterogeneity
between the sites in E∗
1 and distribute resources equally among them to simplify implementation.
This is in line with de Vries et al. (2021a), who suggest splitting sites into few groups with identical
visit frequencies per group, and we thus use their naming, Three-Category Policy. The heuristic, as
deﬁned here, still requires the computation of the optimal allocation. However, it simpliﬁes imple-
mentation drastically, and Figure 6a shows that this is without a signiﬁcant loss in performance.
Next, the Diﬀerent Start heuristic uses the algorithm developed in Section 4.2, based on the
average values of the estimates ˆpi, ˆqi, and ˆmi, but with the individual estimates ˆci for the number of
existing clients. This is appropriate when the adoption dynamics and market potentials at diﬀerent
sites are highly similar, but the visit histories diﬀer signiﬁcantly.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

25
The ﬁnal heuristic makes use of the algorithm developed in Section 4.1 to determine how many
sites should be prioritized. The algorithm assumes entirely homogeneous sites, so we take averages
of ˆpi, ˆqi, ˆmi, and ˆci. As sites are not actually homogeneous, we employ the following approach
to choose which of the sites to prioritize, termed Homogeneous, Largest c. The sites with the
largest values of ˆci are prioritized as long as they have not yet reached the inﬂection point in the
diﬀusion process. We exclude sites beyond the inﬂection point to avoid saturated markets. Using
ˆci for prioritization captures the results from Section 4.2. Visits are equally distributed among the
prioritized sites, so the complexity of implementing the allocation is much reduced.
The latter three heuristics indicate the usefulness of the insights derived in Section 4. Even
without frequent changes to the visit schedule and when based on the assumption of homogeneity,
they largely avoid saturation. Except for the Three-Category Policy, the heuristics are simpler to
compute than the optimal allocation. At the same time, except for Diﬀerent Start, the heuristics
are easy to implement. We believe that regional managers can further improve performance by
combining insight-based heuristics with information available on the ground.
Figure 6
Performance throughout the planning horizon of the optimal and heuristic allocations
3
6
9
12
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.9
1.2
Planning horizon [years]
Eﬀective adopters [106]
Optimal
Myopic 1
Myopic 6
Myopic
Three-CP
Diﬀ. start
Hom. largest c
(a) Parameter certainty
3
6
9
12
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.9
1.2
Planning horizon [years]
Eﬀective adopters [106]
Optimal dynamic
Myopic 1
(b) Uncertainty sequentially resolved
Note. Panel (a) assumes known Bass model parameter values, and Panel (b) assumes uncertain parameters.
6.3.3.
Uncertainty in parameter estimates. To investigate the eﬀect of uncertainty in
Bass parameter estimates, we simulate two dynamic heuristics. To this end, we perform 50 repli-
cations of the following procedure. We sample the true parameters by scaling each of the original
estimates by independent random variables uniformly distributed between 0.5 and 1.5. When allo-
cations are adjusted each year, we assume that estimates approach the true value. In particular, we
assume that the diﬀerence between a parameter’s true value and the estimated value is proportional
to 1 over the square root of the number of visits to the site. The Myopic 1 allocation dedicates
all resources, barring constraints, to the sites with the highest estimated current demand at the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

26
beginning of the year. Another heuristic, based on the optimal allocation (“Optimal dynamic”),
dynamically updates the Bass estimates every year and reoptimizes the allocation for the remain-
ing planning horizon. Figure 6b shows the range of eﬀective adopters across replications for both
allocations. When adapting allocations dynamically, the uncertainty does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect
performance, and our approach continues to outperform the myopic one in the long term.
7.
Conclusions
A central objective within the sustainable development agenda is to provide broad and aﬀordable
access to health services worldwide. Nearly half of humanity lives in rural areas, leading to diﬃcul-
ties in expanding access. One promising approach is the use of mobile healthcare units that establish
temporary delivery sites close to rural populations. Diﬀerent types of organizations employ MHUs
for a range of health services, each facing complex planning challenges. In this paper, we focus on
organizations that provide specialized health services for which access is limited both by physical
barriers and informational barriers, for example, HIV counseling, disease screening, vaccination, or
family planning. The long-term allocation of resources has traditionally been based on the implicit
assumption of constant demands. This ignores the presence of informational barriers, which make
community interaction and trust-building essential, leading to complex adoption dynamics. We
analyze the resource allocation problem when such adoption dynamics are made explicit.
Our resource allocation model for MHUs allows us to derive several insights. First, we ﬁnd that
it is optimal to prioritize a subset of sites while allocating the minimum necessary resources to all
remaining sites (recall that all sites are guaranteed an acceptable level of service). Thus, distribut-
ing resources equally among all sites can be far from optimal, but focusing on too few sites may
precipitate saturation eﬀects. High current adopter demand can be a good criterion for prioritizing
amongst underdeveloped sites, but, in general, cumulative adopter demand should be preferred as a
metric. Second, among the prioritized sites, those with lower cumulative demand should be visited
more often because word-of-mouth eﬀects can lead to demand snowballing. Thus, for prioritized
sites that are not yet experiencing saturation, more resources should be allocated to those where
current demand is lower. This is in contrast with the practice of allocating more resources to sites
with higher current demand. Third, our results conﬁrm the intuitive eﬀect of diﬀusion character-
istics on the optimal allocation. Sites with higher diﬀusion rates through innovation or imitation,
larger market potential, or fewer existing clients should generally receive more resources.
Our application to MHUs delivering family planning services in Uganda demonstrates the poten-
tial beneﬁts of accounting for the future evolution of adopter demand when allocating resources. It
shows how to predict future demands without additional data-gathering eﬀorts and how to make
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

27
decisions based on these predictions. Moreover, we ﬁnd evidence in the data suggesting that imita-
tion dominates the diﬀusion of family planning services and that the willingness to use long-term
methods is associated with the prevalence of short-term methods in the community.
Naturally, our work has limitations. In particular, we make two assumptions about the organi-
zation employing MHUs. First, it aims to broaden access to a health service for which there are
signiﬁcant informational barriers, in addition to the physical ones. Second, existing clients requiring
repeated services do not face those informational barriers, and a baseline frequency of visits can
guarantee their access to services. This excludes, for example, organizations that provide primary
care through MHUs. As with any model, we also need to make simplifying assumptions about a
complex reality. In particular, we only consider the (long-term) allocation of visits to sites, but
not their exact scheduling. Thus, we assume that there is no eﬀect of the inter-arrival time on the
number of adopters. Recent research indicates that there is a positive relationship between client
volume and inter-arrival time (de Vries et al. 2021a), even though we verify that this is lower for
service adopters than existing clients. We note that MHUs, whose resources are allocated based on
our model, can still react to this eﬀect by adjusting their ﬁnal visit schedule. In particular, they
may space out visits to a site when current demand is high (in the intermediate part of the Bass
curve) and increase the frequency of visits when demand is low (when demand is initially building
up). We believe that further research should integrate the long-term and short-term perspectives
while also considering other aspects of the visit schedule aﬀecting demand, for example, its regu-
larity. Such research must overcome the dilemma of leaving enough ﬂexibility to adjust schedules
in the face of uncertainties while scheduling suﬃciently in advance to incorporate the long-term
demand dynamics described here.
We further assume the allocation of visits to be the only decision variable. In practice, organiza-
tions may directly inﬂuence the adoption dynamics through marketing or community engagement
activities. To do so systematically, however, requires an in-depth understanding of these activities’
eﬀects. We provide an initial step in this direction. In terms of the estimation procedure, we point
out the limited time during which we observe client interactions. We hope to further validate our
approach in the future using longer time series. Finally, relying mainly on publicly available data
introduces some limitations on the granularity, accuracy, and timeliness of estimates. However, it
contributes to achieving a practicable and replicable approach to long-term planning of limited
organizational resources.
Our framework allows for an eﬀective planning procedure that may contribute to broadening
access to health services and, thus, advance the sustainable development agenda. It also provides a
foundation to discuss the importance of long-term planning in this context. This can be of particular
importance because donors often push for short-term results with their funding decisions.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

28
References
Aˇgrali S, Geunes J (2009) Solving knapsack problems with s-curve return functions. European Journal of
Operational Research 193(2):605–615.
Aljassim N, Ostini R (2020) Health literacy in rural and urban populations: A systematic review. Patient
Education and Counseling 103(10):2142–2454.
Aung KK, Hill C, Bennet J, Song Z, Oriol NE (2015) The emerging business models and value proposition
of mobile health clinics. American Journal of Accountable Care 3(4):36.
Barton P, Bryan S, Robinson S (2004) Modelling in the economic evaluation of health care: Selecting the
appropriate approach. Journal of health services research & policy 9(2):110–118.
Bass FM (1969) A new product growth for model consumer durables. Management Science 15(5):215–227.
Bass FM (1980) The relationship between diﬀusion rates, experience curves, and demand elasticities for
consumer durable technological innovations. The Journal of Business S51–S67.
Bass FM, Krishnan TV, Jain DC (1994) Why the Bass model ﬁts without decision variables. Marketing
Science 13(3):203–223.
Berkman ND, Sheridan SL, Donahue KE, Halpern DJ, Crotty K (2011) Low health literacy and health
outcomes: an updated systematic review. Annals of internal medicine 155(2):97–107.
Besiou M, Van Wassenhove LN (2020) Humanitarian operations: A world of opportunity for relevant and
impactful research. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 22(1):135–145.
Bongaarts J, Watkins SC (1996) Social interactions and contemporary fertility transitions. Population and
Development Review 639–682.
Boswijk HP, Franses PH (2005) On the econometrics of the Bass diﬀusion model. Journal of Business &
Economic Statistics 23(3):255–268.
Conde-Agudelo A, Rosas-Bermudez A, Casta˜no F, Norton MH (2012) Eﬀects of birth spacing on mater-
nal, perinatal, infant, and child health: A systematic review of causal mechanisms. Studies in Family
Planning 43(2):93–114.
Crouse HL, Macias CG, Cruz AT, Wilson KA, Torrey SB (2010) Utilization of a mobile medical van for
delivering pediatric care in the bateys of the Dominican Republic. International Journal of Emergency
Medicine 3(4):227.
de la Torre LE, Dolinskaya IS, Smilowitz KR (2012) Disaster relief routing: Integrating research and practice.
Socio-Economic Planning Sciences 46(1):88–97.
de Vries H, Swinkels LE, Van Wassenhove LN (2021a) Policies for mobile family planning services. Production
and Operations Management, forthcoming.
de Vries H, van de Klundert J, Wagelmans A (2021b) Towards elimination of infectious diseases with mobile
screening teams: HAT in the DRC. Production and Operations Management, forthcoming.
Doerner K, Focke A, Gutjahr WJ (2007) Multicriteria tour planning for mobile healthcare facilities in a
developing country. European Journal of Operational Research 179(3):1078–1096.
Duvall S, Thurston S, Weinberger M, Nuccio O, Fuchs-Montgomery N (2014) Scaling up delivery of contra-
ceptive implants in sub-Saharan Africa: Operational experiences of Marie Stopes International. Global
Health: Science and Practice 2(1):72–92.
Ergun ¨O, Gui L, Heier Stamm JL, Keskinocak P, Swann J (2014) Improving humanitarian operations through
technology-enabled collaboration. Production and Operations Management 23(6):1002–1014.
Ferrer JM, Mart´ın-Campo FJ, Ortu˜no MT, Pedraza-Mart´ınez AJ, Tirado G, Vitoriano B (2018) Multi-
criteria optimization for last mile distribution of disaster relief aid: Test cases and applications. European
Journal of Operational Research 269(2):501–515.
Feyisetan B, Adetunji J, Starbird E (2017) Stages in the adoption of modern contraceptive methods: Do
the growth patterns in developing countries follow the s-curve model? Accessed May 1, 2021, https:
//tinyurl.com/yylols98.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

29
Gatignon H, Eliashberg J, Robertson TS (1989) Modeling multinational diﬀusion patterns: An eﬃcient
methodology. Marketing Science 8(3):231–247.
Ginsberg W (1974) The multiplant ﬁrm with increasing returns to scale. Journal of Economic Theory
9(3):283–292.
Gralla E, Goentzel J (2018) Humanitarian transportation planning: Evaluation of practice-based heuristics
and recommendations for improvement. European Journal of Operational Research 269(2):436–450.
Groupo M´edico, Global Doctors for Choice Network (2011) Unwanted pregnancy forced continuation of
pregnancy and eﬀects on mental health. Accessed May 1, 2021, https://tinyurl.com/y3upratk.
Hodgson MJ, Laporte G, Semet F (1998) A covering tour model for planning mobile health care facilities in
Suhum District, Ghana. Journal of Regional Science 38(4):621–638.
Jukes MC, Drake LJ, Bundy DA (2007) School Health, Nutrition and Education for All: Levelling the Playing
Field (CABI).
Keskinocak P, Savva N (2020) A review of the healthcare-management (modeling) literature published in
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
22(1):59–72.
Laporte G (1992) The vehicle routing problem: An overview of exact and approximate algorithms. European
Journal of Operational Research 59(3):345–358.
Lee H, Kim SG, Park Hw, Kang P (2014) Pre-launch new product demand forecasting using the Bass
model: A statistical and machine learning-based approach. Technological Forecasting and Social Change
86:49–64.
Lenk PJ, Rao AG (1990) New models from old: Forecasting product adoption by hierarchical Bayes proce-
dures. Marketing Science 9(1):42–53.
Lloyd CT, Chamberlain H, Kerr D, Yetman G, Pistolesi L, Stevens FR, Gaughan AE, Nieves JJ, Hornby G,
MacManus K, et al. (2019) Global spatio-temporally harmonised datasets for producing high-resolution
gridded population distribution datasets. Big Earth Data 3(2):108–139.
Luenberger DG, Ye Y (1984) Linear and Nonlinear Programming (Springer).
Mabuto T, Latka MH, Kuwane B, Churchyard GJ, Charalambous S, Hoﬀmann CJ (2014) Four models of
HIV counseling and testing: Utilization and test results in South Africa. PloS One 9(7):e102267.
Mauad EC, Silva TB, Latorre MR, Vieira RA, Haikel RL, Vazquez VL, Longatto-Filho A (2011) Oppor-
tunistic screening for skin cancer using a mobile unit in Brazil. BMC Dermatology 11(1):12.
McCoy JH, Lee HL (2014) Using fairness models to improve equity in health delivery ﬂeet management.
Production and Operations Management 23(6):965–977.
Meade N, Islam T (2006) Modelling and forecasting the diﬀusion of innovation—a 25-year review. Interna-
tional Journal of Forecasting 22(3):519–545.
MSI Reproductive Choices (2016) Chapter 4: Operational excellence. Outreach Channel Success Model.
MSI Reproductive Choices (2020) Global impact report 2019. Accessed May 1, 2021, https://tinyurl.co
m/yy4xgcfx.
MSI Reproductive Choices (2021a) About us—Our ambition. Accessed May 1, 2021, https://tinyurl.co
m/yxuxfvea.
MSI Reproductive Choices (2021b) Uganda. Accessed May 1, 2021, https://tinyurl.com/y34cddpa.
Narita R, Diaz MDM (2016) Teenage motherhood, education, and labor market outcomes of the mother:
Evidence from Brazilian data. EconomiA 17(2):238 – 252.
Natekin A (2020) Open machine learning course mlcourse.ai: Topic 10. Gradient Boosting. Accessed May 1,
2021, https://tinyurl.com/y4zwkyx5.
Neke NM, Gadau G, Wasem J (2018) Policy makers’ perspective on the provision of maternal health
services via mobile health clinics in Tanzania—ﬁndings from key informant interviews. PLoS ONE
13(9):e0203588.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

30
Peres R, Muller E, Mahajan V (2010) Innovation diﬀusion and new product growth models: A critical review
and research directions. International Journal of Research in Marketing 27(2):91–106.
Plambeck EL, Ramdas K (2020) Alleviating poverty by empowering women through business model innova-
tion: Manufacturing & Service Operations Management insights and opportunities. Manufacturing &
Service Operations Management 22(1):123–134.
Prussing JE (1986) The principal minor test for semideﬁnite matrices. Journal of Guidance, Control, and
Dynamics 9(1):121–122.
Ridgeway G (2019) Generalized boosted models: A guide to the gbm package. Accessed May 1, 2021, https:
//tinyurl.com/y5alu3nk.
Rogers EM (2010) Diﬀusion of Innovations (Simon and Schuster).
Shoupe D (2016) LARC methods: Entering a new age of contraception and reproductive health. Contraception
and Reproductive Medicine 1(4).
Singh S, Darroch JE (2012) Adding it up: Costs and beneﬁts of contraceptive services—estimates for 2012.
Accessed May 1, 2021, https://tinyurl.com/y2sp4kv2.
Srivastava V, Bullo F (2014) Knapsack problems with sigmoid utilities: Approximation algorithms via hybrid
optimization. European Journal of Operational Research 236(2):488–498.
Starbird E, Norton M, Marcus R (2016) Investing in family planning: Key to achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals. Global Health: Science and Practice 4(2):191–210.
Stenberg K, Axelson H, Sheehan P, Anderson I, G¨ulmezoglu AM, Temmerman M, Mason E, Friedman HS,
Bhutta ZA, Lawn JE, et al. (2014) Advancing social and economic development by investing in women’s
and children’s health: A new global investment framework. The Lancet 383(9925):1333–1354.
Strasser R (2003) Rural health around the world: Challenges and solutions. Family Practice 20(4):457–463.
Strasser R, Kam SM, Regalado SM (2016) Rural health care access and policy in developing countries.
Annual Revue of Public Health 37:395–412.
The World Bank (2018) Rural population (% of total population). Accessed May 1, 2021, https://tinyur
l.com/y6clzxp3.
Udell M, Boyd S (2014) Maximizing a sum of sigmoids, https://tinyurl.com/yxfhjplf.
UN (2019) Global progress in satisfying the need for family planning. Accessed May 1, 2021, https://tiny
url.com/y6pzpypc.
UN (2020) Youth. Accessed May 1, 2021, https://tinyurl.com/y6nyla2h.
Vaahtera M, Kulmala T, Maleta K, Cullinan T, Salin ML, Ashorn P (2000) Childhood immunization in
rural Malawi: Time of administration and predictors of non-compliance. Annals of Tropical Paediatrics
20(4):305–312.
Van den Bulte C, Stremersch S (2004) Social contagion and income heterogeneity in new product diﬀusion:
A meta-analytic test. Marketing Science 23(4):530–544.
van Maarseveen R (2020) The urban rural-education gap: Do cities indeed make us smarter? CPB Discussion
Paper. Accessed May 1, 2021, https://tinyurl.com/yxn6y7kb.
Van Rijn L, de Vries H, Van Wassenhove LN (2020) Decentralized site assignment for family planning
outreach teams, unpublished manuscript.
Wang X, Rafa M, Moyer JD, Li J, Scheer J, Sutton P (2019) Estimation and mapping of sub-national GDP
in Uganda using NPP-VIIRS imagery. Remote Sensing 11(2):163.
WHO (2012) From evidence to policy: Expanding access to family planning. Accessed May 1, 2021, https:
//tinyurl.com/y4nhc2ou.
WHO (2019a) Maternal mortality. Accessed May 1, 2021, https://tinyurl.com/y6kqygtv.
WHO (2019b) Preventing unsafe abortion. Accessed May 1, 2021, https://tinyurl.com/y3y4ctwo.
WHO, The World Bank (2017) Tracking universal health coverage: 2017 global monitoring report. Accessed
May 1, 2021, https://tinyurl.com/y3ek945p.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

31
Wickstrom J, Yanulis J, Van Lith L, Jones B (2013) Approaches to mobile outreach services for family
planning: A descriptive inquiry in Malawi, Nepal, and Tanzania. Accessed May 1, 2021, https://ti
nyurl.com/cfswmz5q.
WorldPop, CIESIN, Columbia University (2018) The spatial distribution of population in 2020, Uganda.
Accessed May 1, 2021, https://tinyurl.com/y4qy8hox.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

32
Appendix A:
Algorithm for identifying the solution in the case of Section 4.2
Deﬁne the capacity used by an allocation as described in Corollary 1: P(l,λ) = Pl
i=1 min{(ˆπ(λ) −π0
i ),T}+
P|C2|
i=l+1 F + P
i∈C1 min{max{ˆπ(λ) −π0
i ,F},T}. Any optimal allocation satisﬁes P(l∗,λ∗) = Π. For a ﬁxed l,
P(l,λ) is decreasing in λ, and it is increasing in l for a ﬁxed λ. Hence, we can deﬁne the following algorithm
for ﬁnding the optimal allocation for sites with homogeneous and symmetric demand functions but diﬀerent
starting points.
Data: Set of sites N ordered as described in Corollary 1
Result: π∗
for l in 0,...,|C2| do
if ∃λ such that P(l,λ) = Π then
λ∗←solution of P(l,λ) = Π ;
π(l) ←optimal allocation given l and λ∗in (7);
Ψ(l) ←objective value obtained by allocation π(l);
else
Ψ(l) ←0;
end
end
π(|C2| + 1) ←optimal allocation given in (8);
Ψ(|C2| + 1) ←objective value obtained by allocation π(|C2| + 1);
l∗←arg maxl Ψ(l);
π∗←π(l∗);
Appendix B:
Proofs of mathematical claims in the main text
Proof of Proposition 1.
Simple
calculus
shows
that
˜ψ′′
i
=
Y ′′
i (πi)
=
−
mipiθi(pi+qi)3e(pi+qi)πi(pie(pi+qi)πi −qiθi)
(pie(pi+qi)πi +qθi)
3
. The sign of Y ′′
i (πi) is determined by the sign of pie(pi+qi)πi −qiθi,
which has a unique root at log(θiqi/pi) and is positive for πi < log(θiqi/pi) and negative for πi > log(θiqi/pi).
If log(θiqi/pi) < 0, then Yi is concave so we set πinﬂ
i
= max{log(θiqi/pi),0}. By substituting the expression
for πinﬂ
i
± ϵ into Yi and some algebra, it follows that Yi is symmetric around πinﬂ
i
. The term ci cancels out.
Proof of Proposition 2.
First, a solution π∗exists because the objective function is bounded and the
domain is compact. Now, suppose that for such a solution, P
i∈N π∗
i < Π and there exists a j such that π∗
j < T.
Let ϵ = min{Π −P
i∈N π∗
i , T −π∗
j }. Consider the feasible allocation π′ = (π∗
1,...,π∗
j + ϵ,...,π∗
n). Because
ψ is a strictly increasing function, we obtain P
i∈N βiψi(π∗
i ) −P
i∈N βiψi(π′
i) = βjψj(π∗
j ) −βjψj(π∗
j + ϵ) < 0,
which contradicts the assumption that π∗is optimal.
□
Proof of Proposition 3.
The existence of a λ∗such that (a), (b), and (c) follows directly from the KKT
conditions in (5). To prove (d), we use the second-order conditions. The second-order necessary conditions
require that the Hessian of the Lagrangian evaluated at a local maximum is negative semi-deﬁnite on the
hyperplane tangent to the active constraints (Luenberger and Ye 1984, section 11.8). Because the constraints
are linear, the Hessian H(π) of the Lagrangian is the Hessian of the objective function, which is diagonal with
entries βiψ′′
i (πi). To test whether this matrix is negative semi-deﬁnite on the hyperplane of active constraints,
assume, without loss of generality, that the inequality constraints are tight for the set of sites such that j > m
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

33
for some m ≤n, i.e., πj = F or πj = T, while for the set of sites i ≤m, the inequality constraints are not
binding, i.e., F < πi < T.
To deﬁne the hyperplane tangent to the active constraints, ﬁrst note that there are n −m + 1 active
constraints, so the hyperplane is (m −1)-dimensional. For i < m, consider the vectors Ai, where all entries
are zeros, except for entry i that is a 1, and entry m that is a −1. For a solution π′ = π + ϵAi, the inequality
constraints are still active because the components m + 1,...,n are zeros, and the equality constraint is still
satisﬁed because any move of an additional ϵ units in the i-th direction is balanced by the −ϵ units moved in
the m-th direction. Moreover, the vectors Ai are linearly independent, so the matrix A = (A1 A2 ··· Am−1)
deﬁnes the hyperplane tangent to the active constraints: {y ∈Rm−1 : Ay = 0}. Thus, the second-order neces-
sary conditions reduce to A⊤H(π)A being negative semi-deﬁnite or equivalently −A⊤H(π)A being positive
semi-deﬁnite (see Luenberger and Ye 1984, sections 11.5-11.6 for an overview of this approach). E.g., for
m = 3,
−A⊤H(π)A =

−β1ψ′′
1(π1) −β3ψ′′
3(π3)
−β3ψ′′
3(π3)
−β3ψ′′
3(π3)
−β2ψ′′
2(π2) −β3ψ′′
3(π3)

.
A necessary condition for positive semi-deﬁniteness is that all principal minors (not only the leading ones)
are non-negative (Prussing 1986). The m −2 and m −3 order principal minors, i.e., the determinants of
submatrices that delete all but one and two rows and columns, give us for i,j,k ∈{1,...,m} the following
necessary conditions:
−βiψ′′
i (πi) −βjψ′′
j (πj) ≥0
(11a)
−βiψ′′
i (πi) −βkψ′′
k(πk) ≥0
(11b)
−βjψ′′
j (πj) −βkψ′′
k(πk) ≥0
(11c)
βiβjψ′′
i (πi)ψ′′
j (πj) + βiβkψ′′
i (πi)ψ′′
k(πk) + βjβkψ′′
j (πj)ψ′′
k(πk) ≥0.
(11d)
We do not require the conditions for higher-order principal minors for the theory developed here.
From the conditions in (11), we get that βiψ′′
i (πi) + βjψ′′
j (πj) ≤0 for any set of sites i,j ∈E1(π,λ) ∪
E2(π,λ), i ̸= j. It follows that, for an optimal solution π∗, no more than one of ψ′′
i (π∗
i ) for i ∈E∗
1 ∪E∗
2 can be
positive, i.e., only one site can be a member of E∗
2. In addition, the member of E∗
2 needs to have the smallest
second derivative in absolute value.
□
Proof of Proposition 4.
We ﬁrst show that there exists an optimal allocation π∗such that either E∗
1 = ∅
or E∗
2 = ∅with a symmetric demand function. First, let π∗be a solution to (1) such that j ∈E∗
2 (there is
at most one member of E2 by Proposition 3). If E∗
1 contains more than one element, we can show that this
solution is dominated by an allocation where all or some capacity of site j is allocated to sites in E∗
1. Let π∗∗
be such that π∗∗
j = π∗
j −ϵ and π∗∗
i = π∗
i +ϵ/|E∗
1| ∀i ∈E∗
1, where |E∗
1| is the number of elements in E∗
1 and ϵ > 0
is small enough not to make any new inequality constraints binding. Because of the symmetry, it can easily
be shown that Ψ(π∗∗) > Ψ(π∗), implying that if E2 ̸= ∅then E∗
1 can have at most one member. If k denotes
a unique element of E∗
1, any solution that transfers some capacity from site j to k (or vice-versa) attains the
same objective value. Now, let π∗∗be such that either π∗∗
k = T or π∗∗
j = F: π∗∗
j = π∗
j −min{T −π∗
k, π∗
j −F}
and π∗∗
k = π∗
k + min{T −π∗
k, π∗
j −F}. It follows that we can transform any optimal solution to one where
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

34
either E∗
1 = ∅or E∗
2 = ∅. Moreover, from part (c) in Proposition 3 follows that either E∗
1 = ∅or G∗= ∅. Thus,
when considering all the possible allocations into the four sets, the two alternatives in the proposition will
always yield an optimal solution. In (i), we have E∗
1 and L∗non-empty, while E∗
2 and G∗are empty. In (ii),
we have E∗
1 empty and at most one site in E∗
2. The expressions for x∗and x∗∗are such that they maximize
the respective conﬁguration.
□
Proof of Proposition 5.
(a) follows from the same argument used in the proof of Proposition 4: any
optimal allocation with E∗
1 and E∗
2 nonempty can be transformed into an allocation with at least the same
rewards and one of the two being empty.
To prove (b), let π∗be a solution such that i ∈L∗and j /∈L∗. For such an optimal solution to exist,
the following condition has to hold: π0
j + π∗
j ≥π0
i + π∗
i . This condition ensures that site j is further along
the curve; otherwise, because i,j ∈C2, we could transfer ϵ > 0 units from site j to i and obtain a better
allocation. Now, consider the alternative allocation π∗∗such that π∗∗
j = π0
i −π0
j + π∗
i , π∗∗
i
= π0
j −π0
i , and
π∗∗
k = π∗
k for all k ̸= i,j. It is easy to check that ψi(π∗∗
i ) = ψj(π∗
j ) and ψj(π∗∗
j ) = ψi(π∗
i ) which implies that
π∗∗attains the same objective as π∗. Thus, π∗∗is also optimal, and we have shown existence. The same
argument does not hold if π0
i < π0
j because the transformation would violate the constraints.
To prove (c), let π∗be an optimal solution such that i ∈L∗and j /∈L∗. Consider the alternative allocation
π∗∗such that π∗∗
j = F and π∗∗
i = π∗
j and π∗∗
k = π∗
k for all k ̸= i,j. Because i,j ∈C1, we can easily check that
π∗∗obtains a higher reward. Thus, we reach a contradiction.
To prove (d), suppose to the contrary that π∗is an optimal solution such that i ∈E∗
1, j /∈L∗, and π0
j +π∗
j >
π0
i + π∗
i . Consider the alternative allocation π∗∗such that π∗∗
j = π∗
j −ϵ and π∗∗
i = π∗
i + ϵ for 0 < ϵ < π∗
j −π∗
i ,
and π∗∗
k = π∗
k for all k ̸= i,j. Since π0
j + π∗
j and π0
i + π∗
i lie in the concave region, allocation π∗∗dominates
π∗. Because π∗is an optimal allocation, we reach a contradiction.
□
Proof of Corollary 1.
Given the constructed order of set N, Proposition 5 guarantees the existence of an
optimal allocation π∗so that there exist k∗and l∗such that π∗
i > F if i ∈{1,...,l∗}∪{|C2|+1,...,|C2|+k∗},
and πi = F otherwise. Moreover, either |E∗
2| = 1 and |E∗
1| = 0, or |E∗
2| = 0. For the former, (8) describes the
only possible optimal allocation. For the latter, we show that (7) is the optimal allocation with Lagrange
multiplier λ∗. The KKT conditions require that all members of the set E∗
1 satisfy π∗
i = ˆπ(λ∗) −π0
i for some
λ∗. Moreover, part (d) of Proposition 5 shows that for all sites i ∈G∗, we have that T ≤ˆπ(λ∗) −π0
i . Thus,
for all i ≤l∗, we have that π∗
i = min{ˆπ(λ∗) −π0
i ,T}. Similarly, for sites i ∈C1, i ≤|C2| + k∗, we have that
π∗
i = min{ˆπ(λ∗)−π0
i ,T}. In addition, for i > |C2|+k∗, we know from Proposition 3 that βψi(F) ≤λ∗and, as
i ∈C1, this implies that ˆπ(λ∗) −π0
i ≤F. Therefore, for any i ∈C1, π∗
i = min{max{ˆπ(λ∗) −π0
i ,F},T}.
□
Appendix C:
Formal results related to Section 4.4
Proposition 6.
∂Y ′
i (π∗
i )
∂mi
> 0.
Proof.
It is easy to see that
∂Y ′
i (π∗
i )
∂mi
=
e(pi+qi)π∗
i (pi+qi)2K
h
(mi−ci)qi+(mipi+ciqi)e(pi+qi)π∗
i
i3 , with a K such that limπ∗
i →0 K =
mi(pi + qi)(m2
i pi + c2
i qi) > 0 and
∂K
∂π∗
i = e(pi+qi)π∗
i (pi + qi)(mipi + ciqi)(m2
i pi + 2miciqi −c2
i qi). Note that
m2
i pi +2miciqi −c2
i qi is concave in ci, with the maximum at ci = mi. Here, it takes the value m2
i (pi +qi) > 0.
It follows that K is increasing in π∗
i and, because K > 0 holds for π∗
i = 0, it is always positive.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

35
Proposition 7.
∂Y ′
i (π∗
i )
∂ci
> 0 if π∗
i < πinﬂ
i
and
∂Y ′
i (π∗
i )
∂ci
< 0 if π∗
i > πinﬂ
i
.
Proof.
Assume
that
πinﬂ
i
>
0.
With
some
algebra,
it
follows
that
−
∂Y ′
i (π∗
i )
∂ci
=
e(pi+qi)π∗
i m2
i (pi+qi)3h
−(mi−ci)qi+(mipi+ciqi)e(pi+qi)π∗
i
i
h
(mi−ci)qi+(mipi+ciqi)e(pi+qi)π∗
i
i3
. But −(mi −ci)qi + (mipi + ciqi)e(pi+qi)π∗
i > 0 ⇔π∗
i >
log
 (mi−ci)qi
mipi+ciqi

pi+qi
⇔π∗
i > πinﬂ
i
. If πinﬂ
i
= 0, the result follows directly.
□
Proposition 8.
∂Y ′
i (π∗
i )
∂pi
> 0 if π∗
i < ˜πi and
∂Y ′
i (π∗
i )
∂pi
< 0 if π∗
i > ˜πi for some ˜πi > πinﬂ
i
.
Proof.
It is easy to see that
∂Y ′
i (π∗
i )
∂pi
=
e(pi+qi)π∗
i mi(mi−ci)(pi+qi)K
h
(mi−ci)qi+(mipi+ciqi)e(pi+qi)π∗
i
i3 , with a K such that limπ∗
i →0 K =
m2
i (pi + qi)2 > 0, limπ∗
i →πinfl
i
= 4(mi −ci)qi(mipi + ciqi) > 0 (assuming πinﬂ
i
> 0), limπ∗
i →∞= −∞, and
∂K
∂π∗
i =
−(pi + qi)(mipi + ciqi)e(pi+qi)π∗
i 
(mi −ci)
 e(pi+qi)π∗
i −1

+ (pi + qi)π∗
i (mipi + ciqi)e(pi+qi)π∗
i 
< 0.
□
Proposition 9.
∂Y ′
i (π∗
i )
∂qi
> 0 if π∗
i < ˜πi and
∂Y ′
i (π∗
i )
∂qi
< 0 if π∗
i > ˜πi for some ˜πi, where ˜πi ≥πinﬂ
i
if qi ≥pi or
πinﬂ
i
= 0, and ˜πi < πinﬂ
i
otherwise.
Proof.
With some algebra, it follows that
∂Y ′
i (π∗
i )
∂qi
=
e(pi+qi)π∗
i mi(mi−ci)(pi+qi)K
h
(mi−ci)qi+(mipi+ciqi)e(pi+qi)π∗
i
i3 , with a K
such that limπ∗
i →0 K = mici(pi + qi)2 > 0, limπ∗
i →∞= −∞, and
∂2K
∂π∗
i
2 = −e(pi+qi)π∗
i (pi + qi)3(mipi +
ciqi)[ci + π∗
i (mipi + ciqi)] < 0. Moreover, it holds that limπ∗
i →0
∂K
∂π∗
i = −(mi −ci)(pi + qi)2(mipi + ciqi), so it
must hold that ∂K
∂π∗
i < 0 everywhere. Additionally, assuming πinﬂ
i
> 0, limπ∗
i →πinfl
i
K = 2(mi−ci)(qi−pi)(mipi+
ciqi), which is non-negative if and only if qi ≥pi.
□
Proposition 10. Suppose that the inequality constraints are not binding for sites 1,..., ˆn and that all
sites i < ˆn are members of E∗
1. Then,
∂π∗
1
∂β1 > 0,
∂π∗
i
∂β1 > 0 for j ≤ˆn,j ̸= i, and ∂λ∗
∂β1 > 0.
Proof.
Take derivatives with respect to β1 on either side of the ˆn+1 equations βiψ′
i(π∗
i ) = λ∗∀i = 1,..., ˆn,
Pˆn
i=1 π∗
i = Π −Pn
i=ˆn+1 π∗
i . The resulting system of equations is
ψ′
1(π∗
1) + β1ψ′′
1(π∗
1)∂π∗
1
∂β1
= ∂λ∗
∂β1
,βiψ′′
i (π∗
i )∂π∗
i
∂β1
= ∂λ∗
∂β1
∀i = 2,..., ˆn,
ˆn
X
i=1
∂π∗
i
∂β1
= 0.
Solving this, we arrive at
∂π∗
1
∂β1 = −
P
j̸=1,j≤ˆn
1
βj ψ′′
j (π∗
j )
P
j≤ˆn
1
βj ψ′′
j (π∗
j )
1
β1ψ′′
1 (π∗
1 )ψ′
1(π∗
1) > 0,
∂π∗
i
∂β1 =
1
βiψ′′
i (π∗
i )β1ψ′′
1 (π∗
1 )
P
j≤ˆn
1
βj ψ′′
j (π∗
j ) ψ′
1(π∗
1), for i =
2,..., ˆn < 0, ∂λ∗
∂β1 =
1
β1ψ′′
1 (π∗
1 )
P
j≤ˆn
1
βj ψ′′
j (π∗
j ) ψ′
1(π∗
1) > 0.
□
Appendix D:
Detailed description of the data matching process
Due to frequent changes to administrative regions at all levels and possible inaccuracies in the data, we
combine multiple sources to establish a robust matching between the sites and the corresponding census
and population information. We ﬁrst enumerate the data sets used, the variables within those data sets
required for matching and providing population and census information, as well as their source:
[1] MSI sites. Data: site name, team, district. Source: MSI internal
[2] Facility information. Data: site name, coordinates, parish, sub-county, county, district. Source: http:
//catalog.data.ug/dataset/health-centres-uganda
[3] Site information. Data: site name, coordinates. Source: OpenStreetMaps, veriﬁed with MSI
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

36
[4] Village shapes 2011. Data: shape, village, parish, sub-county, county, district. Source: http://catalog.
data.ug/dataset/cc5656d0-13e8-4540-adcc-7d21378c75c1
[5] Sub-county shapes 2014. Data: shape, sub-county, county, district. Source: http://catalog.data.ug/
dataset/uganda-subcounties-2014
[6] Uganda census 2014. Data: parish, sub-county, county, district, census information. Source: http://gh
dx.healthdata.org/record/uganda-population-and-housing-census-2014
[7] Uganda population 2020 (predicted). Data: squares, population. Source: https://www.worldpop.org/g
eodata/summary?id=6446
We next describe the procedure. We attempt to match on complete names. If there are no matches, the
closest strings (using the Levenshtein distance) are identiﬁed and manually controlled.
1. Clean [1].
(a) Change of district to pre-2016 name (23 of Uganda’s 135 districts were created during the span of
observations by splitting oﬀfrom extant districts, so we use the old districts)
(b) Sites without district information: add district if sites can be matched based on name and team
2. Extend the list given in [2] with sites found in OpenStreetMaps or Google Maps. Match [2] and [3] to
[1] based on site name and manually correct any cases without full matching.
3. Match [4] to [1].
(a) Match if site name and village match, and districts identical.
(b) Coordinates in [1]: only accept matches if coordinates within village shape or less than 15km from
centroid. For multi-matches, accept that with smallest distance to village centroid.
(c) No coordinates in [1]: if match unique, accept and use the village centroid as coordinates.
4. Match [5] to [1], if coordinates within sub-county shape.
5. Match [6] to [1].
(a) Match on locality data from [2] if available and unique (in order of priority, at parish, sub-county,
county, or district level).
(b) Match on locality data from [3] if available and unique. If unique match with [4], use parish level.
(c) Match census information at lowest level (90.97% / 5.52% / 0.13% of sites matched at parish /
sub-county / county level). Remaining 3.38% without reliable location information dropped.
6. Match [7] to site clusters (referred to as “sites” throughout the paper).
(a) All sites within a radius of 5 km from another site belong to the same cluster.
(b) Record population of all squares in [7] within 8 km from any site in a cluster and corresponding
smallest distance to the site (“radius”).
(c) For radii between 1 and 8 km, use a third-degree polynomial to estimate a cluster’s population.
Average (resp. minimum) adjusted R2 is 0.9993 (resp. 0.9722).
(d) Remove clusters with total population at radius 5 km above 95% quantile (focus on remote clients).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146

37
7. Compute cluster impact values.
(a) For each cluster, compute a poverty score
i. Regress district-level log GDP per capita (from Wang et al. 2019) on combinations of six
district-level census variables. The best model achieves adjusted R2 of 0.65.
ii. Using site-speciﬁc census data, predict GDP per capita for each site’s surrounding area.
iii. Normalize prediction to [0,1] poverty score: poverty scorei =
minj log GDP per capitaj
log GDP per capitai
.
(b) For each cluster, compute an age score.
i. Using site-speciﬁc census data, compute fraction of young persons (15–24 years old) out of
population in reproductive age (15–49 years old).
ii. Normalize to [0,1] age score: age scorei =
minj 1−fraction youngj
1−fraction youngi
.
(c) Compute cluster impact βi = (age score)i(poverty score)i.
Appendix E:
Analysis of demographic changes
We verify that the population mix at a site remains relatively constant. We do not observe variation over
time in the census data, as we only make use of the 2014 census, and the previous one was taken in 2002,
judged to be too long ago for relevance. However, we observe the percentage of young clients, which we
take as a proxy for the percentage of young persons in the census population, one of the components of the
impact parameter βi. In particular, the percentage of young clients per visit exhibits a standard deviation of
0.13 (resp. 0.12) for the average (resp. median) site. If the percentage of young clients were entirely random,
the standard deviation should be approximately 0.5. For the percentage of young clients within the adopter
population, the standard deviation is 0.16 (resp. 0.15) on average (resp. in the median).
We also verify that population growth is relatively constant between sites. We compare the relative pop-
ulation growth at each site between 2015 and 2020, using the WorldPop database, described in Section 5.
The coeﬃcient of variation of the empirical distribution is 0.55, so the variation can be considered low.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906146