TITLE: OM Forum—Challenges and Strategies in Managing Nonprofit Operations: An Operations Management Perspective
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2019
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2018.0758
---

This is a postprint version of the following published document:
Berenguer, G., & Shen, Z.-J. (Max). (2020). OM 
Forum-Challenges and Strategies in Managing 
Nonprofit Operations: An Operations Management 
Perspective. Manufacturing & Service Operations 
Management, 22 (5), pp. 888-905.
DOI: 10.1287/msom.2018.0758
© 2019, INFORMS

 
1 
 
Challenges and Strategies in Managing Nonprofit 
Operations: An Operations Management Perspective 
 
 
 
Gemma Berenguer and Zuo-Jun (Max) Shen 
 
Purdue University 
University of California, Berkeley 
 
The final published paper can be found: 
https://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/10.1287/msom.2018.0758 
 
 
The Operations Management (OM) community is paying increasing attention to the analysis of 
nonprofit operations. However, what is it about this type of operations that makes it particularly 
interesting to OM scholars? We address this question by studying the objectives, actors and main 
activities of nonprofit operations and the most common challenges they face. In addition, we 
suggest tactical and operational strategies to address these challenges by considering works in the 
for-profit sector and in different applied areas. The ultimate goal of this paper is to inspire and 
stimulate OM researchers to develop significant theoretical and empirical models in this novel 
stream of literature. 
 
Keywords: nonprofit operations; operations management; challenges; tools and strategies 
1. Introduction 
Goods and services are delivered to accomplish nonprofit goals in many different settings. For 
example, the Weatherization Assistance Program (WAP) provides free energy-efficient services 
to low-income families in the United States; it is sponsored by the Department of Energy and run 
by county-level community-based organizations. Another example is the massive relief operation 
in the aftermath of the 2010 earthquake in Haiti, in which the American Red Cross (ARC) spent 
$148.5 million of cash donations to provide food, water, medical care, emergency shelter, cash 
grants, and other essentials in the first six months. 

 
2 
Although they appear to be very different, the operations of the WAP and ARC’s relief actions 
are both examples of nonprofit operations. Thus, we define a nonprofit operation as a set of actions 
that focus on the provision of goods or services by a nonprofit organization (NPO). In turn, an 
NPO is an organization that is formed and operates with a goal different from earning profit. That 
is, if surplus income is realized, then it should not be distributed to the organization’s shareholders 
as profit or dividends. This constraint is technically called the “nondistribution constraint” 
(Hansmann 1980) and if enforced, the organization can apply for tax-exempt status in many 
countries. 
Market and government failure theory provides a reason for the existence of NPOs (Weisbrod 
1977). When markets have characteristics such as information asymmetry, lack of competition, 
high search or bargaining costs, capital market imperfections, or other externalities, there is a lack 
of involvement of the for-profit sector. Usually, the government responds to the inefficiency by 
providing public goods. However, the public sector sometimes allocates these consumer goods or 
services inefficiently or fails to provide them in a way that the underserved communities need. In 
some cases, these inefficiencies are due to the strict rules and bureaucracy of the public sector. 
Other times, because elected officials’ objectives include responding to majoritarian interests (i.e., 
they are interested in allocating resources 
and services according to the desire of the median voter), 
they fail to assist to minority groups. Private and public sector inefficiencies are known as market 
and government failures, respectively, and when one or both of these occur, NPOs step in. 
Some authors consider public agencies and NPOs to belong to the same sector. Indeed, in case 
of market failure, both type of organizations can provide the needed goods or services and, often, 
they work together. In this setting, the NPO acts as the service provider and the government as the 
major funder. However, there are differences in 
the ways these two sectors operate that are relevant 
to Operations Management (OM) scholars. One difference, as highlighted before, is that the public 
sector orients its actions to provide a level of service that satisfies the average voter, whereas the 
nonprofit sector operates with the goal of serving specialized and niche groups (Oster 1995). 
Another difference is that the primary source of funding for the public sector is taxes, whereas for 
the nonprofit sector, it is donations. Despite the evidence of the existence of three different sectors, 
we alert the reader that in many places of this paper, we discuss differences between for-profit and 
nonprofit operations, but we do not technically discuss how a public operation might be different. 
OM researchers interested in analyzing public sector operations can start with the book written by 

 
3 
Pollock et al. (1994). 
 
1.1 Nonprofit and for-profit organizations 
The nonprofit management literature has studied the major differences between NPOs and for-
profit organizations (FPOs). In the following, we provide a list of differences with an emphasis on 
factors that cause nonprofit operations to be more inefficient than for-profit operations. The factors 
are general but not absolute, so exceptions can be found. 
Goals and performance metrics: An FPO’s primary goal is to obtain profit for its shareholders by 
offering products or services. An NPO can have multiple goals. One of these goals is to maximize 
the provision of a service or product, and if profits are obtained, they are reinvested in the NPO’s 
cause. 
Stakeholders size and responsibilities: NPOs tend to have a more complex set of stakeholders than 
FPOs of a similar size (Anheier 2000, Euske 2003). Anheier (2000) called this tendency “the law 
of nonprofit complexity”. This diverse set of stakeholders is composed of board members, staff 
members, volunteers, clients, and beneficiaries. For example, nonprofit boards are typically larger 
than for-profit boards due to the need to include members of multiple constituencies and the need 
to show its prestige and reputation to meet additional fundraising needs (Anheier 2005). For NPOs, 
the large pool of stakeholders limits the control of the executive, which differs from the higher 
degree of autocratic control of FPOs (Euske 2003). Additionally, while FPOs are primarily 
responsible for their actions to their shareholders, NPOs are responsible to all their stakeholders 
(Hull and Lio 2006). 
Specific industries: NPOs 
are present in industries where trust and reputation are important because 
it is hard to evaluate the quality of the good or service provided. This is especially true in developed 
countries that diligently enforce the “nondistribution constraint” and, by doing so, discourage these 
organizations from making false claims regarding the quality of their products to obtain extra 
surplus (Hansmann 1980). Moreover, NPOs engage in tax-exempt and donor-financed activities. 
The most predominant sectors are healthcare, education, community services, arts and culture, and 
humanitarian relief. In Section 5, we discuss the most pressing operational challenges that 
characterize each of these sectors. 
Challenging environments: Difficult political and social environments, such as serving 
the socially 
excluded, difficult-to-reach geographical areas or very volatile environments, are challenging 

 
4 
settings where market and government failures 
are more likely to occur. Therefore, NPOs are often 
the only type of organization providing services in these environments. Operating in these 
environments is a major factor that makes the management of certain nonprofit operations a very 
complex task (Lewis 2001, Sahley 1995). 
Financial differences: The financial model of NPOs is fundamentally different from that of FPOs 
for three reasons. First, NPOs cannot raise capital by issuing stock as FPOs do; second, NPOs rely 
on external donations as a source of equity capital, which may constrain the allocation of resources 
to the preferences of the donors (Fama and Jensen 1985); and third, the existence of the 
“nondistribution constraint” prohibits paying cash dividends from net revenues (Wedig 1994). One 
of the advantages of NPOs is that they can deliver goods and services at lower prices than FPOs 
because donors forgo claims on the cash returns earned from their donations (Fama and Jensen 
1985). 
Workforce incentives: NPOs’ employees are less driven by financial incentives and are more 
motivated to create societal changes than employees in FPOs (Mirvis and Hackett 1983). For this 
reason and because high salaries often conflict with the NPO’s stringent budget and nonprofit goal, 
nonprofit workers tend to receive lower salaries and fewer benefits than 
for-profit workers, making 
the ability to recruit and retain quality staff more challenging for NPOs (Wolf 1999). Additionally, 
volunteers are a type of workforce particular to the nonprofit sector. 
Risk taking: There is a consensus in the management literature that NPOs tend to be more risk 
averse than FPOs (Wedig 1994). This risk aversion is directly related to the number of different 
stakeholders to which the organization is responsible (Hull and Lio 2006) and the fact that the 
failure of an NPO to carry out its mission places its ability to obtain future donations in jeopardy. 
Risk taking has been linked with innovation adoption and learning capabilities, which are two 
aspects for which NPOs are usually at a disadvantage compared with FPOs due to NPOs’ risk 
averse behavior (Hull and Lio 2006). 
 
1.2 The nonprofit supply chain 
A process view of the operation will help us navigate throughout the different parts of a nonprofit 
operation as it is described in Figure 1. It can be observed that a simplified version of a nonprofit 
operation has the basic structure of any operation, which consists of suppliers, the provider and 
customers, with the addition of donors (in gray in Figure 1). Some of the terminology is adapted 

 
5 
to nonprofit operations: the provider is the NPO, and the customers are called beneficiaries. While 
we have already defined NPOs, beneficiaries are the recipients of the good or service the nonprofit 
operation provides and might or might not pay for it. For this supply chain to be entirely 
representative of a nonprofit operation, donors and donation flows also appear in the operation. 
Commonly, in nonprofit operations, donors are driven by their own incentives and roles, and 
they may become a very powerful force. We further describe the major challenges that concern 
donors in Section 3.3. Associated with donors, flows of pecuniary and non-pecuniary (time and 
goods) donations can be part of the nonprofit operation (represented by gray arrows in Figure 1). 
Typically, these flows are necessary because they bring viability to an operation that would 
otherwise be unsustainable. In terms of donations, challenges include obtaining (i.e., fundraising) 
and managing donations, which are addressed in Sections 4.1 and 4.3, respectively. 
 
Figure 1: Major actors of a nonprofit supply chain. 
1.3. Framework of the paper 
This paper is organized into discussions of the objectives, actors and activities of nonprofit 
operations (Table 1). Section 2 discusses the objectives of nonprofit operations. Section 3 describes 
the roles and challenges of the major actors of a nonprofit operation. Section 4 discusses the most 
notable and challenging activities that occur in a nonprofit operation. Section 5 summarizes the 
different types of nonprofit operations. Finally, in Section 6 we briefly summarize the paper and 
provide some guidance for future research in the form of a call for research. 
 
Table 1 Structure of the paper. 
 
Objectives §2 
Actors §3 
Activities §4 
Multi-criteria tools used by FPOs 
Multi-objective optimization 
Equity 
Efficiency 
Effectiveness 
NPO §3.1 
Suppliers §3.2 
Donors §3.3 
Beneficiaries §3.4 
 
Fundraising §4.1 
Cross-subsidization §4.2 
Managing donations §4.3 
Allocation policies §4.4 
Pricing §4.5 
Suppliers
NPO
Beneficiaries
Donors

 
6 
Workforce management §4.6 
 
We intend for this paper to be comprehensive, 
and we select references from a variety of fields 
such as OM, economics, nonprofit management, and sociology to better illustrate the concepts 
presented. This paper introduces and analyzes the peculiarities of nonprofit operations from an 
OM perspective, and its ultimate goal is to inspire and stimulate researchers to develop significant 
theoretical and empirical models in this novel stream of literature. 
 
2. Objective(s) of a nonprofit operation 
While profit is the overall goal of a for-profit operation, no single goal can adequately represent 
all nonprofit operations. Anthony and Young (1988) claimed that the lack of a single nonprofit 
performance measure makes it challenging to fairly compare different entities by conducting a 
simple broad quantitative analysis. Additionally, the lack of such a measure also makes the 
decentralization and delegation of decisions within the same organization difficult. 
Economics and management studies have considered the challenge of finding the best 
performance measure for NPOs. Kaplan (2001) suggested adapting the for-profit sector balanced 
scorecard framework to suit NPOs, for example, by changing the financial measures at the top of 
the scorecard to an “overarching” mission objective or including donors’ perspectives in customers’ 
perspectives. Similarly, the triple bottom line accounting approach used by some FPOs (e.g., B 
corporations) could be adapted to NPOs (Kim et al. 2016). In their book, published in 1986, 
economists James and Rose-Ackerman identified different types of NPO objectives: maximizing 
managers’ objectives (quality, quantity, product type, revenue, or revenue minus fundraising costs) 
while ignoring beneficiaries’ and donors’ preferences; maximizing ideological goals subject to 
survival constraints; and maximizing a dominant group’s interest (such as doctor’s income in 
hospital operations or time spent by tenured professors on research in a university setting). 
To study operations involving multiple criteria or multiple agents, OM researchers often 
design models with multiple objectives. In general, these models do not have a single “best” 
solution; rather, the goal is to find the set of non-dominated solutions, where a non-dominated 
(a.k.a. non-inferior or Pareto optimal) solution is a solution for which an improvement in one 
objective requires the degradation of another. Specific multi-objective optimization techniques 
such as goal programming (GP), the weighted sum method, and the ε-constrained method are used 

 
7 
to identify this set (Daskin 2011). Under this multi-objective setting, many nonprofit models 
include an equity or fairness objective combined with another conflicting objective (e.g., Balcik et 
al. 2010b, McCoy and Lee 2014). An equity measure is included because demand exceeds supply 
in many nonprofit settings (see Section 4.4), and it is important to consider distributional equity. 
Equity or fairness is a measure that reflects the notion that human beings believe that rewards, 
punishments and resources should be distributed according to a combination of different criteria: 
merit, need, equality, and procedural (Leventhal 1976). There is a large list of equity measures, 
where proportional fairness and max-min fairness are two of the most well-accepted and 
axiomatically justified measures (Bertsimas et al. 2011). Often, a combination of equity and 
efficiency measures is employed. Note that efficiency is also widely used in the for-profit sector 
and reflects the ratio of output to the total input needed to run an operation. 
In addition to efficiency, other popular measures in the for-profit sector can be considered for 
nonprofit operations. One of the most often used measures is effectiveness, which represents 
overall output and is defined as the level of satisfaction of a need and the alleviation of its adverse 
impacts (Savas 1978). In fact, some scholars (Johnson and Smilowitz 2007, Savas 1978) claim 
that efficiency, effectiveness, and equity are the basic and essential conflicting measures that are 
considered in public settings and can also be applied to nonprofit operations. An example of this 
is Swaminathan (2003) who uses equity, efficiency and effectiveness measures in the context of 
free drug distribution by an NPO to multiple clinics. Additionally, each specific nonprofit applied 
area has unique features that drive the type of metrics that should 
be utilized, for example, response 
time for humanitarian relief operations or quality-adjusted life year for healthcare operations. 
Other measures that are particularly linked to nonprofit operations are equality, social welfare, 
poverty reduction, and sustainability (Berenguer 2016). 
The involvement of multiple agents in a nonprofit operation exacerbates the challenge of 
measuring this type of operation because each agent might have conflicting and myopic goals. 
Inefficiencies have been attributed to coordination issues in different applied areas: global health 
supply chains (Kraiselburd and Yadav 2012), humanitarian logistics (Thomas and Kopczak 2005), 
and community-based operations (Johnson and Smilowitz 2007). We further discuss coordination 
issues in the next section. 
 
3. Actors in a nonprofit operation 

 
8 
In the following paragraphs, we describe the role of each actor in a nonprofit operation and the 
relationships with other organizations. We start by describing the NPO’s intra-organizational 
relationships and the NPO’s inter-organizational relationship with organizations (NPOs §3.1.1 and 
FPOs §3.1.2) external to the nonprofit operation. Next, we discuss the relationships between the 
other actors in the nonprofit operation (the suppliers §3.2, donors §3.3, and beneficiaries §3.4) and 
the provider NPO. Special attention is devoted to the donors’ case because it includes peculiar 
challenges and there are interesting strategies that can be used to address the challenges. In general, 
coordination issues that arise between different actors in a nonprofit supply chain are exacerbated 
due to this sector’s lack of formal contracting and insufficient investments in information systems 
technology (Bradley et al. 2003, Kraiselburd and Yadav 2012, Tomasini and Van Wassenhove 
2009). 
 
3.1 The nonprofit provider 
We first examine the intra-organizational structure of NPOs, which tends to be more decentralized 
than that of FPOs (Oster 1996). One reason for this decentralization is that local divisions (last-
mile organizations) are devoted to their mission, and thus, their priority is to be responsive to their 
beneficiaries. This local focus, coupled with a lack of investment in information technology due 
to stringent budgets, can create information opacity between the different divisions of an NPO and 
lead to excessive administrative costs, which can result in inefficiencies (Bradley et al. 2003). 
Another factor that exacerbates decentralization is the earmarking of funds for specific units of the 
NPO. For instance, a single organization, such as World Vision International (WVI), could be 
running different programs (e.g., malaria and schooling programs) in the same province in Kenya. 
These programs are not allowed to share resources, such as the use of vehicles or spare parts, 
because they are funded by different donors (Bhattacharya et al. 2014). Regarding intra-
organizational structures, it has been empirically tested that a franchise-type of model is preferred 
by NPOs over the regular FPO branch model (Oster 1996). The franchise model provides the 
necessary level of autonomy to local divisions (franchisees) to be able to run their operations and 
manage their finances independently from the headquarter NPO (Bilodeau and Steinberg 2006). 
3.1.1 NPO’s relationships with other external NPOs 
According to Oster (1995), collaboration is more common between NPOs than between FPOs, and 
it is encouraged by multiple factors, including shared values and missions, shared volunteers, 

 
9 
shared lines of action with repeated interactions, the ability to credibly commit to cooperation, and 
low gains from competition. Such collaboration can greatly benefit all parties because they can 
share resources and increase service provision. Examples can be found in the early care and 
education area, where NPOs engage in interagency collaboration to use the resources (monetary 
and nonmonetary) attached to the collaboration to strategically address certain service gaps to 
improve care (Sowa 2009). Another more concrete example in the relief operations literature is the 
coordinated use of an IT tool by different organizations to improve last-mile distribution in refugee 
camps after the 2010 earthquake in Haiti (Ergun et al. 2014). 
By contrast, several factors constrain collaboration between NPOs. Similar to the intra-
organizational collaboration issues, Bhattacharya et al. (2014) stated that earmarking of donations, 
decentralized decision making and severe budget constraints are such key constraints. Donors 
disincentivize organizations to collaborate by funding individual organizations based on their 
stand-alone performance to address some particular situation. This makes it difficult for different 
NPOs to share resources and subsequently creates competition because resources are limited. In 
fact, NPOs may compete for the same pool of donations/funds, revenues, board members, labor, 
and/or beneficiaries. For example, competition is common in the early stages of relief response, 
when there is global attention and high funding levels, and organizations are reluctant to share 
information if it gives them a competitive advantage over others (Balcik et al. 2010a). Another 
example is nonprofit social marketing agencies that compete for clients and funding in the same 
space (Ritchie and Weinberg 2000). 
3.1.2 NPO’s relationships with external for-profit parties 
Nonprofit providers are becoming increasingly aware that collaborating with for-profit parties can 
be mutually beneficial. On one hand, NPOs obtain resources and expertise from the for-profit 
sector, and on the other hand, commercial organizations can benefit from opportunities to improve 
their impact on society, fulfilling their corporate social responsibility duties (Tomasini and Van 
Wassenhove 2009). There are numerous examples of such collaborations, such as the CARE-
Starbucks Alliance in which CARE acted as the knowledge provider of Starbucks’ development 
projects and Starbucks publicized CARE in its stores and shared with CARE the profits gained 
from selling special coffee packages from the project countries (Care 2016). Another successful 
partnership occurred when FedEx helped Heart to Heart International respond to humanitarian 
disasters by donating and ensuring expedited shipments in exchange for advertisement (Heart 

 
10 
2016). Researchers in nonprofit management have studied this type of partnership extensively (e.g., 
Austin 2000, O’Regan and Oster 2000). These partnerships come with challenges related to the 
different incentives of for-profit and nonprofit employees (as noted in Sections 1.1 and 4.6). 
According to O’Regan and Oster (2000), the different incentives and training of managers in these 
two types of organizations make it challenging to agree on the specifics of contracts as well as to 
successfully run operations. 
NPOs compete with FPOs in certain environments. In some situations, a funder might finance 
both NPOs and FPOs in the same marketplace, which fosters competition. Examples can be found 
in Medicare and Medicaid programs, voucher schemes for education and workfare programs 
(Tuckman 1998). While NPOs have competitive advantage in terms of reputation, they might 
struggle to produce a higher quality and lower cost product or service than an FPO. Oster (1995) 
claimed that the type of competition that typically can be observed is monopolistic competition 
rather than perfect competition, that is, product competition rather than pure price competition. 
Furthermore, it is common to observe that both types of entities specialize in different market 
niches. For example, regarding childcare, for-profits can be observed in the areas of cities where 
the middle- to upper-income population lives, and thus, high fees can be charged to cover their 
costs; nonprofits are typically located in the centers of cities and near low-income populations. 
This difference is in line with the market failure theory, where for-profits will not enter a market 
that is inefficient for them. Additionally, the ability of NPOs to raise funds from different sources, 
other than fees, can help them remain financially sustainable (Oster 1995). 
Some NPOs also run commercial operations to help finance their core nonprofit operations 
(i.e., cross-subsidize; see Section 4.2 for more discussion), which may cause competition with 
FPOs because these for-profit operations generate sales revenues. FPOs might claim unfair 
competition when an NPO’s operation is subject to subsidization, for example, via tax-exempt 
outputs (Weisbrod 1988). 
 
3.2 Suppliers 
Owing to the nature of nonprofit operations, some mechanisms and tools used to manage the 
relationship between suppliers and for-profit providers cannot be directly implemented in the 
nonprofit context. For example, in humanitarian relief logistics, tools that are used by the 
commercial sector to improve logistical coordination, such as no-show penalty fees or overbooking, 

 
11 
are not observed in the relationship between suppliers and NPOs (Dolinskaya et al. 2011). In 
general, for NPOs in the humanitarian relief sector, OM scholars claim that there is an absence of 
formal contracts between suppliers and nonprofit providers, which triggers challenges in terms of 
sharing risks and costs (Balcik et al. 2010a, Dolinskaya et al. 2011). 
In-kind donations represent a type of supply that is particular to nonprofit operations and can be 
observed in any applied area (see more details in Section §4.3.1). This type of donation has an 
uncertain nature that can affect the regular sourcing of procured supplies. On one hand, due to in-
kind donations, the level of the procured supplies can decrease on average; on the other hand, 
accepting in-kind donations can increase the variability in the procurement process. In the area of 
humanitarian relief operations, a third type of stock related to pre-positioned supplies is added to 
in-kind donations and procured supplies. Despite the existence of these three different sources of 
supplies, Balcik and Ak (2014) claimed that post-disaster procurement is the most common 
sourcing method in humanitarian relief operations, which alludes to the regular procurement 
practices in for-profit operations. From this discussion, we observe that there is an opportunity to 
study and put into practice new contract mechanisms that exploit the unique features of the 
supplier-nonprofit provider relationship. 
 
3.3 Donors 
For nonprofit operations that depend on donations, the power of donors is important and typically 
increases with the amount of funds. Major donors can influence organizational change, shape 
future agendas and investments, and help monitor the performance of nonprofit operations (Fama 
and Jensen 1985). This enforcement role played by the donor arises from the lack of an equity 
market and the lack of clear and quantifiable performance measures for 
nonprofit operations (Oster 
1995). Notably, the role of angel and venture capital investors in startups and social enterprises 
might have some parallelisms with the role of donors in NPOs, especially in the early stages of 
startup growth. 
In the following, we delve into the characteristics of the vertical relationship between donors 
and NPOs 
(§3.3.1) 
and the horizontal relationship between multiple donors in a nonprofit operation 
(§3.3.2). 
3.3.1 Donors’ relationship with NPOs 

 
12 
In the United States, the government is the major donor to NPOs. Studies on the relationship 
between the government (donor) and NPOs (provider) can be found in the economics literature on 
the transactional model (e.g., DeHoog 1984 and Grønbjerg 1993). In this model, the government 
provides financial resources to reduce the startup costs of NPOs so they can quickly respond to 
specific community needs (Salamon 1987). 
OM researchers are beginning to study the donor-provider contractual relationship in 
nonprofit operations. In relation to the aforementioned enforcement role of the donor, Privett and 
Erhun (2011) studied auditing-based contracts between a funder and an NPO by using the 
principal-agent framework. The study claimed that proper auditing improves overall efficiency in 
the nonprofit sector. 
Governments and international agencies sponsor nonprofit and for-profit providers to sustain 
certain operations that offer products or services with a societal impact (e.g., solar stoves, vaccines 
and food). OM scholars have rarely studied this relationship where the provider is an NPO. One 
example is Berenguer et al. (2017b) who compared the purchase and sale subsidy of a donor 
through a for-profit and nonprofit channel when pricing is exogenous and endogenous. They found 
that when the recipient of funds is an NPO, a purchase subsidy is always more effective. However, 
this is not always true for FPOs, where a sale subsidy is preferable when the overall subsidy 
donated is large and the firm has pricing power. 
3.3.2 Multiple donors’ relationships in the same nonprofit operation 
Empirical studies show evidence that points to a persistent lack of coordination in the aid efforts 
of major donors in different nonprofit applied areas (Aldasoro et al. 2010). This lack of 
coordination is one of the major factors causing aid ineffectiveness because it imposes higher 
transaction costs and creates negative incentives (Bigsten 2006). OM works have recently 
corroborated this thesis in the global health and humanitarian relief sectors, which are two 
nonprofit sectors that usually involve large global operations. Berenguer et al. (2016) empirically 
observed that donation flows from multiple donors increase managerial inefficiency in the global 
health environment. In the humanitarian relief field, it has been observed that a combination of 
multiple donors and a high operational mix of development and disaster response programs lead 
to a decline in service levels (Besiou et al. 2014). 
Various strategies that can create an environment that favors donor coordination have been 
discussed in the development economics literature (e.g., Knack and Rahman 2007) as well as in 

 
13 
the global health OM literature (e.g., Kraiselburd and Yadav 2012). These can be categorized into 
two major strategies: establishing a leading coordinating organization and having independent 
organizations publish various donor performance metrics. 
Regarding the first strategy, the coordinator can be the leading donor organization (e.g., a UN 
agency or the military), a supra-organization (such as the Global Fund or the Clinton Health Access 
Initiative, (CHAI)), a coalition or partnership of the donors (e.g., Interagency Supply Chain Group 
(ISG)), or the local government. The coordinator can enable the pooling of donations; oversee 
product purchases, transportation services, and inventories; and promote capacity and information 
sharing. However, pooling makes it difficult, if not impossible, to track the impact of individual 
donor’s funds, so donors do not have full visibility of their specific donations (Gulrajani 2016, 
Kraiselburd and Yadav 2012). Regarding disaster relief, Stapleton et al. (2010) claimed that the 
main objectives of the coordinator are to guarantee visibility, a unified objective, trust, and a brand 
name for the alliance. In addition, Dolinskaya et al. (2011) noted that coordination by command 
has been the most effective coordination mechanism in humanitarian relief. 
In the for-profit sector, global supply chain companies act as coordinators by providing trade 
and logistics services to suppliers in the same for-profit supply chain space. An example in the 
consumer goods space is Li & Fung, which specializes in matching retailers (uncertain demand) 
with suppliers (capacity). Although this type of FPO could act as a coordinator in nonprofit 
operations, this rarely occurs. 
The second strategy is having independent organizations publish various donor performance 
metrics (e.g., think-tank organizations such as the Center for Global Development). Examples of 
these measures include “how each donor proliferates aid across recipients and sectors” and “the 
frequency of delegation to lead donors” (Knack and Rahman 2007). Publishing these figures may 
encourage donors to mitigate the effects of donor fragmentation by increasing their willingness to 
collaborate more with other donors or by concentrating on fewer and larger donation operations. 
However, to our knowledge, it is still uncertain what level of impact this strategy has and what 
specific performance metrics are more effective for achieving this goal. This strategy has 
parallelisms in the for-profit sector, where independent organizations publicly disclose some 
aspects of FPOs’ performance, such as their environmental performance, to nudge FPOs to be 
more responsible. 
 

 
14 
3.4 Beneficiaries 
For a nonprofit operation, the types of “clients” can be classified as those in the public 
administration literature: paying consumers, beneficiaries, and obligatees (Alford 2002). 
Beneficiaries receive the service for free, so they do not participate in an economic exchange with 
the provider. For this type of customer, rather than trying to serve the greatest possible demand, 
the provider’s major challenge is to ration the offered goods or services, which are limited by 
budget constraints. Additionally, another relevant decision is how to segment paying and non-
paying clients. Obligatees have to be persuaded to receive the service; thus, they are served against 
their will, for example, prisoners in a nonprofit private prison. This classification reveals a few 
major differences between the customers of a nonprofit and those of a for-profit operation. For the 
sake of simplicity, in this paper, we refer to all types of clients of a nonprofit operation as 
beneficiaries. 
Demand uncertainty is a challenge in any operation, but it is a particularly common issue in 
nonprofit operations. Nonprofit operations often face abrupt changes in demand (especially in 
disaster relief settings), mostly due to the following reasons: 1) lack of information sharing 
between multiple stakeholders, and 2) a shortage of available funding for collecting data, 
monitoring and demand forecasting. The latter is particularly true in developing regions, where it 
is challenging to obtain reliable public information, such as market size, income levels, or even 
the location of various populations (Levine et al. 2008). In addition, most NPOs do not appreciate 
the long-term payoff of gathering and analyzing data for forecasting, which contributes to a 
shortage of funding for this purpose (Bradley et al. 2003). 
If resources and strategic decision making are devoted to mitigating the effects of demand 
uncertainty, NPOs can implement strategies that are often used in the for-profit sector. We provide, 
in the following, a list of these strategies, with examples of studies and implementations in the 
nonprofit sector: 
• Strategic tools such as agile supply chains or pull systems (Oloruntoba and Gray 2006). 
• Pre-positioning (Akkihal 2006, Apte 2009, Balcik and Beamon 2008, Duran et al. 2011) and 
stockpiling (Adida et al. 2011, Beamon and Kotleba 2006, Bravata et al. 2006), which are 
location and inventory management strategies, respectively. 
• Risk pooling, which aggregates multiple types of demand to compensate for demand 
fluctuations in different sites or organizations (Balcik et al. 2010a, Jack and Powers 2004). 

 
15 
• Stochastic dynamic programming as the tool for making operational decisions (Lien et al. 
2009, 
McCoy and Brandeau 2011). 
• Forecasting techniques to estimate future demand (Levine et al. 2008, Van der Laan et al. 2016). 
• Simulation (Das et al. 2008) and system dynamics (Fleβa 2003) models. 
 
4. Activities in a nonprofit operation 
In this section, we review the most interesting and challenging activities that take place in nonprofit 
operations, including fundraising, cross-subsidization, managing donations, supply and resource 
allocation, pricing, and workforce management. 
 
4.1 Fundraising 
As indicated initially when discussing their financial differences, NPOs have different means of 
raising capital than FPOs because they cannot issue stock and cannot easily obtain loans backed 
by shareholder investment (Privett 2012). The most common ways to raise funds are through 
seeking donations, winning grants, employing volunteers, charging fees, utilizing bonds, and 
accruing investment earnings (Steinberg 2006). A critical operational challenge related to 
fundraising is assessing how much money should be spent on fundraising efforts. Indeed, a 
competition for donations could increase fundraising costs to exceed a level that donors would 
find acceptable. Oster (1995) stated that fundraising efforts should follow a marginal analysis, so 
when fundraising efforts yield higher revenues than incremental costs, fundraising should be 
expanded. A similar problem is characterizing the determinants of giving. Empirical works have 
studied the efficient and optimal design of multiple strategies such as direct marketing strategies 
(Durango-Cohen et al. 2013) and donor-institution interactions such as class reunions of alumni 
(Netzer et al. 2008). Additionally, ways to increase (private or public) donation revenues have 
been modeled. For example, McCardle et al. (2009) used a utility function model to show that a 
tiered donation structure allows the recipient organization to receive larger donations because 
different tiers are associated with different reputations. 
Charity auctions are organized by charities or NPOs to raise money for their projects and are 
considered a subset of auctions specific to the nonprofit sector. Engers and McManus (2007) 
compared equilibrium bidding and revenue across three charity auction formats: first-price winner-
pay, second-price winner-pay, and first-price all-pay. Theoretically, the all-pay auction dominates 

 
16 
the winner-pay auctions. For an empirical study of bidding behavior in charity auctions and 
lotteries, refer to Schram and Onderstal (2009). An interesting practice that is used in the for-profit 
sector and could be commonly adopted in the nonprofit sector is crowdfunding, through which 
ventures or projects are funded by raising many small amounts of money using the internet as the 
major platform. 
 
4.2 Cross-subsidization 
When funds are not sufficient and sales are a possible revenue stream, cross-subsidization is a 
strategy that consists of blending for-profit and nonprofit practices by subsidizing charity services 
with fee services. This strategy has been used by NPOs in sectors such as healthcare and arts and 
culture. An example of cross-subsidization is the Aravind Eye Hospital in India, where profitable 
fee-charging hospitals subsidize care at free hospitals. An example of OM works in this area is de 
Véricourt and Lobo (2009) who studied the dynamic allocation of hospital assets between for-
profit and nonprofit activities to maximize social benefit in this two-revenue types (donations and 
sales) setting. In the economics literature, Segal and Weisbrod (1998) claimed that these two types 
of revenue are not independent and estimated a set of structural and reduced-form empirical models 
using data from five different nonprofit industries showing that a significant negative relationship 
exists between donations and sales. They claimed that donations crowd out commercial activities 
since NPOs have a certain aversion to commercial activities because they do not fully maximize 
revenues that are not related to the mission. This topic can be further studied in OM research; 
researchers could further analyze this dependence and explore the link between sales and donations 
to improve donation forecasting or fundraising efforts. 
 
4.3 Managing donations 
The major revenue sources of a nonprofit operation can be divided into three types: fees from the 
provision of services or goods, grants from the government, and private donations. To gain a sense 
of the weight of each of these revenue sources, we refer to a recent study by the John Hopkins 
University Center for Civil Society Studies, which found that NPOs from a pool of 12 different 
countries on average derived 43% of their revenue from fees charged for services, 32% from 
government sources, and 23% from private philanthropic donations (Salamon et al. 2013). 
Furthermore, private donations can take three basic forms: cash, time, and goods (or in-kind), and 
each form has its own peculiarities. For the sake of simplicity, in this paper, we use the term 

 
17 
donation to refer to any revenue flow that is not a fee obtained for a service or a good. 
We start this section by describing the major characteristics of two specific types of donations: in-
kind donations and grants. Voluntary labor is discussed in Section 4.6. We then highlight the major 
challenges of managing donations, earmarking and addressing uncertainty, which are associated 
with most types of donations. Strategies to mitigate these challenges are also provided following 
the description of each challenge. 
4.3.1 In-kind donations 
Corporations make in-kind donations to offload overstocks, claim tax deductions, or enter new 
markets (Hellenius and Rudbeck 2003). Individuals donate in-kind gifts to be helpful, and some 
prefer to donate in-kind over cash because of issues related to trust and efficacy (Ülkü et al. 2015). 
However, nonprofit providers strongly prefer cash donations over in-kind donations (Tomasini 
and Van Wassenhove 2009). Cash donations provide flexibility, whereas in-kind donations are 
earmarked-at-source donations that are difficult to coordinate in terms of matching the best timing 
and best size with demand. Moreover, the quality of the supply may be inadequate, and resources 
otherwise devoted to relevant activities need to be redirected to handling, sorting, and testing the 
in-kind donations, which entail costs. Thus, recipients of in-kind donations should assess whether 
demand for the items exists and if it is worthwhile to accept this type of donation (Hellenius and 
Rudbeck 2003). 
Ülkü et al. (2015) studied this problem analytically by replicating the donor’s decision process 
of whether to make a cash or in-kind donation. They developed a model to maximize the total cash 
collected by the NPO while minimizing unsolicited or inappropriate in-kind donations. These 
scholars determined the optimal amount of cash to collect and made recommendations regarding 
the minimum cash solicitation amount. 
4.3.2 Grants 
As mentioned above, we classify grants as a type of donation, but they certainly have some specific 
characteristics. Grants have a more concrete timeframe in which NPOs need to apply for and 
request a specific amount of funds. Grantee organizations make the decisions, and if a grant is 
awarded, it is for a specific purpose (earmarked). Determining the amount of money to request for 
the grant and the portfolio of grants to apply for are interesting aspects of the process. Regarding 
the overall portfolio of donations of an NPO, empirically tests have identified the relationships 
that exist between different types of donations. For example, it has been tested that government 

 
18 
grants crowd out private donations; i.e., an increase in government grants reduces the fundraising 
efforts of NPOs (Andreoni and Payne 2003). This effect could be viewed differently – it could be 
negative because the NPO will receive fewer donations, but it could also mean that government 
grants are a more efficient fundraising strategy for the organization. 
4.3.3 Earmarking 
Donations to nonprofit operations can be earmarked for specific projects. In fact, for some 
international agencies, earmarked funds represent a significant portion of all their funding. For 
example, 70% of United Nations organizations’ funding was earmarked in 2012, 
and for the World 
Bank Group, it was 40% (Tortora and Steensen 2014). Although earmarking can reduce costs and 
increase donations, it has the negative effect of constraining the budget, thus triggering different 
inefficiencies. In particular, in the context of humanitarian aid, Toyasaki and Wakolbinger (2011) 
found that with earmarked private donations, the overall percentage of fundraising costs is lower. 
However, inefficiencies have been observed in the form of employing excessive fleet sizes by 
NPOs that apply vehicle replacement policies with earmarked donations from multiple donors 
(Pedraza-Martinez et al. 2011). Lower service levels have also been observed with earmarked 
funding in decentralized vehicle supply chains (Besiou et al. 2014). Studying a mix of disaster and 
development operations, Aflaki and Pedraza-Martinez (2016) found that increasing public 
awareness of development programs helps organizations obtain more non-earmarked donations 
for disaster activities. Lack of trust is one of the major drivers of earmarked donations, as noted 
for in-kind donations. Thus, increasing transparency by publicizing the NPO’s activities and 
performance can improve trust and reduce earmarking. 
4.3.4 Uncertain donations 
Individuals and private firms make donations that often do not involve formal commitments or 
contracts specifying a particular quantity or time. This results in commitment unreliability, which 
makes the flow of donations (pecuniary and non-pecuniary) highly uncertain in terms of both the 
quantity and timing of these funds. These conditions greatly affect the efficiency, scalability and 
sustainability of nonprofit operations (Lewis 2001). In the following, we suggest a series of 
strategies that could help mitigate the uncertainty of donations. These strategies can be classified 
as ex-ante (forecasting, financing, and traditional funding) and ex-post (payment for results (PfR) 
funding), where forecasting and financing are tools very commonly used in the for-profit sector. 

 
19 
A standard OM method that helps mitigate the effects of supply uncertainty is forecasting 
future donations. For example, Davis et al. (2016) used predictive modeling to estimate future in-
kind donations to a local food bank. Financing is another ex-ante strategy for mitigating donation 
uncertainty. For example, the Pledge Guarantee for Health is a bridge financing mechanism 
designed by the United Nations to reduce funding volatility by facilitating short-term credit while 
guaranteeing future donor commitment for the procurement of health commodities (United 
Nations Foundation 2011). When the previously mentioned strategies are unavailable, operational 
strategies can be utilized. For example, when credit is unavailable and external funding is 
unreliable in terms of timing, Natarajan and Swaminathan (2014) proposed using a finite-horizon 
periodic-review inventory model to determine the optimal procurement policy. Among other 
results, this work claimed that receiving partial funding in a timely manner may actually be better 
than delayed full funding. 
PfR is an ex-post funding approach that consists of postponing payment until after the 
implementation of an operation is complete and outcomes are observed. OM scholars are 
beginning to study this feedback loop type of funding. For example, Devalkar et al. (2016) studied 
the differences between traditional funding (i.e., ex-ante funding) and PfR funding by modeling 
the tradeoff between the information asymmetry inherent in funding inputs and exposing the NPO 
to shortfall risk by making funding contingent on output. They observed that PfR is not always the 
best option from a social welfare perspective because under PfR, when there is high output 
uncertainty, the nonprofit provider is more reluctant to invest a large amount of funding in the 
project. Devalkar et al (2017) suggested using a hybrid funding approach for which there are 
traditional donors that fund ex-ante and also ex-post donors. These scholars found that this hybrid 
approach could deliver up to twice the benefit of the traditional funding approach. 
 
4.4 Allocation policies 
Nonprofit operations often have limited supplies and donations available at hand. Moreover, 
sometimes, services or goods are provided for free or at a price below their marginal cost. Under 
these circumstances, demand easily exceeds supply, and a priority or rationing policy must be 
established based on fairness or other nonprofit measures. Rationing has been theoretically studied 
in OM for cases in which customers of different priority classes arrive in sequence (e.g., Topkis 
1968) and for cases in which there is information asymmetry but no priority class (e.g., Cachon 

 
20 
and Lariviere 1999). The literature in this area mostly focuses on the supplier-customer 
relationship, with profits or costs as the main objectives. Waiting lists, explicit queuing, and first-
come first-served schemes are possible rationing strategies that are commonly used in nonprofit 
operations. FPOs prefer to avoid these mechanisms and opt for expanding capacity or increasing 
prices (Steinberg and Weisbrod 1986). The differences between NPOs and FPOs are also reflected 
in situations in which eligibility requirements need to be set for rationing purposes. NPOs tend to 
restrict eligibility to those who are not able to pay or to a particular target group who would benefit 
the most from the product or service. In contrast, FPOs tend to use eligibility requirements to 
screen for unobservable willingness to pay (Steinberg and Weisbrod 1986). 
Concerning different nonprofit applied areas, rationing is particularly relevant in humanitarian 
relief and healthcare operations. As noted by de la Torre et al. (2012), no publication on 
humanitarian relief provides standard priority guidelines for scenarios in which demand exceeds 
supply. However, a common practice is to give preference to the most vulnerable, particularly in 
the case of malnourished children. A few humanitarian organizations follow the Sphere Handbook 
to satisfy the minimum needs for a selected subset of the overall population (The Sphere Project 
2011). In the healthcare setting, organ allocation is a resource allocation problem where demand 
exceeds supply. This problem has been studied extensively in OM. For example, Zenios et al. 
(2000) solved a dynamic resource allocation problem to assign kidneys to wait-listed patients. A 
three-criterion objective function was developed including one efficiency and two inequity 
measures. Another example is Alagoz et al. (2004), who employed a Markov decision process to 
study the optimal timing for a living-donor liver transplant. This work maximized the patient
's 
health, measured as quality-adjusted life expectancy. NPOs and FPOs could be responsible for 
making these allocation decisions, where FPOs are not necessarily free to choose allocations that 
simply maximize profits due to regulations and other possible constraints. It would be interesting 
to study allocation policies under different settings where NPOs or FPOs are in charge. 
The goods and services provided in some of the nonprofit settings discussed thus far can be 
classified as meeting critical needs, thus a stockout in such operation can often result in the loss of 
lives, which makes controlling potential shortages a high priority. OM scholars have developed 
several modeling tools to represent and limit the occurrence of these high-value loss and stockout 
situations. These tools include the following: 

 
21 
• defining shortage cost for unmet demand to prioritize stockout avoidance (e.g., Pierskalla 
(2005) defined shortage costs at blood centers based on the cost of processing, handling, and 
transporting blood in an emergency) 
• providing alternative services during emergencies (e.g., Nagurney et al. (2009) designed 
supply chain networks with the option of outsourcing the production, storage, and delivery of 
critical products) 
• developing a service level to control for stockouts (e.g., Samii et al. (2012) used two service 
levels for low- and high-priority demand in the inventory rationing of influenza vaccines) 
 
4.5 Pricing 
Traditionally, pricing in nonprofit operations is employed to control service allocation to the 
desired beneficiaries rather than due to motivations related to collecting revenue. Although FPOs 
typically establish the lowest prices at or above the marginal costs of serving a particular income-
based group of customers, in nonprofit operations, the prices for low-income customers are often 
set below the marginal cost. However, revenue-generating NPOs are starting to adopt novel pricing 
schemes grounded in the for-profit sector such as value-based pricing and dynamic pricing (e.g., 
NPOs in the arts and culture). It would be interesting to further study these pricing schemes in 
nonprofit settings to see whether there might be any structural differences. 
Steinberg and Weisbrod (1986) listed the most general pricing schemes used by NPOs: free 
to all comers, a uniform fee, and a more elaborate fee structure. Regarding the latter, sliding-scale 
fees, multi-part prices with separate access and usage charges, and nonlinear prices with caps and 
deductibles are the most popular schemes used by NPOs. These scholars hypothesized that NPOs 
use sliding-scale fees more often than FPOs because NPOs have a larger income-based range of 
consumers due to also serving clients who are unwilling or unable to pay. Therefore, the rates 
NPOs offer are more diverse. In addition, because consumers support the NPO’s mission, they are 
more likely to reveal their willingness to pay and are more willing to accept the redistribution that 
accompanies this type of pricing mechanism. 
For some goods and services (for instance, disaster relief), it is not advisable to charge a fee. 
Oster (1995) identified the factors to be considered in deciding whether to charge fees. It is 
recommended to avoid charging fees when public goods are distributed (i.e., goods that, when 
given to others, do not incur incremental costs), when there are large positive externalities 

 
22 
associated with the consumption of the good or service, when the cost of collecting the fees 
exceeds the benefit generated by the fees collected, and in circumstances in which donors or staff 
believe it is unacceptable to charge a fee. FPOs may also offer free services but typically offer 
them to customers they know have potential to be converted into paying customers or only to 
specific customer segments via price discrimination (Chestnut et al. 2018). 
Finally, there is a type of pricing that is particular to NPOs -- this occurs when beneficiaries 
are required to pay in a non-monetary form, such as labor or supplies (Steinberg and Weisbrod 
1986). This mechanism is used when it directly supports the NPOs mission or when it supplies 
scarce resources such as labor or material. 
 
4.6 Workforce management 
NPOs tend to be more labor-intensive than capital-intensive; thus, workforce management is a 
very important task. The management of volunteers and the retention of paid employees are the 
two major challenges of workforce management in NPOs. 
Voluntary labor is one of the most distinctive features of the nonprofit sector. Volunteers 
represent an average 2.2% of the total workforce according to a recent 13-country study (Salamon 
et al. 2013). Bilodeau and Steinberg (2006) highlighted a few key aspects that need to be 
considered when modeling this type of labor. The first is that voluntary labor should be modeled 
the same way as cash donations. Moreover, these scholars 
note that empirical works have 
indicated 
that complementarity exists between donations of time and money. The second key notion is that 
although volunteer labor is free, accepting it entails the same costs for recruitment, training, 
supervision and retention that are incurred for any paid employee of any organization. Since 
volunteers do not have a contracted obligation to work, one of the major challenges is managing 
uncertain behavior. An example of OM work in this area is Sönmez et al. (2016), who modeled 
voluntary labor as a stochastic process in the context of food bank gleaning operations, where 
pickup volunteers and gleaning foods are both stochastic, and the model maximizes the total 
volume gleaned. NPOs need to devise rewards to keep volunteers engaged and reduce this 
uncertainty, for example, using a hierarchical structure for volunteers similar to the staff hierarchy 
(Oster 1995) or assigning volunteers to interesting tasks related to the NPO’s mission rather than 
mundane tasks (Wolf 1999). These activities imply that there is a certain amount of collaboration 

 
23 
between volunteers and paid workers. This type of scheduling problem could be an area for future 
OM research. 
 
As mentioned at the beginning of this paper, paid NPO workers have lower salaries and 
fewer benefits than paid FPO workers. This wage gap can be seen as a labor donation to the NPO’s 
mission (Weisbrod 1977). Despite the existence of self-selection, where NPO employees are less 
driven by financial incentives and are more motivated to create societal change, the turnover rates 
are higher for NPOs than for organizations in other sectors (Nonprofit HR 2016). Well-known 
strategies that can be used to retain talent include employee recognition efforts, flexible working 
options and professional development opportunities, but these might be seen as “luxuries” by 
NPOs. Nonetheless, NPOs tend to underestimate the hidden costs of turnover (Nonprofit 
Leadership Alliance 2018), which might be considerably higher than retention costs. 
 
5. Different types of nonprofit operations 
There are multiple ways to classify NPOs and by extension, nonprofit operations. For instance, 
NPOs can be classified as advocacy or service delivery organizations based on their main purpose 
and activities (Lewis 2001). Advocacy NPOs seek to induce the government to “do the right thing” 
and try to change the status quo, especially in areas related to social justice and the environment. 
In contrast, service delivery NPOs are dedicated to providing goods or services to meet direct 
needs such as education and healthcare. Another popular classification of NPOs distinguishes 
between relief and development operations (Byman 2000). A relief operation is a short-term 
activity focused on providing goods and services to minimize the immediate risks to human health 
and survival. Alternatively, a development operation is a longer-term activity focused on 
community self-sufficiency and sustainability. 
Nonprofit operations can also be classified based on their different applied areas. The most 
relevant areas are healthcare, education, community services, arts and culture, and disaster relief. 
In the following, each area is reviewed and its particular operational challenges are highlighted. 
 
5.1 Healthcare 
NPOs have an active role in healthcare; some hospitals, community health centers, and other 
healthcare facilities such as blood banks are NPOs. Economists have paid particular attention to 
nursing homes and claim that the proliferation of nonprofit nursing homes has occurred due to the 

 
24 
fact thatit is not easy to evaluate the quality of service because the direct beneficiary might not be 
a useful source of information (the same applies to daycare centers). Due to the nondistribution 
constraint, NPOs are less likely to abuse the system by providing low quality service (Hansmann 
1980). Common financial practices used in the healthcare field are cross-subsidization and 
governmental reimbursement programs for services rendered to patients. Some specific 
operational problems in this area include the organ allocation problem, the scheduling of scarce 
resources (e.g., beds and staff), and the medical facility location problem. For these problems, 
specific healthcare metrics can be considered such as quality-adjusted life year (QALY) and 
disability-adjusted life year (DALY). Other relevant issues in healthcare operations are related to 
supply perishability (e.g., organs and blood) as well as demand uncertainty (e.g., patient arrivals). 
Global health care is a subarea of healthcare that deserves special mention. The goal of global 
health care is to provide essential medicine to people in low- and middle-income countries. This 
requires a global operation that includes a wide range of different actors involved in the financing 
and distribution of drugs. Global health experts agree that many of the observed operational 
problems in this area are caused by coordination issues across multiple stakeholders with widely 
divergent objectives (Kraiselburd and Yadav 2012). 
 
5.2 Education 
Although the presence of NPOs in the education field is significant, it has not received much 
attention from the OM community. One challenging problem is the college admission problem, 
which could be analyzed as a stable marriage problem (Gale and Shapley 1962). A second issue 
that is very specific to education is the management of revenues, which are typically a mix of 
tuition fees, government funding and private donations. Fundraising strategies to increase private 
donations have become more relevant since public institutions have reduced educational funding 
(Durango-Cohen et al. 2013). Another interesting problem in the education field is the impact of 
collaborations between different institutions for knowledge creation. One example is the creation 
of for-profit spin-offs by nonprofit universities (Gumport and Snydman 2006). 
 
5.3 Community services 
The OM community has studied community services in the area of community-based OR (Johnson 
and Smilowitz 2012, Parry and Mingers 1991). By community service we refer to any service 
provided to an entire community or to a specific underserved or underrepresented target population. 

 
25 
Examples of the goods and services that are provided include food, energy assistance (e.g., the 
weatherization program), homeless shelters, family development housing, and budget counseling. 
For this type of NPO, challenges related to the selection of the target population are common. 
Moreover, due to the close proximity of the NPO with the end beneficiaries, the most relevant 
operational issues are facility location, spatial planning and delivery-routing decisions. There is 
also a recurrent and ongoing discussion regarding the use of equity measures combined with 
efficiency/effectiveness measures (Johnson 2011). In the United States, a significant percentage 
of community-based organizations, called community action agencies, have a strong relationship 
with the government via the Community Action Program. This program’s different funding 
mechanisms and overall donor-NPO power-control relationship is one of a kind (Privett 2012). 
 
5.4 Arts and culture 
Price discrimination based on different types of seats is commonly used by organizations in the 
performing arts industry. Additionally, NPOs in this industry might ask individuals to volunteer to 
pay an additional amount if the price of the ticket is lower than the value they place on the 
performance. This strategy is successful due to the existence of the nondistribution constraint 
(Hansmann 1980). Cross-subsidization is also a very common practice used by NPOs in the arts 
and culture. For example, museums heavily promote gift shops and special exhibitions that finance 
the activities that lose money but drive the mission of the NPO. Some decisions about these 
practices are related to the pricing and volumes assigned to these profit-generating activities (Rose-
Ackerman 1986). Interesting questions arise from these activities such as whether they damage the 
reputation of the NPO or whether, by offering these activities, NPOs are competing with similar 
activities offered by FPOs. A second interesting challenge is related to the management of 
volunteers, including recruiting and retaining them and determining which tasks should be 
assigned to them, as these tasks might overlap with the tasks of paid staff (Wolf 1999). 
 
5.5 Disaster relief 
Most organizations in this area rely solely on donations, including some unwanted in-kind 
donations (Kovács and Spens 2007). Another relevant characteristic of disaster relief operations is 
that they are short term and sudden. Thus, forecasting, planning and coordination are extremely 
challenging tasks. Consequently, pre-positioning is a very key and specific strategy associated with 
this type of operation. Because these operations are generally short-lived and unexpected, studies 

 
26 
on performance metrics for disaster relief operations have been especially prolific and particularly 
emphasize the evaluation of response times (Beamon and Balcik 2008, Schiffling and Piecyk 
2014). The following is a small sample of references that examine humanitarian logistics: Altay 
and Green (2006), Ergun et al. (2010), Thomas and Kopczak (2005), and Van Wassenhove (2005). 
 
6. Conclusions and call for research 
The study of nonprofit operations is an emerging and important research area that is still 
underrepresented in OM. There is a need to develop analytical and empirical models that are 
tailored to nonprofit operations. In past years, some efforts have been undertaken in this direction. 
For example, Annals of Operations Research journal published a special issue about “Operations 
Research in the Public Sector and Nonprofit Organizations” (Sinuany-Stern and Sherman 2014) 
and Production and Operations Management (POM) journal has recently published a special issue 
dedicated to “Not-for-profit Operations Management” (Berenguer et al. 2017a). This article aims 
to stimulate future OM research on nonprofit operations by highlighting the key features of such 
operations and the associated major challenges and strategies, which are summarized in Table 2. 
To conclude this article, we now identify some interesting research directions that we think deserve 
more attention from the OM community. 
 
6.1 Operational decisions and efficiencies 
For revenue-generating NPOs, certain operational decisions can be refined and improved upon by 
adopting practices grounded in the for-profit sector. For example, NPOs can adopt more efficient 
pricing mechanisms, such as value-based pricing, dynamic pricing, or transfer pricing for global 
supply chains. Investing in marketing is an operational decision that is not necessarily unique to 
FPOs and should be explored by NPOs. Donations and sales have been shown to be interdependent 
and this relationship could be exploited to improve forecasting or fundraising efforts. 
Workforce scheduling is another operational decision with particular features for NPOs because 
they are faced with uncertain flows of volunteers, austere salaries, and mission-based incentives. 
OM scholars can help NPO managers by designing workforce scheduling methods that consider 
these features. 
Nonprofit operations are particularly vulnerable with situations related to scalability and 
sustainability. We speculate that operations’ missions and funding constraints are major causes of 

 
27 
this vulnerability because they force NPOs to be responsive. This type of environment conflicts 
with prioritizing efficient practices such as exploiting economies of scale (Euske 2003). We 
encourage OM researchers to further investigate these issues. 
 
6.2 Strategic decisions: coordination problems and investment decisions 
As we just mentioned, NPOs’ motivation to follow their social goals incentivizes them to be 
responsive to beneficiaries instead of prioritizing the efficiency of their operations. This behavior, 
in addition to uncertain funding, can inhibit planning and adversely impact long-term investment 
decisions (Sahley 1995). As noted in this paper, one of the major causes of this issue is the lack of 
investment in information technology. As mostly observed in the for-profit sector, information 
visibility can mitigate inefficiencies, which improves an organization’s usage of resources and 
could also improve the NPOs’ social goals. Therefore, formal studies on the (economic and social) 
value of information in nonprofit operations would be very beneficial. 
Further study is needed on coordination mechanisms that can foster effective collaboration 
between different entities in nonprofit operations. For example, operating by command is a 
successful mechanism for nonprofit operations in the humanitarian relief sector, and this 
mechanism is substantially different from the contracts typically used in the for-profit environment. 
In effect, the contractual relationships with NPOs have particular features that should be carefully 
considered. Special attention should be given to the performance metrics used, the supply sourcing 
mix, and the funding mix and its constraints. Formal studies on the (social and economic) value of 
collaboration are interesting. 
 
6.3 Empirical research and benchmarking studies 
To our knowledge, formal performance comparisons between the operations of NPOs and those 
of FPOs have not been carried out in the OM literature. Healthcare and education are two different 
applied areas in which both types of organizations coexist and data can be easily found for this 
type of research. This type of analysis would be particularly useful for instances in which donors 
need to select an organization to sponsor (e.g., award a grant) or subsidize or when clients want to 
choose the type of organization that provides the highest quality of service. If differences between 
the two types of organizations are indeed observed, it would be interesting to identify the 
differences in operational and strategic decisions and the differences in terms of the positioning of 
each type of organization in an efficient frontier analysis. 

 
28 
The OM community can make an interesting and significant contribution by empirically analyzing 
the use of the process view approach and its fundamental process metrics for nonprofit operations. 
A general framework can be developed to analyze the performance of various NPOs and identify 
where improvement can be achieved. Grouping NPOs by sector could also provide further insights. 
 
6.4 Innovation in running nonprofit operations 
Unique features of nonprofit operations highlight the need to use innovative ways to manage them 
because these features do not appear in the for-profit or public sectors. Some of the most interesting 
features are associated with donations, for example, the management of voluntary labor, gifts-in-
kind, and charity auctions. The study of the use of new online platforms and new funding 
mechanisms as well as their impact on nonprofit operations is also an important area of research 
in OM. Utilizing efficient mechanisms is critical because NPOs have budgets that are very limited, 
highly earmarked and highly uncertain. In this paper, we have mentioned a few funding 
mechanisms such as traditional funding schemes, bridge financing, and PfR. We encourage OM 
scholars to carry out empirical and analytical works that study the efficacy of different funding 
mechanisms. Special attention should be devoted to feedback loop funding and its effects on 
operational decisions and performance. 
As previously discussed, the risk averse behavior of traditional NPOs inhibits innovation. While 
the study of risk aversion 
(both empirical and analytical) is interesting and deserves more attention, 
we suggest that OM researchers analyze new business models suitable for nonprofit ventures. On 
a similar note, social enterprises are positioned between the for-profit and nonprofit sectors and 
follow practices borrowed from the for-profit sector to achieve an overall goal that can be defined 
as “social value” (Dees et al. 2001). Social enterprises are gaining momentum over traditional 
NPOs due to the attractiveness of the goods and services they offer and their innovative business 
models. We believe that traditional NPOs can learn from this type of organization because they 
face similar challenges related to raising funds, scalability and sustainability. 
 
Table 2 Challenges and strategies of nonprofit operations. 
 
Challenges 
Some tools and strategies 
Finding the best performance metric 
- Multi-objective optimization 
- Equity/efficiency combination ^ 
- Balanced scorecard approach* 

 
29 
- Triple bottom line approach (B corporations)* 
Lack of coordination between different 
actors 
- Formal contracting 
- Investment in IT to share data 
- Operating by command ^ 
Lack of coordination between different 
donors 
- Establishing a leading coordinator 
- Publishing donor data 
- Using 
for-profit global supply chain companies 
(e.g., Li & Fung Inc.)* 
Scalability and sustainability problems 
- Guaranteeing funding to exploit economies of scale 
- Adopting strategies from social enterprises* 
Shortage of supply 
- Efficiently managing in-kind donations ^ 
- Pre-positioning supplies 
Shortage of funds 
 
- Fundraising 
- Using a tiered donation structure ^ 
- Cross-subsidizing ^ 
- Applying for grants 
- Using volunteers ^ 
- Using direct marketing strategies* 
- Crowdfunding* 
Demand uncertainty 
 
- Improving forecasting 
- Using agile supply chains or pull systems 
- Pre-positioning supplies 
- Risk pooling 
- Using modeling tools: stochastic dynamic programming, simulation 
and system dynamics tools 
Earmarked donations 
- Increasing public awareness of less popular programs^ 
- Improving trust by increasing transparency (e.g., use of online 
platforms) 
Uncertain donations 
 
- Using ex-ante strategies: forecasting, bridge financing^, and 
traditional funding 
- Using ex-post strategies: payment for results (PfR) funding^ 
- Focusing on hybrid ex-ante and ex-post funding ^ 
Allocation when supply is lower than 
demand 
- Rationing with and without priority classes 
- Using wait lists 
- Using explicit queuing 
- Using modeling tools: shortage costs, outsourcing for emergency 
services, and service levels 
Pricing 
 
- Price discrimination 
- Non-monetary payments with labor or supplies ^ 
- Value-based pricing* 
- Dynamic pricing* 
- Transfer pricing for global supply chains* 
Management of volunteers 
- Using a tiered volunteer structure ^ 
- Assigning interesting tasks 
Employee retention 
- Recognizing employees’ efforts 
- Providing flexible working options 
- Providing professional development opportunities 
Lack of innovation 
- Adopting strategies from the business models of social enterprises * 
Note: ^: Practices that are particularly used by NPOs; 

 
30 
 *: New practices from the for-profit sector that have not been commonly used by NPOs. 
 
 
Acknowledgments 
The authors would like to thank the associate editor and three anonymous referees for their helpful 
comments and suggestions. 
References 
Adida, E., DeLaurentis, P.C.C., & Lawley, M.A. (2011). Hospital stockpiling for disaster planning. IIE Transactions, 
43(5), 348–362. 
Aflaki, A. & Pedraza-Martinez, A.J. (2016). Humanitarian funding in a multi-donor market with donation uncertainty. 
Production and Operations Management, 25(7), 1274-1291. 
Akkihal, A.R. (2006). Inventory pre-positioning for humanitarian operations. Master of Engineering. thesis, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Alagoz, O., Maillart, L.M., Schaefer, A.J., & Roberts, M.S. (2004). The optimal timing of living-donor liver 
transplantation. Management Science, 50(10), 1420–1430. 
Aldasoro, I., Nunnenkamp, P., & Thiele, R. (2010). Less aid proliferation and more donor coordination? The wide 
gap between words and deeds. Journal of International Development, 22(7), 920-940. 
Alford, J. 2002. Defining the client in the public sector: A social-exchange perspective, Public Administration Review, 
62(3), 337-346. 
Altay, N., & Green, W.G. (2006). OM research in disaster operations management. European Journal of Operational 
Research, 175 (1), 475-493. 
Andreoni, J. & Payne, A. (2003). Do government grants to private charities crowd out giving or fund-raising?, 
American Economic Review, 93(3), 792-812. 
Anheier, H.K. (2000). Managing non-profit organisations: Towards a new approach. Centre for Civil Society, London 
School of Economics and Political Science. 
Anheier, H. K. (2005). Nonprofit Organizations: Theory, Management, Policy. Routledge: Taylor and Francis Group. 
Anthony, R.N., & Young, D.W. (1988). Management Control in Nonprofit Organizations. Irwin, Homewood. 
Apte, A. (2009). Humanitarian logistics: A new field of research and action. Foundations and Trends in Technology, 
Information and Operations Management, 3(1), 1–100. 
Austin, J.E. (2000) Strategic collaboration between nonprofits and businesses. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector 
Quarterly, 29(1), 69–97. 
Balcik, B., & Beamon, B.M. (2008). Facility location in humanitarian relief. International Journal of Logistics 
Research and Applications, 11(2), 101–121. 
Balcik, B., Beamon, B.M., Krejci, C.C., Muramatsu, K.M., & Ramirez, M. (2010a). Coordination in humanitarian 
relief chains: Practices, challenges and opportunities. International Journal of Production Economics, 126(1), 22-
34. 
Balcik, B., Iravani, S., & Smilowitz, K.R. (2010b), A review of equity in nonprofit and public sector: a vehicle routing 

 
31 
perspective, in Cochran, J.J. (Eds.), Wiley Encyclopedia of Operations Research and Management Science, Wiley, 
Hoboken, NJ. 
Balcik, B., & Ak, D. (2014). Supplier selection for framework agreements in humanitarian relief. Production and 
Operations Management, 23(6), 1028-1041. 
Bhattacharya, S., Hasija, S., & Van Wassenhove, L.N. (2014). Designing efficient infrastructural investment and asset 
transfer mechanisms in humanitarian supply chains. Production and Operations Management, 23(9), 1511-1521. 
Beamon, B.M. & Balcik, B. (2008). Performance measurement in humanitarian relief chains. International Journal 
of Public Sector Management, 21(1), 4-25. 
Beamon, B.M., & Kotleba, S.S. (2006). Inventory modelling for complex emergencies in humanitarian relief 
operations. International Journal of Logistics Research and Applications, 9(1), 1–18. 
Bertsimas, D., Farias, V.F., & Trichakis, N. (2011). The price of fairness. Operations Research, 59(1), 17-21. 
Berenguer, G. (2016). Modeling approaches and metrics to evaluate nonprofit operations. Advances in 
Managing Humanitarian Operations, book edited by Altay, N., Haselkorn, M. P., Zobel, Christopher W., Springer. 
Berenguer, G., Keskinocak P., Shanthikumar, J.G., Swaminathan, J. & Van Wassenhove L.N. (2017a). A Prologue to 
the Special Issue on Not-for-Profit Operations Management. Production and Operations Management, 26 (6), 
973-975 
Berenguer, G., Feng, Q., Shanthikumar, J.G., & Xu, L. (2017b). The effects of subsidies on increasing consumption 
through for-profit and not-for-profit newsvendors. Production and Operations Management, 26 (6), 1191-1206. 
Berenguer, G., Iyer, A., & Yadav, P. (2016). Disentangling the efficiency drivers in country-level global health 
programs: an empirical study. Journal of Operations Management, 45, 30-43. 
Besiou M., PedrazaMartinez A. J., & Van Wassenhove L. N. (2014). Vehicle Supply Chains in Humanitarian 
Operations: Decentralization, Operational Mix and Earmarked Funding, Production and Operations Management, 
23(1), 1950-1965. 
Bigsten, A. (2006). Donor Coordination and the Uses of Aid, Working paper, Göteborg University. 
Bilodeau, M., R. & Steinberg. (2006). Donative nonprofit organizations. Handbook of the Economics of Giving, 
Altruism and Reciprocity, 2, 1271-1333. 
Bradley, B., Jansen, P. & Silverman, L. (2003). The nonprofit sector’s $100 billion opportunity. Harvard Business 
Review, 81(5), 94–103. 
Bravata, D.M., Zaric, G.S., Holty, J.E.C., Brandeau, M.L., Wilhelm, E.R., McDonald, K.M., & Owens, D.K. (2006). 
Reducing mortality from anthrax bioterrorism: strategies for stockpiling and dispensing medical and 
pharmaceutical supplies. Biosecurity and Bioterrorism: Biodefense Strategy, Practice, and Science, 4(3), 244–262. 
Cachon, G.P., & Lariviere, M.A. (1999). Capacity choice and allocation: Strategic behavior and supply chain 
performance. Management Science, 45(8), 1091–1108. 
Care. (2016) http://www.care.org/about/partnerships/corporate-partners/our-partners, accessed March 2018. 
Chestnut, J., Ahn, HS., Anupindi, R. Giving It Away to Increase Profits: Price Discrimination and the Effect of Free 
Goods. 
Das, T.K., Savachkin, A.A., & Zhu, Y. (2008). A large-scale simulation model of pandemic influenza outbreaks for 

 
32 
development of dynamic mitigation strategies. IIE Transactions, 40(9), 893–905. 
Daskin, M. (2011). Service Science, John Wiley & Sons Inc. 
Davis, L.B., Jiang, S.X., Morgan, S., Nuamah, I., & Terry J.R. (2016). Analysis and Prediction of food donation 
behavior for a domestic hunger relief organization. International Journal of Production Economics, forthcoming. 
de la Torre, L.E., Dolinskaya, I.S. & Smilowitz, K.R. (2012). Disaster relief routing: integrating research and practice. 
Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 46(1), 88–97. 
de Véricourt, F., & Lobo, M.S. (2009). Resource and revenue management in nonprofit operations. Operations 
Research, 57(5), 1114–1128. 
Dees, J.G., Emerson, J., & Economy, P. (2001). Enterprising nonprofits: A toolkit for social entrepreneurs. John 
Wiley & Sons Inc. 
DeHoog, R.H. (1984). Contracting Out for Human Services: Economic, Political, and Organizational Perspectives. 
State University of New York Press, Albany. 
Devalkar, S.K., Sohoni, M.G., & Sharma, N. (2016). Payment for Results: Funding Non-profit Operations, Indian 
School of Business, working paper. 
Devalkar, S.K., Sohoni, M.G., & Arora, P. (2017). Ex-post funding: How should a resource-constrained non-profit 
organization allocate its funds? Production and Operations Management, 26(6), 1035-1055. 
Dolinskaya, I.S., Shi, Z.E., Smilowitz, K.R., & Ross, M. (2011). Decentralized approaches to logistics coordination 
in humanitarian relief. T. Doolen, E. Van Aken, eds., Proceedings of the 2011 Industrial Engineering Research 
Conference. 
Duran, S., Gutierrez, M. A., & Keskinocak, P. (2011). Pre-positioning of emergency items for CARE international. 
Interfaces, 41(3), 223–237. 
Durango-Cohen, E.J., Torres, E.L., & Cohen, P.L. (2013). Donor segmentation: when summary statistics do not tell 
the whole story. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 27, 172-184. 
Engers, M. & McManus, B. (2007). Charity auctions. International Economic Review, 48(3), 953-994. 
Ergun, O., Karakus, G., Keskinocak, P., Swann, J., & Villarreal, M. (2010). Operations research to improve disaster 
supply chain management. Wiley Encyclopedia of Operations Research and Management Science, John Wiley & 
Sons, Hoboken, NJ. 
Ergun, O., Gui, L., Heier Stamm, J.L., Keskinocak,P. & Swann, J. (2014). Improving Humanitarian Operations 
Through Technology-enabled Collaboration. Production and Operations Management, 23(6), 1002–1014. 
Euske, K.J. (2003). Public, private, not-for-profit: everybody is unique?, Measuring Business Excellence, 7(4), 5-11. 
Fama, E.F. & Jensen, M.C, (1985). Organizational forms and investment decisions. Journal of Financial Economics, 
14, 101-119. 
Fleßa, S. (2003). Decision support for AIDS control programmes in Eastern Africa, OR Spectrum, 25(2), 265–291. 
Gale, D., & Shapley, L.S. (1962). College admissions and the stability of marriage. American Mathematical Monthly, 
69(1), 9–15. 
Grønbjerg, K.A. (1993). Understanding Nonprofit Funding: Managing Revenues in Social Service and Community 
Development Organizations. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco. 

 
33 
Gulrajani, N. (2016). Bilateral versus multilateral aid channels. Strategic choices for donors. Overseas Development 
Institute Report. 
Gumport, P.J., & Snydman, S.K. (2006). Higher education: evolving forms and emerging markets. The non-profit 
sector: a research handbook. 2
nd Edition. 462-484. 
Hansmann, H.B. (1980). The role of nonprofit enterprise. The Yale Law Journal, 89(5), 835–901. 
Heart to Heart International. (2016). http://www.hearttoheart.org/nepal-earthquake-relief-by-the-numbers/ . accessed 
March 2018. 
Hellenius, R., & Rudbeck, S. (2003). In-kind donations for nonprofits. McKinsey Quarterly, 4, 23–27. 
Hull, C.E., & Lio, B.H. (2006). Innovation in non-profit and for-profit organizations: Visionary, strategic,and financial 
considerations. Journal of Change Management, 6(1), 53-65. 
Jack, E.P., & Powers, T.L. (2004). Volume flexible strategies in health services: a research framework. Production 
and Operations Management, 13(3), 230–244. 
James, E., & Rose-Ackerman, S. (1986). The Nonprofit Enterprise in Market Economics. Harwood Academic 
Publishers, London. 
Johnson, M.P., & Smilowitz, K. (2007). Community-based operations research. INFORMS Tutorials in Operations 
Research, 102-123. 
Johnson, M.P. (2011). Community-Based Operations Research: Decision Modeling for Local Impact and Diverse 
Populations. Springer, New York. 
Kaplan, R.S. (2001). Strategic performance measurement and management in nonprofit organizations. Nonprofit 
Management and Leadership, 11(3), 353–370. 
Kim, S., Karlesky, M.J. Myers, C.G., & Schifeling, T. (2016). Why Companies Are Becoming B Corporations? 
Harvard Business Review, June 17. 
Knack, S., & Rahman, A. (2007). Donor fragmentation and bureaucratic quality in aid recipients. Journal of 
Development Economics, 83, 176–197. 
Kovács, G., & Spens, K.M. (2007). Humanitarian logistics in disaster relief operations. International Journal of 
Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, 37(2), 99–114. 
Kraiselburd, S., & Yadav, P. (2012). Supply chains and global health: an imperative for bringing operations 
management scholarship into action. Production and Operations Management, 22(2), 377-381. 
Leventhal, G.S. 
(1976) What Should Be Done with Equity Theory? New Approaches to the Study of Fairness in Social 
Relationships. Department of Psychology, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan 48202. 
Levine, R., J. Pickett, N. Sekhri, & Yadav, P. (2008). Demand forecasting for essential medical technologies. 
American Journal of Law and Medicine, 34, 269–297. 
Lewis, D. (2001). The Management of Non-Governmental Development Organizations: An Introduction. Routledge, 
London. 
Lien, R., Iravani, S.M.R. & Smilowitz, K.R. (2014), Sequential resource allocation for nonprofit operations, 
Operations Research, 62(2), 301-317. 
McCardle, K.F., Rajaram, K., & Tang, C.S. (2009). A decision analysis tool for evaluating fundraising tiers. Decision 

 
34 
Analysis, 6(1), 4–13. 
McCoy, J.H., & Brandeau, M.L. (2011). Efficient stockpiling and shipping policies for humanitarian relief: UNHCR’s 
inventory challenge. OR Spectrum, 33(3), 1–26. 
McCoy, J.H., & Lee, H.L. (2014). Using fairness models to improve equity in health delivery fleet management. 
Production and Operations Management, 23(6), 965–977. 
Mirvis, P.H. & Hackett, E.J. (1983). Work and work force characteristics in the nonprofit sector, Monthly Labor 
Review, 106(4), 3-12. 
Nagurney, A., Yu, M., & Qiang, W. (2009). Supply chain network design for critical needs with outsourcing. Papers 
in Regional Science, 90(1), 123-142. 
Natarajan, K. V., & Swaminathan, J. M. (2014). Inventory management in humanitarian operations: Impact of amount, 
schedule, and uncertainty in funding. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 16(4), 595-603. 
Netzer, O., Lattin, J., & Srinivasan, V. (2008). A Hidden Markov Model of Customer Relationship Dynamics, 
Marketing Science, 27(2), 185-204. 
Nonprofit HR (2016). 2016 Nonprofit employment practices survey results, Nonprofit HR. 
Nonprofit Leadership Alliance. (2018). https://www.nonprofitleadershipalliance.org/cost-of-employee-turnover/, 
accessed March 2018. 
Oloruntoba, R., & Gray, R. (2006). Humanitarian aid: an agile supply chain? Supply Chain Management: An 
International Journal, 11(2), 115–120. 
Oster, S.M. (1995). Strategic management for nonprofit organizations: Theory and cases. Oxford University Press, 
USA. 
Oster, S.M. (1996). Nonprofit organizations and their local affiliates: a study in organizational forms. Journal of 
Economic Behavior & Organization, 30(1). 
O’Regan, K.M., & Oster, S. (2000). Nonprofit and For Profit Partnerships: Rationale and Challenges of Cross-Sector 
Contracting, Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 29(1), 120-140. 
Parry, R., & Mingers, J. (1991). Community operational research: its context and its future. Omega, 19(6), 577–586. 
Pedraza-Martinez, A.J., Stapleton, O., & Van Wassenhove, L.N. (2011). Field vehicle fleet management in 
humanitarian operations: A case-based approach. Journal of Operations Management, 29(5), 404–421. 
Pierskalla, W. (2005). Supply chain management of blood banks. Operations Research and Health Care, 70(2), 103-
145. 
Pollock, S.M., Rothkopf, M.H., & Barnett, A. (1994). Operations research and the public sector. Amsterdam: North-
Holland 
Privett, N., & Erhun, F. (2011). Efficient funding: Auditing in the nonprofit sector. Manufacturing & Service 
Operations Management, 13(4), 471–488. 
Privett, N. (2012). Operations Management in community-based nonprofit organizations, M. Johnson (Ed.), 
Community-Based Operations Research, 167, 67-95. Springer, New York. 
Ritchie, R.J.B., & Weinberg, C.B. (2000). A Typology of Nonprofit Competition: Insights for Social Marketers, 
Social 
Marketing Quarterly, 6(3), 64–71. 

 
35 
Rose-Ackerman, S. (1986). The economics of nonprofit institutions: studies in structure and policy. Oxford University 
Press, USA. 
Sahley, C. (1995). Strengthening the capacity of NGOs: cases of small enterprise development agencies in Africa. 
Intrac Oxford. 
Salamon, L.M. (1987). Partners in public service: The scope and theory of government-nonprofit relations. The 
nonprofit sector: A research handbook, 99–117. 
Salamon, L. M., Wojciech Sokolowski, S., Haddock, M., & Tice, H. S. (2013). The State of Global Civil Society and 
Volunteering: Latest findings from the implementation of the UN Nonprofit Handbook. 
Samii, B., Pibernik, R., Yadav, P., & Vereecke, A. (2012). Reservation and allocation policies for influenza 
vaccines. European Journal of Operational Research, 222(3), 495-507. 
Savas, E.S. (1978). On equity in providing public services. Management Science, 24(8), 800 - 808. 
Schiffling, S. & Piecyk, M. (2014). Performance measurement in humanitarian logistics: a customer-oriented 
approach, Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 4(2), 198 – 221. 
Schram, A. & S. Onderstal. (2009). Bidding to Give: An Experimental Comparison of Auctions for Charity. 
International Economic Review, 50(2), 431-457. 
Segal, L., & Weisbrod, B. (1998). Interdependence of Commercial and Donative Revenues. B. A. Weisbrod, To Profit 
or Not to Profit: The Commercial Transformation of the Nonprofit Sector, 105‒127. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Sinuany-Stern, Z., & Sherman, H.D. (2014) Operations research in the public sector and nonprofit organizations, 
Annals of Operations Research, 221(1), 1–8. 
Sönmez, E., Lee, D., Gomez, M. I., & Fan, X. (2016). Improving food bank gleaning operations: An application in 
New York State. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 98(2), 549-563. 
Sowa, J.E. (2009). The collaboration decision in nonprofit organizations: views from the front line. Nonprofit and 
Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 38(6), 1003-1025. 
Stapleton, O., Van Wassenhove, L.N. & Tomasini, R. (2010). The challenges of matching corporate donations to 
humanitarian needs and the role of brokers, Supply Chain Forum: An International Journal, 11(3), 42-53. 
Steinberg, R. (2006). Economic theories of nonprofit organizations. In W. Powell & R. Steinberg (Eds.), The nonprofit 
sector: A research Handbook (p. 659) (2nd Edn). New Haven: Yale University Press 
Steinberg, R., & Weisbrod, B.A. (1986). Pricing and rationing by nonprofit organizations with distributional 
objectives. To Profit or Not to Profit: The commercial transformation of the nonprofit sector, 64-82. 
Swaminathan, J.M. (2003). Decision support for allocating scarce drugs. Interfaces, 33(2):1–11. 
The Sphere Project. (2011). The Sphere Handbook. http://www.sphereproject.org/, accessed March 2018. 
Thomas, A.S., & Kopczak, L.R. (2005). From logistics to supply chain management: the path forward in the 
humanitarian sector. Fritz Institute. 
Toyasaki, F., & Wakolbinger, T. (2011). Impacts of earmarked private donations for disaster fundraising, Annals of 
Operations Research, 1-21. 
Tomasini, R., & Van Wassenhove, L.N. (2009). Humanitarian Logistics. Palgrave Macmillan, UK. 

 
36 
Topkis, D.M. (1968). Optimal ordering and rationing policies in a non-stationary dynamic inventory model with n-
demand classes. Management Science, 15(3), 160–176. 
Tortora, P., & Steensen, S. (2014). Making earmarked funding more effective: Current practices and a way 
forward. Better Policies for Better Lives Report No, 1. 
Tuckman, H.P., (1998). Competition, commercialization, and the evolution of nonprofit organizational structures. B. 
A. Weisbrod, To Profit or Not to Profit: The Commercial Transformation of the Nonprofit Sector, 105‒127. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Ülkü, M. A., Bell, K. M., & Gray-Wilson, S. (2015). Modeling the impact of donor behavior on humanitarian aid 
operations. Annals of Operations Research, 230(1), 153-168. 
United Nations Foundation. (2011). The pledge guarantee for health. http://www.unfoundation.org/what-we-
do/campaigns-and-initiatives/pledge-guarantee-for-health/, accessed March 2018. 
van der Laan, E., van Dalen, J., Rohrmoser, M., & Simpson, R. (2016). Demand forecasting and order planning for 
humanitarian logistics: an empirical assessment. Journal of Operations Management. Forthcoming. 
Van Wassenhove, L.N. (2005). Humanitarian aid logistics: supply chain management in high gear. Journal of the 
Operational Research Society, 57(5), 475–489. 
Wedig, G.J. (1994). Risk, leverage, donations and dividends-in-kind: a theory of nonprofit financial behavior. 
International Review of Economics and Finance, 3(3), 257-278. 
Weisbrod, B.A. (1977). The Voluntary Nonprofit Sector: An Economic Analysis. Lexington Books, Lexington. 
Weisbrod, B.A. (1988). The Nonprofit Economy. Harvard University Press. 
Wolf, T. (1999). Managing a nonprofit organization in the twenty-first century. Simon & Schuster Inc. 
Zenios, S.A., Chertow, G.M., & Wein, L.M. (2000). Dynamic allocation of kidneys to candidates on the transplant 
waiting list. Operations Research, 48(4), 549–569.