TITLE: A Two-Sided Incentive Program for Coordinating the Influenza Vaccine Supply Chain
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2020.0938
---

(Please, provide the mansucript number!)
A Two-sided Incentive Program for Coordinating the
Inﬂuenza Vaccine Supply Chain
Kenan Arifo˘glu
School of Management, University College London, Level 38, 1 Canada Square, London E14 5AA, UK, k.arifoglu@ucl.ac.uk
Christopher S. Tang
UCLA Anderson School of Management, 110 Westwood Plaza, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA, ctang@anderson.ucla.edu
Revised on June 17, 2020
Problem deﬁnition: The US inﬂuenza (ﬂu) vaccine supply chain is decentralized and experiences frequent supply and
demand mismatches caused by two key factors: (1) the vaccine production process (yield) is highly uncertain; and (2)
individuals are self-interested and do not completely take into account positive and negative externalities that they impose
on others. To improve matching of supply and demand, we counteract these factors by developing an ex-ante budget-
neutral incentive program. Methodology: We model the ﬂu vaccine supply chain as a decentralized system consisting
of self-interested individuals on the demand side, and a proﬁt-maximizing manufacturer with uncertain yield on the
supply side. We use backward induction to characterize the subgame-perfect equilibrium of the sequential game that
models the interactions between individuals and the manufacturer. Results: We develop a two-sided incentive program
that proposes ‘vaccination incentives’ to be given to individuals on the demand side, and ‘a menu of transfer payments’
between the social planner and manufacturer on the supply side. When the realized vaccine supply is high (or low), our
incentive program provides positive (negative) vaccination incentives for individuals to stimulate (or curb) the demand
and eliminate positive (or negative) externalities by making vaccination more affordable (or costly). When social beneﬁts
from vaccination are signiﬁcantly high, our incentive program uses a menu of transfer payments to penalize (or subsidize)
the manufacturer for low (or high) yield realizations so that it produces the socially-optimal quantity. We show that our
incentive program can attain the social optimum, maintain an ex-ante balanced budget (i.e., budget-neutral in expectation),
and distribute the maximum social welfare between individuals and the manufacturer arbitrarily. Academic/practical
relevance: We establish the sources of inefﬁciency in the ﬂu vaccine supply chain. To eliminate the inefﬁciency, we
develop a two-sided incentive program that policymakers can implement to ﬁnance vaccines under an ex-ante balanced
budget. Managerial implications: Vaccination incentives to individuals can ensure their access to the vaccine, but they
are not enough to entice the manufacturer to ensure vaccine availability. A menu of contracts contingent on realized yield
provides necessary incentives to the manufacturer and assures the availability.
Key words: Inﬂuenza vaccine, contract, vaccination incentive, self-interested behavior, externality, random yield
1.
Introduction
Vaccination is among the most cost-effective medical interventions against the inﬂuenza (ﬂu) epidemic
(Pauly 2005). However, the US ﬂu vaccine supply chain is highly decentralized and is known to be inef-
ﬁcient due to frequent supply and demand mismatches (Government Accountability Ofﬁce 2005; Institute
of Medicine 2004). These mismatches are caused by two factors arising from the demand and supply sides.
1

2
Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
On the demand side, individuals make their vaccination decisions in a self-interested1 manner and do not
account for all the ‘externalities’ (i.e., indirect beneﬁts/costs) that they impose on others’ well-being (Gal-
vani et al. 2007; Shim et al. 2012). On the supply side, the manufacturer produces the ﬂu vaccine through a
long and uncertain production process (Gerdil 2003; Deo and Corbett 2009).
Various researchers (e.g., Brito et al. 1991) identiﬁed ‘positive externalities’ as the only source of inef-
ﬁciency on the demand side by showing that not enough people are seeking vaccination because they are
self-interested, so they do not consider all indirect beneﬁts from their vaccination (e.g., protecting others
due to herd immunity). To eliminate positive externalities and improve the demand-side efﬁciency, previ-
ous research proposed mechanisms/interventions to increase the demand (Mamani et al. 2012; Adida et al.
2013). It has also been shown that, in the presence of positive externalities, the manufacturer’s lack of in-
centives causes inefﬁciency on the supply side and leads to a lower production quantity than that in the
social optimum (Mamani et al. 2012; Adida et al. 2013). To elicit the manufacturer to produce more and
improve supply-side efﬁciency, different interventions (e.g., whole-unit discount/cost-sharing contracts) are
proposed in the literature (Chick et al. 2008; Adida et al. 2013).
In contrast to the suggestions proposed in the extant literature, the Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
vention (CDC) does not always seek to increase the demand. Speciﬁcally, when the supply is limited, it
aims to curb the demand by recommending that individuals in low-risk groups do not seek vaccination and
that they leave the vaccine to high-risk individuals (Meltzer et al. 1999; Galvani et al. 2007).2 In line with
this CDC practice, Arifo˘glu et al. (2012) ﬁnd that mechanisms that focus only to increase the demand, as
suggested in the literature, can make the ﬂu vaccine supply chain even more inefﬁcient. This is because,
when the supply is limited, the equilibrium demand is higher than the socially-optimal demand and the
source of inefﬁciency on the demand side is ‘negative externalities’ (e.g., each individual seeking vaccina-
tion reduces vaccine availability and increases infection risk for all other individuals). Arifo˘glu et al. (2012)
also show that, in the presence of negative externalities, the manufacturer can have higher incentives and
thus over-produce, especially when the social beneﬁts from vaccination are low. Therefore, mechanisms
that intervene only on the supply side to entice the manufacturer to produce more can actually make the ﬂu
vaccine supply chain become more inefﬁcient.
The above observations reveal that prior research tends to focus only on developing mechanisms to in-
crease demand or supply in the presence of positive externalities, and there is a need to develop a mechanism
1 When making their vaccination decisions, some individuals might have altruistic motivations; however, self-interest is more inﬂu-
ential and accounts for 75% of vaccination decisions (Galvani et al. 2007; Shim et al. 2012; Hahne 2013).
2 Flu vaccine cannot be efﬁciently allocated in practice due to problems in its production and distribution. Priority groups are not
mandatory and only a recommendation by CDC. CDC data shows that individuals with high infection cost are not necessarily more
stubborn in their search for the ﬂu vaccine. For example, consistently in the past 20 ﬂu seasons, there are always some low-risk
individuals (10-40%) who got vaccinated even though a signiﬁcant number of high-risk individuals (40-80%) did not receive the
vaccine (Fiore et al. 2010; CDC 2017, 2018).

Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
3
that can boost/curb demand and increase/decrease the production under appropriate conditions. At the same
time, it is not clear if there exists an incentive mechanism that can coordinate both supply and demand
sides of the decentralized ﬂu vaccine supply chain in the presence of positive and negative externalities.
Further, even if such coordinating mechanisms exist, it is unclear if any of them are budget-neutral so that
no external funding is required. We examine these open research questions in this paper.
In this paper, we consider a decentralized ﬂu vaccine supply chain over a single vaccination season
that consists of self-interested individuals and a proﬁt-maximizing manufacturer with uncertain production
yield. First, the manufacturer determines its planned production quantity (i.e., chicken eggs to be fertilized);
however, due to the inherent yield uncertainty, only a random fraction of this quantity (i.e., vaccine doses)
is brought to the market. Then, upon observing the realized vaccine supply, each self-interested individual
decides whether to seek vaccination or not by comparing the infection cost (e.g., sickness, healthcare costs,
lost wages, etc.) and the vaccination cost (e.g., side effects, vaccine price, administration costs, etc.).3 When
demand exceeds supply, we consider random (or proportional) rationing and assume that the available
vaccine is allocated to individuals with equal probability.
By comparing the decentralized supply chain and the social optimum (or the ﬁrst best), we ﬁnd that, when
the realized vaccine supply is abundant, fewer individuals than the socially-optimal demand will seek vac-
cination due to positive externalities. This behavior will increase the infection risk and decrease the social
welfare. On the other hand, when the vaccine supply is limited, more individuals than the socially-optimal
demand will seek vaccination due to negative externalities. As the limited vaccine supply is rationed, some
individuals with higher infection costs may not receive the vaccine and the social welfare decreases. Lastly,
on the supply side, depending on infection and vaccination costs, the manufacturer may over- or under-
produce, even when there is no demand-side inefﬁciency. Based on these three ﬁndings, we develop a
two-sided incentive program to coordinate the supply and demand sides of the ﬂu vaccine supply chain.
First, to counteract the inefﬁciency on the demand side, we offer a ‘vaccination incentive’ to individuals
that can be negative or positive depending on the realized vaccine supply. This incentive is negative and
makes vaccination more costly when the realized vaccine supply is low. By doing so, it aims to curb the
demand and eliminate the negative externalities that cause demand-side inefﬁciency when vaccine supply
is limited. In doing so, it can help to ensure that individuals with high infection costs can get vaccinated.
Such negative vaccination incentives (especially, for low-risk individuals) are observed in practice. For
example, general practitioners (GPs) or healthcare providers are either not subsidized at all or subsidized
only for high-risk individuals to increase effective vaccination costs and thereby effectively create negative
vaccination incentives, either for all individuals or for only low-risk individuals (Institute of Medicine 2004;
3 We allow the ﬂu vaccine to be imperfect so that vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals can be infected with different probabil-
ities that depend on vaccination coverage. Because vaccination reduces the infection risk, the probability of infection is lower for
vaccinated individuals.

4
Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
Spencer and Kennedy 2007; Sinha et al. 2018; NHS 2020). On the contrary, when the realized vaccine
supply is high, the vaccination incentive that we propose is positive and makes vaccination less costly.
This will boost the demand and eliminate the positive externalities which cause demand-side inefﬁciency
for high realizations of the vaccine production. Such positive vaccination incentives are used in practice
by making vaccination more accessible (e.g., allowing pharmacies to administer the vaccine) (Sinha et al.
2018); subsidizing GPs for all vaccine administrations (Spencer and Kennedy 2007; Nugent and Knaul
2006); and covering vaccination costs for everyone through vouchers, and public/private insurance (Institute
of Medicine 2004; Sinha et al. 2018).
Second, to counteract supply-side inefﬁciency and align the manufacturer’s incentives with the produc-
tion incentives in the social optimum, we propose a contract that is offered by the social planner to the
manufacturer ex ante before the uncertain yield is realized. This contract takes the form of a menu of trans-
fer payments that are contingent on the realized vaccine supply. Speciﬁcally, under the contract, when social
beneﬁts are signiﬁcantly high (e.g., high infection costs and low vaccination costs), the manufacturer is
penalized for low realized vaccine supply and is subsidized for high realized vaccine supply. By penalizing
or rewarding the manufacturer ex post, our contract elicits the manufacturer to choose the socially-optimal
production quantity ex ante. Similar payment schemes that depend on the outcome of an uncertain event are
commonly used in healthcare, e.g., Payment-by-Result (PbR) and Risk Sharing (RS) contracts used in Italy
to pay pharmaceutical ﬁrms, and Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program (HRRP) used to reimburse
hospitals in the USA (So and Tang 2000; Keohane and Petrie 2017; Arifo˘glu et al. 2020).
Through our analysis, we show that the two-sided incentive program we propose can be ex-ante budget-
neutral in the sense that the net cost of the program is zero in expectation. This budget-neutral two-sided
incentive program also provides the ﬂexibility to the social planner to arbitrarily distribute the welfare
between individuals and the manufacturer.
Finally, through an extensive numerical study, we examine the impact of vaccine efﬁcacy on the demand-
and supply-side inefﬁciency and evaluate the performance of our two-sided incentive program. We ﬁnd that
the manufacturer can be better off with imperfect vaccines and thus may have some ﬁnancial incentives to
not develop a more effective vaccine. Interestingly, we also ﬁnd that a more effective vaccine can make the
vaccine supply chain more inefﬁcient. In addition, the numerical study reveals that our incentive program
can reduce the social costs by more than 70%. It also indicates that ‘one-sided’ mechanisms examined in the
literature (that focus on demand (or supply) side by ignoring uncertain yield (or individuals’ self-interest))
can increase social costs, and our two-sided incentive program outperforms them, especially when the yield
uncertainty is high and/or infection costs among the population are low.
This paper is organized as follows. We review the related literature and list our contributions in the fol-
lowing section. In §3, we present the model and assumptions. We analyze the social planner’s problem in a

Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
5
centralized system in §4. Then, in §5, we study the decentralized supply chain with self-interested individ-
uals and the manufacturer. In §6, we develop a two-sided incentive program to coordinate the decentralized
supply chain. We present our numerical study in §7 and conclude the paper in §8. All proofs are presented
in Appendix B in the online supplement.
2.
Related Literature and Contributions
Previous research has studied the role of consumption externalities on individuals’ vaccination decisions.
The epidemiology literature examines the interaction between individuals’ self-interested vaccination deci-
sion and the disease progression (Bauch and Earn 2004; Reluga et al. 2006; Galvani et al. 2007). The health
economics literature studies the role of externality arising from vaccination and ﬁnds that the demand for
vaccines is lower than the socially-optimal demand (Brito et al. 1991; Geoffard and Philipson 1997; Philip-
son 2000). Brito et al. (1991) propose a tax/subsidy payment, which subsidizes vaccinated individuals and
taxes unvaccinated individuals, to induce the demand, and Geoffard and Philipson (1997) analyze the role
of subsidies in eradicating infectious diseases. We introduce the uncertain yield to the health economics
and epidemiology literatures and show that a transfer payment that is contingent on the realized yield is
necessary on the supply side to align the manufacturer’s incentives, and vaccination incentives given to
individuals should depend on the supply-side factors such as the wholesale price and uncertain yield.
In the context of ﬂu vaccine supply chain, several studies examine the coordination issues between ﬁrms
(e.g., manufacturer, healthcare provider, etc.) in the presence of uncertain yield (Cho and Zhao 2018).
Assuming that the government has full control of the demand, Chick et al. (2008) propose a whole-unit
discount/cost-sharing contract under which the social planner shares the manufacturer’s production cost and
induces the production quantity. Chick et al. (2017) extend Chick et al. (2008) by assuming that the manu-
facturer has a second opportunity and can exert a more costly production effort to fulﬁll the demand which
cannot be satisﬁed due to the uncertain yield. They show that the manufacturer commands information rent
due to information asymmetry and they propose a menu of contracts to attain the social optimum. Dai et al.
(2016) study on-time delivery of the ﬂu vaccine and study the coordination between the manufacturer and
healthcare provider. They develop contracts that ensure on-time delivery of the vaccine. In our study, we
incorporate a new and important element that involves individuals’ self-interested behavior, and we ﬁnd that
the coordinating mechanism must entail a vaccination incentive for individuals and a transfer payment for
the manufacturer that is contingent on the realized vaccine supply.
Yamin and Gavious (2013) focus only on self-interested individuals and develop a game-theoretical epi-
demiology model to ﬁnd the optimal vaccination incentive (subsidy). Mamani et al. (2012) study the co-
ordination issues in vaccine supply chains with self-interested individuals and multiple manufacturers, and
they propose subsidy payments to align individuals’ incentives with the social optimum. Unlike Mamani
et al. (2012) and Yamin and Gavious (2013), we consider the uncertain yield in this paper and show that
positive vaccination incentives (subsidy payments) alone cannot eliminate the inefﬁciency.

6
Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
By considering both self-interested individuals and uncertain yield, Adida et al. (2013) are the ﬁrst to
develop a two-sided mechanism that proposes a subsidy payment to vaccinated individuals on the demand
side and a cost-sharing contract on the supply side. Our paper complements Adida et al. (2013) but is
fundamentally different in the following aspects:
• First, in contrast to assuming that all individuals make their vaccination decisions by ignoring the un-
certain yield and preorder the vaccine before the vaccine supply is realized as considered in Adida et al.
(2013),4 we assume that individuals make their vaccination decisions after observing the realized vaccine
supply so that yield uncertainty affects the demand. This modeling choice enables us to examine the impact
of uncertain yield (supply side) on individuals’ rational behavior (demand side) and capture a phenomenon
that occurs in practice, i.e., individuals rush to get the vaccine when the realized vaccine supply turns out to
be low (Cho and Tang 2013).
• Second, unlike Adida et al. (2013) who assume efﬁcient allocation, we consider the inefﬁciency in the
allocation of the ﬂu vaccine (see footnote 2) and assume that, in the event of supply shortages, available
vaccine is randomly allocated to individuals who seek vaccination. This modeling choice enables us to show
how negative externalities create inefﬁciency on the demand side. To counteract negative externalities, we
develop a vaccination incentive that lowers individuals’ utility from vaccination and curbs excess demand
when the realized vaccine supply is limited.5
• Third, unlike the incentive mechanism in Adida et al. (2013), our two-sided incentive program proposes
a menu of contracts between the social planner and the manufacturer that depends on the realized yield to
coordinate the supply side and it offers two extra values: (1) it is ex-ante budget neutral and balances out
the budget in the long run; and (2) it provides the social planner with ﬂexibility to arbitrarily distribute the
welfare between individuals and the manufacturer.
Arifo˘glu et al. (2012) identify sources of inefﬁciencies on demand and supply sides by considering a
setting similar to our paper. They show that, when individuals take uncertain yield into account, in addition
to positive externalities, negative externalities arise and also lead to inefﬁciency on the demand side. They
assume that vaccination provides perfect protection against infection and do not propose a speciﬁc mecha-
nism to coordinate the ﬂu vaccine supply chain. We generalize the main results in Arifo˘glu et al. (2012) to
the case with imperfect vaccines and ﬁnd that: (i) the manufacturer might have some ﬁnancial incentives to
4 Healthcare providers (not individuals) preorder from the manufacturer by anticipating the rational behavior of individuals (CDC
2005; Rall 2009; American Academy of Pediatrics 2019). Individuals decide whether to get vaccinated or not during the vaccination
season after observing the realized vaccine supply.
5 We also developed an alternative two-sided mechanism based on the assumptions in Adida et al. (2013): (1) individuals ignore
uncertain yield and order the vaccine in advance before observing the realized vaccine supply; and (2) in the event of limited supply,
an individual with high infection cost will always receive the vaccine before any individuals with lower infection costs, i.e., efﬁcient
allocation. (The analysis of this alternative mechanism is not presented for brevity.) We found that incentivizing individuals through
vaccination subsidies only, as suggested by Adida et al. (2013), can adversely impact on the negative externalities and the alternative
two-sided mechanism proposed by Adida et al. (2013) can exacerbate the demand-side inefﬁciency.

Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
7
develop a less effective vaccine; and (ii) higher vaccine efﬁcacy can increase total supply-chain inefﬁciency.
More importantly, while the coordination issue is not considered in Arifo˘glu et al. (2012), we develop a
two-sided incentive program that can coordinate the ﬂu vaccine supply chain by eliminating demand- and
supply-side inefﬁciency.
In summary, our paper contributes to the extant literature by: (i) capturing the interaction between individ-
uals’ self-interested behavior and manufacturer’s uncertain production yield in practice; and (ii) developing
a new two-sided incentive program that coordinates a decentralized ﬂu vaccine supply chain in the presence
of positive/negative externalities (demand side) and uncertain yield (supply side). Our incentive program is
ex-ante budget-neutral and provides the social planner with the ﬂexibility to arbitrarily distribute welfare
between individuals and the manufacturer.
3.
Model Fundamentals
We now describe our model and notation (see Table 1). We consider a ﬂu vaccine supply chain comprising
a welfare-maximizing social planner, a proﬁt-maximizing ﬂu vaccine manufacturer, and a continuum of
individuals who make self-interested vaccination decisions. Flu vaccine supply chain operations are known
to be challenging because of the inherent supply uncertainties (Cho 2010) and the inherent demand com-
plexities due to the ‘externalities’ caused by limited vaccine supply and ﬂu transmission among individuals
(Arifo˘glu et al. 2012).
3.1.
Endogenous Supply of Flu Vaccine under Uncertainty: Qr
The social planner (e.g., government) negotiates with the manufacturer in advance regarding the wholesale
price w that the manufacturer receives for each unit of vaccine dose sold. Given the pre-negotiated whole-
sale price w and the processing cost of each planned production unit c, the manufacturer needs to decide
on the ‘planned input production quantity’ Q (measured in terms of the number of chicken eggs fertilized).
However, due to the inherent uncertainty in the production process of the ﬂu vaccine (Chick et al. 2008; Deo
and Corbett 2009; Jansen and Ozaltın 2017),6 the ‘actual output production quantity’ is Qr = Y · Q (mea-
sured in terms of the number of vaccine doses), where the uncertain yield Y ∈[0,∞) is a random variable
that follows a distribution F (·) with mean µ and standard deviation σ.7 To ensure that the manufacturer has
the incentive to produce the vaccine, we assume that wµ > c.
6 The majority (over 97%) of the ﬂu vaccine in the USA is produced by injecting virus strains into chicken eggs through a very
complex process (Palese 2006; Government Accountability Ofﬁce 2008). Growth characteristics of virus strains inside chicken eggs
are highly variable, which makes the uncertain yield an important challenge in the ﬂu vaccine production.
7 More than one vaccine dose can be obtained from a chicken egg so that the proportional yield Y can be greater than 1 (Hartgroves
2009; Palese 2006; Chick et al. 2008; Deo and Corbett 2009; Arifo˘glu et al. 2012). Also, our analysis continues to hold when the
proportional yield has a ﬁnite upper bound (i.e., Y ∈[0,Y ] where Y < ∞).

8
Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
Table 1
Notation in the Analytical Model
Exogenous Variables
c
:
Unit production cost per planned production quantity
p
:
All additional vaccination costs beyond wholesale price w that a vaccinated individual incurs
(e.g., vaccine administration, side effects, etc.)
VH
:
Utility of a healthy individual
w
:
Manufacturer’s wholesale price
x
:
Infection cost of an individual
¯x
:
Maximum infection cost within the population
Y
:
Random proportional yield with realization y
µ
:
Mean of the random proportional yield Y
σ
:
Standard deviation of the random proportional yield Y
Endogenous Variables
K
:
A constant parameter of the transfer payment T under the incentive program
Q
:
Planned input production quantity (measured in number of chicken eggs fertilized)
r
:
Ex-post vaccination incentive under the incentive program
T
:
Ex-post transfer payment to the manufacturer under the incentive program
t
:
Ex-ante tax collected from all individuals under the incentive program
Probability Distributions
F
:
Distribution of proportional yield Y with support [0,∞), mean µ and standard deviation σ
G
:
Distribution of infection cost x across the population with support [0, ¯x] (G = 1 −G and G is
uniform distribution, i.e., G(x) = x/¯x)
Deﬁnitions
B := Marginal social beneﬁt from vaccinating an individual with a certain infection cost
h := Ex-post fraction of vaccinated people
hzr := Zero-risk vaccination fraction above which the average number of people infected by an in-
fected individual is less than 1
h(i) := Ex-post fraction of vaccinated people in the social optimum (in decentralized supply chain and
under the incentive program, respectively) if i = c (i = d and i = I, respectively)
Qr := Realized production quantity (measured in number of vaccine doses), which is a random pro-
portion of the planned production quantity, i.e., Qr = Y · Q
Q(i) := Optimal planned input production quantity in the social optimum (in decentralized supply
chain and under the incentive program, respectively) if i = c (i = d and i = I, respectively)
S(I) := Ex-post total cost borne by the social planner due to the incentive program I
Ui := Net utility of an unvaccinated (vaccinated) individual if i = u (i = v)
u := The probability of infection for an unvaccinated individual
v := The probability of infection for a vaccinated individual
W
:= Ex-post social welfare
W (i) := Ex-ante expected social welfare in the social optimum (in decentralized supply chain and under
the incentive program, respectively) if i = c (i = d and i = I, respectively)
x(i) := Threshold infection cost (such that only individuals with infection costs higher than that thresh-
old seek vaccination) in the social optimum (in decentralized supply chain and under the in-
centive program, respectively) if i = c (i = d and i = I, respectively)
φ := Ex-post vaccine allocation probability or ﬁll rate
π := Manufacturer’s expected proﬁt
π(i) := Manufacturer’s expected proﬁt in the social optimum (in decentralized supply chain and under
the incentive program, respectively) if i = c (i = d and i = I, respectively)

Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
9
3.2.
Sequence of Events
The sequence of events is as follows. First, before the vaccination season, the manufacturer determines
its input production quantity Q. Second, at the beginning of the vaccination season, the actual production
quantity Qr = yQ is realized and commonly observed,8 where y is realized yield. Third, upon observing
Qr, each individual decides whether or not to seek vaccination by considering the underlying trade-offs that
we shall explain next. (All unused vaccine will be discarded with zero value due to antigenic drift.)
3.3.
Endogenous Demand of Flu Vaccine: G(ˆx)
There is a continuum of self-interested individuals in a population with a size normalized to 1. To capture
heterogeneity across different individuals (Pauly 2005), we assume that each individual enjoys a utility VH
when ‘healthy’, but incurs an infection cost x when ‘infected’.9 For tractability, we assume that infection
costs among individuals are uniformly distributed between 0 and ¯x, i.e., x ∼U[0, ¯x].10 For ease of expo-
sition, we shall use G(·) to denote the distribution of x ∼U[0, ¯x] so that G(x) = x/¯x. We assume that an
individual’s infection cost x is private information but its distribution G(·) is common knowledge.11
In addition, we let p denote all additional costs on top of the wholesale price w that an individual incurs
due to vaccination (e.g., vaccine administration, side effects, etc.), that is, w +p is the total cost of receiving
the vaccine. For tractability, we assume that p is the same for all individuals and is common knowledge. To
ease our exposition and to focus on the development of our two-sided incentive program for coordinating a
decentralized ﬂu vaccine supply chain, we assume that available vaccine is allocated to individuals seeking
vaccination with equal probability (i.e., random rationing). Since random rationing is a stylized represen-
tation of vaccine allocation in practice, we also consider the vaccine allocation based on priority groups
(e.g., elderly, infants, etc.) and show that all our key results continue to hold. See §6.4 for our discussion on
priority groups.
8 Supply projections for a ﬂu season are calculated based on manufacturer reports and publicized well in advance via CDC’s
website and the media (Mangan 2016; Searing 2018; CDC 2019). These projections are in line with weekly lot distribution reports
announced by the CDC and US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) throughout the vaccination season (FDA 2018; CDC 2019).
Thus, in line with our assumption, information about the realized production quantity Qr is readily available and observed by
individuals before the vaccination season starts.
9 An infected individual may end up in one of four different cases (i.e., no medical care sought, outpatient visit, hospitalization, and
death) with some probability. Hence, x represents the expectation of all (direct and indirect) costs that an infected individual incurs
in these cases (Meltzer et al. 1999).
10 This assumption is sufﬁcient to guarantee the uniqueness of the solutions in the decentralized supply chain and social optimum.
We numerically tested our results for several combinations of parameter values from practice (see Table 2 in §7) and observed from
all numerical examples that our results hold true even when x has exponential distribution.
11 The distribution of infection costs G(·) may depend on the severity of the ﬂu epidemic or the virulence of ﬂu virus strains. Our
assumption that G(·) is common-knowledge implicitly assumes that the virulence of ﬂu virus strains is known when the production
starts (i.e., six to nine months before the ﬂu season). This is consistent with research showing that the severity of the ﬂu epidemic
can be predicted accurately before the ﬂu season starts by tracking the global circulation of virus strains and/or changes in the
structure of hemagglutinin protein in the ﬂu virus (Russell et al. 2008; Wolf et al. 2010).

10
Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
3.3.1.
Infection probabilities u(.) and v(.). To capture the fact that the ﬂu virus may be transmit-
ted among individuals through different means, including direct contact, we use a Susceptible-Infected-
Recovered (SIR) epidemic model to obtain the infection probabilities that depend on the ‘vaccinated frac-
tion of the population’ h ∈[0,1] (Bauch and Earn 2004; Mamani et al. 2012). (We shall deﬁne h(.) more
formally later.) Also, because the ﬂu virus mutates and changes its structure frequently (antigenic drift),
vaccination does not stop individuals from getting infected (Anderson and May 1991; Cho 2010; Mamani
et al. 2012). Hence, for any given vaccinated fraction of population h ∈[0,1], there is a probability u(h)
for an unvaccinated individual to get infected (by the end of the ﬂu season) and a probability v(h) for a
vaccinated individual to get infected, where u(h) ≥v (h). We assume that infection probabilities u(h) and
v(h) are common knowledge and continuous in h.
We let u′ and v′, respectively, be the ﬁrst derivatives of u and v with respect to their arguments, and deﬁne
the ‘zero-risk vaccination fraction’ hzr as:
hzr =

inf {h ∈[0,1]|(1 −h)u(h) + hv (h) = 0}, if v (1) = 0,
1,
if v (1) > 0.
(1)
The zero-risk vaccination fraction hzr is also known in epidemiology as the ‘critical vaccination fraction’
that reduces the average number of individuals infected by an infected person below 1 so that there is no
infection risk for (vaccinated or unvaccinated) individuals, i.e., by (1), u(h) = v(h) = 0 for h ≥hzr (Hill
and Longini 2003). For tractability, we shall assume that the infection probabilities u(h) and v(h) satisfy
the technical conditions in Assumption 1.
ASSUMPTION 1.
(i) The individual with the largest infection cost ¯x will seek vaccination when nobody
is vaccinated, i.e., ¯x · u(0) ≥w + p + ¯x · v (0).
(ii) Infection probabilities u(h) and v (h) satisfy: u′ (h) < 0 and v′ (h) ≤0 for h ≤hzr.
(iii) Each additional vaccination leads to a smaller decrease in expected infection risk across the popula-
tion, i.e., (1 −h)u(h) + hv (h) is convex in h for h ≤hzr.
(iv) The gap between the expected infection risk across the population and the infection risk of a vaccinated
individual is decreasing as more people are vaccinated, i.e., (1 −h)(u(h) −v (h)) decreasing in h
for h ≤hzr.
(v) Each additional vaccination leads to a smaller marginal decrease in the total number of infections
that vaccination causes relative to the average, i.e., h[((1 −h)u(h) + hv (h)) −v (h)] is concave in
h for h ≤hzr.
Conditions in Assumption 1 are quite general, and in §7, we shall present speciﬁc functional forms for
u(h) and v(h) (e.g., considered by Mamani et al. 2012) that satisfy them. Condition (i) guarantees that some
individuals will seek vaccination in the decentralized supply chain. Conditions (ii) and (iv) (or conditions

Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
11
(iii) and (v)) guarantee the uniqueness of the solution in the decentralized supply chain (or social optimum).
By conditions (ii) and (iii), the expected infection risk is convex and strictly decreasing for h < hzr.12
3.3.2.
Vaccinated fraction h(.), and vaccine allocation probability φ(.). Given the realized vaccine
supply Qr and any threshold ˆx such that only individuals with infection cost x > ˆx seek vaccination so that
the ‘vaccine demand’ is G(ˆx) ≡1 −G(ˆx) = 1 −ˆx
¯x (such a threshold always exists, see §5.1), the ex-post
vaccinated fraction or ‘sales’ h(ˆx,Qr) is:
h(ˆx,Qr) = min

G(ˆx),Qr
 
.
(2)
Also, since we assume random rationing, the (ex-post) vaccine allocation probability or ‘ﬁll rate’ φ(ˆx,Qr)
can be expressed as follows:
φ(ˆx,Qr) = h(ˆx,Qr)
G(ˆx)
= min

1, Qr
G(ˆx)

.
(3)
3.4.
Ex-post Social Welfare W(ˆx,Qr)
For any given realized vaccine supply Qr and the threshold ˆx, the ex-post social welfare W(ˆx,Qr) (i.e.,
total utilities of all individuals (or total individual surplus) plus ex-post revenue from vaccine sales) satisﬁes:
W (ˆx,Qr) = VH −ph −
Z ˆx
0
[u(h) · x]d(G(x)) −
Z ¯x
ˆx
[φ · v(h) · x + (1 −φ) · u(h) · x]d(G(x))
= VH −ph −¯x
2G2 (ˆx)u(h) −¯x
2
 1 −G2 (ˆx)

[φ · v(h) + (1 −φ) · u(h)],
(4)
where h(.) and φ(.) are functions of (ˆx,Qr) as given in (2) and (3), respectively. In the ﬁrst line of (4), the
ﬁrst term represents the total utility when all individuals are healthy; the second term represents total net
vaccination costs to society (because the actual sales of vaccine is equal to h); the third term is total utility
loss of infected individuals who do not seek vaccination (i.e., those individuals with infection cost x ≤ˆx);
and the last term is total utility loss of infected individuals who seek vaccination (by accounting for the
vaccine availability probability φ). Because G(ˆx) = ˆx/¯x, we obtain the second line of (4).
4.
Socially-Optimal Decisions in a Centralized System
We ﬁrst determine a benchmark solution that is based on the socially-optimal decisions in a centralized
system, where the social planner aims to maximize the social welfare by setting manufacturer’s planned
production quantity to Q(c) and ‘dictating’ that all individuals should follow a particular threshold policy13
12 Using the SIR epidemic model, Chick et al. (2008) show that this is a valid assumption for a wide range of parameter values of
ﬂu epidemic and its vaccine. We observe assumptions that are similar to conditions (iv) and (v) in the literature (e.g., see Mamani
et al. 2012).
13 In the social optimum, the society incurs higher infection costs in cases when individuals with higher infection cost are infected.
Therefore, the social planner never vaccinates an individual with a lower infection cost while another individual with a higher
infection cost is not vaccinated. This indicates that there is a threshold infection cost x(c)(Qr) such that only individuals with
x > x(c)(Qr) will seek vaccination.

12
Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
x(c)(Qr). (Throughout this paper, we use superscript (c) for the social optimum and superscript (d) for
the decentralized case.) By considering the sequence of events as described in §3.2, we now determine the
socially-optimal production quantity and demand (i.e., Q(c) and G
 x(c)(Qr)

) via backward induction.
4.1.
Socially-Optimal Demand: G
 x(c)(Qr)

In the centralized system, the social planner chooses the threshold x(c)(Qr) that maximizes the ex-post
social welfare given in (4), i.e., x(c)(Qr) = arg maxˆx W(ˆx,Qr). To characterize the threshold x(c)(Qr), we
let xzr be the threshold infection cost that corresponds to the zero-risk vaccination fraction hzr given by (1)
so that:
G(xzr) = hzr.
(5)
Also, we deﬁne B(ˆx), the marginal social beneﬁt from not vaccinating the individual with infection cost ˆx,
as follows:
B (ˆx) ≡dW(ˆx,Qr)
dˆx
= p
¯x + 1
2

G2 (ˆx)u′(G(ˆx)) +
 1 −G2 (ˆx)

v′(G(ˆx))

−G(ˆx)(u(G(ˆx)) −v(G(ˆx))).
(6)
Using the above deﬁnitions, Proposition 1 characterizes the threshold x(c)(Qr) and the socially-optimal
demand.
PROPOSITION 1. For any realized vaccine production quantity Qr ≥0, there exists a unique socially-
optimal threshold policy x(c)(Qr) ∈[xzr, ¯x) so that its corresponding ex-post vaccination demand (or
equivalently, the ex-post vaccinated fraction) satisﬁes:
G
 x(c)(Qr)

≡h(c)(Qr) = min

G(xc
1),Qr
 
,
(7)
where xc
1 ∈[xzr, ¯x)
xc
1 =
 xzr, if limx→x+
zr B (x) ≤0,
ˇx,
if limx→x+
zr B (x) > 0,
(8)
and ˇx ∈(xzr, ¯x) satisﬁes B (ˇx) = 0
Proposition 1 reveals that when the realized vaccine supply is abundant (i.e, Qr ≥G(xc
1)), some vaccines
will not be used and the social planner will vaccinate just enough individuals such that ex-post social beneﬁts
are maximized (i.e., socially-optimal demand is equal to G(xc
1)). However, when the realized vaccine supply
is limited (i.e, Qr < G(xc
1)), the socially-optimal demand is always equal to the available supply and no
vaccine is unused (i.e., G(x(c)(Qr)) = Qr).

Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
13
4.2.
Socially-Optimal Production Quantity: Q(c)
Given the ex-post socially-optimal demand G
 x(c)(Qr)

as stated in Proposition 1, we now solve the social
planner’s problem in the ﬁrst stage. The social planner chooses its production quantity so as to maximize
the ex-ante expected social welfare. Hence, the social planner solves:
W (c) = max
Q {W (c)(Q) ≡EY [W(x(c)(Y Q),Y Q)] −cQ},
(9)
where the (ex-post) social welfare function W and the threshold x(c)(Qr) are given by (4) and (7), respec-
tively. Proposition 2 characterizes the socially-optimal planned production quantity Q(c).
PROPOSITION 2. The socially-optimal planned production quantity Q(c) satisﬁes:
Z
G(xc
1)
Q(c)
0
¯x[−B
 xc
2
 yQ(c)
] · ydF (y) = c,
(10)
where B (·) and xc
1, respectively, satisfy (6) and (8), and, for Qr > 0, xc
2(Qr) ∈[0, ¯x) is given by:
xc
2(Qr) = G
−1 (min{1,Qr}).
(11)
5.
Decentralized Supply Chain
We now examine the decentralized supply chain in which individuals make their own vaccination decisions
and the manufacturer determines its own planned production quantity. By considering the sequence of
events as described in §3.2, we characterize the equilibrium of the decentralized supply chain via backward
induction.
5.1.
Decentralized Demand: G
 x(d) (Qr)

To begin, we ﬁrst determine an individual’s vaccination decision after observing the realized vaccine pro-
duction quantity Qr. An individual with infection cost x will obtain an expected utility equal to Uu(x) =
VH −u(h) · x if he chooses not to seek vaccination. However, if he chooses to seek vaccination, his ex-
pected utility is equal to Uv(x) = φ · [VH −(w + p) −v(h) · x] + (1 −φ) · (VH −u(h) · x). Hence, an
individual with infection cost x will seek vaccination if and only if Uv(x) > Uu(x) (or equivalently, when
x(u(h) −v(h)) > w + p). This condition yields:
LEMMA 1. In an ex-post equilibrium in the decentralized supply chain, given realized vaccine supply Qr,
there exists a unique threshold x(d)(Qr) such that an individual with infection cost x will seek vaccination
if and only if x > x(d)(Qr).
We now characterize x(d)(Qr), the threshold that determines the ex-post demand in the decentralized
supply chain. To do so, we deﬁne xd
1 ∈(xzr, ¯x) and xd
2(Qr) ∈[0, ¯x), respectively, as follows:
xd
1

u
 G
 xd
1

−v
 G
 xd
1

= w + p,
(12)
xd
2(Qr)[u(Qr) −v (Qr)] = w + p,
(13)

14
Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
for Qr > 0. We characterize the ex-post equilibrium demand in the decentralized supply chain as in Proposi-
tion 3(i), and then we compare it with available supply as in Proposition 3(ii) and with the socially-optimal
demand as in Proposition 3(iii). Proposition 3(ii) reveals that, when the supply is limited (i.e., Qr < G(xd
1)),
more individuals seek vaccination so that the resulting equilibrium demand exceeds the available supply.
PROPOSITION 3.
(i) For any realized vaccine supply Qr > 0, there exists a unique threshold x(d)(Qr)
in the decentralized supply chain so that the corresponding ex-post demand satisﬁes:
G(x(d)(Qr)) =



G(xd
2(Qr)), if Qr ≤G(xd
1),
G(xd
1),
if Qr > G(xd
1).
(14)
(ii) In the decentralized supply chain, the ex-post equilibrium demand is greater than the available supply
(i.e., G
 x(d)(Qr)

> Qr) if and only if 0 < Qr < G(xd
1).
(iii) The ex-post equilibrium demand in the decentralized supply chain is larger than the ex-post socially
optimal demand (i.e., G
 x(d)(Qr)

> G
 x(c)(Qr)

) if and only if 0 < Qr < G(xd
1).
Using Propositions 1 and 3, we draw Figure 1 to illustrate the ex-post demand in the social optimum and
in equilibrium of the decentralized supply chain. We observe from Figure 1 that, when the realization of
production quantity is sufﬁciently high (Qr ≥G(xd
1)), the socially-optimal demand is higher than that in
the decentralized supply chain. For such values of the realized production quantity, ‘positive externalities’
cause demand-side inefﬁciency. Speciﬁcally, due to herd immunity, each individual, if vaccinated, creates
indirect beneﬁts for the rest of the society by protecting people around them. However, individuals are
self-interested and do not consider all (indirect) social beneﬁts (i.e., positive externalities) when deciding
whether to seek vaccination or not, so that fewer people seek vaccination in the decentralized supply chain
than in the social optimum.
Figure 1
Ex-post Demand in Social Optimum and Decentralized Supply Chain
Figure 1 also shows that, when the realized production quantity is sufﬁciently low (Qr < G(xd
1)), the
equilibrium demand is greater than the socially-optimal demand. In such cases, ‘negative externalities’ lead

Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
15
to the demand-side inefﬁciency. In particular, when the vaccine supply is limited, each individual seeking
vaccination reduces the vaccine availability and thereby decreases expected utilities of all other individuals
seeking vaccination (e.g., individuals with high infection costs can be rationed and may not get vaccinated).
However, when deciding whether to seek vaccination or not, individuals are self-interested and do not
take into account all (indirect) social costs (i.e., negative externalities). Consequently, more people seek
vaccination in the decentralized supply chain than in the social optimum.
5.2.
Decentralized Production Quantity: Q(d)
Anticipating ex-post equilibrium demand G(x(d)(Qr)) as characterized in Proposition 3, the manufacturer
chooses its production quantity Q(d) to maximize its ex-ante expected proﬁt by solving:
π(d) = max
Q {w · EY

h
 x(d)(Y Q),Y Q

−cQ},
(15)
where h is given in (2). Proposition 4 characterizes the manufacturer’s production quantity in the decentral-
ized supply chain and compares it with the production quantity in the social optimum.
PROPOSITION 4.
(i) The equilibrium production quantity in the decentralized supply chain Q(d) sat-
isﬁes:
Z
G(xd
1)
Q(d)
0
w · ydF (y) = c,
(16)
where xd
1 is given by (12).
(ii) Relative to the socially-optimal production quantity Q(c) given in (10), the equilibrium production
quantity in the decentralized supply chain is lower, i.e., Q(d) < Q(c).
Proposition 4(ii) shows that, when vaccines are imperfect (i.e., v(h) > 0), the manufacturer in the decen-
tralized supply chain produces less than the socially-optimal production quantity. (This result generalizes
the result presented in Arifo˘glu et al. (2012) that assume vaccines are perfect (i.e., when v(h) = 0).) Hence,
in addition to the fact that the demand side is inefﬁcient, this result implies that the supply side is also inefﬁ-
cient. This is mainly due to the manufacturer’s self-interest: the manufacturer cares only about its own proﬁt
and does not take social beneﬁts from each vaccination into consideration when choosing its production
quantity.
6.
Coordination: A Two-Sided Incentive Program
To improve the social welfare in the decentralized ﬂu vaccine supply chain, we now propose a two-sided
incentive program that is contingent on the manufacturer’s ex-post realized production quantity Qr. Specif-
ically, it offers: (i) a ‘transfer payment’ T(Qr) to the manufacturer (on the supply side), where this transfer
payment can be a subsidy (or a penalty) when T(Qr) is positive (or negative); and (ii) a ‘vaccination in-
centive’ r(Qr) to each vaccinated individual (on the demand side), where this incentive can be positive or
negative.

16
Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
To operationalize this two-sided incentive program I = (r(Qr),T(Qr)), we consider the following se-
quence of events. Before the production starts, in addition to the wholesale price contract w, the social
planner offers a menu of transfer payments T (Qr) to the manufacturer, which is contingent on the ex-
post production quantity Qr. Given the wholesale price w and the menu of transfer payments T (Qr), the
manufacturer chooses its production quantity Q(I). At the beginning of the vaccination season, the actual
production quantity Qr = y·Q(I) is realized and commonly observed. Then the social planner announces the
vaccination incentive r(Qr) to all individuals. Notice that the vaccination incentive r(Qr) is determined af-
ter the actual production quantity Qr is realized. Then, given the ‘effective vaccination cost’ w +p−r(Qr),
each individual decides whether to seek vaccination or not. Finally, the social planner delivers (or collects)
the transfer payment T (Qr) to the manufacturer and vaccination incentive r(Qr) to vaccinated people.
6.1.
Demand (G
 x(I)(Qr)

) and Production (Q(I)) under the Incentive Program
We begin our analysis by studying each individual’s vaccination decision in the second stage, given the
realized production quantity Qr and the vaccination incentive r(Qr). By noting that the effective cost of
vaccination is now (w + p −r(Qr)), we can use the same approach as described in §5.1 to show that an
individual with infection cost x will seek vaccination if and only if the revised condition x(u(h) −v(h)) >
(w + p −r(Qr)) holds, which yields:
LEMMA 2. In an ex-post equilibrium in the decentralized supply chain under the incentive program
I = (r(Qr),T(Qr)), given realized vaccine supply Qr, there exists a unique threshold x(I)(Qr) such that
an individual with infection cost x will seek vaccination if and only if x > x(I)(Qr).
Anticipating the ex-post demand under the incentive program G
 x(I)(Qr)

, the manufacturer determines
the production quantity Q(I) ex ante by maximizing its expected proﬁt π(I) (Q). Speciﬁcally, the manufac-
turer solves:
π(I) = max
Q
{π(I) (Q) ≡EY

w · h(x(I)(Y Q),Y Q) + T(Y Q)

−cQ},
(17)
where the ﬁrst and second terms inside the expectation are the ex-post revenue to be obtained from vaccine
sales (h is given in (2)) and the transfer payment to be received from the social planner, respectively.
6.2.
The Coordinating Incentive Program
We now identify a speciﬁc incentive program I = (r(Qr),T(Qr)) that can coordinate the decentralized ﬂu
vaccine supply chain so that manufacturer’s and individuals’ incentives are aligned with the social optimum,
i.e., Q(I) = Q(c) and x(I)(Qr) = x(c)(Qr) for all Qr. Speciﬁcally, we consider the incentive program with
the following parameters:
r (Qr) = w + p −¯x
 1 −h(c)(Qr)
 u
 h(c)(Qr)

−v
 h(c)(Qr)

,
(18)
T (Qr) = K −(w + p)h(c)(Qr) −¯x
2
h 1 −h(c)(Qr)
2  u
 h(c)(Qr)

−v
 h(c)(Qr)

+ v
 h(c)(Qr)
i
,
(19)

Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
17
where K is a constant (that we shall specify later) and h(c)(Qr) = G(x(c)(Qr)) is given by (7). Next,
Proposition 5 shows that above incentive program coordinates the decentralized ﬂu vaccine supply chain.
PROPOSITION 5. In a decentralized supply chain that operates under the incentive program I =
(r(Qr),T(Qr)) in (18) and (19) with a given constant K:
(i) All individuals voluntarily behave in line with the social optimum in an ex-post equilibrium so that
x(I)(Qr) = x(c)(Qr) for any realized vaccine supply Qr.
(ii) The manufacturer chooses the socially-optimal ex-ante production quantity in equilibrium voluntarily
so that Q(I) = Q(c).
Proposition 5 indicates that we need a vaccination incentive r(Qr) to coordinate the demand side and a
transfer payment T(Qr) to coordinate the supply side. We next explain how vaccination incentive r(Qr) in
(18) and the transfer payment T(Qr) in (19) work and coordinate the demand and supply sides, respectively.
6.2.1.
Coordinating vaccination incentive: r(Qr). To understand how the vaccination incentive
works on the demand side, we draw Figure 2 to illustrate r (Qr) in (18). Figure 2 shows that, when the
uncertain yield Y is accounted for, the vaccination incentive r(Qr) can be positive or negative and take the
form of subsidy or penalty. Speciﬁcally, when the realized vaccine supply is sufﬁciently high, i.e., Qr >
G

x(d)
1

, the demand in decentralized supply chain is always less than that in social optimum (see Figure
1) due to the positive externalities; therefore, to induce more individuals to seek vaccination, our incentive
program provides positive vaccination incentive (i.e., r (Qr) > 0) as illustrated in Figure 2.
Figure 2
Individual vaccination incentive r(Qr) in (18)
On the other hand, when the realized vaccine supply is low enough, i.e., Qr ≤G(xd
1), the demand in de-
centralized supply chain exceeds the socially-optimal demand due to negative externalities (see Figure 1). In
such cases, as shown in Figure 2, to curb the excess demand and ensure that individuals with high infection
costs can get vaccinated, our incentive program creates negative vaccination incentive (i.e., r (Qr)) < 0).

18
Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
REMARK 1 (VACCINATION INCENTIVES IN PRACTICE). We commonly observe vaccination incen-
tives in practice. For example, positive vaccination incentives are used in practice by making vaccination
more accessible, subsidizing GPs for all vaccine administrations, and covering vaccination costs for every-
one through vouchers, and public/private insurance (Institute of Medicine 2004; Nugent and Knaul 2006;
Spencer and Kennedy 2007; Sinha et al. 2018). Similarly, general practitioners (GPs) or healthcare providers
are either not subsidized at all or subsidized only for high-risk individuals to increase effective vaccination
costs, which effectively creates negative vaccination incentives, either for all individuals or for only low-
risk individuals (Institute of Medicine 2004; Spencer and Kennedy 2007; Sinha et al. 2018; NHS 2020).
Speciﬁcally, the vaccination incentive that we propose can be implemented in practice by using electronic
voucher cards as recommended by the Institute of Medicine (IOM) (see chapter 7; Institute of Medicine
2004).
6.2.2.
Coordinating transfer payment: T(Qr). To understand how the transfer payment T(Qr)
works on the supply side, we consider a case where the social planner does not subsidize the manufacturer
(i.e., T(Qr) = 0) and only intervenes in the demand side to elicit individuals through r(Qr) in (18). We call
this ‘no demand-side inefﬁciency case’ since there is not demand-side inefﬁciency. In this case, individuals’
incentives are aligned with the social optimum, and the ex-post demand is equal to G(x(c)(Qr)), which is
given by (7), so that the manufacturer’s optimal production quantity Q satisﬁes:
Z
G(xc
1)
Q
0
w · ydF (y) = c.
(20)
By comparing the left-hand side of (10) and that of (20), for any realized production quantity Qr <
G(xc
1), the marginal beneﬁt to the society (as a whole in the centralized system) from producing each
dose of vaccine is equal to ¯x[−B(x(c)(Qr))] whereas the marginal beneﬁt to the manufacturer (even when
there is no demand-side inefﬁciency) is equal to w. This ‘difference’ in marginal beneﬁts to the society
and manufacturer causes inefﬁciency on the supply side. Hence, to entice the manufacturer to choose the
socially-optimal production quantity Q(c), the transfer payment to the manufacturer T(Qr) makes the man-
ufacturer’s marginal beneﬁt equal to that of the society and thereby aligns its incentives with the social
optimum. To demonstrate this better, by using two problem instances (i.e., ¯x = $100 and ¯x = $2,000) from
our numerical study in §7, we draw Figure 3 to illustrate the coordinating transfer payment (i.e., T(Qr) in
(19)), and ex-post marginal beneﬁt of the manufacturer and society from selling a dose of vaccine (i.e., w
and ¯x[−B(x(c)(Qr))], respectively).
Figure 3a shows that, when the infection costs among the population are low (i.e., ¯x = $100), the marginal
beneﬁt to the society is less than that to the manufacturer (i.e, w > ¯x[−B(x(c)(Qr))]) for sufﬁciently high
realized production quantity Qr ≥G(xc
1) = 0.67. Then it can be shown that the expected marginal beneﬁt
to the manufacturer in the case of no demand-side inefﬁciency with T(Qr) = 0 is higher than that to the

Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
19
Figure 3
Transfer payment to the manufacturer under the coordinating incentive program (i.e., T(Qr) in (19))
with K = K as given in (23), and ex-post marginal beneﬁt from selling a dose of vaccine to the
manufacturer (i.e., w) and to the society (i.e., ¯x[−B(x(c)(Qr))], where B(.) is given by (6))
(a) ¯x = $100
(b) ¯x = $2,000
Note: Two problem instances (i.e., ¯x = $100 and ¯x = $2,000) in this ﬁgure are from our numerical study in §7 with parameter
values: µ = 1, σ = 0.4, p = $23, w = $15, and c = $3; and infection probabilities u(h) and v(h) as, respectively, given in (25) and
(26), where R0 = 2.5, α = 0.9, and η = 3.3. By Propositions 2 and 4, the planned production quantities in the decentralized and
centralized systems are equal to: Q(d) = 0.046 (4.6% of the population) and Q(c) = 0.76 (76% of the population) for ¯x = $100,
respectively; and Q(d) = 0.8 and Q(c) = 1.92 for ¯x = $2,000, respectively.
society. Thus, when ¯x = $100, the manufacturer produces more in the case of no demand-side inefﬁciency
than in the social optimum (i.e., Q satisfying (20) is equal to 0.84 and is higher than the socially-optimal
production quantity Q(c) = 0.76). To discourage the manufacturer from this overproduction, Figure 3a il-
lustrates that, for ¯x = $100, our incentive program always penalizes the manufacturer (i.e., T(Qr) < 0)
but makes medium yield realizations more attractive by penalizing the manufacturer less (i.e., T(Qr) is
non-monotone). This reduces the manufacturer’s production quantity but not more than necessary so that it
targets socially-optimal production quantity.
Figure 3b shows that the society’s marginal beneﬁt is signiﬁcantly higher than that of the manufacturer
for all Qr ≤G(xc
1) = 0.67 when the infection costs among the population are high (i.e., ¯x = $2,000). In
this case, when there is no demand-side inefﬁciency and T(Qr) = 0, it can be shown that the manufac-
turer chooses a very low production quantity and under-produces (i.e., the optimal Q satisfying (20) is
equal to 0.84 and is lower than the socially-optimal production quantity Q(c) = 1.92). To encourage the
manufacturer to produce more, Figure 3b shows that, for ¯x = $2,000, our incentive program penalizes the
manufacturer (i.e., T(Qr) < 0) when its realized production quantity Qr is low (and the penalty decreases
as the realized production quantity increases), and it rewards the manufacturer (i.e., T(Qr) > 0) when its
realized production quantity is very high. In doing so, the incentive program entices the manufacturer to
increase its production quantity Q to the socially-optimal level Q(c).

20
Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
Although the yield (Y ) is uncertain and outside its control, the manufacturer can increase or decrease the
realized quantity (Qr = Y · Q) by choosing its planned production quantity Q. By penalizing or reward-
ing the manufacturer ex post, our transfer payment T(Qr) elicits the manufacturer to choose the socially-
optimal production quantity Q(c) ex ante.
REMARK 2 (TRANSFER PAYMENT IN PRACTICE). The transfer payment that we propose can be im-
plemented through a contract between government and the manufacturer, e.g., CDC vaccine contract (CDC
2020). Similar contracts (or payment schemes) that depend on the outcome of an uncertain event are com-
monly used in healthcare: For example, to entice manufacturers to develop more effective drugs, Italy uses
PbR and RS contracts under which a manufacturer is initially paid for the medication used to treat a person
but it is later penalized and required to return all or part of the payment if the patient does not respond
to the treatment (Keohane and Petrie 2017). In addition, to entice hospitals to exert readmission reduction
efforts in the USA, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) implements HRRP under which
hospitals are penalized if their actual 30-day excess readmission ratios (ERR) exceed median ERR within
their peer group (CMS 2017; Arifo˘glu et al. 2020).
6.2.3.
Program participation and budget neutrality. While Proposition 5 states that the incentive
program I = (r(Qr),T(Qr)) in (18) and (19) can entice the manufacturer and individuals to behave in a
socially-optimal manner, this incentive program may not be implementable because it can make the manu-
facturer and/or overall utilities of all individuals worse off compared to the case with no incentive program,
so that either the manufacturer is not willing to participate or no policymaker is in its favor. Further, the
incentive program may require external funding. Next, we derive conditions such that our incentive pro-
gram is implementable (i.e., it weakly improves the manufacturer’s proﬁt and expected total utilities of all
individuals) and ex-ante budget-neutral (in expectation).
For any K, let us deﬁne the total ex-post net cost borne by the social planner (i.e., the amount paid to the
manufacturer and those vaccinated individuals) under the two-sided incentive program I = (r(Qr),T(Qr))
as:
S(I)(Qr) = T(Qr) + r(Qr) · h(c)(Qr),
= K −¯x
2((1 −(h(c) (Qr))2)u(h(c) (Qr)) + (h(c) (Qr))2v(h(c) (Qr))),
(21)
where h(c)(Qr) = G(x(c)(Qr)), which is given by (7). Notice that the total net cost under the incentive
program to the social planner S(I)(Qr) is increasing in K. Also, we deﬁne two terms K > K > 0 as follows:
K = VH + π(d) −W (d),
(22)
K = VH + π(d) −W (c),
(23)
where W (c) = EY

W(x(c)(Y Q(c)),Y Q(c))

−cQ(c) and W (d) = EY

W(x(d)(Y Q(d)),Y Q(d))

−cQ(d)
are, respectively, the total expected social welfare in social optimum and decentralized supply chain. In

Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
21
addition, π(d) is the manufacturer’s equilibrium proﬁt in the decentralized supply chain as given in (15).
Also, we deﬁne the term Kbn > 0 that satisﬁes:
Kbn = ¯x
2EY

(1 −(h(c)  Y Q(c)
)2)u(h(c)  Y Q(c)
) + (h(c)  Y Q(c)
)2v(h(c)  Y Q(c)
)

.
(24)
Recall from Proposition 1 that everybody seeking vaccination is vaccinated in the social optimum, i.e.,
hc(Qr) = ¯G(x(c)(Qr)) ≤Qr and φ(xc(Qr,Qr),Qr) = 1. Then, from (4), Kbn is the expected total utility
loss of all (vaccinated and unvaccinated) individuals due to infection in the social optimum.
Using the above deﬁnitions, Proposition 6 speciﬁes conditions under which the manufacturer is willing
to participate in our incentive program, and our incentive program improves the expected total utilities of
all individuals and/or is ex-ante budget-neutral.
PROPOSITION 6. Suppose that the social planner offers an incentive program I = (r(Qr),T(Qr)) as
stated in (18)-(19), where T(Qr) depends on the value of K.
(i) If one selects K that has K > K, then, relative to the case of no incentive, the manufacturer’s expected
proﬁt (i.e., π(I)) is higher under the incentive program I = (r(Qr),T(Qr)) (i.e., π(I) > π(d)).
(ii) If the term Kbn satisﬁes Kbn < K, then relative to the case of no incentive, the expected total utilities
of all individuals are higher under the incentive program I = (r(Qr),T(Qr)) for any value of K.
(iii) If one selects K = Kbn, then the incentive program I = (r(Qr),T(Qr)) is ex-ante budget-neutral (in
expectation); i.e, EY

S(I)(Y Q(c))

= 0.
Proposition 6(i) shows that the social planner should choose the parameter K sufﬁciently large so that the
manufacturer receives enough transfer payment under our incentive program and is willing to participate. In
addition, Proposition 6(ii) asserts that the expected total utility loss of all individuals due to infection in the
social optimum (i.e., Kbn) must be small enough so that the improvement in the expected total utilities of
all individuals under our incentive program is sufﬁciently high. Proposition 6(i) and (ii) together imply that,
if it is carefully designed, our incentive program can beneﬁt the manufacturer and the rest of the society, so
it is implementable.
Further, Proposition 6(iii) indicates that, if the social planner can use its reserve to implement our incen-
tive program as stated in (18)-(19) with K = Kbn, then the incentive program will ‘balance out’ in the long
run and achieve the socially-optimal solution at no cost (in expectation). However, for this ex-ante budget-
neutral incentive program to be implementable, it should improve the expected total utilities of all individu-
als without making the manufacturer worse off so that the manufacturer participates (i.e., K > Kbn > K by
Proposition 6(i) and (ii)). This indicates that the ex-ante budget-neutral incentive program with K = Kbn
may not always be implementable (e.g., the manufacturer will not participate when Kbn < K). To overcome
this challenge, in §6.3, we shall develop a ‘modiﬁed’ version of our incentive program so that it is always
‘ex-ante budget-neutral’ (in expectation) and implementable.

22
Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
6.3.
A Modiﬁed Budget-Neutral Incentive Program
We now ‘modify’ our incentive program in §6.2 to make sure that it is self-sufﬁcient and has a balanced
budget in the long run (i.e., budget-neutral in expectation). Under the ‘modiﬁed incentive program’, in
addition to (r(Qr),T(Qr)) as stated in (18)-(19), the social planner collects/returns a constant tax/beneﬁt t
from/to all individuals (i.e., I = (t,r(Qr),T(Qr))) before the ﬂu vaccination season or the yield uncertainty
is realized. (The constant t is a tax to be collected when it is positive and it is a beneﬁt to be returned
when it is negative.) This constant tax/beneﬁt t can be considered as part of annual healthcare-related tax
(e.g., social security and medicare taxes in the USA, and national insurance contribution in the UK) which,
whether they use healthcare services or not, governments collect from everyone so as to cover healthcare
costs for the society (IRS 2020; GOV.UK 2020).
Because t is collected/returned from/to all individuals in advance (independent from whether they are
vaccinated or not), it will not change individuals’ vaccination decisions. Hence, given the vaccinated frac-
tion h and realized production Qr, an individual with infection cost x seeks vaccination if and only if
x(u(h) −v(h)) > w + p −r(Qr). Therefore, with r(Qr) given in (18), individuals will voluntarily be-
have in line with the social optimum under the modiﬁed incentive program. Similarly, given the transfer
payment T(Qr) in (19), the manufacturer will voluntarily produce the socially-optimal production quantity
Q(c) under the modiﬁed incentive program since its proﬁt is independent of t.
However, note that, when t > 0 so that it is a tax to be collected from all individuals, imposing a tax t on
all individuals under the modiﬁed incentive program will reduce the total expected utilities of all individuals
and can make them worse off overall compared to the case with no incentive program. Consequently, the
modiﬁed incentive program may not be implementable. Proposition 7 shows that, if the tax t and the constant
K are carefully chosen, the modiﬁed incentive program I = (t,r(Qr),T(Qr)) in (18) and (19) will always
be implementable and ex-ante budget-neutral.
PROPOSITION 7. Suppose that the social planner offers the modiﬁed incentive program I =
(t,r(Qr),T(Qr)) that has t = K −Kbn, where Kbn is given by (24), and r(Qr) and T(Qr) given, re-
spectively, in (18) and (19). Then, the modiﬁed incentive program I = (t,r(Qr),T(Qr)) is always ‘ex-ante
budget-neutral’ (in expectation), i.e., t = EY

S(I)(Y Q(c))

. In addition:
(i) Under the modiﬁed incentive program, the total expected utility of all individuals and expected proﬁt
of the manufacturer is, respectively, equal to (VH −K) and (K + W (c) −VH).
(ii) If one selects K that has K > K, then, relative to the case of no incentive, the manufacturer’s expected
proﬁt is higher under the modiﬁed incentive program I = (t,r(Qr),T(Qr)).
(iii) If one selects K that has K < K, then, relative to the case of no incentive, the expected total utilities
of all individuals are higher under the modiﬁed incentive program I = (t,r(Qr),T(Qr)).

Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
23
The seasonal ﬂu epidemic occurs every year, and, in a given ﬂu season, depending on the realized pro-
duction quantity Qr, the modiﬁed incentive program as given in Proposition 7 might have a budget deﬁcit
(i.e., t −S(I)(Qr) < 0) or a budget surplus (i.e., t −S(I)(Qr) > 0). However, Proposition 7 implies that, if
implemented over the long run, the total budget surplus due to the modiﬁed incentive program is enough to
cover the total budget deﬁcit ( i.e., t = EY

S(I)(Y Q(c))

). Thus, the modiﬁed incentive program is ex-ante
budget-neutral and balances out its budget in the long run.
Further, Proposition 7(i) indicates that, under the modiﬁed incentive program with t = K −Kbn, the
social planner can arbitrarily distribute ex-ante social welfare among individuals and the manufacturer (e.g.,
by choosing K arbitrarily). More importantly, Proposition 7(ii) and (iii) reveal that, when the parameter
K is set neither very high nor very low (i.e., K < K < K), the modiﬁed incentive program is always
implementable and improves individuals’ total expected utility without making the manufacturer worse off.
6.4.
Allocation Based on Priority Groups
Our analysis so far ignores priority groups and assumes that the available vaccine is randomly allocated
among all individuals seeking vaccination. However, we can easily extend our model by incorporating
the vaccine allocation based on priority groups as in Arifo˘glu et al. (2012). To do so, one can divide the
population into two priority groups based on the infection cost x: high-risk group with x ≥z; and low-risk
group with x < z, where z ∈[0, ¯x] is exogenously speciﬁed, and it is common knowledge and independent
of the realized production Qr.14 Individuals in the high-risk group have a higher priority, and the vaccine
available at the beginning of the vaccination season is made available to individuals in the high-risk group
ﬁrst and then to individuals in the low-risk group if any vaccine remains. There is random rationing within
each priority group so that individuals in the same priority group have an equal chance to obtain the vaccine
when the supply is limited (Arifo˘glu et al. 2012; CDC 2018).
In the social optimum, the social planner has complete control and can dictate to individuals whether to
seek or to not seek vaccination in the social optimum. It is never optimal for the social planner to ask more
individiuals to seek vaccination than the available vaccine, as this rations individuals with high infection
costs and decreases social welfare. Therefore, priority groups are irrelevant in the social optimum, and the
socially-optimal demand and production quantity are, respectively, equal to G(x(c)(Qr)) in (7) and Qc in
(10).
In the decentralized supply chain, priority groups affect the availability of ﬂu vaccine for individuals
and thus is relevant only in case of limited supply. Therefore, when the realized production is sufﬁciently
high (i.e., Qr ≥G(x(d)
1 )), the ex-post demand in the decentralized supply chain with priority groups is the
same as that without priority groups and equal to G(x(d)
1 ). When the realized production is low (i.e., Qr <
14 This corresponds to the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) practice of announcing the priority groups before
the realization of vaccine supply (Institute of Medicine 2004).

24
Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
G(x(d)
1 )), prioritizing individuals with high infection costs reduces the demand compared to the case without
the priority groups by discouraging some individuals with low infection costs from seeking vaccination;
however, the ex-post demand with priority groups is still more than the available supply Qr. This implies that
both positive and negative externalities still exist and cause inefﬁciency on the demand side. In particular,
priority groups have no impact on the positive externalities when supply is unlimited but decrease the extent
of negative externalities when supply is limited. It also implies that, in the decentralized supply chain with
priority groups, the ex-post vaccinated fraction (i.e., vaccine sales) is the same and equal to h(d)(Qr) =
min{Qr,G(xd
1)} so that the manufacturer’s proﬁt is the same and its production quantity is equal to Q(d) as
given in (16). Consequently, by Q(c) > Q(d) in Proposition 4(ii), the manufacturer’s incentives are still not
aligned with those of the society, and priority groups have no impact on the supply-side inefﬁciency.
Lastly, independent of the priority groups, our modiﬁed incentive program in §6.3 aligns manufacturer’s
and individuals’ incentives with the social optimum. Therefore, it continues to coordinate the decentralized
supply chain even in the presence of priority groups.
7.
Numerical Study
We now present an extensive numerical study to better understand the impact of vaccine efﬁcacy (see §7.1)
and the value of our modiﬁed incentive program, as stated in Proposition 7 (see §7.2). For our numerical
study, we use the following infection probabilities u(h) and v(h) associated with a particular form of the
SIR15 model that has been considered by Mamani et al. (2012):
u(h) =
(
1−η(1−α)h
1−h

1 −αh −
1
R0

, if h < hzr,
0,
if h ≥hzr,
(25)
v (h) =
(
η (1 −α)

1 −αh −
1
R0

, if h < hzr,
0,
if h ≥hzr,
(26)
where η is a constant,16 α is the vaccine efﬁcacy (e.g., vaccine is perfectly effective when α = 1), R0 is
the average number of individuals infected by an infected person, and hzr = (R0 −1)/αR0 if R0 > 1 (and
hzr = 0 if R0 ≤1). We relax condition (i) in Assumption 1 (i.e., there may be no demand for the vaccine)
and choose α > 1 −1/η to ensure that conditions (iv) and (v) in Assumption 1 are satisﬁed.
To make our welfare-maximizing formulation consistent with the cost-minimizing formulations exam-
ined in the literature (Galvani et al. 2007; Chick et al. 2008), we normalize VH to 0 and interpret −W (c) and
15 The SIR epidemic model and corresponding infection probabilities in Mamani et al. (2012) assume that the initial infected
fraction of the population is very small, and hence, the initial fraction of population that is susceptible is almost equal to 1. Taking
into account that some fraction of the population can be initially not susceptible to infection (e.g., 40-60%) as in Katriel and Stone
(2010), and Yamin and Gavious (2013), we obtain infection probabilities for vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals. Using these
infection probabilities, we performed a numerical analysis and showed that all insights in our numerical study in this section are
still valid.
16 The constant η is chosen such that the infection probability in (26) is a good approximation for the infection probability of the
vaccinated population. The actual infection probability can be obtained from a SIR epidemic model with imperfect vaccinations.
See Mamani et al. (2012) for further details.

Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
25
−W (d) as the ex-ante total ‘social costs’ in the social optimum and decentralized supply chain, respectively.
As the distribution of random yield Y , we use gamma with mean µ = 1 (Chick et al. 2008) and truncate it at
Y = 4. We choose the rest of the parameter values from the literature to the extent possible, as summarized
in Table 2. We consider a range of values for sensitivity analysis, but, for brevity, we present results only
for a subset of parameter combinations in Table 2.
Table 2
Parameter values
Parameters
Value
Source
Coefﬁcient of variation of the yield, CV ≡σ
µ
{0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8}
Chick et al. (2008)
Highest infection costs, ¯x ( $ )
{100, 500, 2000}
Galvani et al. (2007)
Basic reproduction ratio, R0
{1.5, 2, 2.5, 3}
Mamani et al. (2012)
The constant, η
3.3
Mamani et al. (2012)
Vaccine efﬁcacy, α
{0.8, 0.85, 0.9, 0.95, 1}
Mamani et al. (2012)
Production cost per unit egg, c ( $ )
{1.5, 3}
Deo and Corbett (2009);
Koh and Paxson (2009)
Ratio of wholesale price to production cost, w/c
{2, 5}
CDC (2009)
Vaccination costs, p ( $ )
23
Meltzer et al. (1999)
7.1.
Impact of Vaccine Efﬁcacy
We ﬁrst study the impact of vaccine efﬁcacy on ex-post demand and negative/positive externalities in §7.1.1,
and then, in §7.1.2, we discuss how the vaccine efﬁcacy affects the supply chain inefﬁciency.
7.1.1.
Ex-post demand. Figure 4 illustrates the ex-post demand in the decentralized supply chain and
social optimum for ¯x ∈{100,2000} and α ∈{0.8,1} when the coefﬁcient of variation CV = 0.4, R0 = 2.5
and w = $15. We observe from Figure 4 that the impact of vaccine efﬁcacy on the demand depends on the
realized yield, and that a more effective vaccine does not necessarily make the demand side more efﬁcient.
With a more effective vaccine, the social planner can provide the same level of immunization by vaccinating
fewer individuals, and the demand in the social optimum decreases. Moreover, the increase in vaccine
efﬁcacy makes the vaccine more valuable by decreasing the infection risk more for vaccinated individuals
when the vaccinated fraction is low, whereas it makes the vaccine less valuable by decreasing the infection
risk more for unvaccinated individuals when the vaccinated fraction is high. When the infection cost is
low (¯x = $100) as in Figure 4a, nobody seeks vaccination due to low direct beneﬁts when the vaccine is
imperfect (α = 0.8). Therefore, as its efﬁcacy increases (e.g., α = 1), the vaccine becomes more valuable
and more people demand it, which increases negative externalities (for low Qr) and decreases positive
externalities (for high Qr).
On the other hand, when infection cost is high (¯x = $2,000) as in Figure 4b, the number of individuals
seeking vaccination is very high and the vaccinated fraction is mostly bounded by realized production.
Consequently, a more effective vaccine (e.g., α = 1) is more valuable so is demanded more when the

26
Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
Figure 4
Ex-post demand in decentralized supply chain and social optimum
(a) ¯x = $100
(b) ¯x = $2,000
vaccinated fraction is low (low Qr) whereas it is less valuable so is demanded less when the vaccinated
fraction is high (high Qr). Thus, higher vaccine efﬁcacy increases negative externalities for sufﬁciently low
Qr and decreases positive externalities for sufﬁciently high Qr. Interestingly, when infection cost is high, it
decreases negative externalities and increases positive externalities for intermediate Qr.
Overall, Figure 4 shows that the net effect of vaccine efﬁcacy on the demand side is not clear ex ante.
More importantly, it indicates that the manufacturer can sell more and increase its proﬁt by producing an
imperfect vaccine (e.g., vaccinated fraction and hence sales is (weakly) higher for α = 0.8 and ¯x = $2,000
in Figure 4b). Therefore, the vaccine manufacturer may have some ﬁnancial motivations to produce a less
effective ﬂu vaccine.
7.1.2.
Supply-chain inefﬁciency. Figure 5 depicts demand- and supply-side inefﬁciency and total
supply-chain inefﬁciency17 for α ∈{0.8,0.85,0.9,0.95,1}, CV ∈{0.2,0.8} and ¯x ∈{100,2000} when
R0 = 2.5 and w = $15.
We observe from Figure 5 that total supply-chain inefﬁciency can be signiﬁcant (e.g., more than 60%) and
that the vaccine efﬁcacy impacts on the inefﬁciency in the supply chain differently, depending on how costly
the infection is (i.e., high/low ¯x) and/or how uncertain the production yield is (i.e., high/low CV ). When
infection cost is low (i.e., ¯x = $100), supply-chain inefﬁciency is mainly due to individuals’ self-interest on
the demand side. This is because, for ¯x = $100, the manufacturer’s and society’s expected marginal beneﬁts
17 We let W (NDI) as the social welfare in no demand-side inefﬁciency case (as described in §6.2.2) and measure demand-side
inefﬁciency by
h
1 −W (NDI)/W (d)i
×100%, supply-side inefﬁciency by
h
(W (NDI) −W (c))/W (d)i
×100%, and total supply-
chain inefﬁciency by
h
1 −W (c)/W (d)i
× 100%.

Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
27
Figure 5
Impact of vaccine efﬁcacy on supply-chain inefﬁciency
(i.e., the left-hand side of (10) and (16)) are very close; however, due to low direct vaccination beneﬁts
(especially, when the vaccine efﬁcacy is low), demand in the decentralized supply chain is signiﬁcantly
less than that in social optimum (e.g., see Figure 4b for α = 0.8). Moreover, recall from §7.1.1 that, for
¯x = $100, negative externalities increase while positive externalities decrease in vaccine efﬁcacy. Increase in
negative externalities dominates and demand-side inefﬁciency increases for low enough α whereas decrease
in positive externalities dominates and demand-side inefﬁciency decreases for high enough α. Therefore, as
Figure 5 shows, supply-chain inefﬁciency ﬁrst increases and then decreases in vaccine efﬁcacy for ¯x = $100.
This implies that a more effective vaccine does not always increase supply-chain efﬁciency.
Further, we observe from Figure 5 that total supply chain inefﬁciency is signiﬁcant and supply-side
inefﬁciency is higher than demand-side inefﬁciency when infection cost and yield uncertainty are both high
(i.e., ¯x = $2,000 and CV = 0.8). For ¯x = $2,000, production in decentralized supply chain is signiﬁcantly
lower due to misalignment between the manufacturer’s and society’s incentives. Therefore, under high yield
uncertainty (i.e., CV = 0.8), it becomes more likely to end up in cases with limited supply, where negative
externalities are signiﬁcant (see Figure 4b). As a result, when ¯x = $2,000 and CV = 0.8, supply-chain
inefﬁciency is very high and mainly due to the manufacturer’s self-interest on the supply side. Figure 5 also
shows that, for ¯x = $2,000, the vaccine efﬁcacy has a major impact on supply chain inefﬁciency only when
the yield uncertainty is low (i.e., CV = 0.2). This implies that, when the infection cost is high, efforts to
improve vaccine efﬁcacy will pay off only when the vaccine supply is more reliable.
7.2.
Value of Coordination
Next, we ﬁrst analyze the impact of coordinating the demand or supply side on the value of coordination
of the other side in §7.2.1, and then, in §7.2.2, we compare our two-sided incentive program against two
mechanisms in prior literature.

28
Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
7.2.1.
Interaction between demand- and supply-side coordinations. Figure 6 illustrates the percent-
age increase18 in the value of coordination on one side due to the coordination on the other side for CV ∈
{0.2,0.4,0.6,0.8}, R0 ∈{1.5,3} and ¯x ∈{100,2000} when α = 0.9 and w = $15. The ﬁgure shows that
demand- and supply-side coordination can increase or decrease the value of coordination on the other side,
and hence can be strategic complements or substitutes.
Figure 6
Increase in value of coordination on demand or supply side due to coordination on the other side
(a) ¯x = $100
(b) ¯x = $2,000
When the infection cost is low (i.e., ¯x = $100), we observe from Figure 5 that the supply-chain inef-
ﬁciency is mainly due to individuals’ self-interest on the demand side (i.e., low supply-side inefﬁciency);
therefore, the interaction between demand- and supply-side coordination is not signiﬁcant (less than 1%)
as Figure 6a shows. On the other hand, when the infection cost is high (i.e., ¯x = $2,000), both demand-
and supply-side inefﬁciencies are high so that, as Figure 6b shows, coordinating the demand or supply side
has a signiﬁcant impact on the value of coordination on the other side, especially when the ﬂu is very in-
fectious, and the production yield is highly uncertain (i.e., R0 = 3, and CV > 0.4). Interestingly, Figure 6b
shows that demand- and supply-side coordinations increase/decrease each other’s value and are strategic
complements/substitutes when the production yield is less/more uncertain. This implies that coordinating
each side of the supply chain has more impact on the overall inefﬁciency when the production yield is highly
uncertain.
7.2.2.
Two-sided vs. one-sided coordination. There are two forms of incentive mechanisms in the
literature that aim to coordinate only one side of the ﬂu vaccine supply chain. First, the coordinating mech-
anism ignoring the supply side (e.g., the tax/subsidy mechanism of Brito et al. (1991)) aims to coordi-
nate the demand side by ignoring the manufacturer’s self-interest and the limited supply due to uncertain
yield. This mechanism in the literature corresponds to the case where the social planner implements the
18 We let W (NDI) and W (NSI), respectively, be the social welfare in no demand-side inefﬁciency case (as described in
§6.2.2) and in the no supply-side inefﬁciency case (where the manufacturer always behaves in line with the social op-
timum while self-interested individuals make their vaccination decisions). Then, we measure the percentage increase in
the value of coordination on one (demand or supply) side due to coordination on the other (supply or demand) side by
h
(W (NDI) + W (NSI) −W (c) −W (d))/W (d))
i
× 100%.

Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
29
socially-optimal demand G(xc
1) without accounting for the supply side. Second, the coordinating mecha-
nism ignoring the demand side (e.g., the whole-unit discount/cost-sharing contract of Chick et al. (2008))
intends to coordinate the supply side by ignoring individuals’ self-interested behavior and assuming that
the demand is exogenously controlled by the social planner. This mechanism in the literature corresponds
to the case where the social planner implements the socially-optimal quantity Q(c) without accounting for
the self-interested behavior of individuals. Figure 7 illustrates the value19 of our two-sided mechanism and
aforementioned one-sided mechanisms in prior literature for CV ∈{0.2,0.4,0.6,0.8}, R0 ∈{1.5,3} and
¯x ∈{100,2000} when α = 0.9 and w = $15.
Figure 7
Reduction in social costs under different coordinating mechanisms
Figure 7 shows that our two-sided incentive program creates signiﬁcant social value (e.g., it reduces
social costs by more than 70%), especially when the infection cost is very high (i.e., ¯x = $2,000). When
the infection cost is low (i.e., x = $100), there is a signiﬁcant misalignment between individual and social
beneﬁts, and few individuals seek vaccination, as explained above. In such cases, accounting for individuals’
self-interested behavior is very important. Thus, as is shown in Figure 7 for ¯x = $100, the coordination
mechanism ignoring the demand side performs poorly and increases social costs because it ignores the self-
interested individual behavior, whereas the coordination mechanism ignoring the supply side performs as
well as the two-sided coordination because it considers self-interested individual behavior.
On the other hand, when the infection cost is high (i.e., ¯x = $2,000), the supply-chain inefﬁciency is
mostly due to the uncertain yield (i.e., high supply-side inefﬁciency), especially when the yield uncertainty
is high (see §7.1.2). Thus, from Figure 7 for ¯x = $2,000, we can draw three conclusions. First, the coordina-
tion mechanism ignoring the demand side (or self-interested individuals) performs better than the one that
ignores the supply side (or manufacturer’s self-interest and uncertain yield). Second, when the infectious-
ness of ﬂu virus is high (R0 = 3), the coordination mechanism ignoring the supply side performs poorly and
19 We measure the value of our two-sided incentive program and aforementioned two one-sided mechanisms in the literature accord-
ing to the percentage reduction in the total social costs compared to that in the decentralized supply chain, i.e.,
h
1 −W (c)/W (d)i
×
100% and
h
1 −W (o)/W (d)i
× 100%, where superscript ‘o’ corresponds to a one-sided mechanism.

30
Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
increases social costs in most cases, whereas the coordination mechanism ignoring the demand side always
decreases social costs. Third, vaccine supply becomes more uncertain so that the supply-side inefﬁciency
increases as the CV increases. Hence, when ¯x = $2,000, as CV increases, the coordination mechanism
ignoring the demand side and focusing on the supply side surpasses the coordination mechanism ignoring
the supply side and performs almost as good as the two-sided coordination.
Overall, our two-sided incentive program outperforms both one-sided coordinating mechanisms exam-
ined in the literature in all cases, as shown in Figure 7. This ﬁnding reveals that, to coordinate a ﬂu vaccine
supply chain, it is very important to account for the interaction between the self-interested individual be-
havior that affects demand, and the manufacturer’s self-interest and yield uncertainty that affect supply.
8.
Conclusion and Policy Implications
The US vaccine market has experienced frequent supply and demand mismatches due to its highly decen-
tralized structure. This has raised serious concerns among health ofﬁcials and policymakers since vaccines
grant signiﬁcant personal and social beneﬁts that give them their unique status in the healthcare system.
After their study in 2003, the Institute of Medicine (IOM) committee on vaccines concluded that, to ﬁnance
the vaccines, the USA needs a comprehensive strategy that provides adequate incentives to individuals and
vaccine manufacturers in order to achieve the right balance in assuring access to vaccines while also en-
couraging their availability (Institute of Medicine 2004). In this paper, we have provided one such strategy
for ﬂu vaccines.
Speciﬁcally, we have developed a two-sided incentive program to coordinate a decentralized ﬂu vaccine
supply chain with self-interested individuals and a manufacturer with uncertain production yield. On the
demand side, this incentive program creates negative vaccination incentives for individuals to counteract
negative externalities and curb the demand if the realized vaccine supply is limited, whereas it creates pos-
itive vaccination incentives for individuals to counteract the positive externalities and increase the demand
when the realized vaccine supply is abundant. On the supply side, it proposes a menu of contracts between
the social planner and the manufacturer which penalizes the manufacturer for low realized vaccine supply
and subsidizes it for high realized vaccine supply. Our two-sided incentive program creates value for the
manufacturer and all individuals in the sense that the expected the manufacturer’s proﬁt and expected total
utilities of all individuals are higher than those in the decentralized supply chain.
Moreover, the incentive program that we propose offers additional ﬂexibility for the social planner to
distribute welfare among individuals and the manufacturer. More importantly, it is ex-ante budget-neutral
(in expectation) and does not require any external funding in the long run. Further, by using parameter
values in the prior research, we have conducted an extensive numerical study. We have found that our two-
sided incentive program can reduce the social costs signiﬁcantly (e.g., more than 70%) and that, contrary to
their intended purposes, incentive mechanisms that aim to coordinate only one side of the ﬂu vaccine supply

Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
31
chain (ignoring the other side) can actually increase the social costs instead of decreasing them. We also
ﬁnd that vaccine manufacturers may have some ﬁnancial motivations to develop imperfect (less effective)
vaccines, and that more effective vaccines can increase the supply-chain inefﬁciency.
Our results have important policy implications on the IOM committee’s recommendations about ﬁnanc-
ing the vaccines in the USA. First, we conﬁrm that the vaccine payment system proposed by the committee
that provides vaccination incentives to individuals through government subsidies and vouchers can ensure
individuals’ access to vaccines and eliminate the demand-side inefﬁciency. However, for the ﬂu vaccine,
where the yield uncertainty plays an important role, these vaccination incentives should be modiﬁed taking
the realized yield into consideration, speciﬁcally because the yield affects the coverage and hence the social
beneﬁts from each vaccination. Second, in contrast to the committee’s expectations, we show that vaccina-
tion incentives given to individuals are not sufﬁcient to entice the manufacturer to produce more and ensure
the availability of ﬂu vaccines. Our ﬁnding conﬁrms the concerns raised by the National Vaccine Advisory
Committee (NVAC) that the vaccine payment system proposed by the IOM committee will not provide
enough incentives to the manufacturer (Hinman 2005). To ensure availability of ﬂu vaccines, we develop
a contract between the social planner and the manufacturer that depends on the realized yield. Third, we
show that ﬁnancing vaccinations does not necessarily require external funding and can be designed to have
a balanced budget in the long run.
There are several directions for future research. We do not consider the healthcare providers and phar-
macies that actually vaccinate people. Future work can incorporate all parties involved in the ﬂu vaccine
supply chain and develop incentive mechanisms to align their incentives with the social optimum. Also, we
assume that all individuals are self-interested and behave rationally. Our work can be extended by consid-
ering irrational behavior of individuals. Finally, in our model, vaccination occurs only in a single period,
and all vaccines arrive at the beginning of that period. Future work can model the vaccination season as
multiple periods, and analyze individuals’ decisions regarding when to vaccinate by considering the arrival
of vaccines over time.
References
E. Adida, D. Dey, and H. Mamani. Operational issues and network effects in vaccine markets. European Journal of
Operational Research, 231(2):414–427, 2013.
American Academy of Pediatrics. Inﬂuenza implementation guidance: Prebooking, 2019. Retrieved on March 18 2019
from
https://www.aap.org/en-us/advocacy-and-policy/aap-health-initiatives/
immunizations/Influenza-Implementation-Guidance/Pages/Prebooking.aspx.
R. Anderson and R. May. Infectious diseases of humans: Dynamics and control, 1991.
K. Arifo˘glu, S. Deo, and S. M. R. Iravani. Consumption externality and yield uncertainty in the inﬂuenza vaccine
supply chain: Interventions in demand and supply sides. Management Science, 58(6):1072–1091, 2012.
K. Arifo˘glu, H. Ren, and T. Tezcan. Hospital readmissions reduction program does not provide the right incentives:
Issues and remedies. Management Science, 2020. Forthcoming.

32
Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
C. T. Bauch and D. J. D. Earn. Vaccination and the theory of games. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
101(36):13391–13394, 2004.
D. L. Brito, E. Sheshinski, and M. D. Intrilligator. Externalities and compulsory vaccinations. Journal of Public
Economics, 45:69–90, 1991.
CDC. Inﬂuenza vaccine prebooking and distribution strategies for the 2005–06 inﬂuenza season. Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report, 54(12):307–308, April 2005.
CDC.
Vaccine
price
list.
2009.
http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/programs/vfc/
cdc-vac-price-list.htm.
CDC. Inﬂuenza vaccination coverage trends 1989–2008 (NHIS), 2017. URL https://www.cdc.gov/flu/
pdf/professionals/NHIS89_08fluvaxtrendtab.pdf.
CDC.
Estimates of Inﬂuenza Vaccination Coverage among Adults—United States, 2017–18 Flu Sea-
son, 2018.
Retrieved on March 19, 2019, from https://www.cdc.gov/flu/fluvaxview/
coverage-1718estimates.htm.
CDC.
Seasonal Inﬂuenza Vaccine Supply and Distribution, 2019.
Retrieved on March 18, 2019, from
https://www.cdc.gov/ﬂu/about/qa/index.htm.
CDC. CDC Vaccine Price List, 2020. Retrieved on January 22, 2020, from https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/
programs/vfc/awardees/vaccine-management/price-list/index.html.
S. E. Chick, H. Mamani, and D. Simchi-Levi. Supply chain coordination and inﬂuenza vaccination. Operations
Research, 56(6):1493–1506, 2008.
S. E. Chick, S. Hasija, and J. Nasiry. Information elicitation and inﬂuenza vaccine production. Operations Research, 65
(1):75–96, 2017. doi: 10.1287/opre.2016.1552. URL https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2016.1552.
S.-H. Cho. The optimal composition of inﬂuenza vaccines subject to random production yields. Manufacturing &
Service Operations Management, 12(2):256–277, 2010.
S.-H. Cho and C. S. Tang. Advance selling in a supply chain under uncertain supply and demand. Manufacturing &
Service Operations Management, 15(2):305–319, 2013.
S.-H. Cho and H. Zhao. Healthcare Supply Chain, chapter 8. John Wiley & Sons, 1st edition, 2018.
CMS. New stratiﬁed methodology hospital-level impact ﬁle user guide. https://www.cms.gov, 2017. Accessed
on 19 August 2019.
T. Dai, S.-H. Cho, and F. Zhang. Contracting for on-time delivery in the US inﬂuenza vaccine supply chain. Manu-
facturing & Service Operations Management, 18(3):332–346, 2016.
S. Deo and C. J. Corbett. Cournot competition under yield uncertainty: The case of the U.S. inﬂuenza vaccine market.
Manufacturing and Service Operations Management, 11:563–576, 2009.
FDA. Inﬂuenza Virus Vaccine for the 2018-2019 Season, 2018. Retrieved on March 18, 2019 from https://www.
fda.gov.
A. E. Fiore, T. M. Uyeki, K. Broder, L. Finelli, G. L. Euler, J. A. Singleton, J. K. Iskander, P. M. Wortley, D. K. Shay,
J. S. Bresee, and N. J. Cox. Prevention and control of inﬂuenza with vaccines: Recommendations of the advisory
committee on immunization practices (ACIP). MMWR Recommendations and Reports, 59(RR-8):1–62, 2010.

Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
33
A. P. Galvani, T. C. Reluga, and G. B. Chapman. Long-standing inﬂuenza vaccination policy is in accord with in-
dividual self-interest but not with the utilitarian optimum. Proceedings of National Academy of Science, 104:
5692–5697, 2007.
P.-Y. Geoffard and T. Philipson. Disease eradication: Private versus public vaccination. American Economic Review,
87(1):222–230, 1997.
C. Gerdil. The annual production cycle for inﬂuenza vaccine. Vaccine, 21:1776–1779, 2003.
Government Accountability Ofﬁce. Flu vaccine: Recent supply shortages underscore ongoing challanges, 2005. Re-
trieved on June 1, 2009 fom http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d05177t.pdf.
Government Accountability Ofﬁce. Inﬂuenza vaccine: Issues related to production, distribution and public health
messages, 2008. Retrieved June 1, 2009 from http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d0827.pdf.
GOV.UK. National insurance, 2020. Retrieved January 19, 2020 from https://www.gov.uk/national-insurance.
J.
Hahne.
Vaccination
decisions:
Selﬁsh,
selﬂess,
or
both?
marketing
to
mixed
motives,
2013.
Retrieved
January
09,
2020
from
http://www.yalescientific.org/2013/02/
vaccination-decisions-selfish-selfless-or-both-marketing-to-mixed-motives/.
L. C. S. Hartgroves. Strategies for Inﬂuenza Vaccines. PhD thesis, Division of Investigative Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, Imperial College London, 2009.
A. N. Hill and I. M. Longini. The critical fraction for heterogenous epidemic models. Mathematical Biosciences, 181:
85–106, 2003.
A. R. Hinman. Financing vaccines in the 21st century: Recommendations from the national vaccine advisory commit-
tee. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 29(1):71–75, 2005.
Institute of Medicine.
Financing Vaccines in the 21st Century: Assuring Access and Availability.
The National
Academies Press, Washington D.C., 2004.
IRS. Topic no. 751 social security and medicare withholding rates, 2020. Retrieved January 19, 2020 from https:
//www.irs.gov/taxtopics/tc751.
M. C. Jansen and O. Y. Ozaltın. Note on Cournot competition under yield uncertainty. Manufacturing & Service
Operations Management, 19(2):305–308, 2017.
G. Katriel and L. Stone. Pandemic dynamics and the breakdown of herd immunity. PLoS ONE, 5(3), 03 2010.
N. Keohane and K. Petrie. Outcomes-based reimbursement of medicines. Technical report, The Social Market Foun-
dation, July 2017.
W. Koh and D. Paxson. Blockbuster antivirals and vaccines: Real options in a ﬂu pandemic. Working Paper, 2009.
H. Mamani, E. Adida, and D. Dey. Vaccine market coordination using subsidy. IIE Transactions on Healthcare
Systems Engineering, 2:78–96, 2012.
D.
Mangan.
‘Concerning’
drop
seen
in
the
number
of
older
adults
getting
ﬂu
vacci-
nations.
CNBC,
29
September
2016.
https://www.cnbc.com/2016/09/29/
concerning-drop-seen-in-the-number-of-older-adults-getting-flu-vaccinations.
html.
M. I. Meltzer, N. J. Cox, and K. Fukuda. The economic impact of pandemic inﬂuenza in the United States: Priorities
for intervention. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 5(5):659–671, 1999.

34
Arifo˘glu and Tang: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
NHS. Who should have the ﬂu vaccine?, 2020.
R. Nugent and F. Knaul. Fiscal Policies for Health Promotion and Disease Prevention, chapter 11. World Bank,
Washington, DC, 2nd edition, 2006.
P. Palese. Making better inﬂuenza virus vaccines? Emerging Infectious Diseases, 12(1):61–65, 2006.
M. Pauly. Improving vaccine supply and development: Who needs what? Health Affairs, 24(3):680–689, 2005.
T. Philipson. Economic Epidemiology and Infectious Diseases, volume 1, chapter 33, pages 1761–1799. Elsevier
Science B. V., 2000.
S. Rall. Overcoming inﬂuenza vaccine purchasing challenges. Pharmacy Purchasing and Products, 6(9):6–9, 2009.
T. C. Reluga, C. T. Bauch, and A. P. Galvani. Evolving public perceptions and stability in vaccine uptake. Mathemat-
ical Biosciences, 204:185–198, 2006.
C. A. Russell, T. C. Jones, I. G. Barr, N. J. Cox, R. J. Garten, V. Gregory, ..., and D. J. Smith. The global circulation
of seasonal inﬂuenza a (h3n2) viruses. Science, 320(5874):340–346, 2008.
L. Searing.
The big number: Millions of ﬂu vaccines will be offered this season.
Washington Post,
7
October
2018.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/health-science/
the-big-number-millions-of-flu-vaccines-will-be-offered-this-season/2018/
10/05/08b44b62-c7de-11e8-b1ed-1d2d65b86d0c_story.html.
E. Shim, G. B. Chapman, J. P. Townsend, and A. P. Galvani. The inﬂuence of altruism on inﬂuenza vaccination
decisions. Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 9(74):2234–2243, 2012.
S. Sinha, J. Dunning, and I. Wong.
The underappreciated burden of inﬂuenza amongst Canada’s older pop-
ulation and what we need to do about it.
Technical report, National Institute of Ageing, 2018.
Re-
trieved on January 22, 2020 from https://www.ryerson.ca/content/dam/nia/white-papers/
burden-of-influenza.pdf.
K. C. So and C. S. Tang. Modeling the impact of an outcome-oriented reimbursement policy on clinic, patients, and
pharmaceutical ﬁrms. Management Science, 46(7):875–892, 2000.
I. Spencer and J. Kennedy.
Review of the arrangements for the seasonal inﬂuenza programme in england.
Technical report, Department of Health & Social Care, 2007.
Retrieved on January 23, 2020 from
https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-of-health-and-social-care.
Y. Wolf, A. Nikolskaya, J. Cherry, C. Viboud, E. Koonin, and L. D.J. Projection of seasonal inﬂuenza severity from
sequence and serological data. PLOS Currents Inﬂuenza, 2010. Last modiﬁed: April 4, 2012.
D. Yamin and A. Gavious. Incentives’ effect in inﬂuenza vaccination policy. Management Science, 2013.

(Please, provide the mansucript number!)
Online Supplement:
A Two-sided Incentive Program for Coordinating the
Inﬂuenza Vaccine Supply Chain
A.
Deﬁnitions and Auxiliary Results
In this appendix, we make deﬁnitions and derive auxiliary results that help us to prove our main results in
the paper. To that end, we deﬁne
ϕ1 (x) = x
 u
 G(x)

−v
 G(x)

−(w + p),
(A.1)
ϕ2 (x,Qr) = x(u(Qr) −v (Qr)) −(w + p),
(A.2)
for Qr > 0 and x ∈[0, ¯x]. Certainly, xc
2(Qr) exists and is equal to ¯x·min{Qr,1} since G(x) = min{x/¯x,1}
for all x ≥0.
We use Lemma A.1 to characterize the demand in social optimum and equilibrium of the decentralized
supply chain.
LEMMA A.1. Deﬁne xzr ∈(0, ¯x] as in (5).
(i) There exists xd
1 ∈(xzr, ¯x) satisfying (12) (i.e., ϕ1 (xd
1) = 0) such that ϕ1 (x) < 0 if x < xd
1, and ϕ1 (x) >
0 if x > xd
1.
(ii) B(x) as given in (6) is strictly decreasing for x ≥xzr; and B(x) > 0 if x < xc
1, and B(x) < 0 if
x > xc
1, where xc
1 ∈[xzr, ¯x) satisﬁes (12).
(iii) xd
1 > xc
1, where xc
1 ∈[xzr, ¯x) and xd
1 ∈(xzr, ¯x), respectively, satisfy (7) and (12).
Proof of Lemma A.1: We prove each part of the lemma separately.
Part (i): By (A.1), we have ϕ1 (x) = −(w + p) < 0 for x ≤xzr by (1), and
dϕ1 (x)
dx
= u
 G(x)

−v
 G(x)

−G(x)
 u′  G(x)

−v′  G(x)

> 0
(A.3)
for x > xzr, where equality and inequality in (A.3) follow from G being uniform and Assumption 1(iv),
respectively. In addition, limx↑¯x ϕ1 (x) > 0 by Assumption 1(i) and (A.1). Then, by ϕ1 (x) = −(w + p) < 0
1

2
Author: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
for x ≤xzr and dϕ1 (x)/dx > 0 for x ∈(xzr, ¯x), this implies that there exists a unique xd
1 ∈(xzr, ¯x) that
satisﬁes (12) or ϕ1 (xd
1) = such that ϕ1 (x) < 0 if x < xd
1, and ϕ1 (x) > 0 if x > xd
1.
Part (ii): From (6), B (x) = p/¯x > 0 for x ≤xzr by (1), and limx↑¯x B (x) < 0 by Assumption 1(i). More-
over, by Assumption 1(iii) and (v), B (x) in (6) is decreasing in x for all x > xzr. Note that B (x) may be
discontinuous at x = xzr (i.e., limx↑x−
zr B (x) ̸= limx↓x+
zr B (x)) depending on the form of infection proba-
bilities. If limx↓x+
zr B (x) ≤0, then B(x) < 0 for all x > xzr since B(x) is decreasing for x > xzr. Thus,
when limx↓x+
zr B (x) ≤0, for xc
1 = xzr, B(x) > 0 if x < xc
1, and B(x) < 0 if x > xc
1. On the other hand, if
limx↓x+
zr B (x) > 0 there exists an ˇx ∈(xzr, ¯x) satisfying B (ˇx) = 0 such that B (x) is negative (or positive)
for all x ∈(ˇx, ¯x) (or x ∈(xzr, ˇx)). This, by B (x) = p/¯x > 0 for x ≤xzr and B (x) being decreasing in x
for x > xzr, implies that, when limx↓x+
zr B (x) > 0, for xc
1 = ˇx, B(x) > 0 if x < xc
1, and B(x) < 0 if x > xc
1.
Part (iii): From part (i), xd
1 ∈(xzr, ¯x). Thus, if xc
1 = xzr, i.e., limx↓x+
zr B (x) ≤0, then xc
1 < xd
1. Next, we
show that xc
1 < xd
1 if xc
1 = ˇx, i.e., limx↓x+
zr B (x) > 0. Note by (6) and (12) that
B
 xd
1

= 1
2G2  xd
1

u′  G
 xd
1

+ 1
2
 1 −G2  xd
1

v′  G
 xd
1

−w
¯x < 0
by Assumption 1(ii). Moreover, from the part (ii), B (x) is decreasing for all x ∈(xzr, ¯x] and B (xc
1) = 0
when xc
1 = ˇx. This implies that xc
1 < xd
1.
□
B.
Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1: We ﬁrst characterize the threshold infection cost that determines the socially-
optimal demand (i.e., x(c) (Qr)). Then, by using this threshold, we show that the socially-optimal demand
satisﬁes (7). By (4), we have
W (x,Qr) =



VH −pQr −¯x
2u(Qr) + ¯x
2 (1 + G(x))Qr (u(Qr) −v (Qr)),
if x < xc
2 (Qr)
VH −pG(x) −¯x
2G2 (x)u
 G(x)

−¯x
2 (1 −G2 (x))v
 G(x)

, if xc
2 (Qr) ≤x ≤¯x
for x ∈[0, ¯x] and Qr > 0, where xc
2 (Qr) is given by (11). Next, we ﬁnd x that maximizes the ex-post social
welfare W (x,Qr).
By (1), for x < xc
2 (Qr), the ex-post social welfare W (x,Qr) is increasing in x if Qr < G(xzr) = hzr
and it is constant in x if Qr ≥G(xzr). That is, for all Qr > 0, ex-post social welfare is non-decreasing in x
for x < xc
2 (Qr). Therefore, the threshold infection cost in the social optimum x(c) (Qr) cannot be less than
xc
2 (Qr). Now, we consider x ≥xc
2(Qr). Note that, for x ≥xc
2(Qr),
∂W (x,Qr)
∂x
= 1
¯x

p −¯xG(x)
 u
 G(x)

−v
 G(x)

+ ¯x
2

G2 (x)u′  G(x)

+
 1 −G2 (x)

v′  G(x)
i
= B (x)

Author: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
3
for Qr > 0 where B (x) is given by 6. By Lemma A.1(ii), B(x) > 0 for x < xc
1 and B(x) < 0 for x > xc
1,
where xc
1 is given by (8). Then, if xc
2(Qr) > xc
1, the ex-post social welfare W (x,Qr) is always decreasing
in x so that it is socially optimal to vaccinate all individuals with x ≥xc
2(Qr) (i.e., x(c)(Qr) = xc
2(Qr)).
However, if xc
2(Qr) ≤xc
1, the ex-post social welfare attains its maximum at x = xc
1 (i.e., increasing (de-
creasing) in x for ≥xc
2(Qr) ≤x ≤xc
1 (x > xc
1)) so that x(c)(Qr) = xc
2(Qr). Consequently, by using (11),
the socially-optimal demand is equal to G
 x(c) (Qr)

= min

Qr,G(xc
1)
 
.
□
Proof of Proposition 2: By Proposition 1 and using (9), the ﬁrst and second derivatives of W (c) (Q) are,
respectively, given by:
dW (c) (Q)
dQ
=
Z
G(xc
1)
Q
0
¯x[−B(xc
2(yQ)) · y]dF (y) −c,
d2W (c) (Q)
dQ2
= ¯xB(xc
1)G
2 (xc
1)
Q3
f
G(xc
1)
Q

+
Z
G(xc
1)
Q
0
¯xdB(xc
2(yQ))
dx
ydF (y) < 0,
for Q ≥0, where xc
2(Qr) is given by (11), and B (x) is given by (6). The inequality above follows from
B(xc
1) ≤0 and B(x) being decreasing in x > xc
1 (by Lemma A.1(ii)), and indicates that W (c) (Q) is concave
in Q. Note that
lim
Q↓0
dW (c) (Q)
dQ
> wµ −c > 0,
where the ﬁrst inequality follows from (6) by Assumption 1(i) and (ii), and the second inequality follows
from our assumption that wµ > c. Then by limQ↑∞dW (c) (Q)/dQ < 0 and W (c) (Q) being concave, it
follows that there exists a unique Q(c) ∈(0,∞) satisfying dW (c)  Q(c)
/dQ = 0, and Q(c) is the unique
maximizer of W (c) (Q).
□
Proof of Lemma 1: For any given realized production quantity, let ˜h be the vaccinated fraction in the
equilibrium. Suppose that an individual with infection cost ˆx ∈[0, ¯x] does not seek vaccination. Since
the individual with ˆx does not seek vaccination, we have ˆx(u(˜h) −v(˜h)) < w + p. For any x < ˆx, this
condition is satisﬁed and hence individuals with x < ˆx do not seek vaccination. Therefore, there exists a
thresholds x(d)(Qr) such that all individuals with x > x(d)(Qr) seek vaccinations while all individuals with
x < x(d)(Qr) do not.
□
Proof of Proposition 3: We prove each part of the proposition separately.
Part (i): First, we characterize the equilbrium demand. To that end, we deﬁne ψ (x,Qr) as the excess of
utility to the marginal individual with infection cost x when seeking vaccination over not seeking. It turns
out that
ψ (x,Qr) = x(u(h(x,Qr)) −v (h(x,Qr))) −(w + p)
for all Qr > 0, and x ∈[0, ¯x], where h satisﬁes (2). Note by (2) and Assumption 1(iv) that ψ (x,Qr) is
non-decreasing in x so that the threshold x(d)(Qr) that determines the equilibrium demand is the minimum

4
Author: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
x such that ψ (x,Qr) > 0 for any Qr > 0. (In cases such an x does not exist, the threshold is equal to ¯x and
nobody seeks vaccination.)
Using (11) and (2), ψ (x,Qr) becomes
ψ (x,Qr) =



ϕ2 (x,Qr), if x < xc
2 (Qr),
ϕ1 (x),
if xc
2 (Qr) ≤x ≤¯x,
(B.1)
for all Qr > 0, where ϕ1 and ϕ2 are given, respectively, by (A.1) and (A.2). Notice that ψ (x,Qr) is con-
tinuous in x for all Qr > 0 since ϕ1 and ϕ2 are both continuous in x, and ϕ1(xc
2(Qr)) = ϕ2(xc
2(Qr),Qr).
Now, consider two cases: xc
2 (Qr) ≤xd
1 and xc
2 (Qr) > xd
1, where xd
1 and xc
2(Qr) are, respectively, given by
(12) and (11).
Case 1 (xc
2 (Qr) ≤xd
1): In this case, by (B.1), ψ (x,Qr) = ϕ2 (x,Qr) for x < xc
2(Qr). Note by (A.1) and
(A.2) that limx↓0 ϕ2 (x,Qr) < 0 and limx↑xc
2(Qr) ϕ2 (x,Qr) = ϕ1 (xc
2 (Qr)) < 0, where the second inequality
follows from xc
2 (Qr) < xd
1 and ϕ1 (x) < 0 for all x < xd
1 (by Lemma A.1(i)). This, by ϕ2 being increasing
in x by (A.2), implies that ϕ2 (x,Qr) < 0 for x < xc
2(Qr). Thus, ψ (x,Qr) is negative for x ∈[0,xc
2 (Qr)).
Then, it remains to analyze the excess utility in ψ (x,Qr) for x ≥xc
2(Qr). By (B.1), ψ (x,Qr) = ϕ1 (x) for
x ∈[xc
2 (Qr), ¯x]. Then, by xc
2 (Qr) ≤xd
1 in this case and by Lemma A.1(i), it follows that ψ (x,Qr) > 0 if,
and only if, x > xd
1 (i.e., x(d) (Qr) is unique and equal to x(d)
1 ). Therefore, the equilibrium demand is equal
to G(xd
1) when xc
2 (Qr) ≤xd
1 (i.e., Qr ≥G(xd
1) by (11)).
Case 2 (xc
2 (Qr) > xd
1):
In this case, by (B.1), ψ (x,Qr) = ϕ1 (x) > 0 for all x ≥xc
2 (Qr) by
Lemma A.1(i). Thus, it remains to consider x < xc
2 (Qr) to characterize the threshold x(d) (Qr).
By (B.1), ψ (x,Qr) = ϕ2 (x,Qr) for all x < xc
2 (Qr) so that, by (A.2), limx↓0 ψ (x,Qr) < 0 and
limx↑xc
2(Qr) ψ (x,Qr) > 0, where the second inequality follows from the continuity of ψ (x,Qr) and
ϕ1 (x) > 0 for all x > xd
1 (by Lemma A.1(i)). This by ϕ2 (x,Qr) being increasing in x (by (A.2)) implies
that there exists xd
2 (Qr) ∈(0,xc
2 (Qr)) such that ψ (xd
2 (Qr),Qr) = ϕ2 (xd
2 (Qr),Qr) = 0, and ψ (x,Qr) is
negative (or positive) for x < xd
2 (Qr) (or x > xd
2 (Qr)), where xd
2 (Qr) is given by (13). Therefore, x(d) (Qr)
is unique and equal to xd
2 (Qr) so that the equilibrium demand is equal to G(xd
2 (Qr)) if xc
2 (Qr) > xd
1 (i.e.,
Qr < G(xd
1) by (11)).
Part (ii): From part (i), x(d) (Qr) is equal to xd
2 (Qr) ∈(0,xc
2 (Qr)) so that, by (11), G
 x(d) (Qr)

> Qr
for all Qr < G(xd
1), and x(d) (Qr) is equal to xd
1 ∈(xc
2 (Qr), ¯x) so that G
 x(d) (Qr)

< Qr for all Qr >
G(xd
1).
Part (iii): If Qr < G(xd
1), then G
 x(d) (Qr)

> Qr = G
 x(c) (Qr)

by part (ii) and Proposition 1 since
xc
1 < xd
1 by Lemma A.1(iii). Similarly, if Qr ≥G(xd
1), then G
 x(d) (Qr)

= G(xd
1) by Proposition 3(i)
and G
 x(c) (Qr)

= min

G(xc
1),Qr
 
≥G(xd
1) since xc
1 < xd
1 by Lemma A.1(iii). Thus, G
 x(d)(Qr)

>
G
 x(c)(Qr)

if, and only if, Qr < G(xd
1).
□

Author: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
5
Proof of Proposition 4: We prove each part of the proposition separately.
Part (i): By (15), the ﬁrst and second derivatives of π(d) (Q) are, respectively, given by:
dπ(d) (Q)
dQ
= w
Z
G(xd
1)
Q
0
ydF (y) −c,
d2π(d) (Q)
dQ2
= −wG
2 (xd
1)
Q3
f
G(xd
1)
Q

< 0,
for Q ≥0. Note that
lim
Q↓0
dπ(d) (Q)
dQ
= wµ −c > 0, and lim
Q↑∞
dπ(d) (Q)
dQ
= −c < 0,
where the ﬁrst inequality follows from our assumption that wµ > c. Then it follows that there exists a unique
Q(d) ∈(0,∞) satisfying dπ(d)  Q(d)
/dQ = 0 and Q(d) is the unique maximizer of π(d) (Q).
Part (ii): We prove this part by contradiction. Contrary to our claim, suppose that Q(d) ≥Q(c). By (6), we
have
c >
Z
G(xd
1)
Q(c)
0
¯x[−B
 xc
2
 yQ(c)
· y]dF (y) >
Z
G(xd
1)
Q(d)
0
wydF (y).
We get the ﬁrst inequality above by (10), and by xc
1 < xd
1 (by Lemma A.1(iii)) and B (x) < 0 for
x > xc
1 (by Lemma A.1(ii)). The last inequality follows from our supposition that Q(d) ≥Q(c) and
−¯xB
 xc
2
 G(xd
1)

> w (by (12), (6) and Lemma A.1(ii)). However, the ﬁnal result is a contradiction to
Proposition 4(i) and hence Q(d) < Q(c).
□
Proof of Lemma 2: For any Qr > 0, let ˜hI be the vaccinated fraction in the equilibrium under the incentive
program I = (r(Qr),T(Qr)). Assume that the individual with infection cost ˆx does not seek vaccination,
i.e., ˆx(u(˜hI) −v(˜hI)) + r(Qr) < w + p. Notice that for any x < ˆx,this condition is satisﬁed and hence
individuals with x < ˆx do not seek vaccination. This indicates that under the incentive program I, there is a
threshold x(I)(Qr) such that only individuals with infection cost x ≥x(I)(Qr) seek vaccination.
□
Proof of Proposition 5: We prove each claim in Proposition 5 separately.
Part (i): We deﬁne ψI (x,Qr) as the excess of utility under the incentive program to the marginal indi-
vidual with infection cost x, when seeking vaccination over not seeking. In addition, we let
τ (x,Qr) = x(u(h(x,Qr) −v(h(x,Qr))
(B.2)
for x ∈[0, ¯x] and Qr > 0, where h is given by (2). Then, by (18) and h(c)(Qr) = h(xc(Qr),Qr) =
G(xc(Qr)), the excess utility under the incentive program can be written as follows:
ψI (x,Qr) = τ (x,Qr) −τ
 x(c)(Qr),Qr

,
(B.3)
for all Qr > 0 and x ∈[0, ¯x], where x(c)(Qr) is given by (7). By using h(x,Qr) = min{G(x),Qr} from
(2), notice that, for any given Qr > 0, τ (x,Qr) as given in (B.2) is non-decreasing in x by Assumption

6
Author: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
1(ii) and (iv). By (B.3), this implies that ψI (x,Qr) is also non-decreasing in x so that the threshold that
determines the demand under the incentive program x(I)(Qr) for Qr > 0 is the minimum x, if any, such
that ψI (x,Qr) > 0. Next, we characterize this threshold x for all Qr > 0 (i.e., x(I)(Qr)).
By (B.3), ψI (x,Qr) = 0 at x = x(c)(Qr) which by ψI (x,Qr) being non-decreasing in x implies that
ψI (x,Qr) ≤0 for all x ≤x(c)(Qr). Therefore, the threshold x(I)(Qr) cannot be less than x(c)(Qr). Then,
it remains to consider x > x(c)(Qr). By (7) and (11), x(c) (Qr) = max{xc
1,xc
2 (Qr)} ≥max{xzr,xc
2 (Qr)},
where the inequality follows from xc
1 ≥xzr by Lemma A.1(ii). Then it follows from (1) and (2) that, for
x > x(c)(Qr) ≥max{xzr,xc
2 (Qr)}, h(x,Qr) < min{hzr,Qr} by (5) and (11). Then, for x > x(c)
2 (Qr),
h(x,Qr) = G(x) by (2) so that, by (B.2), τ (x,Qr) = x
 u(G(x)) −v(G(x))

is strictly increasing in x
by Assumption 1. By (B.3) and ψI (x,Qr) ≤0 for x ≤x(c)
2 (Qr), this implies that ψI (x,Qr) > 0 if, and
only if, x > x(c)
2 (Qr). Therefore, x(I)(Qr) = x(c)(Qr) for all Qr > 0 so that the demand under the incentive
program is always equal to the socially-optimal demand.
Part (ii): Recall from part (i) that h(c)(Qr) = h
 x(c) (Qr),Qr

= h
 x(I) (Qr),Qr

for all Qr ≥0. Then,
by (17), it turns out that
π(I) (Q) = EY

wh
 x(c) (Y Q),Y Q

+ T (Y Q)

−cQ,
for all Q ≥0. Using h
 x(c) (Qr),Qr

= min

G(xc
1),Qr
 
(by (7)) and (19), we obtain
dπ(I) (Q)
dQ
= −
Z
G(xc
1)
Q
0
¯x
2

(1 −yQ)
2 u′ (yQ) +

1 −(1 −yQ)
2
v′ (yQ)

ydF (y)
+
Z
G(xc
1)
Q
0
(¯x(1 −yQ)(u(yQ) −v (yQ)) −p)ydF (u) −c
=
Z
G(xc
1)
Q
0
¯x[−B (xc
2 (yQ)) · y]dF (y) −c
for all Q ≥0, where B (x) satisﬁes (6) and G(xc
2 (Qr)) = Qr for Qr < G(xc
1). By (10), B (x) being
decreasing in x for x > xzr and xc
1 > xzr (see Lemma A.1(ii) and (iii)), and xc
2 (Qr) being decreasing in Qr
(see (11)), this implies that π(I) (Q) is maximized at Q = Q(c).
□
Proof of Proposition 6: We prove each part of the proposition separately.
Part (i): We ﬁrst prove the existence of a positive K ≥K. From (23), we have
K = VH + π(d) −W (c)
= wEY

h
 x(d)  Y Q(d)
,Y Q(d)
+ pEY

h
 x(c)  Y Q(c)
,Y Q(c)
+ ¯x
2EY
h  1 −h
 x(c)  Y Q(c)
,Y Q(c)2  u
 h
 x(c)  Y Q(c)
,Y Q(c)
−v
 h
 x(c)  Y Q(c)
,Y Q(c)i
+ ¯x
2EY

v
 h
 x(c)  Y Q(c)
,Y Q(c)
+ c
 Q(c) −Q(d)
> 0

Author: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
7
since Q(c) > Q(d) by Proposition 4.
Next, we prove that the manufacturer’s proﬁt is higher under the incentive program with K ≥K. By (17)
and Proposition 5, the expected proﬁt of the manufacturer under the incentive program is equal to
π(I) = EY

wh
 x(c)  Y Q(c)
,Y Q(c)
+ T
 Y Q(c)
−cQ(c) = W (c) + K −VH ≥π(d)
for K ≥K, where the second equality follows from (9) and (19), and the inequality follows from K ≥K =
VH + π(d) −W (c). As a result, the manufacturer is not worse off ex ante.
Part (ii): In this part, we show that the expected total utility of all individuals under the incentive program
with any K, the expected total utility of all individuals is high compared to the case of no incentive if
Kbn < K. The expected total utility of all individuals in the equilibrium of decentralized supply chain is
equal to W (d) −π(d). On the other hand, for any K, the expected total utility of all individuals under the
incentive program with transfer payments (18)-(19) is equal to
W (c) + EY
 r
 Y Q(c)
−w

h(c)  Y Q(c)
+ cQ(c) = VH −Kbn,
(B.4)
where the equality follows from (9) and (18). Note by (22) that if Kbn < K, the expected total utility
of all individuals under the incentive program is greater than that in the decentralized supply chain, i.e.,
VH −Kbn ≥W (d) −π(d).
Part (iii): In this part, we show that the incentive program with K = Kbn in (24) is ex-ante budget-neutral.
By (21), expected total cost of subsidies to the manufacturer and vaccinated individuals with K = Kbn is
given by:
EY

S(I)(Y Q(c))

= Kbn −EY
h ¯x
2((1 −(h(c)  Y Q(c)
)2)u(h(c)  Y Q(c)
)
+(h(c)  Y Q(c)
)2v(h(c)  Y Q(c)
))

= 0,
where the second equality follows from (24).
□
Proof of Proposition 7: By (21), under the incentive program I = (t,r(Qr),T(Qr)) with t = K −Kbn,
and (r(Qr),T(Qr)) given in (18) and (19), the expected total cost due to subsidies to the manufacturer
and vaccinated individuals is equal to EY

S(I)(Y Q(c))

= K −Kbn. Note that for t = K −Kbn, total tax
collected ex ante is equal to the expected total cost due to subsidies to the manufacturer and individuals,
i.e., t = EY

S(I)(Y Q(c))

. Hence, the incentive program with t = K −Kbn is ex-ante budget-neutral.
We now prove three parts of the proposition. Note that, under the incentive program with or without
the tax t, the transfer payment is the same and given by (19). Then, it follows from part (i) in the proof
of Proposition 6 that the manufacturer’s proﬁt under the modiﬁed incentive program is equal to π(I) =
W (c) + K −VH so that part (ii) of Proposition 7 follows from Proposition 6. In addition, the expected total

8
Author: Coordinating the Flu Vaccine Supply Chain
utility of all individuals under the incentive program I = (t,r(Qr),T(Qr)) with t = K −Kbn and transfer
payments (18)-(19) is equal to
W (c) −K + Kbn + EY
 r
 Y Q(c)
−w

h(c)  Y Q(c)
+ cQ(c) = VH −K,
(B.5)
where the equality follows from (9) and (18). Thus, part (i) of the proposition follows. This, by (22), implies
that if K < K, the expected total utility of all individuals under the incentive program is greater than that in
thedecentralized supply chain, i.e., VH −K ≥W (d) −π(d).
□