TITLE: Dynamic Procurement of New Products with Covariate Information: The Residual Tree Method
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2018
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2018.0725
---

LBS Research Online
G-Y Ban, J Gallien and A Mersereau
Dynamic Procurement of New Products with Covariate Information: The Residual Tree Method
Article
This version is available in the LBS Research Online repository: https://lbsresearch.london.edu/
id/eprint/973/
Ban, G-Y, Gallien, J and Mersereau, A
(2019)
Dynamic Procurement of New Products with Covariate Information: The Residual Tree Method.
Manufacturing and Service Operations Management, 21 (4). pp. 798-815. ISSN 1523-4614
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2018.0725
INFORMS (Institute for Operations Research and Management Sciences)
https://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/10.1287/msom.20...
Users may download and/or print one copy of any article(s) in LBS Research Online for purposes of
research and/or private study. Further distribution of the material, or use for any commercial gain, is
not permitted.

Dynamic Procurement of New Products with Covariate
Information: The Residual Tree Method
Gah-Yi Ban
London Business School, Regent’s Park, London, NW1 4SA, United Kingdom.
gban@london.edu
Jérémie Gallien
London Business School, Regent’s Park, London, NW1 4SA, United Kingdom.
jgallien@london.edu
Adam Mersereau
Kenan-Flagler Business School, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA.
ajm@unc.edu
Problem deﬁnition: We study the practice-motivated problem of dynamically procuring a new, short
life-cycle product under demand uncertainty. The ﬁrm does not know the demand for the new product but
has data on similar products sold in the past, including demand histories and covariate information such as
product characteristics.
Academic/practical relevance: The dynamic procurement problem has long attracted academic and
practitioner interest, and we solve it in an innovative data-driven way with proven theoretical guarantees.
This work is also the ﬁrst to leverage the power of covariate data in solving this problem.
Methodology: We propose a new, combined forecasting and optimization algorithm called the Residual Tree
method, and analyze its performance via epi-convergence theory and computations. Our method generalizes
the classical Scenario Tree method by using covariates to link historical data on similar products to construct
demand forecasts for the new product.
Results: We prove, under fairly mild conditions, that the Residual Tree method is asymptotically optimal as
the size of the data set grows. We also numerically validate the method for problem instances derived using
data from the global fashion retailer Zara. We ﬁnd that ignoring covariate information leads to systematic
bias in the optimal solution, translating to a 6–15% increase in the total cost for the problem instances under
study. We also ﬁnd that solutions based on trees using just 2–3 branches per node, which is common in the
existing literature, are inadequate, resulting in 30–66% higher total costs compared with our best solution.
Managerial implications: The Residual Tree is a new and generalizable approach that uses past data on
similar products to manage new product inventories. We also quantify the value of covariate information
and of granular demand modeling.
Key words : new product, inventory management, data-driven operations, Scenario Tree method, Residual
Tree method, demand uncertainty
History : Original: February 24, 2017. This version: March 28, 2018
1

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
2
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
1.
Introduction
Matching supply with demand is a critical challenge for retailers selling short life cycle products
in markets with fast-changing demand trends, such as fashion apparel and consumer electronics.
In response, retailers and academics have considered speciﬁc operational strategies, such as quick
response and fast fashion, for facilitating this matching. Such strategies make use of many levers at
the ﬁrm’s disposal, including product design (e.g., component commonality), forecasting and mar-
ket tests (e.g., early order incentives), manufacturing locations (e.g., on-shoring and near-shoring),
manufacturing sequencing (e.g., delayed diﬀerentiation), pricing (e.g., clearance or in-season mark-
downs), and logistics (Fisher et al. 2001).
Another recognized strategy involves the dynamic allocation of demand with diﬀerent levels of
uncertainty to manufacturing facilities characterized by diﬀerent lead times and costs. The key idea
is to selectively use fast and expensive supply sources after having acquired as much information as
possible about products with high initial demand uncertainty (risk-based supply portfolio strategy;
see Fisher and Raman 1996) or to supply the portion of demand that is associated with more
uncertainty (base/surge demand strategy; Allon and Van Mieghem 2010).
This paper is motivated by our interaction with the Spain-based apparel retailer Zara, which
has implemented such a procurement segmentation approach in its supply chain. Speciﬁcally, Zara
typically purchases some initial quantity of a new product from China several months before the
season, but depending on sales during the season it can subsequently place one of several in-season
replenishment orders for the same product from more expensive but closer vendors located in places
like Turkey or Portugal (Patel 2012). A key related challenge reported to us by Zara managers is
the related decision complexity. For example, it was often unclear to them exactly how much of a
given article should initially be ordered from China as a function of the diﬀerent costs and lead
times associated with all capable suppliers worldwide and of the anticipated decrease in forecast
uncertainty once the selling season starts.
The second and third authors of this paper have been helping Zara adapt existing stochastic
programming approaches to address this dynamic procurement challenge and to implement this
work as part of the industrial decision support system shown in Figure 1. This system is designed
for use by a fashion buyer charged with making procurement decisions for a new product. It includes
tools for the buyer to visualize and edit the demand forecasts (line chart in Figure 1) and to see,
edit, and optimize the procurement plan (bar chart and the right-hand-side table in Figure 1). Field
testing of this system with Zara buyers has revealed additional critical challenges, however. Firstly,
the system currently relies on Zara’s legacy process for forecasting demand of new products, which

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
3
requires a selection by the user of several past articles from previous seasons deemed “comparable”
to the new one under consideration. As buyers realized that this choice of prior comparable articles
was a subjective one often having a substantial impact on purchasing recommendations, they started
asking for automated suggestions of which comparable articles to use. Secondly, the system currently
relies on an ad hoc model of demand learning dynamics which requires time and expertise to estimate
and maintain. For this reason, the learning model is shared by all articles within the same product
subfamily (e.g., women’s shirts), which for Zara can comprise a relatively large set of products. As a
result, a relatively well-understood article similar to ones sold in previous seasons, and thus having
little demand uncertainty, could get the same recommended initial purchase quantity from China
as a fashion-forward and untested article for which much demand uncertainty is resolved after the
ﬁrst weeks of sales are observed. This results in suboptimal decisions; for example, the beneﬁts of
a second purchase from Turkey or Portugal are lower for the well-understood garment than for the
fashion-forward one so that, all else being equal, the well-understood garment should have a larger
initial purchase quantity from China.
The present study lays the foundations for addressing these challenges as part of a more data-
driven, accurate and automated version of the existing decision support system shown in Figure 1.
Although we hope to help Zara implement such an enhanced system in the future as part of our on-
going relationship with the ﬁrm, we believe that the relevance of this foundation work extends much
beyond Zara. Speciﬁcally, this paper presents, analyzes and tests a practice-oriented, generalizable
and tractable data-driven computational method for optimizing the procurement of a new, short life
cycle product from multiple sources over time. As there is no historical data for a new product, the
key to our solution is the use of covariate (also known as feature/attribute/predictor) information
to link the new product to similar products that were sold in the past. Relevant product covariates
for apparel articles may include the procurement cost, retail price, colour, item type (e.g., sweater,
t-shirt, etc.), fabric, design style (e.g., sporty, classic), expert predictions of the product’s popularity,
etc. We refer to covariates tied to product attributes that do not change over time as “static.” Our
approach can also account for “dynamic” covariates—e.g., lagged demand observations included to
naturally account for demand auto-correlations. Importantly, covariates are essential for accounting
for product heterogeneity by providing a means for aligning demand observations across diﬀerent
products. This allows us to construct a large number of estimated demand trajectories relevant to
the new product, which we can then use in a scenario-based model of forecast updating dynamics.
Our method employs a new approach which we call the Residual Tree method, which can be
used to solve general multi-stage stochastic programs where there is no information about the

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
4
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
underlying uncertainty, but there are data on historical data trajectories of other stochastic processes
related through covariate information. The Residual Tree method extends the classical Scenario
Tree method of stochastic programming (see Shapiro et al. 2009), which relies on scenario samples
from the underlying stochastic process of interest (in our case, demand for the new product). In
contrast, our approach replaces these scenario paths with “residual paths”, composed of residuals
from a regression model relating the uncertainty in question and the available covariate information.
We show that our Residual Tree method can solve, to an arbitrary accuracy, a generic version of
the dynamic procurement problem by following three steps: (i) a least-squares or lasso regression
providing demand forecasts capturing the covariate information; (ii) binning of output residuals for
improved computational eﬃciency; and (iii) solving a large linear program in which the new product
demand is approximated by the binned residual paths. We prove, under natural assumptions, the
method just described is asymptotically optimal as the number of similar products increases.
Lastly, we numerically validate the Residual Tree method on stylized problems based on data
provided by Zara. The numerical results are promising in that the Residual Tree method ﬁnds
solutions quickly that have near-optimal ﬁnite-sample performance. Our numerical results further
show the importance of covariate information. For example, we ﬁnd that ignoring static covariates
results in out-of-sample cost increases on the order of 6-15%, with statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%
level in a four-period problem. We also ﬁnd that considering just 2–3 branches per node for the
dynamic procurement problem, as is the case in much of the literature to date, is too simplistic
and may result in solutions that underperform substantially, with additional costs of 30 −66% of
the optimal total cost compared with our solution with 10 branches per node, also with statistical
signiﬁcance at the 1% level.
Our approach integrates regression with multi-stage stochastic programming in a way that is
intuitive while retaining desirable theoretical properties such as asymptotic optimality. The approach
is practical in the sense that the main input is data a retailer is likely to have. While we assume
a linear relationship between a product’s demand and relevant covariates, we do not impose any
distributional assumptions on the residuals. We believe this work is the ﬁrst to leverage the power
of covariate information in multi-stage procurement optimization.
We discuss the related literature and our contributions in Section 2, the optimization model in
Section 3, our proposed solution approach in Section 4, asymptotic optimality results in Section 5,
and numerical experiments in Section 6. We conclude in Section 7. The proofs of all mathematical
results are placed in the online Appendix. Some of the data presented in this paper have been
disguised to protect its conﬁdentiality, and we emphasize that the views presented in this paper do
not necessarily represent those of the Inditex Group.

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
5
Figure 1: Graphical user interface component used by Zara as part of a decision support system
adapted to the dynamic procurement problem in its environment.
2.
Literature Review
This paper relates to the literature on production/inventory systems investigating how one or mul-
tiple supply sources should be used when demand forecast updates become available over a ﬁnite
time horizon. As discussed in the recent survey by Serel (2016), these feature a variety of model-
ing approaches, including multi-period extensions of the newsvendor model (Lau and Lau 1996),
Bayesian updating (Eppen and Iyer 1997, Burnetas and Gilbert 2001), the martingale model of
forecast evolution (Iida and Zipkin 2006, Lu et al. 2006, Wang et al. 2012) and the forecast band
reﬁnement model (Kaminsky and Swaminathan 2001, 2004). Within this body of work, our paper
is closest to the practice-oriented studies motivated by collaboration with industry, such as Fisher
and Raman (1996), Fisher et al. (2001), Jones et al. (2001) and Peng et al. (2012). We also highlight
Escudero et al. (1993) and Higle and Kempf (2011), which propose computational approaches based
on stochastic programming to address production/inventory problems with demand uncertainty. Fi-
nally, our work is closely related to Agrawal et al. (2002), which is a practice-based study reporting
the use of stochastic programming to address a dynamic procurement problem arising in a retail
environment. In contrast to all papers above, our approach is data-driven, captures a potentially
large amount of covariate information, and is justiﬁed by an asymptotic optimality result.
This paper also contributes to the growing literature on data-driven approaches to operations
management challenges, which seeks to inform operational decisions using available historical data

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
6
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
and minimal distributional assumptions. There are now many studies on data-driven inventory
management (e.g. Burnetas and Smith 2000, Huh and Rusmevichientong 2009, Kunnumkal and
Topaloglu 2008, Godfrey and Powell 2001, Levi et al. 2007, Levi et al. 2015, Ban and Rudin (2018),
Ban 2018 and references therein). A number of recent studies are further motivated by the avail-
ability of large data sets that contain covariate data (also referred to as features, characteristics,
attributes or explanatory variables), as is this paper. These include Ban and Rudin (2018), Ferreira
et al. (2015), Chen et al. (2015), Cohen et al. (2016), Qiang and Bayati (2016), Hu et al. (2016), Ban
and Keskin (2017) and Baardman et al. (2017). Our work is distinct from the data-driven operations
management literature just discussed, which considers covariate information for single-period opti-
mization problems only. In contrast, we focus on the dynamic procurement problem, which requires
analyzing a more complex multi-stage stochastic program.
From a methodological standpoint, our Residual Tree method adds to the literature on Scenario
Tree methods for solving multi-stage stochastic programs. We refer the reader to Dupačová et al.
(2000) for a review up to 2000, and Pennanen and Koivu (2002), Dupačová et al. (2003), Heitsch
and Römisch (2003), Casey and Sen (2005), Pﬂug and Hochreiter (2003) and Rios et al. (2015)
for more recent developments. In the classical Scenario Tree method, knowledge of the distribution
of the underlying stochastic process is assumed, enabling the decision-maker to simulate arbitrary
quantities of data from it. In contrast, our Residual Tree method is intended to be used when the
decision-maker does not know the distribution of the underlying stochastic process of interest, but
instead has ﬁnite observations of other stochastic processes that are related to the one in question
through covariate information. In this sense the Residual Tree method is a covariate data-driven
generalization of the classical Scenario Tree approach. Our proof of asymptotical optimality relies
on the epi-convergence theory of Pennanen (2005) and Pennanen (2009) developed for classical
Scenario Tree methods. We note that our proof must show that both discretization error (which also
arises in the classical Scenario Tree method) and estimation error (which arises from our regression
modeling of the data) vanish, and is therefore a nontrivial extension of past work.
Methodologically, the most closely related paper to ours is Rios et al. (2015), who use functional
regression based on historical data to estimate a stochastic model of electricity demand, then use
their model to generate scenarios for a Scenario Tree formulation of an electricity generation problem.
There are a few key diﬀerences with our paper. First, Rios et al. (2015) assume limited data on
the process of interest along with some temporal covariates (that are revealed over time) compared
with our assumptions of no data on the process of interest and the existence of both static and
temporal covariates. Second, our approach directly constructs demand scenarios from regression

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
7
residuals, whereas theirs ﬁrst ﬁts distributions to residuals and then samples from the distributions.
Thirdly, Rios et al. (2015) does not include any theoretical guarantees, whereas we prove asymptotic
optimality of our method.
Figure 2: Timeline of events.
3.
Model
We formulate our dynamic procurement problem in two steps. We ﬁrst describe our assumed demand
process and connect it to data that is likely to be available to a fashion retailer. We then formulate
the stochastic optimization problem.
3.1.
Demand Model and Description of Existing Data
Stochastic demand for a new product arrives in every period, described by a random vector {D0t}T
t=1
deﬁned on the probability space (Ξ0,F 0,P0), where each D0t : Ξ0t →R+, 1 ≤t ≤T is a random
variable on P0t, and P0 = P01 × ... × P0T is the product measure. (We use the index 0 to refer to
the new, focal product; data from n other, historical products will be indexed by k = 1,...,n.) Note
the demands up to time t induce a natural ﬁltration F0t = σ({D−1
0s (A) : 1 ≤s ≤t,A ∈Ω}) on F 0.
We assume that the demand D0t linearly depends on a mt-dimensional random covariate vector
X0t, where each element may consist of product features such as price, color and style code, as well
as time-series factors such as seasonality and past demands. Note the subscript t in mt is used to
allow for the number of covariates to diﬀer across periods. In other words, we assume the random
demand D0t for our focal product in period t is given by:
D0t|(X0t = x0t) = αt + β⊤
t x0t + εt,
(1)
where αt ∈R is a scalar intercept coeﬃcient, βt ∈Rmt is a vector of model coeﬃcients, x0t ∈Rmt is
a vector of mt realized covariates at time t, and εt is the random error described shortly.

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
8
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
Since the product is new, the coeﬃcients αt and βt and some components of x0t (e.g. past demands
d0(t−1) if there are time-series dependencies) are unknown to the ﬁrm. However, in our problem
setting the ﬁrm has access to a large amount of data on similar products sold in the past, using
which it can forecast the demand for the new product. We now describe the demand model which
makes this cross-learning possible.
Assume the following demand model for the family of n + 1 products (the focal product 0 plus n
other similar products sold in the past):
Dkt|Xkt = αt + β⊤
t Xkt + εt, k = 0,1,...,n,
(2)
where αt, βt and εt are as in (1), and for each k = 0,...,n, Xkt is an independent mt-dimensional
random covariate vector with a common distribution PXt, where we use the notation Xt to denote the
generic random covariate vector. The random errors εt, t = 1,...,T are assumed to be independent
across time and of the feature vectors Xkt, k = 0,...,n and t = 1,...,T. They are also assumed to be
drawn independently from a (common) continuous distribution with strictly increasing cumulative
distribution function Fεt (i.e., an inverse cdf exists), with mean zero and variance σ2
t , for each
t = 1,...,T. Finally, we assume that E[XtX
⊤
t ], where Xt := [X1t,...,Xnt], exists and is a symmetric
positive deﬁnite matrix.
As for the data, we assume the ﬁrm has a database of past demands and covariates of n similar
products sold in the past, D = {(xk1,dk1)n
k=1,...,(xkT,dkT)n
k=1}, drawn from the demand model (2).
We assume that n−1 Pn
k=1 XtX
⊤
t are ﬁnite symmetric positive deﬁnite matrices. At the beginning of
the selling season, the ﬁrm also has the covariates for the new product, [ˆx01,..., ˆx0T], where we use
theˆnotation to highlight the fact that some non-static elements of the covariate vector (e.g. past
demands, weather or economic indicators) may be estimates of values to be revealed later (as the
season unfolds, the ﬁrm will observe X0t = x0t, t = 2,...,T). (Note that if the demand only depends
on static, product-characteristic covariates, then ˆx0t = x0t for all t = 1,...,T.)
As an example, if the new product 0 were of a particular t-shirt design, the database D would
include the demand histories for other t-shirt products oﬀered last season. For any product k =
0,1,...,n and any time period t, the feature vector xkt could include numerical representations of
t-shirt k’s color, fabric, and design; the historical demand strength of t-shirts during the time of
year represented by period t; and the observed demand for t-shirt k in period t−1. We remark that
in describing the database D we are not distinguishing between observed sales and demand.
Comments on the demand model (2) and the available data

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
9
1. Linearity. The linear demand model (2) is a widely-used and useful model that can arbitrarily
approximate nonlinear models and is general enough to subsume many time-series models (e.g.
autoregressive and martingale models such as the Martingale Model of Forecast Evolution
(MMFE) of Heath and Jackson 1994 and Graves et al. 1986). We refer the readers to Ban and
Rudin (2018) for details on how smooth nonlinear models can be approximated by linear ones
through Taylor expansions and enlargement of the covariate dimension, and on how time-series
models and MMFE models can be captured by the linear demand model.
2. Assumptions on the residual error εt. As the residual error is not product-dependent, the un-
derlying assumption is that the demands for products within the same product family have the
same distribution once adjusted for their means. For example, the demands for two diﬀerent
t-shirt designs both being normally distributed with the same variance but diﬀerent means
would satisfy the assumptions of our model. Thus the assumption of a common error distribu-
tion at each time t = 1,...,T allows for cross-learning of the product demands. We believe this
is a reasonable assumption, since all eﬀects due to other factors are meant to be captured by
the linear demand model, leaving a noise term with a common distribution across products.
3. Assumptions on the design matrix Xt. The assumptions on E[XtX
⊤
t ] and its empirical coun-
terpart n−1 Pn
k=1 XtX
⊤
t are standard requirements for least-squares regression estimation to be
possible. Violation of the assumptions (i.e. the matrices are not positive deﬁnite) implies the
existence of redundant covariate dimension(s), and this can be dealt with by removing the
problematic dimension(s) from consideration.
4. Data-driven learning. The inclusion of an arbitrary selection of covariates realized over time, in-
cluding past demand observations, enables the learning component of our model. This learning
would typically be reﬂected by an estimated positive correlation structure between the initial
observations of weekly sales and sales subsequently predicted, and/or by an estimated decreas-
ing variance pattern for the random error term εt over time. While a variety of alternative de-
mand learning models have been used in past studies of related dynamic production/inventory
problems (e.g., the Bayesian model in Burnetas and Gilbert 2001, the MMFE in Wang et al.
2012, the band reﬁnement model in Kaminsky and Swaminathan 2001, 2004), we emphasize
that our approach is data-driven. That is, the starting point assumed for the demand model
(2), the combined estimation and optimization method to be presented in Section 4 and the
related asymptotic optimality theory to be developed in Section 5 is a data set of historical
observations, as opposed to exogenously given distributional knowledge.

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
10
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
3.2.
Optimization Problem Formulation
We model the management of a single new product over a ﬁnite, T-period time horizon indexed
in the forward direction by t = 1,...,T. In each period t, the ﬁrm may order some quantity of
the product from a vendor chosen from a set S of potential suppliers, letting S = |S|. Orders from
supplier j placed in period t then arrive after a deterministic lead time ℓj at a cost of ctj.
The ﬁrm has initial inventory I0. Any unmet demand is assumed lost, incurring opportunity costs
of bt per unit. The ﬁrm also incurs a holding cost of ht per unit for inventory held at the end of
periods t = 1,...,T −1. At the end of the horizon, any remaining units of inventory are salvaged,
generating revenue v per unit. We assume ht > 0 and bt ≥bt+1 for all t = 1,...,T and bT > v. The
assumption bt ≥bt+1 is justiﬁed because retail prices, and hence stockout opportunity costs, typically
decrease in time. The condition bT > v precludes giving the retailer an incentive to withhold stock
from customers in period T in order to make more money in salvage.
Figure 2 illustrates the sequence of events within a period. Orders are chosen and placed with
the covariate vector ˆx0t, but before past orders arrive and the new demand D0t is observed; note
this timeline allows for orders from suppliers with zero lead time to arrive in the same period the
order is placed. Let qtj denote the quantity ordered in period t from supplier j. We have qtj ∈Qtj,
where Qtj is a bounded subset of R+. We require qtj ∈F0t, i.e. adapted to the natural ﬁltration of
the demand process up to time t.
The multi-stage stochastic procurement problem we wish to solve is thus:
min
qtj,It,lt
1≤t≤T,1≤j≤S
E
"T −1
X
t=1
htIt +
T
X
t=1
btlt +
T
X
t=1
S
X
j=1
ctjqtj −vIT
#
(PP)
s.t.
qtj ∈F0t,
∀1 ≤t ≤T,
∀1 ≤j ≤S,
(PPa)
It =



It−1 +
X
j∈S
X
1≤τ≤t−1:
τ=t−ℓj
qτj −D0t




+
,
∀1 ≤t ≤T
(PPb)
lt =



D0,t −It−1 −
X
j∈S
X
1≤τ≤t:
τ=t−ℓj
qτj




+
,
∀1 ≤t ≤T
(PPc)
qtj ∈Qtj,
∀1 ≤t ≤T,
∀1 ≤j ≤S
(PPd)
It ≥0, lt ≥0,
∀1 ≤t ≤T,
(PPe)

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
11
where PP is short for “procurement problem” and the expectation is taken over the measure induced
by {D01,...,D0T}. Note P
1≤τ≤t:
τ=t−ℓj
qτj denotes the total order quantity arriving from supplier j during
period t, lt the lost sales incurred during period t and It the inventory on-hand at the end of time t.
The constraint (PPa) is a requirement that decisions are adapted to the history, (PPb) captures the
inventory dynamics, (PPc) captures the lost sales dynamics and (PPd)–(PPe) deﬁne the domains
of the decision variables. Note constraints (PPb) and (PPc) apply almost surely. We assume the
parameters of problem (PP) are such that it is feasible and thus at least one optimal solution exists.
Denote the solution to (PP) by (q∗,I∗,l∗), where q∗= [q∗
t1,...,q∗
tS]T
t=1, I∗= [I∗
1,...,I∗
T] and
l∗= [l∗
1,...,l∗
T]. Denoting the available information at the beginning of period t by Ht :=
{I0,...,I(t−1),l0,...,l(t−1),x01,...,x0t,[q∗
τ1,...,q∗
τS](t−1)
τ=1 }, we note that q∗
tj, j = 1,...,S, I∗
t and l∗
t
are policies (functions) that map Ht to the reals. Finally, we note I0, the initial inventory on-hand,
is a constant assumed given.
Some features of optimization formulation (PP) are motivated by considerations in Zara’s envi-
ronment. We allow for an arbitrary number of supply options with diﬀering lead times, in keeping
with the number and diversity of the vendors and shipping options available to Zara. While lead-
times are assumed to be deterministic for tractability reasons, we understand the typical variability
of vendor delivery times to be lower than, or at worst comparable to, our intended planning period
of one week. We also emphasize that the assumption of boundedness imposed on sets Qtj allows us
to capture realistic supply constraints and cost structures such as limited vendor capacity, minimum
order quantities, and quantity discount schemes. Finally, the assumed lost sales dynamics align
with Zara’s observations of typical customer behaviors when confronted with stock-outs of fashion
products. While these lost sales dynamics can present speciﬁc tractability challenges (Zipkin 2008),
the following proposition establishes that the inventory and lost sales constraints (PPb)-(PPc) in
(PP) have equivalent linear expressions in this case.
Proposition 1. The multi-stage stochastic program (PP) is equivalent to the following problem,
in that the optimal solution(s) and the optimal objective values coincide:
min
qtj,It,lt
1≤t≤T,1≤j≤S
E
"T −1
X
t=1
htIt +
T
X
t=1
btlt +
T
X
t=1
S
X
j=1
ctjqtj −vIT
#
(PP2)
s.t.
qtj ∈F0t,
∀1 ≤t ≤T,
∀1 ≤j ≤S,
(PP2a)
It = It−1 + lt +
X
j∈S
X
1≤τ≤t−1:
τ=t−ℓj
qτj −D0t,
∀1 ≤t ≤T.
(PP2b)

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
12
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
qtj ∈Qtj,
∀1 ≤t ≤T,
∀1 ≤j ≤S
(PP2c)
It ≥0, lt ≥0,
∀1 ≤t ≤T.
(PP2d)
4.
Solution Approach: the Residual Tree Method
A standard numerical approach to solving multi-stage stochastic programs such as (PP2) is to model
the uncertainty using Scenario Trees that directly represent the evolution of the key uncertainty
drivers such as the demand. Such an approach would be justiﬁed for (PP2) if the decision-maker
(DM) had suﬃciently many iid observations of the demand process, or, if the DM knew the dis-
tributions of the underlying demand process (from which s/he could simulate an arbitrarily many
observations of iid demand trajectories). Clearly, neither situation is applicable to our problem of
procuring a product that has never been sold before, thus the Scenario Tree method (which is a
well-known and studied technique in stochastic programming; see the references in the literature
review for the latest on this method) is not applicable in our setting.
To solve Zara’s procurement problem (PP2), we thus develop a new method, called the Residual
Tree method, which circumvents the lack of direct demand observations for the new product by using
historical data on similar items sold in the past. While the DM could use the demand data on similar
products to construct a Scenario Tree directly, this would yield decisions that are systematically
biased, due to diﬀerences in the products. Instead, the Residual Tree method employs a two-step
approach whereby in the ﬁrst step, least-squares (or lasso) regression is carried out to not only
learn the parameters of the demand model (2), but also to construct artiﬁcial demand data for the
never-before sold new product using the residuals from the regression. The second step solves an
approximated version of (PP2) using the constructed data set.
We present two versions of the Residual Tree method to estimate the solution of (PP2), (q∗,I∗,l∗).
The ﬁrst version (presented in Section 4.2) is to be used when the number of features, mt, is
small relative to n (perhaps identiﬁed through a prior feature-selection step). The second version
(presented in Appendix B) is designed for situations when mt is large, possibly much larger than n,
and only a subset of the features have a non-negligible role in the demand model (2). In Section 5
we prove the asymptotic optimality of both versions of our approach. For comparison, we ﬁrst
present the standard Scenario Tree approach to solving (PP2) under the hypothetical assumption
that demand observations for the new product were available.

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
13
Figure 3: A schematic of the Residual Tree, when there is no serial correlation in the demand
(otherwise, the second-stage residuals depend on the ﬁrst-stage residuals) (left plot). A schematic
of histogram binning to reduce the size of the Residual Tree, where twelve residual scenarios are
reduced to six. Note that the distribution of the residuals need not be normal, and the bell-curve
in the schematic is for illustrative purposes only (right plot).
4.1.
Scenario Tree Algorithm
In the hypothetical situation where the DM had K observations of the demand path for the new
product, {dk
01,...,dk
0T}K
k=1, a textbook Scenario Tree approach to the problem (PP2) is to solve the
following approximation:
min
qk
tj,Ik
t ,lk
t
1≤t≤T,1≤j≤S,1≤k≤K
1
K
K
X
k=1
"T −1
X
t=1
htIk
t +
T
X
t=1
btlk
t +
T
X
t=1
S
X
j=1
ctjqk
tj −vIk
T
#
(SC)
s.t. ∀1 ≤k ≤K & ∀1 ≤t ≤T :
qk
tj = qℓ
tj
∀k,ℓwith same demand path up to t −1, ∀1 ≤j ≤S,
(SCa)
Ik
t = Ik
t−1 + lk
t +
X
j∈S
X
1≤τ≤t−1:
τ=t−ℓj
qτj −dk
0t,
(SCb)
qk
tj ∈Qtj
∀1 ≤j ≤S
(SCc)
Ik
t ≥0, lk
t ≥0.
(SCd)
The key changes to (PP2) by the approximation (SC) are: (i) the decision processes become K-
dimensional vectors, one for each demand path scenario; (ii) the objective is now an empirical
average of the costs over the K scenario paths, rather than an expectation; (iii) the non-anticipativity
constraint (PP2a) simpliﬁes to (SCa); and (iv) the almost-sure random constraint (PP2b) is replaced
by K deterministic constraints (SCb).
The Scenario Tree approach is one of the standard approaches to solving a multi-stage stochastic
program as (PP2). In the special case where the demand process is a discrete random vector with
K equally-weighted scenario paths, (SC) is equivalent to (PP2); otherwise (SC) is a computable

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
14
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
approximation of (PP2). For a textbook treatment of the topic we refer the readers to Shapiro et al.
(2009), and for recent developments, the references mentioned in the literature review.
Although the Scenario Tree approach is popular and well-studied, the assumptions that under-
pin it renders its application to our problem impossible, because the DM does not have demand
observations for a brand-new product (either directly or through the knowledge of the demand
distribution), which appears in (SCb). Our Residual Tree method remedies this shortcoming by
constructing trees based on residuals from regressions on similar products sold in the past.
4.2.
Residual Tree Algorithm (Least-squares Regression version)
Step 1. Residual Tree construction.
(a) Least-squares regression. For each t ∈[1,...,T], perform least-squares regression on
available data on the n historical demands of similar products sold in the past:
min
αt∈R, βt∈Rmt
n
X
k=1
(dkt −αt −β⊤
t xkt)2.
(3)
Let (ˆαt, ˆβt) denote the optimal solution, and {εkt}n
k=1 the residuals. We can construct
n “samples” of the demand for the new product by combining the results of (3):
{ ˆdk
0t = ˆαt + ˆβ⊤
t ˆx0t + εkt}n
k=1,
(4)
where we use the ˆd notation in ˆdk
0t to highlight the fact that dk
0t is not a draw from
a known distribution of the new product demand (as is the case in the Scenario Tree
method), but an estimated sample from cross-learning from similar products, and in ˆx0t
to highlight the fact that some components of ˆx0t may themselves be estimated from
data (e.g. time-series components), as discussed in Sec. 3.1. We now have n independent
demand estimates at every point in time for the new product, equalling nT scenario
paths in total.
(b) Histogram binning (for eﬃcient computation if n is too large). We could use the demand
samples constructed in Step 1 (a) directly, but if n is too large, we can reduce the
computation time by binning the residuals into a histogram (see Fig. 3, right plot).
Choose 1 ≤Bt ≤n, the number of histogram bins at time t, for t = 1,...,T, and ¯εbt,
b = 1,...,Bt the center of the b-th bin at time t. Bt is also equal to the number of
branches emanating from each node in the tree at period t. Let pbt denote the empirical
probability of a residual εkt being in the b-th bin at time t.

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
15
We now have Bt sample predictions for the demand at time t = 1,...,T:
{ ¯d0t(b) := ˆαt + ˆβ⊤
t ˆx0t + ¯εbt}Bt
b=1,
(5)
each occurring with probability pbt. The total number of scenarios is thus reduced to
B := B1 ×...×BT. Let B = {{b1,...,bT} : bt ∈{1,...,Bt}, t = 1,...,T} denote the set
of labels for all possible scenario paths, and denote a particular scenario path by b =
[b1,...,bT], which occurs with probability pb = pb1 × ... × pbT . Denote the discretized
state space by ˆΞn = ˆΞ1 ×...× ˆΞT and the corresponding discretized probability measure
by ˆPn = ˆP1 × ... × ˆPT.
Step 2. Solve an estimated problem using the Residual Tree from Step 1.
Compute replenishment decisions by solving the following optimization problem (denoted
EPP, for “estimated procurement problem”):
min
qtj(·),It(·),lt(·)
1≤t≤T,1≤j≤S
X
b∈Bn
pb
"T −1
X
t=1
htIt(b) +
T
X
t=1
btlt(b) +
T
X
t=1
S
X
j=1
ctjqtj(b) −vIT(b)
#
(EPP)
s.t. ∀1 ≤t ≤T :
qtj(b) = qtj(b′), ∀b,b′ ∈B, s.t. ¯d0τ(bτ) = ¯d0τ(b′
τ), ∀1 ≤τ ≤t −1, ∀1 ≤j ≤S,
(EPPa)
It(b) = It−1(b) + lt(b) +
X
j∈S
X
1≤τ≤t−1:
τ=t−ℓj
qτj(b) −¯d0,t(bt), ∀b ∈B,
(EPPb)
qtj(b) ∈Qtj, ∀1 ≤j ≤S, ∀b ∈B
(EPPc)
It(b) ≥0, lt(b) ≥0, ∀b ∈B,
(EPPd)
where we indicate the dependence of the demand data and decisions on the particular
scenario path b explicitly. Denote the solution to (EPP) by (ˆq(n),ˆI(n),ˆl(n)) ∈(RT S ×RT ×
RT)B, where ˆq(n) = [ˆq1j(·),..., ˆqT j(·)]S
j=1 ∈RT S, ˆI(n) = [ˆI1(·),..., ˆIT(·)] ∈RT and ˆl(n) =
[ˆl1(·),...,ˆlT(·)] ∈RT.
Remarks.
1. Decisions after t = 1: The estimated optimal ordering policy ˆq(n) from (EPP) is a matrix of
values that maps the initial state (starting inventory, I0) and the n constructed demand paths to
ordering decisions. At time t = 1, the decision-maker orders ˆq1j from each supplier j = 1,...,S,
the actual demand for the new product d01 is observed, with which inventory I1 and lost sales
l1 can be computed. For subsequent decisions in periods t = 2,...,T, the decision-maker re-
solves (EPP) with ordering quantities, inventories and lost sales up to period t−1 ﬁxed by their

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
16
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
realized values. In other words, the decision-maker solves the procurement problem via a forward
rolling-horizon approach.
2. Histogram binning: There are a myriad of ways to construct the histogram in Step 1 (b), with
the total number of bins, Bt, the centres ¯εbt, b = 1,...,Bt and the widths δbt of the bins at time
t being free parameters. (Clearly, a smaller number of bins is more computationally eﬃcient but
has greater discretization error; we illustrate this tradeoﬀin Section 6.) Note that, however, for
the asymptotic optimality results in Section 5, the decision-maker needs to increase the total
number of bins with n such that the resulting histogram measure is asymptotically equivalent to
the sample-average measure. We state this requirement precisely in the statement of Theorem 1
in the next section.
3. Unknown covariates for the new product: Whenever constructing a residual tree, we construct
sample demand predictions ¯d0t(b) using equation (5) for a bin b in a period t > 0 using mid-points
from bin b’s parent bins as values for the relevant lagged demand covariates. When (EPP) is
solved in a forward rolling-horizon manner (see Remark 1), as the season progresses the ﬁrm will
observe actual dynamic covariate values for the new product and so can progressively replace
any estimated components of the covariate vector ˆx0t, t = 1,...,T, before each re-solve of (EPP).
4. We leave the sets Qtj unspeciﬁed in (EPP) for the sake of expositional simplicity, reminding
the reader that the theory to be developed in Section 5 only requires these sets to be bounded.
Various possible choices of set types with that property lead to diﬀerent speciﬁcations of (EPP)
for computational purposes. For example, for closed intervals [0,Kj] where Kj is a capacity limit
for supply source j (EPP) is a linear program. Sets of the type {0}∪[Oj,Kj] would also capture
a minimum order quantity Oj and would lead to (EPP) being a mixed integer program.
5. Comparison with Scenario Tree algorithm of Sec 4.1: Apart from fundamental diﬀerences in
the starting assumptions, the key mathematical diﬀerence between the two approaches is in
the inventory balancing equations, whereby in (EPPb), the estimated demand sample is used
as opposed to the actual demand sample in (SCb). Thus, the Residual Tree method is subject
to estimation errors as well as discretization errors, unlike the Scenario Tree method which is
subject to only the latter. Our theory in Section 5 extends results for the Scenario Tree method
by reconciling both errors.
In the online Appendix B, we extend the algorithm just stated to the high-dimensional setting
where the DM may have a number of redundant covariates in the data set, by replacing the least-
squares regression of Step 1 (a) with lasso regression. That is, the decision-maker has access to a
superset of rt > mt covariates (among which the identities of the true mt covariates are unknown).

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
17
Applying least-squares regression (3) using all rt covariates becomes problematic in this case because
of ill-conditioning of the design matrix, hence the need for a modiﬁcation to the algorithm.
In the following section we state the asymptotic optimality of the procurement solutions obtained
using the Residual Tree Algorithm (Least-squares Regression version). The lasso version of the
algorithm is also asymptotically optimal; we leave this statement to Appendix B.
5.
Theory: Asymptotic Optimality of the Residual Tree Method
The main result of this section is that if nature generates product family demand data from the
random models (1)–(2), then both the optimal value and the optimal solution of (EPP) converge to
the optimal objective value and the optimal solution of (PP) as the number of products n tends to
inﬁnity, which is known as epi-convergence in the stochastic programming literature. (Note that we
use the terms ‘epi-convergence’ and the more self-evident ‘asymptotic optimality’ interchangeably.)
We state this formally below. The proofs of the results are deferred to Appendix C, and below we
provide some qualitative explanations of the key ingredients.
Theorem 1. Assume that, for all y ∈R and 1 ≤t ≤T,

X
1≤b≤Bt
pbtI( ¯d0t(b) ≤y) −1
n
n
X
k=1
I( ˆdk
0t ≤y)

P→0
(6)
as n →∞, where
P→denotes convergence in probability. Then the optimal values of (EPP) obtained
using Residual Tree Algorithm (Least-squares Regression version) converge to that of (PP) as n →
∞and all cluster points of {ˆq11(n),..., ˆq1S(n), ˆI1(n),ˆl1(n)}n∈N are optimal ﬁrst-stage solutions of
(PP).
The assumption (6) requires the binned histograms to converge to the true density as the sample-
average distribution. A necessary requirement for this is for Bt to grow linearly with n, i.e., Bt = Cn
for some constant C ∈(0,1). One intuitive way to bin the residuals so that (6) is satisﬁed is to bin
them into ﬁner intervals as n grows (e.g. by binning into quartiles at ﬁrst, then by deciles, then in
ever smaller percentiles as n grows).
An immediate consequence of Theorem 1 is that decisions made in periods t = 2,3,...,T by the
forward recursion process described in Remark 1. of Sec 4.2 also converge to the optimal t-stage
solutions of (PP), conditioned on the demand path d01,...,d0(t−1) and orders [ˆq1j,..., ˆq(t−1)j]S
j=1
made up to period t −1. The result is immediate because conditioned on the demand path and
orders up to period t −1, the T-stage problem (PP) reduces to a T −t + 1-stage problem, whose
ﬁrst-stage solution is the decision for period t.

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
18
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
To prove Theorem 1, we make use of recent results of Pennanen (2005) and Pennanen (2009), who
establish suﬃcient conditions for discretized multi-stage stochastic programs to epi-converge (i.e.
both the objective and the ﬁrst-stage solutions converge). We extend these results to the Residual
Tree method, which are subject to estimation errors as well as discretization errors, as discussed
in Remark 5 in Sec. 4.2. The full proof is rather intricate and we simplify the presentation by ﬁrst
establishing three separate lemmas on the nature of the true problem (PP), one on the continuity
property of the random objective function, one on the expectation of the objective function, and
one on the property of the demand model. Apart from the well-behaved nature of (PP), asymptotic
optimality requires the consistency of the estimated demand processes, with or without the residual
binning, and convergence of the probabilities of the scenario paths as the number of similar products
grows. We show that our Residual Trees, with and without binning, satisfy both requirements.
6.
Numerical Study
In this section we present results of a numerical study designed to illuminate the properties and
behavior of the Residual Tree algorithm. Our primary goals in this section are to understand the
ﬁnite-sample performance of the algorithm— namely, the dependence of the performance on the
amount of available data (both covariate information and the number of observations), the resolution
of the Residual Tree, and the running time of the algorithm — thereby providing insight into its
potential for wide-spread applicability in practice. We also seek to verify that the policy output of
our computational algorithm has qualitative properties that are consistent with the known optimal
solutions of related stylized analytical models described in the literature. All results we report on
were calculated using MATLAB 8.6, calling Gurobi 6.00 to solve linear programs, running on a
single Macintosh desktop computer with a 3.2 GHz Intel i5 processor. We view this as a conservative
choice relative to industrial computing clusters available at many ﬁrms.
Our tests focus on two sets of procurement problem instances diﬀering primarily in how we
simulate the demand data inputs. The ﬁrst set of problem instances are two-period problems in
which the demand does not depend on static covariates but is serially correlated across periods. The
second includes four-period problems in which the generative model is based on both static and time-
series covariates. In both cases, we ﬁrst specify the true demand model (either by construction or
from raw Zara data), then simulate data sets of various sizes from them to evaluate the convergence
behavior of the Residual Tree algorithm.
For both sets of examples we use the Residual Tree Algorithm (Least-squares Regression version)
as described in Section 4, and we reduce the size of our Residual Trees using the binning technique

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
19
described in Step 2, which controls the number of bins (i.e., the number of tree branches) at each
node of the Residual Tree. The bin breakpoints are set at equal percentiles of the residual data used
to ﬁt the tree, and we represent each bin in the tree by its median residual value. It follows that all
the bins b = 1,...,Bt at a node are assigned equal probabilities pbt = 1/Bt. Note that this binning
method satisﬁes the required condition speciﬁed in (6) if Bt is made to grow linearly with n.
We note that for the results reported here we solve the problem (EPP) once at the beginning
of the horizon and apply the single policy obtained over the whole horizon. Thus the performance
results are for the largest problem instance the DM has to solve, and we omit reporting results for
the entire forward rolling horizon approach described in Remark 1 of Section 4.2 for the sake of
brevity and simplicity. To implement the Residual Tree policy without re-solving, we interpret each
bin as capturing a range of possible residual values, such that the set of bins {1,...,Bt} represents a
mutually exclusive and exhaustive partitioning of the possible residual realizations in period t. This
enables us to trace out-of-sample residual paths through the tree. It also means that a single solution
to (EPP) yields an ordering policy that can be applied to new products with previously unseen
error sequences, even without re-solving in a rolling-horizon manner. (In practice, the DM may as
well re-solve the problem as the selling season unfolds and new demands are observed.) When we do
not re-solve (EPP) in subsequent periods, we obviously forego the opportunity to replace dynamic
covariate estimates with realized values, as described in Remark 3 in Section 4.2.
6.1.
Two-Period Instances without Static Covariates
For the instances considered in this subsection, there are two periods with ordering opportunities
and demand realizations in each period. There are three supply options: the ﬁrm can place an order
to be delivered prior to period 1 at cost 0.5 (“pre-season” supplier), the ﬁrm can place an order prior
to period 1 to be delivered between the two periods at cost 0.5 (“slow” supplier), and the ﬁrm can
deliver after period 1 for delivery prior to period 2 at cost 1 (“fast” supplier). We assume a penalty
cost of b = b1 = b2 = 11 per unit of unmet demand, a holding cost of h1 = 0.25 per unit carried over
between the two periods, and no salvage value for units left over at the end of the problem horizon.
We simulate demand trajectories such that demand realizations do not depend on any static
covariates but are linearly dependent across periods. For each path, demand in period 1 is sampled
from a normal distribution with mean 1000 and standard deviation 100, and demand in period 2
is sampled from a normal distribution with standard deviation σ2 and mean equal to the period 1
demand realization. That is, we sample from the following population demand model for k = 1,...,n,

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
20
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
where n is the number of similar products in the product family for which the ﬁrm has demand
data.
Dk1 = 1000 + ε1,
ε1 ∼N(0,1002),
(7)
Dk2 = 0 + 1Dk1 + ε2,
ε2 ∼N(0,σ2
2),
Note that in demand model (7) the standard deviation σ2 of the second error term ε2 is a
parameter capturing the amount of learning occurring between the ﬁrst and the second period. This
is because smaller values of σ2 induce larger correlations between Dk1 and Dk2 in our problem,
so that observations of the ﬁrst-period demand are more predictive of the second-period demand
when σ2 is small. As a result, the problem instance deﬁned in this subsection is qualitatively similar
to the two period models with learning considered for example in Fisher et al. (2001), Milner and
Kouvelis (2002, 2005) and Li et al. (2009). Later, we will present some results examining how order
quantities produced by our approach vary with σ2. Until then, we set σ2 = 100.
For each of the results reported here, we run the algorithm on 200 independently generated train-
ing sets, then we evaluate the resulting policies on a single, common, and independently generated
“test set.” We vary the number n of demand trajectories in the training sets, but we use a common
test set of size 100,000. (Since the instances we consider here do not depend on static covariates, the
same policy can be applied to all paths in the test set. We take a diﬀerent approach in the next sub-
section, where demand depends on static covariates that diﬀer across test set paths.) Times, costs,
and orders reported in this subsection are averaged across 200 runs. Unless indicated otherwise, we
keep the number of bins per node constant (i.e., B = Bt for all t) for each instance.
Table 1 reports the performances of policies generated using training sets (n = 50,200,1000)
and trees of diﬀerent sizes (B = B1 = B2 = 1,2,3,5,10,25,50). We express the average percentage
costs in Table 1 as percentages relative to the average cost 1813.46 of the best-performing policy,
calculated using n = 1000 and B = 50 and assuming that the coeﬃcients in the generative demand
model (7) are known. We use this as a proxy for the cost of the true optimal policy, noting that this
average cost is within 1% of that produced using the next-largest tree. We give results for versions
of the model in which the coeﬃcients in the generative demand model are known, unknown, and
estimated from the training data, and estimated using a misspeciﬁed intercept-only set of models
that ignore the dependence between the ﬁrst and second period demands. Note the case with known
coeﬃcients eliminates the estimation error, leaving only the discretization error (deﬁned in Section
4.2 Remark 5) and is thus equivalent to a situation in which the ﬁrm has n sample paths of past
demand for the focal product and applies the Scenario Tree method as outlined in Section 4.1.

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
21
Known coeﬃcients
Estimated coeﬃcients
Intercept-only
B
n = 50
n = 200
n = 1000
n = 50
n = 200
n = 1000
n = 50
n = 200
n = 1000
1
67.1
65.6
65.1
67.0
65.6
65.1
66.8
65.8
65.1
2
27.7
26.1
25.5
27.8
26.2
25.5
23.1
22.0
21.8
3
10.0
8.9
8.7
10.1
8.9
8.7
11.8
10.5
10.4
5
3.7
3.0
2.8
3.8
3.0
2.8
5.4
4.4
4.3
10
1.5
1.0
0.9
1.6
1.0
0.9
2.6
1.9
1.7
25
0.7
0.2
0.1
0.9
0.2
0.1
3.8
3.0
2.9
50
0.7
0.1
0.0
0.8
0.1
0.0
3.5
2.6
2.5
Table 1: Out-of-sample performance of three versions of the proposed policy for a two-period problem
without static covariates. Results are presented as percentage cost increase compared with the
best-performing policy, marked in bold. We provide standard errors for these estimates in online
Appendix D.
Interestingly, the “estimated coeﬃcients” policy based on a relatively small data set of n = 50
training paths and a relatively small Residual Tree with B = 10 bins per node achieves an out-of-
sample cost performance just 1.6% larger than our best policy. This is a promising result from an
implementation standpoint, as n = 50 is a realistically small number of similar items in a product
family. B = 10 bins per node achieves an attractive balance in this case between oversimplifying the
stochasticity in the problem and computational eﬃciency.
Directionally, the results conform to expectations. We see that the out-of-sample performance
of the policy generally improves as the number of training paths (n) increases and as the number
of bins per node (B) in the Residual Tree increases for each of the three versions of the policy.
This is intuitive: a larger training set reduces estimation error by yielding more accurate regression
coeﬃcient estimates and by allowing for more accurate calibration of the discrete model of errors,
while more branching reduces the discretization error by imposing a ﬁner model of demand. The
best cost performances are achieved for instances with largest n and B, which is consistent with
performance convergence both as a function of the amount of training data and with the size of
the tree. In addition, for ﬁxed training set size and tree size we see that the policy based on known
coeﬃcients outperforms the policy based on estimated coeﬃcients, which in turn outperforms the
policy based on the misspeciﬁed intercept-only demand model for all instances except for those
using the smallest trees.
A closer examination of Table 1 shows a strong dependence of the results on the size of the tree
used in the algorithm but relatively small diﬀerences between policies computed with 50, 200, and
1000 training paths. By comparing the results of the policy with estimated coeﬃcients with those
for known coeﬃcients, we conclude that the value of knowing the true demand model coeﬃcients
(which corresponds to using the hypothetical Scenario Tree algorithm of Sec. 4.1) is surprisingly

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
22
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
marginal for the instances considered, even for the case with n = 50. This shows that the additional
estimation error introduced by the Residual Tree method, as explained in Remark 2 of Sec. 4.2, is
dominated by the discretization error that both it and the Scenario Tree method are subject to.
Using an over-simpliﬁed demand model (the “intercept-only” model), however, has a larger cost
penalty relative to using a correctly speciﬁed model, leading to an out-of-sample cost overage of
2.5% for the case even when n = 1000 and B = 50. This indicates the presence of a systematic bias
due to model misspeciﬁcation.
Figure 4 (left plot) illustrates convergence of the policy itself by showing the average initial orders
placed as a function of the tree size B. Results shown are for n = 50 and the “estimated coeﬃcients”
version of the policy. Plots for the cases n = 200 and n = 1000, omitted for brevity, show average
initial orders to be nearly identical to those for n = 50. Overall, we conclude that the numerical
results are consistent with asymptotic optimality as a function of both n and B.
The computation time required to compute the policy depends primarily on the size of the
Residual Tree. The largest tree we considered (B = 50) required an average computation time of
approximately 24 seconds to compute a policy based on a single training set of 1000 demand paths.
In all the computations discussed above, we have built Residual Trees with the same number of
bins for each node. However, the architecture of the Residual Tree can be optimized for a particular
instance. Figure 4 (right plot) shows the out-of-sample performance of the policies generated from
Residual Trees with more or fewer bins in the ﬁrst period relative to the second period. Letting
B1 and B2 indicate the number of bins per node in the ﬁrst and second periods, respectively, we
consider 9 policies with B1 = 1,2,3,4,6,9,12,18,36 and B2 = 36/B1. For the particular problem
considered, the best policies result from slightly more branching in the ﬁrst period relative to the
second (B1 = 9,B2 = 4). In practice, the best tree architecture will depend on the problem instance,
the underlying uncertainty, and its evolution over time.
We have also investigated the sensitivity of the policies generated by our approach to various
problem parameters. We have found the sensitivities to the cost parameters to be quite intuitive,
and we omit the details for brevity. For example, we have seen that the average total order quantity
increases with the shortage penalty cost b and decreases with the supply costs. We have also found
that as we increase the costs of the pre-season and slow suppliers relative to the fast supplier, the
retailer (intuitively) tends to substitute the fast supplier for the less responsive suppliers.
Figure 5 shows how the average orders placed with the various supply options depend on the
learning parameter σ2 deﬁned earlier. Total orders tend to increase with σ2, which can be understood
from basic newsvendor arguments; that is, the retailer stocks more stock to buﬀer added demand

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
23
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
0
10
20
30
40
50
Initial order
Bins per node (B)
Pre-season supplier
Slow supplier
1200
1250
1300
1350
1400
1450
1500
1550
1600
1650
0
10
20
30
40
Average Out-of-Sample Performance
B1 = 36/B2
Figure 4: Initial orders under the policy as a function of the number of bins per node (B) in the
Residual Tree (left plot). Out-of-sample performance of policies based on Residual Trees with more
or fewer bins in the ﬁrst period relative to the second period (right plot).
uncertainty. This increase comes from larger orders placed with the slow supplier. We observe that
orders with the pre-season supplier are unaﬀected by σ2 in these instances. (The demand uncertainty
in period 1 of our problem is relatively small compared with the expected demand in period 2,
implying that the problem eﬀectively decomposes across periods.) The average orders placed with
the fast supplier actually decrease with σ2, which is more clearly evident in the right-hand plot of
Figure 5. Because smaller values of σ2 reﬂect a greater amount of learning occurring between the
ﬁrst and second periods, our results suggest that the attractiveness of the fast supplier increases
with the ability to better predict second period demand based on the observation of demand in the
ﬁrst period. We have conﬁrmed this insight by measuring the increase in cost when we make the fast
supplier unavailable. Indeed, this cost increase exceeds 7% for σ2 = 25 but is only 2% for σ2 = 200.
We note that these results are qualitatively consistent with the numerical ﬁndings for the value
of ﬂexibility reported in analytical studies of two period ordering problems with learning, such as
Milner and Kouvelis (2002, 2005). In the context of Zara, they are also consistent with the intuition
that orders from China should decrease with the speed of demand learning at the beginning of the
selling season (see Section 1).
Figure 6 illustrates the policy we compute for ordering from the fast supply option as a function
of realized ﬁrst-period demand. We see that fast supplier orders given σ2 = 200 are no larger than
orders given σ2 = 25, in keeping with Figure 5. Both computed policies therefore involve a minimum
threshold for the second period order based on the ﬁrst period demand realization, and a linear
increase for the second period order beyond that threshold. This exactly matches the (s,S) policy
structure that is proven to be optimal or near-optimal in analytical studies of two period ordering
problems with speciﬁc distributional assumptions, such as Milner and Kouvelis (2005) and Li et al.

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
24
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
0
50
100
150
200
Average order quantity
s2
Pre-season supplier
Slow supplier
Fast supplier
Total order
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
50
100
150
200
Average order quantity
s2
Fast supplier
Figure 5: Sensitivity of policy to standard deviation σ2 of ε2 (left plot). Average fast supplier orders
shown with smaller graph scaling (right plot). (Policies are averaged over all runs and all test set
demand paths for training sets of size n = 200 and Residual Trees with B1 = B2 = 25 bins per node.)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
750
850
950
1050
1150
1250
Fast supplier order
Realized demand in first period
s2 = 200
s2 = 25
Figure 6: Policy for ordering from fast supplier as a function of the ﬁrst-period demand realization.
(Each policy is computed based on a single training set path.)
(2009). Furthermore, we note that the ordering threshold for the second order decreases with the
amount of learning, and that the slope of the increasing portion of both plots is approximately
two. This comes from two sources: (1) each additional unit of ﬁrst-period sales depletes stock by
one unit that must be replenished, and (2) each additional unit of ﬁrst-period demand raises the
expectation for second-period demand by one unit, arising from the slope of “1” in the equation for
D2 in (7). We conclude that the solutions produced by our computational approach exhibit the same
key qualitative properties that were previously established by available analytical and parametric
studies of similar two period problem instances.
6.2.
Instances with Static Covariates
As discussed in Section 3.1, a key innovation of our approach is its accounting for covariates in its
assumed demand process. While the demand model considered in the previous subsection includes
lagged demand as a “dynamic” covariate in the second period, we would also like to consider demand
models that include “static” covariates that reﬂect information known about the product prior to

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
25
the selling season. As mentioned earlier, in practice these static covariates may capture features
such as price, design, or expected popularity.
Let us consider four-period problems in which the population demand model includes both static
and dynamic covariates. Speciﬁcally, the demand models for the k = 1,...,n products are:
Dk1 = {738 + 1072Xk1 −403Xk2 + 2.8Xk3 −55Xk4 + ε1}
+ ,
ε1 ∼N(0,10442),
Dk2 = {−399 −638Xk1 + 53Xk4 + 0.854Dk1 + ε2}
+ ,
ε2 ∼N(0,7812),
Dk3 = {−5 + 0.955Dk2 + ε3}
+ ,
ε3 ∼N(0,6012),
Dk4 = {874 −46Xk4 + 0.516Dk2 + 0.318Dk3 + ε4}
+ ,
ε4 ∼N(0,8202),
where the static covariates are distributed as follows:
Xk1
iid
∼Bernoulli(0.25),
Xk2
iid
∼Bernoulli(0.5),
Xk3
iid
∼Normal(900,2002),
Xk4
iid
∼Discrete Uniform on {7.95,8.95,...,22.95}.
This demand model is based on regression models ﬁt using stepwise forward variable selection
method to real sales data for a single category of 70 garments introduced by Zara during a single
season. Here, the covariates Xk1 and Xk2 correspond to binary features present (or absent) in each
garment, Xk3 to the number of stores in which the garment was initially introduced, and Xk4 to
the retail price of the garment. The distributions of these covariates are loosely based on observed
data for the category.
We assume two supply options available each period: a fast supplier able to supply with zero lead
time ℓ1 = 0 at cost c1 = c11 = c21 = c31 = c41 = 1, a slow supplier able to supply with lead time ℓ2 = 1
and cost c2 = c21 = c22 = c32 = c42 = 0.5, a holding cost of h = h1 = h2 = h3 = h4 = 0.25 per unit
per period, and a penalty cost of b = b1 = b2 = b3 = b4 = 11 per unit of unmet demand. We assume
salvage value of zero for inventory left over at the end of the horizon.
As previously, we simulate data sets to serve as training and test data for ﬁtting and evaluating the
policies, respectively. Here, for each demand path we also generate a set of static covariates, randomly
and independently drawn according to the distributions speciﬁed above. Solving the optimization
problem (EPP) yields an ordering policy conditional on a single set of static covariates. Therefore,
to generate the results in this section we must re-solve the policy for each test demand path. For
this reason, we make use of a smaller test set than in Section 6.1. Speciﬁcally, the test set comprises

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
26
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
200 independently generated combinations of covariates and demand paths. As before, we vary the
size of the training sets and the size of the Residual Trees.
In Table 2, we present the out-of-sample performance of policies generated using training sets
of sizes n = 50,200,1000 and Residual Trees of increasing sizes (B = B1 = B2 = B3 = B4 =
1,2,3,5,7,10). We compute four versions of the policy in order to understand the value of covariate
information: one in which we assume that the true regression coeﬃcients used to generate the data
are known, one in which the form of the true regression model is known but the coeﬃcients must
be estimated from the training data, one in which the static covariates are unavailable, and one
that ignores both static and dynamic (i.e., lagged demand) covariates. As previously, we present the
results as percentages relative to the best-performing policy, which was computed assuming known
coeﬃcients based on 1000 training paths and a Residual Tree with 10 bins per node.
As we saw in the previous 2-period example, in Table 2 we see that the policy performances
improve with the amount of training data, with the size of the Residual Tree, and with better-
speciﬁed regression models. Strong performance can be achieved even with a relatively limited
amount of training data; for example, for trees with 10 bins per node, the performance diﬀerence
between the n = 50 and n = 1000 policies is just 2.0% for the policy based on known coeﬃcients
and 4.0% for the policy based on estimated coeﬃcients. Convergence of the policy performances is
evident as the underlying Residual Trees increase in size.
For B = 10 and for a realistically small training set of n = 50, the performance of the estimated
problem is within 4.9% of the best-performance, again supporting the practical validity of the
algorithm. The value of the covariate information is evident; for the same data set size n = 50 and
coarseness B = 10, the loss in the total cost by ignoring static covariates only and by ignoring
all covariates are 10.8% −4.9% = 5.9% and 20.3% −4.9% = 15.4% of the total cost of the best-
performing policy, respectively. A two-sample t-test reveals that these diﬀerences are statistically
signiﬁcant at the 1% level.
Interestingly, we also observe that the performance of the algorithm heavily depends on the
number of bins used. For instance, for n = 50 with all covariates, using B = 2 yields solutions that
are worse than then B = 10 by 71.2% −4.9% = 66.3% of the total cost of the best-performing
policy. For B = 3, the diﬀerence is 34.6% −4.9% = 29.7% of the total cost of the best-performing
policy. Both diﬀerences are statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level. The literature on the dynamic
procurement problem to date often considers only 2–3 demand branches per node, and our results
indicate that such simpliﬁed models may not yield good solutions in practice.

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
27
Known coeﬃcients
Estimated coeﬃcients
Ignoring static covariates
Ignoring all covariates
B
n = 50
n = 200
n = 1000
n = 50
n = 200
n = 1000
n = 50
n = 200
n = 1000
n = 50
n = 200
n = 1000
1
181.2
178.4
178.9
184.3
183.0
179.8
199.8
190.7
192.8
195.2
189.7
191.4
2
55.3
52.1
53.0
71.2
58.9
53.8
69.1
66.5
69.8
75.6
75.1
74.3
3
26.3
21.3
22.6
34.6
25.3
26.7
34.6
34.2
34.0
46.2
46.2
45.3
5
6.3
6.2
4.9
15.7
8.0
6.2
19.6
17.5
15.6
27.6
26.5
24.5
7
2.8
3.0
2.6
7.6
5.4
2.1
14.3
14.2
11.6
22.0
22.4
21.5
10
2.0
0.4
0.0
4.9
1.5
0.9
10.8
9.1
9.0
20.3
18.8
19.0
Table 2: Out-of-sample performance of four versions of the proposed policy for a four-period prob-
lem with static covariates. Results are presented as percentage cost increase compared with best-
performing policy, marked in bold. We provide standard errors for these estimates in online Appendix
D.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Initial order
Bins per node (B)
Fast supplier order
Slow supplier order
Figure 7: Initial orders under the policy as a function of the number of bins per node (B) in the
Residual Tree.
Figure 7 plots average initial orders to the fast and slow suppliers as a function of the size of
the underlying Residual Tree. Results reﬂect the policy based on the correctly speciﬁed regression
model with estimated coeﬃcients and training sets of n = 50 demand paths, although we note that
using larger training sets makes no discernible diﬀerence in the appearance of this plot. As predicted
by our theory, we see the policy decisions converging as the tree increases in size and granularity.
6.3.
Computation Time
One limitation of the Residual Tree method, as with the Scenario Tree method, is that the compu-
tational complexity of a tree-based approach will grow exponentially with the horizon T.
For the purpose of understanding computation times, we solve instances of the problem (EPP)
for horizons T = 4,6,8, for simulated training sets of size n = 1000, and for various choices for the
binning conﬁguration [B1,...,BT]. We assume two suppliers, and we sample training data from
a discrete-time martingale population demand model with increments given by normal random
variables and no static covariates.

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
28
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Computation time (seconds)
Total node count
Figure 8: Average computation time required to compute the “estimated coeﬃcients” policy based
on a single set of 1000 training paths for various horizons and binning conﬁgurations.
The times plotted in Figure 8 represent times to solve (EPP) averaged over 20 instances on a
single desktop computer processor. (As mentioned previously, this is a conservative choice relative
to industrial computing clusters available to some retailers.) We ﬁnd that the times in Figure 8 are
well-described (R2 = 0.9994) by a quadratic function of the count of nodes in the tree PT
t=1
Qt
τ=1 Bτ:
Computation time (seconds) ≈0.4832 + 0.0067(Node count) + (1.178 × 10−6)(Node count)2.
We can use this quadratic relationship to predict the time required to solve similar instances of
various horizons with various binning conﬁgurations. We present some example predictions in Table
3, where we estimate both the time to solve a single T-period problem (“solve time”) and the total
time required to re-solve in each period t using bin conﬁguration [B1,...,BT −t+1] (“re-solve time”).
We see that (EPP) remains computationally feasible for 8- and 10-period problems with 3 bins per
period, but becomes prohibitively time-consuming for larger trees. One opportunity for improvement
would be to consider trees with diﬀering numbers of bins per period; for example, the last line in
Table 3 shows that we expect that a 10-period conﬁguration with 10 bins in the ﬁrst period and 2
bins per period for periods 5-10 will be solved faster than the conﬁguration with 3 bins per period.
Some preliminary experiments have suggested that the best choice of binning conﬁguration depends
on the evolution of uncertainty over time.
It is also possible to use solutions to short-horizon versions of our residual tree method as heuristic
policies for longer-horizon problems. For example, even if replenishment decisions can be made
weekly in practice, we might consider using a coarser time granularity in the model, as there may
be limited incremental beneﬁt to modeling more ordering opportunities within a selling season.
Other promising ideas include smart scenario reduction methods, parallelization, limited lookahead
heuristics, re-solving on rolling horizons, and hybrid approaches that combine some of these ideas.
To characterize the relative performance of these heuristics over a representative set of problem
instances is a signiﬁcant task that we leave for future work. We point out that, while in practice

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
29
Node
Est. solve
Tot. re-solve
T
B
count
time (s)
time (s)
4
[5 5 5 5]
780
6
9
4
[7 7 7 7]
2,800
29
33
4
[10 10 10 10]
11,110
221
232
6
[3 3 3 3 3 3]
1,092
9
15
6
[5 5 5 5 5 5]
19,530
581
635
6
[7 7 7 7 7 7]
137,256
23,119
23,738
6
[10 10 ... 10]
1,111,110
1.5e+06
1.5e+06
Node
Est. solve
Tot. re-solve
T
B
count
time (s)
time (s)
8
[2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2]
510
4
11
8
[3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3]
9,840
181
231
8
[5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5]
488,280
2.8e+05
3.0e+05
10
[2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2]
2,046
19
39
10
[3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3]
88,572
9,839
11,297
10
[5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5]
12,207,030
1.8e+08
1.8e+08
10
[10 5 4 3 2 2 2 2 2 2]
76,460
7,403
10,160
Table 3: Predicted computation times to solve (EPP) for selected horizons and binning conﬁgura-
tions.
a retailer would require a policy determined on a single demand path, for us to rigorously study
policy performance with either static covariates or policy re-solving requires us to solve (EPP) over
each demand path. This implies that the computational limits bind more tightly when studying
performance than when implementing in practice.
7.
Conclusion
As mentioned in the beginning, this work arose out of an engagement with Zara in which we ini-
tially adapted standard stochastic programming approaches for the dynamic procurement problem
they regularly face when introducing new apparel items. The data-driven approach described in
this paper has not yet been implemented at Zara, due to various exogenous time constraints and
resource allocation choices. As part of our ongoing relationship with that ﬁrm however, we hope to
leverage this work and learn more about related implementation aspects by helping them develop
an enhanced data-driven version of their current decision support system for dynamic procurement.
To that end, we note that for implementation purposes Zara and other retailers may need to further
specify the relatively generic formulation (EPP) in order to capture important features of their busi-
ness environment, such as supplier-speciﬁc quantity discount schemes and minimum order quantity
constraints. A wide range of such features may be captured using integer programming formulation
techniques (Bertsimas and Weismantel 2005), and we emphasize again that the results in Section
5 establish that the asymptotic optimality of the Residual Tree method continues to hold for any
resulting mixed integer programming formulation as long as it corresponds to bounded sets Qtj.
Finally, the Residual Tree method is a general data-driven method for solving multi-stage stochas-
tic programs, and as such may be valuable for other applications that employ stochastic pro-
gramming. Examples include ﬁnancial options pricing, where historical prices and features such as
economic indicators and market factors abound; and energy utility management, where historical
demands and demographic and weather feature data are available (see Rios et al. 2015).

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
30
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Yiangos Papanastasiou for input in early stages of this project and Miguel Díaz, Francisco
Babio Fernandez, Juan José Lema, Julio López and Olaia Vázquez from Zara/Inditex for sharing real-world
context and data and for many helpful discussions. The third author thanks the Sarah Graham Kenan
Foundation for support.
References
Agrawal, Narendra, Stephen A Smith, Andy A Tsay. 2002. Multi-vendor sourcing in a retail supply chain.
Production and Operations Management 11(2) 157–182.
Allon, Gad, Jan A Van Mieghem. 2010. Global dual sourcing: Tailored base-surge allocation to near-and
oﬀshore production. Management Science 56(1) 110–124.
Baardman, Lennart, Georgia Perakis, Divya Singhvi. 2017. Leveraging comparables for new product sales
forecasting. Proceedings of MSOM Conference .
Ban, Gah-Yi. 2018. Conﬁdence intervals for data-driven inventory policies with demand censoring. SSRN
Working Paper .
Ban, Gah-Yi, N. Bora Keskin. 2017. Personalized dynamic pricing. Available at SSRN: https: // ssrn.
com/ abstract= 2972985 .
Ban, Gah-Yi, Cynthia Rudin. 2018. The big data newsvendor: Practical insights from machine learning.
forthcoming in Operations Research .
Bertsimas, Dimitris, Robert Weismantel. 2005.
Optimization Over Integers.
Dynamic Ideas, Belmont,
Massachusetts.
Burnetas, Apostolos, Stephen Gilbert. 2001. Future capacity procurements under unknown demand and
increasing costs. Management Science 47(7) 979–992.
Burnetas, Apostolos N, Craig E Smith. 2000. Adaptive ordering and pricing for perishable products. Oper-
ations Research 48(3) 436–443.
Casey, Michael S, Suvrajeet Sen. 2005. The scenario generation algorithm for multistage stochastic linear
programming. Mathematics of Operations Research 30(3) 615–631.
Chen, Xi, Zachary Owen, Clark Pixton, David Simchi-Levi. 2015. A statistical learning approach to person-
alization in revenue management .
Cohen, Maxime C, Ilan Lobel, Renato Paes Leme. 2016. Feature-based dynamic pricing. SSRN Working
Paper .
Dupačová, Jitka, Giorgio Consigli, Stein W Wallace. 2000. Scenarios for multistage stochastic programs.
Annals of operations research 100(1-4) 25–53.

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
31
Dupačová, Jitka, Nicole Gröwe-Kuska, Werner Römisch. 2003. Scenario reduction in stochastic programming.
Mathematical programming 95(3, Ser. A) 493–511.
Eppen, Gary D, Ananth V Iyer. 1997. Improved fashion buying with Bayesian updates. Operations research
45(6) 805–819.
Escudero, Laureano F., Pasumarti V. Kamesam, Alan J. King, Roger J-B. Wets. 1993. Production planning
via scenario modelling. Annals of Operations Research 43 311–335.
Ferreira, Kris Johnson, Bin Hong Alex Lee, David Simchi-Levi. 2015. Analytics for an online retailer: Demand
forecasting and price optimization. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 18(1) 69–88.
Fisher, Marshall, Kumar Rajaram, Ananth Raman. 2001.
Optimizing inventory replenishment of retail
fashion products. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 3(3) 230–241.
Fisher, Marshall, Ananth Raman. 1996. Reducing the cost of demand uncertainty through accurate response
to early sales. Operations research 44(1) 87–99.
Friedman, Jerome, Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani. 2009. The elements of statistical learning, 2nd ed..
Springer series in statistics Springer, Berlin.
Godfrey, Gregory A, Warren B Powell. 2001. An adaptive, distribution-free algorithm for the newsvendor
problem with censored demands, with applications to inventory and distribution. Management Science
47(8) 1101–1112.
Graves, Stephen C, Harlan C Meal, Sriram Dasu, Yuping Qui. 1986. Two-stage production planning in a
dynamic environment. Multi-stage production planning and inventory control. Springer, 9–43.
Greene, William H. 2011. Econometric analysis. 7th ed. Pearson International Edition.
Heath, David C, Peter L Jackson. 1994. Modeling the evolution of demand forecasts ith application to safety
stock analysis in production/distribution systems. IIE transactions 26(3) 17–30.
Heitsch, Holger, Werner Römisch. 2003. Scenario reduction algorithms in stochastic programming. Compu-
tational optimization and applications 24(2-3) 187–206.
Higle, Julia H., Karl G. Kempf. 2011. Production planning under supply and demand uncertainty: A stochas-
tic programming approach. G. Infanger, ed., Stochastic Programming, chap. 14. International Series in
Operations Research and Management Science, Springer Science+Business Media, 297–315.
Hu, Kejia, Jason Acimovic, Francisco Erize, Douglas J Thomas, Jan A Van Mieghem. 2016. Forecasting
product life cycle curves: Practical approach and empirical analysis .
Huh, Woonghee Tim, Paat Rusmevichientong. 2009.
A nonparametric asymptotic analysis of inventory
planning with censored demand. Mathematics of Operations Research 34(1) 103–123.
Iida, Tetsuo, Paul H Zipkin. 2006. Approximate solutions of a dynamic forecast-inventory model. Manufac-
turing & Service Operations Management 8(4) 407–425.

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
32
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
Ioﬀe, Alexander D. 1977. On lower semicontinuity of integral functionals. i. SIAM Journal on Control and
Optimization 15(4) 521–538.
Jones, Philip C., Timothy J. Lowe, Rodney D. Traub, Greg Kegler. 2001. Matching supply and demand:
The value of a second chance in producing hybrid seed corn. Manufacturing & Service Operations
Management 3(2) 122–137.
Kaminsky, Philip, Jayashankar M Swaminathan. 2001. Utilizing forecast band reﬁnement for capacitated
production planning. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 3(1) 68–81.
Kaminsky, Philip, Jayashankar M Swaminathan. 2004. Eﬀective heuristics for capacitated production plan-
ning with multiperiod production and demand with forecast band reﬁnement. Manufacturing & Service
Operations Management 6(2) 184–194.
Knight, Keith, Wenjiang Fu. 2000. Asymptotics for lasso-type estimators. Annals of statistics 1356–1378.
Kunnumkal, Sumit, Huseyin Topaloglu. 2008. Using stochastic approximation methods to compute optimal
base-stock levels in inventory control problems. Operations Research 56(3) 646–664.
Lau, Hon-Shiang, Amy Hing-Ling Lau. 1996.
The newsstand problem: A capacitated multiple-product
single-period inventory problem. European Journal of Operational Research 94(1) 29–42.
Levi, Retsef, Georgia Perakis, Joline Uichanco. 2015. The data-driven newsvendor problem: new bounds and
insights. Operations Research 63(6) 1294–1306.
Levi, Retsef, Robin O Roundy, David B Shmoys. 2007. Provably near-optimal sampling-based policies for
stochastic inventory control models. Mathematics of Operations Research 32(4) 821–839.
Li, Jian, Suresh Chand, Maqbool Dada, Shailendra Mehta. 2009. Managing inventory over a short season:
models with two procurement opportunities. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 11(1)
174–184.
Lu, Xiangwen, Jing-Sheng Song, Amelia Regan. 2006. Inventory planning with forecast updates: Approximate
solutions and cost error bounds. Operations research 54(6) 1079–1097.
Milner, Joseph M, Panos Kouvelis. 2002. On the complementary value of accurate demand information and
production and supplier ﬂexibility. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 4(2) 99–113.
Milner, Joseph M, Panos Kouvelis. 2005. Order quantity and timing ﬂexibility in supply chains: The role of
demand characteristics. Management Science 51(6) 970–985.
Patel, Jalpa. 2012. Optimization-based decision support system for retail sourcing. Master’s thesis, Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology.
Peng, Chen, Feryal Erhun, Erik F. Hertzler, Karl G. Kempf. 2012. Capacity planning in the semiconductor
industry: Dual-mode procurement with options. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
14(2) 170–185.

Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
Article submitted to Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; manuscript no.
33
Pennanen, Teemu. 2005. Epi-convergent discretizations of multistage stochastic programs. Mathematics of
Operations Research 30(1) 245–256.
Pennanen, Teemu. 2009. Epi-convergent discretizations of multistage stochastic programs via integration
quadratures. Mathematical Programming 116(1-2) 461–479.
Pennanen, Teemu, Matti Koivu. 2002.
Integration quadratures in discretization of stochastic programs.
Stochastic Programming E-Print Series .
Pﬂug, Georg, Ronald Hochreiter. 2003. Scenario generation for stochastic multi-stage decision processes
as facility location problems.
Tech. rep., Department of Statistics and Decision Support Systems,
University of Vienna.
Qiang, Sheng, Mohsen Bayati. 2016. Dynamic pricing with demand covariates. SSRN Working Paper .
Rios, Ignacio, Roger JB Wets, David L Woodruﬀ. 2015. Multi-period forecasting and scenario generation
with limited data. Computational Management Science 12(2) 267–295.
Serel, D. A. 2016. Intelligent procurement systems to support fast fashion supply chains in the apparel
industry. Tsan-Ming Choi, ed., Information Systems for the Fashion and Apparel Industry, chap. 7.
Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 121–144.
Shapiro, Alexander, Darinka Dentcheva, Andrzej Ruszczyński. 2009. Lectures on stochastic programming:
modeling and theory. SIAM.
Wang, Tong, Atalay Atasu, Mümin Kurtuluş. 2012. A multiordering newsvendor model with dynamic forecast
evolution. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 14(3) 472–484.
Zipkin, Paul. 2008. On the structure of lost-sales inventory models. Operations research 56(4) 937–944.

e-companion to Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
ec1
Electronic Companion to “Dynamic Procurement of New Products
with Covariate Information: the Residual Tree Method"
Appendix A:
Proof of Proposition 1
We proceed by ﬁrst proving (A) that a feasible solution to problem (PP) is feasible in problem (PP2). Then
we prove (B) that an optimal solution to problem (PP2) is feasible in (PP). Because the objective functions
of the two problems are identical, it follows that the optimal solutions to the two problems and their objective
values must coincide. We show both reductions pathwise, for a ﬁxed demand path d0 = {d01,...,d0T} and
ﬁxed order decisions q = {q1j,...,qT j}. As a shorthand, we let Qt = P
j∈S
P
1≤τ≤t−1:
τ=t−ℓj
qτj indicate the total
shipment received in period t given the demand path.
To prove claim (A), let the pair (I∗,l∗), where I∗= {I∗
1,...,I∗
T} and l∗= {l∗
1,...,l∗
T}, denote a feasible
solution to (PP). Fix t and consider the sign of I∗
t−1 +Qt −d0t. If I∗
t−1 +Qt −d0t ≥0 then I∗
t = I∗
t−1 +Qt −d0t
by constraint (PPb) (which holds almost surely) and l∗
t = 0 by constraint (PPc). Therefore constraint (PP2b)
holds on the given demand path for t. Furthermore, I∗
t ≥0 so I∗
t ∈R+ and l∗
t ≥0 so l∗
t ∈R+. Similarly, if
I∗
t−1 +Qt −d0t < 0 then I∗
t = 0 by constraint (PPb) and l∗
t = d0t −I∗
t−1 −Qt by constraint (PPc) so constraint
(PP2b) holds and we have I∗
t ≥0 and l∗
t ≥0. Since this holds for all d0 and q, we have (A).
To prove claim (B), now let the pair (I∗,l∗), where I∗= {I∗
1,...,I∗
T} and l∗= {l∗
1,...,l∗
T}, denote an optimal
solution to (PP2). We prove (B) via the following lemma.
Lemma EC.1. Let (I∗,l∗) be an optimal solution to problem (PP2) given the assumed demand path. Then
l∗
t > 0 implies I∗
t = 0 for all t ∈{1,...,T}.
(Proof of Lemma EC.1.)
Suppose l∗
τ ≥ϵ and I∗
τ ≥ϵ for some τ ∈{1,...,T} and some ϵ > 0. We contradict
the optimality of this solution by constructing an alternative solution (ˆI,ˆl) with strictly lower cost. Our
construction of this alternative solution depends on τ.
If τ = T, then let
ˆlt = l∗
t ,
∀t ∈{1,...,T −1}
ˆlT = l∗
T −ϵ
ˆIt = I∗
t ,
∀t ∈{1,...,T −1}
ˆIT = I∗
T −ϵ.
It is straight-forward to show that (ˆI,ˆl) is feasible in (PP2). Furthermore, the cost of solution (I∗,l∗) less
the cost of (ˆI,ˆl) is strictly positive:
bT

l∗
T −ˆlT

−v

I∗
T −ˆIT

= (bT −v)ϵ > 0.

ec2
e-companion to Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
If τ < T, then let
ˆlt = l∗
t ,
∀t ∈{1,...,T}\{τ,τ + 1}
ˆlτ = l∗
τ −ϵ
ˆlτ+1 = l∗
τ+1 + ϵ
ˆIt = I∗
t ,
∀t ∈{1,...,T}\{τ}
ˆIτ = I∗
τ −ϵ.
Again, (ˆI,ˆl) is feasible in (PP2). The cost of solution (I∗,l∗) less the cost of (ˆI,ˆl) is strictly positive:
bτ

l∗
τ −ˆlτ

+ bτ+1

l∗
τ+1 −ˆlτ+1

+ hτ

I∗
τ −ˆIτ

= (bτ −bτ+1)ϵ + hτϵ > 0,
by assumptions on the parameters stated in Sec. 3.2. Since this holds for all d0 and q, we have (B).
□
Returning to claim (B), we ﬁx t and consider two cases. First, suppose l∗
t = 0. Then constraint (PP2b)
implies I∗
t = I∗
t−1 −d0t + Qt and the non-negativity of I∗
t implies that I∗
t = I∗
t−1 −d0t + Qt ≥0. Therefore
(PPb) holds. Furthermore, I∗
t−1 −d0t + Qt ≥0 implies that
 d0t −I∗
t−1 −Qt
+ = 0 so (PPc) holds.
Second, suppose l∗
t > 0. Lemma EC.1 then implies I∗
t = 0, and constraint (PP2b) implies l∗
t = d0t −I∗
t−1 −
Qt > 0 so (PPb) holds. Furthermore, d0t −I∗
t−1 −Qt > 0 implies that
 I∗
t−1 + Qt −d0t
+ = 0 so (PPc) holds.
Appendix B:
Residual Tree Algorithm (Lasso Regression version): High
Dimensional Data
In our demand model as described in Section 3.1, the demand in period t depends on an mt-dimensional vector
of covariates. Supposing that the decision-maker has access to a superset of rt > mt covariates (among which
the true mt covariates are unknown), then rt −mt of the covariates are irrelevant or redundant. Applying
least-squares regression (3) using all rt covariates is then problematic because of model misspeciﬁcation and
the increased likelihood of ill-conditioned covariance of the design matrix. Thus, for this case, we propose
modifying Step 1 (a) of the Residual Tree Algorithm (Least-squares Regression version) by replacing the
least squares regression with Lasso regression as follows:
Step 1. (a)′ Lasso Regression. For each t ∈[1,...,T], perform Lasso regularized regression on available data
on the n existing products:
min
αt∈R, βt∈Rmt
n
X
k=1
(dkt −αt −β⊤
t xLasso
kt
) + λn||βt||1,
(EC.1)
where λn > 0 is the regularization parameter, and ||·||1 denotes the L1 norm. Denote the solution
vector by (ˆαLasso
t
, ˆβLasso
t
). We can thus construct n sample estimates for the new product by
using the estimated parameters and the residuals from the Lasso regression:
{ ˆdLasso
0t
= ˆαLasso
t
+ ˆβLasso⊤
t
ˆx0t + ˆεLasso
kt
}n
k=1.
(EC.2)
If histogram binning Step 1 (b) is employed after Lasso Step 1 (a)′, we have the following Bt samples
of constructed data:
{ ¯dLasso
0t
(b) := ˆαLasso
t
+ ˆβLasso⊤
t
ˆx0t + ¯εLasso
bt
}Bt
b=1,
(EC.3)

e-companion to Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
ec3
where ¯εLasso
bt
, b = 1,...,Bt are the centres of the histogram bins for the residuals from Lasso regression
(EC.1), {ˆεLasso
kt
}n
k=1.
The Residual Tree Algorithm (Lasso Regression version) is also asymptotically optimal. We defer the proof
to Appendix C.
Theorem EC.1. Assume (6) and λn/n = o(1). Then the optimal values of (EPP) using Residual
Tree Algorithm (Lasso Regression version) converge to that of (PP) as n →∞and all cluster points of
{ˆq11(n),..., ˆq1S(n), ˆI1(n),ˆl1(n)}n∈N are optimal ﬁrst-stage solutions of (PP).
Remark on the choice of the regularization parameter λn: If λn is too large, the resulting parameter
estimates (ˆαLasso
t
, ˆβLasso
t
) will have large biases; whereas if λn is too small, the parameter estimates will retain
dimensions that should not be in the model as the penalization eﬀect will be small. A suﬃcient condition for
asymptotic consistency of (ˆαLasso
t
, ˆβLasso
t
) is λn/n = o(1), i.e. λn should decrease faster than the rate O(n)
[Knight and Fu (2000)], which is one of the assumptions we make for Theorem EC.1. In practice, for ﬁxed
n, λn can be chosen via cross-validation; that is, we can tune λn over a grid of values based on some data
put aside for validation purposes (see Friedman et al. 2009 for further details).
Appendix C:
Proofs of results in Section 5.
The proofs of Theorem 1 and Theorem EC.1 rely on the following three lemmas.
Lemma EC.2. The function f : RT(S+2) × Ξ0 →(−∞,∞] given by
f(q,I,l;D0,[1,T]) =
T −1
X
t=1
htIt +
T
X
t=1
btlt +
T
X
t=1
S
X
j=1
ctjqtj −vIT,
(EC.4)
where q = [q1j,...,qT j]1≤j≤S, I = [I1,...,IT], and l = [l1,...,lT] may depend on the random vector D0,[1,T] =
[D01,...,D0T], is lower semi-continuous in the ﬁrst argument and has the lower compactness property of
Ioﬀe (1977).
Lemma EC.3. The following conditions hold for the stochastic optimization problem (PP): for every fea-
sible z ∈RT(S+2), there is a uniformly bounded sequence yµ →z of non-anticipative, P0-a.s. continuous
functions yµ : Ξ0 →RT(S+2) such that
limsup
n→∞
EˆPnf(yµ(D0,[1,T]);D0,[1,T]) ≤EP0f(yµ(D0,[1,T]);D0,[1,T]),
∀µ ∈Z+ and
(a)
limsup
µ→∞
EP0f(yµ(D0,[1,T]);D0,[1,T]) ≤EP0f(z(D0,[1,T]);D0,[1,T]).
(b)
Lemma EC.4. The stochastic demand model (1) is a time series model with uniform innovations, i.e. for
each t = 1,...,T, the demand is of the form
D0t|X0t = gt(D00,D01,...,D0,t−1,ωt),
(EC.5)
where D00 is a (non-random) constant, ω1,...,ωT are mutually independent random variables, with ωt uni-
formly distributed in the unit interval [0,1], and gt : Ξ01 × ... × Ξ0,t−1 × [0,1] →Ξ0t.

ec4
e-companion to Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
(Proof of Lemma EC.2.)
Firstly, f(· ;D0,[1,T]) is continuous for every D0,[1,T] ∈Ξ0 so it is lower semi-
continuous. Secondly, the function f : RT(S+2) × Ξ0 →(−∞,∞] satisﬁes the lower compactness property of
Ioﬀe (1977) if there exists a non-decreasing real-valued function g on [0,+∞) and a real number b such that
f(z;D0,[1,T]) ≥−g(||z||∞) −b,
∀z ∈RT(S+2), ∀D0,[1,T] ∈Ξ0.
Now
f(q,I,l;D0,[1,T]) ≥−T(c∞S||q||∞+ (h∞∨v)||I||∞+ b∞||l||∞),
∀(q,I,l) ∈RT(S+2), ∀D0,[1,T] ∈Ξ0,
where c∞= max{c1j,...,cT j}1≤j≤S, h∞= max{h1,...,hT −1} and b∞= max{b1,...,bT}, thus f(· ;·) satisﬁes
the lower compactness property of Ioﬀe (1977).
□
(Proof of Lemma EC.3.)
The condition (a) holds because by (6), ˆPn converges to the sample average
measure as n goes to inﬁnity, then by the Weak Law of Large Numbers (WLLN) on the sample average
measure.
For condition (b), let z = (q,I,l) ∈RT(S+2) be an admissible policy to (PP). Consider, for µ ∈Z+, the
function
yµ = z −10
µ ,
where 10 is a vector with T(S + 2) ones and a zero at the end (corresponding to the location of IT in the z
vector). Then
||yµ||∞≤||z||∞+ 1,
hence yµ is uniformly bounded for every z.
We also have, by elementary algebra,
f(yµ(D0,[1,T]);D0,[1,T]) = f(z(D0,[1,T]);D0,[1,T]) −C
µ ,
where C is the positive constant
C =
T −1
X
t=1
ht +
T
X
t=1
bt +
T
X
t=1
S
X
j=1
ctj,
which is clearly dominated by f(z;D0,[1,T]) for all µ ∈Z+. Thus we have
EPf(yµ(D0,[1,T]);D0,[1,T]) ≤EPf(z(D0,[1,T]);D0,[1,T])
for all µ ∈Z+, and (b) follows.
□
(Proof of Lemma EC.4.)
Given X0t = x0t, deﬁne the function
gt(D00,...,D0,t−1,ωt) := αt + β⊤
t x0t + F −1
εt (ωt),
(EC.6)
where F −1
εt
is the inverse cdf of the random error term εt in the demand model (2). We immediately have
D0t|(X0t = x0t) = gt(D00,...,D0T,ωt),
(EC.7)
which satisﬁes the deﬁnition of a time series model with uniform innovations.
□

e-companion to Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
ec5
Before proceeding with the proofs, let us ﬁrst introduce some deﬁnitions.
Deﬁne the Lebesgue space Z(P0) := L∞(Ξ0,F 0,P0;RT(S+2)), and the set of (F0t)T
t=1-adapted elements of
Z(P0)
N(P0) := {z ∈Z(P0) | z contains an (F0t)T
t=1 -adapted function}.
In other words, N(P0) is the set of feasible solutions (each of which are, technically speaking, equivalence
classes, as solutions that diﬀer on sets of measure zero have equivalent objective values) of (PP).
Now consider the discretized demand space ˆΞn. Let ˆΞbt denote the b-th bin out of Bt(n) bins at time t.
Deﬁne, for each n ∈Z+ and t = 1,...,T, the functions sn : Ξ0 →Ξ0 and ψt,n : Ξt →R given by
sn(d0,[1,T]) := ¯d0,[1,T](b), and
ψt,n(d0,t) :=
pbt
P(ˆΞbtt)
,
where b = [b1,...,bT] is such that d0t belongs to the bt-th histogram bin ˆΞbtt at time t, and ¯d0,[1,T](b) =
[ ¯d01(b1),..., ¯d0T(bT)], where ¯d0t(·), t = 1,...,T are as deﬁned in (5). In words, sn(·) maps a vector of demand
path for the new product to one of the demand paths deﬁned by the Residual Tree by determining which
histogram bin each demand belongs to; and ψt,n(·) denotes the ratio of the empirical histogram measure of
a given demand path to the true measure of the histogram bins ˆΞbtt, t = 1,...,T. Thus, the closer sn(·) is to
the identity map, and the closer ψt,n(·) is to one, the better the Residual Tree approximation.
Finally, let Nn(P) be the set of {(sn)−1(F0t)}-adapted elements of X(P0).
(Proof of Theorem 1).
By Corollary 3.1. of Pennanen (2005), epi-convergence follows if our problem
satisﬁes the following two conditions:
• Condition 1: the sequence {ˆPn}∞
n=1 of discretized measures is such that Nn(P) ⊂N(P0) for all n ∈Z+
and
sn(D0,[1,T])
P→D0,[1,T], and
(EC.8)
max
b∈Bt(n)

pbt(n)
P(ˆΞbt(n))
−1
 →0, ∀1 ≤t ≤T,
(EC.9)
as n tends to inﬁnity.
• Condition 2:
(a) The function f : RT(S+2) ×Ξ0 →(−∞,∞] given by (EC.4) is lower semi-continuous in the ﬁrst argument
and has the lower compactness property of Ioﬀe (1977).
(b) For every feasible z ∈RT(S+2), there is a uniformly bounded sequence yµ →z of non-anticipative, P-a.s.
continuous functions yµ : Ξ0 →RT(S+2) such that
limsup
n→∞
E ˆ
Pnf(yµ(D0,[1,T]);D0,[1,T]) ≤EPf(yµ(D0,[1,T]);D0,[1,T]) ∀µ ∈Z+
limsup
µ→∞
EPf(yµ(D0,[1,T]);D0,[1,T]) ≤EPf(z(D0,[1,T]);D0,[1,T]),
where f(·,·) is the function deﬁned in (EC.4).

ec6
e-companion to Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
In words, Condition 1 states necessary conditions on the data-driven estimate of the stochastic program
(PP). Speciﬁcally, (EC.8) is a statement regarding the asymptotic consistency of the data-driven estimate of
the demand process and (EC.9) is a statement regarding the consistency of the residual histogram tree. Sep-
arately, Theorem 2 of Pennanen (2009) shows that if the underlying stochasticity of a multi-stage stochastic
program is a time series model with uniform innovations as is the case with our problem by Lemma EC.4,
then the sequence (ˆPn)∞
n=1 satisﬁes Condition 1 if the following conditions hold for all t = 1,...,T:
C1. gt(D00,...,D0,t−1,·) is a bijection for every D0,[1,T] ∈Ξ0, where gt(·) is the function deﬁned in (EC.5)
of Lemma EC.4,
C2. gt(·) and the function (D01,...,D0t) 7→gt(D00,...,D0,t−1,·)−1(D0t) are Borel-measurable,
C3. gt(·) is P01 × ... × P0,t−1 × ωt-almost-surely continuous, and
C4. ˆωt(n) →ωt weakly as n →∞, where ˆωt(n) is the random variable with the discrete uniform distribution
Fˆεt(n)(ˆεt(n)), where ˆεt(n) is a random variable equal to εkt k = 1,...,n with probability 1/n (recall εkt’s
are the residuals from Step 1 (a) of the Residual Tree Algorithm (Least-squares Regression version)),
and Fˆεt(n)(·) denotes its cdf.
Below we show the conditions C1–C4 are satisﬁed by our problem.
PC1. By the model assumption, εt has an inverse cdf, so gt(D00,...,D0T,·) is a bijection for every D0,[1,T] ∈
Ξ0.
PC2. The Borel-measurability of gt(·) and of the function (D00,...,D0,t−1) 7→gt(D00,...,D0,t−1,·)−1(D0t)
follows from the measurability of ωt and εt.
PC3. It is clear that the function gt(·) is continuous in all its arguments.
PC4. By Lemma 2 of Pennanen (2009), this is equivalent to (EC.8) and (EC.9) being satisﬁed. (EC.8)
is satisﬁed by the consistency of the least-squares regression model under the assumptions made in
Sec. 3.1 [see, for example, Chapter 4.4.1 of Greene (2011)], and (EC.9) is satisﬁed by the asymptotic
equivalence of the histogram distribution to the empirical distribution (spelled out in (6) of Step 2. of
Residual Tree Algorithm (Least-squares Regression version)), the latter of which is uniformly consistent
via the Glivenko-Cantelli Theorem. Note the conditions (EC.8) and (EC.9) hold even when there are
time-series components in the covariate vector which may need to be estimated from data in earlier
periods, which can be shown recursively from t = 1 because any time series covariate components are
themselves estimated via least-squares regression in a consistent manner.
Condition 2 concerns the structure of the original problem itself, and we have shown that our problem
satisﬁes these conditions by Lemmas EC.2 and EC.3. Thus our problem satisﬁes the assumptions of Corollary
3.1. of Pennanen (2005) and the conclusions follow.
□
Proof of Theorem EC.1.
It suﬃces to check that the map sLasso
n
: Ξ0 7→Ξ0 deﬁned by
sLasso
n
(d0,[1,T]) := ¯dLasso
0,[1,T](b),

e-companion to Ban, Gallien & Mersereau: New Product Procurement with the Residual Tree Method
ec7
where b = [b1,...,bT] is such that d0t belongs to the bt-th histogram bin ˆΞbtt at time t, ¯dLasso
0,[1,T](b) :=
[ ¯dLasso
01
(b1),..., ¯dLasso
0T
(bT)], where ¯dLasso
0t
(·), t = 1,...,T are as deﬁned in (EC.3), converges to the identity
map as n →∞. Knight and Fu (2000) shows that this holds if λn/n = o(1), i.e. λn decreases faster than O(n)
rate.
□
Appendix D:
Standard Errors for Tables 1 and 2
This section provides standard errors corresponding to the tables of results in Sections 6.1 and 6.2.
Known coeﬃcients
Estimated coeﬃcients
Intercept-only
B
n = 50
n = 200
n = 1000
n = 50
n = 200
n = 1000
n = 50
n = 200
n = 1000
1
1.28
0.61
0.40
1.24
0.64
0.40
1.15
0.59
0.39
2
0.53
0.26
0.20
0.52
0.26
0.20
0.58
0.31
0.21
3
0.30
0.16
0.11
0.30
0.16
0.11
0.39
0.20
0.14
5
0.15
0.08
0.06
0.17
0.08
0.06
0.22
0.11
0.08
10
0.07
0.03
0.02
0.07
0.03
0.02
0.10
0.04
0.04
25
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.05
0.01
0.01
0.13
0.06
0.05
50
0.05
0.01
0.00
0.06
0.01
0.00
0.13
0.06
0.05
Table EC.1: Standard errors for the performance ratio results presented in Table 1, estimated using
bootstrapping.
Known coeﬃcients
Estimated coeﬃcients
Ignoring static covariates
Ignoring all covariates
B
n = 50
n = 200
n = 1000
n = 50
n = 200
n = 1000
n = 50
n = 200
n = 1000
n = 50
n = 200
n = 1000
1
13.87
13.98
13.86
15.18
14.74
13.90
15.53
15.56
15.73
15.72
15.52
15.49
2
6.36
6.33
6.39
7.82
6.73
6.59
7.88
8.60
8.70
9.71
10.03
9.90
3
3.56
3.74
3.85
4.58
4.02
4.08
5.77
6.16
5.91
7.71
7.94
7.74
5
1.87
1.99
1.70
3.02
2.36
1.98
3.55
3.96
3.68
5.52
6.04
5.94
7
1.21
1.25
1.09
2.41
1.68
0.96
3.03
3.11
2.77
4.46
5.34
5.05
10
1.10
0.44
0.00
2.15
1.05
0.47
2.13
2.26
2.02
3.54
4.56
4.42
Table EC.2: Standard errors for the performance ratio results presented in Table 2, estimated using
bootstrapping.