TITLE: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits with Collective Penalty
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2018
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2017.0653
---

UCLA
UCLA Previously Published Works
Title
Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits with Collective Penalty
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/04688174
Journal
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 20(2)
ISSN
1523-4614
Authors
Caro, Felipe
Chintapalli, Prashant
Rajaram, Kumar
et al.
Publication Date
2018-05-01
DOI
10.1287/msom.2017.0653
 
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org
Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

MANUFACTURING & SERVICE OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT
Vol. 00, No. 0, Xxxxx 0000, pp. 000–000
issn 1523-4614|eissn 1526-5498|00|0000|0001
INFORMS
doi 10.1287/xxxx.0000.0000
c⃝0000 INFORMS
Authors are encouraged to submit new papers to INFORMS journals by means of
a style ﬁle template, which includes the journal title. However, use of a template
does not certify that the paper has been accepted for publication in the named jour-
nal. INFORMS journal templates are for the exclusive purpose of submitting to an
INFORMS journal and should not be used to distribute the papers in print or online
or to submit the papers to another publication.
Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and
Shared Audits with Collective Penalty
Felipe Caro, Prashant Chintapalli, Kumar Rajaram, Chris S. Tang
UCLA Anderson School of Management, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095,
felipe.caro@anderson.ucla.edu, prashant.chintapalli.1@anderson.ucla.edu, kumar.rajaram@anderson.ucla.edu,
chris.tang@anderson.ucla.edu
When suppliers (i.e., contract manufacturers) fail to comply with health and safety regulations, buyers
(retailers) are compelled to improve supplier compliance by conducting audits and imposing penalties. As
a benchmark, we ﬁrst consider the independent audit-penalty mechanism in which the buyers conduct
their respective audits and impose penalties independently. We then examine the implications of two new
audit-penalty mechanisms that entail a collective penalty. The ﬁrst is the joint mechanism under which
buyers conduct audits jointly, share the total audit cost incurred, and impose a collective penalty if the
supplier fails their joint audit. The second is the shared mechanism in which each buyer conducts audits
independently, shares its audit reports with the other buyers, and imposes a collective penalty if the supplier
fails any one of the audits. Using a simultaneous move game-theoretic model with 2 buyers and 1 supplier,
our analysis reveals that both the joint and the shared mechanisms are beneﬁcial in several ways. First, when
the wholesale price is exogenously given, we establish the following analytical results for the joint mechanism
in comparison to the independent mechanism: (a) the supplier’s compliance level is higher; (b) the supplier’s
proﬁt is lower while the buyers’ proﬁts are higher; and (c) when the buyers’ damage cost is high, the joint
audit mechanism creates supply chain value so the buyers can oﬀer an appropriate transfer-payment to
make the supplier better oﬀ. Second, for the shared audit mechanism we establish similar results but under
more restrictive conditions. Finally, when the wholesale price is endogenously determined by the buyers, our
numerical analysis shows that the above key results continue to hold.
Key words : Supply Chain Risk, Supplier Compliance, Audits, Collective Penalty, Socially Responsible
Operations
History :
1

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
2
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
1.
Introduction
Low labor costs in the East have encouraged many ﬁrms to source their products from
countries like Bangladesh, China, Indonesia, and Vietnam. However, without strong com-
mitment from buyers and consistent law enforcement by governments, some suppliers (i.e.,
contract manufacturers) ignore basic health and safety standards at their factories. Over
the past decade, Bangladesh has been a popular low cost country for many western com-
panies (e.g., Walmart, H&M, Mango, and Adidas) to source apparel products. However,
the tragic collapse of the Rana Plaza building in 2013, which occurred due to the negli-
gence of a supplier, has raised serious concerns about worker-safety standards in supply
chains. Donaldson (2014) commented that there is a perception that 20% of the factories in
Bangladesh are unsafe in terms of building structure safety, ﬁre safety, electrical safety, and
the like. Besides Bangladesh, developing countries such as China, Cambodia, and Vietnam
are facing similar challenges from non-compliant suppliers with unsafe factories (Fuller and
Bradsher 2013, Demick 2013, Wong and Fung 2015).
While the international brands are not directly and legally responsible for the safety
standards employed in their suppliers’ factories, they face a “sourcing dilemma”. If they
do not source from these countries, millions of poor workers will go unemployed because
garment exports constitute a substantial portion of the countries’ exports in many devel-
oping countries such as Bangladesh (Tang 2013). On the other hand, if they continue to
source from these countries, the international brands are under public pressure to improve
worker-safety standards at their suppliers’ factories. To address these challenges, many
companies often adopt an independent audit-penalty mechanism in which they indepen-
dently conduct audits of their suppliers’ factories and impose individual penalties when
non-compliance is detected. For example, PVH Corp. (the parent company of brands such
as Calvin Klein and Tommy Hilﬁger) increased its eﬀorts in auditing its supplier factories.
Since 2012, PVH audited 84% of its tier-1 suppliers at least once per year and reported
the non-compliant health and safety issues on its website (www.pvhcsr.com). Despite its
prevalence, the independent mechanism has two drawbacks: (a) the penalty imposed by
a single buyer may not be severe enough to ensure that the supplier complies with the
required safety standards, especially when the supplier has many buyers, and (b) the audit
process can be costly and time consuming.

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
3
In this paper, we consider two new audit-penalty mechanisms: joint and shared. These
audit-penalty mechanisms are based on a collective penalty and can potentially reduce
the drawbacks mentioned above using diﬀerent auditing procedures. Speciﬁcally, the joint
mechanism is conducted by a “consortium” of buyers who share the total audit cost, and
the supplier is subjected to a collective penalty if it fails the joint audit. In contrast, the
shared mechanism consists of audits conducted independently by buyers who then share
their ﬁndings among themselves. In doing so, a supplier’s non-compliance is exposed to all
the buyers when the supplier fails even one audit, and the supplier will then be subjected
to a collective penalty. The collective penalty under both these mechanisms can be more
severe than the penalty imposed by each buyer independently and this mitigates the ﬁrst
drawback. Furthermore, the buyers gain savings in the joint and shared mechanisms. In the
joint mechanism they gain savings through sharing the audit cost, whereas in the shared
mechanism, given the advantages of information sharing, the buyers save on auditing by
lowering their individual audit levels. This mitigates the second drawback.
We present a uniﬁed framework to analyze the independent, joint, and shared mecha-
nisms. Such analysis provides a better understanding of the approaches recently employed
by retailers to improve supplier compliance in their supply chain. Two well publicized
approaches are the Accord on Fire and Building Safety in Bangladesh (bangladeshaccord.
org) instituted by the European retailers and the Alliance for Bangladesh Work Safety
(bangladeshworkersafety.org) set up by the North American retailers.1 More details
and discussion on the diﬀerences between these initiatives can be found in Greenhouse
and Cliﬀord (2013), Economist (2013), and Jacobs and Singhal (2015). From our perspec-
tive, the joint audit mechanism captures two key aspects of these initiatives: (i) instituting
common work place safety standards through a joint audit, and (ii) imposing a collec-
tive penalty on a non-compliant supplier. Thus our framework provides a basis to develop
a better understanding of the Accord and the Alliance. Furthermore, since these initia-
tives have aﬃrmed to share information about suppliers and impose collective penalties
on non-compliant suppliers, their interactions can be analyzed by the shared mechanism.
1 The Accord is a legally binding agreement signed in May 2013 by 166 apparel corporations from 20 countries in
Europe, North America, Asia and Australia, along with numerous Bangladeshi unions and NGOs (e.g., Workers
Rights Consortium, International Labor Organization). The goal of the Accord is to improve workplace safety of over
2 million workers at 1,800 factories (Kapner and Banjo 2013). To reduce the exposure to broad legal liability, U.S.
retailers formed the Alliance in 2013, a non-legally binding, ﬁve-year commitment to improve safety in Bangladeshi
ready-made garment factories. The Accord is committed to provide funds to improve building safety whereas the
Alliance is not committed to ﬁnance safety improvements.

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
4
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
Figure 1 summarizes the three audit-penalty mechanisms. As shown in the ﬁgure, while
the joint and shared mechanisms impose the same collective penalty, they diﬀer in terms of
the auditing process: joint versus independent audits. On the other hand, the independent
and shared mechanisms use the same audit process but they diﬀer in terms of the penalty
they impose: individual versus collective penalty. Therefore, it is unclear which mechanism
is more eﬀective from the buyers’ perspective. This serves as the motivation to examine
the following three key questions in this paper:
1. Which of the three mechanisms results in a higher supplier compliance?
2. Which mechanism results in a higher payoﬀto the supplier?
3. Which mechanism is the most eﬀective from the buyers’ perspective?
To study these questions, we develop a simultaneous move game-theoretic model with 3
players (2 buyers and 1 supplier) to capture the essence of the independent, joint, and
shared mechanisms. For each of these mechanisms, the buyers select their audit levels and
the supplier selects its compliance level simultaneously.
Figure 1
The independent (I), shared (S), and joint (J) audit-penalty mechanisms.
When the wholesale price is exogenously given and remains the same across all three
mechanisms, our key ﬁndings are as follows. First, the joint mechanism improves supplier’s
compliance. Second, compared to the independent mechanism, the joint mechanism yields
a higher proﬁt to the buyer but a lower proﬁt to the supplier. Third, when the buyers’
damage cost is higher than the supplier’s compliance cost, the supplier can always be
made better oﬀunder the joint mechanism through a transfer-payment by the buyers.
We establish similar results (with smaller impact) for the shared mechanism under more
restrictive conditions. Therefore, when a collective penalty is combined with joint audits,

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
5
the joint mechanism (instead of shared mechanism) oﬀers more opportunities to create
supply chain value.
Likewise, when the wholesale price is endogenously determined by the buyers, our numer-
ical results show that most of the key structural results derived in the exogenous wholesale
price model continue to hold. In particular, we ﬁnd that, relative to the independent mech-
anism, the joint mechanism can be Pareto improving so that both the buyers and the
supplier are better oﬀ. Additionally, we ﬁnd that the joint mechanism dominates the other
two mechanisms in terms of supplier’s compliance level and buyers’ proﬁts. By combining
our analytical and numerical results, we conclude that the joint mechanism is an eﬀective
mechanism for improving supplier’s compliance level and the buyers’ proﬁts. This result
provides a more formal justiﬁcation for the value of the Accord and the Alliance that are
designed to make suppliers increase their compliance levels.
Our paper belongs to a new research stream in supply chain risk management that
examines three types of supply chain disruptions (Sodhi et al. 2012). The ﬁrst type is due
to disruptions caused by natural disasters (e.g., Japan’s T¯ohoku earthquake and tsunami,
Thailand’s major ﬂood, etc.) and human induced disasters (e.g., the terrorist attacks on
9/11). Sodhi and Tang (2012) provide a comprehensive discussion on this type of supply
chain disruptions. The second type of disruption is caused by major ﬁnancial crises (e.g.,
Asian currency devaluations in 1997, the sub-prime ﬁnancial crisis in 2008) that can disrupt
supplier’s operations (Babich et al. 2007). Our paper deals with the third type of supply
chain disruptions that are caused by an “intentional act” committed by the supplier. Well-
publicized examples include Mattel’s lead tainted toys in 2007, melamine tainted milk in
2008, and Baxter’s adulterated Heperin in 2008. The research in this area examines issues
of product adulteration that occur when suppliers use unsafe materials to produce products
that can cause physical harm to consumers (Babich and Tang 2012, Rui and Lai 2015).
Such supplier non-compliance issues have forced many western ﬁrms to take action to
improve supplier compliance. In this setting, Plambeck and Taylor (2015) use a game-
theoretic model with a single buyer and a single supplier to explore the interactions between
the buyer’s audit level and the supplier’s compliance and deception eﬀort. By examining the
equilibrium outcomes (supplier’s compliance level, supplier’s deception eﬀort, and buyer’s
audit level) they show that when a supplier deceives the auditors by hiding certain critical
information, the buyer’s actions could motivate the supplier to cause more harm.

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
6
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
In the context of environmental violations, Kim (2015) examines the interactions between
a regulator’s inspection policy and a ﬁrm’s non-compliance disclosure timing decisions. By
considering the case when environmental violations are stochastic, this work shows that
there are conditions under which periodic inspections can be more eﬀective than random
inspections. Orsdemir et al. (2015) investigate how vertical integration can be used as a
strategy to ensure compliance. They examine the scenario of two supply chains, one of
which is vertically integrated, and highlight that the presence of a supply chain partner-
ship plays a key role in determining supplier compliance. They argue that, in the absence
of a partnership, overly tight scrutiny of violations can backﬁre and degrade compliance
when negative reporting externalities are high. However, tighter scrutiny encourages com-
pliance in the presence of partnership. Moreover, if the positive externalities are high, the
integrated and compliant ﬁrm will cease to share responsibly sourced components with
its competitors thus hurting the industry-wide compliance. More recently, Fang and Cho
(2015) consider a setting with joint and shared audits in which multiple buyers engage in
a cooperative game in the presence of externalities by which the violation of one buyer can
aﬀect the proﬁt of other buyers.
While our paper also deals with the issue of supplier compliance, it is fundamentally
diﬀerent from the existing literature on supply chain risk management in three ways. First,
the papers listed above primarily focus on the strategic interaction between one buyer and
one supplier. Instead, we examine and compare three diﬀerent mechanisms (independent,
joint, and shared) by capturing the strategic interactions among two buyers and one poten-
tially non-compliant supplier. Second, we consider the issue of a non-compliant supplier
and employ the notion of “collective penalty” imposed by both buyers when such a non-
compliant supplier fails the joint audit under the joint mechanism, or one of the audits
under the shared mechanism. Our contribution is to examine the implications of a collec-
tive penalty facilitated by the joint and shared mechanisms. Third, in comparison to Fang
and Cho (2015), our paper has a diﬀerent motivation. Our work is geared towards compar-
ing three audit-penalty mechanisms and understanding when they can increase supplier
compliance and supply chain proﬁts in a non-cooperative setting. In particular, our model
and results emphasize the tension between buyers and the supplier, whereas Fang and
Cho (2015) mostly study the cooperation among buyers when the supplier is indiﬀerent

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
7
between auditing schemes. Though our research is motivated by workplace safety, it also
applies to other regulations that require auditing to verify compliance.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present our modeling framework and
the resulting equilibrium outcomes, and in Section 3 we compare the results across all the
three mechanisms. In Section 4, we extend our analysis to the case when the wholesale
price is endogenously determined by the buyers. In Section 5 we discuss implications for
the the Alliance and the Accord. We present our conclusions in Section 6. All proofs are
provided in an online appendix.
2.
The Model
Consider a supply chain comprising of two buyers (i = 1,2) and one supplier s. For ease of
exposition, we focus our analysis on the case when the buyers are identical so that buyer
i sells one unit of its product at price p and pays the supplier a wholesale price w. We
denote the supplier’s unit cost by c. Since our focus is on the audit-penalty mechanism,
we consider p, w and c to be exogenous so that the values of these parameters do not
depend on the mechanism adopted by the buyers. In other words, the strategic intent of
diﬀerent mechanisms is to encourage the supplier to improve its compliance level, but not
to increase selling prices, or reduce wholesale prices (e.g., Van Mieghem 1999), or do both.
This seems reasonable in the context of outsourcing agreements between western ﬁrms
and suppliers located in developing countries because reducing the wholesale price would
create public concern about the ﬁrm’s moral and ethical standards. However, in Section 4
we extend our analysis to the case when the wholesale price is endogenously determined
by the buyers under each mechanism.
We use a simultaneous move game to model the dynamics between the buyers and the
supplier for all the three mechanisms. Speciﬁcally, each buyer i simultaneously selects its
audit level zi, i = 1,2, and incurs an audit cost of αz2
i , where α > 0 and zi ∈[0,1] (in the
joint mechanism the buyers choose zi but reach a joint audit level z through a process
that will be explained later). Here, zi represents the probability that buyer i’s audit will
be eﬀective in detecting non-compliance (if it exists). This notion of audit probability is
commonly used in the literature (e.g., Babich and Tang 2012, Orsdemir et al. 2015). While
the buyers select their audit levels, the supplier simultaneously selects its compliance level
x and incurs a compliance cost γx2, where γ > 0 and x ∈[0,1]. Here, x represents the

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
8
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
probability that the supplier complies with the workplace safety regulations. In practice,
the supplier might face other decisions besides compliance. However, we focus exclusively
on the compliance decision in order to have a parsimonious model that serves our research
goal. Incorporating other decisions is left for future work.
The simultaneous move framework is justiﬁable when the supplier cannot observe the
buyer’s audit level. However, if this is observable, then a sequential move framework would
be the more appropriate in which the buyers will ﬁrst select their audit levels simultane-
ously in each mechanism. By anticipating the buyers’ audit levels, the supplier selects its
compliance level. For completeness, we also analyzed the sequential game model and found
that the key results are consistent with those in the simultaneous game model. We refer
the interested reader to Caro et al. (2015).
To facilitate analytical comparisons, we assume that the audit cost α remains the same
across all the three mechanisms, even though the same approach can be applied to examine
the case when audit cost depends on the audit mechanism chosen. We also assume a convex
auditing cost αz2
i since one would expect the buyers to prioritize the most cost-eﬀective
activities. Moreover, this assumption is quite standard whenever each marginal increase in
eﬀort is more costly, e.g., see Plambeck and Taylor (2015).
Regardless of the mechanism adopted by the buyers, all parties face the following risks.
First, if a non-compliant supplier is detected by buyer i, the buyer will reject the unit
product without payment, and the supplier will incur a goodwill cost g associated with
the contract termination imposed by buyer i. Second, if a non-compliant supplier is not
detected by buyer i, the buyer will accept the unit product and pays the supplier the
wholesale price w. However, there is a chance that this non-compliance will be exposed to
the public. In that case, buyer i will incur an expected “collateral damage” d due to the
spillover eﬀect of the non-compliant supplier. Throughout this paper, we assume that the
collateral damage d is severe enough so that there is an incentive for the buyer to audit its
supplier. For this reason, we make the following two assumptions that provide motivation
for the supplier to care about compliance and for the buyer to care about auditing:
Assumption 1. The supplier’s goodwill cost g associated with contract termination
imposed by buyer i, i = 1,2, is higher than the supplier’s proﬁt margin (i.e., g > w −c).
Assumption 2. The damage cost d of buyer i, i = 1,2, due to a non-compliant supplier
is higher than the buyer’s proﬁt margin (i.e., d > p −w ≡m).

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
9
After all players have made their (audit or compliance) decisions, the sequence of events
is as follows: (i) the supplier produces the product and incurs the production cost c; (ii)
the buyers inspect for non-compliance; (iii) trade occurs only if non-compliance is not
detected by the buyers; otherwise, g is incurred by the supplier; (iv) the public ﬁnds out
about any possible non-compliance in which case the buyers incur d and the supplier
incurs a discounted penalty ηg, with 0 ≤η ≤1. For ease of exposition, we analyze the
non-cooperative simultaneous game for the case when η = 0. The analysis associated with
the case when η > 0 is omitted because the results change in the expected direction (i.e.,
the supplier complies more and the buyers audit less compared to when η = 0).
2.1.
Independent Mechanism (I)
Under the independent mechanism, buyer i selects its audit probability zi and the supplier
selects its compliance level x. Figure 2 depicts the extensive form of the simultaneous
game under the independent mechanism. We follow the convention that the dashed line
represents information imperfection in the game tree. We begin our analysis with the
supplier’s problem. From the ﬁgure we observe that the supplier will fail buyer i’s audit
with probability zi(1 −x). By considering the wholesale price w, the goodwill cost g, and
the compliance cost γx2, the supplier’s problem for any given audit levels z1 and z2 is given
by:
πs(z1,z2) = max
x∈[0,1]
2
X
i=1
[w(1 −zi(1 −x)) −gzi(1 −x) −c] −γx2
= max
x∈[0,1] 2(w −c) −(w + g)(1 −x) ·
2
X
i=1
zi −γx2.
(1)
Figure 2
Independent mechanism extensive-form game: supplier’s compliance level x and buyer’s audit level zi.
To ensure that the supplier has incentive to fully comply, we assume that the supplier’s
proﬁt margin is high enough so that the supplier’s expected proﬁt is non-negative under

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
10
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
full compliance (i.e., when x = 1). By considering the objective function given in (1), this
assumption can be stated as:
Assumption 3. The supplier’s total proﬁt margin is higher than its full compliance cost
so that 2(w −c) ⩾γ.
Before determining the supplier’s best-response, observe that ∂πs
∂x evaluated at (1,1) is
equal to 2(w +g)−2γx. Hence, we can interpret the term r ≡w+g
2γ as the supplier’s “rate of
return on compliance per buyer.” By applying Assumptions 1 and 3, it is easy to check that
2g > 2(w −c) ⩾γ so that 2w > γ. Thus, we conclude that r > 1
2. As we shall see later, r will
be used in proving and interpreting our results. By considering the ﬁrst order condition
associated with (1), the supplier’s best response for any given buyers’ audit levels z1 and
z2 is given by xI(z1,z2) = min{1,r(z1 + z2)}. (Throughout this paper, we use superscripts
I,J and S to denote the outcomes associated with the independent, joint, and shared
mechanisms respectively.)
Next, we determine buyer i’s best response zi(x,zj) for a given supplier compliance level
x and buyer j’s audit level zj. We assume that the general public is not aware that the
buyers have a common supplier, so the two buyers are treated independently by the public.
Following Figure 2 and considering the proﬁt margin m ≡(p −w), the damage cost d, and
the audit cost αz2
i , the proﬁt of buyer i is given by:
Πi(zi;x,zj) = m(1 −zi(1 −x)) −d(1 −zi)(1 −x) −αz2
i .
(2)
From the ﬁrst order condition we obtain buyer i’s best response to be zI
i (x,zj) =
min{d−m
2α (1 −x),1} for i = 1,2. By considering the supplier’s best response xI(z1,z2) and
buyer i’s best response zI
i (x,zj) simultaneously, it can be easily established that the equi-
librium compliance and audit levels are given by
xI =
r(d −m)
α + r(d −m)
and
zI =
d −m
2(α + r(d −m)).
(3)
Note that xI < 1 and zI < 1 because r ≡w+g
2γ > 1
2 so we are guaranteed to obtain an
interior solution. The characteristics of the equilibrium in Equation (3) are described in
the following lemma:
Lemma 1. Under the independent mechanism I, the buyer’s audit level zI and the sup-
plier’s compliance level xI given in (3) possess the following properties:

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
11
(i) The supplier’s compliance level is always higher than the buyer’s audit level (i.e.,
xI = 2rzI > zI).
(ii) Both supplier’s compliance level xI and the buyer’s audit level zI are increasing in
the buyer’s damage cost d, and decreasing in the buyer’s audit cost α.
(iii) The supplier’s compliance level xI is decreasing in the supplier’s compliance cost γ.
However, the buyer’s audit level zI is increasing in γ.
(iv) The supplier’s compliance level xI is increasing in the supplier’s goodwill cost g.
However, the buyer’s audit level zI is decreasing in g.
(v) The supplier’s compliance level xI is increasing in the wholesale price w. However,
the buyer’s audit level zI is increasing in w if, and only if, w < √2αγ −(d −p).
Lemma 1 has the following implications. The ﬁrst statement reveals that the buyer’s audit
has an “amplifying” eﬀect as it makes the supplier to increase its compliance level by the
factor of 2r(> 1) (i.e., twice the rate of return on compliance). Consequently, the ﬁrst
statement implies that the buyer can encourage the supplier to comply fully (i.e., x = 1)
without conducting full audits (i.e., zi < 1). The second statement is intuitive. A higher
damage cost d will force the buyers to increase their audit levels that, in turn, will cause the
supplier to increase its compliance level. In the same vein, the audit cost has a dampening
eﬀect. A higher audit cost will force the buyers to reduce their audit levels that, in turn,
leads to a lower compliance of the supplier. The third statement shows the opposite eﬀect
of the supplier’s compliance cost γ. When the supplier’s compliance cost γ increases (i.e.,
as r decreases), the supplier will lower its compliance level xI. On anticipating this, the
buyer will increase its audit level zI. To interpret the last statement, it is intuitive that the
supplier would increase its compliance level when the buyer oﬀers a higher wholesale price.
However, to explain the characteristics of buyer’s audit level, we consider the case when
w is low so that the supplier’s compliance level is low. When this is the case, a buyer can
easily expose the supplier’s non-compliance without needing to exert a high audit level.
However, when w gets larger, the compliance increases and the buyer needs to exert a
higher audit level to detect the residual level of non-compliance by the supplier.
By substituting zI and xI given in (3) into (1) and (2), and by noting that xI = 2rzI,
the buyer’s proﬁt ΠI(zI) and the supplier’s proﬁt πI
s(zI) at equilibrium are given by:
ΠI(zI) = m(1 −zI(1 −2rzI)) −d(1 −zI)(1 −2rzI) −αzI2,
(4)
πI
s(zI) = 2(w −c) −γ + γ(1 −2rzI)2 = 2(w −c) −γ + γ(1 −xI)2.
(5)

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
12
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
2.2.
Joint Mechanism (J)
Next, we analyze the simultaneous game for the joint mechanism. For any given joint audit
level z selected by the consortium (i.e., both the buyers), the supplier will fail the joint
audit with a probability of z(1 −x). Upon failing the joint audit, the supplier receives no
payment and it will be subject to the collective penalty 2g imposed by both the buyers.
Hence, the supplier’s problem can be written as:
πs(z) = max
x∈[0,1]{[2w(1 −z(1 −x)) −2gz(1 −x) −2c] −γx2}.
(6)
Using the ﬁrst-order condition, the supplier’s best response xJ(z) is obtained as:
xJ(z) = min{2rz,1}.
(7)
Identifying the buyers’ best response requires specifying how the joint audit level is
selected and how the audit cost is shared. For that, consider buyer i’s proﬁt when the joint
audit level is z and buyer i pays a proportion θi of the auditing cost:
Πi(θi;z,x) = m(1 −z(1 −x)) −d(1 −z)(1 −x) −θiαz2.
(8)
Suppose for a moment that buyer i is able to unilaterally select the joint audit level.
Clearly, in that case buyer i would want z to maximize the proﬁt above. From the ﬁrst
order condition, buyer i would want the joint audit level z to be:
z = zi(θi) ≡(d −m)(1 −x)
2αθi
.
(9)
Note that if θi = 1
2 for i = 1,2, then both buyers would want the joint audit level to be
(d−m)(1−x)
α
, and therefore they would reach consensus automatically. With that in mind,
in what follows we assume that the buyers a priori agree to evenly share the audit cost.
We make this assumption for ease of exposition. However, in the Appendix B we formally
show that θ1 = θ2 = 1
2 is indeed the outcome of a non-cooperative game between the two
buyers.
Given θi = 1
2, we can derive buyer i’s best response from (9), and together with the
supplier’s best response in (7) we can solve the simultaneous equilibrium as:
xJ =
2r(d −m)
α + 2r(d −m)
and
zJ =
d −m
α + 2r(d −m).
(10)

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
13
An interior solution is guaranteed since xJ < 1 and 2r > 1 implies that zJ < 1. Lemma 4 in
Appendix A is analogous to Lemma 1 and shows that the joint mechanism equilibrium in
Equation (10) exhibits the same characteristics as stated in the independent mechanism
equilibrium given in Lemma 1 (i.e., Equation (3)).
By using (6), (7), (8) and (10) along with θ1 = θ2 = 1
2, the equilibrium proﬁts of the
buyers and supplier under the joint mechanism can be written as:
ΠJ(zJ) = m(1 −zJ(1 −2rzJ)) −d(1 −zJ)(1 −2rzJ) −1
2αzJ 2,
(11)
πJ
s (zJ) = 2(w −c) −γ + γ(1 −2rzJ)2 = 2(w −c) −γ + γ(1 −xJ)2.
(12)
2.3.
Shared Mechanism (S)
In this section, we analyze a simultaneous game to examine the third mechanism: the
shared mechanism. In this mechanism, each buyer conducts its own audit independently,
but shares its ﬁndings with the other buyer so that a non-compliant supplier will be exposed
to both buyers if it fails either of the buyers’ audits. Figure 3 provides the extensive-form
game of the shared mechanism. For any given audit levels z1 and z2, the supplier with
compliance level x will fail buyer i’s audit with probability [zi(1 −x) + zj(1 −zi)(1 −x)]
for i = 1,2, and j ̸= i. By noting that the supplier will fail buyer i’s audit with probability
zi(1 −x) under the independent mechanism (Figure 2), we can conclude that, through
sharing audit reports, the shared mechanism enables buyer i to identify a non-compliant
supplier with an “additional probability” of zj(1 −zi)(1 −x). This additional probability
plays an important role in analyzing the shared mechanism.
Figure 3
Shared mechanism extensive-form game: buyer i’s audit level zi (i = 1,2) and supplier’s compliance
level x.

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
14
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
Under the shared mechanism, supplier’s proﬁt can be written as
πs(x;z1,z2) = 2(w −c) −2(g + w)(z1 + z2 −z1z2)(1 −x) −γx2
(13)
and buyer i’s (i = 1,2) proﬁt can be written as
Πi(z1;z2,x) = m[1 −(z1 + z2 −z1z2)(1 −x)] −d(1 −z1)(1 −z2)(1 −x) −αz2
i .
(14)
The best responses of the supplier and the buyers are given by:
x(z1,z2) = 2r(z1 + z2 −z1z2)
and
zi(x,zj) = (d −m)
2α
(1 −zj)(1 −x),
(15)
where i = 1,2 and i ̸= j. By solving the above three equations simultaneously, we charac-
terize the equilibrium in Lemma 2.
Lemma 2. Under the shared mechanism S, the buyer’s audit level zS and the supplier’s
compliance level xS can be characterized as follows:
(i) The buyer’s audit level zS is the unique root z ∈(0,1 −
q
2r−1
2r ) of the following cubic
equation:
V (z) ≡2rz3 −6rz2 +
µ
1 + 4r +
2α
d −m
¶
z −1 = 0.
(16)
(ii) The supplier’s compliance level is xS = 2rzS(2 −zS) and xS ∈(0,1) .
Lemma 5 in Appendix A shows that the shared mechanism equilibrium (as implicitly
deﬁned in Lemma 2) exhibits the same characteristics as stated in Lemma 1. Finally, the
supplier and the buyer proﬁts under the shared mechanism are given by:
ΠS(zS) = m
£
1 −(2zS −(zS)2)(1 −xS)
¤
−d(1 −zS)2(1 −xS) −αzS2,
(17)
πS
s (zS) = 2(w −c) −γ + γ(1 −xS)2,
(18)
where zS and xS are the equilibrium audit and compliance levels as given in Lemma 2.
3.
Comparison of Equilibrium Outcomes Across Mechanisms
To gain a deeper understanding about the results derived in the last section, we now
compare the equilibrium decisions across all three audit-penalty mechanisms. Then we
compare the buyers’ and the supplier’s proﬁts across the mechanisms.

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
15
3.1.
Comparison of buyers’ audit and supplier’s compliance levels
We compare the equilibrium decisions across the three mechanisms in Proposition 1.
Proposition 1. Across all three mechanisms, the buyers’ audit levels satisfy: zS < zI <
zJ. Additionally, the supplier’s compliance levels satisfy the following:
(i) xJ > xI and xJ > xS.
(ii) xS > xI if and only if α ≥eα ≡max
©
(d −m)(er −r),0
ª
, where er ≡
1
√
5 −1(≈0.81).
Proposition 1 has the following implications. First, relative to the independent mechanism,
the buyer can aﬀord to audit less under the shared mechanism because all the audit ﬁndings
are shared. On the other hand, relative to the independent mechanism, the buyer can
aﬀord to increase their joint audit level under the joint mechanism because the joint audit
cost is shared by the two buyers. This explains the ﬁrst statement.
Statement (i) in the second statement indicates that because the joint audit level is
higher (i.e., zJ > zI), the supplier must commit to a higher compliance level under the joint
mechanism in response to the increased audit level and the higher (collective) penalty for
non-compliance. Hence, xJ > xI. Next, while both the joint and shared mechanisms impose
the same collective penalty, the buyers in the consortium maintain a higher audit level
under the joint mechanism. In response, the supplier must commit to a higher compliance
level under the joint mechanism. Thus, xJ > xS.
Statement (ii) is noteworthy because it shows that, relative to the independent mecha-
nism, the shared mechanism can make the supplier to comply more and yet the buyer to
audit less. When rate of return on compliance r is high (r ≥er ⇔eα = 0 by deﬁnition), the
supplier will comply more under the shared mechanism because of the collective penalty.
However, when the rate of return on compliance is low (r < er ⇔eα > 0), the compliance level
is driven by the audit cost α of the buyers. If α < eα, then the buyers become complacent
and try to delegate the responsibility of auditing to each other because the cost of auditing
is low. The supplier takes advantage of this behavior and complies less under the shared
mechanism. However, when α ≥eα, each buyer, realizing that the other buyer alone cannot
audit at a greater level due to the high audit cost, seriously takes up the responsibility to
audit and this makes the supplier to comply more. Figures 4 and 5 illustrate the results
stated in Proposition 1. For all the plots in Section 3 we use the following parameter values:
d = g = 1000,c = 0,p = 1800, and w = 900. (In Appendix C, we provide diﬀerent plots for
the case when d = 2g = 2000.)

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
16
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
Figure 4
Audit levels for I, S and J mechanisms with γ = 800 (left) and γ = 1500 (right)
Figure 5
Compliance levels for I, S and J mechanisms with γ = 800 (left) and γ = 1500 (right)
3.2.
Comparison of supplier’s proﬁts
Using the equilibrium proﬁts of the supplier as given in (5), (12), and (18), we establish
the following result that compares supplier’s proﬁts across diﬀerent mechanisms.
Proposition 2. The supplier’s proﬁt possesses the following properties:
(i) πJ
s (zJ) ⩽πI
s(zI) and πJ
s (zJ) ⩽πS
s (zS).
(ii) πS
s (zS) ⩽πI
s(zI) if and only if α ≥eα, where eα is deﬁned as in Proposition 1.
Because the supplier’s proﬁt is driven by the compliance level, the results as stated in
Proposition 2 are congruent with Proposition 1. In particular, the supplier has the lowest
proﬁt in the joint mechanism due to the collective penalty and the higher compliance level
(statements (i) and (ii) in Proposition 1). Figure 6 illustrates the ﬁndings of Proposition
2. Here eα = 0 for γ = 800 and eα = 17.6 for γ = 1500 so we observe πS
s (zS) ⩽πI
s(zI) for most
values of α.
3.3.
Comparison of buyers’ proﬁts
The following result compares the buyers’ proﬁts across the diﬀerent mechanisms.
Proposition 3. The buyers’ proﬁts possess the following properties:
(i) ΠJ(zJ) ⩾ΠI(zI).

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
17
Figure 6
Supplier’s proﬁts (normalized) for I, S and J mechanisms with γ = 800 (left) and γ = 1500 (right)
(ii) ΠS(zS) ⩾ΠI(zI) if and only if α ≥eα, where eα is deﬁned as in Proposition 1.
Proposition 3 has the following implications. The ﬁrst statement illustrates that each
buyer can obtain a higher proﬁt under the joint mechanism than under the independent
mechanism because the buyers share the total audit cost incurred by the consortium while
forcing the supplier to comply more. Further, one would intuitively think that the buyers’
proﬁts would improve if they can attain higher supplier compliance through lower audit
levels. This is the ﬁnding in the second statement of the above proposition: when α is
large, as shown in Proposition 1, the supplier complies more (xS > xI) while the buyers
audit less (zS < zI), and therefore they make higher proﬁts under the shared mechanism
compared to the independent mechanism.
Proposition 3 does not provide a comparison of the buyers’ proﬁt between the joint
and shared mechanisms. Our numerical results indicate that ΠJ(zJ) ⩾ΠS(zS) as it can
be seen in Figure 7. It seems intuitive that the buyers would be better oﬀin the joint
mechanism since they can save on the auditing cost while inducing the highest compliance.
For a few limiting cases (e.g., r →1
2 and α →0) one can indeed show analytically that
ΠJ(zJ) ⩾ΠS(zS), which provides partial support for our numerical observation.
Figure 7
Buyers’ proﬁts (normalized) for I, S and J mechanisms with γ = 800 (left) and γ = 1500 (right)

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
18
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
3.4.
Comparison of supply chain proﬁts
From Propositions 2 and 3 we observe that buyers are better oﬀbut the supplier is worse
oﬀwhen there is a collective penalty under the joint mechanism. In the context of emerg-
ing economies such as Bangladesh, making the supplier substantially worse oﬀcould be
perceived as being socially unfair and the buyers may face adverse publicity. Therefore,
we now examine if the buyers can oﬀer transfer-payments to the supplier so that both the
buyers and the supplier are better oﬀ.
Consider for instance the joint mechanism versus the independent mechanism. When
each buyer i oﬀers a transfer-payment T(> 0) to the supplier, all parties will be better
oﬀif ΠJ −T ⩾ΠI for each buyer and πJ
s + 2T ⩾πI
s for the supplier. That is, there exists
a transfer-payment T that is Pareto improving if, and only if, the supply chain proﬁt is
higher (i.e., 2ΠJ +πJ
s ⩾2ΠI +πI
s). Such Pareto-improving transfer-payment will make the
joint mechanism acceptable to both the buyers and the supplier. By considering the buyer’s
proﬁt given in (4) and (11) and the supplier’s proﬁt given in (5) and (12) we obtain the
following results:
Proposition 4. The total supply chain proﬁt under the joint mechanism is higher than
that under the independent mechanism if any of the following conditions hold:
(i) The audit cost α is suﬃciently low.
(ii) The damage costs of each buyer is larger than the compliance cost of the supplier
(i.e., d > γ).
(iii) The total damage cost incurred by the buyers is greater than the compliance cost of
the supplier (i.e., 2d > γ) and the cost of non-compliance for each buyer is greater
than the cost of non-compliance for the supplier (i.e. d −m > g + w).
Proposition 4 provides a set of suﬃcient conditions ensuring the existence of a transfer-
payment T > 0 such that the joint mechanism creates supply chain value compared to
the independent mechanism. Part (i) in Proposition 4 states that, regardless of the other
parameter values, if the audit cost α is low enough, then the savings from the joint audit
will outweigh the decrease in the supplier’s proﬁt. To see this, note that xI and xJ tend
to one when the audit cost α approaches zero. Since zI
xI = zJ
xJ = 1
2r, it follows that the audit
level in the joint and independent mechanisms are equal to
1
2r when α →0. This can be
conﬁrmed in Figures 4 and 5. Hence, when α is close to zero, xI ≈xJ and zI ≈zJ, so πI
s ≈πJ
s ,

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
19
but ΠI
i < ΠJ
i because the joint mechanism has an audit cost saving of α
2 compared to the
independent mechanism. By continuity, there must exist a range (0,α ′), with 0 < α ′ ≤∞,
such that 2ΠJ + πJ
s ⩾2ΠI + πI
s, which is statement (i) in Proposition 4.
Parts (ii) and (iii) in Proposition 4 are conditions to ensure that the supply chain will
earn net positive savings through compliance. In contrast, if there is a net loss through
compliance, then the joint mechanism might lead to lower supply chain proﬁts compared to
the independent mechanism. This can only happen when α is large so the audit cost advan-
tage of the joint mechanism has less impact – see the discussion of part (i) of Proposition
4 in the previous paragraph.
The shared mechanism is harder to analyze because we only have an implicit charac-
terization of the audit level zS as stated in Lemma 2. Our best attempt is summarized in
Proposition 5 in Appendix A, which is similar to part (iii) of Proposition 4. Nevertheless,
in our extensive numerical study we observed that the results in Proposition 4 – in partic-
ular, parts (i) and (ii) – also held true for the shared mechanism as shown, for instance,
in Figure 8.
Figure 8
Supply chain proﬁts (normalized) for I, S and J mechanisms with γ = 800 (left) and γ = 1500 (right)
The left plot in Figure 8 has d > γ, so 2ΠJ + πJ
s ⩾2ΠI + πI
s for all α per part (ii) of
Proposition 4. We observe the same for the shared mechanism. The right plot in Figure 8
has d < γ < 2d and (d −m) < 2(d −m) < g + w, so neither parts (ii) or (iii) of Proposition
4 apply (and Proposition 5 for the shared mechanism does not apply either). Hence, in the
right plot of Figure 8 only part (i) of Proposition 4 applies and the joint mechanism yields
a higher supply chain proﬁt for lower values of α (here α ′ = 190.83), but for larger values
the independent mechanism is better from a channel perspective. The same can be said
for the shared mechanism. Overall, as consumers become more aware of compliance issues,
one would expect the collateral damage d to become high enough such that d > γ, which

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
20
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
would ensure that the joint (or shared) mechanism yields a higher proﬁt for any audit cost
α.
3.5.
Comparison of consumer surplus
The proﬁt comparisons are crucial from the supply chain perspective. However, from the
social responsibility perspective, one needs to consider the impact of the mechanisms on
consumer surplus.
Consider a typical end consumer who derives an intrinsic utility V from the product and
hence, gains a surplus of V −p when consuming one unit of the product. The expected
utility of a representative consumer is thus given by (V −p) · Pr(Sale), where Pr(Sale) is
the probability that trade occurs in equilibrium. We assume that V > p, else the consumer
would not purchase the product. Thus, to compare the consumer surplus under diﬀerent
audit-penalty mechanisms, it suﬃces to observe the sale probability Pr(Sale) under each
of the mechanisms.2 The sale probabilities under the independent, joint and shared mecha-
nisms are given as: SI ≡1−zI(1−xI),SJ ≡1−zJ(1−xJ), and SS ≡1−zS(2−zS)(1−xS).
With these deﬁnitions we have the following result:
Lemma 3.
1. SJ > SI if and only if
√
2r(d −m) > α.
2. There exists a threshold value αJ such that SJ > SS if and only if α < αJ.
3. There exists a value αI such that SI < SS if and only if min{αI, eα} < α < max{αI, eα},
where eα is deﬁned as in Proposition 1.
Lemma 3 shows that the independent mechanism has a higher sale probability than the
joint mechanism when the audit cost α is large. The sale probability is better in the joint
mechanism when the compliance level is relatively high – in fact, much greater than 0.5
– but such high compliance level can only be attained if auditing is not too costly, as
shown in Figure 5. Hence, consumer surplus is lower under the joint mechanism when α
is large. Note however, that the parameter d implicitly captures how much society values
compliance. As d increases, it follows from Lemma 3 that there is a wider range of α for
which the sale probability is higher in the joint mechanism than in the independent case.
Similar observations can be made for the shared mechanism.
2 Our model assumes that p is exogenous. In practice, some consumer might be willing to pay a premium for responsible
sourcing practices.

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
21
4.
Endogenous Wholesale Price
In this section, we extend our model to the case when the wholesale price wi and the
audit level zi are endogenously determined by buyer i and when the compliance level x is
endogenously determined by the supplier. Since the game for each of the three mechanisms
involves 5 diﬀerent decisions, i.e., (w1,z1;w2,z2;x), selected by 3 players (2 buyers and 1
supplier), the analysis is complex and the analytical comparisons across all the three mech-
anisms are no longer tractable. Therefore, we make these comparisons through numerical
analysis. To facilitate such analysis, we solve a two-stage game: in the ﬁrst stage the buyers
simultaneously choose the wholesale prices and then the second stage corresponds to the
simultaneous game analyzed in Section 3. Note that the Alliance for Bangladesh does not
include any provisions for the garment prices, whereas the Accord only states that prices
should ensure ﬁnancial feasibility (see Table 1 in Jacobs and Singhal 2015). In other words,
these consortiums do not address pricing and auditing simultaneously, which is consistent
with our sequential approach.
To incorporate the issue of endogenous wholesale price to be determined by each buyer,
we deﬁne two additional terms: (a) buyer i’s proﬁt margin mi ≡p −wi, i = 1,2; and (b)
the supplier’s “rate of return on compliance to buyer i’s audit” ri ≡g+wi
2γ . Notice that both
terms depend on the wholesale price wi to be determined by buyer i. In what follows, we
ﬁrst describe how we determine the best-response functions (i.e., the supplier’s compliance
level and the buyers’ audit level) for any given wholesale price vector (w1,w2) under each
of the three mechanisms. We then explain how we compute the wholesale price and the
corresponding proﬁts in equilibrium.
4.1.
Independent Mechanism I
By using the same approach presented in Section 2.1, it is easy to check that, for any given
wholesale price vector (w1,w2), the supplier’s proﬁt and the buyers’ proﬁt can be written
as
πs(x;z1,z2,w1,w2) =
2
X
i=1
[wi(1 −zi(1 −x)) −gzi(1 −x) −c] −γx2
=
2
X
i=1
(wi −c) −(wi + g)(1 −x) ·
2
X
i=1
zi −γx2,
(19)
Πi(zi,wi;x) = mi(1 −zi(1 −x)) −αz2
i −d(1 −zi)(1 −x), i = 1,2.
(20)

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
22
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
On solving the simultaneous game between the supplier and the buyers for a given wholesale
price vector (w1,w2), we obtain the equilibrium audit and compliance decisions as below:
zI
i (w1,w2) =
(d −mi)
2α + r1(d −m1) + r2(d −m2), i = 1,2,
(21)
xI(w1,w2) =
r1(d −m1) + r2(d −m2)
2α + r1(d −m1) + r2(d −m2).
(22)
By substituting the above equilibrium into (19) and (20), we obtain the proﬁts of the sup-
plier and the buyers, which we denote by πI
s(w1,w2) and ΠI
i (w1,w2),i = 1,2, respectively.
By using πI
s(w1,w2) and ΠI
i (w1,w2) and by inducting backward we obtain the equilibrium
wholesale prices wI
1 and wI
2 by solving a non-cooperative game between the two buyers as
follows. First, we consider the bounds imposed on wholesale prices by Assumptions 1 and 2
(i.e., max{0,p −d} ⩽wi ⩽min{p,g + c}) and by Assumption 3 (i.e., w1 + w2 −2c ⩾γ). We
then compute the best-response function of buyer i (i.e., w∗
i (wj)) numerically by solving
the following problem of buyer i for diﬀerent values of wj:
PI :
max
wi ΠI
i (wi,wj)
subject to (21),(22),
max{0,p −d} ⩽wi ⩽min{p,g + c} for i = 1,2,
w1 + w2 −2c ⩾γ,
ΠI
i (wi,wj) ⩾0,for i = 1,2.
In this problem, the last two constraints correspond to the individually rational constraints
associated with the supplier and buyers, respectively. Next, we determine the equilibrium
wholesale price wI
1 and wI
2 as the point of intersection of the above derived best-response
functions. As the buyers are identical, we observe that wI
1 = wI
2 ≡wI∗. Finally, we retrieve
the corresponding equilibrium outcomes (zI∗,xI∗,πI∗
s ,ΠI∗) through substitution.
4.2.
Joint Mechanism J
For any given wholesale price w1 and w2, we can use the same approach as presented in
Section 2.2 to determine the supplier’s proﬁt as:
πs(z) = max
x∈[0,1]{(w1 + w2)(1 −z(1 −x)) −2gz(1 −x) −2c −γx2}
(23)

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
23
where z is the joint audit level adopted by the consortium. The best response of the supplier
is obtained as xJ(z) = min{(r1 + r2)z,1}.
Now suppose buyer i is able to select unilaterally the joint audit level z. Then, buyer i
would choose a joint audit level of
z = zi(θi) ≡(d −mi)(1 −x)
2αθi
(24)
that maximizes its proﬁt
Πi(θi;z,x) = mi(1 −z(1 −x)) −d(1 −z)(1 −x) −θiαz2.
(25)
Thus, if
θi
d−mi =
θj
d−mj then both buyers choose the same joint audit level and hence would
automatically reach a consensus. Using this fact, we assume that buyer i and buyer j agree
a priori to share the audit cost in the ratio θi
θj = d−mi
d−mj . As before, we make this assumption
for ease of exposition and in Appendix B we formally show that
θi
d−mi =
θj
d−mj =
1
2d−m1−m2
is the outcome of a non-cooperative game. By using these proportions θ1 and θ2, we can
determine the equilibrium audit and compliance levels as:
zJ ≡zJ(w1,w2) =
(2d −m1 −m2)
2α + (r1 + r2)(2d −m1 −m2)
(26)
xJ ≡xJ(w1,w2) =
(r1 + r2)(2d −m1 −m2)
2α + (r1 + r2)(2d −m1 −m2).
(27)
By substituting the equilibrium above into (23) and (25), we can express the supplier’s
and buyer i’s proﬁts as πJ
s (w1,w2) and ΠJ
i (w1,w2); respectively. We then induct backwards
to obtain the equilibrium wholesale prices wJ
1 and wJ
2 by solving a non-cooperative game
between the two buyers. We obtain the best-response function of buyer i by solving the
problem PJ, which is the same as problem PI except that the proﬁt function ΠJ
i (wi,wj)
is based on the equilibrium expressions (26) and (27) (instead of (21), (22)). The ensuing
procedure to obtain the equilibrium outcomes (zJ∗,xJ∗,πJ∗
s ,ΠJ∗) is the same as in explained
in Section 4.1.
4.3.
Shared Mechanism S
Akin to (13) and (14), we obtain the supplier’s and the buyers’ proﬁts as:
πs(x;z1,z2,w1,w2) =
2
X
i=1
{(wi −c) −(wi + g)(1 −x) · (zi + zj + zizj)} −γx2,
(28)
Πi(zi,wi;zj,x) = mi(1 −(zi + zj + zizj)(1 −x)) −αz2
i −d(1 −zi)(1 −zj)(1 −x),
(29)

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
24
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
so that the best-response functions of the players for any given wholesale price vector
(w1,w2) are
zS
i = (d −mi)(1 −zS
j )(1 −xS)
2α
, i = 1,2, i ̸= j,
(30)
xS = (r1 + r2)(zS
1 + zS
2 −zS
1 zS
2 ),
(31)
where for notational convenience we suppress the arguments (w1,w2) of zS
i and xS. As
before, we obtain the equilibrium wholesale prices by solving the best-response functions
of the two buyers simultaneously. The best-response function of buyer i is obtained by
solving the problem PS, which is analogous to PI and PJ. The remaining steps to obtain
the equilibrium outcomes (zS∗,xS∗,πS∗
s ,ΠS∗) are the same as in the independent and joint
mechanisms.
4.4.
Numerical Analysis
In this section, we use the approach outlined in sections 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 to compute
the equilibrium outcomes (i.e., wk∗,zk∗,xk∗,πk∗
s ,Πk∗) associated with mechanism k, where
k = I,J,S. Also we used the same parameter values as in Section 3 (except the fact that the
wholesale price wi is now computed instead of exogenously given). The following ﬁgures
summarize our results.
First, since the buyers impose a collective penalty under the joint and shared mecha-
nisms, one would expect the buyers to oﬀer a higher wholesale price under these mecha-
nisms than under the independent mechanism to incentivize the supplier. This intuition is
conﬁrmed in Figure 9, but only when the buyer’s audit cost α is suﬃciently high. This is
because when audit costs are low, the buyers can aﬀord to audit at a higher level, which
in turn increases supplier’s compliance without the need to oﬀer higher wholesale prices.
Figure 9
Equilibrium wholesale price w for I, S and J mechanisms with γ = 800 (left) and γ = 1500 (right)

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
25
Second, when the wholesale price is endogenously determined by the buyers, Figures 10
and 11 indicate that the results stated in Proposition 1 continue to hold for the case when
the buyer’s audit cost α is low. More importantly, we conﬁrm that the joint and the shared
mechanisms can make the supplier more compliant. However, contrary to the ﬁnding made
in Proposition 1, when α is high and the wholesale prices are endogenous, we notice that
the buyers audit more under the shared mechanism than what they would otherwise do
under the independent mechanism. Additionally, as depicted in Figure 9, when α is high,
the buyers also oﬀer a higher wholesale price to encourage a higher supplier compliance
under the shared mechanism. Thus, the buyers use higher audit levels and higher wholesale
prices as two levers to increase supplier’s compliance under the shared mechanism when
the wholesale price is endogenously determined.
Figure 10
Audit levels when w is endogenous with γ = 800 (left) and γ = 1500 (right)
Figure 11
Compliance levels when w is endogenous with γ = 800 (left) and γ = 1500 (right)
Third, Figures 12 and 13 indicate that, among all three mechanisms, the buyers earn the
most and the supplier earns the least under the joint mechanism. This ﬁnding is consistent
with Propositions 2 and 3. Hence, from the buyer’s perspective, the joint mechanism still
dominates the other two mechanisms. Note from Figure 12 that the supplier always makes
a positive proﬁt when α > 0 under all three mechanisms. In contrast, Figure 13 shows that

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
26
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
the buyers’ proﬁt vanishes when the audit cost α is signiﬁcantly high, and this happens
sooner than with exogenous w because the competitive pressure makes the buyers’ proﬁt
decrease faster.
Figure 12
Supplier’s proﬁts when w is endogenous with γ = 800 (left) and γ = 1500 (right)
Figure 13
Buyers’ proﬁts when w is endogenous with γ = 800 (left) and γ = 1500 (right)
Finally, Figure 14 is the counterpart of Figure 8 when the wholesale prices are endoge-
nous. We observe the same results as in Proposition 4. In particular, when the buyers’
damage costs is higher than the supplier’s cost of compliance (d > γ), the joint and shared
mechanisms create supply chain value compared to the independent mechanism for all
values of α. This allows for a transfer-payment to compensate the supplier for its higher
compliance. In general, a Pareto-improving transfer-payment is always possible when the
audit cost α is low enough, as seen in the right plot of Figure 14.
Thus, as demonstrated by the numerical analysis in this section, the key analytical
results that we obtained with an exogenous wholesale price in Section 3 continue to hold
when the wholesale price is endogenous.

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
27
Figure 14
Supply chain proﬁts when w is endogenous with γ = 800 (left) and γ = 1500 (right)
5.
Discussion
In this section we discuss some of our model implications in relation to the Alliance and
the Accord. It should be noted that our model by no means fully represents these agree-
ments; instead, it captures various salient features especially the audit-penalty mechanism.
Nevertheless, our ﬁndings can be relevant for the design of future consortia.
The Alliance and the Accord are fundamentally similar in many aspects (Labowitz and
Baumann-Pauly 2014) and both advocate joint audits. However, one important diﬀerence
is that the Accord is legally binding whereas the Alliance is not (Economist 2013). Specif-
ically, under the Accord, factory workers can take legal action if they believe that the
Accord fails to “follow through on their commitment”.3 This can be incorporated in our
model through the damage cost d. Assuming a higher damage cost d for the Accord would
be consistent with the additional legal costs faced by the Accord when its auditing eﬀort
fails to detect non-compliance. A higher damage cost implies higher audit and compliance
levels (per Lemma 4), but it also implies lower proﬁts for the buyers. So this would indicate
that the Accord might ensure safer factories compared to the Alliance, but at the expense
of lower proﬁts due to a higher liability.
The Accord stipulates that a non-compliant factory that fails to eliminate safety hazards
must be terminated. This commitment is also legally binding.4 In contrast, the Alliance is
not legally bound to terminate a non-compliant factory. In other words, there is a positive
chance that the buyers might continue to do business with a factory that failed the audit.
This can be incorporated in our model through the goodwill cost g.5 Assuming a lower
goodwill cost g for the Alliance would be consistent with the fact that the supplier is less
3 http://www.cleanclothes.org/resources/background/comparison-safety-accord-and-the-gap-walmart-scheme
4 http://www.just-style.com/news/bangladesh-accord-cuts-ties-with-four-more-factories_id127323.aspx
5 Alternatively, one can include an expected payment from the buyer to the supplier that is proportional to z(1 −x).

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
28
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
likely to be terminated when non-compliance is detected. If g is lower, then the rate of
return on compliance r is lower, and per Equation (10) the audit and compliance levels
will decrease.
Aside from being legally binding or not, both agreements stipulate contributions from
the buyers toward helping the supplier’s compliance. This can be incorporated into the
model by assuming that the buyers incur a certain portion δ of the compliance cost γx2.
It can be shown that when δ > 0, for all three mechanisms (I, J, and S): the compliance
level is higher, the audit level is lower, and the supplier’s proﬁt increases. In contrast, the
buyers’ proﬁt increases only when the audit cost α is high.6 Hence, as expected, providing
ﬁnancial assistance beneﬁts the supplier but might not be in the best interest of the buyers.
Finally, we have shown that the joint mechanism eﬀectively increases compliance, so
both the Alliance and the Accord should be able to achieve their primary goal. If these
consortiums also want to ensure that the suppliers are better oﬀ(or at least not worse oﬀ),
then our results show that some form of transfer-payment is needed.
6.
Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we presented a uniﬁed framework of three diﬀerent audit-penalty mechanisms
(independent, joint, and shared) for improving supplier’s compliance in supply chains. By
considering a simultaneous move game involving 2 buyers and 1 supplier, we analyzed and
compared the equilibrium outcomes (the supplier’s compliance level, the buyer’s audit level,
the supplier’s proﬁt, the buyers’ proﬁts and the supply chain proﬁt) across all three mech-
anisms for the case when the wholesale price is exogenously given. We also extended our
analysis to the case when the wholesale price associated with each mechanism is endoge-
nously determined by the buyers. We show that the joint mechanism dominates in terms of
supplier compliance and the buyers’ proﬁt. Moreover, in our numerical analysis we observe
that the key structural ﬁndings that we made for the case of exogenous wholesale price
continued to hold even when the wholesale price is endogenously determined by the buyers.
Overall, we can summarize the key ﬁndings for the joint mechanism as follows:
1. The supplier’s compliance always improves, and it always results in higher buyer proﬁt
under the joint mechanism.
2. The supplier, however, earns the lowest proﬁt under the joint mechanism and earns
the highest proﬁt under the independent mechanism.
6 The details of this analysis is available from the authors upon request.

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
29
3. The buyers have to oﬀer a Pareto-improving transfer-payment to the supplier to make
the latter better oﬀunder the joint mechanism.
4. Such transfer-payment is possible when the audit cost is low or when the buyers’
damage cost is higher than the supplier’s cost of compliance. When these conditions
hold, the supply chain proﬁt under the joint mechanism is higher than the proﬁt
under the independent mechanism and this enables the buyers to provide the Pareto-
improving transfer-payment.
We ﬁnd similar results for the shared mechanism, which shows that it is also a viable
mechanism to create supply chain value through collective penalty.
Overall, our results enable us to gain a better understanding about the dynamic inter-
actions among the buyers and the supplier under independent, joint and shared mecha-
nisms. Since the joint mechanism captures two salient features (collective penalty and joint
audits), our results provide additional justiﬁcation for the implementation of the Accord
and the Alliance in Bangladesh.
Future research could consider alternative audit-penalty mechanisms and settings where
our modeling assumptions do not apply. These include settings in which the buyers are non-
identical (diﬀerent price/cost structure, diﬀerent bargaining power, etc.), scenarios with
incomplete information on costs, or an extension in which the retail price p is endogenous.
All of this could potentially aﬀect the ordering of the three mechanisms. Given the current
concerns over supplier compliance, addressing these questions could be worthwhile avenues
for future research.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the guest editor, the associate editor, three anonymous reviewers, and the seminar partic-
ipants at the Arizona State University, Imperial College London, National University of Singapore, Oxford
University, and University College London for their constructive comments about an earlier version of this
paper.
References
Babich V, Burnetas AN, Ritchken PH (2007) Competition and diversiﬁcation eﬀects in supply chains with
supplier default risk. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 9(2):123–146.
Babich V, Tang CS (2012) Managing opportunistic supplier product adulteration: Deferred payments, inspec-
tion, and combined mechanisms. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 14(2):301–314.

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
30
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
Camerer C (2003) Behavioral game theory: Experiments in strategic interaction (Princeton University Press,
New York and Princeton).
Caro F, Chintapalli P, Rajaram K, Tang CS (2015) Improving supplier compliance through joint and shared
audits, unpublished manuscript, UCLA Anderson School, available at SSRN 2683515.
Demick B (2013) Explosion at Chinese auto parts factory kills 68, injured many more. Los Angeles Times.
Donaldson T (2014) Bangladesh resetting the bar on compliance standards. The Sourcing Journal.
Economist (2013) Clothing ﬁrms in Bangladesh: Accord, Alliance, or disunity? The Economist.
Fang X, Cho SH (2015) Cooperative approaches to managing social responsibility in supply chains: Joint
auditing and information sharing, available at SSRN 2686018.
Fudenberg D, Tirole J (1991) Game Theory (The MIT Press, Cambridge MA).
Fuller T, Bradsher K (2013) Deadly collapse in Cambodia renews safety concerns. New York Times.
Greenhouse S, Cliﬀord S (2013) U.S. retailers oﬀer plan for safety at factories. New York Times.
Harsanyi JC, Selten R (1988) A General Theory of Equilibrium Selection in Games (MIT Press).
Jacobs B, Singhal V (2015) The eﬀect of the Rana Plaza disaster on shareholder wealth of retailers: Impli-
cations for sourcing strategies and supply chain governance. To appear in Journal of Operations Man-
agement .
Kapner S, Banjo S (2013) U.S. retailers near pact on Bangladesh factory safety. The Wall Street Journal.
Kim SH (2015) Time to come clean? Disclosure and inspection policies for green production. Operations
Research 63(1):1–20.
Labowitz S, Baumann-Pauly D (2014) Business as usual is not an option: Supply chains and sourcing after
rana plaza. Technical report, NYU Stern Center for Business and Human Rights.
Orsdemir A, Hu B, Deshpande V (2015) Responsible sourcing via vertical integration and supply chain part-
nership, working paper, UNC Chapel Hill Kenan-Flagler Business School, available at SSRN 2630733.
Plambeck EL, Taylor T (2015) Supplier evasion of a buyer’s audit: Implications for motivating compliance
with labor and environmental standards. To appear in Manufacturing & Service Operations Manage-
ment .
Rui H, Lai G (2015) Sourcing with deferred payment and inspection under supplier product adulteration
risk. Production and Operations Management 24(6):934–946.
Sodhi MS, Son BG, Tang CS (2012) Researchers’ perspectives on supply chain risk management. Production
and Operations Management 21(1):1–13.
Sodhi MS, Tang CS (2012) Managing supply chain risk, volume 172 (Springer Science & Business Media).
Tang CS (2013) Helping the poorest link in the chain: Bangladesh’s garment factory workers. UCLA Anderson
School Global Supply Chain Blog.

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
31
Van Mieghem JA (1999) Coordinating investment, production, and subcontracting. Management Science
45(7):954–971.
Wong CH, Fung E (2015) More toxic goods stored near Tianjin homes. The Wall Street Journal.
Appendix A:
Supplemental Results.
Lemma 4. Under the joint mechanism J, the buyer’s joint audit level zJ and the supplier’s compliance
level xJ given in (10) possess the following properties:
(i) The supplier’s compliance level is always higher than the buyer’s audit level (i.e., xJ = 2rzJ > zJ).
(ii) Both the supplier’s compliance level xJ and the buyer’s audit level zJ are increasing in the buyer’s
damage cost d and are decreasing in the buyer’s audit cost α.
(iii) The supplier’s compliance level xJ is decreasing in the supplier’s compliance cost γ. However, the
buyer’s audit level zJ is increasing in γ.
(iv) The supplier’s compliance level xJ is increasing in the supplier’s goodwill cost g. However, the buyer’s
audit level zJ is decreasing in g.
(v) The supplier’s compliance level xJ is increasing in the wholesale price w. However, the buyer’s audit
level zJ is increasing in w if, and only if, w < √αγ −(d −p).
Lemma 5. Under the shared mechanism S, the buyer’s joint audit level zS and the supplier’s compliance
level xS given in Lemma 2 possess the following properties:
(i) The supplier’s compliance level is higher than the buyer’s audit level (i.e., xS > zS).
(ii) Both the supplier’s compliance level xS and the buyer’s audit level zS are increasing in the buyer’s
damage cost d and are decreasing in the buyer’s audit cost α.
(iii) The supplier’s compliance level xS is decreasing in the supplier’s compliance cost γ. However, the
buyer’s audit level zS is increasing in γ.
(iv) The supplier’s compliance level xS is increasing in the supplier’s goodwill cost g. However, the buyer’s
audit level zS is decreasing in g.
(v) The supplier’s compliance level xS is increasing in the wholesale price w. The buyer’s audit level zS is
decreasing in w when w is suﬃciently large.
Proposition 5. The total supply chain proﬁt under the shared mechanism is higher than that under
the independent mechanism if the total cost of non-compliance for both buyers is larger than the cost of
non-compliance for the supplier (i.e., 2(d −m) > g + w) and α ≥eα, where eα is deﬁned as in Proposition 1
Appendix B:
Proportional Sharing of Joint Audit Cost under the Joint Mechanism.
B.1.
Exogenous Wholesale Prices
Here we provide the details of the non-cooperative game under the joint mechanism. To ensure that there is
an implementable joint audit, we assume that the consortium will agree to adopt the “minimum-audit-level
rule” that we describe shortly. This rule embodies the notion of the weakest link or minimum eﬀort that

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
32
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
underpins many coordination problems that are modeled as non-cooperative games, see Camerer (2003).
Though this is one particular rule to reach consensus, it should be noted that the same results shown here
below can be obtained by formulating the joint mechanism as a unanimous game, see Caro et al. (2015).
The buyers have to agree on the joint audit level and the audit cost sharing. In a non-cooperative setting,
buyer i would have to propose an audit level zi and a share θi of the audit cost. Hence, each buyer has
a two-dimensional strategy space. Analyzing such kind of game is complex. Moreover, without additional
structure the proﬁt of buyer i might not be jointly concave in zi and θi. To avoid these problems, recall that
Equation (9) provides a one-to-one mapping between the share θi and buyer i’s “ideal” joint audit level. We
use this relation to reduce buyer i’s strategy space to θi ∈[0,1] as shown next.
We now introduce the audit level selection process that is agreed upon by both buyers a priori. Speciﬁcally,
the buyers play a game in which they simultaneously propose the share of the auditing cost each one of them
would like to pay. In other words, buyer i proposes θi and buyer j proposes θj.7 The outcome of the game
is determined according to the following rules:
1. If θi ̸= θj, then the audit level adopted by the consortium is z = min{zi(θi),zj(θj)}, where zi(θi) is given
in Equation (9), and the total audit cost will be shared according to the proportion that is proposed
by the buyer whose audit level is adopted.
2. If θi = θj = θ ≥1
2, then the joint audit level is z = zi(θ) = zj(θ) and each buyer pays a proportion θ of
the auditing cost.
3. If θi = θj < 1
2, then the consortium is not formed and the independent mechanism takes place.
Since zi(θi) < zj(θj) if and only if θi > θj, the minimum-audit-level rule reduces to verifying which buyer is
willing to pay a higher share of the auditing cost. With this audit selection process, buyer i’s proﬁt can be
written as:
ΠJ
i (θi;θj,x) =









m(1 −zi(θi)(1 −x)) −d(1 −zi(θi))(1 −x) −θi αzi(θi)2 if θi > θj
m(1 −zi(θ)(1 −x)) −d(1 −zi(θ))(1 −x) −θ αzi(θ)2 if θi = θj = θ ⩾1
2
m(1 −zj(θj)(1 −x)) −d(1 −zj(θj))(1 −x) −(1 −θj)αzj(θj)2 if θi < θj
ΠI(zI) if θi = θj < 1
2.
(32)
The buyers’ simultaneous actions θi and θj are essentially a coordination game and as such there are
multiple equilibria (Fudenberg and Tirole 1991). In fact, any θ ∈[0,1] such that θi = θj = θ corresponds
to an equilibrium. To select one equilibrium point, we adopt the payoﬀdominance reﬁnement proposed
by Harsanyi and Selten (1988). Speciﬁcally, we show that the equilibrium θ1 = θ2 = 1
2 in which the buyers
equally share the joint audit cost is payoﬀdominant. This is formalized in Lemmas 6 and 7.
Lemma 6. Under the minimum-audit-level rule, each buyer will agree to share the joint audit cost equally,
i.e., θ1 = θ2 in equilibrium.
Lemma 7. The payoﬀdominant equilibrium of the joint mechanism game is given by θ1 = θ2 = θ = 1
2.
7 The supplier also participates in the game by simultaneously choosing the compliance level x.

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
33
B.2.
Endogenous Wholesale Prices
Note that since zi(θi) = (d−mi)(1−x)
2αθi
, we have zi(θi) < zj(θj) if, and only if,
θi
d−mi >
θj
d−mj . Thus, the proﬁt of
buyer i under J with unequal wholesale prices and “minimum-audit-level rule” is given by
ΠJ
i (θi;θj,x) =











mi(1 −zi(θi)(1 −x)) −d(1 −zi(θi))(1 −x) −θiαzi(θi)2 if
θi
d−mi >
θj
d−mj
mi(1 −zi(θ)(1 −x)) −d(1 −zi(θ))(1 −x) −θαzi(θ)2 if
θi
d−mi =
θj
d−mj =
1
2d−m1−m2
m(1 −zj(θj)(1 −x)) −d(1 −zj(θj))(1 −x) −(1 −θj)αzj(θj)2 if
θi
d−mi <
θj
d−mj
ΠI(zI) if
θi
d−mi =
θj
d−mj <
1
2d−m1−m2
(33)
where mi = p −wi. In the last case, when
θi
d−mi =
θj
d−mj <
1
2d−m1−m2 , the consortium is not formed and each
buyer resorts to an independent audit. The following lemmas are equivalent to Lemmas 6 and 7.
Lemma 8. For a given wholesale prices w1 and w2, the buyers’ equilibrium choice of θ1 and θ2 satisfy the
condition
θ1
d−m1 =
θ2
d−m2 . Hence, the buyers choose the same audit level in equilibrium.
Lemma 9. The equilibrium given by θi =
d−mi
2d−m1−m2 , i = 1,2, is payoﬀdominant.
Appendix C:
Numerical Study with d >> g
Here we present numerical results when the collateral penalty of the buyers d is much larger than the goodwill
cost g experienced by the supplier. This scenario is arguably more realistic because in cases of non-compliance
the market tends to punish more the buyers and put less blame on the supplier (due to the fact it is located
in developing country). The following ﬁgures assume d = 2g = 2000. All the other parameters remain the
same as in Sections 3 and 4.
Figures 16 and 15 show that the audit and compliance levels are higher compared to the scenarios with
d = g = 1000, especially for high values of the audit cost α. This follows from Lemmas 1, 4, and 5. Figure 17
shows the supply chain proﬁts. Note that d > γ so from Proposition 4(ii) it follows that the joint mechanism
achieves higher supply chain proﬁts for all values of α. We omit the ﬁgures when the wholesale price is
endogenous because they look very similar to the exogenous case. In contrast to Figure 9, when d = 2000
the wholesale price in equilibrium is constant for all relevant values of α. The reason is that a high penalty
d pushes the buyers to audit more, which in turn increases the compliance level, so they do not have to use
the wholesale price to incentivize the supplier. Consequently, the buyers lower the wholesale price as much
as possible and the constraint w1 + w2 −2c ≥γ becomes active.

Author: Improving Supplier Compliance Through Joint and Shared Audits
34
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 00(0), pp. 000–000, c
⃝0000 INFORMS
Figure 15
Audit levels when d = 2g = 2000. Left plot has γ = 800 and right plot has γ = 1500.
Figure 16
Compliance levels when d = 2g = 2000. Left plot has γ = 800 and right plot has γ = 1500.
Figure 17
Supply chain proﬁts (normalized) when d = 2g = 2000. Left plot has γ = 800 and right plot has γ = 1500.