TITLE: Can Deep Reinforcement Learning Improve Inventory Management? Performance on Lost Sales, Dual-Sourcing, and Multi-Echelon Problems
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2021.1064
---

Can Deep Reinforcement Learning Improve Inventory Management?
Performance on Lost Sales, Dual Sourcing and Multi-Echelon Problems
Joren Gijsbrechts
Cat´olica Lisbon School of Business & Economics, Portugal
Robert N. Boute
Vlerick Business School and KU Leuven, Belgium
Jan A. Van Mieghem
Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University, United States
Dennis J. Zhang
Olin Business School, Washington University in St. Louis, United States
December 17, 2018; Revised Jul. 29, 2019; Oct. 6, 2020; Jul. 2, 2021
Problem deﬁnition: Is Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) eﬀective at solving inventory problems?
Academic/practical relevance: Given that DRL has successfully been applied in computer games and
robotics, supply chain researchers and companies are interested in its potential in inventory management.
We provide a rigorous performance evaluation of DRL in three classic and intractable inventory problems:
lost sales, dual-sourcing and multi-echelon inventory management.
Methodology: We model each inventory problem as a Markov Decision Process and apply and tune the
Asynchronous Advantage Actor Critic (A3C) DRL algorithm for a variety of parameter settings.
Results: We demonstrate that the A3C algorithm can match performance of state-of-the-art heuristics
and other approximate dynamic programming methods. While the initial tuning was computationally- and
time-demanding, only small changes to the tuning parameters were needed for the other studied problems.
Managerial implications: Our study provides evidence that DRL can eﬀectively solve inventory problems.
This is especially promising when problem-dependent heuristics are lacking. Yet generating structural policy
insight or designing specialized policies that are (ideally provably) near optimal remains desirable.
Key words : Inventory Theory and Control, Logistics and Transportation, Supply Chain Management,
OM-Information Technology Interface
1.
Introduction
In the nexus of business and technology, no topic is hotter today than machine learning and artiﬁcial
intelligence. We focus on deep reinforcement learning (DRL), the subﬁeld of machine learning that
develops “prescriptions” or policies for sequential decision-making problems. DRL employs deep
neural nets to approximate the value or policy functions of Markov Decision Processes. This allows
DRL to circumvent the curse of dimensionality, inherent to dynamic programming. With the help
of DRL, programs have learned to play Atari games directly from image pixels [Mnih et al. 2015]
and recently AlphaGo has beat the best human players in Go, the most complex board game in
human history [Silver et al. 2016].
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
2
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
Despite the on-going frenzy about these breakthroughs, applications of DRL in industrial con-
texts such as inventory management remain rather scarce. The true strength of these general
learning algorithms is that they provide a way to solve a diversity of problems rather than relying
on extensive domain knowledge or restrictive assumptions. In the inventory management literature
a variety of model-speciﬁc heuristics exist; it typically depends on the model assumptions which
heuristic performs best. In contrast, DRL algorithms are easily accessible and can be applied to
any sequential decision-making problem. As such, DRL could be perceived as a general purpose
technology that can serve many diﬀerent purposes.
We test the use of DRL on three classic inventory problems. In lost sales inventory models
customers walk away or receive an expedited shipment at a premium cost when the desired product
is not available (and hence no backlogging is allowed). Under dual sourcing, inventory can be
replenished from a fast but expensive source and from a regular, cheaper source with longer lead
time. In the equivalent dual-mode problem, inventory can be replenished from a single source
using two complementary transportation modes. Multi-echelon inventory management includes
additional stages or echelons of the supply chain that can hold inventory, such as an intermediate
central warehouse between an upstream plant and downstream retailers.
These conceptually-simple problems have vexed supply chain management scientists for decades.
Little is known about the optimal policy structure and traditional solution methodologies such
as dynamic programming quickly become intractable due to the curse of dimensionality: their
size grows exponentially as replenishment lead times get longer. Heuristic policies are typically
problem-dependent and rely on restrictive assumptions, limiting their use in diﬀerent settings. We
explore whether a general purpose technology like DRL provides an alternative.
We establish proof-of-concept with rigorous performance benchmarks to lost sales, dual-sourcing
or dual-mode, and multi-echelon inventory models. Our conclusion is nuanced: DRL can match
performance of state-of-the-art heuristics across a variety of problems, with limited changes to the
tuning parameters. Yet, ﬁnding good initial hyperparameter sets is computationally burdensome
while the resulting policies of DRL algorithms remain black boxes. Generating structural policy
insight or designing specialized policies that are (ideally provably) near optimal thus remains a
desirable research activity. At the same time, DRL provides promising results and has potential in
practice, especially when problem-dependent heuristics are lacking.
We aspire to make the following contributions: (1) Provide proof-of-concept that deep reinforce-
ment learning can tackle a variety of inventory problems that have intractable dynamic programs;
(2) Numerically evaluate performance relative to the optimal dynamic program and to heuris-
tic policies and approximate dynamic programming methods; and (3) Provide a tutorial on how
DRL works. Our aim is thus not to contribute to DRL per se; but to demonstrate how DRL may
contribute to inventory management.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
3
2.
Selected Literature reviews
We provide a brief introduction to well-performing heuristics on lost sales (Section 2.1), dual
sourcing (Section 2.2), and multi-echelon (Section 2.3) inventory models. These heuristics have
been developed and shown to perform well under the conventional assumptions: i.i.d. demand,
linear sourcing costs and deterministic lead times. As soon as one of these assumptions is relaxed
or other practice-speciﬁc constraints are added, the performance of these heuristics may suﬀer and
better performing policies are desired. This is precisely where numerical approximation methods
may provide a solution, which we review in Section 2.4.
2.1.
Lost Sales Inventory Models
Arrow and Karlin [1958] show that in a single sourcing backlogging model with constant lead time,
inventory level (i.e., inventory on hand minus backorders) and outstanding orders can be collapsed
into one single number (i.e., the inventory position) and a single-dimensional base-stock policy is
optimal. They also indicate that this state-space reduction no longer holds when excess demand
is lost instead of backlogged. The optimal policy then depends on the entire inventory pipeline
vector such that the complexity grows exponentially in the lead time. Morton [1969] provides more
structural properties and bounds.
Base-stock policies generally perform poorly in lost sales inventory models [Zipkin 2008a], except
for large penalty costs, in which case optimal inventory levels are high and stock-outs are rare.
Huh et al. [2009] prove that base-stock policies are asymptotically optimal for large penalty costs.
[Goldberg et al. 2016] show that the Constant Order policy with only constant replenishment from
a single source [Reiman 2004] is asymptotically optimal for long lead times. Xin [2019] combines
these two asymptotic results to propose the Capped Base-Stock policy.
The Myopic policy generally performs well for the lost sales inventory model [Morton 1971, Zipkin
2008a]: it computes in each period t the order quantity that minimizes the expected costs in the
period when the order arrives (i.e. in period t+l, with l representing the lead time) by recursively
computing the expected stock levels in period t + l. These ﬁndings are more rigorously conﬁrmed
by Brown and Smith [2014] who use the value of perfect information in combination with the
L♮-convexity (read el-natural) property (which was proven by Zipkin [2008b]). They develop tight
lower bounds and show how myopic policies consistently perform close to optimality on the lost
sales problem even in settings where dynamic programming is intractable. Extensions such as the
Myopic 2-period policy [Zipkin 2008a] perform even better. Further increasing the myopic horizon
comes at the expense of increased computation time (similar to the dynamic program in which the
inﬁnite horizon is used to choose actions). The one- and two-period myopic policies are essentially
approximate dynamic programming methods as they require, at each time epoch, the iteration (or
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
4
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
evaluation) over all states that can be reached during the considered horizon [Xin 2019]. They thus
also suﬀer from the curse of dimensionality and are more computationally intensive than base-stock
or constant order policies. Inspired by Zipkin’s (2008b) ﬁnding that the value function of the lost
sales problem is L♮-convex, Sun et al. [2016] develop a linear programming approximate dynamic
programming (LP-ADP) algorithm. We elaborate further on LP-ADP in Section 2.4.
2.2.
Dual Sourcing Inventory Models
Dual sourcing or dual-mode replenishment has been studied since the pioneering inventory man-
agement models of the mid-twentieth century. Fukuda [1964] proved that the optimal policy follows
a base-stock structure when the lead time diﬀerence between both sources is exactly one period.
When the lead time diﬀerence exceeds one period, however, a base-stock policy is no longer opti-
mal [Sheopuri et al. 2010]. No simple structure prevails and the optimal policy depends on the
vector of outstanding orders [Whittemore and Saunders 1977]. As costs related to replenishments
within the expedite lead time do not impact the optimal policy [Sheopuri et al. 2010], the optimal
policy depends on the (lr −le) outstanding orders, in which lr and le respectively represent the
lead time of the regular slow and expedite supplier. These insights inspired the development of
various heuristic policies by collapsing the state vector to one or two inventory positions; c.f., Xin
and Van Mieghem [2021] for a contemporary review.
Hua et al. [2015] show that the dual sourcing value function satisﬁes L♮-convexity, similar to the
lost sales inventory model [Zipkin 2008b]. Inspired by this property, they show that the optimal
orders to the slow source are more sensitive to the longest outstanding orders, and the optimal
orders to the fast source depend more on the soon-to-arrive outstanding orders. By developing
upper and lower bounds on the slow source’s order and using a weighted average of these bounds
to determine the slow source’s orders, they generalize the VBS policy to the Best Weighted Bounds
policy. Chen and Yang [2019] exploit L♮-convexity to develop an LP-ADP algorithm to dual sourcing
with supply uncertainty, identical to that of Sun et al. [2016] for lost sales inventory models.
2.3.
Multi-Echelon Inventory Models
Multi-echelon models include multiple stages or echelons in the supply chain that can hold inven-
tory. For instance, central warehouses can pool inventory prior to allocating it to downstream
retailers. Seminal works such as Clark and Scarf [1960] and Federgruen and Zipkin [1984] charac-
terize the optimal policy structure under several strong assumptions such as, respectively, having
a serial system (i.e., no parallel stocking facilities) or no option to stock at intermediate terminals.
de Kok et al. [2018] provide an extensive review of the variety of multi-echelon inventory models
studied based on number of echelons, network structure, holding cost functions, etc. They also
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
5
mention that there is little hope to ﬁnd the optimal policy structure in divergent multi-echelon
systems, such as the one we investigate.
We study the multi-echelon inventory model employed in Van Roy et al. [1997]. They adopt a
neuro-dynamic programming approach to solve a two-echelon model with one warehouse and mul-
tiple retailers. The model is a hybrid between backlogging and lost sales, as described in Section 7.
Closely related to this model are the partial lost sales and divergent network models studied in
Nahmias and Smith [1993, 1994].
2.4.
Approximate Dynamic Programming
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) provide a mathematical framework to solve sequential decision-
making problems with countable state and control spaces [Puterman 1994]. Traditional solution
methodologies such as linear programming (LP) or dynamic programming (DP) using either value
or policy iteration, generally do not scale well to large problem sizes. Therefore, several approximate
dynamic programming (ADP) methods have been developed as described in the seminal book
by Powell [2011]. We provide a selective review, starting from methods that heavily exploit the
problem structure to the most general purpose technologies available to date.
One branch of ADP methods exploits the problem structure. For example, for inventory models
with zero or one period lead time, Halman et al. [2009] and Chen et al. [2014] avoid the need to
iterate over the entire state space, speeding up the DP optimization and allowing the algorithm
to solve close to polynomial time. Because of their heavy reliance on the problem structure, Chen
et al. [2014] discuss the desire of more general purpose models. Our work may address this desire.
A second branch of ADP methods reduces the size of the problem by aggregating states, e.g.
by clustering states based on features. Fang et al. [2013] and Giannoccaro and Pontrandolfo [2002]
cluster the pipeline inventory into subsets by aggregating parts of the pipeline inventory. Based on
their expertise into the speciﬁc problem, Van Roy et al. [1997] manually select 23 features from a
multi-echelon supply chain to cluster the state space. These features include aggregations of parts
of the inventory vectors, the variance among retailer inventory levels, products of inventory levels
etc. It is often left up to the discretion of the user how to choose good cluster sizes, which can
be a formidable challenge. Keller et al. [2006] automate this state aggregation process by using a
neighborhood component analysis. While state aggregation can speed up computation, important
information can get lost. This is always the case when the optimal policy depends on each element
of the state, as in the three inventory problems that we study.
A third branch approximates the value or policy functions of MDPs to generate near-optimal
policies. Selecting a good approximation is challenging if little is known about the structure of the
optimal value or policy function. In inventory management, various function approximations are
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
6
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
used, such as a linear combination of the state variables [Keller et al. 2006] or ﬁtting a speciﬁc
quadratic function on the state variables [as in Sun et al. 2016, Chen and Yang 2019]. The latter
exploits the L♮-convexity property of respectively the lost sales and dual sourcing model with supply
uncertainty to ﬁt a speciﬁc L♮-convex quadratic shape, as introduced by Murota [2003]. As it is
often infeasible to explore the entire state space when approximating the value function, eﬃcient
sampling of states is required. Some methods rely on well-known heuristics to sample states: Sun
et al. [2016] use the myopic lost sales policy to sample states and Chen and Yang [2019] leverage
the Single/Dual Index and Tailored Base-Surge policies. Both then apply linear programming to
ﬁt the approximation coeﬃcients of the value functions using the sampled states.
Linear programming approximate dynamic programming (LP-ADP) falls in the third branch of
ADP techniques. It assumes a speciﬁc functional approximation of the sample states using a well-
known heuristic and uses linear programming to obtain the coeﬃcients of these value functions. This
approach circumvents the computational explosion characterizing traditional linear programming
to solve MDPs: the need to include the value function of each state in the objective while each
state-action pair requires a unique constraint. Instead, only the sampled states are included in the
objective function and only the sampled state-action pairs are included in the constraints. Solving
the LP then provides the coeﬃcients of the approximating value functions, which then provides
a vehicle to evaluate the value function at unvisited states. An “LP-greedy” policy minimizes the
current cost plus the cost-to-go of the next stage. Both Sun et al. [2016] and Chen and Yang [2019]
report small savings in comparison to the sampling policies. We employ LP-ADP as a benchmark
in our numerical experiments.
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a mathematical framework to solve MDPs without requiring an
exact representation of the environment. An RL agent learns to maximize expected rewards by
interacting with an environment. Mathematically, RL algorithms develop a good approximation of
the value or policy function of the underlying MDP. Choosing a good functional approximation and
eﬃcient sampling of states and actions is key. While there are RL algorithms that heavily exploit
problem structure, we focus on the recently developed general purpose RL algorithms. A major
beneﬁt of these RL algorithms in comparison to problem-speciﬁc heuristics is that they can learn
policies in environments with less stylized or non-conventional assumptions. This is valuable in
settings where oﬀ-the-shelf inventory replenishment heuristics are not available or do not perform
well. A well-performing generic technology then adds value compared to tailor-made policies for
one speciﬁc company or business.
Although classic RL algorithms, such as temporal diﬀerence and Q-learning, had some success in
the past [Tesauro 1995, Kohl and Stone 2004, Watkins 1989], original RL approaches still suﬀered
from the lack of scalability [Strehl et al. 2006]. Therefore, in recent years, reinforcement learning
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
7
is combined with deep learning i.e., powerful function approximation using deep neural networks.
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) thus uses deep neural networks to approximate the value or
policy functions of MDPs. Although both RL and DRL have been studied extensively in the
Computer Science and Operations Research literature [Sutton and Barto 1998, Mnih et al. 2015],
the accessibility of more computational power and recent algorithmic breakthroughs have sparked
new interest in DRL. The excellent performance of DRL in a set of Atari games reported in Mnih
et al. [2015] was an important milestone. By embedding target networks and experience replay in
deep Q-learning, the performance of DRL algorithms peaked. These algorithmic improvements add
an additional neural net and a large history of observations, respectively, which stabilizes learning.
It inspired many follow-up papers improving the performance of deep Q-learning further. Notable
extensions include the use of dueling networks [Wang et al. 2015], double Q-learning [van Hasselt
et al. 2015], prioritized experience replay [Schaul et al. 2015], or the rainbow implementation of
Hessel et al. [2017] that combines and compares these extensions.
Unlike Q-learning methods that approximate the value functions of the underlying MDP, policy-
based methods directly develop a policy. The REINFORCE algorithm of Williams [1992], for
instance, uses gradient ascent to develop a stochastic policy. Since the algorithm learns on-policy
(i.e., it only uses the most recent observations to update the policy) the samples are correlated and
non-stationary. This causes learning to be less stable as the policy may over-ﬁt on certain regions of
the state-space. The Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic (A3C) algorithm that we will employ
uses parallel learners and a critic as a baseline to improve the speed and stability of the learning
process. We will elaborate further on this actor-critic approach in Section 3. When we started this
research project A3C was one of the most popular DRL algorithms due to its excellent performance
and fast training time [Mnih et al. 2016]. We show that with only minor modiﬁcations, it is capable
to develop good policies on three intractable inventory problems. Yet, as our numerical experiments
also conﬁrm, A3C remains rather sensitive to the employed hyperparameters and not all models
converge to good policies. Follow-up papers have tackled these limitations. Notable breakthroughs
include trust region methods, such as Trust Region Policy Optimization and Proximal Policy
Optimization [Schulman et al. 2017a,b], that prevent the policy update from being too large. These
models are less sensitive to the hyperparameters while training is more stable and convergent.
A vast literature exists on optimizing the hyperparameters of machine learning algorithms. We
adopt a random search approach (see also Section 4). Bergstra and Bengio [2012] show (both
empirically and theoretically) that random search outperforms naive grid search, without being
more complex to implement. In random search samples are randomly drawn from speciﬁed intervals;
as such, it is arguable even more easy to implement than a grid search, in which the modeller
speciﬁes a grid of potential values from which the hyperparameters are picked. Bergstra et al.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
8
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
[2013] demonstrate how random search may be improved upon by using more complex tuning
approaches. Bayesian models, for instance, rely on a probability model to estimate how diﬀerent
hyperparameter combinations will perform. We opted for a random search approach as it has several
key beneﬁts compared to more complex methods, as also outlined by Bergstra and Bengio [2012]
and Bergstra et al. [2015]: (1) simplicity: random search only requires the modeller to deﬁne the
interval on which one should sample without building an additional optimization framework; (2)
parallelization: Bayesian models require observations (i.e., outcomes of the algorithm) to be able
to estimate the performance of each hyperparameter (i.e., to develop the surrogate objective). This
requires at least some runs to be made sequentially to perform the Bayesian update. In random
search all runs can be parallelized; (3) unbiased analysis: random search generates independent
and identically distributed samples. The resulting unbiased samples facilitate visualization of the
results and avoid over-ﬁtting on local minima.
Supervised machine learning models thrive on the availability of more data than ever, elevating
their performance to higher levels. The relation between data and the performance of RL algorithms
is more nuanced. DRL algorithms are used to generate policies for complex problems without
requiring the availability of data; all that is needed is an environment to interact with. For instance,
while Alpha Go learned to play the game of Go by using data of games of human experts [Silver
et al. 2016], its update Alpha Zero learned from scratch [Silver et al. 2017] solely by playing the
game against itself, eﬀectively generating data through self-play. Even though DRL algorithms
may require millions of training iterations, they do not require excessive amounts of training data,
as long as a model of the environment exists that generates the random variables of the problem.
Evidently, the model (or simulation engine) may need data to keep generating the random variables.
In many practical settings the distribution of the uncertainty is unknown and must be derived
from historical samples. We refer to Levi et al. [2015] for an excellent discussion on the impact of
using empirical samples rather than the true distribution on the classic Newsvendor problem.
There are only limited applications of DRL to inventory management. Oroojlooyjadid et al.
[2017] applied deep Q-learning to the Beer Distribution Game. While our paper also applies DRL
to inventory problems, it diﬀers from this working paper in two distinctive ways. First, we pro-
vide optimality gaps on three diﬀerent inventory problems whose stochastic dynamic program
become quickly intractable. Second, we show the versatility of DRL by applying it to three diﬀerent
inventory problems with limited modiﬁcation of the algorithm, thereby demonstrating that DRL
resembles a general purpose technology.
3.
DRL Solution Approach to Lost Sales Inventory Replenishment
Deep Reinforcement Learning provides a way to approximate and solve large Markov Decision Pro-
cesses for which traditional dynamic programming methods are intractable. We will demonstrate
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
9
in this section how the Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic (A3C) algorithm operates. We use
the lost sales inventory model as our focal problem and show in later sections how dual sourcing
and multi-echelon problems can be plugged into the same framework, showing the versatility of
the algorithm.
Consider the periodic-review inventory replenishment of a single item over an inﬁnite horizon. In
the conventional lost sales model, inventory can be replenished at unit cost c with lead time l. At
the beginning of any period t, the order quantity, qt ≥0, must be decided knowing the last observed
inventory on hand, It−1, and outstanding receipts or “pipeline” vector Qt−1 = (qt−l,qt−l+1,··· ,qt−1).
We note that this formulation assumes strictly positive lead times. If l = 0, there are no outstanding
orders as the order qt−l = qt is immediately received and added to the on-hand inventory. Finally, the
unknown demand dt is realized and subtracted from the on-hand inventory. Excess demand is lost
so that inventory evolves as It = [It−1 + qt−l −dt]+ and the pipeline vector as Qt = (qt−l+1,··· ,qt).
The lost sales problem can be modeled as a Markov Decision Process with state St = (It−1,Qt−1)
at time t. As orders placed in period t −l are available at the beginning of period t, they can be
added to the ending inventory of period t −1 such that the state vector becomes l-dimensional:
St = (s0 = It−1 + qt−l,s1 = qt−l+1,s2 = qt−l+2,··· ,sl−1 = qt−1). Let St denote the set of admissible
states at time t. The action vector for the lost sales problem is one-dimensional consisting of the
units ordered at = (qt). We opt for a vector notation to accommodate for the multi-dimensional
action spaces in dual sourcing and multi-echelon models in Sections 6 and 7, respectively. After
taking action at, the cost ct incurred in period t consists of sourcing costs, per-period holding cost
h for each unit held in inventory-on-hand or per-period shortage cost p per unit of lost demand:
ct(St,at) = qtc + h[It]+ + p[dt −It−1 −qt−l]+.
(1)
Let At denote the set of admissible order policies πt = {at+j : j = 0,1,···}. The objective is to ﬁnd
an admissible order policy that minimizes the expected present value Ct of future costs. Assuming
henceforth suﬃcient regularity including countable, compact state and action spaces, this cost
when starting from state St and following policy πt is:
Cπt
t (St) =
∞
X
j=0
γjEπtct+j(St+j,at+j)
where γ ∈(0,1) is the discount factor and Eπt is the expectation operator when following policy πt.
Deﬁne the optimal value function v(St) as the inﬁmum of Cπt
t (St). Assuming suﬃcient regularity
and countable states and actions, the value functions are obtained when following an optimal policy
by solving the celebrated recursive Bellman equations [Bellman 1954]:
v(St) = min
at∈At


ct(St,at) + γ
X
S′∈St+1
P(St+1 = S′|St,at)vt+1(S′)


.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
10
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
Input 
Hidden layer + Activation
Output layer + Softmax
(0)
(1)
(n)
Softmax
“Actor”
“Critic”
v(St )
w1,1,0
w1,1,1
w1,1,l-1
Σsiw1,1,i + b1
a0 = 
a1 = 
an = 
ai = 
s0 = It-1 + qt-l 
s1 = 
qt-l+1 
s2 = 
qt-l+2 
sl-1 = 
qt-1
b1
π(St ) = Pr(ai|St) 
St = {s0,s1,...,sl-1}
 
We provide visualization for the general case 
with strictly positive lead time. Note that the 
pipeline does not exist if l equals zero.
(i)
ai = 
(i+1)
ai+1= 
(qt)
i=0
l-1
Figure 1
Visualization of a simple neural net of the A3C where the input dimension is l, one hidden layer is used
and n actions can be chosen. The output consists of (1) a value v(St) (estimated by the “critic”) when
using (2) a stochastic policy over the action space π(St) = P(at|St) (estimated by the actor using a
softmax function on the last layer that normalizes all values into a probability vector).
Despite their simple appearance, solving these Bellman equations can quickly become problematic
as their problem complexity suﬀers from the triple curse of dimensionality [Powell 2011], which is
driven by the dimension of (1) the l-dimensional state space; (2) the uni-dimensional action space;
and (3) the transition probability matrix, dependent on the size and number of possible demand
realizations. Note that we assume integer or discrete demand; continuous only makes it harder.
To cope with the curse of dimensionality, the dimensions of the problem can be reduced by
applying approximate dynamic programming. As discussed in Section 2.4, one ADP branch includes
reinforcement learning. In their simplest form, value-based methods such as tabular Q-learning
[Watkins 1989] store estimated values of v(S) in lookup tables. In Q-learning, action-value functions
Q(St,a) represent the future expected cost of taking action a from state St and then following the
best-known policy from state St+1. Note that the Q-values only diﬀer in the ﬁrst step from the
value function v(S). These Q-values can iteratively be improved: Qt+1(St,at) = (1 −α)Qt(St,at) +
α(ct + γ maxa∈A EQ(St+1,a)), in which α represents the learning rate that trades oﬀhow much
the new observation ct + γ maxa∈A EQ(St+1,a) is used to update the initial estimate Qt(St,at).
New states and actions can be explored by following ϵ-greedy methods that trade oﬀfollowing the
best-known policy, with probability (1 −ϵ) against exploring new actions, with probability ϵ.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
11
More sophisticated value-based methods use parametric approximations of the values v(S) to
circumvent the curse of dimensionality when storing all function values in lookup tables. Neural
networks are an example of approximators of non-linear functions. Neural nets have an input layer,
several hidden and activation layers in sequence, and an output layer. Figure 1 illustrates a neural
net with one hidden layer. Its input is the l−dimensional state vector St = (s0 = It−1 + qt−l,s1 =
qt−l+1,s2 = qt−l+2,··· ,sl−1 = qt−1). A layer’s output is a linear function of its input followed by
a non-linear “activation layer.” The value of the ﬁrst node of the hidden layer is
l−1
P
i=0
w1,1,isi + b1
where the weights of the red edges (w1,1,1 ···w1,1,l) and the bias b1 are tuning parameters. The
activation layer adds non-linearity to the linear function. For example, a positive-part operator,
called “rectiﬁed linear unit” ReLU, only passes positive node values to the next layer. Concatenating
layers provides powerful approximations to non-linear value functions. Traditional neural networks
use mostly one or two layers while recent deep learning employs a larger number of hidden layers.
In contrast to value-based methods, policy-based methods directly develop a policy. A determin-
istic policy prescribes for each state a single action. A stochastic policy prescribes for each state
a probability distribution over all actions that speciﬁes the probability that each action should
be taken. At the juncture of value-based and policy-based methods, actor-critic methods com-
bine both techniques by relying on an actor who develops a policy that is evaluated by a critic.
We will explore the power of one such actor-critic method, namely the Asynchronous Advantage
Actor-Critic (A3C) algorithm.
In what follows, we use notation θ to deﬁne the set of all parameters that must be ﬁne-tuned
during training of the model, i.e., all weights of the edges and biases of the global neural net
(θg) and of the local nets (θi) of each parallel learner i. (We describe the use of the global and
local nets in the next paragraph.) Given set θg, A3C generates for every state St a stochastic
policy: π(St;θg) = P(at|St) (i.e., a probability distribution over all actions) and one value function
vπ(St;θg) (representing the expected future discounted cost of following the stochastic policy). In
our experiments, we use a fully connected network, implying that all nodes between layers are
connected and the actor and critic use the same hidden layers. This delivered good performance
on our inventory problems, but it does not necessarily need to be the case. The output of the
actor passes a “softmax” function that normalizes the output layer values into a proper probability
vector that deﬁnes the stochastic policy, as shown in Figure 1.
The A3C algorithm employs a special structure where n parallel learners each have an individual
neural net with parameter set θi, ∀i ∈{1,··· ,n}. Together, yet asynchronously, the learners update
the global neural net with parameter set θg. The total set of trainable parameters of the model
θ thus includes both θi, ∀i ∈{1,··· ,n} and θg. (We will later show that we use the local net
with parameter set θi to compute the gradient of the loss function but apply the update on the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
12
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
global net with parameter set θg.) Each learner i interacts independently with its own copy of
the environment by using its own neural net. The agents learn and update the global network
through a training buﬀer of m periods of observed states, actions and costs as follows: During the
k-th buﬀer, the current policy πk is simulated for m subsequent periods starting at state Sm(k−1).
During the simulation, each parallel learner keeps track of the incurred costs (cm(k−1),··· ,cmk),
the actions taken (am(k−1),··· ,amk), the visited states (Sm(k−1),··· ,Smk) and the resulting state
at the end of this episode (Smk+1). Given these records, each learner computes its loss function for
training iteration and buﬀer k, denoted by Lossk and to be deﬁned in detail soon. Each learner i
then computes the gradients of the total loss with respect to the parameters θi of its own local
neural net and iteratively adjusts the parameters of the global net θg using a stepsize α > 0 in the
direction of the gradient to reduce the loss:
θg
k+1 = θg
k −α∇θiLossk/||∇θiLossk||.
This process happens asynchronously, meaning that updates to the weights of the global network
are made immediately whenever an agent has simulated its buﬀer and computed its gradient.
The weights of the global network are thus continuously updated by using the gradients from the
local learners. Once the global network is updated, the weights of the global network are then
copied back to the local learner. The motivation for using parallel learners is that each learner is
interacting with its own copy of the environment, which reduces the probability of over-ﬁtting on
speciﬁc state regions. To avoid exploding gradients, a clipping function bounds the gradients. The
step size depends on the used optimization method. We employ Adam, developed by Kingma and
Ba [2015], which dynamically adapts the step size based on the past updates.
The total loss function used is the sum of three speciﬁc losses that we now deﬁne:
Loss = Value Loss + Policy Loss + Entropy Loss.
The loss function and its gradient are computed for each parallel learner i and applied asyn-
chronously to the global net. The value loss measures the quality of the value function approxi-
mation by the diﬀerence between the future discounted cost and the approximated value function
at each observed state in the episode buﬀer. The future discounted cost of a state Sp = Smt−k in
the t-th episode buﬀer consists of the costs observed k steps until the end of the episode buﬀer,
C(k)
p
=
kP
i=0
γicp+i, plus the inﬁnite-horizon discounted costs after the episode buﬀer, which is approx-
imated by the value function in the last period of the buﬀer, γk+1vπt(Stm+1;θi). The value loss is
then deﬁned as the sum of the squared errors of all states (Sm(t−1),··· ,Smt) within the episode
buﬀer. We use a value regularization term βV (which we ﬁxed at 0.25) to prevent over-ﬁtting:
Value Loss = βV
m
X
p=0

−vπt(Sm(t−1)+p;θi) + C(m−p)
m(t−1)+p + γm−pvπt(Smt+1;θi)
2
.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
13
The policy loss is used to improve the policy by selecting “better” actions. For each action taken
at period p during the episode t, we compute the diﬀerences between the cost of this action plus
the discounted value of the next state (ct(St,at)+γvπt(St+1)) and the value function at the current
state (vπt(St)). This diﬀerence can be positive, which means that the action is not optimal using
the current value function, zero, or negative, which means the current action is better than the
action suggested by the policy. Therefore, minimizing this diﬀerence helps to choose better actions
with respect to the current value function. We use Generalized Advantage Estimation [Schulman
et al. 2015], in which the observed diﬀerences within the episode buﬀer are once again discounted.
Generalized advantage estimation uses an additional weighing parameter λ ∈[0,1] which we keep
ﬁxed at 1 as it provides good performance in our setting. Since, at a given state, each action is only
taken with a certain probability, the loss is corrected by multiplying by the log of the probability
of selecting action at:
Policy Loss =
m
X
i=0
 
log P(am(t−1)+i|Sm(t−1)+i)
k
X
p=0
γp  cm(t−1)+i + γvπt(Sm(t−1)+i+1;θi) −vπt(Sm(t−1)+i;θi)

!
.
Finally, the entropy loss is used to avoid the A3C algorithm over-ﬁtting and converging to local
optima. Minimizing entropy ensures that the model keeps the right balance between exploring new
actions and exploiting actions that are known to perform well. The entropy for each episode buﬀer
is deﬁned as the entropy of the probability function over actions taken, which is the logarithm of the
probability mass function over actions taken: P(ai|si)log P(ai|Si). This entropy is minimized when
all actions have the same probability and is equivalent to encouraging the algorithm to explore
new actions. An entropy regularization term βE determines how much exploration is added to the
loss function:
Entropy Loss = βE
m
X
p=0
P(am(t−1)+p|Sm(t−1)+p)log P(am(t−1)+p|Sm(t−1)+p).
4.
How to tune a DRL algorithm?
Thanks to the open nature of the machine learning community, the code for many deep reinforce-
ment learning algorithms is freely available. While this should greatly facilitate their application,
it is our experience that the cumbersome tuning process may demotivate researchers to explore
the potential of DRL methods. Indeed, determining the suitable hyperparameters of the A3C algo-
rithm (summarized in Table 1) is a non-trivial and very time-consuming task because evaluating
hyperparameter sets is expensive and noisy. Therefore, we share our experience on how to achieve
good performance for three diﬀerent inventory problems, together with our code, which will be
shared along with the publication of this paper. This may help other researchers to directly build
on our experience when applying DRL to other operations problems.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
14
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
For our initial models, we tested various hyperparameter settings and kept track of well-
performing hyperparameter values. To further improve the results, we stored the best models
(i.e., trained neural networks) and restarted from these models using diﬀerent entropy factors and
learning rates. This further improves already well-performing models and uses less exploration
and more exploitation as training progresses. This labor intensive tuning process motivated us
to develop an automated tuning strategy without manual intervention, which we also tested to
compute optimality gaps for the lost sales and dual sourcing problems. In addition, we selected a
set of well-performing hyperparameter values that we used for a more extensive sensitivity analysis
(in Section 5.2).
Building on our experience of manually tuning various model instances, we developed the fol-
lowing automated tuning process for the A3C algorithm: First, we decided to keep the following
hyperparameters ﬁxed: four layers in the neural network with widths 150, 120, 80 and 20, respec-
tively; each layer followed by a ReLU activation; value regularization 0.25; four parallel learners;
and clipping rate 40. These hyperparameters did perform well and any manual tuning deviations
did not result in any signiﬁcant improvement. Equivalently, the computational eﬀort to further
optimize those parameters did not outweigh their beneﬁts in our experience. Therefore, they pro-
vide a good starting point. Of course, it is possible that changes to these hyperparameters can
perform equally well or better in other settings.
Second, we took 200 random sample points of the remaining three hyperparameters—i.e., the
length of the buﬀer, the entropy regularization rate and the learning rate—over pre-deﬁned ranges.
While the length of the episode buﬀer is simply sampled on a linear scale, both the entropy
regularization rate and the learning rate are sampled on a log scale. This means that for a tuning
range [10−a,10−b], we sample x on the uniform interval [a,b] and set our hyperparameter to 10−x .
We determined those ranges by monitoring the three components of the loss function (value, policy
and entropy loss) during manual training. This provided insight into the relevant ranges of the
three parameters where the A3C algorithm tended to converge to good results. We evaluated the
expected cost of the A3C policy by simulating 10 sample paths of 100,000 periods. We note that to
further reduce the conﬁdence intervals of all results in this manuscript, we additionally simulated
all policies developed by the A3C algorithm on 100 sample paths of 100,000 periods.
Third is the ﬁnal choice of the three hyperparameter values. The simplest solution is to pick
the sample point with the best results. We went one step further and ﬁtted a quadratic function,
speciﬁcally a 3D ellipsoid, through the lower convex hull of the 200 points to highlight a well-
performing region of the tuning parameters. Later, we will provide a visualization of this approach.
We used an ellipsoidal convex hull merely to indicate a good parameter region; while its minimum
may suggest a well-performing parameter at this point it is just that: a suggestion. More research
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
15
Hyperparameter
Well-performing values Range for tuning
Number of layers
4
Width of layers
[150,120,80,20]
Value regularization (βV )
0.25
Activation functions
ReLU
Number of parallel learners
4
Clipping rate
40
Learning rate (α = 10x)
x = −4
x ∈[−7,−2]
Entropy regularization (βE = 10x) x = −7
x ∈[−10,−2]
Buﬀer size
20
[20,100]
Table 1
Hyperparameters of the A3C algorithm that require tuning. The ﬁrst column contains one set that
performs well across all settings. The second column contains the ranges used in the automatic tuning process.
on the applicability of an ellipsoidal convex hull seems desirable but is outside the scope of this
paper.
Table 1 summarizes both the values of hyperparameters that are kept ﬁxed as well as the ranges
used in the automatic tuning of the remaining three hyperparameters. Note that the learning
rate and entropy regularization are sampled from a continuous interval, while the buﬀer size is
constrained to be integer. Once the hyperparameters are chosen, the four agents start training.
Performance of the agents during training is evaluated every 100,000 periods by computing the
average cost per period on a ﬁxed sample path of 100,000 periods. When costs do not improve
during 30 consecutive evaluations, the agent stops training. This is equivalent to a simulation of
3 million periods, with an intermediate cost evaluation every 100,000 periods. Once all agents are
ﬁnished, a new set of hyperparameters is chosen. The evaluation of one set of hyperparameters took
us about 24 CPU hours. All models were trained using (university) cloud servers. For each of the
settings reported in Sections 5.1 and 6 (optimality gaps of lost sales and dual sourcing, respectively)
we evaluated the A3C algorithm on approximately 250 hyperparameter settings (including both the
manual search to set the ranges and the automatic tuning). The initial tuning of the dual sourcing
and lost sales model thus required about 3000 of these “runs.” This resulted in total training
costs of around $2500 at current Google Cloud Platform rates of $0.033174 per virtual CPU hour.
For the sensitivity analysis (Section 5.2) we ran the algorithm for approximately 2000 additional
runs, resulting in an additional cost of around $1500. These large numbers contrast sharply with
the computational eﬀort necessary for our benchmarks. The benchmark heuristics typically have
1 to 3 policy parameters and optimization takes seconds or minutes. The methods that rely on
approximate dynamic programming (the myopic policy and LP-ADP algorithm) partly circumvent
the curse of dimensionality; as such, their running time can typically be expressed in minutes or
hours rather than in days or weeks as is the case for the A3C algorithm.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
16
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
Setting 1
Setting 2
Setting 3
Setting 4
Setting 5
Setting 6
Hyperparameter
Tuning Range (p=4, l=2)
(p=4, l=3)
(p=4, l=4)
(p=9, l=2)
(p=9, l=3)
(p=9, l=4)
Learning rate (α)
[10−5,10−3]
4.26 × 10−4
3.04 × 10−4
3.00 × 10−4
4.23 × 10−5
8.8 × 10−5
5.25 × 10−5
Entropy regularization (βE)
[10−5,10−10]
4.74 × 10−8
1.43 × 10−7
2.10 × 10−7
2.77 × 10−9
5.43 × 10−9
4.19 × 10−10
Length of the Episode buﬀer (m) [1,··· ,200]
197
107
46
62
87
63
Action Space
[0,1,··· ,20] [0,1,··· ,20] [0,1,··· ,20] [0,1,··· ,20] [0,1,··· ,20] [0,1,··· ,20]
Table 2
Hyperparameters and action space of the A3C algorithm in our six lost sales inventory model settings.
5.
Performance Evaluation of DRL in Lost Sales Inventory Models
To allow for a stringent performance analysis of the A3C algorithm in inventory management we
develop two sets of experiments. The ﬁrst experiment considers small-scale settings for which the
dynamic program can be solved. Then we can compare the optimality gaps of the A3C algorithm
with the optimality gaps of state-of-the-art heuristic policies and approximate dynamic program-
ming methods in Section 5.1. The second experiment considers larger settings where we can no
longer solve for the optimal policy so we can only evaluate A3C relative to other heuristics in Sec-
tion 5.2. We also provide sensitivity with respect to the demand (by testing diﬀerent distributions
including larger supports), lead time (and lead time uncertainty) and service levels.
5.1.
Optimality gaps of the A3C algorithm and benchmarks for lost sales
We adopt six of the numerical experiments of Zipkin [2008a] to compare the A3C algorithm with
several well-performing heuristics and methods using approximate dynamic programming and to
stringently compare versus the optimal policy. All experiments have a unit holding cost h = 1,
ordering cost c = 0 and demand is Poisson distributed with λ = 5. Lead times are 2, 3 and 4
periods and the shortage penalty p is either 4 or 9, resulting in six settings. The hyperparameters
of the A3C algorithm are automatically tuned as described in Section 4. Table 2 reports the tuning
ranges, the best performing hyperparameters and the action space we used in each experiment.
We benchmark the A3C algorithm against six heuristic policies. Three policies are simple to
implement and possess interesting asymptotic behaviour: a Base-Stock policy, a Constant Order
policy and a Capped Base-Stock policy. In addition we add three ADP policies: the Myopic 1-
period and Myopic 2-period policies that have been shown by Zipkin [2008a] to perform well across
a variety of settings, as well as the LP-ADP approach of Sun et al. [2016].
The optimal cost for each scenario was determined by numerically solving the DP using a discount
factor of 99.9%. The costs obtained by the A3C algorithm are found by simulation and shown with
95% conﬁdence intervals. The other policies’ parameters are optimized by simulation, after which
the steady state distribution of their Markov chain was computed to compute its expected cost.
Figure 2 plots the results of our numerical experiment. The A3C algorithm performs in line
with the Myopic 1-period policy but cannot match the performance of the Myopic 2-period or
the Capped Base-Stock policy. It does perform better than the Base-Stock and Constant Order
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
17
Myopic
1-period
Myopic 
2-period
Base-Stock
Constant Order
Capped 
Base-Stock
A3C
p
l
4
4
9
4
9
9
2
3
4
2
3
4
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
Optimality Gap (%)
3.6 5.2 7.0
2.1 4.1 5.3
0.2 0.9 1.9 0.2 0.6 1.2
5.5
8.3 9.9
3.8 5.1 6.3
19.8
14.6
11.4
68.6
57.2
50.1
0.2 0.7 1.5 0.5 1.4 1.0
3.2 3.0
6.7 4.8 3.1 3.4
Figure 2
The A3C algorithm performs in line with the Myopic 1-period policy but cannot match the performance
of the Myopic 2-period policy nor of the even better performing Capped Base-Stock policy. Yet A3C
does perform better than the Base-Stock and Constant Order policy.
policies. We can thus conclude that the A3C algorithm, with limited modiﬁcation, develops good
policies for the lost sales inventory problem, yet cannot beat the best performing heuristics.
Figure 3 reports the performance of 100 runs of the LP-ADP approach of Sun et al. [2016] with
p = 4 and l = 4. One run corresponds to sampling 6,000 demands. Then we use the myopic policy
and store the 6,000 states visited and actions taken to construct the LP. We exclude the results of
the ﬁrst 1,000 periods warm-up. Then we solve the LP to obtain the coeﬃcients of the quadratic
approximation. Finally, we evaluate the performance of the LP-greedy policy for 60,000 periods,
excluding a warm-up of 10,000 periods. This concludes one LP-ADP run.
It is striking in Figure 3 that the results are very run dependent: only a minority of the runs
achieves reasonable performance yet no run outperformed the myopic sampling test policy. Sun
et al. [2016] do report occasional improvements over the sampling test policy. While LP-ADP has
been reported to obtain results in line or slightly better than the sampling test policy, in our
experience it does not appear to be a stable, nor well-performing method for our lost sales inventory
problem. We tested diﬀerent lengths of sample paths but did not observe any improvement in
performance. The beneﬁt of LP-ADP is that it is computationally less intensive than A3C. One
LP-ADP run can typically be ﬁnished in minutes instead of hours. Even 100 runs was easily done
on one personal computer without requiring cloud computing.
The automatic tuning of the hyperparameter values revealed that the A3C performance was
fairly insensitive to the length of the buﬀer size and the set of best performing values of the learning
rate and entropy can be enveloped by an ellipsoid. Figure 4 shows the optimality gaps of each of
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
18
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
0
20
40
60
100
80
50
100
150
200
250
Sample run number
Optimality Gap (%)
Myopic Policy
Results LP-ADP
Runs where policy 
never orders. 
7%
Figure 3
Sample run performance of the LP-ADP method relative to the myopic base policy for a lost sales
problem with p = 4 and l = 4.
the training runs of the A3C algorithm. We use a logarithmic scale as a signiﬁcant amount of runs
have very high optimality gaps. The red dots indicate policies that diverged to policies that reach
inﬁnitely high or low inventory levels such that the optimality gap is eﬀectively inﬁnitely large. In
our visual their optimality gaps are around 104% as we bound the state space for numerical reasons
(i.e., we do not want to feed inﬁnite values to the neural net). The best learning rate seems to be
in the neighbourhood of 10−4 while the entropy factor should be set smaller than 10−7 to achieve
good performance. We have used the same hyperparameter values in Section 5.2.
5.2.
Sensitivity analysis
In what follows we provide numerical sensitivity of the performance of the A3C algorithm for
larger demand support, longer (and stochastic) lead times and increasing service levels. Many
of these settings no longer allow for a comparison with the optimal policy due to the curse of
dimensionality. In fact, also the methods that rely on approximate dynamic programming (i.e., the
myopic policies and the LP-ADP method) suﬀer in these problem settings. To facilitate comparison
across our sensitivity analysis we thus only compare the A3C algorithm with the Constant Order,
the Base-Stock and the Capped Base-Stock policy. Given its excellent performance in Figure 2, the
latter serves as a solid benchmark while the other two are easy-to-use with interesting asymptotic
properties. All reported costs are computed by simulating 100 sample paths of 100,000 periods
and include 95% conﬁdence intervals. The parameters of our base case (setting 3 in Figure 2) are:
h = 1, c = 0, l = 4, p = 4 while demand is Poisson distributed with λ = 5.
Sensitivity to longer lead times Figure 5 plots the results when the lead time is increased
from 5 up to 10 periods. Similar to Figure 2, the Capped Base-Stock policy outperforms the A3C
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
19
Entropy regularization 
(log scale power of 10)
Optimality Gap (%) (log scale power of 10)
0
2
4
0
8
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
3
1.5
0
0.5
1
2
2.5
Learning rate
 (log scale power of 10)
6
-5
-10
3.5
4
Figure 4
The automatic tuning of the learning rate and the entropy over the intervals speciﬁed in Table 1 reveals
that all points on the convex hull (marked with black star) ﬁt an ellipsoid (results shown for p = 4 and
l = 4). The red dots indicate policies where the A3C algorithm does not develop a good policy, e.g.,
policies that never place orders, or policies that result in inﬁnite inventories.
algorithm for small lead times. Interestingly, the A3C algorithm performs particularly well for large
lead times, outperforming the benchmark policies. The reason for this excellent performance is
related to the fact that we adopt a discrete demand distribution while the asymptotic properties
of the Constant Order and Capped Base-Stock policies only hold for continuous demand supports.
Due to the integer-spaced and small demand support, the Constant Order policy was unable to
order close enough to the mean demand. (Our mean in the base case is 5; constantly ordering 5
units would result in large inventory holding costs while ordering 4 units causes on average 20% of
the demand to be lost.) The A3C algorithm, however, converges to a policy that alternates between
ordering four and ﬁve units such that its average order quantity is closer to the mean demand.
This inspired us to design an additional mixed policy that orders either 4 or 5 units according to
a two-point distribution P[qt = 4] = P and P[qt = 5] = (1 −P) and we numerically search over P.
Figure 5 shows that this mixed strategy policy performs better than the benchmark policies and
matches the performance of the A3C algorithm.
We acknowledge that these ﬁndings relate to our use of a small and integer demand support and
that the discretization eﬀect will fade away for larger demand supports. Yet, we ﬁnd it interesting
to show how the A3C algorithm may inspire the development of new benchmark heuristics.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
20
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
5
6
7
8
9
10
5.0
5.5
6
Lead time (l)
Average cost
A3C
Constant Order
Base-Stock
Capped Base-Stock
Mixed strategy
Figure 5
Increasing the lead time favors the A3C algorithm, ultimately outperforming all benchmarks.
10
15
20
25
7.0
8.0
9
10
11
12
Mean demand (λ)
Average cost
A3C
Constant Order
Base-Stock
Capped Base-Stock
Figure 6
Increasing the mean demand does not signiﬁcantly impact the performance of the A3C algorithm.
Sensitivity to larger demand support To demonstrate how the A3C algorithm performs
on larger problem settings we let the mean demand increase towards 25 in steps of ﬁve. To cope
with the larger demand we enlarged the action space of the A3C algorithm to the range [0,100]
for this analysis. We observe in Figure 6 how a larger demand support does not signiﬁcantly alter
the relative performance compared to the benchmark policies. For this speciﬁc cost and lead time
setting the A3C algorithm continues to perform slightly worse than the Capped Base-Stock policy
but outperforms the constant-order and base-stock policy. This supports our ﬁndings in Section 5.1
and provides conﬁdence that the A3C algorithm performs well in large settings.
We also tested the impact of diﬀerent demand distributions, i.e., a uniform and a geometric
distribution but this did not yield clear-cut insights. It depends on the benchmark and problem
setting whether the relative performance of the A3C improves or reduces.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
21
4
9
19
49
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Penalty (p)
Average cost
A3C
Constant Order
Base-Stock
Capped Base-Stock
Figure 7
Increasing the penalty cost (and thus service level) shows how the A3C algorithm performs in line with
the (Capped) Base-Stock policy. The Constant Order policy suﬀers when the lost sales penalty rises.
Sensitivity to diﬀerent service levels We subsequently assess the impact of the service level
by letting the lost sales penalty p vary between {4,9,19,49}. The A3C algorithm performs in line
with the Capped Base-Stock and the regular Base-Stock policy, which are both asymptotically
optimal for large penalty costs. The A3C algorithm is able to develop policies close to these
asymptotically optimal heuristics, performing for instance within 1% for the highest penalty cost
we tested (p = 49).
Inclusion of stochastic lead times We also analyzed the performance under stochastic lead
times. We uniformly sample the delivery lead time of each order from a discrete set of realizations
on the integer space [l,l], where the decision-maker does not have access to the arrival times of
individual orders. At the beginning of period t the decision-maker thus observes the inventory
before ordering (consisting of the ending inventory of last period plus all orders that arrive in
period t) and the pipeline vector including all outstanding orders that have not arrived yet. In
addition to learning the demand distribution, the model should thus also learn how to cope with
uncertainty in the lead time.
We use the same base case and sample the lead times from a uniform distribution on the interval
[l,l]. We ﬁx l = 2 and let l increase from 4 to 11. To the best of our knowledge no tailored heuristics
exist in the lost sales setting with stochastic lead times. Janakiraman and Roundy [2004] investigate
base-stock policies in this setting (albeit without order cross-overs) due to their simplicity —
despite being sub-optimal. We thus compare against the same benchmark policies as the previous
sensitivity experiments.
Our results demonstrate that the Capped Base-Stock policy continues to outperform even for
stochastic lead times. Figure 8 demonstrates how the A3C algorithm performs in line with a
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
22
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
7.0
7.5
8
8.5
9
Max lead time (l)
Average cost
A3C
Constant Order
Base-Stock
Capped Base-Stock
Figure 8
When lead times are stochastic the A3C algorithm outperforms a simple Base-Stock policy, performs in
line with a Constant Order policy but can not outperform a Capped Base-Stock policy in all evaluated
settings. Additional tuning may reduce the gap with the Capped Base-Stock policy.
constant-order policy, outperforms the Base-Stock policy and performs slightly worse than the
Capped Base-Stock policy in all but one setting. The fact that the setting with l = 8 does approach
the Capped Base-Stock policy indicates there may be potential for further improvement in the
other settings as well by further tuning the algorithm.
6.
Performance Evaluation of DRL in Dual Sourcing Inventory Models
Problem setting and Formulation In the conventional dual sourcing or dual mode model,
inventory can be replenished at unit cost cr using a regular source with lead time lr and using
an expedited source with lead time le < lr at premium unit cost ce > cr. At the beginning of
any period t, two order quantities, qr
t ≥0 and qe
t ≥0, must be decided knowing the last observed
inventory on hand, It−1, and outstanding receipts or “pipeline” vector Qt−1 = (qr
t−lr +qe
t−le,qr
t−lr+1+
qe
t−le+1,··· ,qr
t−lr+le−1 + qe
t−1,qr
t−lr+le−2,··· ,qr
t−1). We note that this formulation assumes strictly
positive lead times. If le=0, there are no outstanding expedited orders. After the order decision,
orders qr
t−lr and qe
t−le are received and added to the on-hand inventory. Finally, the unknown
demand dt is realized and subtracted from the on-hand inventory. Excess demand is backlogged
so that the inventory and pipeline vector evolve as It = It−1 + qr
t−lr + qe
t−le −dt and Qt = (qr
t−lr+1 +
qe
t−le+1,qr
t−lr+2 + qe
t−le+2,··· ,qr
t−lr+le + qe
t ,qr
t−lr+le−1,··· ,qr
t ).
The dual sourcing problem can be modeled as a Markov Decision Process with state St =
(It−1,Qt−1) at time t. Similarly to the lost sales system we can add orders placed lr/le peri-
ods ago to the inventory on hand such that the state space becomes lr-dimensional: St = (s0 =
It−1 + qr
t−lr + qe
t−le,s1 = qr
t−lr+1 + qe
t−le+1,s2 = qr
t−lr+2 + qe
t−le+2,··· ,sle = qr
t−lr+le + qe
t−1,sle+1 =
qr
t−lr+le−1,··· ,slr+1 = qr
t−1). We note that future costs in periods t to t+le −1 cannot be inﬂuenced
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
23
Optimality Gap (%)
ce
lr
105
105
105
110
110
110
2
2
3
3
4
4
Tailored Base Surge (TBS)
A3C
Single Index (SI)
Dual Index (DI)
Capped Dual Index (CDI)
0%
1%
2%
0.03
0.00
0.06
0.11
0.00
0.00
0.11 0.18
0.27
0.36 0.36
0.49
0.56
1.03 0.98
2.11
1.43
2.44
0.06
0.99
0.01
0.71
0.00
0.58
0.52
0.80 0.82
0.51
1.85
1.33
Figure 9
The A3C algorithm is able to develop policies whose expected cost is within 2% of the optimal cost.
This performance is comparable to Tailored Base-Surge, Single Index and Dual Index policies, but
uniformly dominated by the Capped Dual Index policy (as expected given its robust optimality). Single
and Dual Index performance deteriorates as the lead time increases while TBS improves.
and are thus sunk at time t. Hence the state space dimension of the dynamic program can be
reduced to lr −le [Sheopuri et al. 2010]. The action taken in period t is now two-dimensional:
at = (qr
t ,qe
t ) consisting of the ordered quantities from the regular and expedited source, respectively.
Results of Applying DRL We evaluate the performance of DRL in the six small-scale dual
sourcing settings of Veeraraghavan and Scheller-Wolf [2008] with linear sourcing costs for which the
dynamic program is numerically solvable. The results are compared versus well-known heuristics.
Since the value function of the dual sourcing problem is L♮-convex, we also benchmark against the
LP-ADP technique, used by Chen and Yang [2019] in dual sourcing with supply uncertainty.
To keep the dynamic program computationally solvable, the lead time of the expedited source
is 0 with a discrete uniform demand over {0,1,2,3,4}. Unit holding and backlog costs in all six
experiments are h = 5 and b = 495 while the unit sourcing cost of the regular source cr = 100. The
six experiments range in their unit expediting sourcing cost ce (high = 110 or low =105) and the
regular source’s lead time lr (small = 2, medium = 3 and high = 4). All results are obtained as
described in the lost sales problem in Section 5.1. Figure 9 reports our results and shows that the
A3C algorithm succeeds in developing a policy that performs within 2% of optimality in all six
experiments. This performance is comparable to the Single Index and Tailored Base Surge policies.
The Capped Dual Index policy, which is robustly optimal, also outperforms all other policies in this
stochastic setting. The optimality gaps are smaller compared to the lost sales settings we tested (as
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
24
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
A3C optimality gap during training
Best Solution found during training
Optimality gap of the A3C algorithm during training.
Training Epoch (100,000 periods). 
Optimality Gap (%)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Figure 10
The A3C algorithm quickly converges to a decent policy (within ≈20% of optimality). Then it trains
fast (≈200 episodes of length 100,000 periods) to around 5%, after which it steadily reduces the
optimality gap to less than 2% while exploring policies that fall within 10-20% of the optimal policy.
is also apparent by the scale of the vertical axis). This may be because all policies use a base-stock
policy to control the local orders, which may reduce the cost diﬀerences between our benchmarks.
We also compare against the LP-ADP algorithm that Chen and Yang [2019] used in a dual
sourcing setting with supply uncertainty. We used the SI, DI, CDI and TBS policies as sample
test policies, and for each sample path we solved the LP and evaluated the LP-greedy policies. We
repeated this procedure for 100 diﬀerent sample paths and tested sample paths of lengths 6,000,
11,000 and 60,000. Unfortunately, LP-ADP using this procedure did not manage to develop policies
for dual sourcing that outperformed the test policies. Rather, the LP-ADP policies were often too
myopic in nature; e.g., many policies did not order, or placed only expedited orders.
A potential reason may be that, in contrast to Chen and Yang [2019], our model contains no
supply uncertainty and perhaps the latter is needed for LP-ADP to provide improvement over
the test policies. Or perhaps the LP-ADP improvement documented by Chen and Yang [2019] in
a setting with supply uncertainty resulted from using test policies that were not developed for a
dual-sourcing setting with supply uncertainty. We conclude that, in our experience, the LP-ADP
method was highly dependent on the sample test policy and failed to improve on the benchmark
dual-sourcing heuristics that we used as sample test policies.
Noteworthy is that the training time of A3C remains relatively stable independent on the slow
source’s lead time, in contrast to dynamic programming. Nonetheless, it is not exceptional that
more than ﬁve million periods are simulated per agent to ﬁnd near-optimal policies, even in small-
scale experiments. Figure 10 plots an example of a training curve of the A3C algorithm, where the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
25
best policy is obtained after 4.5 million periods of simulation per agent. Typically, the algorithm
converges quickly to a relatively good policy (within ≈20% of optimal cost). Then it trains fast (≈
200 episodes of length 100,000 periods) to approximately 5%, after which it steadily reduces the
optimality gap to less than 2%. These results were obtained by occasionally restarting trained mod-
els with diﬀerent hyperparameter values. For instance, a smaller learning rate could occasionally
improve performance of these pre-trained models.
7.
Performance Evaluation of DRL in Multi-echelon Inventory Models
Problem setting and Formulation We adopt the multi-echelon inventory model of Van Roy
et al. [1997] with one warehouse and K identical retailers (see Figure 11). Van Roy et al. [1997]
are the ﬁrst to adopt a neuro-dynamic programming approach in inventory management. They
use a neural net to approximate the value function which is updated using temporal diﬀerence
learning. Employing the same setting allows us to show how a deeper neural net and a more
advanced algorithm eliminates the need for manual feature engineering, which was needed to make
the algorithm of Van Roy et al. [1997] work well.
Inventory held at the central warehouse or at the retailers incurs a unit holding cost hw and hr,
respectively. The replenishment lead time from the manufacturer to the warehouse is lw periods,
and from the warehouse to any retailer lr periods. All locations have limited capacity: (1) maximum
production rate is Cm units per period; (2) warehouse inventory position cannot exceed Cw units;
and (3) retail inventory position cannot exceed Cr units.
The
model’s
MDP
has
state
St = (Iw
t−1,Qw
t−1,Ir
t−1,Qr
t−1),
where
Iw
t−1
is
the
end-of-
period
inventory
at
the
warehouse
and
Qw
t−1 = (qw
t−lw,··· ,qw
t−1)
its
outstanding
orders;
Ir
t−1 = (I1
t−1,··· ,IK
t−1)
the
end-of-period
inventories
at
the
K
retailers,
and
Qr
t−1 =
(q1
t−lr,··· ,q1
t−1,q2
t−lr,··· ,q2
t−1,··· ,qK
t−lr,··· ,qK
t−1) their respective outstanding orders.
The action vector at = (qw
t ,q1
t ,··· ,qK
t ), consists of the order quantities: qw
t
at the warehouse
and qi
t (i = 1,··· ,K) at retailer i. The retailer order quantities cannot exceed the end-of-period
inventory on hand in the warehouse, i.e.,
K
P
i=1
qi
t < Iw
t−1 + qw
t−lw. The sequence of events is as follows.
Each period t demand di at retailer i is fulﬁlled by the inventory on hand at retailer i. In case
of a stock-out, [di −(Ii
t−1 + qi
t−lr)]+ > 0, customers either decide to wait for an expedited, same-
day delivery from the warehouse — this occurs with probability Pw— or walk away such that
the retailer incurs a lost sale with probability 1 −Pw. The system is thus a hybrid of a backlog-
ging and lost sales model. Important is that expedited deliveries are shipped after retailers have
placed orders (q1
t ,··· ,qK
t ) and are allocated inventory from the warehouse. This implies that only
[Iw
t−1 + qw
t−lw −
K
P
i=1
qi
t] units can be expedited. Let Bt denote the number of customers in period t
that request an expedited delivery. The number of requested expedited deliveries exceeding the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
26
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
It
It
It
It
qt-1
w
q w
qt-1
1
q1
t-lw
K
t-lw
q
qt-1
K
w
1
2
K
MANUFACTURER
WAREHOUSE
RETAILERS
t-lr
Figure 11
Two-echelon supply chain of Van Roy et al. [1997] in which one capacitated warehouse is replenished
from a manufacturer with lead time lr and replenishes K capacitated retailers with lead time lw.
available end-of-period inventory on hand at the warehouse,

Bt −[Iw
t−1 + qw
t−lw −
K
P
i=1
qi
t]
+
, is lost
and the remainder, Bt −

Bt −[Iw
t−1 + qw
t−lw −
K
P
i=1
qi
t]
+
, is expedited and shipped same-day from the
warehouse. Expedited deliveries by the warehouse incur a unit cost cw while unmet demand is lost
at a unit penalty cost p. The cost in period t thus is:
ct(St,at) = hwIw
t + hr
K
X
i=1
Ii
t + cw

Bt −
"
Bt −[Iw
t−1 + qw
t−lw −
K
X
i=1
qi
t]
#+

+ p


"
Bt −[Iw
t−1 + qw
t−lw −
K
X
i=1
qi
t]
#+
+
K
X
i=1

di −Ii
t−1 + qi
t−lr
+ −Bt

,
(2)
where the ﬁrst two elements represent the inventory holding costs in the supply chain, the third
element the expedited delivery costs and the last two elements the lost sales costs upon stock-out
at the warehouse and upon stock-out at the retailer. The state evolves as follows: Iw
t = Iw
t−1 +
qt−lw −
K
P
i=1
qi
t −
"
Bt −

Bt −[Iw
t−1 + qw
t−lw −
K
P
i=1
qi
t]
+#
, Ii
t = [Ii
t−1 + qi
t−lr −di]+ for each retailer i,
Qw
t = (qw
t−lw+1,··· ,qw
t ) and Qi
t = (qi
t−lr+1,··· ,qi
t) for each retailer i.
Results of Applying DRL To apply A3C in the multi-echelon inventory model, we adapt the
width of the ﬁrst layer of the neural net to the dimension of the state space (lw +Klr). As the action
space is K-dimensional, we reduce the action space by adopting a base-stock replenishment policy
for the warehouse and the retailers with state-dependent base-stock levels, similar to Van Roy
et al. [1997]. This reduces the action space to only two dimensions at = [yw
St,yr
St], consisting of a
base-stock level at the warehouse and a base-stock level for all retailers, which all depend on the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
27
state St. The warehouse order qw
t raises its inventory position to its base-stock level yw
st. Note that
qw
t may not exceed production capacity Cm and the inventory position may not exceed Cw. Hence,
qw
t = min
 
Cw −(Iw
t−1 +
lw
X
i=1
qw
t−i),min
 
yw
st −(Iw
t−1 +
lw
X
i=1
qw
t−i),Cm
!!
.
After the warehouse has ordered, each retailer places its order to raise their inventory position to
the base-stock level yr
St: qi
t = yr
St −(Ii
t−1 +
lrP
i=1
qi
t−i). After ordering, each retailer’s inventory position
may not exceed Cr:
qi
t ≤Cr −(Ii
t−1 +
lr
X
i=1
qi
t−i).
If the warehouse has insuﬃcient capacity to deliver all retailer orders, the inventory is allocated
to the retailers by minimizing the diﬀerence in inventory position between all retailers after orders
are allocated following Van Roy et al. [1997].
We test the two numerical settings used in Van Roy et al. [1997] (see Table 4) Each element
of the random demand vector D = (d1,··· ,dK) is sampled from a normal distribution with mean
µ and standard deviation σ, rounded to the nearest integer.
As computing the optimal policy
is intractable we only compare the A3C versus a base-stock policy with constant, i.e., not state-
dependent, base-stock levels yw and yr. Unlike the dual sourcing and lost sales inventory models
we cannot deploy the LP-ADP approach, as we do not know the structure of the value function,
and the K-dimensional demand makes the number of transition probabilities too large and the
formulation of the constraints of the LP infeasible.
We trained the A3C algorithm using the automatic tuning process with the same set of hyper-
parameters as in dual sourcing and lost sales (see Table 3). We ﬁxed the buﬀer size at 100, which
provided decent results after 100 training runs of the A3C algorithm. The discrete action space
of the A3C algorithm is identical to that used in Van Roy et al. [1997]. The state-dependent
base-stock levels yw
St are restricted to 6 values {50,60,··· ,100} while yr
St is restricted to 9 values
{0,5,10,··· ,40} in Setting 1 and 11 values {0,5,10,··· ,50} in Setting 2. Restricting the base-stock
levels to this set of values will go at the expense of being able to reach the optimal policy. Yet, it
allowed us to improve on a state-independent base-stock policy in which all base-stock levels are
allowed. We ﬁnd that the A3C algorithm improves approximately 9% and 12% on the base-stock
policy with constant base-stock levels. These results are in line with, and slightly better in setting 2,
than Van Roy et al. [1997] who report savings around 10%.
One key distinguishing factor with the method of Van Roy et al. [1997] is that A3C (or DRL)
does not require manual feature engineering. Van Roy et al. [1997] manually develop 23 features
based on the state vector. Instead, DRL or A3C learns directly from the state vector. This is
possible because our network uses four layers and is ‘deeper’ than the single layer with activation
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
28
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
Hyperparameters
Tuning Range Setting 1
Setting 2
Learning rate used
[10−5,10−3]
5.78 × 10−5
1.74 × 10−4
Entropy regularization (βE)
[10−10,10−6]
4.68 × 10−5
1.46 × 10−8
Length of the Episode buﬀer (m) 100
100
100
Base-stock levels warehouse (yw
St)
[50,60,··· ,100] [50,60,··· ,100]
Base-stock levels retailers (yr
St)
[0,5,··· ,40]
[0,5,··· ,50]
Table 3
Hyperparameters of the A3C algorithm to achieve results in both multi-echelon settings.
lw lr µ σ
K
hw hr cw p
Pw
Cp
Cw
Cr
Setting 1 2
2
5
14 10 3
3
0
60 0.8 100 1000 100
Setting 2 5
3
0
20 10 3
3
0
60 0.8 100 1000 100
Table 4
Numerical setting used in lost sales multi-echelon setting of Van Roy et al. [1997]
neural net used in Van Roy et al. [1997]. Their careful selection of the features has resulted in
excellent performance but required problem knowledge. In contrast, DRL does not require any
manual feature engineering, a desirable characteristic of a general purpose technology. Moreover,
we observe that A3C manages to ﬁnd slightly better policies in the larger setting 2.
8.
Conclusions and Reﬂections
Our study provides evidence that deep reinforcement learning can eﬀectively solve classic,
intractable inventory problems. The A3C algorithm can be trained to produce policies that match
the performance of state-of-the-art heuristics and other approximate dynamic programming meth-
ods. Applying deep reinforcement learning, however, is not eﬀortless. Initial tuning of the hyper-
parameters is computationally and time-intensive and requires both art and science. Yet, after
extensive manual tuning of 9 hyperparameters in one problem setting, ﬁxing 6 parameters and
automatically tuning the learning rate, entropy regularization, and buﬀer size resulted in good
performance in the other two problem settings. More so, using only one well-performing hyper-
parameter set resulted in good performance across all sensitivity analyses. Given such minimal
changes among three diﬀerent problem settings, DRL seems a promising general purpose technol-
ogy.
Our rigorous comparative analysis required the controlled “lab” environment for which the
stochastic inventory policies have been developed. Applying the A3C algorithm on a dual-mode
transportation problem setting of a consumer goods manufacturer with real data (c.f. Online
Appendix) provides evidence that our lab ﬁndings may extrapolate to “the real world.” We ﬁnd
that the A3C algorithm adapts well to company-speciﬁc problem settings without requiring re-
tuning of the algorithm. This agrees with one of the authors’ experience with applying DRL in
a large distribution company: While training and tuning DRL for the ﬁrst warehouse required
substantial setup time and cost, scaling the algorithms to other locations was signiﬁcantly easier
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
29
because both the models and the parameters could be re-used (similar to our experience here going
from lost-sales to the other two problem settings). Our analysis and reported training times only
concern the initial setup time and cost, and thus are likely conservative.
Our lab environment assumed the demand distribution was known and our training eﬀectively
could sample an unlimited number of data points from that distribution. It is well known that
machine learning can learn over time, so our analysis focused on the comparative performance
without demand learning. (Again, this implies that our assessment of DRL relative to heuristics
that don’t learn is likely conservative.) In addition to computational power, machine learning—and
especially deep learning—also requires vast amounts of training data to perform well. Whereas
this is true for deep supervised learning, the need for (big) data appears more nuanced for deep
reinforcement learning applied to inventory management: The practical experiment in the Online
Appendix shows that training using a relatively small demand data set was suﬃcient to achieve
good out-of-sample performance. This also is encouraging for adoption of DRL in the real world.
In conclusion: DRL can eﬀectively solve classic, intractable inventory problems both in a con-
trolled lab environment as well as in practical settings with complex environments (non-linear cost
functions with multiple constraints) and limited training data. Yet the ﬁrst-time implementation
is computationally and time demanding. We also found that A3C does not outperform all heuristic
policies and remains, like other ADP methods, a black box. So our conclusion is nuanced: DRL
seems a promising general purpose technology that can be applied to intractable inventory prob-
lems. Yet, before applying DRL in practice, we recommend to study performance in non-stationary
environments with multiple products and unknown demands that must be learned from histori-
cal data. We also believe that there remains a job for academic inventory researchers to generate
structural policy insight or design specialized policies that are (ideally provably) near optimal. We
hope that by sharing our experience and code, this paper will provide a stepping stone for such
research in inventory management and other operational settings.
References
Arrow KJ, Karlin S (1958) Studies in the mathematical theory of inventory and production (Stanford Uni-
versity).
Bellman R (1954) The Theory of Dynamic Programming. Bulletin of the Amer Math Soc 60(6):503–515.
Bergstra J, Bengio Y (2012) Random Search for Hyper-Parameter Optimization. J. of Machine Learn. Res.
13:281–305.
Bergstra J, Komer B, Eliasmith C, Yamins D, Cox DD (2015) Hyperopt: a python library for model selection
and hyperparameter optimization. Comput. Sci. & Discovery 8(1):1749–4699.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
30
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
Bergstra J, Yamins D, Cox DD (2013) Making a science of model search: Hyperparameter optimization in
hundreds of dimensions for vision architectures. Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on
International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 28, 115–123.
Brown DB, Smith JE (2014) Information relaxations, duality, and convex stochastic dynamic programs. Ops
Res 62(6):1394–1415.
Chen W, Dawande M, Janakiraman G (2014) Fixed-dimensional stochastic dynamic programs: An approxi-
mation scheme and an inventory application. Ops Res 62(1):81–103.
Chen W, Yang H (2019) A heuristic based on quadratic approximation for dual sourcing problem with
general lead times and supply capacity uncertainty. IISE Transactions 51(9):943–956.
Clark AJ, Scarf H (1960) Optimal Policies for a Multi-echelon Inventory Problem. Mgt Sci 6(4):363–505.
de Kok T, Grob C, Laumanns M, Minner S, Rambau J, Schade K (2018) A typology and literature review
on stochastic multi-echelon inventory models. Eur J of Op Res 269(3):955–983.
Fang J, Zhao L, Fransoo JC, Van Woensel T (2013) Sourcing strategies in supply risk management: An
approximate dynamic programming approach. Comput. Oper. Res. 40(5):1371–1382.
Federgruen A, Zipkin P (1984) Approximations of dynamic, multilocation production and inventory prob-
lems. Mgt Sci 30(1):69–84.
Fukuda Y (1964) Optimal Policies for the Inventory Problem with Negotiable Leadtime. Mgt Sci 10(4):690–
708.
Giannoccaro I, Pontrandolfo P (2002) Inventory management in supply chains: a reinforcement learning
approach. Int. Journ. Prod. Econ. 78(2):153–161.
Goldberg DA, Katz-Rogozhnikov DA, Lu Y, Sharma M, Squillante MS (2016) Asymptotic Optimality of
Constant-Order Policies for Lost Sales Inventory Models with Large Lead Times. Math. Oper. Res.
41(3):898–913.
Halman N, Klabjan D, Mostagir M, Orlin J, Simchi-Levi D (2009) A fully polynomial-time approximation
scheme for single-item stochastic inventory control with discrete demand. Math. Oper. Res. 34(3):674–
685.
Hessel M, Modayil J, van Hasselt H, Schaul T, Ostrovski G, Dabney W, Horgan D, Piot B, Azar M, Silver
D (2017) Rainbow: Combining improvements in deep reinforcement learning. arXiv:1710.02298 .
Hua Z, Yu Y, Zhang W, Xu X (2015) Structural properties of the optimal policy for dual-sourcing systems
with general lead times. IIE Transactions 47(8):841–850.
Huh WT, Janakiraman G, Muckstadt JA, Rusmevichientong P (2009) Optimality of Order-Up-To Policies
in Lost Sales Inventory Systems. Mgt Sci 55(3):404–420.
Janakiraman G, Roundy RO (2004) Lost-sales problems with stochastic lead times: Convexity results for
basestock policies. Ops Res 52(5):795–803.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
31
Keller PW, Mannor S, Precup D (2006) Automatic basis function construction for approximate dynamic
programming and reinforcement learning. Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, 449–456, ICML ’06 (ACM).
Kingma DP, Ba J (2015) Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. arXiv:1412.6980 .
Kohl N, Stone P (2004) Policy gradient reinforcement learning for fast quadrupedal locomotion. Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation.
Levi R, Perakis G, Uichanco J (2015) The data-driven newsvendor problem: New bounds and insights. Ops
Res 63(6):1294–1306.
Mnih V, Badia AP, Mirza M, Graves A, Lillicrap TP, Harley T, Silver D, Kavukcuoglu K (2016) Asynchronous
Methods for Deep Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:1602.01783 .
Mnih V, Kavukcuoglu K, Silver D, Rusu AA, Veness J, Bellemare MG, Graves A, Riedmiller M, Fidjeland
AK, Ostrovski G, Petersen S, Beattie C, Sadik A, Antonoglou I, King H, Kumaran D, Wierstra D, Legg
S, Hassabis D (2015) Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 518:529–533.
Morton TE (1969) Bounds on the Solution of the Lagged Optimal Inventory Equation with no Demand-
Backlogging and Proportional Costs. SIAM Rev. 11(4):572–596.
Morton TE (1971) The Near-Myopic Nature of the Lagged-Proportional-Cost Inventory Problem with Lost-
Sales. Ops Res 19(7):1708–1716.
Murota K (2003) Discrete Convex Analysis: Monographs on Discrete Mathematics and Applications 10 (Soci-
ety for Industrial and Applied Mathematics).
Nahmias S, Smith SA (1993) Perspectives in Operations Management (Springer, Boston, MA).
Nahmias S, Smith SA (1994) Optimizing Inventory Levels in a Two Echelon Retailer System with Partial
Lost Sales. Ops Res 40(5):582–596.
Oroojlooyjadid A, Nazari M, Snyder L, Tak´aˇc M (2017) A Deep Q-Network for the Beer Game with Partial
Information. arXiv:1708.05924 .
Porteus EL (2002) Foundations of Stochastic Inventory Theory (Stanford Business Books).
Powell WB (2011) Approximate dynamic programming: solving the curses of dimensionality (Wiley).
Puterman ML (1994) Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming (Wiley).
Reiman MI (2004) A new and simple policy for the continuous review lost sales inventory model. Working
Paper, Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies .
Schaul T, Quan J, Antonoglou I, Silver D (2015) Prioritized experience replay. arXiv:1511.05952 .
Schulman J, Levine S, Moritz P, Jordan MI, Abbeel P (2017a) Trust region policy optimization.
arXiv:1502.05477 .
Schulman J, Moritz P, Levine S, Jordan M, Abbeel P (2015) High-Dimensional Continuous Control Using
Generalized Advantage Estimation. arXiv:1506.02438 .
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
32
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
Schulman J, Wolski F, Dhariwal P, Radford A, Klimov O (2017b) Proximal policy optimization algorithms.
arXiv:1707.06347 .
Sheopuri A, Janakiraman G, Seshadri S (2010) New Policies for the Stochastic Inventory Control Problem
with Two Supply Sources. Ops Res 58(3):734–745.
Silver D, Huang A, Maddison CJ, Guez A, Sifre L, van den Driessche G, Schrittwieser J, Antonoglou I,
Panneershelvam V, Lanctot M, Dieleman S, Grewe D, Nham J, Kalchbrenner N, Sutskever I, Lillicrap
T, Leach M, Kavukcuoglu K, Graepel T, Hassabis D (2016) Mastering the game of go with deep neural
networks and tree search. Nature 529:484–489.
Silver D, Schrittwieser J, Simonyan K, Antonoglou I, Huang A, Guez A, Hubert T, Baker L, Lai M, Bolton
A, et al. (2017) Mastering the game of go without human knowledge. Nature 550:354.
Strehl AL, Li L, Wiewiora E, Langford J, Littman ML (2006) Pac model-free reinforcement learning. Pro-
ceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine learning, 881–888.
Sun P, Wang K, Zipkin P (2016) Quadratic Approximation of Cost Functions in Lost Sales and Perishable
Inventory Control Problems. Working Paper,Fuqua School of Business, Duke University .
Sutton RS, Barto AG (1998) Introduction to reinforcement learning, volume 135 (MIT press Cambridge).
Tesauro G (1995) Temporal diﬀerence learning and td-gammon. Communications of the ACM 38(3):58–68.
van Hasselt H, Guez A, Silver D (2015) Deep reinforcement learning with double q-learning.
arXiv:1509.06461 .
Van Roy B, Bertsekas DP, Lee Y, Tsitsikis JN (1997) A Neuro-Dynamic Programming Approach to Retailer
Inventory Management. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Decision and Control .
Veeraraghavan S, Scheller-Wolf A (2008) Now or Later: A Simple Policy for Eﬀective Dual Sourcing in
Capacitated Systems. Ops Res 56(4):850–864.
Wang Z, Schaul T, Hessel M, van Hasselt H, Lanctot M, de Freitas N (2015) Dueling network architectures
for deep reinforcement learning. arXiv:1511.06581 .
Watkins C (1989) Learning from delayed rewards. Ph.D. thesis, Cambridge University.
Whittemore AS, Saunders SC (1977) Optimal Inventory Under Stochastic Demand With Two Supply
Options. J on Appl Math 32(2):293–305.
Williams R (1992) Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning.
Machine Learning 8(3):229–256.
Xin L (2019) Understanding the performance of capped base-stock policies in lost-sales inventory models.
Forthcoming in Operations Research. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357241 .
Xin L, Van Mieghem JA (2021) Dual Sourcing, Dual Mode Dynamic Inventory Models: A Review. Working
Paper, UC Chicago .
Zipkin P (2008a) Old and new methods for lost-sales inventory systems. Ops Res 56(5):1256–1263.
Zipkin P (2008b) On the Structure of Lost-Sales Inventory Models. Ops Res 56(4):937–934.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
33
Demand per period
Kr
Units ordered (qr )
Cost when sourcing from the regular 
source in containers of size kr
Empirical probability density function (pdf)
Best Gamma Fit (pdf) - G(1.98,5.34) 
Empirical demand distribution is fitted by Gamma distribution.
Probability of order size excl. zero orders (%)
Cost function employed in the practical setting.
Actual demand time-series used in the practical setting.
Order size (pallets)
Order size (pallets)
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
kr
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
0
5
10
15
20
30
35
0
0
Period (weekdays in one year)
Figure 12
We applied the A3C algorithm on a real data set with actual daily demand time-series (top left) whose
empirical distribution is well-ﬁtted by a discrete Gamma distribution Γ(1.98,5.34) (top right) and a
5.5% probability of no demand. Slow-mode transportation is containerized and each container has
maximum capacity kr and incurs a ﬁxed ordercost Kr (bottom).
Online Appendix - Application at a Consumer Goods Manufacturer
We applied the A3C algorithm on a real dataset (see top left panel of Fig. 12) of a consumer
goods company that replenishes its distribution center using rail and road from its 1000km remote
manufacturing plant. To include practical constraints of rail transport, we modiﬁed the linear
sourcing costs in the conventional dual sourcing problem to Kr⌈qr
kr ⌉+ crqr + ceqe, where Kr is the
ﬁxed cost of ordering a container with capacity kr using rail transport (see bottom panel of Fig. 12).
The real demand time series contains approximately one year of demand-per-weekday data,
expressed in pallets. There is no demand in 5.5% of the (week)days; in the other days demand is
well ﬁtted by a discretized (by rounding to the nearest integer) Gamma distribution Γ(1.98,5.34)
(see top right panel of Fig. 12). Daily inventory holding costs are 25% of the product value, which
we normalized to h = 1 per pallet (so that all other costs are normalized against h = 1). Unit
backlog costs b = 98 reﬂect a desired 99% service level using the critical fractile
b
b+h. The unit
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
34
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
sourcing costs reﬂect actual price quotes and in-transit inventory costs: cr = 50 and ce = 75 per
pallet, and Kr = 500 per container shipped using rail with capacity kr = 33 pallets. Rail and truck
transport require lr = 7 and le = 4 days, respectively. These include actual transportation times as
well as additional processes such as order preparation and administrative tasks.
We compare two training methods: (1) using the ﬁrst 70% of the sample path (by sampling
from the empirical distribution) to train the A3C algorithms and use the remaining 30% for
out-of-training-sample evaluation; and (2) training on the ﬁtted gamma distribution (taking into
account the 5.5% probability of having no demand). For small scale problems we stringently eval-
uated the DRL’s value against the optimal value found by numerically solving the dual sourcing
dynamic program (DP). Given that the optimal policy of this speciﬁc problem setting is not known,
and that the problem size renders the dynamic program intractable, we benchmark performance
against “extrapolated optimality using clairvoyance” using the expected value of perfect informa-
tion (EVPI) as follows. First, we determine the expected cost under perfect information Cclair: For
a given demand sample path, solve for the cost of the optimal “clairvoyant” dual sourcing policy
assuming the future sample demand path is known. In the conventional setting where sourcing
costs are linear in the ordered volumes, the clairvoyant policy is simple: qr
t = Dt+lr and qe
t = 0.
With non-linear sourcing costs (i.e., stemming from container constraints) we approximate the
inﬁnite-horizon clairvoyant cost by solving, at each time t, the deterministic dual sourcing problem
using a MIP over the rolling horizon {t,...t+T}. We gradually increase the horizon length T until
the clairvoyant policy converges. We repeat for 10 demand samples and average to compute Cclair.
Second, we estimate the optimal cost by adding the estimated EVPI to Cclair. EVPI is deﬁned
as the diﬀerence between optimal cost and Cclair and equals the optimal expected holding and
backlogging costs. In a single-sourcing newsvendor model, the latter is proportional to the standard
deviation of demand if demand is normally distributed with mean µ and variance σ2 [Porteus 2002].
Therefore, the scaled EVPI/µ is proportional to the coeﬃcient of variation: EVPI/µ = βσ/µ.
We boldly extrapolate this property to our dual sourcing system and estimate the factor β in a
small scale system (by solving its dual sourcing DP) and extrapolate to large scale (practical µ) to
estimate the large-scale EVPI. Figure 13 provides some ﬁrst evidence of this linear relationship for
dual sourcing in our practical setting. We compute the clairvoyant policy with the real data and
add the extrapolated EVPI to estimate optimal cost, as shown in Figure 13. The A3C algorithm
develops policies within 6% and 7% of the extrapolated optimal costs for training method (1) and
(2), respectively.
We also evaluated against traditional dual sourcing heuristics. As these traditional heuristics
are designed for linear sourcing costs, they did not perform well in this cost setting and all only
relied on single sourcing fast. The A3C algorithm performed approximately 13% better than single
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881

Deep Reinforcement Learning in Inventory Management
00(0), pp. 000–000, © 0000 INFORMS
35
Coefficient of variation (σ/µ)
Standard deviation (σ)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
0%
Expected value of perfect information/µ
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
10
20
30
40
50
Expected value of perfect information
β
β
EVPI computed when 
DP is tractable.
EVPI extrapolated 
when problem size 
becomes large.
EVPI computed when 
DP is tractable.
6%
Figure 13
Left panel: Similar to single sourcing, the EVPI, evaluated with DP, remains linear in σ for dual
sourcing. Right panel: When the problem scale is too large to computationally solve the DP, we
estimate the optimal costs by adding the EVPI to the cost of the optimal clairvoyant policy. This
EVPI is found by extrapolating the linearity of EVPI from small (where β is estimated with DP) to
large scale systems.
sourcing when evaluated on the remaining 30% of demand samples. We did not observe strong
performance degradation of the A3C algorithm when we bootstrapped the out of sample data
points for evaluation on a larger dataset. This demonstrates that the A3C algorithm is capable
of developing good policies when trained using a relatively small real dataset for realistic cost
functions without needing any tailored heuristics.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3302881