TITLE: Precommitments in Two-Sided Market Competition
JOURNAL: MSOM
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2022.1173
---

TSpace Research Repository 
 
tspace.library.utoronto.ca 
 
 
Precommitments in Two-Sided Market 
Competition 
 
Ming Hu & Yan Liu 
 
Version Pre-print or submitted manuscript. 
 
Citation 
(published version) 
Hu, M., & Liu, Y. (2023). Precommitments in two-sided market 
competition. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 25(2), 704-
718. 
 
Copyright / License Copyright © 2023, INFORMS 
 
DOI https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2022.1173 
Publisher’s Statement This is a submitted manuscript of an article published by INFORMS in 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to cite TSpace items 
 
Always cite the published version, so the author(s) will receive recognition through services that track 
citation counts, e.g. Scopus. If you need to cite the page number of the author manuscript from TSpace 
because you cannot access the published version, then cite the TSpace version in addition to the published 
version using the permanent URI (handle) found on the record page. 
 
This article was made openly accessible by U of T Faculty. 
Please tell us how this access benefits you. Your story matters. 
 

Precommitments in Two-Sided Market Competition
Ming Hu
Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3E6, ming.hu@rotman.utoronto.ca
Yan Liu
Department of Logistics and Maritime Studies, Faculty of Business, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong,
yan.y.liu@polyu.edu.hk
We consider a two-sided market competition problem where two platforms compete in both supply and
demand sides. We examine a variety of competition modes and study the impact of precommitment on
the equilibrium outcomes. By comparing three types of competitions: simultaneous price and wage com-
petition (with no precommitment), wage precommitment competition (followed by price competition), and
price precommitment competition (followed by wage competition), we show that a precommitment made
on the less competitive side has a less intensiﬁed outcome than no commitment. We show that commission
precommitment, where the platforms ﬁrst compete in setting their commission rates and then their prices,
is less proﬁtable than the precommitment in price or wage whichever is on the less competitive side. More-
over, commission precommitment is more proﬁtable than no commitment when the competition intensity
of one side is suﬃciently higher than the other; however, when the competition intensities of both sides
are suﬃciently close, the commission precommitment can be less proﬁtable than no precommitment at all.
Further, we extend the celebrated Kreps-Scheinkman equivalency to the two-sided market and show that the
capacity precommitment, in which the platforms ﬁrst precommit to an initial matching capacity and then set
price and wage simultaneously subject to the precommitted capacity, leads to the most proﬁtable outcome
among all competition modes. We then extend the comparison of various competition modes to account for
demand uncertainty with positively or negatively correlated potential market sizes, reﬂecting weather-driven
or spatial-dispersion uncertainty. We show that beyond the tradeoﬀs mentioned above without demand
uncertainty, no commitment and commission precommitment beneﬁt from more demand variability due to
their operational ﬂexibility in response to the market changes. Moreover, in comparison with no commit-
ment, wage precommitment can tie the hands of platforms in responding to market changes, but can restrain
cutthroat wage competition when the potential market sizes turn out to be high. The strengths of these two
countervailing eﬀects depend on the correlation of the platforms’ market size uncertainties.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

2
1.
Introduction
Platforms in two-sided markets, bridging products/services providers with consumers, have pene-
trated into our daily lives. The increasing prevalence of two-sided markets prompts heated compe-
tition among platforms. For example, Uber and Lyft, the most popular ride-hailing ﬁrms, compete
heavily on pricing, attempting to lure customers away from each other by constantly undercut-
ting on price via coupons. Distinct from the traditional market with competition focused on the
demand side, Uber and Lyft also compete heavily on wages on the supply side, as those plat-
forms crowdsource services from independent contractors. This paper investigates two-sided market
competition on both demand and supply sides, with a focus on the interaction between the two
sides—the matching quantity is the minimum between supply and demand—a unique and inherent
feature in two-sided market competition at the operational level.
In addition to the no-commitment scenario where price and wage are set in the spot market, the
competition could take place sequentially in two stages as well, with price, wage, or commission
rate precommitted in the ﬁrst stage and followed by another decision later in the spot market. The
ﬂat-rate pricing strategy launched by Uber and Lyft recently, which allows passengers to ride for a
set price, e.g., as low as $2 per ride in Chicago. This demonstrates that price could be acting as a
precommitment device in the two-sided market competition. In Aug 2019, as ride-hailing platforms
fought against a then-not-yet-approved California bill that requires the platforms to reclassify the
independent contractors as employees, Uber and Lyft supported a $21-an-hour minimum wage for
drivers in California. This indicates that wage can also be a precommitment device in two-sided
markets. In addition to price and wage, commission can serve as a precommitment device too,
given that it is common for platforms to preannounce a ﬁxed commission rate, followed by pricing
decisions in the spot market, e.g., Uber charges its drivers a commission of 20-25% of the trip
fare. Lastly, in Aug 2019, New York City announced that a cap on for-hire vehicle licenses, ﬁrstly
introduced in 2018, will be extended for one year, in the interest of congestion and low driver wages
(Honan 2019). Yu et al. (2020) point out that the Chinese government also introduced regulatory
measures to control the maximum number of registered drivers for DiDi in various tier-1 cities such
as Beijing and Shanghai. These regulations suggest a platform can possibly commit to a cap on
the driver pool size (see Cachon et al. 2017 and Gurvich et al. 2019 for studies on such a decision).
In the economics literature, it is well-established that Cournot (quantity) competition results in
less intensiﬁed competition than Bertrand competition for substitutable products (see, e.g., Singh
and Vives 1984). Kreps and Scheinkman (1983) point out that Bertrand (price) competition with
precommitted capacity yields the same equilibrium outcome as Cournot competition, which not
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

3
only uncovers the relationship between price and quantity competition in a one-sided market, but
more importantly, manifests that precommitment in capacity could aﬀect the nature of competition
and the equilibrium outcome. Given the various possible precommitment devices identiﬁed above,
we aim at examining how various precommitment devices would perform and compare in the two-
sided competition. The preferences are examined from the perspective of the platforms, whereas
the drivers, riders, and the social planner would have the opposite preference from the platforms.1
More speciﬁcally, we study a two-sided market competition game in which two platforms compete
in both demand and supply sides. In the base model, as in the classic Kreps-Shaninkman equiv-
alency, we assume away uncertainty and adopt a linear demand system of diﬀerentiated services
which depends on both platforms’ prices. Further, we adopt a linear supply system of diﬀerentiated
employers which depends on both platforms’ wages.2 The platforms set their own price and wage.
Then the potential demand and supply emerge based on the demand and supply systems, and the
matching quantity for each platform takes the minimum of its potential demand and supply (see
Hu 2020, Section 3 for the justiﬁcation of such a minimum form). Each platform’s proﬁt is the
multiplication of its proﬁt margin per unit (price minus wage) and the matching quantity.
We ﬁrst consider three types of competitions: simultaneous price and wage competition (with
no precommitment), wage precommitment competition (followed by price competition), and price
precommitment competition (followed by wage competition), all involving price and wage decisions,
but with diﬀerent or no precommitment devices. In a clean-cut fashion, we ﬁnd that the eﬀect
of precommitment on the equilibrium outcome depends on the comparison of the competition
intensities of the two sides. If a precommitment is made on the less (more) competitive side, the
sequential competition with the precommitment has a less (more) intensiﬁed equilibrium outcome
than simultaneous price and wage competition with no precommitment. This result can be viewed
of as a generalization of the celebrated Kreps-Scheinkman equivalency (Kreps and Scheinkman
1983) which says precommitment on capacity (with no competition on the supply side) leads to
less intensiﬁed equilibrium outcome than price comeptition. As the platform can precommit the
matching quantity (through price or wage) on the less competitive side, such a precommitment
alleviates the competition compared to simultaneous two-sided competition. Beyond that classic
insight by Kreps and Scheinkman, if a precommitment is made on the more intensiﬁed side, such
a precommitment leads to more intensiﬁed outcome than simultaneous two-sided competition.
1 In a competitive two-sided market, the lower the prices and the higher the wages, drivers and riders and social
welfare are better oﬀ, but the platforms are worse oﬀ. That is, the competitive platforms’ proﬁtability goes against
the welfare of the riders, drivers, and a social planner.
2 See https://thecollegeinvestor.com/20641/ultimate-lyft-vs-uber-comparison-drivers-riders/ for diﬀer-
entiation between ride-hailing platforms Uber vs. Lyft in the eye of riders and drivers.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

4
Motivated by the prevalence of a platform’s commission rate as being ﬁxed and preannounced,
we analyze commission precommitment competition, a two-stage game where the platforms com-
pete in setting the commission rate ﬁrst and then in setting their price, and compare it with the
aforementioned competitions. We ﬁnd several intriguing results. First, the leverage of commission
precommitment in inﬂuencing the price is indirect and commission precommitment is less prof-
itable than the precommitment on price or wage on the less competitive side, because the latter
could directly lead to a precommitted matching quantity in the ﬁrst stage, whereas the former
fails to do so. On the contrary, commission precommitment is more proﬁtable than the precommit-
ment on price or wage on the more competitive side. Second, commission precommitment is more
proﬁtable than no precommitment when the competition intensity of one side is suﬃciently higher
than that of the other. Consider two extreme cases for example: simultaneous price and wage com-
petition reduces to price precommitment competition when there is no competition on the supply
side, and to wage precommitment competition when there is no competition on the demand side,
respectively. Given we have shown that price or wage precommitments on more competitive side
is less proﬁtable than commission precommitment, we see that the commission precommitment
is more eﬀective than no precommitment for those two extreme cases. Third, when the two-sided
competition intensities are suﬃciently close, the commission precommitment is less proﬁtable than
no precommitment. This is because the intrinsic desire of balancing supply and demand could
eﬀectively impose a constraint on the two-sided competitions when the two sides are about to be
equally competitive, whereas for this case, commission precommitment tips oﬀsuch a balance.
Then we analyze quantity competition that competes in setting the matching quantity simulta-
neously with market-clearing price and wage resolved from the predetermined quantities. We show
that quantity competition, as an extension of Cournot competition in a one-sided market to two-
sided competition, admits a higher equilibrium price than simultaneous price and wage competition
which is the counterpart of Bertrand (price) competition in the one-sided market. This general-
izes the well-known insight that Cournot competition is less intensiﬁed than Bertrand competition
(Singh and Vives 1984) to two-sided competition. Moreover, quantity competition beats both price
and wage precommitment competitions in terms of proﬁtability, indicating that precommitment
on quantity is the most eﬀective compared to precommitment on either price or wage. (Thus quan-
tity commitment also beats commission commitment.) The intuition is that precommitment on
quantity through price or wage is not as direct as precommitment on quantity itself.
To see how the desirable outcome of quantity competition for the platforms can be achieved,
we investigate a two-stage game where the platforms impose a cap on the matching quantity in
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

5
the ﬁrst stage and then set price and wage simultaneously in a subsequent stage. We ﬁnd that
in equilibrium, this two-stage game yields the same equilibrium outcome as quantity competition,
conﬁrming that Kreps-Scheinkman equivalency still holds under two-sided competition. This result
implies that the platforms can potentially achieve the least competitive market outcome by capping
their driver pool size, which ironically seems the regulatory aim of many governmental agencies.
Even though we have shown the power of commitment in sequential movements without any
uncertainty consistent with the economics literature, in practice, precommitment is made at a
high level, while at the operational level decisions such as pricing are often made in response to
market conditions. We therefore extend the comparison of various competition modes to account
for demand uncertainty with positively or negatively correlated potential market sizes. The positive
demand correlation may reﬂect that both platforms operating in the same region may have their
demand co-driven by weather or special events. The negative demand correlation may capture that
the drivers of the two platforms are spatially dispersed, and upon a rider’s arrival at a random
location, one platform may have an edge over the other due to geographical proximity. We ﬁnd that
more ﬂexible competition modes such as no commitment and commission precommitment beneﬁt
from more demand variability (with a ﬁxed mean demand) due to their operational ﬂexibility
in response to the market changes. Moreover, demand uncertainty may undermine or enhance
the (dis)value of wage precommitment, as opposed to no commitment. On the one hand, wage
precommitment can tie the hands of platforms in responding to market changes. On the other hand,
wage precommitment has a beneﬁt of constraining the competition on the supply side which could
be throat-cutting in the spot market. The former eﬀect tends to be weaker and the latter eﬀect
is likely stronger under positively correlated demand than negatively correlated demand, because
the demand side competition is softened under the negatively correlated market sizes compared
to the positively correlated ones. Lastly, market size uncertainty generally undermines the value
of precommitment in price, to a less extent in the negatively correlated case than the positively
correlated counterpart.
2.
Literature Review
Our work is closely related to the classic economics literature on oligopoly pricing. It is well-
established that Cournot (quantity) competition results in higher prices than Bertrand (price)
competition for homogeneous or diﬀerentially substitutable products. With a linear demand system
of duopoly like ours, Singh and Vives (1984) show that quantity competition leads to higher prices
and proﬁts than price competition for substitutable products. Vives (1985) extends the result to
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

6
a setting where ﬁrms sell multiple diﬀerentiated products with a general demand structure. In
contrast, we study price/wage and quantity competition in a two-sided market.
Kreps-Scheinkman equivalency establishes a fundamental connection between quantity and price
competition. Speciﬁcally, Kreps and Scheinkman (1983) show that a Bertrand (price) competition
under precommitted capacity yields the same equilibrium outcome as Cournot (quantity) compe-
tition. That is, a two-stage game in which the ﬁrms ﬁrst commit to a capacity and then play price
competition with the predetermined capacity leads to the same outcome as in Cournot competi-
tion. Farahat et al. (2019) conﬁrm that Kreps-Scheinkman equivalency still holds in a diﬀerentiated
product setting with commonly used demand functions and general spillover models. Anupindi
and Jiang (2008) establish the equivalence between a Cournot game and a price game with a pre-
commitment on the capacity and a contingent production quantity subject to that capacity in the
presence of market size uncertainty, which shows the stochastic counterpart of Kreps-Scheinkman
equivalency. To expand the whole spectrum from price competition to quantity competition, Vives
(1986) considers the impact of ﬂexible vs. inﬂexible technology, which diﬀers in whether the ﬁrms
can produce more products than a precommitted capacity quantity. As the ﬁrms move from inﬂex-
ible to ﬂexible technology, the equilibrium price ranges from Cournot price to Bertrand price,
because the precommitment power is weakened by more ﬂexible technology. With demand uncer-
tainty, Afeche et al. (2019) demonstrate that the presence of reorder opportunity may yield larger
initial precommitted orders and lower expected proﬁt, thus mitigating the value of original pre-
commitment. Complementing the literature, we show that Kreps-Scheinkman equivalency holds in
a two-sided market in which the platforms can commit to a cap on their matching quantity.
With a duopoly of diﬀerentiated ﬁrms `a la Hotelling, Nasser and Turcic (2016) allow ﬁrms to
choose whether to commit to a quantity in the ﬁrst place and ﬁnd that if the product diﬀerentiation
is suﬃciently low, both ﬁrms choose to commit in equilibrium which allows them to avoid the intense
price competition, whereas asymmetric equilibrium in quantity commitment could arise if the level
of diﬀerentiation is suﬃciently high. Peura et al. (2017) analyze a model with two ﬁnancially
constrained ﬁrms competing under the classic Bertrand framework and show that trade credit, in
the presence of ﬁnancing cost, can serve as a commitment device (similar to quantity commitment)
that alleviates the price competition. Rather than one-side competition with commitment studied
in these papers, we focus on the two-sided market and examine various commitment devices such
as price, wage, commission, quantity, and capacity.
Competition in two-sided markets has attracted great interest from both economics and opera-
tions management communities. In the economics literature, Rochet and Tirole (2003) study the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

7
eﬀect of platform governance on price allocation and end-user surplus in a two-sided market of com-
peting platforms and compare the outcomes with socially optimal ones. Liu et al. (2019) generalize
Rochet and Tirole’s framework and show that the impact of increased platform competition on the
equilibrium transaction fees charged by platforms depends heavily on whether buyers multihome.
Caillaud and Jullien (2003) analyze competition among intermediaries who can use sophisticated
pricing such as registration and transaction fees. Nikzad (2019) investigates the eﬀects of the size of
the labor pool on the equilibrium outcomes in ride-hailing markets. Tan and Zhou (2020) construct
a general model (i.e., an arbitrary number of platforms, a more general form of product diﬀeren-
tiation, and more than two sides) of price competition among platforms in multi-sided markets to
study how the platforms compete for multiple sides of customers and the impact of competition on
prices and welfare. In contrast, we follow the economics literature of Kreps-Scheinkman equivalency
and study the eﬀect of precommitment in a two-sided competitive market.
In the operations management literature, Cohen and Zhang (2019) study two competing ride-
hailing platforms who cooperate and introduce a new joint service to the market. They show that
this joint service can beneﬁt both platforms, riders, and drivers by a properly designed proﬁt-
sharing contract. Bernstein et al. (2020) consider a pricing game between two platforms that employ
the commission-rate contract with the drivers, and assume both customers and drivers are sensitive
to congestion in the system which aﬀects their chance of being matched. The authors consider
single-homing where each driver works through a single platform (corresponding to β = 0 in our
setting) and multi-homing where each driver can work through both platforms (corresponding
to β > 0 in our setting), and ﬁnd that all players are worse oﬀin the multi-homing setting. In
order to see whether competing platforms can co-exist proﬁtably, Bai and Tang (2020) examine
a similar two-sided competition problem where the competition involves not only price and wage
oﬀered by platforms, but also the resulting waiting time for customers and utilization for drivers.
They identify under what conditions the race-to-the-bottom Bertrand equilibrium would persist
and under what conditions both platforms could be proﬁtable. Siddiq and Taylor (2020) examine
the eﬀect of the access to autonomous vehicles (AVs) on the platforms that compete on both
demand and supply sides. They identify conditions under which platforms’ access to AVs, allowing
a platform to withdraw from the competitive labor market, reduces platform proﬁt, agent welfare,
and social welfare. Benjaafar et al. (2020) consider a model similar to Bernstein et al. (2020)
where the two platforms decide simultaneously on the price and wage and then workers decide
which platform to serve and simultaneously customers decide on which platform to use. They ﬁnd
that whether workers beneﬁt from the competition among on-demand service platforms (i.e., the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

8
equilibrium wage is greater than that in the monopoly case) depends on the mass of labor market,
whereas the platforms are always worse oﬀwith the competition. As a follow-up, Wu et al. (2020)
focus on comparing the simultaneous movements of workers and customers vs. their sequential
movements, in response to the announced wages and prices by the competing platforms. Chen et al.
(2020) investigate the platforms’ bonus strategy by analyzing a model that incorporates platforms’
two-sided competition in a multi-period setting, where each platform can oﬀer bonus to service
providers who participate consistently. They identify cases in which the platforms will oﬀer bonus
in equilibrium and analyze the impact of bonus oﬀerings on platform proﬁt and social welfare.
Ahmadinejad et al. (2020) investigate the possibility of whether competition leads to market failure
in the form of the “tragedy of the commons.” Distinct from those papers that mostly examine one
mode of competition by platforms, we analyze a set of competition modes with various commitment
devices in which platforms make decisions sequentially without or with demand uncertainty and
focus on the impact of diﬀerent commitment devices on the equilibrium outcomes.
Our work also contributes to the vast operations management literature on competition. This
literature typically captures the competitive economic decisions such as prices together with some
other operational decisions such as inventory, capacity, or wait time, and studies the impact of these
operational features on the market equilibrium. For example, Allon and Federgruen (2007) study
various competition modes among competing service facilities each of whom decides a waiting-
time standard simultaneously or sequentially with a price level. In contrast, we study competition
in a two-sided market, rather than a one-sided market. More importantly, we aim to see how
precommitment in various instruments aﬀects the competition outcome.
3.
Model
We study a two-sided market competition problem in which two platforms compete in both supply
and demand sides. Platform i (i = 1,2) competes in oﬀering a wage wi to independent service
providers and a price pi to consumers. On the consumer side, each platform’s demand depends on
both platforms’ prices; it should increase in the competitor’s price and decrease in its own price.
Speciﬁcally, we assume the demand of platform i, denoted by di(pi,pj), follows a linear form:
di(p) = di(pi,pj) = [Ω−pi + γpj]+,
j ̸= i, i = 1,2,
(1)
where Ωis the ﬁxed potential market size, and 0 ≤γ < 1 is the demand substitution factor that
measures the level of service diﬀerentiation and competition intensity on the demand side. The
extreme case of γ = 0 corresponds to that the services provided by the two platforms are not
substitutable and thus there is no competition on the demand side.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

9
On the service provider side, like the demand side, each platform’s supply depends on both
platforms’ wages; in particular, it increases in its own wage and decreases in the competitor’s wage.
Speciﬁcally, we assume the supply of platform i, denoted by si(wi,wj), also follows a linear form:
si(w) = si(wi,wj) = [wi −βwj]+,
j ̸= i, i = 1,2,
(2)
where 0 ≤β < 1 is the supply substitution factor and measures the competition intensity of two
platforms in the labor market. Likewise, β = 0 means there is no competition on the supply side.
Platform i earns a proﬁt margin of pi −wi for each unit of matching between supply and demand.
Hence, its proﬁt denoted by πi(w,p) can be written as:
πi(w,p) = (pi −wi)min{di(pi,pj),si(wi,wj)},
j ̸= i, i = 1,2.
(3)
For all the competitions analyzed in this paper, if supply is less than demand for a platform, the
limited supply will be randomly allocated among those who demand it and the unsatisﬁed demand
will be lost. Similarly, if demand is less than supply for a platform, the limited demand will be
randomly allocated among those who supply it and the extra supply will be wasted. This is the
same proportional rationing rule adopted in Kreps and Scheinkman (1983).
Next, we analyze and compare the following set of competition modes.
• Price and wage competition (mode P)—no commitment. This mode extends the classic price
competition in a one-sided (mostly the demand side) market, by letting platforms decide on both
price and wage simultaneously.
• Wage precommitment (mode wp). By competing on wage in the ﬁrst stage, the platforms
precommit to a supply quantity generated according to the supply functions (2), which is the upper
bound on how much each platform can ultimately sell to consumers. In the subsequent stage, the
platforms compete on price and then the demand is realized according to (1).
• Price precommitment (mode pw). The price precommitment competition is analogous to the
wage precommitment competition. The diﬀerence is that in the price precommitment competition,
by competing on price in the ﬁrst stage, the platforms precommit to a demand quantity generated
according to (1), also representing the upper bound on how much each platform is in need of
supply. In the subsequent stage, the platforms compete on wage and then the crowdsourced supply
is realized according to (2).
• Commission precommitment (mode C). In this mode, the platforms compete on the commis-
sion rate ﬁrst and then on the price in the second stage (the wage is derived from the price and
the precommitted commission rate).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

10
• Quantity competition (mode Q)—capacity precommitment. This mode extends the classic
quantity competition in a one-sided (mostly the demand side) market, by allowing platforms to
decide on the matching quantity simultaneously, with the prices and wages set such that those
matching quantities are met. Later we will show that this mode is achievable by a two-stage
competition, in which the platforms ﬁrst precommit to an initial matching capacity and then set
price and wage simultaneously subject to the precommitted matching capacity.
We investigate how the precommitments in various instruments fare against the competition
in the spot market with no precommitment. We ﬁrst derive the equilibrium of each competition
modes, respectively, and then compare the equilibrium results to gain managerial insights. For each
mode X = {P,wp,pw,C,Q}, we use (p∗
X,w∗
X,d∗
X,s∗
X,z∗
X,π∗
X) to denote the symmetric equilibrium
price, wage, demand quantity, supply quantity, matching quantity, and proﬁt level for each ﬁrm,
respectively.
3.1.
Simultaneous Price and Wage Competition: No Committment
As described earlier, simultaneous price and wage competition is a one-shot game in which both
ﬁrms decide on the price and wage simultaneously. For any ﬁxed price and wage decisions of its
competitor, each ﬁrm will make its own decisions such that its demand equals to its supply quantity,
otherwise, the ﬁrm could improve its proﬁt by either raising the price or lowering the wage. This
gives the best response of a ﬁrm given the other ﬁrm’s decisions on price and wage. Solving the set
of best response functions yields the following equilibrium.
Lemma 1. The simultaneous price and wage competition admits a unique equilibrium of prices
and wages, which is symmetric for any ﬁrm:
p∗
P =
3 −2β
4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ Ω,
w∗
P =
1
4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ Ω,
The resulting equilibrium matching quantity and platform’s proﬁt level for any ﬁrm are:
z∗
P =
1 −β
4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ Ω,
π∗
P =
2(1 −β)2
(4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ)2Ω2.
It can be readily veriﬁed that p∗
P > w∗
P and d∗
P = s∗
P = z∗
P > 0. That is, the platforms will keep a
positive proﬁt margin for themselves. Moreover, it is not surprising to see that the platforms will
set price and wage in the spot market such that demand and supply can be matched perfectly.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

11
3.2.
Wage Precommitment Competition
With platforms’ wage decisions committed from the ﬁrst stage, the second-stage game is analogous
to a capacitated price competition game, as the maximum available supply is capped by a quantity
determined by the committed wages. If the prices in the second stage are set such that the resulting
demand is less than the precommitted supply upper bound, we assume the unmatched supply
will not get paid, as seen from the proﬁt function (3). An alternative formulation is that the
service providers are guaranteed to receive the committed wage, no matter whether the supply is
matched or not. Then the proﬁt function is πi(w,p) = pi min{di(pi,pj),si(wi,wj)} −wisi(wi,wj),
which is equivalent to πi(w,p) = pidi(pi,pj) −wisi(wi,wj), subject to di(pi,pj) ≤si(wi,wj). This
is true when platforms commit to a wage to entice drivers to come out and work for rush hours or
after midnight. We verify that under this alternative formulation, all of our results still hold. The
intuition is that under the alternative assumption, the extra supply (if any) becomes the platform’s
liability, and the platform can always improve its proﬁt by reducing the committed supply quantity
in a deterministic world; therefore, the resulting equilibrium wage and price are set such that the
supply quantity is equal to the demand, which leads to the same equilibrium results.
In the second stage, each platform would adopt either the supply-depletion price or the revenue-
maximizing price. For a low wage and the resulting small precommitted supply quantity, the
platform would at best choose the supply-depletion price that clears its entire supply. For a high
wage and the resulting ample precommitted supply, the revenue-maximizing price can be the best
choice. In equilibrium, anticipating the outcomes in the second stage, platforms would not set the
wage too high in the ﬁrst stage so that they have any unsold supply in the second stage, i.e., the
wages are chosen such that both ﬁrms adopt the supply-depletion price. Then, we are able to move
back to the ﬁrst stage, analyze the wage decisions and derive the ﬁrst-stage equilibrium.
Lemma 2. The wage precommitment competition admits a unique sub-game perfect equilibrium
of price in the second stage and wage in the ﬁrst stage, which is symmetric for any ﬁrm:
p∗
wp =
3 −2β −βγ −2γ2 + β2γ + βγ2
(1 −γ)(4 −3β + γ −2βγ −2γ2 + β2γ + βγ2)Ω,
(4)
w∗
wp =
1 + γ
4 −3β + γ −2γ2 −2βγ + β2γ + βγ2 Ω,
(5)
such that the supply is equal to the demand. The resulting equilibrium matching quantity and
platform’s proﬁt level are:
z∗
wp =
(1 + γ)(1 −β)
4 −3β + γ −2γ2 −2βγ + β2γ + βγ2 Ω,
π∗
wp =
(1 −β)2(2 −γ2 −βγ)(1 + γ)
(1 −γ)(4 −3β + γ −2βγ −2γ2 + β2γ + βγ2)2 Ω2.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

12
3.3.
Price Precommitment Competition
In the price precommitment competition, platforms commit to a demand quantity which serves
as the upper bound on the matching quantity. If the platforms set a low wage such that there is
unmatched demand, those unmatched demands would be lost. That is, the platforms only commit
to the price to charge customers if matched, but do not guarantee a matching. Similar to the
discussion for the wage precommitment, an alternative formulation is to impose the constraints
that all customers at the committed prices have to be satisﬁed. In the deterministic world, this
alternative formulation is equivalent to the current setting. This is because the equilibrium prices
are chosen in the ﬁrst stage such that there will not be any excess demand in the second stage game,
analogous to the wage precommitment competition. Using this property, we solve the sequential
game of price precommitment competition backwards and obtain its subgame perfect equilibrium.
Lemma 3. The price precommitment competition admits a unique sub-game perfect equilibrium
of wage in the second stage and price in the ﬁrst stage, which is symmetric for any ﬁrm:
p∗
pw =
3 + β −β2 −βγ
4 −3γ + β −2βγ −2β2 + β2γ + βγ2 Ω,
(6)
w∗
pw =
1 + β
4 −3γ + β −2βγ −2β2 + β2γ + βγ2 Ω,
such that the supply is equal to the demand. The resulting equilibrium matching quantity and
platform’s proﬁt level are:
z∗
pw =
1 −β2
4 −3γ + β −2βγ −2β2 + β2γ + βγ2 Ω,
π∗
pw =
(1 −β2)(2 −β2 −βγ)
(4 −3γ + β −2βγ −2β2 + β2γ + βγ2)2 Ω2.
3.4.
Commission Precommitment Competition
Commission rate contract is widely used across many two-sided platforms. Uber, for instance, desig-
nates a commission rate of 20-25% and passes 75-80% of each ride fare to its drivers. Airbnb charges
its hosts a host service fee of 3% for each reservation. The commission rate is a strategic deci-
sion that is precommitted at least for a period of time. We study the commission precommitment
competition, a two-stage competition game, in which the platforms compete on the commission
rate ﬁrst and then on the price in the second stage (the wage is derived from the price and the
precommitted pay-out ratio). If the pay-out ratio to the suppliers is denoted by αi, then the com-
mission rate of the platform is 1 −αi. That is, for each unit of matching quantity, the service
provider receives wi = αipi and the platform retains (1 −αi)pi. Denote by α the pay-out ratio
vector. Therefore, the proﬁt of platform i can be written as
πi(α,p) = (1 −αi)pi min{di(pi,pj),si(αipi,αjpj)},
j ̸= i, i = 1,2.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

13
We ﬁrst show that for any ﬁxed commission rate α, it is optimal for ﬁrms to set the equilibrium
price such that the demand equals to the supply quantity in the second stage (see Lemma F.2).
Given that the supply at optimality equates to demand, the price and thus the platform proﬁt can
be expressed as the function of α, from which we obtain the optimal commission rate as a function
of the other ﬁrm’s decision of commission rate. Solving the set of equations yields the equilibrium.
For the sake of tractability, we focus on the symmetric solution.
Lemma 4. The commission rate precommitment competition admits a unique symmetric sub-
game perfect equilibrium of price in the second stage and pay-out ratio in the ﬁrst stage:
α∗=
1
2(1−β)[3+(1−γ)β−β2]
n
β(3 −γ2) −β2(γ + 1) −(1 −γ)(2 + 2γ + β)
+
p
(1 + γ)[β4(1 + γ) −2β3γ(3 −γ) + β2γ(12 −11γ + γ2) −4β(1 −γ)(4 + 2γ −γ2) + 4(4 −4γ −γ2 + γ3)]
o
, (7)
p∗
C =
1
1 −γ + (1 −β)α∗Ω.
(8)
The resulting equilibrium platform’s proﬁt level for any ﬁrm is:
π∗
C = α∗(1 −β)(1 −α∗)
(1 + α∗−γ −βα∗)2 Ω2.
(9)
We also have the following observation.
Lemma 5. If the platforms commit to a lower α in the ﬁrst stage, the optimal price is higher in
the second stage.
Lemma 5 show that if a lower commission rate is set in the ﬁrst stage, then at optimality a higher
price must be set in the second stage. Given a lower commission rate in the ﬁrst stage, suppose
that a lower price is set in the second stage, which then induces a higher demand. However, the
lower price and commission rate produce a lower wage, leading to a lower supply, which cannot
match the larger demand. Hence, it must be the case that a higher price is set in the second stage.
3.5.
Quantity Competition: Capacity Precommitment
In one-sided (demand side) market, price competition sets prices strategically and can fulﬁll any
quantity that consumers demand, leading to the most intense competition on price. In contrast,
Cournot competition allows ﬁrms to set quantity strategically but they have no say in setting prices.
Rather, the entire supply quantity will be cleared at the market-clearing price. It is a well-known
result that the Cournot competition alleviates the intensity of competition, thus resulting in higher
price and proﬁt than price competition. This result triggers our interest in such a research question:
will this relationship still hold in the context of a two-sided market competition? To answer this
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

14
question, this section explores the quantity competition and then compares it to simultaneous price
and wage competition prescribed in Section 3.1.
Quantity competition in a two-sided market, similar to Cournot competition in one-sided market,
competes on the matching quantity, with a market clearing price and wage derived from the
quantity decisions: Given the matching quantity decisions of the competition, it is optimal for the
platforms to set the price and wage such that the demand and supply are equal to the matching
quantity. Hence, the platform’s proﬁt can be written as a function of the matching quantity of
both platforms, from which we obtain each platform’s optimal matching quantity as a function of
the other platform’s matching quantity. Solving the set of equations yields the equilibrium.
Lemma 6. The quantity competition admits a unique equilibrium of matching quantities, which
is symmetric for any ﬁrm:
p∗
Q =
3 + β −β2 −2γ2 −βγ2
(1 −γ)(4 + β + γ −2γ2 −2β2 −β2γ −βγ2)Ω,
(10)
w∗
Q =
(1 + γ)(1 + β)
4 + β + γ −2γ2 −2β2 −β2γ −βγ2 Ω,
The resulting equilibrium matching quantity and platform’s proﬁt level for any ﬁrm are:
z∗
Q =
(1 + γ)(1 −β2)
4 + β + γ −2γ2 −2β2 −β2γ −βγ2 Ω,
π∗
Q =
(2 −γ2 −β2)(1 + γ)(1 −β2)
(1 −γ)(4 + β + γ −2γ2 −2β2 −β2γ −βγ2)2Ω2.
Generalized Kreps-Scheinkman equivalency. Kreps and Scheinkman (1983) study a model
in which the ﬁrms play a two-stage capacity (quantity) precommitment game, where they set a
capacity (quantity) in the ﬁrst stage and then compete on price in the second stage subject to
the capacity constraint chosen earlier. The authors establish that the equilibrium of such a two-
stage game has the same outcome as that of the Cournot model. Next, we examine whether an
analogous equivalency holds in a two-sided market, which could help justify how to reach the
Pareto-dominating equilibrium under the quantity competition compared to other competition
modes.
Prior to the analysis, we ﬁrst deﬁne the quantity precommitment game in a two-sided market.
In the ﬁrst stage, any platform i simultaneously sets a quantity level qi, representing the maximum
amount each platform can match between supply and demand. For instance, the maximum amount
could be controlled by the number of drivers recruited by a platform or the amount of reminders or
coupons sent to a driver pool for a given time slot. Denote by q the matching quantity vector. In
the subsequent stage, the platforms compete in the spot market by setting both price p and wage
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

15
w simultaneously. The proﬁt function of platform i as the outcome of matching therefore can be
written as
πi(p,w,q) = (pi −wi)min{di(p),si(w),qi}.
We ﬁrst present a lemma.
Lemma 7. In Nash equilibrium of the two-stage quantity precommitment competition, the result-
ing capacity is set in the ﬁrst stage such that there does not exist any excess supply and demand
in the second stage.
Lemma 7 indicates that in the Nash equilibrium of the quantity precommitment competition,
both ﬁrms set a capacity constraint in the ﬁrst stage that will be binding in the second stage.
Note that if the capacity set in the ﬁrst stage is suﬃciently large, then the ﬁrms compete on price
and wage at the subsequent stage as if there is no capacity constraint at all, leading to the same
outcome as simultaneous price and wage competition. Compared to this case, a capacity constraint
imposed in the ﬁrst stage would alleviate the competition on price and wage, therefore improving
proﬁtability for the platforms. If ﬁrm 1 sets a low capacity while ﬁrm 2 sets an ample capacity,
then ﬁrm 1 could employ a higher price to clear its tight supply, whereas ﬁrm 2 could set a lower
revenue-maximizing price for its large quantity. The competition on price and wage, although less
intensiﬁed thus leading to a higher proﬁt for either platform than the case with ample capacity
levels for both ﬁrms, is still more intensiﬁed than the case with tight capacity constraints for
both ﬁrms. Therefore, only the case with tight capacity constraints for both ﬁrms could sustain in
equilibrium. Lemma 7 implies the following result immediately.
Proposition 1 (Generalized Kreps-Scheinkman Equivalency). The
equilibrium
out-
come of the two-stage quantity precommitment competition, in terms of price, wage, matching
quantity and proﬁt for any ﬁrm, is the same as that of the single-stage quantity competition.
Proposition 1 conﬁrms that the Kreps and Scheinkman equivalency still holds in a two-sided
market. Combining with Proposition 4, Proposition 1 implies that a more desirable situation than
all of the previous discussed competition modes with various commitment devices is that the
platforms constrain themselves with capacity constraints. Such constraints can be achieved through,
e.g., limiting the size of the labor pool.
3.6.
Comparisons
Now we compare the various competition modes to examine the performance of precommitments
in diﬀerent instruments. To simplify notation, we make the following deﬁnition.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

16
Definition 1. When the platforms prefer competition mode X over Y , denoted by X ⪰Y ,
then X results in higher prices and platform proﬁts, i.e., p∗
X ≥p∗
Y , π∗
X ≥π∗
Y , and lower wages and
matching quantities, i.e., w∗
X ≤w∗
Y , z∗
X ≤z∗
Y .
We note that the preference ⪰is from the perspective of the platforms. With the linear demand
and supply systems possibly derived from a representative consumer and driver maximizing a
quadratic utility function, respectively, lower prices mean higher rider welfare and higher wages
mean higher driver surplus. Therefore, the opposite of ⪰would be preferred by the riders, drivers,
and the social planner with the objective of maximizing the total social welfare which moves in
the same direction as the total matching quantity.
Proposition 2.
(a) If the demand side is more competitive than the supply side (i.e., γ ≥β),
the preference ranking by the platform is: wp ⪰P ⪰pw.
(b) If the supply side is more competitive than the demand side (i.e., γ < β), the preference
ranking by the platform is: pw ⪰P ⪰wp.
Proposition 2 shows that the ranking of the three closely related competition modes depends
on the comparison of the competition intensities of the two sides. If the demand side is more
competitive, the wage precommitment competition leads to higher equilibrium prices and proﬁt
levels and lower wages and matching quantities, than simultaneous price and wage competition,
which in turn leads to higher equilibrium prices and proﬁt levels and lower wages and matching
quantities than the price precommitment competition. The rankings are reversed if the supply is
more competitive. In other words, if the decisions of the less competitive side are made earlier and
those of the more competitive side are delayed to a later point, the sequential competition has a
less intensiﬁed market outcome than simultaneous price and wage competition. The intuition is
as follows. As the platform can precommit matching quantity (through price or wage) on the less
competitive side, the precommitment alleviates the competition compared to simultaneous two-
sided competition. In the extreme case, on the supply side, there is no wage-sensitive supply and the
supply cost is a constant, which can be viewed as no competition at all. By precommitting quantities
in a sequential competition with price competition in the second stage, the equilibrium outcome of
quantity competition is less intensiﬁed compared to price competition, which is known by combining
the celebrated results of Kreps-Scheinkman equivalency and Singh and Vives (1984). In contrast, if
the decisions of the more competitive side are made in the ﬁrst stage, the precommitment leads to
a more intensiﬁed market outcome than simultaneous price and wage competition. When the price
and wage are jointly determined, the less competitive side would constrain the competition intensity
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

17
of the more competitive side, as both sides of supply and demand are balanced in equilibrium.
However, when the more intensiﬁed side makes the decision ﬁrst, such a balancing constraint is
weakened, because the balancing constraint is absent in the ﬁrst stage when the more intensiﬁed
decisions are being made. This result essentially extends the intuition learned from Kreps and
Scheinkman (1983) and Singh and Vives (1984) to the setting where the supply is crowdsourced
and elastic and deepens our understanding of the two-sided market.
Now, we compare the commission precommitment competition with others.
Proposition 3. (a)
(i) If the demand side is more competitive than the supply side (i.e.,
γ ≥β), the preference ranking by the platform is: wp ⪰C ⪰pw.
(ii) If the supply side is more competitive than the demand side (i.e., γ < β), the preference
ranking by the platform is: pw ⪰C ⪰wp.
(b)
(i) If γ ≥β or γ ≪β, the preference ranking by the platform is C ⪰P.
(ii) If γ ≤β and γ is suﬃciently close to β, the preference ranking by the platform is P ⪰C.
Part (a) of Proposition 3 shows that exactly as simultaneous price and wage competition, the
precommitment on commission is less proﬁtable than the direct precommitment of price or wage
on the less competitive side. This is because, by precommitment on price or wage, the matching
quantity is precommitted as an outcome. However, by precommitment on the commission, the
matching quantity is not yet committed. For example, suppose the supply side is more competitive
than the demand side. With a higher price on the less competitive side precommitted in the price
precommitment competition, the matching quantity is directly committed to be at a lower level.
However, in a commission precommitment game, due to the intense competition on the supply
side, the platforms need to commit a higher commission to attract service providers, which results
in a lower price according to Lemma 5. In essence, the leverage of commission precommitment in
inﬂuencing the price and resulting matching quantity is indirect and hence less proﬁtable.
Nevertheless, the commission precommitment performs better than no commitment (i.e., simul-
taneous price and wage competition) in most of the parameter space of two-sided competition
intensities γ and β. This happens when the demand side is more competitive than the supply
side (i.e., γ ≥β) or the supply side is suﬃciently more competitive than the demand side (i.e.,
γ ≪β). For example, consider two extreme cases that either β = 0 (i.e., no competition on the
supply side) when simultaneous price and wage competition reduces to price precommitment com-
petition, or γ = 0 (i.e., no competition on the demand side) when simultaneous price and wage
competition reduces to wage precommitment competition (see Lemma F.3). Part (a) shows that
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

18
the direct precommitment on the price or wage decision on the more competitive side leads to
more intense competition than the indirect precommitment on commission. Therefore, for those
cases, simultaneous price and wage competition is less proﬁtable than commission precommitment
competition.
Only when the two-sided intensities γ and β(≥γ) are close enough in a narrow band, does
precommitment on the commission actually lead to a more intensiﬁed market outcome than simul-
taneous price and wage competition, though the magnitude is not signiﬁcant. That is, the pre-
commitment on the commission may hurt platforms as opposed to no precommitment. This coun-
terintuitive insight can be explained as follows. When two-sided intensities are balanced, there is
little need to use the precommitted decision on the less competitive side to restrict the competition
on the more competitive side, because the balanced matching of supply and demand by default
imposes a constraint on the two-sided competitions. However, by commitment to the less-eﬀective
device of the commission rate, the balance can be tipped over, leading to a more competitive
outcome than simultaneous price and wage competition.
(a) C vs. wp
(b) C vs. pw
(c) C vs. P
Figure 1
Comparison between Commission Precommitment Competition and Others
Figure 1 displays the comparisons between the commission precommitment competition and
the others for each pair of (β,γ). Figures 1(a) and 1(b) conﬁrm the results in Proposition 3(a).
Figure 1(c) exhibits that in most regions the commission precommitment is more proﬁtable than
simultaneous price and wage competition. Only in the narrow band with γ slightly smaller than
β, is it less proﬁtable, which is consistent with Proposition 3(b).
Now we compare quantity competition with all the other competition modes.
Proposition 4. The platforms prefer Q over any of the competition modes among wp, P, pw,
and C, i.e., Q ⪰max{wp,P,pw,C}.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

19
Proposition 4 shows that the quantity competition leads to higher prices and proﬁts and
lower wages and matching quantities than any of simultaneous price and wage competition, and
wage/price/commission precommitment competition. It generalizes the well-known result that
quantity competition alleviates the competition and leads to higher prices and proﬁts than the
price competition to the context of a two-sided market. In particular, Proposition 4 demonstrates
that precommitment on the matching quantity is the most eﬀective compared to precommitment
on either wage or price. The intuition behind is as follows. In a two-stage sequential competition,
the commitment is made indirectly through either price or wage, which still suﬀers competition on
either the demand or supply side and is thus not as eﬀective as direct commitment on the match-
ing quantity. Ultimately, the most powerful commitment is to directly precommit to the matching
quantity, which, as shown in Proposition 1, can be achieved by setting a cap on the matching
quantity (e.g., the number of drivers a platform hires) and then competing in setting price and
wage. This result implies that the platforms can potentially achieve the least competitive market
outcome (and thus the lowest social welfare) by capping their driver pool size, which ironically
seems the regulatory objective of many governmental agencies.
4.
Demand Uncertainty
In the base model, we assume a deterministic market size to examine the performance of various
precommitment devices. In this section, we explore how diﬀerent precommitment devices would
fare in the two-sided market competition under demand uncertainty.
Reynolds and Wilson (2000) show that precommitment on capacity before market size uncer-
tainty is realized may result in the non-existence of a symmetric equilibrium in pure strategy if the
variation exceeds a threshold. Hence, for ease of exposition, we choose not to study capacity precom-
mitment. Note that Kreps-Scheinkman equivalency may not hold under market size uncertainty.
Thus we do not present quantity competition whose legitimacy is justiﬁed by Kreps-Scheinkman
equivalency in the deterministic case, though it can be fully characterized under uncertainty.3 With
a bit notational abuse, we use the same notation from the deterministic case for all random cases.
4.1.
Positively Correlated Market Size Uncertainty
First, we assume the two ﬁrms face exactly the same market size Ω, which is a random variable.
Such a positive correlation of the potential market sizes can be driven by weather or a special
occasion, which equally applies to the same area where both platforms operate.
3 In quantity precommitment competition, the ﬁrms decide on the matching quantities before the market size real-
izations, while the prices and wages are market-clearing ones contingent on the realizations.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

20
In contingent simultaneous price and wage competition, there is no commitment on any instru-
ment, and both price and wage are set contingently on the realization of the market size, that is,
they are simultaneously announced after the market size is realized. In all the competition modes
with precommitment, we assume that the commitment is made before the randomness is realized,
and the second-stage decision is made after the randomness is realized, to reﬂect the fact that
precommitment is made at the strategic or tactic level, while the other decision is made at the
operational level. Speciﬁcally, in wage precommitment competition, the wage decisions are simul-
taneously made before the realization of the uncertainty, while the price decisions are contingent
on the realization. The price precommitment competition is analogous to the wage precommit-
ment competition, with the sequence of price and wage decisions reversed. In the commission-rate
precommitment competition, the platforms announce their commission rate before the market size
realization and then decide their price after the realization.
4.1.1.
Contingent simultaneous price and wage competition. Since the price and wage
decisions are contingent on the realization of the market size, according to Section 3.1, it is readily
veriﬁed that for any realized market size x, the optimal price and proﬁt are given as follows in an
equilibrium that is unique and symmetric:
p∗
P =
3 −2β
4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ x,
π∗
P =
2(1 −β)2
(4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ)2 x2.
(11)
Therefore, the equilibrium expected proﬁt in this competition is simply
E[π∗
P ] =
2(1 −β)2
(4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ)2 E[Ω2],
(12)
which holds regardless of the distribution of the market size. Given the expected proﬁt E[π∗
P ] is
proportional to the second moment of the potential market size E[Ω2] = (E[Ω])2 + Var[Ω], it is
implied that the more variable the market is, given its expectation ﬁxed, the higher a platform’s
expected proﬁt is. The reason is that the platform’s proﬁt function given a market-size realization
is convex in the market size, indicating that the proﬁt gain from an increase in market size is
greater than the proﬁt loss from the same amount of decrease in market size.
4.1.2.
Wage precommitment competition. For any pair of precommitted wages w, after
the market size is realized, the best-response price of each platform takes the form of either a
supply-depletion price or a revenue-maximizing price. To simplify the analysis, we assume the two
ﬁrms take symmetric actions. We ﬁnd that in equilibrium, the wages w are set either low such
that both platforms adopt the supply-depletion price for any market size or intermediate such that
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

21
both adopt the revenue-maximizing price for market-size realizations below a threshold, and the
supply-depletion price otherwise. Intuitively, if high wages are set in the ﬁrst stage such that both
ﬁrms adopt the revenue-maximizing price for any market size, then each ﬁrm has an incentive to
reduce the wage and increase the proﬁt margin. The detailed analysis is relegated to Appendix B.
4.1.3.
Price precommitment competition. For any pair of precommitted prices p, after
the market size is realized, the best-response wage of each platform takes the form of either a
demand-depletion wage or a revenue-maximizing wage. To simplify the analysis, we assume the
two ﬁrms take symmetric actions. We ﬁnd that in equilibrium, the prices p are set either high such
that both platforms adopt the demand-depletion wage for any market size or intermediate such
that both adopt the revenue-maximizing wage for market-size realizations above a threshold, and
the demand-depletion wage otherwise. Intuitively, if low prices are set in the ﬁrst stage such that
both ﬁrms adopt the revenue-maximizing wage for any market size, then each ﬁrm has an incentive
to raise the price and increase the proﬁt margin. The detailed analysis is relegated to Appendix C.
4.1.4.
Commission precommitment competition. For any pair of precommitted pay-out
ratios α and any market size x, we have the equilibrium price of platform i in the second stage as:
p∗
i =
1 + αj + γ + βαj
(1 + αi)(1 + αj) −(γ + βαi)(γ + βαj)x,
j ̸= i, i = 1,2,
(13)
and thus ﬁrm i’s expected proﬁt function can be written as follows,
πi(α) =(1 −αi)(1 + αj + γ + βαj)

αi(1 + αj + γ) −βαj(1 + γ + βαi)
 

(1 + αi)(1 + αj) −(γ + βαi)(γ + βαj)
 2
E[Ω2],
j ̸= i, i = 1,2.
We focus on the symmetric equilibrium of the pay-out ratio, which is unique and takes the same
value as (8) in the deterministic case. By (13), we have
p∗
C =
1
1 −γ + (1 −β)α∗x,
π∗
C = α∗(1 −β)(1 −α∗)
(1 + α∗−γ −βα∗)2 x2.
(14)
Therefore,
E[π∗
C] = α∗(1 −α∗)(1 −β)
(1 + α∗−γ −βα∗)2 E[Ω2],
(15)
which holds regardless of the distribution of the market size. Like the contingent simultaneous price
and wage competition (see (12)), the expected proﬁt is the same as that in the deterministic case
except the replacement of Ω2 by E[Ω2]. Hence the ﬁrms’ proﬁtability increases in the variance of
the market size uncertainty. Although the commission rates are announced before the realization
of market size uncertainty, such a precommitment still gives the ﬁrms ﬂexibility to react to the
market size uncertainty in the subsequent stage through their contingent pricing decision.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

22
4.1.5.
Comparison under demand variability. Compare the modes P and C. We observe
from expressions (12) and (15) that the ﬁrm’s expected proﬁt under both modes P and C is the
same as that in the deterministic case except the replacement of Ω2 by E[Ω2]. Therefore:
Corollary 1. The comparison between modes C and P in the presence of demand uncertainty
stays the same as that in the deterministic case, which is shown in Proposition 3(b).
As both competition modes of C and P retain ﬂexibility in response to market changes, their
comparison is independent of the demand uncertainty.
The next proposition compares the modes wp and P.
Proposition 5. In the presence of demand uncertainty, compare the modes wp and P.
(a) Suppose β = 0.
(i) If γ is suﬃciently small and Ωhas a suﬃciently low variance, E[π∗
wp] ≤E[π∗
P ].
(ii) If γ is suﬃciently large, E[π∗
wp] > E[π∗
P ].
(b) Suppose γ = 0.
(i) If β is suﬃciently small and Ωhas a suﬃciently low variance, E[π∗
wp] ≤E[π∗
P ].
(ii) If β is suﬃciently large, E[π∗
wp] > E[π∗
P ].
Proposition 5 part (a)(i) says that when there is no competition on the supply side, for which
precommitment on the supply side would have value without market size uncertainty (see Propo-
sition 2 part (a)), precommitment in wage, in the presence of market size uncertainty, could do
harm to the ﬁrms’ proﬁt. In wage precommitment competition, when the market size uncertainty
takes a relatively small variance, intuitively, it is still optimal to set the wage ex ante such that
the ﬁrms adopt a supply-depletion price for any market size (just as in the deterministic case). In
this case, the equilibrium wage takes the value of
w∗
wp =
1 + γ
4 −3β + γ −2γ2 −2βγ + β2γ + βγ2 E[Ω].
(16)
Compared to (5), we observe that the equilibrium wage decided before the realization of uncertainty
takes the expectation of the optimal wage for each possible scenario, which would lead to excess
supply for a low realized market size and insuﬃcient supply for a high realized market size, resulting
in a lower expected proﬁt than the expectation of the optimal proﬁt for each possible scenario with
wage set after the realization. Therefore, compared with simultaneous price and wage competition
(with no precommitment), wage rigidity could hurt the platforms. That is, in the presence of
market size uncertainty, the precommitted wage could limit the platforms’ ﬂexibility to react to the
market conditions, resulting in a lower proﬁt than contingently setting price and wage. Figure 2(a)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

23
shows that, without market size uncertainty, the wage precommitment competition dominates
simultaneous price and wage competition completely when β = 0. In the presence of market size
uncertainty, Figures 2(b)-(f) shows that when β = 0, the wage precommitment competition is
dominated by simultaneous price and wage competition for small values of γ.
(a) ΩH = 4,ΩL = 4,q = 0.5
(b) ΩH = 4.05,ΩL = 3.95,q = 0.5
(c) ΩH = 4.1,ΩL = 3.9,q = 0.5
(d) ΩH = 4.5,ΩL = 3.5,q = 0.5
(e) ΩH = 4.7,ΩL = 3.3,q = 0.5
(f) ΩH = 5,ΩL = 3,q = 0.5
Figure 2
Comparison between E[π∗
wp] and E[π∗
P ] with positively correlated market size uncertainty
To understand part (a)(ii), note that when β = 0, without market size uncertainty, simultaneous
price and wage competition boils down to a price competition only (as there is no competition on
the supply side) and the wage precommitment competition turns to a two-stage problem where the
wage is decided without competition in the ﬁrst stage. According to Kreps-Scheinkman equivalency,
the wage precommitment competition as a two-stage game is equivalent to Cournot competition,
leading to a less intensiﬁed competition and thus a higher proﬁt than the price competition. That is,
when β = 0, without market size uncertainty, wage precommitment competition is more proﬁtable
for ﬁrms. In the presence of market size uncertainty, such a beneﬁt of precommitment still persists
especially when there is an intensiﬁed competition on the demand side (i.e., γ is suﬃciently large),
which is conﬁrmed by Figure 2 when β = 0. As for part (b)(i), note that without market size
uncertainty, when the supply side is more competitive than the demand side, precommitment in
wage leads to a more intensiﬁed market outcome than simultaneous price and wage competition
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

24
(see Proposition 2 part (b)). In the presence of market size uncertainty, this eﬀect still exists
(especially with low demand variability), which is conﬁrmed by Figure 2 with γ = 0.
Although the inﬂexibility due to precommitment in wage may hurt the ﬁrm’s revenue, part (b)(ii)
shows that the precommitment can improve the platform’s revenue in some cases because the
precommitted supply upper bound can alleviate the intense competition on the supply side. To see
this, consider when there is no competition on the demand side (i.e., γ = 0), simultaneous price and
wage competition boils down to a wage-only competition ex post, while the wage precommitment
competition reduces to a wage-only competition ex ante. Suppose there is ﬁerce competition on
the supply side (i.e., β is suﬃciently large). Compared to contingent simultaneous price and wage
competition, the wage precommitment can prevent the platforms from competing too aggressively
by setting wages too high in the spot market when the demand turns out to be high.
In summary, other than the impacts of wage precommitment revealed in the deterministic case,
demand uncertainty may undermine or enhance the (dis)value of wage precommitment. On the one
hand, wage precommitment can tie the hands of platforms in responding to market changes. On
the other hand, wage precommitment may restrain cutthroat wage competition when the potential
market size turns out to be high. Figure 2 displays the comparison between E[π∗
wp] and E[π∗
P ] as the
market size Ωtakes a two-point distribution and changes with an increasing variance but a ﬁxed
mean. Without uncertainty, Figure 2(a) shows that the comparison depends on the competitiveness
of the two sides, see Proposition 2. As the demand variability increases (still in a small range), the
region where competition mode P is preferred shifts to the left and expands slightly in Figures 2(b)-
(c), indicating that the uncertainty in market size undermines the value of precommitment in wage
when the demand-side competition is slightly more intense than the supply-side competition (i.e.,
γ is slightly larger than β). As the variability further increases, the region where the competition
model wp is preferred becomes enlarged in Figures 2(d)-(f), indicating that high-enough market size
uncertainty can reinforce the value of precommitment in wage, in particular, when the supply-side
competition is suﬃciently intense (i.e., β is suﬃciently large).
Compare the modes wp and C. Figure 3 indicates that the comparison between modes wp and C
is very similar to that between wp and P, although the region where C is better is larger than that
where P is better in Figure 2. Recall that demand variability beneﬁts the ﬁrms under modes P and
C in the same scale, so the comparison between P and C is ﬁxed as the variability increases, which
explains the similarity between Figures 3 and 2. Moreover, Figure 1(c) shows that C is better than
P in most of the parameter space without uncertainty. Hence it is not surprising that the region
where C is better than wp is larger compared to the region where P is better than wp.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

25
(a) ΩH = 4,ΩL = 4,q = 0.5
(b) ΩH = 4.5,ΩL = 3.5,q = 0.5
(c) ΩH = 5,ΩL = 3,q = 0.5
Figure 3
Comparison between E[π∗
wp] and E[π∗
C] with positively correlated market size uncertainty
Compare the modes pw and P. Like the wage precommitment competition, the impact of market
size uncertainty on the price precommitment competition has two opposite eﬀects. On the one
hand, the precommitted price limits the ﬁrm’s ﬂexibility to react to the market size uncertainty.
On the other hand, when the demand side is rather competitive, price precommitment alleviates
the competition on the demand side compared to no precommitment. However, unlike the pre-
commitment in wage which commits the supply quantities (as there is no supply uncertainty),
the precommitment in price does not perfectly determine demand, and thus the alleviation of
competition on the demand side is somewhat limited. To summarize, in the presence of market
size uncertainty, the precommitment in price does not work as eﬀectively as the precommitment
in wage. Figure 4(a) shows that without market size uncertainty, the comparison depends on the
competitiveness of the two sides, consistent with Proposition 2. As the variability increases, Fig-
ures 4(b)-(c) show that the region where pw is better shrinks signiﬁcantly, indicating that market
size uncertainty undermines the value of precommitment in price. Compared with Figures 2(b)-(f),
the region where pw is better is much smaller than the region where wp is better.
(a) ΩH = 4,ΩL = 4,q = 0.5
(b) ΩH = 4.1,ΩL = 3.9,q = 0.5
(c) ΩH = 5,ΩL = 3,q = 0.5
Figure 4
Comparison between E[π∗
pw] and E[π∗
P ] with positively correlated market size uncertainty
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

26
(a) ΩH = 4,ΩL = 4,q = 0.5
(b) ΩH = 4.1,ΩL = 3.9,q = 0.5
(c) ΩH = 4.5,ΩL = 3.5,q = 0.5
Figure 5
Comparison between E[π∗
wp] and E[π∗
pw] with positively correlated market size uncertainty
Compare the modes wp and pw. Since the precommitment in price fails to do well in alleviating
the competition on the demand side, it is no surprising that the region where wp does better keeps
expanding as the variability increases (see Figure 5). When the variability is large enough (e.g.,
ΩH = 4.5 and ΩL = 3.5), mode pw is completely dominated by mode wp.
4.2.
Negatively Correlated Market Size Uncertainty
In this subsection, we focus on the impact of perfectly negatively correlated market size uncertainty.
The model setup is pretty similar to Section 4.1, while the only diﬀerence is that the uncertain
market sizes for the two platforms are perfectly negatively correlated. For ease of exposition,
we assume there is a probability 1/2 that (Ω1,Ω2) = (ΩH,ΩL) and an equal chance of 1/2 that
(Ω1,Ω2) = (ΩL,ΩH). Such a perfectly negative correlation can capture the spatial aspect of ride-
hailing in the sense that the total drivers working for the two platforms may be ﬁxed but upon
an arrival of a rider at a random location, one of the platforms may have drivers within the range
that the estimated arrival time is tolerable but the other does not.
4.2.1.
Contingent simultaneous price and wage competition. Contingent on the real-
ization of market sizes, each ﬁrm decides its price and wage ex post. Similar to Section 3.1, one can
derive the equilibrium proﬁt for each possible realization and then take the expectation to obtain
the following equilibrium proﬁt.
Lemma 8. In contingent simultaneous price and wage competition with perfectly negatively cor-
related market size uncertainty, the expected proﬁt for each ﬁrm is
E[π∗
P ] = 2(4 −3β2 −βγ)(3γ −β −2β2γ)(ΩH + ΩL)2 + (4 −3β2 −βγ −3γ + β + 2β2γ)(Ω2
H + Ω2
L)
(16 −2βγ −9β2 −9γ2 + 4β2γ2)2
.
(17)
In competition mode P, both price and wage decisions are contingent on the realization of market
size uncertainty, thus the optimal proﬁt is a convex function of the realized market size. Therefore,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

27
demand variability helps increasing the ﬁrms’ proﬁt, similar to the positive correlation case. In
addition, when one platform has a realized higher market size, the other would have a lower realized
market size. As a result, the platforms enjoy a less competitive landscape in expectation, which
further leads both platforms to beneﬁt more from a higher market size variability.
4.2.2.
Wage precommitment competition. Since the two ﬁrms are ex ante symmetric, we
assume that both ﬁrms take symmetric actions in their wage decisions. However, since the two
ﬁrms face diﬀerent market sizes ex post, it is natural that they will behave diﬀerently in setting
prices. Similar to Section 4.1.2, for any ﬁxed w, after the market sizes are realized, the optimal
price for a platform takes the form of either a supply-depletion price or a revenue-maximizing
price. We ﬁnd that in equilibrium, the precommitted wage w is set either low such that both ﬁrms
adopt supply-depletion prices for any market size, or intermediate such that one ﬁrm facing a low
market size adopts a revenue-maximizing price while the other facing a high market size adopts a
supply-depletion price. Intuitively, if a high wage is set in the ﬁrst stage such that both ﬁrms adopt
revenue-maximizing prices for any market size, then each ﬁrm has an incentive to cut wage which
can improve the proﬁt margin immediately. The detailed analysis is relegated to Appendix D.
4.2.3.
Price precommitment competition. Since the two ﬁrms are ex ante symmetric, we
assume that both ﬁrms take symmetric actions in their price decisions. However, since the two
ﬁrms face diﬀerent market sizes ex post, it is natural that they will take diﬀerent actions in their
wage decisions. The analysis is analogous to Section 4.2.2 and relegated to Appendix E.
4.2.4.
Comparison under demand variability. Compare the modes wp and P. In the
presence of negatively correlated market size uncertainty, Figure 6 displays a set of numerical
comparisons. Observe that when γ is suﬃciently small, E[π∗
wp] tends to be smaller than E[π∗
P ],
indicating that precommitment in wage, in the presence of negatively correlated market size uncer-
tainty, could do harm to the ﬁrm’s proﬁtability. This is due to that the precommitted wage limits
the ﬁrm’s ﬂexibility to react to the market size uncertainty, and thus leads to a lower proﬁt than
simultaneous price and wage competition. The driving force is the same as Proposition 5(a)(i).
However, diﬀerent from Figure 2, E[π∗
wp] is still lower than E[π∗
P ] in the upper-right corner of
Figures 6(d)-(e). That is, when the variance of market size uncertainty is not too small, negatively
correlated market size uncertainty does not reinforce the value of precommitment in wage, in
contrast to the positively correlated counterpart. Recall that with positively correlated market size
uncertainty, there is a reinforcement to the value of precommitment due to that a precommitted
supply quantity can alleviate the competition on the supply side when the market size is realized
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

28
(a) ΩH = 4,ΩL = 4,q = 0.5
(b) ΩH = 4.05,ΩL = 3.95,q = 0.5
(c) ΩH = 4.1,ΩL = 3.9,q = 0.5
(d) ΩH = 4.5,ΩL = 3.5,q = 0.5
(e) ΩH = 4.7,ΩL = 3.3,q = 0.5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
(f) ΩH = 5,ΩL = 3,q = 0.5
Figure 6
Comparison between E[π∗
wp] and E[π∗
P ] with negatively correlated market size uncertainty
high for both. However, with negatively correlated uncertainty, the competition on the supply
side is not that ﬁerce since the realized market size is always high for one ﬁrm but low for the
other. As a result, in the aforementioned parameter subspace, unlike Proposition 5(b), the wage
precommitment competition performs worse than simultaneous price and wage competition which
is responsive to market conditions. This comparison is formally stated in the following proposition.
Proposition 6. Suppose β = γ.
(a) Positive Correlation. Suppose there is a probability 1/2 that (Ω1,Ω2) = (ΩH,ΩH) and an equal
chance that (Ω1,Ω2) = (ΩL,ΩL).
(i) If β is suﬃciently small, then E[π∗
wp] ≤E[π∗
P ].
(ii) If β is suﬃciently large, then E[π∗
wp] > E[π∗
P ].
(b) Negative Correlation. Suppose there is a probability 1/2 that (Ω1,Ω2) = (ΩH,ΩL) and an equal
chance that (Ω1,Ω2) = (ΩL,ΩH). If ΩH is suﬃciently small, then E[π∗
wp] ≤E[π∗
P ].
The assumption of β = γ gives the comparison between modes wp and P a fair start as they
result in the same equilibrium outcome if there is no demand uncertainty. Proposition 6(a) shows
that with perfectly positively correlated market size uncertainty, whether simultaneous price and
wage competition performs better (worse) than wage precommitment competition can depend on
the intensity of the competition of the two sides. In the upper-right (down-left) along the diagnoal,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

29
the competition on both sides is more (less) intense, and the value of precommitment in alleviating
the competition outweighs (is outweighed by) the downside of inﬂexibility. Proposition 6(b) shows
that with perfectly negatively correlated market size uncertainty, simultaneous price and wage
competition could dominate wage precommitment competition when the market promise is limited.
This is because the precommitment power in curbing intensiﬁed competition has little value due
to the capped market sizes. Meanwhile, the ﬂexibility could have a larger value than the positive-
correlation counterpart, due to that under the negatively correlated market sizes, with contingent
price and wage, a platform can better take an advantage of a realized high market size (knowing
the competitor has a low realization) or avoid cutthroat competition with the competitor if its
realized market size is low.
(a) ΩH = 4,ΩL = 4,q = 0.5
(b) ΩH = 4.1,ΩL = 3.9,q = 0.5
(c) ΩH = 5,ΩL = 3,q = 0.5
Figure 7
Comparison between E[π∗
pw] and E[π∗
P ] with negatively correlated market size uncertainty
Compare the modes pw and P. Figure 7 shows a similar pattern as Figure 4 that the region
where E[π∗
pw] is greater shrinks signiﬁcantly, indicating that market size uncertainty generally
undermines the value of precommitment in price. Nevertheless, compared with Figure 4, the region
where E[π∗
pw] is greater is larger, due to that the precommitment in price works better in the
negatively correlated case than the positively correlated counterpart, as the competition on the
demand side is softened with negatively correlated market sizes and precommitment in price tends
to be precommitment on the less intensiﬁed side.
Compare the modes wp and pw. As in the positively correlated case, the precommitment in
price does not work as well as the precommitment in wage, since it fails to directly precommit
a matching quantity so to alleviate the competition on the demand side, which explains that the
region where E[π∗
pw] is greater shrinks as the variability increases in Figure 8. However, because the
realized market size is always high for one ﬁrm but low for the other, the need of precommitment
in wage in alleviating competition on the supply side is reduced, and in the mean time, the value of
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

30
(a) ΩH = 4,ΩL = 4,q = 0.5
(b) ΩH = 4.1,ΩL = 3.9,q = 0.5
(c) ΩH = 4.5,ΩL = 3.5,q = 0.5
Figure 8
Comparison between E[π∗
wp] and E[π∗
pw] with negatively correlated market size uncertainty
precommitment in price in alleviating competition on the demand side is strengthened. Therefore,
the region where E[π∗
pw] is greater is larger in the negatively correlated case than that in the
positively correlated case, which explains the diﬀerence between Figures 5(c) and 8(c).
5.
Conclusions
Our model is motivated by the ride-hailing markets. But to keep the model parsimonious, we
assume away some salient features in those markets such as demand and supply may be sensitive
to the chance of being matched or the time it takes for them to be matched. In the base model, we
also assume away the demand uncertainty and focus on studying various sequential movements in
two-sided market competition—wage precommitment competition (followed by price competition),
price precommitment competition (followed by wage competition), commission-rate precommit-
ment, and quantity/capacity precommitment—and comparing them with simultaneous price and
wage competition (with no precommitment). For the deterministic demand setting, we obtain a set
of sharp results that deepen our understanding of the nature of competitive markets beyond the
celebrated Kreps-Scheinkman equivalency in one-sided market competition. First, precommitment
on the less competitive side alleviates the competition. Second, quantity precommitment, sustained
through a two-stage game with capacity precommitment, leads to the most proﬁtable outcome
among all competition modes. Third, commission precommitment is more proﬁtable than no com-
mitment when the competition intensity of one side is suﬃciently higher than the other, but it can
also perform worse than no commitment. We also extend the comparison of various competition
modes to account for demand uncertainty with positively or negatively correlated market sizes.
Our results have the following managerial implications. First, our results caution platforms that
precommitment of price or wage on the more competitive side can have a detrimental eﬀect than
no commitment at all and suggest platforms to precommit on the less competitive side. Second,
governmental regulation that restricts the for-hire vehicle licenses is often viewed as running against
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

31
the market expansion eﬀorts by the ride-hailing platforms that can lead to more rides and traﬃc
and less sustainable commuting. However, it could also help restrain price competition among
platforms, allowing them to charge higher prices, beneﬁting their proﬁtability, and hurting social
welfare. Third, the preference of precommitment such as wage precommitment vs. no commitment
can be reversed depending on how the demands of the two platforms are correlated.
References
Afeche, P, M Hu, Y Li. 2019. The downside of reorder ﬂexibility under price competition. Working paper,
University of Toronto.
Ahmadinejad, A, H Nazerzadeh, A Saberi, N Skochdopole, K Sweeney. 2020. Competition in ride-hailing
markets. Working paper, Standford University.
Allon, G, A Federgruen. 2007. Competition in service industries. Oper. Res. 55(1) 37–55.
Anupindi, R, L Jiang. 2008. Capacity investment under postponement strategies, market competition, and
demand uncertainty. Management Sci. 54(11) 1876–1890.
Bai, J, CS Tang. 2020. Can two competing on-demand service platforms be both proﬁtable? Working paper,
Wake Forest University.
Benjaafar, S, X Yang, S Xiao. 2020. Do workers beneﬁt from competition among on-demand service plat-
forms? Working paper, University of Minnesota.
Bernstein, F, GA DeCroix, NB Keskin. 2020. Competition between two-sided platforms under demand and
supply congestion eﬀects. Manufacturing & Service Oper. Management Forthcoming.
Cachon, GP, KM Daniels, R Lobel. 2017. The role of surge pricing on a service platform with self-scheduling
capacity. Manufacturing & Service Oper. Management 19(3) 368–384.
Caillaud, B, B Jullien. 2003. Chicken & egg: Competition among intermediation service providers. RAND
J. Econ. 34(2) 309–328.
Chen, L, Y Cui, J Liu, X Liu. 2020. Wage schemes and platform competition. Working paper, Cornell
University.
Cohen, MC, R Zhang. 2019. Cooperation and proﬁt sharing for ride-sharing platforms. Working paper,
McGill University.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

32
Farahat, A, WT Huh, H Li. 2019. On the relationship between quantity precommitment and Cournot games.
Oper. Res. 67(1) 109–122.
Gurvich, I, M Lariviere, A Moreno. 2019. Operations in the on-demand economy: Staﬃng services with
self-scheduling capacity. Sharing Economy: Making Supply Meet Demand. Springer, 249–278.
Honan, K. 2019. New York City extends cap on Uber, Lyft drivers. WSJ Aug 7, 2019.
Hu, M. 2020.
From the classics to new tunes: A neoclassical view on sharing economy and innovative
marketplaces. Prod. Oper. Management Forthcoming.
Hu, M, Y Zhou. 2020. Price, wage and ﬁxed commission in on-demand matching. Working paper, University
of Toronto.
Kreps, DM, JA Scheinkman. 1983.
Quantity precommitment and Bertrand competition yield Cournot
outcomes. RAND J. Econ. 14(2) 326–337.
Liu, C, T Teh, J Wright, J Zhou. 2019. Multihoming and oligopolistic platform competition. Working paper,
National University of Singapore.
Nasser, S, D Turcic. 2016. To commit or not to commit: Revisiting quantity vs. price competition in a
diﬀerentiated industry. Management Sci. 62(6) 1719–1733.
Nikzad, A. 2019. Thickness and competition in ride-sharing markets. Working paper, University of Southern
California.
Peura, H, SA Yang, G Lai. 2017. Trade credit in competition: A horizonal beneﬁt. Manufacturing & Service
Oper. Management 19(2) 263–289.
Reynolds, SS, BJ Wilson. 2000.
Bertrand-edgeworth competition, demand uncertainty, and asymmetric
outcomes. J. Econ. Theory 92(1) 122–141.
Rochet, J, J Tirole. 2003. Platform competition in two-sided markets. J. Eur. Econ. Assoc. 1(4) 990–1029.
Siddiq, A, T Taylor. 2020. Ride-hailing platforms: Competition and autonomous vehicles. Working paper,
University of California, Berkerly.
Singh, N, X Vives. 1984. Price and quantity competition in a diﬀerentiated duopoly. RAND J. Econ. 15(4)
546–554.
Tan, G, J Zhou. 2020.
The eﬀects of competition and entry in multi-sided markets.
Rev. Econ. Stud.
Forthcoming.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

33
Vives, X. 1985. On the eﬃciency of bertrand and cournot equilibria with product diﬀerentation. J. Econ.
Theory 36(1) 166–175.
Vives, X. 1986. Commitment, ﬂexibility and market outcomes. Int. J. Ind. Organ. 4(2) 217–229.
Wu, S, S Xiao, S Benjaafar. 2020. Two-sided competition between on-demand service platforms. Working
paper, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
Yu, J, CS Tang, ZM Shen, X Chen. 2020. A balancing act of regulating on-demand ride services. Management
Sci. 66(7) 2975–2992.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

1
Online Appendix to
“Precommitments in Two-sided Market Competition”
The online appendix includes six sections.
• Section A provides the detailed analysis of quantity precommitment competition.
• Section B analyzes the wage precommitment competition with perfectly positively correlated
market size uncertainty.
• Section C analyzes the price precommitment competition with perfectly positively correlated
market size uncertainty.
• Section D analyzes the wage precommitment competition with perfectly negatively correlated
market size uncertainty.
• Section E analyzes the price precommitment competition with perfectly negatively correlated
market size uncertainty.
• Section F includes proofs of the lemmas and propositions in the main text.
A.
Quantity Precommitment Competition in KS Equivalency
We begin our analysis in Section A.1 by examining the price and wage decisions in the second
stage conditional on the capacity decisions of the ﬁrst stage. Section A.2 derives the equilibrium
of the quantity precommitment game.
A.1.
Subgame Analysis
Suppose q is ﬁxed, and we study the second stage competition where ﬁrm i ∈{1,2} decides its
price pi and wage wi simultaneously. For any ﬁxed (pj,wj) where j ̸= i, ﬁrm i faces the following
optimization problem
max
pi,wi
(pi −wi)min{di(pi,pj),si(wi,wj),qi}.
(A.1)
At optimality we have Ω−p∗
i + γpj = zi = w∗
i −βwj, because any excess demand or supply does
not beneﬁt ﬁrm i. Hence,
p∗
i = Ω+ γpj −zi,
w∗
i = zi + βwj.
(A.2)
Thus, (A.1) can be written as
max
zi
(Ω+ γpj −2zi −βwj)min{zi,qi}.
(A.3)
Solving (A.3) yields that, if qi ≥
Ω+γpj−βwj
4
, then z∗
i =
Ω+γpj−βwj
4
. Otherwise, z∗
i = qi. To see this,
if the capacity is above that threshold, then the supply and demand quantity should take the one
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

2
that maximizes the proﬁt as if there is no capacity constraint. Otherwise, the ﬁrms should set the
price and wage such that both the demand and supply equal to the capacity.
Based on the values of q, we have four cases.
Case (a): Suppose for any i = 1,2,
qi ≥Ω+ γpj −βwj
4
.
(A.4)
That is, both ﬁrms set a large capacity in the ﬁrst stage such that the price and wage decisions
in the second stage are not constrained. In this symmetric case, z∗
i =
Ω+γpj−βwj
4
. Using (A.2), we
obtain the best response function of ﬁrm i,
p∗
i (pj,wj) = 3
4(Ω+ γpj) + 1
4βwj,
w∗
i (pj,wj) = 1
4(Ω+ γpj) + 3
4βwj.
Solving the set of the above equations yields the equilibrium quantities for any i = 1,2,
p∗
i =
3 −2β
4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ Ω,
w∗
i =
1
4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ Ω,
z∗
i =
1 −β
4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ Ω.
(A.5)
Putting p∗
i and w∗
i back to (A.4) rewrites the initial condition as follows,
qi ≥
1 −β
4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ Ω.
Case (b): Suppose for any i = 1,2,
qi < Ω+ γpj −βwj
4
.
(A.6)
That is, both ﬁrms set a small capacity in the ﬁrst stage. In this symmetric case, z∗
i = qi. Using
(A.2), we obtain the best response function of ﬁrm i,
p∗
i = Ω+ γpj −qi,
w∗
i = qi + βwj.
Solving the set of the above equations yields the equilibrium quantities for any i = 1,2,
p∗
i = (1 + γ)Ω−γqj −qi
1 −γ2
,
w∗
i = qi + βqj
1 −β2 .
(A.7)
Putting p∗
i and w∗
i back to (A.6) rewrites the initial condition as follows,
qi < (1 + γ)(1 −β2)Ω−[γ(1 −β2) + β(1 −γ2)]qj
4 −3β2 −3γ2 + 2β2γ2
.
Case (c): Suppose
q1 < Ω+ γp2 −βw2
4
,
q2 ≥Ω+ γp1 −βw1
4
.
(A.8)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

3
That is, ﬁrm 1 sets a small capacity while ﬁrm 2 sets a large capacity in the ﬁrst stage. In this
asymmetric case, z∗
1 = q1 and z∗
2 = Ω+γp1−βw1
4
. Using (A.2), we obtain the best response function of
ﬁrm i,
p∗
1 = Ω+ γp2 −q1,
w∗
1 = q1 + βw2,
p∗
2 = 3
4(Ω+ γp1) + 1
4βw1,
w∗
2 = 1
4(Ω+ γp1) + 3
4βw1.
Solving the set of above equations yields the equilibrium quantities for any i = 1,2,
p∗
1 = (4 −3β2 + 3γ −2β2γ)Ω−(4 −3β2 −βγ)q1
4 −3β2 −3γ2 + 2β2γ2
,
w∗
1 = β(1 + γ)Ω+ (4 −3γ2 −βγ)q1
4 −3β2 −3γ2 + 2β2γ2
,
(A.9)
p∗
2 = (3 + 3γ −2β2 −2β2γ)Ω−(3γ −β −2β2γ)q1
4 −3β2 −3γ2 + 2β2γ2
,
w∗
2 = (1 + γ)Ω−(γ −3β + 2βγ2)q1
4 −3β2 −3γ2 + 2β2γ2
.
(A.10)
Putting (p∗
1,p∗
2) and (w∗
1,w∗
2) back to (A.8) rewrites the initial condition as follows,
q1 < 4 −3β2 + 3γ −2β2γ −β −βγ
16 −2βγ −9β2 −9γ2 + 4β2γ2 ,
(γ −γβ2 + β −βγ2)q1 + (4 −3β2 −3γ2 + 2β2γ2)q2 ≥(1 + γ)(1 −β2)Ω.
Case (d): Suppose
q1 ≥Ω+ γp2 −βw2
4
,
q2 < Ω+ γp1 −βw1
4
.
This case is symmetric to Case (c) and is thus omitted.
A.2.
Nash Equilibrium Analysis
In this section, we derive the Nash equilibrium based on the subgame analysis above. First, we
study the quantity decisions of the ﬁrst stage for each case. We use subscript {a,b,c,d} to indicate
the equilibrium proﬁt in each case.
Case (a): If
qi ≥
1 −β
4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ Ω,
(A.11)
then according to (A.5), we obtain the equilibrium proﬁt
π∗
i,a = (p∗
i −w∗
i )z∗
i =
2(1 −β)2
(4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ)2Ω2.
Observe that the result in this case is exactly the same as the simultaneous price and wage com-
petition prescribed in Section 3.1.
Case (b): If
(4 −3β2 −3γ2 + 2β2γ2)qi + (γ −γβ2 + β −βγ2)qj < (1 + γ)(1 −β2)Ω,
(A.12)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

4
then according to (A.7), ﬁrm i’s proﬁt function can be written as follows,
πi = (p∗
i −w∗
i )qi =
n(1 + γ)Ω−γqj −qi
1 −γ2
−qi + βqj
1 −β2
o
qi.
Maximizing πi yields ﬁrm i’s best response function
q∗
i = (1 + γ)(1 −β2)Ω−{γ(1 −β2) + β(1 −γ2)}qj
2(2 −β2 −γ2)
.
(A.13)
Solving the set of equations (A.13) gives the equilibrium quantities in this case
q∗
i =
(1 + γ)(1 −β2)Ω
4 −2β2 −2γ2 + β + γ −β2γ −βγ2 .
Therefore,
p∗
i = Ω−q∗
i
1 −γ ,
w∗
i =
q∗
i
1 −β ,
π∗
i,b =
(1 + γ)(1 −β2)(2 −β2 −γ2)
(1 −γ)(4 −2β2 −2γ2 + β + γ −β2γ −βγ2)2 Ω2.
Observe that the result in this case is exactly the same as the quantity competition prescribed in
Section 3.5.
Case (c): If
q1 < 4 −3β2 + 3γ −2β2γ −β −βγ
16 −2βγ −9β2 −9γ2 + 4β2γ2 Ω,
(A.14)
(γ −γβ2 + β −βγ2)q1 + (4 −3β2 −3γ2 + 2β2γ2)q2 ≥(1 + γ)(1 −β2)Ω,
(A.15)
then according to (A.9), ﬁrm 1’s proﬁt function can be written as follows,
π1 = (p∗
1 −w∗
1)q1 = (4 −3β2 + 3γ −2β2γ −β −βγ)Ω−(8 −3β2 −2βγ −3γ2)q1
4 −3β2 −3γ2 + 2β2γ2
q1.
Maximizing π1 yields ﬁrm 1’s equilibrium quantities,
q∗
1 = 4 −3β2 + 3γ −2β2γ −β −βγ
16 −6β2 −6γ2 −4βγ
Ω,
π∗
1,c = 1
2
(4 −3β2 + 3γ −2β2γ −β −βγ)2
(4 −3β2 −3γ2 + 2β2γ2)(16 −6β2 −6γ2 −4βγ)Ω2.
One can check that q∗
1 satisﬁes (A.14).
Next we derive π∗
2,c. Using (A.10) and (A.9), ﬁrm 2’s proﬁt can be obtained,
π∗
2,c = (p∗
2 −w∗
2)z∗
2 = (p∗
2 −w∗
2)Ω+ γp∗
1 −βw∗
1
4
=
2Ω2
(4 −3β2 −3γ2 + 2β2γ2)2
n
(1 + γ −β2 −β2γ) −(β + γ −β2γ −βγ2)4 −3β2 + 3γ −2β2γ −β −βγ
16 −6β2 −6γ2 −4βγ
o2
.
Case (d): This case is symmetric to Case (c) and is thus omitted.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

5
B.
Wage Precommitment Competition with Perfectly Positively
Correlated Market Size Uncertainty
We start this section with the analysis of the subgame equilibrium conditional on a ﬁxed wage in
the ﬁrst stage in the presence of a deterministic market size, and then derive the equilibrium of
wage precommitment competition with perfectly positively correlated market size.
B.1.
Subgame Equilibrium with A Deterministic Market Size
The following lemma characterizes the outcome of the pricing game in the second stage for any
ﬁxed precommitted wage.
Lemma B.1. For any ﬁxed w, the subgame equilibrium prices are given by
(i) If
1 −βγ
1 −γ2 + 1 + βγ
2 −γ2

w1 −

γ
2 −γ2 + β −γ
1 −γ2

w2 ≤

1
1 −γ −γ + 1
2 −γ2

Ω,
(B.1)
1 −βγ
1 −γ2 + 1 + βγ
2 −γ2

w2 −(
γ
2 −γ2 + β −γ
1 −γ2

w1 ≤

1
1 −γ −γ + 1
2 −γ2

Ω,
(B.2)
the equilibrium prices are
p∗
1 = pd
1 =
1
1 −γ2
n
(1 + γ)Ω−(1 −βγ)w1 + (β −γ)w2
o
,
(B.3)
p∗
2 = pd
2 =
1
1 −γ2
n
(1 + γ)Ω−(1 −βγ)w2 + (β −γ)w1
o
.
(B.4)
(ii) If

2
4 −γ2 +
2
2 −γ2

w1 +

γ
4 −γ2 −
2
2 −γ2 (γ
2 + β)

w2 ≥

2
2 −γ2 −
2
4 −γ2

(1 + γ
2)Ω,
(B.5)

2
4 −γ2 +
2
2 −γ2

w2 +

γ
4 −γ2 −
2
2 −γ2 (γ
2 + β)

w1 ≥

2
2 −γ2 −
2
4 −γ2

(1 + γ
2)Ω,
(B.6)
the equilibrium prices are
p∗
1 = pm
1 =
2
4 −γ2
n
(1 + γ
2)Ω+ γ
2w2 + w1
o
,
(B.7)
p∗
2 = pm
2 =
2
4 −γ2
n
(1 + γ
2)Ω+ γ
2w1 + w2
o
.
(B.8)
(iii) If

2
4 −γ2 +
2
2 −γ2

w1 +

γ
4 −γ2 −
2
2 −γ2 (γ
2 + β)

w2 ≤

2
2 −γ2 −
2
4 −γ2

(1 + γ
2)Ω,
(B.9)
1 −βγ
1 −γ2 + 1 + βγ
2 −γ2

w2 −

γ
2 −γ2 + β −γ
1 −γ2

w1 ≥

1
1 −γ −γ + 1
2 −γ2

Ω,
(B.10)
the equilibrium prices are
p∗
1 = pd
1 =
2
2 −γ2
n
(1 + γ
2)Ω−w1 + (γ
2 + β)w2
o
,
(B.11)
p∗
2 = pm
2 = γ + 1
2 −γ2 Ω−
γ
2 −γ2 w1 + 1 + βγ
2 −γ2 w2.
(B.12)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

6
(iv) If
1 −βγ
1 −γ2 + 1 + βγ
2 −γ2

w1 −

γ
2 −γ2 + β −γ
1 −γ2

w2 ≥

1
1 −γ −γ + 1
2 −γ2

Ω,

2
4 −γ2 +
2
2 −γ2

w2 +

γ
4 −γ2 −
2
2 −γ2 (γ
2 + β)

w1 ≤

2
2 −γ2 −
2
4 −γ2

(1 + γ
2 )Ω,
the equilibrium prices are
p∗
1 = pm
1 = γ + 1
2 −γ2 Ω−
γ
2 −γ2 w2 + 1 + βγ
2 −γ2 w1,
p∗
2 = pd
2 =
2
2 −γ2
n
(1 + γ
2)Ω−w2 + (γ
2 + β)w1
o
.
Proof of Lemma B.1.
For any ﬁxed w, we derive the inventory-depletion price for both plat-
forms
pd
1(p2) = Ω+ γp2 −(w1 −βw2),
pd
2(p1) = Ω+ γp1 −(w2 −βw1).
By solving maxpi(pi −wi)(Ω−pi+γpj), we obtain the revenue-maximizing price for both platforms
pm
1 (p2) = Ω+ γp2 + w1
2
,
pm
2 (p1) = Ω+ γp1 + w2
2
.
According to Hu and Zhou (2017), the best response for ﬁrm i given ﬁrm j’s price pj is
p∗
1(p2) = max{pd
1(p2),pm
1 (p2)},
p∗
2(p1) = max{pd
2(p1),pm
2 (p1)}.
We examine Case (i) ﬁrst. We solve
p∗
1(p2) = pd
1(p2),
p∗
2(p1) = pd
2(p1)
(B.13)
and obtain
p∗
1 = pd
1 =
1
1 −γ2
n
(1 + γ)Ω−(1 −βγ)w1 + (β −γ)w2
o
,
(B.14)
p∗
2 = pd
2 =
1
1 −γ2
n
(1 + γ)Ω−(1 −βγ)w2 + (β −γ)w1
o
.
(B.15)
Then we solve
p∗
1(p2) = pm
1 (p2),
p∗
2(p1) = pd
2(p1)
and obtain
p∗
1 = 1 + γ
2 −γ2 Ω−
Ω
2 −γ2 w2 + 1 + βγ
2 −γ2 w1.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

7
We also solve
p∗
1(p2) = pd
1(p2),
p∗
2(p1) = pm
2 (p1)
and obtain
p∗
2 = 1 + γ
2 −γ2 Ω−
Ω
2 −γ2 w1 + 1 + βγ
2 −γ2 w2.
Given that p∗
1(p2) = max{pd
1(p2),pm
1 (p2)} and p∗
2(p1) = max{pd
2(p1),pm
2 (p1)}, in order to ensure
(B.13) holds, it must be the case that when ﬁrm i sets price pd
i , ﬁrm j does not have the incentive
to set price pm
j , that is, pd
j(pd
i ) ≥pm
j (pd
i ) for i = 1,2. Hence,
1
1 −γ2
n
(1 + γ)Ω−(1 −βγ)w1 + (β −γ)w2
o
≥1 + γ
2 −γ2 Ω−
Ω
2 −γ2 w2 + 1 + βγ
2 −γ2 w1,
1
1 −γ2
n
(1 + γ)Ω−(1 −βγ)w2 + (β −γ)w1
o
≥1 + γ
2 −γ2 Ω−
Ω
2 −γ2 w1 + 1 + βγ
2 −γ2 w2,
which yields the constraints (B.1) and (B.2).
Continuing in this fashion, we establish Cases (ii), (iii), and (iv).
□
B.2.
Perfectly Positively Correlated Market Size
We assume Ωis a random variable distributed on [Ω, ¯Ω]. For any ﬁxed w, when the market size is
realized, the optimal price takes either the supply-depletion price or revenue-maximizing price. For
the sake of trackability, we assume the two ﬁrms take symmetric actions. According to Section B.1,
we have three cases with respect to the value of w, detailed below. Suppose Ω= x.
Case 1: Low Wage. The wage is too low such that for any x ∈[Ω, ¯Ω], both ﬁrms adopt the
supply-depletion price at the subsequent stage.
According to Lemma B.1(i), the wage w is set such that
1 −βγ
1 −γ2 + 1 + βγ
2 −γ2

w1 −

γ
2 −γ2 + β −γ
1 −γ2

w2 ≤

1
1 −γ −γ + 1
2 −γ2

Ω,
(B.16)
1 −βγ
1 −γ2 + 1 + βγ
2 −γ2

w2 −(
γ
2 −γ2 + β −γ
1 −γ2

w1 ≤

1
1 −γ −γ + 1
2 −γ2

Ω.
(B.17)
Then the equilibrium prices are
p∗
i = pd
i =
1
1 −γ2
n
(1 + γ)x −(1 −βγ)wi + (β −γ)wj
o
.
Therefore, ﬁrm i’s expected proﬁt can be written as follows
E[πi(w1,w2)] = E[(pi −wi)zi] =
Z
x

x
1 −γ + β −γ
1 −γ2 wj −2 −γ2 −βγ
1 −γ2
wi

(wi −βwj)dF(x)
=
 E[Ω]
1 −γ + β −γ
1 −γ2 wj −2 −γ2 −βγ
1 −γ2
wi

(wi −βwj).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

8
So, the ﬁrm’s optimization problem can be written as
max
wi
 E[Ω]
1 −γ + β −γ
1 −γ2 wj −2 −γ2 −βγ
1 −γ2
wi

(wi −βwj)
s.t.
1 −βγ
1 −γ2 + 1 + βγ
2 −γ2

w1 −

γ
2 −γ2 + β −γ
1 −γ2

w2 ≤

1
1 −γ −γ + 1
2 −γ2

Ω,
(B.18)
1 −βγ
1 −γ2 + 1 + βγ
2 −γ2

w2 −(
γ
2 −γ2 + β −γ
1 −γ2

w1 ≤

1
1 −γ −γ + 1
2 −γ2

Ω.
The ﬁrst order condition gives
w∗
i,c1 =
1 + γ
4 −3β + γ −2γ2 −2βγ + β2γ + βγ2 E[Ω].
(B.19)
And the second order derivative is negative. Let
w1
ub =
1
3 −2β −2γ + βγ Ω.
(B.20)
The constraint (B.18) gives
wi ≤w1
ub.
Let E[π∗
c1] denote the optimal expected proﬁt in Case 1. Clearly, if w∗
i,c1 < w1
ub, then E[π∗
c1] =
E[πc1|w=w∗
i,c1]. Otherwise, E[π∗
c1] = E[πc1|w=w1
ub].
Case 2: Medium Wage. The wage is in a medium range such that there exists a threshold bΩ(w)
beyond which the ﬁrms would adopt the supply-depletion price and adopt the revenue-maximizing
price otherwise.
According to Lemma B.1(i) and (ii), the wage w is set such that

2
4 −γ2 +
2
2 −γ2

w1 +

γ
4 −γ2 −
2
2 −γ2 (γ
2 + β)

w2 ≥

2
2 −γ2 −
2
4 −γ2

(1 + γ
2 )Ω,

2
4 −γ2 +
2
2 −γ2

w2 +

γ
4 −γ2 −
2
2 −γ2 (γ
2 + β)

w1 ≥

2
2 −γ2 −
2
4 −γ2

(1 + γ
2 )Ω,
1 −βγ
1 −γ2 + 1 + βγ
2 −γ2

w1 −

γ
2 −γ2 + β −γ
1 −γ2

w2 ≤

1
1 −γ −γ + 1
2 −γ2

¯Ω,
1 −βγ
1 −γ2 + 1 + βγ
2 −γ2

w2 −(
γ
2 −γ2 + β −γ
1 −γ2

w1 ≤

1
1 −γ −γ + 1
2 −γ2

¯Ω.
Then the equilibrium prices are
p∗
i =



pd
i =
1
1−γ2
n
(1 + γ)x −(1 −βγ)wi + (β −γ)wj
o
, if
x ≥bΩ(w),
pm
i =
2
4−γ2
n
(1 + γ
2)x + γ
2wj + wi
o
,
if
x < bΩ(w).
Therefore, ﬁrm i’s expected proﬁt can be written
E[πi(wi,wj)] =E[(pi −wi)zi]
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

9
=
Z
¯Ω
bΩ(w)

x
1 −γ + β −γ
1 −γ2 wj −2 −γ2 −βγ
1 −γ2
wi

(wi −βwj)dF(x)
+
Z bΩ(w)
Ω

2
4 −γ2
n
(1 + γ
2 )x + γ
2wj + wi
o
−wi

x −(1 −γ)
2
4 −γ2
n
(1 + γ
2 )x + γ
2wj + wi
o
dF(x).
So, the ﬁrm’s optimization problem can be written as
max
wi
Z
¯Ω
bΩ(w)

x
1 −γ + β −γ
1 −γ2 wj −2 −γ2 −βγ
1 −γ2
wi

(wi −βwj)dF(x) +
Z bΩ(w)
Ω

x
2 −γ −2 −γ2
4 −γ2 wi +
γ
4 −γ2 wj
2
dF
s.t.

2
4 −γ2 +
2
2 −γ2

w1 +

γ
4 −γ2 −
2
2 −γ2 (γ
2 + β)

w2 ≥

2
2 −γ2 −
2
4 −γ2

(1 + γ
2)Ω,
(B.21)

2
4 −γ2 +
2
2 −γ2

w2 +

γ
4 −γ2 −
2
2 −γ2 (γ
2 + β)

w1 ≥

2
2 −γ2 −
2
4 −γ2

(1 + γ
2)Ω,
1 −βγ
1 −γ2 + 1 + βγ
2 −γ2

w1 −

γ
2 −γ2 + β −γ
1 −γ2

w2 ≤

1
1 −γ −γ + 1
2 −γ2

¯Ω,
(B.22)
1 −βγ
1 −γ2 + 1 + βγ
2 −γ2

w2 −(
γ
2 −γ2 + β −γ
1 −γ2

w1 ≤

1
1 −γ −γ + 1
2 −γ2

¯Ω.
Let w∗
i,c2 denote the solution derived from the ﬁrst order condition. Also let
w2
lb =
1
3 −2β −2γ + βγ Ω,
w2
ub =
1
3 −2β −2γ + βγ
¯Ω.
The constraints (B.21) and (B.22) give
w2
lb ≤wi ≤w2
ub.
Let
E[π∗
c2]
denote
the
optimal
expected proﬁt
in
Case
2.
Clearly,
if
w2
lb ≤w∗
i,c2 ≤
w2
ub,
then
E[π∗
c2] = max{E[πc2|w=w∗
i,c2],E[πc2|w=w2
lb],E[πc2|w=w2
ub]}.
Otherwise,
E[π∗
c2] =
max{E[πc2|w=w2
lb],E[πc2|w=w2
ub]}.
The expression of w∗
i,c2 is hard to derive with a general distribution for market size Ω. Here, we
assume a two-point distribution for Ωand derive the expression of w∗
i,c2, which will be used in the
proof of Proposition 6(a). We assume Ωtakes the value of ΩH with probability q and the value of
ΩL with probability 1 −q. So, the ﬁrm’s optimization problem can be written as
max
wi q
 ΩH
1 −γ + β −γ
1 −γ2 wj −2 −γ2 −βγ
1 −γ2
wi

(wi −βwj) + (1 −q)
 ΩL
2 −γ −2 −γ2
4 −γ2 wi +
γ
4 −γ2 wj
2
s.t.

2
4 −γ2 +
2
2 −γ2

w1 +

γ
4 −γ2 −
2
2 −γ2 (γ
2 + β)

w2 ≥

2
2 −γ2 −
2
4 −γ2

(1 + γ
2)ΩL,

2
4 −γ2 +
2
2 −γ2

w2 +

γ
4 −γ2 −
2
2 −γ2 (γ
2 + β)

w1 ≥

2
2 −γ2 −
2
4 −γ2

(1 + γ
2)ΩL,
1 −βγ
1 −γ2 + 1 + βγ
2 −γ2

w1 −

γ
2 −γ2 + β −γ
1 −γ2

w2 ≤

1
1 −γ −γ + 1
2 −γ2

ΩH,
1 −βγ
1 −γ2 + 1 + βγ
2 −γ2

w2 −(
γ
2 −γ2 + β −γ
1 −γ2

w1 ≤

1
1 −γ −γ + 1
2 −γ2

ΩH.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

10
The ﬁrst order condition gives
w∗
i,c2 =
q(2 −γ)2(2 + γ)(1 + γ)ΩH −2(1 −q)(2 −γ2)(1 −γ2)ΩL
q(4 + γ −3β + β2γ + βγ2 −2γ2 −2βγ)(2 −γ)2(2 + γ) −2(1 −q)(2 −γ2)(1 −γ2)(1 −γ).
(B.23)
And
w2
lb =
1
3 −2β −2γ + βγ ΩL,
w2
ub =
1
3 −2β −2γ + βγ ΩH.
Case 3: High Wage. The wage is too high such that for any x ∈[Ω, ¯Ω], both ﬁrms adopt the
revenue-maximizing price at the subsequent stage.
According to Lemma B.1(ii), the wage w is set such that

2
4 −γ2 +
2
2 −γ2

w1 +

γ
4 −γ2 −
2
2 −γ2 (γ
2 + β)

w2 ≥

2
2 −γ2 −
2
4 −γ2

(1 + γ
2 )¯Ω,
(B.24)

2
4 −γ2 +
2
2 −γ2

w2 +

γ
4 −γ2 −
2
2 −γ2 (γ
2 + β)

w1 ≥

2
2 −γ2 −
2
4 −γ2

(1 + γ
2 )¯Ω.
(B.25)
Then the equilibrium prices are
p∗
i = pm
i =
2
4 −γ2
n
(1 + γ
2 )x + γ
2wj + wi
o
.
Therefore, ﬁrm i’s expected proﬁt can be written
E[πi(wi,wj)] = E[(pi −wi)zi] =
Z
x

x
2 −γ −2 −γ2
4 −γ2 wi +
γ
4 −γ2 wj
2
dF(x).
So, ﬁrm i’s optimization problem can be written as
max
wi
Z
x

x
2 −γ −2 −γ2
4 −γ2 wi +
γ
4 −γ2 wj
2
dF(x)
s.t.

2
4 −γ2 +
2
2 −γ2

w1 +

γ
4 −γ2 −
2
2 −γ2 (γ
2 + β)

w2 ≥

2
2 −γ2 −
2
4 −γ2

(1 + γ
2)¯Ω,
(B.26)

2
4 −γ2 +
2
2 −γ2

w2 +

γ
4 −γ2 −
2
2 −γ2 (γ
2 + β)

w1 ≥

2
2 −γ2 −
2
4 −γ2

(1 + γ
2)¯Ω,
Ω
2 −γ −2 −γ2
4 −γ2 wi +
γ
4 −γ2 wj ≥0,
(B.27)
where the last constraint is derived from pi ≥wi for any x ∈[Ω, ¯Ω].
The ﬁrst order condition gives
w∗
i,c3 =
2 + γ
2 −γ2 −γ E[Ω].
(B.28)
Let
w3
lb =
1
3 −2β −2γ + βγ
¯Ω,
w3
ub =
2 + γ
2 −γ2 −γ Ω.
(B.29)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

11
The constraints (B.26) and (B.27) give
w3
lb ≤wi ≤w3
ub.
Let E[π∗
c3] denote the optimal expected proﬁt in Case 3. Clearly, w∗
i,c3 ≥w3
ub. Then, the convexity
of the proﬁt function implies that
E[π∗
c3] = E[πc3|w=w3
lb].
(B.30)
Summary: The expected equilibrium proﬁt in wage precommitment competition is
E[π∗
wp] = max{E[π∗
c1],E[π∗
c2],E[π∗
c3]}.
C.
Price Precommitment Competition with Perfectly Positively
Correlated Market Size Uncertainty
We start this section with the analysis of the subgame equilibrium conditional on a ﬁxed price in
the ﬁrst stage in the presence of a deterministic market size, and then derive the equilibrium of
price precommitment competition with perfectly positively correlated market size.
C.1.
Subgame Equilibrium with A Deterministic Market Size
The following lemma characterizes the outcome of the wage game in the second stage for any ﬁxed
precommitted price.
Lemma C.1. For any ﬁxed p, the subgame equilibrium wages are given by
(i) If
(6 −2β2)p1 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p2 < (4 −β2)Ω,
(C.1)
(6 −2β2)p2 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p1 < (4 −β2)Ω,
(C.2)
the equilibrium prices are
w∗
1 = wm
1 = 2p1 + βp2
4 −β2
,
w∗
2 = wm
2 = 2p2 + βp1
4 −β2
.
(ii) If
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p1 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p2 ≥(2 + β −β2)Ω,
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p2 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p1 ≥(2 + β −β2)Ω,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

12
the equilibrium prices are
w∗
1 = wd
1 =
1
1 −β2
n
(1 + β)Ω−(1 −βγ)p1 + (γ −β)p2
o
,
w∗
2 = wd
2 =
1
1 −β2
n
(1 + β)Ω−(1 −βγ)p2 + (γ −β)p1
o
.
(iii) If
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p1 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p2 < (2 + β −β2)Ω,
(6 −2β2)p2 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p1 ≥(4 −β2)Ω,
the equilibrium prices are
w∗
1 =
1
2 −β2
n
βΩ+ (1 + βγ)p1 −βp2
o
,
w∗
2 =
1
2 −β2
n
2Ω+ (2γ + β)p1 −2p2
o
.
(iv) If
(6 −2β2)p1 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p2 ≥(4 −β2)Ω,
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p2 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p1 < (2 + β −β2)Ω,
the equilibrium prices are
w∗
1 =
1
2 −β2
n
2Ω+ (2γ + β)p2 −2p1
o
,
w∗
2 =
1
2 −β2
n
βΩ+ (1 + βγ)p2 −βp1
o
.
Proof of Lemma C.1.
For any ﬁxed p, the demand quantity for each ﬁrm is ﬁxed. On the one
hand, the ﬁrm could set its wage such that the supply quantity is smaller than the demand, that
is, the ﬁrm faces such an optimization problem:
max
wi (pi −wi)(wi −βwj)
s.t.
wi −βwj ≤Ω−pi + γpj.
Maximizing the proﬁt function gives that if pi ≤
2Ω+2γpj+βwj
3
, then w∗
i =
pi+βwj
2
. Otherwise, w∗
i =
Ω−pi + γpj + βwj. On the other hand, the ﬁrm could set its wage such that the supply quantity
is greater than the demand, that is, the ﬁrm faces such an optimization problem:
max
wi (pi −wi)(Ω−pi + γpj)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

13
s.t.
wi −βwj ≥Ω−pi + γpj.
Clearly, w∗
i = Ω−pi + γpj + βwj. Combining the above two scenarios yields that
w∗
i =
 pi+βwj
2
,
if
pi ≤
2Ω+2γpj+βwj
3
,
Ω−pi + γpj + βwj, otherwise.
We examine Case (i) ﬁrst. We obtain if
p1 ≤2Ω+ 2γp2 + βw2
3
,
p2 ≤2Ω+ 2γp1 + βw1
3
,
(C.3)
then
w∗
1 = p1 + βw2
2
,
w∗
2 = p2 + βw1
2
.
Solving the above set of equations yields that
w∗
1 = 2p1 + βp2
4 −β2
,
w∗
2 = 2p2 + βp1
4 −β2
.
Putting w∗
1 and w∗
2 back into (C.3) gives (C.1) and (C.2).
Continuing in this fashion, we establish Cases (ii)-(iv).
□
C.2.
Perfectly Positively Correlated Market Size
We assume Ωis a random variable distributed on [Ω, ¯Ω]. For any ﬁxed p, when the market size is
realized, the optimal wage takes either the demand-depletion wage or revenue-maximizing wage. To
simplify the analysis, we assume the two ﬁrms take symmetric actions. According to Section C.1,
we have three cases with respect to the value of p, detailed below. Suppose Ω= x.
Case 1: High Price. The price is too high such that for any x ∈[Ω, ¯Ω], both ﬁrms adopt the
demand-depletion wage at the subsequent stage.
According to Lemma C.1(ii), the wage p is set such that
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p1 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p2 ≥(2 + β −β2)¯Ω,
(C.4)
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p2 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p1 ≥(2 + β −β2)¯Ω,
(C.5)
Then the equilibrium wages are
w∗
i = wd
i =
1
1 −β2
n
(1 + β)x −(1 −βγ)pi + (γ −β)pj
o
.
Therefore, ﬁrm i’s expected proﬁt can be written as follows
E[πi(pi,pj)] = E[(pi −wi)zi]
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

14
=
Z
x

pi −
1
1 −β2
n
(1 + β)x −(1 −βγ)pi + (γ −β)pj
o
(x −pi + γpj)dF(x)
=
Z
x

1
1 −β2
n
−(1 + β)x + (2 −β2 −βγ)pi −(γ −β)pj
o
(x −pi + γpj)dF(x).
So, the ﬁrm’s optimization problem can be written as
max
pi
Z
x

1
1 −β2
n
−(1 + β)x + (2 −β2 −βγ)pi −(γ −β)pj
o
(x −pi + γpj)dF(x)
s.t.
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p1 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p2 ≥(2 + β −β2)¯Ω,
(C.6)
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p2 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p1 ≥(2 + β −β2)¯Ω.
The ﬁrst order condition gives
p∗
i,c1 =
3 + β −β2 −βγ
4 −3γ + β −2βγ −2β2 + β2γ + βγ2 E[Ω],
and the second order derivative is negative. Let
p1
lb =
2 + β −β2
3 −2γ + β −βγ −2β2 + β2γ
¯Ω.
The constraint (C.6) gives that
pi ≥p1
lb.
Let E[π∗
c1] denote the optimal expected proﬁt in Case 1. Clearly, if p∗
i,c1 ≥p1
lb, then E[π∗
c1] =
E[πc1|p=p∗
i,c1]. Otherwise, E[π∗
c1] = E[πc1|p=p1
lb].
Case 2: Medium Price. The price is in a medium range such that there exists a threshold bΩ(p)
beyond which the ﬁrms would adopt the revenue-maximizing wage and adopt the demand-depletion
wage otherwise.
According to Lemma C.1(i) and (ii), the wage p is set such that
(6 −2β2)p1 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p2 < (4 −β2)¯Ω,
(6 −2β2)p2 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p1 < (4 −β2)¯Ω,
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p1 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p2 ≥(2 + β −β2)Ω,
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p2 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p1 ≥(2 + β −β2)Ω.
Then the equilibrium wages are
w∗
i =
(
wd
i =
1
1−β2
n
(1 + β)x −(1 −βγ)pi + (β −γ)pj
o
, if
x ≤bΩ(p),
wm
i =
2pi+βpj
4−β2 ,
otherwise.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

15
Therefore, ﬁrm i’s expected proﬁt can be written
E[πi(pi,pj)] =E[(pi −wi)zi]
=
Z bΩ(p)
Ω

1
1 −β2
n
−(1 + β)x + (2 −β2 −βγ)pi −(γ −β)pj
o
(x −pi + γpj)dF(x)
+
Z
¯Ω
bΩ(p)
(2 −β2)pi −βpj
4 −β2
2
dF(x).
So, the ﬁrm’s optimization problem can be written as
max
pi
Z bΩ(p)
Ω

1
1 −β2
n
−(1 + β)x + (2 −β2 −βγ)pi −(γ −β)pj
o
(x −pi + γpj)dF(x) (C.7)
+
Z
¯Ω
bΩ(p)
(2 −β2)pi −βpj
4 −β2
2
dF(x)
s.t.
(6 −2β2)p1 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p2 < (4 −β2)¯Ω,
(C.8)
(6 −2β2)p2 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p1 < (4 −β2)¯Ω,
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p1 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p2 ≥(2 + β −β2)Ω,
(C.9)
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p2 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p1 ≥(2 + β −β2)Ω.
Let p∗
i,c2 denote the solution derived from the ﬁrst order condition. Also let
p2
lb =
2 + β −β2
3 −2γ + β −βγ −2β2 + β2γ Ω,
p2
ub =
4 −β2
6 −β −4γ −2β2 + β2γ
¯Ω.
The constraints (C.8) and (C.9) give
p2
lb ≤pi ≤p2
ub.
Let E[π∗
c2] denote the optimal expected proﬁt in Case 2. Clearly, if p2
lb ≤p∗
i,c2 ≤p2
ub, then E[π∗
c2] =
max{E[πc2|p=p∗
i,c2],E[πc2|p=p2
lb],E[πc2|p=p2
ub]}. Otherwise, E[π∗
c2] = max{E[πc2|p=p2
lb],E[πc2|p=p2
ub]}.
The expression of p∗
i,c2 is hard to derive with a general distribution for market size Ω. Here,
we assume a two-point distribution for Ωand derive the expression of p∗
i,c2. We assume Ωtakes
the value of ΩH with probability q and the value of ΩL with probability 1 −q. So, the ﬁrm’s
optimization problem can be written as
max
pi (1 −q)

1
1 −β2
n
−(1 + β)ΩL + (2 −β2 −βγ)pi −(γ −β)pj
o
(ΩL −pi + γpj) + q
(2 −β2)pi −βpj
4 −β2
2
s.t.
(6 −2β2)p1 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p2 < (4 −β2)ΩH,
(6 −2β2)p2 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p1 < (4 −β2)ΩH,
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p1 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p2 ≥(2 + β −β2)ΩL,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

16
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p2 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p1 ≥(2 + β −β2)ΩL.
The ﬁrst order condition gives
p∗
i,c2 =
(1 −q)(3 + β −βγ −β2)(4 −β2)2
(1 −q)(4 −3γ + β −2βγ −2β2 + βγ2 + β2γ)(4 −β2)2 −2q(2 −β −β2)(2 −β2)(1 −β2)ΩL.
And
p2
lb =
2 + β −β2
3 −2γ + β −βγ −2β2 + β2γ ΩL,
p2
ub =
4 −β2
6 −β −4γ −2β2 + β2γ ΩH.
Case 3: Low Price. The price is too low such that for any x ∈[Ω, ¯Ω], both ﬁrms adopt the
revenue-maximizing wage at the subsequent stage.
According to Lemma C.1(i), the price p is set such that
(6 −2β2)p1 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p2 ≤(4 −β2)Ω,
(6 −2β2)p2 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p1 ≤(4 −β2)Ω.
Then the equilibrium wages are
w∗
i = wm
i = 2pi + βpj
4 −β2 .
Therefore, ﬁrm i’s expected proﬁt can be written
E[πi(pi,pj)] = E[(pi −wi)zi] =
Z
x
(2 −β2)pi −βpj
4 −β2
2
dF(x) =
(2 −β2)pi −βpj
4 −β2
2
.
So, ﬁrm i’s optimization problem can be written as
max
pi
(2 −β2)pi −βpj
4 −β2
2
s.t.
(6 −2β2)p1 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p2 ≤(4 −β2)Ω,
(C.10)
(6 −2β2)p2 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p1 ≤(4 −β2)Ω.
The ﬁrst order condition gives
p∗
i =
β
2 −β2 p∗
j,
(C.11)
and the second order derivative is positive. Letting pi = pj, then (C.10) gives that
pi ≤
4 −β2
6 −β −4γ −2β2 + β2γ Ω.
Putting pi = pj =
4−β2
6−β−4γ−2β2+β2γΩinto the proﬁt function yields
E[π∗
c3] =
(1 −β)2(2 −β)2
(6 −β −4γ −2β2 + β2γ)2 Ω2.
Summary: The expected equilibrium proﬁt in price precommitment competition is
E[π∗
pw] = max{E[π∗
c1],E[π∗
c2],E[π∗
c3]}.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

17
D.
Wage Precommitment Competition with Negatively Correlated
Market Size Uncertainty
Before we analyze the wage precommitment competition with negatively correlated market size
uncertainty, we ﬁrst study the subgame equilibrium after the demand uncertainty is realized.
D.1.
Subgame Analysis
Without loss of generality, we assume (Ω1,Ω2) = (ΩH,ΩL). The analysis for (Ω1,Ω2) = (ΩL,ΩH) is
symmetric and is thus omitted.
For any ﬁxed w, we derive the supply-depletion price for both platforms
pd
1(p2) = ΩH + γp2 −(w1 −βw2),
pd
2(p1) = ΩL + γp1 −(w2 −βw1).
By solving maxpi(pi−wi)(Ωi−pi+γpj), we obtain the revenue-maximizing price for both platforms
pm
1 (p2) = ΩH + γp2 + w1
2
,
pm
2 (p1) = ΩL + γp1 + w2
2
.
According to Hu and Zhou (2017), the best response for ﬁrm i given ﬁrm j’s price pj is
p∗
1(p2) = max{pd
1(p2),pm
1 (p2)},
p∗
2(p1) = max{pd
2(p1),pm
2 (p1)}.
Solving for the subgame prefect Nash equilibrium yields the following result.
Lemma D.1. For any ﬁxed w, the subgame equilibrium prices are given by
(i) If
(3 −βγ −2γ2)w1 + (γ + βγ2 −2β)w2 ≤ΩH + γΩL,
(D.1)
(3 −βγ −2γ2)w2 + (γ + βγ2 −2β)w1 ≤ΩL + γΩH,
(D.2)
the equilibrium prices are
p∗
1 = pd
1 =
1
1 −γ2
n
ΩH + γΩL −(1 −βγ)w1 + (β −γ)w2
o
,
(D.3)
p∗
2 = pd
2 =
1
1 −γ2
n
ΩL + γΩH −(1 −βγ)w2 + (β −γ)w1
o
.
(D.4)
(ii) If
2(3 −γ2)w1 −(γ + 4β −βγ2)w2 ≥2ΩH + γΩL,
2(3 −γ2)w2 −(γ + 4β −βγ2)w1 ≥2ΩL + γΩH,
the equilibrium prices are
p∗
1 = pm
1 =
1
4 −γ2
n
2ΩH + γΩL + γw2 + 2w1
o
,
(D.5)
p∗
2 = pm
2 =
1
4 −γ2
n
2ΩL + γΩH + γw1 + 2w2
o
.
(D.6)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

18
(iii) If
2(3 −γ2)w1 −(γ + 4β −βγ2)w2 ≤2ΩH + γΩL,
(D.7)
(γ −2β + βγ2)w1 + (3 −βγ −2γ2)w2 ≥ΩL + γΩH,
(D.8)
the equilibrium prices are
p∗
1 = pd
1 =
1
2 −γ2
n
2ΩH + γΩL −2w1 + (2β + γ)w2
o
,
(D.9)
p∗
2 = pm
2 =
1
2 −γ2
n
ΩL + γΩH −γw1 + (1 + βγ)w2
o
.
(D.10)
(iv) If
2(3 −γ2)w2 −(γ + 4β −βγ2)w1 ≤2ΩL + γΩH,
(γ −2β + βγ2)w2 + (3 −βγ −2γ2)w1 ≥ΩH + γΩL,
the equilibrium prices are
p∗
1 = pm
1 =
1
2 −γ2
n
ΩH + γΩL −γw2 + (1 + βγ)w1
o
,
p∗
2 = pd
2 =
1
2 −γ2
n
2ΩL + γΩH −2w2 + (2β + γ)w1
o
.
D.2.
Nash Equilibrium Analysis
For simplicity, we assume the ﬁrms make symmetric decisions. Note that there is a probability 1/2
that (Ω1,Ω2) = (ΩH,ΩL) and an equal probability that (Ω1,Ω2) = (ΩL,ΩH). Before the market size
is realized, the two ﬁrms face exactly the same situation and thus set the same wage ex ante. For
any ﬁxed w, when the market size is realized, the optimal price takes either the supply-depletion
price or revenue-maximizing price. According to Section D.1, we have three cases with respect to
the value of w.
Case 1: Low Wage. The wage is too low such that for any realized market size, the two ﬁrms
adopt the supply-depletion price at the subsequent stage.
According to Lemma D.1(i), if the wage w is set such that
(3 −βγ −2γ2)w1 + (γ + βγ2 −2β)w2 ≤ΩL + γΩH,
(D.11)
(3 −βγ −2γ2)w2 + (γ + βγ2 −2β)w1 ≤ΩL + γΩH,
(D.12)
then the equilibrium prices are
p∗
1 =



1
1−γ2
n
ΩH + γΩL −(1 −βγ)w1 + (β −γ)w2
o
if
Ω1 = ΩH,
1
1−γ2
n
ΩL + γΩH −(1 −βγ)w1 + (β −γ)w2
o
if
Ω1 = ΩL,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

19
and
p∗
2 =



1
1−γ2
n
ΩH + γΩL −(1 −βγ)w2 + (β −γ)w1
o
if
Ω2 = ΩH,
1
1−γ2
n
ΩL + γΩH −(1 −βγ)w2 + (β −γ)w1
o
if
Ω2 = ΩL.
Therefore, ﬁrm i’s expected proﬁt can be written as follows
E[πi(w1,w2)] =1
2

1
1 −γ2
n
ΩH + γΩL −(1 −βγ)wi + (β −γ)wj
o
−wi

(wi −βwj)
+ 1
2

1
1 −γ2
n
ΩL + γΩH −(1 −βγ)wi + (β −γ)wj
o
−wi

(wi −βwj)
=
 E[Ω]
1 −γ + β −γ
1 −γ2 wj −2 −γ2 −βγ
1 −γ2
wi

(wi −βwj).
So, the ﬁrm’s optimization problem can be written as
max
wi
 E[Ω]
1 −γ + β −γ
1 −γ2 wj −2 −γ2 −βγ
1 −γ2
wi

(wi −βwj)
s.t.
(3 −βγ −2γ2)w1 + (γ + βγ2 −2β)w2 ≤ΩL + γΩH,
(3 −βγ −2γ2)w2 + (γ + βγ2 −2β)w1 ≤ΩL + γΩH.
(D.13)
The ﬁrst order condition gives
w∗
i =
1 + γ
4 −3β + γ −2γ2 −2βγ + β2γ + βγ2 E[Ω].
(D.14)
And the second order derivative is negative. Let
w1
b =
ΩL + γΩH
3 −2β + γ −βγ −(2 −β)γ2.
(D.15)
The constraint (D.13) gives
wi ≤w1
b.
Let E[π∗
c1] denote the optimal expected proﬁt in Case 1. Clearly, if w∗
i < w1
b, then E[π∗
c1] =
E[π|w=w∗
i ]. Otherwise, E[π∗
c1] = E[π|w=w1
b ].
Case 2: Medium Wage. The ﬁrms would adopt the revenue-maximizing price with a low market
size ΩL and supply-depletion price otherwise.
According to Lemma D.1(iii) and (iv), if the wage w is set such that
2(3 −γ2)w1 −(γ + 4β −βγ2)w2 ≤2ΩH + γΩL,
(γ −2β + βγ2)w1 + (3 −βγ −2γ2)w2 ≥ΩL + γΩH,
2(3 −γ2)w2 −(γ + 4β −βγ2)w1 ≤2ΩH + γΩL,
(γ −2β + βγ2)w2 + (3 −βγ −2γ2)w1 ≥ΩL + γΩH,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

20
then the equilibrium prices are
p∗
1 =



pd
1 =
1
2−γ2
n
2ΩH + γΩL −2w1 + (2β + γ)w2
o
if
Ω1 = ΩH,
pm
1 =
1
2−γ2
n
ΩL + γΩH −γw2 + (1 + βγ)w1
o
if
Ω1 = ΩL,
and
p∗
2 =



pd
2 =
1
2−γ2
n
2ΩH + γΩL −2w2 + (2β + γ)w1
o
if
Ω2 = ΩH,
pm
2 =
1
2−γ2
n
ΩL + γΩH −γw1 + (1 + βγ)w2
o
if
Ω2 = ΩL.
Therefore, ﬁrm 1’s expected proﬁt can be written
E[π1(wi,wj)] =1
2

1
2 −γ2
n
2ΩH + γΩL −2w1 + (2β + γ)w2
o
−w1

(w1 −βw2)
+ 1
2

1
2 −γ2
n
ΩL + γΩH −γw2 + (1 + βγ)w1
o
−w1

(ΩL −pm
1 + γpd
2)
=1
2
2ΩH + γΩL + (γ2 −4)w1 + (2β + γ)w2
2 −γ2
(w1 −βw2) + 1
2
nΩL + γΩH −γw2 + (−1 + βγ + γ2)w1
2 −γ2
o2
.
So, ﬁrm 1’s optimization problem can be written as
max
w1
1
2
2ΩH + γΩL + (γ2 −4)w1 + (2β + γ)w2
2 −γ2
(w1 −βw2) + 1
2
nΩL + γΩH −γw2 + (−1 + βγ + γ2)w1
2 −γ2
o2
s.t.
2(3 −γ2)w1 −(γ + 4β −βγ2)w2 ≤2ΩH + γΩL,
(γ −2β + βγ2)w1 + (3 −βγ −2γ2)w2 ≥ΩL + γΩH,
(D.16)
2(3 −γ2)w2 −(γ + 4β −βγ2)w1 ≤2ΩH + γΩL,
(D.17)
(γ −2β + βγ2)w2 + (3 −βγ −2γ2)w1 ≥ΩL + γΩH.
The ﬁrst order condition gives
w∗
i =
(2 −γ2)(2ΩH + γΩL) + 2(−1 + βγ + γ2)(ΩL + γΩH)
14 −4γ −12β + 4βγ −8γ2 + 10βγ2 + 3γ3 −4βγ3 −2β2γ2 −βγ4 .
(D.18)
Let
w2
lb =
ΩL + γΩH
3 + γ −2β −βγ −2γ2 + βγ2 ,
w2
ub =
2ΩH + γΩL
6 −γ −4β −2γ2 + βγ2 .
The constraints (D.16) and (D.17) give
w2
lb ≤wi ≤w2
ub.
Let E[π∗
c2] denote the optimal expected proﬁt in Case 2. Clearly, if w2
lb ≤w∗
i ≤w2
ub, then E[π∗
c2] =
max{E[π|w=w∗
i ],E[π|w=w2
lb],E[π|w=w2
ub]}. Otherwise, E[π∗
c2] = max{E[π|w=w2
lb],E[π|w=w2
ub]}.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

21
Case 3: High Wage. The wage is too high such that the two ﬁrms adopt the revenue-maximizing
price for any market size at the subsequent stage.
According to Lemma D.1(ii), if the wage w is set such that
2(3 −γ2)w1 −(γ + 4β −βγ2)w2 ≥2ΩH + γΩL,
(D.19)
2(3 −γ2)w2 −(γ + 4β −βγ2)w1 ≥2ΩH + γΩL,
(D.20)
then the equilibrium prices are
p∗
1 =



pm
1 =
1
4−γ2
n
2ΩH + γΩL + γw2 + 2w1
o
if
Ω1 = ΩH,
pm
1 =
1
4−γ2
n
2ΩL + γΩH + γw2 + 2w1
o
if
Ω1 = ΩL,
and
p∗
2 =



pm
2 =
1
4−γ2
n
2ΩH + γΩL + γw1 + 2w2
o
if
Ω2 = ΩH,
pm
2 =
1
4−γ2
n
2ΩL + γΩH + γw1 + 2w2
o
if
Ω2 = ΩL.
Therefore, ﬁrm 1’s expected proﬁt can be written
E[π1(w1,w2)] =1
2
n
1
4 −γ2
n
2ΩH + γΩL + γw2 + 2w1
o
−w1
o2ΩH + γΩL −(2 −γ2)w1 + γw2
4 −γ2
+ 1
2
n
1
4 −γ2
n
2ΩL + γΩH + γw2 + 2w1
o
−w1
o2ΩL + γΩH −(2 −γ2)w1 + γw2
4 −γ2
=1
2
n2ΩH + γΩL −(2 −γ2)w1 + γw2
4 −γ2
o2
+ 1
2
n2ΩL + γΩH −(2 −γ2)w1 + γw2
4 −γ2
o2
.
So, ﬁrm 1’s optimization problem can be written as
max
w1
1
2
n2ΩH + γΩL −(2 −γ2)w1 + γw2
4 −γ2
o2
+ 1
2
n2ΩL + γΩH −(2 −γ2)w1 + γw2
4 −γ2
o2
s.t.
2(3 −γ2)w1 −(γ + 4β −βγ2)w2 ≥2ΩH + γΩL,
(D.21)
2(3 −γ2)w2 −(γ + 4β −βγ2)w1 ≥2ΩH + γΩL,
2ΩL + γΩH −(2 −γ2)w1 + γw2 ≥0,
(D.22)
where (D.22) is derived from the constraint p1 ≥w1.
The ﬁrst order condition gives
w∗
i =
2 + γ
2 −γ2 −γ E[Ω].
(D.23)
Let
w3
lb =
2ΩH + γΩL
6 −2γ2 −γ −4β + βγ2 ,
w3
ub = 2ΩL + γΩH
2 −γ2 −γ .
(D.24)
The constraint (D.21) and (D.22) give w3
lb ≤wi ≤w3
ub.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

22
Let E[π∗
c3] denote the optimal expected proﬁt in Case 3. Observe that w∗
i > w3
ub. By the
convexity of the proﬁt function, we have the optimal proﬁt E[π∗
c3] = E[π|w=w3
lb].
Summary: The expected equilibrium proﬁt in wage precommitment competition is
E[π∗
wp] = max{E[π∗
c1],E[π∗
c2],E[π∗
c3]}.
E.
Price Precommitment Competition with Negatively Correlated
Market Size Uncertainty
Before we analyze the price precommitment competition with negatively correlated market size
uncertainty, we ﬁrst study the subgame equilibrium after the demand uncertainty is realized.
E.1.
Subgame Analysis
Without loss of generality, we assume (Ω1,Ω2) = (ΩH,ΩL). The analysis for (Ω1,Ω2) = (ΩL,ΩH) is
symmetric and the detail is thus omitted.
Lemma E.1. For any ﬁxed p, the subgame equilibrium wages are given by
(i) If
(6 −2β2)p1 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p2 ≤(4 −β2)ΩH,
(E.1)
(6 −2β2)p2 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p1 ≤(4 −β2)ΩL,
(E.2)
the equilibrium wages are
w∗
1 = wm
1 = 2p1 + βp2
4 −β2
,
w∗
2 = wm
2 = 2p2 + βp1
4 −β2
.
(ii) If
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p1 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p2 ≥(2 −β2)ΩH + βΩL,
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p2 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p1 ≥(2 −β2)ΩL + βΩH,
the equilibrium wages are
w∗
1 = wd
1 =
1
1 −β2
n
ΩH + βΩL −(1 −βγ)p1 + (γ −β)p2
o
,
w∗
2 = wd
2 =
1
1 −β2
n
ΩL + βΩH −(1 −βγ)p2 + (γ −β)p1
o
.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

23
(iii) If
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p1 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p2 < (2 −β2)ΩH + βΩL,
(6 −2β2)p2 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p1 ≥(4 −β2)ΩL,
the equilibrium wages are
w∗
1 =
1
2 −β2
n
βΩL + (1 + βγ)p1 −βp2
o
,
w∗
2 =
2
2 −β2
n
ΩL −p2 + (γ + β
2 )p1
o
.
(iv) If
(6 −2β2)p1 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p2 ≥(4 −β2)ΩH,
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p2 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p1 < (2 −β2)ΩL + βΩH,
the equilibrium wages are
w∗
1 =
2
2 −β2
n
ΩH −p1 + (γ + β
2 )p2
o
,
w∗
2 =
1
2 −β2
n
βΩH + (1 + βγ)p2 −βp1
o
.
Proof of Lemma E.1.
For any ﬁxed p, the demand quantity for each ﬁrm is ﬁxed. On the one
hand, ﬁrm 1 could set its wage such that the supply quantity is smaller than the demand, that is,
ﬁrm 1 faces such an optimization problem:
max
w1 (p1 −w1)(w1 −βw2)
s.t.
w1 −βw2 ≤ΩH −p1 + γp2.
Maximizing the proﬁt function gives that if p1 ≤2ΩH+2γp2+βw2
3
, then w∗
1 = p1+βw2
2
. Otherwise, w∗
1 =
ΩH −p1+γp2 +βw2. On the other hand, ﬁrm 1 could also set its wage such that the supply quantity
is greater than the demand, that is, ﬁrm 1 faces such an optimization problem:
max
w1 (p1 −w1)(ΩH −p1 + γp2)
s.t.
w1 −βw2 ≥ΩH −p1 + γp2.
Clearly, w∗
1 = ΩH −p1 + γp2 + βw2. Combining the above two scenarios yields that
w∗
1 =
 p1+βw2
2
,
if
p1 ≤2ΩH+2γp2+βw2
3
,
ΩH −p1 + γp2 + βw2, otherwise.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

24
Similarly, one can derive
w∗
2 =
 p2+βw1
2
,
if
p2 ≤2ΩL+2γp1+βw1
3
,
ΩL −p2 + γp1 + βw1, otherwise.
We examine Case (i) ﬁrst. We obtain if
p1 ≤2ΩH + 2γp2 + βw2
3
,
p2 ≤2ΩL + 2γp1 + βw1
3
,
(E.3)
then
w∗
1 = p1 + βw2
2
,
w∗
2 = p2 + βw1
2
.
Solving the above set of equations yields that
w∗
1 = 2p1 + βp2
4 −β2
,
w∗
2 = 2p2 + βp1
4 −β2
.
Putting w∗
1 and w∗
2 back into (E.3) gives (E.1) and (E.2).
Continuing in this fashion, we establish Cases (ii)-(iv).
□
E.2.
Nash Equilibrium Analysis
For simplicity, we assume the ﬁrms make symmetric decisions. Note that there is a probability 1/2
that (Ω1,Ω2) = (ΩH,ΩL) and an equal probability that (Ω1,Ω2) = (ΩL,ΩH). Before the market size
is realized, the two ﬁrms face exactly the same situation, and thus set the same price. For any ﬁxed
p, when the market size is realized, the optimal wage takes either the demand-depletion wage or
revenue-maximizing wage. According to Section E.1, we have three cases with respect to the value
of p.
Case 1: High Price. The price is too high such that both ﬁrms adopt the demand-depletion wage
at the subsequent stage for any market size.
According to Lemma E.1(ii), if the price p is set such that
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p1 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p2 ≥(2 −β2)ΩH + βΩL,
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p2 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p1 ≥(2 −β2)ΩH + βΩL,
then the equilibrium wages are
w∗
1 =



1
1−β2
n
ΩH + βΩL −(1 −βγ)p1 + (γ −β)p2
o
if
Ω1 = ΩH,
1
1−β2
n
ΩL + βΩH −(1 −βγ)p1 + (γ −β)p2
o
if
Ω1 = ΩL,
and
w∗
2 =



1
1−β2
n
ΩH + βΩL −(1 −βγ)p2 + (γ −β)p1
o
if
Ω2 = ΩH,
1
1−β2
n
ΩL + βΩH −(1 −βγ)p2 + (γ −β)p1
o
if
Ω2 = ΩL.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

25
Therefore, ﬁrm i’s expected proﬁt can be written as follows
E[πi(wi,wj)] =1
2

pi −
1
1 −β2
n
ΩH + βΩL −(1 −βγ)pi + (γ −β)pj
o
(ΩH −pi + γpj)
+ 1
2

pi −
1
1 −β2
n
ΩL + βΩH −(1 −βγ)pi + (γ −β)pj
o
(ΩL −pi + γpj)
=1
2
1
1 −β2

−(ΩH + βΩL) + (2 −β2 −βγ)pi −(γ −β)pj
 (ΩH −pi + γpj)
+ 1
2
1
1 −β2

−(ΩL + βΩH) + (2 −β2 −βγ)pi −(γ −β)pj
 
(ΩL −pi + γpj).
So, the ﬁrm’s optimization problem can be written as
max
pi
1
2
1
1 −β2

−(ΩH + βΩL) + (2 −β2 −βγ)pi −(γ −β)pj
 
(ΩH −pi + γpj)
+ 1
2
1
1 −β2

−(ΩL + βΩH) + (2 −β2 −βγ)pi −(γ −β)pj
 
(ΩL −pi + γpj)
s.t.
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p1 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p2 ≥(2 −β2)ΩH + βΩL,
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p2 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p1 ≥(2 −β2)ΩH + βΩL.
(E.4)
The ﬁrst order condition gives
p∗
i =
3 + β −β2 −βγ
4 −3γ + β −2β2 −2βγ + β2γ + βγ2 E[Ω].
And the second order derivative is negative. Let
p1
b =
(2 −β2)ΩH + βΩL
3 −2γ + β −βγ −2β2 + βγ .
The constraint (E.4) gives
pi ≥p1
b.
Let E[π∗
c1] denote the optimal expected proﬁt in Case 1. Clearly, if p∗
i ≥p1
b, then E[π∗
c1] =
E[π|p=p∗
i ]. Otherwise, E[π∗
c1] = E[π|p=p1
b].
Case 2: Medium Price. The price is in a medium range such that both ﬁrms would adopt the
demand-depletion wage with a low market size ΩL and the revenue-maximizing wage otherwise.
According to Lemma E.1(iii) and (iv), if the price p is set such that
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p1 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p2 < (2 −β2)ΩH + βΩL,
(6 −2β2)p2 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p1 ≥(4 −β2)ΩL,
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p2 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p1 < (2 −β2)ΩH + βΩL,
(6 −2β2)p1 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p2 ≥(4 −β2)ΩL,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

26
then the equilibrium wages are
w∗
1 =



wm
1 =
1
2−β2
n
βΩL + (1 + βγ)p1 −βp2
o
if
Ω1 = ΩH,
wd
1 =
2
2−β2
n
ΩL −p1 + (γ + β
2 )p2
o
if
Ω1 = ΩL,
and
w∗
2 =



wm
2 =
1
2−β2
n
βΩL + (1 + βγ)p2 −βp1
o
if
Ω2 = ΩH,
wd
2 =
2
2−β2
n
ΩL −p2 + (γ + β
2 )p1
o
if
Ω2 = ΩL.
Therefore, ﬁrm 1’s expected proﬁt can be written
E[π1(p1,p2)] =1
2(p1 −wm
1 )(wm
1 −βwd
2) + 1
2(p1 −wd
1)(ΩL −p1 + γp2)
=1
2
1
(2 −β2)2
n
(1 −βγ −β2)p1 −βΩL + βp2
o2
+ 1
2
1
(2 −β2)
n
(4 −β2)p1 −2ΩL −(2γ + β)p2
o
(ΩL −p1 + γp2).
So, ﬁrm 1’s optimization problem can be written as
max
p1
1
2
1
(2 −β2)2
n
(1 −βγ −β2)p1 −βΩL + βp2
o2
+ 1
2
1
(2 −β2)
n
(4 −β2)p1 −2ΩL −(2γ + β)p2
o
(ΩL −p1 + γp2)
s.t.
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p1 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p2 < (2 −β2)ΩH + βΩL,
(E.5)
(6 −2β2)p2 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p1 ≥(4 −β2)ΩL,
(E.6)
(3 −2β2 −βγ)p2 −(2γ −β −β2γ)p1 < (2 −β2)ΩH + βΩL,
(6 −2β2)p1 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p2 ≥(4 −β2)ΩL.
The ﬁrst order condition gives
p∗
i =
12 −2β −8β2 + 2β3 + 2β2γ + β4
14 −4β −12γ + 4βγ −8β2 + 10β2γ + 3β3 −4β3γ −2β2γ2 −β4γ .
Let
p2
lb =
(4 −β2)ΩL
6 −β −4γ −2β2 + β2γ ,
p2
ub =
(2 −β2)ΩH + βΩL
3 + β −2γ −βγ −2β2 + β2γ .
The constraints (E.5) and (E.6) give
p2
lb ≤pi ≤p2
ub.
Let E[π∗
c2] denote the optimal expected proﬁt in Case 2. Clearly, if p2
lb ≤p∗
i ≤p2
ub, then E[π∗
c2] =
max{E[π|p=p∗
i ],E[π|p=p2
lb],E[π|p=p2
ub]}. Otherwise, E[π∗
c2] = max{E[π|p=p2
lb],E[π|p=p2
ub]}.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

27
Case 3: Low Price. The price is too low such that both ﬁrms adopt the revenue-maximizing wage
for any market size at the subsequent stage.
According to Lemma E.1(i), if the price p is set such that
(6 −2β2)p1 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p2 < (4 −β2)ΩL,
(6 −2β2)p2 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p1 < (4 −β2)ΩL,
then the equilibrium wages are
w∗
1 = 2p1 + βp2
4 −β2
,
w∗
2 = 2p2 + βp1
4 −β2
.
Therefore, ﬁrm i’s expected proﬁt can be written
E[πi(wi,wj)] =(pi −wi)(wi −βwj) =
1
(4 −β2)2
n
(2 −β)pi −βpj
o2
.
So, ﬁrm i’s optimization problem can be written as
max
pi
1
(4 −β2)2
n
(2 −β)pi −βpj
o2
s.t.
(6 −2β2)p1 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p2 < (4 −β2)ΩL,
(E.7)
(6 −2β2)p2 −(4γ −β2γ + β)p1 < (4 −β2)ΩL.
The ﬁrst order condition gives
p∗
i =
β
2 −β2pj,
and the second order derivative is positive. Letting pi = pj, then (E.7) gives that
pi ≤
4 −β2
6 −β −4γ −2β2 + β2γ .
Putting pi =
4−β2
6−β−4γ−2β2+β2γ into the proﬁt function yields that
E[π∗
c3] =
(1 −β)2(2 −β)2
(6 −β −4γ −2β2 + β2γ)2 Ω2
L.
Summary: The expected equilibrium proﬁt in price precommitment competition is
E[π∗
pw] = max{E[π∗
c1],E[π∗
c2],E[π∗
c3]}.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

28
F.
Proof of Lemmas and Propositions in the Main Text
Proof of Lemma 1.
For any ﬁxed (p2,w2), platform 1’s best choice is to render the demand
equal to the supply quantity. Otherwise, the platform could always improve its proﬁt by either
raising the price or lowering the wage. Let z1 denote the matching quantity, then
Ω−p∗
1 + γp2 = z1 = w∗
1 −βw2.
Hence,
p∗
1 = Ω+ γp2 −z1,
w∗
1 = z1 + βw2.
(F.1)
Platform 1 faces such an optimization problem:
max
z1
(Ω+ γp2 −2z1 −βw2)z1
s.t. z1 ≤1
2(Ω+ γp2 −βw2).
Note that the above constraint is derived by p∗
1 ≥w∗
1. Solving the problem yields z∗
1 = Ω+γp2−βw2
4
.
Plugging back into (F.1) gives the best response of platform 1 as follows,
p∗
1(p2,w2) = 3
4(Ω+ γp2) + 1
4βw2,
w∗
1(p2,w2) = 1
4(Ω+ γp2) + 3
4βw2.
By the same token, we obtain
p∗
2(p1,w1) = 3
4(Ω+ γp1) + 1
4βw1,
w∗
2(p1,w1) = 1
4(Ω+ γp1) + 3
4βw1.
Solving the set of the above equations yields the resulting equilibrium.
□
Prior to the proof of Lemma 2, we ﬁrst introduce a lemma.
Lemma F.1. In wage precommitment competition, the resulting equilibrium wages and prices
are such that the supply is equal to the demand.
Proof of Lemma F.1.
We show Cases (ii), (iii), and (iv) in Lemma B.1 in Online Supplement B.1
cannot be equilibrium. The approach is to show a unilateral change in wage could beneﬁt at least
one ﬁrm.
Case (ii): In this case, both ﬁrms have excess supply and choose the proﬁt-maximizing prices.
Suppose ﬁrm 1 reduces its wage by setting ˜w1 = w1 −e and ﬁrm 2 keeps its wage unchanged by
setting ˜w2 = w2. Note that e is chosen such that the constraints (B.5) and (B.6) still hold. In other
words, reducing the wage does not aﬀect both ﬁrms choosing the proﬁt-maximizing prices in their
quantity-constrained pricing game.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

29
By (B.7) and (B.8), we have ˜p1 = p1 −
2
4−γ2e, ˜p2 = p2 −γ
2
2
4−γ2e, and ˜d1(˜p1, ˜p2) = Ω−˜p1 + γ˜p2 =
Ω−p1 + γp2 +
2
4−γ2(1 −γ2
2 )e. Hence,
˜π1 = (˜p1 −˜w1) ˜d1(˜p1, ˜p2)
= (p1 −w1 + e −
2
4 −γ2 e)

d1(p1,p2) +
2
4 −γ2 (1 −γ2
2 )e

> (p1 −w1)d1(p1,p2) = π1.
[by 1 >
2
4 −γ2 and 1 > γ2
2 ]
Therefore, reducing w1 can improve ﬁrm 1’s proﬁt.
Case (iii): In this case, ﬁrm 1’s supply runs out and ﬁrm 2 has excess supply. We will show a
unilateral change in w2 can beneﬁt both ﬁrms, which indicates that the ﬁrms will not choose the
quantity in the ﬁrst stage such that this case will occur in the second stage.
Subcase 1: Suppose γ(γ + β) < 1. Suppose ﬁrm 2 reduces its wage by setting ˜w2 = w2 −e and
ﬁrm 1 keeps its wage unchanged by setting ˜w1 = w1. Note that e is chosen such that the constraints
(B.9) and (B.10) still hold. In other words, reducing the wage does not aﬀect ﬁrm 1 choosing the
supply-depletion price and ﬁrm 2 choosing the proﬁt-maximizing price in their quantity-constrained
pricing game.
By (B.11) and (B.12), we have ˜p1 = p1 −
2
2−γ2( γ
2 + β)e, ˜p2 = p2 −1+βγ
2−γ2 e, and ˜d2(˜p1, ˜p2) = Ω−˜p2 +
γ˜p1 = Ω−p2 + γp1 + 1+βγ
2−γ2 e −
2γ
2−γ2( γ
2 + β)e. Hence,
˜π2 = (˜p2 −˜w2) ˜d2(˜p1, ˜p2)
= (p2 −w2 + e −1 + βγ
2 −γ2 e)

d2(p1,p2) + 1 + βγ
2 −γ2 e −
2γ
2 −γ2 (γ
2 + β)e

> (p2 −w2)d2(p1,p2) = π2
where the last inequality holds because 1 > 1+βγ
2−γ2 and 1+βγ
2−γ2 >
2γ
2−γ2( γ
2 + β), both of which hold due
to γ(γ +β) < 1. Therefore, reducing w2 can improve ﬁrm 2’s proﬁt. Moreover, note that the supply
quantity for ﬁrm 1 increases (because w2 is reduced) and ﬁrm 1 keeps adopting the supply-depletion
price, so due to the concavity of ﬁrm 1’s proﬁt function, we arrive that ﬁrm 1’s proﬁt increases as
well.
Subcase 2: Suppose γ(γ + β) > 1. Suppose ﬁrm 2 increases its wage by setting ˜w2 = w2 + e and
ﬁrm 1 keeps its wage unchanged by setting ˜w1 = w1. By a similar process as Subcase 1, we could
show that increasing w2 can improve ﬁrm 2’s proﬁt.
Case (iv): Symmetric to Case (iii).
Combining the above three cases, we could see only Case (i) is the possible equilibrium. That is,
the equilibrium wages are chosen in the ﬁrst stage such that there will not be any excess quantity
in the second-stage pricing game.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

30
Proof of Lemma 2.
According to Lemmas B.1 and F.1, ﬁrm i’s proﬁt (using (B.3) and (B.4))
can be written as follows,
πi(w1,w2) = (pi −wi)zi =

Ω
1 −γ + β −γ
1 −γ2 wj −2 −γ2 −βγ
1 −γ2
wi

(wi −βwj).
Maximizing πi(w1,w2) gives ﬁrm i’s best response function,
w∗
1(w2) =
1 −γ2
2(2 −γ2 −βγ)

Ω
1 −γ + 3β −β2γ −βγ2 −γ
1 −γ2
w2

,
w∗
2(w1) =
1 −γ2
2(2 −γ2 −βγ)

Ω
1 −γ + 3β −β2γ −βγ2 −γ
1 −γ2
w1

.
Solving the above set of equations yields the equilibrium.
□
Proof of Lemma 3.
Price precommitment competition is analogous to wage precommitment
competition, and thus the detailed analysis is omitted.
□
Before the proof of Lemma 4, we ﬁrst analyze the subgame of the second stage conditional on
the commission rate decisions of the ﬁrst stage. We obtain the following result.
Lemma F.2. For any ﬁxed commission rate α, it is optimal for platforms to set the equilibrium
price such that the demand equals to the supply quantity.
Proof of Lemma F.2.
For any ﬁxed commission rate α, ﬁrm 1’s proﬁt is
π1(α) = (p1 −α1p1)min{Ω−p1 + γp2,α1p1 −βα2p2}
= (1 −α1)p1 min{Ω−p1 + γp2,α1p1 −βα2p2}
=
 (1 −α1)p1(Ω−p1 + γp2), if p1 ≥Ω+γp2+βα2p2
1+α1
,
(1 −α1)p1(α1p1 −βα2p2), otherwise.
We ﬁrst consider the following optimization problem.
max
p1
(1 −α1)p1(Ω−p1 + γp2)
s.t. p1 ≥Ω+ γp2 + βα2p2
1 + α1
.
The ﬁrst order condition (without constraint) gives
Ω+γp2
2
, which is smaller than
Ω+γp2+βα2p2
1+α1
.
Therefore, by the concavity of the proﬁt function, we have p∗
1 = Ω+γp2+βα2p2
1+α1
.
Then, we consider the other optimization problem.
max
p1
(1 −α1)p1(α1p1 −βα2p2)
s.t. p1 ≤Ω+ γp2 + βα2p2
1 + α1
.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

31
The ﬁrst order condition gives βα2p2
2α1 . Moreover, the second order derivative is positive, indicating
that
βα2p2
2α1
is the solution to minimize the objective function instead of maximizing. Note that
π1 = 0 when p1 = 0, so it is not hard to see in this case the optimal solution p∗
1 = Ω+γp2+βα2p2
1+α1
.
To summarize, no matter in which case, the optimal price is
Ω+γp2+βα2p2
1+α1
, implying that the
demand equals to the supply.
□
To understand why Lemma F.2 holds, consider the two possible cases regarding the comparison
between supply and demand. If demand exceeds supply via a relatively lower price, raising the price
could not only improve the proﬁt-margin directly, but also boost the matching quantity because
the supply quantity is increased due to the raised wage. Therefore, the case where demand exceeds
supply can never be the equilibrium. If, on the other hand, supply exceeds demand via a relatively
higher price, it can be shown that the revenue-maximizing price is lower than the supply-depletion
price. Hence, by the concavity of the proﬁt function, it is optimal for the platforms to set the prices
such that demand equals to the supply.
Proof of Lemma 4.
Lemma F.2 implies that
Ω−p∗
1 + γp2 = α1p∗
1 −βα2p2,
Ω−p∗
2 + γp1 = α2p∗
2 −βα1p1.
Solving this set of equations yields ﬁrm 1’s optimal pricing decision for any ﬁxed α,
p∗
1 =
1 + α2 + γ + βα2
(1 + α1)(1 + α2) −(γ + βα1)(γ + βα2)Ω.
(F.2)
Then ﬁrm 1’s proﬁt function can be written as follows,
π1(α) =(1 −α1)(1 + α2 + γ + βα2)

α1(1 + α2 + γ + βα2) −βα2(1 + α1 + γ + βα1)
 

(1 + α1)(1 + α2) −(γ + βα1)(γ + βα2)
 2
Ω2.
Maximizing the proﬁt gives ﬁrm 1’s best response function,
α∗
1(α2) =
(1 + α2 + γ + βα2 −β2α2 + βγα2)(1 + α2 −γ2 −γβα2) + 2(1 + α2 −βγ −β2α2)(βα2 + βγα2)
2(1 + α2 + γ −β2α2)(1 + α2 −γ2 −γβα2) + (1 + α2 −βγ −β2α2)(1 + α2 + γ + βα2 −β2α2 + βγα2).
Similarly, we obtain ﬁrm 2’s best response function α∗
2(α1). Solving the set of equations yields the
equilibrium.
□
Proof of Lemma 5.
It follows (8) immediately.
□
Proof of Lemma 6.
According to Theorem 2 in Hu and Zhou (2020), given the output decision
of the competition, ﬁrm 1 is optimally to set price and wage such that the demand and supply are
equal to the output. That is, for any ﬁxed (p2,w2), there exists a z∗
1(p2,w2) such that
Ω−p∗
1 + γp2 = z∗
1 = w∗
1 −βw2.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

32
Similarly,
Ω−p∗
2 + γp1 = z∗
2 = w∗
2 −βw1.
Then we derive
p1 =
1
1 −γ2 [(1 + γ)Ω−z1 −γz2],
w1 =
1
1 −β2[z1 + βz2],
p2 =
1
1 −γ2 [(1 + γ)Ω−z2 −γz1],
w2 =
1
1 −β2[z2 + βz1].
Therefore, ﬁrm i’s proﬁt can be expressed as follows,
πi(zi,zj) = (pi −wi)zi =

Ω
1 −γ −(
1
1 −γ2 +
1
1 −β2)zi −(
γ
1 −γ2 +
β
1 −β2)zj

zi.
(F.3)
We obtain ﬁrm i’s best response function as follows,
z∗
1(z2) =
1
2(
1
1−γ2 +
1
1−β2 )
n
Ω
1 −γ −(
γ
1 −γ2 +
β
1 −β2)z2
o
,
z∗
2(z1) =
1
2(
1
1−γ2 +
1
1−β2 )
n
Ω
1 −γ −(
γ
1 −γ2 +
β
1 −β2)z1
o
.
Solving the above set of equations yields the equilibrium result.
□
Proof of Lemma 7.
We expect to show among the Nash equilibriums in Cases (a)-(d) in Online
Supplement A.2, only Case (b) is the possible equilibrium. We ﬁrst focus on symmetric solutions,
Case (a) and Case (b). Note that condition (A.11) in Case (a) is
qi ≥
1 −β
4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ Ω,
and condition (A.12) in Case (b) reduces to
qi ≤
1 −β2 + γ −β2γ
4 −3β2 −3γ2 + 2β2γ2 + β + γ −β2γ −βγ2 Ω.
One can check
1 −β
4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ Ω=
1 −β2 + γ −β2γ
4 −3β2 −3γ2 + 2β2γ2 + β + γ −β2γ −βγ2Ω,
and verify that π∗
i,a ≤π∗
i,b for i = 1,2. This establishes that Case (a) is not the equilibrium.
We then examine the asymmetric solutions. We ﬁrst show that each q is covered by at least one
of these four cases. First, the two lines in (A.12) intersect at the point (
1−β
4−3β−3γ+2βγ,
1−β
4−3β−3γ+2βγ).
Second, one can show
1 −β
4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ Ω−4 −3β2 + 3γ −2β2γ −β −βγ
16 −2βγ −9β2 −9γ2 + 4β2γ2 Ω
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

33
=
−12γ
(4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ)(16 −2βγ −9β2 −9γ2 + 4β2γ2)
≤0.
Finally, the line in (A.15) coincides with the line of a larger slope in (A.12). The above three points
ensure that each q is covered by at least one of these four cases.
Moreover, it can be veriﬁed that π∗
i,c ≤π∗
i,b for i = 1,2. Therefore, Case (c) is not the equilibrium.
By symmetry, Case (d) is not the equilibrium, either. Hence, Case (b) is the only possible equilib-
rium. Therefore, the ﬁrms choose q in the ﬁrst stage such that both the supply and demand will
equal to q in the second stage.
□
Proof of Proposition 1.
It follows Lemma 7 that Case (b) is the equilibrium. As shown in Case
(b) in Online Supplement A.2, the equilibrium outcome of the two-stage quantity precommitment
competition is the same as that of the single-stage quantity competition.
□
Proof of Proposition 2.
Part 1: We ﬁrst compare mode wp with mode P.
Note that
p∗
wp =
3 −2β −βγ −2γ2 + β2γ + βγ2
(1 −γ)(4 −3β + γ −2βγ −2γ2 + β2γ + βγ2)Ω,
p∗
P =
3 −2β
4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ Ω,
so p∗
wp −p∗
P reduces to
(3 −2β −βγ −2γ2 + β2γ + βγ2)(4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ)
−(3 −2β)(1 −γ)(4 −3β + γ −2βγ −2γ2 + β2γ + βγ2),
=γ2 + β(−γ −2γ2) + β2(2γ + γ2) −β3γ = (γ −β)(1 −β)2γ.
Note also that
w∗
wp =
1 + γ
4 −3β + γ −2βγ −2γ2 + β2γ + βγ2 Ω,
w∗
P =
1
4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ Ω,
so w∗
wp −w∗
P reduces to
(1 + γ)(4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ) −(4 −3β + γ −2βγ −2γ2 + β2γ + βγ2) = −γ(γ −β)(1 −β).
One can verify that the comparisons for the matching quantity and proﬁt also reduce to com-
paring the competition intensities of the two sides.
Part 2: We then compare mode pw with mode P.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

34
Note that
p∗
pw =
3 + β −β2 −βγ
4 −3γ + β −2βγ −2β2 + β2γ + βγ2 Ω,
p∗
P =
3 −2β
4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ Ω,
so p∗
pw −p∗
P reduces to
(3 + β −β2 −βγ)(4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ) −(3 −2β)(4 −3γ + β −2βγ −2β2 + β2γ + βγ2),
= −βγ + β2 + β2γ −β3 = −β(γ −β)(1 −β).
Note also that
w∗
pw =
1 + β
4 −3γ + β −2βγ −2β2 + β2γ + βγ2 Ω,
w∗
P =
1
4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ Ω,
so w∗
pw −w∗
P reduces to
(1 + β)(4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ) −(4 −3γ + β −2βγ −2β2 + β2γ + βγ2) = β(γ −β)(1 −γ).
One can verify that the comparisons for the matching quantity and proﬁt also reduce to com-
paring the competition intensities of the two sides.
□
Lemma F.3.
(i) If β = 0, then p∗
P = p∗
pw.
(ii) If γ = 0, then p∗
P = p∗
wp.
Proof of Lemma F.3.
Putting β = 0 and γ = 0 into p∗
P , p∗
wp, and p∗
pw yields the result.
□
Lemma F.3 says that in the absence of competition in supply (resp., demand) side, simultaneous
price and wage competition is equivalent to the price precommitment competition (resp., wage
precommitment competition). This result is intuitive. For instance, in the absence of supply side
competition (i.e., β = 0), the supply quantity is determined by each ﬁrm itself, so it makes no
diﬀerence in simultaneous price and wage competition for the ﬁrm to decide the wage either together
with the price or later. Therefore, simultaneous price and wage competition can be understood as
a price competition in the ﬁrst stage and followed by the wage determined automatically to match
supply with the demand, which is equivalent to the prescribed price precommitment competition.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

35
Proof of Proposition 3.
Part (a): We ﬁrst compare mode wp with mode C. Recall that
p∗
wp =
3 −2β −βγ −2γ2 + β2γ + βγ2
(1 −γ)(4 −3β + γ −2βγ −2γ2 + β2γ + βγ2)Ω,
p∗
C =
1
1 −γ + (1 −β)α∗Ω,
so
p∗
wp −p∗
C =
3 −2β −βγ −2γ2 + β2γ + βγ2
(1 −γ)(4 −3β + γ −2βγ −2γ2 + β2γ + βγ2)Ω−
1
1 −γ + (1 −β)α∗Ω.
One can verify that p∗
wp ≥p∗
C if γ ≥β and p∗
wp < p∗
C otherwise. The comparisons for the wage,
quantity, and proﬁt also reduce to comparing the competition intensities of the two sides.
We then compare mode pw with mode C. Recall that
p∗
pw =
3 + β −β2 −βγ
4 −3γ + β −2βγ −2β2 + β2γ + βγ2 Ω,
p∗
C =
1
1 −γ + (1 −β)α∗Ω,
so
p∗
pw −p∗
C =
3 + β −β2 −βγ
4 −3γ + β −2βγ −2β2 + β2γ + βγ2 Ω−
1
1 −γ + (1 −β)α∗Ω.
One can verify that p∗
pw ≤p∗
C if γ ≥β and p∗
wp > p∗
C otherwise. The comparisons for the wage,
quantity, and proﬁt also reduce to comparing the competition intensities of the two sides.
Part (b): We compare mode P with model C. Recall that
p∗
P =
3 −2β
4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ Ω,
p∗
C =
1
1 −γ + (1 −β)α∗Ω,
so
p∗
P −p∗
C =
3 −2β
4 −3β −3γ + 2βγ Ω−
1
1 −γ + (1 −β)α∗Ω.
One can verify that p∗
P ≤p∗
C if γ ≥β or γ is suﬃciently small, and p∗
P > p∗
C if γ ≤β and γ is
suﬃciently close to β. Similarly, the comparisons for the wage, quantity, and proﬁt also depend on
the competition intensities of the two sides. This completes the proof.
□
Proof of Proposition 4.
According to Proposition 2 and Proposition 3(a), it suﬃces to show
p∗
Q ≥max{p∗
wp,p∗
pw} and π∗
Q ≥max{π∗
wp,π∗
pw}.
Part 1: We ﬁrst compare mode Q with mode wp. Note that
p∗
Q =
3 + β −β2 −2γ2 −βγ2
(1 −γ)(4 + β + γ −2γ2 −2β2 −β2γ −βγ2)Ω,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

36
p∗
wp =
3 −2β −βγ −2γ2 + β2γ + βγ2
(1 −γ)(4 −3β + γ −2βγ −2γ2 + β2γ + βγ2)Ω,
so p∗
Q −p∗
wp reduces to
(3 + β −β2 −2γ2 −βγ2)(4 −3β + γ −2βγ −2γ2 + β2γ + βγ2)
−(3 −2β −βγ −2γ2 + β2γ + βγ2)(4 + β + γ −2γ2 −2β2 −β2γ −βγ2)
=
n
12 + 3γ −14γ2 −2γ3 + 4γ4 + β(−5 −5γ + 3γ2 + 3γ3) + β2(−7 + 6γ2 −γ4) + β3(3 + 3γ −γ2 −γ3) + β4(−γ)
o
−
n
12 + 3γ −14γ2 −2γ3 + 4γ4 + β(−5 −6γ + 2γ2 + 3γ3) + β2(−8 + 8γ2 + γ3 −γ4)
+ β3(4 + 5γ −γ2 −2γ3) + β4(−2γ −γ2)
o
=β
n
γ + γ2 + β(1 −γ3)(1 −β) −2βγ2 −2β2γ + β3γ + β3γ2o
=β(1 −β)
n
β(1 −γ3) + γ(1 + β + γ −βγ −β2γ −β2)
o
≥0.
Note also that
w∗
Q =
(1 + γ)(1 + β)
4 + β + γ −2γ2 −2β2 −β2γ −βγ2 ,
w∗
wp =
1 + γ
4 −3β + γ −2βγ −2γ2 + β2γ + βγ2 ,
so w∗
Q −w∗
wp reduces to
(1 + β)(4 −3β + γ −2βγ −2γ2 + β2γ + βγ2) −(4 + β + γ −2γ2 −2β2 −β2γ −βγ2)
= −β2(1 −γ2) −βγ(1 −β2) ≤0
Moreover, one can verify that z∗
Q ≤z∗
wp and π∗
Q ≥π∗
wp.
Part 2: We then compare mode Q with mode pw. Note that
p∗
Q =
3 + β −β2 −2γ2 −βγ2
(1 −γ)(4 + β + γ −2γ2 −2β2 −β2γ −βγ2)Ω,
p∗
pw =
3 + β −β2 −βγ
4 −3γ + β −2βγ −2β2 + β2γ + βγ2 Ω,
so p∗
Q −p∗
pw reduces to
(3 + β −β2 −2γ2 −βγ2)(4 −3γ + β −2βγ −2β2 + β2γ + βγ2)
−(3 + β −β2 −βγ)(1 −γ)(4 + β + γ −2γ2 −2β2 −β2γ −βγ2)
=6γ + γ2 + β(γ −γ3) + β2(−2γ2) + β3(−γ + γ3) + β4γ2
=6γ + γ2(1 −β2)2 + βγ(1 −γ2)(1 −β2)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

37
≥0.
Note also that
w∗
Q =
(1 + γ)(1 + β)
4 + β + γ −2γ2 −2β2 −β2γ −βγ2 Ω,
w∗
pw =
1 + β
4 −3γ + β −2βγ −2β2 + β2γ + βγ2 Ω,
so w∗
Q −w∗
pw reduces to
(1 + γ)(4 −3γ + β −2βγ −2β2 + β2γ + βγ2) −(4 + β + γ −2γ2 −2β2 −β2γ −βγ2)
= −γ(1 −βγ)(β + γ) ≤0.
Moreover, one can verify that z∗
Q ≤z∗
pw and π∗
Q ≥π∗
pw.
□
Lemma F.4 will be used for the proof of Proposition 5.
Lemma F.4.
(a) Suppose β = 0. If γ is suﬃciently small, then E[π∗
c2] ≤E[π∗
c3].
(b) Suppose γ = 0. If β is suﬃciently small, then E[π∗
c2] ≤E[π∗
c3].
Proof of Lemma F.4.
Part (a): According to Cases 2 and 3 in Online Supplement B.2, it suﬃces
to show for each x ∈[Ω, bΩ(w)], the proﬁt earned by setting the inventory-depletion price is lower
than that by setting the revenue-maximizing price, that is,

x
1 −γ + β −γ
1 −γ2 wj −2 −γ2 −βγ
1 −γ2
wi

(wi −βwj) ≤

x
2 −γ −2 −γ2
4 −γ2 wi +
γ
4 −γ2 wj
2
.
(F.4)
Since the ﬁrms take symmetric actions, we let wi = wj. Putting β = 0 into (F.4) yields
x −(2 −γ)wi
1 −γ
wi ≤(x −(1 −γ)wi
2 −γ
)2.
We obtain
x −(2 −γ)wi
1 −γ
wi −(x −(1 −γ)wi
2 −γ
)2
=
1
(2 −γ)2(1 −γ)
n
−(1 −γ)x2 −[(1 −γ)3 + (2 −γ)3]w2
i + [2(1 −γ)2 + (2 −γ)2]xwi
o
→−1
4(x −3wi)2
[as γ →0]
<0.
This establishes that E[π∗
c2] ≤E[π∗
c3].
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

38
Part (b): Again, we expect to show

x
1 −γ + β −γ
1 −γ2 wj −2 −γ2 −βγ
1 −γ2
wi

(wi −βwj) ≤

x
2 −γ −2 −γ2
4 −γ2 wi +
γ
4 −γ2 wj
2
.
(F.5)
Since the ﬁrms take symmetric actions, we let wi = wj. Putting γ = 0 into (F.5) yields
(x −(2 −β)wi)(1 −β)wi ≤1
4(x −wi)2.
We obtain
(x −(2 −β)wi)(1 −β)wi −1
4(x −wi)2
=(3
2 −β)xwi −[(2 −β)(1 −β) + 1
4]w2
i −1
4x2
→−(1
2x −3
2wi)2
[as β →0]
<0.
This establishes that E[π∗
c2] ≤E[π∗
c3]. This completes the proof.
□
Before the proof of Proposition 5, we ﬁrst provide some conditions imposed on γ and Ωfor
Proposition 5(a-i): γ is suﬃciently small and Ωhas a low variance such that
1 + γ
4 + γ −2γ2 E[Ω] ≤
Ω
3 −2γ ,
(F.6)
(2 −γ2)(1 + γ)
(4 + γ −2γ2)2(1 −γ)E[Ω]2 ≤
2
(4 −3γ)2E[Ω2],
(F.7)
E[Ω2]
(2 −γ)2 −
2(2 −γ2 −γ)¯ΩE[Ω]
(2 −γ)(4 −γ2)(3 −2γ) +
  (2 −γ2 −γ)¯Ω
(4 −γ2)(3 −2γ)
2 ≤
2
(4 −3γ)2E[Ω2].
(F.8)
It is easy to verify that (F.6) and (F.7) could hold if γ is suﬃciently small and Ωhas a low variance.
Here, we illustrate (F.8) could hold as well with an example of two-point distribution for Ω. We
assume Ωtakes ΩH and ΩL with equal probability. We have
lim
γ→0
E[Ω2]
(2 −γ)2 −
2(2 −γ2 −γ)¯ΩE[Ω]
(2 −γ)(4 −γ2)(3 −2γ) +
  (2 −γ2 −γ)¯Ω
(4 −γ2)(3 −2γ)
2 −
2
(4 −3γ)2E[Ω2]
=1
4E[Ω2] −1
6
¯ΩE[Ω] + 1
36
¯Ω2 −1
8E[Ω2] = 1
8E[Ω2] −1
6
¯ΩE[Ω] + 1
36
¯Ω2
=1
4(1
2Ω2
H + 1
2Ω2
L) −1
6ΩH(1
2ΩH + 1
2ΩL) + 1
36Ω2
H = 1
16
n
(1
3ΩH −ΩL)2 −2
3ΩHΩL
o
,
which is negative if ΩH ≤5ΩL.
Now we provide some conditions imposed on β and Ωfor Proposition 5(b-i): β is suﬃciently
small and Ωhas a low variance such that
1
4 −3β E[Ω] ≤
1
3 −2β Ω,
(F.9)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

39
1
4E[Ω2] −
¯ΩE[Ω]
2(3 −2β) + 1
4
¯Ω2
(3 −2β)2 ≤2(1 −β)2
(4 −3β)2E[Ω2].
(F.10)
As above, one can verify that (F.9) and (F.10) indeed hold if β is suﬃciently small and Ωhas a
low variance.
Proof of Proposition 5.
Part (a-i): We ﬁrst derive the equilibrium proﬁt in wage precommit-
ment competition. Let β = 0.
Case 1: Low Wage. Inequality (F.6) tells us that w∗
i,c1 ≤w1
ub, hence, the optimal proﬁt in Case 1
is as follows,
E[π∗
c1] = E[πc1|w=w∗
i,c1] =
(2 −γ2)(1 + γ)
(4 + γ −2γ2)2(1 −γ)E[Ω]2.
Case 2: Medium Wage. According to Lemma F.4(a), E[π∗
c2] ≤E[π∗
c3].
Case 3: High Wage. (B.30) indicates that
E[π∗
c3] =
Z
x
(
x
2 −γ −2 −γ2 −γ
4 −γ2
w3
lb)2dF(x)
= E[Ω2]
(2 −γ)2 −
2(2 −γ2 −γ)¯ΩE[Ω]
(2 −γ)(4 −γ2)(3 −2γ) +
  (2 −γ2 −γ)¯Ω
(4 −γ2)(3 −2γ)
2.
We have
E[π∗
wp] = max{E[π∗
c1],E[π∗
c3]}.
On the other hand, (12) gives
E[π∗
P ] =
2
(4 −3γ)2E[Ω2].
Inequalities (F.7) and (F.8) show that E[π∗
c1] ≤E[π∗
P ] and E[π∗
c3] ≤E[π∗
P ], respectively. Hence,
E[π∗
wp] ≤E[π∗
P ].
Part (a-ii): We obtain
E[π∗
wp] ≥E[πc1|w=w1
ub] =
 E[Ω]
1 −γ −
Ω
1 −γ
2 −γ
3 −2γ

Ω
3 −2γ ,
E[π∗
P ] =
2
(4 −3γ)2E[Ω2].
One can check E[π∗
wp] > E[π∗
P ] if γ is suﬃciently large.
Part (b-i): As in Part (a-i), we ﬁrst derive the equilibrium proﬁt in wage precommitment com-
petition. Let γ = 0.
Case 1: Low Wage. Inequality (F.9) tells us that w∗
i,c1 ≤w1
ub, hence, the optimal proﬁt in Case 1
is as follows,
E[π∗
c1] = E[πc1|w=w∗
i ] = 2(1 −β)2
(4 −3β)2E[Ω]2.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

40
Case 2: Medium Wage. According to Lemma F.4, we have E[π∗
c2] ≤E[π∗
c3].
Case 3: High Wage. (B.30) indicates that
E[π∗
c3] =
Z
x
(
x
2 −γ −2 −γ2 −γ
4 −γ2
w3
lb)2dF(x) = 1
4E[Ω2] −
¯ΩE[Ω]
2(3 −2β) + 1
4
¯Ω2
(3 −2β)2.
We have
E[π∗
wp] = max{E[π∗
c1],E[π∗
c3]}.
On the other hand, (12) gives
E[π∗
P ] = 2(1 −β)2
(4 −3β)2E[Ω2].
Clearly, E[π∗
c1] ≤E[π∗
P ]. Inequality F.10 shows E[π∗
c3] ≤E[π∗
P ]. Hence, E[π∗
wp] ≤E[π∗
P ].
Part (b-ii): We obtain
E[π∗
wp] ≥E[πc1|w=w1
ub] = (3 −2β)E[Ω] −(2 −β)Ω
(3 −2β)2
(1 −β)Ω,
E[π∗
P ] = 2(1 −β)2
(4 −3β)2E[Ω2].
One can check that if β is suﬃciently large such that
(3 −2β)E[Ω] −(2 −β)Ω
(3 −2β)2
Ω≥2(1 −β)
(4 −3β)2E[Ω2],
E[π∗
wp] ≥E[π∗
P ] holds immediately. This completes the proof.
□
Proof of Lemma 8.
We ﬁrst derive the equilibrium when (Ω1,Ω2) = (ΩH,ΩL). Similar to Sec-
tion 3.1, one can derive
p∗
1,H(p2,L,w2,L) = 3
4(ΩH + γp2,L) + 1
4βw2,L,
w∗
1,H(p2,L,w2,L) = 1
4(ΩH + γp2,L) + 3
4βw2,L,
p∗
2,L(p1,H,w1,H) = 3
4(ΩL + γp1,H) + 1
4βw1,H,
w∗
2,L(p1,H,w1,H) = 1
4(ΩL + γp1,H) + 3
4βw1,H.
Solving the set of the above equations yields the following equilibrium.
p∗
1,H = (12 −6β2)ΩH + (9γ + β −4β2γ)ΩL
16 −2βγ −9β2 −9γ2 + 4β2γ2
,
w∗
1,H = (4 + 2βγ)ΩH + (3γ + 3β)ΩL
16 −2βγ −9β2 −9γ2 + 4β2γ2 ,
p∗
2,L = (12 −6β2)ΩL + (9γ + β −4β2γ)ΩH
16 −2βγ −9β2 −9γ2 + 4β2γ2
,
w∗
2,L = (4 + 2βγ)ΩL + (3γ + 3β)ΩH
16 −2βγ −9β2 −9γ2 + 4β2γ2 .
By symmetry, when (Ω1,Ω2) = (ΩL,ΩH), the equilibrium is
p∗
1,L = (12 −6β2)ΩL + (9γ + β −4β2γ)ΩH
16 −2βγ −9β2 −9γ2 + 4β2γ2
,
w∗
1,L = (4 + 2βγ)ΩL + (3γ + 3β)ΩH
16 −2βγ −9β2 −9γ2 + 4β2γ2 ,
p∗
2,H = (12 −6β2)ΩH + (9γ + β −4β2γ)ΩL
16 −2βγ −9β2 −9γ2 + 4β2γ2
,
w∗
2,H = (4 + 2βγ)ΩH + (3γ + 3β)ΩL
16 −2βγ −9β2 −9γ2 + 4β2γ2 .
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

41
Hence, the expected proﬁt for each ﬁrm is
E[π∗
P ] = 1
2(p∗
1,H −w∗
1,H)(w∗
1,H −βw∗
2,L) + 1
2(p∗
1,L −w∗
1,L)(w∗
1,L −βw∗
2,H)
=

(4 −3β2 −βγ)2 + (3γ −β −2β2γ)2 
(Ω2
H + Ω2
L) + 4(4 −3β2 −βγ)(3γ −β −2β2γ)ΩHΩL
(16 −2βγ −9β2 −9γ2 + 4β2γ2)2
.
□
Proof of Proposition 6.
Part (a-i): Here we specify the condition imposed on β: β is suﬃciently
small such that
ΩH ≤min
n2(1 −β)(2 −β2)(2 −β) + 2(2 + β)(2 −β)3
(2 + β)(2 −β)2(3 −β)
ΩL, 5 −3β
3 −β ΩL
o
.
We ﬁrst show if β is suﬃciently small, the equilibrium proﬁt in wage precommitment competition
is
E[π∗
wp] =
E[Ω]2
2(2 −β)2.
We examine the three cases in Online Supplement B.2. Note that we assume there is a probability
1/2 that (Ω1,Ω2) = (ΩH,ΩH) and an equal chance that (Ω1,Ω2) = (ΩL,ΩL).
Case 1: When β = γ,
w∗
i,c1 =
E[Ω]
2(2 −β)(1 −β),
w1
ub =
ΩL
(3 −β)(1 −β).
Since ΩH ≤5−3β
3−β ΩL, we have w∗
i,c1 ≤w1
ub. Due to the concavity of the proﬁt function, the optimal
proﬁt in Case 1 is as follows,
E[π∗
c1] = E[π|w=w∗
i,c1] =
E[Ω]2
2(2 −β)2.
(F.11)
Note that
E[π∗
c1] > E[π|w=w1
ub] = [(3 −β)ΩH −(1 + β)ΩL]ΩL
2(3 −β)2(1 −β)
.
(F.12)
Case 2: When β = γ,
w∗
i,c2 =
(2 + β)(2 −β)2ΩH −2(2 −β2)(1 −β)ΩL
2(2 + β)(2 −β)3(1 −β) −2(2 −β2)(1 −β)2,
w2
lb =
ΩL
(3 −β)(1 −β).
Since ΩH ≤2(1−β)(2−β2)(2−β)+2(2+β)(2−β)3
(2+β)(2−β)2(3−β)
ΩL, we have w∗
i,c2 ≤w2
lb. Due to the concavity of the proﬁt
function,
E[π∗
c2] = E[π|w=w2
lb] = [(3 −β)ΩH −(1 + β)ΩL]ΩL
2(3 −β)2(1 −β)
.
(F.13)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

42
Note that
E[π∗
c2] > E[π|w=w2
ub] = q(2 −β)2Ω2
H + (1 −q)[(3 −β)ΩL −ΩH]2
(2 −β)2(3 −β)2
.
(F.14)
Case 3: When β = γ,
w3
lb =
ΩH
(3 −β)(1 −β),
E[π∗
c3] = q(2 −β)2Ω2
H + (1 −q)[(3 −β)ΩL −ΩH]2
(2 −β)2(3 −β)2
.
(F.15)
The equalities (F.11), (F.13), and (F.15) and inequalities (F.12) and (F.14) indicate that
E[π∗
wp] =
E[Ω]2
2(2 −β)2.
On the other hand, when β = γ, (17) gives
E[π∗
P ] =
E[Ω2]
2(2 −β)2.
Clearly, E[π∗
wp] ≤E[π∗
P ].
Part (a-ii): Here we specify the condition imposed on β: β is suﬃciently large such that
ΩH ≥5 −3β
3 −β ΩL
and
2(2 −β)2(3 −β)ΩHΩL −(3 −β)2(1 −β)Ω2
H −[2(2 −β)2(1 + β) + (3 −β)2(1 −β)]Ω2
L ≥0.
The inequality ΩH ≥5−3β
3−β ΩL indicates that w∗
i,c1 ≥w1
ub in Case 1. By the concavity of the proﬁt
function, the optimal proﬁt in Case 1 is as follows,
E[π∗
c1] = E[π|w=w1
ub] = [(3 −β)ΩH −(1 + β)ΩL]ΩL
2(3 −β)2(1 −β)
.
Since E[π∗
wp] takes the optimal of the three cases, we have
E[π∗
wp] ≥E[π∗
c1] = [(3 −β)ΩH −(1 + β)ΩL]ΩL
2(3 −β)2(1 −β)
.
Next, we compare E[π∗
wp] with E[π∗
P ].
E[π∗
wp] −E[π∗
P ]
≥[(3 −β)ΩH −(1 + β)ΩL]ΩL
2(3 −β)2(1 −β)
−
E[Ω2]
2(2 −β)2
=
1
4(3 −β)2(1 −β)(2 −β)2
n
2(2 −β)2(3 −β)ΩHΩL −(3 −β)2(1 −β)Ω2
H −[2(2 −β)2(1 + β) + (3 −β)2(1 −β)]Ω2
L
o
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

43
≈
1
4(3 −β)2(1 −β)(2 −β)2
n
2(2 −β)2(3 −β)ΩHΩL −2(2 −β)2(1 + β)Ω2
L
o
=
2(2 −β)2ΩL
4(3 −β)2(1 −β)(2 −β)2
n
(3 −β)ΩH −(1 + β)ΩL
o
≥0,
where the above approximation holds as β →1.
Part (b): Here we specify the condition imposed on ΩH: ΩH is suﬃciently small such that
ΩH ≤min
n 5 −β
3(1 −β)ΩL, 20 −24β −20β2 + 28β3 + 3β4 −8β5 + β6
12 −24β + 28β3 −13β4 −8β5 + 5β6
ΩL
o
.
We ﬁrst derive the equilibrium proﬁt in wage precommitment competition with negatively cor-
related market size uncertainty. Let β = γ. We examine the three cases listed in Online Supple-
ment D.2.
Case 1: Inequality ΩH ≤
5−β
3(1−β)ΩL indicates that w∗
i ≤w1
b. Hence, the optimal proﬁt in Case 1 is
as follows,
E[π∗
c1] = E[π|w=w∗
i ] =
1
8(2 −β)2{Ω2
H + Ω2
L + 2ΩHΩL}.
(F.16)
Note that
E[π∗
c1] > E[π|w=w1
b ] = (3 + β)ΩH −(1 −β)ΩL
2(1 + β)2(3 −β)2
(ΩL + βΩH).
(F.17)
Case 2: Inequality ΩH ≤20−24β−20β2+28β3+3β4−8β5+β6
12−24β+28β3−13β4−8β5+5β6
ΩL indicates that w∗
i ≤w2
lb. Hence, by the
concavity of the proﬁt function, the optimal proﬁt in Case 2 is as follows,
E[π∗
c2] = E[π|w=w2
lb] = (3 + β)ΩH −(1 −β)ΩL
2(1 + β)2(3 −β)2
(ΩL + βΩH).
(F.18)
Note that
E[π∗
c2] > E[π|w=w2
ub] = (5 −2β + β2)Ω2
H + (9 + β2)Ω2
L + (10β −6)ΩHΩL
2(2 + β)2(3 −β)2
.
(F.19)
Case 3:
E[π∗
c3] = (5 −2β + β2)Ω2
H + (9 + β2)Ω2
L + (10β −6)ΩHΩL
2(2 + β)2(3 −β)2
.
(F.20)
Equalities (F.16), (F.18), and (F.20) and inequalities (F.17) and (F.19) indicate that
E[π∗
wp] =
1
8(2 −β)2{Ω2
H + Ω2
L + 2ΩHΩL}.
Comparing E[π∗
wp] with E[π∗
P ] yields that
E[π∗
wp] −E[π∗
P ]
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828

44
=
1
8(2 −β)2{Ω2
H + Ω2
L + 2ΩHΩL} −(4 + β2)(Ω2
H + Ω2
L) + 8βΩHΩL
4(4 −β2)2
=
1
8(4 −β2)2
n
(−4 + 4β −5β2 −4β3 −β4)(Ω2
H + Ω2
L) + (8 −8β −6β2 −8β3 −2β4)ΩHΩL
o
=
1
8(4 −β2)2
n
−4(1 −β)(ΩH + ΩL)2 −(5β2 + 4β3 + β4)(Ω2
H + Ω2
L) −(6β2 + 8β3 + 2β4)ΩHΩL
o
<0.
This completes the proof.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3734828